The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. III
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. III. Philadelphia: Globe, 1880.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri3).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

V


T-


,i-"

%.


-*


1  It'"'

^1-

1I-'

i


54-  ,'-•-'.  \^


Boston  Medical  Library
in  the  Francis  A.Countway
Library  of  Medicine  -Boston


COLUMBIAN NATURAL CLASP NO.  ION

PAT.  1,290,083  PAT.  1,593,048

THE  UNITED  STATES  ENVELOPE  CO. SPRING.nELD,MASS.

33/8 X R


.,-CAriV-


m


V. ;-,  /


*■-.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF  OUE


MATERIA  MEDICA


BY


0.  HERIISTG,  M.  D.


VOLUME  III.


PHILADELPHIA:

THE  AMERICAN  HOMCEOPATHIC  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY.

J.  M:.  STOI3ID^IlT & CO.


Copyright,  1881,  by  Theresa  Hertftg.


Author's  Mark.


PRESS  OF  GLOBE  PRINTING  HOUSE.


DEDICATED


TO


.  P.  P.  WELLS,

BROOKLYN,  N.  Y.


PREFACE.


We  herewith  present  to  the  medical  profession  Vol.
Ill  of  The  Guiding  Symptoms,  the  completion  of  which
we  have  found  '^a  labor  of  love."

Actuated,  as  we  have  been,  by  the  spirit  of  the  de-
parted author,  it  has  been  our  aim  to  complete  the
volume  just  as  it  would  have  been  had  Hering  lived.
At  the  time  of  his  death,  the  first  forms,  containing
Bryonia,  had  left  the  press ;  Bufones,  Cactus,  etc.,  had
been  prepared  by  him  for  the  printer,  and  a  day  before
his  sudden  death  he  was  collating  the  materials  of
Galcarea  ostrearum.  Here  his  work  of  over  fifty  years
was  turned  into  Hands  he  had  trained  and  trusted,  for
the  purpose  of  completing  Avhat  he  felt  he  would  never
see  finished  in  this  life,  and  yet  hoped  to  in  the  next;
for  in  his  homely  and  quaint  way,  he  said,  a  few  weeks
before  his  departure,  "Perhaps,  from  my  place  in
Heaven,  I  may  peep  through  a  little  hole  and  see  that
my  work  is  well  done!"

As  soon  as  preliminaries  were  arranged,  and  his
MSS.  placed  into  our  hands,  we  worked  assiduously
until  the  completion  of  the  present  volume,  which  is
the  fruition  of  our  labors.  Its  earlier  appearance  was
prevented  by  other  exacting  literary  work  and  profes-
sional duties  that  demanded  close  application.


PREFACE.  VI

In  respect  to  the  dedication,  it  will  be  of  interest  to
note  that  Dr.  Hering  left  the  following  writing,  which
is  quoted  verbatim:

"  This  third  volume  is  dedicated  by  the  author  to
DR.  P.  P.  WELLS,

one  of  his  oldest  and  dearest  friends.

Why  was  not  the  first  volume  dedicated?  Lt  had  been
intended,  and  ivas  promised,  to  be  dedicated  to  our  gifted

CARROLL  DUNHAM,

but  he  had  been  called  cnuay,  and  his  place  remained
empty.

Why  was  tlie  second  volume  not  dedicated  f  At  that
time,  after  the  unexpected  demand  for  a  second  edition  of
the  Condensed  Materia  Medica,  it  seemed  very  uncertain
ivhether  an  exhaustive  work  would  ever  be  wanted  by  the
profession;  but,  the  demand  for  our  third  volume  makes
it  no  longer  doubtful.

As  this  country  never  forgets  pioneers,  let  our  names  go
together  in  history,  until  the  time  comes  when  LLahnemann's
will  be  the  predominating  medical  school.''^

As  a  "motto"  for  himself,  his  co-workers,  and  all
others,  when  he  began  the  third  volume,  the  ceaseless
worker  wrote:

'^Individualize!  and  study  our  most  valuable  medi-
cines in  their  monographies,  picking  them  out  here
and  there  for  comparison,  but  not  in  alphabetical  order.
Go  on  in  that  way,  not  omitting  a  day,  until  Zinc  will
roof  the  building."


Vll  PEEFACE.

To  the  marks  used  in  the  present  volume,  we  have
nothing  to  add  to  the  explanation  given  in  Volume  I,
except  that  the  character  tz  has  been  used  instead  of  U,
to  denote  symptoms  produced  Avhile  the  sick  were
under  medicinal  action.

For  many  words  of  encouragement  from  numerous
friends  we  have  felt  grateful,  and  among  others  we
desire  to  thank  Dr.  E.  A.  Farrington  for  useful  sug-
gestions, and  Drs.  C.  B.  Gilbert,  A.  C.  Rembaugh,
Levi  J.  Knerr  and  Edward  M.  Gramm  for  clerical
assistance.

C.  G.  Raue, \

C.  B.  Kneee,  >  Editors.

a  MOHK,  J


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


MATERIA MEDICA.


BRYONIA  ALBA.

White  Bryony.  Ciicurhitaceoe.

The  juice  of  the  fresh  root  before  flowering.  Proved  by  Hahnemann
and  pubhshed  in  1816  in  second  part  of  his  Materia  Medica;  208  of  his
own  symptoms,  102  from  students,  Mishler,  Homburg,  Riickert  and  Dr.  E.
Stapf  and  one  of  Nicolai.  In  1824,  second  volume  of  second  edition :  537
of  his  own  and  242  symptoms  from  others;  additional  provers  are  Her-
mann and  Fred.  Hahnemann.  In  1833,  third  edition,  781  symptoms  of  the
former.  An  unnecessary  reproving  was  made  by  thirty-one  Austrian
physicians,  many  taking  (as  they  did  with  Aconite)  another  species,  the
dioica;  further  additions  by  0.  Piper,  Lemke,  Drs.  Stow  and  Price,  and  a
proving  of  the  Jenichen^™  by  Berridge  and  some  poisonings  appeared  in
the  journals.

^Mind. 1 1  Partial  loss  of  consciousness. ^Hydrocephalus.
Unconsciousness.

I  Unconscious,  could  not  speak. ^Cholera  Asiatica.
Stupefaction.
Weak  memory.
I  So  weak  in  mind  that  his  ideas  disappear  as  if  he  would  faint,

together  with  heat  in  face,  especially  on  standing.
Confusion  of  head,  especially  of  forehead.
Confusion  in  head  with  drawing  in  occiput,  extending  into

neck  before  going  to  sleep-
Head  confused  and  aching,  as  after  a  night's  dissipation ;  does

not  wish  to  rise,  morning  on  awakening.

VOL.  III.— 1.  (1)


BRYONIA  ALBA.  2

Difficult  comprehension.

I  Sees  visions  and  faces  when  closing  eyes. ^Typhus.

Fancies ;  mental  excitability.

I  Nightly  delirium.

Delirious  talk,  especially  at  night.

I  In  the  morning,  at  daybreak,  delirious.

B  Delirium  at  night  of  the  business  of  the  day. ^Typhus.
Delirium  about  his  business ;  worse  at  night,  after  3  a.m.

I I  Talking  of  the  business  of  the  day  in  his  delirium.  ^Diar-
rhoea.

BThe  patient  desires  to  go  home. ^Typhus.

1 1  Desire  to  get  out  of  bed  and  go  home. ^Diarrhoea.

I  Desire  for  things  that  cannot  be  had,  which  are  refused,  or
not  wanted  when  oifered.

Prattling  about  business  to  be  attended  to.

I  Irrational  talking  of  his  business.

Hastiness.

Taciturnity.

Weeping  mood,  with  headache  and  other  complaints.

Dejection  ;  despondency  ;  irritability.

Great  depression  and  very  morose  mood  without  any  cause,
quite  contrary  to  his  habit.

Depression  and  apprehension  for  the  future.

Great  sense  of  insecurity,  with  mental  depression  and  appre-
hension for  the  future.

I  Apprehensiveness ;  fearfulness.

Apprehensive ;  uneasiness  and  dread  on  account  of  the  future.

Anxiety  and  restlessness.

I  In  the  room  he  became  very  anxious,  better  in  the  open  air.

■  Anxiety  in  the  whole  body  which  compelled  him  to  do  some-

thing constantly,  and  wherever  he  went  he  found  no  rest.
IB  Anxiety  about  the  future,  particularly  in  childbed  or  after,

she  fears  not  to  have  wherewithal  to  live.
Anxiety,  worse  in  room,  better  in  open  air.
BB  Anxious,  peevish  and  hasty  disposition.
Fea,r  of  death,  which  he  thinks  is  near.
B  Fear  of  death. ^Pertussis.
Anxious  feeling  referred  to  sternum  or  cardiac  region;  pressing

or  painful  sensation.
Easily  startled,  with  headache.
B Despair  of  recovery. /^Pertussis.

■  Great  despondency  ;  disinclined  to  think;  exhaustion  of  intel-

lectual powers.
Both  mental  and  bodily  quietness  is  required.
B Irritable  mood.

■  Mood  at  once  irritable,  weeping  and  morose.
BYery  irritable;  inclined  to  fright,  fear  and  vexation.
Irritable  mood  ;  wishes  to  be  alone.


3  BRYONIA  ALBA.

BBYery  irritable;  inclined  to  be  angry ;  after  getting  angry:
chilly  or  a  red  face  and  heat  in  head.

■  Peevishness. ^Diarrhoea.

I  Peevishness,  irritability  and  violence. ^Pertussis.
I  Morose;  everything  puts  him  out  of  humor.

■  Ill-humor. ^Diarrhoea.

I  Very  ill-humor;  troubled  with  needless  anxiety.
Contradiction  easily  provoked  anger  during  the  whole  proving.
Obstinate  and  passionate.
I  Mental  exhaustion.

■  Somnambulism.
Restless  ;  wants  to  change.

Restlessness,  with  fear  of  the  future;  fear  of  death,  which  he

thinks  is  near.
Restlessness,  with  nocturnal  heat.
I  Bad  effects  from  mortification,  violence  and  anger.
I  Ailments  arising  from  chagrin,  and  other  conditions,  when

attended  with  chilliness  and  coldness  of  the  body.
After  having  been  angry,  he  is  chilly ;  has  red  face  and  heat

in  head.
As  consequence  of  fright :  painful  rigidity  of  the  limbs.
^  Sensorium. Sensorium  blunted.

I  I  Distracted  state  of  the  sensorium.

■  Stupefaction  of  the  head.

■  Great  confusion  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  frontal  region.

■  Confusion  of  the  head  after  rising  from  bed.

■  Confusion  in  head  with  drawing  in  occiput, extending  into

neck  before  going  to  sleep.

■  In  the  morning,  on  waking,  the  head  is  as  confused  and  ach-

ing as  if  he  had  dissipated and  been  drunk  the  evening  pre-
vious ; does  not  wish  to  rise  from  bed.

■  Dizzy  in  morning,  and  weak  in  the  limbs  the  whole  day.
Dizziness  on  turning  the  head,  or  on  stooping.

■  Giddiness,  especially  when  rising  from  a  seat,  or  from  a  re-

cumbent position.
G-iddiness,  with  sensation  of  looseness  in  brain  when  stooping,

and  when  raising  up  the  head.
Swaying  to  and  fro.

■  In  the  morning,  on  rising  from  bed,  dizzy  and  whirling,  as  if

the  head  were  turning  in  a  circle.

■  ■Sensation  in  bed  as  if  she  was  sinking  deep  down.

■  Tendency  to  run  backwards.

Vertigo:  as  though  all  objects  were  reeling;  as  though  the
brain  were  turning  around;  as  if  the  head  were  turning  in  a
circle  ; on  rising  ;  or  on  raising  head ;  with  reeling  backward.

■  Slight  vertigo  on  raising  the  head  after  inclining  it  forward.

■  Vertigo  like  whirling  if  he  sits  up  in  bed,  with  nausea  in  mid-

dle of  chest ;  as  if  faintness  would  ensue.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  4

I  Vertigo  as  if  one  were  being  turned  around,  or  as  if  every-
thing whirled  about  when  standing.

I  I  A^ertigo  conjoined  with  headache  in  occiput ;  •<  from  motion.
^  Inner  Head.  I  Vertigo  and  confusion  of  head  on  slightest  mo-
tion.

iPressive  frontal  headache  very  much  increased  by  stooping.

Pressing  outward  in  frontal  region  and  left  eyeball,  especially
on  stooping.

I  iFullness  and  heaviness  in  forehead  :  as  if  brain  were  pressed
out ;  with  bleeding  of  nose ;  red,  bloated  face ;  worse  when
opening  or  moving  eyes;  when  stooping;  in  evening;  from
motion ;  better  from  closing  eyes ;  from  external  pressure.

I A  pressive  pain  in  forehead,  so  that  he  can  scarcely  stoop.

■  Pressive  pain  in  forehead  and  occiput; ■<  by  motion.

■  Headache,  as  if  everything  would  press  out  at  forehead.
Pressive  pain  above  left  eye,  followed  by  dull,  pressive  pain  in

occipital  protruberances,  thence  spreading  over  whole  body ;

on  quick  motion,  and  after  eating,  pain  so  severe  that  it

seemed  a  distinct  pulsation  within  the  head.
Great  fullness  and  heaviness  of  head,  with  digging  pressure  in

direction  of  forehead.
Tearing  across  forehead,  then  in  cervical  muscles,  then  in  right

arm.
Burning  in  forehead.
Headache  in  forehead  and  temples,  with  pressure  from  within

out,  and  sensation  when  stooping  as  if  everything  would  fall

out  of  skull.
Puin  in  right  temple  ;  a  tensive  twisting  in  single  muscle  fibres.
Pain  in  both  temples,  pressing  from  within  outwards.

■  Slight  drawing  in  temporal  bones,  from  above  downward  to-

ward the  zygoma,  especially  on  left  side.
Drawing,  tearing  pain  in  right  temple, mostly  extending  to

upper  molars  and  muscles  of  neck.
I  I  Drawing  and  tensive  headache  in  temporal  region.
Tearing  in  one  (right)  side  of  head,  extending  into  cheek  and

jaw-bones;  worse  from  motion,  touch  and  heat; >■  in  rest

and  from  external  pressure.

■  Continued  stitch  deep  in  brain,  on  left  side,  when  coughing.
Sensible  beating  in  vertex,  with  same  and  fullness  in  cranium,

in  region  of  cerebellum.

■  Sensation  of  weight  pressing  on  the  vertex.
Throbbing  headache  on  top  of  head,  morning  when  waking.
TrSticking,  jerking,  throbbing  headache,  from  forehead  back  to

occiput.

Headache  in  occiput,  extending  to  shoulders,  while  lying  on
back  in  bed,  after  waking  in  morning.

Pressive  pain  in  occiput,  drawing  down  into  neck,  relieved  to-
ward noon.


BRYONIA  ALBA.

Iln  morning  in  bed,  after  "waking,  while  lying  upon  back,  head-
ache in  occiput,  which  extends  to  shoulders,  like  a  heaviness
when  pressed  upon  a  sore  spot.

■  Severe  shooting  pains,  extending  to  vertex  or  occiput; ■<  at

night  or  from  motion  of  eye.
Sharp  pain  in  left  occipital  protuberance,  coming  and  going

suddenly.
I  Violent  headache,  like  a  great  w-eight  in  head,  as  if  he  w^ould

incline  it  to  either  side,  with  pressure  in  brain  from  within

outward,  and  great  desire  to  lie  down  immediately.

■  Headache,  as  if  something  pressed  the  skull  asunder.

■  Pressure  and  burning  pain  in  head. ^Pertussis.
Pressure  in  head,  as  if  brain  were  too  full  and  pressed  outward,

mostly  when  sitting.
Headache,  as  if  head  would  burst,  with  dry  and  parched  lips.
Jerking,  throbbing  headache.

■  ■Stitches  in  head  from  forehead  to  occiput;  on  stepping  hard.

■  Continued  stitch,  deep  in  brain,  left  side,  when  coughing.

■  Stitches  in  head. ^Pertussis.
Splitting  headache.

I  I  Great  heaviness  of  head  and  pressure  of  brain  forwards.

■  Congestive  headache,  as  if  forehead  would  burst  open,  with

epistaxis.

■  Heat  in  the  head.

■  ■Rush  of  blood  to  the  head.

■  ■Apoplexy.

■  Encephalitis. ^Metastasis  of  miasmatic or exanthematous

diseases.

■  Headache  commences  in  morning,  not  on  waking,  but  when

first  opening  eyes.

■  Headache  as  though the  head  would  burst,  commencing  in

morning  and  gradually  increasing  till  evening.

■  Headache,  as  from  nightly  revelling.

■  Headache  in  morning,  after  rising;  a  twitching- drawing  in

molar  and  maxillary  bones.

■  In  morning,  before  breakfast,  pain  as  if  head  were  compressed,

with  heaviness  in  it,  mingled  with  stitches ;  she  could  not  raise
eyes  on  account  of  pain,  and  if  she  stooped,  she  could  not
rise  up.
Headache  after  every  meal.

■  ■Headache  after  washing  himself  with  cold  water  when  face

was  sweating;  in  such' cases  opening  eyelids  increases  head-
ache.

■  Always  on  coughing,  motion  in  head  like  pressure.

■  ■Headache  when  stooping,  as  though  all  the  contents  of  head

would  issue  from  forehead.

■  ■Headache  from  ironing.

■  The  headache  is  expanding;  <  by  slightest  motion,  as  the


BRYONIA  ALBA.  6

simple  effort  of  opening  eyes,  by  stooping,  after  eating,  and
when  coughing, and  often  accompanied  by  nosebleed ; >■
by  pressure  and  closing  eyes,
IB  Headache  from  constipation;  dull  pain  in  forehead,  and  pe-
culiar pressing  sensation  in  temples.

■  Headache  >  by  tieing  up  the  head.

■  Obstinate  headache  with  constipation;  headache  almost  every

day,  beginning  immediately  after  rising  in  morning,  and  in-
creasing during  day  ;  <^  from  mental  exertion  and  from  cof-
fee; with  frequent  vomiting  of  a  little  bilious  fluid;  stools
dry,  hard,  as  if  burnt.

■  ■Gastric,  rheumatic  and  congestive  headache,  characterized

by  vertigo,  heaviness  of  head,  pressure  in  head  and  rush  of
blood  to  head.

■  ■Rheumatic  headache  in  cold,  raw,  wet  seasons.

■  Hemicrania;  hysterical  headache.

^  Outer  Head. A  small  painful  spot  on  forehead.

Increase  of  pain  under  vertex,  with  soreness  of  scalp,  just  over
same  ;  painful  soreness  of  vertex,  it  feels  bruised.

■  Burning  on  vertex  near  forehead.

■  Heat  of  head  in  the  morning.

■  ■Heat  of  head:  with  dark-red  face;  with  coldness  of  rest  of

body;  with  much  thirst  and  pain  in  limbs  when  moving
them  ;  worse  in  evening.

■  Tension  and  tearing  in  external  head; <<  from  motion,  touch,

and  in  a  warm  room  ; >  lyii^g  quiet  and  on  painful  side.

■  ScaJp  very  tender  to  touch;  child  cannot  bear  even a  soft

brush  upon  it. ^Dandruff.

■  Soreness  in  occiput  and  behind  ears;  <  from  touch  and  in

dry  weather ; >■  lying  on  painful  side  and  after  sweat.

■  Oily, greasy, sour-smelling perspiration on head (and  the

whole  body)  during  sleep ;  at  night,  especially  towards
morning.

■  The  hair  seems  very  greasy,  with a  cool head;  the  hands

become  fatty  while  combing  the  hair.
I  I  Greasiness  of  hair  of  head.

■  Dandruff;  scalp  rough  and  uneven.
Burning  heat  or  cold  sweat  on  head.

■  Coldness  on  vertex;  with  cold  hands,  chilliness,  inner  heat

and  disagreeable  throbbing  through  whole  body.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Dread  of  light. ^Intermittent.
Aversion  to  light,  particularly  sunlight.
Optical  illusions  in  bright  or  prismatic  colors.
Flickering  before  right  eye,  after  dinner.
Appearance of  all the  colors of  the  rainbow ; every object

seemed  covered  with  these  colors.
Letters  run  together  when  reading.
Eyes  sparkling  ;  watering  ;  dull  or  glassy.


BRYONIA  ALBA.

Dim  vision.

lA  bluish  haze  appeared  before  the  vision,  (vision  |J})  with
severe  pain  over  eye  like  a  needle  going  through  eyes  and
head,  (compelling  her  to  go  to  bed)  with  heat  through  tlie
■whole  head,  <^  by  stooping.  ^Hypersemia  of  the  optic  nerve
and  retina.

Very  sensitive  pressive  pain  (coming  and  going)  in  left  eye-
ball, especially  violent  on  moving  the  ball,  with  a  feeling  as
if  the  eye  became  smaller  and  was  retracted  within  the  orbit.

I  Eyes  very  sore,  and  feel  as  if  pressed  out  of  the  head.

I  Eyeballs  excessively  painful,  he  cannot  bear  to  have  them
touched.

I  I  Ciliary  neuralgia ;  the  pains  are  very  sharp  and  severe,  even
making  the  patients  scream  out ;  the  pains  are  aggravated
by  opening  the  eye  and  by  any  motion  of  the  eyeball ;  the
eyes  must  be  kept  closed  and  at  rest ;  the  pains  are  usually
sharp  in  character,  passing  through  eye  into  head  or  from
eye  downward  into  malar  region  and  thence  backward  to
occiput;  the  seat  of  pain  becomes  sore  as  a  boil,  and  the
least  exertion,  talking,  moving  or  using  the  eyes  aggravates
the  trouble.

Stitches  in  the  eyes.

I  The  eyes  feel  very  sore  to  touch,  and  when  moving  them.

I I  Soreness  and  aching  of  eyes  when  moving  them.

1 1  Pressing,  crushing  pain  in  eyes,  worse  on  motion.
Burning  in  eyes  and  edges  of  the  eyelids.
I  I  Sensation  as  if  there  were  sand  in  eyes.
Pressure  in  eyes,  as  if  full  of  sand.
Aching  in  left  orbit ;  pulsation  in  the  same.
Inflammation  of  eyes,  aggravatedby  heat.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes  and  lids,  especially  in  new-born  infants

and  gouty  subjects.

■  Inflammation  of  eye,  redness,  photophobia  and  at  the  same

time  violent  pains  in  teeth  and  face;  <  from  warmth  and  >■
by  cold.

■  Inflammation extends to choroid; opacities are  present  in

vitreous ;  iris  tremulous ;  great  ciliary  injection ;  pus  in
anterior  chamber;  eyeball  sore  on  moving,  and  darting  pains
from  left  eye  through  head,  with  heaviness  of  head  after-
noons. ^Acute  irido-choroiditis.

■  Rheumatic  iritis,  caused  by  cold,  with  steady  aching  pain  in

back  part  of  eye,  extending  through  to  occiput,  worse  at
night  and  on  motion.

■  Choroiditis  uncomplicated  with  iritis,  especially  in  serous  or

exudative  forms.

■  Eyeball  feels  full,  as  if  pressed  out,  with  sharp  shooting  pains

in  eye  and  head,  worse  at  night. ^Glaucoma.

■  Periodical  inflammation  of  eyes,  with  colic.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  8

■  Burning  redness  of  eyes. ^Rheumatic  attack.

Painless  twitching  and  drawing  together  of  left  upper  lid,  with

sensation  of  heaviness  therein.
PufEness  of  right  upper  lid.

■  Swollen  eyelids,  especially  the  upper. ^Pertussis.
I  I  Lids  swollen  and  puffed.

Burning  in  eyes  and  edges  of  eyelids.

I  I  Itching  and  burning  of  margin  of  lids.

■  Dry  burning-itching  tetters  on  the  lids.

I I  Scalding  in  corners  of  eyes  aggravated  at  night.
Frequent  lachrymation.

Severe  burning  and  lachrymation  of  right  eye.
Morning,  agglutination  and  frequent  lachrymation.
I  I  Discharge  of  mucus  from  eye,  obstructing  visions  and  pus.

■  Rheumatic  inflammation  of  eyes.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. Intolerance  of  noise.
Ringing ;  roaring ;  humming  or  chirping.
Roaring, humming  in  left  ear,  resembling  pouring  of  water

over  a  dam.
Head  feels  light,  with  constant  wabbling  in  both  ears.

■  Discharge  of  blood  from  ears. ^Vicarious  menstruation.
Feeling  of  stoppage  in  ears.

1  I  Obstruction  in  external  meatus.

Swelling,  redness,  painful  sensitiveness  and  heat  of  external
right  ear ;  at  times  piercing  stitches  deep  into  ear ;  accom-
panied by  swelling  and  painfulness  of  right  parotid  gland,
which  was  especially  sensitive  to  even  slight  touch  of  the
steel  bows  of  spectacles.

I  Otorrhoea  following  inflammation.

Complaints  predominating  in  external  ears.

I  I  Boil  in  front  of  ear.

■  Throating  suppuration  of  parotid.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Frequent  sneezing.
When  coughing,  sneezing  twice.
Sneezing  between  coughs.
Loss  of  smell.

■  Nosebleed  in  morning  after  rising; less  frequently  during

day,  but  sometimes  during  sleep.

■  Bleeding  of  nose,  especially  in  morning,  with  suppressed  men-

struation.

■  Nosebleed. ^Pertussis.

I  ■  Nosebleed  in  morning,  awaking  from  sleep ;  blood  florid.
^Vicarious  menstruation. ^Scarlatina.

■  ■Epistaxis  and  checked  menses,  or  in  place  of  catamenia  with

other  menstrual  derangements.
Dry  cold  in  head.

■  Dry  nasal  catarrh. ^Pertussis.

Fluid,  thin,  light-colored  discharge  from  right  nostril.


9  BRYONIA  ALBA.

Catarrh  extending  to  frontal  sinuses  or  into  chest.

Fluent  coryza,  watery  or  greenish.

I  I  Fluent coryza,  beginning  with  violent  frequent  sneezing ;
also  a  stitching  headache  when  stooping,  with  hoarseness.

Profuse  coryza*  without  cough.

Swollen  nose  with  inflamed  nostrils.

Swelling  of  nose,  with  very  sore  pain  when  touched.

■  Swollen  nose,  with  nosebleed  for  several  days.

Inflamed  and  ulcerated  nostrils.

I  I  Nose  much  swollen,  with  sharp  pain  ;  sore  to  touch.

Swelling  of  tip  of  nose,  with  twitching  pain  in  it,  and  on  touch
feeling  as  if  it  would  ulcerate.
'  Upper  Face. There  is  a  motion,  more  or  less  constant,  of  the
jaws,  as  if  chewing  something.

Pinching  pressure  in  articular  cavity  of  right  jaw,  more  vio-
lent on  motion.

Dull  aching,  in  alveoli  of  upper  jaw,  right  side,  now  jumping,
and  then  mild.

Twitching,  tearing  in  right  malar  bone  up  to  right  temple,  ex-
ternally, sore  upon  touch.

Painful  pressure  under  right  cheek-bone  relieved  by  external
pressure.

Bloatedness,  or  swelling  of  the  face.

I  I  Face  swollen,  even  closing  eyes.

I  Red,  burning,  hot  face.

I  I  Red  spots  on  face  and  neck.

Red,  round,  hot  spot  on  cheek,  over  malar  bone.

Face  bluish-red,  with  diflScult  inspiration.

Hot,  bloated,  red  face.

■  Face  red,  hot,  puffed. ^Pertussis.
Yellow  paleness  of  face,  or  livid  color.
Nodosities,  indurations  and  boils  on  the  face.

■  Tetters  in  face;  after  washing,  red  and  smooth.
Lower  Face. Complaints  predominate  on  lower  jaw  and  lip.

■  Drawing  and  tearing  pain,  from  temple  down  to  malar  bone

and  lower  jaw. Compare  prosopalgia. ^Trismus.
Twitching  in  both  corners  of  mouth.

■  I  Constant  motion  of  mouth,  as  if  chewing. ^Brain  afi'ections

of  children.

■  Upper  lip  and  nose  swollen,  red,  and  hot.

Lower  lip  dry,  black,  thickly  encrusted,  everted  and  very  sensi-
tive.

■  B Lips  dry,  swollen,  cracked. ^Diarrhoea. ^Typhus.

■  Mouth  and  lips  very  dry.

■  ■Dryness  of  lips  and  tongue,  with  thirst,  drinking  much  at  a

time,  but  not  often.

■  Great  dryness  of  lips,  of  tongue  and  of  hard  palate,  while  tip

of  tongue  was  moist.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  10

llParched  and  dry  lips,  likes  to  moisten  them  often; mouth

dry; very  thirsty  for  cold  water.
1 1  Lips  parched,  dry  and  cracked.
1 1  Children  pick  lips. Compare  Rhus  tox.
I  Lips  cracked  and  bleeding. ^Pertussis. •

I  I  Lips  swollen,  with  a  biting,  burning  eruption.

I I  Scrofulous,  swollen  lips.
I  Ulcerated  lips.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums.  > Toothache  about  3  a.m.,  as  if  an  exposed
nerve  in  a  hollow  tooth  were  paining  from  cold  air,  which
becomes  aggravated  on  lying  on  painless  side,  and  then  goes
away  if  one  lies  on  painful  side.

I  In  evening,  in  bed,  jerking  toothache,  now  in  upper,  now  in
lower  back  teeth ;  when  pain  is  in  upper  teeth  and  they  are
pressed  by  tip  of  finger,  pain  suddenly  ceases  and  changes  to
corresponding  lower  teeth.

I  Jerking  toothache  when  smoking.

iDrawing,  at  times  jerking  toothache  in  left  upper  back  teeth,
only  during  and  after  eating,  when  teeth  seem  too  long  and
wobble  back  and  forth.

I  Pain  as  if  a  tooth  were  screwed  in  and  then  pulled  out,  which
is  momentarily  relieved  by  cold  water,  but  becomes  better  on
walking  in  open  air,  together  with  tearing  in  cheeks  and
pinching  in  ears,  at  night,  till  6  a.m.

I  IDrawing,  jumping  toothache  when  eating,  or  just  after  eat-
ing, or  evening  in  bed ; ■<  from  warmth.

Darting,  or  flushing  pain  in  teeth.

Toothache  from  an  exposed  nerve;  sensitiveness  of  decayed
teeth  to  contact  of  air.

Teeth  seem  too  long.

I  I  Teeth  feel  too  long  and  loose.

■  Tearing,  stitching  toothache  while  eating,  extending  to  mus-

cles of  neck,  aggravated  by  warmth.

I I  Toothache  :  shooting  from  one  tooth  to  another,  or  into  head
and  cheeks.

■  Worse  from  brushing  teeth. Compare  StapMs.

I  Toothache  on  introducing  anything  warm  into  mouth.

Toothache  relieved  by  cold  water,  or  lying  on  painful  side.

Toothache  worse  from  smoking  or  chewing  tobacco;  from  tak-
ing anything  warm  into  mouth.

I  I  Teeth  and  gums  sore.

iPainful  swelling  of  gums.

I  Aching  of  gums  with  teething  children. Similar  to  DoUchos.

Teeth  are  loose.

Toothache:  shooting  from  one  tooth  to  another,  or  into  head
and  cheeks  ;  from  an  exposed  nerve  (sensitiveness  of  de-
cayed teeth  to  contact  of  air) ;  pain  worse  from  smoking  or
chewing tobacco; from introducing  anything warm into


11  BRYONIA  ALBA.

mouth;  relieved,  momentarily,  by  cold  water,  and  when  ly-
ing on  painful  side.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. iLoss  of  taste.

Taste:  flat,  insipid,  pasty,  sweetish,  putrid,  sickly,  disgusting,
nauseous,  I  I  bitter.

I  She  has  almost  no  taste  for  food  ;  when  not  eating,  the  mouth
is  bitter.

I  The  bitter  taste  remains  in  posterior  part  of  palate  after  dinner.

■  Everything  tastes  bitter;  cannot  swallow  food.
I  1  Taste  bitter  or  putrid,  with  offensive  breath.

I  Nauseous,  bitter  taste  in  mouth  in  the  morning.

I I  Dry  tongue.
Trembling  of  tongue.

I  Great  dryness  of  tongue,  mouth  and  lips. ^Constipation.

I  Tongue  dry,  rough,  cracked  and  dark  brown.

Dryness  of  tongue,  with  sensation  of  prominent  papillge.

Dryness  of  tongue  ;  tip  moist.

Great  dryness  of  lips,  tongue  and  hard  palate,  while  tip  of
tongue  was  moist.

I  Small  aphthae  on  tip  of  tongue.

Fine  pricking  in  anterior  third  of  tongue.

Tongue  coated  grayish,  or  thickly  yellow,  with  lips  dry  and
cracked.

Tongue  thinly  coated  yellow,  with  sunken  raphe,  or  longitudi-
nal fissure.

White  tongue  with  red  edges.

I  Tongue  dry  and  red,  brown,  white  or  yellow. ^Diarrhoea.

I  Tongue  thickly  coated  white. ^Diphtheritis.

I  Tongue  coated  white  or  yellow,  especially  in  the  middle.

I I  Very  much  furred  tongue.
Dark  brown  colored  tongue.
Tongue  viscous,  bilious.

I  Dry,  white,  filthy  tongue. ^Rheumatic  attack.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Offensive  smell  from  mouth,  with  hawking  of

offensive  tough  mucus,  sometimes  in  round  cheesy  lumps,  the

size  of  a  pea.
Bad  odor  from  mouth,  as  of  the  monthly.
I  Accumulation  of  frothy,  soap-like  saliva  in  mouth  and  throat,

which,  at  times,  almost  chokes  the  patient. ^Typhoid.

■  Accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth. ^'Pertussis.

■  Dryness  in  mouth,  so  that  tongue  sticks  to  palate.

■  ■Dryness  in  mouth,  without  thirst,  or  with  thirst  for  large

quantities  of  water.

■  Dry  mouth  during  chills. ^Intermittent.

■  Mouth and lips very dry;  only momentarily relieved  by

drinking.
Dryness  of  the  mouth,  tongue  and  throat.

■  Feeling  of  dryness  in  mouth. 6'Diphtheritis.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  12

I  Aphthae;  with  infantile  diarrhoea  ;  open  fontanelles.
^^  Throat. A  great  deal  of  phlegm  comes  down  from  the  choanse.
A  kind  of  scraping  and  roughness  back  in  throat.
Back  of  throat  seems  swollen ; feels  as  if  he  had  a  severe

coryza,  which  hinders  him  when  reading.
Tough  mucus  in  fauces,  loosened  by  hawking.

■  Harassing,  fatiguing  hawking  of  mucus;  he  fears  he  Avill  suf-

focate ; retching ; cannot  sleep ; flighty ; sees  faces  when

closing  the  eyes.
I  1  Sensation  of  pressure  and  fullness  in  throat.
Pressive  pain  in  right  tonsil.
Slight  pain  in  left  tonsil.
1  I  Stitches  in  throat  when  swallowing.
1  I  Sticking  pain  on  swallowing  on  feeling  of  throat,  and  on

bending  neck.
Itching  needle-like  stitches  in  throat  (especially  if  he  was  walk-
ing rapidly),  which  irritate  and  cause  scratching ;  disappear

after  scratching.
I  Stitches  and  scratching  in  throat. ^Pertussis.
Constant  disposition  to  swallow,  with  sharp,  stinging  pain  in

external  parts (right  side),  on a  line  with  promontory of

larynx.
I  I  Great  dryness  in  fauces  and  throat,  sometimes  with  burning.
Dryness  of  pharynx,  with  smarting  just  behind  pomum  adami.
I  Feeling  of  numbness  from  stomach  up  through  oesophagus,

with  diarrhoea  and  tenesmus.
Pain  in  throat ;  throat  is  dry  and  raw  on  empty  swallowing ;

on  drinking  this  sensation  disappears  for  a  short  time,  but

soon  returns ;  it  is  worse  in  a  warm  room.
I  I  Crawling  sensation  in  throat;  inducing  a  cough,  followed  by

mucous  sputa.
Sensation  of  swelling  and  constriction  in  oesophagus.
I  Quickly  prostrated;  shuns  all  motion;  complains  on  moving

or  when  being  moved  of  pain everywhere ;  white  tongue  ;

feeling  of  dryness  in  mouth  without  particular  thirst  or  with

desire  for  large  quantities. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Aphthous  patches  on  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  fauces.

■  Constitutional  tendency  to  aphthous  formations  in  throat.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Too  great  appetite.
1  Unnatural  hunger  for  six  days.

■  Abnormal  hunger;  he  must  often  eat  something.
Eats  little  and  often.

Loss  of  appetite ;  thirst  for  cold  water.

■  Aversion  to  food.

■  Desires  things,  immediately,  which  when  offered  are  refused.

■  Desire for unusual things; acids, sweets, strong coffee,

oysters,  etc.

■  Desire  for  acids.


13  BRYONIA  ALBA.

I  Hasty  and  eager  drinking. ^Brain  diseases.

■  Great  thirst  day  and  night.

I  Great  thirst  (he  was  obliged  to  drink  much  cold  water),  with

internal  heat  without  feeling  hot  externally.
Great  thirst ;  desire  for  large  quantities  of  cold  water.

I I  Thirst  for  large  quantities  at  long  intervals.

I  Great  thirst;  she  can  and  must  drink  a  great  deal  at  once;

drink  does  not  distress  her.
Thirst  during  stool.

■  Violent  thirst  for  cold  water;  drinks  a  great  deal  at  a  time.

^Pertussis.
No  appetite  for  milk ;  but  if  he  takes  it,  the  appetite  therefor
returns  and  he  begins  to  relish  it.  .

I I  Desire  for  warm  drink,  and  relieved  by  it.

I  Desire  for  cold  and  acid  drinks. ^Diarrhoea.

Aversion  to  greasy  food.

I  Desire  for  things  which  are  not  to  be  had,  or  are  refused  when
offered. ^Diarrhoea.
^'^  Eating  and  Drinking. Some  complaints  better  on  an  empty
stomach.

A  great  many  symptoms  directly  after  dinner  and  during  first
half  of  afternoon.

Almost  always  aggravated  after  eating,  particularly  after  a  satis-
fying meal,

I  I  After  eating  there  is  often  a  constricting  pain  in  stomach,
then  a  cutting  in  epigastrium  and  then  vomiting  of  food ;
worse  from  motion.

■  After  eating:  sensation  of  weight  in  stomach,  as  of  a  heavy

stone;  eructations  flatulency. ^Gastric  derangement.
Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating,  especially  after  eating  bread.
Snapping  noises  in  1.  side  of  stomach  as  if  the  victuals  were

pushed  to  the  1.  side.

■  After  eating  oysters  or  chicken-salad,  tasteless  eructations.

■  Sour-crout,  cabbage,  potatoes,  and  other  vegetables,  particu-

larly nitrogenized,  disagree.

■  Incarceration  of  hernia  after  eating  cold  fruit.

Nausea,  on  assuming  an  erect  position,  after  eating,  with  water-
brash.

I  I  After  eating  :  belching, tasting  of  food.

Gastric  derangement  after  old  sausages ;  old  cheese;  cabbage;
sour-crout ;  fruit ;  turnips  ;  salads  ;  milk,  etc.

Stomach  distended  with  wind  after  eating,  especially  after
oysters  and  chicken-salad  in  evening.

Bitter  vomiting  when  drinking  immediately  after  a  meal.

Distension  of  abdomen,  especially  after  eating.

After  meals :  diarrhoea.

■  Worse  after  eating  or  drinking. ^Pertussis.

■  Spasmodic  cough  after  drinking. ^Aphthae.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  14

I  Headache  when  drinking  after  being  heated.

Glass  of  wine  in  evening  caused  heartburn.

Frequent  drinking  of  cold  water  relieved  bitter  taste  and  incli-
nation to  vomit.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. i  i  Hic-
cough.

Hiccough  after  eating,  and  on  every  shock  caused  by  it  press-
ure in  forehead,  as  if  brain  shook  from  behind  forwards.

■  Frequent  empty  eructations,  mostly  bitter. ^Pertussis.

I  I  Bitter  or  sour  belchins;  with  waterbrash  sour  or  tasteless.

I  Eructations  after  eating,  at  last  bitter.

Frequently,  at  times,  sourish  eructations  after  eating.

I  Belching  after  meals,  with  taste  of  what  has  been  eaten.

Shooting  pain  with  belching.

I  Pressive  pain,  with  continuous  eructations  and  vomiting  after-
ward of  greenish-yellow  mucus ;  often  by  every  step  stomach
is  very  sensitive.

Heartburn  from  wine,  evenings.

Profuse  waterbrash  and  vomiting  after  eating.

Gulping  up  of  food  after  every  meal;  sometimes  sour.

I  Food  is  thrown  up  immediately  after  eating,  with  consti-
pation ;  lips  dry  and  cracked.

■  Something  bitter  rises  into  mouth,  without  eructations,  with

nausea.
Nausea  in  abdomen,  in  stomach  and  oesophagus.
Nausea  before  stool.

■  Nausea. ^Pertussis.

I  I  Nausea  after  meals  eaten  with  relish.
llNausea  on  waking  in  morning.

■  Nausea,  increased  or  brought  on  by  slightest  motion;  must

lie  quiet.

■  Nausea,  relieved  by  keeping  quiet;  desires  to  keep  still,  with

splitting  headache.

■  Constant  nausea  and  thirst. ^Constipation.
Nausea,  with  bitter  eructations.

■  Nausea  when  rising  up  and  while  sitting  up  in  bed;  has  to  lie

down  again.

■  ■Nausea  and  fainting  on  sitting  up. ^Diarrhoea.
After  nausea  :  canine  hunger.

Ng-usea  and  inclination  to  vomit.

Nausea  after  eating,  sometimes  with  vomiting  of  food,  retained

by  keeping  very  quiet  after  the  meal.
Nausea  and  vomiting  in  morning  when  waking.
I  I  Nausea  and  vomiting,  morning  and  evening,  chiefly  water

and  mucus.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  during  heat. ^Intermittent.
Empty  retching,  with  waterbrash.

Vomiting  and  belching.


^5  BRYONIA  ALBA.

B  Vomiting  of  solid  food,  not  of  drink. ^Pertussis.
A^oraiting  of  food,  immediately  after  eating.

■  Vomiting  after  eating  bread.

I  I  Vomiting  of  food  and  a  fluid  consisting  of  mucus  and  bile

tasting  very  bitter.
Vomiting  during  stool.
Vomiting  after  drinking.

Bitter  vomiting,  when  drinking  immediately  after  meal.
I  Vomiting,  first  of  bile,  then  of  food. ^Pertussis.
I  I  Vomiting  of  food  when  coughing.
Sour  vomiting  and  eructation.
Vomiting  of  bitter,  musty  or  putrid  liquid,  which  leaves  similar

taste  in  mouth.
I  Vomiting  of  bitter substances, or  of  yellow-green mucus.

^Diarrhoea.
I  Vomiting  of  food,  with  hiccough  and  retching.
I  Vomiting  of  blood.
I  Vomiting  during  cholera  season.
Vomiting  of  bile;  pain  and  heaviness  in  region  of  liver,  radiant-

ing  to  r.  shoulder.
I  Vomiting  and  rumbling  after  chills. (!^Intermittent.
After  vomiting  :  sensation  as  if  stomach  were  distended.

■  Gulping  up  of  phlegm  during  night.

■  Severe  stitches  in  1.  side  accompany  vomiting.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pain  in  pit  of  stomach.

Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  as  if  there  was  a  stone  in  it ;  goes

off  with  much  eructation.
Pressure  and  fullness  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  <  by  motion.

■  Pressure  and  stitches  in  pit  of  stomach  and  right  hypochonder.

/^Icterus.

■  Feeling  as  if  pit  of  stomach  were  swollen.
Soreness  in  pit  of  stomach  when  coughing.

■  Sensitiveness  of  pit  of  stomach  to  touch  and  pressure.
Heat  in  pit  of  stomach  ; <  during  every  inspiration.

■  Large  abscess  at  pit  of  stomach  after  a  blow.
Epigastric  region  painful  to  pressure.

■  Epigastric  region  painful  to  touch;  so  sensitive  cannot  endure

clothes.
Cutting  as  with  knives  in  epigastric  region.
Burning  in  stomach  and  pit  of  stomach,  especially  when  mov-
ing-
Tension  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  feeling  of  heat.

■  Stitching  pain  in  region  of  stomach;  <  from  motion,  espe-

cially from  a  misstep.
I  i  Stitches  in  stomach.
Stitching  in  stomach  when  lying  on  side;  also  in  pit  of  stomach

when  making  a  false  step.

■  Pains  in  stomach. ^Pertussis.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  16

I  Gastric  derangement  from  talcing  cold.
I  Stomachache  associated  with  anxiety.

■  Burning  in  stomach  and  pit  of  stomach,  especially  when  mov-

ing.

■  Stomach  becomes  extremely  sensitive  to  touch  or  pressure.

■  Inflammation  of  stomach.
Swelling  of  stomach.

I  Stomach  full  and  sensitive  to  pressure.

■  Sensation  as  though  a  stone  lay  in  stomach  ;  epigastric  region

painful  to  touch.

■  Grastralgia: with  inclination  to  commit  suicide; if  after  a

meal,  or  even  while  eating,  patient  complains  of  a  pressure
in  pit  of  stomach  as  from  a  stone ;  >>  by  eructation,  <^  by
motion  and  attended  with  constipation.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating,  like  from  a  stone ;  makes

him  fretful.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  as  soon  as  he  has  eaten,  and  even  while

eating.

Constrictive  pain  in  region  of  stomach  as  if  that  part  were  rol-
led up  into  a  ball ;  relief  was  obtained  by  drawing  legs  up
against  abdomen.

Distention  of  stomach  and  eructations  of  wind.

Feeling  of  emptiness  of  stomach,  with  distention  of  abdomen.

Numbness  in  stomach. See  13.

■  Painful tension of  stomach, with soreness when touched.

^Rheumatic  attack.

■  Burning  in  pit  of  stomach. ^Rheumatic  attack.

I  1  Food  oppressed  stomach ;  felt  like  a  wad  at  epigastrium ;
often  food  regurgitated.

■  Pain  excessive  when  in  motion;  perfect  relief  from  quiet  or

from  eructations  of  wind.

■  ■Gastric  affections:  dry  mouth,  tongue  and  throat, without

thirst ;  tongue  coated  more  in  middle ;  giddy  when  stooping
or  rising;  forehead  heavy;  face  bloated  or  sallow,  yellowish  ;
taste  bitter ;  food  lies  heavy,  particularly  bread ;  pit  of
stomach  sore  to  touch,  constipation,  etc.

■  Derangement  of  stomach,  with  gastric  fever,  chills  and  cold-

ness.
All  gastric  symptoms  easier  when  keeping  quiet.

■  Gastric  affections  in  young  girls.

^^  Hypochondria. ■  Burning  pains  along  anterior  connection  of
diaphragm  with  ribs.
I  I  Pressure  in  epigastrium  ;  worse  after  eating  and  when  walk-
ing ;  sometimes  extending  to  umbilical  regions,  even  to  blad-
der and  perineum.

■  Stitches and  soreness  in  epigastrium  and  hypochondrium.

^Pertussis.
Tensive  pain  in  region  of  liver.


17  BRYONIA  ALBA.

1  1  Tensive,  burning  pain  in  hepatic  region.

Tensive  pain  below  false  ribs  in  right  hjpochondrium,  especi-
ally sensitive  on  deeep  inspiration.

iTransient  stitches  in  right  hypochondrium,  with  painful  sensi-
tiveness of  this  region  to  hard  pressure  or  deep  inspiration.

Burning  and  stitching  pain  in  hepatic  region.

iStitches  in  liver,  when  touching  it;  when  coughing  and
breathing. ^Inflanamation  of  the  liver.

Congestion  of  liver.

■  Sticking  pain  in  liver. ^Pertussis.

Pains  in  liver,  mostly  stinging  or  tensive  and  burning.

I  Icterus.

I  I  Stitches  most  frequent  in  region  of  spleen.

I  Stitching  pain  in  spleen  during  chills. ^Intermittent,

■  Hard  swelling  of  spleen;  crepitation  on  motion  of  legs;  pain

in  1.  heel ;  bronchial  catarrh  ;  in  an  old  man.
^®  Abdomen. Tearing  pain from  hip  through  abdomen  to  epi-
gastrium.

Nausea  in  abdomen.

Sudden  painful  cuttings  in  intestines,  with  a  feeling  as  though
one  were  digging  him  with  the  fingers,  compelling  him  to
bend  double,  relieved  by  profuse  pasty  evacuations.

Dull,  griping  and  cutting  in  intestines,  prior  to  passage  of  fla-
tus; motion  and  standing  increase  the  pains.

Griping  pains  about  the  navel.

I  I  Pains  sticking  and  shooting  in  both  sides  of  abdomen ;  <;
from  motion  ;  changing  into  stitches  from  belly  to  stomach.

Stitches  and  other  pains  hinder  the  respiration.

I  Stitches  in  abdomen. ^Pertussis.

Pains  in  abdomen  flying  upwards.

I  Painless  twitching  in  left  side  of  abdomen,  between  navel  and
left  flank,  as  of  twitching  in  muscles  of  walls  of  abdomen,
followed  by  sticking  pains  deep  in  left  side  of  back.

I  Pain  on  a  limited  spot  in  abdomen,  dull,  with  a  throbbing  sen-
sation. ^Enteritis.

Slight,  crampy,  cutting  pain,  with  heat  in  right  hypogastric
region,  increased  by  every  inspiration.

Slight  colic  at  time  of  rising  and  through,  forenoon.

Colic  worse  from  motion.

I  Heat  rising  from  abdomen  into  epigastrium  and  chest;  with
heartburn; ■<  at  night;  with  dry  mouth  and  thirst.

Pain  in  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue.

I  During  colic,  must  keep  very  still ;  with  stools  hard  and  dry,
as  if  burnt.  •

All  day  long  feeling  in  abdomen  as  though  diarrhoea  would  set
in ;  the  same  sensation  exists  in  anus.

Cutting  pains  before  stool.

VOL.  III. — 2.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  18

Colic  before  stool.
Movement  of  flatus  produces  pain.
Rumbling  and  gurgling  in  bowels.
I  Abdominal  plethora.

■  Distension  of  abdomen  and  rumbling,  especially  after  eating.

^Pertussis.
1  I  Sense  of  distension  and  actual  swelling  about  umbilicus.
Great  distension  in  abdomen  toward  evening.
Distended  abdomen  ;  continued  motion  in  abdomen  and  colic,

then  continued  constipation  ;  feels  as  if  something  lay  in  ab-

,domen.
Distension  of  abdomen  relieved  by  passage  of  offensive  flatus.
I  Bloated  abdomen. ^Dropsy.
Great  sensitiveness  of  abdomen.

■  Abdomen  very  sensitive,  as  if  sore.
I  Tenderness  of  abdominal  walls.

■  Peritonitis,  with  stinging,  burning  pains;  abdomen  very  sore

to  touch,  with  constipation,  especially  if  in  a  rheumatic  sub-
ject.

■  ■  Gastro-enteritis.

■  Hysterical  spasms  in  abdomen.

■  Abdominal  complaints  from  concussion  or  overlifting.
Pressing  pain  toward  left  inguinal  ring  when  sitting  down.

■  Pain  in  inguinal  region  tensive,  going  down  the  thighs. ^Quo-

tidian fever.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. A  sense  of  pressure, heat,  weight  and
powerlessness  of  sphincter  ani  and  rectum.

■  After  the  attacks  of  colic,  escape  of  wind.
Passage  of  offensive  flatus.

All  day  long,  discharge  of  flatus.

Constant,  or  rather  frequent,  short  emissions  of  offensive  flatus.
With  passing  of  flatus,  sensation  as  though  a  diarrhoeic  stool
would  come  on.

■  Constant  urging  to  stool,  without  succeeding. ^Enteritis.
Urging  to  stool,  followed  by  copious,  pasty  evacuations  ;  with

relief  of  symptoms,  except  that  confusion  of  head  remained.

■  Griping  and  pinching  in  abdomen  and  in  region  of  navel,  as  af-

ter taking  cold,  for  several  days,  and  a  profuse,  thin  evacua-
tion follows.

■  Awaking  in  morning  with  colic  and  urging  to  stool;  has  to

get  up,  stool  follows. ^Intermittent.

■  Fermentation  in  abdomen  ;  almost  impossible  to  retain  stool.

^Diarrhoea.

■  Involuntary  stool  while  asleep.

I  I  Diarrhoea  preceded  by  colic,  at  night  or  early  morning,  after
rising  and  walking  about ;  coming  on  so  sudden,  that  escape
is  hard  to  prevent.

■  Slight  pinching  and  moving  in  intestines,  followed  by  watery


19  BRYONIA  ALBA.

ptool;  -with  passage  of  flatus ;  pinchings  do  not  disappear,
but  are  frequently  repeated  during  afternoon ;  with  a  sensa-
tion of  soreness  in  intestines,  together  with  a  dragging  down-
ward and  outward ;  with  two  profuse  watery  evacuations  in
one  hour ;  followed  by  a  slight  burning  in  anus.

I  I  Diarrhoea  generally  painful.

B  Colic  with  stool,  like  a  constriction  and  griping  with  the  hand,
Avhich  causes  diarrhoea.

I  Bilious  diarrhoea,  with  lancinating  pain.

■  Loose  stools,  painless  and  undigested.

■  Frequent  stools.

In  morning  a  pasty,  afterward  a  liquid  stool,  of  a  strong  odor ;

followed  by  burning  and  soreness  in  anus.
Very  oifensive,  profuse  stool.

■  Diarrhoea  putrid,  smelling  like  old  cheese;  worse  (or  only)  in

morning  ;  during  hot  weather.
Stool  smelling  foul,  like  old  rotten  cheese. ^Diarrhoea.
Very  offensive,  pasty  evacuations.

■  Diarrhoea-like,  bilious,  acrid  stools;  with  soreness  in  anus,

continuing  eight  days.

■  Bilious  diarrhoea.

Stools  like  dirty  water,  with  whitish  granulated  sediment  of  un-
digested food.

■  Brown,  thin,  fecal  stools.

■  Thin,  bloody  stools.
Before  stool :  colic  ;  nausea.

■  ■Vomiting  and  purging  during  cholera  season.

■  Hard  stool  passed  with  great  exertion,  with  confusion  of  head.
Much  straining  in  order  to  get  through  defecation.

During  stool :  burning  in  anus ;  prolapse  of  rectum  ;  motion
like  fermentation  in  abdomen  ;  pain  in  stomach ;  vomiting ;
coldness  and  rigors  ;  thirst;  drowsiness.

■  During  stool :  burning  in  anus. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Diarrhoea-like  stool  followed  by  prickling  and  burning  in  anus.

■  Slight  burning  with  evacuation  of  stool  and  urine.

■  A  pasty  evacuation  with  burning  in  anus,  soon  after  waking;

a  second  fluid  stool  in  half  an  hour ;  urinated  very  often,
much  each  time,  when  at  stool.
After  stool :  burning  in  rectum  ;  heat ;  sleepiness.

■  Urging  followed  by  copious  pasty  evacuations,  with  relief  of

all  symptoms  excepting  confusion  of  head.
Almost  always  better  after  stool.

■  With diarrhoea: morning and forenoon great weakness.

^Ill-treated  intermittent.
Involuntary  stools  while  asleep.

■  Diarrhoea  especially  at  night  and  burning  in  anus  with  every

passage.
Diarrhoea  in  morning,  or  worse  in  morning.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  20

Diarrhoea  in  morning,  after  getting  up,  preceded  by  cutting

pains  in  bowels.
Soft  stool  in  morning.
I  Stools  soft,  getting  thinner an thinner in morning, after

getting  up  till  10  A.M. ^Ill-treated  intermittent.

I  Mush  eaten  at  supper  appears  undigested  in  morning  diar-

rhoea. ^Ill-treated  intermittent.
Diarrhoea  after  eating  fruit  or  sour-crout.

I I  Diarrhoea  during  a  spell  of  hot  weather.

I  Stool  pasty  with  much  flatus,  followed  by  hard  portions,  and

again  by  soft,  so  that  he  believed  he  would  scarcely  finish

evacuation.
I  Stool  very  unsatisfactory,  only  after  much  straining,  which

caused  a  rush  of  blood  to  head,  and  a  feeling  of  confusion

in  head.
I  1  Retention  of  stool,  infrequent,  large  in  form,  solid ; passing

with  difiiculty,  attended  by  prolapsus  and  burning.
Stools  too  large  in  size.

Hard,  tough  stool,  with  protrusion  of  rectum.
Obstinate  constipation  ;  stools  very  dry,  large  and  hard ;  only

passed  after  much  straining.

I  Dry,  parched  stool  passed  with  effort  in  morning.
Stools  dry,  large,  hard,  and  very  dark.

Hard,  black,  di'y  and  scanty  stool.

I I  Stools  hard,  dark  and  dry,  as  if  burnt.

I  Chronic  constipation,  often  causing  severe  headache  ;  stools
very  hard  and  dry,  often  expelled  with  difiiculty.

■  Constipation  of  sucklings  and  lying-in  women.

In  horses  :  dung  in  small  balls  (hard) ;  alternate  lameness  and
swelling  of  hock-joints,  especially  if  feet  swell  while  at  rest.

I  Constipation ;  tedious  costiveness  with  a  difiicult  evacuation
of  small,  hard  stools,  as  if  burnt. ^Rheumatic  attack.

I  Two  pasty  off"ensive  evacuations  in  afternoon,  followed  by  burn-
ing in  anus.

Sensation  of  plug  in  anus,  at  6  A.M.

■  Burning  pain  in  anus. ^Rheumatic  attack.
Aching  hemorrhoids.

■  Mucus  and  blood  preceded  by  hard  stool.  ^Cholera  infantum.
Burning  at  anus  during  stools.

■  Diarrhoea  alternating  with  constipating.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Nephritis.

Pain  in  region  of  kidneys.

Urine  : I  I  copious  and  pale ;  scanty  and  dark  ;  white,  turbid  ;

brown,  like  beer ; hot  and  red ; deposits  white  sediment ;

hot,  scanty  and  red.
While  water  passes,  a  cutting  or  a  constriction  in  urethra.
I  I  Brick-dust  sediment  in  urine.
Great  urgency,  almost  irresistible  desire  to  urinate.


21  BRYONIA  ALBA.

Frequent  urination.

■  Urging  to  urinate  from  heavy  lifting. ^Dyspnoea.

■  Pressure  to  urinate  and  involuntary  discharge  of  urine. ^Per-

tussis.
Obliged  to  rise  at  night  to  urinate.
I  I  During  exertion,  urine  passes  involuntarily.
Urine  frequent,  but  scanty,  only  exceptionally  copious.

■  Between  6  and  7  p.m.  urinated  very  often,  much  each  time,

when  at  stool.
Diminished  secretion  of  urine;  hot,  red.
White,  turbid  urine.
I  Urine  profuse. ^Intermittent.

■  Small  discharge  of  urine;  hot,  of  dark  color;  when  standing

a  short  time  becoming  thick. /^Rheumatic  attack.
Cutting  in  urethra ;  sensation  of  constriction  while  urinating.
Before  urinating :  burning  and  cutting.
During  urinating :  burning  and  constricted  feeling  in  urethra  ;

abdominal  pains.
Burning,  pressing,  drawing,  and  tearing  in  urethra.

■  Urine  deposits  a  pinkish  sediment,  covering  bottom  of  vessel.

■  During  motion  some  drops  of  urine  pass  out  of  urethra  with-

out sensation.

■  Urine  passed  through  night  deposited  a  white  sediment; its

color  was  reddish-yellow.

■  Burning  in  urethra,  when  not  urinating.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  desire.
Stitches  in  right  testicle  and  spermatic  cord.
Stitches  in  testicles  while  sitting.

■  Gleet;  burning;  green  discharge.

■  Red  itching  eruption  on  glans  penis.

^^ Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Severe  pain  in  region  of  right
ovary,  like  from  a  sore  spot,  causing  an  irritation  and  drag-
ging; pain  extended  down  to  thighs,  while  at  rest;  pain
aggravated  by  touch.

■  Stitching  pains  in  ovaries  on  taking  a  deep  inspiration;  can

hardly  bear  least  touch  on  affected  parts ;  worse  on  motion.

■  Pain  in  r.  ovary;  <  when  touched.

■  Ovaritis  with  rheumatic  affections  and  in  confinement.

■  Uterine  sufferings  are  increased  by  least  motion.

■  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Dropsy  of  uterus;  swelling  increases  during  day  and  dimin-

ishes at  night.

■  Burning  pain  in  fundus  of  uterus,  r.  side.

Pinching and  uneasiness in abdomen, as if  menses should

appear.
I  I  Hastens  coming  on  of  menses  and  increases  the  flow.

■  ■Menstruation  too  early  and  too  profuse,  with  dark  red  blood;

backache,  splitting  headache;  worse  from  motion.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  22

Suppressed  menses,  with  frequent  bleeding  of  nose.

Catamenia  too  profuse  and  of  long  duration.

B  Amenorrhoea  with  abdominal  and  urinary  symptoms.

■  Suppression  of  menses  or  lochia.

During  menstruation :  pain  in  back  and  loins ;  tearing  in  limbs ;
headache ;  nausea.

■  Membranous  dysmenorrhoea.

■  When  menses  do  not  appear,  bleeding  from  ear  or  nose.

■  Flooding  of  dark blood, with  pain in small of  back, and

headache.

Swelling  and  inflammation  of  1.  labia  majora.

Hard,  black  pustule  on  a  swollen  portion  of  1.  labia  majora.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■Nausea  and  vomit-
ing of  pregnancy.

■  During  pregnancy  :  pain  in  abdomen  and  burning  in  uterus;

constipation ;  spasmodic  pains  with  chill,  particularly  after
anger.

■  Threatened  abortion.

■  Spasmodic  labor-pains.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  uterus.

■  After-pains  excited  by  least  motion,  even  taking  a  deep  in-

spiration.

■  Lochia  too  profuse,  with  burning  pain  in  region  of  womb.'

■  Lochial  discharge  often  very  offensive.

■  ■Suppression  of  lochia,  with  sensation  as  if  head  would  burst.

■  Peritonitis  puerperalis.

■  Milk  fever,  with  rheumatic  pains  in  breast.

■  ■Puerperal  fever;  particularly  when  the  breasts  are  distended

with  milk  ;  deep  inhalations  are  painful ;  stitches  in  ab-
domen ;  thirst  for  large  quantities  of  water ;  she  cannot  lie
upon  either  side ;  abdomen  distended.

■  Suppression  of  sweat  during  confinement  and  ill-effects  there-

from.

■  ■Nursing  women  have  taken  cold;  ache  all  over;  head  as  if

it  would  burst ;  lips  dry ;  parched ;  breasts  swollen,  feel
heavy  ;  milk  suppressed.

■  Rash,  especially  of  lying-in  women  and  their  infants.

■  Drawing  or  lancinating  pains  from  hip  to  foot;  worse  from

touch  or  motion. ^Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.
Excessive  flow  of  milk.

Oozing  out  of  milk  ;  secretion  generally  increased.
Scanty  secretion  of  milk.
Tensive  burning  and  tearing  pain  in  mammae.

■  Inflamed  mammse.

■  Stony  heaviness  of  breasts.

■  Breasts  feel  heavy,  are  pale,  but  hard  and  painful.

■  Breasts  have  a  strong  hardness  in  them;  they  are  hot  and

pain,  but  not  very  red.


23  BRYONIA  ALBA.

I  Left  mamma  swollen;  pains  worse  when  lifting  the  arm.
I  Nipples  very  hard.

I  Infant  screams  after  nursing;  wind  passes  ;  slimy,  green  diar-
rhcea.

■  Inflammation  of  mammae,  with  a  sensation  of  heaviness;  a

sort  of  stony  heaviness; the  mammae  hard  and  pale  (red
streaks  indicate  Bellad.) ;  suffering  worse  by  motion  (<from
ajar  or  jolt  indicates  Bellad.).
Ilnflammation  of  breasts,  with  suppression  of  flow  of  milk,

■  During  weaning,  swelling  of  breasts  and  axillary  glands,  par-

ticularly left.
I  With  cows  :  painful  swelling  of  udder.

■  Infant,  sore  mouth  ;  child  does  not  like  to  take  hold  of  breast,

but  after  mouth  becomes  moistened  it  nurses  well.

■  Lumps,  indurations  and  inflammation  of  mammge,  with  dimin-

ished or  retarded  secretion  of  milk. ^Puerperal  fever.

■  Children  ache  from  being  lifted  or  pressed.

■  Costive  infants.

■  Children  do  not  want  to  be  carried,  but  lie  quiet.

■  ■First  stage  of  mammary  abscess.

■  Prevents  gathered  breasts  in  most  cases  during  lactation  and

after  weaning. Phytol.  follows  well.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. ■Tickling  in  larynx. ^Acute  bronchitis.
Voice  nasal  or  raised.

■  Hoarseness,  with  inclination  to  sweat.

■  Hoarseness  with  singers.

■  Hoarseness. ^Pertussis. ^After  measles.

Sensation  of  apple  seed  cell  lodged  in  upper  larynx,  or  rima
glottidis.

■  Bronchial  croup;  hoarseness,  with  tendency  to  perspire;  dry,

hacking,  painful  cough,  <  in  going  from  cold  into  warm
air;  gasping  for  breath  before  a  fit  of  coughing;  after  mea-
sles ;  also  in  the  rheumatic  diathesis.

■  Soreness  in  trachea. ^Pertussis.

Tough  mucus  in  trachea,  loosened  only  after  frequent  hawking.

When  he  goes  into  a  warm  room  from  open  air,  a  sensation  as
if  vapor  were  in  trachea,  which  causes  him  to  cough  ;  he
feels  as  though  he  cannot  inspire  enough  air.

Irritation  to  cough  as  though  some  mucus  were  present;  after
he  has  coughed  some  time,  a  pain  is  felt  there  mingled  with
pressure  and  soreness;  the  pain  is  worse  while  talking  or
smoking.
^®  Respiration. Respiration  with  moist  sound.

I  I  Breathing  accelerated  as  though  by  a  feeling  of  heat  in  epi-
gastrium and  chest.

■  Shortness  of  breath. ^Pertussis.

■  So  weak  she  can  scarcely  speak,  in  the  morning. ^Inter-

mittent.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  24

Respiration  quick  and  deep,  but  without  motion  of  the  ribs.
Breathing  better  in  cohl  air  and  from  drinking  cold  water.
Amelioration,  while  making  an  expiration.

■  Worse  from  talking  and  laughing. ^Pertussis.

I  I  Breathing  impeded  by  pressing  pains,  either  just  above  epi-
gastrium or  over  whole  chest,  or  on  sternum.
Cannot  take  a  long  breath  on  account  of  stitches  in  chest.
I  During  inhalation,  stitches  through  chest  to  scapulae.

I  Stitches  from  1.  to  right  side  of  chest,  during  inspiration.
Breathing  quick, difficult  and anxious; caused  by  stitches,

principally  in  chest,  compelling  patient  to  sit  up,

I I  Shortness  of  breathing  aggravated  by  the  slightest  motion.

■  Panting  for  breath. ^Pertussis.

■  I  Crowing  or  grating  breathing. ^Hydrocephalus  of  a  child.
Breathing  quick, difficult  and anxious; caused by  stitches

most  in  chest,  compelling  to  sit  up.
Deep,  slow  breathing.

■  Disposition  to  deep  inspiration. ^Pertussis.
Inclined  to  draw  a  long  breath;  sighing;  sobbing.

■  ■Constant  disposition  to  sigh,  and  sigh  deeply.
Tormented  with  a  desire  to  take  a  long  breath,  which  is  hin-
dered by  a  stitch  in  chest.

Frequent  sighing-breathing.
Deep,  slow  breathing.

Difficult  breathing,  only  possible  with  the  assistance  of  the  ab-
dominal muscles.

■  Attacks  of  dyspnoea  and  suffi9cation. ^Pertussis.

■  A  suffocating  feeling  as  from  tight  neckwear.

■  ■Asthma,  with  a  feeling  as  if  something  should  expand,  but

would  not.
Paroxysms  of  asthma,  at  night,  with  stitching  pains  in  abdomen.

■  Asthma  and  cough,  with  pains  in  middle  of  chest,  preventing

sleep  at  night,  cannot  lie ;  tongue  thick  white,  furred.
^^  Cough. iDry  cough.

Hacking  dry  cough  from  upper  part  of  trachea.

I  I  Hacking  cough  from  a  definite  spot  in  trachea,  becoming
sensitive; -<  from  talking  and  smoking.

I  I A  dry,  hacking  cough ;  single  spasmodic  forcible  shocks  to-
ward upper  part  of  trachea,  which  seems  to  be  covered  with
dry,  tough  mucus,  even  tobacco  smoking  causes  it.

■  Grippe  with  moist  cough  or  rheumatic  pains.

Dry,  spasmodic  cough,  after  eating  and  drinking,  with  vomit-
ing of  food,  after  a  crawling  and  tickling  in  epigastrium.

■  Cough excited by tickling  in throat and in epigastrium.

^Pertussis.
Cough  excited  by  nausea,  by  eating  or  drinking,  by  creeping

or  tickling  in  stomach,  on  entering  a  warm  room.
Nausea  excites  cough  and  coughing  after  vomiting.


25  BRYONIA  ALBA.

Dry  cough,  excited  by  a  creeping  or  tickling  in  throat  or
stomach.

I  Cough  from  tickling  in  throat  and  pit  of  stomach;  in  evening
and  at  night  without  expectoration ;  during  day  expectora-
tion is  yellow,  or  consists  of  coagulated  brown  blood,  or  of
cold  mucus  of  a  disagreeable  flat  taste.

I  I  Cough  from  a  sensation  of  vapor  in  trachea,  preventing  get-
tino;  enough  air.

I  Cough  with  sneezing.

■  Spasmodic  cough,  as  from  vapor  of  sulphur. ^Pertussis.

I I  Dry,  spasmodic  cough,  principally  in  night,  and  after  drink-
ing and  eating,  when  entering  a  warm  room,  and  after  tak-
ing a  deep  inspiration.

Cough  worse  after  eating  or  drinking,  with  vomiting  of  what
had  been  eaten.

lit  seems  to  be  impossible  to  drink  without  coughing.  ^Per-
tussis.

I  I  Cough  on  coming  from  open  air  into  a  warm  room.

I  I  Cough  with  stitching  pains  in  brain.

Cough  and  stitches  in  the  head  and  chest;  or  pain,  as  if  the
head  and  chest  would  burst.

I I  Cough  with  stitches  in  sides  of  chest,  or  with  headache  as  if
the  head  would  fly  to  pieces.

iWhooping-cough  with  much  sneezing.

I  Cough  with  vomiting  and  slimy  mouth.

I  I  Cough  with  gagging,  without  nausea.

iDry  cough,  as  if  coming  from  the  stomach;  together  with  a
crawling  and  tickling  in  pit  of  stomach.

Cough,  mostly  dry,  caused  by'titillation  in  the  throat;  or  spas-
modic and  suffocating,  after  eating  and  drinking ;  with  vom-
iting of  the  food.

During  cough:  scratching  in  throat;  shortness  of  breath;  catch-
ing of  breath ;  thoracic  pains,  >  by  pressure ;  bruised  feeling
in  hypochondriac  regions,  >  by  pressure;  pressing  in  head;
bursting  pain  in  head  and  chest;  stitches  in  head,  throat
and  chest,  sides  and  epigastrium,  or  hypochondria;  pains  in
abdominal  muscles;  nausea  and  vomiting  of  food;  sore  pain
in  epigastrium;  lachrymation ;  toothache.

Cough:  with  involuntary  discharge  of  urine;  hoarseness;
thirst;  sneezing;  stitches  in  chest  and  small  of  back;  red

■  face;  aggravated  by  motion,  talking,  laughing,  eating  and
drinking.

I  I  Cough  with  rawness  in  larynx.

I  I  Cough  with  stitches  in  intercostal  spaces  and  in  sternum.

I I  While  coughing,  they  press  with  hand  upon  sternum  as
though  it  needed  support.

I  I  Cough  with  soreness  in  epigastrium  and  abdominal  muscles.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  26

1 1  Dry  cough  with  pleuritic  stitches;  during  heat.  ^Inter-
mittent.

I  Cough  compels  to  spring  up  in  bed  involuntarily. ^Typhoid

pneumonia,  etc.
B  Painful  cough  and  difficult  breathing. ^Pneumonia  of  infants.

I I  Cough  shaking  the  whole  body  ;  pain  felt  in  head  or  in  ab-
dominal muscles.

Expectoration  not  constant;  morning  and  evening,  sometimes
also  during  day.

I  Sputa  at  first  difficult  to  dislodge.

I  Sputa  tough  and  hard  to  separate,  falling  in  a  jelly-like
lump,  light  in  color,  almost  a  yellow  or  soft  brick  shade.
^Pneumonia.

I  Cough  from  a  constant  crawling  upward  in  throat,  followed
by  expectoration  of  mucus.

Cough  with  yellowish  expectoration,  or  mucus  streaked  with
blood.

Dry  cough  with  brick-dust  colored  expectoration.

I  I  Sputa  not  frequent,  scanty,  tough,  sometimes  bloody.

I  Cough  evening  and  night,  without  expectoration;  morning
and  daytime  with  it,  of  mucus  yellow  or  mixed  with  coagu-
lated brownish  blood. ^Pertussis.

Expectoration  brown,  like  liver.

Cough  with  bloody,  rusty,  tenacious  expectoration.

1  Sputa  of  an  unpleasant  flat  taste. ^Pertussis.

I  Sputa  often  cold.  ^Pertussis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  ■  Constriction  of  chest;  she  felt  the
need  of  breathing  deeply  (as  if  the  chest  were  stopped  and
she  could  get  no  air),  and  if  she  attempted  to  breathe  deeply
there  was  pain  in  chest,  as  if  something  were  being  distended
which  could  not  be  completely  distended.

Sensation  of  heaviness  beneath  sternum,  extending  towards
shoulder,  impeding  respiration;  deep  inspiration  was  diffi-
cult; oppression  of  r.  side  of  chest,  with  very  fine,  extremely
severe  stitches  in  r.  axillary  gland.

Sense  of  fullness ;  stuffed  feeling  throughout  the  chest.

Stitch  in  upper  part  of  chest,  through  shoulders,  on  inspiring.

I  I  Stitching,  lancinating  pains  are  the  most  frequent  in  chest;
on  inspiration  or  on  turning  around  in  bed;  situated  in  sides
of  chest  or  extend  through  from  front  to  scapulae.

I  Stitches  in  right  side  of  chest  between  third  and  fourth  ribs,
while  sitting.

Stitches  in  chest  and  sides  of  chest,  especially  when  coughing
or  drawing  a  long  breath,  obliging  one  to  sit  up,  or  lie  on
back; <  by  motion.

Sharp  stitching  pain  in  chest,  below  r.  nipple,  extending  out-
ward, only  on  expiration.


27  BRYONIA  ALBA.

I  Pricking  pains  below  r.  nipple  from  within  outward,  in  cavity

of  chest;  felt  only  during  inspiration.

Chest  very  sensitive,  with  stitches  in  1.  side  of  it,  on  inspira-
tion ;  whole  forenoon.

Short  but  violent  stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest,  so  that  must  hold
breath,  could  not  cry  out.

Tearing  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest  extend  from  behind  forward,
>  during  rest,  <  during  motion  and  on  deep  inspiration.

Stitching  pain  in  region  of  diaphragm,  <  from  motion  or
coughing.

I I  Stitches  in  chest,  when  breathing  or  coughing.

1 1  Stitch  in  side  is  aggravated  by  cough,  breathing  and  motion.
I  Stitches,  soreness  and  burning  pains  in  chest. ^Pertussis.
Sharp  pain  in  left  infra-mammary  region;  worse  during  inspi-
ration.
Complaints  predominate  in  lower  part  of  chest.

■  Rheumatic  pleurodynic  pains  in  chest  and  lungs.
Chill  in  left  chest.

Burning  in  right  half  of  chest.

iHeat  in  chest. ^Pleurisy. ^Pneumonia.

Heat  and  burning  pain  in  chest.

Inflammation  of  first  and  second  divisions  of  bronchi,  with  an
irritative,  shaking,  dry  cough;  heat;  pain  and  soreness
behind  sternum;  worse  daytime  and  by  motion.

I  In  case  of  an  inflammatory  affection  of  the  chest  supervening

in  the  course  of  pertussis.

■  Pleuritic  pains  in  advanced  stage  of  phthisis.

I I  Pleurisy  with  fluid  exudation.

I  iPleuritis.

I I  Pleuro-pneumonia,  with  stabbing  pains ;  frequent  respiration ;
bloody  expectoration;  high  fever;  bursting  headache;  <  on
motion  and  deep  inspiration.

1 1  Pneumonia.

I  In  pneumonia  with  scanty  expectoration,  tough,  falling  in  a

round  jelly-like  lump,  in  color  almost  a  yellow  or  soft  brick

shade.
I  Acute,  inflammatory  condition  in  catarrh  of  old  people.
iHjdrothorax.

■  Incipient  phthisis.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.,  i Irritable  heart;  beating  54
when  sitting,  but  on  rising  ever  so  quietly,  going  up  to  110
or  115  and  gradually  subsiding  again.

■  Frequent  sharp  pain  in  cardiac  region.

■  On  going  up  stairs  a  little  rapidly,  heart  flutters  and  palpitates

so  much  as  to  put  him  out  of  breath.

■  ■Stitching  pains  in  the  sides  of  thorax  make  it  almost  impos-

sible to  expand  chest.

■  ■Stitching  pain  in  region  of  heart.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  28

Cramp  in  region  of  heart,  aggravated  by  walking,  raising  one's

self,  or  using  slightest  exertion,  even raising  the  arm.
Pressive  pain  in  the  praecordial  region.
Oppression  in  region  of  heart.
Heart  beats  violently  and  rapidly.

■  Palpitation  of  heart;  frequently  violent,  and  with  oppression

of  chest. ^Carditis.

■  Palpitation  of  heart. ^Pertussis.

■  Endocarditis.
Burning  in  veins.

Pulse:  quick,  full,  hard,  rapid  and  tense;  at  times  intermit-
tent, with  strong  orgasm  of  blood.
Pulse  frequent  at  night,  slower  during  day.

■  Pulselessness. ^Cholera  Asiatica.

^  Outer  Chest. ■  Soreness  of  the  ribs,  as  if  beaten.

Painful  spot,  as  from  a  bruise,  on  second  rib,  right  side,  ex-
tending to  sternum.

■  A  painful  spot  on  the  second  rib  of  the  right  side,  extending

to  sternum,  as  after  a  blow  or  bruise,
i Pressive  pain  in  prsecordial  region.
1  I  Heat  only  internal  or  on  single  parts  of  body,  conjoined  with

great  thirst.

■  Rheumatism  of  muscles  of  chest.

■  Stitches  in  sternum  on  coughing;  was  obliged  to  hold  chest

with  hand;  even  pressing  upon  it  caused  a  sticking.
I  I  Seat  of  pain  in  chest  is  sensitive  to  pressure  and  when  arms
are  moved.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  nape  of  neck,  as  after  taking  cold.

■  Painful  stiffness  of  muscles  of  right  side  of  neck,  from  touch

and  on  moving  the  head  towards  the  shoulders.

■  On  right  side  of  nape  of  neck,  toward  the  shoulder,  painful

stiffness  of  muscles  on  moving  the  head.

■  Drawing  and  stiffness  of  muscles  of  right  side  of  neck.

■  A  pain  in  nape  of  neck near  the  occiput,  like  a  pain  and

weakness  together,  as  if  the  head  were  weak.
Rheumatic  stiffness  and  tension  in  nape  of  neck  and  back.

■  Painful  stiffness  of  neck.
Glands  on  neck  sore  to  touch.

Sharp  rheumatic  pain  in  tendon  of  trapezius  (left)  on  turning

head  to  left.
Dull  stitches  between  scapulae,  extending  from  behind  forward,

in  afternoon  while  lying.

■  Stitches  under  1.  scapula  through  to  heart.

Alternating  dull,  aching  and  sharp  pain,  beneath  right  scapula,

at  its  lower  or  inferior  angle.
Rheumatic  pain  in  back,  between  inferior  angles  of  scapulae.
I  I  In  back,  stitching  and  jerking-pressing  between  the  scapulae,

extending  through  to  epigastrium  when  sitting.


29  BRYONIA  ALBA.

Left  arm  and  hand  in  a  weaving  motion  up  and  down ;  each
time  uttering  a  sigh.

■  Shooting  stitches  in  back  through  chest.

A  drawing  down  back  when  sitting,  disappearing  on  motion.
I  The  pain  extended  through  thorax  to  lower  portion  of  sternum

(pain  in  first  dorsal  vertebrpe).
Stitches  in  back  and  small  of  back.
Creeping  chilliness  in  back,  from  above  downwards.
I  Pain  in  back  before  the  paroxysm.
Eruption  on  the  back,  aching  like  a  sore.
Dull  aching  in  lumbar  muscles.
I  I  Stiffness,  tearing  and  tenderness  in  joints  and  muscles  of

lumbar  region,  prevent  motion  and  stooping; most  when

standing  or  sitting,  >■  when  lying.
I  I  In  lumbar  and  sacral  region,  pain  as  if  beaten.
I  Stitches  in  sacral  region  and  back. ^Pertussis.
Pain  in  the  small  of  back,  which  makes  walking  or  turning

difficult;  as  if  bruised,  when  lying  on  it.
Painful  stiffness  in  small  of  back,  compelling  him  to  walk  and

sit  crookedly.
Pain  in  small  of  back,  like  a  painful  stiffness,  not  allowing

one  to  stand  erect.
iPressive  drawing  pain  in  small  of  the  back  and  loins,  which

makes  turning  very  difficult;  it  awoke  him  from  sleep.
iPain  in  small  of  back; «<  by  every  motion. ^Rheumatic

attacks.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Painful  pressure  on  top  of  right  shoulder,  worse

upon  touch ;  on  deep  breathing  it  becomes  a  dull  stitching,

which  extends  downwards  and  outwards  to  shoulder-joint.
Painful  tension  and  pressure  in  right  shoulder,  when  at  rest.
Tearing  in  shoulder-joints  and  upper  arms,  with  tension  and

stitching,  and  shining  red  swelling  of  parts.
Rheumatic  swelling  of  right  shoulder  and  upper  arm,  with

stitches.
Complaints  predominant  on  upper  arm.
Drawing  and  tearing  pains  in  right  upper  arm.
B  Rending  in  shoulder-joints  and  upper  arms,  with  tightness

and  piercing. ^Rheumatic  attacks.
I  I  Arms  incline  to  sink  by  one's  side.
!A  feeling  in  right  elbow  as  if  the  arm  were  broken,  with  a

troublesome  paralytic  pain;  it  changed  afterward  to  a  draw-
ing pain;  it  extended  to  shoulder-joint  and  lasted  all  day.
Swelling  of  elbow  and  hand-joints,  and  upper  parts  of  hands.

■  Swelling  of  elbow-joint,  and  somewhat  above  and  below  it  as
M far  as  the  middle  of  upper  and  forearm,  and  of  soles  of  feet.

■  Swelling  about  the  elbow-joints;  worse  in  left. ^Rheumatic

attacks.

■  Swelling  of  right  elbow-joint,  with  stitches.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  30

Swelling  of  arm  around  the  elbow.

Tearing  pains  on  inner  surface  of  forearm,  in  a  line  from  elbow
to  wrist.

Fine  stitches  in  wrists,  if  hands  become  warm,  and  during  rest;
they  do  not  disappear  on  motion.

Pain  in  wrists,  as  ]f  wrenched  or  sprained,  on  every  motion.

Swollen  hands.

Complaints  predominate  in  palm  of  hand.

Stitching  pain  in  fingers  when  writing.

On  writing  or  taking  hold  of  anything,  a  sensation  as  if  finger-
joints  were  swollen  and  puffed;  they  are  painful  on  much
exertion  and  on  touch.

Rather  hot,  pale  swelling  in  last  joint  of  little  finger,  with  stick-
ing in  it  on  moving  the  finger,  or  on  pressing  it.

■  Hot,  pale  swelling  of  finger-joints  and  whole  hand. ^Rheu-

matic attacks.
^'  Lower  Limbs. I  Inflammation  of  psoas  muscles.

Pains  in  right  trochanteric  and  gluteal  region,  of  an  aching,
cramp -like  and  bruised  kind  ;  worse  at  every  motion.

I  Pains  in  1.  lumbar  region  extending  to  thigh;  <  in  after-
noon, when  sitting  up  and  by  movement;  walks  with
crutches. ^Sciatica.

Stabbing  pain  in  hips.

I  Shooting  pains  extending  towards  hip.

Stitches  in  hip-joint,  extending  to  knee.

In  morning,  feels  lame  and  bruised,  particularly  in  right  hip.

Cracking  and  feeling  of  dislocation  of  hip-joint,  when  walking.

■  Sciatica  :  pains  <  sitting  up,  by  moving,  and  late  in  evening;

lies  best  on  painful  side ;  often  <^  by  cold  water.

I A  few  large  stitches,  like  knife-stitches,  in  hips.

Great  painfulness  of  right  thigh  ;  pain  comes  from  head  of  fe-
mur, extends  along  anterior  surface  of  thigh  to  knee.

■  Great  weariness  in  thighs,  he  can  scarcely  go  up  steps;  less

when  going  down  steps.

■  When  walking  bent,  sticking  pain  from  hip  into  knee.
Complaints  predominate  on  front  side  of  thigh,  in  patella,  and

in  calf  of  leg.

■  Stitches  in  knees  when  walking.

Pain  in  right  knee,  so  that  in  evening  he  could  scarcely  walk,
and  was  obliged  to  keep  the  leg  very  quiet ;  inner  side  of
knee  very  painful  to  touch  ;  next  morning,  while  in  bed,
there  was  no  pain,  but  after  being  up  a  while  pain  returned.

Painful  stiff'ness  of  knees,  with  stitches,  especially  when  moving
them.

■  Synovial  inflammation  of  knee-joints.  •'

■  A  feeling  in  right  knee-cap  as  if  he  had  been  kneeling  a  long

time.

■  Tearing  pain  in  shins.


31  BRYONIA  ALBA.

I  Tensive  sensation  in  bend  of  knee,  which  afterward  changed

to  a  drawing  and  wrenching  along  crest  of  fibula,  lasting
several  minutes.
Knees  totter  and  knock  together  when  walking.

I I  Swelling  of  knee,  with  tensive  pain  in  ligaments.

I  Knee-joints  swollen,  red,  shining,  motion  impossible. ^Rheu-
matism. ,
Pinching-tearing  in  right  calf.
Tightness  in  calves.

■  Bruised  pain  on  outer  side  of  left  calf,  on  moving  and  turning

foot,  as  also  on  touch  ;  during  rest  a  numb  sensation  in  this
place.
Tension  in  ankles  on  motion.

I  The  ankle  feels  as  if  dislocated,  especially  when  walking.
Tensive  pain  on  back  of  feet,  even  when  sitting.

Pain  in  feet  as  if  sprained.

Hot  swelling  of  instep,  with  bruised  pain  on  stretching  out

foot ;  foot  seems  tense  on  stepping  on  it,  and  on  touch  it

pains,  as  if  suppurating,  like  an  abscess.

I I  Feet  are  tense  and  swollen  in  evening.

1 1  Hot,  inflammatory  swelling  of  feet,  with  redness.

Gouty  swelling  of  feet,  with  redness,  heat  and  tensive  pain.

■  Sensation  in  tendo  achillis  as  if  bruised. ^Rheumatic  attack.
I  Horses  :  during  distemper,  hard  swelling  and  coldness  of  feet,

especially  of  hind  feet.

Stitches  in  soles.

Prickling  in  soles  of  feet  when  walking.

I  I  Severe  pain  in  sole  of  foot,  with  great  lameness,  could  not
walk  ;  not  much  swelling.

I  Sudden  pains  in  balls  of  great  toes.

Stitches  in  big  toe.

I  The  legs  are  so  weak  that  they  will  scarcely  hold  him,  on  com-
mencing to  walk,  and  even  when  standing.

Swelling  of  lower  limbs.

■  Weariness  and  stiffness  of  lower  limbs.
Swelling  of  legs,  down  to  feet.

I  Putrid  ulcers  on  lower  limbs.

I  Gouty  affections  of  lower  extremities;  pains <  from  motion.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Tensive  or  stitching  pains  in  limbs.
I  I  Pains  in  limbs  and  joints  ; >  by  warmth.

■  Violent  pain  in  limbs  during  heat. ^Intermittent.

I  Pain  in  limbs  ; <^  by  motion  and  during  heat. ^Intermittent.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  tops  of  shoulders  and  in  1.  knee.

■  ■Rheumatic  and  gouty  pains  in  limbs,  with  tension ; <  from

motion  and  contact.

■  Acute  articular  rheumatism, swelling  pale  red;  pain  <  on

slightest  motion  ;  fever  ;  pulse  130.
I  I  Limbs  move  but  sluggishly.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  32

Laming  and  bruised  feeling  in  extremities.
Weariness  and  stiffness  of  limbs,  especially  the  lower.
Weakness  of  limbs  obliges  him  to  sit.

■  Weariness  and  heaviness  in  all  limbs  ;  feet  can  scarcely  carry

her  on  account  of  heaviness,  when  walking.
I  All  limbs  seem  bruised  and  paralyzed,  as  if  he  had  lain  upon
a  hard  bed.

0  Paralysis  of  limbs.

1  I  Limbs  and  joints  swell,  become  red,  and  are  very  sensitive

to  touch  or  motion.
I  Heaviness  in  limbs,  which  seem  like  lead.
I  Horses:  walk  stiff  from  lameness  of  joints.
1 II  Constant  threshing  with  left  arm  and  leg. ^Hydrocephalus.
I  Ulcers  on  fingers  and  toes.

■  Tearing, stinging pains, most  in limbs, particularly  when

moving  the  parts,  with  intolerance  of  touch. ^Rheumatic
attack.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  tearing  in  r.  side  of  head  >;
pain  in  stomach  >  ;  all  gastric  symptoms  >  ;  feet  swell ;
stitches  in  wrists ;  numb  sensation  on  outer  1.  calf.

Lying:  on  back,  headache  in  occiput  in  morning;  headache
with  pressure  in  brain  <;  ;  on  painful  side,  tension  and  tear-
ing in  head  >  ;  on  painful  side,  soreness  in  occiput  and  be-
hind ears  >  ;  in  bed,  hazy  vision  and  sticking  pain  over
eye  >  ;  on  painless  side,  toothache  <C  ;  on  painful  side,
toothache  ^  ;  on  side,  stitching  in  stomach  ;  asthma  and
cough  <;  ;  stitching  between  scapulae  ;  stiffness  ;  tearing  and
tenderness  in  lumbar  region  >>  ;  pain  in  small  of  back  <^  ;
compelled  to  lie  down.

Sitting :  in  bed,  vertigo  and  faintness  ;  pressive  headache  ;
in  bed,  nausea ;  pain  toward  inguinal  ring ;  stitches  in
testicle  ;  stitches  in  chest  >>  ;  stitches  between  third  and
fourth  ribs  ;  stitching  and  jerking  between  scapulae  to  epi-
gastrium ;  stitching,  tearing  and  tenderness  in  lumbar
region  <<  ;  pain  in  lumbar  region  <C  ;  sciatica  <C  ;  tensive
pain  on  back  of  feet ;  heat  or  chill  <^.

Rising  :  reluctant  to  rise  in  morning  ;  giddiness  ;  vertigo  with
reeling  ;  to  erect  position  after  eating,  nausea  and  water-
brash  ;  heart  beat  goes  from  54  to  110 ;  from  bed,  faintness.

Standing:  weak  mind,  faintness;  vertigo  and  whirling;  grip-
ing and  cutting  in  intestines  ■<  ;  stiffness,  tearing  and
tenderness  in  lumbar  region  <^ ;  stands  inerect  from  pain  in
back  ;  weakness  of  legs.

Stooping  :  or  turning  head,  dizziness  ;  giddiness  with  looseness
of  brain  ;  fractal  headache  <  ;  pressing  in  frontal  region  and
1.  eyeball  <  ;  fullness  in  forehead  <  ;  sensation  of  falling
in  head;  difficulty  in  resuming  erect  position;  heat  in  head  <;


33  BRYONIA  ALBA.

stitching  headache ;  stiffness,  tearing  and  tenderness  in  lum-
bar region  ■<.

Bending  :  neck,  sticking  pain ;  drawing  legs  on  abdomen  ;
constriction  in  epigastrium  >  ;  turning  head  to  left,  pain
in  tendon  of  trapezius  ;  cutting  in  intestine  >  ;  turning,
pressive-drawing  in  back  and  loins  <  ;  bending  and  stretch-,
ing  limb,  swollen  instep,  bruised  pain.

Walking  :  stitches  from  forehead  to  occiput,  stepping  hard  ;
stomach  sensitive  ;  misstep,  stitching  in  stomach  <<  ;  press-
ure in  epigastrium  <  ;  ascending  stairs,  palpitation  and
breathlessness,  pain  in  small  of  back  <i  ;  crooked,  from  stiff-
ness in  back  ;  cracking  and  feeling  of  dislocation  in  hips  ;
bent,  sticking  from  hip  to  knee  ;  stitches  in  knee  ;  knees
totter  and  knock  together  ;  feeling  as  of  ankle  dislocated  ;
foot  feels  tense ;  prickling  in  sole  of  foot ;  pain  in  sole  ;
weakness  of  legs  ;  weariness  and  heaviness  ;  weakness  and
weariness ;  ■<  ascending  stairs,  >•  descending.

Motion  :  anxiety  >>  ;  vertigo  and  headache  <;  ;  fullness  in
forehead  ;  <  moving  eyes  ;  pressure  in  forehead  and  occi-
put <  ;  severe  pulsating  pain  in  head  ;  tearing  in  r.  side  of
head  <C  ',  of  eyes,  shooting  pains  in  head  <C  ;  of  eyes,  in-
creases headache  ;  expanding  headache  <;  ;  headache  better
closing  eyes ;  limbs  pain  ;  tension  and  tearing  in  outer
head  <;  ;  of  eyeball,  sensitive  pressure  <C  ',  of  eyes,  ciliary
neuralgia  •<  ;  eyes  sore  and  aching  ;  of  eyes,  pressing-
crushing  pain  ■<  ;  rheumatic  iritis  and  aching  in  back  of
eye  to  occiput  <C  ;  pinching  pressure  at  articulation  of  r.
jaw ;  complains  of  pain  everywhere  ;  constriction  and  cut-
ting in  stomach  after  eating,  with  vomiting  <  ;  on  shock
from  hiccough,  pressure  in  forehead  as  of  brain  shaking ;
nausea  <  ;  fullness  and  pressure  at  pit  of  stomach  ■<  ;
burning  at  stomach  <C  ;  stitching  in  epigastrium  <C  ;  pain
in  stomach  excessive ;  moving  legs,  crepitation ;  griping
and  cutting  in  intestines  <  ;  sticking  and  shooting  pain  in
abdomen  <  ;  colic  <  ;  urine  passes  involuntarily  ;  drib-
bling of  urine  without  sensation ;  pain  in  ovaries  <  ;  uterine
suffering  <  ;  backache  and  headache  <  ;  after-pains  brought
on ;  lancinating  pain  from  hip  to  foot  <C  ;  inflammation  of
mammae  (suffering)  •<  ;  short  breath  <C  ',  redness  of  face  << ;
stitches  in  chest  •<  ;  inflammation  of  bronchi  <C  ;  pleuro-
pneumonia <<  ;  cramp,  in  heart  <C  ;  drawing  down  in  back
disappears ;  stiffness,  tearing  and  tenderness  in  lumbar
region  <  ;  sprained  pain  in  wrist ;  pain  and  swollen  sensa-
tion in  finger-joints  ;  sticking  in  little  finger ;  aching  in
gluteal  region  •<  ;  pain  in  lumbar  region  <<  ;  sciatica  <C  ;
pain  in  knee  <  ;  stiffness  and  stitches  in  knee  <  ;  knee
swollen,  cannot  move;  bruised  pain  in  outer  calf;  tension
in  ankles ; gouty  pains  <  ; pain  in  limbs  <  ;  rheumatic

VOL.  III.— 3.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  34

pains  <;  limbs  a'Tid  jaints  swollen  and  sensitive;  tearing
and  stinging  in  limbs  <  ;  indisposed  to  exertion  ;  weariness
and  sweat  after  exertion;  aching  of  arms  and  feet;  faint-
ness ;  chills  <  ;  sweat  easily  excited ;  stitching  about  large
joints  ;  soreness  in  periosteum  and  ligaments  ;  affected  parts
swollen,  cannot  move  them  ;  stitching  pain  in  swollen  joints ;
stinging  in  gouty  swellings ;  of  arms,  pain  in  1.  mamma
and  chest.
3s  Iferves. Oversensitiveness  of  all  the  senses.

Increased  bodily  irritability.

I  Spasm  developed  through  repercussion  of  measles.

Spasmodic  complaints;  starting,  twitching  of  limbs.

B  Hysteric  spasms.

I  Clonic  spasms.

lis  often  indicated  after  spasms  have  been  controlled,  and  there
remain  fullness  of  pulse,  abdominal  tenderness  and  perspira-
tion.

Feels  lazy,  and  indisposed  to  work.

■  Weaving  motion  of  1.  arm  and  leg,  with  sighing.
Is  compelled  to  lie  down.

I  Great  weariness  in  morning  and  afternoon.
I  Loss  of  strength  on  slightest  exertion.

■  Great  weariness  and  sweat  over  whole  body  after  a  slight

exertion.
8  She  is  weak,  arms  and  feet  ache  if  she  does  any  work,  arms

sink  down;  if  she  goes  upstairs  she  can  scarcely  get  along.
Great  weakness  and  exhaustion ;  worse  from  walking.
I  The  feeling  of  weakness  becomes  very  great,  especially  great

fatigue  after  a  long  walk.

I  On  rising,  great  exhaustion  and  weakness,  which  increased

during  forenoon,  while  walking,  so  that  he  had  to  drag  him-
self about ;  on  going  upstairs  there  was  excessive  weakness
in  knees  and  legs.

I I  Fainting  in  morning,  getting  up,  or  when  rising  up  in  bed.
Sudden  prostration,  shunning  all  motion.

I  Uncommonly  wearied  and  prostrated.

■  General  prostration.

Very  tired  and  prostrated ;  great  weariness.

I  Weariness,  prostration  in  whole  body.

I  Great  prostration  and  uneasiness.

I  Great  prostration. ^Constipation.

B  iFaintiness  :  when  rising  from  bed  ;  from  slightest  motion.

BOn  rising  from  bed  he  was  attacked  with  faintness,  with  cold

sweat  and  rumbling  in  abdomen.
Great  lameness,  and  desire  to  keep  quiet.
B  Paralysis  generally  of  both  sides.
^^  Sleep. BVery  much  inclined  to  yawn;  frequent  yawning  the

whole  day.


35  BRYONIA  ALBA.

I  Excessive  gaping. ^Rheumatic  attack.

Drowsiness,  with  half  closed  eyes,

I  Much  sleepiness  during  the  day  when  alone.

I  Great  sleepiness  and  constant  yawning,  though  he  had  slept

well  the  previous  night.
I  So  sleepy,  that  he  wishes  to  sleep  the  whole  day.
Drowsiness  during  and  after  stool.
I  I  Great  sleepiness  by  day,  with  yawning,  lassitude,  stretching,

etc.,  yet  at  night  no  sleep  on  account  of  tumultuous  course

of  blood,  anxiety  and  heat.
I  In  the  evening,  before  falling  asleep,  she  starts  up  in  fright.
I  He  could  not  sleep  well;  a  warmth  and  anxiety  in  the  blood

prevented  it  until  12  o'clock.

■  Sleeplessness most before midnight. ^Rheumatic attack.

^Pertussis.

I  Sleeplessness  on  account  of  uneasiness  in  the  blood  and  anxi-
ety; the  thoughts  crowd  upon  one  another.

I  I  A  concourse  of  anxious  thoughts  keeps  him  awake  till  3  to
4  A.M.

Sleeplessness  before  midnight,  with  thirst,  heat  and  ebullitions.

Sleeplessness,  especially  before  midnight,  owing  to  heat  and
anxiety,  especially  on  the  chest.

No  sleep  before  midnight,  on  account  of  a  frequent  shivering
sensation  over  one  arm  and  foot,  followed  by  sweat.

■  Sleepless  night,  with  heat  and  restlessness,  every  other  night

sweat  and  better. ^Spoiled  intermittent.
I  i  Sleep  full  of  dreams.
Night  very  restless,  disturbed  by  frightful  dreams;  frequent

waking.

■  He  started  from  an  anxious  dream  and  screamed  out.

■  Dreams:  about  household  affairs;  about  business  of  the  day.
Dreams  of  dispute  and  vexation.

■  Night  restless,  he  could  scarcely  sleep  for  half  an  hour,  and

during  his  slumbering  was  continually  busy  with  what  he
had  read  the  evening  previous.

■  Sleep  walking;  produced  and  cured.
Delirium  at  night  of  the  business  of  the  day.

■  Nightmare.

■  Delirium,  as  soon  as  he  awakes.

■  Comatose  sleep,  broken  by  delirium.

1  i  Often  a  prattling  and  muttering  delirium  during  sleep.

During  the  night  a  bitter  taste.

During  sleep:  masticating  motions  of  the  lower  jaw; faeces

pass  off;  starting  and  jumping  motion  evening  during  sleep,

seems  to  aggravate  sufferings.
Chilliness  in  evening  in  bed,  after  lying  down.

■  Insists  on  leaving  the  bed.

On  wakening,  pain  in  liver  and  kidneys.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  36

After  the  midday  nap  he  was  chilly;  the  head  confused.

I  Immediately  after  lying  down  in  bed,  in  evening,  sensation  of
heat,  with  external  heat  over  him,  without  thirst  through
the  whole  night;  he  turned  from  one  side  to  the  other,  did
not  dare  to  uncover  any  part,  because  it  immediately  caused
violent  pain  in  the  abdomen,  a  painful  griping,  sticking  or
sticking  griping,  as  if  flatus  moved  spasmodically  here  and
there,  with  loss  of  sleep  from  a  multitude  of  crowding
thoughts;  in  the  morning  this  condition  disappeared,  with-
out his  noticing  any  flatulence.
^^Time.  Night:  delirium,  <  after  3  A.M.;  shooting  pain  in
head  <  ;  toward  morning,  sour  oily  sweat  on  head  (and
body) ;  rheumatic  iritis  and  aching  in  back  of  eye  to  occi-
put ■<  ;  fullness  of  eyeball,  with  shooting  pain  in  eye  and
head  <  ;  scalding  in  corners  of  eyes  <  ;  toothache,  with
tearing  in  cheeks  and  pinching  in  ears,  till  6  a.m.  ;  gulping
up  of  phlegm  ;  heat  in  abdomen  and  heartburn  ■<  ;  diar-
rhoea preceded  by  colic ;  involuntary  stools ;  urine  reddish-
yellow,  white  sediment ;  dropsy  of  uterus  >  ;  cough  from
tickling ;  dry  spasmodic  cough  ;  pulse  frequent ;  dry  heat ;
sweat  profuse,  at  8  a.m.  ;  copious  sour  sweat.

Morning :  head  confused  and  aching ;  delirium  ;  does  not  wish
to  rise;  dizziness;  head  whirls  and  turns  in  circle;  throbbing
on  top  of  head ;  on  waking  pain  in  occiput  to  shoulders ;
headache  when  first  opening  eyes ;  bursting  headache ;  be-
fore breakfast,  compression  and  heaviness  of  head  with
stitches;  head  hot;  agglutination  and  tears  in  eye;  nose-
bleed on  awakening;  toothache,  3  a.m.;  nauseous,  bitter
taste ;  nausea  on  waking ;  nausea  and  vomiting ;  colic  and
urging  to  stool;  diarrhoea  preceeded  by  colic;  pasty  stool;
fluid  stool;  stools  get  thinner  and  thinner;  dry  parched
stool ;  sensation  of  plug  in  anus ;  too  weak  to  speak ;  ex-
pectoration ;  lame  and  bruised  in  r.  hip ;  pain  in  knee  re-
turns ;  weakness  and  exhaustion  on  rising ;  griping  with
loss  of  sleep  >  ;  heat  in  head ;  sweats  profuse.

Noon:  pressive  pain  in  occiput  to  neck  <.

During  day :  dropsy  of  uterus  increased ;  inflammation  of
bronchi  <  ;  pulse  slower ;  great  weariness ;  sleepiness ;
skin  dry;  dropsical  swellings  <•

Afternoon  :  heaviness  of  head  ;  forepart  of,  many  symptoms ;
stitches  between  scapulae  ;  pain  in  lumbar  region  <<.

Evening :  fullness  in  forehead  <  ;  bursting  headache  <  ;  heat
of  head,  coldness  of  body  and  pain  in  limbs  <  ;  toothache
in  back  teeth;  drawing-jumping  toothache  in  bed;  heart-
burn from  wine ;  nausea  and  vomiting ;  distension  in  ab-
domen ;  frequent  urination,  6  to  7  p.m.  ;  cough  from  tick-
ling ;  expectoration ;  sciatica  <  ;  pain  in  knee  <  ;  feet
tense  and  swollen ; starts  with  fright on  falling  asleep ;


37  BRYONIA  ALBA.

chilliness  after  lying  down ; coldness  and  chilliness ; hot
cheeks,  chill  all  over,  goose-flesh  and  thirst.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In-doors :  very  anxious ;  chilli-
ness <.

Warmth :  tearing  in  r.  side  of  head  <  ;  tension  and  tearing  in
head  <  ;  inflammation  of  eyes,  with  pains  in  teeth  and
face  <  ;  drawing-jumping  toothache  <  ;  tearing-stitching
toothache  < ;  in  room,  pain  in  throat  <  ;  warm  drinks,  >  ;
weather,  diarrhoea ;  air,  dry  painful  cough  <  ;  air,  vapor  in
trachea  causing  cough ;  dry  spasmodic  cough  <  ;  chills  < ;
stitches  in  wrist  when  hands  warm ;  pains  in  limbs  and
joints  >.

Open  air :  anxiety  >  ;  pain  as  of  tooth  screwed  in  and  pulled
out  >  ;  decayed  teeth  sensitive.

Cold:  headache  on  washing  after  sweating;  raw  and  wet,
rheumatic  headache ;  inflammation  of  eyes,  with  pains  in
teeth  and  face  >  ;  face  red  and  smooth  after  washing ;
toothache  as  of  cold  air ;  water,  pain  as  of  tooth  screwed  in
and  pulled  out,  >  momentarily ;  water,  internal  heat  >  ;
fruit,  incarceration  of  hernia  after ;  water,  bitter  taste  and
nausea  >  ;  air,  breathing  >  ;  water,  sciatica  <.

Dry  air:  soreness  in  occiput  and  behind  ears  <.

I  Cerebral  disturbance  from  getting  wet.

•  Diarrhoea  after  taking  cold  or  getting  hot  in  summer.

I I  Complaints  when  warm  weather  sets  in  after  cold  days.

I  Complaints  from  cold  drinks  in  hot  weather.

I I  Kicks  the  covers  off.
^"  Fever. 1 1  Chilliness.

More  chilliness  in  the  room  than  in  the  open  air.

Chilliness  and  coldness  of  the  body,  also  in  bed.

Coldness  and  chilliness,  mostly  in  the  evening,  and  often  only

on  one  (right)  side.
Chilliness  during  stool.

I  Skin  icy  cold,  shrivelled. ^Cholera  Asiatica.
I  I  Coldness  and  shivering  over  the  whole  body.

■  Before  chill,  vertigo  and  headache. ^Intermittent.
Chill,  with  external  coldness  of  the  body.

■  Chills  begin  on  lips,  and  on  tips  of  fingers  and  toes;  great

thirst  during  all  stages. ^Intermittent.
I  Right-sided  chill. ^Intermittent.
I  I  Chill  with  thirst.
Chill: >  by  drinking;  after  sleep;  <  by  exercise; <  in  a

warm  room.

I  Chilly  sensation  about  the  ulcers.
Chill  or  heat  on  diseased  part.

I I  Chilliness  predominating,  frequently  with  heat  of  head,  red
cheeks  and  thirst.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  38

I  Chilliness  with  heat  in  head  and  red  face. ^Rheumatic  attack.

Chills  with  heat.

Shaking  chill,  frequently  with  heat  in  head,  internal;  generally
with  intense  desire  for  cold  drinks.

I  Chills  with  thirst;  heat  of  face  with  flushed  cheeks.  ^Inter-
mittent.

I  In  evening :  hot  and  red  cheeks  with  chill  all  over,  with  goose-

flesh  and  thirst.
Heat  or  chill  lessened  while  sitting.

I I  Fever,  with  dry,  burning  heat,  mostly  internal ;  blood  seems
to  burn  in  veins.

iHeat  in  head  and  face.
I  Heat  in  head  in  morning.

Blleat  in  head  in  forenoon ;  feels  as  though  it  would  come  out
at  forehead.

■  Dry  heat  at  night.

I  Heat,  with  desire  to  uncover.

I  Feeling  of  heat  in  face,  with  redness  and  thirst.

Fever,  with  bitter  taste  and  thirst.

BHeat  with  thirst. ^Intermittent.

Great  aggravation  of  sufferings  during  the  heat.

Heat  after  stool.

■  Sweat  in  morning.

Cold  sweat  on  forehead  and  whole  head.
' Sweat  in  short  spells  and  only  on  single  parts.
I  Profuse  night  and  morning-sweat.
I  Profuse  night-sweat  after  3  a.m.
BDry  skin  during  day,  copious  sour  sweat  in  night  and  towards

morning.
» Sour  smelling  profuse  sweat  during  a  good  nights  sleep.
Sour  or  oily  sweat.
I  Sweat  profuse,  sour  or  oily. ^Intermittent.

■  Unctuous,  oily  sweat. ^Pertussis.

■  Sweat  easily  excited  by  exercise. ^Intermittent.

I  1  Sweat  on  slight  exertion ;  even  when  walking  in  cool  air.

II  Sweat  relieves.

■  Sweat  over  whole  trunk  and  head,  but  not  on  parts  aff"ected.

^Rheumatic  attack.

■  Thirst  only  during  the  fever. ^Intermittent.

■  Intermittent  connected  with  incipient  tuberculosis,  with  pro-

ponent and  recedent  type.

■  B  Nervous  fever  with  pain  in  limbs.

■  Typhoid  fevers ;  accumulation  of  frothy,  soap-like  saliva  in

mouth  and  throat,  which  at  times  seems  to  choke  patient ;
diarrhoea  ;  dry  lips ;  great  thirst.
^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Appearing and  vanishing quickly:
sharp  pain  in  left  occipital  protuberance.
Alternately  :  restlessness  every  other  night ;  periodical  sweats


39  BRYONIA  ALBA.

on  single  parts ;  intermittent  with  preponent  and  recedent
type.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Bight :  tearing  from  forehead  to
arm  ;  drawing-tearing  in  temple ;  tearing  in  head ;  burning
and  lachrymation  of  eye ;  heat  and  swelling  of  r.  ear ;
parotid  swollen  and  sensitive ;  thin,  light  discharge  from
nostril ;  pinching  pressure  at  articulation  of  jaw  ;  dull  ach-
ing in  alveoli  of  upper  jaw;  twitching-tearing  in  malar  bone
to  temple ;  painful  pressing  under  r.  cheek  bone ;  sting-
ing pain  near  larynx  on  swallowing ;  stitches  in  testicle
and  spermatic  cord ;  pain  in  ovarian  region ;  burning  in
fundus  of  uterus ;  oppression  of  chest,  with  stitches  in  axil-
lary gland ;  stitches  between  third  and  fourth  ribs ;  prick-
ing pain  below  nipple ;  burning  in  chest ;  painful  spot  on
second  rib  to  sternum ;  aching  and  sharp  pain  beneath
scapula ;  painful  pressure  on  shoulder ;  rheumatic  swelling
of  shoulder  and  upper  arm,  with  stitches ;  aching  pain  in
gluteal  region ;  lame  and  bruised  in  hip ;  great  pain  in  thigh ;
pain  in  knee ;  pain  in  knee-cap  as  of  long  kneeling ;  pinch-
ing-tearing  in  calf;  coldness  and  chilliness  of  body.

Left :  pressing  out  in  eyeball ;  pressure  above  eye ;  drawing
in  temporal  bone  ;  stitch  in  1.  side  of  brain  when  coughing  ;
sharp  pain  in  occipital  protuberance ;  continued  stitch  deep
in  brain ;  sensitive  pressure  in  eyeball ;  darting  pains  from
eye  through  head ;  snapping  in  stomach  as  of  food  pushed
to  I.  side ;  stitches  in  side  on  vomiting  ;  pain  in  heel ;  twitch-
ing in  abdomen ;  sticking  in  back ;  heat  in  hypogastrium ;
pain  toward  inguinal  ring;  iniiammation  of  labium  major;
mamma  swollen  ;  swelling  of  breast  and  axillary  glands  dur-
ing weaning ;  stitches  in  chest ;  chill  in  chest ;  rheumatic
pain  in  tendon  of  trapezius  on  turning  head  to  left ;  stitches
under  scapula  to  heart ;  swelling  in  elbow-joints ;  bruised
pain  on  outer  calf;  rheumatic  pains  in  knee;  constant  thresh-
ing with  arm  and  leg ;  weaving  motion  in  arm  and  leg.

Within  out :  headache  in  forehead  and  temples  ;  pressive  pain
in  temples ;  violent  headache,  with  pressure  in  brain ;  con-
tinued stitch  in  brain  ;  stitches  in  head  and  chest ;  pricking
pain  below  r.  nipple.

Above  downwards  :  drawing  from  occiput  into  neck ;  tearing
in  forehead,  extending  to  r.  arm  ;  drawing  in  temporal  bones ;
drawing-tearing  in  r.  temple  to  neck ;  tearing  in  head  ex-
tending into  jaw-bones ;  headache  in  occiput  to  shoulders ;
pressive  pain  in  occiput  into  neck ;  drawing  and  tearing  from
temple  to  malar  bone ;  pressure  in  epigastrium  to  umbilicus
and  bladder ;  pain  in  inguinal  region  ;  drawing  in  intestines  ;
pain  in  ovarian  region ;  lancinating  from  hip  to  foot ;  pain
in  thorax  to  lower  part  of  sternum ;  creeping  chilliness  in
back; dull  stitching  on  shoulder; tearing  from  elbow  to


BRYONIA  ALBA.  40

wrist ;  pain  in  lumbar  region  to  thigh  ;  stitching  in  hip  to
knee;  pain  along  thigh  to  knee; swelling  of  legs  to  feet.

Below  up  :  twitching-tearing  in  r.  malar  bone  to  temple ;  tear-
ing in  hip  to  epigastrium  ;  pains  in  abdomen ;  heat  from
abdomen  to  chest ;  drawing  in  elbow  to  shoulder ;  shooting
pain  to  hip ;  chills  begin  at  fingers  and  toes.

Left  to  right :  stitches  in  chest  during  inspiration.

Right  to  left :  painful  spot  on  second  rib  to  sternum.

Before  back  :  sticking,  jerking,  throbbing  headache  from  fore-
head to  occiput ;  sharp  pains  in  eyeballs  to  occiput ;  darting
pains  from  1.  eye  through  head  ;  aching  from  eye  to  occiput ;
stitches  through  chest  to  scapulae ;  pain  in  lumbar  region.

Behind  forwards :  shaking  of  brain  from  hiccough  ;  stitches  in
1. chest ; stitches below scapulae ; stitches and pressing
between  scapulae  and  epigastrium.
*^  Sensations, Oversensitiveness  of  senses  to  external  impres-
sions.

Every  spot  in  body  is  painful  to  pressure ; <  mornings.

Drawing  rheumatic  pains  in  various  parts  of  body.

Transient  drawing  and  tension  in  almost  all  limbs  and  joints.

Rending:  in  shoulder-joints  and  upper  arms.

Tearing  :  across  forehead  ;  in  cervical  muscles  ;  in  r.  arm  ;  in
r.  temple ;  in  external  head  ;  in  r.  malar  bone ;  in  cheeks  ;
in  teeth  ;  from  hip  to  epigastrium  ;  in  urethra ;  in  limbs  dur-
ing menstruation  ;  in  mammae  ;  in  lumbar  muscles ;  in  shoul-
der-joints and  upper  arms  ;  in  r.  upper  arm  ;  on  inner  side
of  forearm  ;  in  shins.

Cutting:  in  epigastrium ;  in  intestines;  before  stool;  in  urethra
during  urinating.

Stabbing  :  in  chest ;  in  hips.

Lancinating  : during  diarrhoea ;  from  hip  to  foot.

Darting :  through  head.

Piercing:  in  shoulder -joints  and  upper  arms.

Stitching :  deep  in  brain,  1.  side ;  in  head ;  from  forehead  to
occiput ;  in  eyes ;  deep  in  ear ;  in  teeth ;  in  throat ;  in  1.
side ;  in  stomach ;  in  abdomen ;  in  liver ;  in  spleen ;  in  r.
testicle  and  cord  ;  in  ovaries  on  inspiration ;  in  chest ;  in  inter-
costal spaces  and  sternum ;  in  r.  axillary  gland ;  in  region
of  heart ;  between  scapulae ;  under  1.  scapula  to  heart ;  in
sacral  region ;  in  shoulder-joints  and  upper  arms;  in  r.  elbow-
joint;  in  wrist;  in  fingers  when  writing;  in  hip-joint  to
knee ;  in  knees  when  walking ;  in  soles ;  in  big  toe ;  in  all
serous  membranes.

Shooting :  extending  to  vertex  or  occiput ;  in  eye ;  in  teeth ;
in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen ;  in  back  through  chest ;  toward
hip.

Stinging  :  in  throat ;  in  liver  ;  in  abdomen.


41  BRYONIA  ALBA.

A  prickling  sensation  "like  pins  and  needles"  on  soles  or  on
other  parts  of  body,  or  with  an  eruption.

Prickling :  in  anterior  third  of  tongue  ;  at  anus  ;  in  soles  when
walking ;  in  soles  of  feet ;  of  skin  (nettle-rash).

Pinching:  pressure  in  articulation  of  r.  jaw;  in  ears;  in  ab-
domen ;  in  r.  calf.

Griping  :  in  intestines  ;  during  stool.

Digging :  in  forehead  ;  in  teeth  as  from  cold.

Aching :  of  head  in  morning ;  headache,  in  occiput ;  tensive,
in  temporal  region  ;  in  head  when  stooping  ;  expansive  head-
ache ;  in  eyes ;  in  1.  orbit ;  from  eye  to  occiput ;  dull,  in
alveoli  of  upper  jaw;  of  gums  during  teething;  in  back;
beneath  r.  scapula;  in  back;  in  lumbar  muscles;  and  bruised
feeling  in  r.  gluteal  region.

Pressure  :  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  frontal  region  ;  above  1.  eye ;
in  occipital  protuberance ;  outward  in  head  ;  on  vertex ;  in
occiput ;  in  temples  ;  in  1.  eyeball ;  under  r.  cheek-bone ;  in
throat ;  in  stomach ;  toward  1.  inguinal  ring  on  sitting  ;  in
urethra ;  at  larynx  ;  over  chest  and  sternum ;  in  precordial
region  ;  on  top  of  r.  shoulder.

Burning :  in  forehead  and  temples ;  in  eyes ;  in  r.  eye ;  in
stomach  ;  along  diaphragm  and  ribs  ;  in  liver  ;  in  abdomen  ;
at  anus ;  with  stool  and  urine ;  in  rectum  ;  in  fundus  of
uterus  ;  in  mammae  ;  in  chest ;  in  veins  ;  spots  on  skin.

Scalding :  in  eyes.

Smarting  :  behind  pomum  adami.

Drawing :  in  occiput ;  in  temporal  bones ;  tearing  in  r.  temple ;
in  1.  upper  lid  ;  in  back  teeth  ;  in  urethra  ;  from  hip  to  foot;
in  muscles  of  neck,  r.  side ;  in  r.  upper  arm  ;  along  crest  of
fibula.

Twisting :  tensive  in  single  muscle  fibres.

Jerking :  from  forehead  to  occiput ;  toothache  in  evening ;
pressing  between  scapulge.

Twitching :  drawing  in  maxillary  bones  ;  of  1.  upper  lid  ;  in  r.
malar  bone ;  in  corners  of  mouth  ;  in  abdomen,  1.  side.

Soreness  :  of  nose ;  of  r.  malar  bone ;  of  teeth  and  gums  ;  in
epigastrium;  of  abdomen  ;  in  intestines  ;  of  larynx;  behind
sternum  ;  of  cervical  glands. •

Rawness  :  in  throat ;  in  larynx.

Tension :  in  temporal  region  ;  in  external  head ;  at  stomach  ;
in  region  of  liver ;  down  thighs ;  at  sphincter  ani ;  in  mam-
mae ;  in  nape  of  neck ;  in  r.  shoulder ;  in  knee ;  in  ankles ;
on  back  of  feet.

Pain :  in  head ;  above  1.  eye ;  in  occiput ;  in  r.  temple ;  in
both  temples ;  sharp,  in  1.  occipital  protuberance ;  pressive,
in  head ;  dull,  in  forehead ;  in  small  spot  on  forehead ;  in
vertex ;  in  limbs  on  motion  ;  like  of  needle  through  eye  and
head ;  severe,  in  eye ;  violent,  in  teeth  and  face ;  in  1.  ton-


BRYONIA  ALBA.  42

sil ;  in  throat ;  constricting,  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen ;  in
kidneys ;  in  r.  ovarian  region ;  in  back  and  loins  during
menstruation;  rheumatic,  in  uterus;  in  breasts;  on  inspir-
ing ;  in  abdominal  muscles ;  in  cardiac  region ;  in  infra
mammary  region  ;  rheumatic,  in  chest  and  lungs ;  in  nape
of  neck  ;  in  lumbar  and  sacral  region ;  in  small  of  back ;
paralytic,  in  r.  elbow ;  in  wrist  as  if  sprained ;  in  1.  lumbar
region  to  thigh  ;  in  r.  thigh  to  knee;  in  left  calf;  in  sole  of
foot ;  in  ball  of  great  toe  ;  in  liver  and  kidneys  on  awaken-
ing.

Sensitiveness  :  of  external  r.  ear ;  of  r.  parotid ;  of  lower  lip  ;
of  teeth  to  air ;  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  of  abdomen  ;  in  lumbar
muscles.

Scraping :  and  roughness  in  throat.

Scratching :  in  throat.

Tickling :  in  epigastrium  ;  in  throat,  exciting  cough.

Crawling :  in  throat ;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  throat,  exciting
cough.

Crepitation :  moving  legs.

Cracking:  of  hip-joint  when  walking.

Throbbing :  on  top  of  head ;  throughout  body.

Pulsation  :  in  left  orbit.

Beating :  in  vertex.

Looseness :  of  teeth.

Lightness  :  of  head,  with  wabbling  in  ears.

Emptiness :  of  stomach.

Fullness  :  in  forehead  ;  in  cranium  ;  of  eyeball ;  in  throat ;  at
stomach  ;  at  r.  hypochondrium.

Tightness  :  in  shoulder-joints  and  upper  arms  ;  in  calves.

Swollen :  as  if,  at  pit  of  stomach ;  finger-joints  as  if  swollen
when  writing.

Heaviness  :  in  forehead ;  in  head  ;  of  head,  in  afternoon  ;  of  1.
upper  lid;  in  stomach  ;  in  region  of  liver ;  at  sphincter  ani;
of  breasts  ;  beneath  sternum.

Plug  :  ears  feel  stopped ;  at  epigastrium.

Uncomfort :  in  abdomen  as  of  menses.

Weakness :  of  thighs.

Weakness  :  of  limbs  ;  in  .morning  and  afternoon  ;  after  slight
exertion.

Faintness :  mental  weakness ;  in  morning  when  rising ;  from
slightest  motion.

Trembling :  of  tongue.

Numbness  :  in  stomach  and  oesophagus.

Coldness :  after  anger ;  on  vertex  ;  of  hands,  and  chilliness  ;
chill  in  1.  chest ;  chilliness  in  back  ;  chilliness  in  evening  in
bed  ;  chilliness  during  stool ;  of  skin  ;  of  whole  body.

Itching :  at  margin  of  lids  ;  in  throat ;  on  glans  ;  eruption  on
skin  ;  between  fingers.


43  BRYONIA  ALBA.

Dryness  :  of  lips,  tongue  and  hard  palate ;  of  throat.
'*  Tissues. Plethora.

Burning  sensation  in  veins.

I  Inflammation of  mucous and serous  membranes. ^  Acute

catarrh. ^Pleuritis. ^Pericarditis. ^Peritonitis.
Stitches  in  all  serous  membranes.

I II  Inflammations  that  have  advanced  to  stage  of  serous  efi"usion.
I!  Rheumatic  afiection  of  joints. Compare  Merc.  suhl.
I  I  Drawing  and  pain  as  if  luxated  in  medium  and  smaller  joints.
Stiffness  and  stitches  in  joints.
1  I  Stitching  pains  in  region  of  large  joints  as  in  shoulder,  over

trochanter,  and  at  knee ;  all  aggravated  by  motion,  touch  or

any  jar  or  shock.
I  Arthritic  affections.

■  Arthritic  nodosities.

■  Erysipelas  of  joints.

Rheumatism,  with  redness  and  swelling  of  joints ;  motion  is
intolerable.

I  Rheumatism  muscular  and  articular.

Soreness  appears  to  be  in  sheath  of  tendon,  but  principally  in
periosteum  and  ligaments  ;  there  does  not  appear  to  be  that
swelling  of  joints,  stiffness  and  dread  of  motion  that  usually
characterizes  rheumatism ;  but  motion  always  increases  pain.

Swelling  (pale  or  red)  of  affected  parts,  with  inability  to  move
them.

I  I  Joints  red,  swollen,  shining,  stiff,  with  stitching  pain  from
slightest  motion.

■  Fixed,  acute  rheumatism,  aggravated  by  motion;  travels  slowly

from  joint  to  joint.

■  Violent  pains  in  scrofulous  swollen  joints.

■  Gouty,  red,  shining  swelling  of  single  parts,  with  stinging

when  moving  them.

■  Hardness  in  groups  of  muscles  affected  by  neuralgia.

I  I  Involuntary  muscles  seem  not  to  be  greatly  embarrassed ;

sphincters  not  relaxed.
Swelling  and  induration  of  glands  and  other  parts,  pale  tender.
Hot  swelling  of  glands.

■  ■Dropsical  swellings  increase  during  day  and  diminish  dur-

ing night.

■  Dropsy.
Emaciation  predominates.

■  Suppuration  of  cellular  tissue.

■  In  acute  abscess,  promotes  resorption  of  pus.

*°  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  fullness  in

forehead  >  ;  tearing  in  r.  side  of  head  >  ;  headache  >  ;

pressing  pain  under  r.  cheek  bone  >  ;  pain  in  upper  teeth

changes  to  lower  ;  pit  of  stomach  sensitive.

Touch :  tearing  in  r.  side  of  head  <  ;  tension  and  tearing  in


BRYONIA  ALBA.  44

outer  head  <  ;  scalp  tender ;  soreness  in  occiput  and  behind
ears  <  ;  eyeballs  sensitive  ;  eyes  sore  ;  r.  parotid  sensitive  ;
nose  sore  and  swollen  ;  swelling  and  ulcerative  pain  in  tip  of
nose ;  r.  malar  bone  sore ;  lower  lip  sensitive  ;  sticking  pain
on  feeling  of  throat ;  pit  of  stomach  sensitive ;  stitches  in
liver ;  abdomen  sensitive  ;  pain  in  ovarian  region  <  ;  lanci-
nating from  hip  to  foot  <  ;  chest  sensitive ;  soreness  behind
sternum  ;  glands  of  neck  sore  ;  pressive  pain  on  shoulder  •<  ;
finger-joints  painful ;  bruised  pain  on  outer  calf ;  suppurative
pain  in  foot ;  rheumatic  pains  <  ;  sensitive ;  pain  in  limbs  ;
small  red  spots  on  body,  sensitive,  somse  not  sensitive ;  nettle-
rash,  with  prickling.

I  Children  dislike  to  be  carried,  or  to  be  raised.

Injuries  :  abscess  at  pit  of  stomach  after  blow.

It  is  found,  that  Bryon.  is  rarely,  if  ever,  indicated  in  dis-
eases affecting  the  external  tissues  of  eye ;  its  great  sphere
of  usefulness  being  in  diseases  of  uveal  tract.
^^Skin. I  Yellow  skin  of  whole  body,  even  efface.

Jaundice.

I A  red,  round,  hot  spot  on  cheek  on  malar  bone.

I  Petechias.

I  I  Small,  red  spots  on  various  parts  of  body;  some  with  sensi-
bility and  not  disappearing  on  pressure ;  some  burning  and
disappearing  on  pressure.

■  Cutaneous  eruptions  generally  dry.
Dry,  itching  eruption  over  whole  body.
Burning-itching  eruptions.

■  Eruption  over  whole  body,  especially  on  back  as  far  as  neck,

which  itched  so  violently  that  he  was  obliged  to  scratch  it.
Red,  elevated,  rash-like  eruption  over  whole  body.
Nettlerash,  with  a  great  prickling,  particularly  when  touched.

■  White  miliary  eruption.

■  Rash,  especially  of  children,  and  during  childbed.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammations,  especially  of  joints.

■  iSlow  development  of  rash  in  eruptive  fevers;  or,  sudden  re-

ceding of  rash,  with  diflBcult  respiration ;  or  inflammatory
affection  of  chest.

■  After  measles. ^Pertussis.

■  When scarlatinal eruption delays, or suddenly recedes.

^Dropsy,  pleuritis,  or  meningitis.

■  Ailments  from  suppression  of  measles. ^Pertussis.

■  ■After  suppression  of  exanthemata. ^Diarrhoea.

Febrile  symptoms  preceding  eruption  of  small-pox  and  miliary
fever ;  secondary  affections  remaining  after  measles  and
scarlatina.

Hard  knots  and  blotches.

■  Ulcers  putrid;  cold  feeling  in  them.

■  Painless  ulcers.


45  BRYONIA  ALBA.

I  Real  itch  between  fingers,  on  body  and  in  hollow  of  knees.
I  Variola  with  dropsy.
I  Anasarca.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Indicated  in  light  complex-
ions, but  more  in  dark.
Rheumatic  diathesis.

0  Black  hair,  dark  complexion,  tendency  to  constipation.

1  I  People  with  choleric  temperament,  bilious  tendency,  dark  hair

and  complexion,  with  firm,  fleshy  fibre.
Old  people.

I  Old  women,  accustomed  to  taking  alcohol. ^Asthma.
*^  Relations. Antidotedby:  Aeon.,  Alum.,  Camphor.,  iChamom.,

Chelid., Clemat., Coffea, llgnat.,  Mur.  ac, iNux  vom.,

Pulsat.,  Rhus  tax.,  Seneg.
Bryon.  antidotes : Alum., Chlorine, Cinchon.,  Frag,  vesc,

Mereur.,  Rhus  tox.
Compare :  the  Cucurhitacece  (all  of  which  have  belching,  with

unaltered  taste  of  food) ; WAcon.,  Ammon., I  Ant.  crud.

(nausea,  vomiting  and  diarrhoea;  cannot  bear  milk) ;  Arnic,

I  \  Arsen.  (unlike  Bryon.,  drinks  often  and  little,  and  eats

seldom,  but  much);  Ascl.  tub.  (pleura); iBellad.  (delirium,

etc.,  hasty  speech  and  hasty  drinking) ; I  Calc.  ostr.,  Carb.

veg. (miliaria); II  Caustic, Chamom., itignat., Ipec.

(miliaria); l^aZzcarJ.  (miliaria,  chest  affections) ;  Kreosot.,

Laches.,  iLycop.,  Mereur.,  Natr.  sulph.  (morning  diarrhoea) ;

llNatr.  mur.,  Nitr.  ae., llNux  vom.  (digestive  organs);

Opium, Petrol., I  Phosphor., Podoph.,  Pulsat.  (morning

diarrhoea) ; Ran. bulb, (pleurisy, rheumatic affections) ;

I  Rhus  tox.  (rheumatism,  etc.);  Rumex  (morning  diarrhoea) ;

Sepia,  Siliea,  Spigel.  (pleura) ; II Sulphur,  Squilla (pleura).
Compatibles: before Bryon., Aeon., Ammon., Nux vom..

Opium,  Rhus  tox.;  after  Bryon., WAlum.,  Arsen.,  Kali

carb.,  Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat. .,  Rhus  tox.,  Sulphur.
Complements  :  Alumina,  Rhus  tox.


BUFONES.  46

BUFONES.

Toads.  Reptilia.


Toads  belong  to  the  most  poisonous  reptiles.  In  olden  times  being
looked  upon  as  horrible  things,  they  were  given  in  horrible  diseases.
During  the  rage  of  improvement  the  remedy  was  thrown  overboard,  and
even  the  poisonous  qualities  doubted,  until  rare  experiments,  especially
those  by  Vulpian,  have  settled  the  question.  In  1832  Henke,  our  great
prover,  was  the  first  in  our  school  to  call  attention  to  it ;  his  observations
were  published  in  Meyer's  Monatsblatt,  1860,  and  in  1834  the  homoeopathic
society  of  Thiiringen  sent  some  symptoms  to  the  archives  of  Stapf  (Vol.  14,
No.  2,  page  102).  In  1849  Mure  published  a  proving  with  his  preparation
taken  from  the  most  common  toad  in  Brazil,  called  by  him  Bufo  satybien-
sis.  This  was  translated  by  Hempel  and  Allen.  Houat  published  one  of
his  provings  in  Nouvelles  Donnees.  This  was  translated  three  times ;  by  Lippe,
Lilienthal  and  Allen.  In  1859,  Destrone,  in  a  French  journal,  collected
notes  from  all  old  writers  and  also  made  some  provings.  His  collection
has  been  translated  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  including  the  very  doubtful
numbers  6,  7,  and  half  of  8.  The  provers  mentioned  have  used  about  half
a  dozen  difl"erent  species  and  nearly  every  one  proved  a  different  prepara-
tion. The  cures  are  of  the  greatest  importance  and  cannot  be  doubted  in
the  least,  even  not  by  such  who  make  profession  of  so-called  skepticism.
But  now  for  nearly  ten  years  we  have  not  been  able  to  find  a  single  case  in
our  journals.  The  cures  have  been  epilepsy,  cancers,  beginning  of  malacie
of  the  brain  and  cutaneous  diseases.  Many  of  Houat's  symptoms  have
been  verified.

The  best  way  of  getting  the  poison  was  proposed  in  1861  by  Roth  in
Paris,  {AUg.  h.  Zeit. ,Yo\.  6,  page  112,  mentioned  in  Schwabe's  Pharmacopcea
by  Faradization ;  but  in  1862,  in  C.  Miiller's  Quarter Zt/,  Vol.  13,  the  same
author  proposed  a  still  better  one.  The  toad  was  to  be  held  with  the  left
hand  in  a  wooden  forceps,  the  glands  on  the  side  of  the  head  pressed  with
a  wire  forceps  and  the  juice  caught  on  a  glass  plate :  it  is  soluble  in  alcohol.

^  Mind. Desire  for  solitude,  to  produce  masturbation.

Whimpered,  then  cried,  until  he  fell  into  a  state  of  coma.

Left  his  bed  after  apathy  and  ran  like  mad  through  the  house,
constantly  howling;  eyes  injected;  tongue  dry;  pulse  re-
gular ;  no  febrile  heat.

Stupor.

I  Weak  memory;  idiotic.  ■•  /^Spasms.

Delirium  or  apathy,  with  hot  head.

I  Mind  not  aifected. ^Epilepsy.

Longs  for  solitude,  yet  dreads  being  alone. See  22.

Inclination  to  be  angry,  to  bite.


47  BUFONES.

Bites  at  surrounding  objects.

■  Easily  laughs  or  cries  ;  cries  much. ^Epilepsy.
Fear  of  disease,  of  animals,  of  death.

■  Great  anguish. ^Meningitis.
Ill-humor. See  23.

Becomes  angry  if  misunderstood ;  before  spasms.
Easily  startled.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo.

Vertigo,  as  if  house  were  turned  up  and  down.
Giddiness,  with  heaviness  of  head.
Vertigo,  spasms,  fainting  followed  by  death.

■  Attacks  were  ushered  in  by  numbness  of  brain. ^Epilepsy.
Stupor  and  inability  to  speak.

Apathy  following  coma.
^  Inner  Head. Pressure  like  two  iron  hands  holding  temples.
See  29.
Headache,  after  breakfast.

One-sided  headache  (r.  side)  relieved  by  bleeding  of  nose.
Headache,  aggravated  by  light  and  noise;  accompanied  by  cold
feet  and  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Dull  headache  in  1.  side. ^Softening  of  brain.

■  Headache,  with  epilepsy.
I  I  Violent  orgasm  in  head.

■  Has  much  congestive  headache,  with  flushed  face. ^Epilepsy.
*  Outer  Head. Headache  in  forehead  and  on  vertex ;  parts  are

tender  to  touch,  especially  in  evening.

■  Lancinations in occiput, inclining  head  to  fall backwards.

^Meningitis.
Continued  agitation  of  head  and  arms.

■  Head  was  at  first  drawn  to  one  side,  either  r.  or  1.,  then  back-

wards, before  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.
Profuse  perspiration  on  head.
Hair  falls  out.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Cannot  bear  sight  of  brilliant  objects.
Objects  appear  as  if  seen  through  a  veil.
Amaurosis.

■  More  acute  vision,  and  eyes  less  sensitive  to  wind.
Itching  in  eyes,  with  dimness  of  sight.

■  Pupils  largely  dilated  and  unaffected  by  light  before  attack.

/^Epilepsy.
Ugly  squinting  look.

Eyes  red,  injected ;  itching,  swollen,  painful.
Spasmodic  pain  in  eye,  which  appeared  slightly  injected.
Burning,  itching  and  ulceration  of  lids,  especially  at  canthi.

■  Eyes  became  highly  injected;  shrunken  and  lifeless  in  ap-

pearance, as  the  attacks  multiplied. ^Epilepsy.

■  Right  eye  open,  left  nearly  closed ;  eyeballs  rolled  upwards

and  to  left  before  attack. ^Epilepsy.


BUFONES.  48

iLeft  lid  paralyzed,  hangs  down. /^Softening  of  brain.

■  Edges  of  eyelids  red  and  some  crusts  in  lashes. ^Epilepsy.
A  whitish  crust  over  eyebrows.

lEyes  sunken  during  spasm. ^Epilepsy.

Incapable  of  opening  lids,  in  coma.
°  Hearing  and  Ears. Least  noise  is  disagreeable ;  music  is  un-
bearable.

I  Beating  in  heart  reverberates  in  ears. ^Meningitis.

Hardness  of  hearing,  especially  for  words.

Purulent  otorrhoea ;  ulceration  and  bleeding  of  external  ears ;
pains  worse  from  cold  washing. See  8  and  12.

Swelling  of  ears  and  parotids.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Loss  of  smell.

Epistaxis  almost  producing  faintness  ;  relieves  headache.

Sneezing  in  evening,  when  going  to  bed ;  coryza ;  pimples  on
upper  lip.

Running  of  greenish-yellow, putrid mucus, worse  evening ;
cold  air  causes  a  feeling  of  corrosion.

Ulcerated,  burning  nostrils.

Mucus  descends  into  posterior  nares.
^  Upper  Face. Face  much  altered.

I  Distortion  and  turgescence  of  face  ;  mouth  and  eyes  convulsed;
profuse  sweat  on  face.

B First  muscles  of  face  commenced  to  twitch,  extending  thence
over  whole  body. ^Epilepsy.

■  Face  grayish;  red,  bloated  during  spasms.
Cold  water  causes  a  pricking  of  face. See  6,  12.
Momentary  hot  flushes  of  face.

I  I  Copious  sweat  running  down  face.

Burning  and  redness  of  swollen  face.

Phlegmonous  erysipelas,  which  leaves  face  deformed.

Erysipelas.

BFace  bathed  in  sweat  during  spasms. ^Epilepsy.
®  Lower  Face. Pimples  on  upper  lip,  with  coryza.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Toothache.

Falling  out  of  teeth.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Difficult  mobility  of  tongue,  it  paralyzes
rapidly;  irritability  of  tongue  and  other  muscles.

■  A  kind  of  lapping  motion  of  tongue,  feeling  of  face  and  rub-

bing of  nose  before  attacks. ^Epilepsy.
E  Stuttering ;  I  I  stammering ;  get  angry  when  incoherent  speech

is  not  understood. ^Chorea.
Stupor  and  inability  to  talk.
I  I  Bites  the  tongue.
Dry  tongue.

I  I  Tongue  cracked,  bluish-black.
Lips  and  tongue  black.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Fetid  odor  from  mouth.


49  BUFONES.

I  Mouth  wide  open  before  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

Mouth  burning,  as  from  acid  ;  worse  from  cold  water. See  6,  8.

I  I  Sanguinolent  salivation.

I I  Bloody  saliva. ^Spasms.

■  During  violent  agitation  of  muscular  system,  ejection  of  frothy,

bloody  saliva  from  mouth. ^Epilepsy.
Carried  objects  within  his  reach  to  his  mouth  to  bite  them.
13  Throat. Mucus  descends  from  nose  into  posterior  nares.
Dryness  in  throat,  impeding  deglutition  (morning).
Difficult  swallowing,  can  hardly  swallow  saliva.
Convulsive  and  constrictive  motion  in  throat,  with  a  sensation

like  a  stone  there.
iFearful  sore  throat,  could  eat  neither  supper  nor  breakfast  for

it ;  verified  at  another  time  in  same  person.

■  Eruption  in  pharynx,  like  spot  on  skin. See  46. ^Epilepsy.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Desire  for  sugar-
water.

Desire  for  sweetened  water  and  milk,  yet  they  cause  nausea
and  colic.

Longing  for  brandy  ;  delights  in  getting  drunk.

Aversion  to  food  and  drink.
^'  Eating  and  Drinking. Dizzy,  drunken  feeling  after  dinner.

Sleepiness  after  meals,  especially  after  dinner. See  4.

After  eating,  irresistible  sleepiness.

Colicky  pain  after  drinking  milk,  and  after  smoking  tobacco.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

Eructations,  as  from  rotten  eggs.

Nausea  and  vomiting  after  the  swelling.

I  I  Nausea  in  morning  for  a  week.

Vomiting  after  drinking.

■  Yellow  fluid  in  vomit,  like  that  from  eruption. ^Epilepsy.
Vomiting  of  bile  or  of  blood ;  burning,  cramping  in  stomach.
Nervous  excitement,  with  nausea  or  vomiting.

^'  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  as  if  he  would  faint,
from  emptiness  in  stomach.
Weak,  faint  feeling  in  stomach. See  36.

Burning  in  stomach ;  lancinating  pains  radiating  to  liver  and
heart.
^*  Hypochondria. Rapid  motion  of  the  diaphragm.

Pulsating,  laming  pain  in  liver,  like  an  abscess ;  vomiting  of

bile.
Enlargement  of  the  liver.
^^  Abdomen. Colicky  pains  after  milk,  or  from  smoking  tobacco.
Violent  colic,  with  convulsive  movements  of  jaws  and  limbs.
Spasms  end  by  convulsive  movements  in  abdomen.

■  The  attack  originates  in  abdomen. ^Epilepsy.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■■  Dysentery, with  delirium,  headache
and  sleeplessness.

VOL.  III.— 4.


BUFONES.  50

Bowels  torpid.
Stools  white.

Difficult,  hard  stool,  with  cold  body  and  hot  head.
Ascarides.

Hemorrhoidal  tumors,  with  discharge  of  bright  red  blood.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Burning  pain  in  kidneys,  with  oppressed
breathing  and  faintness.
I  Urine  passes  off  involuntarily. ^Softening  of  brain.
Frequent  discharge  of  pale  urine.

I  During  violent  agitation  of  entire  muscular  system,  discharge

of  urine. ^Epilepsy.
Urine  brown,  of  offensive  odor.
Suppression  of  urine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, Inclination  to  touch  the  genitals.
Desire  for  solitude  to  practice  onanism.
Involuntary  seminal  emissions.

Impotence;  semen  is  ejaculated  too  quickly,  or  fails  entirely.
Semen  is  discharged  too  quickly,  without  pleasurable  sensation,

sometimes  with  cramps  or  painful  heaviness  in  limbs.

■  Impotence  of  worst  kind;  produced  in  some  and  cured  in

others.
Spasms  during  coition.

I I  Buboes.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  l  Burning  and  swelling  of  ovaries.

■  Burning  heat  and  stitches  in  ovaries.

■  Swelling  and  great  sensitiveness  of  ovarian  region.

■  Violent  cramps  in  ovarian  region,  extending  into  groins.

■  Hydatids  in  ovaries.

Epileptic  aura  from  uterus  towards  stomach.

■  Distending,  burning  pains  or  cramps  in  uterus ;  sharp,  dagger-

like pains ;  worse  on  walking  or  sitting  too  long. ^Carci-
noma uteri.
Ulceration  of  cervix  uteri,  with  burning  pains  ;  offensive,  puru-
lent leucorrhoea.

■  Enormous  blisters  on  tumefied  ulcers,  discharging  a  serous,

yellow  fluid. /^Epilepsy.

■  Menstruation  suppressed. ^Epilepsy.

■  Menstruation  regular  but  rather  scanty. ^Epilepsy.
Menstruation  too  early,  with  headache.

Menstruation too early, preceded  by  headache, burning in
uterus  and  vagina.

■  Spasms  occur  just  before  the  menses. ^Epilepsy.

■  Attacks  worse  at  time  of  menses,  which  return  every  three

weeks. ^Epilepsy.

During  menses,  contractive  pain  in  liver,  palpitation ;  shiver-
ing in  legs.

After  menses,  ill-humored.

■  Yellow  fluid  in  leucorrhoea,  like  from  eruption. ^Epilepsy.


51  BUFONES.

^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. iiHaematuria  in
childbed.
Inflammation  of  mammae ; purulent sinuses ;  sensation as  if
breasts  were  torn  towards  belly.

I  Puerperal  convulsions  if  suppuration  is  suspected.
I B  Cancer  mammse  occultus.

I I  Mammary  cancer.
Milk  mixed  with  blood.

■  Tumefaction  like  a  cord  from  groin  to  knee. ^Milk  leg.

I  Child  became  epileptic  in  consequence  of  mother  having  a
fright  or  fit  of  anger  during  the  nursing  period.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Burning,  excoriation  in  larynx  ;  bleed-
ing fissures,  causing  quick,  jerking  cough.
^^  Respiration.  I  After  the  convulsive  movements  became  less
rapid  and  violent,  the  breathing  became  heavy  and  stertor-
ous, with  the  usual  puflBng  of  lips  at  every  expiration,  which
culminated  in  a  deep-drawn  sigh,  and  the  patient  sank
directly  into  coma. ^Epilepsy.

Difficult  breathing  from  compression  of  larynx,  trachea  and
heaviness  of  chest;  must  sit  up  or  bend  forward. See  21.

Sensation  as  if  chest  and  heart  were  constricted.

Breathing  anxious,  difficult,  gets  shorter  and  shorter,  with  fever.

Dyspnoea  ;  pants  like  a  dog.
^^  Cough. Cough  from  any  emotion.

Cough  from  burning  or  stitches  in  larynx.

I  Cough  nocturnal,  provoked  towards  3  or  4  a.m.  by  a  tickling
in  larynx,  which  he  feels  only  at  this  hour.

I  Cough  in  consequence  of  cold  feet.

B  Violent  cough,  with  vomiting.

I  Cough  dry,  with  sharp  pain  or  burning  in  chest.

I  Sputa  mucous  or  sanguinolent,  or  formed  of  pure  blood,  raised
most  in  morning  and  evening,  with  sensation  of  cold  in  chest ;
a  sensation  which  is  often  succeeded  by  heat  and  congestion.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  chest  (right  side).

Burning  like  fire  in  lungs.

■  Laryngitis,  haemoptysis,  phthisis  pulmonalis.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation :  with  headache ;

after  a  meal ; with  nausea  ; during  menses ;  on  awaking ;

evening.
Palpitation  and  oppression  from  walking  fast.
Sticking  pains  about  apex  of  heart.

Heart  feels  as  if  too  large,  as  if  drowned  in  a  basin  of  water.
Sense  of  constriction  about  heart  and  chest. See  3.
Heaviness  about  heart.
Paralysis  of  heart.
I  The  pulse  became  more  and  more  rapid  and  thread-like  as  the

paroxysms  multiplied. ^Epilepsy.


BUFONES.  52

^'  Neck  and  Back.  I  Attacks  ushered  in  by  a  jerk  in  nape  of
neck. ^Epilepsy.

I A  swelling  of  the  bone  the  size  of  a  fist. ^Caries  of  dorsal
vertebrae.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Great  desire  to  exercise  the  arms. See  36.

Burning,  lancinating  in  bones  of  arms. See  44.

I  Arms  became  stiffened  before  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

The  arras  go  to  sleep  easily.

iNumbness  of  1.  arm. ^Epilepsy.

Swelling  of  wrists  and  finger-joints,  with  burning  and  pulsating.

I A  blister  in  hand  which  recurred  annually.

Ixlfter  a  slight  contusion  of  (little)  finger,  tearing  pain,  with
redness  along  whole  arm,  following  l^^mphatic  vessels  into
armpit,  causing  there  painful  glandular  swellings.

I  Contractions  of  fingers  of  r.  hand,  then  left,  followed  the  lap-
ping motion  of  tongue,  with  thumbs  drawn  into  palms ;  be-
fore an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

Panaritium,  swelling  blue-black  around  nail  (thumb),  followed
by  suppuration.

I  Panaritium:  pain  runs  in  streaks  all  the  way  up  arm.

^^  Lower  Limbs. ■  i  Ischias.

1  I  The  lower  limbs  are  more  in  motion  than  the  upper.

Cramps  in  legs,  awaking  him  from  his  sleep.

Legs  were  drawn  backwards  until  they  touched  the  glutei.

■  Lower  limbs  straight  and  stiff  before  attack. ^Epilepsy.

■  Lower  limbs  get  weak,  has  to  take  first  one  stick  then  two  to

be  able  to  walk, ^Softening  of  brain.
Great  weakness  of  legs.

Shooting,  boring  in  knees,  ankles,  feet ;  worse  moving.
Swelling  of  knees,  with  pulsative  and  distending  pains.
I  ■  Podagra.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Limbs  are  very  easily  moved.

Contusive  pains  in  arms,  legs  and  loins,  during  movement.
Trembling  of  limbs;  heaviness.
Cramps  in  limbs  ;  worse  in  cold  air.
Arthritic  swellings.

■  Swelling  of  hands  and  arms;  burning  pains. ^Erysipelas.

Large  yellow  blisters  in  palms  and  soles,  of  three  inches  cir-
cumference; the  fluid  oozing  out  is  yellowish  and  corroding;
repeatedly  on  several  places.

^'  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  ■Pain  in  limbs  since  months,  he
is  bent  and  cannot  walk  without  a  stick.  ^Caries  of  dorsal
vertebrae.

■  Each  attack  heralded  by  restless  movements  of  limbs  and  body.

^Epilepsy.
Sitting  too  long,  uterine  pains.
Must  sit  up  ;  dyspnoea.
Incline^  to  lie  on  left  side.


53  BUFONES.

Lying  on  back  increases  sufferings.

Walking :  distending,  burning  pain  or  cramps  in  uterus ;
dagger-like  pains  <<  ;  fast,  palpitation  and  apprehension.

Sitting:  distensive,  burning  pain;  cramps  in  uterus ;  dagger-
like pains  <  ;  diflScult  breathing  >>.

Bendino;  forward  :  difficult  breathino;  >>.

Motion  :  discharge  of  urine  from  violent  agitation  of  muscular

system  ;  desire  to  exercise  arms ;  lower  limbs move  more

than  upper ;  shooting,  burning  in  knees,  ankles  and  feet  <C ;

contusive  pains  in  arms,  legs  and  loins.

^^  Nerves. Great  muscular  strength ;  prefers  jumping  to  walking.

Great  mobility  of  the  limbs.

I  I  Repeated  shooting  through  the  whole  body.

I  Up  to  the  period  of  beginning,  the  muscles  were  in  a  state  of
tonic  contraction,  but  then  jactitations  or  twitchings  com-
menced. ^Epilepsy.

Twitching;  of  the  muscles.

I  The  twitching  over  whole  body  increased  rapidly  in  severity,

till  the  entire  muscular  system  became  violently  agitated.
^Epilepsy.

I I  Tonic  and  clonic  spasms.
Spasms  begin  in  the  solar  plexus.

I  I  Loss  of  consciousness  and  falling  down.

Convulsions. ^Epilepsy  (after  fright).

I  Epilepsy  after  onanism. Compare  Sulphur.

I  I  Spasms  caused  by  or  associated  with  suppuration  of  internal

parts.
I  Convulsion  of  limbs. ^Softening  of  brain.

■  Spasms:  from  fright; at  new  moon;  after  onanism;  during

coitus.

Before  the  spasm:  I  I  angry  for  several  days;  I  face  grayish-
yellow,  eyes  sunken;  jerks  in  back  of  neck.

During  the  attack:  Iface  distorted,  red,  biting  the  tongue;
bloody  saliva ;  violent  movements  of  limbs  ; I  I  profuse  sweat.

After  the  attack:  spasmodic  movements  of  intestines;  I  pro-
found sleep.

Subsultus  tendinum.

I  Falls  to  the  ground  unconscious,  with  a  blood-curdling,  wild

cry,  followed  by  spasms  in  limbs;  distorted  facial  muscles,
grinding  teeth  and  foaming  mouth ;  ending  in  loud,  snoring
sleep. ^Epilepsy.

I I  Spasms  very  severe,  followed  by  sleep. ^Epilepsy.

I  Attacks  come  on  in  sleep,  are  followed  by  severe  pain  and
pressure  in  top  of  head. ^Epilepsy.

■  Dreadful  paroxysm  several  times  a  week. ^Epilepsy.

■  Fifty  paroxysms  occurred  during  fifteen  hours,  with  complete

unconsciousness. ^Epilepsy.


BUFONES.  54

Trembling,  faint,  with  a  sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach;

tottering  gait. See  33.
Great  weakness;  fainting.
1 1  Paralysis.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness  after  meals.

Sleepiness  when  he  smokes  tobacco  in  forenoon.

Sleepy,  stupid  after  eating,  or  after  having  been  in  open  air.

Sleepy,  as  if  drunken;  congestion  to  head.

Drowsy,  but  cannot  sleep,  from  agitation ;  constantly  turning

in  bed.
1  After  a  deep-drawn  sigh,  patient  sank  away  into  a  comatose

condition,  from  which  no  effort  could  rouse  him. ^Epilepsy.
Continued  yawning,  could  not  keep  lids  open.
I  Very  profound  coma  subsequent  to  attacks. ^Epilepsy.
Child  cries  and  complains,  finally  becomes  comatose.
I  Stupid  sleep  after  epileptic  attack.
Starts  in  sleep,  awakens  as  if  frightened;  palpitation.
I  At  midnight  seized  with  convulsions,  recurring  every  twenty

minutes  till  4  p.m.  of  next  day.
On  awaking,  aggravation  of  all  sufferings  ;  neck  stiff;  arthritic

pains.
^^Time. Midnight:  convulsions,  returning  every  twenty  minutes,

till  4  P.M.
Morning :  dryness  in  throat ;  nausea  ;  mucous  or  sanguinolent

sputa  <  ;  aggravation  of  all  symptoms;  neck  stiif ;  arthritic

pains;  SAveat  towards  morning.
Evening  :  headache  in  forehead  and  vertex  ;  sneezing  ;  putrid,

greenish-yellow  mucus  from  nose  <;  ;  mucous  or  sanguinolent

sputa  <  ;  palpitation  with  headache ;  symptoms  generally

worse.
I  Attacks  appear  with  change  of  moon. ^Epilepsy.
^^  Temperature and  Weather. The  warm  room  is  unpleasant.
I  Headache  and  flushed  face  much  worse  in  warm  room  or  near

stove ;  better  from  cold  bathing  or  in  cold  air. ^Epilepsy.
■  Putting  feet  in  hot  water  and  drinking  something  hot,  some-
times breaks  up  the  attack. ^Epilepsy.
Great  sensibility  to  open,  cold  air  and  wind. See  34,  37,  40.
Open  air:  coldness;  moist  skin;  nervousness  and trembling

worse.
Cold :  air  causes  corrosion  of  nostrils  ;  water  causes  pricking

of  face;  water,  burning  of  mouth  <  ;  air,  cramps  in  limbs.
Wind:  eyes  less  sensitive  to.
*"  Fever. Coldness  and  shivering,  with  moist  skin,  nervousness

and  trembling;  worse  going  into  open  air.
Heat,  with  apathy  or  delirium,  and  cold  feet.
I  The  limbs  get  cold,  head  and  face  increasingly  hot,  as  parox-
ysms multiply. /^Epilepsy.
Burning  heat  in  various  parts.


55  BUFONES.

Limbs  burning  hot  during  fever.

I  Hot  head,  cold  body;  delirium  or  apathy;  constipation.
Profuse,  oily  sweat  on  head  and  face.

I I  Bathed  in  sweat.  ^Epilepsy.
I  I  Profuse  sweat,  weak  ;  spasms.
Sweat  during  sleep,  towards  morning.

I  The  body,  and  especially  hands  and  arms  bathed  in  a  clammy
perspiration,  as  attacks  multiplied. ^Epilepsy.

■  Checked sweat, now  very  copious,  most  towards  morning.

^Softening  of  brain.

I  Cold  sweat.

I I  Quartana.
I  Plague.

*^ Attacks,  Periodicity. ■  Every  week,  on  one  day,  four  attacks.
^Epilepsy.
I  About  once  a  week,  always  in  the  night,  followed  by  some
hours  of  coma. ^Epileptic  spasms.

■  Has  from  ten  to  twelve  attacks  yearly. ^Epilepsy.

■  Attacks  since  about  five  years. ^Epilepsy.

*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  eye  open  ;  stitches  in  chest.

Left:  dull  headache;  eye  nearly  closed;  lid  paralyzed.
*^  Sensations. Ilf  awake  she  has  some  warning,  from  a  feeling
of  general numbness, immediately followed by  a spasm.
^Epilepsy.

Sensation  as  if  breasts  were  torn  towards  belly.

Lancinating :  in  stomach  to  liver  and  heart ;  in  bones  of  arms.

Stitching:  iu  ovaries;  in  larynx;  in  chest,  r.  side ;  about  apex
of  heart ;  in  skin.

Pricking :  of  face  from  cold  water.

Shooting:  in  knees,  ankles  and  feet;  repeated,  through  whole
body.

Tearing :  along  arm.

Contusion :  in  arms,  legs  and  loins  during  motion.

Pressure :  like  two  iron  bands  holding  temples  ;  in  top  of  head.

Aching:  of  head  after  meal ;  one-sided  headache  ;  of  head  with
epilepsy  ;  in  forehead  and  vertex  ;  of  teeth ;  of  head  during
menstruation.

Soreness :  of  throat.

Burning :  of  eyelids  ;  of  nostrils  ;  of  face  ;  of  mouth ;  in  stom-
ach ;  in  kidneys;  of  ovaries  ;  pain  in  uterus;  in  uterus  and
vagina ;  during  menstruation ;  in  larynx  ;  in  chest ;  like  fire
in  lungs ;  in  bones  of  arms;  of  wrists  and  finger-joints;  in
knees,  ankles  and  feet ;  in  hands  and  arm  ;  heat  in  various
parts ;  of  skin.

Pain  :  of  eyes ;  spasmodic  in  eye  ;  colic  after  drinking  milk  or
smoking ;  dagger -like  in  uterus  ;  in  streaks  up  arm  ;  arthri-
tic pains  on  awakening.


BUFONES.  56

Tenderness :  of  forehead  and  vertex ;  of  ovarian  region ;  of
bones.

Twitching :  of  whole  body.

Compression  :  of  larynx,  trachea.

Contraction  :  in  liver  ;  of  chest  and  heart.

Constriction  :  about  heart  and  chest.

Distension:  in  uterus;  pain  in  knees.

Largeness :  of  heart.

Emptiness :  in  stomach.

Heaviness:  in  limbs,  from  coition;  of  chest;  about  heart;  of
limbs.

Stone :  sensation  of,  in  throat.

Pulsating :  pain  in  liver,  abscess-like ;  of  wrists  and  finger-
joints;  pain  in  knees,  with  swelling.

Beating :  in  ear.

Weakness  :  of  legs  ;  great  weakness  and  fainting.

Faintness  :  from  epistaxis ;  in  stomach.

Heat :  of  head  and  face.

Shivering :  in  legs.

Coldness:  of  feet,  with  headache;  of  feet,  causing  cough;  in
chest ;  of  limbs,  with  moist  skin.

Numbness :  of  brain.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Itching  :  in  eyes,  with  dimness  of  sight ;  of  eyelids ;  of  lower
limbs.

Dryness:  of  tongue;  in  throat.
^*  Tissues. Bleeding.

I  Redness  and  swelling  along  course  of  lymphatics,  after  wounds,

etc. See  24,  32.
Subsultus  tendinum  and  contraction  of  muscles.
Bones  sensitive ;  bones  of  legs  brittle ;  caries  of  spinal  vertebrae  ;

pains  in  joints  as  if  crushed;  arthritis;  tophi  on  knees  and

feet.
Scrofulosis  ;  fistula;  I  carbuncles.

I I  Open  cancer.

Swelling  of  whole  body,  which  turns  a  deep  yellow.
Swelling  of  body  like  hydrops,  with  great  oppression.

^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Small  wounds  suppu-
rate much.

1  I  Tendency  of  wounds  to  suppurate,  with  throbbing  and  lanci-
nating pains.

Lymphatics  swell  after  a  wound.

l]3epression  of  skull  from  a  horse's  kick  on  occiput.  ^Epilepsy.

■  Convulsions  after  having  teeth  extracted. ^Epilepsy.

I  When  suppurations  seem  to  be  the  cause  of  convulsions.
^Epilepsy.

Touch :  tenderness  of  forehead  and  vertex ;  ovarian  region
sensitive.


57  BUFONES.

^^Skin.  iStitches  in  skin  prevent  sleep  at  night.  ^Softening  of
brain.

I  Red  or  purplish  streaks  in  neck,  back  or  other  parts.  ^Men-
ingitis.

Yellow  color  of  skin.

Skin  greenish,  dirty,  oily,  or  Igrayish-yellow. See  36.

Erysipelatous  eruptions.

Pustules,  tetters  and  eruption  of  small  nodules.

Large  yellow  blisters,  like  pemphigus,  mostly  on  palms  of  hands
and  soles  of  feet ;  burning.

iPompholyx  in  hand  returning  every  year.

I  Phly ctenoid  eruption,  discharging  a  thin,  yellow  fluid,  simi-
lar to  that  appearing  in  vomit  and  leucorrhoea. ^Epilepsy.

Moist  tetters,  with  suppurating  places  resembling  flat  ulcers,  in
mane  of  horses.

I  Bluish-black  swelling  around  (thumb)  nail,  followed  by  sup-
puration. ^Panaritium.

I  Ulcers,  with  burning  pains.

I  I  Malignant  pustule.

I  Carbuncles  ;  blue  far  around.

I  iCarbunculus  pestilentialis.

Chilblains.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  6,  inclination  to

touch  the  genitals.

iBoy,  set.  11,  good  constitution ;  epileptic  attack  six  months
ago,  without  apparent  cause.

iWoman,  set.  30,  wreck  in  mind  and  body  from  epilepsy.

I  Woman,  set.  40,  suff"ered  thirty  years  with  epileptic  spasms.

I  Woman,  set.  24,  suffered  for  more  than  a  year  with  epilepsy.

Child,  set.  6,  had  some  poison  spirted  into  his  r.  eye  by  a  toad,
during  a  dry,  hot  June  day  in  Rome.
^®  Relations. Antidotedby:  Laches.,  Senega.

Compare;  In  convulsions  from  low  grades  of  suppuration,
Arsen.,  Canthar.,  Laches.,  Tarent. ;  in  epilepsy,  aura
starting  in  solar-plexus,  Artem.,  Calc.  ost.,  Nux  vom.,
Silica;  aura  starting  in  arm,  Laches.,  Sulphur ;  in  chorea,
patient  cannot  Avalk,  must  run  or  jump,  Kali  hrom.,  Natr.
mur.;  in  masturbation,  impotence,  etc.,  Hyosc,  Mercur.,
If  Sulphur ;  in  malignant  pustule,  Antim.  crud..  Laches.;
in  bullse,  panaritia,  etc.,  Hepar,  Laches.,  Phosjjh.  ac,
Silica.

Cuhehce  is  similar  to  Bufo  (Lippe).

Complementary:  Salamandra  (epilepsy,  cerebral  softening).


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  58

CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

Nighthlooming  Cereus.  Cactaeeoe.

We  are  indebted  for  this  very  valuable  medicine  to  the  wife  of  Dr.  Ru-
bini  in  Naples.  Admiring  the  great  beauty  and  sweet  odor  of  the  flower,
and  knowing  its  short  life,  opening  at  evening,  closing  and  dying  before
dawn  of  day,  she  induced  her  husband  to  make  a  preparation  from  the
young  flower,  from  which  is  their  masterly  proving,  which  will  be  a
boon  to  suffering  humanity  to  the  end  of  timo.  In  1864  Rocco  Rubini
published  his  monograph,  and  in  1865  Dr.  A.  Lippe  published  the  first
correct  and  complete  translation  of  it  into  English.  All  other  translations
into  English  and  German  are  full  of  errors  and  omissions.  Later  prov-
ings  have  been  made  by  Hencke,  Lemke,  especially  by  Barnes  Horn.  Ob-
server, Vol.  3,  p.  78,  1860.  Same  year  some  symptoms  were  observed  by
C.Hg.  and  G.  Bute.

^  Mind. General  stupidity.

Difficulty  in  finding  right  expression  when  writing  the  symp-
toms down.

■  Thinks  she  will  not  recover. ^Rheumatism  with  heart  disease.
I  Feels  she  is  dying  and  thinks  she  will  not  live  till  morning,

but  has  no  fear  of  death. ^Rheumatism  of  heart.
I  I  Love  of  solitude.

I  I  Irresistible  inclination  to  cry  (an  intelligent  woman).
I  I  Cries,  knows  not  why ;  consolation  aggravates.

■  Screaming  with  pains,  with  complete  consciousness. ^Rheu-

matism with  pain  in  heart.
Taciturn,  unwilling  to  speak  a  word  or  to  answer.

■  Cheerful  and  vivacious. ^Heart  disease.

■  Sadness,  taciturnity,  and  irresistible  inclination  to  weep.
Invincible  sadness.

I  I  Hypochondriacal.

■  Fear  of  death  ;  he  believes  his  disease  incurable.
Indescribable  fear  that  something  terrible  is  going  to  happen

to  him.

■  During  and  after  attack,  great  anxiety,  fearing  some  organic

lesion  of  heart  which  will  cause  sudden  death. ^Angina
pectoris.
Anxiety  returning  in  the  evening.

■  Despondent. ^Rheumatism  with  heart  disease.

■  Easily  frightened,  often  awakes  in  a  fright. ^Enlargement

of  heart.


59  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

Felt  much  alarmed  on  waking,  but  could  not  tell  the  cause  of
. alarm.
^Sensorium. I  Vertigo  from  congestion;  face  red,  bloated ;  pul-
sation in  brain  ;  madness,  anxiety.

■  Vertigo;  <  from  physical  exertion,  turning  in  bed,  stooping,

rising  from  a  recumbent  position,  and  deep  inspiration.
^  Inner  Head. Heaviness  of  head.

A  numb  pain  with  a  stupefied  feeling,  extending  from  above

eyes  across  base  of  brain.
Pain  in  forehead  and  eyes,  with  ringing  in  ears.
Stinging  pain  in  forehead  over  eyes.

■  Pulsation  in  temples  as  if  the  skull  would  burst;  intolerable

at  night.

■  Pain  in  r.  temple  by  spells,  brought  on  by  a  glass  of  wine,  by

attending  opera,  or  after  getting  dinner  at  too  late  an  hour.
Congestion  to  brain,  blood-shot  eyes,  coma,  suffocation,  flushes
in  face ;  fever,  from  exposure  to  sun's  rays.

■  ■Heavy  pain  like  a  weight  on  vertex; >  by  pressure,  but

<  from  sounds,  hearing  talking,  or  strong  light.

■  ■Right  sided  headaches  and  neuralgias  which are  periodic,

pulsating  and  throbbing,  and  of  extreme  type.

■  Pulsating  pain,  with  sensation  of  weight  in  r.  side  of  head,

continuing  day  and  night,  so  severe  as  to  make  him  cry  out.

■  Heavy  pulsating  pain  in  head.

Troublesome  pressure  in  r.  parietal  bone ;  later  pain  in  1.  pa-
rietal bone,  early  on  rising.

■  Pain  and  pressure  on  vertex,  with  palpitation  and  sensation

as  if  heart  was  grasped. ^Coryza.

■  Tensive  pain  on  vertex.

■  Feeling  as  if  head  were  compressed  in  a  vice  and  that  it  would

burst  open  from  severity  of  pain.

■  Something  seems  to  be  whirling  up  from  chest  to  brain  and  all

arteries  seem  to throb; feels  as  if  dying. ^Rheumatism
of  heart.
I  I  Headache  from  noise  and  light.

■  Headache  commences  in  morning  and  grows,  as  day  advances,

to  an  unendurable  height,  with  vomiting.
Excessive  pain  in  head,  so  anxious  he  cannot  remain  in  bed ;

prostrated,  weak.
Headache  m  different  parts  of  head; <  from  motion  and  deep

inspiration.

■  Headache  from  sanguineous  congestion  or  rheumatism.

■  I  Cerebral  congestion.

■  ■Sanguineous  apoplexy.

*  Outer  Head.  ■Pain  in  r.  temple  coming  in  spells;  begins  in
morning,  increasing  during  day,  with  vomiting ;  nose  con-
stantly dry;  must  lie  perfectly  quiet;  <  from  keeping  up,
noise,  light  or  exertion.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  60

Pressive  pain  in  1.  parietal  bone,  rather  external.

Painful  drawing  in  aponeurotic  covering  of  occiput ; >  bend-
ing head  backwards.

I  Cold,  clammy  sweat on  forehead, upper  and  lower  limbs.
^Cardiac  rheumatism.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Sensitive  to  light. ^Headache.

Dimness  of  sight  from  circles  of  red  light  before  eyes.

At  a  short  distance  he  cannot  recognize  a  friend

Dark  spots  before  eyes,  with  pain  in  forehead  and  eyes.

iDimness  of  sight;  cannot  see  at  a  distance;  objects  appear  to
be  obscured.

Weakness  of  sight  returning  periodically.

Sight  blurred.

I  Eyes  blood-shot; cerebral  congestion  even  to  coma, when
perspiration  fails. ^Intermittent.

I  Acute  rheumatic  ophthalmia.

Hyperaemia  of  eye,  especially  of  fundus.
■  I  Exophthalmic  goitre. ^Heart  disease.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Worse  from  sounds,  even  talking ;  heavy
pain  like  a  weight  in  vertex.

I  I  Singing  or  ringing  in  ears.

Hardness  of  hearing  from  congestion ;  pulsations  in  ears;  noise
like  running  water  or  buzzing.

Hearing  diminished  by  buzzing  in  ears.

■  Pulsations  and  buzzing  in  ears. ^Otitis.

■  Rheumatic  otitis.

■  Otitis  from  checked  perspiration.

"^  Smell  and  Nose. Fluent,  acrid  coryza ;  nostrils  sore.

■  Dry  or  fluent  coryza.

Dry  and  unpleasant  coryza; must  lie  at  night  with  mouth
open.

■  Constant  dry  nose. ^Headache.

■  Profuse  nosebleed,  soon  ceasing.

^Tipper  Face.  ■Prosopalgia,  right-sided,  chronic;  <  from
slightest  exertion,  tolerable  only  when  lying  still  in  bed  ;
brought  on  by  wine,  music,  strong  light,  or  missing  dinner
at  usual  hour.

■  Flushes  of  heat  in  face,  with  suffocation. ^Intermittent.

■  Face  bloated  and  red,  with  pulsation  in  head.

■  Paleness  of  face  and  emaciation.

■  Pale,  death-like  countenance. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.

■  Anxious  look,  pale  face,  purplish  lips. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.

■  Blue  face,  with  chill. ^Intermittent.

■  Face  and  head  swollen  and  discolored. ^Heart  disease.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  acrid.

■  Loss  of  taste  for  food,  with  nausea.

■  Tongue  purple,  with  thick  brown  sordes  on  teeth. ^Low

fever.


61  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

Prickling  in  point  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Fetid  breath  in  morning.

I  Breath  very  oiFensive. ^Low  fever.
^^  Throat. Throat  feels  sore.

Feeling  of  warmth  about  throat  and  chest.
Constriction  of  oesophagus,  which  prevents  swallowing.
Constriction  of  throat,  exciting  a  constant  desire  to  swallow.
Constriction  of  oesophagus ; must drink large quantities to
force  fluid  into  stomach.

I I  Suffocative  constriction  at  throat,  with  full  throbbing  caro-
tids. ^Angina  pectoris.

Scraping  sensation  at  soft  palate,  lasting  aboui  an  hour.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Appetite  good,  but

digestion  weak.
Loss  of  appetite  and  of  taste  for  food ;  nausea.
I  Loss  of  appetite. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.
I  Complete  loss  of  appetite  ;  he  cannot  take  least  morsel  of  food.
I  No  desire  for  meat,  of  which  he  had  been  very  fond. ^Heart

disease.

I  No  appetite;  stomach  rejecting  anything  she  tried  to  take.

^Low  fever.
'®  Eating  and  Drinking. I  After  eating  :  weight  and  distress  in
stomach.
After  dinner:  pulsation  (in  coeliac  axis)  behind  stomach.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Nausea  in
morning,  continues  all  day.
Acrid,  sour  fluid,  rising  into  throat  and  mouth,  making  food

taste  acid.
Vomiting  of  blood.

■  Violent  vomiting  when  perspiration  fails. ^Intermittent.

■  Frequent  vomiting. ^Low  fever.

I I  Hsematemesis.

^^ Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Indigestion;  sensation  as  if
stomach  was  closed,  with  constipation  ;  palpitation  and  sen-
sation of  constriction  of  heart ;  <  ascending  and  walking.

Sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach,  with  appetite  undisturbed
and  stool  as  usual.

Acrid  acid  in  stomach,  which  rises  in  throat  and  mouth.

I  Uncomfortable  sensation  at  pit  of  stomach,  as  if  falling.
^Angina  pectoris.

Constrictive  feeling  at  scrobiculus  cordis,  extending  to  hypo-
chondria, impeding  breathing.

■  Sharp  neuralgic  pains  in  cardia,  causing  patient  to  weep  and

cry  loudly.
Burning  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Strong  pulsation  in  scrobiculus.

■  Rumbling  in  stomach  precedes  palpitation.

1  I  Sensation  of  weight  with  oppression  in  stomach.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  .  62

Burning  pulsation  or  heaviness  in  stomach.

I  Continuous  and  annoying  pulsation  and  burning  in  stomach.
^Climaxis.

I A  constant  fluttering  sensation  in  stomach,  over  location  of
coeliac  axis,  in  a  spot,  size  of  about  a  dollar ;  a  burning  line
extends  down  from  it  to  lower  ribs  on  either  side;  a  hot
flash  shoots  downwards  frequently.  ^Low  fever.
^^  HypOch.ondria.  Jerking  pain  on  r.  side  below  short  ribs,  ex-
tending backwards.

I  Engorgement  of  liver ;  acute  or  chronic. ^Heart  disease.

Pain  in  epigastrium,  somewhat  to  left,  later  lower  down  on  r.
side.

I  Sharp  pains  shooting  through  diaphragm  and  up  into  chest;

jerking  breathing. ^Rheumatism  of  diaphragm.

I I  Feeling  as  of  a  cord  tightly  tied  around  lower  part  of  chest;
marking  out  attachment  of  diaphragm.  ^Rheumatism  of
diaphragm.

^^  Abdomen. ;rDull  pains  in  abdomen,  then  flushes  of  heat  and

tingling. ^Rheumatism,  with  palpitation.
Pain  in  middle  of  lower  abdomen,  somewhat  to  right,  soon  after

going  to  bed.
Violent  pains  in  bowels  almost  causing  him  to  faint.
Wandering  pains  in  umbilical  region,  which  cease  and  recur

periodically.
TrCrampy  pain  about  navel,  with  soreness  as  of  a  foreign  body;

■<  on  motion.
TrColic,  with  loose  stool. ^Rheumatism  and  palpitation.
I  Beating  in  abdomen. ^Palpitation  of  heart.
Insupportable  heat  in  abdomen,  as  though  something  burned

him  internally.

I  Pain  in  lower  portion  of  abdomen  and  a  bearing  down  sen-

sation, at  times  quite  severe. ^Low  fever.

■  Peritonitis.

■  Enteritis.

II  Severe  gastro-enteritis.

■  Gastric  fever.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. I  Morning  diarrhoea  of  very  loose  feces,

preceded  by  great  pain. ^Heart  aff'ection.
Diarrhoea,  watery  mucus,  bilious  (in  forenoon).
B  Stools  scanty,  resembling  dirty  water,  averaging  as  often  as

every  hour. ^Low  fever.

■  Diarrhoea; <C  in  forenoon.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  heart  affections.

■  Irregular  stools. ^Palpitation  of  heart.
Constipation  ;  stool  hard  and  black.

■  Constipation  from  hemorrhoidal  congestion.

■  Sensation  of  weight  in  anus,  and  a  strong  desire  to  evacuate


63  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

a  great  quantity ;  however,  nothing  passes. ^Heart  affec-
tion.

Peculiar  sensation  at  anus, as  though  rectum were  swollen,
causing  scraping  and  prickling  sensation  during  stool.

Swollen,  painful  varices  at  anus.

Copious  hemorrhage  from  anus.

1 1  Fluent  hemorrhoids.

Pricking  in  anus,  as  from  pins,  ceasing  on  slight  friction.

Itching  in  anus.

I  Fistula  in ano,  with  violent  palpitation and  oppression of
heart.
^^  Urinary  Organs. I  Paralysis  of  bladder.

Constriction  of  neck  of  bladder.

Frequent  but  ineffectual  desire  to  urinate.

I  I  Desire  to  urinate ;  after  attempting  to  do  so  for  a  long  time,
water  passes  abundantly.

■  Insupportable  irritation  in  urethra,  as  if  he  should  pass  water

constantly.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  an  abundant  flow  of  urine,

each  time,  during  night.
Urine  passes  by  drops,  with  much  burning.
Urine  seems  diminished  in  quantity.
I  Strangury.

■  Suppression  of  urine  and  pains  in  bladder during  febrile

access,  when  perspiration  fails. ^Intermittent.
I  Urine  scanty,  not  very  frequent,  but  burning  and  scalding.

/^Low  fever.
Profuse  urine,  of  a  straw  color.
Urine,  on  cooling,  deposits  a  red  sand.
I  Urine  reddish,  turbid,  very  abundant.
llHfematuria;  urination  prevented  by  clots,
^^Male  Sexual  Organs. Prostatic  affections:  weight  in  anus;

constriction  of  bladder ;  desire  to  pass  water,  unable  to  pass

it  for  a  time,  but  finally  succeeded ;  irritation  as  if  he  should

pass  water  constantly.
Female  Sexual  Organs. I Painful  constriction  around  pelvis,

extending  gradually  towards  stomach,  causing  a  sensation  as

of  a  great  blow  in  region  of  kidneys,  making  her  cry  out.

■  Pulsating  pain  in  ovarian  regions;  pains  extend  down  thighs,

returning  periodically  at  same  time  each  day.

■  Ovaritis.

I  Pulsating  pain  in  uterus  and  ovaries.

Sensation  of  constriction  in  uterine  region.

I  1  Spasmodic  constriction  in  uterus  and  vagina,  often  from
least  touch,  gradually  extending  upwards.

Hysteralgia:  sadness;  crying,  but  without  reason;  consolation
aggravates  ;  love  of  solitude ;  fear  of  death  ;  constriction  of
uterus  ;  whole  body  feels  as  if  caged  in  wires. See  43.


23


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  64

Pains  in  uterus  and  its  ligaments,  returning  periodically  each
evening.

■  Metritis.

I  Menses  too  soon  ;  black,  pitch-like.

■  Very  painful  menstruation.

1  I  Menstruation  with  most  horrible  pains,  causing  her  to  cry

aloud  and  weep.
1  I  Sensation  of  contraction  of  uterus  during  profuse  menses.

■  Menstruation  with  constrictive  spasm  of  uterus  ;  pains  agoniz-

ing, <  evening ;  flow  scanty,  ceases  when  lying  down.

I  I  Menses  ceasing  at  night.

I I  Constriction  of  vagina  preventing  coition. ^Vaginismus.

2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Labor  suppressed.

I  I  Hard  tumor  in  r.  mamma,  which  was  growing  until  milk
began  to  be  secreted,  since  then  subsiding.

Ilnflammation  of  mammae;  sensation  of  fullness  in  chest;  over-
sensitive to  cold  air.

Cyanosis  in  infants. Compare  Laches.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, a  Voice  low,

hoarse,  constriction  of  chest.

■  Bronchial  symptoms  arising  from  overaction  of  heart.
I  Acute  bronchitis.

I  Bronchitis,  with  expectoration  of  mucus,  day  and  night.

■  Chronic  bronchitis,  with  rattling  of  mucus;  becoming  acute

in  consequence  of  a  cold,  causes  great  anxiety  and  suffo-
cation.

■  Chronic  bronchitis,  of  many  year's  standing,  with  rattling  of

mucus,  continuous  day  and  night ;  oppression  of  breathing
on  going  up  stairs,  and  inability  to  lie  horizontally  in  bed.

■  Voice  moderately  full  at  times ;  then  decreasing,  with  a  pecu-

liar whistling  sound,  almost  to  a  Avhisper. ^Low  fever.
^^Respiration. ■  Inspiring  fresh  air  is  very  reviving.

■  Jerking  breathing. ^Rheumatism  of  diaphragm.

■  Breathing  became  more  and  more  labored,  so  that  she  could

not  lie  down. ^Cardiac  dropsy.

■  Sometimes  breath  stopped  for  half  a  minute  without  losing

consciousness  ;  skin  gets  colder.

■  Short  breathing;  oppression;  anxiety  and  feeling  of  constric-

tion as  though  a  band  encircled  the  chest. ^Palpitation  of
heart.

■  ■Difficulty  of  breathing;  continued  oppression  and  uneasiness,

as  if  chest  were  constricted  with  an  iron  band,  and  could  not

dilate  itself  for  normal  respiration.
Shortness of  breath while  walking, especially  on ascending

stairs.
Slight  dyspnoea  during  day  while  walking.

■  Oppression  of  breathing  on  going  up  stairs. ^Bronchitis.

■  ■  Oppression  of  chest,  as  from  a  great  weight,  difficult  breath-


65  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

ing;  uneasiness,  as  if  an  iron  band  prevented  normal  motion

of  chest.
I  Chronic  oppression  of  breathing.
I  Feeling of  oppression during  respiration. ^Palpitation of

heart.

■  Oppression  on  chest  like  a  great  weight,  or  as  if  chest  were

compressed,  with  fainting,  cold  sweat,  loss  of  pulse.

■  Compression  of  chest. ^Fatty  hypertrophy  of  heart.

■  Congestive  asthma.

■  Suffocative  attacks,  with  turbulent  action  of  heart;  worse  at

11  P.M. ^Enlarged  heart  in  a  young  woman.

■  Frequent  attacks  of  asthma,  with  stricture  around  chest,  like  a

band  of  iron.
I  ■  Periodical  attacks  of  suffocation,  with  fainting,  cold  perspira-
tion on  face,  and  loss  of  pulse.

■  Sense  of  constriction  of  chest,  with  suffocation. ^Rheumatism

and  pain  in  heart.

■  Suffocative  dyspnoea,  with  chill,  in  child,  aet.  6  months. ^In-

termittent.
Frequently,  every  year,  a  sensation  of  a  hoop  around  throat,
another around heart, and another around diaphragm.
^Asthma.

■  ■Could  only  breathe  with  shoulders  elevated  and  lying  on

back. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.

■  When  breath  stops,  there  is  violent  gasping  and  palpitation.

^Cardiac  rheumatism.

■  Sometimes  breath  stops  altogether  for  half  a  minute,  but  with-

out unconsciousness,  afterwards gasping. ^Cardiac  rheu-
matism.
^^  Cough. Dry  cough  from  tickling  in  throat  and  from  itching  in
larynx.

■  Spasmodic  cough,  with  copious,  mucous  expectoration.

■  Cough,  with  thick  yellow  sputa,  like  boiled  starch.

■  Catarrhal  cough,  with  much  viscid  expectoration.

■  Catarrhal  fevers.

Obstinate,  stertorous  cough ;  <  at  night.

■  Excessive  secretion  of  mucus,  with  oppression,  when  attempt-

ing to  lie down ; face and  limbs cold ; heart felt as if
clutched. ^Chronic  bronchitis.

■  Sputa  copious,  yellow  and  jelly-like. ^Low  fever.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Great  fullness  in  chest,  extending
up  to  throat. ^Palpitation  of  heart.

■  Congestion  of  lungs. ^Cardiac  dropsy.

■  ■Congestion  to  chest,  which  prevents  lying  down; palpita-

tion ;  constriction  of  chest.

Feeling  of  constriction  in  chest,  as  if  bound ;  hindering  respi-
ration.

Sensation  of  great  constriction  in  middle  of  sternum,  as  if

VOL. III. — 5.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  66

parts  were  compressed  by  iron  pincers,  which  compression
produces  oppression  of  respiration.

I  Griping  pain  behind  sternum.

iFeeling  of  constriction  in  chest,  impeding  speech.

I I  Painful  sensation  of  constriction  in  lower  part  of  chest,  as  if
a  cord  was  tightly  bound  around  false  ribs,  with  obstruction
of  breathing.

Dull  pain  in  lungs.

I  Dull  percussion  sound  in  front  to  fourth  r.  rib. ^Pleuritis.

I  Pain  from  lower  part  of  chest  to  shoulder-blades. ^Pleuritis.

I  Pricking  pains  in  chest,  oppressed  respiration,  intense  cough;
bloody  sputa;  hard,  quick,  vibrating  pulse;  sharp,  wander-
ing pains  in  chest  and  scapular  region. ^Pneumonia.

■  Abnormal respiratory murmur and bronchial respiration.

^Pleuritis.

■  Continual  rattling  of  mucus ; oppressed  breathing; cannot

lie  in  a  horizontal  position  ;  attacks  of  anxiety  and  suffo-
cation.

Pressive  pain  in  upper  part  of  left  chest,  between  second  and
third  ribs,  at  8  a.m.,  while  quietly  sitting;  dyspnoea  induc-
ing deep  breathing  and  lasting  several  minutes.

Pressive  pain  in  upper  part  of  right  chest ;  difficult  breathing.

Pressive  pain  in  chest  causing  dyspnoea  and  inducing  deep
breathing ;  worse  while  walking.

■  Hepatization  of  lungs.

■  Pulmonary  tuberculosis  in  first  stage.

I  1  Bronchitis,  with  palpitation  of  heart  and  bronchial  catarrh,
from  overaction  of  heart.

■  ■Haemoptysis,  with  marked  arterial  excitement  (but  less  fever

and  restlessness  than  Aeon.) ;  convulsive  cough.

■  Pneumorrhagia,  renewed  every  four,  six,  seven,  or  eight  hours,

accompanied  each  time  with  convulsive  cough,  and  expectora-
tion of  two  or  three  pounds  of  blood;  is  at  once  relieved,  and
ceases  entirely  in  four  days.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Pain  deep  in  heart,  some-
what to  the  right  and  posteriorly,  like  a  jerking  body;  often
repeated  during  4  or  5  hours;  later,  often  but  less  violent,
and  a  little  higher  up.
Whizzing  to  and  fro  sound;  bruit  de  soufflet.

■  Something  seemed  to  be  whirling  up  from  chest  to  brain,  and

all  arteries  seemed  throbbing.

■  Sensation  of  an  annoying  movement  from  before  backward  in

cardiac  region  as  of  a  reptile ; <  by  day  than  by  night.

■  Sensation  as  if  heart  turned  over.

■  Sensation  in  chest  as  if  heart  whirled  round,  first  in  one  di-

rection and  then  in  another. ^Heart  affection.

■  At  times  felt  as  if  some  one  was  grasping  heart  firmly,  with

sensation  as  if  it  whirled  around.


67  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

I  Contractive pain in region  of  heart; going  down  to  1.  ab-

domen, it  catches  breath  ; cold  feeling  in  chest  at  seat  of
pain  ;  low  spirited  ;  weeping. ^Chorea.

I I  Sensation  of  constriction  in  heart,  as  if  an  iron  hand  pre-
vented its  normal  movements.

iDuU,  heavy  pain,  worse  from  pressure;  suffocating  respiration;
face  blue ;  oedema,  especially  of  left  hand  and  of  legs  to
knees ;  feet  icy  cold ;  pulse  intermittent.  ^Chronic  car-
ditis.

I  Great  pressure  at  heart,  going  around  under  1.  axilla  to  back,
"like  a  belt  of  pain  ;"  at  midnight  became  very  bad,  like  a
hand  grasping  heart,  with  soreness  and  aching,  and  soreness
to  touch  in  all  affected  region;  also,  sore  aching  in  1.  arm
down  to  elbow. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.

I  Pain  in  cardiac  region. ^Palpitation  of  heart.

I  Acute  pains  and  stitches  in  heart.

I  Pricking  pains  impeding  breathing  and  movements  of  body  ;
oppression  ;  cannot  lie  on  left  side  ;  blue  face  ;  pulse  quick,
throbbing,  tense  and  hard.  ^Carditis.  ^Cardiac  rheu-
matism.

I  Very  acute  pain,  and  such  painful  stitches  in  heart  as  to  cause
him  to  weep  and  to  cry  out  loudly,  with  distressing  palpita-
tion, faintness,  dyspnoea.

■  Lancinating  pain  in  heart  when  perspiration  fails. ^Inter-

mittent.

■  Paroxysms  of  violent,  stitching  pain  in  heart,  with  icy  cold-

ness of  limbs. ^Sequel  to  rheumatism.

■  ■Constant  pain  in  region  of  heart,  with  sensation  as  if  heart

were  "bound  down,"  or  "had  not  room  enough  to  beat,"  or
"as  if  bolts  were  holding  it." ^Sequel  to  rheumatism.

■  ■Feeling  as  if  heart  were  compressed  or  squeezed  by  a  hand.
Cardiac  rheumatism. Compare  Spigel.

■  ■  Heart  seemed  to  be  held  by  an  iron  hand  for  many  hours.

^Angina  pectoris. ^Cardiac  rheumatism. ^Fatty  degenera-
tion. ^Hypertrophy.
Pains  in apex of  heart  shooting  down  left  arm to  ends  of
fingers ;  feeble  pulse ;  dyspnoea.

■  Pain  in  heart  worse  on  speaking  or  lying  on  left  side. ^Car-

diac rheumatism.

■  Pain  at  heart  paroxysmal. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.

■  Acute  carditis,  with  blueness  of  face ;  oppression  of  breathing ;

dry  cough  ;  pricking  pain  in  heart ;  cannot  lie  on  left  side ;
pulse  quick,  throbbing,  tense  and  hard.

■  Acute  inflammatory affection of  heart; idiopathic or  from

rheumatism.

■  Rheumatic  inflammation  of  heart,  with  severe  pain  in  apex,

and  pain  shooting  down  left  arm  to  end  of  fingers;  dyspnoea; .
pulse  feeble,  120.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  68

I  Chronic  caVditis,  Avith  oedematous  and  cyanotic  face;  suffocat-
ing respiration;  continued  dull  pain  in  heart;  dropsical
eft'usion  throughout  body ;  cannot  drink  or  speak  ;  hands
and  feet  cold ; pulse  intermittent.

I  Functional  disorder  of  heart,  from  mental  emotions;  ■<  at
menstrual  period.

■  Fluttering  sensation  in  heart  like  a  bird's  wing. ^Chronic

palpitation.

■  Increased  pulsation  of  heart,  and  while  walking  pulsation  in

chest  with  anxiety, lasting  all morning,  accompanied by
pressure  in  left  parietal  bone.
Palpitation  of  heart  on  ascending  stairs.

■  Palpitation  causing  great  restlessness  and  uneasiness.

■  Occasional  attacks  of  palpitation  after  unusual physical  or

mental  exertion. ^Angina  pectoris.

■  Palpitation  of  long  standing,  caused  by  an  unfortunate  love

affair.
Palpitation  ■^yith  vertigo,  loss  of  consciousness,  dyspnoea;  worse
walking,  at  night ;  lying  on  left  side ;  at  approach  of  men-
ses ;  from  any  exertion.

■  ■Palpitation of  heart, continued  day and night; <<  when

walking,  and  at  night,  when  lying  on  1.  side.

■  Violent  palpitation with  suffocative  spells  when  lying  down.

^Fatty  hypertrophy  of  heart.

■  Palpitation  with  sensation  of  heaviness; stitching  pains  in

heart ;  pulse  small,  weak  and  rapid. ^Heart  disease.

■  Irregular  palpitation  of  heart  at  night; ■when  lying  on  left

side  or  turning  in bed ; >  from an  upright  posture and
■  deep  inspiration.

■  Palpitation  <  at  night,  most  before  midnight,  and  lying  on

1.  side.

■  Violent  palpitation  with  very  distressing  dyspnoea. , ^Cardiac

dropsy.

■  Slow,  cutting  pain,  from  above  downward  through  centre  of

heart,  making  motion  or  breathing  impossible.

■  Apex  beat  one  inch  without  a  line  drawn  vertically  through

nipple. ^Enlargement  of  heart.

■  Palpitation of  heart  consists of  small  irregular  beats,  with

necessity  for  deep  inspiration ; slight  excitement  or  deep
thought  is  sufficient  to  produce  this  condition.

■  Irresru^ar  and  intermittent  action  of  heart. ^ After  delivery

by  forceps.

■  Rapid,  short,  irregular  beats  of  heart,  on  rapid  motion.

■  Several violent,  irregular  beats of  heart,  with  sensation of

pressure  and  heaviness  in  cardiac  region.

■  Violent,  turbulent  action  of  heart,  it  beats  violently  for  a  short

time  then  ceases  entirely. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.

■  Organic  and  nervous  palpitation  of  heart.


69  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

■  Great  irregularity  of  heart's  action,  intermittent  at  times  and

of  varying  character ;  great  frequency  of  action  alternating
with  slowness.  ^Enlargement  of  left  ventricle  with  great
irritation  of  cardiac  nerves.

■  Dullness  in  pr^cordia  extensive;  blowing  with  first  sound  of

heart  heard  most  distinctly  at  apex.  I  Rheumatic  affection
of  heart.

■  Endocardial  murmurs; excessive  impulse; increased  prse-

cordial  dullness. /^Enlarged  right  ventricle.

■  Mitral  regurgitation. ^Cardiac  dropsy.

■  Stenocardia.

■  ■Heart  disease,  with  oedema  of  left  hand  only.

■  Valvular  diseases,  second  sound  of  heart  being  replaced  by  a

harsh  murmur.

■  Second  sound  of  heart  lost. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.

■  Valvular  derangement  and  dilatation  of  r.  ventricle.

■  Insufficiency  of  aortic  valve.

■  Mitral  insufficiency,  with  eccentric  hypertrophy  of  1.  ventricle.

■  ■Aneurism  of  heart  and  large  arteries.

■  ■Hypertrophy,  with  dilatation;  patient  pulseless,  extremely

exhausted,  panting  and  sad,  cannot  lie  down  or  speak ;  has
scarcely  slept  for  fifteen  days;  forgetful;  feet  oedematous.
In  fifteen  minutes,  pulse  82 ;  in  thirty  minutes,  88  ;  after  a  strong
dose,  in  fifteen  minutes,  80;  in  thirty  minutes,  72;  two
hours,  64.

■  Pulse  105. ^Rheumatism  of  heart.

Pulse  82 ;  fell  to  78 ;  weak  ;  in  thirty  minutes,  74.

■  Feeble  pulse. ^Dyspnoea.

Later,  pulse  softer  and  more  feeble,  with  a  sense  of  weakness
throughout  whole  body,  most  in  back  part  of  neck;  it  is
troublesome  to  hold  up  head.

■  Pulse  feeble,  intermittent,  or  entirely  gone. ^Rheumatism

and  pain  in  heart.

■  Death-like  feeling  at  heart  and  around  to  left  back. /^Cardiac

rheumatism.

Powerful  pulse  beat  and  pulsation  in  upper  part  of  chest,  at
night  in  bed.

Pulse  at  wrist  beats  hard  and  quick  against  finger  without  be-
ing frequent.

The  heart-beat  and  pulsation  in  chest  stronger  to  hearing  and
feeling  while  lying  on  back  than  on  side,  with  anxiety  and  rest-
lessness.

Pulse  very  irregular  and  soft,  running  from  60  to  68  for  several
hours.

■  Pulse  small, quick and  irregular,  intermitting  at  intervals,

especially  when  excited. ^Palpitation  of  heart.

■  Irregular  rhythm,  and  intermitting  pulse. (? Hypertrophy  of

heart.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  70

\  Aneurism  :  by  anastomosis  ;  of  the  aorta.
^^  Outer  Chest. Sharp,  wandering  pains  in  chest.

Painful  drawing  in  muscles  of  left  side  of  chest,  extending  to
shoulder-joint,  impeding  breathing  and  use  of  left  arm.

■  Sensation  of  constriction  in middle  of  sternum,  as if  com-

pressed by  iron  pincers,  with  difficult  breathing ; <  from
motion.

■  Rheumatism  of  muscles  of  chest. See  18.

Pain  in  left  chest,  which  is  increased  by  touch ;  relieved  by
gently  raising  it.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Rheumatic  pain  in  region  of  heart  and  small
of  back.

■  Pain  under  1.  shoulder-blade. ^Palpitation  of  heart.

■  Coldness  in  back  and  icy-cold  hands.

■  Lumbar  muscles  tender  on  pressure  and  stiif,  especially  on

first  moving  after  repose. ^Rheumatic  affection  of  heart.

■  Exophthalmic  goitre,  with  characteristic  heart  symptoms.
Intolerable  pain,  commencing  early,  before  rising,  in  lower  part

of  muscles  of  back,  on  right  side,  extending  to  gluteals,  and
lasting  all  day.
Pain  in  muscles  of  throat,  at  times  during  day.

■  Sharp  pains  shooting  through  body  towards  back,  and  up-

wards into  chest,  with  sensation  of  rush  of  blood  to chest.
^Rheumatism  of  diaphragm.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Troublesome  rheumatism  of  shoulder.

Sensation  of  great  constriction  in  shoulder,  so  that  he  cannot
move.

■  Pain  in  shoulders  and  arms.

Fleeting,  tearing  pains  in  joints,  shifting  from  shoulder  to  el-
bow and  fingers,  mostly  on  right  side.

■  Sore  aching  in  1.  arm  down  to  elbow. ^Rheumatism  of  heart.
Pain  in  muscles  of  right  upper  arm,  at  times  during  day.

■  Pain  in  left  arm  down  to  fingers. ^Diseases  of  heart.
Aching  in  arms  and  hands,  similar  to  pains  in  so-called  "ach-
ing in  bones."

Tearing,  in  left  elbow-joint.

■  Numbness  of  1.  arm. ^Enlargement  of  heart.

Numbness  of  left  arm,  with  troublesome  pricking  in  little  fin-
ger, lasting  a  short  time.

I  I  Formication  and  weight  in  arras.

Painful  lassitude  and  heaviness  in  arms.

Drawing-tearing  pain  in  r.  arm,  early  on  waking  and  last-
ing during  morning,  which  after  rising  extends  to  r.  wrist-
joint.

■  (Edema  of  hands,  mostly  of  left. ^Heart  disease.

Dry,  scaly  herpes  on  inside  of  right  elbow,  no  itching ;  later,
same  on  outside  of  left  elbow.
"  Lower  Limbs. Restlessness  of  legs,  cannot  keep  them  still.


71  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

Numbness  in  legs  and  feet.

Severe  rheumatic  pain  in  1.  ankle,  with  some  swelling.

iCEdema  of  legs, skin  shining;  dents  remain  a  long  time.

^Heart  disease.
iCEdema  of  lower  limbs. ^Rheumatism  and  pain  in  heart.
Dry,  scaly  herpes  on  left  internal  malleolus ; later,  same  on

right  internal  malleolus.
Great lassitude and heaviness in  lower  limbs and unusual

drowsiness  early  on  rising,  after  quiet  sleep,  and  lasting  two

hours.
Pain  in  muscles  of  calves  and  soles  of  feet,  at  times  during  day.
Clinching  pain  in  sole  of  right  foot, occurring several  times

during  day,  very  annoying,  but  lasting  only  a  short  time.
^^  Limbs  in  General. I  Rheumatic  pains,  in  shoulders,  upper  and

lower  arms,  in  hips  down  to  feet;  worse  in  rest  and  in  mo-
tion, and  in  all  positions.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. I  Constriction  much  increased  by

muscular  exertion,  especially  by  reading  aloud or  by  loud

talking. ^Rheumatic  affection  of  heart.

■  Symptoms  aggravated  by  exercise,  stooping  or"  fright,  and  at

night. ^Palpitation  of  heart.
I  After  a  misstep  in  crossing  the  street,  a  jar  of  the  cars  on
crossing  tracks  at  right  angles,  sitting  down  low  in  an  un-
guarded manner,  stretching  arms  above  head,  lifting  books,
etc. ^Angina  pectoris,

■  Better from continued  but  gentle motion. ^Rheumatism,,

with  pain  in  heart.

■  Cannot  lie  horizontally  in  bed.

■  Lying  on  left  side  at  night  excites  attacks. ^Rheumatism  and

pain  in  heart.

■  A  desire  to  lie  perfectly  quiet  on  back. ^Angina  pectoris.

■  Must  lie  perfectly  quiet,  with  headache;  any  attempt  to  sit

up,  any  noise,  light  or  exertion,  increases  suffering  terribly.

Lying :  menstrual  flow  ceases ;  horizontal  position,  oppressed
breathing  <  ;  on  back,  with  shoulders  elevated,  difficult
breathing  >  ;  congestion  of  chest  <  ;  pain  in  heart  lying  on
1.  side ;  on  1.  side,  palpitation  <  ;  palpitation,  with  suffoca-
tive spells ;  on  back,  heart-beat  and  pulse  in  chest  stronger.

Sitting :  pressure  between  second  and  third  ribs ;  palpitation
>  ;  supported  by  pillows,  rest  >.

Rising :  vertigo  worse.

Turning:  in  bed,  vertigo  <  ;  in  bed,  weak,  must  have  assist-
ance.

Bending:  of  head  back,  drawing  in  coverings  of  occiput  >.

Stooping:  vertigo  <.

Walking :  palpitation  and  constriction  of  heart  <  ;  -  shortness
of  breath;  pressure  in  chest  <;  pulsation  and  anxiety  in
chest;  palpitation  <.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  72

Ascending  :  palpitation  and  constriction  of  heart  <  ;  shortness
of  breath ;  oppression  of  breathing  ;  palpitation  of  heart.

Motion  :  vertigo  <  ;  headache  <  ;  pain  in  temple  <  ;  proso-
palgia <  ;  crampj  pain  at  navel  <  ;  pricking  pain  <  ;  pal-
pitation from  exertion  ;  cutting  pain  through  heart  <  ;  heart-
beats short  and  irregular ;  pain  in  chest  better  raising  it ;
after  repose,  lumbar  muscles  tender  and  stiff;  restlessness  of
legs  ;  rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders,  arms  and  hips  to  feet  <  ;
pain  in  r.  knee  worse.

All  positions :  rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders,  arms  and  hips  to
feet  <•
35  Jferyes. ^rTrembling  all over, commencing  in  abdomen,  with
stiffness  and  numbness. ^Rheumatism  and  palpitation.

Excitement  increases  headache;  pains  so  severe  they  provoke
screaming.

General  weakness,  prostration,  great  depression,  sleepless.

General  discomfort,  drowsiness,  as  after  severe  sickness.

I  I  General  weakness,  with  sadness  and  bad  humor.

I  Feels  very  weary,  so  much  so  that  she  needs  assistance  to  turn
over  in  bed. ^Low  fever.

I  1  General  weakness  and  prostration  of  strength.

I  I  Great  prostration  of  strength,  so  that  he  must  remain  in
bed,  not  feeling  able  to  use  his  legs.

■  Fainting. ^Rheumatism  and  pain  in  heart.

I  Child,  get.  6  months,  must  be  lifted  up  and  held  up;  it  seemed
as  if  it  would  die. ^Intermittent.

I  Was  thought  dying. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.
^^  Sleep. A  stupid,  drowsy  feeling.

Restless  sleep  at  night.  ■

Sleeplessness  in  forepart  of  night  from  intrusion  of  various
thoughts  ;  later,  restless  sleep.

I I  Sleeplessness.

I  Slept  none  for*  four  days  and  nights. ^Low  fever.

1  I  Sleepless  without  pain;  or  from  pulsations  in  pit  of  stomach
or  in  ears.

I  I  Sleepless  from  arterial  palpitations  in  scrobiculum  and  r.  ear.

Delirium  at  night ;  on  awaking  it  ceases,  but  returns  in  sleep.

I  I  Delirium  at  night  on  waking  up.

I  Sleep  greatly  disturbed;  very  diflScult  to  find  a  position,  in
which  she  could  obtain  any  rest,  and  only  easy  when  bolstered
up  by  several  pillows. ^Palpitation  of  heart.

Awakened  at  night  by  violent  pain  in  right  knee,  extending
from  patella  to  outer  side  of  lower  thigh  ;  increased  by  slight-
est movement  of  limb.

Wakeful  at  night,  with  a  tired  feeling ;  rheumatic  pain  in  whole
r.  leg,  severe  enough  to  prevent  sleep.

■  Restless  sleep. ^Rheumatism  and  pain  in  heart.
Frightful  dreams  for  three  nights,  making  him  cry  out.


73  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

■  Worst  sleep  towards  day. ^Palpitation  of  heart.

Sleep  disturbed  by  lascivious  dreams  and  painful  erections.

Dreams  he  cannot  remember.
^^  Time.  Night :  bursting-pulsating  in  temples  ;  menses  cease ;  ob-
stinate cough  <  ;  palpitation  <  ;  irregular  palpitation ;  in
bed,  powerful  pulsation  in  upper  chest ;  delirium  ;  pain  in  r.
knee;  1  p.m.,  slight  chill,  burning  heat,  pain  in  uterus;
scorching  heat,  with  headache.

Towards  morning:  disturbed  sleep  <.

Morning :  alarm  on  awaking ;  on  rising,  pressure  in  parietal
bones ;  headache,  which  grows  constantly  worse ;  pain  in
temple  begins;  breath  fetid;  diarrhoea  <;  8  a.m.,  pressure
between  second  and  third  ribs;  pulsation  in  chest,  with  anxi-
ety ;  before  rising,  intolerable  pain  in  lower  back  continues
all  day ;  on  waking,  drawing-tearing  in  arm  and  wrist ;  on
rising,  lassitude  in  lower  limbs,  with  drowsiness ;  chilliness,
10  A.M.;  quotidian,  11  A.M.;  rheumatism  of  all  joints  <  on
rising.

During  day :  reptile-like  movement  in  cardiac  region  <  ;  pain
in  lower  back;  pain  in  muscles  of  throat ;  pain  in  muscles  of
arm;  pain  in  calves  and  soles  of  feet;  clinching  pain  in  sole
of  foot;  itching  of  skin.

Evening  :  anxiety  ;  soon  after  retiring,  pain  in  lower  abdomen  ;
palpitation;  pain  during  menstruation  <  ;  infant,  6  months,
has  chill  11  P.M.;  rheumatism  of  all  joints  <C  ;  itching  as  of
flea-bite  on  chest  and  abdomen ;  itching  on  abdomen  and
calves.

Midnight :  great  pressure  at  heart  <^  ;  pain  in  head,  coma,  in-
sensibility till  midnight,  then  thirst  and  sweat ;  sharp  chill,
followed  by  headache,  fever  and  thirst.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat :  congestion  to  head  and
fever  from  sun's  rays  ;  of  sun,  vomiting.

Cold  air:  mammae  sensitive.

I  After  water  in  the  cellar. 6'Rheumatism.
*"  Fever. Coldness  in  back  and  cold  hands.

BSkin  gets  colder. ^Rheumatism  of  heart.

I  I  Slight  chilliness  towards  10  A.M.

I  I  Chilliness,  with  chattering  of  teeth.

■  General  chilliness,  so  severe  as  to  make  the teeth chatter,

which  lasts  three  hours  and  does  not  go  off,  although  he  lies
down  and  covers  himself  over  with  many  blankets.

■  Chill  at  11  P.M. — an  infant,  get.  6  months. ^Intermittent.

■  Fever,  intermittent,  with  congestion  to  head;  flushes  in  face;

suppressed  urine;  pains  in  bladder;  lancinating  in  heart;
violent  vomiting;  sweat  does  not  appear  after  exposure  to
the  sun.
Chill  not  relieved  by  covering  ; (returns  same  hour  each  day  ;
regular  paroxysms  at  11  A.M.  and  11  p.m.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  74

I  Fever  brought  on  by  exposure  to  sun's  rays. ^Intermittent.

I I  At  1  P.M.  slight  chill,  then  burning  heat,  dyspnoea,  pulsat-
ing pain  in  uterine  region,  ending  in  slight  sweat.

I  Inflammatory  fevers.

■  Simple  rheumatic  fevers.

I  I  Burning  heat,  with  short  breath.

I  I  Scorching  heat  at  night,  with  headache,  following  a  chill,

and  terminating  in  sweat.

0  Quotidian intermittent fever,  at the same  hour  for many

successive  days.

I I  Quotidian,  11  A.M.;  great  coldness  for  two  hours,  then  burn-
ing heat,  with  great  dyspnoea,  violent  pain  in  head,  coma,
stupefaction,  insensibility  till  midnight,  then  unquenchable
thirst  and  sweat.

■  Sharp  chill  every  midnight,  followed  by  some  headache,  fever

and  thirst  and  considerable  sweat. ^Intermittent  of  a  lying-
in  woman.
1 1  Intermittent  fever,  with  derangement  of  stomach.

1  Heat  after  chill,  with  dyspnoea,  headache  and  thirst;  with

insensibility  till  midnight,  then  shortness  of  breath  and  ina-
'  bility  to  remain  lying ;  followed  by  profuse  sweat,  with  great
thirst.

I  Skin  moist.

Sweat  over  whole  body.

I I  Where  perspiration  fails  to  show  itself. ^Intermittent.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Periodicity  :  pains  down  thighs  return
at  same  hour  each  day  ;  pains  in  uterus  return  each  evening ;
chill  returns  same  hour  each  day;  paroxysm  at  11  a.m.  and
11  P.M.;  intermittent  fever,  recurring  at  same  hour  every
day.

■  Attacks  brought  on  by  any  emotion,  excitement,  or  upon  at-

tempting to  exercise. ^Rheumatism,  with  pain  in  heart.

■  Attacks  occur  several  times  daily. ^Rheumatism,  with  pain

in  heart

■  A  dangerous  paroxysm  about  11  p.m.

■  Attacks  may  come  in  sleep,  connected  with  fright  or  anxiety

in  dreams. ^Angina  pectoris.

■  Worse  in  spells. ^Diaphragmitis.

*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  spells  of  pain  in  temple ;
headache  and  neuralgia ;  pulsating  and  sensation  of  weight
in  head;  pain  in  parietal  bone,  later  in  1.  side;  prosopalgia;
jerking  pain  below  short  ribs ;  pain  in  epigastrium  ;  pain  in
lower  abdomen  ;  percussion  dullness  to  fourth  rib;  pressive
pain  in  chest;  pain  in  heart;  valvular  derangement  and  dila-
tation of  ventricle ;  pain  in  lower  back  to  gluteals ;  pain  in
muscles  of  arm ;  drawing  and  tearing  in  arm  to  wrist ;  dry
herpes  on  elbow  ;  clinching  pain  in  sole  of  foot ;  sleepless  from


75  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

palpitation  in  ear  and  scrobiculum  ;  pain  in  r.  knee  at  night;
dry  herpes  on  outer  elbow  and  malleolus.

Left:  pain  in  parietal  bone  ;  pressure  in  parietal  bone  ;  pain  in
epigastrium  shifting  to  r.  side ;  great  pressure  at  heart  to
back  ;  sore  aching  in  arm  ;  cannot  lie  on  side  ;  pains  from
heart  down  arm  to  fingers ;  pain  in  heart  ■<  lying  on  side ;
lying  on  side,  palpitation  <  ;  oedema  of  hand  in  heart  dis-
ease; eccentric  hypertrophy  of  ventricle  ;  death-like  feeling
at  heart  to  back  ;  pain  in  chest;  pain  under  shoulder-blade;
pain  in  arm;  tearing  in  elbow-joint;  numbness  of  arm;  prick-
ing in  little  finger;  rheumatic  pain  and  swelling  in  ankle;
dry  herpes  on  internal  malleolus  ;  dry  herpes  on  outer  elbow.

Above  downward:  pain  down  thighs;  sore  aching  in  arm;
pains  from  heart  shooting  down  1.  arm  to  fingers ;  cutting
pain  through  heart ;  pain  in  lower  back  to  gluteals  ;  tearing
in  joints  shifting  from  shoulder  to  elbow  and  fingers ;  pain
in  1.  arm  to  fingers.

Below  upward  :  whirling  from  chest  to  brain  ;  sharp  pains  into
chest ;  constriction  in  uterus  and  vagina  ;  pain  to  shoulder-
blades  ;  sharp,  pains  to  chest  and  back  ;  pain  from  patella  to
lower  thigh,  outer  side,  at  night.

Before  backward :  numbness  and  stupid  feeling  from  eyes  to
base  of  brain  ;  jerking  pain  below  short  ribs,  r.  side  ;  annoy-
ing movement  in  cardiac  region,  like  reptile ;  great  pressure
at  heart  to  left  back.
*^  Sensations.  I  Soreness,  aching  and  soreness  to  touch  in  all  the
affected  region  (heart  and  under  axilla  to  back).  /9Rheuma-
tism  of  heart.

Constriction  of  chest,  heart,  bladder,  rectum,  uterus,  vagina,
etc.,  is  frequently  brought  on  by  slightest  contact  (showing
that  irritation  of  sensory  roots  is  immediately  followed  by
contraction  of  muscles  supplied  with  motor  nerves).

I  Whole  body  feels  as  if  caged,  each  wire  being  twisted  tighter
and  tighter.

iPains  everywhere:  head,  arms,  legs,  back,  chest,  heart;
darting,  springing  like  chain  lightning,  terminating  with  a
sharp,  vice-like  grip,  only  to  commence  again  a  moment  af-
terward, with  restlessness  and  groaning.

Sensitiveness:  of  eyes  to  light ;  of  lumbar  muscles.

Sensation  in  heart  like  bird's  wing.

Sensation  of  movement  from  before  backwards,  in  cardiac  region.

Sensation  as  if  stomach  were  closed.

Death-like  sensation  at  heart  and  around  to  1.  back.

Lancinating:  in  heart.

Cutting :  through  centre  of  heart. •

Stitching:  in  heart;  very  painful,  at  heart;  violent,  at  heart,
in  paroxysms.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  76

Tearing:  in  joints,  mostly  r.  frona  shoulder  to  elbow  and  fin-
gers; in  1.  elbow-joint.

Shooting:  through  diaphragm  into  chest;  down  1.  arm  to  fingers.

Pricking  :  in  point  of  tongue  ;  in  arms  ;  in  chest ;  in  heart,  im-
peding breathing  and  movement:  in  little  finger.

Jerking  :  on  r.  side. below  ribs.

Burning  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  a  line  from  cardiac  axis  to  mar-
gin of  lower  ribs,  hot  flash  shoots  downward ;  Avhile  passing
urine.

Aching :  one-sided,  in  head  ;  at  heart ;  in  1.  arm  to  elbow  ;  in
arms.

Drawing;  in  coverings  of  occiput;  in  muscles  of  1.  chest  to
shoulder ;  tearing  in  r.  arm.

Pressure :  in  r.  parietal  bone ;  on  vertex  ;  in  1.  parietal  bone  ;
in  upper  part  of  1.  chest ;  excessive  at  heart  and  under  axilla
to  back.

Soreness  :  and  aching  at  heart ;  and  aching  in  1.  arm  to  elbow  ;
of  throat.

Scraping :  at  soft  palate.

Pain  :  in  head  ;  in  forehead  and  eyes  ;  spells  of  pain  in  r.  tem-
ple ;  in  1.  parietal  bone;  in  head  from  slight  noise;  terrible
in  head,  with  vomiting;  in  different  parts  of  head;  in  face,
r.  side ;  neuralgic  in  cardia ;  in  epigastrium  ;  sharp,  through
diaphragm  to  chest ;  dull,  in  abdomen  ;  in  lower  abdomen  to
right ;  violent,  in  bowels ;  wandering,  in  umbilical  region  ;
cramp-like,  about  navel;  in  bladder  during  febrile  access;
during  menses;  from  lower  chest  to  shoulder-blades;  sharp,
wandering,  in  chest  and  scapular  region;  deep,  in  heart;
dull,  heavy,  in  heart;  acute,  in  heart;  constant,  at  heart;
in  apex  of  heart;  in  1.  chest;  rheumatic,  in  region  of  heart
and  small  of  back  ;  under  1.  shoulder-blade  ;  severe,  in  lower
back  to  gluteals  ;  in  shoulder  and  arms  ;  rheumatic,  in  1.  an-
kle ;  rheumatic,  in  hips  to  feet ;  in  knee  and  lower  thigh  at
night ;  rheumatic,  in  r.  leg;  rheumatic,  in  all  joints.

Palpitation  :  with  pressure  on  vertex,  with  fistula  in  ano  ;  with
stoppage  of  breath  ;  distressing,  with  stitching,  faintness  and
dyspnoea  ;  on  ascending  stairs  ;  after  physical  or  mental  ex-
ertion ;  from  unfortunate  love  ;  with  vertigo  and  unconscious-
ness ;  continued  day  and  night ;  irregular,  at  night.

Beating:  in  epigastrium ;  in  abdomen.

Throbbing :  one-sided',  in  head ;  of  carotids.

Fluttering :  in  stomach.

Pulsation:  in  temples  ;  in  head  ;  one-sided;  in  r.  side  of  head;
in  ears  ;  in  head  ;  behind  stomach  (coeliac  axis) ;  after  eating ;
in  scrobiculus ;  in  stomach ;  in  ovarian  region ;  in  uterus
and  ovaries  ;  in  chest,  while  walking.

Suffocation  :  with  heat  in  face  ;  consequent  to  cold ;  periodical
attacks,  with  fainting.


77  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

Constriction:  of  throat;  of  oesophagus  ;  at  scrobiculus  cordis  ;
of  neck  of  bladder  ;  around  pelvis  ;  in  uterus  and  vagina ;  of
uterus  during  menses  ;  of  vagina;  of  chest;  in  middle  ster-
num ;  of  chest  as  of  cord ;  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  heart,  as
if  iron  hand  prevented  movements;  in  shoulder.

Cord  :  feeling  of,  around  lower  chest.  .

Band :  as  if,  around  chest.

Hoop  :  sensation  of,  around  throat,  around  heart  and  diaphragm.

Bound  down  :  as  if,  at  heart.

Clutching :  at  heart.

Griping:  behind  sternum.

Grasping :  at  heart.

Compression  :  of  head,  as  if  in  a  vice ;  or  squeezing,  of  heart,
as  if  by  hand.

Ringing  and  buzzing  in  ears.

Whizzing  :  to  and  fro  in  chest,

Whirling:  from  chest  to  brain ;  in  heart.

Turning :  as  of,  in  heart.

Tension :  on  vertex.

Bearing  down  :  in  lower  abdomen.

Blow  : as  of,  near  kidneys.

Oppression :  of  chest  and  uneasiness ;  of  chest,  as  of  weight ;
on  lying  down ;  great,  of  breathing.

Heaviness:  on  vertex ;  in  stomach;  in  arms;  in  lower  limbs.

Weight :  in  r.  side  of  head  ;  in  stomach,  after  eating;  in  anus  ;
in  chest.

Fullness  :  in  chest ;  in  chest  to  throat.

Swollen  :  as  if,  in  rectum.

Discomfort :  at  stomach.

Emptiness :  in  stomach.

Weakness  :  general,  and  prostration  of  strength.

Rumbling :  in  stomach  before  palpitation.

Irritation  :  great,  in  urethra.

Formication:  and  weight  in  anus  ;  inarms.

Numbness  :  from  eyes  to  base  of  brain  ;  of  1.  arm  ;  in  legs  and
feet.

Tickling  :  in  throat  causes  cough.

Itching:  in  anus;  in  larynx  causes  cough  ;  in  skin,  as  of  flea-
bite  ;  on  chest  and  abdomen  in  evening ;  on  abdomen  and
calves  in  evening  ;  during  day.

Warmth  :  about  throat  and  chest.

Heat:  flushes  of,  in  abdomen;  in  abdomen;  burning,  with
short  breath ;  scorching,  at  night,  following  chill.

Coldness  :  of  skin  from  difficult  breathing ;  of  feet,  with  sufi'o-
cative  respiration;  of  limbs;  in  back.

Chilliness  :  with  chattering  of  teeth.
**  Tissues. 1  Affects  the  sensory  nerves  most.

1 1  Congestions.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.  78

■  Various  kinds  of  inflammations.

I  Rheumatism  of  all  joints  of  limbs,  great  deal  of  pain,  stiffness

and  swelling;  worse  in  evening  and  again  mornings  on  first
rising. ^Pain  in  heart.

■  Rheumatic  inflammations,  with  pain  and  swelling  of  parts.

I I  Organic  diseases  of  the  heart.

I  Emaciation. ^Low  fever. (^Rheumatic  heart  disease.

Emaciated  or  bloated.

I  Dropsical  aff'ections. ^Heart  disease.

I  Hemorrhages :  from  nose,  lungs,  rectum  and  stomach.
*5  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries, ii  Twitching  of  mus-
cles and  sensation  of  constriction  produced  by  touching  the
aff"ected  part.

Touch :  spasmodic  constriction  in  uterus  and  vagina ;  cardiac
region  sore  and  aching;  pain  in  1.  chest  <.

Pressure  :  heavy  pain  on  vertex  >>  ;  dull  pain at  heart  ■<  ;
lumbar  muscles  tender.

Slight  friction  relieves  pricking  in  anus.

Renewed  pain  in  a  thumb  which  had  been  dislocated  a  month
before.

■  Traumatic  fevers.

*^  Skin.  Troublesome  itching,  as  of  flea-bite,  on  chest  and  abdo-
men, every  evening,  inducing  rubbing ;  better  on  retiring  to
rest ;  not  present  during  day  ;  no  eruption.

Itching  on  abdomen  and  calves  in  evening  when  undressing.

Itching  present  during  day,  but  disappears  by  evening.

iDry,  scaly  herpes  without  itching ;  appeared  first  on  left  inter-
nal malleolus,  next  on  outer  side  of  right  elbow  ;  then  on  right
internal  malleolus  ;  last  on  outer  side  of  left  elboAV.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. >  A  man  of  irate  temper. ^Dia-
phragmitis.

iCiiild,  aet.  six  months. ^Intermittent'.

I  Woman,  aet.  60,  stout,  robust,  after  exposure  to  water  in  the

cellar. ^Rheumatism.

I I  Sanguineous  congestions  in  persons  of  plethoric  habit.

' iWoman,  set.  24,  severe  headache  from  taking  cold. G-elsem.,
Bellad.  of  no  avail.

■  Man,  set.  28,  during  service  in  our  war,  articular  rheumatism

in  back  and  limbs;  mustered  out  as  incurable. Cactus  1".
^Rheumatic  affection  of  heart.
iWoman,  set.  28,  tall,  dark  hair  and  eyes. ^Rheumatic  disease
of  heart. Cactus^^",  one  dose  followed  by  rapid  improve-
ment, without  return  of  symptoms.

iWoman,  set.  28,  tall,  dark  hair  and  eyes. ^Affection  of  heart
after  rheumatism.

1 1  Woman,  set.  30,  frequent  attacks  of  angina  pectoris.

I  Woman,  set.  — ,  suffering  for  weeks. ^Nervous  palpitation  of
heart.


79  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.

I A  woman,  get.  40,  four  doses  of  30th. ^Enlargement  of  heart.

I  Colored  woman,  get.  48,  elimaxis.  Cadus^"'^,  one  dose.
^Violent  palpitation.

I  Man,  aet 52. ^  Heart  aifection.

I  Miss,  set.  60. Cactus-%  three  doses.  ^Rheumatism  of  heart.

iWoman,  set.  60. ^Cardiac  dropsy.

I  Bowels  and  kidneys  utterly  failed  to  respond  to  the  most
powerful  drastic  cathartics  and  diuretics;  her  end  seemed
near.  20th  (after  the  lower)  cured,  restoring  the  healthy
action  of  bowels. ^Cardiac  dropsy.

I A  woman,  attacked  fourteen  months  ago  with  a  low  grade  of
fever,  to  which  camp  diarrhoea  was  soon  added.

■  Thirteen months treated by an army surgeon; hopeless.
^Low  fever.
^^  Relations. Antidotes:  Aeon.,  Camphor.,  Cinchona.

Compatible:  Digit,  (tumultuous  action  of  heart;  slow,  ir-
regular pulse;  scanty  urine;  dropsy,  etc.),  Eupat.  perf.,
Laches.,  Nux  vom..  Sulphur  (pleuritis).

Useful  after:  Aeon.,  Arvic,  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Chamom.,
Gelsem.,  Ipec,  Kali  brom.  (diaphragmitis).  Laches.,  Nux
vom.,  Rhus  toz.

Compare:  in  mental  symptoms,  Digit.,  Laches.;  in  conges-
tions to  head,  Bellad.,  Glonoin;  in  pain  and  pressure  in
head,  Arnic,  Carh.  veg..  Coral,  rub.,  lodum,  Nux  vom.,
Opium,  Spigel;  in  weight  on  vertex.  Aloes,  Alum.;  in
heart  affections.  Aeon.,  Act.  rac,  Amyl.  nitr.,  Arnic,
Bellad.,  BovisL,  Crotal.,  Digit.,  Eupat.  perf.,  Justitia,
Kalmia,  Laches.,  Lilium,  Naja.,  Pulsat.,  Spigel,  Tarent.,
Zincufn  (as  if  cap  over  heart);  in  bronchitis,  etc.,  Ant.  tart.,
Ipec,  Tabac;  in  constrictions  (chest).  Alum.,  Bellad.,
Bovist.,  Cainca,  Cadmium  sulf..  Kali  chlor..  Kali  nitr..
Laches.,  Stramon.,  (uterus)  Murex,  (vagina)  Kali  carb.;  in
menses  ceasing  at  night.  Caustic;  in  leucorrhoea,  Amm.
mur.;  in  intermittents,  Ai^sen.,  Bryon.,  Calc  ostr.,  Eupat.
perf.,  Natr.  mur.,  Rhus  tox..  Sulphur;  in  dropsies,  Digit.,
I^almia; in  sleeplessness  at  night,  Sulphur.

Relatives : Cereus  bonplandii,  Gereus  serpentinus,  Opuntia.


CADMIUM  SULFURATUM.  80

CADMIUM  SULFURATUM.

Sulpldde  of  Cadmium.  Cd  S.

Discovered  in  1817  by  Stromeyer  and  Herrmann  as  a  constant  associate
of  Zincum,  especially  in  the  Silesian  ores. The  best  solvent  is  nitric  acid.

Recommended  in  1820  by  Graefe  in  eye  diseases  in  the  place  of  Zincum  ;
afterwards  by  Tott  in  1833.  Experiments  by  Schubarth  on  dogs  were  pub-
lished in  HufelancVs  Journal  about  1821.

H.  J.  Burdock  made  an  insignificant  proving  on  himself  in  1827.  The
first  real  proving  was  made  by  Petroz  in  1854  and  published  in  the  May
number  of  Journale  de  la  Soc.  (raZZtcane,  including  cured  symptoms;  it  ap-
peared in  the  Oct.  number  of  the  Allg.  Horn.  Zeitung  and  in  1856  in  HirscheVs
Archiv,  Vol.  II.  These  were  not  followed  by  any  other  reports  until  1878,
when  Dr.  Hardenstein,  of  Vicksburg,  used  the  remedy  successfull}'^  in  one
of  the  most  murderous  epidemics  of  yellow  fever;  the  application  of  the
remedy  proving  him  to  be  a  master  in  prescribing.  Cadmium  is  no  doubt
a  so-called  antipsoric  of  high  rank.

^Mind. I  Mostly  unconscious. ^Cholera  infantum.

Horror  of  solitude  and  of  work.

Apprehension  at  approach  of  anybody.

Anxiety  ;  also  before  going  to  stool.

Excessive  irritability.

Vexation,  or  a  fit  of  passion  <  symptoms  in  general.
^Sensorium. > Vertigo; room  and  bed  seem  to  spin  around.

^Yellow  fever.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  vertex.

Lancinations  in  head.

Tingling,  digging  and  drawing  in  head.

Hammering  in  head.

Pulsations  in  temples.

Inflammation  of  brain.

Apoplexy.
*  Outer  Head. Herpes  on  temples.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Inability  to  read  small  type.

Hemeralopia.

Looking  steadily,  symptoms  in  general  <.

Rending  pains'  in  eyes.

Lancinations  in  eyes  from  within  outwards.

Dilatation  of  one  pupil,  and  contraction  of  other.

I  Blennorrhoeic  affection  of  eyes.

I  Idiopathic  chronic  torpid  conjunctivitis.

iSwelling  of  conjunctiva  remaining  after  blennorrhoea.


81  CADMIUM  SULFURATUM.

Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes.

I  Macula  cornese (after  removal  of  a  fragment  of  iron  whicli

caused  inflammation)  covering  half  the  pupil,  bluish,  much
impeding  sight. ^Boy,  set.  10  years.
iMacula  cornese  covering  pupil  after  a  conjunctivitis  and  kera-
titis traumatica. ^Girl,  set.  6  years.

I I  Opacity  of  cornea  connected  with  slow  inflammation  and
blennorrhoea.

Cicatrix  on  cornea.
Burning  lachrymation.

■  Inability  to  close  eyes. ^Paralysis  of  face.
Pressure  above  eyes.

Tension  in  eyebrows.

Hollow  eyes..

Blue  circle  around  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Sounds  echo  in  head.

Abnormal  hearing,  alternating  with  abnormal  vision.

Clucking  in  ears.

Lancinations  in  ears.

Lacerating  pain  in  ears.

Pressure  behind  ears.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Ulcerative  or  cancerous  smell.

Tightness  at  root  of  nose,  and  tension  in  nose.

Lacerating  pain  in  nose.

Epistaxis.

Obstruction  of  nose  by  swelling.

Numbness  of  nose.

Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  nose.

Caries  of  nasal  bones.

Boils  on  nose,  and  ulceration  of  nostrils.
^  Upper  Face. iPain  with  cold  sweat  in  face. See  16. ^Yel-
low fever.

■  Painful  drawing  in  face. ^Paralysis  of  face.
Crawling  sensation  in  face.

Vexed  look.
Gloomy  countenance.
Grayish  complexion.
Yellow  spots  on  cheeks  and  nose.

Chronic  eruption  of  forehead,  on  nose,  and  around  mouth.
^  Lower  Face. Trembling  of  jaw.

■  Distortion  of  mouth  to  one  side. ^Paralysis  of  face.
Spasmodic  motion  of  upper  lip.

Swelling  of  lips.
Aphthae  on  lips.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Pitchy  taste. ^Yellow  fever..
Food  tastes  like  salt.
Peculiar  metallic  taste  after  taking  it.

VOL.  III. — 6.


CADMIUM  SULFURATUM.  82

I  Tongue  shows  traces  of  black  vomit,  dirty  brown  or  black.
/^Yellow  fever.

■  Difficulty  in  talking  and  swallowing ^Paralysis  of  face.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Symptoms  of  mouth  are  <  during  deglutition.
Salivation.

Frequent  running  together  of  saliva  in  mouth,  has  to  spit  it
.  out  often,  and,  with  much  straining  and  retching  brings  up  a
tough  phlegm.
13  Throat. Constriction  of  oesophagus.

Deglutition  aggravates  symptoms  in  general.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Thirst.

In  bed,  at  night,  thirsty  and  hot.
^*  Eating  and  Drinking. After  drinking :  horripilation.
Getting  drunk,  symptoms  <C  in  general.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Salty,

rancid  belching. ^Yellow  fever.
Rancid  eructations,  especially  at  noon.

■  Deadly  nausea. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Intense  retching  and  distressing  nausea.

■  Nausea  in  mouth,  chest  and  abdomen,  often  with  pain  and

cold  sweat  in  face. ^Yellow  fever.
Nausea  in  chest,  mouth,  and  abdomen,  generally  accompanied

by  red  face  and  trismus.
Gagging  and  retching  up  of  tough  mucus,  every  few  minutes.

■  Excessive  vomiting  of  yellowish-greenish semi-fluid  masses,

almost  gelatinous. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Vomiting  of  sour,  yellow  and  black  matter,  with  pain  in  ab-

domen. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Excessive  nausea,  gagging,  retching;  so  sensitive  that  the  least

touch  of  the  lips  will  bring  on  vomiting. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Deadly  nausea,  must  lie  quiet,  to  ward  oiF  black  vomit,  which

is  already  in stomach and  can  be  smelt. ^Yellow  fever,
early  part  of  second  stage.

■  ■Nausea;  or  black  vomit,  when  other  medicines  fail. ^Yel-

low fever.

Vomiting  brown  fluid  after  drinking  cold  water ;  dog.

Vomiting  of  food,  bile  and  mucus.

Vomiting  of  acid  matter,  of  black  or  yellowish  matter,  accom-
panied by  cold  sweat  in  face,  and  griping.

Violent  pains  in  stomach,  in  region  of  navel,  and  tenesmus
with  urging  to  stool ;  vomiting  of  all  food  taken  and  much
phlegm  and  bile.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, l  Burning  and  cutting  pains  in
. stomach. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Useful  after  cramps  in  stomach. ^Yellow  fever.

Gastric  symptoms  aggravated  during  pregnancy ;  in  drunk-
ards ;  after  cramps  in  stomach ;  after  drinking  beer ;  in
forenoon.


83  CADMIUM  SULFURATUM.

Cutting  pain  in  stomach.
Burning  pain  in  stomach.

■  Intense  burning  in  stomach;  also  burning  from  oesophagus  to

stomach. ^Yellow  fever.
Coldness  in  stomach  and  hypochondria.
Violent  pains  in  stomach  and  navel,  and  urging  to  stool.
^^.Hypochondria, iLancinations  in  1.  hypochondrium. ^Yellow
fever.
Symptoms  of  stomach  and  hypochondria  are  aggravated  by
walking,  or  carrying  burdens.
^®  Abdomen, lEain  in  abdomen,  with  vomiting. ^Yellow  fever.
I  Pain  and  pulsation  in  sides  of  abdomen. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Cutting  pain  in  bowels  and  kidneys. ^Yellow  fever.
Pressure  in  sides  of  abdomen.

Compressed  feeling  in  abdomen.

Stretching  pain  in  abdomen.

Griping  in  lower  bowels.

Lancinations,  bruised  pain,  or  pulsation  in  abdomen.

Feeling  of  inertia  in  abdomen.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. I  Aivine  evacuations,  almost  gelatinous  of
a  yellowish-green  semi-fluid  character. ^Cholera  infantum.
^'  Urinary  Organs, Griping  in  region  of  kidneys.

■  Cutting  pain  in  region  of  kidneys  and  bowels. ^Yellow  fever.
**  Pregnancy, Parturition. Lactation. ■Acts  well  during

pregnancy. ^Yellow  fever.

Gastric  symptoms  during  pregnancy.

Erysipelas  of  mammse.

Inflamed  nipples.
^®  Respiration, Interrupted  breathing  during  sleep.

On  waking,  want  of  air.
-^  Cough. Cough,  with  loss  of  consciousness,  agitation,  red  face,

pain  in  stomach,  or  vomiting  of  bile.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Feeling  of  dilatation  of  chest.

Feeling  as  if  lungs  adhered  to  chest.

Contraction  in  chest.

Painful  blows  in  chest.

Tingling  in  chest.

Weakness  of  chest.

Chest  symptoms  are  aggravated  by  a  squatting  posture.
^^ Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, ■Palpitation. ^Yellow  fever.

Beating  near  heart.

■  ■Palpitation  of  heart,  with  constriction  of  chest.
Pulse  80  to  100  ;  dogs.

^"  Outer  Chest. Rheumatic  pain  in  external  chest.
Drawing  in  external  chest.
Swelling  of  external  chest.
Brown  spots  on  chest.


CADMIUM  SULFURATUM.  84

^'  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  muscles  of  neck,  as  from  efforts  to

vomit.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Suppuration  of  axillary  glands.

Stretching  of  arms.

Sensation  of  swelling  of  arms.

Swelling  of  armbones.

Brown  spots  on  elbow.

Tension  in  forearm.

Tearing  pain  in  metacarpal  joints.

Gnawing  in  hands.

Jerking  of  fingers.

Sweat  in  palms.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Boils  on  buttocks.

Numbness  of  thighs.

While  asleep,  feet  are  agitated  by  shocks.

Rheumatism  of  lower  limbs.

Digging  and  boring  in  lower  limbs.

Pressure,  pain  as  if  sprained,  trembling,  or  cramps  in  knee.

Tearing  pain  in  legs.

Cramp  of  calf

Heaviness  of  feet.

Lancination  in  joints  of  lower  limbs,  and  in  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Red  spots  on  extremities.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. He  lies  with  his  head  low  and
hands  under  it.

Squatting  posture :  chest  symptoms  worse.

Walking : symptoms of stomach and hypochondrium <  ;
coldness.

Sitting  :  chest  symptoms  from  squatting  posture ;  drowsy.

Ascending  stairs : symptoms  ■<  in  general.
^®  Nerves. Jactitations  ;  startings  of  limbs.

Restlessness.

Very  uneasy  ; "  changing  his  position  often  ;  dog.

Weakness  of  affected  parts,  with  horripilation.

Weak  and  thirsty  ;  dog.

Weakness  after  vomiting.

Great  exhaustion  after  vomiting ;  next  morning,  pain  in  mus-
cles of  neck  and  throat  from  great  exertion  in  vomiting.

■  Child  can  hardly  move  a  limb. ^Cholera  infantum.
^-  Sleep. Drowsiness  when  sitting.

Sleepiness  in  forenoon.

Somnolence,  with  broken  dreams.

He  sleeps  with  his  eyes  open.

Moaning  and  smiling  during  sleep.

Nightmare.

On  waking  up :  symptoms  <  in  general.

After  sleep :  symptoms  <  in  general ;  coldness.


85  CADMIUM  SULFURATUM.

I  Can  hardly  sleep;  sleep,  if  at  all,  with  open  eyes. ^Cholera

infantum.
^*  Time. Night :  in  bed,  hot  and  tEirsty  ;  itching  of  skin.
Before  midnight :  fever.
Morning : gastric  symptoms <  ; pain in throat and neck

muscles  from  vomiting ; sleepy ; after  sleep,  symptoms  in

general  <;.
Forenoon  :  gastric  symptoms  ;  sleepiness.
Noon :  rancid  eructations.
^^Temperature  and  "Weather. Sunshine: symptoms  <  in

general.
Air  :  sweat  checked  after  exposure.

I  Useful  if  any  of  the  grave  symptoms  appear  after  being  ex-
posed to  a  draft  of  air,  or  when  sweat  is  checked. ^Yellow

fever.
I A  man  after  riding  in  sharp  north-east  wind  (in  France)  had

a  half  sided  rheumatic  paralysis  of  face,  appearing  suddenly;

treated  by  the  old  school  four  weeks  without  success,  got

well  in  eight  days  after  two  doses  of  12th.
Cool  air :  symptoms  <;  in  general.
Cold:  itching  of  skin.
*°  Fever. Horripilation  :  after  drinking  ;  with  hot  hands.
Icy  coldness.
Coldness :  even  when  near  the  fire ;  after  sleeping,  and  after

walking ;  with  heat  in  hands.
Fever,  before  midnight.
Sweat  in  axillae.

I  When  sweat  is  checked  after  exposure  to  a  draft  of  air. ^Yel-
low fever.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Within  out:  lancination  in  eyes.

Left :  lancination  in  hypochondrium.
*^  Sensations. Sensation  of  inertia  in  abdomen.
Sensation  as  if  lungs  adhered  to  chest.
Sensation  as  of  painful  blows  in  chest.
Lancination:  in  head;  in  eyes;  in  ears;  in  1.  hypochondrium;

in  abdomen  ;  in  joints  of  legs  and  toes.
Cutting:  in  stomach;  in  bowels  and  kidneys  ;  in  joints.
Rending :  in  eyes.

Tearing :  in  metacarpal  joints  ;  in  legs.
Lacerating  :  in  ears  ;  in  nose.
Boring :  in  lower  limbs.
Digging :  in  head  ;  in  lower  limbs.  •

Gnawing :  in  hands.

Drawing :  in  head  ;  in  face ;  in  external  chest.
Cramping :  in  stomach  ;  in  knee  ;  in  calf.
Griping : with  vomiting  and  cold  sweat  in  face ; in lower

bowels ;  in  kidneys.
Beating :  near  heart.


CADMIUM  SULFUR  AT  CJM.  86

Pulsating :  in  temples  ;  in  sides  of  abdomen.

Hammering :  in  head.

Bruised :  in  abdomen.

Pressure :  above  eyes ;  behind  ears ;  in  sides  of  abdomen ;  in

lower  limbs.
Burning:  lachrymation  ;  in  stomach.
Pain  :  in  vertex ;  in  face  ;  in  stomach  and  navel ;  in  abdomen  ;

rheumatic,  in  external  chest;  in  neck  ;  sprain-like,  in  knee;

in  muscles  of  neck  and  throat  from  vomiting.
Heaviness :  of  feet.
Tightness  :  at  root  of  nose.
Tension  :  in  eyebrows  ;  in  nose ;  in  forearm.
Compression :  in  abdomen.
Constriction  or  contraction  :  of  chest.
Dilatation :  on  chest.
Stretching :  in  abdomen.
Swelling  :  of  arms.
Crawling :  in  face.
Tingling :  in  head ;  in  chest.
Numbness:  of  nose;  of  thighs.
Coldness :  in  stomach  and  hypochondria.
Weakness  :  of  chest ;  after  vomiting.
Itching  :  of  skin,  at  night.
^*  Tissues. Cutting  pains  in  joints.
^*  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries, Touch : itching  of

skin.
*"  Skin. Itching : at  night,  in  bed ;  when  touched,  and  during

cold ;  ameliorated  by  scratching,  which  excites  a  voluptuous

feeling.
Blueness  of  skin.
Yellow  eruption.

Scaly,  cracking,  damp,  suppurating  herpes.
Chilblains.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. lActs  well  with  drunkards.

^Yellow  fever.
I  Child,  set.  15  months,  teething. I  Cholera  morbus.
*^  Relations. Cadmium  has  a  strong  resemblance  to  Zincum,  the

former  acting  more  powerfully.
Compatible :  Bellad.  after  Cadmium  removed  rolling  of  head

with  open  eyes  in  cholera  infantum ; Carh.  veg.^ ;  Lohel.  infi.

after  failure  of  Cadmium  in  yellow  fever ;  Nitr.  ac.
Aletris  relieved  nausea  of  pregnancy  after  failure  of  Cadmium.
Cadmium^^,  hourly,  for  fourteen  hours,  helped  where  Ipec,

Arsen.  and  Bellad.  failed. ^Cholera  infantum.


*  I  could  give  hundreds  of  cases  of  yellow  fever  where  Cadmium  relieved
the  most  dangerous  symptoms,  but  no  case  of  that  disease  in  its  graver
forms  can  be  safely  treated  without  Carbo  vegetabilis. — Haedknstein.


87  CADMIUM  SULFURATUM— CAINCA.

Compare :  in  constriction  across  chest,  with  palpitation,  Kali
chlor. ;  in  weakness,  nausea,  vomit  and  burning,  Arsen.  ;
in  nausea  and  retching,  Asar.,  Bryon.^  Crot.  tigl.,  Cuprum,
Nux  vom.^  Podoph.,  Tart.  emet. ;  in  deathly  nausea,  Ipec,
Tahae. ;  in  greenish,  gelatinous  vomit,  Aethus.,  Arsen.,
Bryon.,  Ipec,  Veratr.;  in  gelatinous  stools,  Aloes,  Colchic,
Cubeb  ,  Jlelleb.,  Kali  bich.,  Podoph.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia
(green).


CAINCA.

Chioeocca  racemosa.  Bubiacece.


Introduced  in  1826  as  a  specific  for  dropsy  by  Martius  and  Langsdorf
from  Brazil;  later  found  useless  in  hydrops,  and  injurious  in  post  scarlati-
nal dropsy.

In  1843  proved  by  Buchner  and  several  others,  who  got  the  genuine  root
from  Martius  himself,  and  published  the  provings  in  the  British  Quarterly,
then  in  Buchner's  (Nmser's)  A.  Z  f.  H ,  II,  appendix,  p.  141-144.  Proved  by
Lippe,  in  Carlisle,  in  1845;  by  Isaac  Draper  in  Phila.,  in  1850.

The  collection  made  by  Roth  was  translated  by  J.  W.  Metcalf  and  pub-
lished with  additions  in  1852  in  the  New  York  Quarterly.


^  Mind. Want  of  disposition  for  intellectual  labor.

Ennui,  forgetful.

Violent  and  angry  in  evening.

Mental  effort  increases  headache.

I  Weeping  with  cough,
^  Sensorium. Vertigo:  withdesireto  vomit;  when  going  upstairs.

Dullness,  fullness  and  pressure  in  frontal  region,  and  in  sin-
ciput.
'  Inner  Head. Sensations  in  head  like  those  produced  by  ether.

Head  dull  and  heavy.

Dullness,  pressure,  and  afterwards  weight  in  sinciput.

Pressure  from  above  downwards  in  sinciput.

Lancinating  shocks  in  1.  frontal  eminence.

Tearing  in  middle  of  forehead.

Lancination  in  r.  temple  and  r.  side  of  chest.

One  sudden  and  severe  pain  in  1.  side  of  head  and  forehead.

Pulsating  pain  in  forehead  over  1.  eye.

Pains  in  head  ;  dull,  heavy,  dragging,  steady  pains  from  fore-
head to  vertex,  through  central  line.


CAINCA.  88

Weight  in  temples  and  occiput.

Weight  and  pressure  in  occiput.

Very  violent  headache,  especially  in  occiput;  <^  in  evening.

Very  violent  headache,  especially  in  occiput.
*  Sight  and  Eyes. Appearances  like  clouds  before  eyes.

Goes  to  sleep  at  3  p.m.,  in  consequence  of  an  inclination  to  do
so;  on  waking  an  hour  afterwards  he  could  see  nothing,
even  in  open  air,  in  consequence  of  a  mist  before  his  eyes.

Increased  sensibility  of  eye.

Pressure  in  middle  of  globe  of  eye,  first  from  above  downwards,
and  then  in  opposite  direction,  with  a  feeling  as  if  pupil  were
turned  up  and  light  only  came  from  above,  impeding  vision
for  five  minutes  ;  same  symptom  half  an  hour  afterwards.

Pressive  pain  ;  shooting  deep  into  1.  eye.

Pupils  very  much  dilated.

Burning  in  eyes.

Eyes  appear  and  feel  suffused.

I  Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  fluent  coryza.

Oedematous  swelling  of  r.  inferior  eyelid ;  a  small  purulent
point  was  afterwards  formed,  but  soon  absorbed.

Oedema  of  1.  upper  eyelid  for  five  days ;  it  subsequently  be-
came uniformly  red  and  puckered,  with  frequent  itching.

Supra-orbital  pain  manifests  itself  alternately  on  r.  and  1.  side.

Pressure  in  orbital  bones ;  soon  afterwards,  pressure  from
above  downwards  in  upper  half  of  r.  orbital  margin;  pressive
drawing  along  course  of  supra-orbital  nerve,  with  vomiturition
and  uneasiness  in  abdomen ;  same  symptoms  subsequently
appeared  on  1.  side.
®  Hearing  and  Ears.  Roaring  and  tingling  in  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Violent  catarrh  of  thin  mucus,  excoriating

nose,  especially  in  day-time.
^  Upper  Face. Heat  in  face.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Tearing  in  lower  teeth,  in  evening.

Teeth  set  on  edge.

Pasty  mucus  on  teeth,  in  afternoon.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  in  mouth,  resembling  that  of  wild
plums,  bitter.

Greasy,  insipid  taste  in  mouth.

;rRed  tongue,  equally  red  all  over,  without  any  soreness  in  epi-
gastric region.

Very  dry  tongue,  covered  with  dirty  white  fur.

Tongue  furred  white.

White  mucus  covering  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Increased  secretion  of  saliva  and  of  urine.

Abundant,  thick  saliva.

Irritation  of  buccal  membrane  as  far  as  larynx.
^^  Throat. Dryness  of  fauces.

Feeling  of  scraping  in  pharynx.


89  CAINCA.

Scraping  in  uvula,  pressure  in  stomach,  which  mounts  into
oesophagus,  and  is  not  relieved  by  eructations;  accompanied
by  slight  A'omiturition,  and  a  little  while  afterwards,  bor-
borygmi  in  abdomen,  such  as  precede  a  diarrhoea.

Pressure  with  scraping  in  uvula  not  relieved  by  eructation.

Roughness  in  throat,  almost  peppery.

Sensation  of  scraping  and  roughness  in  throat,  which  subse-
quently becomes  dry  and  obliges  him  to  hawk.

Sensation  of  cold  along  course  of  oesophagus.

Sen^sation  of  burning  in  pharynx.

Dry,  burning  heat  in  oesophagus,  with  hoarseness.

Painful  dryness  in  throat.

Difficulty  of  swallowing,  which  arises  from  upper  part  of
pharynx.

Inflammation  of  throat,  with  foul-smelling  salivary  flow.

Angina  scarlatinosa. Compare  oedema  and  Bright's  disease.

Ulcers  in  throat  to  eustachian  tube.

"Appetite,  Thirst. Desiyes,  Aversions. Unusual  appetite

for  one  day.
Absence  of  appetite  and  thirst,  with  continual  desire  to  vomit.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  supper  :  pulsation  in  abdomen.
After  having  eaten  :  cuttings  in  abdomen.
Weakness  after  dinner,  obliging  him  to  lie  down.
Weakness  of  feet  after  eating.
Tearing  in  feet  after  dinner.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Frequent

tasteless  eructations.

Continual  eructations.

Nausea.

Desire  to  vomit:  with  vertigo;  with  absence  of  appetite  and
thirst.

Vomiturition  augmented  by  spitting.

Vomiturition  and  slight  chills.

Vomiturition  ;  two  hours  afterwards,  borborygmi,  several  liquid
stools,  copious  urine,  and  continual  desire  to  urinate.

Violent  vomiting.

Copious  vomiting,  by  which  he  discharges  saliva,  bile,  chyme,
and  even  faecal  matter,  followed  by  several  stools  of  fsecal
matter  enveloped  in  a  viscous  mucus.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Tension  in  prsecordial  region,
notwithstanding  his  moving  about.

Pressure  in  stomach,  with  vomiturition.

Sharp  shooting  pains  in  stomach,  obliging  him  to  leave  dinner.

Sensation  of  cold  in  stomach,  then  violent  cold  on  whole  ante-
rior part  of  chest  for  half  an  hour,  forcing  him  to  button  up
his  coat;  followed  by  pressure  in  stomach  as  if  from  a  foreign
body ;  similar  pressure  in  throat ;  after  continuing  for  an
hour,  it  changes  into  slight  burning.


CAINCA.  90

Sensation  of  cold  in  epigastric  region.
Heat  in  region  of  stomach.
^*  Hypochondria. Some  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium,  at  noon.

rain  in  li.ver ;  he  goes  to  bed  because  he  is  afraid  of  an  attack

of  hepatitis.
Pressure  between  r.  and  1.  lobes  of  liver,  extending  into  r.  in-
ferior pulmonary  lobe.
Pressive  and  lancinating  pain  in  middle  of  ascending  colon,

resembling  that  he  had  experienced  two  days  before  under

1.  lobe  of  liver ;  not  >■  by  eructations.
Lancination  in  and  across  splenic  region.
^'  Abdomen. Sensation  of  anxiety  and  strong  heat  in  abdomen.
Sensitiveness  of  abdomen  to  touch,  and  when  bending  back-
wards.
Borborygmi  in  abdomen.
Uneasiness  and  fullness  of  abdomen,  with  feeling  of  inflation,

not  relieved  by  eructations.
Fullness  and  inflation  of  abdomen.
Aching  in  abdomen  and  slight  rumbling  in  intestines,  followed

by  a  liquid  stool.
Cuttings  in  abdomen  after  having  eaten.
Violent  pains  in  whole  abdomen,  which  shift  their  places,  with

borborygmi  and  continual  eructations.
Transitory  colicky  pains  followed  by  a  diarrhoeic  stool;  matters

discharged  are  mixed  with  air-bubbles  ;  stool  occurs  again  in

afternoon.
Inflation  of  abdomen  continuing  notwithstanding  stools.
Peculiar  indefinable  sensation  in  epigastrium  and  umbilical  re-
gion,  continuing  half  an  hour  and ceasing  after  a  pappy

stool ;  accompanied  by  increase  of  urine.
Slight  pains  around  navel,  with  borborygmi,  and  finally  noisy

eructations.
Dullness  and  uneasiness  in  abdomen,  sensitiveness  to  touch,

especially  under  navel ; subsequently  he  discharges  a  great

deal  of  gas  from  his  stomach.
Pain  below  navel,  with  necessity  to  go  to  stool.
Slight  pain  in  abdomen  as  low  down  as  the  umbilicus ;  after  a

repeated  dose  increased  and  higher  up ;  obliged  to  leave  his

dinner.
Pains,  sharp  lancinating,  in  stomach,  causes  paleness,  obliging

him  to  lie  down ;  on  waking  from sleep,  6  p.m.,  still  some

pain  and  slight  sensations  of  looseness.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Frequent  necessity  to  go  to  stool,  but

with  discharge  of  wind  only.
Necessity  to  go  to  stool,  with  pressure  on  rectum.
. At  5  in  morning  an  urgent  loose  evacuation.
Soft  or  lienteric  stools.


91  CAINCA.

Two  pappy  stools  before  breakfast,  then  nausea  and  desire  to
vomit.

Stool  copious  ;  diarrhoeic  ;  free,  loose,  watery.

Several  liquid  stools,  with  copious  urine.

Rheumatic  diarrhoea.

Stools  more  frequent,  two  or  three  a  day,  almost  liquid,  yel-
lowish ;  evacuations  are  always  preceded  by  colic.

Soft  stool  in  morning,  after  rising,  followed  by  cuttings  ;  a
quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards,  a  pappy  stool,  w^th  painful
colic,  which  returns  in  paroxysms  several  times  during  day.

Diarrhoea  of  feculent  matter,  followed  by  slight  vertigo  and
malaise,  at  noon ;  before  2  p.m.  another  liquid  evacuation,
followed  by  borborygmi  in  abdomen  ;  towards  evening,  he
passes  much  wind  without  relief.

Colic  continually  recurs  from  time  to  time.

Vomiturition  and  pains  in  abdomen  cease  after  stool.

On  going  to  bed,  in  evening,  violent  tickling  in  rectum,  which
obliges  him  to  turn  in  bed  and  scratch.

Burning  at  anus.

Itching  at  anus  after  a  scanty  stool.
^^  Urinary  Organs. iPain  in  region  of  kidneys  in  morning;  can-
not change  his  position.

Continual  and  slight  aching  and  drawing  pain  in  urethra,  caus-
ing desire  to  urinate,  but  not  increased  by  passing  water.

Difficult  discharge  of  water,  with  subsequent  burning  in  that
part  of  urethra  which  traverses  glans  ;  with  burning  at  ex-
ternal meatus  and  continued  desire  to  make  water,  at  noon.

Emission  of  urine,  penis  being  erect,  which  causes  a  burning
like  fire,  in  passing  through  urethra,  almost  amounting  to
strangury.

Weak  impulse  to  urinate.

Continual  desire  to  urinate.

Copious  urinations  in  morning,  on  three  occasions,  with  con-
tinual urging,  but  without  pain.

Urination  more  frequent,  but  urine  not  increased.

Frequent  urination ;  urine  more  transparent  than  usual.

Very  copious  urine,  although  no  great  time  had  elapsed  since
he  urinated.

He  is  obliged  to  urinate  almost  every  hour,  day  as  well  as
night,  and  always  passes  an  abundant  supply,  which  seems
to  him  of  a  deeper  color  than  usual.

Acrid,  salt  urine  of  an  ammoniacal  odor.

Copious  urine,  limpid  as  water.

■  Polyuria  of  some  months'  duration.

I  Copious  urination  after  drinking  coffee.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Great  increase  of  sexual  impulse.

Emissions  following  voluptuous  dreams.

After  flatulency,  in  forenoon,  sharp  pains  in  right  testicle.


CAINCA.  92

23  Female  Sexual  Organs. •  One  of  the  best  emmenagogues.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Voice  hoarse
and  hollow,  with  dry  and  burning  heat  in  pharynx.

Aphonia.

Roughness  of  throat ;  voice  hoarse.

Hoarseness  and  roughness.

He  is  frequently  obliged  to  hawk  on  account  of  irritation  in
upper  part  of  larynx.

Accumulation  of  easily  detached  portions  of  mucus  in  trachea.

Frequent  hawking.

Violent  heat  in  trachea.
^®  Respiration.  Dyspnoea.
^^  Cough. Irritation  to  cough.

Tickling  cough,  with  tough  greenish-grey  expectoration,  wak-
ing him  at  3  A.M.

■  Attacks  of  rough  coughing  from  7  p.m.  till  1  a.m.,  with
rattling  of  phlegm  and  short  breath ;  accumulation  of  wind
in  abdomen,  which  feels  like  a  pair  of  bellows  set  in  motion ;
feels  it  putting  hands  there.

1  Cough  with  weeping.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest.

Uneasiness  and  pressure  in  chest.

Pressure  on  chest  as  though  from  a  great  weight.

Lancination  in  middle  of  r.  side  of  chest.

In  evening,  lancination  in  middle  of  r.  side  of  chest,  returning
after  several  days,  with  weight  on  chest,  followed  by  oppres-
sion, which  disappears  in  two  hours.

Oppression  in  inferior  third  of  chest,  with  embarrassment  of
respiration  when  going  upstairs.

Lancinations  in  inferior  third  of  r.  side  of  chest.

TrHydrothorax  incipiens :  continual  want  of  breath  increased
by  walking,  particularly  upstairs ;  in  evening,  after  lying
down  such  a  constriction  of  chest  that  she  is  obliged  to  sit
up  from  fear  of  suffocating ;  sometimes  also  during  day
attacks  of  contraction  of  chest ;  legs  oedematous,  even  above
knees.
^®  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Pulse  78 ;  afterwards  54 ;  it
falls  to  50  and  becomes  almost  imperceptible  remaining,
however,  unchanged  in  frequency.

Pulse  rather  full  than  accelerated.

Pulse  small  and  somewhat  accelerated.

Pulse  accelerated  whole  day,  especially  after  siesta ;  his  nor-
mal pulse  is  slow.

Very  agitated  pulse.

Perceptible  pulsation  in  abdominal  aorta  during  rest,  after
supper.

Carotids  beat  more  violently.
^^  Outer  Chest. Intercostal  muscles  pain.


93  CAINCA.

^'  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  back.

•Isolated  pains  in  trunk,  lancinating  and  bruising.

Pains  in  small  of  back  as  though  in  kidneys ;  ameliorated  by
lying  bent  backwards  somewhat.
22  Upper  Limbs. I  Bruised  feeling  of  1.  upper  arm.

f'ain  as  if  broken  in  1.  arm.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Extension  and  stretching  of  limbs,  with  sensa-
tion of  cramps  in  lower  extremities.

Heaviness  in  lower  extremities.

Great  depression  in  inferior  extremities,  drawing  in  muscles  of
calf,  in  knee-joint;  pain  like  rheumatism  in  muscles  of
shoulder  and  back  on  r.  side,  in  1.  intercostal  muscles  in
second  and  third  spaces,  and  in  upper  lumbar  vertebrse ;
aching  in  second  intercostal  space  extends  to  sternum  and
lasts  until  evening.

Breaking  pain  in  knee-joint,  with  feeling  as  if  lower  end  of
femur  were  about  to  escape  from  patella.

Oedematous  swellings :  hydrops  of  lower  limbs  without  great
prostration  and  without  fever;  after  intermittent,  violent
cold,  or  checked  catamenia.

Weakness  in  knee-joints,  with  sensation  as  if  patella  would
be  dislocated.

I  Crampy  sensation  in  legs.

Continual  pressure  in  anterior  third  of  r.  foot.

Tingling  sensation  in  bottom  of  L  foot  as  if  it  had  been  asleep ;
later  in  both  feet.

Acute  lancination  under  nail  of  r.  great  toe.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Weariness  of  limbs.

TrSweat  on  hands  and  feet.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. During  rest :  after  supper,  pul-
sation in  abdomen  ;  skin  moist.

Lying  :  weakness  >> ;  constriction  of  chest  <C  ',  pains  in  small
of  back  >■ .

Sitting:  constriction  of  chest  >.

Bending  backwards  :  abdomen  sensitive.

Walking :  want  of  breath ;  perspires  over  whole  body  in
evening.

Ascending :  vertigo ;  desire  to  vomit ;  respiration  embar-
rassed.

Motion  :  pain  in  kidneys  <.

Great  precipitancy  in  all  his  actions.
^®  Nerves. Great  fatigue  after  working  two  hours.

Very  weak  next  morning  from  pain  between  2  and  3  a.m.
^  Sleep. Yawning.

All  afternoon  very  somnolent,  continuing  during  evening.

Feels  stupid  and  sleepy  ;  could  easily  go  to  sleep.

I  I  Somnolence.

Sleeplessness  all  night.


OAINCA.  9i

Sleep  troubled  by  frequent  wakings  and  disturbing  dreams,  as
for  instance,  that  he  was  about  to  fall.

He  wakes,  after  having  slept  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  with  a  start,
and  crying  out  in  consequence  of  a  painful  dream.

Sleep  very  restless,  with  lascivious  dreams.

Unquiet,  restless  dreams  at  night.
^^Time. Night:  attacks  of  coughing  from  7  P.M.  to  1  A.M.;  sleep-
lessness ;  cough  awakens  at  3  a.m.

Morning:  5  a.m.,  loose  evacuation;  two  pappy  stools  before
breakfast,  then  nausea  ;  pain  in  kidneys  ;  copious  urination
with  continued  urging;  3  a.m.,  tickling  cough  with  expecto-
ration ;  very  weak  from  pain  between  2  and  3  a.m.

Forenoon  :  flatulency.

Noon :  pain  in  r.  hypochond. ;  diarrhoea  with  vertigo  and
malaise ;  burning  in  urethra  and  desire  to  make  water.

Afternoon  :  3  P.M.,  goes  to  sleep,  on  waking  in  one  hour  could
see  nothing ;  pasty  mucus  on  teeth ;  diarrhoeic  stool  re-
peated; 6  P.M.,  on  awakening  pain  in  stomach  and  looseness
not  quite  gone  ;  somnolence  ;  pulse  frequent  after  siesta.

During  day :  nasal  catarrh  of  thin  mucus  ;  colic ;  pulse  ac-
celerated;  symptoms  <  from  4  to  6  P.M.

Evening :  violent  and  angry  ;  headache  in  occiput  <  ;  tearing
in  lower  teeth  ;  passes  wind  without  relief;  going  to  bed,
tickling  in  rectum;  lancination  in  r.  chest;  constriction  of
chest  on  lying  down  ;  somnolence  ;  dry  heat  without  thirst ;
perspiration  over  whole  body.
*"  Fever.  Slight  chill  and  trembling,  followed  by  weight  in  head,
heat  in  face,  roaring  and  tingling  in  ears.

Cold,  arising  from  stomach.

General  heat.

Heat,  dry,  without  thirst,  especially  towards  evening.

He  sweats  more  easily  than  usual.

He  perspires  over  his  whole  body  in  evening,  when  taking  a
little  walk,  atmospheric  temperature  being  low.

Skin  moist,  sweating,  even  when  at  rest.
**  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  lancinating  in  temple  and
side  of  chest ;  oedema  of  lower  lid ;  pressure  in  orbital
margin,  afterwards  on  1.  side;  pain  in  hypochond.,  at  noon;
pressure .  between  r.  and  1.  lobes  of  liver  to  r.  lower  pul-
monary lobe ;  after  flatulence,  pain  in  testicle ;  lancination
in  chest ;  rheumatic  pain  in  back  ;  continual  pressure  in
anterior  third  of  foot ;  lancination  under  great  toe  nail.

Left :  lancinating  in  frontal  eminence ;  one  sudden  pain  in
head ;  pulsating  pain  over  eye ;  pressive  pain  in  eye ;
oedema  of  upper  lid  ;  bruised  feeling  in  upper  arm  ;  broken
pain  in  arm  ;  tingling  in  bottom  of  foot.

Left  to  right  :  feet  asleep.

Right  to  left :  headache.


95  CAINCA.

Above  down  :  pressure  in  sinciput ;  pressure  in  eye  ;  pressure
in  r.  orbital  margin,  afterwards  also  in  left.

Below  up  :  pressure  in  eye.

Before  back  :  dragging  pains  from  forehead  to  vertex.

The  morbid  phenomena  shift  their  locality.
"  Sensations. Feels  all  over  as  if  under  the  influence  of  a  slight
galvanic  shock.

Sensitiveness :  of  abdomen.

Sensation  as  if  pupil  were  turned  upward.

Peculiar  indefinable  sensation  in  epigastrium  and  umbilical
region.

Sensations  in  head  like  those  produced  by  ether.

Anxiety :  in  abdomen.

Lancinating:  in  1.  frontal  eminence;  in  r.  temple  and  r.  chest;
in  middle  of  ascending  colon;  in  splenic  region;  in  stomach  ;
in  r.  chest ;  in  trunk  ;  under  nail  of  r.  great  toe.

Cutting :  in  abdomen.

Shooting:  in  stomach.

Tearing :  in  middle  of  forehead  ;  in  feet.

Dragging :  from  forehead  to  vertex.

Drawing:  along  supra  orbital  nerve  ;  in  urethra.

Burning :  in  eyes  ;  in  pharynx  ;  in  throat ;  in  urethra  ;  at
meatus.

Bruised :  in  trunk  ;  in  1.  upper  arm.

Aching:  in  abdomen  ;  in  urethra.

Scraping :  in  pharynx  ;  in  uvula  ;  in  throat.

Pressure:  in  frontal  region  and  sinciput ;  in  occiput;  in  globe
of  eye ;  in  1.  eye  ;  in  orbital  bones  ;  in  stomach  to  oeso-
phagus ;  and  scraping  in  uvula  ;  in  throat ;  between  r.  and
1.  lobes  of  liver  to  r.  inferior  pulmonary  lobe  ;  in  middle  of
ascending  colon  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  chest ;  in  anterior  of  r.
foot.

Cramping :  in  lower  extremities  ;  in  legs.

Pain  :  sudden  and  severe  in  1.  side  of  head  ;  headache  in  occi-
put ;  supra  orbital ;  in  r.  hypochond.,  at  noon  ;  in  liver  ;
in  abdomen  ;  colic-like,  in  abdomen  ;  around  navel ;  below
navel ;  in  kidneys  ;  in  r.  testicle ;  in  intercostal  muscles ;
in  back  ;  in  trunk.

Broken,  in  1.  arm  ;  breaking,  in  knee-joint.

Pulsating :  over  1.  eye  ;  in  abdomen.

Fullness  :  in  frontal  region  and  sinciput ;  in  abdomen.

Uneasiness :  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest.

Oppression  :  of  chest.

Depression :  in  lower  extremities.

Dullness :  in  frontal  region  and  sinciput ;  from  forehead  to
vertex ;  in  abdomen.

Heaviness :  from  forehead  to  vertex  ;  in  lower  extremities.

Weight :  in  sinciput ;  in  temple  and  occiput.


CAINC  A— CALABAR.  96

Tension  :  in  praecordial  region.

Constriction  :  of  chest.

Roughness :  in  throat.

Weakness  :  after  dinner  ; of  feet ;  in  knee-joint ; in  morning.

Weariness :  of  limbs.

Fatigue  :  after  working  two  hours.

Tingling  :  in  ears  ;  in  bottom  of  r.  foot.

Tickling :  in  rectum.

Itching :  of  1.  upper  lid  ;  at  anus.

Heat :  in  face  ;  in  abdomen.

Coldness :  along  oesophagus  ;  in  stomach  and  anterior  chest ;
in  epigastric  region.

Dryness :  in  throat.
"Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Sensitiveness  of  ab-
domen to  touch.

While  travelling  18  miles  in  the  cars,  he  had  to  urinate  18
times.

It  removes  the  fatigue  consequent  upon  too  long  a  ride  on
horseback.
*®  Skin. I  Dry  skin  with  hydrops.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. I  An  aged  female. /9 Hydro-
thorax  with  oedema  of  feet.
*^  Relations. Antidotes  : ColcMcum,  Rhux  tax.,  Veratrum.

Rhux  tox.  relieved  the  gastralgia.

I  Cainca?'^^  three  doses  taken  at  eight  day  intervals  after  Arsenio
had  given  some  relief. ^Hydrothorax  with  oedema  of  feet.

Compare : Bryonia^  and  especially  Apocynum^  which  is  re-
markably analogous.


CALABAR.

Physostigma  vcnenosum.  Leguminoscp.

Triturations  of  the  whole  bean.  First  mentioned  by  the  missionaries  to
the  western  coast  of  Africa;  in  1846  by  Daniel;  in  1855  investigated  by
Christison  ;  in  1862  first  observations  by  Frazer  on  the  contraction  of  the
pupil  (also  by  Workman) ;  used  and  abused  since  by  many.  ,

^  Mind. Uncommon  mental  activity.

^  Sensorium. Dizziness,  with  faintness  and  muscoe  volitantes  on

moving,  1  p.m.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  middle  of  forehead  in  one  spot  above  eyes,

and  over  and  in  left  eye  a  pain,  with  muscse  volitantes.


97  CALABAR.

Pressure  in  temples.

Pain  through  temples,  as  from  pressure  of  blood  to  head,  with
throbbing  of  arteries  on  side  of  neck.

Pain  through  temples  and  burning  of  eyes.

Intense  painful  pressure  in  vertex  and  both  temples  ;  has  to  lie
down.

Pressure  in  vertex  extending  over  to  occiput.

Numbness  and  peculiar  sensation  in  top  of  head,  especially  to-
wards back  of  head.

Five  minutes  after  taking  dose,  dull  pain  in  1.  occipital  region.

A  feeling  of  loss  of  power  and  sensation  in  back  of  head  as  if
head  would  fall  over  forwards,  and  the  natural  supports  of
head  would  no  longer  hold  it  back.

Congestive  headache  all  forenoon.

Rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  heat  and  burning  of  nose,  sneezing
slight.
*  Outer  Head. Numbness  of  temples  and  crawling  sensation  over
head.

Between  8  and  9  p.m.,  a  creeping  numbness  over  back  of  head
and  all  down  spine,  especially  in  part between  hips.
" Sight  and  Eyes. (Eyes  feel  weak.

Great  pressure  on  eyes;  with  muscse  volitantes.

Sore  pain  in  eyes,  with  flying  specks.

The  medicine  affects  the  sight  very  much,  producing  these
spectres  constantly:  flitting  before  the  sight,  long  snakes  or
worms,  both  dark  and  light ;  also  waves  before  eyes,  making
objects  have  a  tremulous  motion,  as  if  it  gave  same  quality
of  involuntary  motion  to  optic  nerve  that  it  does  to  motor
nerves,  and  made  the  sight  movable.

Objects  appear  larger  and  nearer.

Slight  sensation  of  double  sight,  as  if  images  of  objects  would
be  multiplied.

I  Felt  film  over  eyes  and  blur;  objects  mixed,  followed  by  dull
pain  over  and  between  eyes.

Dimness  of  distant  vision  is-  followed  shortly  after  by  contrac-
tion of  pupil.

I  Dimness  of  vision  as  a  sequela  to  diphtheritis.

I  The  internal  rectus  does  not  do  its  work  rightly,  and  the  axes
of  eyes  do  not  correspond;  eyes  feel  weak;  lachrymation,
especially  of  1.  eye.

Feeling  of  straining  in  eyes  shortly  after  effects  are  produced.
, On  attempting  to  look  upward,  not  the  least  movement  was  per-
ceptible, showing  paralysis  of  superior  rectus  and  inferior
oblique  muscles.

■  In  looking  downward,  the  superior  oblique  muscle,  which  is
governed  by  the  n.  trochlearis,  alone  acted,  making  a  slight
rotation  around  the  visual  axis,  rather  than  a  downward
movement.

VOL.  III. — 7.


CALABAR.  .  98

■  Complete  paralysis  of  accommodation.

\  Paralj^sis  of  ciliary  muscles  after  long  continued  debilitating
disease.

I  Left  pupil  sluggish,  not  much  dilated;  myopia,  and  objects
seem  too  large,  with  left  eye:  after  a  blow  on  left  eyeball.

BPupil  permanently  dilated,  with  loss  of  accommodation,  of
eight  years  standing,  after  traumatic  injury  to  the  cornea.

Pupil  was  dilated,  cornea  turned  well  outward,  and  on  looking
toward  the  r.  side  it  could  not  be  brought  to  centre  of  palpe-
bral fissure  (showing  a  paralysis  of  internal  rectus  muscle.)

Occasions  contraction  of  the  pupil  and  sympathetically  dilata-
tion of  the  pupil  of  the  other  eye.

In  twenty  minutes  pupil  contracted  to  size  of  pin's  head,  with
a  boy.

I  I  Shortsightedness.

I  Myopia.

The  effects  last  longer  on  iris  than  on  ciliary  muscles.

'•  Where  iris  has  a  tendency  to  protrude  through  a  corneal
wound.

B Drawing-twisting  sensation  in  eyes.

Sharp,  shooting  and  drawing  sensation  in  r.  eye.

Eyes  are  sore  and  give  pain  when  moved  from  side  to  side.

I  Pain  in  eyeball.

Symptoms  of  eyes  all  morning,  with  much  burning  of  balls.

Burning  of  eyeballs.

Burning  of  eyes  and  bloodshot  appearance  of  them  all  forenoon.

■  Eyes  smart;  lids  feel  sore.

Heavy  headache  and  pain  in  eyes,  with  much  heat  in  head  and
face ;  muscse  volitantes  both  black  and  light.

\  Ulceration  of  margin  of  cornea,  leading  to  perforation,  or  even
when  prolapsus  of  iris  has  just  occurred.

\  In  cases  of  retinitis,  to  diminish  the  access  of  light.

Beating,  or  throbbing  and  twitching  between  eyebrows.

Excites  salivary  and  lachrymal  secretion.

I  The  whole  affection  came  on  suddenly;  about  a  month  before
she  went  to  bed  well,  and  on  rising  next  morning  found  it
impossible  to  open  the  eye.  ^Rheumatic  attack  of  ocular
muscles.

Endeavoring  to  open  eye,  a  slight  upward  movement  of  lid  re-
mained, caused  by  the  musculus  orbicularis  palpebrarum,
governed  by  facial  nerve,  relaxing  itself  still  more.

Upper  lid  of  1.  eye  hanging  down,  outer  caruncle  lower;  that
of  r.  side,  complete  ptosis.

■  Considerable  tenderness  of  skin  around  eye.
Mattery  eyes.

■  Intolerable  pain  over  both  orbits.

''  Smell  and  Nose, A  sensation  exactly  as  if  nose  was  going  to


99  CALA.BAR.

bleed,  and  the  peculiar  taste  wliich  goes  with  it;  at  2  and

8  P.M.

Twitching  in  nose,  and  involuntary  expansion  of  nostrils.
Numbness  from  between  eyes  down  through  nose.
Sneezing.

Burning  heat  in  nose  and  sensation  as  if  it  would  bleed ;  quiv-
ering sensation  in  teeth  as  if  they  were  resting  on  a  vibrat-
ing board  ;  at  4  p.m.
*  Upper  Face. Stupid  look  and  a  drunken  gait.

Involuntary  twitching  of  mouth,  also  of  eyebrows.
■  Sensation  of  contraction  of  whole  1.  side  of  face,  with  slight
numbness.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. I  Smarting  of  end  of  tongue.

Tongue  became  very  sore  on  1.  side,  quite  back  to  root,  and  it
was  very  hard  to  move  it;  felt  as  if  it  was  stiff.
13  Throat. I  Feeling  as  if  a  ball  were  rising  in  throat.
'*  Aversions. Disgust  of  cold  drinks.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■  After  eating:  relief  of  pain  in  head.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting.
B Nausea  and  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Trembling  sensation  in  nerves
all  down  through  body,  especially  at  pit  of  stomach,  with  mo-
tion going  up  and  down  in  nerves  like  waves,  accompanied
by  slight  nausea  and  a  sensation  of  faintness.
Nervousness  at  pit  of  stomach.
Great  pain  and  soreness  in  and  all  around  pit  of  stomach,  and

all  around  body  in  this  part  before  and  behind.
Sense  of  emptiness  and  weakness  at  stomach,'  without  hunger  ;
3  P.M.
'^Hypochondria. Soreness  around  body  at  waist ;  6  P.M.
'^  Abdomen. Sore  pain  in  bowels,  with  burning,  loose  discharge.

Bowels  spasmodically  contracted.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Pains  in  womb,  as  if  menses  were
coming  on.
Leucorrhoea.

Leucorrhoea  and  much  weakness  at  4  p.m.
^®  Respiration. I  Yawning  and  sighing  respiration.
B  Laborious  breathing.

Kills  by  paralyzing  nerves,  supplying  breathing  muscles.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Severe  pain  in  left  side  and  entirely

unlike  any  pain  in  lungs  that  he  has  ever  had.
^®  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Power  of  contraction  of  heart
is  increased.
Number  of  beats  of  heart  sometimes  increased,  sometimes  di-
minished.
Nervous  symptoms,  with  palpitation  of  heart  and  much  weak-
ness at  pit  of  stomach.
Heart's  action  feeble  and  irregular.


CALABAR.  100

Violent  palpitation  of  heart.

Death  by  paralysis  of  muscles  of  heart.

Blood  very  fluid.

Pulse  frequent.

•  A  weak  pulse  is  considered  a  contra  indication  ;  hard  and  ra-
pid, an  indication.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Inclination  to  stretch  out  neck,  "  to  run  head
out,"  from  uneasy  sensations  in  back  of  neck.

Pain  at  back  of  neck,  with  difficulty  of  turning  head  around.

In  afternoon  a  peculiar  pain  across  back  of  neck,  at  base  of
brain,  as  if  it  were  cutting  oif  body  from  head  ;  it  went  right
through  neck,  and  seemed  to  go  to  back  part  of  throat,  w^ich
was  sore  and  stiff.

Pains  in  back  between  shoulders  and  a  little  lower  down.

Drawing  in  back,  as  if  it  were  too  short  to  allow  stooping  with-
out pain,  and  yet  difficulty  in  keeping  upright.

Pain  all  down  spine  and  close  to  it,  on  both  sides  of  it.

Pains  all  down  back  of  neck,  especially  in  most  prominent
bone  there,  and  on  each  side  of  it ;  drawing  whenever  the
head  was  turned.

Pain  in  back  on  each  side  of  spine,  from  between  shoulder-
blades  to  below  waist ;  pain  which  made  it  hard  to  stoop.

Pain  in  back,  also  down  arms,  with  weakness  of  same;  2  p.m.

Stiffness  and  pain  going  all  down  spine ;  with  these  pains  in
back  there  is  an  inclination  to  bend  forwards,  as  if  hard  to
sit  up  straight ; 1  p.m.

The  nerves  in  back  of  body  (the  passive  nerves  or  nerves  of  sen-
sation) it  seems  to  paralyze  and  numb  ;  and  during  this
numbing  process  it  causes  a  good  deal  of  pain,  very  similar
to  a  pain  in  a  tooth,  when  its  nerve  is  dying  or  being  killed.

Pain  in  lower  part  of  back  and  spine,  between  hips.

Pain  in  back  between  hips  and  a  slight  feeling  of  numbness  in
region  of  womb  ;  6.30  p.m.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Trembling  of  hands,  could  hardly  sew;  10.30a.m.

Tired  feeling  in  arms  and  difficulty  in  lifting  them.

Numbness  of  1.  hand  as  if  asleep.

Numbness  in  1.  arm  and  down  ring  finger.

Chill  and  slight  numbness  in  r.  arm.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  lower  limbs.

Pain  in  outside  of  knee  ;  cramps  in  left  foot  in  evening  while  in
a  warm  bath.

Pain  in  left  thigh  and  in  both  knees  after  walking  only  a  few
steps ;  about  noon.

A  sensation  as  of  a  drawing  of  cords  behind  leg,  under  knee,
making  it  hard  to  walk,  especially  up  stairs.

Trembling  of  legs,  as  if  one  could  not  walk  straight.

A  feeling  as  if  all  power  were  going  out  of  legs  and  they  would
give  way ;  as  if  the  cause  of  the  weakness  came  from  that


101  CALABAR.

one  spot  in  back,  between  hips,  and  took  away  all  power  be-
low that  spot,  from  limbs.

Cramp  in  foot.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Pain  in  limbs.

"Loss  of  power  in  limbs.

On  walking,  feeling  of  unsteadiness  from  knees  downward,  so
that  he  had  to  tread  carefully,  especially  when  eyes  are  shut ;
feels  as  if  he  must  look  to  see  where  he  is  going.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Constant  desire  to  move  head
from  side  to  side.

Disinclination  to  move.

Hinders  voluntary  motion  as  well  as  causes  involuntary  motion.

Motion:  cannot  move  eye  upward.;  difficulty  in  moving  eye
downward  ;  soreness  of  eye  ;  tongue  stiff  and  sore.

Walking :  pain  in  1.  thigh  and  knees  ;  and  ascending,  drawing
as  of  cords  under  knee  ;  unsteadiness  from  knees  down.

Stretching:  uneasiness  in  back  of  neck  >.

Turning:  pain  at  back  of  neck  <.

Bending  forward:  stiffness  and  pain  down  spine  >.

Lifting  arms  :  tired  feeling.
36  ^QYYQs, Shuddering  and  trembling  running  down  through  all
nerves  of  body.

Violent  tremblings  all  over,  in  the  street ;  felt  for  an  instant  as
if  he  should  lose  consciousness,  and  could  hardly  get  home ;
riding  in  a  car  for  twenty  minutes  did  not  relieve  sensations.

Trembling.

Felt  a  sudden  access  of  vigor  and  felt  particularly  strong ;  all
the  symptoms  seemed  to  come  like  a  reaction.

Loss  of  voluntary  motion  without  loss  of  consciousness.

Complete  relaxation  of  whole  body,  as  if  every  nerve  were  un-
strung, even  to  the  eyes,  which  felt  as  if  all  power  to  see
were  going  out  of  them.

Giddmess  and  faintness  without  uneasiness.

Paralyses  motor  nerves,  but  does  not  impair  sensibility,
intelligence  and  muscular  irritability.

Cause  of  death,  true  suffocation,  never  causes  paralysis  of  heart.
^^  Sleep. Intense  sleepiness.

Intensely  sleepy  in  morning;  almost  impossible  to  tear  himself
up ;  feels  as  if  drugged.
^^  Time. Morning  :  congestive  headache  ;  eye  symptoms  ;  inten-
sely sleepy.

Afternoon:  1  p.m.,  dizziness  and  faintness;  stiffness  and  pain
of  arms ;  8 — 9  p.m.,  creeping  numbness  over  back  of  head
and  down  spine;  2 — 8  p.m.,  nose  feels  like  bleeding;  4  p.m.,
quivering  in  teeth;  leucorrhoea  and  weakness  ;  6  p.m.,  sore-
ness around  waist;  pain  across  back  of  neck  ;  2  p.m.,  pain
in  back  and  down  arms,  weakness  of  same  ;  6.30  p.m.,  pain
between  hips,  numbness  in  womb.


CALABAR.  102

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Both  days  he  felt  weakest,
were  particularly  cool  and  bracing.

Felt  a  perfect  horror  of  cold  water.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity, The  symptoms  subside  in  the  same
order;  first  derangement  of  accommodation,  then affection
of  pupil.

The  trembling  spells  come  on  in  fits ;  and  at  the  least  thing
that  startles.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right : shooting  and  drawing  in
eye  ;  ptosis  ; chill  and  numbness  in  arm  ;  pupil  much  di-
lated ;  sight  of  eye  impaired  ;  pupil  small.

Left :  pain  in  eye  ;  dull  pain  in  occipital  region  ;  lachryma-
tion  ;  pupil  sluggish  ;  upper  lid  paralyzed ;  contraction  of
face  with  numbness ;  soreness  of  tongue  with  difficult  mo-
tion ;  severe  pain  in  chest ;  numbness  in  arm  and  hand  ;
pain  in  thigh.

Before  back  :  pressure  in  vertex  to  occiput.
*^  Sensations.  The  nervous  symptoms  came  first,  being  in  centre
of  forehead,  and  very  much  at  pit  of  stomach,  and  going
downwards ;  soreness  around  middle  of  body  came  next,  and
last  of  all  the  pains  in  back  and  spine ;  these  lasted  the
longest  and  seemed  the  most  characteristic  of  all  the  symp-
toms.

Nervous  motions  through  body  and  arms.

A  kind  of  pain  like  that  caused  by  stooping  over  work  for  a
long  time,  or  by  long  pressure  of  back  against  a  chair — as  if
the  nerves  were  compressed.

Shooting  :  in  r.  eye.

Burning  :  of  eyes  ;  of  nose  ;  of  eyeballs  ;  in  nose  ;  in  bowels.

Drawing :  in  eyes  ;  in  back  ;  drawing  down  back  of  neck
when  turning  head  ;  as  of  cords  under  knee.

Smarting  :  of  eyes  ;  of  end  of  tongue.

Straining  :  in  eyes.

Twisting :  in  eyes.

Cramping :  in  1.  foot.

Pressure :  in  temple  ;  in  vertex ;  in  vertex  to  occiput ;  on
eyes.

Soreness :  in  eyes  ;  of  lids  ;  of  1.  side  of  tongue  ;  around  pit
of  stomach  ;  around  waist ;  in  bowels  ;  and  stiffness  of
throat.

Pain :  above  eyes  ;  through  temples  ;  dull,  in  1.  occipital  re-
gion ;  headache,  in  morning ;  in  eyeball ;  around  pit  of
stomach  ;  in  womb  ;  in  1.  chest ;  at  back  of  neck  ;  in  back  ;
down  spine  ;  down  back  of  neck  ;  down  arms  ;  between
hips;  in  lower  limbs  ;  in  knee  ;  in  1.  thigh  and  both  knees.

Beating  :  between  eyebrows.

Throbbing  :  on  side  of  neck  ;  between  eyebrows.


103  CALABAR.

Twitching : between eyebrows ; in nose ; of  mouth and of

eyebrows.
Quivering  :  in  teeth.
Trembling  :  all  through  body  ;  of  legs.
Discomfort :  at  back  of  neck.
Heaviness  :  in  head.
Tenderness  :  around  eye.
Stiffness  :  of  1.  side  of  tongue.
Contraction  :  of  1.  side  of  face.
Tired :  in  arms.

Faintness :  in  street  and  while  in  car.
Weakness  :  of  eyes  ;  at  pit  of  stomach.
Powerlessness  :  at  back  of  head  ;  of  legs.
Creeping :  back  of  head  and  down  spine.
Crawling  :  over  head.
Unsteadiness  :  from  knees  down.
Numbness : in  top  of  head  ; of  temples  ; back  of  head  and

down  spine  ;  between  eyes  down  through  nose  ;  of  1.  side  of

face  ;  region  of  womb  ;  of  1.  arm  and  hand  ;  in  r.  arm.
Shuddering:  through  whole  body.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : soreness

around  pit  of  stomach;  soreness  around  waist,  6  p.m.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitutioa. Girl,  set.  9,  pupil  of  r.  eye  very

much  dilated  ;  a  small  scar  on  outer  edge  of  cornea.
Woman,  set.  24,  sight  of  r.  eye  impaired,  could  only  distinguish

light  from  darkness.
A  woman,  set,  21,  paralysis  of  oculo-motor  nerve.
Woman,  set.  57,  r.  pupil  only  half  as  large.
Man,  set.  53,  paraplegia,  pupil  contracts  to  pin's  head  in  size.
*^  Relations. Antidotes ;  Atrojna  and  Hydrate  of  Chloral. Cam-

phoj'  suspends  the  symptoms  temporarily.
Compatible:  Amyl.  nitr.,  Comum,  Crelsem.
Compare : in eye diseases, Agaricus  {Amanita), Caustic,

Chamom.,  Conium,  Curare;  in  tetanus,  JS^ux  vom.


CALADIDM.  104

CALADIUM.

Caladium  seguinum.  Araceoe.


Proved  in  Surinam,  where  it  is  a  common  poison,  in  1830,  and  published
in  Stapfs  Archives,  in  1832.  Another  proving,  by  Schreter,  one  of  our  best
men,  followed  in  1842.  The  last  and  best  proving  of  all  is  by  E.  W.  Ber-
ridge.


^  Mind. B  Unconsciousness  or  coma. ^Typhus.

Stupefying  pressure  in  r.  temple,  in  eyes  and  in  forehead.

I  Opens  her  eyes  and  asks,  Where  am  I  ?  what  do  you  all  want

around  me  ? A  few  moments  after,  Calad.'^^ ^Typhus.
Very  forgetful ;  he  cannot  remember  if  what  he  ought  to  have

done  and  written  during  the  day  is  really  accomplished  until

he  convinces  himself  of  it.
Absentminded.

I  Delirious,  unintelligible  murmuring. ^Typhus.
Loud  cries  about  an  illness,  like  a  child,  with  senseless  pratt-

I  I  So  averse  to  the  medicine,  that  it  required  a  desperate  eifort

to  overcome  it.
In  the  forenoon  restless  and  disinclined  to  work,  afterwards

very  busy,  but  forgetful.
I  Mind  depressed, impotence.
Apprehensiveness,  before  going  to  sleep.
I  1  Very  careful  about  his  health ;  apprehensive.
Fear  of  catching  scarlet  fever  when  attending  a  case;  a  fear  he

never  had  before.
Fear  of  cutting  himself  while  shaving.
■  Lascivious  ideas. ^Gleet. ^Impotence.
Boldness.

Fretful  and  sleepy  in  morning.
Becomes  easily  angry  at  everything.
Nervousness.

Restless,  cannot  control  himself  after  smoking.
Extreme  excitement.

Faintness  on  rising,  or  after  mental  exertion.
^  Sensorium. Dullness  in  head  and  drowsiness  after  brcakflist.
Head  feels  confused  like  from  a  heavy  load. See  18.
Benumbed  feeling.

Confusion  and  whirlings  in  head,  with  nausea.
Somewhat  dizzy  after  walking.


105  CALADIUM.

I  1 A  rocking,  dizzy  sensation  after  lying  down  and  closing
eyes,  preventing  sleep.

I  I  Vertigo  and  nausea,  in  morning,  with  stitches  in  pit  of
stomach.

Crampy  feeling  between  shoulders  and  in  brain  while  walking,
as  if  he  would  fall.
^  Inner  Head. Headache,  left  side,  most  in  forehead  and  occiput.

Forehead  :  pressure  after  smoking ;  bursting  pain  ;  boring.

Sticking  in  r.  temple,  especially  in  r.  eye.

Boring  and  sticking  in  1.  temple,  relieved  by  pressure.

Stinging  in  r.  temple  and  eye.

Pressing  in  1.  side  on  which  he  had  lain;  disappears  on  sitting.

Tensive  pain  in  temples,  with  drowsiness.

Drawing  in  occiput;  drawing  tearing,  up  into  head.

Headache  as  from  a  heavy  load. See  2  and  18.

Headache,  with  pain  in  shoulder.

Heavy  pressing  headache  after  siesta.

On  waking,  stupefying,  pressure  in  r.  temple.

Heat  ascends  from  below  into  head  and  becomes  an  internal
glowing  heat.

Occasional  heat  in  head.
*  Outer  Head. Left  half  of  head  feels  as  if  asleep.

Stitches  as  if  with  pins  in  skin  of  forepart  of  head.

Pimples  on  scalp  behind  ear,  sensitive  to  touch.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Burning  in  eyes.

Stitches  in  eyes.

I  I  Stitches  in  r.  eye  and  throbbing  in  1.  knee.

I  I  Stitches  in  1.  eye  and  in  a  corn.

Sensitive,  stupefying  pressure  in  eyes  and  forehead,  with  heat
in  face,  and  restlessness  he  can  hardly  control,  while  smok-
ing ;  followed  by  much  hawking  of  mucus  and  slimy  vomit-
ing, with  urging  to  stool.

Pressure  in  eyeballs,  with  painful  sensitiveness  when  touched.

Eyes  feel  too  large  and  are  inflamed.

I  I  Eyes  close,  even  while  walking  in  open  air,  with  drowsiness
before  dinner,  and  tension  in  temples.

On  closing  eyes  :  vertigo.
®  Hearing  and  JEars. Sensitive  to  noise.

I  Extremely  sensitive  to  noise,  especially  if  he  wishes  to  sleep.

I  I  When  going  to  sleep  he  is  waked  by  folding  of  paper ;  he  is
sensitive  to  it.

■  Slightest  noise  startles  her  from  sleep. ^Typhus.

Twittering  in  ears.

Roaring  in  ears,  frequently  during  day.

I  Something  seems  to  be  put  before  ears,  even  before  deaf  one,
so  that  he  cannot  hear  for  a  while.

Violent  earache  during  fever.

Stitches  in  1.  ear,  with  borino;  toothache.


CALADIUM.  106

Throbbing  in  r.  ear,  and  a  sensation  around  it  as  if  warm  water
were  flowing  about  it  in  a  circle.

Throbbing  with  a  feeling  around  r.  ear  as  if  it  were  asleep.

Throbbing  and  formication  around  r.  ear.

Burning  on  external  upper  margin  of  ears,  without  redness
or  heat.

Tickling  and  itching  in  r.  ear,  evenings.

Pimples  on  and  behind  1.  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose, '  l  Discharge  of  blood  and  mucus  when  blow-
ing nose.

Sudden  burning  in  upper  part  of  nose,  then  a  long-continued
irritation  to  sneeze  as  from  pepper ;  and  at  last  violent,
short  sneezing,  followed  by  fluent  coryza.

Corrosive  burning  in  nose.

Painful  pimples  on  r.  side  of  septum.
^  Upper  Face, Stitches  in  skin  of  forehead  as  if  with  needles.

Biting-burning  stitches  on  cheeks ;  stitches  as  if  with  needles.

I  I  Heat  in  face;  flushed  face.

Sensation  as  if  spidBrwebs  were  sticking  here  and  there,  or  as
if  a  fly  was  crawling  on  face.

II  Flies  alight  more  frequently  on  his  face  and  head. See  40.
^  Lower  Face, l  Lying  with  mouth  half  open  in  coma. ^Typhus.

Dry  lips,  with  thirst,  waken  at  night.
Mouth,  lips  and  tongue  swollen.
Glands  on  lower  maxilla  swollen,  after  fever.
^°  Teeth  and.  Gums, After corroding, sour vomit, teeth  feel

too  long.
Drawing  in  1.  molars  from  above  downwards  ;  from  r.  ear  to

teeth.
Boring  toothache,  with  stitches  in  ear.
Toothache,  mornings  and  evenings.
Toothache  in  evening, that  wakes  him  from  sleep again  in

morning.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Insipid  taste  on  tongue,  herbaceous,  with

a  scratchy  sensation  in  throat,  as  of  something  sharp.
Milk  tasted  sour  and  was  repugnant.
Tongue  swollen,  filling  whole  cavity  of  mouth ;  cannot  talk ;

quantities  of  albuminous  saliva.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Diminished  saliva.

Saliva  like  white  of  eggs,  running  out  in  large  quantities ;  t.

Mouth  is  sticky  and  herby.

Sensation  in  mouth  as  if  burnt  with  kreosote.

Burning  in  mouth  and  fauces.

I  I  Mucous  membrane  of  mouth  uniformly  very  red;  curtains

of  palate  exceedingly  red,  but  not  swollen ; uvula  slightly

swollen.
^^  Throat. Curtains  of  palate  exceedingly  red,  not  swollen.
Uvula  slightly  swollen.


107  CALADIUM.

Fauces  and  pharjnx  dry,  not  mouth.

i  1  Scratchy  sensation  in  throat  as  of  something  sharp,  or  with
a  dry  sensation  and  much  hawking.

I  I  Hawking  phlegm  and  vomiting  after  smoking.

Dryness  in  fauces  and  pharynx,  not  in  mouth,  without  thirst,
and  with  aversion  to  cold  water.

I I  Complained  of  dryness  and  burning  in  throat. ^Typhoid.
Tickling  in  throat,  with  cough  (after  one  hour),  often  renewed

during  day.

"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. Sensation  of  hunger,
soon  after  taking.

Evenings,  after  theatre,  he  is  hungry,  contrary  to  custom,  but
eats  nothing;  nausea,  in  morning,  while  half  asleep,  with
a  sensation  of  faintness,  as  if  he  had  over-eaten  and  must
vomit;  when  fully  awake  this  sensation  ceased.

After  vomit  from  smoking,  eats  bread  and  butter  with  relish.

Eats  only  because  stomach  feels  hollow,  but  very  hastily,  and
is  soon  satisfied.

I  Eats,  but  without  hunger. ^Impotence.

Thirst  with  dry  lips  wakes  him  at  night.

■  Wakens  wants  drink  and  swallows  it  with  greatest  haste.
/^Typhus.

I  Desire  to  drink  without  thirst.

I  Thirst  and  want  of  appetite  before  coma. ^Typhus.

After  eating  he  drinks,  but  only  because  there  is  something
very  dry  lying  in  stomach.

I  I  Thirstless  with  fever.

I  Does  not  drink  at  all  for  many  days ;  he  wants  beer,  but  is
not  thirsty  ;  he  could  not  have  taken  a  drop.

Does  not  drink  the  whole  day.

Dry  fauces  and  pharynx  without  thirst  and  with  aversion  to
cold  water.

I  Thirstless,  even  aversion  to  cold  water ;  he  drinks  only  warm
drinks. ^Impotence.

Milk  tasted  sour  and  was  repugnant.

Longing  for  beer,  without  decided  thirst;  he  was  not  able  to
drink  water  throughout  proving.

Desire  to  smoke,  which  disagrees.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking, Before  dinner  :  sleepy.
•- Hasty  eating.

Takes  his  breakfast  with  hunger  and  relish,  but  is  hardly  satis-
fied when  he  becomes  ill-humored  and  uncomfortable  ;  head
exceedingly  confused,  and  he  grows  sleepy.

After  eating  :  oppression  of  chest;  sensation  as  if  food  lay  dry
in  stomach  ;  wants  to  drink.

After  pickled  fish,  in  evening,  uncomfortable ;  abdomen  dis-
tended ; >  when  walking ; <  riding.

From  smoking  :  headache ;  pressure  in  eyes  ;  nausea  ;  vomit-


CALADIUM.  108

ing  of  slime ;  urging  to  stool ;  cramp  in  soles ;  when  lying
down,  itching  of  fingers.

Vinegar  and  all  acids  disagree.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Long  con-
tinuing hiccough.

I  I  Incomplete  eructations,  because  they  are  hindered  by  burn-
ing pressure  in  abdomen.

■  Frequent  eructations  of  very  little  wind,  as  if  stomach  were
full  of  dry  food. t'Asthma.

I  I  Nausea  :  with  confusion  in  head  ;  with  vertigo  ;  with  stitches
in  pit  of  stomach ;  with  hollowness  in  stomach ;  with  faint-
ing feeling  during  morning  slumber.

After,  and  while  smoking  his  accustomed  tobacco  :  nausea  and
inclination  to  vomit.

While  smoking  a  cigar  :  sudden  inclination  to  vomit ;  he  must
stop  smoking ;  at  same  time  urgency  to  stool,  so  that  he
thought  he  could  scarcely  retain  it,  yet  is  obliged  to  strain
hard  to  get  rid  of  pappy  yellow  stool.

Corroding  sour  vomit  with  phlegm,  after  smoking.

Acrid  sour  vomit,  makes  teeth  feel  too  long.
^"^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  im-
pedes respiration  and  causes  cough.

Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach,  which  is  drawn  inward  with  every
stitch  ; <  when  sitting  ;  it  makes  him  weak  and  nauseated.

Stitches,  as  with  needles,  deep  in  pit  of  stomach.

Cutting  through  epigastrium  and  1.  flank,  as  with  glass,  after
midnight,  and  preventing  sleep.

Cutting  in  umbilical  region.

Throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach,  after  walking ;  it  makes  him  very
tired.

Pain  deep,  internally,  when  pressing  on  pit  of  stomach.

Constant  sensation  as  if  a  bird  were  fluttering  in  stomach  and
trying  to  escape,  causing  nausea  in  stomach,  but  without
retching,  from  morning  till  afternoon.

Pressure,  extending  upward-;  at  last  it  is  like  a  gnawing  in
orifice  of  stomach,  preventing  deep  inhalation  and  belching.

I  I  Burning  in  stomach,  which  is  not  relieved  by  drinking;  it
continues  the  whole  evening,  after  drinking  tea  and  choc-
olate.

Dull  internal  burning  in  stomach  and  upper  part  of  abdomen ;
at  last  it  becomes  a  very  severe  pressure,  extending  upward
under  breast,  and  then  a  gnawing  in  orifice  of  stomach,  which
prevents  deep  breathing  and  eructations.

Empty  hollow  feeling  in  stomach.
^^Hypochondria. Stitches,  jerkings,  and  pressure  in  region  of

spleen.
^^  Abdomen. BFelt,  three  or  four  times,  a  sensation  as  if  a  long


109  •  CALADIUM.

worm  were  writhing  in  region  of  transverse  colon  or  duo-
denum.

Spasmodic  cutting  in  abdomen,  at  navel ;  must  bend  himself
double.

Sudden  twisting  pain  in  abdomen,  in  evening.

Violent  throbbing,  mostly  above,  to  right  of  navel  ;  throbbing
with  inner  heat,  much  prostrating  heaviness  in  epigastrium.

Violent  pulsating  or  burning  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

Strong  pulsation  in  epigastrium ;  each  throb  gives  him  a  jerk.

Burning-pressing  in  abdomen.

Burning  in  abdomen  leaves  a  dull  ache.

Coldness  from  abdomen  to  feet.

Warmth  in  abdomen  ;  heat  at  night.

I  Burning. ^Typhlitis.

I  Burning  in  hypogastric  region. ^Cystitis.

Pain  deep  in  abdomen  when  exerting  pressure  in  epigastrium.

Abdomen  is  painful  to  touch,  especially  region  of  bladder.

Abdomen  sore  to  touch,  as  if  beaten,  after  cough.

Abdomen  very  hard,  distended,  painful  to. pressure.

If  pain  extends  into  abdomen  it  leaves  behind  a  dull  pressure.

Speechless  ;  he  touches  his  belly  as  seat  of  pain  ;  t.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Escape  of  small  quantities  of  flatus.  ,

Evacuations  of  consistence  of  pap  and  in  small  quantity.

Stool  omits  the  first  day,  with  a  feeling  of  diarrhoea,  in
evening.

Urgency  to  stool;  passage  of  noisy  flatus  at  first;  is  compelled
to  strain  hard  to  eject  soft  pappy  stool.

Noisy  flatus  before  soft  stool,  with  much  efibrt.

After  breakfast  a  second  stool;  after  much  urging  a  little  lump
of  phlegm,  covered  with  blood,  passes.

Frequent  urging  for  a  soft,  pasty,  yellow  stool.

Stools  at  first  watery,  afterward  thicker.

I  I  Very  scanty,  pasty  stool.

Soft  stool,  yellow,  pasty ;  he  was  scarcely  dressed  after  move-
ment before  he  was  obliged  to  go  again,

I  I  Stools  soft,  afterward  passage  of  thin  red  blood.

Soft  stool,  after  one  hour,  followed  by  passage  of  blood ;  later,
moving  about,  and  burrowing  in  abdomen;  hsemorrhoidal
symptoms,  an  hour  after  a  second  stool,  with  passage  of
blood  after  evacuation.

After  stool  thin  red  blood  passes  in  considerable  quantities.

Mucus  passes  after  stool,  and  later,  a  thin  fluid  flows  from  anus.

Obstruction  of  bowels,  with  fever  heat.

I  Stool  omitted  before  and  with  coma. ^Typhus.

I  Stool  has  been  retained  since  beginning  of  disease,  which  be-
gan with  chill. ^Typhoid.

Stitches  as  of  knives  in  rectum.

Stitches  in  rectum  soon  after  stool.


CALADIUM.  110

Boring,  digging  in  anus  and  sacrum.
21  Urinary  Organs. I Sensation  of  fullness  in  bladder;  region  of

bladder  sore  to  pressure. ^Cjistitis.
Region  of  bladder  painful  to  touch ;  without  desire  to  urinate,

bladder  seems  as  if  full,  followed  by  moderate  urination.
Spasmodic  drawing  sidewise,  from  bladder  towards  penis,  or

deep  behind  and  near  bladder.
I  I  Stinging  deep  in  hypogastrium,  behind  and  above  bladder.
Pain  in  region  of  bladder;  sensation  of  fullness  without  urging

to  urinate,  followed  by  a  moderate  discharge  of  water.
I  Violent  pain  during  urination.
Stinging  and  drawing  in  1.  ureter.
I  Stitches  in  urethra,  evenings.
Burning  in  urethra,  if  pressing  to  increase  the  flow,  it  burns

like  hot  water.
Burning  in  urethra,  with  and  without  urinating.
Burning  or  offensive  urine.

E  I  Urine  oflFensive,  with  sediment. ^Impotence. ^Gleet.

I  Scanty,  putrid  smelling  urine,  in  evening. ^Impotence.

^^  Male  Sesual  Organs. I  Sexual  desire  with  relaxed  penis,  or

painful  erections  without  desire.
■  Impotence,  with  mental  depression.
Impotency ; penis remains relaxed during excitement and

sexual  desire.
Erections,  when  half  asleep,  mornings,  that  ceased  when  fully

awake.
An  erection  in  morning  and  cohabits,  but  suddenly  his  desire

ceased,  and  he  did  not  know  if  there  was  an  emission  or  not.
No  erection,  even  after  amorous  caresses.

Painful  erections,  without  sexual  desire;  it  alternates  one  morn-
ing with  desire,  with  relaxed  penis.
Incomplete  erection  ;  it  seems  as  though  it  were  broken,  with

which  semen  emits  too  soon.
Erection  mornings,  without  any  desire.
During  an  embrace,  no  emission  and  no  orgasm.
After coition : prepuce remains retracted, with pain and

swelling ;  sore  corrosive  pain  ;  this  returns  after  every  coi-
tion for  months.
Pimples  on  mons  veneris.
Drawing  from  bladder  to  penis.
Stitches  in  penis.
Dull  burrowing  in  penis.
Gonorrhoea  of  glans.
Glans  very  red,  covered  with  fine  red  points,  very  dry,  which

cause  a  desire  to  rub  it;  prepuce  is  very  much  swollen  along

its  margin,  sore  and  very  painful.
I  Glans  dry  and  red. ^Impotence.
Sore  corrosive  pain  on  prepuce.


Ill  CALADIUM.

I  I  Prepuce  very  much  swollen  along  its  margin,  sore  and  very

■  painful,  biting  on  urinating.
After  coition  painful  erection.

Sexual  organs  seem  larger,  as  if  puffed,  relaxed  and  sweating ;

skin  of  scrotum  seems  thicker  than  usual.
I  I  Excessive  perspiration  on  scrotum.
I  Violent  itching  eruption  on  scrotum  ; <  at  night,  dry  and

scaly.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Pain  in  abdomen,  with  pressure  on

uterus.
I  Itching  followed  three  months  later  by  a mucous  discharge

and  a  very  troublesome  eruption  of  pimples  around  genitals.

■  Frequently  returning  itching  over  genitals,  finally  with  volup-

tuousness.

■  Violent  itching  on  external  genitals  compelled  her  to  scratch

in  spite  of  punishment ;  reduced  her  in  body  and  mind.

I  BPruritis  vaginae  ;  induces  onanism  ; during  pregnancy.

Onanism,  with  mucous  discharge,  and  pimples  around  parts.
^'Pregnancy. iPruritis  vaginee.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness;
want  of  timbre  in  voice.

Larynx and  trachea  seem  to  be  constricted;  deep  breathing
impeded.

Unable  to  speak  a  word  on  account  of  vocal  chords  being  swol-
len, and  from  continual  cough.

Epiglottis  and  adjacent  parts  decidedly  swollen,  and  exceed-
ingly painful  to  pressure.

When  asked  where  he  suffered,  he  pointed  to  his  larynx,  then
to  his  mouth,  and  lastly  to  his  stomach.

Cough,  on  attempting  to  speak.

I  I  Wheezing  when  taking  a  deep,  breath,  and  irritation  to  cough
felt  above  larynx.

I  I  Tickling  in  throat  with  cough,  often  repeated  during  day;
<C  at  night.
"^Respiration. Dyspnoea  produced  by  pressure  on  scrobiculum.

Oppression  of  chest,  with  burning  in  stomach ;  oppression  also
continues  afterwards.

Larynx  feels  constricted  with  wheezing  respiration.

Panting-breathing  at  night,  with  fever. See  40.

Fever  with  chilliness  and  thirst ; wheezing  in  chest ; coryza  :
throbbing  in  chest.

■  Breathes  in  sighing  jerks,  during  unconsciousness  and  great

heat. ^Typhus.
Respiration  very  incomplete,  inspiration  catching ;  sinking  in

of  pit  of  stomach  was  very  noticeable. Compare  17.
Deep  inhalation  prevented  by  burning  in  stomach.
Respiration  difficult  and  oppressed ;  he  grasped  his  throat  with

his  hand  every  moment.


CALADIUM.  112

Asthma :  great  oppression,  could  scarcely  get  his  breath  ;  feels
as  if  mucus  would  cause  suffocation,  but  without  anxiety ;
attacks  after  eating,  or  after  siesta ;  when  rash  on  forearm
disappears ;  in  alternation  with  rash  on  chest.

■  Asthmatic  complaints.
^^  Cough. Sudden  and  involuntary  cough,  caused  by  an  irritation
high  up  in  throat;  it  is  a  half  cough,  half  moan.

Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  causes  cough ;  later  heaviness  there
prevents  his  cough.

Cough  was  not  spasmodic,  was  without  expectoration,  and  ag-
gravated if  he  attempted  to  speak  a  word.

Incessant  cough  of  a  hoarse  sound.

Cough,  no  sputa,  but  wheezing.

He  desires  to  cough,  but  heaviness  in  pit  of  stomach  will  not
permit  it.

Weak,  toneless  cough ;  at  night,  prevents  sleep ;  continues
next  morning.

Weak,  but  continuous  cough ;  raises  little  hard  lumps ;  chest
then  feels  hollow  or  empty.

Cough  in  slight,  weak,  sensitive  paroxysms,  with  expectoration
of  small  lumps  of  mucus.

Cough,  lasting  from  10  p.m.  to  1  a.m.

Cough  at  first  prevents  sleep  at  night,  later  also  in  morning;
weeks  after  seldom,  but  more  violent;  throbbing  in  chest  and
coryza  after  fever.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  chest,  in  evening.

Dull  sticking  in  r.  side  of  chest,  with  oppression ;  <  on  1.,
>  when  lying  on  r.  side,  evenings,  in  bed.

Stitches  as  with  needles  on  a  small  spot  between  1.  nipple  and
axilla,  very  deep  inside,  neither  breathing  nor  moving  in-
fluences it.

Pressive  sticking  in  1.  side  of  chest,  near  sternum.

Throbbing  in  chest,  with  night  fever.

Hollowness  and  emptiness  in  chest  after  expectoration.
^' Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse: hard  and  bounding
in  intermittents ;  very  frequent,  hardly  to  be  felt  in  typhus.

Peculiar  throbbing  below  heart,  not  palpitation,  only  perceptible
on  applying  hand. See  31.

Pulse  small  and  frequent ;  t.

I  Pulse  hard  and  bounding. ^Intermittent.

Hard,  full,  jerking  pulse.

Small  pulse  with  cold  sweat.

B  Pulse  was  rapid,  but  scarcely  perceptible. ^Typhoid.
^^  Outer  Chest. Fluttering  sensation  below  cardiac  region.

On  straightening  up,  cracking  below  last  ribs,  as  if  one  rib  had
been  dislocated  and  snapped  back  again.

Ribs  and  small  of  back  feel  as  if  beaten  when  rising  in  morning.


113  CALADIUM.

Itching,  burning  rash  on  forearm  and  chest,  alternating  with

asthma.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Between shoulders, rheumatic  pain ; can

hardly  turn  in  bed ;  feels  beating  of  pulse  when  lying  down.
Between  shoulders  a  spasmodic  sensation  in  walking  as  if  he

would  fall  headlong.
Stitches  in  back,  as  if  from  incarcerated  flatus.
Backache. See  gleet,  22.
Boring  and  burrowing  in  sacrum  and  anus.
Sacral  region  and  back  feel  bruised ;  in  morning,  on  rising.
Pains  in  sacrum,  mornings,  a  kind  of  weakness,  as  if  he  had

not  suflicient  strength  in  sacrum  ; stitches  during  certain

movements,  especially  when  walking.
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  Pain  in  shoulder,  with  headache.
Drawing-squeezing  pains  in  arms.

Arms  "asleep"  on  waking  in  morning;  can  hardly  move  them.
Pain  between  bones  of  forearm. See  34.
Rash  on  forearm  ;  in  bend  of  elbow  and  on  wrist.
Eruption  on  inner  forearm  of  very  red  pimples ;  itching  and

burning  disappear,  and  are  followed  by  asthma.
After  writing :  faintness.
Feeling  in  palms  like  pins  and  needles,  similar  to  what  is  felt

when  ulnar  nerve  is  struck,  or,  by  some  people,  when  look-
ing down  from  a  height ;  felt  towards  evening  and  lasted  till

sleep,  causing  her  to  rub  them  hard.
Left  thumb  numb  and  as  if  asleep  ; also  little  finger,  with

crawls.
All  fingers  felt  very  large,  like  sausages ;  she  could  not  use

them  well ;  they  felt  as  if  they  were  going  to  be  paralyzed  ;

this  lasted  till  middle  of  next  day.
Itching  of  fingers,  especially  evening,  when  lying  down.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Furuncle  on  buttock,  painful  when  sitting.

When  standing,  his  knees  feel  weak  and  tremble  ;  is  obliged  to

sit  down.
Left  knee : throbbing  pain  when  lying,  evenings ;  as  if  being

forced  asunder ;  cracks  on  stepping  and  impedes  walking.
Feet  icy-cold,  with  hot  fever  and  hot  hands.
Feet  hot,  with  cold  body.
Pains  behind  tendo  Achillis.
Cramp  in  soles,  at  night.
Corroding  burning  on  toes.
Sticking  in  a  corn.
Stitches  in  a  corn  in  1.  little  toe.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Drawing-pinching  pains  between  bones  of

forearm,  and  behind  tendo  Achillis.
As  if  beaten  in  all  joints  ;  heaviness  in  limbs,  in  morning.
I  I  Limbs  weak ; cannot  get  out  of  bed ; all  forenoon  weary,

fatigued  and  ill-humored.

VOL.  III.— 8.


CALADIUM.  114

^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Lying :  desire  to  lie  down  ;  rock-
ing dizziness  ;  pressing  in  side ;  stitches  in  r.  chest,  >  when
on  r.  side,  <  on  1.  side ;  throbbing  in  1.  knee ;  nervous
symptoms  >  ;  debility  >  ;  faintness.

I  Lying  in  bed  with  mouth  partly  open  ;  4th  day. ^Typhus.
Sitting :  headache  disappears  ;  pressing  in  side  >  ;  stitches  at

pit  of  stomach  <; ;  furuncle  on  buttocks  painful.

Rising  :  faintness.

Standing  :  knees  weak,  trembling  and  painful.

Turning  :  rheumatic  pain  between  shoulders  <C.

Bending:  cutting  in  abdomen  >.

Straightening  up  :  cracking  below  last  rib.

Walking :  dizziness ;  cramping  between  shoulders  and  in  brain ;
discomfort  after  pickled  fish  in  evening  >  ;  throbbing  in
umbilical  region  ;  spasm  between  shoulders  ;  stitches  in
sacrum  ;  cracking  in  knees  and  aching ;  tires ;  has  to  take
hold  of  something  to  prevent  falling.

Motion  :  faintness  after  writing.

I I  Aversion  to  motion;  dreads  it;  I  wants  to  lie  down  all  the
time,  but,  making  an  effort,  he  is  strong  enough.

^®  Nerves. Frequent  startings  during  sleep.

■  Lies  entirely  unconscious;  single  shocks  convulsed  her  body

from  time  to  time  ;  9  p.m.  the  7th  day. ^Typhus.

I  Tremors  and  fear  of  having  an  attack. ^Epileptic  patient.

Heaviness  in  morning  and  all  forenoon.

Weakening  stitches.

Prostrated  by  throbbing  in  abdomen.

Must  lie  down  and  close  eyes,  when  it  seemed  as  if  he  were
rocked.

Debility  obliging  him  to  lie  down.

Faintness  after  writing,  when  reflecting,  lying,  and  on  rising
up,  or  with  nausea.
^^  Sleep. Grows  sleepy  and  fretful  again  at  7  in  morning,  and
would  like  to  return  to  bed.

Sleepy  in  morning,  after  rising ;  his  eyes  close  while  walking
in  open  air,  with  nausea  and  qualmishness  in  stomach,  where
a  sensation  of  emptiness  is  felt,  with  weakness  and  prostra-
tion in  knees.

Sleepy  before  dinner,  must  close  his  eyes ;  sleepy  in  early
evening,  cannot  keep  awake.

■  Sank  back  upon  her  pillow  again  (after  drinking)  and  im-

mediately fell  asleep  with  sighing  respiration. ^Typhoid.
Before  going  to  sleep,  apprehensive.
He  is  obliged  to  lie  down  during  day,  but  is  unable  to  sleep ;

he  shivers,  and  is  dizzy.
Everything  disturbs  him  in  sleep,  I  I  most  noises,  even  rattling

of  paper ;  cough ;  cannot  get  asleep  till  1  o'clock  at  night.
I  Starting  in  sleep,  moaning  and  groaning.


115  CALADIUM.

A  sort  of  slumber  (light  sleep) ;  nausea ;  faintness ;  heat,  in

morning ;  erections.
During  a  confused  slumber,  everything  comes  to  his  mind,

which  he  had  forgotten  while  awake.
I  Coma  after  the  crawls. ^Typhus.

■  Unconsciousness  and  coma. ^Typhus.

Excessive  erections,  at  4  a.m.,  without  desire  ;  deep  sleep
towards  6  a.m.,  so  that  he  can  scarcely  rouse  himself,  with
vivid  dreams  of  persons,  whom  he  has  not  seen  for  years.

Restless  night,  with  heat ;  is  obliged  to  uncover,  with  light
slumber.

During  sleep  :  internal  fever  disappears.

Pie  groans  and  moans  anxiously  in  sleep,  so  that  he  wakes
neighbors  several  times  in  night,  and  for  several  nights.

Everything  troubles  him  in  sleep.

Sleep  at  night  restless,  with  confused  dreams.

Restless,  anxious  dreams.

Very  clear,  vivid  dreams.

Dreams  of  dead  persons,  and  events  of  past  years,  so  vivid
that  when  he  awakes,  he  falls  asleep  again  directly,  and  con-
tinues to  dream  of  them.

■  Started  from  her  slumber  at  slightest  noise. ^Typhus.

lit  seem-ed  uncertain  whether  she  was  always  aroused  by  a
noise,  or  whether  she  was  not  often  aroused  by  thirst ;  each
time  she  was  aroused,  she  asked  for  water. ^Typhus.

A  nap  during  day  lessens  all  symptoms.
'After  siesta:  headache;  oppression  of  chest.

On  awaking :  headache,  also  after  siesta ;  still  sleepy,  fretful ;
thirst,  with  dry  lips ;  arms  asleep.
^^  Time.  Night:  awakened  by  dry  lips  and  thirst;  heat  in  ab-
domen; itching  of  scrotum  < ;  tickling  cough  <;  panting
breath;  toneless  weak  cough;  cough  from  10  p.m.  to  1  a.m.;
cramp  in  soles  ;  restless  and  hot ;  corrosive  burning  of  skin
on  cheek,  nose,  toes.

Midnight :  cutting  in  pit  of  stomach.

After  midnight :  stitches  through  epigastrium  and  1.  flank  ;
chill ;  abdomen  cold,  feet  hot.

Morning:  vertigo,  nausea,  with  stitches  at  pit  of  stomach;
on  waking,  stupefying  pressure  in  r.  temple  ;  toothache  ;
nausea  while  half  asleep  ;  during  slumber,  faintness  ;  nau-
seating fluttering  in  stomach  ;  after  breakfast,  second  stool ;
erections  when  half  asleep;  has  erection  and  cohabits,  desire
suddenly  ceases  ;  erection  without  desire  ;  cough  continues  ;
ribs  and  small  of  back  as  if  beaten  ;  sacral  region  and  back
feel  bruised  ;  pain  in  sacrum  ;  arms  asleep,  can  hardly  move
them  ;  heaviness  of  limbs  ;  limbs  weak,  fatigued  ;  7  a.m.,
sleepy  and fretful ; emptiness at stomach  ; weakness  of


CALADIUM.  116

knees ; excessive  erections,  4  a.m.  ; deep  sleep  at  6  a.m.  ;
9  A.M.,  burning  sensation.

Afternoon :  heaviness.

During  day  :  roaring  in  ears  ;  tickling  cough  ;  does  not  drink  ;
must  lie  down.

Evening :  tickling  and  itching  in  r.  ear ;  toothache ;  burn-
ing in  stomach  ;  twisting  in  abdomen  ;  urine  scanty  and
putrid ;  feeling  of  diarrhoea ;  stitches  in  urethra ;  dull
stitches  in  r.  chest;  itching  of  fingers;  throbbing  in  1.
knee  ;  convulsed  by  shocks  ;  sleepy  ;  cold  until  midnight ;
chilly ;  cold  from  abdomen  to  feet ;  heat  and  thirst
till  midnight ;  burning  sensation,  7  P  M.  ;  hands,  face
and  abdomen  hot,  feet  cold  till  midnight ;  9  p.m.,  sweet
odor  of  sweat ;  sweat  with  prostration  ;  itching  of  skin.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Worse  from  warmth,  warm
air,  warm  bed  ;  most  complaints  during  the  heat  of  day
(tropics).

Has  to  uncover  during  fever  heat.

Better  in  doors.

Open  air  :  sweat  followed  by  chill.

Cold  water  lessens  the  burning.

■  Result  of  catching  cold. ^Typhoid.

Cold  : aversion  to  cold  water ; water, corrosive  itching  of
skin  >.
^^  Fever. '  '  Coldness  of  single  parts,  sometimes  with  crawling.

Cold,  in  evening  till  midnight,  with  thirst,  panting,  beating  in
chest ;  coryza.

Chilliness  over  back  and  whole  body,  with  drawing  pains  in  1.
little  finger,  that  feels  as  if  full  and  gone  to  sleep,  besides  a
pulled,  stretched  sensation  in  whole  body.  ..

Chilly,  in  evening,  without  thirst ;  coldness  extends  from  ab-
domen to  feet;  they  are  icy-cold,  as  also  are  fingers.

1 1  Began  with  a  chill,  thirst  and  loss  of  appetite. ^Typhoid.

Heat  before  midnight,  during  sleep,  passing  off  quickly  on
awaking.

Fever  after  seven  days;  heat  with  thirst;  violent  pain  in  ear;
swollen  submaxillary  glands,  and  constipation.

Fever  the  ninth  day  ;  heat  with  thirst,  in  evening,  till  mid-
night; it  again  wakes  him,  when  it  disappears.

Fever  on  twelfth  and  thirteenth  days;  in  evening,  till  raid-
night,  coldness  with  thirst,  catching  in  chest,  therewith  he
feels  sleepy ;  it  wakes  him  again  about  midnight,  and  then
disappears,  together  with  throbbing  in  chest  and  coryza.

I  In  morning  at  9  and  in  evening  at  7  o'clock  a  burning  sensa-
tion, during  which  patient  often  started  up  and  mumbled  un-
intelligible words. ^Typhoid.

Heat  only  internal,  with  throbbing  in  body.

Heat  rises  up  in  head.


117  CALADIUM.

Internal  feverish,  heat,  exhausting  sweat,  as  from  oppressive
heat.

Heat  with  drowsiness.

Internal  fever  disappears  during  sleep.

llFalls  asleep  during  evening  fever,  and  wakes  when  it. stops.

Heat  after  midday  sleep,  then  sweat,  then  chill  in  open  air.

Heat  before  midnight,  chill  after.

Heat  of  hands,  face,  and  abdomen,  with  cold  feet  before  mid-
night ;  after  midnight,  abdomen  is  cold,  feet  hot,  without
thirst.

■  Sweat  attracts  flies,  which  bother  him  very  much.

■  She  perspired  at  times,  and  her  sweat  had  quite  a  sweetish

odor. ^Typhus.

I  Sweet  odor  of  sweat,  especially  when  she  appeared  to  be  dy-
ing, at  9  P.M.,  7th  day.

Sweats  easily.

Scanty  sweat.

Gentle  sweat  with  internal  heat  and  prostration.

Cold  sweat  all  over.

Sweat  with  earache ;  with  drowsiness.

Sweat  toward  evening,  with  prostration,  yawning,  and  sleepi-
ness.

Sweat  relieved  all  symptoms.

After  siesta :  heat,  then  sweat  followed  by  chill  in  open  air.

Catarrhal  fever  with  chilliness,  thirst,  and  throbbing  in  chest.
Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  sticking  in  temple  and
eye  ;  stinging  in  temple  and  eye ;  stupefying  pressure  in
temple  on  waking  ;  stitches  in  eye  ;  throbbing  in  ear  and
feeling  of  warm  water  around  it ;  throbbing,  formication  and
feeling  as  if  ear  asleep;  tickling  and  itching  in  ear;  pimples
on  septufn  of  nose  ;  drawing  from  ear  to  teeth  ;  beside  navel,
throbbing;  dull  stitches  in  chest.

Left:  boring  and  sticking  in  temple;  pressing  in  side  from  ly-
ing ;  side  of  head  as  if  asleep  ;  throbbing  in  knee  ;  stitches
in  eye ;  stitches  in  ear  ;  pimples  on  and  behind  ear  ;  draw-
ing in  molars ;  stitches  through  flank  as  with  glass ;  stinging
and  drawing  in  ureter  ;  stitches  between  nipple  and  axilla  ;
sticking  near  sternum  ;  throbbing  in  knee  ;  stitches  in  a
corn  on  little  toe.

Left  to  right :  headache  ;  pressure  in  temples  ;  boring  stitches
in  temples.

Above  down  :  drawing  in  1.  molars.

Below  up :  heat  ascends  into  head ;  burning  in  abdomen  to
breast.

Behind  forward :  drawing  from  bladder  to  penis.
**  Sensations. Sensations  in  1.  half  of  head  as  if  asleep.

Sensation  of  something  before  ear  preventing  hearing ;  sensa-
tion as  if  r.  ear  asleep  ;  sensation  of  something  dry  lying  in


42


CALADIUM.  118

stomach;  sensation  as  of  diarrhoea,  in  evening;  in  palms  like

pins  and  needles.
Sensitiveness:  of  pimples  behind  ear;  of  eyeballs;  of  abdomen

to  touch  and  pressure;  of  bladder  to  touch  and  pressure;  to
'  pressure  of  epiglottis  and  adjacent  parts.
Cutting : through epigastrium and 1. flank ; in umbilical

region.
Stitches,  like  with  needles,  felt  in  various  parts  of  body.
Stitching :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  skin  of  forepart  of  head  ;  in

eyes  ;  in  r.  eye  ;  in  1.  eye  ;  in  1.  ear  ;  in  ear  ;  on  cheek ;  in

splenic  region  ;  knife-like,  in  rectum  ;  in  urethra;  in  penis;

in  chest ;  between  1.  nipple  and  axilla ;  in  back  ;  in  sacrum

when  walking.
Sticking :  in  r.  temple  and  eye ;  in  1.  temple  ;  in  chest  near

sternum,  1.  side  ;  in  corn  of  1.  little  toe;  in  fresh  wounds.
Stinging :  in  r.  temple  and  eye  ;  deep  in  hypogastrium  ;  in  1.

ureter.
Boring : in  forehead ; in  1.  temple  ; in  teeth  ; in  anus  and

sacrum.
Gnawing  :  at  orifice  of  stomach.
Digging  :  in  anus  and  sacrum.

Burrowing :  in  abdomen  ;  dull,  in  penis  ;  in  sacrum  and  anus.
Bursting :  pain  in  forehead.
Twisting :  pain  in  abdomen.
Drawing :  in  occiput ;  in  1,  molars  ;  from  r.  ear  to  teeth  ;  from

bladder  towards  penis  ;  in  1.  ureter  ; in  arms ;  in  1.  little

finger.
Cramping:  between  shoulders  and  in  brain,  walking;  in  soles.
Scratching :  in  throat.

Stretching:  of  whole  body;  with  the  crawls.
Writhing :  as  of  a  long  worm  in  colon.
Jerking :  in  splenic  region.
Burning :  in  eyes  ;  on  upper  margin  of  ears  ;  in  upper  part  of

nose ;  stitches,  on  cheek  ;  in  mouth  and  fauces  ;  in  throat ;

in  abdomen  ; in  stomach  ; in  hypogastrium  ; in  urethra ;

and  itching  rash  on  forearm  and  chest ;  corroding,  on  toes  ;

of  surface,  in  morning  ;  in  fresh  wounds.
Burnt :  as  if  with  creosote,  in  mouth.
Biting  :  on  cheek  ;  of  prepuce,  on  urination.
Bruised :  ribs  and  small  of  back,  as  if  beaten  ;  in  all  joints,  as

if  beaten.
Aching  :  of  ear,  during  fever  ;  in  teeth,  morning  and  evening.
Soreness :  of  abdomen  to  touch  ;  of  prepuce.
Pressure :  in  forehead,  after  smoking  ;  in  1.  side,  from  lying ;

stupefying,  in  r.  temple  ; in  eyes  ; in  abdomen  ; in  pit  of

stomach  ;  in  splenic  region  ;  on  uterus.
Pain :  headache  in  forehead  and  occiput ;  headache  as  from  a

load  ;  pressing  headache ;  in  pimples  on  r.  side  of  nasal  sep-


119  CALADIUM.

turn ;  headache  from  smoking ;  at  pit  of  stomach ;  deep  in
abdomen  ;  in  region  of  bladder  ;  during  urination  ;  sore  and
corrosive  pain  of  prepuce  after  coition  ;  rheumatic,  between
shoulders  ;  backache  ;  in  sacrum  ;  in  shoulders  ;  between
bones  of  forearm.

Discomfort :  in  evening,  after  pickled  fish.

Largeness  :  of  eyes  ;  of  fingers.

Beating  :  in  chest.

Fluttering :  in  stomach  ;  below  cardiac  region.

Throbbing :  in  1.  knee  ;  in  r.  ear  ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  to  right
of  navel;  inchest;  below  heart;  of  body  with  internal  heat.

Pulsating :  in  upper  abdomen  ;  in  epigastrium.

Tension  :  in  temples.

Contraction  :  of  larynx  and  trachea.

Twittering :  in  ears.

Dullness :  in  head.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Heaviness :  in  epigastrium  ;  in  pit  of  stomach  prevents  cough ;
in  nervous  system.

Fullness  :  in  bladder ;  in  little  finger.

Hollowness  :  in  stomach  ;  in  chest.

Faintness  :  in  morning ;  in  morning  during  slumber  ;  after
writing.

Weakness  :  in  sacrum  ;  of  knees  when  standing  ;  of  limbs.

Warmth  :  as  of  water  around  r.  ear ;  in  abdomen.

Coldness  :  from  abdomen  to  feet.

Spasm  :  sensation  like,  between  shoulders.

Numbness  :  in  head ;  in  1.  thumb  and  little  finger.

Formication  :  around  r.  ear.

Itching :  in  r.  ear  ;  of  fingers  when  lying ;  eruption  on  scro-
tum ;  of  female  genitals  ;  and  burning  eruption  on  inner
forearm.

Tickling  :  in  r.  ear  ;  in  throat  causes  cough.

Crawling :  as  of  a  fly  over  face,  or  spider-webs  sticking  here
and  there.

Cracking :  below  last  ribs  on  straightening  body ;  in  1.  knee
when  stepping.

Dryness  :  in  pharynx  ;  of  lips.
"Tissues. I  Loss  of  fluids.

Dryness ;  inflammation  of  mucous  membranes.

Mucous  membranes  : 1 1  dry  ; I  i  dry  feeling ; I  inflamed.

Soft  parts  retracted.

Glands  swollen.

Joints  crack  ;  pain  like  dislocation.

Bruised  feeling  in  joints.

Phthisis  ;  typhus  ;  prurigo.

I  Dropsical  swellings.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  pimples  be-


CALADIUM.  120

hind ear sensitive ; sensitiveness of eye-balls ; abdomen
painful,  especially  near  bladder ;  must  touch  the  part.

Pricking  in  palms,  like  from  pins  and  needles,  has  to  rub  them
hard,  toward  evening,  lasting  till  sleep.

Pressure :  boring  and  sticking  in  temple  >  ;  abdomen  pain-
ful ;  soreness  near  bladder.

Riding  :  discomfort  in  evening,  after  pickled  fish.

I  Mosquito-bites  burn,  itch  intensely.
^^  Skin. Frequent  attacks  of  violent  and  corrosive  burning  in  small
places  of  skin  on  cheek,  nose,  toes  and  other  places,  at  night,
obliging  him  to  rub.

Crawling.

On  skin,  especially  in  face,  frequent  sensation,  as  if  a  fly  were
crawling  there.

Stitches  like  needles.

Itching,  evening,  after  going  to  bed ;  has  to  scratch.

Violent  corrosive  itching,  burning;  must  touch  parts,  but  can-
not scratch  there  ;  feeling  as  from  splinters  of  glass ;  no
swelling,  but  much  heat ;  bright  red  spots  on  face,  eyes,
throat,  arms ; >>  from  cold  water.

Fly-bites  burn  and  itch  severely.

Kash,  with  white  vesicles,  on  wrist,  forearm  and  elbow ;  it
itches  from  heat  at  night,  burns  internally  after  scratching.

Nettle-rash  on  inner  side  of  forearm,  consisting  of  very  red
pimples,  which  itch  and  burn  very  much,  after  three  to  four
days,  when  it  disappears  ;  immediately  great  oppression  of
chest,  so  that  he  could  scarcely  get  breath,  as  if  mucus
would  suffocate  him,  without  anxiety ;  especially  after  eat-
ing, and  after  midday  nap.

White,  suppurating  pimples,  with  red  areolag,  appear  here  and
there  on  body,  with  an  itching  sensation,  sore  to  touch.

Pimples  :  scalp ;  ear  ;  nose  ;  mons  veneris.

Painful  pimples  on  septum  of  nose,  r.  side.

A  furuncle  had  formed  on  buttock,  that  pained  him  severely,
when  sitting.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitutiono Lax  phlegmatic  temperament.

Girl,  set.  four ;  irresistable  itching  on  genitals.  6  drops  of
tincture  in  3  ounces  of  water,  every  3  hours.

I  Girl,  set.  20;  suddenly  attacked  with  genital  itching  after  3
months.  8  drops  of  tincture  in  6  ounces  of  water,  every  3
hours  a  tablespoonful.

I A  widow,  upwards  of  40,  mother  of  a  large  family. ^Typhus.
*®  Relations. Family relations : Aimm  draeon., Arum  mac.^
Arum  tripli.

Antidotes:  Camphor.  (.^),  li Qapsic.  The  juice  of  the  sugar
cane  is  said  to  be  antidotal,  and  the  negroes  say  the  juice  of
the  root  will  annul  eflFects  produced  by  the  juice  of  the
leaves, llgnat.  relieved  the  stitches  in  pit  of  stomach,  and


121  CALADIUM— CALCAREA  ARSENICA.

the  fever; Qarh.  veg.  removed  the  rash,  Hyosc.  lessened  the

night  cough, Zingiber  the  asthma. Mercur.  relieved  the

preputial  symptoms,  22.
Caladium  antidotes :  Mercur.
Compatible:  Aeon.,  Canthar..,  Puhat..,  Sepia.
Incompatible:  Arurti  triph.,  and  doubtless  the  oih^r  Aracece.
After  failure  of  Opium,  Stramon.,  Bryon.,  Aeon.,  Batr.  mur.

and  Ipec.  in  typhoid,  Caldd.  cured  completely.
Complementary  :  Nitr.  ac
Compare:  the  ^racgte  generally ;  II  Aeon.,  iBryon.,  it  Caustic.,

Carh.  veg.,  Canthar.,  llCapsic.,  Hyosc,  \Ignat.,  iLycop.,

iMercur., \Nitr.  ac,  llNux  vom.,  tJPhosphor.,  llPulsat.,

I  Sepia,  I  Sulphur,  Zingih.


CALCAREA  ARSENICA.

Arseniate  of  Lime.  .  2>  Oa  0,  As  Ot


Prepared  and  proved  by  C.  Hg,  in  1848,  in  the  4th  centesimal  tritura-
tion, and  by  five  other  well  experienced  provers,  who  did  net  know  of
each  other,  until  1851.  Some  cures  were  published  to  induce  more  prov-
ings.  The  few  given  here  contain  elements  of  great  promise.  We  want
more  cures,  even  reports  of  failures,  but  above  all  good  provings  of  the
higher  potencies.  '

^  Mind. Mind  seems  dull  and  unable  to  digest  any  subject.

Unable  to  attend  to  any  business,  on  account  of  headache.

■  Delirium  evenings  in  the  dark. ^Typhoid  with  albuminuria.

1 1  Great  depression  of  mind.

I  Mind  much  depressed  with  great  anxiety,  about  still  greater
evils  in  the  future. ^Albuminuria.

With  exertion  of  mind  headache  lessens  but  is  much  worse
afterwards.

The  slightest  emotion  causes  palpitation  of  heart.  Comp.  Lith.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  when  moving  the  head. See  11.

In  sudden  attacks  he  feels  as  if  he  was  flying  or  swimming  in
the  air,  as  if  his  feet  did  not  touch  the  ground ;  feels  in-
describably well,  as  if  in  heaven,  the  most  wonderful  visions
pass  before  his  eyes,  it  seems  to  be  a  great  many  different
things  but  lasts  only  a  second,  it  passes  like  lightning  but
is  infinitely  much.

A  pressing  heaviness  first  on  top  of  head,  then  in  occiput.

Head  seems  to  get  heavier  and  heavier.


CALCAREA  ARSENICA.  122

1  Congestion  to  the  head  before  an  epileptic  attack.
^  Inner  Head. Dull stupefying  headache  in  different  parts of
head,  but  principally  above  and  behind  ears.

Head  gets  heavier  and  heavier,  and  quick  movement  makes  him
giddy.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  head  before  an  epileptic  attack.

TiViolent  pains  over  r.  eye.

The  headache  was  the  worst  in  front  and  above  1.  ear,  most  on  a
place  where  he  had  a  headache  before.

Between  ear  and  r.  forehead  a  burning,  lasting  some  months.

Boring-jerking  in  front  over  r.  ear  and  on  lower  border  of
acquisitiveness  and  in  occiput  in  region  of  sociableness,  with
a  chill,  has  to  go  to  bed ;  after  getting  cold  outdoors  in
winter.

Stitches  in  1.  side  of  head,  above  neck  towards  region  of  tem-
ples and  across  forehead  from  r.  to  1.

Pressing  heaviness ;  first  in  vertex,  afterwards  in  occiput.

I  I  Mornings,  going  outdoors,  very  peculiar  headache ;  boring-
shooting  in  occiput  in  regular  measure,  and  simultaneously
a  sensation,  as  if  one  was  drawing  on  a  thread  in  larynx
from  front  backwards,  and  repeated  once  soon  afterwards.

Violent  headache,  beginning  at  noon,  increasing  toward  even-
ing, worse  after  supper:  a  digging,  pressing  beating  through
left  half  of  head,  I  I  from  front  backwards ;  lying  on  forehead
it  is  <  in  occiput  over  nape  of  neck ;  lying  on  back  it  is  <<
in  forepart  of  head,  the  same  lying  on  either  side,  always  ■<
opposite  side.  It  causes  a  feeling  of  lameness  in  whole  body ;
it  was  followed  by  a  tearing  pain  in  upper  and  lower  jaw,
as  if  jerking  down  from  head;  relieved  by  Puhat.

Headache  commencing  very  slightly  but  gradually  increasing
to  such  violence,  that  he  is  unable  to  do  any  business ;  it  is
most  in  forehead,  as  if  it  would  split  the  head  and  tear  it  to
pieces.  The  beating  of  pulse  gradually  has  increased  from
80  to  100 ;  each  beat  of  heart  he  felt  in  head  as  if  every
beat  was  striking  against  a  wedge.  Stooping  and  going
outdoors  <.  He  had  to  go  home  again,  on  the  7th  day,
could  do  nothing  and  felt  exceedingly  weak.  From  the  4th
day  of  the  proving  it  had  increased  gradually  up  till  noon
of  7th  day.

Burning  in  head,  first  left  then  right.

Headache  >■  with  mental  exertion,  but  is  <i  after. See  1.

Headache  •<  after  slightest  error  in  diet.

Headache  and  palpitation  of  heart  <  and  >■  together.

Headache  with  stiffness  of  neck  wakens  him  toward  4  a.m.  ;
he  had  no  sleep  after  it  and  could  not  lie.

Beating  in  head  and  back  drive  him  out  of  bed.

Weekly  headache ;  stitches  in  r.  forehead.
^  Outer  Head. I  Temples  cedematous. ^Albuminuria.


123  CALCAREA  ARSENICA.

I  Head  is  hot. ^Albuminuria.
°  Sight  and  Eyes. Letters  seem  to  run  together.

■  Delirium  in  the  dark.

I  Eyes  have  little  brilliancy. ^Albuminuria.

Violent  pain  in  r.  eye  and  above  it.

Headache  over  1.  eye.

I  Blue  rings  under  eyes.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Headache  and  toothache  extend  into  ears.

Benumbing  headache  is  most  above  and  behind  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing  with  fluent  coryza  in  morning.

Sneezing  with  a  jerking-shooting  pain  near  1.  side  of  breast-
bone, region  of  4th  and  5th  ribs.

Before  breakfast,  catarrh  in  head,  spitting  of  mucus,  which
falls  down  from  choanse.

3  A.  M.,  wakefulness,  restlessness,  sweat  and  running  catarrh,
next  morning  with  frequent  sneezing.

No  phlegm  through  nose,  only  from  choanse.

Crusts  are  formed  in  choanae. See  25.
^  Upper  Pace. Tearing  pain  in  upper  and  lower  jaw;  jerking
down  from  head ;  after  Glonoine  taken  for  headache,  Pulsat.
relieved.

Heat  in  face  with  palpitation.

I  Pale  face  and  blue  rings  under  eyes  with  palpitation.

■  Looks  pale  and  suffering. ^Albuminuria.

■  Face  swollen,  especially  about  eyes. ^Albuminuria.

'  Lower  Face. Tearing  pain  in  upper  and  lower  jaw  from  head
down.
Itching  on  upper  lip.

■  Lips  dry. ^Albuminuria.

^®  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache  in  decayed  molars,  extending

into  ears,  recurring  weekly.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Flat  unpleasant  taste,  sometimes  metallic,
sometimes  alkaline.
Sour  taste  with  sore  throat.
Taste  like  garlic  during  swallowing.

■  Tongue  dry. ^Albuminuria.
Burning  on  tip  of  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Saliva  runs  together  in  mouth  like  water,  with
a  tasteless  belching.

Sour  taste. See  13.
13  Throat. Choanse. See  7.

Tickling  in  back  of  throat. See  25.

After  belching  a  burning  in  oesophagus  as  from  pepper,  with
garlicky  taste  when  swallowing.

A  roughness  and  scratching  in  throat  as  if  he  had  eaten  nuts.

A  sensation  as  if  a  scab  was  in  upper  part  of  throat  and  oc-
casioned tickling  and  cough,  which  shakes  whole  chest  and
feels  as  if  bruised.


CALCAREA  ARSENICA.  124

Copious  hawking  of  tough  white  phlegm.
Dryness  in  pit  of  throat  and  roughness  of  voice.
Pressing  pain  in  throat,  in  clavicular  region,  with  sour  taste
and  water-brash.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. No  craving  for

food  for  body  or  mind.

No  appetite  during  evening  after  fever,  with  thirst  in  after-
noon. See  40.

■No  appetite,  with  pain  in  loins  and  groins. See  19.

Thirst  for  cold  water.

ONo  appetite,  can  enjoy  only  soup,  often  eating  which  causes
eructations,  often  also  vomiting,

■  Great  thirst,  but  when  she  drinks  too  much,  pain  in  belly  and

diarrhoea  supervenes. ^Albuminuria.
Desire  for  wine  or  other  spirituous  drinks.
^'  Eating  and  Drinking. iCan  bear  turnips  now  and  cornmeal,

even  when  costive ;  had  given  him  headache  since  20  years

and  pain  in  sternum ; after  sweet  potatoes,  diarrhoea  in

night.
After  drinking  wine,  pain  in  groins  or  in  spermatic  cords.
After  the  least  error  in  diet  headache  increases.
Torpid  condition  of  body  and  mind ;  the  food  he  eats  seems  to

lie  in  stomach  without  digesting.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Pressing  as
if  to  belch,  ending  with  a  sudden  beat  of  heart. See  20.

Belching,  followed  by  burning  in  pharynx ;  with  a  running
together  of  saliva.

Nausea  when  sitting  down.

Water-brash  with  sour  taste.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Acidity  of  stomach.

Burning  heat  in  stomach.

Anxiety  in  pit  of  stomach.

Dull  pressing  stitches  below  stomach,  with  cutting  across  ab-
domen.

Digging  in  pit  of  stomach.

Painful  stitches  in  pit  of  stomach,  started  by  some  movements
of  arm ;  the  pain  is  followed  by  a  cutting  in  r.  side.

Sensation  as  if  stomach  was  expanded.

■  Region  of  stomach  distended. ^Albuminuria.

I  Gastric  ulcer,  in  a  girl  with  scanty  menstruation.
May  be  indicated  in  pancreatic  diseases  with  albuminuria.
Cancer  of  pancreas,  when  there  is  burning  pain.
^^  Hypochondria. ■  Cirrhosis of  the  liver  in typhus with  al-
buminuria.
Sensation  of  fullness  below  short  ribs,  at  1  p.  m.  ;  feels  weary
and  drowsy.
^^  Abdomen. Sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  whould  appear  ;  soon  after
colicky  pain  around  navel  with  pressure  downwards.


125  CALCAREA  ARSENICA.

Colic  and  looseness  of  bowels.

Sensation  in  both  groins  and  loins  as  if  a  hernia  would  be

forced  out,  with  loss  of  appetite  after  drinking  some  wine ;

lasting  ten  weeks.
I  Bowels  very  tense. ^Albuminuria.
■  Swelling  of  inguinal  glands  with  tearing  pain  in  legs.
Very  painful  shooting,  cutting  jerk  across  abdomen  going  from

right  to  left.
Sensation  as  if  abdomen  was  expanded,  with  fever. See  40.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Faintness; cold hands followed by  a

stool  without  relief.
Urging  to  stool  with  palpitation  and  oppression  of  chest.
Burning  with  the  passage.
Stool  with  ascarides,  and  itching  at  anus  from  evening  until

midnight.
Diarrhoea  at  midnight  after  sweet  potatoes.
I  I  Looseness  and  colic ;  also  during  pregnancy.
Infantile  diarrhoea.
Stool  tardy,  but  not  hard.
I  1  Hard  and  difficult  stool  for  months.
^^  Urinary  Organs. I  Great  sensitiveness  to  pressure  in  region

of  kidneys. ^Albuminuria.

I  Must  pass  urine  every  hour; urine  containing  very  much

albumen. ^Albuminuria.
Burning  with  scanty  urine.

I I  Albuminuria.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Pain  in spermatic  cords  after  great
exertion  and  drinking  some  wine;  has  to  go  home;  hands
turn  cold ;  faintness  and  stool  without  relief.
2*  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Scanty  menses. ^Gastric  ulcer.

Bearing  down  and  prolapsus. See  24.
^*  Pregnancy. During  pregnancy  bearing  down,  prolapsus  va-
ginae and  other  complaints. See  20  and  31.
Albuminuria  during  pregnancy.

2'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Drawing  as

with  a  thread  from  larynx  backwards,  with  headache.
Dryness  in  pit  of  throat  and  roughness  of  voice,  followed  by  a
feeling  as  if  a  crust  were  in  upper  part  of  throat,  which
caused  a  tickling  and  a  cough,  shaking  the  whole  chest;
feeling  all  over  chest  as  if  beaten.
I  Loses  voice  and  afterwards  consciousness ;  before  an  epileptic
attack.
^®  Respiration. I  l  Kind  of  asthma,  awakens  soon  after  midnight
with  difficulty  in  breathing  as  from  fullness  in  chest ;  gets
uneasy,  turns  all  night  in  bed  from  side  to  side,  falls  asleep
and  gets  awake  again. Has  such  an  attack  every  night,
but  each  night  somewhat  later  until  it  reaches  the  morning,


CALCAREA  ARSENICA.  126

after  he  rises.  Breathing  not  free  all  day,  but  without  pal-
pitation.

■  Feeling  as  if  he  would  suffocate,  with  palpitation.

^^  Cough, Cough  shaking  the  whole  chest,  caused  by  a  tickling
from a crust  in upper  part  of  throat ; chest  feels as if
beaten.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. In  clavicular  region  pain  in  throat.
Dull  pressure  on  chest,  with  roughness  of  throat.
Fullness  in  chest. See  asthma,  26.
Chill  extends  from  back  towards  chest. See  40.
Burning  and  heat  in  che^t. See  29.

■  Precursory  symptoms,  with  violent  pains  on  1.  side. ^Epi-

lepsy.
^'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Immediately  oppression  and

increased  soreness  of  heart,  with  palpitation.
Rush  of  blood  towards  1.  chest.
Jerking-shooting  pain  about  4th  and  5th  ribs,  1.  side, near

breastbone. See  sneezing,  7.
The  prover  never  took  a  medicine  M'hich  acted  so  strongly  on  the

vascular  system ;  two  nights  in  succession,  throbbing  in  head

and  back  drove  him  out  of  bed.

■  Pains  in  region  of  heart  and  fearful  palpitation,  with  burning

and  heat  in  chest,  followed  by  shooting  in  back,  extending
to  feet  and  arms.

■  Attacks  of  pains  in  heart,  with  violent  attacks  of  palpitation

and  fear  of  suffocating  ;  the  face  is  pale  and  there  are  deep
rings  below  eyes.  ^After  suppression  of  intermittent  by
opium.

■  Paing  in  heart;  before  the  epileptic  attack. See  36.

■  Constriction  of  heart. ^Before  an  epileptic  attack.
Constriction  of  heart  like  from  a  rush  of  blood  to  left  chest,

with  palpitation  and  urging  to  stool.
;rHis  habitual  palpitation,  not  caused  by  an  organic  disease,  in-
creases very  much.

■  Beat  of  heart  very  strong. ^Albuminuria.

Frequent  attacks  of  palpitation,  with  heat  of  face,  lasting
several  days,  after  each,  even  slight  emotion  of  mind ;
before  such  an  attack  always  heat  of  hands  and  tremu-
lousness.

Violent  palpitation,  with  an  urging  to  belch  and  unable  to
get  the  wind  up,  as  if  something  in  heart  prevented  it ;
suddenly  follows  a  violent  beat,  like  an  explosion,  com-
mencing in  pit  of  stomach  and  extending  up  into  head,  after
which  he  feels  every  beat  of  pulse. Curb.  veg.  antidoted.

I  1  Palpitation  and  headache  increase  and  decrease  together.

--■Palpitation,  with  oppression  of  chest,  disturbing  sleep.  See
37. ^Before  epilepsy.


127  CALCAREA  ARSENICA.

I  Every fourth beat of  pulse omits "with great regularity.

See  36.
Pulse increased  in number  continually  from 80  to 100,  is

quicker  and  harder ;  he  feels  with  it  all  beats  of  heart  durr

ing  3  to  4  days  ;  somewhat  >  on  5th  day.
I  Pulse  120,  easily  compressed. ^Albuminuria.
^"  Outer  Chest. Dull  pressure  on  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  very  near  nape  of  neck.

I  i  Stiffness  of  neck  with  headache,  on  waking  in  morning.

Shuddering  over  back  ;  extending  into  feet  and  arms.

Throbbing  in  back,  drives  out  of  bed  at  night.

■  Violent  backache  between  shoulders  and  sacrum.

I  Could  not  straighten  back. ^Albuminuria.

Frequent  shooting  in  small  of  back,  after  diarrhoea  with  colic ;

in  6th  month  of  pregnancy  after  30  cent.
32  Upper  Limbs. Lame  pain  as  if  beaten,  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm,

morning  in  bed ; >  after  lying  on  it.
Lame  feeling  of  1.  arm,  with  a  painful  drawing  about  3  inches

above  wrist  to  the  upper  arm  and  into  shoulder ;  later  the

same  feeling  in  r.  arm,  but  less  marked.
Backache  extends  into  arm.

I  Pains  in  1.  hand  and  arm  before  the  epileptic  attack.
Cold  hands  and  fainting  after  pain  in  spermatic  cords.
Chill  from  back  to  arms.
Heat  of  hands  before  palpitation.
iBack  of  hands  oedematous. ^Albuminuria.
^^  Lower  Limbs. '  '  Pain  in  his  1.  knee  of  a  neuralgic  character.
Backache  extends  into  lower  limbs.
Tearing  pain  in  legs,  with  swelling  in  groin.
I  Lower  extremities  oedematous. ^Albuminuria.
Weariness  in  lower  limbs,  most  in  knees.
I  I  Weariness  amounting  to  lameness  of  lower  limbs.
Feet  heavy.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Stooping  causes  headache,  like

pulse  beating  against  a  hedge.
Sitting  down  :  nausea.
Lying  down: throbbing in  head  and  back; sleeplessness;

causes  headache  on  opposite  side  lain  on ; on  1.  arm  >

pain  as  if  beaten  ;  epileptic  attack  ceased.
Motion :  of  head  causes  vertigo ; giddy,  from  quick  motion  ;

of  arms  causes  stitch  in  pit  of  stomach  and  cutting  in  r.  side.
After  great  exertion  :  fainting ;  pain  in  spermatic  cord.
^"Nerves, Weary,  with  fullness  under  ribs.

Lame  sensation  in  whole  body,  with  headache.

Great  weariness  and  drowsiness.

Bodily  and  mental  relaxation.  •

Collapse,  in  heart  and  kidney  aflfections.

Very  weak,  with  headache.


CALCAREA  ARSENICA.  128

Restless  in  morning,  with  difficult  breathing.
Tremulousness  before  palpitation.

Lightness  of  whole  body,  as  if  swimming  or  flying  in  air.
Fainting,  after  great  exertions.

■  Epileptic  attacks  since  10  years,  begin  with  a  pain  in  1.  arm,

appear  only  at  daytime.

■  Epileptic  attacks,  commence  with  a  pain  in  heart  or  a  con-

striction ;  without  any  organic  disease  of  heart.
■Epileptic  attacks,  most  at  night,  appeared first after  total
abstinence,  in  a  drunkard,  commenced  with  strong  palpita-
tion, rush  of  blood  to  head,  loss  of  speech  and  consciousness;
every  fourth  beat  of  pulse  omits  regularly.

■  Epileptic  attacks  appeared  earlier,  more  violent  and  at  shorter

intervals,  and  then  ceased  on  lying  down.

■  Strength  pretty  well  gone. ^Albuminuria.

■  ■Epilepsies  proceeding  from  valvular  diseases  of  heart.

^^  Sleep. Drowsy  and  weary,  with  a  sensation  of  fullness  under
short  ribs.

Desire  to  sleep  in  middle  of  day,  with  heavy  legs.

Sleep  at  night  very  restless,  disturbed  by  headache  and  palpi-
tation ;  he  turns  from  one  side  to  another.

Rolls  about  all  night,  sleeps  and  wakes,  with  asthma. See  26.

After  3  a.m.,  sleepless,  restless  and  perspiring;  followed  next
morning  by  a  running  coryza  and  frequent  sneezing.

For  weeks  nearly  without  sleep  ;  he  could  not  bear  to  lie  down.

Every  night  an  attack  of  difiicult  breathing ;  each  night  later.

Dreams  of  people  he  had  not  seen  for  twenty  years  and  had
not  in  his  mind  the  day  before ;  often  repeated.

Throbbing  in  head  and  back  drives  him  out  of  bed  for  two
nights.
^^  Time. Evening  : delirium  ; headache  worse  after  supper ;  no
appetite  after  fever ;  until  midnight  itching  at  anus.

Morning:  headache;  headache  wakens  him  4  a.m.  ;  sneezing,
fluent  coryza ;  catarrh  in  head  and  choanse ;  3  a.m.,  wake-
fulness, restlessness,  sweat,  catarrh ;  pain  in  shoulder  and
arm  in  bed ;  restless,  difficult  breathing.

Noon :  headache  towards  evening ;  chill,  <  towards  evening
and  after  supper.

1  P.M. :  weary  and  drowsy  ;  fullness  below  short  ribs.

Afternoon :  thirst ;  fever  and  distended  abdomen.

Midnight:  diarrhoea;  asthma,  after,  later  each  night;  throb-
bing in  back.

All  day  :  breathing  not  free.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Winter: chill  after  getting
cold  out-doors.

•Out  of  doors:  headache.
*"  Fever, Chilly  crawl  over  back  towards  arms  and  chest ; it


129  CALCAREA  ARSENICA.

originates  always  inwardly  with  a  sensation  as  if  skin  and
adjoining  parts  were  hot.

Chill  with  headache  from  getting  cold. See  39.

I  She  feels  a  shuddering  or  shivering  running  over  the  back;
has  sometimes  gooseflesh,  especially  at  night,  and  is  sleep-
less. ^Albuminuria.

Fever  in  afternoon,  with  sensation  as  if  abdomen  were  puifed
up ;  much  thirst  for  cold  water  and  afterwards  loss  of  ap-
petite in  evening.  '

Heat  in  chest,  with  palpitation. See  29.

Night  sweat  after  3  a.  m. See  37.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  hour  :  must  pass  urine.

Commencing  slightly,  increasing  to  violent  splitting :  head-
ache.

Weekly  :  headache ;  toothache.
'^  Locality and  Direction. Left  side  is  generally  most  af-
fected.

From  r.  to  1. : stitches  in  forehead;  cutting  jerks  in  abdomen.

First  1.  then  r. :  burning  in  head ;  drawing  in  upper  arms.

From  front  to  back  :  headache.

Right :  pain  over  eye ;  burning  between  ear  and  forehead ;
boring  jerking  front  of  ear ;  stitches  in  forehead ;  arm  and
shoulder,  lame  pain.

Left:  above  ear,  headache;  stitches  in  side  of  head;  digging,
pressing  beating  through  half  of  head  ;  violent  pain  in  chest
before  epilepsy ;  shoulder  and  arm,  lame  pain ;  hand  and
knee  pain ;  neuralgia.
"  Sensations.  As  if  flying  or  swimming  in  air;  as  if  feet  did  not
touch  ground.

As  if  a  scab  Avas  in  upper  part  of  throat.

As  if  stomach  was  disturbed.

As  if  diarrhoea  would  appear.

As  if  a  hernia  would  be  forced  out  in  groins  and  loins.

As  if  one  was  drawing  on  a  thread  ;  in  larynx,  from  front
backward.

As  if  beaten,  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm.

As  if  skin  and  adjoining  parts  of  back  were  hot.

Boring  jerking:  over  r.  ear  and  in  occiput.

Boring  shooting :  in  occiput.

Jerking  shooting  :  over  1.  side  of  breast  bone.

Jerking:  from  head  to  jaw.

Tearing  :  in  upper  and  lower  jaw  ;  in  head  ;  in  legs.

Digging :  through  1.  half  of  head  ;  in  pit  of  stomach.

Cutting:  across  abdomen.

Stitches  :  in  1.  side  of  head ;  across  forehead  ;  in  r.  forehead ;
in  pit  of  stomach.

Shooting  :  across  abdomen  ;  in  small  of  back.

Shuddering :  in  back  ;  to  feet  and  arms.

VOL.  III.— 9.


CALCAREA  ARSENICA.  130

Splitting :  in  head.

Dull  pressing  stitches:  below  stomach.

Neuralgia :  in  1.  knee.

Drawing :  of  arms.

Soreness :  of  heart.

Burning:  between  ear  and  r.  forehead;  in  head,  first  1.  then  r. ;
on  tip  of  tongue  ;  in  oesophagus  ;  in  pharynx  ;  in  stomach  ;
in  cancer  of  pancreas ;  with  passage ;  with  scanty  urine ;
in  chest.

Bruised :  in  chest.

Pressing :  through  1.  half  of  head ;  in  throat ;  in  clavicular  re-
gion ;  on  chest.

Bearing  down  :  with  prolapsus  and  during  pregnancy.

Undefined  pain:  over  r.  eye;  in  r.  eye;  over  1.  eye;  in  groins
or  spermatic  cords ;  in  1.  chest  before  epilepsy ;  in  region  of
heart ;  in  heart ;  near  nape  of  neck  ;  1.  hand  and  arm.

Stupefying :  different  parts  of  head  ;  behind  ears.

Beating :  through  1.  half  of  head ;  in  head  ;  in  back.

Throbbing  :  in  head  and  back.

Pressing  heaviness :  on  top  of  head,  then  in  occiput.

Heaviness  :  of  head ;  feet.

Fullness  :  below  short  ribs  ;  in  chest.

Scratching :  in  throat.

Roughness :  in  throat.

Weariness  :  in  lower  limbs.

Constriction :  of  head.

Tickling  :  in  back  of  throat.

Benumbing :  headache  above,  and  behind  ears.

Lameness  :  in  whole  body.

Itching :  on  upper  lip.

Heat :  in  face  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  chest ;  in  hands.

Chilly  crawl :  over  back  towards  arms  and  chest.

Dryness  :  in  pit  of  throat.
**  Tissues. I  Emboli  in  albuminuria.

I  Obesity;  fatty  degeneration.

Heart  and  kidney  diseases.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Infantile  diarrhoea.

Scrofulous,  tuberculous  diseases  with  albuminuria.

■  Complaints  of  drunkards  after  abstaining.

■  Complaints  of  fat  women  when  approaching  the  climaxis.

In  lymphatic,  scrofulous  and  tuberculous  persons  after  Conium.
**  Relations.  Antidotes  :  Carh.  veg.  (palpitation),  Grlonoin  (head-
ache), Pulsat.  (headache,  tearing  pains  in  face).

Compatible : Conium,  Crlonoin,  Opium,  Pulsat.

Compare:  in  mental  symptoms,  palpitation,  LitJi.  carh.;  in
headache,  Glonoin,  Pulsat.,  Sepia,  Sulphur;  in  bad  effects
from  drinking,  Ai^sen. ;  in  desire  for  wine  and  alcoholic
drinks,  Nux  vom. ; in  gastric  ulcer, Arsen.,  Kali  jod.,


131  CALCAREA  ARSENICA  AND  FLUORICA.

Pliosplior.  ;  in  asthma,  Arsen.,  Tpec.  ;  in  heart,  beat  inter-
mittent, constriction,  palpitation,  spasms,  Arsen.,  Carb.
veg.,  Digit.,  Glonoin,  Lith.  carh.


CALCAREA  FLUORICA.

Calcium  fluoride.  The  hone  salt.


Proved  by  J.  B.  Bell  on  himself  and  others ;  N.  E.  M.  Q.,  1874,  p.  300.

The  provings  of  J.  B.  Bell  including  those  of  J.  U.  W.  and  J.  S.  H.  (made
and  led  by  a  master  observer)  are  confirmed  :

"] .  By  internal  evidence ;  the  symptoms  were  mostly  new  to  the  pro  vers
and  arose  without  any  apparent  cause.

2.  By  repetition  of  the  same  symptoms  in  the  same  provers.

3.  By  striking  likeness  of  some  of  those  symptoms  to  the  symptoms  of
Calcarea  ostrearum,  particularly  those  of  the  mind  and  larynx.

4.  By  equally  marked  similarity  of  symptoms  to  those  of  Fluoric  acid
(vivid  dreams  of  new  scenes,  death  of  relatives,  and  of  the  cadaver).

Thus  also  incidentally  and  inferentially  the  provings  of  Calc.  ostr.  and
Fluor,  ac.  are  confirmed;  and  all  by  the  15th  potency  of  an  inert  sub-
stance.—J.  B.  Bell."

The  same  could  be  shown  throughout  the  whole  of  our  Mat.  Med. — C.  Hg.

All  contained  in  Schuessler's  latest  edition  is  added.  The  cures  are
principally  from  Schuessler  and  his  followers.

^  Mind. All  day  an  entirely  unusual  tendency  to  look  on  the
dark  side  of  things ;  with  much  depression  of  spirits.
Depression  of  spirits  and  disposition  to  set  a  higher  value  on

money  than  natural  to  him  (avarice?).
Feeling  of  anxiety about  money  matters ;  thought  he  would
come  to  want  or  would  soon  be  "running  astern"  financially
(entirely  without  occasion).
Indecision.
^  Inner  Head. Dull headache  over  whole head, with faintish

nausea  at  stomach,  all  afternoon,  >>  in  evenings.
■*  Outer  Head. 'On  left  side  of  head  (corresponding  to  os  tempo-
rale)  a  flat  swelling  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  high  and  1^
in  diameter ; skin  of  unaltered  color ; no  pain  in  it ; by
gently  pressing,  a  fluid  could  be  felt;  pressing  hard,  a  rough
jagged  hard  mass,  growing  on  bone.
■  Enlargement  or  swelling  on  parietal  bones  of  new-born  child-
ren, with  an  apparent  osseous  wall.
1 1  Cephalgematoma.


CALCAREA  FLUORICA.  132

^  Sight  and  Eyes. iFlickering  and  sparks  before  eyes,  mostly
left.
After  writing  some  time  was  no  longer  able  to  see  distinctly,
because  of  a  blur  or  mist  before  eyes,  with  some  aching  in
eyeball ; >  when  closing  eyes  and  pressing  tightly  upon
them.
I  Spots  on  cornea  ;  opacities.
I  Conjunctivitis.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. I  Calcareous  deposits  on  the  tympani.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Blowing  of  much  mucus  from  nose  with  in-
effectual desire  to  sneeze.
lOzaena.

■  Copious, offensive, thick, greenish  -  yellow nasal catarrh.

^Osseous  growths.
*  Lower  Face. B  A  hard  swelling  on  jawbone.

■  Swelling  of  the  size  of  a  pigeon  egg  under  lower  jaw,  very

hard  and  jagged.
A  "cold  sore"  commences  at  left  corner  of  mouth;  after  two
days  it  is  quite  extensive,  but  no  cold  with  it ;  never  had  a
cold  sore  before.
I  Cold  sores  rather  small ;  hard  herpetic  sores  on  lips, from
colds,  not  diffused  like  Natr.  mur.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. I  Deficient  enamel  of  teeth.
^^  Throat. Desire  to  swallow  from  a  tickling  in  larynx  as  from  a
small  foreign  body,  but  without  relief.
Hawking  of  mucus. See  16.

Prickling,  burning,  suffocative  sensation  in  throat;  <  at  night
and  from  cold  drinks,  >>  from  warm  drinks.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking, Soon after  dinner, hacking  cough.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hawking
of  mucus  in  morning  caused  an  attack  of  hiccough,  which
was long and weakening, and recurred frequently dur-
ing day.
Faintish  nausea  at  stomach,  with  headache. See  3.
^^  Hypochondria. About  midnight,  or  soon  after,  was  awakened
by  a  sharp  lancinating  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium  under  11th
rib,  occurring  in  paroxysms ;  ■<  "v^hen  lying  on  painful  side ;
so  much  so  as  to  cause  a  feeling  of  bursting  outward;  >-  when
lying  on  painless  side  and  when  doubling  up ; accompanied
with  restlessness.
At  8  A.M.,  frequent  attacks  of  lancinating  pains  in  hepatic  re-
gion ; <  when  sitting,  >  when  walking  about.
^^  Abdomen. For  some  days  much  wind  in  lower  part  of  ab-
domen;  <  when  riding  and  towards  evening;  >  after  lying
down  at  night.
^^  Stool and Rectum. Slight diarrhoea, with painful urging
before  stool ;  first  part  of  stool  natural,  last  part  loose.
Constipation  with  dizziness  and  dull  headache.


133  CALCAREA  FLUORICA.

During  night  awakened  by  itching  at  anus  from  pin-worms,
not  felt  to  that  degree  since  childhood  and  rarely  felt  at  all.
I  Bleeding  piles. ^Osseous  tumors.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Profuse  emission  of  pale  watery  urine,  from

8  A.M.  to  3  P.M.

Rose  twice  during  night  to  pass  urine  profusely,  which  he  never
did  before.

Increased  secretion  of  pale  urine  ;  3rd  day.

Urine  scanty,  high  colored  and  turbid ;  5th  day.

Urine  emits  a  pungent  odor.

Urine  causes  smarting  along  urethra,  particularly  at  its  ex-
ternal orifice.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Ilnduration  of  testicles.
^*  Pregnancy. iHard  knots  in  breasts.
"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Some  tick-
ling in  larynx  and  occasional  hawking,  with  desire  to  clear
larynx.

Occasional  attacks  of  tickling-itching  in  larynx,  inducing  a
hacking  cough; <^  from  3  to  4  p.m.

Slight  feeling  of  oppression  with  tickling  in  larynx.

Soon  after  itching  at  anus,  itching-tickling  in  larynx,  forcing
a  spasmodic  cough,  which  was  relieved  after  a  few  hours  by
hawking  a  little  mucus  from  larynx.

Dryness  in  larynx.

The  tickling  extends  from  larynx  about  3  inches  down  trachea.

Towards  night,  dryness  in  larynx,  with  desire  to  clear  it,  and
some  hoarseness  but  no  cough.

Hoarseness  after  laughing  or  reading  aloud.
^^  Respiration. Oppression  of  breath,  as  from  taking  cold.

Difficulty  of  breathing;  as  if  the  epiglottis  was  nearly  closed.
2^  Cough. Hacking  cough. See  25.

Soon  after  dinner  a  hacking  cough  occurring  in  one  or  two
paroxysms  at  a  time,  caused  by  a  tickling  in  larynx,  as  from
a  small  foreign  body  ;  not  relieved  by  coughing.

Spasmodic  cough  from  itching  in  larynx. See  25.
^^  Outer  Chest. I  Osseous  growth  at  angle  of  eighth  r.  rib,  size

of  a  man's  fist. ^Exostosis.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Small  goitres  improved.

I  Indurated  cervical  glands  of  stony  hardness.

Tired  aching  of  small  of  back,  as  after  long  ride,  but  did  not
ride  far ;  can  sit  in  no  position  to  relieve  back.

During  afternoon  much  pain  and  tired  aching  in  lower  part  of
back  with  bodily  restlessness ;  must  walk  about.

I  Lumbago,  from  strains;  pains  <  after  rest,  >  after  moving
a  little,  and  from  warmth  (when  Rhus  tox.  did  no  good).
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  Osseous  tumor  on  spine  of  scapula.

I  Swelling  of  elbow-joint;  after  maltreatment  improved  by  Ferr.
phosj)h.  until  jerks  and  starting  led  to  an  examination  of


CALCAREA  FLUORICA.  134

the  joint  and  the  discovery  of  crepitation,  showing  a  want  of
synovial  fluid ;  one  grain  each  morning  and  evening  im-
proved it  so  much  that  the  opening  closed  and  some  motion
became  possible.

I  The  left  thumb  after  being  wounded  and  badly  treated  had
fistulous  ulcers  and  a  crepitation  of  the  joint  of  the  first
phalanx  ; after  Silic.  had  been  given.

■  Exostoses  on  fingers. See  47.
^^  Lower  Limbs. I Swelling  on lower limb of  a  young lady
(formerly  treated  for  periostitis  of  humerus) ;  a  rough,  hard,
bony  swelling,  covering  whole  width  of  shinbone,  several
inches  long,  had  lasted  6  weeks ;  3rd  cured  in  3  weeks.

I  Spavin  of  horses.

I  Patellae  surrounded  by  supernumerary  bones, irregular  in

shape,  varying  from  size  of  millet-seeds to  marbles ;  also

abounding  at  various  depths  in  tendons  under  knees  and

also  in  tarsal  and  carpal  articulations. ^Osseous  growths.

^'  Rest. Position. Motion. After  rest :  lumbago  worse.

Sitting : <  pain  in  hepatic  region.

Can  sit  in  no  position  to  >  back.

Lying :  on  painful  side  <  pain  in  hepatic  region  ;  on  painless
side  >  pain  in  hepatic  region ; >  wind  in  abdomen.

Doubling  up  : >  pain  in  hepatic  region.

Motion  :  pain  in  back  better.

Writing :  eyes  blurred  and  misty,  after.

Walking  about : >  pain  in  hepatic  region  and  back.

Riding  :  <  wind  in  lower  abdomen.
2^  Nerves. Restlessness,  with  pain  in  liver ;  tired  backache.

Feeling  of  fatigue  all  day.
^^  Sleep. Sleep  unrefreshing  on  account  of  indistinct  dreams  of
unsuccessful  efforts  to  do  various  things,  leaving  an  unpleas-
ant impression  on  waking.

Dreams  in  siesta,  vivid  and  distinct,  of  new  scenes,  places,
books,  etc.

Vivid  and  distinct  dreams  of  wholly  new  scenes  and  places,
not  unpleasant,  but  with  a  sense  of  impending  danger.

Vivid  and  distinct  dreams,  also  natural  and  connected ;  of  the
death  of  a  relative,  causing  much  grief  and  weeping.

I  I  Vivid  dreams  and  dreams  with  weeping  about  such  as  had
died  seven  years  before.

Dreamed  of  cutting  up  a  woman  in  pieces  as  an  animal  for
salting ;  the  details  very  distinct  and  the  dream  seemed  to
continue  a  long  time.

Last  night  jumped  from  bed  in  a  dream  and  tried  to  get  out  at
window,  which  woke  him.

During  night  awakened  by  itching  in  anus  from  pin-worms.
^^  Time. All  day  :  depressed  spirits.

3  to  4  P.M. :  larynx  tickling-itching ;  cough.


135  CALCAREA  FLUORICA.

Afternoon:  headache  "with  nausea 4  backache.

Towards  night :  larynx,  dryness  and  hoarseness.

Evening :  dull  headache  with  faintish  nausea,  better.

At  night:  throat  feels  <;  itching  at  anus;  rises  to  pass  urine;

jumps  from  bed.
Midnight:  sharp  pain,  r.  hypochondrium;  itching  of  anus.
8  A.M. :  pains  in  hepatic  region  ;  profuse  emission  of  urine.
8  A.M.  to  3  P.M. :  profuse  emission  of  urine.
39 Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth:  lumbago  >  from;
warm  drink,  >  throat.
Cold  drinks  :  throat  <  from.

I  Worse  in  damp  weather,  but  >  by  fomentation. ^Osseous
growth.
*"  Feyer. 1  Attacks  of  fever,  lasting  a  week  or  more,  with  thirst ;

dry,  brown  tongue  ;  sleepless  unrest. ^Osseous  growths.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Of  tickling-itching  in larynx  ; hic-
cough <  from  3  to  4  p.m.,  and  all  day.
Of  fever :  lasting  a  week  or  more,  with  thirst,  brown  tongue,

sleepless  and  weak.
Of  hiccough  :  from  hawking  mucus.
Of  lancinating  pains  in  hepatic  region.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right : sharp pain in hypochon-
drium ;  osseous  growth  at  angle  of  eighth  rib.
Left :  swelling  on  side  of  head ;  cold  sore  on  corner  of  mouth  ; .
thumb,  fistulous  ulcers.
^^  Sensations, i Piercing,  darting,  grinding  pains  in  all  joints ;
crampy  knotting  of  leg-muscles. ^Osseous  growth.
Lancinating  :  in  hepatic  region.
Burning :  in  throat.
Prickling :  in  throat.
Smarting :  along  urethra.
Dull  pain  :  in  head.
Tired  aching  :  small  of  back.
Bursting  outward  :  in  hepatic  region.
Suffocative :  in  throat.
Oppression :  of  breath.
Tickling  :  in  larynx ;  in  trachea.
Itching :  at  anus  ;  in  larynx.
Dryness :  in  larynx.
**  Tissues. Corresponds  to  solidified  infiltrations.

■  Indurated  enlargements  in  fascia  and  capsular  ligaments  of

joints.

■  Exudation  from  surface  of  bones  which  quickly  harden  and
■>  assume  a  nodular  or  jagged  form.

I  Nodes  and  hard  bone  swellings.

■  Suppuration  of  bones;  similar  to  Silic.  and  Calc.  phosph.

■  Osseous  growths  in  tarsal  and  carpal  articulations.
Supernumerary  bones  (rice  bodies  Y).


CALCAREA  FLUORICA.  136

I  Indurated  glands,  of  stony  hardness.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Better  from  slight
pressure  :  eyes.

I  Following  an  injury. ^Osseous  growth.

I  Relieved  by  rubbing. ^Osseous  growth.
^®  Skin. I  Occasional  erysipelas. ^Osseous  growths.
^''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. J-  B.  B.,  set.  29,  sanguine
mental bilious temperament, dark brown fine hair and
beard,  blue  eyes ;  proved  the  15th  and  30th.

J.  U.  W.,  {fit.  23,  sanguine  temperament,  light  hair,  bald  in
front,  blue  eyes,  reddish  beard ;  proved  15th.

J.  S.  H.,  set.  22,  bilious  sanguine  temperament,  black  rather
dark  beard,  dark  hazel  eyes  ;  proved  15th. .

I A  man,  set.  30,  pale  and  lean. ^Osseous  tumor.

I  Strong  healthy  girl,  set.  3.  ^Cephalsematoma.  After  Calc.
Jluor.^  in  a  few  weeks  it  had  entirely  disappeared.

I A  negro,  set.  28,  after  an  injury  received  12  years  ago,  a
bunch  on  angle  of  8th  right  rib,  increasing  rapidly,  within
8  months  as  large  as  a  man's  fist.  Calc.  Jluor.^^  every  12
hours  for  three  days,  then  omitting  3  days ;  in  two  weeks
diminished  two-thirds ;  3  months  afterwards  an  incon-
siderable roughness  only  left. ^Exostosis.

I A  man,  set.  50,  blonde,  lymphatic;  for  ten  years  rheumatic
arthritis;  articular  exostoses  on  fingers,  feet  and  knees  ;  after
partial  relief  by  Bryon.  and  Gale,  ostr.,  Calc.  fiuor.^^,  the
supernumerary  bones  disappeared.  ^Osseous  growths.
^*  Relations.  Compatibles  :  Calc.  phosph  ;  Natr.  mur.,  which
has  similar  cold  sores  ;  Silica,  in  "affection  of  thumb,  32.

Useful :  after  failure  of  Rhus  tox.  in  lumbago ;  after  Ferr.
phosph.  in  synovitis ;  after  Silica  in  suppuration ;  after
Bryon.  and  Calc.  ostr.  in  arthritis.
Compare :  in  ozsena,  Calc.  phosph.;  in  cold  sores,  Natr.  mur.;
in  swelling  on  skulls  of  infants,  Silica;  in  suppuration  of
bones,  Calc.  phosph. .,  Silica;  in  spavin  of  horses,  Phosph.
ac,  Silica,


13T  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

Trituration  of  the  middle  layer  of  oyster- shells.

Hahnemann  proved  first  the  Calc.  aceiica,  and  his  provings  were  printed  in
his  Materia  Medica ;  but  after  he  had  commenced  to  triturate  insohible
substances  with  milli-sugar,  he  preferred  to  use  in  the  preparation  of
Calcarea  the  whitest  pieces  from  the  middle  of  large  broken  oyster-
shells.  This  had  been  a  favorite  medicine  with  him  for  sick  children,  in
former  times,  when  the  chemists  considered  it  a  pure  carbonate  of  lime.

When  his  grand  master-proving  was  published,  he  added  the 'Symptoms
of  the  acetate,  because  very  similar,  but  distinguished  them  by  a  line .

Accurate  analysis  has  shown  that  some  portion  of  the  phosphate  is  con-
tained even  in  the  whitest  pieces  taken  from  the  oyster-shells;  and  the
long-lasting  famous  lawsuit  of  the  East-India  Company  about  the  James
powders  has  shown  that  there  is  an  essential  difference  in  the  effect  on
sick  persons  between  chemical  preparations  apparently  alike,  if  the  same
substance  has  been  taken  from  the  mineral  or  animal  kingdom.  Hence
it  has  been  preferred  to  name  it  as  above.

^  Mind. I  Enfeebled  memory. ^Epilepsy.
iForgetfulness  ;  vanishing  of  thoughts.

■  Misplaces  words,  with  tendency  to  express  himself  wrongly.

I  When  roused  opens  eyes  with  absence  of  mind  and  alarm,
murmuring,  frightened. ^Intermittent.

Buried  in  deep  thought ;  anxiety  about  present  and  future.

I  Rush  of  thoughts  prevents  sleep.

Cannot  get  rid  of  one  and  the  same  thought  at  night,  even  dur-
ing light  slumbers. ^Typhoid.

I  Mind  full  of  concern  about  imaginary  things  that  might  hap-
pen to  her. ^Chlorosis.

I  Mind  is  confused,  so  that  what  is  read  or  heard  is  not  under-
stood or  apprehended.

I  Intellect  dull;  unable  to  progress  in  her  studies. ^Epilepsy.

I I  Thinking  is  difficult.
Absentminded,  after  nausea  in  afternoon.

I  Stupid,  peevish,  in  the  intervals. ^Epilepsy.

I  Appears  to  be  lapsing  into  complete  imbecility. ^Epilepsy.

■  Imagines  some  one  is  walking  beside  her  ; that  something

hanging  over  back  of  chair  is  a  person  sitting  there,  etc.

■  Feels  as  if  she  would  lose  her  senses. ^Megrim.

■  ■Visions of faces and persons, when eyes are closed.

^Typhus.

■  Mental  aberration  with  horrid  visions  before  eyes  and  cardiac


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  138

anxiety  ; he  despairs  of  his  salvation  and  wants  to  stab

himself.
iDelirium. ^Second  week  of  typhus.
I  Sees and  plays with cats and  other  animals in delirium.

^Nervous  fever.
iMania-a-potu,  with  delirious  talk  about  fire,  rats,  mice,  and

murder.
I  Mania;  sees  many  curs  crowding  around  him;  fights  them

off". ^From  chilling  feet  and  legs  in  potter's  clay.
I  Desire  to  go  home. ^Insanity.
Desire  for  company.
Steady  inclination  to  work,  with  mental  anxiety.

■  Inclination  to  weep,  with  mental  depression  ; weeps  when

admonished.
I  Feels  as  if  she  would  like  to  run  up  and  down,  and  scream.
I  She  thinks  and  talks  of  nothing  but  murder,  fire,  rats,  etc.

■  Violent  screaming  spell  every  day  at  5  p.m.,  so  hard  as  to

cause  a  scrotal  hernia ;  infant,  set.  5  weeks.
I  Changeable  mood; easily  laughing  or  crying. ^Neurosis

cordis.
Disinclined  to  talk,  and  very  irritable.

■  Taciturn,  with  a  dry  tongue.

■  Disinclination  for  every  kind  of  work. ^Coryza. ^Addi-

son's disease.

■  Does  not  care  to  get  well,  or  to  do  anything.

■  Weeping  mood. ^Muscular  atrophy.
Weeping  and  anxious.

■  Whimpering. ^Catarrh.

■  Low  spirited,  and melancholy,  with weeping and despair

of  life.

■  Low  spirited  and  depressed. ^Diarrhoea. ^Muscular  atrophy.

^Phthisis  pulmonalis. ^Chorea.

■  Despondent  and  melancholy,  in  highest  degree,  with  a  kind

of  anguish.

■  Children  sad  and  unhappy.

■  Weary  of  life. ^Catarrh.
Hopelessness  ;  despair.

■  Hypochondriacal  mood. ^Coryza.

■  Restless  anxiety.

Anxious  and  irritable  by  spells.
Anxiety  :  with  nausea  ;  during  sweat.

■  Anxious  about  getting  well,  during  the  intervals. ^Epilepsy.

■  Apprehension  about  present  and  future.

■  Apprehensive  mood; as  if  some  misfortune  were  about  to

happen  ;  about  his  health  ;  that  he  might  have  an  organic
disease  of  the  heart.

■  Fear,  that  something  sad  or  terrible  will  happen.


139  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM,

1 1  Fears  she  will  lose  her  reason,  or  that  people  will  observe  her

confusion  of  mind.
I  Fear: of  death  ; of  consumption  ; of  misfortune ;  of  being

alone.
I  Child  is  afraid  of  everything  it  sees. ^Inflammation  of  brain.

■  Concern  about  spiritual  welfare.

■  Feels  aAve-stricken  at  night. ^Diarrhoea.

■  ■Anxiety,  shuddering  and  dread  as  soon  as  evening  comes

on,  with fear of  death ; torments  those  around  him  day
and  night.
Great  anxiety  :  with  spasm  in  rectum  ; with  dull  shocks  from
posterior  wall  of  chest  up  to  between  shoulders.

■  Great  anxiety  and  oppression. ^Scarlatina.

■  ■Great  anxiety,  restlessness  and  palpitation.

■  Anguish,  with  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Anxiety. ^Second  week  of  typhus.

■  Fear  excited  by  reports  of  cruelties.

■  Great  anxiety,  in  evening,  for  which  no  reason  could  be  as-

signed. ^Uterine  tumor.
Easily  startled.

■  ■  Despairing ; hopeless  of  ever  getting  well ; with  fear  of

death,  tormenting  all  around  day  and  night.

■  Indifference; does not care to get well; reticence and

inertness.

■  Apathy  and  depression  of  mind. ^Addison's  disease.

■  Quiet  mild  disposition. ^Strabismus.

■  Active,  full  of  fun. ^Boy  with  chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Excessive  mischievousness,  with  obstinacy.

■  Voluptuous,  lascivious  fancies.
Ill-humored^  with  white  blood-streaked  stool.
Dissatisfied  and  easily  angered.

Aversion  to  everything  as  soon  as  he  sits  idle.

■  Obstinacy  and  irritability.

■  ■Children  self-willed,  inclined  to  grow  fat.

■  Hateful,  vindictive.

■  Irritable  without  cause ;  cries  about  trifles;  borrows  trouble,

■  Irritable  mood. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Child  cross,  fretful  and  restless. ^Scarlatina.

■  Children  very  fretful  and  stubborn. ^Rachitis.
Irritability,  with  pressing  frontal  headache.

I  I  Peevish  without  cause.

■  Peevishness,  much  nervous  excitement  and  irritability.

■  Very  peevish  and  easily  vexed. ^Chorea.

■  Easily  offended;  takes  everything  amiss.

■  Violence  and  anger.

■  Restless  mood,  with  gloominess  and  anxiety.

■  Child  restless  and  cross  during  day. ^Keratitis.

■  Easily  frightened;  tendency  to  start.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  140

»

Mental  occupation  >  headache;  I  better  from  engaging  his
attention. ^Chorea.

Nervousness  <  by  mental  exertion  and  >  from  closing  eyes.

1 1  After  exerting  mind :  hypersemia  of  head  ;  chorea ;  tremb-
ling spells.

8  Aggravation  from  mental  emotions. ^Neuralgia  cordis.

■  Headaches  of  school-children.

The  slight  eftbrt  of  talking  gave  him  the  sensation  as  if  the

brain  would  be  paralyzed,  mostly  in  occiput.
From  thinking  :  drawing  pain  in  r.  side  of  forehead.

■  Affections  from  egotism.

■  ■Excitement  brings  on  dysmenorrhoea;  least  excitement  en-

dangers return  of  catamenia,  or  causes  metrorrhagia.

■  After  great  anxiety  and  worriment  of  mind. ^At  the  onset

of  typhoid.

■  Mental  anxiety,  producing  palpitation,  sweat, nausea, and

tremor.

■  Excited  by  chagrin  or  fear.  ^Epilepsy.
Vexation  causes  vertigo.

■  Fright  followed  by  trembling  motions  of  upper  and  lower

limbs  in  repeated  paroxysms. ^Chorea.
^  Sensorium. Want  of  memory  and  confusion  in  head,  with  be-
numbing pressing  pain  in  forehead.
Sensation  as  if  he  would  drop  unconscious.

■  Feels  as  if  she  would  fall  when  walking.
Surging  humming  in  head,  with  dullness.
Feeling  of  emptiness  in  head.

Dullness  of  head  :  as  if  too  full ;  with  buzzing  in  head  ;  with
sensation  of  a  board  before  head ;  with  stinging  in  neck  ;
from  pressure  in  lower  part  of  abdomen;  with  vertigo,  back-
ache and  chilliness.

■  Constant  fulness  in  head.

■  Dullness  of  head,  particularly  in  morning. ^Chronic  coryza.

■  Rush  of  blood  to  head:  with  heat,  redness  and  puffiness  of

face ; <C  from  alcoholic  drink ; <^  in  morning  when  awak-
ing;  •<  after  mental  exertion.

■  Heaviness  in  forehead ; <  when  reading  or  writing.

■  Heaviness  and  stupefaction,  with  nervous  erethism,  remaining

for  a  few  days. ^Megrim.

■  Dizziness  and  trembling  in  morning  until  he  has  his  breakfast.

■  Dizzy:  after  scratching  head  ;  after  attack  of  epilepsy.

■  Dizziness  on  going  up  stairs. ^Tuberculosis. ^Haemorrhoids.
Reeling  vertigo,  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  Giddiness  when  walking  or  hurried,  or  after  arriving  at  top

of  stairs  ;  inclined  to  fall  to  the  left. ^Sore  throat.

■  Vertigo:  in  morning,  in  bed;  when  rising  or  shortly  after;

<  stooping,  with  darkness  before  eyes  ;  after  walking ;  when
standing and looking about; as if  things  were  turning


141  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

with  her ;  <  looking  upwards ;  on  going  up  stairs,  espe-
cially when  running;  when  turning  head  quickly;  in  morn-
ing, with  nausea  and  vomiting.

lYertigo  when  climbing  into  high  places.

1 1  Vertigo on  going  up stairs, or  up a hill. ^Palpitation.

I  lYertigo  on  suddenly  raising  or  turning  head,  even  when
at  rest.

lYertigo  on  walking  in  open  air,  as  if  he  would  tumble,  espe-
cially on  suddenly  turning  head.

lYertigo,  stupefaction  and  a  sensation  of  falling.  ^Neurosis
cordis.

lYertigo,  with  inclination  to  fall  backwards  or  sideways.

Yertigo :  with  headache  ;  nausea  and  vomiting,  incarcerated
flatulence.*

lYertigo,  accompanied  by  nausea  and  a  feeling  as  though  one
would  fall  unconscious.

Yertigo,  with  unsteadiness  in  thighs  when  walking  rapidly.

I  Yertigo. ^Addison's disease. ^During intervals of epi-
leptic spasms.
^  Inner  Head. I Pressure  in  forehead,  with  nausea  and  belching.

Headache  centres  with  such  violence  on  top  of  head,  that  she
thinks  brain  is  dissolving  and  she  will  go  crazy. ^Megrim.

I  Severe,  particularly  frontal,  headache; <  in forenoon  and

from  mental  exertion ;  pallor ;  indigestion ;  lassitude,  prin-
cipally in  morning. ^Chronic  headache  after  suppression
of  itch.
■  Stupefying  pressing  ache  in  forehead,  during  rest  arid  mo-
tion. ^Chronic  coryza.

I I  Stupefying  pressive  pain  in  forehead,  with  confusion  of
senses  and  dullness  of  whole  head,  while  reading ;  he  was
obliged  to  stop  and  did  not  know  where  he  was.

Heavy  pressing  frontal  headache,  with  belching  and  nausea ;
must  close  eyes;  <C  from  mental  exertion,  stooping  and
walking  in  open  air ;  >  from  rising  up,  in  warmth  and
lying  on  back.

iPressing  as  if  forehead  would  burst.  ^Catarrh  in  sinus
frontalis.

iPressive  drawing  headache  through  the  day,  concentrates
about  r.  eye  in  evening.

I  Heaviness  in  forehead  ; <  by  reading  and  writing.

Boring  in  forehead  and  1.  temple,  in  or  out  morning  and  even-
ing; <  in  open  air,  from  pressure  and  stooping;  >  from
touch.

Cutting  pain  in  forehead.

I  Painful  pressure  in  forehead,  extending  down  into  nose.
IPressive  pain  in  forepart  of  head  above  root  of  nose,  in  morn-
ing. ^Coryza.

I I  Tearing  headache  above  eyes  down  to  nose,  with  nausea.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  142

Spasmodic  pain,  drawing  from  forehead  to  vertex,  after  tak-
ing cold.

In  temples :  pressure  outward  and  inward ;  drawing  pain ;
throbbing  ;  burning  ;  violent  jerks.

■  Shooting  from  1.  temple  to  right; <  from  stooping; >  from

pressure.

Shooting  pains  in  both  sides  of  head,  with  nausea.

Stitches  in  temples,  with  heat  in  ears.

I  Stitching  headache  over  1.  temple.

iHemicrania  1.  side;  stitches  in  temple  and  downward  into
teeth  ;  <  on  awaking,  from  motion,  noise  and  talking ;
>  in  evening. ^Chlorosis. .

Pricking  in  1.  side  of  head,  with  vertigo.

Tensive  headache,  mostly  in  r.  side  of  head  and  temple.

I  Headache  from  r.  temple  to  vertex  ;  drawing  in  root  of  nose
and  closing  eyes.

I  Frequent  one-sided  headache,  always  with  much  empty  eruc-
tation or  inclination  to  vomit.

■  Headache. ^Addison's  disease.

■  Sick  headache  on  1.  side,  with  scanty  menses ;  on  r.  side  with

profuse  menses.

■  Throbbing  headache  in  middle  of  brain  every  morning,  con-

tinuing all  day.

■  Throbbing  headache,  through  forehead  and  base  of  brain.

■  Hammering  in  head.

■  Headache;  pain  being  seated  in  crown  of  head.  ^Recon-
'valescence  from  yellow  fever.

■  Violent  pressive  pain  in  vertex.

■  Weight  on  top  of  head.

■  Pressure  in  vertex  and  forehead,  with  irresistable  sleepiness

after  dinner,  and  cold  feet.

■  Violent  throbbing  on  vertex;  has  to  lie  perfectly  quiet.

■  A  surging  humming  in  top  of  head.

■  He  is  roused  from  sleep  every  morning  at  5  o'clock  by  a

violent  aching  pain  in  vertex,  which  goes  off  after  one  hour.

■  Burning  sensation  on  vertex.

■  Cutting  in  vertex  and  occiput,  with  distended  veins  on  tem-

ples ;  sore  scalp.
Cutting  thrusts  from  within  out,  with  throbbing  in  vertex.

■  Headache  extending  from  back  to  crown  of  head. ^Reconval-

escence  from  yellow  fever.

■  ■Headache  begins  in  occiput  and  spreads  to  top  of  head,  so

severe  that  she  t&inks  head  will  burst,  and  that  she  will  go

crazy. ^Megrim.
I  I  Pulsation  in  occiput.
Dull  tearing  pain  through  brain.

■  Brain  as  if  squeezed  and  relaxed  alternately.


143  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

0  Pressing  pain  from  within  outward,  occupying  only  a  part  of

head  at  a  time.

■  Stupefying  headache:  from  3  a.m.  till  afternoon; <  on  ris-

ing, stooping,  or  exerting  mind ; >  closing  eyes.

■  Fulness  and  heaviness  in  head. ^Megrim. ^Congestion.

^Hemorrhoids.
Tightness  of  r.  side  of  temple.

■  Throbbing  and  hammering  in head,  in  morning; <  from

stooping,  mental  exertion,  spirituous  liquors,  and  after  walk-
ing in  open  air  ; >  from  closing  eyes  and  lying  down.
Concussive  throbs  in  head,  abdomen  and  chest.

■  iConcussive,  stitching,  pulsating  pains  in  head,  as  if  it  would

split,  with  cough. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

1  I  Stitches  in  head.

Empty  feeling  in  head,  with  shooting  pains.

■  Pressing  pain,  with  sensation  of  fulness,  heaviness  and  pulsa-

tion, in  head. ^Hereditary  headache.

■  Pains  half  sided,  tearing,  shooting,  throbbing. ^Rheumatic

headache  with  children.
Wandering  pains  in  head.

■  Strange  feeling  of  icy-coldness  in  some  parts  of  head  or  in

whole  head. ^Megrim.

■  ■Internal  and  external  sensation  of  coldness  of  various  parts

of  head,  as  if  a  piece  of  ice  were  lying  against  it,  with  pale
puffed  face.

■  Head  feels  hot,  dull  and  heavy. ^Coryza.

■  Great  heat  in  head;  perceptible  at  times  to  the  hand  held

2  or  8  inches  from  it. ^Tinea.

■  Brain  feels  hot  and  burning. ^Typhoid.

■  Severe  heat  in  head  and  great  orgasm  of  blood,

■  ■Congestion  to  head: with  heat  and  stupefying  headache;

with  red-puffed  face  ;  with  toothache ;  during  night ;  <  in
morning  when  awaking,  and  from  spirituous  drinks;  in
monorrhagia  ; in  tuberculosis.

■  Nervous  sensation  as  if  blood  were  rushing  to  head.

■  Headache. ^VV^orms.

■  One-sided  headache,  with  belching. ^Reconvalescence  from

yellow  fever.

Headache  accompanied  by :  weak  memory ;  vertigo  ;  noises
in  head  ;  fluent  coryza  or  stoppage  of  nose;  nausea  ;  vomit-
ing ;  constipation ;  worms  ;  menstrual  irregularity  ;  op-
pression of  breathing ;  cold  feet;  chorea;  epilepsy;  glandu-
lar swellings,  etc.

Headache  aggravated  by  :  thinking  about  it ;  mental  ex-
ertion ;  sexual  debauches ;  spirituous  liquors ;  talking ;
looking  up  ;  reading  or  writing  ;  hot  sun  ;  stooping  ;  going
up  stairs  ;  walking  in  open  air ;  in  a  draft ;  by  taking  cold;
lifting  ;  getting  wet ;  and  during  dentition.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  144

Headache  ameliorated  by  :  closing  eyes  ;  vomiting  mucus  and
bile  ;  lying  down  ;  tight  bandaging  ;  pressure  ;  and  cold
applications.

I  Headache  after  attack. ^Epilepsy.

■  Stupefying  headache,  from  3  A.M.  until  afternoon.

I  Headache  from  waking  early  in  morning  ;  cannot  sleep  after
3  A.M. ^lieconvalescence  from  yellow  fever.

■  Violent  headache  every  morning. ^Albuminuria.
I  Chronic  headache  depending  upon  brain-fag.

■  Inflammation of  brain; particularly during dentition; in

scrofulous  subjects.

■  ■  Chronic  hydrocephalus.

*  Outer  Head. '  l  Pressive  drawing  in  r.  temporal  muscle.

■  Fine  tearing  or  jerking  stitches  in  vertex,  towards  evening ;

<C  from  washing  and  during  wet  weather  ; ^  in  dry  air ;
also  from  scratching  and  rubbing.
I  ■  Burning  in  vertex  ;  also  after  grief. Compare  Pliosjjli.

■  Stinging  on  vertex,  in  evening;  <C  in  wet,  >  in  dry  weather,

and  from  rubbing.

■  Sore  pain  in  back  part  of  head; <  from  touch  and  in  wet

weather  ; >  from  scratching  and  rubbing.

■  Crepitation  in  back  part  of  head,  followed  by  warmth  rising

through  nape  of  neck  into  head  ;  <  early  on  rising  and  at
noon  after  eating  ; >  on  lying  down.

■  Tearing  in  bones  of  head.

■  Left-sided  headache.

■  Painful  sensitiveness  of  scalp,  especially  on  moving  muscles

of  forehead  ;  <<  towards  evening  and  in  open  air,  especially
damp  air  and  draft,  and  on  getting  warm  in  bed.

■  Clinching- tearing  in scalp and  muscles of  head; <  from

washing,  and  in  open,  especially  damp,  air  ;  >  from  press-
ure, rubbing,  scratching,  lying  down,  and  in  dry  weather.

■  Biting,  burning  and  crawling  itching  on  scalp,  spreading  from

back  part  of  head ;  <  from  scratching,  which  causes  lumps
and  a  bloody  eruption,  which  forms  into  scales ;  >>  in  even-
ing on  getting  warm  in  bed.

■  Crawling  on  scalp  and  lower  part  efface.

■  Itching  on  scalp  ; biting, burning, crawling spreads from

occiput,  followed  by  scurfs ; <  on  getting  warm  in  bed.

■  Itching  burning  on  head  and  neck.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  upon,  top  of  head. ^Rheumatism.

■  Cold  feeling  on  top  of  head. ^Uterine  cancer.

■  ■Internal  and  external  sensation  of  coldness  of  one  (r.)  side

of  head,  as  if  a  piece  of  ice  were  lying  there  ;  <  weather
changing ;  in  early  morning ;  from  motion  in  open  air ;
>  on  lying  down.

■  Head  becomes  cold  very  easily,  which  causes  headache,  as  if


145  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

a  board  lay  upon  head,  with  pressive  pain  in  it,  and  chilli-
ness of  whole  body.
I  Heat  of  head.

I  Heat  on  top  of  head  after  grief.

I I  Sweating  of  head,  very  profuse,  rolling  down  face  in  large,
bead-like  drops  ;  the  pillow  is  wet  for  some  distance  around
child's  head. ^Tinea. ^Chalk-like  stools.

■  Face  and  head  bathed  in  sweat  and running off  in  little

streams. ^Palpitation.
iSweat  on  back  of  head  and  neck,  in  evening.

■  Profuse  sweat  on  head. ^Cholera  infantum. (9Colic. ^Me-

tritis. ^Uterine  displacement.  ^Eclampsia.  ^Epilepsy,
after  attacks.

■  Sweat  all  over,  especially  on  head  and  face,  with cold  ex-

tremities even  in  hot  weather;  must  have  his  feet  covered
with  a  feather-bed. ^Heart  disease.

■  Copious  exhausting  sweat,  particularly  at  back  part  of  head

and  nape  of  neck,  lower  limbs  remaining  cold  ;  <C  in  even-
ing and  on  least  motion,  especially  in  cold  air ;  >■  on  sitting
quietly  and  in  warm  room.

Sweat,  particularly  on  head,  in  morning  when  walking  in
open  air.

ilNocturnal  sweats  of  head.  ^Softening  of  brain.  ^Denti-
tion. ^Impetigo.  ^Bronchitis.  ^Phthisis -pulmonalis.
^Second  stage  of  coxalgia.  ^Liver  complaint,  with  dropsy.
^Lymphatic  enlargements.

■  Disagreeable  odor  about  head  from  sweating. /^Softening  of

brain.

■  Cold  sweat  of  head. ^Keratitis.

■  ■Head  too  large,  fontanelles not  closing. ^Hydrocephalus.

^Rhachitis. ^Marasmus. ^Eclampsia. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  ■Open fontanelles, with large  head  and  much  sweating  of

same;  children  leuco-phlegmatic,  very  fat  and  of  leaden
weight;  abdomen  hard  and  distended,  with  sour  smelling
diarrhoea.

■  Hydrocephalic  enlargement  of  head;  the  boy  required  a  hat

several  sizes  smaller  every  three  or  four  months  while  under
treatment  until  normal.

■  Exostoses  on  skull.

■  Swellings  in  bones  of  skull,  inflamed  with  sticking  pain  and

hammering; ending  in  suppuration; <  from damp, cold
air  ;  >  on  touching  and  rubbing.
Idiopathic  fungus  of  dura  mater,  or  cranium.

■  Convulsive  movements  of  head.

■  On  turning  head: vertigo; and  on  stooping,  she feels as

though  she  does  not  know  where  she  is  ;  heaviness  in  it  <  ;
painful  concussion  in  brain;  pain  in  neck,  as  though  a  swell-

voL.  in.— 10.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  146

ing  Avere  about  to  appear;  swelling  on  neck  painful;  sudden

pain  in  neck,  as  if  dislocated.
Worse  on  bending  head  back,  or  inclining  it  to  right  or  left:

toothache.
I A  muscular  strain  produces  headache.
I  Cannot  rest  head  back. ^Pneumonia.
Orgasm  of  warm  blood  to  head  from  pit  of  stomach.

I  Cramp-like  tearing  in  scalp.

■  Painful  soreness  of  scalp,  more  when  moving  the  muscles  of

forehead  ; <  in evening, open air, damp  air, draft, and
getting  warm  in  bed.*
i  Itching  on  scalp.

I I  Scratches  head  impatiently  on  getting  awake  or  when  dis-
turbed in  sleep.  ^Coxalgia.  ^During  dentition.  ^Par-
alysis.

•  Pain  at  roots  of  hair  ;  hair  bristles  up  when  chilled.
I  Hair  falls out; or comes out  when  combing. ^Childbed.

^After  inflammatory  or  nervous  diseases.
I  Hair  dry  ;  looks  like  tow. ^Cholera.
iHair  falls  out  on  crown  of  head. ^Megrim.
BBare  spots,  size  of  palms  of  hands,  without  a  single  hair  ;  on

horses.

■  Falling  out  of  hair,  mostly  on  temples  and  sides  of  head  down

to  beard  ;  with  dryness  of  hair ;  great  sensitiveness  of  scalp,
with,  yellowish-white  scales  on  same  ;  sensation  of  coldness
of  outer  head  ; puffed  up  face ; many  small  warts  on  hands.
^Lying-in  women.
I  I  Papulous  eruption  on  forehead.

■  Headache  with  an  unusual  accumulation  of  dandruff  on  scalp.

^Pregnancy.

■  Dry,  tenacious,  bran-like  scurf  on  scalp. ^Keratitis.

■  Scales  on  head,  either  dry  or  moist,  small  or  large,  thin  or

thick,  and  yellowish-white.

■  Thick  scabs  on  head,  with  yellow  pus  ;  spreading  to  face.

■  Scabs  on  scalp,  thick  and  bleeding  when  picked;  also  itch  a

little  ;  glandular  swellings  in  neck. ^Eczema  capitis.

■  Yellow  scabs  upon  vertex,  covering  nearly  entire  top  of  head.

^Tinea.

I  Eczema  of  scalp ; with  flatulence,  protrusion  of  navel  and

screaming  spells,  at  5  p.m.,  until  scrotal  hernia  formed  (fol-
lowed by  Lycop.).

■  Dry,  thickly  encrusted,  foul  smelling  eruption,  commencing

at  back  of  head  and  extending  over  whole  head  to  beard,
with  crawling  and  sore,  itching  pain, >  from  scratching.

II  Tinea  favosa;  thick  scabs  covered  with  thick  pus.

■  iCrusta  serpiginosa  ;  herpes  circinatus. ^Dentition.
I  I  Tumors,  suppurating  boils  and  abscesses  on  scalp.

■  Easily  suppurating  hairless  boils  and  encysted  swellings  on


147  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

scalp, returning  every  four  weeks (at  full  moon),  painful
especially  in  open  air.

■  Paralysis  after  striking  head  against  a  stone  wall;  boy,  set.

8  years.
'Sight  and  Eyes. I Farsightedness  ; snapping as of  sparks

from  an  electric  machine,  in  occiput  and  ears.
I  Sensitiveness to light; photophobia. ^Megrim. ^Tinea.

^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa. /^Ulcerated  cornea.
iPhotophobia  ; <  in  morning  after  rising,  and  in  evening  by

candle  light.
I  Great  shunning  of  light,  closes  lids,  sits  in  corners,  bores  face

in  pillows,  or  hangs  head.
llGreat  photophobia; <  in  evening;  agglutination  of  lids  in

morning. ^Keratitis.
.  IPhotophobia,  accompanied  by  a  chronic  soreness  of  thighs..

^Strabismus.
iStinging pains in eyes worse from candle-light; rainbow

around  light.

■  Glittering  or  bright  luminous  appearance  before  eyes,  with

severe  vertigo.

■  Sees  a  bright  star  to  right  side,  which  she  is  constantly  in-

duced to  follow  with  her  eyes,  which,  however,  recedes  as
fast  as  she  turns  her  eyes. ^Chorea.

■  Optical  illusions  in  dark  colors;  she  saw  black  spots  during

physical  exertion.
I  Mist  before  eyes  when  looking  keenly  at  anything  or  when
reading. ^Pregnancy.

■  Blackness  before  eyes,  with  nausea  at  pit  of  stomach,  in  morn-

ing before  meal.

■  Dim  vision  after  fine  work  ;  objects  run  together  ;  desire  to

close  eyes.

■  Dimness  of  vision  :  with  feathery  appearance  before  eyes ;  as

if  looking  through  gauze;  after  getting  head  cold';  after
meals.

■  Dimsightedness. ^Muscular  atrophy. Mervous headache.

/^Uterine  ailments.  ft'Pulmonary  derangements.  (^Addison's
disease.  ^ After  suppression  of  acute  cutaneous  diseases.
^Chorea.

■  She  sees  only  half  of  the  object  to  the  right  of  that-  particu-

larly looked  at,  though  it  would  naturally  fall  within  the
field  of  vision. ^Chorea.

■  ■  Cataract.

■  Like  a  shadow  before  eyes, obscuring one  side  of  object;

pupils  much  dilated.

■  Sudden  blindness  after  dinner;  anxious  sweat,  nausea,  and

an  appearance  of  bright  shiny  light  before  eyes.

■  ■Horrid  visions  when  eyes  are  closed.  ■  ^Typhus.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  148

Asthenopia  in  pale  flabby  subjects  inclined  to  grow  fat;  <^  in
damp  weather,  from  warmth,  and  after  using  eyes.

I  Veils,  feathers,  shadows  or  black  spots  appear  before  eyes,
making  vision  indistinct ;  it  is  also  indistinct  from  straining
of  body  or  mind,  from  reading,  and  after  dinner.

I  At  3  to  4  inches  distance  objects  appear  blended  or  flowing
into  one  another. ^Strabismus.

I  Shortsighted,  to  read,  nose  has  to  touch  the  paper.  I  Stra-
bismus.

8  Severe  pain  over  whole  head  after  straining  or  overexerting
eyes. ^Strabismus.

■  Slightest  attempt  to  use  eyes  causes  frightful  pain  in  them.

I  While  reading:  pressive,  stupefying  pain  in  forehead;  darken-
ing of  eyes ;  must  wink ;  tension  in  ocular  muscles ;  by
candle-light,  burning  and  cutting  in  eyes  and  lids ;  stitching
in  eyes  with  flow  of  tears  in  sun.

I  Worse  from  reading,  writing  or  looking  up.  ^Nervous  sen-
sations in  head.

On  looking  around,  vertigo.

■  Closing eyes: >■ headache; horrid  visions appear; feels

need  of  closing  eyes.
I  Pressure,  itching,  coldness  or  burning  and  stinging  in  eyes.

■  Tearing  in  eyes  and  on  head.

■  ■Dilated  pupils;  often  indicated  after  Sulphur.

■  Pupils  sometimes  dilated  and  sometimes  contracted.
Redness  of  eyes.

■  Oozing  of  blood  from  eyes.

■  ■Fungus  haematodes  with  opacity  of  cornea.

■  Fungus  medullaris.

■  Excrescence  on  inner  corner  of  eye;  eye  inflamed.

■  Pterygium  proceeding  from  external  can  thus  towards  cornea.

■  Corneal  afi"ections  of  children.

■  Bluish  cornea  or  bluish  spots  on  it. ^Horses.

■  ■Dimness  of  cornea  ;  opacity;  maculuse.

■  Pustules  on  cornea,  with  a  tendency  to  spread  and  ulcerate;

a  white  centre  with  red  margin. ^OphthalmJa  scrofulosa.

■  A pustule  above  centre  of  cornea  with  bloodvessels  running

to  it  from  above.

■  ■Pustules  on  cornea,  much  lachrymation  and  excessive  photo-

phobia ; <  by  gas-light,  or  in  morning,  and  in changes  of
weather.

■  Vascular  ulcer  on  cornea.

■  Ulceration  of  cornea  in  child  with  light  hair,  blue  eyes  and

distended  abdomen. (Resulting  cicatrix, Grraphit.) ^Op-
thalmia  scrofulosa.

■  ■Corneitis  and  conjunctivitis.

■  ■Ophthalmia:  from  taking  cold ;  entrance  of  foreign  body  ;  in

the  new-born  ;  scrofulous  ;  arthritic.


149  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  Traumatic  iritis.

I  Retinitis.

I  Foreign  bodies  in  eye.

I  Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  vesicles  containing  a  clear  fluid.

I  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa:  lids  closed,  red,  swollen,  painful,  itch-
ing, glued  together  in  morning;  conjunctiva  inflamed  and
red  ;  vesicles  filled  with  pus  on  cornea  ;  acrid  flow  of  tears  ;
great  photophobia  ;  stitching  pain  in  eyes.

■  Conjunctivitis  trachomatosa  with  pannus  ;  from  working  in

the  wet.
I  Sore  eyes  and  rough  cough. I  Sheep.

■  Sensation  in  eyes  as  if  she  should  press  them  in.

I  Stitching  pains  through  eyeballs  at  external  canthus.  ^Ker-
atitis.

■  Stinging  pain  in  eyes. ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

I  Stinging,  tearing,  burning,  pressing,  itching  in  eyes.
I  Dreams  of  violent  stitches  in  eye.

B  Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  stitches  as  of  needles,  burning,  flow
of  tears,  and  difficulty  in  opening,  at  night.

■  Smarting,  burning  and  cutting  in  eyes  and  lids,  especially

when  reading  by  candle-light.
I  Pain  in  eyeball  <  in  evening  and  by  gas-light. ^Keratitis.

■  Extending  to  eyes  : pressure  in  vertex  ; stitching  headache

on  r.  side  ;  to  r.  eye,  pressing  pain  in  forehead-;  to  eye  and
ear,  boring  and  stitching  toothache.

■  Stitching  in  head,  out  at  eyes.
Tearing  pain  in  bones  of  orbit.

■  Feels  as  if  she  squinted. (^Nervous  sensation  in  head.

■  Strabismus;  after  cutting  eye-teeth.

■  Left  eye  turns  in. ^Strabismus.

■  On  turning  eyes  tension  in  ocular  muscles.

■  Sensation  as  if  eye  moved  involuntarily.

■  A  slight  dull  or  blurred  appearance  of  eye. ^Strabismus.

■  Anxious  look  of  eyes. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Lachrymation  of  reddened  eyes  ;  he  can  scarcely  open  them.

■  Much  lachrymation  and  photophobia. ^Keratitis.

■  Lachrymation  : in  open  air,  or  in  morning  ;  while  writing  ;

with  considerable  pain.

■  Fistula  lachrymalis  ;  thick  yellow  pus  in  canthus  ;  itching,

humid  eruptions.

■  Excessive  secretion  of  mucus  in  eyes.

■  Burning  in  canchi. ^Ophthalmia.

■  Stitches  in  inner  canthi,  with  alternating  stitches  and  throbb-

ing in  eyes,  and  after  the  pain  disappeared,  frequent  blow-
ing of  nose.
I  I  Itching  in  canthi.

■  Severe  pressure,  day  and  night,  as  if  a  grain  of  sand  were

under  upper  lid.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  150

I  I  Swelling  and  redness  of  lids,  with  nightly  agglutination;
during  day  they  are  full  of  gum,  with  a  hot  sensation  and
smarting  pain  and  lacbrymation.

I  Lids  closed,  red,  swollen,  with  painful  itching  in  them,  ag-
glutination mornings. ^Keratitis.

I  I  Lids  feel  sticky  when  moving  them.

I  I  Agglutination  and  suppuration  of  lids.

lEyes  full  of  gum  in  day-time.

I  I  Lids  are  agglutinated  with  gum  in  morning  ;  eyes  look
watery,  and  pain  if  she  looks  at  the  light.

■  Eyelids inverted and swollen;  they  looked  like  raw  beef;

were  stuck. together  with  yellow  gum. ^Tinea.
lEntropium.
Ilf  the  closed  eyes  are  opened  by  force,  a  stream  of  acrid  hot

tears  gushes  out.
1  I  Twitching  in upper  lids,  with  a  sensation  as  if  eye  were

moving  of  itself
BA  painful  sensation  as  if  a  small  foreign  body  were  in  eyes.

■  Quivering  in  upper  eyelid.

■  Nictitation  in  upper  and  lower  lid.

■  Clonic  spasms  of  eyelids.

■  Spasmodic  closure  of  lids  and  photophobia. ■Ophthalmia

scrofulosa.

■  Itching  margins  of  lids.

■  Heat  and  heaviness  in  upper  lids.

■  Burning  and  cutting  in  eyelids.

■  Lids  hard  and  swollen  ;  throbbing  pains.

■  Blepharophthalmia,  which  destroyed  the  eyelashes  and  partly

the  lids.

■  Dry  scurf  on  cilia  during  day  ;  lids  agglutinated  in  morning.

■  Indurations  after  styes.

I  Sensation  of  swelling  below  eye.
I  Fine  crawling  under  eye.

■  Encysted  swelling  over  1.  eye,  congenital.

■  Dermoid  swelling  of  eye.

■  Dark  rings  around  eyes. ^Worms.

■  Obstruction  of  lachrymal  duct ;  fistula  lachrymalis.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Brain  sensitive  to  loud  or  shrill  sounds.
^Megrim. ^Toothache.

■  Many  perversions  of  hearing;  noises; deafness,  with  feeling

as  if  something  lay  in  front  of  the  membrana  tympani ;
noise  or  sputtering  in  ear  when  using  a  handkerchief  or
swallowing.

■  Ringing  in  ears.

■  Cracking  in  ears  when  chewing  or  swallowing.

■  Roaring  in  ears  ;  with  nausea;  with  inclination  to  fall.

■  Ringing,  buzzing,  singing  and  hissing  or  thundering  in  ears.


151  •  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

iHardness  of  hearing,  especially  after  suppression  of  intermit-
tent by  quinine ;  also  from  eustachian  catarrh.

■  Deafness. ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa. ^Epilepsy. ^Intermit-

tent fever. ^Otorrhoea.
iDiminished  sense  of  hearing,  with  singing  and  ringing  in  ear,
alternating  with  musical  sounds  ;  of  26  years  standing.

■  Deafness: right-sided; in the  scrofulous; <  in  opsn  air  ;

>>  from  sweating.

■  Deafness  of  1.  ear,  and  on  shaking  head  singing  and  roaring.
I  I  Heat  within  ears,  like  hot  blood.

I  Throbbing  in  ears.

Tingling  in  ears.

I  I  Pain  in  internal  ears,  first  right  then  left ;  •<  extreme  heat
or  cold,  blowing  nose  or  coughing ;  internally  tender.
^  After  variola.
■  ■Pain  in  ear  beating,  with  knocking,  buzzing  and  roaring  ;
detonations ;  meatus  externus  filled  with  whitish,  pappy,
fetid  pus  or  viscid  discharge  ;  membrana  tympani  perfor-
ated. ^Scrofulous  subjects.

■  Pain  shoots  into  ear  and  head. ^Toothache.

■  Pulsation,  stitching  and  heat  in  ears.

Right  ear  much  swollen,  with  sudden  jerking  pain,  causing

whole  body  to  start ;  same  in  eyelids  and  face.
I  Stitches  in  ears  and  eyes,  from  within  outwards.

■  Earache  : <  by  blowing  nose  ;  with  cough.

■  Dryness of ears, with deafness, or copious secretion of

cerumen.

■  ■Inflammation  and  swelling  of  outer  and  inner  ear.

■  A  little  water  trickles  from  ear,  with  Avhich  he  hears  well;

difficult  to  hear  with  other  ear,  which  has  normal  wax.

■  Discharge from  ear  muco-purulent.  ^Suppuration of  middleear.

■  ■Otorrhoea  muco-purulent, affecting principally r.  ear;  en-

larged glands. ^Eczema. ^Scrofula. ^Goitre.

■  Offensive  discharge  from  ears. ^Pruritis  vulvae.

I  Chronic  catarrh  of  middle  ear. ^After  suppressed  itch. ,

I I  Ulceration,  then  granulation,  then  polypus  ;  great  stench.

■  Tickling  at  times  in  r.  eustachian  tube. ^Sore  throat.

■  Stitches  or  pain  in  throat  extending  to  ears.

■  Deafness  from  eustachian  catarrh.
I  Swellings  in  ears.

I  Small  ulcers  at  outer  meatus.

■  Dampness,  moist  eruption,  behind  ears.

■  Eruption  and  itching  of  ears.

■  Retro-aural  abscess  after  incision.
I  Parotitis,  particularly  on  r.  side.

■  Painful  inflammatory  swelling  of  parotids.

■  Swelling  in  front  of  1.  ear,  painful  to  touch,  like  a  boil.
B I  Parotitis  in  scarlatina; discharge  ichorous,  malignant.


CALCARBA  OSTREARUM.  152

■  Suppuration  of  parotid  ;  neighboring  glands  indurated.

■  Corrosive  nasal  discharge  and  glandular  swellings  of  ears.
I  Steatoma  over  r.  parotid  gland.

■  Fistulous  ulcers  towards  neck  discharging  pus  in  front  of  ears.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Smell  sensitive.

8  Impaired  smell. ^Chronic  coryza.

■  Very  offensive  smell  in  nose;  stench  as  of  manure,  gunpowder

or  putrid  eggs. ^Chronic  coryza. ^Nasal  catarrh.
BEpistaxis  frequent  and  profuse,  almost  to  faintness.
I  Bleeding  of  nose  in  morning. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■  Hemorrhage  from  nose; <<  from  r.  nostril. ^Tuberculosis.

■  Nosebleed  in  the  scrofulous,  subject  to  cold  in  head  (morning).

■  Annoying  dryness  of  nose. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■  Dry  nose  at  night ;  moist  during  day.

■  Mucous  membrane  of  nose  swollen. ^Chronic  catarrh.

■  I  Loud  breathing  through  nose. ^Tuberculosis.

■  Frequent  sneezing  without  coryza,  or  with  dry  coryza.

■  Frequent  sneezing  from  pricking  or  itching  in  nose. ^Coryza.

■  Sneezing  with  a  foul  smell  from  throat.  ^Bronchial  catarrh.
I  After  frequent  vain  attempts  at  sneezing,  severe  fluent  coryza.
I  Drawing  pain  in  occiput,  disappears  on  sneezing.

■  Nose  sometimes  very  dry  and  then  again  plugged  with  yelloAV

offensive  pus.
I  I  Profuse  fluent  coryza.

■  Coryza  with  profuse  secretion,  clear like  water, of  a  salty

taste.

■  Colds  come  on  suddenly  with  a  discharge,  dropping  in  spells

like  clear  water  from  nose. ^Coryza.

■  Discharge  from  nose  ceases  in  morning  and  causes  headache.

^Chronic  catarrh. ^Ozgena.

■  Severe  fluent  coryza,  with  headache.

■  Fluent coryza, followed by colic. ^Nasal catarrh. ^In

children.

■  Coryza  with  oppression  of  chest. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Fluent  coryza  soon  becomes  purulent,  whitish-yellow. ^Tuber-

culosis.

■  Constant catarrh in nose, with thick mucous discharge.

^Asthma  bronch.

■  Nasal  discharge  yellow  and  thick. ^After  variola.

■  Blowing  thick  slime  from  nose,  mixed  with  blood. ^Chronic

catarrh.

■  Purulent  thick  or  yellow-red  discharge  making  lip  sore  ;  red,

itching  pustules  on  upper  lip  and  cheeks  ;  nose  swollen  ex-
ternally and  internally.

;rPlugs  of  mucus  in  nose.

At  first  stoppage  of  nose,  then  fluent  coryza,  with  cough.

■  Stoppage  of  nose. ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  Stoppage  of  nose,  can  hardly  breathe,  especially  at  night ;  on


lo3  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM..

boring  into  nose  with  finger,  sensation  as  if  something  were
pushed  up,  and  blood  appears  ;  nose  externally  swollen
and  sore.

■  Stoppage  of  nose,  sneezing;  <  morning  on  awaking. (^Chronic

colds.
I  Nose  stopped  up  with  yellow,  foul  smelling  pus.

■  Stoppage  of  nose,  with  oppression  and  sense  of  anxiety  in

chest.

■  Purulent, sometimes bloody profuse discharge from nose.

^Chronic  catarrh. ^Ozgena.

■  Acrid  discharge  from  nose. ^Keratitis.

■  Cold  in  head  with  sores  inside  nose. ^Pruritus  valvge.

■  Sore,  ulcerated  nostrils.

■  Nostrils  ulcerated  and  scabby  ;  lips  sore.

■  On  nostrils  ulcerated  spots,  covered  with  crusts  and  very  sen-

sitive to  touch. ^Chronic  catarrh.

■  Scurfs  in  nose.

■  Ulceration  of  inner  nose,  with  at  times  yellow,  and  at  times

black  crusts.

■  Foul  stench  from  nose.

■  Ozgena  after  suppressed  itch.

■  ■Nasal  polypi,  Avith  loss  of  smell.

■  Great  liability  to  catarrhs. ^Coryza.

■  Discharge  changeable  in  color  and  consistency,  dropping  from

posterior  nares.

■  Blowing  nose  yields  thick  slime,  mixed  with dark blood.

^Chronic  coryza.

■  When  blowing  nose,  darting  to  ear.

■  Effort  of  blowing  nose  caused  sensation  as  if  ear  were  closed.

■  Nose  inflamed,  red  and  swollen. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■  Painful  sensitiveness  of  nose,  Avith  coryza.
I  I  Stitches  toward  nasal  bone.

■  A  pain  rises  from  nose  up  to  forehead,  as  if  a  board  were  laid

against  it.
I  Fine  crawling  on  side  of  nose.

■  Sensation  of  swelling  around  nose.

I  Sore,  painful,  swollen  and  erysipelatous  looking  nose ;  it
is  quite  hard  to  touch,  and  attended  with  much  frontal
headache.

I  On  left  ala  nasi  (externally)  a  red  swollen  spot  tender  to  touch
and  on  moving  muscles  of  nose.

■  Cartilage  at  bridge  of  nose  painful,  especially  on  pressure.

■  Swelling  of  nose,  especially  at  root,  frequently  appearing  and

disappearing  ;  bluish-red  ;  nasal  passage  stopped  up.

■  ■Swelling  of  nose  and  upper  lip,  in  children.

I  Nose  thick,  red,  with  acrid  discharge.  ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.
I  Knotty  swelling  on  ridge  of  nose.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  154

' :7rSoreness  and  rawness  around  tip  of  nose,  with  redness  and
determination  of  blood  to  same.
I  On  motion,  painfulness  of  r.  wing  of  nose,  which  is  swollen.
I  Cancer  of  nose.
I  Abscess  of  nose.
I  Herpetic  eruption  on  nose,  in  horses  ;  after  Sulphur.

■  Tearing  headache  above  eyes  down  nose,  with nausea and

gaping.

■  Metastasis  from  nose  to  abdomen  ;  when  coryza  ceases,  colic

sets  in. din  children.
8  Upper  Face. I  Tearing  pain  in  cheek,  which  becomes  swollen.

■  Rending  in  facial  bones.

■  Chronic  prosopalgia;  fat  people; damp,  cold  feet;  profuse

menses.
I  Pain  in  upper  jaw  when  chewing.

■  If  face  is  exposed  to  cold  air  it  pains;  soon  subsides  in  a  warm

room. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Pains  from  r.  mental  foramen  along  the  nerve  up  the  lower

jaw  to  ear. ^Prosopalgia.
I  Pressure  in  head  spreading  to  cheek.

■  Anxious  face  when  raised  from  cradle. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Eyes  and  mouth  drawn  down,  the  latter  open,  with  an  idiotic

expression. ^Marasmus.

■  ■Face  looks  old  and  wrinkled. ^Cholera  infantum. ^Maras-

mus. ^Diarrhoea  of  children.

■  Cadaverous  appearance. ^Tumor  of  eye.

■  Cold  face  and  forehead. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Coldness of  face, hands and  feet ; when  solitude  becomes

burdensome.

■  Chilliness,  alternating  with  heat,  especially  in  face. ^Coryza.
■  I  Heat  of  face  :  with  headache,  and  determination  of  blood  to

head  ;  with  pain  in  1.  temple.
I  Warmth  or  heat  of  forehead  and  face,  with  shivering  of  whole
body.

■  Face  pale  and cachectic. ^Chronic  coryza. ^Leucorrhoea.

^Chorea,  ^Epilepsy.  ^Herpes.  ^Cholera  infantum.  ^Diar-
rhoea. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.  ^Worms.  ^Dysmenorrhoea.
^Scarlatina.

■  Pale  earthy  countenance. ^Keratitis.

■  Face  sallow. ^Asthma  bronchiale. ^Addison's  disease.

■  When  emaciation  occufs,  face  is  pale  or  sallow.

■  Face  waxy  pale. ^Palpitation.

■  Pale,  lean  face  with  deep-set  eyes,  surrounded  by  dark  rings.

^Worms,

■  Paleness  of  face  with  frequent  flushes. ^Tuberculosis.
I  1  Yellow  color  of  face.

■  Face  red. ^Headache. ^Tinea. ^Typhus.

■  Flushed  face,  lying  on  1.  side. ^Intermittent.


155  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  Glowing  redness  of  face,  with  a  fine  net-work  of  capillaries,
like  veined  marble.

Coppery  appearance  of  face.

I  Sweat  on  forehead. ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

I  Large  drops  of  sweat  in  face,  with  fainting  spell.

llFace  puffed  up,  in  children.

iPuflfiness  efface. ^Hypergemia  of  head.

I  Swelling  of  cheeks  after  faceache.

TrStriped  swelling  on  cheeks,  next  to  these  light  spaces.

I  Swelling  of  r.  side  of  face  and  ear  ;  covered  with  pimples.

;rNodular  swellings  in  face.

iBaggy  swellings  in  face,  which  are  in  constant  state  of  in-
flammation and  frequently  suppurate ;  also  polypi  in  ear.

Iltching  and  eruption  in  face  and  in  whiskers.

■  Red  itching  pustules on upper  lip  and  cheeks. ^Chronic

coryza.
1  Moist  itching  scurfy  eruption  on  cheeks  and  forehead,  with
burning  pain.

■  Eruptions  of  painful  papules  or  an  eczema.

■  Forehead  and  face  were  covered  with  yellow  scabs,  especially

about  the  mouth. (?Tinea.

■  Pityriasis  in  spots  on  face.

■  Light  spaces  in  face,  with  dark  surroundings.

■  Light  brown  spots  or  freckles  on  face.

■  "Seed  wart"  on  1.  cheek.

I  Tensive  pain  when  chewing,  with  boil  under  earlobe.
I  Cracking  in  ear  when  chewing.
®  Lower  Face. '  Crawling  on  lower  part  of  face.
I  I  Drawing  pain  in  jaw.

■  Lower  jaw,  gum  and  cheek  swollen. ^Toothache.

■  Swelling  of  r.  lower  jaw-bone.

■  Swelling  of  upper  lip,  in  morning. ^Catarrh. ^Scrofula.

^Keratitis. ^Epilepsy. ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

TrLuraps  in  upper  lip.

I  I  Swelling  of  lower  lip.

I  I  Ulcers  inside  of  lower  lip,  which  interfere  with  speak-
ing; light  yellow,  surrounded  by  redness,  painful  on  con-
tact with  tongue  and  every  motion.

■  Scurfy  pimples  on  border  of  red  portion  of  lower  lip.

■  Very  small  warts  in  bunches  on  lower  lip  ;  horses.

■  Lips  dry. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  ■Lips  chapped  and  cracked  ;  corners  of  mouth  ulcerated.

■  Eruption  on  lips  and  mouth.

■  On  motion  of  lower  jaw,  digging  stitches  in  1.  temple.

■  While  chewing:  cracking  in  ear;  pain  on  side  and  lower  sur-

face of  tongue  ; tensive  pain  in  maxillary  joint;  painful  ten-
sion in  swollen  gland  under  jaw.

■  Chewing  motion  with  mouth  before  attack. ^Epilepsy.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  156

* llChewino;  motion  of  jaws  during  sleep. ^Acute  yellow  atro-
phy. ^Hepatic  affections.
1 1  Painful  swelling  of  sub-maxillary  glands.
I  Sub-maxillary  glands swollen and suppurating; followed,

later,  by  goitre.
llHard,  painful  swelling  of  sub -maxillary  glands; painful

tension  when  chewing ;  sticking  pain  when  touched.
1  Large  swelling  of  sub- maxillary  glands  of  r.  side,  not  tender

to touch, painful  only when turning  head; from getting

feet  wet.
I  Drawing  and  stitching  in  1.  chest  to  1.  sub-maxillary  gland.
^^  Teeth,  and  Gums. B  Inclined  to  gnash  teeth  as  in  a  chill.
I  Inclined  to  touch  tooth  with  tongue.
I  Teeth  crumbling  from  decay. ^Chronic  prurigo. ^Diarrhoea.

^Emaciation.
I  Pressure  on  upper  row  of  teeth.
I  Gnawing  toothache  in  upper  molars.
I  Drawing  toothache  with  stitches,  day  and  night,  relieved  by

cold  or  warmth.
B  Drawing,  pricking,  rooting,  throbbing,  jerking  in  teeth.
I  Moderate  toothache;  with  very  severe  swelling  of  cheek  ;  with

stitching.
BThrobbing,  boring  and  swelling  of  gums  and  cheeks.
I  Tearing  pains,  extending  up  into  head,  as  if  roots  were  being

torn  out.
a  Pain  in  hollow  teeth,  especially  around  loose  stumps.
I  I  Gnawing  toothache  ; <  in  evening.
BPain  in  upper  and  lower  teeth,  1.  side,  extends  to  maxillary

bones.
I  Toothache  extending  to  ear.
I  Pressure  in  head,  spreads, to  teeth.
;rToothache  on  r.  side,  which  cannot  be  located  in  any  special

tooth  ;  afterwards  nausea  and  coldness  in  abdomen  ;  patient

never  had  toothache  before.
I  I  Immediately  after menstruation, toothache, drawing and

sticking,  day  and  night ; <  if  she  inclined  head  to  right,  or

to  left,  or  backward.
B  Toothache  during  pregnancy,  with  determination  of  blood  to

head,  from  taking  cold  ;  worse  at  night ; <  from  noise  and

warmth  or  cold.
B  Toothache,  with  inflammation  of  bones.
BB  Teeth  cannot  endure  air  or  any  coldness.
Teeth  are  raised,  and  pain  when  biting  on  them.
Toothache :  after  drinking  cold  liquids,  or  excited  by  draught,

or  cold ; drawing, shooting  or  boring ; during  and  after

menstruation  ;  during  pregnancy  ;  worse  from  warm  or  cold

drinks  ; from  getting  wet  and  Avorking  in damp places  ;

<  from  noise  and  trying  to  use  eyes.


157  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  1  Toothache  in  all  teeth  ;  <  from  entrance  of  cold  air ;  wakes
him  at  night.

I  Teeth  are  particularly  sensitive  to  cold  air.

■  Offensive  smell  from  teeth.

I I  Difficult  dentition.  ^Rhachitis.  ^Eclampsia.  ^Cholera  in-
fantum. ^Hydrocephalus,  ^Crusta  lactea.  ^Infantile
catarrh.  ^Laryngo-tracheitis.  ^Bronchitis.  ^Bronchial
catarrh. ^Marasmus. ^Urticaria. ^Chorea.

iDurino;  teething;  sore  mouth.

I  Pulsating  in  gums. (Compare  Pulsat.)

I  Stitching  in  gums.

■  Gums  painfully  tender  ;  swelling,  bleeding,  even  at  night.

■  Toothache,  with  red  swollen  and  inflamed  gums,  followed  by

pain  in  jaw,  went  from  upper  to  lower  teeth  and  from  right
td  left ; >  from  external  warmth.

■  Toothache  and  bleeding  of  gums,  with  foul  odor  from  mouth.

■  Bleeding  of  gums  after  suppressed  menses.

I  Gums  eaten  away  ;  the  exposed  bones  becoming  covered  with
callous  membrane.

■  Fistula  dentalis. (Compare  Fluor,  ac.)

■  Epulis,  soft  and  painless.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Loss  of  taste  ;  with  impaired  smell.
lEood  tastes  '"too  fresh"  or  unsalted.

■  Taste:  sour;  salty;  like  ink;  of  iron;  bitter,  back  in  throat;

metallic  or  leaden  ;  foul ;  like  dung,  in  mouth  and  pharynx ;
like  smell  of  strong  urine;  pappy,  in  headache;  acid,  in
gout ;  unpleasant,  with  cough.

■  Sour  taste  in  mouth  or  of  food.

■  Cold  water  is  the  only  thing  having  a  good  taste. ^Heredit-

ary headache.

■  Speech  is  difficult  and  clumsy.

■  ■Tongue  dry,  does  not  like  to  talk. (Compare  P7i(ospA.  ac.

and  Bellad.)

■  Dr^mess  of  tongue,  at  night,  and  morning  on  awaking.
Great  dryness  of  mouth  and  tongue,  with  a  sense  of  roughness.

■  Dryness,  alternating  Avith  excess  of  saliva. ^Ranula.

■  Rough  streaks  in  middle  of  a  dry  tongue. ^Typhus.
I  Dry,  slimy  tongue,  Avith  dull  pain  in  forehead.

I  Rough  bristling  sensation,  with  great  dryness  of  mouth  and

tongue.
I  Pain  on  side  and  lower  surface  of  tongue  on  spitting.

■  Soreness of  tongue, either on tip, sides, or dorsum; can

scarcely  talk  or  eat.

■  Burning  pain  at  tip  of  tongue,  as  from  soreness  ;  worse  from

warm  food  or  drink.

■  Burning  pain;  burning  vesicles,  which  become  ulcers.

■  Tongue  pains  as  if  ulcerated. ^Glossalgia.
I  Painful  blisters  on  tongue  and  palate.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  158

■  Tongue  clean,  red,  pointed. ^Intermittent.
I  Tongue  red,  raw. ^Gastromalacia.

I  Cracked  and  fissured  tongue.

■  Glossitis  after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Tongue  generally  white  coated. ^Headache.
Tongue  dirty,  with  nasty  taste. ^Pneumonia.

I  Tongue,  lips  and  hands  became  white  and  cold.

■  Pain beneath  tongue, when swallowing, on  1.  side,  behind

hyoid  bone.

■  Swelling  of  sub-lingual  glands. ^Ranula.

■  Tongue  pushed  upwards  and  to  left  by  a  globular,  semi-trans-

parent, fluctuating  tumor,  size  of  pigeon  egg. ^Ranula.
Cancer  or  syphilitic  tubercle  of  tongue.
Abscess,  cracks  or  fissures  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Heat  in  mouth,  with  hot  breath.

■  Dryness  of  mouth,  at  night.

■  Dryness  of  mouth,  alternating  with  salivation. ^Aphthge.

■  Great  dryness  in  mouth. ^Coryzai

I  Collection  of  water  in  mouth,  with  disposition  to  gag,  in  oeso-
phagus.

1  Frequent  spitting;  after  vexation  ;  with  pressure  in  stomach.

iFlow  of  sour,  watery  fluid  from  mouth,  with  nausea.

I  Copious  viscid  saliva,  with  sour  taste  in  mouth.

1  I  Accumulation  of  much  mucus  in  mouth,  though  it  does  not
cause  spitting.

iFoul  odor  from  mouth.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  mouth  and  fauces,  when  salivation

alternates  with  dryness  of  mouth  and  lips. ^Stomatitis.

■  Sore  mouth of  children; canker sores, especially during

teething.

■  Mouth  slimy  ;  blisters  on  inner  surface  of  cheek  and  tongue.
Ulcers  in  mouth.

■  Ulcers  inside  of  lower  lip,  light  yellow  surrounded  by  red-

ness ;  pain  on  contact  of  tongue  and  every  motion  ;  inter-
feres with  eating  and  speaking.

■  Recent  spongy  painless  tumor,  size  of  marble,  on  inner  side

of  r.  under  lip  ; near  corner  of  mouth  ; fair  and  fat : leuco-

phlegmatic  young  lady.
^*  Throat. Chronic  swelling  or  hardening  of  palate.

Blisters  on  roof  of  mouth  and  uvula,  which  is  dark  red.
Stitches  in  palate,  after  expectoration  of  blood,  from  coughing.

■  Inflammatory  swelling  of  palate and  uvula  or  tonsils,  with

sensation  as  if  throat  were  contracted  when  swallowing.

■  Sensation  of  stinging  and  pricking  roughness  of  back  part  of

palate,  exciting  cough. ^'Coryza.
Uvula  feels  elongated.

■  Swollen  or  ulcerated  tonsils.


159  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  Greatly  inflamed  throat,  with  aphthse  on  tonsils  and  roof  of

mouth. ^Scarlatina.
I  Fauces  feel  unpleasantly  rough. ^Coryza.

■  Smarting  aching  in  back  of  throat  about  ten  minutes  after

eating. ^Sore  throat.
I  Pharynx  spasmodically  contracted.
I A  feeling  in pharynx, in afternoon, as if  food remained

sticking  in  it  and  could  not  get  into  stomach,  Avith  a  kind

of  nausea.
I  Pain  in  throat  extending  to  ears.
B  Feeling  of  swelling  in  throat ;  <  1.  side  extending  up  into  ears.

■  Feeling  of  a  lump  in  throat.

■  Tickling  as  from  a  feather  in  throat ;  swallowing  difficult.
Scratching  in  throat;  stitching  and  pressure  on  swallowing;

constriction.
Stitches  in  chest  extending  towards  throat.
TrRelcixed  throat,  with  roughness  and  hoarseness,  and  soreness

of  eyes.
Bitter  taste  in  throat  or  mucus  tasting  of  iron.

■  Throat  very  painful;  swallowing  difficult. ^Scarlatina.

■  Tliroat  feels  narrowed,  so  that  she  must  frequently  swallow.

^Sore  throat,

■  For  a  week  feeling  of  a  lump  in 1.  side  of  throat,  which

makes  her  feel  sick  and  compels  her  to  swallow  saliva  often,
and  on  doing  so,  lump  seems  to  descend.

■  On  swallowing: cracking noise in ear; pain  on  side  and

lower  surface  of  tongue  to  left  behind  hyoid  bone ;  pressure
in  pharynx;  sensation  as  if  fauces  were  filled  with  mucus;
sensation  of  much  mucus  in  pharynx  ;  narrowness  in  oeso-
phagus; stinging  and  stitches;  is  not  able  to  swallow  bread  ;
pain  as  of  a  plug  in  throat.

I  She  cannot  eat  enough  ;  it  will  not  go  down.

I  Swallows  wrong  way;  afterwards  cough  with  expectoration
of  blood.

■  Feeling  in  pharynx,  afternoon,  as  if  food  remained  sticking

in  it  and  could  not  get  into  stomach,  with  a  kind  of  nausea.
Hawking  of  phlegm,  particularly  in  morning,  with nausea ;
causes  odor  in  mouth  when  hawking.

■  Hawks  saltish  mucus  from  throat. ^Chorea.

■  Throat  is  rough. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

I  Sensation  of  rawness  and  soreness  of  entire  oesophagus.
I  Violent  stitching  in  upper  part  of  oesophagus  when  not  swal-
lowing.

■  Sensation  as  if  food  had  lodged  in  oesophagus;  taste  of  iron

and  of  ink.

■  Heavy  load  rising  from  abdomen  up  into  throat. ^Gastralgia.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  or  narrowness  of  oesophagus.

■  Organic  stricture  of  oesophagus.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  160

I  Throat  inflamed,  with  aphthae  on  tonsils  and  roof  of  naouth.

^Scarlatina.
■  Sore  throat  when  weather  changes. ^Catarrh.
I B  Sore  throat  marked  ;  cellular  tissue  around  cervical  glands

swollen ;  nose  sore,  obstructed. ^Scarlatina.
!  Calcareous  deposits  in  pharynx.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions, b  Appetite  increased

abnormally,  alternating  with  loss  of  appetite.

(Appetite  prodigious;  thirst  very  great. ^Mesenteric  disease.

B  B  Ravenous  hunger,  with  weak  stomach.

B  Ravenous  hunger  in  morning.

B  Canine  hunger. ^Epilepsy.

i  Eats  a  great  deal  and  yet  loses  flesh. ^Marasmus. ^Epilepsy.

B Voracity:  everything  she  eats  seems  to  go  into  an  empty
stomach.  ,

Hunger,  soon  after  eating.
•  IB  Appetite  poor,  with  an  aversion  to  meat  and  a  craving  for
boiled  eggs. ^Palpitation.

BLoss  of  appetite;  but  when  he  began  to  eat,  he  relished  it.

I  i  Complete  loss  of  appetite.  ^Coryza.  ^Keratitis.  ^Indi-
gestion. ^Neurosis  cordis.  ^Gout.  ^Gonagra.  ^Mus-
cular atrophy. ^Hereditary  headache.

i  Anorexia. ^Pneumonia.

I  Anorexia  and  bulimia, ^x^ddison's  disease.

I  No  appetite,  but  constant  burning  thirst. ^Cough.

B  Increased  thirst,  especially  for  cold  drinks,  and  particularly
at  night.

BThirsty;  craving  cold  drinks. ^Cholera  infantum.

I  Constant  thirst,  even  after  drinking.  ^Lymphatic  enlarge-
ments.

I  Much  thirst  for  acidulated  water.

Great  thirst:  with  complete  loss  of  appetite;  with  stomach
pains ;  with  chilliness.

B  Great  thirst. ^ Worms. ^Gonagra. ^Gout. ^Epilepsy.

BNo  thirst. ^Hereditary  headache. ^Coryza.

B Desire  for  sweets. (^Uterine  displacement.

B  Appetite  for  sweets  and  pastry. ^Epilepsy.

I  Great  desire  for  eggs;  wine,  sour,  salt  or  sweet  things  ;  sugar,
disagrees.

BBLonging  for  eggs,  particularly  with  children,  in  sickness
or  during  reconvalescence,  even  before  they  are  able  to
swallow.

BBLonging  for  boiled  eggs.  ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.  ^Uterine
displacement. ^Coxalgia. ^Scarlatina.

B  Craves  indigestible  things,  chalk,  coal,  etc.

B  Unnatural  craving  for  ice  cream  and  lemonade,  which  agree
with  her.


161  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

■  Irresistible  desire  to  eat  raw  potatoes  and  liandfuls  of  flour,

in  alternation,
I  Great  aversion  to  eating.

■  Aversion  to  meat  and  warm  food.

BB  Aversion  to  meat. ^Chlorosis. ^Goitre.
Aversion  to  milk  which  tastes  sour.

■  Aversion  to  smoking  tobacco.

"Eating  and  Drinking. B Before  breakfast:  headache;  faint-
ness,  weakness  ;  drowsiness  and  trembling.

■  Headache  before  breakfast, ^Epilepsy.
Brought  on  by  eating  :  toothache  ; cough.

After  dinner :  sudden  blindness  ;  heat  of  face ;  distension  of
abdomen.

After  evening  meal :  pressure  in  stomach  ;  pinching  and  forc-
ing immediately  under  navel;  severe  chill,  followed  by  pain
in  abdomen  throughout  night.

After  eating:  first  stitches  then  boring  in  last  molar  tooth;
heat  or  flatulency,  with  nausea  ;  pain  in  stomach  and  ab-
domen;  bloatedness;  eructations  with  burning;  pressure  in
stomach;  aching  or  crampy  pains ;  cramp-like  pain  around
navel,  causing  nausea,  with  cold  sweat,  relieved  by  eructa-
tion; burning  in  throat;  I  swelling  of  stomach  ((^chlorosis) ;
cough  ((^bronchial  catarrh);  palpitation  of  heart  (i^chlor-
osis);  fullness  in  abdomen;  diarrhoea;  straining,  almost
cutting,  forcing  down,  in  colon;  headache,  palpitation,  rush
of  blood  to  head  and  sleepiness  ;  immediately  hungry.

■  Burning  extending  up  into  throat,  after  every  meal,  especi-

ally after  use  of  hard,  dry  food.

■  Worse  after  eating  smoked  meats.

■  Sour  taste  after  eatino;  sugar  or  cake.

■  Worse  from  salad  ;  from  leguminous  food.

Better  from  eating :  first  stitches  then  boring  in  last  molar

tooth  ;  cutting  in  abdomen.
Worse  from  drinking:  diarrhoea;  cough  and  spitting  blood.
I  Worse  from  drinking  cold  water. ^Epilepsy.

■  After  milk:  nausea  and  sour  eructations  ;  water-brash.

■  Worse  from  spirituous  drinks. ^Throbbing  headache.

I  After  wine,  especially  champagne,  often  is  relieved. ^He-
reditary headache.
I  Sweat  after  eating  or  drinking. ^Crusta  lactea.
I  Nausea  from  smoking  tobacco.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  N'ausea  and  Vomiting, b Frequent

hiccough.

■  Eructations:  tasting  of  food  eaten;  bitter;  sour;  offensive;

of  tasteless  fluid; of  brownish  sour  fluid; with  taste  like
gall;  rancid,  leaving  scratching  sensations.
I  Frequent  eructations,  generally  sour,  with  burning  from  epi-
gastrium upward.

VOL.  III. — 11.


CALCAHEA  OSTREARUM.  162

Much  empty  eructation :  "with  headache  in  temples ;  with
hemicrania  ;  with  uneasiness  in  legs.

■  Sour  eructations. ^Diarrhoea. ^Gastralgia.

I  Uneasy  movements  over  entire  body,  from  suppressing  eruc-
tations.

B Heart-burn  :  extending  to  throat;  with  continued  loud  belch-
ing after  eating;  with  cough  and  nausea;  with  itching  and
stitching  burning  at  nape  of  neck.

1  Rising  of  tasteless  water  in  mouth. ^Sore  throat.

B  Nausea  and  water-brash  after  milk.

B  Gulping  up  of  food,  with  foul  taste.

1  Qualmishness  while  riding.

BNausea :  mornings,  with  qualmishness  and  shuddering ;
toward  evening,  during  dentition  ;  with  roaring  before  ears ;
with  sensation  in  pharynx  as  if  food  had  stuck  there ;  with
flow  of  sour  water  from  mouth  ;  with  pressing  pain  in  lower
abdomen;  with  trembling ;  with  cold  sweat ;  after  drinking
milk  ;  after  colic ;  in  pit  of  stomach,  in  morning,  fasting,
with  blackness  before  eyes,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  sit
down ;  in  forenoon,  followed  by  anxiety  in  afternoon.

Accumulation  of  water  in  mouth  with  vertigo  in  morning;
also  at  other  times,  with  water -brash  ;  sometimes  early
vomiting.

BWhen  he  had  eaten  almost  enough,  he  became  nauseated,  this
ceased  if  he  stopped  eating.

BNausea  with  heat  in  top  of  head. ^Megrim.

Nausea,  and  headache :  after  severe  vertigo  ;  from  customary
smoking.

BShe  feels  sick,  but  is  unable  to  bring  up  anything.

Nausea  following  vomiting.

BVomit:  sour;  of  bitter  slime;  of  what  has  been  eaten  ;  black;
bloody;  sweet  {Kreosot.,  jPlumbum.);  sweet,  with  nursing
women  ;  curdled  milk  ;  of  sour  water,  at  night ;  after  eating
■fish  ;  of  all  he  eats  ;  after  epileptic  attacks.

BBSour  vomiting,  especially  during  dentition.

BVomit  has  sour  smell. ^Cholera  infantum.

B  Occasional  acidity  of  stomach.  ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.  ^Ad-
dison's disease.

Bi  Vomiting  and  diarrhoea  of  teething  children.

B  Vomiting  of  mucus  or  bile  announces  the  remission. ^Megrim.

BMilk  is  vomited  in  the  form  of  cheese.

With  vomiting  of  food  aching  or  crampy  pains.

Vomiting  on  drinking  water  after  evening  meal.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. B  Epigastric  region  painful  to
touch. ^Chronic  mesenteric  disease.

B  Aching,  both  when  fasting  and  after  eating,  and  particularly
on  coughing.

BPain  in  epigastrium.


163  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  Pressing  pain  in  stomach,  as  if  a  load  or  stone  were  in  it,  after
moderate  supper ;  •<  from  motion ;  >■  lying  quiet  on  back.
^Gastralgia.

I  Pressure  and  cramp-like  pain  in  stomach  Avhen  fasting,  or
after  meals,  with  vomiting  of  ingesta.

iGastrodynia.

■  Severe  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  when  pressing  upon  it,  and

after  stool,  in  forenoon,

■  Pressure  transversely  across  stomach.

■  Pressure  at  pit  of  stomach,  at  night.

■  Pressure  in  stomach,  with  pressure  outwards  under  last  rib.
I  Anxious  pressure  in  stomach,  followed  by  insensibility.

I  Stitching  pressure  in  stomach  after  eating.
I  Stitches  at  pit  of  stomach,  downwards.

■  Cutting  pain  in  epigastrium.
I  Digging  at  pit  of  stomach.

Sudden  jerks  at  pit  of  stomach,  with  fear.
I  Trembling  and  beating  in  region  of  stomach.
I  Tensive  pinching  pain  at  pit  of  stomach.
I  Relaxed  sensation  in  stomach.

■  Warm  streams  of  blood  from  pit  of  stomach  to  head.
I  Burning  in  stomach  while  sitting.

I  Burning  extending  upward  from  pit  of  stomach.
I  Constricting  pains  at  pit  of  stomach.

■  Cramps  in  stomach :  from  gases;  with  sour  eructations;  with

nausea;  ending  in  vomiting;  with  sour  or  bitter  vomit,  or
vomiting  of  food; with  yawning; with  anxiety  and  con-
striction  in chest; palpitation of heart, costiveness and
blind  piles  ;  in  the  scrofulous.
Cardialgia,  afternoon  to  evenino-,

■  ■Pit of  stomach swollen like  a  saucer  turned  bottom up;

painful  to  pressure.  (^Icterus.  ^Hepatic  affections.  ^Hem-
orrhoids. ^Neur^lgia  cordis.  ^Dyspepsia.  ^Diarrhoea.
^In  children.

■  Hard  bloated  stomach. ^Intermittent.

■  ■Bloating  in  region  of  stomach,  compelling  him  to  undo  his

clothing. /^Palpitation.

■  Distress in epigastric  region, much greater  just before  a

stool,  compelling  to  press  hands  upon  that  region  and  bend
forward;  relieved  to  some  extent  by  movement  of  bowels.
^Mesenteric  disease.

■  Indigestion. ^Icterus. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Weak digestion  from  a  blow  or  strain^ scarcely  any  food

agrees  ;  sleepy  all  day.

■  Weak  stomach  with  great  voracity.

I  Gastromalacia :  tongue  red  as  if  raw;  total  loss  of  appetite;
great  thirst; vomiting  of  all he eats; stool  often  green,


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  164

many  small  lumps  surrounded  by  green  matter ;  emaciation

of  neck  ;  peculiar  crying.
I  Cannot  bear  tight  clothing  over  pit  of  stomach.
B After  gastric  disturbances. ^Chronic  headache.
'^Hypochondria. B Pressure  in  hepatic  region,  with  every  step,

when  walking.
I  Stitches  in  hepatic  region  during  or  after  stooping, ^Icterus.
I  Darting  pain,  r.  to  1.  side,  with  profuse  sweat;  had  to  bend

double, clench her  hands, writhe with agony. ^Icterus

from  calculus.

■  Enlargement  of  liver. ^Icterus.

■  Induration  of  liver.

I  Sore  pain  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen.

■  Enlarged  spleen. ^Intermittent. ^Gout  and  rheumatism.

■  Tightness  in  both  hypochondria.

■  Feeling  as  if  laced  below  hypochondria,  with  trembling  and

throbbing  in  epigastric  region.

■  ■Tight  clothes  about  hypochondria  are  unbearable. ^Icterus.

/^Dysmennorrhoea.

■  Bloated,  must  loosen  garments. ^Heart  disease.

■  ■Swelling  of  epigastric  region,  toward  1.  side.

■  Stitches  in  1.  side  on  bending  towards  same.

■  ■Pains  more  on  1.  side,  especially  under  1.  hypochondrium  ;

tearing  stitching  pains  in  1.  chest  to  hypochondrium.
Abdomen. ■  Sensitive  to  pressure  in  epigastrium  and  abdomen.
^Addison's  disease.
I  Uneasiness  in  abdomen.

■  I  General  soreness in whole lower abdomen. ^Prolapsus

uteri.

■  Cutting  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

■  Cutting  and  grasping  in  abdomen,  in  afternoon,  with  vomiting

of  food  taken  at  dinner.
Pressive  sticking  pain  in  abdomen,  without  diarrhoea.
I  Digging  pain  in  abdomen  during  vomiting.
I  Jerking  in  abdomen  towards  glans  penis.

■  Pressing,  pinching  pain  in  abdomen,  with  or  without  diarrhoea.

■  Pressure. in  lower  abdomen,  on  physical  exertion.

I  Pressure  in  abdomen,  from  pit  of  stomach  downwards.

■  Heavy  load  rising  from  abdomen  into  throat. ^Gastralgia.

I  Sensation  like  crawling  of  worms  in  abdomen,  causing  nausea.

I  Beating  in  abdomen.

I  Hot  burning  in  abdomen.

■  Feeling  of  coldness  in  abdomen. ^Colic.

I  Sense  of  coldness  with  swelling  of  lower  abdomen. ^Uterine
tumor.

■  Frequent  pain  in  upper  part  of  abdomen;  a  "grumbling  pain"

or  a  "very  sharp  squeeze." ^Mesenteric  disease.

■  Severe  spasms  in  intestines. ^Colic.


19


165  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

iFrequent  severe  cramp  in  intestinal  canal,  especially  in  even-
ing and  night,  with  coldness  of  thighs.

I  Colic  of  horses  ;  after  Cinchona^  or  abuse  of  it.

I  Colic:  with  waterbrash  ;  following  coryza  and  diarrhoea;  fol-
lowed by  intermitting  diarrhoea.

I  Colicky  pains  about  umbilicus  toward  uterus.

I  Abdominal  pains  are  brought  on  or  aggravated  by  inspiration.

I  Contractive  drawing  aching  in  epigastrium  and  across  upper
abdomen,  compelling  to  walk  bent  forward,  and  aggravated
by  deep  inspiration.

iNausea  with  pain  in  lower  abdomen,  beginning  in  morning,
reaches  its  height  in  evening.

I  Pain  in  abdomen  all  night.

iPain  in  abdomen  relieved  by  warmth. 6'Mesenteric  disease.

I  Pains  relieved,  by  cold  water  applications;  wants  them  fre-
quently renewed. ^Peritonitis.

I  Incarcerated  flatus,  with  distension. ^Megrim.

I  I  Constant  rumbling  in  bowels.

I I  Flatulency  with  gurgling  in  right  side  of  abdomen.

I  I  Tension  in  abdomen,  with  distension,  all  afternoon,  without
sensation  of  flatus,  which  disappears  after  passing  wind.

I  Abdomen  large. ^Chronic  diarrhoea. ^Lumbrici.
. B  Abdomen  protuberant. ^Hydrocephalus.

I I  Abdomen  much  distended  ;  hard.  ^Keratitis.  ^Ophthalmia
scrofulosa.  ^Colic.  ^ Colic  during  dentition.  ^ Worms.
^Cholera  infantum.  (^Marasmus.  ^Ovarian  dropsy.  ^Fi-
broid uterine  tumor.  ^Uterine  displacement.  ^Coxalgia.
^Gonarthrocace.  ^Epilepsy.  ^Eclampsia,  intermittent.
^Osteitis. ^Rhachitis. ^Addison's  disease.

1 1  Mesenteric  glands  hard  and  swollen,  in  children;  abdomen
feels  as  if  filled  with  stones  or  ovoid  bodies.

lEnlargement  and  induration  of  mesenteric  glands,  with  clay-
like evacuations ;  dry  and  flabby  skin  and  muscles ;  hair
dry  and  looking  like  tow.

B I  Mesenteric  atrophy.

B Ascites;  abdomen  painful  to  touch.

B Ulcers  in  bowels.

BB Emaciated  everywhere,  except  abdomen.

BWorm  symptoms. ^Chorea.

B  Taenia.

BB  Soreness  of  navel;  a  moist  excrescence  like  proud  flesh  from
navel  of  infants. {Kali  carb.,  Natr.  mur.)

Binoruinal  and  umbilical  hernia;  walls  of  abdomen  so  thin  that
.  a  truss  could  not  be  worn.

B Pressing  and  pain  in  1.  groin.

B  Umbilical  hernia.

I  Pain  as  if  swollen,  with  hardness  in  inguinal  region;  <  upon
touch  or  pressure.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  166

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. I  Tension  in  abdomen,  disappears  after

passage  of  flatus.
I  Looseness  of  bowels. ^Prosopalgia. ^Eclampsia. ^Tuber-
culosis. ^Gonarthrocace.

■  Tendency  to  looseness  of  bowels,  with  prolapse  of  rectum.

^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
I  Inclined  to  diarrhoea,  especially  toward  evening. ^Coxalgia.
I  Looseness  of  bowels,  however  induced,  makes  her  feel  weak

for  a  long  time ;  bowels  worse  in  evening.
iDiarrhoea. ^Hydrocephalus. ^Worms. ^Cholera  infantum.

^Epilepsy. ^Typhus. ^Osteitis. ^Goitre.
B Diarrhoea: of  Varying character, undigested,  offensive,  like

spoiled  eggs,  mixed,  soft  and  lumpy ;  undigested,  whitish ;

a  stool  which  is  first  hard,  then  pappy,  then  soft ;  scanty,

mixed  with  blood ;  the  stool  does  not  weaken  the  patient,  in

chronic  diarrhoea.

■  IDiarrhoea  of  sour smell. ^Cholera  infantum. ^During

dentition. ^Scrofula.
iDiarrhoeic,  clay-like  stools,  smelling  sour  or  fetid.

■  Stools  white,  undigested. ^Intermittent.

■  Profuse  diarrhoea,  watery,  slimy,  with  bits  of  coagulated  milk

of  sour  smell;  painless. ^Rhachitis.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea;  also  after  burns.

■  Asiatic  cholera.

■  Diarrhoea:  with  pain  in  abdomen;  after  eating ;  after  walk-

ing and  motion.

■  Watery,  pale  yellow,  or  whitish  soft  stools. ^Intestinal  ca-
, tarrh.

■  Grayish-whitish  feces. ^Icterus.

■  Stools  whitish,  watery,  most  frequent  in  after  part  of  day.

^Cholera  infantum.

■  Stool  whitish-gray,  often  streaked  with  blood. ^Chronic  di-

arrhoea.

■  Whitish  frothy  diarrhoea. ^Rhachitis,

■  Perfectly  milk-white  stools. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Whitish  stools,  with  emaciation. ^Chronic  prurigo..

■  White  stools,  streaked  with  blood,  with  despondency  and  pain

in  liver  when  drawing  a  breath  ;  burning  in  rectum  after
stool.

■  Stools  copious,  pappy,  of  a  dark  greenish-brown  color,  quite

offensive. ^Mesenteric  disease.

■  Stools  watery,  smelling  badly. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Stools: frequent,  first  hard,  then  pasty,  then  liquid;  thin,

offensive,  like  bad  eggs;  yellowish,  gray,  or  clay-like,  fecal;
whitish,  watery,  worse  in  after  part  of  day,  often  of  sour
smell ;  undigested,  hard,  or  thin.

■  Involuntary  stool,  as  if  fermented.

■  ■Watery  stools. ^During  teething.


167  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

1  Passage  of  bloody  slime  with  stool.

I  Stool  scant,  hard  and  black.

iHard,  undigested  stool  of  a  light  color  or  chalky  appearance.

I  Stool  large,  hard,  dry,  knotty,  and  difficult  of  passage.

I  Feels  best  when  constipated.

1  Stool  hard,  egg-shaped  and  white,  passed  with  great  strain-
ing. ^Liver  complaint,  with  dropsy.

I  Hard,  thick,  scanty,  and  evacuated  with  difficulty,  or  com-
plete constipation.

I  Must  extract  excrements  with  fingers.

I  Constipation  of  bowels  with  unsuccessful  urging. ^Coryza.

■  Constipation. ^Megrim. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis. ^Neurosis

cordis. ^Gonagra. ^Gout. ^Muscular  atrophy. ^Addi-
son's disease. ^Icterus.
I  Stool  regular,  with  prominent  abdomen  and  milky  urine.

■  Stool  after  eating.

■  Stools  chiefly  during  4  a.m.  to  noon,  seldom  after  noon  or  be-

fore midnight. ^Mesenteric  disease.

■  Bowels  moved  more  frequently  towards  evening. ^Bronchitis.
I  Ineffectual  urging,  with  nausea.

Before  stool:  irascible  irritability.

During  stool :  burning,  tearing,  and  tenesmus  in  rectum  ;  pro-
lapse of  rectum  ;  piles ;  succus  prostaticus ;  rolling  in  ab-
domen ;  twitching  in  muscles  of  abdomen  ;  pallor.

After  stool :  pressure  in  rectum  ;  erections ;  lassitude ;  op-
pression of  breath  with  anxiety  ;  in  epigastrium  stitches
during  pressure.

I! Tapeworm  and  ascarides  with  stool.

■  Pressure  or  straining  in  rectum; constant  desire  for  stool.

^Ovarian  dropsy. ^Chronic  dysentery.
I  Constriction  of  rectum.
I  Tensive,  jerking  or  aching  pain  in  rectum.
I  Sensation  of  heat  at  lower  end  of  colon,  with  drawing  and

cutting  therein.

■  Cramp  in  rectum,  the  whole  forenoon;  a  griping  and  stitch-

ing, with  great  anxiety  ;  was  not  able  to  sit,  had  to  walk
?ibout.

■  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  lower  portion  of  rectum.

■  Burning:  in  rectum  ;  in  anus.

I  I  Pain  in  rectum,  as  if  it  were  torn  open,  during  a  soft  evacua-
tion ;  grape-like  protrusion  around  anus,  inflamed,  burning
and  painful.

■  Oozing  of  fluid  from  rectum,  smelling  like  herring  brine.

■  Discharge  of  blood  or  bloody  mucus  from  rectum.

I  Hemorrhoidal  flow  with  violent  itching  over  whole  body.
I  Flow of  blood  from rectum, coincident  with severe nasal
catarrh.

■  Suppressed  hemorrhoidal  flow,  with  vertigo;  pressis-e,  dull.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  168

thick  sensation  in  head  as  of  drunkenness ;  severe,  pressive,
stupefying  headache ;  weakness  of  memory  ;  stool  seldom,
costive ;  foul  smelling  and  copious  sweat  of  feet,  with  sore-
ness of  soles.

I  First  itching  in  rectum,  then  cramps  in  abdomen  and  infla-
tion, then  stomach  pains 'in  paroxysms.

B  Crawling  in  rectum,  as  from  worms.

lAscarides,  with  hard  stool.

I S  Tapeworm  ;  after  GrajMt.

■  Involuntary  passage  of  foamy  stool.

I  I  Rectum  with  its  haemorrhoids  protrudes  during  stool.

I  Hsemorrhoidal  tumors  appear,  which  pain  both  during  motion
and  repose,  and  especially  at  stool,  and  bleed  freely.

iVarices,  swollen,  protruding,  burning.

I  Anus  powerless. ^Muscular  atrophy.

iHaemorrhoidal  affections  with  hacmatemesis.

B  Mucous  haemorrhoids.

BWhen  bleeding  is  checked,  head  is  affected. ^Hasmorrhoids.
^Heematemesis.

I  Crampy,  jerking  pain  from  small  of  back  to  anus.

B Burning,  stitching  and  itching  at  anus  and  on  scrotum,  which
had  been  seat  of  herpetic  eruption.

Bitching  of  anus.

Bitching, as  from thread  or  pin-worms, and a  burning, in-
flamed eruption  around  anus.

BAnal  abscess.

B Large,  bleeding,  burning  ulcers  in  anus  and  rectum.

B Burning  in  anus,  during  stool.

BFIow  of  blood  from  anus,  with  determination  of  blood  to  head.

B Prolapsus  ani ;  burning  with  stool. .^Cholera  infantum.

I  Soreness  between  legs  and  at  anus.
^^  TJrinarv  Organs. Symptoms  worse  at  night.

B  Pressing  pain  in  kidneys  and  loins. ^Addison's  disease.

B  Aching  in  kidneys  and  lumbar  region  when  riding.

BiPolypi  and  varices  of  bladder. ^Hsematuria.

B  Fungoid  of  trigone  vesicale.

B  Inflammation  of  bladder.

B  Spasm  of  bladder,  hysteric  and  hypochondriacal.

B  Cutting  stitches  in  urethra,  with  ineffectual  desire  to  urinate.

I  i  Stitches  througli  female  urethra.

I  Burnmg  at  meatus,  at  night,  when  urinating,  or  after  coition.

Pain  in  urinary  passage  after  feet  became  wet.

B  Bleeding  from  urethra.

BWhen  busily  occupied,  she  has  to  run  and  pass  a  few  drops
of  urine.

B Frequent  urination  ;  also  at  night,

BFrcquent  and  profuse  urination. ^Coryza..


169  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

■  During  pain  slie  is  obliged  to  urinate  about  every  10  minutes.

^Prosopalgia.
I  Child  desires  to  urinate,  none  flows;  at  another  time  could
not  retain  it.

■  Involuntary  emission  of  urine  when  walking. ^Tumor  of

vulva.

■  Wetting  the  bed; fat  children, red  face;  sweat  easily  and

catch  cold.
TrPressing  on  bladder  with  frequent  urging,  passing  very  little.
^Megrim.

■  Chronic  strangury  from  standing  on  cold  pavement.
Before  urinating :  burning.

During  urinating: cutting,  burning,  sore  pain;  burning  pain
of  inflamed  foreskin  ;  passage  of  blood  and  mucus.

■  Polypous  masses  pass  with  urine.

After  urinating :  renewed  desire  with  burning ;  itching  in  glans.

■  Urine  milk-white  with  whitish  sediment.
I  Dark  scanty  acid  urine. ^Gonagra.

■  Bloody  urine.

■  Bloody  urine. ^Scrofula. ^Polypus.

■  Urine clear, but of  a pungent fetid  odor. (^Cholera  in-

fantum.

■  Urine  dark  and  off'ensive.

■  Acrid  or  sour  smelling  urine.

■  Urine  smells  strong. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Foul  smelling,  dark  brown  urine,  with  white  sediment.

■  After  standing,  urine  looks  turbid,  like  lime-water.

■  Sediment  in  urine  after  standing. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Diabetes.

■  Albuminuria. ^Following  variola.

■  Gravel;  urinary  calculi.

■  Stone  in  bladder.
Tumors  of  bladder.

■  Copious  white  mealy  sediment  in  urine.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  '  ■Increases  sexual  desire  and  provokes
emissions,  but  unusual  weakness  follows  indulgence  and  eja-
culation is  tardy.

■  Excessive  sexual desire,  caused by lascivious fancies,  but

penis  failed  in  erection,  which  was  only  induced  by  rubbing  ;
scarcely  had  coition  commenced  when  semen  was  emitted;
this  was  followed  by  excessive  weakness  and  great  excita-
bility of  nerves ;  he  was  discontented  and  angry,  and  knees
seemed  to  give  way  from  weakness.

■  Burning  and  stinging  while  semen  discharges  during  coition.

■  ■Impotence.

■  ■  Consequences  of  onanism  or  of  too  frequent  coitus  :  pressing

pain  in  head  and  back ;  lassitude  and  weakness  in  lower


CALCAREA  OSTRBARUM.  170

limbs ; knees  seem to give  way ; sweats  easily,  debility,
hands  tremble ;  chorea ;  palpitation  ;  epilepsy.

llFrequent  nocturnal,  involuntary  emissions. ^Tuberculosis.

I  Aching  of  testicles,  with  spasmodic  retraction.

■  Cutting  rending  from  inguinal  regions  to  testicles.
I  Induration  of  testicles.

I  Hydrocele  of  children.

■  Spermatic  cords  painfully  swollen.

■  Inflammation  of  prepuce,  with  redness  and  burning  pain.

■  Inflammation  of  prepuce,  frsenum  and  orifice  of  urethra,  with

a  little  yellow  pus  between  fraenum  and  glans.

■  Phymosis.

■  Balanitis.

■  Itching  vesicle  on  foreskin.

■  Scrotum  hangs  relaxed.

■  Scrotal  swelling,  with  scaly  spots.

■  Drawing pain from r. hypochondrium towards symphisis

pubis.

■  ■Itching  and  burning  of  genitals  of  both  sexes.

I  I  Chronic  gonorrhoea,  which  has  been  suppressed.

■  Gleet;  fat,  lymphatic  persons.

■  Organic  stricture.

■  Fig-warts,  often  smelling  like  old  cheese  or  herring-brine.

■  Dry  and  copper-colored  eruptions  on  genitals  of  children.
^*  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Nymphomania.

■  Sterility,  particularly  when  catamenia  is  too  early  and  too

profuse.

■  Great  lassitude  after  coitus.

■  Constant  aching  in  vagina. ^Puerperal  fever.

■  Burning  soreness  in  genitals. ^Uterine  cancer.

■  Bearing  down  pain  in  pelvis. ^Fibroid  of  uterus. ^'Ovarian

dropsy.

■  Sense  of  weight  and  soreness  in  uterus.

■  A  sense  of  shuddering  and  painful  pressure  within uterus.

^Uterine  tumor.

■  Pain  in  uterus  or  r.  ovarian  region  extending  down  thighs.

■  Stinging  in  os  uteri  and  stitches  in  cervix. ^Uterine dis-

placement.
B  Prolapsus  with  sensation  of  pressure  on  uterus  ;  bearing  down,
as  if  prolapsus  would  occur,  and  internal  organs  would  pass
out,  hence  difl&culty  in  standing.

■  Uterus  low  down, enlarged; mouth  open  to  admit  finger;

a  smooth  sensitive  body  felt  within. ^Fibroid  of  uterus.

■  Displacements  of  womb,  caused  by  lifting.

■  Warts  on  os  uteri.

■  Polypus  uteri.

B  Chronic  infarcts  of  womb. ^Metritis.

■  Ulcers,  or  polypi,  or  cancer  of  uterus: desponding  mood;


171  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

.  fault-finding;  ill-humor;  hysteria;  stupefying  or  throbbing
headache ;  supra-orbital  neuralgia ;  headache,  with  empty
eructations  ;  icy  coldness  in  and  about  head  ;  head  and
upper  part  of  body  sweat  profusely  at  night ;  trembling
pulsation  of  heart ;  sour  vomiting  ;  painful  urination  ;  back-
^  ache ;  bloated  abdomen  with  emaciation  and  good  appetite ;

adapted  during  climaxis,  in  old  maids, or  in  women  who
have  had  no  children.
iPhyscmetra.

I  Menses  late;  at  times  scanty  with  bloating. ^Goitre.

I I  Menses  will  not  appear;  in  plethora.

B  Complaints  as  if  menses  would  set  in,  but  do  not.  ^Ame-
norrhoea.

1 1  Menses:  too  early;  last  too  long;  too  profuse.  ^Menor-
rhagia. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.  ^Hiemorrhoids.  ^Sterility.
^Ovarian  dropsy.  ^Metritis.  ^Uterine  disphiceraent.
^Uterine  tumor.  ^Leucorrhoea.  ^Endocarditis.  ^Gonar-
throcace. ^Epilepsy. ^Intermittent. ^Chlorosis.

■  Profuse  menstruation  ; too frequent menstruation  ; conse-

quent anaemia. ^Fibroid  tumor  of  uterus.

■  Too profuse cataraenia. ^Gastralgia. ^Uterine cancer.

^Megrim. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Menses profuse, membranous, dark colored,  tardy  or  pre-

mature. ^Tumor  of  vulva.

■  Monthly  periods  regular,  copious  and  dark. ^Neurosis  cordis.

■  Frequent  menses,  with  weakness  in  legs.

■  Menses  lasting  2  weeks,  with  interval  of  2  weeks.

■  Menses  irregular,  every  5  months. ^Epilepsy.

■  Menses  8  days  late,  very  scanty,  lasts  5  days; with  swelling

of  abdomen.

■  ■The  least  excitement  brings  on  a  return  of  profuse  catamenia.
I  I  Very  often  useful  in  scanty  menstruation.

■  Suppression  of  menses  in  women  of  full  habit,  leucophleg-

matic  temperament,  or  with  anasarca  from  working  in  water.
1  Absence  of  menses  after  fright.

■  Amenorrhoea  with  dropsy  of  uterus  and  adjacent  parts.

■  Membranous  dysmenorrhoea.

■  Before menstruation: indisposition; disposed to frights;

amorous  dreams  ;  headache  ;  heat  of  head  ;  chills  and  noct-
urnal colicky  pains  ;  aching  of  back  and  hips  ;  pain  in
arm-pits  ;  pain  and  swelling  of  breasts  ;  leucorrhoea.

■  At  beginning  of  menstruation  :  cramps.

■  During  menstruation  :  labor-like  pains  in  abdomen  and  back;

pain  in  hip-bones  or  in  arms  ;  heat  of  head  ;  headache  and
toothache  ;  headache  and  pain  in  nape  of  neck  ;  hardness  of
hearing  ;  painful  deglutition  ;  nausea  and  ineffectual  strain-
ing at  stool ;  difficulty  of  breathing ;  anxiety  and  restless-
ness, followed  by  faintness ;  nocturnal  agglutination  of  eye-


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  172

lids  ;  lachrymation,  in  morning  ;  swelling  of  feet :  orgasm

of  blood,  at  night,  with  restless  sleep  ;  cutting  in  abdomen

or  uterus,  and  griping  in  back.
lAfter  menstruation  :  leucorrhoea;  toothache;  inflammation  of

eyes  ;  ulcer  on  cornea.
B  A  few  days  before  or  after  catamenia :  megrim.
B I  Metrorrhagia.
B Discharge  of  bloody  water  from  uterus,  in  an  old  woman,  with

pain  in  back  as  though  menses  were  coming  on.
BFIow  of  blood  between  monthly  periods. ^Cancer  of  womb.
B  Hemorrhage  profuse,  bright  red. ^Fibroid  of  uterus.
B Uterine  hemorrhages;  tendency  to  miscarry.
B  Metrorrhagia,  with  leucorrhoea,  during  climacteric  period,
ii Leucorrhoea: like  milk,  with  itching  and  burning;  before
, or  after  menses  ;  during  micturition  ; profuse  at  times  ;  in

fits  and  s*tarts  ;  worse  after  exercise  ;  with  great  debility ;

with  stinging  in  os  and  aching  in  vagina ;  with  burning  in
.  cervical  canal ;  with  accumulation  of  mucus  between  labia

and  thighs  ;  with  chlorosis  ;  in  scrofulous  women.
B  Milk-like  leucorrhoea. ^Uterine  displacement.
B  i  Leucorrhoea  with  pruritus; white,  milky, but  not  thick;

heat  of  parts.
B  Acrid  leucorrhoea,  corroding  genitals. Ophthalmia.
IB  Leucorrhoea thick, yellow; <  by day, when urinating.

/i  Vulvar  tumor.
B I  Frequent  leucorrhoea  between  menses,  which  are  too  early

and  profuse. ^Incipient  phthisis.
B  B  Chlorosis.

J  Aching  in  vagina. ^Uterine  displacement. ^Uterine  cancer.
Bitching  or  pressing  in  vagina.
B  a  Vaginal  polypi  and  fistula.
BStinging,  burning  tubercles  on  margin  of  labia.
iPainful  tumor  on  right  labium,  size  of  a  thumb;  tender  on

pressure  ;  could  hardly  sit  down. ^'Vulvar  tumor.
B  Varices  of  labia.

BMuch  moisture  between  labia  and  thighs,  with  biting  pain.
B  Voluptuous  sensation  in  genital  parts,  in  afternoon.
B  Violent  itching  and  soreness  of  vulva. ^Pruritus.
BBurning  soreness  in  genitals.

Bitching  and  stitches  either  in  internal  or  external  vulva.
B  Terrible itching of  parts towards evening, or  after  going

to  bed.
B  Inflammation and  swelling  of  genitals, with purulent dis-
charge.
^^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. •  Causes  conception

to  take  place  readily.
Bin  first  month  of  pregnancy  menses  still  flow,  accompanied

by  much  pain.


173  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  Vomiting  of  pregnancy  and  toothache.

I I  Clumsy,  awkward,  easily  falls  ;  tired  from  short  walk,  from
a  general  feeling  of  lameness  in  pelvis. ^Pregnancy.

1 1  Cramps  in  toes  or  soles  of  feet,  during  pregnancy.

■  Threatened  miscarriage  in  those  who  generally  have  profuse

menses  or  are  subject  to  hsemorrhages.

■  Promotes  expulsion  of  moles,  etc.  ;  darting  shooting  pains.
1 1  False  labor-pains,  running  upwards.

After-pains  or  milk-fever  after  confinement.

■  Puerperal  fever ;  constant  aching  in  vagina  ;  cold  damp  feet ;

head  perspiring  freely  ;  stitches  in  neck  of  uterus.

■  Red  rash  on  7th  day  after  confinement;  after  restlessness,

anxiety  and  increased  fever.

■  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

■  Lochia  last  too  long,  or  have  a  milky  appearance.

■  Coxarthrocace  ;  after  childbed.

■  Profuse  menstruation  during  lactation. Compare  Silica.

■  ■Secretion  of  milk  too  abundant;  galactorrhoea.

■  Profuse secretion of  watery  milk,  which the child  refuses

to  take.

■  ■Excessive  lactation;  also  hectic  and  sweat; debility  as  a

consequence.

■  ■Breasts  distended,  milk  scanty  ;  she  is  cold,  feels  cold  air

very  readily ;  there  is  a  want  of  vital  activity  to  secrete
the  milk.

■  ■Deficient  milk  ;  mammae  not  swollen.

■  ■Absence  of  milk,  in  cows,  after  severe  sickness.

■  Sweet  vomiting,  without  suppression  of  milk,  in  a  nursing

woman.

■  Hardening  of  nipples.

■  Ulcer  on  nipple.

■  Hot  swelling  of  mammge.

■  ■Breasts  hard,  but  not  red.

■  Mammary  glands  pain  as  if  they  were  suppurating,  especially

on  touch.

■  Glandular  hypertrophy  and  induration  of  breast.

■  Malignant  ulceration  of  mammge.

■  Induration  of  mammae  ;  scirrhus.

■  When  nursing  child,  severe  internal  stitching,  as  if  arrows

were  forced  through  breasts.

■  ■Milk  disagrees  with  the  infant.

■  Milk  has  a  disagreeable,  nauseating  taste;  child  will  not  nurse

and  cries  much.

■  Child  will  not  take  breast,  cries  itself  hoarse,  has  swollen

gums  and  swollen,  sore  tongue;  slimy  stool;  at  times  thin,
sour  fluid  from  breast,  child  takes  it,  but  draws  too  lightly,
then  cries  and  makes  body  stiff,  has  large  blood-boils  and
lumps;  often  has  pains  in  lungs  and  chest,  groaning  in  sleep;


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  174

severe  cutting  in  abdomen,  with  urging  to  stool  without  pass-
ing anything.

1 1  Crusts  on  head  in  nursing  chihiren.

I B Inflammation  of  eyes  with  new-born  children.

I  Child  has  been  slow  about  teething  and  walking.  ^Tinea
capitis.

IBDifficult  teething  of  children.*

§  Infantile  hernia  and  moist  excrescence  on  navel.

■  Ailments  from  worms.

i  Child  becomes  sore  around  anus.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Rough

voice  in  morning,  which  improves  by  hawking. ^Chronic

coryza.
llPainless  hoarseness;  could  scarcely  speak; <  in  morning.

^Phthisis. ^Bronchitis. ^Coryza.

■  Hoarseness:  larynx  often  becomes  dry  ; with  severe  burning

in  throat ;  with  cough  at  night.
IB  Hoarse,  hardly  audible  voice.
i Persons  who  have to talk  a  great  deal  become  subject to

hoarseness. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  While  speaking :  pinching,  almost  cramp-like  pain  in  lower

abdominal  walls  ;  stitches  in  neck.

■  Talking:  debilitates;  aggravates  headache  and  cough.

■  After  much  speaking  rawness  and  pain  or  weakness  in  chest.

■  Roughness  or  rawness  in  larynx; ■<  in  morning.

■  Chronic  laryngitis.

B  Whistling  in  larynx  after  lying  down,  evenings.

■  Prickling  in  larynx,  with  severe  night  cough,  concussive  and

fatiguing  ;  rattling  cough,  with  little  expectoration  ;  will  not
permit  him  to  sleep ;  cannot  bear  cold  drink.

BPain  in  larynx,  as  if  something  were  being  torn  loose  when
coughing.

BDryness  of  larynx.

■  Habitual  croup  in  scrofulous  children  during  dentition.

■  Sequelae  of  croup.

!  Ulceration  of  larynx  and  lungs,  especially  in  stone-cutters.
BNecrosis  of  cartilages  of  larynx.

■  In  trachea  a  tickling  irritation,  as  if  from  dust  or  feather-

down  ;  and  cough  is  provoked  by  this  as  well  as  by  eating,
and  playing  piano.
' B  Sensation  as  if  something  were  torn  loose  in  trachea.

■  Difficult  loosening  of  phlegm  in  trachea.

■  Wheezing  in  windpipe. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

1  Sensation  as  though  a  lump  of  phlegm  were  moving  up  and
down  in  windpipe  when  coughing. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

*When  remedy  does  not  act,  put  it  into  child's  milk,  if  bottle  fed. — C.  Hg.


175  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

B  Catarrli  of  bronchia  in  teething  children.

■  Rattling  of  mucus. ^Bronchitis.

I  Sensation  of  dust  in  throat  and  lungs. ^Asthma.

iBronchocele.

I  Thyroid  gland  enlarged. ^Goitre.

I  Goitre  of  36  years  standing;  commenced  at  13  years.

■  Goitre  at  7  years; Iodine  and  Spovgia  failed;  left  lobe  as

large  as  a  pigeon's  egg,  soft,  reddish,  indolent,  moveable,
traversed  with  bluish  veins  ;  otorrhoea.

lYoung  lady  of  15  years,  subject  from  2  years  of  age  to
"fluxion  of  throat,"  "almonds  of  ear,"  (parotid  tumors)  and
swellings  of  submaxillary  glands ;  after  treatment  by  a
plaster,  goitre  developed ;  after  21  days  of  treatment  by
powdered  calcined  egg-shells,  the  urine  became  much  more
copious,  whitish,  and  loaded  with  muddy  sediment  as  of
chalk  ; after  30th  day  no  tumor  visible.

lYoung  lady,  get.  17,  subject  to  suppuration  of  anterior  sub-
maxillary glands ;  goitre  at  puberty,  lobes  separate,  soft
and  indolent;  menstruation  every  six  weeks  or  two  months;
she  becomes  stout,  if  discharge  is  scanty;  respiration  im-
peded; must  sit  upright  several  times  in  night.  (Cured  in
5  months  by  Calc.  ost.,  3rd  trit.,  6th,  30th  and  200th  dil.)
^^Respiration,  l Oppression  of  breathing  relieved  by  throwing
siioulders  back.

■  Fi-equent  need  to  breathe  deeply.

I  Difficult,  laborious  breathing. ^Palpitation.

B  Great  shortness  of  breath. ^Chlorosis.

I  Throat  feels  closed,  as  if  she  could  not  get  her  breath. ^Sore

throat.
I  Was  obliged  to  breathe  deeply,  which  caused  sticking,  now  in

r.,  now  in  1.  side  of  chest,  or  hypochondrium.
IB  Loud  breathing  through  nose. ^Tuberculosis.
I  Sobbing  respiration,

I  Oppression  of  breathing  with  pressure  on  rectum.

I I  Shortness  of  breath  after  walking  and  on  going  up  slightest
ascent.

Desire  to  take  a  deep  breath,  and  sensation  as  if  breath  re-
mained stopped  between  scapulae.

B Stoppage  of  breathing  when  stooping  or  walking  against  wind.

B  Tightness  of  chest  with  hoarseness.

B Tight  breathing  and  tension  as  from  rush  of  blood  to  chest;
relieved  by  raising  shoulders. ^Asthma. ^Tuberculosis.

I  Oppression  of  chest ;  turning  in  bed  puts  her  almost  out  of
breath. ^Chlorosis.

I  Nocturnal  tightness  of  breathing ;  with  heat ;  apprehensive
anxiety ;  restlessness.

■  Difficult  breathing,  awaking  with  anxiety.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  176

•  Asthma:  early  in  morning;  muscles  not  rigid;  sensation  of
dust  in  throat  and  lungs. ^Scrofula.

I  Constriction  of  chest  alternating  with  pain  in  abdomen,  or
accompanied  by  pressure,  or  digging  around  navel ;  nausea,
with  other  spasmodic  ailments.

iDyspnoea:  with  tightness  of  chest;  with  stitches  in  chest;
anguish  and  tight  feeling.

i Spasmodic  contraction  in  precordial  region,  checking  breath,
followed  by  violent  shocks,  stitches  in  heart,  leaving  an  ach-
ing pain.

■  Dyspnoea,  occasioned  by  cough. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  With  every  breath  he  takes,  he  utters  a  loud  noise.

sOn  inspiration  :  tearing  or  stitching  as  of  needles  in  abdomi-
nal muscles  below  ribs ;  stitching  across  abdomen;  sharp
stitches  in  1.  side;  stitches  deep  in  r.  chest;  cutting  in
chest;  entire  chest  painfully  sensitive;  pressure  on  chest;
sore  pain  in  chest ;  irritation  to  cough  ;  cutting  pain  at  last
ribs  from  within  out ;  single,  severe  stitches  in  upper  part
of  back;  constricting  pain  in  upper  abdomen;  gnawing  pain
on  1.  side  of  chest.

■  Inspiration  difficult,  with  anxious  tightness  of  chest.

I  On expiration: loud  rattling in trachea; itching  stitches

on  chest.
BB Mucus  rattles  in  chest  on  expiration; <C.  when  lying  and

in  evening. SBronchial  catarrh.
1  During  breathing:  pain  in  abdomen  above  hips;  rumbling  in

abdomen; stitches  in  chest  most  severe; pain in liver;

pressive  pain  in  spine ;  painful  shocks  in  r.  side  of  back.

■  With  every  breath  she  makes  a  sound  as  though  respiration

would  fail  her.

■  Catching  of  breath: from  stitching  in  abdomen  to  back,  and

from  stitches  in  heart;  on  bending.
^'^  Cough, i Tickling  cough,  as  from  a  feather  in  throat,  or  as  of
dust  in  larynx. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Tickling  in  larynx  causes  cough. ^Catarrh.

■  Constant  tickling  under  middle  of  sternum  causing  a  hacking

cough  ; -<  from  talking  and  moving. ^Onset  of  typhus.

■  Cough  from  constriction  of  throat.

■  Irritation  to  cough,  in  chest.

■  During  entire  day,  a  constant  hacking  cough,  seems  to  be  in-

voluntary from  habit,  in  children.

■  From  tickling,  a  dry  cough; <  towards  morning,  with  a

hoarse  voice.

■  Tickling  cough  and  periodical  hoarseness  prevent  preaching.

(^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Tickling  and  very  troublesome  cough  at  night,  at  different

hours ;  immediately  after  waking  up  raises  whitish  mucus.
^Bronchial  catarrh.


177  CALGAREA  OSTREARUM.

i  Cougli :  dry,  especially  at  night ;  violent,  first  dry,  after-
Avards  with  profuse  salty  expectoration,  with  pain,  as  if
something  had  been  torn  loose  from  larynx ;  with  rattling
in  chest  and  bronchia;  in  morning,  with  yellowish  expectora-
tion ;  from  inspiration ;  from  playing  on  piano.

■  Short  hacking  cough. ^Second  week  of  typhus.

I  Dry  hacking  cough  all  night. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

B  Short  concussive  cough,  especially  at  night,  with  itching  in
larynx.

I  Dry  tormenting  cough,  chiefly  at  night,  raising  only  after
long  and  great  efforts  scanty  white,  frothy,  gluey  or  dirty-
looking  putrid  sputa.

B  Loose  cough. ^Bronchitis. ^Pneumonia. (^Tuberculosis.

B  Cough  caused  by  sensation  of  plug,  which  moved  up  and
down  in  throat.

DCouo;h  durinof  or  after  eating. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

i  Coughing  up  blood  after  drinking.

B  Cough  hardly  permits  talking. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

B  B  Cough  induced  by  playing  on  piano  ;  every  note  she  struck
seemed  to  vibrate  in  her  larynx.

BCou2;h  worse  on  walking.

B Loose  cough  in  morning. ^Bronchial  catarrh.
• B  Cough  dry  at  night,  loose  by  day.

B  Cough  in  afternoon.

B  Cough  worse  in  evening. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

B Cough  dry  before  midnight,  loose  after;  hurts  chest;  <  walk-
ing; sputa  yellow  and  thick. 6'After  variola.

BDry  hacking  cough  in  evening,  especially  in  bed.

BDry  cough  at  night,  after  midnight,  so  that  heart  and  arteries
throb.

BBNight  cough. ^Phthisis.

Bin  night  on  waking,  a  long  scraping,  dry,  spasmodic  cough.
^Bronchial  catarrh.

B  Cough  dry  at  night  and  in  evening,  with  shocks  in  head  and
sometimes  vomiting;  in  morning  it  is  loose,  sputa  being  yel-
low and  sometimes  bloody;  often  in  morning  before  coughing
large  mucous  rales  are  heard  in  trachea  on  expiration.

EB  Cough  <  in  morning  on  rising  and  in  early  evening.
/^Tuberculosis.

i Whooping-cough,  attacks  <  mornings.

B Cough  in  morning;  yellow  pus-like,  bad  smelling  sputa.

B Cough;  sees  frightful  objects  at  night.

a  Cough  producing  frontal  headache. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

BCouo;h  causes  stitchinor  headache. /^Bronchial  catarrh.

B  During  coughing  painful  shocks  in  head. ^Typhus.

B  Cough  with  coryza.

B  Cough  with  nasal  catarrh,  first  dry,  later  fluent.  ^Bronchial
catarrh.

VOL.  III. — 12.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  178

B  Cough  with  nausea  and  a  kind  of  heartburn.

B  Cough  with  rattling  in  chest. ^Tuberculosis.

8 During  cough:  rawness  in  chest;  pain  as  if  tearing  some-
thing loose;  sweetish  vomit;  headache;  pressure  in  stom-
ach and  chest;  pain  in  inguinal  hernia;  pain  in  chest;
palpitation  and  throbbing  of  arteries;  sweat;  convulsions;
earache ;  gagging  with  evening  and  night  cough  ;  catching
of  breath  ;  inclination  to  vomit  and  vomiting  of  sweetish
matter ;  headache.

B  Cough  after  measles  and  variola.

S  Whooping  cough  in  teething  children.

Bllgemoptysis.

B  Raises  white  phlegm. ^Cough.

B Cough  with  grayish  expectoration,  especially  in  morning;
very  dispirited  ;  pains  in  both  sides  of  chest.

B  Cough  with  copious  sputa,  sweetish  or  sour,  lumpy  mucus.
^Bronchial  catarrh.

Expectoration:  Biof  mucus,  with  sweetish  taste;  of  blood,
when  coughing  and  hawking,  with  rough  and  sore  sensation
in  chest ;  of  thick  mucus  ;  salty  ;  putrid  ;  yellow,  stinking  ;
gray-yellow,  of  putrid  smell;  bloody  purulent;  tasting  sour;
during  day,  but  none  during  night.

BExpectoration  of  bloody  mucus,  with  emaciation. ^Gleet.

B Fetid  sputa. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

B  Sputa  greyish  and  fetid,  or  yellow  and  not  fetid.  ^Pneu-
monia.

B  Viscous  sputa  loosened  with  difficulty,  of  sweetish  or  flat  taste.
^Catarrh  of  lungs.

B  Cough  almost  always  with  profuse  sputa,  whitish -yellow,
purulent  in  morning. ^Tuberculosis.

B  Copious  mucous  secretion,  weakening  and  emaciating  the  sick.
^Bronchial  catarrh.

BlMucus  rattlino;  in  lun^s. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

1  I  Mucus  in  chest  without  cough.
^'^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, be  Acts  upon  upper  and  middle
portion  of  right  lung. ^Pulmonary  consumption.

BLeft  lung  aifected. ^Pneumonia.

I  Pain  in  r.  side. ^Cough.

I  I  Anxiety  and  sense  of  constriction  in  chest.

B  Oppression  of  chest,  as  if  too  full  of  blood,  often  accompanied
by  palpitation.

B  At  night,  oppression  of  chest,  with  heat,  restlessness  and
thirst.

B  Oppression  of  chest :  with  coryza  ;  with  pain  in  back.

B Tightness  on  chest  accompanying  manual  labor.  Compare
Amm.  mur.

B Oppression  or  constriction  of  chest;  >  by  drawing  shoulders
backward. ^Tuberculosis.


179  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

B  Constriction  of  abdomen,  upwards  to  chest.
I  Weakness  in  chest  interferes  with  speaking. ^Leucorrhoea.
Pressure  on  chest.

B  Sensitiveness  and  sensation  of  soreness  in  chest,  when  draw-
ing a  deep  breath  and  when  touching  it.

I  Soreness  of  chest,  especially  under  clavicles,  daring  deep  in-

spiration, and  especially  to  touch.

I I  Sore  pains  in  chest,  as  if  beaten  ; <;  during  inspiration.
B  Chest  feels  sore  and  raw. /^Bronchial  catarrh.

BStitches  in  chest:  with  urging  in  abdomen;  with  difficult
breathing ;  and  sides,  when  moving ;  from  deep  inspiration,
and  when  lying  on  affected  side;  in  1.  side,  on  inspiration;
>■  from  rubbing.

I  Stitching  in  1.  chest  to  throat  pit,  with  loose  night  cough.

1  Concussive  stitch  in  chest,  from  hepatic  region.

B  Cutting  in  chest,  on  inspiration.

BLancinating  pain  from  sore  spot  in  1.  chest,  extending  trans-
versely across  sternum  to  a  corresponding  point  in  r.  side  of
chest,  thence  turning  a  little  downward. ^Rheumatism.

BBurning  in  chest.

B  Coincident  with  heart  beat,  dull  shocks  from  posterior  wall  of
chest,  upwards  to  between  shoulder-blades.

B  Pinching,  nipping  sensation  in  entire  hypochondrium,  extend-
ing to  under  surface  of  sternum.

B  Gnawing  griping  in  abdomen  and  stomach,  starting  from  chest.

BPain  in  chest,  occasions  dyspnoea  and  a  sense  of  constriction
in  thoracic  parieties. ^Rheumatism.

B  Congestion  to  chest. ^Menorrhagia.

B  Suppuration  of  lungs  ;  in  horses,

BB  Tuberculous  consumption.

B  Abscess  in  lungs  of  chiklren,  particularly  in  1.  lung.

B  Consumption  in  scrofulous  persons,  with  morning  cough,
purulent  expectoration,  hypertrophic  mucous  membrane,
bleeding  easily.

SPIeuro-pneumonia  in  tuberculous  individuals.

B Threatened  paralysis  of  lungs  in  scarlatina;  loud  rattling  in
windpipe,  breath  hot ;  praecordial  anguish ;  no  cough  ;  ratt-
ling mostly  during  expiration.

BMuch  mucus  in  chest.
^*  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, b  Anxious  sensation  about
heart.

B  Compressive  pain  in  heart.

B  Stitching  in  heart  and  region  of  heart  during  breathing.

Bellows  or  anemic  murmurs  around  heart  and  large  arteries.

B  Audible  beating  of  heart.

B  Tremulous  pulsation  of  heart ;  <^  after  eating;  at  night,  with
anguish. ^Endocarditis.

B  Anxious  palpitation  from  slightest  exercise.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  180

iPalpitation of  heart. ^Neurosis cordis. ^Hseraorrhoids.

^Second  week  of  typhus. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.
B  Palpitation  of  heart  before  attack. ^Epilepsy.
IPalpitation: with  anxiety  and  anxious  restlessness; Halso

at  night, or  after  meals ; when  falling  asleep ; with  cold

feeling  at  night ;  preventing  sleep  ;  with  pain  in  1.  arm  ;  on

awaking; with laborious breathing; after  least exertion;

want  of  breath  when  moving  or  ascending;  after  suppressed

eruptions.
BFluttering  of  heart  and  faintness.
i  Arrest  of  breath,  when  walking  against  the  wind,  or  when

stooping,
i Inclination  to  draw  a  deep  breath.
B Palpitation  <  after  eating. ^Endocarditis.
iPalpitation  of  heart  with  cough  at  night. ^Bronchial  catarrh,
i Heart disease: in  scrofulous  constitutions; after  abuse of

mercury.
iEbullition  of  blood,  with  restlessness  and  uneasiness.
BMuch  beating  in  blood-vessels.
B  Pulse  full,  accelerated  or  tremulous. ^Typhus,
i  Unequal  pulse  with  tremendous  palpitation.
B  With  each  pulse-beat  a  broad  stitch  upwards  in  chest  muscles.
B  Idiopathic  arteritis.
B  Aneurism,  particularly  of  aorta.
B  Fatty  degeneration  and  calcification  of  blood-vessels.
^^  Outer  Chest. Cannot  bear  clothes  tight  around  chest.

IB  Chest painfully sensitive to touch, and on inspiration.

^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
B  Sensation  of  soreness  and  acute  sensibility  to  pressure  in  a

small  place  in  pectoral  muscles,  1.  side  upper  third. 6'Rheu-

matism.
BPricklino;  stitches  in  muscles  of  chest.
I  External  heat  and  swelling  of  r.  chest.
Bin  r.  side  between  ribs,  a  small  lump  may  be  felt  under  skin,

like  cartilage ;  painful  to  touch,  and  on  breathing  stinging

in  it,  extending  to  shoulder-blades ;  accompanied  by  diflicult

breathing  on  r.  side.
B  Convulsive  movements  of  chest.
BRhachitic  deformity  of  thorax  in  costo-sternal  region,  with

paroxysm  of  bronchial  asthma ; infra-maxillary  and  other

glands  swollen. ^Bronchial  asthma.
B  Sweat  on  chest.
B Mammary glands pain as if  suppurating, especially when

touched.
•  Bitching  on  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. B  Carotids  throbbing. ^Tinea  capitis.

B  Swelling  of  glands,  with  aching,  and  on  chewing,  sometimes

also  on  swallowing,  stitching  pains.


181  CALCAHEA  OSTREARUM.

!  Goitre  and  scrofulous  swellings.
B Pricking  on  neck  and  face.
I  Itching  burning  on  neck.

I  Warmth  ascending  nape  of  neck  after  crackling  in  occiput.
B Stiffness  and  rigidity  at  nape  of  neck:  with  headache;  cramp-
like, up  to  vertex;  in  morning,  with  corjza; with  djsmen-
norrhoea.
BPain  in  neck,  on  turning  head,  as  if  a  tumor  would  protrude

there.
BPainless  swelling  of  glands,  in  neck,  at  margin  of  hair.
B  B  Cervical  glands  swollen. ^Keratitis. ^Ophthalmia. ^Scar-
latina. (^Eclampsia. ^Eczema.
B I  Glands  of  neck  swollen,  with  eruption  on  head.
BEnormouslj  enlarged  cervical  glands. ^Caries  of  lower  jaw.
B  Painful  swelling  of  cervical  glands.
B Indurated  glands  at  neck,  with  stitching  pain.
BBurning  pain  at  nape  of  neck  to  occiput,  lasting  all  day,  and

ceasing  only  on  going  to  sleep  at  night.
B  Sensation  as  if  scalp  were  loosened  from  head  back  to  nape

of  neck.
Bin  spells  pressure  outwards  in  occiput,  extending  to  back.
B Rheumatic  pain  in  upper  cervical  vertebrse, with  stiffness

of  neck.
B Easily  overstrains  himself  from  lifting,  from  which  neck  be-
comes stiff  and  rigid,  with  headache.
BNeck  thin  and  scrawny. (^.Marasmus. ^Gastroraalacia.
B  Swelling  and  incurvation  of  vertebriB  of  neck  and  back.
BPain  between  shoulders  and  in  lower  part  of  back. ^Cough.
B Drawing  pain  between  shoulder-blades.
B Stitches  very  severe  in  various  parts  of  back;  sudden  stitches,

especially  between  scapulae.
B  B  Pressure  between  and  under  shoulder  blades.
B  Shooting  pains  under  1.  shoulder.

BDull  shocks  upwards  to  between  shoulder-blades,  from  pos-
terior wall  of  chest.
BSensation  of  numbness  in  side  of  back,  on  which  he  has  been

lying ;  after  siesta.
B  Curvature  of  dorsal  vertebrae.

BExtending  towards  small  of  back:  constricting  pain  in  ab-
domen; stitches  in  1.  abdomen;  stitches  in  r,  hypochon-
drium ;  stitches  in  abdomen ;  drawing  pain  in  posterior
hepatic  region.
BPain  in  small  of  back  :  could. scarcely  rise  from  a  seat;  with
watery  bloody  discharge  from  vagina  ;  from  incarcerated
flatus.
Bintolerable  backache.  ^Fibroid  in  uterus.  6'DysmeTior-
rhoea. /^Rheumatism. t^Lumbago. d'Keratitis. ^Oph-


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  182

thalmia  scrofulosa. ^Otorrhoea. ^Coxalgia. ^Eclampsia.

^Epilepsy. ^Intermittent. ^Scarlatina.
I  Rheumatism  of  lumbar  vertebrae,  with  violent  boring,  tear-
ing, burning  pain,  extending downwards,  with  inclination

to  move.
UPain starting  from small of  back; spinal bones affected.

^Ischias.
1  Weakness  in  small  of  back.

I  Weak  feeling  in  back,  worse  from  mental  annoyance.
I  Urging  in  back.
I  Pain  in  sacral  region,  back  and  neck, after  overlifting,  or

feelino;  as  if  wrenched.
a  Heat  around  coccyx.
I  Drawing  and  tearing  pinching  in  coccyx.
lAfter  painful  stiffness  of  spine,  ebullition  and  determination

of  blood  to  head.
1  Painful  stiffness  in  back, making change of  posture very

difficult.
■  Inflammation  of  spinal  cord.
I  Pott's  disease.*

B  Spine  curved  laterally. ^Marasmus.
I  Spina  bifida- of  the  new-born.
B Spinal  complaints  with  gressus  vaccinus.
*"  Upper  Limbs. Pains  in  shoulders,  with  fever. ■
i  Arthritic  pain  in  r.  shoulder. ^Rheumatism.
1  Shooting  pains  under  1.  shoulder.
B  Stitches  in  1.  shoulder-joint.

BPain  from  1.  shoulder  down  along  arm  and  towards  heart.
B  Painful  aching  of  shoulder-muscles  and arms. ^Muscular

atrophy.
B  Suppuration  of  axillary  glands.
B  Fistulous  ulcers  in  glands  of  axilla.
I  Internal  drawing  corrosive  pains  in  r.  arm,  especially  under

joint;  can  move  arm  but  is  painful; <  at  night.
B Pressing  pain  in  r.  upper  arm.
B  Weakness  and  a  kind  of  paralysis  of  1.  arm ;  it  is  difficult  to

move  or  raise  it ;  it  will  fall  down  of  itself.
B Weakness  and  lameness of  arms; sudden  weariness, as  if

paralysed. ^Muscular  atrophy.
BNightly  lacerating  and  drawing  pain  in  arms. ^Muscular

atrophy.
BArms  feel  bruised  on  moving  them,  or  taking  hold  of  them.
B  Cramp  in  whole  of  one  or  other  arm.
I  Arm  goes  to  sleep  if  he  lies  upon  it,  with  pains.
B  Sense  of  something  running  up  arm  before  attack. ^Epilepsy.
B  Stiffness  of  elbows.

*  Ea&ilv  detected  by  the  hot  spnri?e  down  tlie  spine;  if  Calc.  oslr_  is  ap-
plied early  with  proper  mechanical  aid,  curvature  may  be  prevented.


183  ■  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  I  Spasmodic  tearing  pain  on  outer  side  of  forearm,  extending

from  elbow  to  wrist,  as  soon  as  he  takes  hold  of  anything

with  the  hand.
B  Forearm  becomes  covered  with  dots  like  goose's  skin.
lArms  cold  to  elbows. ^Cholera  infantum,
a  Severe  itching  on  inner  part  of  forearm;  small  water  blisters

from  scratching.
B Pustules  on  forearm.

B  Hands  and  forearms  feel  cramped  in  morning.
BPain  in  wrist-joint.
BPain  as  from  a  sprain  in  r.  wrist,  or  as  if  something  had  been

wrenched  or  dislocated.
B Ganglion  on  r.  wrist  size  of  a  bean.

B Feeling  as  if  something  in  wrist-joint  had  been  contused.
B  Painful  swelling  at  carpus,  and  itching  when  touched.
BPain  in  hands. ^Leprosy.

I  I  Cramp  in  hands,  at  night,  lasting  till  morning  on  rising.
BNumbness of  hands  when grasping  anytliing. ^Muscular

atrophy.
B Nervous  trembling  of  hands. ^Intermittent.
B  Swelling  of  hands.

B  Sweating  of  hands  and  palms  of  hands.
B Upper  limbs, especially  hands, become cold and tremble.

^Hereditary  headache.
BBurning  sensation  on  backs  of  hands.
B Palms  of  hands  painful,  on  cutting  bread.
BPain  in  finger  joints,  with  sensation  as  if  they  were  swollen,

on  waking  from  sleep  in  evening.
B Finger-joints  much  swollen.
B  Arthritic  nodosities  on  hand  and  finger-joints.
I  Convulsive  trembling  of  1.  index  finger.
B  Stiffness of  index finger, so that  he can make but  little

use  of  it.
B Middle  fingers  become  dead;  they  are  white,  cold  and  sense-
less, preceded  by  slight  drawing  in  them.
I  i  Middle phalanx  of  1. middle finger  painful,  especially  to

pressure.
I  I  Large  painful  boil  on  first  phalanx  of  fourth  finger.
B Piercing  darting  pains  in  1.  ring  finger; joint  permanently

enlarged  for  12  years  ; constant  dull  pain  day  and  night.
,  B  Awkwardness  of  fingers  ;  they  feel  as  if  dead. (^Chlorosis,
i  Want  of  mobility  of  fingers. ^Muscular  atrophy.
iFingers  stiff  in  morning;.
B Frequent  paralysis  of  fingers.
1  Painful  nodules  on  fingers.

B  Swelling  of  radius  and  crusts  on  skin,  smelling  like  cheese,
i Boils and rhagades on fingers and hands. ^Sequela of

acarus  itch.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  184

«

B  Small  ulcers  on  index  finger,  moist,  itching  and  painful  to
touch  ;  surrounded  by  small  vesicles.

;rA'^esicles  on  fingers.

■  Herpetic  eruption  on  hands.

BWarts  on  arms  and  hands.

S Little  warts  on  hands  and  fingers. (90torrhoea.
^^  Lower  Limbs. E  Inflammation  of  psoas  muscles.

iCoxalgia,  with  drawing  stitches,  or  tearing,  or  cutting.

iCoxalgia  ;  scrofulous  diathesis,  child  commenced  limping  seem-
ingly without  any  occasion,  and  dragged  left  foot  in  walk-
ing, without  complaining  of  any  pain  ;  on  examination,  no
diseased  condition  was  found  externally;  the  ailing  limb
being,  however,  a  little  longer  than  the  sound  one;  on  press-
ing the  head  of  bone  into  cotyloid  cavity,  child  complained
of  pain ;  in  walking,  toes  were  always  directed  outward ;
cure  resulted  in  less  than  a  month.

iRelaxation  of  ligaments  about  hip-joint.

BHipjoint  disease  with  contraction. .

SHip  disease  with  dislocation  of  head  of  femur.

iDrawing  and  shooting  in  hip.

I  Open  sore  on  hips  of  a  little  girl,  discharging  splinters  of  bone.

B  Atrophy  of  r.  hip,  arrest  of  growth  of  femur,  with  limping.
^Boy,  5  years  old,  following  spasms.

B  Coldness  and  deadness  of  feet. ^Boy,  epileptic  spasms.

B  Needle-like  stitches  in  buttock.

B  Aching  smarting  across  gluteal  region. ^Rheumatism.

I  Cold  feeling  in  gluteal  region. ^Rheumatism.

1  I  Itching  vesicular  eruption  over  whole  body,  especially
over  hips.

I  Sensation  as  if  r.  hip  and  thigh  were  brittle,  as  well  as  short
and  small.

B  Stitching  in  thigh,  on  stepping,

1  Weariness  and  a  feeling  of  stiffness  in  anterior  muscles  of
thigh,  in  morning,  on  beginning  to  walk.

B  Painful  weariness  of  lower  limbs,  especially  of  thighs  and  feet.

BLifeless,  "gone  asleep,"  sensation  in  muscles  of  thighs.

B  Coldness  of  thighs. ^Colic.

BGlands  on  thighs  swollen.

i  Bloody  boils  on  thigh,  instead  of  asthma  during  new  moon.

iOld  sore  on  thigh  begins  to  smell  like  rotten  eggs.

1  Varicose  veins  on  thighs.

B  Fistulous  openings  in  thigh.

B  Emaciation  of  thighs  and  paralysis  of  extensor  muscles.

Bitching  of  thighs.

BB  Weakness  and  trembling  in  legs,  especially  above  and  below
knees,  after  coition.

B  Sciatic  pains  caused  by  working  in  water.


185  CALCAEEA  OSTREARUM.

iPain  extends  down  into  limbs  and  keeps  them  in  constant  un-
easiness. 6'Ischias.
I  Stitching  and  tearing  in  knee.

■  Tearing  and  stinging  in  knee.

■  Creaking  sound  in  r.  knee  while  walking,  obliging  her  to

stand  still.
fl  Cartilage  inflamed,  mostly  about  knee.
I  Red,  burning  swelling  of  knee,  comes  over  night.
iBoth knees hot, pale, swollen, very  sensitive to touch;

<<  at  night. ^Gout. ^Gonagra.

I  Knee  swollen,  hot  and  red,  pain  on  motion  extending  to

sacrum  and  toes,  abscess  discharging  yellowish,  creamy  sub-
stance ;  menses  absent  since  trouble  in  knee  (eight  years).
^Chronic  arthritis  in  woman  of  43  years.

I I  Swelling  of  knees.

1  Drawing  or  stinging  pain  in  knee  while  sitting  and  walking.

■  Weakness  of  knee  as  if  sprained,  gives  way  under  him,  has

to  straighten  it  before  walking.

■  Weakness  in  knees. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Lameness  in  1.  knee. (^Rheumatism.

■  Ulcei"-like  sores  on  r.  knee,  discharge  of  pus  in  morning  on

pressure.
.. ■Spongy  swelling  of  knee-joint.

■  Red  stripes  on  tibia,  consisting  of  nettle-rash  elevations,  with

severe  itching  and  burning  after  rubbing.

■  Shins  ulcerated  and  puffed  up,  with  affection  of  bone.

■  Denuded  spots  on  shins  that  water  for  a  long  time.

I  I  Pain  in  calf,  on  walking  and  stepping,  or  on  touch  and  on
bending  foot.

■  Legs  go  "to  sleep"  in  evening  when  sitting.

■  Left  calf  swollen,  with  internal  lumps;  much  pain  in  foot.

■  Cramps  of  legs. ^Muscular  atrophy.

■  Hard  knots  in  calves,  internal,  with  pain.

■  Jerking  stitching  in  leg  and  above  ankle-joint.

■  Tightening  pain  in  legs  during  pressive  cramps  in  stomach.

■  Humid  spot  on  leg.

I  I  Much  itching  on  lower  leg  and  foot.
I  I  Itchino;  below  both  calves.

■  Itching  on  lower  limb  and  foot-joint.

■  Pains  in  tendo  achilles.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  of  tendo  achilles,  with  violent  pain.

I  i  Unusual  weariness  in  lower  extremities,  at  noon,  especially
in  ankles.

■  Feet  and  legs  swollen  to  knees. ^Pneumonia.

■  Small,  deep,  painless  ulcer  on  r.  external  malleolus.

■  Weariness  of  feet  so  great  that  it  seems  as  though  they  could

not  bear  body,  and  knees  would  bend.

■  Insensibility  of  feet,  in  evening.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  186

I  Sweat  of  feet,  toward  evening.

BBCold  damp  feet.  ^Cough.  ^Hydrocephalus  traumaticus.
^Prosopalgia.  /^Hseraorrhoids.  ^Metritis.  ^Uterine  dis-
placement. ^ Tumor  of  vulva.  ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
^Rheumatism.

I! Sensation  in  feet  and  legs  as  if  she  had  on  cold  damp  stock-
ings. ^Herpes  circinatus.

I  Viscous  cold  sweat  on  legs.

■  Foot-sweat  makes  feet  sore.

*i  Coldness  and  deadness  of  feet,  especially  at  night  in  bed.

B  Heaviness  of  feet,  with  great  irritability.

B  Cramps  in  feet  and  legs. ^Muscular  atrophy.

B  Oedema  of  feet  after  abuse  of  quinine.

BEruption  on  feet,  itching,  violent  biting,  causing  scratching;

bleeding  when  scratched,  and  changing  to  an  eruption  like

nettle-rash.
B  Small  pustules  on  foot,  secreting  much  pus.
S Necrosis  of  tarsus.
;rBlisters  on  feet,  which  change  to  foul  ulcers.

■  Burning  in  soles. ^Uterine  displacement.
fiBurning  of  soles  of  feet  at  night.

B  Soles  of  feet  swollen.

1  Offensive  sweat  on  feet  making  soles  raw. ^Hsemorrhoids.

B  Spreading  blisters  on  soles  of  feet.

B Ulcerated  bunions  and  callous  places  on  soles.

B Great  toe  very  sensitive  on  walking;  feels  numb  on  bending;

<^  at  night.
B  Corns,  sore,  with  burning  pain.
Bicy  coldness  of  legs. ^Megrim. ^Palpitation.
B  Coldness  of  legs,  with  night  sweats.
B  Cramp  in  bend  of  knee;  in  calves  of  leg;  soles  of  feet;  toes;

especially  when  extending  leg,  pulling  on  boots.
Depression  of  spirits,  with  heaviness  in  legs,
i  Heaviness  and  stiffness  of  legs. ^Muscular  atrophy.
Legs  go  to  sleep  while  sitting.
B  B  Child  is  very  backward  in  learning  to  walk,  or  children  seem

to  forget  how  to  walk.  •

BRed  spots  on  legs.
S Enlarged  veins  on  legs  are  painful.

iWhitish  swelling  of  leg  and  foot  with  sensation  of  coldness.
BLegs  like  sticks. ^Marasmus,
i  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.
I  Bunions  after  frostbite.
^*  Limbs  in  General, b  Tearing  in  limbs.

iPain  as  if  beaten  in  upper  arms  and  middle  of  thighs,  when

ascending  stairs.
i  Heaviness  and  painful  weight  in  limbs  and  great  fatigue  on

walking;.


187  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  Great  weakness  and  ^Yeariness  of  all  limbs,  especially  in  feet,
lasting  till  she  goes  to  bed.

■  Shooting  pains  throughout  limbs,  both  upper  and  lower ;  he

began  to  imagine  he  was  going  to  have  rheumatic  fever;
finger-joints  became  much  swollen.

■  Burning  in  hands  and  tearing  in  legs,  alternately  in  knee

and  hip-joint.
I  Upper  arms  and  thighs  feel  as  if  lamed  and  bruised.
I  Cramp  in  arms  and  legs.
I  Sweaty  hands  and  feet. ^Megrim.
I  Limbs  go  to  sleep.

I  Trembling  motion  of  upper  and  lower  limbs  in  spells. ^Chorea.
iCrampy  feeling  in  single  parts,  and  contraction,  especially  of

fingers  and  toes.

■  Hands  and  feet  stiff,  spasmodically  bent  inwards.

■  Contraction  and  later  rigidity  of  flexors  of  r.  arm;  fingers,

hand,  arm  and  leg  of  r.  side  cold  and  damp. ^Epilepsy.
iPains  in  joints  of  shoulder,  knee  and  foot,  with  or  Avithout

swelling.
I  Cracking  in  knee  and  shoulder.

■  Paralytic  bruised  pain  in  long  bones  and  in  joints  of  limbs,

also  in  small  of  back,  on  motion  ;  even  when  sitting  or
standing,  back  pains  as  if  beaten,  and  muscles  of  legs  are
sore  to  touch.

■  Cold  hands  and  feet. ^Dysmenorrhoea. ^Chlorosis.

■  Cold  hands  and  warm  feet.

■  Coldness  of  limbs, ^xlddison's  disease.

■  On  flexor  side  of  forearm  and  thigh  small  ulcerating  pustules.

■  Synovitis. ^Scrofula.

^IRest.  Position.  Motion.  Lying:  constant  inclination  to
lie,  in  chlorosis  ;  on  affected  side,  stitches ;  >  throbbing
headache  ;  cannot  lie,  in  pneumonia ;  <  on  side,  tuber-
culosis ; >  on  back  ;  assumes  the  prone  position.

Letting  legs  swing : ■<  epilepsy.

Sitting  :  causes  backache  and  headache,  chlorosis  ;  drawing  or
stinging  pain  in  knee  ;  legs  go  to  sleep.

Rising  from  seat :  <  rhaumatism  ;  is  difficult  after  sitting
aAvhile.

Bending:  feels  numb.

Stooping :  produces  a  bewildered  sensation  ;  arrest  of  breath  ;
.  <C  headache.

Elevated  :  when  keeping  limbs,  ulcers  better.

Stretching :  inclination  to,  in  morning  ;  of  limbs,  before  epi-
leptic attacks  ;  of  horses  limb,  in  exostosis.

Straightening : ■<  rheumatism.

Exercise,  slightest:  anxious  palpitation.

Exertion,  least :  perspiration,  even  in  open  air.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  188

Straining  or  overlifting : stiff  neck; backache.; headache;

sore  throat;  rheumatism;  uterine  displacement.
Motion  :  pain  on,  in  knee.
Moving  : stitches  ;  want  of  breath  ; <  headache  ; symptoms

of  chest  and  heart ; >  gastralgia.
Beginning  to  walk  : weariness  and  a  feeling  of  stiffness  in

anterior  muscles  of  thigh.
Walking : cough  <  on  ; against  the  wind, want  of  breath  ;

tension  or  stitches  in  hip-joint ;  drawing  or  stinging  pain  in

knee  ; pain  in  calf; creaking  sound  in  r.  knee  ; great  toe

very  sensitive  ; great  fatigue,  in  chlorosis  and  tuberculosis  ;

children  show  no  disposition  to  walk,  or  stumble  and  fall

easily.
Stepping:  pain  in  calf; <  pain,  in  rheumatism.
Playing  on  piano  :  cough.
Ascending : vertigo  ; headache  in  vertex  ; want  of  breath  ;

palpitation  ; pain,  as  if  beaten,  in  upper  arm  and  middle  of

thigh  ;  dizzy  and  entirely  exhausted.
Turning  :  in  bed,  pain  in  neck;  feels  as  if  the  back  "cricked"  ;

<  turning  from  back  to  sides,  tuberculosis.
Overdriven  horses  refuse  to  eat.
^^  Nerves. B  So-called  nervous  irritability  and  nervous  excitement.

^Megrim. ^Muscular  atrophy.
8 Nervous  erethism. ^Herpes.
I  Sensation  of  power  with  lack  of  will  force.
B Peculiar  fear  of  shadows  thrown  by  candle-light;  a  child.
B  Restless  and  irritable.
I  Uneasiness  even  to  fainting.

B  Sudden  starting  of  body,  with  jerking  and  roaring  in  ears.
aSubsultus  tendinum.

B  A  kind  of  voluptuous  trembling,  with  sadness.
B Attacks  as  of  fear,  passing  from  feet  over  body;  trembling;

grinding  of  teeth,  doubling  of  fists,  as  if  in  furious  anger;

wishes  to  destroy  himself,  yet  retains  consciousness ;  after-
wards a  shivering  over  back.
B  Anxious  trembling,  with  drowsiness,
a  Uneasiness  and  trembling  fear,  with  internal  chill.
BTremblino;  in  limbs  and  continuous  lassitude.
B  Hysterical  fits  of  laughing.
B  Hysteric  spasms.
B Muscular  twitching;  clonic  spasms  and  epileptic  paroxysms.

^Addison's  disease,
a  Throws  herself  forcibly  about,  rolls  on  ground,  tries  to  catch

hold  of  bystanders'  clothing,  which  she  puts  into  her  mouth,

bites  and  spits,  makes  a  loud  barking  noise,  all  with  open

dull  eyes.
i  Chore:. :  sometimes  only  one-sided;  involuntary  motions,  some-


189  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

times  falling  down  ;  violent  motions  of  hands  and  feet;  from
fright,  onanism,  or  worms;  in  second  dentition.

I  Chill  Avith  red  face,  gazes  fixedly  before  him,  fingers  jerk
spasmodically,  while  both  arms  lie  stretched  at  length;  then
wild  laughter  with  fixed  staring  gaze  and  hard  bounding
pulse.

I  Convulsions  in  a  little  boy,  with  chalky  stools  and  distended
abdomen. ^Croup.

» Spasms. ^Whooping  cough. ^Dentition.

B  Tonic  spasms,  with  scrofulous  people.

I  Frequent  severe  spasms,  especially  in  evening  and  at  night,

with  coldness  of  thighs.  •

II  Epilepsy:  before  the  attack  sense  of  something  running  in
arms,  or  from  pit  of  stomach  down  through  abiomen  into
feet ;  sudden  attacks  of  vertigo  ;  loss  of  consciousness  with-
out convulsions ;  pharyngeal  spasms,  followed  by  desire  to
swallow.  Causes  :  vexation  ;  fright ;  onanism. ;  protracted
intermittent;  suppression  of  chronic  eruption.  Worse  at
night,  during  solstice  and  full  moon ;  with  hallooing  and
shouting.

■  Epileptic  attack; while  standing at  his  work  ho  fell  sud-

denly to  ground  sideways,  without  consciousness,  and on
returning to consciousness  found himself  lying  with  out-
stretched arms ;  this  was  followed  by  heat  and  some  sweat.
B  Epilepsy  of  three  years  standing ; eight  to  ten  fits  daily  ;
wor=e  from  4  a.m.  to  4  p.m.

■  Easily  tired  by  bodily  exertion. ^Uterine  displacement.
B  Nervous  debility. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Protracted  convalescence. i9Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Muscular debility, uneasiness and lassitude. ^Addison's

disease.

■  Paralysis  of  voluntary  muscles. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Exhaustion  in  morning. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

■  ■Great  weakness. ^Chronic  diarrhoea. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  From walking up stairs, dizzy and entirely exhausted.

^Uterine  displacement.

■  Weak,  no  animation. ^Cough.

■  General  malaise. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  ■Easy  relapses,  one  does  not  continue  to  convalesce.
I  I  Disinclination  for  every  kind  of  labor.

■  Feels  very  tired. ^Consumption.

I  I  Very  weary  and  sleepy  the  whole  day.

■  Such  great  weariness  that  he  is  not  able  to  walk.

IB  Great  loss  of  power  on  walking,  especially  in  limbs,  with  ex-
hausting sweat.

■  I  She  was  unable  to  go  up  stairs,  and  became  very  much  ex-

hausted from  it.

■  Great  exhaustion  on  waking  in  morning  from  a  deep  sleep.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  190

so  that  the  confused  and  sleepy  condition continued  even

after  rising  from  bed.
B Child  languid,  yellow  and  pale;  whining;  stool  scanty.
B Lassitude  in  limbs; general  sense  of  weakness  after  every

walk,  such  as  one  feels  after  a  fever ;  it  even  goes  so  far  as

to  amount  to  attacks  of  faintness  with  chill;  indistinct  vision

and  nausea.
1  Great  lassitude: with  sickly  complexion; with  intense  ap-
petite ;  with  vertigo  and  tendency  to  falling.
I  Very  great  weakness  with  great  nervous  excitement.
8 Great  weakness and debility: from a short  walk; from

talking.
BVery  weak  and  sick  for  several  days  after  coition,
i Great prostration: with fluent  coryza; with nausea and

vomiting  of  food  taken.
■  Want  of  strength,  especially  in  morning ;  arising  from  loss

of  animal  fluids.
BFainting:  after  loss  of  sight  with  coldness;  after  stool;  in

Addison's  disease.
I  Spells of  fainting in street; come on with sensation of

something  rising  from  stomach  to  head ;  feels  as  if  he  would

die  ;  followed  by  bewilderment  of  mind. ^Tumor  of  eye.
i  Sensation  as  if  about  to  faint  with  headache.
I  After  going  out  in  evening,  yawning  and  fainting.
B  Attacks  like  fainting  after  writing  and  thinking,  when  lying

down,  or  when  rising.
I  I  Great  desire  to  be  mesmerized.
1  Paralysed  in  all  limbs,  even  scalp  feels  lax.
B  Great  heaviness  of  bod3^
B  Paralysis  : of  upper  extremities  ;  of  fingers  ;  of  legs  ; after

onanism  or  sexual  excesses.
BParalysis  of  voluntary  muscles. ^Cereb.  spin,  meningitis.
BLocomotor  ataxia; after exposure  to  wet and cold; after

sexaal  excesses.
B Idiopathic  neuroma.
^'^  Sleep. B  Considerable  day-sleepiness. ^Chronic  diarrhoea. 6'Neu-

rosis  cordis.
B  After  siesta  great  dullness  of  head.

DWeary  sleepiness  in  all  limbs  in  evening,  with  chilliness.
R  Great  inclination  to  sleep  after  supper.
B  Sleepiness  and  continuous  yawning.

I  Yawning:  Avith  cramps  in  stomach;  with  fatigue;  with  chilli-
ness over  entire  body.
BLate  falling  asleep  in  evening.

B  Sleeplessness  :  from  many  thoughts  crowding  his  mind  ;  from
mind  turning  on  same  thought;  from  mortification  at  trifles;
until  2  or  3  a.m.
B Restless,  sleepless  nights. ^Megrim. ^Gonagra.


191  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

B  Light  slumber,  or utter sleeplessness, from overactivity  of
mind. ^Onset  of  typhus. ^Chronic  headache.

HThe  same  disagreeable  idea  always  rouses  the  sick  as  often
as  they  fall  into  a  light  slumber.

I  Horrible  phantasies  in  bed,  at  night,  before  going  to  sleep.

1 8 When  closing  eyes,  horrid  visions. ^Typhus. ^Lying-in.

B  Raves  in  sleep. ^Keratitis.

Before  going  to  sleep : severe  sweating  of  face ; pressure  in
stomach  ;  burning  itching  as  from  nettles.

I  Very  sensitive  to  noise,  on  going  to  sleep.

B  Starting  in  sleep,  or  just  when  going  to  sleep.

BBChild  chews  and  swallows  in  sleep.

Blleat  and  nausea,  with  very  uneasy  sleep.

BNightmare;  cramp  in  calves;  much  palpitation  and  tumult
of  blood  at  night.

BDuring  sleep: short, almost  sobbing  breathing; cough  at
night;  palpitation  of  heart.

B Flighty  and  wandering  at  night.

SThrows  himself  about  in  bed,  all  night. 6'Tinea.

B  Continually  throws  himself  about,  with  snoring  groaning,  the
entire  night.

B  Restless  at  night,  with  dry  heat. ^Coryza.

B  Restless  at  night,  with  sweats  on  head. ^Dentition.

B  Disagreeable  twitching  in  penis,  in  bed.

B  Visible  jerking  in  1.  great  toe,  in  bed.

B  a  Cold  feet  at  night  in  bed.

BNight  sweats;  also  after  3  a.m.  ;  sticky,  only  on  legs.

B Often  obliged  to  get  up  in  night,  two  or  three  times,  to  dry
her  head  with  a  towel. ^Softening  of  brain.

B  Severe  itching  on  various  parts  of  body,  in  bed.

B  Awakens  early  in  night.

B  Cannot  sleep  after  3  o'clock  in  morning.

B Frequent  awaking  at  night.

BOn  awaking:  is  roused  with  difficulty;  pain  in  head,  with
vertigo  ;  heaviness  of  head  ;  dull  pain  in  forehead  ;  at  first
dull,  then  pressive  pain  in  temple;  flickering  appear-
ance, like  sparks  of  fire  before  eyes ;  eyelids  stick  together  ;
taste  in  mouth  like  ink ;  dryness  of  tongue ;  drawing  and
cutting  in  abdomen ;  at  midnight,  cough  with  nausea ;
painful  stiffness  in  spine;  painfulness  of  finger-joints  as  if
swollen.

B  After  rising  from  bed,  stupefying  pressing  pain  in  head.

B Dozing  even  after  getting  up  on  her  feet.  ^Phthisis  pul-
monalis.

B  Inclination  to  stretch,  mornings.

B  Uneasiness  from  dreams  and  heat.

iMuch  orgasm  of  blood,  at  night,  with  many  dreams.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  192

I  I  Frightful  dreams  all  night,  and  at  last  a  sensual  dream  with

an  emission.
I  Voluptuous  dreams.

1  I  Anxious  and  frightful  dreams,  from  which  he  was  unable  to

free  himself  on  waking.

5  Fearful  of  fantastic  dreams  during  sleep.

B  Horrible  frightful  dreams  of  sickness,  death  and  corpses.
^^  Time.  Night :  cough  dry ;  cramp  in  hands :  both  knees
hot,  pale,  swollen,  very  sensitive  to  touch  ;  coldness  and
deadness  of  feet ;  burning  of  soles  of  feet ;  great  toe  very
sensitive  on  walking;  horrible  phantasies;  night -mare;
cramp  in  calves  ;  much  palpitation  and  tumult  of  blood  ;
flighty  wandering  ;  throws  himself  about  in  bed  ;  restless  ;
awakens  early  in  ;  much  orgasm  of  blood ;  frightful  dreams  ;
internal  heat,  especially  in  feet  and  hands  ;  skin  hot.
Midnio;ht :  before,  nio-ht-sAveats.

2  to  3  A.M.:  sleeplessness;  chillcommencing  in  pit  of  stomach.

3  A.M. :  often  night-sweats  ;  cannot  sleep  after.

Morning:  cough  with  yellowish  expectoration  ;  loose  cough  ;
grayish  expectoration,  purulent ;  coryza  with  stiffness  and
rigidity  of  nape  of  neck  ;  hands  feel  cramped  ;  fingers  stiff;
uneasiness  and  a  feeling  of  stiffness  in  anterior  muscles  on
beginning  to  walk  ;  ulcer-like  sores  on  r.  knee,  discharge
pus  on  pressure ;  exhaustion  ;  inclination  to  stretch  ;  dry
tongue  without  thirst.

Morning,  towards :  in  bed,  itching  worse.

11a.m.:  fever  without  chill.

Forenoon  :  chill  with  shivering.

Noon :  unusual  uneasiness  in  lower  extremities,  especially  in
ankles.

4  a.m.  to  4  P.M.  :  epilepsy.

Day,  during :  expectoration  ;  tremulous  pulsation  of  heart,
<^  after  eating  ;  burning  pain  at  nape  of  neck  to  occiput ;
very  weary  and  sleepy.

Afternoon  :  cough.

6  to  7  P.M. :  fever  without  chill.

Evening: cough  <  ; pain in finger-joints; insensibility of
feet ;  feet  sweat ;  chill  with  shivering  ;  fever  for  ten  days  ;
first  heat  efface,  then  chill ;  and  night  skin  hot.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cannot  bear  sun;  vertigo  while
walking  in  it.

Inclination  to  uncover  during  heat. Comp.  SuIjjJiur.

Inspiration  of  fresh  air  was  beneficial  and  strenghtening.

5  BAversion  to  open  air  ; the  least  cold  air  goes  right  through.
Great  sensitiveness  to  damp  cold  air.

Walking  in  open  air:  vertigo;  pressive  headache;  tightness
of  chest ;  crampy  pains  in  arms  ;  pain  in  patella  ;  pressive
pain  in  1.  tibia  ;  trembling  of  entire  body.


193  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

After  going from open air into room  : great peevishness :

throbbing  headache  <  ;  pressing  outward  in  forehead  >.
The  pain  is  aggravated  by  the  slightest  change, as  from a

current  of  air,  cold  or  warm.
Ailments  resulting  from  draft,  washing  or  working  in  water,

and  dread  of  water  and  bathing.
Immersion in cold  water > paroxysm of  cutting in ab-
domen.
After  wetting  feet :  pain  in  ureters.
Dry  weather  :  ulcers,
^o  Fever. ■  Coldness  :  of  face,  hands  and  feet ;  of  body,  and  cold
sweat ;  and  indistinct  vision,  with  attack  of  faintness, ■
I  She  feels  a  sort  of  inward  coldness.
I  Icy  coldness  in  and  on  head.

I  Chilliness:  with  vertigo  and  headache;  with  headache,  after
taking  cold  ;  with  stitches  through  head ;  with  pale,  sickly
complexion  ;  with  grasping  in  hypochondrium ;  with  thirst,
after  motion  of  feet ;  with  erysipelatous  inflammation  of
lower  leg ;  when  rising  in  morning ;  mostly  in  evening ;
and  cold  creeping  over  body  ;  though  limbs  feel  warm.
Chill  begins  in  scrobiculus  cordis  with  spasms,  or  cold  agoniz-
ing weight,  increasing  with  chill  and  disappearing  with  it,
I  Shivering  over entire body, with sudden pain  in parietal

bone,  as  if  it  had  been  forcibly  broken.
Fever  without  chill  at  11  a.m.  and  from  6  to  7  p.m.
i  Chills,  commencing  at  2  p.m.,  in  pit  of  stomach.
Chill  at  11  A.M.  one  day,  at  4  P.M.  the  next.
I  Chill  with  shivering,  mostly  in  evening,  yet  sometimes in

forenoon.
I  Paroxysms  occurred  every  other  day  at  11  A.M. ;  chills  began

in  feet  and  extended  toward  head. ^Intermittent.
I  Chill  and  headache;  drowsy  fatigue  in  all  limbs.
I  Thirst  during  chill. ^Intermittent.
Before  chill: drawing  in  all  joints,  and  great  heaviness  of

head  and  body.
I  Dry  heat  with  uneasiness  and  drowsiness.
I  Krequent  attack  of  sudden  universal  heat,  as  if  she  had  been

drenched  with  hot  water,  with  despair  of  life.
I  Heat  with  or  without  thirst,  followed  by  chilliness  and  cold

hands.
lExternal  heat,  with  internal  chilliness,  in  evening  in  bed.
I  Inward  chilliness  alternating  with  flushes  of  heat. ^Coryza.
I  Paroxysm  of  fever  in  forenoon  ;  chill  and  heat  alternating.
!S  Hectic  fever:  with  alternate  chills  and  heat;  frequent  at-
tacks of  flushes  of  heat,  with  anguish  and palpitation of
heart,  or  constant  shuddering  in  evening,  with  red  cheeks ;
skin  dry,  withered ; sweats  easily ; great  debility ; after

VOL.  III. — 13.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  194

'prolonged  or  profuse  lactation,  loss  of  fluids,  tuberculosis,

etc.,  etc.
B Morning;  fever.
iFlushes  of  heat  and  trembling.

■  Heat  and  ebullition  of  blood  to  head.

I  Frequent  flushes  of  heat,  -with anxiety  and palpitation of

heart.
I  Evening  fever  for  three  days,  first  heat  of  face,  then  chill.

■  Evening  fever,  with  burning  heat  in  belly  and  thirst  for  water

the  whole  night. /^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Fever  in  evening,  with  hard  quick  pulse.

■  Nightly  internal  heat,  especially  in  feet  and  hands,  morning

dry  tongue,  without  thirst ;  external  heat  of  head.

■  Skin  hot,  especially  evenings  and  nights,  when  it  is  covered

with sweat, which threatens to exhaust the child more
and  more.  "

■  Considerable fever, with thirst, hot dry skin, after get-

ting wet.

■  Little  fever. ^Gonagra. ^'Gout.

■  Heat  with  inclination  to  uncover.

■  Skin  hot,  then  cold  clammy  sweat. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Hot  sweat. ^Intermittent.

■  Sweat  over  whole  body,  with  severe  cramp  in  stomach,

■  Great  sweat  on  moderate  motion.

■  Perspiration  from  least  exertion,  even  in  open,  cold  air.

■  Easily  sweating. ^Tuberculosis. ^Worms.

■  Perspires  easily. ^During intervals of  epilepsy. ^Rheu-

matism. ^Bronchial  asthma.

■  Sweats  easily,  when  exerting  himself,  in  preaching. ^Bron-

chial catarrh.

■  Heat  and  sweat  after  epileptic  attack.

Sweat : of  palms  ; of  feet ; most  profuse  on  head  and  chest ;
with  uneasy  sleep  ;  during  first  sleep.

■  ■Morning  sweat.

■  Night  sweat,  especially  on  head,  neck  and  chest.

I  I  Night  sweat,  especially  before  midnight,  with  cold  limbs^

■  Clammy  night  sweat,  only  on  legs.

■  Cold  sweat  and  coldness  of  body.

■  Cold  sticky  sweat  on  feet.

■  Bod}"  always  bathed  in  sweat,  especially  head,  while  feet  are

very  cold. ^Palpitation.

■  ■Partial  sweats: ■  I  ■head,  scalp  wet,  cold,  wets  pillow  fir

around; ■male  organs; B  Inape  of  neck  ; ■■chest; ■axillae;
■  Ihands  ; ■knees  (^cholera  infantum) ; ■  I  ■feet.

■  Complaints  after  suppressed  sweat.

■  ■Intermittent  fever  after  abuse  of  quinine;  chronic  forms  with

scrofula;  chill  commences  in  stomach,  agonizing  weight,  in-
creasing with  chill  and  disappearing  with  it;  with  people


195  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

working  much  in  cold  water; cachectic  constitutions;  sup-
pressed eruptions  ;  desire  for  eggs.

I  Attacks  of  intermittent  with  spasmodic  symptoms.
iTertian  evening  fever;  first  heat  in  face,  then  chilliness.

I I  Typhoid  fever,  during  aggravation  which  precedes  rash  (14th
day),  palpitation,  tremulous  pulse,  anxiety,  red  face,  de-
lirium, jerks ;  short,  hacking  cough;  excessive  diarrhoea.

I  Sequelae  of  putrid  fever  ;  horses.
B  Useful  in  convalescence  from  yellow  fever.
"  Attacks, Periodicity. Returning at intervals : aching  in
throat.
■  Attacks  several  months  apart. ^Epilepsy.
I  Lasting  from  3  days  to  6  months. ^Hereditary  headache.
I  Worse  toward  new  moon. ^Grangrsena  oris.

I  Worse  during  solstice. ^Epilepsy.
;rWorse  about  new  moon. ^Crusta  lactea.

I I  Worse  during  full  moon. ^Epilepsy.
Some  symptoms  <  every  other  day.

""^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  lung  affected,  stitches  on  in-
spiration, to  throat-pit ;  abscess  ;  lancinating  pain  from  sore
spot  in  chest  to  r.  side  ;  pain  in  arm,  with  palpitation  ;
soreness  in  pectoral  muscles ;  shooting  pain  in  shoulder
down  along  arm  and  towards  heart ;  arm,  weakness  and  a
kind  of  paralysis  ;  shoulder,  shooting  ;  convulsive  trembling
of  index  finger  ;  middle  phalanx  of  middle  finger  painful ;
piercing  darting  pains  in  ring  finger  ;  foot  dragged  in  walk-
ing ;  lameness  in  knee.

Right :  side,  pain  in  ;  lancinating  pain  extending  from  1.  to  r.
side  ;  external  heat  and  swelling  ;  between  ribs  small  lump,
with  difficult  breathing  ;  shoulder,  arthritic  pain  ;  arm,  in-
ternal drawing  corrosive  pains  ;  arm,  pressing  pain  ;  wrist,
pain  as  from  a  sprain  ;  ganglion  in  wrist  size  of  a  bean  ;
atrophy  of  hip ;  sensation  as  if  hip  were  brittle,  as  well  as
short  and  small;  creaking  in  knee  when  walking;  ulcer-like
sores  on  knee  ;  small,  deep,  painless  ulcer  on  external  mal-
leolus ;  fingers,  hand,  arm  and  leg  cold  and  damp  ;  knee,
blood-boils.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  scalp  were  loosened  from  head  back  to  nape
of  neck  ;  pain  in  sacral  region,  back  and  neck,  after  over-
lifting,  as  if  wrenched,  as  if  they  were  swollen  ;  as  if  r.  hip
and  thigh  were  brittle,  as  well  as  short  and  small ;  as  if
lower  limbs  had  gone  to  sleep  ;  as  if  she  had  on  cold  damp
stockings.

Of  a  plug  :  which  moved  up  and  down  in  throat.

Cutting  :  in  chest,  on  inspiration.

Lancinating  :  from  sore  spot  in  1.  chest ;  nightly  in  arms.

Stitching  : headache  from  cough  ;  in  1.  chest  to  throat-pit ;  in


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  196

region  of  heart ;  pain  in  neck  ;  various  parts  of  back  ;  be-
tween scapulae  ;  in  thigh,  on  stepping  ;  in  knee.

Stitch  :  upwards  in  chest  muscles  ;  in  1.  shoulder-joint.

Concussive  stitch  :  in  chest.

Stinging  :  in  lump  between  ribs,  r.  side  extending  to  shoulder-
blades  ;  in  knee  ;  in  bones.

Needle-like  stitches  in  buttock.

Prickling  :  stitches  in  muscles  of  chest ;  on  neck  and  face.

Smarting  :  across  gluteal  region.

Corrosive  :  pains  in  r.  arm.

Rawness  :  in  chest,  from  dry  cough.

Burning  :  in  chest ;  pain  at  nape  of  neck  ;  pain  extending
downwards,  with  inclination  to  move  ;  in  back  of  hands  ;  on
tibia  ;  on  soles  of  feet,  at  night ;  pain  in  corns  ;  in  hands  ;
in  veins.

Biting  :  eruption  on  feet.

Gnawing  :  in  abdomen  and  stomach.

Boring  :  rheumatism  of  lumbar  vertebrse  :  in  bones.

Jerking  stitching  :  in  leg  above  ankle-joint.

Tearing:  pain  as  if,  in  chest;  rheumatism  of  lumbar  vertebrae;
in  coccyx;  pain  on  outer  side  of  forearm;  in  knee;  in  limbs;
in  legs  ;  ulcers.

Shooting:  pains  under  1.  shoulder;  through  limbs,  both  upper
and  lower.

Drawing :  pain  between  shoulder-blades ;  in  coccyx ;  pains  in
r.  arm  ;  in  middle  fingers ;  in  knee.

Nipping  :  in  entire  hypochondrium.

Pinching  :  in  entire  hypochondrium  ;  in  coccyx.

Piercing : darting  pain  in  1.  ring  finger.

Griping  :  in  abdomen  and  stomach.

Bruised :  arms  feel,  on  moving  them.

Soreness  :  in  chest.

Aching :  swelling  of  glands  of  neck  and  back  ;  of  shoulder-
muscles  and  arms  ;  smarting  across  gluteal  region.

Pressure:  in  stomach  and  chest;  on  chest;  between  and  under
shoulder-blades.

Pressing  pain  :  in  r.  arm.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  upper  cervical  vertebras.

Dull  pain  : day  and  night.

Undefined  pain:  in  inguinal  hernia;  in  both  sides  of  chest;  in
back,  with  oppression  of  chest;  in  neck,  on  turning  head ;  be-
tween shoulders  and  in  lower  part  of  back  ;  in  shoulders,  with
fever;  in  r.  wrist-joint,  as  from  a  sprain;  in  hands;  in
tendo  achilles ;  as  if  beaten  in  upper  arms  and  middle
of  thighs.

Painful :  stiffness  in  back.

Brittle:  as  if  r.  hip  and  thigh  were.

Urging :  in  back.


197  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

Throbbing  :  ulcers.

Tightness  :  on  chest.

Tightening:  pain  in  legs  during  pressive  cramps  in  stomach.

Compressive  pain  :  in  heart.

Constriction  :  in  chest,  with  anxiety  ;  of  abdomen  upwards.

Cramped  :  hands  and  forearms  ;  in  feet  and  legs;

Twitching :  in  penis,  in  bed.

Shocks:  in  head  at  night,  from  dry  cough;  dull,  from  posterior

wall  of  chest  upwards.
Heaviness :  and  painful  weight  in  limbs,  and  great  fatigue  on

walking  ;  of  the  body.
Weight :  sensation  of,  in  different  parts.
Weariness  :  of  .lower  limbs.
Weak  :  feeling  in  back  ;  in  1.  arm.
Numbness  :  of  single  parts  ;  in  side  of  back,  on  which  he  has

been  lying  ;  in  hands ;  in  great  toe  on  walking.
Dead  :  fingers  and  feet  feel  as  if.
Paralytic  bruised  pain  in  long  bones  and  in  joints  of  limbs  ;

also  in  small  of  back,  on  motion.
Warmth:  ascending  nape  of  neck.
Heat:  and  swelling  of  r.  chest;  around  coccyx.
Cold: feeling  in  gluteal  region;  feet;  icy  feeling  in  and  on

head  ;  like  cold  air  passing  over  the  part.
Itching  : in  chest ; burning  on  neck  ; on  inner  part  of  fore-
arm ;  of  thighs ;  on  tibia ;  on  lower  leg  and  foot ;  eruption

on  feet,
**  Tissues. I  Congestions :  head;  eyes;  ears;  nose;  face;  chest;

abdomen  ;  limbs  ;  plethora.

I  Anaemic  symptoms. ^Menorrhagia. ^Uterine  tum.or. ^Fol-

lowing loss  of  fluids,  hemorrhage,  sweat,  diarrhoea,  seminal
emissions,  etc.

I I  Chlorosis.

■  Poor  assimilation. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
1  Bleeding  from  inner  parts.

iFungus  medullaris.

■  Bloody  tumors.

B I  Varicose  veins  ;  burning  in  veins.

BB  Inflammation,  painful  swelling  and  induration  of  glands.

■  Glandular  swelling. ^Keratitis. ^Catarrh. ^Gonarthrocace.

■  Atrophy, with glandular swelling of scrofulous subjects.

^Marasmus,  etc.
B  B  Cystic  swellings.
B  Cancer  of  breast,  very  sensitive,  and  painful  to  touch.

■  Sour  taste  in  mouth,  or  of  food,  sour  vomiting, especially

with  children  during  dentition,  also  sour  diarrhoea,  accom-
pany affections  of  mucous  membranes.
iPus:  albuminous,  whitish,  yellow,  copious  or  scanty,  putrid.

■  Mild  pus. ^Blenorrhoea.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  198

bPus  stinking. ^Horses.

■  Pyemia.

■  Granular vegetations; 1 1  polypus (in nose, ear, bladder,

uterus).

■  Boring,  stinging  or  pulsating  in  bones.

■  Exostoses;  horses,  continually  stretch  the  limb.

■  ■Tardy  development  of  bony  tissues,  with  lymphatic  enlarge-

ments.

■  Osteomalacia  with  decubitus.

■  8 Softening  of  bones; fontanelles  remaining  open  too  long,

and  skull  very  large;  swelling  of  joints.

■  ■Curvature  of  bones,  especially  of  spine  and  long  bones.
B I  Extremities  deformed,  crooked. ^Rhachitis.

■  Swelling,  caries,  necrosis  and  malformation  of  bones  in  scro-

fulous individuals.

■  Acts  on  epiphyses  of  bones.

■  Spinal  meningitis  extending  from  diseased  bones  of  spine.

■  Osteo-myelitis  scrofulosa.

■  Steatoma,  reappearing  and  suppurating  every  four  weeks.

■  Crackling,  or  crepitation  in  joints,  as  if  they  were  dry.

■  Arthritic  nodosities,  with  stiff  joints.

■  ■Hip disease; second  stage; scratches  head on awaking;

craves  boiled  eggs  ;  swollen  glands  ;  diarrhoea,  etc.

■  White  swelling  of  knee;  pressing,  stitching  pains  intermitting

at  night  and  during  rest.

■  Twitching  of  muscles.

■  Cramps  in  single  parts,  which  draw  limbs  crooked,  especially

toes  and  fingers.

■  Easy  straining.

■  Muscular  weakness ;  children.

■  ■  Muscles  soft  and  flabby. ^Cholera  infantum. ^Atrophy  of

infants. ^Asthma. /^Scrofula. ^Chlorosis. ^Chorea,  etc.

■  Muscular  atrophy; muscles  of  back  and  limbs  wasted.

■  With  rheumatic  pains  hard  welts  are  to  be  felt  in  muscles.

■  Rheumatism. ^Goitre.

■  Arthritic  tearing  in  muscles.

■  Visible  quivering  of  skin,  from  feet  to  head,  with  which  he

becomes  dizzy.
J  a  Scrofulous  eruptions  and  ulcers  in  children.

■  Fistulous,  carious  and  scrofulous  ulcers.
■Puffiness. ^Chlorosis.

sBloatedness of  body and face, with swelled abdomen, in
children.

■  In  eruptions  of  skin  determined  by  diseases,  which  usually

(as  haemorrhoids,  disorders  in  secretion  of  urine,  etc.)  locate
in  internal  organs.

■  Anasarca. ^Amenorrhoea. ^xVfter  scarlatina.


199  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

1 1  Tendency to obesity, especially in cliildren and young

people.
I  Atrophy,  especially  of  neck  and  face. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.
lEmaciation ; imperfectly  growing  bones. ^Hydrocephalus

traumaticus.  ,

■  Great  emaciation,  with  swelled  abdomen  and  good  appetite.

■  Marasmus;  large  belly;  body  and  also  limbs  wasted;  appetite

good;  hollow,  wrinkled  face;  skin  dry,  wrinkled;  hair  dry;
averse  to  exercise,  etc.

lEmaciation.  ^Cholera  infantum.  ^Tuberculosis.  ^Intes-
tinal catarrh.  ^Chronic  diarrhoea.  ^Leucorrhoea.  ^Pneu-
monia.

llNutrition  impaired  with  tendency  to  glandular  engorgements.

li  Scrofula.
"*'  Touch, Passive  Motion. Injuries. Horseback  riding  :

>  headache.

Pressure :  middle  phalanx  of  1.  middle  finger  painful ;  <C  ach-
ing in  female  genitals.

Touching  :  >»  stitches  in  temple  ;  small  ulcers  on  index  finger
painful;  both  knees  hot,  pale,  swollen,- very  sensitive  to
touch;  pain  in  calf ;  painful,  cancer  of  breast.

Cannot  bear  tight  clothing,  particularly  around  hypochondria  ;

>  from  loosening  garments.

Lifting:  easily  overstrained  or  sprained;  headache,  backache,

stiff  neck,  sore  throat.
Small  wounds  suppurate  and  do  not  heal ;  the  wound  is  raw

and  inflamed,  painful  as  if  beaten.

I  After  burns:  chronic  diarrhoea  ;  tumors.

II  Traumatic  ophthalmia.

*®  Skin. Bitching  on  various  parts  of  body.

(Itching  at  all  times  worse  towards  niorning,  in  bed.  ^Herpes
circinatus.

■  Eruptions  burn  and  itch. ^Keratitis.

■  Visible  quivering  of  skin. 6'Muscular  atrophy.

■  Skin  pale  and  flabby,  or  dry,  shrivelled  and  yellow.

■  Bloated  appearance  of  skin.

■  Chaps,  or  rhagades,  especially  in  those  who  work  in  water.

■  Unhealthy,  ulcerative  skin  ;  even  srpall  wounds  suppurate.

■  Skin  sensitive  to  rubbing,  when  washing;  she  must  do  it  her-

self, and  very  gently.

■  Perceptible  quivering  of  skin  from  head  to  foot,  witli  giddiness.

■  Eruption  of  prickly  heat  over  whole  body.

■  Violent  irritation  about  chest,  back,  neck  and  shoulders,  and

in  calves  of  legs,  followed  by  a  reddish  rash,

■  Elevated  red  stripes  on  tibia,  with  severe  itching  and  burning

after  rubbing.

■  A  red  rash  aj)pears  on  the  7th  day. ^Peritonitis.

■  Whole  body, particularly lower  limbs, covered with large


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  200

pomplii  of  angry  red  color,  itching  terribly;  TN-hen  scratched

increasing  in  size; ■<  at  night.
I  Chronic  form  of  urticaria,  mostly  disappearing  in  cold  air.
I  Skin  rough,  with  appearance  like  miliary  rash.
I  Miliary  eruption  over  abdomen,  itching  so  that  he  must  scratch

until  he  screams.

■  Erysipelas  (lower  leg,  with  swelling)  in  repeated  attacks.

■  Scarlatina, with,  corrosive  nasal discharge  and swelling  of

glands  of  ear,  first  left  side,  then  right ;  sore  throat ;  skin
of  face  pale  bloated,  no  sign  of  eruption  there  ;  threatened
paralysis  of  lungs.

!  Chronic  forms  or  protracted  cases  of  scarlatina,  where  tem-
perament is  leucophlegmatic,  nose  sore  and  obstructed,
glands  of  neck  swollen  ;  slow  fever,  especially  <  in  morn-
ing; child  pale  and  languid,  does  not  seem  to  convalesce
after  regular  recession  of  eruption.

BExtensive  portions  of  body  without  redness. ^Scarlatina.

I  Sequela  of  scarlatina. ^Parotitis.

I  Yellow  color  of  skin,  with  scrofula.

lEruption  of  white  spots  and  some  scattered  red  patches  on
wrists,  back  of  hands,  thighs,  legs  and  ankles,  with  violent
irritation.

iSpots  glistening  through  skin.

I  Fresh  leprous  spot  on  chin  ;  a  rough  dark  spot  soon  becomes
the  size  of  a  half  dollar.

I  Milk-white  spots  on  skin  with  dark  borders.  '

I  Spots  on  skin  usually  white  became  more  bluish.

I  Skin  has  a  bran-like  coating.

■  Herpes,  burning;  chapped;  furfuraceous,  or  moist,

■  Ringworm.

■  Scaly  skin.

■  Eruptions  moist,  scurfy. ^Milk  crust.

■  Scurfy  pimples  on  border  of  free  edge  of  lower  lip.

■  jMoist  eruption  behind  r.  ear.

■  Thick  crusts,  moist  or  dry. /^Dermatitis.

■  ■Eczema,  thin  moist  scabs  upon  head,  with  swollen  cervical

glands  ;  eczema  behind  ears.

■  Skin  hypertrophied,  dark  red,  secrets  a  corrosive  fluid,  which

dries  into  thick  crusts  on  both  hands  and  forearms;  burn-
ing itching  of  parts;  motion  of  wrist  and  finger-joints  is
painful.

■  Eruption  with  thick  scales  and  yellow  pus  underneath.

■  Eruptions  yielding  a  thick,  mild  secretion. (^Impetigo.

■  In  centre  of  spots  dry  vesicular  elevations  change  into  nodules.

■  Papules  in  various  parts  of  body.

■  Pustular  eruption  on  head,  neck,  shoulders  and  buttocks.

■  Pustules  under  breast  painful  on  rubbing.

■  Acne  indurata  or  punctata.


201  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

■  Indurations  in  skin  of  horses.

I  Hard  eczematous  vesicles  on  backs  of  hands.

I  Itch-like  vesicles  between  fingers  and  in  bends  of  elbows.

I  Small  phagedenic  blisters  on  index  fingers.

■  Blisters  that  leave  raw  spots,  or  are  converted  into  ulcers,

especially  on  elbow,  .on  upper  and  forearm  ;  accompanied
by  bloated,  florid  and  scaly  appearance  of  face,  and  scabby
condition  of  feet.
iBlood-boils  :  appear  on  head,  neck  and  shoulders,  or  on
thigh  instead  of  his  asthma,  during  new  moon  ;  •  on  both
cheeks,  in  front  of  ears;  on  r.  knee,  can  press  quantity  of
pus  out.

■  Eradicates  the  predisposition  to  boils.

■  Old  ulcers,  deep,  fistulous,  carious.

■  Ulcers  :  simple,  indolent,  sloughing  and  hEemorrhagic,  putrid,

carious,  white  or  yellow;  tearing  and  throbbing;  <  in
morning;  also  just  before  falling  asleep;  on  awaking;  when
letting  limb  hang  down ;  before  menstruation  ;  from  wet
poultices  ;  in  the  Spring  of  the  year ;  in  wet  weather  ;
>■  when  keeping  limb  elevated ;  in  dry  weather ;  from
rubbing  or  scratching.

■  Ulcers:  with  red,  hard,  swollen  circumference;  high  and  feeble

granulations ;  without  much  pain  ;  or,  tearing  and  throbbing
in  ulcers  ;  pus  scanty,  albuminous.

■  Subcutaneous  tubercle.

■  A  red  excrescence,  size  of  bean,  every  four  weeks;  inflames,

breaks  open,  becomes  hollow,  discharges  pus,  and  then
heals.

■  Round  swellings,  Avhich  appear  in  different  places,  on  joints

of  upper  limb,  breasts,  lower  legs  and  feet,  with  needle-like
stitches,  especially  at  joint;  also  pain  in  ear,  with  fever  heat
and  thirst.

■  Encysted  tumors  ;  naked  tumors. ^Horses.

■  Cystic  swellings,  discharging  pus.

■  Bloody  tumors ;  nsevus.

■  Cholesteatoma.

■  Enchondroma.

■  Spongy  tumor.

■  Recurring  fibroid  tumors.

Malignant  tumors  on  head,  eyes,  nose,  mouth,  neck  and  female
genitals.

■  Lipoma,  from  abuse  of  liquors,  or  from  scrofula.

■  Many  very  small  warts  appear  here  and  there.

■  Warts:  round,  soft  at  base,  almost  of  color  of  skin,  upper

surface  hard,  rough,  whitish  and  horny.

■  Wart  appears,  itches,  bleeds,  and  disappears.

■  Warts:  inflamed; stinging;  suppurating,  and  forming  ulcers.

■  Warts  thickly  studding  mouths  of  sheep.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  202

I  Variola  during  teething  ;  sequelae  of  variola.
I  Sequelae  of  measles  ;  eye  disease,  etc.

B  After  suppressed  eruptions.  ^Epilepsy.  ^Megrim.  ^Nerv-
ous palpitation  of  heart,

I  After  suppressed  pimples  on  face. ^Nervous  palpitation  of

heart.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■  Pale,  leucophlegmatic,  weakly,
timid  persons.

i  Scrofulous  constitutions,  with  pale  face,  rather  fair  complexion
and  disposition  to  corpulence.

iMore  frequently  indicated  with  the  young ;  cannot  be  often  re-
peated with  the  old,  unless  higher  potencies  are  used.

II  Diseases  of  children,  especially  during  dentition.

B  Children  and  sucklings  become  thick  and  gross,  as  if  fat,  but
are  pale  and  unhealthy.

B  B Leucophlegmatic  temperament  in  childhood. ^Dentition.

BFair,  plump  children. ^Crusta  lactea. ^Urticaria,  etc.

BB Children  self-willed;  fair,  plump  ;  fat,  flabby,  with  red  face,
sweat  easily,  and  readily  take  cold;  large  heads  and  ab-
domens, open  fontanelles  and  sutures,  and  crooked  legs.

iFat  child,  set.  18  months,  light  hair,  blue  eyes.  ^Tinea
capitis.

B  Child,  set.  2,  blue  eyes,  blonde  hair  and  fair  skin. ^Hives.

B  Boy,  set.  2,  strumous,  head  sweats  much  at  night.

B  Child,  set.  3,  blue  eyes,  blonde  hair,  plump  fat  habitus.
^Strabismus.

BBoy,  set.  10;  since  his  4th  year. ^Mesenteric  diarrhcBa.

BMiss,  set.  14,  light  complexion. ^Epilepsy.

B Puberty;  girls  who  begin  with  menses  too  early  and  too
profuse;  fat,  yet  chlorotic;  plethoric  girls,  amenorrhoea,  etc.

BGirl,  set.  16,  fair  complexion,  strumous  family,  easily  excited
to  tears. ^Herpes  circinatus.

BGirl,  set.  20,  small,  plethoric  and  blonde.  ^Chlorosis  with
heraicrania.

B  Light-haired  youth,  growing  rapidly. ^Tuberculosis.

B  8  Young  who  grow  too  fat  and  heavy. ^Ozsena  scrofulosa.

BA  young  man,  after  he  had  worked  with  his  bare  feet  in
cold  clay.

BA  widow,  set.  40,  large  figure,  round  form,  brown  hair,  blue
eyes,  white  and  delicate  skin,  constantly  red  cheeks,  irrit-
able. ^Gout.

B Plethoric  woman. ^Vulvar  tumor.

a  Climacteric  years;  hysteric  women  who  have  not  been  mar-
ried ;  who  have  had  profuse  catamenia  ;  metrorrhagia.

BA  woman,  set.  60,  night  sweats  of  head  since  37th  year.

BMan,  set.  60,  dark-haired,  muscular,  thin  and  tall. ^Polypus.

iFat,  unhealthy  children. ^Ulcer  of  cornea.


203  CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

I  Fat,  flabby  children,  with  red  face,  who  sweat  and  catch  cold

easily. ^Enuresis  nocturna.

I I  During  dentition. ^Eclampsia.

llNervous,  hemorrhoidal,  plethoric  and  lymphatic  constitu-
tions ;  disposed  to  grow  fat.

■  Chronic  headaches  of  torpid  constitutions.
I  Gouty  people.

I  Herpes  in  the  scrofulous,  with  enlarged  glands,
a  Tuberculous  diathesis.

■  Scrofulous  diathesis. ^Rhachitis. ^Hydrocephalus. 6'Crusta

lactea.  ^Keratitis.  ^Cataract.  ^Strabismus.  ^Herpes.
^Polypus  auris.  ^Canorum  oris.  ^Intestinal  catarrh.
^Catarrh.  ^  Worms.  ^  Amenorrhoea.  ^Menorrhagia.
^Uterine  displacement.  ^Uterine  cancer.  ^Pruritus
vulvae.  ^  Dysmenorrhoea.  ^Gonarthrocace.  ^Bronchial
catarrh.  ^Asthma.  ^Rheumatism.  ^Eclampsia.  ^Inter-
mittent. ^Chorea.  (^Scarlatina.  ^Coryza.  "  ^Nasal  ca-
tarrh. ^Hepatic  affections.

IlLeucophlegmatic,  light  complexion,  blue  eyes,  blonde  hair,
fair  skin.

I  Fair,  light  complexion,  grows  too  rapidly. ^Tuberculosis.

I  Full  habit  and  ebullitions.

■  Sanguine  temperament,  muscles  soft,  flabby. ^Goitre.

■  Darkish  yellow  complexion,  spare  habit. ^Icterus  calculosus.

■  Nervous  temperament,  delicate  constitution. ^Megrim.

■  Black  hair,  dark  complexion,  blue  eyes. ^Rheumatism.
■Nervous  temperament,  dark  hair  and  gray  eyes. ^Proso-
palgia.

iNervo-bilious  temperament,  black  hair,  dark  complexion.
^Muscular  atrophy.

■  Fat  persons. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Persons  inclined  to  grow  fat. /9At  the  onset  of  typhus.

■  Leucophlegmatic  temperament. ^Cholera  infantum. ^Lar-

yngo  -  tracheitis.  ^Bronchitis.  ^Haematuria.  ^  Gleet.
^Menorrhagia.

■  Persons  subject  to  nightly  emissions. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  For  drunkards.

^^ Relations. Antidotes: CampJior,  IiJec,  Nitr.  ac,  Nitr.  spir.

dulc,  Nux  vom.,  Sulphur.
Calc.  ost?\  antidotes:  Bisinuth,  Cinchon.,  Chin.  suJph.,  Digit.,

Mezer.  (headache),  Nitr.  ac,  Phosphor.
Compatible: before  llLycop.,  Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  Platin.,

Silica; after \  Qhmnom., iCinchon., Coniicm, \  Cuprum,

llNitr.  ac, \ Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,  llSulphur  (especially if

pupils  dilate).
Incompatible:  before  tiNitr.  ac.  and  llSulphur,  according  to

Hahnemann.
Complementary  to  Bellad.


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.  204

Compare:  Alum.,  Amm.  mur.  (tightness  of  chest);  Arnica,
Arsen.  (swollen  mesenteric  glands);  iBryon.  (child  chews
and  swallows  in  sleep);  Baryt.,  llBellad.  (eclampsia,  scar-
latina, headache,  crusta  lactea,  etc.);  Calc.  phos'ph.  (cold
damp  feet,  uterine  trouble);  Ohamom.,  Cina  (worms);
I'CineJion.  (deafness,  etc.);  Coccul.  (weak  from  talking);
Conium,  I  Cuprum  (epilepsy);  Fit.  mas.  (tapeworm);  Fluor,
ac.  (naevus) ;  Jodum,  Ignat.  (child  chews  and  swallows  in
sleep);  I  Zjoec..  (diarrhoea,  cholera  infantum);  Kali  carh.,
ULycop.  (typhus,  intertrigo,  gout,  ophthalmia,  gonitis,  epi-
lepsy, etc.);  Magnes.,  iMercur.  (canker  sores,  quinsy,  heart,
stool,  sweat,  particularly  on  chest  with  old  people,  etc.);
Mezer.,  Nitr.  ac,  \Nuxvom.  (headache,  spasm  of  eyelid);
I  Phosphor,  (burning  in  vertex);  Pulsat.  (sleepless,  restless
after  scarlatina) ;  Rhus  tox.  (rheumatism,  ophthalmia) ;  Saech.
alb.  (swollen  mesenteric  glands);  Secale  (menses);  Seyia
(convalescence  from  yellow  fever);  I  Silica  (desire  to  be  mes-
merized, nsevus,  swollen  mesenteric  glands);  ilSulphur
(epilepsy,  intertrigo,  gleet,  etc.);  Teucrium  (polypus);
Veratr.  (weak  from  talking);  Ztncum  (scarlatina).

General  remarks  :  Acts  a  long  time  ;  with  children,  when  in-
dicated, may  be  often  repeated ;  with  aged  people,  however,
it  should  not  be  repeated,  for  if  given  to  them  a  second  time,
especially  if  the  first  dose  benefitted,  it  will  usually  do  hnrm  ;
when  the  remedy  does  not  otherwise  act,  put  it  in  child's
milk,  if  bottle  fed.


205  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

The  Phosphate  of  Calcium.


This  salt  of  lime  was  prepared  and  proved  as  follows :

1.  Pyrophosphoric  acid  in  the  vitreous  state  dissolved  in  distilled
water  by  drops  in  lime  water  until  the  water  acted  neutral,  the  gelatin-
ous deposit  dried  with  filteiing  paper.  Proved  in  3rd  and  30th.  Contains
several  combinations  of  Phosph.  ac.  and  Calcarea.

2.  Freitag:  Calcined  bones  powdered  in  diluted  sulphuric  acid  dis-
solved till  Siiturated,  filtered,  precipitated  by  carbonate  of  ammonia,
washed  with  water.  Proved  by  the  Allentown  Academy  in  3rd  and  30th.
Contains  a  potency  of  sulphate  of  ammonia.

3.  Lappe :  Pure  phosphoric  acid  prepared  from  bones,  saturated  with
ammonia  till  it  commences  to  act  on  reddened  litmus.  Standing  for
several  days,  it  forms  a  sediment  of  alumina,  ferrum,  calcarea,  or  all  that
may  be  contained  in  it,  it  is  then  filtered,  diluted  and  a  solution  of  calc.
mur.  added,  which  is  discontinued  before  it  ceases  to  precipitate;  it
is  then  washed,  filtered  and  after  drying  slightly  heated  in  a  platina
crucible  to  drive  off"  the  last  remains  of  amm.  mur.

This  was  potentized  by  Lappe  and  Jenichen,  and  proved  by  Schreter.

4.  Beneke:  Phosphate  of  soda  and  muriate  of  lime;  the  precipitate
washed. Contains  potencies  of  natr.  mur.

5.  Gruner  separated  a  neutral  combination  by  adding  to  one  part
calc.  acetica  one  and  a  half  of  natr.  phosph.,  washing  it  well.  This  never
will  remove  all  the  acetate  of  sodium.

6.  Cate:  Five  parts  of  calcined  ox  bones,  finely  powdered,  well  mixed
with  six  parts  of  oxalic  acid  and  20  to  30  of  distilled  water.  Af  er  stand-
ing, filtered  to  separate  the  oxalate  of  lime.  The  phosi)hor!C  acid  de-
canted and  bicarbonate  of  soda  added  till  acid  reaction  ceased.  Evapor-
ated till  phoisphate  of  soda  crystalized  ;  a  clear  solution  of  pulverized
oyster-shells  in  boiling  acetic  acid  till  neutral,  evaporated  and  crys
talized.  Each  of  the  two  separately  dissolved  and  solutions  mixed,  washed
or  dried. Some  acetate  of  sodium  will  remain. The  same  as  Gruner's.

Iq  1833  Calcarea  phosphorica  mixta  cured  the  broken  femur  of  an
old  man.

In  1834  provings  of  this  preparation  by  Gideon  Humphreys,  Green,  Bute
and  others  published  in  Correspondenzblatt,  Jahr,  etc.

In  1835  provings  in  Allentown  of  Freitag's  preparation.  •

In  1846  Schreter's  provings  of  Jenichen  ^°  published  in  Arcliiv,  23.

In  1850  Beneke's  experiments. See  British  Quarterly  XVII,  41,  637.

In  1858  Cate  in  Transactions  of  the  American  Institute,  15th  meeting,  in
Brooklyn.

^  Mind. I A  lack  of  definiteness  or  total  loss  of  memory.

DForgetfulness  , forgets  what  he  has  clone  a  short  while  ago.


CALCAREA  PIIOSPIIORICA.  206

i Writes  wrong  words,  or  same  words  twice.

I  Dullness: with every headache; <  from bodily exertion;

>>  from  cold  washing  ;  from  mental  occupation.

Obtuse  intellect;  difficulty  in  performing  intellectual  opera-
tions ;  cannot  clearly  distinguish.

Stupidity;  indifference;  cretinism.

B Likes  to  be  alone.

I I  She  wishes  to  be  at  home,  and  when  at  home,  to  go  out;
goes  from  place  to  place.

Involuntary  sighing.

B Often  screammg  and  grasping  with  hands;  cold  sweat  in
face,  body  cold  ;  children  with  open  fontanelles.

Does  not  want  to  do  what  he  has  to  do.

Feels  as  if  she  had  been  frightened.

Anxiousness  with  other  complaints.

B  Anxiety  of  children:  in  pit  of  stomach;  Avith  bellyache;  with
chest  complaints  ;  with  palpitation.

B Peevish  and  fretful  children, ^Cholera  infantum.

i Inclined  to  indignation  and  anger.

BFeel  complaints  more  when  thinking  about  them.

Unpleasant  news  bring  him  beside  himself;  sweat  breaks  out.

B  Ailments  from  grief,  disappointed  love.

After  vexation depressed; cannot  work, walks as if  lame;
looseness  of  bowels.
^  Sensorium. Feeling  of  fullness and confusion,  or  a dullness
accompanying  headache.

B Vertigo:  on  motion;  when  getting  up,  or  rising  from  sitting;
when  walking  in  open  air ;  <  in  windy  weather ;  with
costiveness  of  old  people ;  with  dull  headache,  nausea,  com-
plaints of  eyes,  neck,  aching  limbs;  with  whites  before
catamenia.

BOld  people  stagger  when  getting  up  from  sitting.
^  Inner  Head. B  Fullness  and  pressure  of  head,  <  from  pressure
of  hat.

I  Pressure  above  eyes  and  towards  them.

B  Headache  over  forehead,  with  tearing  pains  in  arms  and
hands,  most  in  wrists  and  r.  middle  finger.

B  Headache  on  vertex  and  behind  ears,  with  a  drawing  in  mus-
cles of  neck,  to  nape  and  occiput.

BHeat  in  head ;  burning  on  top,  running  down  to  toes.
. B  Headache,  throbbing  through  both  sides, most  after quick
motion.

B  Aching,  drawing  pains  around  lateral  protuberances  of  occiput.

B Dullness  with  every  headache;  >  from  cold  washing  and
mental  occupation  ; <  from  bodily  exertion.

lHead^c^f^:  with  gastric  symptoms,  with  uterine  complaints,
or  foiluwing  other  sensations;  in  peevish  and  fretful  chil-
dren ;  <  from  change  of  weather,  extending  from  forehead


207  CALCA.REA  PHOSPHORICA.

to  nose,  or  from  temples  to  jaw,  with  some  rheumatic  feel-
ing from clavicles to  Avrists ; <C  when thinking  about  it,
and  in  morning ; >>  from  cold  washing  and  mental  occu-
pation.
llHeadache  of  schoolgirls,  with  diarrhoea.

■  Rheumatic  headache  ; <  at  night.
iHypergemia  of  brain.

I  Acute  and  chronic  hydrocephalus  and  hydrocephaloid. ^Cho-
lera infantum.
I  Hydrocephalus  congenitus.

■  Sensation  as  if  brain  were  pressed  against  skull. ^Fungus

of  cranium.

■  Meningitis  involving  bony  structure  of  spine.
Idiopathic  fungus  of  dura  mater.

■  Stupid  look,  taking  no  interest  in  any  thing,  keeps  eyes  shut,

always  worse  in  wane  of  day,  great  inclination  for  salt  meat
or  potatoes  :  fontanelles  too  much  open. ^Incipient  hydro-
cephalus.
*  Outer  Head. Headache  ;  head  feels  and  is  cold  to  touch.

■  Sore  pain,  drawing,  rending,  tearing  in  bones  of  skull,  most

along sutures of  skull, particularly between frontal and
parietal  bones,  or  around  temporal  bones.

■  Crawls  run  over  top  of  head;  as  if  ice  were  lying  on  upper

occiput.

■  Head  is  hot,  with  smarting  of  roots  of  hair.

■  AflFections  of  bony  structure  of  skull.

■  Skull  very  soft  and  thin,  crackling  like  paper  Avhen  pressed

upon. ^Cholera  infantum.
j|@°=  Fontanelles  remain  open  too  long,  or  close  and  re-open.
Nonunion of  bones  in  fracture  of  skull,  particularly  in  the

aged.

■  Depression  on  occipital  bone. ^Sanguineous  occipital  tumor,
j  Cranio  tabes.

■  Encephalocele.

■  Cannot  hold  head  up;  moves  it  from  place  to  place;  head

totters.

■  Tied  feeling  or  tension  in  scalp  of  forehead.

■  Itching  black  scurfs  ;  poor  crop  of  hair,  or  losing  hair.

■  Scalp  sore,  hurts;  creeping,  numbness,  or  cold  crawls,  cold-

ness on  occiput.

■  Impetigo  on  scalp.

■  Scrofulous  ulcers  on  top  of  head.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Light,  particularly  candle  or  gas-light,  hurts
eyes.

■  Letters  change  into  little  black  points,  or  small  round  gray

spots,  or  as  if  a  little  bird  was  flying  from  left  to  light,

■  Shimmering,  glittering,  fiery  circles  ;  dreams  of  fire.

■  Veil  over  eyes  ;  eyes  misty. ^Amaurosis  and  cataract.


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.  208

I  Eyeballs  hurt;  aching  as  if  beaten.

■  Cool  feeling  toward  or  back  of  eyes.

I B  Sensation  in  eye,  as  if  something  were  in  it ; renewed  if

others  talk  about  it.
Squinting  distortion  of  eyeballs,  as  if  it  were  from  pressure;

eyeballs  seem  distended,  they  protrude  somewhat.
Eyes  red,  capillary  vessels  visible  in  streaks  from  corners  to

cornea.

■  Conjunctivitis. ^Dentition.
I  Ulcers  and  spots  on  cornea.

iLeft  eye  much  inflamed,  cornea  hazy,  particularly  upper  por-
tion, and  traversed  by  red  vessels;  photophobia.  ^Keratitis
after  variola.

Eyes  water,  most  Avith  gaping.

Furuncle  between  r.  eyebrow  and  upper  lid,  eye  inflamed,  lids
falling  or  closed,  most  in  morning.

Hot  feeling  in  lids.

Sweat  of  brows  and  lids.

I  Spasm  of  eyelids.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Singing  and  other  noises,  most  in  r.  ear.

B  Difficult  hearing.

Earache,  tearing,  shooting,  jerking  pain  ;  alternating  or  asso-
ciated with  rheumatic  complaints.

B  Excoriating;  discharge  from  ears.

Heat  of  inner  and  outer  ear.

Burning  itching  of  outer  ear  in  warm  room,

B Outer  ears  cold;  cold  and  aching,  or  hot  and  aching.

BCold  feeling  or  coldness  of  ears,  followed  by  throbbing,  heat
and  hard  hearing.

Ears  cold  ;  point  of  nose  cold.

B  Pimples  on  ears.

Soreness  in  and  around  ears.

Inner  and  outer  ear  swollen,  red,  sore,  itching  and  hot.

Aching,  pressing,  tearing,  rending  in  and  around  ears ;  most
behind  or  below.

Burning  pain  on  a  small  spot  over  r.  ear,  highly  sensitive  to
slightest  touch.

B  All  bones  around  ears  ache  and  hurt ;  shooting  outwards.

B  Fain  in  processus  zygomaticus.

Aching,  sore  pain  in  region  of  parotid  glands.

Large  ulcers  above  or  around  ears  and  in  region  of  parotid
glands.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Tickling  in  nose  and  sneezing.

B  Streaks  of  blood  ;  nose  bleeding,  in  afternoon.

Biting  stinging  in  front  corner  of  1.  nostril,  later  r.  nostril :
sneezing  and  running  of  tears.

B  Sneezing,  and  soreness  on  edges  of  alse,  fluent  coryza,  in
forenoon.


209  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

I  Corjza : fluent  in  a  cold  room  ; stopped  in  warm  air  and

outdoors.
I  Chronic  catarrh,  with  scrofulous  children,
j  Ozaena  scrofulosa.
I  Large  pedunculated  nasal  polypi.

■  Swollen  nose  with sore  nostrils,  small  abscesses,  ulcers,  in

scrofulous  children.
I  Point  of  nose  :  icy  cold; itching.
^  Uppsr  Face. >  Faceache  (neuralgic-rheumatic)  ■<  at  night.

I  Pain  in  face,  particularly  in  upper  jaw-bone,  from  right  to

left ;  extends  from  other  parts  to  face,  or  from  face  to  other

parts.

■  Face:  pale;  sallow;  yellowish;  earthy;  full  of  pimples.

I  Complexion  dirty  white  or  brownish. ^Cholera  infantum.

I  Heat  in  face:  in  evening;  with  chill  or  other  complaints.

I  Cold  sweat  on  face;  body  cold.

I  Coppery  face,  full  of  pimples.

;rWarts  on  mouth.
^  Lower  Face. B  Swollen  upper  lip  ;  painful,  hard  and  burning.

;rSwelling  of  submaxillary  glands  with  soreness.
^^  Teeth,  and  Guois. I  Teeth  sensitiveto  chewing.

I  Pain  in  eye  and  stomach  teetn.

Shooting  in  molars ;  all  hollow  teeth  cannot  bear  air.

Toothache,  with  tearing,  boring  pain  at  night ; <  from  warm
and  cold  thinors.

I  Too  rapid  decay  of  teeth.

I I  Slowness  in  teething;  also  in  closing  of  fontanelles  ;  com-
plaints during  teething.

iSlow  dentition,  with  cold  tumors  and  emaciation.

:  Convulsions  without  fever  during  dentition.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Foul  taste  and  smell.

Flabby  sweetish  taste.

B Disgusting  taste  when  getting  awake; <  when  hawking.

B Bitter  taste: in morning, with headache; particularly of
wheat  bread;  at  setting  in  of  catamenia.

BTip  of  tongue  sore,  burning,  little  blisters  on  it.

B Tongue  swollen,  numb,  stiff;  with  pimples.

BTono-ue  white  furred  at  root,  most  in  mornino;.
^^  Inner  Mouth. BA  sore  spot  inside  of  r.  cheek.

Dryness  of  mouth  and  tongue,  into  choange ;  with  or  without
thirst.

B  Running  of  saliva  with  fluent  coryza.
^^  Throat. B  Sensation  of  weakness  or  emptiness in  fauces  and
throat.

B Fauces  and  uvula  red  and  swollen;  warm  drink  dees  not  hurt.

BSore  aching  in  throat; <C  when  swallowing.

It  hurts  to  swallow  saliva,  not  food.

VOL.  III. — 14.


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.  210

iWhen  swallowing,  pain  in  tongue,  fauces,  pharynx,  chest  and

pit  *f  stomach.
Dryness  in  throat  at  night.
B  Sore  throat :  with  tickling  cough  in  evening ; <  after  going

to  bed  ;  with  fluent  coryza.
Pains  and  burning  from  other  parts  towards  throat.
Hawking  up  phlegm  late  in  evening,  at  night  and  in  morning,

with  gagging.
I  Diphtheria;  first  to  reduce  fever  and  limit  inflammation  of

throat.
I  Chronic  swelling  of  tonsils.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Unusual  hunger
at  4  P.M.
No  appetite  from  noon  to  noon,  but  thinking  about  it,  she
wants  to  eat.

Complete  want  of  appetite  before  or  during  catamenia.

Much  thirst,  with  dry  mouth  and  tongue,  during  after  part
of  day.

I  Infants  want  to  nurse  all  the  time.
"Eating  and  Drinking, BEating  ice-cream  in  evening  gives
him  colic,  and  he  has  to  vomit  next  morning.

Juicy  fruit  or  cider  causes  diarrhoea.

SB  At  every  attempt  to  eat,  bellyache.

After  breakfast  belching,  hawking,  gagging,  nausea.
With  his  dinner  vertigo  and  loss  of  memory.

B  After  meals,  more  after  dinner,  headache  or  drowsiness,  weari-
ness, itching,  dull  pain  in  stomach,  with  soreness  when  press-
ing on  it ;  heart-burn  and  other  gastric  symptoms.

After  supper  pressure  in  rectum  with  a  stool,  first  part  hard,
the  last  thin.

B  After  drinkino;  cold  water,  cuttins;  in  bell  v.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, b  Sour  belch-
ing and  gulping  up.

Belching  all  forenoon,  with  qualmishness.

B  After  belching,  burning  in  epigastrium.

Heart-burn  one  to  two  hours  after  dinner.

BNausea  from  smoking,  or  after  drinking  coffee.

BNause?,  rising  from  pit  of  stomach  when  moving,  >  dur-
ing rest,  followed  by  headache  and  lassitude.

'B  Vomiturition  from  hawking  phlegm.

SVomiting,  with  trembling  of  hands.

B  Children  vomit  often  and  easily,
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. B  Empty  sinking  sensation at
epigastrium.

Bindescribable  uneasiness  in  region  of  stomach.

B  Stomach  feels  expanded.

BFlabbiness  or  a  kind  of  relaxation  of  stomach. Comp.  Throat.

B Pressure  in  stomach  : >  when  she  rests.


211  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

BBurning  at  stomach,  and  rising  of  water  into  mouth.

I  Sharp  cutting  or  cramp-like  pain  in  stomach,  with  headache.

■  Violent  pain  in  stomach,  with  great  debility,  headache  and

diarrhoea; pain  is  excited  by  introducing  least  morsel of
food  into  stomach.
^*  Hypochondria. iHardnes-s,  soreness  and  pressure  in  r.  side.

I  Throbbing  in  r.  hypochondrium  ; > after  belching  or  pass-
ing wind.

I  Stitches  shooting  in  region  of  liver  when  taking  a  deep  breath.

I  Pressure  and  soreness  in  1.  side.

I  After  liver  complaints,  dropsy.

Sharp  pain  in  region  of  spleen.
^'Abdomen. lEmpty  sinking sensation around navel, or in
whole  belly.

1  Burning  in epigastrium, in region of  navel,  in  whole  ab-
domen, rising  up  into  chest  and  throat.

I  Aching  soreness  and  pain  around  navel; >  after  fetid  wind
passes  oif.

I  Oozing  of  a  bloody  fluid  from  navel  of  infants.

Severe  pain  in  region  of  transverse  colon  at  3  p.m.

Pinching,  shooting,  stitches,  running,  kicking,  moving  in  1.
side  of  belly.

I  Cutting,  pinching,  sharp  colic,  followed  by  diarrhoea.

I  Bellyache  > after  passing  wind, after  stool or  after  leu-
corrhoea.

■  Abdominal  pains,  with  headache,  earache,  hot  face  ;  pain  in

groins,  looseness  of  bowels,  weary  legs,  crawls ;  or  in  alter-
nation  with headache, burning in throat, uterine pains,
lassitude.
(Motion  in  belly  as  of  something  alive.

■  Incipient  mesenteric  tabes,  with  much  diarrhoea,  foetid,  some-

times lienteric  stools.

■  Abdominal  wall:  tingling,  numb  ;  quivering,  or  aching.

■  Aching  soreness,  cutting,  drawing  in  1.  groin,  later  in  right.
Warm  feeling  in  groins,  burning,  aching  pain.

':  Abdominal  hernige,  in  anaemic  patients.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Offensive  flatus.

■  Juicy  fruit  or  cider  causes  diarrhoea.

■  Diarrhoea  after  vexation,  with  headache  of  schoolgirls ;  with

flatulence;  offensive  pus  with  stools.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  much  flatulence,  during  dentition. ^Cholera

infantum.

■  Daily  watery,  very  hot  stools.

■  Greenish  thin  stools  of  children,  sometimes  slimy. ^Cholera

infantum.
Stools  :  green  and  loose,  sometimes  slimy,  with  children  ;  soft,
passed  with  difficulty  ;  hot  and  watery  ;  white  and  mushy.


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.  212

I  Stools,  in  which there were many  small white points or

flakes,  like  pus,  scarcely  perceptible.
iMornings  copious,  soft  stool; renewed  urgency  directly  on

Aviping,  after  which  a  little  more  was  evacuated.
I  Very  offensive  diarrhoea.

I  Hard  stool,  with  depression  of  mind;  with  old  people,  caus-
ing vertigo  and  headache.
I  Hard  stools  with  much  blood.

I  After  stool  buzzing  in  ears;  weak  feeling  in  male  sexual  parts.
I  Bleeding  after  stool,  or  with  a  soft  stool  followed  by  slime;

protrusion  of  piles.
Watery  looseness  day  and  night,  with  an  urging  for  stool  every

15  minutes.
Heaviness  and  urging  with  costiveness  or  after  looseness.
\  Removes  the  disposition  to  intestinal  worms  in  anaemic  or

weakly  patients.
I  Protruding  piles  aching,  itching,  and  sore;  oozing  of  a  yellow

fluid,  and  bleeding.

■  Single  stitches  in  rectum  towards  anus,  or  shooting  in  anus.
"Warmth,  burning,  pulsating  in  anus ;  bearing  down  towards

anus.

I  Sore  feeling  in  anus  when  getting  up  in  morning.

I  Itching  in  anus,  most  in  evening.

Small  furuncle  near  anus  to  right  with  much  pain  ;  cannot
sit ;  has  to  stand  or  lie  on  1.  side ;  discharges  bloody  pus
and  there  remains  a  painless  fistula. (Two  provers.)

I  Fistula  ani  alternating  with  chest  symptoms.

Fistula  ani,  in  persons  who  have  pains  in  joints  with  every
spell  of  cold,  stormy  weather.

Fissures  of  anus,  in  tall  slim,  light  complexioned  children,  who
form  bone  and  teeth  sloAvly.
^^  Urinary  Organs. •  Dropsy,  after  kidney  disease.

I  Violent  pain  in  region  of  kidneys,  when  lifting,  or  when  blow-
ing nose.

I A  painful  sensation  in  neck  of  bladder,  like  that  when  having
the  stream  suddenly  stopped.

Sore  aching  in  bladder  ; <  after  making  water.

Pressing  pain  most  on  r.  side  of  bladder.

I  Shooting  in  mouth  of  bladder.

■  Violent  pain  in  bladder  and  all  neighboring  parts  (prostata)

with  a  weak  stream  of  water.

■  Cutting  pains  in  urethra.

■  Frequent  urging  to  urinate.

■  Large  quantities  of  urine,  with  a  sensation  of  weakness.
Before  urinating :  cutting  in  bladder ;  pressing  down  ;  cutting

in  urethra.
While  urinating:  drawing  in  female  bladder  upwards ;  burn-
ing and  hardness  in  male  urethra.


213  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

After  urinating  :  cutting  and  burning  in  male  urethra ;  press-
ing and  cutting  in  female  bladder,  deep  into  the  left;  relaxa-
tion and  weakness  of  male  organs.

Bin  diabetes  mellitus  where  lungs  were  implicated;  of  very
great  service  not  only  to  lungs,  but  also  in  diminishing
quantity  of  urine  and  lowering  its  specific  gravity.

A  pressure  in  abdomen,  with  difficulty  in  preventing  escape  of
urine.

j  Wetting  bed,  with  general  debility.

■  Dark  urine  ;  warmer  than  usual  and  of  a  penetrating  odor.
Diaper  reddish-yellow.

Increase  of  urine,  with  flocculent  sediment.

j  Bright's disease of  kidneys, if  indicated by concomitant

symptoms.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual desire  increased  with  some ;

with  others  decreased.
Erection  painful,  with  burning  in  urethra,  and  a  tension  in

penis,  in  evening.

■  Erection  while  riding  in  a  carriage,  without  desire.

;rOne  or  two  emissions  three  nights  in  succession  put  him  com-
pletely out  of  humor  and  prostrated  him.
Shooting  in  root  of  penis  and  bladder.

■  Shooting  through  perineum  and  into  penis.

I  Itching  of  scrotum  ;  sweating;  soreness;  pimples.

■  Scrotum  sore,  oozing  of  a  fluid.

■  Swelling  of  testicles.
':  Hydrocele.

■  ■Chronic  gonorrhoea,  in  anaemic  subjects.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Nymphomania ;  all  organs  in  erec-
tion, with  insatiable  desire,  particularly  before  catamenia.

■  Voluptuous  feeling  as  if  all  female  parts  were  filling  up  with

blood ; she  feels  pulse  in  all  parts,  with  increased  sexual
desire.
Clitoris  erect  after  urination,  with  sexual  desire.

■  Aching  in  uterus,  in  morning.

Pressing  in  uterus,  increased  sexual  desire,  aching  in  neck  of
bladder,  prostration.

■  Weakness  and  distress  in  region  of  uterus;  <;  during  passage

of  stool  and  urine.
Cutting  pain  in  uterus  through  to  sacrum.

■  Prolapsus  <  during  stool,  micturition  or  menses,
j  Prolapsus  in  debilitated  persons.

■  Uterine  displacement  combined  with  rheumatic  pains.

■  Cervix  and  os  swollen,  red  and  painful ;  (even  after  maltreat-

ment with  "caustic")  shot- like  bunches  to  digital  touch;
visible  under  mucous  surface  as  bright  red  spots.  ^Uterine
disease.-

■  Uterine  polypus.


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.  214

Pressing,  drawing  and  sore  feeling  as  if  catamenia  should  ap-
pear; soreness,  aching,  pressure  in  uterus  and  vagina,  in
loins,  flushes  of  heat ;  fatigued  from  going  up  stairs ;  pain
from  r.  groin  into  1.  hip.

Less  catamenia,  more  whites  like  white  of  eggs,  day  and  night,
■<  in  morning,  after  rising,  of  a  sweetish  odor ;  increased
with  the  stool  white  and  of  a  bad  odor.

I  Menses:  too  early,  blood  bright,  with  girls;  too  late,  blood
dark,  or  first  bright,  then  dark  with  women.

BiCatamenial  blood  dark,  especially  with  rheumatic  patients.

Menses  every  two  weeks,  black  and  clotted.

B Labor-like  pains  before  and  during  catamenia.

Before  catamenia :  great  sexual  desire,  followed  by  a  copious
flow  ;  headache  3-7  days  before ;  griping  and  rumbling  in
bowels  ;  stitching  pain  in  1.  side  of  head ;  whites  and  sleepi-
ness during  day.

During  catamenia :  vertigo  and  throbbing  in  forehead ;  blood
rushes  to  head ;  throbbing  headache  increasing  after ;  over
OS  pubis  pressure ;  want  of  appetite,  bellyache  and  diar-
rhoea, backache,  shooting,  lower  limbs  heavy,  weary,  over-
fatigued,  going  up  stairs  feels  stiff  all  over.

After  catamenia :  increases  throbbing  headache;  want  of  ap-
petite;  backache  and  aching  in  lower  limbs  ;  whites.

Menorrhagia  :  menses  every  two  weeks,  black  and  clotted  ;  be-
fore their  appearance  griping  rumbling  in  bowels  and  leu-
corrhoea ;  stitching  pain  in  1.  side  of  head ;  sleepiness  dur-
ing day.

iLeucorrhosa  like  white  of  egg,  day  and  night.

B  Whites  cream-like  pass  from  her  in  afternoon,  unconsciously.

B  Whites  for  two  weeks  after  catamenia,  or  from  one  term  to
another.

Leucorrhoea:  increases  in  ratio  that  menses  decrease;  pain
and  pressure  in  genitals ;  every  cold  causes  rheumatic
pains  ;  acne,  full  of  yellow  pus  ;  dirty  complexion  ;  mental
anxiety;  fault-finding;  flatulency;  haemorrhoids  oozing  a
watery  fluid  all  the  time ;  fistula  in  ano ;  burning  in  epi-
gastrium ;  w^eak,  sinking  feeling  in  abdomen ;  useful  for
young  ladies  who  have  been  crossed  in  love.

B  Tearing  from  r.  side  of  navel,  more  upwards  than  downwards,
with  anxiety  of  mind ;  was  gone  as  soon  as  leucorrhoea
appeared.

Burning  in  vagina,  with  pain  on  both  sides  of  bladder  or
uterus ;  burning  like  fire  up  into  chest.

Pains  from  navel  and  other  parts  drawing  to  vagina.

Sore  aching,  warm  feeling  between  external  labia,  stitching
pain  in  inner  labia.

Pain  in  vagina,  with  flushes  and  faintness.

Aching  in  vagina  after  nosebleeding.


215  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

Swelling  of  extsrnal  pirts  anl  vagina,  when  awaking.

■  Throbbing, stinging, tickling, sore aching or pressing in

genitals, drawing upwards in symphysis, downwards in
thighs.
I  Drawing  pain  from  right  to  left,  over  pubes,  with  discharge

of  some  blood  ;  followed  by  earache,  first  left  then  right.
I  I  Over  mons  veneris  a  pressure  upwards,  throbbing  or  other
sensations.
^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  Complained  as  in
first  period  of  pregnancy,  a  drawing  aching  in  region  of
navel,  extending  to  sacral  region,  <  in  forenoon  ;  heart-
burn up  into  throat,  soreness  in  r.  groin,  and  a  kicking
quivering  over  os  pubis.

■  Weariness  in  all  limbs  during  pregnancy.

Milk  changeable,  from  alkaline  to  neutral,  or  to  acid  ;  watery

and  thin.
S  Mammae  sore  to  touch,  feel  as  if  larger,  as  during  last  half

of  pregnancy.
iPains  and  burning  in  mammae.

I  Nipples  aching  ;  sore.

I I  Child  refuses  breast, milk  has  a  saltish  taste  ; trying  it,
taste  remains  long  in  mouth.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  BroncMa. a  Hoarse-
ness and  cough,  day  and  night.
8  Hoarse,  sore  throat  and  hacking  cough,  in  morning,
i  Chronic  catarrh,  with  ansemia.
\  Catarrhs  in  scrofulous  or  gouty  constitutions.

■  Burning  in  larynx  after  same  feeling  on  backpart  of  tongue.

I  Must  hawk  or  hem  to  clear  voice;  when  they  talk  they  con-
stantly hem  or  hawk.
^"Respiration. ■  Breathing  more  frequent,  short  and  diSiculfc.
With  inhalation :  shooting  in  1.  breast  and  r.  temple ;  sudden
jerking  pain  in  back.

■  Short  breath  and  cough.

■  ■Involuntary  sighing.

■  Desire  to  take  a  deep  breath,  to  sigh;  with  it  a  pain  in  chest,

shooting  in  liver.

■  Contraction  of  chest  and  difficult  breathing;  evening  till  10

P.M.  >  on  lying  down,  <  getting  up.

■  Suffocating  attacks  of  a  male  child  of  6  months,  after  nurs-

ing, more  often  after  crying  and  after  being  taken  out  of
cradle ;  breathing  ceases,  head  turns  backwards,  face  blue,
fighting  with  hands  and  feet ;  after  attacks  greatly  relaxed ;
some  days  none,  some  days  several  attacks.
^^  Congh.  Pain  on  a  small  spot,  from  coughing,  with  short  breath.
Dry  cough  with  hoarseness  and  soreness  and  dryness  in  throat.

■  Cough:  with  yellow  expectoration,  more  in  morning;  with


CALCAREA  MOSPHORICA.  216

fever,  dryness  and  thirst;  from  6  a.m.  to  6  p.m.;  during
difficult  dentition.

I  With  cough,  stitches  in  chest,  heat  on  lower  part  of  chest
and  upper  arm.

Cough  with  soreness  and  dryness  in  throat  in  the  tuberculous.

I  Chronic  cough  of  consumptives,  who  suffer  Avith  cold  ex-
tremities.

Whooping  cough,  in  obstinate  cases.
"^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Burning  sensation  in  chest,  from
below  up  into  throat ;  sometimes  doAVnwards.

Pressing  ache  in  chest,  most  below  and  extending  upwards.

■  Sharp  pain  in  region  of  sixth  rib,  first  on  r.  side,  later  on  1.

fourth  and  fifth  rib,  coming  and  going,  takes  breath  away,
most  with  a  deep  breath ;  during  day.

Shooting  pain  in  1.  chest;  going  through  to  shoulder.

Stitch  in  1.  side  while  breathing.

Beating  in  a  small  spot  on  1.  side.

I A  most  obstinate  pain  in  lower  part  of  1.  lung  and  in  1.  hypo-
chondrium. ^Uterine  disease.

I  Sharp  pain  like  an  instrument  passing  through  end  of  breast-
bone ;  during  day.

■  Contraction  of  chest  and  difficult  breathing,  evening  till  10

P.M. ; >  lying  down,  <^  when  getting  up.
I  Dull  aching  in  chest,  with  soreness  to  touch.

■  Phlegm  rattling  on  chest,  also  during  difficult  teething.
Incipient  phthisis  in  anaemic  patients.

■  Profuse  sweat  in  phthisis  ;  cold  extremities.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Sharp  cutting,  shooting  in
region  of  heart,  interrupts  breathing.

■  Palpitation  with  anxiety,  followed  by  a  trembling  weakness,

particularly  of  calves.
I  After  heart  disease,  dropsy.

■  Feels  beating  of  pulse,  not  frequent  but  quick  ;  while  sitting,

feels  it  in  nape  of  neck  and  1.  chest.
^^  Outer  Chest. Burning  in  pit  of  throat.

■  Clavicles  sore,  first  left,  then  right.

■  Tearing,  pressing  and  shooting  in  sternum.

■  Sore  pain  on  sternum.

■  Ulcer  over  sternum  or  clavicle.
Pains  where  cartilages  and  ribs  meet.

Painless gnawing with quivering,  jerking  and  heat;  is  full

of  fear.
A  tumor  like  a  walnut  in  1.  male  mamnia,  hurts  when  pressed.
^^  Keck  and  Back. Over  clavicle  soreness  and  cutting  ;  pains

in  neck,  soreness ;  glands  hurt.

■  Rheumatic  pain  and  stiffness  of  neck,  with  dullness  of  head;

from  slight  draught  of  air.
Pain  on  sides  of  throat,  aching  on  pressure,  up  to  ear,  or  from


217  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORIC  A.

ear  to  shoulder ; «<  when  turning  neck, also when swal-
lowing.

Muscles  of  neck  hurt  up  to  occiput,  first  right,  then  left.

I  Cramp-like  pain  in  neck,  first  one  side,  then  the  other.

Malignant  tumors  on  neck.

Drawing  in  back  and  limbs,  with  gaping,  stretching,  bending
backwards :  ■<  evening  and  morning,  on  getting  awake  and
on  moving  about.

Pains  and  aches  in  and  near,  between  and  mostly  below  shoul-  "
derblades  ;  throbbing,  pulsating,  jerking.

I  Pain  in  back. ^Uterine  disease.

I  Violent  pain  in  small  of  back,  when  making  least  bodily
efibrt ;  sometimes  obliging  him  to  scream.

I  In  region  of  kidneys  violent  pain,  when  lifting  or  when  blow-
ing nose ;  pain  in  back,  jerking,  rending,  cutting,  shooting.

■  Abscess  near  lumbar  vertebrsB.

■  Numbness  and  lameness  in  sacrum.
Sharp  sacral  pains.

■  Violent stitch on a small spot between left ilium and

sacrum, with slightest  motion  ; has to  lie on same  spot
without  moving.

■  Soreness  in  sacro-iliac  symphysis,  as  if  separated.

Pain  and  aching,  soreness,  pressure,  tearing  and  shooting  in

OS  coccygis.
I  Crick  in  back,  and  lumbago.

■  Curvature  of  spine  to  left  (scoliosis  sinistra),  lumbar  vertebrae

bend  forward.
Spina  bifida.
^^  Tipper  Limbs. Pain  and  aching  in  shoulders  and  shoulder-
blades.
Sore  aching,  bruised  pains  in  shoulder  or  down  arm.
Shooting  and  tearing  from  shoulder-joint  along  the  whole  arm.
Soreness,  burning  and  itching  under  arms.

■  Hard  bluish lumps  under  arm; oozing  and  scabbing  after

checked  itch  ;  much  relieved  ; Sulphur  finished  the  cure.

■  Rheumatic  pain  in  upper  arm  near  shoulder-joint; cannot

lift  arm.
Lameness  of  arms,  "fall  asleep."
Trembling  in  arms  and  hands.

■  Dull  pain  in  arms,  first  left,  then  right;  from  shoulder  to

fi.)gers; from  clavicle  down  to  wrist; <  from change of
weather.
Sensation  in  elbows  as  if  joint  had  been  struck.

■  Through  elbows  shooting,  usually  first  left,  then  right.
Cramp-like  pain  in  forearm,  sore,  bruised  feeling  ;  tearing.
Pimples  on  inner  side  of  forearm.  ^

Pain  in  r.  wrist,  with  lameness  as  if  beaten ;  cramp-like  and
other  pain,  when  moving  or  using  it.


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.  218

Hands  "asleep,"  or  numb.

Pimples  on  back  of  hand  and  on  wrist.

I  All  bones  of  arms  ache,  particularly  thumb.

In  r.  thumb,  joints  as  if  luxated  or  sprained.

Pain  in  single  fingers.

Tips  of  thumb  and  fingers  sore.

I  Ulcerative  pain  in  roots  of  finger-nails  of  r.  hand,  especially

in  middle  finger.
I  Gouty  nodosities  on  condyles.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Tearing,  shooting,  drawing  in  hip-bone.
Sacro-iliac  symphysis  as  if  separated,  in  walking.
Coxarthrocace,  third  stage ;  puts  an  end  to  further  destruction

of  bone,  suppuration  ceases,  new  bone  is  formed.
Shooting  and  stitches  from  hip-bone  up  or  down,  most  from

ischium  down,  jerking,  drawing,  with  a  warm  feeling.
BButtocks  and  back  "asleep,"  with  a  sensation  of  uneasiness.
I  In  Uiites  a  lameness  as  if  beaten;  after  a  storm  all  kinds  of

pain  with  soreness,  most  from  right  to  left,  but  alternating,

most  on  r.  side.
I  On  buttocks  stinging  in  little  spots,  itching,  burning;  sore

spots  oozing,  scurfy.
B  Sharp  pain  in  tendons  on  inside  of  thighs,  more  when  walking.
B Shooting  through  1.  thigh  to  knee,  or  down  to  ankle  bones;

toes  too  thick  ;  heavy  load  in  nape  of  neck.
B  Aching  and  soreness  of  thighs  as  if  beaten,  with  aching  in

sacral  bones.
Pains  above  knee.

B  Pains  in  knees  <C  when  walking,  first  left,  then  right.
Boring  in  r.  knee,  <  from  stretching,  most  at  night.
B  Knees  pain  as  if  sprained,  so.re,  when  walking.
Tendons  in  hollow  of  knee  as  if  too  short.
Chronic  swelling  of  knee.

Hygroma  patellae  (housemaid's  knee) ;  in  anaemic  subjects.
B Lower  limbs,  abdomen  and  sacrum  "asleep.;"  cannot  get  up

from  seat.
BLegs  tired,  weak,  restless,  crawling,  tingling.
Lame  feeling  of  lower  limbs,  tired,  heavy.
BLower  limbs  "fall  asleep,"  with  a  restless,  anxious  feeling;

has  to  move  them,  to  jump  out  of  carriage  ;  also  at  night.
Tearing  in  1.  lower  leg  from  knee  down  to  foot ;  dry,  crusty

eruption  covers  leg.
BPain  in  bones,  particularly  shinbones.
B Drawing  pain  in  shinbones.
A  pain  in  head  of  left  tibia,  caused  by  a  kick,  returned ;  the

spot  got  so  sore,  that  he  could  not  bear  it  to  be  touched ;  it

disturbed  sleep,  coming  on  every  night ;  gradually  an  ex-
ostosis was  formed  and  remained.
Violent  pain  below  hollow  of  knee ;  <  when  taking  boots  off.


219  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

8 Cramp  in  calves;  on  a  small  spot  inside,  when  walking.
BCrampy  pain  in  calves, drawing, rending, shooting, warm

feeling.
I  Rending,  tearing,  shooting  in  ankle-joint.
I  Ulcers  on  malleolus  dexter,  edges  callous,  ichor  putrid.

■  Fistulous  ulcers  on  ankle-joint.
Cramp-like  pains  in  feet,  most  in  ankle-joint.

■  Ankle-joint  feels  as  if  dislocated.
Sore  pain  and  aching  in  heel.

■  Caries  of  heel.

Stinging  in  middle  of  soles  ; shooting  in  soles  and  in  balls

of  toes.
Pains  in  big  toe,  like  a  cramp,  or  aching  in  region  of  root  of

nail,  first  right,  then  left.

■  Gouty  pain  in  big  toe.

Jerking  twitching  of  r.  big  toe  towards  left.
Stinging  and  shooting  in  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Extensors  more  affected  than  flexors.

■  Feeling  of  lameness  of  flexors and sudden  aching of  ex-

tensors.

■  Pain  in  all  joints,  most  1.  side.

■  Aching  in  limbs,  with  weariness.

■  Rheumatic  pains  flying  about.

■  Every  cold  causes  rheumatic  pains  in  joints  and  in  various

parts  of  body. ^Uterine  displacement.

■  Inflammatory  rheumatism.

■  Pains  flying  about  in  all  parts  of  rump  and  limbs  after  getting

wet  in  rain.

■  ■Rheumatism,  pertaining  particularly  to  cold  weather,  get-

ting well  in  Spring  and  returning  next  Autumn.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  >  nausea  ;  >  pressure  in

stomach.
Lying : on  back,  restless ; >  on side ;  >>  headache, pain

in  stomach,  belly  and  breathing.
Sitting :  stagger  on  getting  up  ;  feels  beating  of  pulse  in  nape

of  neck  and  1.  chest.
Stooping :  vertigo  ;  rush  of  blood  to  head  ;  dull  pain  in  head.
On  motion  :  vertigo ;  aching  in  back  and  lower  limbs  >-.
Moving : <;  nausea.
Quick  motion  :  throbbing  headache.
Painful  symptoms  brought  on  by  moderate  motions  of  single

limbs,  >  after  lying  down.
Exertion  : <  headache.

Pains  after  great  exertion  ; ■<  when  lying  down.
Walking  : vertigo  ;  running  coryza  ;  cramp  in  calves  ;  sharp

pains  in  tendons  on  inside  of  thighs  ;  pain  in  knees,  first  1.

then  right.
Going  up  stairs  :  weariness.


CALCAREA  PIIOSPHORICA.  220

36  Jferygg. After  unpleasant  news,  numbness.
Stiff  in  bed  in  morning  ;  can  hardly  turn.

■  Disposition  to  stretch.

■  Weariness, <  going  up stairs  ; wants  to  sit  down, shuns

getting  up.

■  Indisposition  to  work,  mental  or  physical.

■  Weakness,  with  other  symptoms.

■  Lower  limbs,  abdomen  and  sacrum  "  asleep;"  cannot  get  up

from  seat.
Languor  with diarrhoea, leucorrhoea, catamenia and during
pregnancy.

■  Child  will  not  stand  anymore,  and  loses  flesh.

■  Children  do  not  learn  to  walk,  or  lose  the  ability.

■  Trembling  of  hands,  with  headache,  pain  in  chest,  bellyache.

■  Trembling  of  arms  and  hands,  with  other  complaints,  parti-

cularly uterine.
Trembling  feeling  ;  with  toothache  and  uterine  pains.
Hands  tremble  ; she  is  sick,  heart  palpitates,  fears  bad  news,

afterwards  weak.
Thumbs  moved  spasmodically.
Big  toes  twitching,  little  toes  drawn  inward.
Starting  in  sleep.
Restlessness,  spasmodic  motion  of  limbs  ;  <  when  lying  on

back,  >  lyiiig  on  side.

■  Child:  convulsive  starts,  lies  on  its  back.
Stepping  motion  of  lower  limbs.

TrViolent  screaming,  grasping  with  hands  in  great  agony
towards  its  mother,  cold  sweat  most  in  face,  whole  body
cold,

■  Attacks  of  spasms  going  through  body  like  an  electric  shock,

so  that  she  fulls  down;  they  last  a!:>out , a  minute  and,  ex-
cept being  a  little  weak,  she  felt  well ;  has  about  thirty  at-
tacks daily.

■  A  girl,  set.  18  ;  suppressed  menses  from  bathing,  followed  by

epileptic  spasms  with  opisthotonos  and  unconsciousness.

■  Epileptic  attacks  in  a  young  lady  of  18,  which  had  existed

since  she  was  a  child  six  months  old ;  attacks  occurred
every  three  months ;  spasms  all  clonic  and  on  left  side,  with
diarrhoea  and  loss  of  consciousness  ;  she  falls  forward  on
the  face  and  sleeps  afterwards  ;  sometimes  she  has  a  second
attack  the  same  day  ;  they  frequently  occur  after  eating.

;  Epilepsy;  suitable  for  young  persons  whose  bodies  are  in  pro-
gress of  development,  and  for  scrofulous  subjects.

\  Rheumatic  paralysis.

I  Great  debility  with  enuresis.

I  Useful  after  weakening  acute  diseases ;  [Psorin.  if  there  are
copious  sweats.)
^^  Sleep. B  Constant  stretching  and  yawning.


221  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

Gaping  with  tears  in  eyes.

I  Gaping  and  irresistible  drowsiness  all  forenoon,  before  and  at

dinner.
I  Drowsy  all  day  and  evening.
With  drowsiness  gloomy  mood,  inability  to  think,  headache,

singing  in  ears,  sweat  in  face,  prostration  of  limbs.
I  Sleep  disturbed,  most  before  midnight.

I  Dreams:  very  vivid,  most  of  late events or  last readings;

of  travelling.
In  sleep,  starting  as  from  fright.
In  bed,  pains  in  bones  or  joints,  etc.
Sweat  on  parts  wakens  in  night.

I I  Cannot  get  awake  in  early  morning.

Complaints  in  morning:  pain  in  head,  heart,  back  ;  bad  taste,
as  if  she  had  been  sick.

■  Children  cry  out  in  sleep.

^^Time.  Night:  <  headache;  <  faceache;  hawking  of  phlegm ;
boring  in  knee.

Midnight :  before,  sleep  disturbed.

Morning:  <^  headache;  eyelids  falling  or  closed;  bitter  taste;
tongue  white  furred  on  root ;  hawking  of  phlegm  ;  copious
soft  stool ;  sore  feeling  in  anus  ;  aching  in  uterus  ;  >>  cata-
menia  ;  hoarse,  sore  throat  and  hacking-cough  ;  yellow  ex-
pectoration ;  drawing  in  back  and  limbs  ;  stiff  in  bed  ;  can-
not awake  early  ;  complaints,  head,  heart,  back  ;  chill  after
dressing  ;  copious  night-sweats,  towards  morning.

Forenoon :  coryza  ;  drawing  aching  in  region  of  navel ;  gap-
ing irresistible  drowsiness.

Day  and  evening :  drowsy.

6  A.M.  to  6  P.M. :  dryness  and  thirst  during  difficult  dentition.

3  P.M. :  severe  pain  in  region  of  transverse  colon.

4  P.M. :  unusual  hunger.

Afternoon :  nose  bleeding ;  cream-like  whites  pass  uncon-
sciously.

Evening  :  heat  in  face  ;  sore  throat,  with  tickling  ;  hawking
of  phlegm  ;  colic ; ■<  drawing  in  back  and  limbs  ;  dry  heat.

Wane  of  day  :  worse  ;  much  thirst,  dry  mouth  and  tongue.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  room  :  burning  itching  ;
tluent  coryza  ;  warm  things,  ■<  toothache.

Open  air:  walking  in,  headache;  fluent  coryza;  hoarseness;
cough  ;  on  watery  days  nose  stopped  ;  carious  teeth  worse  ;
chill:

■  A  slight  draft  is  followed  by  rheumatic  pain  in  neck,  stiffness

and  dullness  in  head.
Cold  room  :  fluent  coryza.
Cold  liquids  :  toothache.  *

■  Every  cold  causes  pains  in  joints,  and  sutures.
From  cold  washing  : >  headache.


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.  222

After  a  cold  footbath  gets  red,  with  prickling  like  nettles.

Change  of  weather :  headache  ;  tearing  in  forehead  to  nose
and  temples,  from  occiput  to  vertex,  with  earache ;  dull
pains  in  arms,  from  clavicles  down  to  wrist.

Worse  in  changeable  weather,  particularly  when  the  snow  melts
and  in  East  winds.

Day  after  a  snowstorm,  buttocks  as  if  beaten,  wuth  lameness.

In  damp,  rainy,  cold  weather  dull  pain  in  lower  limbs.
^"  Fever. I  Shaking  chill,  out-doors.

I  I  Frequent  creeping  shiverings,  with  motion  of  scrotum,  not
like  that  after  urinating.

Frequent  crawls  all  over ;  crawls  on  head.

Chill:  in  morning  after  dressing  ; -with  cough ;  with  coryza  ;
with  uterine  pains.

Shivering  with  a  hot  face,  with  bellyache.

BCold  in  lower  part  of  body,  face  hot.

Feels  beating  of  pulse,  not  frequent  but  quick  ;  while  sitting
he  feels  it  in  nape  of  neck  and  1.  chest.

I  Heat  runs  from  head  down  to  toes.

iDry  heat  in  evening,  hot  breath,  beating  of  heart,  mouth  and
tongue  dry  without  thirst,  gaping,  stretching,  etc.

B  Copious  night- sweats  ;  on  single  parts  ;  towards  and  during
morning.

B  Sweat  on  parts,  wakens  in  night.

§  Profuse  sweat  in  phthisis.

I  Chronic  intermittent  fever,  in  scrofulous  children.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Every  two  weeks  :  catamenia.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  middle  finger,  tearing  pains ;
eyebrow,  furuncle  ;  ear,  singing  ;  ear,  burning  ;  cheek,  sore
spot ;  side,  hardness,  soreness  and  pressure ;  hypochonder,
throbbing ;  pressing  pain  in  bladder  ;  to  1.  groin,  pressing
drawing  and  sore  feeling,  as  if  catamenia  should  appear  ;
tearing  in  navel ;  soreness  in  groin  ;  temple,  shooting ;
sharp  pain  in  region  of  sixth  rib  ;  pain  in  r.  wrist ;  in
thumb  as  if  luxated;  ulcerative  pain  in  roots  of  finger  nails;
boring  in  knee.

Left :  nostril,  biting  stinging  ;  side,  pressure  and  soreness  ;
side  of  belly,  pinching,  shooting,  stitches;  running,  kicking,
moving  and  stitching  pain  in  head  ;  shooting  m  breast ;
shooting  in  chest ;  stitches  in  side  while  breathing  ;  obstin-
ate pain  of  lung  and  hypochondrium;  sharp  pain  in  region
of  fourth  and  fifth  ribs  ;  shooting  through  thigh  to  knee
or  down  to  ankle-bones;  tearing  in  lower  leg,  from  knee
down  to  foot.

Left  to  right:  earache;  clavicles  sore;  dull  pain  in  arms;
shojoting  through  elbows  ;  pain  in  knees.

First  one  bide,  then  the  other:  cramp  like  pain  in  neck.
*^  Seaisations. As if  brain were  pressed  against  skull ; as if


223  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

something  were  in  eye  ;  as  if  joint  had  been  struck;  as  if
dislocated.

Jerking  :  earache ;  pain  in  back  ;  outer  chest ;  in  back  ;  in
hip-bone;  in  r.  big  toe.

Tearing :  pains  in  hands  and  arms ;  in  bones  of  skull ;  ear-
ache; in  and  around  ears;  toothache;  from  r.  side  of  navel ;
in  sternum  ;  in  os  coccygis  ;  in  hip-bone  ;  in  1.  lower  leg;
ankle-joint ; •<  at  night  and  in  bad  weather.

Rending  :  in  bones  of  skull ;  in  and  around  ears  ;  pain  from
knee  to  foot ;  in  back  ;  in  ankle-joint.

Sharp ;  cutting  in  stomach  ;  pain  in  region  of  spleen  ;  colic  ;
pain  through  end  of  breast-bone  ;  sacral  pains.

Cutting :  colic  ;  1.  groin  ;  pains  in  urethra  ;  in  bladder  ;  pain
in  uterus  ;  region  of  heart ;  over  clavicle  ;  in  back.

Stitches:  1.  side  of  head;  region  of  liver;  1.  side  of  belly;  in
anus;  pain  in  inner  labia;  in  chest,  1.  side;  on  a  small  spot
between  1.  ilium  and  sacrum ;  in  hip-bone.

Shooting :  through  1.  thigh  to  knee ;  ankle-joint ;  in  soles
and  balls  of  toes ;  in  toes ;  in  sternum ;  in  os  coccygis ;
along  the  whole  arm  ;  through  elbows  ;  in  hip-bone ;  ear-
ache ;  around  bones  of  ears  ;  in  molars  ;  region  of  liver  ;  1.
hypochondrium  ;  1.  side  of  belly  ;  in  anus;  in  mouth  of  blad-
der ;  in  root  of  penis  and  bladder ;  perineum ;  1.  breast  and
r.  temple;  in  liver;  pain  in  1.  chest;  region  of  heart.

Stinging :  in  nostrils  ;  in  genitals  ;  on  buttocks  ;  in  middle  of
soles  ;  in  toes.

Boring :  toothache  ;  in  r.  knee ;  <  at  night  and  in  bad
weather.

Drawing :  pains  around  lateral  protuberances  of  occiput ;  in
bones  of  skull ;  in  1.  groin  ;  in  muscles  of  neck  ;  in  female
bladder  upwards  ;  pain  from  r.  to  1.  over  pubes  ;  in  region
of  navel ;  in  back  and  limbs  ;  in  hip-bone  ;  pain  in  shin-
bones.

Burning  :  on  top  of  head  ;  itching  of  outer  ear  ;  pain  on  a
small  spot  over  r.  ear  ;  upper  lip  ;  tip  of  tongue  ;  in  epi-
gastrium ;  at  stomach ;  in  anus;  in  male  urethra;  in  va-
gina ;  in  mammae  ;  in  larynx  ;  in  chest ;  pit  of  stomach  ;
under  arras  ; on  buttocks  ; in  skin.

Biting  : in  nostrils  ; in  skin.

Sraa  ting  :  of  roots  of  hair.

Sore  pam  :  ia  bones  of  skull ;  piles  ;  aching  in  bladder  ;  ach-
ing between  external  labia  ;  aching  in  genitals  ;  clavicles  ;
pam  in  sternum  ;  in  heel.

Soreness  :  of  thighs  as  if  beaten  ;  in  and  around  ears  ;  tip  of
tongue  ;  r.  hypochondrium  ;  around  navel ;  of  scrotum  ;  in
uterus  and  vagina  ;  in  r.  groin  ;  over  clavicle  ;  in  os  coe-
cygis  ;  under  arms.

Aching  : in  heel ; big  toe  ; of  extensors  ; in  limbs  ; pains


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.  224

around  lateral  protuberances  of  occiput ;  in  and  around
ears  ;  all  bones  around  ears  ;  region  of  parotid  glands  ;  in
throat ;  around  navel ;  abdominal  wall ;  soreness,  1.  groin  ;
piles;  in  uterus  ;  in  neck  of  bladder ;  in  vagina;  nipples;
in  OS  coccygis;  shoulders  and  shoulder-blades  ;  down  arms  ;
of  thighs  as  if  beaten.

Dull  aching  :  in  chest.

Pressure  :  above  eyes  and  towards  them  ;  in  and  around  cars  ;
in  rectum;  in  stomach;  r.  hypochondrium;  l.hypochondrium;
pain,  r.  side  of  bladder;  in  abdomen;  in  uterus;  in  vagina;
in  genitals  ;  aching,  in  chest ;  in  sternum";  in  os  coccygis  ;
from  shoulder-joint  along  the  whole  arm.

Bruised  :  pains  in  shoulder  or  down  arms.

Gnawing  : outer  chest.

Pinching:  1.  side  of  belly  ;  colon.

Cramp-like  pains  :  in  neck  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  forearm  ;  in  feet ;
in  ankle-joint ;  in  big  toe.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  upper  arm,  near  shoulder-joint.

Undefined  pain  :  in  processus  zygomaticus  ;  in  face  ;  around
navel  ;  transverse  colon  ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;  neck  of
bladder  ;  violent,  in  bladder  ;  in  vagina  ;  in  mammae  ;  and
aches,  in  neck,  between  and  mostly  below  shoulder-blades  ;
in  back  ;  small  of  back ;  in  os  coccygis  ;  in  shoulders  and
shoulder-blades;  in  r.  wrist;  above  knee  ;  in  bones  ;  shin-
bones  ;  big  toe  ;  in  joints.

Anxious  feeling  :  down  limbs.

Restless  :  lower  limbs.

Uneasiness  :  in  region  of  stomach,  buttocks  and  back.

Throbbing:  headache;  r.  hypochondrium;  in  genitals;  between
and  mostly  below  shoulder-blades.

Pulsating :  in  anus ;  between  and  mostly  below'  shoulder-
blades.

Kicking  :  1.  side  of  belly  ;  over  pubis.

Quivering  :  abdominal  wall ;  over  pubis  ;  outer  chest.

Twitching  :  in  big  toe.

Pressing  down  :  in  bladder.

Bearing  down  :  towards  anus.

Tension  :  in  scalp  of  forehead  :  in  penis.

Weakness  :  in  fauces  and  throat ;  in  bladder.

Sinking  :  at  epigastrium  ;  around  navel.

Emptiness  :  in  fauces  and  throat.

Tickling :  in  nose,  and  sneezing  ;  in  genitals.

Running:  1.  side  of  belly.

Crawling  :  in  legs  ;  with  pains,  <  at  night  and  in  bed.

Creeping  :  in  occiput.

Tingling  :  abdominal  wall ;  in  legs.

Numbness  :  on  occiput ;  of  hands.

Asleep  :  buttocks  and  back.


225  CALCAREA  PHOSPHORIC  A.

Lameness  :  of  arms,  as  if  beaten.

Shocks  like  electric  sparks.

Warmth  :  in  anus  ;  between  external  labia  ;  in  ischium.

Heat :  in  head  ;  in  face  ;  on  lower  part  of  chest.

Hot  feeling :  in  eyelids.

Coldness  :  on  occiput ;  of  ears  ;  in  abdomen,  with  nausea.

Itching:  inner  and  outer  ears  ;  point  of  nose;  piles;  in  anus  ;

of  scrotum  ; under  arms  ; on  buttocks  ; in  skin.
Dryness  : in  throat  at  night.
**  Tissues. B I  Bones  affected  along  sutures  or  at  symphyses.
U  Non-union  of  fractured  bones.

■  Curvature  of  spine  to  left;  lumbar  vertebrae  bend  forward.

■  Condyles  swollen  on  forearms  and  lower  limbs.

■  Abscess  near  lumbar  vertebrge.

■  Spina  bifida.

■  ■Large  pedunculated  nasal  polypi; polypi  of  rectum  and

uterus.

■  Incipient  mesenteric  tabes,  with  much  diarrhoea,  fetid,  some-

times lienteric.
B I  Rachitis  ;  fontanelles  wide  open  ;  diarrhoea,  emaciation.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  joints  and  various  parts  of  body.

■  Soreness  of  tendons  when  flexing  or  extendino-.

■  ■Flabby,  shrunken,  emaciated  children.
I B  Ansemia ;  true  bloodlessness.

■  BPhosphatic  diathesis.

■  Tendency  of  bones  to  bend  or  curve.
•  Cancer  in  scrofulous  constitutions.

■  Caries  of  hip-joint  and  heel,  with  stinking  pus.

■  Most  pains  in  joints,  afterwards  in  bones.
Sharp  pain  in  tendons.

I  A  constituent  of  teeth,  bones,  connective  tissue  and  blood-
corpuscles,  and  to  be  given  in  corresponding  disturbances  ;
in  true  chlorosis  from  anaemia;  chronic  swelling  of  glands  ;
chronic  articular  rheumatism ;  gout ;  exostoses,  osteophytes
and  similar  new  growths  on  bone ;  scrofulosis  ;  suppuration
of  bones  and  joints  ;  dropsy  from  loss  of  blood  or  of  other
fluids,  or  depending  on  diseases  of  heart,  liver  and  kidneys.
^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Riding  in  a  carriage :
ears  itch  ;  he  has  a  second  stool ;  his  foot  ftills  asleep  ;
crawling  in  sole ;  erections  ;  buttocks  asleep  ;  restlessness
in  lower  legs.

Lifting  : child  from  cradle  causes  suflbcative  attacks.

Touch  :  burning  pain  on  a  small  spot  over  r.  ear  painful  to
touch  ;  a  pain  in  head  of  1.  tibia  so  sore,  he  could  not  bear
it  touched.

Pressure  : <C  head,  chest,  belly  and  limb  symptoms.

Every  step  is  felt  in  head,  or  in  sacrum.

In  fractures  to  promote  formation  of  callus.


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.  226

The  place  of  old  injury  becomes  the  seat  of  new  affections.
^^  Skin. iDry  skin,  most  on  hands.

flSkin  dark,  brown  or  yellow.

Bitching  and  burning  as  from  nettles.

Itching,  biting,  most  on  places  years  before  affected.

B  Tetters  on' lower  legs,  peeling  off,  scaling.

BPimples  in  region  of  joints.

I  Eczema  with  anaemia ;  dry  crusty  affections.

S  Furuncles  form  ulcers.

E Fistulous  or  scrofulous  ulcers;  slow  to  heal.

B  Ulceration,  after a mustard  poultice  is  allowed  to  remain
too  long.*

B  Ulcerating  scars  after  an  amputation.

\  Tubercles  in  skin.

Cholesteatoma.

I  Skin  diseases  (scurfy  and  scabby)  in  anaemic,  scrofulous  or
gouty  constitutions.

I  Lupus.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution^ b  During  first  and  second
dentition, diarrhoea with much wind. ^Hydrocephalus.
^Diarrhoea. ^Rachitis.

B Children  lose  flesh,  will  not  stand  any  more;  do  not  learn
to  Avalk.

I  Delicate  growing  girls  or  children.

Girls  at  or  near  puberty  ;  schoolgirls.

Old  people,  vertigo;  constipation:  fractures.

B Child,  1^  years  old;  light  complexion.  ^Incipient  hydro-
cephalus.

BA  girl,  set.  16. ^Keratitis  after  variola.

BA  girl,  set.  18. ^Epileptic  spasms.

B  A  young  man,  set.  18  ;  indurated  breast.

Tedious  cases,  in  scrofulous  or  anaemic  children.

Ansemic  subjects  :  gonorrhoea  ;  catarrhs  ;  pains  ;  chlorosis  ;
skin  diseases.

Debilitated  persons  :  prolapsus,  etc.

Scrofulous  constitutions  :  catarrh  ;  epilepsy  ;  skin  diseases.

Gouty  constitutions  ;  catarrh  ;  pains  ;  skin  diseases.
*^  Kelations. Remarkable  similarities  with  Carb.  an.

Compatible:  before  Sulphur;  Sifter  Ar sen.,  Jodum,  Mercur.
(incipient  mesenteric  tabes).

Complementar}^:  Ruta.

Compare  :  in  bone  affections,  fistulae,  etc.,  Berber.,  B  QaJc.  ostr.,
Calc.  fluor.,  it  Fluor,  ac,  Ruta,  I  Silica,  Sulphur;  in  joint
affections,  rheumatic  and  suppurative,  Berber.,  Kaliphosjjh.,
Natr.  mur.  (hygroma);  in  dental  caries,  Fluor,  ac,  Magn.
jyhosph..  Silica;  in  epilepsy,  Oalo.  ostr.,  Ferr.  pJiosph.,  Kali

*  Sapo  sodse  relieves  the  burning.


227  CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.

mur.,  Kali  pliGsph.^  Sih'ca;  in  spasm  of  eyelids,  Calc.  ostr.,
Nux  vovi. ;  in  diabetes,  jKa?z'  phosph.,  Natr.  pJiosph. ;  in
tabes  mesenterica,  Arsen.^  Jodum,  Mercur.;  in  hsemor-
rhoids,  Ferr.  phosph. ;  in  worm  affections,  Natr.  phosph.
(removes  disposition) ;  in  debility  after  acute  diseases,  Psorin.;
in  peevishness  and  fretfulness  of  children,  Chaviom.


CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.

Calcium  sulphate.  Ca  SO^^.

1847.  Extracts  from  provings  of  C.  Hg.,  Dr.  Withy  and  that  of  a  j'oung
lady.

1873.  Extracts  from  provings  with  the  30th  and  200th  by  Dr.  C.  M.
Conant,  (Trans.  Am.  Inst,  of  Horn.).

Cured  symptoms  by  C.  Hg.,  Koeck  and  Knerr.

Symptoms  from  Schuessler  and  Old  School  authorities  are  marked
with  :  .

t.  stands  for  toxicological  symptoms.

^  Mind. Loss  of  consciousness  ;  t.

Loses  memory  and  power  of  thought  suddenly,  after  lunch.

Sometimes  a  desire  to  walk,  to  attend  to  something ;  as  soon
as  she  sets  out  to  do  it,  the  desire  is  gone.

Awoke  screaming.

Great  depression  at  times.

Liveliness and good  spirits  change  to  grief  and  melancholy,
afternoon  and  evening.
^  Sensorium. While  walking,  dizzy  in  head and  weakness and
oppression  from  head  and  across  stomach.

Vertigo  with  deathly  nausea.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  1.  forehead  and  head.

Severe  frontal  headache,  <C  after  dinner  and  in  evening.

Ache  across  forehead  and  in  vertex.

Pain  around  head,  several  times  before  going  to  bed.

Tearing  around  whole  head,  with  nausea,  when  rising  from
lyi^gi  >  while  lying.

Headache: from concussion; with feeling as if  eyes were
sunken  ;  during  catamenia  ;  with  pain  in  chest.

Inflammation  of  eyes,  evening  and  night,  with  slow  fever ;  sen-
sation of  heat,  eyes  red.

Conjunctiva  yellow.  ^

•  Eyes  bleared,  red  ;  with  colic.


CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.  228

Tears  from  1.  eye,  with  left  siJed  coryza.
Twitching  of  eyelids.
Smarting  in  inner  canthi.
Severe  inflammation  in  canthi.
Boil  over  1.  eye.
^  Outer  Head, Sensation  around  head  as  if  he  had  his  hat  on,
4  P.M.
On  region  of  anterior  fontanelle  two  red  pimples,  and  a  burn-
ing sore  feeling  on  a  place  as  large  as  a  dollar.
Painful  pimples  on  scalp  leave  a  yellow  scab.
Hard  tender  swellings  in  scalp  in  edge  of  hair,  l:;jleeding  when
scratched.  /

Crusta  lactea  or  "scald  head"  of  children. )
Cranio  tabes.
Sight  and  Eyes. Sees  only  half  an  object.
Looking  at  a  piece  of  paper  pains  r.  eye.
Occasional  blindness,  with  twitching  of  eyelids.
Deep  ulcers  on  cornea.
Ophthalmia,  pus  thick  and  yellow,
i  Cornea  smoky,  pus  in  anterior  chamber,  sensation  as  from  a
foreign  body  ; has  to  tie  up  the  eye ;  after  injury  to  the  eye
from  a  splinter.
Continued  dull  pain  over  r.  eye;  evening.
Twitching  of  muscles  on  supra-orbital  foramen,  near  outer  cor-
ner of  1.  eye.
Pressing  pains  in  I.  eyeball ;  cutting  in  1.  eye  with  soreness  in

evening,  as  if  eyes  were  sunken  in  head,  with  headache.
Protrusion  of  eyes  ;  t.
^  Heariug  and  Ears. Singing  in  her  ears.
Otitis  after  a  slap  on  ear.
Dark  brown  earwax  from  r.  ear ;  A.M.
Pimple  on  top  of  r.  ear.

Soreness  of  r.  parotid  gland  ; >■  walking  in  open  air.
^  Smell  and  Nose. A  quivering  on  root  of  nose,  extending  to
cheek.
Nosebleed.

Coryza,  with  thick,  yellow,  lumpy,  mattery  discharge.
Yellowish  mucus  from  1.  nostril  and  tears  from  1.  eye.
During day r.  nostril discharges  watery  mucus,  I.  dry ; at

night  vice  versa.
Yellowish-green  phlegm  from  posterior  nares.
Scanty  phlegm, mostly from posterior  nares, morning and

evening.
Posterior  nares  closed,  watery  coryza  from  anterior.
Influenza  and  sneezing,  >>  in  open  air;  coryza  on  r.  side  after

a  bath,  ^  out-doors.
Blood&treaked  mucus  from  1.  nostril  after  a  bath.


229  CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.

Excoriating  watery  coryza  in  open  air,  >  in-doors  and  after
•washing  with  cold  water.

Edges  of  nostrils  slightly  sore,  excoriated.
^  Upper  Face. •  Swollen  cheek  with  toothache  ; if  suppuration
threatens.

A  small  swelling  on  1.  inferior  maxilla,  about  lower  and  middle
part  of  buccinator.

Swollen  hard  pimple  on  1.  cheek.

Darting  pains  in  r.  side  of  face.

Pain  in  r.  upper  jaw.

Flushes  of  heat.

Exceedingly  pale,  sickly  appearance  (workers  in  plaster).

■  Herpetic  eruptions  on  face.

i Pimples  and  pustules  on  face.
^  Lower  Face. Blister-like  sores  on  r.  lower  lip,  ulcerate,  ooze
bloody  matter,  and  extend  to  r.  corner  of  chin.

Many  tender  pimples  under  beard  discharge  blood  or  oily  trans-
parent matter.

On  outer  lower  lip  a  raw  sore,  forming  a  scab.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. •  Rlieumatic  toothache.

Pain  in  r.  upper  jaw,  with  swollen  and  tender  gums  about  a  de-
cayed molar.

Toothache : ]  with  swollen  cheek ; after  dark,  and  in  sleep ;
first  <  by  cold  water,  soon  >>.

Right  lower  molar  decayed;  is  tender  and  sensitive  to  cold  air,
water,  etc.

':  Inside  of  gums  swollen  and  sore.

Gums  bleed  while  brushing  his  teeth.
'^  Taste and  Tongue. Taste: :  flabby; soapy; sour  acrid;
bitter.

At  base  of  tongue  slightly  puckered  sensation.

Tongue  coated  yellow  at  base  ; j  resembling  a  layer  of  half
dried  clay.

Tongue  seamed  with  a  deep  red  line.

Glossitis  ; •  when  suppuration  begins.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Inside  of  upper  lip  sore.

Dryness  of  mouth  ;  t.
"  Throat. Soreness,  left  side  of  roof  as  if  burned,  while  eating.

Pharynx  red  and  sore,  tonsils  affected.

I  Diphtheritis  of  the  soft  palate;  fauces  are  much  swollen  ;  also
in  scarlatina.

\  Tonsillitis  if  a  discharge  of  pus  is  anticipated.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Excessive  appetite
and  thirst.

No  appetite  for  meat.

Great  desire  for  tea,  claret,  green  sour  vegetables  and  fruit.
"  Eating  and  Drinking. While  eating  :  roof  of  mouth  sore.

After  maple  sugar,  diarrhoea.


CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.  230

After  eatinp; :  better;  lunch,  loses  memory  ;  dinner,  headaclie.
^^ Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea:

with  vertiii;o  ;  with  headache  ;  with  pain  in  pelvis.
"  Scrobiculun  and  Stomach. •  Pain  in  stomach  ;  motions  and

buinings  ;  pain  extends  into  liver.
^^  Hypochondria. Severe  pain  in  region  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. Sensation  of  weakness  across  stomach,  as  if  from
the  head.
Colic  :  with  rumbling  ;  with  diarrhoea  ;  with  bleared  eves.
A  feeling  in  lower  part  of  abdomen  as  if  skin  was  too  tight,

with  pain.
Pain  in  r.  side  of  pelvis,  followed  by  weakness,  nausea  and  pain
at  stomach.
Intestinal  ulcers,  w'ith  typhus.
Buboes  ;  to  prevent  suppuration.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea,  with pain in abdomen,  from
change  of  weather  or  after  eating  maple  sugar.
I  Diarrhoea : with discharge of  pus, or bloody  pus; with

typhus.
I  Dysentery,  if  the  passages  consist  of  pus-like  slime.
I  Painful  abscesses  about  anus  in  cases  of  fistula.
J  Prolapsus  ani.

i  Costiveness  ;  with  hectic  fever;  with  difScult  breathing.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Chronic  nephritis.

I  Bright's  disease,  if  the  symptoms  correspond.
:  Red  urine,  with  hectic  fever.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. •  Spermatorrhoea  with  impotency.
Gonorrhoea  ;  in  suppurative  stage.
Chronic  syphilis.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  came  later  and  continued
longer;  usual  symptoms,  headache,  twitchings,  great  weak-
ness, etc.,  were  aggravated.
21  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, !  Mastitis,  when  pus

begins  to  form  or  to  prevent  suppuration.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Croup.

Catarrh,  with  thick,  lumpy,  white-yellow  or  pus-like  secretion.
^^  Respiration. Shortbrealhed,  costive  and  cachectic  (workers  in
plaster  of  paris).
'•  Asthma,  with  hectic  fever.

After  great  dryness  of  mouth,  suffocative  attacks  with  protru-
sion of  eyes,  loss  of  consciousness,  and  death  ;  t.
^^  Cough. :  Cough,  with  hectic  fever.
Chronic  cough  of  the  tuberculous.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  sternum  became  so  much  <,
she  was  obliged  to  double  up.
At  times  a  pain  across  ch«st.
Pain  in  chest,  and  headache.
Pneumonia,  third  stage.


231  CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.

I  Empyema  ;  after  thoracocentesis.
^'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pain  from  anterior  of  heart

down  to  lower  part  of  thigh.
'^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  across  back  of  her  neck.
Pain  in  lower  part  of  back.

Chronic  pain  in  os  coccygis  was  greatly  aggravated.
^^  Upper  Limbs. iThe  third  phalanx  of  index-finger  had  been
bruised;  had  a  misformed  surface,  suppurating,  full  of  gran-
ulations, the  bone  was  bare,  pains  very  violent.
Eingers  are  stiff  in  a  dream  ; stiff  and  painfully  rigid,  puffy

and  stiff,  mainly  on  r.  hand,  A.M.
Swelling  of  phalanges  of  fingers.
Inflammation  and  swelling  of  little  finger.

•  Whitlow,  when  suppuration  begins.

^^  Lower  Limbs. ;  Inflammation of  hip-joint; in suppurative

stage  of  hip  disease.
I  Ischias  and  podagra.
Pain  from  heart  to  lower  thigh.
Painful  rigidity  of  legs,  A.M.,  especially  the  r. ;  later  the  upper.

part  <  P.M.  ;  the  worst  in  early  evening.
A  weakness  in  her  legs.
Weariness  in  knees  after  walking.
I  Pain  in  knees  from  a  blow.
':  Stitches  in  knee.
Lameness  in  inner  part  of  1.  knee  when  in  bath,  A.M.,  when

stooping  or  walking  fast,  later  in  posterior  part.
Legs  tender  to  touch  ;  feet  slightly  swollen  and  tender.
A  great  burning  .and  itching  of  soles  of  her  feet.

•  Burning  on  soles,  with  hectic  fever.

The  basis  of  fourth  1.  toe  suddenly  tender  while  walking.
'*  Limbs  in  General. •  Pain  in  joints.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Better  while  lying:  headache.

Stooping  : <  lameness  in  eye.

Obliged  to  double  up  to  >  pain  in  stomach.

When  rising  from  lying  down  :  headache.

Better  walking  in open air; improves soreness in parotid
gland  ;  desire  to  walk.

While  walking  :  dizzy  ;  toe  tender.

After  walking : weariness  in  knees ; walking  fast, lameness
in  knees.
36  Jferves. Twitchings  during  catamenia.

Great  disposition  to  lie  down  aiid  stretch  out.

Weakness  and.  oppression  from  head  down  to  stomach.

Weakness  during  catamenia.

Much  exhausted  after  a  dream.

Great  lassitude,  2  p.m.  till  evening. ,

Weak,  languid,  no  pluck  ;  intolerable  lassitude  after  siesta.

Weariness  after  pain  in  pelvis.


CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.  232

^^  Sleep. :  Sleepy  during  day,  wakeful  at  night.

Before  going  to  bed,  pain  in  head.

She  dreamed  she  had  a  convulsion  from  fright,  awoke  scream-
ing and  much  exhausted.

Internal  lassitude  after  siesta.
^^  Time. In  morning :  lameness  of  knee,  in  bath.

2  P.M.  until  evening:  lassitude.

Afternoon  and  evening :  liveliness  alternates  with  melancholy.

4  P.M. :  external  headache.

Evening  :  toothache ;  pain  in  legs.

Late  P.M.  :  half-sightedness.

About  10  P.M. :  pain  in  eye.

Before  going  to  bed  :  headache.

At  night :  toothache.
39  Temperature  and  Weather. •  Burns  and  scalds ;  whensup-
puration  begins.

I  Suppurating  chilblains.

Open  air :  better  walking  in  it ;  desire  to  be  in  it.

Suffered  unusually  from  cold,  while  taking  his  usual  bath,  a.m.

Knee  pains  in  bath.

Sensitive  to  water,  first  <  then  >,  toothache.

From  change  of  weather :  diarrhoea.

After  washing  with  cold  water  :  coryza.
^^  Fever. •  Quotidian  or  tertian  fever.

\  Intermittent  fever ;  back  of  tongue  has  a  coating,  resembling
dry  clay.
Typhus  :  when  diarrhoea  sets  in  ;  intestinal  ulcers.
Hectic  fever:  with  costiven ess  and  red  urine;  with  asthma,
cough  and  burning  in  soles  of  feet.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right : over  eye  dull  pain  ;  in  eye,
pain;  soreness  of  parotid  gland;  earwax  dark;  pimple  on
top  of  ear ;  watery  mucus  from  nostril ;  pain  in  upper  jaw ;
sores  on lip; toothache; pain  in pelvis; fingers  stiff";
rigid  legs.

Left:  pain  in  forehead;  twitching  of  muscles  about  eye;  press-
ing pain  in  eyeball;  cutting  in  eye;  tears  from  eye;  boil
over  eye ;  coryza  from  nostril ;  swelling  on  infra  maxilla ;
pimple  on  cheek;  soreness  roof  of  mouth;  knee  lame;  toe
tender.

Direction  of  pain  across :  in  head,  stomach,  liver,  chest,
and  neck.

Above  downwards  :  heart  to  leg.
*^  Sensations. As  if  he  had  his  hat  on  ; as  of  a  foreign  body  in
eye  ;  as  if  skin  was  too  tight  in  lower  abdomen.

Darting  :  in  r.  side  of  face.

Stitches :  in  knee.

Burning  :  sore  feeling  on  anterior  fontanelle  ;  in  stomach  ;  of
soles  of  feet.


233  CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.

Tearing :  around  head.
Smarting:  in  inner  canthi.
Soreness  :  of  r.  parotid  ;  roof  of  mouth.
Aching:  across  forehead  ;  in  vertex.
Dull  pain  :  over  r.  eye.

Undefined  pain: in  1.  forehead  and  head  ,  in  r.  upper  jaw;  in
stomach  ; in  region  of  liver  ; in  lower  abdomen  ; in  r.  side
of  pelvis  ; in  anal  abscess  ; across  chest ; in  chest ; from
heart  to  thigh  ;  across  back  of  neck  ;  in  lower  part  of  back  ;
in  joints.
Puckered  sensation  :  at  base  of  tongue.
Weakness  :  across  stomach.
Lameness :  in  knee.
Itching :  of  soles  of  feet.
**  Tissues. :  Its  sphere  of  action  is  in  the  connective  tissue  ; in-
flammation with  suppuration.
Arrests  hemorrhage  and  blenorrhoea.

Abscesses  which  have  their  seat  in  the  connective  tissue,  if
they  are  the  result  of  stasis  in  the  connective  tissue  tubuli.
Serous  swellings;  post- scarlatinal  dropsy,  in  rare  cases.
Hard  or  suppurating  glands.

In  third  stage  of  inflammation  ;  lumpy  or  bloody  discharge.
Acute  and  chronic  rheumatism.

Discharge in cough, leucorrhoea, gonorrhoea, etc., yellow,
thick  and  lumpy,  sometimes  bloody.
After  mechanical  injuries,  when  in  neglected  cases  suppuration
has  set  in.
Greenish,  brownish,  yellow  crusts.
Cystic  tumors  ;  fibroma  ;  fibrous  polypi.
^'  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Legs  tender  to  touch ;
toe  tender  while  walking.
From  a  blow  or  concussion  :  headache ;  pain  in  knee.
After  a  slap  on  ear  :  otitis.
After  a  bruise :  suppuration  of  finger.
After  a  hurt  by  a  splinter :  sore  eye.

Cuts  and  wounds,  to  control  suppuration;  thick  yellow  matter.
Burns  and  scalds,  if  suppurating.
^®  Skin. Itching  on  soles.

•  Scarlet rash ; scarlatina, with excessive swelling of  soft
palate.
Suppurating  pustules  and  nodules.

Skin  affections,  with  greenish,  brownish  or  yellowish  scabs.
Yellow  scab  follows  pimples  on  scalp.
Boils  and  furuncles.

Abscesses  and  carbuncles,  to  control  the  formation  of  pus.*
Tetters.

*  Anthracine  is  much  better. C.  Hg.


CALC. SULPH.— CALENDULA.  234

I  Ulcers  discharging  thick  yellow  matter.

Many  little  matterless  pimples  under  hair,  bleeding  when
scratched.

Grayish,  lead-colored  skin  (workers  in  gypsum).

\  Chilblains,  when  suppurating.
^^  Relations. Compatible  :  after  Kali  mur.,  JVatr.  sulph.,  Silica.

Compare :  Calend.,  in  suppurations  ;  Jlejjar,  in  suppurative
processes,  but  has  wider  sphere  and  acts  with  more  intensity ;
Kali  mur.,  in  milk  crust  and  other  skin  affections,  swollen
cheek,  croup,  dysentery;  Natr.  sulph.,  in  post-scarlatinal
dropsy  ;  SiUea,  in  hard  or  suppurating  glands,  ulcers  of
cornea,  tonsillitis,  mastitis,  frostbites.


CALENDULA.

3farigold.  Co^npositoe.

Native  of  Southern  Europe;  cultivated  in  our  gardens;  not  to  be  con-
founded with  Tagetes.

^  Mind. B  Consciousness  returned  after  24  hours,  but  great  drowsi-
ness remained. ^Burns.

(Delirious  and  wild. ^Burns.

Anxious,  morose,  solicitous,  during  chill.

Fretful,  sleepy,  dreamy.

Great  irritability  ;  he  is  easily  frightened  ;  hearing  is  acute.
^  Sensorium. Dull  head,  as  aft,er  a  debauch.

Head  heavy  in  morning,  as  after  a  long  illness.

Feels  as  if  he  would  faint,  with  movements  in  stomach  and  ab-
domen.
^  Inner  Head. Cephalalgia  after  mechanical  injuries.

Headache  in  forehead,  after  eating,  with  sensation  of  heat  in  it.

Pressive  headache,  now  in  forehead,  now  in  temple;  only  when
lying  down.

Dull,  pressive  sensation  in  occiput.

Concussion  of  brain.

Punctured  or  lacerated  wounds  of  brain.
*  Outer  Head. Heat  of  head  towards  evening.

B  A  deep  hole  in  skin  of  forehead  from  a  fall.

Bin  lacerated  wounds  of  scalp;  to  prevent  suppuration.

8  Fractures  of  skull,  particularly  if  compound.

Fungus  of  cranium ;  symptoms  of  compression  with  no  fracture.


1^00


CALENDULA.


Hernia  cerebri,  after  fractured  skull.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. After  operations  upon  eye  or  lids  where  un-
due inflammation  or  suppuration  is  to  be  avoided.

iBienorrhoea  of  the  lachrymal  sac.

B Traumatic  conjunctivitis,  keratitis  and  iritis.

B Sclerotica  wounded  with  knife;  choroidea  and  corpus  vitreura
protruded;  eye  retained  form  and  sight  for  large  objects;
remedy  used  internally  and  externally.

\  Staphyloma  cornese,  externally  applied.

White  of  eye  inflamed,  with  pressive  headache,  now  in  fore-
head, now  in  temples,  when  lying  down,  not  when  sitting
and  standing  ;  pupils  dilated.

Dryness  and  biting  in  margin  of  lid,  as  from  smoke.

Pupils  dilated,  lids  very  much  swollen.

B  Eyelids  stretched  to  fullest  extent  of  orbits. /9Burns.

B Lacerated  and  incised  wounds  of  eyes.

BEyes  black  and  blue  from  extravasated  blood.  ^Lacerated
wounds.

Bin  wounds  of  lids  and  brows  which  have  been  badly  treated
by  plasters  and  suppuration  has  taken  place.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. Hearing  too  acute  ;  starts  with  a  fright.
^  SmeU  and  Nose, l  Laceration  of  dorsum  and  tip  of  nose,  from

a  fall.
^  Upper  Face, Swollen  sensation  in  lips,  spreading  to  sides  of
nose,  increasing  rapidly  in  intensity,  and  spreading  to  eyes
and  forehead,  with  burning  and  stinging.

Face  puffy,  much  swollen  under  his  eyes.

Heat  in  face,  after  dinner.

Lacerated  wounds  of  face  ;  to  prevent  suppuration.
'  Lower  Face. B  Right  side  of  under  lip  lacerated  from  a  kick  of
a  newly  shod  horse ;  healed  without  noticeable  scar.

Eruption  of  small  vesicles  in  1.  corner  of  lips  and  on  r.  side  of
mouth.

Submaxillary  glands  pain  on  touch,  as  if  swollen  and  about  to
suppurate,  and  at  times  cause  a  tensive  pain,  which,  especi-
ally on  swallowing,  causes  a  pressure  in  throat.

Drawing-tensive  pain  in  glands  behind  1.  ramus  of  lower  jaw,
on  moving  head.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. >  After  extraction  of  teeth,  or  dental  opera-
tions resulting  in  laceration  of  gums.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Before  meal,  bitter  taste  of  phlegm  in
throat.

B  Tongue  dry,  red  and  cracked. ^Burn.
^^  Throat. Pressure  in  throat  when  swallowing.

Wounds  of  oesophagus,  to  prevent  oesophagitis.

Foreign  bodies  in  oesophagus  having  produced  laceration.

Scalds  of  throat,  with  loss  of  substance.


CALENDULA.  236

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Diminished  appetite  for  dinner,  though
he  relishes  food  when  he  eats.
Drinks  much  :  at  night ;  with  heat.
Aversion  to  drink,  with  crawls.

After  eating :  forehead  aches,  with  a  feeling  of  heat  in  it.
Before  dinner  :  bitter  taste  of  phlegm  in  throat.
After  dinner :  heat  in  face,  hands  and  feet.
From  smoking :  hiccough.

When  he  drinks,  it  gives him  each  time  a  shiver  and  shak-
ing chill.
Cold  drinks  cause  a  craAvl.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  K"ausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough
after  smoking.
Intimation  of  nausea,  at  times,  in  forenoon.
Vomiting  of  food,  and  diarrhoea,  with  cardialgia.
Vomiting,  with  pain  in  uterine  region,  after  taking  cold.
^'' Scrobiculum and Stomach. B Induration in stomach and
uterus.
Movements  in  stomach  causes  faint  feeling.
^^Hypochondria Pressure  on  last  rib,  1.  side,  with  movements

in  abdomen  and  crawls  on  back.
^*  Abdomen. Anxiety  and  griping  in  belly,  with  a  stool.

i Constant  pain  in  abdomen  and  sensitiveness  in  r.  iliac  region.

^Enteritis  from  foreign  body.
Dull,  coarse  stitches  in  middle  of  r.  side  of  abdomen,  on  mov-
ing ;  they  disappear  during  rest.
A  boring-digging  pain,  deep  in  region  of  navel,  when  walking.
Movements  in  abdomen  cause  faint  feeling.
I  Stretching  and  dragging  in  groin. ^Hypertrophy  of  uterus.
I  After  Cfesarian  section  for  lacerated  womb.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. 8  Frequent  mucous  stools  with  pain  in  ab-
domen. ^Enteritis  from  foreign  body.
A  stool  in  morning,  preceded  by  griping  and  anxiety  in  ab-
domen, and  accompanied  by  a  chill.
Diarrhoea,  with  vomiting  of  food,  after  cardialgia.
I  Constipation  from  occasional  retroversion. ^Hypertrophy  of

uterus.
Perineal  abscess ;  to  close  the  wound  after  operation,
i  Ruptures  of  perineum.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Urine  suppressed; 1. ear  ached fearfully
ran matter, splitting headache, eyes pained him from
headache.
Frequent  micturition  ;  urine  colorless  as  water,  is  very  hot  and

burning.
Has  to  urinate  often  in  night.
Tearings,  at  times,  in  urethra,  during  a  chill.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. a  Mechanical excoriation of  mucous
surface  of  prepuce  after  coitus.


237  CALENDULA.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I Profuse,  offensive  watery  discharge
from  vagina,  Avitli  great  exhaustion.
Pain  in  uterine  region,  with  vomiting,  after  taking  cold.
Cancer  of  womb  with  flooding  and  loss  of  substance.

■  Inflammation,  with  lacerated  hymen,  from  coitus  or  otherwise.
I  Sense  of  weight  and  fullness  in  pelvis  ;  menorrhagia. ^Hy-
pertrophy of  uterus.

\  Complaints  during  menstruation.

I  i  Ulcerations  of  os  uteri.

I  Induration  of  uterus.

\  Uterine  cancer.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Ruptures  of  cer-
vix and  perineum  during  childbirth.

I  Profuse,  offensive,  watery  discharge  from  vagina,  with  great
exhaustion,  second  and  third  day  after  instrumental  delivery.
^Gangrene  of  uterus.

lExcoriated  and  cracked  nipples.
^'Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia. Voice  stronger
and  deeper  as  soon  as  feverheat  abates,  in  evening.

Injuries  to  the  air  passages  of  a  suicidal  or  other  nature  in  the
form  of  cuts  or  lacerations.

Foreign  bodies  in  air  passages.
^®  Respiration. Great  efforts  made  to  inflate  the  lower  lobes  of
lungs,  which  were  only  successful  when  sitting  up.

During  inhalation  :  pressure  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Breathing  easier  after  the  heat  abates.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure  and  oppression  in  1.  side
of  chest,  in  evening,  when  lying  in  bed.

Drawing  pressure  in  1.  side  of  chest,  when  standing,  during  in-
spiration.

Pressive  drawing  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  on  breast-bone,
with  stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Feels  squeamish  in  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  irregular  and  dimin-
ishing rapidly.

■  Pulse 160, fell  in twelve hours to 120, in twelve  more

to  110. ^Burn.
'"  Outer  Chest. Pressive  drawing  sensation  on  breast-bone.
Ribs  ache  as  if  pressed  together.
Axillary  glands  sore  to  touch.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Rheumatic  drawing  in  r.  side  of  neck,  which
is  <C  on  bending  neck  to  r.  side,  and  on  raising  r.  arm ;  it
extends  to  shoulder,  in  morning.
Pressive  pain  beneath  r.  lower  point  of  shoulder-blade,  with  a
sensation  as  if  every  thing  was  suppurating  and  bruised,  in
afternoon.
Pressive  drawing  pain  between  shoulder-blades.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Axillse  very  hot ;  glands  sore  to  touch.


CALENDULA.  .  238

Cold  hands  feel  hot.

I  Compound  fracture  of  1.  upper  arm;  bone  splinters  protrud-
ing ;  healed  the  stump  after  amputation.

I  Crushed  index-finger  of  r.  hand.

I  First  phalanx  of  1.  index-finger,  both  phalanges  of  ring  finger
completely  torn  away,  likewise  the  flesh  from  tip  of  middle
finger.

I  Tip  of  index-finger  cut  away.

B Middle  finger  sawed  through  near  first  joint,  leaving  tip  hang-
ing by  skin.

B  Third  finger  cut  to  near  centre.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Tired  weary  feeling  pervading  lower  limbs.

Pains  in  knees,  while  sitting;  in  outer  side,  as  if  bruised.

Burning  tearing  in  upper  part  of  calf,  while  sitting.

Drawing,  cramp-like  pain  on  inner  border  of  sole,  while  sitting.

B Varicose  swellings  and  ulcers.

Foot  crushed,  erysipelas  and  gangrene.

Ulcers  from  ingrowing  toe  nail.

i  Ulcers  on  r.  leg  and  foot  ragged,  deep,  with  a  frequently  oc-
curring dreadful  pain,  with  profuse  suppuration,  the  discharge
of  a  horrid  stench. ^Ulcer  on  leg.

B  Frightful  lacerated  wounds  by  mangling  muscles  of  thighs,
patella  displaced  laterally.

a  Outer  part  of  r.  thigh,  skin  and  muscle  torn  off  by  machinery
down  to  bone. ^Lacerated  wounds.

BA  compound  fracture  of  leg  with  a  wound  9  inches  long,  ex-
posing tibia  completely ;  Arnica  was  first  employed  on  ac-
count of  great  bruising  and  extravasation  of  blood  in  leg;
thereafter  dressed  with  water;  Calendula  cured  rapidly  with-
out much  suppuration.
^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL Hands  and  feet  cold.

Drawing  pressive  tension  in  wrists  and  ankles  during  rest.

Wounds  about  joints ; after  surgical  operations ; to  prevent
caries  or  necrosis.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Restless  at  night,  can  rest  in  no
position.

Lying  down  :  pressive  headache  ;  pressure  and  oppression  1.
side  of  chest.

Feels  best  when  walking  about,  or  when  lying  perfectly  still.  ,

The  rheumatic  drawing  pains  appear  only  during  motion,  and
are  very  slight.

B  Moving  causes  pain,  even  after  the  wound  is  dressed  ;  rheu-
matism <C  from  motion.

"Walking :  boring  digging  pain  deep  in  region  of  navel.
36  Jiferves. Tifed,  weary  feeling.

Great  irritability,  easily  frightened.

Traumatic  and  idiopathic  neuroma.

B  Neuritis,  resulting  from  lacerated  wounds.


239  •  CALENDULA.

■  General  pallor  and  insensibility. ^Flesh  wounds.

■  Exhausted  from  loss  of  blood  and  excessive  pain. ^Lacerated

Avounds.
^^  Sleep. Sleepy,  dreamy  and  fretful.

Eeels  as  if  he  would  fall  from  a  height,  when  dropping  asleep;
urine  suppressed;  she  passes  less  than  half  her  usual  quan-
tity of  urine.

Very  restless  at  night ;  he  gets  rest  in  no  position ;  he  con-
tinually wakes ;  is  obliged  to  urinate  frequently,  and  drinks
very  much,
^^  Time. Night ; drinks much ; very  restless  ; has to  urinate
often.

Morning :  head  heavy  after  long  illness  ;  stool  with  chill,  pre-
ceded by  griping  and  anxiety.

Forenoon  :  intimation  of  nausea  ;  chilliness  of  hands  and  feet ;
great  heat.

Afternoon:  heat,  creeping  chills  ;  frequent  thirst.

5, P.M. :  heat,  thirst,  chill  abates.

Evening : heat  of  head  ; pressure  and  oppression  1.  side  of
chest ;  in  bed,  great  heat,  smarting,  feet  burn  very  much
and  are  inclined  to  sweat ; towards, a  feeling  of  heat in
otherwise  cold  hands.
^Tever. I  Chill,  fever  and  headache  from  mechanical  injuries.

Crawls  on  back.

Violent  chill  after  traumatism.

Nearly  all  the  symptoms  appear  with  a  chill.

Chilly  whole  morning,  and  very  sensitive  to  air.

Chilliness  in  hands  and  feet,  whole  forenoon,  without  thirst,
together  with  drawing,  pressive,  rheumatic  pains  through
whole  body ;  ribs  ache  as  if  squeezed  together  and  bruised,
after  sitting  a  while,  in  morning.

He  feels  shivery  and  has  a  kind  of  gooseflesh,  while  skin  seems
warm  to  touch.

Shivering  in  back,  with  pressure  on  last  rib  on  1.  side,  with
movements  in  region  of  stomach  and  abdomen,  as  if  he
would  faint.

Sensation  of  heat  in  face,  of  hands  and  feet,  after  eating,  and
an  hour  afterwards  thirst.

Great  heat,  whole  forenoon,  with  much  sweat ;  he  feels  qualm-
ish in  chest,  and  shoulders  are  very  hot.

Heat  in  afternoon,  with  creeping  chills  and  frequent  thirst;
drinking,  however,  causes  each  time  shivering  and  a  shak-
ing chill.

The  heat  continues  unabated  after  5  p.m.,  but  cold  drinks
cause  shivering.

The  heat  abates  after  5  p.m.,  without  shivering,  even  in  open
air,  head  feels  freer,  breathing  easier,  and  voice  stronger
and  deeper.


CALENDULA.  240

Towards  evening,  a  feeling  of  heat  in  otherwise  cold  hands  and
whole  body,  with  creeping  chills,  without  thirst  and  almost
aversion  to  drinking,  while  sitting.

Great  heat  in  evening,  in  bed;  he  begins  to  sweat;  especially
feet  burn  very  much,  and  are  inclined  to  sweat.
^2  Locality  and  Direction. Left  side:  pressure  on  last  rib;  ear
ached  fearfully;  chest,  pressure;  ribs,  pressure.

Right :  iliac,  constant  pain  ;  side  of  abdomen,  dull  coarse
stitches  ;  of  neck,  rheumatic  drawing  ;  shoulder-blade,  pres-
sive  pain  beneath  ;  leg  and  foot,  ragged  and  deep  ulcers.
*^  Sensations,  As  if  everything  about  r.  shoulder-blade  were  sup-
purating and  bruised ;  as  if  tired  and  weary  ;  lower  limbs  as
if  bruised  ;  as  if  she  would  fall  from  a  height.

Drawing :  cramp-like  pain  on  inner  border  of  sole.

Pressing :  headache.

Swollen  :  sensation  in  lips.

Crawls :  on  back.

Heat :  and  headache  in  forehead  ;  in  face.

Dryness  :  and  biting  in  margin  of  lid.
**  Tissues. Stimulates  proliferation  of  white  globules,  augments
quantity of  fibrin and  its transformation into connective
tissue.

Secures  healing  by  first  intention.

Suggiilations;  bloody  and  serous  infiltrations  of  cellular  tissue
in  open  wounds  and  ulcers.

Inflammations  resulting  from  cutting  or  tearing  the  parts.

Promotes  granulations  and  prevents  disfiguring  scars.

Promotes  favorable  cicatrization  with  the  least  possible  amount
of  suppuration.

Sloughing  and  suppuration  from  mechanical  injuries  ;  prevents
or  arrests  gangrene.

Loss  of  skin,  cell  and  muscle  substance.

Valuable  in  healing  or  reproducing  bone.
Scrofula.

Cutaneous  cancers.
Toucli. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Most  violent  pains
after  bandages  are  put  on.

Sore  to  touch  :  glands.

After  surgical  operations,  to  promote  healthy  granulations,
and  to  prevent  or  arrest  gangrene.

After  removing  tumors,  to  prevent  suppuration.

B  Profuse,  bad-colored,  stinking  suppuration,  hectic  fever,
both  bone  and  muscle  wounded  by  a  ball ;  caries.

External  wounds  and  lacerations,  with  (or  without)  loss  of  sub-
stance ;  articular  wounds  and  clean,  surgical  cuts.

1 1  In  all  cases  with  loss  of  soft  parts,  when  no  union  can  be
effected  by  means  of  adhesive  plaster.

Lacerated,  torn  and  jagged  looking  flesh  wounds.


4S


241  CALENDULA.

I  Skin  or  flesh  has  come  off  in  pieces.

Penetrating  wounds  in  articulations  with  abundant  flow  of
synovia.

Rupture  of  muscles  or  tendons.

Dislocations  with  injury  to  soft  parts.

Chills,  fever  and  headaches  from  mechanical  injuries.
^^  Skin. :  Jaundice.

':  Soft  warts.

Stinging  pain  in  wound  during  fever  heat;  surroundings  look
very  red.

A  wound  is  painful,  in  morning,  as  if  bruised  and  smarting,
with  picking  in  it  and  threatening  to  suppurate.

Wound  raw  and  inflamed ;  painful,  as  if  beaten ;  parts  around
wound  become  red,  with  stinging  in  wound  during  febrile
heat ;  constitutional  tendency  to  erysipelas.

In  charring  of  skin,  after  separation  of  slough.

I  Old  neglected  wounds,  maggoty  and  offensive.

Ulcers :  weak,  indolent,  irritable  inflamed,  sloughing,  varicose,
or  hemorrhagic ;  excessive  secretion  of  pus ;  painful,  as  if
beaten;  surrounding  parts  are  red;  stinging  during  fever;
•<  at  night.

Abscesses :  when  induration  occurs  after  surgical  operations,
followed  by  suppuration  ;  wound  becomes  raw  and  inflamed,
is  painful  in  morning  as  if  beaten,  with  stinging,  followed  by
throbbing,  as  if  it  would  suppurate.

Hinders  or  prevents  gangrene.
''^Stages  of  Life, Constitution. iGrirl,  set. 22, dreadfully
mangled  lower  limbs  by  wheels  of  a  car. ^Flesh  wounds.

I  Girl,  get.  22,  robust,  remarkably  healthy,  suffering  from  burn
by  camphene,  maltreated  by  allopathy  for  six  weeks,  until
pronounced  past  recovery.

I A  man,  get.  42,  for  five  years  an  ulcer  on  leg of  a  mercurio-
syphilitic  origin.
^^  Relations. Contains  a  great  deal  of  nitrogen  and  more  phos-
phoric acid.

Antidotes  :  Arniea  (pain  in  lacerated  hand).
.Compatible: Ar7iic., Arsen., Bryon., Nitr. ac, Phosphor^
Rhus  tox., administered internally as indicated ; before
Arnic,  Hepar ;  after  Arsen.

Incompatible : Camijhor.

Complementary :  Mepar  (pyemia).

Compare:  I  Arnic.  ^  Arsen.,  Bryon.,  Calc.  sulph..  Camphor,
Carh.  an.,  Qarh.  veg.,  iHyper.,  in  painful  wounds,  Ledum,
JSfitr.  ac,  Pliosplwr.,  Rhus  tox.,  Ruta,  II Salic,  ac,  in  pu-
trid, gangrenous  wounds,  Sulph.  ac,  Sympliyt.

General  remarks :  Calendula,  like  Salic  ac,  is  useful  in  pre-
venting excessive  suppuration,  and  in  preventing  putridity,
both  keeping  from  wounds  and  sores  septic  germs. Tlie

VOL.  III.—  16.


CAMPHORA.  242

odor  of  the  flowers  is  disliked  by  mosquitoes;  and  the  smoke
of  the  burning  plant  will  drive  mice  and  lizards  from  houses.


CAMPHORA.

Camphor.  Lauraceoe.

All  our  progress  as  a  school  depends  on  the  right  view  of  the  symptoms
obtained  by  proving  with  camphor  or  with  opium. — C.  Hg.

^  Mind. Unconsciousness.

Grew  dizzy  while  studying  in  school,  12.30  p.m.,  book  seemed
to  go  round,  could  hardly  keep  his  seat ;  felt  as  if  falling
toward  r.  side  and  as  if  going  into  a  state  of  sleep  or  uncon-
sciousness ;  >■  in  open  air ;  a  boy,  set.  13 ;  t.

Vomiting  and  convulsions,  with  loss  of  consciousness  and  fre-
quent desire  to  make  water.

Loss  of  consciousness,  during  which  he  was  attacked  with  vio-
lent convulsive  fits,  and  maniacal  frenzy.

Falls  down,  without  consciousness,  with  howling  cries.

Stupefaction  of  senses,  like  fainting.

Half  stupid  and  senseless,  moaning  and  groaning.

Want  of  memory.

Complete  loss  of  memory,  after  an  attack  of  catalepsy,  with
loss  of  consciousness,  followed  by  vomiting.

■  Memory  lost,  after  mental  or  sensorial  disturbances.
Though  he  could  remember  the  name  of  every  thing,  when  he

looked  at  it,  yet  it  was  not  without  investigating  its  nature,
that  he  could  discover  its  use.

■  Awkwardness.

Unusually  clear-headed ;  also  intellectual  dullness.

Uneasiness  of  body  and  a  confusion  of  mind,  impossible  to

Ideas  were  confused,  delirium.

Monomania,  with  horrible  visions  and  torturing  ideas  about
religion,  which  he  cannot  shake  off,  although  he  is  conscious
that  they  are  morbid ;  is  worse  at  night.

A  tumult  of  crude  ideas  floated  through  his  mind,  with  a  noise
in  his  ears,  followed  by  insensibility.

I  He  lay  with  closed  eyes,  seemingly  asleep,  answering  no  ques-
tions ;  when  the  distant  town-clock  struck,  he  lifted  his  arm
at  every  stroke ; one  evening  he  went  to  the  piano  with


243  CAMPHORA.

closed  eyes  and  played  with  greatest  precision,  what  at  other
times  he  could  not  have  done  without  his  notes  ;  several
times  he  wrote  letters  in  an  acquired  language  more  correctly
than  in  a  waking  state ;  once  he  occupied  himself  for  several
hours  with  the  number  6 ;  at  times  he  had  violent  spasms
and  priapism.
It  was  to  him  as  if  he  moved  in  his  own  little  world,  in  which
all  things  were  clear  and  defined ;  ontside  of  which,  uncer-
tain and  undefined ;  t.

■  Thought  he  would  die. ^Gastralgia.

Very  nervous  ; imagined  various  things ; that  he  would  get

yellow  fever,  etc. ;  boy,  set.  13;  t.
Confused  fancies,  and  delirium.

■  Delirious,  somnolent,  with  slow  fever,  at  night.
Stupefaction,  coma  and  delirium.

Delirium  with  heat  in  throat  and  thirst.

Delirium,  with  pain  in  stomach.

Most  furious  delirium,  being  with  difficulty  restrained  in  bed

by  two  men.
I  Rage,  with  foaming  at  mouth.

■  Violent  rage; scratches,  spits  and  bites; tears  her  clothes

and  foams  at  mouth. ^Puerperal  mania.

■  Mania,  with  melancholy.

Disposition  to  cry  out  frequently,  he  knew  not  what  for,  but
would  frequently  find  himself  crying  out  when  at  work  or
when  walking  about.

Desire  to  be  diverted  from  thoughts  of  himself;  t.

Desire  to  dispute  ;  self-willed.

■  Wants  to  get  out  of  bed.

Often  felt  as  if  he  ought  to  kill  people,  when  in  street ;  never
felt  a  disposition  to  kill  any  of  his  own  family,  but  thought
he  ought  to  kill  somebody.

■  Impulse  to  jump  out  of  window.

He  talks  irrationally,  and  proposes  absurd  things.
Talked  wildly,  constantly  repeating  the  same  sentence.
Gestures  and  conversation  very  wild  and  strange.

■  Greatly  excited,  talks  incessantly. ^Puerperal  mania.
TiMind  wandering ;  talking,  shouting,  crying  and  laughing  by

turns;  t. ^Spasms.
Was  found  much  excited,  screaming  loudly,  "I  shall  not  faint!

I  shan't  faint,  for  if  I  do,  I  will  have  fits  and  never  come  out

of  them! "
Uttered  a  strange  scream,  a  sort  of  howl,  leaped  from  bed,

apparently  in  great  agony,  and  bent  on  something  desperate.
•  Screamed, raved  and  scolded in most  indecent language;

4th  day. ^Puerperal  mania.

■  Cries  for  help,  takes  hold  of  others,  will  not  be  left  alone.

■  Weeping  or  crying,  does  not  know  why.


CAMPHORA.  244

Sighing  and  muttering  in  sleep.

■  Tosses anxiously in bed, weeps incessantly; full irritable

pulse,  violent  headache. ^Hysteria,

Restless  tossing  about ;  heart  palpitates.

Children  throw  things  in  the  air  with  crazy  laughter...-

Strips  himself,  and  tries  to  jump  out  of  window.

He  beats  himself  on  chest,  and  falls  into  a  faint.

Child  creeps  into  a  corner,  howls  and  cries ;  everything  that  is
said  is  taken  as  if  one  were  ordering  him,  and  he  were  con-
sidered naughty  and  would  be  punished.

I  Violent  outbursts  of  rage  and  vituperation ;  abuses  her  child.
^Puerperal  mania.

I  Hasty  in  action  and  speech. ^Puerperal  mania.

Does  not  speak  unless  questioned.

Aversion  to  all  kinds  of  work.

Greatly  exhilarated,  lively  mood.

Depressed,  sad  and  irritable,  despondent.

I  Indescribable  wretchedness.

Felt  a  vague  sense  of  impending  danger  to  life,  >  moving
about,  rushed  out  of  house  and  walked  violently  until  he
perspired,  which  relieved  ;  t.

Dread  of  being  alone  in  dark.

Afraid  of  mirrors  in  room,  lest  he  should  see  himself  in  them  ;
so  excessive  was  this  fear  at  times  in  night  that  he  would
have  got  up  and  broken  the  mirrors,  only  that  he  was  still
more  afraid  to  get  up  alor^e  in  the  dark.

Indescribable  dread  of  being  drawn  upwards.

I  Very  great  anxiety.

I  Prgecordial  anxiety,  with  weeping.

TrAnxiety,  restless  tossing  in  bed. ^Cancer  labii.

■  Anxiety,  almost  loses  consciousness. /^Puerperal  mania.

An  indifference  whether  the  world  uses  one  well  or  ill,  every-
thing is  repulsive.

Very  irritable  and  fretful ;  every  word  irritates  and  ex-
cites him.

Fretful,  anxious,  at  night,  with  frightful  visions.

Palpitation ;  vexed  by  want  of  sympathy,  afraid  to  be  alone  a
moment,  fears  death ;  boy,  set.  13 ;  t.

Dogmatical,  easily  offended.

Voluptuous  ideas.

Great  excitement,  almost  amounting  to  frenzy.

Excitement,  as  of  intoxication.

Easily  startled.

Want  of  irritability  ;  general  apathy.

■  Lethargy  ;  cannot  be  roused. ^Typhus.

■  ■Better  when  thinking  of  the  existing  complaint.

Thinks  he  is  going  to  die;  <  when  he  thinks  about  it;  boy,
set.  13;  t.


2^5  CAMPHORA.

I  Mania  after  mental  overexertion,  in  a  boy,  jet.  14; talks  dis-
connectedly, refuses  to  answer;  wants  to  lie  on  bare  floor,
and  wallows  in  his  own  filth.
^  Seusorium. -Severe  dizziness,  flushing  of  face,  followed  by  ex-
treme pallor ;  t. ^Spasms.

Sensation  as  if  all  objects  were  too  bright  and  glittering.

On  looking  through  window  everything  in  street  appears  in
utmost  tumult  and  confusion.

I  Vertigo:  in  frequent  short  attacks;  after  nausea  and  retch-
ing, giddy,  sparks  before  eyes,  dim  sight,  singing  in  ears,
heat  and  tremor ;  vomiturition ;  Avith  tendency  to  fall  for-
ward, 10  a.m.,  while  walking;  so  severe  that  knees  knock
together,  and  he  nearly  falls  ;  on  stooping ;  when  sitting.

■  Staggers,  or  totters  in  walking;  feels  drunken.

iFeels  as  if  lighter,  not  touching  the  ground;  as  if  he  conld  fly.
Uncertain  in  his  gait;  in  looking  down  it  seems  as  if  all  ob-
jects were  commingled ;  t.

■  Lightness  or  dizzy  heaviness  of  head.

■  Loss  of  consciousness,  fainting,  delicate  people  suddenly  sink

down,  turn  pale,  shut  eyes;  breathing  and  pulse  very  weak;
after  recovering,  one-sided  lameness  or  blindness.

■  All  senses  vanish,  even  the  touch; cannot  distinguish  cold

or  hot.

■  Stupor;  fainting;  apoplexy.

Vertigo  without  nausea,  uncertainty  of  motion,  and  a  fainting
fit,  in  which  he  remained  unconscious  for  four  or  five  min-
utes ;  t.
^  Inner  Head. Head  confused,  stupefied,  burning  hot,  congested,
generally  clear  consciousness,  sometimes  unconscious.

■  Frontal  headache  ;  pressing  outward  ;  also  left-sided.

■  Contraction,  as  if  laced  together,  in  cerebellum  and  glabella,

with  coldness  all  over.
Throbbing  headache  in  forehead,  over  root  of  nose,  with  heat.
Fine  tearing  in head, especially  in  1. side  of  forehead  and

occiput.

■  Throbbing-stinging  in  forehead,  all  night,  with  a  dry,  thirst-

less  heat.
Tearing-sticking  in  forehead,  and  pressure  on  upper  part  of

frontal  bone.
Pressure  :  in  forehead,  in  middle,  on  r.  side,  on  1.  side  ; over

1.  eye,  in  evening.
Heaviness  and  heat  in  forehead,  •<  when  walking.
Slight  headache  in forehead, which gradually  became  more

violent,  and  accompanied  by  stitches,  apparently  starting  in

temporal  bones,  and  returning  every  five  minutes.
Dull  headache  above  frontal  bone,  with  nausea.
Pressive  headache,  alternating  in  forehead  and  at  sides.


CAMPHORA.  246

Headache, beginning in frontal region and extending to

occiput.
I  Boring  in  temples,  shooting  towards  eyes  or  teeth  in  short

attacks,  early  in  morning.
Single  violent  stitches  in  r.  half  of  brain.
Fine  tearing  in  r.  temple  and  forehead.
Tearing  pressure  in  r.  temple.
Throbbing  pressure  in  temples.
Headache,  with  drawings  in  r.  side.
Pressure  by  jerks,  in  head,  over  1.  ear.
I  Throbbing  of  temporal  arteries,  and  distended  jugular  veins.

I  Aching  in  middle  of  head,  from  forehead  backwards,  lasted

through  evening  and  next  day.
Cutting  jerks  or  shocks  from  forehead  and  temples  towards

middle  of  brain,  in  short  intervals,  soon  after  lying  down.
Heat  and  heaviness  of  head,  especially  vertex.
Severe  pressure  on  r.  side  of  vertex.
Dull  pressure  in  region  of  vertex.

I I  Throbbing,  like  beats  with  a  hammer,  in  cerebellum,  iso-
chronous with  pulse ;  head  hot,  face  red,  limbs  cool,  >  in
standing ;  mostly  with  such  as  were  deprived  of  sexual  in-
tercourse.

Pressure  in  occiput.

Cutting  pressure  from  1.  side  of  occiput  towards  forehead.

A  contractive  pain  at  base  of  brain,  especially  in  occiput,  and
above  root  of  nose,  which  continues  without  cessation,  where-
by head  is  leaned  to  one  or  other  side ;  a  pain  which  is  very
much  <  by  stooping  low,  lying  down,  or  by  external  press-
ure ;  with  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  hot  forehead,  and
coma  vigil.

Uneasy  feeling  at  back  of  head.

TrSensation  of  cold  in  cerebellum.

1 1  Contraction,  as  if  laced  together  in  cerebellum  and  glabella,
with  coldness  all  over. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

Heat  in  head,  and  tearing  headache,  soon  passing  oJBT  and  dis-
appearing on  pressure.

Transient  headache,  as  if  brain  were  compressed  from  all  sides,
only  felt  during  half  consciousness,  when  he  was  not  paying
attention  to  his  body  ;  if  he  became  conscious  of  his  pain  and
thought  of  it,  it  immediately  disappeared.
'  Drawing  sensation  all  around  head,  as  if  nerves  of  head  were
all  drawn  up ;  drawings  for  some  minutes,  then  remissions,
then  drawings  again.

Headache,  as  if  bruised,  or  as  if  brain  were  sore.

Head  heavy,  with  anxiety,  brilliant  eyes,  red  face  and  great
agitation.

iDizzy  heaviness  of  head;  head  sank  backwards.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  heaviness  of  head ;  >  from  ex-


247  CAMPHORA.

ternal  pressure;  heat  in  head,  as  if  sweat  would  follow,  while
crawlings  run  over  limbs  and  belly.

Throbbing  headache ;  alternate  pallor  and  flushes.

Intense  headache  and  giddiness.

TrHeadache,  with  burning  in  stomach  and  praecordial  anxiety.
^Cancer  labii.

Headache,  with  burning  pain  in  stomach,  eructations,  great
thirst,  and  a  sense  of  formication  in  extremities.

iPains  run  from  head  to  tips  of  fingers,  with  trembling  and
uneasiness.

Headache,  in  morning,  after  rising,  for  several  days  in  suc-
cession.

Pressive  headache  from  within  outward,  immediately.

■  Hydrocephalus:  great  coldness  of  skin,  yet  child  cannot  bear

to  be  covered.

■  Inflammation  of  brain  after  sunstroke.

*  Outer  Head. iCold  sweat  on  forehead. ^Cholera  infantum.
Hot  sweat  on  forehead  and  in  palms.
Scalp  intensely  hot.

Heat  of  head,  hands  and  feet,  yet  thirstless.
Drawing  around  head,  as  if  it  were  drawn  upwards,  in  short
attacks,  with  crawls.

■  Spasmodic  motions  of  head.
Head  is  thrown  back.

Head  drawn  to  r.  shoulder;  rest  of  body  relaxed;  unconscious.
Spasmodic drawing of  head, laterally or backwards, with

deathly  coldness
Premature  gray  hairs.

■  Anterior  fontanelle  much  depressed. ^Cholera  infantum.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Sensation  of  increased  and  dazzling  light.

■  Objects  appear  too  bright  or  glittering,  at  same  time  black

spots  are  seen.
Flickering  before  eyes.
Objects  quivered  before  his  eyes.

■  Cannot  read,  letters  run  together;  dim  and  dark.

Strange  visions  before  his  eyes ;  hallucinations ;  wonderful
forms  float  before  eyes.

■  Sees  bright  colors,  sparks  and  fiery  wheels,  alternating  with

mistiness. .

■  After  using  eye  for  awhile  objects  become  indistinct,  as  if

seen  through  a  fog,  often  they  appear  double ;  the  upper
portion  of  large  objects  is  not  visible.

■  Objects,  upon  which  she  fixes  her  gaze,  appear  to  move  to

one  side,  with  a  jerk.
Sees  objects  plainly  at  arm's  length,  things  farther  ofi"  appear

dim  and  undefined  ;  t.
Eyes  sensitive  to  light;  photophobia.


CAMPHORA.  248

Darkness  before  eyes,  as  if  objects  were  encircled  in  a  cloud;

sight  obscured  or  dim.
iDimness  of  vision  diminishes  as  attacks  of  vertigo  increase.
I  Sees  better  after  breakfast,  not  at  all  in  evening.
I  Pupils  contracted  and  immovable  or  dilated.
lEyes  worse  in  sunlight.
Conjunctiva  injected,  pupils  dilated.
I  Chronic  inflammation  of  eyes.
Red  spots  on  white  of  eye.

;rHeat,  redness  and  burning  in  eye,  with  lachrymation.
Eyes  brilliant  and  glittering.
He  looks  at  one  staring  and  wondering,  without  consciousness.

■  Disturbed  wild  and  roving  glances,  disheveled  hair. ^Puer-

peral mania.
lEyes  staring,  sparkling,  a  little  convergent; 3d  day. ^Puer-
peral mania.
OEyes  fixed,  staring,  turned  upwards  or  outwards.
BEy5s  protrude,  with  monomania,  despair  of  salvation,  wants

to  cry,  but  his  eyes  are  dry.
TrEyes turned to right, upwards and backwards, head the

same;  t. ^Spasms.
lEyes  deeply  sunken  ;  blue  rings  ;  pale  face.
Soreness  or  tense,  stiff  feeling  in  eyes  and  eyelids  all  day.
Sensation  in  eyeballs  as  from  pressure  and  pushing  upon  them

from  behind.
Lachrymation  in  open  air ;  lids  feel  stiff,  sore  or  tense.
Twitching  or  biting  in  external  canthus.
Smarting,  biting-itching,  sticking,  or  burning  in  eyelids.
Burning  or  biting  in  edges  of  lids.

Twitching  of  lids  ; quivering  in  upper  lid ;  constant  agitation.
Eyelids  are  covered  with  many  red  spots.
I  When  closing  eyes  in  slumber,  things  appear  to  grow  thicker

or  thinner,  as  the  pulse  beats.
Pressure  above  r.  eye.
^Hearing  and  Ears. I Singing, ringing, buzzing, or roaring

in  ears.
Burning,  stitches,  or  tearing  in  ears.

■  Stitches  from  a  draft  of  air.
Tearing  behind  and  above  ears.

I  Pain  in  1.  ear  from  a  dark  red  pimple,  which  suppurated  in
thirty-six  hours.

■  Yellow  blisters  around  ear,  with  erysipelas  of  face.

■  Ear-lobe  hot  and  red.
I  I  Congestion  to  ears.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Sudden,  momentary  boring  in  r.  side  of  nose.
Drawing  in  1.  side  of  nose.

In  anterior  corner  of  nostrils,  stinging  as  if  sore  and  would
ulcerate.


249  CAMPHORA.

Itching  in  nose,  and  1.  nostril.

Air  of  room,  breathed  through  nose,  seems  cooler,  when
walking.

Violent  stitching,  or  crawling,  from  root  of  nose  almost  to  tip.

1 1  Nose  cold  and  pointed. ^Summer  complaint. ^Cholera.

I  I  Sneezing,  beginning  coryza.

iCoryza,  fluent  or  dry.

Nose  stopped  on  r.  side,  afterwards  running.

I  Catarrhal  affections,  with  headache,  from  sudden  change  of
weather.

I  Nosebleed.
^  Upper  Face. ■  Features  changed, distorted, relaxed, and  ex-
pressionless.

Face  :•  scarlet-red  and  puffy;  flushed,  with  wild  expression;
bluish  and  pinched ;  pale,  anxious  and  haggard ;  distorted
and  sunken  ;  livid,  cold  and  deathly.

Spasmodic  distortion  of  facial  muscles,  with  froth  from  mouth.

I  Red  and  glowing  face. ^Puerperal  mania.

I  I  Redness  of  cheeks  and  lobules  of  ears.

I  1  Red  face,  with  warmth  of  body.

I  I  Pale  face,  with  crawling.

I  Looks  pinched  and  blue. ^Cholera  asiatica.

■  Erysipelatous  red  cheeks  and  ear-lobes.

■  Face now pale, then livid, expressing despair; incessant

spasmodic  movements,  grimaces.
Very  pale  face,  with  at  first  closed,  afterwards  open staring

eyes,  with  eyeballs  turned  outward.
Excessive  paleness  of  face,  with  a  fixed  and  stupid  look.

■  Flushed  and  bloated  face,  brilliant  eyes,  full  rapid  pulse  and

hot  skin  ;  cannot  bear  heat. ^Cancer  labii.

I  Pale  face,  dry  skin,  not  hot,  cool  forehead  ; 3d  day. ^Puer-

peral mania.
Black  in  face.
iFace  hippocratic. ^Scarlet  fever. ^Cholera.

■  Distorted  features. ^Puerperal  mania.

I I  Cold  sweat,  with  vomiting. ^Cholera.

I  Cold  sweat  stood  in  drops  on  his  face,  nose  icy-cold  and
pinched,  upper  lip  everted  ;  could  not  see. ^Gastralgia.

■  Flushes  and  grows  pale  by  turns. ^Puerperal  mania.

In  morning,  disturbed  countenance,  with  blue  rings  around  eyes.

Heat  in  face  and  cold  hands.

Stitching  in  1.  cheek.

Drawing  in  1.  zygoma ;  boring  in  right.

Burning  in  face.

Slight  twitchings  of  face.

■  Buries  face  deep  in  pillow  to  shut  out  hideous  sights. ^De-

lirium.
^  Lower  Face. ■  Froth  or  foam  at  mouth.


CAMPHORA.  250

■  Upper  lip  drawn  up,  exposing  teeth.

Lips  everted  as  in  bleating,  head  hot,  feet  cold ;  t.

iBlue  lips. ^Cholera  infantum.

^rCancer  of  under  lip.

I  Lockjaw,  with  coldness  (and  brownish  look  of  eruption,  dur-
ing partial  repercussion,  in  scarlatina).

Drawing  in  angle  of  r.  lower  jaw.

Tensive  pain  in  masticators.

Stitching  in  chin.

Glands  near  lower  jaw  are  swollen;  seem  to  cause  a  toothache.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums.  A  little  froth  about  teeth,  which  were
firmly  clenched.

Flying  toothache,  gnawing-boring  in  molars,  mostly  in  hollow
ones ;  much  <  if  even  a  soft  little  crust  of  bread  touches
the  suffering  tooth ;  <  from  drinking  cofiee  or  spirituous
liquors ;  >  after  drinking  beer  or  cold  water,  but  <<  from
water  kept  in  mouth  ;  relieved  by  coition.

Drawing  in  upper  incisors,  and  in  hollow  lower  molars.

Transient,  cutting  shootings  through  gum  to  roots  of  incisor
and  canine  teeth.

Transient  toothache,  now  in  one,  now  in  another  tooth.

I  Cutting  toothache,  which  seems  to  originate  from  swelling  of
a  sub-maxillary  gland.

Painful  looseness  of  teeth  ;  teeth  seem  too  long.

During  coition  toothache  ceases,  immediately  after  which  he
sleeps  quietly  for  the  first  time.

When  walking,  drawing  in  decayed  upper  incisors.

On  going  into  cold,  or  windy  air  with  the  toothache,  a  stitch
shoots  from  tooth  into  eye.

Gums  loosened,  of  a  livid  color.

■  Constant  pressure, makes him mad,  with great  itching  of

swollen  gums,  teeth  too  long.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Taste: acute; beef  broth  tastes  too
strong;  food  tastes  bitter,  meat  more  so  than  bread;  tobacco
has  an  offensive,  bitter  taste.

■  Bad  taste,  with  nausea  and  vomiting,  in  morning.
Great  difficulty  of  speech  and  thought.

■  Speech  uncertain,  impeded ;  when  roused,  he  had  scarcely  any

power  to  articulate.

■  Speech  feeble,  broken,  hoarse.

Could  not  speak  from  words  seeming  to  choke  him in  larynx.

■  Red  tongue. ^Polydipsia.

Tongue :  felt  swollen  and  numb ;  dry,  or  covered  with  aphthae.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  on  back  part  of  tongue,  like  a  scraping,

with  much  saliva.
I  Tongue  thick,  spongy,  fissured,  covered  with  much  yellowish

mucus.
Burning  on  edge  of  tongue  and  hard  palate.


251  CAMPHORA.

iBurning  sensation  on  end  of  tongue,  as  from  pepper.

1 1  Tongue  cold,  flabby,  trembling.

I  Tongue  and  teeth  dirty  and  dry. ^Typhus. ^Suppression
of  urine.
^^  Inner  Mouth. '  i  Mouth  open.

Foaming  at  mouth.

I  Saliva :  running  together,  watery ;  at  times  slimy  and  tena-
cious ;  children  "slobber."

Mouth  dry  and  parched,  red  tongue,  no  thirst ;  t.

Mouth,  tongue  and  gums  feel  swollen.

■  Whole  mouth  interiorly,  with  tongue,  gums  and  palate,  feels

as  if  swollen.

■  Sensation  in  mouth,  as  after  eating  peppermint-lozenges,  and

same  in  stomach.

■  Dryness  and  after  it  aphthous  sponginess  of  mucous  membrane.
Continued  dryness  of  mouth,  with  increased  thirst.

■  Unpleasant  heat  in  mouth  and  stomach.

■  Coldness  in  mouth.

A  cold  sensation  rises  into  mouth  and  to  palate.

Sense  of  coolness  changed  to  that  of  sharpness  and  burning.

■  Offensive  odor  from  mouth,  in morning,  which  he  himself

noticed.

■  Boiling  hot  tea  seems  cold  to  him.

^*  Throat. iHeat:  on  hard  palate  ;  in  throat;  in  oesophagus.

■  A  dry  scraping  sensation  on  palate.

■  Single  coarse  stitches  in  palate.

■  Burning  from  palate  down  oesophagus;  it  makes  him  drink,

but  this  does  not  lessen  it.

■  Repeated  short  stitches  at  back  and  toward  1.  side  of  pharynx.

■  Sore  throat  when  swallowing,  and  even  more  when  not  swal-

lowing, as  if  throat  were  sore  and  torn  up,  with  a  sensation
as  if  she  had  eaten  rancid  substances.
Scraping  in  throat.

■  A  hot  vapor  seems  to  rise  up  throat  and  out  of  mouth.  ^Scar-

let fever.
Slight  warmth  in  oesophagus and  stomach, extending over
whole  body.

■  A  cooling  sensation  rising  up  the  throat  to  roof  of  mouth.

■  Rattling  in  throat. ■  Scarlet  fever.

■  Swallowing  is  impossible. ^Typhus.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Neither  appetite

nor  thirst.

■  Aversion  to  accustomed  tobacco-smoking  without  its  tasting

badly;  he  soon  becomes  averse  to  it,  even  to  vomiting.

■  Desire  to  drink  without  feeling  thirsty.

■  Continued  thirst,  with  frequent  drinking.

■  Insatiable  burning  thirst,  not  quenched  by  incredible  quan-

tities of  cold  water. ^Polydipsia.


CAMPHORA.  252

Desire  for  beer,  which  >  the  toothache.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking*. Could  neither  taste  bread  nor  meat
on  account  of  nausea.
I  Eats  voraciously  and  has  frequent  thirst. ^Puerperal  mania.

■  After  meals:  he  feels  heart  beating  against  ribs;  a  drawing

through  whole  body,  with  coldness,  cold  arms,  hands  and
feet ;  constant  belching.

Drinking  difficult.

Better  from  drinking  cold  w^ater.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i Belching
and  gulping  up  contents  of  stomach.

I  I  Empty  eructations  frequently  after  eating,  and  almost  con-
tinuous.

BNausea:  with  vertigo,  twitching  in  face,  salivation,  retching
and  vomiting  ;  with  accumulation  of  saliva ;  and  prostra-
tion, 10  to  11  A.M.

Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  which  disappeared  every  time
after  an  eructation.

Retching.

Nausea  and  vomiting,  especially  mornings.

She  drank  some  coffee,  which  excited  vomiting.

■  Constant  vomiting. ^Viper  bite.

I  Vomit:  bilious;  of  some  blood;  mostly  sour.

■  Watery,  slimy  vomit. ^Summer  complaint.
Vomited  black-streaked  fluid  smelling  of  camphor.

■  Chronic  vomiting,  in  morning,  of  sour  mucus.

■  Vomiting,  with  cold  sweat  in  face.

■  Coldness  after  vomiting.

■  Sometimes  nausea  and  vomiting,  with  cold  sweat. ^Cholera.

■  Absence  of  nausea  and  vomit,  icy-cold. ^Cholera.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pain  in  epigastric  region.

■  Terrible  anguish  and  burning  at  pit  of  stomach driving  to

despair. ^Cholera  asiatica.

■  Pain,  as  if  beaten,  or  distended,  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  fulness

of  abdomen  ;  sensitive  to  touch.

Sensation  in  region  of  pit  of  stomach  as  if  distended  at  this
point,  and  diaphragm  thereby  pressed  upward;  oppression  of
breathing.

Pain,  at  first  moderate,  but  afterwards  very  intense,  in  epi-
gastrium, radiating  all  over  belly  and  into  limbs,  accom-
panied by  uterine  tenesmus.

Gradually  increasing  pain  in  epigastrium,  loins,  and  bowels,
with  strangury  and  vomiting.

Pressive  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  or  in  anterior  part  of  liver.

An  oppressive  sensation,  with  a  feeling  of  warmth,  in  pit  of
stomach.

■  Unpleasant  feeling  in  gastric  region,  with  transient  vertigo.
Digestion  impaired, < after  taking cold, with pressure or


253  CAMPHORA.

burning  above  navel,  great  thirst,  prsecordial  anxiety,  heat,
.burning  and  dryness  of  skin,  limbs  heavy  as  lead.
Stitches  and  burning  in  stomach.

■  Sensation  of  heat  in stomach,  with  chilliness  in  loins  and

small  of  back.

■  Coldness  in  stomach.
Feeling  like  hunger  in  stomach.

I  Awoke  in  night,  with  cramp  in  stomach  so  violent  he  thought
he  would  die. ^Gastralgia.
^*  Hypochondria. I  Constrictive  pain  below  short  ribs,  extend-
ing to  lumbar  vertebrae.

I  Aching  pressure  in  both  hypochondria.

I  Aching  in  anterior  part  of  liver.

In  r.  hypochondrium  a  stitch  from  front  to  back,  <^  when
running.

Pressive  pain  in  hypochondria.

Under  short  ribs  a  painful  contraction,  through  to  lumbar
vertebroe.

I  Stitches  in  spleen, from front  backwards, < afcer quick
walking.
*^  Abdomen. I  Cutting  colic,  at  night.

Slight  cuttings  in  region  of  navel,  followed  by  passage  of  flatus,
inclination  to  stool,  and  urging  to  urinate.

Movements  in  intestines,  and  in  afternoon,  frequent  passage  of
offensive  flatus ;  and  during  next  night,  from  1  to  2  o'clock,
violent  pressive  pain,  located  in  coeliac  ganglia,  so  severe
that  he  feared  that  inflammation  would  ensue,  which  caused
great  anxiety  and  sweating.

Sticking-drawing  heaviness,  which  is  distinctly  felt  on  pressure
in  r.  side  of  lower  abdomen.

I  In  r.  side  a  stinging-drawing  heaviness,  more  perceptible  when
pressed ;  a  drawing  soreness,  more  inward  than  outward,
extending  to  region  of  liver  and  chest,  <C  when  inhaling.

Drawing  bruised  pain,  more  internally  than  externally,  especi-
ally on  inspiration,  in  whole  r.  side  of  abdomen,  extending
into  region  of  liver,  and  into  chest.

Drawing  in  1.  side  of  lower  abdomen,  with  a  tensive  bruised
sensation.

I  Pinching  in  region  of  navel.

■  Bellyache,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  follow.

At  first,  passage  of  much  flatus,  and  after  several  hours,  in
morning,  pressure  in  abdomen  as  of  distension  from  flat-
ulence.

iHard  pressure  in  1.  side  of  lower  abdomen.

Pressure  and  burning  about  navel.

I  Violent  burning  heat  in  upper  and  lower  abdomen.

■  Burning  in  bowels. ^Cholera  asiatica.


CAMPHORA.  254

I  Heat  in  abdoinen.

Sensation  of  hardness  and  heaviness  in  abdomen,  above  .navel.

I  Coldness  in  upper  and  lower  abdomen,  followed  by  burning
heat  therein.

I  Cold  feeling  in  abdomen  spreading  over  chest.

I  An  aching  in  abdomen  seems  to  cause  a  suffocating  contrac-
tion of  chest.

Burning-sticking  in  a  surface  as  large  as  hand,  below  anterior
crest  of  ilium,  extending  to  groin.

Itching-crawling  in  r,  groin,  >■  on  rubbing.

Abdomen  retracted.

■  Transient  ascites,  or  dropsy  with  ischuria  after  abuse  of  can-

tharides.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Flatulency  ;  wind  passes  without  relief.

I  Rice  water  stools ;  difficult  passage  of  feces  preceded  by  pas-
sage of  much  wind,  but  with  the  same  difficulty.  ^Summer
complaint.

Involuntary  stools,  thin  and  blackish.

I  Cholera  infantum :  vomiting  and  diarrhoea  suddenly  cease ;
coldness  of  body,  blueness  of  nails  and  lips,  cold  sweat  on
forehead  and  upper  part  of  chest,  with  icy  cold  feet;
hoarseness.

■  Cholera  infantum : cold  spell  coming  on  at  night,  with  desire

to  be  uncovered.

■  Diarrhoea  with  colicky  pain,  particularly  when  caused  by  cold.

■  I  Anxiety  and  restlessness,  absence  of  evacuations,  frequently

chilly  or  feeling  as  if  cold  air  was  blowing  on  covered  parts ;
great  sinking  and  collapse. ^Cholera  asiatica.

■  Diarrhoea:  attack  very  sudden  ;  sudden  and  great  sinking  of

strength ;  cold  sweat  on  face ;  eyes  sunken  and  fixed ;  icy
coldness  of  whole  body ;  face  pale,  livid,  purple,  icy  cold,
distorted ;  upper  lip  drawn  up,  exposing  teeth ;  foam  at
mouth. ^Cholera  morbus. ^Cholera  asiatica.

■  After  taking  cold,  cutting  with  involuntary  loose  discharge  of

dark -brown  or  black  feces,  like  coffee-grounds.

■  Stool: generally painless; dark-brown, thin and scanty;

blackish,  like  coflee-grounds  ; sour ; involuntary  ; sluggish
and  incomplete.
Urging  to  stool : stool of  usual  hardness,  but  only  a  little
passes,  followed  by  very  violent  urging  again,  and  a  scanty
discharge  again.

■  Urging  to  stool  and  insufficient  discharge,  cramp  in  sphincter

ani.

■  Faeces passed  with difficulty,  not  without  exertion  of  ab-

dominal muscles,  as  if  peristaltic  motion  of  intestines  was
diminished,  and  at  same  time  rectum  was  contracted.

■  Constipation  from  inactivity  of  bowels.


255  •  CAMPHORA.

I  Rectum  seems  contracted,  swollen,  and  painful,  on  passing

flatus.
I  Chapped  sensation  in  rectum,  drops  of  blood  from  anus.
Smarting  in  rectum.

Aggravation  :  during  epidemic  cholera  ;  from  hot  sun.
2^  Urinary  Organs. Pain  in  bladder  after  acrid  drugs.
I  Painful  urination;  sticking-burning.
nBurning  during  urination. ^Pregnancy.
I  Strangury  from  stricture  following  gonorrhoea.
I A  biting  in  back  part  of  urethra ;  during  and  after  urination
pressure  in  bladder.

■  Frequent  urination,  passes  more  than  he  drinks;  loses  strength;

emaciates.
Frequent  desire  to  make  water,  with  some  pain  in  course  oi
spermatic  vessels.

■  Frequent  and  difficult  urination  ;  contraction  of  bladder  less

powerful,  urine  passes  slowly  and  by  drops.

Diminished  power  of  bladder ;  urine  passes  very  slowly,  with-
out any  mechanical  hindrance.

I  Urine  passes  in  a  very  thin  stream,  passes  almost  involunt-
arily, and  after  it  a  painful  contraction  going  from  front
backwards.

■  Involuntary  escape  of  urine  ;  urine  dribbles.

■  Difficult  urination. ^Impotentia  virilis.

■  Urine  scanty,  in  drops,  or  suppressed.
Urine  increased,  of  a  dark-brown  color.

Urine  contains  sugar,  is  pale,  odorless ;  contains  mucus,  with-
out sediment.
Yellowish-green,  turbid  urine,  of  a  musty  odor.

■  Urine  red,  bloody;  after  irritating  drugs,  or  in  exan thematic

fevers.

Urine  with  white  or  red  sediment.

Urine  profuse,  colorless,  frequent,  almost  every  five  minutes.

Urine  quite  clear,  but  having,  like  the  perspiration,  a  very
strong  odor  of  camphor.

I  I  Urine  burns,  passing  in  drops  ;  painful  urination  ;  hot  burn-
ing in  urethra  as  after  cantharides.

■  Retention  of  urine ;  a  pressure  on  bladder ; desire  to  urinate.

^Pregnancy. ^Ischuria  of  infants. ^Measles.

■  Tenesmus  of  neck  of  bladder. ^Strangury.

■  Hemorrhage  from  urinary  organs  after  irritating  drugs,  especi-

ally cantharides,  and  during  exanthematic  fevers.
22  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  desire.

■  Nervous  erethism  of  sexual  organs  following  frequent  excite-

ment, without  satisfaction  of  desire.

■  Increased  sexual  desire;  unusual  sexual  ardor,  with  continued

delusions  respecting  the  object  of  embrace.

■  Attacks  of  violent  priapism,  during  dreams.


CAMPHORA.  256

iWant  of  sexual  desire,  with  weakness  of  parts,  want  of  erec-
tions ;  testicles  relaxed. ^Impotence.

■  Stultified  by  sudden  laxness  of  penis  ;  at  night  the  fancy  be-
comes excited  in  dreams,  and  a  discharge  is  the  result.

iNightly  emissions  ;  sometimes  occurring  without  a  dream.

Involuntary  masturbation.

Contractive  sensation  in  testicles.

Stinging-itching  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce.

I  On  1.  side  of  root  of  penis,  while  standing,  a  pressure  outwards,
as  if  a  hernia  would  protrude.

1  Gonorrhoea,  with  constant  sticking  together  of  meatus.

iChordee.

B After  gonorrhoea: suppression of  urine, with  restlessness,
pain  in  hypogastric  region,  weak  but  rapid  pulse,  and  delir-
ium ;  strangury  from  stricture.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  orgasm.

B I  Erethism  of  sexual  system. ^Puerperal  mania.

Os  uteri  enlarged  and  hot.

B  Dropsy  of  uterus ;  red,  sometimes  greenish  urine,  deposits  a
thick  sediment ;  urine  passed  slowly,  bladder  being  nearly
paralyzed,  body  cold.

Severe  labor-like  pains,  as  in  parturition.

Slight  discharge  of  blood  from  vagina.

B  Menstruation  too  profuse,  or  cessation  of  menses.
24  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation. Abortion,  particularly
during  epidemic  influenza.

B Labor  pains:  weak  or  ceasing  ;  will  not  be  covered,  restless  ;
skin  cold.

B  Cramps  during  pregnancy  ;  cannot  remain  covered.

B Puerperal  mania:  staring  eyes,  sparkling,  somewhat  conver-
gent ;  pale  face,  dry  skin,  not  hot ;  cool  forehead  ;  sits  up
in  bed  held  by  three  women  whom  she  scolds  in  the  most
indecent  and  abusive  terms  ;  constantly  bares  her  breast.

B Lochia  suppressed. ^Puerperal  mania.

BFine  stinging  in  nipples.

B  Suppuration  of  mammae.

B  B  New-born  children :  asphyxia;  hard  places  in  skin  on  ab-
domen and  thighs,  quickly  increasing  and  getting  harder,
sometimes  with  a  deep  redness  spreading  nearly  over  whole
abdomen  and  thighs;  violent  fever,  with  startings  and  tetanic
spasms,  with  bending  backwards  ;  make  no  water.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  b  Voice  husky
and  deep. ^Cholera  asiatica.

B  Talked  in  a  husky  voice. ^Gastralgia.

B  Voice :  weak  ;  uncertain  ;  bleating  ;  whispering  ;  murmur-
ing ;  hollow.

BB  Influenza.


257  CAMPHORA.

I  Mucus  in  air-passages  ; it  makes  voice  husky  and  is  not  re-
moved by  hacking,  or  clearing  throat.

Pain  in  air-passages  and  bronchial  tubes,  mostly  in  couo-hino-,
and  even  when  hacking  and  clearing  throat.

Contractive  sensation  in  larynx,  as  from  sulphur-fumes.

I  Constriction  of  larynx,  or  feeling  as  if  throat  were  tied.

B  Cutting  cold  feeling  deep  in  windpipe  ;  causes  a  slight  cough.

I  Dry  feeling  in  bifurcation  of  trachea.
^® Respiration. B Breathing:  anxious;  oppressed;  sighing;  quiet;
deep  and  slow  ;  heavy,  difficult  and  slow  ;  short  and  snoring ;
irregular  and  hurried ; hurried  and  labored ; almost  com-
pletely arrested,  neither  audible  nor  visible.

B  Suffocative  oppression.

Choking  sensation  ;  it  threatens  to  suffocate  him  and  constrict
larynx.

TrGasping  for  breath,  chest  feels  dry,  could  scarcely  speak.

B  Asthma,  <  worse  from  bodily  exertion.

I  I  Inhalation  shorter  than  exhalation,  in  sleep.

I  I  Snoring  in  sleep,  with  inhalation  and  exhalation.

B  Asphyxia,  or  apparent  death  of  new-born  children.

B Suspended  respiration  ;  heart  ceases  to  beat,  life  seems  gone.
Follows  well  after  Tart.  emet.

BHot  breath,  with  acute  eruptive  diseases.

BBCool  breath,  as  from  the  grave  playing  upon  hand  held  be-
fore mouth. ^Cholera  asiatica.

bA  cold  feeling  in  chest, followed  by  cold  breath. ^Em-
physema.

Spasms  of  chest.
"  Cough. Hacking,  dry  cough.

Short  cough,  from  scraping  in  throat.

8  Very  fatiguing  cough  without  bringing  anything  up.

B  Violent  dry  cough,  with  hoarseness. ^Seqael  to  measles.

B  Cough,  with  pain  in  throat,  chest,  stomach  and  abdomen.

BDry  cough  every  forenoon  for  two  weeks.

B Every  inhalation  starts  the  cough.
^^  Inner Chest  and  Lung-S. Stitches  in chest, and hacking  .
I  cough,  as  if  caused  by  cutting  cold  sensation  deep  in  air-

passages.

Stitches  through  to  spine,  mostly  through  I.  lung.

B Stitches :  from  shoulders  into  chest ;  in  1.  side  of  chest  when
walking  ;  through  chest  to  spine.

Soft  pressure  internally  in  chest,  below  sternum,  with  difficult

inhalation,  and  a  cold  sensation  rising  up  into  mouth.
Pressure  in  upper  part  of  sternum,  as  from  a  load.

B  Trembling  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  arm,  when  lying  on  1.  side ;
it  ceases  on  turning  to  r.  side.

B  Contraction  of  chest,  and  oppression.

8  Mucus  in  air-passages.

VOL.  III. — 17.


CAMPHOR  A.  258

II  Congestion  to  chest.

■  Pneumonia  notha  of  old  people,  with  sinking  of  forces,  dry

burning  heat  and  dyspnoea  ;  slight  moisture  on  face  ;  ratt-
ling breathing  indicating  threatening  paralysis  of  lungs.

I  In  later  stages  of  pneumonia,  short,  anxious,  oppressed  breath-
ing, with  chill  and  heat  alternating.

I  Hepatization  of  r.  lung  ;  of  lower  lobe  of  left.

I  Hepatization  of  1.  lung,  and  some  pleuritic  exudation.  ^Pleuro-
pneumonia.

■  Emphysema  pulmonum.

I  Sensation  of  coldness,  extends  from  pit  of  stomach  over  whole

sternum,  and  exhaled  as  a  cold  breath. ^Asthma  emphy-

sematicum.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Great  anxiety  in  prsecordial

region.
iPrsecordial  distress,  when, spoken  to,  with  sensation  of  severe

coldness  and  irresistible  sleepiness.
Spasmodic  stitches  in  region  of  heart,  with  oppression  of  chest,

when  lying  on  1.  side  ;  on  turning  to  r.  side  it  ceases.
I  He  felt  and  heard  throbbing  of  heart  against  ribs,  after  eating.
Heart-beat : very  slow,  and  intermitting ; impulse  hard,  but

regular.
Palpitation, as  if  heart  turned  forward  and  over ; stoppage

of  breath  and  gasping  ; has  to  walk  about  the  room  ; boy,

set.  13  ;  t.

■  Palpitation: after  eating; I  I  trembling  with  anxiety;  with

regular  slow  beats ;  after  awaking,  with  twitches ;  with
cold  face,  limbs  and  body  ;  with  pale  face  and  coldness  of
surface  ;  with  sudden  oppression  of  breathing.

Often  easily  startled  when  awake,  and  then  feels  throbbings  or
palpitations.

Pulse:  full;  1 1  weak;  1 1  not  perceptible;  frequent  and  scarcely
perceptible  ;  accelerated  without  fever  ;  very  much  acceler-
ated, but  undulating,  and  without  strength ;  very  rapid  ;  full
and  rapid  ;  full  and  irritable  ;  irritable  in  evening  ;  hard  or
soft;  Ifrequent  and  small  (hepatized  1,  lung);  1 1  extremely
small ;  small  and  slow,  sixty  beats  to  minute  ;  small  and
hard,  becoming  slower  and  slower ;  small,  weak  and  quite
frequent ;  could  not  be  counted  ;  1  extremely  rapid  and  weak
(typhus) ;  audible  and  full ;  weak  and  thready.

■  Diminished  flow  of  blood  to  those  parts  remote  from  heart.

^^  Outer  Chest. iOn  upper  part  of  sternum,  pressure  like  a  heavy
load,  while  standing.

■  Tearing  pain  from  his  r.  nipple  to  chest.

Fine  tearing  pain  near  r,  nipple,  extending  down  into  pelvis.
Fine  stitches  in  nipples.

■  Small  rash  on  outer  throat  and  chest.

■  Cold  sweat  on  upper  part  of  chest. ^Cholera  infantum.


259  CAMPHORA.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Painful  drawing  or  tearing  along  medulla

spinalis.
I  Painful  drawing  and  stiffness  on  side  of  neck,  when  walking

in  open  air.
Stiffness  in  nape  of  neck.

Drawing  on  1.  side  of  nape  of  neck  toward  shoulder.
Stitches  in  neck,  near  r.  shoulder,  on  motion.
Tensive  pain  in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck  and  lower  portion  of

neck  ; <  on  every  motion  and  on  turning  neck.
Tearing  pain  in  nape  of  neck,  on  bending  head  forward.
Creeping  sensation  in  1.  side  of  neck,  above  clavicle.
I  Pain  in  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  cervical  vertebrae ; <  from

moving  head  ; >  from  pressing  hand  thereon.
Swelling  of  cervical  glands.
I  Jugular  veins  distended.
I  Heat  with  an  inward  vibration  spreads  from  neck  and  from

between  shoulders  into  limbs.

■  Rheumatic  pain  between  shoulders.

■  Drawing  stitches  through  and  between  shoulder-blades,  ex-

tending into  chest  when  moving  arms.
I  Stitches  near  r.  shoulder,  tearing  when  moving,  from  neck

up  into  head,  tensive  pain  with  motion  and  turning.
Sensation  of  sticking  coldness  in  sacral  region,  which  passed

with  lightning-like  velocity  along  side  of  vertebrae  to  nape

of  neck  and  over  whole  body,  alternating  with  a  feeling  of

transient  heat.
Tired  feeling  in  small  of  back,  when  walking.

■  Pressure  in  small  of  back,  with  leaden-like  heaviness  of  lower

limbs.
Violent  pain  in  back  all  day.

I  Constricting  pain  from  short  ribs  to  lumbar  vertebrae.
Pain  runs  through  back  into  limbs  repeatedly.

■  Coldness  in  small  of  back  and  loins.

■  Inner  coldness  in  loins  and  small  of  back  ;  <C  by  walking  but

a  few  steps.

I  Sensation  as  if  cool  air  was  blowing  on  back.

1  I  Cold  feeling  on  back.

I  I  Chilliness  in  back,  and  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Drawing,  painful  stitches through  shoulder-
blades  and  between  them,  extending  into  chest  on  moving
arm,  for  two  days.

Tearing  pressure  on  edges  of  shoulder-blades  impeding  motion
of  arm.

Pressure  on  top  of  shoulder,  particularly  right ;  drawing  pain
in  left.

Bruised  pain  in  both  shoulders.

Tearing  pressure  in  middle  of  posterior  portion  of  r.  upper  arm.

Drawing  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  arm,  when  walking.


CAMPHORA.  260

Tearing  on  inside  of  1.  arm,  passing  at  times  into  thumb  and
index-finger.

Tired  feeling  in  1.  arm,  commencing  at  1.  shoulder,  extending
into  wrist ; >■  by  motion  of  arm.

Jerking,  fine  tearing  from  middle  of  inner  surface  of  1.  upper
arm  to  middle  of  forearm.

I  I  Painful  pressure  in  r.  elbow-joint,  <  leaning  upon  it,  when  it
extends  into  hand.

Bruised  pain  in  r.  elbow,  wrist  and  fingers.

Tired  feeling  from  1.  elbow  into  hand.

Sensation  of  fatigue  and  heaviness  in  1.  arm.

Pressure  and  drawing  on  inner  side  of  both  arms,  during  rest
of  parts,  ceasing  when  moving  them.

TiRight  arm  extended  above  head,  as  if  catching  something ;  t.
^Spasms.

I  Convulsive  rotation  of  arms.

I  Rotary  movement  of  r.  arm;  thumb  clenched.  ^Cholera  in-
fantum.

Arms  move  involuntarily  from  time  to  time  ;  eyes  are  turned
up ;  girl,  set.  5.

Arms  more  convulsed  than  lower  limbs.

Arms:  stiff;  powerless.

Hands :  tremble  ;  cold  ;  bluish.

a  His  hands  do  not  feel  anything  he  touches.

B  Fingers  stiff,  open,  distorted  ;  thumb  drawn  back  at  nearly  r.
angles  with  its  metacarpal.

■  Sensation  in  joint  of  thumb  as  if  sprained.

I  Skin  of  fingers  shriveled. ^Cholera  asiatica.

Bitching  on  back  of  hands,  in  palms  and  on  knuckles.
^^  Lower  Limbs. B  Drawing  in nates,  as  if  it  would  paralyze
the  thigh.

B  Soreness  as  if  beaten  in  thighs,  after  walking.

B Drawing,  bruised  pain  in  r.  thigh,  and  on  inner  side  near  and
below  patella ;  he  fears  that  the  leg  will  bend  forward  sud-
denly.

B  Tearing  in  anterior  muscles  of  r.  thigh.

! Cracking  and  creaking  in  hip,  knee,  and  ankle-joints.

Pressing  in  1.  knee  and  leg,  and  above  r.  knee.

B  Stitches  on  patella.

Blvnees  give  way  ;  tremble;  tottering  gait.

B  Heaviness  in  knees.

iLegs  heavy  like  a  weight,  hanging  from  knee  down.

iSubsultus  tendinum  of  r.  lower  limb.

B  Cramps  in  calves. ^Cholera  asiatica.

Drawing-pinching  pain  on  backs  of  feet,  especially  on  mov-
ing them.

B  Joints  of  feet  ache  as  if  sprained,  when  walking.


261  CAMPHORA.

I  Tearing,  crampy  pain  on  backs  of  feet,  extending  up  outer

side  of  calves  to  thighs.
I  Toes  drawn  up  or  spread.

8  Tearing  in  tips  of  toes,  and  under  nails,  when  walking.
I  Soreness  in  toe-joints  and  in  corns.
I  Oedema  of  feet. ^Polydipsia.
I  Icy  cold  feet. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Lower  extremities  paralyzed. ^Typhus. ^Suppression of

urine.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Cracking  and  creaking  in  hip,  knee,  and
ankle-joints.

■  Drawing  in  fingers,  then  in  toes.

■  Blueness  of  nails. ^Cholera  infantum.
Limbs  as  heavy  as  lead.

I  I  Limbs  are  difficult  to  move.

Stretching, trembling, and general painful sensitiveness of
limbs.

■  Hands and feet tremble, if he attempts to move them.

^Shock  from  injury.
Convulsive  agitation  in  limbs,  after  tetanic  stiffness.

■  Rheumatism returns repeatedly, attacking part after part,

even  internal  organs.
Violent  cramps  in  extremities.

■  ■Coldness  of  limbs.

TrExtremities  and  limbs  cold  and  cramped ;  t. ^Spasms.

■  Cold  extremities,  clammy  sweat,  great  prostration. ^Cholera

asiatica.
^^E,est. Position. Motion. :;rBetter  in  sitting  posture  on  sofa
and  bed;  t. ^Spasms.

■  Tosses  in  agony. ^Cholera  Asiatica. While  sitting:  cold  feel-

ing in  r.  leg.

Lying  down :  cutting  in  head ;  <  contractive  pain  base  of  brain  ;
spasmodic  stitches  in  region  of  heart,  with  oppression  of
chest,  when  on  1.  side,  or  turning  to  r.  side.

Standing :  >  throbbing  like  beats  with  a  hammer,  in  cerebellum.

Stooping:  <  contractive  pain  base  of  brain.

Moving:  drawing,  pinching  pain  on  backs  of  feet;  pain  in
fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  cervical  vertebrse  from  moving  head ;
arms,  drawing  stitches  through  and  between  shoulder-blades;
nausea,  chronic  vomiting.

Walking:  vertigo;  <  heaviness  and  heat  in  forehead;  drawing
in  decayed  upper  incisors;  <  stitches  in  spleen,  from  front
backwards;  painful  drawing  and  stiffness  on  side  of  neck
when  in  open  air;  a  few  steps,  inner  coldness  in  loins  and
small  of  back;  drawing  in  muscles  of  1.  arm;  soreness  as  if
beaten;  pains  in  joints  of  feet;  heaviness  in  legs.

Running: <  stitch  from  front  to  back  in  r.  hypochondre.

Exertion:  bodily  <  asthma.


CAMPHORA.  262

^^  Nerves. Increase  of  muscular  power.
iSubsultus  tendinum.

■  Great  nervous  excitability,  jerking,  twitching  and  trembling.

■  Trembling  of  inner  parts.

■  Easily  startled  when  awake,  and  then  feels  throbbing  or  pal-

pitation.

Starting  with  tremor  of  limbs  ;  t.

Convulsive  circular  motion.

I  I  Clonic  and  tonic  spasms  and  convulsions  ;  falls  down  uncon-
scious.

■  Spasms  of  children,  with  sopor;  from  suppressed  eruptions  ;

from  suppressed  catarrh  of  head  or  chest.

■  Spasms,  bending  body  backwards  and  twisting  extremities.

^Cholera.

■  Trismus,  especially  of  new-born  children;  tetanus.

■  Tetanic  spasms  of  arras,  hands,  feet  and  Ipwer  jaw;  body  stiff,

with  slight  opisthotonus,  from  suppressed  scarlatina.

■  Eclampsia,  with  anaemia  ;  coldness.

■  Epilepsy  ;. throws  himself  back  with  dreadful  shrieks  ; en-

deavors to  tear  everything  within  his  reach.

■  Violent  epileptic  spasms  after  vexation  ;  girl,  get.  17.

■  Shock  from  injury: cold  extremities,  trembling  of  tongue,

hands  and  feet.
Excessive  weakness,  prostration  and  exhaustion.
Discomfort  of  whole  body.

■  Attacks  of  malaise.

■  Loses  strength  suddenly. ^Cholera  asiatica.

■  Fainting  spells  follow  each  other  in  rapid  succession. ^ Viper

bite.

■  Want  of  bodily  irritability  ;  insensibility  to  touch.

■  His  whole  body  is  insensible  to  touch  and  cold  as  marble.

■  Feels  no  inward  warmth.

■  A  tremor  seized  on  every  part  of  his  body  ;  quieted  by  bath-

ing his  hands  and  face  in  cold  water.

■  Lassitude  and  depression  of  spirits,  with  frequent  yawning  and

stretching.
^^  Sleep. I  1  Yawning  and  sleepiness  during  day ;  falls  asleep  in
evening.

■  Sleep:  profound;  deep;  unrefreshing ;  coma.

■  Sleepless  and  restless.

■  Sleeplessness,  alternatirig  with  coma.

■  Afraid  to  go  to  bed  ; suddenly  all  sleep  is  gone.;  eyes  open

against  will,  and  awful  sensations  disturb  him.

■  Snoring  during  inhalation  and  exhalation;  moaning;  sighing.

■  Much  sweat  during  sleep.

■  Talking  all  night  in  a  gentle  voice.

■  Twitchings,  also  on  awaking,  followed  by  palpitation.

■  Gets  awake  with  a  night-mare,  or  cannot  get  fully  awake.


263  CAMPHORA.

I  Dreams : anxious  ;  fearful ;  visions  of  spirits  ;  about  what  is
intended,  or  what  had  happened  in  morning  hours.
^^  Time. '  '  All  complaints  worse  as  soon  as  it  gets  dark.

Night  and  solitude  frighten  him.

Night:  monomania;  delirium;  low  fever;  burning  in  oeso-
phagus; seminal  emissions.

All  night:  throbbing,  stinging  in  forehead.

Morning:  shooting  in  temples ;  bad  taste;  offensive  odor  from
mouth;  headache  after  rising;  early  attacks  of  boring  in
temples,  shooting  towards  eyes  or  teeth;  bad  taste,  with
nausea  and  vomiting.

10  to  11  A.M.:  nausea,  vertigo,  vomiting,  prostration.

Forenoon:  cough.

1  to  2  P.M.:  colic.

Afternoon :  movements  in  intestines,  frequent  passage  of  offen-
sive flatus.

Evening:  fever.

8  P.M.:  drawing  in  fingers  and  toes.

All  day:  soreness  or  tense,  stiff  feeling  in  eyes  and  eyelids.
''  Temperature  and  Weather. Effects  of  sunstroke.

He  is  excessively  sensitive  to  cold  air.

The  surface  cold  to  the  touch,  yet  they  throw  off  all  covering,
will  not  remain  covered.

After  change  of  weather,  catarrh  with  headache,  or  diarrhoea
with  colic.

.Sunstroke;  sunburns  on  face  and  hands;  restless  and  depressed.

Is  improved  by  warm  air.

I  Takes  cold  easily;  after  it,  toothache;  weak  digestion;  fevers,

rigors  or  diarrhoea.

I I  Very  sensitive  to  cold  air.
Better  from  drinking  cold  water.

Open  air :  painful  drawing  and  stiffness  on  side  of  neck  when
walking  in  open  air.
*"  Fever. ■  Chill,  chilliness  and  sensitiveness  to  cold  air ;  crawlings
with  gooseflesh.

cheeks  ;  quiet  delirium  ;  sinking  pulse. ^Nervous  fever.

Illcy  coldness  all  over,  with  death-like  paleness  of  face  ;  dim-
inished circulation  to  parts  most  distant  from  heart.

I  Great  coldness  of  surface,  with  a  desire  to  uncover.

I  Skin  becomes  very  cold. ^Cholera  asiatica.

I  I  Rigor,  with  chattering  teeth,  thirst,  followed  by  sleep.

I  Chill : with  anxiety  ;  with  unconsciousness  ;  with  pale  face  ;
with  clonic  spasm  ;  congestive  chill.

I  Chilly  all  over,  followed  by  heat  and  warm  sweat  on  forehead,
with  nausea.

Increased  warmth  of  body,  with  redness  of  face.

I  Heat  all  over,  getting  much  worse  while  walking.


CAMPHORA.  2G4

I  Heat,  with  distension  of  veins,  increased  by  every  motion.

I  Heat  or  sweat,  with  aversion  to  uncover;  he  cannot  get  warm.

B  Sweat  profuse,  warm  and  improving.  •

BfiCold,  clammy,  weakening  sweat.

Typhus  :  greatest  weakness  ;  cold  sweat  all  over  ;  quickly  de-
creasing temperature,  especially  of  extremities  ;  small,  very
frequent,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse  ;  great  nervous  restless-
ness of  body  and  limbs  ;  collapse  in  face  ;  cold,  pointed
nose  ;  automatic  motions  of  muscles  ;  delirium  ;  syncope ;
snatches  of  sleep  ;  great  thirst,  with  red,  dry  tongue  ;  fre-
quent involuntary  stools,  after  much  rolling  and  rumbling  in
bowels.

i  Severe  and  long  chill  at  beginning  of  yellow  fever,  with  tremb-
ling of  internal  parts  and  coldness  of  limbs.
*^  Attacks, Rheumatic  attacks  remit,  go  to  one  part  after  another.

Attacks  come  suddenly.

Every  five  minutes  stitches  in  temporal  bones.

Remissions:  in  the  drawing  sensation  all  around  head.
''^  Locality  and  Direction. Within  outwards :  pressing  headache ;
pressing  on  eyeballs.

Backwards  :  stitches  in  spleen.

Left:  of  neck,  creeping;  shoulder,  tired;  lung,  stitches  through  ;
chest  and  arm,  trembling,  it  ceases  turning  to  r.  side;  lung
hepatized;  cutting  1.  side  of  occiput;  ear  pain;  side  of
nose,  drawing;  nostril,  itching;  sided  headache;  fine  tear-
ing in  head;  drawing  in  lower  abdomen;  hard  pressure  in
lower  abdomen;  root  of  penis,  while  standing  pressure  out-
wards, as  if  a  hernia  would  protrude;  spasmodic  stitches  in
region  of  heart  when  lying  on  1.  side;  drawing  1.  side  of
nape  of  neck  toward  shoulder;  ear,  pressure  by  jerks;
stitches  in  1.  cheek;  zygoma  drawing;  pharynx,  stitches;
side,  drawings.

Right:  itching,  crawling  in  r.  groin,  <  on  rubbing;  spasmodic
stitches  in  region  of  heart,  ceases  on  turning  to  r.  side;
thigh,  drawing  bruised  pain  in;  head  drawn  to  r.  shoulder;
eye,  pressure;  side  of  nose,  boring;  nose  stopped;  lower
jaw,  drawing;  hypochondre,  a  stitch;  lower  abdomen,
sticking,  drawing ;  itching,  crawling  in  groin ;  lung,  hepa-
tized; shoulder,  pressure;  arm,  rotary  movement;  thigh,
tearing  ;  lower  limb,  subsultus  tendinum.
^^ Sensations.  As  if  bruised,  headache;  mouth  as  after  eating
peppermint  lozenges;  as  if  throat  were  sore  and  torn  ;  as  if
she  had  eaten  rancid  substances ;  pain  in  stomach  as  if  dis-
tended ;  as  if  cool  air  was  blowing  on  back  ;  thumb  as  if
sprained.

Boring:  in  temples;  r.  side  of  nose;  in  r.  zygoma.

Jerking:  fine  tearing  from  middle  of  inner  surface  of  1.  upper
arm.


265  CAMPHORA.

Tearing:  fine,  in  head;  sticking  in  forehead;  in  r,  temple  and

. forehead;  in  ears,  behind  and  above;  pain  from  r.  nipple

to  chest;  along  medulla  spinalis;  pain  in  nape  of  neck;  r.

shoulder;  r.  upper  arm;  r.  thigh;  pain  in  backs  of  feet;  in

tips  of  toes;  here  and  there  in  joints.

Cutting:  jerks  or  shocks  from  forehead  and  temples  towards
middle  of  brain ;  shooting  through  gum  to  roots  of  incisor
and  canine  teeth;  colic  at  night;  region  of  navel;  deep  in
windpipe.

Stitches:  starting  in  temporal  bone;  r.  half  of  brain;  in  ears;
from  a  draft  of  air;  violent  in  root  of  nose;  1.  cheek ;  in  chin  ;
shoot  from  tooth  into  eye;  in  palate;  in  stomach;  r.  hypo-
chondre;  in  spleen;  coeliac  ganglia;  in  chest;  through  to
spine;  in  region  of  heart;  in  nipples;  in  neck  near  r.  shoul-
der; on  patella.

Shooting:  towards  eyes  or  teeth;  here  and  there  in  joints,
from  temples;  through  gum  to  roots  of  incisor  and  canine
teeth.

Sticking: drawing heaviness below  crest  of  ilium;  burning

before  urination;  coldness  in  sacral  region.
.Stinging:  anterior  corner  of  nostrils;  r.  side  of  lower  abdomen;
on  inner  surface  of  prepuce;  in  nipples.

Biting:  in  external  canthus;  itching  in  eyelids;  edges  of  lids;
in  back  part  of  urethra.

Burning:  in  edges  of  lids;  in  ears;  in  face;  on  edge  of  tongue ;
end  of  tongue;  from  palate  down  oesophagus;  anguish  at
pit  of  stomach;  above  navel  and  about  navel;  below  anterior
crest  of  ilium ;  before  and  during  urination ;  dryness  of  skin.

Smarting:  in  eyelids;  in  rectum.

Chapped  feeling  in  rectum.

Scraping:  back  part  of  tongue;  in  throat.

Gnawing  boring  in  molars.

Aching:  in  middle  of  head;  in  both  hypochondria;  anterior
part  of  liver;  in  abdomen.

Drawing;  pain  in  r.  thigh;  pain  in  back  part  of  feet;  through
shoulder-blades;  pain  in  1.  shoulder;  1.  upper  arm;  inner
side  both  arms;  r.  side  of  head;  all  around  head;  1.  side  of
nose;  1.  zygoma;  in  angle  of  r.  lower  jaw;  r.  side;  1.  side;
along  medulla  spinalis  and  stiffness  on  1.  side  of  neck ;  stitches
through  between  shoulder-blades;  in  nates.

Pressure:  headache;  r.  temple;  by  jerks  over  1.  ear;  on  eye-
balls, from  behind;  pain  pit  of  stomach;  pain  in  both  hypo-
chondria; 1.  side  lower  abdomen;  about  navel;  in  small  of
back;  with  leaden-like  heaviness  of  lower  limbs.

Pressing:  outwards,  frontal  headache;  on  upper  part  of  frontal
bone;  r,  side  of  vertex;  in  occiput;  above  r.  eye;  above
navel;  in  bladder;  in  chest;  upper  part  of  sternum;  on  chest


CAMPHORA.  266

like  a  heavy  load;  on  top  of  r.  shoulder;  painful,  in  elbow

joint;  on  inner  side  both  arms;  1.  knee.
Pinching:  region  of  navel ;  pain  on  backs  of  feet.
Soreness:  as  if  brain  was  sore;  eyes  and  eyelids.
Bruised:  r.  side;  1.  side;  pain  in  both  shoulders,  as  if  beaten;

pain  in  r.  elbow;  wrist  and  fingers;  pain  in  r.  thigh.
Rheumatic  pain  between  shoulders.
Pain :  in  1.  ear  from  a  dark  red  pimple ;  in  epigastric  region ;

as  if  distended;  in  periosteum  of  toes.
Violent  pain  in  back  all  day.
Throbbing: headache in  forehead; stinging in  forehead all

night;  in  temples; of  temporal  arteries;  like  beats  with  a

hammer  in  cerebellum.
Tense:  feeling  in  eyes  and  eyelids;  pain  in  masticators;  pain

in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck.
Swollen:  tongue;  mouth  and  gums.
Stiff:  feeling  in  eyes  and  eyelids.
Numb:  tongue.

Uneasy :  feeling  in  back  of  head.
Contraction:  as  if  bound  together,  in  cerebellum  and  glabella;

pain  base  of  brain;  painful  under  short  ribs  through  lumbar

vertebrae;  in  testicles;  in  larynx;  of  chest.
Constriction: pain  below  short  ribs; in larynx; pain  from

short  ribs  to  lumbar  vertebrae.
Cramp:  in  stomach;  on  backs  of  feet ;  all  over  body.
Heaviness:  and  heat  in  forehead;  in  vertex;  r.  side;  in  abdo-
men;  in  knees.
Tired:  feeling  in  small  of  back  when  walking;  feeling  in  1.

arm ;  feeling  from  1.  elbow  into  hand.
Fatigue:  and  heaviness  in  1.  arm.
Creeping:  1.  side  of  neck.

Crawlings:  run  over  limbs  and  body;  about  head;  r.  groin.
Warmth:  in  oesophagus.
Heat;  in  forehead;  in  vertex;  in  face;  in  mouth  and  stomach;

violent  in  upper  and  lower  abdomen.
Cooling  sensation  rising  up  throat  to  roof  of  mouth.
Cold:  in  cerebellum;  hands;  mouth;  in  stomach;  feeling  deep

in  windpipe;  in  small  of  back  and  loins.
Itching: 1.  nostril; swelling  on gums; on  inner  surface  of

prepuce;  in  groin.
Dryness:  all  over  body  ;  on  back  part  of  tongue;  in  bifurcation

of  trachea.
^*  Tissues, I  Soft  parts  drawn  in.

E  Cyanosis  ;  external  parts  turn  black.

I  Internal  congestions.

I  Cramps  in  inner  and  outer  parts.

I  Cracking  of  joints.

I  Stenosis  after  inflammations.


26T  CAMPHORA.

I  Dropsy  of  external  parts;  less  often  of  internal.

I  Glands  inflamed.

I  Flow  of  black  coagulated  blood. ^Viper  bite.

I  Pains  in  periosteum  of  all  bones.

I  Tearing-shooting  here  and  there  in  joints.

■  Greatest  emaciation.

I  Rheumatic  fevers ;  pains  changing  place;  persistently  return.

I  Anthrax: Camphor,  relieved  pain  and  swelling;  prevented
formation  of  new  pustules ; the  gangrenous  aspect  of  the
wound  changed  for  the  better ;  man,  get.  65.
*®  Touch. Passive  Motions. Injuries, 1 1  Skin  of  the  whole
body  painfully  sensitive,  the  slightest  touch  hurts.

External  pressure :  <  contractive  pain  at  base  of  brain ;  >  rush
of  blood  to  head.

Disappearing  on  pressure:  heat  in  head.

Sensitive  to  touch :  distended  stomach.

From  pressing  hand  thereon :  improved  pain  in  upper  vertebrae.

Painful  pressure  in  r.  elbow  joint: ■<  leaning  upon  it.

llEffects  of  shock  from  injury:  surface  of  body  cold,  face  pale
and  bluish,  lips  livid;  diarrhoea;  pulse  feeble;  nervous  anxi-
ety and  stupefaction;  sighing  respiration ;  great  exhaustion.
*^  Skin. Skin: I  I  flabby;  relaxed;  leather-like;  loose;  sensitive;
burning  ;  itching.

I  Skin  dry,  even  in  bed  ;  not  a  trace  of  sweat ; dry  with  heat.

I  Skin  tense,  hot,  dry,  like  parchment.

I  Skin  cold,  bluish  on  face  and  hands,  looks  shrivelled.

I  Skin  cold  as  marble,  frightfully  cold  to  touch,  still  patient
would  not  be  covered ;  very  great  excitability  and  fear  of
being  left  alone.

iPetechise  over  entire  body,  which  is  cold. ^Viper  bite.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation,  with  coldness,  paleness  and  sink-

ing, and  aversion  to  being  covered.

■  Measles: pale  face,  cold  skin,  bluish  ; tetanic  rigidity ; dys-

uria ;  eruption  does  not  appear.

■  ■All  sequelae  of  measles.

■  Scarlatina: with cold, blue, hippocratic face; rattling in

throat ;  with  hot  breath,  hot  sweat  on  forehead ;  child  will
not  be  covered.

■  Sudden  sinking  away  of  variola  pustules.

■  Bedsores.

■  Blood  blisters ;  erysipelas;  gangrene;  hard  spots.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Irritable,  weakly  blondes  most
aifected. Scrofulous  children  most  sensitive  to  Camphor.
Boy,  set.  13. Vertigo  and  palpitation;  t.

■  Girl,  set.  17. ^Epilepsy.

■  A  man,  aet.  65. ^Anthrax.

*^ Relations. Antidotes:  Opium,  Sp.  nitr.  dulc,  Dulcam.,  Phos-
phor.


CAMPIiORA.— CANNABIS  INDICA.  2G8

Camphor  antidotes:  Canthar.^  Cuprum,  Lycop.,  Squilla,
a.nd  the  effects  of  so-called  worm  medicines,  tobacco,
bitter  almonds,  and  other  fruits,  containing  prussic  acid  ;
likewise  for  the  secondary  affections  remaining  after  poison-
ing with  acids,  salts,  metals,  poisonous  mushrooms,  etc.

In  most  other  cases,  the  smelling  of  Camphor  is  not  antidotal,
but  palliative,  by  producing  the  symptom  "Pain  better  while
thinking  of  it."

Vaccine  virus  failed  to  take  effect  when  kept  in  proximity  to
Camphor.

Incompatible:  after  Nitrum.  Tea,  coffee,  and  lemonade,  as  a
rule,  do  not  interfere,  but  in  some  cases  coffee  aggravated
and  was  followed  by  vomiting.

Compare:  Carho  veg.  in  coldness  from  undeveloped  exanthems,
in  collapse,  and  in  continuous  epistaxis;  Canthar.;  Cuprum;
■Duleam.;  Lycop.;  Mitrwn;  Opium  in  narcotism,  heart  affec-
tions; Phosphor,  in  anguish  and  burning  in  cholera;  Sp.
nitr.  dule.;  Squilla ;  Vtrat.  alb.


East  Indian  Hemp.  Cannahinece.


iHead  feels  very  heavy,  loses  consciousness  and  falls.

il  Every  few  moments  he  would  lose  himself,  and  wake  up,  as
it  were,  to  those  around  him.

liHe  forgot  his  last  words  and  ideas,  and  spoke  in  a  low  tone
with  a  thick  voice,  as  if  tired.

I  BHe  begins  a  sentence,  but  cannot  finish  it,  because  he  forgets
what  he  intends  to  write  or  speak.

ii Inability  to  recall  any  thought  or  event,  on  account  of  differ-
ent thoughts  crowding  on  his  brain.

iille  could  not  read,  partly  on  account  of  dreamy  spells,  and
partly  because  he  had  not  full  power  of  vision.

I  Very  absent-minded.

B  a  Constantly  theorizing.

His  mind  is  filled  with  ridiculous  speculative  ideas.

lExaltation  of  spirits,  with  excessive  loquacity.

i Great  exaltation  of  mind;  at  times  with  enthusiastic  language.

B lExaltation  of  spirits,  with  great  gayety  and  disposition  to
laugh  at  the  merest  trifle.

BHe  could  not  fix  his  thoughts  upon  one  subject.

B Sudden  transition  from  one  fantasia,  when  completed,  to  an-


269  CANNABIS  INDICA.

other ;  the  general  character  may  remain  unchangeQl ;  after
visions  of  great  sublimity,  usually  follow  visions  of  quiet  re-
laxing; and  recreatins;  nature.

i Hallucinations  and  imaginations  innumerable;  that  he  is
gradually  swelling,  his  body  becoming  larger  and  larger ;
that  some  one  calls  him  ;  that  he  hears  numberless  bells
ringing  most  sweetly ;  imagines  he  hears  music ;  shuts  his
eyes,  and  is  lost  for  some  time  in  the  most  delicious  thoughts
and  dreams.

i  I  Exaggeration  of  duration  of  time  and  extent  of  space  ;  a  few
seconds  seem  ages ;  a  few  rods  an  immense  distance.  ^De-
lirium tremens.

lit  appeared  to  him  that  an  occurrence,  which  happened  quite
recently,  had  taken  place  long  ago,  and  again  that  some-
thing, that  had  to  happen  soon,  seemed  exceedingly  tardy  in
coming.

A  sense  of  having  two  existences  ;  double  consciousness.

1 8 Fixed  ideas.

I  Incoherent  talking.

I I  Laughs  indiscriminately  at  every  word  said  to  him.

I  Uncontrollable  laughter,  till  the  face  becomes  purple,  and  back

and  loins  ache.

I I  Full  of  fun  and  mischief,  and  laughs  immoderately.
1 1  Moaning  and  crying.

1 1  Great  apprehension  of  approaching  death.

I  He  was  in  constant  fear  he  would  become  insane.

I I  Horror  of  darkness.

I  Anguish,  accompanied  by  great  oppression  ; >  in  open  air.
I  Great mental agitation, anxiety, irritability, nervousness.

^Menorrhagia.
iNervous;  she  trembles  at  least  source  of  agitation.  ^Headache.
^  Sensoriuni. Vertigo,  on  rising,  with  stunning  pain  in  back  part

of  head,  and  he  falls.
Heavy  pressure  on  brain,  forcing  him  to  stoop.
Dullness  of  head.
^  Inner  Head. Assists  brain  to  labor  after  a  debauch.

Violent  shocks  pass  through  brain,  on  regaining  consciousness.
Heavy  insurmountable  pressure  on  brain,  forcing  him  to  stoop.
Dull  drawing  pain  in  forehead,  especially  over  eyes.
Throbbing  aching  pain  in  forehead.
Jerking  in  r.  side  of  forehead,  toward  interior  and  back  part

of  head.
Severe  stitch  in  r.  temple,  gradually  changing  to  pressive  pain.
Dull  stitching  in  r.  temple.
Pain  in  whole  r.  side  of  head.
Aching  in  both  temples,  most  severe  in  right.
A  sensation  as  of  brain  boiling  over  and  lifting  cranial  arch  like

lid  of  a  tea-kettle.


CANNABIS  INDICA.  270

1 1  Feels  as  if  top  of  head  was  opening  and  shutting,  and  as  if

calvarium  was  being  lifted.
Dull,  heavy,  throbbing  pain  through  head,  with  a  sensation  like

a  heavy  blow  on  back  of  head  and  neck.
I  Heavy  weight  at  back  of  head,  from  which  pains  shoot  up

sides  of  head  to  temples  and  vertex ;  pain  at  midday  forces

her  to  cry.
Frequent  involuntary  shaking  of  his  head.
I  Headache,  accompanied  by  flatulence,  continuing  until  he  can

pass  wind  either  upwards  or  downwards;  throbbing  of  occiput.
\  Megrim,  or  sick  headache.

*  Outer  Head. Scalp  and  skin  of  forehead  felt  as  though  tightly

stretched  over  skull.
Crawling  in  scalp,  on  top  of  head.
Soreness  of  scalp  to  touch.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  of  vision.

Visual  clairvoyance.

Sensitiveness  of  r.  eye  to  light.

Letters  run  together  while  reading.

Twinkling,  trembling  and  glimmering  before  eyes.

Eyes  are  bright  and  shiny.

Injection  of  vessels  of  conjunctiva  of  both  eyes.  ,

Jerking  in  external  corner  of  eye  and  eyelid.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. Hearing  very  acute.

Noise  in  ears,  like  of  water  boiling.

Periodical  singing  in  ears  during  his  dreamy  spells,  ceasing

when  he  came  to  himself.
Ringing  and  buzzing  in  ears.
Throbbing  and  fulness  in  both  ears.
Aching  in  both  ears.
"Upper  Face. I Countenance  dejected  and  careworn. ^Head-
ache.
Wearied,  exhausted  appearance.
Drowsy  and  stupid  look.
Pale  face.

Tense  feeling  in  facial  muscles.

Skin  of  face,  especially  of  forehead  and  chin,  feels  as  if  drawn
tight.
^  Lower  Face. Dryness  of  mouth  and  lips.

Lips  feel  as  if  glued  together.
^°  Teeth and Gums. Gritting and grinding of  teeth while

sleeping.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Every  article  of  food  is  extremely  pa-
latable.
Metallic  taste.
Stammering  and  stuttering.
"  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  mouth,  without  thirst.
White,  thick,  frothy,  and  sticky  saliva.


271  CANNABIS  INDICA.

"  Throat. Throat  is  parched,  accompanied  by  intense  thirst  for
cold  water.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Ravenous  hunger ;

not  appeased  by  food.
Desire  for  and  dread  of  water.
"  Eating  and  Drinking. While  eating,  his  stomach  felt  swollen
and  his  chest  oppressed,  as  if  he  would  suffocate ;  Avas  forced
to  loosen  his  clothes.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pain  in  cardiac  orifice,  relieved
by  pressure.
TrSensation  of  warmth  in  stomach. ^Gonorrhoea.
^^  Abdomen. I  Flatulence  on  rising  in  morning. ^Headache.
Flatulent  rumbling  in  bowels,  at  night.
Abdomen  feels  swollen  ;  relieved  by  belching.
2"  Stool  and  Rectum. Sensation  in  anus,  as  if  he  were  sitting  on
a  ball ;  as  if  anus  and  a  part  of  urethra  were  filled  up  by  a
hard,  round  body.
Painless  yellow  diarrhoea.
21  Urinary  Organs. "  Constant  dull  pain  in  region  of  r.  kidney,
and  in  glans  penis.
Pain  in  kidneys  when  laughing.
Sharp  stitches  in  both  kidneys.
Aching  in  kidneys,  keeping  him  awake  at  night.
Burning  in  kidneys.
Urine :  loaded  with  slimy  mucus,  after  exposure  to  damp  cold ;

pain  in  bladder  and  urethra ;  profuse,  colorless.
Urinates  frequently,  but  in  small  quantity.
Frequent  micturition,  with  burning  pain,  in  evening.
Has  to  wait  some  time  before  urine  flows.
Has  to  force  out  last  few  drops  with  hand.
Urine  dribbles  out  after  stream  ceases.

Urging  to  urinate,  with  much  straining,  but  cannot  pass  a  drop.
Burning  and  scalding,  or  stinging  pain  in  urethra,  before,  dur-
ing and  after  urination.
22  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  excessively  increased;
satyriasis  ;  priapism.
Erections : while  riding,  walking,  and  also  while  sitting  still ;

not  caused  by  amorous  thoughts ;  violent ;  painful.
Penis  relaxed  and  shrunken.

Uneasiness,  with  burning  sensation  in  penis  and  urethra,  accom-
panied by  frequent  calls  to  urinate.
Sharp  prickings,  like  needles,  in  urethra,  so  severe  as  to  send  a

thrill  to  cheeks  and  hands.
Gonorrhoea  :  unaccompanied  by  pain  ;  light  headedness  ;  slight
tingling,  with  inflammation  around  meatus ;  slight  burning
during micturition; discharge yellowish -white and very

profuse.
Feeling  in  urethra  as  if  there  were  a  gonorrhoeal  discharge.


CANNABIS  INDICA.  272

On  squeezing  glans  penis,  a  white  glairy  mucus  oozes  out.
Chordee.

Itching  of  glans  penis.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  increased.
Very  profuse  mensLruation.
I  Menses  very  profuse  and  painful,  dark,  but  without  clots ;

lasting  eighteen  days. ^Menorrhagia.
■  Violent  uterine  colic,  with  cramps  in  extremities. ^Post  par-

tum  hemorrhage.
B Spasmodic uterine colic; pains returning  like  labor-pains;
great  agitation  and  sleeplessness. ^'Menorrhagia.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Threatened  mis-
carriage,  with  discharge  of  blood  from vagina, in  eighth
month  of  pregnancy ;  burning  in  making  water,  with  puru-
lent discharge. ^Gonorrhoea.
"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Inability  to

measure  compass  and  volume  of  voice  when  speaking.
^®  Respiration. It  requires  great  effort  to  take  a  deep  inspiration.
Oppression  of  chest,  with  deep,  labored  breathing,  <  when  as-
cending.
Feels  as  if  suffocating  and  has  to  be  fanned.
^^  Cough. Rough  cough,  with  scraping  immediately  under  sternum.

Hard,  dry  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  extending  from  both  nip-
ples through  chest.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  of  heart,  which

awakens  from  sleep.
Pressing  pain  in  heart,  with  dyspnoea,  whole  night.
Painful  sticking  as  with  prongs  of  a  fork  in  heart.
Stitches  in  heart,  accompanied  by  great  oppression ;  the  latter

relieved  by  deep  breathing.
Pulse  slow  (as  low  as  46) ; rapid  (as  high  as  160).
^^  Keck and Back. B  Chin  suddenly  drawn  down  to  sternum,

lasting  three  or  four  days,  when  it  relaxed.
Pain  across  shoulders  and  spine;  must  stoop,  cannot  walk  erect.
Pain,  with  drawing  through  lumbar  vertebrae,  on  standing.
;rWarmth  in  spine  extending  to  head.
B  Backache,  worse  catamenial  periods,  which  occur  every  two

weeks,  and  are  scanty.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Agreeable  thrilling  through  arms  and  hands.
Coldness  of  r.  hand,  with  stiffness  and  numbness  of  r.  thumb.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Right  limb  feels  paralyzed  when  walking.

Weariness  in  both  limbs,  almost  amounting  to  paralysis ;  worse

in  left.
Agreeable  thrilling  in  both  limbs,  from  knees  down,  with  a

sensation  as  if  a  bird's  claws  were  clasping  knees.
Is  unable  to  walk  up  stairs  on  account  of  an  almost  entire


273  CANNABIS  INDICA.

paralysis  of  limbs,  with  stiffness  and  tired  aching  in  both

knees.
On  attempting  to  walk,  he  experienced  intensely  violent  pains,

as  if  he  trod  on  a  number  of  spikes,  which  penetrated  soles

and  ran  upwards  through  limbs  to  hips ;  worse  in  r.  limb  and

accompanied  by  drawing  pains  in  both  calves.
Shooting  pains  in  joints  of  toes  of  1.  foot,  worse  in  great  toe.
Aching  and  stitching  pain  in  ball  of  1.  great  toe.
Numb  feeling  of  sole  of  1.  foot,  then  whole  foot,  increasing  to  a

numbness  of  whole  limb.
Pricking  in  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Heaviness  of  arms  and  legs.

Paralysis  of  lower  limbs  and  r.  arm.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest  gives  general  relief. Great

desire  to  lie  down  in  day  time.
Standing:  pain,  with  drawing  through  lumbar  vertebrse.
Walking :  cannot  walk  erect,  pain  across  shoulders ;  r.  limb

feels  paralyzed;  is  unable  to  walk  up-stairs,  or,  attempting

to  walk,  violent  pains  through  lower  extremities.
^'  Nerves. Trembling  with  mental  weakness.
Thoroughly  exhausted  after  a  short  walk.
Felt  so  weak  that  he  could  scarcely  speak,  and  soon  fell  into  a

deep  sleep.
Catalepsy.
■  Exaltation  of  all  the  powers  of  mind  and  body  before  the  fit.

^Epilepsy.
^'^  Sleep. Desire  to  sleep,  but  inability  to  do  so.

Excessive  sleepiness ;  great  desire  to  lie  down  in  daytime.
Felt  so  weak  that  he  could  scarcely  speak,  and  soon  fell  into  a

deep  sleep.
Starting  of  limbs  while  sleeping,  which  awoke  him,  when  he

feared  he  would  have  a  fit.
Talking  during  sleep.

Voluptuous  dreams,  with  erections  and  profuse  seminal  emis-
sions.
Dreams  :  of  danger,  and  of  perils  encountered ;  of  dead  bodies  ;

prophetic  ;  vexatious  ;  melancholy.
In  daytime,  dreams,  returning  periodically,  or  dreamy  attacks.
Nightmare  every  night,  as  soon  as  he  falls  asleep.
^^Time. Daytime:  dreams.

Midday :  heavy  weight  at  back  of  head.
Evening:  burning  pain;  frequent  micturition.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Is  not  so  sensitive  to  cold  as

usual.
Damp,  cold  weather :  urine  loaded  with  slimy  mucus.
*"  Fever. Loss  of  animal  heat.
General  chilliness.
Coldness  of  face,  nose  and  hands,  after  dinner.

VOL. III. — 18.


CANNABIS  INDICA.  274

Increased  heat  of  body.

Profuse  sticky  sweat  standing  out  in  drops  on  his  forehead.
"  Attacks, Periodicity. Every  two  weeks : backache, worse

catamenial  periods.
*^  Locality  and  Birection. Right:  jerking  in  forehead;  severe

stitch in  temple; pain in head; aching in temple; eye,

sensitive  to  light;  limb  feels  paralyzed; on  attempting  to

walk,  violent  pains  in  legs.
Left:  weariness  and  paralysis  of  legs;  numb  feeling  in  foot.
^^  Sensations. An  indescribable  "queer"  feeling  pervades  the

whole  body.
Feeling  of  lightness  or  buoyancy ;  as  if  he  was  raised  from  the

ground  and  could  fly  away.
Sensation  as  if  single  parts  became  larger  and  thicker.
As  if  brain  boiled  over;  as  if  top  of  head  was  opening  and

shutting ;  as  if  calvarium  was  being  lifted  up ;  as  if  a  heavy

blow  on  back  of  head  and  neck;  as  if  he  were  sitting  on  a

ball; as  if  suffocated; as  if  a  bird's  claws  were  clasping

knees ;  as  if  he  had  on  a  number  of  spikes.
Stitch: r.  temple; sharp,  in  both  kidneys; extending  from

both  nipples  through  chest;  in  heart;  in  ball  of  1.  great  toe.
Sticking :  as  with  prongs  of  a  fork  in  heart.
Stinging:  pain  in  urethra.
Pricking:  in  feet ;  over  whole  body.
Sharp  :  pricking  like  needles  in  urethra.
Shooting:  pains  in' joints  of  toes  of  1.  foot.
Burning : in kidneys ; frequent micturition with  burning ;

and  scalding  in  urethra ;  in  penis  ;  of  skin.
Jerking  in  r.  side  of  forehead.
Drawing :  pain  in  forehead ; through  lumbar  vertebrae ;  pain

in  both  calves.
Pressive :  pain  in  r.  temple ;  pain  in  heart.
Pressure  :  on  brain  ;  on  skin  excites  burning.
Stunning  :  pain  in  back  part  of  head.
Aching  :  pain  in  ball  of  1.  great  toe ;  in  both  temples ;  in  both

ears  ;  in  kidneys  ;  tired  in  both  knees.
Soreness  :  of  scalp  to  touch.

Dull :  pain  through  head ;  pain  in  region  of  r.  kidney.
Pain  :  in  whole  side  of  head ;  in  bladder  and  urethra ;  across

shoulders.
Throbbing:  aching  pain  in  forehead ;  pain  through  head.
Thrilling:  agreeable,  through  arms  and  hands;  in  both  limbs.
Numbness  :  of  r.  thumb  ;  of  sole  of  1.  toe  ;  over  whole  body.
Formication  :  or  itching  on  various  parts.
Crawling :  in  scalp  :  on  top  of  head.
Paralyzed  sensation:  r.  limb;  r.  arm.
Tense  :  feeling  in  facial  muscles  ;  skin  of  face  feels  as  if  drawn

tight ;  skin  of  head.


275  CANNABIS  INDICA.

Stretched  :  tightly  over  skull,  scalp.

Heavy  :  pain  through  head  ;  arms  and  legs.

Weight :  at  back  of  head.

Warmth :  in  stomach  ;  in  spine,  extending  to  head.

Coldness:  of  r.  hand.

Itching:  of  glans  penis.
^*  Tissues. Loss  of  muscular  sense  ;  anaesthesia.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure : on  skin

excites  burning.
^®  Skin. Pricking  over  whole  body  with  numbness,  often  pleas-
urable.
Formication  or  itching  on  various  parts.
Tension  in  skin  of  head  and  face,
lis  very  anaemic. ^Menorrhagia.
Pressure  on  skin  excites  burning.
Anaesthesia ;  while  standing  is  not  conscious  of  touching  the

ground.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Affects  persons  of  nervous  and

sanguine  temperament  most ; the  bilious  nearly  as  much  ;

the  lymphatic  but  slightly,  as,  with  vertigo,  nausea,  coma,

or  muscular  rigidity.
B  A  woman,  set.  30. ^Menorrhagia.
I  Mother  of  three  children. ^Menorrhagia.
*^  Relations. Compare  Cann. sat., especially Chapter  48, for

drug  relations,  as  the  comparisons  doubtless  apply  to  Oann.

ind.


CANNABIS  SATIVA.

American  or  European  Hemp.  Cannahinece.

^  Mind.  ■  Seems  to  be  in  a  dream,  as  if  things  were  not  real ;  feels
as  if  she  did  not  know  where  she  was  ;  objects  seem  strange;
feels  at  times  as  if  she  were  somebody  else ;  memory  bad ;
forgets  when  speaking  what  she  is  going  to  say,  or  what  she
is  going  to  do,  unless  she  makes  a  note  of  it;  cannot  follow
what  persons  say  to  her ;  when  writing  repeats  or  omits
words. ^Post  partum  hemorrhage.  .

1  Makes  mistakes  in  writing.

I  Says  one  thing  for  another  when  speaking.

I  Time  seems  prolonged. ^Post  partum  hemorrhage.

I  Voices  including  her  own  seem  to  come  from  a  distance ;  her


CANNABIS  SATIVA.  276

own  voice  seems  strange,  as  if  it  were  somebody  else  speak-
ing. ^Post  partura  hemorrhage.

■  Thoughts  seem  to  stand  still.

I  Feeling  as  if  she  would  lose  her  senses. ^Post  partum  hemor-
rhage.
Hasty  manner,  with  chill,
i  Sadness  and  melancholy.

■  Despondent  in  forenoon,  lively  in  afternoon.
Lectrophobia.

■  Anxious  and  apprehensive  feeling  at  pit  of  stomach,  with  op-

pression of  breath  and  palpitation ;  rising  of  something  warm
into  throat,  with  arrest  of  breathing;  soon  something  became
lodged  in  trachea,  with  flushes  of  heat.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  :  when  standing,  with  swimming  of  head  ;
when  walking,  with  tendency  to  fall  sideways.

■  Giddiness,  when  walking,  with  fear  of  falling. ^Post  partum

hemorrhage.

■  Head  feels  as  if  it  would  fall  in  all  directions. ^Post  partum

hemorrhage.
^  Inner  Head. Rush  of  blood  to  head,  causing  heat  and  flushes.
Violent  throbbing,  with  heat  of  head,  and  fever.
Forehead  feels  compressed,  from  margins  of  orbits  to  temples ;

not  relieved  by  bending  forwards.
Pressure  below  frontal  eminences,  extending  deep  through  brain

to  occiput.
Pressure  in  temples.

■  Pain  in  r.  temple  and  vertex,  as  if  opening  and  shutting;  be-

gins on  waking,  lasts  all  day ; <  from  noise. ^Post par-
tum hemorrhage.
^  Outer  Head. Sensation  as  if  drops  of  cold  water  were  falling
on  head.

Crawling  in  scalp.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  After  looking  long,  mistiness  before  eyes.
^Post  partum  hemorrhage.

Weakness  of  eyes  and  diminished  vision.

Alternating  dilatation  and  contraction  of  pupils  in  same  light.

Sensation  of  spasmodic  drawing  in  eyes.

Pressure  from  back  of  eyes  forwards.

Sensation  as  if  sand  were  in  eyes.

Keratitis  parenchymatosa  (not  pannus),  in  which  whole  thick-
ness of  cornea  is  red  and  vascular.

Cornea  becomes  obscured  (film  before  eyes).

Leukoma.

Cornea  becomes  opaque  and  a  pellicle  appears  on  it.

■  Opacity  of  cornea  after  a  bee-sting.

■  Maculae  and  ulcers  on  cornea.

■  ■Scrofulous  eye  troubles.

■  Cataract.


277  CANNABIS  SATIVA.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears,  and  throbbing.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Dryness  in  nose,  and  sensation  of  stoppage.
Stupefying  pressure,  like  from  a  blunt  point,  on  root  of  nose.
Bleeding  of  nose,  sometimes  to  fainting.
Large  pimples  on  nose,  surrounded  by  red  swelling.
Sensation  as  if  nose  was  enlarging  and  obstructing  vision.
Swelling  and  copper  redness  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Tace  pale.

Left  cheek  red,  not  hot;  right  one  pale;  pain  in  a  right  tooth.
Slight  pulsations  in  various  portions  of  face,  particularly  in
1.  buccinator.
^  Lower  Face, Eruption  on  Vermillion  border  of  lips.

Numbing  compressing  pain  in  1.  side  of  chin,  affects  teeth  of
same  side.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Pain  in  hollow  teeth.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. BNasty  taste  in  mouth,  on  washing,  re-
turns after  meals. ^Post  partum  hemorrhage.
Loss  of  taste.

Difficult  speech,  at  times  stuttering.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  mouth,  throat  and  lips.
^^  Throat. Burning  dryness  of  palate,  mornings.

Dryness  of  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. "Does  not  like
meat,  of  which  she  used  to  be  fond. ^Post  partum  hem-
orrhage.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructations

of  air  ;  of  bitter,  acrid  fluid.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Cramp  in  stomach.

Uninterrupted dull  stitches near pit  of  stomach,  just  below
ribs,  momentarily  >  by  bending  trunk  backward  and  for-
ward.
^^  Hypochondria. Dull  stitching  in  1.  side,  just  below  ribs,  when

breathing  and  when  not.
^^  Abdomen. Intestines  feel  bruised.

Painful  jerks  in  abdomen,  moving  from  place  to  place,  as  if
something  living  were  in  it,  accompanied  by  drawing  from  L
hip-bone  across  to  r.  and  thence  into  knee ;  still,  however,
the  pain  remained  in  hip,  where  it  seemed  like  a  tearing,
pushing  pain.
Pain  and  pressing  outwards in abdominal ring, as if  parts

would  suppurate.
Feeling  as  if  intestines  would  drop.
Outward  pressure  in  abdominal  ring.
■  Ascites  after  abuse  of  quinine.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. During  and  after  stool  burning  in  anus.
Pressure  in  rectum  and  sacral  region,  as  if  intestines  were  sink-
ing down  and  would  be  pressed  out,  while  sitting.
Constrictive pain  in  aniis, together  with  a  sensation as  if


CANNABIS  SATIVA.  278

thighs  were  drawn  together, so  that  she was  obliged  to

close  them.
Sensation  like  trickling  of  cold  water  in  anus.
Constriction  of  anus.

I  Constipation. /^Urinary  troubles. ^Phyniosis.

"^  Urinary  Organs. Ulcerative  pain  in  region  of  kidneys.
Nephritic  colic  of  horses.

Sensation  of  soreness,  and  inflammation  of  kidneys  and  bladder.
B Penis  swollen  ;  thick  purulent  discharge;  difficulty  in  making

water,  not  from  burning,  but  from  stoppage  at  intervals,  as

if  from  spasm;  child,  get.  6. ^Urethritis.
Drawing  pain  from  region  of  kidneys  to  inguinal  glands,  with

anxious,  nauseous  sensation  in  pit  of  stomach.
Burning  smarting  in  urethra,  from  meatus  backwards  ;  posteri-
orly stitching  while  urinating.
Urethra  feels inflamed and sore  to touch, along its  whole

length ;  during  erections  tensive  pain ;  feels  drawn  up  into

knots.
Burning  while  urinating,  but  especially  just  after.
Burning  along  urethra,  at  commencement  and  end  of  urinating.
When  not  urinating,  burning  pain  in  forepart  of  urethra,"with

pressure  to  urinate  almost  constantly.
Stitches  along  urethra,  when  not  urinating.
Jerking  stitches  in  posterior  portion  of  urethra,  when  standing.
Long  standing  dysuria.

I I  Pain  extending  from  orifice  of  urethra  backward,  burning-
biting,  posteriorly  more  sticking,  while  urinating.

I  Tearing  as  if  in  fibres  of  urethra,  in  the  form  of  a  zigzag.

I  Urging  to  urinate,  with  pressive  pain.

Stream  of  urine  forked.

Urine  :  white,  turbid,  or,  red  and  turbid ;  full  of  fibres.

Enuresis ;  paralysis  of  bladder,  particularly  in  old  people.

I  Pain  in  neck  of  bladder  and  both  kidneys;  urging  to  urinate
every  15  or  20  minutes ;  urine  yellowish-white  and  the  last
mixed  with  blood,  scalding  when  passed,  but  <  after ;  at
close  of  urination  very  painful  spasmodic  closing  of  sphincter
and,  at  same  time,  very  severe  stricture  and  drawing  up  of
anus ;  constant  urging  to  stool,  with  inability.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  I  Priapism,  with  free  mucoid  discharge.
^Gonorrhoea.

Increased  sexual  desire.

-Nocturnal  emission  mixed  with  blood.
/ Frequent  erections,  followed  by  stitches  in  urethra.

Prepuce  dark- red,  greatly  swollen,  sensitive  to  touch.

Penis  swollen,  without  marked  erections.

Penis  painful,  as  if  sore  or  burnt,  when  walking.

Pressive  dragging  sensation  in  testicles,  when  standing.

Great  swelling  of  prepuce,  approaching  to  phymosis.


279  CANNABIS  SATIVA.

Dark  redness  of  glans  and  prepuce.

Light  red,  lentil-sized  spots  on  glans.

iPhymosis,  accompanied  by  constipation.

1 1  Inflammatory  stage  of  gonorrhoea. See  21.

Discharge  of  watery  mucus  from  urethra ;  painless  discharge
of  a  clear  transparent  mucus  from  urethra,  without  erection  ;
closing  of  orifice  by  mucus.

Swelling  of  glans  penis;  a  sort  of  erection  without  sensation  ;•
coldness  of  genital  organs,  Avith  warmth  of  rest  of  body;
prepuce  dark-red,  hot  and  inflamed  (see  Sulphur).

Smarting,  as  from  excoriation  of  margin  and  inner  side  of  pre-
puce; continual  burning  of  prepuce  and  glans  for  four  days;
bathing  it  in  cold  water,  brought  on  a  pain  as  from  excoria-
tion ;  skin  of  prepuce  is  covered  with  bright  red  spots  size  of
a  pea ;  when  walking,  penis  feels  sore  and  burnt.
^'  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Increased  sexual  desire ;  nympho-
mania ;  sterility.

Too  profuse  menses,  with  dysuria.

■  Infantile  leucorrhoea.

Gonorrhoea :  cutting  between  labia  during  micturition,  swelling
♦ of  vagina,  orifice  of  urethra  closed  with  muco-pus,  urine
voided  in  a  spray.
2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Threatened  abor-
tion in  gonorrhoeic  patients.
iPost  partum  hemorrhage.
^*  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Voice  weak,
often  inaudible.
In  morning,  tough  mucus  in  lower  portion  of  trachea,  cannot
be  dislodged  by  coughing  and  hawking ;  after  hawking  and
coughing,  trachea  feels  raw  and  sore ;  finally  mucus  loosens
of  itself,  and  he  must  hawk  it  up  frequently.
Things  go  down  "the  wrong  way"  in  swallowing.
^®  Respiration. Oppression  of  breathing,  from  tensive,  pressive
pains  in  middle  of  sternum,  which  is also  sore  to  touch  ;
sleepiness.
Obliged  to  breathe  deeply  ;  chest  oppressed  ;  sensation  of  ap-
prehension in  throat.

■  Dyspnoea  and  extreme  agitation;  must  sit  most  of  the  time.

^Humid  asthma.

■  Wheezing  and  mucous  rales. ^Bronchitis.

■  Has  to  stand  by  open  window,  leaning  forward. ^Asthma.

^"^  Cough. Hacking-cough,  arises  from  pit  of  throat,  with  a  cool,
salty  fluid  deep  in  throat,  posteriorly.
Cough,  with  a  green,  viscid  expectoration.
Cough,  with  burning  in  chest.

■  Cough,  with  bloodspitting  and  stitches  in  r.  side. ^Pleurisy.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sore  feeling  under  upper  part  of

sternum.


CANNABIS  SATIVA.  280

I A  digging  beneath  upper  part  of  sternura,  without  oppression
of  breath.

■  Stitches  in  r.  side. ^Pleurisy.

B  Spasmodic  affections  of  chest  and  abdomen,  accompanied  by

urinary  troubles.
^"  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Throbbing  in  scrobiculum.
I  Visible  palpitation. ^Pneumonia  of  horses.
Violent  beating  of  heart,  on  moving  body  and  on  stooping,  with

warm  sensation  about  heart.
Pulse  very  weak,  slow,  frequently  almost  imperceptible.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Drawing  in  neck,  extending  upwards.
Pain  in  small  of  back.
Pain  in  middle  of  back,  as  if  some  one  were  pinching  it  with

pincers  ;  pain  extending  gradually  toward  abdomen.
(Pressure  as  if  with  a  sharp  point  in  coccyx.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Rending  pressure  on  shoulder,  in  attacks.
Coldness  and  cold  feeling  of  hands.
Formication  and  numb  feeling  in  tips  of  fingers.
Sudden  lameness  of  hand ;  trembling  of  hand,  when  attempting

to  clasp  anything.
Palms  of  hands  hot  and  dry,  with  kidney  trouble.  *

■  Contraction  of  fingers  after  a  sprain.

^' Lower  Limbs. Cramp-like,  jerking,  digging  pain  in  r.  hip.

Drawing  pains  in  feet.

I  Violent  pain  with  contraction  in  tendo  achillis  and  1.  foot.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Weariness  of  limbs.

Neuralgic  pains  in  limbs.

Rheumatic  drawing  in  periosteum  of  long  bones,  as  if  they  had
been  bruised  by  blows;  during  motion.

Arthritic  rheumatism,  with  dyspnoea.
^^  Kest. Position. Motion. Sitting :  pressure  in  rectum  and
sacral  region.

Standing :  swimming  of  head  ;  pressive,  dragging  sensation  in
testicles.

Bending  forward :  forehead  feels  compressed,  not  relieved.

Motion :  rheumatic  drawing  in  long  bones.

Walking:  fear  of  falling;  giddiness;  penis  feels  sore  and  burnt.
3^  Nerves. Tetanic  spasms  of  upper  limbs  and  trunk.

Hysteria.

!  Faint  feeling,  sometimes  faints  right  off. ^Post  partum  hem-
orrhage.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness,  but  fear  of  bed.

Uneasy  sleep  at  night.

Dreams  disagreeable  and  frightful ;  disappointed  in  everything
and  is  filled  with  anxiety.

Awoke  at  night  from  slumber,  with  frightful  dreams,  not  know-
ing where  he  was.

Vivid,  lascivious  dreams  after  midnight.


281  CANNABIS  SATIVA.

^^Time. Night:  sweat  wanting,  or,  only  on  forehead; burning
heat.
Morning:  dryness  of  mouth.
Day :  pain  in  r.  temple  and  vertex.
3^  Temperature and  Weather. Uncovering  :  > unendurable
fine  stitching  over  whole  body,  like  from  a  thousand  needle-
points, at  night,  when  sweating  from  warm  covering.
*"  Fever. Chill,  with  thirst  and  shaking.
Shivering  over  whole  body.

External  coldness  of  Avhole  body,  with  exception  of  face.
Heat  only  in  face,  and  slight.
Nightly  burning  heat.

Sweat  wanting,  or,  only  on  forehead  and  neck,  at  night.
«  Locality  and  Direction. Right : temple  and  vertex  pain ;
side  of  chest,  stitches;  digging  pain  in  hip.
Left: side  of  chin,  numbing  compressing  pain;  dull  stitching
just  below  ribs ;  drawing  from  hip  bone  across  to  right.
"Sensations. iFeels  as  if  hot  water  were  poured  over  him.

I  Sensation  as  if  drops  of  cold  water  were  falling:  on  head;

from  the  anus;  from  the  heart.
As  if  opening  and  shutting,  temples  and  vertex ;  as  if  sand  were
in  eyes;  as  if  nose  was  enlarging  and  obstructing  vision;
as  if  something  living  were  in  abdomen;  as  if  intestines
would  drop;  as  if  thighs  were  drawn  together;  as  if  cold
water  trickled  in  anus;  urethra  feels  as  if  drawn  up  into
knots;  penis,  as  if  sore  or  burnt,  as  if  excoriated;  long
bones,  as  if  bruised.
Sensation  as  if  parts  had  enlarged.

lUnendurable  fine  stitching  over  the  whole  body,  like  from  a
thousand  needle-points,  at  night,  when  sweating  from  warm
covering,  better  when  uncovering.
Jerks:  painful,  in  abdomen;  in  urethra;  lower  limbs.
Stitches:  near  pit  of  stomach;  while  urinating;  along  urethra;

in  r.  side  of  chest ;  fine,  unendurable  over  whole  body.
Sticking:  in  urethra  while  urinating.
Cutting:  between  labia.

Tearing :  pain  in  hip  ;  as  if  in  fibres  of  urethra.
Rending:  pressure  on  shoulder.
Digging:  of  back;  pain  in  r.  hip.

Drawing:  in  eyes;  pain  from  region  of  kidneys  to  inguinal
glands ;  up  of  anus ;  in  neck ;  pains  in  feet ;  rheumatic,  in
periosteum  of  long  bones.
Spasmodic :  drawing  in  eyes.
Dragging:  in  testicles.
Pushing:  pain  in  hip.

Burning:  dryness  of  palate;  in  anus;  smarting  in  urethra;
while  urinating;  along  urethra;  of  prepuce;  in  chest;  heat
at  night.


CANNABIS  SATIVA.  282

Smarting  :  of  prepuce ;  in  urethra.

Pressure:  below  frontal  eminences;  in  temples;  from  back  of

eyes  forwards;,  in  abdominal  ring; as  if  to  urinate;  as  if

with  a  sharp  point  in  coccyx.
Pressive  dragging  in  testicles.

Soreness:  in  kidneys  and  bladder;  under  upper  sternum.
Bruised:  intestines  feel.
Ulcerative  pain  in  region  of  kidneys.

Pain :  in  hollow  tooth ;  in  abdominal  ring ;  in  small  of  back.
Beating:  of  heart  violent.
Throbbing:  violent,  with  heat  of  head  and  fever;  and  ringing

in  ears  ;  in  scrobiculum.
Compressed :  forehead ;  pain  in  chin.
Cramp:  in  stomach.
Cramp-like:  jerking  in  lower  limbs.
Constrictive  : pain  in  anus.
Contraction :  of  fingers  after  a  sprain ; in  tendo  achillis ; in

1.  foot.
Formication  :  and  numb  feeling  in  tips  of  fingers.
Numbing  : pain  in  chin.
Crawling :  in  scalp.
Dryness:  of  mouth,  throat  and  lips.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  sensitiveness

to,  prepuce  ;  middle  of  sternum  sore  to  touch.
■*'  Skin. Unendurable  fine  stitching  over  whole  body,  like  from  a

thousand  needlepoints,  at  night,  when  sweating  from  warm

covering ; >  when  uncovering.
Itching  pimples.
Vesicles  on  head  and  chest,  filled  with  serum  and  surrounded

by  red  areola ;  burn  when  touched.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, b  Child,  set.  6. ^Urethritis.
** Relations. Antidotes: of  large  doses,  lemon  juice,  Strychnia,

and  faradization  of  respiratory  muscles  to  maintain  respira-
tion; of  small  doses,  Cam-pJior.^  Mercur.
Compatible :  iBellad.,  iHyosc,  II Lyco-p.,  iNuxvom.,  Opium,

iiPulsat.,  Rhus  tox  ,  I  Veratr.
Compare : Cann.  ind.,  the  drugs  mentioned  above,  as  well  as

Act.  rac, Arnic, Bryon., iCanthar., Petrol., Petros.,

Stannum,  iStramon.,  Sulphur.


283  CANTHAEIDES.

CANTHARIDES.

Spanish  Flies.  Cantltaridece.

Mlind. I  Unconsciousness,  lies  with  outstretched  arms;  sudden
starting  up,  screaming,  throwing  arms  about. ^Metritis.

■  Sudden  loss  of  consciousness  with  red  face. ^Dentition.

■  Lies  in  a  stupor  with  cold  surface  and  occasional  jerks.
Ursemic  coma,  delirium  and  convulsions.
iForgetfulness.

Strange  ideas  crowd  on  him  against  his  will.
I  Confusion ; distraction of  mind ; inability to concentrate
thought.

■  Confusion  of  head  and  pulsation  in  forehead,  in  morning.
Hallucinations,  especially  at  night;  deliria  of  people  long  dead.

I  Furious  delirium,  with  crying,  barking  and  biting; confusion

of  head,  anxious  restlessness ;  cold  sweat,  especially  on  hands
and  feet.

■  Almost  frenzied  delirium.

■  Paroxysms  of  rage,  renewed  by  sight  of  dazzling,  bright  ob-

jects, or  touching  larynx  when  trying  to  drink  water.

■  Whining  and  complaining,  with  anxious  restlessness,  <  from

motion,  >>  lying  quiet.
Constantly  attempting to do something,  but  accomplishing
nothing.

■  Despondent  and  low-spirited,  says  she  must  die.

■  Fear,  confusion  of  ideas,  she  could  not  think  clearly. ^Vesical

hemorrhoids.

I I  Great  amativeness ;  amorous  frenzy.

■  Unbounded  frantic  sexual  desire. ^Mania.

■  Exceedingly  sensitive  to  all  impressions;  irritable  and  blas-

pheming. ^Traumatic  neuralgia.

■  Insolent  and  contradictory  mood,  in  afternoon.
Uneasiness  day  and  night,  with  hot  head.

■  Anxious  restlessness,  ending  in  rage.

Great  restlessness, obliging  him  to  move  constantly; great
activity  of  mind.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo : and staggering ; and fainting ; while
walking  in  open  air,  with  transient  attacks  of  unconscious-
ness; appearance  of  fog  before  eyes.

■  Heaviness  of  head.

^  Inner  Head. Soreness  and  burning  in  brain.
Dull  heavy  pain  in  forehead.
Confusion  of  head  in  morning  with  pulsations  in  forehead.


CANTHARIDES.  284

iBurning  in  sides  of  head,  ascending  from  neck,  with  soreness
and  giddiness;  <  morning  and  afternoon;  when  standing
or  sitting; >  while  walking  or  lying  down.

Stitches  in  side  of  head  and  occiput.

I  Painful  tearing  on  vertex,  with  sensation  as  if  some  one  were
pulling  a  lock  of  hair  upwards.

■  Violent  lancinating  pains  deep  in  brain,  especially  in  occiput.

^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Heaviness  in  occiput,  with  drowsiness  and  incapacity  to  think.
Heat  and  throbbing  in  head.

Sensation  of  fulness,  with  heat  rising  up  into  head,  with  anx-
iousness.

■  Headache  from  washing  or  bathing.

Cerebro-spinal  meningitis:  paroxysms  of  rage  and  fury;  pain
deep  in  brain,  with  an  expression  of  great  suffering;  base  of
brain  is  the  chief  seat  of  pain;  urine  dribbles  or  passes  with
burning-cutting  pain.
^  Outer  Head,  l Hair  falls  out  when  combing.  ^During  confine-
ment or  lactation.

■  Scales  on  scalp;  enormous  dandruff.
"Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Objects  look  yellow.

■  Eyes  look  yellow.

■  Burning  in  eyes  and  glowing  heat,  as  from  coals.

■  Biting  sensation,  as  if  salt  were  in  eyes.

■  Smarting  in  eyes.

■  Lachrymation  in  open  air;  must  close  eyes;  on  opening  lids,

margins  pain  as  if  sore,  like  raw  flesh.

■  ■Inflammation  of  eyes,  particularly  when  caused  by  a  burn.

■  Eyes  protruding;  fiery,  sparkling,  staring  look.
Involuntary  spasmodic  movement  of  eyes.

■  Eyes  sunken,  surrounded  by  blue  rings.

■  Eyes  restlessly  in  motion,  at  times  staring,  always,  however,

with  a  frightful  look;  pupils  contracted. ^Acute  mania.
Right  eye  looks  bleared,  congested,  inflamed;  pain  •< night,
cannot  read  then ;  sight  quite  good ;  commenced  Avith  feel-
ing as  of  lashes  in  eye  ;  urine  scalds.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Ringing,  humming,  or  roaring  in  ears.

■  Tearing  in  right  ear  and  right  mastoid  process,  as  if  bone

would  be  torn  out.

■  A  hot  exhalation  passes,  at  intervals,  and  frequently,  out  from

ears.
^ Smell  and  Nose. Coryza  with  pains  in  limbs; also  chronic
coryza.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  dorsum  of  nose,  spreading  to

both  cheeks,  but  more  to  right;  followed  by  desquamation.

■  Secretion  of  much  tenacious  mucus  from  nose,  without  sneez-

ing ;  hoarseness  and  painful  hawking  of  tough  mucus  from
chest;  nightly  dry  cutting  stitches  along  trachea,  externally.


285  CANTHARIDES.

^  Upper  Face. BExpression  of  extreme  suifering,  terror  or  despair.

Sunken,  hippocratic  countenance.

I  Death-like  look  during  and  after  the  pains.

I  Face:  hot,  red  and  swollen;  swollen  and  puify;  flushed  when
stooping ;  yellow,  or  very  pale.

B Face  fallen  in;  cheeks  bluish. ^Acute  mania.

■  Erysipelas  beginning  on  dorsum  of  nose  and  spreading to
cheeks,  more  to  right.
^  Lower  Face. 'Dry  lips,  without  thirst.

BThe  jaws  tightly  closed,  almost  approaching  trismus,  espe-
cially when  they  wished  to  give  her  water  or  medicine,  which
she  prevented  by  an  angry  tossing  about. ^Acute  mania.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. I  Grinding  teeth. ^Meningitis. ^Typhus.

Painful  red  spot,  size  of  a  pm's  head,  over  carious^  root  of  an
upper  incisor ;  discharges  pus  from  a  small  opening  in  cen-
tre, when  pressed.

I  Gums  spongy  and  swollen. ^Suppurative  metritis.

Scurvy;  coagulated  blood  in  mouth  in  morning  on  waking;
bloody  urine.
"Taste and  Tongue, l Taste: bitter; lost;  gold  tooth-plate
tastes  coppery.

■  Speech  weak  and  timorous.

■  Trembling  of  tongue.

■  Tongue  fiery  red. ^Facial  erysipelas.

■  Tongue:  thickly  furred,  red  at  edges;  swollen  and  thickly

coated ;  and  back  of  mouth,  in  part  excoriated,  in  part  cov-
ered with  blisters.

■  Inflammation  of  tongue  with  vesicles.

■  Sublingual  glands  swollen  and  red.

^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Mucous  membrane  red  and  covered  with  small
blisters.

■  Loss  of  epithelium  on  lips,  tongue  and  palate. ^Dysentery.

■  Burning  pain  in  mouth,  throat  and  stomach.
Dryness  in  mouth.

■  Vesicles  and  cankers  in  mouth  and  throat. ^Dysentery.

■  Lining  of  mouth  and  throat  covered  with  white  blisters  from

size  of  a  pin's  head  to  that  of  a  bean.

■  Salivation:  copious;  tasteless;  disgustingly  sweet.

^^  Throat. Expectoration  of  frothy  saliva  streaked  with  blood.

■  Mucus  in  posterior  nares  must  be  hawked  into  mouth  to  be

discharged.

■  ■Burning  sensation  in  throat,  which  feels  as  if  on  fire.

■  Burning  in  throat  with  scraped  sensation  and  spitting  of  blood.

■  Spasmodic  constriction  and  intense  pain  at  back  of  throat.

■  Throat  inflamed  and  covered  with  plastic  lymph.

■  Aphthous  ulcer  at  back  part  of  fauces,  covered  with  a  whitish

adherent  crust ;  a  similar  one  on  right  tonsil.
Throat  swollen.


CANTHARIDES.  286

■  Swallowing  very  difficult. ^Tonsillitis.

I  Difficult  deglutition  with  nocturnal  regurgitation.

I  Water  drank  regurgitates  through  nose. ^Sequel  of  burn.

Inflammation  and  suppuration  of  tonsils.

Diphtheria:  dysuria;  urine  contains  shreds  or  coats  of  urinif-

erous  tubuli;  extreme  prostration,  sinking,  death-like  turns;

irritable-looking  rash  upon  skin  or  shining  through  epidermis.
Throat: <<  in  afternoon  and  at  night; <<  while  drinking  and

from  wet  poultices ;  >>  while  lying  down.
"  Appetite. Thirst. Desires, Aversions. 1 1  Diminished

appetite.
Canine  hunger,  particularly  for  meat.
I  Great  thirst,  with  burning  pain  in  throat  and  stoinach.
B  Thirst,  with  aversion  to  all  fluids.
B  Disgust  for  everything ;  drink,  food  and  tobacco.
Coffee  disagrees.
^°  Eating  and  Drinking. B  After  drinking  coffee,  sensation  of

fulness.
B  Drinking,  even  small  quantities  of  water,  increases  pain  in

bladder.
Great  thirst,  but  drinking,  and  even  the  sight  of  water,  in-
creases the  pain.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Wausea  and  Vomiting, ii  Empty

eructations;  B eructations  of  sour,  frothy  mucus,  tinged  bright

red.
B Nausea  and  vomiting.
'  B  Vomiting:  of  water  drank,  also  of  blood;  greenish,  offensive;

of  bile  and  ingesta;  of  frothy  mucus,  tinged  bright  red.
B  Vomiting,  with  violent  retching  and  severe  colic. ^Pregnancy.
B  Vomiting  of  bile. ^Phrenitis.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. B  Acute  pain  in  region  of  stomach

and  bladder,  with  such  exquisite  sensibility  that  the  slightest

pressure  produces  convulsions.
BB  Violent  burning  pain  in  stomach.
B  Burning  in  region  of  pylorus.
B  Pressure  in  scrobiculum  after  eating.
B  Sensation  of  fulness,  extending  to  chest  and  abdomen,  after

taking  coffee.
B  Nightly  regurgitation  of  food.
B  Chronic  gastritis  with  dysuria.
^^Hypochondria. B Incarceration  of  flatus  under  short  ribs.
Inflammation  of  liver  and  diaphragm.
I  I  Right  side  of  liver  painful  and  sensitive. ^Yellow  fever.
B  Splenic  troubles.  *

^^  Abdomen. B Abdomen  swollen  and  tympanitic  above;  yields  a

dull  sound  below. ^Puerperal  fever.
B  Great  distension  and  tenderness  in  belly.


287  CANTHARIDES.

I  Abdomen sensitive, and burning pain about umbilicus.
^Cholera.

■  Violent  burning  pain  and  heafthrough  whole  intestinal  tract,

with  painful  sensitiveness  to  touch.

■  Cutting  in  abdomen.

I  Sensation  of  great  fulness  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.
I  Cutting,  stitching,  or  burning  in  groins.
I  Peritonitis, with burning pains in abdomen and urinary
tenesmus.

■  Ascites.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. "No  stool  or  urine  for  48  hours. /? Acute
mania.
1  I  Copious  stools.

Frequent  small,  corrosive  stools,  with  colic  and  pinching.
Stools:  yellow,  brown,  watery;  white,  with  tenesmus.

■  Diarrhoea,  of  blood  and  mucus.

■  Faeces  red,  slimy  or  green.

■  ■  Passage  of  white  or  pale-red  tough  mucus  with  the  stool,  like

scrapings  from  intestines,  with  streaks  of  blood.

■  Passage  of  pure  blood  from  anus  and  urethra.

■  Before  stool:  straining;  urging;  colic.

■  During  stool:  cutting,  colicky  pains;  burning  in  anus;  pro-

lapse of  rectum ;  pressing  and  urging,  extorting  cries.

■  Stool  with  painful  pressure  on  bladder. ^Catarrh  of  bladder.

■  After  stool:  ^colic  relieved;  burning,  biting  and  stinging  in

anus;  straining;  faintness ;  shuddering.
Chilliness  as  though  water  were  poured  over  one,  with  internal
warmth.

■  Desire  for  stool  while  urinating.

■  Pain  in  perineum,  seemingly  arising  from  neck  of  bladder.
^^  Urinary  Organs. bDuII  |iressing  pains  in  both  kidneys.  _

■  Pain  in  region  of  kidneys  and  urging  to  urinate,  steadily  in-

creasing in  severity.

■  Constant,  dull  painful  sensation  in  region  of  kidneys,  late  m

evening.

■  ■Paroxysmal  cutting  and  burning  pains  in  both  kidneys,  the

region  very  sensitive  to  slightest  touch,  alternating  with
pain  in  tip  of  penis ;  urging  to  urinate ;  painful  evacuation,
by  drops,  of  bloody  urine,  and  at  times,  of  pure  blood.
Inflammation  of  kidneys;  excessively  violent  pains  of  bladder;
gangrene  of  mucous  coat  of  bladder;  paralysis  of  neck  of
bladder;  desire  to  urinate,  frequent  and  violent,  with  scanty
discharge  with  great  pain,  and  often  bloody.

■  Dull,  heavy  distensive  pain  in  region  of  kidney,  either  side,

no  relief  in  any  position;  continued  rolling  and  twisting  of
body,  with  groans  and  cries,  resulting  in  nausea,  retching
and  vomiting,  unless  the  stomach  is  empty;  no  great  desire


CANTHARIDES.  288

to  urinate,  but  a  tingling  thrill  running  down  dorsum  of
penis  to  glans.  ^Renal  calculus.
iPainful  urging  to  urinate,  but  was  not  able  to;  had,  however,
to  be  catheterized,  which  caused  much  pain;  urine  cloudy,
of  a  somewhat  bright  yellow  color;  after  standing  a  little,
a  sediment  of  mucus  and  phosphatic  salts  appeared;  imme-
diately on  being  passed  was  of  alkaline  reaction ;  some  pus
with  the  urine.  Region  of  bladder  sensitive  to  outward
pressure. ^Catarrh  of  bladder.

I  Every  two  hours  an  attack  of  very  painful  urging  to  urinate,

during  which,  with  whining  or  groaning,  a  quantity  of  clear
urine  was  discharged,  accompanied  with  pressure  on  the
rectum  and  the  passage  each  time  of  a  little  soft,  but  other-
wise normal  stool. ^Bladder  complaint  in  an  old  man.

I I  Violent  tenesmus  vesicae  and  strangury.

I  IPainful  discharge  of  a  few  drops  of  bloody  urine,  causing

very  severe  sharp  pain,  as  if  a  red-hot  iron  were  passed
along  urethra;  this  pain  was  most  acutely  felt  at  membranous
portion  of  canal,  and  in  meatus  urinarius.

■  Cutting  and  contracting  pains  from  ureters  down  toward  penis;

at  times  pains  pass  from  without  inwards;  pressure  on  glans
relieves  pain  somewhat.

I I  Violent  burning,  cutting  pains  in  neck  of  bladder,  extending
to  fossa  navicularis,  worse  before  and  after  urinating.

1 1  Violent  pains  in  bladder  with  frequent  urging ;  intolerable
tenesmus.

■  Heaviness  in  bladder,  feels  sore  on  slightest  motion.

1 1  Urging  to  urinate  from  smallest  quantity  of  urine  in  bladder.

■  Dribbling  discharge,  reddish,  sometimes  mixed  with  blood.

■  Urging, <  when standing, and still more  when  walking;

>  when  sitting.

■  With  urging  to  urinate,  stitching  pain  in  forepart  of  neck  of

bladder;  on  continued  urging,  only  a  few  drops  pass.

■  Frequent,  painful  urination,  constantly  preceded  by  violent

pain  in  glans.

■  I  Ardor  urinae.

■  ■Before,  during  and  after  urinating  fearful  cutting  pains  in

urethra;  she  must  double  herself  and  scream  from  pains.

■  ■Burning,  when  urinating,  and  when  not.

■  Urine  passes  in  thin  and  divided  stream. ^Stricture.

■  Fruitless  effort  to  urinate.
Frequent  and  copious  urination.

■  Enuresis.

■  ■Retention  of  urine,  causing  pain. ^Suppressed  gonorrhoea.

■  Urine  contained  (when  finally  passed)  much  albumen,  was

almost  black. ^Acute  mania.

■  Urine  dark  colored.

■  Urine:  turbid  and  scanty;  cloudy  during  night,  like  mealy


289  CANTHARIDES.

«

water,  with  white  sediment;  albuminous,  containing  cylin-.
drical  casts;  deposits  grayish-white  granules.
Red-colored  urine,  as  if  mixed  with  blood.

I  Atony  of  bladder  from  long  retention  of  urine.
Hemorrhoidal  affections  of  bladder  and  enlarged  prostate.

■  Intense  vesical  spasm.

Post- scarlatinal  nephritis;  threatening  uraemia.
Morbus  Brightii :  early  stage,  especially  when  occurring  from
blows  on  the  loins,  or  sudden  change  of  temperature.

B  Diabetes  insipidus.
"Male  Sexual  Organs. H Sexual  desire:  increased;  disturbing
sleep  at  night.

IBFrightful  satyriasis;  violent,  j)ainful  priapism,  with  excessive
pains.

B  Strong  and  persistent  erections,  painless  and  without  volup-
tuous sensation.
.  B  Erections  at night,  with  contraction and sore  pain  along
urethra.

Frequent  nocturnal  emissions;  spermatorrhoea  from  relaxed
penis,  early  in  evening,  in  bed,  without  sensation ;  discharge
of  blood  in  place  of  semen.

B  Swelling  of  glans,  which  is  very  painful,  even  to  external
pressure.

BGonorrhoeal  phimosis.

Burning  in  excretory  ducts  of  vesiculse  seminal es  and  in  urethra,
during  and  after  coition.

B  Dropsical  swelling  of  penis  and  scrotum.

TrGangrene  of  penis.

Drawing  pain  in  spermatic  cord,  while  urinating.

B  Testicles  drawn  up.

I  Smegma  prseputii.

Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.
*3  Female  Sexual  Organs. Over-sensitiveness  of  all  the  parts.

B Ovarian  region:  stitches,  arresting  breathing;  violent  pinch-
ing pains,  with  bearing  down  towards  genitals;  great  burn-
ing pain.

B  Inflammation  of  ovaries  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea.

Cysto-ovarium  with  urinary  difficulties ;  hydatids.

B Pruritus:  with  strong  sexual  desire;  during  climacteric  period.

B  Violent  itching  in  vagina.

Swelling  of  neck  of  uterus,  with  burning  in  bladder;  pain  in
abdomen ;  constant  vomiting.

i Swelling  and  irritation  of  vulva;  vaginismus.

I  Inflammatory  suppuration  of  womb  with  extreme  tenderness.

I  Uterine  hemorrhage,  with  great  irritation  in  neck  of  bladder.

Membranous  dysmenorrhoea  with  dysuria.

B Menses:  too  early,  too  profuse;  blood  black  or  scanty,  breasts
painful. ^Sterility.

VOL.  in. — 19.


CANTHARIDES.  290

Menses  retarded.

I  Amenorrhcea,  with  fulness  and  pain  in  head.
iLeucorrhcea: with sexual excitement; in consequence of

masturbation;  with  prurigo.
Uterine  hemorrhage,  with  great  irritation  in  neck  of  bladder;
more  suitable  to  sterile  women.

^^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. iVomiting,  with  vio-
lent retching  and  severe  colic ;  burning  at  pylorus.
Abortion,  with  constant  desire  to  urinate.
Sterility.

■  Puerperal  convulsions:  the  presence  of  bright  objects; the

sight,  the  drinking,  or  the  sound  of  water,  and  touching  the
larynx  reproduce  violent  spasms.

■  Promotes  fecundity; expels moles, dead foetuses and the

placenta.

I I  Retained  placenta  or  membranes,  usually  with  painful  urina-
tion.

■  Burning  pain;  abdomen  sensitive;  peritonitis,  with  tenesmus

of  bladder.
Mammae  painful;  dysuria.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  >  Complete
loss  of  voice;  much  cough;  threw  himself  about  in  bed,  from
anxiety. ^Croup.

■  Speech  very  low,  with  sensation  of  weakness  of  vocal  organs.

■  Voice:  hoarse;  feeble  and  indistinct.

■  Burning  and  stinging  in  larynx,  especially  when  attempting  to

hawk  up  tough  mucus.

■  Catarrh  in  larger  bronchia,  with  profuse,  yellow  expectoration.
^^  Respiration. ■  When  breathing  deeply,  and  when  speaking,  she

feels  as  if  she  dare  not  exert  herself,  on  account  of  extra-
ordinary weakness  of  respiratory  organs ;  speech  therefore
weak  and  timorous.
Oppression of  breathing, with sensation of  constriction of
pharynx.
^^  Cough. 'Dry,  hacking  cough.

During  cough:  shortness  of  breath;  pain  in  abdomen ;  erections.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Shooting  pain  in  chest,  from  front
toward  back,  impeding  respiration.

■  A  fine  stitch  extending  from  r.  axilla  into  chest.

■  Stitching  pain  in  forepart  of  r.  chest;  it  then  passes  down- .

wards  into  r.  lower  ribs.

■  Stitches  in  chest,  more  on  right  side,  or  first  left,  then  right;

in  lower  right  chest,  extending  toward  middle  of  sternum.

■  1  Burning  in  chest.

■  Exudation  within  the  pleura. ^Pleurisy.

^'Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, s  Anxiety  in  cardiac  region.

■  Stitch  in  heart,  followed  by  a  crawling  sensation.

■  Drawing  pain  in  region  of  heart.


291  CANTHARIDES.

I  Pulse:  very  variable,  mostly  hard,  full  and  frequent,  at  times

intermittent ;  frequent  and  small ;  slow,  feeble  and  scarcely
perceptible ;  more  full  and  rapid  in  morning.
^°  Outer  Chest. ■  Stitches  in  sternum.

■  Burning  m  chest.

^^Neck  and  Back. ■  Stiffness  of  neck,  with  tensive  pain  on
stooping.
Stiffness,  tearing,  and  lancinating  in  nape  of  neck  to  head.

■  Tearing  in  cervical  muscles.

■  Tearing  pain  in  back,  especially  mornings.

Pressing,  gnawing  and  tearing  in  back,  while  walking,  after
rising  from  a  seat.

■  ■Pain  in  loins,  with  incessant  desire  to  urinate.

I I  Pain  in  loins,  kidneys  and  abdomen,  with  such  pain  on  urin-
ating that  he  could  not  pass  a  single  drop  without  moaning
and  screaming.

iLancinations  and  tearing  in  os  coccygis,  causing  him  to  start.

^Coccyodynia.
In  left  lumbar  region,  sensation  of  coldness  and  formication,

on  a  spot  the  size  of  a  hand.
Dragging  in  back,  as  before  menstruation,  followed  by  slight

show ;  t.
Opisthotonus.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Tearing  and  stitching  pains  in  arms.
Drawing  pains  in  shoulder-joint

■  Eczematous  vesicles  between  fingers,  itching and burning

fearfully.
■Eczematous  eruption  on  dorsum  of  1.  hand,  between  and  upon
fingers ;  burning,  pricking,  shallow  vesicles  filling  with  fluid
and  soon  drying  into  thin  crusts,  which  peeled  off,  leaving
denuded  spots ;  <  from  cool  water,  >  from  warmth.
^^  Lower  Limbs.  ■  Coxalgia  with  spasmodic  pains  in  bladder  and
strangury.

■  Tearing  from  right,  later  left  hip-bone,  down  to  knees.

■  Knees  totter  when  ascending  steps.

■  Violent  pains  in  knees  ;  sometimes  boring.

■  Pain  in  soles,  as  from  an  ulcer,  could  not  step.

■  Fearful  pain  in  soles  of  feet,  like  an  ulcer;  she  could  not  step

for  four  days.
"Going  to  sleep"  of  lower  extremities.
Contraction  of  lower  limbs.

■  Darting  pain  from  r.  foot  to  r.  side  of  head  in  paroxysms.

^Neuralgia.
'''Limbs  in  General. ■Weakness  and  trembling  of  limbs.
Tearing  in  limbs,  relieved  by  rubbing.

■  Dropsical  swelling  of  hands  and  feet.
;rCold  extremities.

■  Cold  sweat  of  hands  and  feet.


CANTHARIDES.  292

^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Restlessness  :  compelling  him  to

move  about.
Lying  down  :  burning  in  sides  of  head.
Stooping :  face  hot,  red  and  swollen  ;  stiffness  in  neck.
Movement :  sweat.

Rising:  pressing,  gnawing  and  tearing  in  back.
Walking :  vertigo,  staggering  aud  fainting ;  burning  in  sides

of  head;  pressing,  gnawing  and  tearing  in  back.
3^  Iferves, Restlessness,  compelling  him  to  move  about  continually.
iSubsultus  tendinum.
I  Weakness,  prostration,  faintness,  general  coldness,  colla^pse.

^Diphtheria.
Universal  tetanic  spasms,  trembling,  fainting.
I  Convulsions,  with  dysuria  and  hydrophobic  symptoms ;  bright

light,  drink  or  sound  of  falling  water,  touching  larynx,  or

painful  parts,  cause  or  renew  the  spasm;  excessive  desire

for  sexual  intercourse.
Hysteria  with  urinary  troubles.
Paraplegia  occurring  in  Morbus  Brightii.
■  Hemiplegia  of  r.  side  with  aphasia.
Tetanic  or  epileptiform  convulsions,  followed  by  coma.
^^ Sleep. B Sleeplessness ;  anxious  dreams;  erections.

i  Sleepy,  but  cannot  sleep  soundly  on  account  of  sudden  twitch-

ings. ^Sequel  of  a  burn.
^*  Time. General  aggravation  after  midnight  and  during  day.
Night:  hallucinations;  regurgitation  of  food;  sexual  desire.
Morning :  confusion  of  head  and  pulsation  in  forehead ;  burn-
ing sides  of  head  ;  coagulated  blood  in  mouth ;  tearing  pain

in  back.
Afternoon  :  burning  sides  of  head.
Evening :  constant  dull  painful  sensation  in  region  of  kidneys ;

emissions ;  chill.
^^  Temperature  and  Weatlier. Warm  applications  relieve  pains

in  knees.
Open  air :  lachrymation.
*9  Fever. "  Chill  in  evening,  not  relieved  by  external  warmth.
I  Burning  in  palms  and  soles.

B  Burning  heat  at  night,  which  patient  does  not  feel.
BHeat,  with  thirst.
I  Sweat  on  genitals.

BCold  sweat,  especially  on  hands  and  feet. ^Collapse.
fiCold  extremities.
B  Chill  running  up  back ;  succeeded  by  thirst  without  heat ;  not

relieved  by  external  warmth.
fi  Sweat  smells  like  urine.
E  Sweat  from  every  movement.
8  Evening  fever. ^Catarrh  of  bladder.


293  CANTHARIDES.

I  Typhoid,  with  difficult  and  scanty  urination,  palpitation  <
lying  on  left  side,  and  rising  of  a  clot  of  blood  into  mouth.

SB  in  the  third  stage,  when  there  is  complete  insensibility;

cramps  in  abdominal  muscles  and  legs ;  suppression  of  urine ;

hemorrhages  from  stomach  and  intestines;  cold  sweat  on

hands  and  feet. /^Yellow  fever.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Some  symptoms  appear  every  seventh

day.
«  Locality  and  Direction. Sides  :  of  head,  burning.

Right :  ear,  tearing ;  mastoid  process ;  liver  painful  and  sen-
sitive; axilla  into  chest,  fine  stitching;  tearing  in  hip-bone;
darting  pain  in  foot  and  head.

Left :  lumbar  region,  sensation  of  coldness ;  eczematous  erup-
tion on  dorsum  of  hand  and  fingers.
"  Sensations. iRaw  and  sore  pain  in  whole  body,  internally  and
externally.

lEvery  part  oversensitive,  accompanied  by  excessive  weakness.

Burning,  stitching  and  tearing  pains  predominate.

As  if  some  one  were  pulling  a  lock  of  hair.

I  Darting,  stinging  pain  on  diflferent  parts  of  body  at  same  time.  '
Compare  Crot.  tigl.

Prickling:  after  erysipelas.

Stitching :  i:n  neck  of  bladder.

Cutting :  in  both  kidneys ;  from  ureters  downwards  towards
penis ;  in  neck  of  bladder.

Boring :  in  knees.

Tearing :  and  stitching  pains  in  anus.

Drawing :  in  spermatic  cord.

Burning :  in  throat ;  violent,  in  stomach  ;  intestinal  tract ;  in
anus ;  in  both  kidneys ;  when  urinating ;  excretory  ducts ;
in  larynx.

Biting :  in  anus.

Scraped :  sensation  in  throat.

Heaviness :  in  bladder.

Coldness  :  1.  lumbar  region.
**  Tissues. Acts  on  parenchyma  of  kidneys  and  destroys  them.

Increased  secretions  from  mucous  membranes,  and  ulcerated
surfaces.

Hemorrhages  from  nose,  mouth,  intestinal  canal,  urinary  and
genital  organs.

■  Great  emaciation. ^Catarrh  of  bladder.
Swelling,  heat,  redness,  even  gangrene  of  parts.
Pleurisy,  particularly  in  Morbus  Brightii.
Dropsy  from  atony  of  urinary  organs,  with  ischuria.

•Skin  affections,  particularly  of  an  erysipelatous,  vesicular
character.

■  Suppuration  of  internal  organs.

^'^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. sOn  being  touched


CANTHARIDES.  294

or  disturbed  had  violent  attacks,  so  that  it  took  four  men  to
hold  her. ^Acute  mania.

■  Touching  the  larynx  or  painful  parts  renews  the  symptoms.

^Spasms.
Pressure:  on  stomach  produces  convulsions  ;  swelling  of  glans

painful.
I B  Scalds  and  burns. See  46.
*'Skin, I  Ulcerative  pain  in  skin  when  touched.

■  Erythema,  from  exposure  to  rays  of  sun. ^Eczema  Solaris.

■  Vesicles  all  over  body,  worse  between  toes,  which  are  all  sore

and  suppurating.

■  Vesicular  erysipelas;  the  blebs  swell  and  exude  much  watery

matter.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the  skin,  followed  by  prickling.

■  Superficial  ulcerations  caused  by  burns,  with  burning  pains

and  lachrymation.

■  ■Burns,  before  blisters  form,*  and  when  they  have  formed.
Pemphigus.

■  Psoriasis.

Pityriasis,  especially  in  children.

■  Itching,  changing  place,  like  from  lice.

Ulceration  and  gangrene  after  exanthematous  diseases.

Ulcers  with  itching,  tearing  and  lacerating,  or  burning,  smart-
ing and  stinging;  pus  copious,  inodorous,  slightly  yellow,
sometimes  tinged  with  blood,  <  from  rubbing  and  scratching.

Carbuncle.

Immovable,  firm,  hard  tumor,  directly  above  symphysis  pubis.

Eczema:  watery  vesicles,  as  if  excoriated;  burning,  itching,
and  when  touched  burning  and  smarting;  eruption  mostly
on  r.  side;  early  inflammatory  stage.

Petechise.

Large  burning,  painful  blisters  on  an  erysipelatous  base.

Variola:  dysuria  and  bloody  urine ;  distressing  headache  and
backache;  eruption  not  properly  developed,  or  assuming  an
hsemorrhagic  hue.
*^ Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. "A  boy,  ^t.  6,  light  com-
plexion. ^Sequel  of  a  burn.

■  A  woman  in  third  month  of  pregnancy. ^Eczema  of  hands.

■  Woman,  set.  29,  scrofulous. ^Kidney  affection.

*^  Relations. Antidotes:  Aeon.,  I  I  Camphor.,  Kalinitr.,  Lauroc,
I  \Pulsat.
Canthar.  antidotes  Qamphor.,  vinegar  and  alcohol.
Compatible: Bellad., Mercur.,  Phosphor., Pulsat., Sepia,
8ulp)hur.

*  Recommended  by  Dr.  Heriiig  as  a  most  valuable  remedy  in  scalds  and
burns.  The  injured  part  is  immersed  or  bathed  in  a  few  drops  of  the  tinc-
ture in  water.  A  potency  may  be  given  inwardly.  To  demonstrate  the
truth  of  sim/ia,  he  frequently  challenged  skeptics  to  burn  their  fingers  and
then  immerse  the  injured  member  in  a  dilution  of  Cantharides. — Eds.


295  CANTHARIDES— CAPSICUM.

Incompatible:  Coffea;  oil  increases  the  pernicious  effects  by
rendering  tlie  active  principle  [Cantharidine)  more  soluble,
favoring  greater  absorption.

Compare:  Aco7i.^  Apis  (renal  and  bladder  troubles),  Bellad.^
Bryon.  (pleurisy),  Camijlwr.,  Cannah.,  Oapsic,  Cinchori.,
Cochlearia  armor,  (renal  and  bladder  troubles),  Coffea,
Colocyn.  (colic),  Boryphora  decern,  (urethritis,  especially  in
children),  Equiset.  (renal  and  bladder  troubles),  Formica
riifa,  Hydrangea  arhor.  (renal  and  bladder  troubles),  Myosc,
Lauroc,  Ledum,  Liyiaria  vulg.  (renal  and  bladder  troubles),
Lycop.,  Mercur.  (semen  mixed  with  blood),  PJiospJior.,
Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sassafras  (urine  burns  like  fire,  shreddy
particles  and  blood  in  it),  Seneg.,  Sepia,  Stramon.,  Sulphur.

See  introduction  to  Arnica  as  to  the  Arnica  fly.

Other  drags  vesicatory  like  Oantharis  may  be  compared,  viz:
Arum  triph.,  Oantharis  strigosa  (on  cotton  plant),  Clemat.
vitalb.,  Clemat.  crispa  (the  Spanish  fly  feeds  on  this),  Crot.
tig.,  Boryp)hora,  iL'uphor.  cor.,  Juglans  cathar.  (leaves),
Lytta  vit.  (fly  of  sweet  potato),  3Iaruta  cotula  (every  part
of  plant  acrid),  Mezereum,  Plantago  alis.,  Ranunc.  seel.,
and  Rhus  tox.


CAPSICUM.

Cayenne,  or  red  pepper.  Solanacece.


This  plant  is  cultivated  abundantly  almost  everywhere.  The  stem  is
Fmooth,  thick  and  branching,  rising  to  the  height  of  two  or  three  feet,
leaves  are  ovate  and  pointed;  flowers  are  solitary  and  white,  standing  on
long  peduncles;  the  fruit  is  a  pendulous  pod,  containing  numerous  flat,
kidney-shaped,  bufF-colored  seeds.

In  purchasing  the  dry  capsules  and  seeds  as  imported,  from  which
tincture  is  prepared,  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  confusion  with  the
smaller  pods  sold  under  the  same  name,  and  as  Chillies— a  name  applied  to
two  or  three  species.

Hahnemann  prepared  a  tincture  of  the  powdered  ripe  pods,  with  the
seeds,  in  the' proportion  of  20  grains  of  the  powder  to  400  drops  of  alcohol.

^  Mind. ■  Coma  and  delirium. ^Typhus. ^Yellow  fever.
Forgetfulness.

I  Children  become  clumsy,  awkward;  especially  with  headache.
Cloudiness  of  intellect;  idiocy,  melancholy,  hypochondriasis.
B  Haunted  by  a  disposition  to  suicide.


CAPSICUM.  296

I  He  is  taciturn,  peevish  and  obstinate.
Disinclination  to  think  and  work.

I  I  He  is  in  a  contented  mood,  is  jocose,  and  sings,  and  still  he

becomes  angry  from  the  slightest  cause.

I I  Home-sickness:  with  red  cheeks  and  sleeplessness  J  with
hot  feeling  in  fauces.

■  Melancholy  or  hypochondriasis.
Fear  of  censure.

I  I  Fearfulness.

I  Awakens  with  fright,  screams,  and  remains  full  of  fear.
Anxiety  and  fear,  as  though  he  was  going  to  die.

Peevish,  irritable,  angry ;  easily  offended,  takes  everything
in  bad  part.

■  Obstinacy.

II  After  emotions,  fever,  with  red  cheeks.
^  Sensorium. Intoxication.

Vertigo  ;  reeling  from  side  to  side.

I  Vertigo :  with  hypochondriasis  and  torpid  digestion  ;  during
cold  stage  of  intermittent  fever.

■  Senses  obtuse.

'''  Inner  Head. Empty,  stupid  feeling  in  head.

I  Darting  pains  in  head; <  at  rest ; >  walking.

I I  Headache,  as  if  skull  would  split,  when  moving  head,  walk-
ing, or  coughing.

I A  bursting  headache,  or  feeling  as  if  brain  were  too  full,  or

head  too  large.
Bursting  headache  in  evening,  >>  from  lying  with  head  high.

■  Bursting  pain  and  throbbing  in  head. ^Pertussis. ^Inter-

mittent fever.
I  Headache  as  if  skull  were  bruised,  on  moving  head  and  on
walking.

■  Throbbing  headache  in  forehead  and  temples.

■  Pressing  headache  in  forehead  and  temples.

■  Constant  pressive  headache  in  forehead,  above  root  of  nose,

with  stitches  through  ear  and  over  eye.

■  Pressing  headache  in  forehead,  as  though  a  pressure  from

occiput  would  force  the  brain  out  through  forehead,  accom-
panied by  cutting  pain  coming  forward  from  occiput.

Pressive  headache  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

I  I  Drawing-tearing  in  1.  side  of  head.

Violent,  deeply-penetrating  stitches  in  vertex.

1  1 A  headache,  more  stitching  than  tearing ;  <  during  rest ;
>>  on  motion.

■  Headache  during  chill. ^Intermittent.
Chronic  headache  with  absence  of  perspiration.

■  Megrim  and  hysterical  cephalalgia.
Brain  symptoms  in  measles.

*  Outer  Head. ■  Head  seems  too  large.


297  CAPSICUM.

■  Drawing,  tearing  pain  in  right  frontal  bone.

I  Skull  feels  bruised,  on  moving  head,  or  walking.

Tinea  capitis.

Chilliness  of  scalp,  followed  by  burning  itching  of  integuments

of  skull,  >  from  scratching.
Biting-itching  on  hairy  scalp,  as  from  lice,  compelling  him  to

scratch ;  after  scratching  roots  of  hair  and  scalp  feel  painful,

as  though  hair  was  being  pulled  out.
Sweat  on  forehead ;  cold  sweat  on  forehead,  with  sensation  of

fainting.

■  Swelling  on  mastoid  process  behind  ear,  painful  to  contact.

■  Periostitis  and  caries  of  mastoid  process.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Flickering  before  eyes,  with  headache.
Objects  appear  black  ;  dim  vision  ;  amblyopia  amaurotica.

■  Burning  in  eyes,  with  redness  and  lachrymation.

■  Pressing  pain  in  eyes,  as  from  a  foreign  body.
Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  relaxation  of  external  and  internal

coats.
Pupils  markedly  dilated  or  contracted.
Fine  sticking  pain  in  eyes.
Eyes  very  prominent,  with  paleness  of  face.
Pressure  in  eyelids,  so  that  he  cannot  open  them  far  enough.
Painful  quivering  under  r.  eyelid.
Eyes  >>  after  rubbing.

■  Eyes  protrude  from  sockets,  with  burning  and  lachrymation.

^Pertussis.
' Hearing  and  Ears. ■Cannot  bear  noise. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Dull  hearing,  after  previous  burning  and  stinging  in  ear.

■  Catarrhal  deafness.

Stitching  pains  in  ears,  with  burning  and  stinging;  hardness

of  hearing.
■A  pressive  pain  in  ear  with  every  cough,  as  if  an  abscess  would

open. ^Pertussis.

■  A  pressive  pain  very  deep  in  ears.

■  Pressive,  later  an  itching  pain,  deep  in  ear.

■  Aching  in  one  or  both  ears  when  coughing.

■  Itching  pain  very  deep  in  ear. ^Otitis.

■  Tympanum  perforated,  and  cavity  filled  with  thick,  yellow

pus. ^Otitis.
I  I  Tearing  in  concha  of  ear.  •

■  Ears  very  hot. ^Pertussis.

■  Tearing  pain  behind  left  ear.

■  Swelling  behind  ear,  painful  to  touch.

■  ■Painful  swelling  behind  ear;  periostitis  and  caries  of  mastoid

process.

■  Deep-seated  swelling  under  ear. ^Otitis.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Diminished  acuteness  of  smell,
i  Nose-bleed  in  morning,  in  bed.


CAPSICUM.  298

I  Bloody  mucous  discharge,  from  nose,  when  coughing. ^Per-
tussis.
I  Collection  of  thick  mucus  in  nose  and  throat. ^Scarlatina.
I  I  Stoppage  of  nose.
Coryza  and  influenza.
I  I  Crawling  tickling  in  nose,  as  in  stopped  coryza.

■  Tingling,  titillation  in  nose. ^Hoarseness. ^Coryza.

■  Sneezing,  with  roughness  in  throat. ^Scarlatina.

■  Tip  of  nose  very  hot  and  red,  <  towards  evening.  ^Pertussis.
Contractive,  jerking  pains  in  1.  side  of  nose  atfd  above  1.  eye.
Painful  acne  below  nostrils.

Itching,  with  stitches  in  nose.

On  coughing  or  sneezing,  cutting  in  one  or  other  limb.
*  Upper  Face. '  Increased  heat  of  face.

■  Cheeks  red,  not  hot,  alternating  with  paleness. ^Scarlatina.

^Intermittent.

■  Pain  in  face,  worse  from'  touch  and  in  evening. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Pain  in  face,  partly  like  bone  pains,  excited  by  external  touch ;

partly  like  fine  pains  piercing  the  nerves,  which  are  tor-
menting on  falling  asleep.

■  Pressure  in  zygoma,  <  from  touch  and  in  evening. ^Faceache.

■  Neuralgia  facialis. ^Fothergill's  disease.
Swollen  face,  with  toothache.

Painful  quivering  below  r.  eyelid.

Red  dots  in  face  and  herpes  on  forehead,  with  biting  and  itching.

Erythematous  eruption  on  internal  surface  of  cheeks,  and  on

1.  side  of  face,  with  biting  sensation  as  from  salt.
^  Lower Face. ■  Lips : swollen  ; cracked  ; smarting  ; burning.

^Diarrhoea. ^Scarlatina.
I  Burning,  painful  vesicles  in  mouth. ^Cancrum  oris.
Acne  about  the  lips.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  feel  elongated  and  dull.

Drawing  pain in teeth; carious toothache  with or  without

swelling  of  cheeks.

■  Teeth  dirty  and  painful. ^Stomatitis.

■  Gums:  hot,  burning,  swollen,  inflamed  and  sensitive;  spongy,

retracted  from  teeth. ^Stomatitis.
^' Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Taste: sour;  flat,  watery,  followed  by
heartburn; I B foul,  like  putrid  water. ^Diarrhoea. ^Inter-
mittent. ^Dysentery.

■  When  coughing,  the  air  from  lungs  causes  a  strange,  offensive

taste  in  mouth.

■  Small  burning  blisters  on  tongue. ^Scarlatina.

■  Tongue  and  inside  of  lips  full  of  flat,  sensitive,  spreading

ulcers,  with  a  lardaceous  centre. ^Stomatitis.
Feeling  of  dryness  of  tongue  without  thirst.
^^  Inner  Mouth, ■  Fetid  odor,  unbearable,  carrion-like. ^Stom-
acace.


299  CAPSICUM.

I  Saliva:  viscid,  offensive,  copious. ^Stomatitis. ^Scarlatina.

■  Salivation  during  chill. ^Intermittent.

I I  Burning  blisters  in  mouth. ^Scarlatina.

I  Small,  flat,  burning  ulcers  in  mouth  and  fauces.

I I  Tough  mucus  in  mouth,  or  dryness.
Cancrum  oris.

"  Throat.  Pain  in  upper  part  of  fauces  between  acts  of  degluti-
tion, as  if  parts  were  sore  and  were  being  spasmodically
drawn  together,  as  in  water-brash.

■  Burning  soreness  with  ulcers  on  fauces. ^Angina  faucium.

■  Painful  pressure  in  hard  and  soft  palate  while  swallowing.

^Scarlatina. ^Angina  aphthosa.

■  ■Tough  congealed  mucus  in  posterior  nares,  on rising  in

morning,  requiring  much  hawking  to  dislodge.

■  Uvula  elongated,  feels  as  if  pressing  on  something  hard.

■  Continuous  stitches  in  throat,  exciting  dry,  convulsive  cough.

^Pertussis.

■  Stinging,  causing  night  cough.

■  Continued  stitching  in  throat,  in  region  of  epiglottis,  causing

a  dry  cough  without  relief.

■  ■Tonsillitis  with  burning,  smarting  pain.

■  Left  tonsil  inflamed;  right,  painful. ^Asthma.

■  ■  Great  soreness  in  throat,  with  smarting. ^Scarlatina.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  of  throat. ^Angina  faucium.

■  Constriction  of  throat,  with  burning;  whitish  deposit. ^Scar-

latina. ^Diphtheria.

■  ■Burning  and  other  pains  in  throat,  worse  between  acts  of

deglutition.

■  Pain  in  throat,  only  when  coughing,  as  from  a  single  painful

swelling.

■  Pressive  pain  in  throat,  as  if  an  abscess  would  break,  during  a

paroxysm  of  coughing. ^Pertussis.
Sensation  of  roughness  in  throat.

■  ■  Throat  inflamed,  dark  red,  burning,  pressing.

■  Whitish  spots  in  throat,  with  a  red  halo.

■  Inflammation  of  throat, dark  purplish-red  color  of  velum

palati,  r.  side,  near  eustachian  tube,  with  most  violent  pains,
causing  anxiety ;  salivation  and  thirst  for  cold  water ;  heat,
with  shuddering  and  cold  finger-tips ;  pulse  unchanged ;
■<  in  morning  and  towards  evening.

■  Relaxed  sore  throat  with  cough;  sub-acute  inflammation  of

throat,  with  dryness  and  smarting;  relaxed  uvula  of  smok-
ers and  drinkers.

■  Pain  on  swallowing,  as  in  inflammation  of  throat,  but  when

not  swallowing,  drawing  pain  in  throat.

■  Difiiculty  in  swallowing,  tongue  furred;  haggard  look.

■  Dysphagia  paralytica.

■  Torpidity  of  fauces,  pharynx  and  oesophagus.


CAPSICUM.  300

lx\phthous  angina.

I  Tonsillitis.

I  Angina  pharyngea  maligna,  gangrenosa.

■  Deposits  covering  a  considerable  portion  of  fauces,  with  smart-

ing. ^Diphtheria.
I  In scarlatinal  anginas  with  redness  of  face  as  in tipplers,
small  red  spots  in  face,  burning  vesicles  in  mouth  and  on
tongue.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions, i  Appetite  increased,
alternating  with  aversion  to  food  and  complete  anorexia.

■  Thirstlessness,  or  intense  thirst  with  abdominal  uneasiness,

but  no  tenderness  on  pressure.

B  Thirst,  during  fever  only,  for  large  quantities.

I  Thirsty,  as  the  chill  comes  on. ^Intermittent.

1  Thirst  after  stool. ^Dysentery.

B  Desire  for  coffee,  but  it  nauseates. ^Diarrhoea.

•  Dipsomania;  morning  vomiting,  sinking  at  stomach.
"  Eating  and  Drinking. BFood  tastes  sour. ^Diarrhoea.

1  Better  while  eating  ;  worse  after.

B  After  eating  :  burning  in  stomach.

B  Vegetables  cause  flatulence.

B  Water  causes  : purging ; B  B  shuddering ;  tenesmus  and  thin
stool;  chills.

Drinking  cold  water  >  cough.

BNausea,  and  attacks  of  suffocation,  after  coffee,  yet  desire
for  it.
*"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, b  Belching,

with  stitch  in  side,  while  walking.
BHeartburn;  waterbrash. ^Catarrh  of  stomach.
BNausea  and  vomiting,  with  headache.
B  Nervous,  spasmodic  vomiting.
B  Vomits  phlegm,  with  chill. ^Intermittent.
B  Vomiting  in  malignant  fevers. ^Yellow  fever.
^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressing  pain  in  scrobiculum.
Stitches  in  scrobiculum  on  breathing  deeply,  from  talking  and

from  touch.
B  Accumulation  of  mucus  and  acids  in  stomach.
BBurning  in  stomach. ^Gastralgia. ^Colic.
B  Sensitiveness  and  aching  in  region  of  stomach  and  duodenum

after  colic. ^Dysentery.
Sensation  as  if  cold  water  were  in  stomach.
Bl  Stomach  icy  cold,  or  burning  in  it.
B  Deranged  stomach,  with  fever.

B  B  Dyspepsia  from  torpidity,  particularly  in  old  people.
8  Gastralgia  and  gastromalacia.
^8  Hypochondria. B" Catching  pain"  in  region  of  liver,  or  in

lower  portion  of  r.  lung,  with  each  cough. ^Pleuro-pneu-

monia.


301  CAPSICUM.

~  I  Spleen  sensitive,  swollen,  especially  after  abuse  of  quinine.

I  Painful  enlargement  of  spleen. ^Intermittent.
"  Abdomen. ■  iBurning  or  cutting  pains  in  abdomen. ^Hemor-
rhoids.
.  I  Cutting  and  twisting  pain  in  bowels,  as  from  wind;  before
stool. ^Dysentery.

I  I  Drawing  and  twisting  in  abdomen,  with  and  without  di-
arrhoea.

I  Peculiar  feeling  in  abdomen,  a  sort  of  drawing;  he  must  bend
double.

I  Colic,  with  cutting-twisting  pain  about  navel,  and  passage  of
tough  mucus,  like  diarrhoea,  at  times  mixed  with  b'ack
blood ;  after  every  stool,  thirst,  and  after  every  drink,
shivering.

I  Flatulence  and  windcolic.

I  Abdomen  distended  to  bursting. ^Dysentery. .

I  Sore  pains  in  abdomen  and  loins.
, I A  tensive  pain,  extending  from  abdomen  to  chest,  as  from
distension  in  abdomen  ;  cannot  bear  clothing.

I  I A  pressive  tension  in  abdomen,  especially  in  epigastric  region,
between  pit  of  stomach  and  navel,  ■<  on  motion,  together
with  a  pressive  tension  in  lower  portion  of  back.

I  Abdomen  distended;  suffocative  arrest  of  breathing.  ^Dys-
entery. ^Cystitis.

Pain  in  inguinal  region.

Hernia  ventosa.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. I  Stools:  frequent,  small,  with  tenesmus
and  burning  in  rectum  and  bladder;  bloody,  mucous,  shaggy;
greenish,  frothy,  <  at  night ;  tenacious  mucus,  mixed  with
black  blood.

I  Mucous  diarrhoea  with  tenesmus.

■  I Dysentery:  tenesmus  and  strangury;  pain  <  from  a  current

of  air,  even  if  warm.

■  After  a  drink,  must  go  to  stool,  but  was  costive;  only  a  little

mucus  passed.

Before  stool :  cutting,  flatulent  colic,  twisting  pains  about  um-
bilicus.

During  stool :  tenesmus  ;  cutting  and  twisting.

After  stool:  I  tenesmus;  burning  at  anus  ;  i  I  thirst,  drinking
causes  shuddering  ;  drawing  pains  in  back.

I I  Smarting  and  burning  pain  in  anus  and  rectum.  ^Diar-
rhoea. ^Dysentery.

I  Biting-stinging  pain  in  anus,  with  diarrhoea-like  stool.

I I  Violent  tenesmus. ^Dysentery.

I  (Tenesmus  of  rectum  and  bladder  at  same  time.

I  Hemorrhoids :  burning  as  if  pepper  were  sprinkled  on  them,
swollen,  itching,  throbbing ;  with  sore  feeling  in  anus ;  bleed-
ing or  blind ;  with  mucous  discharge ;  with  bloody,  mucous


CAPSICUM.  302

stools ;  with  drawing  pain  in  small  of  back  and  cutting  pain
in  abdomen.

■  Suppressed  hemorrhoidal  flow,  causing  melancholy.

^^  Urinary Organs. I Renal pains, with or without calculi.

^Nephritis.
1 1  Burning  in  bladder. ^Dysentery. ^Gonorrhoea.
I  Colic,  with  spasm  of  bladder.
B Burning  in  orifice  of  urethra,  immediately  before,  during,

and  for  a  minute  after  urinating.
I  Stitches,  as  with  needles,  in  forepart  of  urethra,  when  not

urinating.

■  Pressure  towards  bladder,  and  some  stitches  extending  from

within  outwards  in  region  of  neck  of  bladder,  while  cough-
ing, and  some  time  afterwards.

BB Tenesmus  vesicae;  strangury. ^Dysentery.

B  Frequent,  unsuccessful  desire  to  urinate. ^Diarrhoea.

B  Frequent  micturition,  scalding,  smarting,  sticking  pain  in
urethra,  tenesmus  and  even  chordee;  (as  inflammation  s.ub-
sides  discharge  less  and  thinner). ^Gonorrhoea.

BBBurning,  smarting  after  urination.

B Burning-biting  pain  in  urethra,  after  urinating.

BR,etention  of  urine,  spasm  of  bladder. ^Cystitis,  in  horses.

Urine  red,  or  bloody.

B Inflammation  of  neck  of  bladder. ^Cystitis.

B  Purulent  discharge  from  urethra,  sometimes  bleeding. ^Gon-
orrhoea.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. B Painful  erections  at  night; cream-
like discharge  from  urethra ;  burning,  when  urinating ;  at
other  times  cutting,  stinging  in  urethra.

B Discharge  from  urethra:  purulent;  bloody,  urethra  painful
to  touch ;  cream-like.

BB Gonorrhoea:  second  stage;  white  discharge,  like  cream  ;  ex-
cessive sensibility  of  parts  to  contact ;  chordee,  which  can
only  be  appeased  or  subdued  in  cold  water.

a  Protracted  gleet.

8 Coldness  of  scrotum,  and  impotence;  dwindling  of  testicles
and  extinction  of  sexual  instinct ;  shrivelling  of  spermatic
cords ;  emaciation ;  falling  ofi"  of  beard  and  weakness  of
sight.

B  Prepuce  swollen.

BCrampy,  testicular  pains  after  emissions.

BPain  in  prostate  gland. ^Gonorrhoea.

■  Coldness  of  scrotum,  in  morning  on  waking.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Discharge  of  fetid  mucus  from
vagina.
BDuring  menstruation:  nausea;  pressure  in  epigastrium.
Disordered  menstruation,  with  a  pushing  or  stitching  sensation
in  1.  ovarian  region.


303  CAPSICUM.

2' Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation, b During  pregnancy:
affections  of  ears  ;  heartburn,  vomiting  ;  mucous  diarrhoea  ;
hemorrhoids  ;  burning  in  anus.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, n  Hoarse-
ness from  straining  voice,  in  singers,  preachers,  etc.
I  Hoarseness, nose  stopped  up, throat feels  rough. ^Scar-
latina.
I  Excessive  tingling and tickling  in larynx, <  after  lying
down,  in  evening. ^Pertussis.

■  Crawling  and  tickling  in  larynx 9,nd trachea,  with  a  dry

hacking  cough,  in  evening,  after  lying  down.

Tickling  sensitiveness  in  trachea,  causing  him  to  sneeze  vio-
lently a  few  times.

I  Chronic  sore  throat. ^Bronchitis  maligna.
^*  Respiration. I  Exhalation  from  lungs,  on  coughing,  causes  a
strong  offensive  taste  in  mouth.

I  Seems  as  if  she  could  not  get  air  deep  enough  into  lungs.

I  Deep  breathing,  almost  like  a  sigh. ^Pertussis.

■  Respiration  slow.

B Asthma:  with  red  face,  eructations,  chest  feels  distended;
wheezing  inspiration ;  breathing  <  when  moving  about,
ascending  or  walking.

B  Sibilant  rales  mostly  1.  side  posteriorly,  during  inspiration  ;
spongy  sound  during  expiration  ;  constant  dyspnoea;  oppres-
sion at  bifurcation  of  bronchia,  >  from  successful  cough.
^Asthma.

I  I  Dyspnoea,  which  seems  to  rise  from  stomach,  or  from  fulness
of  chest.
"  Cough. B  Painful  cough.

i  Frequent  dry,  hacking  cough.

BDry,  hard  evening  cough,  with  pain  in  distant  parts.

B  Evening  and  night  cough,  with  hectic.

B I  Nervous,  spasmodic  cough.

B  Cough  in  sudden  paroxysms,  convulses  whole  body.

B  Cough,  with  headache,  as  if  head  would  fly  to  pieces.

B  Cries  after  coughing. ^Whooping  cough.

BWith  every  explosive  cough  (and  at  no  other  time),  there
escapes  a  volume  of  pungent,  fetid  air. ^Pleuro-pneumonia.

B  Coughing  or  sneezing  causes  a  sudden  pain  in  one  or  other
of  limbs.

B  Cough,  with  drawing  from  chest  into  neck.

B  Cough,  with  feeling  of  pulling  upwards  from  stomach,  up
chest  to  throat-pit.

B  Stitches  in  suffering  parts,  with  cough.

During  cough :  splitting  pain  in  head  ;  drawing  or  stinging
in  sides  of  chest ;  stitches  in  back  and  bladder  ;  pressing
ulcerative  pain  in  neck  or  ear  ;  bursting  pain  in  head,  chest
and  bladder ;  escape  of  urine ;  pressure  about  thighs  ;  in-


CAPSICUM.  304

clination  to  vomit,  or  vomiting  ;  offensive  breath  ;  pain  in
knees  or  legs,  ears  and  throat.

I  Cough  worse:  after  anger;  after  warm  drinks;  evening,
night ;  when  lying ;  after  sharp  winds ;  dry,  cold  weather ;
any  draught,  warm  or  cold.

Expectoration  infrequent ;  particularly  in  morning.

I  Sputa  dirty  brown,  not  rusty. ^Pleuro-pneumonia.
2^  Inner Chest and Lungs. Stitches in side, particularly
the  left.

I  Pain  in  chest  and  back  ;  during  heat. ^Intermittent.

B Drawing  in  one  or  both  sides  of  chest,  up  to  neck.  ^Per-
tussis.

■  Throbbing  pain  in  chest.

I  Pain  in  chest,  when  sitting,  as  if  chest  were  too  full  and  there
were  not  room  enough  in  it.

8  Pain  as  if  chest  were  constricted,  which  arrests  breathing  and
is  <C  even  on  slight  motion.

Haemoptysis,  with  dyspnoea.

Pneumonia,  complicated  with  bronchitis.

B Pleuritic  pains. ^Quotidian  intermittent.
^®  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, Pectoral  anxiety.

Fatty  degeneration  of  heart  and  atheroma  in  obese  persons.

1  Pulse:  irregular,  often  intermitting  ;  slow,  intermitting.

B  Pulse  full,  strong,  most  frequent  in  evening. ^Dysentery.

Unusually  violent  pulsation  of  arteries  of  abdomen.

Clucking  rapid  pulsations  in  some  of  larger  arteries.
^°  Outer  Chest. B  Pains  in  sternum,  with  sweat,  while  walking.
*^  Neck  and  Back. B  Jerking- tearing  pain  in  r.  cervical  glands.

B  Glands  of  neck  painful,  swollen. ^Stomatitis.

B Excruciating,  tearing  pains  in  back,  extorting  cries,  causes

•  him  to  double  up,  during  chill. ^Intermittent.

B  Drawing-tearing  pain  in  back  and  spine.

B  Shooting  in  back  and  chest. ^Cough.

B  Pain  in  sacrum  and  small  of  back.  ^Hemorrhoids.  ^Dys-
entery.

BPain  in  back  continuing  after  stool. ^Diarrhoea.

B  Chilliness  between  scapulae. ^Asthma.

BB  Coldness  beginning  in  back. ^Intermittent.

B  Sensation  as  if  cold  water  was  dropping  down  back. ^Inter-
mittent.
^^  Upper  Limbs. B  Drawing-tearing  pain  in  arms.
83  Lower  Limbs. '  Shooting-tearing  from  hip  to  knee  and  foot,
especially  when  coughing.

1  I  Sticking-tearing  pain  from  hip-joints  to  feet,  especially  on
coughing.

B  Drawing  pain  in  hip-joint  (pain  like  a  stiff  neck),  <  from  touch
and  by  bending  trunk  backwards.

B  Caries  of  r.  hip  ;  1.  leg  atrophied  and  painful.


305  -  CAPSICUM.

I  Tensive  pain  in  knee.

An  internal  pain  in  1.  leg  made  up  of  drawing  and  stitching.

Single  stitches  in  r.  great  toe,  produced  by  stamping  foot.

I  Cold  sweat  on  upper  part  of  legs.

1  Cold  feet.

■  Violent  pains  in  1.  atrophic  leg. ^Spinal  curvature,  with

coxarthrocace.
Paralysis  of  lower  extremities.
^*  Limbs  in  General. I  Rheumatic  pain  in  limbs. ^Cough.

■  Tearing  in  limbs  ;  they  are  drawn  up  during  chill. ^Inter-

mittent.
Weakness  and  heaviness  of  limbs,  followed  by  trembling  of

upper  limbs  and  knees  ;  hands  refused  to  write.
Stiffness  and  painfulness  of  all  joints  on  beginning  to  walk.
Pains  in  joints  from  taking  cold.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  <  darting  pains  in  head;

<  headache.
Lying:  cough  worse.
Lie  down  :  great  desire.
He  shuns  all  motion.
Inclination  to  bend  forward.
Moving: head,  headache  as  if  skull  would  split,  and  as  if

bruised;  asthma;  chilly;  joints  stiff,  crack  on.
Talking :  stitches  in  scrobiculum.
Walking : > darting  pains  in  head ; head  as  if  bruised  ;

asthma  ;  pains  in  sternum.
Ascending :  asthma.
*®  N^erves. All  senses  are  more  acute.

I  Great  restlessness. ^Measles.
Want  of  bodily  irritability.

I I  Lack  of  reactive  force,  especially  with  fat  people.

I  Great  desire  to  lie  down  and  sleep ;  does  not  want  to  exert
himself  in  the  least. ^Angina  faucium. ^Diphtheria.

I  Weak,  exhausted  ;  vital  forces  sunken.  ^Paralysis.  ^Gan-
grene. ^Meteorism. ^Typhus.

■  Staggering  when  walking.
Sciatica.

Paralysis  of  tongue,  fauces,  pharynx,  oesophagus,  stomach  and
intestinal  canal.
*^  Sleep. Great  drowsiness  after  eating.

■  Yawning. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Constant  desire  to  lie  down  and  sleep. ^Sore  throat.

■  Sleepless  from  emotions,  from  homesickness,  or  from  cough.

■  Screaming  in  sleep. ^Pertussis.

■  Sleep  full  of  dreams,  restless. ^Pertussis.
Lethargy.

Sopor,  with  hospital  gangrene.
VOL.  III.— 20.


CAPSICUM.  306

^^  Time. Remission  during  day  and  before  midnight.
Night :  painful  erections.

Morning:  in  bed,  nosebleed;  coldness  of  scrotum.
10.30  A.M.  :  chill.
11  A.M. :  fever.
Evening:  tip  of  nose  very  hot  and  red;  pain  in  face;  pressure

in  zygoma  ; cough  worse ; pulse  full  and  strong ; chill ;

bursting  headache.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Shuns  open  air; sedentary;

uncleanly  ;  chill  in  open  air.
Dreads  uncovering,  even  in  hot  stage.
Generally  better  in  warmth.

Great  sensitiveness  to  cool  air,  particularly  a  draught.
Elevated  temperature  of  intestinal  canal.
Cool  air,  especially  a  draught  of  air,  becomes  very  unpleasant;

warmth  of  body  becomes  less  and  less  and  intolerance  of  a

cool  temperature  greater  and  greater.
In  proportion  as  coldness  of  body  increases,  low  spiritedness

and  contraction  of  pupils  increase.
Heat  of  hands,  but  not  of  remaining  portion  of  body.
^^  Fever. I  Fever  heat,  with  violent  burning  and  headache.

■  Absence  of  thirst  during  heat. ^Intermittent.
I  Heat,  followed  by  chill,  with  thirst.

Great  sleepiness  after  fever  ;  could  scarcely  prevent  herself
from  going  to  sleep  ;  especially  after  eating.

I  Heat  lessened  by  motion.

iFever  at  11  a.m.  (following  chill  at  10.30  a.m.),  lasting  all
day,  without  subsequent  sweat.

I  Fever  (after  very  short  chill  at  11  or  12  a.m.)  lasts  all  night,-
with  great  thirst.

I  Skin  cool,  pulse  slow,  want  of  appetite. ^Dysentery.

■  Coldness  over  whole  body  ; limbs  are  cold  without  shivering.

I I  Shivering  and  chilliness  after  every  drink.
I  Chilly  externally  ;  inwardly,  burning.

I  Chill  begins  in  back,  with  thirst,  <  after  drinking,  lessened
when  walking  out  of  doors.

I  Chilly  on  moving.

I  Chill  at  10.30  a.m.,  commencing  between  shoulders  and  run-
ning down  back.

Evening  chill.

Chilliness  when  airing  the  bed.

I  Chill  in  open  air,  particularly  in  a  draught.

■  Thirst  just  before  and  during  chill.

I  During  chill,  cold  across  chest,  with  a  sensation  as  of  water
dropping  down  back.

During  chill:  anxiety,  giddiness  and  dulness  of  head;  intoler-
ance of  noise;  cannot  collect  her  thoughts  and  is  awkward  so


307  CAPSICUM.

that  she  runs  into  everything  ; tearing  pains  in  back  and
limbs,  extorting  cries  and  causing  the  patient  to  bend  up  ;
>>  by  putting  hot  things  to  back.
Chill,  followed  by  sweat ;  or  by  heat,  with  sweat  and  thirst.

■  Sweat:  violent,  copious  ;  lessened  by  motion,

■  Sweat  coming  on  soon  after  fever  commences,  and  continuing

with  it.

■  Profuse  sweat  after  fever,  all  night.

■  Intermittent,  with  torpidity  of  abdominal  nervous  centres  and

painful  enlargement  of  spleen.
Intermittent  fever,  with  predominance  of  chill,  accompanied
by  thirst,  without  much  heat.

■  ■  Hectic  fever  after  emotions,  and  in  nostalgia.

Putrid  typhus,  with  extreme  prostration  and  black  vomit.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodicity  marked.

■  Chill  spreads  gradually  until  extreme  points  are  reached,  then

as  gradually  declines. ^Intei-mittent.

*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Shifting  pains,  which  were  very
violent,  now  here,  now  there.
Right :  frontal  bone,  drawing,  tearing;  painful  quivering  under
eye;  inflammation  of  throat;  catching  pain  in  lung;  cervi-
cal glands,  jerking  tearing;  hip,  caries;  great  toe,  stitches.
Left:  side  of  head,  drawing  tearing;  side  of  face,  erythem-
atous eruption ;  ovary  pushing  or  stitching ;  sibilant  rales  ;
leg  atrophied  and  painful.

^^ Sensations. ■■As  if  Cayenne  pepper  were  sprinkled  on  parts.

■  Violent  pains  on  various  places;  now  here,  now  there. ^Neu-

ralgia of  children.

■  Sensation  as  if  parts  would  go  to  sleep.'

Extreme  lassitude ;  all  limbs  feel  bruised  ;  all  limbs  affected.

As  if  skull  were  bruised,  on  moving ;  as  if  throat  were  sore
and  were  being  spasmodically  drawn  together ;  as  if  chest
were  contracted;  as  if  cold  water  were  dropping  down  back.

Burning  :  gums  ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  cutting  pains  in  ab-
domen ;  in  rectum  and  bladder ;  in  anus  ;  in  urethra  ;  after
urinating  ;  in  head  ;  in  skin  ;  in  breast  and  face  ;  blisters
in  mouth.

Tearing  :  pain  in  r.  frontal  bone  ;  in  r.  cervical  glands  ;  pain
in  back  ;  in  arms  ;  in  limbs.

Cutting :  pain  in  bowels  ;  before  stool ;  in  urethra.

Shooting :  in  back  and  chest ;  from  hip  to  knee  and  foot.

Stitches  : as  with  needles  in  urethra  ; 1.  ovarian  region  ;  with ^.
cough  ;  in  back  of  bladder ;  in  side  of  chest ;  breast,  and
face.

Sticking:  tearing  pain  from  hip-joints  to  foot.

Stinging  :  in  arms  ;  in  urethra  ;  pain  in  head.

Jerking :  pain  in  r.  cervical  glands.


CAPSICUM.  SOS

Drawing:  pain  in  r.  frontal  bone;  pain  in  teeth;  in  abdomen;
in  back  ;  in  head  ;  in  one  or  both  sides  of  chest ;  in  back
and  spine  ;  in  arms  ;  in  hip-joint.

Smarting  :  in  fauces ;  in  anus  ;  after  urinating.

Biting:  in  arms.

Soreness  :  in  throat.

Sore :  pains  in  abdomen.

Splitting :  pain  in  head.

Bursting :  pain  in  head.

Tenesmus  :  of  rectum  and  bladder.

Pressive :  pain  in  throat ;  in  scrobiculum  ;  tension  in  abdo-
men ;  pain  in  neck  or  ear.

Pressure :  towards  bladder  ;  in  epigastrium  ;  about  thighs.

Pushing:  in  1.  ovarian  region.

Pulling:  upwards  from  stomach.

Twisting :  pain  in  bowels  ;  in  abdomen.

Tensive :  pain  extending  from  abdomen  to  chest.

Rheumatic  :  pains  in  limbs.

Pain :  in  prostate  gland  ;  in  chest ;  in  sacrum  ;  in  back  ;
drawing  stitching  in  1.  leg.

Painful :  enlargement  of  spleen.

Throbbing :  headache  in  forehead  ;  pain  in  chest.

Trembling :  upper  limbs  and  knees.

Crampy  :  testicular  pains  after  emissions.

Constriction :  of  throat.

Distended :  chest  feels.

Elongated :  teeth  feel.

Heaviness :  of  limbs.

Weakness  :  of  limbs.

Roughness :  in  throat.

Hot :  gums  ;  followed  by  chill  and  thirst.

Heat :  increase  of,  in  face  ;  chill  follows.

Coldness :  of  scrotum,  in  morning,  on  waking  ;  beginning  in
back  ;  over  whole  body.

Chilliness  :  between  scapulae  ;  shivering  after  every  drink.

Chilly  :  externally  ;  on  moving.

Tingling  :  in  larynx.

Tickling:  in  larynx.

Crawling :  in  larynx.

Itching  :  breast  and  face.

Dryness :  on  tongue.
**  Tissues. Irritation  and  inflammation  of  mucous  linings.

1 1  Relaxed  fibre ;  obesity.

■  Joints:  crack  ;  stiff,  painful  on  beginning  to  move  ;  pain,  as
if  paralyzed.

Chronic  muscular  rheumatism  in  patients  of  sedentary  habits.  ■

Gout,  stiffness,  painfuln'ess  and  cracking  of  joints.


809  CAPSICUM.

Glandular  swellings  ;  scrofula.

I  I  Marasmus.
Dropsy,  with  torpidity.

Seasickness ;  cholera ;  cachexia  Africana ;  yellow  fever ;  typhus
ictorodes.

I I  Intermittent  fever.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries, i  Worse  from  touch  ;
skin  sensitive,  with  many  internal  ailments.

■  Seasickness.

Touch  :  pains  in  face  worse  ;  excited  by  ;  urethra  painful  to.
*®  Skin. ■  iBurning  in  skin.

Stitching,  burning,  itching  over  whole  body, < on  breast

and  face.
I  Skin  bloated,  flabby.
Formication.

■  Itching  worse  from  scratching.
Acne  rosacea.

■  Scarlet  eruption  on  neck  and  breast,  face  of  extreme  rednes=?,

sometimes  alternating  with  a  mottled  appearance;  lips  swol-
len ar;d  cracked,  burning  blisters  in  mouth  and  on  tongue  ;
•  saliva  very  slimy  and  little  increased  in  quantity ;  tickling
and  roughness  in  throat,  with  sneezing  and  a  hacking  cough.
^Scarlatina.

■  Herpetic-like  eruption  on  forehead,  on  face  itching-burning.
Herpes.

Scrofulous  ulcers  ;  carbuncle.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■  Light  hair,  blue  eyes.

■  Frequently  indicated  in  persons  of  lax  fibre  and  muscles,  less

frequently  in  those  of  tense  fibre.

■  Nervous,  but  full  habit.

■  Phlegmatic,  awkward,  easily  offended ;  indolent,  melancholic;

lack  of  reaction. ^Gastric  troubles.

■  Lazy,  fat,  unclean  persons  who  dread  open  air.

■  Children  who  are  always  chilly,  refractory,  clumsy.
I  Gouty  individuals.

■  Hemorrhoidal  constitutions.
Blonde  girl,  set.  17. ^Asthma.

Woman,  set.  67,  nervous  temperament  and  full  habit. ^Pleuro-
pneumonia.
^*  Relations. Antidoted  by  : Calad.,  Camphor.,  Cina,  Ctnchon.,
Sulph.  ac,  or  vapor of  burning  sulphur  (sensation  as  if
parts  had  "gone  to  sleep").

It  antidotes :  effects  of  alcohol,  cofi"ee,  opium,  quinine  (fevers
after  abuse  of),  manihot  (cold  feeling  in  limbs,  muscles  lame,
swelling  of  belly).

Compatible:  Bellad.,  Lycop.,  Pulsat.,  Silica.

Compare: Arnic,  UBellad.  (headache,  etc.),  iBryon.  (head-


CAPSICUM— CARBO  ANIMALIS.  310

ache,  cough,  etc.),  Calad.,  Chelidon.^  Cina,  CincJion.,  Crot.
tig.  (after  drinking  urging  to  stool),  Helleh.  (colic  with  spasm
of  bladder),  Ignat..,  Lycop..,  Natr.  carh.  (tenesmus  of  rectum
and  bladder),  Nuxvom.,  iPulsat.,  Silica,  Stramon.,  Veratr.,
and  Viola  od.


CARBO  ANIMALIS,

Animal  ehareoal.


Burnt  animal  substances,  porcupine,  swallows,  moles,  human  bones,  etc.,
have  been  used  in  medicine  before  and  since  the  time  of  Dioscorides,  for
glandular  affections,  scirrhus,  epilepsy,  etc.

1708. Quesnot,  Plusieurs  secrets  rares  et  curieux,  p.  124. Paris.

1827.  Introduced  by  Hahnemann  in  his  Chronic  Diseases,  the  symptoms
numbering  190;  in  1831,  191,  and  in  1837,  they  had  increased  to  728.  The
symptoms  referred  to  Hartlaub  and  Trinks  are  from  Nenning.

The  preparation  used  by  Hahnemann  in  his  provings,  and  which  ought,
therefore,  to  be  preferred  to  all  others,  was  made  by  placing  a  thick  piece
of  ox-hide  between  red-hot  coals,  where  it  was  allowed  to  remain  as  long
as  it  burned  with  a  flame.  As  soon  as  the  flame  ceased,  the  red-hot  mass
was  extinguished  by  being  pressed  between  two  flat  stones.

Contains  several  substances  besides  carbon,  the  principal  one  being
phosphate  of  lime.

1840.  Fueter,  Schweizer  Zeitsehrift,  makes  mention  of  burnt  mole,  useful
in  goitre,  glandular  indurations  and  scirrhus.

1845. Diirr  used  human  bone  coal  successfully  in  mesenteric  atrophy.

Clinical  cases  are  reported  by  Payr,  H.  Kl.,  1870,  p.  158;  A.  E.  Small,
N.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  April,  1871;  J.  Eomig,  Allentown  Correspondenz  Blatt;  E.
W.  Berridge,  H.  M.,  1884,  p.  Ill,  and  others.

^Mind. Unclouded  consciousness  and  great  anguish  with  sinking

of  vital  forces.
Sensation of  stupefaction in head with dulness  in occiput,

<  from  motion  in  cold,  damp  air,  >>  when  at  rest  in  warm

room.
I  Confused,  did  not  know  whether  he  had  been  asleep  or  awake ;

morning.
Loss  of  memory,  forgets  word  just  spoken.
I  Desire  to  be  alone;  she  is  sad,  reflective;  avoids  conversation.
Hastiness.
Variable  mood  ;  alternate  cheerfulness  and  melancholy.


311  CARBO  ANIMALIS.

I  Low-spirited.

I  Easily  frightened.

Fearful  in  the  dark.

I  Anxiety  and  orgasm  of  blood  at  night,  so  severe  that  she  was
obliged  to  sit  up.

I  Anxiety  ;  apprehensive,  after  an  emission.

I  I  Homesick.

Head  heavy  and  dull  early  in  morning,  with  irritable  mood.
^  Sensorium. I  Vertigo  and  confusion  on  sitting  up  ;  >  when  re-
clining.

iVertigo:  with  vibrating  of  all  objects,  staggering; with  fall-
ing backwards ; with  epistaxis ; early  in  morning ; after
shaving  ;  with  nausea,  on  rising  up  after  stooping.
^  Inner  Head. I  Brain  feels  as  if  loose,  during  motion  ; <  after
eating  and  in  cold; >  when  lying  in  bed  and  in  warmth.

Darting  pains  through'  head,  like  lightning.

I  She  has  sensation  as  of  a  tornado  in  head.

I  Roaring  in  head.

■  Sensation  in  forehead  as  if  something  lay  above  eyes,  on  ac-

count of  which  she  could  not  look  up.

■  Heaviness  in  forehead  on  stooping,  with  sensation  as  if  brain

would  fall  forward  ;  vertigo  on  rising,  so  that  she  soon  fell
down.

■  Pain  in  top  of  head,  as  if  skull  had  been  split  or.  torn  as-

under ;  <  during  wet  weather  and  at  night ;  must  press
head  with  both  hands.

■  ■Tearing  in  r.  side  of  head.

■  Pain  in  1.  side  of  head.

■  Stupefying  headache  in  occiput,  early  in  morning  and  in

forenoon.
I  I  Heaviness  of  head,  especially  in  occiput,  and  of  1.  temple,

with  confusion.
Stupefaction  in  head,  with  vertigo; had  to  close  her  eyes,

when  rising  after  stool.
TrHeadache,  with  red  eyes  and  stopped  nose.

■  Pressure  in  whole  brain  ;  on  head  after  eating.

I  Throbbing  headache  after  menses  ; <  in  open  air.

■  In morning,  head  is confused,  so that he does not  know

whether  he  has  been  sleeping  or  waking ;  sense  as  of  splash-
ing in  1.  hemisphere  of  brain,  when  walking  fast ;  pain  in
vertex,  as  if  brain  had  been  torn  in  pieces,  or  were  open.

■  In  morning,  his  head  was  very  much  confused;  did  not  know

whether  he  had  been  asleep  or  awake.
I  1  Heaviness  in  head,  in  morning,  with  dim  vision  and  watery
eyes.

■  Heaviness: in  head,  at  night;  weary  feet ; in  forehead,  on

stooping;  especially  in  cerebellum;  <  forenoon,  in  cold  air;
>  after  dinner.


CARBO  ANIMALIS.  312

iRush  of  blood  to  head  ;  confusion  in  head.

iNervous  and  congestive  headache  and  pressure  in  occiput  soon

after  eating  ;  sensitiveness  of  scalp  ;  pains  with  rumbling  of

wind  in  abdomen.
*  Outer  Head, >  Tenseness  of  scalp  on  forehead  and  vertex,  with

great  sensitiveness  of  these  parts  to  dry,  cold  air  ; <;  from

pressure  and  touch  ; ^  in  warmth.
Cold  creeps  on  head,  before  stool.

■  Eruptions  on  head.

Indurations  on  scalp  in  scrofulous  childreii.
Scirrhous  cancer  on  forehead.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Far-sightedness  with  dilated  pupils.
iDim  sight,  eyes  feel  weak.
^rBegins  to  squint.
I A  net  seems  to  swim  before  eyes.
TrLeft  eye  becomes  red  and  burning  ;  can  scarcely  open  lids  ;

pus  wells  out ;  violent  stitches  preventing  sleep  at  night ;  in

morning,  eye  is  closed.
B  Sensation  as  if  eyes  were  lying  loose  in  sockets.

■  Senile  cataract.

■  Broken  up  cataract  was  absorbed.

■  Scirrhus  of  lachrymal  glands.

®  Hearing  and  Ears.  ■■Hearing  weak  and  confused  ;  tones  be-
come commingled  ;  he  cannot  tell  from  which  side  they
come,  and  it  seems  as  though  they  came  from  another
world.

■  Ringing  in  ears  when  blowing  nose.
Stitches  in  and  back  of  ears.

■  Ichorous  otorrhoea.

■  Parotid  gland  swollen  and  indurated  ;  lancinating  pains.

■  Periosteum  behind  ear  swollen.

^  Smell  and  Nose.  ■Nosebleed:  every  morning,  preceded  by
dull  feeling  in  head  ;  preceded  by  vertigo. /?Epistaxis.

■  Corj/za: scraping  in throat, <  evening,  night, and  when

swallowing  ;  with  lachrymation  ; fluent,  with  loss  of  smell,
yawning  and  sneezing.
TrFluent  coryza,  so  that  she  can  scarcely  speak,  with  painful
sneezing  ;  must  blow  nose  frequently  ;  nostrils  red.

■  Dry coryza ; cannot  breathe through  nose  in morning  on

waking,  and  for  some  time  after.

■  Stoppage  of  nose.

■  Tough  mucus  hanging  down  into  pharynx  in  strings.
Swelling  of  nose,  with pimples  inside  and outside,  forming

scurfs  which  last  a  good  while.

■  Tip  of  nose  : red,  painful  to  touch  ; skin  feels  tight,  is  chap-

ped ;  little  boils  inside  of  nose ;  cracked,  feeling  tense,  burn-
ing, <  during  menses ;  vesicles  at  r.  nostril  with  malignant
ulceration.


313  CARBO  ANIMALIS.

I  Hard,  bluish  tumor  on  end  of  nose.

Dry  skin  about  nostrils,  desquamating.

;rPain  in  nasal  bones  and  stoppage  of  nose,  on  sneezing  nose

and  alge  nasi  remain  stuck  to  septum.
I  Pain  in  nasal  bones.

■  Scrofulous  ozgena.

B  Carcinoma  of  nose.
'  Upper  Face. iFace  has  cachectic  appearance; earthy. ^In-
duration of  uterus  and  pancreas.
I  Heat' in  face  and  head,  in  afternoon.

■  Stitches  in  malar  bones,  lower  jaw  and  teeth.

■  Shooting  and  stitches  in  malar  bone,  especially  left,  running

towards  ear.

■  Erysipelas  of  face.

■  Eruption  of  red  spots  on  cheeks.

■  Brown  or  pink  spots  in  face.

■  Saddle  across  nose.

■  ■  Copper-colored  eruption.

■  Acne;  young,  scrofulous  persons.  '

■  A  large  number  of  pimples  on  face,  without  sensation.
. ■Faceache.

■  Carcinoma  of  face.

Hair  of  beard  falls  out,  with  itching  of  chin.
^  Lower  Face. 'Lips  swollen,  burning.

■  Vesicles,  or  cracks  on  lips.

■  Swelling  of  submaxillary  gland.

■  Scirrhus  of  lips.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Teeth  loose,  sensitive  on  chewing,  and  to
the  least  cold.

■  Grumbling  and  jerking  in  eye-tooth  ;  cannot  bear  anything

cold  to  touch  it ; >■  when  sweating.

■  Drawing  pains  in  teeth,  >  after eating  salt  things; easy

bleeding  of  gums,  with  looseness  of  teeth,  sensitive  to  cold.
Toothache  in  carious  teeth,  on  waking  from  sleep.

■  Toothache  on  going  to  bed,  during  day  and  during  sleep,  with

night-workers.

■  Vesicles  in  mouth,  forming  ulcers.

■  Gums:  red,  swollen,  painful ;  bleeding. ^Scurvy.

■  Pustules  on  gums,  and  gum-boils.

"Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Taste:  bitter,  especially  morning;  sour.

■  Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  with  loss  of  appetite. ^Induration  of

uterus.

■  Bitter  taste,  in  liver  affections.

Taste  of  manure  in  mouth,  in  morning  ;  soft  stool  with  mucus
looking  like  coagulated  albumen  ;  a  viscid  inodorous  humor
oozes  from  rectum  and  perineum.

■  Burning  on  tip  of  tongue,  and  rawness  in  mouth.

■  Burning  blisters  on  tips  and  edges  of  tongue.


CARBO  ANIMALIS.  314

I  I  Mouth  and  tongue  feel  immovable,  so  as  to  produce  slow  and

drawling  speech.
Smooth  tongue.

I  Tongue  red  with  yellow  coating  down  centre,  or  slimy  tongue.

^InduratioQ  of  uterus.
iDryness  of  palate  and  tongue.

I I  Knotty  indurations  in  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth.  ■  Blisters  in  mouth,  which  cause  burning.
^Aphthae.

■  Burning  on  tip  of  tongue,  and  rawness  of  mouth.
I  Mouth  and  tongue  dry.

■  Biting  cheeks. ^Epilepsy.

■  Profuse  tasteless,  thin  saliva  of  sweetish,  putrid  odor. ^In-

durated pancreas.

■  Saltish  water  rises  from stomach and  runs  out of  mouth.

^Cancer  of  stomach.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  apparently  rising  from  abdomen  into

throat  and  mouth. ^Indurated  pancreas.
13  Throat. ^rSore,  burning  spots  on  palate.

■  Swelling  of  palate.

■  Burning  sensation  in  throat.

■  Raw  sensation  in  throat  and  oesophagus,  to  pit  of  stomach  ;

not  increased  by  swallowing.

■  Raw  feeling,  like  heartburn,  >>  after  eating.
I  I  Pressure  in  throat,  only  when  swallowing.

■  Mucus  in  throat,  hawking.

■  Scirrhus  of  pharynx.

"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. ■Ravenous  hunger.

■  No  appetite,  aversion  to  food,  particularly  fatty  food.

■  Loss  of  appetite,  with  bitter  taste. 6'Induration  of  uterus.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking.  ■Eating  causes:  fatigue;  distress  and
burning  in  stomach ;  inflation ;  long  lasting  nausea,  after
meat ;  vomiting  (indurated  pancreas).

■  Eating  relieves  rawness  in  throat.

Bad  effects  from  spoiled  fish  and  decayed  vegetables.

■  So  weak  that  she  cannot  eat.

/"Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■Hiccough

after  meals.

■  Eructations:  sudden;  painful,  empty;  sour;  tasting  of  food

eaten  long  before.

■  Long  continued  nausea,  after  eating  meat,  with  qualmishness

and  many  empty  eructations.

■  Nausea  at  night.

I  I  Nausea  and  aversion  to  tobacco-smoking.
Vomiting  after  eating.

■  Saltish  water  runs  from  mouth,  retching,  vomiting,  hiccough,

cold  feet. ^Cancer  of  stomach.


.315  CARBO  ANIMALIS.

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Weak  empty  feeling  at  pit  of
stomach,  not  >•  by  eating.
I  Sore  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Oppression  in  epigastrium. ^Indurated  pancreas

Sharp  stitches  to  right  of  scrobiculum  during  inhalation  when
standing,  >>  when  walking.

■  Spasmodic  cramps.

■  Pressing,  clawing,  griping,  burning  in  stomach. ^Cancer  of

stomach.
Pressure  in  stomach,  with  nausea.

■  Like  a  load  or  weight  in  stomach  on  waking,  mornings.

I  Faint,  gone  feeling;  also  from  suckling  child; eating  does

not  relieve.
I  Fulness,  cold  feeling  in  stomach  after  slight  meal,  >  laying

hand  on  stomach.
iSqualmishness  with  faint  feeling.
I  Heartburn.
I  Saltish  water  rises  from  stomach;  retching  and  vomiting;  cold

feet ;  hiccough ;  pressure,  clawing,  griping  and  burning  in

stomach. ^Cancer.
Digestive  disturbances  with  eructation  and  diarrhoea.
^^Hypochondria. I Aching,  almost  cutting  in  region  of  liver,

even  while  lying  down.

■  Pressing  and  cutting  in  hepatic  region.

I  Pains  in  liver,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence.
I  I  Burning  and  stitches  in  spleen.

■  Induration  of  pancreas.

^^  Abdomen, l  Stitching  and  lancinating  pains  in  abdomen,  >
from  urinating.

■  Labor-like  pains  about  umbilicus  extending  to  small  of  back

and  thighs. ^Induration  of  uterus.
Pinching  about  umbilicus,  with  sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would

set  in.
Violent  pain  below  umbilicus  extending  around  to  back.

■  Gastralgia  and  painful  abdominal  affections.

■  Painful  sensation  in  r.  lower  abdomen,  as  if  something  would

be  squeezed  through.

■  Soreness  in  abdomen  while  coughing.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  rising  from  abdomen  into  throat  and

mouth. ^Indurated  pancreas.

■  Abdomen  greatly  distended;  much  annoyed  with  flatus.
Distention  of  single  portions  of  abdomen.

■  Incarcerated  flatulence.

■  Motions  in distended abdomen, with passage of  offensive

flatus.

■  Rumbling  in  abdomen.

1  Tearing,  transversely  across  pubes,  and  then  through  pudenda,
as  far  as  anus.


CARBO  ANIMALIS.  316-

I  I  Sticking  in  groin,  also  at  night,  disturbing  sleep  and  wak-
ing her.

I  Feeling  in  1.  groin,  on  sitting  down,  as  if  a  hard  body  were
lying  there ; >  from  pressure  and  by  passing  flatus.

I  Inguinal  hernia.

;rSmall,  painful  boils  in  inguinal  region.

■  Maltreated  buboes,  with  elevated  margins  and  offensive  ichor-

ous discharge.

I  Buboes  before  discharging,  as  large  as  pigeon  eggs,  very  hard,

red,  painful;  stitches  preventing  motion;  sensitive  to  touch;
pain  extending  into  thigh,  with  uncomfortable  chilliness ;
thirst  with  appetite  ;  sleepless  ;  burning  during  urination.

I I  Hard  buboes,  begin  to  suppurate ;  or,  inaltreated  cases  with
callous  edges,  ichorous,  offensive  discharge.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Flatus  cannot  escape,  anus  seems  closed.
I  Unsuccessful  desire  for  stool ; passes  only  offensive  flatus ;

pain  in  back,  and  feeling  across  abdomen  as  if  there  was  no

expulsive  power.
I  Stool  hard,  lumpy,  scanty,  irregular. ^Constipation.
Stools  smell  like  burnt  meat.
B Blood  passes  during  stool.
B  Stitches  in  rectum  and  anus.

■  Severe  burning  in  rectum  and  anus.
1  Tapeworm.

B  Sticky,  odorless  moisture  oozes from  anus  and perineum  ;

anus  sore.
B Piles,  burn  and  sting,  <  during  walking.
Rawness  and  chafing  about  perineum.
Sweat  on  perineum.
'^^  Urinary  Orleans, bb  Renal  colic.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate  ;  urine  increased,  fetid ;  sometimes

stream  interrupted  ;  more  frequent  at  night.
Bineflficient  urging,  with  painful  pressure  in  loins,  groins  and
thighs.

■  During  urination  :  burning  soreness  in  urethra.
B  Urine  red. ^Induration  of  uterus.

Offensive  smelling  urine ;  sometimes  discharged  involuntarily.

B  Urine,  after  standing,  deposits  a  copious  whitish-yellow  sedi-
ment. ^Indurated  pancreas.

I  I  Paralysis  of  bladder.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. B Seminal  emissions;  parts  feel  weak  ;
exhausted  mentally  and  bodily.

B Testicles  seem  to-be  growing  gradually  smaller,  with  complete
relaxation  of  genitals  and  a  feeling  of  weakness  in  them.

BB  Syphilis;  buboes,  mostly  left-sided  ;  old  maltreated  buboes,
cut  open  or  cauterized,  presenting  large,  terrible  ulcers,  with
callous  edges  and  a  secretion  of  offensive  ichor.

■  Scirrhus  of  scrotum.


!17  CARBO  ANIMALIS.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Tearing  pain,  transversely  across
pubes,  and  then  through  pudenda,  as  far  as  anus.

■  Bearing  down  pains,  with  copious  discharge  of  slimy,  discolored

blood. ^Induration  of  uterus.
1 1  Menses:  too  early;  too  long  ;  not  profuse.

I  Menses  suppressed. /^Indurated  pancreas.

I I  Menorrhagia  from  chronic  induration  of  uterus;  also  in
cachectic  women,  with  glandular  affections ;  blood  black,
clotted,  putrid.

■  During  menses: lameness  in  thighs; pressing  in small of

back,  groins  and  thighs,  with  unsuccessful  desire  to  eructate;
chilly,  yawning ;  i  I  the  flow  weakens  her,  she  can  hardly
speak ;  blood  dark.

■  After  menses:  throbbing  headache,  <  in  open  air.

■  Leucorrhoea:  stains  linen  yellow;  offensive;  burning,  biting,

corroding ;  more  when  walking  or  standing ;  causes  weak
feeling  in  stomach.

■  Discharge  of  blood  from  vagina,  with  labor-like  pains. ^In-

duration of  uterus.

■  Erectile  tumors  with  burning  sensation.

■  Offensive  uterine  discharges. ^Gangrene. ^Carcinoma.

■  Chronic  or  subacute  metritis.

I  Malignant  ulcers  of  os  uteri  with  foul  discharge.

■  Induration  of  neck  of  uterus  ;  burning.

■  Indurated,  swollen  uterus,  after  depressing  emotions  in  deli-

cate, Aveakly,  pale  Avomen.

■  Burning  into  thighs ;  labor-like  pains  in  pelvis  and  sacrum ;

slimy,  bloody  discharge,  very  weak. ^Cancer  uteri.

■  Hypertrophy  of  ovaries  and  uterus.

■  Prolapsus  and  induration  of  uterus.

VPregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. iNausea,  <  at
night.

■  ■Lochia  long  lasting,  thin,  offensive,  excoriating,  with  numb

limbs.

Milk  is  thin,  has  a  salty  taste.

Secretion  of  milk  after  weaning.

Maramse  :  sensation  of  expansion  in  mammae ;  darting  pains
of  nursing  women  arrest  breathing,  <<  from  pressure;  hard,
painful  nodes ;  swollen,  inflamed  (erysipelatous)  during  con-
finement.

■  Mammary  tumor  hard,  uneven,  skin  loose;  burning  pains;

dirty,  blue-red  spots  ;  pains  drawing  towards  axilla ;  night-
sweat  ;  low-spirited. ^Scirrhus  mammae.

■  Painless  tumor  in  r.  mamma,  hard,  as  large  as  a  hen's  egg.

■  ■Hard,  painful  nodules  and  indurations  in  mammae.

■  Painful  induration  below  nipple,  as  large  as  hazelnut.

■  Painful  indurations  in  1.  mamma,  of  stony  hardness,  uneven


CARBO  ANIMALIS.  318

nodules, immovable, dirty,  bluish-red; tearing, s-tinging
pains  extending  to  side  of  shoulders  and  through  arm.

■  Scirrhous  indurations  in  mammae/

I  Carcinoma  of  mammae:  dirty,  bluish  and  loose  skin,  or  red
spots  on  skin ;  burning  and  drawing  towards  axillae ;  axil-
lary glands  indurated.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. >  Rawness
and  hoarseness  in  morning  after  rising,  with  dry  cough.

■  Hoarseness,  <  evenings  ;  loss  of  voice  during  night.

■  Cough, hoarseness  and  night -sweat  very  fetid  and  debili-

tating.

■  Phthisis  trachealis.

■  Swelling  of  thyroid  gland.

'^  Respiration. ■  Dyspnoea  with  anxiety  and  low  spirits.

■  Oppression  in  morning' and  after  eating.

■  Panting  and  rattling  breathing.

2^  Cough. ■Cough  induced  by  tickling  in  r.  side  of  chest,  or  lying
on  r.  side ;  sputum  green.

■  Tickling  cough,  with  constriction  of  larynx  and  chest.

■  Severe,  dry  cough,  shakes  abdomen  as  if  all  would  fall  out,

must  support  bowels;  loose  rales  until  something  is  coughed
up;  mornings  on  rising  and  nearly  all  day.
' I  1  Dry  cough  only  at  night,  when  lying  on  r.  side,  for  several
nights.

■  Dry  cough. ^Induration  of  uterus.
Cough  with  concussion  or  pain  in  abdomen.

■  Soreness  in  abdomen  while  coughing.

;rCough  with  expectoration,  day  and  night ;  pain  in  throat.

■  Cough  with  greenish  sputum. ^Pneumonia  of  r.  lung. ^Sup-

puration of  r.  lung.

■  Sputum  dark  brown,  tough,  syrup-like,  of  extremely  disagree-

able taste. ^Gangraena  pulmonum.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. S  Sharp  burning  stitches  in  chest.

■  Burning  in  chest,  with  pressive  pain.

S Sensation  of  coldness  in  chest;  through  from  front  to  back.

■  Pneumonia  r.  lung,  suppuration  beginning;  green  sputum.

■  Phthisis  pulmonalis.

I  Pleurisy,  lingering ; skin  livid,  emaciation,  hectic  or  typhoid
symptoms.

■  Sensation  as  though  hard  indurations  in  breast  rose  higher

and  he  cannot  stand  pressure  on  it;  this  alternates  with  pain
in  shoulders  and  upper  arm.

Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Sensation  of  coldness  in

praecordial  region, with horripilations. ^Indurated pan-
creas.

■  Palpitation:  after  eating;  when  singing  in  church  ;  morning
on  awaking,  must  lie  still  with  eyes  closed  ;  in  evening.

■  Pulse  accelerated,  especially  evening;  beating  in  blood-vessels.


29


319  CARBO  ANIMALIS.

■  Rapid  pulse. I  Induration  of  uterus.
Cyanosis.

^^  Outer  Chest. Violent  pain  in  sternum.

■  Sensitive  nodules  on  external  chest.
11  Indurated  axillary  glands.

31  Neck  and  Back. I  Prickling  stitches  in  nape  of  neck.
I  Painful  scrofulous  induration  of  glands  of  neck.
I  Blood-boils  on  neck.
I  Scrofulous  goitre.

■  Pressing,  drawing  and  stiffness  in  lumbar  region,  as  if  broken.

■  Sharp  drawing  across  small  of  back,  sensitive  to  every  step.

■  Drawing  pain  in  small  of  back,  and  a  feeling  as  if  it  were

broken,  when  walking,  standing  and  lying.
■Pressive  pain  in  small  of  back.
;rPains  in  back,  on  coughing,  ascending  stairs,  stepping  hard,

and  jumping,  preventing  deep  breathing,  and  causing  her  to

have  fever.

■  Coldness  and  aching  in  lumbar  region  and  legs. ^Cough.

■  Tumor  on  inner  part  of  r.  shoulder-blade,  red  externally,  soft

in  centre. ^Scirrhus  mammse.

■  Coccyx  feels  bruised;  burning  when  touched;  pain  like  that

of  subcutaneous  ulceration,  <  sitting  or  lying.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Tearing  pain  in  neighborhood  of  1.  shoulder.  ^

■  Swelling  of  axillary  glands,  with  rash  on  back. ^Blepharitis,
%  ■  Axillary  glands  indurated.

■  Herpes  in  axilla.

TiHard  swelling  with  great  itching  on  r.  forearm,  inner  side,
along  edge  of  radius.

■  Wrists  pain  as  if  sprained.

■  Hands  became  stiffer,  in  connection  with  which  finger-tips  be-

came sore  as  though  rubbed  open.

■  Hands  numb;  fingers  readily  go  to  sleep;  often  with  chest

affections.

■  Violent  trembling  of  hands  in  morning  at  breakfast ;  hands

appear  as  if  paralyzed ;  on  grasping  anything,  fingers  be-
come stiff  as  though  they  had  not  sufficient  power.
Sharp  stitches  in  ball  of  r.  thumb  and  in  fingers.

■  Numbness of  fingers on  inside  and tips, with  stifi'ness of

finger-joints ;  they  crack  on  bending.

■  Gouty  stiffness  of  finger-joints.

■  Swelling  of  bones  and  induration  of  tendons  of  fingers.

■  Arms  painful  to  touch.

^^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Stitches  in  1.  hip,  when  sitting.

■  Violent  drawing  pains  in  hip,  extending  forwards  and  down-

wards.

■  Pain  in  hip  causes  limping.

■  Weakening  sweats,  particularly  on  thighs.

■  Sweat  at  night  on  thighs  only.


CARBO  ANIMALIS.  320

■  Gnawing  pains  in  shin-bones,  such  as  usually  followed  cold

feet.
I  Cramp  in  forepart  of  lower  leg- near  tibia,  when  walking.

■  Painful  tension  in  calves,  when  walking.

I  Legs  as  far  as  calves  go  to  sleep,  during  day.

■  Drawing  and  stitches  in  legs.

■  Painful  contraction  of  tendo  achillis.

■  Pain  in  heels  ;  feet  sore.

■  Weakness  and  pain  in  ankle.

■  ■Weakness  of  ankles  in  children  who  try  to  walk.

■  Foot  turns  under,  when  walking,  as  from  a  weak  ankle.

I  I  Very  cold  feet  from  9  a.m.  till  3  p.m.;  also  in  evening
in  bed.

■  Corns,  painful  to  touch.  .

■  Frostbitten  feet  and  toes.

^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Bruised  feeling  in  limbs,  especially  dur-
ing motion.

Numbness  of  limbs.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Best : <  stupefaction  in  head,
with  dulness  in  occiput..

Lying  down  :  aching  in  region  of  liver ;  drawing  pain  in  small
of  back  ;  coccyx  feels  bruised.

Sitting  :  up,  vertigo  and  confusion,  >  when  reclining ;  coc-
cyx feels  bruised.

Rising  :  vertigo.

Standing :  leucorrhoea.

Stooping  :  nausea  on  rising  after  ;  heaviness  in  forehead.

Motion  :  brain  feels  as  if  loose.

Walking  :  splashing  in  1.  hemisphere  of  brain  ;  piles  burn  and
sting  ;  leucorrhoea  ;  drawing  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  painful
tension  in  calves.

Eating  :  causes  fatigue.
^"Nerves. B  Weak,  want  of  energy  ;  head  confused ;  prostration.
^Cancer.

■  Great  prostration. ^Induration  of  uterus.

■  After  appearance  of  menses  such  great  weakness that  she

could  scarcely  speak,  with  yawning  and  stretching.

■  1  Straining  and  overlifting,  easily  produce  great  debility.
^'^  Sleep. B  Sleepy  all  forenoon  ; yawning.

■  Anxious,  frightful  visions  and  restlessness,  keep  him  awake.

■  Sleep  full  of  vivid  fancies;  talks,  groans,  sheds  tears.

^^  Time.  Night :  heaviness  in  head  ;  1.  eye  red  and  burning,  pre-
venting sleep  ;  coryza ;  scraping  m  throat ;  nausea  ;  stick-
ing in  groin  ;  frequent  desire  to  urinate  ;  cough  with  ex-
pectoration ;  sweat ;  febrile  chill ;  fever  at  night,  chill  with-
out thirst ;  backache  ;  heat  with  great  thirst.
Morning  :  confused  ;  head  heavy,  irritable  mood  ;  vertigo  ;
epistaxis  ;  stupefying  headache  ;  dry  coryza ;  bitter  taste  ;


321  CARBO  ANIMALIS.

taste  of  manure  in  mouth ;  weight  in  stomach  ;  rawness  and
hoarseness  in  throat ;  oppression  ;  severe  dry  cough  ;  pal-
pitation after  eating  ; violent  trembling  of  hands  ; sweat,
towards.
Forenoon  :  stupefying  headache  ;  sleepy.
9  A.M.  till  3  P.M. :  very  cold  feet.
Afternoon  :  chill.

Evening  : coryza  ;  scraping  in  throat ; hoarseness  ; pulse  ac-
celerated ;  chill.
11  P.M. :  chill.

Day:  during,  toothache  ;  cough  with  expectoration  ;  legs  "go

to  sleep";  chilliness.

^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  >  brain  feeling  as  if

loose,  during  motion.

Warm  room : >  stupefaction  in  head,  with  dulness  in  occiput.

Cold  :  cannot  bear  anything  to  touch  teeth  ;  teeth  sensitive  to

cold.
In  cold  air : <<  heaviness  in  head,  at  night.
Dry,  cold  air  : <  tenseness  of  scalp  on  forehead  and  vertex.
Cold,  damp  air : <  stupefaction  in  head,  with  dulness  in  oc-
ciput.
In  open  air : <  throbbing  headache; I  sensitive  to  air.
Wet  weather : <  pain  in  top  of  head,  as  if  skull  had  been  split
or  torn  asunder.
^°  Fever. B  Chill,  especially  in  afternoon  and  after  eating  ;  even-
ing chill,  followed  by  sweat.
Chill  at  11  P.M.
I  1  Great  chilliness  during  day.
I  I A  febrile  chill  awoke  her  at  night  in  bed.
;rFever  at  night,  chill  without  thirst ;  at  night  backache,  morn-
ings sweat ;  irregular  stools.
I  Heat  always  after  a  chill,  mostly  at  night  in  bed.
I  Heat  with  great  thirst. ^Induration  of  uterus.
Averse  to  uncovering  during  heat.
I  Sweating  after  eating,  especially  during  siesta.
I  Sweat  generally  towards  morning;  also  from  slight  exertion,

even  eating.
I  a  Night-sweat  fetid,  debilitating,  staining  yellow.
■  Sweats  when  walking  in  open  air.
Sweat  staining  brownish-yellow.
Typhus.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Left : side  of  head,  pain  ;  temple,
heaviness  ; hemisphere  of  brain,  sense  of  splashing  ; eye,
becomes  red  and  burns  ;  shooting  stitches  in  malar  bones  ;
feeling  of  a  hard  body  in  groin,  on  sitting  down  ;  buboes  ;
painful  induration  in  mamma  ;  tearing  pain  near  shoulder  ;
stitches  in  hip.
Right :  hand,  tearing  ;  nostril,  malignant  ulceration  ;  painful

VOL.  III. — 21.


CAREO  ANIMALIS.  322

sensation  in  lower  abdomen  ;  mammary  tumor,  hard,  large
as  a  hen's  egg ;  cough  induced  by  tickling  in  chest ;  dry
cough  when  lying  on  side ;  pneumonia  ;  tumor  on  inner
part  of  shoulder-blade  ;  hard  swelling,  great  itching  on  fore-
arm ;  sharp  stitches  in  ball  of  thumb.
"Sensations.  As  if  loose,  brain,  during  motion;  as  of  a  tornado
in  head  ;  as  if  skull  had  been  split  or  torn  asunder  ;  as  if
eyes  were  lying  loose  in  sockets ;  as  if  something  would  be
squeezed  through  abdomen  ;  as  if  there  was  no  expulsive
poAver  in  rectum  ;  as  though  hard  induration  in  breast  rose
higher.

Jerking :  in  eye-teeth.

Cutting  :  region  of  liver.

Darting  :  pains  through  head  ;  pains  of  nursing  women.

Lancinating  :  pains  in  parotid  glands  ;  in  abdomen.

Stitches  :  in  1.  eye,  preventing  sleep  ;  in  and  back  of  ears  ;
in  malar  bones,  lower  jaw  and  teeth;  in  spleen;  in  abdomen  ;
in  chest ;  in  nape  of  neck.

Stinging  :  in  mammary  indurations.

Sticking  :  in  groin.

Sliooting  :  in  malar  bones.

Tearing:  transversely  across  pubes ;  in  mammary  indurations.

Burning  :  1.  eye ;  lips  ;  blisters  on  tip  and  edges  of  tongue  ;
in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in  spleen  ;  during  urination  ;  in
rectum  and  anus;  neck  of  uterus;  pains  in  mammary  tumor;
stitches  in  chest.

Prickling  :  in  nape  of  neck. .

Aching  :  region  of  liver.

Soreness  :  of  abdomen.

Sore  feeling:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Raw  :  sense  in  throat  and  oesophagus. .

Pressing  :  in  small  of  back.

Pressure  :  in  whole  brain  ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  hepatic
region  ;  lumbar  region.

Drawing  :  pains  in  teeth  ;  in  lumbar  region.

Griping  :  in  stomach.

Clawing :  in  stomach.

Splashing  :  1.  hemisphere  of  brain.

Bruised  :  feeling  in  coccyx  ;  feeling  in  limbs.

Pains  :  in  liver  ;  labor-like  around  umbilicus  ;  gastralgia  ;  in
back.

Weight :  in  stomach.

Throbbing  :  headache,  after  menses.

Heaviness  :  of  head  ;  in  occiput.

Stiffness  :  of  finger- joints.

Tenseness  :  of  scalp  on  head  ;  skin  of  nose.

Contraction  :  of  tendo  achillis..

Heat :  in  face  and  head  ;  with  great  thirst.


323  CARBO  ANIMALIS.

Cold  :  creeps  on  head.

Coldness  : rising  from  abdomen  into  throat  and  mouth ; in

chest ;  in  lumbar  region  and  legs.
Numbness  :  of  finger-tips.
^*  Tissues. 'Venous  plethora;  threatened  stagnation  of  circula-
tion, cyanosis,  rital  heat  sinks  to  a  minimum.

■  Struma  varicosa.

I  Evil  effects  from  loss  of  fluids.

■  Joints  weak;  easily  sprained.
Arthritic  stiffness  and  nodes.

■  Painful swelling of  glands in neck, axillge, inguina and

mammse.

■  Glands  indurated,  swollen,  inflamed,  with  lancinating,  cutting

or  burning. ^Scirrhus.
Sycosis.

■  Scrofulous  affections  of  glands.

Dry  ulceration  of  external  parts,  following  tumors ;  true  in-
dolent ulceration.

■  Benignant  change  into  ichorous  suppurations.

■  Gummata.

■  Hypertrophic  conditions  in  general,  and  especially  of  genitals

and  abdominal  glands.

■  Cartilage -like polypi undergo retrograde metamorphosis  ;

fleshy  polypi  slowly,  but  mucous  polypi  not  at  all.
Tumors ;  colloid  deposits  in  the  viscera,  particularly  stomach.

■  Syphilis,  buboes.

■  Ovarian  cyst.

■  Pain  in  scirrhous  indurations.

■  Polypus  and  carcinoma.

'^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. 1 1  Worse  from  slightest
touch  :  buboes  ;  arms.

■  Easily  sprained  from  lifting  even  small  weights.

*®Skin. ■Skin  dry  and  hanging  infolds. ^Indurated  pancreas.
^Carcinoma.

■  Itching  over  whole  body  ;  evenitig  in  bed.  •

■  Erysipelatous  swellings,  with  burning  pain,  and  indurations

of  affected  parts.

i Frost-bites:  inflamed,  burning.

B  Coppery  eruption  over  whole  body,  especially  in  face,  on  fore-
head and  nose.

■  Smooth  and  bright  carmine  spots  showing  a  tendency  to  in-

durate. ^Leprosy.

■  Herpes;  tliin,  red  skin,  with  scales  on  legs,  in  a  baker,  after

desquamation  of  large  pieces.

■  Irregular  surface,  violent  burning  pain.
B  Nodes  in  skin,  with  cough,  in  horses.

■  Stinging  in  scars;  painful  cicatrices,  they  bseak  open,  <  in

change  of  weather.


CARBO  ANIMALIS.  324

I  Indurated  skin  and  rhagades  ;  losing  hair.

Readily  bleeding  ulcers.

Furuncles  size  of  pea,  which  opened,  have  a  strong  smell  like
burnt  meat.

8  Scrofulous  skin  diseases.

■  Hairless  spots,  when  horses  are  continually  losing  their  hair.
^"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, Young,  scrofulous  subjects.

!  Elderly  persons,  especially  with  venous  plethora,  blue  cheeks,
blue  lips,  debility,  etc.

A  girl,  set.  14. ^Indurated  mammary  glands.

A  young  girl. ^Goitre.

A  sensitive  woman,  set.  20. ^Scirrhus  mammse.

A  married  woman,  set.  21,  after  confinement.  ^Indurated
mammary  gland.

A  lady,  set.  32. ^Phthisis.

A  woman,  set.  35. Scirrhus  mammse.

A  single  lady,  set.  36,  narrow,  flat  chest. ^Indurated  pancreas.

A  woman,  set.  46,  struma  since  twenty  years.

Aneurismatica.

A  scrofulous  girl,  set.  15. ^Indurated  cervical  glands.

A  young,  childless,  married  woman.  ^Indurated  mammary
gland.

A  maiden  lady,  over  fifty  years  old. ^Indurated  mammary
tumor.
*^ Relations. Antidoted by: Arsen.^ Oamplior.^ Nax vom.,
vinegar. .

It  antidotes  :  bad  effects  of  quinine.

Compatible:  lArsen.,  ^iBellad.,  iBryon.,  Pliosphor.^  Pulsat.,
%l  Sepia,  l^  Silica^  I  Sulphur.,  Veratr.  (especially  in  whoop-
ing cough).

Complementary  : Oale.  pliosph.

Compare :  Badiag.  and  Bromum  (indurations,  suppurations,
etc.),  iiOalc.  pJiosph.,  llCarh.  veg.  (not- so  good  a  glandu-
lar remedy), Cinchon. (evil eff"ects from loss of  fluids),

■  Graphit.,  iiPhosphor,  (nostrils  adhere  to  the  septum),
Pulsat..  II Sepia,  Silica,  II Sulphur,  (vertigo  with  epis-
taxis),  Veratr.


325  ■  CARBO  VE6ETABILIS.

CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

Vegetable Charcoal.

Lowitz,  a  German,  discovered  the  properties  of  vegetable  charcoal  to
deoderize  and  arrest  putrefaction.  It  was  first  employed  in  medicine  with
success,  externally,  to  fetid  ulcers  and  eruptions,  afterwards  internally  for
flatulence,  its  employment  all  the  while  being  based  upon  its  chemical
properties.  Hahnemann  was  the  first  who  elucidated  that  the  dynamic
influence  was  the  only  curative  one,  by  proving  the  triturated  vegetable
charcoal  on  healthy  persons  and  then  applying  it  in  practice.  His  experi-
ments were  made  on  twenty  or  thirty  different  persons,  who  strictly  ob-
served dietetic  rules  and  kept  themselves  strictly  aloof  from  all  medicinal
influences.  The  cruder  preparation  failed  to  produce  any  symptoms  of  im-
portance, but  after  potentization  was  carried  farther  on,  a  steadily  increas-
ing number  of  symptoms  was  produced  in  sensitive  persons  and  in  animals.
He  used  the  Carho  ligni  betulse,  but  assures  us  that  well-prepared  charcoal
acts  in  the  same  manner,  irrespective  of  the  kind  of  wood  used.  The
provings  by  Adams,  Gersdorf  and  Caspari  in  the  Materia  Medica  Pura,
1827,  contained  720,  the  Chronic  Diseases,  18P>0,  including  the  former,  930;
the  second  edition,  in  1837,  1189  symptoms.  We  have  had  no  provings
since,  excepting  one  by  C.  Neidhard,  with  the  second  centesimal  tritura-
tion, which  is  included. The  charcoal  contains  carbonate  of  potash.

For  remarks  on  its  use  in  yellow  fever,  see  Chapt.  40.

^  Mind. Falls  down  insensible.

B  Stupor,  collapse.

iMemory  feeble,  flow  of  ideas  slow;  tendency  to  fixed  ideas.

Periodical  Want  of  memory ;  headache  as  if  integuments  of
head  were  contracted ;  hat  presses  on  head  as  a  heavy  bur-
den ;  when  taking  off  hat,  he  feels  as  if  a  handkerchief  were
tied  round  head ;  creeping  in  integuments  of  occiput  as  if
hairs  were  in  motion.

I  Confusion  of  head,  making  thinking  diflScult ;  morning  on
waking ;  he  had  to  make  great  exertion,  as  if  arousing  him-
self from  a  dream.

When  it  became  dark  in  her  room,  frightful  shapes  appeared
before  her  eyes  ;  started  from  anxious  dreams.

Flightiness  at  night.

Voluptuous  fancies.

1  Quiet  delirium. ^Typhus.

Frequent  screaming.

iBlndilFerence;  heard  everything  without  feeling  pleasantly  or
unpleasantly,  and  without  thinking  of  it.

Lack  of  cheerfulness  in  evening.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  326

Feels  unhappy  with  every  little  pain.

Nightly  fear  of  ghosts. ^Worm  affections.

H  Anxiety.

8 Anxiety:  as  if  oppressed;  with  heat  in  face;  accompanied
by  shuddering ;  on  closing  eyes ;  in  evening  after  .lying
down ;  on  awaking.

Great  anxiety  and  heat  with  pains.

Trembling  anxiety  in  morning.

Anxiety  and  uneasiness  causing  him  to  tremble  all  over,  as  if
he  had  committed  a  crime,  ending  in  weeping,  even  before
strangers  ;  painful  hiccough  in  oesophagus.

■  Very  irritable,  excitable  and  inclined  to  anger.

I  Peevish,  wrathful;  child  wishes  to  vent  itself  in  rage,  strikes,
kicks,  bites. ^Worm  affections.

Obstinacy.

Much  excited  in  evening,  with  distended  veins.

I  Restless,  anxious;  4  to  6  p.m.

BEasily  frightened  or  startled. ^Dysentery.

Starting  with  fright  on  going  to  sleep.

Worse  after  mental  exertion.
^  Sensorium,  l  Vertigo:  with  momentary  attacks  of  fainting;
had  to  hold  on  to  something;  from  quick  movements  of
head ;  with  dark  color  of  face ;  with  nausea,  particularly
on-  looking  out  of  window ;  when  stooping,  ■<  walking
and  sitting;  from  flatulence;  venous  stasis;  especially  after
a  debauch  ;  in  bed ;  when  sitting  up  after  sleep.

B  Vertigo,  with  pain  in  forehead. ^Chronic  catarrh.

I  Whirling  in  head,  whole  day.

I  Confusion  of  head,  which  makes  thinking  difficult.

I I  Fainting  after  sleep,  after  rising,  or  while  yet  in  bed,  morn-
ings ;  belching ;  caused  by  debilitating  losses,  or  abuse  of
mercury.

^  Inner  Head. I  Violent  tearing  in  forehead,  at  a  small  spot  near

temple.
iPain  in  r.  side  of  forehead  and  head. ^Intermittent  fever.
I  Aching  or  beating  over  eyes,  or  in  whole  head,  commencing

at  nape  of  neck  ; •<  evening  after  a  meal,  with  congestion

to  head  ;  after  a  debauch.
iPressive  headache  just  over  eyes,  with  tears ;  eyes  pain  on

moving  them.
I  Pressure  across  forehead,  weighing  down  eyelids,  <  by  weight

of  hat.
8' Pressure  in  forehead,  temples  and  vertex.
Frontal  headache  with  vertigo.

B  Sensation  as  if  a  strap  were  drawn  tightly  across  forehead.
I  I  Pressive  pain  on  vertex,  with  soreness  of  hair  to  touch.
Stitching  headache  extending  to  occiput,  in  evening.
i  Tearing  and  drawing  in  1.  side  of  occiput.


327  CAREO  VEGETABILIS.

llDull  headache  in  occiput; violent  pressive  pain  in  lower

portion  of  occiput ;  feeling  of  weight.
Sensation  of  emptiness  in  head,  with  hunger.

I  Burning  in  head  ;  head  and  hands  hot.

I I  Head  feels  heavy  as  lead.
Sensation  of  electric  shocks  in  head.
Sensation  in  head  as  of  humming  of  bees.

I  Painful  throbbing  in  head,  during  inspiration.

Throbbing  with  heat  in  head  and  fulness,  after  a  meal  and  in
evening.

Pulsating  in  head,  as  though  he  would  be  attacked  by  paralytic
stroke.

I  Headache  as  from  constriction  of  scalp.

Constrictive  headache,  with  nausea,.

I  Painful  stitches  through  head,  when  coughing.

Headache :  causing  nausea ;  with  great  weakness,  faintness
and  pain  in  every  limb ;  from  becoming  over-heated ;  on
awaking  from  sleep ;  with  burning  here  and  there  on  body,
in  morning.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  head,  followed  by  nosebleed.

I  Congestion  to  head,  with  spasmodic  constriction,  nausea  and
pressure  over  eyes,  feeling  of  coryza;  from  over -heated
rooms.

Awakes  with  sensation  of  congestion  of  brain.

Acute  pain  in  head  extending  to  upper  maxilla.
*  Outer  Head. >Head  painfully  sensitive  to  pressure,  especially
of  hat ; <  from  taking  cold  or  chilling  of  head,  and  from
getting  warm  in  bed.

I  Scalp  painful  to  touch.

ilHat  pressed  upon  head  like  a  heavy  weight,  and  he  con-
tinued to  feel  the  sensation  even  after  taking  it  off,  as  if  head
were  bound  up  with  a  cloth.

Pressing  and  burning  tearing  on  outer  head,  especially  in  mus-
cles of  occiput  and  nape  of  neck  ;  >  from  sitting  quietly  in
warm  room.

I  Sensation  of  contraction  in  integuments  of  head,  which  causes
a  cramp-like  tension  in  brain,  <  from  pressure  of  hat  and
over-heating,  >  from  uncovering  head.

I  Head  sensitive  to  cold,  easily  becomes  chilled,  especially  after

over-heating  and  sweating  of  it; affections  following  it  are
<  in  morning  and  on  walking  in  open  air,  >  in  warm  room.

I I  Sweat  on  forehead,  often  cold.
Inclination  to  lie  and  rest  with  head  high.
Feeling  as  if  hair  stood  on  end.

Falling  out  of  hair  (after  severe  diseases  or  abuse  of  mercury),

with  great  sensitiveness  of  scalp  to  pressure.
I  Hair  falls  out,  <  on  back  of  head;  scalp  itches  in  evening.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  328

when  warm  in  bed ; occasioned  by  severe  illness  or  after

parturition.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. lEyes  dull,  lustreless,  deep-set,  pupils  do  not

react  to  light. ^Typhus.
I  Black  spots  floating  before  eyes;  also  flickering,  flames  and

rings.
Objects  near  her  constantly  become  narrower  and  smaller.
I  Eyes  become  weak  and  ache,  from  overwork  or  fine  work ;

myopia.

■  Pressure  and  aching  in  eyeballs.
Pains  in  eyes  after  lying  down.
Eyes  pain  in  evening.

I  i  Burning  in  eyes.

Pressing  and  burning  in  eyes.

I  Feeling  of  sand  in  eyes. ^Intermittent  fever.

I  Heavy  weight  seems  to  rest  on  eyes ;  must  make  exertion  to

distinguish  letters  when  reading.
iMuscles  of  eye  pain,  when  looking  up.
On  attempting  to  speak,  motion  of  eyes  as  from  stitches  in

them.
1  Hemorrhage  from  eyes,  generally  with  burning. ^Conges-
tion to  head. ^Whooping-cough.
Burning  and  pressure  in  canthi.
I  Itching  about  eyes  and  in  margin  of  lids,  particularly  in

morning.
Lids  agglutinated.
I  I  Discharge  of  thick,  flesh-colored,  offensive  moisture  from

r.  eye.
Lachrymation.
;rAching  pain  in  orbits  and  in  eyeballs  passing  to  back  of  head;

paroxysm  passes  away  for  a  few  minutes  and  then  returns ;

>  on  walking  in  open  air,  <  on  lying  down.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. Hearing  very  acute.

■  Ringing  in  ears  ;  buzzing.

Rustling  in  ears,  as  of  straw,  whenever  jaws  are  moved ;  dis-
charge of  a  thickish,  flesh-colored,  badly -smelling  liquid
from  ear ;  painful  eruption  on  upper  lip.

Roaring  in  ears  accompanies  vertigo;  with  scanty  ear-wax.

Illusions  of  hearing ;  he  thought  he  heard  some  one  approach-
ing his  bed.

I  Deafness,  particularly  after  acute  exanthema  or  abuse  of  mer-
cury ;  ears  too  dry.

Tearing  and  aching  in  ears  from  within  outwards.

■  Ulceration  of  internal  ear  and  discharge  of  pus.

I  Something  heavy  seems  to  lie  before  ears ;  they  seemed  stop-
ped, hearing  not  diminished.

■  Deficient  or  badly  smelling  cerumen.
■Yellow  ear-wax  with  dryness  of  ears.


329  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

■  Offensive  otorrhoea.
External  ears  swollen  and  hot.

iPain  from  r.  ear  down  neck,  on  turning  head ;  after  itch-like

eruptions.
I  Left  ear  hot  and  red  every  evening.

■  Parotitis,  swelling  grows  hard. ^Mumps.

^  Smell  and  Nose,  l  Nosebleed:  before  attack  of  fainting;  several
times  daily  for  weeks ;  face  pale  before  and  after  every  at-
tack ;  after  straining  at  stool ;  small,  intermittent  pulse ;
after  debauch  ;  in  old  or  debilitated  people  ;  after  fevers.

■  Frequent  copious  and  easy  epistaxis ; <  at  night  or  in  fore-

noon, followed  by  pain  over  chest ; blood  thin  and  black,
generally  <  at  night ;  excited  by  emotions  or  jarring.

■  Ineffectual  desire  to  sneeze,  with  crawling  in  1.  nostril.

■  Frequent  sneezing,  with  constant  and  violent  crawling  and

tickling  in  nose ;  lachrymation  and  biting  pain  in  and  above
nose. ^Hay  asthma.
I  Dry  nasal  catarrh ;  nares  obstructed.

■  Severe  coryza,  with  hoarseness  and  rawness  on  chest. ^Hay

asthma.

■  Watery  fluid  discharge  from  nose,  or  stoppage,  <  towards

evening.
Stoppage  of  nose.
'  ■Nasal  catarrh,  with  sore  throat. ^Measles.

■  Drawing  in  root  of  nose.

■  Itching  of  nose,  particularly  around  nostrils. ^Coryza.

■  Nose  pointed  ;  hippocratic  face.

^  Upper  Face.  BFace:  very  pale;  grayish  -  yellow ;  greenish;
hippocratic.

■  Pale  face,  flushes  to  roots  of  hair  after  a  little  wine. ^Asthma.

■  Drawing  and  aching  pains  in  facial  nerve.

■  Tearing  pains  in  1.  half  of  face.

■  Jerking  tearing  in  r.  upper  maxilla.

■  Facial  and  maxillary  bones  sore.

■Jerk-like  tearing  in  1.  zygoma,  in  front  of  ear,  in  evening,

in  bed.
I  I  Drawing  pain  in  upper  and  lower  jaw  on  both  sides,  with

drawing  in  head  and  confusion  of  it.

■  Soreness  of  facial  bones  of  upper  and  lower  jaws.

■  Face  hippocratic. ^Typhus.
I  Corpse-like  face.

■  Cold  sweat  on  face.

■  Face  cold;  tongue  cold  and  contracted.

Glowing  redness  of  face  with  a  fine  network  of  capillaries  as  if
marbled.

■  Swelling  of  upper  lip  and  cheeks  with  jerking  pain.

■  Red  cheeks;  sometimes  red  and  covered  with  cold  sweat.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  330

Painful  eruptions  on  upper  lip  ;  the  vermilion  border  is  covered
"with  pimples.

■  Acne  in  face  of  young  people.
1 1  Parotitis.

Herpetic  eruptions  in  face.
I  Lupus  vorax  in  face.
^  Lower  Face. >  Brown,  or  blackish-looking  cracked  lips.

■  Swelling  of  lips.

Lower  lip  red  and  swollen  on  inside,  preventing  her  from
speaking.

■  Quivering  or  twitching  of  upper  lip.
Chattering  of  chin.

^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Tearing  in  incisor  teeth.
I  Teeth  feel  long  and  are  sore.

■  Drawing  and  tearing  pain  in  molars.

■  Tearing  in  teeth  from  hot,  cold  or  salt  food;  <  when  touched

with  tongue.

Pain  in  teeth  on  1.  side,  <  in  open  air,  >  after  eating.

Toothache:  constricting;  clucking;  from  cold  and  warm  sub-
stances taken  into  mouth.

■  ■Looseness  of  teeth,  with  bleeding  of  gums,  which  are  very

sensitive.

■  Teeth  decay  rapidly.

■  Sore  pain  in  gum  during  day.

■  ■Gum  painfully  sensitive  when  chewing.
I  Gum  retracts  from  lower  incisors.

■  When  sucking  gum,  pure  blood  flows  into  mouth,  in  forenoon,

returning  several  days  at  same  time.

■  Bleeding  of  teeth  when  cleaning  them.

■  Pustules  on  gum  ;  gum-boils.

■  Aphthaa  or  thrush.

■  Teeth  and  gum  affections  from  abuse  of  mercury.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Bitterness  on  palate,  tongue  dry.
• 8 Bitter  taste  before  and  after  eating.

■  Bitter  taste,  with  clean  tongue,  particularly  in  old  women.

■  Sour  taste  in  mouth  after  eating.

■  Saltish  taste.

■  Tongue  heavy,  with  difficult  speech.

■  Tip  of  tongue  raw  and  dry ;  heat  in  mouth.

■  Sensitiveness  of  tongue,  with  rawness  in  it.

■  Glossitis  when  tongue  becomes  indurated.

■  ■Tongue  turns  black. ^Typhus. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Tongue  red  and  dry,  or  covered  with  dirty  crust. ^Typhus.

■  Tongue: white; coated  with yellow-brown  mucus; lead-

colored;  blue,  sticky,  moist;  dry,  parched,  fissured;  black.

■  ■  Tongue  cold. ^Asiatic  cholera. ^Yellow  fever. ^Typhus.
Small  ulcers  sc'attered  through  mouth;  grayish  color,  burning

like  live  coals;  the  ulcers  are  small,  gray,  deep  and  isolated.


831  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

'- Inner  Mouth. B Mouth  and  breath  cold. ^Cholera. ^Yellow

fever.
I  Mouth  hot,  tongue  almost  immovable,  saliva  bloody;  edges

of  gums  yellow,  indented;  gums  loose,  receding,  ulcerated.
I  Heat  in  mouth, especially m  upper  lip,  with  rawness  and

dryness  of  tip  of  tongue.
■  Dryness,  or  increased  collection  of  saliva  in  mouth,  which  is

often  stringy.
I  Tough  mucus  in  mouth,  putrid  taste  and  loss  of  appetite.
I  Foul  taste  and  offensive  odor  from  mouth.
I  iStomacace.
Foaming  at  mouth,  or  extreme  sweating;  animal  lies  down  and

bores  head  backwards,  towards  nape  of  neck. ^x\nthrax.
iHemorrhage  from  nose  and  mouth;  blood  black.
^^  Throat. '  '  Pressive  pain  on  posterior  part  of  palate.

B  Swelling  and  inflammation  of  uvula,  with  stitches  in  throat.

B Burning  and  biting  feeling  in  fauces.

B Sloughing  of  some  parts  of  swollen  fauces;  fetid  ichor.

B  Sensation  in  pharynx  as  if  it  were  swollen  or  contracted.

1  I  Pressive  tearing  in  muscles  of  throat.

B  Scraping,  rawness,  burning  in  throat.

B  Small  burning  spots  in  throat. IStomacace.

BSore  throat,  with  ptyalism.

BOn  small  spots  in  throat,  sensation  of  something  acrid  and

corroding,  which  produces  suffocative  cough. 6'Stomacace.
B Tough  mucus  in  throat, as  though  lump was  there  which

cannot  be  removed. IStomacace.
Hawking  of  much  mucus  from  throat.
B  Throat  feels  as  if  dried  with  blotting  paper. IStomacace.
BFood  cannot  be  easily  swallowed;  throat  seems  constricted;

no  pain.
Binflammation  of  oesophagus.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Inordinate  appetite

or  thirst.

Hunger,  with  feeling  of  emptiness  in  head.

BWant  of  appetite; eats  only  dinner;  feeling of  relaxation
and  weakness  of  muscles  of  limbs.

TrThirst,  with  diarrhoea.
• B Longing  for  coffee;  acids;  for  sweet  and  salt  things.

B Aversion  to  meat  and  fat  things;  to  milk,  which  causes  flatu-
lence.
^^Eating  and  Drinking.  BAfter  eating:  headache;  acidity  in
mouth;  plainest  food  disagrees;  heaviness,  fullness  (more
after  supper),  sleepiness;  nausea,  vomiting;  feels  as  if  abdo-
men would  burst;  worse  after  debauch  from  rich  living.

B Dreads  to  eat  because  of  pains;  burning  in  epigastrium  and
deep  in  abdomen.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  332

1  Everything  that  he  eats  causes  eructation  of  wind.  /9Inter-
mittent  fever.

I  After  milk,  sour  eructations.

I  Gastric  symptoms:  from  wine;  coffee;  too  much  milk;  ex-
cessive use  of  butter,  or  from  rancid  butter,  from  fats  in
general;  fish,  especially  if  tainted;  from  wine-drinking;
from  mixed  beverages  in  hot  weather;  from  ice  water  or
different  waters ;  from  flatulent  vegetables ;  abuse  of  salt  or
salt  meats.

Affections  after  fat  and  fat  foods,  pastry,  etc.,  which  are  not
cured  by  PuUat.

I  I  If  he  eats  or  drinks,  abdomen  feels  as  if  it  would  burst.
^^Hiccougii,  Belching,  Mausea  and  Vomiting, a  Violent

eructations,  almost  constant;  offensive  smelling  eructations ;

tasting  of  butter  which  was  eaten;  bitter;  sour  or  rancid,

after  eating  or  drinking,  with  gagging,  almost  vomiting.
XJulping  up  of  food.
I  Frequent,  empty  eructations,  mostly  in  afternoon,  also  when

preceded  by  pinching  in  abdomen.

■  Pyrosis,  great  flow  of  water. ^Catarrh  of  stomach.

i Pyrosis:  excessive  amount  of  gas  constantly  belched,  which
tasted  hot  and  acrid;  stomach  distended  and  tender.

1  Pyrosis  at  night.

B Frequent  qualmishness;  he  did  not  vomit,  however.

I  Nausea:  and  disgust  for  food,  after  eating  soup;  in  morning,
an  hour  after  waking,  with  qualmishness  in  stomach;  after
breakfast,  fullness  in  abdomen,  vomiting  and  restlessness,  so
that  she  does  not  know  how  to  lie,  with  pain  in  stomach.

I  Cannot  bear  sun;  she  becomes  nauseated,  sick  feeling  in
stomach  and  abdomen. ^Intermittent  fever.

Vomiting  on  recovering  from  insensible  condition.

Vomiting  after  eating.

sMuch  vomiting  at  end  of  chill. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  No  vomiting;  diarrhoea,  spasm  or  pain. ^Cholera  asiatica.

■  Vomiting:  of  blood;  of  food,  in  evening; of  sour,  bilious

bloody  masses.
iHsematemesis:  body icy  cold;  breath  cool; pulse  thready,
intermittent; fainting;  hippocratic  face;  blood black and
thick.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. aEpigastric  region  very  sensi-
tive; aching  and  griping  in  it,  as  from  flatulence.

■  Burning,  lancinating  in  epigastrium  and  deep  in  abdomen;

<  from  eating;  with  anguish,  flatulency  and  diarrhoea.

■  Burning  in  stomach,  with  a  creeping  sensation  up  to throat.

■  Burning  in  stomach,  spreading  down  to  small  of  back  and  up

to  shoulders. ^Gastralgia. ^Cancer.

■  Soreness  and  burning  in  stomach,  with  weakness,  causing

dyspnoea.


333  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

I  Sensation  of  rawness  in  stomach,  rising  into  oesophagus  to

middle  of  chest.

■  Spasmodic  pain  in  stomach,  compelling  to  crouch  forward,

and  impeding  respiration.

nGastralgia,  especially  when  there  is  much  flatus  and  a  burn-
ing ache.

e  Contractive  cramp,  day  and  night,  extending  to  chest;  abdomen
distended ;  must  bend  double,  <  lying  down ;  pain  paroxys-
mal, takes  away  breath.

■  Pain  in  stomach  from  nursing,  or  other  loss  of  fluids.
BFeels  acidity  in  stomach  while  lying  on  back  and  when  walk-
ing; stomach  feels  heavy  and  as  if  hanging  down.

U  Great  accumulations  of  flatus  in  stomach.
(Acidity  of  stomach,  with  eructation  of  wind.
Trembling  in  region  of  stomach.
a  A  contractive  sensation  beneath  stomach.

I I  Stomach  feels  tense  and  full ;  flatulence.

a  Discomfort  and  pressure  in  stomach,  after  eating.
IB  Distention  of  stomach  and  abdomen.
I  Pain  in  stomach,  <  an  hour  after  eating.
Cancer  of  stomach,  with  burning  pains.
^^Hypochondria. Right  lobe  of  liver  painful;  burning  pain  in

region  of  liver.
I  I  Bruised  pain  in  liver.
B Stitching  pain  in  region  of  liver,  and  epigastrium,  also  in

spleen,  and  thence  to  both  sides,  increased  by  deep  inspiration.
B  Tension  in  region  of  liver,  as  if  it  were  too  short  there,  on

■waking  from  midday  nap.
B Region  of  liver  very  sensitive  and  painful  to  touch;  clothing

unendurable. ^Jaundice.
B  Constant,  dull,  heavy  feeling  in  liver. ^Intermittent  fever.
B Pressing,  pinching  in  region  of  spleen;  quick  lightning-like

stitches;  abdomen  bloated.
Pain,  as  if  beaten,  in  hypochondria.
Dull  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium.
B Drawing  pains  around  waist,  half  an  hour  after  food,  especially

in  evening ;  stomach  feels  as  if  full  of  wind ;  bowels  loose ;

urine  pale.
BPain  and  tenseness  in  hypochondria.
'^Abdomen, fi Colic:  from  flatulence,  abdomen  full  to  bursting;

pain  <  about  bladder,  or  left  of  epigastrium; <  from  least

food;  >  from  passing  flatus,  or  hard  stool;  <  or  excited

by  riding  in  a  carriage.
Cutting  and  griping  in  abdomen,  after  fainting.
Violent  constrictive,  labor-like  colic,  3  a.m.
I  I  Pinching,  or  pressive  colic  in  lower  abdomen.
I  I  Dragging  or  griping  colic,  after  a  stool.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  334

■  Pain  in  bowels,  as  from  lifting  or  a  sprain,  as  soon  as  she  lies
upon  side;  mostly  in  one  side  of  abdomen.

I  Abdomen  feels  as  if  hanging  heavily ;  walks  bent.

I  I  Accumulation  of  flatus  in  r.  side  of  upper  abdomen,  more
towards  back,  with  pinching  pains.

BMuch  flatulence  and  distension  of  abdomen,  caused  by  things
which  usually  digested  easily.

B  Flatus  collects  here  and  there  in  abdomen,  under  short  ribs,
in  hypogastric  region,  causing  pinching  and  pressure,  and
very  gradually  passing  down  into  rectum,  with  sensation  of
heat.

BMeteoristic  distention  of  abdomen. ^Typhus.

B Meteorism,  with  loud  rumbling;  fetid  or  odorless  flatus.

B  Abdomen  distended,  >  from  passing  wind  upwards  or  down-
wards.

bAs  pain  decreases,  gurgling  begins  in  abdomen.

Pain  above  umbilicus  on  touch.

Burning  on  skin  of  r.  side  of  abdomen.

BEngorgement  of  portal  system.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. B  Flatus,  hot,  moist,  offensive.

i  Passage  of  ofi'ensive,  at  last  moist,  flatus,  with  painfuP  drag-
ging towards  sacrum,  and  thence  toward  abdomen.

BPassages  of  great  quantities  of  flatus.

B Faeces  escape  with  flatus.

1  Stools:  burning,  light-colored,  fetid,  watery,  bloody,  with
tenesmus;  covered  with  fllamentous  yellow  mucus,  last  part
bloody;  putrid,  cadaverous  smelling,  involuntary;  dysen-
teric, terribly  offensive;  thin,  pale  mucous;  in  fragments,
tough,  scanty,  with  urging  and  tingling  in  rectum,  and  press-
ure on  bladder  and  uterus.

8  Stools  of  ashy  gray  color,  and  mushy  consistency. ^Carditis.

i Putrid  stools,  cold  breath,  after  stool  pressing  in  small  of
back  toward  bladder  and  in  rectum,  with  burning  in  rectum ;
feeling  of  emptiness,  weakness,  anxiety  and  trembling  de-
bility. ^Dysentery.

I  Profuse  diarrhoea  in  tuberculous  patients,  with  great  tympa-
nitis.

I  Painful  diarrhoea  of  old  people.

lEven  soft  stool  passed  with  difficulty.

Constipation;  solid  stool  enveloped"in  mucus;  tough,  scanty,
not  properly  cohering  stool.

B Ineffectual  urging  to  stool;  only  wind  passes  with  painful
pressure  in  rectum.

B  Before  stool  much  pressure  with,  at  same  time,  pressure  on,
the  bladder  and  in  the  back  (frequent  in  women);  at  last
with  pains  like  labor,  and  great  straining,  a  soft  stool  is
voided.

B  Tenesmus  in  rectum.


335  •  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

Stitch  through  rectum  from  os  coccygis  as  if  with  a  hot  pin.

In  rectum  and  anus,  burning,  both  independently  of,  and  dur-
ing, the  evacuation  of  flatus  and  stool.

I  Itching  and  burning,  stitches  and  cutting  pain  at  stool.

■  I  Burning  in  rectum.

I  Gnawing  in  rectum  when  not  at  stool.

1  Crawling  in  rectum;  ascarides.

I  x\crid,  corrosive  moisture  from  rectum.

H  Haemorrhoids :  protrude;  blue;  suppurating  and  offensive;
with  burning;  after  debauchery  ;  cause  dysuria;  after  abuse
of  sulphur,  with  extreme  acidity  of  stomach  and  obstinate
intestinal  and  gastric  catarrh,  with  extreme  secretion  of  mu-
cus; hgemurrhoidal  conditions  with  epistaxis.

8  Stitches  towards  anus.

I  Burning  in  anus  after  a  stool.

I  Sticking  in  anus  during  stool,  as  with  needles.

B  Soreness  of  anus.

B  Bitching  of  anus.

BA  glutinous  moisture  of  a  musty  odor  exudes  in  considerable
quantity  from  anus,  at  night.

BPassage  of  mucus,  with  urging  in  anus.

B  Bleeding  from  anus,  during  and  after  stool.

More  of  a  relaxation  than  contraction  of  anus.

I  I  Soreness  of  perineum,  with  painful  itching  when  touched.

B  Soreness,  with  itching  and  moisture  of  perineum  at  night.

BS  Rawness  and  chafing  of  children  in  hot  weather.

BB  Cholera  asiatica,  stage  of  collapse.

B  Intestinal  ulcers,  with  profuse  stools  resembling  washings  of
flesh,  smelling  like  carrion. ^Typhus.

B Bowels  inactive  and  constipated. ^Intermittent  fever.

B  Passage  of  tape-worm.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Soreness  at  neck  of  bladder.

i  Pressure  on  bladder.

B Tearing  in  urethra  on  urinating,  and  the  last  drops  are  like
mucus.

Frequent,  anxious  urging  to  urinate,  day  and  night.
' Cutting  pain  on  urinating.

B  Incontinence  of  urine;  wetting  bed  at  night.

a  Urine almost  suppressed, dark  in  color;  thick,  with  stale

• odor.

B  Urine  suppressed. ^Cholera  asiatica.

Urine:  scanty,  reddish,  turbid,  as  if  miked  with  blood;  too
dark ;  with  red  sediment ;  bloody,  with  varices  of  anus  and
bladder ;  copious,  light-yellow,  diabetic  ;  milky.

BBlenorrhoea  vesica;  old  people.

B  Morbus  Brightii,  from  abuse  of  alcohol.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. B  Sexual  instinct  suppressed.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  336

I  Seminal  discharge  too  early  during  coitus,  followed  by  roar-

ing in  head.

I I  After  sexual  excesses  and  onanism.

■  Onanism  during  sleep.

■  Too  frequent  pollutions,  particularly  in  morning.

■  Prostatic  discharge,  while  straining  at  stool.

■  Smooth,  red,  moist  spots  on  glans  penis.
Pressure  in  testicles.

■  Swelling  of  testicles  from  metastasis  of  mumps.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Menses  :  too  early,  too  profuse ;
blood  pale  or  thick,  corrosive,  acrid  smelling;  scanty;  too
frequent,  preceded  by  spasmodic  colic,  and  attended  by  vio-
lent headache  and  colic  ;  preceded  or  followed  by  leucorrhoea.
At  the  time  menses  should  appear,  violent  itching  of  old  tettery
eruptions.

■  Menorrhagia,  burning  across  sacrum,  passive  flow.

■  Metrorrhagia  from  uterine  atony ;  cold  and  deathly  pale,  wants

to  be  fanned.

■  Burning, smarting and soreness, with abundant leucor-

rhoea, most  abundant  in  early  morning.

■  Corroding leucorrhoea, with swelling of female genitals.

^Prurigo.

■  Leucorrhoea:  thin,  in  morning  on  arising,  not  through  day;

milky,  excoriating;  thick  yellow,  preceding  or  following
menses ;  intermitting,  coming  and  going  suddenly ;  with
soreness  and  rawness  in  pudenda.

■  Vaginal  fistula,  burning  pains.

■  Varices  of  vulva,  itching  of  vulva  and  anus;  cause  dysuria.

■  Red,  sore  places  on  pudenda;  aphthae;  also  during  leucor-

rhoea.

■  ■Soreness,  itching,  burning  and  swelling  of  pudenda. ^Pru-

rigo.

■  Erectile  tumors  in  genitals;  blue,  hard,  pricking.

■  Uterine  cancer;  paroxysmal  spells  of  burning  in  uterine  re-

gion ;  varicose  veins  in  genitals ;  cold  knees  in  bed.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, s  Labor-pains  weak,
or  ceasing,  with  great  debility ;  especially  after  severe  dis-
ease or  great  loss  of  fluids.

■  Brown,  foul  smelling  lochia.

■  ■Debility  from  nursing. ^Gastralgia.
I  Suppression  of  milk.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  mammae.

■  Lumps  in  mammae,  with  induration  of  axillary  glands,  with

burning  pains. Comp.  Carh.  an, ^Scirrhus.
Neuralgic  nodes  in  mammae.

■  Intertrigo  or  chafing  of  infants.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Voice  weak
or  extinct. ^Asiatic  cholera.


337  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

I  Deep  voice,  failing  if  exerted;  no  pain.

iHoarseness:  and  rawness, <  evenings;  aphonia  mornings;

in  damp,  cool  weather;  chronic; <  from  damp,  evening  air;

warm, wet  weather,  and  from  talking;  resembling  a  bass

voice.
■  Cannot  speak  a  loud  word,  or  voice  becomes  deep  and  rough,

or  fails.

I  Obstinate  hoarseness;  <  in  evening.  ^Tracheitis.  ^Asth-
matic affections. ^Hydrothorax.

IHoarseness  early  in  morning; <  worse  in  damp,  cool  weather.

I  Hoarseness ;  <  worse  in  afternoon,  evening  and  from  speak-
ing. ^Stomacace.

IHoarseness,  following  croup.

I  He  is  obliged  to  clear  his  throat  so  often  in  the  evening,  that
the  larynx  becomes  raw  and  sore.

I  When  coughing,  severe  pain  in  larynx  and  in  region  of  thy-
roid cartilage,  as  if  ulcerated.

I  Ulcerative  pain  or  scraping,  and  titillation  in  larynx.

II  Great  roughness  in  larynx,  with  deep,  rough  voice,  which
failed  if  he  exerted  it,  though  without  pain  in  the  throat.

I  Tingling,  tickling  in  larynx.
Irritation  in  larynx  causes  sneezing. ^Influenza.
I  Unusual  feeling  of  dryness  in  trachea,  not  relieved  by  hawk-
ing.

■  Laryngeal  phthisis  with  irritative  fever;  after  Bellad.
I  Chronic  bronchitis,  particularly  in  old  people.

■  Bronchial  catarrh,  hoarse,  mucous  rales;  chest  and  ribs,  as  if

bruised;  blue  nails  and  cold  extremities.
I  Whooping  cough  in  beginning ;  spasmodic,  with  retching  and
vomiting.

■  In  highest  grade  of  croup:  bluish  color  of  face,  pale,  pulse

small  and  intermittent; difficult  breathing  and whistling,
with complete insensibility and no  cough; rare,  muffled
cough,  semi-comatose  or  constant  restlessness,  with  clinging
to  persons.
,^®  Respiration. I  Offensive  breath. ^Typhus.

■  Breath  cold. ^Asiatic  cholera. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Cold  breath,  coldness  of  throat,  mouth  and  teeth.

■  ■Breathing  short,  with  cold  hands  and  leet.
Breathing  deeply  causes  fatigue  of  back.
Loud  breathing  during  sleep.

■  Loud,  rattling  breathing;  cough  ceases;  oedema  pulraonum

impending.

■  ■Desires  to  be  fanned,  must  have  more  air.

Loses  breath  on  turning  in  bed,  or  when  going  to  sleep.

■  Inclination  to  sigh,  and  to  take  a  deep  breath. ^Intermittent

fever.
VOL.  III. — 22


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  338

I  Difficult  breathing,  fullness  of  chest,  and  palpitation  on  slight-
est motion.

■  Breathing  laborious,  quick  and  short;  only  a  catching  for
breath.

Shortness  of  breath  while  walking.

I  Great  dyspnoea,  great  anxiety,  but  not  restless  ;  cough  in  vio-
lent spells,  watery,  profuse  expectoration. ^Emphysema.

I  Asthma  of  old  people  and  of  poor,  exhausted  constitutions;
weakness,  trembling ;  looks  as  if  dying ;  full  of  wind,  but
cannot  raise  it;  >•  in  cold  air;  •<  in  morning.
^^  Cough.  B  Cough  caused  by  itching  in  larynx  (with  tenacious,
salty  expectoration),  in  evening  on  going  to  sleep,  and  in
morning  after  waking.

iHalf  involuntary,  rough  cough,  caused  by  constant  rough-
ness and  crawling  in  throat.

B Cough  :  spasmodic,  hollow,  in  short,  hard  spells;  continuous,
hard  and  dry;  caused  by  a  feeling  as  of  vapor  of  sulphur;
<C  evening  or  before  midnight;  at  times  dry,  painful,  at
others  with  purulent,  slimy,  offensive,  or  salty  sputa ;  with
copious  sputa  night  and  morning;  and  vomiting  after  other
symptoms  of  whooping-cough  are  gone;  with  painful  stitches
through  head;  <  goiiig  fi'om  warm  to  cold  places;  motion;
walking  in  open  air ;  after  lying  down ;  evening  in  bed  from
eating  or  drinking,  especially  cold  food  or  drink  ;  from  talk-
ing; on  expiration;  during  supper.

B Cough  is  mostly  hard  and  dry,  and  hoarse  or  rough  sound-
ing ;  is  most  apt  to  occur  after  a  full  meal,  and  ends  in  vom-
iting. ^Whooping  cough.

BPain  in  chest  after  cough;  burning  as  from  a  coal  of  fire.

B  Soreness  of  chest  and  heat  of  body  when  coughing.

BEvery  violent  coughing  spell  either  brings  up  a  lump  of  phlegm,
which  relieves,  or  it  is  followed  by  retching,  gagging  and
waterbrash.

B Obstinate  cough  preventing  sound  sleep;  getting  <  towards
morning  and  from  talking ;  also  upon  persons  approaching
or  passing;  pulse  only  72;  there  is  also  dyspnoea,  and  is
compelled  to  lie  with  head  high ;  on  percussion  the  whole
lung  gives  forth  a  dull  sound. ^Hydrothorax.

B  Spasmodic  cough  in  three  or  four  paroxysms  daily.
Bitching  internally  from  throat  down  centre  of  chest,  <  when
coughing.

Sputa:  tough  and  greenish,  yellow-green  or  purulent;  brown,
bloody ;  or  less  often  tenacious  whitish mucus,  or  watery  ;
of  sour  or  saltish  taste;  of  unpleasant  odor.
B  Feeling  of  mucus  in  throat,  at  night,  choking  her  when  she

coughs,  <<  when  sitting  up  or  moving.
BMuch  hawking  of  mucus.
B  Continual  mucous  expectoration,  or  gagging  and  vomiting  of


339  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

mucus ;  great  exhaustion  after  every  coughing  spell,  blue-
ness  of  skin,  >  from  hard  fanning. ^Pertussis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Cutting  and  aching  pain  in  chest.

I  Burning  under  sternum;  rattling  of  large  bubbles ;  dyspnoea;
cold  knees  in  bed.

I  Burning  in  chest,  as  from  glowing  coals;  rawness  and  sore-
ness.

I  Haemoptysis,  burning  in  chest,  paroxysms  of  violent  cough,
hoarse;  paleface;  cold  skin;  slow,  intermittent  pulse;  wants
to  be  fanned.

■  Dull  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  extending  into  short  ribs.
I  Stitches  in  chest. Cormp.  ICali  car b.

I  Oppressive  tearing  in  left  chest.

I  Pressive  pain  in  upper  right  chest,  through  to  scapula.

I  Aching  and  tearing  in  chest,  extending  to  hips.

I  In  left  middle  chest  painful  spot  size  of  dollar,  with  cough.
(^Stomacace.

Pain  in  chest  from  drinking  cold  water.

I  Pain  in  1.  lung,  hard,  heavy,  constant,  confined  to  main  bron-
chial tubes;  great  susceptibility  to  cold;  after  inhalation  of
great  heat  from  a  fire.

A  tight  feeling  in  chest,  and  constant  desire  to  cough,  from  a
scraped  feeling  and  a  tickling  in  throat  and  trachea.

■  After  disappearance  of  coryza,  chest  much oppressed,  with

wheezing  and  rattling;  he  was  unable  to  remain  in  bed  on
account  of  want  of  air,  and  cough,  which  affected  him  even
to  vomiting,  and  was  difficult  to  loosen.

Itching  from  throat  down  centre  of  chest; <  by  coughing.

IB  Weak,  fatigued  feeling  of  chest,  particularly  on  waking.

■  Congestion  to  chest  and  head.-

1  Pleuritic  serous  exudation,  with  hectic  fever  and  evening  ag-
gravation.
Asthmatic  affections  from  hydrothorax.

■  Chronic  asthma:  once  or  twice  monthly;  better  in  summer;

attacks  come  always  during  sleep,  either  after  midnight  or
in  the  afternoon  sleep ;  patiertt  nas  to  get  out  of  bed  and
sit  by  the  table,  and  so  work  off  the  attack ;  the  chest  feels
as  if  walled  up,  and  only  with  the  greatest  exertion  is  the
panting  breath  drawn.

■  Inveterate  cases  of  asthma  in  old  people; <  early  in  morn-

ing; >■  in  cold  air;  increase  of  saliva;  appearance  as  if
dying. ^Asthma.

■  Coughs  day  and  night,  with burning and  pressing under

sternum ;  expectorates  yellow,  purulent  matter  and  tuber-
cles. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

■  Phthisis  tuberculosa  incipiens,  or  septic  condition  with  pros-

tration, sunken  features,  sallow  complexion,  emaciation  and
hectic.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  340

llPneumonia:  third  stage,  fetid  sputum;  cold  breath  and  sweat;
wants  to  be  fanned;  threatened  paralysis  of  lungs.
^'  Heart,  Pulse  and Circulation. Prsecordial anguish as
though  he  would  die.

■  Burning  in  region  of  heart.

■  Palpitation:  excessive,  for  days ;  after  eating;  when  sitting.
I  Orgasm  of  blood,  visible  palpitation,  internal  heat,  especially

when  sitting  ;  anguish  and  great  thirst. ^Carditis.
I  Pulse,  thread-like;  weak  and  small ;  intermittent;  weak  and

faint;  hardly  to  be  felt.
I  Pulse  very  irregular,  intermitting,  frequent. ^Carditis.
I  Blood  stagnates  in  capillaries,  cyanosis;  cold  face  and  limbs;

cold  sweat;  complete  torpor;  impending  paralysis  of  heart.

^Yellow  fever.
Aneurisms;  blue  varicosities;  fine  capillary  net-work  having

a  marbled  appearance.
^  Outer  Chest. Sensation  of  shortness  of  breath, with tearing,

drawing,  burning  pains  of  outer  chest.
iBrown-yellow  blotches  on  chest.
I  Itching  and  soreness  in  axillse.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I  Tearing  in  cervical  muscles.

■  Drawing  in  nape, up into  head,  with  nausea  and rush of

water  from  mouth.
iStiflTness  of  nape  of  neck.

■  Cervical glands  swollen  and painful, especially those  near

nape.

■  Single,  scattered,  red  spots  on  neck.

■  Pain  in  scapular  region.

;rPain between shoulders,  both  sides  of  spine  when  moving
head ;  ^  from  warmth  of  stove.

■  Rheumatic  drawing  in  back  •<  when  stooping.
1  I  Drawing  pain  in  back,  mostly  when  sitting.

■  Stiffness  of  back;  spine  becomes  bent.
Shuddering  in  back.

Itching  acne  on  back.

■  Severe  pain  in  small  of  back,  she  was  unable  to  sit;  then

sensation  as  of  a  plug  in  back,  had  to  put  a  pillow  under  it.

■  Pinching,  pressive  pain  near  lowest  portion  of  spine.

■  Pressing,  crampy,  labor-like  colic  in  small  of  back and  in

bladder.

■  Pressive,  sore  pain  beneath  coccyx.

■  Burning  about  hips  and  scapulae  and  aching  along  spine.

■  Rheumatic  drawing  and  aching  from  loins  to  coccyx.

^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Burning  on  right  shoulder  and  scapula.

■  Stitches  and  tearing  pain  in  shoulders,  <  from  motion  and

in  morning.
Drawing  rheumatic  pains  in  r.  shoulder.


341  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

Cramp-like  tension  as  though  shoulders  would  be  drawn  to-
gether.
Stitches  and  burning  in  r.  axilla.

Pressing,  drawing  pain  below  r.  axilla,  <  from  motion.
I  Bruised  pain  in  both  elbow-joints,  painful  to  touch.

■  Drawing  in  arm  on  which  he  is  lying  at  night.

■  Drawing,  tearing  in  left  forearm,  from  elbow  to  hand.

■  Arms  weary  when  writing.

Paralytic  weakness  of  r.  arm  and  shoulder.

Drawing  in  shafts  of  bones  of  arm  painful  to  pressure.

■  Lacerating  pain  in  r.  wrist  when  trying  to  grasp  an  object";

could  not  retain  hold  on  account  of  a  paralytic  weakness  in
wrist. ^Ganglion.

■  Tearing:  in  either  wrist;  in  fingers  of  left  hand.
Joints  of  hands,  <  in  windy  weather.
Paralytic  pain  in  carpus  from  motion.

Sensation  of  shortening  of  tendons  in  wrist  and  hand.

Sprained  feeling  in  r.  hand.

Hands:  burn;  icy  cold;  tips  of  fingers  covered  with  cold  sweat;

numb in morning and when washing; tearing pains in

hands  and  fingers.

■  Burning in palms of hands, principally when working.

^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
Itching  in  palms  of  hands  at  night.
Boring, tearing,  drawing,  pricking,  stitches  and  burning  in

fingers  and  finger-joints.

■  Paralytic  weakness  of  fingers  when  seizing  anything.

■  Cramp  of  fingers,  drawing  them  out  of  shape.

White,  slightly  reddened  swelling  of  fingers,  also  disappearino'
suddenly.

■  iFine  itching  eruption  on  hands.
Pulsation  in  tips  of  fingers.

^* Lower  Limbs. (Tearing  near  and  beneath  left  hip,  extending
to  sacrum.

■  Drawing  pain  in  hip-joints,  extending  down  thighs,  <  when

walking.

■  Hip  disease:  third  stage,  black,  ichorous,  offensive  discharge;

great  weakness.

■  Severe  laming,  drawing  pain  from  abdomen  down  left  leg.

■  Severe  paralytic  drawing  pain,  extending  from  abdomen  down

into  1.  leg.
Tearing  in  r.  hip  and  thigh.

Stitches  in  thigh,  passing  downwards  when  walking.
Crampy  pain  on  outside  of  1.  thigh  on  lifting  it,  when  ascending

stairs.
Burning  and  rheumatic  drawing  in  thighs.
Tension  in  thigh  in  morning.
Constrictive  pain  in  thigh,  causing  leg  to  give  way  in  walking.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  342

I  I  Itching  on  thigh  near  scrotum ;  the  place  is  moist.

Twitching  of  muscles  of  thigh.

Stiffness  in  thighs  on  standing  up;  numbness  when  walking.

Stitches  in  patella  on  rising  after  sitting.

Burning  in  and  about  knees.

Paralytic  pain  in  knees.

Lassitude and sensation  as  if  knees  would  give  way  when

walking  and  standing.
Sensation  as  though  knee  was  swollen.
Knees  go  to  sleep.
IB  Cold  knees,  particularly  in  night.
Tension  in  knee  and  hip-joints  on  awaking.
Legs  and  knees  were  drawn  up  involuntarily.
Cramp  in  lower  leg  when  walking.
I  Uneasy  feeling  in  legs  in  evening,  in  bed ;  had  to  stretch  them

often.

I  Left  lower  leg  feels  paralyzed.
Lassitude  in  legs  from  noon  until  evening.

I I  Ulcer  on  leg  burns  at  night;  discharge  offensive;  mottled,
purple.

Iln  ulcers  on  leg,  gangrene,  burning,  but  <  from  warmth,

yet  not  >  from  cold.
Cramp  in  calves  at  night.
Stitches  in  1.  ankle-joint.

On  treading,  pain  as  though  metatarsi  were  torn  apart.
I  Cramp  in  soles,  evening  after  lying  down;  toes  crooked.
Burning  in  soles  of  feet.

Pain  in  soles  of  feet  as  though  they  were  too  soft  when  walking.
Stitch  in  r.  great  toe.
Tearing  pains  in  toes,  <C  from  walking.
I  Toes  red,  swollen,  stinging,  as  if  frosted.
Tearing  under  toe-nails  in  evening  until  night.

■  Tips  of  toes  ulcerated.

■  Very  cold  feet  in  evening.
Continual  insensibility  of  feet  to  touch.

lledness  and  swelling  of  feet,  with  sticking  pains  as  though

frozen.
I  Feet  swollen  at  night. ^Gastralgia.
Foot-sweat  when  walking.
Tearing  in  legs,  from  collection  of  flatus  in  bowels.

■  Sensation  of  stiffness  in  legs,  after  an  evening  nap,  so  that  he

was  unsteady  while  walking  until  he  had  walked  a  little.

■  Heaviness  in  lower  limbs.
Restlessness  of  legs.
Limbs  go  to  sleep.

1  Foot-sweat,  excoriating  toes.
^* Limbs  in  General. ■  Burning:  in  limbs;  in  hands  and  soles,
during  menses;  in  bones  and  ulcers.


343  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

I  In  the  extremities  acliiiig  and  burning  pains,  but  especially
lassitude,  heaviness  and  even  numbness ;  generally  diminished
by  repose,  but  often  in  the  legs  a  restlessness,  so  that  one
knows  not  where  to  place  the  limbs.

Violent  pressure  in  arms  and  legs.

I  Boring  pain  in  all  limbs  as  if  in  marrow  of  bones,  before
attack. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Drawing  pain  in  limbs.

•  Rheumatic  pains,  with  flatulency.

iLimbs:  feel  bruised;  numb;  "go  to  sleep"  when  lying  on

them.
Pains  in  limbs  as  though  from  sprain  or  overlifting.

■  Weariness,  especially  in  limbs.

■  Great  weariness  and  stretching  of  limbs  in  morning.
Bruised  feeling  in  joints,  >  after  rising.

Sluggish,  tired trembling in limbs, and  sweating  easily  in

morniYig.
Twitching  of  single  limbs  during  day.
Twitching  in  arms  and  legs  in  evening  in  bed.  ^

■  The  limb  upon  which  he  lies  goes  to  sleep  easily.
Coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  <  in  evening.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Repose  : >  aching,  burning,  las-
situde, heaviness,  numbness.

■  Lying  in  bed,  bending  double  and  getting  warm  relieves  gas-

tralgia.

Lying  down :  anxiety  ;  pains  in  eyes ;  cough  ;  drawing  in
arm  ;  cramp  in  soles  ;  limbs  feel  bruised  ;  <  pain  in  stom-
ach ;  on  back  and  stomach.

Sitting:  <  vertigo  ;  orgasm  of  blood  ;  drawing  pain  of  back  ;
she  had  to  loosen  clothing  on  account  of  pressure  in  scrobi-
culus  cordis.

Rising  :  after  sitting,  stitches  in  patella  ;  heaviness  and  stifl"-
ness  in  limbs.

Standing  :  stiffness  of  thighs  ;  lassitude  in  knees.

Motion :  slightest,  difficult  breathing ;  stitches  and  tearing
pain  in  shoulders  ;  pressing  drawing  pain  below  r.  axilla.

Moving  :  jaws,  rustling  in  ears.

Turning  :  in  bed,  loses  breath.

Washing  :  tearing  pains  in  hands  and  fingers.

Writing  :  arms  weary.

Treading  :  down,  pain  in  metatarsi ;  joints  feel  bruised.

Walking  :  <  vertigo  ;  head  sensitive  to  cold  ;  >  aching  pain
in  orbits  ;  shortness  of  breath  ;  drawing  pains  in  hip-joints  ;
stitches  in  thighs  ;  constrictive  pain  in  thigh  ;  lassitude  in
knees  ;  cramp  in  lower  legs  ;  pain  in  soles  ;  tearing  pain  in
toes  ;  foot  sweat ;  stiffness  of  legs  ;  weary  after  a  short
walk  ;  most  pains  appear.

Lifting :  thigh,  going  up  stairs,  crampy  pain  in  thigh.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  344

■  Effects  from  overlifting.
Inspiration  :  stitching  pain  in  liver..

^®  Nerves.  I  Vital  forces  nearly  exhausted,  cold  surface,  especially
below  knees  to  feet;  lies  as  if  dead;  breath  cool;  pulse  in-
termittent, thready;  cold  sweat  on  limbs.

■  Depression,  not  preceded  by  erethism  or  excitement.
I  Faint-like  weakness  in  attacks.

Weakness  makes  talking  difficult.

■  Indolent,  weary,  in  morning  in  bed.

Sensation  of  great  weariness  in  bed  and  in  morning.

■  Weary  after  a  short  walk.

■  Prostration towards noon, head feels empty, sensation of

hunger.
Lassitude  in  evening  and  in  open  air.
Sensation  of  weakness  in  body  at  night.
Weakness,  with  trembling  in  body.

■  Want  of  nervous  irritability,  of  susceptibility  to  medicines.

■  Collapse. ^Asiatic  cholera. /^Yellow  fever.

■  Great  restlessness  at  night. ^Intermittent  fever.
After  a  spree.

Spasms;  also  before  onset  of  menses.
^^ Sleep. ■  Sleepiness  in  forenoon  while  sitting,  and  when  reading;
removed  by  motion.

■  Sleepy  during  day; had  to  sleep  before  and  after  noon;  at

night  sleep  full  of  fancies,  weary  and  unrefreshed  on  rising.

■  Early  sleepiness  in  the  evening,  but  cannot  go  to  sleep  early

after going to bed ; anxiety, restlessness ; congestion of
head  prevents  sleep.
Drowsiness,  after  dinner  and  in  evening.

■  Frequent  yawning  and  stretching,  which  seem  to  do  good.

■  Sleepless,  from  uneasiness  in  body;  from  orgasm  of  blood.

■  Does  not  fall  asleep  until  1  a.m.

■  ■Awakens  often  from  cold  limbs,  especially  cold  knees.
Could  not  go  to  sleep  at  night  on  account  of  itching  on  arms,

hands,  and  between  fingers.
Bad  effects  from  nightwatching  or  revelling.

■  Legs  drawn  up  during  sleep,  which  is  restless  and  disturbed

by  frequent  waking.
Flying  pains  before  going  to  sleep.
Trembling  anxiety  on  awaking.

■  Night  full  of  dreams;  unrefreshed  after  sleep.
Restlessness ;  she  had  to  go  through  deep  water.

^^  Time.  Night :  flightiness  ;  fear  of  ghosts  ;  epistaxis  ;  cramp  in
stomach  ;  moisture  exuding  from  anus  ;  soreness  and  itch-
ing ;  frequent  urging  to  urinate  ;  wetting  the  bed  ;  mucus
in  throat ;  drawing  in  arm ;  palms  of  hand  itch ;  cold  knees ;
tearing  under  toe-nail  ;  feet  swollen  ;  weakness  ;  great  rest-
lessness; exhausting  sweats;  burning  in  bed;  sluggishness.


345  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

Morning :  confusion  of  head  ;  trembling  anxiety  ;  fainting
after  sleep  ;  headache  and  nausea  ;  head  sensitive  to  cold  ;
itching  about  eye  ;  burning-smarting  female  sexual  organs  ;
cough  after  waking  ;  asthma  ;  stitches  and  tearing  pain  in
shoulders  ;  hands  burn  ;  limbs  weary  ;  tired  trembling  ;  in-
dolent, weary  ;  exhausting  sweats  ;  extreme  lassitude.

1  A.M. :  does  not  fall  asleep  until  after.

3  A.M. :  violent  constriction  ;  labor- like  colic.
Forenoon  :  mouth  and  gums  bleed  ;  sleepiness.
Afternoon  :  hoarseness  ;  drowsiness.

4  to  6  P.M. :  restless,  anxious.

Evening:  lack  of  cheerfulness;  anxiety,  as  if  oppressed ;  much
excited ;  throbbing  in  head ;  scalp  itches ;  eyes  pain  ;  watery
discharge  from  nose;  jerking  tearing  1.  zygoma;  drawing  pain
around  waist ;  hoarseness  obstinate ;  cough  ;  hectic  fever  ;
uneasy  feeling  in  legs  ;  lassitude  of  legs  ;  tearing  under  toe-
nails ;  legs  stiff ;  lassitude;  sleepy;  drowsiness;  weariness.

Day  and  night :  cough  ;  itching  over  body.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Ill  efiects  from  getting  over-
heated.

Warmth  : <<  ulcers  on  leg.

Warm  room  : >>  head  ;  in  bed,  scalp  itches.

Warm  in  bed  :  itching  all  over  body  ;  inclination  to  uncover.

From  cold  and  warpa  substances  taken  into  mouth  :  toothache.

Going  from  warm  to  cold  places  :  cough.

Cold  water  :  pain  in  chest.

Cold  air :  <  head  ;  >  inveterate  cases  of  asthma  ;  suscepti-
bility.

Open  air  :  >>  pain  in  orbits  and  eyeballs  ;  lassitude.

Damp  evening  air  : <  hoarseness.

Damp  cold  weather  : <  hoarseness.

Bad  consequences  from  living  in  damp  dwellings.

Windy  weather  : <  joints  of  hands,

1  Worse  in  changes  of  weather,  especially  warm,  damp  weather;
protracted  sultry  weather.
*"  Fever. I  Shivering  in  evening,  with  weariness  and  flushes  of
heat  before  sleep.

Coldness  and  chilliness  of  body,  ■<  at  night.

Before  chill :  throbbing  in  temples ;  tearing  in  bones  of  limbs
and  in  teeth  ;  cold  feet.

I  Chill,  generally  with  thirst;  mostly  evenings,  at  times  left-
sided.

Chill  in  morning.

I  Very  cold  hands  and  feet  in  evening.

I  Chill,  with  icy  coldness  of  body.

Internal  chilliness,  with  great  thirst.

I  Chill  with  great  thirst,  then  heat  with  slight  thirst  or  only  in
beginning.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  346

I  Lassitude  during  chill.

One-sided  chills.

(Heat,  after  or  independent  of  chill.

■  Flushes  of  burning  heat,  evening;  generally  without  thirst.
Heat,  with  great  anxiety,  in  evening.

■  General  burning  heat  in  evening;  at  night,  in  bed.
I  Heat  and  sweat  commingled.

Heat  and  sweat  in  evening.

During  heat:  headache,  vertigo,  redness  of  face,  dimness  of
vision,  nausea,  pain  in  stomach,  abdomen  and  chest,  dys-
pnoea, pain  in  legs.

Sweat:  over  whole  body  after  fainting;  during  meals.

■  Sweats  easily,  especially  about  head  and  face.

■  Exhausting  night  or  morning  sweats.

■  Sweat:  profuse;  putrid  or  sour.
Sweat  most  on  upper  part  of  body.

■  Chill,  with  a  marked  degree  of  thirst;  no  thirst,  or  but  slight

during  fever,  but  patient  wishes  to  be  fanned  all  the  time,  as
if  to  compensate  for  the  lack  of  thirst.

■  ■Adynamic  and  gastric  fevers,  occurring  in  hot  weather  from

abuse  of  ice-water,  and  other  Summer  beverages.

■  Hectic  fever.

■  Typhoid and yellowfever patients : cyanotic, coldness of

limbs,  almost  in  agony  of  death ; impending  paralysis of
heart  and  collapse.

■  ■Yellow  fever:  third  stage,  hemorrhages,  with  great  paleness

of  face,  violent  headache,  great  heaviness  in  limbs  and  tremb-
ling of  body.  *

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Several  times  daily  for  weeks  : nose-
bleed.
Twice  monthly  :  asthma.

*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  tearing  drawing  in  occiput ;
ear  hot ;  nostril  crawling  ;  zygoma  jerk-like  tearing  ;  pain
in  teeth  ;  side  of  chest,  stitches  ;  oppressive  tearing  ;  wrist
and  fingers  tearing  ;  leg,  laming  drawing  from  abdomen  ;
paralytic  drawing  pain  in  leg ;  ankle,  stitches  ;  sided  chill.
Right :  side  of  forehead,  pain  ;  discharge  from  eye ;  ear,  pain ;
lobe  of  liver,  painful ;  side,  upper  abdomen,  flatus  ;  side  of
abdomen,  burning  of  skin  ;  upper  chest,  pressive  pain  ;
shoulder,  drawing,  rheumatic  pain  ;  axilla,  pressing  draw-
ing pain;  arm,  paralytic  pain;  wrist,  lacerating  pain;
tearing  in  hip.

*  "Just  as  the  milk  of  sulphur  applied  to  the  skin  (worn  in  the  stock-
ings) is  the  best  preventive  of  cholera,  so  Carbo  vegetabilis  is  the  best  pre-
ventive of  yellow  fever."— C.  Hg.

"In  Memphis,  1873,  charcoal  came  much  into  favor  as  a  prophylactic;  out
of  more  than  fifty  persons  who  took  it  and  were  constantly  exposed  to  the
fever,  not  one  was  attacked ;  the  usual  dose  was  half  a  teaspoonful  of  the
crude  powder,  two  or  three  times  a  day."^Dr.  L.  Morse.


3^7  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

Upper  :  part  of  body  :  sweat.
^^  Sensations, l  Pains  fly  all  over  body. ^Neuralgia.

As  if  integuments  of  head  were  contracted  ;  as  if  a  strap  were
drawn  tightly  across  forehead  ;  as  though  he  would  be  at-
tacked by  paralytic  stroke  ;  as  if  hair  stood  on  end  ;  as  of
sand  in  eyes  ;  as  if  pharynx  were  swollen  or  contracted  ;  as
though  a  lump  were  thin  ;  as  if  dried  with  blotting  paper  ;
as  if  abdomen  would  burst,  after  eating  or  drinking  ;  as  of  a
hot  pin  in  rectum  ;  as  of  vapor  of  sulphur,  cough  ;  as  if
rolled  up,  chest  feels  ;  as  though  shoulders  would  be  drawn
together  ;  as  if  tendons  of  wrist  and  hand  were  shortening  ;
as  if  knees  would  give  way,  when  walking  and  standing  ;  as
though  knees  were  smaller;  as  if  frosted,  toes;  as  if  in  mar-
row of  bones  losing ;  as  if  being  stroked  with  hand  over
whole  body.

Sensitive  : teeth  ;  gums  painfully  ;  tongue  ;  epigastric  region.

Burning  :  in  head  ;  on  outer  head  ;  in  eyes  ;  canthi  ;  ulcers
on  tongue,  like  live  coals  ;  in  fauces  ;  in  throat ;  in  epigas-
tric region,  up  to  throat ;  region  of  liver  ;  on  skin  of  r.  side
of  abdomen  ;  stools  ;  in  rectum  ;  hemorrhoids  ;  female  or-
gans ;  as  from  a  coal  of  fire  in  chest ;  under  sternum ;  hseraop-
tysis;  region  of  heart;  about  hips,  and  in  scapulse;  hands;
palms;  finger-joints;  in  thighs;  knees;  gangrenous  ulcers  ;
soles  of  feet ;  without  thirst ;  in  bones  ;  skin.

Lancinating  :  in  epigastrium.

Cutting  :  pain,  at  stool ;  pain,  on  urinating ;  in  abdomen  ;  in
chest.

Boring  :  finger-joints  ;  in  limbs.

Stitching  :  headache  ;  through  head  ;  in  throat ;  region  of
liver ;  region  of  spleen  ;  through  rectum  ;  at  stool ;  towards
anus  ;  in  chest ;  in  shoulders  ;  maxilla  ;  finger-joints  ;  in
thighs  ;  in  patella  ;  1.  ankle  ;  r.  toe  ;  all  over  body,  on  get-
ting warm  in  bed.

Itching  stitches  :  in  side  on  which  he  lies.

Sticking  :  in  anus  ;  through  feet.

Pricking  :  finger-joints.

Jerking  :  tearing  in  r.  upper  maxilla.

Tearing  :  1.  side  of  occiput ;  in  outer  head  ;  in  ears  ;  pains  in
1.  half  of  face  ;  in  incisor  teeth  ;  in  molars  ;  in  urethra  ;  in
chest;  in  shoulders  ;  in  1.  forearm,  from  elbow  to  hand;  r.
wrist ;  in  either  wrist ;  finger-joints  ;  near  and  beneath
1.  hip  ;  r.  hip  ;  pains  in  toes  ;  under  toe-nails  ;  in  legs  ;
bones  of  limbs  ;  in  various  parts,  at  night.

Drawing  :  1.  side  of  occiput ;  in  root  of  nose  ;  pains  in  facial
nerve ;  pain  in  upper  and  lower  jaw,  on  both  sides  ;  in
head,  and  confusion  ;  in  molars  ;  pains  around  waist ;  in
chest ; in  nape  of  neck  ; pain  in  back  to  coccyx  ; r.  shoul-


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  348

der;  r.  axilla;  in  arm  on  which  he  lies;  finger  joints  ;  pain
in  hip-joint ;  abdomen  to  leg.

Smarting :  female  organs.

Biting  :  in  and  above  nose  ;  in  fauces.

Pinching:  in  abdomen;  in  region  of  liver;  colic;  hypogastric
region  ;  lower  spine.

Griping  :  epigastric  region  ;  in  abdomen  ;  after  stool.

Pressing  :  region  of  spleen  ;  small  of  back  ;  r.  axilla.

Pressive  :  pain  on  vertex  ;  pain  in  lower  portion  of  occiput  ;
aching  in  eyeballs  ;  pain  on  posterior  part  of  palate  ;  colic  ;
pain  in  lower  spine  ;  sore  pain  beneath  coccyx.

Pressure  :  in  canthi  ;  in  stomach  ;  hypogastric  region  ;  on
bladder,  before  stool  ;  on  bladder  ;  in  testicles  ;  pain  in  up-
per r.  chest ;  arms  and  legs.

Rawness  :  in  throat ;  in  stomach.

Scraping  :  in  throat ;  in  chest.

Bruised  :  pain  in  liver  ;  feeling  in  joints  ;  pain  in  both  elbow-
joints  ;  in  limbs,  on  rising.

Aching  :  pain  in  orbits  ;  in  ears  ;  pains  in  facial  nerve  ;  epi-
gastric region  ;  in  chest ;  along  spine  to  coccyx  ;  in  ex-
tremities.

Soreness :  of  facial  bones  of  upper  and  lower  jaws ;  in  stomach  ;
of  anus  :  of  perineum  ;  female  organs  ;  of  chest ;  in  axillae.

Bursting  :  pain  <^  about  bladder.

Laming  :  pain  from  abdomen  down  leg.

Sprained  :  feeling  in  r.  hand.

Rheumatic  :  drawing  from  loins  to  coccyx  ;  r.  shoulder  ;  pain
in  limbs.

Pain:  in  stomach,  burning;  dull,  r.  hypochondria;  in  bowels,
as  from  lifting;  about  umbilicus;  in  chest;  in  scapular  re-
gion; severe  on  small  of  back  ;  in  limbs,  as  if  sprained.

Throbbing  :  in  head  ;  here  and  there  in  body.

Long :  teeth  feel.

Tenseness  :  in  hypochondria.

Tension  :  region  of  liver,  as  if  too  short  there  ;  in  chest ;  in
thighs  ;  in  knees.

Constriction :  of  scalp  ;  headache  ;  in  throat ;  violent  colic  ;
pain  in  thigh.

Contractive  cramp  in  stomach.

Cramp  :  of  fingers  ;  pain,  1.  thigh.

Cramp-like  :  tension  in  shoulders  ;  calves,  at  night ;  in  soles.

Uneasy  :  feeling  in  legs,  in  bed.

Discomfort :  in  stomach.

Fulness  :  in  head  ;  after  eating.

Emptiness  :  in  head  ;  after  putrid  stools.

Heavy  :  head  ;  feeling,  in  liver  ;  something,  seems  to  lie  be-
fore ears  ;  feeling,  in  stomach  ;  in  limbs.

Heaviness  :  after  eating  ;  in  rectum.


349  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

Lassitude  :  in  knees  ;  in  legs  ;  evening,  .in  open  air  ;  during

chill.
Weariness  :  of  limbs  ;  great,  in  bed  ;  unrefreshed.
Fatigue  :  of  back  ;  arms.
Dragging  :  after  stool.

Stiffness  :  in  thighs  ;  in  legs,  after  sleeping  in  evening.
Electric  :  shocks  in  head.
Tittillation  :  in  larynx  ;  in  chest.
Tingling  :  in  larynx.
Paralytic:  weakness  of  fingers;  pain  from  abdomen  down  leg;

pain  in  knees.
Numbness  :  in  legs.

Creeping :  in  epigastrium,  up  to  throat.
Crawling  :  1.  nostril ;  in  rectum  ;  in  throat.
Shuddering  :  in  back.

Coldness:  knees,  in  bed  :  hands;  of  body  ;  of  limbs.
Heat : head  and  hands  ; 1.  ear  ; mouth  ; in  rectum  ;  flatus  ;

internal ;  after  or  independent  of  chill ;  evening,  with  anxi-
ety ;  and  sweat.
Dryness  :  in  mouth  ;  in  trachea.
Itching:  about  eyes;  in  root  of  nose;  pain,  at  stool;  of  anus;

of  perineum;  of  old  herpetic  eruptions  ;  in  throat ;  axillse;

acne  on  back  ; of  palms  of  hands  ;  on  thigh ;  all  over  body ;

hands  and  calves.
**  Tissues. I  Symptoms  of  imperfect  oxydation  of  blood.

I  Blood  stagnates in  capillaries, causing blueness, coldness;

ecchymoses.

■  Aneurisms  bright  red,  round, flat,  bleeding  violently  from

least  wound.
I  Slightest  irritation  causes  bleeding  from  venous  capillaries.

■  Worse from loss of fluids; (hemorrhages, sweats, diar-

rhoeas, etc.)

■  Lymphatic  glands  swollen,  indurated,  or  suppurating;  burn-

ing pains.

■  ■Swelling  of  glands,  in  scrofulous  or  syphilitic  persons.
Scurvy ;  so  weak,  can  scarcely  walk.

Peritonitis,  with  tympanitis  and  paralysis  of  intestines.
Threatening  paralysis  of  lungs  in  third  stage  of  pneumonia.

■  Burning  in  bones  and  other  parts.

Long  standing  catarrhs  in  elderly  people  or  reduced  constitu-
tions ;  venous  capillary  dilatation  of  pharyngo- laryngeal
parts;  torpor  of  all  functions.

Organic  detrition  without  reaction.

■  Gangrene: humid;  senile;  in  cachectic  persons ;  when  vital

powers  have  become  weakened ;  great  foulness  of  the  secre-
tions ;  great  prostration.

■  Anaemia  after  summer  complaint;  feeble,  pallid,  white  skin.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.  350

I  Chlorosis, with itch -like rash and fluor albus  ; scorbutic

gums;  so  weak,  can  scarcely  walk.
Emaciation  and  withering  of  affected  parts.

I  Atrophy,  body  cold,  lies  as  if  dead,  yet  conscious.

I I  Sepsis,  sunken  features,  sallow  complexion,  hectic,  typhoid
symptoms.

Cholera  asiatica;  yellow  fever;  typhus;  epilepsy;  rheumatism.
^^ Touch. Passive  Motion, Injuries. Touch: scalp  pain-
ful ;  tearing  in  teeth  •<  ;  region  of  liver  painful  ;  soreness
of  perineum,  when  touched ; bruised  pain in  both  elbows
painful;  drawing  in  shaft  of  bones  painful  to  pressure;  con-
tinual insensibility  of  feet  to  touch.
Riding  aggravates  :  soreness  in  limbs  ;  colic.
I  Effects  from  overlifting.

Shock  from  injury  : stupor,  want  of  vision  and  hearing,  col-
liquative cadaverous  diarrhoea,  cold  sweat,  rattling  breath-
ing, stagnant  circulation,  frequent  filiform  pulse.
*®  Skin. '  I  Burning  in  various  places  in  skin;  also  at  night,  in  bed.
Itching  all  over  body,  day  and  night;  fugitive  itching  when

warm  in  bed-
Formication  in  skin.

I  Skin  dry  and  brittle. ^Typhus.

■  Jaundice: after  too  much  or  too  rich  food; from  abuse  of

mercury.

I I  Blue  color  of  body,  with  terrible  cardiac  anxiety  and  icy
coldness  of  whole  surface. ^Cyanosis.

Brownish  spots.

■  External  parts  grow  black. ^Gangrene.
I  Folds  of  skin  become  raw  and  ulcerated.

■  Fine,  moist  rash,  with  burning  at  spots  where  there  is  no

eruption.
Nettle-rash, painless papules and fine  itching  eruptions on

hands  and  calves.
Sequelae  of  measles,  particularly  hoarseness.
Scarlatina :  last  stage ;  rattling  in  throat,  loss  of  vital  power  ;

foul  breath  and  cold  extremities ;  must  have  air  and  wants

to  be  fanned;  sticky  cold  perspiration;  sepsis  and  sloughing.
I  Moist  herpetic  eruption,  especially  in  face.
BDry  rash,  like  itch.
I  Moist  itch  ;  abuse  of  mercurial  salves.

■  Certain  forms  of  leprosy  ;  face  appears  swollen,  spots  reddish-

brown  ;  toes  appear  as  if  frozen.

■  Purpura  hemorrhagica,  with  fever  and  great  soreness.
Asthenic  variola,  with  cold  breath  and  excessive  prostration,

livid  purple  eruption.

■  Ulcers:  varicose;  scorbutic;  livid,  easily  bleeding;  fetid.
Ulcers  are  offensive ; old  ones  break  out  afresh ; they  burn

and  easily  bleed.


351  CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

Pressure  and  tension  around  ulcer  in  leg.

I  An  ulcer  which  has  been  removed,  breaks  out  again,  and  in-
stead of  pus,  emits  a  bloody  lymph.

I  Syphilitic  ulcers  with  high  edges  become  irritable  from
topical  treatment ;  margins  sharp,  ragged,  undermined ;
discharge  thin,  acrid,  offensive ;  ulcer  painful  and  liable  to
bleed  when  touched.

I  i  Ulcerations  with  burning  pain.

I  Pus  from  an  ulcer  was  offensive,  like  asafoetida.

■  Telangiectasia  of  children.
Burns ;  chilblains.

I  Decubitus  in  typhus,  from  decomposition  of  blood.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. I  Children,  after  exhausting
diseases.
Boy,  aet.  3  years. ^Deafness.

II  Vital  powers  low,  venous  system  predominant.

■  Old  people. ^Asthma. ^Chronic  bronchitis. ^Dyspepsia.

^Hemorrhoidal  troubles. ^Blenorrhoea.

Negro  woman,  aet.  40. ^Purpura  hemorrhagica.

Man,  get.  39,  delicate  stature  and  constitution.  ^Phthisis
pulmonalis.

Man,  ast.  43,  bilious lymphatic temperament, lung trouble
from  inhalation  of  great  heat  of  fire.
^^ Relations. Antidoted  by:  Atsen.,  Camphor.,  Coffe a,  Laches.,
Spir.  nitr.  dulc.

It  antidotes :  effects  of  putrid  meats  or  fish,  rancid  fats,  salt  or
salt  meats; Cinchon.,  Laches.,  Mercur.

Compatible:  before  lArsen.,  I  iCinchon.,  Droser  ,  iKalicarh.,
Phosph.  ac. ;  after  Bellad.  (in  laryngeal  phthisis,  with  irri-
tative fever),  XBryon.  (gastric  sphere,  particularly  in  hot
weather),  II Kali  carh..  Laches.,  Lauroc,  Mercur.  (burn-
ing hemorrhoids,  after  every  stool  protrusion  of  bleeding
piles;  when  itch  is  dry),  Nux  vom.,  Sepia,  Sulphur,  (when
itch  is  dry),  Tahac,  Veratr.  (in  beginning  of  pertussis).

Complementary :  I{^ali  carh.

Compare:  the  carbons  generally;  Qaustic,  Laches.,  Phosphor.
and  i^i^mea;  in  hoarseness ;  (7am^Z!or  in  collapse;  Cinchon.,
Plumbum  in  neglected  pneumonia,  etc.,  especially  in  old
topers ;  Natr.  mur.  in  paralytic  weakness,  when  grasping
things;  i Opium  in  lack  of  reaction  after  well-indicated  re-
medies; Phosphor,  in  easily  bleeding  ulcers;  iiPulsat.  in
bad  effects  from  fat  food  and  pastry;  tt Sulphur  in  acrid
smelling  menses,  erysipelatous  inflammation  of  mammae.


CARBOLIC  ACID.  352


CARBOLIC  ACID.


0,  H, OH.


This  collection  contains,  besides  all  clinical  symptoms  that  could  be
found  in  the  journals,  the  principal  symptoms  from  the  provings  of  Li-
lienthal,  Bacmeister,  Hoyne,  Duncan,  Hedges,  Boyce,  Williamson,  Price,
and  Haeseler;  also  some  toxicological  symptoms,  the  principal  ones  among
them  being  referable  to  a  report  of  surgical  cases  by  Billroth,  published  in
Chirurgische  Klinik  and  reprinted  in  vol.  99, 1879,  of  Allg.  Horn.  Zfitung;  they
are  designated,  t.  The  symptoms  marked  n  were  contributed  by  Von  Tagen.

^  Mind. Insensibility.
Loss  of  memory.
TrForgetfulness,  she  cannot  remember  anything,  becomes  easily

confused.
TrShe  starts  to  do  something  and  forgets  it.
TrShe  has  difficulty  of  remembering  events  that  have  passed.
;rShe  has  periods  of  mental  abstraction.
Absentminded,  starts  when  spoken  to,  nervous  tremor.
Inability  to  fix  the  mind  on  anything  or  retain  what  is  read.
Muddled  and  confused.
;rShe  had  sense  of  bewilderment.
Mind  unusually  clear,  desirous  for  intellectual  work.
Entire  disinclination to study; what he had accomplished

seemed  very  trifling.
Disinclination  to  mental  efforts,  even  to  read.
Disinclination  for  mental  or  bodily  labor.  «

■  Constantly  agitated,  moaning  continuously  and  occasionally

uttering a piercing cry; delirious starting from sleep.

^Scarlatina.
Depressed;  morose;  irritable.
Fear  of  impending  sickness,  evening  in  bed.
Very  irritable.
TiShe  became  petulant  and  impatient  although  naturally  good,

quiet  and  gentle.
Mental  and  physical  exhilaration.
Restless;  cries  out  in  sleep  ;  t. ^Meningitis.
'  Sensorium. Felt  as  if  staggering,  like  a  drunken  man.
Giddiness,  not  >  by  shutting  eyes.
Vertigo :  on  going  up  and  down  stairs  ; >  by  walking  fast  in.

open  air,  ■<  by  sitting  down,  fear  of  falling;  with  trembling.
^  Inner  Head. Aching  and  burning pain  in  forehead,  >  by

pressure  of  cold  hand.


353  CARBOLIC  ACID.

I  I  Dull  frontal  headache  in  centre  of  forehead.

Dull  frontal  headache:  with  chilliness;  with  general  lassitude;

>  in  open  air.

I  I  Feeling  of  tightness  across  forehead,  directly  above  frontal

sinuses.

I I  Dull frontal headache, as if an india-rubber band  was
stretched  tightly  over  forehead,  from  temple  to  temple.

Frontal  headache  and  oppression  of  chest,  going  from  left  to

right.
Trlntense  pressing  pains  through  temples  and  in  top  of  her

head  ; even  down  to  nape  of  neck,  stiffness  and  soreness

was  felt.
;rShe  had  severe  semi-lateral  headache,  extending  over  vertex,

this  entire  surface  was  sensitive  to  touch.
Burning  pain  in  r.  temple  and  vertex.
1 1  Dull,  heavy  pain  through  temples,  with  tight  band  across

forehead,  and  tightness  in  nose  between  eyes.
Pressure  in  1 temple,  seemingly  on  surface  of  brain.
Twitching  pains  through  temples,  neuralgic  pains  in  left.
Jagging  pain  in  head,  <  from  light  and  noise.
Sharp,  darting  neuralgic  pain  in  head,  changing  situation  from

one  side  to  other.
Dull  pain  running  from  forehead  to  occiput.
Burning  pain  in  top  of  head.
Sensation  as  of  fine  electric  sparks  in  vertex,  changing  to  a

prickling,  itching,  >  by  rubbing.
Feeling  in  top  of  head  as  if  brain  was  swashing  about.
Headache  in  upper  half  of  head,  in  morning.
Dull  pressure  and  pain  in  occiput  and  muscles  of  back  of  neck,

especially  just  behind  ears.
Expansive  pains  in  head,  with  swimming  before  eyes.
I  Head  felt  as  if  enclosed  in  a  band,  which  at  times  seemed  to

compress  and  crush  in  head,  <  in  temples.
Fullness  of  head  all  over  brain,  with  dull  pains.
I  Head  feels  very  heavy.

Numbness  in  head  after  reading,  with  pressure  in  temples.
Headache,  with  nausea,  >•  by  a  cup  of  green  tea. >
Pressure  or  a  tight  bandage, >  headache  temporarily, also

>  while  smoking  after  tea ; <  bending  head  forward.
Reading  <  pressure  in  occiput.

Severe  burning  in  brain,  over  eyebrows,  in  evening.
;rHer  brain  throbbed  and  entire  head  ached.
Rush  of  blood  to  head,  face  flushed.
I  I  Congestive  headache.

■  Basilar  meningitis  ;  acute  hydrocephalus.

■  Periodical  spells  of  sick  headache,  about  time  of  catamenia.

■  Tinea  capitis  ;  vermin  on  head.
*  Outer  Head. ■Itching  of  scalp.

VOL.  III. — 23.


CARBOLIC  ACID.  354

•

Scalp  sensitive  to  touch,  could  not  comb  or  brush  hair.

Sweat  on  head  from  least  exertion.

Sensation  of  coldness,  like  cold  sensation  experienced  when
nerve  of  tooth  is  touched,  in  one  spot  on  head,  when  stoop-
ing, followed  by  clammy  sweat.

I  Cold  clammy  moisture  on  head.

Feels  like  rubbing  head  and  eyes.

B  Retraction  of  head. ^Hydrocephalus.

I  Small  pustulous  vesicle  a  little  to  1.  of  vertex.
°  Sight  and  Eyes. Cannot  see  across  room.

I  I  Sensitive  to  light ;  headache.

Swimming  before  eyes.

Constant  dark  spot  in  front  of  1.  eye.

Letters  seem  to  run  together  while  writing.

Things  look  as  if  they  were  moving  backwards  and  forwards.

Pupils  contracted  and  insensible  to  light ;  t.

■  Alternate  contraction  and  dilatation  of  pupils.  ^Hydro-
cephalus.

Neuralgic  twitching  in  eyeballs.

Eyelids  open,  move  up  and  down  constantly ;  t.

BBVery  severe  orbital  neuralgia  over  r.  eye.

B  Neuralgia  of  r.  eye  and  temple.

B  Slight  pain  over  r.  eyebrow;  the  same  kind  of  pain,  but  in  a
milder  degree,  under  r.  patella,  both  of  short  duration.

Acute  piercing  pain  in  a  small  spot  on  1.  supra-orbital  ridge
before  rising ;  spot  remains  sore  to  touch.

Watering  of  1.  eye  and  watery  discharge  from  nose,  in
evening.

Pains  in  head  effect  eye  &f  painful  side  so  much,  it  is  difficult
to  keep  it  open.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Pressing  pain  in  1.  ear,  transient.

TzShe  had  tingling,  numb  feeling  in  ear,  followed  by  humming,
buzzing  sound.

;rBeating  pain  with  a  humming  sound  in  both  ears.

;rMeatus  auditorius  externus  excoriated  and  covered  with  small
pustular  eruption,  extending  inwards. ■

Pain  from  throat  extends  into  ear.

Itching  of  r.  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose, B  Smell  more  acute.

a  Watery  discharge  from  both  nostrils,  in  open  air,  >  in-
doors, returning  when  entering  a  cold  room. /9Coryza.

B  Fetid  discharge  from  nose. ^Diphtheria.

;rSame  secretion  was  blown  from  nose  as  was  hawked  from
throat.

Stinging  in  1.  nostril,  with  watery  discharge  from  nose  and  eye.

Both  nostrils  plugged  up.

When  blowing  nose,  mucus  bloody,  or  bright  red  blood.


855  CARBOLIC  ACID.

iNasal  membrane  so  tumefied,  must  breathe  through  mouth.

^Scarlatina.
Feeling  of  expansion  in  nasal  passage,  when  walking  out  of

doors.
Tightness  in  nose  between  eyes.
Sensation  at  1.  wing  of  nose  as  of  fine  electric  sparks,  wants  to

rub  the  part  repeatedly.
Itching  of  nose.

I  Nasal  catarrh,  ozsena,  discharge  very  offensive.
I  Epithelioma  on  nose.

iA  small  vesicle  formed  on  centre  of  nose. ,
*  Upper  Face. Face  sensitive  to  touch  of  towel.

■  Face  flushed  and  burns. ^Headache.
I  I  Face  pale ;  and  anxious.

■  White  circle  around  mouth,  rest  of  face  dusky  red. ^Scar-

latina.

I  Sallow,  soapy  and  bloodless  complexion.

Twitching  in  cheeks  and  temples.

Drawing  pain  in  jaw,  r.  side.

Sharp  pain  about  centre  of  cheek,  as  if  bitten  by  a  mosquito.

Itching  of  face ;  of  r.  cheek.

A  momentary  chill  runs  from  face  downwards,  in  a  hot  room.

Slight  pustular  eruption  on  r.  side  of  face.

Lupus  efface.

Cold  sweat  on  face  ;  t.
^  Lower  Face. Slight  lividity  of  lips  ;  t.

I  Lips  dry,  cracked,  painful  or  black. ^Scarlatina.

Burning  on  lips.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. I  Aching  of  teeth  of  r.  upper  jaw. ^Tooth-
ache.

I  Grinding-  of  teeth. ^Hydrocephaloid.

■  Sordes.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Coppery  metallic  taste  on  tongue  and

upper  palate.
Burning  and  tingling  of  tongue,  as  if  a  thousand  pins  were

pricking  it.
Burning  on  tongue,  especially  on  tip.
Biting  sensation  on  tongue.
Not  able  to  protrude  tongue. '
Tongue  trembling  and  like  raw  beef.
I  I  Tongue  dry  and  chippy ;  parched  and  fissured.
Tongue: white;  dark  brown; 1  thick  yellow-white  fur  down

centre (scarlatina) ; red  papillse project  here  and there  ;

shiny,  glossy,  dry  coating  ;  covered  with  thick  yellow  fur.
•  Tongue  dark  brown  coat,  sordes. ^Remittent  autumnal  fever.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Profuse  secretion  of  bluish- white  frothy  saliva.
Foaming  at  mouth  ;  t.
Mouth  and  throat  full  of  thick  viscid  mucus.


CARBOLIC  ACID.  356

Swelling  and  soreness  of  inner  side  of  1.  cheek,  opposite  molars.

■  Thrush,  aphthae,  stomatitis.

iMouth  and  tongue  bldck,  sordes  and  ulcerated  patches  on  in-
side of  lips  and  cheeks. ^Scarlatina.

■  I  Intensely bad  smell  from mouth. ^Diphtheria. ^Scar-

latina. ^Constipation.
White  hardened  or  corrugated  patches  of  mucous  membrane;  t.
Breath  fetid  and  repulsive. ^Scarlatina.
'^Throat. B1  Fauces fiery-red, swollen; diphtheritic patches;

breath  almost  unbearable. ^Scarlatina.
Dryness  of  posterior  nares.
Full  feeling  in  throat,  with  constant  desire  to  swallow.

■  Liquids,  on  being  swallowed,  return  by  nose. ^Scarlatina.
Choking  feeling  in  throat,  with  disposition  to  hawk  up  phlegm.
Hawking  of  mucus  from  pharynx  and  posterior  nares.
;rTingling,  burning,  dryness  in  throat; later  soreness,  tume-
faction and  swelling  of  surrounding  structures.

Sharp  stitches  in  throat.

■  Burning  in  throat  and  oesophagus,  with  heat,  rising  up  from

stomach.

;rEntire  pharynx,  uvula  and  velum  palati  looked  glazed,  had
reddish,  pearly  hue,  not  unlike  early  manifestations  of  diph-
theria ;  tonsils  were  swollen  and  involved  in  like  manner.

Diphtheria ;  exudation  imbedded  in  mucous  membrane  with
ibetor  oris.

■  Fauces covered  with exudate,  glands  of  neck  swollen,  apho-

nia,  croup-like cough, fetid discharge  from nose, violent
fever,  pulse  130. ^Diphtheria.
•  ■Spasmodic  contraction  of  oesophagus.
I  I  Mucous  membrane  of  oesophagus  dry,  brownish,  shrunken.
Soreness  of  throat,  <  on  r.  side.
Pain  in  throat  extending  to  ear.
Throat  >■  while  smoking  after  tea  (supper).
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Loss  of  all  ap-
petite.

■  Excessive  thirst.

TrThirst  and  dryness  of  mouth  and  lips ;  relieved  by  cooling

drinks.
Desire  for  whiskey  and  tobacco.
"  Eating  and  Drinking. Felt  as  if  she  had  eaten  too  much.

■  While  eating  a  little  breakfast,  felt  every  now  and  then  as  if

he  had  to  get  up  and  vomit.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough
after  dinner.

Nausea  :  from  cold  water  ;  in  morning  ;  in  throat.

I  I  Constant  belching  up  of  wind  from  stomach,  d  Consti-
pation.

Fruitless  eructations.


357  CARBOLIC  ACID.

I  Acid  eructations  and  formation  of  gas.

;rSometimes sweetish regurgitation,  at other  times  bitter or

sour,  or  like  buttermilk  and  cabbage.
Vomiting  of  dark  olive-green  or  black  fluid  ;  t.
Vomiting,  with  great  restlessness  ;  t.

•  Vomiting. ^Pregnancy. ^Seasickness. ^Cancer.

I  Vomiting; of  drunkards; vomits everything taken into
stomach. ^Bright's  disease.

B  Chronic  vomiting,  sarcinoe  in  vomit.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach, Weight in epigastrium, as
though  burdened  with  flatulence; seeks  relief  in  fruitless
eructating,  and  pressing  hand  on  pit  of  stomach.

■  Burning  in  stomach.

Distress  in  stomach,  with  deathly  faintness  and  great  sensi-
tiveness to  smells.

Empty  gone  feeling,  also  with  sensation  of  weight,  or  with  ful-
ness instomach,  and  constant  desire  to  swallow.

•  Soreness  in  stomach  and  bowels.

I A  great  deal  of  pain  changing  about  from  stomach  to  sides,
especially  r.  side  and  chest.

•  Dyspepsia; aching  in  stomach;  diarrhoea,  followed  by  con-

stipation ;  colicky  pains.

•  •  Cancer  of  stomach.

^^  Hypochondria. Uncomfortable feeling across stomach and
liver.
I  I  Pain  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  also  in  iliac  region  of  both  sides.

•  Sharp  pain  in  r.  hypochondre. ^Remittent  autumnal  fever.
Soreness  of  hypochondria  •<  on  motion.

«Dull  pressing  pains  in  hypochondria.
^^  Abdomen. Sinking  feeling  all  over  abdomen.

•  Rumbling  and  rolling  in  abdomen,  with  a  sense  of  distension.
Sensation  of  distension  in  abdomen,  as  if  full  of  wind,  but  does

not  pass  any.
A  burning  or  digging  feeling  low  down  in  abdomen.

•  Frequent  occurrence  of  colic-like  pains.

•  Colic  of  nursing  infants.

I  Great  tenderness  over  transverse  colon.
I  I  Bowels  feel  sore,  when  walking.

Bowels  bloated  and  full  of  flatus  three  hours  after  a  meal.
Rumbling  in  bowels,  feeling  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on
after  walking  about.

•  Flatulence  of  old  age  depending  on  imperfect  digestion.
Jolting  during  riding  affects  unpleasantly  the  abdominal  or-
gans, which  feel  hot  and  sore.

Burning  on  outside  of  abdomen.

•  Abdomen  retracted. ^Hydrocephalus.

A  crampy  stitch  in  1.  inguinal  region  while  sitting.
Abdominal  muscles  feel  sore.


CARBOLIC  ACID.  358

Itching  of  lower  part  of  abdomen,  as  if  bitten  by  something.
*°  Stool  and  Rectum. Emission  of  putrid  flatus.

■  Flatulence  of  old  people. ^Dyspepsia.
I  Fetid  stools.

I  Rice-water  discharge  of  very  oflFensive  odor,  resembling  that

of  rotten  eggs. ^Summer  complaint.
Stool,  like  thick  glue,  passed  in  thin  strips,  like  tape.
I  Bloody and mucous discharge, appearing  like scraping of

mucous  membrane  ;  tenesmus. /^Dysentery.
Looseness  of  bowels,  stools  of  appearance  as  in  bilious  diarrhoea.
Watery  evacuations,  with  pain  and  sick  stomach.

■  Involuntary  thin,  black  stools. ^Collapse.

■  Involuntary  stools  of  intolerable  odor. ^Puerperal  fever.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  vomiting  of  everything  taken;  desire  to  drink.

^Summer  complaint.

■  Diarrhoea,  resulting  from  bad  drainage.

■  Dysentery : bloody, mucous stools, like  scrapings ; tenes-

mus ;  tenderness  over  transverse  colon  ;  tongue  dry  and
coated  with  thick,  yellow  fur  ;  great  thirst  and  high  fever  ;
pulse  100.

Involuntary  stools,  at  night  in  bed.

Constant  ineffectual  urging  to  stool.

■  Periodical  spells  of  diarrhoea,  followed  by  constipation. ^Hy-

drocephalus.
I  1  Constipation.

■  Sluggishness  of  bowels,  accompanied  by  offensive  breath.
Great  tenderness  of  rectum.

Disagreeable  hot  burning  sensation  in  rectum.
Anus  itches  and  feels  as  if  skin  was  rubbed  off.
I  I  Hemorrhoids, with tenderness of  rectum, also external,
sometimes  bleeding.
^^  Urinary  Organs, Tired  sensation  in  renal  region.
I  1  A  dark  greenish-brown  color  of  urine.

■  Greenish  urine. ^ After  scarlatina.

■  Urine  scanty  and  red. ^Scarlatina.

■  Urine: golden  -  yellow  ; grass or  olive-green; very  dark-

colored  ;  black  or  blackish  olive-green.

■  Frequent  micturition.
Straining  on  passing  urine.

■  Obliged  to  void  urine  three  times  every  night,  and  no  less

than  a  pint  each  time  ;  greatly  debilitated  thereby.
Urine  increased,  had  a  strong  smell.

■  Micturated  freely  an  excessive  quantity  of  saccharine  urine.

^Diabetes.

■  Urine  contained  albumen  ;  t. ^Meningitis.

■  While  urinating  always  an  involuntary  mucous  discharge  from

anus.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Awakened  by  strong  sexual  excitement.


359  CARBOLIC  ACID.

Sexual  desire  very  much  decreased ; in  one  case  lost  for  13
days.

Sexual  organs  relaxed  and  weak,  lascivious  dreams,  with  weak-
ening seminal  emissions.

Prickling  pain  through  glans,  penis  and  urethra.

Intense  burning  itching  of  genitals.

Itching  of  scrotum  and  inside  of  thighs  >  by  scratching,  but
it  soon  returns.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  '  Pain  in  region  of  1.  ovary,  when
walking  in  open  air,  soon  subsiding.

I  Painful  swelling  of  1.  ovary. ^Remittent  autumnal  fever.

■  Menses  irregular.

1  I  Menses  too  profuse,  dark  color,  followed  by  headache  and
great  nervous  irritability.

■  Menorrhagia: sinking  spells,  with  cold  clammy  skin,  sallow,

soapy,  bloodless  complexion,  irritability  of  stomach,  food
lies  heavy,  flatulence,  sour  belching,  fulness  in  throat,  swol-
len feeling  ;  alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation.

■  Induration  of  cervix  uteri.

■  Ulceration on cervix uteri; •<  after  caustics,  discharge  of

fetid,  greenish,  acrid  matter  from  vagina ;  <C  after  menstru-
ation, which  was  profuse  and  lasted  six  to  eight  days.

■  Mucous  tubercles  on  labia  and  inner  thighs,  with  vaginal  dis-

charge.
Copious  discharge  of  fetid,  greenish,  acrid  matter  from  vagina.
^Leucorrhoea.
^^  Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation. ■Vomiting  of  preg-
nancy ;  great  irritability  ;  violent  frontal  headache.

■  Puerperal  fever ;  high  fever  alternating  with  often  recurring

chills  of  short  duration,  followed  by  profuse  sweat  with  rest-
lessness ;  tenderness  over  uterus  and  r.  iliac  fossa  ;  pulse
160;  diarrhoea,  involuntary  stools  of  intolerable  odor;  lochia
suppressed  ;  craving  for  food  ;  thirst.
"  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Aphonia.
^Diphtheria.

Soreness  of  respiratory  organs,  with  hoarseness.

Hoarseness,  with  stiff  neck.

Hawking  of  clear  white  mucus.

Left  side  of  larynx  very  sore  to  pressure.

Tickling  in  throat  causing  short  hacking  cougii.

■  Catarrhal  croup.

Chronic  laryngitis  and  bronchitis.
^®  Respiration. TiRespiration  uneven  and  irregular.
I  I  Stertorous  respiration.
I  Difficult  respiration,  with  sense  of  oppression.

■  Desire  to  take  long  inspirations,  with  yawning.
Sighing  or  moaning  expirations  ;  t.

;rHer  breath  was  hot  and  feverish.


CARBOLIC  ACID.  360

■  Shortness  of  breath  on  going  up  hill  or  up  stairs.
Dyspnoea  at  night.

^^  Cough, Constant  inclination  to  cough.

I  Short,  dry,  hacking  cough,  with  tickling  in  throat;  can  hardly

retain  anything  on  stomach.
Troublesome  cough,  with  foul  tenacious  expectoration.
I  Croup-like  cough. ^Diphtheria.
I  Whooping  cough,  with  redness  of  face,  watering  of  eyes  and

frontal  headache.
Expectoration  of  a  large  quantity  of  thick,  whitish  mucus.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Dull  pain  through  upper  lobes  of

lungs,  afternoon.

■  Slight  uneasy  pains  in  r.  lung.

Dull  aching  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  abdomen,  running  around

to  scapulae.
Chest  feels  as  if  compressed,  or  as  if  a  load  were  pressing  in

front ;  desire  to  dilate  chest.
Tight  feeling  in  both  lungs,  especially  in  outer  chest.

■  Feeling  of  narrowness  in  chest,  as  if  diaphragm  depressed

lungs.

Oppression  of  chest  and  frontal  headache,  going  from  1.  to  r.

Feeling  of  expansion  in  lungs  and  nasal  passages,  when  walk-
ing out  of  doors.

I  Phthisis  pulmonalis.

Gangrene  of  lung.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Stitches  in  region  of  heart.

Bellows  murmur  over  mitral  valves  and  dyspnoea,  <C  at  night.

Heart  worse  after  indiscretion  in  eating.

Must  walk  very  slow  on  account  of  heart  beating,  is  exhausted
by  ascending.

■  Fearful  beating  of  heart,  especially  at  night,  accompanied

with  great  dyspnoea.

■  Organic  valvular  heart  disease,  consequent  upon  inflammatory

rheumatism  eight  years  previously.

■  Violent  fever,  pulse  130. ^Diphtheria.

Pulse :  rapid  (120),  feeble  and  flickering ;  intermittent,  some-
times slow  ;  feeble  and  flickering  ;  small  and  rapid.

■  Pulse  irregular. ^Hydrocephaloid.

■  Pulse  160. ^Puerperal  fever.

^^  Outer  Chest*. Transient  dull  pain  under  1.  clavicle.

Sensation  as  of  fine  electric  sparks  on  sternal  end  of  r.  clavicle.

Dull  pressure  under  sternum,  in  region  of  sixth  rib.

TiSlight  tingling  along  1.  side  of  chest.

Cold  sweat  on  chest ;  t.
^^  Neck  and  Back- Jerking  in  1.  common  carotid  artery  while
walking  rapidly  after  dinner.

Twitching  in  r.  sterno  cleido  mastoid  muscle;  t. ^Meningitis.

Stitching  pains  in  r.  side  of  neck.


361  CARBOLIC  ACID.

Drawing  in  muscles  of  neck.

Neck  feels  lame  and  stiff,  wiien  moving  head.

iNeck  very  stiff  and  sore  ;  feels  as  if  lie  had  taken  a  bad  cold.

^Remittent  fever.
Very  great  sense  of  weight  on  neck,  with  tenderness even  to

touch,  on  seventh  cervical  vertebra.
I  Glands  of  neck  swollen. ^Diphtheria.
Itching  of  back  of  neck  and  back.
Aching  pains  in  small  of  back,  down  to  thighs.
Aching  pains  in  small  of  back,  <  when  straightening,  from

jolting  when  riding,  >  by  pressure.
She  has  dragging  sensation  across  loins  and  throughout  pelvis.
Boring  pains  in  small  of  back,  with  a  cold.

■  Severe  pain  in  lumbo-sacral  region,  mostly  during  latter  part

of  night,  of  long  standing.

■  Soreness  of  muscles  of  back  and  limbs.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Fetid  perspiration  in  armpits.

I  Pains  in  r.  shoulder  without  suffering  from  moving  arm,

I  Aching  pains  in  1.  shoulder,  like  a  toothache,  when  lying  on
r.  side.

1  Severe  rheumatic  pains  in  r.  shoulder;  feeling  as  though  it
would  be  impossible  to  raise  arm,  but  when  effort  was  made
it  aggravated  the  pain  but  very  little. ^Rheumatism.

Drawing  pain  in  1.  arm,  from  shoulder  to  elbow.

■  Soreness  of  muscles  of  r.  arm.

TiTingling,  burning  and  numb  feeling  down  1.  arm  to  tips  of
fingers,  followed  by  dull  aching,  heavy  feeling.

■  Aching  pain  in  1.  forearm.

Creeping,  shuddering  or  horripilation  in  1.  forearm,  running
upwards.

■  Constant  tired,  heavy  feeling  in  1.  arm.

■  Twitching  of  arms,  principally  the  right ;  t. ^Meningitis.
Contracting  pain  in  palms  of  r.  hand.

Sensation  as  of  fine  electric  sparks  on  middle  finger  of  1.  hand.

Trembling  of  hands  ;  cannot  write  steadily.

Spasmodic  flexion  of  hands  on  forearms  ;  t.

1  I  Slight  lividity  of  finger-tips.

Numbness  of  skin  of  hands.

Stiffness  and  pricking  in  hand,  followed  by  a  pimple  on  middle

finger  (where  the  acid  touched),  which  increased  to  size  of  a

carbuncle.

■  ■Vesicular  eruption  on  hands  and  all  over  body,  which  itches

excessively ; >  after  rubbing,  but  leaving  a  burning  pain.
Tingling-itching  in  little  finger  of  r.  hand,  soon  after  in  left.
Pain  in  second  phalangeal  joint  of  middle  finger  of  r.  hand.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Aching  in  both  hips  ;  in  r.  hip  and  1.  knee.

■  Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  hip-joint.

Deepseated  muscular  pain  on  inside  of  upper  third  of  1.  thigh.


CARBOLIC  ACID.  362

A  faint  feeling  spreading  from  thighs  all  over  body.

I  Aching  soreness beneath 1. patella, all day  up  to  about  4

o'clock  P.M. ;  feels  as  if  it  would  be  stiff  and  sore  to  move  it,

but  is  not  felt  at  all.
Sore,  bruised  feeling,  or  tingling-itching  in  leg,  during  motion.

■  Lower  extremities  feel  heavy  as  lead.

■  Paralysis  of  lower  extremities  ;  t. ^Meningitis.
Sensation  just  below  knee  on  shin  as  if  it  was  touched  with  a

piece  of  ice.

■  Sharp  pain  in  1.  shin.

■  Aching  pain  to  1.  of  middle  of  1.  shin-bone.
Dull  pain  in  r.  ankle  and  1.  knee.
Bruised  pain  beneath  I.  tendo  achillis.
Pain  in  great  toes.

Feet  feel  heavy,  bruised.
Fetid  perspiration  of  feet.

■  Carbuncle  on  hip  of  lady,  set.  50.

■  Oedema  of  both  legs  ;  t. ^Meningitis.
Chronic  ulcers  on  feet  and  ankles.

■  Chronic  ulcers  on feet  and  ankles,  deep,  emitting  a  strong

odor  and  burning  like  fire.
'*  Limbs  in  General. ■Numb  ache  in  arms  and  legs. ^Remit-
tent fever.

■  Stiffness  of  limbs. ^Hydrocephaloid.
Cold  hands  and  feet.

^'Rest. Position. Motion. Lying:  in  bed,  tired.

Sitting:  down  ■<  vertigo;  crampy  stitch  L  inguinal  region.

Bending:  head  forward  •<  headache.

Stooping:  coldness  in  head.

Writing:  letters  run  together.

Walking: fast  >  vertigo ; rumbling  in  bowels; pain  1.  ovary;
up  stairs,  short  breath ;  out  doors,  feeling  of  expansion  in
lungs  and  nasal  passages ;  heart  beats.
^^  Nerves. TrShe  had  nervous  trembling.

I  I  Trembling,  uncertain  staggering  walk.

Tonic  spasms  of  arms.

Trembling  and  convulsions.

■  Partial  convulsive  movements. ^Hydrocephaloid.

■  Easily  fatigued  by  least  walk.

■  Complains  of  being  very  tired,  even  while  lying  in  bed. ^Re-

mittent fever.

■  Feels  as  if  he  had  taken  a  bad  cold. ^Remittent  fever.

■  General  malaise,  great  languor  and  weakness.

■  ■Profound  prostration; physical  exhaustion; surface  pale,

bathed  in  cold  sweat ;  collapse.
Became  thoroughly  unfit  for  study,  as  every  exercise  at  read-
ing increased  all  symptoms,  especially  pressing  at  occiput.


363  CARBOLIC  ACID.

"  Sleep. Yawning,  with  desire  to  take  long  inspirations.

I  I  Constant  inclination  to  yawn,  languid  and  sleepy,  desire
to  stretch.

TrShe  slept  by  spells  ;  sleep  unsatisfactory  ;  fitful  starting.

I  Sleeps  uneasily,  eyes  half  closed. ^Scarlatina.

I  I  Wakes  often-  during  night.

Heavy  and  sleepy,  perplexed  with  dreams,  wakes  unrefreshed.

Somnolency,  sopor,  ending  in  coma.

I  Dreams  :  unable  to  recall  ;  of  fire  ;  amorous  ;  of  travelling.
^^Time. Night:  dyspepsia  <;  fearful  beating  of  heart;  severe
pain  in  lumbo- sacral  region;  wakes  often;  sweat.

Morning:  headache  in  upper  half  of  head;  nausea.

All  day  up  to  4  o'clock:  aching  pain  beneath  patella.

2^  Temperature  and  Weather. Room  feels  close  and  hot.

Cold:  hand,  pressure  >  aching  and  burning  pain  in  forehead;
water,  nausea.

Open  air:  chilly;  watery  discharge  from  both  nostrils;  walk-
ing in,  pain  in  region  of  1.  ovary.
*"  Fever. Chilly  sensation  while  in  a  warm  room.

Chilly  in  open  air.

A  momentary  chill  runs  from  face  downwards,  in  a  hot  room.

I  Chill,  followed  by  fever  and  very  slight  sweat,  with  numb
ache  in  arms  and  legs  ;  pulse  small  and  rapid  ;  <  about
sundown  and  through  night ;  felt  as  if  he  had  taken  a  bad
cold.

iHigh  fever,  alternating  with  often  occurring  chills  of  short
duration,  followed  by  profuse  sweat,  with  restlessness.  ^Pu-
erperal fever.

Was  covered  with  perspiration.

Sweat  at  night.

Typhoid  and  low  miasmatic  fevers.

Fever  of  enteric  type.

■  Remittent  fever,  occurring  every  autumn.

■  Intermittent  fever,  with  enlargement  of  spleen.

■  Scarlet  fever.

"Attacks,  Periodicity. Pains  sharp, come  suddenly,  last  a
short  time,  disappear  suddenly.
Periodical:  spells  of  sick  headache.

^^  Locality  and  Direction. Symptoms  go  from  head  down-
wards.

■  Affected  r.  side  first  and  afterward  same  parts  of  left. ^Re-

mittent fever.
Left :  bruised  pain  beneath  tendo-achillis ;  aching  pain  in  knee ;
pain  in  thigh;  sharp  pain  in  shin;  dull  pain  in  knee;
frontal  headache  from  left  to  right;  pressure  in  temple;
small  pustules  on  vertex;  constant  dark  spots  in  front  of
eye;  eye,  watering;  pressing  pain  in  ear;  nostril,  stinging;
wing  of  nose,  sensation  of  fine  electric  sparks ;  s-welling  and


CARBOLIC  ACID.  364

soreness  of  inner  side  of  cheek  ;  pain  in  region  of  ovary ;
larynx  very  sore  to  pressure ;  dull  aching  in  chest ;
oppression  of  chest  and  frontal  headache,  going  from  1.  to  r. ;
transient  pain  under  clavicle;  slight  tingling  along  side  of
chest;  jerking,  common  carotid;  pain  in  shoulder  like  a
toothache;  arm,  drawing  pain;  tingling  burning  in  arm;
aching  in  forearm,  also  creeping  shuddering;  constant  tired
heavy  feeling  in  arm.

Right:  burning  pain  in  temple;  very  severe  neuralgia  over
eye  and  patella;  ear,  itching;  in  jaw,  drawing  pain;  itching  of
cheek;  pustular  eruption;  aching  of  teeth,  upper  jaw;  sore
throat ;  chest,  pain  ;  pain  in  hypochondrium  ;  inguinal  re-
gion, crampy  stitch  :  iliac  fossa,  tenderness  ;  sense  as  of  fine
electric  sparks  on  sternal  end  of  clavicle  ;  twitching  in  sterno
cleido  mastoid  muscle ;  stitching  pain  in  neck  :  rheumatic
pain  in  shoulder ;  soreness  of  muscles ;  twitching  of  arm  ;
contractive  pain  in  palms  of  hand;,  tingling  itching,  little
finger ;  pain  in  second  phalangeal  joint  of  middle  finger  ;
aching  in  hip  and  knee;  dull  pain  in  ankle.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  an  India  rubber  band  was  stretched  tightly
over  forehead,  from  temple  to  temple ;  as  of  fine  electric
sparks  in  vertex  ;  as  if  brain  was  swashing  about ;  as  of  fine
electric  sparks  1.  wing  of  nose ;  as  if  compressed,  chest ;  of
fine  electric  sparks  on  sternal  end  of  r.  clavicle ;  as  though
it  would  be  impossible  to  raise  arm  ;  as  of  fine  electric  sparks
on  middle  finger  of  left  hand  ;  as  if  just  below  knee  or  shin
had  been  touched  with  a  piece  of  ice ;  as  if  he  had  taken  a
bad  cold.

Sharp  :  pain  in  head  ;  pain  centre  of  cheek.

Darting :  pain  in  head.

Stitches  :  region  of  heart.

Prickling:  in  vertex.

Twitching  :  pains  through  temples  ;  r.  sterno  cleido  muscle.

Burning:  pain  in  top  of  head;  in  brain;  of  lips;  of  tongue;
in  throat;  in  abdomen;  in  rectum;  down  1.  arm;  ulcer  on
lower  extremities.

Pressing:  pain  through  temples,  in  top  of  head;  pain  1.  ear.

Pressure:  in  left  temple;  in  occiput.

Drawing:  pain  1.  arm.

Dragging:  across  loins.

Bruised:  feeling  in  leg.

Rheumatic: pains  in  r.  shoulder.

Distention: in  abdomen.

Expansive: pains  in  head.

Sore: abdomen; feeling  in  legs.

Aching: small  of  back;  pain  in  shoulders; 1.  forearm.

Dull  pain: running  from  forehead  to  occiput.

Throbbing: entire  head.


365  CARBOLIC  ACID.

Colic-like  pains  :  in  abdomen.

Crampy  stitch  :  in  1.  inguinal  region.

Narrowness: of  chest.

Tight  feeling  :  in  both  lungs.

Stiff: neck.

Tired :  in  renal  region.

Lame : neck.

Horripilation:  1.  forearm.

Numbness  of  skin  of  hands.

Tingling: of  tongue;  in  throat;  down  1.  arm.

Full :  feeling  in  throat.

Heavy: as  lead,  lower  extremities.

Weight:  on  neck.

Shuddering:  1.  forearm.

Creeping: 1.  forearm.

Coldness :  when  nerve  of  tooth  is  touched.

Chilly:  while  in  a  warm  room.

Hot: abdomen; in  rectum.

Itching: lower  abdomen.

Dryness: in  throat.
**  Tissues. ■  B  Putrid  discharges  from  mouth,  throat,  nostrils,  ears,
rectum  and  vagina.

CEdema  of  feet,  hands  and  face,  with  soapy,  colorless  com-
plexion ;  after  loss  of  blood.

Scarlatina  maligna.

Confluent  variola  ;  no  secondary  fever.

Carious  bones  ;  necrosis  ;  osteosarcoma  ;  sinuses.
*' Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. lExtensive  scald  (in
glycerine  externally).

Touch  :  tooth,  coldness  ;  1.  supra  orbital  spot  sore  to.

Reading: numbness  of  head  ;  pressure  in  occiput.

I  Burns,  especially  if  they  ulcerate  and  discharge  is  offensive.

I I  Lacerated  wounds  from  blunt  instruments;  bones  bare  or
crushed  and  splintered.

*®Skin. B  Offensive  odor  from  skin.

Erysipelas.

Itching  of  skin  of  various  parts  of  body;  >  by  scratching,  but'
soon  returns.

Innumerable  small  (miliary)  vesicles  over  whole  body.

Eruption  not  diffused  equitably  over  entire  surface,  interrupted
in  many  places,  and  of  a  dusky  red  color. ^Scarlatina.

1 1  Malignant  forms  of  scarlatina.

Pustular  and  vesicular  eruptions.

■  Confluent  variola.

I  Acne,  eczema,  impetigo  scabies,  psoriasis  inveterata,  leprosy;
prurigo  ;  pytiriasis  versicolor  ;  lupus,  carbuncles  and  can-
cerous sores  ;  sloughing  wounds  ;  chronic  ulcers.


CARBOLIC  ACID— CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM. 366

■  Ulcers  with  foul  odor.
Extensive  burns  or  scalds.
Chilblains  and  chapped  hands.

"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. bTwo  children,  9  months  old.
^Summer  complaint.
IM.  B.,  get.  10. ^Psoriasis.
I  Lad,  aet.  18. ^Variola.
I  Miss,  set.  19. ^Hysterical  vomiting.
1  Young  lady,  set.  21. ^Variola.
I  Woman,  set.  39. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Woman,  set.  46,  scrofulous  diathesis. ^Chronic  ulcers  on  feet

and  ankles.

•  Woman,  set.  50. ^Carbuncle  on  hip.
*^  Relations. Antidotes : chalk, but  better Calc. sacch., pre-
pared  by dissolving sixteen parts refined sugar in forty
parts  water,  and  adding  five  parts  slaked  lime  ;  digest  three
days,  stir  occasionally,  filter,  and  evaporate  to  dryness. s^

Huseraan  and  Wood  say,  use  sweet  oil  or  castor  oil  as  an  anti-
dote, as  according  to  Lemaire  it  will  cause  the  acid  to  be
more  slowly  absorbed  ;  emetics  are  generally  useless.

Incompatible :  glycerine  and  vegetable  oils  being  solvents,
spread  and  increase  its  action.

Compare:  iGelsem.,  Mercur.  and  Sulphur  in  band  like  head-
ache; Arsenic,  Carh.  veg.,  Cinchon.  ?^,n^  Kreosot.  in  burns,
ulcers,  etc.,  with  unhealthy,  offensive  discharge.


CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM.

Carbon  hisulijliide  (Ale.  sulph.  Lampadii).  C.S^'


To  the  clinical  and  principal  symptoms  from  Hering's  Monograph  on
Carh.  sulph,  1870,  are  added  those  of  a  poisoning  by  Dr.  M.  Bernhardt,
published  in  Berl.  Ki.  Wochenschrift  in  1871,  marked  t.

^  Mind. Defective  memory ;  frequently  she  did  not  know  what
she  was  to  do  with  the  things  she  was  holding  in  her  hands;  t.
Difficult  thinking,  I  I  memory  weakened.
Sought  for  things  lying  before  them.
Could  not  find  the  right  words.

Stares  at  her  hands  and  fingers  with  a  vacant  look;  t.
Bfhavior  childish  and  idiotic;  t.
Cheerful,  free  from  care,  after  wind  passed.


367  CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM.

Surly,  morose ;  vehement,  irascible,
Want  of  energy.

Exhilarations  bordering  on  drunkenness.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo,  sudden  attacks,  I  I  while  sitting.
I  I  Dull  muddled  feeling  in  forehead ;  as  if  contracting.
Great  dulness  of  head.

■  Confusion. ^Headache.

■  Drunken,  unconscious  from  whisky.
Frequent  attacks  of  fainting;  t.

■  Asphyxia. See  26.

^  Inner  Head. '  '  Pressure,  most  in  forehead.

Violent  pain  in  head ;  headache  increasing  until  it  causes  con-
fusion of  mind;  feverish  attacks;  cold  extremities,  and
spasmodic  pulse.

Very  sharp  pains  in  head,  through  temples,  nearly  every  day,
notably  after  dinner;  numbness  through  to  top  of  her  head.

■  Violent  headache,  increasing  till  mind  is  affected.
Penetrating  pain,  <  by  shaking  head  and  heavy  steps.
Fluctuating  in  head,  <  by  moving  head.

Painful  heavy  feeling  in  head,  after  breakfast.

*  Outer  head. Brushing  the  hair  is  painful.

Itching  on  head.

Head  sinks  forward  in  walking.

Single  nodules  on  head,  sore  to  touch.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. '  l  Dim  sight;  objects  fade  away.

Vanishing  of  sight;  t.

Reading  brings  tears  to  eyes.

Sunken  eyes,  with  grey  rings.

Staring  eyes.

Small  pustule  on  upper  lid,  itches  and  burns.

Lids  heavy;  sore  on  moving;  quivering.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears.

I  I  Stitches  in  ears;  after  stool.

Stitches  in  1.  ear.

Pain  in  1.  ear,  when  swallowing.

At  intervals,  feeling  as  if  some  one  was  quickly  pressing  on
tympanum  with  a  blunt  instrument.

Ears  as  if  stopped  up.
^  Smell  and  Nose. End  of  nose  burns  and  is  quite  red,  and
burning  as  if  raw.

Tickling  in  point  of  nose,  with  irritation  to  sneeze.

Sneezing,  Avith  sensitiveness  in  chest.

Eruption  on  nose.

*  Upper  Face. Expression  bewildered  and  as  of  one  demented;  t.

An  eruption  on  nose  and  cheeks  similar  to  acne  of  drunkards.

Tetter-like  eruption  on  1.  cheek,  produced  through  scratching

with  finger  nails; spreads  and  is  covered  with yellowish-


CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM.  368

brown  scabs,  disfiguring  the  face;  almost  unbearable  on  ac-
count of  continued  itching.
'  Lower  Face. Pushes  the  lower  jaw  far  forward,  and  gnashes
with  it  against  the  upper  one;  t.
Lips  dry  and  burning.

Contractive  feeling  in  muscles  of  lower  jaw.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. -Evening,  throbbing  toothache,  with  burn-
ing in  last  molar,  upper  left,  not  very  severe  but  continuing
all  night.
I  Toothache  brought  on  by  warm  food.
B  Neuralgia  of  teeth.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  sweetish,  foul,  bitter,  sour,  pappy
metallic.
Lisping,  stammering  speech  like  that  of  a  child  ;  t.

■  Saltish  taste  of  phlegm  hawked  up  from  fauces.

'^  Inner  Mouth. Great dryness  of  mouth,  with  unquenchable

thirst;  t.
^^  Throat, Tickling  in  posterior  portion  of  palate  after  lying  down,

causing  violent,  dry  cough.
Burning  in  throat,  extending  to  stomach.
Sensation  as  if  a  hair  had  lodged  in  throat.
Stitching,  contracting  pain  in  upper  part  of  oesophagus,  as  if  a

piece  of  bone  had  lodged  there.
Dryness  in  throat ;  t.

Scraping  feeling  in  throat,  with  fine  stitches.
Swallowing:  difficult;  causes  pain  in  1.  ear.
^^  Appetite, Thirst. Desires, Aversions. Hunger,  with

aversion  to  eating.
Loss  of  appetite  or  speedy  satiety  when  eating.
Great  thirst;  desire  for  beer.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  breakfast :  headache ;  pressure

in  stomach  ;  diarrhoea.
After dinner: pressure in stomach; diarrhoea;  tickling in

urethra;  pain  in  thigh;  pain  in  feet;  pain  in  belly  ceases.
After  eating  :  painful,  heavy  head ;  belching  ;  abdomen  puffed

up ;  bellyache.
Drinks  enormous  quantities  of  water;  t.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Acrid  burn-
ing eructations  after  eating.
I  Sour belching  and  passage of much sour  flatus; >  from

belching.
Nausea,  with  fainting  spells ;  with  pressing  frontal  headache ;

with  bitter  taste,  on  awakening;  with  frequent  eructations  ;

with  accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth,  as  of  fainting.
Inclination  to  vomit  when  entering  a  room  or  going  into  open

air.

■  Vomiting  of  bitter  water.


369  CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM.

^' Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Pressing,  stitching  pains,  of
short  duration  in  pit  of  stomach,  beginning  at  one  point  and
radiating  to  cardiac  region,  followed  by  loud  belching.

Burning  in  scrobiculum  and  stomach.

Stabbing  pains  in  stomach,  extending  to  back.

Flying  stitches  in  region  of  stomach.

I  Pressure  in  region  of  stomach  and  under  sternum,  with  herpetic
dyscrasia.

Feeling  in  stomach  as  if  tied  together.

Stomach  painful  to  external  pressure.

Heartburn.
^^  Hypochondria. Stitches  under  short  ribs.

I  Liver  complaint,  with  dropsical  swelling  of  feet.
^^  Abdomen. I  Cutting  pains  in  bowels.

Pressing,  crampy  pain  in  abdomen.

Griping  pains  around  navel,  with  urging  to  stool.

Navel  drawn  inward,  with  pain. ^Diarrhoea.

Jerking  and  stitching  pains  in  abdomen.

I  Rumbling  and  flatulent  complaints;  twisting,  rolling,  and  rum-
bling as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.

■  Fullness  and  distention  of  abdomen.
Abdominal  walls  feel  bruised  and  sore.
I  Strangulated  hernia.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. Very  offensive  and  frequent  passage  of
flatus.
Stool  always  thin,  papescent  and  small.
After  stool :  headache  ;  stitches  in  ears ;  pressure  in  stomach  ;

burning ;  weakness  and  trembling.
Diarrhoea  watery  or  mucous,  with  much  rumbling,

■  Chronic  diarrhoea,  which  set  in  every  four  to  six  weeks  and

lasted  for  one  or  two  days ;  yellowish,  frothy,  sour-smelling
fluid  evacuations,  with  tenesmus  and  colicky  pains,  par-
ticularly in  umbilical  region,  through  which  the  navel  was
drawn  inwards  ;  came  on  during  tiight.

■  Stool  not  increased,  but  accompanied  with  tenesmus.
Considerable  discharge  of  bright  red  blood,  with  stool.
Constipation :  with  belching ;  with  herpes.
Burning  and  itching  at  anus.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Stitch-like,  cramping  pain  in  bladder  and
neck  of  bladder,  through  to  urethra,  at  same  time  a  similar
pain  in  anus  and  rectum.
Burning  in  urethra:  with  the  erections;  when  urinating.
Involuntary  urination  during  the  night;  t.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Complete  loss  of  sexual  desire.

Tickling  in  forepart  of  urethra  and  sensation  as  if  something

would  run  out.
Burning  in  urethra  during  erections  and  when  urinating.
;rStitches  in  left  spermatic  cord.
VOL  III. — 24.


CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM.  370

;rLeft  testicle  more  swollen  and  indurated  than  usual,  also  much
more  painful  even  when  at  rest,  afterwards  smaller  and  more
comfortable.
Scrotum  shriveled  and  drawn  up.
Impotence,  with  atrophied  testicles.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Labor-pains too

weak.
"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness,
irritation  to  hawk;  heat  in  larynx;  scratching  and  scraped
feeling. ^Clergyman's  sore  throat.
^^Respiration. Il Expiration hot; breathing difficult; flying
stitches  and  burning in chest;  quickly passing over but
frequently  returning.
1  Asphyxia  from  alcohol  and  from  coal  gas.
^^  Cough. Cough  from  irritation  in larynx  or  at  bifurcation  of
trachea.
Cough  caused  by  heartburn.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Warmth  and  fullness  in  chest,  with
difficult  breathing. ^Congestion  of  lungs.
I  Flying-burning  and  stitches  in  chest. ^Phthisis.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  of  heart,  with
anaemic  patients;  nun's  murmur  in  vessels  of  neck.

■  Spasmodic  pulse. ^Headache.
Diminution  of  pulse  to  52. ^Ansemia.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Rheumatic  pains,  with  stiffness  of  neck.
I  Goitre.

Feeling  as  if  a  heavy  load  was  hanging  on  back  between  scapulae.
Pains  in  small  of  back  and  loins.
Pains  as  if  dislocated  in  region  of  r.  loin.

Tensive feeling in small  of  back,  < going  up  stairs,  with
occasional  jerking  towards  hip-joint.
^^  Upper  Limbs. '  Crackling  in  r.  shoulder-joint  from  every  motion,
connected  with  more  or  less  severe  stitches  from  shoulder-
joint  to  elbow,  with  every  change  of  weather.
Jerking,  stitching  pain  in  r.  shoulder-joint.

■  Stitches  from  shoulder-joint  to  elbow,  or  even  to  wrist,  espe-

cially violent  after  midnight  and  during  damp  or  cold  weather.
Tearing  pains  in  1.  shoulder  and  r.  elbow.
I  Wrist-joint  scalded  with  boiling  water; wrist  much  swollen,

blisters  partially  opened.
I  Slight  scald  of  I.  hand;  bright  redness  without  much  pain  or

swelling.
;rSensation  as  if  arm  were  being  drawn  up.
Vibration  and  trembling  in  hands  ;  t.  ,

I  Gout  of  hand.

■  Herpes  phlyctsenodes,  covering  dorsal  surface  of  hand.
Laming  and  pricking  pain  in  1.  arm ;  arm  goes  to  sleep.


371  CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM.

Jerking,  flying  stitches  in  wrists  and  in  finger-joints. ^Rheu-
matism.
^^  Lower  Limbs. I  Jerking,  stitching  rheumatic  pains  in  lower
limbs.

Inflammatory  sciatica  in  1.  thigh,  from  taking  cold,  with  entire
inability  to  walk.

I  Chronic  sciatica  in  r.  thigh,  movements  of  limb  impeded.

Pain  as  if  dislocated  in  r.  knee.

Pain  in  1.  metatarsal  bones  as  if  wrenched  by  a  misstep.

Dropsical  swelling  of  feet. (9Hepatic  afiection.

Audible  cracking  of  ankle  when  walking ;  ankle  was  sprained
two  years  ago.

Cramps  in  calves  of  legs  and  in  toes.

■  Impetigo: pimples  which  form  scabs,  in  the  popliteal  space

and  on  dorsum  of  foot  and  hand.
Pain  in  ankle-joints  as  if  broken,  in  morning  in  bed.
Stabbing,  piercing pain  from  metatarsal  bones  through  toes,

while  walking.
Painful  tiredness  and  bruised  feeling  in  soles  of  feet.
I  Cold  feet.

■  Rheumatism  of  lower  extremities;  slightest  motion  brings  on

violent  pains,  particularly  in  hips  and  knees,  with  redness
and  swelling  of  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General.  ■  Tearing  in  all  limbs,  coming  and  going,
now  in  one  and  again  in  another  limb.
A  sudden  pain  catches  her  and  comes  so  quickly  as  to  make  her
jump ;  pain  begins  at  left  elbow  and  runs  down  the  left  side
to  the  foot.

■  Tearing  in  limbs,  with  herpes  of  face.

■  ■Jerking,  stitching,  tearing,  flying  pains,  returning  at  regular

intervals,  for  a  long  time.

■  Crackling  of  joints  after  previous  gouty  aff"ections  of  joints.

■  Chronic  rheumatic  and  arthritic  affections.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting :  sudden  attacks  of  vertigo.

Motion  :  slightest,  <  rheumatism  of  lower  extremities.

Walking :  stabbing  pains  from  metatarsal  bones  through  toes.
^^  Nerves.  A  feeling  of  vibration  and  trembling  in  whole  body,
particularly  in  the  hands;  t.

When  placed  on  her  feet  she  sinks  slowly  to  the  ground;  t.

Anaesthesia  of  the  skin  and  mucous  membranes ; t.

■  Sciatica.

^''  Sleep. Restless  sleep,  with  tossing  in  bed.

^^  Time. Night :  throbbing  toothache  ;  involuntary  urination.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  food  brought  on  tooth-
ache.
^Tever. ■  Feverish  attacks. ^Headache.

■  Coldness. ^Headache.

After  much  walking :  sweat,  which  relieved  headache.


CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM.  372

Suppression  of  usual  perspiration.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Coming  and going  quickly, pain  in

forehead  and  limbs.
1 1  Short  but  quickly  returning  attacks,  at  regular  intervals.
Every  six  weeks,  chronic  diarrhoea.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Left : ear,  stitches  ; pain  in  ear ;

swallowing  causes  pain  in  ear; tearing  pain  in  shoulder;

laming  jerking  pain  in  arm  ;  pain  in  metatarsal  bones.
Right :  loin,  pains  as  if  dislocated ; shoulder-joint,  crackling

and  stitching ; tearing  pain  in  elbow ; sciatica  in  thigh ;

pain  in  knee,  as  if  dislocated.
*^  Sensations. ■  Pain  in  bladder,  urethra,  rectum  and  anus,  seems

unbearable ;  itching. ^Tetter.
As  if  tied  together,  stomach  ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in  ;  as

if  something  would  run  from  urethra ;  as  if  a  heavy  load

was  hanging  on  back  between scapulae ; as  if  arm  were

being  drawn  up ;  as  if  broken,  ankles,  in  morning  in  bed.
Sharp  pains  :  through  temples.
Jerking : in  abdomen ;  wrist  and  finger-joints ;  lower  limbs  ;

in  bladder ;  1.  spermatic  cord.
Flying  stitches :  in  wrists  and  finger-joints.
Stitching :  upper  part  of  oesophagus ;  pit  of  stomach ; under

short  ribs  ;  in  abdomen.
Stabbing : in  stomach ; from  metatarsal  bones  through  toes.
Piercing :  from  metatarsal  bones  through  toes.
Pricking :  in  1.  arm.
Burning:  end  of  nose;  in  last  upper  1.  molar;  in  throat;  in

stomach ;  in  anus.
Bruised  feeling :  in  soles  of  feet.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  lower  limbs.
Flying  pains  :  in  stomach.
Pain :  in  small  of  back,  as  if  dislocated ;  in  region  of  r.  loin  ;

in  urethra.
Pressing :  pains  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  pain  in  abdomen.
Pressure :  in  forehead ;  in  stomach.
Contracting  pain  :  in  upper  part  of  oesophagus.
Tensive  feeling  :  in  small  of  back.
Throbbing :  headache.
Fluctuating :  in  head.
Fullness :  in  chest.
Heavy  feeling :  in  head.
"  Crampy  pain :  in  abdomen ;  in  bladder.
Laming  pain  :  in  1.  arm.
Numbness  :  through  top  of  head.
Warmth :  in  chest.
Dryness :  in  throat.

Tickling :  in  point  of  nose ;  palate ;  in  urethra.
Itching :  in  anus.


373  CARBONEUM  SULFURATUM.

**  Tissues. I  Enlarged  and  indurated  lymphatic  glands.
Tetters.
I  Cold  swellings.

■  Rheumatic  troubles.

■  Rheumatism,  either  without  fever  or  with  only  slight  fever.

■  Rheumatism  and  gout;  after  the  relief  of  acute  and  inflamma-

tory conditions.

■  Chronic  rheumatic  and  arthritic  aifections,  which,  of  them-

selves, are  without  fever.

■  Gout,  but  not  gouty  dyscrasia.

■  Gouty  swellings  when  not  of  too  long  standing.

■  Tuberculosis  of  lungs  or  bowels.

^^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure: external,
stomach  painful.
A  heavy  step  :  hurts  head.
Reading  :  brings  tears  to  eyes.

■  Scalds  and  burns.

*"  Skin. ■Itch  and  herpetic  affections.

■  Vesicles  on  a  red,  inflamed  and  swollen  basis;  partly  close

together,  but  mostly  separated;  they  contain  an  opaque,
yellowish  fluid,  which  forms  thick,  yellowish  scabs,  sometimes
the  discharge  excoriates  and  produces  violent  itching.  ^Her-
pes phlyctsenodes.

■  Pimples  which  form  scabs,  in  popliteal  space  and  on  dorsum

of  foot  and  hands. ^Impetigo.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Herpetic  dyscrasia.

^^  Relations. Compare: Carh.  veg.  (flatulency); Sulphur  (sen-
sitiveness of  abdomen).


CARDUOS  MARIANUS.  374

CARDUUS  MARIANUS.

Silyhum  Marianum  Craertno.  Compositcp..

Radix,  Herba  et  Semen  Cardui  Mariae  in  use  since  olden  times.  Re-
vived by  Rademacher  in  1848.

A  very  complete  history  and  some  symptoms  given  by  Reil  (Clotar  Mil-
ler's Quarterly,  Vol.  3,  p.  453,  1852) ;  proved  by  Lembke  {Zeit.  fiir  Klin.,
Vol.  6,  p.  18) ;  a  most  excellent  proving  by  Dr.  Bnchmann  [Allg.  Zeit.  fur
Horn.,  Vol.  98,  1879),  the  same  who  has  shown  by  his  microscopic  investi-
gations his  great  superiority  as  a  scientific  man,  and  the  discoverer  of  the
solubility  of  all  metals  and  other  substances,  presupposed  by  Hahnemann.

^Mind. 1  Forgets  what  he  has  just  intended  to  do.

Sadness  with  tendency  to  weep.

I  Fullness  in  head  with  disposition  to  become  angry.
^  Inner  Head. I  Sensation  of  fullness  and  heaviness  in  head.

Pressing  pain  on  inner  surface  of  skull,  in  region  of  coronal
suture.

■  Pressure in forehead, most marked directly over eyes.
I  I  Pressing  pain  in  occiput.

Transient  headache  in  forehead  and  temples.
Pressive  headache,  as  in  incipient  coryza.
Headache  shortly  before  meals,  disappearing  after  eating.
*  Outer  Head. Tensive  pressure  in  scalp,  as  if  constricted  around

skull.
Fullness  of  head,  with  tensive  pain  in  scalp,  over  left  parietal

bone.

■  Feeling  of  constriction  over  eyebrows.
I  I  Pain  in  left  parietal  bone.
Drawing  pain  in  scalp  of  occiput.
Great  sensitiveness  of  head  to  cold.

®  Sight  and  Eyes, l  l  Burning  and  pressure  in  eyeballs.

Pressure  in  eyeballs  as  if  they  were  pressed  against  side  of

orbits.
Pain  in  right  eye.
Redness  of  conjunctiva.

I  I  Burning  sensation  in  edges  of  upper  and  lower  lids.
I  I  Pressive,  burning  sensation  in eyelids,  with  swelling  and
heaviness  of  same ;  more  especially  in  left  eye,  which  can
with  difficulty  be  opened.
1  I  Pressure  over  left  eye.
Pain  in  orbits.


375  CARDUUS  MARIANUS.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. Pain  in  right  auricle,  in  circumference  of
meatus.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Loss  of  smell.

Tickling  sensation  at  outer  edge  of  nostrils.

I  I  Tickling  sensation  at  first  in  right,  then  in  left  nostril,  with

watery  discharge.
Burning  in  nostrils.

Burning  in  right  nostril,  with  watery  discharge  from  same.
Epistaxis.
*  Upper  Face. Sensation  of  heat  in  face.

Complexion  dirty  or  florid.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Drawing  pains  in  carious  teeth.

A  hollow  tooth  is  painful  to  contact  of  tongue.
^^  Taste and  Tongue. Whitish  coating  of  middle  of  tongue,
with  redness  of  edges.
Metallic  taste,  constricting  palate  and  pharynx.
I  Bitter  taste  in  mouth.

Soups  salted  as  usual  tasted  insipid ;  at  other  times  well  salted
food  is  repugnant.
^^  Inner  Mouth. I  l  Collection  of  water  in  mouth.
^3  Throat. '  l  Feeling  of  roughness  and  dryness  in  palate.

I  1  Smooth  sensation  of  mucous  membrane  of  palate,  as  though

it  were  covered  with  fat.
Sensation  of  dryness  in  palate  and  on  lips.
Repeated  eructations  of  air,  with  burning  in  oesophagus  like

heartburn.
Dysphagia.
^'Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Smoking,  though
usually  repugnant  in  evening,  is  agreeable.
I  Want  of  appetite.
Voracity.

^^  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and  Vomiting. ^rSour

eructations.

I  I  Empty  eructations,  after  food  taken  with  aversion.

I  Nausea,  with  collection  of  water  in  mouth.

Continual  nausea  with  desire  to  vomit.

I  Intense  nausea,  painful  retching  and  vomiting  of  sour,  green-
ish fluid.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  i  Stitches  in  scrobiculum.

Pressing  pains  at  pit  of  stomach.

Drawing  pains  from  1.  to  r.  through  pit  of  stomach.

I  I  Contents  of  stomach  and  intestines  sour. ^Epidemic  affec-

tion.
Pain  in  stomach,  lasting  for  two  hours,  preceded  by  vomiting.

I I  Pressure  in  stomach:  with  eructation  of  air;  at  night  on
awakening;  lasting  all  day;  coming  and  disappearing
during  day.

Sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach,  as  before  meals.


CARDUUS  MARIANUS.  376

I  Burning  in  stomach,  as  of  acidity,  with  transient  pressure

in  stomach.
Stitches  in  1.  of  stomach,  worse  on  inspiration.
Uncomfortable  sensation  in  epigastric  region.
Painful  griping  in  stomach.
Colicky  pains  in  stomach,  with  waterbrash.
Hsematemesis ;  cardialgia; vomiting  of  pregnancy; melsena.
^^  Hypochondria, Feeling  of  fullness  in  hypochondria,  neces-
sitating deep  inspiration.
I  Hepatic  region  sensitive  to  pressure.

■  Pressure,  drawing  pain  and  stitches  in  hepatic  region.

•  Sensation  of  tension  and  pressure  in  liver,  on  lying  on  1.  side.

Crawling  sensation,  like  passage  of  a  small  body  size  of  a  pea
through  a  narrow  canal,  on  posterior  side  of  liver  from  r.
to  1.,  extending  to  pit  of  stomach,  on  a  level  with  border  of
ribs;  repeated  three  times  after  a  pause  of  one  minute,  and
lasting  three  seconds  each  time.

Feeling  of  pressure  as  of  flatus,  under  margin  of  ribs  to  1.  last-
ing ten  minutes,  then  to  r.,  then  to  r.  more  posteriorly,
finally  posteriorly  to  left.

Stitching  pains  in  region  of  spleen,  especially  on  inspiration
and  stooping.

Liver  complaint;  icterus;  gall-stones.

iPlethora  in  portal  circulation;  hyperaemia  of  liver;  catarrh
of  gall-passages  ;  sluggish  peristalsis  in  colon.

I  Swelling,  sensitiveness,  and  induration  of  1.  lobe  of  liver,
causing,  by  compression,  respiratory  embarrassment,  and
cough  with  thick  expectoration.

I  Dull  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium,  from  time  to  time,  with  stitches ;
short,  dry  cough ;  difficult  breathing ;  bitter  taste  and  yel-
lowish complexion  ;  subacute  fever. ^Liver  complaint.

IB  The  diseased  liver  has  either  already  implicated  the  lungs,
showing  itself  by  haemoptysis,  as  in  simple  congestion,  or
as  inflammation  of  liver  and  lungs  ;  vomiting  of  blood.
"Abdomen, i  Typhlitis.

Painful  sensations  of  an  undefined  character  in  abdomen,  ne-
cessitating deep  inspiration,  increased  by  vigorous  move-
ments of  body.

■  Drawing  pain  between  umbilicus  and  pit  of  stomach,  coming

and  going,  in  peritoneum  of  abdominal  wall,  from  r.  to  1.,
followed  by  pain  with  sensation  of  heat  in  a  spot  as  large  as
a  hen's  egg,  between  umbilicus  and  inguinal  region  to  left.

■  Violent  pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  <  by  pressure,  continu-

ing uniform  until  sleep  sets  in.

■  Pressing  pain  in  abdomen  on  r.  side,  between  margin  of  ribs

and  hip,  while  riding  in  a  carriage,  lasting  for  one  hour.

■  Drawing  pain  in  hypogastric  region.
Pulsation  in  abdomen.


37T  CARDUUS  MARIANUS.

■  Awakens  with  pains  in  abdomen,  near  r.  hip  bone.

I  Stitching  pain  in  abdomen,  one  hand's  breadth  to  1.  of  r.  hip-

bone.

■  Pressing  pain  in  abdomen  tor.;  body  in  a  horizontal  posi-

tion, with  sensation  of  heat.
Drawing  pain  extending  through  r.  inguinal  region.
Burning  pain  in  small  intestine,  in  hypogastrium.

I I  Sensation  of  motion  in  intestines  on  expiration,  extending
breadth  of  a  hand  around  umbilicus.

Pressure  with  sensation  of  warmth  in  small  intestine,  on  1.

side  of  abdomen.
I  Stitches  in  small  intestine,  >  by  pressure.
Griping  pain  in  intestines,  on  1.  side.
Painless  flatulency  in  small  intestine.
Distention  of  abdomen,  especially  on  r.  side.
I  I  Rumbling  in  small  intestine.
Violent,  painful  rumbling  in  hypogastrium.
Cutting  pain  in  bowels,  changing  from  place  to  place.
I  1  Passage  of  flatus,  unusually  copious.
Ascites  ;  peritonitis  puerperalis  ;  typhilitis  stercorales.
^'^  Stool  and  Rectum. "Melsena.
I  Stools  now  hard,  now  soft.

I  Constipation.

Stool  hard  and  knotty.

I I  Stool  very  hard  and  insufficient.

Hard  stool,  followed  after  an  hour  by  a  soft  chocolate  colored

passage,  slightly  colored  with  bile.
I  Paste-like,  clayey  stool,  without  bilious  coloring.
Sluggish  stool.
After  drinking  weissbier,  is  overcome  on  the  way  by  the  most

violent  urging  to  stool.

■  Burning  pain  in  rectum  and  anus,  which  interferes  with  sit-

ting. ^
Itching  in  anus.

■  Hemorrhoids, with acidity of stomach and distention of

bowels.
Visceral  obstruction.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Urging  to  urinate, without  necessity  of
passing  water.

■  Pressure  on  bladder,  producing  dribbling  of  urine,  after  un-

availing urging  to  stool.
Chilliness  on  awakening,  with  vigorous  urging  to  urinate,  with
voiding  of  only  two  tablespoonfuls  of  normally  colored  urine.

■  Burning  at  meatus  after  urination.

■  Burning  pain  in  urethra,  with sensation  as  of  swelling  of

neighboring parts, compelling her to arise from sitting
posture.


CARDUUS  MARIANUS.  378

Drawing  pain  :  with  burning,  sensation  in  bladder ;  in  bladder
when  sitting.

I  Awakened  bj  pain  in  urethra,  with  pain  in  r.  lumbar  region.

Copious  passage  of  urine  of  a  golden  yellow  color,  with  draw-
ing sensation  in  inguinal  region.

Drawing  sensation  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  during  urination.

Copious  passage  of  urine,  with  deposit  of  red  sediment.

I  Urine  turbid,  golden  yellow,  and  acid.

Urine  like  whey,  yellowish  brown,  and  diminished  in  quantity.

Urine  diminished  in  quantity ;  depositing  sediment  and  con-
taining traces  of  bilious  coloring  matter.

I  Urine  scanty;  brownish  in  color,  and  containing  bilious  col-
oring matter.

Strangury ;  calculi.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. '  '  Erection  on  awakening.

Pressure  in  urethral  portion  of  glans.

Drawing  pains  in  testicles.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Menstruation  too  profuse  or  sup-
pressed.

■  Chronic  uterine  hemorrhage,  with  derangement  of  portal  cir-

culation.

Drawing  pain  in  vagina.

Leucorrhoea;  amenorrhoea;  metrorrhagia.
24  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Vomiting  of  preg-
nancy.

Agalactia.

■  Simple  inflammatory  irritation  of  mammae.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Pressing
pain  in  speaking  and  swallowing,  in  neighborhood  of  hyoid
bone  on  1.  side,  increased  by  pressure  from  without,  with
sensation  of  swelling  at  this  point.
Sensation  of  dryness  in  larynx.

I  I  Irritation  in  posterior  part  of  larynx,  causing  cough.

^^  Respiration. Drawing  pain  on  margin  1.  rib,  with  pain  dur-
ing breathing;  especially  during  expiration.
Stitches  at  lower  margin  of  ribs,  between  both  linea  mammalis,

with  each  inspiration.
Stitches  in  r.  side  in  neighborhood  of  seventh  rib ;  on  deep  in-
spiration and  on  bending.
Stitches  on  inspiration  between  linea  mammalis  and  axillaris  at
sixth  rib.
^^  Cough. Sympathetic  cough,  dry,  hacking,  <  at  night.

I I  Cough  with  stitches in  sides  of  chest,  and  bloody  sputa.
^Epidemic  affection.

Haemoptysis  with  frequent  dry  tickling.
Irritation  to  cough,  excited  by  roughness  in  fauces.
Irritation  to  cough,  on  posterior  side  of  larynx.


379  CARDUUS  MARIANUS.

Awakened  by  irritation  to  cough,  behind  larynx,  with  chilli-
ness.

Several  attacks  of  short,  dry  cough,  without  tickling.

Short,  dry  cough  ;  irritation  proceeding  from  throat-pit.

Scraping  sensation  in  throat  producing  cough.

Cough  with  gastric  symptoms,  and  painfulness  of  epigastrium
to  pressure.

Cough  dependent  on  old  hepatic  or  splenetic  troubles.

■  Expectoration:  pure  blood  ;  mucus  mixed  with  blood. ^Dis-
ease of  liver.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. isPains  in  chest  going  to  front
part,  to  shoulders,  back,  loins  and  abdomen,  combined  with
urging  to  urinate. ^Epidemic  affection.

jrDrawing  pains  in  1.  side  of  chest.

I  I  Stitches  in  side,  with  fever,  cough  and  spitting  of  blood,  in
affections  of  liver,  and  jaundiced  complexion.

Drawing pains in chest, 1. side ; increased by  pressure in
stomach.

I  I  Oppression  in  1.  side  of  chest,  with  pain,  especially  during
deep  breathing.

Pleuritis ; chronic  bronchial  catarrh; phthisis;  haemoptysis;
asthma.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pain,  pressure  and  stitches
in  region  of  heart.

Drawing  pain  in  region  of  heart,  with  oppression  on  deep  in-
spiration.
^"  Outer  Chest.  Stitching  pain  at  a  small  spot  in  neighborhood
of  sixth  rib;  in  line  of  axilla  to  1.,  with  continued  drawing
pain;  stitching  pain  passes  gradually  to  front  and  interferes
with  inspiration.

Drawing  pain  on  margin  1.  rib,  with pain during  breathing,
especially  during  expiration.

I  I  Short  stitches  behind  short  ribs  of  1.  side.

Stitching  pain  extending  breadth  of  a  hand  over  right  nipple,
on  stooping  and  on  raising  right  arm.

Stitches  at  margin  of  lower  ribs,  between  both  mammary  lines,
at  each  inspiration.

Stitches  during  inspiration, between mammary  and  axillary
lines  on  sixth  rib.

1  I  Drawing  pain  through  1.  pectoral  muscle,  and  1.  intercostal
muscles,  below  axilla.

Drawing  pain  through  r.  pectoral  muscle-
Pressure  in  r.  pectoral  muscle.

Stitches  from  1.  nipple  to  r. and  downward,  lasting  several
seconds.

Stitches  in r.  side,  near  the  seventh  rib,  on  deep  inspiration
and  on  stooping.

I  I  Continual  drawing  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest,  extending  to


CARDUUS  MARIANUS.  380

axilla,  with  stitching  pain  in  same  place  near  fifth  rib  on  ex-
piration ; <C  after  deep  inspiration.

Drawing  sensation  from  1.  side  of  chest  to  back.

Pains  extend  over  entire  front  of  chest,  and  are  so  violent  as
to  make  motion  of  arms,  walking  and  stooping,  almost  im-
possible.
^^  Neck  and  Back.  Pressing  pain  in  a  spot  about  size  of  a  small
coin  in  nape  of  neck  to  1.,  and  on  a  level  with  the  mastoid
process ;  after  a  few  moments  the  pain  subsides  and  occurs
on  corresponding  part  of  r.  side.

Pressure  in  nape  of  neck.

1 8  Drawing  pains  in  entire  back,  followed  by  fatigue.

1 1  Drawing  pain  on  r.  side  of  back,  from  shoulder-blade  to
lumbar  region,  changing  locality.

Drawing  pains:  in  muscles  of  back ;  in  lumbar  region  ;  in  small
of  back  ;  on  inner  margin  of  r.  shoulder-blade;  in  1.  shoulder-
blade.

Pressure  in  back  below  shoulder-blades.

Drawing  sensation  on  outer  margin  of  1.  shoulder-blade.

Tearing  sensation  in  1.  shoulder-blade.

Burning  and  sore  pain  in  region  of  1.  shoulder-blade,  ■<  by
inspiration,  pressure  and  reclining.

■  Sensitiveness  of  dorsal  and  cervical  vertebras.
^  Upper  Limbs. Bruised  feeling  in  arms.

Pain  in  shoulder-joint  on  raising  r.  arm.

Rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder,  radiating  from  neck.

Pressure  in  shoulders.

Drawing  pain  in  r.  upper  arm.

I  I  Violent  pains  of  a  rheumatic  character  in  r.  deltoid.

Pains  in  r.  arm  are  at  times  so  violent  that  groaning  cannot
be  suppressed.

I  I  Tearing  in  1.  upper  arm.

Burning  pain  in  skin,  on  inner  side  of  lower  half  of  1.  fore-
arm.

I I  Drawing  pain  in  muscles  covering  1.  radius,  alternating
with  pain  in  same  muscles  of  r.  side.

Cramp-like  pain  in  muscles  covering  1.  radius.

Pressure  in  wrist-joints.

Cramp-like,  drawing  pains,  in  inner  side  of  r.  hand,  extend-
ing to  first  two  joints  of  fourth  finger.

Burning  pain  on  outer  surface  of  1.  index-finger,  in  skin.

Rheumatic,  drawing  sensation,  in  first  joint  of  fourth  finger  on
1.  hand.

Rheumatic,  drawing  sensation,  in  first  joint  of  r.  index-finger.

Drawing  pain  in  fourth  finger  of  r.  hand,  on  outer  side.

Cramp-like  pain  in  fingers  of  1.  hand,  lasting  for  ten  minutes.

I  I  Cramp-like  pain  in  second,  third  and  fourth  fingers  of  r.
hand,  on  outer  side.


381  CARDUUS  MARIANUS.

^^  Lower  Limbs. llPain  in  hip-joints,  spreading  through  but-
tocks, causing  difficulty  in  arising,  <  from  stooping.
Bruised  pain  in  buttocks  and  legs.
TrDrawing  pain  in  r.  thigh.
Drawing  pain  in  skin  on  outer  side  of  1.  knee.
1  I  Drawing  pain  in  1.  knee  joint.

Stiffness  in  knees  while  walking,  of  patella  and  in  tendons  of
popliteal  space,  with  sensation  of  lameness  in  lower  parts  of
thighs,  causing  unsteady  and  stumbling  gait.
I  I  Sensation  of  coldness  in  knees.

Pain  in  hollow  of  knees  while  walking,  more  especially  in  left.
Sensation  while  walking  as  of  a  band  around calves, or  of

pantaloons  being  too  tight  a  few  inches  below  knee.
Drawing pain  in superficial  nerves,  below  patella  on  outer

side  of  lower  thigh,  over  a  space  of  four  fingers  in  breadth.
Drawing  pain  from  outer  side  of  knees  to  outer  malleolus.
Drawing  pain  from  inner  side  of  lower  thigh,  to  inner  malleolus.
Drawing  pain  from  1.  knee  into  lower  thigh.
Paralyzing  pain  in  1.  tibia.
I  I  Cramp-like  pain  in  calves.
I  I  Pain  in  dorsum  of  r.  foot.

I  1  Sudden,  cramp-like  pain,  in  muscles  of  sole  of  r.  foot,  flex-
ing the  toes;  after  disappearance  of  same,  intense  itching
in  front  of  heel.
Pain  on  lower  part  of  r.  heel,  <  from  walking.
I  I  Sensation  of  coldness  in  toes  and  soles  of  feet.
Sciatica.

Rheumatism  and  spasms  of  the  extremities.
Varicose  ulcers.
CEdema  of  the  feetr.
^*  Limbs  in  General. I  l  Lassitude  in  arms  and  legs  in  morning

after  rising,  not  >  by  walking  in  open  air.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting :  drawing  pain  in  bladder.
Stooping:  stitches  in  r.  side  and  over  r.  nipple;  in  hip-joints.
Arising  :  difficult,  pain  in  hip-joints.
Raising  arm  :  stitching  pain  over  r.  nipple.
Walking :  almost  impossible,  with  pains  in  chest ;  stiffness  of
knees  ;  pain  in  hollow  of  knee ; as  if  a  band  around  calves ;
pain  in  heel.
Motion  :  of  arm,  pains  extend  over  entire  front  of  chest.
Every  sudden  or  violent  movement  of  body  is  painful,  both  in
chest  and  abdomen. ^Cough.
3s  Nerves. ■  General  feeling  of  discomfort,  lassitude  and  malaise.
I  i  Great  fatigue  after  eating,  and  fatigue  with  frequent  yawn-
ing.
2^  Sleep. I  Restless sleep, with frequent  awakening and  many
dreams.
Lying  on  back  produces  nightmare.


CARDUUS  MARIANUS.  382

1  I  Fatigue  about  4  p.m.,  with  sleep  while  riding,  lasting  ten
minutes.

I  I  Great  fatigue  with  frequent  yawning.

I  I  On  awakening,  great  fatigue  with  disinclination  to  rise.  '

Uncontrollable  yawning  in  quick  succession.

Irritation  to cough,  felt  behind larynx  on  awakening,  with
chilliness.
^^  Time. Night :  dry,  hacking  cough  ;  itching  of  skin.

Morning: lassitude  of  arms  and  legs.

4  P.M. :  fatigue  with  sleep  while  riding.

All  day:  pressure  of  stomach,  with  eructation  of  air.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Cold: great  sensitiveness- of

the  head.
^•^  Fever. llEpidemic  affection  (see  chest  and  stomach)  lasting
seven  weeks,  was  lessened  to  a  few  days;  the  longest  seven
days.

I  Gastric,  catarrhal,  or  rheumatic  fever,  with  pain  in  stomach
and  region  of  liver,  increased  by  pressing  on  it ;  symptoms
frequent  in  epidemic  influenza.

I  I  Chilliness  on  awakening,  with  strong  urging  to  urinate.

Chill,  with  pulse  increased  from  75  to  90.

Chill,  with  sensation  of  a  pulse  beat  in  abdomen.

Chilliness  at  night,  <  by  uncovering;  pulse  in  morning  82.

General  sweating  and  lassitude  on  awakening.

Sweating  of  forehead  and  back  after  meals.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  parietal  bone,  pain  ;  eyelids,
difficult  to  open  ;  nostril,  watery  discharge ;  tension,  lying
on  side ;  pressure  of  flatus,  under  ribs  ;  lobe  of  liver,  swell-
ing, sensitiveness ;  small  intestine,  pressure ;  chest,  draw-
ing pain ;  in  chest,  oppression ;  iri  side,  stitches ;  pectoral
region,  drawing  pain ;  in  neck  and  shoulder-blade,  pressing
pain;  upper  arm,  tearing;  forearm,  burning  pain;  in  radius,

•  drawing  pain;  index -finger,  burning  pain;  fourth  finger,
rheumatic  drawing ;  in  fingers,  cramp-like  pain ;  in  knee,
drawing  pain  ;  in  tibia,  paralyzed  pain.

Right:  in  eye,  pain;  auricle,  pain;  nostril,  burning;  under
margin  of  ribs,  pressure  of  flatus;  in  hypochondria,  dull  pain;
abdominal  wall,  drawing  pain ;  abdomen,  near  hip,  pains ;
in  lumbar  region,  pain ;  side  of  abdomen,  drawing  sensa-
tion; nipple,  stitching  pain;  pectoral  region,  drawing  pain;
in  neck,  pressure,  pressing  pain  ;  side  of  back,  drawing
pain  ;  shoulder-blade,  drawing  pain  ;  shoulder-joint,  pains  ;
in  deltoid,  violent  pain  ;  in  arm,  violent  pains  ;  in  radius,
drawing  pain  ;  muscles  of  hand,  cramp-like  drawing ;  in-
dex-finger, rheumatic  drawing ;  fourth  finger,  drawing  pain  ;
in  fingers,  ctamp-like  pain  ;  in  thigh,  drawing  pain ;  in
dorsum  of  foot,  pain  ;  in  heel,  pain.


383  CARDUUS  MARIANUS.

Left  to  right : drawing  pain  through  pit  of  stomach  ; stitches
in  nipples.
^^  Sensations. As  if  eyeballs  were  pressed  against  side  of  orbits  ;
as  though  palate  were  covered  with  fat.

Stitches  :  in  scrobiculum  ;  in  stomach  ;  hepatic  region  ;  re-
gion of  spleen;  hypochondrium;  small  intestine;  near  sixth
rib,  1.  side  ;  over  r.  nipple.

Cutting  :  in  bowels.

Colicky  pains  :  in  stomach.

Tearing  :  1.  upper  arm.

Rheumatic  pains  :  in  shoulder  ;  fourth  finger,  1.  hand  ;  r.  in-
dex-finger.

Drawing  pain :  in  teeth ;  through  pit  of  stomach  ;  hepetic  re-
gion ;  about  umbilicus;  through  r.  inguinal  region;  in
bladder  ;  in  inguinal  region  ;  in  testicles  ;  in  vagina  ;  mar-
gin of  1.  ribs  ;  pain  in  chest ;  region  of  heart ;  through
r.  pectoral  region  ;  in  entire  back  ;  in  r.  upper  arm  ;  in
superficial  nerves  about  knee  ;  lower  thigh  ;  r.  thigh  ;  in
skin  of  outer  1.  knee-joint ;  in  muscles  of  1.  radius  ;  inner
side  of  r.  hand  ;  fingers.

Burning  :  in  eyeballs  ;  edges  of  upper  lids  ;  in  nostril ;  in
oesophagus  ;  above  umbilicus  ;  pain  in  small  intestine  ;  in
rectum;  in  meatus,  after  urination;  in  bladder;  1.  shoulder-
blade  ;  in  skin  ;  1.  index-finger.

Pressing  pain  :  inner  surface  of  skull ;  in  stomach  ;  in  ab-
domen ;  pain  in  speaking  ;  small  of  back.

Pressure  :  in  forehead  ;  in  eyeballs  ;  in  eyelids  ;  hepatic  re-
gion ;  under  ribs;  small  intestine;  in  bladder;  in  nape  of
neck  ;  in  back,  below  shoulder-blades  ;  in  wrist-joints.

Tensive  pressure  :  in  scalp  ;  pain  in  liver.

Bruised  feeling :  in  arms.

Paralyzing  pain  :  1.  tibia.

Pain  :  in  stomach  ;  violent  in  abdomen  ;  in  hip-joints ;  in
dorsum  of  r.  foot  ;  r.  heel.

Roughness  :  in  palate.

Scraping  :  in  throat.

Fullness  :  of  head  ;  in  hypochondria.

Swelling  :  in  larynx.

Emptiness  :  in  stomach.

Constriction  :  over  eyebrows.

Band  :  around  calves.

Cramp-like:  muscles  1.  radius;  inner  side  r.  hand;  in  fingers;
pain  in  calves  ;  r.  foot.

Motion  :  in  intestines.

Crawling  :  in  posterior  side  of  liver.

Coldness  :  in  knees  ;  on  awaking  ;  at  night.

Chilliness  :  on  awaking.


CARDUUS  MARIANUS— CASCARILLA.  384

Warmth  :  in  small  intestine.
Heat :  in  face  ;  about  umbilicus.
Dryness  :  in  palate  and  lips  ;  in  larynx.
Itching  :  in  anus  ;  in  front  of  head.
**  Tissues. Portal hyperaemia ;  catarrh  of  biliary  ducts ;  tardy
peristaltic  movements  in  large  intestines  ;  hemorrhoids.
IB  Dropsical  diseases,  depending  on  organic  affections  of  the

liver  ;  frequently  of  long  standing.
Passive  hemorrhages,  connected  with  diseased  liver  or  spleen.
^®  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure : hepatic
region,  sensitive;  <C  rheumatic  pain  in  stomach.
Riding:  fatigue.
^®  Skin. Itching  on  lying  down  at  night.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, h  Woman  who  was  exhausted
by  much  suffering  and  repeated hemorrhages  from womb
after  abortion,  with  frequent  attacks  of  bilious  colic. ^Ty-
philitis  stercoralis.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Bryon.,  lOhelid.,llMercur.,  Nuxvom.,
and  I  iPodoph.,  in  hepatic  affections,  especially  jaundice.


CASCARILLA.

Croton  Eleuteria.  Ewphorhiacece.


Tincture  of  the  bark,  which  is  bitter,  aromatic  and  tonic  in  its  effect,
somewhat  resembling  Cinchona  bark.

It  is  mentioned  as  curative  in  hemorrhages  and  intermittent  fever,  in
Tschudi's  Peru,  Vol.  II,  p.  217.  The  provings  are  from  Stapfs  Archives,
15,  1,  184,  and  by  A.  Zambrock;  the  clinical  symptoms  by  Hering  and
Lippe.

^  Mind. Disinclination  to  think.

^  Inner  Head. Heat  and  confusion  of  head.

Dull  drawing  pain  in  r.  temporal  region.
"  Sight  and  Eyes. Itching  about  eyes.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Burning  heat  of  inner  and  outer  ear.
^  Upper  Face. Faceache.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter,  rough  taste,  when  smoking.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Gangrenous  aphthae  of  children.
13  Tliroat. Sensation  of  swelling  deep  down  in  throat.

Accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat.


385  CASCARILLA.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. iNo  appetite,  es-
pecially early  in  the  morning.
I  Thirst  for  hot  tea  during  heat. ^Intermittent,
i  Aversion  to  smell  of  tobacco-smoke.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructations :

with  bitter  taste;  empty;  ineffectual.
^'^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Burning pressure in pit of
stomach.
Slight  tensive  pressure  in  epigastric  region,  as  after  eating  too
much ;  the  concussion  of  every  step  taken  is  painfully  felt
in  region  of  stomach.
^^Hypochondria. Uncomfortable  pressure  and  tension  in  hypo-
chondria, almost  like  incarcerated  flatus,  though  associated
with  a  feeling  of  hardness.
^^  Abdomen. Pressure  and  rumbling  in  abdomen.
Griping  preceding  morning  stool.
Boils  in  the  inguinal  region.
'^^  Stool  and  Rectum, ■  Occasional  diarrhoea,  becoming  gradu-
ally worse  and  more  frequent,  with  backache  and  lassitude.

■  Constant  slight  urging,  often  with  pain  high  up  in  rectum,

gnawing  in  character.

■  Diarrhoea  alternating  with  hard,  lumpy  stools.

■ Constipation;  stool  hard,  in  pieces,  covered  with  mucus.

■  1  Passes  bright  blood  with  or  without  stool,  in  large  quantities,

causing  weakness.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Soreness  and  burning  in  orifice  of  urethra

after  urinating.
Involuntary  micturition.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Spermatorrhoea.
^*  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Tickling  in

trachea  causing  short  dry  cough.
^'  Cough, Short  dry  cough,  from  tickling  in  trachea.

Hgemoptysis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitch  upwards  on  1.  side.
*^  Neck  and  Back. I  Backache  and  weakness,  inclination  to  lie

down. A  distaste  for  business.

■  Backache,  muscles  of  both  sides  pained  violently.

'^  Upper  Limbs.  Pressive  tensive  pain  in  r.  shoulder-joint,  dur-
ing rest  and  motion.

^*  Lower  Limbs. Formicating  pain  in  calves.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Pain  in  joints.

^'  Best.  Position.  Motion.  Walking :  in  open  air,  sweat  on
back.

2®  Nerves.  Great  fatigue  and  lassitude,  with  weariness  in  the
limbs.

■  The  whole  day  greatest  degree  of  lassitude,  had  to  lie  down,

but  was  not  refreshed.
VOL.  III. — 25


CASCARILLA.


886


^'^  Sleep. Sleep  with  clear  consciousness.

Horrible  dreams,  wakes  up  frightened.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  open  air :  sweat  on  back,

while  walking.
^^  Fever. Anxious  heat  of  whole  body  and  slight  sweat,  followed
by  drowsiness.

Sweat  on  back  when  walking  in  open  air,  with  chilliness,  >•
when  standing  still.

I  Heat  with  thirst  for  warm  drinks. ^Intermittent.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  drawing  in  temporal  region.
*^  Sensations. As  of  swelling  in  throat.

Drawing:  in  temporal  region.

Burning :  of  ears ;  in  orifice  of  urethra.

Burning  pressure:  in  pit  of  throat.

Tensive  pressure:  in  epigastric  region ;  in  hypochondria.

Pressure:  in  abdomen.

Griping:  in  abdomen,  preceding  stool.

Soreness :  in  orifice  of  urethra.

Tickling:  in  trachea.

Itching:  about  eyes;  of  skin.
^*  Tissues. Hemorrhages.

Anaemia;  dropsy.
*^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries.

felt  in  region  of  stomach.
^^  Skin. Itching  of  skin.

*^  Relations. Compare: Cinchon.  (effects  of  loss  of  blood;
mittents) ; I  Grraphit.  (mucus  mingled  with  stools).


Concussion  of  step  is


inter-


387  CASTANEA  VESCA.

CASTANEA  VESCA.

Chestnut.  Cupuliferce.

Tincture  of  the  leaves.

Symptoms  marked  1 1  are  those  italicized  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  from
provings  of  Houghton  and  others.
Clinical  use  in  pertussis,  by  Conant,  Counselor,  Feb.,  1880.

"  Throat, l  ■  Slight  acrid  feeling  in  throat.

"  Desire. I  l  Desire  for  warm  drinks.

^^  Abdomen. I  l  Abdominal  walls  sensitive.

I  I  An  uncomfortable  relaxed  condition  of  the  abdominal  viscera
all  day,  better  when  lying  on  back.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. I  l  The  soft  stools  consisted  of  short,  small
pieces,  like  chopped  tape;  this  character  of  stool  has  con-
tinued for  three  years,  whenever  loose  stools  occur.
I  11.30  P.M.,  sudden  and  urgent  desire  for  stool,  accompanied
by  severe  pain  and  rumbling;  pain  relieved  by  stool.

"Cough. I  Pertussis,  early  stage,  with  violent  spasmodic,  very
dry,  ringing  cough.

^^  Best. Position. Motion. Lying  on  back :  >  relaxed  con-
dition of  abdominal  viscera.

^"  Fever. I  l  Perspiration  very  free  after  drinking.

*^  Sensation. Acrid :  in  throat.
Pain:  before  stool.

*^  Relations. Compare:  Amm.hrom.,lMephit.  diUdillNaphthal.
in  whooping-cough.


CASTOEEUM.  S88

CASTOREUffl.

Castor  Fiber.  Rodentia.


Tincture  of  secretion  contained  in  preputial  sacs  of  the  beaver.

Mentioned  by  Galen,  Hippocrates  and  Pliny,  and  in  use  among  the  Ara-
bians, who  gave  it  in  hepatic  and  uterine  troubles,  and  in  epilepsy  and
convulsions.  Eecommended  later  for  hysterical  complaints  by  Pomet  and
Hill;  for  deafness,  by  Lemery.

The  only  provings  are  by  Caspar!  and  Nenning;  the  former  proved  the
Russian,  the  latter  the  Austrian  variety.  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  III.
The  original  in  Hartlaub  and  Trink's  Annates,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  314.

Clinical  symptoms  are  from  Gosewisch,  Siegrist,  Neidhard,  Trousseau  and
Pidoux  and  H.  M.,  1879.

^  Mind. Very  peevish  humor,  indisposed  to  talk.

Very  sensitive  to  all  kinds  of  impressions.

Irritable  in  morning ;  cheerful  abandon  in  evening.

B  Melancholic  and  full  of  anxious  longing. ^Hysteria.

Angry  exclamations  during  sleep.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness  and  fainting.
^  Inner  Head. Headache,  with  giddiness  and  fainting.

Heaviness,  with  drawing  pain  in  head.

Transitory  pressure  in  forehead.

Dull  headache  from  in  outwards  in  r.  forehead.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Dimness  of  vision,  and  lachrymation. ^Ca-
tarrh.

Appearance  before  eyes,  as  though  he  had  not  slept  enough.

I  1  Eyes  are  agglutinated  nearly  all  night.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Earache  and  buzzing  in  ears.

Pain  behind  1.  ear.

Otorrhoea.
'®  Teeth  and  Gums. Pain  in  1.  lower  row  of  molar  teeth.

Swelling  of  gums.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Swelling  of  tongue.

I A  rounded  elevation  in  centre  of  tongue,  the  size  of  a  pea,  sur-
rounded by  an  angry  suspicious-looking  base,  the  size  of  a
nickel  five-cent  piece,  extremely  sensitive  to  touch  or  food,
with  a  drawing  sensation  as  if  a  string  was  pulling  centre  of
tongue  towards  hyoid  bone,  with  burning  in  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Bad  smell  from  mouth.
13  Throat. Dryness  of  oesophagus.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Want  of  appetite.


389  CASTOREUM.

I  I  Thirst  is  so  violent  that  she  could  not  drink  enough  water,
after  dinner.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching,
with  stitches  in  chest.
Nausea  after  urinating.

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Weight  at  stomach.
Griping  in  stomach.

Tenesmus  in  stomach,  with  constrictive  pain  under  sternum.
Tension  and  heaviness  in  stomach.
Emptiness  in  stomach.

I  Sensation  in  stomach  as  though  it  would  go  to  sleep.
^^  Hypochondria. Pressure  in  region  of  liver  from  in  outwards.
^^  Abdomen. Pain  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.
Colic  from  flatulency.
■  Yawning,  in  abdominal  complaints.
Abdomen  distended,  in  afternoon.
I  I  Umbilical  hernia,  with  colic,  in  a  screaming  infant.
Abdomen  feels  as  though  full  and  distended.
Above  1.  ilium  in  flanks,  sensation  of  soreness  as  though  from

an  internal  wound.
On  taking  a  deep  breath  stitching  pains  on  both  sides  in  ab-
domen, above  hips  to  spinal  column,  extending  to  region  of
liver,  as  though  he  was  being  stuck,  in  various  places  above
ilium,  with  needles.
^^ Stool  and  Rectum. Stools: l whitish,  watery ;  bloody  mucus;
greenish  mucus;  frequent.
I  Stools  contain  pus; patient  is  compelled  to  sit  bent  double;

feels  gagged  when  lying  down.
Before  stool : cutting  or  pinching  colic ; painful  rumbling ;

dragging  in  groin.
During  stool :  fetid  flatus  ; I  burning  at  anus.
I  After  stool:  burning  at  anus.

Accompaniments  of  bowel  complaints  : yawning  ;  chilliness  ;
bad  smell  from  mouth  ;  violent  thirst.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Scanty  urine;  heat  and  burning  when  urin-
ating.
After  urinating :  nausea.
22  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Seminal  emissions,  with  great  excit-
ability of  sexual  parts.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. During  menses : pain commences
in  middle  of  thighs,  extending  over  limbs,  and  more  or  less
over  entire  body.
•  Dysmenorrhoea  ; abdomen  distended  ; blood  leaves  uterus  in
drops,  with  tenesmus-like  pain.
^'  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Nausea  and  vomit-
ing in  pregnancy.
2^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness
with  disposition  to  clear  throat.


CASTOREUM.  390

^®  Respiration. Shortness  of  breathing,  in  forenoon;  when  walk-
ing fast.

■  Short,  difficult  breathing,  with  frequent,  long  inspirations.
I  Very  deep  inspirations,  with  heat  in  breast  and  in  face.

■  Frequent,  slow,  deep  inspirations,  with  short  expirations.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  chest,  with  belching.

Heat  in  breast,  as  though  a  fire  was  burning  there,  in  evening.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Feeling  of  oppression  about

heart.
^^  Outer  Chest. Cramp-like  pains  extending  across  breast.

Pain  under  sternum,  when  touching  it.

I  On  taking  a  deep  breath,  sensation  as  though  something  heavy
lay  under  sternum.

Pressure  on  sides  of  sternum,  especially  on  expiration.

Sensation  of  internal  heat  under  sternum.
'^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  r.  shoulder,  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,
as  though  he  had  carried  something  heavy.

Hot  hands,  with  distended  veins.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Great  feeling  of  lassitude  in  lower  limbs.

Pressure  in  1.  flank  downwards  through  inguinal  gland,  when
walking.

Feet  are  weary,  cannot  walk  any  farther.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Spasms  of  hands  and  feet.
^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down :  feels  gagged.
^^  Nerves. Jerking  of  small  groups  of  muscular  fibres.

Sensation  of  heaviness  in  whole  body.

Trembling  of  limbs.

\  Chorea,  epilepsy,  whooping-cough,  nervous  palpitation,  cramp
in  various  parts  of  body,  and  tetanus.

Paralysis.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness.

B  Constant  yawning,  though  never  sleeping  in  day-time.

In  sleep,  angry  exclamations.

Cannot  sleep  after  eating.
^^  Time. Morning :  irritable.

Night:  eyes  agglutinated.

Afternoon:  abdomen  distended.
^0  Fever, Shuddering of  single parts, back, vertex, forehead,
elbow,  feet.

I  Typhus.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  behind  ear,  pain;  lower  row

of  molars  pain;  abdomen,  pain;  ilium,  soreness;  flank,  pressure.

Right :  forehead,  dull  headache ;  shoulder,  pain.

Within  out:  dull  headache;  pressure  in  region  of  liver.
"  Sensations. Tearing  drawing  pains  in  various  parts  of  body.

Burning:  in  tongue;  at  anus;  in  breast,  as  of  fire.

Stitching:  pains  on  both  sides  of  abdomen ;  inchest.

Griping:  in  stomach.


391  CASTOREUM— CASTOR  EQUORUM.

Drawing  pain :  in  head.
Pressure:  on  sides  of  sternum ;.  in  1.  flank.
Heaviness  :  in  whole  body  ;  under  sternum.
Tension :  in  stomach.
Emptiness :  in  stomach.
^*  Tissues. :  Enteralgia,  having  its  seat  in  small  intestines,  no

evacuations  ;  appearing  suddenly  after  mental  emotions,  or

getting  cold  feet; accompanied  by  pallor,  cold  sweat  and

fainting.
Inflammatory  and  spasmodic  afiections  of  digestive  and  sexual

organs.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Hysterical  individuals.
^^  Relations. Antidotes: Camphor.,  Opium  and  vegetable  acids.
Compare: Amhra  gris.,  Ignat.,  Moschus,  Valer.,  especially

in  nervous  women  with  pains,  cramps  and  weakness  after

severe  illness.


CASTOR  EQUORUM.

The  Rudimentary  Thumbnail  of  the  Horse.


A  small,  flat,  oblong-oval  horn,  wrinkled  on  the  surface,  breaking  off  in
scales,  darker  than  the  hoof,  growing  on  the  inner  side  of  the  leg  above
the  fetlock  of  horses,  styled  by  Oken  "the  rudimentary  thumbnail  of  the
horse,"  and  by  Paracelsus  Verruc.se  equorum  genuum.

The  scales  are  triturated  and  during  the  process  develop  a  peculiar  odor,
thought  by  some  to  resemble  Moschus,  by  others  Castoreum,  The  report
of  a  cure  of  epilepsy  of  long  standing  with  this  substance,  and  his  high
opinion  of  the  importance  of  animal  medicines,  induced  Dr.  Hering,  in
1836,  to  make  the  trituration  and  proving,  in  which  he  was  assisted  by
Geist,  Kummer,  Eomig  and  Bauer  of  the  Allentown  Academy.

The  clinical  experience  of  Hering,  Geist,  Eomig,  Helfrich  and  others,
has  proved  it  a  highly  useful  remedy  in  cracked  and  ulcerated  nipples,  of
the  worst  kind,  in  nursing  women.  The  symptom  indicating  its  use  in
this  particular  was  observed  on  one  of  the  male  provers.

Pliny,  Paracelsus  and  Koschnitz  speak  of  its  use,  by  fumigation,  in
uterine  troubles,  epilepsy  and  stone  in  the  bladder.  This  remedy  needs
further  proving,  particularly  on  women,

^  Mind. Unusual  laughter  about  things  that  are  not  funny.
^  Sensorium. '  l  Vertigo,  headache  and  nausea  in  morning.
^  Inner  Head. Pressure  in  forehead.
Headache  in  1.  temple.


CASTOR  EQUORUM.  392

Pressing  pain  in  both  temples  from  in  outwards,  as  though

the  head  was  being  screwed  apart.
Pressure  from  in  outwards,  especially  in  temples  near  ears,

more  on  1.  side.
Pressive  pain  in  temples  disappears  after  awaking  from  sleep.
Deep  pressure  in  occiput  as  though  something  firm  was  press-
ing against  it;  in  forenoon.
D  Headache  with  vertigo  and  nausea,  sour  stomach  and  lack  of
appetite.
^  Outer  Head. Sensation  as  though  occiput  had  gone  to  sleep.
Scalp  goes  to  sleep  from  nape  of  neck  to  vertex ;  accompanied

by  sensation  as  though  posterior  half  of  head  lay  in  ice.
Crawling  in  hair  as  though  aomething  was  running  in  it.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Frequent  twitching  in  r.  eyelid.

Itching  in  canthi.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Disagreeable  sensation  of  dryness  in  1.
ear,  compelling  him  to  scratch;  also  slightly  in  r.  ear.
Twitching  pain  internally  in  1.  ear.

Small  painless  pustules  behind  1.  ear  covering  an  area  the  size
of  a  silver  dollar.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Continued  fluent  coryza,  with  constant  sen-
sation of  hunger,  even  after  eating.
Passive  pain  in  nasal  bones.
^  Upper  Face. Transitory,  burning,  prickling  pain  in  face and

also  on  body,  now  here,  now  there.
^  Lower  Face. Prickling  and  heat  on  both  cheeks.
Dry  lips  with  thirst  in  evening.
;rCaused  a  number  of  warts  about  the  mouth  of  a  horse,  which

were  cured  by  Thuja.
Sensation  like  trismus.
^^  Tongue. Burning  pain  on  front  part  of  tongue. ^
^^  Inner  Mouth. Slight  painful  sensation  in  molar  teeth,  r.  side.
Shooting  inwards  in  cavities  of  hollow  teeth,  1.  side.
Pain  in  hollow  teeth  of  1.  side,  compelling  him  to  pick  them.
Great accumulation of saliva, especially immediately after

eating.
Soon after pains  in teeth, loud rumbling in abdomen; in
forenoon.
^*  Appetite. Desire. Great  hunger,  even  after  eating. ^Coryza.

Desire  to  smoke  tobacco.
^®  Belching. Repeated  empty  eructation.

"  Abdomen. I  l  Colic  with  urging  waked  him  in  morning,  followed
by  a  very  thin,  watery,  somewhat  burning  stool.
Slight  pain  in  1.  inguinal  region.
Prickling  pains  in  1.  inguinal  region.
^^  Stool. I  I  Urgent  stool,  preceded  by  colic  and  passage  of  offen-
sive flatus.
^*  Lactation. Il Cracked,  sore  nipples  in  nursing  women;  exces-


393  CASTOR  EQUORUM.

sively  tender,  cannot  bear  touch  of  clothing; even  in  ne-
glected cases  where  the  nipple  is  nearly  ulcerated  oif  and
only  hangs  by  small  strings.
Swelling  of  both mammary glands, especially  r. ; they are

painful  to  touch,  mostly  left.
Violent  internal  itching  in  breasts,  in  attacks  driving  to  de-
spair; rubbing  and  scratching  >,  but  make  the  skin  rough;
the  areola  is  reddened  for  some  distance  around  the  nipples,
which  are  painful  and  drier  than  usual.
Swollen  mamrage  are  very  painful  on  descending  stairs ;  sensa-
tion as  though  they  would  fall  oif,  he  was  compelled  to  press
against  them  with  his  hands  to  ameliorate  this  disagreeable
sensation.
The  areohe  become  red  as  in  erysipelas,  and  also  the  nipples ;
very  painful  on  left  breast,
^^  Larynx. Disagreeable  sick  feeling  in  larynx;  when  triturating.
^-  Inner  Chest. I  Stitching  pain  in  chest.

^^  Heart. Peculiar  sensation  about  heart  as of  something alive
struggling;  with  anxiety,  walking  about,  and  fermentation  in
epigastrium  and  abdomen;  in  forenoon.
^^  Outer  Chest. Burning  pain  on  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I  Weakness  of  spine.

I  Pain  in  coccyx,  <  every  evening  while  sitting.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  middle  of  1.  forearm,  in  evening.

Pain  in  1.  elbow  and  r.  knee,  followed  by  violent  pain  in  r.

tibia,  in  evening.
Right  wrist-joint  pains  as  though  sprained,  and  on  allowing
arm to  hang  down,  the  pain  radiates  into  ring  and  little
fingers.
Left  wrist-joint  becomes  painful  as  though  sprained,  and  at  the

same  time  pain  in  little  finger  of  r.  hand.
Twitching  pain,  often  recurring  over  1.  wrist-joint.
Drawing  pain,  from  in  outwards,  in  ball  of  1.  hand,  extending

to  finger-tips.
Drawing  pain  in  r.  arm  and  axilla.

Pain  in  r.  arm  awakes  from  sleep,  accompanied  by  whimper-
ing ; arm feels as  if  asleep,  thicker  and  heavier,  >  from
rubbing ; he  goes  to  sleep  again,  and  in  morning  has  for-
gotten everything.
Frequent  erratic  prickling  pains  passing  from  one  arm  to  other

and  also  into  face.
Crumbling  of  finger-nails  from  slightest  knock  against  them.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Burning  pain  on  side  of  1.  knee.
Pain  in  knee,  especially  when  sitting.
I  I  Repeated  pain  in  r.  tibia.

Continuous  pain  in  r.  popliteal  space,  when  knee  is  bent,
especially  on  stooping,  also  on  sitting  down  and  most  on
rising  after  sitting.


CASTOR  EQUORUM.  394

Tension  in  1.  calf.

Pains  in  r.  tibia  and  in  1.  forearm.

Many  small  blood-boils  on  both  lower  legs,  in  a  psoric,  very
unsusceptible  individual.

Dull  pain  in  ankle  and  wrist-joint.

Pain  in  both  heels.

Pain  in  1.  great  toe,  as  though  frosted.

Some  toe-nails  came  oif;  new  ones  had  already  formed  beneath
them.

Very  brittle  toe-nails.

Frequent  single  fine  stitches  in  lower  limbs,  continuous  burn-
ing pain  in  right.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Arms  and  legs  sore  as  if  beaten.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting  :  pain  in  knee.

Stooping  :  pain  in  popliteal  space.
^^  Nerves, i  Syncope.

•  Epilepsy.
^^  Sleep. Becomes  sleepy  early  in  evening.

Restless  sleep,  with  many  dreams,  with  going  to  sleep  of  r.
arm.

Stretches  his  arms  up.  over  his  head  and  cracks  his  fingers  dur-
ing sleep.

At  night  dreams  that  his  mother,  who  is  living  in  Germany,  is
sick,  without  having  thought  of  her  the  previous  day.

In  winter  dreams  of  fresh  fruit  hanging  on  trees.
^^  Time. Morning :  vertigo  ;  colic ;  sleepy  ;  forgetful.

Forenoon:  deep  pressure  in  occiput.

Evening :  pain  in  1.  forearm  ;  1.  elbow  ;  r.  knee  ;  tibia  pains  ;
becomes  sleepy.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  temple,  headache  with  press-
ure outward ;  ear,  dryness ;  ear,  painless  pustule ;  hollow
teeth,  shooting;  inguinal  region,  pain;  forearm,  pain;
wrist,  twitching  ;  hand,  drawing ;  knee,  burning  pain  ;  calf,
tension  ;  great  toe,  pain.

Right:  eyelids,  twitching ;  ear,  dryness ;  molars,  pain  ;  mam-
mary gland,  swells;  tibia,  pain;  hand,  pain;  axilla  and
arm,  drawing  pain  ;  popliteal  space,  pain  ;  arm,  goes  to  sleep.
**  Sensations.  As  though  head  was  being  screwed  apart ;  as
though  occiput  had  gone  to.  sleep ;  as  though  posterior  half
of  head  lay  in  ice ;  as  though  something  was  running  in
hair ;  as  if  arm  was  asleep.

Peculiar  sensation  about  heart,  as  of  something  alive.

Stitching  pain  :  in  chest.

Prickling  pain  :  in  face ;  in  chest ;  from  one  arm  to  other  ;  in
face.

Shooting  :  in  cavities  of  hollow  teeth.

Burning:  in  face;  on  tongue;  pain  1.  knee.

Pressing  pain :  in  both  temples.


395  CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES.

Pressure  :  from  in  outward.
Drawing  pain  :  1.  hand  ;  r.  arm  and  axilla.
Dull  pain  :  in  ankles  and  wrist-joint.
Pain :  in  knee,  when  sitting ;  in  both  heels ;  I.  great  toe.
Twitching  :  in  1.  wrist.
Crawling :  in  hair.
Dryness  :  in  1.  ear.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. An  infirm  old  horse  became

rejuvenated.
*^  Relations To  be  thought  of  in  comparison  with  Hiiypomanes,
Oxalate  of  lime,  and  Calc.  phosph.,  and  on  account  of  a
similarity  of  odor,  with  Moschus  and  Castoreum.
Antidotes : Hepar  relieved sore nipples ; Thuja removed
warts  which  Castor  equor.  produced  on  mouth  of  a  horse.


CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES.

Blue  Coliosh.  Berheridaeeoe.


Grows  in  the  woods  from  Canada  to  Carolina  and  Kentucky.  Tritura-
tion and  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  brown,  knotty,  hard  root,  which  is
yellow  inside.  Called  "squaw  or  pappoose-root"  by  the  Indians,  by
whom  it  is  used  in  female  complaints.  First  introduced  into  medi-
cine by  botanic  physicians,  afterwards  into  our  school  by  Dr.  E.  M.  Hale,
in  an  article  contained  in  N.  A.  Journ.  of  Horn.,  vol.  6,  p.  373.

The  only  proving  we  have  is  by  Dr.  Burt,  in  Hale's  New  Remedies,  2d
edition,  p.  171.  The  majority  of  important  symptoms  are  from  clinical  ex-
perience, referable  to  Drs.  E.  J.  Blake,  Hale,  Helmuth,  W.  H.  Holcombe,
Kebs,  E.  Ludlam,  M.  Macfarlan,  G.  F.  Matthes,  Morrison,  W.  McGeorge,
G.  B.  Palmer,  and  many  others  who  use  it  frequently  in  practice.


^  Mind. BFretful,  weak  of  mind  and  memory. ^Miscarriage.

I  Fretful,  irritable  mood  ; apprehension. ^False  conception.
^  Sensorium. Swimming,  a  sort  of  vertigo,  with  dimness  of  sight;

gulping  a  bitter,  sour  fluid.
^  Inner  Head. Dullness  of  head,  with  contracted  feeling  of  skin
of  forehead.
Sensation  as  of  needles  being  stuck  in  forehead.

■  Headache,  pressure  behind  eye,  dimness  of  sight. ^Uterine

derangement.

■  Severe  headache  over  1.  eye.' ^Miscarriage.

Severe  pains,  by  spells,  in  temples,  as  if  they  would  be  crushed
together.


CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES.  396

1  Headache  aggravated: by  stooping;  from  light;  from  noon

until  night. ^Miscarriage.
Rheumatic  or  neuralgic  headaches,  dependent  upon  uterine  or
spinal  troubles.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  ache,  with  a  feeling  as of  something
under  lids.
Lachrymation.

Pressure  behind  eyes  ;  profuse  flow  of  tears.
■  Heaviness  of  upper  lids,  has  to  raise  them  with  the  fingers,

^Leucorrhoea.
Severe  drawing  pains  over  1.  eye.
"^  SmeU  and  Nose. Drawing  pains  in  nose.
*  Upper  Face. 8"Moth  spots"  on  forehead. ^Leucorrhoea.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  feel  sore,  elongated.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  coated  white.
^"  Inner  Mouth. Sensation  of  dryness  in  mouth  ;  heat.

Aphthae  ;  stomatitis  materna.
^^  Throat. Distress  in  fauces,  which  causes  frequent  inclination

to  swallow.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Coffee  seems  to
aggravate.
Canine  hunger,  with  white  coated  tongue.
Great  thirst.
^®  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. Empty
eructations.
Frequent  gulping  up  of  sour,  bitter  fluid,  with  vertigo.
Spasmodic  vomiting,  cardialgia,  excessive  nausea.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Heat  in  stomach  ;  fullness.

Distress in  stomach and  bowels, with drawing  in r.  hypo-

chondrium.
Burning  distress  in  stomach.
Dyspepsia,  with  spasmodic  symptoms.
Spasms  of  stomach  attending  uterine  irritation.
^*  Hypochondria. Drawing  in  r.  hypochondrium,  and  over  liver.
"  Abdomen. Distention  of  abdomen,  with  tenderness.

Spasmodic  action  of  muscular  tissues  of  intestines,  from  irrita-
tion of  motor  nerves,  or  from  rheumatism.
Distress  and  colicky  pain  in  abdomen,  intestines,  and  umbilical

region,  >>  by  passing  flatus.
Rumbling  in  bowels,  awaking  at  1  A.M.  with  urgent  desire  for

stool.
Spasmodic  and  flatulent  colic.
^^  Stool  and  K.ectum. B  Watery  stools,  great  quantity,  runs  a  per-
fect stream  from  bowels,  but  no  pain  ; 1  a.m. ^Cholera
morbus.
Soft  stool,  very  white.  '

Constipation  ;  stool  every  other  day.


397  CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Emission  of  copious,  pale  or  straw-colored

urine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. I Every few minutes sharp, stinging

pain  in  glans  penis. ^Gonorrhoea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Sensation  as  if  uterus  was  congested,
with  fullness  and  tension  in  hypogastric  region.
Spasmodic  pains  in  uterus.
Irritable  vagina,  spasmodic,  intense  pains.
Aphthous  vaginitis.
Menses  too  soon.

■  Menses  :  preceded  by  pain  in  small  of  back;  great  aching  and

soreness  of  lower  limbs  ;  bad  breath  ;  bitter  taste  ;  vertigo  ;
chilliness  ;  flow  very  scanty,  blood  very  light,  with  intense
nausea  and  vomiting  of  yellow,  bitter  matter;  pain  unremit-
ting for  several  hours  ;  habitual  cold  feet  became  warm
under  action  of  remedy.

Painful  menstruation,  flow  being  normal  in  quantity.

Spasmodic  dysmenorrhoea  ;  spasmodic,  intermittent  pains  in
bladder,  stomach,  broad  ligaments  (groins),  even  chest  and
limbs  ;  congestion  and  irritability  of  uterus  ;  scanty  flow.

Menstrual  colic ;  uterus  retroverted.

Amenorrhoea ;  spasms,  cramps,  or  great  atony.

IlLeucorrhoea :  sharp,  acrid,  very  weakening;  with  heaviness
of  upper  eyelids,  has  to  lift  them  up  with  the  fingers ;  of
profuse  bland  mucus;  with  "moth  spots"  on  forehead;  in
little  girls.

iLeucorrhoea,  with  congestion  of  uterus  and  forcing  down  pains,
tardy  appearance,  or  absence  of  menses,  profuse  secretion
of  mucus  from  vagina,  and  drawing  pains  in  lower  ex-
tremities.

ILeucorrhoea  in  a  woman,  married  ten  years  and  never  had  a
child;  in  a  few  weeks  became  pregnant  and  was  delivered  in
safety.

Hysteric  convulsions  during  dysmenorrhoea.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Threatening  abor-
tion, spasmodic  bearing  down  pains ;  vascular  excitement ;
tremulous  weakness ; pains  severe  in  back  and  loins,  but
uterine  contractions  feeble ;  slight  flow.

I  Threatened  abortion :  all  movement  of  child  had  ceased ;  sense
of  weight,  and  profuse  hemorrhage ;  paroxysms  of  labor-
pains  so  severe,  patient  had  to  hold  on  to  objects  for  sup-
port.

Habitual  abortion  from  uterine  debility.

■  Spasmodic  rigidity  of  os,  delaying  labor; pains  like  pricking

needles  in  cervix.
Tormenting,  useless  pains  in  beginning  of  labor.

■  Labor-pains  short,  irregular,  spasmodic  ; patient  very  weak

and  irritable  ;  no  progress  being  made.


CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES.  398

Pains  become  weak,  flagging  from  long  protracted  labor,  caus-
ing exhaustion ;  thirsty,  feverish.

I  Weak  labor-pains  passing  off  with  a  shiver  and  causing  much
distress.

I  After-pains:  especially  after  exhausting  lengthy  labor;  spas-
modic, across  lower  abdomen  ; extend  into  groins.

Retained  placenta  and  membranes.

Hemorrhage,  particularly  after  hasty  labor.

Passive  hemorrhage  after  abortion  or  confinement.

Protracted  lochia ;  great  atony ;  blood  oozes  passively  from  re-
laxed uterine  vessels.

Suppressed  lochia.

I  Griping  soreness  of  uterus,  ■<  from  pressure.

I  After  cessation  of  menses,  occasional  loss  of  blood  ;  fugitive
pains  in  uterus  and  ovaries  ;  cervix  swollen  and  congested  ;
OS  pouting  and  tightly  closed  ;  feeling  of  tension  and  full-
ness in  uterine  region ;  bloated  abdomen.  ^False  concep-
tion.
2' Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Hoarseness

and  loss  of  voice. ^Uterine  disturbances. ^Leucorrhoea.
^®  Respiration. Panting  breathing,  oppression  of  chest. ^Uter-
ine disturbances. ^Rheumatism.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Spasmodic, intermittent  pains  in

chest,  with  amenia.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Severe  drawing  pain  in  sterno-cleido-mas-
toid,  drawing  head  to  left.
Rheumatic  stiffness  of  nape  of  neck.
Dull  pain  in  lumbar  region.

■  Severe  pains  in  back  and  loins. ^Threatening  abortion.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l  Severe  drawing  pain  in  wrists  and  fingers.

Rheumatism  of  wrists  and  finger-joints,  with  swelling ;  cutting
in  joints  when  closing  hands ;  pains  shift  to  nape  of  neck,
with  spasmodic  rigidity ;  panting;  oppression  of  chest;  high
fever ;  delirium  ;  nervous  excitement.
I  Fingers  are  very  stiff.
^^  Lower  Limbs, l  Drawing  pains  in  thighs,  knees,  ankles,  feet,
and  toes.
Knees  weak,  when  walking.
Pain  in  feet  and  toes,  ■<  at  night.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatism,  especially  of  smaller  joints.
All  joints  crack,  when  walking  or  turning.
Severe  drawing  pains  in  joints  of  arms  and  legs.
Constant  flying  pains  in  arms  and  legs,  remain  only  a  few  min-
utes in  any  one  place.
Pain  in  fingers,  ankles,  feet,  and  toes,  causing  restlessness  at
night.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Stooping :  <  headache,
Walking :  joints  crack.


31)9  CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES.

Turning :  joints  crack.
Closing  hands  :  cutting  in  joints.
3^  Nerves. Great  nervous  excitement ;  spasmodic  affections.

Chorea at puberty, or during establishment of  menstrual

function.
Sympathetic  cramps  and  spasms  of  bladder,  rectum  or  bowels,

in  consequence  of  uterine  disturbances.
Hysterical  or  epileptiform  spasms  at  puberty,  from  menstrual

irregularities,  especially  in  rheumatic  females.
I  Tremulous  weakness  felt  over  entire  body. ^Uterine  hemor-
rhage.
I  I  Paraplegia,  with  retroversion  and  congestion  of  uterus  after

childbirth  ; partial  loss  of  sensation ;  emaciation,  angemia,

general  debility.
^^  Sleep. I  Sleepless,  restless,  nervous. ^Rheumatism. ^Uterine

complaints.
^^  Time. Night :  restless,  fingers,  ankles,  feet  and  toes  pained  so

much  ;  headache.
1  A.M. : rumbling  in  bowels  ; watery  stool, runs  a  perfect

stream.
Noon  until  night :  headache.
*"  Fever. Fever  high,  delirious,  nervous  excitement,  rheumatism.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. H  Pains are intermittent and par-
oxysmal. ^Labor. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
Every  few  minutes  :  pain  in  glans  penis.
Pains  recur  daily.
Every  other  day  :  stool.

Pains  in  extremities  change  place  every  feW  minutes.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Left : severe  headache  over  eye  ;

drawing  pains  over  eye.
Right :  h^pogastrium,  drawing.
^^  Sensations. As  of  needles  being  stuck  in  forehead,  also in

cervix ; as  if  temples  would  be  crushed  together ; as  of

something  under  eyelids  ;  as  if  uterus  was  congested.
Cutting  :  in  joints,  when  closing  hands.
Spasmodic  pain:  in  uterus;  in  vagina;  in  bladder;  in  stomach;

in  groins  ;  in  chest ;  in  limbs.
Flying  pains  :  in  arms  and  legs.
Stinging  :  in  glans  penis.
Colicky  pain : in  abdomen,  intestines,  umbilical  region  and

uterus.
Burning  :  distress  in  stomach.
Drawing:  pain  over  1.  eye; in  nose;  in  r.  hypochondrium ;

pain  in  sterno-cleido-mastoid;  in  wrists  and  fingers;  in  joints

of  arms  and  legs  ;  in  lower  limbs.
Aching  :  of  eyes  ;  of  limbs.
Pressure :  behind  eyes.
Soreness  :  of  uterus  ;  of  limbs.


CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES.  400

Dull  pain  :  in  lumbar  region.

Pain  :  by  spells  in  temples  ;  severe  in  back  and  loins  ;  in  feet
and  toes,  at  night.

Elongated  :  teeth  feel.

Contracted  :  skin  of  forehead.

Tension  and  dullness  :  in  uterine  region.

Heaviness  :  of  upper  lid  ;  in  uterine  region.

Fullness  :  in  stomach.

Tremulous  weakness  :  over  entire  body.

Heat :  in  mouth  ;  in  stomach.

Dryness  :  of  mouth.
**  Tissues. AtFects  principally  female  sexual  organs ; want of
tonicity  of  womb  ; feeble  contractions ; leucorrhoea ; hys-
teria and  spasmodic  affections.

Acts upon muscular tissue. Rheumatism, particularly of
small  joints,  which  has  a  tendency  to  shift.
^^  Skin. Skin  hot  and  dry.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Especially  suited  to  females.

Little  girls  subject  to  leucorrhoea.
^^  Relations. Incompatible  :  coffee.

Compare:  iAct.  rac,  Bellad.  (intermittent  and  paroxysmal
pains),  Cann.  ind.,  Lilium  tig.,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.  (labor-
pains  similar,  but  mental  condition  opposite),  Sepia  (reflex
symptoms  from  uterine  irregularities).


401  CAUSTICUM.

CAUSTICUM.

Tinetura  acris  sine  Kali.


Causticum  was  first  mentioned  by  Hahnemann  in  his  Apothekerlexicon.  His
views  are  fully  set  forth  in  the  first  volume,  published  in  the  year  1793,
under  the  word  "Feuer,"  on  p.  293,  and  in  the  la«t  volume  published  in
1799,  under  "  Spiesglanztinctur,"  p.  256.  His  mode  of  preparation  is  found
in  Chronic  Diseases,  Vol.  HI,  in  the  introduction  to  his  arrangement,  in
which  are  included  the  symptoms  of  the  time  honored  Tinetura  acris,
which  was  considered  by  him  in  all  respects  similar.  In  the  second  vol-
ume of  Materia  Jledica  Para,  first  and  second  editions,  Hahnemann  de-
fends his  views  fully,  and  gives  the  indications  he  had  collected  up  to  that
time.  In  the  third  edition  the  Aetzstofftinkiur  is  omitted,  because  he  placed
the  remedy  among  the  anti-psorics,  and  at  the  same  time  recommended
the  weaker  but  purer  preparations  of  lime.  In  the  fourth  edition,  1830,
Vol.  IV,  p.  81,  he  not  only  gives  a  long  list  of  the  most  remarkable  cures,
but  also  his  provings  and  those  of  his  pupils,  in  all  1014  symptoms.

iVhatever  diversity  of  opinion  may  exist  theoretically  in  regard  to  the
chemical  nature  of  this  substance,  (see  Lorbacher's  treatise,  A.  H.  Z ,  Vol,
XCV),  the  unquestionable  good  results  obtained  by  its  use,  in  potentized
form,  by  a  majority  of  our  best  practitioners,  stamp  it  a  polychrest  of  the
highest  order.

Irrespective  of  the  clinical  cases  taken  from  Riickert's  collection,  Stapfs
Archives,  and  the  older  journals,  the  following  clinical  authorities  from  our
more  recent  literature  are  mentioned,  as  showing  the  extensive  and  con-
tinued use  of  this  remedy  :

Berridge,  E.  W.,  Eye,  M.  H.  Rev.,  16,  p.  495;  Berridge,  E.  W.,  Rheumatic
Fever,  Med.  Adv.,  4,  p.  479 ;  Chamberlain,  W.  B.,  Cramps  in  Feet,  N.  E.  M.
G.,  1871  ;  Conant,  C.  M.,  Asthenopia,  Med.  Couns.,  1,  p.  209;  Farrington,  E.
A.,  Facial  Neuralgia,  Horn.  J.  Obs.,  Nov.,  1879;  Fincke,  B.,  Deafness,  A.  J.
H.  M.  M.,  2,  p.  220;  Frost,  Agalactia  H.  M.,  4,  p.  283;  Gardiner,  D.  R.,  Neu-
ralgia, A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  3,  p.  66;  Gardiner,  Sr.,  Headache  from  Gaslight;
Goullon,  H.,  Jr.,  Acne  Rosacea,  A.  H.  Z.,  83,  p.  Ill ;  Goullon,  H.,  Jr.,  Enu-
resis and  Blepharitis,  A.  H.  Z ,  88,  p.  77 ;  Goullon,  H.,  Jr.,  Eczema,  A.  H.  Z.,
88,  p.  185;  Goullon,  H.,  Jr.,  Urinary  Complaint,  A.  H.  Z.,  89,  p.  203;  Guern-
sey, H.  N.,  Anal  Soreness,  H.  M.,  5,  p.  238;  Heyne,  Ischias,  A.  H.  Z.,  79,  p.
146 ;  Heyden,  Paralysis,  A.  H.  Z,  83,  p.  153  ;  Houghton,  H.  C,  Deafness,  A.
J.  H.  M.  i\/.,  4,  p.  17;  Kafka,  J.,  Paralysis  Glottidis,  A.  H.  Z.,  88,  p.  185;
Kirsch,  Sr.,  Cataract,  A.  H.  Z.,  85,  p.  45;  Lippe,  A.,  Eye  Case,  Caustic.^'^  \
Morgan,  J.  C,  Hemorrhoids,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  4,  p.  89;  Morgan,  W.,  H.  W.,
12,  p.  70;  Mossa,  Acne  Mentagra,  H.  KL,  1872,  p  45;  Mossa,  Prosopalgia,
H.  KL,  1872,  p.  44;  Mossa,  Hoarseness,  H.  KL,  1872,  p.  45;  Nankiwell,  J.
H.,  Facial  Paralysis,  H.  W.,  9,  p.  217;  Nankiwell,  J.  H.,  Enlarged  Cervical
Glands,  H.  W,  4,  p.  72 ;  Nichols,  C.  F.,  Lepra,  H.  M.,  1871,  p.  113  ;  Owens,
J,  B.,  Epilepsy,  0.  M.  and  S.  Rep.,  5,  351 ;  Payr,  Paresis,  A^.  Z.  H.  KL,  14,  p.
VOL.  III. — 26,


CAUSTICUM.  402

132;  Pomeroy,  F.  F.,  Cough,  M.  I.,  5,  p.  285  ;  Price,  E.  C,  Croup,  A.  H.  0.,
1873,  p.  27] ;  Raue,  C  G.,  Mammary  Fistula,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  2,  p.  238;  Sher-
burne, F.  B.,  Ophthahnia,  M.  A.,  1873,  p.  406  ;  Small,  A.  E.,  Hoarseness,  U.
S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  9,  p.  35  ;  Wesselhoeft,  C,  Shortening  of  Leg,  N.  E  M.  G.,
,1873,  p.  163;  pathogenetic  symptoms  after  Caustic^'^,  in  a  child  set.  18
months,  suffering  from  whooping-cough,  by  C.  Hg  ,  not  published.

■'Mind. I  Consciousness  undisturbed. ^Chorea.
I  Unconsciousness. _^Epilepsy.
iWeakress  of  memory  ;  absentminded. ^Chorea.
I  I  Absence  of  mind,  with  loss  of  ideas  ;  uses  wrong  words.
I  I  Inattentive  and  distracted.

■  Understands  questions  only  after  repetition.

■  Dullness  of  head.

Dull,  gloom'y  pressure  affects  the  brain.

Incapacity  to  think  or  to  follow  his  business,  after  injurious

effects  of  gasrlight.
I  Imbecility  before  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

■  Melancholy,  disposition  to  weep. (!?Pertussis.

■  Hysterical  weeping  after  spasms.

■  ■The  least  thing  makes  the  child  cry.

;rChild  screams  and  tosses  about  at  night. ^Whooping-cough.

■  Weeping,  crying  or  laughing. ^Chorea.

■  Spasmodic  laughter  before,  Avith  or  after  spasms.

■  Great  restlessness,  which  prompts  him  to  run  away. ^Dur-

ing intervals  of  epilepsy.
I  I  Persistent  silence,  difficult  to  overcome.

■  Taciturn,  distant.

1  I  Disinclined  to  work.
Tense,  gloomy  feeling  in  head.

■  Weeping,  or  whining  mood. ^Paralysis.

■  Chilly,  with  sad  mood  and  apprehension  of  the  future,  ■<  in

evening. ^Chronic  headache.

■  Sorrowful  thoughts  during  night,  during  day  weeping,  anxi-

ety and  misgiving  about  the  future.

■  Low-spirited. ^Gastric  headache.

■  ■Melancholy  mood  ;  sadness;  hopelessness.
Melancholy,  with  great  prsecordial  anxiety.

■  ■Melancholy  from  care,  grief  and  sorrow.

■  Melancholy; she  looks  upon  the  dark  side  of  everything.

^Amenorrhoea. ^Menorrhagia.

■  Hopelessness,  and  despair. ^Paralysis.

■  Hopeless  weeping  mood,  expecting  death. ^Hemiplegia.

■  Anxious,  uneasy  mood,  as  if  something  unpleasant  impended  ;

this  unfits  him  for  every  kind  of  work.

■  Becomes  anxious,  as  though  he  would  die.

■  Becomes  anxious,  worried  and  pale.
Fearfulness  and  distressed  feeling  about  heart.


403  CAUSTICUM.

I  Full  of  timorous  fancies,  evenings;  child  fears  to  go  to  bed
alone.

■  Timorous  anxiety  and  depression. ^Pertussis.

I  111  effects  of  sudden  emotions,  fright,  fear,  etc. ^Chorea.

I  Fear  of  death. ^Paralysis.

I  I  Full  of  frightful  ideas,  in  evening.

I  Great  apprehension  whenever  anything  happens;  despondent,
depressed,  most  excessive  exhaustion  and  prostration.

I  Apprehension  of  impending  danger,  with  urging  to  stool.

I  Had  a  foreboding  of  her  attack,  which  interrupted  her  play-
ing suddenly;  she  went  to  the  sofa  and  assumed  her  peculiar
position  with  the  knees. ^Chorea.

I  I  Anxiety  in  evening,  before  going  to  sleep;  the  boy  could
not  fall  asleep  because  he  constantly  thought  of  anxious
things  ;  one  could  with  difficulty  induce  him  to  go  to  bed.

Great  anxiety,  with  flying  thoughts  and  stammering.

I  Anxiety. ^Gastric  headache.

Anxiety,  with  nausea.

■  Anxiety  and  red  face  from  urging  to  stool. ^Obstruction  of

bowels.

■  Anxiety  and  despondency;  has  been  subjected  to  nightwatch-

ing,  care,  trouble,  etc. ^Agalactia.
I  I  Anxiety  and  uneasiness  at  night  did  not  permit  her  to  sleep.

■  Anxiety  before  falling  asleep,  as  though  attack  of  fainting

would  return  and  he  would  die.
Easily  startled.

Excessive  sympathy  for  others.
Ill-humor.
Irascible  mood.

■  ■Peevish,  irritable,  censorious  mood.

Irritable  temper,  disposition  to  take  everything  in  bad  part.
I  I  Fretful  and  despondent,  without  being  vexed.

■  Paroxysm  of  quarrelsome  anger. ^Pertussis.

■  Very  suspicious  and  distrustful.

■  Thinking of  complaints aggravates them. ^Hemorrhoids.

^Hysteria.

■  Pain  ■<  by  mental  labor. ^Hemorrhoids.

■  After  overexertion  of  mind. ^Tinnitus.

■  After  seeing  a  case  of  chorea  she  gets  it  herself.

■  Irresistible  yawning  when  listening  or  paying  attention  to

others.
Hastiness  causes  short  breath.

■  ■Mental  and  other  ailments  from  long-lasting  grief  and  sor-

row. ^Chronic  headache. ^Face  and  toothache. 6'Chorea.

■  Injurious  effects  of  fear  and  vexation. ^Chorea.

After  anger,  stitches  in  upper  portion  of  chest,  when  drawing  a
deep  breath.

■  Mental  alienation  after  suppression  of  eruptions.


CAUSTICUM.  404

^  Sensorium. Sensation  as  if  he  would  fall,  without  vertigo.

I  I  Dizzy,  as  from  compression  of  head.

I  Vertigo  :  tending  forv?ards  and  sideways  ;  tendency  to  fall
backward,  when  stooping  ;  at  night  in  bed,  on  rising  and  on
lying  down  again  ;  on  looking  fixedly  at  an  object ;  ^  in
open  air  ;  with  sensation  of  weakness  in  head,  and  anxiety  ; "
accompanying  paralysis  ;  with  headache  ;  in  hemiplegia  ;
at  11  A.M. ;  •<  in  middle  of  day ;  after  suppression  of  ulcers  ;
from  moving  head  ;  from  gas-light ;  during  and  after  stool,
with  nausea.

iVertigo and whirling  in head during  menstruation, <  on
stooping,  >>  in  afternoon.

I  Runs  for  a  while  in  a  circle,  to  the  right,  then  falls  down  un-
conscious. ^Epilepsy.

iFainty,  qualmish  feeling.

I  Faint,  trembling,  weakness  ;  giddy  in  open  air.
^  Inner  Head. I Dullness  of  head. ^Catarrh.

I  Pressing  pain  in  forehead,  with  stoppage  of  nose.

I  Feels  as  if  there  was  a  ball  of  fire  in  forehead.

■  Sensation  as  of  an  empty  space  between  forehead  and  brain,

-<  in  evening  and  in  cold,  >  in  warmth.
iPressive  pain  in  r.  frontal  eminence.

■  Violent  cutting  pain  in  forehead. ^Epilepsy.
Sensation  of  contraction  in  whole  side  of  head.

Heat  in  r.  side  of  head,  with  violent  pains  in  stomach.

■  Stitches  in  temples,  <r  from  sitting  or  reading. ^Pertussis.

■  Violent  stitches  in  r.  temple,  <  evenings. ^Chronic  head-

ache.

■  Throbbing  and  stitches  in  vertex.

■  Stitches  in  vertex. ^Vertigo.

■  Headache  in  vertex. ^Epilepsy.

■  Violent  boring  pain  in  vertex. ^Fistula  dentalis.
Burning  stinging  in  upper  part  of  head.

■  Dull,  pressive  headache. ^Influenza.

■  Head  feels  as  if  driven  asunder,  with  nausea,  from  gas-light.
I  I  Painless  digging  in  whole  head.

■  Pain  in  different  parts  of  head. ^Paralysis.

■  Roaring,  buzzing  and  hissing  in  head. ^Chronic  headache.

^After  epileptic  attack.

■  Congestion  to  head,  with  roaring  in  head  and  ears. ^Per-

tussis.
Sensation  of  weakness  in  head,  with  vertigo.
Headache  from  extreme  hunger.

■  Pain  shoots  from  eyes  into  head,  at  intervals,  <  evening  and

night. ^Ophthalmia.
Constant  succession  of  shocks  or  jerks  in  head.

■  Nightly  tearing  and  digging  headache.
Sensation  as  if  brain  were  loose,  when  moving  head.


405  CAUSTICUM.

Headache  before  or  after  spasms.

1 1  Rheumatic  pains  in  head  so  severe  as  to  cause  nausea.

Headache  with  vomiting,  in  morning.

I  Headache  and  great  weariness  after  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

Apoplexy,  followed  by  paralysis.
^  Outer  Head. I  Contracted  skin  of  forehead,  in frontal  head-
ache, with  tremulous  weakness. ^Aphonia.

I  Pain  at  a  small  spot  on  vertex,  as  if  bruised,  only  to  touch.

Dull  pain  on  vertex,  with  pain  in  urethra,  after  urinating.

Sensation  in  occipital  bone  as  if  the  parts  were  numb,  pithy
or  dead.

Tensive  tearing  pain  in  integuments  of  head,  particularly  on
sides  and  behind  ears,  <  from  draft  and  cold  air,  >  in  warm
bed,  and  in  damp  weather.

■  Tension  of  scalp.

Itching  and  stinging  of  scalp.

I  Turns  head  to  the  right. ^Chorea.

I  Trembling  of  head. ^Epilepsy.

Headache  begins  with  stinging  in  scalp.

B  Scalp  very  sore  to  touch. ^Impetigo  capitis.

I  Heat  and  soreness  in  scalp. ^Gastric  headache.

I  Head  hot  and  sweaty  before  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

■  Small,  round,  soft  nodes  on  scalp  and  glabella. ^Epilepsy.

I I  Tinea  capitis  in  occipital  region.
Spasms  of  head.

Chorea  after  retrocedent  eruption  on  head.
Involuntary  nodding  of  head  while  writing.

■  Drawing  of  head  toward  one  side;  frequent  urging  to  urinate;

involuntary  urination  during  fit. ^Epilepsy.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  sensitive  to  light  and  heat.

■  Photophobia  the  whole  day,  constantly  obliged  to  wink.
Sees  frightful  images  as  soon  as  he  closes  eyes.

I  Flickering,  sparks  or  black  points  before  eyes.
I  If  he  winks,  he  sees  sparks  of  fire  before  eyes,  even  on  a
bright  day.

■  Flickering  before  eyes,-  as  from  swarms  of  insects.

■  Spots,  at  first  small,  then  larger,  round,  then  jagged,  white,

then  green,  first  before  r.,  then  1.  eye,  followed  by  dimness
and  loss  of  vision.

■  Sight  obscured:  as  from  a  gauze  before  eyes;  as  from  a  mist;

momentarily,  on  blowing  nose  ;  green  halo  around  light.

■  Eyes  become  dim,  and  vision  indistinct;  it  seems  as  though  a

thick  cloud  or  fog  were  before  eyes.

■  Obscuration  of  sight,  as  if  a  veil  were  drawn  before  eyes,

when  standing.
Sensation  as  though  membrane  was  over  eyes.

■  Obscuration  of  vision  for  a  moment,  on  blowing  nose.

■  Dimness  of  vision. ^Headache. ^Pregnancy.


CAUSTICUM.  40.6

■  Diplopia,  with  inability  to  turn  1.  eye  outward.
I  Perpendicular  half-sight  in  cataract.

■  Cataract: sensation  as  if  there  was  a  substance  in  eye  too

large,  causing  a  kind  of  heaviness  and  distention,  only  in
evening;  also  a  feeling  as  if  there  was  something  moving  in
eyes,  in  evening.
I  Asthenopia  ;  sensation  as  of  a  stick  or  sand  in  eyes  ;  drowsi-
ness, but  does  not  sleep,  upper  lid  falls,  dimness  of  sight.
^Sequel  to  measles.

■  Amblyopia. ^Hemiplegia, ^Paresis.

■  Threatened  amaurosis  during  confinement,  with  want  of  milk.

■  Looking  up  causes  inclination  to  fall  to  the  left. ^Vertigo.

■  Burning  and  stinging,  as  with  needles,  in  eyes,  with  dryness

and  photophobia,  from  6  to  8  p.m. .

■  Burning  and  dryness  of  eyes,  from  4  p.m.  till  evening.

■  Burning  in  eyes,  without  redness.
Burning  of  eyes,  when  touched.

■  Biting  and  pressure  in  eyes,  which  seem  heavy,  with  redness

of  lids.

■  Pressing  pain  in  eyes,  >  by  external  pressure. ^Ophthalmia

scrofulosa.

■  Pressive  pain  in  eye,  <  from  touch.
Slight  drawing  in  eyes.

Tenseness  in  r.  eye,  which  seemed  as  if  paralyzed.

■  Pain  in  eyes,  as  if  sand  were  in  them.

■  Dragging  pain  in  eyes. ^Toothache.

■  Drawing  in  eyes. ^Headache  from  gas-light.

■  Dry  sensation  in  eyes,  with  pressure  in  them.

I  I  At  first  dryness  of  eyes  in  morning,  and  stiffness,  followed
by  lachrymation.

■  Itching  of  eyes,  especially  of  lids;  disappears  on  rubbing.

■  ■Sensation  of  heaviness  in  upper  lid,  as  if  he  could  not  raise

it  easily,  or  as  if  it  were  agglutinated  to  lower  lid,  and  could
not  be  easily  loosened.

■  Constant  inclination  to  touch  and  rub  eye,  which  seems  to  re-

lieve a  pressure  in  it. ^Cataract.
■Eyes  inflamed,  burning,  red,  dry,  stinging.

■  Inflammation  of  eye,  with  partial  destruction  of  tissue.

■  Lachrymation,  even  in  room,  though  •<  in  open  air. ^In-

fluenza. ^Facial  hemiplegia.

■  Acrid  tears  from  1.  eye,  with  shooting  pain. ^Ophthalmia.

■  Accumulation  of  tears,  particularly  in  open  air  ;  they  do  not

run  from  eye.

■  Eyesconstantly  open,  not  winking.  ^Facial  paralysis.  ^Hemi-

plegia.

■  Inclination  to  close  eyesj  lids  seem  heavy; ■■paralysis  of

upper  lids. ^Hysteria. ^Pregnancy. ^Blepharoptosis.

■  Cornea  covered  with  red  vessels  and  has  a  tendency  to  bulge.


407  CAUSTICUM.

I  Spots  on  cornea,  and  opacity.
1 1 1  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  Ophthalmia:  with  corrosive  lachrymation  and  shooting  pains,

extending  up  into  head,  <  in  evening  and  night ;  violent
shooting  pains  ;  smarting  as  if  worried  or  irritated,  without
much  lachrymation ;  with  crusty  eruptions  in  and  about
nose.
I  Itching,  like  flea-bites,  in  1.  inner  canthus,  with  desire  to
rub  it.

■  Burning  in  both  inner  canthi.

■  Annoying  pressure  in  inner  canthus. ^Hemiplegia  of  face.

■  Itching  on  lower  lid  and  on  its  inner  surface,  with  burning  as

soon  as  he  touches  eye  or  moves  it.

■  Granulations  over  entire  bulbus  of  1.  eye.

■  Lids  swollen,  always  red  and  painful.

■  ■Agglutination  of  lids.  ,
Blepharitis,  >  in  fresh  air.

I  I  Visible  twitching  of  lids  and  of  1.  brow.

■  ■Paralysis  of  muscles,  particularly  if  caused  from  exposure  to

cold.

■  Old  warts  on  eyebrows,  lids  or  nose. ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

^Rheumatism.

Tumors  on  lids.

I  I  Feeling  as  if  a  tight  skin  came  half  way  down  over  r.  eye,
preventing  sight  of  that  eye,  when  blowing  nose,  removed
by  rubbing ;  after  the  sensation  of  a  skin  has  gone,  feeling
as  if  something  were  pricking  the  eye,  which  waters.

■  Trachoma,  with  pannus.

Old  stye  swells,  sticking  as  with  needles  in  it,  in  morning.
Occasionally  sudden  pain  over  r.  eye.

■  Rolling  of  eyes. ^Epilepsy.

^Hearing  and  Ears.  ■  Roaring,  tinkling,  singing,  humming,
buzzing,  chirping,  whizzing,  or  pulsating  in  ears.  ^Deaf-
ness. ^Rheumatism. ^Pertussis. ^Hemiplegia.

■  On  turning  head,  cracking  and  snapping  in  ears. ^Deafness.

■  Reverberation  of  all  sounds,  even  of  the  patient's  own  voice ;

hears  with  difiiculty.

I  ■Words  and  steps  re-echo  in  ears.

■  She  speaks  low,  because  her  own  words  appear  to  her  very

loud. ^Pregnancy.

■  ■Deafness. ^Otorrhoea. ^Facial  hemiplegia. ^Rheumatism.

■  Stitches  in  r.  ear,  paroxysmal,  and  in  rapid  succession.

I I  Burning  of  ears  ;  they  get  red.

■  Hot  pressure  in  ears and  whole  head, so  that  vision  be-

came dim.

■  Feeling  of  obstruction  in  ears,  with  offensive  purulent  dis-

charge.
Itching  in  inner  ear.


CAUSTICUM.  408

Diseases  of  middle  ear,  especially  non- suppurative,  when  facial

branch  of  seventh  pair  is  involved.
Pinching  in  ear.

■  Offensive  otorrhoea.

■  Eruptions  on  ear  lobe,  and  behind  ears. ^Herpes. ^Im-

petigo capitis.
II  Accumulation  of  earwax,  sometimes  offensive  in  odor.
I  Pain  in  ear,  as  if  something  was  trying  to  force  out.
I  Dragging  pain  in  ears. ^Toothache.
I  Dull  pain  in  ears. ^Deafness.
Ears  sensitive  to  the  wind.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Blowing  blood  from  nose,  mornings,  or  pro-
fuse nosebleed.
Blowing  nose  affects  eye. See  5.
Epistaxis  from  1.  nostril.
I  Nosebleed  during  attack. ^Epilepsy.
BBVequent  sneezing,  particularly  in  morning.

I  Frequent  sneezing,  Avith  pain  in  chest. ^Influenza.

I I  Dry  coryza,  with  stoppage  of  nose.

iNose  stopped  up  at  night,  running  by  day. ^Pertussis.
1 1  Fluent  coryza,  with  pain  in  chest  and  limbs.
I  Acrid,  burning  discharge  from  nose. ^Influenza.

I  Coryza,  with  hoarseness,  preventing  loud  speech.

■  Dryness  of  nose. ^ Acne  rosacea.
PuiEness  of  nose  ;  scrofulous  swelling,
ailtching  of  tip  of  nose  and  alse,  as  well  as  inside.

I I  Pimples,  ulcers  or  crusts  on  tip  of  nose;  inflamed,  swollen
and  scurfy.

■  Eruptions  on  nose,  with  burning. ^Acne  rosacea. ^Eczema.
Eczema  on  nostrils.

Portion  of  1.  side  and  tip  of  nose  eaten  by  an  ulcer,  covered

with  a  thick  crust. ^Lupus  of  nose.
1 1  Old  warts  on  nose.
Nose  and  upper  lip  feel  thick  and  heavy.
^  Upper  Face. I Pains in malar bones, zygomatic arch and

maxillae.

■  Drawing  pains,  which  extend  into  cheek  and  ear,  and  are

most  apt  to  occur  on  r.  side.

■  Burning  in  face.

■  Pains  produce  spasm  of  muscles,  a  sensation  of  numbness  on

side  of  face,  as  if  asleep.

■  Neuralgia: r.  side; <  at  night,  chilly,  no  thirst; scanty

menses  ;  1.  side  >  by  rubbing  part  with  a  cloth  dipped  in
cold  water.

■  Facial  neuralgia  at  every  stormy  change  of  weather  ;  attacks

of  unconsciousness  while  sitting,  with  set  eyes  and  continued
motion  of  muscles  about  mouth. ^Anaemia.

■  Transient  violent  drawing  pain  in  r.  cheek,  and  then  in  ear.


409  CAUSTICUM.

iDracrging  pain  in  muscles  efface. ^Toothache.

I  Face:  ydlow;  bluish-red;  sickly  looking;  expression  gloomy ;

looks  dissatisfied.
lYellow complexion, particularly on temples. ^Headache.

(^Dentition. ^Ophthalmia scrofulosa. ^Uterine  troubles.

^Scabies.
I  Paleness  of  face. ^Enuresis. ^Hemiplegia.  ^Colic.  ^Chorea.
Redness  efface,  with  dullness  in  head.
iVery  red  face  during  attack. ^Epilepsy.
Burning  as  of  glowing  coals  in  small  spots  in  face,  eyes,  ears,

and  cheeks  ;  cannot  move  on  a'ccount  of  pain.
Sudden  shuddering  in  face,  extending  across  chest  or  over  back

to  knees.
I  1  Itching  of  face.

I  Red,  erysipelatous  swelling  of  cheek. ^Toothache.

I I  Acne  rosacea  on  cheeks  and  forehead:  in  dispersed  groups.

I  Moist,  suppurating  spot  in  centre  of  tetter  on  cheeks,  en-
larges, Itches  and  burns,  and  becomes  covered  with  a  thick
crust.

I  Pimples  on  1.  cheek,  with  severe  itching.

I  Hard  pustules,  with  blackish  centre,  through  beard. ^Acne.

I  I  Eruptions  in  face  ;  acne,  burning  and  stinging.
Occasional  spasmodic  twitching  of  muscles  of  1.  side  of  face.

I I  Paralysis  of  one  side  of  face.  ^Hemiplegia.  ^Chorea.
^Otorrhoea. ^After  cold.

1 1  Prosopalgia  and  rheumatism  in  face.

I  Severe  tearing  pains  in  1.  half  of  face. ^Facial  neuralgia.

Upper  lip  and  nose  feel  heavy.

■  Convulsive  movements  in  muscles  of  face. ^Chorea. ^Risus

sardonicus.

■  Contracts  brows,  with  pain  in  head. ^Aphonia.
I  Her  face  feels  to  her  like  fur. ^Hemiplegia.
Shivering,  beginning  in  face  and  spreading  from  it.
Serpiginous  ulceration,  with  smarting  and  excoriation.
1 8  Warts  on  face.

®  Lower  Face. I  Mouth  drawn  to  one  side. ^Hemiplegia.

■  Swelling  of  lower  lip.

■  Tearing  in  diseased  root  of  1.  lower  jaw.

■  Jaws  stiff  and  lame,  not  able  to  eat  much  for  weeks. ^Bron-

chitis.

■  Sensation  of  tension  and  pain  in  jaws,  could  only  with  diffi-

culty open  mouth,  and  could  not  eat  well,  because  a  tooth
seemed  too  long.

■  He  could  separate  jaws  only  with  great  difficulty,  and  could

not  open  mouth  as  usual ;  it  seemed  as  if  throat  below  jaw
were  swollen  or  tense. ^Trismus. ^Tetanus.

■  Stitches  in  angle  of  r.  lower  jaw. ^Hemiplegia.

■  Arthritic  and  rheumatic  pains  in  lower  jaw.


CAUSTICUM.  410

■  Drawing  pain  in  glenoid  cavity  of  jaw  ;  sensation  as  if  jaw

was  contracted.

■  Warts  on  lips.

■  Ulcer  on  lower  lip  with  burning  pain,  bleeds  once  in  awhile.

■  Single  red  spots  on  chin  spreading  to  nose  and  adjacent  parts.

■  Froth  at  mouth. ^Spasms.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Dull  stitches  in  upper  back  teeth,  extend-
ing upward.

■  Dull  stitches  in  lower  back  teeth,  extending  downward.

■  Boring  pain  in  a  lower  back  tooth,  extending  to  nose  and  eye.

■  A  painful  prickling-dig'ging  in  lower  back  teeth,  extending  as

far  as  ears.

■  ■Painful  looseness  and  elongation  of  teeth.

■  ■Stitching  and  tearing  toothache.

■  Tearing  in  both  r.  rows  of  teeth,  extending  into  zygoma;

both  jaws  of  this  side  are  painful  to  pressure,  and  on  chew-
ing feel  as  if  bruised.
I  I  Sticking  toothache.

I  I  Throbbing  toothache,  with  painful  gum,  so  that  he  could

not  chew.

■  ■Throbbing  toothache  after  taking  cold,  no  fever.

I I  Pain  in  sound  teeth,  on  drawing  in  cold  air.

■  Toothache  during  and  after  siesta  in  all  stumps,  >  from  cold

water,  <C  from  smoke; without  violent  pain,  disagreeable
sensation  as  though  a  foreign  body  were  in  them.

■  Long  lasting  chronic  toothache.

Burning  pain  in  hollow  teeth  when  eating  and  drinking.

■  Sensation  as  though  blood  would  crowd  into  teeth,  with  burn-

ing stitching  in  fingers.

■  Grinding  of  teeth.

■  Offensive  smell  from  teeth. ^Impetigo  capitis.

■  Grum  is  painfully  sensitive,  without  pain  in  teeth.

■  ■Swelling  of  gums,  readily  bleeding  and  tedious  suppuration.

^Fistula  dentalis.

■  ■Frequently  recurring  abscesses  of  gums.

"Taste  and  Tongue. ■Taste: greasy; putrid;  bitter;  sour;
as  from  disordered  stomach.

■  ■Stuttering, diflBcult, indistinct speech. ^Chorea. ^Per-

tussis. ^Hemiplegia.

■  ■Speechlessness,  from  paralysis  of  organs  of  speech.

■  ■Tongue  coated  white  on  both  sides,  red  in  middle. ^Epi-

lepsy.
Intolerable  soreness  of  tongue  as  if  scalded.

■  ■Painful  vesicles  on  tip  of  tongue.

■  ■  Paralysis  of  tongue.

Pain  in  tongue  as  if  he  had  bitten  it.

■  Bites  tongue  during  attack. ^Epilepsy.


411  CAUSTICUM.

^^  Inner  Mouth. I Dryness  of  mouth  and  tongue.

I  Swelling  of  inner  side  of  cheek  ;  he  bites  it  when  chewing.

I  Induration  on  inside  of  cheek. ^Herpes  on  cheek.

I  Saliva  runs  from  mouth, more  after  eating. ^Toothache.
^Paralysis.

I  Much  phlegm  in  mouth  and  throat. ^Pertussis.

Froth  at  mouth. ^Epilepsy.
"  Throat. Redness  of  uvula  and  fauces.

I  Soreness  and  burning  in  fauces. ^Angina. ^Pertussis.

I  Sore,  painful  spot  on  hard  palate.

Torn  feeling  in  throat  during  mental  exertion.
Jerking  pain  in  throat.

■  Burning  and  rawness  in  throat,  with  sensation  like  heart-

burn.

I I  Burning  pain  in  throat;  not  caused  by  swallowing;  on  both
sides,  seemed  to  arise  from  chest.

1 1  Rawness  and  ticklingMn  throat,  with  dry  cough  and  some
expectoration  after  long  coughing.

■  Roughness  and  scraping  in  throat. ^Pertussis.
iPain  in  tonsils. ^Hemiplegia  of  face.

■  Dryness  in  throat,  posteriorly. ^Aphonia.

■  Dryness  in  throat, noticed  when swallowing, followed by

scraping  along  down  throat.

■  Tickling  sensation  in  throat. ^Aphonia.

■  Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat,  or  as  of  food  lodging  in  oeso-

phagus.

■  Pressure  in  throat-pit  as  of  a  foreign  body.

■  I  Pain  in  throat,  <  by  stooping.

Sensation  as  if  something  cold  were  rising  in  throat.

■  ■Must  swallow  continually,  feels  as.  if  throat  were  too  narrow.

■  Constant  disposition  to  swallow,  >  while  eating, <  after.

^Diarrhoea.

■  ■Mucus  collects  in  throat,  cannot  be  raised  by  hawking;  is

obliged  to  swallow  it. ^Pertussis.
Constant  desire  to  clear  throat.
Hawking  of  mucus  from  pharynx  and  posterior  nares.

■  ■Hawking  of  mucus,  with  pain  in  pit  of  throat.

■  Phlegm  in  throat,  which  she  is  unable  to  hawk  up,  and  which

sickens  her. ^During  pregnancy.

■  Throat  reddened,  with  increase  of  mucus. ^Deafness.

■  Swelling,  like  goitre,  on  throat.

■  Rheumatic  sore  throat.

Sore  throat,  with  drawing  in  r.  leg.

■  Paralysis  of  oesophagus.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  iSits  down  to  table
with  some  appetite,  but  can  scarcely  eat  a  morsel.  ^Preg-
nancy.


15


CAUSTICUM.  412

■  Ravenous  hunger,  takes  food  in  a  hurried  manner. ^Den-

tition.
I  Appetite  either  too  great,  or  none  at  all. ^Epilepsy.
I  No  appetite. ^Hemiplegia. ^Gastric  headache.
Hunger  :  after  nausea ;  causes  headache.
I  No  appetite  in  the  morning.
Want  of  appetite  and  thirst.
I  I  Great  thirst  for  several  days. ,
I  No  thirst. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Thirst:  after  eating;  for  cold  drinks;  with  aversion  to  drink;

with  scanty  urine.

■  Desire  for  beer  ; 1 1  for  smoked  meat.

■  Aversion  to  sweet  things. ^Diarrhoea. ^Pertussis.
Eating  and  Drinking. ■Eating  is  painful  on  account  of  sen-
sitive gums,  and  in  other  cases  difficult  on  account  of  lame-
ness and  stiffness  of  jaws.

After  chewing  meat,  teeth  ache  as  though  blunt,  at  same  time
sensation  as  though  shreds  of  meat  were  between  teeth  which
he  wishes  to  remove.

■  1  Bread  causes  pressure  in  stomach'.

■  Fresh  meat  causes  nausea  and  waterbrash  and  renews  the

trouble  ;  smoked  meat  agrees. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Fat  food  disagrees,  causes  offensive  belching. ^Epilepsy.

■  Coffee  seems  to  aggravate  every  symptom. ^Pertussis.
After  eating: feels  relieved; much  thirst; whooping-cough

worse  ; pressure  in  whole  abdomen  ;  sometimes  disagreeable
mucus  in  mouth  ;  eructation.
Collection  of  flatus  in  abdomen  after  a  small  meal.

■  Violent  increase  of  pain  after  the  least  nourishment,  or  after

tightening  her  clothes  around  her  waist. ^Hysteralgia.

■  SA  swallow  of  cold  water  relieves. ^Pertussis. ^Spasms.

■  Acids  cause  inconvenience. ^Weak  stomach.

"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

■  Eructations: frequent, empty; tasting  of  food; of food;

burning  ;  as  if  he  had  eaten  pepper  ;  sour  ;  tasting  like
almonds  ;  smelling  like  musk  ;  tasting  like  rotten  wood  ;
tasting  like  ink.

■  Acidity  of  stomach  after  eating  fat,  saccharine,  or  farinaceous

food. ^Bronchitis.

■  Sensation  of  lime  being  burned  in  stomach,  with  rising  of  air.

^Pregnancy. ^Confinement.

■  Heartburn. ^Gastric  headache. ^Bronchitis.

■  Burning and  waterbrash,  the  water tasting  salty. ^Con-

stipation.

■  Constant  efforts  to  belch. ^Hysteralgia.

■  Nausea: before, during and after meals; with headache;

>  after  eructating  ;  with  sour  vomiting  ;  with  salt-water-
brash  after  stool.


413  CAUSTICUM.

1 1  Sour  vomiting,  followed  by  sour  eructations.

■  Vomiting:  of  blood,  at  night;  with  headache.

■  Vomiting  of  sour  water. ^Pertussis.  v

■  Stomach  deranged  from  acids  and  sour  things.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■■Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.
^Diarrhoea.

■  Sensation  of  fulness  in  stomach. ^Headache.

■  ■Pinching,  clawing  in  pit  of  stomach  on  deep  breathing.

■  Stitches  in  scrobiculum.

■  Pit  of  stomach  sore  to  to.uch. ^Gastric  headache.

■  ■Cramp  in  stomach.

■  Pain  in  stomach  in  morning,  increased  by  every  quick  move-

ment; must  lie  down.
Violent  pain  in  stomach,  accompanied  by  heat  in  r.  side  of
head.

■  Constant  sensation  as  if  lime  were  being  burnt  in  stomach,

with  a  sort  of  rolling  rising  of  air.

■  Violent  pain  in  stomach;  at  times  the  pain  seems  to  be  seated

in  stomach,  at  times  in  chest; always  >•  by  lying  down,
<C  by  moving  about.

■  Pain  in  stomach  from  ice-water.

I  I  Sensation  as  of  a  disordered  stomach,  with  distension  of  ab-
domen.

■  Violent  pressure  from  pit  of  stomach  over  whole  chest,  mak-

ing breathing  difficult,  >  before  attack. ^Epilepsy.
^^Hypochondria. ■Stitches  in  region  of  liver. ^Pregnancy.

Bflepatic  pains  with  distension  after  eating.

Heat  and  sweat  about  hypochondria and  upper  part  of  ab-
domen.

■  Necessity  to  loosen clothing  about  hypochondria. ^Diar-

rhoea.
^^  Abdomen. ■Stitches  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  in  evening.

■  Pains  in  abdomen,  must  bend  double  ; <C  after  least  nourish-

ment, or  from  tightening  clothes. ^Hysteralgia.

■  Cramps  in  bowels. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Colic:  in  morning  ;  pain  radiates  to  back  and  chest.
Twisting  abdominal  pains  before  stool.

■  Cutting  colic  on appearance of  menses,  without  diarrhoea,

with tearing in back and small of  back, especially on
motion.
Pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  with  cough.

■  Flatulency, loud  rumbling  and  rolling  in  bowels. ^Preg-

nancy.

■  ■Painful  distension  of  abdomen.
Abdomen  swollen  and  hard,  body  wasted.

■  ■Tumid  abdomen,  in  children. ^Dentition. ^Pertussis.
TiOn  abdomen,  in  region  of  bladder,  itching  boil,  sui rounded


CAUSTICUM.  414

Pinching  in  small  spot  on  r,  side  of  abdomen  after  eating.
Rheumatic  pain  in  abdomen  and  in  chest.
Inguinal  glands  swollen,  pain  very  much  on  moving.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, l  Frequent  passage  of  offensive  flatus.
^Leucorrhoea.

■  Involuntary  escape  of  feces  with  flatus.
1 1  The  stool  passes  better  standing.

Stools :  tough  and  shining ;  first  hard  and  in  pieces,  the  last

soft ;  knotty,  like  sheep's  dung  ;  too  small  shaped  ;  the  size

of  a  goose  quill;  fatty,  oi^y;  liquid,  fecal;  white,  mucous  ;

involuntary.
;rChild  passes  with  great  pressure  two  or  three  tablespoonfuls  of

an  odorless  gelatinous  mass,  streaked  with  blood,  towards

morning. ^Whooping-cough.
Evacuations  of  mucus  and  bright  blood  with  knotty,  difiicult

feces,  without  any  trace  of  mucus.
Before  stool :  twisting  abdominal  pain.
During  stool :  vertigo.

After  stool :  nausea  ;  salt  waterbrash  ;  vertigo.
Bloody  stool,  with  burning  soreness  of  rectum.
Diarrhoea  : from  cold  air  striking  abdomen  ;  from  eating  fresh

meat;  with  violently  itching  acne;  in  scrofulous  children.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea  in  dyspeptics  and  consumptives.

I I  Constipation  ;  frequent  but  unsuccessful  desire  to  pass  stool.
6'Gastralgia. ^Leucorrhoea.

Twisting  abdominal  pain  before  stool.

After  stool :  burning  at  anus,  subdued  pulse  and  palpitation ;
giddiness;  escape  of  prostatic  juice;  pinching  in  hypochon-
dria; waterbrash.

II  Frequent  ineffectual  efforts  to  stool,  with  much  pain,  anxiety
and  redness  in  face.

I  Stool  is  passed  with  great  difficulty  and  exertion  of  abdominal

muscles. ^Hemiplegia.
Spasm  in  rectum,  which  rendered  walking  impossible.

■  Painful  spasm  of  rectum,  which  prevents  evacuation  or  renders

it  very  small,  no  larger  than  a  goose  quill.

II  Frequent,  sudden,  penetrating,  pressive  pain  in  rectum.
1 1  Itching  and  sticking  in  rectum.

■  Severe  itching  in  rectum  and  in  genitals.

■  Pressure  in  rectum.

■  Pressing  in  rectum,  as  if  feces  were  lodged  in  it  which  want

to  come  away.

■  Spasms  in  rectum  with  renewed  desire  to  pass  water. ^Affec-

tion of  prostate.
I  I  Burning  in  anus  after  stool.
Soreness  and  oozing  of  moisture  from  anus.

■  Excessive  itching  in  anus,  day  and  night.


415  CAUSTICUM.

I  Anus  very  sensitive  to  contact.
,  Prurigo  ani,  relieved  by  cold  water.

■  Fistula  in  ano.

I  Fissure  of  anus,  pains  <  when  walking.

I  Large,  painful  pustule  near  anus,  discharging  pus,  blood  and

serum.

I I  Hemorrhoids;  impeding  stool;  swollen,  itching,  stitching,
moist ;  stinging,  burning,  painful  when  touched,  when  walk-
ing, when  thinking  of  them  ;  from  preaching  or  straining
voice.

I  Hard  hemorrhoids,  extremely  painful  when  touched,  when

walking,  when  standing  or  sitting ; >  after  a  stool.

I I  Pain  and  strong  pulsation  in  perineum. /^Fistula  in  ano.
I  Stitching  in  anus  before  eating.

Iln  morning,  stool  loose,  with  much  tenesmus,  voiding  of  gel-
atinous, odorless  masses,  somewhat  streaked  with  blood,  at
the  same  time  cold  hands ;  child,  aet.  10  months.

I  Stool  seldom,  after  weak  urging  large  thick  lumps  came,
which  were  voided  with  great  exertion  and  pain,  afterwards
prolapsus  recti  and  tenesmus.

I  Sore  pain  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors,  <  when  thinking  of  them.

■  Hemorrhoids  after  standing,  as  in  preaching.
Sores  between  the  nates.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Burning  in  urethra  : when  urinating  ;  sud-
denly at  night.
After  urinating :  pain  in  urethra,  accompanied  by  dull  pain  on
vertex.

I I  Itching  of  orifice  of  urethra.

I  Pain  in  urethra  and  bladder  after  a  few  drops  pass.  ^Pro-
static affection.

■  Frequent  urging to  urinate, day  and night. ^Catarrh of

bladder. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Painful  retention  of  urine  brought  on  by  slightest  exposure  to

cold. ^Catarrh  of  bladder.
Retention  of  urine  in  young  children.

■  Constant  ineffectual  desire  to  urinate; frequent  evacuation

of  only  a  few  drops,  with  spasms  in  rectum,  and  consti-
pation.

■  Evacuation  of  blood,  with  urine,  or  instead  of  it,  with  great

pain ; all  sensations  <C  at  night.

■  Ineffectual attempts to urinate; when a few drops were

passed,  he  had  violent  pain  in  bladder,  and  also  (after  walk-
ing much  in  order  to  relieve  it)  cramps  in  rectum.

■  Urging  to  urinate,  without  passing  anything;  she  was  obliged

to  wait  a  long  time,*  and  then  only  a  very  little  urine  passed,
but  urging  was  soon  again  renewed,  without  pain.  ^Catarrh
of  bladder.


CAUSTICUM.  416

I  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  without  passing  any ;  then,  while
sitting,  involuntary  flow  of  it.

I  I  Frequent  and  very  much  increased  micturition ;  urine  soon

deposited  a  sediment  like  yeast.

I I  He  urinates  so  easily  that  he  is  not  sensible  of  the  stream,
and  scarcely  believes  in  the  dark  that  he  is  urinating,  until
he  makes  sure  by  sense  of  touch.

I  Very  frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  involuntary  dribbling

of  urine.

I I  Involuntary  passage  of  urine:  IB  when  coughing,  sneezing  or
blowing  nose;  Hat  night  when  asleep:  in  walking;  from
paralysis ;  in  bronchitis.

I  Cannot  retain  urine,  and  could  not  feel  urine  passing  through
urethra. ^Cataract.

I  Symptoms  of  paralysis  of  bladder  from  prolonged  retention  of

urine  and  overdistension  of  bladder. ^Pregnancy.

I I  Enuresis  nocturna. ^Chorea. ^Diarrhoea. ^Pregnancy.
I  Urine  stopped  at  intervals,  in  evening.

I  Last  drops  of  urine  are  delayed.

After  urinating,  smarting  in  pudendum  as  from  salt.

I I  Retention  of  urine,  with  frequent  and  urgent  desire,  occasion-
ally a  few  drops  or  a  small  quantity  may  dribble  away.

I  Paralysis  of  bladder  from  long  retention  of  urine.

I  Urine:  dark-brown;  turbid  and  cloudy  on  standing;  deposits

a  yeasty  sediment;  deposits  oxalate  of  lime.
I  Light-colored  urine,  like  Avater. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Excess  of  uric  acid. ^Bronchitis.

I  In  evening,  copious  urination,  always  very  turbid  ;  thick,
white,  offensive  smelling  deposit.

■  Burning  in  urethra  when  urinating,  especially  after  coitus.
Diabetes  insipidus.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  During  coition,  blood  is  discharged
from  urethra,  with  ejaculation  of  semen.
Absence  of  erections.
I  I  Stitches  in  r.  testicle.

■  ■Pressive  pain  in  testicles.

■  ■Increase  of  smegma  about  glans.
Twitching  in  penis.

Vesicles  under  prepuce  changing  to  suppurating  ulcers.

■  Vesicles  on  prepuce. ^Catarrh  of  bladder.

Phagedenic  chancre,  jerking  pain,  watery,  greenish,  corroding

discharge.
Chancre  with  fungous  excrescences.

Syphilis  complicated  with  gout,  scurvy  or  eruptive  diseases.
Herpes  prseputialis.
Chronic  prostatitis ;  contraction  of  sphincter,  with  excoriating

serous  discharge  from  anus  ;  pulsations  in  perineum.

■  ■Itching  of  orifice  of  urethra,  scrotum  and  skin  of  penis.


417  CAUSTICUM.

Pollutions  during  siesta:  without  any  recollection  or  conscious-
ness of  them  ;  with  extremely  voluptuous  sensation.

Erections  with  much  itching  in  penis.

After  coitus,  pain  in  upper  portion  of  abdomen,  extending
towards  inguinal  region.

I  Soreness  and  rawness  between  legs.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  Aversion  to  coitus. ^Leucorrhoea.

iMenses:  too  early  and  too  profuse,  and  after  ceasing,  a  little
is  passed  from  time  to  time  for  days  ;  I  retarded;  retarded,
but  increased  in  quantity  (hysteric  spasms)  ;  scanty,  too
weak ;  bright  red  ;  smell  badly  and  excite  itching  of  vulva  ;
only  during  day  ;  with  violent  pains  in  abdomen  and  dis-
charge of  large  clots,  with  colic,  without  diarrhoea  ;  scanty,
with  prosopalgia  ;  with  vertigo  and  whirling  in  head ;  ceas-
ing on  lying  down.

I  Menses  preceded  by  great  pain. ^Acne  rosacea.

I  Before  menses:  anxious  dreams;  melancholy;  colic  and  back-
ache ;  cramp-like  spasms.

■  During  menstruation  :  no  blood  discharged  at  night ;  pain  in

abdomen,  as  if  parts  were  torn,  with  pain  in  small  of  back,
as  if  from  a  bruise,  and  discharge  of  large  clots  of  blood  ;
pressing  in  stomach  ;  diarrhoea ;  stitches  beneath  1.  breast ;
yellowness  of  face;  whirling,  dizziness  and  headache;  dejec-
tion, tiredness,  perspiration  ;  epilepsy-
Menstrual  blood  bright  red,  with  pain  in  pelvis,  as  if  pressed
or  screwed  together.

■  First  menses  are  delayed. ^Ophthalmia.

■  Menses  very  irregular. ^Headache. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Leucorrhoea: profuse,  flows  like  menses  and  has  same  odor;

only  at  night,  or  <^  then  ;  with  scanty  menses ; ropy,  clear
discharge  ;  weakening  ;  acrid,  causing  itching  and  biting.

■  Soreness  in  vulva  and  between  legs.

■  Smarting  in  pudendum,  like  from  salt,  after  urinating.

■  Acridity  during  and  after  urinating,  which  bites  like  salt  in

pudenda.
Vaginal  fistula.

2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■Cough during

pregnancy.

■  ■  Spasmodic  labor-pains.

Symptoms  during  labor  attributable  to  debility  from  night-
watching,  grief,  or  other  depressing  influences.

Puerperal  convulsions:  paroxysms  complicated  with  screams,
gnashing  of  teeth  and  violent  movements  of  limbs.

■  Absence  of  milk  and  threatening  amaurosis.

■  Milk  almost  disappeared  in  consequence of  fatigue,  night-

watching  and  anxiety.

■  A  sticking  pain  below  1.  mamma. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

VOL.  III. — 27.


CAUSTICUM.  , 418

Pain  in  1.  mamma  to  below  axilla,  without  induration,  especi-
ally when  nursing.

■  Violent  itching  about  mammse  in  a  nursing  woman.

I  Mammary  fistulse  after  abscess.

I I  Nipples  sore,  cracked,  surrounded  with  herpes.

I  Cracked  nipples  and  suppression  of  milk.

I I  Children  are  slow  in  learning  to  walk ;  unsteady  tottering
gait. ^Meningeal  tuberculosis.

25  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  i  Voice  re-
verberates in  head. ^Deafness.

■  Hoarseness:  worse  in  morning,  with  scraping  in  throat;  for

several  days  could  not  speak  loud;  with  coryza ;  ■■with
rawness,  burning  and  soreness  in  chest ;  with  dry  cough.
^Aphonia.

■  ■  Sudden  loss  of  voice. ^Paralysis  glottidis.

■  Chronic  hoarseness  remaining  after  acute  laryngitis.

■  Hoarseness  in  public  speakers  and singers from straining

vocal  organs.

■  ■  Laryngeal  muscles  refuse  to  act ;  cannot  speak  a  loud  word.

^Paresis  of  cords.

■  Sense  of  utter  weakness  in  laryngeal  muscles. ^Aphonia.
Aphonia : from  spasm  in  windpipe ; from driving  in  cold  ;

from  straining  voice.

■  Hoarseness  and  rawness  in  throat,  in  morning.
Hoarseness  towards  evening,  with  dry,  tickling  cough.

■  Paresis  of  laryngeal  muscles  and  vocal  cords.

■  Sensitive  pressive  pain  in  larynx,  on  blowing  nose.

■  Sensation  of  rawness  in  larynx. ^Croup.

■  Larynx  sore  to  touch. ^Aphonia.

Phthisis  laryngea,  with  dry  cough  ;  suppurative  stage.

■  Dryness  in  larynx,  and  dry  sensation  in  air-passages.
Sense  of  constriction  in  larynx.

■  Burning  and  soreness  in  trachea. ^Pertussis. ^Catarrh.

■  Great  rawness  of  throat  and  chest  when  coughing.

■  Irritation  to  cough: with  every  expiration; in  morning,

in  bed.  ^

■  Frequent  need  to  clear  something  out  of  larynx.
Often  indicated  in  beginning  of  croup.
Membranous  croup.

Hoarseness,  with  pain  in  chest.
Much  hawking  of  mucus.
Rattling  of  phlegm  in  throat  and  chest.
^®  Respiration. ■  Arrest  of  breathing  when  talking  or  walking
rapidly ;  must  suddenly  catch  after  breath.

■  Shortness  of  breath  precedes  paroxysms  of  coughing.

■  ■Shortness  of  breath.

■  Frequent  suffocating  fits  during  an  inspiration,  as  if  some  one


419  CAUSTICUM.

constricted  larynx,  producing  a  momentary  arrest  of  breath-
ing when  sitting.

I  When  taking  a  deep  breath,  tension  in  chest. ^Epilepsy.

I  Worse  during  expiration  and  from  talking. ^Pertussis.

■  Dyspnoea:  with  frequent  sighing  ;  in  morning  ;  with  chronic

cough.
^'' Cough.  B Cough:  violent,  hollow,  at  times  dry,  with  pain  in
chest ;  hollow,  especially  night  and  morning,  with  tightly
adhering  mucus  in  chest,  and  with  sensation  of  soreness  on
chest;  hacking,  from  creeping  and  rawness  in  throat;  caused
by  crawling  in  larynx,  or  by  stooping  to  pick  up  anything ;
always  caused  by  speaking  ;  with  pain  in  hip,  and  invol-
untary passage  of  drops  of  urine  ;  dry,  remaining  after  per-
tussis ;  frequent  and  tickling  ;  for  the  most  part  in  daytime
without,  at  night  with  expectoration.

I  Dry,  hollow  cough,  from  five  to  six  paroxysms,  with  sore  sen-

sation in  a  streak  down  along  trachea,  where  it  pains  on
every  paroxysm  of  cough,  and  almost  prevents  breathing.

I I  Cough,  with  'a  sensation  as  if  the  patient  could  not  cough
deep  enough  to  start  mucus,  produced  by  tickling,  accom-
panied by  rawness.

■  Cough  wakes  her  from  sleep,  in  evening  and  morning;  dur-

ing day,  little  or  no  cough.

Cough:  worse  evening  till  midnight;  from  exhaling;  drink-
ing coffee  ;  cold  air ;  draught  of  air  ;  when  awaking.

Cough  excited  by :  tickling  in  throatpit ;  creeping  tickling ;
mucus  in  throat ;  eating.

Short  cough  after  eating.

■  Hissing  cough. ^Aphonia.

■  Cough  only  on  lying  down.

■  In  evening,  continuous  cough  and  rattling  of  mucus.

■  Hollow  cough  without  resonance,  day  and  night. ^Paralysis

glottidis.

■  ■Hollow  racking  cough. ^Bronchitis.

■  Cough  wakens  frequently,  or  in  evening  short  hollow  cough.

^Pertussis.

■  ■Cough  relieved  by  a  swallow  of  cold  water.
,  ■■Cough  <_  by  bending  forward.

Tormenting  cough  with  zona.

I  I  Cough  strains  every  nerve  in  her  body.

■  Cough  causes  soreness' in  abdominal  muscles  and  bowels.

■  ■Continual  annoying  cough;  with  each  cough  escape  of  urine.

■  Cough  with  :  burning  in  air-passages  ;  pain  in  larynx  ;  rheu-

matic pain  in  limbs  ;  soreness  and  general  stiffness ;  pain
in  hips.

■  ■Influenza,  with  tired  sensation,  limbs  as  if  beaten; rheu-

matic pains.

■  Whooping-cough  in  catarrhal  stage.


CAUSTICUM.  420

Expectoration:  acrid,  fatty- tasting; BIcannot  be  raised,  but
must  be  swallowed.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. I  l  Anxiety  in  chest :  after  stool,  in
evening,  with  distended  abdomen  ;  with  fever.

I  Burning,  sticking  and  soreness  in  chest. ^Pertussis.

■  Stitches  in  chest  below  arms,  extending  to  pit  of  stomach,
with  anxiety.

I  Pain  in  chest,  as  though  raw,  preventing  him  from  lying  down
at  night ;  has  to  change  position.

B Sticking  pain  in  chest;  very  sore and  ulcerated,  with  and
without  coughing,  with  stopped  coryza  and  stoppage  of  nose.

BB  Soreness  in  chest.

Smarting  in  chest  while  coughing.

B  Painful  compression  of  chest,  from  both  sides  towards  ster-
num, with  oppression  of  breath  and  weakness  of  voice.

BB  Tightness  of  chest,  must  frequently  take  a  deep  breath.

B  Spasmodic  constriction  of  chest. ^Pertussis.

B  Sensation  in  chest  as  if  clothes  were  too  tight.

B  Oppression  of  chest  after  eating.

Sensation  of  fullness  in  chest  and  around  heart.

BPain  in  chest,  when  sneezing. ^Influenza.

B  Rattling  in  chest. ^Pertussis.

Constrictive  pressure  in  chest  and  region  of  stomach,  compel-
ling him  to  bend  backward  for  relief.

Phthisis  mucosa.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, b  Oppression  at  heart,  with
lowness  of  spirits,  cardiac  anxiety.

B  Stitches  in  cardiac  region. ^Pertussis.

Burning  in  region  of  heart,  with  palpitation.

BPalpitation  of  heart. ^Pertussis.

B Palpitation,  with  languor. '

B  Chronic  disease  of  heart  in  young  girls,  occasioned  by  over-
lifting.

BB  Pulse  excited  towards  evening,  with  orgasm  of  blood.
^°  Outer  Chest. B  •  Stitches in  sternum,  from  deep  breathing  or
lifting.

B  B  Painful  compression  of  chest,  from  both  sides  toward  sternum,
with  oppression  of  breath  and  weakness  of  voice.

BB  Sensation  as  if  clothing  were  too  tight.

Rash  on  breast  and  arms,  itching  like  scabies.

Heat  in  sternum.

Eruption  around  nipples.
^^  Neck  and  Back. BB  Stiffness and  pain  in neck and throat,
with  pain  in  occiput,  muscles  felt  as  if  bound,  could  scarcely
move  head.

B Tearing  pain  in  back of  neck,  moving  up  and  forward  to
frontal  region.


421  CAUSTIOUM.

■  Long-continued  tension  in  r.  side  of  neck  and  chest,  so  that  it

drew  body  towards  r.  side.
I  Attacks  of  pain  once  or  twice  daily,  a  small  carbuncle  on  neck,

over  spine. ^Gastralgia.
I  An  excessively  itching  and  moist  tetter  on  neck.
Rheumatism  of  nape  of  neck.
Enlargement  of  cervical  glands.
Swelling,  like  goitre,  on  throat.

I  Stitches:  in  back  ;  in  1.  lumbar  region.

I I  Painful  stiffness  of  back  and  sacrum,  especially  when  rising
from  chair.

I  Pain  in  middle  of  spine,  on  swallowing,  as  food  goes  down,
as  from  a  sharp  crust  there,  sticking  into  it  in  an  inward
direction. ^Rheumatic  fever.

I  i  Pressing,  cramp- like  pain  in  small  of  back,  in  region  of
kidneys.

Pressing-stitching  pain  along  side  of  r.  scapula,  when  swallow-
ing or  hawking.

Backache,  especially  in  coccyx.

I  I  Pain  in  back  during  menstruation.

■  Complains  of  a  sore  pain  in  back  during  labor;  cries  "hold

my  back!  Oh!  hold  my  back!"
Pain  in  both  loins,  as  if  surrounded  by  bands.

■  Pinching,  crampy  pain  in  lumbar  region  and  buttocks.

■  Tearing  pains,  commencing  along  lumbar  vertebrae,  running

forward  around  1.  lumbar  region  to  linea  alba. ^Neuralgia.
Sensation  as. if  a  cold  wind  were  blowing  on  parts  between

scapulae.
I  1  Much  itching  on  back  and  on  calves.

■  Blood-boils  on  back.

■  Lameness  in  small  of  back. ^Leucorrhoea.
Incipient  tabes  dorsalis.

Rheumatic  spinal  irritation.

Pinching  pain  in  sacrum,  with  hysterical  spasms.
Pain  begins  in  sacrum  and  goes  into  1.  hip,  tensive,  as  if  mus-
cles were  too  short.

■  ■Bruised  or  darting  pain  in  os  coccygis.

■  ■Dull  drawing  pain  in  region  of  os  coccygis.

^^  Upper  Limbs ■  Tearing  and  drawing  in  shoulder-blades.
Shoulder-joint  painful  on  motion.

■  Rheumatic  aching  in  shoulder.

■  Paralysis  of  deltoid;  cannot  raise  hand  to  head;  subject  to

pains,  ■<  at  night,  causing  continued  motion.

■  Pains  in  shoulder,  when  dressing  in  morning,  preventing  mo-

tion. ^Rheumatism.

■  ■Pressure  on  shoulders.

■  Sensation  as  if  cold  water  were  running  from  clavicle  down

to  toes,  along  a  narrow  line.


CAUSTICUM.  422

I  Itching  on  arms.

I I  Dull  drawing  aud  tearing  in  arms  and  hands.

I  Griping  clawing as  from a  hand  around  elbow, >■ from-

warmth.
B Pressing  pain  above  elbows.
I  Pains  in  elbow-joints.
I  Lameness,  weakness  and  flabby  condition  of  muscles  of  arm,

after  scalding  arm.

I  Tensive  pain  in  1.  lower  arm.

■  Paralysis  of  one  arm  and  muscles  of  deglutition.  ^Sequel  to
diphtheria.

I I  Paralysis  of  r.  arm,  with  glossoplegia.

B  Torpid  feeling  in  arms  at  night. ^Gastric  headache.

B  B  Paralysis  of  upper  extremities.

Right  arm  cold  up  to  axilla.

B Eruptions  and  warts  on  arms.

BB Paralytic  feeling  in  r.  hand.

Bicy  coldness  of  hands,  with  stools  of  gelatinous  masses,  accom-
panied by  tenesmus.

BPain  in  r.  wrist,  as  if  sprained,  weakness  of  joint.

BB  Trembling  of  hands. ^Rheumatism. ^^Neuralgia.

TrSweat  on  hands,  hindering  her  very  much  in  knitting.

TrOn  back  of  1.  hand,  between  little  and  fourth  fingers,  very
painful  nodules  on  tendons  ;  pain  >  from  cold  water.

BB  Sensation  of  fullness  in  hand,  when  grasping  anything.

BDry  tetter  in  palms  of  hands.

TiUlcerating  spots  on  palms  of  hands,  in  which  tendons  were
contracted.

B  Stitches  in  finger  to  elbow.

BBDrawing  pains  in  finger-joints.

I  I  In  evening,  sudden  pain  and  lameness  in  finger-tips.

I  I  Fingers  feel  icy  cold,  but  warm  to  touch.

B  Painful  numbness  of  thumb  and  index-finger,  appeared  as  if
they  were  larger,  especially  when  touching  something;  im-
pedes free  use  of  hand.

B  A  large,  oval- formed,  horny  wart  close  to  extremity  of  r.  fore-
finger.

B  Clenching  of  thumbs. ^Epilepsy.

B  Fingers  half  closed,  cannot  move  them,  excepting  with  the
other  hand.

B  B  Contraction  and  induration  of  tendons  of  fingers.

B  Stiffness  of  fingers.

B  B  Paralysis  of  hands.

B  Panaritium  and  paronychia.

B  B  Warts  on  tips  of  fingers.

B  B  Fleshy  warts  close  to  nails.
^'  Lower  Limbs. 'B  Bursting  pain  in  hips,  on  coughing.


423  CAUSTICUM.

■  Stitching  pain  in  hip-joint  and  region  of  hip,  discharge  of

thin  ichor.

■  Aching  in  hip-joint,  as  if  dislocated,  when  stepping. ^Per-

tussis.
Pain  in  1.  hip-joint,  commencing  in  an  instant,  as  if  hip  would
be  torn  from  her.

■  Head  of  femur  seems  to  be  out  of  acetabulum,  the  limb  is

shortened. ^Hemiplegia.

■  Hip  disease:  pains  in  joint;  fistulae  ;  hectic  fever.

■  Coxarthrocace.

■  At  night,  the  side,  hip,  and  thigh  upon  which  he  lay,  were

sore,  as  if  bruised,  or  as  if  pressed ;  was  frequently  obliged
to  turn  over.

■  ■Soreness  between  thighs,  high  up.

■  ■Drawing  and  tearing  in  thighs  and  legs,  knees  and  feet,

•<  in  open  air,  >>  in  warmth  of  bed.

■  ■Bruised  pains  in  thighs  and  legs,  mornings  in  bed.

I  i  Distressing  uneasiness  in  both  limbs,  in  morning  in  bed,
lasting  one  hour.

■  Painful  itching  on  inner  side  of  thigh  along  vein,  extending

to  toes.

■  ■  Marbled  skin  of  thighs  and  legs.

■  ■Cracking  in  knees,  when  walking  and  descending.

■  Tensive  pain  and  stiffness  in  hollow  of  knee,  when  walking.

■  A  tension  in  hollow  of  knees,  when  sitting  or  beginning  to

walk,  relieved  by  continued  walking.

■  Stiffness  in  1.  knee,  when  walking.

■  ■Tendons  of  knees  seem  too  short.

■  Tension  in  knee  and  ankle-joints.

Drawing  from knee  to  malleolus, with  knife -like  stitching
towards  toes.

■  ■  Gonagra.

Nightly  burning  tearing  in  shins  from  above  downwards.
Drawing  on  side  of  shins extending  downward,  with single
stitches  in  edges  of  shin-bone.

■  Cramp :  in  calf,  mornings  in  bed ;  in  sole  of  r.  foot  and  tendo

achillis,  when  stretching  it.

■  Cramp  in  tendo  achillis  awakens  from  sound  sleep  at  2  A.M.  ;

has  to  jump  out  of  bed  and  scream  at  top  of  her  voice.

■  Severe  tearing  in  tendons  beneath  r.  calf.

I  I  Tearing,  beating,  boring  in  lower  leg  and  feet  with  every

movement.
I  I  Numb  pain  now  on  malleolus,  now  on  heel,  and  again  on  outer

edge  of  foot.

■  Pain  in  ankle,  when  sitting,  not  when  walking.
I  I  Stiffness  in  ankle.

■  ■Gouty  tearing  in  region  of  lower  leg, especially  in  small

joints  of  foot,  with  swelling  of  parts.


CAUSTICUM.  424

I  Tension  in  heel  and  tendo  achillis.

I  Foot  feels  contracted,  with  tension  on  putting  it  to  the  ground.

^Leprosy.
I  Itching  on  dorsum  of  foot.

■  Numbness  of  feet  and  toes.

I  Marbled  skin  on  dorsum  of  foot.

1  Swelling  of  feet.

I  Sweaty  feet. ^Acne  rosacea.

I  I  Cold, painless  swelling, especially  on  back  of  foot, with

itching.
I  1  Lower  leg  uniformly  swollen,  upon  it  are  spots  as  large  as  a

hand,  which  appear  like  a  thick,  uniform  layer  of  leather.

I  I  Aching  here  and  there  in  leg,  with  small  tubercles,  very

hard,  pale  red,  itching  and  painful.

■  Contraction  of  feet,  tension  when  putting  soles  to  the  ground.

^Leprosy.

I I  Cramp  in  feet,  toes  and  soles.

I  I  Cannot  keep  feet  quiet,  and  yet  moving  them  causes  great

pains.
iFeet  and  lower  leg  full  of  acne;  rubs  himself  the  whole  night,

especially  soles  of  feet  and  abdomen. ^Nursing  child.
I  Feet  hot,  tense,  and  swollen.

I  I  When  rubbing  feet  a  little,  they  become  covered  with  large

blisters.

I I  Emaciation  of  feet.
I  I  Cold  feet.

I  I  Stitches,  as  though  with  pen-knife,  in  soles  of  feet.

■  Crawling  in  both  soles,  as  from  something  alive.

I  Corroding  or  phagedenic  blisters  and  ulcerations  on  heel.

I  I  Heels  and  balls  of  toes  pain  as though  ulcerating,  when

touched  and  on  treading  down.
I  Ball  of  great  toe:  crawling,  burning;  severe  pressive  pain;

burning  stitches.

■  Severe  pressive  pain  in  posterior  joint  of  great  toe.

I  I  During  night,  round,  watery  vesicle  forms  beneath  ball  of
great  toe.

■  Crippled  nails  on  toes,  and  ingrowing  toe-nails.

■  I  Unsteady  walking  and  easy  falling,  of  little  children. ^Den-

tition. ^Chorea. ^Rheumatism. ^Verrucas. ^Pertussis.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  ■Gouty  pains  in  limbs.

■  Tearing  in  limbs,  now  in  one,  now  in  another,  at  one  time

severe,  at  another  slight,  though  constant.

■  Tearing  in  several  limbs,  <  in  joints,  and  extending  from

these  into  long  bones.

■  Tearing,  especially  in  joints,  and  from  them  through  various

bones  in  body,  sometimes  in  several  at  once  ;  pain  was  not
aggravated  by  external  pressure.
Soreness  to  touch  on  anterior  surface  of  arms  and  legs.


425  CAUSTICUM.

1 1  In  tolerable  uneasiness  in  limbs,  in  evening.

■  Violent  spasmodic  motion  of  arms  and  legs. ^Epilepsy.
I  Twisting  and  jerking  of  limbs. ^Chorea.

■  Hands  and  feet  go  to  sleep.  -
Formication  in  limbs,  with  spasms.

■  Coldness  of  shoulder-joints  and  ankles. ^Epilepsy.

■  Unsteadiness  of  limbs,  tottering  gait  of  children,  and  liability

to  fall. ^Meningeal  tuberculosis.

■  ■Weakness  and  trembling  of  limbs.

■  ■Paralytic  weakness  of  limbs.

■  Contraction  of  limbs.

■  Stiifness  of  limbs  from  gouty  deposits.

■  Serous  swellings  of  joints,  with  but  slight  inflammation;  great

irritation  of  cuticle  ;  tendency  to  white  swelling.

■  Crippled  nails  on  fingers  and  toes.

^'  Best. Position. Motion. At  night  cannot  get  a  quiet  posi-
tion, nor  lie  still  a  minute.

■  Disposition  to  stretch,  or  bend,  or  crack  joints.
Weariness  and  inclination  to  lie  down.

Lying  down : >  pain  in  stomach,  and  gastralgia ; menses

cease  ;  cough  ;  on  1.  side  <C  toothache.
Sitting : or  reading,  stitches  in temples ; facial  neuralgia ;

■<  hemorrhoids  ;  urging  to  urinate ; suflbcating  fits  ; pain

in  ankles  ;  uneasiness  of  body.
Standing  :  obscuration  of  eyes  ;  stool  passes  better ;  <  hemor-
rhoids, they  ache  more.
Bending  forward :  cough  ;  backward,  >  constrictive  pressure

in  chest.
Stooping : vertigo  and  whirling  in  head  ; pain  in  throat ;

<  cough,  particularly  whooping-cough.
Kising  from  sitting  :  painful  stifi'ness  of  back ; I  ■  affected  parts

tremble.
Stepping  :  <  aching  in  hip-joint.
Lifting  :  stitches  in  sternum.
Descending  :  cracking  in  knees.
Turning  head  :  cracking  and  snapping  in  ears.
Movement :  quick,  pain  in  stomach  ; <  pain  in  stomach  and

abdomen; <  swollen inguinal  glands; of  shoulder-joints,

gives  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  tearing,  beating,  boring  in  lower

legs  and  feet.
Motion  : profuse  sweat ; difficult, on account  of  contracted

tendons.
Move  :  cannot,  on  account  of  pain  in  face.
Writing  :  involuntary  nodding  of  head.
Walking :  impossible,  spasm  in  rectum  ;  soreness  and  fissure

of  anus  ; <  hemorrhoids  ;  cracking  and  tension  in  knees,

on  beginning  to  walk  and  relieved  by  continued  walking ;

pain  in  soles,  ankles  and  toes  ;  ulcers  bleed  ;  profuse  sweat.


CAUSTICUM. •  426

1  After  excessive  bodily  exertion. ^Paralysis.

■  Children  are  slow  in  learning  to  walk,  and  fall  easily. ^Per-

tussis. ^Warts. ^Dentition. ^Chorea. ^Rheumatism.
^®  Nerves. Il  Hysteria.

■  Extreme  tendency  to  start.

■  Restlessness  of  body, particularly  in evening. ^Pertussis.

^Leucorrhoea.

■  Restlessness,  wants  to  run  away. ^Epilepsy.

■  Uneasiness  of  body,  with  anxiety  about  heart,  while  sitting;

she  was  obliged  to  rise  and  walk  about.
I  I  Anxiety  throughout  body,  with  vertigo.

■  Twitchings  and  clonic  spasms.
I  I  Cramps  now  here,  now  there.

■  Convulsions: with  screams,  gnashing  of  teeth,  and  violent

movements  of  limbs  ;  with  feverish  heat  and  coldness  of
hands  and  feet ;  in  evening  and  at  night ;  hysterical ;  epi-
leptic ;  followed  by  paralysis.

■  Spasms  after  a  fright.

■  Convulsive  motions  of  extremities  in  child's  sleep,  with  dis-

turbed eyes,  and  coldness  of  body. ^Eclampsia.

■  ■Chorea,  even  at  night,  r.  side  of  face  and  tongue  may  be

paralyzed.

■  Child  lies  on  her  stomach,  with  one  knee  inserted  in  hollow

of  the  other,  feet  drawn  upon  buttocks,  making  spasmodic
jerks  simulating  movements  of  coition  ;  muscles  of  face  con-
torted, risus  sardonicus. ^Chorea.

■  Epileptic  attack  :  after  fright ;  during  time  of  puberty  ;  also

<<  during  new  moon  ;  with  involuntary  micturition  ;  with
scanty  menstruation  and  leucorrhoea;  in  scrofulous  subjects;
after  suppression  of  eruptions  ;  with  softening  of  brain ;
>>  by  drinking  cold  water  as  soon  as  pressure  in  stomach
commences.

■  After  any  exertion, eating  but  little, smoking  much,  and

emotions,  in  evening  attack  of  fainting.

■  ■Faint-like  sinking  of  strength.

■  ■Weakness  and  trembling. ^Aphonia.

■  Trembling  of  limbs. ^Epilepsy.

■  Prostration  with  great  weakness  in  limbs. ^Influenza.

I  I  Sensation  of  internal  stiffness  from  head  to  abdomen  ;  he  is
pale  and  cold.

■  ■Paralysis: of  vocal  cords; one-sided; of  tongue  ;  of  eye-

lids ;  of  face  ;  of  extremities  ;  of  bladder.

■  Paralysis  of  facial  muscles  after  typhus.

■  ■Gradually  appearing  paralysis.

■  Paralysis  of  single  parts,  caused  by  exposure  to  cold  wind

or  draft.

■  Hemiplegia,  particularly  from  suppression  of  eruptions;  numb-

ness, atrophy,  and  coldness  of  the  parts.


427  CAUSTICUM.

I  Progressive  locomotor  ataxia.

^'^  Sleep. H  Yawning  and  stretching.

I I  Intense  sleepiness,  can  scarcely  resist  it,  must  lie  down.

■  Soporous  condition  after  attack. ^Epilepsy.

I  Sleepy  in  daytime,  sleepless  at  night. ^Pertussis.

I I  Sleeplessness  at  night :  on  account  of  dry  heat;  cannot  rest
in  any  position. ^Chorea. ^Gastralgia.

iWakes  from  sound  sleep  at  2  a.m.,  with  cramps  in  tendo
achillis. ^Bronchitis.

1 1  During  first  sleep,  wets  bed. ^Enuresis.

I  Very  uneasy  all  night,  after  a  short  sleep  awakened  by  anxi-
ety and  restlessness,  which  scarcely  allowed  ten  minutes
quiet  in  one  place  ;  must  sit  up  ;  involuntary  throwing  of
head  from  side  to  side,  until  exhaustion  brought  on  sleep.

I  I  Laughing  and  crying  during  sleep.

I  Many  motions  with  arms  and  legs  during  sleep,  at  night.

■  Starting  from  sleep,  in  a  fright. ^Pertussis.
I  Dreams  :  anxious;  quarrelsome;  fretful.

I  In  morning,  in  bed,  spasmodic  attack  ;  after  rising,  cold  sen-
sation in  arm,  then  a  jerk,  with  violent  twitching  in  trunk
and  arms  ;  anxiety.

1  Worse  on  awaking  from  sleep. ^Pertussis. ^Chorea.

1 1  Bad  effects  from  nightwatching.  ^Lossofmilk.  ^Dystocia.
^^  Time.  Il  At  night  he  can  get  no  easy  position;  he  cannot  lie
still  a  moment.
Night :  arms  and  legs  in  motion  during  sleep  ;  severe  internal
chill ;  torpid  feeling  in  arms  ;  <<  neuralgia  of  face  ;  burn-
ing in  urethra ;  blood  with  urine  ;  menses  cease ;  leucor-
rhoea  ;  cough  <  ;  paralysis  of  deltoid  ;  burning  and  tear-
ing in  shins;  has  to  rub  feet  and  legs  all  night ;  watery  vesi-
cles on  toes  ;  chorea  <  or  >  ;  sleepless ;  heat,  followed  by
internal  chilliness.

2  A.M. :  cramp  in  tendo  achilles  awakes.
4  A.M. :  sweat.

8  A.M. :  internal  heat,  without  thirst,  with  sweat  in  hands.

Morning  :  rheumatic  pains  in  head  ;  first  dryness  and  .stiffness
in  eyes,  then  lachrymation  ;  sticking  in  eyes;  blowing  blood
from  nose  ;  deafness  ;  sneezing  ;  pain  in  stomach  ;  hoarse-
ness ;  rawness  of  throat ;  dyspnoea ;  cough ;  whooping-
cough  >  ;  bruised  pain  in  legs  ;  cramp  in  calves  ;  spas-
modic attacks,  arms  and  legs  ;  sweat,  when  walking.

Afternoon : >  vertigo.

4  P.M. :  burning  and  dryness  of  eyes.

6  to  8  P.M. :  burning  and  stinging  as  with  needles  in  eyes  ;
heat.

10  to  12  P.M. :  epileptic  attacks.

Evening  :  -<  sensation  as  of  an  empty  space  between  forehead
and  brain  ;  pain  shoots  from  eyes  into  head  ;  as  if  there  was


CAUSTICUM.  428

a  substance  moving  in  eye  ; ophthalmia ; nose  stopped  ;

stitches r. side  of  abdomen  ; urine  stopped  at  intervals  ;

urine  copious;  violent  stitches  r.  temple;  whooping-cough  <  ;

cough  short and hollow  ; anxiety  ; pain and  lameness  of

finger-tips  ; uneasiness  of  limbs  ; body  restless  ; epileptic

attacks.
Day  :  photophobia  ;  nose  running  ;  sleepy.
Day  and  night :  itching  in  anus  ;  cough.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. iCan  bear  neither  warmth  nor

cold. ^Toothache.
She  cannot  cover  herself  too  warmly,  but  warmth  does  not

relieve.
After  being  heated  by  dancing,  took  cold  and  suffered  with

paresis  of  muscles  of  eye.
I  Worse  on  coming  from  the  air  into  a  warm  room. ^Head-
ache.

■  Getting  heated,  <  eruption. ^Acne  rosacea.

Warmth  :  >  sensation  as  of  an  empty  space  between  forehead
and  brain  ;  ^  tensive  tearing  pain  in  integuments  of  head  ;
>>  griping- clawing  in  forearm  ;  of  bed,  drawing- tearing  in
thighs  and  legs;  chronic  urticaria;  >>  gout  and  rheumatism.

Cold  water :  >  face  by  rubbing  part  with  a  cloth  dipped  in  ;
toothache;  >■  pertussis;  sticking  abdomen,  diarrhoea;
^  prurigo  ani ;  cough  relieved  by  a  swallow  ;  >>  painful
nodules  on  hand  ;  prevents  epileptic  attacks  ; >  eruptions.

■  Taking  cold  from  scrubbing  and  washing. ^Ischias.

■  From  a  river-bath  in  summer. ^Paralysis.

■  After  bathing:  cough.

Better  in  open  air:  incapacity  to  think  after  gas-light.

Open  air  : >  lachrymation  ;  accumulation  of  tears  ;  cough  <[

after  walking  in  it ; ■<  drawing-tearing  in  thighs  and  legs  ;

■<  gout,  face  and  toothache  ; ■<  chorea  during  pregnancy.
Fresh  air  :  blepharitis.

■  Sensitive  to  cold  air. ^Headache. ^Scabies.

Cold  air  :  pain  in  sound  teeth ;  <  whooping-cough  ;  painful
retention  of  urine  ;  paralysis  of  single  parts,  caused  by  ex-
posure ;  causes  eruption  to  disappear ;  striking  abdomen
causes  diarrhoea  ; <  rheumatism.

Draft  of  cold  air  :  <;  tensive  tearing  pain  in  integument  of
head  ;  aphonia  ;  cough  ;  caused  paralysis  of  face.

■  Worse  on  becoming  Cold. ^Whooping-cough.
Wind  :  ears  sensitive  to  ;  cold  winds  cause  paralysis.
Stormy  change  of  weather  :  facial  neuralgia.

Damp  weather:  >  tensive  tearing  pain  in  integuments  of  head;
>-  bleeding  ulcers  ;  rhinitis.

■  ■After  getting  wet. ^Paralysis.

Colds  contracted  in  spring-time  and  from  sudden  change  of


429  CAUSTICUM.

weather  ;  coryza  of  profuse,  transparent  mucus  ;  cough  with
expectoration,  rawness  in  chest  and  morning  hoarseness.
Worse  in  clear,  fine  weather,  >  in  damp,  wet  weather.
*"  Fever. I  B  Shivering  beginning  in  and  spreading  from  face.

I  Chill  and  chilliness:  predominating,  frequently  with  coldness

of  whole  1.  side  ;  of  diseased  parts  ;  with  prosopalgia  ;  with
pertussis  ;  left-sided.

I I  Much  internal  chilliness,  immediately  followed  by  sweat  with-
out intervening  heat.

■  Severe  internal  chill  about  midnight.

IB  Chill  lessened  by  drinking,  and  in  bed.

I  I  Chill  passes  downAvard.

I  Coldness  of  single  parts.

I  Chilly,  with  gooseflesh,  while  head  and  face  burns. ^Head-
ache.

TrChild  is  feverish  at  night  and  wants  the  breast  all  the  time.
^Whooping-cough.

IB  Flushes  of  heat,  followed  by  chill.

I  I  Internal  heat,  without  thirst,  with  sweat  of  hands,  8  A.M.

I  Heat  from  6  to  8  p.m.,  heat  descending.

I  I  Heat  and  sweat  in  hypochondria  and  on  upper  part  of  ab-
domen.

I  Profuse  sweat : when  walking  in  open  air  ; from  motion  ;

' when  sleeping  during  day.

iMorning-sweat  toward  4  A.M.

I  Sour  smelling  night-sweat.

TrYiscid  sweat  of  strong  urinous  odor.

I  Sweats  easily  on  head. ^Epilepsy.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Paroxysmal  stitches  in  r.  ear.

Attacks  come  on  twice  daily.

I  Pain  in  paroxysms.

Sometimes  two  attacks  in  succession. ^Epilepsy.

Attacks  lasting  twelve  hours. ^Epilepsy.

Attacks  once  or  twice  daily. ^Gastralgia.

Every  two  to  three  days  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

Every  week  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

Every  two,  three,  four  weeks  an  attack. ^Epilepsy.

New  moon. ^Epileptic  attacks.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. One-sided  paralysis, especially  of
flexor  muscles.

Right :  epilepsy,  runs  in  a  circle  ;  heat  in  head ;  stitches  in
temple;  pain  in  frontal  eminence;  chorea  turns  head  ;  spots
before  eye  ;  eye  tense ;  as  if  a  tight  skin  came  half  way
down  over  eye;  sudden  pain  over  eye;  stitches  in  ear  ;  neu-
ralgia in  face;  drawing  pain  in  cheek;  stitches  in  lower  jaw;
drawing  in  leg  ;  heat  in  side  of  head  ;  stitches,  pain,  pinch-
ing in  abdomen;  stitches  in  testicle;  tension  in  neck;  press-
ing stitching  along  side  of  scapula; on  forefinger  a  large


CAUSTICUM.  430

horny  wart;  cramp  in  foot;  tearing  in  calf;  chorea  at  night ;
arm  cold;  paralysis  of  arm  and  hand;  wrist  as  if  sprained.

Left :  spots  before  eye  ;  vertigo  falls  ;  eye,  acrid  tears,  shoot-
ing pain ;  itching  in  canthus ;  eye,  granulations ;  brow,
visible  twitching  of  lid ;  nostril,  epistaxis  ;  ulcer,  tip  of
nose  ;  side  of  face,  neuralgia  ;  pimples  on  cheek  ;  twitching
in  face ;  tearing  pains  in  face ;  tearing  pain  in  jaw  ;  stitches
beneath  breast ;  pain  in  mamma  ;  stitches  in  lumbar  region  ;
tearing  pains  in  hip,  as  if  muscles  were  too  short ;  tensive
pain  in  forearm  ;  pain  in  hip  ;  knee,  stiffness  ;  side,  chill ;
hand,  tendons,  painful  nodules.
**  Sensations.  As  if  there  was  a  ball  of  fire  in  forehead  ;  as  if  he
would  fall ;  as  if  brain  were  loose  in  head  ;  as  though  a
membrane  was  over  eyes  ;  as  if  there  was  a  substance  in
eye  ;  as  of  a  stick  or  sand  in  eyes  ;  eyes  as  if  paralyzed ;  as
if  eyelids  were  agglutinated  ;  as  if  something  were  trying  to
force  out  of  ear  ;  as  though  a  foreign  body  were  in  teeth  ;
as  though  blood  would  crowd  into  teeth  ;  as  if  scalded,
tongue ;  of  a  lump  in  throat ;  as  if  something  cold  were  ris-
ing in  throat ;  as  if  throat  were  too  narrow  ;  as  though
shreds  of  meat  were  between  teeth  ;  pelvis,  as  if  pressed  or
screwed  together  ;  as  if  clothing  of  chest  were  too  tight ;  as
if  cold  wind  were  blowing  between  scapulae  ;  as  if  lumbar
muscles  were  too  short ;  as  if  cold  water  were  running  from
clavicle  to  feet ;  as  though  touched  from  time  to  time  with
an  icicle,  skin.

Lightning-like  pains  darting  from  place  to  place.

1 1  Terrible  sensation  of  tearing,  paroxysmal;  often  moving
forward,  then  remitting,  again  starting  from  same  spot ;
neuralgia,  moving  from  occiput,  upwards  and  forwards,-  over
vertex.  •

I  i  Tearing  pains. ^Prosopalgia.

Tearing:  and  digging  headache;  pain  in  integuments  of  head ;
pains,  1.  half  of  face;  1.  lower  jaw  ;  in  both  r.  rows  of  teeth;
in  throat ;  small  of  back  ;  pain,  back  of  neck ;  shoulder-
blades  ;  in  arms  and  hands ;  thighs  and  legs ;  in  shins ;  in
tendons  beneath  calf,  with  every  movement ;  in  limbs  ;  in
joints.

Boring :  pain  in  vertex ;  pain  in  lower  back  tooth ;  in  lower  leg
and  foot  from  every  movement ;  in  ulcers.

Jerking :  pain  in  throat ;  phagedenic  ulcer.

Shocks  or  jerks  :  in  head.

Cutting :  pain  in  forehead  ;  colic  on  appearance  of  menses.

Shooting  :  pain  in  1.  eye ;  to  head.

Darting  :  pain  in  os  coccygis.

Stitches :  in  temples  ;  in  r.  temple ;  in  vertex  ;  r.  ear ;  in
angle  of  r.  lower  jaw;  dull,  in  upper  back  teeth;  in  lower
back  teeth;  in  fingers;  in  scrobiculum  ;  in  region  of  liver ;


431  • CAUSTICUM.

in  rectum;  r.  testicle;  in  cardiac  region;  in  sternum;  in
lumbar  region;  in  fingers;  r.  elbow;  pain,  in  hip-joint;
knife-like,  from  knee  to  toes  ;  in  soles  of  feet ;  great  toe.

Sticking:  toothache;  pain,  below  1.  mamma;  inchest;  middle
of  spine.

Stinging:  itching  of  scalp;  as  with  needles,  in  eyes;  in  teeth;
hemorrhoids.

Prickling  :  in  lower  back  teeth.

Biting  :  and  pressure  in  eyes.

Burning :  stinging  in  upper  part  of  head  ;  as  with  needles,  in
eyes  ;  and  dryness  of  eyes  ;  eyes  red  ;  in  both  inner  canthi ;
in  face  ;  as  of  glowing  coals,  in  small  spots  in  face,  eyes,
ears  and  cheeks  ;  pain,  in  bleeding  lips ;  in  hollow  tooth ;
in  fingers  ;  in  fauces  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  anus  ;  hemorrhoids  ;
in  urethra ;  and  soreness,  in  chest ;  in  trachea ;  in  air-
passages  ;  cardiac  region  ;  nightly  burning,  in  shins  ;  great
toe  ;  skin,  like  nettle-rash  ;  in  ulcers ;  in  gout.

Her  face  feels  to  her  like  fur.

Heartburn  :  in  throat.

Smarting :  eyes  ;  in  pudendum  ;  in  chest. '

Twisting :  abdominal  pain  before  stool.

Clawing :  in  stomach.

Griping-clawing  :  arms  and  hands.

Pinching :  in  ear  ;  in  stomach  ;  r.  side  of  abdomen  ;  in  hypo-
chondria ;  pain,  in  lumbar  region  ;  in  sacrum.

Digging :  headache  ;  lower  back  teeth.

Pressive  pain:  in  r.  frontal  eminence;  in  rectum;  in  testicles;
in  coccyx  ;  great  toe.

Pressing  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  small  of  back  ;  stitching,  r.  scap-
ula ;  pain,  above  elbows.

Pressure :  in  inner  canthus  ;  hot,  in  ears  and  whole  head  ;  in
throat ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  rectum  ;  on  shoulders.

Drawing :  in  eyes  ;  pains  extend  into  cheek  and  ear  ;  pain  in
glenoid  cavity  ;  pain  in  os  coccygis  ;  in  shoulder-blades  ;  in
arms  and  hands  ;  in  finger-joints  ;  in  thighs  and  legs  ;  from
knee  to  malleolus.

lit  draws  and  tears  through  whole  body. ^Headache.

Dragging  :  pain  in  eyes  ;  in  ears  ;  in  muscles  of  face.

Aching  :  in  hip,  as  if  dislocated  ;  here  and  there  in  leg.

Soreness :  in  scalp ;  in  fauces  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  chest ;
in  trachea.

Bruised  feeling :  in  outer  head ;  in  jaws  ;  in  os  coccygis ;  in
thighs  and  legs.

Rawness  :  in  fauces  ;  in  larynx.

Scraping :  down  throat.

Gouty  :  pains  in  limbs.

■  Rheumatic  and  neuralgic  pains. ^Bronchitis.


CAUSTICUM. '  432

Rheumatic  pain :  in  head  ;  in  lower  jaw  ;  in  abdomen  ;  ach-
ing, in  shoulder.

Tensive  pain :  gout.

Bursting  pain  :  in  hips.

Sprained  feeling :  in  r.  wrist ;  in  gout.

Undefined  pain:  violent,  in  stomach;  dull,  on  vertex  ;  in  ear;
in  malar  bones  ;  in  sound  teeth ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in
r.  abdomen;  and  strong  pulsation,  in  perineum  ;  in  neck  ;  in
finger-tips  ;  in  1.  hip  ;  in  ankle.

Throbbing  :  in  vertex  ;  toothache.

Beating :  in  lower  leg  and  foot,  with  every  movement.

Tension :  and  pain,  in  jaws  ;  r.  side  of  neck ;  pain,  in  fore-
arm ;  pain  and  stiffness,  in  hollow  of  knees.

Tenseness  :  in  r.  eye.

Spasm :  in  rectum.

Cramp  :  in  stomach  ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  feet.

Compression :  of  chest.

Constriction  :  in  larynx  ;  of  chest ;  of  feet.

Contracted :  in  whole  side  of  head  ;  in  jaw  ;  in  foot.

Obstruction  :  feeling  of,  in  ears.

Fullness :  in  stomach  ;  of  chest ;  in  hand,  on  grasping  any-
thing.

Heaviness :  in  upper  lids  ;  upper  lip  and  nose.

Stiffness :  in  neck  ;  of  1.  knee,  when  walking.

■  Drawing  lame  feeling  of  unaffected  part. ^Taralysis.
Lameness :  finger-tips.

I  Pain  in  paralyzed  parts  increases  when  lameness  decreases.

^Paralysis.
Torpid  feeling :  in  arms,  at  night.
Crawling :  in  both  soles  ;  in  great  toe.
Tickling :  in  throat.
Itching : like  flee-bites,  1.  inner  canthus  ;  on  lower  eyelid  ;  in

inner  ear ;  of  tip  of  nose  ;  of  face  ;  1.  cheek  ;  in  eyes ;  in

rectum,  day  and  night ; hemorrhoids  ;  orifice  of  urethra  ;

about  mammse  ; rash on  breast  and  arms ; on  back and

calves  ;  on  arms  ;  on  inner  side  of  thighs  ;  on  dorsum  of

foot.
Numbness  :  of  side  of  face  ;  of  thumb  ;  of  malleolus,  heel  and

toes.

■  Numbness  and  deadly  whiteness  of  lamed  limbs,  sometimes

with  coldness  of  head  or  feet.

Formication :  in  limbs.

Heat :  r.  side  of  head ;  in  sternum ;  and  sweat,  in  hypo-
chondria.

Uneasiness  :  in  both  limbs.

Coldness  :  of  shoulder-joints  and  ankles  ;  in  arms  ;  of  single
parts.


433  CAUSTICUM.

■  Chilliness,  with  pains. ^Prosopalgia.
Dry  sensation  :  in  eyes  ;  in  air-passages.

**  Tissues.  I  Disposition  to  hypersemia  and  congestion  depending
on  diminished  action  ot"  motor  nerves  on  muscular  coat  of
blood-vessels. ^Aphonia.

■  Hemorrhages  of  very  dark  blood.

■  Net-like  appearance  of  capillaries.

■  Painful  varices,  ulcers,  or  warts.

■  ■Contraction  of  flexor  tendons; tension  and  shortening  of

muscles.

■  Rheumatic  and  arthritic  inflammations,  with  contraction  of

flexors  and  stifl'ness  of  joints.
Catarrhal  affections.
Chronic  arthritis  ;  nodosities.
Synovitis.
Ill-efi"ects  from  debilitating  loss  of  fluids.

■  ■Disturbed  functional  activity  of  brain  and  spinal  nerves,  re-

sulting in  paralysis.

■  Softening  of  brain; epilepsy;  locomotor  ataxia;  spasmodic

afi'ections.
Afiects  principally  oculo-motor  nerves,  third  pair;  facial  nerve,
seventh  pair  ;  and  motor  (inferior  maxillary)  branch  of  fifth
pair  ;  also  spinal  nerves,  particularly  upper.
Proud  flesh  ;  caries  ;  scrofulosis.
*' Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. ■■Whatever  part  she

grasps,  burns.

;rChild  wants  to  be  carried  all  day. ^Whooping-cough.

Touch  :  pain  on  vertex  ;  scalp  sore  ;  eyes  burn  ;  pressive  pain
in  eyes  ;  constant  inclination  to  touch  and  rub  eye  ;  itching
on  lower  lids ;  stomach  sore  to ;  anus  sensitive ;  hemor-
rhoids stinging,  burning  ;  larynx  sore  ;  heels  and  balls  of
toes  sore  to  ;  front  of  arms  and  legs  sore  to.

Cannot  bear  touch  of  clothing  on  chest.

Pressure  :  causes  pain  in  eyes  ;  tearing  in  teeth,  painful  to
pressure.

Rubbing  :  eye,  >  a  tight  skin  which  comes  half  way  down  ;
with  cold,  wet  towel,  >>  neuralgia  efface.

Straining  :  vocal  organs,  hoarseness.

Ichorous  suppurating  scalds  and  burns  slow  of  healing  ;  or
patients  say,  "they  have  never  been  well  since  that  burn."

Burns  from  nettles.

Redness  of  frosted  limbs.

Old  injuries  freshen  up.
■'^  Skin. Yellowish  looking  skin,  particularly  about  temples.

■  Intertrigo,  during  teething.

■  Itching : over  whole  body  ; at  various  parts,  especially  on

tip  and  wings  of  nose ;  face;  scrotum;  back;  arms;  palms;
dorsum  of  feet.

VOL.  III. — 28.


CAUSTICUM.  434

1 1  Subacute  and  chronic eruptions, similar to  blisters  from

burns.
Chronic  urticaria,  coming  out  more  fully  in  fresh  air,  with

decided  aggravation  and  itching  from  heat  of  bed.
Pemphigus.
Zona.

■  Eruption  of  pimples  on  tip  of  nose.

■  Excessively  itching  moist  tetter  on  neck.
Itching  blotches,  with  burning,  like  nettle-rash.

Itching  eruption  preventing  sleep,  burns  and  bites,  especially

on  sore  spot  on  lower  leg.
Scabies,  after  abuse  of  sulphur  or  mercury.
Eczema  pustulosa.

Sensation  as  though  touched  from  time  to  time  with  an  icicle.
Marbled  appearance  of  skin.

■  ■Large,  jagged,  often  pedunculated  warts  exuding  moisture

and  bleeding  easily.

■  Small,  non-pedunculated  warts  all  over  body,  internal  and  ex-

ternal, and  on  ■  eyelids.

■  ■Warts,  and  scrofulous  skin  affections.

■  Lupus.

■  Injuries  of  skin,  which  had  healed,  become  sore  again.

■  ■Burns  and  scalds.

■  ■  Varicose  and  fistulous  ulcers.

■  Phagedenic  ulcers.

Ulcers  :  bleeding,  with  blisters  on  surrounding  skin,  boring
and  burning  ;  burning  in  edges  ;  pain  as  if  burnt ;  sensi-
tive, surrounded  by  pustules  ;  swollen,  with  a  feeling  of
tenseness  ;  pus  bloody  and  corroding,  greenish  or  gray,
ichorous  and  thin  as  water,  sometimes  yellow  ;  >  in  damp
weather  and  from  walking.

■  Corrosive  ulceration  of  tubercles  in  skin. ^Syphilis.
Ulcers  on  hands, fingers  and  toes  : corroding,  thin,  watery,

often acrid discharge , with burning pain ; discolored ;

ichorous.
Old  sores  originating  in  burns,  maltreated  with  lead.
Injurious effects, chorea, paralysis, epilepsy, etc., following

suppressed  itch  or  other  chronic  scrofulous  exanthemata.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Diseases  corresponding  to  the

hydrogenoid  constitution  of  Grauvogl.

■  ■Darkhaired  persons  with  rigid  fibre  most  affected.

■  Lymphatic,  torpid  temperament. ^Bronchitis.

■  ■  Children  with  black  hair  and  eyes. ^Enuresis  nocturna.

■  Especially  adapted  to  feeble,  delicate  children. ^Pertussis.

^Enuresis.

■  Diseases  incidental  to  old  age. ^Varicose  veins.

■  Children  with  delicate  skin. ^Dentition.


435  CAUSTICUM.

I  During  evolution  of  a  group  of  teeth,  intertrigo  appears  with
occasional  convulsions. /^Dentition.

Child,  get.  18  months. ^Diarrhoea.

Girl,  ast.  9. /?Hip  disease.

Child,  aet.  10. ^Leucoma.

Boy,  set.  10. /^Catarrh  of  bladder.

Girl,  set.  11. ^Enuresis.

Boy,  get.  12. ^Enlarged  cervical  glands.

Child,  get.  12. /^Ophthalmia.

Girl,  get.  12,  weakly,  delicate. ^Chorea.

Girl,  get.  14,  scrofulous. ^Chorea.

Boy,  get.  15. ^Enuresis.

Boy,  get.  15,  scrofulous  and  miserable. ^Epilepsy.

Girl,  ast.  15,  brunette. ^Enuresis.

Slender,  blonde  girl,  set.  15. /9Warts  on  fingers.

Boy,  get.  17. ^Stammering  from  childhood.

Girl,  get.  18. /^Epilepsy.

Girl,  get.  24. ^Acne  rosacea  on  nose.

A  lady,  get.  32. ^Paresis  of  muscles  of  eye.

Girl,  get.  20,  weakly,  mild  temper,  since  16  years. /^Rhinitis.

Girl,  aet.  21. /^Crusty  nose.

Girl,  get.  24,  terribly  disfigured  nose. ^Acne  rosacea.

Robust  choleric  woman,  set.  30. ^Aphonia.

Woman,  get.  30,  well  fed,  choleric,  full  blooded. /^Paralysis.

Woman,  aet.  32. ^Hemiplegia  of  face.

Robust  woman,  get.  36,  phlegmatic  temperament. (^Rhinitis.

A  weakly  seamstress,  set.  37. ^Headache.

A  woman,  get.  37,  appears  consumptive,  thin  in  flesh. /?Bron-

chitis.
Woman,  get.  39,  of  a  melancholic  mood. ^Toothache. /?Pro-

sopalgia.
Woman,  aet.  39,  emaciated,  pale and sickly  since 6  years.

^Cephalalgia  and  gastritis.
Woman,  aet.  40. ^Ophthalmia.
Woman,  get.  40,  mild,  gentle  disposition. ^Faceache.
Woman, get. 46, full habit, dark complexion, phlegmatic.

^Deafness.
During  climacteric  years. /^Deafness.
Old  maid,  weakly,  pale. ^Prosopalgia.
Woman,  get.  55,  emaciated. ^Neuralgia.
Woman,  get.  60. ^Paralysis.
Woman,  set.  66. ^Tetter  on  r.  cheek.
Very  much  weakened  woman,  set.  69. ^Hemiplegia.
Woman,  set.  70. /^Paralysis  of  facial  nerve. ^Glossoplegia.
Old  maid,  aet.  75,  fond  of  coffee. /^Chronic  headache.
A  youth,  get.  17. /^Stammering.
A  man,  set.  25. ^Hemiplegia  of  face.
A  man,  set.  36. ^Wart  on  finger.


CAUSTICUM.  436

A  man,  set.  44,  strong,  athletic,  short  neck. ^Epilepsy.

A  very  strong,  robust  merchant,  travelling  much,  set.  52.
^Headache.

A  man,  set.  61. ^Paralysis  of  bladder.

"In  my  practice  the  greater  number  of  Causticum.  patients,
suffering  from  throat  complaints,  were  men." Lorbacher.
^^  Kelations. Antidoted  by : Asaf., Coffea, Coloc, Dulcam.,
Guajac.  (rheumatic  contraction  of  tendons  of  arms  and  legs),
Nitr.  spir.  dule.,  Nux  vom.

It  antidotes:  Asaf.^  CincJion.,  Colo e.,  JEuphr as.,  Plumbum;
B I  poisoning  by  lead,  (paralysis);  bad  effects  (paralysis  of
tongue)  of  type  held  between  lips  of  a  compositor ;  abuse  of
Mercur.  and  Sulphur  in  scabies.

Compatible:  before  Calc.  ostr.,  Kali  jod.  (facial  paralysis  from
an  abscess),  Lycop.,  Nux  vom.  (vertigo),  Rhus  tox.,  Ruta
(stiffness  of  upper  limbs  after  paralysis).  Sepia,  Silica  (in-
grown toe-nails).  Sulphur,  Zinc,  sulph.  (external  use  in
chronic  ophthalmia) ;  intercurrently  Arseyi.  (acne  rosacea,
epilepsy  of  drunkard).  Cuprum  (epilepsy),  Ignat.  (chorea),
Podoph.  (ophthalmia),  Pulsat.  (ophthalmia),  Rhus  tox.
(amblyopia).  Sepia  (rhinitis,  epilepsy),  Stannum  (paralysis);
after  Calc.  ostr.  (tetter),  Coceul.  (lame  arm  after  scald),
Coloc.  (colic).  Cuprum  (epilepsy),  Hyosc.  (chorea),  Ignat.
(chorea  from  fright).  Petrol,  (hip  disease),  Petrosel.  (urinary
troubles),  Rhus  tox.  (hemiplegia),  Sepia  (ophthalmia),  Stra-
mon.  (chorea),  Sulphur  (headache,  otorrhoea,  ulcer  on  nose,
prosopalgia,  epilepsy,  limping).

Incompatible :  Acids,  Coffea,  Phosphor.

Complementary :  Petrosel.

Compare:  in  mental  weakness,  paralysis,  tinea  capitis,  etc.,
Baryt.  carh.;  in  ptosis,  facial  paralysis,  Grelsem.;  in  laryn-
geal affections.  Ant.  tart  ;  in  paralysis  of  muscular  coat  of
bladder,  Arsen.,  Helleh.,  Hyosc;  in  meningeal  tuberculosis,
Lycop.,  Natr.  carh.,  Stramon.,  Sulphur ;  in  contraction  of
brow,  with  pain  in  head,  Lycop. ;  in  blistering  of  heel,
Cepa  ;  in  cough,  must  swallow  mucus,  Arnic.


437  CEANOTHUS  AMERICANUS.

CEANOTHUS  AMERICANUS.

New  Jersey  Tea,  or  Red-root.  Rhamnacece.


Extends  from  Canada  to  the  Gulf,  and  west  to  Arkansas  and  Iowa.

The  bark  of  this  root  is  considered  astringent  by  the  Old  School  and  is
recommended  in  aphthous  sore  mouth  and  sore  throat,  accompanying  scar-
let fever. See  Investigator,  April,  187V). — J.  L.  Andrews.

Authorities. — L.  Munyon,  Am.  Observ  ,  7,  100  ;  clinical  cases  and  a  frag-
mentary proving  by  J.  C.  Burnett,  in  Mon.  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  23,  p.  155.

W.  Geisse  reported  a  case  of  chronic  urinary  trouble  in  an  old  man,
cured  by  the  tea.


^  Mind. I  Low-spirited, fears he  will become unfit for work.

^Chronic  splenitis.
^iGreat  nervous  excitement,  with  chilliness  and  loss  of  appetite;

felt  as  if  nerves  were  shaken;  at  dinner  could  scarcely  hold

knife  and  fork.
^  Inner  Head. '  i  Headache  in  r. side, with  pain  in  region  of

spleen.
^^  Inner  Mouth. •  Aphthous  affections  of  mouth  and  fauces.
^®  Hypochondria, ll  Deep-seated  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium.
I  Pain  and  fullness  in  1.  side,  with  inability  to  lie  on  it.

■  Severe  pain  in  region  of  spleen,  with  low  spirits.

I  Pain  in  1.  side,  for  a  long  time  with  leucorrhoea  and  chilliness.
I  Pain  in  1.  side,  headache  r.  side  ; severe  pain  in  1.  side,  with
inability  (for  years)  to  lie  on  that  side.

■  Swelling  in  1.  side,  under  ribs,  with  cutting  pain,  -<  in  cold

weather,  with  constant  chilliness,  must  sit  over  fire. ^Chronic
splenitis.

■  Enlarged  spleen,  extending  to  within  an  inch  of  crest  of  ilium,

with  severe  pain  in  side.

■  Chronic  hypertrophy  of  spleen. ^After  intermittent.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea.

I  Dysentery.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. •  Syphilitic  complaints.
^^  Female Sexual Organs. ■  Leucorrhoea, profuse, thick and
yellow,  with  pain  under  1.  ribs. ^Chronic  splenitis.

;rMenses  appeared  ten  days  too  early,  and  very  profusely.

■  Catamenia  appears  every  two  weeks.

■  Metrorrhagia,  with  pain  in  region  of  spleen.
^'  Neck  and  Back. ;rChilliness  down  back.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Cannot  lie  down,  on  account  of
pain  in  1.  side.


CEANOTHUS  AMERICANUS.  438

^'  Temperature  and  Weather. iMust  sit  over  fire.  ^Splenitis.

Cold  weather: <  swelling  and  pain  in  1.  side  under  ribs.
*"  Fever, ;rChilliness,  principally  down  back  ; shivering  ; loss  of
appetite,  and  nervous  excitement.
I  Rigors  at  frequent  intervals,  with  pain  in  1.  side. ^Chronic

splenitis.
Intermittent,  with  chronic  enlargement  of  spleen.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  two  weeks,  catamenia.

*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  headache.

Left :  pain  in  region  of  spleen  ;  deep-seated  pain  in  hypochon-
drium; pain  and  fullness  in  hypochondrium,  with  inability
to  lie  down,  with  leucorrhoea  and  chilliness;  swelling  in  side
under  ribs  ;  pain  in  side,  with  rigors.
*^  Sensations. As  if  nerves  were  shaken ;  at  dinner  could  scarcely
hold  knife  and  fork.
Cutting :  in  1.  side  under  ribs.
Pain  :  in  1.  side.
Fullness  :  in  1.  side.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. iGirl,  set.  14. /^Splenitic

pain.

A  young  lady,  set.  about  26. /^Chronic  splenitis.

A  woman,  set.  about  30,  or  32,  mother  of  several  children,  ill-
fed  and  overworked. ^Chronic  hypertrophy  of  spleen.

A  middle  aged,  childless  lady,  of  fresh  complexion, ^Chronic
hypertrophy  of  spleen.

A  lady, set.  about  55. ^Chronic  splenitis, chills  and  leu-
corrhoea.

A  young  man. ^Chronic  splenitis.
***  Relations. Berber,  helped  the  pain  in  spleen  when  Ceanoth.
failed.

Coniuni  helped  in  second  attack  of  metrorrhagia  when  Ceanoth.
failed.

Mi/r.  cerif.  finished  the  cure  of  icterus,  after  Ceanoth.  relieved
the  severe  pain  in  1.  side.


439  CEDRON.

CEDRON.

Simdba  Cedron.  Simarubaeecp,.


The  fruit  of  a  South  American  tree,  also  growing  in  the  West  Indies.

Trituration  of  the  seeds,  or  a  tincture  prepared  from  the  whole  fruit.

In  1699,  mentioned  in  the  history  of  the  Buccaneers.

In  1828,  seeds,  grown  on  the  Andes,  offered  for  sale  by  the  native  Indians
in  Carthagena.

In  1844,  discovered  on  the  Isthmus.

In  1846,  Purdie  discovered  the  tree  on  the  Rio  Grande.

In  1851,  Dr.  Cazentre,  Collectanea,  in  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  272.

Considered  a  specific  for  bites  of  venomous  serpents,  hydrophobia  and
stings  of  poisonous  insects,  in  Panama,  and  used  for  epidemic  intermit-
tents. Hellert's  experiences,  ibid.

In  1851,  reports  by  Sir  Wm.  J.  Hooker,  Pharm.  Journ.  and  Transact.,  10,
344,  later  in  Ceniralblatt,  1,  271.

In  1851,  Lewi  found  the  tree  in  the  Sierras  Calientes  in  New  Granada,
and  says,  the  seed  is  similar  to  the  Ignatia  bean  and  as  bitter.  Dumas,
Journ.  de  Chim.  Med.,  282.

In  1853,  Dr.  Metcalf  on  New  Provings,  N.  A.  J.  H,  vol.  3,  p.  99.

In  1856,  cures  of  intermittent  fever,  Otto  Fiillgraff,  A.  A.  J.  H ,  5, 179.

Casanova's  pathogenetic  and  clinical  experiments  on  fourteen  persons,
Monthly  Bom.  Rev.,  vols.  5  and  6.

Provinss  by  Teste  on  three  persons,  in  6th  dilution.  Reported  cures  of
intermittents  of  Martinique  and  Wallachia. Materia  Medica,  p.  575.

In  1859,  provings  by  J.  Douglas,  N.  A.  J.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.  120.

A  cure  of  quotidian  ague  by  Hughes.

Provings  by  Stennett,  W.  Horn.  Obs.,  vol.  2,  p.  11.

In  1874,  S.  A.  Jones,  resume  of  symptoms.  Am.  Obs.

In  1876,  article  on  intermittents  by  A.  Charge,  Trans.  WorMs  Horn.  Con-
vention.


^  Mind. Nervous  excitement,  followed  by  depression.

■  Restless,  as  driven  from  place  to  place;  urine  dark  yellow

and  increased  in  quantity.

■  After  delirium  tremens,  trembling  of  whole  body.
Nervous  depression  after  coitus.
iLectrophobia.

I  Body  is  heavy,  mind  depressed. ^Intermittent.
Mental  symptoms  <  at  night.
^  Sensorlum. Dullness  of  senses.

■  Vertigo. ^Menstrual  epilepsy.

■  Giddiness,  with  falling  down  in  convulsions. ^Epileptiform

eclampsia.


CEDRON.  440

^  Inner  Head. Shooting  pain  in  orbital  region.

Headache,  especially  deep  in  orbits,  obliging  him  to  shut  eyes,
and  extending  to  occiput.

■  Intense  pain  in  forehead. ^Epileptiform  eclampsia.

■  Pressing  frontal  headache,  with  sharp  pains  from  above  eyes

to  temples  and  occiput,  ■<  before  a  storm. ^Choroiditis.
Throbbing  pain  in  head,  commencing  in  temples,  extending
around  to  forehead.

■  From  temple  to  temple,  pain  across  eyes.

Pressure  at  r.  temple,  dull  pain  in  r.  side  of  head,  diappears

towards  noon.
Pressive  headache,  at  noon.
Pressure  on  top  of  head.
Sharp  pain  in  occiput.
1 1  Head  felt  as  if  swollen.
Distensive  headache,  <  during  night.
I  Sick  headache  every  other  day  at  11  o'clock.
I  Congestion  to  head. ^Chill.

Attacks  of  headache  recur  with  clock-like  periodicity.
Headache  ■<  in  open  air  and  on  rising.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  of  vision.

Objects  seem  red  at  night  and  yellowish  during. day.
I  Dilated  pupils,  with  tumid  face.
I  Flashes  of  light  before  eyes.

A  peculiar,  unsteady,  glistening  appearance  of  eyes,  and  in-
tolerance of  light.

I  Dull  appearance  of  eyes.
Eyes  injected  and  sore  to  touch.

Alternate  dryness  and  smarting  of  eyes  with  moisture,  <  when

closing  them.
Smarting  and  burning,  with  lachrymation.
Acrid  tears  which  seemed  to  scald  cheeks.
I A  tic-like  pain  over  1. eye,  for  more  than  thirteen  years,

which  never  came  on  except  after  coitus.

I I  Severe  shooting  pain  over  1.  eye.

■  Severe  ciliary  neuralgia,  distinctly  periodical. ^Glaucoma.

^Iritis. ^Choroiditis.
I  Pain  across  eyes,  from  temple  to  temple.
Neuralgic  affections  <C  evenings  and  when  lying  down.
I  Deep  sunken  eyes,  during  catamenia.
Spasmodic  twitching  of  upper  lid.
Burning  sensation  in  upper  lid.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. I  Tinnitus. ^Menstrual  epilepsy.

I  Deafness,  at  night. ^Intermittent.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Profuse  discharge of  thin,  clear, acrid, or
glassy-looking  mucus.

iPoint  of  nose  cold,  with  chilliness  and  yawning,  at  9  p.m.
^  Upper  Face. I  Animated  red  face. ^Intermittent  fever.


441  CEDRON.

Yellow  face  and  skin.
I  Face  pale,  during  catamenia.

I  Tumid face, with pupils much dilated. ^Epileptiform
eclampsia.

■  Prosopalgia,  more  frequently  in  women  than  in  men,  gener-

ally on  r.  side,  recurring  in  regular  paroxysms  of  indefinite

duration,  with  spasmodic  distortion  of  muscles  corresponding

to  affected  region.
Unbearable  neuralgic pains,  wandering  from  place  to  place,

but  emanating  from  a  carious  tooth  ; pressing  or  tearing

pain,  with  occasional  shooting.
I  Chronic  intermittent  prosopalgia,  always  coming  on  at  7  or  8

P.M.,  and  lasting  from  two  to  four  hours.
Facial  neuralgia,  returning  with  clock-like  periodicity.
I  Flying  heat  in  face,  alternating  with  chills. ^Prosopalgia.
Facial  neuralgia,  arising  from  malarial  influences.
'  Lower  Face. iLips  cold,  bluish  and  dry,  during  catamenia.
*"  Teeth  and  Gums. Tz-Sudden  toothache  in  1.  upper  molars  ;  on

inspiration,  sensation  as  if  cold  air  touched  teeth.

■  Odontalgia  every  night,  during  catamenia.

■  Bleeding  of  gums,  during  catamenia.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Difficulty  of  speech,  during  catamenia.

■  Stammering speech after coitus, in a woman. ^Choreic

attack.
Pricking  itching  of  tongue.

■  Painful  pricking  of  tongue,  with  sensation  of  heat. ^During

catamenia.

■  Tongue  felt  paralyzed  at  times,  during  catamenia.

'^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  dry,  great  thirst  for  cold  water.

■  Mouth  and  tongue  very  dry,  during  catamenia.

■  Profuse  ptyalism  after  catamenia.
Burning  and  smarting  in  mouth.

Tingling  sensation  in  mouth  as  from  the  shock  of  a  galvanic
battery.

■  Fetid  breath,  during  catamenia.

IS  Throat. TrPain  on  a  small  spot  in  1.  side  of  throat,  next  root  of
tongue,  as  of  a  foreign  body,  <  from  pressure.

■  Enlargement  of  tonsils,  with  redness  of  velum  palati,  and  con-

stant need  of  swallowing. See  26.
Burning  in  fauces,  throat  and  stomach.
Constriction  of  throat ;  difficulty  of  swallowing.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Longing  for  cold
in  some,  and  for  warm  drinks  in  others.

■  Great  thirst,  during  catamenia.

^^  Eating  and Drinking. ■After  meals: semi-liquid  evacua-
tions, with  colic  and  wind.
Improved  by  eating  :  suffocative  fits. See  26.


CEDRON.  442

^^ Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Slight

nausea.
Nausea,  with  distension  of  stomach.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation as  of  a  stone  on
stomach.
•  Gastric  affections  ;  spasm  of  stomach  and  bowels.
^^  Hypochondria. Stitches  in  spleen  and  liver.
"  Abdomen. Abdomen  hard  and  distended.

Flatulence,  colic  and  cramps.
^**  Stool  and  Rectum. I  Semi-liquid,  whitish  faeces,  somewhat  like
starch ;  white,  frothy,  and  papescent  evacuations  immediately
after  meals,  accompanied  with  slight  colic  and  discharge  of
inodorous  wind.

■  Involuntary  discharge  of  feces. ^Choreic  attack.
I  I  Excessive  tenesmus.

:  Cholera  morbus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. A  great  deal  of  pain  in  kidneys.
Burning  along  ureters  and  in  urethra.
Profuse  secretion  of  urine.
Frequent  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate.

■  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine. ^Choreic  attack.

■  Discharge  of  inodorous  urine,  as  clear  as  water,  on  recurring

consciousness. ^Epileptiform  convulsions.

Urine  very  high  colored.

Urine  throws  down  a  bran-like  sediment.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■After  coitus,  pain  over  1.  eye.

Gonorrhoea-like  discharge,  lasting  three  days.

Thin,  gleety  discharge,  day  and  night,  with  formication  over
body.

Feeling  as  if  a  drop  of  urine  were  in  urethra,  or  a  constant
dropping  from  it.
'^'Female  Sexual  Organs.  iPost  coitum,  irregular  and  un-
controllable movements  of  1.  upper  and  lower  extremities,
and  of  some  portions  of  face,  manifested  by  grimaces  and
contortions  of  different  kinds  ;  these  symptoms  lasted  from
fifteen  to  twenty  minutes;  could  not  speak  without  stammer-
ing, and  respiration  was  very  much  affected;  involuntary
discharge  of  urine  and  faeces  at  times  during  attack.  ^Choreic
attack.

■  During  catamenia  :  mouth  and  tongue  very  dry  ;  diflBculty  of

speech  ;  great  thirst ;  painful  pricking  of  tongue,  with  sen-
sation of  heat ;  felt  at  times  as  if  tongue  was  paralyzed  ;
face  pale  ;  deep  sunken  eyes  ;  odontalgia  every  night ;  fetid
breath;  lips  cold,  bluish,  dry  ;•  now  and  then  slight  bleed-
ing of  gums.

■  After  catamenia  profuse  ptyalism  and  leucorrhoeal  flow.

■  Leucorrhoea  regularly  every  month,  five  or  six  days  previous

to  catamenia,  with  pain  in  uterus  and  swelling  of  vulva.


443  CEDRON.

iLeucorrhoeal  discharge  appearing  in  place  of  catamenia.

I  Menstrual  epilepsy  (epileptoid  convulsions),  precursory  symp-
toms of  which  were  manifested  precisely  the  same  day  that
catamenia  commenced  ;  vertigo,  tinnitus  aurium,  and  irreg-
ularity in  action  of  heart ;  then  aura  epileptica,  followed  by
loss  of  consciousness  and  falling  ;  a  distressing  cry,  now  and
then  alternated  with  risus  sardonicus  and  slight  foaming  at
mouth  during  attack.
2^  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  Tendency  to  mis-
carriage, repeating  itself  at  same  epoch.

■  Epileptiform  eclampsia,  in  a  primipara,  in  seventh  month  of

pregnancy. See  36.
"Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i Larynx
constricted  and  tender ; diflaculty  of  swallowing ;  difficult
respiration, with partial loss of  voice, recurring at in-
tervals.
I  Feeling  of  suffocation  in  throat.

■  Chronic  intermittent  laryngitis  ;  attack  comes  on  every  even-

ing, with  shivering  chills,  lasts  about  two  hours,  terminates
with  a  profuse  perspiration.
^*  Respiration. ■  Respiration  very  much  affected  after  coitus,  in  a
woman. ^Choreic  attack.

■  Hurried  respiration  and  feeling  of  suffocation  in  throat.

■  Suffocating  fits  regularly  every  day  from  10  to  12  o'clock  ;

there  are  sensations  of  choking  or  stifling  ;  difficulty  of
breathing,  obliging  her  to  stand  in  an  erect  position  ;  en-
largement of  tonsils  during  attack,  with  redness  of  velum
palati,  and  constant  need  of  swallowing  ;  <  after  sleeping,
>  by  eating.

■  Breath  cold.

^^  Cough.  ■Troublesome  cough,  coming  on  regularly  every  morn-
ing at  about  6  o'clock,  and  lasting  from  two  to  three  hours.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest ;  frequent  in-
clination to  sigh  and  draw  a  deep  breath.
Sharp  darting-cutting  pains  under  ribs.

''^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, ilrregular  action  of  heart.

^Menstrual  epilepsy.

■  Quick  and  full  pulse,  with  aminated  red  face. ^Intermittent

fever.

■  Irregular  pulse,  with  palpitation. ^Epileptiform  eclampsia.

■  Rapid  intermittent  pulse,  impossible  to  count  strokes;  also,

palpitation  of  heart,  rapid  and  intermittent.

^^  Neck  and  Back.  ■Stiff  neck;  pain  all  along  spine.  ^Cerebro-
spinal meningitis.

^^  Upper  Limbs.  '  Pain  at  insertion  of  r.  deltoid,  and  rheumatic
pain  in  r.  side.

^^  Lower  Limbs.  Numb,  dead  feeling  in  legs ;  they  feel  en-
larged.


CEDRON.  444

'*  Limbs  in  General.  Transient  pain  in  joints,  principally  in  r.
elbow,  which  perspire.

Tearing  and  twitching  pains  in  limbs.  /

Cramps,  followed  by  contracting  and  tearing  pains  in  ex-
tremities.

Cold  sensation  in  hands  or  feet.

Icy  coldness  of  extremities.

I  Gout.

^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down : <  neuralgic  affec-
tion, in  evening.
iHas  to  stand  in  an  erect  position. ^Suffocative  attacks.
^^  Nerves. General  debility,  languor  and  fainting.

I I  Chronic  intermittent  neuralgia,  recurring  in  paroxysms  with
great  regularity.

■  Trembling  of  whole  body. ^ After  delirium  tremens.

I  Choreic  attack,  after  coitus,  in  a  woman.

■  Epileptiform eclampsia: attacks  came  on  regularly  twice  a

day,  morning  and  evening,  at  same  hours  ;  intense  pain  in
forehead  ;  tumid  face,  with  pupils  much  dilated  ;  giddiness,
resulting  in  her  falling  down  in  most  distressing  convulsions ;
insensibility,  closed  teeth,  and  frothy  secretions  from  mouth ;
difficult  respiration,  irregular  pulse,  and  palpitation  ;  the
whole  lasting  for  six  or  eight  minutes  ;  on  recovering,  con-
sciousness, felt  very  weak,  and  discharged  a  large  quantity
of  inodorous  urine,  as  clear  as  pure  water  (primipara,  in
seventh  month  of  utero-gestation). ^Hysteria.

■  Epileptiform  convulsions  during  catamenial  period.
Entire  body  feels  numb.

^^  Sleep. Yawning.

Worse  after  sleeping  :  suffocative  fits. See  26.
"  Time. Night : mental  symptoms  <  ; distensive  headache  <  ;
objects  seem  red  ;  deafness.

4  A.M. :  chill,  followed  by  sweat.

6  A.M. :  troublesome  cough  ;  regular  paroxysm  of  fever.

II  A.M. :  sick  headache,  every  other  day.
10  to  12  :  suffocating  fits,  daily.

Toward  noon  :  pressing  pain  in  r.  temple  >.

Noon :  pressive  headache.

4  P  M. : chill  after  washing  in  cold  water.

7  or  8  P.M. :  chronic  intermittent  prosopalgia.

9  P.M. :  point  of  nose  cold,  with  chilliness  and  yawning.
Evening :  neuralgic  affection  ;  epileptiform  eclampsia.
Day  :  objects  appear  yellow.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  drinks :  longing  for.
Cold  drinks  :  longing  for.
Open  air : ■<  worse  headache.

■  Chills  and  fever  in  persons  returned  from  tropical  countries.

■  Worse  before  a  storm  :  neuralgic  pains. ^Choroiditis.


445  CEDRON.

^^  Fever. Chilliness  and  yawning  ;  point  of  nose  cold.

I  Chill  at  4  A.M.,  followed  by  sweat;  at  4  p.m.,  after  washing
in  cold  water,  chill  alone.

I  Shivering  and  chill,  followed  by  profuse  perspiration,  every

evening. ^Chronic  laryngitis.
Chill,  with  congestion  to  head ;  hands,  feet  and  nose  remain

icy  cold.
Chill,  severe  enough  to  shake  whole  body,  renewed  by  every

motion,  lasting  one  to  two  hours ;  hands,  feet  and  nose  cold.
Regular  paroxysm  of  fever,  coming  at  same  hour,  commencing

every  day  at  6  p.m.,  by  chills  in  back  and  limbs,  or  cold  feet

and  hands.
Heat  over  entire  body.

Hot  stage:  dryness;  heaviness  of  head;  redness  of  face;  burn-
ing heat  in  hands,  pulse  full  and  accelerated,  thirst,  with

desire  for  warm  drinks.

I I  Profuse  perspiration.

During  sweat,  coldness  and  heat  and  heat  and  coldness  irreg-
ularly intermingled.

I  Bluish-red  face;  forearm  to  elbow,  and  hands  and  feet  cold;

sweat  beneath  axilla  and  on  chest;  a, child.
Quotidian  or  tertian  fever  with  marked  periodicity.

I I  Miasmatic  fevers  of  low  marshy  regions  in  warm  seasons
and  tropical  countries  ;  chill  returns  with  clock-like  reg-
ularity.

"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Clock-like  periodicity  :  headache.

1 1  Attacks  occur  with  unerring  periodicity  to  the  hour.  ^Pro-
sopalgia. ^Neuralgia. ^Intermittent.

At  same  epoch  of  pregnancy  :  tendency  to  miscarriage.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Left : eye,  a  tic-like  pain  ; shoot-
ing pain  over  eye  ;  toothache  ;  pain  in  throat ;  pain  in  eye
after  coitus  ; upper  and  lower  extremities,  uncontrollable
movements.

Right :  temple,  pressure  ;  side  of  head,  pains  ;  face,  prosopal-
gia ;  pain  in  deltoid  ;  transient  pain  in  elbow.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  swollen,  head  ;  as  if  cold  air  touched  teeth  ;
as  if  paralyzed,  tongue  ;  as  from  shock  of  galvanic  battery,
in  mouth  ;  as  of  a  stone  on  stomach  ;  as  if  a  drop  of  urine
were  in  urethra,  or  dropping  from  it ;  as  if  enlarged,  legs.

Stitches  :  in  spleen  and  liver.

Darting- cutting  :  under  ribs.

Shooiing  :  pain  in  orbital  region  ;  over  1.  eye  ;  toothache.

Pricking-itching :  of  tongue.

Tearing:  toothache;  in  limbs  ;  in  extremities.

Smarting  :  in  eyes  ;  in  mouth.

Burning :  in  eyes  ;  in  upper  eyelid  ;  in  mouth  ;  in  fauces,
throat  and  stomach  ;  along  urethra  ;  heat,  in  hands.

Pressure :  r.  temple  and  head  ;  on  top  of  head.


CEDRON.  446

Pressing  :  frontal  headache  ;  toothache.

Contused  feeling.

Twitching :  in  limbs.

Snarp : pain  in  occiput ;  from  above  eyes  to  temples  and  oc-
ciput.

Tingling :  in  mouth.

Formication  :  over  body,  with  gleet.

Numbness :  in  legs.

Throbbing :  pain  in  head.

Undefined  pain  :  in  kidneys.

Heaviness :  of  head.

Suffocative  feeling :  in  throat.

Cramps :  in  extremities.

Heat:  in  tongue.  '

Flying  heat :  of  face.

Heat  and  cold  :  irregularly  intermingled.

Dryness  :  of  head.
**  Tissues. Aifects  cerebro-spinal  system,  kidneys  and  bowels.

Counteracts  bites  of  venomous  serpents  and  stings  of  poisonous
insects.

Marked  debility,  apparently  due  to  action  on  brain  and  nerv-
ous system.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure  : <  pain  in
throat.

Touch  :  eyes  sore  to.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Adapted  to  persons  of  a  vol-
uptuous disposition  and  of  an  excitable,  nervous  tempera-
ment ;  more  especially  to  females.

A  child. ^Cyanosis.

Women  more  frequently  aifected  with  prosopalgia  than  men.

A  woman,  neuralgic  headache. ^Chronic  choroiditis.

Primipara,  in  seventh  month  of  pregnancy. ^Epileptiform
eclampsia.
"  Relations. The  debility  of  Cedron  in  intermittent  fever  appears
to  be  due  to  action  on  brain  and  nervous  system,  not  to  the
effect  of  profuse  perspiration,  as  in  Cinchona.

Given  against  bite  of  venomous  serpents  and  stings  of  poison-
ous insects.

Compare  Cinchona  and  Arsen.

Cedron  removes  roaring  in  ears,  produced  by  Cinchona.

Bellad.  removes  "objects  appear  red  at  night  and  yellowish
by  day."


4*7  CEPA.

CEPA  (ALLIUM).

Common  Onion.  Liliaceoe.


In  use  as  a  medicine  since  time  immemorial.  Among  the  Egyptians  it
■was  hung  up  in  noxious  corners,  carried  about  with  one,  taken  for  the
consequences  of  bad  water,  used  for  the  sting  of  insects,  animal  poisons,
even  the  bite  of  the  mad  dog;  it  was  applied  as  an  irritant  and  to  mature
abscesses,  even  carbuncles;  then  it  was  used  for  frozen  feet,  by  Dioscoiides,
who  states  that  it  is  "  efficacious  when  feet  are  rubbed  sore,"  a  symptom  con-
firmed by  the  provings  and  verified  in  our  practice.  Then  it  was  also  used
as  a  remedy  for  promoting  the  growth  of  hair  and  hoofs,  as  also  for  de-
stroying warts  and  corns;  it  was  given  for  the  eequelse  of  "  white  and  black
measles  in  the  body."  Dioscorides  gave  it  for  podagra.  It  was  consid-
ered an  eye-remedy  and  an  ear-remedy,  serviceable  in  angina  and  for  loos-
ening mucus  if  it  rattled  in  the  throat  and  bronchia  of  children  and  old
people.  It  was  given  against  flatulence  and  to  promote  the  catamenia  as
well  as  the  flow  of  urine.  Dioscorides,  and  physicians  following  him,
among  the  Arabians,  had  a  glimpse  of  the  truth  of  similia,  for  they  used
the  onion  to  cure  the  symptoms  they  knew  it  was  capable  of  producing ;
but  with  Galen  all  reasonable  investigation  ceased.

It  is  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament  under  the  name  Bejel,  which  the
Hebrews  craved,  as  in  our  time,  coflTee  and  tobacco  are  craved.

Homer  mentions  it  in  Iliad  XI,  629,  and  in  Odyssey  XIX,  233.

Herodotus,  Hist.  II,  Euterpe  N.  125.

Hippocrates,  Dediaete,  II,  359  ;  De  afi"ect.,  529;  De  Morbo  Sacro,  802.

Theophrast,  Bd.  VII,  4.

Plinius  XX,  (5)  20.

Oribasius,  Med.  coll.  XI,  XV.

Aetius  Tetr.  1,  serm.  1.

Paulus  Aegineta  de  re  med.  VII.

In  1847,  on  September  15th,  C.  Hg.  commenced  his  proving  with  a  tinc-
ture prepared  from  the  red  Connecticut  onion ;  he  was  assisted  by  Drs.
Jeanes  (whose  preparations  were  made  in  water  up  to  fourth  dilution),
Williamson,  Neidhard,  Lingen,  W.  Wesselhceft,  Geist,  Eckel,  Zumbrock,
Alliborn  and  Raue._  See  American  Drug  Provings,  or  translation  therefrom
by  Allen  in  his  Encyclopsedia.

To  the  original  collection  are  added  clinical  notes  from  H.  E.  Arndt,
Hempel's  Mat.  Med.,  vol.  I,  p.  293  ; C.  W.  Balfour,  A.  0.,  vol.  IV,  p.  344
Blakely,  H.  M.,  vol.  4,  304; Greenleaf,  Trans.  N.  Y.  Med.  Soc,  1872,  p.  596
Guernsey,  H.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  209  ; Helmuth,  Am.  Homoeopath.,  April,  1878
D.  S.  Kimball,  M.  I,  vol.  3,  p.  418 ; S.  Lilienthal,  N.  Am.  J.  of  Horn  ,  Aug.,
1870.


CEPA.  448

^  Mind. Apathetic,  mornings.

I  Very  melancholy. ^Catarrh.

(Indefinable  anxiety;  walks  about,  and  finally  full  of  appre-
hension, throws  himself  on  the  bed  and  now  gets  up  again  ;
constant  violent  pains  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  more  in  middle
and  lower  part  of  abdomen  and  in  region  of  bladder,  with
troubles  in  urinating  and  no  stool ;  violent  thirst;  face  ex-
pressive of  anxiety  and  doubt ;  skin  hot,  especially  in  pain-
ful and  sensitive  places  ;  pulse  somewhat  accelerated,  full
and  hard.

I  Fears  she  will  become  distracted,  from  pain  in  suppuration

of  fingers.

■  Confused  and absentminded, in afternoon, after wine and

coffee.
Makes  mistakes  in  spelling.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  on  rising.

■  Dullness,  pressure,  fullness,  heaviness  in  head,  most  in  occi-

put, <  evenings,  >  in  open  air,  and  <  when  returning  to
a  warm  room.

I I  Dullness  and  confusion  of  head.  ^Coryza.  ^Whooping-
cough.

^  Inner  Head. Stitches  as  of  needles  in  forehead.

1 1  Dull  frontal  headache. ^Coryza.

Dullness  in  forehead  and  whole  head,  as  after  inhaling  chloro-
form.

I  Pain  in  forehead,  with  catarrh.

Pains  deep  in  head,  over  1.  brow.

I  Pains  in  both  temples,  most  severe  in  r.,  <  by  winking;
afterward  the  pain  extends  over  forehead,  <<  on  1.  side.

I  Pain  in  temples,  <  after  motion  of  eyelids.

As  if  swollen  and  heavy  on  crown.

I  Headache  from  both  sides  of  ■  head,  downward  and  inward,
toward  middle.

I  Headache,  first  in  occiput,  then  in  forehead,  over  r.  eye.

■  Intense  pain in occipital  region and cervical spine. ^In-

fluenza.

Confusion  in  occiput,  first  on  both  sides  and  toward  upper,
part,  pressing  down  sideways,  then  behind  ears  and  around
whole  occiput.

•  Severe  headache,  with  slight  coryza.

Whole  head  becomes  hot.

Head  full  and  heavy.

Fullness  and  heaviness  in  head,  as  if  it  were  bound  up,  with
flickering  before  eyes.

Pressive  headache,  with  sensation  as  if  whole  head  were  wrap-
ped up  in  warm  water.

I  An  electric  shock  passes  through  head.


449  CEPA.

1 1  Dull  headache,  with  coryza ;  <^  in  evening,  >>  in  open  air,
but  aggravated  when  returning  to  a  warm  room.

Headache  ceases  during  menses.

1 1  Catarrhal  headache.
^  Outer  Head. Stitches  over  whole  1.  forehead,  externally  ;  they
draw  into  ear,  upper  jaw  and  teeth  of  same  side;  evenings.

■  Numbness  in  bones  of  skull,  as  if  asleep.
Tingling  pain  behind  1.  mastoid  process.

Sensation  as  if  whole  head  were  wrapped  up  in  warm  water.

I  Prickling  sweat  on  bald  vertex  after  each  meal.
:  Falling  out  of  hair.

'  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  sensitive  to  light,  particularly  the  left.

Clouily  vision  by  candle-light.

llDullness  of  eyes,  with  aversion  to  light.  ^Coryza.  ^Per-
tussis.

Flickering  and  blinding  before  eyes  ;  everything  dances  hither
and  thither.

A  bright  dazzling  in  distance  and  dimness  near  by.

■  Letters  appear  smaller  ;  when  getting  sleepy,  eyes  dull,  dim

and  sensitive  to  light. ^Coryza.

I I  Burning,  biting  and  smarting  of  eyes  as  from  smoke,  wants
to  rub  tliem.

Iltchiiig,  burning,  stinging  of  eyes.

Sensation  as  if  eye  were  hanging  by  a  string  or  torn.

Drawing  pain  extending  into  1.  eye  from  cheek.

lEyes  red,  itching,  and  sensitive  to  touch,  left  worse.

llEyes  watery  and  suifused,  capillaries  injected. ^Coryza.

Muco  watery  discharge  from  eyes  and  nose,

■  Excessive  lachrymation,  with  redness  of  eyeballs,  with  fre-

quent sneezing. ^Coryza.
I  Lachrymation  of  1.  eye,  with  coryza,  was  much  greater,  eye
was  much  redder  and  more  sensitive  to  light,  than  right.

■  Profuse  bland  lachrymation. ^Coryza.

■  Lachrymation  is  for  most  part  in  evening  in  warm  room  ;  1.

eye  weeps  most  and  is  more  sensitive  to  light.

■  Shooting  pain  in  r.  lachrymal  duct.

■  Winks  with  eyes,  with  pain  in  temples.

■  Smarting  of  inner  surface  of  upper  lids.

■  Swelling  of  lids  and  around  eyes. ^Coryza.

■  Thread-like  pain:  over  r.  eye,  towards  root  of  nose;  from

cheek  towards  eye.
Needle-stitches  in  eyebrows.
Itching  in  supra-orbital  region,  more  on  1.  side.
Heat  in  1.  eyebrow.
Pain  over  r.  eye  to  root  of  nose.

■  Catarrhal  ophthalmia. ^Whooping-cough.

®  Hearing and Ears. Noises in ears, buzzing and roaring ;
sounds  appear  to  come  from  a  distance.
VOL  III. — 29.


CEPA.  450

Humming  in  ears  on  lying  down.
Roaring  in  1.  ear,  as  after  a  severe  cold.
I  Tinnitus. ^Pertussis.

■  Hardness  or  dullness  of  hearing.

I  Stitches  towards  ear  from  1.  forehead.

I  Pain,  like  thick  threads,  towards  ear  from  deep  within  head.

iPains  jerking  from  throat  towards  eustachian  tube.

Chilling  or  burning  twitching  in  region  of  r.  eustachian  tube

near  throat.
I  Earache.

■  Discharge  of  pus  from  ear.

Pain  behind  ears  deep  within  head  from  backward  and  inward

to  ears.
Pecking  behind  r.  ear.
Under  1.  ear  a  hard swelling,  size  of  a  hazle-nut,  extending

from  above  angle  of  lower  jaw  to  ear,  from  which  pains  go

into  ear,  especially  on  pressure.

^  Smell  and  Nose. lEpistaxis.

■  Dryness  of  anterior  nares.
I  Nose  stopped,  nasal  voice.

I A  feeling  of  tightness  at  root  of  nose.
Pain  into  root  of  nose  from  above  r.  eye.

■  Constant  sneezing,  with  profuse  acrid  coryza,  ■<  on  coming

into  a  warm  room. ^Pertussis.

■  Immediately  after  rising  from  bed  in  morning  violent  sneez-

ing, as  if  it  would  tear  her  to  pieces.
Crawling  in  r.  nostril,  as  before  sneezing  : must  frequently
blow  thin  mucus  out  of  nose.

■  Frequent  sneezing,  lachrymation,  pain  in  forehead,  acrid  dis-

charge from  1.  nostril,  hacking  cough  on  inspiring  cold  air,
cold  alternates  with  heat.

■  Profuse  nasal  discharge. ^Scarlatina.

■  ■Acrid  discharge  from  1.  nostril.

Cold  begins  mostly  on  1.  side  and  goes  to  right.

■  Spring  coryza.

■  ■  Colds  after  damp  north-easterly  winds.  '

■  ■Fluent  coryza,  with  headache,  tears  from  eyes,  feels  hot  and,

thirsty  with  want  of  appetite;  cough  and  trembling  of  hands;
<  evenings  and  in-doors  ; >  in  open  air.

■  Ichor  oozing  out  of  nose. ^Second  stage  of  scarlatina.

■  Ichorous  fluid  from  nose,  when  singing. ^Convalescence  from

scarlatina.

■  Acrid  watery  discharge  dropping  from  tip  of  nose.

■  Dropping  from  nose,  watery  discharge,  burning  and  corroding

nose  and  upper  lip.

■  Spring  coryza:  tingling  and  itching  in  r.  nostril.

■  ■Every  year,  in  August,  morning  coryza,  with  violent  sneez-


451  CEPA.

ing ;  very  sensitive  to  odor  of  flowers  and  skin  of  peaches
(lasting  two  or  three  weeks).
Coryza,  at  times  with  stoppage  of  nose, so  that  she  speaks
through  nose,  at  others  with  profuse  mucous  discharge.

■  Catarrh,  with  watering  and  smarting  eyes,  with  violent  sneez-

ing; he  must  "take  a  long  breath,"  and  then  sneezes  cor-
respondingly.

■  Violent  catarrh,  after  north-east  wind  and rainy  weather  ;

eyes  suffused,  lids  very  red,  as  from  crying  and  rubbing
them  ;  nose  dropping,  throat  sore,  and  some  cough.

I  Coryza  :  after  chilliness  ;  after  flushes  of  heat  at  evening.

I  Coryza,  with  burning  of  edges  of  nose,  profuse  discharge.

I  Coryza,  >  in  open  air  and  <  in  warm  room. ^Pertussis.

I  I  With  coryza,  trembling  of  hands,  in  evening.

■  Large  pieces  of  a  mucous  polypus  were  blown  out  and  drop-

ping of  water  ceased. ^Polypus.
■Nasal  polypi.

■  Burning  in  edges  of  nose  and  lips. ^Coryza.

'  Upper  Face. Expression  of  anxiety  and  despair,  with  pain  in
abdomen.

■  Thread-like  pains  about  face,  temples  and  ears. ^Pertussis.
Drawing  pain  in  1.  cheek  going  into  interior  of  1.  eye  ; >•  in

cold  air.
Thread-like  pains  in  upper  maxilla.

■  Throbbing,  drawing,  pressing  pains,  with  swelling  of  cheek.

/^Toothache.
Drawing  stitches  into  upper  jaw  and  teeth  from  1.  forehead.
Warm  spots  on  r.  cheek.

■  Face  hot,  especially  in  evening.

■  Paralysis  of  1.  half  of  face,  also  somewhat  noticed  in  limbs  of

same  side,  too  copious  secretion  of  urine.
Eruption  of  nettle-rash  on  face.

Upper  lip  red  and  sensitive  from  acrid  nasal  discharge.
'Lower  Face. ■Worse  when  chewing. ^Toothache.
*"  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Toothache,  with  coryza,  >  when  catarrh
is  worse,  and  <  when  catarrh  ceases.

■  Toothache  in  molars,  after  exposure  to  damp  cold  wind,  and

<  in  warm  room  and  from  warm  drinks ;  >  from  cold  water
and  picking  or  sucking.

Toothache,  going  from  1.  to  right.

Jerking  pain  in  hindermost  molars.

Pressure  in  r.  back  teeth  on  going  into  a  warm  room.

In  first  upper  teeth,  r.  side,  sensitive  drawing  from  root  to
crown  ;  later  same  feeling  in  corresponding  teeth  on  1.  side.

Pressive  pain  in  root  of  1.  eye-tooth  disturbing  sleep,  with  ex-
cessive heat  in  cheeks  ;  >■  towards  morning  during  sweat ;
cheeks  feel  swollen.


CEPA.  452

Feeling  as  if  back  teeth  were  too  long,  with  some  pain,  during

sleep  ; >  on  rising.
Drawing  stitches  into  teeth  from  1.  forehead.
I  Teeth  are  dirty  and  turn  yellow.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. I  Disgusting taste  in  mouth;  sweet  and

nauseous.
Burning  taste,  more  on  gums.
Loss  of  taste.

I  Tongue  dirty,  slimy  and  furred,  especially  in  morning.
Dryness  at  root  of  tongue,  on  r.  side.
Pains  under  tongue;  small  sore  elevations  at  lower  insertion  of

fr^enum.
^^  Inner  Mouth. I  Aching  like  a  large  lump  on  root  of  tongue,

roof  of  mouth,  eustachian  opening,  extends  towards  ear.

■  Sensation  of  fullness  and  soreness  behind  palate.
I  Dryness  and  smarting  above  palate.

■  Dryness  in  mouth,  on  root  of  tongue,  on  soft  palate  and  in

throat.
Dryness  in  mouth,  without  thirst.
Mouth  and  tongue  as  if  scalded.
iBad  odor  from  mouth  and  throat. ^Toothache.

■  Expectoration  of  a  lumpy  mucus  from  posterior  nares.

*^  Throat. ■  Lumps  of  mucus  from  choange,  in  evening,  having  a
nauseous  taste.

■  Tough  viscous  mucus  in  fauces  and  throat.
Hawks  up  mucus  of  a  sweetish  taste.

■  Jerking  pains  from  throat  towards  eustachian  tube.

■  Sensation  of  fullness,  soreness  and  coldness  behind  palate.
Drawing  pain  in  1.  side  of  throat,  >>  by  cold  air.

Eaw  feeling  in  fauces,  with  tickling  in  region  of  epiglottis,  first
on  L,  than  on  r.  side.

■  Soreness  and  dryness  of  throat. ^Influenza.

iPain  in  throat  below  larynx,  as  after  swallowing  too  large  a
mouthful,  or  as  if  swollen  ;  pain  extends  every  little  while
into  r.  ear  ;  whole  afternoon,  coming  on  at  midday.

I A  constrictive  pain  in  forepart  of  throat,  low  down  in  region
of  OS  hyoides,  later  low  down  posteriorly  on  r.  side.

In  throat  and  orifice  of  eustachian  tube,  chilling  or  burning
twitching  and  gnawing,  not  painful.

A  sense  of  nausea  extending  into  throat.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  ball  or  lump  in  throat.

In  pharynx  feeling  as  if  food  remained  stuck  behind  breast-
bone.
Heat  low  in  pharynx,  extending  into  stomach.

■  Numb  feeling  in  posterior  wall  of  pharynx.
Throat  aches,  as  after  taking  cold.

■  Coldness  in  pharynx.
Dryness  in  throat.


453  CEPA.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■  Canine  hunger,
or  loss  of  appetite. ^Pertussis. ^Corjza.
I  Less  appetite  and  increased  thirst.

■  Violent  thirst,  with  a  severe  cold,  frequent  sneezing,  running

of  tears,  pain  in  forehead,  acrid  discharge  from  1.  nostril,
hacking  cough  on  inspiring  cold  air.

I  Thirst. ^Pertussis.

I  Desire  for  raw  onions. ^Pneumonia. ^Yellow  fever.
"Eating  and  Drinking. iBad  effects  from  eating  spoiled  fish.

I  After  each  meal  a  prickling  sweat  on  bald  vertex.

I  Stomach  weak,  cannot  bear  anything  but  raw  onions. ^Yel-
low fever.
^*  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

I  Sour  eructations.

I  Belching,  with  rumbling  in  and  puffing  up  of  abdomen.

■  Belching,  with  fever  heat.

I  Nausea,  squeamishness,  comes  from  stomach  up  throat  into
fauces,  more  when  rising.

■  Nausea  forced  up  throat,  like  a  thrust.

Horrible deathly  nausea  in  stomach,  with  slight  eructations,
which  relieve  somewhat,  after  eating.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pain  below  sternum.
Pressure  in  epigastrium.

■  Pressure  in  stomach,  with  gaping.

■  Feels  a  pressure  on  cardia  from  behind.

■  Stomach  feels  empty,  weak.

■  Pain  below  sternum  to  right,  in  region  of  pylorus.

^*  Hypochondria. ■  Pressure  in  region  of  liver,  with  crawls  along
back,  and  coldness.

■  Pains begin in hepatic region and spread over  abdomen.

/^Colic.
Stitches  in  1.  side,  >  on  lying.

■  Contracting  sensation  in  spleen,  with  stitches  while  lying.
"Abdomen. ■Colicky  pain  in  region  of  navel, < on  sitting,

>>  when  walking.

■  Wind  colic. ^Pertussis.

■  Cutting  in  belly,  like  a  thread,  towards  centre.

Colic:  from  catching  cold  by  getting  feet  wet;  ■after  eating
too  much;  after  eating  cucumbers,  salad,  etc.;  hemor-
rhoidal ;  of  children.

■  Severe  pains  in  abdomen. ^Pertussis.

■  Colicky  pains,  beginning  in  hepatic  region  and  spreading  over

whole abdomen, worse around navel; ■< when sitting;
>  when  moving  about  and  by  passing  flatus.

■  Violent  pain  in  hypogastriura,  to  left,  with  urging  to  urinate ;

burning  micturition. ^Incarcerated  hernia.

■  Stitches  in  loins.


CEPA.  454

I  Deep  in  pelvis  on  a  small  spot  to  right,  violent  pressure  and

cutting  as  with  small  knives.
Flashes  of  heat  in  abdomen.

■  Abdomen  puffed  up,  with  rumbling,  more  to  left ;  ineffectual

urging  to  stool,  with  heat,  some  pains,  difficult  breathing,
and  inconvenience  of  clothing  ;  >  after  wind  passes  freely.

■  Abdomen  distended,  dull  in  head,  urging  to  stool  ends  with

diarrhoea.
Rumbling  in  bowels,  with  stomachache,  after  breakfast.

■  Violent  cutting  pain  in  1.  loAver  abdomen,  with  frequent  desire

to  micturate,  and  burning  micturition.
Heat  in  abdomen,  with  pain.
Ascites.

■  ■Annoying  pains  over  middle  of  groin.

■  Pressure  in  1.  inguinal  ring.

■  Hernia  in  1.  groin  much  protruded  and  strangulated;  very

severe  pains  from  high  up  in  1.  side  of  hypochondrium  drew
toward  incarcerated  hernia  ;  very  restless  ;  much  fever,  etc.
Periodic  pains  in  pubic  region,  <<  on  sitting.
^^  Stool and Rectum. ■■  Flatus very offensive, and moist;
mornings.

■  Bowels  loose,  after  midnight,  or  towards  morning,  with  offen-

sive flatus.

■  (Offensive  flatus. ^Pertussis.
Odorless  masses  of  wind.

Urging  to  stool,  with  rumbling  in  bowels,  but  nothing  passes.

■  Constipation,  following  intermittents  treated  by  quinine.

■  Difiicult  passing  of  faeces  ;  passage  interrupted.

■  Urging  without  a  passage,  but  stitches  in  rectum.
Contraction,  cutting,  tearing  pain  at  anus  during  stool,  with

irritation  of  hemorrhoids.

■  Hemorrhoidal  pains.

A  very  painful  stitch  extends  along  rectum  downward.

■  Tearing  jerks  in  anus  ;  also  biting  and  crawling.

In  anus,  and  protruding  hemorrhoids,  a  cold  creeping,  like  a
worm,  more  on  1.  side.

■  Itching  at  anus. ^ Worms.

■  Rhagades  in  anus.
Blood  passes  with  stool.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Pains  in  renal  region  and  pressure  in  re-
gion of  bladder. ^Pertussis.

■  Region  of  bladder  very  sensitive,  child  screams  if  hand  is

placed  there.

■  In  bladder  a  burning  pressure,  afterwards  in  sacrum ;  pain  in

region  of  kidneys,  more  1.  side  ;  pain  in  groins.
I  I  Pressing  and  other  pains  in  region  of  bladder.

■  Sensation  of  weakness  and  warmth  in  bladder  and  urethra.

■  Frequent  urinating;  with  burning  in  urethra;  urine  very  red;


455  '  CEPA.

all  day,  still  oftener  evenings ; especially  with  shuddering
and  chilliness.

I  Spasmodic  strangury  after  getting  feet  and  bowels  cold.

■  Dribbling  or  spurting  of  urine,  in  old  people.

I I  Urine  frothy  and  iridescent.

I  In  albuminuria  it  diminished  urging  for  frequent  urination
and  also  the  quantity  of  albumen  in  urine.

■  Polyuria.

■  Increased secretion of urine. ^Coryza. ^Catarrh. ^Pa-

ralysis.
Urine: frothy  and  clear; red; reddish -yellow,  with  sandy

sediment.
"Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Increased  sexual  desire.

Erections, with painful tension, without sexual desire, in

morning.
I  After  coitus  pain  in  bladder  and  prostate  gland.
Weakness  in  hips  interferes  with  coition.

■  Drawing  in  spermatic  cords.

Pain  from  inguinal  ring  along  spermatic  cord.

■  Burning  on  glans  penis  and  in  urethra.
Pressive  pains  in  bladder  and  prostate.

■  Pain  in  pubic  region.

"  Female  Sexual  Organs. iPain  in  uterine  region.

During  menses,  headache  ceases  and  returns  when  they  dis-
appear.
Amenorrhoea.
"Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■  In  childbed,  pan-
aritia  on  several  fingers,  with  red  streaks  up  arm ; pains
driving  to  despair.

■  After forceps delivery, swelling  of  whole lower  limb, ex-

ceedingly painful,  mostly  in  thigh.
"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Tickling  in
epiglottis.

■  Catarrhal  hoarseness. ^Pertussis.

■  Pain  as  if  larynx  would  be  torn  when  coughing. ^Coryza.

■  Tickling  in  larynx,  with  hoarseness.

■  ■Tickling  in  throat,  with  aching  in  larynx. ^Pertussis.
I  I  Throbbing  in  larynx,  and  sensation  as  if  it  contracted.

■  Constant  inclination  to  hack  in  order  to  relieve  tickling  in

larynx.

■  ■Violent  catarrhal  laryngitis;  hoarse  cough  seemed  to  split

and  tear  larynx,  causes  watering  of  eyes,  etc.

■  Acute  bronchitis,  going  from  1.  to  r.

'"Respiration. ■Oppressed  breathing:  from  pressure  in  middle
of  chest ; •<  in  evening ;  in  ascites. ^Pertussis.

■  Hacking  and  worrying  till  he  cannot  breathe. ^Coryza.

■  He  must  take  a  long  breath  and  then  sneezes  correspondingly.

■  ■  On  inspiring  cold  air,  hacking  cough.


CEPA.  456

On  deep  inspiration,  sticking  in  1.  side.
^^  Cough. 1 1  Laryngeal  cough,  frequently  repeated. ^Coryza.

1 1  [Severe  laryngeal  cough,  -vshich  compels  patient  to  grasp
larynx;  feels  as  if  cough  would  tear  it. ^Coryza.

iHoarse,  harsh,  ringing,  spasmodic  cough;  excited  by  constant
tickling  in  larynx  ;  cough  produces  a  raw,  splitting  pain  in
larynx,  so  acute  and  so  severe  as  to  compel  patient  to  crouch
from  suffering,  and  to  make  every  effort  to  suppress  cough.
^Pertussis.

I  Frequent  cough,  tension  in  upper  part  of  chest,  loss  of  ap-
petite ; <  every  evening,

I  Cough,  with  fullness  in  head,  especially  in  occiput,  with  heat,
copious  fluent  acrid  coryza  and  profuse  bland  lachrymation.
^Whooping-cough.

I  Cough  increases  in  evening.

I  Cough  brought  on  by  inhaling  cold  air.

I  Hacking  cough  from  inhaling  cold  air.

I  Constant  inclination  to  hack  in  order  to  relieve  tickling  in
larynx.

■  Spasmodic  cough  simulating  croup.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Pain  in  chest,  as  though  food  had
lodged  behind  stomach.

I  Stitches,  with  burning,  in  middle  of  1.  side  of  chest,  when  tak-
ing a  deep  breath.

I  Pains  here  and  there  flitting  through  chest.

I  I  Pressure  in  upper  part  in  middle  of  chest,  makes  respiration
difficult.

■  Tension  in  upper  part  of  chest,  with  coryza  and  cough.

■  Rattling  in  chest.

■  Tough  mucus  from  chest.

■  Epidemics  of  autumnal  influenza.

■  Incipient  pneumonia  in  children.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  iPulse  more  frequent  and
full ;  or,  slow  and  hard.

■  Pulse  full  and  accelerated.

^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Intense  pain  in  cervical  spine. ^Influenza.
Pain  a  handsbreadth  below  r,  shoulder,  more  towards  spine,

after  long  sitting.
Right  shoulder-blade  painful  on  lying  in  bed.

■  Crawls  in  back;  after  sitting,  pain  under  r.  shoulder-blade.
Stitches  in  lumbar  region.

■  Pain  in  small  of  back,  if  bowels  did  not  move.
Burning  pressure  in  small  of  back.
Shiverings  in  back.

■  Chills  run  up  back. ^Pertussis.

■  Chilly  crawls  run  down  back,  most  at  night,  more  frequent

urination,  followed  by  heat  and  thirst.


457  CEPA.

I  Rigidity  of  spinal  column  in  periodic  attacks,  accompanied  by

pain  through  whole  chest.
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  Sweat  in  axilla.

I  Pain  in  r.  shoulder-blade,  when  lying  in  bed.

Pain  under  r.  shoulder,  in  belly  and  pubic  region.

Stitch  runs  through  r.  arm,  from  shoulder-blade  to  elbow,  with

burning  pain.
Pains  from  a  blow  in  r.  elbow-joint.
iNumbness  in  1.  elbow,  ■<  on  slight  motion.
Needle-stitches  in  arms.
I  Pain  in  arms,  more  1.  forearm.
Weak  sensation,  especially  in  arms.

Pain  in  middle  of  1.  radius,  <C  writing,  >  from  rubbing.
iLame  sensation  in  all  joints  of  arm.
Pain  in  r.  wrist,  on  back  and  extensor  side,  evenings.
I  Hands  red  and  dry,  as  if  he  had  been  in  the  cold.
Pain  in  1.  middle  finger,  and  in  r.  fourth  and  fifth  fingers.
B  Sweat  in  palms  of  hands.

■  Trembling  of  r.  hand,  he  can  hardly  write.

I  Whitlow,  on  margin  of  skin  around  finger-nails,  inflamed  and

suppurating,  pains  up  whole  arm.
Voluptuous,  corrosive  itching,  especially  on  palmar  side  of  1.

thumb,  from  first  to  second  phalanx,  in  evening.

■  Panaritium.

■  Suppuration,  after  a  prick  with  a  needle,  under  1.  thumb  nail;

a  red  streak  up  to  elbow,  where  a  lump  the  size  of  a  hazel-nut

is  formed.
^^  Lower  Limbs. I  Weakness  of  hips. ^Pertussis. ^Interfering

with  coitus.
Excessive  tired  feeling  in  region  of  hips,  in  evening,  on  rising

from  sitting,  and  on  walking,
iNettle-rash  on  thighs.
Bruised  feeling  in  1.  thigh,  near  knee.
Pain, almost  burning  pressure, in  upper  part of  1. thigh,

toward  outer  side.
Pain  on  outer  side  of  r.  thigh,  above  knee.

■  Glowing sensation  on  outer  side and upper  part  of  both

thighs.

■  Pain  above  knees.

Shooting  pains  in  1.  leg  and  r.  foot.
Stitches  in  r.  knee,  from  within.

■  Lameness  in  knee.
Paralytic  pains  in  knee-joint.

Burning  pressure  in  middle  of  1.  lower  leg,  then  on  right.

■  Pains  in  ankle-joint.

■  ■Sore  and  raw  spots  on  feet,  especially  heel,  from  friction.
Painful  twitching  on  inner  side  of  1.  heei.


CEPA.  458

I  I  Pain  in  most  external  soft  parts  of  r.  great  toe,  and  also  in  1.

middle  finger.
I  Brittle  hoofs  and  losing  hair,  with  horses;  (tinct.  in  water.)
'*  Limbs  in  General, l  Soreness  in  limbs  and  aching  in  all  bones,

as  after  taking  cold. ^Coryza.
I  Tired  feeling  in  all  limbs.
Weak  sensation  in  limbs  after  flatulent  troubles.

■  Neuralgia  of  stump  (after  amputation),  violent  burning-sting-

ing pains.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. In lying : increased earache,
toothache,  splenic  pain.

Lying :  stitches  in  spleen  ;  in  bed,  pain  in  shoulder-blade.

Sitting :  <  colic  in  region  of  navel  and  hepatic  region ;  <  pe-
riodic pains  in  pubic  region.

Rising :  vertigo  ; >■  toothache.

Walking: >-  colic  in  region  of  navel.

Motion  :  of  eyelids,  pain  in  temple  ; >>  colic.
'^Nerves. iWeak  and  tired,  has  to  lie  down.

Deathly  faintness  after  profuse  micturition.

■  Lassitude. /^Pertussis.

■  Traumatic  chronic  neuritis; pains  violent  and  wearing  out

the  patient.
Neuroma.
^^  Sleep. 8 Yawning: with  headache  and  cramp  in  stomach  ;  with
sleepiness  ;  near  objects  seem  distant.

■  Gaping  in  deep  sleep.

■  Restless  sleep,  drowsy  in  morning.

■  At  evening,  walking  in  street,  increased  dropping  from  nose,

from  both  nostrils,  without  sensation  of  coryza.

■  Wakes  nights  at  2  a.m.,  with  excited  pulse; cannot  sleep

again  till  morning ;  without  any  chill,  only  heat  without
thirst ;  disappears  mornings,  but  is  <  again  for  a  few  hours
after  breakfast,  afterward  much  prostrated.

■  Dreams :  of  being  near  the  water ;  of  battles,  fights,  precipices,

and  deep  wells  ;  of  storms  at  sea,  high  waves ;  annoying,  in

convalescents.
^^  Time. 2  a.m.  :  wakes  ;  heat  Avithout  thirst.

Morning: apathetic, restless, drowsy; violent sneezing;

pressive  pain  in  root  of  eye-tooth  >- ;  tongue  dirty,  slimy,

furred  ; offensive  flatus  ; bowels loose  ;  erections  ; cannot

sleep  till  morning.
In  afternoon  :  confused  and  absentminded.

■  Worse  in  afternoon  and  evening ;  when  lying  down. ^Per-

tussis.
Evening :  dullness,  pressure  in  head  ■<  ; stitches  1.  forehead
into  ear;  lachrymation ;  fluent  coryza  <<  ;  face  hot;  raises
lumps  of  mucus  from  choanse ;  frequent  urination ;  pain  in
r.  wrist ;  pain  in  fingers  ;  dropping  from  nose.


459  CEPA.

In  evening :  after  drinking  beer  and  eating  herring,  excessive
thirst ;  heat  and  severe  coryza,  with  much  lachrymation,
headache,  acrid,  burning  discharge  from  nose,  so  that  upper
lip  became  red  and  sensitive.

'^Temperature  and  Weather. « Colds  and  toothache  after

damp  cold  wind  and  weather.
I  Bad  effects  from  getting  feet  wet.
Warm room : <  dullness, pressure, heaviness , <  constant

sneezing; <<  fluent  coryza ; <  toothache.
I  Patient  likes  to  wash  himself  frequently  and  is  fond  of  being

in  open  air. ^Toothache.
Cold  water  : >  toothache.
Open  air :  >>  dullness,  pressure,  heaviness  in  head ;  >  fluent

coryza  ; >  toothache.
Cold  air : >  drawing  pain  in  1.  cheek  and  throat ;  toothache  ;

hacking  cough.
Spring :  coryza.
August :  hay  fever.

Autumnal  epidemics  of  spasmodic  cough.
*Tever. I  Coldness  alternates  with  heat. ^Catarrh.
I  Chills,  followed  by  fever, ^Influenza.
I  Heat  in  head,  on  head,  in  brows,  in  face,  in  cheeks,  in  throat

down  to  stomach  and  bowels.

■  Heat  with  coryza,  alternating  with  cold  and  flitting  heat  over

whole  body  and  thirst ;  evenings.

■  Attacks  of  flushes  of  heat. ^Coryza.

I  Heat  and  thirst,  with  rumbling  in  belly. ^Coryza.

I  Heat,  without  thirst,  2  A.M.,  passes  off  by  morning,  <  again

after  breakfast.
I  Heat. ^Pertussis.
I  Sweats  easily  and  copiously.

■  Yellow  fever.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodic  pain  :  in  pubic  region.

In  Spring :  coryza.

Every  year  in  August :  morning  coryza  ;  hay  fever.

In  Autumn  :  epidemics  of  spasmodic  cough.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Downward  and  inward  :  headache.

Right  to  left  in  upper  half  of  body,  left  to  right,  in  lower  part,
in  provings.

■  Commencing  1.  side,  going  to  right. ^Coryza. ^Colds.
First  left,  then  right : nostril,  acrid  discharge  ; acute  bron-
chitis.

Left:  eye  itches  and  is  more  sensitive  to  light  and  weeps  more;
pains  deep  in  brow;  forehead,  stitches;  tingling  pain  behind
mastoid ;  itching  in  supra-orbital  region  ;  heat  in  eyebrow  ;
roaring  in  ear;  ear,  hard  swelling  ;  drawing  in  cheek,  going
to  eye;  forehead  down  to  teeth,  drawing  stitches  ;  face,  para-
lysis ;  toothache,  going  from  1.  to  r. ;  first  upper  teeth  sensi-


CEPA.  460

tive;  pressive  pain  at  root  of  eye-tooth  ;  drawing  stitches  in
forehead  ;  drawing  pain  in  throat ;  raw  feeling  in  fauces  ;
stitches  in  hypochondria;  violent  cutting  in  lower  abdomen;
inguinal  pressure;  hernia;  protruding  hemorrhoids;  pain  in
kidneys;  sticking  in  lung  on  deep  inspiration;  elbow,  numb-
ness ;  pain  in  forearm  ;  pain  in  fingers ;  thumb,  itching  ;
thumb-nail,  suppuration  ;  bruised  feeling  in  knee  ;  thigh,
pain ;  pain  in  leg ;  burning  in  lower  leg ;  painful  twitch-
ing in  heel ;  pain  in  middle  finger.

Right :  pain  in  temple ;  pain  over  eye ;  shooting  pain  in
lachrymal  duct ;  thread  pain  over  eye  ;  chilling  or  burning-
twitching  in  region  of  eustachian  tube;  pain  in  root  of  nose;
nostril,  crawling;  cheek,  warm  spots;  pressure  in  back  teeth;
first  upper  teeth  sensitive  ;  dryness  of  root  of  tongue  ;  pain
in  ear;  pain  below  shoulder  ;  stitches  from  shoulder-blade
to  elbow;  pains  in  wrist;  pain  in  fingers;  hand,  trembling;
pain  in  thigh  ;  pain  in  foot ;  knee,  stitches  ;  pain  in  great
toe  ;  pricking  in  arm.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  swollen  and  heavy  on  crown  ;  as  if  whole
head  were  wrapped  up  in  warm  water  ;  as  if  eye  were  hang-
ing by  a  string  or  torn  ;  as  if  teeth  were  too  long  ;  as  of  a
a  ball  or  lump  in  throat ;  as  if  larynx  would  be  torn  when
coughing;  as  though  food  had  lodged  behind  sternum.

1 1  Neuralgic  pains,  like  a  long  thread:  in  face,  head,  neck  and
elsewhere;  <  evenings;  towards  ear  from  deep  within  head.

Cutting :  in  belly,  like  a  thread  ;  in  anus.

Stitches  :  as  of  needles  in  forehead  ;  in  eyebrows  ;  in  eyes  ;  in
ears;  in  upper  jaw;  towards  ear  from  forehead;  in  rectum;
in  1.  hypochondrium ;  in  lumbar  region ;  runs  through  arm ;
in  skin.

Sticking :  in  1.  chest  on  inspiration.

Stinging  :  of  eye.

Shooting  :  in  1.  leg  and  r.  foot.

Tearing  jerks  :  in  anus.

Tingling  pain :  behind  I.  mastoid  process.

Jerking :  from  throat  to  eustachian  tube ;  in  molars.

Tearing :  in  anus.

Pecking  :  behind  r.  ear.

Burning- stinging  :  in  stump  after  amputation.

Drawing  :  into  upper  jaw  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  spermatic  cords  ;  in
head ;  in  occiput.

Pressure :  in  teeth  ;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  region  of
liver;  in  pelvis;  in  1.  inguinal  region;  in  region  of  bladder;
1.  thigh.

Soreness  :  behind  palate ;  in  limbs.

Raw  feeling  :  in  fauces.

Smarting  :  of  eyes  ;  of  upper  lids  ;  above  palate.

Scalded  :  mouth  and  tongue.


461  CEPA.

Biting :  of  eyes  ;  in  anus.

Gnawing:  in  orifice  of  eustachian  tube;  eyelids;  nose;  mouth;

lips.
Burning  : of  eyes  ; taste  ; orifice  of  eustachian  tube  ;  throat ;

in  bladder  ; on  glans  penis  ; small  of  back  ; 1.  thigh  ;  skin.
Burning-twitching  :  in  region  of  r.  eustachian  tube.
Paralytic  pain  :  in  knee-joint.
Painful  twitching  :  on  inner  1.  heel.
Tired  feeling  :  in  limbs.
Bruised  feeling  :  in  knee.
Aching:  on  root  of  tongue;  roof  of  mouth;  eustachian  orifice;

through  body  ; in  joints  ; in  bones  ; in  forehead  and  head  ;

in  temples  ;  in  cervical  spine  ;  over  r.  eye.
Undefined  pain: behind  ears  deep  in  head; under  tongue;

in  throat ; below  sternum  ;  in  hepatic  region  ;  in  abdomen  ;

over  middle  of  groin  ; violent,  in  hypogastrium  ; inguinal

ring  ; uterine  region  ; small  of  back  ; 1.  thigh  ; r.  wrist ;

above  knees.
Fullness  :  in  head  ;  behind  palate.
Heaviness  :  in  head  ;  in  occiput.
Empty :  stomach  feels.
Tension  :  in  upper  part  of  chest.
Constrictive  :  as  if  head  were  bound  up  ;  at  root  of  nose  ;  pain

in  throat.
Contraction :  in  spleen.
Tickling :  in  larynx.

Itching :  of  eyes  ;  in  supra-orbital  region  ;  at  anus.
Electric  shock  :  through  head.

Numbness  :  in  bones  of  skull ;  in  posterior  wall  of  pharynx.
Crawls  :  in  r.  nostril ;  along  back  ;  in  anus.
Coldness  :  behind  palate  ;  in  back.
Chilling:  orifice  of  eustachian  tube.
Warmth :  of  urethra.
Glowing:  on  thighs.
Pleat:  without  thirst ;  in  head ;  withcoryza;  in  pharynx  and

oesophagus  ;  in  flashes  in  abdomen.
Dryntss  :  in  mouth  ;  above  palate ;  in  throat.
**  Tissues. All  joints  ache.
Nephritis.
1 1  Inflammations  and  increased  secretion  of  mucous  membranes.

^Coryza. ^Pertussis.
iGangrsena  senilis,  woman,  set.  80,  (externally  as  a  salve).
1 1  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens,  after  instrumental  delivery.
Dropsy.

■  Brittle  hoofs  and  falling  out  of  hair,  in  horses.
*^  Touch Passive  Motion. Injuries. Picking  or  sucking

teeth  : >  toothache.
Touch  :  eyes  sensitive  to.


CEPA.  462

Rubbing :  wants  to  rub  eyes.
Pressure :  ■<  pain  in  swelling  under  1.  ear.
Must  grasp  larynx.

I  Traumatic  neuritis,  pains  violent  and  continuous,  wearing  out
the  patient.

■  After  hurts  and  lesions,  stiffness  in  back  and  periodic  attacks,

trismus  and  pain  in  chest.
Hurts  do  not  heal.
*®  Skin, I  Pricking,  like  from  pins  or  needles,  in  skin,  especially
on  head,  on  forehead,  in  brows,  on  throat  and  on  r.  arm.

■  Redness  and  itching  of  skin.

■  Nettle-rash  on  thighs,

■  Measles,  with  strongly  marked  catarrhal  symptoms.

■  Scarlatina,  with  characteristic  running  from  nose  and  urinary

symptoms.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■  Children. ^Coryza. ^Per-
tussis. ^Pneumonia.

Woman,  set.  80. ^Senile  gangrene.

An  old  woman.  ^Whitlow.
*^  Relations.  Antidoted  by  :  Arnic.  (toothache),  Chamom.  (belly-
ache), Nux  vom.  (coryza,  recurring  yearly  in  August ;  un-
pleasant sensations  caused  by  handling  peaches,  and  some
blossoming  trees  and  plants  ;  hay-fever),  Veratr.  (colic  with
despondency).  Thuja  (offensive  breath  and  diarrhoea  after
eating  onions).

Roasted  coffee  will  remove  onion  breath.

Compatible :  before  Calc.  ostr.  and  Silic.  in  polypus.

Incompatible:  All.  sat.,  Aloes.,  Scilla.

Complementary :  Pliosidhor.,  Pulsat.^  Sarsap.,  Thuja.

Compare :  Aeon.,  Chlorine,  Ifec.


463  CETRARIA  ISLANDICA.

CETRARIA  ISLANDICA.

Iceland  Moss.  LicTienes.


The  well-known  Iceland  moss,  growing  in  large  quantities  in  Alaska,  re-
commended to  the  Old  School  since  1674  by  Olaf  Borrichius,  Hiaren  and
others,  is  prepared  by  decoction.

Hahnemann  calls  it,  in  Lesser  Writings,  translated  by  Dudgeon,  p.  257,  in
comparison  with  the  woody  sexatilis,  ih.&  powerful  Iceland  moss,  and  in  his
Apothecary's  Dictionary,  1795,  a  work  full  of  valuable  hints,  vol.  2,  p.  450,
he  notices  what  is  inserted  in  the  following,  marked  :  .  Dr.  Theodore
EiJckert,  our  veteran,  published  a  number  of  valuable  cured  symptoms  and
introduced  it  in  this  way  into  our  Materia  Medica  {Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  4,
p.  179  1834) ;  his  careful  observations  are  marked  I .  Provings  by  intelligent
persons  are  desirable.

"  Teeth  and  Gums. •  Scurvy.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. I  l  Very  bitter  and  slimy  taste.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. '  i  Increased  the

appetite  (if  not  boiled  too  long).
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. I  Feels  full  and  satisfied  after  eating  a

little. ^Phthisis.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. •  Habitual
vomiting.
In  large  doses  it  sometimes  causes  nausea.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. I  The  bitterness  seems  generally
to  agree  with  stomach.
I  I  Strengthens  digestive  power  and  is  very  nutritive.
I  Pressure  in  stomach,  from  large  doses.

I  Constricted  feeling  above  scrobiculum,  and  distension ;  also
felt  in  back. ^Phthisis.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. •  Diarrhoea  from  acridity.

I  It  seems  to  open  the  bowels  with  some  of  the  sick,  more  than

it  is  wished  for.
I  I  Rarely  diarrhoea.
J  Chronic  diarrhoea.

I  After  using  it,  the  first  formed  stool  and  not  offensive. ^Diar-
rhoea of  consumptive.
^^  Urinary  Organs. •  Ulcerated  kidneys.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. •  Ulcers  of  uterus.
Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation. 1 1  It  makes  the  milk


23


of  the  nursing  bitter.


"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, •  Very  fre-
quent catarrhs.


CETRARIA  ISLANDICA.  464

i  Chronic  catarrhs  of  bronchial  mucous  membrane.
I  Tickling and spasmodic feeling in windpipe, on waking.
^Phthisis.
^^Respiration. I Shortness  of  breath,  weakness,  has  to  stop  to
get  breath  when  walking  out-doors. ^Phthisis.
I  Rales. ^Phthisis.
^"^  Cough. :  Tickling  cough  after  feverish  eruptive  diseases.
Spitting  of  blood,  and  of  pus.
Little  cough  of  an  asthenic  character.
Whooping-cough.
All  kinds  of  bloody  expectoration.

■  Violent  cough, beginning at  breakfast and  lasting  several

hours,  with  copious  expectoration. ^Phthisis.

■  Violent  spells  of  coughing  during  the  day, none  at  night.

^Phthisis.
1  Copious,  thick,  yellow,  lumpy  expectoration. ^Phthisis.

■  Expectoration  has  a  rotten  taste  and  smell,  which  nauseates

her. ^Phthisis.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, l  Soreness  in  chest  from  coughing.
^Phthisis.

■  Consumptives.
Pituitous  consumption.
In  every  case  of  weak  lungs.
Purulent  consumption.

I  I  Pain  in  chest.
^°  Outer  Chest. B  Oppression  of  chest,  particularly  with  morning-
cough. ^Phthisis.
^^  Kest. Position. Motion. Walking  out- doors  : has  to  stop

to  take  breath.
^^  Time. Towards  morning :  sweat.

In  forenoon :  chill.

In  afternoon  :  fever.

During  day  :.  violent  spells  of  coughing,
^^  Fever. •  Putrid  fevers.

\  Intermittent  fevers.

■  Chill  in  forenoon,  fever  in  afternoon. ^Phthisis.

■  Sweat  towards  morning,  with  weakness. ^Phthisis.
*^  Sensations. Pressure  :  in  stomach.

Soreness :  in  chest.

Constriction  :  above  scrobiculum  ;  in  back.
Tickling :  in  wind-pipe.
**  Tissues. :  Emaciated  people.
Scrofulous  emaciation.

Atrophy,  depending  on  suppurative  processes.
*^  Relations. •  Poisoning  by  metallic  vapors,
j  Poisoning  by  acrid  substances.


465  CHAMOMILLA.

CHAMOMILLA.

Matricaria  Chamomilla.  Compositoe,

Tincture  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant  when  in  flower;  the  flowers  con-
tain active  principles  which  combine  the  properties  of  bitters  and  etheral
oils.  The  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  but  is  occasionally  cultivated  in  our
gardens;  the  leaves  and  flowers  are  small,  thus  diS"ering  from  the  Anthemis
nobilis  or  Roman  chamomile  ;  it  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  An-
themis cotula  or  wild  chamomile,  growing  abundantly  by  the  wayside  and
in  waste  places  in  this  country.  A  decoction  of  the  plant  in  the  shape  of
tea  is  much  used,  and  abused,  as  a  domestic  medicine,  particularly  in  Ger-
many. Hahnemann  classed  Chamomilla  with  the  polychrests.  Two  hun-
dred and  seventy-two  symptoms  observed  by  himself,  and  three  by  other
authors,  were  published  in  his  Fragmenta,  and  in  Vol.  Ill  of  his  Materia
Medica  Para,  second  edition,  these  had  increased  to  four  hundred  and  sixty-
one,  besides  containing  thirty  additional  symptoms  observed  by  Stapf.
For  later  provings  of  the  drug,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  III.  Clinical
observations  are  found  scattered  through  our  entire  literature,  there  proba-
bly not  being  a  physician  in  our  ranks  who  has  not  tested  the  virtue  of
Chamomilla  in  either  high  or  low  preparations.  Among  the  contributors
to  Chamomilla,  we  refer  to :

Hofi"man,  H.  H.,  Post  Partum  Hemorrhage,  Trans.  Horn.  Soc.  of  Pa.,  2,  p.
433;  Van  Cutsem,  Mental  Symptoms  the  result  of  Poisoning,  Rev.  Horn.,
p.  100,  Eaue's  Record,  1875,  marked  t;  Norton,  Geo.  J.,  Pustular  Ophthal-
mia, Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1874, 1,  p.  419 ;  Gross,  W.,  Eclampia,  Archives,  p.  104,  and
Intermittent,  Archives,  3,  p.  52;  Schubert,  Ad.,  Archives,  1,  3,  p.  158  ;  Rummel,
Fr.,  Intermittent,  Archives  8,  1,  p.  34;  Kaemerer,  etc.,  see  A.  H.  Z ,  83,  p.
149 ;  accidental  proving  from  drinking  Chamomile  tea,  reported  by  J.  C.
Burnett,  Horn.  Review,  21,  p.  408,  marked,  tox.

^  Mind. I  Child  lies  senseless,  completely  without  consciousness;
frequent  changes  in  face,  distortion  of  eyes,  contraction  of
facial  muscles,  rattling  in  chest,  with  much  cough;  it  yawns
and  stretches  very  much.
Insensibility.

■  Absence  of  mind.

I  When  writing  or  speaking,  he  omits  whole  words.

■  Dullness.

I  I A  joyless  dullness  of  senses,  with  sleepiness,  without,  how-

ever, being  able  to  sleep.

I I  Dullness  of  senses,  diminished  power  of  comprehension.

I  I  Confusion  of  head,  with  transient  painful  pressure  on  eyes,
in  afternoon.

voii.  III. — 30.


CHAMOMILLA.  466

Imbecility.

B Imagines  he  hears  voices  of  absent  persons,  at  night,  cannot
compose  himself  to  sleep.

Ecstacies  and  delirium.

Delirium  with  hallucinations;  t.

Delirium  with  fearful  cries;  t.

Tries  to  get  away  from  her  friends  if  they  seek  to  comfort  her.

B  B Child  cries;  quiet  only  when  carried.

Her  cries  can  be  heard  through  the  whole  neighborhood;  t.

B Utters  sudden,  startling  and  piercing  cries  on  waking  out  of
sleep,  vows  there  is  some  dreadful  beast  under  his  bed  or  in
the  room  and  will  not  be  appeased  until  the  gas  is  lit  and
the  room  searched;  a  boy,  aet.  4. ^Nightmare.

BB  Piteous  moaning  of  child  because  he  cannot  have  what  he
wants.

B  Moaning  on  account  of  a  very  trifling  offence,  which  had
happened  a  long  time  ago.

BB  Whining  restlessness;  the  child  wants  this  and  that,  which,
when  offered,  is  refused  or  pushed  away.

B  Involuntary  moaning,  with  heat  of  face.

BHe  tosses  about  the  bed,  with  febrile  heat  and  redness  of
cheeks,  and  talks  confusedly,  with  open  eyes.

B  Tosses  anxiously  about  the  bed  at  night,  full  of  fancies.

Scratches  at  the  walls  with  her  hands;  t.

B  Child  becomes  stiff  and  bends  itself  backwards,  kicks  with  its
feet  when  carried,  screams  immoderately,  and  throws  every-
thing off.

BB  Averse  to  talking,  short  and  snappish.

B Disinclined  to  talk,  is  angry  if  anyone  speaks  to  her.

B  Introversion,  she  cannot  be  induced  to  say  a  word.

BB  Cannot  endure  being  spoken  to,  or  interrupted  while  speak-
ing, especially  after  rising  from  sleep.

B  B  Child  does  not  wish  to  be  touched.

B  B Patient  can't  bear  anyone  near  him,  and  answers  snappishly.

Cannot  bear  music.

Sadness.

Melancholia,  with  constant  moaning  and  muttering  to  herself,
walks  all  the  time  with  downcast  eyes.

Hopelessness.

BVery  anxious;  everything  she  undertakes  is  very  unsatis-
factory; she  is  irresolute,  with  flushes  of  heat  in  face,  and
cool  sweat  in  palms.

B  Attacks  of  anxiety.

BFuII  of  anxiety,  with  great  uneasiness.

Great  anxiety;  feels  excited  in  all  the  senses;  t.

B Anxiety,  with  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate,  without  much
urine  in  bladder.

B  Thoughts  of  dying.


467  CHAMOMILLA.

Indifference.

1 1  Peevish  disposition,  nothing  pleases.

1 1  Peevish  about  everything,  with  dyspnoea.

I  Quarrelsome.

I I  Peevishness;  she  seeks  a  cause  for  being  peevish  at  every-
thing; can't  return  a  civil  ansvi^er.

■  Fretful,  and  easily  irritated.

I  Fretful,  out  of  humor  and  obstinate,  even  to  quarrelling,  on

appearance  of  menses.
I  Morose  fretfulness;  everything  that  another  does  is  wrong;

no  one  does  anything  to  please  him.

I  He  frets  internally  about  every  trifle.

I I  Very  irritable  and  fretful;  child  must  be  carried.

■  Very  irritable;  moaning  and  groaning.
1 1  Irritable,  impatient  mood.

■  Great  impatience,  everything  seems  to  go  too  slowly.

■  She  is  sleepless  and  cross.

■  Ill-humored  and  irritable,  the  whole  day.

■  She  is  always  out  of  humor,  particular-ly  at  her  menstrual

periods,  when  she  is  headstrong  even  unto  quarrelling.
Not  applicable  to  persons  patient  under  influence  of  pain.

■  The  pains  are  very  distressing,  she  feels  that  she  can  hardly

bear  them ;  she  wishes  to  get  away  from  herself. ^Labor.

■  In  all  her  sufferings  there  is  a  vein  of  ill-humor; she  can

hardly  speak  pleasantly  ;  feels  like  scolding  about  every-
thing ;  she  often  gives  vent  to  her  ill-humor  in  spite  of  all
restraint.

■  She  becomes  almost  furious  about  the  pain;  she  cannot  bear

her  clothes  to  touch  the  part  affected.

■  ■Easily  chagrined  or  excited  to  anger.
Insulting,  cross  and  uncivil  in  temper.

Great  tendency  to  quarrel,  to  speak  in  an  obstreperous  manner.

■  Obstinacy.
Mistrust.

■  ■The  child  can  only  be  quieted  by  carrying  it  on  the  arm.

■  Great  restlessness  and  anxiety.

■  Restless  and  impatient,  with  fever.

Bi Excessive  uneasiness,  anxiety,  agonizing  tossing  about,  with
tearing  pains  in  abdomen.

■  Great  restlessness  and  inward  chilliness.

■  SOversensitiveness to pain, which seems unbearable and

drives  to  despair.

■  All bad effects following anger. ^Convulsions. ^Ghill.

^Fever. ^Bilious  complaints.

■  Jerking  and  twitching  in  its  sleep,  or  the  nurse  may  have  had

a  fit  of  anger  which  causes  the  convulsions  in  the  child.

■  Bad  effects  of  having  feelings  wounded.


CHAMOMILLA.  468

^  Sensorium. I  Dullness of  senses,  with  sleepiness,  yet  cannot

sleep.
S Vertigo: with vanishing  of  thoughts; after  eating; after

drinking  coffee ;  staggering,  in  morning  on  rising  from  bed  ;

with  fainting ; with dimness  of  sight,  when  sitting  up  in

bed ;  in  bed,  with  nausea ;  when  stooping ;  on  rising  after

sitting ;  while  sitting  erect ;  when  talking.
^  Inner  Head. I  Heaviness, dullness, pressure, constriction, or

burning  in  forehead.

■  Tearing  headache  in  forehead,  with  sensation  as  if  a  lump

were  falling  forward,  while  sitting,  or  turning  over  in  bed.

■  Recurrent,  paroxysmal,  tearing  headache  in  forehead.
iSticking-tearing  headache  in forehead, which extends into

chest.
I. Jerking  headache  in  forehead,  especially  after  eating.
iPressive  pain  in  both  temples,  like  from  strong  pressure  with

thumbs,  forenoon.

■  Pressure,  extending  from  vertex to forehead  and  temples ;

<<  when  thinking  of  it,  from  sudden  stooping,  or  from  men-
tal exertion.

■  Pressing  headache  as  from  a  stone  in  forehead,  hot  head,

<  evenings.

■  Headache,  especially  in  temples; a  pressure  as  from  firm

pressure  with  fingers.

■  Tearing  pain  in  temples.

■  Tearing  and  stinging  pain  in  1.  side,  particularly  in  temple,

and  in  and  around  eye.

■  Stitches  in  temples.

■  Tearing headache,  with heaviness of  head,  <;  about noon,

after  vexation,  or  an  error  in  diet.

■  Violent  stinging  pains  in  1.  side  of  head,  from  occiput  to  up-

per jaw,  after  vexation.

■  Pressure increasing and decreasing,  especially  in  r.  half  of

forehead  and  in  r.  temple,  where  are  also  felt  very  frequent
dull  stitches,  which  sometimes  extend  to  occiput  like  electric
sparks.

■  Pressing  and  burrowing  headache,  especially  in  forehead  and

temples.

■  Tearing  and  sticking,  extending  outward  to  temples.

■  Wandering  pains  in  temples,  frequently  recurring,  and  always

■<  at  beginning.

■  Pressure  and  pressing  from  vertex  extending  over  forehead

and  temples,  •<  as  soon  as  attention  was  directed  to  it,  and
by  sudden  stooping,  or  by  mental  exertion,  as  when  reflect-
ing or  even  reading.

■  ■Throbbing  headache.

■  Stitches  through  head,  from  hard  palate  to  vertex.


469  CHAMOMILLA.

I  Headache  like  needle-stitches,  as  if  eyes  would  fall  out  of

head.

I I  Transient  attacks  of  throbbing  in  one  half  of  brain.
H  One-sided  drawing  headache.

I  Sensation  of  compression  of  brain,  or  as  from  constriction  of

meninges.

Heaviness  in  head  :  with  dullness  ;  with  pain  in  temples  ;  par-
ticularly in  occiput  on  waking  in  morning ;  with  drawing
forward  of  head ;  with  bruised  sensation.

Confusion  of  head :  with  disinclination  for  mental  work  ;  with
inclination  to  bend  it  backward ;  with  sticking  and  borinc,
especially  in  r.  temple,  in  morning ;  with  pressure  in  par-
oxysms, during  afternoon,  particularly  on  waking.

■  B Congestion  to  head: following  anger;  with  pressure  while

lying  down  ;  on  vertex  ;  with  heat  in  face  and  oppression  of

chest ;  with  stitches  in  head  and  chest.
Pain  in  head,  as  if  it  would  burst,  on  waking  from  sleep.
She  has  intense  headache  on  top  of  head,  as  from  pressure

from  within,  and feeling as if  top  of  head  were blown

off; t.
Sensation  of  fullness  and  heat  in  head.
Headache : felt  even  during  sleep ; in  morning  in  bed ;  with

vertigo  ;  after  eating  ;  at  night.

I I  Megrim.

*  Outer  Head. iSwelling  of  temples,  with  painfulness  to  touch.

■  Rheumatic  pain  in  head. ^Dysentery.

■  Inclined  to  bend  head  backward.

I  Moves  her  head  backwards  and  forwards.

I I  Warm  sweat  on  head,  wetting  hair.

■  Hot,  sticky  sweat  covering  forehead  and  hairy  scalp.

■  Feeling  as  if  hair  stood  on  end,  with  shivering. ^Gastro-

bilious  fever.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Staring  eyes.
Aversion  to  light.

■  Intense  photophobia, least  light  unbearable. ^Ophthalmia

scrofulosa.

■  Flickering  before  eyes: she  could  not  see  where  she  was;

when  lying  down.
Eyes  dim  and  weak,  in  morning ;  by  candle-light  it  seemed  as

if  rays  of  light  passed  from  eyes  to  flame.
Obscuration  of  vision laterally, when fixing  vision upon a

white  object.
Dimsightedness :  with  vertigo,  when  sitting  up  in  bed ;  with

chilliness.
Great  burning  and  heat  in  eyes.
Severe  stitches  in  eyes.
Sensation  as  if  eyeball  were  drawn  tightly  backward.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes,  lids  agglutinated  in  morning;  discharge


CHAMOMILLA.  470

of  blood  from eyes  ; inflammation  caused  by  exposure  to
cold, damp atmosphere, or  -<  by every cold change of
weather.
!  I  Eyes  swollen  in  morning;  agglutinated  with  purulent  mucus.

■  Yellow  conjunctiva.

I  Conjunctivitis,  in  infants.

■  Pustules on cornea, with considerable  vascularity, profuse

lachrymation , not much photophobia, child thirsty and
peevish. ^Dentition.

■  Keratitis pustulosa, with considerable photophobia, moist

eruption  on  face  and  head,  child  ver}^  cross.

■  Great  dryness  of  edges  of  eyelids,  or  copious  mucous  secretion.

■  Profuse  acrid  discharge  from  eyes  and  nose. ^Ophthalmia

scrofulosa.
Spasmodic  closure  or  great  heaviness  of  lids.
Pressive  pain  beneath  upper  lid,  on  moving  eyes  and  shaking

head.
Lids  agglutinated  after  sleep.

Great  dryness  in  Meibomean  glands  on  margin  of  lids.
Great  swelling  and  bluish  redness of  eyelids,  first  1.  then  r.

so  that  child  cannot  open  them.
On pressing lids apart, conjunctiva appears swollen and

dark  red.
Inner  surface  of  lids,  as  well  as  ball  of  eye,  covered  with  much,

partly  yellow  purulent  mucus,  partly  with  bloody  fluid.
Least  pressure  causes  pure  blood  and  large  quantity  of  muco-

pus  to  issue  from  between  lids.
At  canthi  and  along  border  of  lids  dried  muco-pus.

■  Swelling  and  bluish  redness  of  skin,  with  running  of  pure

blood  from  eye.

■  Soreness  of  canthi.

■  Corners  of  eyes  are  filled  with  purulent  matter,  in  morning.

■  Stitches  in  orbital  region.

8 1  Violent  pressure  in  orbital  region;  sensation  in  eyeball,  as
if  it  were  tightly  compressed  from  all  sides,  with  momentary
obstruction  of  vision.

■  Byes  protrude  and  rotate  constantly  in  their  orbits. ^Tetanic

convulsions  after  measles.

■  Ophthalmia  neonatorum ;  diarrhoeic  stools,  chafing  of  genitals,

flabbiness  of  muscles,  rash,  restless  sleep ;  child  wants  to  be
carried.

■  Catarrhal  and  scrofulous  ophthalmia  in  cross,  peevish  children

during  dentition.
Arthritic  ophthalmia,  first  stage.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Great  sensitiveness  to  noise,  especially  to
music. ^Otalgia.

■  Illusions  of  hearing,  at  night,  as  though  voices  of  absent  per-

sons were  heard.


471  CHAMOMILLA.

1 1  Roaring  in  ears,  as  from  rushing  water.

I  Ringing  in  ears. ^Post  partum  hemorrhage.
She  cannot  endure  music.

Sensation  as  if  ears  were  stopped.
Sensation  as  if  hot  water  were  running  out  of  r.  ear.
Dull  pressure  as  from  a  blow  in  inner  ear,  on  stooping.
Sharp  stitches  in  r.  meatus.

I I  Single  large  stitches  in  ear,  especially  when  stooping,  with
ill-humor  and  peevishness  about  trifles.

Stitches  extending  into  inner  ear  from  lower  jaw.

I  Frequent  stitches  and  sudden,  transient  spasmodic  sensation
in  front  of  r.  ear,  in  region  of  tragus ;  this  sensation  some-
times extended  into  auditory  canal.

I  Stitches  in  ear,  especially  when  stooping.

I  Occasional  tearing  in  1.  ear. ^Hemicrania.

I I  Pressing  earache  in  spells,  with  tearing  pain,  extorting  cries.

■  Otalgia:  with  hot  perspiring  forehead;  lancinations  or  tensive

drawing  pains  extending  to  lobes  of  ears.

iMoist  ear-wax,  or  scarcity  of  ear-wax,  resulting  in  dryness.

I  Acute  inflammation  of  middle  ear,  when  patient  is  prostrated
by  and  intolerant  of  shooting,  drawing  pains;  auricle  usu-
ally hot  and  red ;  meatus  red,  but  not  swollen ;  membrana
tympani  not  much  congested.

■  Right  ear  red  and  painful. ^Intermittent  fever.
Dull  stitches  in  r.  mastoid  process.

i  I  Particularly  sensitive  to  open  air  about  ears.

■  Swelling  of  parotid  gland.

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Extremely  sensitive  to  all  odors.

■  Nosebleed,  relieving  confusion  of  head.

■  Bleeding,  coagulated  or  dark  blood. ^Epistaxis.

■  Irritation  to  sneeze,  with  crawling,  dry  heat  and  stopped  up

sensation  in  nose ;  feeling  as  if  coryza  would  appear ;  also
with  pressure  in  forehead.

■  Coryza: fluent,  watery;  viscid;  acrid;  with  loss  of  smell  ;

with  dry  hacking  cough.

■  Catarrh,  with  dry,  fatiguing  cough,  painful  bruised  feeling  in

umbilical  region,  painfully  sensitive  to  touch,  and  <  at  night.
^Dentition.

■  Stoppage  of  nose.

Dryness  and  sensation  of  fullness  and  heaviness  in  nose,  fol-
lowed by  nosebleed.

■  Catarrhs,  with  ulcerated  nostrils  and  chapped  lips,  one  cheek

pale,  the  other  red,  with  chills  and  thirst.

■  Crawling  in  nose  until  eye  waters.

^  Upper  Face. ■Convulsive movements  and  twitching of  facial
muscles  and  lips.

■  Neuralgia  of  face,  pain  causes  hot  sweat  about  head  and  ex-


CHAMOMILLA.  472

torts  screams;  stinging  pain  extending  to  upper  jaw,  from
occiput,  1.  side.

■  Burning  in  face.

I  Hot  face,  with  redness  of  cheeks.

I I  Redness  of  one  cheek,  returning  in  paroxysms,  without  shiv-
ering or  internal  heat. 6'Hemicrania.

I  Forehead  hot,  but  moist. ^Otalgia.

■  Wrinkled  forehead.

I I  Red  face,  or  redness  and  heat  of  one  (1.)  cheek,  the  other
being  pale.

■  Face  pale,  sunken,  distorted  by  pain.

■  Yellow  or  bloated  face.

■  ■One  cheek  red  and  hot,  the  other  pale  and  cold.

■  Heat  of  face,  while  rest  of  body  is  cool.
Pale  face,  with  small  rapid  pulse ;  t.

■  Paleness  of  face,  with  cold  cheeks.

■  ■  Face  sweats  after  eating  or  drinking.
Puffiness  of  face  and  cheeks.

1  Fiery  red  rash  on  face. ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  Facial  erysipelas  after  toothache.
Skin  of  forehead  wrinkled  above  nose.

Swelling,  hardness  and  blueness  of  one  cheek. ^Neuralgia.

■  One-sided  swelling  of  cheek,  generally  the  left.

■  Erysipelas,  starting  on  1.  cheek,  near  nose,  gradually  spread-

ing over  face  and  head.

■  Stitches  in  joint  of  r.  jaw,  extending  into  upper  back  teeth,

severe  but  transient.
Exanthema  on  face.
*  Lower  Face, '  Child  draws  mouth  back  and  forth,  or  from  side
to  side. ^Teething. ^Convulsions.

■  Single  stitches  in  jaw,  extending  into  inner  ear.

■  Lips  crack  and  peel ;  rhagades  in  middle  of  lower  lip.

At  night,  lips  become  dry  and  stick  together,  without  thirst.

■  Swelling  of  submaxillary  glands. ^'Toothache. ^Facial  ery-

sipelas.
Sensation  of  heaviness  in  lower  jaw.
Pain  on  opening  jaws,  as  if  masseter  muscles  were  painfully

cramped,  which  pain  also  extended  into  teeth.
Feeling  of  weakness  in  muscles  of  mastication,  with  inclination

to  hold  mouth  open,  and  increased  saliva.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, ■  Toothache  is  so  violent,  she  tosses  about,

moans  constantly  and  complains  of  digging,  gnawing  pain  in

hollow  teeth; <  at  night,  preventing  sleep ; <  from  coifee.

■  Violent  toothache  in  an  apparently  sound  tooth ;  single  stitches

through  1.  upper  jaw,  with  itching  and  crawling  sensation  in
teeth. ^Amenorrhoea.

■  Toothache: stitching; digging; gnawing; from  suppressed

perspiration;  from  taking  cold;  during  or  after  eating;  ■■if


473  <  CHAMOMILLA.

anything  warm  is  taken  into  mouth,  especially  after  coffee,
■<  by  talking;  in  open  air;  in  room  ;  getting  warm  in  bed;
during  menstruation  and  pregnancy  ;  most  1.  side  and  lower
teeth ;  worse  at  night ;  affecting  principally  women  and
children  ;  after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Drawing  toothache  (without  being  able  to  locate  it  in  any

tooth) ;  it  disappears  during  eating,  but  especially  rages  at
night,  therewith  teeth  feel  too  long.

■  Drawing  pain  in  teeth  after  eating  and  drinking.

I A  slight  burrowing  and  sensation  of  heaviness  in  alveoli  of
some  of  back  teeth;  "this  sensation  seems  intolerable,  and
makes  him  very  peevish." •

■  Sensation  of  fullness and heaviness in  alveoli  of  first  and

second  back  teeth  of  both  sides  of  upper  jaw,  with  a  slight
burrowing  and  boring  in  their  roots,  with  a  sensation  as  if
alveoli  were  distended  and  formed  a  hard,  tense  swelling.

■  Throbbing  toothache,  insupportable  at  night,  ■<  by  warmth

of  bed,  patient  turns  about  and  keeps  moaning.
Grumbling-drawing  toothache  in  jaw.

■  Violent  toothache  in  1.  upper  jaw,  always  after  eating  warm

food.
Toothache  recurring  in  intermittent  attacks,  with  swelling  of
cheeks  and  accumulation  of  saliva ; pains  shoot  back  and
forth,  even  extend  to  eye  and  ear; <  by  drinking  cold
water.

■  ■Toothache  recommences  when  entering  the  warm  room,  or

drinking  anything  warm.

■  One-sided  toothache  and  tearing  in  head  and  jaw.

■  Toothache  as  from  taking  cold,  if  one  exposes  oneself  to  cold

air  when  sweating.

■  Toothache from draught of air, extending towards ear.

^Otalgia.

■  Toothache  in  attacks  with  ptyalism.

■  Paroxysms  of  violent  pain  from  root  of  upper  eye-tooth  to

cheek,  nose  and  temple.

■  Grrumbling  and  crawling  in  teeth  of  upper  jaw.

■  Periodical violent toothache  in molar,  1.  lower  jaw; tooth

is  hollow;  pain  is  drawing  and  jerking;  <^  before  mid-
night, >  after  eating.

■  Rheumatic  toothache: particularly  one-sided, -<  at  night;

pains  unendurable,  red  cheek,  cannot  designate  which  tooth  is
affected ;  jerking,  tearing  pain  often  extending  into  ear ;
often  ■<  after  eating  and  drinking,  often  >  by  dipping
finger  into  cold  water  and  applying  it  to  affected  part ;  very
much  <C.  from  drinking  cold  drinks ;  warmth  of  bed  un-
bearable.

■  Teeth  sensitive  to  touch,  especially  some  hollow  back  teeth.

■  ■  Teeth  feel  too  long.


CHAMOMILLA.  474

Looseness  of  teeth.

Teeth  covered  with  mucus.

B  iGums  red  and  tender. ^Dentition.

I  Burning  in  swollen  gums.

■  Sensation  as  if  gum  were  swelling  about  some  of  back  teeth.

I  Tearing  toothache  which  extends  to  ear,  with  swelling  of
cheek  and  periosteal  swelling.

B  Painful  swelling  of  1.  cheek,  caused  by  a  carious,  badly  plug-
ged tooth  ;  pain  lancinating,  •<  at  night.

IB  Teething  children:  with  watery,  greenish  and  also  chopped
diarrhoea,  smelling  like  rotten  eggs :  jerking  of  limbs  or
starting ;  convulsion! ;  child  bends  double  and  draws  legs
upon  abdomen  ;  moaning  ;  want  to  be  carried  ;  dry  cough  ;
restless  at  night;  want  to  drink;  quick  rattling  breathing.
"  Taste  and  Tongue.  B  Taste:  slimy,  bitter;  sour;  like  rancid
fat ;  putrid  ;  offensive  at  night.

Bread  tastes  sour.

BB  Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  in  morning.

B  Burning  on  tongue.

B  Tongue  red  in  middle,  white  at  sides. ^Tertian  intermittent.

I  Tongue:  coated,  white;  yellowish;  or  white  at  sides,  red  in
middle ;  red,  cracked  ;  dry.

Severe  biting  on  back  of  tongue  and  on  roof  of  palate.

Tongue  dry,  with  thirst  for  water,  loss  of  appetite,  flushes  of
heat,  sweat  of  face  and  palpitation,  followed  by  unnatural
hunger.

B  Tongue  coated  white,  with  islands  on  it ;  t.

I  I  Blisters  on  and  beneath  tongue,  with  stinging  pain.

Convulsive  movements  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. B  a  Heat  in  mouth,  pharynx  and  oesophagus  to
stdmach.

B  Dryness  of  mouth,  in  morning,  followed  by  distension  of  ab-
domen and  imperfect  evacuation.

B  Extreme  dryness  in  mouth,  with  lameness  of  limbs.

BB  Collection  of  saliva,  of  metallic,  sweetish  taste.

Offensive  taste  in  mouth,  at  night.

What  he  hawks  up  has  an  ofi'ensive  taste.

Sourish  odor  from  mouth.

IBFetid  smell  from  mouth.
13  Throat, BPain  in  1.  side  of  fauces  while  swallowing  ;  velum  was
somewhat  reddened,  and  external  pressure  just  under  angle
of  jaw  caused  pain  in  fauces.

Spasmodic  drawing  pain  in  palate,  extending  into  fauces.

Pain  in  back  part  of  throat,  <  by  moving  throat  and  swal-
lowing.

BB  Spasmodic  constriction  of  pharynx.

Stitches  in  throat,  near  ear.

Throbbing  in  back  part  of  throat.


475  CHAMOMILLA.

Stitching-burning  pains  in  throat.

I  Inflammation  of  throat,  with  sensation  as  though  something

■was  sticking  in  it,  which  ought  to  be  removed  by  hawking ;
heat  in  pharynx  and  thirst ;  dark  redness  of  affected  parts.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  throat,  of  tonsils  or  pharynx,  with

acute  stinging-burning  pain  in  larynx  ;  usually  roughness  of
voice,  some  dyspnoea,  tickling  irritation  to  cough.

I I  Sore  throat,  with  swelling  of  parotid  or  submaxillary  glands,
or  tonsils.

iDifficult  swallowing  of  solid  food,  and  when  lying  down.

Sore  throat  from  suppression  of  cutaneous  action.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Unnatural  hunger,
in  evening.

1 1  Want  of  appetite.

When  food  is  set  before  him,  it  makes  him  shudder,  it  is  so  re-
pugnant.

1 1  Great  thirst  for  cold  water  and  desire  for  acid  drinks.

Thirst,  with  febrile  heat  and  redness  of  cheeks.

Unquenchable  thirst,  with  dryness  of  tongue.

■  Increased  thirst,  with  evening  fever  and  painful  diarrhoea.

1 1  Likes  to  hold  cold  water  to  mouth  a  long  titoe,  when  drinking.

^Dentition.
Desire  for :  acids  ;  sour-crout.

■  Aversion  to:  beer;  coffee  and  warm  drinks ;  to  broth.

^'  Eating  and  Drinking. Fullness  while  eating, with  nausea
after  eating.

■  ■After  eating  and  drinkinof,  heat  and  sweat  of  face.

■  After  eating :  vertigo;  abdomen  puffed  up.

■  ■Thirsty  and  hot  with  the  pains.

■  In  morning,  after  drinking  cofi"ee,  heat  all  over  and  sweat,

with  vomiting  of  bitter  mucus,  followed  by  bitter  taste  in
mouth,  weakness  in  head,  and  nausea.
After  drinking  coffee  :  vertigo.

■  Cutting  pain  and  debility  after  drinking.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■Hiccough.

■  Eructations:  sour;  constant,  empty  ; ■■aggravate  the  pain.  •

■  Eructations  of  gas,  smelling  of  bad  eggs.
I  I  Eructations  and  passage  of  flatus.

The  existing  pain  is  increased  by  eructations.
Disgust,  qualmishness,  >■  by  eating.

■  Nausea:  with  vertigo  while  lying  in  bed  ;  and  inclination  to

vomit ;  and  bitter  vomiting  ;  after  drinking  coffee  ;  after
breakfast ;  with  collection  of  saliva  in  mouth  ;  as  if  she
would  faint.

■  Nausea  after  morning  coffee,  with  attacks  of  suffocation. •

■  Inclination  to  vomit:  with  diarrhoea  and  fever  during  night;

as  if  one  would  faint.

■  I  Fruitless  efforts  to  vomit.


CHAMOMILLA.  476

iVomituritio, with  slight  stinging pains in  region  of  liver,
after  vexation.

B Vomiting:  of  bile  ;  of  food;  of  what  has  been  drunk  ;  slimy
matter  ;  sour.
.^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. I Severe  painful  pressure  in  epi-
gastrium makes  her  toss  about  in  despair. ^Intermittens
tertiana.

iPressive  pain  in  stomach  and  beneath  short  ribs,  which  im-
pedes breathing,  especially  after  drinking  coffee.

■  Epigastrium  painfully  bloated,  in  morning,  with  sensation  as

if  contents  were  passing  into  chest ;  belching  of  wind  is
painful.

■  Pressing  and  cutting  in  epigastrium,  with  anxiety.

■  Burning  or  stinging  pain  in  pit  of  stomach.

BB  Pressure  in  stomach,  as  from  a  stone  pressing  down.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating  a  little.

■  Burning  across  stomach  into  each  hypochondrium.

■  Gastralgia:  in  highly  irritable  persons,  or  following  vexation;

pressure  as  from  stone  in  scrobiculum  and  under  short  ribs,
1.  side,  and  short  breathing,  anxiety,  fear,  restlessness,  toss-
ing about,  sometimes  throbbing  headache  on  vertex,  driving
patient  out  of  bed ; ■<  after  a  meal  or  at  night.

■  E  Constrictive  gastralgia  in  coffee-drinkers.
Gastralgia  relieved  by  drinking  coiTee.

^^Hypochondria. ■  Stitching  pains  in  hypochondria.

■  Stitches  in  region  of  liver,  with  vomiturition  and  frequent

chilliness,  after  vexation. ^Hemicrania.
Pressure  in  hypochondria  and  in  stomach  after  eating.
Continual  tensive  pain  in  hypochondriac  region,  with  tension

around  brain.

■  Fullness  and  distension  in  hypochondria.
Incarceration  of  flatulence  in  hypochondria.
Diaphragmitis.

■  Hepatitis  after  vexation  or  taking  cold,  with  gastric  troubles

and  icteroid  symptoms.
"  Abdomen. Pressive  colic  about  navel.

■  Griping-tearing  colic  in  region  of  navel  and  lower  dovm  on

both  sides,  with  pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  it  were  broken.
Pain  in  belly  from  side  to  side,  just  above  navel,  correspond-
ing to  transverse  colon,  from  r.  to  left ;  t.

■  Umbilical  region  sensitive.

■  Colicky  cutting  pains  in  abdomen,  with  hard  chill;  the  pain

seems  insufferable,  she  wants  to  jump  out  of  bed.

■  Colic, rather cutting than sticking, with accumulation of
• saliva  in  mouth.

Constant  tearing  colic  in  side  of  abdomen, as  if  parts were
rolled  up  in  a  ball.

■  Tearing  pain  in  abdomen.


477  CHAMOMILLA.

I  Constricting  pain  in  abdomen  andback;  she  kicks,  grates  her

teeth,  and  screams.

I I  Colic  returns  from  time  to  time,  flatulence  accumulates  in
hypochondria,  and  stitches  shoot  through  chest.

Grurgling  in  side  extending  into  abdomen.

■  Abdominal  cramps,  particularly  flatulent  colic;  flatus  collects

in  various  places  and  strives  to  force  a  passage;  distension  of

hypochondria  and  epigastrium;  patient  sufi"ers  from  anxiety,

restlessness  and  clammy  perspiration.
•  Sensation  as  if  bowels  were  drawn  up  in  a  ball,  and  abdomen

were  empty.
1 1  Wind  colic,  abdomen  distended  like  a  drum,  wind  passes  in

small  quantities  without  relief;  >  by  applying  warm  cloths.
iWind  colic,  with  tympanitis  and  vomiturition.

■  Wind  colic,  wdth  sensation  as  if  a  hernia  would  appear.

■  Hysteric  colic.

1  Abdominal  pain, with frequent  emission of  pale, colorless

urine  in  large  quantities.
I  Colic  while  urinating.
I  Colic  at  sunrise.
I  Colic,  with  violent  pain  in  1.  hip,  when  lying  on  r.  side.

■  Abdomen  is  distended,  but  soft;  when  pressed,  patient  com-

plains of  increased  oppression  of  chest  and  anxiety.

■  Distension  of  abdomen  after  a  meal  or  in  morning.

■  ■Abdomen  tympanitic  and  sensitive  to touch. (^Agalactia.

^Peritonitis.

■  Abdomen  sensitive  to  touch,  particularly  in  inguinal  region.
Sensation  as  if  whole  abdomen  were hollow,  with constant

motion  in  intestines.
Compressive  pain  in  abdomen.
Pain in abdomen , as when constipation causes a delayed

passage.
Bruised  pain  in  muscles  of  lower  abdomen.
Pain  in  abdomen  prevents  urination.

■  Dragging  toward  abdominal  rings,  as  if  parts  were  too  weak

and  hernia  would  appear.
Feeling  of  griping  and  coldness  and  chilliness  in  inside  of  ab-
domen, passing  downward  into  legs,  as  far  as  knees  ; t.

■  Peritonitis.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Flatus:  sour  smelling;  stinking;  putrid.
Stools:  green,  slimy,  mucous;  mixed  green  and  white,  mucous;
chopped,  white  and  yellow,  mucous ;  green  or  yellowish  ;
watery,  frequent,  preceded  by  cutting  constricting  bellyache,
<  in  epigastric  region  ;  mucous,  with  colic  and  vomituritio ;
bilious,  with  burning  in  anus  ;  painful,  thin,  green,  consist-
ing of  feces  and  mucus;  ■■green,  watery,  corroding,  Avith
colic,  thirst,  bitter  taste  and  bitter  eructations;  like  chopped
or  stirred  eggs,  smelling  sour; ■■hot,  smelling  like  rotten


CHAMOMILLA.  478

eggs;  changeable;  containing  undigested  food  ;  mucous  and
bloody.

■  Violent  bilious  diarrhoea,  with  intense  colic  and  burning  in

anus,  after  vexation.
In diarrhoea, especially of  watery, mucous character, stools

preceded  by  violent  cutting  pain  below  umbilicus  ;  >>  after

stool.
I  Diarrhoea,  with  violent  colic,  forcing  screams.
I  Daily  four  or  five  bloody,  slimy  stools,  preceded  by  bellyache

and  tenesmus  ;  a  child,  a  year  old.

■  Several  mucous  passages,  with  colic  and  vomituritio. ^Sup-

pressed measles  from  taking  cold.

■  Nightly  diarrhoea,  with  colic,  so  that  she  was  obliged  to  bend

double.

■  Diarrhoea  after  taking  cold  or  anger;  very  painful  cutting

jerks  from  r. shoulder  towards  head,  with  thirst  and de-
bility.

■  Watery  diarrhoea; six  to  eight  passages  daily,  preceded  by

cutting,  constricting  bellyache,  <  in  epigastric  region.

■  Mucous  diarrhoea. ^Scarlet  rash.

■  Painless, green, watery diarrhoea, a  mixture  of  feces and

mucus.

■  Diarrhoea,  green  and  watery,  and  slimy,  or  like  chopped  eggs

and  spinach.

■  Green,  fetid  stool,  watery  discharge.

■  Passages  at  first  greenish,  later  like  rice-water. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Yellowish-brown stool,  sour, fetid; bites everything, plays

with  tongue  and  gums;  sour  vomiting;  sleepless. ^Dentition.

■  White,  slimy  diarrhoea,  with  colic.
Stools  at  first  white,  then  putty-like  ;  t.  .
Great  ineffectual  desire  for  stool ;  t.

Diarrhoeic  complaints  aggravated :  during  dentition ;  after
taking  cold  ;  after  anger  or  chagrin  ;  at  night ;  after  to-
bacco ;  in  childbed  ;  from  downward  motion  ;  after  sup-
pression of  perspiration.

■  Torpid  stool.

■  Constipation;  discharges  yellow  and  solid,  crumbling  from  ex-

cessive dryness. ^Dentition.

■  B  Constipation  from  inactivity  of  anus.
Sticking  pain  in  rectum  after  every  stool.

■  Hemorrhoids:  blind;  painful,  bleeding,  burning,  inflamed.
Stitches  in  rectum  after  stool.

■  Soreness  of  anus,  particularly  after  stool.

■  Itching  pain  in  anus.

1 8  Ulcerating  fissures  at  anus.

■  Chafing  about  anus.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Dragging  towards  ureters  like  labor-pains,
with  very  frequent  urging  to  urinate.


479  CHAMOMILLA.

I  Sticking  pain  in  neck  of  bladder  when  not  urinating.

■  Burning  in  neck  of  bladder  when  urinating.

I  Ineffectual  urging,  with anguish;  sensation of  smarting,  or
burning  pain  in  urethra,  during  micturition.

■  Desire  to  pass  water  frequently,  it  being  profuse  and  pale.

^ISTervous  disorders.
Biting  pain  in  urethra  when  urinating.
Urination  prevented  on  account  of  pain  in  abdomen.
Force  of  bladder  is  weakened,  urine  passes  in  a  weak  stream.
Involuntary  passage  of  urine,  which  feels  hot.

■  Involuntary  urination  at  night.

■  Urine  : hot ; yellow,  with  flaky  sediment ; scanty  ; turbid,

clay- colored soon after  passing ; turbid, gets thick when
standing,  sediment  yellow  ;  abundant  and  light  colored  ;  red
as  blood.
^^Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Violent. erections,  and  excited  sexual
desire  ; also  nightly  emissions.
Itching,  stinging  pain  in  margin  of  prepuce.

■  Swelling  of  prepuce  and  soreness  of  border. ^Sycosis.
^*  Female  Sexual  Organs. Congestion  to  uterus.

■  Drawing  tearing  in  uterus, painful to  touch; she  feels  as

though  she  could  not  possibly  bear  the  least  touch. ^In-
duration of  uterus.

■  Menses: too  early; too  profuse; blood  offensive  smelling ;

blood  coagulated,  dark.
Menses  suppressed.
Suppression  of  menses,  with  swelling  of  pit  of  stomach,  and  a

pain  as  if  heart  would  be  pressed  down,  with  swollen  abdomen,

labor-like  pains  and  anasarca.

■  Excessive  menstruation, blood dark, nearly black, clotted,

with  .pain  through  from  back  to  front,  attacks  of  syncope,
coldness  of  limbs,  much  thirst.

■  Profuse  discharge  of  clotted  blood,  with  severe  labor-like  pains

in  uterus  ;  tearing  pains  in  legs.

■  Cutting  colic  and  drawing  in  thighs  before  menses.

■  Labor-like  pains  before  or  during  menstruation.

■  During  menses: swollen  breasts,  sore  nipples,  diarrhoea  with

colic,  fainting,  short,  dry  cough,  labor-like  pains.

■  Discharge  of  blood  before  proper  period.

■  Passage  of  blood  between  menses.
Metrorrhagia,  even  in  old  women.

■  Metrorrhagia  of  dark,  coagulated  blood,  flowing  more  in  par-

oxysms ; much  thirst ;  coldness  of  limbs,

■  Metrorrhagia,  with  passage  of  foetid  blood  in  lumps.

■  Pressing  towards  genital  organs;  passing  of  large  quantities

of  colorless  urine.

■  Drawing  from  small  of  back  forwards,  griping  and  pinching  in

uterus,  followed  by  discharge  of  large  clots  of  blood.


CHAMOMILLA.  480

II  Menstrual  colic,  following  anger.

1 1  Membranous  dysmenorrhoea.

I  Acrid,  biting,  watery  discharge  from  vagina,  particularly  after

a  meal.
I B  Yellow,  smarting  leucorrhoea.
iSmarting-burning  in  vagina,  as  if  excoriated.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Toothache  during

pregnancy,  pains  render  her  frenzied.
Bloody  discharge  with  labor-like  pains  during  pregnancy.

■  Threatened  abortion,  with  discharge  of  dark  blood  ; frequent

urination,  urine  profuse  and  pale  ;  great  restlessness  and
agony  ;  irritability  ;  heaviness  of  whole  abdomen  ;  frequent
yawning,  chills  and  shuddering.

I  Uterine  hemorrhage  after  abortion,  in  spells;  contracting,  out-

ward pressing  pains  in  abdomen  proceeding  from  back ;
<;  when  lying  on  back ;  ringing  in  ears  ;  frontal  headache.

II  Labor- pains  press  upward;  she  is  hot  and  thirsty,  cross  and
inclined  to  scold.

B Labor-pains  spasmodic  and  distressing;  tearing  pains  down
legs  ;  she  is  oversensitive  to  the  pain,  wishes  to  get  away
from  herself;  is  irritable  and  snappish,  desires  fresh  air;
says  she  must  and  will  get  up.

■  Spasmodic  distressing  labor-pains  during  pregnancy,  prevent-

ing sleep  ;  irritability.
I  Violent  labor-pains  and  tearing  in  veins  of  legs,  with  discharge
of  dark,  coagulated  blood.

I  Labor-pains,  with  more  or  less  discharge  of  dark  blood  and

frequent  urination,  urine  being  profuse  and  pale.

I I  Hour- glass  contraction;  irritable;  thirsty;  desire  for  fresh
air  ;  restless.

I  i  Rigidity  of  os  ;  scarcely  able  to  endure  the  pains.

I I  After-pains  very  acute  and  distressing.

■  Constant  violent  after-pains  on  second  day  after  delivery  of

fourth  child;  become  unbearable  when  child  nurses,  so  that
she  screams  out.

■  Too  long  continued  after-pains.

■  Post  partum  hemorrhage: the  uterus  outside  the  abdomen  is

felt  to  be  contracted  into  little  knots  or  bunches  about  the
size  of  a  walnut;  redness  of  one  cheek,  paleness  of  the  other.

■  Milk-fever,  after  anger.

■  Metritis,  after  violent  anger,  especially  after  parturition,  and

lochia  generally  increased.

■  Puerperal fever, with great restlessness, excitement, sore

breasts,  absence  of  milk  ;  mucous,  greenish,  watery,  milky
diarrhoea,  profuse  lochia,  with  labor-like  pains,  going  through
from  back  to  front.

■  ■Puerperal  convulsions,  after  anger;  or  has  one  red  cheek,  the

other  being  pale.


481  CHAMOMILLA.

Rash  of  lying-in  women  and  nursing  infants,  caused  by  lieat  or
errors  in  diet,  with  watery,  greenish,  chopped-egg  diarrhoea,
corroding  anus.

■  Lochia  too  profuse  and  bloody.

■  Suppression  of  lochia,  followed  by  irritability,  diarrhoea,  colic

and  toothache.
I  Dark  lochia!  discharge.

■  Excessive  sweating  after  confinement.

■  Milk  runs  out  in  nursing  women.

■  Milk  is  cheesy,  or  mixed  with  blood  or  pus.

■  Suppression  of  milk  from  a  fit  of  anger.

■  Distress  after  nursing.

■  iMammcB  hard  and  tender  to  touch,  with  drawing  pains;  is

fretful,  sleepless  and  cross.

■  Induration  in  mammary  glands,  very  tender  to  touch;  draw-

ing lacerating  pains. ^Scirrhus.

■  Breasts  are  very  tender,  nipples  inflamed  and  swollen.

■  Erysipelas  of  breasts,  nipples  excessively  sore.

■  Infants:  screaming  day  and  night,  often  without  cause  ; in-

cipient hydrocephalus  ;  stoppage  of  nose,  or  watery  moisture
runnitjg  from  nose  ;  inflammation  of  intestines,  when  stools
are  thin,  watery,  accompanied  by  much  pain,  <  at  night ;
the  little  sleep  at  night  disturbed  by  frequent  starting ;  in-
cipient marasmus,  frequent  diarrhoeic  stools,  occasionally
swelling  of  glands,  abdomen  tense  and  ^ard ;  hernia ;
scream  with  colic ;  frequent  diarrhoeic  stool  corroding
anus ;  screaming  "with  great  restlessness,  tossing  about,
colic,  drawing  up  of  legs  ;  troublesome,  dry  cough  ;  pneu-
monia; catarrhal  irritation,  loose  cough,  rattling  breath-
ing; cardiac  anguish;  induration  of  mammary  glands,
tender  to  touch  ;  erysipelatous  inflammation  and  swelling  of
breasts  ;  convulsive  twitching  of  limbs,  when  falling  asleep ;
incipient  spasms  ;  epileptic  attacks  ;  feverish  condition  with
irritated  nerves,  anxiety  and  restlessness,  easily  startled;
abrasions  and  chafing  ; rash.

■  ■  Children  have  spasms  in  consequence  of  nursing  milk  vitiated

by  a  fit  of  anger.

"  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Burning  in

larynx.

■  ■Sensation  of  rawness  and  scraping  in  larynx.

■  Sensation  of  rawness  in  upper  part  of  air-passages.

■  Sensation  of  slight  pressure  on  air-passages,  with  some  irrita-

tion to  cough.

■  ■Tickling  in  pit  of  throat  causing  scraping,  dry  cough.
Voice  hoarse.

■  Catarrhal hoarseness, with dryness of  eyelids, burning  or

stinging  sensation  in  larynx,  painful  soreness  in  one  spot,
only  relieved  by  long  coughing  and  raising  a  little  phlegm.

VOL.  III. — 31.


CHAMOMILLA.  482

I  Hoarseness,  on  account  of  tough  mucus  in  larynx,  which  can
only  be  removed  by  strong  hawking.

■  Hoarseness,  with  violent  persistent  cough,  a  high  degree  of

heat  every  evening,  with  fretfulness  on  awaking  ;  and  child
frets  and  scolds,  asks  for  one  thing  and  then  for  another.

I  Hoarseness  after  taking  cold.

I  Inflammation  of  throat,  with  stinging,  ulcerative  pain  at  epi-
glottis, which  excites  cough  and  interferes  with  swallowing.

■  Whistling,  wheezing  and  rattling  in  trachea,  when  breathing.

■  Sensation  of  cord around trachea,  with constant desire to

cough.

■  Croup  of  children  ; spasm  of  chest,  with  suifocative  attacks

after  anger  ;  child  wants  to  be  carried.

■  Nervous  bronchial  asthma.

^®  Respiration. Anxious  breathing.

■  Oppressed  breathing,  as  if  chest  were  not  wide  enough.

■  Dyspnoea,  constricted  feeling  at  supra- sternal  fossa,  with  con-

stant irritation  to  cough.

1  I  Dyspnoea,  as  from  suffocative  catarrh  (larynx  feels  con-
stricted) in  region  of  pit  of  throat,  a  constant  irritation  to
cough.

Suff'ocative  dyspnoea,  with  sensation  of  being  strangled  by
cord  around  trachea  ;  constant  desire  to  cough.

■  ■Suffocative  attacks  from  repercussion  of  measles  eruption,  by

taking  cold.
Suffocative  attacks.

Rapid,  deep  breathing,  with  great  heaving  of  chest.
Short,  panting  breath.

■  Short  breath,  with  rattling.
Short,  croaking  breathing.

Draws  short,  deep  breaths,  with  great  elevation  of  thorax.

■  Rattling  breathing,  with  cough.

■  Rattling  breathing,  slow  inspiration  and  rapid  expiration.

■  Sour  smelling  or  fetid  breath.

■  Loud,  rattling,  sighing  or  unequal  respiration.

Snoring  inspirations  daring  sleep,  which  are  shorter  than  the
expirations,  with  open  mouth  and  hot,  clammy  sweat  on  fore-
head.

■  ■  Asthma  after  a  fit  of  anger.

■  Asthmatic  attack,  seemingly  produced  by  an  accumulation  of

flatus,  >  from  bending  head  back,  in  cold  air,  and  from
drinking  cold  water;  ■<  in  dry  weather  and  from  warm  diet.

■  Asthma  from  vapors  of  sulphur,  after  Pulsat.

^^  Cough. iThe  child  becomes  angry  and  then  coughs.

■  (Jough  and  hoarseness  with  rattling  mucus  in  trachea,  especi-

ally during  winter.

■  Constant  irritation  to  cough,  beneath  upper  part  of  sternum.


483  CHAMOMILLA

I  Constant  desire to  cough, -with sensation of  cord around

trachea.
I  Cough  caused  by  irritation  low  down  in  air-passages,  during

night.
I  Cough  from  tickling  in  chest.
I  Paroxysms  of  coughing  about  midnight,  with  which  something

seems  to  rise  in  throat,  as  if  she  would  suffocate.
I  Cough  particularly  at  night,  with  tough,  slimy  expectoration,

tasting  bitter  and  putrid.
I  Dry  cough  ■<  at  night  and  during  sleep.
Cough,  with  expectoration  during  day,  without  at  night.
I  Dry  cough  from  catching  cold.
I  Rough,  scraping  cough  of  children  in  winter,  with  tickling  in

supra-sternal  fossa,  •<  at  night.

I  Dry  cough,  continuing  during  sleep.

■  Cough  dry  and  hacking;  child  is  very  fretful.

I I  Scraping,  dry  cough,  caused  by  tickling  in  pit  of  throat,
<  at  night,  even  in  sleep,  especially  with  children  after  tak-
ing cold  in  winter.

■  Rough,  dry  cough. ^Sequel  to  measles.

I  Cough,  with  flushes  of  heat  in  face,  at  same  time  chilliness  of

limbs  and  back.
I  Cough  threatens  to  burst  chest. iRheumatism.
I  Amelioration  of  cough,  when  getting  warm  in  bed.

■  Expectoration  bloody,  dark  and  coagulated.
Cough,  with  rattling  in  chest.

Expectoration  : acrid,  blood  coagulated ; dark  ; mucous  ;  vis-
cous ;  watery.
Taste  of  expectoration  :  bitter,  putrid,  or  sour.

■  Catarrhal  stage  of  whooping-cough,  with  constant,  irritating,

dry  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Burning  pain  under  sternum,  and
from  beneath  sternum  to  mouth.
Burning  in chest, with dullness in head, as  if  he did not
know  where  he  was,  with  anxiety.

■  Constriction  in  upper  part  of  chest,  which  hurts  on  coughing.
Tensive  pain  across  chest,  when  breathing.

■  Sudden  stitches  and  darts  through  chest,  extorting  screams;

dyspnoea taking away voice and threatening suffocation.
^Rheumatism.
I  I  Single  severe  stitches  in  chest  at  times.

■  Stitches  into  chest  from abdomen  after  each  start,  as  in  a

fright,  when  waking  or  sleeping.

■  Chest  painful,  when  coughing.

■  Stitches  in  sides  of  chest.

■  Stitches  shoot  from  abdomen  into  middle  of  chest,  as  from

flatulence.


CHAMOMILLA.  484

Stitches  in  side  of  chest  beneath  ribs  and  shoulder-blades,  when

breathing.
I  Pain  in  chest  with  every  deep  breath. ^Rheumatism.
Chest  is  sore  internally  as  if  bruised.
(Oppression  of  chest  as  from  flatulence  which  has  accumulated

in  upper  part  of  abdomen.
I  Heavy  feeling  in  chest.

Pressive  pain  beneath  sternum,  Avhich  impedes  breathing.
Drawing  pain,  or  sensation  as  if  r.  side  of  chest  were  repeatedly

drawn  inward,
i  Oppression  of  chest,  short,  moaning  breathing,  with  pain  in

chest,  sometimes  stitches,  on  taking  a  deep  breath.

■  Rattling  of  mucus  in  chest.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Palpitation  and  faintness.
I  Uneasiness  about  heart,  faints  frequently;  twitching  of  limbs  ;

oppression  of  chest. ^Shock  of  injury.
I  Pain  in  heart,  as  if  something  weighed  it  down. ^Cardialgia.
I A  kind  of  faintness  ; he  becomes  sick and  qualmish  about

heart,  feet  suddenly  feel paralyzed, with heaviness of  all

limbs,  as  if  they  were  worn  out.

■  Shooting  stitches  in  precordial  region,  thence  to  various  parts

of  body.

I  I  Rapid stitches about heart, on motion, interfering with
breathing.

I  Pulse  small,  but  tense  and  accelerated. 6'Neuralgia.

Pulse  frequently  very  unequal,  and  for  a  time  weak.

I  Pulse  first  full,  then  again  weak  and  contracted.

I  Pulse  small  and  uneven.

Pulse  small  and  rapid  ; t.
^^  Outer  Chest. Tearing  pain  in  region  of  clavicle  and  throat.

I  Whole  thorax  feels  as  if  beaten. ^Rheumatism.

A  hard  node  beneath  nipple,  painful  to  touch,  with  drawing-
tearing  pain.

Scirrhous  hardness  of  mammary  glands.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Tensive  stiffness  of  cervical  muscles.

Glands  swollen  and  often  very  sensitive  ;  painful,  when  turn-
ing neck.

Drawing  pain  in  scapulae.

■  Drawing  or  stinging  or  tearing  pain  in  back.

■  Great  pain  in  back,  sometimes  extending  through  abdomen  to

front,  and  into  genitals. ^Threatened  miscarriage.

■  Bruised  sensation  in  muscles  of  loins  and  back.

■  Small  of  back  feels  bruised.
Contractive  sensation  in  spine.

■  Pain  in  small  of  back,  especially  at  night.

Fullness,  anxiety,  and  tearing  pain  in  back,  after  eating;  after-
wards extends  to  abdomen.

■  Backache,  <  when  stooping  and  walking,  and  from  coffee.


485  CHAMOMILLA.

Unendurable  pain  in  loins  and  hip-joint  at  night,  if  he  lies
upon  opposite  side.

Stiff  pain  in  loins,  after  sittinfi;.

iBackache. ^Tertian  intermittent.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Uninterrupted  fine  sensitive pressure  in  arti-
cular ligaments and periosteum of  arm from shoulder  to
fingers,  a  drawing  tearing,  <  after  midnight,  when  lying  on
back,  >  when  lying  upon  painful  arm.

Jerking  stitches  like  electric  sparks  in  left  shoulder  and  ex-
tending into  cervical  muscles.

Stitches  extending  through  right  arm  to  shoulder.

I  Pain  in  arms,  cannot  bear  slightest  motion.

Tearing  pain  in  muscles  of  arms,  particularly  in  flexors  of  fore-
arm, in  morning  soon  after  waking,  <<  in  cool  evening  air.

I  Stiffness  of  arm,  as  if  it  would  go  to  sleep,  when  one  grasps

anything  with  hand.
Crawling  tearing  in  bones  of  arm,  extending  into  fingers,  as  if

arm  were  numb.
Pricking  numb  sensation  in  right  arm,  waking  from  sleep  at

night.

I I  Arms  immediately  go  to  sleep,  if  she  grasps  anything  firmly;
she  is  obliged  to  let  them  sink  down.

Paralytic-like  pressive  sensation  along  nerves  of  arm,  extend-
ing to  tips  of  fingers.

Drawing  and  paralytic  pain  in  elbows  and  hands.

Drawing  pain  in  inner  portion  of  arm,  from  elbow  to  tips  of
fingers,  late  in  evening.

Pains  in  elbows  as  after  carrying  a  heavy  weight  with  arms
bent,  aggravated  by  extending  arms,  worse  on  right  side.

Drawing  pain  and  stitches  in  wrist.

Left  arm  went  to  sleep  without  having  been  lying  on  it.

I  Convulsions  of  arms,  with  clenching  of  thumbs.

■  Convulsive  twitchings  of  fingers.

Severe  stitches  in  arms  along  bones,  especially  in  forearms  and
in  metacarpal  bones.

Stitches  in  hands  and  finger-joints.

Burning  pain  in  hand,  in  afternoon.

iFingers  become  cold  and  are  inclined  to  "go  to  sleep,"  while
sitting.

Fingers  '"go  to  sleep,"  in  morning.

I  Cold  hands,  with  cold  perspiration  in  palms  of  hands.  ^Rheu-
matism.

Pain  in  thumb  and  index-finger,  as  from  a  sprain  or  a  strain,
or  from  too  great  exertion,  or  as  if  it  were  broken ;  felt  when
moving  it.

I  Finger-joints  red  and  swollen.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  hip-joint,  as  if  sprained,  on  walking,
after  sitting,  in  evening.


CHAMOMILLA.  486

A  kind  of  fierce  labor- pain,  extending  from  sacrum  into  thigh,
a  drawing  paralytic  pain.

■  Violent  drawing  tearing  pains  from  1.  ischium  to  os  calcis  and

sole  of  foot,  with  cramp-like  tension  of  muscles. ^'Sciatica.
Stitches  in  nates  and  thighs.

Pain  on  posterior  surface  of  right  thigh  when  walking.
Bruised  pain  in  thighs.

■  Tearing  pains  down  legs.

I  I  Short  attacks  of  exhaustion,  especially  of  lower  extremities.
An indescribable  pain in thigh  on rising after  sitting,  and

when  lying  with  thigh  stretched  out.
Paralytic  stiffness  with  weariness  of  thigh,  like  a  bruise.
Stitches  in  thighs.
Bruised  pain  in  thighs.

■  Heaviness  and  lassitude  in  legs. ^Post  partum  hemorrhage.

■  Restlessness  of  legs  and  feet,  at  night.

He  was  obliged  to  stretch  out  legs  from  time  to  time  in  order
to  get  rested.

■  Trembling  of  lower  leg,  when  going  to  sleep.
Tearing  pain  in  upper  and  lower  legs.

■  Stitches  jumping  about  from  place  to  place,  especially  in  knees

and  ankles,  disappearing  on  motion.
Tension  in  knees.

■  Cracking  of  knee  during  motion.

She  had  to  draw  up  her  feet  on  account  of  pain  in  calves  and
knees,  when  she  stretches  they  "go  to  sleep."

Drawing  pain,  extending  from  knee  through  lower  leg,  late  in
evening.

Drawing,  tearing  pain,  extending  from  knee  to  ankle.

■  Violent  drawing  up  of  knees  towards  chest  so  soon  as  he  falls

asleep,  dreams  he  is  falling  into  the  depths.
Stitches  below  head  of  fibula.

■  ■Cramp  in  legs  and  calves,

■  Crawling  and  heaviness  of  calves.
Sensation  in  legs  as  if  they  would  fall  asleep.

■  Redness  and  swelling  around  malleoli. ^Rheumatism.
Constrictive  sensation  in  ankles.

Tearing  pain  in  feet,  he  cannot  allow  them  to  be  covered
in  bed.

■  Tearing  pain  in  feet  after  a  severe  chill ;  must  lie  down  and

keep  quiet,  pain  in  ankle,  ■<  from  every  motion.
Feet  seem  paralyzed,  and  pithy  in  soles  on  stepping  on  them,

■<  at  night.
Itching  pain  internally  in  side  of  heel.
It  seems  as  though  toes  would  bend  up  and  would  go  to  sleep,

while  sitting,  especially  great  toe.
Spasmodic  contraction  of  toes,  with  tearing  pain  in  limbs.

■  Tearing  pain  in  feet  following  a  severe  chill ;  she  has  to  lie


487  CHAMOMILLA.

down  and  keep  quiet,  every  motion  brings  on  pain  in  joint

of  foot.
Feet  feel  paralyzed,  with  faintness. See  29,
Tension  in  feet  and  up  calves.
1 1  Burning  of  soles,  at  night ;  puts  feet  out  of  bed.
I  Sensation  of  numbness  in  toes.
^*  Limbs in General. I  Pain in periosteum , with paralytic

weakness.

■  Drawing  and  tearing  pains  in  limbs,  •<  at  night,

I  Tearing  (neuralgic)  pain  in  all  limbs;  only  >>  by  constant

tossing  about  in  bed.
I  Aching  in  all  limbs,  with  lassitude.
I  Pain  in  limbs,  with  weakness,  slow,  dragging  gait.
Drawing-tearing  jerks  in  long  bones  of  limbs,  or  in  tendons.
I  Nightly lame, tearing pain in limbs, with sensation of

numbness.
I  Limbs  feel  heavy. ^Threatened  miscarriage.
I  Stiffness  in  limbs.

■  Convulsive  twitching  in  limbs. ^Threatened  miscarriage.
Convulsive,  single  jerks  of  limbs,  when  just  falling  asleep.
Hands  and  feet  become  easily  stiffened  in  cold,  as  if  they  would

be  frozen.

I  Joints  sore,  as  if  bruised  and  tired  out; no  power  in  hands

and  feet.
Pains  in  all  joints  on  motion,  as  if  they  were  stiff  and  would
break.

■  Cracking  in  joints, especially of  lower limbs, with pains

therein,  as  if  bruised.

II  Violent  rheumatic  pains  drive  him  out  of  bed  at  night,  and
compel  him  to  walk  about.

^^  Rest, Position. Motion. Inclination  to  lie  down.

Lying:  down,  flickering  before  eyes  ;  difficult  swallowing;  in
bed,  nausea  with  vertigo  ;  on  back,  pressing  pain  in  ab-
domen, proceeding  from  back  ;  pressing  in  articular  liga-
ments; indescribable  pain  in  thighs,  when  stretched  out ;
must  lie  down,  tearing  pain  in  feet ;  <  neuralgic  pain ;
wakeful.

Lying  upon  opposite  side:  pain  in  loins  and  hip  joint.

Sitting :  erect  in  bed,  vertigo  ;  tearing  headache ;  in  bed,  dim-
sightedness  ;  fingers  become  cold  ;  toes  bend  up  ;  drowsy  ;
causes  stiff  pain  in  loins.

Sits  stiffly  on  a  chair,  like  a  statue,  and  does  not  seem  to  notice
anything.

Rising:  from  bed,  vertigo;  after  sitting,  vertigo;  after  sitting,
pain  in  thigh  ;  aggravates  ulcers.

Stooping :  pressure  from  vertex  to  forehead  ;  dull  pressure  as
from  a  blow  in  inner  ear ;  stitches  in  ear ;  backache.

Bending  head  backwards,  asthmatic  attack.


CHAMOMILLA.  488

Shaking  head,  pressive  pain  beneath  upper  eyelid.
Turning :  over  in  bed,  tearing  headache  ;  neck  painful.
Grasping  with  hand:  stiffness  of  arm;  arms  "go  to  sleep."
Stretching:  when  lying,  causes  pain  in  thigh;  is  obliged  to

stretch  legs  to  get  rested; "gone  to  sleep"  feeling  in  calves

and  knees.
Child  stretches  itself.

Tossing  about  in  bed,  <  pain  in  all  limbs.
Tosses  about  in  bed  as  if  desperate  ;  colic.
She  must  and  will  get  up.
Walking  :  backache  ; >  rheumatic  pains.
1 1  Child  gets  relief  from  being  carried.

Moving :  eyes,  pressive  pain  beneath  upper  lid  ; head  back-
wards and  forwards,  throat  pains.
Motion : slightest,  pain  in  arms ; stitches  in  limbs,  jumping

from  place  to  place;  cracking  of  knee ; tearing  pain  in  feet ;

pain  in  all  joints ; aggravates  ulcers ; rapid,  stitches  about

heart.
^^  Nerves. I Excessive  impressionability  and  irritability  of  nervous

system.
I  lOversensitiveness  after  abuse  of  coffee  or  opium.

I  Irritability,  especially  following anger,  progressing  even  to

most  violent  spasms  of  chest  and  throat.

■  Intense restlessness, and spasmodic twitching of limbs.

^Threatened  miscarriage.

I I  Child  suddenly  stiffens  body  and  bends  backwards,  kicks
when  carried,  screams  immoderately  and  throws  everything
off. ^Dentition.

Tremulous  starting  up  ;  twitches  of  limbs  and  eyelids.
Single  twitches  of  limbs  and  of  head  during  morning  nap.

■  Convulsions  of  children: child  becomes  stiff,  rolls  its  eyes,

distorts  face,  twitches,  throws  its  limbs  about,  clenches
thumbs,  bends  body  backwards  or  sideways,  has  rattling
breathing,  with  foam  at  mouth;  moves  legs  up  and  down
alternately,  grasps  and  reaches  with  hands,  mouth  drawn
from  side  to  side,  eyes  staring,  or  eyes  and  face  distorted ;
stupor. ^Dentition.

■  Convulsive condition of  little children, with distended  ab-

domen, greenish,  whitish,  chopped,  frequent  stools;  vomit-
ing of  sour  smelling  fluid.

■  Tetanic  convulsions  following  measles.

■  Twitching  in  eyelids,  eyeballs,  lips  and  facial  muscles.

■  Pain  in  limbs,  with  weakness,  and  slow,  dragging  gait.

■  General  prostration,  faintness.

■  Great  prostrating  debility  as  soon  as pain  begins. ^Neu-

ralgia.

■  Lassitude  in  morning  on  awaking.
Syncope,  particularly  hysterical.


489  CHAMOMILLA.

Sensation  of  numbness.

■  Neuralgia : patient  wild  and  unruly,  wants  relief  at  once ;

heat  with  anxiety  and  restlessness  ; hot  sweat,  particularly
on  face  and  scalp  ; <<  at  night,  while  lying  down  ;  must  get
up  and  rush  about ;  affects  principally  1.  side.
^^  Sleep. She  complains  of  sleepiness  on  account  of  bruised  feel-
ing in  limbs,  with  inclination  to  weep  and  ill-humor.

■  Frequent  yawning. ^Threatened  miscarriage.

■  Yawning  and  stretching.

■  Sleepiness,  with  dullness  of  senses.

■  Sleep,  with  half-open  eyes.

■  Snoring  breathing  when  asleep.

■  ■Sleepy,  but  cannot  sleep.

■  Drowsiness,  with  short  breathing,  groaning,  starts.

■  If  he  sits  down  during  day  he  wishes  to  sleep,  but  if  he  lies

down  he  is  unable  to  sleep,  and  remains  awake.

■  Could  not  sleep  till  2  a.m.,  partly  from  painful  weakness  in

limbs,  partly  from  sensation  of  heat  and  restlessness,  which
makes  him  toss  about  in  bed.

■  ■Sleepless  and  restless  at  night.

■  Nightly  sleeplessness  from  anxiety  and  visions.

■  Restless  sleep,  with  weeping,  howling,  groaning  and  tossing

about.

■  Sleeplessness,  with  fever  and  dyspnoea.

■  Starting  and  jerking  while  asleep.

■  Scarcely  sleeps,  and  on  falling  asleep  is  tormented  by  vivid,

fanciful,  anxious  and  frightening  dreams.
Horrid  nightmare  ;  child  awakes  three  or  four  times  nightly
with  fearful  fright,  uttering  sudden  startling  and piercing
cries,  and  vows  there  is  some  dreadful  beast  under  the  bed
or  in  his  room  ;  nervous,  peevish,  and  fretful.

■  During  sleep  : moaning  ; weeping  and  wailing  ; snoring  in-

spirations with  open  mouth;  starting  up,  crying  out,  tossing
about  and  talking ;  headache  and  other  pain  is  felt ;  hot,
sticky  sweat  on  forehead  ;  twitching  of  muscles.

■  Coma  vigil,  or  rather  an  inability  to  open  eyes  ;  slumbering

without  sleep,  quick  expiration,  and  tearing  headache  in  fore-
head, with  nausea.
Lies  with  knees  apart  while  sleeping.

■  Aggravation  of  complaints  on  falling  asleep  and  awaking.
Dreams : anxious ; she  sees  horrible  apparitions  and  starts ;

about  fatal  accidents.
^^  Time.  At  night :  sensation  of  violent  heat,  with  burning,  un-
quenchable thirst,  dry  tongue,  stupefaction.
Night :  headache  after  eating  ;  illusions  of  hearing  ;  umbilical
region  sensitive  to  touch  ;  toothache  <C  ',  toothache  before
midnight ;  rheumatic  toothache  ;  painful  swelling  of  cheek  ;
children  want  to  be  carried;  taste  slimy,  bitter,  sour,  rancid,


CHAMOMILLA.  490

putrid,  offensive  ;  inclination  to  vomit ;  gastralgia  <  ;  diar-
rhoea; involuntary  urination;  inflammation  of  intestines  ■<  ;
cough  without  expectoration  ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  unen-
durable pain  in  loins  ;  legs  restless  ;  feet  seem  paralyzed  ;
burning  in  soles  ;  drawing-tearing  pains  in  limbs  ;  violent
rheumatic  pains  drive  him  out  of  bed  ;  neuralgia  ■<  ;  sleep-
less ;  rheumatism  ;  burning-smarting  or  darting-lacerating
pains  in  ulcer  ;  itching  of  rash.

Midnight :  paroxysms  of  coughing.

After  midnight :  pain  in  arm.

2  A.M. :  could  not  sleep.

Morning:  vertigo,  on  rising;  sticking  and  boring  in  r.  temple;
headache  ;  eyes  dim  and  weak  ;  inflammation  of  eyes  ;  eyes
swollen  ;  corners  of  eyes  filled  with  purulent  matter  ;  bitter
taste  ;  after  drinking  coffee,  heat,  sweat,  vomiting  ;  epigas-
trium painfully  bloated;  colic  at  sunrise;  heaviness;  fingers
"go  to  sleep;  "  single  twitches  in  limbs.

Early  in  morning  in  bed :  eyes  half  open  and  directed  down-
wards, somewhat  enlarged  pupils,  sopor.

9  to  12  A.M. :  general  heat,  then  violent  sweat.
Forenoon  :  pressive  pain  in  both  temples.
Noon  : <i  tearing  headache.

Afternoon : pressure  in  head  ; burning  pain  in  hand  ; fever

paroxysms.
Evening  : pressive  headache  ;  burning  cheeks  ;  flying  shivers  ;

unnatural  hunger ;  hoarseness,  with  violent  cough  ;  drawing

pain  in  inner  portion  of  arms  ; pain  in  hip-joint ; drawing

pain  in  knee  ;  fever.
Day  :  cough  with  expectoration.
Day  and  night :  screaming.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather, Warm  things  taken  into  mouth:

<^  toothache.
Warm  room  : toothache  commences  in.
Getting  warm  in  bed : <<  toothache ; >  cough.
Heat  of  bed  : ■<  ulcers.

1 0  Pains  are  aggravated  by  heat.
Warm  clothes: >  abdominal  colic.
Cold : >  ulcers.

Cold  water : <<  toothache  ;  rheumatic  toothache.

Draft  of  air  :  toothache.

Open  air:  desire  for;  ulcers  aggravated.

1 1  Oversensitive  to  open  air,  aversion  to  wind,  particularly  sen-
sitive about  ears.

Cold  air:  very  sensitive  to  ;  chilly.

Cold  change  of  weather  : ■<  inflammation  of  eyes.

Sensitiveness  to  moist  air.

Damp  cold  weather : <<  inflammation  of  eyes.

I  Great  dread  of  wind.


491  CHAMOMILLA.

Windy  weather : <<  ulcers.
Dry  weather  :  asthmatic  attacks.
*"  Fever. I  Chilliness  and  coldness  in  general ; internal  coldness  ;

one-sided  chill  with  or  without  thirst.
1 1  Chill  and  coldness  of  whole  body,  with  burning  heat  of  face

and  hot  breath.
I  Cold  limbs,  with  burning  heat  of  face,  burning  heat  in  eyes,

and  burning  hot  breath.
I  Coldness  efface,  hands  and  feet.
I  Chill  of  posterior,  with  heat  of  anterior  part  of  body,  or  vice

versa.
Immediately  after  uncovering  violent  chill.
I  Chill,  with  trembling  of  body,  nausea  and  bitter  vomiting.
I  Chill  and  shivering,  generally  of  single  parts  only,  with  heat

of  others.
I  Chill,  followed  by  heat,  with  biting,  sour  smelling  sweat.

■  Chilliness  and  sensitiveness  to  cold  air  ;  she  has  to  keep  well

covered  at  night.

■  Shivering  when  uncovering  and  from  cold  air.

■  Slight  shiverings,  alternating  with  heat,  creep  over  back  and

abdomen.  ,

■  Shivering  on  posterior  portion  of  body,  of  arms,  of  thighs,  and

of  back,  which  returns  in  paroxysms,  without  external  cold-
ness, but  rather  with  internal  and  external  heat,  especially
of  forehead  and  face.

■  Shivering  from  draught.

■  Constant  alternation  of  heat  and  coldness  of  various  parts;

at  one  time  hands  were  cold,  at  another  warm  ;  at  one  time
lower  leg,  at  another  thigh  was  cold,  at  another  warm  ;  at
one  time  forehead  was  cold  and  cheeks  hot,  etc.

■  Alternation  of  cold  and  heat  in  different  parts  of  body,  especi-

ally face.

■  ■Heat  and  shivering  intermingled,  mostly  with  one  red  and

one  pale  cheek.

■  Febrile  excitement  and  oversensitiveness to  twitchings  and

spasms.

■  Internal  heat,  with  shivering.

■  Heat,  with  anxiety  and  sweat  on  face  and  scalp.

■  Burning  heat  in  lightly  covered  parts,  though  when  not  cov-

ered almost  cold.

■  Burning  in  cheeks,  with  Hying  shiverings,  in  evening.

■  Heat  creeping  over  head  and  face  continued  a  long  time.

■  Heat  and  sweat  of  face,  after  eatin^  and  drinkinor.
Biting  heat.

■  ■Long  lasting  heat,  with  violent  thirst  and  frequent  startings

in  sleep.

■  Heat,  flushed  face,  great  thirst,  headache,  colic,  abdomen  sen-

sitive to  touch  and  tympanitic;  milk  disappeared.


CHAMOMILLA.  492

I  Fever,  with  redness  of  one  cheek  and  paleness  of  other.
General  heat  9  to  12  a.m.,  then  violent  sweat.

■  Evening  fever,  with  diarrhoea.

I  I  Great  heat  and  sleeplessness  at  night.

I  Child  is  very  feverish  and  cross. ^Dentition.
IB  Hot  and  thirsty  with  the  pains.

I I  Profuse  sweat  of  covered  parts.

I  Hot  sweat,  from  pain. ^Neuralgia.

I I  Sweat  during  sleep, most  on head, usually  sour  smelling.
Sweat,  with  smarting  sensation  in  skin.

■  Profuse  night-sweat,  with  sleeplessness.

■  Relief  of  pain  after  sweat,  not  during.

■  Revulsion  of,  and  therefrom  entire  want  of  sweat.

■  SujBTering  on  account  of  checked  perspiration,  or  on  account  of

a  fit  of  anger.

■  Cold  perspiration.

■  While  sweating,  severe  itching  of  sweating  parts.

■  Paroxysm  in  afternoon,  usually  anticipating  two  hours.

■  Intermittent  fever, not  produced by  swamp  miasm, but  in

Spring  in  nervous  persons,  and  where  large  cities  extend.

■  Intermittent  fever, chill  accompanied  by  external  and  inter-

nal heat.

■  Instead  of  usual  fever  paroxysm,  violent  biliary  colic,  with

vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  in  consequence  of  vexation.

■  Gastric  or  bilious  fever:  particularly  after  violent  outbreak  of

anger;  hot  face;  unquenchable  thirst ;  bilious  taste ;  vomit-
uritio  ;  anxiety  ;  restlessness,  etc.

■  Worm  fever,  with  spasms.

■  Gastro-rheumatic  fever  after  taking  cold,  followed  by  gastric

complaints,  vomituritio,  bitter  taste,  etc.,  or  first  gastric,
then  rheumatic  troubles,  such  as  tearing  pain  in  limbs,  colic,
chilliness,  heat,  sour  sweat,  restlessness  and  sleeplessness  at
night.

■  Puerperal  fever,  with  great  restlessness  and  irritability  ;  lack

of  milk  in  breasts.
Prodroma  of  pituitary  fever.

■  Nervous  fever.

Typhoid  fever,  in  consequence  of  anger,  care,  grief,  and  taking
cold ;  spasmodic  symptoms,  diarrhoeic  stools,  with  fermenta-
tion in  abdomen ;  attacks  of  fainting,  twitching,  sleepless-
ness, with  fear,  vivid  fancies ;  body  cold  and  face  burn-
ing hot.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  ■  'Pains  recur  in  evening  and  are  worse
before  midnight.

Paroxysms :  redness  of  one  cheek ;  of  toothache,  with  ptyalism ;
of  pain  in  head  ;  of  neuralgia  ;  of  fever,  which  usually  anti-
cipates two  hours.

Intermittent  attacks  of  toothache.


493  '  CHAMOMILLA.

From  time  to  time  colic  from  flatulence.

Winter  :  rough,  scraping  cough.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  side  of  head,  tearing  and
stinging  pain  ;  great  swelling  and  bluish  redness  of  eyelids;
occasional  tearing  in  ear  ;  neuralgia  in  face  ;  cheek  red  and
hot ;  cheek  swollen  ;  erysipelas  in  cheek  ;  violent  stitches
in  upper  jaw  ;  toothache  in  lower  jaw  ;  violent  toothache  in
upper  jaw;  periodical  toothache  in  lower  jaw;  painful  swell-
ing in  cheek  ;  pain  and  swelling  in  fauces  ;  gastralgia ;  pain
in  hip  ;  arm  went  to  sleep  ;  ischium,  violent  drawing -tear-
ing pains;  scalp  and  face,  neuralgia.

Right:  side  of  head,  pressure  increasing  and  decreasing;  great
swelling  and  bluish  redness  of  eyelids  ;  ear,  as  if  hot  water
were  running  over  it ;  ear,  frequent  stitches  ;  ear,  red  and
painful;  stitches  in  jaw-joint;  pain  in  elbow  ;  cutting  jerks
in  shoulder;  when  lying  on  side,  pain  in  1.  hip;  temple,
sticking,  boring  ;  side  of  chest,  drawing  sensation.

Right  to  left:  pain  in  abdomen.

One-sided  chill.

Side  to  side:  child  draws  mouth  from.

Back  to  front :  pain  in  female  sexual  organs.

Backwards : inclined  to  bend  head  backwards  ; moves  head
backwards  and  forwards;  and  forwards,  child  draws  mouth;
labor-pains  press.
*^  Sensations. <  lOversensitiveness  of  senses,  especially  if  produced
by  coffee  or  narcotics.

As  if  a  lump  were  falling  forward  in  head  ;  as  from  firm  press-
ure with  fingers  on  forehead;  as  if  eyes  would  fall  out  of
head  ;  as  if  head  would  burst ;  as  if  top  of  head  were  blown
off;  as  if  hair  stood  on  end;  as  if  eyeball  were  drawn
tightly  backward  ;  as  if  orbital  region  were  tightly  com-
pressed from  all  sides  ;  as  if  ears  were  stopped  ;  as  if  hot
water  were  running  over  r.  ear  ;  dull  pressure  as  from  a
blow  in  inner  ear,  on  stooping  ;  as  if  gums  were  swollen
about  lower  back  teeth  ;  as  though  something  was  sticking
in  throat;  as  if  contents  of  stomach  were  passing  into  chest;
as  if  small  of  back  were  broken  ;  as  it"  abdomen  were  rolled
up  in  a  ball ;  as  if  a  hernia  would  appear  ;  as  if  heart  would
be  pressed  down ;  as  of  a  cord  around  trachea ;  as  if  she
would  suffocate  ;  as  from  flatulence,  oppression  of  chest ;  as
if  limbs  were  torn  out;  thorax,  as  if  beaten;  as  if  arms  were
numb  ;  as  if  thumb  were  broken  ;  as  if  sprained  on  walking,
limbs ;  as  if  legs  would  "go  to  sleep ;"  as  if  bruised  and  tired
out,  joints.

Lancinations :  in  ears;  in  teeth,  at  night;  in  ulcers.

Cutting :  pain  and  debility  after  drinking  ;  in  epigastrium  ;
pains  in  abdomen  ;  pain  below  umbilicus  ;  jerks  from  r.
shoulder  toward  heart ;  colic  before  menses.


CHAMOMILLA.  494

Shooting :  in  middle  ear  ;  in  precordial  region.

Stitches:  in  temples;  extending  to  occiput  like  electric  sparks;
from  palate  to  vertex  ;  in  head  and  chest ;  in  eyes  ;  in  r.
meatus,  on  stooping  ;  in  r.  mastoid  process  ;  in  r.  joint  of
jaw,  extending  into  ear  ;  through  1.  upper  jaw  ;  in  throat,
near  ear ;  in  hypochondria ;  in  region  of  liver ;  shoot
through  chest ;  and  darts,  through  chest  from  abdomen  ;  in
sides  of  chest ;  in  precordial  region ;  in  arms  along  bones ;
in  wrist;  in  hands  and  finger-joints;  in  thighs;  jumping
about,  from  knees  to  ankles.

Stinging :  pain  in  temple ;  in  face ;  pain  beneath  tongue ;
burning  pains  in  larynx  ;  pain  in  region  of  liver  ;  pain  in
pit  of  stomach  ;  in  margin  of  prepuce  ;  in  larynx;  in  skin.

Sticking  :  tearing  headache  ;  pain  in  rectum  after  stool ;  pain
in  neck  of  bladder.

Tearing :  headache  ;  pains  in  temples  ;  in  1.  ear  ;  in  head  and
jaws  ;  toothache  ;  colic  in  abdomen  ;  in  uterus ;  pains  in
veins  of  legs ;  pain  in  region  of  clavicle  ;  beneath  nipple  ;
in  back  after  eating ;  in  muscles  of  arms  from  shoulder  to
fingers ;  from  1.  ischium  to  os  calcis  ;  down  legs ;  pain  in.
upper  and  lower  legs ;  pain  in  feet.

1 1  Paralytic  sensations  are  always  accompanied  by  drawing  or
tearing  pain,  and  drawing  or  tearing  pains  rarely  occur  with-
out paralytic  or  numb  sensation  in  the  part.

Jerking  :  headache  in  forehead  ;  toothache  ;  of  long  bones  of
limbs.

Boring  :  in  roots  of  teeth.

Burrowing :  headache  in  forehead  and  temples  ;  in  head  ;  in
alveoli  of  lower  back  teeth.

Pinching :  in  uterus.

Digging:  teeth  and  gums.

Gnawing :  hollow  teeth.

Grumbling  :  toothache.

Griping :  tearing  colic  in  region  of  navel ;  inside  of  abdomen  ;
in  uterus.

Dragging :  towards  abdominal  rings.

Drawing:  headache;  in  ears;  toothache;  in  uterus;  in  thighs;
from  small  of  back  ;  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  pain  beneath
nipple  ;  pain  in  scapulae  ;  from  shoulder  to  fingers  ;  in  el-
bows and  hands;  in  wrists;  violent,  from  1.  ischium  to  os
calcis ;  pains  through  lower  legs  and  ankles.

Biting :  on  back  of  tongue  ;  in  urethra  ;  in  eruption  on  nape
of  neck.

Smarting:  in  vagina;  in  skin.

Burning:  in  forehead;  in  eyes ;  in  face;  in  swollen  gums ;  on
tongue  ;  stitching  pain  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in  anus  ;  in
neck  of  bladder  ; in  urethra  ; in  vagina  ; in  larynx  ; pain


495  CHAMOMILLA.

under  sternum ;  in  chest ;  in  palms  of  hand  ;  soles  ;  face  ;
heat  in  lightly  covered  parts;  in  skin.

Aching  :  in  all  limbs.

Scraping :  in  larynx.

Rawness :  in  larynx.

Pressive  pain :  in  both  temples  ;  beneath  upper  eyelid  ;  in
stomach  ;  beneath  sacrum.

Pressing :  headache  ;  from  vertex  over  forehead  ;  earache  ;  in
epigastrium  ;  towards  genitals.

Pressure  ;  inner  head  ;  extending  from  vertex  to  forehead ;
from  vertex  over  forehead,  when  lying  down  ;  in  head  from
within  out ;  in  orbital  region  ;  in  forehead ;  in  epigastrium,
severe  ;  in  stomach,  after  eating  a  little  ;  as  from  a  stone,  in
scrobiculum  ;  in  hypochondria  ;  on  air-passage  ;  in  articular
ligaments  of  arms.

Soreness  :  in  rectum,  after  stool ;  in  larynx  ;  chest,  internally.

Bruised :  sensation  in  head  ;  feeling  in  umbilical  region  ;  pain
in  muscles  of  lower  abdomen  ;  sensation  in  muscles  ;  pain  in
thighs  ;  feeling  in  limbs  ;  in  skin.

Rheumatic :  pain  in  head  ;  toothache ;  pains  in  limbs  drive
him  out  of  bed.

Sprained:  pain  in  thumb  and  index-finger;  in  hip-joint.

Ulcerative  :  pain  at  epiglottis.

Indescribable:  pain  in  thigh.

Pain  :  in  temples  ;  in  teeth,  shoots  back  and  forth  in  parox-
ysms; in  belly  from  side  to  side;  in  abdomen,  prevents  urina-
tion; labor-like,  in  uterus;  in  chest,  with  every  deep  breath;
in  heart ;  in  ^mall  of  back  ;  unendurable,  in  loins  ;  in  arms  ;
in  thumb ;  in  hip-joint ;  in  calves ;  in  periosteum  of  limbs.

Throbbing :  headache  ;  in  one  half  of  brain  ;  toothache  ;  in
back  part  of  throat.

Heaviness :  inner  head  ;  in  whole  abdomen  ;  in  chest ;  as  if
heart  were  weighed  down  ;  of  limbs  ;  of  eyelids  ;  in  nose  ;
in  lower  jaw  ;  in  alveoli  of  some  of  back  teeth  ;  of  legs  ;  of
calves.

Stopped  up  feeling :  nose.

Fullness  :  in  head  ;  in  nose  ;  and  distension  in  hypochondria  ;
after  eating  ;  in  alveoli  of  first  and  second  back  teeth  ;  of
both  sides  of  upper  jaw.

Empty :  abdomen.

Hollow  :  as  if  whole  abdomen  were.

Uneasiness  :  about  heart.

Too  long  :  teeth  feel.

Distended :  alveoli.

Tensive :  drawing  in  ears ;  pain  in  hypochondria ;  around
brain  ;  stiffness  in  cervical  muscles ;  knees ;  feet  and  calves.

Constriction  :  in  forehead  ;  of  meninges  ;  of  pharynx  ;  pain  in


CHAMOMILLA.  496

abdomen  and  back;  at  supra-sternal  fossa;  in  upper  part  of

chest ;  in  ankles.
Constricting :  bellyache.

Contracting  :  outward  pains  in  abdomen  ;  sensation  in  spine.
Compressed  sensation  :  of  brain  ;  pain  in  abdomen.
Cramped  feeling  :  jaw  ;  legs  and  calves.
Spasmodic  sensation  :  in  front  of  r.  ear.
Weariness :  of  thigh.

Weakness  :  muscles  of  mastication  ;  of  limbs.
Numbness  :  of  fingers  ;  in  toes  ;  all  over.
Pithy :  soles  feel.
Paralyzed  feeling :  along  nerves  of  arm  to  tips  of  fingers ;  in

feet ;  painful,  from  sacrum  into  thigh  ;  of  stiffness  in  thigh ;

pain  in  elbows  and  hands;  feet;  weakness  of  limbs.
Crawling:  in  nose  ;  1.  upper  jaw;  in  bones  of  arms  ;  in  calves.
Tickling:  in  pit  of  throat ;  in  chest.
Itching:  1.  upper  jaw;  pain  in  anus;  in  margin  of  prepuce;

toes;  of  sweating  parts  ;  of  rash;  of  skin.
Coldness  :  inside  of  abdomen.
Chilliness  :  inside  of  abdomen.
Shuddering:  through  skin.
Heat : in  face  ; in  head  ; in  eyes  ; in  auricle  ; in  nose  ;  1.

cheek  ; of  face  ; in  mouth  ; in  pharynx  ;  and  restlessness ;

forehead and  face  ; and  coldness  of  various parts  at  one
' time  ;  different  parts  of  body  ;  and  shivering  ;  and  anxiety;

creeping  over  head  and  face  ;  with  pain.
Dryness:  of  mouth.
^*  Tissues. Acts  more  on  sensory  than  on  motory  sphere.
Inflammation  resulting  from  a  fit  of  passion.
Excessive  sensibility  and  irritability  of  fibre.
Spasmodic  trembling,  associated  with  symptoms  of  nervous  irri-
tability.

■  Muscular  or  articular  rheumatism,  with  great  nervous  exci-

tability.

Neuralgia  in  paroxysms  of  most  violent  character.

I  Rheumatism  ;  drawing,  tearing  pains,  accompanied  by  sensa-
tion of  lameness  or  numbness  ;  pain  more  in  tendons,  liga-
ments and  bones  (not  in  muscles),  without  swelling  of  parts  ;
pains  <  at  night ;  they  do  not  change  location.

■  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.
Ebullitions  and  hemorrhages.

■  Incipient  gout;  gouty  ophthalmia.

Inflammation,  swelling,  induration,  and  atrophy  of  glands.

Indurations  in  mammary  gland.

Serous  non-suppurative  inflammations,  or  suppuration  of  cel-
lular tissue,  or  pus  scanty,  thin  and  corroding.

Female  genitals  :  leucorrhoea  ;  menstrual  troubles  ;  dysmenor-
rhoea;  menorrhagia,  etc.


497  CHAMOMILLA.

Increases  the  secretions  of  the  respiratory  mucous  membrane.

Bilious  vomiting ;  subacute  hepatitis  ;  mucous  diarrhoea.

E-heumatism,  in  ligaments  and  periosteum.

Fever  arising  from  physical  irritation,  such  as  dentition,  or  in-
digestible foreign  bodies  in  intestines ;  nervous  system  highly
excited,  yet  sensorium  not  much  perverted.

All  catarrhal  affections,  with  or  without  fever,  especially  after
taking  cold,  occurring  most  frequently  in  children  and  women
of  nervous  excitable  temperament.

■  Catarrhal aifections of  eyes, ears, gastro- intestinal, urino-

genital  and  respiratory  mucous  membranes.

Intestinal  catarrh,  with  affections  of  liver  and  bladder.

1 1  Digestive  canal:  increased  and  altered  secretions,  accumula-
tion of  flatus  during  the  period  of  dentition.

I  iLooseness  of  bowels,  with  colic,  following  anger,  or  in  children.
On  the  skin  it  produces  miliary  eruption,  isolated  papules  and

pustules,  and  an  unhealthy  disposition,  so  that  wounds  do

not  readily  heal,  but  become  very  painful.
^*  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Painful  to  touch :

outer  head  ; umbilical  region  ; abdomen  sensitive  ; teeth  ;

uterus  ;  mammae  ;  hard  node  beneath  nipple  ;  ulcers.
Sensitive  to  touch :  skin.
Pressure :  causes  pure  blood  to  issue  from  eyelids ;  on  angle  of

jaw  causes  pain  in  fauces ;  on  chest,  oppression.
Covering : <;  pain  in  feet.
Injuries:  readily  suppurate.
Shock  of  injury: unstrung  by  pain; <C  from  talk  or  touch  ;

groaning  ; pain  burning  and  as  if  torn  ; pale,  cold,  moist

skin, or  general perspiration ; forehead and limbs cold ;

>  from  hot  applications.

I I  Children  obtain  relief  by  being  carried.
*®  Skin. Yellow  skin.

1 1  Skin  moist  and  burning  hot.

Stinging  pain  leaving  soreness  after  scratching.

Burning  in  skin.

Smarting  in  skin.

Skin  creepy  and  sensitive  to  touch.

Bruising  pain  and  smarting  in  skin.

■  Dryness  of  skin.
Itching  of  skin.
Shuddering  felt  all  over  skin.

I  Skin  unhealthy,  every  injury  suppurates.

■  Exanthema  difficult  of  healing.  *
Miliary  exanthema.

Miliary  eruption  on  the  cheeks.

■  Red  rash  on  cheeks  and  forehead.
Erysipelas  in  the  face.

■  Erysipelas,  accompanying  toothache.


CHAMOMILLA.  498

Hives  in  peevish,  fretful  children.

An  eruption,  only  slightly  elevated,  on  nape  of  neck,  which
causes  a  biting  sensation,  compelling  her  to  scratch.

Small  red  blotches  on  skin,  which  are  covered  with  nettle-like
rash.

Rash  of  infants  and  lying-in  women.  Small  red  spots  on  skin
covered  with  pimples.

Red  rash,  consisting  of  thick  pimples,  which  are  crowded  into
a  red  spot  in  skin,  on  lumbar  vertebrae  and  on  side  of  ab-
domen ;  they  itch  especially  at  night,  with  some  biting,
shuddering  is  felt  all  about  the  spot  from  time  to  time.

■  Repercussion  of  measles  after  taking  cold,  nothing  but  bluish

spots  visible,  with  watery  evacuations,  nausea  and  colic.
I  Skin  inclined  to  inflammation.
Oversensitiveness  of  skin,  in  children.

■  Excoriation  of  children  and  infants  between  thighs.

■  Burning  and  smarting  or  darting  lacerating  pain  in  ulcer,  at

night,  with  crawling  and  painful  oversensitiveness  to  touch
and  air,  particularly  to  wind.

Redness  and  swelling  of  ulcers.

Lancinating  and  darting  in  ulcers.

"Proud  flesh"  in  sensitive  ulcers,  with  inflamed  edges.

Ulcers  are  aggravated :  at  night ;  in  open  air  ;  during  men-
struation ;  from  motion  of  aff"ected  part ;  by  wet  poultices  ;
by  pressure  on  side  of  limb  opposite  to  ulcer ;  on  rising  from
seat  or  bed ;  from  drinking  cofl"ee  ;  from  heat  of  bed,  and  in
windy  weather.

Ulcers  are  improved  by  cold.

Pustulous  pimples  on  face.
■■ I  Itching  pimples  covered  with  scurfs,  and  ulcerating  around
ulcer.

■  Severe  itching  of  sweating  parts.
Rhagades  of  skin.

■  Skin  yellow,  jaundiced.
Sequelae  of  scarlatina.
Chilblains.  •

■  Pimples  appear  with  itching  around  an  ulcer,  which  is  covered

with  a  crust  and  suppurates,  margin  around  base  of  ulcer
very  red.

■  Inflammatory  swelling  of  glands.

Skin  symptoms  are  aggravated:  in  evening  and  night;  when
the  child  is  kept  too  warm ;  after  taking  cold ;  after  scarlet

*  fever; during  menstrual  flow; during  pregnancy; during
perspiration,  and  after  suppressed  perspiration.
*•  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.

■  ■Light  or  brown  hair,  nervous,  excitable  temperament.

■  ■Children, new-born and  during  period  of  dentition.


499  CHAMOMILLA.

■  Diseases  of  children,  especially  such  as  affect  abdominal  organs
or  are  dependent  on  them.

1 1  Adults;  even  aged  persons  with  arthritic  or  rheumatic  dia-
thesis.

A  child,  set.  6  weeks. ^Ophthalmia.

A  male  infant,  of  eight  weeks,  constipated  since  birth.  ^Den-
tition.

A  child,  set.  9  months. ^Eclampsia.

A  child,  a  year  old. ^Diarrhoea.

A  boy,  set.  1  year. ^Dysentery.

A  boy,  set.  4,  light  complexioned,  blue  eyed,  sandy  haired.
^Nightmare  of  two  years  duration.

A  girl,  set.  5. ^Otalgia.

A  boy,  set.  13. ^Measles.

A  small,  robust  girl,  set.  17,  has  not  menstruated. ^Toothache.

A  young  servant  girl,  suffering  since  four  weeks.  ^Intermittens
tertiana.

A  servant  girl,  after  vexation.  ^Bilious  vomiting,  diarrhoea
and  colic.

A  girl,  S3t.  20,  robust  build,  short  in  stature,  quiet  even  tem-
perament. ^Rheumatism.

A  woman,  set.  25. ^Tetanic  convulsions  after  measles.

A  woman,  set.  25,  delicate  constitution,  has  been  nursing  three
months. /^Agalactia.

A  woman,  iet.  26. ^Threatened  abortion.

A  woman,  set.  26,  robust  build,  in  third  pregnancy.  ^Threat-
ened miscarriage.

A  woman,  set.  28,  sensitive  disposition.  ^Diarrhoea,  with
colic.

A  woman,  set.  30,  of  vigorous  constitution. ^Toothache.

A  widow,  set.  30. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

A  woman,  set.  34,  after  vexation. ^Hemicrania.

A  woman,  set.  34. ^Post  partum  hemorrhage.

A  robust  woman,  set.  34. ^111  effects  of  anger.

A  high-tempered,  thin,  young  woman. ^Bilious  fever.

A  woman,  set.  40,  exhausted  suffering  look.  ^Neuralgic  tooth-
ache.

A  man,  set.  40,  robust  and  well  nourishe'd. ^Sciatica.

A  woman,  set.  50,  diarrhoea  after  taking  cold.  ^Gastric  de-
rangement.

A  man,  set.  nearly  60,  addicted  to  the  use  of  opium.  ^Mus-
cular twitching.

A  man  suffering  from  painful  swelling  of  left  cheek  caused  by
a  carious  and  badly  plugged  tooth.

A  farmer,  after  intermittent  fever,  vexation. ^Bilious  colic.

A  woman,  set.  83. ^Diarrhoea.


CHAMOMILLA.  500

^^  Relations.  Antidoted  by:  \  Aeon.,  Alum.,  Borax,  Camphor.,
tCoccuL,  \  Ooffea,  Coloc,  Conium,  \Ignat.,  \Nux  vom.,
llPulsat.

It  antidotes :  Ooffea,  Opium.  (As  long  ago  as  1830,  I  gave
CJiamom.  in  cases  spoiled  by  the  use  of  Opium,  or  Morphia,
at  least  as  an  intercurrent  before  giving  other  remedies,  and
mostly  with  brilliant  results.  It  corresponds  to  the  second-
ary symptoms  of  Opium,  not  at  all  to  the  primary,  and  acts
better  in  the  lower  dilutions. C.  Hg.)

Compatible :  Merc.  sol.  and  Sulphur  in  diarrhoea ;  Pulsat.

Complementary:  Bellad.  in  diseases  of  children.  {Qhamom.
acts  more  on  nerves  of  abdomen,  Bellad.  more  on  the  cranial
nerves.)

Compare:  I  Aeon.,  Alum.,  lArnic.,Arsen.,  li  Bellad.,  Borax,
Byyon.,  Calc.  ostr.  (dentition),  Caustic.,  iCina,  iCoccul.,
1 1  Coj^(3a  (oversensitive  to  pain),  Coloc,  Conium  {\ert\go  m
bed),  Cypripedium  (sleeplessness),  Hepar,  Byosc,  Ignat.
(nervousness,  oversensitiveness,  etc.),  Lycop.,  Magn.  carh.^
Mercur.  (diarrhoea,  swollen  parotid),  Nux  vom.  (sour  smell-
ing breath,  constrictive  gastralgia  in  coffee  drinkers),
llPulsat.  (gastric  and  intestinal  symptoms,  temperament
and  mood),  Rheum,  Silica  (nursing  children),  I  Sulphur
(burning  of  soles  of  feet  at  night  in  bed,  diarrhoea).


m


FVSj


iiff.yv^:


;^-.1


m^^.


feV'


■i^-yi^


COUNTWAY LIBRARY OF MEDICINE

RX

601

HU2

V.3

RARE  BOOKS  DEPARTMENT
