The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. IX
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. IX. Philadelphia: Globe, 1889.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri9).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

^


Boston  Medical  Library
in  the  Francis  A.  Countv/ay
Library  of  Medicine  -Boston


COLUMBIAN i.AT'JRAL CLASP NO.  lON^
PAT.  1,290,083  PAT.  1,533,048

THE  UNITED  STATFS  ENVELOPE  CO. SPRINGFIELO,MASS
33/8  X  6


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


or  OUR


MATERIA  MEDIOA


BY


O.  HERING,  M.  D.


VOLUME  IX.


PHILADELPHIA:
PUBLISHED  BY  THE  ESTATE  OF  CONSTANTINE  HERING,

112  and  114  North  Twelfth  Street.


Copyright,  1890,  by  Theresa  Hering.


Author's  Mark.


PRESS  OF  QLOBE  PRINTING  HOUSE.  PHILADELPHIA.


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


Materia  Medica.


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.

The  Common  Field  Buttercup.  Pianunculaceas.

Provings  by  Franz,  Archiv  fiir  Homoeopatliische  Heilkunst,  vol.  7.

Clinical  Authorities.— -Hemeratopa  (2  cases),  Billig,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
5,  p.  149 ;  Neuralgia  of  stomach,  Custis,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  403;  Jaundice,  Cus-
tis,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  403  ;  Diarrhoea,  Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  43  ;
Pains  in  chest,  Pope,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  38  ;  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  247  ;
Sore  spots  after  pneumonia,  Ockford,  Raue's  Eec.,1875,  p.  19,  from  H.W.,  vol.  9,  p.  1 98  ;
Pneumonia,  Buchner,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  328;  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,
p.  250  ;  Pleuritis,  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  249  ;  Hydroihorax  and  pleurisy,
pneumonia,  Smith,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  40 ;  Sensation  of  coldness  on  chest,  Buruett,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  730;  Pleurodynia,  Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  160  ;  Strong,
Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  10,  p.  753  ;  Intercostal  neuralgia,  Black,  B.  J.  E.,  vol.  2,  p.  274;
Gerstel,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  119;  Pain  at  scapula,  Jeanes,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.
334  ;  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  33  ;  Herpes  on  hands  and  fingers,  Schweikert,  Haubold,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  45;  Wart  on  thumb,  Chancere,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  102,  p.  64,  from
Bib.  Horn.,  Jan.,  1881  ;  Sciatica,  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  248;  Times  Ret.,
1877,  p.  39,  from  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  760;  Pain  in  knee  and  abdomen,  Heath,
Horn,  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  233 ;  Cerebrospinal  affection,  Colton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.
471 ;  Rheumatism,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  536  ;  Black,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
2,  p.  274;  Herpes  zoster,  Marwick,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  133;  Pemphigus,  Rummel,
Eiick,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  165;  Eczema,  Pope,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  45;  Chilblains,
shingles,  Marwick,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  64.

^  Mind. Vanishing  of  thought  on  reflection ;  stares  at  one
point.
Obtuseness  of  senses.


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS. *  4

Quarrelsome,  angry  mood,  easily  provoked.

Afraid  of  ghosts  ;  does  not  like  to  remain  alone.

I  I  At  the  beginning  of  delirium  tremens,  with  talkative
mania;  unusual  exertions  and  powerful  efforts  to  escape
from  bed;  convulsions  of  facial  and  cervical  muscles;
risus  sardonicus;  stitches. in  liver;  long-lasting  gas-
tralgia,  burning  changing  to  a  dull  pressure,  with
nausea;  vertigo;  confusion  of  head,  as  if  intoxicated.
^  Sensorium.  i  Vertigo,  with  danger  of  falling,  when  going
from  room  into  open  air.

I  I  Dizziness  of  head; sensation  as  if  head  would  be  en-
larged and  distended,  making  it  difficult  to  think.
^  Inner  Head, n Headache  over  r.  eye;  <  lying  down;  >
walking  and  standing.

I  Pressing  headache  in  forehead  and  on  vertex,  as  if  pressed
asunder,  with  pressure  on  eyeballs  and  sleepiness ;  >
in  evening  and  when  entering  a  room,  from  cold  air,  or
vice  versa.

nPain  in  temples;  drawing  and  pressure  in  evening
while  walking,  with  feverish  restlessness  and  difficulty
of  breathing.

I  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  sensation  of  fulness  and  en-
largement of  head.

^  I  Headache,  with  nausea  and  sleepiness.

•  Headache is caused or aggravated by a change  of
temperature.
^  Outer  Head. Head  feels  too  large.

Crawling,  creeping,  or  burning  pricking  in  scalp.  .
* ight  and  Eyes. ■  Mist  before  eyes.

I  iHemeralopia  during  pregnancy;  heat, biting  and  press-
ure in  eyes;  redness  of  conjunctiva  and  lids,  especially
inner  surface  of  lower  lids;  lachrymation ;  pus  in
canthi;  pustules  on  eyes;  eyes  look  w^eak ;  pupils
dilated ;  candlelight  appears  to  her  as  a  bright  circle ;
can  see  well  during  day.

I  I  Sudden  hemeralopia  in  a  boy  set  3f  years;  pupils  but

slightly  dilated  ;  mother  similarly  affected.

I I  Pressure  and  smarting  in  eyeballs.
iPainfulness  of  r.  eyeball.

■  Sensation  of  burning  soreness  in  r.  lower  eyelid.
I  Smarting  and  soreness  in  outer  canthus  of  r.  eye.
I  I  Herpes  zoster  supraorbitalis,  with  bluish-black  vesicles,
high  fever  and  usual  pains.
*  Hearing and Ears. Sticking  in r.  ear  in  region of
tympanum.
Stitches  in  ears,  principally  in  evening.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Redness  and  inflammatory  swelling  of
nose,  with  tension.


5  RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.

Scabs  in  nostrils ;  sore  nose.

I  Hay  fever;  smarting  in  eyes;  eyelids  burn  and  feel  sore;
nose  stuffed  up,  especially  toward  evening,  with  press-
ure at  root  of  nose  and  tingling  and  crawling  sensation
within  its  cavity ;  sometimes  this  sensation  attacks  pos-
terior nares,  causing  patient  to  hawk  and  swallow  and
endeavor  in  every  way  to  scratch  affected  part ;  hoarse-
ness; sharp, stitching  pains  in  and  about  chest;  general
muscular  soreness; neck  of  bladder  may  be  affected,
producing  some  burning  in  passing  water.
^  Upper  Face. Dry  heat  in face,  with redness  of  cheeks,
evenings.
Tingling  in  face,  especially  on  nose  and  chin.
I  I  Vesicular  eruption  on  face,  as  from  a  burn;  smarts  as
if  scalded  ;  eruption  in  clusters. ^Eczema.
^  Lower  Face. Spasms  of  lips.

'^  Inner  Mouth. White  saliva  in  mouth,  tasting  like  copper.
13  Throat. Much  viscid  phlegm  in  throat.

I  I  Scraping,  burning  in  throat  and  roof  of  mouth,  inflam-
matory.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. '  i  Increased  thirst

in  afternoon.
'■'^  Eating  and  Drinking, i  >  One  of  our  most  effective  agents
for  the  removal  of  bad  effects  of  alcoholic  beverages :
hiccough  ;  epileptiform  attacks ;  delirium  tremens.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea and Vomiting, i  i  Fre-
quent eructations.
■  Spasmodic  hiccough. ^Alcoholism.
I  I  Nausea  in  afternoon,  sometimes  with  headache.
'"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  i  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.
I  I  Violent  burning  in  region  of  cardiac  orifice  of  stomach.
I  I  Sensation  of  soreness  and  burning  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  <

from  touch.
I  I  Neuralgia  of  stomach; attacks irregular,  coming  on
without  special  cause ;  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  dis-
tressing burning  and  soreness  ;  wanted  the  clothing  all
loose  and  to  bend  back,  with  great  restlessness  and  some
jaundice ;  attacks  preceded  by  itching  of  palms  of  hands
inducing  scratching.
'*  Hypochondria. ■  Sensation  of  soreness  in  hypochondria,
especially  to  tduch.
I  Stitches  in  region  of  liver,  extending  into  chest.
Pulsations  in  1.  hypochondrium.
I  In  evening,  hypochondria  and  lowest  ribs  feel  painful  as

if  bruised.
I  I  Jaundice ; itching of body, especially of palms of
hands.
'^  Abdomen, l  l  Rumbling  and  movements  in  abdomen.


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.  6

I  Stitches in 1. side of abdomen, in forenoon when

walking.
I  Stitching  with  pressure,  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  in  region

of  last  true  rib,  arresting  breathing,  with  stitches  and

})ressure on top of  r.  shoulder,  when walking after

having  been  seated.
iSore  pain  and  stitches  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  immediately

after  supper.

■  Violent stitches from 1. lumbar region transversely

through  abdomen,  especially  below  umbilicus  and
toward  r.  groin,  immediately  after  dinner.

■  Colic  and  cutting  pains  in  abdomen  when  pressing  on

it,  sensation  as  if  everything  were  sore  and  bruised.

■  Burning  soreness  in  abdomen.

■  Great  tenderness  of  abdomen  to  touch.

^•^  Stool  and  Rectum.  l  l  Diarrhoea  for  a  week ;  colorless,
w^atery,  painless,  a  little  frothy,  generally  coming  in  one
gush,  about  six  times  daily.
I  I  Acute  abdominal  and  thoracic  pains  following  dysen-
tery ;  chronic  serous  discharges  of  dysentery,  with
stabbing  pains  in  abdomen  and  chest.

"'  Urinary  Organs. Ulcers  in  bladder.

"  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Ovarian  neuralgia,  chronic  cases,
always  excited  by  atmospheric  change.
I  I  Leucorrhoea,  at  first  mild,  then  acrid,  corroding.
Respiration, l  i Heavy,  short  breathing,  in  evening;  must
take  a  deep  breath  frequently,  with  burning  and  fine
stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest.

^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  ■Oppression  of  chest,  with  much
weeping  in  evening  with  sore  pain  in  eyes,  especially
right ;  as  after  deep  chagrin,  had  to  take  a  deep  breath
frequently.

■  Pressure  and  tightness  across  lower  part  of  chest,  with

fine  stitches  which  seem  to  be  felt  in  outer  parts  of
chest  first,  but  then  extend,  deep  into  chest,  now  in  r.
now  in  1.  side;  <  moving,  stooping,  or  taking  an
inspiration ;  in  evening  when  walking  or  standing,  in
open  air  or  in  room.

■  Pressing  pain  in  outer  parts  of  chest.

■  Violent  pains  in  chest  whole  forenoon.

I  !  Pains  in  chest,  stitches  in  r.  side  and  pressure  in  middle
chest,  continuing  uninterruptedly  almost  all  day,  with
painful  inspiration.

1  I  Pain  in  morning  as  if  bruised,  or  as  if  one  had  been
lying  in  a  wrong  position,  in  region  of  lowest  true  rib,
1.  side.

iPain  in  1.  side  of  chest,  in  morning,  in  region  of  pecto-
ralis  major,  near  axilla,  <  during  motion.


26


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.

I  I  Early  in  morning,  while  walking,  feels  a  sticking  in
region  of  fifth  and  sixth  1.  ribs,  with  great  sensitiveness
to  touch  and  debility.

I  (Sticking  pain  in  1.  chest  and  as  if  there  were  subcuta-
neous ulceration,  <  from  motion.

I  I  Stitches  in  interior  of  1.  side  of  chest,  when  walking  in
open  air,  in  region  of  nipple ;  the  stitches  disappear
when  he  continues  to  walk,  after  which  a  pain  is  felt
below  last  true  rib  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

I  I  Violent  sticking  pain  above  1.  nipple,  near  axilla,  in
morning,  when  rising ;  dare  not  move  his  arm  or  raise
it;  dare  not  even  raise  trunk  lest  he  should  scream
with  pain ;  has  to  sit  or  stand  stooping,  with  head  and
chest  forward  to  1.  side.

■  Sticking  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest,  in  region  of  fifth  and
sixth  ribs,  in  forenoon.

I  I  Painful  soreness  under  short  ribs  of  1.  side,  especially
when  moving  trunk,  for  several  days.

1  I  Violent  pressure  and  sensation  as  if  bruised  over  whole
1.  side  of  chest,  immediately  after  rising,  in  morning;
every  movement  of  shoulder  causes  pain  ;  pain  spreads
over  whole  chest,  with  shortness  of  breath,  is  unable  to
speak  long  sentences  on  account  of  want  of  breath.

I  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  region  of  short  ribs,  with  pain  in
back,  lassitude  and  ill-humor.

I  Pressing  and  pushing  in  lowest  part  of  r.  side  of  chest,
toward  liver,  in  forenoon.

I  Pain  in  chest  and  restless  nights,  continuing  for  weeks.

I I  Stitches,  neuralgic,  myalgic,  or  rheumatic  pains  in
chest.

I  Chronic  soreness  on  pressure  within  thorax  or  abdomen,
as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration.

I  Chronic  pains  in  chest,  frequently  extending  toward
liver  or  from  liver  into  chest.

I  Chronic  cases  of  internal  pains,  especially  over  region
of  diaphragm  ;  inframammary  pains  of  women.

iDiaphragmitis;  sharp,  shooting  pains,  pains  from  hypo-
chondria and  epigastrium  through  to  back.

I  Pleurisy  and  hydrothorax.

I  Pneumonia  resulting  from  sudden  exposure  to  cold  while
overheated,  or  vice  versa ;  cheeks  bright  red  ;  tongue
clean ;  respiration  difficult,  short,  oppressed,  accom-
panied by  loud  rales;  dry  heat;  turgescence  of  skin
without  sweat ;  early  prostration,  so  great  at  onset  that
he  can  hardly  walk ;  small,  rapid  pulse,  with  great
excitement  of  heart  and  circulation ;  nausea,  even
fainting  when  sitting  up  and  on  motion.

I  I  Left-sided  pneumonia  with  pleurisy  ;  great  soreness  just


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.  8

below  1.  nipple  on  drawing  a  breath,  with  a  sensation
as  of  something  tearing,  and  occasional  pleuritic  stitches
radiating  from  that  point  over  whole  1.  side  of  chest,
which  was  quite  sensitive  to  touch  ;  appetite  and  strength
failing  from  effects  of  incessant  pain;  there  was  but
slight  cough ;  while  drawing  an  unusually  full  breath
a  sudden  sense  of  tearing  in  affected  part  of  chest,
followed  by  expectoration  of  about  two  ounces  of  blood.
iSmall  sore  spot,  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration ;  after
pneumonia.

■  Acute  thoracic  pains  after  pneumonia  or  pleuritis,  sug-

gestive of  adhesions.

■  Pain  about  lungs  from  adhesions  after  pleurisy.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  full,  hard,  rapid  in
evening,  slower  in  morning.

^^  Outer  Chest.  '  l  Whenever  she  goes  out  of  doors  a  sensation
as  if  she  had  cold  wet  cloths  applied  to  three  different
parts  of  anterior  wall  of  thorax,  viz.,  in  both  infra-
clavicular fossae  and  just  under  1.  breast;  sensation
comes  on  at  once  on  going  out  of  doors,  is  constant  as
long  as  she  is  out,  and  disappears  immediately  on  going
into  house ;  it  prevents  her  from  conversing  with  any
one  while  out ;  after  a  fall  two  and  a  half  years  ago.
1 1  Stitches  about  chest  in  every  change  of  weather.

■  External  painfulness  of  whole  trunk.

■  External  soreness  of  chest  and  abdomen,  <  from  touch,

motion  and  coughing,  accompanied  by  tightness  of
chest  as  if  a  full  breath  could  not  be  drawn  on  account
of  acute  pain  and  mental  anxiety,

■  ■Chest feels sore,  bruised; <  from  touch,  motion,  or

turning  body. ^Pleurodynia.

■  Sharp,  shooting  pains  about  chest.  ^Intercostal  neuralgia.
I  I  Acute  pain  principally  in  shoulder,  axilla  and  mamma,

so  severe  in  breast  that  she  dreaded  cancer.  ^Inter-
costal neuralgia.

I  I  After  overstraining  himself  threw  up  some  blood ;  it
rose  into  mouth  at  night  or  after  exertion,  and  seemed
to  draw  from  r.  side  about  hip ;  bloodspitting  ceased,
but  more  or  less  pain  continued  in  that  part  ever  since,
and  down  into  arm  toward  insertion  of  pectoral
muscle;  the  breast  swells  the  size  of  hand  and  is  tender
to  touch  and  when  arm  is  moved ;  <  from  cold,  singing,
hard  work ;  feels  much  depressed,  wishes  to  lie  down
and  give  up. ^Pleurodynia.

I  I  Slight  rigor ;  pain  in  1.  side  about  sixth  or  seventh  ribs,
increasing  during  night  and  following  day;  sat  bent
forward  in  bed  and  leaning  toward  1.  side ;  slightest
motion  caused  intense  pain  like  a  knife  thrust  into  side


9  RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.

and  through  back;  intense  dread  of  any  movement;
is  afraid  to  take  a  full  breath ;  unable  to  lie  down  for  a
moment ;  could  not  bear  least  touch  on  affected  side ;
screamed  if  compelled  to  make  least  movement ;  pulse
120,  small,  weak  ; much  exhausted  by  want  of  sleep
and  the  awkward  position. ^Pleurodynia.
1 1  Pleurodynia,  rheumatic,  myalgic  or  neuralgic.
I  I  Rheumatism  of  several months standing caused  by
catching cold during a sea voyage; pains  confined
almost entirely to trunk ; chest and abdomen feel
bruised ; on  least  motion pains  become  cutting  and
sharp.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iPain along inner  edge  of  1.  scapula,
often extending below  its  inferior angle  or  through
lower  half  of  1.  side  of  thorax.

■  Stitches  in  and  between  shoulder-blades,

■  Muscular  pains  about  lower  margin  of  shoulder-blades

in  women  who  follow  sedentary  employments;  pain
burning,  often  over  only  a  small  space,  greatly  <  by
long-continued  needlework  or  writing.

■  Pain  in  back,  lassitude,  and  pain  as  if  bruised  in  region

of  short  ribs,  with  ill-humor.

■  Stitches  in  r.  lumbar  region  when  walking,  with  a  slight

burning  sensation.

■  Pain  depending  upon  spinal  irritation.

'^  Upper  Limbs. ■Spasmodic,  rheumatic  pains  in  arms.

■  Stitches  in  arms  and  hands.

I  I  Jerking  pain  in  r.  upper  arm.

I  I  Sudden  tearings  in  r.  forearm  and  between  thumb  and
index  finger ;  while  writing.

■  Herpes  or  blisterlike  eruption  in  palms  of  hands;  blue

blisters  on  fingers.

Cold  hands.

I  I  Frequent  tingling  in  single  parts  of  fingers.

I  I  Cauliflower-like  wart  on  outer  side  of  terminal  phalanx
of  r.  thumb.
^  Lower  Limbs. '  '  Great  weakness  in  lower  limbs,  in  fore-
noon, when  walking.

■  Sciatica  especially  in  women;  pains  <  moving  about,

yet  not  better  lying  down ;  <  in  rainy,  stormy  weather ;
stitching-burning  pains,  radiating  from  dorsal  region
of  spine.

■  Drawing  pain  in  thighs,  extending  downward.

I  I  Severe  pain  on  inner  aspect  of  1.  knee,  very  sore  to
touch,  point  of  pain  easily  covered  with  finger  end;
sometimes  >  from  motion  <  from  pressure  ;  knee  joint
cracked  on  stretching  limb ;  also  sore  spot  on  abdomen
about  two  inches  above  navel  and  same  distance  1.  of


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.  10

median  line ;  it  was  sore  as  a  boil,  but  no  external
evidence ; <  from  pressure.

I  I  Stinging  and  soreness  in  feet  and  toes,

I  iPulsative  stitches  in  1.  heel,  when  standing,  in  fore-
noon.

I  Corns  sensitive  to  touch,  smart  and  burn.

■  Chilblains.

I  I  Stump  of  amputated  leg  a  mass  of  chilblains,  many
places  being  much  ulcerated ;  intense  pain  and  itching,
preventing  rest  at  night.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down : headache  over
r.  eye  <.

Could  not  lie  down :  pain  in  side.

Could  not  lie  on  side  :  dyspnoea.

Sitting  up :  fainting.

Sat  bent  forward  in  bed  and  leaning  toward  1.  side :  pain
in  side.

Has  to  sit  or  stand  stooping,  with  head  and  chest  forward
to  1.  side.

Standing :  headache  over  r.  eye  >  ;  stitches  and  tightness
in  chest ;  stitches  in  heel.

Indisposition  to  standing  or  walking :  irritability  of  cere-
bro-spinal  system.

Change  of  position  :  bruised  pains  <.

Motion  :  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  <  ;  of  arm  or  trunk  <
sticking  above  1.  nipple ;  causes  fainting ;  soreness  of
chest  <  ;  abdomen  <  ;  of  arm,  tenderness  of  breast ;
slightest,  causes  intense  pain  in  side ;  sciatica  <  ;  some-
times >  pain  in  knee;  bruised  pains  <.

Walking :  headache  >  ;  pressure  in  head  <  ;  stitches  in
abdomen ;  after  having  been  seated  stitches  in  shoulder;
stitches  and  tightness  in  chest ;  sticking  in  1.  chest  con-
tinuous ;  stitches  disappear ;  weakness  in  lower  limbs.
^^  Nerves. Tired  and  broken  down  all  day.

Lassitude,  ill-humor ;  pain  in  back  and  as  if  bruised  in
region  of  short  ribs.

Twitching  of  muscles.

I  I  Epileptiform  attacks. ^Alcoholism.

Sudden  weakness,  with  fainting.

Trembling  of  limbs,  with  oppression  of  breathing,  after
fright  or  anger ;  <  in  evening,  and  sometimes  after
eating,  from  change  of  temperature,  especially  from
heat  to  cold.

I  llntercostal  or  spinal  neuralgise;  rheumatic  or  neuralgic
pleurodynia.

I  I  Great  depression  of  spirits,  almost  amounting  to  suicidal
mania;  constant  twitching  and  jerking  of  muscles  of
neck  and  of  face  and  chest  contiguous  to  this  region ;


11  RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.

muscles  of  back,  between  shoulders,  also  contributed  to
increase  this  jerking  movement;  the  principal  direction
of  the  movement  was  to  bring  chin  directly,  or  from
side  to  side,  toward  chest;  sterno-mastoid  and  sterno-
hyoid muscles  frequently  drawn  into  ridges  by  tonic
contractions  of  their  fibres ;  <  from  talking  and  presence
of  individuals ;  while  talking,  if  shoulders  were  con-
stantly moved  up  and  down,  the  spasm  was  considerably
>  and  the  articulation  easier ;  marked  indisposition  to
stand  up  for  any  length  of  time,  also  to  walking,  even
about  house.  ^^Irritability  of  cerebro-spinal  system.
^^  Sleep.  I  I  Falls  asleep  late  in  evening  and  wakes  several
times  at  night,  not  from  any  pain,  but  because  he  is  not
sleepy.
■  Disturbed  sleep  at  night.

I  I  Sleeplessness,  often  with  dyspnoea,  heat  and  ebullitions;
cannot  lie  on  side.
^  Time.  Morning :  pain  as  if  bruised  in  region  of  lowest  true
rib  1.  side ;  sticking  pain  above  nipple ;  pressure  and
bruised  sensation  in  1.  side  of  chest;  pulse  slower;  sweat
scanty.
Forenoon: stitches  in  abdomen; violent  pain  in  chest;

weakness  in  lower  limbs.
Day  :  tired  and  broken  down.

Immediately  after  dinner :  stitches  through  abdomen.
Afternoon: increased  thirst; nausea; stitches  in heel;

chilly,  with  heat  in  face  <.
Evening :  pressing  headache  <  ;  pressure  in  temples ;
stitches  in  ears ;  nose  stuffed  up ;  dry  heat  in  face ;  hy-
pochondria feel  painful ;  heavy  short  breathing ;  op-
pression of  chest ;  stitches  and  tightness  in  chest ;  pulse
full,  hard,  rapid;  trembling  of  limbs;  falls  asleep  late;
chilly,  with  heat  in  face  <.
Night:  sleep  disturbed  by  itching  of  chilblains;  wakes

several  times.
After  midnight :  intermittent  fever.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. Room :  stitches  or  tightness
in  chest.
Open  air :  stitches  and  tightness  in  chest,  as  if  she  had
cold  cloths  applied  to  thorax; well-covered  chest is
chilly.
Change  of  temperature:  causes  or  aggravates  headache;
excites  ovarian  neuralgia ;  stitches  about  chest ;  trem-
bling of  limbs.
From  room  into  open  air:  vertigo;  pain  in  forehead  and

vertex  <.
From  cold  air  into  room  :  headache  <.
Sudden  exposure  to  cold  while  overheated,  or  vice  versa;
pneumonia.


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.  12;

Cold:  tenderness  of  breast  <  ;  ulcers  <.

Draft  of  cold  air:  bruised  pains  in  different  parts  of
body  <.

Rainy  stormy  weather:  sciatica  <;  rheumatic  pains  <.
*°  Fever, l  Chilly,  with  heat  in  face,  < afternoon  and  even-
ing; the  well-covered  chest  is  chilly  out-doors.

Pulse  full,  hard  and  rapid  in  evening;  slower  in  morn-
ing ;  chill  predominates,  with  heat  in  face ;  <  in  after-
noon and  evening.

Chilliness  and  heat  in  face  after  dinner.

The  fever  consists  only  of  a  chill.

Heat,  with  internal  chill  at  same  time.

Heat  in  evening,  <  on  r.  side  of  face,  with  cold  hands  and!
general  discomfort.

Sweat  scanty,  only  in  morning  on  waking.

I  I  Intermittent  fever  after  midnight;  heat  and  violent,
thirst,  with  full,  soft,  quick  pulse,  followed  by  general
sweat,  mostly  on  forehead.

Rainy,  stormy  weather:  sciatica,  <  ;  rheumatic  pains  <.
^^  Attacks,  Perodicity. Daily :  diarrhoea  six  times.

For  weeks :  restless  nights  and  pain  in  chest.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  headache  over  eye;,
painfulness  of  eyeball ;  soreness  of  lower  eyelid ;.
soreness  of  outer  canthus  of  eye ;  sticking  in  ear ;
stitching  with  pressure  in  side  of  abdomen ;  stitches
and  pressure  on  top  of  shoulder;  stitches  in  side  of
chest ;  pressing  and  pushing  in  lowest  p^rt  of  r.  side  of
chest;  blood  seemed  to  draw  from  side  about  hip;,
jerking  pain  in  upper  arm ;  tearing  in  forearm  and
between  thumb  and  index  finger;  wart  on  terminal
phalanx  of  thumb  ;  heat  <  side  of  face.

Left:  pulsations  in  hypochondrium ;  stitches  in  side  of
abdomen ;  stitches  from  lumbar  region  through  abdo-
men toward  r.  groin  ;  burning  and  stitches  in  chest ;
sticking  in  region  of  fifth  and  sixth  ribs ;  stitches  in
interior  of  side  of  chest ;  violent  sticking  above  nipple ;
violent  pressure  and  bruised  sensation  over  whole  side
of  chest;  pneumonia;  soreness  below  nipple,  along
inner  edge  of  scapula,  or  through  lower  half  of  side  of
thorax;  severe  pain  on  inner  aspect  of  knee;  pulsative
stitches  in  heel.
*^  Sensations.  Confusion  of  head,  as  if  intoxicated;  as  if  head
would  be  enlarged;  as  if  head  were  pressed  asunder;
hypochondria  in  lowest  ribs  painful  as  if  bruised ;  as  if
everything  in  abdomen  were  sore  and  bruised ;  as  if
there  were  subcutaneous  ulceration ;  as  if  bruised  in  1.
side  of  chest ;  in  region  of  short  ribs,  as  if  bruised  ;  as  of
something  tearing  in  chest ; as  if  she  had  cold  wet


13  RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.

cloths  applied  to  three  different  parts  of  wall  of  thorax ;
as  if  a  full  breath  could  not  be  drawn ;  as  of  a  knife
thrust  into  side  and  through  back ;  muscles  as  if  they
had  been  pounded.

Pain :  over  r.  eye ;  in  temples ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in
chest;  in  region  of  lowest  true  rib  1.  side;  in  region  of
pectoralis  major;  in  back;  about  lungs;  along  inner
edge  of  1.  scapula.

Intense  pain  :  in  stump  of  amputated  leg.

Violent  pains :  in  chest.

Acute  pain  :  in  chest ;  in  shoulder,  axilla  and  mammse.

Severe  pain  :  on  inner  aspect  of  1.  knee.

Cutting  pains :  in  abdomen.

Stabbing  pains  :  in  abdomen  and  chest.  '

Shooting  pains:  from  hypochondria  and  epigastrium  to
back  ;  about  chest.

Tearings :  in  r.  forearm  and  between  thumb  and  index
finger.

Stitches:  in  liver;  in  ears;  from  liver  into  chest;  in  1.  side
of  abdomen;  on  top  of  shoulder;  from  lumbar  region
through  abdomen  ;  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  in  r.  side ;  in  in-
terior of  1.  side  of  chest;  in  and  between  shoulder-
blades  ;  in  r.  lumbar  region ;  in  arms  and  hands.

Pulsative  stitches :  in  1.  heel.

Stitching  pains :  in  and  about  chest ;  in  r.  side  of
abdomen.

Stitching  burning  pain:  radiating  from  dorsal  region  of
spine.

Jerking  pain :  in  r.  upper  arm.

Pressing  pain  :  in  outer  part  of  chest ;  in  lowest  part  of  r.
side  of  chest.

Drawing  pain  :  in  thigh.

Eheumatic  pains :  in  chest ;  in  arms ;  in  muscles  about
trunk.

Sticking :  in  r.  ear ;  in  region  of  fifth  and  sixth  1.  ribs ;  in
1.  chest;  above  1.  nipple;  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Stinging :  in  feet  and  toes.

Smarting:  in  eyballs;  in  outer  canthus  of  r.  eye;  in  eyes;
of  eruption  on  face ;  of  corns..

Burning  soreness :  in  lower  eyeball ;  in  abdomen.

Burning:  in  region  of  cardiac  orifice  of  stomach;  in  pit  of
stomach ;  in  neck  of  bladder ;  of  corns ;  of  eczema  ;  of
ulcers.

Soreness:  of  nose;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  hypochondria;
under  short  ribs  in  1.  side;  just  below  1.  nipple;  in  feet
and  toes.
Burning  pricking  :  in  scalp.
Painfulness :  of  r.  eyeball.
Pressure : in  .  forehead  ; on vertex ; on eyeballs ; in


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.  14

temples ;  in  eyes  ;  at  root  of  nose  ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  on
top  of  r.  shoulder ;  across  lower  part  of  chest ;  in  middle
of  chest,  over  whole  1.  side.

Pulsations :  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Heat :  in  face.

Tightness:  across  lower  part  of  chest.

Oppression  :  of  chest.

Tingling :  in  face ;  in  single  parts  of  fingers.

Crawling:  in  scalp;  in  nose;  in  skin  of  fingers.

Creeping :  in  scalp.

Itching :  of  palms  ;  of  body ;  of  stump  of  amputated  leg  ;
of  vesicles  on  fingers.

Chilliness :  in  face  ;  in  chest.
"  Tissues. I  Inflammation  of  serous  membranes,  particularly
of  pleura  or  peritoneum ;  acute  stabbing  pains  in  chest
in  case  of  pleuritis ;  effusion  of  serum,  with  great  anx-
iety, dyspnoea  and  distress.

llRheumatism  of  muscles,  particularly  in  muscles  about
trunk  ;  intercostal  rheumatism ;  muscles  sore  to  touch,
feel  bruised  as  if  they  had  been  pounded.

■  Tearing-stitching  bruised  pains,  now  in  one  then  in  an-

other part  of  body ;  pain  <  from  touch,  motion,  change
of  position,  draft  of  cold  air ;  fever ;  heat  of  one  side  of
body  with  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Rheumatic  pain  <  in  damp  weather,  and particularly

from  change  of  weather  or  change  of  temperature ;
rheumatic  headache.

■  Rheumatic and arthritic soreness,  with  stitches  over

whole  body.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  burning  in
pit  of  stomach  <  ;  soreness  of  hypochondria;  tenderness
of abdomen ;  sensitiveness  of  1.  side  of  chest ; breast
swells  and  is  tender  ;  1.  knee  very  sore  to  touch  ;  corns
sensitive;  muscles  about  trunk  sore ;  ulcers  <.
Pressure:  on  abdomen,  bruised  feeling;  <  pain  in  knee.
After  a  fall  two  years  ago :  as  if  she  had  cold  wet  cloths
applied  to  thorax  in  open  air.
*^  Skin. I  I  Coarse  itching  in  hollow  of  hand.
I  I  Crawling  in  skin  of  fingers.

■  Vesicles  on  fingers,  transparent,  dark -blue,  elevated  as

large  as  pin's  head;  intolerable  burning  itching ;  her-
petic horny  scurf  forms  after  vesicles  open  ;  scratching
brought  on  a  shining  red,  loose  swelling  of  fingers,  with
inflammation ;  after  applying  hart's  grease  the  horny
scurf  no  longer  formed,  but  in  places,  the  size  of  a
shilling,  crowded  groups  of  small  holes  of  size  of  pin's
head  (as  if  they  were  the  pores)  were  formed,  emitting
a  yellow  lymph  in  shape  of  drops  of  sweat  and  chang-
ing to  small,  flat,  spreading  ulcers,  healing  with  diffi-


15  RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.

culty,  with  corroded  sharp  borders  and  intolerable  burn-
ing-stinging itching,  depriving  him  of  rest  for  weeks.

I  Vesicular  eruptions  as  from  burns.

I  Herpes  zoster;  zona;  vesicles  filled  with  serum  which
burn,  may  have  a  bluish-black  appearance ;  especially
when  following  course  of  supraorbital  or  intercostal
nerves  and  followed  by  sharp  stitching  pains.

■  Herpes  :  preceding  neuralgia  costalis;  on  fingers  and  in

palm  of  hand ;  over  whole  body.
I  I  Pemphigus :  large  blisters  form,  burst,  and  leave  raw

surfaces ; in children,  blisters of  two,  three or four

inches  in  diameter ;  restlessness ;  prostration.
I  I  Constantly  repeating  eruption  of  blisters,  secreting  a

foul-smelling,  gluey  matter,  forming  crusts  and  healing

from  centre. ^Pemphigus.
lEczema  :  vesicles  followed  by  scurfs,  then  a  fresh  eruption

of vesicles,  with  burning  and itching; attended  by

thickening  of  skin  and  formation  of  hard,  horny  scabs.
iPain  like  that  of  shingles,  without  eruption.
llShingles  and  intercostal  neuralgia.
I  Flat,  burning,  stinging  ulcers,  with  ichorous  discharge;

pus  sanious  or  acrid ;  <  from  touch  or  cold.
I  Hornlike  excrescences.

■  Chilblains.

^'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Boy,  set.  3|  years,  mother
affected  with  same  trouble  during  her  pregnancies ;
hemeralopia.

Lady,  set.  27,  three  weeks  after  confinement  went  out  driv-
ing on  a  cold  day  and  met  with  an  accident  which
frightened  her  considerably;  affected  evening  of  same
day;  pleurodynia.

Mary  J.,  set.  30,  teacher,  two  and  a  half  years  ago  had  a
fall,  since  then  suffering;  cold  sensation  on  chest.

Man,  set.  30,  black  hair,  irritable  temper,  blacksmith,  four
years  ago  overstrained  himself  and  threw  up  some  blood,
since  then  suffering ;  pleurodynia.

Woman,  set.  30,  pregnant,  suffering  since  seventh  month,
similarly  affected  during  former  pregnancy;  hemer-
alopia.

Mrs.  E.,  set.  38,  widow,  mother  of  three  children,  nervo-
bilious  temperament,  engaged  in  nursing,  and  subjected
to  care  and  anxiety ;  cerebro-spinal  affection.

Man,  set.  42,  pain  in  knee  and  abdomen.

Man,  set.  50,  suffering  two  months;  neuralgia  of  stomach.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Bryon.,  Camphor.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.

Incompatible:  Sulphur,  Staphis.,  Spir.  nitr.  dulc,  alcohol,
wine  and  vinegar.

Compare:  Aeon.,  Arnica,  Bryon.,  Cactus,  Clemat.,  Crot.  tigl.,
Euphorb.,  Mezer.,  Sabad.


RANUNCULUS  SCELERATUS.  16

RANUNCULUS  SCELERATUS.

Celery-Leaved  Crowfoot.  Eanunculacese.

Proved  by  Y.,  Archiv  fiir  Horn.,  and  Schreter,  Neues  Archiv  fiir  Hotnoopathie.

CijiNicAii  Authorities. — Inflammation  of  mouth  and  tongue,  diphtheria,  Eitten-
house,  A.  O.,  vol.  7,  p.  528 ;  B.  J.  H.,  voL  29,  p.  428  ;  Use  in  aneurism  of  aorta,
Searle,  A.  O.,  vol.  7,  p.  409;  Neuralgia,  Price,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  118  ;  Pemphigus,
Elwert,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  147,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  30,  p.  345;  Coras,  Berridge,
Hah.  Mo.,  1874,  p.  111.

^  Mind. Dulness  of  head.

Indolence  and  aversion  to  mental  occupation  in  morning ;
low-spirited,  depressed  in  evening.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  with  loss  of  consciousness.
^  Inner  Head. '  l  Gnawing  pain  in  a  small  spot  on  vertex  or

either  temple.
^  Outer  Head. Sensation  as  if  head  were  too  large  and  full.
Biting  itching  on  scalp.
Scalp  feels  tense.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  l  Eyes  very  weak  and  watery.
I  I  Pain  in  eyeballs,  when  moving  them  quickly.
I  I  Pressing  in  eyeballs,  periodically.
I  I  Painful  pressure  in  eyeballs.
■Smarting  in  eyes  and  canthi.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  '  Otalgia  with  pressing  or  gnawing

pain  in  head,  and  drawing  pain  in  teeth.
^  Smell and Nose. Lachrymation, with watery nasal
discharge.
I  1  Ordinary  catarrh,  with  sneezing,  fluent  coryza,  pains
in  joints,  and  burning  on  urination.
^  Upper  Face. ■  Sensation  as  if  face  were  covered  with  spider
web.
I  I  Slight  drawing  with  feeling  of  coldness  above  r.  eye-
brow, down  cheek,  as  far  as  corner  of  mouth.
Face  cold,  livid.
^  Lower  Face. '  >  Tremulous  sensation around corners of
mouth and lower lip, preceding vomiting without
inclination  to  vomit.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, l  l  Drawing,  stinging,  jerking  in  teeth.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Tongue  exfoliated  in  spots,  which  are
raw ;  mouth  inflamed.
I  I  Both  sides  of  tongue  denuded,  like  islands,  the  remain-
ing parts  thickly  coated. ^Diphtheria.


17  RANUNCULUS  SCELERATUS.

Tongue  coated  white,  inflamed,  red  and  burning.
I  I  Tongue  cracks  and  peels  off.
Shooting  in  tip  of  tongue.
13  Throat. Scraping  and  burning  in  throat.

I  I  Swelling  of  tonsils,  with  shooting  stitches  in  them.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Eruc-
tations : empty ; after  meals,  with  taste  of  what  has
been  eaten.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Pain  in  stomach,  with
fainting  fits.
I  I  Pressure  and  sensation  of  fulness  in  pit  of  stomach,  <

from  external  pressure,  most  violent  in  morning.
Sensation  of  soreness  and  burning  in  pit  of  stomach.
Inflammation  of  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria, i  i  Dull  pressure  about  liver, <  from  a
long  breath.
I  I  Stitches  in  liver,  spleen  or  kidneys.
I  I  Long  stitches in region of spleen ; < during deep

inspiration.
iSpleen swollen after intermittent  fever and  abuse of
quinine.
^^  Abdomen, l  l  Screwing  pressure  behind  umbilicus  ;  sensa-
tion as  if  a  plug  w^ere  lodged  there,  in  morning.
Twitching  in  abdominal  integuments.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. I  Frequent  sensation  as  if  diarrhoea
would  set  in.
I  I  Frequent  soft,  or  watery,  fetid  stools.
Hard  stool,  preceded  by  colic.
^^  Urinary  Organs, i  i  Urine  burns ;  strangury.
^"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Stitches  in  glans  penis.
^^  Respiration. Dyspnoea  from  gnawing  behind  sternum.
^^  Inner Chest and  Lungs, ' '  Burning  soreness  behind
xiphoid  cartilage.
I  I  Long,  frequent  stitches  behind  xiphoid  cartilage,  in  a

space  as  large  as  palm  of  hand.
■  Stitches  in  chest  and  intercostal  muscles.
I  Gnawing  in  chest;  behind  sternum  (with  dyspnoea).
I  Continual  pressure,  as  from dull  instrument,  below  r.
false  ribs,  <  from  deep  inspiration.
I  Painful  sticking  in  r.  chest,  not  <  by  inspiration.
I  Violent  contracting-pinching  pain  in  chest,  behind  r.
nipple.

1  Whole  chest  feels  weak  and  bruised.
I  Aneurism  of  descending  aorta  and  varicosities ; cold
and  livid  face  and  ears,  with  sensation  of  a  cobweb  upon
face  ;  lachrymation  and  discharge  of  watery  mucus  from
nose  (much  relieved).

VOL.  IX. — 2.


RANUNCULUS  SCELERATUS.  ^ 18

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  i  Stitches  in  region  of
heart.
Pulse  quick,  full,  but  soft,  with  heat  at  night.
^^  Outer  Chest. '  '  Chest  feels  bruised,  with  sensation  of  weak-
ness therein.
I  Stitches  in  chest  and  intercostal  muscles.
I  I  External chest and sternum painfully sensitive to
touch.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iPain  in  small  of  back.
I  I  Stitch  in  r.  lumbar  region  when  walking.
I  I  Stitches  in  region  of  kidneys.

I  1  Sudden  violent  jerks  in  lumbar  region  during  a  walk
in  open  air,  arresting  breathing.
'^  Upper Limbs. '  l  Long-continuing  boring  sticking  along
whole  1.  forearm  to  tip  of  index  finger,  where  it  is  most
violent.
I  I  Continual  gnawing  in  palm  of  1.  hand.
Itching  between  fingers,  evenings.
Swelling  of  fingers,  mornings.
^^  Lower Limbs. Stinging, boring and gnawing in legs,
especially  violent  in  big  toe.
1  I  Boring  and  gnawing  in  r.  big  toe.
I  Sudden  stitches  in  forepart  of  r.  big  toe,  as  if  a  needle

were  thrust  in  deep,  made  him  cry  out.
I  Sudden  stitches  in  r.  big  toe,  passing  into  a  burning.
I  I  For  four  months  two  corns  on  ball  of  first  and  second  1.
toes,  sensitive  to  touch  or  pressure,  smart  and  burn,  and
occasionally  shock  very  painful,  when  letting  leg  hang
down,  when  they  also  throb,  and  especially  painful  by
flexing  toes ;  >  by  extending  them  ; >  by  wearing  a
thick-soled  boot ;  at  times  numbness  in  corns ;  knock-
ing toe  against  anything  so  as  to  cause  boot  to  grate
against  corns  causes  great  pain  and  burning.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Gout  in  fingers  and  toes.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Letting  leg  hang  down  :  corns
painful.
Flexing  toes :  corns  painful.
Extending  toes :  corns  >.
Motion  :  of  eyeballs  causes  pain.

Walking : stitch  in  r.  lumbar  region ; jerks  in  lumbar
region.
^^  Nerves. •  i  Neuralgia  of head,  back  and  cardiac  region,
with  extreme  tenderness  of  whole  spinal  column  ;  patchy
appearance  of  tongue.
Convulsive  twitches  of  limbs.
Fainting  with  the  pains  in  stomach.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Wakes  after  midnight,  is  wide  awake  and  remains
so  for  a  long  time.
I  I  Half  slumber  after  midnight,  frightful,  anxious  dreams


19  RANUNCULUS  SCELERATUS.

about  corpses,  dead  bodies,  serpents,  battles,  etc. ;  con-
stant tossing  about  in  bed.
^^  Time. Morning : aversion  to  mental  labor ; fulness  and

pressure  in  pit  of  stomach;  sensation  of  plug  behind

umbilicus.
Evening : low-spirited and depressed ; heat ; itching,

biting,  tingling  <.
Night:  heat.

After  midnight :  wakeful ;  heat  and  thirst  <.
^Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  violent  jerks  in

lumbar  region  while  walking;  after  walking,  heat.
*°  Fever, l  '  Chill  or  chilliness  during  meals.

Heat,  in-doors  evening,  after  walking  in  open  air.
Dry  heat  at  night,  with  violent  thirst,  mostly  after  mid-
night.
I  I  Fever ;  wakes  after  midnight,  many  nights  in  succession,

with  heat over  whole  body  and  violent  thirst;  pulse

full,  soft,  accelerated,  80 ;  afterward  sweat  over  whole

body,  especially  on  forehead.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodical : pressing  in eyeballs.
During  meals :  chilly.

Many  nights  in  succession  :  wakes  after  midnight.
"  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  coldness  and  drawing  above

eyebrows ;  pressure  below  false  ribs ;  painful  sticking

in  chest; pinching  behind  nipple; stitch  in  lumbar

region ;  gnawing  in  big  toe ;  stitches  in  big  toe.
Left:  continual  gnawing  in  palm  of  hand.
"  Sensations. As  if  head  were  too  full  and  too  large ;  as  if

face  were  covered  with  spider  webs ; as  if  a  plug  were

lodged  in  umbilicus ; as if  diarrhoea would set in ;

pressure  as  from  a  dull  instrument ;  as  if  a  needle  were

thrust  deep  into  big  toe.
Pain: in  eyeballs; in  joints; in  stomach; in small  of

back ;  in  corns.
Violent  contractive  pinching  pain  behind  r.  nipple.
Shooting :  in  tip  of  tongue.
Shooting  stitches :  in  tonsils.
Stitches: in  liver,  spleen  and  kidneys; in  glans  penis;

behind  xiphoid  cartilage ;  in  chest ;  in  region  of  heart ;

in  r.  lumbar  region  ; in  region  of  kidneys ; in  big  toe.
Gnawing  pain  :  in  a  small  spot  on  vertex  or  either  temple ;

behind  sternum  ;  in  palm  of  1.  hand  ;  in  legs ;  in  big  toe.
Long-continued  boring,  sticking :  along  whole  1.  forearm

to  tip  of  index  finger.
Boring :  in  legs  ;  in  big  toe.
Neuralgia  :  in  head,  back  and  cardiac  region.
Drawing  pain  :  in  teeth.
Violent  jerks  :  in  lumbar  region.


RANUNCULUS  SCELERATUS.  20

Jerking:  in  teeth.

Stinging :  in  teeth  ;  in  legs.

Smarting :  in  eyes  and  canthi ;  of  corns.

Burning: of  tongue; in  throat;  in  pit  of stomach; of
corns.

Burning  soreness  :  behind  xiphoid  cartilage.

Soreness:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Scraping :  in  throat.

Bruised  feeling  :  in  chest.

Biting,  itching :  on  scalp.

Drawing: above r.  eyebrow down cheek to  corner of
mouth-;  in  teeth.

Pressure:  in  pit  of  stomach ;  about  liver  ;  behind  umbili-
cus ;  below  false  ribs.

Pressing :  in  eyeballs ;  in  head.

Fulness  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Tense  feeling:  on  scalp.

Tremulous sensation : around corners of mouth and
lower  lip.

Weakness :  in  chest.

Numbness :  of  corns.

Itching :  between  fingers.

Coldness :  above  r.  eyebrow.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : external
chest  and  sternum  sensitive;  first  and  second  toe  sen-
sitive.

Pressure:  fulness  in  pit  of  stomach  <.

Knock  against  boot :  corns  very  painful.
*^  Skin. I  I  Itching,  boring,  biting,  tingling,  gnawing  in  vari-
ous  parts of  body,  now here,  now there,  especially
toward  evening.

I  iVesciular  eruptions, with acrid,  thin,  yellowish dis-
charges.

I  I  Blisters  which  leave  a  raw  surface  with  acrid  discharges.

I  iThe  body  of  an  infant  about  three  months  old  was
covered  all  over  with  pemphigus ;  continual  thirst ;
very  frequent,  weak  and  intermitting  pulse  ;  trembling
with  anxious  features  ;  Arsen}  caused  improvement  for
six  days,  blisters  decreased ;  here  and  there  ulcers
formed  on  parts  covered  with  blisters,  discharging  a
yellowish  fluid ;  Ran.  seel}  healed  them  up.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Infant,  set.  3  months ;  pem-
phigus.
*^  Relations.  Compatible  :  After  Arsen.  in  pemphigus ;  Laches.
follows  in  diphtheria  with  denuded  tongue.


21  .  RAPHANUS  SATIVUS.

RAPHANUS  SATIVUS.

Badish.  Cruciferse.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root.

Symptoms  obtained  from  the  effects  of  eating  the  root,  also  by  proving  the  tinc-
ture 2d,  15th  and  30th  dilutions,  by  Nusser,  Eev.  de  la  Mat.  Med.  Hom.,  vol.  1,  p
545,  1840  ;  Curie's  Journ.  de  la  Soc.  Gall.,  vol.  5,  p.  281 ;  Martin,  Am.  J.  of  Hom.
Mat.  Med.,  1870,  p.  154 ;  Berridge,  Am.  Observer,  1875,  p.  307.

Clinical.  Authorities. — Flatulence  and  diarrhoea  after  ovariotomy,  Bell,  Eaue's
Bee,  1873,  p.  264,  from  Trans.  Am.  Inst.,  1871,  p.  269;  Flatulence,  Hom.  Kec,
vol.  3,  p.  151.

^  Mind. Anguish  with  dread  of  death,  which  is  supposed  to

be  near.
'  Sensorium. Vertigo  with  dimness  of  sight.
'  Inner  Head. Pressure  above  root  of  nose.
Stitches  on  vertex.

Brain  feels  tender  and  sore  from  least  jar  w^hen  walking.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Pressure  above  eyes,  with  difficulty  of
sight,  going  off  after  vomiting.
QEdema  of  lower  lids.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Heat  in  1.  ear  and  over  whole  1.  side

of  face.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nose  somewhat  stopped.
^  Upper  Face. Face  pale.

Expression  of  pain  and  exhaustion.
Cheeks  burn,  are  red  ;  whole  head  and  face  red.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i Taste:  bitter;  pasty.
Tongue  coated  thick  white.

Tongue  pale  and  purplish,  with  a  deep  furrow  and  pale-
red  points  in  middle.
^^  Throat. Back  of  throat dry, > holding cold water  in
mouth.
White  tenacious  mucus  in  throat  after  heavy  sleep.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite.

iThirst:  excessive;  violent;  constant.
"  Eating  and  Drinking. Worse  after  eating.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i Nausea:
with  efforts  to  vomit ; when  lying  down ;  constant;  in
paroxysms  with  faintness  and  inability  to  lie  down.
Vomiting : of  food  and  white  mucus,  with  oppression  of
chest,  heaving  of stomach  and  coldness;  of  bile  and
water.


RAPHANUS  SATIVUS.  •  22

Shuddering  over  back  and  arms  before  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Violent pressure  in  epi-
gastric region.

I  Pain  in  stomach,  obliging. one  to  eat  all  the  time.
^^  Abdomen. iPain  in  abdomen.

■  Griping  about  umbilicus.

Colic :  after  drinking  milk  or  water ;  after  eating.

Pains  in  belly  constant,  but  <  after  motion.

Bowels  sore  from  least  jar ;  can  hardly  tolerate  clothing.

■  Gurgling  in  abdomen  (at  night).

I I  Accumulation  and  retention  of  flatus,  no  relief  upward
or  downward.

■  Distension  of  abdomen,  followed  by  griping,  as  if  stool

would  occur.

■  Abdomen  much  swollen,  hard  and  painful  to  pressure,

especially  hypogastrium.

■  Great  swelling  of  abdomen,  commencing  at  stomach;

abdomen  hard  as  if  filled  with  air,  without  pain ;  cannot
bear  any  pressure  on  stomach,
I  I  Pains  from  incarcerated  flatus,  coming  in  paroxysms ;
colon  and  other  intestines  project  in  little  tympanitic
tumors  all  over  abdomen,  which  is  flaccid  in  the
interval;  diarrhoea  of  yellow  brown  fluid,  with  no
passage  of  flatus  by  mouth  or  anus  for  a  long  time  ;
•twenty-two  days  after  performance  of  ovariotomy.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■  Stool:  brown  or  yellow-brown  fluid,
coming  with  much  force ;  green,  liquid,  mixed  with
mucus  and  blood  ;  frothy,  copious,  undigested.

■  Constipation,  bloating  of  abdomen,  absence  of  gases,  no

emission  of  gas  upward  or  downward,  prompt  satiety
when  eating,  sedentary  life.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Urine:  more  copious  than  the  liquid
drunk ;  copious,  yellow  ;  yellow,  turbid,  with  a  sediment
resembling  yeast.

■  Phos.-ammon.-magnes.  in  excess  in  urine;  gravel.
During  micturition,  burning  in  urethra.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Sexual  excitement;  nymphomania.
Great  aversion  to  opposite  sex.
Constant  titillations  in  genitals.

Sensation  of  a  foreign  body  rising  from  uterus  to  chest.
Mucous  leucorrhoea,  at  times  slightly  tinged  with  blood.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Feeling  as
of  something  sticking  in  larynx;  after  quietly  walking
or  much  talking  it  becomes  a  dryness  and  excites  a
cough.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse : quick,  full but

soft,  with  heat  at  night ;  small.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down  :  nausea.
Inability  to  lie  down :  nausea  and  faintness.


23  RAPHANUS  SATIVUS.

Motion:  pain  in  belly  <.
Walking:  jar  from,  brain  feels  tender  and  sore.
^^  Nerves. l  l  Great  weakness  and  languor ; weakness  with
tenderness  of  abdomen.
I  1  Hysterical  attack.
^^  Sleep. I  Sleep  restless  with  distressing  dreams.
Awoke  in  morning  with  cramping  sore  pain.
^^  Time. Morning: awoke with cramping  pain; toward,
perspiration  after  heat.
Night :  gurgling  in  abdomen  ;  pulse  quick,  full,  soft,  with

heat.
After  midnight :  dry  heat,  thirst,  ebullitions.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  water :  held  in  mouth  >

dryness  of  throat.
*"  Fever, i  Chilliness:  in  back;  along  back  and  posterior  sur-
face of  arms ;  during  meals.
Heat  in  evening,  in  room,  after  walking  in  open  air.
Dry  heat  at  night, with  violent  thirst and ebullition,

mostly  after  midnight.
I  1  Disposition  to  perspire.

Perspiration  after  heat,  toward  morning,  mostlj^"  on  fore-
head.
Intermittent  fever  after  midnight ;  heat  and  violent  thirst,
with  full  soft,  quick  pulse,  followed  by  general  perspira-
tion, mostly  on  forehead.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Paroxysms :  pain  from  incarcerated
flatus  ;  nausea.
During  meals :  chilliness.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Left : heat  in  ear  and  side  of

face.
*^  Sensations. As  if  stool  would  occur ;  abdomen  as  if  filled
with  air; as  of  a  foreign  body  rising  from  uterus  to
chest ;  as  of  something  sticking  in  larynx.
Pain :  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen.
'  Stitches  :  on  vertex.
Griping :  about  umbilicus.
Burning :  of  cheeks ;  in  urethra.
Heat :  in  1.  ear  and  over  1.  side.
Pressure : above  root  of  nose ; above  eye ;  in  epigastric

region.
Tenderness :  of  abdomen.
Dryness:  in  larynx;  in  throat.
Titillation  :  in  genitals.
Shuddering :  over  back  and  arms.
Chilliness :  in  back  ;  along  arms.
*''  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Cannot  bear  cloth-
ing :  bowels  sore.
*^  Skin. Vesicular  eruption,  with  acrid,  thin,  yellowish  dis-
charge.


RAPH.  SAT.— RATANHIA.  24

Pressure:  abdomen  painful ;  cannot  bear  it  on  stomach.
Least  jar :  bowels  sore.
^^  Relations. Compare : Anacard. in stomach symptoms ;
Carbo  veg.  in  flatulence.


RATANHIA.

Rhatany,  Mapato,  Puinacuchu.  Polygalacese.

A  native  of  Peru,  growing  in  dry,  argillaceous  and  sandy  soil.
The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  dry  root.

Hartlaub  and  Trinks,  Arz.  M.  L.,  vol.  3,  p.  57  ;  Teste,  Mat.  Med.;  Trousseau
and  Pidoux,  Mat.  Med.;  Gaz.  des  Hosp.,T843;  Berridge,  U.  S.  Med.  Times,  1876.

Clinical  Authorities. — Pterygium, 'i^ewton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  210;  Con-
stipation and  fissure  of  anus,  Allen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  523  ;  Fissured  anus,  Hib-
bard',  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  255  ;  Ascaris  vermicularis,  Gushing,  N.  E.  M.  G. ;  Fissures
of  nipple,  Allen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  527.

^  Inner  Head. Painful  sticking  in  head,  here  and  there.
Headache  as  if  head  were  in  a  vise.
Dull,  deep  stitches  in  vertex.
Pain  in  middle  of  forehead,  as  if  brain  would  fall  out,

while  straining  at  stool.
^  Sight and Eyes. Sensation  of  white  speck  before  eyes,

impeding  sight  in  evening  by  candlelight,  with  constant

urging  to  wipe  eyes,  >  after  wiping.
Sensation  as  of  a  skin  before  eyes.
I  I  Inflammation  of  white  of  eye;  a  membrane  seemed  to

extend  to  central  point  of  eye,  which  burned.

■  Pterygium.

I  I  Twitching  in  1.  upper  eyelid.

Twitching  in  r.  eye  and  r.  upper  lid.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Violent  stitch  in  r.  ear.

Chirping  in  r.  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Dryness  of  nose.

Dry  coryza,  with  complete  stoppage  of  nostrils.

Bleeding  of  nose.

Scabs  on  nose.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. The  molars  feel  elongated,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  coldness  rushed  out  of  them.

■  Terrible  toothache  during  early  months  of  pregnancy;

must  get  up  at  night  and  walk  about.
Shooting  pulsating  pain,  with  sensation  of  elongation  in


25  RATANHIA.

one  1.  upper  incisor  (which  is  painful  to  touch)  in  even-
ing; <  after  lying  down,  compelling  one  to  rise  and
to  walk  about.
Gums  exude  sour  blood  on  sucking  them.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Burning  on  tip  of  tongue.

"  Inner  Mouth, l  '  Tasteless  water  collects  in  mouth.

"  Throat. Painful spasmodic  contraction  in  throat,  during
which  he  is  unable  to  speak  a  loud  word.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Constant  desire  to
eat.

^®  Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea and Vomiting. iVery
violent  hiccough,  so  that  stomach  is  painful.

*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Contractive  pain  in  stomach.
Ulcerative  pain  in  region  of  stomach.
I  I  Atonic  dyspepsia  ;  accumulation  of  tasteless  water  in
mouth ;  flat  taste ;  no  appetite,  but  constant  desire  to
eat;  eructations  after  dinner,  empty  or  tasting  of
ingesta;  vomiting  of  water,  preceded  by  loathing;
bloatedness  of  stomach  >  by  emission  of  flatus;  cut-
ting in  abdomen,  going  off"  by  eructations;  ineffectual
urging  to  stool;  hard  stool  with  straining;  yellow
diarrhoeic  stools,  with  burning  before  and  during  stool ;
languor  and  prostration,  with  weariness  of  whole  body.

^^  Hypochondria. i  '  Exudation  in  pleura  with  sweat  and
diarrhoea. ^Induration  of  liver.

^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Thin,  fetid  stools,  burning  like  Atc  in
anus.
I  1  Bloody  diarrhoea.

■  Discharge  of  blood  from  rectum  with  or  without  stool.

■  Urging  sensation  in  small  of  back,  as  if  there  would  be

stool ; hard  stool with  straining ; sudden stitches  in
anus ;  fissures  of  anus.
I  I  Stool  is  accompanied  by  sweat. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Hard  stool,  with  straining;  ineffectual  urging  to  stool.

■  Straining;  stool  so  hard  that  she  cried  out;  great  pro-

trusion of  hemorrhoids,  followed  for  a  long  time  by
burning  in  anus.
\  I  Inactivity  of  bowels  for  a  long  time,  but  without  large
accumulation  of  hardened  feces ;  constantly  increasing
distress  in  rectum  and  anus,  protrusion  of  rectum  after
stool;  great  heat  with  frequent  but  ineff'ectual  efforts  to
evacuate  bowels  and  bladder ;  three  or  four  deep  and
angry-looking  fissures  of  anus,  also  several  superficial,
but  very  sore  and  raw  abrasions  of  mucous  membrane,
extending  as  far  as  sphincter,  and  a  little  beyond  into
rectum ;  sensation  as  if  rectum  and  anus  were  all  twisted
up,  followed  by  most  violent  cutting,  not  only  after  an
evacuation,  but  at  other  times; pain  after  stool  as  if


RATANHIA.  26:

splinters  of  glass  were  sticking  in  every  direction
into  anus  and  rectum,  with  great  heat ;  these  pains  so
intense  that  she  could  not  keep  quiet;  sensation  after
stool  as  if  rectum  protruded  and  then  suddenly  went
back  with  a  jerk  and  most  horrible  pain ;  frequent  inef-
fectual desire  to  urinate;  fluttering  of  heart;  desire  ta
die  during  pains;  relief,  after  a  stool,  by  hot  water,
so  that  he  always  sat  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  a
sitz-bath  as  hot  as  he  could  endure;  relief  only  while  in
bath.

I  I  Fissure  of  anus; great  constriction; stools  are  forced

with  great  effort,  and  anus  aches  and  burns  for  hours.

I I  Excruciating  pains  immediately  after  stool,  especially  if
bowels  are  costive. ^Fissured  anus.

1 1  Fissures  of  anus,  with  great  sensitiveness  of  rectum,

■  Violent  itching  of  rectum.

I  Dry  heat  at  anus,  with  sudden  stitches,  like  stabs  with  a

penknife.
Burning  in  anus  before  and  several  hours  after  stool,  with

protrusion  of  varices.

■  Burning in  anus  before  and during a diarrhoea-like

stool.

■  Burning  in  anus  before  and  after  soft  diarrhoeic  stools.
Protrusion  of  varices  after  hard  stool,  with  straining  and

violent  pressing  in  rectum.

■  Oozing  from  anus.

■  Ascaris  vermicularis ;  severe  itching  about  anus.

■  Pin-worms  in  children.

^'  Urinary  Organs.  '  i Diabetes;  considerable  emaciation  and
weakness ;  limbs  sore  and  aching ;  great  appetite ;  in-
satiable thirst  and  constant  dryness  of  mouth  ;  gums
livid  and  swollen;  soreness  in  kidneys;  severe  pain  in
small  of  back,  >  from  motion ;  hard  stool  with  strain-
ing; frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge,
or  passes  large  quantities  of  light-colored  urine.

Burning  in  urethra  while  urinating.

Incontinence  of  urine.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge  which
soon  becomes  turbid  and  cloudy.
^^  Female  Sexual  S^rgans. '  i  Uterine  pains  following  retro-
cession of  eruption  on  lumbar  region.

Menstruation  too  early,  profuse  and  of  too  long  duration,
with  pains  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back.

Metrorrhagia.

Leucorrhoea,  with  itching  in  rectum and discharge of
bloody  mucus.
24  Pregnancy,  Parturition,  Lactation, i  '  Threatened  mis-
carriage.


27  RATANHIA.

1 1  Fissures  of  nipples  in  nursing  women.
^^  Cough. Dry  cough  with  tickling  in  larynx  and  great  sore-
ness in  chest.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Congestion  of  blood  to  chest,
with  heat  and  dyspnoea.

Stitches  in  chest,  especially  when  ascending  steps.

1  iHydrothorax.

1  I  Exudation  in  pleural  cavities  with  sweat  and  diarrhoea.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Bruised  sensation  in  back  and  hips,  early
on  rising,  >  on  motion.

Twitching  in  small  of  back.

Pain  in  small  of  back  during  menses.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  toothache  <.

Motion  :  pain  in  back  >.

Ascending  steps :  stitches  in  chest.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  water :  relieved  pain  in

rectum  and  anus.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Several  hours :  burning  of  anus.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  twitching  in  eye  and
upper  lid  ;  stitch  in  ear ;  chirping  in  ear.

Left ;  twitching  in  upper  eyelid ;  sensation  of  elongation
in  upper  incisor.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  head  were  in  a  vise ;  as  if  brain  would
fall  out ;  as  of  a  white  speck  before  eyes ;  as  of  skin  be-
fore eyes ;  as  if  coldness  rushed  out  of  molars ;  as  if
there  would  be  stool ;  as  if  rectum  and  anus  were  all
twisted  up ;  as  of  splinters  of  glass  in  anus  and  rectum ;
as  if  rectum  protruded  and  then  suddenly  went  back
with  a  jerk.

Pain :  in  middle  of  forehead ;  in  abdomen  and  small  of
back.

Excruciating  pains :  in  bowels.

Horrible  pain  :  in  rectum.

Severe  pain  :  in  small  of  back.

Cutting :  of  abdomen.

Shooting,  pulsating  pain :  in  1.  incisors.

Stitches: dull,  deep  on  vertex; in  r.  ear; in  anus; in
chest.

Contractive  pain  :  in  stomach.

Ulcerative  pain :  in  region  of  stomach.

Sticking :  painful  in  head.

Aching:  in  limbs.

Burning :  on  tip  of  tongue ;  in  anus ;  in  urethra.

Soreness:  of  limbs  ;  of  kidneys;  inchest.

Bruised  sensation  :  in  back  and  hips.

Heat :  at  anus.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Twitching :  in  1.  upper  eyelid  ;  in  r.  eye  and  upper  lid  ;  in
small  of  back.


EAT  A  N  H I  A— RHEUM.  28

Chirping :  in  r.  ear.
Dryness :  of  mouth  ;  of  nose.
Itching :  of  rectum.
*'  Tissues. I  Asthenic  hemorrhages  with  exhaustion.
■  Chronic  diarrhoea  and  leucorrhoea.
I  iFissures  of  anus  and  nipples.
^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Touch : tooth

painful.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man,  set.  30,  suffering  over
a  year;  fissured  anus.
Man,  set.  47,  nervous  temperament,  spare, overworked ;
constipation  and  fissure  of  anus.
^^  Relations. Compare :  Iris  vers.,  Canthar.,  Sulphur,  in  rectal
symptoms ; Thuja  in  sensation  of  splinters  of  glass  in
rectum  and  anus.


RHEUM.

Rhubarb.  Polygonacese.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Gross,  Hornburg,  Eiickert,  Teuthorn,  etc.  See
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  8,  p.  303.

Clinical  Atjthokities. — Headache,  Fuller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  20,  p.  539  ;  Diffi-
cult dentition,  Tuller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  20,  p.  538 ;  Renal  affections,  Tuller,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  20,  p.  542 ;  Diarrhcea,  Hartmann,  Tietze,  Weigel,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
846;  Kirsch,  Miiller,  Hartmann,  Kafka,  Weber,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  430;
Smalls,  Eaue's  Kec,  1873,  p.  122,  from  U.  S.  Med.  and  Surg.  Jour.,  vol.  7,  p.  428  ;
Dysentery,  Gauwerky,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  447.

^  Mind. 1 1  Child  impatiently  and  vehemently  desires  many
things  and  cries ;  dislikes  even  its  favorite  playthings.
II  Screaming  of  children,  with  urging  and  sour  stools.
Not  inclined  to  talk  much ;  indolent ;  taciturn  ;  morose.
Restless,  with  weeping.
'  Sensorium. Vertigo  and  heaviness,  with  beating  in  head  ;
<  while  standing.
Sensation  as  if  brain  moved,  when  standing.
^  Inner  Head. Beating  headache.

Dull,  light,  dizzy  sort  of  headache,  extending  over  whole

brain.
Dull,  stupefying  headache,  with  bloated  eyes.
Heaviness  of  head  ;  heat  rising  up  to  it.


29  RHEUM.

Pulsation  in  head,  ascending  from  abdomen.

Pulsative,  crampy  headache.

Sensation  as  if  brain  moved  when  stooping.

I  I  Headache  due  to  gastric  derangement ;  pain  on  top  of

head ;  sour,  flat,  slimy  taste  in  mouth ;  bitter  taste  of
food  ;  hunger,  but  great  repugnance  to  food  after  eating
a  little.

*  Outer  Head, l  Sweat  on hairy  scaljD,  constant  and very

profuse ;  whether  asleep  or  awake,  in  motion  or  quiet,
the  hair  is  always  sopping  wet;  sweat  may  or  may  not
be  sour.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Weak  and  dull,  especially  when  looking

intently  at  any  object.

Swimming  eyes  full  of  water,  especially  in  open  air.

Pupils  dilated,  with  pressing  headache;  later  contracted,
with  inward  restlessness.

Contracted  pupils.

Pulsation  in  eyes.

Convulsive  twitching  of  eyelids.

Granulated  upper  lids.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Stupefying  drawing  in  root  of  nose,  ex-
tending to  tip,  where  it  tingles.
^Tipper  Face. Pale;  one  cheek  red,  the  other  pale.

Muscles  of  forehead  are  drawn  together  and  wrinkled.

Tension  of  skin  of  face.

Cool  sweat  on  face,  most  around  nose  and  mouth.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Painful  sensation  of  coldness  in  teeth,
with  accumulation  of  much  saliva.

I I  Difficult  dentition  ;  restlessness  and  irritability;  child
is  nervous,  with  temporary  satisfaction  after  its  whims
are  gratified  ;  pallor  of  face ; occasional  twitching  of
eyelids,  corners  of  mouth,  lips  and  fingers ;  the  child
smells  sour.

"Taste  and  Tongue, i Taste:  sour;  flat,  slimy;  insipid  or
nauseous ;  bitter  only  of  food,  even  of  sweet  things.
Tongue  numb,  insensible.
^^  Inner  Mouth, l  l  Salivation  with  colic  or  diarrhoea.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Desire  for  va-
rious kinds  of  food,  which  become  repugnant  as  soon  as
a  little  is  eaten.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating  prunes,  colic.

After  a  meal,  loose  stool ;  colic,  which  is  worse  standing.
*^  Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,

as  from  stomach  or  abdomen,  with  colic.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Fulness  in  stomach,  as  after
eating  too  much.
Throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach.
■  Disordered  stomach  in  children;  nervous,  irritable,  de-


RHEUM.  30

siring  many  things,  with  repugnance  to  food,  pale  face,
sour-smelling  breath,  nightly restlessness  and  crying
during  sleep.
^^  Hypochondria, l  Jaundice,  in  consequence  of  eating  un-
ripe fruit,  accompanied  by  white  diarrhoea.
I  I  Duodenal  catarrh  and  catarrh  of  biliary  ducts,  with
jaundice; stools  whitish,  pasty,  or  clay-colored;  skin,
earthy,  jaundiced.
^^  Abdomen, l  l  Sensation  of  nausea  in  abdomen.

I  Abdomen  bloated,  tense;  wind  seems  to  rise  into  chest.
I  I  Like  a  lump  around  navel.

■  Cutting  and  rumbling  as  from  flatulence.

■  Griping  with  great  urging  to  stool.

■  Cutting  in  umlDilical  region.

I  I  Colic :  violent  pain  with  cutting ;  must  lie  doubled  up  ;
<  when  standing ;  immediately  before  stool,  not  >  by
stool ;  before  and  during  stool,  >  after ;  a  quarter  of  an
hour  after  dinner;  ■■with  very  sour  stools,  acid  chil-
dren; in  children  made  <  at  once  by  uncovering  an
arm  or  a  leg,  child  smells  sour ;  <  by  eating  plums.
"^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■  Frequent  urging  and  ineffectual
straining ;  <  on  motion  and  walking.

■  Colicky;  ineffectual  urging ;  altered  fecal  stools.

■  Desire  for  stool  after  a  meal.

■  Stool:  brown,  slimy;  loose,  thin,  curdled,  sour-smelling,

fermented  ;  corroding  anus ;  mucous  and  fecal ;  pasty ;
thin,  brownish,  fecal;  whitish,  curdy,  turning  green  on
diaper  on  exposure  to  air ;  of  a  pea-green  ;  feces  mixed
with  green  slime ;  fetid  ;  frothy.

■  Before  stool :  urging;  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate ;  cut-

ting colic.

■  During  stool:  colic;  chilliness,  cutting  and  constricting

pains  in  abdomen  ;  pale  face ;  salivation ;  screaming
(teething  infants),  with  drawing  up  of  limbs  or  stiffen-
ing body.

■  After  stool:  tenesmus;  renewed  urging  (when  moving) ;

constrictive  cutting  colic,  <  from  motion.
I  Aggravation :  when  moving  about;  in  infants  and  chil-
dren; after  eating; during dentition; in childbed;
during  inflammatory rheumatism ; in hot weather ;
when  uncovering  (pains).

■  Amelioration  :  by  bending  double  (colic).

■  Diarrhoea,  with  sour,  slimy stool and tenesmus after

abuse  of  Magnesia.

■  Almost  immediately  after  nursing  child  has  a  loose  stool,

which  is  sour-smelling,  accompanied  by  colic.

■  Liquid slimy stools,  as if  fermented, with  pale  face,

ptyalism,  colic,  crying  and  restlessness;  child  draws  up
legs,  smells  sour  despite  all  washing.


51  RHEUM.

1  I  Very  severe  diarrhoea,  with  colic  and  tenesmus;  alter-
nate chilliness  and  heat ;  great  thirst ;  general  sweat ;
great  prostration,  restlessness,  fear  of  death.

iDiarrhcea  of  teething  children  during  Summer;  extreme
emaciation.

I  Diarrhoea  of  children  who  have  not  cut  any  teeth ;  evacua-
tions fluid,  greenish,  sour-smelling,  as  if  fermented,  ac-
companied by  colic,  with  flexing  of  thighs  upon  abdo-
men ;  tossing  about;  paleness  of  face ;  ptyalism.

I  Sour,  fetid  discharge  during  dentition ;  always  some
congestion  about  head;  fever  and  dark-colored,  smarting
urine  and  dysuria.

I  Dysentery ;  after  bloody  stools  have  ceased,  tenesmus,  with
brown,  mushlike,  slimy,  sour  stools.

I  I  During  phthisis,  greenish  diarrhoea,  of  sour  smell,
containing  much  mucus,  accompanied  by  colic  and
tenesmus.

I  I  Diarrhoea  during  inflammatory  rheumatism.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea,  sour,  frothy;  with  moist  tongue,  thirst,
loss  of  appetite.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Burning  in  kidneys  and  bladder,  before
and  during  urination.

Bladder  weak,  must  press  hard  to  urinate.

Urine  :  increased  ;  red  or  greenish-yellow.

I  I  Abdomen  distended;  urine  scanty,  burning,  reddish,
with  a  pink  sediment;  face  pale  and  bloated;  disposi-
tion irritable  ;  very  nervous ;  constant  disposition  to
sweat  upon  slightest  motion ;  hair  wet  all  the  time ;
severe  cutting  drawing  in  1.  loin  below  short  ribs,  with
a  drawing,  aching,  burning  sensation  in  1.  ovarian
region,  sometimes  agonizing. ^Ascites.

I  I  Child  lay  in  a  stupor,  from  which  he  frequently  roused
and  screamed ;  face  pale  and  covered  with  cool  sweat,
forehead  and  hair  sopping  wet;  lips,  eyelids  and  fingers
twitching;  urine  scanty,  hot,  with  slimy  shreds  and
strings  of  blood  on  diaper ;  renal  region  tender  on  press-
ure, causing  child  to  wince  and  cry.

I  I  Eight  months  pregnant ;  face  and  eyes  bloated ;  great
pallor  of  countenance,  irritable,  nervous,  easily  startled
by  noises  and  apprehensive,  twitching  of  facial  muscles ;
great  disposition  to  sweat  on  slightest  motion;  cool
sweat  on  forehead;  hair  constantly  wet;  urine  scanty
and  fragrant,  high-colored.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. Bearing  down  in  uterine  region,

while  standing.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. 1 1  After  abortus,
urinary  complaints.

I  Milk  of  nursing  women  yellow  and  bitter ;  infant  re-
fused breast.'


RHEUM.  32

■  Diarrhoea in first  days after confinement,  with colic,

tenesmus,  prostration,  restlessness  ;  fear  of  death  ;  stools

watery,  offensive.
I  Stitches  in  nipples.
^^  Respiration. Dyspnoea,  as  from  a  load  on  upper  part  of

chest.
I  I  Snoring  inspiration  during  sleep.
^^  Heart, Pulse and Circulation. Pulse generally  un-
changed ;  only  a  little  accelerated,  especially  in  evening.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  in  sacrum  and  hips ; cannot

walk  straight.
Violent  cutting,  as  if  in  lumbar  vertebrae,  <  by  stool.
I  I  Cutting,  drawing  in  1.  lumbar  region,  beneath  short

ribs  and  ni  forepart  of  1.  side  of  lower  abdomen,  just

above  pubes;  digging  in  intestines.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Darting  pains  in  arms.
Twitching  in  arms,  hands  and  fingers.
Bubbling  sensation  in  elbow  joints.
Veins  of  hand  distended.
Cold  sweat  on  palms  of  hands.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Twitching  of  muscles  of  thighs.

I  I  Sensation  of  fatigue  in  thighs,  as  after  great  exertion.
I  I  Tensive,  pressing  pain  in  hollow  of  1.  knee,  extending  to

heel.
StiflPness  in  bend  of  knee,  with  pain  on  motion.
Bubbling  sensation  from  bend  of  knee  to  heel.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Limbs  fall  asleep  from  lying  on  them,

particularly  the  lower,  in  putting  one  over  the  other.
I  I  Simple  pain  in  all  the  joints  during  motion.
^^  Rest; Position. Motion. Takes  the  queerest  positions,

in  order  to  rest  awhile; restless  nights; cannot  walk

erect; flexes  limbs; puts  hands  over  head; must  lie

doubled  up.
Lying  on  limbs  :  makes  them  fall  asleep.
Must  lie  doubled  up  :  colic.
Stooping :  as  if  brain  moved.
Standing :  vertigo,  as  if  brain  moved ;  colic  <  ;  bearing

down  in  uterine  region.
Motion : urging  and straining  <  ; colic  <  ; slightest

disposition  to  sweat ;  stiffness  in  bend  of  knee  painful,

pain  in  all  joints.
Walking  : urging  and  straining.

Cannot  walk  straight :  stiffness  of  limbs,  hips  and  sacrum.
^^  Nerves. Weakness, exhaustion also of children, with

diarrhoea.
Weakness  and  heaviness  of  whole  body  as  if  one  were

waking  from  a  heavy  sleep.
Restlessness.


33  RHEUM.

Child  is  pale,  quarrels,  frets  in sleep ; with  convulsive

startings  in  fingers.
^'^  Sleep. Puts  hands  over  head  when  falling  asleep  and  in

sleep.
During  sleep:  heat;  jerking  motion  of  muscles  in  face  or

eyelids ; trembling ; moving limbs ; bending head

backward.

■  Children  cry  and  toss  about  all  night;  delirious  talking;

full  of  fear.
I  I  Vivid,  sad,  anxious  dreams.
Walking  in  sleep.
On awakening from sleep,  headache; bad odor from

mouth.
Requires  very  little  sleep  and  not  much  food.
^^  Time. Evening :  pulse  accelerated.

Night:  restlessness;  children  cry  and  toss  about.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. General  aggravation  from

uncovering,  from  cold.
Amelioration  from  wrapping  up,  from  warmth.
Open  air:  eyes  full  of  water.
Uncovering  arm  or  leg:  colic  <.
Hot  weather:  colic  <.
*'^  Fever. Chilliness,  alternating  with heat ; internal,  with

external  heat.
Heat  all  over,  mostly  on  hands  and  feet,  with  cold  face ;

no  thirst.
Perspiration  from  slight  exertions.

■  Sweats  easily  without  fever.

I  Perspiration  on  forehead  and  scalp  after  slight  exertion.

iCold^  perspiration  on  face,  especially  about  mouth  and
nose.

llSweat  on  scalp  and  forehead.

Cold  sweat  about  nose  and  mouth.

Sweat  stains  yellow.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate:  chilliness  and  heat.
*'^  Locality and  Direction. Symptoms  mostly left-sided ;
going  (in  the  sick)  downward,  or  from  r.  to  left.

Left :  cutting  drawing  in  loin  ;  drawing,  burning  in  ova-
rian region ;  cutting  drawing  in  lumbar  region  and  in
forepart  of  side  of  lower  abdomen  ;  pressing  pain  in  hol-
low of  knee.
**  Sensations.  As  if  brain  moved ;  as  of  a  lump  around
navel ;  as  of  a  load  on  upper  part  of  chest ;  cutting  as  if
in  lumbar  vertebrse ;  heaviness,  as  if  one  were  waking
from  a  heavy  sleep.

Pain  :  on  top  of  head  ;  in  all  joints.

Violent  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Cutting:  in  umbilical  region.

VOL.  IX. — 3.


RHEUM.  34

Cutting  drawing  :  in  1.  loin ;  in  1.  lumbar  region.

Darting  pains:  in  arms.

Digging :  in  intestines.

Stitches :  in  nipples.

Constricting  pains :  in  abdomen.

Drawing,  aching,  burning:  in  1.  ovarian  region.

Tensive,  pressing  pain  :  in  hollow  of  knee.

Beating :  in  head.

Throbbing:  in  pit  of  stomach .•

Pulsation  :  in  head  ;  in  eyes.

Twitching:  eyelids,  corners  of  mouth,  lips  and  fingers;  in

arms  and  hands;  of  muscles  of  thighs.
Burning:  in  kidneys  and  bladder.
Bearing  down :  in  uterine  region.
Stupefying  drawing :  in  root  of  nose.
Dull,  stupefying  headache.
Dull,  light,  dizzy  sort  of  headache.
Bubbling  sensation :  in  elbow  joints ;  from  bend  of  knee

to  heel.
Fulness :  in  stomach.
Heaviness:  in  head.
Numbness :  of  tongue.
Painful  coldness :  in  teeth.
."  Tissues. Diarrhoea  during  dentition.

Acute  rheumatism,  going  from  joint  to  joint,  r.  shoulder

to  hip,  1.  hip  to  right.
Lameness  of  wrists  and  knees  after  sprains  and  disloca-
tions.
Anasarca.
^^  Skin. BSour  smell  of  whole  body.

I  Child  smells  sourish,  even  if  washed  or  bathed.
*'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Often  suitable  for  children,

sucklings,  or  during  dentition.
Sour-smelling  children  w^ho  cry  a  great  deal.
Child,  set.  5  months,  suffering  four  days;  diarrhoea.
Boy,  aet.  6  months,  after  diphtheria ;  acute  nephritis.
Boy,  set.  9  months,  ill  three  days ;  diarrhoea.
Girl,  set.  2;  frothy  diarrhoea.
Woman,  set.  35,  blonde,  lively  disposition,  delivered  several

days  ago,  suffering  three  days ;  diarrhoea.
Mrs.  W.,  set.  47,  eight  months  pregnant;  renal  disorder.
Mrs.  A.,  set.  60;  renal  affection.
*^  Relations. Antidoted by: Camphor., Chamom., Coloc,

Mercur.,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.
It  antidotes: Canihar.  and  Magn.  carh.
Compatible :  Ipecac.
Complementary  :  after  Magn.  carb.
Compare:  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Chamom.,  Coloc,  Didcam.,  Nux

vom.,  Podoph.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sulphur.


35  EHODODENDRON.


RHODODENDRON.

*

Yellow  Snowrose.  Ericaceae.

A  native  of  Siberia,  grows  in  the  mountains  and  flowers  in  July.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves.

Provings  by  Seidel  and  others,  Arcliiv  fiir  Horn.,  vol.  10,  p.  139.

Clinical  Atjthokities.  —  Dysecoia,  Tinnitus  aurium,  Schulz,  Kallenbach,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  379  ;  Prosopalgia,  Hirschel,  Eane's  Eec,  1870,  p.  292  ;
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  149 ;  Ussher,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  191,  from  Horn.  World ;
Toothache,  Gutmann,  Altschul,  Elb,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  473;  Villers,  Oehme,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  209;  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  133;  Fains  in  stom-
ach, Goullon,  Meyer,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  117  ;  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  22;  Dysuria,
Wilson,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  5,  p.  375;  Ovarian  cyst  is  caused  to  discharge  into  abdomen,
Ozanam,  Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  de  France ;  Balanitis,  Gilchrist,  Surg.  Therap.,  p.  532 ;
Induration  of  testicles,  Hartman,  Schreter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  210 ;  Berridge,
Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  553  ;  Hydrocele,  Seidel,  Kallenbach,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,
p.  214;  Gross,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  585;  Lilienthal,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.14,
p.  138;  Hastings,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.  351;  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  242;  Orchitis,
hydrocele,  Ussher,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  191 ;  Cough,  Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,
p.  694;  Pain  in  arm,  Allen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,  p.  77;  White  swelling  of  knee  (2
cases),  Henke,  Seidel;  Pain  in  periosteum,  Waddell,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  427;
Rheumatic  pain  in  I.  side,  Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  172,  from  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  80,  p.  75  ;  Rheumatism,  Gross,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  537 ;  Smith,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  220 ;  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  254.

^  Mind. Leaves  out  whole  words  in  writing.

Great  indifference,  with  aversion  to  all  occupation.
While  talking  easily  forgets  what  he  is  talking about;
does  not  recollect  what  he  had  been  talking  about  till
he  has  thought  awhile.
■Nervous  persons  who  dread  a  storm  and  are  particularly
afraid  of  thunder.
^  Sensorium. Sensation  of  stupefaction  and drowsiness  in
head  on  rising  in  morning.
Intoxicated  from  a  little  wine.
I  iDulness  of  head.
•^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  forehead  and  temples  when  lying  in
bed  in  morning;  <  from  drinking  wine  and  from  wet,
cold  weather ;  >  after  rising  and  moving  about.
Early  in  morning  in  bed,  headache  which  almost  deprives

him  of  his  senses,  >  after  rising.
I  I  Tearing,  boring  pain  in  1.  temporal  region.
*  Outer  Head. The  scalp  feels  sore  and  as  if  bruised.


RHODODENDRON.  36

Violent  drawing  and  tearing  in  bones  and  periosteum  of
cranial  bones;  <  when  at  rest,  in  morning;  during  a
thunderstorm  and  during  wet,  cold,  stormy  weather;
>  from  wrapping  head  up  warmly ;  from  dr}^  heat
and  from  exercise.

Biting  itching  on  scalp,  especially  in  evening.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  of  vision  when  reading  and
writing.

I  I A  man  about  40  complained  of  a  gradual  failure  of
sight,  accompanied  by  periodically  recurring  violent
pains,  involving  eyeball,  extending  to  orbit  and  head,
<  at  approach  of  storm,  >  when  storm  broke  out;
rheumatic  diathesis;  pupils  somewhat  dilated  and  slug-
gish, T  +  Mn  both  eyes;  pulsation  of  retinal  veins,  but
no  excavation  of  optic  nerve ;  field  of  vision  not  circum-
not  be  brought  above  |§ ;  pain  recurred  until  relieved
by  the  medicine.

Periodical,  dry  burning  in  eyes,  <  in  bright  daylight  and
from  looking  intently.

I  I  Burning  pain  in  eyes;  when  reading  or  writing  he  has

a  feeling  of  heat  in  them.

I I  Ciliary  neuralgia,  <  before  a  storm.

I  I  Insufficiency  of  internal  recti  muscles;  darting  pains
like  arrows  through  eye  from  head,  <  before  a  storm.
^Asthenopia  muscularis.

I  I  On  staring  or  writing,  very  hot  lachrymation  from  r.
eye,  and  at  same  time  shooting  in  r.  eye  from  within
outward.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  eyelids.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Otalgia  (r.  ear) ;  violent  twitching  pain.

Sensation  in  ear  as  from  a  worm.

Buzzing  in  ear,  <  when  swallowing.

Violent  pain  in  r.  external  ear,  commencing  in  morning
and  continuing  nearly  all  day.

Tearing  sensation  in  and  about  r.  ear.

Constant  buzzing  in  ears  and  a  sensation  as  if  water  were
rushing  into  them  ;  loud  sounds  re-echo  for  a  long  time ;
humming  and  ringing  before  ears.

I  1  Constant  tearing  pain  in  ears  ;  roaring ;  stitching,  tear-
ing headache;  shortness  of  breath,  <  from  least  motion  ;
for  several  years  hardness  of  hearing.

I  I  Tinnitus  aurium,  <  r.  side;  feels  pulsation  of  heart  in
ear ;  sounds  in  ears  as  of  a  gentle  downpour  of  rain,  <
toward  evening;  hears  wath  difficulty  the  talking
around  him  ;  tick  of  watch  not  heard  14  inches  from  r.
ear  and  11  from  1. ;  flushes  of  heat  at  night,  pressure  in
forehead  and  vertex.


37  RHODODENDRON.

I  I  After  an  arthritic  affection  of  head,  twenty  years  ago,
constant  ringing  and  roaring  in  ears,  followed  by  hard-
ness of  hearing,  which  gradually  grew  worse,  so" that  for
the  last  ten  years  could  hear  nothing  unless  one  called
loudly  into  her  ear. ^Dysecoia.

I  1  After  catching  cold,  roaring  and  ringing  in  ears  ;  can
hear  in  morning  on  rising,  but  as  day  advances  the
noises  in  ears  gradually  grow  more  intense,  so  that  in
evening  can  scarcely  hear  those  about  him  ;  buzzing  in
ears  like  that  of  a  bee,  or  noise  like  that  following  the
tolling  of  a  bell,  at  times  interrupted  by  cracking  sounds  ;
noises  cease  for  a  time,  then  begin  again ;  tick  of  watch
heard  on  both  sides  at  distance  of  two  feet  and  two
inches.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Diminished  sense  of  smell.

Bleeding  of  nose,  1.  side.

Soreness  of  inner  nose,  with  yellow  or  black  scurf.

Violent  sneezing,  when  rising  in  morning,  with  heat  in
face.

Thin,  fluid  and  profuse  discharge  from  nose,  with  rheu-
matic or  gouty  symptoms.

I  I  Stoppage  of  1.  half  of  nose,  near  root,  <  in  morning  be-
fore rising ;  during  day  stoppage  of  1.  nostril  alternates
with  that  of  r.,  but  nose  is  never  stopped  entirely ;  >  in
open  air.
^  Upper  Face. Chilliness  over  face.

Violent  tearing,  jerking  faceache  ;  <  in  wind  and  changes
of  weather ;  >  while  eating  and  from  warmth.

I  I  Prosopalgia ;  pain  begins  in  temple  and  extends  to
lower  jaw  and  chin;  acute  pain  extending  from  temple
to  temple,  <  from  motion,  talking  and  cold  applications.

1  I  Violent  faceache,  spreading  over  r.  side  of  face  from
teeth  and  gums,  radiating  over  .mouth,  eyes  and  ears,
equally  violent  day  and  night,  during  motion  and  rest ;
pains  drawing,  tearing,  jerking;  <  by  wind  and
changes  of  weather ;  >  from  warmth,  entirely  relieved
while  eating  and  for  some  time  after ;  commonly  trouble-
some in  Spring  and  Autumn,  the  present  very  severe
attack  in  Winter.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  dry,  burning.

Vesicles  on  inner  side  of  lower  lip,  sore  when  eating.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. >  ■  Toothache :  with  earache ;  teeth  loose ;
snags ;  gums  swollen ;  <  from  change  of  weather ;  >
from  warmth  and  after  eating ;  great  weakness  after  pain.

■  Toothache;  the  approach  of  a  thunderstorm  or  cloudy,
windy  weather  is  always  preceded  by  a  drawing,  aching
or  cutting  pain.

Occasional  grumbling  and  tearing  in  four  first  anterior


RHODODENDRON.  38

molars  for  a  short  time ;  now  in  upper,  now  in  lower
jaw ;  now  on  r.,  now  on  1.  side.

■  Transient  pain  in  single  teeth,  recurring  especially  in

damp  weather  and  before  a  storm.

I  I  Toothache  appearing  every  Spring  and  Fall  during
prevalence  of  a  sharp  east  wind,  lasting  several  weeks;
constant  boring  in  a  single  tooth  ;  stitches  extending
into  ear;  pain  <  on  touching  tooth;  pain  at  times  in-
termits, <  at  night  from  cold  drinks,  especially  inhala-
tion of  cold  air ;  >  from  external  heat.

I  I  Toothache  especially  after  a  chill,  begins  with  a  dis-
agreeable pricking  in  teeth  of  one  side,  gradually  in-
creases to  a  drawing,  tearing  pain  over  face  and  temples
on  same  side;  <  from  warmth,  especially  warmth  of
bed  ;  teeth  perfectly  sound.

I  1  Toothache;  pain  began  in  a  carious  tooth,  but  finally
affected  also  neighboring  teeth ;  pain  >  while  chewing
and  for  a  short  time  afterward.

I  I  Rheumatic  or  gouty  pains  in  teeth ;  drawing  tearing  in
molars,  <  in  cloudy,  stormy,  rainy  weather,  also  in  rest;
pain  often  intermits,  generally  appears  in  morning.

■  Arthritic toothache,  < at night,  from cold  or warm

drinks;  >  from  external  application  of  heat.
I  1  Neuralgia in  inferior  and superior  dental nerves  for
seven  weeks; woman in  agony,  sleepless;  gums had
been  swollen;  had  three  sound  teeth  taken  out,  without
relief
I  1  Rheumatic  toothache  radiating  from  r.  lower  jaw  to  teeth.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  lost ;  food  has  no  taste.

Smarting  vesicles  under  tongue.
^^Inner  Mouth. Increase  of  saliva  in  mouth,  with  dryness  of

throat.
^*  Throat. Sore  throat.

Constriction  and  burning  in  throat.

Scraping  and  scratching  sensation  in  fauces ;  sensation  as
if  those  parts  were  lined  with  mucus.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Easily  satisfied
with a small quantity of  food ; feels uncomfortable
afterward.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Gulping  of
a  rancid  or  bitter  fluid.
I  I  Empty  eructations.

Nausea,  waterbrash,  pressure  at  stomach,  >  by  belching.
Vomits  after  fluids,  especially  cold  water; green,  bitter
vomit.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sinking  at  stomach.
Pressure  in  stomach  at  night,  after  cold  drinks.
Constriction  and  pressure  at  pit  of  stomach,  with  dj^spnoea.


39  RHODODENDRON.

Pressing  in  pit  of  stomach  during  and  after  eating.

1  I  After  a  thorough  wetting,  pressing  pain  in  1.  side  under
short  ribs ;  >  by  eating.

I  I  Periodical  crampy  pain  under  short  ribs;  pressing  and  "
drawing,  with  fulness  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  oppression
in  breathing;  pain  as  from  flatulency  in  different  parts,
but  especially  in  1.  hypochondrium.

I  1  Bellyache  after  eating;  in  umbilical  region  after  supper,
obliquely  over  hypochondria;  pressing  in  pit  of  stom-
ach after  dinner,  during  and  after  eating.
^^  Hypochondria. '  '  Pain  as  from  tension  under  short  ribs ;
periodical  crampy  pains.

■  Painful  incarceration  of  flatus  in  hypochondria  and  in

small  of  back.

Pressing  and  drawing,  with  feeling  of  repletion  in  stomach,
and  oppression  of  breathing.

Stitches in spleen from walking fast; tension from
stooping.
^^  Abdomen. Distension  in  upper  part  of  abdomen,  with  dysp-
noea ;  evening  and  morning.

Much  rumbling  in  abdomen,  with  eructations  and  dis-
charge of  fetid  flatus.

Colic  at  navel,  or  feeling  of  repletion  after  eating.
Stool  and  Rectum. S  Stool :  papescent,  yet  tardy,  requiring
much urging; painless, undigested; thin, brownish,
fecal ;  spurting  out  with  force.

iDiarrhoea:  after  meals;  after  fruit;  from  wet,  cold
weather;  before  a  thunderstorm;  in  morning,  with
much  flatus ;  with  pains  in  limbs.

I  I  Dysentery  in  summer,  renewed  before  a  thunderstorm.

Drawing  extending  from  rectum  to  genitals.

Pulsation  in  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  draw-
ing in  region  of  bladder.

Greenish  urine.

I  1  Somewhat  increased  pale  urine  has  an  offensive,  acrid
odor.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate ;  pain  in  urethra  as  from  sub-

cutaneous ulceration.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Desire  weak ;  aversion  to  an  embrace.
Emissions  at  night,  with  amorous  dreams,  later  long-con-
tinued erections.

■  Testicles: especially epididymis, intensely painful to

touch ;  soreness  extending  into  abdomen  and  thighs ;
drawn  up,  swollen,  painful ;  drawn  up  when  walking,
contusive  pain.
Violent  sticking  in  r.  testicle,  as  if  violently  contused,  in
evening,  while  sitting;  pain  disappears  when  walking,
but  returns  immediately  upon  sitting  down.


20


RHODODENDRON.  40

I  Violent,  painful  drawing  in  hard,  somewhat  swollen
testes,  extending  as  far  as  abdomen  and  thigh,  especially
on  r.  side.

Drawing,  sticking  pain  in  r.  testicle  and  spermatic  cord,
>  from  motion  ;  sometimes  pain  is  pricking,  commenc-
ing in  r.  testicle  and  spreading  in  a  zig-zag  manner
along  perineum  toward  anus,  lasting  some  seconds,  and
so  violent  that  it  arrests  breathing.

I  Balanitis;  prepuce  distended  like  a  bladder,  with  integu-
ment thin,  no  pain  or  fever,  little  discharge,  and  no
annoyance  apart  from  the  increased  size.

I  I  Scanty,  painless,  thin  discharge  from  urethra;  swelling
of  1.  testicle,  with  tearing  pains  therein,  extending  up
spermatic  cord;  severe,  periodic,  tearing,  throbbing,
digging  pain  in  1.  hip  bone,  extending  to  middle  of
thigh,  becoming  almost  intolerable  when  at  rest,  so  that
he  could  not  sit  or  lie  in  bed  at  night ;  after  cohabiting
with  wife  who  had  fluor  albus.

I  I  Orchitis,  "1.  side,  smooth,  hard  swelling;  preceded  by
hydrocele.

llChronic  orchitis;  testicle  indurated,  wdth  tendency  to
atrophy ;  feeling  in  gland  as  if  it  were  being  crushed.

I  I  Seventeen  years  ago  had  orchitis,  r.  side,  after  which
testicle  remained  somewhat  enlarged,  after  severe  exer-
tion severe  pain  in  small  of  back,  followed  in  evening
by  drawing,  pressing  pain  in  r.  testicle  which  became
swollen ;  pain  >  lying  with  knees  drawn  up,  <  stand-
ing ;  'pain  sometimes  extends  into  abdomen  and  causes
tension  at  r.  inguinal  ring.

I  1  Orchitis  with  fever,  from  catching  cold  while  dancing,

while  recovering  from  an  attack  of  gonorrhoea ;  1.  testicle
swollen  to  size  of  hen's  egg.

I I  Induration  and  swelling  of  testicles  after  gonorrhoea,  or
with  blennorrhoea.

1  I  Swelling  and  hardness  of  1.  testicle,  following  gonor-
rhoea ;  formerly  had  headache  before  a  thunderstorm.

I  I  Farmer,  aged  40,  without  known  cause,  had  orchitis,
treated  six  months  without  benefit,  swelling  increased
in  size  and  hardness,  so  that  he  could  not  walk,  and
penis  lay  hidden  in  the  tumor;  1.  testicle  size  of  three
fists,  very  tense,  hard,  painful  to  least  touch.  ^Hydrocele.

llHydrocele:  from  birth,  r.  side,  in  a  child  aged  4 weeks;
as  large  as  a  hen's  egg,  since  birth,  in  a  boy  aged^  1|
years ;  left-sided,  in  a  scrofulous  child  set.  3  years ;  r.  side,
in  an  infant  set.  1  year;  1.  side,  in  a  boy  set.  4  years;
from  birth,  increasing  from  year  to  year,  in  a  boy  set.  7
years;  1.  side,  in  a  hemorrhoidal  subject  set.  60.

■  Itching  and  sweating  of  scrotum.


41  RHODODENDRON.

Soreness  or  sore  sensation  between  genitals  and  thighs.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menstruation  too  profuse  and  too
early ;  fever  and  headache  at  each  menstrual  period.

Suppressed  menstruation.

Pain  in  ovaries ;  <  in  changes  of  weather.

Serous  cysts  in  vagina.

A  country-woman,  set.  35,  suffered  since  five  years  from  a
voluminous  cyst  in  r.  ovary ;  Rliodod.^  was  employed  in-
ternally and  externally ;  about  sixth  day  patient  was
taken  with  acute  pains  in  stomach,  with  a  feeling  of
fluid  pouring  into  abdomen; vomited  bile; for  three
days high  fever; the cyst  filled  up again; repeated
Rhodod.  next  month,  again  a  rupture  took  place  in  about
eight  to  ten  days,  with  symptoms  of  subacute  peritonitis,
after  cure  of  which  patient  refused  to  continue  treatment.
2i  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. After  parturition,
burning  in  uterine region,  alternating with  pains  in
limbs,  fingers  spasmodically  flexed.
^^  Respiration. Dyspnoea  from  constriction  of  chest.  _
^^  Cough. Cough :  dry,  exhausting,  morning  and  evening, with
oppression  of  chest  and  rough  throat;  with  escape  of
urine;  dry,  excited  by  tickling  in  trachea.
I  1  Attacks  of  dry  cough ;  after  an  attack  has  lasted  four
to  five  hours,  during  which  time  she  coughs  constantly,
there  follows  either  vomiting  of  a  serous,  bitter,  some-
what slimy  fluid,  containing  no  particles  of  food,  or  she
is  so  prostrated  that  she  has  to  lie  down  and  sleep ;  for
the  next  four  or  six  hours  feels  well  and  has  no  cough ;
suddenly  and  without  apparent  cause  sensation  of  severe
pressure and  constriction  in  region  of  stomach,  as  if
some  one  was  pressing  forcibly  with  fist  against  stomach,
accompanied  by  a  constant  and  uncontrollable  irrita-
tion to  cough,  arising  from  epigastrium ;  with  the  press-
ure in  stomach  there  is  a  similar,  but  less  severe,  sen-
sation in lumbar  region of  spine,  from which  place
extend  drawing,  tearing  pains  at  one  time  into  upper,
then  into  lower  limbs ;  appetite  impaired.
^^  Inner Chest  and  Lungs. Shooting  through  1.  chest  to
back,  when  bending  back  and  to  right.
I  I A  very  transient  dull  pain  extending  from  chest  to  1.
hypochondrium,  almost  like splenetic stitches,  when
walking  fast.
I  I  Breath  and  speech  fail  from  the  violence  of  pleuritic
stitches running  downward  in  anterior  1.  chest,  after
standing  on  cold  ground  and  getting  chilled.
I  I  Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  side  below  short  ribs,  continuous
and  of  a  pressing  nature,  after  taking  cold  by  getting
wet;  >  from  eating.


RHODODENDRON.  42

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Boring  pain  in  region  of
heart.
Heart's  beat  stronger.
Pulse  slow  and  weak,  or  unchanged.
^^  Outer  Chest. Chest  sensitive  to  touch.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  of  nape  of  neck,  in  morning.
-iStiffness  of  nape  of  neck;  tearing  pains  in  nape  of  neck,
extending  thence  g-radually  half-way  down  back ; <  at
night  and  in  bed,  so  that  she  must  rise.
iRheumatic  pains  in  back  and  shoulders.

■  Stiff  neck,  gums  and  teeth  sore,  pains  fly  about  every-

where.
Shooting  from  back  to  pit  of  stomach.
Pain  from  small  of  back  into  arms.

■  Small  of  back  pains,  <  when  sitting  and  in  wet  weather.
^^  Upper Limbs. Paralytic,  rheumatic  pain in r.  shoulder

upon  which  he  rests,  sometimes  extending  below  elbow
and  going  off  by  turning  to  other  side.

■  Violent  tearing,  boring  pain  in  1.  shoulder  joint.

I  I  Severe  pain  in  deltoid  muscle,  <  from  motion  and  from

vexation  before  a  thunderstorm.
Drawing  pain  in  arms,  <  in  wet  weather.
Sensation  as  if  blood  ceased  to  circulate  in  arms,  hands

feel  warm.
■Sensation  of  weakness  and  formication  in  arms,  as  if  they

were  asleep,  <  from  heat  of  bed,  exposure  to  cold  and

stormy  weather.

■  Tearing:  in  1.  forearm,  at  night;  in  r.  forearm.

I  I  About  6  P.M.,  tearing,  cramplike  drawing  in  forearm,
as  if  in  periosteum,  during  wet,  cold  weather;  violent
tearing,  boring  pain  in  1.  shoulder  joint,  with  prickling
in  fingers. ^Chronic  rheumatism.

■  Sensation  as  if  wrists  were  sprained.

■  Pain  as  if  sprained  in  r.  wrist  joint,  impeding  motion,

<  when  at  rest,  in  rough  weather.

Intensely  painful  drawing  and  digging  in  1.  wrist  joint,  in
evening,  when  at  rest.

I  I  Sudden  swelling  with  tearing  pains  in  r.  wrist,  extend-
ing to  dorsum  of  hand  ;  in  a  man  suffering  from  con-
dylomata.

Increased  warmth  in  hands.

Itching,  obliging  to  scratch,  of  middle  and  ring  fingers  of
1.  hand,  with  erysipelatous  redness.
'^  Lower  Limbs. Sensation  of  soreness  in  thighs  near  genitals.

I  I  Severe  tearing  pains  beginning  in  upper  and  posterior
portion  of  r.  thigh  and  extending  down  into  foot,  with
sensation  of  formication  in  whole  limb;  pain  <  during
rest,  drives  her  out  of  bed  early  in  morning ;  foot  im-


43  RHODODENDRON.

mediately  "goes  to  sleep"  when  sitting  down  after  walk-
ing; must  move  foot  constantly;  pain  and  stiffness  of

leg,'<  mornings.  . . ,  ,. ,  ,• i i

I  I  Periodical  tearing  pams  m  lower  hmbs,  particularly
about  hip  joint,  <  in  stormy  weather,  in  rest  and  at
night ;  at  times  swelling  and  painfulness  of  finger  joints.

llStftching  pains  in  knee  and  ankle  joints ;  tension  m
legs  when  walking;  constant  sensation  as  if  feet  and
legs  were  asleep;  <  after  sitting  still,  and  early  in
morning  on  rising ;  after  an  attack  of  influenza.

1  I  White  swelling  of  knee,  with  intolerable  tearing  pains,
<  during  rest  and  at  night.  .

• I  Rheumatic  pains  in  lower  extremities  and  feet,  as  if  in
periosteum,  <  when  at  rest  and  during  wet,  cold  weather.

Sensation  of  coldness,  skin  wrinkles  on  legs.

Dropsical  swelling  of  lower  legs  and  feet.

■  Sensation  in  lower  legs  and  feet  "  as  if  asleep."
Unusual  coldness  of  feet.  ,  .

I  Gout,  when  there  is  a  fibrous  deposit  in  great  toe  joint,
not  the  usual  deposits  of  urate  of  soda.

■  Affection  of  great  toe  joint,  often  mistaken  for  bunion,

but  of  rheumatic  character.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Heavy,  weak  feeling  and  formication
in  back  and  limbs ;  <  at  rest  and  in  rough  weather.
Sensation  in  joints  as  if  sprained,  with  swelling  and  red-
ness ;  with  arthritic  nodosities.

■  Drawing,  tearing  pain  in  periosteum,  <  at  night,  in  wet,

stormy  weather  and  in  rest;  >  in  motion;  mostly  m

forearms  and  lower  legs.
Erratic  tearing  pains  in  limbs.
Pains  in  limbs  felt  especially  in  forearm  and  legs  down  to

fingers  and  toes;  they  soon  pass  off,  and resemble  a

cramplike  drawing.

■  Pains  in  limbs  seem  to  be  seated  in  bones  or  periosteum  ;

they  are  mostly  confined  to  small  spots  and  reappear  on
change  of  weather.

I  I  Tearing  pain  beginning  at  outer  side  of  r.  arm,  extend-
ing to  nape  of  neck  and  into  back,  then  down  into  thigh,
where  it  becomes  stitching  in  character ;  heels  are  par-
ticularly painful;  walking  difficult,  feels  as  if  heavy
weights  were  hanging  to  feet ;  <  in  rest  and  change  of
weather. ^Rheumatism.

1  I  For  twelve  years,  periodical,  severe,  tearing  pams  m
limbs;  for  six  days  r.  forearm  and  foot  affected;  no
swelling  or  redness ;  <  at  night,  she  cannot  remain  m

bed.  ,

I  I  Severe  tearing  pains  in  limbs,  with  swelhng  and  red-
ness of  several  joints; r.  knee,  elbows,  1.  finger  joints


KHODODENDRON.  44

affected ;  pains  <  at  night,  particularly  toward  morn-
ing, with  tension  and  stiffness  in  joints  ;  after  syphilis

treated  with  large  doses  of  Mercury.
I  I  After  catching  cold,  paralytic  condition  of  limbs ;  severe

drawing, pinching,  stitching pains in limbs ; fever ;

could  not  walk  or  stand,  neither  could  he  move  his  arms

or  hands ;  sleep  disturbed  at  night  by  pain.
■  Chronic  rheumatism  affected  the  smaller  joints  and  their

ligaments.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  gouty  pains  in  teeth  <  ;

pain  in  hip  bone  intolerable ;  pain  in  wrist  < ;  pain  in

thigh ;  pains in lower  limbs  <  ;  paralytic  weakness ;

heavy,  weak  feeling  and  formication.
Lying  with  knees  drawn  up :  pain  in  r.  testicle.
Shoulder  on  which  he  rests,  rheumatic  pain;  goes  off  when

turning.
Cannot  get  to  sleep  or  remain  asleep  unless  her  legs  are

crossed.
Rising:  headache  >.
Sitting:  severe  pain  in  testicles;  after  walking,  feet  go  to

sleep.
Stooping:  tension.
Standing:  pain  in  testicle  <.
Motion :  pain  in  ears  < ;  prosopalgia  < ;  pain  in  deltoid

muscle;  pains  in  limbs  >;  in  open  air  causes  profuse

debilitating  sweat.
Must  move  foot  constantly.
Walking :  stitches  in  spleen ;  testicles  drawn  up ;  pain  in

testicles  >  ;  tension  in  legs.
Chewing:  pain  >.

Exertion:  pain  in  back;  slight,  causes  great  weakness.
Exercise:  headache  >,
Could  not  walk  or  stand,  neither  move  his  arms  nor  hands

on  account  of  severe  pain.
^^  Nerves. Paralytic  weakness  during  rest.
Great  weakness  after  slight  exertion.
Heavy,  weak  feeling  and  formication  in  back  and  limbs,

<  in  rest  and  in  rough  weather.
Painful  sensitiveness  in  windy  and  cold  weather.
I  I  Paroxysmal  chorea  in  1.  arm,  leg  and  face,  on  approach

of  a  storm.
^^  Sleep. Awakes  as  if  called.

Great  sleepiness  during  day,  with  burning  in  eyes.
Deep,  heavy  sleep  before  midnight,  with  sleepiness  early

in  evening,  but  sleepless  after  midnight ;  morning  sleep

disturbed  by  pain  and  restlessness  in  body.
I  I  Cannot  get  to  sleep  or  remain  asleep  unless  her  legs  are

crossed.


45  RHODODENDRON.

^'  Time.  Morning:  on  rising,  stupefaction  and  drowsiness  in
head;  when  lying  in  bed,  pain  in  temples  and  forehead
pain  in  external  ear;  violent  sneezing  when  rising
toothache  generally ;  distension  in  abdomen ;  diarrhoea
dry  cough ;  stiffness  of  nape  of  neck ;  tearing  in  thigh
stiffness  of  leg  <;  in  bed,  chilliness.

During  day :  alternate  stoppage  of  1.  and  r.  nostril ;  great
sleepiness;  if  cold  air  blows  on  him,  chilliness.

All  day :  severe  pain  in  external  ear.

About  6  P.M. :  tearing,  cramplike  drawing  in  forearm.

Toward  evening:  sounds  in  ears  <. •

Evening :  itching  of  scalp  <  ;  distension  in  abdomen :
pain  in  testicle ;  dry  cough  ;  pain  in  wrist  joint ;  early,
sleepiness;  persistent  ice-cold  feet ;  heat.

Night:  flushes  of  heat;  toothache  <;  pressure  in  stom-
ach ;  emissions ;  pain  in  hip  bone ;  pains  down  back  <  ;
pain  in  lower  limbs  <.

Before  midnight:  deep,  heavy  sleep.

After  midnight :  sleepless.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Almost  all  symptoms  re-
appear with  rough  weather.

Open  air:  stoppage  of  nostril  >;  moving  in,  profuse
sweat.

Dry  heat:  headache  >.

Heat  of  bed  :  formication  in  arms  <.

Warmth :  faceache  >  ;  toothache  >  ;  toothache  <  from
warmth  of  bed.

Wrapping  up  warmly:  head  >.

Wind  and  changes  of  weather :  violent  faceache  <  ;  tooth-
ache < ;  pains  in  ovaries  <  ;  painful  sensitiveness.

After  thorough  wetting:  pressing  pain  in  1.  side;  rheu-
matic pain  in  1.  side.

Wet,  cold  weather :  pain  in  head  <  ;  transient  pain  in
single  teeth;  gouty  pains  in  teeth  <;  diarrhoea;  small
of  back  pains  <  ;  drawing  pain  in  arms  <  ;  exposure  to,
weakness  and  formication  in  arms;  tearing  in  forearm.

Cold :  prosopalgia  <  ;  toothache  <  from  cold  drinks  and
inhalation  of  air;  water,  vomits  after;  standing  on
ground,  stitches  in  chest ;  increased  warmth  of  hands.

External  heat:  toothache  >.

Stormy  weather:  rheumatic  pains  <.

Before  a  storm :  ciliary  neuralgia  <  ;  pains  through  eye
from  head  <;  toothache;  diarrhoea;  dysentery;  pain
in  deltoid  muscles  <  ;  paroxysmal  chorea  in  1.  arm,  leg
and  face.

After  catching  cold  while  dancing:  orchitis.
*^  Fever. Chilliness  in  morning  in  bed  and  during  day  if  cold
air  blows  on  him.


RHODODENDRON.  46

Chilliness  alternating  with  heat.

Persistent  ice-cold  feet  in  evening,  continuing  long  after
lying  down  in  bed.

Heat  in  evening  with  cold  feet.

Sensation  of  heat,  especially  in  hands,  although  they  feel
cold  to  touch.

I  I  Frequent  increase  of  warmth  of  hands,  even  in  cold
weather.

Feverish  heat  in  evening,  with  burning  in  face.

Profuse  debilitating  sweat,  especially  when  moving  about
in  open  air.

Offensive  smelling  sweat  in  axillae.

Formication  and  itching  of  skin,  with  sweat.

Perspiration  has  an  odor  of  spice.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate:  1.  and  r.  nostril  stopped;
burning  in  uterine  region  and  pains  in  limbs;  chilliness
and  heat.

Periodical :  pains  in  eyeballs ;  crampy  pain  under  short
ribs  in  1,  hip  bone ;  tearing  pains  in  lower  limbs ;  in
limbs.

Spring  and  Autumn:  faceache;  toothache  during  sharp
east  wind.

For  several  years :  hardness  of  hearing.
*^  Locality  and 'Direction.  Right:  hot  lachrymation ;  shoot-
•  ing  in  eye ;  otalgia ;  pain  in  external  ear  ;  tearing  sen-
sation in  and  about  ear ;  tinnitus  aurium  <  ;  violent
faceache;  toothache  from  lower  jaw  to  teeth;  sticking
in  testicle ;  tension  at  inguinal  ring ;  voluminous  cyst
in  ovary ;  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder  upon  which  he
rests;  tearing  in  forearm;  pain  in  wrist  joint ;  tearing
in  thigh  ;  knee  and  elbow,  tearing  pain.

Left:  pain  in  temporal  region;  bleeding  of  nose,  side;
stoppage  of  side  of  nose ;  pain  in  hypochondrium  ;  swell-
ing of  testicles;  pain  in  hip  bone;  orchitis;  testicle
swollen  to  size  of  hen's  egg ;  testicle  size  of  three  fists ;
shooting  through  chest  to  back  ;  stitches  in  anterior
chest ;  rheumatic  pain  in  side  bek)w  short  ribs  ;  boring
pain  in  shoulder  joint;  tearing  in  forearm;  digging_  in
wrist  joint;  itching  of  fingers;  finger  joints,  tearing
pains;  chorea  in  arm,  leg  and  face.

Within  outward :  pain  in  r.  eye.
*^  Sensations.  Scalp  as  if  bruised  ;  as  of  a  worm  in  ear  ;  as  if
water  were  rushing  into  ear;  as  if  throat  were  lined  with
mucus;  as  from  tension  under  short  ribs;  testicle  as  if
violently  contused  ;  or  as  if  it  were  crushed ;  as  of  fluid
pouring  irrto  abdomen ;  as  if  some  one  were  forcibly
pressing  with  fist  against  stomach  ;  as  if  blood  ceased  to
circulate  in  arms;  as  if  arms  were  asleep;  as  if  wrists


47  RHODODENDRON.

were  sprained  ;  as  if  feet  and  legs  were  asleep  ;  rheuma-
tism as  if  in  periosteum  of  lower  extremities;  as  if  heavy
weights  were  hanging  to  feet.

Pain  :  in  forehead  and  temples;  in  limbs;  in  urethra;  in
ovaries ;  from  small  of  back  into  arms ;  in  r.  wrist  joint ;
of  leg.

Violent  pain :  in  eyeball,  orbit  and  head ;  in  external  ear.

Severe  pain :  in  small  of  back ;  in  deltoid  muscle.

Acute  pain  :  from  temple  to  temple ;  in  stomach.

Cutting :  in  teeth.

Darting  pains :  like  arrows  through  eye  from  head.

Shooting :  in  r.  eye  from  within  outward ;  in  upper  and
lower  limbs ;  through  1.  chest  to  back ;  from  back  to  pit
of  stomach.

Stitching:  in  head;  from  teeth  into  ears;  in  knee  and
ankle  joints.

Tearing :  in  1.  temporal  region  ;  in  bones  and  periosteum
of  cranial  bones;  in  and  about  r.  ear;  in  head;  in
molars;  in  testicle  and  spermatic  cord;  in  1.  hip  bone;
in  nape  of  neck ;  in  1.  shoulder  joint ;  in  forearms ;  in
upper  posterior  portion  of  r.  thigh  into  foot ;  in  lower
limbs.

Jerking,  tearing  pain  :  in  face.

Violent,  twitching  pain  :  in  r.  ear.

Boring :  in  1.  temporal  region ;  in  a  single  tooth  ;  in  region
of  heart ;  in  1.  shoulder  joint.

Digging :  in  1.  hip  bone.

Throbbing :  in  1.  hip  bone.

Pulsation  :  in  anus.

Crampy  pains:  under  short  ribs.

Cramplike  drawing :  in  forearm.

Drawing,  sticking  pain :  in  r.  testicle  and  spermatic  cord.

Sticking:  in  r.  testicle.

Burning  pain  :  in  e3^es.

Rheumatic  pain :  in  1.  side  below  short  ribs ;  in  back  and
shoulder.

Rheumatic  or  gouty  pains:  in  teeth.

Transient  dull  pain :  from  chest  to  1.  hypochondrium.

Drawing:  in  bones  and  periosteum  of  cranial  bones;  in
teeth ;  from  rectum  to  genitals ;  in  stomach ;  in  region
of  bladder  ;  in  arms.

Pressing  pain  :  in  1.  side  under  short  ribs.

Pressing :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  stomach.

Pressure:  in  forehead  and  vertex;  in  stomach.

Soreness:  of  inner  nose;  of  throat;  extending  into  ab-
domen and  thighs ;  between  genitals  and  thighs ;  of
teeth.

Burning :  in  uterine  region  ;  in  face.


RHODODENDRON.  48

Dry  burning  :  in  eyes ;  in  lips ;  in  throat.

Heat :  in  eyes.

Warmth :  in  hands.

Stiffness :  of  nape  of  neck  ;  of  leg  ;  in  joints.

Tension :  in  legs.

Constriction  :  in  throat ;  at  pit  of  stomach.

Fulness :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Dulness:  in  head.

Stupefaction :  in  head.

Pricking:  in  teeth.

Scraping :  in  fauces.

Dryness :  of  throat.

Formication  :  in  whole  limb ;  in  back  and  limbs.

Biting,  itching :  on  scalp.

Itching :  of  scrotum ;  of  middle  and  ring  fingers  of  1.  hand.

Coldness :  in  legs.
*' Tissues. I  Acute  inflammatory  swelling  of  joints,  wander-
ing from  one  joint  to  another,  and  at  times  reappearing
in  joint  first  affected ;  pains  particularly  severe  at  night;
<  in  rest  and  during  rough,  stormy  weather.

■  General rheumatic pains,  brought on by damp,  cold

weather  and  <  during  wet.
I  Rheumatism  of  cervical  and  thoracic  muscles;  rheumatic

neuralgia  of  extremities ;  pains  <  at  rest  and  in  cloudy

and  stormy  weather.
iRheumatic  pains  especially  in  all  the  aponeuroses,  <  in

rest ;  <  at  night ;  pains  do  not  admit  of  the  limbs  being

at  rest;  desire  to  move,  and  moving  relieves;  <  before

change  of  weather,  particularly  before  a  thunderstorm  ;

especially  r.  side ;  pains  <  in  night,  but  more  toward

morning  ;  in  hot  season.

■  Arthritic  nodes.

■  Orchitis  and  hydrocele.
Dropsical  swellings.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touching: tooth-
ache <  ;  testicles  very  sensitive ;  chest  sensitive.
*^  Skin. Burning  and  tearing,  with  erysipelas.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  a^t.  7,  suffering  since
birth;  hydrocele.

Boy,  set.  14,  good  constitution;  swelling  of  knee.

Woman,  set.  22,  delivered  a  short  time  ago,  after  an  attack
of  influenza;  rheumatism.

Girl,  set.  26,  servant;  toothache.

Man,  set.  28,  strong,  after  catching cold  while  dancing,
while  recovering  from  an  attack  of  gonorrhoea ;  orchitis.

Man,  set.  30,  thin,  tall,  good  constitution ;  w^eakness  and
formication  in  arms.

Man,  set.  31,  strong,  under  treatment  for condylomata;
pain  and  swelling  of  wrist.


49  RHODODENDRON.

Man,  set.  33,  printer,  for  last  six  months  suffered  from

syphilis,  after  being  apparently  cured  by  large  doses  of

mercury  present  attack  came  on ;  swelling  and  pain  in

joints.
Woman,  get. 34,  working  out by  the  day,  suffering  six

days;  rheumatism.
Woman,  set.  35  ;  ovarian  cyst  discharged.
Woman,  set.  35,  weak,  mother  of  several  children ;  cough.
Woman,  set.  36,  good  constitution,  violent  temper,  married

fifteen  years,  suffering  three  weeks;  tearing  in  leg.
Man,  set.  37,  good-humored,  well  built,  seven  days  ago

caught  cold,  since  then  suffering ;  rheumatism.
Man,  set.  38,  strong  and  health.y,  after cohabiting  with

wife  who  was  suffering  with  fluor  albus ;  orchitis  and

pain  in  leg.
Farmer,  set.  40;  hydrocele.

Man,  £et.  41,  two  years  ago  caught  cold,  since  then  suffer-
ing; dysecoia.
Man,  set.  48,  laborer,  had  orchitis  seventeen  years ago  ;

orchitis.
Woman,  set.  50,  suffering  twenty  years ;  dysecoia.
Woman,  set.  51,  suffering  twelve  years ;  rheumatism.
Woman,  set.  54,  suffering  fourteen  days;  earache.
Man,  set.  55,  laborer,  strong  constitution,  suffering  fourteen

days;  rheumatism.
Man,  set.  64,  after  catching  cold  ;  tinnitus  aurium
Man,  set.  64  suffering  ten  months ;  enlargement  of  testicle.
Old  lady,  irritable,  suffering  six  years;  rheumatism.
■"^  Relations. Antidoted by: Bryon., Camphor, Clematis,

Rhus  tox.
Compare: Aurum, Bryon., Calc. ost., Clematis, Conium,

Kalmia,  Ledum,  Lycop.,  Mercur., Nux  vom.,  Phosphor. y

Pulsat.,  Ranunc,  Rhus  tox.


VOL.  IX. — 4.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  50

RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

Poison  Oak  or  Ivy.  Anacardiaceas.

Provings  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers,  R.  A.  M.  L.,  vol.  2,  p,  357  ;  Helbig,
Heraclides,  vol.  1,  p.  53  ;  Eobinson,  Br.  J.  of  Horn.,  vol.  25,  p.  330;  Joslin,  Am.
Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  1,  p.  553 ;  Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  of  Horn.,  N.  S.,  vol.  3,  p.  501  ;  and
mumerous  involuntary  provings  from  coming  in  contact  with  the  plant,  or  being
«xposed  to  its  exhalations,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  8,  p.  330.

Ci-iNiCAi,  Authorities. — Melancholia,  Sorge,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  93,  p.  109;  Mental
disorder,  Hartlaub,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.1,  p.  44;  Fear  of  being  j)oisoned,  Dn\ac,
Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  75;  Vertigo,  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  88,  p.  132;  Headache,
Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  188;  Migraine,  Hs.,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  109,  p.  207  ;  Menin-
gitis, Sturm,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  128 ;  Eruption  on  head  and  Ozcena,  Pulte,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  1,  p.  398;  Iriclo-choroiditis,  Norton,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  80,
from  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  March,  1873,  p.  30 ;  Opacity  of  cornea,  Stens,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,
p.  58,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  156  ;  Ophthalmia:  rheumatic,  catarrhal,  scrofulous,
■exanthematous-scrofulous,  erysipelatous,  Kammerer,  Schelling,  Gross,  Nehrer,  Thorer,
Lichtenfels,  Lobethal,  Mschk.,  B.  J.H.,  vol.  6,  pp.  517-23,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
>p.  239 ;  Conjunctivitis,  B.,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  204  ;  Ptosis,  Le  Beau,  N.  A.  J.  H,,
vol.  19,  p.  572 ;  Swelling  under  eyes,  Munroe,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  374 ;  Affection
,.of  eye,  Martin,  Horn.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  149;  Buchner,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  209  ;  Epis-
4axis,  Gross,  Ng.,  Riick.  Ki.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  414  ;  Facial  neuralgia,  Schron,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  189;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  299-301 ;  Diphtheria  of  lips,  Nichol,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1887,  p.  279;  Parotitis,  Fielitz,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,
p.  374;  Rheumatism  of  lower  jaiv,  Von  Tagen,  Horn.  CL,  vol.  3,  p.  142  ;  Toothache,
Hartman,  Schelling,  Riicl^:.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  474;  Sore  throat,  Baylies,  Hom.  CL,
vol.  1,  p.  219;  Oesophagitis,  Griesselich,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  540;  Pain  in  r.
.hypochondrium,  Kirkpatrick,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  167  ;  Pain  in  abdomen,  Berridge,
Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  554;  Colic,  Hegewald,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  31  ;  Physconia
peritonealis  (3  cases),  Gauwerky,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  728  ;  Enteritis,  Kirsch,
.Schelling,  Riick.  KL  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  356  ;  Intestinal  catorA,  Molin,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.32,
p.  696  ;  Hernia,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  384 ;  Diarrhoea,  Martin,  Hom.
■CL,  vol.  1,  p.  137  ;  Mann,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  482;  Chronic  diarrhoea.  Madden,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  717  ;  Dysentery,  Bowie,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1886,  p.  154 ;  Smith,
;U.  S.  M.  and  S.  Jour.,  Oct.,  1870,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  145;  Proll,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
113,  p.  186 ;  Fissure  of  anus,  Macfarlan,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  73  ;  Bright's  disease
(2  cases),  Biirkner,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  524 ;  Weakness  of  bladder,  Jacobi,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  548  ;  Incontinence  of  iwiftp,  Sonnenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,
ip.  45  ;  Urinary  difficulty,  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  386  ;  Metastasis  of  mumps
.to  testicle,  Fisher,  Bib.  Hom.,  vol.  8,  p.  140 ;  GEdema  of  scrotum  and  penis.  Gross,
iRiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  62  ;  Ovarian  tumor,  Chauvet,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,
ip.  65;  Prolapsus  uteri,  South  wick,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  411  ;  Polypus  of  uterus,
'Cuntz,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  169,  from  I.  H.  Pr.,  2,  p.  60 ;  Metrorrhagia,  Kershaw,
'Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  368  ;  Amenorrhoea,  Thorer,  Riick.  KL  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  252; Use  in


51  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

dysmenorrhoia,  Gorton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  513  ;  Influenza,  Hooper,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  9,  p.  128;  Payne,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  232;  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  48 ;
Cough,  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  403 ;  Pain  in  chest,  Gregg,  Griggs  111.  Rep.
(E.  radicans),  p.  96  ;  Hcemoplysis,  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  224;  Pneumonia,
Gross,  Diez,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  330 ;  Sherbino,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  120  ;
Use  in  phthisis,  Payne,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  167  ;  Cardiac  neurosis,  Pellicer,
Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  130,  from  El.  Grit.  Med.,  June,  1874 ;  Affection  of  heart,
Cochran,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  397  ;  Swelling  of  glands  of  neck,  Guernsey,  M.  I.,
vol.  3,  p.  281 ;  Spincd  irritation.  Miller,  T.  H.  M.  S.,  Pa.,  1885,  p.  181 ;  Dittrich,
Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  189,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  85,  78  ;  Lumbago,  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  1,  p,  36;  Brewster,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  14;  Greenleaf,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,
p.  258  ;  Glover,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  618  ;  Affection  of  back,  Wesselhoeft,  Horn.
CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  61 ;  Martin,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  149  ;  Strain  of  shoulder,  Stens,
A.  H.  Z.,  p.  85,  vol.  189  ;  Burning  in  hand  and  arm,  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,  p.  68  ;
Pain  in  ivrist,  Smith,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  125  ;  Strain  of  wrist,  strain  of  thumb,  Gallupe,
M.  I.,  vol.  6,  p.  442  ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  309 ;  Warts  on  hands,  Gross,  Euck.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  311 ;  Injury  of  hip,  Gallupe,  B.  J.  H.,  vol,  24,  p.  308  ;  M.  I.,  vol.  6,
p.  442 ;  Inflammation  of  hip  joint,  Hiller,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  375  ;  Ooxalgia,  Weber,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  123 ;  Sciatica,  Villers,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  146  ;  from  Hom.  Viertel-
jahrsch.,  vol.  2,  p.  425 ;  Biirkner,  A.H.Z.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  109 ;  Gordon,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.
29  ;  Pratt,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  132;  Seip,  T.H.M.S.  Pa.,  vol.  2,  p.  269  ;  Martin,  Hom.  Eec,
vol.  3,  p.  69  ;  Carter,  Hom  Eec,  vol.  3,  p.  165  ;  Peck,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  376  ;  Ischias,
Hendrichs,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  109,  p.  126  ;  Eoberts,  A.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  237 ;  Rheumatic
sciatica,  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  238  ;  Hydrarthros  genu,  Sulzer,  Eaue's  Eec,
1874,  p.  256,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  87,  p.  84 ;  Oonagra,  Hartmann,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,
p.  294;  Swelling  of  knee  joints,  Klauber,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,  p.  140  ;  Swelling  in  pop-
liteal space.  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  163 ;  White  sivelling  oj  knee,  Thomas,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  46;  Suppuration  of  knee,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.
289 ;  Pains  in  legs,  Goodno,  Hom.  CL,  vol  3,  p.  140;  Ulcer  on  leg,  Brewster,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  267  ;  Sprain  of  ankle,  Helmuth,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  272  ;  Swell-
ing of  foot,  E.  E.  S.,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  198 ;  Fetid  foot  sweat,  Gorton,  U.  S.  M.
and  S.  J.,  vol.  9,  p.  13 ;  Chronic  inflammation  of  joints,  Sircar,  Calcutta  Jour.,  vol.  2,
p.  220;  Eruption  on  limbs, 'Norton,  Hah.  Mo.,  1875,  Times  Eet.,  1875,  p.  135;
Hysteria,  Schron,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  288  ;  Chorea,  Wesselhoeft,  Mass.
Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  363;  Epilepsy,  Sircar,  Calcutta  Jour.,  vol.  1,  p.  458 ;  Restlessness
of  legs,  Rushmore,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  356 ;  Loss  of  co-ordination  in  legs,  Searle,  Hom.
CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  101  ;  Paraplegia,  Smith,  N.  Y.  St.  Tr.,  1869,  p.  519,  Eaue's  Eec,
1871,  p.  192;  Paralysis,  Eau,  Payr,  Aegidi,  Valenti,  Schelling,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
,  vol.  4,  p.  476  ;  Paresis,  Sorge,  Fischer,  Schoff,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  548 ;  Peters,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  349  ;  Rheumatic  lameness,  Bolle,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  661 ;
Rheumatic  paralysis,  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  793 ;  Paralysis  agitans,  Payr,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  479  ;  Ague,  Miiller,  Gross,  Battmann,  Mschk,  B.  in  D.,
Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  979  ;  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  148,  Elb.,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  110,
p.  11  ;  Skeels,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  2,  p.  493;  Mann,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  483  ;  Pearson,
M.  I.,  vol.  5,  p.  433  ;  Hills,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  7,  p.  583  ;  Miller,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  324 ;
Martin,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  108;  Ayres,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  117;  Sarchet,  Org.,  vol.  2,
p.  135;  Catarrhal  fever,  Mann,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  482;  Rheumatic  fevers,
Kunkel,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  251,  from  J.  Pr.,  1873,  p.  237  ;  Typhoid  fever,  Dun-
ham, Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  148  ;  (5  cases),  Wurmb  &  Caspar,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,
pp.  13-23 ;  Rheumatism,  Dixon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  383 ;  Sorge,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  52

p.  549;  H.  H.,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  13;  Hall,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  485;  Hup-
field,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1880,  p.  224 ;  Smith,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  4,  p.  277  ;  Inflammatory
rhsumalism,  Baxter,  Proc.  H.  M.  S.,  Ohio,  1874,  p.  110;  Anasarca,  Weber,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  354;  Newton,  Horn,  Rev.,  vol.  14,  p.  340 ;  Searle,  A.  H.  O.,
vol.  6,  p.  225  ;  Dropsy,  Hesse,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  25  ;  Boils,  Mooers,  Am.  Horn.,
vol.  1,  p.  215;  Boils  and  abscesses,  Chamberlain,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  107;
Carbuncle,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  194 ;  Induration  of  glands,  Hartmann,
Riick.  Kl.,  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  410 ;  Syphilitic  nodes,  Peters,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  535 ;
Secondary  syphilis,  Berridge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  78;  ^rystpe/as,  Holeczek,  Gross,
Bethmann,  GouUon,  Kapper,  Schwarze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  147  ;  Berridge,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.  344;  Brewster,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  14;  W.  J.  B.,  A.  J.  H.
M.  M.,  vols.  2,  p.  265 ;  Payne,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  235 ;  Erysipelatous  inflamma-
tion. Walker,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  5,  p.  323  ;  Erysipelas  bullosum,  Goullon,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.4,  p.  547;  Herpes  zoster  (2  cases),  Burnett,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  291,  from
H.  W.,  vol.  8,  p.  37 ;  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  119  ;  Zona,  Russell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
30,  p.  119  ;  Hawley,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.5,  p.  168  ;  Erythema  nodosum,  Newton,  Hom.
Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  212;  Urticaria,  Kent,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  262 ;  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  200;  Eczema,  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  118;  Elb,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  Ill,
p.  164 ;  Hedges,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  vol.  8,  p.  441  ;  Eczema  rubrum,  Eczema  im-
petiginoides,  Arcidarius,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  145-6;  Crusta  lactea,  Hooper,
A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  9,  p.  128 ;  Psoriasis,  Preston,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  373 ;  Purpura,
Miiller,  H.  in  F.,  Ruckert,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  206 ;  Chronic  eruptions,  Stapf,
Jahr,  Trinks,  Lindner,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  256  ;  Itching  eruption,  Stowe,  Org.,
vol.  2,  p.  220  ;  Scarlet  fever,  Muller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  63 ;  Farrington,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  378  ;  Measles,  Goullon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  587,  from  \.  H.  Z.,
Jan.,  1872;  Smallpox,  Mayrhofer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  114;  Rhus  poisoning,
Miller,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1886,  p.  152.

^  Mind.  I  Absence  of  mind  ;  forgetfulness  ;  difficult  compre-
hension, cannot  remember  recent  events ;  recalls  with
difficulty  things  and  names.

■  Languor  of  the  mind,  is  unable  to  hold  an  idea.

I  Stupefaction,  with  tingling  in  head  and  pains  in  limbs,

>  in  motion.
Illusions  of  the  fancy  ;  visions.
iLow,  mild  delirium,  thinks  he  is  roaming  over  fields,  or

hard  at  work.
II Incoherent talking; answers hastily or reluctantly,

thought  seems  difficult ;  answers  correctly  but  slowly.

■  Anxiety,  timidity; < at  twilight; restless  change  of

place  ;  w^ants  to  go  from  bed  to  bed.

■  Apprehensive,  anxious  and  tremulous.
Inexpressible  anxiety,  with  pressure  at  heart  and  tearing

at  small  of  back.

■  ■Great  apprehension  at  night;  cannot  remain  in  bed.

■  Anxiety  :  while  sitting  was  obliged  to  take  hold  of  some-

thing because  she  did  not  think  she  could  keep  up  on
account  of  the  beating  and  drawing  pains  in  limbs  ;
and  apprehension  as  if  he  wished  to  take  his  own  life ;
with  loss  of  strength  as  if  he  would  die.


53  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

Fear  and  despair  on  account  of  sad  thoughts,  which  she

could  not  get  rid  of.
I  Fear :  that  he  will  die  ;  with  anxiousness  and  sighing  ;  of

being  poisoned.

■  Fretful;  general  unhappiness  of  temper.
Ill-humored,  depressed  ;  easily  moved  to  tears.
Impatient  and  vexed  at  every  trifle  ;  she  does  not  endure

being  talked  to.

■  Great despondency, with prostration; inclination to

weep,  especially  in  evening,  with  desire  for  solitude.

■  Disgust  for  life:  thoughts  of  suicide;  wants  to  drown

himself;  with  fear  of  death  ;  with  desire  to  die,  without

sadness.
Depression  and  discouragement  and  dissatisfaction  with

the  world,  in  the  evening.
I  Sad,  begins  to  weep  without  knowing  why.

■  Melancholy,  ill-humor  and  anxiety,  as  if  a  misfortune

would  happen,  or  as  if  she  were  alone  and  all  about  her
were  dead  and  still,  or  as  if  she  had  been  forsaken  by  a
near  friend  ;  <  in  house,  >  walking  in  open  air.

I  I  Melancholia  after  suppression  pf  menses  by  fright  and
sorrow  ;  great  restlessness  and  anguish  as  if  she  had
committed  a  crime,  or  as  if  she  thought  some  terrible
calamity  impended ;  these  feelings  drove  her  from  one
place  to  another ;  could  not  rest  quietly  at  night  in
bed  ;  was  robbed  of  sleep  and  all  desire  to  live ;  slight
pain  in  temples;  a  little  vertigo  ;  head  cool ;  much  de-
pressed in  mind ;  spoke  but  little.

1  'Restlessness  and  anxiety  about  heart  as  if  she  had  com-
mitted a  crime  or  as  if  some  great  misfortune  was  in
store  for  her,  is  driven  from  one  place  to  another;
deprived  of  sleep  and  all  desire  to  live  ;  always  de-
pressed, speaks  little,  no  appetite,  sometimes  belching
which  relieves ;  slight  vertigo  and  pain  in  temples.
^Amenorrhoea  from  fright.

I  I  After  fright  heavy  feeling  in  forehead ;  a  week  later  she
told  her  mother  not  to  look  at  her;  seemed  to  be  dis-
trustful and  did  not  wish  to  see  any  one;  she  came
running  in  from  the  street  and  said  people  were  look-
ing at  her ;  sat  quietly  alone  ;  her  eyes  dim,  shunned
the  light;  since  this  time  the  symptoms  have  returned
three  times,  lasting  six  weeks  each  time ;  this  time
eight  weeks,  symptoms  as  before  but  without  the  com-
plaint of  the  eyes ;  cries  without  cause,  imagines  people
are  finding  fault  with  her  because  she  is  earning
nothing,  acts  in  a  childish  manner ;  heaviness  of  head
when  head  is  in  a  low  position;  beating  in  temple  on
which  she  is  lying; after  taking  cold,  diarrhoea;  for


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  54

past  week  coughed  when  lying  down,  with  stitches  in
pit  of  stomach  ;  chilly  hands  and  feet ;  frequent  motion
in  bowels.
' Sensorium.  i Vertigo:  and  dulness  of  head  ;  as  if  intoxi-
cated when  rising  from  bed ;  with  chilliness,  and  pressure
behind  eyes  ;  in  the  aged,  <  when  rising  from  lying,
turning  or  stooping  ;  when  standing  or  walking  ;  while
lying  down.

Weakness  of  head  ;  whenever  she  turned  the  head  she
quite  lost  consciousness ;  on  stooping  it  seemed  as
if  she  could  never  rise  again.

■  Head  confused  and  dull.

Dulness  of  head  :  pressure  in  r.  temple,  and  just  above
and  behind  r.  orbit  a  pressing  downward  as  from  a
weight;  disinclination  for  literary  work;  and  an  in-
toxicated feeling,  in  morning ;  as  if  intoxicated  while
sitting,  on  rising  such  dizziness  that  it  seemed  as  if  she
were  going  to  fall  forward  and  backward.

Heaviness  and  dulness  of  head  on  turning  eyes ;  even
the  eyeball  hurts.

Head  so  heavy  that  she  was  obliged  to  hold  it  upright  in
order  to  relieve  the  weight  pressing  forward  into  fore-
head.
^  Inner  Head Burning  in  forehead  when  walking.

I  Feeling  as  of  a  board  strapped  across  forehead.

I  I  Pain in  1.  temple  and  orbital  region,  appearing  daily

for  three  months,  and  lasting  until  evening ;  caused  by
getting  wet ;  >  from  rapid  motion.

I I  Brain  feels  loose  when  stepping  or  shaking  head.

I A  sensation  of  swashing  and  jarring  in  brain  ;  each
step  concusses  brain.

I  Pain  as  if  brain  were  torn,  <  when  moving  eyes.

I  Headache  :  stupefying,  with  buzzing ;  <  when  sitting  or
lying,  in  cold,  in  morning,  from  beer ;  >  from  warmth
and  motion  ;  must  lie  down  ;  returns  from  least  chagrin ;
immediately  after  a  meal.

I  Stitches  in  head  extending  to  ears,  root  of  nose  and
malar  bones,  with  toothache.

I  Feeling  as  if  parts  were  screwed  together  in  muscles  of
back  part  of  head.

I  I  Dull  pain  beginning  in  occiput  extending  to  vertex
and  thence  to  forehead,  there  attaining  an  intolerable
degree  of  severity ;  at  times  vomiting  of  bile  which  re-
lieves the  pain  but  exhausts  the  patient ;  pain  begins
in  morning,  lasts  until  5  p.m.,  and  is  particularly  severe
after  3  o'clock,  >  by  walking  rapidly  in  open  air ;  par-
oxsyms  every  week. ^Migraine.

I  I  Periodical  attacks  of  headache  ; pain  particularly  in


55  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

back  part  of  head,  so  severe  that  she  cannot  speak  and
must  go  to  bed  for  24  hours,  during  which  time  she
neither  speaks,  eats  nor  drinks  ;  the  slightest  vexation
or  least  exercise  in  open  air,  particularly  if  she  amused
herself  at  same  time,  brought  on  an  attack  next  day.
^Hysteria.

■  Occipital  headache;  muscles  sore,  >  from  moving  and

warmth ;  caused  by  draught,  dampness,  or  by  niternal
causes,  as  in  typhoid.

■  Headache  in  occiput,  >  by  bending  head  backwa'rd.
I  Painful  tingling  in  head,  especially  of  occiput.

I  Aching  in  occipital  protuberances.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  humming,  formication  and

throbbing;  face  glistening  and  red;  restless  moving
about.

I I  Meningitis  in  exanthematous  fevers,  or  after  gettmg;
wet ;  tingling  limbs ;  high  fever  ;  restlessness.

1  I  For  two  days  complete  loss  of  consciousness ;  r.  upper
and  lower  extremities  paralyzed;  pulse  rapid,  trem-
bling, scarcely  perceptible  ;  involuntary  escape  of  urine  ;
respiration  very  gentle,  with  frequent  moaning ;  appear-
ance cadaverous ;  oedematous  swelling  of  lids  ;  body
cold  to  touch. ^Meningitis.

iCerebro-spinal  meningitis;  anxiety,  restlessness,  stupe-
faction, vertigo  ;  fulness  and  bruised  pain  in  head,  ex-
tending to  ears  ;  bleeding  of  ears  and  nose  ;  dry  cough,
with  perhaps  bloody  sputa ;  pain  in  back  as  if  sprained  ;
tearing  tensive  pains,  with  stiffness  of  muscles  and
joints  ;  vivid  dreams  ;  various  eruptions.
*  Outer  Head. iHead  painful  to  touch,  sore  as  a  boil.

I  Scalp  sensitive,  <  on  side-  not  lain  on,  when  growing
warm  in  bed,  from  touch  and  combing  hair.

■  Violent tearing and drawing  pains  in periosteum of

cranial  bones;  <  at  rest  and  in  damp,  stormy  cold
weather;  >  wrapping  head  up  warmly  and  by  dry
heat  and  exercise.

■  Headache  as  if  occipital  tissues  were  screwed  together.

■  Liability  to  take  cold  from  having  the  head  wetted.

■  Vesicular  erysipelas  of  scalp,  going  from  1.  to  right.
Biting  itching  on  scalp,  forehead,  face  and  about  mouth,

with  eruption  of  pimples  like  nettlerash.
I  I  Thick  scurf  over  hairy  whole  scalp,  from  under  which

a greenish pus discharges; severe itching  at night

under  the  scurfs  ;  hair  eaten  away.
I  I  Eruption  on  head,  eating  into  surrounding  parts,  with

violent itching at night;  discharge  of  greenish pus

from  r.  nostril ;  1.  nostril  excoriated,  with  discharge  of

bloody  mucus  on  blowing  nose. ^


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  SG

I  Eruption  suppurating,  moist,  forming  thick  offensive-
smelling  crusts;  itching  <  at  night;  hair  is  eaten  off;
extends  to  shoulders. t'Scald-head.

I  I  Dry  herpes  on  hairy  scalp.
^ Sight  and  Eyes, i Aversion  to  light;  scrofulous  affections.

I  Extreme  confusion  of  sight.

■  Obscurity  of  vision  ;  sensation  as  of  a  veil  before  eyes.
I  Lids  red,  swollen,  oedematous,  especially  the  upper,  and

spasmodically  closed,  with  profuse  gushes  of  hot  tears
on  opening  them;  saclike  swelling  of  conjunctiva;
yellow,  purulent,  mucous  discharge;  swelling  around
eyes ;  burning  pain  in  eye,  with  much  photophobia ;
stitches  in  eyes  and  temples,  with  vertigo ;  lids  cannot
be  opened  ;  <  in  evening;  pressive  burning  pain  in  r.
eye,  so  intense  he  could  not  bear  slightest  touch  ;  child
lies  constantly  on  its  face  with  its  hands  to  its  head;
liead  hot  and  face  red.  ^Irido- choroiditis.
I  I  Mr.  S.,  set.  66,  rheumatic  diathesis;  had  a  cataract
removed  by  Graefe's  modified  linear  extraction ;  on
second  night  after  operation,  sharp  pains  in  eye,  restless,
fever  and  thirst ;  upper  lid  oedematous,  lids  tightly
closed,  on  opening  a  profuse  gush  of  hot  tears  followed;
chemosis,  haziness  of  aqueous,  suppuration  commencing.
^Irido-choroiditis  suppurativa  traumatica.

I  I  Miss  D.,  set. 18; had  discission  made  of capsule  re-

maining after  extraction  of  cataract ;  nausea,  vomiting;
1  A.M.,  sharp  shooting  pain  in  eye,  lids  spasmodically
closed,  oedematous,  profuse  hot  lachrymation  on  open-
ing, photophobia,  chemosis.

I I  Iritis  :  either  of  rheumatic  or  traumatic  origin  or  from
exposure  to  wet ;  inflammation  may  extend  to  and  in-
volve choroid  :  pains  shoot  through  eyes  to  back  of  head,
<  worse  at  night ;  profuse  flow  of  hot  tears  on  opening
eyes;  in  some  cases  inflammation  may  go  on  to  suppu-
ration ;  in  rheumatic  or  gouty  subjects  ;  suppurative,  or
where  the  ciliary  body  and  choroid  are  involved,  es-
pecially if  of  traumatic  origin.

■  Mydriasis  from  exposure  to  cold  and  dampness.

■  Pustules  and  superficial  ulcers on  cornea,  with  great

photophobia;  conjunctiva  quite  red,  even  to  chemosis.

•  Suppuration  of  cornea,  especially  when  consequent  upon
cataract  extraction.

i  I  Totally  blind  ;  cornea  filled  between  its  lamellae  with  a
thick  whitish  exudation  ;  iris  distorted  ;  iridectomy  of
no  avail;  has  been  subject  to  facial  erysipelas;  cold
water  had  suppressed  eruption  ;  since  then  weak  sight,
gradually  total  blindness,  until  relieved.  ^Opacity  of
cornea.


57  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

iKerato-iritis,  especially  if  rheumatic  in  character,  from
cold,  damp  atmosphere.

Glaucoma.

I  Orbital  cellulitis.

I  I  Pain  in  r.  eyeball,  of  such  intensity  that  she  could  not
bear  even  a  slight  touch ;  redness  of  sclerotic,  and  de-
velopment of  numerous  bloodvessels  ;  dulness  of  cornea,
great  sensibility  to  light ;  iris  of  affected  eye,  which  in  its
natural  state  was  blue,  is  now  green,  pupillary  margin
not  well  defined,  pupil  itself  does  not  move  when  ex-
posed to  light,  lens  appeared  of  a  smoky  dimness ;  an
eruption  of  red  pimples  and  pustules  on  nose  and
cheek  increased  as  action  of  eye  declined,  and  vice
versa ;  a  burning  tearing  pain  in  neighborhood  of  dis-
eased eye,  <  morning  and  night,  depriving  patient  of
rest  and  sleep.

Itching  in  eyes  on  exerting  vision.

I  Aching  or  pressive  pain  in  eyes.

Left  eye  felt  enormously  swollen  and  enlarged,  though
this  was  not  the  case.

Sharp  pains  run  from  eyes  into  head.

Biting  as  from  something  sharp  and  acrid  in  r.  eye.

Biting  in  eyes  ;  lids  agglutinated  in  morning.

Drawing  and  tearing  in  region  of  brows  and  in  malar
bones.

llEyes  are  closed  and  greatly  swollen  and  inflamed.

I  Acute  conjunctivitis  from  getting  wet.

I  Great  photophobia,  profuse  acrid  lachrymation  in  morn-
ing and  in  open  air ;  cheek  under  eye  dotted  with  red
pimples  ;  lids  spasmodically  closed.

I  I  Violent  inflammation  of  r.  eye. ^Conjunctivitis.

I  Saclike  swelling  of  conjunctiva,  with  yellow  purulent
discharge.

I  Eyes  red  and  agglutinated  in  morning.

1  I  Catarrhal  ophthalmia;  lids  swollen  and  completely
closed,  from  under  which  escaped,  from  time  to  time,
purulent  mucus ;  on  attempting  to  open  lids  there
flowed  out  a  quantity  of  water,  and  the  conjunctiva
covering  the  lids  was  loose,  swollen,  projecting  betwixt
the  lids  and  prevented  the  eyeball  from  being  seen.  ^
Arthritic  ophthalmia,  from  working  in  w^ater  or  getting
wet,  with  tearing  pain  in  eyes,  especially  at  night.

■Scrofulous  ophthalmia ;  phlyctenules  on  and  about
cornea ;  intense  photophobia ;  eyelids  involved  and
spasmodically  closed  ;  yellow  pus  gushes  out  when  they
are  forced  apart ;  pains  <  at  night.
I  I  Scrofulous  ophthalmia  ;  r.  eye  affected  ;  not  much  pho-
tophobia ;  lids  slightly  swollen ;  on  cornea  a  small
scrofulous  ulcer  surrounded  by  fasciculi  of  vessels.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  58

I  I  Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  with  phlyctenulse  on  edge  of
cornea  of  1.  eye  ;  pain  and  photophobia  not  very  great;
scrofulous  eruption  on  internal  nose,  which  was  much
swollen.

I  I  Conjunctiva  of  1,  eye  very  red  and  studded  with  small
ulcers;  great  photophobia;  frequent  lachrymation ;
eruption  behind  ears  and  beneath  scalp,  exuding  plenti-
fully. ^Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I  I  Violent  inflammation  of  eyeball;  two  dirty-looking
ulcers  on  cornea  of  1.  eye,  size  of  hemp  seeds ;  great
photophobia ;  thick  scabs  around  alee  nasi  and  angles
of  mouth. ^Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I  I  Scrofulous  ophthalmia ;  excessive  photophobia,  child
lies  all  day  with  face  resting  on  floor ;  constant  restless-
ness, loss  of  appetite ;  emaciation.

I  I  Right  eye  surrounded  by  an  oedematous  swelling,  from
border  of  orbit  to  alee  nasi ;  eyes  slightly  red,  lachry-
mose by  day,  closed  up  by  night ;  child  constantly  rub-
bing its  eyes,  restless  and  sleepless.  ^Ophthalmia  ery-
sipelatous.

I  I  Conjunctivitis  granulosa; <  in right  eye;  heaviness

of  lids ;  <  in  stormy  weather,  with  pannus.
•  Ophthalmia  neonatorum  ;  lids  red,  oedematously  swollen
and  spasmodically  closed  ;  restlessness  at  night.

I I  Pains  in  eyes  when  moving  or  turning  eyeballs.

■  Paralysis  of  any  of  muscles  of  eyeball,  resulting  from

rheumatism,  exposure  to  cold  or  getting  feet  wet.
Burning  in  inner  canthus  of  r.  eye.

■  Weeping  eyes ;  bleareyedness.

■  Epiphora  of  long  standing,  with  an  apparent  stricture  of

lachrymal  duct.

1 1  Inflammation  of  lids  ;  lids  much  swollen.

I  I  Right  upper  lid  much  swollen,  hard  ;  pains  <  from
5  to  7  P.M. ;  walking  around  does  not  relieve  ;  when  she
moves  her  eye  it  feels  as  if  there  was  a  hard  ball
moving  around ;  burning,itching, shooting  pains  around
lid  ; <  in  cold  air.

■  Erysipelas  of  lids,  sometimes  of  traumatic  origin;  pro-

fuse lachrymation,  spasmodic  closure  of  lids.

■  Eyelids oedematous, or erysipelatous, with scattered

watery  vesicles ;  meibomian  glands  enlarged,  cilia  fall
out.

■  Oedematous  erysipelatous  swelling  of  lids  and  face,  with

small  watery  vesicles  scattered  over  the  surface,  and
drawing  pains  in  cheek  and  head.

■  Lids  look  red  and  fiery,  like  erysipelas,  and  itch  greatly.

■  Violent  burning,  itching  and  prickling  in  swollen  lids.

■  Uncomplicated  blepharitis,  especially  of  acute  form,  with


59  ^ RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

a  tendency  to  formation  of  abscess  ;  lids  highly  oedema-
tous,  profuse  lachrymation  with  pain  ;  <  at  night,  >
from  warm  applications.

■  Simple  oedema  of  lids.

I  Eyelids  present  a  bladder-like  appearance,  and  the  lids
are  closed  from  the  great  swelling.

I  Lids  oedematously  swollen,  copious,  acrid,  serous  dis-
charge, corrodes  adjacent  parts. ^Blepharitis.

iChronic  inflammation  of  lids  ;  puffiness  of  lids  and  face  ;
meibomian  glands  enlarged  ;  falling  out  of  cilise  ;  itch-
ing and  biting  in  lids;  sensation  of  dryness  of  eyes;
burning  in  internal  canthus ;  acrid  lachrymation  in
morning  and  in  open  air,  or  constant  and  profuse
lachrymation  which  may  be  acrid  or  not.

Relaxation  of  eyelids,  with  puffiness  of  lids  and  hot,
flushed  face.

I  Heaviness  and  stiffness  of  lids,  like  a  paralysis,  as  if  it
were  difficult  to  move  lids.

I  I  Ptosis  of  r.  eyelid  in  a  girl,  set.  5,  first  noticed  when  five

days  old  ;  whenever  she  wished  to  open  her  eye  to  look
at  anything,  she  involuntarily  opened  widely  her
mouth,  which  made  her  look  ludicrous.

I I  Ptosis,  also  paralysis  of  muscles  of  eyeball,  from  ex-
posure to  cold  or  wet ;  in  rheumatic  patient.

1 1  Lids  agglutinated  with  purulent  mucus,  in  morning.
I  I  Eruption  on  1.  lower  lid  ;  inflammation  of  conjunctiva;

burning  and  painful  twitching  in  affected  part.
A  red,  hard  swelling,  like  a  stye,  on  lower  lid,  toward

inner  canthus,  with  pressive  pain,  lasting  six  days.
iStyes  on  lower  lids.

■  Symptoms of lids dependent upon inflammation of

deeper  structures.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. Hardness  of  hearing,  especially  of
human  voice.

■  Otalgia,  with  pulsation  in  ear  at  night.

■  Excoriating  discharge  of  bloody  pus  from  ear  in  acute

inflammation.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  external  and  internal  ear,

vesicular,  with  excessive  otalgia.

■  Inflammatory  swelling  of  glands  beneath  ears. ^ After

scarlatina.

■  Lobule  of  1.  ear  swollen.

■  ■Parotitis,  1.  side;  especially  suppuration. ^Scarlatina.
^  Smell  and  Nose. 1 1  Loss  of  smell.

■  Nosebleed: frequent; on stooping; in morning; at

night  ;  coagulated  blood  ;  at  stool,  or  from  exertion  ;  in
typhus,  with  some  relief.

■  Spasmodic  sneezing.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  60

I  I  Sudden  cessation  of  cough  followed  by  most  outrageous
sneezing,  all  night ;  in  morning  face  red,  swollen,  can-
not talk  for  sneezing ;  points  to  head  and  abdomen.
^Influenza.

■  Dryness  and  stoppage  of  nose.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  in  nostrils.

■  Discharge  from  nose:  of  thick,  yellow  mucus;  of  nasal

mucus without coryza ; of  green, offensive  pus; of

yellow  ichor,  with  swollen  cervical  glands ;  hot,  acrid

from  nares.
Hot  burning  beneath  1.  nostril  so  that  the  breath  seemed

to  come  out  of  it  hot.
iSwelling  of  nose.

■  Tip  of  nose  red  and  sensitive ;  nose  sore  internally.
iPuffiness  of  nose.

I  Fever  blisters  and  crusts  under  nose.
I  I  Eczema  on  both  sides  below  nose ;  nose  swollen,  now
and  then  bleeding.

■  Eruption  in  corners  of  nose.

*  Upper  Face. Face  :  fier}^  red ;  pale,  sunken,  nose  pointed,
blue  around  eyes  ;  red,  with  heat.

■  Burning,  drawing,  tearing  in  face;  teeth  feel  too  long;

restlessness.

I  I  For  several  successive  nights,  awoke  after  having  been
asleep  about  an  hour,  with  pain  in  temporal  region  of
1.  side,  extending  toward  head,  cheeks  and  teeth  of
same  side ;  pain  increased  from  minute  to  minute,  was
of  a  glowing,  tearing  character  and  forced  him  to  quit
his  bed  and  walk  about  the  room  for  three  hours  during
the  night ;  went  to  bed  exhausted,  fell  asleep,  but  awoke
again  in  half  an  hour  and  was  obliged  once  more  to
walk  about  until  7  or  8  a.m.  ;  during  day  teeth  of  af-
fected side  felt  too  long  and  w^ere  loose  so  that  he
could  masticate  but  little;  felt  very  weak  and  cold.
^Facial  neuralgia.

I  I  Facial  neuralgia  ;  feeling  of  great  coldness  ;  <  in  open
air;  violent  evening  exacerbation;  dysenteric  diarrhoea.

I  I  From  having  been  in  a  cellar,  where  he  perspired  much,
especially  on  head,  old  neuralgic  pains  reappeared;
patient  pressed  hand  on  1,  cheek,  pressed  teeth  together
and  had  a  distorted  painful  face.

■  Tension  and  swelling  of  face.

■  Great  swelling  of  face,  especially  of  eyelids  and  ears.
Violent  burning  in  swollen  face,  lids  and  ears.

■  ■Erysipelas  from  1.  to  r.  ;  face  dark-red,  covered with

yellow  vesicles ; burning,  itching and  tingling  with
stinging;  delirium  and  high  fever.
I  I  Whole  face  swollen,  eyes  nearly  closed ;  ears  swollen ;


61  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

swelling  of  face  red,  hot,  with  tension  and  burning,  r.
side  being  covered  with  vesicles,  some  of  which  had
burst;  hairy  part  of  scalp  very  sensitive  to  touch,  par-
ticularly in  region  of  occiput,  which  was  the  seat  of
pressing  pains  ;  ringing  in  ears  with  hardness  of  hear-
ing ;  frequent  short  naps ;  delirium  at  night ;  slow,
complaining  speech ;  great  despondency ;  constantly
lies  on  back,  at  rare  intervals  sluggish  movements  of
limbs ;  no  appetite ;  great  thirst ;  frequent,  deep  in-
spirations with  sighing;  diarrhoea;  cough  with  expec-
toration of  blood  ;  urine  bluish-red. ^Erysipelas.

i  I  Whole  face,  except  forehead,  greatly  swollen,  hot,  harsh
to  touch,  bright-red,  shiny  and  covered  with  vesicles;
lids  greatly  swollen,  cannot  open  eyes  ;  auditory  meatus
on  both  sides  swollen ;  stitching  pains  in  throat  on
swallowing;  sides  of  back  painful  to  touch,  without
swelling  or  hardness ;  tongue  red,  dry ;  great  thirst ;
frequent  yawning ;  painful  pressure  on  chest  and  about
heart ;  at  rare  intervals  cough  with  expectoration  of
blood  ;  tearing  pains  in  all  the  limbs ;  skin  dry,  hot ;
urine  scanty,  dark  ;  pulse  rapid,  weak. ^Erysipelas.

I  1  Er3'sipelas  bullosum  ;  the  spots  had  spread  over  fore-
part of  scalp,  entire  face  covered  with  large  blisters;
heat,  swelling  and  intense  pain  ;  tongue  smooth,  very
red;  much  thirst ;  anxiety;  restlessness;  sleeplessness;
very  quick  pulse.

I  I  Inflammation  commenced  in  outer  ear  and  gradually

spread  to  cheek  and  forehead  of  same  side,  then  to
opposite  ear,  cheek  and  side  of  head,  with  blistering,
burning  and  itching. ^Erysipelas.

I I  Acne  rosacea.

I  Milk  crust;  thick  crusts  and  a  secretion  of  fetid,  bloody
matter.

■  Impetigo  on  face  and  forehead.

I  I  Forepart  of  head  and  r.  side  of  face  covered  with  a
thick,  moist  crust,  from  under  which  an  ichorous,  fre-
quently sanious,  offensive  discharge  oozes  ;  underlying
skin  rough,  excoriated  ;  lids  of  r.  eye  red,  swollen  ;  con-
junctiva red ;  skin  of  whole  body,  but  particularly  of
arms  and  feet,  rough  and  scaly,  often  covered  with
thick  moist  crusts  ;  intolerable  biting-itching  in  affected
parts,  <  toward  evening,  at  night  and  from  warmth  ;
on  scratching  a  sanious  pus  is  discharged  with  momen-
tary relief;  an  intolerable  odor  arises  from  the  patient.

■  Crusta  lactea;  crusts  on  cheeks,  extending  up  to  temples

over  hairy  part  of  scalp,  even  eyelids  being  covered  ;  on
several  fingers  painful  ulcerations  about  nails.
iChronic  suppurating  eruptions  on  face.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  62

^  Lower  Face. Cramplike  pain  in  articulation  of  lower  jaw,

close  to  ear,  during  rest  and  motion  of  part,  >  from

pressure  and  warmth.
Pressive  and digging  pain  in  glands  beneath  angle  of

lower  jaw.
I  Pain  in  maxillary  joints  as  if  the  jaw  would  break.
liStiffness  of  jaws,  cracking  in  articulation  of  jaw  when

moving  it;  jaw  easily  dislocated.

■  Dull,  aching  cramplike  pain  in  articulation  of  r.  lower

jaw  when  at  rest,  and  when  in  motion,  accompanied  by
a  crackling  sound and severe  pain as if  jaw  would
break,  >  by  pressure  and  warm  food  and  drinks.
iRheumatism  of  maxillar}^  joint.

I  I  Parotitis  after  catching  cold  ;  suppuration  was  feared

and  an  incision  made ;  swelling  then  somewhat  sub-
sided but  became  more  indurated,  particularly  around
scar;  if  exposed  to  north  and  east  winds  inflammation
and  swelling  occurred,  at  which  time  she  could  hardly
open  mouth.

I I  Corners  of  mouth  ulcerated,  fever  blisters  around  mouth.

■  Exanthema  on  cheeks,  chin  and  around  mouth.

■  Herpetic,  crusty  eruptions  around  mouth  and  nose  with

itching  and  burning.

I  Pimples  about  mouth  and  chin.

I  Lips dry and parched, covered with reddish-brown
crusts. ^Typhus.
'°  Teeth  and  Gums, l  Teeth  painful  with  stinging  at  root  of
nose,  extending  to  malar  bones.

Toothache,  in  evening,  first  in  a  hollow  tooth,  which  be-
came elongated  and  loose,  then  also  in  other  teeth  in
which  the  pain  was  partly  sticking  and  partly  crawling.

Jerking  toothache  at  night  (about  10  p.m.);  the  jerking
extending  into  head  ;  >  from  application  of  cold  hand.

Tearing  pain  in  teeth,  >  by  hot  applications.

■  Jumping,  shooting,  as  if  teeth  were  being  torn  out;  or

slow,  pricking,  throbbing  or  tearing,  extending  into
jaws  and  temples;  face  sore;  <  at  night,  from  cold,
from  vexation,  >  from  external  heat;  crusty  caries.

■  Gnawing  sensation  in  hollow  teeth  <  from  cold.

■  Teeth  feel  too  long  and  too  loose,  feel  as  if  asleep.
Looseness  of  lower  incisors  ;  she  cannot  bite  upon  them.

'"^ Taste  and  Tongue.  ■Taste  :  putrid,  mornings  after  eating;
■  ■metallic;  food, especially  bread, tastes  bitter;  disgust-
ing, bitter,  with  a  sensation  of  dryness  in  mouth,  fre-
quently awoke  her  at  night.

■  ■Tongue:  dry;  sore,  redness  at  tip;  not  coated  but  very

dry,  which  provoked  drinking ;  dry,  red,  cracked  ;  has
a  triangular  red  tip  ;  white,  often  on  one  side  ;  yellowish;


63  RHUS  a'OXICODENDRON.

covered  with  brown  mucus;  takes  imprint  of  teeth;
blistered ;  coated  at  root, yellowish- white ;  thickly  coated ;
brown  mucus,  excepting  on  edges,  in  morning  on  rising.
"Inner  Mouth. Sleeps  with  open  mouth.

I  Breath:  putrid,  excessively  so  in  typhoid  fever  and  diph-
theria.

I  Mouth  dry,  with  much  thirst.

Water  accumulates  in  mouth,  is  frequently  obliged  to  spit.

I  Saliva  bloody;  runs  out  of  mouth  during  sleep.

I  Much  tough  mucus  in  mouth  and  throat.

I  I  Both  lips  large,  prominent,  tender  and  of  an  ashy-gray

color  from  infiltration  beneath  mucous  membrane  of  an
albuminous-looking  matter  behind  which  was  a  layer
.of  dark-colored  fluid,  probably  blood;  face,  especially
forehead,  bluish  and  cool;  features  drawn  and  pinched;
submaxillary  glands  greatly  swollen ;  pulse  96,  small  and
thready ;  temperature  97.3° ;  tongue  swollen,  pale  and
covered  with  an  offensive  mucus  similar  in  odor  and
hue  to  lips ;  extreme  prostration.  /^Diphtheria  of  lips.
^^  Throat, l  Sensation  of  dryness  in  throat.

I I  Great  thirst  and  dryness  in  throat,  in  typhoid  conditions.
Unable  to  drink ;  at  every  swallow  the  drink  chokes  her

as  if  pharynx  were  inactive  or  paralyzed ;  associated
with  a  sensation  of  dryness  in  throat  posteriorly.

■  Difficult  swallowing  of  solids,  as  from  contraction.

■  Painful  swallowing,  particularly  when  swallowing  empty

or  saliva.
Sore throat; deglutition difficult,  with  stitching  pains,

throat  much  swollen  externally,  maxillary  and  parotid

glands  greatly  enlarged.
■Sore  throat  as  from  an  internal  swelling,  with  bruised

pain,  also when  talking,  with  pressure  and  stinging

when  swallowing.

■  ■Throat  sore,  feels  stiff;  after  straining  throat.

■  Sticking  or  stinging  pains  in  tonsils,  <  on  beginning  to

swallow.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation;  parotids  swollen ;  cellulitis

of  neck ;  drowsiness.

Tonsil  (right)  covered  with  yellow  membrane.

I  I  Fever  <  toward  night ;  pains  in  back  of  neck  with
stiffness,  <  on  turning,  >  on  change  of  position ;  rest-
lessness ;  inflammation  of  r.  tonsil,  with  a  patch  like
chamois  leather,  yellowish-white,  thick  ;  tongue  white,
heavily  coated,  top  and  edge  red,  almost  sore,  raw-look-
ing ;  fetid  breath ;  sticking  pain  on  swallowing,  <  when
first  beginning  to  swallow;  loathing  of  food.  ^Diph-
theria.

■  Diphtheria;  child  restless,  wants to  be  carried  about


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  64

wakes  up  every  now  and  then  complaining  of  pain  in
throat;  bloody  saliva  runs  out  of  mouth  during  sleep  ;
parotid  glands  swollen;  transparent, jelly-like  discharges
from  bowels  at  stool  or  afterward.

I  I  Pain  in  back,  in  a  spot  corresponding  with  about  centre

of  oesophagus,  <  eating  and  drinking;  when  food
reaches  this  spot  it  refuses  to  go  further,  so  that  she  can
take  only  fluids ;  seeks  to  force  food  past  affected  spot
by 'twisting  body  about  or  assuming  some  favorable
position,  after  which  she  is  relieved.  ^CEsophagitis.
iCEsophagitis,  especially  after  corrosive  substances.

I I  Parotid  and  submaxillary  glands  highly  inflamed  and
enlarged  ;  swallowing  nearly  impossible.  ^Diphtheria.
^Scarlatina. ^Variola.

I  Mumps  on  left  side.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i Hunger  without
appetite.

Loss  of  appetite  in  palate  and  throat,  with  emptiness  in
stomach,  and  at  same  time  ravenous  hunger,  that  dis-
appeared after  sitting  awhile.

I  Complete  loss  of  appetite  for  all  food;  nothing  tastes
well,  neither  food,  drink  nor  tobacco.

I  No  appetite,  or  wants  only  dainties.

I I  Thirst  with  dryness  of  throat.

I  Unquenchable  thirst,  wants  only  cold  drinks;  <  at
night,  from  dryness  of  mouth.

■  Desire  for:  oysters;  sweets;  beer;  cold  milk.

■  Aversion  to:  spirituous  liquors;  to  meat;  to  beer.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking, i  After  eating :  great  sleepiness ;  ful-
ness in  stomach ; giddiness ;  heaviness  in  stomach  as
from  a  stone.
From  drinking  ice-water:  pain  in  stomach  and  nausea.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  i  Eructa-
tions: seem  to  become  incarcerated  and  remain  in  r.
side  of  chest ;  with  nausea ; with  tingling  in  stomach,

<  when  rising  from  lying.

I  Nausea:  after  ice-water ;  after  eating,  with  sudden  vomit-
ing; with  inordinate  appetite  and  inclination  to  vomit;

<  at  night  and  after  eating.

'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Violent  throbbing  in  epi-
gastric region.

■  Stinging  or  pulsation  in  pit  of  stomach.
■Ulcerative  pain  in  pit  of  stomach.
Fulness  in  stomach,  as  if  overloaded.

■  Fulness  or  heaviness,  as  from  a  stone  in  stomach; after

eating.

■  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  as  if  swollen  or  as  if  drawn

together.


65  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

Oppression  in  stomach  toward  evening.
1 1  Pain  in  stomach  and  nausea,  after  ice-water.
'*  Hypochondria, n Soreness  as  if  beaten  in  hypochondriac

region  and  abdomen,  <  on  side  on  which  he  lies,  <

when  turning  and  worst  when  beginning  to  move.
Pressing  drawing,  from  below  upward,  in  1.  hypochon-
' drium,  with  anxiety  and  nausea  in  chest.
I  I  Severe  pain  in  r.  hypochondriac  region  with  high  fever,

was  hardly  able  to  breathe ; kept  moving  about ;  >

after  eating.
I  I  Shooting  pains  of two  weeks  standing. ^Abscess  of

liver.
^^  Abdomen, i  Abdomen  bloated:  especially  after  eating ;  all

day  a  sensation  of  fermentation  in  it.
Griping  and  jerking  pain  in  abdomen.
Pain  in  region  of  ascending  colon.
Pain  and  contraction  in  abdomen,  she  was  obliged  to  walk

bent  over.

I  I  Pains  like  a  knife  in  r.  abdomen  on  walking.

■  Soreness  of  navel.

I I  Soreness  in  walls  of  abdomen,  especially  in  morning
when  stretching;  after  physical  strain.

•  Sensation  as  if  something  were  torn  loose  in  abdomen.

■  Visible  contractions  of  abdomen  above  navel.

i  I  Pains  in  stomach  and  abdomen  after  drinking  ice-water;
since  then  whenever  she  eats  anything  has  colic,  which
is  followed  by  a  normal  stool,  with  relief.

I  Colic,  he  must  walk  bent;  <  at  night;  after  getting  wet.

I  I  Violent  colic,  >  only  by  lying  on  back  with  legs  elevated

vertically.

I I  Typhlitis.

I  I  Constant  pressing,  burning  pains  in  whole  r.  side  of
abdomen,  <  rising  from  a  seat,  but  particularly  severe
when  sitting  down,  with  sensation  as  if  a  lump  lay  like
a  pressing  heavy  weight  in  abdomen;  on  this  account
and  because  of  a  tension  and  disturbance  in  whole  r.
side  of  abdomen  which  extended  to  groin,  she  could
not  stand  erect,  or  easily  lift  r.  foot  or  propel  it  forward,
whole  r.  side  of  abdomen  very  tense  and  painful  to
pressure ;  a  broad  fiat  tumor  could  be  detected  extend-
ing from  crest  of  ilium  to  linea  alba,  upward  to  liver,-
downward  to  region  of  groin,  feeling  as  if  it  rounded
itself  inward  and  backward;  face  sunken,  pale,  dis-
torted, with  suffering  expression  ;  anorexia ;  aversion  to
food ;  moderate  thirst ;  chilliness  mixed  with  heat ;
rapid  hard  pulse;  emaciation;  despondency;  feeling  of
extreme  prostration. ^Physconia  peritonealis.

I  I  Vomiting  of  mucus,  bile  and  food  ;  sleeplessness ;  fever;

VOL.  XI. — 5.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  QQ

belching  of  wind  ;  loss  of  appetite  ;  mouth  dry,  pappy  ;
dirty  white  coating  on  tongue;  abdomen  distended,
painful,  very  sensitive  to  pressure;  stitches  below  r.  ribs
on  inspiration;  pain  <  on  eating;  on  fourth  night  re-
currence of  chill ;  unquenchable  thirst ;  skin  burning
hot  and  dry ;  pulse  rapid,  small  and  hard  ;  pain  in
limbs  as  if  constricted ;  feet  and  ankles  numb,  as  if
asleep;  eyes  dull;  face  pale,  pointed,  expressive  of
suffering.

I  I  Enteritis ;  tearing,  stitching,  burning  pains ;  grass-green

vomiting;  cannot  tolerate  least  touch;  whitish  stools
containing  pus ;  burning  fever,  <  1  p.m.  ;  burning  in
and  beneath  eyes;  dryness  of  gums;  throbbing  in  tem-
ples; tickling  in  throat;  gurgling  in  abdomen  followed
by  stools  which  are  not  fecal ;  difficult  urination  ;  ex-
tremely sensitive  spot,  r.  side,  one  inch  below  navel,
which  when  touched  causes  nausea.

I I  Enteritis  or  peritonitis,  with  typhoid  symptoms  ;  invol-
untary stools.

■  Incarcerated  hernia.

I  Inflammatory  swelling  of  inguinal  glands.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum.  iStools:  watery,  mucous  and  bloody,
with  nausea,  tearing  down  thighs,  and  much  tenesmus ;
frothy;  white;  painless  and  undigested  ;  bloody  water
like  washings  of  beef;  yellowish  brown,  blood}^,  cada-
verous smelling  and  involuntary  at  night  [typhoid] ;
dark,  yellow,  watery ;  thin,  mucous,  red  or  yellow ;  jelly-
like, streaked  white  and  yellow ;  greenish,  mucous,  with
jelly-like  globules  or  flakes;  lumps  of  transparent
mucus;  yellowish  white,  fecal;  yellow,  fluid;  dark
red  [brick-colored]  fluid  ;  otter-colored  fluid  [typhoid]  ;
profuse,  yellow,  watery  ;  scanty,  frequent  bloody  water ;
alternating  with  constipation ;  involuntary  (at  night
while  sleeping) ;  fetid ;  frothy  and  painless  [yellow
fluid]  ;  very  offensive  [dark  yellow,  watery]  ;  odorless
[bloody,  watery  or  yellow  fluid].

I  Before  stool :  constant  urging,  with  nausea  and  tearing
colic ;  cutting  colic.

1  During  stool :  cutting  colic ;  nausea  ;  urging ;  tenesmus ;
tearing  pains  down  thighs ;  shortness  of  breath.

I  After  stool:  remission  of  pains  and  urging ;  tenesmus.

■  Nightly  diarrhoea,  with  violent  pain  in  abdomen,  >  after

stool  or  while  lying  prone.
I  I  Diarrhoea  after  marching  through  moist  ground  with

bare  feet.
I  I  Dark  brown,  thin,  and  very  fetid  stools  eight  or  ten

times  daily,  especially  in  early  morning  and  between  4

and  6  p.m.  ; stools  often  contained mucus,  occasionally


67  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

pus  and  frequently  lentil-shaped  clots  of  blood ;  very
weak,  could  not  sit  up,  except  in  bed,  because  hanging
down  feet  always  brought  on  urging  to  stool,  with  in-
voluntary evacuation  if  not  at  once  responded  to.
/? Chronic  diarrhoea.

I  I  Intestinal  catarrh  during  subsidence  of  cholera  epidem-

ica ;  twenty  to  thirty  motions  in  twelve  hours ;  vomit-
ing frequent;  cyanosis  of  hands  and  face;  corpselike
coldness  of  forearms,  forehead  and  cheeks;  bowels
emitted  a  splashing  sound  when  pressed,  showing  an
admixture  of  fluid  and  wind;  asphyxia;  prostration  of
strength;  apathy  of  mind;  liquid  stools  mixed  with
some  firmer  lumps,  strong  smelling ;  vomiting  of  whit-
ish fluid,  with  a  shade  of  green,  with  a  sickly  smell
and  mixed  with  mucus;  headache;  incessant  thirst;
frequent  sighing;  tenesmus;  bowels  distended  with
wind ;  sickly  taste  in  mouth.

I I  In  voluntary  stools,  with  great  exhaustion. i^Typhoid
fever. ^Gastro-enteritis.

■  Cholera  infantum,  typhoid  t3^pe;  very  restless  at  night,

has  to  be  moved  often  to  get  relief.

■  Dysentery;  tenesmus,  with  nausea,  tearing  and  pinching

in  abdomen ;  tenesmic  stools,  followed  by  involuntary
discharges  from  bowels.

■  Dysenteric  discharges  since  early  in  morning;  extremely

severe  and  constant  tenesmus ;  great  chilliness  ;  constant
restlessness.

■  Hemorrhage  of  black  blood  from  bowels. ^Typhoid.

■  Sense of constriction in rectum as if one side had

grown  up.

■  Shooting  pain  up  rectum.

I  I  Fissure  of  anus,  with  periodical  profuse  bleeding.

■  Hemorrhoids:  sore,  blind;  protruding  after  stool,  with

pressing  in  rectum,  as  if  everything  would  come  out.
^^  Urinary  Organs. "Tearing pain  in  region  of  kidneys;

oedema ;  after  exposure  to  wet.
I  I  In  a  miner  exposed  to  much  dampness,  oedema  of  face

and  feet  developing  into  a  general  anasarca ;  urine  full

of  albumen. ^Bright's  disease.
I  I  Severe  tearing  pains  in  small  of  back;  urine  contains

blood  and  albumen;  anasarca;  in  a  man  exposed  to

heat. ^Bright's  disease.

■  Urine:  hot;  white;  muddy;  pale,  with  white  sediment;

dark,  becoming  turbid  ;  high-colored,  scanty  and  irritat-
ing;  turbid  when  passed ;  red  and  scanty ;  snow-white
sediment  [urate  of  ammonia]  ;  bloody,  discharged  drop
by  drop,  with  straining;  diminished,  though  he  drinks
much  ;  passes  in  a  divided  stream.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  '  68

■  Tenesmus  vesicse;  discharges  a  few  drops  of  blood-red

urine.

■  Retention of  urine; backache; restless, cannot keep

quiet.

■  Urine  voided  slowly;  spine  affected;  from  getting  wet.
I  I  Urine  escapes  in  drops,  flow  interrupted ;  burning  in

small  of  back;  constipation;  paralytic  weakness  with
coldness  and  numbness  of  1.  arm  and  foot;  during
sixth  month  of  pregnancy.

■  Frequent  urging  day  and  night,  with  increased  secretion.

■  Urine  involuntary,  at  night,  and  while  at  rest.

■  Weakness  of  bladder  in  girls  and  women,  with  frequent

desire  to  urinate ;  also  constant  dribbling  in  boys.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Erections  at  night  with  desire  to
urinate.

■  Pains  in  glans  penis  on  account  of  swelling  of  prepuce,

causing  paraphimosis.

■  ■Swelling  of  glans  and  prepuce,  dark  red,  erysipelatous.
Stinging  itching  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce.

■  Humid  vesicles  on  glans.

■  Red  blotches  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce.

■  ■Humid  eruption  on  genitals  and  between  scrotum  and

thigh.

■  Eruption  on  genitals,  closing  urethra  by  swelling.

■  ■Scrotum becomes thick and hard, with intolerable

itching.

■  ■(Edema  of  scrotum  and  penis.

I  I  Enormous  oedema  of  scrotum  and  penis  after  scarlet
fever,  with  recurrence  of  fever ;  penis  assumed  a  spiral
form.

■  Humid  eruptions  or  erysipelas  of  scrotum.
I  I  Metastasis  of  mumps  to  r.  testicle.

I  I  Gonorrhoea;  repeated  urging  to  urinate;  burning  in
urethra  ;  scanty,  very  thick  discharge.

1  I  Sweat  in  second  sleep  for  a  month;  aching  in  glans
penis ;  after  urination  a  few  drops  escape.  ^Secondary
syphilis.
*^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  '  i  Ovarian  cyst,  had  existed
eighteen  months  in  a  laboring  woman  set.  20 ;  bru-
nette ;  fresh,  rosy  complexion ;  strained  herself  lifting
shortly  after  first  appearance  of  tumor.

I  I  Consciousness  of  uterus  feeling  sore  and  low  down  in
pelvis,  so  as  to  seriously  interfere  with  walking ;  mictu-
rition frequent  and  painful ;  much  burning  and  itching
of  skin  all  over  body ;  soreness  in  back  and  hypogas-
trium  ;  subject  to  rheumatism. ^Prolapsus.

1  I  Bearing  down  in  pelvis  when  walking ;  itching  in
rectum ;  desire  for  acids ;  pains  are  most  in  r.  ovarian


69  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON

region ;  feels  as  if  her  back  would  break ;  >  by  lying
on  a  hard  floor  or  with  pillow  under  back  ;  stiffness  in
joints  when  at  rest,  goes  o,ff  during  motion.

1  Prolapsus:  after  parturition ;  from  straining  or  lifting;
in  rheumatic  women  whose  pains  compel  them  to  shift
about  in  order  to  get  relief;  <  in  damp  weather  or
before  a  storm.

I  Laborlike  pains  and  pressure  in  abdomen  while
standing.

■  Metrorrhagia,  blood  clotted  with  laborlike  pains.

I  I  The  flow  following  last  confinement  never  ceased,  at
times  amounting  to  a  severe  hemorrhage ;  when  lying
or  sitting  quietly  extreme  vertigo  came  on,  which  only
passed  away  on  rising  and  walking.

I  I  Polypus  of  uterus  after  getting  chilled  from  a  sea-bath,

felt  benumbed  after  the  bath  and  had  a  pain  in  shoul-
ders as  if  sprained,  <  at  night  toward  3  a.m.;  lost
her  memory  and  was  almost  paralyzed  in  her  limbs ;
headache  and  vertigo ;  soon  afterward  uterine  hemor-
rhage ;  twice  there  had  been  removed  from  her  womb
masses  of  polypous  growth,  but  the  bleeding  returned
soon  after ;  uterus  low  down  in  pelvis  and  retroverted,
its  posterior  wall  softened  and  swollen,  filling  almost
entire  cavity  of  pelvis;  os  dilated,  cicatriced,  discharg-
ing thin  blood ;  leucorrhoea ;  turbid  urine.

I I  Menses :  too  early,  profuse  and  protracted  ;  flow  light-
colored,  acrid,  causing  biting  pain  in  vulva.

■  Menorrhagia: from a strain; in rheumatic women;

<  at  night,  demanding  constant  change  of  position  to

find  relief.
I  Membranous  dysmenorrhcsa  in  rheumatic  women.
1  I  Obstructive  dysmenorrhoea ; pains  cramping,  bearing

down ;  backache,  <  in  horizontal  position  and  by  lying

on  back.
lAmenorrhcea:  from  getting  wet;  with  milk  in  breasts;

after  catching  cold,  with frequent  affections  of  chest

and  epistaxis.
I  lAmenia,  after  getting  wet  in  a  rainstorm,  followed  by

hydroiTietra.

■  Discharge  of  offensive,  blackish  water  from  vagina,  with

bursting  feeling  in  head  as  if  head  was  swelling  out.  _

■  Shooting  pains  by  spells  through  head; <  when  lying

and  >  when  head  is  raised.

■  Soreness  in  vagina  shortly  after  an  embrace,  or  hindering

an  embrace.
Sticking  pain  in  vagina,  not  increased  by  contact.
■ ■■External  genitals  inflamed,  erysipelatous,  cedematous.

■  Uterine  complaints  resulting  from  exposure  to  cold,  damp

weather,  from  getting  wet,  particularly  while  perspiring.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  70

2*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i During  pregnancy:
discharges  of  blood;  pelvic  articulations  stiff  when  be-
ginning to  move.
I  Abortion  impending  from  straining  or  overexertion.

■  Lochia  vitiated  and  offensive,  lasting  too  long,  or  oft  re-

turning, she  is  well-nigh  exhausted.

I A  vitiated  discharge  from  vagina  with  shooting  upward
in  parts,  with  a  bursting  sensation  in  head.

I  After-pains  of  too  long  duration,  after  severe  labor,  with
much  and  excessive  straining.

llMilk  leg,  also  metritis  after  delivery;  w^ith  typhoid
symptoms.

iMammse:  swell  from  catching  cold,  streaks  of  inflam-
mation; galactorrhoea ;  milk  vanishes  with  general  heat.

I  I  For  weeks  after  delivery  has  much  pain  in  r.  limb,  with
numbness  from  hips  to  feet.

I  I  For  wrecks  after  delivery  has  a  terrible  cough,  it  seems
as  if  something  w^ould  be  torn  out  of  chest.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  ■  Hoarse-
ness :  with  roughness,  scraping,  or  raw  sensation  in
larynx;  roughness  and  soreness  in  chest;  from  over-
straining voice.

iMuscular  exhaustion  of  larynx  from  prolonged  and  loud
exercise  of  voice  ;  hoarseness,  after  being  silent  awhile,  >
talking ; <  in  evening,  and  from  change  of  weather.

Frequent  tickling,  irritability  in  air-passages,  as  if  it  w^ould
provoke  cough.

■  Cold  sensation  in  larynx,  when  breathing.
I  I  Burning  rawness  in  larynx.

■  Hot  air  arises  from  trachea.

■  Influenza  ;  air-passages  seem  stuffed  up  ;  aching  in  bones;

sneezing  and  coughing,  <  from  uncovering  body ;  aris-
ing from exposure  to  dampness;  dry,  hard,  tickling
cough,  < evening until  midnight ;  stiffness  in  back
and  limbs.
^^Respiration. I Respiration  hurried;  very  short  at  night.

■  Oppression:  as  if  breath  were  stopped  at  pit  of  stomach ;  <

after  a  meal ;  anxious,  as  if  not  able  to  draw  a  long
breath .

■  Dyspnoea  from  pressure  and  painfulness  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Hot  breath.

^'^ Cough.  ■Cough:  dry,  teasing;  caused  by  tickling  in  bron-
chia ;  from  uncovering,  even  a  hand ;  with  tearing
pain  in  chest,  stitches,  profuse  sweat  and  pain  in
stomach ;  <  evening  until  midnight,  or  in  morning
soon  after  waking,  from  talking,  lying  down  or  sitting
still ;  from  tickling  under  sternum  ;  preventing  sleep
at  night ;  frequent  hacking  in  evening  after  lying  down,


71  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

with  bitter  taste  in  throat  till  he  falls  asleep,  and  in
morning  a  similar  hacking  cough  and  a  similar  taste,
lasting  till  he  rises ;  short,  from  severe  tickling  and  irri-
tation behind  upper  half  of  sternum,  followed  by  feeling
of  discouragement  and  apprehension  ;  whenever  he  puts
his  hands  out  of  bed;  spasmodic,  shatters  the  head;
short,  anxious,  painful,  frequently  awakens  her  from
sleep  before  midnight  with  very  short  breath  ;  dry,
during  day,  wrenching  epigastrium,  excited  by  talking
or  singing,  shoulders  and  cervical  muscles  stiff  and
lame  on  first  moving ;  >  during  exercise.

i  I  During  convalescence  from  pneumonia,  when  coughing,
terrific  pain  in  1.  shoulder,  as  if  shoulder  would  fly  to
pieces,  and  his  wife  would  have  to  hold  his  shoulder
with  her  hand  and  pinch  as  hard  as  she  could;  pain
was  brought  on  by  a  fit  of  coughing,  and  he  had  to  get
out  of  bed  and  swing  his  arm  back  and  forth  as  fast  as
he  could  to  relieve  it.

I  Acute  cases  of  cough  with  much  prostration  of  whole
system.

I  Dry,  hard,  racking,  rheumatic  coughs ;  the  case  is  apt  to
take  on  a  low  tj^phoid  form,  and  is  greatly  aggravated
at  night.

I  lA  dry  teasing  cough  coming  on  before  the  chill  and

continuing  during  it.

■  Nocturnal  dry  cough  with  insufficiency  of  mitral  valve.

I I  Cough  with  taste  of  blood,  although  no  blood  is  to  be
seen.

■  Cough with expectoration of bright-red blood and

qualmish  feeling  in  chest.

■  Sputa:  acrid  pus;  grayish-green  cold  mucus  of  putrid
smell ;  pale,  clotted  or  brown  blood.

Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest :  at  night

with sticking  pains,  especially  on  breathing ;  anxiety

with  M^eight  on  lower  portion  of  chest.
Tension  across  chest,  in  evening  very  short  breath  and

weakness  in  all  the  limbs.
In  morning  on  rising,  drawing  and  stitching  pains  in  1.

nipple  through  to  scapula,  gradually  increasing  until

it  caused  severe  suffering ;  face  pale.
■Stitches  in  chest  and  sides  of  chest,  especially  when  sitting

bent,  talking,  sneezing  or  taking  long  breath ;  <  when

at  rest.

■  Tingling  in  chest,  with  tension  in  intercostal  muscles.

■  Acute  pleurisy  with  typhoid  symptoms.

■  Acute  catarrh;  the  nasal,  laryngeal,  tracheal  and  bron-

chial passages  seem  stuffed  up,  commencing  at  about
sunset,  with  sneezing  and dry,  hard,  tickling  cough,


28


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  72

continuing  very  severe  until  midnight,  when  all  the
sufferings  are  >  ;  renewed  next  morning.

I  I  After  exposure,  chilliness,  headache,  oppressed  breath-
ing, catching  pains  in  r.  side  of  chest,  cutting  off  breath
on  deep  inspiration ;  anxiety  and  apprehension  that
unless  relieved  he  would  only  be  able  to  breathe  but  a
short  time;  restless  at  night;  plentiful  crop  of  vesicles
around  mouth,  which  had  appeared  over  night.  ^In-
fluenza.

I  I  Pneumonia  after  exposure  to  rain  while  overheated ;
short,  oppressed  respiration ;  cough  with  stitches  in
sides ;  skin  hot,  dry ;  tongue  red,  dry ;  pulse  rapid,
hard ;  urine  dark,  becoming  turbid  on  standing,  and
depositing  a  sediment;  diarrhoea;  impaired  appetite;
considerable  thirst ;  sleep  restless,  full  of  dreams ;  languid
and  weak.

I  I  Stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest,  <  coughing  and  breathing ;
short,  anxious  respiration  ;  deep  respiration  impossible ;
severe  cough  with  expectoration  of  mucus  and  brownish
blood ;  partly  crepitant  and  partly  bronchial  relies ;
bronchophony  r.  side  and  dulness  on  percussion  ;  lies
upon  back  or  on  r.  side ;  burning,  dry  heat ;  pulse  tense,
frequent;  anxious  sleep;  transient  delirium;  circum-
corners  of  mouth  and  sclerotica  ;  unquenchable  thirst ;
loss  of  appetite ;  yellowish-brown  coating  on  tongue ;
bitter  taste;  nausea,  inclination  to  vomit,  diarrhoea;
dark  brown  urine. ^Pleuro-pneumonia  biliosa.

I  I  Pneumonia,  relapse  ;  restless  tossing  about  at  night ;
acute  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest  in  locality  previously
affected,  very  sensitive  to  touch  ;  pulse  again  rapid,
strong  and  full ;  cough  severe,  with  scanty  expectora-
tion of  bloody  mucus ;  on  breathing,  sensation  as  if  air
became  imprisoned  in  epigastrium,  causing  great
anxiety.

■  Pneumonia:  adynamic  type  ;  free  expectoration  of  thin,
puslike  secretion  stained  deeply  with  blood.

Brickdust  expectoration  of  bloody  sputa,  raised  with
great  difficulty,  and  accompanied  by  high  fever,  invol-
untary diarrhoea,  in  the  worst  cases  ;  with  typhoid  symp-
toms, often  from  resorption  of  pus ;  with  tearing  cough
and  restlessness,  because  quiet  makes  pain  and  dyspnoea
worse;  pneumonia  nervosa.

I  I  Frequently  recurring  short  cough,  with  blood-streaked
expectoration ;  stitches  in  1.  side  and  oppression  of  chest ;
menses  scanty  but  regular ;  for  last  8  days,  after  catch-
ing cold,  erysipelatous  on  dorsum  of  r.  hand,  with  burn-
ing and  stitching,  and  formation  of  a  flat  ulcer  which
began  as  a  vesicle. ^Haemoptysis.


73  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

iHeemoptysis:  expectoration  of  blood  becomes  nearly  a
habit,  so  that  patient  gradually  becomes  anaemic,  weak,
and  the  blood  itself  poor;  from  overexertion,  blowmg^
wind  instruments;  blood  bright;  pain  in  lower  part  of
chest;  renewed  from  least  mental  excitement.
'^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  iWeak  and  tremulous
feeling  about  heart; chest  and  heart  feel  weak  after  a

walk.  .

■  Dragging  and  stiffness  of  cardiac  region,  especially  on

beginning  to  move.

■  Stitches  in  heart  with  painful  lameness  and  numbness  ot

1.  arm.

■  Palpitation:  violent,  when  sitting  still,  pulsations  mov-

ing body  ;  anxious  in  morning  on  awaking ; following
overexertion.

■  ■  Uncomplicated  hypertrophy,  from  violent  exercise.

I  I  Enlargement  of  heart  with  dilatation ;  pam  m  i.
.shoulder  and  down  1.  arm,  which  felt  cold  and  numb ;
pain  <  at  4  a.m.  faint,  fluttering  sensation  m  stomach
and  1.  chest ;  sensation  of  gurgling  in  heart  region,
with  soreness  in  1.  side ;  lying  on  it  causes  severe  palpita-
tion and  pain  in  heart.

I  1  Difficult  breathing  on  ascending  stairs ;  a  deep  inspira-
tion, or  raising  1.  arm  suddenly,  caused  a  momentary,
acute,  stabbing  pain  in  middle  anterior  portion  of  fourth
intercostal  space  on  same  side;  heart  beats  slightly
accelerated;  some  time  previous  was  wet  for  several
hours.  .  ,

■  ■Organic diseases of heart, with sticking pam and

soreness ;  numbness  and  lameness  of  1.  arm.

■  ■Aching  in  1.  arm,  with  disease  of  heart.

■  ■Myalgia  cordis.

■  Pulse: accelerated,  weak,  faint  and  soft; trembling  or

imperceptible; sometimes quicker  than  heart's  beat;
irregular ;  affected  by  beer,  coffee  or  alcohol.
^  Outer  Chest. Numb  sensation  in  chest.

Pain  in  chest  as  if  sternum  were  pressed  inward.

■  Mvalgia  or  muscular  rheumatism  of  chest.

''Neck"' and  Back. ■■Stiff  neck  with  painful  tension  when

moving;  of  rheumatic  origin  ;  from  a  draft.
Pain  in  cervical  muscles  as  if  parts  were  asleep,  and  as  if

one  had  been  lying  for  a  long  time  in  an  uncomfortable

position,  toward  evening.
Hard  swelling  on  1.  side  of  neck  under  ramus  ot  lower

jaw  increased  to  size  of a  man's  fist,  so  large  that  it

turned  face  directly  to  one  side,  causing  chin  to  rest  on

r.  shoulder.
■  ■Swollen  or  inflamed  glands  of  neck,  with  red  streaks,  as

in  scarlet  fever.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  74

I  I  Carbuncle  on nape  of neck  near spinous  process  of

upper  cervical  vertebra;  swelling  brownish-red,  with
several  small  openings,  discharging  offensive-smelling
pus ;  great  pain  :  fever ;  sleep  disturbed.

I I  Pains  in  shoulders  and  back,  with  stiffness  as  from  a
sprain.

I  Pain  between  shoulders  on  swallowing  food.

Sticking  in  back  while  stooping,  in  evening.

Pressive  stitches  in  back,  <  while  walking  or  stooping
but  more  on  rising  up  again.

Constrictive  pain  in  dorsal  muscles,  while  sitting,  >  bend-
ing back,  <  bending  forward.

Violent  rheumatic  pain  between  scapulae,  neither  >  nor
<  by  motion  or  rest,  only  >  by  warmth,  <  by  cold.

I  Painful  tension  between  shoulder-blades.
llStiffness  in  small  of  back,  painful  on  motion.
Sensation  as  if  bruised,  in  r.  side  of  lumbar  vertebrae  and

in  small  of  back.

I I  While  sitting  small  of  back  aches,  as  after  long  stoop-
ing or  bending.

iiPain  as  if  bruised,  in  small  of  back,  whenever  he  lies
quietly  upon  it  or  sits  still ;  >  on  moving  about.

I  Pain  in  small  of  back,  on  grasping  it,  as  if  the  flesh  had

been  beaten.

I I  Heaviness  and  pressure  in  small  of  back,  as  if  one  had
received  a  blow,  <  while  sitting.

Pressure  as  with  a  cutting  edge,  across  small  of  back,
while  standing  or  bending  backward.

■  I  Pain  in  small  of  back,  <  when  sitting  still  or  when

lying ;  >  when  lying  on  something  hard,  or  from
exercise.
I  I  Sudden  acute  pain  in  small  of  back  while  lifting  a
light  board  so  that  he  could  raise  himself  only  with
difficulty;  next  day  paralysis  of  arms,  with  burning  on
urination,  scanty  discharge,  and  vesical  tenesmus.

■  Violent  pain  "  as  if  back  were  broken"  in  lumbar  region,

on  least  movement  or  coughing,  from  straining  back  by
lifting.

■  Lumbago;  pain  <  after,  not  during  motion.

I  I  Lumbar  pain  of  three  weeks  duration  after  a  strain;
great  pain  and  soreness,  <  after  getting  warm  in  bed
and  on  beginning  to  move.

I  I  Sensitive  spot  in  spine  between  shoulder-blades ;  when
spot  is  touched,  he  has  waterbrash,  afterward  nausea
and  vomiting;  easily  tired  and  then  can  swallow
nothing  without  vomiting  it  up  directly  ;  before  vomit-
ing, burning  sensation  in  stomach  and  between  shoulder-
blades; must  make  great  effort  to  vomit ; cannot  eat


75  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

meat,  it  distresses  him ;  numbness  of  middle  finger  of
r.  hand ;  has  not  done  a  day's  work  for  six  years,  on
account  of  weakness,  a  kind  of  paralytic  feeling  in  arms,
and  increased  pain  in  back  and  consequent  nausea;
<  in  damp,  rainy,  cold  weather,  particularly  east  wind ;
can  only  drink  coffee,  tea  makes  him  worse ;  vomits
cold  water  immediately ;  bowels  move  only  every  five
or  seven  days,  very  costive;  strained  himself  lifting  an
invalid  wife  eight  or  nine  years  ago,  but  felt  no  imme-
diate symptoms  after  it,  except  pain  in  back  ;  Spring  of
1862,  during  a  northeast  rainstorm,  he  endeavored  to
assist  in  moving  a  heavily  laden  team  of  lumber,  after
which  felt  something  giving  way  between  his  shoulders.

I  I  Violent  pain  in  head,  from  back  to  front  and  down
spine ;  lies  on  her  back,  head  and  back  drawn  back-
ward ;  slightest  move  or  touch  causes  excruciating  pain ;
pulse  slow ;  action  of  bowels  almost  paralyzed  ;  urine
voided  daily  but  slowly  ;  complete  sleeplessness ;  pain
in  paroxysms ;  caused  by  getting  wet. ^Spinal  irritation.

I  I  Great  pain  in  small  of  back;  <  in  bed,  >  on  pressure.
/^Spinal  irritation.

I  I  Severe  pain  over  crest  of  1.  ileum,  between  crest  and
posterior  superior  spine,  >  by  pressure  and  heat.
^Spinal  irritation.

llSpinal  membranes  inflamed,  even  myelitis;  from  get-
ting wet  or  sleeping  on  damp  ground.

Burning  feeling  in  loins.

■  Stiffness and  lameness  in  sacrum,  <  on  resting  after

exercise.

■  Curvature  of  dorsal  vertebrse.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Pressure  on  shoulders  like  a  heavy  weight.

Left  shoulder  seems  paralyzed.

Sensation  as  if  some  one  were  pressing  upon  1.  shoulder,
by  the  clavicle.

Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm  in  region  of  del-
toid muscle.

Severe  pain  at  top  of  1.  shoulder.

Tearing  in  shoulder  joint  and  on  top  of  scapula.

Shooting  inward  and  throbbing  in  left  shoulder.

Stitches  in  shoulders  while  lying,  >  on  moving  about.

■  Tearing  and  burning  in  shoulder,  arm  lame,  <  in  cold,

wet  weather,  in  bed,  and  at  rest.
I  I  Pain  in  muscles  of  1.  shoulder  and  arm,  also  in  bones

of  arm  while  joints  remain  unaffected ;  numb  sensation

about  hands  and  fingers,  after  a  wetting.
I  I  Strain  of  1.  shoulder  joint  very  painful  for  a  long  time ;

became  at  last  immovable;  sleepless  at  night.

■  Painful  swelling  of  axillary  glands;  suppurating.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  76

■  Trembling  of  arms  after  moderate  exertion.

■  Violent  tearing  pain  in  arm,  most  violent  while  lying

still.
The  arm  upon  which  he  rests  the  head  in  sleep  becomes

numb.
Shooting  pains  through  arms.

■  Drawing,  paralyzed  sensation  in  1.  arm,  at  night.

■  Sticking  and  drawing  in  1.  arm  extending  downward  to

tips  of  fingers.
Drawing  stitches  in  arms,  from  shoulders  downward.

■  Tensive  aching  pains  as  if  arms  were  luxated.

Pain  in  1.  upper  arm  as  if  muscles  or  tendons  were  unduly
strained,  when  limb  is  raised.

■  ■Numbness  or  aching  in  1.  arm,  with  heart  disease.
Cramplike  drawing  or  tension  in  elbow  joint.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  articular  structures,  especially

when  resulting  from  blows,  sprains,  etc.
Drawing  and  tearing  extending  from  elbow  joint  into  wrist.

■  Jerking  tearing  in  elbow  and  wrist  joints,  during  rest,

>  during  motion.
I  I  Loss  of  power  and  stiff'ness  of  forearms  and  fingers  on
moving  them.

■  Paralysis  of  arm,  with  coldness  and  insensibility.

i  I  Sudden  paralysis  of  1.  arm  while  in  open  air  on  a  rainy;
day ;  arm  cold  without  sensation  or  motion ;  pulse  on
affected  side  small,  almost  trembling ;  dull  headache  s
roaring  in  ears ;  lachrymation  and  pressure  in  eyes  a
from  sand  ;  dryness  of  gums  ;  offensive  taste  in  mouth
clean,  dark  red  tongue ;  diarrhoea  with  tenesmus  and
frequent  urging  to  urinate ;  restless  sleep ;  constant
chilliness ;  melancholy.

■  ■Erysipelatous  swelling  of  arms.

■  Pain  in  r.  wrist.

■  Sensation  on  upper  surface  of  1.  wrist  on  bending  it  as  if

it  had  been  sprained.

I  I  For  six  months  stiff  wrist  joint,  swollen  and  painful;
pain  <  after  rest  when  first  beginning  to  move  the
joint,  after  washing  in  cold  water,  by  cold  generally,
change  of  weather,  in  a  feather  bed,  by  exertion  in
morning  after  night's  rest,  and  in  evening.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  darting  through  wrist  joint  from  side
to  side  after  a  sprain.

1  I  Tenderness  of  carpal  articulation ;  could  not  bear  any
shaking  of  wrist  from  forearm,  or  any  pressure  over
articulation  of  wrist  or  any  sideway  motions  of  hand  ;
inflamed  state  of  articular  surfaces  of  wrist,  probably
of  synovial  membrane  ;  after  sprain.

Drawing  pain  in  palm  of  r.  hand.


77  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

•  Rheumatic  pains  in  hands.

I  I  Pains,  aching,  drawing  with  numbness;  began  in  r.
hand,  extended  to  all  parts ;  stiff  in  morning  on  begin-
ning to  move;  must  change  position  frequently  at  cost
of  pain  ;  <  after  midnight. (^Rheumatism.

I  Rheumatism  with  great  swelling  of  hands,  brought  on
by  wet  weather.

iHot  swelling  of  hands  in  evening.

I  i  Burning  in  palm  of  r.  hand  and  sensation  as  if  hand
were  being  held  in  hot  water,  <  in  rest,  in  cold,  holding
anything  cold,  but  particularly  from  cold  water,  and
from  midnight  toward  morning ;  >  from  motion,  let-
ting hand  hang,  warmth  and  warm  water  ;  at  3  a.m.
whole  hand  and  forearm  burn,  driving  her  nearly  to
distraction,  must  get  out  of  bed  and  walk  about  till
morning ;  hand  as  if  lame  and  during  day  often  "  goes
to  sleep  "  for  hours  ;  hand  dr}^  as  if  withered,  unless  it
is  rubbed  with  fat ;  must  constantly  carry  something
in  hand.

iRhagades  on  backs  of  hands.

Swollen  veins  on  hands.

I  Warts  particularly  on  hands  and  fingers.

I  Cold,  sweaty  hands.

■  Fingers  can  be  moved  only  with  pain,  on account  of

great  swelling.

Tearing  in  joints  of  all  fingers.

A  fine  sticking  pain  in  fingers.

Index  and  middle  fingers  of  one  hand  feel  numb  and
asleep  in  morning.

Severe  pain  at  phalanges  of  several  fingers,  about  mid-
way between  joints,  in  evening.

iWhen  grasping  anything,  feeling  as  if  pins  were  prick-
ing tips  and  palmar  surfaces  of  first  phalanges  of  fingers.

■  Crawling  as  if  asleep,  in  tips  of  fingers.

I  1  Strained  middle  joint  of  thumb  severely  eight  days
before ;  had  been  quite  sore  and  painful,  <  nights ;
could  not  use  it  without  increasing  painful  state.

■  Inflammatory  swelling  of  finger  tips  with  formication.
I  I  Acute  pain  in  middle  finger  of  r.  hand  while  working,

which  disappeared  as  he  continued  his  occupation ;
thereupon  a  sensation  of  numbness  and  formication
appeared  in  finger,  which  gradually  extended  along
median  nerve  to  elbow ;  this  sensation  grew  more  pro-
nounced from  day  to  day,  and  hand  began  to  lose  its
strength,  middle  finger  particularly  seeming  lamed.

■  ■Swelling  of  fingers.

■  Hangnails.

I  I  Eczema  impetiginoides ;  angry  eruption  on  r.  forearm,


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  78

extending  from  elbow  to  phalangeal  joints  ;  surface
raw  and  excoriated  and  covered  with  yellow  scabs  and
eliminates  a  sero-purulent  discharge ;  infiltration  of
areolar  tissue,  with  much  swelling ;  general  health
affected  ;  fever  at  night,  with  chilliness,  etc.

iChronic  psoriasis  covering  arms,  especially  left,  exterior
surface  of  arms  and  dorsa  of  hands ;  violent  itching,
but  not  the  cloud  of  branlike  scales.
** Lower  Limbs. Drawing  pain  in  r.  natis,  just  below  small
of  back,  >  on  pressure.

iPressive  pain  in  hip  joints  at  every  step,  and  a  paralyzed
sensation  in  anterior  muscles  of  thigh.

Tension  and  drawing  in  r.  hip.

I  Tension  in  1.  hip  joint  while  sitting.

■  When  lying  upon  side -hip  hurts,  and  when  lying  upon

back  small  of  back  hurts.

■  Tearing  and  drawing  from  hip  to  knee  while  walking  or

standing.

I I  Sciatica:  r.  side,  dull  aching  pain,  <  at  night,  in  cold
or  damp  weather ;  >  by  rubbing,  from  heat  and  when
warmed  by  exercise ;  numbness  and  formication.

I  I  Severe  attack  every  few  weeks,  crippling  him  for  days
at  a  time;  r.  thigh  and  hip  affected;  pains  <  when
keeping  still  and  on  attempting  to  move,  in  wet,  damp
weather ;  >  after  moving  around  and  from  warm  appli-
cations; attacks  brought  on  by  overwork  and  exposure.
^Sciatica.

I  I  Violent  tearing,  burning  pain  proceeded  from  tuberosity
of  r.  ischium,  followed  course  of  sciatic  nerve  and  spread
*  over  thigh,  knee  and  leg ;  generally  came  at  night,  in-

creased in  intensity  every  minute,  until  obliged  to  get
up  and  walk  about,  when  pain  went  off. ^Sciatica.

I  I  Acute  pain  in  1.  hip,  particularly  when  rising  from  a
seat,  pain  then  extending  toward  spine,  into  abdomen,
and  at  times  to  knee  ;  shortness  of  breath ;  pains  about
heart,  at  times  very  severe,  as  if  something  would  burst
in  chest,  hard  pressure  over  painful  spot,  and  entire
quietness  relieves. ^Sciatica.

1  I  Sciatic  neuralgia  for  twelve  years ;  pain  occupied  whole
1.  lower  limb,  particularl}^  posterior  part  of  thigh ;  draw-
ing, burning,  lancinating  pains,  <  at  night,  so  as  to
prevent  sleep  ;  also  <  in  cold  wet  weather.

I  I  Sciatica,  1.  side ;  intense  pains  gradually  increasing  in
severity ;  lightning-like  pains  shoot  through  limb  ;  sen-
sation of  coldness  in  limbs ;  <  in  rest,  >  from  continued
motion  ;  sleeplessness  at  night.

I  I  Sciatica  with  tenderness  about  knee  joint ;  pain  constant
when  walking ;  could  rise  from  bed  or  chair  only  with
great  effort  and  care.


79  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

I  I  Sciatica,  r.  side ;  pain  extremely  violent,  makes  him
scream,  <  when  at  rest;  >  by  walking  when  able  to
walk.

I  I  Stinging  pain,  <  during  rest  in  bed ;  has  to  turn  over,
or  change  position  of  leg  every  few  minutes,  which  re-
lieves pain  for  a  short  time ;  heaviness,  when  he  under-
takes to  run,  leg  lacks  power ;  cramps  in  calves  obliging
him  to  get  out  of  bed  and  walk  the  floor.

I  I  Excessive  nervousness ;  sleeplessness ;  inability  to  rest
in  any  position  ;  muscular  twitching  in  all  parts  of  body,
especially  in  affected  leg,  at  night. ^Sciatica.

I  1  Rheumatic  sciatica;  pain  <  after  rising  from  his  box
(he  is  a  coachman) ;  urine  thick.

I  iCoxalgia  in  r.  hip-joint  along  ischiatic  nerve  to  ankle  ;
>  from  warmth,  <  from  cold ;  first  motion  very  pain-
ful, gradually  getting  >  from  continued  motion.

I  Coxalgia :  involuntary  limping ;  pains  felt  mostly  in
knee ;  <  from  overexercise ;  <  at  night ;  with  length-
ening of  limb.

I  After  exposure,  pain  in  hips,  thence  to  lower  part  of
thigh,  only  on  external  side;  leg  lame  and  stiff";  pain
<  in  change  of  weather,  from  cold  and  exercise.

iPain  as  if  sprained  in  hip,  knee  or  ankle  joint.

I A  sense  of  stiff'ness  in  pelvic  articulations  on  first  attempt-
ing to  walk  ;  >  after  getting  warm  in  walking.

■  Much  pain  continues  in  r.  limb,  with  numbness  from  hips

to  feet.  ^ After  parturition.
I  I  Drawing  pain  with  crepitation  in  hip  joints;  pain  <  by
leaving  chair  after  long  sitting,  by  sitting  down  in  the
cold,  by  exerting  leg  during  walking,  in  the  Autumn
and  by  change  of  weather ;  >  from  warmth  of  stove,  in
sun,  and  by  continued  gentle  motion ;  leg  is  so  lame
that  he  is  obliged  to  take  hold  of  the  pantaloons  near
knee,  in  order  to  lift  it  and  .move  it  on ;  when  limping
in  this  manner  the  leg  was  always  bent  in  the  knee-joint,
and  every  attempt  to  extend  it  caused  pain,  complete
extension  was  impossible;  the  limb  being  stiff  in  hip
joint  every  motion  was  painful  and  imperfect;  after
exposure  to  snow-storm  while  overheated.  ^Rheuma-
tism.

■  Traumatic  cases  of  inflammation  of  hip  joint;  frequently

after  Arnica,  in  bad  effects  from  contusion  and  from
straining  of  capsular  ligaments  and  of  tendons  and  mus-
cles of  thigh,  with  swelling  and  great  pain  in  affected
parts ;  or  when  caused  by  exposing  perspiring  skin  to
sudden  cold,  or  by  getting  wet,  or  from  lying  on  wet
ground  after  body  has  been  in  perspiration ;  aching,
drawing,  tearing,  tensive  pains  with  a  sensation  as  if


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  80

skin  around  diseased  parts  were  too  tight ;  pain  <  in
recumbent  posture.
I  I  Four  years  ago  was  thrown  from  a  wagon  and  much
injured  about  hips  and  small  of  back ;  was  very  lame
and  unable  to  move  much  or  sit  up  any  length  of  time;
has  been  in  feeble  health  ever  since ;  it  has  affected  her
very  much  to  stand  or  walk  since  the  injury;  thinks
she  has  not  been  able  to  bear  her  weight  on  her  limb
since,  without  more  or  less  suffering  through  the  hips ;
cannot  endure  walking,  even  for  a  short  distance,  with-
out suffering  for  a  week  or  more,  and  at  times  is  con-
fined to  bed  in  consequence ;  riding  or  any  jarring
affects  her  in  much  the  same  way ;  much  tenderness  to
pressure  about  heads  of  both  femora  and  edges  of  ace-
tabulum, joint  of  coccyx  and  sacrum ;  pressing  head  of
femur  against  acetabulum  produces  much  pain  and  ach-
ing, and  she  feels  it  so  constantly  while  bearing  any
weight  upon  limbs ;  sleep  restless  and  unquiet,  espe-
cially first  part  of  night.

1  I  Man  of  sanguine  temperament,  had  been  injured  by  the
caving  in  of  a  gravel  bank,  injuring  his  r.  hip;  no  sleep
for  three  nights;  unable  to  move  or  have  the  leg  stirred;
groaning  under  severe  pain  and  suffering ;  whole  hip
and  thigh  quite  hot  and  inflamed.

I  Aching  pain  in  both  hip  joints  at  every  step,  and  a  para-
lytic feeling  in  anterior  muscles  of  thighs.

Right  rectus  cruris  muscle  very  sensitive  on  pressure,  as  if
bruised.

Tension  on  posterior  surface  of  thigh  while  riding  one  leg
over  the  other.

Tension  in  1.  thigh,  extending  downward  from  hip-joint.

Jerking  and  tearing  in  r.  thigh,  somewhat  above  knee.

Tearing  pain  in  middle  of  outer  portion  of  thigh,  while
sitting,  >  on  motion.

Tearing,  dragging  pains  in  muscles  of  1.  thigh.

iThe  pain  runs  in  streaks  down  limbs  with  every  evac-
uation.

1  I  From  a  severe  wetting  all  over,  was  seized  with  terrible
pains  in  lower  extremities,  paroxysmal  in  character,
driving  him  to  desperation  ;  could  remain  in  no  position,
but  resembled  a  dancing  monkey.

]^^  Lameness  and  stiffness  and  pain  on  first  moving  after
rest,  or  on  getting  up  in  the  morning,  >  by  continued
motion.

I  I  After  becoming  thoroughly  chilled  a  year  and  a  half
ago  during  a  long  railroad  journey,  legs  had  gradually
become  stiff  and  weak ;  numbness  of  feet  with  tingling;
every  now  and  then  attacks  of  painful  stiffness  in  back,


81  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

which  would  lay  her  up  for  two  or  three  weeks ;  urine
thick. ^Rheumatic  paralysis.
1 1  Restlessness  of  lower  limbs  in  bed  at  night,  >  by  motion.

■  Spasmodic  twitching  in  limbs  when  stepping  out.
Jerking  in  thigh,  with  tremor  of  knees.

1 1  Paralysis  of  lower  extremities.

•  Lower  extremities  feel  bruised,  they  are  so  weary.

■  Heaviness  of  lower  limbs.

■  Powerlessness  of  lower  limbs,  she  can  hardly  draw  them

up  ;  nurse  has  to  move  them.  ^After  j^arturition.
I  1  On  rising  from  seat  after  sitting  about  four  hours,  loss
of  power  of  co-ordination  in  lower  extremities,  staggers,
takes  longer  strides  than  he  intends,  steps  higher  than
usual ;  feels  strangely ;  symptoms  return  after  sitting
or  lying  down.

■  Scrofulosis  and  rachitis ;  tensive  feeling  in  diseased  limb^

as  if  tendons  were  too  short ;  bruising  pains,  causing
patient  to  scream  ;  <  when  touched.
I  I  For  some  years  sw^elling  of  feet  in  warm  weather ;  finally
limbs  began  to  enlarge ;  no  evidence  of  any  organic
disease;  both  legs  much  swollen  and  pit  upon  pressure;
prickling  heat  in  limbs  and  after  walking,  surface  of
them  becomes  red  and  hot ;  on  first  attempting  motion
limbs  are  stiff,  but  become  more  supple  after  continued
exercise;  tongue  yellowish,  with  red  points  at  tip.
^Anasarca.

■  After  scarlet  fever  anasarcous  condition  of  lower  limbs,

with  diminished  secretion  of  urine.

■  Painful  sw^elling  above  knee.

A  pulling  with  tension  in  tendons  on  inner  side  of  r.  knee,

causing  uneasiness  in  foot. '
Pains  under  patella.
Burning  pain  in  knee  joints  and  lower  extremities.

■  Tearing  in  knee  and  in  ankle,  <  during  rest.
A  stitch  across  knee  on  standing  up  after  sitting.

A  sticking  from  within  outward  in  side  of  knee,  while
walking.

■  ■Stiff'ness,  especially  of  knees  and  feet.

■  Tension  in  knee,  as  if  it  were  too  short.

Heaviness  like  a  hundredweight,  in  hollows  of  knees  and
in  calves,  so  that  he  could  not  move  feet  along.

A  crawling  with  tension  in  tendons  on  inner  side  of  r.
knee.

I  I  After  catching  cold,  swelling  of  knee,  followed  by  sup-
puration; after  eight  weeks  surgical  treatment,  there
were  around  the  patella  three  openings  with  elevated
edges,  from  which  an  unhealthy  thin  pus  was  discharged ;.

VOL.  IX. — 6


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  82

fever ;  continuous  pain ;  sleeplessness;  looks  as  if  he  had
consumption.

I  I  Swelling  of  knee,  with  violent  gnawing  pains.  ^Rheu-
matic gout.

I  I  Groaning  with  pain  in  1.  knee  joint,  which  extends
down  leg;  begged  to  have  the  limb  cut  off.  ^Acute
rheumatism.

iShooting  and  deep  cutting  pains  in  leg.  ^Acute  rheu-
matism.

■I  I  Pain  in  r.  knee ;  <  when  straining  knee ;  often  a
cracking  in  joint  when  stretching  limb ;  exudation  in
joint ;  change  of  wreath er,  especially  rain  or  storm  <
pain,  when  at  rest  there  is  no  pain.  ^Hydrarthrus
genu.

1  I  Painful  swelling  in  popliteal  space  of  one  limb,  oc-
casioned by  a  cold,  preventing  extension  of  leg ;  pain
in  tumor,  particularly  after  walking  and  exercising  leg.

I  I  After  exposure  to  dampness,  swelling  of  finger  joints,
followed  by  a  pale,  rather  painless,  somewhat  fluctuating
swelling  of  r.  knee ;  leg  flexed,  cannot  be  extended ;
emaciation ;  paleness  of  face  ;  no  fever.  ^  White  swelling
of  knee.

I  I  Erysipelatous  inflammation  and  swelling  of  both  knee
joints;  second  sound  of  heart  impaired.

•11  Great  heaviness,  weakness  and  weariness  of  legs.
Great  inclination  to  stretch  out  leg  and  foot,  in  morning.

I I  Aching  pains  in  legs,  inability  to  rest  in  any  position
but  for  a  moment.

Tension  in  calves  while  walking  and  a  sensation  as  if  the

hamstrings  were  too  short.
Cramps  in  calves  after  midnight,  while  lying  in  bed  and

while  sitting  after  walking.
Pain  in  inner,  lower  and  posterior  part  of  calf  of  leg,  felt

-during  earlier  portion  of  a  walk,  whenever  the  heel  was

raised  by  the  action  of  the  calf;  >  after  walking  a  few

minutes.
'On  rising  from  a  chair,  sudden  and  severe  pain  as  from  a

sprain,  at  insertion  of  ligamentum  patellse  into  tibia.
A stitch in hamstrings  just above calves, on violent

motion,  on  rising  from  a  seat  and  on  touch.
Stitches  just  below  r.  knee.
•I  Pain  like  a  tingling,  in  tibise  at  night,  while  feet  are

crossed  ;  she  is  constantly  obliged  to  move  legs  back  and

forth,  and  on  this  account  is  unable  to  sleep.

I  When  walking  legs  feel  as  if  made  of  wood.

'I  I  Paroxysmal  pains  in  legs  from  getting  wet,  especially
when  warm  and  sweaty.

II  Cramps  in  legs  and  feet,  must  walk  about.


83  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

I  Ulcers : on legs, discharging profusely ; on dropsical

legs,  discharging  serum.

I I  Intolerable  itching  of  legs  and  feet  at  night;  old  rash.

I  1  Erysipelas,  red,  itching,  phlegmonous  swelling,  with
vesicular  eruption  extending  like  a  band  around  r.
ankle ;  large  open  ulcer  on  ankle ;  pain  <  after,  not
during  motion  {Rhusrad.  cured  after  failure  of  Rhus  tox.).

I  I  Four  weeks  ago,  while  running  fast,  was  suddenly  taken
with  a  very  acute  pain  in  ankle-joint ;  pain  >  when  at
rest,  but  is  felt  as  soon  as  he  attempts  to  walk  fast,
obliging  him  to  stand  still.

I  I  Sprain  of  ankle,  could  not  touch  foot  to  ground  for  six
weeks,  or  expose  it  to  dampness,  or  be  out  nights.

1  Aching  pains  in  ankles  and  hollow  of  feet  on  walking,
so  that  he  must  lie  down  after  the  least  walk.

■  Swollen  about  ankles  after  sitting  too  long,  particularly

in  traveling ;  feet  swell  in  evening.
I  I  Ulcer  as  large  as  a  silver  dollar  on  internal  malleolus,
with  itching,  stinging,  darting  pains ;  <  after  motion.

■  Swelling  of  feet,  painless  to  touch  in  evening.
Weariness  of  feet  so  that  she  could  not  easily  go  up  stairs.
Deadness  and  numbness  of  lower  part  of  r.  foot,  which

seemed  made  of  wood.

■  Heaviness  and  tension  of  feet  while  sitting.

Feet  painful  as  if  sprained  or  wrenched,  in  morning  on

rising.
A  paralytic  drawing  in  whole  of  foot,  while  sitting.
Crawling  in  feet  in  morning,  while  lying  in  bed  and  after

rising.
Aching  pains  in  hollow  of  feet.
Pains  in  both heels  as  if  stepping  upon  pins,  on first

standing,  in  morning.
Sharp  pain  in  heels  at  times,  like  running  nails  under

skin.
Stitching  in  heels  when  stepping  upon  them.
Spasmodic  contraction  in  inner  side  of  sole  of  foot,  >  by

stretching  it  out  and  bending  sole  upward.
Stitches  in  soles  of  feet  as  if  he  were  walking  upon  needles,

in  evening.

■  Fetid  perspiration  of  feet  in  men  of  a  rheumatic  ten-

dency much  exposed  to  weather  and  devoted  to  hard
manual  labor.

■  Corns,  with  soreness  and  burning.

■  Eczema  on  inner  side  of  thighs  after  vaccination,  much

itching  and  thirst.

■  Eczema  rubrum ;  leg,  from  knee  joint  to  toes,  exhibits  a

dark,  purplish  aspect  and  emits  a  musty  odor,  together
with copious  serous  discharge ; intense  burning  and


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  84

itching,  particularly  on  exposure  to  cold  ;  extreme  irrita-
tion of  mind  ;  general  debility ;  sleeplessness  ;  loss  of
appetite  ;  distress  when  eating  ;  constipation  ;  headache.
I  I  Child,  set.  1|,  has  had  hives,  which  were  very  itchy,
scratching  developed  them  into  large  blisters ;  very
uneasy  and  restless  at  night;  has  now  erysipelas  on
1.  leg,  which  is  swollen  and  dark  purple.

I  1  Erythema nodosum  on  legs  ; large  painful  protuber-

ances over  each  tibia.
^* Limbs  in General. iGi-eat  weakness in limbs; they
tremble.
All  the  limbs  feel  stiff  and  paralyzed  during  and  after
walking,  with  a  sensation  of  a  hundredweight  on  nape
of  neck.

I I  Sensation  of  stiffness  on  first  moving  limb,  after  rest.

1 1  Limbs  upon  which  he  lies,  especially  arms,  fall  asleep.
A  sensation  similar  to  a  trembling  in  arms  and  lower

extremities,  even  while  at  rest.
1 1  Drawing  or  tearing  pains  in  limbs  during  rest.
1 1  Pains  as  if  bruised,  or  sprained,  in  joints.
1 1  Cracking  of  joints  when  stretched.

■  Tension,  stiffness  and  stitches  in  joints  ; <  when  rising

from  a  seat.

>  I  Rheumatoid  pains  in  limbs:  with  numbness  and  tin-
gling ;  joints  weak,  stiff,  or  red ;  shining  swelling  of
joints,  stitches  when  touched ;  <  on  beginning  to  move,
after  12  p.m.,  and  in  wet,  damp  weather  or  places ;  >
from  continued  motion.

1 1  Pain,  swelling  and  stiffness  of  joints  from  sprains,  over-
lifting  or  overstraining.

1  I  Inflammatory  rheumatism,  from  exposure  to  cold,  fol-
lowed by  paralysis  of  r.  side ;  pains  almost  constant  in
r.  side ;  marked  periodicity,  coming  on  at  10  p.m.  and
lasting  until  6  a.m.  ;  <  in  winter  and  before  a  storm,
during  a  storm  pains  over  whole  body  ;  intense  pain
on  moving  after  rest,  but  continued  motion  relieved.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  articular  structures,  especially

when  resulting  from  blows,  strains,  etc.

■  Synovitis;  spurious  anchylosis.

■  Swelling  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Phlegmonous  erysipelas  of  limbs.

■Eruption  on  limbs,  with  intense  itching,  <  at  night,
and  when  putting  hands  in  hot  or  cold  water.
^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest :  tearing  pains  in  cranial
bones  <;  pain  in  jaw;  involuntary  urination  ;  stiffness
of  joints ;  stitches  in  chest  <  ;  tearing  and  burning  in
shoulders  <  ;  tearing  in  elbow  and  wrist  joints  < ;
sciatica  <  ;  stiffness  and  lameness  in  sacrum  <  ;  tear-


85  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

ing  in  knee  and  ankle  joint  <;  no  pain  in  knee;
tearing  and  drawing  in  limbs ;  weakness  of  limbs.

Lying :  cough ;  vertigo ;  headache  <  ;  diarrhoea  >  ;  ex-
treme vertigo ;  shooting  through  head  <  ;  cough  <  ;
pain  in  small  of  back  <  ;  stitches  in  shoulders ;  tearing
in  arms  <  ;  symptoms  return.

Lying  on  back :  colic  >  with  legs  elevated ;  obstructive
dysmenorrhoea  <  ;  pain  in  small  of  back  <  ;  pain  in
head  and  down  spine ;  small  of  back  hurts ;  rheumatic
fever  <  ;  trembling  of  paralysis  >.

Lying  in  bed  :  cramps  in  calves.

Lies  on  back  constantly :  erysipelas.

Lies  on  its  face  with  hands  to  head :  sore  eyes.

Lying  on  hard  floor  with  pillow  under  back  :  backache  >.

Ljdng  on  side :  hip  hurts.

Lying  on  1.  side :  causes  palpitation  and  pain  in  heart.

Side  on  which  she  lies :  beating  in  temple ;  scalp  sensitive ;
soreness  of  abdomen  <.

Lying  upon  limbs :  they  fall  asleep ;  no  sweat  on  parts.

Head  low:  heaviness  <.

Head  raised:  shooting  pains  through  head  >.

Must  hold  head  to  relieve  weight  in  it.

Bending  head  backward :  pain  in  occiput  >  ;  pain  in
head  and  down  spine.

Bending  back :  pain  in  dorsal  muscles  >  ;  pressure  in
small  of  back.

Bending  forward  :  pain  in  dorsal  muscles  <.

Sitting:  headache  <  ;  hunger  >  ;  pains  in  abdomen  <  ;
extreme  vertigo ;  cough  <  ;  palpitation  ;  pain  in  dorsal
muscles ;  small  of  back  aches ;  heaviness  and  pressure
in  small  of  back  <  ;  tension  of  1.  hip-joint ;  symptoms
return ;  after  walking,  cramps  in  calves ;  too  long,
ankles  swollen ;  heaviness  and  tension  of  feet ;  paralytic
drawing  in  whole  foot.

Sitting  bent :  stitches  in  chest.

Could  not  sit  still :  on  account  of  general  uneasiness,  must
turn  in  every  direction  on  chair  and  move  limb.

Rising  from  seat :  pain  in  hip  < ;  loss  of  power  of
co-ordination  in  lower  extremities ;  severe  pain  at  in-
sertion of  ligamentum  patellee  into  tibia ;  stitch  in
hamstrings;  tension,  stiffness  and  stitches  in  joints.

Rising  from  bed  :  vertigo ;  eructations  <.

Rising  from  stooping:  stitches  in  back  <.

Stooping :  vertigo  <  ;  nosebleed ;  pain  in  back ;  stitches
in  back  <.

Standing :  vertigo  <  ;  laborlike  pains  and  pressure  in
abdomen;  pressure  in  small  of  back;  tearing  from  hip
to  knee ;  after  sitting,  a  stitch  across  knee  ;  pain  in  both


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  86

heels; could  not  stand  erect,  or  easily  lift  r.  foot  or
propel  it  forward.

Raising  1.  arm  suddenly :  causes  stabbing  pain  in  fourth
intercostal  space  ;  pain  in  arm.

Bending  wrist :  as  if  sprained.

Riding  one  leg  oyer  other:  tension  of  thigh.

Bending  sole  of  foot  upward:  contraction  >.

Hanging  down  feet :  caused  urging  to  stool.

Change  of  position  :  >  pain  in  back  of  neck  ;  frequent,  in
cholera  infantum  ;  constant,  to  >  menorrhagia  ;  >  pain
in  leg ;  rheumatic  fever ;  during  typhoid ;  zona,  neces-
sitates.

Beginning  to  move:  soreness  in  abdomen  worst;  pelvic
articulations  stiff;  shoulders  and  cervical  muscles  stiff,
lame ;  stiffness  of  cardiac  region ;  lumbar  pain  < ;
pain  in  wrist  joint  <  ;  sciatica  <  ;  limbs  stiff;  rheu-
matism in  limbs  <.
"  Motion :  stupefaction  in  head,  with  tingling  and  pains  in
limbs  >  ;  rapid,  >  pain  in  temple;  of  eyes,  painful;
of  eyes,  <  pain  in  head;  headache  >;  pain  in  jaw;
cracking  of  jaw  ;  stiffness  of  joints  >  ;  painful  tension
of  neck  ;  stiffness  of  back  painful ;  pain  in  small  of
back  >  ;  lumbago  <  after,  not  during;  slightest,  causes
excruciating  pain  in  back ;  stitches  in  shoulders  >  ;
tearing  in  elbow  and  wrist  joints  >  ;  loss  of  power  and
stiffness  of  forearms  and  fingers ;  sciatica  >  ;  continued,
>  coxalgia;  gentle  continued,  >  pain  in  hip  joints;
restlessness  of  legs  >  ;  violent  stitch  in  hamstrings ;
pain  in  ankle,  <  after,  not  during ;  pain  in  ulcers  on
feet  <^ ;  continued,  >  rheumatism ;  produces  cold  feel-
ing ;  causes  shuddering ;  slight  chills.

Swallowing  food  :  pain  between  shoulders.

Stretching :  limb,  cracking  sound  in  knee  joint ;  incli-
nation for,  leg  and  foot ;  sole  of  foot,  contraction  >  ;
cracking  of  joints.

Stretching :  soreness  of  abdomen.

Turning :  vertigo  <  ;  pain  in  back  of  neck  <  ;  soreness
in  abdomen  <.

Swinging  arm  back  and  forth :  >  pain  in  shoulder.

Stepping  out :  spasmodic  twitching  in  limbs.

Stepping :  brain  feels  loose.

At  every  step:  pain  in  hip  joints;  stitches  in  heels.

Walking :  vertigo  < ;  burning  in  forehead ;  pains  in
abdomen ;  bearing  down  in  pelvis ;  vertigo  >  ;  heart
feels  weak  after ;  stitches  in  back  <  ;  tearing  from  hip
to  knee ;  >  sciatica ;  surface  of  feet  becomes  red  and
hot;  sticking  in  side  of  knee;  tumor  of  knee,  pains;
tension  in  calves ; a  few  moments,  pain  in  heel  >  ;


87  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

pain  in  ankle  returns ;  pain  in  ankles  and  hollows  of
feet ;  all  limbs  feel  stiff  and  paralyzed.

Must  walk  bent  over :  pain  in  abdomen.

Must  shift  about  to  get  relief :  prolapsus.

Could  remain  in  no  position :  terrible  pain  in  legs ;  tin-
gling in  tibise.

Cannot  remain  quiet  a  moment.

Inclination  to  move  affected  parts,  continued  motion:
>  soreness  of  nipples.

Ascending  stairs :  difficult  breathing.

While  running  fast  sudden  acute  pain  in  ankle  joint.

Exercise :  pain  in  cranial  bones  >  ;  stiffness  of  cervical
muscles  >  ;  violent,  uncomplicated  hypertrophy ;  pain
in  small  of  back  >  ;  trembling  of  arms  ;  stiffness  and
soreness  of  muscles  pass  off.

Unwonted  exertion :  paralysis.

Overexertion:  palpitation;  coxalgia  <.
^''Nerves,  ll Great  restlessness:  inclination  to  move  affected
parts  ;  at  night ;  has  to  change  position  frequently  ;  it
seemed  as  if  something  forced  him  out  of  bed ;  could
not  sit  still  on  account  of  internal  uneasiness,  but
was  obliged  to  turn  in  every  direction  on  chair  and
move  limbs.

■  Weakness:  with  desire  to  lie  down;  over  whole  body;

weary  as  if  deprived  of  sleep  ;  of  limbs,  mostly  during
rest ;  in  morning  does  not  wish  to  rise  and  dress ;  feels
as  if  sinking  through  bed  ;  as  if  bones  ached  ;  con-
stantly desires  to  sit  or  lie  down  ;  especially  on  walking
in  open  air.

1 1  Great  debility  with  soreness  and  stiffness,  <  on  begin-
ning to  move ;  >  from  continued  motion,  but  soon
fatigued,  requiring  rest  again.

1 1  Numbness:  in  extremities,  with  previous  twitching  and
tingling  in  them  ;  in  the  parts  on  which  he  lies.

■  Paresis  of  limbs  with  numb  sensation  and  difficulty  of

moving  the  back,  in  consequence  of  a  wetting.
1  I  Paresis  of  lower  extremities,  with  commencing  amau-
rosis so  that  patient  could  not  distinguish  large  objects.

I  I  Painless  paresis  in  legs  in  a  girl  aet.  14.

I I  Paralysis  :  after  unwonted  exertion  ;  after  parturition  ;
rheumatic,  from  getting  wet  or  lying  on  damp  ground  ;
from  sexual  excesses;  after  ague  or  typhoid;  parts
painless,  or  painfully  stiff  and  lame,  with  tearing,  tin-
gling and  numbness.

I  I  Sudden  paralysis  of  lower  half  of  body,  in  a  girl  who
was  being  treated  by  an  extension  apparatus  for  curva-
ture of  spine  ;  obstinate  constipation  ;  legs  numb,  cold,
emaciated.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  88

I  'On  third  day  after  a  natural  labor,  the  mother  being
only  thirteen  years  and  six  months  old,  r.  side  became
entirely  paralyzed ;  there  was  an  apparent  total  aboli-
tion of  functions,  of  voluntary  motion  and  special  sen-
sation ;  could  not  articulate  so  as  to  be  understood.

I  Hemiplegia,  right-sided  ;  sensation  as  if  "  gone  to  sleep."

I  I  Paraplegia  in  a  woman  following  an  attack  of  apoplexy
five  years  previously;  she  was  unable  to  stand  or  rise  up.

I A  cute  spinal  paralysis  of  infants.

I  I  Sits  upon  a  stool  and  keeps  it  in  constant  motion  ;  can-
not remain  quiet  a  moment ;  head  and  body  hang  for-
ward, the  former  oscillating  continually ;  violent  trem-
bling of  extremities  ;  cannot  raise  himself  into  erect
sitting  posture,  or  hold  anything,  so  that  he  must  be
fed  ;  on  attempting  to  walk  legs  are  extremely  unsteady,
although  he  can  stand  a  short  time,  the  knees  mean-
while shaking  constantly ;  if  he  takes  a  few  steps  falls
over  his  feet  and  is  not  able  to  rise  again  without  assist-
ance; trembling  >  in  horizontal  position;  during
sleep,  frequent  spasmodic  starting  unnoticed  by  him-
self; muscles  flabby;  emaciation;  constipation;  urine
clear  as  water ;  pulse  small,  soft,  70. ^Paralysis  agitans.

I  I  After  falling  down  steps  the  following  condition  grad-
ually developed  :  lies  upon  abdomen,  with  head  re-
tracted so  that  it  almost  touches  spine;  face  pale,  dis-
torted, covered  with  cold  sweat;  goitre-like  swelling  of
neck  due  to  tonic  spasm  of  cervical  muscles ;  spine
drawn  from  normal  position  ;  crackling  sound  on  bend-
ing lumbar  vertebrae  ;  great  swelling  of  bone  in  region
of  sacrum ;  complete  paralysis  of  lower  extremities  ;
retention  of  urine,  or  discharge  of  bloody  urine  in
drops  with  vesical  tenesmus ;  retention  of  stool ;  no
appetite  ;  great  thirst ;  fever  with  evening  exacerbation ;
but  little  sleep,  and  if  he  falls  asleep  is  restless  and  dis-
turbed by  frightful  dreams ;  violent  jerks  through  body
awake  him  frequently.

llTwitchings  of  limbs  and  muscles.

I  I  Chorea-like  twitching  ;  skin  red,  hard,  itching,  <  from
scratching  ;  great  anguish.

i  I  Chorea  with  pruritus  vulvae  with  intense  itching,  red-
ness and  hardness.

■  Chorea  caused  by  a  cold  bath,  getting  drenched  or  after
repression  of  measles.

1  I  Epilepsy  after  childbirth,  brought  on  by  a  fall  immedi-
ately before  delivery.
^^  Sleep. 1 1  Spasmodic  yawning,  yet  not  sleepy,  with  stitching
and  pain  as  from  dislocation  of  jaw.

I  Great  sleepiness  and  lassitude  after  eating.


89  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

I  Heavy  sleep,  as  from  stupor.

I  Somnolence  with  snoring,  muttering  and  grasping at

flocks.
When  intoxicated  with  beer,  sleeps  with  mouth  open  and
head  thrown  back.

I I  Restless  at  night,  has  to  change  position  frequently.

At  night  it  seemed  as  if  something  forced  him  out  of  bed.
After  midnight,  restless  slumber  filled  with  fretful,  dis-
agreeable thoughts  and  events.

■  Restless  sleep,  with  tossing  about,  raising  and  throwing

off  covers.

Was  unable  to  sleep  after  3  a.m.,  rose  very  anxious,  restless
and  weak,  constantly  trembled,  especially  in  knees.

Unable  to  fall  asleep  after  3  a.m.,  but  after  awhile  fell
asleep  and  then  dreamed  very  vividly  and  on  awaking
it  seemed  as  if  he  had  not  slept.

No  sound  sleep  after  midnight;  she  tossed  about  uneasily
on  account  of  a  distressing  sensation  as  if  whole  body
were  burning,  without  thirst ;  with  dreams  fuH  of  anx-
ious agitations.

She.  did  not  sleep  for  half  the  night,  was  despondent,  ap-
prehensive and  full  of  anguish  about  the  heart.

■Sleepless  for  four  nights;  she  could  not  remain  in  bed.

■  Sleeplessness:  from  pain,  more  before  12  p.m.,  must  turn

often  to  find  any  ease.

As  soon  as  he  wished  to  fall  asleep  his  business  came  to
him  in  anxious  dreams.

Fearful  dreams,  for  example,  that  the  world  was  on  fire,
with  palpitation  on  awaking".

I  I  Dreams  of  great  exertion ;  rowing,  swimming,  walking,
climbing  or  working  hard.
^^  Time. 3  a.m.  :  sleepless  after.

4  A.M.:  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm  <.

Morning:  as  if  intoxicated;  headache  <;  tearing  pain
near  eye  <  ;  lids  agglutinated,  photophobia  and  lachry-
mation  ;  nosebleed  ;  tongue  coated ;  soreness  in  walls  of
abdomen ;  cough  <  ;  on  rising,  drawing  and  stitching
pains  in  1.  nipple  through  to  scapula ;  anxious  ;  after
night's  rest  stiffness  of  wrist  joints  <  ;  inclination  to
stretch  leg  and  foot ;  feet  painful  as  if  sprained;  crawl-
ing in  feet  while  lying  in  bed  and  after  rising ;  pain  in
heels ;  sweat.

9  A.M. :  chill  came  on.

10  A.M. :  drowsy,  weary,  with  yawning.

All  day:  child  lies  with  face  resting  on  floor  (ophthalmia).
During  day  : dry  cough  ;  anxious  palpitation  ;  tenacious

expectoration.
1  P.M.:  burning  fever  <.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  90

2  P.M. :  red  flush  all  over  body.

5  P.M. :  paroxysms  appear.

Twilight:  anxiety,  timidity  <.

Evening :  inclination  to  weep  <  ;  depression  ;  eyes  <  ;
facial  neuralgia  < ;  biting  itching  of  face  < ;  tooth-
ache ;  oppression  in  stomach ;  hoarseness  < ;  till  mid-
night cough  < ;  hacking  cough ;  tension  and  short
breath ;  pain  in  cervical  muscles ;  pain  in  back  ;  stiff-
ness of  wrist  joints  <  ;  feet  swell ;  stitches  in  soles  of
feet;  fever  <  toward,  creeping  coldness  all  over;  heat;
chill  <  ;  fever  commencing  with  a  short  chill ;  quartan
fever  in  paroxysms,

7  P.M. :  as  if  blood  were  running  cold  through  veins ;  severe
chill.

10  P.M. :  jerking  toothache.

Night :  great  apprehension ;  severe  itching  of  scalp ;
crusta  lactea  <  ;  pain  in  eyes  <  ;  iritis  <  ;  tearing  pain
near  eye  <  ;  otalgia ;  sneezing ;  nosebleed  ;  delirium ;
biting  itching  of  face ;  shooting  toothache  <  ;  awoke
with  dryness  in  mouth ;  fever  <  ;  nausea  <  ;  colic  <  ;
involuntary  stool ;  involuntary  urination ;  pain  in
shoulders  <  toward  3  a.m.  ;  menorrhagia  <  ;  oppres-
sion of  chest ;  restless  ;  sleepless  from  pain  in  shoulder ;
paralyzed  sensation  in  arm ;  sciatica  <  ;  coxalgia  <  ;
restlessness  of  legs  ;  tingling  in  tibise ;  itching  of  legs
and  feet;  pain  between  shoulders  and  stretching  of
limbs  during  fever ;  rheumatic  fevers  <  ;  general  per-
spiration ;  itching  of  rash  in  joints  <  ;  itching  <.

12  P.M.:  rheumatism  <.

About  midnight :  quotidian  fever.

After  midnight :  cramps  in  calves;  restless  slumber ;  great
restlessness;  itching  of  rash  <.
'^Temperature  and  Weather. Sensitiveness  to  cold  open
air.

Sufferings  during  raw,  cold  weather  and  the  prevalence  of
northeasterly  winds.

Sufferings  after  drinking  cold  water.

1 1  Bad  consequences  from  getting  wet,  especially  after
being  heated.

From  cold  bathing,  convulsive  twitches.

Heat :  pain  over  crest  of  1.  ilium  >  ;  sciatica  >  ;  gives
general  relief.

Exposed  to  heat:  tearing  pains  in  small  of  back.

Hot  application  :  pain  in  eyes  >  ;  pain  in  teeth  >  ;  shoot-
ing toothache  >  ;  sciatica  >.

Warm  weather :  swelling  of  feet.

Warmth  :  headache  >  ;  of  bed,  <  sensitiveness  of  scalp ;
biting-itching  of  face ;  pain  in  jaw  >  ;  rheumatic  pains


91  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

between  scapulae  >  ;  coxalgia  >  ;  of  stove  >  pains  in
hip  joints ;  burning  and  itching  of  erysipelas ;  crusta
lactea  <,

Getting  warm  in  bed:  lumbar  pain  <.

Getting  warm  from  exercise  :  sciatica  > .

Feather  bed  :  stiffness  and  pain  in  wrist  joints  <.

Whenever  he  puts  his  hands  out  of  bed  he  is  seized  with
a  convulsive  cough.

Uncovering  body  :  influenza  <  ;  cough.

In  house : melancholy,  ill-humor,  anxiety  <  ;  chilliness.

Open  air  :  melancholy  >  ;  lachrymation  ;  facial  neuralgia
<  ;  during  rain  sudden  paral3^sis  of  1.  arm  ;  walking,
weakness;  acrid  lachrymation.

Change  of  weather:  stiffness  of  wrist  joints  <.

Damp,  stormy  weather :  pain  in  cranial  bones  <  ;  con-
junctivitis < ;  paralysis  of  muscles  of  eyeball  from
exposure  to  cold  or  wet ;  prolapsus  <  ;  uterine  com-
plaints; paralytic  feeling  in  arms  <; rheumatism  <.

Before  a  storm  :  inflammatory  rheumatism  <.

Putting  hands  in  hot  or  cold  water :  eruptions  on  limbs  <.

Exposure  to  wet:  tearing  pain  in  region  of  kidney;
oedema  of  face  and  feet; burning  and  sticking  in  skin.

From  getting  wet :  causes  pain  in  1.  temple ;  liability  of
taking  cold  ;  iritis;  conjunctivitis;  arthritic  ophthalmia ;
colic  <  ;  urine  voided  slowly;  amenorrhoea;  amenia;
difficult  breathing  and  pain ;  pneumonia ;  spinal  irri-
tation ;  spinal  membranes  inflamed ;  pain  in  shoulder
and  arm ;  terrible  pains  in  lower  extremities;  paroxysmal
pains  in  legs;  paresis  of  limbs;  paralj^sis;  erysipelatous
inflammation.

Washing  in  cold  water:  pain  in  wrist  joint.

Getting  chilled:  from  sea  bath,  polypus  of  uterus;'  on  a
long  journey,  legs  become  weak  and  stiff.

Lying  on  damp  ground  :  paralysis.

Marching  through  moist  ground  with  bare  feet :  diarrhoea.

Cold  or  dampness:  mydriasis;  ptosis;  influenza;  rheu-
matic pain  between  scapulge  ;  tearing  in  shoulder ;  pain
in  wrist ;  sciatica;  coxalgia;  swelling  of  finger  joints;
erysipelatous  inflammation  <;  urticaria  <.

Exposure  to  cold :  eczema  rubrum  itches  and  burns ;  in-
flammatory rheumatism ;  erysipelatous  inflammation  <.

Cold  air:  pains  in  eyelid  <.

Cold  drinks:  desire  for;  vomits  water  immediately.

Cold  application :  of  hand,  toothache  > ;  shooting
toothache  <.

Ice-water:  causes  pain  in  stomach  and  nausea.

After  exposure  to  snowstorm  when  overheated :  rheuma-
tism.


EHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  92

East  wind  :  <  paralytic  feeling  in  arms  and  weakness.

In  Autumn:  dragging  pains  in  hip  joints.

In  Winter:  inflammatory  rheumatism  <.
*Tever.  l Chilliness:  in  house,  toward  evening,  creeping
coldness  all  over ;  and  heat  in  evening,  face  seemed  very
hot,  though  cheeks  were  cold  to  touch,  and  pale,  breath
hot;  in  back  and  head,  heat  on  anterior  part  of  body;
as  if  cold  water  were  poured  over  him,  or  as  if  blood  were
running  cold  through  veins,  7  p.m.,  feels  cold  when  he
moves.

I  Chill :  over  back,  <  evenings ;  with  pains  in  limbs,  rest-
lessness ;  face  pale,  or  alternating  red  and  pale ;  begins
in  the  legs,  usually  in  thighs,  or  between  scapulae.

■  Shuddering  on  moving  or  uncovering.

■  Sensation  of  internal  coldness  in  limbs.
Coldness  on  1.  tibia.

I  Stretching  and  pain  in  limbs,  shivering  over  whole  body,
with  much  thirst,  cold  hands,  heat  and  redness  of  face.

■  Shivering,  heat  and  perspiration  over  body  at  same  time.

I  I  Severe  chill  at  7  p.m.,  as  if  dashed  with  ice-cold  wa-
ter, or  as  if  blood  were  running  cold  through  vessels ;
cold  when  he  moves;  <  eating  and  drinking;  be-
came hot  by  lying  down  and  covering  up;  pain  between
shoulders  and  stretching  of  limbs  during  fever  at  night,
sweat  in  morning.

■  ■  Cough  during  chill ; dry,  teasing,  fatiguing.
I  I  Great  restlessness  during  chill.

During  chill,  pains  in  limbs,  and  during  fever  twitchings.

■  Chill  increased  by  drinking.

■  Heat :  with  great  thirst;  after  the  chill,  with  sweat  which

relieves ;  general,  as  from  hot  water,  or  hot  blood  run-
ning through  veins ;  general,  with  slight  chills  during
motion,  face  livid;  urticaria  breaks  out  over  whole  body,
with  violent  itching,  <  by  rubbing.

■  During  fever,  nettlerash;  thirst,  drinking  little  and  often.

■  Drowsy,  weary,  with  yawning;  10  a.m.  excessive  heat,

without  thirst.

■  Evening  fever,  with  diarrhoea.

Sweat:  with  pains,  often  with  violent  trembling;  even
during  heat,  except  on  face;  with  violent  itching  of
eruption;  sour;  musty,  putrid;  with  or  without  thirst;
from  warm  drinks;  profuse  in  morning;  profuse,  odor-
less, not  exhausting;  general,  except  on  head.

■  ■During  sweat:  sleep;  urticaria  passes  ofi'  with  violent

itching.

■  Night  sweat,  with  miliary  itching  eruption.

■  Suppressed  foot  sweat.

Checked  perspiration  by  rain  or  dampness,  when  patient


93  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

has  become  warm  from  exercise  and  has  been  in  a  free
perspiration.

I  Dry,  teasing,  fatiguing  cough,  coming  on  sometimes  hours
before,  and  continuing  during  chill. ^Ague.

I  I  Chill  comes  on  about  9  a.m.;  during  chill  seemed  almost
frantic,  frequently  changing  his  position  in  bed,  groan-
ing and  complaining  of  intense  drawing,  tearing,  crampy
pains  in  muscles  of  both  hips  running  dow^n  posterior
thighs  to  calves  of  legs;  fever  intensely  high,  pulse  ac-
celerated but  weak,  face  and  whole  body  red;  slight
thirst  during  both  chill  and  fever,  most  during  chill ;
fever  followed  by  sweat  and  headache. ^Ague.

I  I  Fever  commencing  with  a  short  chill  in  evening ;  every
day  the  chill  and  heat  being  mixed  up  at  the  commence-
ment, the  fever  continuing  during  the  night  with  rest-
lessness and  tossing  about  in  bed  and  a  profuse  sour
sweat  toward  morning;  prostration,  great  weakness,  loss
of  appetite,  vomiting  and  inability  to  take  food  during
day. ^Intermittent  fever.

I  I  Chill  every  morning,  3  a.m.,  beginning  in  r.  thigh,  and
thence  spreading  oyer  whole  body;  during  chill,  dry,
hacking  cough;  immediately  after  chill,  vomiting  fol-
lowed by  fever;  during  fever,  thirst;  no  sweat;  great
exhaustion. ^Ague.

I  1  Paroxysms  appear  about  5  p.m.,  preceded  by  great  yawn-
ing and  pain  in  the  maxillary  joint,  as  if  dislocated;
chill  long  and  severe,  with  shivering  and  chattering  of
teeth;  during  chill  pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  bruised,
compelling  him  to  change  position  constantly,  also
peculiar  drawing  in  arms,  with  formication  and  numb-
ness of  fingers;  heat  great,  with  great  dryness  of  lips
and  mouth,  but  lies  quietly,  without  drinking,  in  a  half
stupid  condition;  answers  questions  slowly  and  despond-
ingly ;  there  also  occur  regularly  two  or  three  diarrhoeic
stools  with  some  colic;  passes  night  in  sleep,  disturbed
only  by  thirst  and*  sweat;  spleen  enlarged.  ^Quotidian
ague.

I  I  Ague :  double  tertian ;  diarrhoea  during  day  of  parox-
ysm; high  fever  with  lassitude  and  somnolence;  spleen
enlarged;  loss  of  appetite ;  constipation;  had  taken  much
Quinine.

I  I  First  chill  at  5  a.m.,  second  at  6  a.m.;  with  chill  pain  in
limbs,  great  restlessness  and  stretching;  fever  with  thirst,
drinks  little  but  often;  colic,  diarrhcea;  great  nausea
and  vomiting  of  bile;  during  fever,  nettlerash. ^Ague.

I  I  Chills  coming  on  every  afternoon,  followed  by  heat  and
then  sweat;  dry,  racking  cough  during  chill. ^Ague.

I  I  Quartan  fever :  paroxysm  came  on  in  evening,  with  pre-


KHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  94

dominating  chill;  much  thirst  during  chill  and  heat:
throbbing  pain  in  forehead  before  and  after  heat;  chronic
miliary  eruption  on  back  of  1.  hand.

I  I  Chill  7  P.M.,  very  cold  even  to  shaking,  fever  and  sweat
in  regular  succession;  no  thirst. ^Ague.

I  I  Quotidian  fever  about  midnight,  with  pressure  and
swelling  at  pit  of  stomach  and  anxious  palpitation
during  day.

I  I  First  headache  (throbbing  in  temples),  afterward  chilli-
ness with  thirst  and  tearing  pains  in  limbs  as  from
fatigue  ;  afterward  general  warmth,  with  slight  chills
during  motion  and  livid  face  ;  finally  profuse,  sour-
smelling  perspiration.

I  I  Tertian  fever  with  nettlerash,  which  disappears  after
attack  ;  during  apyrexia  burning  and  redness  of  scle-
rotica.

I  I  Ague  commencing  in  r.  side  (first  arm,  then  leg  gets
cold).

iHydroa  on  upper  lip. ^Ague.

I  Rheumatic  fevers  prevalent  and  characterized  by  draw-

ing, tearing  pains  in  limbs ;  <  at  night,  with  constant
change  of  position,  <  lying  on  back  ;  lame  feeling  in
lower  extremities ;  frequent  desire  to  urinate ;  fever  <
at  night ;  vertigo,  occipital  pain ;  tension  in  nape  of
neck  and  between  shoulders;  diarrhoea;  erysipelas
bullosum.
ilSlow  fevers;  tongue  dry  and  brown,  or  red  as  if  it  had
been  skinned ;  sordes  on  teeth  ;  bowels  loose ;  great
weakness;  powerlessness  of  lower  limbs,  can  hardly
draw  them  up ;  great  restlessness  after  midnight ;  must
move  often  to  get  relief.

I I  Acute  diseases  take  on  a  typhoid  form.  ^Dysentery.
^Peritonitis. ^Pneumonia. ^Scarlatina. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  For  nine  days  great  weakness  and  mental  dejection;
loss  of  appetite ;  vertigo ;  confusion  of  head  ;  sleepless-
ness ;  attacks  of  fever  returning  every  afternoon,  con-
sisting of  coldness,  followed  by  heat  lasting  for  a  long
time  and  abundant  sweat ;  delirium  at  night  of  eighth
day;  on  ninth  day  fever;  face  red  ;  tongue  dry,  red ;
breathing  quickened,  sharp;  pulse  88;  abdomen
slightly  tympanitic ;  spleen  enlarged,  reaching  to  an-
terior border  of  ribs ;  no  stool  for  three  days ;  urine
scanty,  turbid ;  skin  moist;  several  small  red  spots  on
chest,  disappearing  on  pressure  of  finger ;  vertigo ;
roaring  in  ears  ;  confusion  and  heat  of  head  ;  pressive
pain  in  region  of  forehead ;  dryness  of  mouth  and
throat ;  pappy,  bitter  taste ;  loss  of  appetite ;  great
thirst; abdomen painful to touch; feeling  of  great


95  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

weakness;  general  feeling  of  illness;  sleeplessness  on
account  of  many  and  perplexing  dreams,  occurring  at
moment  lie  falls  asleep. /^Typhoid  fever.
II Shivering followed by heat; feels  himself very  ill;
pressive  pain  in  occiput ;  weariness  and  aching  in  all
the  limbs ;  want  of  sleep ;  on  third  day  temperature,
especially  of  head,  elevated ;  skin  bedewed  with  per-
spiration ;  face  very  red  ;  tunica  albuginea  of  a  yellow-
ish  color; lips dry; tongue dry and coated; voice
rough  and  hoarse ;  some  small  red  spots  on  chest,  dis-
appearing under  pressure  of finger,  and  some  small
pustules ;  respiration  quicker,  sharper  ;  an  occasional
dry  cough  ;  heart  normal,  pulse  108 ;  abdomen  tympan-
itic ;  spleen  reaching  nearly  to  anterior  border  of  ribs ;
stools liquid ; is uneasy ; reflects with difficulty ;
answers very slowly but correctly ; complains of a
feeling  of  great  prostration  and  debility  ;  sleeplessness
and  dreamy  doziness;  aching  of  whole  body;  oppres-
sion of  chest  and  slight  burning  behind  sternum ;  in-
clination to cough ; abdom.en sensitive to touch.
^Typhoid  fever.
• liTyphoid fever: patient  is of  a mild  temperament;
delirium  mild  and  not  violent ;  at  times  may  exhibit  a
disposition  to  jump  out  of  bed  or  try  to  escape,  but
when  more  or  less  conscious,  manifests  little  petulance
or  irritability ;  mental  or  physical  restlessness,  constantly
tosses  about  bed,  first  lying  on  one  side  then  on  other,
one  moment  sitting  up,  the  next  lying  down  ;  or,  at  be-
ginning  of disease, wants to lie  perfectly quiet on
account  of  the  great  weakness,  feels  completely  pros-
trated, is  indifferent  to  everything,  this  sense  of  debility
is  out  of  proportion  to  all  other  symptoms ;  hallucina-
tions;  fears  he  will  be  poisoned,  refuses  medicine  and
food  ;  as  the  stupor  progresses,  he  answers  very  slowly,
reluctantly,  or  petulantly,  but  is  not  violent ;  violent
headache,  as  of a  board  strapped  to  forehead,  often
associated  with  rush  of  blood  to  head  and  sudden  flush-
ing of  face ;  epistaxis,  which  relieves  headache,  blood
dark  ;  pneumonic  cough,  dyspnoea,  rust-colored  sputum;
tongue  dark-brown,  dry,  cracked,  cracks  gape  consider-
ably and  even  bleed  at  times;  sometimes  tongue  and
mouth  are  covered  with  a  brownish  tenacious  mucus  ;
at  other  times  tongue  takes  imprint  of  teeth ;  tongue  shows
a  triangular  red  tip;  disturbance  of  stomach  and  bowels  ;
diarrhoea  with  yellowish-brown stools  of  cadaverous
odor  ;  involuntary  stool  during  sleep  ;  urine  escapes  in-
voluntarily,  and sometimes leaves a reddish stain;
tearing  pains  in  limbs  with  almost  intolerable  back-


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  96

ache ;  if  he  falls  asleep  he  is  restless  and  dreams  of
roaming  over  fields  and  undertaking  arduous  labors ;
sometimes  dreams  of  business  of  day,  surface  of  body
dry  and  hot  and  often  redder  than  natural  ;  red  spots
on  skin  ;  if  he  has  sweat,  it  is  copious  and  sour-smelling
and  is  accompanied  by  a  miliary  rash ;  abdomen  tym-
panitic ;  r.  iliac  region  and  region  of  spleen  especially
sensitive ;  spleen  swollen ;  stools  scanty  and  greenish,
unattended  by  tenesmus;  in  women  uterine  hem-
orrhages may  appear,  but  give  no  relief  to  symptoms  ;
symptoms  of  pulmonary  congestion  appear ;  rales  all
through  chest ;  lower  lobes  especially  affected  ;  cough
at  first  dry,  then  more  frequent  and  loose,  with  expec-
toration of  blood-streaked  sputa.
^* Attacks,  Periodicity.  Periodical  attacks:  of  headache;
profuse  bleeding  from  anus.

Alternating :  stool  and  constipation  ;  red  and  pale  face.

Every  few  minutes  :  changes  position  of  leg  on  account
of  pain.

Daily:  for  three  months  pain  in  temple  and  orbital  region  ;
thin  stools  eight  or  ten  times ;  chill  and  heat  mixed  at
commencement.

Every  morning  3  a.m.  :  chill.

From  morning  till  5  p.m.  :  headache.

Every  afternoon  :  attacks  of  fever.  ^

Nightly  :  diarrhoea.

For  four  w^hole  nights :  sleepless.

For  several  successive  nights:  awoke  after  one  hour's
sleep  with  pain  in  1.  temporal  region.

For  tw^enty-four  hours :  neither  speaks,  eats,  nor  drinks.

Between  4  and  6  p.m.  :  thin  stools.

5  to  7  P.M. :  pain  in  eye  <.

From  10  p.m.  to  6  a.m.  :  inflammatory  rheumatism  lasts.

For  six  days :  swelling  on  1.  lower  lid.

Every  3,  5  or  7  days :  bowels  moved.

For  nine  days  :  great  weakness  and  mental  dejection.

Every  week  :  paroxysm  of  headache.

For  three  weeks :  lumbar  pain.

Every  few  weeks  :  sciatica.

For  a  month  :  sweat  in  second  sleep.

For  six  weeks  :  could  not  touch  foot  to  ground  on  account
of  sprain.

For  six  months :  stiff  wrist  joints.

Every  year  on  13th  of  May  :  seized  with  burning  itching
of  skin,  lasting  twenty-four  hours.

For  six  years:  has  not  worked  on  account  of  weakness
in  arms.

For  twelve  years  :  sciatica.


97  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

^^ Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pressure  in  temple
above  and  beliind  orbit;  burning  pain  in  eye;  oph-
thalmia ;  oedematous  swelling  around  eye ;  conjunc-
tivitis granulosa ;  burning  in  canthus ;  upper  lid
swollen;  pain  in  eyeball ;  biting  in  eye;  inflammation
of  e3^e ;  ptosis  of  eyelid  ;  side  of  face  covered  with  vesi-
cles ;  side  of  face  covered  with  thick  crust ;  lid  of  eye
red,  swollen ;  inflammation  of  tonsil ;  tonsil  covered
with  yellow  membrane  ;  pain  in  hypochondriac  region  ;
like  a  knife  in  abdomen  ;  side  of  abdomen  very  tense ;
stitches  below  ribs;  side,  an  inch  below  navel,  sensitive
spot ;  metastasis  of  mumps  to  testicle ;  pains  in  ovarian
region;  pain  in  limb;  catching  pains  in  chest;  bron-
chophony ;  acute  pain  in  chest ;  erysipelas  on  dorsum
of  hand  ;  side  of  lumbar  vertebrae  as  if  bruised  ;  pain
in  wrist;  pain  in  nates;  tension  in  hip;  sciatica;  tear-
ing from  tuberosity  of  ischium  spreading  over  thigh,
knee  and  leg;  coxalgia  in  hip  joint;  rectus  cruris
muscle  ver37^  sensitive ;  jerking  and  tearing  in  thigh
pulling  and  tension  in  tendons  on  inner  side  of  knee
crawling  with  tension  in  tendons  on  inner  side  of  knee
fluctuating  swelling  of  knee  ;  stitches  just  below  knee
eruption  like  a  band  around  ankle;  deadness  and
numbness  of  lower  part  of  foot ;  paralysis  of  side;  con-
stant pain  in  side  ;  chill  begins  in  thigh,  ague  com-
mencing in  arm  and  leg ;  zona,  pain  going  down  leg.
Left:  pain  in  temple  and  orbital  region;  nostril  ex-
coriated; eye  felt  enormously  swollen;  phlyctenules  on
edge  of  cornea;  conjunctiva  red  and  studded  with
small  ulcers  ;  ulcers  on  cornea  ;  eruption  on  lower  lid;
swelling  on  lower  lid  ;  lobule  of  ear  swollen  ;  parotitis ;
hot,  burning  beneath  nostril ;  mumps  ;  pressive  drawing
in  hypochondrium  ;  coldness  and  numbness  of  foot  and
arm;  terrific  pain  in  shoulder;  pain  in  nipple  through
to  shoulder  ;  stitches  in  side  ;  numbness  of  arm  ;  flutter-
ing sensation  in  chest ;  lameness  and  aching  in  arm  ;
hard  swelling  on  side  of  neck ;  shoulder  seems  para-
lyzed ;  pain  over  crest  of  ileum  ;  as  if  some  one  were
pressing  upon  shoulder;  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder
and  arm ;  severe  pain  in  top  of  shoulder  ;  shooting  and
throbbing  in  shoulder ;  pain  in  muscle  of  shoulder  :
strain  of  shoulder  joint;  paralyzed  sensation  in  arm  ;
sticking  and  drawing  in  arm  down  to  finger  tips  ;  as  if
muscles  of  upper  arm  were  strained  ;  numbness  and
aching  in  arm  ;  sudden  paralysis  of  arm,  wrist  as  if  it
had  been  sprained  ;  tension  in  hip ;  acute  pain  in  hip  ;
in  whole  lower  limb ;  tension  in  thigh ;  tearing  in
muscles  of thigh  ; acute  rheumatism in knee  joint;

VOL.  IX.— 7.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  98

erysipelas  on  leg;  tibia  cold;  chronic  miliary  eruption
on  back  of  hand  ;  felt  a  shock  in  external  orbital  in-
teguments ;  excoriation  at  inner  side  of  nates ;  skin
peeled  from  hand  entirely;  wheals  more  numerous  on
index  finger ;  on  thigh  there  is  a  round  elevated  red
blotch  ;  enlargement  of  parotid.

Right  to  1. :  erysipelas  travels.

Left  to  r. :  vesicular  erysipelas  of  scalp ;  erysipelas  in  face.

From  front  to  back  :  pain  in  head.

From  within  outward :  stitching  in  knee.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  intoxicated ;  as  of  a  weight  behind  r.
orbit ;  as  if  she  were  going  to  fall  forward  or  backward  ;
as  of  a  board  strapped  across  forehead ;  brain  as  if
loaded ;  as  if  brain  were  torn ;  as  if  muscles  in  back  of
head  were  screwed  together;  back  as  if  sprained;  as  if
occipital  tissues  were  screwed  together ;  as  of  a  veil  be-
fore eyes ;  as  if  it  were  difficult  to  move  lids ;  as  if
jaw  would  break ;  as  if  teeth  were  being  torn  out ;
teeth  feel  too  long  and  too  loose ;  as  if  asleep  ;  as  if
pharynx  were  inactive  or  paralyzed ;  stomach  as  if
overloaded ;  as  of  a  stone  in  stomach ;  as  if  pit  of
stomach  were  swollen  or  drawn  together;  hypochon-
driac region  and  abdomen  as  if  beaten ;  as  of  a  knife
in  r.  abdomen  ;  as  if  something  were  torn  loose  in  abdo-
men ;  as  if  a  lump  lay  like  a  pressing  heavy  weight  in
abdomen  ;  limb  as  if  constricted  ;  feet  and  ankles  as  if
asleep ;  as  if  one  side  of  rectum  had  grown  up ;  as  if
everything  would  come  out  of  rectum  ;  shoulders  as  if
sprained  ;  as  jf  head  were  swelling  out ;  as  if  something
would  be  torn  out  of  chest;  as  if  breath  were  stopped
at  pit  of  stomach  ;  as  if  not  able  to  draw  a  long  breath ;
as  if  shoulder  would  fly  to  pieces  ;  as  if  air  became  im-
prisoned in  epigastrium  ;  as  if  sternum  were  pressed
inward  ;  as  if  cervical  muscles  were  asleep  ;  as  if  one
had  been  lying  in  an  uncomfortable  position ;  as  if
bruised  in  r.  side  of  lumbar  vertebrae  and  in  small  of
back ;  as  if  flesh  of  small  of  back  had  been  beaten  ;  as
if  back  were  broken  ;  as  if  some  one  were  pressing
upon  1.  shoulder  ;  as  if  arms  wer^e  luxated ;  as  if  muscles
and  tendons  of  1.  upper  arm  were  unduly  strained ;  as
of  sand  in  eyes ;  as  if  wrist  had  been  sprained ;  as  if
hand  were  held  in  hot  water;  hand  as  if  lame;  hand
dry,  as  if  withered ;  as  if  pins  were  pricking  point  and
palmar  surfaces  of  first  phalanges  of  fingers  ;  finger
tips  as  if  asleep;  as  if  something  would  burst  in  chest;
hip,  knee,  or  ankle  joint  as  if  sprained  ;  as  if  skin
around  diseased  parts  were  too  tight ;  r.  rectus  cruris
muscle  as  if  bruised ;  as  if  tendons  of  limb  were  too


99  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

short;  as  if  knee  were  too  short;  as  if  hamstrings
were  too  short;  legs  as  if  made  of  wood;  lower  part  of
r.  foot  as  if  made  of  wood;  feet  as  if  sprained  or
wrenched ;  heels  as  stepping  upon  pins ;  as  if  run-
ning nails  under  skin  in  heels;  as  if  w^alking  upon
needles  ;  as  of  a  hundredweight  on  nape  of  neck  ;  as  of
a  trembling  in  arms  and  legs  ;  joints  as  if  bruised ;  as
if  sinking  through  bed;  as  if  bones  ached;  as  if  jaw
were  dislocated  ;  as  if  something  forced  him  out  of  bed  ;
as  if  whole  body  were  burning ;  as  if  cold  water  were
poured  over  him ;  as  if  blood  were  running  cold
through  veins ;  as  if  maxillary  joints  were  dislocated ;
as  if  back  were  bruised  ;  as  if  tongue  had  been  skinned;
as  of  a  board  strapped  to  forehead ;  as  if  flesh  were
torn  loose  from  bones,  or  as  if  bones  were  being  scraped ;
pains  as  if  sprained  in  outer  parts ;  as  if  inner  parts
were  grown  together ;  as  if  something  in  inner  parts
were  torn  loose ;  face  and  hands  as  if  covered  with
suggillations.

Pain :  in  1.  temple  and  orbital  region ;  in  back  part  of
head;  in  eyes;  in  r.  eyeball;  in  temporal  region  of  1.
side,  thence  to  head,  cheeks  and  teeth  ;  in  maxillary
joints ;  in  back  of  neck ;  in  back ;  in  stomach ;  in
region  of  ascending  colon ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  glans  penis ;
in  r.  limb  ;  in  lower  part  of  chest ;  in  1.  shoulder  and
arm  ;  in  heart ;  in  cervical  muscles  ;  in  shoulder  and
back  ;  between  shoulders  on  swallowing  ;  in  muscles  of
1.  shoulder  and  arm,  also  in  bones  of  arm ;  in  r.  wrist ;
in  hips ;  down  thighs ;  in  streaks  down  limbs  with
every  evacuation  ;  under  knee-pan;  in  1.  knee  joint;  in
inner,  lower  and  posterior  part  of  calf  of  leg ;  in  heels ;
in  jaw  ;  about  umbilicus.

Terrific  pain  :  in  1.  shoulder.

Terrible  pains  :  in  lower  extremities.

Violent  pain  :  in  abdomen  ;  in  lumbar  region  ;  in  head  ;
in  1.  leg.

Intense  pain  :  in  1.  leg.

Acute  pain  :  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  in  middle  anterior  por-
tion of  fourth  intercostal  space,  1.  side ;  in  small  of
back  ;  in  middle  finger  of  r.  hand  ;  in  r.  hip  ;  in  ankle
joints.

Great  pain  :  in  small  of  back.

Severe  pain :  in  jaw  ;  in  r.  hypochondriac  region ;  over
crest  of  ileum ;  at  top  of  1.  shoulder ;  at  phalanges  of
several  fingers ;  sudden,  at  insertion  of  ligamentum
patellae  into  tibia.

Sharp  pain  :  in  eye  ;  from  eyes  into  head ;  in  heels.

Tearing : at  small  of  back ; in periosteum of cranial


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  100

bones;  in  neighborhood  of  diseased  eye;  in  region  of
brows  and  malar  bones  ;  in  face  ;  in  teeth  ;  down  thighs,
in  region  of  kidneys;  in  chest;  in  shoulder  joint  and
on  top  of  scapula  ;  in  shoulder  ;  violent,  in  arm  ;  from
elbow  joint  into  wrist ;  in  joints  of  all  fingers ;  from  hip
to  knee  ;  from  r.  ischium  following  sciatic  nerve  in  r.
thigh  ;  in  middle  of  outer  portion  of  thigh  ;  in  muscles
of  1.  thigh  ;  in  knee  and  in  ankle.

Bursting  pain :  in  head.

Deep  cutting  pains  :  in  leg.

Lancinating  pain  :  in  1.  leg.

Beating  pain:  in  limbs;  in  temple.

Darting  pains  :  in  ulcers.

Jerking  pain  :  in  teeth  ;  in  abdomen ;  in  elbow  and  wrist
joints ;  in  r.  thigh.

Catching  pains :  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Throbbing :  in  temples  ;  from  teeth  into  temples  and  jaws  ;
violent,  in  epigastric  region ;  in  1.  shoulder ;  centrif-
ugally  in  inflamed  integuments  of  face  and  forehead.

Digging  pain  :  in  glands  beneath  angle  of  lower  jaw.

Gnawing  pain  :  in  swelling  of  knee.

Ulcerative  pain  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Laborlike  pains :  in  abdomen.

Shooting  pain :  in  teeth  ;  in  eyelid  ;  up  rectum  ;  through
head  ;  in  1.  shoulder  ;  through  arms ;  in  leg.

Stupefying  pain  :  in  head.

Stitches:  in  head  to  ears,  root  of  nose  and  malar  bones;
in  eyes  and  temples ;  below  r.  ribs ;  in  stomach ;  in
chest  and  sides  of  chest;  in  1.  side;  in  heart;  in
shoulders  ;  just  below  r.  knee  ;  in  soles  of  feet ;  in  joints.

Stitching  pains  :  in  throat ;  in  1.  nipple  through  to  scapula;
on  dorsum  of  r.  hand;  in  heels.

Drawing  stitches  :  in  arm.

Pressive  stitches :  in  back.

A  stitch :  across  knee ;  in  hamstrings  just  above  calves.

Stinging  pain  :  in  leg.

Sticking  pain  :  in  throat;  in  vagina;  in  chest ;  in  1.  side  ;
in  back ;  in  1.  arm  ;  in  fingers ;  in  side  of  knee.

Constrictive  pain  :  in  dorsal  muscles.

Bruised  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  throat;  in  limb.

Burning  pain :  in  knee  joints  and  lower  extremities ;  in
corns;  of  sclerotica;  in  eruption  around  mouth  and  nose.

Drawing  pains  :  in  cheek  and  head  ;  in  limbs ;  in  region
of  brows  and  malar  bones  ;  in  face  ;  in  1.  nipple  through
to  scapula  ;  in  1.  arm  ;  cramplike,  in  elbow  joint ;  from
elbow  joint  into  wrist ;  in  palm  of  r.  hand  ;  in  r.  natis ;
in  hips ;  from  hip  to  knee  in  1.  leg;  in  hip  joints;  paral-
ytic, in  whole  foot ;  in  arms.


101  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

Rheumatic  pain  :  violent,  between  scapulae  ;  in  1.  shoulder
and  arm  and  in  region  of  deltoid  muscles ;  through
wrist  joints ;  in  hands.

Pressing  pain  :  in  eyes ;  in  stye ;  in  glands  beneath  angle
of  jaw ;  in  hip  joints  ;  in  region  of  forehead  ;  in  occiput.

Dull  pain  :  in  occiput,  vertex  and  forehead.

Tensive  aching  pains  :  in  arms.

Aching:  in  occipital  protuberances;  in  eyes;  in  articula-
tion of  r.  lower  jaw;  in  teeth;  in  glans  penis;  in  bones  ;
of  1.  arm;  in  elbow  joint;  in  r.  limb;  in  legs;  in
ankles  and  hollows  of  feet;  of  whole  body.

Paroxysmal  pains  :  in  legs.

Cramplike  pain  :  in  articulation  of  jaw.

Cramp  :  in  calves  ;  in  legs  and  feet.

Jerking:  in  thigh.

Stinging:  in  throat  when  swallowing;  in  tonsils;  in
stomach;  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce;  in  ulcers;  in
skin.

Burning:  in  forehead;  in  eye;  in  and  beneath  eyes;  in
inner  canthus,  r.  eye ;  in  eyelid  ;  in  swollen  lids;  beneath
nostril ;  in  face ;  of  eruption  around  mouth  and  nose  ;
in  whole  r.  side  of  abdomen ;  behind  sternum ;  in
small  of  back;  in  urethra;  in  stomach  and  between
shoulder  blades;  in  loins;  in  shoulder;  in  dorsum  of  r.
hand  ;  in  palm  of  r.  hand,  forearm  and  hand ;  in  1.  leg ;
of  skin ;  in  pustules  on  chin ;  in  ulcers.

Burning  rawness :  in  larynx.

Burning  itching :  here  and  there  ;  of  skin.

Biting :  in  r.  eye  ;  in  vulva ;  on  lower  lids.

Excoriation:  feeling  of,  on.  inner  side  of  1.  natis.

Soreness:  of  head;  of  nostrils;  of  tongue;  in  abdomen  ;
of  navel ;  in  walls  of  abdomen  ;  in  back  and  hypo-
gastrium;  of  vagina;  in  chest;  in  1.  side;  of  lumbar
region ;  in  corns.

Pricking :  from  teeth  into  jaws  and  temples ;  in  swollen
lids.

Prickling  heat :  in  limbs.

Tenderness  :  of  carpal  articulation  about  knee  joint.

Gnawing  sensation  :  in  teeth.

Dragging:  of  cardiac  region;  in  muscles  of  1.  thigh.

Pressive  drawing:  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Tingling :  in  head ;  in  limbs ;  in  stomach ;  in  chest ;  of
feet ;  in  tibia ;  in  limbs  ;  in  skin.

Tickling:  in  throat;  in  air  passages;  in  bronchia  ;  under
sternum.

Pressure:  at  heart;  behind  eyes;  in  r.  temple;  on  chest
and  about  heart;  in  throat  when  swallowing;  in  rec-
tum; in  abdomen;  in  small  of  back;  on  shoulders;
in  eyes.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  102

Tension  :  of  face ;  across  chest ;  in  intercostal  muscles  ;
of  neck ;  painful,  between  shoulder  blades ;  in  elbow-
joint  ;  in  r.  hip  ;  in  1.  hip  joints ;  on  posterior  surface  of
thigh  ;  of  diseased  limb  ;  in  tendons  on  inner  side  of  r.
knee;  of  knee;  of  calves;  of  feet;  in  joints;  of  nape
of  neck  and  between  shoulders.

Constriction :  in  rectum.

Heaviness:  of  head;  of  lids;  in  small  of  back;  of  lower
limbs;  in  hollows  of  knees  and  calves;  of  legs;  of  feet.

Fulness :  of  stomach.

Anxiety:  in  chest.

Oppression  :  in  stomach  ;  of  chest.

Dryness:  of  mouth;  of  tongue;  of  throat;  of  gums;  of
eyes.

Restlessness :  of  lower  limbs.

Pulsation  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Trembling  :  of  arms  ;  of  knees.

Tremulous  feeling :  about  heart.

Fluttering  sensation  :  in  stomach  and  1.  chest.

Gurgling  sensation  :  in  heart  region.

Swashing,  jarring  sensation:  in  brain.

Lameness :  of  1.  arm  ;  of  sacrum  ;  of  leg.

Paralytic  feeling:  in  arms;  in  1.  shoulder;  in  anterior
muscles  of  thighs.

Weakness  :  of  low^er  limbs.

"Weariness :  of  legs ;  of  feet.

Stiffness  :  of  lids  ;  of  jaws  ;  in  back  of  neck ;  of  joints ;
in  back  and  limbs ;  of  cardiac  region  ;  of  shoulder  and
back ;  in  small  of  back ;  of  sacrum  ;  of  forearms  and
fingers;  in  pelvic  articulation;  painful,  of  back;  of
knees  and  feet ;  in  joints.

Numbness :  of  1.  arm  and  foot ;  from  hips  to  feet ;  in  1.
chest ;  of  finger ;  of  hands  and  fingers  ;  from  finger  to
elbow ;  of  r.  leg ;  of  feet ;  of  lower  part  of  r.  foot ;  in
limbs ;  of  fingers.

Deadness  :  of  lower  part  of  r.  foot.

Crawling  :  in  finger  tips  ;  from  finger  to  elbow  ;  of  r.  leg  ;
in  tendons  of  knees  ;  in  feet.

Biting,  itching  :  on  scalp,  forehead,  face  and  about  mouth  ;
of  eruption  on  hand  and  face.

Itching :  under  scurfs  on  head  ;  in  eyes  ;  of  eruption
around  mouth  and  nose;  inner  surface  of  prepuce;  of
scrotum  ;  in  rectum  ;  of  eruption  of  arms  and  hands  ;
intolerable,  of  legs  and  feet ;  of  ulcers  ;  of  eruption  on
limbs  ;  of  urticaria  ;  intolerable,  of  rash  all  over  skin  ;
of  hairy  parts ;  of  small  pimples ;  of  eczema  ;  of  erup-
tion about  nipples,  breast,  back,  chest,  forehead,  scalp
and  hair.


103  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

Chilliness  :  in  back  and  head.

Coldness :  of  forearms,  forehead  and cheeks ; of  1.  arm

and  foot ; of  larynx  ; of  arm  ; of  1.  leg  ; of  legs  ;  all

over  internal  of  limbs.
"Tissues. I  I  Acts  on  fibrous  and  muscular  tissues.

liSoreness  and  stiffness  in  muscles,  pass  off  during  any

exercise.
1 1  Flesh  of  affected  parts  sore  to  touch.
1 1  Pain  as  if  flesh  were  torn  loose  from  bones ;  or  as  if  the

bones  were  being  scraped.
1 1  Pains as  if  sprained in outer parts; disposition to

sprain  a  part  by  lifting  heavy  weights,  or  stretching

arms  high  up  to  reach  things.
1 1  Inflammation  of  tendons  of  muscles,  from overexer-
tion or  sudden  wrenching  as  in  case  of  a  sprain.

■  Affections  of  ligaments,  tendons  and  membranes,  con-

nected with  joints.

1 1  Bad  effects  of  getting  wet,  especially  after  being  heated.

Iln  inner  parts  sensation  of  fulness;  or  as  if  they  were
grown  together  (adhesion)  or  as  if  something  in  them
were  torn  loose.

I  Dropsy,  with  turbid  urine.

i  "Abdomen  and  legs  greatly  enlarged  ;  from  some  points
of  legs  water  trickles  down ;  appetite  good,  no  thirst,
passes  little  urine ;  after  eating,  pains  in  stomach  ;  sen-
sitive to  cold,  damp  weather ;  preferred  to  lie  propped
up  in  bed.

I  1  General  dropsy;  scrotum  swollen,  from  prepuce  there
hung  a  long-shaped  blister.

■  Dropsy resulting from amenorrhoea,  caused  by  being

drenched  in  rain.

■  ■Smooth,  red  and  shining  swellings,  the  inflamed  skin

being  covered  with  small  painful  white  vesicles.

■  Inflammatory  swellings.

■  Cellulitis; accompanying diphtheria;  orbital  cellulitis

with  formation  of  pus.

■  Boils  and  abscesses.

I  I  Child  emaciated  ;  covered  with  abscesses,  most  of  them
of  a  bloody  character ;  child  appeared  as  if  it  would
shortly  die.

■  Carbuncle,  in  beginning,  when  pains  are  intense,  and

the  affected  parts  are  dark  red ;  if  given  early  may
abort  whole  trouble.

■  ■Glands  swollen,  hot,  painful ;  indurated;  suppurating.

■  Abscesses  of  axillary  and  parotid  glands,  swelling  pain-

ful to  touch,  and  discharging  a  bloody  serous  pus,  with
stinging  and  gnawing  pains.
■Scrofulous  induration  of  glands  of  neck,  nape  of  neck
and  lower  jaw.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  104

I  Prominent  projections  of  bones,  are  sore  to  touch;  as,  for
example,  the  cheek  bones.

I  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  long  bones.

iCrusty  caries,  always  combined  with  tetter,  in  rheumatic
or  gouty  subjects.

■  Scrofulous  and  rickety  affections.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch  :  head  painful ;
cannot  bear  slightest,  on  eye  ;  on  sore  spot  below  navel
causes  nausea;  chest  very  sensitive ;  sensitive  spot  in
spine  ;  causes  waterbrash  ;  causes  excruciating  pain  in
back  ;  scrofulosis  and  rachitis  <  ;  stitch  in  hamstrings ;
stitches  in  limbs ;  abdomen  sensitive ;  flesh  of  affected
parts  sore ;  abscesses  of  axillary  and  parotid  glands
painful ;  prominent  projections  of  bones  sore  ;  eruption
near  corners  of  mouth  on  margin  of  lower  lip  sore ;
pustules  on  chin  pain,  ^  ; ^

Pressure :  pain  in  Jaw  >  ;  abdomen  painful ;  pain  in
back  >  ;  pain  over  crest  of  1.  ileum  >  ;  drawing  pain
in  r.  natis  >  ;  hard,  on  hip  and  leg  >  pain ;  rectus
cruris  muscle  sensitive  ;  pain  in  eruption  <.

Resting  head  upon  arm  :  causes  numbness  of  arm.

Rubbing :  >  sciatica  ;  itching  of  urticaria  <  ;  affected
parts  increases  eruption.

Scratching :  developed  blisters  from  hives ;  itching  <  ;
causes  burning ;  causes  an  agonizing  pleasure ;  causes
smarting  and  itching  of  pimples.

Grasping  and  pinching:  >  pain  in  I.  shoulder;  pain  in
small  of  back  as  if  flesh  bad  been  beaten.

Riding  or  jarring  :  affects  injured  hip.
t Blows or sprains,  etc. : cause chronic  inflammation  of
articular  structures.

After  a  sprain :  pains  in  wrist  from  side  to  side.

A  fall  immediately  before  delivery  :  epilepsy.

Thrown  from  carriage :  injured  about  hips  and  small  of
back.

Traumatic  :  erysipelas  of  lids.
*^Skin. a  Intolerable  itching;  red,  measly  rash  all  over  skin.

iltching  all  over,  <  on  hairy  parts;  burning  after
scratching.

Violent  burning  in  skin,  twitching,  general  perspiration
at  night;  whenever  he  puts  his  hands  out  of  bed  he  is
seized  with  a  convulsive  cough.

Burning  itching  here  and  there.

■  Stinging  and  tingling  in  skin,  burning  after  scratching.
llBurning  itching  eruptions.

■  Humidity  of  skin.

■  Rubbing  affected  parts  increases  eruption.
Red  flush  over  whole  body,  at  2  p.m.


105  EHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

Covered  from  head  to  foot  with  a  fine  red  vesicular  rash,
itching  and  burning  terribly,  especially  in  joints  ;  <  at
night,  causing  constant  scratching,  with  little  or  no
relief,  felt  very  hard  upon  pressure  with  finger;  skin
burning  hot.

Some  small  pimples,  coalescing  into  blisters  the  size  of  a
split  pea,  filled  with  yellow  watery  fluid,  with  intense
itching;  <  at  night  after  12  p.m.;  the  only  relief  he
can  get  is  to  rub  it  with  something  rough  until  the
blisters  are  open.

Numerous  vesicles  appear  on  different  parts  of  body,  vary-
ing from  two  or  three  lines  to  one-fourth  inch  in  diame-
ter; vesicles  dry  and  disappear  by  desquamation.

A  burning  eruption  of  small  blisters,  filled  with  water,
with  redness  of  skin  of  whole  body,  except  on  scalp,
palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet.

Vesicles,  most  of  which  contain  a  milky,  but  some  of  which
also  contain  a  clear  liquid,  become  confluent ;  this  con-
dition lasts  three  days,  after  which  the  skin  desqua-
mates.

Clusters  of  vesicles,  filled  at  first  with  a  watery  substance,
near  both  corners  of  mouth  on  margin  of  lower  lip,  with
a  salty  biting  sensation,  and  soreness  to  touch.

Large  blisters  containing  yellowish  liquid,  with  swelling
of  arm ;  blisters  were  ruptured  carelessly  and  the  liquid
flowed  over  whole  arm,  after  which  a  very  large  number
of  vesicles  appeared,  so  that  after  eight  days  whole
forearm  seemed  to  be  one  mass  of  blisters;  anointing
with  olive  oil  seemed  to  have  no  effect  upon  the  com-
plaint ;  soon  the  upper  arm  and  then  r.  arm  and  other
parts  of  body  became  affected  ;  whole  trouble  lasted  four
weeks.

An  eruption  of  an  erysipelatous  nature  upon  face ;  the
inflammation  had  extended  over  forehead  and  into
scalp,  both  eyes  were  closed,  both  ears,  cheeks  and  lips
were  very  much  tumefied  and  pitted  on  pressure,  and
the  patient's  features  were  so  much  disfigured  that  he
was  not  at  all  recognizable.

Erysipelatoid  eruption  affecting  hands  and  arms,  feet  and
legs,  face  and  sometimes  the  whole  person  ;  it  varied  in
extent  and  in  severity  from  a  small  patch,  with  trivial
itching,  to  an  extended  surface  with  enormous  swelling
and  excruciating  suffering;  pruritus,  tingling,  smarting,
and  swollen  base  of  inflamed  skin,  vesicles  and  blebs,
from  the  size  of  a  pin's  head  to  a  pea,  were  crowded
together,  and  when  these  broke  and  dried,  eczematous
crusts  remained  ;  sufficient  irritation  carried  the  in-
flammation on  to  ulceration.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  106

Bright  redness  of  scrotum  and  penis ;  scrotum  extremely-
flaccid  and  relaxed,  falling  half-way  to  knee.

After  the  lapse  of  about  twenty-four  hours,  itching  and
burning  commenced,  lasting  from  half  an  hour  to  two
hours ;  after  about  thirty-six  hours,  swelling  of  the  parts,
with  violent  itching  and  burning,  increased  on  touching
or  moving  parts  affected,  as  if  pierced  by  hot  needles ;
white  transparent  vesicles  appeared  on  the  highly  red
and  inflamed  skin.

I  Erythema,  rapidly  progressing  to  vesication,  often  ac-
companied with  oedema  and  with  the  final  formation  of
pus  and  scabs ;  surface  about  eruption  is  red  and  angry-
looking.

■  Eruption  herpetic;  with  incessant  itching,  burning  and

tingling;  alternates  with  pains  in  chest  and  dysenteric
stools.

I  I  Scalp,  abdomen,  lower  portion  of  chest  and  part  of  legs
and  back  covered  with  a  moist,  burning,  itching  erup-
tion, which  eats  into  surrounding  parts ;  large  vesicles
form  which  are  filled  with  clear  serum,  later  becoming
turbid,  which  burst  and  become  confluent.

1  I  After  being  poisoned  while  gathering  blackberries  ;  face
presented  a  perfect  picture  of  facial  erysipelas  of  ve-
sicular type;  hands  and  forearms  were  covered  with
patches  of  vesicles.

I  Herpes  zoster  (shingles);  burning  and  neuralgic  pains
after  it.

■  Herpes  preputialis  and  axillaris.

■  Pemphigus,  each  bulla  with  a  red  areola.

I  I  Erysipelatous  swelling  under  eyes  and  red  blotches
over  body.

■  Erysipelatous inflammation: hardness of skin, with

thickening ;  urticaria  ;  from  getting  wet ;  during  rheu-
matism ;  with  chills  and  fever ;  <  in  cold  air ;  burning,
drawing ;  tearing  in  face ;  teeth  feel  too  long ;  restless-
ness ;  face  dark  red,  covered  with  yellow  vesicles  ;  burn-
ing, itching  and  tingling  with  stinging ;  <  in  cold,
open  air,  wet  weather,  getting  wet,  or  damp,  in  cold
places.

■  Vesicular  erysipelas  ;  scalp,  face  and  genital  organs  par-

ticularly affected  ;  affected  parts  dark  red;  inflammation
travels  from  r.  to  left.
I  I  Capt.  S.,  six  years  ago,  kissed  a  child  who  had  scarlatina,
and  felt  it  burn  his  lips ;  in  a  few  weeks  had  boils  on
his  back  ;  after  this  was  costive  ;  once  fainted,  bruising
his  forehead ;  during  faint  had  an  involuntary  stool ;
soon  erysipelas  appeared  on  bruised  forehead,  spreading
over  face,  appearing  on  scrotum  and  penis,  which  sup-


107  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

purated ;  has  had  several  attacks  since,  impairing  his
sight  for  near  objects;  felt  a  shock  in  1.  external  orbital
integuments;  about  noon,  red  erysipelatous  swelling-
began  there,  extending  over  whole  face,  neck  and
scrotum  ;  vesicles  form  exuding  a  fluid  which  stains
linen  yellow  ;  affected  parts  burn  and  itch  ;  when  lying
at  each  beat  of  heart  there  is  a  throbbing  centrifugally
in  inflamed  integuments  of  face  and  forehead ;  any
moisture  to  skin  brings  out  erysipelas  there,  as  it  al-
ways did  in  those  attacks ;  must  scratch  parts,  which
causes  an  "  agonizing  pleasure;"  scratching  of  scrotum
causes  sexual  pleasure  and  an  escape  of  semen,  which
weakens  him  ;  photophobia ;  very  restless  all  last  night,
no  sleep  ;  w^alking  about  stamping,  shaking  arms,  and
striking  about ;  large  yellow  crusts  from  discharge  on
chin ;  eyelids  closed  from  swelling ;  hands  and  feet
cold  ;  pulse  50,  intermitting  in  volume  and  rhythm ;
burning  and  itching  <  from  warmth,

I  I  Zona,  r.  side,  pain  going  down  to  r.  leg,  <  at  night,
necessitating  constant  change  of  position.

Cutaneous  inflammation  and  feeling  of  excoriation  at
inner  side  of  1.  natis.

Scurfy  eruption  over  body  ;  fine  scurf  on  face.

Back  of  hand  is  covered  with  cracks  and  is  hot ;  skin  hard,
rough  and  stiff".

Epidermis  peeled  from  cheeks,  leaving  parts  hot  and
rough.

Skin  peeled  from  1.  hand  entirely;  intolerable  itching;
skin  peeled  from  all  parts  affected.

llEczema:  surface  raw,  excoriated;  thick  crusts,  oozing
and  offensive;  if  face  is  attacked  there  is  oedema  of  loose
cellular  tissue  about  eyelids;  burning,  itching,  tin-
gling pains;  incessant  itching  and  scratching;  the  more
they  scratch  the  greater  the  urgency  to  scratch.

iCrusta  lactea  characterized  by  thick,  heavy  scabs,  on  an
inflamed  base,  with  much  itching  and  restlessness,  <
at  night  and  from  becoming  too  w^arm;  green  slimy
diarrhoea.

I  I  Very  sore  nipples  after  confinement  and  an  itching,
burning  papular  eruption  about  nipples  on  breast,  neck,
chest,  forehead,  scalp  and  hair;  the  itching  kept  just
ahead  of  the  scratching,  disappearing  and  burning  after,
<  during  sweat;  profuse  sweat  on  exterior  parts  of  body,
but  not  on  parts  on  which  she  lay;  restless,  continually
sought  new  positions;  >  after  moving  about.

I  I  Forehead,  face  and  particularly  sides  of  neck,  covered
with  red  nodules,  apices  being  filled  with  pus;  severe
burning.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  108

Pimples  like  the  itch,  with  burning  itching  and  smarting
after  scratching,  on  inner  surface  of  wrist,  and  on  lower
portion  of  cheek.

Hard  pimples  on  hands,  with  burning-biting  itching.

Pimples  large,  deep-seated  and  irritable  to  touch,  on  nates,
especially  on  median  line  near  os  coccygis.

Tetter-like  eruption  around  mouth  and  nose,  at  times  with
jerking  and  itching  burning  pain  in  it.

Pustules,  with  pus  at  tips  on  side  of  chin,  with  pain  only
when  touched,  as  from  pressure  of  a  sharp  edge  and  a
persistent  burning.

■  Pustulous  eruption.

Black  pustules,  with  inflammation  and  itching,  rapidly
spreading  over  whole  body.

llUrticaria  from  getting  wet;  during  rheumatism;  with
chills  and  fever; <  in  cold  air.

I  I  On  the  13th  of  May,  every  year,  for  several  years,  had
been  seized  with  a  burning  itching  of  skin  that  drove
her  nearly  to  distraction ;  eruption  so  confluent  not  a
healthy  spot  could  be  seen;  eyes  closed  with  oedema  of
lids;  seemed  suffocating  and  threw  ofi'  bed  coverings;
whole  paroxysm  lasted  twenty-four  hours. ^Urticaria.

I  I  Upper  and  lower  limbs  and  1.  side  of  throat  covered
with  hard,  dark-red,  circular  elevated  blotches,  in  groups
and  isolated;  skin  of  affected  parts  tense  and  shining,
while  surrounding  skin  is  swollen  and  shows  an  erysi-
pelatous redness;  the  wheals  are  particularly  numerous
on  1.  index  finger,  dorsum  of  hand  and  forearm;  on  neck
and  1.  thigh  there  is  a  round,  elevated  red  blotch,  around
which  larger  and  smaller  patches  were  closely  crowded;
intolerable  itching  in  affected  parts,  particularly  on
index  finger;  fine  stitching  pain  in  the  eruption  itself,
produced  or  aggravated  by  pressure;  patient  appears
depressed;  eyes  closed  as  in  sleep;  fever;  skin  moist;
respirations  increased,  at  times  rales;' cough  not  fre-
quent, with  tenacious  expectoration  during  day;  pulse
104;  feeling  of  weakness;  great  heat  of  head;  vertigo;
nausea;  vomiting;  constant  pain  about  umbilicus.  /9 Ur-
ticaria.

I  I  Bluish  red,  lentil-sized  spots  over  body,  with  lassitude
and  repeated  hemorrhages  from  nose  and  mouth.  ^Pur-
pura.

I  I  Face  and  hands  appear  as  if  covered  with  suggillations.
^Purpura.

I  I  After  catching  cold,  by  exposure  to  rain,  burning  and

, sticking  in  skin,  which  began  to  swell  up  here  and  there,

particularly  on  hands,  arms  and  legs;  bright  red  spots

appear,  of  various  shapes  and  sizes;  rheumatic  tearing

pains  in  hip,  particularly  when  at  rest. ^Purpura.


109  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

1  I  Full  of  bluish  dark  blood,  spots  all  over  body  except
face  and  hands;  bleeding  from  gums;  ice-cold  tempera-
ture; pale  face  and  skin;  small  pulse.

I  Carbuncles,  bluish,  gangrenoiis.

■  Hardness  of  skin  with  thickening.

I  Warts:  especially  on  hands  and  fingers;  large,  jagged,
often  pedunculated,  exuding  moisture  and  bleeding
readily.

I  iRhagades,  chaps;  chilblains.

■  Ulcers: as  if  gangrenous,  arising  from small vesicles,

attended  with  violent  fever;  burning  in  them  or  sensa-
tion of  coldness.

■  Scarlatina :  miliary,  rash  dark,  fever  high,  drowsiness  and

restlessness;  especially  adynamic  forms,  child  grows
drowsy  and  restless;  tongue  red,  sometimes  smooth;
fauces  dark  red  and  have  a  peculiar  oedematous  appear-
ance, cervical  glands  enlarged,  and  there  may  be  en-
largement of  1.  parotid,  there  may  even  be  impending
suppuration  of  these  parts;  cellular  tissue  of  neck  in-
flamed, cutaneous  surface  having  a  dark-red  or  bluish
er3^sipelatous  hue;  delirium,  mild  in  character;  secre-
tions altered,  acrid;  glands  in  all  parts  of  body  may
become  enlarged,  especially  those  of  axillae ;  emaciation  ;
prostration  ;  the  rash  itches  violently  and  there  is  much
restlessness  at  night;  there  is  an  ichorous  or  yellow,
thick  discharge  from  nose,  with  sw^elling  of  glands  of
throat;  a  bright  edge  of  inflammation  surrounds  every
portion  of  eruption,  and  there  is  much  itching,  particu-
larly at  night;  cases  complicated  with  erysipelatous
inflammation.

I  I  Skin  dark  red  from  head  to  foot  and  covered  with  small
vesicles,  containing  a  yellow  pus-like  fluid ;  burning
heat ;  great  thirst ;  sopor ;  starting  and  fright ;  restless-
ness ;  painful  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate ;  bowels  con-
stipated. ^Scarlatina.

1 1 A  child,  set.  13,  threw  a  shawl,  belonging  to  a  child  who
had  died  of  scarlet  fever,  over  her  shoulders ;  next  day
she  had  high  fever;  pulse  140;  sore  throat;  vomiting;
backache;  next  day  rash  appeared  on  neck  and  chest,
extending  gradually  over  body  and  becoming  red,  after
pressure,  from  periphery  to  centre. ^Scarlet  fever.

■  Delirium,  dry  tongue,  almost  complete  loss  of  sleep,  re-

peated bilious  vomiting,  frequent  diarrhoea,  tempera-
ture of  skin  40°  C. ^Measles.

■  Variola:  eruption  sinks  and  turns  livid;  typhoid  symp-

toms.

■  Smallpox:  typhoid  condition;  eruption  illy  developed;

livid; burning fever; extreme prostration; burning


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  110

thirst ;  roaring  in  ears ;  dry,  cracked  tongue ;  lips  and

teeth  covered  with  tenacious  brown  mucus;  meteoric

distension  of  abdomen.
■  Variola: pustules tUrn black from effusion of blood

within ;  diarrhoea,  with  dark,  bloody  stools.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, n  Rheumatic  diathesis.
Child,  set.  6  months,  scrofulous;  catarrhal  ophthalmia.
Infant, set. 8 months, badly nourished, afflicted with

ascarides which  had been relieved by  Podoph.;  ab-
scesses.
Child,  set.  IJ,  has  had  hives;  erysipelas.
Child,  set.  2,  scrofulous,  suffering  since  birth;  eruption  on

head  and  ozsena.
Boy,  set.  2,  suffering  nine  months;  ague.
Boy,  set.  2 ;  scarlet  fever.
Boy,  set.  2| ;  ophthalmia  erysipelatosa.
Boy,  set.  3,  delicate,  pale,  head  and  face  covered  with  an

eruption,  scrofulous ;  ophthalmia.
Girl,  set.  3,  suffering  one  year ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.
Boy,  set.  3,  stout,  otherwise  healthy  ;  strumous  ophthalmia.
Boy,  set.  4  ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.
Girl,  set.  5,  scrofulous ;  ophthalmia.
Lizzie  B.,  set.  5,  healthy  child  from birth,  trouble  first

noticed  five  days  after  birth  ;  ptosis.
Child,  set.  5 ;  scrofulous  induration  of  glands.
Boy,  set.  6,  several  weeks  ago  fell  down  a  high  flight  of

steps ;  paralysis.
Boy,  set.  7  ;  inflammation  of  knee  joints.
Girl,  set.  8,  ill  ten  days;  meningitis.

Boy,  set.  8,  strong,  suffering  since  four  weeks  old  ;  eruption.
Girl,  set.  9,  scrofulous ;  ophthalmia.
Girl,  set.  10 ;  diphtheria  of  lips.
Boy,  set.  10  ;  five  months  ago  fell  while  carrying  a  bundle

of  straw,  since  then  suffering  ;  lameness  of  leg.
Girl,  set.  12,  slender,  lymphatic,  nervous,  had  rheumatic

pains  the  year  before  ;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  12,  suffering  six  months  ;  ague.
Girl,  set.  13 ;  affection  of  eye.
Girl,  set.  13,  has  curvature  of  spine;  paralysis  of  lower

portion  of  body.
Girl,  set.  13  ;  scarlet  fever.
Young  woman,  set.  13|,  on  third  day  after  a  natural  labor;

paraplegia.
Boy,  set.  14  ;  crusta  lactea.
Boy,  set.  14,  blonde,  suffering  four  years ;  eruption  on  head

and  body.
Boy,  set.  14 ;  dysentery.
Boy,  set. 15, from a violent sprain two months ago;

swelling  in  elbow  joint.


Ill  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

C.  P.,  set.  16,  badly-nourished  and  overworked  needle-girl;

erythema  nodosum.
Youth,  set.  17  ;  ulceration  of  cornea.
Boy,  set.  17,  after  exposure  to  snowstorm  while  overheated

two  and  a  half  years  ago ;  rheumatic  lameness.
Girl,  set.  18, small,  lateral curvature of  spine;  mental

disorder.
Girl,  set.  18,  menstruation  not  yet  established ;  influenza.
Girl,  set.  18,  after  nursing  a  person  with  typhoid  fever ;

smallpox.
Girl,  set. 19, quiet, calm, strongly-built, blonde, rosy-
cheeked  ;  intestinal  catarrh.
Man,  set.  19 ;  measles.
Girl,  set.  19 J;  enteritis.
Laboring  woman,  set.  20,  brunette,  fresh,  rosy  complexion,

strained  herself  lifting  shortly  after  first  appearance  of

tumor,  father  had  scirrhous  tumor  of  groin;  ovarian

cyst.
Girl,  set.  20,  blonde,  caught  cold  year  and  a  half  ago,  since

then  suffering ;  amenorrhoea.
Young  woman,  set.  21 ;  parotitis.

Man,  set.  23,  weak,  delicate,  after  typhoid  fever;  epistaxis.
Baker,  set.  23,  of  phthisical  family,  after  severe  labor  in  a

damp  cellar;  swelling  of  knee.
Man,  set.  23,  suffering  twelve  days;  quotidian  ague.
Mrs.  E,  D.,  set.  24,  colored,  hysterical,  hypochondriacal,

suffering  since  puberty  ;  dysmenorrhoea.
Miss  M.,  set.  24,  slender  form,  lymphatic  temperament,

never in good health, suffering four years; injury

to  hip.
Miss  E.  H.,  set.  24,  blonde,  clerk  in  a  store,  suffering  three

weeks;  swelling  of  foot.
Artilleryman,  set.  24,  small  stature,  full  habit,  brown  hair;

quartan  ague.
Miss  C,  set.  25 ;  dysmenorrhoea.
Man,  set.  25,  strong,  caught  cold  by  exposure  to  rain  ;

purpura.
Mrs.  H.,  set.  26  ;  boils.
Woman,  set.  28;  rheumatic  ophthalmia.  _
Tailor,  set.  28,  suffering  twelve  years  ;  sciatica.
Man,  set.  28;  several  years  ago  had  ague,  then  smallpox;

typhoid  fever.
Woman,  set.  30, sanguineous  temperament;  inflammation

of  eye.
Man,  set.  30  ;  oesophagitis.
Woman,  tet.  30,  thin,  healthy,  menses  absent  five  years;

pleuro-pneumonia.
Woman,  set.  30,  married,  two  years  ago  sprained  wrist,

since  then  suffering  ;  pain  in  wrist.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  112

"Woman,  set.  30,  single;  warts  on  hands.

Woman,  set.  30,  colored,  suffering  five  years;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  31,  slender,  muscular,  dark  complexion,  after  ex-
posure ;  rheumatic  lameness.

Man  set.  32,  robust;  erysipelas.

Man,  set.  32,  fifteen  years  after  an  attack  of  syphilis;
syphilitic  rheumatism  and  formation  of  soft  nodes.

Woman,  set.  33,  negro,  suffering  five  years ;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  35,  rheumatic,  after  lifting  heavy  furniture ;
affection  of  back.

Man,  set.  35,  sanguine,  nervous  temperament,  suffering  six
months ;  sciatica.

Woman,  set.  35  ;  erysipelas.

Man,  set.  36,  lively,  intellectual,  active,  brown  complexion,
black  hair,  sparkling  black  eyes ;  facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  36;  oesophagitis.

Woman,  set.  36,  single,  blonde,  delicate,  irritable  dis-
position, lives  by  needlework;  abdominal  inflam-
mation.

Woman,  set.  36,  poorly  nourished,  cachectic,  six  months
pregnant;  urinary  difficulty.

Josefa  Flucha,  set.  36,  married,  born  in  Spain ;  cardiac
neurosis.

Woman,  set.  37,  medium  height,  corpulent,  ill  half  year ;
hsemoptysis.

Man,  set.  37,  professor,  nervous  temperament ;  loss  of  co-
ordination in  legs.

Lady,  set.  38,  mother  of  six  children  ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  38,  well  built ;  urticaria.

Woman,  set.  40,  hysterical ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  40 ;  eruption  on  eyelid.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  several  months,  had  rheumatism
previous  to  attack ;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  40,  brunette,  slender  figure,  mother  of  many
children,  suffered  six  months;  rheumatic  pain  and
stiffness  in  wrist.

Man,  set.  40,  sandy  complexion,  strong,  athletic  and  vigor-
ous constitution  ;  strain  of  thumb.

Man,  set.  40,  large,  muscular,  had  former  attacks,  after
walking  fourteen  miles  ;  sciatica.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  eight  weeks;  suppuration  at  knee
joint.

Man,  set.  40,  after  severe  wetting;  pains  in  legs.

Woman,  set.  40,  wife  of  clergyman,  has  had  an  attack
annually  for  last  seven  years;  urticaria.

Woman,  set.  40,  Irish ;  eczema  impetiginodes.

Man,  set.  41,  strong  and  healthy,  works  in  sugar  factory
and  is  exposed  to  great  heat;  Bright's  disease.


113  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  42,  six  j'^ears  previously  took  a  sea-bath  and
became  chilled  through  and  through,  since  then  suffer-
ing ;  polypus  of  uterus.

Man,  set.  42  ;  typhoid  fever.  ,

Man,  set.  43,  small,  dark  complexion,  weight  90  pounds,
cabinet-maker,  suffering  eight  or  nine  years ;  lameness
of  back.

Woman,  set.  43,  suffering  eighteen  years ;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  44 ;  paralysis  of  arm.

Woman,  set.  44,  Irish,  married,  suffering  four  months;
eczema  rubrum.

Man,  set.  45  ;  opacity  of  cornea.

Man,  set.  45,  small,  choleric  temperament,  nurse,  after  re-
covering from  an  attack  of  typhoid  ;  paralysis  agitans.

Man,  set.  45,  strong,  confined  to  bed  last  three  months
after  exposure ;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  46-49,  tall,  slender,  muscular,  dark  complexion,
leather  manufacturer,  suffering  several  years  with  rheu-
matism of  1.  arm,  after  exposure  to  rainstorm ;  rheu-
matism.

Lady,  set.  50 ;  fear  of  being  poisoned.

Woman,  set.  50,  pale,  emaciated,  for  years  has  had  a  slight
hacking  cough  in  Winter,  strained  back  by  lifting  a
heavy  weight  fortnight  ago,  since  then  suffering ;
lumbago.

Jewess,  set.  51  ;  melancholia.

Woman,  set.  52,  year  and  a  half  ago  became  chilled  during
a  railway  journey,  since  then  suffering;  rheumatic
paralysis.

Woman,  set.  53,  mild  disposition,  small  stature;  suffering
two  weeks ;  epistaxis.

Woman,  set.  55,  strong,  stout,  subject  to  erysipelatous
swellings  of  face,  suffering  ten  days;  erysipelas  bul-
losum.

Man,  set.  55,  farmer,  strong,  large,  muscular,  sufferer  from
sciatic  rheumatism,  which  was  contracted  in  the  army
1862-63,  would  have  severe  attacks  every  few  weeks,
induced  by  overwork  and  exposure ;  sciatica.

Coachman,  set.  55,  some  years  ago  had  a  similar  attack ;
rheumatic  sciatica.

Man,  set.  56,  cabinet-maker,  athletic  figure,  otherwise
always  well,  suffering  eight  months ;  sciatica.

Man,  set.  62,  five  years  ago  similarly  affected;  dropsy.

Woman,  set.  63  ;  pneumonia.

Woman,  set.  64;  sciatica.

Man,  set.  64;  ague.

Man,  set.  66,  tall,  thin,  delicate  frame;  facial  neuralgia,
voii.  IX. — 8.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.  114

M. K., set. 66,  German,  from  exposure to  cold;  rheu-
matism.
Mrs.  C.  K.,  aet.  67,  suffering  several  years;  anasarca.
Lady,  set.  80,  suffering  five  months ;  diarrhoea.
Young  man,  retired  habits,  affected  with  acne punctata,

after  exposure ;  influenza.
Mrs.  C,  sick  for  twenty  years  ;  affection  of  heart.
Bridge-builder, nervous temperament, suffering three

weeks,  caused  by  a  strain ;  lumbago.
Woman,  large,  strong,  suffering  six  months ;  burning  in

hand.
Stout phlegmatic  man,  frequently  subject  to  attacks  of

rheumatic  gout ;  gonagra.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Camphor.,  Coffea,

Crot.  tig.,  Mercur.,  Tenacet,  Sassaf.,  Sulphur,  Verbena  has-

lata,  Virginiana  serpentaria.
It  antidotes:  Bryon.,  Ranunculus,  Rhodo.,  Tart.  em.
Compatible:  Arnic,  Arsen.,  Bryon.,  Calc.  ost.,  Calc.  phos.,

Chamom.,  Gonium,  Lach.,  Phos.  ac,  Pulsat.,  Sulphur.
Incompatible:  Apis.


115  RHUS  VENENATA.


RHUS  VENENATA. (Rhus  Vemix.)
Poison  Sumach.  Anacardiacese.


Grows  in  swampy  localities  in  Canada  and  the  United  States.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves  and  bark.

Provings  by  Bute,  Archiv  fiir  Horn.,  vol.  15,  p.  179 ;  Kunze,  N.  Zeit.  fiir  Klinik,
vol.  12,  p.  155;  Burt,  Am.  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  5,  p.  23 ;  Oehme,  N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,  vol.
1,  p.  121 ;  Butman,  N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,  vol.  4,  p.  200;  McGeorge,  H.  M.,  vol.  7,
p.  315.

CLiNicAii  Authorities. — Sore  mouth,  Burt,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  2,  p.  66 ;  Ulceration
of  cervical  glands,  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  350;  Swelling  on  wrist,  Thomas,  B.
J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  349;  Chronic  rheumatism,  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  329;  Use
in  suppuration,  etc.,  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  350  ;  Erythema  nodosum,  Q5hme,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  1,  p.  152;  Pfander,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  108,  p.  36;  Impetigo,  (Ehme,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  1,  p.  151 ;  Erysipelas,  Small,  Eaue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  240,  from  U.
S.  M.  and  S.  Jour.,  vol.  7,  p.  156 ;  Bhus  poisoning  (2  cases),  McGeorge,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  7,  p.  322.

'  Mind. Great  sadness,  no  desire  to  live,  everything  seems

gloomy.
Inability,  at  times,  to  connect  ideas ;  forgetfulness ;  dull

and  stupid  feeling.
^Sensorium. Vertigo;  <  in  evening;  intolerable  heaviness

of  head.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  heavy,  frontal  headache,  <  walking  and

stooping.
*  Outer  Head. '  l  Great  swelling  of  head,  face  and  hands,  with

sharp,  irritating  fever.
I  I  Vesicular  erysipelas  of  face  and  scalp.
°  Sight  and  Eyes. '  i  Eyes  closed  from  great  swelling  of  cel-
lular tissue  about  them.
I  I  Profuse  lachrymation ;  constant  dull,  aching  pains  in

eyeballs.

I  I  Chronic  inflammation  of  eyes.

^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Vesicular  inflammation  of  ears,  exud-
ing a  yellow  watery  serum.

^  Smell  and  Nose, i Erysipelatous  redness  of  nose.

'Upper  Face. iNose  and  r.  side  of  face  much  swollen,  espe-
cially under  r.  eye.
■  Face  hot,  itching  and  burning  in  different  parts  of  face,
especially  1.  cheek.

I I  Vesicular  eruption  about  face  and  hands  accompanied


RHUS  VENENATA.  116

by  much  swelling  and  an  intolerable  itching  and  burn-
ing. ^Erysipelas.
^  Lower  Face. Drawing  pains  in  upper  and  lower  jaw.
'"Teeth  and  Gums, i  i.Red  vesicular  eruption  on  gums  of

upper  incisors.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. 1 1  Scalded  feeling  of  tongue,  salty,  flat,
rough  taste.
I  I  Centre  and  base  of  tongue  coated  white,  sides  very  red.
I  I  Vesicles  on  under  side  of  tongue,  with  a  scalded  feeling.
iTongue  red  on  tip,  or  red  and  cracked  in  middle.
Distress  in  root  of  tongue  and  fauces.
'^  Inner  Mouth, l  '  Mucous  membrane  of  mouth  very  red.
I  1  Sore  mouth ;  intense  redness  of  mucous  membrane  of
tongue,  cheeks  and  fauces,  with  appearance  of  small
vesicular  points,  accompanied  by  intense  burning,  as  if
mouth  and  throat  had  been  scalded;  this  condition,  if
allowed  to  go  on,  seemed  to  extend  wherever  there  was
mucous  membrane,  even  to  rectum  and  vagina;  several
such  attacks  every  year.
'^Throat. Difficult  deglutition.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Dyspepsia,  with  red  tongue

and  tendency  to  erj'sipelas.
*^  Abdomen. Abdomen  bloated  and  exceedingly  painful  to
least  pressure.
Constant  rumbling  and  griping  in  bowels.
Constant  dull  pains  in  umbilicus,  with  rumbling  in  bowels,

followed  by  a  soft  diarrhoeic  stool.
Pains  <  before  stool,  but  an  evacuation  does  not  stop  the

pain.
Pains  in  umbilicus  with  dry,  lumpy,  dark-colored  stools.
Intolerable  itching  and  burning  of  anus ;  neuralgic  pains

in  anus.
Pains  in  bowels  <  in  morning.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stool  almost  white,  thin,  papescent.
Large  watery  stool,  passed  with  great  force  and  attended
with  violent  colicky  pains,  at  4  a.m.;  during  next  two
hours  had  three  more  profuse  stools  of  this  character.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Burning  in  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i '  Scrotum  much  swollen,  deep  red,

covered  with  vesicles.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Dryness

and  pain  in  larynx ;  hoarseness.
^  Cough. Harsh,  dry  cough,  continuing  for  more  than  two

weeks.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Violent  stitches  through  chest

with  great  suddenness.
^^  Outer  Chest, l  Stiff  neck  or  "crick in  neck"  and  rheu-
matic pains  between  shoulders.


17  RHUS  VENENATA.

■  Lumbago  from  a  strain  or  a  cold.
^^  Neck  and  Back, l  l  Ulceration  of  cervical  glands,  which
discharged  a  very  offensive,  dark-colored  pus ;  dark  red
areola  around  ulcers.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Paralytic  drawing  in  r.  arm,  especially  in
wrist,  extending  to  tips  of  fingers.
I  I  Synovial  swelling  on  wrist  joint,  of  nine  months'  growth,
large  as  a  w^alnut,  dark-colored,  so  as  to  look  like  a  sup-
purating tumor ;  on  holding  to  light  it  appeared  trans-
lucent ;  not  much  pain.
''  Lower  Limbs. Paralyzed  and  bruised  sensation  in  legs.
Paralytic  drawing,  with  pains  in  bones  of  1.  leg.
Great  weakness  of  knees  and  ankles ;  they  ache  constantly.
I  I  Chronic  rheumatism; pain centred  in  heel; is  lame,
walks  with  two  sticks ;  great  pain  on  first  putting  foot
down  to  stand  upon  it;  shooting  pain  in  bone  and  sore
pain  in  ball  of  foot;  foot  oedematous.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Trembling  of  limbs  with  twitching  of

muscles.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Stooping:  frontal  headache  <.
When  first  putting  down  foot  to  stand  upon  it :  great  pain.
Walking:  frontal  headache  <.
'^Nerves, a  Great  restlessness.

I  Lassitude ;  very  weak  and  languid ;  stretching.
^^  Sleep. Many  dreams  during  sleep.

^''Time. Aggravation of all symptoms in morning after
waking.
4  A.M. :  large  watery  stools  with  pain  <.
Morning:  pain  in  bowels  <.
Evening:  vertigo  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  room :  chills.
*Tever. Chills:  over  whole  body;  run  up  back  even  when
warm  and  in  a  warm  room.
Intermittent  without  sweat.
I  Typhus  and  typhoid  fevers.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Intense  itching  periodically  ;  return-
ing every  hour  or  two.
For  more  than  two  weeks :  harsh,  dry  cough.
For  nine  months:  a  synovial  swelling  on  wrist  joint.
Every  year:  several  attacks  of  sore  mouth,  burning  of
mucous  membrane.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  side  of  face  much  swollen,
especially  under  eye;  paralytic  drawing  in  arm;  ery-
thema nodosum  below  knee.
Left :  itching  and  burning  of  cheek ;  pains  in  bones  of
leg ;  erythema  nodosum  on  leg.
"  Sensations. As  if  mouth  and  throat  had  been  scalded.

Pain  :  in  bowels ;  in  larynx  ;  in  bones  of  1.  leg ;  in  ankles,
wrists  and  elbows.


RHUS  VENENATA.  118

Violent  stitches :  through  chest.

Shooting  pains :  in  bone  of  foot.

Neuralgic  pains :  of  anus.

Rheumatic  pains :  between  shoulders ;  in  heel.

Drawing  pains :  in  upper  and  lower  jaw.

Griping :  of  bowels.

Colicky  pains :  in  bowels.

Dull,  aching  pains :  in  eyeballs.

Dull,  heavy  pain  :  in  forehead.

Dull  pains :  in  umbilicus.

Aching :  in  knees  and  ankles.

Paralytic  drawing:  in  r.  arm;  in  1.  leg.
■  Distress :  in  root  of  tongue  and  fauces.

Sore  pain  :  in  ball  of  foot.

Burning:  in  face;  of  mouth  and  throat;  of  anus;  in
urethra.

Bruised  sensation  :  in  legs.

Scalded  feeling :  of  tongue.

Heaviness :  of  head.

Great  weakness:  of  knees  and  ankles.

Trembling :  of  limbs.

Dryness :  of  larynx.

Itching :  in  face ;  of  anus ;  under  and  about  vesicles  on
forearms  and  hands  of  Rhus  poisoning.
*^  Tissues. Affects  all  parts  of  the  body  where  bones  are  di-
rectly covered  with  the  cutis  and  nothing  more ;  back
of  fingers,  forehead,  etc.

Phagedenic  ulcers  of  legs  and  arms,  S3^philitic  or  scrofulous,
having  a  dark  red  blush.

■  Ulcerations  of  lymphatic  glands;  lymphatic  abscesses.
^^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  erythema
nodosum  painful.

Pressure :  abdomen  exceedingly  painful  to  least.
*^  Skin. A  fine  white  rash  keeps  under  the  skin.

!  I  Erythema  nodosum  :  on  r.  leg  below  knee,  seven  such
spots ;  on  1.  three,  all  in  different  stages,  the  largest  one
over  two  inches  in  diameter.

I  I  Erythema  nodosum  during  an  invasion  of  an  attack  of
typhoid  fever;  pain  in  ankles,  wrists  and  elbows,  fol-
lowed by  an  eruption  of  red  patches,  these  also  soon
appear  on  anterior  surface  of  thighs  and  forearms ;  these
spots  are  painful  to  touch,  new  ones  are  constantly  form-
ing, some  of  which  are  bluish.

I  I  On  forearms  and  hands,  especially  on  r.  side,  little  vesi-
cles formed,  the  contents  of  which  soon  changed  to  pus,
but  as  itching  was  very  violent,  they  were  almost  always
destroyed  by  scratching,  before  the  transformation  into
pus  was  complete ;  these  efflorescences  were  soon  covered


119  RHUS  VENENATA.

with  thin,  brownish,  cracked,  firmly  adhering  scabs,  and
increased  in  circumference ;  the  largest  was  about  six
lines  in  diameter ;  under  the  scab  is  a  sore,  even  with
the  skin  and  covered  with  a  thin  layer  of  pus ;  violent
itching  under  and  about  the  vesicles. ^Impetigo.

I  I  Phlegmonous  erysipelas.

I  Rhus  tox.  poisoning:  eruption  on  face,  hands,  genitals
and  thighs ;  red  and  rough ;  scabs  at  corners  of  mouth  ;
intolerable  itching.

■  Ulcers,  cuts  and  other  lesions  of  skin  surrounded  by  a
miliary,  whitish  rash.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  5,  during  invasion
of  typhoid  fever ;  erythema  nodosum.

Boy,  aet.  13;  Rhus  tox.  poisoning.

Boy,  set.' 16,  suffering  two  years;  ulceration  of  cervical
glands.

Lady,  set.  22,  suffering  several  weeks ;  impetigo.

Man,  set.  30,  fifteen  months  ago  had  rheumatism  in  shoul-
ders and  arms,  pain  disappeared  from  these  parts  and
became  fixed  in  heel ;  chronic  rheumatism.

Lady,  set.  38,  lymphatic  temperament;  erysipelas.

Man,  set.  40;  Rhus  rad.  poisoning.
"  Relations. Antidoted by : Phosphor., Bryon. Blue clay
applied  externally  relieves  itching  and  burning  entirely.

Compare:  Anac,  Clematis,  Com.oclad.,  Crot,  tig.,  Ranunculus,
Rhus  tax.,  radicans  and  vernix.


ROBINIA.  120

ROBINIA.

Locust.  Leguminosse.

Tlie  common  locust  tree,  indigenous  to  the  southern  part  of  the  United  States.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  bark  of  the  young  twigs.

Provings  by  Burt,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  1864,  p.  61  ;  Spranger,  Am.  Horn.  Obs.,
vol.  1,  p.  271;  Ball  (poisoning),  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  1865,  vol.  2,  p.  327  ;  Houatt,
Nouvelles  Dontiees,  Paris,  1866.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Headache,  Burt,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  62;  Pain  in
stomach,  Burt,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1.  p.  62;  Pyrosis,  Peck,  T.  A.  J.  tl.,  1883,  p.  676 ;
Sour  stomach,  Burt,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  62;  Kippax,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  96 ;  Smedley,
A.  H.  O.,  vol.  5,  p.  24;  Dyspepsia,  Blake,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  405;  Chronic
affection  of  stomach,  Shafer,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  277 ;  Ague,  Funk,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,
p.  555.

^  Mind. 'Very  low-spirited ;  excessive  irritability. ^Indiges-
tion.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  and  dulness  of  head,  in  whatever  pos-
ture it  is  placed.
Sensation  as  if  brain  revolved,  especially  when  lying  down.
Vertigo  with  unsteadiness  and  nausea.
^ Inner  Head. Dull  frontal  headache;  much  <  by  motion,
with  neuralgic  pains  in  temples  ;  migraine.
Steady  headache,  with  sensation  as  if  head  were  full  of
boiling  water,  and  when  moving  head  sensation  as  if
brain  struck  against  skull.
I  Gastric  headache  from  a  sour  stomach,  caused  by  fat
meat,  gravies,  flatulent food,  cabbage,  turnips,  warm
bread,  pastry,  ice  cream,  raw  fruit,  etc.
I  Sick-headache,  with  eructations  and  vomiting  of  excess-
ively acid  secretions  ;  irritable  and  desponding.
I  I  Chronic  sick-headache.
•^  Upper  Face. Neuralgic  faceache,  spreading  to  eyes,  fore-
head, ears  and  teeth,  changing  the  whole  features  ;  sen-
sation of disarticulation and fracture of jawbone;
1.  side.
^  Lower  Face. Uawbone feels as if disarticulated ; in-
tensely sour  taste  and  vomiting. ^Neuralgia.
"^  Teeth  and  Gums. Burning,  lancinating  pains,  especially
in  carious  teeth,  spreading  to  cheeks,  eyes  and  temples,
<  at  night,  or  when  coming  in  contact  with  food,  es-
pecially cold  or  spiced food  ; teeth  become  loosened
from  the  spongy  and  easily  bleeding  gums.


121  ROBINIA.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Heart-
burn and  acidity  of  stomach,  at  night  on  lying  down.

■  Regurgitation  of  acid  and  bitter  substances,  everything

turning  to  acid.
I  I  Sour  vomiting  of  infants  ;  the  whole  child  smells  sour.

■  Nausea,  with  vomiting  of  intensely  acid  fluid. ^Migraine.
Water  taken  before  eating,  at  night,  returned  in  morning

green  and  sour.
Vomiting  of  intensely  sour  fluid,  setting  the  teeth  on  edge.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Heartburn  and  acidity  of
stomach  at  night  on  lying  down.

■  Dull,  heavy,  aching  distress  in  stomach.

I  I  Acidity  of  stomach  ;  food  turns  sour  soon  after  eating  ;
constant  feeling  of  weight,  fulness  and  tension  in  stom-
ach ;  eructations  accompanied  by  a  sour  liquid,  and  at
times  portions  of  ingesta  ;  burning  pain  in  stomach
and  between  scapulae ;  thirst ;  constant  f'rontal  head-
ache ;  water  taken  before  retiring  at  night,  returns  in
morning  green  and  sour.

I  'Constant  dull  headache,  <  by  motion  and  reading;  at
times  dull,  heavy  aching  distress  in  stomach,  with  sen-
sation as  if  scalded  ;  sour  stomach  every  night.

I  llntensely  acid  condition  of  stomach  often  occurring
suddenly  after  taking  food,  however  carefully  selected  ;
period  between  eating  and  onset  of  attack  not  constant ;
frequent  acid,  fluid  and  flatulent  eructations,  with
slight  temporary  relief;  feeling  of  distension  and
weight,  like  a  stone,  in  epigastrium  ;  nausea  ;  palpita-
tion ;  constipation ;  severe  lancinating  pains  in  epi-
gastric, 1.  inframammary  and  1.  infrascapular  regions ;
pains  of  same  character,  though  less  severe,  in  1.  side  of
head  and  1.  extremities ;  integument  of  1.  temple  and
side  painfully  sensitive  to  contact ;  pallor  of  face ;
shivering,  with  coldness  of  1.  side,  particularly  of  1.  ex-
tremities, which  were  bluish  around  nails;  temperature
of  r.  side  normal  ;  then  considerable  heat  of  surface
and  flushed  face;  with  establishment  of  reaction  symp-

*  toms  subsided  ;  during  attack  great  mental  depression  ;
an  anxious  longing  for  and  expectation  of  speedy  dis-
solution ;  at  times  sudden  vanishing  of  ideas  ;  occasion-
ally very  violent  and  often  repeated  acid  vomiting  so
sour  as  to  set  teeth  on  edge;  matter  ejected  frequently
streaked  with  blood ;  after  violent  attack  of  vomiting
there  was  entire  cessation  of  pain  for  half  an  hour  or
longer ;  tongue  slightly  furred ;  appetite  good  ;  con-
tinued eating  sometimes  seemed  to  postpone  attack  ;
attack  usually  lasts  s'everal  hours ;  suff"ering  almost  con-
tinuous for  last  fifteen  years.


ROBINIA.  122

I  Constant,  dull,  heav}^  squeezing  pain  in  stomach  after
every  meal,  causing  great  distress  and  making  her  cry
everyday;  stomach  sour  ;  constipation;  much  pain  in
lumbar  region ;  obliged  to  keep  her  bed  most  of  day  ;
hands  and  feet  very  cold  ;  cannot  eat  more  than  one
meal  a  day,  it  puts  her  in  such  agony.

I  Fulness  and  oppression  in  pit  of  stomach ;  bitter,  flat  or
foul  taste,  excessively  acid  eructations ;  long-continued
nausea,  finally  >  by  vomiting,  which  is  so  fatiguing
that  it  may  cause  fainting ;  constant  inclination  to  stool,
finally  black,  fetid  stools,  with  great  relief.  ^Gastric
derangement.

■  Dyspepsia  manifesting  itself at  night  and  preventing

sleep.
'^Abdomen. ■  Great  distension  of  stomach  and  bowels,  with
tiatus  ;  intestines  distended  almost  to  point  of  rupturing,
with  severe  colic  and  acid  diarrhoea.

■  Flatulent  colic  and  pinching  in  abdomen,  corresponding

to  pains  in  head ;  severe  colic,  with  ineffectual  desire
for  stool ;  tympanitic  colic,  accompanied  by  great  weak-
ness and  <  from  least  motion.
^"  Stool and  Rectum. ■  Desire  for  stool,  but  only  flatus
passes;  finally  constipated  stools;  from  indigestion.

I  Sour  stools  of  infants,  with  sour  smell  from  body,  and
vomiting  of  sour  milk.

iDiarrhoeic  stools,  yellow,  green,  burning,  with  nervous
agitation,  weakness,  cold  sweat  and  dyspnoea.

■  Stools,  loose,  black,  fetid,  with  great  tenesmus.

■  Diarrhoeic  stools,  black,  fetid  or  watery,  whitish,  excess-

ively frequent  and  generally  involuntary,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  whole  body  would  pass  away  with  stool ;  heat
and  pressure  in  epigastrium ;  cramps  in  extremities ;
weakness  and  extreme  prostration ;  acid  dyspepsia ;
putrid  emanations  from  body  ;  suppression  of  urine ;
fear  of  death.

■  Cholera  infantum;  child  smells  intensely  sour; stools

green  and  watery ;  with  much  tympanitis ;  colic ;  ac-
companied by  excessive  irritability.
"  Urinary  Organs. Lfrine  scanty  and  painful ; or  profuse

and  turbid.
*^ Female  Sexual  Organs.  Nymphomania;  whitish,  green-
ish, yellowish,  thick,  acrid,  purulent  leucorrhoea,  with
tumefaction  and  bruised  feeling  in  neck  of  womb  and
general  prostration ;  ulcerative  pains  in  vagina,  with
acrid  yellowish  leucorrhoea,  of  most  fetid  smell.

Hard  swelling  of  womb.

Cramps  in  womb.

Menses  too  late ;  black.


123  ROBINIA.

Discharge  of  blood,  like  a  hemorrhage,  between  menstrual

periods  accompanied  by  purulent  leucorrhoea.
Eruption  and  ulcers  like  herpes  on  vagina  and  vulva.
*^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down : as  if  brain  re-
volved ;  heartburn  and  acidity  of  stomach.
In  whatever  position  :  vertigo  and  dulness  of  head.
Motion  :  dull frontal  headache  <  ;  of  head,  as  if  brain
struck  against  skull ;  colic  <.
^^  Time. Night :  neuralgic  pains  in  teeth  and  face  <  ;  heart-
burn and  acidity  of  stomach  ;  water  taken  before  eating
returned  in  morning  green  and  sour ;  dyspepsia  at  night.
***  Fever. '  l  Paroxysms  every  day,  late  in  afternoon,  lasting
until  3  or  4  o'clock  next  morning ;  during  attack  entire
loss of consciousness ;  flatulence,  eructations  ;  at  last
with  emission  of  flatus  the  paroxysms  gradually  faded
away ;  on  third  day  of  treatment,  very  severe  paroxysm
followed  by  collapse,  eyes  sunken,  face  hippocratic,  rat-
tling of  mucus  in  throat  and  chest,  threatened  suffoca-
tion ; Garho  veg.  removed  the  most  imminent  danger ;
during  next  three  days  had  three  more  attacks,  also  very
severe;  high  fever  with  delirium,  flatulence  with  un-
consciousness, followed  by  great prostration, dulness
and  heaviness  of  head,  distressing  dreams  when  shut-
ting eyes  ;  flatulence  seems  to  be  chief  cause  of  fever.
^Ague.
I  I  Hectic  fever,  with  night  sweats.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. For  several  hours  :  attack  of  vomit-
ing.
Every  day :  paroxysms  of  fever  late  in  afternoon,  lasting

until  3  or  4  o'clock  next  morning.
Every  night :  sour  stomach.

Last  fifteen  years  :  attacks  of  sour  stomach  and  vomiting.
^"^  Locality and Direction. Right : temperature  of  side
normal.
Left:  sensation  of  disarticulation of  jawbone; pain  in
inframammary,  infrascapular  regions  and  in side of
head  and  extremities ;  integument  of  temple  and  side
painfully  sensitive  to  contact ;  coldness  of  side  and  ex-
tremities.
"  Sensations. As  if  brain  revolved  ;  as  if  head  were  full  of
boiling  water ;  as  if  brain  struck  against  skull ;  jaw-
bone as  if  disarticulated;  stomach  as  if  scalded;  as  if
whole  body  would  pass  away  with  stool.
Pain  :  in  lumbar  region.

Lancinating  pains  :  severe  in  epigastric,  1.  inframammary
and  1.  infrascapular  regions ;  in  1.  side  of  head  and  1.
extremities.
Burning-lancinating  pain :  in  teeth  and  face.


ROBINIA.  124

Burning  pain  :  in  stomach  and  between  scapulae.

Ulcerative  pains  :  in  vagina.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  temples  ;  in  face.

Pinching :  in  abdomen.

Dull,  heavy,  squeezing  pain  :  in  stomach.

Cramps :  in  extremities  ;  in  womb.

Dull,  heavy,  aching  distress  :  in  stomach.

Heat :  in  epigastrium.

Bruised  feeling:  in  neck  of  womb.

Pressure :  in  epigastrium.

Weight:  in  stomach  ;  in  epigastrium.

Heaviness:  of  head.

Oppression :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Dulness :  of  head.

Tension :  in  stomach.

Fulness :  in  stomach  ;  in  pit  of  stomach.

Distension  :  in  epigastrium.

Coldness  :  of  1.  side,  1.  extremities.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Contact :  neuralgia
in  face  <  from  food  ;  integument  of  temple  and  side
painfully  sensitive.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Young  man,  suffering  four
months ;  acidity  of  stomach.

Miss  L.,  set.  26,  temperament  nervo-bilious,  with  a  little
of  the  lymphatic;  menstruates  every  three  weeks  pro-
fusely ;  pains  in  stomach.

Mrs. ,  set.  45,  dark  eyes  and  hair,  nervo-bilious  temper-
ament, mother  of  eight  children ;  suffering  since  fourteen
years  old,  attacks  at  first  every  Spring  and  Fall,  continu-
ing for  about  three  months,  for  last  fifteen  years  suffering
almost  continuous ;  pain  in  stomach,  etc.

Man,  set.  45,  suff'ering  three  years  from  enlargement  of
liver  and  sympathetic  cough  ;  ague.
^^  Relations. Compare:  Bryon.,  Cinchon.,  Carbo  veg.,  Lycop.,
Nux  vom.


125  RUMEX  CRISPUS.


RUMEX  CRISPUS.

Yellow  Dock.  Polygonacese.

A  native  of  Europe  introduced  into  this  country,  where  it  grows  wild  in  fields
and  waste  places.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root.

Provings  by  Houghton,  Thesis,  Hahn.  Med.  College  of  Penna.,  1852;  Joslin,
Trans.  Am.  lost.,  1858.

The  provers  were  E.  M.  K.,  H.  M.  Paine,  Wm.  E.  Payne,  Edw.  Bayard,
Wallace,  Bowers  and  Ehees ;  Preston,  U.  S.  J.  of  Hom.,  vol.  1,  1860;  Wright,
Am.  Inst,  of  Hom.,  1860.

Clinical  Atjthobities. — Pain  in  epigastrium,  Morgan,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.
137  ;  Gasirulgia,  Dyspepsia,  Joslin,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.  529 ;  Morning  diarrhoea,
Preston,  H.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  139  ;  Diarrhoea,  Morrison,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  18,  p.  687  ;
Joslin,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.  529;  Dunham,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.  533  ;  Hale,
Therap.,  p.  641  ;  Aphonia,  Shelton,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  92;  Asthma,  Morgan,  Hom.
CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  137  ;  Catarrhal  affections  of  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchi,  Dunham,  Hom.
Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.  530;  Cough,  Williamson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  133  ;  Shelton,  Hom.
CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  91  ;  Smith,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  108,  p.  190,  from  Hom.  World,  Dec,  1883 ;
Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  260 ;  Joslin,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.  529 ;  Dunham,
Wells,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  2,  pp.  534-5 ;  Cough  (during  pregnancy).  Wells,  Hom.  Eev.,
vol.  2,  p.  535 ;  Blake,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  406  ;  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  437 ;
Dunham,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1876-7,  p.  41  ;  Farley.  M.  I.,  vol.  6,  p.  404;  Moore,  M.
I.,  vol.  6,  p.  344;  Tinker,  Hale,  Therap.,  p.  646 ;  Incipient  phthisis,  ^chmuckev,
N.  Y.  J.*H.,  vol.  1,  p.  372;  Pain  in  cardiac  region,  Ehees,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.
535 ;  Prurigo,  Bernard, 'Horn.  Eec,  vol.  3,  p.  152,  from  Pop.  Zeit.  Horn.,  No.  15,
vol.  13;  Gastralgia,  Knowles  (3  cases),  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  14,  p.  107.

^  Mind. Low-spirited :  with  serious  expression  of  face ;  with
suicidal  mood.
Irritable  ;  disinclined  to  mental  exertion.
^  Sensorium. Dull  feeling  in  head  (with  the  cough).
^  Inner  Head. Headache  after  waking  in  morning,  preceded
by  a  disagreeable  dream.
Dull  pains: on  r.  side;  in  occiput; in  forehead, with

bruised  feeling,  <  on  motion.
Darting  pain,  or  sharp  piercing,  in  1.  side  of  head.
■  Catarrhal  headache,  with  great  irritation  of  larynx  and
trachea,  clavicular  pain  and  soreness  behind  sternum.
■'Sight  and  Eyes. Pain  in  eyes  as  from  dryness;  lids  in-
flamed, <  in  evening.
Sore  feeling  in  eyes,  without  inflammation.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears.
Itching  deep  in  ears.


RUMEX  CRISPUS.  126

^  Smell  and  Nose. Great  desire  to  pick  nose.

I  Nose  obstructed  ;  dry  sensation,  even  in  posterior  nares.

Sudden,  sharp  tingling  sensation  in  Schneiderian  mem-
brane, followed  by  violent  and  rapid  sneezing,  five  or
six  times  in  succession,  with  a  watery  discharge  from
nostrils.

■  Violent  sneezing;  w^ith  fluent  coryza  <  in  evening  and

at  night.
I  Coryza: fluent, with sneezing; with headache; <

evening  and  night.
Accumulation  of  mucus  about  posterior  nares.
I  Yellow  mucus  discharged  through  posterior  nares.
lEpistaxis, violent sneezing and painful irritation of

nostrils.

■  Influenza  with  violent  catarrh,  followed  by  bronchitis.

*  Upper  Face. Heat  of face : redness < evenings ; dull

headache;  with  pulsation  over  whole  body.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste  (morning).

Dry  tongue  and  mouth  ;  tongue  feels  as  if  burned.
Tongue  coated  :  white  ;  yellow  ;  yellowish-brown  or  red-
dish-brown.
'^ Inner  Mouth, l  'Ulceration  of  mouth  and  throat.
13  Throat. I  Scraping  in  throat ;  excoriated  feeling  with  secre-
tion of  mucus  in  upper  part.

■  Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat,  not > by  hawking  or

swallowing,  it  descends  on  deglutition,  but  immediately
returns.

■  Aching  in  pharynx,  with  collection  of  tough  mucus  in

fauces.

■  Catarrhal  affections  of  throat  and  fauces.

''^ Eating  and  Drinking. After  meals: flatulency; heavi-
ness in  stomach  or  epigastrium  ;  aching  in 1.  breast ;
pressure  and  distension  in  stomach.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea

in  night,  before  diarrhoea.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  heaviness  in
epigastrium,  immediately  after  eating.
Sensation  as  of  a  hard  substance  in  pit  of  stomach.
Weight,  pressure  and  distension  in  stomach  after  meals.
I  I  Fulness  and  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  extending  to-
ward throat  pit ;  descends  with  every  empty  deglutition,
but  immediately  returns.

■  Tight,  suffocative,  heavy  ache  in  epigastrium,  through  to

back  ;  clothes  seem  too  tight ;  weak  feeling  in  epigas-
trium, all  <  when  talking;  frequently  takes  a  long
breath.

■  Shooting  from  pit  of  stomach  to  chest;  sharp  in  1.  chest;

slight  nausea  ;  dull  aching  in  forehead.


127  RUMEX  CRISPUS.

I  Aching  and  shooting  in  pit  of  stomach  and  above  it  on
each  side  of  sternum.

I  I  Distress  in  stomach  pit,  <  after  eating,  especially
apples ;  once  after  an  apple  such  distress  that  she  be-
came cold  and  unconscious  and  seemed  to  be  dying ;
at  times  sharp  pains  in  chest  and  abdomen ;  at  times
very  distressing  sensation  as  of  a  bunch  either  in  throat
or  behind  sternum ;  emaciated  ;  could  scarcely  find  any-
thing she  could  eat  without  distress.

I  I  Pain  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  aching  in  1.  chest ;  flatulence  ;
eructations ;  pressure  and  distension  in  stomach  after
meals.

I  I  Aching  in  pit  of  stomach,  and  aching  and  shootings
above  it  in  chest,  at,  and  especially  on  each  side  of
lower  end  of  sternum  ;  after  a  cup  of  tea,  in  a  man  un-
accustomed to  its  use.

I  I  Aching  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  gradually  becoming
very  severe ;  sharp  stitching  pains  in  stomach  extend-
mg  into  chest,  and  below  a  sensation  of  pressure  like  a
lump  in  pit  of  stomach,  sometimes  rising  up  under
sternum,  greatly  <  from  motion  and  somewhat  from
taking  a  long  breath  ;  generally  <  after  eating;  >
lying  perfectly  quiet.

I  I  Distress  in  stomach  becoming  so  severe  that  she  could
not  sit_  up ;  severe  aching  pains  in  stomach  pit  and
above  it;  occasional  spells  of  sharp  shooting  pains  in
chest,  sides  and  abdomen ;  some  headache  and  nausea
after  eating ;  all  symptoms  <  from  motion  and  eating ;
sensation  as  of  a  lump  or  pressure  sometimes  in  throat,
sometimes  behind  sternum.

I  I  Tight,  suff'ocative,  dull,  heavy  ache  in  epigastrium,
through  to  back ;  clothes  seem  too  tight ;  weak  feeling
m  epigastrium;  all  <  by  talking;  frequently  obliged
to  get  a  long  breath  and  to  yawn,  with  watering  of  eyes ;
stitching  pains  in  back  of  r.  hip;  limping  walk.
'^  Hypochondria. I  Pain  in  hypochondrium  from  walking  or

deep  inspiration.
*'  Abdomen. Griping  near  navel,  partially  >  by  discharge
of  offensive  flatus ;  flatulent  colic  soon  after  a  meal.
Pain  occurring,  or  <  during  deep  inspiration.
Sensation of hardness  and fulness  in abdomen, with

rumbling.
I  I  Pain  in  abdomen  in  morning,  followed  by  a  stool.

I  I  Colic  from  a  cold,  with  cough.
^ Stool  and  Rectum. iStools:  painless,  offensive,  profuse;
brown  or  black,  thin  or  watery ;  preceded  by  pain  in
abdomen;  before  stool,  sudden  urging, driving  him  out
of  bed  in  morning.


RUMEX  CRISPUS.  .  128

I  Morning  diarrhoea,  with  cough  from  tickling  in  throat  pit.
I  I  Brown,  watery  diarrhoea,  chiefly  in  morning,  having
five  stools  from  5  to  9  a.m.,  attended  by  moderate  grip-
ing pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen  ;  cough.

I  I  Diarrhoea  every  morning  for  four  days ;  evacuations
profuse,  offensive  and  thin,  even  watery ;  cough  excited
by  tickling  in  throat  pit,  usually  dry ;  when  expectora-
tion occurs  it  is  tasteless ;  cough  shocks  the  stomach
and  is  attended  by  a  sensation  of  excoriation  in  chest ;
it  keeps  her  awake  at  night.

I  I  Diarrhoea  in  morning  ;  four  evacuations  between  6  and
10  A.M.;  very  thin,  painless ;  nausea  on  movement  in
night  preceding  evacuation  ;  mouth  dry ;  tongue  coated
slightly  yellow  ;  day  previous  had  dull  pain  on  r.  side
of  sternum,  sharp  pain  on  1. ;  during  climaxis.

1  I  Serious  attack  of  diarrhoea  in  an  old  man  of  70,  after
failure  of  (Sulphur;  early  morning  aggravation;  nau-
sea; colic;  tickling  cough,  <  by  cool  air  and  talking.

Feces  hard,  tough,  brown ;  costive.

Itching  at  anus  with  discharge  of  offensive  flatus.

Sensation  as  from  pressure  of  a  stick  in  rectum.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Sudden  urging.

Frequent  inclination  to  urinate,  with  sensation  as  if  urine
could  not  long  be  retained.

Involuntary  micturition,  with  cough.

Copious,  colorless  urine,  in  afternoon.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Hoarse-
ness, <  evenings;  voice  uncertain.

Sudden  change  of  voice  at  different  times,  or  at  same  time
on  each  day,  or  with  cough.

I  Voice  :  higher,  as  with  catarrh  ;  nasal;  hoarse,  especially
in  evening.

■  Aphonia  after  exposure  to  cold.

'  I  Reflex  aphonia  due  to  infiltration  of  tubercle  in  apex
of  1.  lung.

■  Catarrhal  aphonia,  with  irritation  in  suprasternal  fossa,

exciting  a  distressing  cough.

■  Tenacious  mucus  in  throat  or  larynx,  constant  desire

to  hawk.

■  Hawking  of  mucus  from  larynx.

■  Desire  to  hawk  phlegm,  which  is  felt  in  larynx  like  mov-

ing to  and  fro,  without  succeeding ; <  in  cold  air ;  <

at  night.
I  I  Much  tough  mucus  in  larynx,  with  a  constant  cough

and desire to  raise  it,  but  without relief; morning

diarrhoea.
I  I  Tenacious  mucus  in  throat  or  larynx  ;  a  constant  desire

to  hawk ;  coughing  and  hawking  <  at  night ;  scraping


129  RUMEX  CRISPUS.

in  throat ;  cough  excited  by  tickling  or  irritation  be-
hind sternum  ;  cough  attended  with  pain  in  head  ;  sud-
den change  of  voice  at  same  hour  on  consecutive  days ;
change  of  voice  at  different  times.

Hawking  of  mucus  from  upper  part  of  larynx  and  throat;
with  burning  soreness ;  extending  later  to  1.  bronchus  ;
renewed  by  a  stronger  exhalation  or  scraping.

I  I  Hawking  of  mucus  from  larynx,  with  burning  soreness ;
voice  hoarse,  especially  in  evening  ;  tickling  in  throat ;
coughing  <  by  pressure  on  larynx;  forced,  barking
cough,  with  soreness  of  larynx  and  chest.

llTickling  in  throat  pit  causing  cough.

Violent  irritation  to  cough  in  larynx  while  eating.

Pain  in  larynx :  while  eating ;  in  top  of  larynx ;  mostly
on  1.  side  ;  with  excoriating  cough.

I  Raw  sensation  in  larynx,  when  coughing.

I I  Acute  catarrhal  affections  of  larynx,  trachea  and  bron-
chi; dry,  frequent,  continuous  cough,  in  long  paroxysms,
or,  under  certain  circumstances,  almost  uninterrupted,
and  out  of  proportion  to  degree  of  organic  affection  of
mucous  membrane  ;  induced,  or  greatly  <  by  any  ir-
regularity of  respiration,  such  as  a  little  deeper  or  more
rapid  inspiration  than  usual,  by  inspiration  of  air  a
little  colder  than  that  previously  inhaled,  by  irregularity
of  respiration  and  irregular  motions  of  larynx  and
trachea,  such  as  are  involved  in  the  act  of  speech,  and
by  external  pressure  upon  trachea  in  region  of  supra-
sternal fossa;  great  irritability  of  mucous  membrane  of
larynx  and  trachea ;  rawness  and  soreness  in  trachea,
extending  a  short  distance  below  suprasternal  fossa
and  laterally  into  bronchi,  chiefly  1. ;  tickling  in  supra-
sternal fossa  and  behind  sternum  provokes  cough  ;  this
tickling  is  very  annoying  and  persistent  and  is  often,
but  momentarily,  and  sometimes  only  partially,  >  by
coughing ;  cough  occurs  chiefly,  or  is  much  <  in  even-
ing after  retiring,  and  at  that  time  the  membrane  of
trachea  is  particularly  sensitive  to  cold  air  and  to  any
irregularity  in  the  flow  of  air  over  its  surface,  so  that
patient  often  covers  head  with  bedclothes  to  avoid  the
cold  air  and  refuses  to  speak  or  even  listen  to  conversa-
tion, lest  his  attention  should  be  withdrawn  from  the
supervision  of  his  respiratory  acts,  which  he  performs
with  the  most  careful  uniformity  and  deliberation.

I  i  Has  not  been  able  to  speak  above  a  whisper  for  nearly
three  months ;  soreness  in  throat  <  during  empty
deglutition,  but  is  not  <  by  swallowing  food  ;  posterior
surface  of  pharynx  irritated  and  in  places  excoriated,

VOL.  IX. — 9.


RUMEX  CRISPUS. ,  130

edges  of  soft  palate  and  uvula  red  and  swollen,  and
covered  with  an  eruption  of  minute  red  pimples  ;  slight
hacking  cough,  produced  by  tickling  in  larynx  and
upper  part  of  trachea  ;  after  taking  cold.
'^^Respiration.  Frequent  feeling  as  if  she  could  not  get  an-
other breath.

Sensation  of  breathlessness,  as  if  air  did  not  penetrate
chest,  or  like  what  is  felt  when  falling  or  passing  very
rapidly  through  air.

Breathing  causes  soreness  behind  sternum.

1 1  Rattling  in  windpipe;  frequent  feeling  as  if  she  could
not  get  another  breath  (compare  Apis),  coughing  spells
several  times  a  day,  lasting  one  and  a  half  hours  at  a
time  and  originating  in  a  sense  of  great  accumulation
of  tough  mucus  in  chest,  with  increased  dyspnoea  and
desire  to  cough  it  up,  causing  a  general  hot  sweat  half
an  hour  before  spell  (increasing  during  it) ;  cough  very
hard,  with  feeling  of  suffocation,  reaching  to  epigastrium,
as  if  tough  phlegm  must  work  up  ;  severe  soreness  be-
hind whole  sternum,  spreading  to  each  side ;  constant
but  <  during  cough  ;  much  tough  mucus  is  brought
up  during  spell ;  during  its  continuance  feels  like  kill-
ing herself  in  despair ;  afterward  prostrate  and  tearful.
^Asthma.

■  Asthma  of  consumptives;  aggravation  2  a.m.
^^  Cough. I  Hoarse,  barking  cough;  in  attacks,  every  night
at  11  P.M.,  and  at  2  and  5  a.m.  (children).

I  Cough,  with  pain  behind  mid-sternum.

I I  Dry,  incessant,  fatiguing  cough,  caused  by  tickling  in
throat  pit,  extending  to  behind  sternum  and  to  stomach ;
soreness  in  larynx  and  behind  sternum  ;  rawness  under
clavicles  ;  pain  in  stomach  ;  stitches  in  1.  lung  ;  cough
<  from  changing  rooms,  evening  after  lying  down,
touching  or  pressing  throat  pit,  from  slightest  inhala-
tion of  cool  air,  covers  head  with  bedclothes  to  make
air  warmer.

I  Hawking  with  burning  soreness  in  larynx;  later  in  1.
bronchus,  renewed  by  strong  exhalation  and  scraping.

Dry  spasmodic  cough,  simulating  early  stage  of  whooping
cough,  at  first  dry,  coming  on  in  paroxysms  preceded  by
tickling  in  throat  pit,  attended  by  congestion  and
slight  pain  in  head  and  wrenching  pains  in  r.  side  of
chest ;  the  most  violent  paroxysm  began  a  few  moments
after  lying  down  at  night,  usually  at  about  11  o'clock ;
this  paroxysm  lasted  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  after  which
he  slept  all  night ;  a  less  severe  paroxysm  occurred  in
bed,  in  morning  after  waking,  and  at  various  times
through  day ; after  two weeks,  expectoration  of  ad-


131  RUMEX  CRISPUS-

hesive  mucus  in  small  quantities,  detached  with  diffi-
culty.

■Hacking  cough.

Pressure  on  throat  causes  cough.

Cough  as  soon  as  he  turns  on  1.  side.

■  The  most  violent  cough  occurs  a  few  moments  after  ly-

ing down  and  at  night;  in  some  cases  complete  aphonia.

I  I  Severe  cough,  provoked  by  pressure  on  trachea,  deep
inspirations,  inhalation  of  cold  air  and  talking ;  cough
severe,  explosive  and  continuous,  hurts  the  head,  ac-
companied by  involuntary  micturition ;  <  latter  part
of  night.

I  'Dry,  tickling,  spasmodic,  cough,  with  tenderness  in
larynx  and  trachea,  rendering  cough  quite  painful.

1  iTeasing,  persistent  cough,  <  in  cool  air,  or  by  anything
which  increases  the  volume  or  rapidity  of  inspired  air.

■  Dry,  hacking,  incessant,  very  fatiguing  cough,  excited

by  tickling  in  suprasternal  fossa,  extending  downward
to  middle  of  sternum,  with  a  sensation  as  if  a  feather
were  swaying  to  and  fro  in  bronchi  with  respiration,
causing  a  tickling  which  provokes  cough.

I  I  Cough  begins  with  tickling  behind  top  of  sternum  and
sometimes  in  paroxysms  of  five  to  ten  minutes  dura-
tion ;  trachea  sore  to  outward  pressure,  feels  excoriated
through  its  whole  extent,  as  do  also  the  whole  fauces ;
cough  excited  by  pressure  on  throat  pit ;  cough  is  vio-
lent with  scanty,  difficult  expectoration,  shocks  head
and  chest,  head  as  if  it  would  fly  into  pieces  and  he
feels  as  if  he  might  raise  blood  any  minute ;  greatly  ex-
hausted after  the  paroxysms  of  coughing ;  head  aches
during  cough.

I  I  Dry  cough  ;  tickling  in  throat  pit ;  continued  desire  to
cough  on  breathing  cold  air,  <  after  retiring  to  bed ;
obliged  to  cover  mouth  with  bedclothes  and  use  every
effort  to  prevent  coughing ;  occasional  pains  through
both  lungs  extending  up  into  trachea ;  feels  weak  and
exhausted  in  morning ;  very  frequently  a  rawness  in
throat  in  morning.

I  I  Is  very  nervous ;  confusion  of  head ;  hoarseness  in
evenings  ;  cough  ;  excoriation  behind  whole  of  sternum
on  coughing  and  on  inspiration ;  coldness  of  fingers.

I  I  Cough  originally  produced  by  inhalation  of  extremely

cold  air  during  Winter ;  cough  <  lying  down,  and  es-
pecially at  11  o'clock  at  night ;  excited  by  tickling  be-
hind sternum  and  attended  by  a  sprainlike  aching  near
sternum  and  with  accumulation  of  mucus  in  fauces  near
posterior  nares.

I I  Cough  about  11  p.m.  when  lying  on  1.  side  ;  awoke  be-


RUMEX  CRISPUS.  132

tween  1  and  2  a.m.  with  cough  in  any  position  ;  it  made
the  chest  feel  bruised  and  seemed  as  if  it  did  not  reach
low  enough  down  to  raise  the  phlegm,  and  when  it  did
loosen  it,  it  caused  soreness  of  chest ;  after  catching
cold  from  exposure  to  cold  early  morning  air.

I  I  Severe  cold  for  several  days ;  pulse  quick,  not  hard,

110,  skin  moderately  hot  and  dry,  face  somewhat
flushed ;  respiration  embarrassed  not  so  much  by  any
constriction  of  chest  as  by  violent  and  long-continued
cough,  which  follows  any  attempt  to  make  a  full  in-
spiration ;  physical  examination  of  chest  reveals  noth-
ing abnormal ;  roughness  and  soreness  in  lower  part  of
trachea  and  behind  upper  third  of  sternum  much
more  perceptible  when  she  coughs ;  cough  dry,  slightly
hoarse,  very  violent  and  fatiguing ;  it  is  provoked  by  a
tickling  in  suprasternal  fossa,  is  induced  by  pressure
upon  trachea  in  that  region  and  especially  by  talking
and  by  deep  inspiration  or  by  inspiration  of  cool  air ;
this  irritability  of  trachea  increases  very  markedly  after
7  P.M.,  so  that  she  suffers  exceedingly  from  the  constant
tickling  and  violent  cough ;  she  can  prevent  it  only  by
respiring  with  great  caution  and  deliberation,  by  avoid-
ing all  distractions  of  speech  and  conversation,  and
finally  she  draws  bedclothes  over  head  in  order  to  avoid
inhaling  cool  air  of  chamber.

I I  Severe  dry  cough  at  times  for  several  years ;  cough  <
in  evening ;  unable  to  breathe  the  cold  air  of  his  bed-
room and  has  a  severe  coughing  spell  in  morning  on
rising  and  at  times  during  day,  especially  on  taking  a
deep  inspiration ;  is  thin  and  rather  emaciated ;  has
frequent  night  sweats  ;  tickling  in  throat  and  at  top  of
sternum  ;  after  coughing  some  time,  rawness  in  throat
of  a  very  disagreeable  character,  extending  from
pharynx  down  beneath  upper  portion  of  sternum,
accompanied  by  a  burning  sensation  through  upper
lobes  of  both  lungs  (clavicular  region),  with  loss  of  ap-
petite and  considerable  prostration,  on  examination  no
indication  of  presence  of  tubercles.

J  I  Contracted  cold  in  head,  throat  and  lungs ;  cough  hard,
dry  and  explosive,  provoked  by  tickling  in  throat,  talk-
ing, deep  inspiration,  inhaling  cold  air,  <  in  lying;
hurts  the  head  and  is  accompanied  by  involuntary
micturition.

I  I  Contracted  cold ;  cough  dry,  hoarse,  barking,  sounding

like  croup,  accompanied  by  fever.

I I  Constant  dry,  barking,  spasmodic  cough.  ^Chronic
pneumonia.

I  I  Cough  originating  in  larynx,  where  loud  mucous  rat-


133  RUMEX  CRISPUS.

tling  could  be  heard  ;  returns  every  ten  seconds  during
day,  less  frequent  at  night.

I  I  Subject  to  eight  miscarriages,  all  in  early  stage  of  preg-
nancy, which  in  each  case  was  early  attended  by  dry,
shaking,  spasmodic  cough,  in  paroxysms  of  great  vio-
lence, instrumental  in  producing  the  abortions ;  at  be-
ginning of  ninth  pregnancy  had  her  cough,  which  was
very  dry,  harsh,  loud,  shaking,  <  at  night,  preventing
sleep,  excited  instantly  and  violently  by  pressure  on
trachea.

llCough  provoked  by  change  from  warm  to  cold,  or  cool
to  warm  air,  also  by  change  in  rhythm  of  respiration.

I  I  Constant  dry  cough  lasting  many  months  in  a  woman
disposed  to  consumption.

Aching  from  shoulder  blades  down  back  or  kidneys.

I  In  women  every  fit  of  coughing  produces  the  passage  of
a  few  drops  of  urine.

I  Dry  cough  commencing  at  2  a.m.

■  Cough  on  changing  rooms.

I  Night  cough  of  phthisis,  with  or  without  clavicular  pain.

'^ Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iPain  in  chest:  in  both  sides.

Dull  aching  in  anterior  portion  of  both  lungs  day  and

night,  for  five  days,  accompanied  by  headache  and  pain

in  stomach,  also  belching  of  wind.
Fine  stitches  in  1.  lung,  at  3.30  p.m.,  while  writing.

■  Sharp  stitching  or  stinging  pains  through  1.  lung  ;  when

patient  turns  1.  side  feels  sore;  early  stages  of  phthisis.
^Pleurodynia.

Very  acute  stitch  along  1.  margin  of  sternum  on  inspira-
tion, in  afternoon  while  riding.

Burning-stinging  pain  in  1.  side,  near  heart,  soon  after
lying  down  in  bed;  gradually  moved  up  into  great
pectoral  muscles  about  two  inches  above  and  to  1.  of
nipple  and  continued  for  a  long  time ;  <  from  deep  in-
spiration and  by  lying  on  back  or  r.  side  ;  >  lying  on
1.  side.

Burning-stinging  pain  in  whole  1.  side  of  chest,  suddenly
when  taking  a  deep  inspiration,  while  in  the  act  of  ly-
ing down  in  bed  at  night.

Stinging,  almost  itching  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest,  just  below
nipple,  followed  and  accompanied  stinging,  burning
pain  in  back.

Burning  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest,  just  below  nipple,  <  on
taking  a  deep  inspiration.

Severe  pain  in  both  sides  and  felt  as  if  in  lungs.

■  Clavicular  pain  ;  raw  pain  just  under  each  clavicle  while

hawking  mucus  from  throat.
Burning-sticking  or  burning-stinging  pain in 1.  chest


RUMEX  CRISPUS.  134

near  heart ;  <  from  deep  breathing  and  lying  down  in
bed  at  night ;  rheumatism.

Burning,  shooting  pain  in  r.  chest.

Sharp  pain  near  1.  axilla.

Pain  in  centre  of  1.  lung.

The  sternum  feels  sprained.

I  I  Great  dyspnoea  ;  constant,  dry,  hacking  cough  ;  mucous
rale  at  apex  of  r.  lung,  with  slight  dulness;  haggard
countenance;  commenced  coughing  two  years  before;
sometimes  pain  in  1.  side  just  below  nipple ;  cannot  ex-
pectorate ;  cough  excited  by  tickling  in  larynx  and
suprasternal  fossa;  sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat  not
>  by  hawking  or  swallowing ;  tough  mucus  in  larynx
with  desire  to  raise  it,  but  without  relief;  diarrhoea;
thighs  and  back  covered  with  small  red  pimples ;  night
sweats  and  restless  nights ;  cough  <  in  morning,  on
entering  warm  room  from  cold  air,  on  stopping  after  a
walk,  on  first  lying  down  at  night,  in  smoke,  or  in
kitchen  where  cooking  is  being  done.  ^Incipient
phthisis.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Heart  feels  as  if  it  sud-
denly stopped  beating,  followed  by  a  heavy  throbbing
through  chest.

Burning  in  region  of  heart.

Dull  pain  in  region  of  heart;  stinging;  <  when  lying
down  and  breathing  deeply.

I  t  Violent  palpitation  of  heart  with  throbbing  of  carotids
anji  throughout  body,  visible  to  eye  and  shaking  bed  ;
pulse  120 ;  violent  aching  pain  in  region  of  heart ;
great  dyspnoea,  especially  while  lying  so  that  he  had  to
be  propped  up  in  a  sitting  posture ;  face  red  and  puffed,
especially  about  eyes,  which  were  red,  heavy  and  lustre-
less ;  tongue  coated  with  white  fur,  red  tip  and  edges ;
excessive  thirst ;  no  appetite ;  costive.

Pulse  accelerated,  mostly  when  going  up  stairs.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pressing  aching  in  back,  at  lower  border
of  scapula.

Sore  or  burning  pain  near  sacro-iliac  symphysis.
^  Upper  Limbs. Pains  in  shoulder  down  to  elbow,  arms  feel
strained.

Hands  cold  when  coughing.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Stitching  in  back  of  r.  hip  ;  limping  walk.

Legs  ache.

Stitchlike  pain  in  knee  joint,  when  standing.

Legs  covered  with  small  red  pimples.

Feet  cold.

Feet  sensitive  ;  stinging  in  corns.
^^  Best. Position. Motion. Lying  down :  cough  <  ;  soon


135  RUMEX  CRISPUS.

after  burning  pain  near  heart ;  while  in  the  act,  burn-
ing pain  in  chest;  stinging  in  region  of  heart  <.

Lying  quiet:  distress  or  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  >.

Lying  on  L  side  :  pain  near  heart  >.

Standing :  stitchlike  pain  in  knee  joint.

Motion  :  pains  in  head ;  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  <  ;
causes  nausea.

Talking :  tight,  suffocative,  heavy  ache  in  epigastrium  <.

Turning  on  1.  side:  cough  <.

Walking:  pain  in  hypochondrium.

Going  up  stairs  :  pulse  accelerated.
^^  Nerves. Great  debility  ;  averse  to  work ;  indifferent  to  his
surroundings.

Restlessness  in  evening.

1 1  Sensitive  to  open  air.
^'^  Sleep. Sleep  disturbed;  wakeful,  restless  ;  short  naps  and
unpleasant  fancies,  even  when  awake.

Unpleasant  dreams.

Unquiet  sleep,  dreams  of  danger  and  trouble.

Wakes  early,  with  headache.
^^  Time. Morning :  headache  after  waking  ;  bitter  taste ;  sud-
den urging  to  stool  drives  him  out  of  bed;  diarrhoea;
rawness  in  throat ;  weak  and  exhausted.

2  A.M. :  dry  cough  commences.

Afternoon :  copious,  colorless  urine ;  stitch  on  margin  of
sternum  ;  fever.

3.30  P.M. :  stitches  in  1.  lung.

Evening :  lids  inflamed  <  ;  fluent  coryza  <  ;  heat  of  face
<  ;  hoarseness  <  ;  cough  <  ;  hoarseness.

Day  and  night:  aching  in  lungs.

Night :  fluent  coryza  <  ;  nausea ;  desire  to  hawk  phlegm  ;
latter  part,  cough  <  ;  burning,  stinging  pain  in  chest  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  prurigo  >.

Covering  mouth  with  bedclothes  :  prevents  cough.

While  undressing :  itching  on  various  parts,  <  in  lower
limbs.

Changing  rooms:  cough  <.

Change  from  cold  or  cool  to  warm  air :  provokes  cough.

Open  air:  sensitive  to  ;  urticaria  <.

Cool  air:  cough  <  ;  vesicular  eruption  itching  when  ex-
posed.

Exposure  to  cold  :  aphonia.

Cold :  prurigo  <.

Cold  air:  desire  to  hawk  phlegm  <  ;  cough  <  ;  inhala-
tions cause  cough.
*"  Fever. Chilly,  <  on  back  ;  colic,  nausea,  stitches  near  mid-
dle of  chest.

Increased  frequency  of  pulse,  and  afternoon  fever.


RUMEX  CRISPUS.  136

Sensation  of  heat,  followed  by  that  of  cold,  without
shivering.

Flushes  of  heat  <  on  cheeks.

Sweat  on  waking  from  a  sound  sleep.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. From  5  to  9  a.m.  :  jBve  stools.

From  6  to  10  a.m.  :  four  stools.

Every  ten  seconds  :  cough.

Every  morning  for  four  days  :  diarrhoea.

After  7  p.m.:  irritability  of  trachea  <.

At  same  time  each  day:  sudden  change  of  voice.

Several  times  a  day  :  coughing  spells  lasting  one  and  a
half  hours  at  a  time.

Every  night  at  11  p.m.,  between  1  and  2  a.m.  and  at  2  and
5  A.M. :  attacks  of  cough.

For  several  years  :  at  times  dry  cough.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  side  of  occiput ;
pain  in  hip  ;  dull pain  on  side  of  sternum  ;  pains  in
side  of  chest ;  shooting  pain  in  chest ;  mucous  rale  at
apex  of  lung  ;  stitches  in  back  of  hip.

Left :  sharp  pain  in  side  of  head  ;  aching  in  breast ;  sharp
pain  in  chest ;  tubercles  in  apex  of  lung ;  burning  sore-
ness of  bronchus  ;  pain  in  side  of  larynx ;  stitches  in
lung;  soreness  in  bronchus;  when  turning  on  side,
cough  ;  fine  stitches  in  lung;  stitching  or  stinging  pains
through  lung;  side  feels  sore  when  turning;  stitch
along  margin  of  sternum  ;  burning,  stinging  pain  near
heart;  burning  stinging  near  nipple;  >  lying  on  side;
burning  stinging  pain  in  whole  side  of  chest;  almost
itching  pain  in  cliest;  sharp  pain  in  axillae;  pain  in
centre  of  lung.
^'  Sensations.  Eyes  pain  as  if  from  dryness ;  tongue  as  if
burned  ;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat;  as  of  a  hard  substance
in  pit  of  stomach  ;  as  of  a  bunch  in  throat  or  behind
sternum;  as  of  pressure  of  a  stick  in  rectum;  as  if
urine  could  not  long  be  retained ;  as  if  she  could  not
get  another  breath  ;  as  if  air  did  not  penetrate  chest ;
as  if  a  feather  were  swaying  to  and  fro  in  bronchi ;  as
if  head  would  fly  into  pieces  ;  as  if  he  might  raise
blood  any  minute ;  as  if  cough  did  not  reach  low
enough  down  to  raise  phlegm;  as  if  heart  suddenly
stopped  beating.

Pain  :  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  hypochondrium  ;  in  abdo-
men; in  head  ;  in  larynx;  in  stomach;  through  both
lungs;  in  chest;  in  centre  of  1.  lung;  in  1.  side  just
below  nipple  ;  in  shoulder  down  to  elbow.

Severe  pain  :  in  both  sides  as  if  in  lungs.

Sharp  pains  :  in  chest  and  abdomen ;  on  1.  side  of  ster-
num; near  1.  axilla.


137  RUMEX  CRISPUS.

Darting  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Piercing :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Shooting :  from  pit  of  stomach  to  chest ;  in  1.  chest ;  on
each  side  of  lower  end  of  sternum  ;  in  abdomen.

Burning,  shooting  pain  :  in  r.  chest.

Wrenching  pains :  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Stitches :  in  1.  lung ;  very  acute  along  1.  margin  of  ster-
num ;  in  back  of  r.  hip.

Sharp  stitching  pains  :  in  stomach  into  chest ;  in  back  of
r.  hip  ;  through  1.  lung.

Stitchlike  pain  :  in  knee  joint.

Burning-stinging  pain  :  in  1.  side,  near  heart ;  in  back.

Stinging,  almost  itching  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Burning  pain :  in  1.  side  of  chest  near  sacro-iliac  sym-
physis.

Raw  pain :  just  under  each  clavicle.

Griping :  near  navel ;  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

Aching :  in  pharynx  ;  in  1.  breast ;  in  epigastrium  ;  in
forehead ;  in  pit  of  stomach  and  above  it  on  each  side
of  sternum  ;  from  shoulder  blades  down  back  or  kid-
neys ;  in  anterior  portion  of  both  lungs ;  in  region  of
heart ;  in  legs.

Tight,  suffocative,  dull,  heavy  ache:  in  epigastrium
through  to  back.

Sprainlike  aching :  near  sternum.

Pressing  aching :  in  back  at  lower  border  of  scapula.

Dull  pains  :  on  r.  side ;  in  occiput ;  in  forehead  ;  on  right
side  of  sternum  ;  in  region  of  heart.

Burning :  in  region  of  heart.

Burning  sensation  :  through  upper  lobes  of  lungs.

Sharp,  tingling  sensation:  in  Schneiderian  membrane.

Stinging:  in  region  of  heart;  in  corns.

Soreness:  behind  sternum;  in  eyes;  burning  of  larynx
and  throat;  of  larynx  and  chest;  of  trachea;  lower
part  of  trachea.

Raw  sensation:  in  larynx;  in  trachea;  under  clavicles.

Excoriated  feeling :  in  upper  part  of  throat ;  in  chest ;
behind  sternum.

Bruised  feeling  :  in  forehead.

Scraping :  in  throat.

Tenderness  :  in  larynx  and  trachea.

Distress:  in  stomach  pit.

Tickling :  in  throat  pit ;  in  suprasternal  fossa  and  behind
sternum.

Heavy  throbbing:  through  chest.

Heaviness :  in  stomach  or  epigastrium.

Pressure :  in  stomach ;  in  pit  of  stomach,  extending  to-
ward throat.


RUMEX  CRISPUS.  138

Hardness :  in  abdomen.

Dull  feeling  :  in  head.

Distension  :  in  stomach.

Fulness :  in  abdomen.

Weak  feeling:  in  epigastrium.

Dryness:  of  tongue  and  mouth.

Dry  sensation:  in  nose.

Itching:  deep  in  ears;  at  anus;  in  various  parts  on  lower

limbs.
Coldness :  of  fingers ;  of  hands  ;  of  feet.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  on  throat

pit;  cough  <.
Pressure:  on  larynx,  cough  <  ;  on  throat  pit,  cough  <  ;

on  trachea  causes  severe  cough.
Riding :  stitch  along  margin  of  sternum.
*^Skin. I  Itching  in  various  parts,  <  on  lower  limbs,  while

undressing.
I  I  Eruption covered uniformly  several regions  of  skin

wath exception  of  face; itching  more  of a  pricking

than  a  burning  character; < by cold, and  > by

warmth. ^Prurigo.

■  Contagious  prurigo  or  "  army  itch."

■  Stinging-itching,  or  prickling-itching  of  skin.

■  Vesicular  eruption,  itching  when  uncovered  and  exposed

to  cool  air.
I  I  Prairie  itch.
Urticaria  ;  <  in  open  air.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  4 ;  cough.
Boy,  set.  5 ;  diarrhoea.
Girl,  set.  6,  suffering  three  weeks  ;  cough.
Girl,  set.  6,  after  catching  cold;  cough.
Girl,  set.  12,  suffering  four  days  ;  diarrhcea.
Joseph  H.,  set.  13,  subject  to  violent  attacks  of  inflamma-
tory  rheumatism, heart being implicated  ; pain in

cardiac  region.
Miss  C,  set.  20,  robust,  healthy,  after  exposure  ;  aphonia.
Woman,  set.  22,  feeble  constitution,  strumous,  subject  for

several  years  to  subacute  rheumatism  ;  cough.
Miss  W.,  young  lady  of  highly  nervous  temperament ;

cough.
Man,  set.  23,  nervous  temperament,  suffering  several  years,

thinks  himself  consumptive;  cough.
Miss  B.,  set.  25,  clear,  white,  very  smooth  skin,  rather  pale,

dark-auburn  hair,  full  round  figure,  after  catching  cold

three  months  ago  ;  sore  throat,  aphonia.
Man,  set.  26,  nervous,  sanguine  temperament;  cough.
Man,  set.  26,  dark  complexion,  married ;  incipient  phthisis.
Mrs.  G.,  set.  30,  suffering  five  days  ;  cough.


139  RUM.  CRISP.— RUTA  GRAV.

Woman,  set.  35,  married,  suffering  four  days ;  diarrhoea.
Mrs.  A.,  £et.  45  ;  cough.

Lady,  set.  about  50,  suffering  three  weeks  ;  pain  in  stomach.
Lady,  set.  about  50,  suffering  four  days  ;  diarrhoea.
Man,  set.  70  ;  diarrhoea.
Farmer,  suffering  three  years;  prurigo.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Camphor.,  Bellad.,  Hyosc,  Conium,

Laches.,  Phosphor.
Compare:  Apis,  Bellad.,  Calc.carb.,  Caustic,  Cistus,  Dulcam.,

Eryngium,  Hepar  sulph.,  Iris,  lodium,  Juglans,  Laches.,

Lycopod.,  Lobelia,  Mercur.,  Nuphar,  Phosphor.,  Podoph.,

piheum,  Sanguin.,  Spongia,  Sulphur.


RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.

Rue.  Rutacess.

A  native  of  tlie  South  of  Europe,  cultivated  in  Northern  gardens.  The  leaves
are  acrid,  hot  and  bitter,  the  flowers  yellow.  The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the
fresh  herb,  gathered  shortly  before  blooming.

Proving  by  Hahnemann,  Franz,  Gross,  Hartman,  Herrman,  Hornburg,  Lang-
hammer,  Stapf,  Wislicenus,  E.  A.  M.  L.,  vol.  4 ;  Hartlaub  and  Trinks,  R.  A.  M.  L.,
vol.  1  ;  Hering,  Archiv  fiir  Horn.,  vol.  15.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Amblyopia,  Bethmann,  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.
vol.  1,  p.  338;  Pain  in  eyes,  Cowperthwaite,  M.  I.,  vol.  1,  p.  96;  Dyspepsia,
Farrington,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  171;  from  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  25;  Hah
Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  45 ;  Chronic  prolapse  of  rectum,  Spooner,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  409
Polypus  and  prolapsus  of  rectum,  Gerstel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  83;  Prolapsus  ani
Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  994 ;  Urinary  difficulty,  Koch,  Horn,  CI.,  vol.  1
p.  220;  Pain  in  back,  Kirsch,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  877  ;  Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  H.
vol.  22,  p.  494;  Pain  below  scapula,  Berridge,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  1J3;  Soreness
in  bones  of  hands,  Libby,  M.  I.,  vol.  3,  p.  205,  1876 ;  Ganglia,  Gregory,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  2,  p.  164 ;  Bursitis,  Smith,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  266 ;  Sciatic  rheumatism.  Miller,
H.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.  199;  Rheumatism,  Nankivell,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  192,  from
H.  W.,  vol.  7,  p.  278 ;  Injury  to  bones,  Hrg.,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  1029.

^  Mind. Inclination  to  contradict  and  quarrel.
Dissatisfied  with  himself  and  others.
Anxious  and  low-spirited,  with  mental  dejection.
Melancholy  disposition  toward  evening,
^  Sensorium. Vertigo :  in  morning  when  rising ;  when  sit-
ting ;  when  walking  in  open  air.
^  Inner  Head. i  l  Sticking drawing  pain extending  from
frontal  to  temporal  bone.


RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.  140

I  I  Stitches  in  1.  frontal  bone,  only  while  reading.

Pulsative  pressing  pain  in  forehead.

Heat  in  head,  with  much  restlessness.

I  I  Rhythmical  pressive  pain  in  head.

I  I  Pain  as  from  a  fall,  in  periosteum,  extending  from
temporal  bones  to  occiput.

Headache :  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  head  ;  like  a  stu-
pefying pressure  on  whole  brain ;  after  excessive  use  of
intoxicating  drinks.
*  Outer  Head.  Large  painful  swelling  on  scalp,  as  if  origi-
nating in  periosteum,  sore  to  touch  and  preceded  by
rending  pain.

I  Head  externally  painful,  as  if  bruised  or  beaten.

Erysipelas  of  scalp,  arising  from  wounds.

Humid  scabs  on  head.

I  Periosteum  from  temples  to  occiput,  pains  as  if  bruised.

Corrosive  itching  on  scalp.

Twitching  in  muscles  of  brow.
°  Sight  and  Eyes. Vision  very  weak,  as  if  eyes  were  excess-
ively strained.

Objects  seem  dim  before  eyes,  as  if  a  shadow  were  flitting
before  them.

iDulness  of  sight,  brought  on  by  taxing  or  straining  eyes.

I  As  if  sight  had  been  strained  by  too  much  reading.
Letters  seem  to  run  together.

Pain  like  a  pressure  in  r.  eye,  with  obscuration  of  vision,
as  if  one  had  looked  too  long  and  intently  at  an  object.

I I  Aching  in  and  over  eyes,  with  blurring  of  vision,  after
using  eyes  and  straining  them  at  fine  work.

■Amblyopia:  dependent  upon  overexertion  of  eyes,  or
anomalies  of  refraction  ;  from  writing  by  artificial  light ;
fine  needlework,  etc.;  in  a  weaver,  could  with  difficulty
distinguish  one  thread  from  another,  and  could  not  read
at  all ;  mistiness  of  sight,  with  complete  obscuration  at
a  distance.

1 1  Asthenopia :  irritability  of  every  tissue  of  eye  from  over-
work or  from  using  eyes  on  fine  work  ;  heat  and  aching
in  and  over  eyes,  eyes  feel  like  balls  of  fire  at  night,
blurring  of  vision,  letters  seem  to  run  together,  lachry-
mation,  etc.

I  I  Choroiditis  in  a  myopic  eye,  caused  by  straining  eyes ;
much  pain  in  eyes  on  trying  to  look  at  objects,  heat  in
eye  though  it  seems  cold,  and  twitching  in  balls.

■  Asthenopia;  more  often  indicated  in  weakness  of  ciliary
muscles  than  of  internal  recti.

I  Loss  of  power  over  internal  rectus.

I  I  Burning  in  eyes  in  evening,  especially  when  trying  to
sew  or  read  ;  eyes  feel  strained  ;  read  too  much  by  arti-
cial  light.


141  RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.

Green  halo  around  light  in  evening.

Spots  on  cornea.

Itching  on  inner  canthus  and  on  lower  lid,  smarting  after

rubbing,  eye  becomes  full  of  water.
I  Eyes  burn,  ache,  feel  strained,  sight  blurred;  <  using

them  in  evening.
Burning  beneath  1.  eye.

Sensation  of  heat  and  fire  in  eyes  and  aching  while  read-
ing (in  evening  by  light).
Eyes  appear  irritable  and  run  water,  especially  toward

evening  after  working  all  day.
Pressure  deep  in  orbits.

I  I  Pain  as  from  a  bruise  in  orbicular  cartilages.
Pressure  on  inner  surface  of  1.  eye,  with  profuse  lachry-

mation.
I  Eyes  feel  hot  like  balls  of  fire.
Eyes  water  in  open  air,  not  indoors.
Spasms  of  lower  eyelids,  afterward  lachrymation.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Sensation  in  ear  as  if  one  were  digging
about  with  a  blunt  piece  of  wood,  a  kind  of  scraping
pressure.
Pain  as  if  bruised  in  cartilage  of  ear,  and  under  mastoid
process.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sweat  on  dorsum  of  nose.

Bleeding  of  nose,  with  pressure  at  root  of  nose.
*  Upper  Face. Erysipelas  and  swelling  on  forehead.
Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  periosteum  of  facial  bones.
Facial  paralysis  after  catching  cold.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  dry  and  sticky.
Pimples  on  lips.

1  I  Pain  as  from  a  blow  beneath  mastoid  process.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Pain  in  lower  teeth.

Gums  painful  and  bleed  readily.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Spasm  of  tongue,  with  difficulty  of

speech.
^^  Throat. Sensation  as  from  a  lump  in  thxoat  on  empty  deglu-
tition.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Appetite  normal,
but  aversion  to  everything  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  eat.
Unquenchable  desire  for  cold  water,  drinks  much  and

often  without  being  incommoded.
Violent  thirst  for  cold  water  in  afternoon.
*^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating :  sudden  nausea ;  pinch-
ing in  stomach  after  bread  and  butter ;  eructations  and
itching  of  skin  after  meat;  replete  as  soon  as  he  eats.
'®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough,
with  depression.
Frequent  odorless  eructations.


RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.  142

A  kind  of  nausea  in  pit  of  stomach.

Nausea,  sudden,  while  eating,  with  vomiting  of  food.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Epigastric  region  sensitive.

Tension  at  stomach  in  great  measure  appeased  by  drink-
ing milk.

Burning  gnawing  in  stomach.

Gnawing  sensation  in  stomach  as  from  emptiness  or
hunger.

Pruritus  of  stomach  and  intestines  showing  itself  by  prick-
ing, gnawing  pains.

I  I  Dyspepsia  of  fifteen  years,  caused  by  straining  stomach
when  carrying  heavy  weight;  pulse  soft,  and  every
attempt  to  eat  meat  would  be  followed  by  headache;
eructations  and  itching  all  over,  like  an  undeveloped
nettlerash  ;  he  could  eat  fat  meat  and  drink  milk.
^^Hypochondria. Gnawing  pressing  pain  in  region  of  liver.

Painful  swelling  of  spleen.
'^  Abdomen. Gnawing  pain  about  navel.

Colic:  with  burning  or  gnawing  pain;  in  children,  from
worms.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Stool :  soft,  discharged  with  difficulty,
from  inactivity  of  rectum  ;  Irectum  protrudes  immedi-
ately on  attempting  a  passage ;  lumpy,  slimy  or  bloody,
with  much  flatus ;  seemingly  only  flatus ;  empty  eruc-
tations, distended  abdomen;  feces  often  escape  when
bending  over.

Frequent  urging  to  stool  with  small,  soft  discharges.

■  Frequent  unsuccessful  urging,  with  prolapsus  ani.
Constipation,  alternating  with  mucous,  frothy  stools.
Scanty,  hard  stool ;  stool  like  sheep's  dung.
Constipation  from inactivity  of  bowels  or  impaction  of

feces  following  mechanical  injuries.

Difficult  expulsion  of  large-sized  feces.

Tearing  in  rectum  and  urethra,  while  urinating.

Tearing  stitches  in  rectum  while  sitting.

Frequent  pressure  to  stool,  with  prolapsus  of  rectum,  also
with  emission  of  much  flatus ;  the  slightest  stooping,  or
still  more  crouching  down,  caused  rectum  to  protrude.

I  I  Prolapsus  of  rectum;  frequent,  lumpy,  slimy  stool;
bloody  at  times;  much  flatus;  stool  often  unsatisfactory,
passing  nothing  but  flatus  ;  empty  eructations  and  dis-
tended abdomen ;  feces  often  pass  involuntarily  while
bending  over;  weakness  in  lumbar  region;  frequent
urination ;  prolapse  always  with  and  sometimes  with-
out stool ;  after  sitting  a  long  time  at  stool  the  prolapsed
bowel  becomes  much  swollen  and  difficult  to  replace ;
four  or  five  stools  a  day;  of  years  standing.

■  Protrusion  of  rectum,  after  confinement.


143  RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.

I  I  Prolapsus  ani,  after  an  attack  of  dysentery,  half  a  year
previously,

I  I  Frequently  itching  in  rectum ;  at  times  expulsion  of
thread  worms ;  slightly  constipated ;  abdomen  some-
what bloated  ;  poor  appetite ;  sudden  prolapsus  recti,
with  tenesmus,  after  eating  grapes ;  prolapsus  frequently
recurred,  especially  after  stool;  after  four  weeks'  use  of
Ruta,  a  mucous  polypus  was  discharged  from  rectum,
since  then  entirely  well.

I  1  Worm  complaints  of  children.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Tearing  pains  in  urethra  while  urinating.

Pressure  on  bladder,  as  if  continually  full;  the  pressure
to  urinate  continues  after  micturition;  at  every  step
after  urinating,  she  feels  as  if  bladder  w^ere  full  and
moving  up  and  down.

Great  pressure  to  urinate,  as  if  bladder  were  constantly
fall,  yet  but  little  urine  is  passed,  and  micturition  is
followed  by  dragging  as  if  much  should  be  passed,  which,
however,  does  not  occur.

I  I  Constant  urging  to  urinate,  could  hardly  retain  urine;
when  that  feeling  occurred  she  had  to  hurry  to  water-
closet  ;  if  she  forcibly  retained  the  water  she  could  not
pass  any  afterward  and  suffered  severe  pains.

Frequent  pressure  to  urinate,  with  scanty  green  urine.

Spasmodic  stricture  of  neck  of  bladder.

Frequent  micturition.

Involuntary  micturition  at  night  in  bed,  and  during  day
when  walking.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs.  Varicocele  following  a  strain ;
hsematocele  in  which  the  effusion  is  small  and  firmly
coagulated.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Menses :  too  early  and  too  pro-
fuse; feeble,  followed  by  leucorrhoea.

Corrosive  leucorrhoea  after  irregular  or  suppressed  menses.
^'  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Lameness  and  sore-
ness all  over;  weak,  feeble  contractions  during  labor.
'^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Sensation  in

larynx  as  from  a  bruise.
^^  Respiration. Short  breath  with  tightness  of  chest,
^'^  Cough. Awakened  about  midnight  with  a  choking  cough.

Cough  with  copious  expectoration  of  thick  yellow  mucus,
with  weak  feeling  in  chest  after  it.

Violent  cough  with  expectoration  of  tough  mucus  and
nausea,
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure  on  sternum  seeming  to
be  internal  and  external.

A  painful  spot  on  sternum,  painful  to  pressure.

Gnawing  pain,  associated  with  some  biting  and  burning
in  r.  side  of  chest.


RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.  144

•  Phthisis  after  mechanical  injuries  to  chest.

Sensation  of  coldness  or  heat  in  chest,
*^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Anxious  palpitation.

Pulse  unchanged  ;  or,  somewhat  accelerated  only  during
heat.
^° Outer Chest. On sternum a  painful spot;  also  painful

to  pressure.
•'"  Neck  and  Back.  1 1  For  twelve  days  pain  below  r.  scapula
<  in  evening,  after  exertion,  by  deep  inspiration  and
by  moving  r.  arm ;  >  by  pressure  and  lying  down,
especially  on  r.  side ;  the  pain  extends  over  a  spot  as
large  as  the  palm  ;  when  severe  it  extends  to  correspond-
ing part  of  1.  side.

Pain  as  if  sprained  or  bruised  in  nape  and  shoulders.

Bruised  pain  extending  along  back.

Drawing,  bruised  pain  in  spine,  frequently  taking  away
breath.

Pain  as  if  beaten  and  lame  in  spine.

Pressive  drawing,  very  acute  pain  in  r.  side  of  spine,  op-
posite liver,  especially  on  inspiration.

Pain  as  from  a  fall  in  dorsal  vertebrae.

Severe  pressure  in  small  of  back,  from  within  outward,  as
if  bruised ;  pain  appears  5  o'clock  in  morning,  and  is
>  by  moving  about  and  by  passage  of  flatus.

Stitches  in  small  of  back  when  sitting,  stooping  or  walk-
ing; >  by  pressure  and  when  lying  down.

Stitches  in  spine  while  sitting ;  is  suddenly  overcome  by
anxiety.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  back,  <  in  morning  before  rising.

I  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  lumbar  vertebrae.

I  Weakness  in  lumbar  region  ;  prolapsus  recti.

I  Pain  in  back  or  coccyx,  as  from  a  blow  or  fall,  or  as  if
bruised.

Bruised  sensation  in  hip  bones.

Cramplike  contraction  or  pulsation  ascending  from  thighs
into  small  of  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  1.  elbow  joint  as  from  a  blow  ;  arm
weak.

Wrists  feel  as  if  sprained,  stiff;  <  in  wet,  cold  weather.

Bones  in  wrist  and  back  of  hand  painful,  as  if  bruised,
during  rest  and  motion.

TiGanglionic  swelling  on  front  of  1.  wrist.

Hands  numb  and  tingle  after  exercise.

I  I  Soreness  through  small  bones  of  hands.

1  I  Ganglia  on  sheath  of  flexor  tendons  of  fourth  finger,
situated  in  palm  of  r.  hand,  as  large  as  a  hickory
nut,  greatly  interfering  wnth  use  of  hand ;  rheumatism
of  r.  leg.


145  RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.

Flat,  smooth  warts  on  inside  of  hands.
Contraction  of  fingers.
■  Bursitis.
'^  Lower  Limbs. On  rising,  after  sitting,  he  cannot  walk  ;  he

falls  back  again.
While  walking  he  falls  from  side  to  side ;  the  feet  will  not

support  him ;  there  is  no  power  or  steadiness  in  thighs.
Ascending or descending a hill is difficult, the legs

give  out.
I  Hip  bones  feel  bruised ;  as  if  from  a  blow  or  fall.
The  painful  parts,  especially  hips  and  bones  of  legs,  are

sore,  as  if  beaten,  whenever  touched.
\ I  Sciatica;  pain  deep-seated  as  if  in  marrow  of  bone,  or  as

if  bone  were  broken  ;  obliged  to  walk  about  constantly

during paroxysms ; pain < sitting  or lying  down ;

constantly  complaining  about  his  sufferings ;  burning,

corrosive  pains,  <  in  damp  or  cold  weather,  or  from

cold  applications.
1  I  Shooting  pains  from  back  down  outside  of  1.  thigh,

sometimes down  sciatic nerve  on  first  moving  or  on

rising after sitting; hamstrings, chiefly outer, feel

shortened  and  sore.  ^Sciatic  rheumatism.
Ilschias  arising  from  injuries  and  contusions.
Anterior  surface  of  thigh  feels  bruised and painful  to

touch,
Whenever  he  stretches  out  the  limbs,  even  a  little,  the

thighs  are  painful,  as  if  beaten.
I  Hamstrings  feel  shortened  and  weak,  knees  give  way

going  up  or  down  stairs.
Posterior  portion  of  thigh  above  knee  seems  bruised.
iPain  and  lameness  in  ankles  after  a  sprain  or  dislocation.
Throbbing  and  hacking  pain  as  if  there  were  an  ulcer  on

anterior  portion  of  1.  ankle.
He  dare  not  step  heavily  upon  feet,  on  account  of  pains

in  bones  of  feet,  with  a  sensation  of  heat.
Earning  and  biting  pains  in  bones  of  feet  during  rest.
Fistulous  ulcers  on  lower  legs.
'*  Limbs  in  General. Is  unable  to  bend  on  account  of  pains

in  all  the  joints  and  hip  bones.
Inflammation of  larger  joints,  especially  in  upper  ex-
tremities.

I  I  Since  five  weeks  severe  rheumatism  of  r.  wrist  and  in

both feet  from  heels  to  toes ; has  been  in  bed  fot  a
month  ;  puffy  swelling  of  instep ;  sour  sweat.

I I  Lameness  after  sprains,  especially  of  wrists  and  ankles.
'^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  wrist  and  back  of  hand

painful ;  pains  in  bones  of  feet.

VOL.  IX. — 10.


RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.  146

Lying  down  :  pain  below  r.  scapula  >  ;  stitches  in  small

of  back  >  ;  parts  on  which  he  lies  sore.
Sitting :  vertigo ;  tearing  stitches  in  rectum ; stitches  in
rectum ;  stitches  in  small  of  back  in  spine ;  on  rising
cannot  walk,  falls  back  again ;  sciatica  <  ;  pains  down
sciatic  nerve  on  rising.
Lies  in  one  position,  then  in  another,  turns  from  side  to

side ;  uneasiness  of  legs ;  rheumatism.
Bending  over :  feces  often  escape.
Slightest  stooping  or  crouching  down :  causes  rectum  to

protrude;  stitches  in  small  of  back.
Is  unable  to  bend  :  pains  in  all  joints.
Stretching  out  limbs  even  a  little :  thighs  painful.
Motion:  of  r.  arm,  pain  below  r.  scapula  <;  >  pain  in

small  of  back ;  wrist  and  back  of  hand  painful.
Exertion  :  pain  below  scapula  <.
Exercise:  hands  numb  and  tingle.

Walking: vertigo;  involuntary  micturition; stitches  in
small  of  back ;  falls  from  side  to  side ;  short  distance,
great  weakness ;  limbs  painful.
Ascending  or  descending  a  hill  is  difficult,  legs  give  out.
Going  up  and  down  stairs: hamstrings feel shortened
and  weak.
^^  Nerves. Great  weakness  after  a  short  walk  ;  the  limbs  feel
bruised  ;  small  of  back  and  loins  are  painful.
Tottering, as if  thighs were weak ; limbs pain when

walking.
Does  not  know  where  to  lay  his  legs  on  account  of  uneasi-
ness and  heaviness ;  he  lies  now  in  one  place,  now  in
another,  and  turns  from  side  to  side.
All  parts  of  the  body  upon  which  he  lies,  even  in  bed,  are

painful  as  if  bruised.
I  I  Restless,  turns  and  changes  position  frequently  when

lying. ^Rheumatism.
Facial paralysis after catching cold;  suits  robust  and

sanguineous  persons.
Rheumatic  paralysis  of  tarsal  and  carpal  joints.
^^  Sleep. Yawning  and  stretching,  indoors.
Sleepiness  during  day.
Frequent  waking  at  night,  feeling  as  if  it  were  time  to

rise.
I  I  Vivid  confused  dreams.
**  Time. Morning: vertigo  on rising; rheumatic  pains in
back  <  before  rising ;  sweat  in  bed.
At  5  o'clock  A.M. :  pressure  in  small  of  back.
During  day :  involuntary  micturition  ;  sleepiness.
Afternoon  :  thirst  for  cold  water ;  heat  with  anxiety.
Toward  evening :  eyes  irritable  and  run  water.
Evening:  melancholy  disposition,  burning  in  eyes;  green


147  RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.

halo around light ; sight  blurred, eyes ache ; pain
below  r.  scapula.

Night :  eyes  feel  like  balls  of  fire ;  involuntary  micturition
in  bed ;  feeling  as  if  it  were  time  to  rise.

About  midnight :  awakened  with  a  choking  cough.
^®  Temperature  and  Weather. Near  warm  stove : chill ;
chilliness.  .

Indoors :  yawning  and  stretching.

Open  air :  vertigo  when  walking,  eyes  water ;  after  walk-
ing, general  sweat.

Cold  applications:  sciatica  <.

Cold  water :  thirst  for.

Wet,  cold  weather:  wrists  feel  stiff,  sprained;  sciatica  <.
*"  Fever. Coldness  running  over  one  side  of  head.

I  I  Coldness  down  spine.

Chill  mostly  left-sided;  <  up  and  down  back;  shakes
even  near  a  warm  stove.

Chill  with  heat  of  face  and  violent  thirst.

External  and  internal  heat  of  face  with  red  cheeks  and
cold  hands  and  feet.

Frequent  attacks  of  quick  flushes  of  heat.

Heat,  mostly  afternoons,  with  anxiety,  restlessness  and
dyspnoea ;  no  thirst.

Sweat,  cold  on  face ;  morning  in  bed.

General  sweat  after  walking  in  open  air.

I  '  Chilliness  through  whole  body  even  when  near  a  warm
stove,  hands  and  feet  cold,  confusion  and  heat  in  head^
great  thirst  which  disappears  immediately  after  drink-
ing, frequent  sneezing,  pain  in  eyes  as  if  strained,
lachrymation,  pain  in  larynx  as  if  bruised,  hoarse  cough
awakening  him  at  midnight,  and  causing  by  its  con-
tinuation vomiting  and  pain  in  sternum,  expectoration
seldom  and  scanty.  ^Catarrhal  fever.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Day :  four  or  five  stools.

For  twelve  days :  pain  below  r.  scapula.

Since  five  weeks:  severe  rheumatism  of  r.  wrist,  both  feet.

Years  standing:  prolapsus  of  rectum.
"  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pain  like  a  pressure  in
eye ;  biting  and  burning  on  side  of  chest ;  pain,  below
scapula ;  acute  pain  in  side  of  chest ;  ganglion  on
sheath  of  flexor  tendon  of  fourth  finger  in  palm ;  rheu-
matism of  leg ;  rheumatism  of  wrist.

Left:  stitches  in  frontal  bone;  burning  beneath  eye;
pressure  on  inner  surface  of  eye ;  ganglionic  swelling
on  front  of  wrist ;  pain  down  outside  of  thigh ;  as  of  an
ulcer  on  ankle ;  chill  mostly  side.

From  within  outward :  pressure  in  small  of  back.
"  Sensations. As  if  from  a  fall,  pain  in  periosteum  ;  as  if  a  nail


RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.  U8

were  driven  into  head ;  head  as  if  bruised  or  beaten ;
pains  as  if  bruised  in  periosteum ;  as  if  eyes  were
excessively  strained ;  as  if  a  shadow  w^ere  flitting  before
eyes ;  as  if  one  had  looked  too  long  and  intently  at  an
object ;  eyes  as  if  balls  of  fire ;  as  if  one  were  digging
about  in  ear  with  a  blunt  piece  of  wood ;  as  of  a  lump
in  throat ;  bladder  as  if  continually  full ;  spine  as  if
beaten  and  lame ;  wrists  as  if  sprained  ;  as  if  pain  were
in  marrow  of  bone  or  as  if  bone  were  broken;  thighs
as  if  beaten ;  as  if  there  were  an  ulcer  in  ankle ;  as  if
thighs  were  weak ;  all  parts  of  body  as  if  bruised  at
night,  feeling  as  if  it  were  time  to  rise.

Pain  like  a  pressure :  in  r.  eye ;  in  orbicular  cartilages ;
in  lower  teeth  ;  below  1.  scapula ;  in  ankles ;  in  bones  of
feet;  in  all  joints  and  hip-bones  ;  in  nerves  and  tissues.

Shooting  pains:  from  back  down  outside  of  1.  thigh.

Rending  pain  :  on  scalp,  preceding  swelling.

Tearing :  in  rectum  and  urethra.

Hacking  pain :  in  anterior  portion  of  1.  ankle.

Throbbing  pain :  in  anterior  portion  of  1.  ankle.

Tearing  stitches:  in  rectum.

Stitches  :  in  1.  frontal  bone ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  spine.

Stitching-drawing  pain :  from  forehead  to  temples.

Pressive-drawing,  very  acute  pain :  in  r.  side  of  spine.

Pain  as  if  bruised.

Bruised  pain :  in  orbicular  cartilages ;  in  cartilage  of  ear
and  under  mastoid  process ;  in  periosteum  of  facial
boneg ;  in  larynx  ;  in  nape  and  shoulders ;  along  back  ;
in  spine;,  in  small  of  back;  in  lumbar  vertebrse;  in
coccyx ;  in  hip  bones,  in  bones  of  wrists  and  back  of
hand.

Pain  as  f:^om  a  blow :  below  mastoid  process ;  in  coccyx  ;
in  L  elbow  joint.

Paiij  as  from  a  fall :  in  dorsal  vertebrse ;  in  back  or  coccyx.

Pinchiijg:  in  stomach.

Pulsative  pressing  pain  :  in  forehead.

Rhythimical  pressive  pain  :  in  head.

Gnawimg  pain:  in  stomach,  about  navel;  in  r.  side  of
chest.

pricking,  gnawing  pains:  in  stomach  and  intestines.

Burning  gnawing :  in  stomach.

Gnawing,  pressing  pain  :  in  region  of  liver.

Burning :  in  eyes ;  beneath  1.  eye ;  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  in
bones  of  feet.

Biting:  in  r.  side  of  chest;  in  bones  of  feet.

Cramplike  contraction  or  pulsation :  ascending  from
thighs  into  small  of  back.

Soreness:  all  over;  through  small  bones  of  hands;  in
hamstrings ;  of  parts  on  which  he  lies.


149  RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.

Rheumatic  pain :  in  back ;  of  r.  leg ;  of  r.  wrist,  both  feet

from  heels  to  toes.
Aching :  in  and  over  eyes.
Pressure :  deep  in  orbits ;  on  inner  surface  of  1.  eye ;  at

root  of  nose ;  on  bladder;  on  sternum  ;  in  small  of  back.
Painful  spot :  on  sternum.
Twitching:  in  eyeballs.
Tension :  at  stomach.
Lameness :  all  over ;  in  ankles.
Heaviness:  of  legs.
Uneasiness:  of  legs.

Heat :  in  head ;  in  eyes ;  in  chest ;  in  feet ;  of  face.
Weak  feeling :  in  chest,  in  lumbar  region.
Corrosive  itching :  on  scalp.
Itching :  on  inner  canthus  and  on  lower  lid  ;  of  skin  after

meat ;  in  rectum.
Coldness :  in  chest ;  over  one  side  of  head ;  down  spine ;

of  hands  and  feet.
"Tissues. 1  Bruised  feeling  all  over  as  from  a  fall  or  blow,  <

in  limbs  and  joints.
Sensation  of  soreness  of  parts  on  which  he  lies.
Pain  in  nerves  or  tissues  that  have  been  stretched,  as  in

sprains.
Pain  in  long  bones  as  if  they  were  broken.
1 1  Bruises  and  other  mechanical  injuries  of  bones  and

periosteum  ;  sprains ;  periostitis ;  erysipelas.
Dropsy.

■  Periostitis  and  pains  in  consequence  of  external  injury,

with  erysipelatous  inflammation  of  parts.

I  In  dislocations  where  the  inflammation  is  fully  under

control,  it  hastens  the  curative  process  in  the  joint.

I I  Bone  lesions  and  fractures ;  scrofulous  exostoses.

■  Swelling  of  ankles.

I  I  Small  epithelial  swellings  on  joints  of  toes.
"  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  swelling  on

scalp  sore,  painful  parts  sore ;  anterior  surface  of  thigh

feels  painful.
Pressure : a  spot  on  sternum painful ; pain below r.

scapula  >  ;  stitches  in  small  of  back  >.
Rubbing :  smarting  of  lower  lid  and  inner  canthus.
Scratching : >  itching.
Walking  or  riding :  causes  chafing  of  skin.
Straining  stomach  when  carrying  a  heavy  weight :  caused

dyspepsia.
Mechanical  injuries:  inactivity  of  bowels  or  impaction  of

feces ;  to  chest,  phthisis.
*^Skin. I  Itching  over  whole  body,  >  scratching.
Itching  of  skin  after  eating  meat.


RUTA  GRAVEOLENS.  150

Jaundice  from  liver  complaints.

Skin  becomes  easily  chafed,  from  walking  and  riding ;
also  in  children.

Acne  rosacea.

Erysipelas :  after  mechanical  injuries ;  of  hands.

Ulcers  and  scabs  on  scalp,  with  copious  discharge.

Ulcerations ;  gnawing,  jerking  pains  ;  pus  sanious.

Fistulous  ulcers  on  lower  legs.

Inflamed  ulcers.

Warts ;  with  sore  pains;  flat,  smooth  on  inside  of  hands.
*^  Stages of  Life, Constitution. In robust,  sanguineous
persons.

Child,  set.  1^,  suffering  half  a  year  after  an  attack  of  dys-
entery; prolapsus  ani.

Girl  aet.  6,  pale,  delicate,  subject  to  slight  catarrhal  attacks,
which  generally  yielded  to  Aeon.;  polypus  and  pro-
lapsus of  rectum.

Man  set.  27,  nervous  temperament,  dark  hair,  blue  eyes,
troubled  for  years,  it  is  a  family  complaint;  prolapse
of  rectum.

Weaver,  eet.  29 ;  amblyopia.

Woman,  set.  34 ;  pain  in  back.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  36,  suffering  a  long  time ;  urinary  difficulty.

Man  set.  53,  suff'ering  five  weeks ;  rheumatism.
*®  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Camphor.

It  antidotes:  Mercur.

Compatible:  Calc.  ost.,  Caust.,  Lycopod.,  Phos.  ac,  Pulsat.,
Sepia,  Sulphur,  Sulph.  ac.  (diseases  of  bones).

Compare :  Arnic,  Argent,  nit.  (asthenopia),  Bryon.,  Calc.  ost.,
Conium  (asthenopia),  Euphras.,  Lycopod.,  Mercur.,  Mezer.,
Phosphor.,  Phytol.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  Silica,  Sulphur.


151  SABADILLA.


SABADILLA.

Cebadilla.  Liliacese.

Indigenous  to  Eastern  Mexico,  Guatemala  and  Venezuela.  It  is  a  bulbous  plant
bearing  greenish-yellow  flowers  on  a  spikelike  raceme.  The  tincture  is  prepared
from  the  powdered  seeds.

Piovings  by  Hahnemann,  Gross,  Hartlaub,  Hromada,  Langhammer,  Kiickert,
Schultz,  Schonke,  Stapf,  etc.,  Archiv  fiir  Hom.,  vol.  4.

Clinical  AuxHORiTiEg. —  Vertigo,  Deck,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  463;  Lachry-
mation,  Boyce,  N.  Y.  S.  Tr.,  1870,  pp.  214,  217,  Eaue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  130;
Toothache,  Oehme,  H.  M.,  vol  9,  p.  319 ;  Sensation  of  a  body  in  throat,  Fanning,
N.  Y.  S.  Tr.,  18T0,  p.  793,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  15;  Sore  throat,  Hirsch,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  250;  Tania,  Fielitz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  808;
Worm  a^edioTJS,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf ,  vol.  5,  p.  390;  Ovaritis,  Doury,  Eaue's
E-ec,  1873,  p.  146,  from  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  9,  p.  51 ;  Influenza,  Eiickert,  Crose-
rio,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  49;  Spinal  affection,  Lobethal,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
3,  p.  472;  Ague,  Sonnenberg,  Lobethal,  Tripi,  Escalier,  Neumann,  Miiller,  Hart-
laub, Seidel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  983;  Segin,  Gueyraid,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,
p.  218,  from  Hom.  Clinique;  Rheumatism,  Berridge,  Time's  Eet.,  1875,  p.  110,
from  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  312;  Measles,  Fornias,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  533.

'  Mind. No  response  to  questions,  loss  of  consciousness ;  after-
ward jumps  up  and  runs  recklessly  through  room.

■  Erroneous  impressions  as  to  the  state  of  his  body.

1 1  Imagines:  himself  sick;  parts  shrunken;  that  she  is
pregnant,  when  she  is  merely  swollen  from  flatus ;  that
she  has  some  horrible  throat  disease  which  will  end
fatally.

■  Delirium  during  intermittents.

Mania;  rage,  quieted  only  by  washing  head  in  cold  water.

Melancholy  from  deep-seated  abdominal  irritation.

Anxious  sensation  with  restlessness  and  qualmishness.

Easily  frightened  ;  startled  by  noises.

Thinking  produces  headache.

Mental  exertion  aggravates  headache  and  produces  sleep.

After  fright  hysteric  paroxysms.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo :  things  turn  black  before  eyes,  sensa-
tion of  fainting;  as  if  things  were  turning,  especially
when  rising  from  a  seat;  more  sitting  than  walking;
felt  stupid.

Dulness  of  head. ^Influenza.

Beclouded,  as  after  intoxication,  without  vertigo  or  pains.

I  I  Vertigo  with  sensation  as  if  all  things  were  turning
around  each  other.


SABADILLA.  152

I  I  Attacks  of  giddiness  coming  generally  in  evening;  in
one  attack  fainted,  then  vomited  food  and  bile ;  during
attacks  felt  suddenly  as  if  she  would  fall  if  she  did  not
hold  on  to  something;  felt  glad  to  get  into  open  air;
gastric  disturbance,  felt  sick  after  meals.

I  I  Attacks  of  giddiness;  of  short  duration,  affected  sud-
denly; everything  seems  to  be  whirling  round  her;  she
has  to  hold  on  to  something,  otherwise  she  would  fall
down ;  if  in  the  house  the  whole  house  seems  to  be
coming  down  upon  her;  if  in  the  street  the  houses  seem
to  be  falling  upon  her,  and  unless  she  can  hold  on  to
some  support  she  falls  down;  sometimes  awakes  at  night
with  the  whirling  sensation  ;  attacks  come  on  without
warning,  last  but  a  few  moments,  and  are  followed  by
a  weak,  tired  feeling ;  at  other  times  suffers  from  attacks
of  longer  duration,  sometimes  lasting  greater  part  of
forenoon,  accompanied  by  nausea  and  visual  disturb-
ance; brain  seems  to  go  round  and  round,  and  eyes
move  to  and  fro,  as  if  they  went  round  with  the  whirl-
ing sensation ;  if  she  shuts  her  eyes  the  whirling  seems
to  go  in  the  opposite  direction  and  she  becomes  sick ;
she  likes  to  lie  perfectly  still  and  to  look  fixedly  at  one
object ;  if  she  turns  her  eyes  to  look  at  any  other  object,
or  if  she  shuts  her  eyes  she  becomes  sick ;  feels  <  in
mornings,  very  weak  in  forenoon  and  >  in  afternoon;
the  sudden  giddy  attacks  come  on  at  any  time,  the
attacks  with  nausea  mostly  in  the  mornings ;  has  a  de-
pressed, anxious  look;  appetite  very  poor;  likes  milk,
feels  soon  satisfied ;  some  nausea  after  meals ;  mouth
when  she  wakes  very  dry  and  burning,  tongue  dry  and
thickly  coated;  bad  taste ;  palms  of  hands  dry  and  horny
and  inclined  to  scale ;  at  night  they  are  so  burning  that
she  has  to-  keep  them  outside  the  bedclothes ;  the  top  of
her  head  is  hot;  she  feels  best  out  of  doors.
^  Inner  Head.  ■  Pressure  in  head  <  in  forehead  and  temples.
^Hay  fever.

Stitches  in  temples.

Headache  after  a  walk  ;  on  returning  to  room  a  twisting,
screwing  pain  from  r.  side  of  head  to  both  temples,
spreading  over  whole  head,  after  going  to  bed,  return-
ing daily.

iHemicrania  with  taenia.

■  Headache  from  much  thinking  or  too  close  attention.

Stupefying,  oppressive  sensation  in  forehead,  producing  a
reeling  sensation.

Corrosive,  burning  point  on  top  of  head.

Head  feels  dull  and  heavy.

Painful  heaviness,  first  in  forepart  of  r.  side  of  forehead,
whence  it  extends  more  and  more  toward  1.  side.


153  SABADILLA.

I  I  Headache  and  vertigo,  >  while  eyes  are  steadily  fixed
upon  an  object  and  while  patient  is  thinking  of  one
subject.

■Stupefying  headache  with  coryza,  itching  and  burning
of  scalp,  general  heat  of  whole  body  ;  <  in  forenoon.
*  Outer  Head. Fine  prickling  stitches  in  skin  of  forehead
and  scalp,  when  becoming  warm.

Burning,  crawling  itching  on  hairy  scalp,  >  from  scratch-
ing, <  from  getting  into  a  sweat  while  walking.

Burning  and  tingling  itching  on  scalp,  as  from  lice.

Burning  itching  most  on  front  of  head  and  behind  ears ;
feeling  of  heat  spreading  thence  over  whole  body  ;  after
scratching  violent  tickling  and  stinging;  red  spots,  later
with  a  scurf,  <  when  overheated  or  sweating  during
day.

Forehead  covered  with  cold  sweat.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. iLachrymation:  when  walking  in  open
air,  on  looking  at  light,  sneezing,  coughing  or  yawning ;
as  soon  as  least  pain  is  felt  in  some  other  part  of  body,
for  instance  in  hand.

Pressure  on  eyeballs  when  looking  upward.

Margins  of  lids  red.

Blue  rings  under  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Difficulty  of  hearing.

Severe  stitches  in  1.  ear.

Tickling  in  ears.

Jerking  pains  with  itching  in  ear.

Itching  of  ears,  with  worms.
^  Smell  and  Nose. iSpasmodic  sneezing. ^Hay  fever. ^In-
fluenza.

•  Fluent  coryza. ^Influenza.

■  Either  nostril  stuffed  up,  inspiration  through  nose  la-
bored, snoring.

Itching  in  nose ;  agreeable  titillation  in  alee.

Profuse  bleeding  from  nose.

Bright  red  blood  comes  from  posterior  nares  and  is  expec-
torated.

Very  sensitive  to  smell  of  garlic.

Violent  sneezing  from  time  to  time,  shaking  abdomen ;
followed  by  lachrymation.

iCoryza  with  severe  frontal  pains  and  redness  of  eyelids;
violent  sneezing ;  copious  watery  discharge  from  nose.
®  Upper  Face. iFace  feels  hot,  as  after  wine,  face  and  eyes
are  red. ^Hay  fever.

Face  deadly  pale  and  sunken,  features  distorted,  great
anxiety.

Beating  and  jerking  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  jaw.

Intermittent  neuralgia,  beginning  with  a  shaking  chill  of
great  severity;  twitching,  convulsive  trembling.


SABADILLA.  154

Swelling  of  face,  with  spotted  eruption.
^ Lower  Face. Can  hardly  open  mouth  from  pain  in  joints
and  muscles;  with  sore  throat.
Lips  hot,  dry,  burn  as  if  scalded.

Cracking  of  articulation  of  jaw  on  opening  mouth  wide.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. 1 1  Remittent  or  intermittent  toothache,
often  extending  over  whole  side  of  face  ;  <  from  hot  or
cold  food  or  drink,  from  walking  in  cold  air,  even  with
closed  mouth.
Dull,  troublesome  pain  in  carious  teeth,  with  sore  throat.
Gums :  swollen  ;  bluish.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  bitter ;  sweet ;  lost.

Tongue :  sore,  coated  thick  yellow ;  white  in  centre  ;  moist,
during  fever;  feels  sore  as  if  full  of  blisters;  burning
on  tip.
Cannot  protrude  tongue,  with  sore  throat.
Pain  in  tongue  and  down  throat,  deglutition  difficult.
^"^  Inner  Mouth. Cannot  bear  anything  hot  in  mouth.

Anything  cold  in  mouth  causes  pain  during  sore  throat.
I  Mouth  dry  ;  throat  sore.

Saliva:  seemingly  hot  during  pyrosis;  copious  with  nausea,
vomiting  and  vomiturition ;  sweetish,  collects  in  mouth ;
jellylike;  ptyalism.
Frequent  spitting  of  insipid  water.
^^  Throat. ■  Sensation  of  a  skin  hanging  loosely  in  throat,
must  swallow  over  it ;  as  if  uvula  were  down.

■  Much  tough  phlegm  in  throat;  must  hawk.

I  I  Hawks  bright  red  blood  from  posterior  nares.
iStitches  in  throat,  only  when  swallowing;  tonsils  swollen
and  inflamed,  nearly  suppurating  ;  1.  to  right.

I  Tonsillitis  after  coryza;  suppuration;  r.  tonsil  remains

somewhat  swollen  and  indurated.

I I  Dryness  of  fauces  and  throat.

■  Constricted  feeling  deep  in  throat,  as  if  oesophagus  would

be  closed,  as  after  swallowing  an  astringent  drink.

■  Continual  desire  to  swallow,  deeply  cutting  pains,  whole

body  writhes.

■  Cannot  swallow  saliva  on  account  of  pain,  must  spit

it  out.

■  While  swallowing,  or  not,  feeling  in  throat  of  a  body

which  he  must  swallow.
Can  swallow  warm  food  more  easily,  in  sore  throat.

■  Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat  with  inclination  to  swallow.

■  Sore  throat,  continual  desire  to  swallow,  pale  redness  and

slight swelling  of mucous membrane ; in children
affected  with  worms.

■  Roughness  in  throat,  as  if  a  morsel  of  food  had  lodged

there,  causing  cough.


155  SABADILLA.

I  In  an  epidemic  of  sore  throat,  all  cases  which  commenced

on  1.  and  extended  to  r.  side.
I  I  Angina;  hydrophobia.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■  Morbid  hunger  or

loathing  of  food. ^Intermittent.
I  Disgust: for  all  food;  for meat; for sour things;  for

coffee ;  for  garlic.
I  No  relish  for  food  until  she  takes  the  first  morsel,  when

she  makes  a  good  meal. ^Pregnancy.
Canine  appetite,  especially  for  sweets,  farinaceous  food,

puddings,  alternating  with  disgust  for  meat,  wine  or

sour  things.
No  thirst,  with  moist  tongue.
I  Desire  for  hot  things. ^Angina.
■  Great  thirst. /^Angina.

I  iThirstlessness,  with  exception  of  desire  for  milk.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructations :

in  intermittents;  rancid;  sour.
Pyrosis,  heat  comes  up into  throat;  copious  salivation,

saliva  seemingly  as  hot  as  the  body,  but  it  is  not.
Constantly  spits  insipid  water.
Nausea : before eating ; with chilliness ; regurgitation,

vomiturition in intermittents;  regurgitation  of  bitter

mucus, leaving fatty taste; constantly spits insipid

water.
Vomiting :  of  bile ;  with  whooping  cough  ;  of  lumbrici ;

or  frequent  nausea  and  vomiturition,  with  feeling  of

foreign  body  in  oesophagus.
Nausea  and  retching,  with  feeling  of  worm  in  oesophagus.
Much  nausea  and  vomiting,  with  heat  in  abdomen.
*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Coldness  in  stomach.
Empty  feeling  in  stomach.

Spasm  of  stomach,  with  short  breath  and  dry  cough.
Troublesome  bloatedness  of  stomach,  with  loss  of  appetite.
Beating  in  1.  side  of  gastric  region  toward  back.
Burning  in  oesophagus  and  stomach,  vomiturition,  cutting

in  abdomen  ;  loose  stool ;  nervous  debility,  twitchings.
Corroding,  burning  pain  in  stomach,  when  walking.
TrHeat  in  stomach  and  through  whole  body.
Burning  pain  in  stomach  and  along  chest,  as  high  as  pit

of  throat.
A  peculiar  pain  as  if  a  sore  spot  were  pressed  upon,  below

pit  of  stomach  on  pressure  and  during  inspiration.
Gastric  symptoms,  <  in  morning.
'*  Hypochondria. Stitching  pains  in  hypochondria.
"Abdomen. Turning  and  twisting  through  whole  abdomen,

as  from  a  lump.
Spasmodic  contraction  of  abdominal  muscles,  1.  side,  with
burning  pains ;  he  bends  over  to  1.  side.


SABADILLA.  156

Sensation  as  if  a  ball  of  thread  were  moving  and  turning
rapidly  through  abdomen.

Cutting  in  bowels  as  with  knives.

Burning,  boring,  whirling  in  region  of  navel. ^Worms.

Bloated  abdomen.

Sensation  as  if  abdomen  were  sunken.

Rumbling  in  abdomen  as  if  empty.

Colic :  with  sensation  as  if  a  ball  were  moving  and  turning
through  abdomen,  cries  out,  "  O  my  bowels,  they  go
like  a  wheel ;"  with  violent  urging  to  stool  and  bor-
borygmus  ;  from  worms.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Emission  of  much  flatus.

Violent  urging  to  stool  with  croaking  as  of  frogs ;  sits  a
long  time,  then  passes  immense  quantities  of  flatus,
which  is  followed  by  an  enormous  evacuation ;  after
that  burning  in  abdomen ;  stool  mixed  with  blood.

Diarrhoea:  I  stool  fermented,  brown,  floating  on  water;
liquid,  mixed  with  blood  and  slime.

Very  difficult  stools,  with  much  burning  in  abdomen  and
a  sensation  as  of  something  alive  in  abdomen.

Before  stool :  pinching  around  umbilicus  ;  loud  rumbling ;
urging  ;  emission  of  flatus  ;  drawing  in  spermatic  cords ;
burning  in  anus  ;  shuddering.

After  stool :  burning  in  abdomen  and  rectum.

■  Crawling,  itching  in  anus  ;  ascarides.

iLumbrici;  taenia;  worm  fever.

I  I  Vomiting  of  lumbrici,  or  nausea  and  retching,  with  sen-
sation of  a  foreign  body  in  oesophagus.

I  I  Tapeworm  with  severe  burning- boring  pains  in  abdo-

men, accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth,  great  chilliness
and  sensitiveness  to  cold  ;  sensation  as  if  abdomen  were
sunken,  or  stomach  gnawed ;  vomiturition  and  sensa-
tion of  foreign  body  in  throat.

I I  Taenia ;  flushed  face  ;  one-sided  headache  with  drawing
extending  into  shoulders,  and  one-sided  convulsive
throwing  about  and  involuntary  rotations  of  arm  of
same  side ;  Sabad.  cured,  and  after  a  few  weeks  adminis-
tration caused  discharge  of  a  large  mass  of  tapeworm,
with  complete  relief.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Urging  to  urinate,  especially  in  evening.
Burning  in  urethra  when  urinating. ^Gonorrhoea.
Urine  thick  and  turbid  like  muddy  water.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Pollutions,  followed  by  loss  of  power
in  extremities.
Lascivious dreams and emissions,  with relaxed  penis;
afterward  painful  erections  with  extraordinary  lassitude.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Nymphomania  from  ascarides.
Before  menses  :  painful  pressure  downward.


157  SABADILLA.

■  Cutting  pains,  as  from  knives,  in  ovary. ^Ovaritis.

I  Menses:  too  late,  with  painful  bearing  down  a  few  days
previous;  decrease,  flow  by  fits  and  starts,  sometimes
stronger,  sometimes  weaker,  blood  bright  red.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i  Gastric  symptoms
during  pregnancy.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Hoarseness
when  pressing  on  larynx,  throat  feels  sore.

■  Influenza  ;  violent  spasmodic  sneezing  and  lachrymation

on  going  into  open  air ;  tonsillitis  begins  on  1.  side  and
extends  to  r. ;  pain  <  wheii  swallowing  empty ;  sensa-
tion as  of  a  thread  or  string  in  throat,  or  a  sense  of  con-
striction as  if  it  were  tied  by  a  string.

■  Epidemic  influenza :  great  sleepiness  during  day;  chil-

liness, shivering  and  horripilations,  particularly  toward
evening  ;  chilliness  running  upward,  from  feet  to  head  ;
lachrymatien  and  redness  of  eyelids;  pressure  in  eyes,
particularly  when  moving  them  and  when  looking  up-
ward ;  pressing  headache,  particularly  in  forehead ;
sore  pain  in  tongue,  which  is  covered  with  a  thick
yellow  coating;  pain  in  tongue  extends  into  throat;
difficult  deglutition;  frequent  sensation  as  if  a  skin
were  hanging  loosely  in  throat ;  bitter  taste  in  mouth  ;
complete  loss  of  appetite ;  nausea ;  dryness  of  mouth ;
thirstlessness ;  constipation  with  rumbling  of  flatus  or
diarrhoea  of  brown  fermented  stool,  which  floats  upon
the  water ;  urine  yellow  and  turbid  ;  cough  with  vomit-
ing, headache,  sharp  stitches  in  vertex,  pain  in  region
of  stomach;  hoarse  cough,  often  with  haemoptysis;  pain-
ful paralytic  weakness  of  limbs,  particularly  of  knees ;
all  the  symptoms  <  from  cold ;  aggravation  toward
afternoon,  reaching  its  height  in  evening;  heat  of  face
with  chilliness  and  coldness  of  limbs  or  chilliness
running  up  back,  returning  every  ten  minutes  ;  skin
dry  as  parchment ;  sleep  restless ;  disturbed  by  anxious
dreams  ;  cough  immediately  on  lying  down.
^^  Respiration. Sensation  of  narrowness  in  throat.

Shortness  of  breath,  cardialgia,  dry  cough.

Breathing  :  heavy ;  anxious,  during  heat.

Wheezing  in  chest.

Sudden  oppression  of  breathing,  in  pit  of  stomach,  with
anxiety.
"Cough.  iCough:  dry,  from  scratching  or  roughness  in
throat;  in  children,  with  lachrymation;  during  chill,
also  during  apyrexia;  hoarse  sounding  with  hsemoptoe;
nightly,  dry  ;  short,  dry,  produced  by  a  scraping  in
throat ;  as  soon  as  one  lies  down  ;  dry,  with  perspiration
and  lachrymation ;  with  stitch  in  vertex,  vomiting  and
pain  in  stomach.


SABADILLA.  158

I  Cough  <  :  from  cold,  or  becoming  cold  ;  as  soon  as  he
lies  down ;  violent  spells  recur  at  same  hour  or  at  new
and  full  moon.
Expectoration  :  of  tenacious,  yellow  mucus,  of  a  repulsive
sweet  taste  ;  of  bright  red  blood,  especially  when  lying
down.
**  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  and  oppression  in  chest
during  apyrexia. ^Intermittent.
Stitches  in  side  of  chest,  especially  when  inspiring or

coughing.
Pleuritis,  great  paralytic  debility.
Complains of coldness, with hot flashes intervening.

^Pleuritis.
Burning  and  stitches  in  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  small,  spasmodic.

Sensation  as  if  circulation  were  suspended.
^°  Outer  Chest. Red  spots  on  chest.  ^

"  Neck  and  Back. ■  Spine  affected ;  after  pollutions  excessive
weakness  shows  itself  in  legs.
Bruised  feeling  in  back  and  spine ;  also  in  sacral  region.
^*  Upper  Limbs. Sweat  in  axillge.
Convulsions  in  arms.
Trembling  of  arms  and  hands.
Stitches  in  muscles  of  arms.
Red  spots  and  stripes  on  arms  and  hands.
When  writing  trembling  of  hand  ;  old  people.
Thick,  crippled  nails.
Pain  in  r.  shoulder  extending  to  chest,  with  sensation  as

if  a  tape  prevented  circulation  of  blood.
Blisters  on  hands  and  fingers  from  little  work.
^*  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  hips  ;  severe  stitching ;  <
daring  rest,  >  from  motion.
Stinging  sensation  in  both  thighs  at  same  time.
I  I  Smarting  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  shooting  down  in  front
of  thigh  and  up  to  r.  scapula ;  pain  makes  her  twist
around ;  numbness  and  tingling  down  r.  leg  and  foot.
^Rheumatism.
■  Loss  of  power  in  legs. ^Spermatorrhoea.
Boring,  tearing  in  thighs.
Stitches  in  muscles  of  thighs.
Severe  burning  and  inflammation  of  tibia.
Feet  swell,  are  painful  on  walking ;  feels  every  pebble.
Heaviness  of  feet.

Thick,  inflamed,  crippled  toe  nails.
Horizontal  fissures  between  and  under  toes.
Swelling  of  feet  with  tenderness  or  profuse  sweating  of
soles.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Paralytic  drawing  through  limbs.
Stitches  in  flesh  of  arms  or  thighs.


159  SABADILLA.

Weariness  in  limbs.

Continuous  heaviness  in  limbs,  obliging  one  to  lie  down

all  day,  but  especially  in  later  hours  of  forenoon  and

toward  evening.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  perfectly  still :  vertigo  >.
Lying  down:  cough  immediately  ;  expectoration  <.
Sitting:  vertigo  <.
Rising  from  a  seat :  vertigo.

He  bends  to  1.  side :  contraction  of  muscles  of  abdomen.
Opening  mouth  wide:  cracking  of  articulation  of  jaw.
Writing:  trembling  of  hands.
Walking : vertigo ; afterward headache, getting into

sweat  <  itching  of  scalp ;  pain  in  stomach.
^^  Nerves. Lassitude.

Great  debility  of  knees  with  relaxation  or  heaviness  of

body.
Great  debility  in  intermittents.
Great  paralytic  weakness  in  pleuritis.
Intense  but  transient  bruised  pain  in  various  parts  of

body.
Intense  pain  in  all  the  bones,  especially  in  joints,  as  if

interior  of bones  were scraped and cut  with  sharp

knife.
Hysteria  after  a  fright.
iTwitchings,  convulsive tremblings, or catalepsy from

worms.
■  Nervous  diseases  from  worms  or  deeply  seated  abdominal

irritation.
^"  Sleep. Sleepiness  :  in  forenoon  ;  all  day  ; can  hardly  over-
come the  inclination  ;  before  chill;  during  heat.
Sleep  disturbed  by  confused  unremembered  dreams.
Drowsy  during  day,  restless  at  night.
Many  ideas  occupy  mind,  prevent  sleep  or  make  it  light ;

evenings.
Sleep restless, tosses about; interrupted by frightful

dreams.
In  morning  starts  up  from  sleep  as  from  a  fright.
*^  Time. Morning : feels < ; vertigo and nausea ; gastric

symptoms  <  ;  heat  on  rising,  mouth  dry  and  stick}^ ;

sweat.
Forenoon :  attacks  of  giddiness  last  greater part ;  very

weak ;  stupefying  headache  <  ;  later  hours,  weariness

of  limbs ;  sleepiness.
Day  :  itching  on  front  of  head  ;  great  sleepiness  ;  drowsy.
Afternoon  :  feels  >  ;  influenza  <  ;  chill.
Evening: attacks of  giddiness, urging  to urinate <;

toward,  shivering  and  horripilations  <  ;  influenza  <  ;

toward,  heaviness  of  limbs;  many  ideas  occupy  mind,

prevent  sleep ;  chill.


SABADILLA.  160

9  P.M. :  paroxysms  of  tertian  ague.

Night:  awakes  with  a  whirling  sensation;  palms  burn;
restless ;  heat,  only  tertian  ague  paroxysms.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  drinks  :  toothache  <  ;
cannot  bear  anything  hot  in  mouth.

When  overheated:  itching  on  head  <.

Warm  stove  :  chilliness  >.

Warmth :  stitches  in  forehead  and  scalp.

Returning  to  room :  twisting,  screwing  pain  from  r.  side
of  head  to  temple.

Open  air :  vertigo  >  ;  feels  >  ;  when  walking,  lachryma-
tion  ;  spasmodic  sneezing  and  lachrymation.

Anything  cold  in  mouth  causes  pain.

Cold  drinks:  toothache  <.

Cold  air:  toothache  <  from  walking.

Cold : <  all  symptoms ;  cough  <  ;  sensitive  to.
*"  Fever. Chilliness  and  sensitiveness  to  cold.

Frequently  recurring  fits  of  shuddering,  passing  off  quickly
without  being  immediately  followed  by  heat  or  thirst ;
suddenly  feels  hot,  especially  in  face ;  feels  as  if  a
hot  breath  came  out  of  mouth  and  nose  and  heated
neighboring  parts ;  no  thirst ;  very  comfortable  feeling
in  whole  body,  and  clearness  of  head ;  fits  of  shuddering
recur  eight  or  ten  times  at  intervals ;  paroxysms  of  heat
less  frequent  but  last  longer.

I  Chill  without  thirst,  often  without  subsequent  heat.

Violent  chilliness,  as  if  dashed  with  cold  water,  >  by  a

n  warm  stove.

■  Dry  spasmodic  cough  with  pain  in  ribs  and  tearing  in

all  bones,  during  chill.

I  Thirst  begins  as  chill  leaves.

I  Thirst  for  warm  drinks  before  heat.

I  Chill:  afternoon  or  evening,  returning  at  same  hour;
often  without  subsequent  heat ;  predominates  particu-
larly on  extremities,  with  heat  of  face ;  runs  from  below
upward.

I  Evening  fever  with  cold  hands  and  feet  and  burning  face.

•  Whole  body  feels  hot  during  coryza. ^Influenza.

■  Heat  mostly  of  head  and  face,  often  interrupted  by  shiv-

ering, always  returning  at  same  hour.

■  Feverish;  he  feels  sick,  anxious,  starts  easily,  trembles,

breathes  short  and  hot.
Febrile  condition,  an  unwell,  sick  feeling,  restless  anxiety,
easy  startings,  short  hot  breath,  trembling,  great  orgasm
of  blood,  eyes  weak  and  unsteady,  as  if  everything  were
in  motion,  as  if  air  itself  were  in  tremulous  motion ;  irre-
sistible desire  to  sleep,  with  yawning,  icy-cold,  shivering
without  shaking,  constant  nausea.


161  SABADILLA.

■  Heat:  only  at  night  and  after  rising  in  morning,  more
internally  or  only  hands,  forehead,  lips  and  cheeks  feel
hot;  hands  are  constantly  dry  and  rough  ;  mouth  com-
pletely dried  up  and  sticky,  in  morning;  moderate
thirst,  desire  for  juicy  food  ;  no  perspiration,  daily  for
two  weeks;  head  and  face,  as  if  he  had  taken  wine,  not
perceptible  to  hand,  for  three  hours.

Heat  in  head  not  felt  externally ;  internal  chilliness.

•  Sweat  of  soles  of  feet.

Apyrexia:  constantly  chilly;  loss  of  appetite ;  eructations
sour,  rancid;  vomiting  of  bile  and  bitter  mucus;  op-
pressive bloatedness  of  stomach  ;  pain  in  chest ;  debility;
sour  eructations.

iSweat  often  during  heat;  in  morning  hours  with  sleep;
on  face,  rest  of  body  cold.

I  I  Tertian  ague  of  several  months'  duration  which  had
been  treated  with  Cinchona;  chill  predominates;  thirst-
lessness  and  bulimia  alternating  with  aversion  to  food.

I  I  Violent  shaking  of  limbs  as  in  a  severe  chill,  so  that  she
could  not  stand  and  hardly  speak,  without  any  sensa-
tion of  coldness,  although  surface  was  cold  to  touch ;
then  heat  and  thirst  followed  by  sweat;  twelve  to  eigh-
teen attacks  during  twenty-four  hours,  <  every  other
day. ^Ague.

I  I  Tertian  ague,  paroxysms  at  night,  after  use  of  household
remedies  paroxysms  ceased  for  a  short  time;  finally  re-
turned and  set  in  daily,  always  at  same  hour;  chill
moderate,  followed  by  thirst  and  severe  long-continued
fever  with  headache.

I  I  Stages  not  well  marked,  shivering  often  recurs  after  on-
set of  heat,  or  there  are  heat  and  coldness  at  same  time  in
different  parts  of  body,  thirst  at  one  time  present,  at
another  absent,  little  alteration  in  pulse,  sweat  profuse
but  of  short  duration ;  transient  nausea;  aversion  to  food
during  paroxysm  ;  accumulation  of  water  in  mouth ;
belching ;  scratching  in  throat  as  from  something  sharp,
and  sensation  as  if  a  soft  body  in  throat  must  be  con-
stantly swallowed ;  paroxysms  appear  at  9  p.m.  ^Ter-
tian ague.

I  i Intermittent  fever  during  Spring;  severe  chill  without
subsequent  heat  or  sweat;  during  apyrexia  great  weak-
ness of  limbs.

I  I  Ague  with  regurgitation  of  food  and  nausea  ;  thirst  be-
between  chill  and  heat.

I  fParoxysms  recur  at  same  hour;  chill  predominates;
thirst  only  between  chill  and  heat;  during  apyrexia
constant  cliilliness,  cough,  oppressed  breathing  and  pain
in  chest.

VOL.  IX. — 11.


SABADILLA.  162

I  I  Ague  paroxysms  consisting  only  of  a  cold  stage;  after
abuse  of  Quinine.

I  I  Paroxysm  invariably  at  3  p.m.,  chill  lasted  two  hours,
with  some  thirst;  heat  violent  of  three  hours'  duration,
and  sweating  for  four  hours;  no  thirst  in  heat  or  sweat.
^Quartan  ague.

iFever  where  gastric  symptoms  prevail,  with  dry,  convul-
sive cough  in  cold  stage. ^Quartan  ague.
"Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternating: canine  appetite  and
disgust  for  meat  and  sour  things;  thirstlessness and
bulimia  with  aversion  to  food.

At  intervals :  eight  or  ten  times  fits  of  shuddering.

Every  ten  minutes:  chilliness  up  back.

At  same  hour  :  cough  ;  chill.

Invariably  at  3  p.m.  :  paroxysms  of  chills.

Daily :  twisting  pain  in  head  ;  for  two  weeks  heat  in  head
and  face;  twelve  to  eighteen  attacks;  shaking.

Nightly :  cough.

Every  other  day:  attacks  of  shaking  <.

At  new  or  full  moon  :  cough  <.

Ague :  of  several  months'  duration.

Spring :  intermittent  fever.
*" Locality  and  Direction. Right:  screwing  pain,  in  side  of
head  ;  heaviness  in  side  of  forehead  ;  pain  in  shoulder  ;
smarting  in  hypochondrium  ;  numbness  and  tingling
down  leg  and  foot.

Left:  severe  stitches  in  ear  ;  jerking  in  muscles  of  upper
jaw;  beating  in  side  of  gastric  region;  spasmodic  con-
traction of  abdominal  muscles;  he  bends  to  side.

Left  to  r. :  stitches  in  throat,  sore  throat;  tonsillitis.

Upward  :  chilliness  running  from  feet  to  head.

From  below  upward  :  chill.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  things  were  turning  around  each  other;
as  if  she  would  fall  if  she  did  not  hold  on  to  some-
thing; as  if  eyes  went  round  with  the  whirling  sensa-
tion ;  lips  as  if  scalded  ;  tongue  as  if  full  of  blisters ;  as
of  a  skin  hanging  loosely  in  throat ;  as  if  uvula  were
down ;  as  if  oesophagus  would  be  closed  ;  as  of  a  body
in  throat  which  he  must  swallow  down  ;  as  of  a  lump
in  throat ;  as  if  a  morsel  of  food  had  lodged  in  throat ;
as  of  a  worm  in  oesophagus ;  as  if  a  sore  spot  were
pressed  upon  ;  as  of  a  lump  in  abdomen  ;  as  if  a  ball  of
thread  were  moving  and  turning  rapidly  through  ab-
domen ;  as  if  knives  were  cutting  abdomen  ;  as  if  abdo-
men were  sunken  ;  abdomen  as  if  empty ;  croaking
as  of  frogs  in  abdomen ;  as  of  something  alive  in  abdo-
men; as  if  stomach  were  gnawed;  as  of  a  thread  or
string  in  throat ;  as  if  throat  were  tied  with  a  string ;


163  SABADILLA.

as  if  circulation  were  suspended ;  as  if  tape  prevented
circulation  in  chest ;  as  if  interior  of  bones  were  scraped
and  cut  with  a  sharp  knife;  as  if  hot  breath  came  out
of  his  mouth  and  nose;  as  if  dashed  with  cold  water;
as  if  everything  were  in  motion ;  as  if  air  itself  were
in  tremulous  motion;  as  if  he  had  taken  wine;  shak-
ing as  if  in  a  severe  chill ;  as  of  something  sharp  in
throat ;  as  if  a  soft  body  in  throat  must  be  constantly
swallowed.

Pain  :  in  joints  and  muscles,  in  tongue  and  down  throat ;
in  region  of  stomach;  in  chest;  in  r.  shoulder  into
chest ;  in  ribs.

Intense  pain  :  in  all  bones  and  joints.

Severe  pains  :  in  frontal  region.

Boring,  tearing  :  in  thighs.

Tearing :  in  all  bones.

Cutting  pains  :  in  throat;  in  abdomen  ;  in  ovary.

Shooting :  down  in  front  of  thigh  and  up  to  r.  scapula.

Stitches:  in  temples;  fine  prickling,  in  skin  of  forehead
and  scalp;  in  1.  ear;  in  throat;  in  vertex;  in  side  of
chest;  in  muscles  of  arms;  in  hips;  in  muscles  of
thighs.

Stitching  pains :  in  hypochondria.

Boring,  cutting,  or  scraped  feeling :  in  bones.

Twisting,  screwing  pain :  from  r.  side  of  head  to  both
temples.

Pinching :  around  umbilicus.

Dull  pain :  in  carious  teeth.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  hips.

Burning-boring  pains  in  abdomen.

Burning  pain  :  in  stomach ;  along  chest  as  high  as  pit  of
throat.

Burning :  of  mouth  ;  of  hands  ;  in  point  on  top  of  head  ;
of  scalp ;  of  face  ;  on  tip  of  tongue ;  in  oesophagus  and
stomach;  in  region  of  navel ;  in  abdomen;  in  anus;  in
rectum  ;  in  urethra  ;  in  chest;  in  tibia.

Burning  itching :  most  on  front  of  head  and  behind  ears.

Smarting:  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Sore  pain  :  in  tongue.

Stinging  :  in  both  thighs.

Soreness:  of  throat;  of  tongue.

Bruised  feeling :  in  back  and  spine  and  sacral  region.

Drawing:  in  spermatic  cords  into  shoulders;  through
limbs.

Stupefying  oppressive  sensations:  in  forehead.

Heat:  spreading  from  head  over  whole  body;  of  lips;  in
abdomen;  in  stomach;  in  head.

Tingling:  down  r.  leg  and  foot.


SABADILLA.  164

Tickling:  in  ears.

Scraping :  in  throat.

Eoughness:  in  throat.

Jerking:  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  jaw.

Beating :  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  jaw ;  in  1.  side  of  gastric
region.

Pressure:  in  head;  on  eyeballs;  in  eyes.

Heaviness :  of  head ;  r.  side  of  forehead,  then  to  left ;  of
feet ;  of  limbs.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Dulness :  of  head.

Sensation  of  narrowness :  in  throat.

Constricted  feeling  :  deep  in  throat.

Turning  and  twisting  :  through  whole  abdomen.

Boring,  whirling  :  in  region  of  abdomen.

Weariness :  of  limbs.

Empty  feeling  :  in  stomach.

Dryness :  of  mouth ; of  tongue ; of  palms ;  of  lips ;  of
fauces  and  throat.

Crawling  :  of  scalp  ;  like  ants  in  skin.

Numbness :  down  r.  leg  and  foot.

Itching  :  of  scalp  ;  in  ears  ;  in  nose  ;  in  anus.

Coldness  :  in  stomach  ;  of  limbs.
*'  Tissues. Boring,  cutting  or  scraped  feeling  in  bones.

Inflammation  of  internal  organs.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure: on lar-
ynx, throat  sore.

Scratching : itching of scalp  > ; violent tickling and
stinging  on  head  and  behind  ears.
*^Skin. Crawling  sensation  like  ants  in  skin.

Red  spots  and  stripes,  more  marked  in  cold.

Gray  dingy  color  of  skin.

Red  spots  on  face  or  on  chest.

Parchment-like  dryness  of  skin.

I  Measles.
*^  Stages  of  Life^  Cfonstitution. Suited  to  persons  of  light
hair,  fair  complexion,  with  a  weakened,  relaxed  mus-
cular system.

(Children ;  old  people.

Boy,  set.  6 ;  ague.

Young  man,  set.  16,  plethoric ;  tsenia.

Mrs.  R.,  set.  28,  suffering  more  or  less  for  about  three
extra  strain,  mental  and  physical,  to  which  she  had
been  exposed ;  there  is  a  tendency  to  neurotic  disease
in  her  family;  one  brother  has  lately  died  in  an  in-
sane asylum,  and  another  has  shown  symptoms  of  men-
tal weakness.


165  SABADILLA— SABINA.

Man,  set.  48,  suffering  8  days ;  ague.

Gardener,  set.  55,  large,  robust,  jaundiced  hue,  suffering

several  weeks ;  quartan  ague.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by : Conium,,  Pulsat.

Compatible: After Bryon. in pleurisy; Arsen,, Bellad.,

Mercur.  and  Nux  vom.  follow  well.
Compare:  Verat.  alb.,  Colocyn.  (ovaritis);  Colchic.,  Lycopod.^

<  4-8  P.M. Pulsat.  >  open  air.


SABINA.

Savine.  Coniferse.

An  evergreen  shrub  native  of  the  south  of  Europe.  The  tincture  is  made  from
the  young  fresh  tops  of  the  branches.

Proved  by  Hahnemann,  Gross,  Fr.  H.,  Herman,  Hartmann,  Stapf,  etc. ;  Archiv
fiir  Horn.,  voh  5;  Hering,  Prak.  Mittheilungen,  1827  ;  Buchner,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  20.

Clinicaij  Authorities. — Toothache,  Bonninghausen,  Riiek.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  I,
p.  476;  Hemorrhoids,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  1003;  Gleet,  GoUman,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  550 ;  Condylomata,  Exuberant  granulations,  Uterine  dis-
placments,  Kurtz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  635  ;  Uterine  affection,  Lietzkau,  Ruck.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  356 ;  Menorrhagia,  Metrorrhagia,  Abortion,  Hartmann,  Weber,
Ran,  Lobethal,  Griessel,  Nenning,  Knorr,  Genzke,  Attomyr,  Schron,  Emmrich,
Sturm,  Pleyel,  Schiller,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  325 ;  Metrorrhagia,  Low,
Battman,  Huber,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  6:^8;  Hahnemann,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,
p.  270;  Huber,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  303 ;  Eldherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  51;  Terry,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  317;  Ludlam,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  278;  Uterine  hemorrhage,
Burchfield,  Med.  Ad.,  vol.  20,  p.  350 ;  Menorrhagia,  Patzak,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
2,  p.  253;  Wesselhoeft,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  20;  Cowperthwait,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  8,  p.  11,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  177  ;  Frost,  H.  M.,  Nov.,  1874,  p.  145,  Raue's  Rec,
1875,  p.  176;  Waddell,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  445;  Dysmenorrhoea,  Johnson,  T.
H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1887,  p.  328;  Fanning,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  3,  p.  30;  Amenorrhcea,
Watzke,  A,  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  55,  from  (Estr.  Zft.  f.  Hom.,  vol.  2,  p.  1 ;  Am,enor-
rhcea  and  ancemia,  Madden,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  301  ;  Leucorrhoea,  Wood,  Hom.  CL,
vol.  3,  p.  93;  Boynton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  412  ;  Threatened  abortion,  Gibson,
M.  I.,  vol.  6,  p.  141 ;  Lindsay,  Org.,  vol.1,  p.  472;  Fleming,  T.  H.  M.S.  Pa.,  1887,
p.  282;  Barretti,  Riv.  Om.,  1874;  (2  cases),  Slocomb,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol,  4,  p.  810;
Premature  rupture  of  the  membranes,  Streeter,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  371  ;  Dystocia,  Adams,
Med.  Adv.,  Jan.,  1890,  p.  35 ;  Retained  placenta,  Schron,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,
p.  404  ;  Eaton,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  140  ;  Arthritis,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  3,  p.  546 ;  Rheumatism,  Wells,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  3,  p.  259  ;  Chronic  rheumatism,
JEgidi,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  90.

^  Mind. Music  is  intolerable  to  her.

Much  irritability  of  temper,  hysteria.


SABINA.  166

Hypochondriacal  mood.

Great  tiredness  and  laziness,  with  a  feeling  of  deep-seated
inward  trouble,  which  makes  him  melancholy  and  sad.

Irritability  of  temper,  with  sour  stomach  and  great
anxiety  ;  hypochondriacal  mood  ;  rheumatic  subjects.
^Sensorium.  Vertigo:  especially  in  morning,  fears  she  will
fall ;  everything  turns  black  before  her  eyes ;  suppressed
menses ;  with  congestion  to  and  heat  in  head  ;  when
standing ;  as  if  he  would  fall ;  with  obscuration  of
vision.

*  Inner  Head. Headache,  especially  in  temporal  eminences,

as  if  parts  were  pressed  asunder;  it  comes  suddenly,

disappears  gradually  and  recurs  frequently.
Frontal  headache,  pressing  down  on  eyes  as  if  they  would

be  pressed  out ; <  in  morning  on  rising ;  >  in  open  air.
Transitory  tensive  pain  in  forehead,  as  if  skin  had  grown

fast,  with  tension  in  eyes.
Pressure  and  dulness  in  head,  especially  in  forehead.
Sense  of  painful  stricture  over  temples.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Lustreless  eyes.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. Buzzing  in  ears.
'^  Smell  and  Nose. Dry  coryza.

Epistaxis,  preceded  by  dulness  and  pressure  in  forehead.
Redness  of  skin  around  alse  nasi,  painful  to  touch.

*  Upper  Face. Flushes  of  heat  in  face,  with  chilliness  all

over  and  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

Pale  face ;  eyes  lustreless  with  blue  rings  around  them.

Pimples  on  cheeks  and  forehead.

Black  pores  in  face  and  on  nose.
'"Teeth  and  Gums. Drawing  toothache  caused  by  masti-
cating.

\  I  Throbbing  toothache,  appearing  toward  evening  and  at
night,  <  after  eating  and  from  warmth  of  bed ;  sen-
sation as  if  tooth  would  burst;  throbbing  in  all  the
bloodvessels ;  belching ;  profuse  discharge  of  bright
red  blood  from  genitalia  between  periods.

I  [Toothache  after  a  gouty  pain  in  great  toe  had  been
driven  away  by  external  applications.

Toothache  evening  and  night.

Tearing  pain  in  roots  of  molars.

Swelling  of  gums  around  broken  teeth.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste  of  food,  of  milk  and  coffee.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Offensive  breath.

Dryness  of  mouth  and  oesophagus  without  thirst.

Dryness  of  mouth  and  throat;  the  saliva  is  quite  white,
and  becomes  frothy  while  talking.
*^  Throat. Dryness  in  throat  with  drawing  pain.


167  SABINA.

Sensation  of  swelling  in  throat,  as  if  he  had  to  swallow
over  a  foreign  bod}'.

Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat;  when  trying  to  swallow,
cannot;  can  swallow  food.
"Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Constant  desire
for  acids  (especially  lemonade)  and  roasted  coffee.

Appetite  poor.
'"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Burning  in
stomach ;  morning  sickness.

Heartburn  and  sour  eructations,  especially  when  sitting
bent,  which  position  also  aggravates  other  symptoms.

Paroxysms  of  nausea  and  qualmishness  when  she  is  in  a
crowd.

Frequent  empty  retching.

Vomiting:  of  bile;  of  undigested  food  eaten  day  previous.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach,  ex-
tending to  back.

Frequent  burning  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  drawing,  twist-
ing and  gurgling  in  bowels,  bearing  down  toward  sexual
organs.
'^  Abdomen. Tympanitis  ;  bloatedness  of  abdomen  ;  rumbling
in  evening,  in  a  warm  room.

Writhing  and  pinching  in  abdomen,  in  umbilical  region  ;
frequently  recurring  with  increasing  violence  and  a
sensation  as  if  vomiting  would  come  on,  without  nausea.

Slight  sensation  of  motion  in  abdomen,  as  if  something
were  alive.

Quivering  in  abdomen,  as  if  there  were  something  alive
in  it,  resembling  fcBtal  movements.

Laborlike  pains  in  abdomen,  down  groins.

Soreness  of  abdominal  muscles.

Pressing  down  toward  genitals.
""Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea  :  with  pain  extending  from
back  through  to  pubes;  in  rheumatic  or  gouty  women;
with  much  flatulence.

Stools:  of  blood  and  mucus;  frequent  urging,  finally  a
liquid  portion  is  discharged,  followed  by  a  hard  portion.

■  Constipation:  stools  hard,  difficult  and  painful;  pain
from  back  to  pubes.

I  Hemorrhoids  with  discharge  of  bright  red  blood,  causing
pain  in  back,  from  sacrum  to  pubes,  biting  sore  pain  in
the  varices,  especially  during  morning  stool.
I  I  Hemorrhoids  with  excessive  discharge  of  bright  red
blood  or  blood  mixed  with  mucus;  cutting,  pressiye
pain  low  down  in  abdomen;  pressing,  urging  pain  in
sphincter  ani ;  constant  urging  to  stool;  itching  and
burning  in  anus;  paroxysmal  stitching  pain  in  small
of  back.


SABINA.  168

^'Urinary  Organs,  i Nephritis,  with  retention  of  urine,  or
discharge  by  drops,  with  burning ;  ardor  urince  in
rheumatic  subjects.

■  Vesical  irritability,  depending  on  gouty  diathesis.
Diminished  discharge  of  red  urine,  with  strangury.
Frequent  violent urging to urinate,  with profuse dis-
charge.

Urine  bloody  and  albuminous
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  increased,  witji  vio-
lent continuous  erections.
Ilnflammatory  gonorrhoea,  with  discharge  of  pus.

■  Rheumatic  gonorrhoea.

I  iGlans  penis  dark  red,  with  burning  soreness  to  touch  ;

painfulness  of  prepuce,  cannot  retract  it ;  attacks  of  pain

in  frsenum  preeputii. ^Gleet.
Hard  swelling  on  penis.
iSycotic  excrescences,  with  burning  soreness.

■  Fig-warts  with  intolerable  itching  and  burning;  exuber-

ant granulations.
^'  Female  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  desire  almost
amounting  to  nymphomania;  almost  insatiable  desire
for  an  embrace.
Ovaritis,  stitches  in  vagina,  deep  from  before  backward.

■  ■Inflammation  of  ovaries  or  uterus  after  abortion  or  pre-

mature labor.
Contractive  pain  in  region  of  uterus.

■  Uterine  pains  running  from  back  to  groins.

■  Painful  active  congestions  of  uterus.

■  Acute  metritis  ;  metritis  hsemorrhagica.

■  Lateral  and  posterior  displacements  of  uterus  from  gen-

eral atony.
I  I  Remittent  but  fixed  pain  in  uterus,  at  times  stitching
in  character;  <  during  menstruation;  colic  with  the
menses;  long-continued  leucorrhoeal  discharge  after
menses;  pain  during  an  embrace;  uterus  enlarged  or
swollen  (mother  died  of  carcinoma  uteri).

■  The  OS  tincse  is  open,  the  blood  looks  red,  the  discharge

is  profuse  and  paroxysmal,  especially  during  motion.
^Threatened  abortion.

■  Discharge  of  blood  between  periods,  with  sexual  excite-

ment.

■  Copious  hemorrhages,  accompanied  by  uterine  colic  ;  con-

tractive laborlike  pains  extending  from  back  to  pubes
and  great  urging  to  urinate.
I  I  Pain  or  feeling  of  malaise,  extending  between  sacrum
and  pubes  and  experienced  in  these  points. (^Metror-
rhagia.

■  ■Metrorrhagia :  resulting  from  plethora ;  clotted  and  fluid


J  69  SABINA.

blood,  pain  extending  from  sacrum  or  lumbar  region,  to
pubes;  with  severe  bearing  down,  extending  from  lower
part  of  back  around  abdomen  and  down  thighs,  blood
bright  red,  thin,  liquid ;  laborlike  pains  in  lumbar  and
uterine  region,  discharge  of  large  clots  of  blood,  bright
red,  coming  in  gushes,  particularly  profuse  on  motion,
OS  uteri  being  constantly  open  ;  <  by  least  motion,  often
>  by  walking;  produced  by  great  irritability  of  organ-
ism, in  patients  who  have  menstruated  very  early  in
life  and  very  freely,  and  have  always  had  more  or  less
tendency  to  miscarriage
I  I  Without  any  apparent  cause  menses  recurred  three  times
during  the  month,  each  time  very  abundant  and  last-
ing three  days;  the  following  month  while  carrying  a
heavy  burden  a  stream  of  blood  suddenly  gushed  from
genitals,  attended  with  violent  hypogastric  pains,  weak-
ness of  head  almost  amounting  to  vertigo;  paleness  of
face;  eyes  heavy,  lustreless ;  great  thirst;  little  appetite,
loose  stool ;  urine  red  by  admixture  of  blood  ;  drawing,
bearing-down  pains  from  fundus  of  uterus  toward  sa-
crum and  along  broad  ligaments  to  each  side,  appearing
periodically,  accompanied  at  one  time  by  a  discharge
of  black  fluid,  at  another,  of  coagulated  blood  ;  when  the
pains  are  absent  she  has  constant  hemorrhage ;  pains  >
by  pressure  ;  least  motion  increases  discharge  ;  hypogas-
trium  distended,  has  a  doughy  feeling,  but  only  tender
on  firm  pressure ;  temperature  of  skin  not  elevated,  that
of  extremities  lowered  ;  pulse  full,  soft,  quick  ;  sleep  un-
easy ;  frequent  shivering  and  mental  anxiety.  ^Metror-
rhagia.

I  I  After  miscarriage  (two  months  ago)  placenta  remained

fourteen  days;  had  a  constant  hemorrhage  which  could
not  be  stopped;  a  tampon  relieved,  but  when  removed
hemorrhage  returned  ;  had  occasional  laborlike  pains
which  caused  some  strings  and  shreds  to  pass.
■  Protracted  uterine  hemorrhage  arising  from  a  loss  of  tone
in  vessels  of  uterus,  whether  from  disease  or  weight  and
pressure  of  foetus  in  utero ;  blood  dark  and  clotted;
gouty  subjects.

I I  Menses:  too  profuse,  too  early;  last  too  long;  partly
fluid,  partly  clotted  and  ofl'ensive;  flow  in  paroxysms;
with  colic  and  laborlike  pains ;  pains  from  sacrum  to
pubes.

I  I  Low  grade  of  asthenic  fever,  violent  menorrhagia;  set
in  with  great  violence,  discharge  red,  clotted,  partly
fluid,  accompanied  by  a  pain  running  from  back  through
to  pubes ;  the  noise  of  the  piano  seemed  to  set  her  dis-
tracted.


SABINA.  170

I  I  In  poor  health  for  two  years,  from  living  in  a  damp
house  in  an  ague  neighborhood ;  liad  chills  several
times;  menses  profuse,  with  large  coagulated,  conical
clots. ^Menorrhagia.

I  I  Girl,  set.  14,  had  menstruated  for  more  than  a  year  and
always  irregularly;  there  was  an  almost  incessant  dis-
charge of  bright-red  blood  for  four  weeks,  so  that  it  was
impossible  to  determine  the  actual  periods  of  commence-
ment of  menstruation  ;  walking  very  much  lessened  the
hemorrhage,  but  it  returned  again  very  soon.  ^Menor-
rhagia.

I  I  Five  months  after  delivery,  very  profuse  discharge  of
blood,  with  pains  in  back  and  laborlike  pressing  toward
pubes;  for  six  days  constant  dribbling  interrupted  by
profuse  gushes  of  blood  with  discharge  of  large  masses
of  dark  coagula  accompanied  by  laborlike  pains ;  <
from  motion ;  rapid  prostration  ;  pale  face ;  vertigo ;
chilliness  ;  uterus  prolapsed,  os  pointing  to  1.  side  while
fundus  lay  on  opposite  side. ^Menorrhagia.

I  iMenorrhagia  during  climacteric  period  in  w^omen  who
formerly  aborted.

I  iDysmenorrhoea  accompanied  by  violent  headache;
menses  generally  delayed,  lasting  about  seven  days,
scanty,  coming  for  a  few  minutes  at  a  time,  then  ceasing
for  six  or  eight  hours,  bright,  clotted,  without  flow ;  pain
in  hypogastrium  going  to  back;  feeling  of  obstruction
internally  ;  dragging  pain  in  back  and  pain  throughout
lower  extremities  which  seems  deep  seated  ;  easiest  posi-
tion is  on  flat  of  back  with  limbs  extended ;  pain  <
walking,  >  from  warmth  ;  severe  pain  in  head  princi-
pally in  anterior  part  and  eyes,  <  stooping,  walking,
>  from  pressure;  nausea,  at  times  vomiting;  feverish-
ness;  cold  hands  and  feet;  pulse  120;  violent  rapid  pul-
sation felt  throughout  body,  except  in  head ;  no  pre-
monitory symptoms,  pain  coming  about  two  hours  after
menses  and  ceasing  on  second  day.

IDysmenorrhoea  with  violent  pain  extending  from  back
through  to  pubes,  rheumatic  in  origin.

I  I  Kate  R.,  16  years  old,  has  not  yet  menstruated,  suffered
three  years  ago  from  intermittent  fever,  and  since  then
complained  of  frontal  headaches  pressing  down  on  eyes
as  if  it  would  push  them  out ;  <  in  morning  when
rising,  >  in  fresh  air ;  cachectic  features  with  blue
rings  around  eyes,  especially  in  morning,  toothache
most  severe  at  night  in  bed,  >  walking  about,  <  by
eating ;  paroxysms  of  nausea  and  qualmishness  when
in  a  crowd;  frequent  burning  in  pit  of  stomach,  draw-
ing, twisting  and  gurgling  in  bowels,  lasting  for  hours ;


171  SABINA.

bearing  down  toward  sexual  organs ;  shortness  of  breath ;
palpitation  at  every  motion,  especially  when  ascending  ;
pressing  pains  in  chest;  heaviness  of  lower  extremities,
with  painfulness  of  thighs  when  walking;  drawing,  tear-
ing pains  in  extremities,  especially  at  night ;  great  las-
situde and  sleepiness.  ^Chlorosis  primaria  amenor-
rhoeica.
I  I  Anna  L.,  17  years  old,  strong  constitution,  menstruated
in  her  thirteenth  year ;  menses  returned  regularly  until
they  became  suppressed  about  18  months  ago  from  im-
moderate dancing;  complains  since  of  severe  vertigo,
especially  in  morning  and  after  exertion,  so  that  she  is
afraid  of  falling,  and  everything  turns  black  before
her  eyes;  pressing  pains  in  forehead;  burning  in  ears,
greenish-yellow  corroding  leucorrhoea;  shortness  of
breath,  palpitation,  sweats  easily,  painful  lassitude;
leuco-phlegmatic  expression  ;  cheeks  and  forehead  cov-
ered with  pimples ;  constant  desire  for  acids  and  roasted
coffee. ^Chlorosis  secundaria  metastatica.

I  I  Yellowish,  ichorous,  fetid  leucorrhoea,  and  painful  dis-

charges of  fetid  blood  every  two  weeks ;  at  climaxis.

I I  Leucorrhoea:  of  pudenda;  of  consistence  of  starch;
copious,  milky,  causing  itching;  ropy,  glairy  from  cer-
vical canal;  with  drawing  })ains  in  broad  of  back
through  to  pubes.

I  I  Corrosive  leucorrhoea  since  commencement  of  first  preg-
nancy, causing  soreness  and  itching  of  thighs.

I  Stitches  from  below  upward  deep  in  vagina.

■  Condylomata  which  itch  and  burn.

I  Cysts  in  vulva,  sensitive  or  with  tearing  pains  during
rest.

1  I  Stitches  in  1.  nipple.

Voluptuous  itching  in  nipples.
^'Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Promotes  the  ex-
pulsion of  moles.

I  iTendency  to  abortion,  especially  at  third  month;  dis-
charge of  bright- red,  partly  clotted  blood,  <  from  any
motion  ;  pain  from  sacrum  to  pubes.

I  1  Greatest  anxiety ;  constant  fear  that  she  will  abort ;  for
last  two  days  on  slightest  motion,  discharge  of  blood,
alternately  bright  red,  fluid  and  dark  or  in  clots  ;  labor-
like pains  from  back  to  pubes ;  external  genitals  hot  to
touch  ;  OS  uteri  dilated  half  an  inch.  /^Threatened  abor-
tion.

I  I  During  fifth  month  of  pregnancy  labor  pains  come  on
at  regular  intervals  of  about  fifteen  minutes,  with  a
slight  but  unceasing  flow  of  bright-red  blood.  ^Threat-
ened abortion.


SABINA.  172

I  I  Profuse  flow  of  blood from vagina ; os  considerably

dilated ; vagina filled with dark coagulated blood ;

chilly;  nausea;  great  thirst;  much  prostration;  third

month  of  pregnanc3^
I  I  Hemorrhage  of  dark-red  blood,  at  times  fluid,  at  others

clotted  ;  not  the  slightest  pain  in  back  or  hypogastrium ;

great  prostration. ^Threatened  abortion.

■  Miss  Rose  L.,  about  22  years  old,  a  thin,  delicate  female

of  nervous  temperament,  forsaken  and  unhappy  ;  seven
months  pregnant ;  morning  sickness  with  loss  of  appe-
tite and  diarrhoea ;  some  blood  has  passed  at  mtervals
of  two  and  three  weeks ;  profuse  metrorrhagia  and  diar-
rhoea ;  flooding  much  <  by  moving  or  going  to  cham-
ber, when  it  flows  profusely  and  is  of  an  arterial  color ;
constant  pain  from  sacral  region  to  pubes;  child  has
not  moved  since  two  days ;  face  pale,  she  begins  to  feel
faint;  os  dilated  and  patulous  (delivered  two  months
later  of  a  healthy  child).

I  I  After  a  miscarriage  violent  hemorrhages,  lasting  each
time  eight  to  ten  daj^s;  during  first  five  days  profuse
discharge  of  bright-red  fluid  blood,  without  pain.

I  I  Uterine  hemorrhage  of  four  weeks'  duration  after  abor-
tion.

I  I  Retained  placenta  after  abortion ;  free  discharge  of  blood ;
mouth  of  uterus  closed  ;  patient  very  nervous.

I  I  Premature  rupture  of  membranes  and  free  escape  of
liquor  amnii;  occurred  forty  days  previous  to  labor,
caused  by  overwork  and  followed  by  labor  pains  and
discharge  of  blood.

I  I  On  eighth  day  after  labor,  reappearance  of  blood,  lochial
discharge  having  already  ceased;  on  ninth  day  three
attacks  of  hemorrhage,  discharge  profuse,  containing  a
large  number  of  clots,  <  on  rising,  causing  loss  of  con-
sciousness; heat  over  whole  body  with  sweat,  face  cold
and  pale.

I  Atony  of  uterus;  painless  loss  of  dark-red  blood  imme-
diately after  delivery ;  discharge  of  fluids  and  clots  with
each  pain.

I  Retained  placenta;  pain,  or  an  uneasy,  bad  feeling,  ex-
tending from  sacrum  to  pubes ;  a  slight  sensation  of
motion  in  abdomen;  intense  after-pains,  notwithstand-
ing the  retention,  with  discharge  of  fluid  blood  and
clots  in  about  equal  proportion  with  every  pain.

■  Retained  placenta  from  atony  of  uterus.

I  After-pains  with  sensitiveness  of  abdomen.

■  Metritis  after  parturition.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Crawling
and  tickling  in  laryiix  exciting  cough  and  mucous  ex-
pectoration.


173  SABINA.

Dry,  hacking  cough  and  tickling  in  trachea ;  expectora-
tion streaked  with  blood  next  day.
^^Respiration. Shortness  of  breath.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Intermittent  stitches  in  clavicle.
Tensive  pain  with  pressure  in  middle  of  sternum,  neither

increased  by  expectoration  nor  inspiration.
Pressing  pains  in  chest.

I  Haemoptysis.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  at  every  mo-
tion, especially  when  ascending.
Pulse  unequal;  generally  quick,  strong  and  hard.
Violent  beating  of  bloodvessels  in  whole  body.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Constant  pain  in  small  of  back,  obliging
him  to  bend  the  back  inward.
Paralytic  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  would  like  to  stretch;  >
bending  backward.

I I  Drawing  pains  in  small  of  back,  extending  to  pubic
region.

I  Indescribable  uneasiness  in  lumbar  vertebrae ;  dragging
sensation  from  behind  forward  resembling  weak  labor
pains.

Weariness  in  lumbar  region.

Laborlike  pains  drawing  down  into  groins.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  as  if  sprained,  in  r.  shoulder  joint,  even
during  rest.

I  iPressive  pain  in  both  upper  arms,  near  elbow  joint,
from  without  inward,  <  on  touch  and  motion.

Paralytic  tearing  along  r.  upper  arm  as  far  as  hand.

Stinging  in  both  upper  arms,  from  within  outward,  near
elbow  joints.

Aching  pain  in  right  radius,  <  from  motion  or  touch.

■  Arthritic  stiffness  and  swelling  of  wrist  joint,  with  tear-
ing and  stinging,  made  almost  insupportable  when  hand
hangs  down.
'''*  Lower  Limbs.  Rheumatism  of  metatarso-phalangeal  joint
of  big  toe,  characterized  by  great  swelling,  bright  shin-
ing red  ;  intense  sensibility  to  touch  and  motion ;  <  at
night;  high  fever.

Heaviness  of  legs,  with  painfulness  of  thighs  when
walking.

Stinging  pains  in  hip  joints,  in  morning  and  when
breathing.

Sensation  of  coldness  in  whole  (r.)  leg.

Ulcers  on  tibia,  with  a  lardaceous  base.

Swelling,  redness  and  stitches  in  big  toe. ^Gout.

The  middle  of  anterior  surface  of  his  thighs  feels  bruised
and  painful.

Tearing  pain  with  pressure  in  metacarpal  bones  of  both
feet.


SABINA.  174

Sharp  stitches  from  within  outward  in  heels.

Painful  drawing  in  joints  of  r.  toes,  <  during  a  walk.
^  Limbs  in  General. Drawing,  tearing  pains  in  extremities,
especially  at  night.

I  I A  man  set.  42;  haggard,  emaciated,  stooping  gait,  thin,
grey  hair,  hollow  eyes,  skin  of  an  ashy  hue;  from  time
to  time  dry  cough,  with  dyspnoea ;  complains  of  weak-
ness and  decrepitude,  no  strength  to  work,  little  appe-
tite, slow  digestion,  sleep  restless  and  full  of  dreams,
sticky  sweat  toward  morning ;  here  and  there  through
joints  a  gouty  lamelike  pain,  now  in  shoulder  and
elbow  joint,  now  in  hip  and  knee;  pains  <  in  a  warm
room  and  >  in  open  air;  pains  usually  in  one  side
of  body,  mostly  r.;  troublesome  pulsation  in  different
bloodvessels,  especially  when  taking  a  deep  breath,  <
in  evening  in  bed,  which  he  has  to  leave  again,  not
being  able  to  return  until  morning  ;  transitory,  tensive
pain  in  forehead,  with  sensation  as  if  skin  had  grown
fast,  with  tension  in  eyes;  redness  of  skin  around  alse
nasi,  painful  to  touch  ;  dryness  of  mouth  and  oesopha-
gus without  thirst;  collection  of  white  frothy  mucus,
tilling  corners  of  mouth  when  talking;  sensation  of
a  body  in  throat,  which  he  tries  to  swallow  but
cannot,  it  offers  no  impediment  to  swallowing  of  food;
heartburn  and  sour  eructations,  especially  when  sit-
ting bent,  which  likewise  aggravates  the  other  symp-
toms ;  >  from  sitting  erect,  from  moving  and  stretching
limbs,  for  which  he  has  an  involuntary  desire ;  rum-
bling and  gurgling  in  abdomen,  especially  in  evening,
in  warm  room ;  great  tiredness  and  laziness,  with  a  feel-
ing of  deep-seated  inward  trouble,  which  makes  him
melancholy  and  sad. ^Chronic  rheumatism.

Great  weakness  and  weariness  of  limbs,  with  tearing  pains
at  night ;  when  very  warm  ;  >  in  cold  air.

I  I  Red  and  shining  swelling  of  great  toe,  with  excessive
pains,  <  by  least  touch  or  motion  ;  heaviness  of  affected
limbs;  fever  <  in  evening;  wandering  pains,  burning,
affecting  one  joint  after  another,  especially  big  toe  and
hand ;  >  by  cool  applications  ;  changes  her  position
often  to  get  relief.  ^Arthritis.
^^Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest:  tearing  pains  in  cysts;
pain  in  shoulder  joint.

Lying  on  flat  of  back  wdth  limbs  extended,  easiest  posi-
tion during  dysmenorrhoea.

Must  lie  down  :  heaviness  of  body.

Sitting  bent :  heartburn  and  sour  eructations  <.

Standing:  vertigo.

Stooping:  pain  in  head  <.


175  SABINA.

When  hand  hangs  down :  tearing  and  stinging  in  wrist
joint  <.

Must  bend  the  back  inward  :  pain  in  small  of  back.

Elevating  limbs :  >  pain  in  ulcers.

Rising:  discharge  of  clots  <.

Changes  position  often  to  get  relief:  arthritis.

Motion:  profuse  discharge  from  uterus;  palpitation;  al-
ways increases  discharge ;  palpitation  ;  pain  in  upper
arms  <  ;  pain  in  r.  radius  <  ;  pain  in  big  toe  <.

Moving  and  stretching  limbs:  eructations  and  heart-
burn >.

Walking:  metrorrhagia  >;  lessened  hemorrhage;  dys-
menorrhoea  <  ;  pain  in  head  <  ;  painfulness  of  thighs  ;
drawing  in  toes  <.

Ascending:  palpitation  <.

Lies  on  1.  side:  during  sleep.
^^  Nerves. Feels  weary  and  weak  in  all  her  limbs  with  great
despondency.

I  I  Heaviness  and  indolence  of  body,  obliging  him  to  lie
down.

Great  lassitude  and  heaviness.

Very  tired  and  lazy.

Is  very  nervous  and  hysterical,  and  if  she  becomes  preg-
nant is  almost  sure  to  abort  about  third  month.

I  Nervousness  so  great  that  music  becomes  unbearable,  it
goes  through  bone  and  marrow.
^''  Sleep. Sleeplessness  and  restlessness  after  midnight,  with
heat  and  profuse  perspiration.

Lies  on  1.  side  during  sleep.
^  Time. Morning :  vertigo  <  ;  frontal  headache  <  ;  pain  in
varices  during  stool;  pain  in  hip  joints;  toward,  sticky
sweat;  tenseness  in  ulcer  <.

During  day:  great  chilliness.

Toward  evening:  toothache.

Evening:  rumbling  in  abdomen;  pulsation  in  different
bloodvessels  <  in  bed;  fever  <;  chill  with  shivering;
tenseness  in  ulcer  <.

Night:  toothache;  pains  in  extremities  <;  pain  in  great
toe  <  ;  drawing  and  tearing  in  extremities  <.

After  midnight:  sleepless  and  restless.
''Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth  of  bed,  toothache
<  ;  pain  (dysmenorrhoea)  >  ;  pain  in  ulcer  <.

Warm  room  :  rumbling  in  abdomen ;  rheumatic  pains  <  ;
gout  <.

Open  air:  frontal  headache  >  ;  rheumatic  pains  >  ;  tense-
ness in  ulcer  >.

Cool  applications:  wandering  pains  in  joints  >.

Cool  air:  weariness  and  weakness  of  limbs  >  ;  gout  >.


SABINA.  176

*"  Fever. Chill  in  evening  with  attacks  of  shivering.

Great  chilliness  during  day.

IShivering  with  obscuration  of  sight,  followed  by  sleepiness.

Burning  heat  of  whole  body,  with  great  restlessness.

Flushes  of  heat  in  face,  rest  of  body  chilly,  hands  and  feet
cold.

Sweats  easily  ;  sweat  every  night.
*' Attacks,  Periodicity. Paroxysms:  discharge  from  uterus;
of  nausea  and  qualmishness.

At  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes:  labor  pains.

Periodically :  pains  in  uterus.

Every  night:  sweat.

Three  times  during  month:  menses.

Every  two  weeks :  painful  discharge  of  fetid  blood.
*"  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  shoulder  joint ;
tearing  in  upper  arm;  aching  in  radius;  coldness  in
leg;  painful  drawing  in  joints  of  toes.

Left:  stitches  in  nipple;  lies  on  side  during  sleep.

From  before  backward:  stitches  in  vagina.

From  behind  forward  :  dragging  in  lumbar  vertebrae.

From  below  upward :  stitches  in  vagina.

From  within  outward:  stinging  in  upper  arms;  stitches
in  heels.

From  without  inward  :  pressive  pain  in  arms.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  she  would  fall ;  as  if  parts  of  tempo-
ral eminence  were  pressed  asunder;  as  if  eyes  would
be  pressed  out ;  as  if  skin  had  grown  fast  on  forehead  ;
as  if  tooth  would  burst ;  as  if  he  had  to  swallow  over  a
foreign  body;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat;  as  if  vomiting
would  come  on ;  as  if  something  were  alive  in  abdomen ;
r.  shoulder  joint  as  if  sprained.

Pain :  in  temporal  eminences ;  from  back  through  to  pubes ;
in  frsenum  ;  in  uterus  from  back  to  groins;  throughout
lower  extremities ;  from  sacral  region  to  pubes ;  in  small
of  back.

Violent  pains :  in  hypogastric  region  ;  from  back  to  pubes.

Severe  pain  :  in  head  and  eyes.

Tearing  pain :  in  roots  of  molars ;  in  cysts,  in  vulva ;  in
wrist  joints;  in  metacarpal  bones  of  both  feet;  in  ex-
tremities.

Paralytic  tearing:  along  upper  arm  as  far  as  hand.

Throbbing  pain :  in  teeth.

Stitches :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  to  back  ;  in  vagina ;  in  1.  nip-
ple ;  in  clavicle ;  in  big  toe ;  in  heels.

Stitching  pain  :  in  small  of  back;  in  uterus.

Cutting  pressive  pain:  low  down  in  abdomen.

Pinching:  in  abdomen.

Dragging  pain :  in  back.


177  SABINA.

Pressing  urging  pain  :  in  sphincter  ani.

Pressing  pain  :  in  chest ;  in  forehead  ;  in  upper  arms.

Tensive  pain:  in  forehead;  in  middle  of  sternum  ;  in  broad

of  back  through  to  pubes ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  joints

of  r.  toes ;  in  extremities.
Contractive  pain  :  in  region  of  uterus.
Aching  pain  :  in  r.  radius.
Bearing-down  pains :  from  fundus  of  uterus  toward  sacrum

and  along  the  broad  ligaments  to  each  side.
Drawing  pain  :  in  teeth  ;  in  throat.
Laborlike  pains  :  in  abdomen  down  groins.
Paralytic  pain  :  in  small  of  back.
Lamelike  pain  :  in  joints.

Burning  sore  pain  :  in  the  varices ;  in  glans  penis.
Dragging  sensation  :  in  lumbar  vertebrge.
Burning :  in  stomach  ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  anus  ;  of  con-
dylomata.
Stinging :  in  both  upper  arms ;  in  wrist  joint ;  in  hip  joints.
Soreness :  of  abdominal  muscles  ;  of  thighs.
Painfulness :  of  thighs.
Painful  stricture:  over  temples.
Throbbing :  in  all  bloodvessels.
Tension :  in  eyes.
Pressure :  in  head ;  in  forehead ;  in  metacarpal  bones  of

both  feet.
Pressing :  on  eyes  ;  toward  genitals.
Heaviness  :  of  lower  extremities.
Dulness :  in  head  ;  in  forehead.
Drawing,  twisting  and  gurgling:  in  bowels.
Writhing :  in  abdomen.
Weariness:  in  lumbar  region;  of  limbs.
Weakness :  of  head  ;  of  limbs.
Dryness:  of  mouth  and  oesophagus;  of  throat.
Tickling:  in  larynx;  in  trachea.
Crawling:  in  larynx.
Itching :  in  anus ;  of  pudenda ;  of  thighs  ;  of  condylomata ;

voluptuous,  in  nipples.
Coldness:  of  hands  and  feet;  in  r.  leg.
**  Tissues. Drawing  pains  through  long  bones.
Red,  shining  swelling  of  affected  parts.
I  Gout;  arthritic  complaints; tearing,  stinging  in  joints

after  they  become  swollen  ;  <  in  heated  room ;  >  in

cool  air  or  cool  room  ;  arthritic  nodes.
Chlorosis.

Throbbing  in  all  the  bloodvessels.
I  Hemorrhages.
^'  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  skin  around

VOL. IX. — 12.


SABINA.  178

alse  nasi  painful ;  glans  penis  sore :  pains  in  upper  arms
<  ;  pain  in  r.  radius  < ;  intense  sensibility  of  great  toe.

Pressure :  pains  in  uterus  >  ;  hypogastrium  tender ;  pain
in  head  >.
*''  Skin. Black  pores  in  skin,  especially  of  face.

I  Fig-warts,  with  intolerable  itching  and  burning;  exube-
rant granulations.

Deep  ulcers ;  prickling  feeling  of  tenseness  in  ulcer ;  <
morning  and  evening,  exertion,  touch,  warmth  of  bed;
>  open  air,  cold,  raising  or  elevating  limbs.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Chronic  ailments  of  women  ;
arthritic  pains  ;  tendency  to  miscarriage.

Gouty  diathesis.

Girl,  set.  12,  came  into  puberty  at  the  age  of  eleven ;  dys-
menorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  14,  tall,  thin,  scrofulous,  has  menstruated  for  more
than  a  year ;  menorrhagia.

Girl,  set.  16,  not  yet  menstruated,  suffered  three  years  ago
from  intermittents,  since  then  complaining;  amenor-
rhoea.

Girl,  set.  17,  strong  constitution,  menstruated  in  her  thir-
teenth year;  suppressed  18  months  ago  from  immoder-
ate dancing ;  amenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  19,  sanguine  temperament,  thin,  weakly  constitu-
tion, menstruated  regularly  since  sixteenth  year,  seven
years  ago  had  hsemoptysis  ;  metrorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  21,  delicate,  nervous,  always  aborted  at  third
month  after  slightest  mental  disturbance,  hemorrhage
being  profuse ;  threatened  abortion.

Mrs.  D.,  set.  21,  nervous  temperament,  suffering  since  her
first  pregnancy ;  leucorrhoea.

Miss  R.  L.,  set.  22,  nervous  temperament,  thin,  delicate,  for-
saken and  unhappy,  seven  months  pregnant;  threatened
abortion.

Young  lady,  set.  23,  in  good  health  ;  menorrhagia.

J.  0.,  set.  24,  medium  height,  dark  complexion,  dark  hair,
nervous  temperament,  very  fond  of  music,  suffering  for
years ;  dysmenorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  24;  threatened  abortion.

Miss  P.,  set.  25,  ill  two  years ;  amenorrhoea  and  ansemia.

AVoman,  set  26,  delivered  two  months  ago,  since  then  suf-
fering; uterine  hemorrhages.

Mrs.  J.,  set.  27,  mother  of  two  children  ;  retained  placenta
after  abortion.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  26,  brunette,  married  ten  years ;  uterine  hem-
orrhage.
Servant  girl,  set.  30,  tall,  thin  ;  metrorrhagia.
Mrs.  A.,  set.  30,  in  poor  health  for  two  years^  from  living  in


179  SABINA.

a  damp  house  in  an  ague  neighborhood,  liaving  had
chills  several  times  ;  menorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  30,  on  ninth  day  after  second  labor;  uterine
hemorrhage.

Woman,  set.  30,  strong,  sanguine  choleric  temperament,
aborted  four  times,  now  three  months  pregnant ;  threat-
ened abortion.

Woman,  set.  32,  three  months  pregnant;  threatened  abor-
tion.

Mrs.  N.,  set.  38,  nine  months  married ;  dystocia.

Woman,  set.  40,  sanguine  temperament,  passed  through
four  pregnancies,  waters  each  time  escaping  eight  days
before  labor;  threatened  abortion.

Man,  set.  42  ;  chronic  rheumatism.

Woman,  well  built,  phlegmatic  temperament,  delivered
five  months  ago,  since  then  has  not  menstruated ;  men-
orrhagia.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Fulsat.

Compatible:  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Fulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Spongia,
Sulphur.

Complementary  to : Thuja.

Compare:  Arnica,  Cole,  ostr.,  Coccul.,  Crocus,  Ipecac,  3Iillef.,
Ruta,  Secale,  Trillium.


SALICYLICUM  ACIDUM.  180

SALICYLICUM  ACIDUWI.

Salicylic  Acid.  H^CrjHj^O^.

Found  in  nature  in  Spiraea  blossoms,  Wintergreen  (Gaultheria),  etc.

Fragmentary  provings  by  Lewi,  H.  K.,  vol.  20,  p.  106;  Macfarlan  (recorded
in  Thesis  of  G.  W.  Shaffer,  March,  1877)  common  symptoms  of  20  provings^
See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  8.

Clinical  Authorities. — Meniere's  dkease,  McClatchey,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  21,
p.  736;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  57;  Deafiiess,  Claude,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  356^
Canker  of  mouth,  Hoffman,  M.  I.,  vol.  5,  p.  66 ;  C7.se  in  diphtheria,  Grosvenor,
Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  659;  Fontheim,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  13,  p.  112;  Indigestion^
Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  86;  Dyspepsia,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  354;
Flatulent  dyspepsia,  Hale,  M.  I.,  vol.  2,  p.  326 ;  Whitman,  M.  I.,  vol.  5,  p.  229  ;.
Inflammation  of  stomach  and  boivels,  Hoffman;  Flatulence,  Hale,  Am.  Hom  ,  vol.  1,
p.  94;  Diarrhoea,  CEhme,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  412;  Cholera  infantum,  Hale,
N.  A.  J.  H,  vol.  25,  p.  354;  Catarrh  of  bladder,  Hale,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  156;,
Septiccemia,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  354;  Septic  fever  (2  cases),  Hale,  M.  I.,
vol.  5,  p.  142;  Sciatica,  Goullon,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  371;  Foot  siveats,  Pagi,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  404 ;  Acute  articular  rheumatism,  Goullon,  Times  Ret.,
1877,  p.  3;  H.  K.,  1876,  p.  69;  A.  H.  Z.,  1876,  p.  76;  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  118;
Acute  rheumatism,  Thompson,  Hom.  Times,  vol.  4,  p.  108;  Rheumatism,  Hale,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  355;  Griswold,  Cal.  Med.  Times,  vol.  1,  p.  5 ;  Koeck,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  124;  Arthritis,  Molin,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  356  ;  Chronic
caries,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  22,  p.  415.

'  Mind. Anxiety  ;  worrying,  restless,  yet  mild.

Melancholic ;  wants  to  lie  quiet ;  feels  faint.

Excited  mood.

Delirium ;  stupid,  can  hardly  collect  his  ideas,  then  he
laughed  without  cause,  talked  incessantly  and  discon-
nectedly, frequently  looked  about  him  with  apparent
hallucinations.
^  Sensorium. Stupefaction  ;  dulness  of  head.  '

Vertigo ;  inclines  to  fall  to  1.  side,  while  surrounding
objects  seem  falling  to  right.

■  Meniere's  disease;  vertigo  which  comes  and  goes,  often
from  no  observable  reason ;  tendency  to  fall  to  affected
side,  while  objects  seem  to  fall  away  to  opposite  side ;
headache  frequent  but  not  always  present;  noises  in
ear ;  defective  or  absent  perosseous  hearing  ;  absence
of  gastric  symptoms,  or  so  slight  as  not  to  account  for
the  other  symptoms;  indeterminate  giddiness  in  hori-
zontal position,  but  considerable  when  raising  head  or
sitting  up.


181  SALICYLICUM  ACIDUM.

^  Inner  Head. Rush  oi  blood  to  head.

Severe  headache ;  piercing,  in  both  temples.
Headache,  commencing  on  top  or  in  back  of  head,  running
down  sterno-mastoid  (more  r.  side),  which  is  tender  to
touch.
"*  Sight  and  Eyes. Diminished  acuteness  of  vision.

•  Plastic  iritis  following  inflammatory  rheumatism,  the
pupil  would  contract  notwithstanding  the  local  use  of  a
one  per  cent,  solution  of  Atrop.  sulph. ; the  nightly-
pain  was  most  agonizing,  temporarily  >  by  hot  appli-
cations.
'^  Hearing  and  Ears, l  Deafness,  with  noises  in  ears.
Nervous  deafness.
Diminished  hearing.
I  Roaring  in  ears,  with  difficult  hearing.
-Disturbs hearing when given for  rheumatism (large
doses).

■  Tinnitus  dependent  upon  hypersemia.

I  Auditory  nerve  vertigo; a  troublesome  nausea  accom-
panying head  symptoms.
Roaring  in  ears  and  difficult  hearing;  hears  music;  rush

of  blood  to  head  ;  excited  mood.
I  I  Purulent,  fetid  otorrhoea.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Wants  to  sneeze.

llncipient  catarrh,  patients,  especially  children,  sneeze
all  day.
^  Upper  Face. Dull,  heavy  aspect ;  face  flushes  quickly  on

slight  excitement.
'^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  as  of  something  burnt;  bitter;

food  has  no  taste.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  and  throat  dry ;  burning  and  dry-
ness of  mouth  and  pharynx.
I  I  Redness  of  buccal  cavity  and  fauces. ^Diphtheria.

■  Stomatitis,  the  mouth  is  hot  and  dry,  tongue  covered

with  burning  vesicles.
Foul  breath  and  oflensive  expectoration.
Mouth  dotted  with  white  patches,  burning,  scalded  feeling;

ulcers  on  tip  of  tongue.

■  Canker  sores,  with  burning  soreness  and  fetid  breath.

I  I  Canker  of  mouth,  stomach  and  bowels;  patient  rapidly
sinking.
13  Throat. Burning  in  throat.

■  Tonsils  red,  swollen,  studded  white.

Violent  efforts  to  swallow,  with  difficulty  in  swallowing,
woke  him  from  sleep ;  the  pain  and  difficulty  became
confined  to  r.  side,  with  sticking  along  Eustachian  tube
into  ear  ;  swelling  of  r.  tonsil  noticeable  externally,  with
sensitiveness to touch and increased  temperature  in


SALICYLICUM  ACIDUM.  182

vicinity ;  mucous  membrane  of  throat  and  posterior
fauces  reel,  swollen,  with  ulcers  size  of  head  of  a  pin ;
after  a  while  a  small  lump  of  cheesy  matter  of  strong
odor  was  expectorated.

■Scarlatina  anginosa;  diphtheritic  form.

I  I  Little  or  no  fever,  but  great  weakness,  difiicult  degluti-
tion, much  inflammation,  the  exudate  soft. ^Diphtheria.

iDiphtheritis;  violent  fever;  entire  fauces  covered  with
a  white  exudate ;  in  two  cases  hoarseness  and  barking
cough  (affection  of  larynx).
*^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,
gagging,  waterbrash.

Frequent  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Ecchymoses  and  ulcerations
in  mucous  membrane  of  stomach  and  bowels.

Burning  in  epigastric  region.

Weak  nervous  sensation  in  stomach.

I  I  Flatulent  and  fermentative  dyspepsia.

■  Distension  and  formation  of  gases  in  stomach  and  bowels

after  meals.
I  I  Excessive  accumulation  of  flatus  and  acidity  of  stomach,,
with  much  belching  of  gas,  anaemia  and  great  irrita-
bility with  despondency. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Dyspepsia  with  putrid  eructations  and  much  accumula-

tion of  gas  on  stomach.

I  I A  young  lady  of  bilious  temperament,  wasted  from  a
fleshy,  strong  girl  to  an  emaciated,  bony  creature ;  as
soon  as  she  would  eat,  no  matter  how  simple  the  food,,
her  stomach  would  bloat  up  so  that  it  would  be  neces-
sary to  loosen  her  dress ;  region  of  stomach  looked  like
an  inflated  bladder;  after  from  one  to  two  hours  suff'er-
ing  in  region  of  stomach  from  this  extreme  distension,,
was  a  putrid  flatus  belched  up,  accompanied  by
collapse  of  stomach  and  temporary  relief;  frequent
vomiting  characterized  by  putrid  fermentation ;  severe
headaches ;  extremely  nervous ;  sleep  fitful  and  unre-
freshing ;  bowels  constipated ;  urine  heavily  loaded
with  sediment ;  fermentation  and  decomposition  seemed
to  commence  as  soon  as  food  reached  stomach.  ^Flat-
ulent dyspepsia.

I  I  Woman,  set.  30,  of  very  unhealthy  family;  always
suffering  from  indigestion ;  daily,  some  hours  after
dinner,  has  diarrhoea;  sometimes  looks  very  badly;
least  error  in  diet  shows  effect  in  an  aggravation  of  the-
diarrhoea.

I  I  Girl  four  years  old,  had  relapse  from  malignant  scarlet,
fever ;  inflammation  of  bowels  supervened,  with  im-
mense distension  of  abdominal  region.


183  SALICYLICUM  ACIDUM.

""  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea;  stools  green;  flushes  easily
as  in  hectic;  acid,  sour,  or  putrid  smelling.
Costive ;  stool  dry,  hard ;  then  diarrhoea,  watery,  sour,  yel-
low, with  great  weakness.
■  Cholera  infantum  or  other  diarrhoea  in children,  when
eructations  have  a  peculiarly  putrid  and  offensive  odor,
j  In  a  case  where  tsenia  solium  had  existed  for  nine  years
four  doses  of  0.5  acid  Salicyl.  a  dose  every  hour,  followed
by  half  an  ounce  01.  ricini,  caused in  half  an  hour
discharge  of  taenia  ten  yards  long,  with  head  entire.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Diabetes  mellitus  (two  cases).
Albuminuria ;  rheumatic  diathesis.

Urine  very  offensive,  largely  composed  of  mucus  ;  micro-
scope revealed  pus,  blood  and  an  abundance  of  mucous
epithelium. ^Catarrh  of  bladder.
Urine:  scanty,  clear,  brown  ;  three  hours  after  its  passage
it  has  a  green  tinge  and  deposits  a  feathery  precipitate,
consisting  of  oblong,  six-sided,  silvery-white  crystals  of
Salicyluric  acid  ;  if  these  are  removed  the  urine  becomes
at  once  putrid  ;  if  not  the  urine  remains  fresh  for  above
a  week.
2^  Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Large  leuco-phlegmatic  woman,
ffit.  45  ;  constant  dull,  heavy  pain  in  cerebellum ;  great
forgetfulness, excessive irritability  and frequent hot
flushes  of  fever.
''Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  lA primipara,
delivered  on  9th  of  May  of  a  large  male  child ;  slight
lesion  of  vagina;  a  piece  of  membrane  as  large  as  finger-
nail was  torn  up ;  membranes  unusully  tough  and  ex-
tensive and  a  small  shred  was  left  in  utero ;  on  third
day chill,  followed  by  fever; pulse  120,  temperature
105;  lochia  offensive. ^Septic  fever.
I  I  Confined  with  second  child  on  May  15th,  delivered  with
forceps  owing  to  the  great  size  of  the  head  ;  no  apparent
lesion;  lochia  not  offensive,  disappeared  on  tenth  day;
considerable  hemorrhage  after  labor,  and  I  suppose  a
small  clot  or  clots  became  impacted  in  uterine  blood-
vessels and  owing  to  access  of  air  (perhaps)  underwent
decomposition,  and  this  septic  material  was  absorbed ;
on  eleventh  day  severe  chill,  repeated  twice  next  day ;
pulse 130,  temperature 104; chills alternated with
febrile heats,  and chilliness  was  excited  by  slightest
touch  of  anything  cold  or  a  swallow  of  cold  w^ater,  and
she  was  very  thirsty;  some  pain  and  swelling  of  one
breast  and  one  knee. ^Septictemia.
'^Respiration. Respiration hurried, sometimes deepened,
sometimes  shallow  or  sighing  and  almost  panting,  as  if
laljored,  but  no  complaint  of  difficulty  of  breathing.


SALICYLICUM  ACIDUM.  184

""  Cough. Dry  cough,  of  a  hard,  racking,  spasmodic  char-
acter, <  at  night  in  old  people.
"^  Inner  Chest  and Lungs. Spasmodic, flatulent  asthma ;

fetid  bronchitis  ;  gangrene  of  lungs.
"  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  small,  rapid,  weak.
3^  Upper  Limbs. '  l  Rheumatic  gout  or  rheumatoid  arthritis,
occurring  in  some  women  during  climaxis; the  pains
disappeared,  the  engorgements  and  nodosities  of  fingers
subsided,  and  the  hands  could  again  be  used.
^  Lower  Limbs, l  '  Formerly  had  foot  sweats,  and  since  their
suppression  is  more  liable  to  rheumatic  pains ;  attacks
especially  at  night ;  after  an  hour's  sleep  the  pains  force
him  to  leave  bed ;  he  changes  to  sofa  but  must  soon
leave  it  again,  and  thus  he  passes  a  sleepless  night;  the
seat  of  pain  corresponds  exactly  to  exit  of  1.  ischiatic
nerve,  goes  from behind  forward and downward  to
knees  and  toes ;  pain  is  drawing,  shooting,  at  the  toes
burning,  or  as  he  expresses  himself,  "  as  if  foot  were  on
an  ant-hill "  and  as  if  the  foot  would  like  to  perspire  ;  no
fever;  can  hardly  ascend  stairs,  must  look  for  some  sup-
port or  he  might  fall. ^Sciatica.
I  Copious  foul-smelling  foot  sweats.
^*  Limbs  in  General. iHeat,  redness,  soreness  and  swelling
about  joints; <  in  knees,  with  acute  piercing  pains;  <
on  motion,  >  from  dry  heat. ^Rheumatism.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying : indeterminate  giddi-
ness.
Wants  to  be  quiet :  melancholic.
Forced  to  leave  bed  :  sciatica.
Sitting  up  :  considerable  giddiness.

Motion:  rheumatism  in  joints  <;  exquisitely  painful,  rheu-
matism of  affected  limb  causes  soreness.
^^  Nerves. Weakness,  faintness.

^*  Time. Night :  dry  cough  <  ;  attacks  of  rheumatic  pains  <.
*^  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  applications :  rheuma-
tism >.
Dry  heat:  rheumatism  of  joints  >.
Sitting  near  open  window  in  a  hot  room :  rheumatism.
'J'ouch  of  anything  cold  :  excited  chilliness.
*"  Fever. "Slight  chill,  crawls  in  spine; yawning;  chill  in
finger  tips.
I  Fever  continuous,  burning,  then  sweat  with  relief;  fever

again,  with  exacerbation  of  symptoms.
Sweat  at  times  more,  at  others  less  profuse.
Profuse  but  short-lasting  sweat.
Weak,  faint  after  fever  and  sweat.
Flushes  easily,  as  in  hectic.
:  Rheumatic  fever.


185  SALICYLICUM  ACIDUM.

*^  Attacks  and  Periodicity. Daily :  some  hours  after  dinner,
has  diarrhoea.

Nightly :  agonizing  rheumatism.
*'^  Location  and  Direction. Right :  difficulty  of  swallowing ;
swelling  of  tonsil ;  severe  pain  in  several  joints ;  pain
in  deltoid  and  gastrocnemius.

Left:  inclines  to  fall  to  side,  vertigo;  severe  pain  in  all
joints;  ankle  and  knee  pains;  elbow  and  wrist  enor-
mously sw^ollen;  pain  in  wrist  and  forearm.
**  Sensations.  As  if  foot  w^ere  on  an  ant-hill ;  as  if  foot  wanted
to  perspire ;  as  if  head  were  squeezed  between  two
beams.

Pain  :  in  shoulder  and  elbow,  then  in  lumbar  region  ;  in
r.  deltoid  and  gastrocnemius.

Terrific  pain  :  in  knee  joint.

Severe  pain:  in  all  the  joints  on  1.  side  and  several  on  r.
side.

Acute  piercing  pain  :  in  joints.

Piercing  pain  :  in  head.

Shooting  pain  :  in  lower  limbs.

Burning  pains :  in  toes.

Sticking:  along  Eustachian  tube  into  ear.

Drawing  pain  :  in  low^er  limbs.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  hands  ;  exit  of  1.  ischiatic  nerves  to
knees  and  toes.

Dull,  heavy  pain  :  in  cerebellum.

Dull,  aching  distress:  in  stomach.

Soreness:  about  joints;  in  r.  deltoid  and  gastrocnemius.

Burning :  of  mouth  and  pharynx ;  of  vesicles  in  mouth  ;
of  canker  sores ;  in  throat ;  in  epigastric  region.

Painful  stiffness :  of  neck.

Dulness :  of  head.

Weak,  nervous  sensations  :  in  stomach.

Dryness :  of  mouth  and  pharynx.
^'  Tissues.  Pieces  of  spongy  bone  became  soft  as  leather  in  a
few^  days  when  placed  in  a  half  per  cent,  solution,  while
compact  bone  tissue  is  very  slowly  softened ;  enamel  of
teeth  is  very  slightly  affected  bj''  it,  but  the  dentine,
when  it  is  exposed  by  caries,  is  rapidly  destroyed.

The  increased  amount  of  the  salts  of  lime  in  the  urine
soon  after  Salicylic  acid  has  been  taken  shows  that  the
acid  deprives  living  as  well  as  dead  bone  of  its  lime
salts.

Causes  a  sort  of  necrosis,  especially  of  tibia.

1 1  Ulceration  of  mucous  surfaces.

1 1  Acute  articular  rheumatism.

■  Rheumatism:  acute  articular;  chronic;  gonorrhoeal ;
diphtheritic.


SALICYLICUM  ACIDUM.  186

I  Acute,  inflammatory,  articular  rheumatism  attacking  one
or  more  joints,  especially  elbows  or  knees,  with  great
swelling  and  redness,  high  fever  and  excessive  sensi-
tiveness to  least  jar;  motion  impossible.

•  Muscular  rheumatism.

■  Severe  pain  in  all  the  joints  on  1.  and  several  joints  on  r.
side ;  large  joints  on  1.  side  were  attacked,  except  hip
and  shoulder,  while  on  r.  side  the  wrist  and  ankle  alone
suffered.

I  lA  tall  young  man,  set.  16,  suffered  from  severe  acute
articular  rheumatism ;  knee  joint  especially  was  seat  of
terrific  pain ;  painful  stiffness  of  neck  ;  excessive  per-
spiration, followed  by  miliaria;  great  lassitude;  pulse
full,  soft,  very  frequent;  went  out  too  early  and  a
relapse  set  in,  with  same  weakening  sweats ;  patient
looked  ansemic  and  emaciated  ;  hurried  pulse,  remind-
ing one  of  heart's  beat  in  beginning  of  phthisis.

I  1 A  teacher  suffered  from  acute  articular  rheumatism  ;  a
relapse  followed  from  carelessness,  attack  being  very
severe,  with  profuse  sour-smelling  sweats  and  extensive
eruption  of  miliaria ;  very  nervous,  urine  showed  heavy
•■  sediment;  desquamation  set  in  just  as  after  scarlet  fever
in  hands  and  feet;  pains  first  in  shoulder  and  elbow^,
then  in  lumbar  region,  so  that  the  patient  could  hardly
move  ;  during  relapse  hands  greatly  swollen,  could  not
be  used ;  sleeplessness  or  sleep  interrupted  by  frightful
dreams,  as  if  his  head  were  squeezed  between  two  beams
(stiffness  of  neck) ;  constipation.
:  Acute  gout.

1  I  Rheumatism  after  sitting  near  an  open  window  in  a  hot
room,  so  that  she  felt  hot  on  one  side  and  chilly  on  the
other ;  1.  ankle  and  knee  joint,  elbow  and  wrist  enor-
mously swollen,  of  a  pinkish  color,  very  sensitive,
every  motion  exquisitely  painful,  pulse  120,  high
temperature,  sweat,  etc.,  even  in  bed,  shocks  passed
from  thigh  down  to  foot  so  that  she  had  to  scream.

I  I  Polyarthritis  rheumatica,  temperature  105;  pain  in-
tense, tenderness  excessive.

1  I  Soreness  and  pain  in  r.  deltoid  and  r.  gastrocuemius,
changing  next  day  to  1.  wrist  and  forearm  ;  some  sensi-
tiveness to  touch  and  great  soreness  on  moving  limb;  no
heat ;  on  following  day  pain  had  removed  to  inside  of
1.  forefinger ;  when  the  pain  appeared  in  one  part  it  dis-
appeared in  the  part  which  had  previously  been  painful

I  I  Purpura  hemorrhagica,  with  hemorrhages  from  all  mu-
cous membranes,  accompanied  by  a  constant  dull  ach-
ing distress  in  stomach  and  occasional  vomiting  of
blood  and  mucus.


187  SALICYLICUM  ACIDUM.

I  Has  a  specific  action  upon  serous  membranes  and
should  be  very  useful  in  dropsical  effusions ;  should  be
tried  in  hydrocephalus,  hydropericardium  and  renal
dropsy.

Ma}^  prove  useful  in  caries  and  necrosis.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries.

Touch  :  top  or  back  of  head  tender;  tonsil  sensitive;  arm
sensitive ;  limbs  tender.
*^  Skin. Skin  red  ;  points  on  skin  like  flea-bites.

Skin  red  and  sensitive ;  rheumatism.

I  Urticaria.

Sprinkled  on  indolent  or  inflamed  ulcers  is  said  to  induce
rapid  healing.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Healthy-looking  child,  set.
5  weeks,  suffering  over  two  weeks ;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  12;  rheumatism.

Young  man,  set.  16,  tall;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  30,  coming  from  a  very  unhealthy  family ;
indigestion  and  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  80,  robust,  formerly  had  foot  sweats,  and  since
their  suporession  is  more  liable  to  rheumatic  pains;
sciatica.
*^  Relations.  Compare:  Colchic.  (rheumatism,  also  subse-
quent weakness);  Kreos.  (piercing  in  temples;  throat;
diarrhoea ;  ulcers,  antiseptic  properties) ;  Carh.  ac.  (mind;
throat ;  weakness,  especially  at  stomach  ;  hectic ;  anti-
septic properties ;  topical  use ;  urine) ;  Salicyl.  of  Soda
(tinitus  aurium,  confusion  and  deafness ;  rheumatism) ;
Nitr.  ac;  Arsen. ;  Phosphor,  (bones);  Lac.  ac.  (bones,
throat);  Omc/iona  (preventing  sepsis ;  fever;  ringing  in
ears).


SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.  188

SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.

Elder.  Ca'prijoliacese.

The  European  elder,  Sambuciis  nigra,  difters  but  slightly  from  the  American,
Sambucus  canadensis. The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves  and  flowers.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Hahnemann,  assisted  by  Franz,  Gross,  Harlmann,
Langhammer  and  Wislicenus,  R.  A.  M.  L.,  vol.  5.

CuNiCAii  Authorities.— Cojysa,  Tietze,  Gross,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  391
Ileus  (3  oases  reported  cured),  Lilienthal,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  116  ;  Influenza,  Sorge,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  p.  110 ;  Larijngismus,  Wesselhoeft,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  19  ;
Spasinodic  croup,  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  765;  Croup,  Fielitz,  Tietze,  B.
J.  H.,  vol.  5.  p.  308  ;  Hawley,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  441  ;  Proll,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,
p.  126;  Cough,  Croup,  Asthma  Millari,  suffocative  attacks,  etc.,  Hartmann,  Eummel,
Tietze,  Hirsch,  Hinz,  Weber,  Fielitz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  97;  Asthmatic
attacks,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2-5,  p.  392 ;  Whooping  cough,  Griesselich,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  84 ;  Arnold,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  728  ;  Use  in  whooping  cough,
Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  366 ;  Catarrhal  affection  of  chest,  Boenning-
hausen,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  694;  Use  in  phthisis,  McGeorge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
vol.  5,  p.  131 ;  Phthisis,  Schiiler,  Schultz,  Riickert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  394 ;
Ague,  Hrg,  Herrmann,  Baertl,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  987  ;  Durham,  Swan,  N.
A.  J.  H.  vol.  21,  p.  106;  Night  sweats,  MuUer,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  p.  148.

^  Mind. Seeing  images  when  shutting  eyes.
Delirium  without  fever.
Anxiety:  with  vomiting;  with  sweat.
Very  easily  frightened  ;  trembling,  anxiety,  restlessness.

■  Fright  followed  by  suffocative  attacks,  with  bluish  bloated

face.
I  Constant  fretfulness.
^Sensorium. Dizziness,  cloudiness  of  head.
^  Inner  Head. Dizziness,  with  tension  in  head  when  moving
it,  sensation  as  if  it  were  filled  with  water.
Sudden  jerks  through  head.
Pressive  pain  on  temporal  bones.

■  Catarrhal  headaches,  especially  of  children.
*  Outer  Head. The  head  is  bent  backward.

Erysipelas  all  over  1.  side  of  head,  ear  much  swollen,  con-
fined to  bed,  could  not  move.

Scurfs  on  head  with  intolerable  itching.

Skull  feels  as  if  stretched.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. '  l  Child  could  not  open  eyes,  could  not
bear  light,  awoke  from  sleep  screaming.

Eyes  and  mouth  half  open  in  sleep. ^Asthma  Millari.


189  SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.


*  Hearing  and  Ears. Great  swelling,  heat,  redness  and  lump

just  under  r.  ear,  in  neck,  accompanied  by  a  very  sharp
pain.
^  Smell  and  Nose. I Child  starts  up  suddenly  as  if  suffocat-
ing. ^Asthma  Miliaria.

I  iSniffles  of  children.

■Breathing  through  nose  impeded,  with  dr}^  coryza,  espe-
cially in  nursing  infants.

I I  Dry  coryza  of  infants;  nose  dry  and  completely  ob-
structed, preventing  breathing  and  nursing;  constant
sniffles.

■  Stoppage  of  nose  with  thick  tenacious  mucus.

*  Upper  Face. iFace:  pale,  bluish  or  red;  pale,  collapsed,.

covered  with  cold  sweat ;  appears  much  older  and  yel-
low ;  bloated,  dark  blue ;  red-spotted.
Burning  heat :  and  redness  of  face ;  with  icy-cold  feet.
On  waking,  face  breaks  out  in  a  profuse  sweat,  which  grad-
ually extends  over  body.
Red,  burning  spots  on  cheeks ;  great  heat  of  face  ;  circum-

Numb  tension  as  from  swelling  in  cheeks  and  on  nose.
'*'  Teeth  and  Gums. Tearing  and  stinging  in  teeth,  with  sen-
sation of  swelling  of  cheek.
^^  Throat. Dryness  of  throat  and  mouth,  with  thirstlessness.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Thirst,  but  drink

is  not  palatable.
*^  Eating  and  Drinking. Worse  after  eating  fruit.
*"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Everything
makes  him  feel  sick.
Vomiting  first  of  food,  later  of  bile.
'^  Abdomen. Distended  abdomen,  with  pressure  and  griping
in  stomach  and  umbilical  region.
Painful  pressure  in  abdomen,  with  nausea  when  leaning

against  a  hard  edge.
Great  soreness  in  abdomen.
I  I  Griping  in  abdomen,  with  emission  of  flatus  as  after

taking  cold.
■  Ileus.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Stools :  frequent,  watery  ;  thin,  slimy,
with  much  wind,  followed  by  urging;  pressure  in  stom-
ach and  navel ;  abdomen  large.
Urinary  Organs. Nephritis.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  profuse  discharge  of  urine..
'^'  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  too  profuse ;  menorrhagia.
2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Mammae  red  and
swollen.
Milk  diminished.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Hoarseness
caused  by  much  tenacious,  glutinous  mucus  in  larynx.


21


SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.  190

Voice  sounds  hollow,

■  Hoarseness,  rawness  in  throat  and  oppression  of  chest.

^Influenza.

I  I  Woke  at  night  with  agonizing  fits,  spasms  of  glottis,
with  agony  and  fear  of  suffocation  ;  springing  up  in  bed
and  struggling  for  breath. ^Asthma  Millari.

iSpasm  of  glottis;  breathing  is  of  a  wheezing,  crowing
character,  <  after  midnight  and  from  lying  with  head
low. ^Croup.

I  Spasms  of  larj^nx  occurring  frequently  during  course  of
acute  laryngitis.

I  I  An  infant  nine  months  old  has  laryngeal  spasms  sev-
eral times  in  day  and  night;  awakes  from  sleep  with
suffocation ;  is  able  to  inspire  but  not  expire ;  becomes
livid  in  face,  gasps  in  great  anguish,  and  very  slowly
recovers  its  breath ;  had  two  attacks  of  this  kind  in  pre-
vious night,  at  8  p.m.  and  11  p.m. 6'Laryngismus.

I  I  Sudden  disappearance  of  coryza;  on  following  night
very  rough,  hollow,  croupy  cough;  agitated  sleep;  fol-
lowing morning  fits  of  hollow,  deep  cough  ;  whistling
respiration  ;  constant  crying  ;  burning  head  ;  crying  or
coughing,  as  if  throat  were  painful. ^Croup.

I  I  Sopor;  snoring  and  whistling,  with  mouth  open  and
head  bent  back ;  starts  up,  strikes  about,  is  nearly  suf-
focated ;  becomes  blue  in  face,  then  cough  with  rattling
breathing;  threatening  suffocation  and  paralysis  of
lungs. ^Croup.

I  I  Much  dry  heat  Avith  restlessness;  sudden  awaking  in
fright  at  night,  from  9  p.m.  until  2  a.m.,  grasping  its
throat;  shortly  after,  perspiration  on  face,  head  and
neck,  going  off  with  sleep ;  during  parox3^sms  of  hoarse,
suffocating  cough  child  had  purple  nails  and  lips;
scanty,  tough  expectoration,  yet  tracheal  sound  was
somewhat  loose. ^Croup.

Iln  dangerous  cases  with  excessive  weakness,  old-looking
features  and  threatening  paralysis  pulmonum.  ^Croup.
^® Respiration.  I Breathing:  anxious,  loud  ;  quick,  wheezing,
crowing.

Oppression  of  chest,  with  pressure  in  stomach  and  nausea.

I  Nightly  suffocative  attacks,  with  great  restlessness;  shed-
ding of  tears  and  throwing  about  of  arms.

I  Suffocating  attacks  after  midnight.

■  Child  suddenly  awakes,  nearly  suffocated,  sits  up  in  bed,

turns  blue,  gasps  for  breath,  which  it  finally  gets ;  spell
passes  off;  it  lies  down  again,  and  is  aroused  sooner  or
later  in  the  same  manner. ^Asthma  Millari.
I  I  Drowsiness,  breathes  with  mouth  open  and  with  a  snor-
ing whistling  sound,  head bent  backward,  suddenly


191  SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.

springs  up,  tossing  arms  about,  face  becoming  blue,  suf-
focation seems  inevitable  when  cough  recurs,  then  with
rattling  breathing  child  sinks  back  exhausted  ;  threat-
ened paralysis  of  lungs.

I  I  Violent  asthmatic  attack,  respiration  rapid  and  whist-
ling ;  occasional  short  but  labored  coughs ;  high  degree
of  dyspnoea ;  constantly  pointing  to  middle  of  chest ;
had  been  suffering  twenty -four  hours,  with  intermissions
of  two  or  three  hours,  the  free  intervals  becoming  grad-
ually shorter  with  each  attack  (which  lasted  usually
from  ten  to  fifteen  minutes);  threatened  suffocation
with  marked  blueness  of  lips.

I  I  Roused  about  2  or  3  a.m.  with  sense  of  stoppage  of  air
tubes  as  by  phlegm.

I  Asthma thymicum ; suppressed perspiration; attack

comes  on  suddenly ;  awakes  from  a  kind  of  lethargy
with  eyes  and  mouth  open  ;  raises  himself  in  bed  with
great  anxiety  and  dyspnoea  ;  respiration  oppressed,  with
wheezing  in  chest;  head  and  hands  puffed  and  bloated,
with  dry  heat  all  over  body  ;  no  thirst ;  small,  irregular
and  intermittent  pulse;  no  cough;  paroxysms  occur
principally  from  midnight  until  4  a.m.  ;  difficulty  of
inspiration  but  not  of  expiration.

II  Attacks  of  suffocation,  resembling  last  stage  of  croup.

^'  Cough.  I  Cough :  hollow,  dry,  at  night ;  deep  and  dry  before
chill ;  with  regular  inhalations,  but  sighing  exhalations  ;
sufifocative  hollow,  deep,  whooping,  caused  by  spasm  of
chest,  expectoration  of  small  quantities  of  tough  mucus,
only  during  day  ;  suffocative  with  crying  children  ;  <
about  midnight,  during  rest,  lying  in  bed,  or  with  head
low,  from  dry,  cold  air.

I  I  After  suppression  of  a  fluent  coryza ;  rough,  hollow,  deep,
croupy  cough ;  restlessness ;  frequent  desire  to  nurse ;
whistling  respiration  ;  cries  with  every  cough,  as  if  throat
were  painful,  head  hot

I  Whooping-cough;  suffocative,  hollow,  deep  cough,  caused
by  a  spasm  in  chest,  with  expectoration  only  during  day
of  small  quantities  of  tough  mucus.

I  I  Dry,  hacking  cough  during  chill  and  heat. ^Ague.

Sputa  :  very  yellow,  as  if  colored  by  bile ;  taste  saltish.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  and  pressure  beneath
sternum  and  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  and  epigastric
region,  with  nausea  and  sense  of  weakness.

Oppression  and  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest  below  nipple.

After  catching  cold  the  previous  Winter,  catarrhal  affec-
tion of  chest ;  violent  hollow,  dry  cough  with  hoarse-
ness and  accumulation  of  much  tough  mucus  in  larynx,
<  during  night;  oppression  of  chest  with  stitches  in  1.


SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.  192

side  when  lying  upon  that  side;  internal  heat  without
thirst;  profuse  debilitating  sweats;  great  nervousness ;
great  sleepiness,  but  sleep  is  restless  and  he  wakes  often,
when  feeling  of  anxiety  prevents  him  from  falling  asleep
redness  of  cheeks  ;  pressure  in  stomach  after  eating,  par-
ticularly after  milk,  frequently  with  vomiting  first  of
food,  then  bile;  urine  watery,  increased  in  quantity;
great  emaciation ;  is  fond  of  warmth ;  feels  >  when
moving  about  a  little  than  when  absolutely  at  rest;  fre-
quent inclination  to  take  a  deep  inspiration,  which  he
can  do  without  difficulty ;  dry,  burning  heat  during
sleep  at  once  going  over  into  profuse  sweat  on  awaking
and  continuing  until  he  falls  asleep  again  when  the
heat  returns.

I  i  After  a  cold  drink  while  overheated,  fever  and  severe
cough  and  expectoration ;  the  following  condition  finally
developing :  pressing  pain  on  chest ;  constant  cough  day
and  night  with  profuse  expectoration  of  offensive,  sweet-
tasting  mucus;  face  pale,  earthy-colored;  great  emacia-
tion ;  pulse  rapid,  weak;  burning  heat  in  palms  of
hands;  great  thirst  in  afternoon;  profuse  sweats  at
night;  complete  loss  of  appetite. ^Phthisis.

I  I  Constant  severe  cough,  with  profuse  salty-tasting  ex-
pectoration ;  great  debility  and  emaciation ;  constantly
increasing  oppression  of  chest ;  oedematous  swelling  of
legs,  extending  up  above  knees ;  as  the  cure  progresses
profuse  urination  and  severe  itching  of  skin  and  finally
exfoliation  of  epidermis  set  in. ^Phthisis.

I  Phthisis:  hectic  flush,  night  sweats,  choking  cough,  after-
noon fevers ;  wakes  up  after  midnight  with  feeling  of
sudden  suffocation,  without  being  able  to  call  for  help  ;
night  sweats  only  when  wide  awake,  passing  over  into
a  dry  heat  as  soon  as  he  falls  asleep.  ^Phthisis.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Orgasm  in  whole  body.

Occasional  omission  of  heart-beat.

I  Angina  pectoris  where  pressui-e  proceeds  from  spine;  in
individuals  formerly  fat  and  robust  and  now  emaciated
on  account  of  mental  emotions,  sexual  indulgence  or
excessive  seminal  losses;  paroxysms  generall}^  come  on
at  midnight,  or  in  middle  of  night  and  wake  patient  up,
compelling  him  to  sit  up  or  get  up  before  he  can  get
any  relief  or  summon  assistance ;  in  many  cases  the
patient  can  give  no  account  of  what  is  the  matter  or
how  it  came  on,  only  sit  up  in  bed  and  moan  and  cry,
with  hand  over  heart.

Pulse  generally  very  frequent  and  small ;  sometimes  slow
and  full,  sometimes  intermitting.


193  SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.

^°  Outer  Chest. Pressure  upon  sternum,  with  a  counter-press-
ure from  spine  to  sternum.

Compression  of  chest  violent,  trembling  from  pain.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Sweat  on  throat  and  neck,  with  children.
'^  Tipper  Limbs. Paralytic  heaviness  in  elbow  joint.

Trembling  of  hands  when  writing.

Stitches  in  wrist.

Dark-blue  bloatedness  of  forearms  and  hands.

Muscles  between  little  finger  and  next  very  sore.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Sharp,  deep  stitches  in  tibia.

CEdematous  swelling  of  feet,  extending  to  legs.

Sensation  of  coldness,  numbness  and  deadness  in  middle
of  r.  tibia.

Icy-cold  feet :  with  warmth  of  body  ;  with  hot  face.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Hands  and  feet  bloated,  blue.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  cough  <.

Lying  down :  dry  heat  after  falling  asleep.

Lying  in  bed:  cough  <.

Lying  on  left  side  :  stitches  in  chest.

Head  low:  spasms  of  glottis  <  ;  cough  <.

Must  sit  up  in  bed  to  regain  breath.

Motion  :  of  head,  tension  and  dizziness.

Writing :  trembling  of  hands.
^^  Nerves. Great  weakness.

General  trembling,  with  anxiety  and  ebullitions  of  blood.

Great  tendency  to  start ;  starts  at  things  to  which  he  is
accustomed.
"^^  Sleep. iSleepiness.

Drowsiness  with  inability  to  sleep.

I  Frequent  awaking,  as  in  a  fright,  with  anxiety,  trembling,
dyspnoea,  as  if  he  would  suffocate.

Slumber  with  eyes  and  mouth  half  open.

During  sleep,  dry  heat ;  after  waking  profuse  sweat.
■^^Time. 2  or  8  a.m.:  roused  with  sense  of  stoppage  of  air
tubes.

During  day:  expectoration  of  tough  mucus.

Afternoon  :  great  thirst ;  fevers.

Night :  spasms  of  glottis ;  dry  cough  ;  profuse  sweat.

7  P.M.  to  1  A.M.:  profuse  sweat  without  thirst.

About  midnight:  cough  <.

After  midnight:  spasms  of  glottis  <  ;  suffocative  attacks.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Shunning  uncovering  during
heat.

From  dry,  cold  air:  cough  <.

After  a  cold  drink  while  overheated:  phthisis.
^°  Fever, l  Chill  running over  whole body, with crawling
sensation  here  and  there.

Hands  and  feet  icy  cold;  rest  of  body  warm.
VOL.  IX. — 1:3.


SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.  194

I  Shaking  chills  before  going  to  bed. flAgne.

■  Spasmodic  deep,  dry  cough ;  may  occur  after  chill  if  ab-

sent in  prodroma.

I I  Dry  heat:  while  he  sleeps;  on  falling  asleep  after  lying
down  ;  without  thirst,  dreads  uncovering.

iHot  body  with  cold  hands  and  feet  during  sleep;  on
awaking  face  breaks  out  into  a  profuse  sweat  which  ex-
tends over  body  and  continues  more  or  less  during
waking  hours;  on  going  to  sleep  again  dry  heat  returns.

■  Sensation  of  burning  heat  in  face,  with  moderate  warmth

of  body  and  icy-cold  feet,  without  thirst.

■  Burning  heat,  dread  of  uncovering.  '

■  Hectic  flush.

Profuse  sweat  without  thirst,  while  awake  from  7  p.m.  to
1  A.M. ;  drops  stood  upon  face,  and  there  was  also  perspi-
ration all  over,  but  after  sleep  he  was  more  hot  than
sweaty  but  without  thirst.

■  General  sweat  except  on  head.

Continued  perspiration  while  awake,  changing  into  dry
heat  as  soon  as  one  goes  to  sleep.

■  Profuse  non-debilitating  sweat  day  and  night. *

■  Debilitating  perspirations  which  often  retard  convales-

cence after  delivery.

■  Night  sweats  except  on  head,  increasing  toward  morning.

■  Profuse  debilitating  night  sweats. ^Phthisis. ^Ague.

■  Night  sweats  in  phthisis  ;  sweats  come  even  when  awake.

■  Profuse  weakening  sweats,  day  and  night,  last  through

apyrexia.

■  Prodroma:  cough  deep,  dry,  racking,  for  half  an  hour;

nausea  and  thirst.
I  I  Irregular  paroxysms  occurring  every  other  day  (quinine
had  no  eff'ect),  cough  deep  and  dry  for  half  an  hour,
with  nausea  and  thirst;  chill  for  half  an  hour,  without
cough,  nausea  thirst;  slight  fever  with  moist  skin  ;  pro-
fuse sweat  at  night,  not  debilitating ;  apyrexia  com-
plete. ^Ague.

■  Chills  and  fever,  type  quotidian;  paroxysms  commenced

at  3  P.M.,  with  hard  dry  cough  from  lower  part  of  chest,
racking  and  shaking  w^hole  body  and  producing  a  pain
over  whole  head  which  is  >  by  pressure  or  having  head
tightly  bound  up ;  no  expectoration  with  cough ;  great
thirst  for  large  quantities  of  water  very  often  ;  longing
for  acids  ;  chills,  severe  and  shaking,  lasting  for  half  an
hour ;  lips  and  nails  look  blue ;  nausea  and  vomiting,
<  by  drinking,  substance  vomited  having  a  bitter-sour
taste ;  bitter-sour  taste  in  mouth  during  paroxysm ;
tongue  coated  white;  skin  cool,  pulse  90;  slight  moisture
on  surface ;  chills  running  down  back ;  back  and  limbs


195  SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.

ache,  particularly  during  chill,  and  <  when  they  come
ill  contact  with  bed;  cough,  headache  and  thirst  con-
tinued; fever,  great  heat  with  stupor  and  prostration;
thirst  and  cough  continue,  but  no  headache;  pains
in  back  and  limbs;  great  difficulty  in  speaking;  with
heat,  a  profuse  perspiration;  delirium;  is  distressed
because  of  some  one  whom  she  imagines  is  in  bed  with
her  and  oppresses  her  respiration  as  if  she  had  to  breathe
for  two;  continual  talking;  sense  of  suffocation,  with  a
quivering  or  fluttering  at  heart;  great  distress  in  region
of  heart,  whence  the  cough  seems  to  proceed ;  hearing
painfully  acute;  great  depression  of  spirits  with  anxious,
vexed,  desponding  thoughts  and  weeping;  moaning
and  weeping  during  sleep;  at  night  a  drenching  sweat,
smelling  sour  fetid,  staining  yellow,  not  debilitating;
ineffectual  desire  to  urinate,  passing  water  about  once
in  twenty-four  hours,  a  small  quantity  of  very  turbid
loam-colored  urine;  patient  suffered  for  years  from
chronic  dysentery  which  was  cured  at  same  time.  ^Ague.

■  Dry  heat  while  asleep,  profuse  sweat  while  awake,  then
dry  heat  again  when  he  sleeps;  the  profuse  sweat  is
rarely  debilitating  and  never  in  proportion  to  its  pro-
fuseness;  always  without  thirst,

iNo  thirst  during  heat  or  sweat.

Shunning  uncovering  during  heat;  visions  when shut-
ting eyes. ^Typhus.
** Attacks, Periodicity. Several  times  in day  and night:
laryngeal  spasms.

Nightly :  suffocative  attacks.

From  9  until  2  p.m.  :  sudden  awaking  in  fright.

From  midnight  until  4  a.m.:  suffocative  attacks.

Once  in twenty-four  hours:  passes  water.

Every  other  day:  paroxysm  of  ague.
'^Locality  and  Direction. Right: swelling,  heat,  redness
and  lumps  just  under  the  ear.

Left:  erysipelas  of  whole  side  of  head  ; stitches  in  side  of
chest  below  nipple.
'^Sensations. As  if  head  were  filled  with  water;  skull  as  if
stretched  ;  as  if  suffocating.

Pain  :  over  whole  head  ;  in  back  and  limbs.

Great  distress: in  region  of  heart.

Sharp  pain  :  under  r.  ear.

Tearing:  in  teeth.

Stitches :  in 1.  side  of  chest  below  nipple ; in  wrist ;  in
tibia.

Stinging:  in  teeth.

Griping:  in  stomach  and  umbilical  region; in  abdomen.

Pressive  pain  :  in  temporal  bones.


SAMBUCUS  NIGRA.  196

Pressing  pain:  on  chest

Jerks :  through  head.

Soreness :  in  abdomen.

Burning  heat :  in  palms  of  hands.

Rawness :  in  throat.

Oppression : of  chest,  beneath  sternum ; in  left  side  of

chest  below  nipple.
Heat :  of  face.
Pressure :  in  stomach ;  in  abdomen  beneath  sternum  and

pit  of  stomach  and epigastric  region ; upon  sternum  ;

from  spine  to  sternum.
Tension:  in  head,  in  cheeks  and  nose.
Dryness :  of  mouth  and  throat.
Itching : of  scurfs  on  head.
Numbness :  in  middle  of  tibia.
Deadness:  in  middle  of  tibia.
Coldness:  in  middle  of  tibia  ;  of  feet.
**  Tissues. 1 1  Edematous  swellings  in  various  parts  of  body,

especially  in  instep,  legs  and  feet.

I  Oedema;  anasarca;  general  dropsy.

I I  Increased  secretion  of  skin  and  of  respiratory  mucous
membrane.

*^  Touch, Passive  Motion. Injuries, i  Leaning  against
hard  edge:  painful  pressure  in  abdomen  with  nausea.
Pressure:  >  pain  in head.
Tightly  bound : >  pain  in  head.
After  contusions,  tension  in  dark-red  swelling.
*®Skin. Bloatedness  and  dark-red  swelling,  with  tension  after

contusions.
*®  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Arsen.,  Camphor.

Compatible:  Bellad.,  Conium, Nuxvom.,  Phosphor., Rhus' tox.,

Sepia.
Compare : Ginchon.,  Ipecac,  Sulphur.


197  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

Bloodroot.  Papaveracess,

Introduced  by  G.  Bute.

Experiments  by  Downey, Inaugural  Dissertation,  1803;  Tully,  Prize  Essay,
Am.  Med.  Kecorder,  1828;  Bute,  Freitag,  Jeanes,  Huseman,  Helfrich,  Bering's
Compilation,  N.  Archiv  fiir  Horn.,  vol.  2,  p.  114;  Tinker,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.,  1870;  _
Billing,  Thesis ;  also  symptoms  by  Fincke  and  Macfarlan.

CiiiNicAii  Authorities. — Headache,  Smedley,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.  50 ;
Mills,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  187;  Mills  (2  cases),  Am.  Hom.,  vol.  1,  p.  113;  Smith,
M.I.,  vol.  6,  p.  344;  Leonard,  Med.  Inv.,  1875,  p.  441 ;  Migraine,  Hs.,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  109,  p.  207 ;  Fulton,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,  p.  77 ;  Sick-headache,  Ehrmann,  A.  H.
Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  24;  Plimpton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  212;  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.
244;  Chamberlin,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  1873,  p.  495;  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  259;  Beebe,
see  Hale's  Th.,  p.  654 ;  Chronic  headaches,  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  52  ;  Coryza,
Sanford,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  2,  p.  125  ;  JScbsal  polypus.  Price,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  214 ;
Wells,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  109,  p.  63;  5  cases  reported  cured,  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
16,  p.  329 ;  Facial  neuralgia,  Drumm,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  62  ;  (Edema  of  glottis,
JSIichol,  A.  H.  O.,  June,  1874,  p.  302;  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  102;  Pharyngitis,
Hedges,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  8,  p.  128 ;  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  77 ;  Diphtheritis,  Biegler,
Hom.  Phys.,  vol.7,  p.  477  ;  Nausea  and  vomiting,  Moore,  M.  I.,  vol.  6,  p.  344;  iVew-
rosis  of  stomach,  Winterburn,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  20,  p.  533  ;  Ulceration  of  as  uteri,  Green-
leaf,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  527  ;  Enlargement  of  breast,  Craig,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.
308;  Use  during  pregnancy,  Burnett,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  147;  Laryngitis,  Nichols,
A.  O.,  June,  1873,  p.  335;  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  120;  Tracheal  irritation,  Blake,
Hom.  Eev.,vol.  16,  p.  406;  Influenza,  Mossa,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  79,  from  Hom.
Kl.,  1870,  p.  98 ;  Kleinert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  705 ;  Croup,  Clark,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  6,  p.  290;  Price,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  8,  p.  235 ;  Cough,  Hunt,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,
p.  211 ;  Sanford,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  2,  p.  125 ;  Bell,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  1873,  p.  380;  Clark,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  290 ;  Capen,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  376  ;  Wells,  Hom.  Eecorder,
vol.  3,  p.  68;  Pulmonary  congestion,  Blake,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  406;  Pneumonia,
Hering,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  333 ;  Affection  of  lungs,  Boyce,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
.  vol.  2,  p.  277  ;  Incipient  phthisis  pulmonalis,  Parsons,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  509 ;
Phthisis,  Bute,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  396  ;  Injury  to  shoulder,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.
6,  p.  294;  Rheumatism  of  arm,  McClatchey,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  331 ;  Fungoid
growth  on  hand,  Drury,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  85 ;  Affection  of  toe,  Drury,  Hom.
Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  85;  Neuralgia,  Fanning,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  1873,  p.  363 ;  Anmmia,  Par-
sons, B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  510;  Rheumatism,  Martin,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  473;
Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  411;  Goodman,  M.  I.,  1875,  p.  300;  Syphilis,
Schlosser,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  572;  Rhus  rad.  poisoning,  Hammond,  M.  I.,
vol.  11,  p.  603 ;  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  16.

^  Mind. Mind  confused,  relieved  by  eructations.

Anxiety  :  and  feeling  of  dread ;  precedes  vomiting  and
delirium.


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  198

Angry  irritability ;  inoroseness  with  nausea ;  cannot  bear
a  person  to  walk  in  room.

Delirium  with  hot  skin.

Mental  torpor,  stupor,  heaviness,  sleepiness.

Hopefulness,  sanguine  of  recovery.

Disgusting  ideas,  and  many  unpleasant  feelings  associated
with  nausea.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  paralyzed  and  unable  to  move  while
lying  on  her  back,  with  full  consciousness  of  her  sur-
roundings.

I  I  With  open  eyes,  one  dream  chases  another;  her  thoughts
constantly  returning,  however,  to  the  one  idea,  which
seems  droll  to  her,  "  What  will  become  of  my  condition,
shall  I  have  typhoid  fever,  inflammation  of  the  brain,
or  shall  I  remain  paralyzed  ?"

I  I  It  seems  to  her  as  if  the  events  that  transpired  in  her
dreams  were  not  of  hours'  but  of  weeks'  and  months'  du-
ration.

I  lit  seems  to  her  as  if  all  around  her  talked  very  rapidly,
and  that  she  is  in  a  railroad  car  and  begs  others  to  hold
her.
^  Sensorium.  >  Vertigo :  with  long-continuing  nausea,  debility
and  headache  ;  with  singing  in  ears ;  with  diminished
vision,  before  vomiting ;  with  nausea  and  headache,  fol-
lowed by  spasmodic  vomiting;  with  dull,  heavy  feeling
in  stomach,  as  if  caused  from  some  hard  substance  there;
on  quickly  turning  head  and  looking  upward ;  on  lying
down  at  night;  on  rising  from  stooping  ;  in  cold  weather;
during  sleep ;  during  climaxis.

Head  feels  dizzy,  cannot  turn quickly  without fear  of
falling.
^  Inner  Head. Headache  with  nausea  and  chilliness,  followed
by  flushes  of  heat,  extending  from  head  to  stomach.

Violent  pain  over  upper  portion  of  whole  1.  side  of  head,
especially  in  eye.

■  Headache  as  if  forehead  would  burst,  with  chill  and  burn-

ing in  stomach.
Pressive  headache  in  forehead.
Frontal  headache  with  considerable  vertigo,  on  rising  from

a  sitting  posture.
I  I  Frontal  headache  extending  into  cheek  bones.
I  Pain  in  forepart  of  head,  shoulders,  chest  and  stomach.

■  Headache  over  r.  eye.

■  Neuralgia  in  and  over  r.  eye.

■  Head  aches  as  if  it  would  burst;  >  w^alking  in  open  air

<  in  temples,  especially  in  r.,  in  afternoon.

■  Pains  in  head  in  spots;  soreness  especially  in  temples.
. ■Dull  headache.


199  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

I  Wandering  pains  in  head.

■  Headache  with  shuddering.

I  Beating  headache  with  throbbing  in  temporal  arteries
and  bitter  vomiting.

■  Pulsations  in  head,  with  bitter  vomiting,  <  from  motion.

■  Headache,  with  rheumatic  pains  and  stiffness  of  limbs

and  neck.

■  Headache  every  seventh  day.

■  Pains  like  a  flash  of  lightning  in  back  of  head.

■  ■Headache  begins  in  occiput,  spreads  upward  and  settles

over  r.  eye.
iPain  in  head  in  rays,  drawing  upward  from  neck.

■  Rheumatic headache, running  up posterior auricular

region.
Feeling  as  if  head  were  drawn  forward.

■  Severe  headache  only  relieved  by  pressing  back  up  against

something  hard,  or  by  pressing  back  of  head.

■  ■Periodical  sick-headache;  begins  in  morning,  increases

during  daj',  lasts  until  evening;  head  feels  as  if  it  must
burst,  or  as  if  eyes  would  be  pressed  out;  throbbing,
lancinating  pains  through  brain,  <  in  r.  side,  especially
in  forehead  and  vertex ;  followed  by  chills,  nausea,
vomiting  of  food  or  bile;  must  lie  down  and  remain
quiet;  relieved  by  sleep.
A  bandlike  constriction  across  forehead  just  below  eye-
brows ;  <  by  exercise,  with  violent  throbbing  of  tem-
poral arteries;  shooting  pains  from  one  temple  to  other,
<  in  night;  <  from  light,  >  from  sleep.

■  Headache  concentrating  in  a  small  spot  over  r.  eye;  eye

becomes  red  and  sore,  yet  hard  pressure  upon  eye  re-
lieves.

\  I  Headache  especially  over  r.  eye  ;  rheumatic  pain  in  neck
and  shoulders  (more  in  1.) ;  >  when  lying  perfectl}'  still;
patient  approaching  climacteric  period.

I  I  Intermittent  neuralgia  coming  in  morning  and  lasting
four  to  six  hours ;  pain  at  internal  superior  angle  of  r.
orbit,  acute  pressing  with  occasional  darts  inward  and
some  throbbing;  part  sore,  but  he  holds  his  hand  there
while  pain  lasts;  conjunctiva  considerably  injected  dur-
ing pain  ;  catarrhal  discharge,  thick,  mostly  from  r.  side
of  nose ;  every  day  for  five  or  six  days.

i  I  Violent  pulsation  and  tearing  in  r.  temple,  <  from  mo-
tion ;  the  slightest  shaking  is  intolerable  to  her,  so  that
she  cannot  bear  to  have  any  one  walk  across  the  floor.
^Sick-headache.

\  I  Headache  with  distension  of  temporal  veins  which  are
painfully  sensitive  to  touch..

I  I  Pressing  pains  in  head,  extending  from nape  of  neck


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  200

over  side  of  head  and  settling  over  1.  eye,  accompanied
by  nausea  and  vomiting  of  food,  bile  and  mucus;  must
lie  down ;  >  when  lying  down  and  vomiting;  attacks
every  eight  days  for  last  nine  years.

I  Severe  pains  in  head,  with  nausea  and  vomiting,  fre-
quently with  bilious  vomiting  in  weekly  attacks  or  at
longer  intervals,  commonly  beginning  in  morning,  in-
creasing in  violence  through  day,  only  diminished  by
lying  quiet  and  sleeping.

I  I  Sick-headache  from  childhood;  eyes  weak  and^  sore;
photophobia,  especially  with  headache ;  for  last  six
weeks  headache  every  third  day,  commencing  a.m.,
pains  extend  from  r.  eye  through  back  part  of  head ;
she  is  in  dark  room  and  cannot  bear  least  light ;  if  she
is  quiet  all  day  is  usually  >  in  evening ;  nausea,  but
does  not  often  vomit  unless  she  goes  into  bright  light,
or  moves  about;  catamenia  every  two  weeks, blood  dark
and  clotted  ;  constipation  ;  debility.

I  I  Sick-headache  every  two  weeks;  when  overexerted  so
as  to  become  very  tired,  she  has  a  great  appetite,  but
satisfying  it  is  followed  by  sick-headache  ;  is  in  the  habit
of  eating  late  in  evening;  during  headache  hot  flashes
and  a  sensation  like  that  of  an  electrical  current  shoot-
ing very  rapidly  from  one  part  of  head  to  the  other.

I  I  Pain  commencing  in  r.  occiput,  extending  to  r.  temporal
bone,  a  tight  drawing,  gradually  increasing  in  intensity,
like  drawing  a  rope  on  a  windlass  as  tight  as  you  can
get  it  until  it  is  almost  beyond  endurance,  when  it  grad-
ually subsides.

I  I  Sick-headache,  commencing  in  morning  on  awaking,  <
during  day,  >  by  sleep  at  night ;  pain  confined  chiefly
to  temples  and  vertex,  so  violent  as  to  cause  her  to  cry
out ;  nausea  generally  in  morning,  followed  by  vomit-
ing, first  of  food,  afterward  of  pure  bile,  occasionally  con-
siderable acid  mucus,  with  severe  burning  distress  in
stomach,  great  weakness  and  goneness,  even  worse  to
bear  than  headache ;  least  quantity  of  food  or  drink  is
immediately  vomited;  attacks  come  on  at  irregular
intervals.

I  I  Headache  and  nausea,  symptoms  increasing  hour  by
hour;  patient  groaning  and  writhing  in  agony,  face
very  red,  head  hot,  injected  eyes,  sensitive  to  light ;  arte-
ries about  head  and  scalp  distended  like  whip  cords,
blood  coursing  through  them  at  a  furious  rate,  giving  a
sensation  to  head  as  if  temples  and  scalp  were  alive  with
irrepressible  pulsation ;  pain  over  whole  head ;  parox-
ysms of  violent  retching  every  few  minutes ;  free  flow
of  clear  urine  as  the  attack  passes  off".


201  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

I  1  Distressing  sick-headache,  for  years ;  in  some  degree  the
symptoms  were  nearly  always  present;  headache  com-
mencing in  forenoon,  gradually  increasing  in  violence
until  sunset,  when  it  would  either  quietly  subside  or  con-
fine her  to  bed  for  a  day  or  two ;  the  pains  originated
low  in  occiput,  drawing  upward  in  rays,  locating  over
r.,  sometimes  over  1.  eye,  attended  with  vomiting,  often
of  bilious  matter;  subject  to  sudden  flushes  of  heat,
burning  of  soles  of  feet  and  quickly  diffused  transient
thrill  felt  at  remotest  extremity  ;  at  times  sensible  throb-
bing of  every  pulse  in  body;  urine  generally  scanty
before  and  during  severe  headache,  but  quantities  of
clear  urine  pass  when  getting  better.

I"  American  sick-headache;"  rush  of  blood  to  head,  caus-
ing faintness  and  nausea,  even  continuing  until  vomit-
ing sets  in ;  violent  pains  begin  in  occipital  region,  spread
thence  over  head  and  settle  over  r.  eye;  pains  sharp,
lancinating,  at  times  throbbing;  can  bear  neither  sounds
nor  odors ;  cannot  bear  any  one  to  walk  across  floor,
the  slightest  jar  annoys  her;  at  height  of  headache
vomiting  of  food  and  bile;  is  forced  to  remain  quiet  in
a  dark  room.;  sleep  finally  relieves ;  sometimes  pain  is
so  violent  that  patient  goes  out  of  her  mind,  or  seeks
relief  by  pressing  head  against  pillow  or  pressing  head
with  hands.

I  1  Neuralgia  in  r.  temple  and  orbit  from  getting  feet  wet.

I  Pain  commences  in  back  of  head,  rises  and  spreads  over
head  and  settles  especially  above  r.  eye,  with  nausea,
vomiting  and  chilliness  ;  is  obliged  to  seek  a  dark  room
and  lie  perfectly  still;  flushes  of  heat;  burning  of  soles
of  feet;  urine  at  first  scanty,  later  profuse  and  clear.

1  I  Frightfully  severe  headache,  the  only  relief  obtained
by  pressing  back  of  head  against  headboard  of  bed.

i  I  Migraine  with  bilious  vomiting,  pains  begin  in  morn-
ing, last  till  evening;  eyes  feel  as  if  they  would  be
pushed  out,  <  by  motion.

I  Sick  headache,  with  heat  and  redness.

■  Headaches:  gastric;  myalgic;  rheumatic;  congestive;
from  suppressed  menses ;  at  change  of  life.

I  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  ringing  in  ears ;  flushes
of  heat;  accumulation  of  water  in  mouth.

I  I  Sanguineous  apoplexy  with  vertigo,  dimness  of  sight,

. vomiting,  burning  in  stomach,  distension  of  temporal
veins.
*  Outer  Head. Soreness  in  spots,  especially  in  temporal  re-
gions.

Distension  of  veins  in  temples ;  feel  sore  when  touched.

Head  very  painful  to  touch.


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  202

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Diminished  power  of  vision.

Dimness  of  e^'es,  with  sensation  as  if  hairs  were  in  them.
Frequent  obscuration  of  vision.

Retinal  congestion,  with  flushed  face  and  congestive  head-
ache.
Pupils  dilated.

■  Yellowness  of  sclerotica,  with  icterus.
Burning  dryness  in  eyes.

I  Pain  over  eyes.

Redness  of  eyes  in  morning.

Superficial  injection  of  eyeball,  with  feeling  of  soreness.

Burning  and  watering  of  r.  e3'e,  which  is  painful  to  touch,
followed  b}^  coryza.

I  I  Acute  conjunctivitis,  with  excessive  redness  and  numer-
ous ecchymoses  in  conjunctiva,  tending  toward  trachoma,
with  moderate  discharge  and  some  pain  in  eye.

■  Catarrhal  ophthalmia,  granular  lids.

■  Ophthalmia,  followed  by  ulceration  of  cornea.

■  Copious  lachrymation :  following  the  burning  and  dry-

ness ;  tears  hot ;  with  coryza.

■  Blepharadenitis:  with  a  feeling  of  dryness  under  upper

lid  and accumulation  of  mucus  in  eye in morning;
blepharitis  and  catarrhal  conditions  of  conjunctiva,  with
burning  in  edges  of  lids,  <  in  afternoon  ;  dependent  on
stricture  of  lachrymal  duct.
I  I  Hard  swelling  like  scirrhus  over  eyebrows.

■  ■Neuralgia  in  and  over  r.  eye.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. Beating,  humming,  with  congestion  of
blood.

■  Hyperexcitation  of  auditory  nerves;  painful  sensitive-

ness, especially  to  sudden  sounds ;  sensation  as  if  she
were  in  a  railroad  car  or  in  some  vehicle  which  was
moving  and  jarring  her,  with  a  feeling  as  if  all  about
her  moved  rapidly  and  confusedly;  desires  to  be  held  in
order  to  remove  this  nervous  vibratory  sensation  through
body;  frequently  in  women  in  climaxis.

■  Earache  with  headache,  singing  in  ears  and  vertigo.
Beating  under  ears,  at  irregular  intervals,  often  only  a

couple  of  strokes.

■  Acute  internal  otitis.

■  Catarrhal  affections  of  inner  ear  and  Eustachian  tube.

■  Throat  affections  causing  deafness  and  otalgia.

■  Increased  redness  of  external  ear,  with  humming  and

roaring  in  ears  from  increased  circulation  of  blood
through  aural  structures.

■  Burning  of  ears,  cheeks  red.

^  Smell  and  Nose. iLoss  of  smell  and  taste.
Dislike  to  odor  of  syrup.


203  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

iFluent  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing;  <  r.  side.

iCoryza,  with  dull,  heavy  pain  over  root  of  nose,  and  sting-
ing sensation  in  nose;  severe  pain  at  root  of  nose  and
in  frontal  sinuses,  with  dry  cough  and  pain  in  chest.

I  I  Severe  cold  in  head  ;  sneezing,  severe  fluid  coryza,  irrita-
tion and  watering  of  eyes;  irritation  of  throat  with
severe  cough.

I  I  Severe  cold  in  head  ;  high  fever ;  acrid  discharge  from
r.  nostril  produced  soreness  of  lips  and  side  of  face.

I  I  Fluid  coryza  alternating  with  stoppage;  eyes  painful  to
touch;  soreness  in  throat;  pain  in  chest,  cough  and
finally  diarrhoea. ^Influenza.

I  Watery,  acrid  coryza,  rendering  nose  sore,  with  copious
watering  of  r.  eye.

ICoryza  with  diarrhoea,  worse  at  night.  _

I  I  Smell  in  nose  like  roasted  onion;  wheezing,  whisthiig
cough  and  finally  diarrhoea,  which  relieves  the  cough.
^Influenza.

iRose  cold  with  subsequent  asthma;  sick  and  faint  from
odor  of  flowers.

I  Acute  or  chronic  coryza,  with  loss  of  smell.

I  I  Severe  catarrh  in  bead,  following  a  cold,  for  some  weeks,
with  some  irritation  of  throat  and  sligbt  cough.

I  I  Sensation  of  stinging  and  tickling,  with  irritative  swell-
ing of  parts,  with  or  without  free  discharge ;  yellowish
or^'grayish -white  discharge  from  nose;  headache  in  r.
bemisphere  of  brain,  with  drawing  pain  in  back  into
neck;  bilious  vomiting. ^Chouic  catarrh.

I  Ulcerative  ozsena  witb  epistaxis.

I  Chronic  nasal  catarrh  with  otlensive  discharges.

I I  Nasal  polypi.

■"*  Upper  Face. Distension  of  veins  of  face,  with  excessive  red-
ness, a  feeling  of  stiffness  and  soreness  of  veins  to  touch.


1 1  Red  cheeks:  with  burning  in  ears;  with  cough.

I  Cheeks  and  hands  livid. rPyphoid  pneumonia.

lies  on  his  back;  pulse  small  and  quick.

Twitching  of  cheeks  toward  eyes.

■  Neuralgia  in  and  over  r.  eye.

I  I  Neuralgia  in  upper  jaw  running  up  to  nose,  eye,  ear,
neck  and  side  of  head;  pain  shooting  and  burning,  can-
not endure  pain  except  by  kneeling  down  and  holding
head  tight  to  floor.

I  Stitches  in  1.  side  of  face,  with  pains  in  forehead.

I  I  Neuralgia  in  face  for  several  years;  beginning  of  paiii
in  upper  jaw,  running  up  to  nose,  eye,  ear  and  side  of
head;  pain  shooting  and  burning,  cannot  stand  pain


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  204

except  by  kneeling  down  and holding  head  tight  to
floor.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  feel  dry.

Swelling  of  lips  toward  evening.

Under  lip  burns,  is  swollen,  hard  and  blistered  ;  blisters

dry  up  and  form  crusts,  which  drop  off.
Stiffness  in  articulation  of  jaws.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i Toothache  from  picking  teeth,  or  in
hollow  teeth  when  touched  by  food.
I  Grumbling  toothache  with  pain  in  same  side  of  head.
Pain  in  carious  teeth  after  cold  drinks.
Looseness  of  teeth  (with  salivation).

■  Spongy,  bleeding,  fungoid  condition  of  gums.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. iLoss  of  taste,  with  a  burnt  feeling  on ,

tongue.
Sweet  things  taste  bitter,  followed  by  burning  in  fauces.
White-coated  tongue  with  slimy,  fatty  taste.
I  Red  streak  through  middle  of  tongue.
Top  of  tongue  burns  as  if  scalded.
I  Tongue  sore;  pains  like  a  boil.

iRed  tongue,  burns  as  if  in  contact  with  something  hot.
Pricking  in  point  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Fetid  breath,  clammy  mouth,  sticky  teeth.
Sores  on  gums  and  roof  of  mouth.
I  Roof  of  mouth  sore,  uvula  sore  and  burning.
I  I  White  patches  on  mucous  membrane  of  mouth,  with

salivation ;  hypertrophy  of  thymus  gland ;  in  a  child

suffering  from  hereditary  syphilis.
^^  Throat. In  evening  after  lying  down,  cough  from  tickling

in  throat.
Spasmodic  constriction  directly  beneath  lower  jaws  across

throat,  very  distressing,  lasting  several  hours.
1  Throat  very  dry,  with  tickling  cough.

■  Burning  in  throat,  especially  after  eating  sweet  things.

■  Roof  of  mouth  and  uvula  sore  and  burning.
Feeling  of  swelling  in  throat  on  swallowing.

Pain  with  sensation  of  swelling,  in  throat,  <  r.  side,  espe-
cially on  swallowing.

■  Throat  feels  swollen  .as  if  to  suffocation  ;  pain  when  swal-

lowing ;  aphonia.

■  Tonsillitis;  promotes  suppuration.

Throat  feels  raw;  some  difficulty  in  swallowing;  mouth
and  throat  feel  almost  denuded  of  mucous  membrane.

■  Heat  in  throat,  better  on  inspiring  cold  air;  throat  so

dry  it  seems  as  if  it  would  crack.
I  I  Dryness  in  throat,  with  soreness,  swelling,  and  redness
as  in  scarlet  fever;  in  one  case  of  six  years'  standing,
in  another  w^ith  hectic  fever  and  cough.


205  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

I  I  General  feeling  of  soreness  throughout  pharynx ;  sensa-
tion as  if  burned  or  scalded  by  hot  drinks ;  dry,  con-
stricted feeling ;  drinking  did  not  moisten  throat,  mucous
membrane  felt  as  if  it  might  crack ;  pharynx  very  red

.  and  angry  looking,  highly  inflamed.

■  Putrid  sore  throat.

■  Angina;  particularl}^  a  species  of  pharyngitis.

■  Ulcerated  sore  throat.

J  Tonsillitis,  chronic,  recurring  frequently.
iSuppuration  of  tonsils;  quinsy.

■  ■Burning  in  pharynx  and  oesophagus.

I  I  Intense  heat  and  redness  of  throat,  amounting  to  a  burn-
ing sensation  ;  choking  feeling  when  swallowing ;  pearly
coating  on  fauces  and  tonsils,  <  on  r.  side ;  r.  tonsil
most  inflamed. ^Diphtheritis.

■  Palate  and  fauces  covered  with  a  continuous  coating  of

pearly  fibrinous  exudation.
"Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Craving  for  he
knows  not  what,  with  loss  of  appetite;  wants  piquant
things.

■  Loss  of  appetite  with  great  weakness  of  digestion.
I  I  Aversion  to  butter.

Sugar  tastes  bitter  and  causes  burning.
'^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Sweet  things  aggravate,  produce
burning.

Soon  after  eating:  feels  empty  ;  difficult  breathing,  nausea,
waterbrash, lassitude almost to fainting, cold sweat
until  12  P.M.,  after  a  little  food.
^^  Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea and  Vomiting. 1 1  Hic-
cough whilst  smoking.

Spasmodic  eructations  of  flatus.

I  I  Frequent  flatulent  eructations  of  unpleasant  odor,  with
disposition  to  vomit  and  paleness  of  face.

I  I  Pyrosis ;  a  rising  of  burning,  corrosive  fluid  from  stom-  ■
ach,  for  twenty  years.

I  Nausea :  with  a  burning  at  stomach  ;  with  much  spitting;
not  >  by  vomiting ;  with  headache,  chill  and  heat ;  in-
tense, in  paroxysms,  <  when  stooping,  with  flow  of
saliva;  followed  by  nettlerash;  with  heartburn;  followed
by  vomiting  and  sometimes  diarrhoea;  periodic;  fol-
lowed by  sneezing;  craves  food  to  quiet  nausea.

■  ■Vomiting:  of  bitter  water;  of  sour  acrid  fluids;  of  in-

gesta;  of  worms;  preceded  by  anxiety;  with  headache
and  burning  in  stomach  ;  head  >  afterward  ;  with  pros-
tration.

■  During  vomiting,  headache,  burning  in  stomach  with

craving  to  eat.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Soreness  and  pressure  in
epigastrium  <  by  eating.


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  20&

■  Sudden  attacks  of  constriction  in  pit  of  stomach  as  if  suf-

focating,

■  Goneness  with  sick  headaclie.

Sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach  :  soon  after  eating;  with
faint,  feverish  feeling.

■  Pressure  in  stomach.

Jerking  in  stomach  as  if  from  something  alive.
I  I  Feeling  of  warmth  and  heat  in  stomach.

■  Burning  in  stomach  ;  with  headache  and  chill.

■  Gastritis,  with  nausea,  headache,  chill  and  heat;  vomit-

ing with  severe,  painful  burning  in  stomach  and  intense
thirst,  red  tongue,  red  and  dry  lips,  hot  and  dry  throaty
tickling  cough.
Pyrosis  ;  rising  of  burning,  corrosive  fluid  with  flatulence.

■  Great  weakness  of  digestion,  loss  of  appetite. ^Dyspepsia.

I  I  Burning  sensation  accompanied  by  pressure  in  epigas-
trium, coming  on  soon  after  lying  down  and  compelling
her  to  rise ;  pains  <  at  night,  but  they  recurred  at  any
hour  when  she  resumed  the  recumbent  position,  though
less  severe  in  daytime ;  >  sitting  up ;  appetite  voracious;
bowels  torpid;  peculiar  drawing  pains  in  shoulders
and  arms  during  sleep,  so  that  when  she  awoke  the  fists
were  tightly  clenched  and  flexed  upon  the  sternal  end  of
clavicle;  this  cramping  up  of  the  arms  always  occurred
during  sleep  and  was  followed  by  a  sense  of  lameness
and  weariness  in  the  aftected  muscles.  ^Neurosis  of
stomach.

I  I A  chronic  inebriate ;  had  been  drinking  steadily  for  a
couple  of  weeks,  beer  and  whisky;  violent  emetoca-
tharsis ;  Nux  vomica  did  not  relieve.  Arsenic  checked
the  bowels  and  relieved  the  intense  thirst,  but  had  no
effect  in  quieting  stomach ;  very  irritable  and  angry
at  not  being  relieved ;  everything  she  took  in  her
stomach,  even  water,  was  instantly  ejected;  about  once
in  fifteen  or  twent}^  minutes  a  spasm  of  stomach,
with  gagging  and  coughing  and  ejection  of  some  frothy
mucus ;  pain  in  chest  and  abdomen  from  the  strain-
ing; intense  burning  extending  from  stomach  up
oesophagus  to  pharynx,  w^hich  felt  swollen  and  dr}^ ;
lying  slightly  turned  on  1.  side ;  impossible  for  her  to
lie  on  r.  side,  and  when  rising  from  lying  down  was
seized  with  vertigo ;  cheeks  and  hands  livid  ;  believed
she  was  soon  to  die  and  was  unwilling  to  be  left  alone.
^^  Hypochondria. Heat,  streaming  from  breast  to  liver.

■  Liver  torpid;  skin  yellow;  colic. ^Jaundice. ^Biliary

concretions.

■  Cough  from  affections  of  liver.

I  I  Pain  in  1.  hypochondrium,  <  from  coughing,  >  from


207  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

pressure  and  when  lying  on  1.  side,  very  copious  urina-
tion at  night.

Violent  stitches  in  splenetic  region.
^'  Abdomen, i  '  Flatulent  distension  of  abdomen  in  evening,
with  escape  of  flatus  from  vagina  (os  uteri  being  dilated).

Beating  in  abdomen.

I  I  Indurations  in  abdomen.

Cutting  bellyache  from  r.  to  1.  of  iliac  fossa,  thence  to
rectum.

■  Soreness  in  abdomen  <  by  eating.

Colic :  followed  by  diarrhoea ;  with  torpor  of  liver.

Feeling  as  from  "hot  water  pouring  from  breast  into  ab-
domen, followed  by  diarrhoea.
'"  Stool  and  Rectum. lUrging,  but  no  evacuation,  with  sen-
sation of  a  mass  in  lower  part  of  rectum  and  discharge
of  offensive  flatus  only.

Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation.

■  Hemorrhoids.

■  Stools:  thin,  fecal;  bright  yellow;  undigested;  watery;

watery  with  much  flatus,  preceded  by  cutting  pain.
1  I  Affection  of  breast  always  ended  with  a  feeling  as  if  hot

water  were  poured  from  chest  into  abdomen  which  w^as

followed  by  diarrhoeic  stool.
1  I  Diarrhoea  following  coryza,  pains  in  chest  and  cough.
Ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  then  vomiting.
Frequent  discharges  of  very  offensive  flatus.
Escape  of  much  flatus  upward  and  downward ;  also  wdth

diarrhoea.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Copious  and  frequent  nocturnal  urina-
tion, clear  as  water.
I  I  Very  copious  urine  at  night,  with  pain  in  1.  hypochon-

drium  ;  <  from  coughing ;  >  from  pressure  and  lying

on  1.  side.

■  Dark-yellow  urine,  with  icterus.

Urine  scanty,  high-colored,  deposits  reddish  sediment  on
standing.
'-  Male  Sexual  Organs. Seminal  emissions.

■  Gleet;  old  cases.

I  I  White  oval  patches  on  mucous  membrane  of  mouth,
particularly  at  angles,  on  mucous  membranes  of  lips,  on
edge  of  tongue,  on  prepuce  and  glans  penis ;  fetid,  cheesy
secretions  from  glans  penis,  later  obstinate  inflamma-
tory headache,  with  constant  congestions  to  head,  tran-
sient heat,  throbbing  pain  <  from  motion  and  stooping,,
extending  upward  from  nape  of  neck,  with  swollen  veins
in  temples.  ^Syphilis.
'^Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Os  uteri  ulcerated;  fetid  corro-
sive leucorrlioea.

Uterine  polypi,  or  cancer.


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  208

I  Distension  of  abdomen  in  evening,  and  flatulent  dis-
charges per  vagina,  from  os  uteri,  which  was  constantly
open;  at  same  time  a  pain  passing  in  rays  from  nape  of
neck  to  head.

■  Metrorrhagia  occurring  at  climaxis;  blood  bright  red,
clotted  and  frequently  offensive ;  sick-headache;  flush-
ing of  face;  face  becomes  scarlet,  this  high  color  passes
off"  with  faint,  weak,  sick  feeling.

I  Pain  in  loins,  extending  through  hypogastric  and  uterine
region  and  down  thighs,  followed  by  appearance  of
menses  (in  cases  of  suppression).

I  Abdominal  pains  (at  night)  as  if  menses  would  appear.

I  iCatamenia  preceded  by  itching  in  axillae.

Menses  much  more  profuse  than  usual,  with  less  pain  and
weakness  in  small  of  back,  but  with  headache  in  r.  side
of  forehead  and  side  of  head,  with  sensation  as  if  eyes
would  be  forced  out  of  head,  <  in  r.  eye.

I  Menses :  at  right  time,  offensive  smelling,  bright  red  flow;
clots,  like  lumps  of  flesh;  later  blood  darker  and  less
offensive;  scanty,  headache  from  occiput  to  frontal  re-
gion, head  as  if  bursting,  face  red  and  hot;  too  early,
with  a  discharge  of  black  blood.

I  I  Dysmenorrhoea  in  feeble,  torpid  subjects,  with  tendency
to  congestion  of  lungs,  liver  or  head.

I  lAmenorrhoea  in  consequence  of  pulmonary  disease;
hectic  flush  of  face.

I  Climacteric  disorders,  especially  flashes  of  heat  and  leu-
corrhoea.

I  I  Burning  of  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet  at  climac-
teric period,  compelling  her  to  throw  bedclothes  off".

I  I  Painful  enlargement  of  breasts  at  climacteric  period.

•  Corrosive,  fetid  leucorrhoea  at  climacteric  period  ;  it  con-
tinues after  menses  cease.

Sharp,  piercing  pain  in  r.  breast,  just  beneath  nipple;  very
difficult  to  take  a  deep  inspiration,  with  some  dyspnoea.

Pain  in  r.  breast  extends  to  shoulder  and  is  so  severe  that
it  is  with  difficulty  hand  can  be  placed  on  top  of  head.

Stitches  in  mammse.

The  nipples  are  sore  and  painful.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation. 1 1  Threatened  abor-
tion with  nausea,  pains  in  loins,  extending  through  epi-
gastric and  iliac  regions  and  down  thighs.

Mammae  :  stitches  in  both  ;  sore  to  touch  under  r.  nipple,
and  painful  soreness  of  nipples.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachia  and  Bronchia. Chronic
dryness  in  throat,  sensation  of  swelling  in  larynx  and
expectoration  of  thick  mucus.

Aphonia  with  swelling  in  throat.


209  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

Dryness  in  throat  with  soreness,  swelling  and  redness.

Tickling  in  throat  in  evening  with  cough  and  headache.

I  Tonsils  and  pharynx  swollen  ;  sawing  respiration ;  expi-
riation  easier  than  inspiration ;  cough  dry  and  harsh,
>  sitting,  <  eating  or  lying  down ;  difficult  expectora-
tion of  tough,  glair}^  mucus ;  inflammation  of  cervical
glands. ^Qildema  laryngis.

I  Acute  catarrhal  laryngitis.

I  I  A'iolent  dry  cough ;  sensation  of  burning  behind  ster-
num, craves  cold  water,  which  soon  is  vomited  ;  fauces
dark-red,  not  swollen;  little  or  no  fever;  headache,
almost  crazy ;  eyes  look  inflamed,  upper  lid  swollen  ;
open  air  relieves  pain  ;  vomits  as  soon  as  he  drinks  or
eats ;  sharp  pain  over  r.  eye. ^Influenza.

■  Tracheal  irritation  secondary  to  heart  disease.

I  I  Sensation  of  dryness,  soreness  and  swelling  in  larynx  and
expectoration  of  thick  mucus ;  redness  in  throat ;  stop-
page of  nose  with  headache  across  eyebrows.  ^Chronic
catarrhal  laryngitis.

I  I A  little  girl,  set.  4,  who  had  been  subject  to  bronchial
affections  since  birth ;  lying  on  her  mother's  lap,  coun-
tenance pale  and  livid,  lips  very  cold,  dyspnoea  extreme
while  cough  was  mufiied  as  if  head  had  been  enveloped
in  a  blanket;  no  expectoration,  sibilant  rales  remark-
ably shrill ;  hands  and  feet  quite  cold  ;  half  delirium.
^Laryngitis.

I  I  Chronic  dryness  of  throat,  sensation  of  swelling  in  larynx
with  expectoration  of  thin  mucus ;  aphonia,  with  swell-
ing of  larynx  ;  continual  severe  cough  without  expecto-
cheeks  ;  tormenting  cough  with  sensation  of  exhaustion.
^Croup.

I  I  Pseudo-membranous  croup;  hoarse,  mufiied  cough;
complete  aphonia ;  pulse  132 ;  soft  palate  and  fauces
covered  with  a  continuous  coating  of  pearly  fibrinous
exudate;  hissing  sound  in  larj^nx ;  great  difi&culty  in
breathing ;  child  stretched  back  his  head  and  grasped

. his  throat  in  his  agony ;  features  dark  and  swollen.

■  Croup  :  catarrhal,  with  spasmodic,  crowing  painful  cough

and  stridulous  breathing;  with  whistling  cough;  me-
tallic sounding,  as  if  coughing  through  a  metallic  tube.

■  Chronic  dryness  in  throat  and  sensation  of  swelling  m

larjaix  and  expectoration  of  thick  mucus.

■  Chronic  laryngitis,  bronchitis  and  trachitis.

■  Pulmonary  consumption.

*^ Respiration. ■Excessive  dyspnoea. /^Asthma.

■  Short,  accelerated,  constrained  breathing ;  extreme  dysp-
voL.  IX. — 14.  t


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  210

noea ; cheeks and hands livid ; compressible pulse.
^Typhoid  pneumonia.

I  Asthma,  especially  after  "rose  cold,"  <  from  odors.

Painful,  sighing  respiration.

Inclination  to  take  deep  inspiration,  which  increases  con-
striction of  chest,  and  causes  tearing  pains  in  chest,  <
r.  side.
"^  Cough.  1  Cough  :  dry,  caused  by  tickling  in  throat  or  stom-
ach ;  evenings  after  lying  down,  from  tickling  in  throat;
awakening  him  and  not  ceasing  until  he  sits  up  in  bed
and  passes  flatus,  upward  and  downward;  dry,  with
considerable  tickling  in  throat  pit,  and  a  crawling  ex-
tending downward  beneath  sternum  ;  very  severe,  caus-
ing considerable  pain  beneath  upper  part  of  sternum,
with  no  expectoration ;  teasing,  dry,  hacking,  with  dry-
of  cheeks ;  with  vomiturition ;  with  headache.

I  I  Continual  severe  cough,  without  expectoration,  with
with  coryza,  followed  by  diarrhoea  which  relieves.

I  Wheezing,  whistling  cough  ;  metallic  sounding ;  stridu-

lous  breathing. ^Croup.

I I  Severe  cough  occurring  after  whooping  cough,  when
patient  takes  cold,  which  partakes  of  the  spasmodic  na-
ture of  whooping  cough,

I  Whooping  cough;  constricted,  spasmodic  action  across

throat  beneath  jaws ;  cough  <  at  night  with  diarrhoea.

I I  Severe  cough  for  six  weeks,  following  a  cold;  coughed
for  hours  at  night,  keeping  whole  house  awake.

^  I  Severe,  harassing  cough,  bloody  sputa,  with  pain  in
occipital  region.

1  I  After  exposure,  dry  hard  cough ;  fever ;  pain  about
shoulders  and  chest ;  sore  throat ;  headache ;  <  cough-
ing ;  cough  <  by  eructations  of  gas  from  stomach.

•  Distressing,  dry,  spasmodic,  exhaustive  coughs,  especially
in  children ;  <  toward  night,  lying  down,  going  into
a  cold  room  to  sleep ;  feeling  of  rawness  and  burning  in
bronchi.

I  1  For  many  years  shortness  of  breath  and  cough,  from
taking  cold  the  distress  became  severe  and  the  attack
resembled  croup ;  wheezy,  whistling  cough,  beginning
with  a  wheeze  and  ending  with  a  whistle ;  <  at  night
when  lying  with  head  low\

I  I  Troublesome  cough  for  a  number  of  years  ;  excited  by
an  irritation  in  region  of  bifurcation  of  bronchi ;  coughs
a  long  time  to  raise  a  little  whitish-yellow  phlegm,  some-
times streaked  with  blood,  after  which  she  experiences
great  relief;  coughs  day  and  night;  is  weak  and  emaci-
ated. (Nitrate  of  Sanguinaria,  2d  trit.)


211  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

I  Tough,  rust-colored  sputa  in  second  and  third  stages  of
pneumonia.

I  Troublesome,  harassing  cough,  with  marked  inflamma-
tory action.  /^Chronic  bronchitis.  ^Incipient  tuber-
culosis.

I  Breath  and  sputa  smell  badly  even  to  patient.

I  Haemoptysis  during  phthisis  pulmonalis.

I  Sputa:  thick,  mucous ;  rust-colored;  offensive,  purulent.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sharp,  piercing  pain  midway  be-
tween sternum  and  nipple,  myalgic  in  character,  the
surface  feels  tender  on  pressure.

Pain  beneath  sternum  and  in  r.  breast.

Intense  burning  pain  between  breasts,  <  in  r.  side,  in
afternoon.

Burning  sensation  under  sternum.

Ver}'  severe  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest  and  hypochondriac
region.

Hot,  burning  streaming  in  r.  side  of  chest  commencing
below  r.  arm  and  clavicle  and  extending  to  hei)atic
region.

Sharp  stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Slowly  shooting  pain  in  r.  chest  about  seventh  rib ;  acute
stitches  in  r.  breast.

iPain  in  r.  chest  to  shoulder,  can  only  with  difficulty  place
hand  on  top  of  head.

I  Stitches  in  lower  part  of  1.  breast  to  shoulder.

Pain  shooting  from  lower  part  of  1.  chest  to  1.  shoulder.

1  I  Pain  in  breast  with  periodic  cough.

■  Burning  and  pressing  in  breast,  then  heat  through  abdo-

men and  diarrhoea.
Constant  pressure  and  heaviness  in  whole  upper  part  of
chest,  with  difficulty  of  breathing.

■  Cramps  in  chest.

■  Pain  in  breast:  with  cough  and  expectoration;  with  dry

periodic  cough.
I  I  Subacute  pulmonary  congestion  in  a  lady  with  florid
complexion  and  full  habit,  set.  50 ;  was  much  troubled
with  general  flushings.

■  Dyspnoea, short, accelerated, constrained breathing;

speech  ceases  to  be  free;  sputa  becomes  tenacious,  rust-
colored,  and  is  expectorated  with  much  difficulty ;  posi-
tion of  patient  is  on  his  back  ;  not  much  pain  in  chest
unless  pleurae  are  involved,  then  burning  stitching
pulse  quick  and  small ;  face  and  extremities  inclined  to
be  cold  or  hands  and  feet  burning  hot,  with  circum-
in  afternoon. ^Pulmonary  affections. ^Pneumonia.

■  Pneumonia  in  second  and  third  stages;  with  dulness  on


HANGUINARIA  CAXADENSIt-.  212

percussion  ;  bi'onchial  respiration,  with  red  or  gray
hepatization  and  infiltration  of  parenchyma.

I  I  Pneumonia;  rust-colored  sputum  ;  distressing  dyspnoea;
hands  and  feet  ])urning  hot  or  very  cold ;  sometimes^
even  before  amount  of  hepatization  will  account  for  it,
there  is  failure  of  the  heart's  action ;  heart  weak  and
irregular  in  action ;  weak,  faint  feeling  about  heart ;
patient  is  faint ;  is  covered  with  sweat  and  suffers  from
nausea.

I  I  Pneumonia,  with  cold  hands  and  blue  nails.

■  Typhoid pneumonia Avith very difficult respiration  ;

cheeks  and  hands  livid;  pulse  full,  soft,  vibrating  and
easily  compressed.

■  Pneumonia: 1.  lung particularly  affected; with heart

disease.

■  ■Catarrhal  irritation  in  chest :  night  sweats;  after  a  cold,

several  months  previously.

1  iSick  an  indefinite  period  with  lung  trouble;  complete
hepatization  of  one  lung ;  fever ;  prostration ;  night
sweats.

I  I  Loose,  string}^  sometimes  flocculent  expectoration,  at-
tending a  severe  cough,  which  seemed  to  rack  whole
frame  during  the  paroxysm ;  darting  pains  through  both
lungs,  <  in  apex  of  1.  lung ;  cough  <  at  night  in  bed ;
evening  exacerbations  of  fever,  with  burning  of  palms
of  hands  and  soles  of  feet ;  debilitating  night  sweats ;
paroxysms  of  excruciating  frontal  headaches ;  dulness
of  percussion  in  1.  supra-  and  infra-clavicular  regions  :
fine  whistling  and  long  expiratory  sounds  in  apex  of  1.
lung ;  bronchial  tubes  in  middle  and  lower  parts  of  both
lungs  contained  much  mucus;  pulse  114,  easily  com-
pressible; anorexia;  insomnia;  thirst;  urine  diminished,
changeable  in  color;  marked  emaciation;  cheeks  hollow;
limbs  and  body  small  and  bony;  eyes  sunken,  glassy.
^Incipient  phthisis  following  amenorrhoea.

1  i Great  emaciation;  bloodless  skin;  set.  15,  had  never
menstruated,  but  twelve  months  ago  there  was  a  slight
discharge  with  pain  in  loins,  at  Avhich  time  she  com-
menced to  fail;  severe,  painful  cough,  with  profuse  ex-
pectoration of  thick,  stringy,  yellowish-white  mucus,  <
at  night ;  night  sweats ;  chest  sore  to  pressure  ;  respira-
tory murmur  faint  and  covered  in  some  parts  by  mucous
nlles;  bronchial  lubes  seemed  filled  with  mucus;  short-
ness of  breath ;  headache;  evening  fever;  burning  in  feet ;
dryness  of  throat ;  anorexia ;  pulse  100,  soft  and  quick  ;
alternate  constipation  and  diarrhoea ;  high-colored,  offen-
sive smelling  urine ;  sleeplessness ;  shooting,  erratic
pains  through  body  and  especialh'  in  chest ;  great  ex-
haustion. ^A  uremia  with  amenorrhoea.


213  SANGUINARIA  CANADEN;S1S.

I  I  For  several  years  cough,  <  in  Summer  ;  a  year  ago  liad
pneumonia  which  left  a  suspicious  permanent  cough ;
cannot  lie  down ;  face  bloated  ;  pupils  somewhat  dilated ;
pulse  ver}'  rapid  and  weak;  night  sweats;  diarrhtL'a;
pain  in  calves  of  legs ;  pain  in  chest,  and  with  every
respiratory  effort  there  is  rattling  in  chest  followed  by
cough  ;  paroxysms  of  cough  with  profuse  offensive-smell-
ing expectoration  ;  the  breath  is  offensive,  even  to  him-
self; retching  with  the  cough,  throbbing  and  sensation  of
tightness  in  head  ;  spasmodic  belching  before  and  after
cough  ;  heat  continues  for  a  while  after  the  cough,  ibl-
lowed  by  yawning  and  stretching.

I  I  Phthisis  florida ;  hectic ;  fever  usually  comes  at  about  2  or
usuall}'  dry  at  first  and  seems  to  be  excited  b}^  tickling
or  crawling  in  larynx  and  upper  portion  of  chest,  pi-ob-
abh^  in  trachea  and  perhaps  in  beginning  of  bronchial
tubes;  great  deal  of  burning  fulness  in  upper  part  of
cliest,  as  if  it  were  too  full  of  blood,  which  it  really  is  ;
sharp  stitching  pains,  especially  about  r.  lung  and  in
region  of  nipple,  probably  mj^algic;  muscles  of  cliest
are  sore  with  this  pain ;  great  dyspnoea.

•  Tuberculosis  pulmonalis ;  breath  and  sputa  smell  badly,
disagreeable  to  patient  himself;  before  and  after  cough-
ing, belching  of  wind;  after  cough,  heat;  after  heat,
diarrhoea;  night  sweats;  pain  in  lower  extremities.

H  Beginning  of  galloping  consumption,  cough  and  vio-
ness to  touch  of  veins  in  temples.

iHsemoptoe  during  incipient  phthisis,  especially  in  women
suffering  from  amenorrhoea,  or  during  and  after  cli-
maxis.

I  I  Vicarious  hemorrhage  from  lungs  from  suppressed  men-
struation in  a  young  consumptive.

I  Haemoptysis  during  phthisis  pulmonalis.

I  I  Syphilitic  pulmonary  inflammation.

I  Chronic  pneumonia  (rivals  Sulphur  and  PJiosphor.).

iHydrothorax ;  asthma;  pleurisy;  intercostal  myalgia.
'^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Painful  stitches  or  press-
ing pain  in  region  of  heart.

Palpitation  before  vomiting,  with  great  weakness,

I  I  Surging  of  blood  and  racing  palpitation,  with  dry  and
burning  skin.  •

I  Irregularity  of  heart's  action  and  pulse,  with  coldness,
insensibility,  etc.

■  Weak  feeling  about  heart.

Pnl.se:  liard,  frequent ;  small  and  quick;  irregular,  with
creat  weakness.


SANGUINAKIA  CANADENSIS.  214

I  Extreme  reduction  of  force  and  frequency  of  pulse,  to-
gether with  great  irregularity  of  action.

■  Metastasis  of  rheumatism  (or  gout)  to  heart,  caused  h\  out-

ward applications  in  inflammatory  rheumatism.
•"  Outer  Chest. Burning  in  sternum.

Severe  soreness  under  r.  nipple,  <  from  touch.
"  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  nape  of  neck.

■Rheumatic  pains  in  nape  of  neck,  shoulders  and  arms.

Soreness  of  nape  of  neck  on  being  touched.

■  Dull pain  along  inner  edge  of  1.  scapula,  worse  from

breathing.
Rheumatic  pains  in  neck,  shoulders  and  arms,  <  at  night.
Shifting  pains  in  back,  <  when  drawing  a  long  breath.

■  Pain  in  sacrum,  from  lifting.

■  Lumbago,  from  lifting;  or,  myalgia  of  great  muscles  of

back.

■  Soreness  down  muscles  of  back;  pains  shifting  about;

feels  pain  more  when  drawing  long  breath.
''  Upper  Limbs. Itching  in  axillae  before  catamenia.

■  ■Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  arm  and  shoulder;  <  at  night,

on  turning  in  bed  ;  cannot  raise  arm.
I  I  Pain  in  r.  deltoid  muscle  of  long  standing ;  <  from  lift-
ing ;  not  felt  when  swinging  arms  to  and  fro ;  <  at  night
when  turning  in  bed,  it  wakes  him  ;  neither  warmth  nor
weatlier  influences  it ;  it  gives  him  no  rest  by  day  or
night;  is  not  relieved  by  motion.

■  Pain  in  top  of  r.  shoulder.

I  1  Pain  in  r.  shoulder  and  upper  part  of  r.  arm,  <  at  night
on  turning  in  bed.

I  I  Pain  confined  to  shoulder,  shoulder-cap  and  cervical
region  ;  neck  stifl',  with  great  pain  on  movement ;  tra-^
pezius  sore  under  [)ressure  and  painful  at  every  move-
ment of  head  or  shoulder ;  deltoid  and  biceps  very  tender
to  pressure,  and  so  sensitive  by  use  that  it  was  impossible
to  raise  arm  from  side. ^Rheumatism.

I  I  Right  arm  hung  at  her  side  or  lay  on  her  lap  as  helpless
as  if  there  had  been  a  fracture  of  humerus ;  could  not
raise  it  an  inch  without  assistance. ^Rheumatism.

I  I A  sensation  of  coldness  in  body  and  r.  arm,  which  no
amount  of  clothing  could  remove ;  swelling  of  r.  arm
between  shoulder  and  elbow  joint;  complete  inability
to  raise  arm  from  lap,  although  lateral  motion  could  be
made ;  tenderness  and  soreness  of  r.  trapezius  and  del-
toid muscles. /^Rheumatism.

I  I  Aching  in  ball  of  r.  thumb,  which  is  swollen,  pain  ex-
fending  around  wrist  and  back  of  hand,  most  severe  in
ball  of  thumb ;  <  since  hot  weather  set  in ;  could  not
use  hand  properly  from  pain  and  weakness  in  it.


215  .  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS,

I  1  Burning  of  palms;  redness  of  hands  and  severe  burning;

lividity  of  hands. ^Pneumonia.
I  I  Fungoid  growth  between  second  and  third  metacarpal
bones,  protruding  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  out  of  palm.
Stififness  of  finger  joints.

I  Ulceration  of  roots  of  finger  nails  on  both  hands.
■  Panaritium,  first  r.  then  1.  fingers.
''  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  hip ;  also  mside  of  r.
thigh.  .

Bruiselike pain  in  thigh,  alternating  with  pressure  and

burning  in  breast.
Pain  through  hips,  extending  down  r.  limb.
Wandering  pains,  <  at  night.
Knees  are  stiff.  , .  i

Left  leg  and  foot  swelled  in  evening,  with  violent  burning
pain,  did  not  know  where  to  lay  limb ;  limb  externally
cold ;  <  until  12  p.m.  .

I  I  Indolent  ulcer  on  r.  shin,  with  dirty  granulations  and
dry  sharp-cut  edges,  brow^nish  thin  discharge,  not  sen-
sitive, no  pain.  ,
Sharp  pain  in  r.  ankle  and  great  toe  joint.
■Burning  in  soles  of  feet,  <  in  bed.
Cold  feet,  afternoon.  ,
I  I  Ingrowing  toe  nail,  unhealthy  granulations,  purulent
discharge  (lotion).  ^ •  -.  -
'*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Burning  of  hands  and  feet,  <  at  night.
Rheumatic  pains  <  in  places  least  covered  with  flesh ;  on
touching  painful  part  pain  vanishes  and  appears  m
some  other  part.
I  Rheumatism  in  all  joints,  with  swelling  and  spasmodic

pain.  1 ■ -j-i.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs,  with  stiffness  and  rigidity.

■  Acute,  inflammatory  and  arthritic  rheumatism.
''Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  still :>  rheumatism.

Lying  down :  cough  from  tickling  pressure  in  epigastrium ;

cough  <.
Lying  with  head  low:  cough  <.
Lies  upon  back.

Lying  on  1.  side:  pain  in  hypogastrium  >.
Slightly  turned  on  1.  side:  spasm  of  stomach  >.
Cannot  lie  on  r.  side :  spasm  of  stomach.
Must  lie  down :  headache.
Sitting  up:  pain  in  epigastrium  ;  cough  >.
Stooping:  nausea  <  ;  throbbing  pain  m  head  <.
Must  kneel  down  and  hold  head  tight  to  floor :  neuralgia

in  jaw  and  face.
Rising  from  sitting  posture :  frontal  headache  with  vertigo.
Motion  :  pulsations  <;  throbbing  pain  in  head  <.


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  .  216

Turning  in  bed  :  pain  in  arm  and  slioulder.
Turning  head  quickly  :  vertigo.
Cannot  raise  arm  from  side :  rheumatism.
Swinging  arm  to  and  fro:  pain  in  arm  is  not  feh..
Exercise : <  lieadache.
^* Nerves. I Great  weakness;  palpitation  of  heart; fainting
weakness.

■  ■Lassitude,  torpor,  languor,  not  disposed  to  move  or  make

any  mental  exertion,  <  in  damp  weathei'.
Limbs  weak  while  walking  in  open  air.

■  ■Lameness  of  r.  arm.

1  I  Chronic  paralysis  of  r.  arm.
Convulsive  rigidity  of  limbs.

^'  Sleep. Sleepless  at  night,  wakes  with  fright,  as  if  lie  would
fall.

Dreams:  of  sailing  at  sea ;  of  business  matters ;  frightful.

Drowsiness  causing  mental  and  bodily  indolence.
'^  Time. Morning :  headache  begins,  <  during  day,  lasts  until
evening ; nausea ; redness of  eyes ; accumulation of
mucus  in  eye.

Morning  and  lasting  four  to  six  hours :  neuralgia.

Forenoon :  headache  commences,  <  until  sunset.

Afternoon :  headache ;  burning  of  eyelids  <  ;  circum-
fever.

2  or  4  P.M. :  fever  usually  comes  on.

Evening :  cough  from  tickling ;  violent  distension  of  abdo-
men ;  tickling  in  throat ;  1.  leg  and  foot  swollen ;  shiver-
ing in  back.

Night :  pain  in  temples  <  ;  pain  in  head  >  ;  coryza  and
diarrhoea  <  ;  pains  in  epigastrium  <  ;  copious  urina-
tion ;  abdominal  pains ;  cough  <  ;  shortness  of  breath
< ;  sweats ;  expectoration  <  ;  pains  in  neck  <  ;  wan-
dering pains  <  ;  burning  of  hands  and  feet  <  ;  sleep-
less; Rhus  poisoning  <.

Until  12  P.M. :  cold  sweat;  swelling  of  1.  leg  and  foot.
^* Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  weather:  pain  in  thumb
<•

Open  air :  headache  >  ;  pain  in  chest  >  ;  limbs  weak
while  walking.

Damp  weather:  lassitude  <.

Cold  room  :  cough  < .

Cold  air:  inspiring,  heat  in  throat  >.

Cold  drinks:  cause  pain  in  carious  teeth.

Cold  water :  craves.
"*°  Fever. Chill  with  headache,  nausea,  pain  under  scapula
on  motion ;  shivering  in  back,  <  evening  in  bed.

I  I  Coldness  of  feet  in  afternoon,  with  painful,  sore  tongue ;
stiffness  of  knee  and  finger  joints.


217  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

Shaking  chill.

I  Flushes  of  heat.

I  Slight  flushes  of  heat,  followed  by  chills,  then  face  flushed,
hands  hot,  qualmish  feeling  all  over ;  lassitude.

I  Heat  flying  from  head  to  stomach.

I  Burning  heat;  rapidly  alternating  with  chill  and  shiv-
ering.


to  3  P.M.,  daily.


ness of  cheeks ;  cough  and  expectoration.

■  Burning  of  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet,  compelling

him  to  throw  bedclothes  off  his  feet  to  cool  them ;  these
paroxysms  generally  come  on  in  afternoon  or  evening.
Slight  chill,  violent  fever,  headache  and  delirium.

■  Copious  sweat ;  cold  sweat.

■  Fevers  from  pulmonary,  hepatic  or  gastric  inflammation;

nervous  fever ;  marsh  fever ;  hectic  fever ;  scarlet  fever
(after  Bell.) ;  typhus,  with  characteristic  headaclie.
"'^Attacks, Periodicity. Alternate: diarrhoea and consti-
pation ;  pain  in  thigh  and  pressure  in  breast ;  ])urning
heat  and  chill  and  shivering.

Periodical  headache.

Every  few  minutes :  violent  retching.

Every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes :  spasm  of  stomach.

Every  day :  for  five  or  six  days,  neuralgia ;  fever  2  to  3  p.m.

Every  third  day  for  six  weeks  :  sick  headache.

Every  seventh  day  :  headache.

Every  eight  days  for  nine  years:  attacks  of  headache  and
vomiting.

Every  two  weeks:  catamenia;  sick  headache.

For  six  weeks :  severe  cough.

For  years:  distressing  sick  headache ;  neuralgia  in  fjxce.

For  many  years  :  shortness  of  breath  and  cough.

For  six  years :  dryness  in  throat.

For  twenty  years :  pyrosis.
^' Locality  and  Direction. Pvight:  headache  over  eye ;  neu-
ralgia in  and  over  eye;  headache  in  temple  ;  lieadache
<  ;  neuralgia  in  orbit ;  catarrhal  discharge  from  side
of  nose;  tearing  in  temple; pains  from  eye  through
back  part  of  head;  pain  from  occiput  to  temporal  bone;
burning  and  watering  of  eye ;  coryza  <  ;  headache  in
hemisphere  of  brain ;  pain  in  throat ;  diphtlieritis  <
pain  in  breast;  sharp  pain  over  eye;  pain  in  chest  <
burning  pain  in  side  of  chest ;  stitches  in  side  of  chest
shooting  pain  in  side  of  chest ;  stitches  in  breast ;  rheu-
matic pain  in  arm  and  shoulder  ;  pain  in  deltoid  mus-
cles; pain  in  top  of  slioulder;  arm  lielpless  with  rheu-


SANGUINARIA  CANADKN8LS.  218

matism  ;  coldness  in  arm  ;  swelling  of  arm  ;  acliing  in
ball  of  thumb  ;  pain  in  tliigh  ;  indolent  ulcer  on  sliin  ;
sharp  pain  in  ankle  and  great  toe  joint;  lameness  of  arm ;
chronic  paralysis  of  side.

Left :  violent  pain  over  whole  side  of  head  ;  rheumatism
in  shoulder ;  pressing  pain  settling  over  eye ;  stitches
in  side  of  face ;  pain  in  hypochondrium ;  stitches  in
lower  part  of  breast ;  pain  from  chest  to  shoulder ;  pneu-
monia ;  darting  pain  in  apex  of  lung ;  dulness  of  per-
cussion in  supra-  and  infra-clavicular  regions ;  pain  on
inner  edge  of  scapula;  rheumatic  pain  in  hip ;  leg  and
foot  swollen.

From  r.:  to  1.;  cutting  bellyache  in  iliac  fossa;  panaritium.
"  Sensations.  As  if  paralyzed ;  as  if  events  that  transpired  in
her  dreams  were  not  of  hours'  but  of  weeks'  and  months'
duration;  as  of  some  hard  substance  in  stomach;  as  if
forehead  would  burst ;  as  if  head  were  drawn  forward  ;
as  if  head  must  burst ;  as  if  eyes  would  be  pressed  out ;
as  of  a  band  across  forehead ;  as  of  an  electrical  current
shooting  through  head ;  pain  like  drawing  a  rope  on  a
windlass  as  tight  as  you  can  get  it ;  as  if  temples  and
scalj)  were  alive  with  irrepressible  pulsation ;  as  if  hairs
were  in  eyes ;  as  if  she  were  in  a  railroad  car  or  in  some
vehicle  which  was  moving  and  jarring  her,  and  as  if  all
about  her  moved  rapidly  and  confusedly ;  tongue  as  if
burnt ;  tip  of  tongue  as  if  scalded  ;  tongue  as  if  in  con-
tact with  something  hot;  throat  as  if  swollen  ;  throat  so
dry  it  seems  as  if  it  would  crack ;  pharynx  as  if  burnt
or  scalded ;  constriction  in  pit  of  stomach  as  if  suffocat-
ing ;  as  of  something  alive  in  stomach  ;  as  of  hot  water
pouring  from  breast  into  abdomen;  as  of  a  mass  in
lower  part  of  rectum ;  as  if  menses  would  appear ;  cough
as  if  head  were  enveloped  in  a  blanket;  throat  and
larynx  as  if  swollen  ;  as  if  upper  part  of  chest  were  too
full  of  blood.

Pain  :  in  forehead ;  in  forehead  and  cheek  bones ;  in  fore-
part of  head,  shoulders,  chest  and  stomach  ;  over  r.  eye;
in  head  in  spots ;  like  a  flash  of  lightning  in  back  part
of  head  ;  in  head  in  rays ;  from  r.  occiput  to  r.  temporal
bone ;  over  eyes ;  in  chest ;  in  teeth ;  in  carious  teeth  ;
in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  in  loins  through  hypogastric  and
uterine  region  down  thighs ;  in  loins ;  about  shoulders
and  chest ;  beneath  sternum  and  r,  breast ;  in  breast ;
in  calves ;  in  lower  extremities ;  in  nape  of  neck ;  in
back  ;  in  sacrum  ;  in  r.  deltoid  muscle ;  in  top  of  r.  shoul-
der and  upper  part  of  arm ;  from  ball  of  thumb  around
wrist  and  back  of  hand  ;  through  hips  and  down  r.  limb;
under  scapula.


219  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

Frightfully  severe  lieadache.

Violent  pain  :  over  upper  portion  of  whole  1.  side  of  head  ;
in  tem[)le  and  vertex  ;  from  occipital  region  over  head
settling  over  r.  eye.

Severe  pain  :  in  head  ;  at  root  of  nose  and  in  frontal  sin-
uses ;  in  r.  breast,  extends  to  shoulder ;  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Sharp  pain :  in  r.  ankle  and  great  toe  joint.

Tearing :  in  r.  temple.

Throbbing,  lancinating  pains :  through  brain.

Darting  pains :  through  both  lungs.

Sharp,  piercing  pain :  in  r.  breast,  midway  between  ster-
num and  r.  nipple.

Cutting  pain :  from  r.  to  1.  iliac  fossa,  thence  to  rectum.

Beating  pain  :  in  head.

Shooting  pains :  from  one  temple  to  other ;  from  1.  chest
to  1.  shoulder.

Wandering  pain  :  in  head.

Stitches:  in  1.  side  of  face;  violent,  in  splenetic  region;  in
mammae;  sharp,  in  r.  chest  about  seventh  rib;  in  r.
breast ;  in  lower  part  of  1.  breast  to  shoulder ;  about  r.
lung  and  nipple ;  in  region  of  heart.

Burning  stitching :  in  chest.

Violent  burning  pain  :  in  1.  leg  and  foot.

Intense  burning  pain  :  between  breasts.

Burning  distress :  in  stomach.

Burning:  in  stomacli;  of  r.  eye;  in  edges  of  lids;  of  ears;
of  under  lip;  of  uvula;  in  throat;  in  oesophagus  and
pharynx  ;  of  palms ;  behind  sternum  ;  under  sternum  ;
streaming  in  r.  side  of  chest  extending  to  hepatic
region;  in  breast;  of  hands  and  feet;  in  soles.

Burning  dryness :  in  eyes.

Stinging  sensation  :  in  nose.

Soreness:  in  spots  on  head;  in  throat;  of  tongue;  of  roof
of  mouth;  of  uvula;  throughout  pharynx;  in  epigas-
trium ;  in  abdomen ;  of  nipples ;  in  larynx ;  under  r.
nipple ;  of  nape  of  neck ;  down  muscles  of  back ;  of  r,
trapezius  and  deltoid  muscles.

Bruiselike  pain  :  in  thigh.

Pricking :  in  point  of  tongue.

Neuralgia :  in  and  over  r.  eye  ;  at  internal  superior  angle
of  r.  orbit;  in  r.  temple  and  orbit;  in  upper  jaw,  nose,
eye,  ear,  neck  and  side  of  head.

Rheumatic  pain :  in  head ;  in  neck  and  shoulders ;  in
nape  of  neck,  shoulders  and  arms ;  in  r.  arm  and  shoul-
der ;  in  1.  hip ;  in  r.  thigli ;  in  places  least  covered  with
flesh  ;  in  all  points.

Drawing  pain:  from  back  into  neck;  in  slioulders  and
arms.


SANGUIXARIA  CANADENSIS.  220

Pressive  pain  :  in  forehead;  from  nape  of  neck  over  head
and  eyes ;  in  region  of  heart.

Dull  pain:  in  head;  along  inner  edge  of  1.  scapula.

(Crumbling  pain  :  in  teeth.

Aching :  in  ball  of  r.  thumb.

Dull,  heavy  feeling :  in  stomach  ;  over  root  of  nose.

Heaviness :  in  chest.

Pressure:  in  epigastrium  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  breast;  in  upper
part  of  chest.

Spasmodic  constriction :  beneath  lower  jaw,  across  throat.

Constriction :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Tiglitness:  in  head.

Stillness:  in  articulation  of  jaw;  of  finger  joints ;  of  knees.

Heat :  in  throat ;  in  stomach ;  streaming  from  head  to  liver.

Tenderness:  of  r.  trapezius.

Rawness :  of  throat.

Dryness :  under  upper  lid  ;  of  lips  ;  of  throat.

Beating:  under  ears;  in  abdomen.

Jerking :  in  stomach.

Throbbing:  in  temporal  arteries;  of  every  pulse  in  body.

Pulsations :  in  head ;  in  r.  temple.

Great  w^eakness  and  goneness  :  in  stomach.

Faint  feeling :  about  heart.

Weak  feeling :  about  heart.

Itching:  in  axilla.

Coldness:  in  body  and  r.  arm.
■^^  Tissues. Languid  circulation,  limbs  cold,  skin  pallid,  sen-
sitive to  atmospheric  changes.

Veins  distended,  feel  sore.

Surging  of  blood.

Red  or  gray  hepatization  of  lungs.

I  1  Polj'pi,  nasal  and  uterine.

I  I  Carbuncles ;  Avarts ;  fungous  excrescences.

•  Roundish  or  oval,  whitish  or  raised  patches  of  mucous
membrane  of  nose,  mouth,  prepuce  and  anus.

■  Polypi  of  larynx  and  nasal  fossse.

Pains  in  places  where  bones  are  least  covered  with  flesh.
"^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  temporal
veins  painfully  sensitive ;  head  very  painful ;  eye  pain-
ful ;  nipples  sore ;  soreness  of  nape  of  neck ;  pain  van-
ishes and  appears  some  other  part.

Pressure :  hard  upon  eye  >  ;  >  headache ;  pain  in  hypo-
gastrium  >  ;  surface  of  chest  tender ;  chest  sore ;  deltoid
and  biceps  tender.

Pressing  back  up  against  something  hard :  >  headache.

Rubbing  Rhus  poisoning  with  something  rough  >.

Slightest  jar : <  headache.

Lifting:  pains  in  sacrum  ;  lumbago.


221  SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

^^Skin. Heat  and  dryness  of  skin.

Itching  and  nettlerasli  with  nausea.

I  Icterus,  eyes  yellow,  stools  white,  dark  yellow  urine,  dur-
ing prevailing  intermittent  fever.

I  Prickling  sensation  of  warmth  spreading  over  body.

I  I  Eruption  on  face  of  young  women,  with  menstrual  trou-
bles, especially  deficiency.

I  Rhus  poisoning;  small  pimples  coalescing  into  blisters
size  of  a  split  pea,  filled  with  yellow  w^atery  fluid,  with
intense  itching;  <  at  night  after  12  p.m.;  the  only  relief
he  can  get  is  to  rub  it  with  something  rough,  until  blis-
ters are  open.

1  I  Fungous  growths.

I  'Scaly  eruptions;  carbuncles.

I  Old  fhdolent  ulcers,  with  callous  borders  and  ichorous
discharge ;  dirty  granulations,  dry,  sharp-cut  edges.
''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. C.  P.,  a^t.  15  months  ;  cold
in  head.

Boy,  set.  1|,  of  syphilitic  parents;  patches  in  mouth.

Girl,  set.  4,  subject  to  bronchial  affections  since  birth  ;
laryngitis.

Boy,  set.  5 ;  croup.

Girl,  set.  10,  lively  disposition;  influenza.

A.  R.,  set.  12,  suffering  six  weeks;  cough.

Girl,  set.  15,  of  French  extraction,  nervo-lymphatic  temper-
.  ament;  anaemia.

Girl,  set.  16,  lymphatic  temperament,  quiet  disposition,
menses  appeared  once,  a  year  ago,  since  then  absent;
incipient  phthisis.

Boy,  set.  18,  scrofulous  diathesis ;  diphtheritis.

Miss  F.,  set.  25,  suffering  since  childhood ;  sick  headaches.

Officer,  a>t.  26 ;  syphilis.

Woman,  tet.  30;  headaches.

A.  S.,  set.  30 ;  cold  in  head.

Mrs.  M.  L.  S.,  a3t.  30,  a  chronic  inebriate,  after  drinking
inordinately  for  several  weeks;  gastric  derangement.

AVoman,  tet.  34,  brunette,  single;  influenza.

Woman,  set.  35  ;  migraine.

Miss  S.  C,  £et.  38;  catarrh  in  head.

Lady,  set  47,  spare  habit,  suffering  w4th  heart  disease;
tracheal  irritation.

Mrs.  F.,  let.  48,  sanguino-bilious  temperament,  w^oman  of
much  energy  and  refinement;  neurosis  of  stomach.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  50,  fleshy,  nearly  past  the  climacteric,  suffer-
ing for  years  ;  sick  headache.

Lady,  set.  50,  florid  complexion,  full  habit  of  body  ;  pul-
monary congestion.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  50;  cough.


SANGUIN.  C'ANAD.— iSARRAC.  PURR  222

Mrs.  P.,  cbt.  55,  blue  eyes,  dark-browii  hair,  iiervo-sanguiiie
temperament,  full  habit,  somewhat  corpulent,  suffering-
fifteen  years ;  sick  headache.

Mrs.  C,  set.  59 ;  oedema  of  glottis.

Man,  net  60,  full  habit,  ruddy  complexion,  full  chest,  af-
flicted many  years ;  cough.

Young  lady,  of  rheumatic  tendency  ;  rheumatism  of  arm.
■**  Relations. It  antidotes: Opium  (dynamic  effects).

Compatible:  Bellad.  (scarlatina).

Compare :  Bellad.,  Iris,  Paullinia  and  Mellilot.  in  head-
aches; Ant.  tart.,  Chelid.,  Phosphor.,  Sulphur  and  Verat.
vir.  in  pneumonia.


SARRACENIA  PURPUREA.

Pitcher  plant.  Sarraceniacese.

Grows  in  boggy  places  from  Canada  southward.
The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant.

Proved  b}'  Porcher,  Duncan,  Thomas,  Hale's  New  Remedies,  1867 ;  Cigliano,
Am.  Obs.,  1871.

Cmnicai.  AuTHOBiTiES. —  Visual  disorder,  Berridge,  N.  A.  J,  H.,  vol.  22,  p.
194;  Phlyetenoid  herpes,  Crica,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  78  ;  Variola,  Martiny,
Mowremans,  Eaue's  Kec,  1875,  p.  287 ;  Smallpox,  Renshaw,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  2,  p.
234 ; Use  in  smallpox,  Cigliano,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  8,  p.  467  ;  Easton,  vol.  1,  p.  135.

*  Mind. Melancholia,  anxious  about  everything.

Great  depression  of  spirits  from  frontal  headache.

Brain  clearer,  buoyant  spirits.

I  iDulness  of  head,  loss  of  memory,  insensibility  of  r.  side;
paralysis  of  hearing  and  smell.

Want  of  memory  with  the  headache.

Difficult  to  concentrate  the  attention,  forgetful ;  feels  dull
and  heavy;  urine  sp.  gr.  1020;  perspires  freely.
^  Sensorium. Head  feels  dull  and  heavy.

Feels  light-headed.

Vertigo :  with  cramps  in  neck,  spreading  to  forehead ;  espe-
cially at  night;  sensation  as  if  he  received  a  knock  on
head,  with  vertigo,  stupor  and  vacillating  gait;  he  is
obliged  to  support  himself  or  else  to  lie  down ;  with
drowsiness  in  head  and  contractions  in  spinal  column.
^  Inner  Head. Frontal  headache,  low-spirited.

Head  dull  and  aches  at  coronal  region.


223  SARRACENIA  PURPUREA.

Severe  headache  in  afternoon  for  two  hours.

Full  feeling  through  head  just  above  ears.

Headache  with  chills,  nausea,  vomiting ;  dim  sight,  sur-

ring  in  ears.
Pulsations  and  burning  heat  of  head  with  sensation  as  if

it  would  split.

*  Outer  Head. Head  is  hot  and  aches.

Head  and  body  warm.
Soreness  of  frontal  bone.
Pruritus  and  heat  of  scalp.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  weak.
Dim  sight,  headache.
I  I  Gas  flame  seems  a  brilliant  yellow  ring,  the  two  not

being  distinct ;  he  sees  black  objects  moving  with  the

eye.
Great  photophobia.

Soreness  of  r.  optic  nerve,  just  behind  eyeball.
Pain  in  1.  eye  as  if  congested,  on  waking.
P]yes  feel  swollen  and  sore.
Eyes  and  lids  inflamed.
Increased  mucous  secretion.
Cutting,  penetrating  pains  in  orbits.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. Surring  in  ears.

Sticking  pains  deep  in r.  ear; transient  but recurring

often ;  same  in  1.  ear.
Intense  otalgia,  fears  he  will  lose  his  senses.
Swelling  of  parotids.
'Smell  and  Nose. Fetid  smell.

Epistaxis  nearly  producing  fainting.
Fluent  coryza,  with  cold  chills  and  loss  of  smell.
Foul-smelling,  green-yellowish  or  bloody  discharges.
Nose  swollen,  red,  with  pressure  and  pulsation  at  root.

*  Upper  Face. Face  flushed.

Heat  and  redness  of  face.

Face  pale,  with  heat  and  chill  alternating.

Erysipelatous  swelling  of  face.

Miliary  eruption  on  face  with  heat  as  if  it  were  on  fire.

Scaly  herpes  on  face  and  forehead.

*  Lower  Face. Intense  neuralgic  pains  from  temples  to  jaws.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  dry.

Tongue  coated  brownish  white.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  dry.
Lips  and  mouth  parched.
"  Throat. Dryness  of  throat  not  relieved  by  tea  or  water,  bor-

borygmi.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Hungry  all  the
time,  even  after  a  meal.
I  I  Appetite  unusually  active,  but  there  was  a  sense  of  pain


SARRAGENIA  PURPUREA.  224

about  stomacli  like  that  after  inflammation  or  that  in
an  overtaxed  muscle.

Bat  little  appetite,  yet  what  is  eaten  agrees  with  him;

urine  1018 ;  pulse  71 ;  sweats  freel}'.

'•'  Eating  and  Drinking. Great  desire  to  slee[)  during  eating.

"Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Copious

painful  vomiting  frequently  after  meals,  with  lightness

from  stomach  to  back  and  colicky  pains.

Vomiting  of  bile  mixed  with  blood.
"^ Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Empty,  hungry  feeling;  for
he  can  keep  nothing  on  his  stomach.

Burning  pains  in  his  stomach,  with  palpitations  and  con-
tractions.

Pinching  pains  in  stomach ;  it  feels  distended  and  torn.
'^  Abdomen. After  going  to  bed,  whole  abdominal  region  was
in  commotion,  extending  along  tract  of  ascending  and
descending  colon,  all  in  a  kind  of  rolling  motion  ;  epi-
gastrium tender  on  pressure.

Some  transient  pains  in  bowels.

Bloated  about  navel.

Borborygmi  and  some  pain  in  bowels  with  constipation ;
dry  throat.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Much  flatus.

First  part  of  stool  natural,  last  diarrhoeic.

Much  tenesmus ;  d3'senteric  diarrhoea.

Stool  at  first  costive,  then  dark,  offensive,  soluble.

Costive;  stools  very  hard,  covered  with  mucus  and  dark.

Stool  copious,  dark,  fetid,  evacuated  with  great  straining;
morning.

Diarrhoeic  stools  mixed  with  glairy  mucus,  bile  and  blood  ;
anorexia,  prostration  and  painfully  strong  palpitation.

Rectum  and  anus  swollen  and  inflamed.

Morning  diarrhoea ;  faint  after  stool,  which  is  dark,  often
mixed  with  blood,  foul-smelling  or  smelling  of  musk  ;
bloatedness  with  colic.

Morning  diarrhoea ;  bloatedness  with  colic ;  faintness  after
stool  which  is  dark,  often  mixed  with  blood  ;  foul-smell-
ing or  of  the  odor  of  musk.
^'Urinary  Organs.  Awoke  3  a.m.  with  urging  to  urinate;
bladder  so  full  it  overcame  resistance  of  sphincter  and
dribbled  away.

Voided  27  oz.  of  urine ;  sp.  gr.  1024 ;  vesical  tenesmus.

Urine  increased,  limpid,  colorless,  scarcely  any  sediment
even  after  several  hours.

Urine  responds  to  tests  for  phosphates,  earthy  phosphates
and  chloride  of  sodium.

Urine  copious,  a  little  cloudy ;  sp.  gr.  1030  (cloudy  from
mucus) ;  pale  yellow.

Urine  scanty,  limpid,  1025.


225  SARRACENIA  PURPUREA.

»

^^  Female  Organs.  Watery  or  milky  leucorrhoea,  thick,
whitish,  foul-smelling  with  spasmodic  pains  in  uterus  ;
pulsative  pains  in  womb  with  swelling  as  if  from  a  tumor
or  dropsy ;  uterus  swollen  as  if  full  of  cysts,  especially  on
r.  side ;  neck  of  womb  swollen  and  hot ;  miliary  erup-
tion and  heat  in  vulva ;  blood}'  discharge  at  other  times
than  menstrual  period  as  during  climaxis.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Phthisis  pulmonalis  and  bron-
chial affections,  joined  to  or  depending  on  a  psoric  state;
hsemoptysis,  thick  cough  ;  continual  tickling  in  larynx
and  bronchi ;  cough,  with  desire  to  vomit  and  vomiting,
paroxysms  of  sufibcation  and  epistaxis;  hard  cough,
shaking  chest  and  bowels  and  stopping  only  after  expec-
torating a  quantity  of  compact  mucus,  tenacious,  fila-
mentous with  a  bitter,  putrid,  oily  taste.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Feeling  of  congestion  about
head,  with  irregularity  of  heart's  action.

Congestion  to  chest,  heavy  feeling  about  heart.

Slight  palpitation  in  morning.

Pulse:  full  and  strong;  68,  general  malaise;  rose  to  100
before  morning ;  61,  very  small ;  quick,  80.
'"  Outer  Chest.  Slight  soreness  of  whole  pectoralis  major ;
pain  ran  up  r.  trapezius  muscle  with  a  wavelike  motion ;
lumbar  heat ;  pulse  70,  full ;  bloated  feeling  at  navel
(probably  from  flatus).

Pain  in  angle  of  ribs  for  half  an  hour.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Warm  sensation  passed  up  back  into  head.

Weak  between  and  below  shoulders.

Back  weak,  wants  to  lean  on  something.

Arms  and  back  tired  and  sore  all  over.

Deep-seated  pain  in  back.

Heat  in  whole  r.  lumbar  region.

Pain  and  soreness  in  sacrum.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Paroxysms  of  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint,  pain
in  1.  carpus  and  tarsus;  face  flushed.

Arms  feel  weak.

Bruised  feeling  from  shoulders  to  hands.

Aching,  sore  pain  in  1.  humerus.

Bones  in  both  arms  pain.
'^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  hip  joints  <  rising  to  feet  from  a
lying  posture.

Paroxysms  of  weakness  in  coxo-femoral  joint  with  pains
of  luxation  and  fear  of  falling  when  trying  to  walk.

Strange  lameness  in  femur,  lower  third,  <  in  inner  con-
dyle.

Pain  in  condyles  of  femur.

Wavelike  motion  in  muscles  of  femur.

Sensation  of  fatigue  in  bones  of  legs  as  if  they  were  too  thick.
VOL.  IX. — 15.


SARRACENIA  PURPUREA.  226

Bruised  ami  luxated  feeling  in  joints.

Pain  in  r.  patella  and  metatarsal  bones.

Knees  feel  weak.

Bruised  pain  in  knees  as  after  a  fall;  he  falls  easily  on  his

knees.
Bone  pains  in  tibia  and  fibula ;  intermittent,  Ijut  bones

continually  sore.
Bones  of  feet  inflamed ;  nodes  as  in  gout.
"  Limbs  in  General. Limbs  cold  when  still  as  from  deficient

circulation.
Limbs  easily  benumbed.
Weakness  of  limbs  with  paralytic  debility.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Wants  to  lean  on  something ;

weakness  of  back.
Rising  to  feet  from  a  lying  posture:  pain  in  hip  joint  <.
Trying  to  walk  :  fear  of  falling.
^*  Nerves. Debility,  wants  to  lie  down  all  the  time.

Languid,  heavy.
'^  Time. Morning : stool with great straining ; diarrhoea ;

slight  palpitation  ;  feverish,  with  shaking  chills.
Afternoon :  severe  headache.
Night:  cramps  in  neck  <.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  open  air :  chilly,  hands

and  feet  cold  ;  head  hot  and  sore,  feels  full.
Cold  air :  makes  him  feel  chilly  and  increases  bone  pains.
^"  Fever. Feverish,  with  shaking  chills  <  in  morning.
Skin  hot  and  dry.
Hands  hot,  warm  all  over ;  cold  air  makes  him  feel  chilly

and  increases  bone  pains,  especially  in  knees.
Hot,  feverish  ;  pulse  80,  small  and  quick.
^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternating :  heat  and  chill.
For  half  an  hour :  pain  in  angle  of  ribs.
For  two  hours : headache  in  forenoon.
■*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  insensibility  of  side ;  sore-
ness of  optic  nerve ;  pain  deep  in  ear ;  uterus  swollen ;

pain  up  trapezius  muscle ;  heat  in  lumbar  region ;  pain

in  shoulder  joint ;  pain  in  patella  and  metatarsal  bones.
Left:  pain  in  eye;  pain  in  ear;  pain  in  carpus  and  tarsus;

pain  in  humerus.
■*'  Sensations. As  if  he  received  a  knock  on  head  ;  as  if  head

would  split ;  1.  eye  as  if  congested ;  heat  in  face  as  if  on

fire ;  swelling  in  womb  as  if  from  a  tumor  or  dropsy ;

uterus  swollen  as  if  full  of  cysts ;  as  if  bones  of  legs  were

too  thick.
Pain:  in  1.  eye;  in  bowels;  up  r.  trapezius  muscle;  in

angle  of  ribs; in  sacrum; in  r.  shoulder  joint;  in  1.

carpus  and  tarsus;  in  bones  of  arms;  in  hip  joints;  in

condyles  of  femur ;  in  r.  patella  and  metatarsal  bones ;  in

tibia  and  fibula.


227  SARRACENIA  PURPUREA.

Intense  neuralgic  pains:  from  temples  to  jaws.

Severe  pain  :  in  head.

Cutting,  penetrating  pains :  in  orbits.

Pinching  pains :  in  stomach.

Spasmodic  pains :  in  uterus.

Pulsative  pains  :  in  womb.

Deep-seated  pain  :  in  back.

Sticking  pains :  deep  in  r.  ear.

Aching,  sore  pain :  in  1.  humerus.

Burning  pains :  in  his  stomach.

Cramps  :  in  neck  to  forehead.

Aching :  at  coronal  region.

Soreness:  of  frontal  bone;  of  r.  optic  nerve;  of  pectoralis
major ;  of  back  and  arms ;  in  sacrum.

Bruised  feeling:  from  shoulders  to  hands;  in  joints;  in
knees.

Burning  heat :  of  head.

Pulsations  :  in  head  ;  at  root  of  nose.

Wavelike  motion  :  in  muscles  of  femur.

Pressure :  at  root  of  nose.

Heaviness :  of  head  ;  about  heart.

Full  feeling :  through  head.

Dryness :  of  tongue ;  of  mouth  ;  of  throat.

Tickling:  in  larynx  and  bronchi.

Dulness :  of  head.

Luxated  feeling :  in  joints.

Strange  lameness :  in  femur.

Heat:  in  vulva;  in  whole  r.  lumbar  region.

Warm  sensation  :  up  back  into  head.

Light  feeling :  in  head.

Weakness:  between  and  below  shoulders; of  back; in
coxo-femoral  joint ;  of  knees ;  of  limbs.
**  Tissues. Bones  feel  heavy,  sore.

Bones  pain,  especially  cervical  and  lumbar  vertebrae,  sa-
crum and  femur,  <  in  inner  condyle  and  great  tro-
chanter.

Phlegmonous  swelling  with  a  rosy  tint  on  various  parts.
^*  Skin. I  I  Phly ctenoid  herpes,

I  Psoriasis.

■  Scrofulous  eruptions.

I  Variola  (decoction  taken  when  eruption  is  out  and  be-
ginning to  pustulate  aborts  secondary  fever,  pitting).

■  Fever  becomes  less,  delirium  vanishes,  pains  lessen,  erup-

tion develops  sooner  and  matures  rapidly,  desiccating
without  leaving  pits.

■  Eruption  out,  pustules  dissipate,  first  on  face,  fever  les-

sens, urine  though  scanty  and  dark  becomes  abundant
and  pale ;  strength  returns.


SARRACENIA  PURPUREA.  228

lArrests  pustules,  killiug  as  it  were  tlie  virus  from  withiiu

preventing  pitting.
I  Constitutional  symptoms  in  three  or  four  days  subside.

■  Even  confluent  forms  are  helped,  little  or  no  pitting  fol-

lowing.

■  Relieves  restlessness,  sleeplessness  during  variola.

I  I A  woman  far  advanced  in  pregnancy  was  cured  of  small-
pox with  Sarrac.  3,  6th  and  9th,  her  accouchement  being
happih'  accomplished  during  her  convalescence,  the
babe  bearing  upon  its  body  numerous  red  blotches,  indi-
cating that  it  had  been  similarly  affected  at  the  same
time  with  the  mother.

I  I  An  infant  a  few  months  old  was  attacked  with  a  grave
form  of  smallpox,  with  variolous  angina,  so  severe  that
it  was  with  difficulty  it  could  take  the  breast ;  the  mother
took  Sarrac.  3,  6th  and  9th,  continued  to  nurse  the  infant,,
which  promptly  recovered  from  the  disease,  and  the
mother  did  not  take  the  disorder,  notwithstanding  the
immediate  and  constant  contact  of  the  child.

I  I  In  an  epidemic  occurring  in  the  environs  of  Wavre  it
was  given  to  more  than  two  thousand  persons  living  in
the  very  middle  of  the  disease  and  coming  in  constant
intercourse  with  it,  but  all  who  took  it  escaped  the  dis-
ease ;  during  the  same  time  more  than  two  hundred
cases  were  treated  by  the  same  remedy  without  the  loss
of  a  single  patient.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Man,  set.  35,  sanguino-bil-
ious  temperament,  suffering  a  long  time ;  phlyctenoid
herpes.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Podophyl.  (diarrhoea).


229  * SARSAPARILLA.


SARSAPARILLA.


Wild  Liquorice.  Smilacese.

Proved  by  Hahnemann,  Hei'raann,  Teuthorn,  Brunner,  Nenning,  Schreter,
Chronische  Krankheiten ;  Hancock,  Krahmer,  Pehrson,  Bering's  Monograph ;
Berridge,  N.  Am.  J.  of  Hom.,  1872  ;  Am.  Obs.,  1875  ;  The  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  107.

Clinical  Authorities. — Melancholia,  Neidhard,  Raue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  366 ;
Headache,  Neidhard,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  106;  Farrington,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  2,  p.  101;  Grriggs,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  450;  Pains  in  occiput,  Neidliard,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1884,  p.  324 ;  Bright' s  disease,  Kent,  Med.  Adv.,  Jan.,  1889,  p.
46 ;  ZTrinary  difficulty,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M,,  vol.  2,  p.  101 ;  Dysuria,  Boyce,
Am.  Horn.,  Sept.,1878,  p.  99 ;  Nocturnal  enuresis,  W.  M.  J.,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.
232  ;  Affection  of  bladder,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  269  ;  Boyce,-  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  133  ;
Cystitis,  Swift,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  354 ;  Wind  from  bladder,  Ring,  H.  M.  S.  O.,
1873,  p.  11 ;  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  217  ;  Calcxdi,  Hartm.,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
2,  p.  31 ;  Renal  calculuf^,  Knerr,  MSS.;  Spermatorrha'u,  Baldwin,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.
22,  p.  262 ;  Hunt,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  243 ;  Sivelling  of  spermatic  cords,  Berridge,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  75 ;  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  147 ;  Suppressed  gonorrhcea,  Ro-
senberg, Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  98 ;  Menstrual  disorder,  Minton,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.
5,  p.  19  ;  Dysmenorrhwa  and  pain  inbrcast,  Burnett,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  269  ;  Leucorrhcea,
Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  43 ;  Climacteric  disorder,  Smith,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.
1,  p.  146;  Scirrhus  of  breast,  Hart,  Org.,  vol.  .3,  p.  107,  from  A.  H.  O.,  1879;  Use
in  asthma,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  801 ;  Inflammation  of  knees,  Robert,
Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  564;  Ulcer  on  leg,  Gilchrist,  Gilch.  Surg.,  p.  84;  Eczema  of  leg,
Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  118;  Faintness,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  77;  Ague,  Ber-
ridge, A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  38 ;  Syphilis,  Rummel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.
167 ;  Eruptions,  Holcombe,  Med.  Inv-,  vol.  9,  p.  4 ;  Chronic  eruption,  Hirsch,  B.  J.
H..  vol.  25,  p.  393.

*  Mind. Mental  depression  caused  by  the  pains.
Anxiety  with  the  pains.
Morose,  with  inclination  to  work.
Gloomy,  desponding  without  known  cause  ;  debility.
Irritable,  impatient  or changeable; very  easilj^ vexed,

cannot  forget  the  cause.
I  I  Thinking  about  the  food  he  has  been  eating  makes  him

sick.
I  I  Desponding,  gloomy  disposition,  amounting  to  despair,

without  any  known  cause;  great  debility,  with  acid,

raw,  slimy  taste  in  mouth,  particularly  after  breakfast.
She  thinks  she  cannot  bear  the  headache.
I  I  Child  cannot  bear  the  itching,  very  impatient.


SARSAPARILLA. '  230

'Sensorium. Dull,  stupid  feeling; cannot  keep  the  mind
on  his  study.
I  I  Heaviness  in  head.

Vertigo :  while  standing  at  window  he  suddenly  fell  back-
ward on  floor  unconscious,  at  same  time  throat  was
swollen,  sour  eructations  before  and  afterward,  severe
perspiration  in  night ;  with  nausea  in  morning  while
gazing  long  at  one  object;  while  sitting  and  walking,
head  inclined  to  droj)  forward.
1  I  Staggers,  falls  forward,  in  open  air.
^  Inner  Head. iHeadache,  with  nausea  and  sour  vomiting,

■  Pressure,  or  pressure  with  stitches,  in  1.  side  of  forehead

and  head.
Headache  like  pressure  of  a  great  weight  in  head,  which

is  inclined  to  sink  forward.
Pressing  and  itching  deep  in  r.  half  of  head,  morning.

■  Throbbing  in  top  of  head  ;  <  from  walking,  even  when

sitting  down  afterward,  now  and  then  aching  through

temples,  forehead  or  occiput.
Violent  throbbing  in  r.  side  of  head,  deep  in  brain.
A  kind  of  buzzing  in  head,  as  if  a  large  bell  had  been

struck.
Dull  tremor  (wuwwern)  with  a  waving  in  head.
Beating  and  sounding  in  r.  side  of  head,  deep  in  brain.
Very  warm  in  head  during  dinner,  with  sweat  on  forehead.
I  1  Shooting  in  r.  parietal  bone  forward  to  temple  or  face.
I  I  Pressing  in  vertex,  increasing  and  decreasing  slowly.

■  Mercurial  syphilitic  affections  of  head.

I  I  Shooting  in  r.  parietal  bone  forward  to  temple  or  face;
staggering  and  falling  forward  in  open  air.  /^Mercurial
syphilitic  affection.

I  I  Shooting  back  of  head  to  front  with  violent  itching,  after
syphilis  and  mercurialization.

I  I  Darting  from  occiput  to  eyes  with  nausea,  determination
of  blood  to  head,  feet  and  hands  cold.  ^Nervous  head-
ache.

1  I  Suffering  severely  all  day,  pains  becoming  more  violent
as  evening  approached,  causing  him  to  jerk  his  head  to
one  side  and  scream  with  every  paroxysm ;  pains  con-
fined to  r.  side  principally,  even  pulsative  and  stitching
in  character,  extending  from  occiput  upward  and  for-
ward over  ear,  around  to  temple  and  across  forehead. ^

I  I  Dull  aching  pain  in  head,  mostly  in  forehead,  <  in
evening ;  vertigo,  especially  in  warm  room ;  stupid  feel-
ing ;  prostration ;  great  drowsiness  in  evening,  but
unable  to  sleep  quietly  through  night ;  nocturnal  emis-
sions from  one  to  three  times  a  week,  occurring  in  con-
nection with  lascivious  dreams;  tired  feeling  in  morning


231  .  SARSAPARILLA.

with  bitter  taste  in  mouth ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ex-
tending down  spermatic  cords.  ^Spermatorrhoea.
I  I  Dull,  stupid  feeling  in  head,  inabilit}^  to  keep  his  mind
on  his  studies,  sometimes  a  feeling  as  if  something  were
pressing  upon  head;  at  times  anguish  of  mind;  un-
able to  read  at  night  on  account  of  a  mist  or  smoky
appearance  before  eyes ;  great  weakness  and  prostration,
render  him  unfit  for  work;  soft,  flabby  muscle;  least
excitement  caused  ejaculation  of  semen  without  sexual
feeling;  obstinate  constipation,  seminal  losses  since
puberty  from  masturbation ;  emissions  with  lascivious
dreams.

*  Outer  Head. Sensitiveness  of  scalp ;  falling  pff  of  hair.

I  Moist  eruption  on  scalp,  pus  from  which  causes  inflamma-
tion of  any  part  it  touches.

iCrusta  lactea,  indicated  only  when  it  begins  with  little
pimples  in  face,  very  itchy,  forcing  child  to  scratch;
parents  subject  to  tetter.

iCrusta  serpiginosa,  with  widely  spread  inflammatory
affection  of  skin,  child  cannot  bear  it  and  is  very  impa-
tient ;  in  open  air  crusts  fall  off  and  new  skin  cracks.

I  Humid  scabs  on  skull.

Falling  off  of  hair,  with  great  sensitiveness  of  scalp  on
combing.

I  Plica  polonica.

iMercurio-syphilitic  affections  of  head.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Vertigo  while  gazing  long  at  one  object.

Flickering  before  eyes,  with  headache.

Great  dimness  of  1.  eye,  as  if  gauze  were  spread  over  it.

Mist  before  eyes,  reading  becomes  difiicult.

Reading  by  candlelight  hurts  eyes,  paper  looks  red.

I  Obscuration  before  eyes  as  from  a  fog ;  mist  when  read-
ing ;  <  after  seminal  emissions.

I  Halo  around  the  candle.

Eyes  pain  from  light  of  day.

Pupils  dilated.

Pressure  in  1.  eye,  as  from  a  grain  of  sand.

Pain  in  1.  then  in  r.  eye,  with  dimness  of  vision.

On  closing  eyes  stinging  in  them.

Pressing  in  eyes  alternates  with  burning.

Stinging  frequent  in  both  eyes,  as  if  dust  or  sand  were  in
them ;  >  outdoors.

I  I  Stinging  in  eyes  on  closing  lids,  and  violent  pain  when
closed  eyes  are  pressed  upon  ;  at  same  time  a  broad  red
stripe  extending  from  cornea  to  outer  canthus.

Internal  canthi  bluish  and  bloated  ;  headache  from  occi-
put forward  ;  abuse  of  mercury.

Quivering  in  r.  upper  lid.


SARSAPARILLA.  232

Laclirymatioii  in  daytime;  lids  agglutinated  in  morning.

Ophthalmia  after  checked  tetter.

Inflamed,  dry  eyelids.

I  Itchlike  eruption  on  eyelids.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Words  reverberate  in  ear.

Sound  in  head  when  talking  as  if  a  bell  were  striking.

Burning  itching  scab  on  ear  lobe.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing  and  running  coryza  in  morning.

Burning  in  nose  on  blowing  it,  with  a  dry  cough.

Ver}^  thick  mucus  from  nose.

I  I  Chronic  stoppage  of  nose.

Coryza  and  cough.

Itching  on  r.  wing  of  nose,  not  >  by  scratching.

Itching  oh  1.  side  of  nose  and  around  eyes.

Pricking  in  point  of  nose  as  from  a  needle.

Eruption  in  1.  nostril ;  sore  nose.

I  I  Right  nostril  stopped  up  and  scurfy.

I  I  Pain  in  nose ;  inflamed  spots  on  septum.

Itching  eruption  under  nose,  as  if  caused  by  acrid  dis-
charge.

A  suppurating  pimple  on  r.  side  of  nose.

Small  boils  on  nose.

Scabby  eruption  on  and  under  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Violent  pain  in  face,  as  if  bruised  about  both
inferior  orbital  edges  on  waking  in  morning,  only  on
pressing  them.

Drawing,  stinging,  tearing  in  masticatory  muscles  of  r.
side,  which  seem  to  have  spasmodically  contracted.

The  jaws  pain  as  if  being  broken.

Fine  pricking  itching  in  face  and  scalp,  as  well  as  about
neck  and  shoulders,  with  feeling  of  great  warmth  in
these  parts ;  on  scratching  it  begins  in  another  place.

■  Face  yellow,  wrinkled,  old-looking.

■  Eruption  like  milk  crust.

■  Itching  eruption  on  forehead,  with  burning ;  becoming-

humid  on  scratching.

I  Pimples  of  various  sizes  on  face.

Heat  of  face ;  sweat  on  forehead,  in  evening  in  bed.
^  Lower  Face. Stiffness  and  tension  in  muscles  and  articu-
lation of  jaw.

Pressing,  stinging  pain  on  lower  inner  edge  of  r.  lower
jaw,  but  only  on  handling  it  and  on  bending  head  back.

Herpes  on  upper  lip.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Sensitiveness  of  upper  front  teeth.

•  Tearing  in  teeth,  from  cold  air  and  cold  drink.

I  I  Toothache  in  last  molars,  >  from  cold  air.

Stinging,  tearing  in  gums  and  root  of  last  r.  inferior  molar.

Swelling  and  sore  pain  of  gums  of  inner  side  of  inferior
maxilla.


233  SARSAPARILLA.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste : of  food ; in  mouth  in

morning.
Sweetish  taste.
Tongue:  coated  white;  rough  several  mornings  on  waking,

passing  off  after  eating;  red,  back  of  it  white.
Mercurial  aphthse  on  tongue  and  roof  of  mouth.
Stitches  in  tongue.
Acrid  sensation  on  tongue.

I  i  Blisters  on  tongue ;  aphthae  on  tongue  and  palate.
Tasteless  water  collects  in  mouth.
Slimy  mouth  in  morning.
Dryness  in  mouth  without  thirst.
Dryness  in  mouth  and  throat,  mornings,  in  bed.
Pressing  drawing  pain  in  soft  palate.
In  fauces:  tickling  ulcerative  sensation,  causing  a  cough.
Acrid  sensation  in  pharynx.
i3  Thj^oat. Spasmodic  contraction  of  throat,  with dyspnoea,

must  loosen  his  cravat.

■  Dryness  and  roughness  of  throat  in  morning.
I  I  Refuses  food  on  account  of  pain  in  throat.

I  I  Sore  feeling  in  throat,  r.  side.

I  I  Sore  throat,  aphthse  on  soft  palate.

I  iTrichotomous  ulcers;  after  plica  polonica  had  been  cut
off,  deep  ulcers  on  tonsils,  spreading  to  soft  palate,  on
back  wall  of  fauces;  pale  bluish  edges;  covered  with
cauliflower  excrescences;  whitish  thin  pus,  smelling
like  rancid  butter ;  refuses  to  take  food  on  account  of
too  much  pain  ;  kept  alive  by  injections  of  milk  in
rectum.
"Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  Want  of  appetite,
the  thought  of  food  disgusts  him.

Want  of  thirst.
*^  Eating  and  Drinking. Burning  in  stomach,  especially  after
eating  bread.

After  eating:  bitter  eructations  (also  during);  feels  as  if
he  had  eaten  nothing ;  diarrhoea ;  deep  inspirations ;
heavy, short  breathing;  asthma;  exhaustion  and  nausea.

Worse  from  warm  diet ;  >  after  cold  diet.

To  drink  water  sets  her  to  vomiting.
*^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough
6  P.M.;  after  dinner.

Eructation:  with  taste  of  food,  after  dinner;  first  bitter
and  sour,  then  empty ;  bitter  in  morning  after  rising ;
during  dinner ;  of  bitter,  sour  matter,  evenings ;  con-
tinuous, sour ;  sour  after  breakfast ;  of  sour  water,  after
noon ;  with  shuddering.

I  I  Belching  with  diarrhoea.

■  Nausea:  when  thinking  of  food  eaten;  with  acrid  sen-


SARSAPARILLA.  234

sution  on  tongue  and  in  pharynx ;  in  stomach,  less  in
throat;  after  breakfast ;  witli  constant  ineffectual  effort
to  vomit.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Burning  in  stomach,  espe-
cially after  eating  bread.
Stomach  has  no  sensation,  after  eating  feels  as  if  he  had
eaten  nothing.

'^  Abdomen, i Rumbling  and  fermentation  in  abdomen,  with
discharge  of  offensive  flatus.

■  Rumbling,  with  sensation  of  emptiness  in  abdomen.
Painful  pressure  inward  and  pinching  in  1.  side  of  abdo-
men in  a  small  spot,  <  by  deep  inspiration.

I  I  Pressure  in  abdomen  from  above  downward ;  pressure

on  bowels.
Burning,  or  cold  feeling  in  abdomen.
I  I  External  abdomen  very  sensitive  to  touch.
In  r.  groin  severe  tension.
Pinching  in  1.  inguinal  region.
I  1  Hernia.

Soreness  in  bend  of  r.  groin  on  appearance  of  menses.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum, i  i  Motion  in bowels  as  if  diarrhoea

would  follow.
I  Loose  stool  in  evening.
I  I  Diarrhoea :  with  discharge  of  flatus ;  with  bellyache  and

backache  at  same  time.

■  Very  hard  stool.

I  Constipation,  violent  urging  to  urinate,  stool  small,  with
much  bearing  down.

■  Difficult  and  painful  stool,  with  fainting  attacks;  stool

retarded,  hard  and  insufficient.

■  Obstinate  constipation  with  violent  urging  to  urinate;.

urging  to  stool  with  contraction  of  intestines ;  excessive
pressure  from  above  downward,  as  if  bowels  were  pressed
out ;  during  stool  violent  tearing  and  cutting  in  rectum.

■  Diarrhoea  after  every  kind  of  food  that  disagrees  with  hi&

stomach  ;  with  belching  and  rumbling  in  abdomen.

■  Blood  with  stool.

•^Urinary  Organs. ■  Chronic  nephritis.

■  ■Neuralgia;  attacks  of  most  excruciating  pains  from  r.

kidney  downward.

■  ■Renal  colic  and  passage  of  gravel.

■  Small  stones  are  expelled  from  bladder.

■  Stone  in  bladder ;  bloody  urine.

■  ■Renal  and  vesical  calculi.

■  Gravel,  in  children.

Painful  constriction  of  bladder,  without  urging.
Pain  and  cramps  in  bladder,  particularly  with  a  painful
urging  and  burning ;  urine  copious  and  pale.


235  SARSAPARILLA.

■  Tenesmus  of  bladder,  with  discharge  of  white  acrid  pus

and  mucus.
Tenderness  and  distension  over  region  of  bladder.
I  I  Nocturnal  incontinence  of  urine  in  a  little  girl;  when

awake  could  pass  urine  only  when  standing.

■  Frequent  discharge  of  pale,  copious  urine.

I  I  Has  to  get  up  two  or  three  times  at  night  to  urinate  and
passes  a  great  c^uantity  :  he  thinks  he  can  never  finish,
at  first  with  burning,  then  without.

■  Frequent  urination,  with  hard  stool.

■  Frequent  inefficient  urging  to  urinate,  with  diminished

secretion .

Frequent  desire  to  urinate  with  scanty  discharge  accom-
panied by  burning.

When  he  sits  urine  dribbles  from  him;  when  he  stands  it
passes  freely.

■  The  urine  passes  in  a  thin,  feeble  stream,  or  in  drops

only,  without  pain  or  urging;  he  has  to  press  much.
I  I  Burning  while  urine  passes,  with  discharge  of  elongated

flakes.
Strangury,  with  pressure  on  bladder,  yet  the  urine  will

not  come,  and  when  it  comes  there  is  cutting  pain.

■  Painful  retention  of  urine.

■  Urine:  bright  and  clear,  but  irritating;  red,  fiery;  often

and  copious,  must  rise  at  night;  ■■scanty,  slimy,  flaky,
sandy ;  copious,  jDassed  without  sensation  ;  pale,  turbid,
immediately  after  its  passage  like  clay  water  and  scanty,
voided  in  a  thin,  powerless  stream ;  deposits  white  sand.

■  Sand  in  urine  or  on  diaper;  child  screams  before  and

while  passing  it.

■  Each  time  she  makes  water,  air  passes  out  of  urethra  with

a  gurgling  noise.

■  Urine  passes  in  a  thin,  feeble  stream  or  in  drops  without

pain.

■  After  passage  of  urine  burning  and  itching,  tearing  pain

from  glans  to  root  of  penis.

■  ■Much  pain  at  conclusion  of  passing  water,  almost  un-

bearable.

■  Jerking  sensation  along  male  urethra.

■  Pain  at  meatus  urinarius,  with  women.

I  I  Great  difficult}^  in  urinating,  constant  ineffectual  desire;
sometimes  urine  (which  is  scanty)  becomes  turbid  on
standing ;  pain  in  back,  at  lower  part  of  spine,  and  from
thence  across  hips  and  down  thighs ;  lower  part  of  ab-
domen tender  to  touch,  hard,  distended  ;  her  symptoms
remind  her  of  what  she  suffered  after  a  confinement.

IIA  man,  £et.  52,  addicted  to  whisky  for  years:  had  a
copious  flow  of  blood  from  bowels  some  four  months


SARSAPARILLA.  236

ago ;  the  exertion  of  walking  a  few  blocks  causes  suffo-
cation ;  after  the  loss  of  blood  feet  began  to  swell ;  both
limbs  to  middle  of  thighs  very  oedematous ;  has  had  two
or  three  nondescript  chills ;  a  few  months  ago  a  sudden
paralytic  weakness  of  1.  arm  and  leg,  passed  off  in  three
hours,  leaving  a  numbness  in  1.  hand,  and  rending  pain
in  1.  side  of  head  and  face ;  no  appetite ;  bloody  mucous
discharges  with  stools ;  feels  as  if  in  a  dream  all  the  time ;
loss  of  memory ;  face  covered  with  varicose  veins  and
very  red ;  general  venous  stasis ;  feeling  on  top  of  head
as  if  he  had  been  hit  with  a  hammer;  must  pass  urine;
several  times  a  night ;  urine  thick  and  cloudy  after
standing,  but  clear  when  first  passed  ;  has  had  much
i  worry  from  financial  losses;  cannot  pass  urine  while

sitting  at  stool,  but  it  flows  freely  when  he  is  standing ;
albumen  in  urine.

(  I  After  each  urination  pain  at  a  point  near  neck  of  blad-
der ;  had  to  urinate  often  and  had  distress  more  or  less
all  through  pelvis ;  after  each  urination  had  chills  com-
mencing at  region  of  neck  of  bladder  and  spreading  up-
ward until  he  felt  them  in  whole  upper  part  of  body.

i  I  After  exposure  to  a  draft  of  cold  air  while  in  a  profuse
perspiration,  next  morning  was  unable  to  move  or  be
moved ;  felt  as  if  he  were  bound  down  to  bed  by  a  sort
of  suction  ;  before  he  got  into  this  condition  had  severe
sharp  pains,  principally  in  back  and  shoulders,  on  least
motion ;  but  two  scanty  discharges  of  urine  in  the  pre-
vious twenty-four  hours.

I  Mrs.  C,  set  50,  took  a  severe  cold,  followed  by  a  chill  and
fever ;  next  morning  after  chill,  awoke  with  severe  pains
through  bladder,  back,  hips  and  down  thighs ;  frequent
urination,  passing  but  little  and  that  mostly  blood,  with
a  great  deal  of  burning  and  straining. 6/Cystitis.

I  I A  sickly-looking  child,  a  girl,  set.  3,  in  bad  health  sev-
eral weeks ;  every  time  the  child  urinates,  wind  comes
from  bladder  with  a  noise.

I  I  After  each  urination  a  pain  at  a  point  in  vicinity  of  neck
of  bladder ;  after  every  urination  chills  commencing  at
region  of  neck  of  bladder  and  spreading  in  an  upward
direction  until  finally  he  felt  them  in  whole  upper  part
of  body.
''''Male  Sexual  Organs,  i Seminal  emissions,  lascivious
dreams,  with  backache,  prostration,  vertigo.

I  The  least  excitement  causes  an  emission,  even  without
sexual  feeling.

I  I  Painful  pollution  nearly  every  night,  with  lascivious
dreams.

■  Lascivious  dreams  with  erections  wake  him  up,  with  head-


237  SARSAPARILLA.

ache,  dim  sight,  prostration  and  vertigo ;  inclination  to
coitus,  with  restless  sleep  and  frequent  emissions ;  sper-
matic cords  swollen,  sexual  excitement  makes  them  ache
and  sensitive;  bloody  pollutions  {Ledum) ;  offensive  odor
about  genitals.

■  Swelling  of  spermatic  cords  after  ungratified  sexual  ex-

citement.
I  A.fter  suppressed  gonorrhoeal  discharge  by  injections  made
of  a  solution  of  gunpowder,  extremely  severe  rheumatic
pains  in  limbs  and  extreme  emaciation.

■  Gonorrhoea  checked  by  cold,  wet  weather  or  by  mercury,

followed  by  rheumatism.

■  Herpes  on  prepuce.

■  Moist  eruption  about  genitals  or  between  scrotum  and

thighs.
Tearing  from  glans  to  root  of  penis.
Glans  red  and  inflamed.

■  Intolerable  odor  about  genitals.

■  Unbearable itching on  scrotum and perineum; after

scratching  little  pimples  rise,  oozing  a  moisture,  and
keep  the  part  sore.

■  Sycosis.

I  I  Old,  dry  sycotic  warts,  remaining  after  mercurial  treat-
ment for  gouty  pains.

■  Syphilis  ;  squamous  eruption  ;  bone  pain  ;  after  abuse  of

mercury.
"Female  Sexual  Organs. '  iCatamenia  very  copious,  even
to  hemorrhage,  with  an  old  maid.

■  Dysmenorrhoea for  twenty  years; generally began  in

morning  with  bitter  vomiting,  diarrhoea  and  fainting-
fits, with  exceedingly  cold  sweats ;  dreadful  pain  in  back,
thighs  and  hypogastrium  ;  had  to  lie  down  the  first  day,
the  second  the  pain  continued  very  bad,  and  on  the
third  day  it  went  off;  1.  nipple  considerably  retracted,
arising  from  a  fall  when  a  child,  and  she  had  severe
pain  in  1.  breast  extending  down  1.  arm,  and  1.  breast
was  so  tender  that  she  would  often  hold  her  hand  in
front  of  it  to  avoid  contact.

■  Menses:  too  late  and  scanty,  preceded  by  urging  to  uri-

nate ;  itching  eruption  on  forehead ;  flow  acrid ;  sore-
ness inside  of  thighs ;  griping  in  pit  of  stomach  in  direc-
tion of  small  of  back.

■  Leucorrhoea  :  on  walking ;  pain  at  meatus  urinarius  after

urinating.
I  I  Leucorrhoea  continuing  six  months  after parturition,
with  severe  laborlike  pains  from  sacrum  to  crest  of  ilium,
or  around  to  uterus;  heat  and  pulsation  in  sacrum;
scanty,  white  leucorrhoea,  when  walking  or  exercising;


SARSAPARILLA.  238

scalding  micturition  ;  severe  pain  at  close  of  urination  ;
had  had  many  abortions.

Nipples  became  retracted  and  insensible.

I  iScirrhus  of  breast  (cured  by  large  doses).

During  climacteric  period :  asthmatic  breathing,  made  <
by  lying  down ;  pain  in  back  very  severe  on  a  line  with
and  immediately  to  left  of  sacrum ;  <  from  pressure
and  from  turning  over  in  bed  ;  severe  and  constant  nau-
sea, with  vomiting,  severe  frontal  headache ;  great  urg-
ing to  urinate  with  onl}'"  slight  emissions  of  urine,
accompanied  with  burning,  stinging  pain  during  and
after  severe  rigors  over  whole  body,  commencing  at  feet ;
rather  calm,  yet  feared  she  would  not  recover.
**  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i Pregnant  women:
before  and  during  stool,  severe  pains  in  sacral  regions,
writhing,  drawing,  radiating  upward  and  downward
until  fingers,  hands,  feet  and  toes  are  involved  and
cramped  from  darting,  drawing  pains,  with  anxiety,
faintness  and  palpitation  of  heart.

I  Suppuration  of  mammse.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. '  i  Croup,
spasmodic  variety ;  laryngismus  stridulus.

Rawness  and  pain  in  larynx.

Throat  rough,  hoarse  and  dry  in  morning  on  waking.

Hoarseness  in  throat  every  other  day.

Tough  slime  in  throat  in  morning  which  cannot  be  re-
moved by  hawking.

Constant  hawking  of  mucus  in  morning,  the  slime  being
reproduced  in  abundance.

Spasmodic  constriction  in  throat  and  chest,  with  difficult
breathing.

Loosens  clothes  from  neck  in  order  to  get  breath  ;  but  this
is  without  avail.
^*  Respiration. Shortness  of  breath,  he  must  loosen  neckcloth
and  vest.

Stoppage  of  breath  as  if  by  a  spasm,  with  constriction  of
throat. ^Spasmodic  asthma.

■  Short  breathing  on  going  up  stairs.

Rigors  over  whole  body  from  below  upward  ;  asthmatic
breathing,  <  by  lying  down.

Oppression  of  chest  impeding  respiration,  mornings.

I  I  Great  emphysema ;  chest  barrel-shaped ;  liver  pressed
downward ;  scaleni  muscles  hypertrophied ;  constant
dyspnoea,  <  after  eating  and  least  motion  (relieved).
^  Cough.  Cough  :  from  tickling  in  chest  or  with  rattling  in
chest;  with  colorless,  tasteless  expectoration,  pain  in
larynx ;  with  headache ;  dry,  with  burning  in  nose  on
blowing  it;  with  coryza  ;  with  nausea,  vomiting  of  bile,
diarrhcea  ;  in  morning.


239  SARSAPARILLA.

I  I  Chronic  catarrh.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Stitches  from  back  through  to
chest  with  every  motion.
I  I  Arthritic  tubercles  in  lungs.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  of  heart  with-
out fear ;  mostly  during  day.
Ebullition  of  blood  and  protruding  veins.
Pulse  accelerated  in  evening,  slow  in  morning.
'"  Outer  Chest. Breast  bone  feels  as  if  bruised ;  sensitive  to
touch.
On  outside  of  chest,  tensive  pain,  as  if  it  were  too  short,  on

straightening  up  and  walking  erect.
I  I  Painful  pressure  on  breast  bone,  <  when  touched.
The  nipples  are  wilted,  unsensitive  and  not  irritable.
Itching  about  nipples.
Urticaria  on  chest.
'^  Neck  and  Back. iNeck  emaciated ;  marasmus  of  children.
I  I  Had  to  loosen  his  necktie ;  feels  narrow-chested.

■  Cervical  glands  indurated  ;  abuse  of  mercury.

I  Stitches  in  back  through  into  chest  from  least  motion.
Pain  down  a  part  of  spine,  across  hips  and  down  thighs ;

difficult  urination.
^*  Upper  Limbs. Stitches  in  joints  of  arms,  hands  and  fingers,

on  motion.
Deep  rhagades  on  fingers,  with  burning  pains.
I  I  Pain  in  tips  of  fingers  on  pressure,  as  if  ulcerated  or  as

if  salt  were  put  on  a  wound.
I  Tips  of  fingers  feel  bruised  and  sore.
I  I  Sides  of  fingers  burning.
I  Fingers  burning  under  nails,  with  itching.
Urticaria  on  hands.

I  Tetter  on  hands.

'^  Lower  Limbs. Weakness  in  thighs  and  knees.

■  Wrenching,  excruciating  pains  in  knees,  which  were  hot,

swollen  and  tender  to  touch,  sometimes  in  1.,  sometimes
in  r.  and  sometimes  in  both  at  the  same  time;  motion
very  painful,  especially  on  going  up  and  down  stairs ;
seat  of  greatest  tenderness  on  either  side  of  patellse ;  fre-
quent attacks  brought  on  by  accidentally  bruising  knees
against  leg  of  table  (which  invariably  produces  severe
inflammation).
Stitches  in  legs  especially  from  motion.

I I  Blue  spots  on  legs,  with  induration  of  skin  under  spots
extending  deep  in,  the  beginning  of  long-lasting  ulcers.

1  I  Pains  in  superficial  knots  on  shin  bone.
Red  spots  on  calves.

I  1 A  young  man,  set.  30,  had  been  salivated,  and  in  addi-
tion to  many  painful  symptoms  had  a  large  ulcer  on  r.


SAR8APARILLA.  240

leg,  surrounding  ankle,  as  large  as  hand,  invading
nearly  whole  circumference  of  part  and  extending  down
through  fascia  almost  to  bone ;  superficial  veins  much
enlarged,  some  cedema  of  foot ;  constant  aching  gnaw-
ing; parts  excessively  sensitive  to  pressure;  had  been
in  habit  of  taking  morphia  nightly  to  secure  sleep  ;  ulcer
irregular  in  form,  ragged  edges;  dark  areola;  edges
high  and  rounded  ;  floor  of  ulcer  flat,  but  uneven  ;  pus
profuse,  horribly  offensive  and  dark-colored ;  would
frequently  partially  granulate,  then  break  down  again,
granulations  becoming  black  and  coming  away  in
masses ;  on  1.  leg  a  similar  sore  not  quite  so  large ;  a
similar  ulcer  on  1.  arm,  midway  between  wrist  and  elbow,
not  quite  as  deep  as  the  others ;  health  poor ;  appetite
deficient;  sleepless  and  generally  worn  out  (benefited).
I  I  Eczema  of  1.  leg,  with  piles,  after  being  relieved  by
Hepar  6x  was  cured  by  large  doses  of  Sarsap.

i  Rheumatic  pains  at  night  in  feet.

I  Icy  coldness  of  feet  before  going  to  bed.

I  Rhagades  on  feet.

I  Before  going  to  bed  swelled  feet.

I  Burning  in  sides  and  tips  of  toes,  with  great  sensitive-
ness to  pressure  of  shoes  or  boots ;  a  similar  burning
also  in  fingers,  under  nails,  with  itching.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  joints  after  gonorrhoea.

I  I  Rheumatism  of  lower  limbs;  swelling  and  induration
of  glands  about  upper  part  of  neck.  ^Syphilis  and  abuse
of  mercury.

■  Pain  in  bones  from  mercury.

In  all  joints  of  body,  tearing  now  here  now  there  for  sev-
eral days,  but  only  of  short  duration.
I  I  Gout  in  lower  limbs.
I  Arthritis  vaga.

■  Exostoses,  mercurial  bone  pain.

"  Limbs  in  General. Limbs  immovable  as  if  paralyzed.

Trembling  of  hands  and  feet.

I  Hands  and  feet  peculiarly  weary.

llRheumatism,  bone  pains  after  mercury  or  checked  gon-
orrhoea; pains  <  at  night  in  damp  weather  or  after
taking  cold  in  water.
^■"'Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  asthmatic  breath-
ing <.

Lying  on  back  :  when  sleeping.

Sitting : head  inclined  to  drop  forward ; urine  dribbles
from  him.

Bending  head  back  :  causes  pain  in  jaw.

Standing:  girl  could  only  pass  urine;  urine  passes  freel}'.

Stooping:  pains  in  occiput  to  forehead.


241  SARSAPARILLA.

Motion :  causes  sharp  pains  in  neck  and  shoulders ;  dysp-
noea <  ;  stitches  from  back  to  chest;  stitches  in  joints;
of  knees  painful;  stitches  in  legs  <.

Turning  over  in  bed :  pain  in  back  <.

Walking  :  head  inclined  to  drop  forward ;  throbbing  in
top  of  head  <  ;  causes  suffocation :  leucorrhoea ;  erect,
chest  feels  too  short ;  pain  from  occiput  to  forehead ;
pain  in  small  of  back.

Going  up  stairs:  short  breathing.
^®  Nerves, Ability  to  go  about  all  day,  fasting ;  no  exertion
seemed  to  tire ;  numbness  of  fingers,  especially  third  and
fourth  on  both  hands.

■Sensation  of  weakness  over  whole  body  ;  faint  feeling.

Fainting  attacks,  with  difficult  stool.

Paralysis,  muscles  atrophied.
^^  Sleep. Sleeplessness  at  night ;  awakens  frequently.

Dreams:  lascivious,  without  erections  but  seminal  emis-
sions ;  of  fatal  accidents.

Sleeps  lying  on  back.
^^  Time.  Morning:  nausea ;  itching  deep  in  head;  tired  feel-
ing; bitter  taste;  lids  agglutinated;  sneezing  and  run-
ning coryza;  tongue  coated  white;  slimy  mouth;  dry-
ness in  mouth  and  throat ;  tough  slime  in  mouth  and
throat;  oppression  of  chest ;  diarrhoea;  pulse  slow.

Forenoon  :  frequent  shuddering  from  feet  upward.

Daytime:  lachrymation  ;  palpitation  of  heart.

6  P.M.:  hiccough.

Evening:  pains  increase;  headache  <  ;  great  drowsiness;
heat  of  face;  eructations;  loose  stool;  pulse  accelerated;
heat  ebullitions  and  palpitations;  heat  and  sweat  on
forehead.

Night: severe perspiration; rheumatic pains in feet;
sleeplessness.
^''Temperature  and  "Weather. Heat:  pimples  itch.

Warmth:  symptoms  >.

Warm  diet:  symptoms  <.

Warm  room:  vertigo  <•

From  warm  room  into  cold  air:  rash  appears.

Open  air:  staggers  and  falls  forward;  crusts  fall  off  and
new  skin  cracks.

Cold  air :  tearing  in  teeth ;  pain  in  molars  >  ;  a  draft  of
while  in  a  perspiration,  next  morning  could  not  move.

Cold  drink  :  tearing  in  teeth.

Cold  diet:  symptoms  >.

Cold,  wet  weather:  checked  gonorrhoea;  rheumatism  <.

Washing:  eruptions  <.

Chilliness:  symptoms  <.
^°  Fever. Chilliness  predominating  (day  and  night).

VOL. IX. — 16.


SARSAPARILLA.  242

Frequent  shuddering,  mostly  in  forenoon,  running  from
feet  upward.

I  I  Rigor  over  whole  body,  from  below  upward.

I I  Worse  during  chilliness ;  >  as  soon  as  he  becomes  warm.
Heat  in  evening,  with  ebullitions  and  palpitation  of  heart.
Ebullition  of  blood,  protruding  veins.

I  I  Heat,  evenings  in  bed,  an  hour  before  falling  asleep ;
blood  boils,  heart  beats,  and  sweat  stands  on  forehead.

llSweat  on  forehead  during  evening  heat.
I  I  For  five  days,  shooting  pain  from  occiput  to  forehead,
on  stooping  or  walking;  for  two  days,  chilliness  begin-
ning in  legs  and  going  all  over  body,  then  general  heat,
then  slight  sweat ;  with  heat,  thirst,  drinking  much  and
often;  shooting  pain  in  small  of  back  when  walking;
feels  hot  to  herself  but  skin  is  cool  to  touch  ;  pulse  120;
some  days  ago  exposed  to  an  offensive  smell  from  de-
composing substances.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Alternating:  pressure  and  burning
in  e3''es.

Two  or  three  times  a  night:  must  get  up  to  pass  urine.

Every  other  day  :  hoarseness  in  throat.

For  two  days :  chilliness  in  legs,  thence  all  over  body.

For  several  days  :  tearing  in  joints.

For  five  days:  pain  from  occiput  to  forehead.

Two  or  three  times  a  week:  seminal  emissions.

Spring:  eruptions  prone  to  appear;  sycotic  eruption  <.

For  twenty  years  :  dysmenorrhoea.
*^ Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  itching  in  half  of  head;
throbbing  in  side  of  head;  beating  and  sounding  in  side
of  head  ;  shooting  in  parietal  bone;  quivering  in  upper
eyelid  ;  itching  in  wing  of  nose  ;  nostril  stopped ;  pain  in
masticatory  muscles ;  pain  in  lower  jaw ;  tearing  in  root
of  last  inferior  molar;  sore  throat;  severe  tension  in
groin  ;  soreness  in  bend  of  groin ;  excruciating  pain
from  kidney  downward;  large  ulcer  on  leg;  boils  on
side  of  nose ;  on  dorsal  side  of  foot.

Left:  pressure  and  stitches  in  side  of  forehead  and  head;
dimness  of  eye;  pressure  in  eye ;  itching  on  side  of  nose;
eruption  in  nostril;  pinching  in  side  of  abdomen;  pinch-
ing in  inguinal  region ;  weakness  of  arm  and  leg ;  numb-
ness of  hand;  rending  pain  in  side  of  head  and  face;
nipple  retracted  ;  severe  pain  in  breast;  ulcer  on  leg  and
arm;  eczema  of  leg;  boils  in  gluteal  regions.

First  1.  then  r. :  pressure  in  eyes.

Upward :  chill  passes  from  bladder.

From  above  downward:  pressure  in  abdomen.

From  below  upward:  rigors  over  whole  body;  shuddering
from  feet.


243  SARSAPARILLA.

Upward  and  downward:  sacral  pains  radiate.
"  Sensations.  As  of  a  great  weight  in  head  ;  a  buzzing  as  if
a  large  bell  had  been  struck  in  head ;  as  if  something
were  pressing  upon  head;  as  if  gauze  were  spread  over
1.  eye;  as  of  a  grain  of  sand  in  eye;  as  of  a  needle  prick-
ing point  of  nose;  face  as  if  bruised;  jaw  as  if  being-
broken;  as  if  he  had  eaten  nothing;  as  if  diarrhoea
would  come  on ;  as  if  bowels  were  pressed  out;  as  if  in
a  dream;  as  if  he  had  been  hit  with  a  hammer  on  top
of  head;  as  if  bound  down  to  bed  by  a  sort  of  suction;
as  if  breath  were  stopped  by  a  breath;  breast  bone  as  if
bruised  ;  as  if  chest  were  too  short ;  as  if  tips  of  fingers
were  ulcerated  or  as  if  salt  were  put  on  a  wound  ;  limbs
as  if  paralyzed.

Pain  :  in  small  of  back  and  down  spermatic  cords ;  in  last
molars ;  in  throat ;  in  bladder ;  in  lower  part  of  spine,
across  hips  and  down  thighs ;  at  point  near  neck  of  blad-
der; at  meatus  urinarius;  in  larynx;  in  superficial
knots  on  shin  bone ;  in  bones.

Excruciating  pains :  from  r.  kidney  downward  ;  in  knees.

Dreadful  pain  :  in  back,  thighs  and  hypogastrium.

Violent  pain  :  in  eyes ;  in  face.

Severe,  sharp  pains :  in  back  and  shoulders ;  through
bladder,  back,  hips  and  thighs;  in  1.  breast;  in  back;
in  head.

Tearing :  in  masticatory  muscles ;  in  teeth ;  in  rectum ;
from  glans  to  root  of  penis ;  in  all  joints.

Rending  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Cutting :  in  rectum.

Darting :  from  occiput  to  eyes ;  in  sacral  regions,  thence
upward  and  downward  to  fingers  and  toes.

Shooting :  in  r.  parietal  bone ;  back  of  head  to  front ;  from
occiput  to  forehead  ;  in  small  of  back.

Throbbing :  in  top  of  head ;  in  r.  side  of  head.

Pulsative  pains :  in  head.

Severe,  laborlike  pains  :  from  sacrum  to  crest  of  ilium,  or
around  to  uterus.

Stitches:  in  1.  side  of  forehead  and  head;  in  tongue;  from
back  to  chest ;  in  joints  of  arms,  hands  and  fingers ;  in
legs.

Stitching  pains :  in  head.

Pinching :  in  abdomen ;  in  1.  inguinal  region.

Griping :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Cramps :  in  bladder.

Burning  pain :  in  rhagades  on  fingers.

Aching :  through  temples,  forehead  and  occiput.

Rheumatic  pains  :  in  limbs ;  in  feet ;  in  joints.

Sore  pain  :  of  gums.


SARSAPARILLA.  244

Stinging:  in  eyes;  in  masticatory  muscles ;  in  gums  and

root  of  molar.
Soreness :  in  throat ;  in  bend  of  r.  groin  ;  inside  of  thighs;

of  tips  of  fingers.
Burning: in  eyes; in  nose;  in  stomach; in  abdomen;

while  urine  passes ;  from  glans  to  root  of  penis ;  of  sides

of  fingers;  under  finger  nails;  in  sides  and  tips  of  toes.
Acrid  sensation:  on  tongue;  in  pharynx;  in  stomach.
Pricking :  in  point  of  nose.
Distress :  all  through  pelvis.
Rawness :  in  larynx.
Heat :  in  sacrum.

Tickling,  ulcerative  sensation  :  in  fauces.
Jerking :  along  male  urethra.
Pulsation:  in  sacrum.
Beating  and  sounding  :  in  r.  side  of  head.
Pressure:  in  1.  side  of  forehead  and  head;  in  1.  eye;  in  ab-

'  domen  ;  on  bowels ;  on  bladder.
Pressing:  deep  in  r.  side  of  head;  in  vertex  ;  in  soft  palate;

on  breast  bone,
Drawing:  in  masticatory  muscles;  in  soft  palate;  in  sacral

region  and  upward  and  downward  to  fingers  and  toes.
Tension :  in  muscles  and  articulation  of  jaw ;  in  r.  groin.
Heaviness :  in  head.

Constriction  :  of  bladder ;  in  throat  and  chest.
Dryness :  in  mouth  ;  in  throat.
Stiffness:  in  muscles  and  articulation  of  jaw.
Numbness  :  of  1.  hand  ;  of  fingers.
Weakness :  in  thighs  and  knees ;  over  whole  body.
Dull  tremor  with  waving:  in  head.
Dull,  stupid  feeling :  in  head.

Pricking  itching:  in  face  and  scalp ;  in  neck  and  shoulders.
Itching :  deep  in  r.  half  of  head  ;  in  head  ;  of  scab  on  ear

lobe ;  in  r.  wing  of  nose ;  on  1.  side  of  nose ;  of  eruption

on  forehead ;  from  glans  to  root  of  penis ;  on  scrotum

and  perineum ;  about  nipples ;  under  finger  nails ;  in

spots  on  scars.
Cold  feeling:  in  abdomen.
"  Tissues. ■  Great  emaciation,  skin  becomes  shrivelled  or  lies

in  folds.

■  Scrofulous,  sycotic  or  syphilitic  affections.
Chronic  abscesses  attended  by  profuse  discharge.
■Rheumatic  bone  pains  after  mercury  or  checked  gonor-
rhoea.

•  Children  emaciated;  face  like  old  people;  big  belly;  dry,
flabby  skin  ;  mushy  passages. ^Marasmus.

■  Eruptions  prone  to  appear  in  Spring,  their  bases  inflamed,

crusts  detach  readily  out  of  doors  and  adjoining  skin
becomes  chapped.


245  SARSAPARILLA.

Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  external  ab-
domen very  sensitive ;  1.  breast  very  sensitive ;  breast
bone  sensitive ;  knees  tender ;  boils  sting.

Pressure :  upon  closed  eyes  causes  violent  pain ;  pain  in
back  <  ;  pain  in  finger  tips ;  toes  sensitive.

Loosens  clothes  from  neck  to  get  breath.

Handling  jaw  causes  pain.

Combing :  scalp  sensitive.

Scratching: causes  itching  to  begin in  another place;
eruption  on  forehead  becomes  humid.
**  Skin. Rash  as  soon  as  he  goes  from  warm  room  into  cold  air.

Dry,  red  pimples,  only  itching  when  exposed  to  heat.

iRhagades  deep  and  burning.

Base  of  eruption  much  inflamed  :  child  cries  much  and  is
very  uneasy ;  crusts  become  detached  in  open  air  and
adjoining  skin  chapped.

■  Herpetic  ulcers,  extending  in  a  circular  form,  forming  no

crusts,  red,  granulated  bases,  white  borders ;  skin  appears
as  after  a  warm  compress ;  serous,  reddish  secretions.

1 1  Ulcers  after  abuse  of  mercur}^

Shrivelled  skin.

■  Tetters  appear  on  all  parts  of  body.

■  Tetters,  herpetic  ulcers,  in  syphilis.

■  Ulcers  in  second  stage  of  syphilis.
Many  little  warts.

I  I  Horses  lose  hair  with  eruptions.

■  Often  returning  rash  makes  the  babies  chafed.

■  Dry,  itchlike  eruptions,  with  emaciation.

■  Pemphigus  squamosus.

■  Serpiginous  eruptions.

Small  pus  boils  on  r.  side  of  nose ;  on  r.  dorsal  side  of  foot,
1.  gluteal  region,  sometimes  with  stinging  pain  on  touch.

Pustules  which  have  been  scratched  open,  leaving  ulcers
suppurating  for  a  long  time,

■  Skin  does  not  heal.

■  Red  spots,  psoriasis-like,  after  abuse  of  mercury.

I  I  An  endemic  affection  occurring  in  Marienwerder,  occa-
sionally with  trichoma  (plica);  patients  unwell  for  a  long
time ;  pale-red  brownish  spots  appear  on  the  extremities,
rarely  on  trunk,  turn  into  small,  deep  ulcers,  edges  cal-
lous, inverted,  these  heal  after  a  time,  but  appear  on
other  places ;  their  size  is  about  half  an  inch,  seldom
smaller,  never  larger;  they  spread  in  a  lino  like  a  wreath
or  garland  ;  the  scars  elevated,  red,  winding;  later  sore
throat,  pain  in  nose;  inflamed,  suppurating  spots  on
soft  palate  and  on  septum,  soon  destroying  it ;  some-
times pains  in  superficial  knots  on  shin  bone  and  other
places ;  also  exostoses.

■  Sycotic  erui^tion  consisting  of  little  spots  scarcely  raised


SARSAPARILLA.  246

above  skin,  often  scaling  a  little  but  looking  like  the
roseola  of  syphilis  and  itching  intolerably,  <  in  Spring,
I  I  Pustular  efflorescence  on  face,  of  ichorous  character;
on  rest  of  body  a  papular  efflorescence ;  this  eruption
appeared  after  violent  nocturnal  itching,  causing  scratch-
ing sometimes  on  upper,  sometimes  on  lower  extremities,
sometimes  on  body  in  form  of  small  colorless  pimples,
containing  serum  ;  the  latter  eruption  began  a  year  ago,
while  that  on  face  appeared  a  year  previously  and
attacked  in  var3ing  degrees  of  intensity  and  extent  the
forehead,  cheeks  and  particularly  nose,

■  Eruption  resembling  psoriasis  in  subjects  who  have  taken

much  mercury. ^Syphilis.
I  Itching  relieved  or  lessened  b}^  scratching.

■  Itching  in  spots  on  scars  after  smallpox.

■  Blue  spots  with  indurated  skin  on  legs.

■  Hardness  of  skin,

'New  skin  cracks  and  burns.

■  iRhagades:  skin  cracks  on  hands  and  feet;  pain  and  burn-

ing, particularly  on  sides  of  fingers  and  toes  (after  Hepar).

■  Eruptions  following  vaccination.

■  Boils.

■  Eczema.

Eruptions  <  from  washing.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Dark  hair ;  sycosis.

Girl,  set.  3,  sickly  looking ;  wind  from  bladder.

Young  man,  get.  19,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  farmer;
spermatorrhoea.

Servant,  set.  20 ;  ague.

Student,  set.  20,  nervous  temperament,  suffering  since  pu-
berty ;  spermatorrhoea,

Man,  set.  30,  had  been  salivated  ;  ulcer  on  leg.

Miss  P.,  maiden  lady,  light  hair  and  complexion ;  mental
depression.

Mr, ,  syphilis  nine  years  ago,  for  which  he  received

large  doses  of  mercury  ;  rheumatism  in  joints ;  headache.

Mrs. ,  set.  32 ;  dysmenorrhoea  and  pain  in  breast.

Lady,  set.  45,  in  poor  health,  passing  through  climaxis ;
asthma,  etc.

Mrs.  C,  set,  50,  after  taking  a  severe  cold  ;  cystitis.

Man,  set.  50,  addicted  to  stimulants ;  affection  of  bladder.  .

Man,  set.  52,  whisky  drinker ;  Bright's  disease.

Man,  set.  65,  robust,  suffering  two  years;  eruption,

Mr. ,  ill  for  twenty  years ;  affection  of  bladder,

*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Bellad.,  Mercur.

It  antidotes  effects  of  Mercury.

Compatible  :  Cepa,  Hepar,  Phosphor.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  Sulph.

Complementar}'- :  Mercur.,  Sepia.

Compare:  Natr.  mur.


247  SECALE  CORNUTUM.


SECALE  CORNUTUM.

Ergot ;  Spurred  Bye.  A  Fungus.

The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  ergot,  gathered  shortly  before
harvest.

This  remedy  awaits  proving.

Toxocological  reports  and  efTects  of  the  rye  disease  are  extensive.  See  Allen's
Encyclopedia,  vol.  8,  p.  551.

Clinical  Acthorities. — Asthenopia,  Willebrand,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  17,  p.  692 ;
Epistaxis,  Hrg.,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  414;  Difficult  dentition,  Syrbius,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  476;  Cardialgia,  Hamb.,  Gneyrand,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
1,  p.  659;  Hcematemesis,  Gross,  Drescher,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  575;  Rummell,
Lobeth,  Jean,  Syrbius,  Gross,  Behlert,  Weigel,  Griessel.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol..  1,
p.  847 ;  Von  Tagen,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  183;  Sinking  spells  from  diarrhoea.
Crow,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  167  ; Cholera,  Eummell,  Lobeth.,  Henke,  Tietzer,
Knorre,  Adler,  Kurtz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  960;  Hcematuria,  Trinks,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  63 ;  Hysteralgia,  Burnett,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  35,  p.  87  ;  Prolapsus
uteri,  Kallenbach,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  345 ; Uterine  prolapsus,  Kallenbach,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  407  ;  Uterine  hemorrhage,  Hartm.,  Hirzel,  Griessel.,  Jean,  Gross,
Ehrhardt,  Diez,  Nenning,  Eupprich,  Drescher,  Frank,  Bernstein,  Thorer,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  332 ;  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  19,  p.  153,  Trans,  by  S.  L.,  A.  J.  H.
M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  98;  Fisher,  Bib.  Horn.,  vol.  8,  p.  140;  Low,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,
p.  306 ;  Metrorrhagia,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  215 ;  Euppich,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  4,  p.  150 ;  Menorrhagia,  Linsley,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  73  ;  Frank,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  1,  p.  259;  Drysdale,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  254; Menstrual  colic,  Syrbius,
Hamb,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  253;  Threatened  abortion,  Lembke,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  2,  p.  386  ;  Hendricks,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  98  ;  Abortion,  Frank,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  1,  p.  258;  Miscarriage,  Euhfus,  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol-  79,  p.  152;  Dystocia,
premature  labor,  Belcher,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  70;  Inertia  of  uterus,  Searle,  A.  H.
O.,  vol.  7,  p.  513;  Retained  placenta,  Fielitz,  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,
p.  404 ; Violent  after-pains  and  hcemorrhage  from  irregular  contractions,  Beckwith,
T.  A.  I.  H.,  1871,  p.  262;  Post-partum  hemorrhage,  J.  F.  E.,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  239,"
Use  in  labor,  Lobeth.,  Kurtz,  Kallenbach,  Diez,  Eummell,  Ehrhardt,  Gross,  Nenning,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  396; Fetid  lochia.  Smith,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  8,  p.  116;
Puerperal  fever,  M.,  A.  H.  Z..  vol.  109,  p.  76 ;  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  454 ;
Cough,  GouUon,  H.  Kl.  1872,  p.  4;  Hcemoptysis,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  216;
Palpitation  of  heart,  Mossa,  Hom.  Kl.  1869,  p.  118;  Aneurism,  Peare,  M.  I.,  1875,
p.  48;  Affection  of  spine,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  218; M.  I.,  vol.  10,  p.  633;
Raue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  250;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  390; Kink  in  back,  Schiissler;
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  38 ;  Cramps  in  fingers,  Kasemann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  613 ,
Paralysis  of  legs.  Hale,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  37  ;  Cramps  in  legs,  Syrbius,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  386  ;  Cramps  in  calves,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  219  ;  Offensive
foot-sweat,  Gallavardin,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  61  ;  Neuralgia,  Willebrand,  Hom.
Kl.  1869,  p.  117;  Hysteria,  G.  B.,  Eiick  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  613  ;  Convulsions,  Helbig,


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  248

Anal.  Ther,,  vol.  1.  p.  185;  Tetanus,  Navarro,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  154;  Chorea,
Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  513;  Bodenstab,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  28 ;
Epilepsy,  Lobethal,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  590 ;  Paralysis,  Laucerosse,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  484;  A.  H,  Z.,  vol.  52,  p.  112;  Post-diphtheritic  paralysis.  Hall,
Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  407;  Night-sweats,  Goullon,  M.  I.  1875,  p.  125;  Gangrene,
Arnold,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  861 ;  ;S'fl?M7e  gangrene,  Hendricks,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
105,  p.  128.

^  Mind. Stupid,  half-sleepy  state.

Impaired  power  of  thinking.

Delirium  :  quiet ;  wandering.
• Mania :  with  inclination  to  bite ;  with  inclination  to  drown.

Un comfortableness  and  depression.

Fear  of  death.

Anxiety,  sadness,  melancholy.

Great  anguish  ;  wild  with  anxiety.

Apathy,  indifference.

Constant  moaning  and  fear  of  death.

Great  anxiety  and  difficult  respiration.

Excessive  sadness,  gradually  changes  to  cheerfulness ;
talks  and  acts  foolishly ;  rage,  followed  by  continuous
deep  sleep.

Paralytic  mental  diseases  ;  treats  his  relations  contemptu-
ously and  sarcastically ;  wandering  talk  and  hallucina-
tions; apathy  and  complete  disappearance  of  the  senses.

1  I  Laughs,  claps  her  hands  over  her  head,  seems  beside
herself. ^After  miscarriage.
^  Sensorium. Unconsciousness,  with  heavy  sleep,  preceded
by  tingling  in  head  and  limbs.

Diminution  and  loss  of  senses,  sight,  hearing,  etc.

All  the  senses  benumbed.

Consciousness  seems  to  continue  until  the  last  breath,  and
just  before  death  it  seems  as  if  patient  would  improve.

Stupefaction ;  stupor.

Vertigo :  constantly  increasing ;  with  stupefaction  and
heaviness  of  head  ;  reeling,  inability  to  stand  erect ;
peculiar  feeling  of  lightness  of  head,  particularly  in
occiput ;  as  from  intoxication  ;  unsteady  gait.

Heaviness  of  head  and  tingling  in  legs.

I  I  Sensation  of  intoxication  while  undressing.
^  Inner  Head. Pulsations  in  head  with  giddiness,  she  cannot
walk.

Pain  and  confusion  most  in  occiput.

Congestion  to  head  and  chest.

Headache;  hemicrania  on  1.  side.
*  Outer  Head. Hair  falls  out.

Twisting  of  head  to  and  fro.

I  I  Scalp  sore.


249  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Photophobia.

Dimness  of  vision  ;  mistiness  before  eyes. ^Cataract.

Double  or  triple  vision.

Blue  and  fiery  dots  fl3^ing  before  eyes.

Pain  in  eyes  with  feeling  as  if  they  were  spasmodically
rotated.

Stitching  pain  in  eyes ;  pressure  on  balls.

After  an  epidemic  of  the  rye  disease  an  unusually  large
number  of  cataracts  occurred  in  young  people,  twenty-
three  of  whom  gradually  became  blind  (fifteen  men  and
eight  women),  associated  with  headache,  vertigo  and
roaring  in  ears ;  of  the  cataracts  two  were  hard,  twelve
soft,  and  nine  mixed.

iCataracta  senilis.

I  I  Suppuration  of  cornea ;  <  from  warm  applications.

I  I  Retinitis  diabetica.

Dilatation  of  pupils.

Suppressed  secretion  of  tears.

Injection  of  conjunctiva.

Eyes  sunken,  surrounded  by  a  blue  margin.

Paralysis  of  upper  lids,  from  coal  gas.

Immovable  state  of  eyelids  after  facial  erysipelas.

Eyes  look  fixed,  wild,  glazed ;  staring  look.

I  I  Pustulous  conjunctivitis  and  blepharitis.

I  I  Exophthalmos  with  struma.
•  Exophthalmic  goitre.
"  Hearing  and  Ears. Undue  sensitiveness  of  hearing,  even
slightest  sound  re-echoed  in  her  head  and  made  her
shudder.

Confused  hearing ;  deafness. ^After  chorea.

Singing  in  ears  and  difficult  hearing.

Humming  and  roaring  in  ears,  with  occasional  deafness.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing.

Nose  feels  stopped  up,  yet  water}'^  discharge  runs  from  it.

I  I  Nose  stopped  up  on  1.  side  as  with  a  solid  plug.

I I  Nosebleed:  blood  dark,  runs  continuously,  with  great
prostration,  small,  threadlike  pulse;  in  old  people  or
drunkards  ;  of  young  women  ;  from  debility.

^  Upper  Face.  Face:  pinched,  pale,  earthy-looking ;  sunken,
hippocratic,  ashy  ;  swollen  ;  contracted,  discolored,  with
sunken  eyes,  blue  rings  around  eyes ;  risus  sardonicus ;
distorted ;  wan,  anxious.

Tingling  in  face.

Muscular  twitchings  usually  commence  in  face  and  then
spread  all  over  body,  sometimes  increasing  to  dancing
and  jumping.

Spasmodic  distortion  of  mouth  and  lips.

Forehead  hot.


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  250

^  Lower  Face. Lockjaw.

Lips  deathly  pale  or  bluish.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Looseness  of  teeth.

Grill  ding  of  teeth.

Bleeding  from  gums.

I  I  Difficult  dentition  ;  great  weakness;  vomiting  of  every-
thing taken  ;  great  thirst ;  pale  face;  eyes  dim,  sunken;
dry  heat,  with  rapid  pulse;  restlessness  and  sleeplessness.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue.  Tongue :  thickly  coated  with  yellowish-
white,  dry,  tenacious  substance;  discolored,  brown  or
blackish  ;  deathly  pale ;  cold  and  livid  ;  clean,  with
dry,  red  tip ;  red  tip  and  edges,  centre  coated.

Slight  but  unpleasant  warmth  on  tongue,  during  day.

Spasm  of  tongue,  projecting  it  from  mouth,  forcing  it
between  teeth  and  rendering  speech  indistinct.

Feeble,  stuttering,  indistinct speech,  as  if  tongue were
paralyzed.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Bloody  or  yellowish  green  foam  at  mouth.

Increased  secretion  of  saliva;  ptyalism.

Much  acid  fluid  in  mouth.

Spitting  of  blood.

Fetid  breath.

Speech  difficult,  slow  and  weak,  with  a  feeling  at  every
motion  as  if  there  were  some  resistance  to  be  overcome.

Dryness  of  mouth.
13  Throat. Dryness  of  soft  palate,  throat  and  oesophagus,  with
thirst.

Burning  in  throat  with  violent  thirst.

Painful  tingling  in  throat  and  on  tongue.

I  i  Throat  sore  on  1.  side  running  up  into  ear.

I  Follicular  pharyngitis;  hawking  up  of  little  follicular
exudates.

■  Diphtheria:  loss  of  strength ;  rapid  loss  of  sensibility ;
numbness  of  extremities ;  painful  tingling  and  crawling
on  tongue;  dry  gangrene;  apathy;  dilated  pupils;
burning  pains  of  affected  parts ;  stammering  speech ;
absence  of  all  reaction.

I  I  Severely  paralyzed  both  in  swallowing  and  speaking ;
could  scarcely  take  food  without  great  danger  of  choking ;
speech  reduced  to  a  whisper ;  could  not  bear  heat  or
covering  and  would  throw  all  covering  off.  ^Post-
diphtheritic paralysis.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  Ravenous,  insatiable
appetite,  even  when  dying  from  exhausting  discharges
from  bowels.

Hunger  as  from  long  fasting.

Disgust  for  food,  especially  for  meat  and  fatty  things.

Thirst:  during  all  stages  of  fever;  unquenchable;  for
acids.


251  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

Great  thirst  and  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat,  with
burning  and  tingling  of  tongue.

Desire  for :  sour  things ;  lemonade.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructations
with  disagreeable  taste ;  sour,  tasteless,  but  with  subjec-
tive, disagreeable,  empyreumatic  odor ;  empty.

Nausea :  inclination  to  vomit;  painful  retchings ;  constant,
<  after  eating.

Excessive  nausea  and  debility,  with  very  little  vomiting
of  a  dark  brown  coffee-grounds  fluid.

Vomiting:  of  food  ;  of  bile;  of  mucus;  of  green,  offensive,
watery  fluid,  painless  and  without  effort,  with  great
weakness;  immediately  after  eating;  of  lumbrici ;  of
blood ;  black  vomit.

I  Hgematemesis,  patient  lies  still ; great  weakness  but  no
pain ;  abdomen  soft.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i Tenderness  of  epigastrium.

Anxiety  and  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  great  sensi-
tiveness to  touch.

■Severe  anxiety  and  burning  at  pit  of  stomach.

Pain  in  pit  of  stomach.

Violent  pressure  in  stomach,  as  from  a  heavy  weight.

Warmth  and  feeling  of  repletion.

Burning  in  stomach.

Painful  constriction  of  epigastrium.

Great  distress  and  oppression  of  stomach,

I  I  Bilious  vomiting,  with  cramping  pains  in  stomach;
burning  in  stomach  extending  up  oesophagus;  head
sunk  upon  breast,  face  pale,  yellowish,  voice  weak,  pulse
small, /^Cardialgia,

I  I  Attacks  of  severe  pressure  and  constriction  in  region
of  stomach  extending  through  to  spine,  extremely
painful  and  followed  in  half  an  hour  by  vomiting  of
tasteless  fluid  or  of  contents  of  stomach,  thereupon  an
intermission  of  several  hours  occurred ;  during  attack
region  of  stomach  felt  as  if  contracted,  and  on  percussion
gave  a  tympanitic  note;  has  three  to  four  attacks  daily.

■  Hemorrhage  from  stomach  ;  lies  still  with  great  weakness
but  no  pain;  face,  lips,  tongue  and  hands  deadly  pale;
skin  covered  with  cold  sweat,  pulse  frequent,  threadlike;
oppression;  abdomen  soft,  without  pain.  ^Haematemesis.

I  I  Hsematemesis ;  attacks  preceded  by  pains  in  epigastrium
and  nausea,  pain  going  to  1.  side  when  pressure  is  made
in  epigastrium ;  marked  protrusion  in  1.  hypochondrium,
with  pain  ;  blood  red,  never  containing  particles  of  food,
and  when  collected  in  a  basin  appears  more  like  bloody
serum  than  pure  blood  and  is  of  offensive  odor,  quantity
vomited  not  very  large ; frequent  chilliness  at  night,


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  252

followed  by  profuse  sweat ;  strength  not  much  impaired ;
appetite  and  sleep  good.
^^  Hypochondria. Enlargement  of  liver.

Acute  pain  in  hepatic  region.

Inflammation  and  gangrene  of  liver;  acute  pains  in
hepatic  region ;  tongue  thickly  coated  with  a  brown
tenacious  substance,  burning  in  throat,  unquenchable
thirst ;  great  weakness,  but  no  pain ;  limbs  cold  and
covered  with  cold  sweat.

Burning  in  spleen;  thrombosis  of  abdominal  vessels.
^^  Abdomen. Distension  of  abdomen ;  tympanitis;  meteorism.

Flatulence  with  rumbling.

Painful  sensitiveness  and  rumbling,  with  continued  nau-
sea and  confusion  of  head.

Inclination  to  colic,  diarrhoea,  and  bloatedness  of  abdomen.

Pain  in  lower  belly,  preventing  an  upright  position,  even
forcing  him  to  lie  doubled  up  in  bed.

Colic  with  convulsions.

I  Pain  in  abdomen  with  burning  in  stomach.

I  Pains  in  hypogastric  region.

Pain  in  loins  as  from  false  labor  pains.

Continual  bearing  down  in  lower  abdomen.

Burning  in  abdomen.

Cold  feeling  in  abdomen  and  back.

Srong  pulsation  in  umbilical  region.

Lumps  and  welts  in  abdomen ;  in  affections  of  uterus.

I  I  Aneurism  of  mesenteric  artery,  in  women.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum.  1 1  Diarrhoea  :  very  exhausting ;  perni-
cious ;  very  offensive ;  involuntary,  profuse,  watery,
putrid,  brown;  discharged  with  great  force;  very  ex-
hausting ;  urine  suppressed ;  painful  with  great  pros-
tration ;  painless  with  tingling  and  numbness  in  limbs;
putrid,  fetid,  colliquative,  patient  does  not  want  to  be  cov-
ered or  to  be  near  the  heat,  but  prefers  to  be  in  the  air  or
wishes  to  be  fanned;  sudden  attacks;  of  children,  dis-
charges whitish,  watery;  chronic  in  overfed  children,
great  prostration;  during  August;  great  stools  undi-
gested, or  watery,  at  times  yellowish,  also  greenish,
with  forcible  expulsion,  accompanied  by  dischare  of
flatus ;  paralytic  weakness  of  sphincter  ani  with  invol-
untary discharges.

Stools :  yellowish  ;  greenish  ;  brownish  ;  watery  and  floc-
culent;  colorless,  watery;  profuse;  frequent;  putrid;
gushing;  involuntary;  watery,  slimy;  thin,  olive  green;
offensive,  watery;  fetid,  dark  colored;  thin,  involun-
tary; watery,  yellowish  or  greenish,  discharged  rapidly
with  great  force  and  even  involuntarily;  painless,  with-
out effort  and  with  great  weakness.


253  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

Before  stool:  cutting  and  rumbling  in  abdomen.

During  stool :  cutting  ;  great  exhaustion  ;  coldness.

After  stool :  exhaustion.

I  I  Five  to  ten  minutes  after  taking  least  quantity  of  food,
severe  colic  which  made  her  bend  double  and  cry  out;
pain  begins  between  region  of  stomach  and  navel,  ex-
tends thence  to  sides  and  rest  of  abdomen  and  down  to
sacral  region,  accompanied  by  severe  urging  and  tenes-
mus, followed  by  a  thin,  slimy,  yellowish  stool  with
some  relief  of  pain  ;  four  to  five  such  attacks  follow  each
other,  then  relief  until  she  eats  again ;  four  to  five  evac-
uations during  night ;  she  compares  pains  to  labor  pains ;
great  thirst;  thick  mucous  coating  on  tongue;  sleep  dis-
turbed ;  prostration. ^Diarrhoea.

I  I  Uncomfortable  fulness  of  abdomen,  with  transient  pinch-
ing pains  in  upper  abdomen  as  from  flatus ;  at  night
severe  cutting  pains  throughout  whole  abdomen ;  rest-
less anxious  tossing  about,  with  short  unrefreshing  naps;
during  night  anus  firmly  closed,  "as  if  locked  up;"  in
morning  frequent  short  watery  evacuations,  in  gushes,
preceded  by  cutting  pains  in  abdomen.

I  I  Stools  yellowish-white,  slimy,  undigested,  escaping  in-

voluntarily, <  at  break  of  day. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Interminable  diarrhoea  in  Summer,  which  resists  every-

thing, especially  in  scrofulous  children ;  putrid,  fetid
and  colliquative;  choleraic  symptoms,  with  cold,  clammy
perspiration ;  sinking  spells  at  3  a.m.  (not  the  restless
anguish  of  Arsenicum).

I I  Colliquative  diarrhoea.

■  Cholerine  with  more  retching  than  vomiting.

■  Cholera  infantum  ;  profuse  undigested  stools,  watery  and

very  offensive,  discharged  by  fits  and  starts  and  followed
by  intense  prostration  ;  pale  face,  sunken  eyes,  dry  heat,
quick  pulse,  restlessness  and  sleeplessness ;  great  aver-
sion to  heat  and  to  being  covered. ^Cholera  infantum.

I  I  Vertigo,  cramps  or  drawing  in  calves  of  legs,  rumbling
in  abdomen,  nausea,  stools  in  rapid  succession,  brown-
ish or  colorless,  rapid  prostration,  coldness  of  limbs,
tongue  but  slightly  coated.

I  I  Profuse  prostrating  evacuations,  severe  painful  cramps
in  feet,  toes,  hands  and  fingers  which  are  spread  apart
or  extended  toward  back  of  hands ;  cramping  pressure
in  stomach  ;  dry,  wrinkled,  cold  skin ;  cyanotic  color
^Cholera.

■  Cholera  infantum  ;  cholera  morbus ;  cholera  Asiatica.

I  I  Patient  cold,  almost  pulseless,  with  spasmodic  twitching
of  muscles  in  various  parts  of  body ;  spreads  fingers
asunder; eyes  sunken,  features  pinched; much  spas-


SEC  ALE  CORNUTUM.  254

modic  retching  although  not  much  vomiting;  skin
harsh,  shrivelled,  dry,  as  if  there  were  no  moisture  left  in
system ;  urine  suppressed ;  tingling  or  formication  all  over
body;  stools  profuse,  watery,  ejected  with  great  violence;
is  cold  but  cannot  bear  to  be  covered.  ^Cholera.
1 1  Aversion  to  heat  or  being  covered,  with  icy  coldness  of
extremities. ^Cholera.

■  Diarrhoea  after  cholera.

I  Cholera  Asiatica,  with  collapse,  sunken,  distorted  face,

particularly  mouth  ;  crawling  sensation  as  from  ants.
Paralysis  of  rectum  ;  anus  wide  open.

■  Hemorrhage  from  bowels.

■  Constipation.

^'  Urinary  Organs.  Retention  of  urine ;  urine  pale  or  bloody;
discharge  of  thick  black  blood  from  kidneys;  obscura-
tion of  sight.  ^Scarlatina.
Diabetes;  great  general  lassitude;  heaviness  of  limbs;
loss  of  strength ;  emaciation  ;  gangrene ;  skin  dry  and
withered;  furuncles;  petechise  ;  fever,  with  unquench-
able thirst;  diminished  power  of  senses;  dryness  of
mouth ;  morbidly  great  appetite ;  cardialgia ;  costive-
ness;  diarrhoea;  watery  urine;  increased  quantity  of
urine.
I  I  Hsematuria  in  a  boy  suffering  from  suppuration  of  glands
of  neck  after  scarlet  fever;  urine  also  very  albuminous;
anasarca;  great  thirst.

■  Passive  hemorrhage ;  blood  thin  ;  blood  corpuscles  want-

ing in  consequence  of  dissolution ;  or  painless  discharge
of  thick  black  blood  in  consequence  of  kidney  disease ;
coldness  of  body;  cold  perspiration  on  forehead;  great
weakness. ^Hsematuria.

Urine  suppressed  ;  on  introducing  catheter  a  gill  of  dark,
prune-colored  urine  passed,  which  appeared  to  be  full
of  gritty  sediment  emitting  a  very  disagreeable  odor.

Unsuccessful  urging  to  urinate.

Ischuria  paralytica.

■  Paralysis  of  bladder.

■  Enuresis:  of  old  people;  pale,  watery  or  bloody  urine.
Urinary  deposit  looking  like  white  cheese.

■  Bloody,  albuminous  urine.

■  Discharge  of  thick  black  blood  from  bladder; kidney

affections.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. After  lightn'ess  in  occiput,  violent
dragging  in  spermatic  cord  causing  sensation  as  if  tes-
ticle were  being  drawn  up  to  inguinal  ring.
After  sexual  excess  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Weak  memory  after  exhausting  coition;  impotence.
Clonic  spasmodic  stricture  of  urethra.


255  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

^*  Female  Sexual  Organs. Uterus  and  r.  ovary  much  con-
gested, very  sensitive  to  touch.

I  I  Pain  in  ovaries  and  uterus.

I I  Pains  of  an  expulsive  character  in  uterus.

1 1  Prolonged bearing  down  and  forcing  pain  in  uterus  ;

thin  and  scrawny  subjects.
Burning  pains  in  greatly  distended  uterus,  which  felt  hard

and  was  painful  to  touch.

I  I  Putrescence  of  uterus ; abdomen  '  distended,  not  very

painful ;  discharge  from  vagina,  brownish,  offensive ;
ulcers  on  external  genitals  discolored  and  rapidly
spreading;  burning  hot  fever,  interrupted  by  shaking
chills;  small,  sometimes  intermittent  pulse;  great  an-
guish, pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  vomiting  decomposed
matter;  offensive  diarrhoea;  suppressed  secretion  of
urine ;  skin  covered  with  petechial  and  miliary  erup-
tions or  shows  discolored,  inflamed  places,  with  a  ten-
dency to  mortification ;  the  patient  lies  either  in  quiet
delirium  or  grows  wild  with  great  anxiety  and  a  con-
stant desire  to  get  out  of  bed. ^Metritis.

I I  Metritis;  tendency  to  putrescence;  inflammation  caused
by  suppression  of  lochia  or  menses;  discharge  of  thin
black  blood,  a  kind  of  sanies,  with  tingling  in  legs  and
great  debility. ^Metritis.

I  Cancer  and  gangrene  of  uterus.

I  Uterine  ulcers  feel  as  if  burnt,  discharge  putrid,  bloody
fluid.

The  uterus  that  had  previously  been  in  a  normal  condi-
tion descended  so  that  it  almost  protruded,  was  hot  and
painful ;  os  open  as  large  as  middle  finger ;  excessive
desire  to  urinate;  labor  pains  only  relieved  by  wet  band-
ages or  pressure  upon  abdomen ;  lasted  three  days,  did
not  miscarry  though  os  remained  open  during  this
period;  afterward  uterus  gradually  ascended,  pains
diminished,  and  after  five  or  six  days  os  contracted ;
went  on  to  eighth  month,  when  she  miscarried.

I  1  Uterus  about  an  inch  from  labia  inferiora,  membrane
around  it  felt  hard,  while  rest  of  mucous  membrane  of
vagina  was  very  much  relaxed  and  gathered  into  a  fold
at  lower  part,

I  Partial  prolapsus  of  uterus  for  eight  months  after  a  for-
ceps delivery  ;  dysuria ,  sense  of  weight  over  pubes  as  if
contents  of  abdomen  would  fall  forward.
I  Prolapsus  of  three  months'  standing;  frequent  severe
cutting  pains  in  abdomen  ;  occasional  nausea.
I  Dreadful  bearing  down,  dragging  out  feeling  in  lower
abdomen,  so  that  her  life  is  almost  unbearable;  every
four  or  five  days  profuse,  thick,  yellow  discharge  from


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  256

vagina;  hesitation  in  urinating;  rheumatism.  ^Hys-
teralgia.

Hemorrhage  from  uterus ;  apparent  death  of  newborn
child.

I  Incessant  metrorrhagia.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage:  when  uterus  is  engorged;  with
pains  in  sacrum,  extending  down  thighs  and  pressing
into  lower  abdomen  ;  after  a  severe  blow  upon  abdomen
of  a  pregnant  woman;  profuse  protracted  flow;  tearing,
cutting  colic,  cold  extremities  and  cold  sweat,  weak,
hemorrhage  <  from  slightest  motion,  blood  thin  and
black,  black  lumpy  or  brown  fluid,  of  disgusting  smell;
black  liquid  blood.

I  I A  woman,  set.  45,  passed  through  a  normal  confinement
seven  years  ago ;  miscarried  about  two  years  ago,  hem-
orrhage kept  on  for  five  months  under  allopathic  treat-
ment, with  exacerbation  during  time  of  menstruation ;
after  ceasing  for  seven  months,  hemorrhage  set  in  again
with  slight  intermissions  of  one  or  two  weeks;  excessive
ansemia ;  sunken  features ;  skin  cold  and  dry ;  pulse
small  and  quick ;  heavily  coated  tongue ;  loss  of  appe-
tite; headache;  since  five  days,  daily  ten  or  twelve  pain-
less stools,  of  mucous,  watery,  sometimes  foul-smelling
masses ;  thin,  black,  foul-smelling  bloody  discharges.

1  I  Feeble  and  extremely  emaciated,  skin  flaccid,  face  very
pale  and  sunken,  with  an  expression  of  suff'ering,  mucous
membranes  pale  and  cool,  hands  and  feet  deficient  of
natural  warmth,  action  of  heart  quickened,  breathing
short  and  oppressed,  pulse  very  small,  120;  abdomen
distended ;  os  uteri  very  open,  with  indented  and  puffy
edges,  flaccid  and  soft,  vagina  tender  and  cool ;  manual
examination  caused  much  uneasiness  and  flooding ;  vio-
lent headache  limited  to  one  spot,  throbbing  in  temples,
roaring  in  ears,  giddiness  on  slightest  movement ;  en-
feebled nervous  system  showed  extraordinary  excita-
bility; many  times  in  day,  and  especially  at  night,
cramps  in  calves  and  spasmodic  twitchings  of  limbs,
causing  exhaustion,  remains  several  hours  in  bed  as  if
paralyzed ;  digestion  and  sleep  disturbed  to  some  extent;
hemorrhage  still  continued,  even  in  horizontal  position,
and  elevation  of  pelvis  caused  no  diminution  in  large
quantity  of  blackened  coagula  which  were  constantly
passing,  whilst  least  movement  increased  discharge  in
a  very  great  degree. ^Chronic  passive  hemorrhage.

I  Uterine  hemorrhage,  flow  passive,  dark  and  may  be  offen-
sive; tingling  or  formication  all  over  body,  holds  her
fingers  spread  asunder,  asks  to  have  her  limbs  rub-
bed;  finally  lies  unconscious  and  cold.


257  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

I  I  Metrorrhagia;  relaxed  condition  of  body;  depressed,
anxious  state  of  mind  ;  unusual  drowsiness  by  day;  gush
of  thin  black  blood  on  least  movement  of  body  ;  general
feeling  of  prostration  ;  diminished  temperature  of  body;
wooden,  numb  feeling  in  lower  extremities.

Uterine  hemorrhage;  did  not  wish  to  be  covered,  desired
windows  to  be  open,  though  room  was  very  cold  and
surface  of  body  like  a  corpse.

■  Painless  flooding  in  feeble,  cachectic,  dyscratic  women,

or  such  as  have  long  resided  in  tropical  climates.

I  I  Since  last  delivery  menses  too  seldom  and  very  irregu-
lar, last  time  rather  copious  in  consequence  of  unusual
exertion  ;  at  night  dreamed  she  was  ascending  the  stairs
with  a  heavy  load,  and  suddenly  a  clot  of  blood  came
away  and  the  blood  seemed  to  gush  forth  ;  the  alarm
awakened  her  and  she  found  that  she  was  bleeding  fast ;
on  following  morning  strength  greatly  reduced ;  lips
and  whole  body,  even  tongue,  deathl}^  pale ;  pulse  could
not  be  distinguished ;  frequent  fainting  fits ;  periodic
pains  with  expulsion  of  clots  of  blood  and  between  these
attacks  constant  oozing  of  thin  briglit  blood.  ^Menor-
rhagia.

I  I  An  excessive  menstrual  flow  every  two  weeks,  lasting
seven  to  nine  days ;  for  last  four  weeks  flow  is  continu-
ous; very  weak  and  thin  ;  has  severe  pains  in  loins  and
uterine  region  ;  bearing  down  pains  as  if  in  labor.

I  Menses:  too  profuse  and  lasting  too  long;  with  tearing
and  cutting  colic,  cold  extremities,  cold  sweat,  great
weakness  and  small  pulse ;  or  with  violent  spasms.

■  Menstrual  blood :  thin  and  black  ;  black,  lumpy  or  brown

fluid  and  of  disgusting  smell.
I  I  Menstrual  colic ;  pains  so  severe  as  to  frequently  cause

spasms ;  uterine  region  very  sensitive  to  touch ;  high

fever ;  pains  >  when  flow  appears.
I  I  Menstrual colic; pale face; coldness of  limbs; cold.

sweat;  small,  suppressed  pulse;  tearing,  cutting  pains

in  abdomen.

■  ■Menses  irregular;  every  four  weeks  for  three  to  four

days,  copious  dark-red  fluid  discharge  of  blood,  with
pressing,  laborlike  pains  in  abdomen ;  constipation ;
pressure  in  occiput;  afterward  continuous  discharge  of
watery  blood,  until  next  period.

Suppression  of  menses  with  pain.

I  I  Gangrene  of  whole  vaginal  mucous  membrane;  on  hold-
ing apart  the  labise  this  membrane  was  found  of  a  dark
slate  color,  emitting  the  characteristic  odor.

Vagina  hot  or  cool.

■  Discharge  from  vagina  almost  black,  fluid  and  very  fetid.

VOL.  IX. — 17.


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  258

I  Leucorrhoea :  in  thin,  scrawn}^  women,  with  prolapsus
uteri;  green,  brown,  offensive ;  like  cream,  from  weak-
ness and  venous  congestion.

Ulcers  on  outer  genitals,  discolored  and  rapidl}^  spreading.
^'  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  Arrested  develop-
ment of  foetus.

Discharge  of  blood  during  pregnancy.

1  Threatened  abortion :  more  especially  at  third  month;
with  copious  flow  of  black,  liquid  blood ;  false  labor
pains,  with  bloody  discharge ;  in  feeble,  cachectic  women,
having  a  wan,  anxious  countenance,  pulse  almost  ex-
tinct, fear  of  death  ;  convulsive  movements.

i  I  Extremely  violent  pains,  almost  without  intermission,
she  seemed  to  be  in  the  last  stage  of  labor,  but  on  ex-
amination OS  was  found  about  the  size  of  half  a  dollar,
thick  and  somewhat  rigid.

i  I  Extremely  violent  pressing  labor  pains,  os,  however,
being  only  about  as  large  as  a  ten  cent  piece ;  hysteri-
cal convulsions.

i  I  When  advanced  about  seven  and  a  half  months  in  preg-
nancy was  taken  with  labor  pains,  wriggling  and  not  dis-
tinctly intermitting;  os  tincse  open,  and  about  size  of  a
shilling;  dulnessand  slight  aching  of  head  ;  despondent.

M Prone  to  abortion  in  third  month;  had  passed  through
five  although  she  kept  her  bed  as  soon  as  pregnant ;
some  labor  pains  with  bloody  discharge;  was  able  to
attend  to  her  household  duties  and  went  to  full  term.

i  I  After  lifting  a  heavy  weight  during  sixth  month  of  preg-
nancy severe  pains  in  stomach,  abdomen  and  small  of
back  and  a  pushing-down  sensation;  violent  movements
of  foetus ;  cold  feet ;  numbness  and  tingling  in  feet ;
small,  weak  pulse.

I  After  abortus :  difficult  contraction  of  uterus ;  thin,  black,
foul-smelling  discharge,

I  Retained  placenta,  after  miscarriage,  especially  when  oc-
curring during  early  months  of  pregnancy ;  offensive  dis-
charges ;  patient  cold  and  often  almost  pulseless  from  loss
of  blood;  uterine  contractions  very  imperfect,  or  else
prolonged  tonic  contraction.

I  1  During  eighth  month  of  pregnancy  violent  convulsions

with  frothing  at  mouth,  etc.,  followed  by  variable  spasms ;
insensibility  and  clonic  spasms,  <  at  every  pain;  on
return  of  consciousness  complained  of  dull  frontal  and
occipital  headache  and  incessant  uterine  pains.  ^Pre-
mature labor.

I I  During  pregnaucy:  frequent  and  prolonged  forcing
pains,  particularly  in  thin,  ill-conditioned  women ;
cramps  in  calv«s.  ;


259  SEGALE  CORNUTUM.

I  Uterine  pains  prolonged  but  ineffectual.

I A  sensation  of  constant  tonic  pressure  in  uterine  region  ;

causes  great  distress ;  desires  fresh  air;  does  not  like  to

be  covered,

I  Hour-glass  contraction.

I I  During  labor:  prolonged  bearing-down  and  forcing
pains  in  uterus ;  pains  irregular ;  pains  too  weak  ;  pains
feeble,  or  ceasing;  everything  seems  loose  and  open,  no
action  ;  fainting  fits.

■  Strength  of  uterus  weakened  b}^  too  early  or  perverted

efforts.

■  Thin,  scrawny  women,  skin  shrivelled,  dry  and  harsh,

sallow  face,  weak  in  labor ;  pains  seem  to  be  entirely
wanting;  uterus  flabby  ;  bearing  down  in  sacral  region,
a  sort  of  prolonged  urging  feeling  in  abdomen.
I  I  While  the  head  was  passing  into  lower  strait,  she  was
suddenly  seized  with  violent  convulsions  lasting  about
three  to  four  minutes,  followed  by  a  stupid  state  with
stertorous  breathing  and  uneasy  moaning  as  if  from
pain.

I  Labor  ceases,  and  twitchings  or  convulsions  begin.

■  Puerperal  convulsions  with  opisthotonos.

•  Retained  placenta,  with  constant,  strongbearing  down  in
abdomen,  or  with  relaxed  feeling  of  parts.

J  I  After  labor,  pale,  weak;  uterus  distended,  burning  pains
therein,  hard,  painful  to  least  touch  ;  discharge  of  black,
coagulated  or  brown,  water}^,  offensive-smelling  blood  ;
throbbing,  tearing  pains  in  thighs  extending  down  to
toes;  pain  <  from  motion;  strong  pulsations  in  umbili-
cal region,  w^hich  could  be  felt  by  the  hand  ;  pulse  at
wrist  weak  and  rapid  ;  frequent  yawning.

i  I  Post-partum  hemorrhage,  with  relaxation  of  uterus,  only
temporarily  relieved  by  compression  ;  after-pains  exces-
sive, <  when  child  nursed.

I I  After-pains:  too  long  and  too  painful.

J  I  Violent  after-pains  with  hemorrhage  arising  from  irregu-
lar contractions ;  the  longitudinal  fibres  alone  contract-
ing in  such  a  manner  as  to  leave  a  sulcus  in  middle,
making  it  appear  as  if  uterus  were  split  open  from  top
to  bottom.

I  I  Cessation  of  lochia,  with  fever;  inflammation  of  uterus,
subsequently  an  abscess  opened  through  vagina.

i  I  Lochia:  dark,  very  offensive  ;  scan  tj'^  or  profuse;  pain-
less or  accompanied  by  prolonged  bearing-down  pain;
suppressed,  followed  by  metritis ;  suddenly  change  char-
acter and  become  of  a  dirty-  brown  or  chocolate  color,
with  fetid  odor,  grows  sad  and  melancholy  and  fears
death;  of  too  long  duration.


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  260

I  Fever  with  frequent  watery  stools. ^Puerperal  fever.

■Strong  tendency  to  putrescence ;  discharge  of  sanious
blood,  with  tingling  in  legs  and  great  prostration  ;  urine
suppressed ;  offensive  diarrhoea ;  voice  hollow  with  dif-
ficult breathing,  feeble  and  inaudible ;  burning  fever
interrupted  by  shaking  chills,  does  not  care  to  be  cov-
ered ;  cold  limbs ;  cold  sweat  over  whole  body ;  gan-
grene. ^Puerperal  fever.

■  Suppression  of  milk;  the  milk  will not  flow  from  the

breast.

■  Lack  of  milk  with  much  stinging  in  mammae.

■  In  women  who  are  much  exhausted  from  venous  hemor-

rhage ; thin, scrawny women  ; the breasts do not
properly  fill with  milk.
Thin,  scrawny  children  with  shrivelled  skin ;  spasmodic

twitchings,  sudden  cries,  feverishness. /^Cyanosis.
Pendulous  abdomen.
^* Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Voice:
hollow,  hoarse,  with  difficult  breathing ;  feeble  and  in-
audible ;  weak,  unintelligible,  stammering.
Thickening  of  mucous  membrane  of  air  passages.
^^Respiration. Respiration:  slow;  labored  and  anxious;  op-
pressed; moaning;  constant  sighing  ;  hiccough.
Blood  is  sometimes  expectorated  during  violent  efforts  to
breathe.
^^  Cough. Hard,  hoarse  cough,  with  but  little  expectoration.
I  I  Concussive  cough ;  profuse  perspiration ;  sleepless  nights ;
inclination  to  colic ;  diarrhoea ;  bloatedness  of  abdomen ;
emphysema. ^Bronchitis.
■Spitting  of  blood,  with  or  without  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Cramp  in  chest.

Pains  over  nearly  whole  front  part  of  chest,  <  from  cough-
ing and  motion.
I  I  Expectoration  of  dark,  frothy,  rather  viscid  blood,
brought  up  by  a  slight  cough  and  amounting  to  a  tea-
cupful  in  four  hours ;  a  spot  as  large  as  a  crown  piece
on  r.  side  of  chest  to  r.  of  nipple,  dull  on  percussion,
with  bronchial  respiration  and  mucous  nMe  over  that
part.
'^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  '  i  Palpitation  ;  hot  fore-
head; inclination  to  sleep  ;  spasmodic  shocks  from  r.  half
of  chest  into  r.  arm  and  leg ;  in  paroxysms  every  two  or
three  hours ;  oftener  in  night,  after  each  meal ;  less  in
open  air ;  coldness  and  numbness  of  r.  hand,  with  tin-
gling in  fourth  and  fifth  fingers ;  loss  of  muscular  power
and  feeling  in  hand  ;  after  sexual  excess.

■  Palpitation of  heart: with contracted and frequently

intermitting  pulse.


261  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

I  Pulse : often  unchanged  even  during  violent attacks ;

generall}^  slow  and  contracted,  at  times  intermittent  or

suppressed ;  somewhat  accelerated  during  heat,  small ;

empty,  weak  ;  threadlike,  in  hemorrhages.

^'  Neck  and  Back. Tumors  on  neck  discharging  yellow  pus.

Gentle,  creeping  sensation  in  back,  as  if  a  soft  air  were
blowmg  through  it.

Tingling  in  back,  extending  to  fingers  and  toes.

Pain  in  small  of  back.

Stitch  in  back.

iSudden  "catch"  or  "kink"  in  back. ^Lumbago.

Pains  in  sacrum  with  bearing  down  as  if  parts  would  be
forced  out,  <  when  moving.

i  I  Hard,  hoarse  cough,  with  but  little  expectoration;  pains
nearly  all  over  front  part  of  chest,  <  from  coughing  and
motion ;  for  several  years  tenderness  of  lower  cervical
and  upper  dorsal  spinous  processes,  with  stiffness  of
neck;  <  from  every  exertion  or  strain  upon  spine;
pressure  upon  diseased  portion  of  spine  produces  pain
there,  as  well  as  all  through  chest,  with  irritation  to
cough. /^Spinal  irritation.

(  I  Stitches  in  upper  dorsal  vertebrae  (between  shoulders),
constant  when  sitting,  intermittent  when  standing,  at
times  extending  into  hands,  <  by  pressure  upon  verte-
brae ;  frequent  formication  through  all  limbs ;  at  times
rigidity  and  spasmodic  stretching  of  fingers  so  that  for
several  minutes  he  cannot  sew ;  frequent  pressure  and
swelling  beneath  epigastrium;  pain  in  back  <  when
sewing.

Violent  pain  in  back,  especially  in  sacral  region ;  anaes-
thesia and  paralysis  of  limbs,  convulsive  jerks  and  shocks
in  paralyzed  limbs ;  painful  contraction  of  flexor  mus-
cles ;  paralysis  of  bladder  and  rectum. ^Myelitis.

■  Myelitis  diffusa.

Paraplegia  preceded  by  cramps  and  muscular  pains.

Difficult,  staggering  gait;  complete  inability  to  walk,  not
for  want  of  power  but  on  account  of  a  peculiar  unfitness
to  perform  light  movements  with  limbs  and  hands ;  con-
tractions of  lower  limbs  on  account  of  which  patient
staggers;  trembling  of  limbs,  sometimes  attended  with
pains ; formication  of  hands  and  feet ;  excessive  sensa-
tion of  heat,  with  aversion  to  heat  or  being  covered.
^Tabes  dorsalis.
Spine  disease  with  gressus  vaccinus.
^'  Upper  Limbs. Arms  fall  asleep.
Rough  rash  all  over  arm.

Spasmodic  jerks  of  hand,  with  flexion  of  hand  at  wrist  or
of  forearm.


SEC  ALE  CORNUTUM.  262

I  Numbness  and  insensibility  of  hands  and  arms.  ^Spinal
affection.

Burning  in  hands.

Hands  deathly  pale.

Coldness  and  numbness  of  r.  hand,  with  tingling  of  ring
and  little  fingers.
. Loss  of  feeling  in  backs  of  fingers.

Loss  of  muscular  power  and  of  feeling  in  hand.

Fingers  convulsively  drawn  in  toward  palm,  clasping
thumb.

I  Contraction  of  fingers.

Fingers  bent  backward  or  spasmodically  abducted.

I  I  Left  thumb  spasmodically  drawn  toward  dorsum  of
hand,  followed  in  a  few  minutes  b}^  cramping  and  flex-
ure of  rest  of  fingers  toward  palmar  surface ;  hands  feel
numb,  like  velvet ;  next  day  both  hands  became  affected
and  after  several  days  felt  a  tingling  and  stitches  in  legs,
followed  by  heaviness  of  same,  >  after  walking,  gen-
erally appearing  while  sitting,  while  cramps  in  hands
always  appear  after  using  them.

Loss  of  sensation  in  tips  of  fingers.

Numbness  of  tips  of  fingers.  .

Crawling  in  tips  of  fingers  as  if  something  alive  were  creep-
ing under  skin  or  as  if  fingers  were  asleep,  as  from  press-
ure upon  arm.

Peculiar  prickling  feeling  in  tips  of  fingers ;  they  are  sen-
sitive to  cold.

Painful  swelling  of  fingers.

Violent  pains  in  finger  tips.

■  Gangrene  of  fingers;  senile  gangrene.

^' Lower  Limbs. Hammering,  tearing  pain  in  both  thighs

increased  by  motion..
Legs  heavy  and  tired.
Tingling  in  legs.
Creeping  feeling  in  anterior  femoral  and  posterior  tibial

regions.
Shufiiing  gait  as  if  feet  were  dragged  along.  ^

Rheumatic  pains  of  joints.
iCramps  in  calves  of  legs  and  soles  of  feet,  disturbing  sleep

at  night  and  hindering  walking  in  pregnant  women.

I  I  After  an  attack  of  cholera  cramps  in  calves  and  sensa-

tion of  numbness  and  formication  in  toes.

I I  Cramp  in  calves.
I  Burning  in  feet.

■  The  feet  seem  asleej)  and  stiff.

I  I  Toes  of  r.  foot  spasmodically  drawn  upward,  continu-
ously during  day  and  occasionally  at  night,  causing  a
peculiar  limping  gait;  this  cramp  was  accompanied  by


263  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

no  pain,  but  by  a  verj^  tiresome  sensation  rendering
walking,  particularly  going  up  and  down  stairs,  very
difficult;  tendons  running  along  dorsum  of  foot  to  toes
were  tense  as  wires  and  the  corresponding  muscles  of
leg  larger  and  harder  than  normal ;  now  and  then
slight  sensation  of  coldness  in  back  and  also  a  peculiar
buzzing  (formication)  in  spine.

Swelling  of  feet  with  black  spots.

I  I  Beginning  senile  gangrene;  swelling  and  livid  coloring
of  r.  foot  extending  to  malleoli ;  foot  cold  ;  severe  inde-
scribable pains.

I  I  Senile  gangrene  commenced  in  great  toe  of  r.  foot  and
slowly  extended ;  foot  was  livid  and  swollen  ;  all  the
symptoms  pointed  to  its  complete  loss.

I  I  Dry  gangrene  of  foot  with  constant  severe,  burning  tear-
ing pains.

Severe  pains  in  sole  of  foot  and  toes ;  black  spot  on  plan-
tar surface  of  heel ;  toes  livid,  blue,  cold  ;  burning  pains;
foot  swollen  ;  walking  impossible. /^Senile  gangrene.

I  I  Profuse,  stinking  and  corrosive  perspiration  of  feet,  soft-

ening and  bleaching  soles  and  destroying  quickly  stock-
ings and  shoes;  existing  two  months  in  a  girl  eighteen
years  old.
Tingling  in  toes.

I I  Gangrene  of  toes.

^*  Limbs  in  General.  Lassitude,  weakness,  heaviness,  trem-
bling of  limbs.

Limbs  cold,  covered  with  cold  sweat.

Formication;  prickling;  tingling;  numbness;  insensibility
of  limbs.

Spasmodic  pains ;  drawing  and  crawling  in  limbs.

Burning  in  hands  and  feet.

I  Fuzzy  feeling  in  limbs.

■  Cramps  in  hands  and  toes.
Painful  jerkings  in  limbs  at  night.

Most  violent  convulsive  movements  of  limbs  occur  .several
•times  a  day ;  during  intervals  fingers  are  numb  and
often  contracted.

Sudden  periodic  contractions  of  limbs,  with  tensive  pain.

Contractions  of  hands,  feet,  fingers  and  toes.

Gangrene  of  limbs,  limbs  suddenly  became  cold,  leaden-
colored  and  lost  all  sensation.

■  Paraplegia.

Internal  pain  greatly  <  by  heat,  whether  of  bed  or  atmo-
sphere ;  somewhat  >  when  exposed  to  a  cooler  atmo-
sphere, though  even  then  it  was  scarcely  tolerable  ;  the
pain  extended  by  degrees  from  toes  to  legs  and  thighs,
and  from  fingers  to  arms  and  shoulders,  gangrene  super-
vened.


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  264

Not  the  slightest  pain  in  gangrenous  limb  when  pricked

or  cut,  though  frequently  motion  is  not  entirely  lost.
Absolute  insensibility  of  tips  of  fingers  and  toes.
1 1  Cold  gangrene  of  limbs.

■  True  anthrax,  rapidly  changing  into  gangrene.
Hands  and  feet  swollen  with  a  gangrenous  black  and  sup-
purating eruption.

Pain  with  some  swelling  without  inflammation,  followed
by  coldness,  blue  color,  cold  gangrene  and  death  of  limb.

The  limbs  become  cold,  pale  and  wrinkled  as  if  they  had
been  a  long  time  in  hot  watet.
^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Must  lie  doubled  up  in  bed :
pain  in  belly.

Sitting :  stitches  in  vertebrae,  constant ;  cannot  bend  for-
ward or  backward  without  losing  his  equilibrium.

Holds  hands  with  fingers  spread  widely  apart.

Standing  :  stitches  in  vertebrae  intermittent.

Inability  to  stand  erect :  vertigo.

Every  exertion  :  tenderness  of  cervical  process  <.

Motion  :  hemorrhage  <  ;  giddiness ;  after  labor,  pains  <  ;
pains  over  chest  <  ;  pains  in  sacrum  <  ;  tearing  in
thighs  <.

Walking:  heaviness  of  legs  >  ;  impossible  from  gangrene.

Every  attempt  to  walk  knees  sink  from  under  him.

Cannot  walk :  giddiness.
^®  Nerves, i  Hypersesthesia  of  cutaneous  nerves,  especially  of
spine.

I  I  Sensation  of  soreness  in  abdomen ;  formation  of  large

lumps  and  swellings  in  abdomen;  r.  hand  very  weak,
particularly  fingers,  so  that  she  could  hold  nothing,  nor
sew  with  that  hand  ;  when  placing  open  hand  to  side
and  taking  it  away  a  spasm  of  hand  occurs,  the  fingers
are  spread  apart  and  she  cannot  close  the  hand ;  rapid
alternations  of  heat  and  cold  in  hands  and  feet ;  cramps
in  legs ;  icy  coldness  of  knees ;  trembling  of  r.  arm  and
hand  while  eating,  must  use  the  left ;  sensation  of  cold-
ness in  stomach,  >  for  a  short  time  by  warm  drinks ;
habitual  constipation. ^Hysteria.

II  Burning:  in  all  parts  of  body  as  if  sparks  of  fire  were
falling  on  them.

■  Neuralgia,  caused  by  pressure  of  distended  veins  upon  a

nerve  trunk.
Spasmodic  twitchings.
Irregular  movements  of  whole  body.
Spasmodic  distortion  of  limbs,  relieved  by  stretching  them

out.
1  I  Expression  of  countenance  varied  every  moment  from

a  constant  play  of  the  muscles;  eyes  rolled  about,  pupils


265  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

dilated,  tongue  jerked  out,  head  moved  about  from  side
to  side;  arms  in  constant  action  with  most  diverse  move-
ments; snatched  objects  rather  than  took  hold  of  them,
could  hold  nothing  securely;  trunk  also  in  constant
motion;  urine  could  not  be  retained;  pulse  small,  weak,
quick  ;  heart  beat  tumultuously ;  appetite  poor  ;  bowels
torpid ;  aching  in  occiput ;  sensation  of  formication  in
extremities;  memory  impaired;  speech  difficult,  hur-
ried ;  no  relief  at  night ;  staggered  about  the  house
almost  all  night. ' ^Chorea.

I  Chorea  associated  with  menstrual  irregularities.

f  I  The  muscular  twitchings  usually  commence  in  face  and
spread  thence  all  over  body,  sometimes  increase  to  danc-
ing and  jumping. ^Chorea.

Spasms,  with  fingers  spread  apart.

Convulsive  jerks  and  starts  in  paralyzed  limbs.

Painful  contractions  in  flexor  muscles.

Tetanic  spasms,  with  full  consciousness,  followed  by  great
exhaustion.

I  I  Convulsions.

Tonic  spasms.

Epileptiform  spasms ;  epilepsy,

I  I  Complains  of  great  weakness,  constipation,  heaviness  in
epigastrium,  formication  in  legs  and  cramps;  at  night
while  asleep  gets  epileptiform  attacks  of  which  she  knows
nothing  next  morning  except  that  she  feels  greatly  pros-
trated and  has  a  constant  heaviness  in  head,

<i  I  After  abortus,  spasms  with  full  consciousness,  afterward
great  exhaustion ;  heaviness  in  head  and  tingling  in
legs.

I  I  Convulsions  first  occurring  after  a  fright  when  a  little
girl,  returned  after  each  confinement.

I  I  Twitching  of  single  muscles;  twisting  of  head  to  and  fro;
contortions  of  hands  and  feet ;  labored  and  anxious  res-
piration. ^Spasms.

i  I  Numbness  of  extremities;  paralysis  of  some  parts ;  pain-
ful tingling  (like  crawling  of, ants)  on  tongue.  ^Post-
diphtheritic paralysis.

■  Paralysis  after  spasm,  and  apoplexy,  with  rapid  emacia-
tion of  affected  parts  and  involuntary  discharges  from
bowels  and  bladder.

<  I  Suddenly  fell  to  ground,  but  without  loss  of  conscious-
ness; on  every  attempt  to  walk  the  knees  would  sink
from  under  him,  especially  r. ;  while  sitting  cannot  bend
forward  or  backward  without  losing  his  equilibrium ;
arms  slightly  weak,  sensation  of  touch  not  affected  ;  gen-
eral dulness;  difficult  speech;  inclination  to  weep; 'com-
plains of  headache  and  pain  in  lumbar  region;  sleep


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  2t)(>

poor;  urine  and  feces  escape  involuntarily;  no  stool  for
several  days;  at  times  oppression  of  breathing.  ^Pa-
ralysis.

I  I  Paralysis  of  lower  extremities,  in  a  woman  past  climac-

teric ;  a  hard,  sensitive  tumor  in  one  of  her  breasts  had
been  developing  for  several  years,  but  for  the  last  year
or  two  had  rapidly  increased  in  size  and  become  very
painful ;  by  continued  application  for  several  months
of  a  yellowish  salve  the  tumor  was  enucleated  ;  in  about
a  month  after  ceasing  to  use  the  salve  a  peculiar  torpor
or  deadness  was  felt  in  great  toes,  which  extended  to
whole  foot  and  ankle  joint;  feet  seemed  large  and  heavy
and  could  be  moved  only  b}^  moving  whole  limb ;  gait
shuffling  as  if  feet  were  dragged  along  by  lifting  legs;
slight  numbness  in  hands.

■  Paralysis,  with  rapid  emaciation,  with  relaxation  of
sphincters.

Mj^elitis  and  softening  of  cord.

Trembling ;  unsteadiness  of  whole  body.

I I  Restlessness;  extreme  debility  and  prostration.
Loss  of  power  of  voluntary  motion.

I  I  Sinking  spells  from  diarrhoea,  at  3  a.m.

I I  Collapse  from  choleroid  diseases,  etc.,  with  cold  skin^
yet  unable  to  bear  warmtli.

'^  Sleep. Frequent  yawning.  ' -

Inclination  to  sleep;  drowsiness;  deep,  heavy  sleep,  stupor.

Sleep  at  night  disturbed  by  frightful  dreams.

Restless  and  sleepless.  < '

^^  Time. At  3  a.m.  :  sinking  spells.

At  break  of  day:  diarrhoea.

In  morning:  frequent  short  evacuations.

During  day:  warmth  on  tongue;  unusual  drowsiness ;  toes
drawn  up  continuously.

During  night :  anus  firmly  closed  ;  cramps  in  calves  and
twitchings  of  limbs  ;  dreamed  she  was  ascending  stairs ;
palpitation  ;  toes  drawn  up  occasionally.

Jerkings  in  limbs ; staggered  about  house  with  chorea ;
ulcers  <.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air :  palpitation  less.

Wants  to  be  in  air  or  be  fanned :  with  diarrhoea.

Warm  applications:  suppuration  of  cornea  <  ;  ulcers  <.

Warm  drinks:  coldness  of  stomach  <.

Does  not  wish  to  be  covered  ;  diarrhoea ;  uterine  hemor-
rhage.

Heat :  could  not  bear  it  and  would  throw  off  all  covering,
in  post-diphtheritic  paralysis  ;  with  diarrhoea,  did  not
wish  to  be  near;  aversion  to,  with  cholera;  internal
pain  much  <  ;  gangrene  <.


267  SECi^LE  CORNUTUM.

Wet  bandages  ;  >  labor  pains.

Cold  :  ulcers  ^  ;  gangrene  > .
***  Fever. Disagreeable  sensation  of  coldness  in  back,  abdo-
men and  limbs.

Skin  cold,  with  shivering.

Coldness  of  surface  of  bod}^  particularly  extremities.

iViolent  chill  of  but  short  duration;  followed  soon  after
b}^  internal  burning  heat,  with  great  thirst.

I  Chill  with  thirst.

I  IViolent  shaking  followed  by  violent  heat,  with  anxiety^

delirium  and  almost  uncjuenchable  thirst.

I I  Intense,  icy  coldness  of  skin,  with  shivering;  pale,  sunken
face.

I  Cold  limbs,  cold  sweats,  great  weakness.
(Jold  stage  preceded  by  vomiting,  succeeded  by  moderate
sweating.

■  Severe  and  long-lasting  dry  heat,  with  great  restlessness

and  violent  thirst.
I  I  Heat  with  thirst  and  hot  skin.

■  Burning  heat,  interrupted  by  shaking  chills,  then  inter-

nal burning  heat,' with  great  thirst.

■  Sweat: all  over  body,  except face; profuse  cold,  cold

limbs ;  from  head  to  pit  of  stomach ;  especially  on  upper
body;  cold,  clammy  over  whole  body ;  colliquative.
I  I  Exhausting  perspiration,  accompanied  by  evening  fever
and  alarming  cough.

■  Cold  surface;  sunken  pale  face  and  blue  lips;  will  not

be  covered  ;  tingling  in  limbs ;  holds  hands  with  fingers
widely  spread  apart;  cold,  clammy  sweat;  speech  feeble,
stuttering. ^Ague.

■  ■Aversion  to  heat  or  to  being  covered  ;  may  feel  cold  but

does  not  wish  to  be  covered.

■  Great  tendency  to  typhoid. ^Intermittent.

"  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Sudden  attacks :  diarrhoea.
Alternation  :  of  heat  and  cold,  in  hands  and  feet.
Five  to  ten  minutes  after  taking  least  quantityof  foo  d

severe  colic.
Every  two  or  three  hours :  paroxysms  of  palpitation.
Several  times  a  day  :  convulsive  movements  of  limbs.
For  several  weeks:  formication  in  tips  of  fingers.
Every  two  weeks  :  excessive  menstrual  flow  ;  lasting  seven

to  nine  days.
For  two  weeks :  profuse  corrosive  foot  sweat.
For  four  weeks :  flow  is  continuous.
During  August :  diarrhoea.
In  Summer:  interminable  diarrhoea.


For  several  years:  tenderness  of  cervical  processes.
"Locality  and  Direction, ivight:  ovary  congested ;


a  spot


SEC  ALE  CORNUTUM.  208

on  side  of  chest  dull  on  percussion  ;  spasmodic  shocks
from  half  of  chest  into  arm  and  leg  ;  coldness  of  hand  ;
toes  drawn  up ;  swelling  and  livid  coloring  of  foot ;  gan-
grene in  great  toe  of  foot ;  hand  very  weak ;  trembling
of  hand  and  arm.

Left :  hemicrania  ;  nose  stopped  up  ;  throat  sore ;  protru-
sion in  hypochondriura ;  thumb  spasmodically  drawn
toward  dorsum  of  hand.
■*^  Sensations.  As  if  intoxicated  while  undressing ;  as  if  eyes
were  spasmodically  rotated  ;  as  of  a  solid  plug  in  nose ;
as  if  tongue  were  paralyzed  ;  as  if  there  were  some  resist-
ance to  overcome  in  speech ;  as  of  a  heavy  weight  in
stomach ;  region  of  stomach  as  if  contracted ;  anus  as
if  locked  up  ;  as  if  testicles  were  being  drawn  up  to  in-
guinal ring  ;  uterus  as  if  burnt ;  as  if  contents  of  uterus
would  fall  forward  ;  as  if  soft  air  were  creeping  through
back  ;  as  if  sacrum  would  be  forced  out;  as  if  something
alive  were  creeping  under  skin ;  as  if  fingers  were  asleep ;
as  if  limbs  had  been  a  long  time  in  hot  water;  as  if
sparks  of  fire  were  falling  upon  different  parts  of  body;
in  lumbar  region ;  as  if  mice  were  creeping  under  skin.

Pain :  in  occiput ;  in  eyes ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  epigas-
trium; in  lower  belly;  in  abdomen;  in  hj^pogastric  re-
gion; in  loins  ;  in  ovaries  and  uterus;  in  sacrum,  dow^n
thighs  and  into  lower  abdomen ;  over  front  part  of  chest;
in  small  of  back;  in  sacrum.

Excruciating  pains:  in  spine.

A^iolent  pain :  in  back ;  in  finger  tips.

Acute  pain :  in  hepatic  region.

Severe  pains:  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back  ;
in  sole  of  foot  and  toes.

Cutting:  in  abdomen.

Tearing  pains :  in  both  thighs ;  in  foot.

Throbbing,  tearing  pains:  in  thighs.

Tearing,  stinging  pains:  in  extremities.

Pinching  pains:  in  abdomen.

Forcing  pain :  in  uterus.

Stitches:  in  upper  dorsal  vertebrae.

Stitching  pains:  in  eyes;  in  legs.

Stitch:  in  back.

Sudden  catch:  in  back.

Throbbing:  in  temples.

Cramps :  in  calves  of  legs ;  in  feet,  toes,  hands  and  fingers  ;
in  chest.

Cramping  pains :  in  stomach.

Cramping  pressure :  in  stomach.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  joints.

Tensive  pain:  in  limbs.


269  SECALE  CORNUTUM.

Drawing  pains :  in  calves  of  legs.

Drawing:  in  limbs.

Dragging:  violent  in  spermatic  cord;  in  abdomen.

Stinging:  on  mammse.

Burning:  in  throat;  of  tongue;  at  pit  of  stomach;  in
spleen ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  uterus ;  in  hands ;  in  feet.

Soreness:  of  throat;  in  abdomen.

Tenderness:  of  epigastrium ;  of  lower  cervical  and  upper
dorsal  spinous  processes.

Distress:  of  stomach.

Painful  constriction  :  of  epigastrium.

Painful  jerkings :  in  limbs.

Jerking:  under  skin.

Pulsations :  in  head.

Pressure:  on  eyeballs;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  occiput;  in
uterine  region.

Heaviness:  of  head  ;  in  epigastrium.

Lightness :  of  head.

Peculiar  prickling  feeling:  in  tips  of  fingers.

Tingling:  in  face;  in  throat  and  tongue;  of  legs;  on
tongue;  in  limbs;  all  over  body;  in  fourth  and  fifth
fingers ;  in  back  ;  in  toes.

Crawling:  on  tongue;  in  tips  of  fingers;  in  limbs;  all  over
body ;  between  skin  and  flesh ;  in  upper  lip ;  all  about
mouth.

Formication:  in  face;  in  gums;  in  extremities;  in  tips  of
fingers;  over  whole  body.

Gentle  creeping  sensation:  in  back.

Fuzzy  feeling:  in  limbs.

Dryness :  of  soft  palate,  throat  and  oesophagus  ;  of  mouth.

Numbness :  in  limbs ;  of  feet ;  of  r.  hand ;  of  tips  of  fingers.

Cold  feeling:  in  abdomen  and  back;  in  limbs;  of  body;
of  r.  hand  ;  in  stomach.
Tissues.  It  destroys  the  activity  of  the  cord ;  convulsive
twitchings  and  shocks,  painful  contractions,  tetanic  man-
ifestations ;  perfect  paralysis,  with  increased  reflex  ac-
tivity ;  most  excruciating  spinal  pains,  especially  in
sacral  region ;  paralysis  of  bladder  and  rectum ;  ten-
dency to  gangrene  ;  rapid  emaciation.

Dissolution  of  blood  corpuscles ;  blood  thin  ;  passive  hem-
orrhages.

Anaemic  state,  either  from  exhaustive  diseases  or  artificial
depletion ;  the  blood  is  thin  and  does  not  coagulate.

Thrombosis  of  abdominal  vessels.

■  Neuralgia  caused  by  pressure  on  nerves  by  a  distended

vein.
Tumefaction  of  glands.

■  Lymphatic  tumors.


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  270

1 1  Collapse  from  choleroid  diseases.

I  Rapid  emaciation  of  paralyzed  parts.

Malignant  pustule.

Emphysematous  swellings.

Passive  hemorrhage;  blood  dark  and  red,  in  feeble  and
cachectic  persons,  accompanied  by  tingling  in  limbs  and
prostration;  desire  for  air;  does  not  like  to  be  covered;
wishes  to  have  limbs  extended  ;  skin  cold.

Rheumatism  (j)eliosis  rheumatica  of  Schoenlein)  generally
is  found  in  cachectic  individuals,  with  j)urpura ;  affects
joints,  especially  of  lower  extremities ;  thrombosis  of
abdominal  vessels.

I  Ulcers:  bleeding;  becoming  black;  feeling  as  if  burnt;

painless;  pricking,  producing  a  prurient  sensation  ;  pus
putrid ;  <  at  night,  touch,  from  external  warmth  ;  >
from  cold.
llGangrene:  from  anaemia;  external  injuries,  application
of  leeches  or  mustard  ;  >  from  cold,  <  from  heat ;  dry,
of  old  people.

■  Dry  gangrene  of  extremities,  parts  are  dry,  cold,  hard  and

insensible,  of  a  uniform  black  color  and  free  from  fetor  ;
large  ecchymoses,  blood  blisters  on  extremities,  becom-
ing gangrenous,  black  suppurating  blisters ;  limbs  be-
come pale,  cold,  shrivelled  or  lead-colored,  losing  all
sensibility.
^*  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  pit  of  stom-
ach very  sensitive  to;  r.  ovary  sensitive  to;  uterus  pain-
ful; ulcers  <.  '  :

Pressure :  upon  abdomen  >  labor  pains ;  upon  vertebrae
stitches  <.

After  lifting  heav}^  weight :  duri-ng  sixth  month  of  preg-
nancy ;  severe  pain  in  stomach,  abdomen  and  small  of
back.

External  injuries :  gangrene.  ^

Skin. Skin  dry  and  cool.

Cold  and  dry;  dingy,  w^rinkled,  dry  and  insensible;  des-
quamation. ..■.:■■  :

I I  Formication :  with  a  sense  as  if  mice  were  creeping
under  skin ;  on  face,  gums  and  other  parts  of  body ;  in
extremities  with  tearing,  stinging  pains ;  in  tips  of  fin-
gers, lasting  several  weeks,  with  a  partial  loss  of  sensi-
bility ;  over  whole  body.

I  Crawling:  all  over  body;  between  skin  and  flesh ;  and
jerking  under  skin.

Violent  crawling  and  prickling  over  whole  body,  espe-
cially in  upper  lip  and  at  times  all  about  the  mouth.

■  Bloody  blisters  on  extremities,  becoming  gangrenous,
llBoils,  small,  painful,  with  green  contents,  mature  very

slowly  and  heal  in  same  manner ;  very  debilitating.


46


271  SEC  ALE  CORN  UTUM.

I  Carbuncles ;  extensive  ecchymoses.
•  Petechia  and  miliary  eruptions.

I I  Purpura  hemorrhagica.

I  Cachectic  females,  with  rough  skin;  pustules  showing  a

tendency  to  gangrene.
lA^arico^e  ulcers  and  enlarged  veins  in  old  people.
I  Ulcers  turn  black,  copious  vomiting  of  a  mixture  of  a

thick,  black,  pitchy,  bilious  or  shiny  matter.

■  Indolent  ulcer,  ichorous,  offensive  pus,  >  from  cold.
General  desquamation  in  scarlatina.

■  Variola  pustules  of  abnormal  appeai'ance,  either  fill  with

a  bloody  serum  or  dry  up  too  soon.
*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Irritable  plethoric  subjects.

,Nervous  temperament.

Women  of  very  lax  muscular  fibre.

Feeble,  cachectic  women  ;  thin,  scrawny.

Very  old,  decrepit  persons.

Women  of  very  lax  muscular  fibre;  passive  hemorrhages,
copious  flow  of  thin,  black,  watery  blood;  the  corpuscles
are  destroyed.

Hemorrhagic  diathesis ;  the  slightest  wound  causes  bleed-
ing for  weeks  (Phos.) ;  discharge  of  sanious  liquid  blood,
with  a  strong  tendency  to  putrescence ;  tingling  in  limbs
and  great  debility,  when  weakness  is  not  caused  by  pre-
vious loss  of  fluids.

Strumous  child,  set.  18  months,  suffering  three  weeks;
diarrhoea.

Boy,  let.  5,  suffering  from  suppuration  of  glands  of  neck
after  an  attack  of  scarlet  fever ;  hsematuria.

Girl,  set.  10,  suffering  four  years  ;  hsematemesis.

Boy,  set.  13  ;  amaurosis.

Boy,  set.  17,  slim,  pale  and  thin,  father  a  weaver ;  chorea.

Mrs.  P.,  set.  18,  sanguine  temperament,  healthy,  well-de-
veloped muscular  system,  primipara ;  dystocia.

Man,  set.  18,  shoemaker's  apprentice,  weak,  pale  face,  light
hair,  flabby  muscles,  fat  cheeks ;  cramps  in  fingers.

Girl,  set.  18  ;  offensive  foot  sweat.

Woman,  set.  20,  gentle  disposition,  lymphatic  temperament,
gave  birth  to  a  child  several  weeks  ago ;  hsematemesis.

Man,  set.  20,  tailor's  apprentice,  strong,; well  nourished;
cramps  in  fingers.

Girl,  set.  22,  sanguine  temperament,  robust;  menstrual
colic.

Mrs.  A.,  set.  25 ;  hysteralgia.

Woman,  set.  28 ;  menstrual  colic.

Woman,  set.  28,  lymphatic-sanguine  temperament,  pale,
leuco-phlegmatic,  has  had  three  children  and  been  pre-
viously healthy;  menorrhagia  following  an  abortion.


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  272

Man,  set.  30,  strong,  well  nourished,  short  neck,  addicted
to  drink  ;  epistaxis,  r.  side.

Woman,  set.  30  ;  prolapsus  of  uterus.

Woman,  set.  32,  blonde,  weak,  after  labor;  uterine  hemor-
rhage.

Woman,  set.  32.  well  built,  married,  no  children ;  metror-
rhagia.

Man,  set.  32,  married ;  spinal  affection.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  35,  mother  of  three  children,  very  weak  and
thin;  menorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  35,  mother  of  three  children  ;  metrorrhagia.

Man,  set.  40,  choleric  temperament;  dark  complexion;
diarrhoea.

Woman,  ^et.  40,  mother  of  seven  children,  weak,  cachectic-
looking,  suffering  from  prolapsus  uteri ;  hysteria.

Woman,  set.  41,  large  frame,  feeble  and  emaciated,  sufif'er-
ing  since  her  return  from  the  tropics ;  metrorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  41,  had  metritis  after  a  forced  labor,  followed
by  leucorrhoea,  latter  cured  by  Stannum  ;  epilepsy.

Architect,  set.  42,  robust  constitution  ;  spinal  affection.

Woman,  set.  45  ;  uterine  hemorrhage.

Woman,  set.  45,  weak,  formerly  suffering  from  hemor-
rhoids ;  menorrhagia.

Forester,  set.  50,  strong,  suffering  three  months ;  paralysis.

Man,  set.  53,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  suffering  many
years  with  gastric  disorder ;  gastralgia.

Woman,  set.  62,  suffering  four  days ;  epistaxis.

Woman,  set.  70,  gouty ;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  80;  senile  gangrene.

Woman,  set.  82;  senile  gangrene.

Girl,  sanguine  temperament,  healthy  but  delicate,  menses
normal,  suffering  several  weeks  ;  cardialgia.

Mrs.  E.,  dark  complexion,  sickly  yellow  countenance,
nervo-lymphatic  temperament ;  dystocia.

Mrs. ,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  dark  complexion,

short,  thick-set,  has  had  four  children  ;  dystocia.

Woman,  just  past  climacteric,  had  tumor  in  breast  which
was  enucleated  by  applications  of  a  salve,  since  then
suffering  ;  paralysis  of  legs.
^^ Relations. Compatible: Cinchon.

Compare  :  Colchic.  (cholera  morbus) ;  Arseoi.,  but  cold  and
heat  act  opposite  ;  Oinnam.  (hemorrhage  after  labor) ;
Plumbum  (diabetes).


273  SELENIUM.


SELENIUM.

Selenium.  The  Element.


The  trituration  is  prepared  from  the  reddish-brown,  somewhat  translucent
metal  which  resembles  sulphur  in  its  chemical  relations.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Hering,  Archiv  fiir  Horn.,  vol.  12,  p.  192  ;  proving
by  Schreter,  N.  Archiv  fiir  Horn.,  vol.  3,  p.  184 ;  Berridge,  N.  Am.  Jour,  of  Horn.,
1873,  p.  501.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Ballard,  M.  I.,  vol.  6.  p.  182 ;  Spermator-
rhoea, Greenleaf,  A  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  258 ;  Prostatitis  and  atony  of  sexual  organs,
Altschul,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  586  ;  Gleet,  Nash,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  289.

^  Mind.  Great  dulness,  with  complete  insensibility  and  indif-
ference to  his  surroundings.

Very  forgetful,  especially  in  business;  during  slumber,
however,  he  remembers  all  he  had  forgotten.

A  kind  of  stammering;  he  uses  syllables  of  words  in  wrong-
connections,  therefore  pronounces  some  words  incor-
rectly.

Difficult  comprehension.

Total  unfitness  for  any  kind  of  work.

Great  talkativeness  when  excited,  especially  in  evening.

■  Mental  labor  fatigues  him.

■  Lascivious  thoughts  with  impotency.
Dread  of  society.

'  Sensorium.  Vertigo  :  on  lifting  head  or  rising  up  ;  on  mov-
ing about,  with  nausea,  vomiting,  faintness;  <  after
breakfast  and  dinner.

'  Inner  Head. Violent  stinging  over  1.  eye,  when  walking  in
sun  or  from  strong  odors ;  with  increased  secretion  of
urine,  and  melancholy.
Headache  every  afternoon,  especially  after  drinking  wine,

tea  or  lemonade.
I  I  Violent  headache  commenced  in  forehead  and  gradually
involved  whole  head  ;  heavily  coated  tongue ;  nausea ;
frequent  vomiting  of  bilious-looking  matter ;  her  usual
cup  of  tea  was  followed  by  an  aggravation  of  all  the
symptoms.

■  Headache  of  drunkards;  headache  after  debauchery.

*  Outer  Head. ■Hair  comes  out  when  combing;  also  from
eyebrows,  whiskers  and  genitals.
VOL.  IX. — 18.


SELENIUM.  274

I  Tingling  itching  on  scalp  in  evening,  oozing  after
scratching.

Tension  and  sensation  of  contraction  of  scalp.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Itching  vesicles  on  edges  of  eyelids  and
on  eyebrows.

Spasmodic  twitching  of  1.  eyeball.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ear  stopped ;  hardening  of  earwax  in

his  deaf  ear.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Itching  in  nose  and  on  edges  of  nostrils.

Inclination  to  bore  fingers  into  nose.

Yellow,  thick,  jellylike  mucus  in  nose.

Discharge  of  dark  blood  from  nose.

Phlegm  in  choanse.

Coryza,  ending  in  diarrhoea.

I  I  Complete  obstruction  of  nose,  chronic.
*  Upper  Face. Twitching  of  muscles  of  face.

Great  emaciation  of  face  and  hands.

Oiliness  of  skin  on  face ;  greasy  and  shining.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Picks  teeth  until  they  bleed  ;  toothache.

Teeth  covered  with  mucus.

■  Toothache  from  drinking  tea.

"  Taste  and  Tongue.  A  kind  of  stammering  speech,  made
mistakes  in  talking,  uttered  syllables  wrongly,  and  could
not  articulate  some  words.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Want  of  appetite
in  morning,  white-coated  tongue.
Aversion  to  food  much  salted.

■  Great  longing  for  ardent  spirits;  an  almost  maniacal  irre-

sistible desire;  has  to  get  completely  drunk  and  feels
distressed  afterward  ;  wants  to  go  to  an  insane  asylum.
^Chronic  alcoholism.
Hungry  during  night.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating : violent  beating  all
over  bod}^,  <  in  abdomen;  must  lie  down.

■  Bad  effects:  from  sugar;  from  salt  food;  from  drinking

tea ;  from  lemonade.

^^  Hypochondrium. Searching  pain  in  region  of  liver,  <  in
taking  a  long  breath,  with  sensitiveness  to  external  press-
ure ;  followed  by  a  red,  itching  rash  in  region  of  liver.
Stitches  in  spleen  when  walking.

Enlargement  of  liver  with  loss  of  appetite,  particularly  in
morning ;  white  coating  on  tongue ;  sharp  stitching
pains  in  hepatic  region,  <  from  motion  and  pressure;
sensitiveness  of  liver ;  peculiar  fine  rash  over  hepatic
region.

'^  Abdomen.  Pulsation  in  whole  body,  especially  in  abdomen
after  eating.

^ Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Stool:  hard  and  so  impacted  that  it


275  SELENIUM.

requires  mechanical  aid;  mucus  or  blood  passes  with
last  portion  ;  contains  threads  of  fecal  matter  like  hair.

Papescent  stool,  with  tenesmus  and  feeling  in  anus  as  after
a  hard  stool.

1  I  Stools  exceedingly  difficult  and  threaten  to  tear  anus,
from  their  immense  size;  hours  may  be  spent  in  an
effort  at  evacuation,  stool  can  be  seen  through  the  dis-
tended anus  as  an  immense  hard,  dark-colored  ball ;  the
sufferings  are  great  and  patient  becomes  wonderfully
agitated.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  Sensation  in  tip  of  urethra  as  if  a  biting
drop  were  forcing  its  way  out.

Twinging  pain  along  urethra  from  behind  forward,  with
a  sensation  as  if  drops  were  passing  out.

■  Involuntary  dribbling  of  urine  while  walking,  also  after
urinating,  especially  after  stool.

llUrine:  dark,  scanty;  red,  in  evening;  sediment  coarse,
red,  sandy.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Erections  slow,  insufficient;  semen
emitted  too  rapidl}^  and  with  long-continued  thrill ;  weak,
ill-humored  after  an  embrace,  weakness  in  loins.

iSemen  thin,  without  normal  odor.

I  Lewd  thoughts,  but  physically  impotent.

No  erection  in.  evening,  notwithstanding  he  was  excited;

erection  in  morning  without  sexual  desire.
Diminution  of  sexual  desire.
Impotence  with  sexual  desire.
Lascivious  dreams,  with  seminal  emissions,  which  awaken

him,  followed  by  lameness  and  weakness  in  small  of

back,

II  Impotence.

Involuntary  dribbling  of  semen  or  prostatic  fluid  during
sleep.

I  I  Seminal  emissions  about  twice  a  week,  lascivious  dreams,
is  always  awakened  by  it ;  always  rises  with  weakness
and  lameness  in  small  of  back. ^Spermatorrhoea.

I  Prostatic  juice  oozes  while  sitting,  during  sleep,  when
walking  and  at  stool.

A  drop  of  watery,  sticky  substance  passes  from  urethra  just
before  stool  and  soon  afterward.

While  sitting  a  drop  of  prostatic  fluid  passes  from  orifice
of  urethra  with  a  peculiar,  disagreeable  sensation.

I  I  Frequent  itching  in  small  spots  on  skin  and  develop-
ment of  small  vesicles  on  hands  and  feet;  sleep  dis-
turbed by  confused  and  lascivious  dreams;  glowing
sensation  of  skin  in  various  parts  of  body  ;  severe  stitch-
ing pain  over  1.  eye,  returning  every  afternoon ;  belch-
ing before  eating,  particularly  after  smoking ;  after  eat-


SELENIUM.  276

ing  desire  to  lie  down  with  inability  to  fall  asleep ;  pain
in  region  of  r.  kidney,  <  from  inspiration ;  dribbling
of  urine  after  stool ;  while  at  stool  must  wait  a  long  while
to  urinate ;  discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  before  and  after
stool;  profuse  sweat  about  abdomen  and  pubes;  dull
pain  in  perineum,  <  urinating,  evacuating  bowels  and
during  ejaculation  of  semen ;  swelling  of  prostata,  feels
hard  and  causes  narrowing  of  urethra ;  seminal  emis-
sions during  sleep ;  weak  erections  although  sexual  de-
sire may  be  great;  premature  ejaculation  of  semen;
cough  on  awaking;  expectoration  of  small  lumps  of
mucus  and  blood;  tearing  pains  in  posterior  part  of
thighs.  ^Prostatitis  and  atony  of  sexual  organs.
I  I  Prostatitis  caused  by  an  immense  hard  stool.

I  I  Discharge  of  slimy  mucus  from  ten  to  fifteen  drops  or

a  tablespoonful  looking  like  milk. ^Prostatic  gleet.
Itching  on  scrotum.

I I  Gonorrhoea  (secondary);  gleet.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Catamenia  copious  and  dark.
^'  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. During  pregnancy

throbb  ng  in  abdomen.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Voice
husky  when  beginning  to  sing,  or  from  talking  long ;
hawks  transparent lumps  every  morning,  sometimes
bloody.
I  Hoarseness  after  long  use  of  voice ;  frequent  necessity  to
clear  the  throat  on  account  of  accumulation  of  clear
starchy  mucus.
Increased  hoarseness  while  singing,  especially  at  the  be-
ginning.
Is  frequently  obliged  to  clear  his  throat,  alternating  with

hoarseness.
■  Tubercular  laryngitis;  raising  of  small  lumps  of  blood
and  mucus ;  tendency  to  hoarseness ; cervical  glands
swollen,  hard  but  not  sore.
^^  Respiration. Frequent  deep  breathing  with  moaning.

Dyspncea  from  accumulation  of  mucus  in  windpipe.
^  Cough. I  I  Cough  in  morning  though  slight  and  weak  affects
whole  chest,  and  lumps  of  mucus  with  blood  are  expec-
torated.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i  '  Pains  in  r.  side  and  under  last
ribs  especially  on  inspiration,  extending  to  kidneys,
which  are  sensitive  to  external  pressure.

^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Throbbing  in  vessels
throughout  whole  body,  pulsation  especially  felt  in  ab-
domen.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Neck  stiff  on  turning  head.

Pain  as  from  lameness  in  small  of  back,  in  morning.


277  SELENIUM.

*^  Upper  Limbs. Tearing  in  hands  at  night,  with  cracking  in
wrists.
Emaciation  of  hands.

■  Itching  in  pahns;  vesicles  on  and  between  fingers.

■  Dry,  seal}'  eruption  on  pahns  of  hands  with  itching,  hav-

ing a  syphilitic  base.

Painful  hangnails.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Cracking  of  knee  joint  on  bending  it.

Flat  ulcers  on  lower  legs.

Emaciation  of  legs.

Itching  around  ankle,  in  evening ;  blisters  on  toes.

Cramps  in  calves  and  soles.

Legs  feel  weak,  with  fear  of  paralysis,  after  typhus.

Itching  about  ankles.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Must  lie  down :  after  eating.

Lifting  head-:  vertigo.

Turning  head :  stiff  neck.

Bending  knee  joint :  cracking  in  it.

Sitting:  prostatic  juice  oozes.

Rising  up :  vertigo.

Any  exertion :  easy  fatigue ;  sweat.

Motion:  vertigo;  pains  in  hepatic  region  <.

Walking:  stitches  in  spleen; involuntary dribbling of
urine;  prostatic  juice  oozes.
*^ Nerves, i Weakness and  general debility; easy fatigue
from  any  exertion  or  labor ;  especially  in  hot  weather.

I  Irresistible  desire  to  lie  down  and  sleep;  strength  sud-
denly leaves  him.

■  Easy  exhaustion;  inability  to  perform  anykind  of  labor,

either  mental  or  physical ;  sexual  desire  with  debility
and  relaxation  of  organs ;  loss  of  prostatic  juice.

■  Great  nervous  debility  after  typhus,  particularly  when

sensations  of  patient  spread  from  above  dow^nward. "^
After  typhoid  fever  great  debility  of  spine,  fears  he  will  be

paralyzed.
iVery  great  aversion  to  a  draft  of  air  either  w^arm,  cold'or

damp.
^^  Sleep. Sleepless before 12 p.m.; light  sleep, least noise

awakens  him ;  starts  on  falling  asleep ;  sleeps  in  cat  naps.
Dreams  of  quarrels  and  cruelties.
Hungry  in  night.

Awakes  early  and  always  at  same  hour.
Worse  after  a  siesta  on  hot  days ;  <  after  sleep.
^^  Time. Morning :  want  of  appetite in  morning ; erection

without  sexual  desire;  cough;  pain  in  small  of  back.
Evening:  great  talkativeness ;  tingling  itching  on  scalp;

urine  red  ;  itching  around  ankle.
Night:  tearing  in  hands;  hungry.


SELENIUM.  278

12  P.M. :  sleepless.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  weather :  weakness  and

general  debility.
Draft  of  air  either  warm,  cold  or  damp :  great  aversion.
*^  Fever. Chill  alternating  with  heat.

External  heat,  burning  in  skin  in  single  spots.

Sweat :  profuse  on  chest,  armpits  and  genitals ;  from  least

exertion ;  as  soon  as  he  sleeps ;  stains  yellow,  or  white

and  stiffens  linen  ;  staining  brownish-yellow.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternation :  of  chill  and  heat.
Every  morning :  hawks  transparent  lumps.
Every  afternoon  :  headache ;  pain  over  1.  eye.
About  twice  a  week  :  seminal  emissions.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  pain  in  region  of  kidney ;

pain  in  side  under  last  ribs.
Left :  stinging  over  eye ;  twitching  of  eyeball ;  pain  over

eye.
From  above  downward  :  sensations  spread.
*"'  Sensations. As  if  biting  drop  were  forcing  its  way  out  of

urethra.
Pain :  in  region  of  r.  kidney ;  in  r.  side  under  last  ribs ;

in  small  of  back.
Violent  pain  :  in  head.
Tearing  pains:  in  thighs;  in  hands.
Twinging  pain  :  along  urethra.
Searching  pain  :  in  region  of  liver.
Sharp  stitching  pains:  in  hepatic  region.
Stitches:  in  spleen.
Violent  stinging:  over  1.  eye.
Burning:  in  skin.
Dull  pain  :  in  perineum.
Cramps  in  calves  and  soles.
Violent  beating:  all  over  body.
Throbbing: in abdomen; in  vessels  throughout  whole

body.
Sensation  of  contraction  :  of  scalp.
Tension :  of  scalp.

Weakness :  of  loins ;  in  small  of  back.
Tingling  itching :  on  scalp.
Itching:  of  vesicles  on  edges  of  eyelids  and  eyebrows;  in

nose  and  edges  of  nostrils ;  in  small  spots  on  skin  ;  on

scrotum ;  in  palms ;  around  ankle ;  in  folds  of  skin  be-
tween fingers  and  about  joints,
**  Tissues. Great  emaciation,  especially  of  face,  thighs  and

hands.
Emaciation  and  withering  of  affected  parts.
The  hair  falls  out.
^^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  region  of

liver  sensitive  to  ;  kidneys  sensitive.


279  SELENIUM— SENECIO.

Scratching :  oozing  on  scalp.
^'Skin. Red  rash  on  region  of  liver.

Frequent  tingling  in  small  spots  of  skin,  with  great  irrita-
tion to  scratch  ;  spots  remain  humid.

Itch  checked  by  mercury  or  sulphur.

Flat  ulcers.

Itching  in  folds  of  skin  between  fingers  and  about  joints,
particularly  ankle  joint.

iHair  falls  off,  on  head,  eyebrows,  whiskers  and  other  parts
of  body.
*^  Relations. Incompatible  : Cinchon.,  wine.

Compare:  P/iosp/ior.,  genito-urinary  and  respiratory  symp-
toms; Stannum  and  Argent,  met.,  cough,  transparent,
starchy,  mucous  expectoration  ;  Alumina,  hard  stool.

Antidotes :  Ignat,  Pulsat.


SENECIO.

Golden  Ragwort.  '  Compositse.

Proved  by  Small,  U.  S.JMed.  and  Surg.  Jour.,  1866,  p.  151 ;  .Jones,  Hale's  New
Eem.,  1876,  p.  971.

Clinical  Authorities. — Dysmenorrhoea,  Blake,  Horn.  Kev.,  vol.  16,  p.  403;
Hale,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  46 ;  Htemoptysis,  Irish,  A.  H.  O-,  vol.  1,  p.  46.

^Mind. I  I  Low spirits alternating with cheerful mood;
I  sleepless;  sensation  of  a  ball  rising  from  stomach  to
throat. ^Amenorrhoea. ^Hysteria.
I  I  Inability  to  fix  mind  on  one  subject  for  any  length  of

time.
A  feeling  like  homesickness.
^  Sensorium. l '  Dizzy  feeling  while  walking  in  open  air  like  a
wave  from  occiput  to  sinciput ;  he  feels  as  if  he  would
pitch  forward ;  nausea.
^  Inner  Head, l  '  Dull  stupefying  headache  with  fulness  of

head,  as  from  catarrh.
*  Outer  Head. '  l  Sharp  lancinating  in  1.  temple,  upper  part
of  1.  eye  and  inside  of  1.  lower  jaw.
I  I  Sharp  stitching  pains  from  within  outward  in  forehead;
sharp  shooting  pains  over  and  in  eyes ;  catarrh ;  sup-
pressed secretion.
■  Headache  preceding  leucorrhoea  and  irritation  of  bladder.
Forehead  hot;  sweaty  in  evening.


SENECIO.  280

*  Sight  and  Eyes, l  '  Sharp  pains  from  within  outward,  1.
eye ;  ladnymation  in  open  air.
1 1  Catarrhal  ophthalmia  from  suppressed  secretions.
^  Smell  and  Nose. iCoryza,  at  first  dull  headache,  dryness
of  nose  and  sneezing,  burning  and  fulness  in  nostrils,
later  secretion  of  copious  mucus.
iCoryza  with  nosebleed.
®  Upper Face, l  Face pale, depressed appearance ; weary,

wants  to  lie  down.
^  Lower  Face. Lips :  and  gums  pale ;  dry,  feverish.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. 1 1  Teeth  tender  and  sensitive.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  slightly  coated ; catarrhal

fever.
^^  Inner  Mouth, l  Mouth  and  fauces  dry,  hot. ^Catarrh.
^2  Throat. Tightness  in  throat,  wants  to  swallow ;  fauces  dry.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions of  sour  gas  and  ingesta.
I  1  Nausea  on  rising ;  morning  sickness  of  pregnancy.
I  Nausea  from  renal  derangements.
^^Hypochondria. Stitches  in  hypochondria;  sharp  cutting

in  diaphragm ;  epigastrium.
^^  Abdomen. Pains  centre  about  navel,  spreading  thence  in
all  directions;  > by  stool;  griping  pains  >  bending
forward.
Rumbling  of  wind.

Catarrh  of  bowels,  rumbling  colic  and  watery  stools.
I  I  Abdomen  much  enlarged  and  very  tense ;  lower  limbs
cedematous;  urine  scanty,  high-colored,  not  more  than
eight  ounces  a  day ;  pain  in  lumbar  region  and  in  ova-
ries; constipation;  cervix  uteri  congested ;  albuminous
leucorrhoea ;  sense  of  weight  in  uterine  region. ^Ascites.
^^ Stool  and  Rectum, i  i Stool,  thin,  watery,  bloody;  with
tenesmus  and  colic;  catarrhal  dysentery;  evening.
I  I  Stool  copious,  with  great  debility  and  prostration;  flatu-
lence; morning.
Stool  in  hard  lumps  mixed  with  yellow  mucus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Slight  pains  in  region  of  kidneys.
■  Congestion  and  inflammation  of  kidneys.
I  I  Attacks  of  renal  inflammation,  attacking  particularly  r.
kidney,  causing  intense  pain,  fever  and  great  prostra-
tion;  on one  occasion  suflfering  intense  and  bladder
seemed  implicated  ;  great  pain  on  passing  urine,  causing
him  to  cry  out ;  constipation ;  urine  reddish,  very  hot,
and  acrid ;  dull  headache;  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat;
chilliness,  fever  and  perspiration.
I  1  Severe  renal  inflammation  with  fever,  chilliness  and
pain  in  lumbar  region,  particularly  in  1.  kidney  ;^  quan-
tity of  urine  below  normal; urine  red,  depositing  a
brickdust  sediment;  considerable  arterial  excitement;


281  .  SENECIO.

skin  hot  and  dry ;  motion  caused  him  to  cry  out  with
pain ;  constipation.

■  Intense  pain  over  r.  kidney,  severe  pain  during  urination,
urine  red,  hot,  acrid  ;  bowels  constipated.

I  Renal  dropsy.

I  I  Ascites  and  oedema  of  lower  extremities  in  a  young
woman.

I  Inflammation  of  kidneys  and  ureters  after  passage  of
gravel.

Tenesmus  of  bladder ;  smarting  in  urethra,  dropsy.

Increased  urinary  secretion ;  followed  by  acute  inflam-
mation.

iHsematuria;  renal  pain  with  nausea.

I  I  Tenesmus  of  bladder,  with  heat  and  urging.

Urging  to  urinate  following  chilliness.

Uncomfortable  heat  in  neck  of  bladder.

I  I  Irritation  of  bladder  in  children,  preceded  by  heat  in
head  and  headache.

I  I  Renal  colic  with  or  without  nausea.

I  Chronic  inflammation  of  neck  of  bladder  with  bloody
urine  and  tenesmus  of  bladder.

I  I  Chronic  inflammation  of  kidneys.

iDysuria:  of  women  and  children  evidently  of  catarrhal
origin ;  mucous  sediment  in  urine ;  with  uterine  dis-
placement.

Smarting  in  fossa  navicularis  before  urination.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Lascivious  dreams,  emissions.

Prostate  gland  enlarged,  feels  hard  and  swollen  to  touch.

Dull  heavy  pain  in  spermatic  cord,  moving  along  cord  to
testicle.

Gonorrhoea,  gleet.

Chronic  prostatitis.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs,  i  i  Menses,  every  three  weeks,  very
profuse,  lasting  eight  or  nine  days,  accompanied  by
severe  cutting  pains  in  region  of  sacrum,  hypogas-
trium  and  groins ;  she  was  pale,  weak  and  nervous  and
had  a  slight  cough,  generally  at  night ;  after  an  abor-
tion.

Menses  premature  and  profuse  or  retarded  and  scanty.

iDysmenorrhoea  with  urinary  symptoms;  cutting  in  sa-
cral and  hypogastric  regions ;  flow  scanty  or  profuse  or
irregular ;  pale,  weak,  auEemic ;  strumous ;  hacking
cough  at  night.

lAmenorrhoea:  from  a  cold;  nervous  irritability,  lassitude,
dropsy ;  wandering  pains  in  back  and  shoulders ;  sen-
sation of  a  ball  rising  from  stomach  into  throat ;  costive;
in  young  girls  with  dropsical  conditions.

■Symptoms  as  if  menses  would  appear,  but  they  fail ;  nerv-
ous, excitable,  sleepless ;  loss  of  appetite.


SENECIO.  282

I  I  Suppression  of  menses  from  a  cold;  after  venesection.

■  Menstrual  irregularities  in  consumptive  patients.
iLeucorrhoea: preceded  by  headache,  sleeplessness  and

irritable  bladder ;  in  little  girls,  preceded  by  headache
and  sleeplessness.
I  Chlorosis,  in  scrofulous  girls,  with  dropsy.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hawking

of  tough,  white  mucus.
*®  Respiration. Respiration  as  if  greatly  fatigued.
Labored  breathing  from  mucous  accumulation,
^  Cough. I  Hacking  night  cough.

■  Mucous  rattling  with  suppressed  cough.

I  I  Great  debility ;  loss  of  appetite ;  flashes  of  heat  during
day ;  redness  of  cheeks  in  afternoon  ;  occasional  night
sweats ;  menses  very  irregular  for  a  year,  have  now-
been  absent  two  months ;  six  weeks  ago  had  caught
cold,  cough,  at  first  dry  then  loose  with  copious  expec-
toration of  yellowish,  thick,  sweet  mucus,  often  streaked
with  blood,  with  sensation  of  rawness  and  soreness  in
chest;  paroxysms  of  coughing  were  quite  severe  and
exhausting.

1  I  Palliated  cough  and  bloody  sputa  in  a  woman  far  gone
with  consumption  and  brought  back  menses  which  were
absent  four  months.

Cough  with  bloody  expectoration.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iCatarrh  of  lungs;  loose  cough
and  copious  mucous  expectoration.

■  Haemoptysis; great emaciation; dry,  hacking cough;

hectic  flush ;  sleeplessness.

■  Haemoptysis  after  venesection  or  suppressed  menstrua-

tion.
I  I  Chronic hemorrhage from lungs with dry, hacking
cough,  hectic  fever,  emaciation,  sleeplessness.

■  Incipient  phthisis,  attended  with  fatiguing  cough,  result

of  obstructed  menstruation ;  increased  bronchial  secre-
tion ;  loose  mucous  cough,  rattling  in  chest,  labored  res-
piration.

■  Phthisis,  with  obstructed  menstruation  ;  bloody  or  copious

mucous  sputa.
'^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  back  and  loins.
Sharp,  lancinating  pains  in  lumbar  region.
Dull  pain  in  1.  lumbar  region.
Severe  pain  in  small  of  back,  in  morning.

■  Cutting  pains  in  region  of  sacrum,  hypogastrium  and

groins,  with  too  early  or  too  profuse  menses ;  she  is  pale,
weak  and  nervous  and  has  a  slight  cough  at  night.
I  I  Wandering  pains  in  back  and  shoulders;  pain  in  joints.
^  Lower  Limbs. Lower  limbs  weary.


283  SENECIO.

'^*  Limbs  in  General. '  i Sharp  stitches  here  and  there;  rheu-
matic pains  in  joints.

iCEdema.
^^  Nerves, l  Nervousness,  sleeplessness  and  hysterical  mood.

I  Much  lassitude  and  great  nervousness.

I  I  Hysteria.

I  I  Wants  to  lie  down  ;  pale.

Slight  exertion  produces  syncope.
^^  Sleep. Great  sleeplessness,  with  vivid,  unpleasant  dreams.

■  Sleeplessness :  of  women  suffering  from  uterine  irritation,
prolapsus  and  its  attendant  nervousness  (it  is  the  Coffea
of  women) ;  during  climacteric  period.

lAt  night  sleepless,  nervous,  hysterical ;  by  day  drows}^,
languid.

I  1  Dreams  mostly  of  an  intellectual  character ;  memory
very  active.
^*Time. Morning:  flatulence;  severe  pain  in  small  of  back;
sweat  toward.

Forenoon  :  chilly.

During  day :  flashes  of  heat ;  drowsy,  languid  ;  frequent
desire  to  urinate.

Afternoon  :  redness  of  cheeks.

Evening  :  forehead  sweaty ;  stools.

Night:  cough;  occasional  sweats;  sleepless;  frequent  de-
sire to  urinate.
^  Temperature  and  Weather, i  i  Sensitive  to  open  air ;  ten-
dency to  catarrhs.

Open  air:  walking  in,  dizziness;  lachrymation.
^"  Fever. Chilly  forenoon  as  after  taking  cold ;  followed  by
heat  and  sweat  in  evening  with  moderate  thirst.

Chilliness  followed  by  urging  to  urinate.

Sweat  toward  morning;  catarrh.

Hectic  fever.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate :  low  spirits  and  cheerful
mood ;  urine  profuse  and  watery  or  dark  colored  and
scanty.

Every  three  weeks  :  menses.
*^ Locality  and  Direction. Left:  lancinating  in  temple  and
eye;  pain  in  lumbar  region.

Right :  inflammation  of  kidney;  intense  pain  over  kidney.

From  within  outward:  pain  in  forehead;  pain  in  eye.
*^  Sensations. As  of  a  ball  rising  from  stomach  to  throat;  as
of  a  wave  from  occiput  to  sinciput ;  as  if  he  would  pitch
forward  ;  respiration  as  if  greatly  fatigued.

Pains:  centre  about  navel;  in  lumbar  region  and  ovaries;
in  region  of  kidneys;  in  back  and  loins;  in  joints.

Intense  pain  :  in  r.  kidney;  over  r.  kidney.

Severe  pain  :  in  small  of  back.

Sharp  pains :  in  1.  eye.


SENECIO.  284

Sharp,  lancinating  pains  :  in  1.  temple,  upper  part  of  1.  eye

and  inside  of  lower  jaw  ;  in  lumbar  region.
Sharp  cutting:  in  diaphragm;  in  region  of  sacrum,  hypo-

gastrium  and  groins.
Sharp,  shooting  pains :  over  and  in  eyes.
Sharp,  stitching  pain  :  in  forehead.
Stitches: in hypochondria; in epigastrium; here  and

there  in  limbs.
Griping  pains  :  in  abdomen.
Rheumatic  pains :  in  joints.
Wandering  pains :  in  back  and  shoulders.
Dull  pain  :  in  1.  lumbar  region.
Dull,  stupefying  pain:  in  head.
Smarting :  in  urethra ;  in  fossa  navicularis.
Soreness :  of  chest.
Rawness :  of  chest.
Burning :  in  nostrils.
Sensitiveness :  of  teeth.
Heat:  in  neck  of  bladder;  in  head.
Tightness :  in  throat.
Fulness  :  in  head ;  in  nostrils.
Dryness  :  of  nose ;  of  mouth  and  fauces.
Weariness :  of  lower  limbs.
**  Tissues. iCatarrhal  affections  of  mucous  membranes.

1  I  Face  bloated,  abdomen  enlarged,  feet  oedematous ;  urine

alternately profuse and watery or dark-colored and

scanty ; frequent desire to urinate day and night.

^Dropsy.
iHemorrhages  from  uterus,  kidneys,  bowels,  lungs,  etc.
I  Dropsy  from  amenia ;  I  ascites  and  oedema  of  lower  limbs

in  a  young  woman.
lAnsemia.
''''Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. 1 1 Women  and  little  girls  of

nervous  temperament.
Lady,  mother  of  one  child,  had  an  abortion  three  years

ago,  another  (at  second  month)  four  months  ago ;  dys-

menorrhoea.
Mrs.  H.,  set.  30,  lymphatic  temperament,  suffering  six  years ;.

inflammation  of  neck  of  bladder.
Woman,  set.  30  ;  dropsy.

Woman,  set.  40,  passing  through  climacteric  period ;  cough.
Merchant,  set.  45,  nervous  temperament,  inclined  to  h&

bilious ;  renal  inflammation.
Woman,  set.  48 ;  amenorrhoea.
Man,  set.  50,  nervo-sanguine  temperament;  attacks  of  renal

inflammation,
*^ Relations. Compare:  ^Zeim,  Oinc/ion.  (hemorrhage);  Coffea;

Caulophyl.,  iSepia (irregular  menses);  Adsearacem.,  Pulsate


285  SENEGA.


SENEGA.

Seneca  Snake  Boot.  Polygalacese.

This  plant  grows  wild  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States.

The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  powdered,  dried  root.

For  general  effects  obtained  from  experiments  with  the  powdered  root  and  tinc-
ture see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  including  Seidel's  and  Lerabke's  collections,  vol.  8,
p.  586.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Hypopion,  Noack,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  341 ;  Paresis
of  oculomotor  nerve,  Allen,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  106;  Catarrh  of  pharynx,  Gerstel,

A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p  150;  Sore  throat,  Haynes,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  97;  Catarrh  of  blad-
der, B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  142;  Influenza,  Hermann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  60;
Trinks,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  706;  Weinke,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  150;  Asthma,
Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  802;  Whooping  Cough,  A.  E.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
5,  p.  728;  Gerstel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  p.  148;  Soreness  in  chest,  Ockford,  Org.,  vol.
3,  p.  377;  Pleurisy,  Pneumonia,  Hydrothorax,  Gallavardin,  Strecker,  Lorbacher,

B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  338 ;  Pleuro-pneumonia,  Strecker,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.
385;  Pneumonia,  Kallenbach,  Pop.  Horn.  Ztg.,  1867,  No.  12;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,
p.  141 ;  Hydrothorax  and  Ascites,  Lorbacher,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  64.

^  Sensorium. Confused  or  reeling  sensation  in  head.

iDulness  and  stupefaction  of  head,  with  pressure  in  eyes
and  obscuration  of  sight.
^  Inner  Head.  Aching  pain  in  head,  in  sinciput  and  occiput,
not  increased  by  pressure,  every  day  when  sitting  in  a
warm  room,  accompanied  by  pressure  in  eyes  which  did
not  bear  touch.

Pressing  pain  in  forehead  and  orbits  after  dinner,  espe-
cially 1.  side,  <  in  open  air.
*  Outer  Head. Shuddering  on  hairy  scalp.
.^  Sight  and  Eyes. Drawing  and  pressure  in  eyeballs,  with
diminution  of  vision.

Weakness  of  sight  and  flickering  before  eyes  when  reading,
necessitating  frequent  wiping  of  eyes,  which  aggravates.

While  reading  eyes  feel  dazzled.

Flickering  and  running  together  of  letters  when  reading.

Flickering  before  eyes  and  weakness  of  sight  when  con-
tinuing to  read  or  write.

On  walking  toward  setting  sun,  another  small  sun  seemed
to  float  beneath  it,  on  turning  eyes  outward  it  changed
into  a  compressed  oval,  disappeared  on  bending  head
and  closing  eyes.


SENEGA.  280

Weakness  of  eyes  with  burning  and  lachrymation.

Obscuration  of  cornea.

Sensitiveness  of  eyes  to  light.

Obscuration  of  sight,  with  glistening  before  eyes,  <  from

rubbing  them.
I  iHypopion  in  scrofulous  subjects.

■  To  promote  absorption  of  lens  fragments  after  cataract

operations  or  injuries  to  lens.

■  Paralysis  of  muscles  of  eye.

I  Iritis  and  specks  upon  cornea.

I  I  Opacities  in  vitreous.

I  Paresis  of  superior  oblique.

I  I  Oculo-motor  paresis ;  Mr.  A.,  set.  33,  four  years  ago  eyes
began  to  be  weak  with  difficulty  in  seeing  clearly ;  droop-
ing lids,  was  obliged  to  pull  them  open ;  began  to  see
double  with  r.  image  obliquely  above  real  one ;  stopped
using  eyes  and  improved ;  this  summer  visited  Mam-
moth Cave,  followed  by  a  return  of  double  vision ;
walked  into  room  with  head  thrown  backward  (occasion-
ally shutting  his  1.  eye  and  holding  his  head  straight),
this  position  relieving  confusion  of  vision  ;  double  vision
caused  him  to  make  missteps,  etc.;  paresis  of  1.  oculo-
motor nerve,  with  paralysis  of  superior  rectus ;  upper
lid  very  weak,  falling  half  over  eye ;  difficult  conver-
gence ;  weak  back ;  deficient  muscular  power ;  subject
to  bilious  headaches.

I  Aching  over  orbits,  eyes  tremble  and  water  when  he
looks  at  an  object  intently  or  steadily ;  eyes  weak  and
watery  when  reading.

I  Eyes  pain  as  if  they  were  pressed  out,  as  if  eyeballs  were
being  expanded,  especially  in  evening  in  candlelight.

Congestion  of  blood  to  eyes,  with  pulsation  in  them  on
stooping.

Swelling  of  eyelids,  with  tingling  in  them.

Hardened  mucus  in  morning  in  eyelashes.

Lachrymation  in  open  air  when  looking  intently  at  an
object.

I  Blepharitis  ciliaris,  <  in  morning,  much  smarting,  dry,
crusty  lashes.

iCilia  hang  full  of  hard  mucus;  smarting  of  conjunctiva
as  if  soap  were  in  eyes,  mornings ;  blepharitis ;  some-
times lids  stick  so  after  sleep  they  must  be  soaked  before
they  can  be  separated.

Pimple  on  margin  of  1.  lower  lid.

Stye  on  lower  lid.

Hydrophthalmia  with  intraocular  compression.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Painful  sensitiveness  of  hearing.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing  for  five  minutes,  so  violent  and


13


287  SENEGA.

long  continued  that  the  head  became  quite  heavy  and
dizzy ;  afterward  a  large  quantity  of  thin  watery  fluid
flowed  from  nose.
Troublesome  dryness  of  Schneiderian  membrane.
II  Frequent  coryza,  commencing  with  feeling  as  if  red
pepper  were  throughout  nostrils  and  air  passages,  fol-
low^ed  by  distressing  cough. /^Influenza.
Smell  of  pus  before  nose.
^  Upper  Face, l  l  Paralytic  feeling  in  1.  half  of  face.

Heat  in  face.
^  Lower  Face. Burning  blisters  on  upper  lip  and  in  corners

of  mouth.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  coated  white,  yellowish -white
or  slimy  in  morning,  with  slimy  unpleasant  taste.
Taste :  metallic ;  like  urine.
^^  Inner Mouth. Increased secretion of saliva; offensive
breath.
Burning  in  throat,  mouth  and  on  tongue.
Throat.' ll Very  dry,  sore  throat; short hacking cough,
which  tears and scrapes throat; loss of  voice,  even
whispering  is  very  painful  to  throat  and  causes  cough  ;
<  in  open  air.
Inflammation  and  swelling  of  throat  and  palate.
Dryness  in  throat  and  accumulation  of  tough  mucus  which
is  difficult  to  hawk  up.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Much  thirst,  with
loss  of  appetite.
Gnawing  hunger  with  sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,
vomiting  of  mucus.
Nausea  as  from  stomach,  with  vomiturition  and  straining
to  vomit.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  below  pit  of  stomach ;
sense  of  gnawing  hunger.
Digging  pain  in epigastrium,  disposition  to  flatulence;

outbursts  of  ill-humor.
Cramps  and  burning  in  stomach.
^*  Abdomen. Ascites accompanying hepatic diseases,  peri-
tonitis or  abdominal  tumors.
Colic,  with  pressing  pain.
Warmth  and  oppression  in  upper  part  of  abdomen  when

inhaling.
Gnawing  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.
Griping  in  bowels.
Stool  and  Rectum. Mushy  or  copious  watery  stools.

Purging,  vomiting  and  anxiety ;  watery  stools,  spurting

from  anus.
Stools:  scanty,  hard,  dry  and  large,  insufficient.


2(1


SENEGA.  288

Watery  diarrhoea,  with  griping  pain  in  bowels;  nausea
and  vomiting.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  Urine :  diminished  ;  dark  and  frothy  for
a  long  time  after  passing;  passed  only  night  and  morn-
ing; at  first  mixed  with  mucous  filaments,  afterward
thick  and  cloudy ;  frequent,  with  greenish  tinge  deposit-
ing a  cloudy  sediment ;  acrid,  increased  in  quantity.
Involuntary  micturition  at  night  in  bed.

■  Irritability  of  bladder.

I  I  Urging  and  scalding  before  and  after  micturition ;  mu-
cous shreds  in  urine ;  on  cooling  becomes  thick  and
cloudy,  or  deposits  a  thick  sediment,  yellowish-red  with
the  upper  stratum  yellow  and  flocculent.  /^Catarrh  of
bladder.

■  Subacute  and  chronic  catarrh  of  bladder.

Burning  and  stinging  in  urethra  during  and  after  mictu-
rition.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Menses  come  on  too  soon ;  has  to
press  in  her  1.  side  at  tenth  rib  to  relieve  gnawing  pain.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Sudden
hoarseness  when  reading  aloud.

■  Aphonia  from  severe  cold  or  excessive  use  of  voice.
Irritation  in  larynx  inducing  a  short,  hacking  cough.
Sudden  tickling  in  larynx  excites  cough.

Tenacious  mucus  in  larynx  inducing  frequent  hawking,
which  results  in  discharge  of  small  lumps  of  mucus.

Constant  inclination  to  clear  throat  and  swallow  saliva.

Great  dryness  of  throat  impeding  speech.  '

Titillating,  scraping  feeling  in  throat.

I  I  Catarrh  of  pharynx  in  a  tenor  lasting  six  months;  not
hoarse  but  when  mucus  collected  in  fauces  was  uncer-
tain of  his  ability  to  bring  out  either  high  or  low  tones ;
voice  feeble;  throat  red,  covered  with  a  thin  layer  of
dark  green,  half-transparent  mucus ;  burning  and  raw
feeling  in  throat  and  hawking.

■  Influenza:  constant  tickling  and  burning  in  throat  and

larynx,  leaving  patient  not  a  moment's  rest  and  prevent-
ing him  from  lying  down ;  fear  of  suffocation.

■  Grippe  with  stitches  in  r.  eye  when  coughing.

■  Constant  burning  and  tickling  in  larynx  and  throat,  with

danger  of  suffocation  when  lying;  copious  expectora-
tion of  tough  mucus ;  relief  by  outdoor  exercise.  ^In-
fluenza.

Laryngeal  phthisis.  ""^  - ^ar-ja.

Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  trachea,  which  he  is  con-
stantly obliged  to  hawk  up.

■  Copious  accumulation  of  tough  mucus  in  air  tubes  which

causes  the  greatest,  often  ineffectual,  eff'orts  at  coughing
and  hawking  for  its  expulsion. ^Bronchitis.


289  0  SENEGA,

^^Respiration.  iSensation  as  if  chest  were  too  narrow,  with
tendency  to  relieve  this  feeling  by  taking  deep  inspira-
tions and  respirations. ^Asthma.

■  Short  breathing  and  oppression  of  chest  when  going  up-

stairs.
Dyspnoea  as  from  stagnation  in  lungs.
Oppressed  breathing,  as  if  chest  were  not  wide  enough,

especially  in  open  air  and  when  stooping.
Shortness  of  breath  from  accumulation  of  mucus  in  chest

and  trachea.
Dyspnoea,  especially  during  rest.
^  Cough. Dry  cough  with  oppression  of  chest  and  roughness.

in  throat.
Frequent  short  and  hacking  cough,  occasioned  by  an  in-
creased secretion  of  mucus  in  lar3'nx,  especially  in  open

air  and  when  walking  rather  fast.
Dry  cough  with  aphonia;  <  in  cold  air  and  walking,  >

by  warm  air  and  rest.
Irritating  cough  with  secretion  of  mucus,  with  much  pain

about  chest.

■  Soreness  of  chest,  dry  cough;  throat  dry;  hoarseness,.

later  much  mucus  in  bronchi  and  trachea.
Cough  <  in  morning,  while  dressing  and  before  breakfast.

■  Irritating,  shaking  dry  cough,  in  chronic  bronchitis  in  the

aged.

Loose,  faint,  hacking  cough,  with  expectoration  of  a  little
phlegm.

Cough  often  ends  in  a  sneeze.

Shaking  cough  like  whooping  cough,  from  burning  and

.  tickling  in  larynx,  in  morning,  with  copious  expectora-
tion of  tough,  white  mucus  like  white  of  egg.

I  I  Whistling  cough  ;  great  oppression  of  chest ;  pressing
pains  when  breathing;  cough  dry  or  yellow  expectora-
tion, at  times  streaked  with  blood;  inflammatory  con-
ditions of  chest;  useless  in  convulsive  stage.  ^Whoop-
ing cough.

■  Whooping  cough  :  chubby  children;  tough  expectoration

clear  like  white  of  egg ;  cough  <  toward  evening ;  ex-
pectoration difficult  to  raise;  crushing  weight  on  chest;
<  at  night  with  excessive  rattling  of  mucus.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Congestion  to  chest,  with  flushes
of  heat  in  face  and  frequent  pulse  in  afternoon.

Tightness  and  oppression  of  chest,  especially  during  rest.

Rattling  in  chest;  loose  but  feeble  cough  with  little  expec-
toration ;  hydrothorax.

Feeling  as  if  thorax  were  too  narrow,  with  constant  incli-
nation to  widen  it  by  deep  inhalation ;  burning  in  chest.

Certain  movements,  especially  stooping,  cause  a  pain  in
VOL.  IX. — 19.


SENEGA.  290

chest  as  if  it  were  too  tight ;  there  is  a  disposition  to  ex-
pand chest  by  frequent  stretching ;  this  leaves  consider-
able soreness  in  chest.

I  I  Soreness  through  chest,  with  feeling  of  oppression  when
in  open  air  and  when  reposing ;  headache  >  in  open  air.

Soreness  in  chest,  <  by  pressure,  coughing  and  sneezing.

Violent  aching  pain  in  chest,  at  night,  when  waking.

Burning  sore  pain  under  sternum,  especially  during  mo-
tion and  on  every  deep  inspiration.

Stitches  in  chest  when  coughing  and  breathing.

Shooting  stitches  in  chest  <  during  inspiration  and  rest.

Dull  stitches  and  burning  pain  in  chest  when  lying  on  r.
side.

I  Walls  of  chest  sensitive  or  painful  when  touched  or  when
he  sneezes  (often  as  a  remnant  of  colds).

Stepping  hard,  walking  fast  or  running  causes  pulling,
sore  pain  as  if  through  mediastinum.

Accumulation  of  mucus  in  chest.

I  Constant  accumulation  of  phlegm  in  bronchial  tubes,  with

irritation  in  bowels,  tendency  to  diarrhoea;  irritation
may  alternate  from  chest  to  bowels  and  vice  versa.

I I  Profuse  secretion  of  mucus  in  lungs  of  old  people,  with
loose,  rattling  cough.

I  Great  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest,  with  flying  pains  in
chest.

Great  soreness  in  walls  of  chest  and  great  accumulation  of
clear  albuminous  mucus  which  is  difficult  to  expecto-
rate ;  pressure  on  chest  as  if  lungs  were  pushed  back  to
spine.

I  Profuse  expectoration  of  clear,  transparent  mucus ;  whole
chest  filled  with  large  mucous  rales. ^Grippe.

I  Tough  mucus  causes  the  greatest,  often  ineffectual  efforts
of  coughing  and  hawking  for  its  expulsion.  <?Bron-
chitis.

■  Bronchitis  of  old  people;  irritating,  shaking  cough.

I  I  Twentieth  day  of  pneumonia  in  a  woman,  set.  56,  r.  side,
violent  stitches,  sinking  strength,  small,  scarcely  per-
ceptible pulse,  short  rare  cough  without  expectoration,
great  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest,  somnolence,  dejected
features.

■  Adynamic  pneumonia;  low  fever  and  much  prostration,
I  iPleuro-pneumonia  in  1.  lung;  at  first  Bry.,  Aeon.,  Bell.

had  been  given ;  the  lancinating  pains  had  completely
disappeared,  but  there  was  still  some  oppression  ;  expec-
toration was  without  blood,  but  very  difficult,  and
strength  was  greatly  reduced ;  in  evening  covered  with
cold  sweat ;  pulse  very  small  and  wiry ;  oppression  so
great  he  must  sit  upright  constantly  ;  mucus  stagnating
and  rattling  in  chest.


291  SENEGA.

I  I  Pleurisy  in  a  latent  form;  dulness  in  lower  three-fourths
of  r.  side  of  chest;  segophony  of  same  side  toward  upper
part  of  lung;  pulse  110;  Seneg.  removed  not  only  the
effusion  but  also  the  thickening  of  the  pleura  conse-
quent on  the  pleurisy.

I  I  Pleurisy ;  after  inflammation  has  passed ;  copious  mu-
cous secretion  with  difficult  expectoration ;  tightness  and
burning  in  chest.

■  Subacute or chronic exudations of pleura; catarrhal

pleuro-pneumonia.
Hydrothorax  and ascites  after  scarlatina;  anasarca;  as-
cites; hoarse  and  feeble  cough,  with  little  expectoration.

■  Phthisis  mucosa.

^*  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Boring  pain  about  heart.
Heart's  beat  shakes  the  whole  body ;  violent  palpitation

while  walking.
Pulse  hard  and  frequent.
'°  Outer  Chest. General  sensitiveness  or  simple  pain  of  walls
of  thorax,  especially  when  touching  them,  it  is  felt  less
during  a  deep  inspiration.

■  Soreness  of  walls  of  chest  on  moving  arms,  particularly

left.
'^  Neck  and  Back. Pressing  pain between scapulae,  espe-
cially when  stepping  hard,  or  on  other  movements  which
concuss  the  chest.

Pulse  rather  hard  and  accelerated.

Pain  under  r.  shoulder  blade,  as  if  chest  would  burst,  when
coughing  or  drawing  a  long  breath.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sensation  as  if  wrist  were  sprained.
"Lower  Limbs. Sensation  of  great  weakness  or  debility  in

legs  ;  joints  feel  as  if  lame.
'*Rest. Position. Motion. Most  symptoms,  especially  those
of  chest,  are  <  when  at  rest  and  >  when  walking  in
open  air.

Rest :  dyspnoea ;  dry  cough  >  ;  tightness  of  chest ;  shoot-
ing through  chest.

Cannot  lie  down  :  tickling  in  larynx  ;  fear  of  suffocation.

Lying  on  r.  side:  pain  in  chest.

Stooping:  oppressed  breathing;  pain  in  chest.

Motion  :  pain  under  sternum  ;  of  arm,  soreness  of  walls  of
chest.

Going  up  stairs :  shortness  of  breathing  and  oppression  of
chest.

Stepping  hard,  walking  fast  or  running:  causes  pulling,
sore  pain  as  if  through  mediastinum  ;  pressing  pain  be-
tween scapulge.

Walking:  fast,  causes  short,  hacking  cough;  violent  pal-
pitation.


SENEGA.  -  292

^^  Nerves. Faintness  when  walking  in  open  air.

Great  mental  and  bodily  lassitude.

Lassitude  and  slight  trembling  of  upper  extremities.

■  Sensation  of  trembling,  with  no  visible  trembling.

Legs  feel  weak,  joints  feel  lame.

Great  debility  with  stretching  of  limbs,  confusion,  heavi-
ness and  beating  in  head.

Great  weakness  which  seems  to  originate  in  chest.

Mental  and  physical  debility,  with  dropsical  effusions.
^'^ Sleep. In  evening,  as  soon  as  one  lies  down,  heavy  sleep;

in  morning  awakes  frequently  with  dyspnoea.
^^  Time. Morning :  hardened  mucus  in eyelashes ; blepha-
ritis ciliaris  <  ;  tongue  slimy ;  cough  < ;  awakes  from
dyspnoea.

Afternoon  :  heat  in  face  and  frequent  pulse.

Evening:  pressure  in  eyes  <  ;  toward,  whooping  cough.

Night  and  morning:  urine  passed  only.

Night:  involuntary  micturition;  whooping  cough  <;  ach-
ing in  chest.
^''Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  air:  dry  cough  <.

Warm  room:  pain  in  head.

Open  air:  pain  in  forehead  <;  lachr3aTiation;  sore  throat
and  cough  <  ;  oppressed  breathing ;  short,  hacking
cough  ;  headache  >  ;  oppression  of  chest;  faintness  when
walking ;  chilliness  and  chill  only  in.

Cold  air:  dry  cough  <.
^^  Fever. Shuddering  over  back,  heat  in  face,  weak,  burning
eyes,  beating  headache,  difficult  breathing,  body  feels
bruised.

Flushes  of  heat;  skin  hot;  skin  becomes  warmer  and
moister.

Chilliness  and  chill  almost  only  in  open  air,  with  weak-
ness in  legs  and  dyspnoea.

Shudders  over  back  with  heat  in  face  and  chest  symptoms.

Sudden  flushes  of  heat.

Perspiration  wanting.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate :  irritation  from  chest  to
bowels  and  vice  versa.

For  five  minutes :  sneezing.

For  six  months:  catarrh  of  pharynx.
"Locality  and  Direction. Right:  stitches  in  eye;  stitches
in  side  ;  pain  under  shoulder  blade.

Left:  pain  in  forehead  <;  pimple  on  margin  of  lower
lid ;  paralytic  feeling  on  half  of  face ;  must  press  side
to  relieve  pain;  pleuro-pneumonia  in  lung;  moving
arm  causes  soreness  of  walls  of  chest.
*'  Sensations.  Eyes  pain  as  if  they  were  pressed  out ;  as  if
e^^eballs  were  being  expanded  ;  as  if  soap  were  in  eyes;


293  SENEGA.

as  if  red  pepper  were  throughout  nostrils  and  air  pas-
sages;  as  if  chest  were  too  narrow ;  dyspnoea  as  from
stagnation  in  lungs ;  as  if  lungs  were  pushed  back  to
spine ;  as  if  chest  would  burst ;  as  if  wrist  were  sprained';
joints  as  if  lame.

Pain:  about  chest;  in  walls  of  thorax;  under  r.  shoulder
blade.

Flying  pains:  inchest.

Boring  pain  :  about  heart.

Digging  pain  :  in  epigastrium.

Shooting  stitches :  in  chest.

Stitches  :  in  r.  eye ;  in  chest..

Dull  stitches :  in  chest.

Cramps  :  in  stomach.

Gnawing :  in  bowels ;  under  tenth  rib  1.  side.

Pressing  pain  :  in  forehead  and  orbits ;  in  abdomen ;  be-
tween scapulae.

Drawing :  in  eyeballs.

Aching  pain :  in  head  ;  over  orbits ;  in  chest.

Stinging:  in  urethra.

Smarting:  of  conjunctiva.

Burning:  of  eyes;  in  throat,  mouth  and  on  tongue;  in
stomach ;  in  urethra ;  in  larynx ;  in  chest ;  and  under
sternum.

Soreness :  of  chest ;  in  walls  of  chest.

Scraping  feeling :  in  throat.

Heat:  in  face.

Beating:  in  head.

Pressure :  in  eyes  ;  below  pit  of  stomach ;  on  chest.

Tingling:  in  eyelids.

Titillating  feeling :  in  throat.

Dryness:  of  Schneiderian  membrane  of  throat.

Oppression :  in  upper  part  of  chest.

Tightness:  of  chest.

Dulness:  in  head.

Emptiness :  in  stomach.

Weakness:  of  legs.

Reeling  sensation  :  in  head.

Paralytic  feeling :  in  1.  half  of  face.
"  Tissues. Catarrhs  that  tend  to  leave  sore  and  tender  places
of  inflammation.

Diseases  of  mucous  membranes;  especially  of  lining  of
larynx,  trachea  and  bronchia.

Subacute  or  chronic  exudations  of  pleura,  catarrhal  pleuro-
pneumonia (after  Bry.)  in  cachectic  pleuritis,  in  hydro-
thorax,  oedema  pulmonum,  in  diseases  of  heart,  primary
and  secondary  anasarca;  in  dropsies  after  albuminuria;


SENEGA.  294

hydrophthalmia  with  intraocular  compression ;  in  as-
cites accompanying  hepatic  diseases,  peritonitis  and
abdominal  tumors ;  in  lymphatic  constitutions  with
tendency  to  mucous  and  serous  exudations.

Dropsy  of  internal  organs  (especially  after  inflammation).

Inflammation  of  internal  organs.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : walls  of
chest  painful ;  of  vesicles  causes  itching.

Pressure:  on  1.  side  >  ;  pain;  soreness  of  chest  <.

Rubbing:  glistening  before  eyes  <.

Bites  of  poisonous  or  enraged  animals.
*^  Skin. Burning  vesicles,  itching  when  touched.
^"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Especially  suitable  for  ple-
thoric, phlegmatic  persons.

Girl,  set.  5  ;  after  scarlatina  ;  ascites.

Girl,  eet.  13,  after  miliary  fever;  hydrothorax  and  ana-
sarca.

Tenor  singer,  set.  26,  suffering  six  months;  catarrh  of
pharynx.

Miss  X.,  set.  30,  small  stature,  poor  constitution,  pale,  thin
face ;  latent  pleurisy.

Man,  set.  33  ;  oculo-motor  paresis.

Man,  set.  33,  slender,  leading  a  sedentary  life,  first  noticed
trouble  with  eyes  four  years  ago ;  paresis  of  oculo-motor
nerve.

Woman,  set.  56 ;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  60 ;  pleuro-pneumonia.
*^ Relations. Compare;  Ammon.  in  bronchial  aff"ections;  Cole.

ost.  in  fat  and  plethoric  people  predisposed  to  catarrhs;

Caustic,  in  muscular  asthenopia,  loss  of  voice,  paralytic

conditions ; Phosphor, in laryngeal  and  pulmonary  ca-
tarrh; Spongia  in  bronchial  catarrh.


295  SEPIA.


SEPIA

Cuttle  Fish.  Mollusca.


Introduced  by  Hahnemann.

The  cuttle  fish  is  an  inhabitant  of  the  European  seas,  particularly  the  Mediter-
ranean. Its  ink  bag  contains  a  blackish-brown  excretory  liquor  with  which  it
darkens  the  water  when  it  wishes  to  escape  its  enemies  or  catch  its  prey.

The  triturations  and  tincture  are  made  from  the  pure,  dry,  genuine  Sepia,  not
from  the  artificial  India  ink  used  in  drawing.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  GersdorfF,  Goullon,  Hartlaub,  Walde,  Gross,  Archiv
fiir  Hom.,  vol.  19,  p.  187 ;  Robinson,  Br.  Jour,  of  Hom.  vol.  25,  p.  331 ;  Berridge,
N.  Am.  Jour,  of  Horn.,  1871,  p.  69;  Ibid.,  1873,  p.  193;  N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,  1874,  p.
402 ;  also  provings  with  the  higher  dilutions  and  triturations  upon  twenty-five
individuals  under  the  auspices  of  the  Amer.  Institute  of  Hom.,  see  Transactions,
1875.

CLiNicAii  AuTHOBiTiES. — Ilental  derangement,  Miiller,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
p.  46;  Haynel,  Analy.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  177;  Wilson,  Eiick,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.
11;  Apoplexy,  Gerson,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  .5,  p.  32;  Headache,  Hahnemann,  Hrg,
Kreussler,  Tietze,  Black,  Goullon,  Haustein,  Hirsch,  Schindler,  S.  in.  K.,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  198;  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  94;  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  108,  p.  93 ;  Berridge,  A.  J.H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  114;  Haynel,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  4,  p.  129 ;  Lippe,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  429 ;  Price,  Med.  Inv.,  Sept.,  1876,
p.  194;  Ockford,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  468  ;  Hemicrania,  Kreussler,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.
4,  p.  75 ;  Sick-headache,  Small,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  Oct.,  1870  ;  Matting  of  the  hair,
Lembke,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  317  ;  Asthenopia,  Bell,  H.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  289  ;  Short-
sight,  Woodyatt,  Med.  Couns.,  vol.  1,  p.  12 ;  Incipient  cataract,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.
331;  Cataract,  Goullon,  I.  Pr.,  1875,  p.  691 ;  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  59 ;  Keratitis,
Norton,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1874,  p.  432  ;  Raue's  Rec.  1875,  p.  54 ;  Ophthalmia,  Tietze,
Schmid,  Link,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  241;  Bethmann,  Wolf,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,
p.  525  ;  Theobald,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  109  ;  Conjunctivitis,  Gerson,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
.5,  p.  109;  Norton,  T.  W.  H.  C,  1876,  pp.  603,  621 ;  Taisal  tumor,  Reisig,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  242;  Stitches  in  ear,  etc.,  Schmitt,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  355;  Epis-
iaxis,  Gerner,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  415;  Nasal  catarrh,  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
1 13,  p.  61 ;  Ozcena,  Freytag,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  399  ;  Facial  neuralgia,  Beckett,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  584  ;  Warts  on  face,  Jones,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  17,  p.  1 1 ;  Tinea  ton-
surans, Burnett,  H.  W.,  vol.  8,  p.  37  ;  Fistula  of  cheek,  and  cough,  Hesse,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  3,  p.  162;  Scirrhus  of  lip,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  445;  Carci-
noma of  lip,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  21 ;  Toothache,  Bcenninghausen,  Schind-
ler, Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  477  ;  Bcenninghausen,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  372;
Goullon,  Bolle,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  17,  p.  224 ;  Goullon,  Hom.  Recorder,  vol.  3,  p.
23,  from  Pop.  Zeit.,  Oct.,  1887  ;  Chronic  affections  of  throat,  Rummel,  Diez,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  540;  Gastralgia,  Boyce,  Med.  Couns.,  vol.  1,  p.  164;  Boyce,
Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  93 ;  Pressure  in  stomach,  Hesse,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  26 ; Gastric


SEPIA.  296

disturbance,  Emmerich,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  662 ;  Guernsey,  Bib.  Horn.,
vol.  8,  p.  30 ;  Guernsey,  H.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  18  ;  Dyspepsia,  Clifton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  17,
p.  159;  Catarrh  of  stomach,  Hirsch,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  341 ;  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,
p.  81;  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  131;  Pains  in  liver,  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.
68;  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  149;  Functional  derangement  of  liver  (2  cases).
Dunham  Lectures  on  Mat.  Med.,  p.  156;  Hepatic  disorder,  Hesse,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  160  ;  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  288  ;  Icterus,  Schmidt,  Bcen-
ningh.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  703;  Pain  in  abdomen,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.
9,  p.  195 ;  Abdominal  complaint,  Kreussler,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  77  ;  Chronic
diarrhcea,  Tietzer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  849 ;  Diarrhoea,  Kafka,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  432;  Clark,  Hom.  World,  May,  1889;  Chronic  constipation,  Nunez,
Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  323;  Prolapsus  of  rectum,  Colby,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.
185  ;  Nocturnal  enuresis,  Boenningh.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  45  ;  Gauwerky,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  342 ;  Warren,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  102 ;  Incontinence  of  urine,
Wesselhoeft,  A.  J.  H,  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  69 ;  Cystitis  and  irritability  of  bladder,  Wes-
selhoeft,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  63;  Irritable  bladder.  Swan,  N.  A.  J.,  vol.  30,
p.  105 ;  Urinary  difficulty,  Swan,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  109  ;  Seminal  emissions,  B.
in  D.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  63 ;  Gonorrhoea,  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  108,  p.  86 ;
Hoyne,  M.  I.,  1876,  p.  542 ;  Gleet,  Lobeth,  Seidel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  98 ;
■Condylomata,  W.  M.  J.,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p  228 ;  Sterility,  Allen,  A.  J.  H.  M.,
M.,  vol.  3,  p.  1 ;  Ovarian  neuralgia,  Gerson,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  618;  Uterine
displacement,  Jackson,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  5,  p.  320;  Jackson,  Med.  Inv.,  July,  1875,
p.  74;  Proll,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  13;  Parsons,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1882,  p.  180;  Pro-
lapsus uteri,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  345 ;  Minton,  Tr.  H.  M.  S.  N.  Y.,
1870,  p.  535;  Partial  procidentia,  Goodno,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  63 ;  Procidentia,
Medley,  Med.  Adv.,  Jan.,  1889,  p.  33 ;  Metrorrhagia,  Knorr,  Kallenbach,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  334;  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  314;  Hydrometra,  Wells,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  89;  Menstrual  disturbance,  Simpson,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  18,  p.
212;  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  314;  Dysmenorrhoea,  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
80,  p.  7 ;  Polle,  Hom.  Kl.,  1869,  p.  125 ;  Kafka,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  5 ;  Amenor-
rhoea,  Dysmenorrhoea,  Bernstein,  Diez,  Eichhorn,  Lembke,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.
254;  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  108,  p.  86 ;  Pain  in  vagina  and  rectum,  Bsethig,  A.  J.
H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  161;  Vaginitis,  Hedenburg,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  295;  Gor-
ton, Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  514;  Leucorrhcea,  Knorr,  Green,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.
365;  Gardiner,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  79  ;  Minton,  Tr.  H.  M.  S.  N.  Y.,  1870,
p.  535 ;  Hawley,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  263 ;  Infantile  leucorrhoea,  Sumner,  N.  Y.
S.  Trans.,  1874,  p.  314;  Pruritus  vulvce,  Guernsey,  T.  H.  W.  Conv.,  1876,  p.  984;
■Scirrhus  mammce  (2  cases  reported  cured),  Burdick,  Org.,  vol.  2.  p.  228  ;  Gambell,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  5,  p.  558 ;  Disorders  of  pregnancy,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,
p.  387  ;  Gambell,  T.  H.  M.  S.  K  Y.,  1870,  p.  170 ;  Dystocia,  Schmitt,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  7,  p.  260  ;  Retained  placenta  and  recurring  hemorrhages,  Nash,  Med.  Adv.,  Feb.,
1890,  p.  105 ;  Shortness  of  breath  (4  cases),  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  110,  p.  148 ;  Dysp-
noea, Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  44;  Asthma,  Carr,  Med  Inv.,  March,  1875,  p.
245 ;  Cough,  Kafka,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  695 ;  Nithak,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,
p.  198  ;  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  l,p.  212;  Kiisemann,  Bethmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
3,  p.  27 ;  Wesselhoeft,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  pp.  66,  67 ;  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1870,  p.
250;  Hesse,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  159;  Whooping  cough,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  84 ;  Wesselhoeft,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  3 ;  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,
1875,  p.  117 ;  Pain  in  chest  and  cough,  Nichols,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  115;  Pleuritis,
Kunkle,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  294;  Phthisis  pulnionalis,  Ehrhardt,  Gross,  Riick.


297  SEPIA,

Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  397  ;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Hesse,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  27,  from
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  138;  Perimyelitis,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  874 ;
Pain  in  back,  Hesse,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  27 ;  Crick  in  back,  A.  F.  E..,  Med.  Inv.,
vol.  6,  p.  563;  Whitlow,  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  132;  Sciatica,  Battmann,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  906  ;  Aching  in  legs,  Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  192  ;  Erup-
tion on  legs,  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p,  69;  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  113;  De-
bility, Dunham,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1876,  p.  87;  Hysteria,  Havtmann,  Lobethal,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  289 ;  Bartlett,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  530 ;  Chorea,  Piollet,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  513;  Morbid  sweats,  Gallavardin,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  61  ;
Gorton,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  vol.  9,  p.  13 ;  Gastric  fever,  S,  in  K.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  649;  Ague,  Schmidt,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  988;  Eing,  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  vol.  1,  p.  261 ;  Morgan,  A.  J.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  131;  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
106,  p.  189 ;  Chlorosis,  Riickert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  279 ;  Jones,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  17,  p.  8  ;  Dropsy,  GouUon,  I.  Pr.,  1875,  p.  695  ;  Rheumatism,  Wells,  Horn.  Eev.,
vol.  3,  p.  259;  Berridge,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  495;  Hesse,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,
p.  26 ;  Articular  rheumatism,  Kunkel,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  pp.  486-9  ;  Boils  and
offensive  foot  sweat,  Morgan,  H.  W.,  vol.  12,  p.  71 ;  Brown  spots  on  skin,  Scales,
Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  185 ;  Urticaria,  Schwarze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  202 ;
Tetter,  Williamson,  T.  H.  M.  S.,  Pa.,  1873;  Psoriasis,  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  108,  p.
94;  Hall,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  53;  Impetigo,  Miller,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  162;
Pemphigus,  Moore,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  12,  p.  304;  Warts,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  311 ;  Diseases  of  skin,  Hahnemann,  Knorr,  Schmole,  Bethmann,  Sommer,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  260.

^  Mind. 1 1  Weak  memory.

■  Heavy  flow  of  ideas;  inability  for  mental  activity;  it  is

an  exertion  to  think.
iFelt  all  day  as  if  he  did  not  care  what  happened ;  no  de-
sire to  work,  inattentive,  absent-minded;  indolent  mood.

■  Language  comes  very  slowly,  has  to  drag  out  the  words

to  express  ideas;  forget  the  chief  points.
Uses  wrong  words  when  writing.

■  Great  indifierence  to  everything;  no  proper  sense  of  life.

■  Every  few  minutes  inclined  to  cry,  without  knowing  the

cause.

■  Great  sadness  and  frequent  attacks  of  weeping  which  she

can  scarcely  suppress.

■  Very  sad  with  unusual  lassitude.

■  Sad  and  gloomy  mood,  mostly  when  walking  in  open  air

and  in  evening.

■  Sad  about  her  health  and  domestic  affairs,  discontented

w4th  everything.

■  Gloominess;  she  feels  unfortunate  without  cause.

■  Dark  forebodings  about  his  disease  in  regard  to  the  future.
I  I  Felt  that  unless  he  held  on  to  something  he  should

scream.

■  Depression  on  awaking  in  morning.

■  Very  nervous;  great  excitability  in  company;  restless,

fidgety ;  wants  to  go  from  one  bed  to  another.


SEPIA.  298

■  Nerves  very  sensitive  to  the  least  noise.
iFits  of  involuntary  weeping  and  laughter.
1 1  Aversion  to  one's  occupation  and  family.
iDread  of  being  alone,

1 1  Anxiety  :  with  fear,  flushes  of  heat  over  face ;  about  real

or  imaginary  evils  ;  toward  evening.
I  iGreat  indifference  to  one's  family,  to  those  they  love  best.
lis  easily  offended. and  inclined  to  be  vehement.

■  Great  irritability  alternating  with  indifference.

■  Greedy,  miserly.

■  After  overexertion  of  mind,  bookkeepers,  etc.

I  I  Quiet,  introspective,  rarely  speaks  a  word  voluntarily,
sits  for  hours  occupied  with  her  knitting,  her  answers
are  intelligent  but  curt.

■  Propensity  to  suicide  from  despair  about  his  miserable

existence.

■  Fears  to  starve,  is  peevish,  and  feels  mortified,  easily

frightened  and  full  of  evil  forebodings.

I  I  After  metrorrhagia  oversensitive,  exalted  nervous  state;
hasty  speech  accompanied  by  quick  gestures ;  eyes  fiery
and  glistening;  pulse  110;  her  movements  were  like
those  of  a  passionate  person ;  if  she  could  not  talk  her
friends  had  to  relate  stories  continually  in  a  quick  way;
at  times  in  the  opposite  state,  gave  short  answers  and
desired  to  be  alone;  was  then  moody  and  feigned  sleep  ;
the  nights  became  more  and  more  anxious  and  restless;

Contradictory,  quarrelsome,  complaining  about  others,

■  Passionate,  irritable.

■  Fretful  and  out  of  humor  for  all  business.

■  Greatest  irritability  from slightest  causes; very  easily

offended.

■  Vexed  and  disposed  to  scold.

Impatience  when  sitting,  like  an  uneasiness  in  bones.

Violent  bursts  of  anger  with  furious  gestures.

1  I  Great  nervous  irritability,  with  sadness,  despondency
and  absentmindedness ;  everything  seems  strange  to
her;  least  exertion  seems  a  great  effort;  it  seems  as  if
she  could  not  understand  anything  and  would  have  to
learn  anew  everything  she  wished  to  do ;  greatest  indif-
ference to  everything,  the  death  of  a  near  relative,  or
some  happy  occurrence,  leaves  her  equally  unaffected ;
no  trace  of  her  former  love  for  friends  or  even  for  her
child  ;  aversion  for  social  intercourse  amounting  to  con-
tempt ;  constant  ill-humor ;  at  times  headache  with  anx-
iety, <  lying  down  ;  head  also  hurts  externally ;  confu-
sion and  throbbing  in  head  ;  constant  pains  in  occiput,
<  lying;  oversensitive  to  noise;  frequent  pains  in  back


299  SEPIA.

extending  down  into  legs  and  feet;  circulation  and  ac-
tion of  heart  weak,  sensation  as  if  heart  stood  still;
menses  irregular ;  at  times  nervous  twitchings ;  screams
on  least  provocation ;  strength  and  general  condition
good;  >  in  a  warm  climate,  also  after  nosebleed;  <
after  coffee  and  opium.
^  Sensorium.  i Stupefaction  of  head,  mental  weakness  or  dul-
ness,  can  scarcely  think.
I  Painful  confusion  in  head,  particularly  in  forehead.

■  Momentary  attacks  of  giddiness  when  walking  in  open

air  or  while  writing.

■  Vertigo:  while  walking,  as  if  every  object  were  in  mo-

tion; with  staggering;  when  drinking;  as  if  objects  were
moving  around  one  ;  as  if  suspended  in  air,  with  uncon-
sciousness; when  rising  from  bed  in  afternoon;  after
losses  of  fluids.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head  ;  heaviness  of  head.

^  Inner  Head.  Drawing  pain  seeming  to  be  external  on  fore-
head back  to  occiput,  in  single  drawings.

Single,  violent,  undulating  jerks  of  pressing  headache  in
forehead.

Tearing  in  upper  part  of  r.  side  of  forehead.

Tearing  in  1.  frontal  eminence.

Violent  stitches  outward  over  1.  orbit,  with  complete  draw-
ing together  of  eye,  for  three  successive  days,  after  ris-
ing in  morning,  continuing  until  noon,  somewhat  <  in
open  air.

Stitches  in  forehead  with  nausea  (she  cannot  eat),  >  from
lying  down.

Fulness  in  temples  and  forehead  and  throbbing  of  carotids.

Tearing  in  1.  temple  to  upper  part  of  1.  side  of  head.

■  Pressure  on  vertex,  <  after  mental  labor.

Beating,  very  painful  headache  in  vertex,  in  morning,  soon
after  rising.

Dull  aching  frontal  headache.

Headache  in  forehead  and  vertex,  followed  by  anxiety  in
pit  of  stomach  with  trembling,  afterward  violent  nose-
bleed.

Heavy  pressing  pain  over  1.  eye  extending  toward  side  of
head  about  3  30  p.m.;  sensation  of  great  fulness  deep  in
1.  orbit  at  4  p.m.  ;  headache  confined  to  1.  side,  >  in  even-
ing and  in  open  air; <  by  shaking  head.

■  Shooting  pains  from  within  out,  especially  over  1.  eye,

extorting  cries,  with  vomiturition.
Occasionally  darting  pains  extending  from  1.  eye  over  side

of  head  toward  occiput.
Headache  >  after  meals,  <  by  mental  labor.
Severe  pressure  in  forehead  during  menses,  with  discharge

of  hardened  offensive  matter  from  nose.


SEPIA.  300

Stitching,  pressive  headache  continuous  in  lower  part  of
forehead  just  over  eye,  <  from  motion,  in  house,  >
when  walking  in  open  air.

Headache :  all  day  with  great  mental  depression ;  in  fore-
noon as  if  brain  were  crushed ;  as  from  pressure  from
within  outward;  as  if  head  would  burst;  also  from
coughing;  in  morning,  with  nausea,  until  noon;  most
severe  toward  evening,  especially  when  shaking  head;
following  perspiration  on  r.  side  of  head  and  face,  with
a  surging  in  forehead,  like  waves  of  pain  rolling  up  and
beating  against  frontal  bone.

Headache  as  from  commotion  of  brain  when  stepping  or
when  shaking  head,  >  when  sitting  up  or  from  slow
exercise.

■  Pressing  or  bursting  headache  as  if  eyes  would  fall  out,

or  head  burst,  <  from  stooping,  motion,  coughing  or
shaking  head  ;  continued  hard  motion  relieves  headache.

I  Pulsating  headache  in  cerebellum,  beginning  in  morning
and  lasting  till  noon  or  sometimes  till  evening;  <  from
least  motion,  when  turning  eyes,  when  lying  on  back;
>  when  lying  on  side,  when  closing  eyes,  when  at  rest
and  in  a  dark  room.

iPainful  cracking  in  occiput.

Jerking  pain  upward  like  electric  shocks  in  head.

■  Beating:  in  head ;  in  occiput.

■  Paroxysms  of  hemicrania,  stinging  pain  from  within  out-

ward, in  one  (mostly  1.)  side  of  head  or  forehead,  with
nausea,  vomiting  and  contraction  of  pupils;  <  indoors
and  when  walking  fast ;  >  in  open  air  and  when  lying
on  painful  side.

■  Boring  headache  from  within  outward,  forenoon  till  even-

ing, feels  as  if  he  would  die ;  <  from  motion  and  stoop-
ing ;  >  by  rest  when  closing  eyes,  from  external  press-
ure and  sufficient  sleep.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  on  vertex.

■  Headache  with  aversion  to  all  food.

■  Hemicrania  in  hysterical  women;  pains  stitching,  press-

ing, tearing  or  twitching  with  passive  congestion  of
head ;  in  chronic  cases  where  the  nervous  system  has
long  been  disordered  ;  leucorrhoea  between  menses ;
sudor  hystericus,  peculiar  sweet-smelling  sweat,  partic-
ularly in  axillse  and  about  soles  of  feet ;  face  pale,  dirty
yellow,  slender  built.

■  Nervous,  rheumatic  or  gouty  pains  in  head,  particularly

in  delicate,  sensitive  women.

■  Frequently  recurring  tearing,  stitching  pains  in  r.  side

of  head,  during  pregnancy,
i Hemicrania,  r.  side;  drawing,  tearing  pains  and  now


301  SEPIA.

and  then  stitches' as  if  from  needles;  <  morning  and
evening;  menses  scanty  and  of  too  short  duration.

I  Severe  pressure  in  occiput  with  heat  and  redness  of  face;
eyes  painful;  lassitude  and  tiredness  of  limbs;  inclina-
tion to  cry ;  is  not  disposed  to  do  anything.

I  Sore  pain  in  1.  eye  and  temple;  throbbing,  tearing  and
stitching  pains  in  1.  temple  extending  downward  ;  stitch-
ing, like  in  an  ulcer,  in  1.  zygoma  and  teeth ;  hair  of
head  sensitive  to  touch ;  pains  <  in  paroxysms,  w^th
fainting;  shivering;  coldness  of  feet;  transient  heat;
thirst;  anxiety;  despair  of  recover3^

■  Migraine  after  catching  least  cold;  tearing,  boring  pains
and  at  times  stitches ;  must  lie  down  and  keep  very
quiet;  closes  eyes  and  presses  head  firmly  to  painful
part;  exposure  to  rough  wind  brings  on  an  attack;  aver-
sion to  food  ;  stools  pappy  ;  menses  too  early.

I  'Severe  headaches,  1.  side,  hysterical  in  character;  tear-
ing, drawing  pains  beginning  at  1.  parietal  region  and
becoming  a  pressing,  throbbing  pain  in  occiput,  accom-
panied by  nausea  and  vomiting;  could  not  open  eyes  or
move  them  ;  photophobia  ;  obstinate  constipation  ;  vio-
lent desire  for  an  embrace  during  attack.

I  I  Subject  to  headaches  for  five  or  six  years;  the  pain  is-
shooting,  at  a  fixed  point  over  eyebrow,  generally  r.,  but
to-day  over  1.;  pain  causes  twitching  of  eyebrow  and

'  desire  to  close  eyes ;  headache  is  <  on  moving  eyes,.
also  on  walking,  every  step  seemed  to  jar;  attacks  come
on  suddenly  and  are  intolerable  first  day,  but  always-
leave  him  very  weak  and  dreading  a  return  for  a  day
or  two  ;  attacks  excited  by  overfatigue,  anxiety  and  vex-
ation or  overwork  in  school;  occasionally  severe  sexual
excitement  with  emission,  not  always  with  dreams,  dur-
ing sleep;  this  precedes  but  seldom  accompanies  head-
ache; during  headache  there  is  inability  to  read,  think
or  study  ;  a  more  frequent  attack  of  bowels,  nausea,  dis-
like to  any  food  except  toast  or  biscuits  and  tea  ;  urine
increased,  nearly  colorless;  tenderness  of  bone  of  side-
of  head  affected  and  under  corresponding  supraorbital
ridge

'  I  Vertigo  as  if  intoxicated  ;  tension  in  forehead  and  press-
ure as  from  a  w^eight  over  eyes;  pressure  and  burning
in  eyes  and  fog  before  r.  eye  (is  blind  in  1.  eye),  lassi-
tude ;  leucorrhoea,  milky  white,  <  during  day.

I  I  Violent  stitches  in  forehead,  cries  out;  the}^  distort  his
face;  stitches  return  every  five  minutes  during  the  day
and  night  with  unabating  force,  and  extend  into  1.  eye
and  ear;  lachrymation  ;  painfulness  of  scalp;  cannO't
find  an  easy  position  for  his  head  ;  every  noise  aggra-


SEPIA.  302

vates  his  symptoms  ;  talking  in  the  room  is  unbearable,
cannot  sleep.

I  I  Headache  every  Saturday  for  several  years;  boring  pain
from  within  outward,  accompanied  by  nausea  and
vomiting ;  >  binding  head  up  tightly  and  after  a  good
sleep.

I  I  Periodical  headache  coming  on  at  2  p.m.,  lasting  till  bed-
time.

■  Headache  in  terrific  shocks.

I  Dull,  stupid  headache,  with  great  mental  depression;
anaemia.

■  Shooting  from  forehead  to  vertex  and  both  sides  of  face.

■  Chronic  congestive  headaches  with  photophobia  and  im-

possibility to  open  eyes  on  account  of  weight  on  upper
lid.

■  Gouty,  or  nervous  headaches,  from  abdominal  plethora

or  menstrual  disturbances.

■  Headache  with  aversion  to  all  food.

■  Chronic  paroxysmal headaches  in  women  during  cli-

maxis ;  disorders  of  digestion,  abdominal  plethora  and
leucorrhoea.

■  Attacks  of  sick  headache  and  sudden  obscuration  of  sight

with  each  attack.

■  Every  time  she  goes  shopping  she  has  a  severe  nervous

headache.

■  Attacks  of  gouty  pains  in  head,  boring  in  character,

causing  patient  to  scream  with  pain,  accompanied  by
vomiting.

■  Congestive, gastric, hysteric, nervous and rheumatic

headaches.

■  Clavus  hystericus.

■  ■Headache  with  aversion  to  all  kinds  of  food,  a  feeling

of  emptiness  and  goneness  in  pit  of  stomach,  very
distressing;  headache  occurring  every  morning  with
nausea,  vertigo,  epistaxis ;  in  women  who  have  moth-
patches  on  their  foreheads,  of  sallow  complexion,  or
who  have  a  yellow  streak  across  bridge  of  nose  and
under  eyes ;  smell  of  food  repulsive.

■  Hemicrania  from  an  affection  of  reproductive  system;

especially  in  young  women  in  whom  the  cerebral  nerves
have  excited  the  sympathetic,  producing  a  long  train
of  hysterical  symptoms.

■  Boring  stinging  over  r.  eye,  <  in  a  thunderstorm,  in

cold  air,  north  wind,  taking  cold  on  head,  etc.

■  Losing  hair  after  chronic  headaches.

I  I  Chronic  meningitis,  headache  <  when  lying  down ;
>  by  remaining  in  a  sitting  position ;  when  pain  in-
creased a  sensation  like  globus  hystericus ;  all  coverings


^^^  SEPIA.

of  neck  felt  too  tight;  fulness,  pulsation  and  beating  in
head;  had  her  fingers  continually  on  dress  covering
neck  even  when  it  was  wide,  the  very  touch  of  il
distressed  her.

■  Meningitis;  the  child  is  in  a  torpid  condition,  with  great

depression  of  vital  power;  urine  has  a  putrid  odor  and
deposits  a  clay-colored  sediment  which  adheres  to  vessel
or  diaper.
I  Rush  of  blood  to  head.

■  Apoplexy: in  men  addicted to drinking and sexual

excesses,  with  a  disposition  to  gout  and  hemorrhoids  •
in women from affections of reproductive system'
venous  form;  headache  coming  on  in  terrific  shocks
dizziness  m walking,  with staggering; forgetfulness
^  coldness  of  feet ;  intermitting  pulse.

■  Threatening  apoplexy  in  dissipated,  middle-aged men

who  are  plethoric,  have  a  large  fat  abdomen,  and  are
subject  to  arthritic  and  hemorrhoidal  complaints-  they
have  usually  passed  through  several  slight  attacks  of
apoplexy  and  are  frequently  visited  by  the  prodromic
symptoms.
*  Outer  Head,  l Involuntary  jerking  of  head  backward  and
forward,  especially  forenoons  and  when  sitting

iFontanelles  remain  open,  with  jerking  of  head,  pale
bloated  lace,  stomacace,  green  diarrhoeic  stools.

I  Sensation  of  coldness  on  vertex,  <  when  moving  head
and  stooping ; >  when  at  rest  and  in  open  air

■  Disposition  to  take  cold  from  dry,  cold  wind  or  getting

head  wet.  ^

External  coldness  of  head.

Swelling  on  forehead.

Swelling  on  one  side  of  head  above  temple,  with  itching-
sensation  of  coldness  and  'tearing  in  it,  <  when  touch-
ing It;  >  when  lying  on  it  or  after  rising  from  bed

I  Sweat  on  head  smelling  sour,  with  faintish  weakness  in
evening  before  sleep  or  in  morning.

iScalp  pains  when  touched  as  if  roots  of  hair  were  sore

Itching  of  scalp.

■  Violent  itching,  like  from  insects,  on  occiput  or  behind


ears.


Small  red  pimples  on  forehead,  roughness

■  Eruption  on  vertex  and  back  part  of  head  dry,  offensive

stmgmg,  itching  and  tingling  with  cracks;  feeling  sore
when  scratching;  falling  off  of  hair

■  Sensitiveness  of  roots  of  hair,  <  in  evening,  to  contact,
.n ^?^V^^*^^  winds;  burning  after  scratching

■  Dandruff  comes  m  circles,  like  ringworm, herpes

■  ■Grreat  falling  out  of  hair. ^Climacteric  period


SEPIA.  304

iScurfs  very  moist,  almost  constantly  discharging  puslike
. fluid.
iMucli  scurf  on  head;  moist  scalp;  tinea  tonsurans.

■  Sensitiveness  of  roots  of  hair,  <  in  evening,  to  contact,

to  cold  north  winds;  burning  after  scratching.

I  I A  boy,  set.  9,  had:  a  bald  spot  on  front  part  of  head
as  large  as  a  silver  twenty-five  cent  piece,  of  glossy
smoothness,  hair  around  appeared  as  if  cut  short  near
roots,  place  covered  with  dry,  crusty  scales;  soon  after
a  similar  spot  on  r.  side  of  head  ;  finally  four  bald  spots
differing  in  size  from  a  dollar  to  a  quarter.

I  1  The  large  coils  of  hair,  for  a  distance  of  about  two
inches  from  head,  became  kinky  so  as  to  make  combing
of  this  part. of  hair  an  impossibility;  there  was  no
moisture  about  scalp  on  these  places,  nor  was  the  hair
itself  tangled  ;  the  smaller  coils  at  sides  of  head  showed
this  condition  also  in  the  lower  third  of  their  length ;
menses  absent ;  congestion  of  blood  to  head  and  chest ;
face  red  ;  headache.
^ Sight  and  Eyes,  i Vanishing  of  sight;  vision  impeded  by
fiery  zigzags  or  sparks  (whooping  cough) ;  flickering
before  eyes  when  looking  into  light ;  green  halo  around
candlelight; llblackspots

Candlelight  fatigues  eyes  when  reading  or  writing  by
causing  a  contractive  sensation.

Cannot  bear  reflected  light  from  bright  objects.

■  Gauze,  black  spots,  or  stripes  before  ej^es.

iDulness  of  sight;  when  writing;  sees  only  one-half  of
object  clearly,  the  other  half  is  obscured.

■  Great  sensitiveness  to  light  of  day.

■  Prickling  of  eyes,  evening  by  candlelight.

■  Asthenopia:  associated  with  exhaustion  dependent  upon

loss  of  semen ;  dependent  upon  reflex  irritation  frota
uterus  (kopiopia  hysterica).
I  I  Mr.  B.,  set.  32,  sick  several  months;  has  abused  eyes  by
reading,  writing,  sewing;  trouble  began  in  r.  eye,  which
is  the  worse ;  sensation  as  if  eye  were  gone  and  a
cool  wind  blew  out  of  socket;  severe  pains  and  itching
around  back  of  eye,  when  closing  eyes  flashes  of  light;
mist  like  a  veil  or  cloud  before  eye ;  <  in  strong  light ;
using  eyes  causes  intense  headache  over  them  ;  desire
to  spasmodically  close  eyes,  which  gives  relief;  menses
regular,  accompanied  by  severe  bearing-down  pain,
with  pain  in  hips  and  back  and  sexual  excitement;
feeling  of  weight  and  heaviness  of  upper  lids  as  if
she  could  not  raise  them,  <  in  morning. ^Asthenopia.

■  Obscuration  of  vision  dependent  upon  hepatic  derange-

ment.


305  SEPIA.

I  I  Astigmatism  from  granular  lids,  on  reading,  black
seemed  grey ;  sight  >  when  looking  out  from  under
brows,  pain  on  using  eyes  by  artificial  light.

I  I A  lady,  set.  67,  was  suddenly  attacked  after  taking  cold,,
with  pressing  pain  around  ej'es,  <  in  open  air;  con-
stantly sees  dark  figures  before  eyes,  like  spider-web  or
lace,  of  size  of  a  hand ;  acute  pain  in  orbit  of  a  pressive^
character,  <  in  open  air ;  r.  eye  only  so  affected ;  sight
had  been  graduall}^  failing  for  a  long  time ;  has  been
subject  to  sick  headaches  all  her  life.  ^Incipient  cata-
ract.

I  I  Keratitis  pust. ;  lashes  of  1.  eye  gone  and  edges  of  lids-
raw  and  sore,  considerable  purulent  discharge  from  eyes,,
face  covered  with  an  eruption,  child  cries  on  washing.

I  Very  large  pustules  around  cornea  with  much  redness,,
no  pain  or  photophobia,  <  in  evening,  corners  of  mouth
cracked.

■  Keratitis  parenchymatosa,  with  uterine  troubles.

■  Pustules  on  cornea,  also  fungus  hgematodes.

■  Trachoma,  with  or  without  pannus, especially  in tea

drinkers.
The  eyes  feel  tired  and  look  injected ;  tendency  to  keep

them  closed.
Eyes  feel  sore  as  if  bruised.
Pressure  in  r.  eye  as  from  a  grain  of  sand,  <  by  rubbing ;

<  when  pressing  eyelids  together.
Pressure  in  eyes  at  night.

Great  burning  of  eyes  and  lachrymation.

Aching  over  eyes  if  he  goes  into  bright  daylight.

Lids  pain  on  waking  as  if  too  heavy  to  open.

Itching  of  internal  canthus  morning  after  waking ;  after
rubbing,  biting  and  severe  lachrymation  and  sore  sensa-
tion in  external  canthus,  which  is  agglutinated.

Biting  in  r.  eye  evenings,  with  inclination  of  lids  to  forci-
bly close.

Sticking  in  1.  eye.

Smarting  pain  in  both  eyes.

Burning  of  eyes  mornings  with  weakness  afternoons.

Eyes  hot  and  drj^ ;  feel  like  balls  of  fire.

Redness  of  conjunctivae.

■  ■Inflammatory  affections  of  asthenic  character,  conjunc-

tiva a  dull  red,  some  photophobia  and  swelling  of  lids,

<  in  mornings.

■  Acute  catarrhal  conjunctivitis,  with  drawing  in  external

canthus  and  smarting  in  eyes,  >  by  bathing  in  cold
water,  <  morning  and  evening.

■  Conjunctivitis  with  muco-purulent  discharge  in  morning

and  great  dryness  in  evening.

TOL.  IX. — 20.


SEPIA.  306

I  Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  stitching  and  pressure.

I  I  Right  eye  inflamed ;  heat,  vessels  much  enlarged,  with
a  patch  of  congestion;  sometimes  feeling  of  grit  in  it;
eyeball  aches  at  back,  smarts  when  reading ;  subject  to
faceache  and  indigestion,  weight  after  food  and  spas-
modic flatulent  pains.

I  I  Right  side  of  face  much  swollen,  deep  red,  covered  with

pimples  filled  with  pus  and  covered  with  yellow  crusts;
during  day  did  not  open  eyes,  only  raised  lids  for  an  in-
stant in  the  dark ;  rubbed  and  scratched  cheeks  and  eyes;
lids  glued  together  in  morning  by  thick  matter;  no  ap-
petite ;  much  thirst ;  little  sleep ;  r.  eye  seemed  much
smaller  than  1.;  r.  angle  of  mouth  drawn  upward.

I I  Stitches  in  eyes;  lids  swollen;  photophobia,  can  hardly
open  eyes ;  profuse  lachrymation ;  sensation  of  heat  in
eyes;  stuffiness  of  1.  nostril;  head  confused,  dull.

1  I  Coryza  with  ophthalmia  and  photophobia  recurring
often  without  apparent  cause ;  lids  red ;  spots  on  cornea.
^Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I  I  Eyes  agglutinated  in  morning ;  great  photophobia  and
pains  in  eyes;  pustules  form  on  cornea  which  suppurate
and  burst,  leaving  long-lasting  maculae ;  recurring  at-
tacks since  a  year.

I  I  Conjunctivitis ;  photophobia  <  in  morning ;  dull  red-
ness of  conjunctiva;  lachrymation;  swelling  of  lids  and
great  heat  in  them.

1  I  Pustular  inflammation,  dependent  on  uterine  troubles,
especially  when  cornea  is  affected  and  inflammation  is
not  confined  to  conjunctiva;  drawing,  aching,  piercing
pains,  <  rubbing,  pressing  lids  together  or  pressing
upon  eye;  light  of  day  dazzles  and  causes  head  to  ache;
conjunctiva  swollen ;  eyes  agglutinated,  morning  and
evening;  considerable  purulent  discharge;  edges  of  lids
raw  and  sore ;  feeling  as  if  lids  were  too  tight  and  did
not  cover  ball ;  eruption  on  face. ^Conjunctivitis.

I  1  Conjunctiva  palp,  injected  in  morning  on  awaking;
discharge  of  purulent  mucus;  toward  evening  gradu-
ally increasing  dryness  of  eye ;  biting-excoriating  sen-
sation in  lids ;  photophobia  ;  later  burning  pain  ;  bleph-
arospasmus ;  lachrymation  suppressed ;  pulse  hard,
rapid ;  dull  pain  in  forehead ;  during  paroxysm  cries
aloud,  and  is  greatly  agitated ;  toward  midnight  spasm
of  lids  ceases,  pain  decreases  and  arrested  secretions  re-
appear; brown  spots  in  face;  sediment  in  urine  like
brickdust. ^Conjunctivitis.

I  I  Severe  conjunctivitis,  every  Summer  for  twenty  years,
from  beginning  of  warm  weather  in  Spring  until  its
close  in  the  Fall;  much  enlargement  of  papillae ;  marked
aggravation  in  morning  and  usual  1}^  in  evening.


307  SEPIA.

>

I  Phlyctenular  conjunctivitis.

I  Follicular  conjunctivitis,  or  a  mixed  form  of  follicular
and  trachomatous  conjunctivitis,  which  is  observed  only
during  the  Summer,  or  always  <  in  hot  weather.

I  I  Soreness  in  internal  canthi  with  entropium,  eyes  <  at
night  and  at  any  time  during  day  on  closing  them,  the
lids  feel  as  if  they  were  too  tight  and  did  not  cover  eye ;
scratching  in  eyes.

■  Amaurosis:  with  contracted  pupils;  after  violent  head-

aches.

■  Yellow  color  of  whites  of  eyes. ^Jaundice.

I  I  Drawing  sensation  in  external  canthi,  smarting  in  eyes
>  by  bathing  in  cold  water,  <  night  and  morning.

■  Drooping  of  lids  with  dull  headache;  feels  as  if  he  had

not  sense  enough  left  to  lift  them.

■  Heat  and  dryness  of  margins  of  lids.

Eyelids  pain  on  awaking  as  if  too  heavy,  and  as  if  he  could
not  hold  them  open.

■  Lachrymation  morning  and  evening,  and  in  open  air.

■  ■  Redness  of  eyelids,  with  styes.

■  ■Nightly  agglutination  of  eyes  or  dry  scurf  on  lids  on

awaking.

Great  itching  on  margins  of  lids.

Granulated  lids,  especially  in  tea  drinkers.

I  I  Chronic  ciliary  blepharitis ;  scaly  condition  of  lid  mar-
gins; small  pustules  (acne  ciliaris)  on  ciliary  border.

■  Tarsal  tumors.

I  I  After  repeated  styes,  hard,  indurated  tarsal  tumor  as
large  as  a  pea,  hindering  motion  of  lid ;  of  two  years'
standing.

■  Heaviness  and  falling  of  under  lids  as  if  they  were  para-

lyzed.

■  Difficulty  of  opening  eyes  in  morning;  paralyzed  condi-

tion of  lids. ^Ptosis.

I  i  Spasmodic  entropion,  with  soreness  of  internal  canthi
and  scratching  in  eyes,  <  at  night  and  at  any  time  dur-
ing day  on  closing  them ;  lids  feel  as  if  too  tight  and
did  not  cover  eyes.

I  I A  boy,  set.  12,  had  many  little  tumors  on  lower  lids,  the
result  of  styes,  which  impeded  movement  of  lids.

■  Brown-yellowish  color  of  eyelids.

®  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Oversensitive  to  noise,  and  particu-
larly to  music.

■  Loud  sounds  and  humming  in  ears  followed  by  loss  of

hearing.

■  Sudden  attacks  of  brief  deafness.
Dragging  pain  or  stitches  in  ears.

I  I  Chronic  otalgia,  one-sided,  with  toothache,  returns  after
every  slight  cold.


SEPIA.  308

■  Discharge  of  thin  matter  from  ear.
I  Much  itching  in  affected  ear.

■  Swelling  of  and  eruptions  on  external  ear.

■  Tetter  on  lobes  of  ean,  behind  ears  and  on  nape  of  neck.

■  Stitches  in  parotid  glands,  which  swell,  with  tensive  pain

on  turning  head.
I  I  Stitches  into  r.  ear,  going  into  brain,  commenced  sev-
eral days  ago,  at  9  a.m.,  while  working  in  field,  1.  ear
affected  first;  stitches  <  at  night;  small  pustules  on  1.
wrist,  which,  when  opened,  discharge  a  milky  fluid  ;  be-
fore this  had  panaritia  of  1.  thumb  and  middle  finger;
since  typhoid  fever  has  been  more  sensitive  to  changes
of  weather,  for  the  last  few  years  bee-stings  bother  him
more  than  they  used  to  do.
"^ Smell  and  Nose. ■Great  sensitiveness  to  odors.

■  Loss  of  smell,  or  fetid,  subjective  smell.

■  Nosebleed: during menses;  during  menses,  in young

girls ;  during  pregnancy  and  with  hemorrhoids ;  after
slightest  blow  or  when  becoming  overheated  in  slight-
est degree.

Nose  dry;  every  symptom  of  cold  in  head ;  stuffed  nose.

Dry  feeling  in  nose  and  fauces.

Frequent  sneezing  without  coryza.

■  Dry  coryza,  especially  of  1.  nostril.

■  Fluent  coryza  with  sneezing,  early  morning.

■  Blowing  of  large  lumps  of  yellow-green  mucus,  or  yellow-

green  crusts,  with  blood  from  nose.

■  ■Dry  coryza;  nostrils  sore,  swollen,  ulcerated  and  scabby;

discharging  large  green  plugs.

■  Swollen, inflamed nose; nostrils sore, ulcerated and

scabby.

■  Tip  of  nose:  inflamed,  swelled,  scurfy ;  painful  eruption.

■  Extremely  offensive  smell  from  nose,  profuse  greenish-

yellow  discharge ;  menses  scanty,  preceded  by  yellow,
excoriating  leucorrhoea,  <  from  motion.

■  ■Large,  offensive-smelling  plugs  from  nose,  often  so  large

that  they  had  to  be  drawn  back  into  mouth  and  expec-
torated, causing  vomiting;  offensive-smelling,  greenish
discharge  from  1.  nostril ;  severe  throbbing  pains  in  fore-
head (relieved  by  Bellad) ;  of  thirteen  years'  standing.
^Ozeena.

■  Catarrh:  pressive  pain  in  root  of  nose;  sore  feeling  in

nose  on  drawing  air  through ;  nose  swollen  and  inflamed,
nostrils  angry  and  ulcerated;  small  ulcers  in  nostrils;
scurfy  nostrils ;  discharge  of  yellow  water  from  nose,
with  cutting  pains  in  forehead ;  dryness  in  nose  and
throat;  dryness  in  choanse  (though  there  is  much  mucus
in  mouth)  with  involuntary  urging  to  swallow;  catarrhs
^arising  from  a  retrocession  of  an  eruption.


309  SEPIA.

I  The  smell  of  cooking  nauseates.

I I  Yellow  saddle  across  bridge  of  nose.

^  Upper  Face.  iFace :  puffed  ;  pale;  yellow,  earthy;  in  morn-
ing red,  in  evening  pale;  red  and  flushed.

1 1  Yellow  saddle  across  upper  part  of  cheeks  and  nose,  and
yellow  spots  on  face;  yellow  around  mouth.

I  Pale,  sallow,  puffiness,  with  margins  around  eyes.

.1  Yellowish  face  with  dyspepsia.

I  Small  red  pimples  on  forehead;  rough  forehead.

I  I  Circular  spots  on  face  and  under  chin  from  quarter  to
half  an  iiich  in  diameter;  several  appeared  in  rapid
succession;  spots  at  first  bright  red,  later  covered  with
a  white  scurf,  then  returning  to  original  red  color;  spots
are  very  slightly  raised  above  the  skin  and  attended
with  but  little  itching  or  sensibility ;  neuralgic  pains
shifting  about  in  various  parts  of  body,  but  more  per-
sistently located  in  occipital  region,  <  remaining  long
in  one  position,  at  night  in  bed,  in  morning  on  rising;
>  changing  position,  and  from  slight  exertion ;  con-
stant feeling  of  languor  and  weariness,  making  least
exertion  disagreeable;  complete  anorexia. ^Psoriasis.

I  Eczema  narium.

I  Herpes,  scurfs  and  black  pores  on  face.

I  Tetters  around  mouth,  with  itching  of  face.

■  Swelling  of  under  lip.

I  I  Inflammation  and  swelling  on  one  side  of  face,  from
root  of  a  decayed  tooth.

I  I  Intermittent  prosopalgia,  with  congestion  of  eyes  and
head,  jerking  pains  like  electric  shocks.

iFaceache:  intermittent,  with  congestion  of  eyes  and  head;
during  pregnancy  ;  jerking,  like  electric  shocks  upward;
pain  appears  in  morning  immediately  on  awaking,
none  in  daytime  but  severe  at  night,  spreading  over
lower  and  upper  maxillse,  radiating  to  vertex,  occiput,
neck,  arms  and  fingers;  tearing,  drawing  pains  in  face
and  nose,  with  swelling  of  cheeks ;  pains  frequently  ex-
tend through  ear,  especially  1.;  <  by  taking  either  hot
or  cold  things  into  mouth ;  in  delicate,  sensitive,  nerv-
ous women,  especially  when  uterine  functions  are  dis-
turbed.

I  I  Paroxysms  of  facial  neuralgia  brought  on  by  riding  in
wind  and  from  excitement;  menstrualnisus  nearly  al-
ways attended  with  neuralgic  pains  of  greater  or  less
severity;  when  wind  is  the  exciting  cause  the  paroxysm
comes  on  with  a  chill,  and  when  excitement,  it  begins
with  trembling;  pains  >  from  pressure,  being  in  a
warm  room  and  lying  quiet;  paroxysms  manifest  them-
selves by  a  slight  chill  or  trembling;  cold  chills  run-


SEPIA.  310

ning  down  spine;  neuralgic  pains  commence  in  1.  tem-
ple and  run  over  1.  side  of  face  and  down  ramus  of  1.
jaw;  pains  are  throbbing  and  digging;  noise  and  odors
from  cooking  make  her  <  ;  attacks  last  about  a  day,
usually  <  in  evening;  >  from  sleep;  menses  last  two
or  three  days,  are  dark,  scanty,  somewhat  stringy ;  pain
and  heaviness  in  r.  ovarian  region,  >  by  leaning  for-
ward; costive;  stool  alternately  hard  and  soft  with  strain-
ing; emission  of  urine  on  coughing,  walking  or  standing
on  her  feet ;  urine  light-colored  and  frequent ;  abdomen
distended ;  appetite  good ;  pain  running  down  r.  leg ;
<  from  northeasterly  winds,  damp  weather  and  excite-
ment. ^Facial  neuralgia.

I  I  Neuralgic  pains  in  face,  1.  side,  from  abuse  of  tobacco.

Jerking  of  muscles  of  face  when  talking.
^  Lower  Face, i  Yellowness  around  mouth.

■  Great  dryness  of  lips.

I  Moist  scaly  eruptions  on  red  part  of  lips  and  on  chin.

llSwelling  and  cracking  of  lower  lip. ^Herpes.

I  I  Fistula  in  1.  cheek  in  region  of  lower  molars,  with
ulcerating  circumference,  size  of  a  ten-cent  piece;  pain-
less, discharges  blood  and  pus,  has  lasted  about  a  year ;
cough,  at  times  with  hoarseness,  bloody  expectoration;
has  lasted  about  two  years ;  fine  vesicular  rales  at  1.
apex ;  cough  <  in  a  drj'^  east  wind  much  more  than  in
damp  air  or  by  getting  wet;  <  in  morning;  is  not  so
well  on  Sundays,  being  then  at  rest  and  in  room,  >
while  at  work ;  <  when  lying  on  1.  side;  appetite  good,
thirsty  in  evening,  sleeps  well ;  his  feet  are  sweaty  and
have  an  offensive  odor.

I  I  Suspicious  tubercle  on  lower  lip  as  large  as  a  bean,
of  cartilaginous  appearance,  with  a  broad  base  and
frequently  bleeding,  looking  very  much  like  a  scirrhus.

I  lAn  epithelial  cancer  of  lower  lip  far  developed,  had
been  excised;  the  wound  healed  kindly;  after  a  few
months  the  patient  began  to  emaciate  and  to  exhibit
every  sign  of  cancer  cachexy ;  the  decline  was  alarm-
ingly rapid ;  eminent  surgeons  diagnosticated  internal
cancer;  no  hope  of  recovery  was  entertained.

iSwelling  and  soreness  of  lower  lip,  burning  pain  and  a
prickling  as  from  a  splinter  of  wood. ^Epithelioma  of

lip-  .
I  I  Carcinoma  of  lower  lip  was  removed  three  times  in  the

course  of  six  months ;  it  had  again  grown  and  was  of
size  of  a  walnut,  stony  hard,  etc. ;  tendency  to  reappear-
ance every  Spring  for  three  years,  i.  e.,  painful  cracks  in
sears  left  by  the  operations.
I  I  Appearance  of  warts  on  face,  one  after  another,  until


311  SEPIA.

there  were  twelve  about  mouth  and  chin;  they  were
rather  long,  quite  roughed  at  the  top,  somewhat  pedun-
culated, and  speedily  returned  after* ligation.

■  Swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums,  i  ■  Toothache :  drawing  in  upper  molars ;
in  a  hollow  tooth,  extending  to  ear ;  throbbing ;  stitch-
ing; all  teeth  painful,  particularly  in  hollow  molar,
which  pains  as  if  elongated  and  swollen,  with  swelling
of  gums  and  cheeks,  with  which  the  pain  ceases ;  draw-
ing <  if  anything  hot  or  cold  is  taken  into  mouth  ;
during  menses  drawing  from  teeth  into  cheek,  which
becomes  swollen;  tearing  out  through  1.  ear,  during
and  after  eating ;  sticking,  she  could  have  cried  ;  stitches
in  teeth  and  jaw  extending  to  ear,  she  could  not  sleep
at  night  on  account  of  it  and  during  day  had  to  tie  a
cloth  over  it ;  with  rapid  decay  of  teeth ;  and  throb-
bing in  gums  during  menses ;  during  pregnancy  with
shortness  of  breath,  worse  from  every  cold  draft  of
air,  when  touching  teeth,  when  talking;  biting  teeth
together.

1 1  Paroxysmal,  beating  throbbing  toothache ;  can  feel
beating  of  pulse  all  over  body ;  pains  >  from  cold
water,  returning  as  soon  as  water  gets  warm ;  walks
about  crying ;  when  pain  is  at  its  height,  tingling  in
fingers  of  left  hand,  becoming  a  tearing  pain  as  it
extends  up  arm  and  is  ended  by  a  spasmodic  attack
of  asthma;  eyelids  red,  burning;  blowing  of  blood
from  nose ;  anxious,  despondent,  lachrymose ;  during
pregnancy.

1  iToothache  starts  from  carious  teeth  of  lower  jaw,  then
spreads  over  whole  left  side,  with  tearing  pains ;  nausea
with  waterbrash ;  >  in  fresh  air,  <  from  cold  water
and  at  night;  no  intermissions,  difficulty  of  speaking
or  chewing ;  fear  of  trismus ;  no  swelling  or  abscess ;
hot  flashes  with  cold  feet ;  during  climaxis.

I  I  Severe  pains  in  teeth  for  several  days,  on  one  side  only,
extending  to  r.  side  of  head ;  great  internal  heat ;
obliged  to  keep  her  mouth  half  open  to  cool  the  mouth,
hence  great  dryness  in  it;  afraid  of  tetanus.

I  I  Long-continued  severe  toothache,  caries ;  1.  sided,  tear-
ing, drawing  pain;  waterbrash  during  pain  ;  <  during
night,  especially  before  midnight,  in  bed,  by  cold  and
eating;  nervousness;  migraine;  leucorrhoea;  climaxis.

I  Chronic  throbbing  in  teeth.

I  The  teeth  feel  dull,  are  loose,  bleed  easily  and  decay
rapidly.

■Swelling  of  gums,  dark  red,  painful  bleeding  from
slightest  touch.


SEPIA.  312

I  Gums  painful  as  if  burned.

Swollen dark red  gums,  with painful throbbing,  as  if

beginning  to*  suppurate,  so  severe  that  it  was  scarcely

endurable.
Sore  ulcerated  gums.

■  Dentition:  grinding  teeth; dry  ringworms  make  their

appearance,  or  seem  to  brighten  up  at  evolution  of
every  fresh  group  of  teeth  ;  bad  smell  from  mouth  ;
aggravation  of  diarrhoea  after  taking  boiled  milk ;
very  exhausting  diarrhoea.
"Taste  and  Tongue.  ■  Taste:  bitter;  saltish;  putrid  or
offensive;  sour  in  morning  on  waking;  disagreeably
bitter  in  morning;  bitterish  sour;  unpleasant  in  morn-
ing, mouth  dry  and  slimy ;  foul,  as  from  an  old  catarrh  ;
slimy,  putrid;  food  tastes  too  salt;  like  manure;
metallic ;  sour  after  eating.

Tongue  and  cavity  of  mouth  feel  as  if  scalded.

Tip  of  tongue  feels  scalded.  ,

Soreness  of  tip  of  tongue,  little  blisters,  sore  edges.

I  Tongue  painful  as  if  sore.

■  Tongue  pale,  flabby  and  indentated. ^Atonic  dyspepsia.
Blister  on  tongue  and  pain  as  if  burned.

■  Vesicles  on  tongue.

■  Tongue coated: white; with mucus; dirty yellow;

brown,  with  red  edges.
Talking  is  only  a  stammering.
Tongue  stiff.
*^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Offensive  smell  from  mouth.
Sour  smell  from  mouth.
Rinsing  mouth  sets  her  to  vomiting.
Dryness of mouth, throat and tongue, which in the

morning  were  quite  rough.

■  Profuse  flow  of  saliva.

Dryness  in  fauces;  roughness  and  burning  <  by  hawking.
13  Throat. Dryness  and  soreness  in  throat  at  night,  it  feels

quite  parched.
Dryness  in  posterior  nares,  yet  much  mucus  in  mouth  with

involuntar}^  urging  to  swallow.
Pressure  in  throat  in  region  of  tonsils,  as  if  neckcloth  were

tied  too  tight.

■  During  first  sleep  she  often  imagines  she  has  swallowed

something,  which  wakes  her  up  in  a  fright,  with  a  sen-
sation as  if  it  had  lodged  in  her  throat,  sensation  re-
mains after  waking.

•  Sensation  of  a  plug  in  throat.

i  ■Much  mucus  in  throat ;  hawking  of  mucus  in  morning.

Burning  of  pharynx.

J  I  Sore  throat,  with  swelling  of  cervical  glands.


313  SEPIA.

I  I  Soreness  and  stinging  in  throat,  with  swelling  of  sub-
maxillary glands.

I  Pain  in  throat  as  if  raw,  when  swallowing;  also  stitch-
ing and  scraping  from  empty  deglutition.

■  Inflammation  of  throat :  <  on  1.  side ;  with  stitching  pain

on  swallowing;  mucous  membrane  much  swollen,  but
only  slightly  red;  sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat;  secre-
tion of  tough,  sticky  phlegm  causing  constant  hemming,
with  feeling  of  dryness  in  throat.

I  Chronic  swelling  of  tonsils;  sensation  like  a  plug  when
swallowing.

I  Contraction  of  throat  without  swallowing.

I  I  Disposition  to  inflammation  of  tonsils,  usually  ending
in  suppuration.

I  I  Chronic  pharyngitis;  pharynx  dark-red;  sensation  of  a
plug  in  throat,  particularly  when  swallowing  and  fre-
quently accompanied  by  feeling  of  constriction  in  throat;
stasis  of  portal  circulation.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i Canine  hunger,
or  no  appetite,  nothing  tastes  well.

iSudden  craving,  sudden  satiety.

Thirstlessness ;  or  much  thirst  in  morning.

Desire :  for  vinegar ;  for  wine.

■  Aversion  to  food:  particularly  meat  and  fat;  to  bread,

during  pregnancy; to  milk,  which  causes  diarrhoea;
loathing.
^'Eating  and  Drinking, i Disordered  stomach  after  bread,
milk,  fat  food  or  acids.

■  During  and  immediately  after  eating,  pains  are  renewed

and  aggravated.
I  After  eating: acidity  in  mouth; eructations,  empty  or

bitter;  bloatedness  of  abdomen.
It  creates  an  aversion  to  drinking  beer.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough
after  a  meal,  lasting  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

■  Eructations:  frequent,  with  efforts  to  vomit;  bitter;  sour;

taste  like  rotten  eggs  or  manure;  after  eating  but  little;
cause  blood  to  rise  in  mouth.

I  Heartburn  extending  from  stomach  to  throat.
iWaterbrash  after  eating  or  drinking.

I I  Nausea:  after  eating,  also  in  morning,  fasting;  from
smell  of  food  or  cooking;  when  riding  in  carriage;  with
anxiety  when  exerting  eyes  ;  with  weakness.

■  Morning  nausea  as  if  everything  in  abdomen  were  turn-

ing round.
1 1  Morning  sickness  of  pregnancy.

■  The  thought  of  food  sickens  her,  with  sense  of  great  weight

in  anus.


SEPIA.  314

I  Nausea  as  if  viscera  were  turning  inside  out;  inclination

to  vomit  in  morning  Avhen  rinsing  mouth.
II Vomiting:  of  food  and  bile  in  morning;  of  milky  fluid  ;
during  pregnancy;  frequently  strains  her  so  that  blood
comes  up ;  of  mucus,  caused  by  taking  even  simplest
food.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i Sensitiveness  of  pit  of  stom-
ach to  touch.

I I  Peculiar  faint,  sinking  emptiness  or  goneness  at  pit  of
stomach.

Pressure  in  stomach :  as  from  a  stone ;  as  if  it  were  sore
internally ;  after  a  meal  and  from  touch.

I  I  Beating  at  pit  of  stomach ;  sour  stomach  ;  fiery  zigzag
before  eyes;  metallic  taste  in  mouth  ;  cracking  in  knee
and  ankle  joints,  and  painful  cracking  in  occiput.

i  Painful  sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach  and  abdomen.


Slight  pressure  on  region  of  stomach  causes  great  pain.

Painful  sensation  of  hunger  in  stomach ;  has  to  eat  some-
thing in  night  or  early  morning.

Violent  pressure  under  1.  ribs  passing  off  when  lying  down.

I  Pain  in  stomach  after  simplest  food,

I  Cramp  in  stomach.

■  Stitches  or  burning  in  stomach.

■  Beating  in  pit  of  stomach.

I  I  Twisting  in  stomach  and  rising  in  throat,  tongue  be-
comes stiff,  speechless,  body  rigid, ^Hysteria,

■  Pain  in  stomach  <  by  vomiting;  extends  to  back,  with

anxiety,

■  Dyspepsia  from  injury  by  overlifting.

Cutting,  boring,  from  region  of  stomach  toward  spine.

■  Hardness  in  pyloric  region.

I  I  Attacks  of  a  severe  cramping  pain  commencing  in  pit  of
stomach,  pain  goes  to  r,  side,  under  short  ribs,  comes  in
paroxysms  and  when  at  its  height  is  almost  continuous
until  she  vomits  a  sour  and  then  a  thick  fluid  substance;
generally  no  nausea,  nor  does  she  vomit  until  she  takes
something  to  make  her  vomit;  countenance  a  dirty-yel-
low, with  distinct  eruptions  near  hair  on  forehead ;  dark
urine  becomes  clear  as  soon  as  pain  leaves ;  after  an
attack  of  pain,  is  very  hungry  and  eats  enormously ;  the
attacks  last  about  six  hours  or  until  relieved  by  vomit-
ing ;  no  day  passes  without  an  attack ;  when  at  its
-height  pain  goes  through  to  back,  between  shoulders;
at  times  pain  commences  between  shoulders;  thirst  after
spell  passes  off;  breath  offensive;  constipation;  stool  in
hard,  green  lumps.

■  Acute  catarrh  of  stomach,  especially  in  young  people;


315  SEPIA.

pain  in  forehead ;  violent  fever  heat ;  inclination  to
sleep,  with  restless  tossing  about;  complete  anorexia;
white  or  yellow  fur  on  tongue,  without  lustre;  small
blisters  on  edges,  sometimes  red  spots  on*  surface.

I  rVertigo  at  night  with  vomiting  of  bile  and  food  ;  shiv-
ering, heat  with  great  thirst;  gums  sore  behind  incisors;
pressure  in  stomach;  stitches  in  r.  hypochondrium  on
touch ;  constipation,  stools  hard,  difficult,  followed  by
burning  in  anus ;  oppression  of  chest ;  sleeplessness ;
itching  eruption  on  hands  and  thighs. ^Gastric  fever.

I  I  Since  several  days  fever;  drowsiness;  vomiting  of  green
slime ;  lips  dry ;  smell  from  mouth  as  of  sour  milk ;
urine  and  perspiration  have  same  smell ;  perspiration
only  partial. ^Catarrh  of  stomach.

I  I  Digestion  poor,  frequently  disordered ;  loss  of  appetite ;
pressure  in  stomach  ;  diarrhoea  alternating  with  consti-
pation; hemorrhoids  bleed  profusely;  menses  too  pro-
fuse, lasting  eight  to  ten  days ;  tearing  pains  in  head,
teeth  and  limbs  on  change  of  temperature ;  gums  swol-
len, bleeding;  frequent  pains  in  throat;  at  times  itch-
ing all  over  body  and  eruption  of  small  pimples ;  eyes
red,  inflamed ;  earthy-colored  face ;  despondency.

I  I  Vomits  all  her  food  ;  painful  sensation  of  emptiness  in
stomach;  sleep  broken  and  unrefreshing ;  costive,  stools
knotty  and  difficult,  has  scarcely  been  moved  for  two
years  without  an  injection;  urine  cloudy,  offensive,  a
hard  crust  difficult  to  scrape  from  vessel.

I  I  For  some  time  pressure  in  stomach,  and  drawing  from
stomach  through  r.  chest  into  shoulder,  one  hour  after
eating;  >  by  loosening  her  dress  and  eructating;  appe-
tite good;  no  thirst;  hypochondriasis;  falls  asleep  late ;
dreams  constantly  and  feels  unrefreshed  in  morning;
tires  easily ;  feels  <  in  snowy  weather.

■  Digestion  excites  heat  and  palpitation  of  heart.

I  I  Beating  at  pit  of  stomach ;  sour  stomach ;  fiery  zigzag
before  eyes ;  metallic  taste  in  mouth  ;  cracking  in  knee
and  ankle  joints  and  painful  cracking  in  occiput.
^^  Hypochondria.  In  region  of  liver :  fulness ;  pressing ;  sore
pain ;  dull  stitches ;  frequent  stitches ;  stitches  when
riding.

I  Stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium.

I  Pain  in  liver  after  moving.

I  I  Sensation  in  hypochondria  as  if  ribs  were  broken  and
sharp  points  were  sticking  in  flesh.

I  I  Sensation  as  of  a  strap  as  wide  as  her  hand  drawn  tightly
around  her  waist,  in  evening,  after  supper.  •

I  I  Dull,  aching  pain  all  around  body  and  feeling  of  some-
thing hard  boring  through  liver;  spasms  in  liver,  which
catch  breath ;  fulness  as  if  bursting,  >  by  urination.


SEPIA.  316

■  Hepatic neuralgia, with great depression of spirits;

weight,  fulness  and  tightness  in  region  of  liver.

I  I  Stitching,  pressing  pains  in  hepatic  region,  extending
thence  to  region  of  r.  shoulder;  vesical  tenesmus;  yel-
low spots  on  forehead  and  over  bridge  of  nose  ;  urine
reddish-brown,  containing  a  thick,  whitish-yellow  mu-
cus ;  heaviness  over  eyes  and  in  nape  of  neck ;  uterus
anteflexed.

I  I  Persistent  febrile  condition;  very  weak,  keeping  his
bed ;  extreme  depression  of  spirits  and  irritabilit}''  of
temper;  occipital  headache;  sudden  excessive  desire  for
food,  but  eats  only  a  small  quantity;  two  or  three  stools
daily  and  one  or  two  at  night,  of  normal  consistency,
but  clay-colored  and  offensive ;  successive  outbreaks  of
furuncles  on  nates;  on  r.  side  of  abdomen,  just  below
arch  of  ribs,  a  very  tender  spot  which  is  the  seat  of  con-
stant pain;  whole  r.  hypochondrium  tender  and  heavy;
aching  in  r.  shoulder ;  restless  sleep ;  urine  has  a  pink
deposit ;  heavy  sweats  at  night.  ^Functional  derange-
ment of  liver.

I  I  Remittent  febrile  condition  with  evening  exacerbations,
no  chills,  pulse  at  11  a.m.  96 ;  aching  weight  and  sore-
ness in  r.  hypochondrium,  and  distress  and  aching  in
r.  shoulder  and  scapula ;  cheeks  flushed ;  forehead  and
conjunctivae  yellow;  irregular  yellow  patches  on  fore-
head; lassitude;  limbs  and  back  ache;  obstinate  con-
stipation; occipital  headache ;  anorexia,  loathes  fat  and
milk;  thirst ;  tongue  flabby  and  indented;  great  flatu-
lence after  food;  restless  sleep;  dry,  hot  skin;  urine
scanty  and  loaded  with  urates.  ^Functional  derange-
ment of  liver.

I  I A  woman  subject  to  gall-stones,  two  attacks  of  shiver-
ing, the  last  at  3  a.m.,  followed  at  7  a.m.  by  pain  in  liver,
afterward  going  across  to  stomach  and  spleen  and  around
back;  liver  >  by  lying  on  it;  pain  >  by  eructations,
she  feels  it  would  be  better  if  she  could  pass  flatus  down-
ward.

■  Jaundice,  with  pain  in  hepatic  region.

I  IJaundice,  with  stitching  pains  in  forehead,  epigastrium
and  small  of  back;  tearing  pains  in  knees  and  feet;
cannot  sleep  at  night,  must  constantly  change  position
of  legs ;  lassitude ;  great  thirst ;  urine  stains  yellow.

I  I  Mrs.  R.,  set.  51,  black  hair  and  thin,  has  had  jaundice
for  three  months;  has  been  for  some  weeks  confined  to
bed ;  when  pregnant  seventeen  years  before  had  same
illness  for  several  months ;  appetite  poor ;  no  thirst ;
stool  every  day,  whitish ;  urine  like  dark  tea,  with
greenish  sediment;  sleeps  badly  and  has.  difficulty  in


317  SEPIA.

falling  asleep;  heat,  sweat  and  twitchings,  especially
in  bed ;  liver  much  enlarged,  smooth  and  not  sensitive ;
about  every  two  weeks  has  an  attack  of  gall-stone  colic ;
she  lies  upon  her  back;  looks  wretched,  face  yellowish-
grey,  apathetic  and  silent.  u
'® Abdomen.  lln  abdomen:  sensation  of  emptiness;  lax
feeling,  after  stool;  soreness  and  pain  as  if  menses
would  appear;  pain  and  weight  on  rising  in  morning;
pain  and  tenderness ;  heaviness ;  sensation  of  a  load,
during  motion ;  drawing  tensive  pressure;  bearing  down
with  menses ;  feeling  of  crowding  and  pressing  down-
ward ;  pressure  as  if  everything  would  issue  through
vulva;  pressing;  cutting;  stinging;  burning;  coldness.

1 1  Feeling  of  bearing  down  of  all  pelvic  organs.

I  Pelvic  distress  through  night,  >  by  lying  on  either  side,
with  legs  flexed  on  thighs  and  thighs  on  abdomen.

Distress  in  hj^pogastric  region  as  of  overdistended  bladder ;

<  sitting  and  lying,  >  on  walking  about.

Severe pelvic pain, commencing in sacrum, passing
forward  and  down  to  r.  knee.

■  Bearing  down  in  pelvic  region,  with  dragging  pain  from

sacrum ;  pain  extending  into  loins  and  down  thighs.
Frequent  attacks  of  contractive  pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,

<  in  morning;  following  this,  more  constrictive  pain
in  stomach;  thence  the  pain  extends  to  chest;  >  by
eructation.

lln  r.  side  of  abdomen:  severe  stitches  ;  pressing  pain.

■  Distension  of  abdomen;  puffed  after  dinner;  loud  rum-

bling noises ;  distension  of  lower  portion.
Feeling as of something adherent in abdomen, with
hiccough.

■  Spasmodic  contractions  in  abdomen,  with  terrible  bear-

ing down.

■  Flatulence  from  lack  of  bile;  abdomen  very  much  dis-

tended after  least  bit  of  food  ;  constipation.

■  Colic:  with  great  distension  and  sensitiveness  of  abdo-

men ;  recurring  toward  evening ;  colic  and  faintness
before  menses.

■  ■Pot-belliedness  of  mothers.

■Soreness  of  abdomen  in  pregnant  women.

■  ■Many  brown  spots  on  abdomen;  chloasma.

I  I  Neuralgia  of  plexus  mesogastricus ;  burning,  boring
pains;  abdomen  greatly  swollen  and  very  sensitive  to
touch ;  terrible  anxiety ;  attacks  came  on  in  evening.

■  Pain  in  abdomen,  >  by  hot  flannels;  loss  of  appetite;

cannot  always  swallow  solid  food,  must  take  it  out  of
mouth ;  riding  causes  pain  in  hj^pochondria,  abdomen
and  lumbar  region,  with  desire  to  lie  down ;  full  feeling


SEPIA.  318

from abdomen  to  throat; comes on from  11  a.m.  to
1  P.M.,  and  then  lasts  all  day ;  >  by  resting.
I  I  Supposed taenia; complains several times a day  of
rolling  in  abdomen,  as  if  something  alive  were  there,
•  with  spasmodic  griping  in  prsecordial  region ;  it  then

rises  upward  in  her  throat;  tongue  becomes  stiff ;  she
loses  her  voice,  and  whole  body  becomes  stiff;  no
appetite ;  abdomen  always  tense ;  stools  irregular ;
menses  painful,  scanty,  irregular,

■  Empty,  gone  feeling  in  epigastrium,  common  to  patients

with  tapeworm.
^ Stool  and  Rectum,  i Stools:  jelly-like,  with  colic  and
tenesmus ;  green  mucus  ;  sour-smelling ;  debilitating ;
bloody ;  oozing  almost  constantly  from  anus ;  expelled
quickly;  frequent;  not  profuse;  fetid;  sour;  putrid;
whitish ;  grey.

■  Diarrhoea,  <  after  drinking  milk;  rapid  exhaustion.
I  I  Discharge  of  blood  with  stool.

I  Before  loose  stool :  nausea ;  colic.

■  During  loose  stool:  prolapsus  ani ;  jerking  pains  from

anus  upward  through  rectum.

■  After  loose  stool :  exhaustion  ;  debility  ;  prolapsus  ani.

I  I  Feeling  as  of  a  weight  in  anus,  during  stool  and  for  an
hour  after.

■  Stool  has  a  putrid,  sourish,  fetid  smell,  expelled  suddenly

and  the  whole  of  it  at  once.

I  I  Summer  complaint,  sunken  eyes  and  face  ;  emaciation;
heat  of  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet,  green  stools,
but  little  pain.

I  I  Painless  diarrhoea,  of  three  weeks'  standing,  four  or  five
stools  in  twenty-four  hours;  evacuations  dark  brown,
pappy,  very  offensive,  coming  very  suddenly ;  loss  of
appetite,  tongue  thickly  coated ;  frequent  belching,
particularly  after  eating ;  meteorism.

1  I  Painful  diarrhoea  of  several  years'  duration,  extreme
emaciation ;  great  disturbance  of  digestive  organs ;
whole  nervous  system  greatly  prostrated.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea  in  women  who  suffer  from  leucorrhoea,
hysteria,  hysterical  hemicrania,  sudor  hystericus,  tran-
sient flushes  of  heat,  frequent  chilliness,  particularly
when  at  stool,  and  whole  facial  expression  indicates
uterine  disturbance.

■  Stool  insufficient,  retarded,  like  sheep-dung.

■  Pain  in  rectum  during  and  long  after  stool;  involuntary

straining.

■  ■Constipation:  during  pregnancy;  slow  and  difficult  dis-

charge even  of  soft  stool ;  stools  hard,  knotty,  insuffi-
cient, scanty,  like  sheep-dung ;  stools  difficult,  covered


319  BEPIA.

with  mucus ;  stool  retarded  with  discharge  of  blood ;
in  pregnant  women  and  in  children  where  manual
assistance  must  be  rendered  in  consequence  of  excessive
straining ;  with  dyspepsia  and  chronic  affections  of
stomach ;  chronic  or  obstinate,  especially  after  failure
of  Nux  vom.  and  Sulph. ;  especially  in  women,  or  per-
sons subject  to  rheumatism ;  discharge  of  blood  with
stools.

■  During  constipated  stool:  pain  in  rectum  extending  to

perineum  and  vagina ;  shooting  and  tearing  in  rectum
and  at  anus ;  prolapse  of  anus ;  sense  of  weight  at  anus ;
terrible  straining  to  pass  stool,  which  is  covered  with
mucus ;  bloody  discharge.

I  After  constipated  stool :  sensation  of  weight  at  anus ;
hemorrhoids.

«  I  Chronic  constipation  of  forty  years'  standing,  in  a  lady
set.  76,  had  become  so  inveterate  that  she  never  had  a*
natural  evacuation.

1  iNo  stools  excepting  under  influence  of  purgatives;  no
movement  for  several  days;  abdomen  swollen;  conges-
tion to  head ;  great  torpidity  of  intestinal  canal.

■  Hemorrhoids:  painful  sensation  of  emptiness  in  epigas-

tric region ;  delicate  and  sensitive  skin ;  protrusion  of
varices  and  of  rectum,  with  difficult  micturition ;  heat,
burning  and  swelling  of  anus  when  piles  do  not  protrude,
defecation  excessively  painful,  stool  being  rather  small,
narrowed  by  diminished  calibre  of  anus;  sometimes
fecal  mass  is  triangular  and  very  painful ;  constant  ooz-
ing of  moisture  from  anus ;  stitches  and  jerkings  from
anus  upward  into  rectum  and  abdomen.
I  Pain  in  rectum  :  extending  to  genitals;  as  from  contrac-
tion ;  burning,  the  entire  day ;  soreness ;  stitches.

I  Itching  in  rectum  and  anus.

■  Prolapse  of  rectum,  <  from  smoking.
Cancer  of  rectum.

I I  Sense  of  weight  or  ball  in  anus,  not  >  by  stool.

■  Soreness  in  anus.

I  1  Congestion  to  anus  soon  after  dinner.

■  Heat,  burning  and  swelling  of  anus.

i  I  Constrictive  pain  in  rectum  extending  to  perineum  and
into  vagina ;  pain  in  rectum  on  going  to  stool,  persists
a  long  time  after  sitting  down,  and  finally  an  imperfect
stool  is  voided,  with  sore,  smarting  pain,  weight  in  anus,
like  a  constant  drag. ^Fissure  of  anus.

I  I  Anus  encircled  by  a  ring  of  condylomata.

■  Expulsion  of  ascarides.

■  Oozing  of  moisture  from  rectum  ;  soreness  between  but-

tocks.


SEPIA.  a20

^^  Urinary  Organs.  Feeling  as  if  bladder  were  full  and  con-
tents would  fall  out  over  pubes,  with  constant  desire  to
push  them  back.

Pressure  on  bladder;  with  burning  after  micturition,  iu
evening ;  in  morning,  and  urging  to  urinate,  urine  pass-
ing only  after  waiting  several  minutes ;  and  frequent
micturition  with  tension  of  lower  abdomen.

Burning  in  bladder  and  forepart  of  urethra.

I  I  Smarting  in  urethra.

■  Frequent  and  strong  urging  to  urinate,  with  painful  bear-

ing down  in  pelvis,  in  morning ;  sensation  referred  to
neck  of  bladder ;  must  rise  frequently  at  night.

liUrine:  clear  like  water;  thick,  slim}^  offensive,  deposit-
ing a  yellowish,  pasty  sediment;  with  much  white  sedi-
ment, fetid  ;  cloud}^  and  dark,  as  if  mixed  with  mucus  ;
scanty,  red  deposit;  sour-smelling;  high-colored,  looks
like  powdered  brick;  dark-red ;  deposit  of  a  white,  ad-
herent film ;  turbid,  clay-colored,  with  reddish  sedi-
ment; blood-red,  with  white  sediment  and  a  cuticle  on
surface ;  with  dark-brown  admixture  ;  lithiasis.

Occasional  stitches  along  urethra.

I  Urging  to  urinate  from  pressure  on  bladder.

I I  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine  at  night,  especially  dur-
ing first  sleep. ^Enuresis.

■  Mucous  discharge  periodical,  not  at  each  micturition;

sometimes  pieces  of  coagulated  mucus  clog  up  urethra.
■Smarting  in  urethra,  when  urinating.

■  Difficulty  of  urinating  especially  in  morning,  a  feeling

as  if  drops  came  out  of  bladder.

■  ■Pressure  on  bladder  and  frequent  micturition  with  ten-

sion in  lower  abdomen.
■Annoying  itching  sensation  in  region  of  bladder,  with
urging  to  urinate,  especially  in  night.

■  Only  through  night  a  drop  or  so  discharges  from  urethra,

staining  linen  yellowish.
Stitching  pain  in  female  urethra.
Discharge  of  mucus  from  urethra,  not  at  each  evacuation

of  urine,  but  periodically.

■  During  and  after  micturition  chilliness  and  heat  in  head.
•  ■Intense  burning  and  cutting  pain  when  urinating.

■  Difficulty  of  urinating,  especially  in  morning.

■  ■The  bed  is  wet  almost  as  soon  as  child  goes  to  sleep,

always  during  first  sleep.

■  ■Urine  passed  within  space  of  two  hours  after  going  to

bed,  during  first  sleep.

■  Nocturnal enuresis: boys of  light complexion; with

onanists.
I  I  Constant  pressure  on  bladder  with  urgent  inclination  to


321  SEPIA.

pass  water ;  sensation  as  if  bladder  and  urinary  organs
would  be  pressed  out,  >  by  standing  or  sitting  with  legs
crossed  or  by  lying  down  ;  if  desire  to  pass  water  is  not
immediately  complied  with,  urine  passes  involuntarily;
urine  scanty,  sometimes  only  a  few  drops,  sometimes
clear,  generally  thick  and  muddy,  with  a  very  adhesive
brickdust  sediment;  no  pain  before  or  during  passage
of  water,  but  immediately  after,  a  sharp,  shooting  pain
passes  from  1.  side  of  urethra  to  a  spot  half  way  between
sternum  and  shoulder  on,  a  level  with  the  second  rib  on
1.  side,  a  sore  pain  constantly  remaining  in  that  spot,
sensitive  to  touch  or  pressure;  sleep  very  much  dis-
turbed at  night  from  having  to  urinate  as  often  as  every
half  hour ;  dreams  of  urinating,  and  finds  on  waking  an
urgent  desire  to  do  so ;  w^eakness  and  aching  in  small  of
back. ^Irritable  bladder.

I  I  Very  urgent  desire  to  urinate  and  difficult  discharge
throughout  day  and  several  times  each  nig'ht,  but  par-
ticularly for  some  hours  after  rising  in  morning,  with  a
feeling  of  bearing  down  in  region  of  bladder,  above  os
pubis;  constant  soreness  throughout  urethra,  bladder
and  vagina;  sore  spot  to  1.  of  pubis,  above  Poupart's  liga-
ment, near  ovarian  region,  especially  tender  on  pressure;
soreness  disappears  suddenly  for  a  day  or  two,  returns
and  is  most  violent  during  menses,  when  entire  vesical
and  uterine  region  burns  and  aches;  constant  tickling
in  bladder;  something  seems  to  move  in  bladder  like  a
worm  and  causes  tickling;  sensation  of  enlargement  of
bladder  (subjective)  which  seems  to  fall  from  side  to
side;  menses  appear  regularly  but  very  painful,  with
bearing  down;  discharge  is  profuse,  blood  light-red
without  clots ;  pains  resemble  labor  pains,  is  obliged  to
brace  her  feet ;  this  condition  lasts  two  days,  after  which
soreness  reappears  in  1.  side  mostly;  depressed  in  spirits,,
owing  to  tormenting  desire  to  pass  water,  which  pre-
vents her  leaving  home;  sleeps  well  but  has  bad  dreams;,
feels  bright  on  awaking  till  she  rises  only  to  be  tor-
mented by  constant  desire  to  void  urine  ;  appetite  good
but  food  causes  pressure  in  stomach,  with  frequent  ful-
ness in  epigastrium  ;  later,  thirst;  oppression  of  respira-
tion, which  is  sometimes  sighing.  ^Chronic  cystitis  and!
irritability  of  bladder.
^^Male  Sexnal  Organs,  i Increased  sexual  desire  with  weak-
ness of  genitals  ;  profuse  sweat  particularly  on  scrotum  ;
itching  around  genitals.

Continued  erections  at  night.

I  After  coition:  great  weakness;  weakness  in  knees;  uretlnu.
burns.

VOL.  IX. — 21 .  /


SEPIA.  322

■  Nightly  emissions  with  sexual dreams; great  despon-

dency ;  sensitive  to  cold,  damp  air,  it  chills  him  through
and  through.
•  During  coition  insufficient  erection  and  but  little  thrill ;
after  it  great  weakness.

■  Weak  and  watery  pollutions.

I  After  emission  burning  in  forepart  of  urethra,  languid
and  drowsy.

■  ■Emissions  after  onanism; despondency,  relaxation  of

body.
I  I  Very  debilitating  seminal  emissions  nearly  every  night ;
frequent  one-sided  stitches  in  forehead ;  constant  offen-
sive sweet  taste  in  mouth,  w^hich  is  always  dry,  but  with-
out much  thirst ;  stools  hard  ;  pain  in  abdomen  as  soon
as  inclination  is  felt  for  stool ;  feeling  of  tiredness  and
restlessness  in  legs,  particularly  calves.

■  Cutting  in  testes.
Swelling  in  scrotum.

■  Prepuce  ulcerates  and  itches  continually  ;  cracks  on  fore-

skin.
Indolent  chancres ;  on  glans  and  prepuce.
Burning,  itching,  humid or  scurfy  herpes prseputialis ;

chappy  herpes,  with  a  circular  desquamation  of  skin.
Eruption  on  glans.
Itching  and  dry  eruption  on  genitals.

■  Profuse  yellowish-white  discharge  from  urethra. ^Gon-

orrhoea.

■  Gonorrhoea  after  acute  symptoms  have  subsided ;  urine

is  loaded  with  urates,  staining  everything  red  and  often
excoriating  and  very  fetid,  associated  with  prostatitis.

■  ■Gleet:  no  pain,  discharge  only  during  night,  a  drop  or

so  staining  linen  yellowish ;  yellowish  discharge,  no
burning  on  urinating ;  painless,  of  a  year  and  a  half's
standing,  orifice  of  urethra  stuck  together  in  the  morn-
ing; particularly  where  sexual  organs  are  debilitated
by  long  continuance  of  disease  or  through  frequent  sem-
inal emissions ;  of  two  years'  duration.

■  Condylomata  completely  surrounding  head  of  penis.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Sterility.

■  Sexual  intercourse  is  intolerable.

■  Jerking  pains  in  vagina  from  below  upward  in  morning

on  waking.

■  Contractive  pain*  or  almost  continuous  stitches  in  vagina.

■  Tenderness  of  sexual  parts  to  touch.

■  Redness,  swelling  and  itching  eruption  of  inner  labia.

I  I  Married  fourteen  years  without  conceiving,  irregular
and  scanty  menses,  followed  by  leucorrhoea;  nausea,
disgust  for  food  ;  frequent  desire  to  urinate ;  a  bearing


323  SEPIA.

down  or  drawing  pain  in  lumbar  region  ;  pain  in  1.  side

of  face,  disposed  to  weep  and  think  married  life  a  blank.

Pressure  and  heavy  weight  or  dull,  heavy  pain  in  ovaries.

■  Congestion;  stinging  in  ovary;  pain  in  ovarian  region

running  outward  and  backward.

■  Neuralgia  of  ovaries  and  appendages;  stitching  or  burn-

ing pains.

■  Indurated  ovaries.

■  Induration  of  neck  of  uterus.
s  Dropsy  of  uterus.

■  Ulceration  and  congestion  of  os  and  cervix  uteri.

■  Induration  of  cervix  uteri,  with  stitching  pains  extend-

ing upward.
I  I  For  three  or  four  months  previous  to  last  confinement,
suffered  from  great  distension  of  abdomen  with  pain
and  soreness;  one  month  previous  to  confinement  labor-
like pains  with  discharge  of  serous  fluid;  pains  subsided
and  returned  again  every  three  or  four  days  until  her
confinement;  thinks  she  must  have  discharged  at  least
three  gallons  of  fluid  during  four  weeks ;  child  was  alive,
after  seven  months,  great  distension  of  abdomen  with
pressure  and  bearing  down,  especially  when  standing
or  sitting  a  long  time,  a  feeling  as  if  contents  would
issue  through  external  organs ;  general  soreness  through
bowels;  occasional  discharges  of  serous  fluid,  similar  to
those  before  confinement,  gushing  out  with  force;  feel-
ing of  soreness  in  uterus  and  external  organs;  urine
scanty,  high-colored,  with  frequent  inclination  and  in-
voluntary discharge  when  coughing  or  sneezing;  dart-
ing pricking  pains  through  hips  and  sides,  sometimes
shooting  down  to  bones  of  pelvis ;  pains  in  back  and
extremity  of  sacrum ;  general  debility ;  easy  perspira-
tion from  least  exercise;  night  sweats;  sometimes  flushes
of  heat  at  night  followed  by  chill ;  poor  appetite ;  bow-
els loose,  several  thin  evacuations  daily  ;  neck  of  uterus
low  in  pelvis,  nearly  as  large  as  at  eighth  month  of  ges-
tation. ^Hydrometra.

■  Burning,  shooting,  stitching  pains  in  neck  of  uterus.

■  Constant  sense  of  pressing  into  vagina ;  crossing  limbs  to

prevent  prolapsus.

■  Painful  stiflhess  in  uterine  region.

Pressure  in  uterus,  causing  oppression  of  breath ;  pressure
downward  is  as  if  everything  would  fall  out,  accom-
panied by  pain  in  abdomen ;  she  must  cross  her  limbs
in  order  to  prevent  protrusion  of  vagina,  yet  nothing
protrudes,  increase  of  gelatinous  leucorrhoea.

Prolapsus  uteri,  with  inclination  of  fundus  to  1.  side,  pro-
ducing a  numb  feeling  in  lower  half  of  1.  side  of  body ;


SEPIA.  324

dull  aching  pain  ;  aching  in  pelvic  region  somewhat  >
by  recumbent  posture,  especially  when  lying  on  r.  side;
tenderness  of  os  uteri.

I  I  Acne  on  face  <  before  menses;  perspires  easily,  hands
moist,  perspiration  of  strong  odor,  not  removed  by  bath-
ing; urine  of  very  disagreeable  odor  and  depositing
sediment  adhering  to  vessel ;  almost  constant  severe
backache  with  pains  through  both  ovarian  regions,  <
on  1.;  frequent  headache  and  stitching  pain  in  vagina.
^Displacement  of  uterus.

I  I  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge;  stools
tardy  although  soft;  fulness  and  pressure  in  pelvis;
pressure  toward  genitals  as  if  everything  would  fall  out ;
abdomen  bloated,  as  if  pregnant;  uterus  prolapsed,  vagi-
nal portion  lying  between  external  labia ;  os  uteri  open.

I  I  Vaginal  portion  of  uterus  swollen,  dry,  protruding  from
between  labia ;  os  uteri  open,  admitting  point  of  index
finger,  internal  os  closed ;  body  of  uterus  fills  up  pelvis  ;
efforts  at  manual  replacement  futile ;  during  twelfth
week  of  pregnancy.

I  I  Confined  two  months  ago;  womb  at  vulva;  unable  to
sit  up,  on  attempting  it  violent  bearing  down  ;  emacia-
tion ;  loss  of  appetite ;  empty,  deathly  sensation  in  epi
gastrium ;  feeling  of  weight  in  anus  not  >  by  stool ;
claylike  sediment  in  urine ;  fever  in  afternoon.

I  1  Face  pale ;  yellow  spots  on  face  and  saddle  across  nose ;
throbbing  headache  every  morning  on  waking  and  last-
ing all  day ;  desire  to  urinate  very  frequently ;  abdo-
men naturally  was  very  large  and  she  was  greatly
annoyed  by  rumbling  in  abdomen ;  all  kinds  of  food
disagreed,  causing  bitter  eructations ;  full  feeling  after
eating;  complete  procidentia  with  dreadful  bearing-
down  sensation,  >  crossing  limbs.

1  I  For  two  years  cough  and  pains  in  1.  lung;  discouraged,
sad,  thinks  she  will  not  recover,  feels  cross  and  irritable^
especially  in  morning ;  alternate  sensation  of  burning
and  coldness  (like  ice)  on  vertex ;  constant  dull  frontal
headaches,  has  been  subject  to  sick-headaches,  usually
pain  centres  over  1.  eye ;  empty,  gone  sensation  at  pit  of
stomach ;  loss  of  appetite,  even  smell  of  cooking  dis-
agrees ;  constipation  ;  cutting  and  burning  during  mic-
turition ;  urine  deposits  a  claylike  sediment,  which
adheres  tenaciously  to  vessel ;  menses  irregular  as  to
time  and  quantity ;  leucorrhoea  most  profuse  before  and
after  menses,  of  a  yellowish  color;  stitches  in  cervix
uteri ;  bearing-down  pain,  as  if  everything  would  pro-
trude, must  lie  down  or  cross  lier  limbs;  cough  dry  and
hacking,  most  in  morning,  no  expectoration  ;  stitches


325  SEPIA.

to  1.  scapula,  <  by  coughing,  inspiration,  touch,  >  by
gentle  pressure;  weakness  of  back,  it  gives  out  in  walk-
ing ;  much  heat  and  pain  in  sacrum ;  all  symptoms  <
in  morning,  >  in  evening.  ^Prolapsus  uteri.
.11  General  health  much  impaired  ;  nerves  weakened ;  con-
stant pain  in  back  and  pelvic  region;  extremely  painful
menstruation;  general  depression  of  spirits;  is  convinced
no  one  understands  her  case,  and  that  she  cannot  be
cured ;  uterus  retroverted,  os  uteri  pressed  high  up
against  os  pubis,  fundus  low  down  in  hollow  of  sacrum ;
slightest  attempt  to  replace  organ  gave  such  severe  pain
as  to  make  all  such  attempts  futile.

1 1  Sensation  of  weight  in  rectum  not  >  by  an  evacuation
and  a  sensation. that  limbs  must  be  crossed  to  prevent
everything  being  pressed  out  of  vagina.

1 1  Prolapsus :  of  uterus ;  of  vagina ;  with  constipation.

1 1  Pain  in  uterus,  bearing  down,  comes  from  back  to  ab-
domen, causes  oppression  of  breathing;  crosses  limbs  to
prevent  protrusion  of  parts.

I  Stitches  or  shooting,  lancinating  pains  mostly  in  neck  of

uterus  go  up  to  umbilicus  and  pit  of  stomach.
Uterine  pains  very  severe ;  the  uterus  feels  as  if  clutched
and  then  suddenly  relaxed,  causing  nausea.

I I  Metrorrhagia,  during  climacteric  age  or  during  preg-
nancy, especially  fifth  and  seventh  months.

I  I  Menses  every  four  weeks,  very  profuse  for  five  days,  dark,
slimy,  flowing  more  profusely  at  night  when  in  bed  and
sleeping;  preceded  two  weeks  by  severe  pain  in  small
of  back  ;  during  catamenia  a  dull,  sickish  pain  in  pubic
region,  with  bearing-down  pain  and  aggravation  of  that
in  back,  which  is  >  by  flow  when  very  abundant;  after
menses,  leucorrhoea,  yellow  and  thick  and  pain  in  small
of  back  for  two  weeks. ^Metrorrhagia.

•  Before  menses:  sadness;  acrid  leucorrhoea;  especially  in

young  women;  violent  colic,  shuddering  all  over  body
whole  day;  sensation  as  if  vulva  were  enlarged  and
soreness  in  perineum.

•  Mania  from  profuse  menstruation.

•  Dysmenorrhoea  in  women  with  scanty  menses;  half-sided

headache ;  weakness  of  eyes  ;  nausea ;  constipation.

I  I  Menses  regular  but  accompanied  by  hemicrania,  nausea

.  and  vomiting,  and  great  prostration,  so  that  she  must
lie  down.

■  During  menses:  sadness;  toothache;  headache;  obscu-
ration of  sight;  violent  pressure  in  forehead,  with  dis-
charge of  plugs  from  nose ;  bleeding  from  nose  ;  soreness
of  limbs;  tearing  in  tibia  ;  colicky  pains.

I  I  Day  before  menses  frequent  chilliness  and  pressure  in


SEPIA.  326

abdomen ;  night  previous  dry  heat  in  body,  restless
sleep,  with  frequent  starting  and  screaming ;  in  morn-
ing crampy  drawing  down  along  thighs ;  some  hours
previous  to  appearance  of  menstrual  flow  pressure  in
abdomen  becomes  a  violent  pain  in  umbilical  region  as
if  intestines  were  drawn  into  a  lump ;  frequently  faints,
and  pain  continues  until  menses  appear ;  after  menses,
mild  leucorrhoea. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

1 1  Menses:  too  late,  scanty  ;  too  early,  scanty;  preceded  by
violent  aching  in  abdomen ;  causing  faintness,  chilli-
ness and  shuddering;  eight  days  too  early,  scanty,  ap-
pearing only  in  morning;  a  week  too  soon  and  lasting
only  one  day;  five  days  too  late;  regular,  but  scanty
and  flow  dark ;  only  in  morning.

I  Insufficient  or  retarded  menses  in  feeble  women  of  dark
complexion  with  fine,  delicate  skin  and  extreixie  sensi-
tiveness to  all  impressions.

I  I  Scanty  menses  preceded  by  abdominal  distress,  pain  in
back  and  palpitation ;  constipation  with  discomfort  in
rectum ;  itching  papular  eruption  on  chin,  cheeks  and
temples.

I  I  For  fifteen  months,  pain  in  kidneys,  slight  leucorrhoea,
deficient  menses,  little  appetite,  difficult  digestion,  pro-
fuse perspiration  of  hands  and  feet,  chilliness  of  lower
extremities.

I  I  Great  lassitude  and  tiredness;  loss  of  appetite;  belch-
ing of  wind  ;  disturbed  sleep ;  despondency  ;  pressure  in
stomach  when  eating;  pinching  pains  in  epigastrium
extending  to  pubes;  menses  very  irregular,  scanty,  ap-
pearing but  three  times  in  twelve  months ;  sensation  as
if  something  heavy  would  force  itself  from  vagina  ;  yel-
low spots  on  face  and  forehead;  cervix  uteri  broad  and
thick  but  not  sensitive  to  pressure.

llAmenorrhoea:  at  age  of  puberty  or  later;  from  a  cold;
in  chlorotic  women ;  in  feeble  women  with  delicate,  thin
skin.

I  I  Amenorrhoea:  every  eight  to  fourteen  days  in  afternoon
and  evening,  severe  burning  and  stitching  pains  in  cen-
tre of  chest  <  from  deep  inspiration,  lasting  several
hours ;  lassitude ;  palpitation  of  heart,  when  walking
rapidly  or  ascending  steps ;  bitter  taste ;  loss  of  appetite ;
constipation ;  sensation  of  fulness  and  at  times  cutting
pains  in  abdomen.

I  When  menses  fail  to  appear  in  mothers  who  do  not  nurse;
abdomen  remains  very  large.

1  I  For  three  years  in  place  of  menses  profuse  leucorrhoeal
discharge.

lAmenorrhcea  and  profuse  yellowish-green  leucorrhoea.


327  SEPIA.

I  Between  menstrual  periods  a  peculiar  offensive  perspira-
tion (sudor  hystericus),  with  a  pungent,  offensive  per-
spiration in  axilla  and  soles  of  feet.

■  Tenderness  of  vagina;  painful  coition;  blood  from  va-

gina after  coition.

i  I  Leucorrhoea  of  a  yellowish,  excoriating  character,  some-
times attended  with  a  burning  sensation;  heat  and  pain
in  sacrum;  menses  a  dirty-brown  color;  offensive,  muco-
purulent sputa  ;  abnormal  nasal  discharge. ^Vaginitis.

I  1  Vaginitis  in  a  blonde  child,  5  years  old.

I  1  Burning  pain  in  rectum,  could  hardly  sit  on  a  chair,
same  pain  in  vagina  and  at  vulva ;  constipated,  head-
ache, vertigo.

Great  dryness  of  vulva  and  vagina,  causing  a  very  dis-
agreeable sensation  when  walking,  after  cessation  of
menses.

I  Diphtheritic  ulcers  in  vagina  and  on  labia.

I  Brown-reddish  color  of  vagina.

I  Redness,  swelling  and  itching  eruption  on  inner  labia.

Soreness  and  redness  of  labia,  in  perineum  and  between
thighs.

I  Pruritus  vulva.

■  Troublesome  and  severe  itching  of  vulva,  with  pimples

all  around  ;  painless  vesicles  in  outer  parts  of  vulva.

■  Severe itching of  vulva; labia swollen with humid

eruption.

I I  Leucorrhoea  :  bloody,  slimy  ;•  yellowish;  yellow;  like
milk;  especially  profuse  after  urinating;  profuse  lumpy,
fetid  mucus ;  acrid,  with  soreness  of  pudendum  ;  look-
ing like  pus;  clear  as  water;  green  red ;  during  preg-
nancy ;  yellow  or  greenish  water ;  of  bad-smelling  fluids;
at  climacteric  period ;  at  puberty ;  with  stitches  in  uterus ;
with  itching  of  vulva  and  vagina ;  <  when  she  has  fre-
quent eructations  and  retchings,  face  pale ;  especially
profuse  after  urinating,  after  making  an  effort  to  vomit ;
only  in  daytime,  with  burning  pain  ;  pains  while  walk-
ing on  account  of  soreness;  with  bearing  down  in  pel-
vis ;  stinging  pain  in  ovarian  region  ;  frequent  urging
to  urinate;  itching  in  genitals;  with  stitches  in  neck  of
uterus;  terrible  pain  during  coition;  between  menses ;
coming  away  in  starts.

■  Gonorrhoea  in  women  after  acute  symptoms  have  sub-

sided.

I  'Thick  yellow,  acrid  leucorrhoea  during  day,  none  at
night ;  fulness,  heaviness  and  tension  in  abdomen  ;  con-
stant painful  pressure  in  sides  as  from  a  burden.

I  I A  child,  set.  5,  body  emaciated,  appetite  gone,  strength
rapidly  decreasing,  afflicted  for  fifteen  months  with  an


SEPIA.  328

unceasing  exhausting  leucorrhoea;  discharge  sometimes
thick  and  of  a  yellowish-green  color,  sometimes  thin
and  always  very  profuse,  running  through  night  dress,
sheet,  and  down  into  mattress  on  which  she  lay  at  night.

■  Induration  and  sensation  of  enlargement  in  mammary

gland;  stitches;  carcinoma.

I  I  Scirrhous  tumor  of  r.  breast,  about  size  of  hen's  egg,  hard,
nodulated  and  tender  to  touch ;  stinging  pain.

iScirrhus  mammae;  burning  pain.

ilSudden hot flushes  at climacteric,  with momentary
sweat,  weakness  and  great  tendency  to  faint.
'^^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Disposition to
miscarriages  from  fifth  to  seventh  month.

I  I  Retained  placenta  after  miscarriage;  discharges  offen-
sive, corrosive,  with  recurrent  hemorrhages.

■  Soreness  of  abdomen  ;  feels  the  motions  of  child  too  sen-

si  tivel}^

■  During  pregnancy  :  yellow-brown  spots  on  face  ;  thought

of  food  sickens  her ;  sensation  of  emptiness ;  painful  feel-
ing of  hunger ;  vomiting ;  toothache ;  colic ;  diarrhoea ;
costiveness ;  congestion  to  chest ;  papitation ;  pain  in
mammae;  swelling  of  labia;  too  quick  escape  of  urine;
laborlike  pains  in  seventh  month ;  loose  morning  cough.

■  Terrible  itching  of  vulva,  causing  abortion.

■  Labor:  os  half  open,  pain  insufficient,  tenderness  of  an-

terior lip  of  mouth  of  uterus,  pain  above  pubes,  as  if
everything  would  come  out;  shuddering  with  pains,
can  bear  them  >  when  warmly  covered  ;  shooting  pains
in  neck  of  womb;  indurated  os  uteri,  dyspnoea;  spas-
modic contraction  of  os;  numerous  fine  needlelike,  dart-
ing pains,  shooting  upward  from  neck  of  uterus;  flushes
of  heat;  cold  feet;  hour-glass  contraction;  constant  sen-
sation of  weight  in  anus ;  pain  shooting  upward  in
vagina;  j)ain  felt  mostly  in  back;  severe  bearing  down
or  forcing  in  back,  occurring  in  regular  paroxysms.

■  Offensive  excoriating  lochia;  very  long  lasting.

■  Nipples  cracked  across  crown,  bleeding  and  sore,  preceded

by  itching.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Reflex  or
sympathetic  aphonia  from  functional  or  organic  disease
of  uterus.

■  Hoarseness:  with  tickling  in  larynx  and  bronchi;  with

coryza  and  dry  cough  from  titillation  in  throat.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  in  larynx.

■  Roughness  and  soreness  of  larynx  and  throat.

^^  Respiration. ■Oppression  of  chest  and  shortness  of  breath,
when  walking.

■  Severe  oppression  of  chest,  toward  evening.


329  SEPIA.

I  After  emotions  of  mind  loses  breath  and  gets  palpitation.

Awakes  in  morning  with  great  dyspnoea,  covered  with
sweat.

Oppression  of  chest  and  cold  sweat.

Is  suddenl}^  aroused  from  a  deep  sleep  by  asthma.

Breathing  <  after  sleep.

I  iShortness  of  breath,  <  sitting  a  long  time,  particularly
in  a  stooping  posture  and  after  motion;  walks  rapidly
without  feeling  any  dyspnoea,  but  if  he  is  stopped  gets
so  short  of  breath  that  he  cannot  speak  and  is  seized
with  a  feeling  of  deathly  anxiety  which  disappears  when
he  resumes  his  walk;  sweats  very  easily  on  slightest
exertion;  very  sensitive  to  cold  wind;  clothing  oppress-
ive after  eating;  very  easily  irritated.

I  I  Great  shortness  of  breath,  hindering  her  in  her  house-
hold work,  must  pause  while  eating  to  get  breath ;  after
eating  pressure  in  stomach ;  oppression  of  breathing  >
in  open  air,  <  in  room,  morning  and  evening;  dancing
and  running  cause  no  shortness  of  breath.

I  Asthma:  short,  easy  inspiration  and  long,  slow,  wheez-
ing expiration.

■  Spasmodic  asthma.
^^  Cough.  iDry  cough:  especially  in  evening,  in  bed,  until
midnight,  frequently  with  nausea  and  bitter  vomiting;
during  sleep  without  waking ;  from  tickling  in  larynx
or  in  bronchi,  toward  morning;  whooping  and  choking,
with  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  and  scraping  sore  pain  in
larynx  not  felt  when  swallowing  saliva;  does  not  awake
from  her  sleep,  but  after  waking  it  becomes  very  severe
and  continuous ;  short,  seems  to  come  out  of  stomach  ;
hard,  concussive;  short  evening  cough,  with  intermit-
tent stitches  in  r.  hypochondrium,  with  eruptions  on
skin,  with  women;  as  if  proceeding  from  stomach  and
abdomen  or  from  constipation,  or  as  if  something  re-
mained lodged  in  stomach  that  would  not  pass  off;  after
a  meal.

I  Cough:  especially  evening  and  morning,  with  salty  ex-
pectoration; with  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest;  with
expectoration  only  in  morning  or  only  during  night;
only  during  day ;  wakes  one  at  night ;  with  expectora-
tion only  before  midnight  as  soon  as  he  gets  into  bed,
not  during  day;  short  hacking  in  evening,  after  lying
down,  with  much  expectoration  of  pure  coagulated  blood,
once  every  minute  ;  wakes  her  at  night,  with  sensation
in  chest  as  if  hollow,  and  smarting  therein  as  if  sore;
most  severe  in  evening  after  lying  down  ;  spasmodic ;
severe,  with  little  expectoration,  with  little  vomiting,
evenings,  when  lying  in  bed  ;  day  and  night,  pain  there-


SEPIA.  ^  330

from  in  pit  of  stomach ;  affects  chest  and  stomach  greatly ;
from  tickling  in  larynx  without  expectoration ;  every
evening,  not  ceasing  until  he  coughs  loose  a  little
phlegm  ;  loose  in  morning,  with  efforts  to  vomit ;  loose
especially  at  night ;  with  expectoration ;  with  taste  in
mouth  as  of  rotten  eggs ;  with  soreness  in  chest;  stitches
in  chest  and  back.

Cough  <  :  from  repose ;  standing  and  sitting ;  lying  in
bed,  or  upon  (1.)  side ;  after  walking  rapidly ;  going  up
stairs;  getting  wet  through;  taking  cold;  cold  damp  air,
as  in  churches  and  cellars ;  cold  north  wind ;  deep  in-
spiration ;  eating ;  sour  food  and  vinegar.

iCough  and  coryza  with  sneezing  commence  every  morn-
ing before  getting  out  of  bed  and  last  until  9  a.m.

I  Coughs  phlegm  loose,  but  cannot  get  it  up  ;  is  obliged  to
swallow  it.

During  evening  cough  after  lying  down,  he  can  raise  >  if
he  turns  from  1.  to  r.  side.

When  she  cannot  expectorate  with  the  cough  her  breath
almost  leaves  her.

■  Expectoration:  profuse;  purulent;  offensive;  fetid;  green;
tasting  salty ;  only  in  morning.

■Dry,  fatiguing  cough,  provoked  by  a  sensation  in  region
of  stomach,  and  seeming  to  come  therefrom ;  or  the
cough  comes,  as  it  seems,  from  the  abdomen.

I  i  Affection  of  lungs  with  haemoptysis  and  cough  for  six
years ;  >  since  appearance  in  face  of  a  red  papular  erup-
tion, now  existing  for  two  years;  hard  papulse  on  a  red
base,  without  suppuration  on  her  cheeks,  forehead,  nose
and  chin,  burning,  itching  and  smarting  intensely,  espe-
cially in  wet,  cold  weather ;  appetite  good,  though  food
causes  pressure  in  stomach ;  constipation  ;  menses  too
often  and  too  profuse ;  easily  exhausted ;  backache ;
cough  reappeared  dr}^  and  hard,  slight  expectoration  on
rising  in  morning;  constant  desire  to  clear  throat,  which
feels  as  if  filled  with  phlegm,  which  it  is  impossible  to
raise ;  oppressed  feeling  through  chest  after  a  hard  par-
oxysm of  cough  ;  nausea  during  and  after  cough  ;  erup-
tion not  very  thick  on  face;  cough  seemed  to  come  from
stomach,  which  felt  as  if  it  were  being  scraped.

I  I  Cough  and  dyspnoea  <  in  dry  air,  fog,  east  and  north
wind ;  in  stormy  weather  she  is  almost  suffocated  ;  in
walking  dyspnoea  often  disappears ;  lying  on  1.  side  is
disagreeable  to  her ;  she  has  to  lie  with  her  head  high,
often  sitting  in  bed ;  a  warm  room  is  oppressive ;  expec-
toration yellow  or  green,  with  salty  taste ;  appetite  mod-
erate; no  thirst;  urine  has  a  blood-red  sediment;  menses
regular  but  scanty ;  always  <  before  and  during  period;


331  SEPIA.

mood  depressed  and  weeping;  formerly  had  cough,  blad-
der trouble,  hemorrhoids,  weakness  of  memory  and
melancholic  state.

I  I  Catarrh  every  Winter  with  violent  coughing;  after  being
ill  a  draft  cough  tormenting  and  dry;  severe  orthopnoea,
had  to  sit  straight  up  day  and  night,  with  horrible  anx-
iety about  a  rattling  in  chest,  with  soreness  as  if  raw
on  chest;  fears  to  suffocate.

I  I  Tickling  cough  in  bed  at  night,  particularly  before
midnight ;  spasmodic,  coming  in  rapid  concussions,  till
breath  is  exhausted,  then  expectoration  of  mucus,  with
temporary  relief.

I  Paroxysms  of  spasmodic  cough  resembling  whooping
cough,  excited  by  tickling  in  chest,  from  larynx  to  stom-
ach ;  daytime  without,  morning  with  expectoration  of
yellow,  green  or  grey  pus,  or  of  a  milk-white,  tenacious
mucus,  generally  of  saltish  taste.

I  I  Child  cries  each  time  it  coughs  at  night ;  can  hardly  get
its  breath,  the  cough  coming  in  such  rapid  succession ;
retching  with  cough,  unless  quickly  picked  up ;  very
cross  and  cannot  be  put  to  sleep  as  usual  during  the  day ;
soreness  in  bends  of  knees  and  elbows,  on  neck  and  be-
hind ears,  rapidly  spreading  and  exuding  an  offensive-
smelling  serum,  paining  when  washed.

I  I  Cough  constant  whenever  child  is  laid  down,  particu-
larly violent  at  night ;  with  spasm  of  diaphragm  and
larynx  as  in  whooping  cough.

I  I  Child,  8  months,  blonde  and  fat;  teeth  developing  rap-
idly; cough  day  and  night,  but  principally  at  night,
with  retching  and  complete  loss  of  breath ;  cough  comes
in  rapid  succession  until  the  breath  is  exhausted,  then
gagging  and  vomiting  of  mucus. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Sudden  severe spasmodic cough  at  night,  cannot  get

enough  breath,  chest  constricted,  retching,  loud  crying;
early  in  second  stage. ^Pertussis.
'  I A  poor  child  growing  up  under  most  wretched  external
conditions;  characteristic  ulcer  on  frenulum  linguse;
complication  with  bronchitis  and  later  lobular  pneu-
monia. ^Whooping  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Oppression  of  chest.
Severe  pressure  in  chest,  evening  in  bed.

■  Sensation  of  emptiness  in  chest.

■  Great  pressure  on  chest,  more  1.  side.

iStitch  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  scapula,  when  breathing  or
coughing.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  in  middle  of  chest.

I  'Frequent  sensation  as  if  a  knife  were  tlirust  into  top  of
1.  lung,  then  turned  around  with  jiaiu  streaking  off
through  shoulder.


SEPIA.  332

Itching  and  tickling  in  chest.

Fulness  and  pressure  in  chest.

Constriction  of  chest  with  cough.

Rattling  in  chest  with  cough.

iChest  s3^inptoms  >  by  pressing  on  chest  with  hand.

I  I  Burning  pain  in  a  fixed  spot  under  r.  nipple;  itching
of  external  chest ;  dry  cough  when  reflecting ;  pain  <
reading  and  thinking ;  rarely  seminal  emissions,  which,
however,  aggravate  pains ;  difficult  expectoration  of
whitish  mucus;  sweats  at  night;  cold  knees  at  night  in
bed;  slow  digestion  especially  of  acids,  with  sensation
of  weight  in  epigastrium  ;  has  old  j)leuritic  adhesions  in
r.  chest.

iiPleuritis  after  a  chronic  headache  had  suddenly  van-
ished.

I  I  Severe  attack  of  pleurisy  in  two  old  men.

I  I  Pleurisy  in  a  boy,  eet,  6;  exudation  had  spread  over
whole  1.  chest.

I  I  Severe  attack  of  pleurisy  in  ayoung  woman  where  Phos.,
though  apparentl}^  indicated,  failed.

•  Chronic  pleurisy,  threatened  phthisis.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  lungs,  palpitation  and  great  anx-

iety.
*  I  Tuberculous  and  other  chronic  diseased conditions,  of
central  third  of  r.  lung  {Arsenicum  upper  third).
■Stretching  or  darting  pains  through  central  portion  of
r.  lung.

■  Neglected  pneumonia,  with  copious,  very  offensive  expec-

toration.

I  I  Short,  dry  cough,  titillation  in  larynx,  sometimes  a
thick,  deep  voice,  without  metallic  timbre ;  sensation  of
dryness  in  chest  and  larynx;  dry,  screeching,  deep,  hol-
low cough,  >  lying  down  ;  difficult  expectoration  of  a
little  mucus,  which  is  tough,  slimy  or  albuminoid.
^Phthisis  pulmonum.

I  I  Sharp  darting  pain  through  r.  side  of  chest,  rather  below
centre  of  r.  lung;  at  times  very  acute,  preventing  full
respiration,  then  again  more  dull,  but  all  the  time  more
or  less  painful ;  after  suppression  of  a  cough  some  months
previously.

I  iDulness  on  percussion  in  r.  lung,  posterior  to  third  and
fourth  ribs ;  much  pain,  both  dull  and  sharp,  in  that
region;  severe  dry  cough,  <  in  evening,  with  expecto-
ration in  morning;  chills,  fever  and  night  sweats;  greatly
emaciated. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

I  I  Complete  anorexia;  sleeplessness;  cough  with  a  milky-
looking  expectoration  ;  fever ;  after  a  severe  paroxysm
of  cough  which  lasted  two  hours  coughed up  several


333  SEPIA.

cupfuls  of  blood  and  a  large  quantity  of  offensive-smell-
ing pus;  this  had  occurred  once  before;  next  day  ex-
pectoration was  again  slimy,  milky-looking  and  very
profuse,  with  almost  uninterrupted  loose  cough,  respi-
ration becoming  easier.  ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
I  I  After  relief  of  a  chronic  dyspepsia  attended  with  sick-
headache  he  began  to  suffer  with  uneasiness  and  pain
just  below  centre  of  r.  lung ;  pain  increased  in  severity
and  he  soon  began  to  cough ;  during  a  very  hot  day
without  unusual  effort  or  exposure  was  seized  with  a
sense  of  suffocation,  probably  from  congestion  of  r.  lung;
much  pressure  and  sharp  pain  through  central  portion
of  r.  chest ;  cough  night  and  day  ;  an  abscess  broke  in
lung,  and  he  expectorated  more  than  a  pint  of  fetid
matter;  at  first  discharge  greenish,  then  bloody  and
yelloWy  finally  grey,  excessively  fetid,  so  profuse  it  came
near  strangling  him ;  while  abscess  was  gathering,  chills,
fever  and  night  sweats ;  abscess  broke,  continued  to  cough
very  severely  day  and  night;  great  emaciation;  very
pale;  pulse  12.0;  extremely  feeble.  ^Phthisis.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Heart  gives  an  occasional
hard  thump.
Violent  palpitation  and  beating  of  arteries  in  evening  in
bed.

■  Palpitation:  after  emotions;  with  stitches  in  1.  side;  with

anxiety  about  things  which  happened  years  ago ;  on

walking  fast.
I  Interruption  of  beating  of  heart  most  after  dinner,  alarmed,

quivering  motion.
I  Wakes  up  with  violent  beating  of  heart.

■  Nervous  palpitation  >  by  walking  fast.

I  I A  man,  about  30,  stout,  healthy-looking,  complains  of
palpitation  and  constipation;  appetite  good ;  no  thirst;
after  eating,  bloatedness  of  abdomen,  anguish  and  pal-
pitation, especially  with  alvine  discharge ;  <  when
sitting  down  after  having  had  a  walk,  never  during
walking  or  dancing ;  flatulency  in  1.  side  of  abdomen
rising  upward,  >  by  pressure;  <  in  cold  wind ;  cannot
lie  on  1.  side,  prefers  to  walk  with  head  uncovered ;  sweats
easily,  especially  on  feet,  which  often  feel  cold.

■  Affections  of  heart,  with  violent  intermittent,  palpitating

and  tremulous  motion  of  heart;  violent,  rather  loud
and  sometimes  intermittent  sounds  of  heart,  with  dul-
ness  of  percussion  over  a  larger  surface ;  flushes  of  heat,
redness,  determination  of  blood  to  head  and  r.  temple,
with  cold  hands  and  feet;  scanty  urine;  costiveness.
Much  ebullition  of  blood  in  whole  body,  at  night,  produc-
ing restless  sleep.


SEPIA.  334

Orgasm  of  blood  with  congestion  to  head  and  chest.

She  feels  pulse  beating  through  body,  particularly  through

whole  1.  chest.
llCongestion  of  blood  to  chest,  with  violent  palpitation  of

heart.
Pulse :  full  and  quick  during  night  and  then  intermitting;

slow  during  day;  accelerated  by  motion  or  being  angry;

tremulous;  intermitting.
Pulsation  in  all  the  bloodvessels.
I  I  Dropsy  in  consequence  of  valvular  insufficiency.
^^  Outer  Chest, n  Brown  spots  on  chest.
I  I  Stitches  in  breasts.

■  Soreness  of  nipples.

I  I  Fungus  hsematodes  in  clavicular  region,  bleeding  pro-
fusely.
''  Neck  and  Back. Pain  constantly  between  shoulders  and
down  back.
Great  aching  between  shoulders  and  under  1.  scapula,  ex-
tending into  1.  lung,  <  on  expiration.

■  Pressure  and  stitches  in  r.  shoulder  blade.

■  Stiffness  in  small  of  back  and  neck.

■  ■  In  small  of  back :  pain  ;  pain  and  weakness ;  at  6  p.m.

pain  or  great  weakness;  weakness  when  walking,  from
uterine  troubles;  pulsations;  aching;  pain  as  if  sprained
in  afternoons  and  evening  in  bed;  tired  pain;  pain  par-
ticularly with  stiffness,  >  by  walking.

During  whole  menstrual  period  she  could  not  sleep  on
account  of  tearing  in  back,  chills  and  heat  with  thirst
and  painful  contraction  of  chest.

Heaviness  in  back  in  morning  on  awaking  as  if  she  could
not  turn  or  raise  herself,  or  as  if  she  had  lain  in  a  wrong
position,  almost  as  if  parts  had  gone  to  sleep.

■  ■When  stooping  sudden  pain  in  back  as  if  struck  by  a

hammer,  >  by  pressing  toack  against  something  hard.

■  Stitches  in  back  when  coughing.

■  ■Pain  in  back  across  hips.

Stitches  posteriorly  over  r.  hip,  for  four  days  almost  con-
tinuous; she  could  not  lie  on  r.  side  on  account  of  pain,
when  touching  part  it  pained  as  from  subcutaneous
ulceration.

■  Aching  pain  across  loins  <  on  moving.

■  Aching  in  sacrum  in  evening,  >  by  pressure.

■  Dull  pain  in  sacrum.

■Soreness  and  pain  in  back  in  sacral  region.

■Constant  dull,  heavy  pain  in  sacrum  and  abdomen  ex-
tending to  thighs  and  legs.

Pain  in  sacrum  extending  through  hips  and  thighs  to
below  knee,  with  weakness  and  lassitude  when  moving.


335  SEPIA.

especially  when  going  up  stairs,  as  if  limbs  would  refuse
to  act  before  reaching  top.

■  Pressing,  dragging  pain  over  sacrum  and  at  same  time

over  hips,  burning  pressure  in  spine  extending  across
dorsal  region  and  under  scapula,  like  that  produced  by
sewing.

■  Weakness  of  sacro-iliac  region.

■  Belching  relieves  pain  in  back.

■  Pains  extending  from  other  parts  to  back.

■  Herpes  circinatus  r.  side  of  neck,  appearing  at  one  time

in  front,  then  at  back,  then  at  side  of  neck,  at  times
they  extend  about  ear,  swelling  of  surrounding  parts.

I 'Throbbing  in  small  of  back  >  by  sitting  upright,  <
sitting,  leaning  back ;  on  turning  in  bed  or  stretching
out  arms  a  pain  catches  her  there  as  if  something  were
going  to  break,  stopping  breath. ^Rheumatism.

M Crick  in  back;  of  eight  years'  standing;  caused  by  a
sudden  strain  when  lifting;  <  when  first  attempting  to
move ;  >  by  continued  motion ;  leucorrhoea ;  riding,  a
jar  or  a  misstep  hurts  her  back  severely.

■  Is  obliged  to  walk  stooping  and  gets  painful  stitches  in

back  by  accidentally  kicking  foot  against  something,

■  Sudden  stitch  in  back  while  lifting,  cannot  move  without

great  pain.

■  Backache  causes  nausea  and  faint  feeling  while  standing.

I  I  Pains  in  small  of  back  after  exposure  to  wet  and  cold

weather;  <  in  morning,  sitting  or  on  beginning  to  move
about ;  falls  asleep  late  and  cannot  lie  on  1.  side  or  upon
back;  vertigo  in  morning  when  rising;  feels  uncom-
fortable in  a  hot  room  or  when  sitting  too  long;  per-
spires easily.

I I  After  a  severe  cold,  chilliness  along  back  in  evening,  fol-
lowed by  a  severe  pain  in  back,  <  slightest  motion  of
back,  on  account  of  which  she  must  lie  very  quietly  on
back ;  great  oppression  of  chest  with  shortness  of  breath
and  violent  beating  of  heart ;  pressing  pain  in  region
of  stomach;  >  from  touch;  frequent  twitching  of  arms;
pulse  tense,  120;  loss  of  appetite;  thirst  moderate;  sweats.
^Perimyelitis.

■  The  spine  is  tender  to  touch  on  pressure.

'*  Upper  Limbs. ■  Swelling  and  suppuration  of  axillary  glands.

■  Humid  tetter  in  armpit.

■  Pain  as  from  dislocation  in  shoulder  joint  after  exertion.
Paralytic  drawing  and  tearing in arm and  armpit to

fingers.

■  Lameness  and  falling  asleep  of  arms  and  fingers.

■  Drawing  in  arms  down  to  fingers.

■  Bruised  pain  in  arms..


SEPIA.  336

■  Herpes  on  elbow  (scaling  off).
iStiffness  of  elbow  and  wrist  joints.

I  Stitches  in  joints  of  arm,  hands  and  fingers.

Tensive  pain  in  metacarpal  joints  of  fingers,  particularly
during  flexion.

I  I  Red,  hard  spot  on  skin  covering  first  and  second  meta-
carpal bones,  rapidl}^  spreading  over  dorsal  surface  of
hand;  scales  fornied  upon  the  red  base  falling  off  in
centre  and  renewed  toward  periphery.

I  Scaly  tetter  on  backs  of  hands  ;  <  in  cold  weather.

I  White  scaly  tetter  on  back  of  hand  and  fingers.

I  Itch  and  scabs  on  hands ;  soldier's  itch.

I  Heat  in  hands  during  day,  with  nervous  excitement.

iCold  hands  even  in  warm  room,  and  from  hands  chill
through  whole  body.

I  I  Profuse  perspiration  of  hands  so  that  all  needles  rusted
and  soiled  her  work  ;  frequent  and  severe  migraine.

llHands  sweat  profusely;  cold,  sweaty  hands.

Things  drop  from  hands.

Burning  of  palms  of  hands.

■  Cold  perspiration  on  hands.
I  Skin  on  palms  peels  off.

I  I  Whitlow  for  six  or  seven  days;  last  joint  of  r.  thumb
inflamed,  swollen  and  itches,  with  throbbing,  shooting
and  burning  in  it;  redness  mostly  on  dorsal  surface  of
phalanx,  throbbing  <  in  palmar  surface;  the  part  is
dark-red  and  pus  invisible  (relieved  the  pain).

I  Panaritium,  with  violent  beating  and  stitching  pains.

•  Painless  ulcers  on  tips  of  finger  or  on  joints.

I  Warts  on  hand  and  fingers;  on  sides  of  fingers;  horny.

Many  warts  of  young  girls  (onanists).

Finger  nails  yellowish,  discolored.
^^ Lower  Limbs. iCoxagra  with  lancinating  stitches,  must
get  out  of  bed  for  relief;  pains  <  from  rising  but  >
from  slow  walking.

1  I  Severe  tearing  pains  in  1.  thigh  ;  along  coarse  of.  sciatic
nerve,  pain  extending  to  calf  of  leg  and  toes;  pain  3  to
5  A.M.;  during  attack  veins  of  affected  part  are  greatly
distended,  she  cannot  remain  in  bed,  gets  up  and  walks
about  room  sobbing;  lassitude  during  day ;  eight  months
pregnant. ^Sciatica.

Swelling  of  limbs  and  feet;  feet  swollen  and  feel  as  if
asleep  ;  feet  burn  much  at  night ;  at  the  climacteric.

Pains  in  hips  and  thighs  extending  to  near  the  knees.

I  Cramp:  in  hip  joint  and  thigh;  in  buttocks  at  night  in
bed  when  stretching  out  limb ;  in  calves,  particularly
during  latter  months  of  pregnancy ;  feet  mostly  in  day-
time, ankles  weak  and  turn  easily  when  walking.


337  SEPIA.

Pain  as  if  bruised  in  r.  hip  joint.

Stiffness  of  legs  to  hip  joint,  after  sitting  for  a  short  time.

Drawing  in  thighs.

I  Soreness  and  burning  between  nates.

I  Lower  limbs  go  to  sleep  when  walking.

I  Much  weakness  in  lower  limbs.

I  Lower  limbs  pain  as  if  beaten ;  desires  to  sit  down,  when
sitting  she  feels  as  if  she  must  stand  up.

iStitches  and  sticking,  drawing  pains,  with  lassitude,  cold-
ness of  feet  or  knees ;  sweat  of  feet.

■  Restlessness  in  legs  every  evening,  with  formication.

I  Sensation  of  running  as  from  a  mouse  in  lower  limbs.

ilcy  coldness  of  lower  limbs.

I  Swelling  of  limbs  and  feet,  <  when  sitting  or  standing,

>  when  walking.
iSw'elling  of  knee,  soft  and  painless.

■  Cracking  in  knee  and  ankle  joints,  stiffness.

I  I  Acute  attack  of  rheumatism  in  r.  knee,  which  is  semi-
flexed, stiff,  swollen,  red  and  painful ;  <  at  night;  great
sense  of  weakness  in  joint;  external  lateral  ligament
especially  sensitive  and  painful  to  touch ;  extreme  sen-
sibility to  cold  air  and  to  every  change  of  weather.

I  I  For  fifteen  years,  scaly  eruption  on  legs  or  a  dark,  dusky
redness  of  skin ;  it  occasionally  improved  but  never  dis-
appeared.

I  I  Papular,  dry,  scurfy,  ring-shaped  eruption,  on  anterior
surface  of  legs,  immediately  below  knees.

I  I  Aching  in  calves,  extending  to  knees,  with  a  feeling  al-
most as  if  bones  were  decaying ;  excitement  and  occu-
pation of  business  during  morning  make  him  forget
his  aching  limbs;  has  had  much  worry  lately.

■  Coldness  in  legs  and  feet,  especially  in  evening  in  bed;.

when  feet  get  warm,  hands  get  cold.

I  Burning  or  heat  of  feet  at  night.

I  Feet  swollen,  with  sensation  as  if  fallen  asleep.

I  I  Feet  hot,  red,  swollen,  dorsal  surface  covered  with  large
pustules,  some  of  which  had  burst,  discharging  a  thick,
yellow  greenish  pus ;  severe  tensive  pains ;  <  in  r.  foot.

I  I  Heaviness  in  feet  when  walking.

I  Icy  coldness  of  feet. ^Metritis.

■  Profuse  sweat  of  feet;  or  sweat  of  unbearable  odor,  caus-

ing soreness  of  toes.

■  Suppressed  foot  sweat.

■  Tension  in  tendo-achillis,  also  swelling  of  tendon.
Ulcer  on  heel  from  a  spreading  blister.

Stitches  in  heels  and  corns  during  day.
Crumbling  misshapen  toe  nails.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Heaviness  of  limbs.

VOL  IX. — 22.


SEPIA.  338

■Stiffness  and  cracking  of  joints  with  arthritic  pains.

■  Jerking  and  twitching  of  limbs  and  head,  during  da3\

■  Limbs  go  to  sleep  easily  after  manual  labor.

■  Weakness  of  joints,  especially  of  knees.

■  Patient  fears  joints  cannot  bear  exertion  of  lifting.

■  Stinging  pains  in  limbs,  inner  parts,  bones.

■  Neuralgia  in  limbs  going  up  into  head.

I  I  Painful  indolent  little  boils  in  armpits  and  thighs  ;  irreg-
ular catamenia;  peculiarly  offensive  sweaty  condition
of  feet,  painful  excoriation  between  toes.

■  Itching  in  bends  of  knees,  elbows  and  on  hands.

■  Palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet  burning  hot.

■  Ulcers  on  upper  part  of  joints  of  fingers  and  toes.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  pulsating  headache  >;

boring  headache  >  ;  coldness  in  vertex  <  ;  fistula  of
cheek  <  ;  neuralgia  of  plexus  mesogastricus  >  ;  cough
worse.

Lying :  headache  with  anxiety  <  ;  pain  in  occiput  <  ;
stitches  in  forehead  >  ;  an  back,  headache  <  ;  on  pain-
ful side,  headache  >  ;  on  it,  swelling  on  side  of  head  >  ;
on  painless  side,  roots  of  hair  more  sore;  quiet  facial
neuralgia  >  ;  >  pressure  under  ribs;  on  liver  >  pain;
on  back  with  gallstone  colic ;  distress  in  hypogastric
region  <  ;  sensation  as  if  urinary  organs  would  be
pressed  out  >  ;  aching  in  pelvic  region;  hacking  cough;
cough  >.

Lying  with  head  high:  cough  and  dyspnoea  >.

Lying  on  side :  pulsating  pain  >  ;  legs  flexed  on  thighs
and  thighs  on  abdomen  >  pelvic  distress.

Lying  on  r.  side:  aching  in  pelvic  region  >.

Lying  on  1.  side :  fistula  of  cheek  <  ;  cough  < ;  is  disagree-
able to  her;  cannot,  pain  in  back  ;  anxious  dreams.

Lying  on  back:  impossible;  pain  in  back;  very  quietly,
compulsory  on  account  of  pain ;  cough  with  expectora-
tion <.

Must  lie  down  :  migraine  during  menses.

Could  not  be  raised  from  recumbent  position  without
fainting.

Sitting:  impatience;  headache  >  ;  involuntary  jerking  of
head ;  distress  in  hypogastric  region  <  ;  bearing  down
a  long  time  shortness  of  breath  <  ;  cough  <  ;  palpita-
tion >  after  a  walk;  throbbing  in  small  of  back,  >  up-
right, <  leaning  back  ;  backache  <  ;  too  long,  feels  un-
comfortable ;  a  short  time,  stiffness  of  legs ;  swelling  of
limbs  or  feet  <.

Sitting  with  legs  crossed:  sensation  as  if  urinary  organs
would  be  pressed  out  >  ;  to  prevent  protrusion  of  va-
gina; bearing-down  sensation  >.


339  SEPIA.

Has  to  sit  straight  up  day  and  night :  orthopnoea.

Stooping:  bursting  headache  <  ;  boring  headache  <  ;
coldness  on  vertex  <  ;  shortness  of  breath  <  ;  sudden
pain  in  back.

Standing :  emission  of  urine ;  as  if  urinary  organs  would
be  pressed  out;  bearing  down;  cough  <;  backache
causes  nausea  and  faint  feeling ;  swelling  of  legs  and
feet  <.

Turning  in  bed :  stretching  out  arms,  catching  pain  in
small  of  back  ;  stitches  in  back.

Turning  from  1.  to  r.  side :  facilitates  raising  phlegm.

Could  not  lie  quiet  for  five  minutes :  restless  sleep.

Rising  from  bed :  pain  in  swelling  on  head  >.

Rising :  pains  from  coxagra  <  ;  very  tired  in  morning.

Leaning  forward:  heaviness  in  ovarian  region.

Must  bend  over :  pain  in  stomach.

Kneeling  at  church  :  fainting.

Stretching  out  limb  :  cramps  in  buttocks.

Remaining  in  one  position  long:  neuralgic  pains  <.

Changing  position :  neuralgic  pains  >  ;  of  legs  impera-
tive.

Desires  to  sit  down,  when  sitting  must  stand  up  again ;
pain  in  limbs.

Cannot  find  easy  position  for  head.

Stepping:  headache  <.

Motion  :  pain  over  eye  <  ;  bursting  headache  <  ;  pain  in
cerebellum  ;  boring  headache  <  ;  of  eyes  <  headache ;
of  head  <  coldness  on  vertex ;  leucorrhoea  <  ;  fistula
of  cheek  >  ;  pain  in  liver  after ;  sensation  of  a  load  in
abdomen ;  shortness  of  breath  < ;  pulse  accelerated ;
aching  across  loins  <  ;  weakness  and  lassitude  in  sa-
crum ;  at  first  <  crick  in  back,  continued  >  ;  causes
great  pain  in  back  ;  at  first  <  pain  in  back ;  chilliness ;
flushes  of  heat  from  least.

Slight  exertion :  neuralgic  pains  >  ;  disagreeable  from
weariness ;  easy  perspiration ;  fatigues ;  irritable  and
faint ;  sweat.

Slow  exercise :  headache  >.

Exertion:  pain  in  shoulder  joint.

Hard  motion:  continued  >  headache.

Shaking  head:  headache  <.

Walking :  vertigo ;  hemicrania  <  ;  headache  <  ;  emis-
sion of  urine;  distress  in  hypogastric  region  >;  back
gives  out ;  after  menses  a  very  disagreeable  sensation ;
oppression  of  chest ;  rapidly  no  shortness  of  breath,  only
when  stopped ;  cough  <  ;  dyspnoea  often  disappears ;
fast,  palpitation  ;  nervous  palpitation  >.

Weakness :  in  small  of  back  ;  pain  and  stiffness  in  small


SEPIA.  340

of  back;  slowly  >  coxagra;  ankles  turn  easily;  lower
limbs  go  to  sleep ;  swelling  of  legs  and  feet  >  ;  heavi-
ness of  feet ;  profuse  sweat.

A  short  walk  :  fatigues  much.

Must  get  up  and  walk  about :  sciatica.

Going  up  stairs :  cough  <  ;  as  if  limbs  would  refuse  to  act;,
fatigues.

Dancing  and  running :  cause  no  shortness  of  breathing,
'^Nerves. Very  faint  all  day.

I  Great  exhaustion  in  morning  during  menses.

Great  exhaustion  and  indolence;  everything  seems  an  ex-
ertion ;  the  least  exertion  fatigues,  even  going  up  stairs.

I  Feeling  of  prostration;  general  languid  feeling  of  whole
body.

I  Feels  weary  and  trembles  all  over.

I  Very  tired  in  morning,  when  rising  from  bed.

I  In  morning  on  waking  weak  feeling  as  from  nausea.
II A  short  walk  fatigues  much.

•  Debility  usually  characterized  by  a  painful  sensation  of
emptiness  at  pit  of  stomach;  icy  coldness  of  feet  and
hands.

I I  Sudden  prostration  and  sinking  faintness.

I  Very  irritable  and  faint  from  least  exertion.

I I  Great  faintness  from  heat,  then  coldness ;  great  exhaust-
ion in  morning,  during  menses.

1  Sudden  faintness,  with  profuse  sweats  and  undisturbed
consciousness,  without  being  able  to  speak  or  stir;  rigid
like  a  statue.

■  Fainting:  after  getting  wet;  from  riding,  in  a  carriage;,

1 1  while  kneeling  in  church  ;  at  trifles.
Frequent  trembling  of  whole  body.

■  Extreme  nervous  restlessness ;  uneasiness  in  whole  body;

fidgety.
I  I  Feels  as  if  she  could  feel  every  muscle  and  fibre  of  her
r.  side,  from  shoulder  to  feet,  an  indescribable  sensation.

■  Frequent  starts  of  upper  part  of  body.

■  Jerking  and  twitching  of  head  and  limbs.

■  Cramps  in  buttocks  in  bed,  at  night,  when  stretching  out

limbs.

■  Twitching  of  limbs  during  sleep.
General  muscular  agitation.

■  Hysterical  spasms;  sensation  of  a  ball  in  inner  parts.

I  I  Sensation  of  an  icy-cold  hand  between  scapulse,  then
coldness  over  whole  body,  followed  by  cramping  of"
chest  as  if  she  would  suffocate,  lasting  several  minutes ;
this  is  followed  by  clonic  spasms  of  r.  leg  with  twitch-
ing therein,  and  twitching  of  r.  arm  when  leg  is  held,,
finally  trembling  of  legs  ;  sleep  frequently  disturbed  by


^41  SEPIA.

attacks  of  anxiety,  sudden  fainting,  profuse  sweats,  and
a  condition  in  which  she  is  conscious  and  can  move
about  but  not  speak. ^Hysteria,
I  I  In  early  childhood  received  a  blow  upon  spine  and  has
ever  since  complained  of  tenderness  along  its  course ;
whole  spine  very  sensitive,  could  bear  no  pressure  upon
it ;  also  a  spot  in  abdomen  a  little  to  1.  and  below  umbil-
icus extremely  tender;  pain  in  1.  shoulder  extending
down  1.  arm  and  side,  at  times  so  severe  that  she  cried
out ;  at  times  peculiar  sensation  in  1.  arm,  feels  very  stiff
although  flexible  as  ever;  constipation; menses  regu-
lar ;  vomiting  each  meal  almost  as  soon  as  eaten ;  con-
tinued in  this  state  for  two  months,  sometimes  >,  at
others  <  ;  then  whole  1.  side  of  abdomen  became  ten-
der, could  not  bear  slightest  touch,  patient  stated  that
paroxysms  of  great  pain  and  anguish  every  evening  in
this  spot  accompanied  by  vomiting  of  bloody  water  and
sometimes  of  pure  blood  to  the  amount  of  several  table-
spoonfuls;  numbness  of  1.  side  and  limbs,  soon  followed
by  complete  paralysis  of  1.  arm;  difficulty  in  urinating,
would  postpone  urinating  for  two  days,  then  three  or
four  days,  each  time  having  terrible  paroxysms  of  suf-
fering;  could  not  be raised  from  recumbent  posture
without  fainting  and  aggravation  of  pains  ;  had  several
paroxysms of  pain during  night,  summoning  whole
household  to  her  bedside  by  her  screams;  would  roll
from  side  to  side  panting,  speaking  only  in  broken  words
and  sentences,  then  would  become  unconscious  for  sev-
eral  minutes,  slowly  recover  and  vomit  some  blood;
finally  lost  all  desire  to  pass  urine  and  during  five  weeks
.  never  passed  a  drop,  suff'ering  no  inconvenience  there-
from ;  pulse  72. ^Hysteria.

Paroxysm  of  something  twisting  about  in  her  stomach
and  rising  toward  throat;  her  tongue  becomes  stiff;  she
became  speechless  and  rigid  like  a  statue.

•  She  is  very  uneasy  about  the  state  of  her  health;  con-
stantly worrying,  fretting  and  crying  about  her  real  or
imaginary  illness. ^Hysteria.

I  I  Violent  spasmodic  movement  of  all  the  limbs  of  body,
and  particularly  of  head,  so  that  most  of  hair  was
rubbed  off";  talking  amounts  only  to  a  stutter  and  is
accompanied  by  twitching  of  muscles  of  face;  great
restlessness,  constant  desire  to  change  his  place  and
position  ;  red  tettery  eruption  on  1.  thigh. /^Chorea.

<  I  Convulsive  motions  of  head  and  limbs;  when  talking
(which  is  only  a  stammering),  jerking  of  facial  muscles;
general  muscular  agitation  ;  desire  to  constantly  change


SEPIA.  342

position and  place ; ringworm-like  eruption  on  skin
every  Spring; uterine  chorea  with  menstrual  irregu-
larities; > after menses and after a thunderstorm.
^Chorea.
I  Hysterical  paralysis.

■  Paralysis  with  atrophy.

■  Great  sensitiveness  to  pain  {Coff.,  Cham.,  Hep.).

■  Sensitiveness  to  cold  air.

'^  Sleep. ■Sleepiness :  in  forenoon  ;  during  day  falls  asleep  as
soon  as  she  sits  down  ;  too  early  in  evening.

■  Difficult  awaking,  no  desire  to  rise,  weariness  of  limbs.

■  Talks  aloud  during  sleep.

■  Restless  sleep: confused dreams; felt  that  she  had  a

weight  pressing  on  her  thighs,  momentary;  on  account
of  anxious  dreams  and  heat;  she  could  not  lie  quiet  for
five  minutes.

■  Sleep  does  not  refresh,  but  leaves  tired,  aching  feeling

through  whole  body.

■  Frequent  awaking  from  sleep  without  cause  or  because

he  thinks  he  has  been  called.

I  I  During  first  sleep,  she  often  imagines  she  has  swallowed
something,  which  wakens  her  up  in  a  fright,  with  a  sen-
sation as  if  it  had  lodged  in  her  throat.

Awakes  at  night  in  a  fright  and  screaming.

■  Twitching  of  limbs.

■  Ebullitions  at  night,  with  restlessness.
Nightl}^  delirium.

Awakes  in  morning  at  3  o'clock  and  cannot  go  to  sleep
again.

■  Wakeful,  sleepless,  from  rush  of  thoughts.

■  Sleeplessness,  cannot  fall  asleep,  is  nervously  oversensi-

tive.

Anxious  dreams  when  l3'ing  on  1.  side.
^^Time. 3  a.m.:  attack  of  shivering;  awakes  and  c.innot  go
to  sleep  again.

3  to  5  A.M.:  pains  in  1.  thigh.

Toward  morning:  tickling  in  larynx  or  bronchi.

Morning:  depression;  beating  in  vertex;  jiemicrania;
heaviness  of  eyelids  <  ;  itching  of  inner  can  thus;  burn-
ing in  eyes ;  photophobia  and  swelling  of  eyelids  <  ;
acute  conjunctivitis ;  conjunctivitis  with  muco-puru-
lent  discharge;  lids  glued  together  by  thick  matter;
photophobia  <  ;  conjunctiva  palp,  injected  on  waking;
smarting  in  eyes ;  lachrymation ;  difficulty  of  opening-
eyes  ;  fluent  coryza  with  sneezing ;  face  red  ;  on  rising
neuralgic  pains  < ;  prosopalgia  appears ;  cough  <  ;
sour  taste  on  wakirtg ;  bitter  taste ;  unpleasant  taste ;
roughness  of  mouth,  throat  and tongue;  hawking  of


343  SEPIA.

mucus;  much  thirst;  in  morning  vomiting  of  food  and
bile ;  on  rising  pain  and  weight  in  abdomen ;  pain  in
abdomen  <  ;  strong  desire  to  urinate;  difficulty  of  uri-
nating; pain  in  vagina;  cross  and  irritable  <;  cough
dry  and  hacking  <  ;  prolapsus  uteri  symptoms  <  ;
crampy  drawing  down  along  thighs ;  menses  only ;
loose  cough ;  great  dyspnoea ;  oppression  of  breathing
<  ;  expectoration ;  cough  loose,  with  effort  to  vomit ;
heaviness  in  back ;  pain  in  back  <  ;  vertigo  when  ris-
ing ;  great  exhaustion  during  menses ;  very  tired ;  on
waking  weak  feeling  as  from  nausea ;  very  cold  feet ;
after  waking  sweat ;  sweat  with  anxiety ;  paroxysms  of
ague  appear  sometimes.

10  A.M.:  paroxysm  of  ague.

From  11  A.M.  to  1  p.m.:  neuralgia  of  plexus  mesogastricus.

From  morning  till  noon:  stitches  over  orbit;  headache
with  nausea.

Forenoon :  as  if  brain  were  crushed ;  till  evening  boring
pain;  involuntary  jerking  of  head;  weakness  of  eyes;
sleepiness.

During  day:  milky  leucorrhoea  <  ;  did  not  open  eyes;  on
closing  eyes ;  scratching  in  them  <  ;  prosopalgia  disap-
pears ;  leucorrhoea ;  cough  only  ;  no  expectoration  ;  pulse
slow;  heat  in  hands;  cramp  infect;  stitches  in  heels
and  corns ;  jerking  and  twitching  of  limbs  and  head  <  ;
falls  asleep  as  soon  as  she  sits  down ;  shuddering  with-
out chill.

All  day:  headache;  shuddering  all  over  bod}^ ;  very  faint;
feet  damp  and  cold.

Day  and  night:  pain  from  cough.

Afternoon :  vertigo  when  rising  from  bed ;  pain  in  small
of  back;  paroxysms  of  quotidian  ague;  fever  <.

Between  3  and  4  p.m.  :■  paroxysms  of  ague.

3.30  P.M. :  pain  over  eye.

4  P.M.:  fulness  deep  in  orbit.

6  P.M.:  pain  and  weakness  in  small  of  back.

Toward  evening  :  increasing  dryness  of  e3''es  ;  colic  recur-
ring; severe  oppression  of  chest;  chilliness  with  thirst;
very  cold  feet.

8.30  P.M. :  flushes  of  heat  all  over  body.

Evening:  sad  and  gloomy;  toward  anxiety;  headache  >;
hemicrania  <;  prickling  of  eyes  by  candlelight;  pust-
ules around  cornea  with  redness  <  ;  biting  in  r.  eye ;
acute  conjunctivitis ;  great  dryness  in  eyes ;  agglutina-
tion of  lids ;  lachry  mation ;  face  pale ;  thirsty ;  as  of  a  strap
around  waist;  fever  <;  attacks  of  neuralgia;  prolapsus
uteri  symptoms  >  ;  oppression  of  breathing  < ;  dry
cough ;  short  cough  ;  hacking  cough  ;  pressure  in  chest ;


SEPIA.  344

beating  of  arteries ;  pain  in  small  of  back ;  aching  in
sacrum  ;  chilliness  along  back  ;  in  bed  cold  feet ;  early,
sleepy ;  chilliness ;  very  cold  feet ;  face  heated  ;  parox-
ysms of  ague;  itching  of  spot  on  r.  hand;  acarus-itch
itching  <.

Night:  pressure  in  eyes;  smarting  in  eyes  <  ;  scratching
in  eyes  < ;  stitches  in  ears  < ;  neuralgic  pains  <  in
bed ;  very  severe  prosopalgia ;  toothache  <  ;  throat
parched;  has  to  eat  something;  vertigo;  heavy  sweat;
pelvic  distress;  involuntary  discharge  of  urine;  much
disturbed  from  having  to  urinate;  gleet  discharge  only;
menses  more  profuse ;  no  leucorrhoea ;  expectoration ;
wakes  with  feeling  as  if  chest  were  hollow  ;  cough  < ;
spasmodic  cough  ;  cold  knees;  much  ebullition  of  blood
in  whole  body;  pulse  full  and  quick;  burning  of  feet;
cramp  in  buttocks ;  rheumatism  in  knee  <  ;  paroxysms
of  pain  ;  awakes  in  a  fright  and  screaming  ;  cold  sweat
<  ;  itching  and  burning  of  skin  in  bends  of  elbows  and
knees.

Before  midnight :  cough  with  expectoration ;  tickling
cough.

Toward  midnight :  spasms  of  eyelids  cease.
''  Temperature  and  Weather. In  hot  weather:  conjunctivitis
always  <.

Becoming  overheated :  nosebleed.

Hot  flannel :  >  pains  in  abdomen.

Warmth:  was  unbearable  during  violent  headache.

Warm  room:  facial  neuralgia  >;  oppressive;  feels  un-
comfortable; cold  hands ;  internal  chilliness;  fine  rash
over  body  remains ;  nettlerash  disappears.

Warm  climate:  nervous  irritability  >.

Warmly  covered  :  can  bear  labor  pains  better.

In  room:  oppression  of  breathing  <.

In  bed:  toothache  <.

Open  air:  sad  and  gloomy;  while  walking,  vertigo  ;  stitches
over  orbit  >  ;  headache  >  ;  pain  over  eye  >  ;  in  head
>  ;  coldness  on  head  >  ;  pressing  pain  around  eyes  <  ;
acute  pain  in  orbit  < ;  lachrymation ;  toothache  >  in
fresh  air ;  oppression  of  breathing  >  ;  chilliness ;  while
walking  profuse  sweat ;  urticaria  appears.
-  In  dry  air,  fog,  east  and  north  wind  :  cough  and  dysp-
ncEa  <.

Change  of  weather:  rheumatism  of  knee  very  sensitive.

In  a  thunderstorm  :  boring  stinging  over  eye  <.

After  a  thunderstorm  :  ringworm-like  eruption  >.

Wind  :  riding  in,  brings  on  facial  neuralgia.

North  wind  :  boring  stinging  over  eye  <^.

Northeasterly  wind :  facial  neuralgia  <.


345  SEPIA.

Rough  wind :  exposure  to,  brings  on  migraine ;  walking

against,  profuse  sweat.
Cold  north  wind :  roots  of  hair sore ; cough  <  ; flatu-
lency >.
Dry  east  wind:  cough  <.
Stormy  weather :  she  feels  almost  suffocated.
Snowy  weather:  feels  <.
Damp  weather:  facial  neuralgia;  pain  in  small  of  back

after  exposure.
Getting  wet  through :  cough  <  ;  fainting.
Cold,  damp  air :  sensitive  to ;  cough  <  ;  eruption  on  face

itches  and  smarts  <.
Cold  water:  acute  conjunctivitis  >  ;  smarting  in  eyes  >  ;

toothache  >  ;  when  water  gets  warm  toothache  returns.
Cold:  toothache  <.
In  cold  air :  boring  stinging  over  eye  <  ;  scaly  tetter  on

back  of  hands  <  ;  rheumatism  of  knee  very  sensitive ;

sensitiveness ;  nettlerash  breaks  out.
Cold  room :  fine  rash  disappeared.
Cold  draft  of  air:  toothache  <.
Hot  or  cold :  things  in  mouth  <  prosopalgia.
*°  Fever, l  Want  of  natural  bodily  warmth.
Very  sensitive  to  cold  air.
•  Shuddering  during  day  without  chill.
I  Chilliness :  evening  in  open  air,  and  from  every  motion  ;

with  thirst,  toward  evening,  followed  by  night  sweat;

for  many  nights ;  internal,  in  warm  room  ;  with  the

pains.
External  warmth  was  unbearable  to  her  during  violent

headache,  yet  she  was  chilly.

■  Coldness:  over  whole  body;  between  shoulders,  followed

by  general  coldness  and  convulsive  twitching  of  r.  side
and  difficulty  of  breathing;  begins  in  feet  and  rises
upward.
I  Chill  frequently  setting  in  after  previous  heat.

■  During  chill  more  thirst  than  during  heat.

I  Cold  hands  and  feet,  with  frequent  flushes  of  heat  to  head

and  face.

I I  Hands  generally  cold  but  moist  with  perspiration.

Icy  coldness  of  both  hands,  in  warm  room  they  send  a

chilly  feeling  through  whole  body.
Very  cold  feet,  particularly  in  evening,  mainly  in  bed,  and

afterward,  when  this  passes  off,  very  cold  hands.

■  I  Very  cold  feet  with  headaches,  especially  toward  evening

and  in  morning.
Feet  damp  and  cold  all  day,  feeling  as  if  they  stood  in  cold

water  up  to  ankles.
iHeat  with  attacks  of  chilliness,  with  thirst.


SEPIA.  346

iFace  much  heated:  from  talking;  with  heat  in  evening,
in  head.

Painful  heat  in  head,  frequently,  with  flushes  of  heat  over
bod3^

Hot  flush  over  face  and  whole  head  lasting  but  a  few  sec-
onds, followed  by  slight  perspiration.

Flashes  of  heat  all  over  body  about  8.30  p.m.

Attacks  of  flushes  of  heat,  as  if  hot  water  were  poared  over
one,  with  redness  of  face,  sweat  of  whole  body  and  anx-
iety without  thirst,  yet  without  dryness  of  throat.

■  Flushes  of  heat  from  least  motion.
I  Heat  ascends.

■Sweat:  during  sleep,  particularly  on  head;  profuse,  while
walking;  especially  in  bends  of  joints;  while  walking
in  open  air  even  against  cold  wind  ;  over  whole  body,
in  morning,  after  waking,  profuse;  with  anxiety  in
morning;  from  least  exertion;  every  morning  in  bed,
after  awaking,  mostly  on  lower  limbs;  of  the  feet;  on
upper  part  of  body  ;  continuous,  debilitating;  pungent,
offensive  in  axillae,  and  soles  of  feet,  causing  soreness.

■  Night  sweat :  cold  on  chest,  back  and  thighs  ;  from  above

downward  to  calves,  every  third  night;  smelling  sour;
offensive  or  like  elder  blossoms.

I  I  Paroxysms  appear  10  a.m.;  shaking  chill  with  thirst
and  vomiting ;  then  severe  laborlike  pains,  >  after  cold
stage,  which  varies  in  duration  and  is  followed  by  pro-
fuse sweat  with  headache  in  forehead  and  occiput  and
palpitation,  also  night  sweats,  throbbing  in  temples,  op-
pression of  chest  and  pain  along  spine  (all  during  sweat);
thirst  only  during  chill,  but  water  is  then  immediately
vomited;  falls  asleep  during  night  sweat;  after  parox-
ysm >  although  greatly  prostrated ;  mouth  full  of  white
mucus;  irritable  during  parox3^sm  ;  constipation;  urine
dark ;  loss  of  appetite  and  irritability  of  stomach ;  is
three  months  pregnant. ^Ague.

I  I  Paroxysms  appear  in  afternoon,  begin  with  heat  in  head,
redness  and  stitching  pains  in  temples,  pressure  in  occi-
put; then  shivering  and  chilliness  along  back,  lasting
an  hour  and  a  half,  with  thirst,  dry  cough,  stitches  in
hypochondria  and  swelling  or  r.  submaxillary  gland ;
fever  ;  has  had  six  paroxysms. ^Quotidian  ague.

i  I  Tertian  ague;  paroxysms  appear  sometimes  in  morning,
sometimes  in  evening;  chilliness  and  shivering,  fol-
low^ed  by  heat,  then  sweat,  particularly  in  face ;  thirst
in  all  three  stages ;  loss  of  appetite ;  bitter  taste  in  mouth ;
thirst;  itching  of  forehead  ;  vertigo,  causing  him  to  fall;
stitches  in  splenic  region,  also  during  cough,  with  ex-
pectoration of  blood -streaked  mucus;  epistaxis;  stitches
in  back  on  turning  in  bed  ;  rumbling  in  abdomen.


347  SEPIA.

I  I  Paroxysms  between  3  and  4  p.m.;  chill  preceded  by
thirst;  during  chill,  thirst;  severe  tearing  pains  in  upper
and  lower  limbs;  hands  and  feet  blue,  icy-cold,  hands
seem  dead;  cough,  with  scanty  expectoration,  lasting
through  hot  stage;  heat  predominates,  is  of  two  hours'
duration  and  is  followed  by  sleep  and  finally  cold  sweat,
particularly  at  night ;  during  apyrexia,  paleness  of  face ;
tearing  pain  in  head  from  ear  to  ear,  also  in  forearms
from  elbows  into  fingers  and  both  knees ;  cold  hands
and  feet  with  weakness;  no  food  seems  salted  enough;
cough  with  scanty  expectoration,  particularly  when
lying  on  back. ^Quartan  ague.

I  I A  girl,  set.  16;  every  four  weeks,  to  the  day,  taken  in
morning  with  severe  chill,  lasting  two  or  three  hours,
followed  by  very  high  fever,  lasting  as  long  as  chill,  this
is  succeeded  by  profuse  sweating ;  the  attack  was  re-
peated a  second  and  third  time  with  an  intervening  well
day,  after  which  the  ague  disappeared  until  expiration
of  four  weeks  from  commencement ;  ague  did  not  return
at  expected  time ;  instead  of  it  a  rather  copious  men-
struation appeared  and  returned  monthly,  with  entire
restoration  to  health.

I  I  Quartan  ague  chill  beginning  in  legs ;  preceded  by  a
small,  hard  lump  in  1.  breast,  above  nipple,  sore  to
touch;  each  time  (twice)  it  waked  her  at  4  a.m.;  one
hour  later,  chill ;  constant  cold,  damp  feeling  in  front
of  chest ;  air  seems  damp. ^Ague.

I  Heat  ascending,  or  sensation  as  if  hot  water  were  poured
over  him.
^'  Attacks, Periodicity. Alternately  : hard  and  soft  stool ;
diarrhoea  and  constipation  ;  burning  and  coldness  on
vertex.

Periodical:  headache  from  2  p.m.  till  bedtime;  discharge
of  mucus  from  urethra.

Every  minute:  expectoration  of  pure  blood.

Every  five  minutes:  during  day  and  night,  stitches  in
forehead.

Every  half  hour:  having  to  urinate  at  night.

Several  times  a  day:  rolling  in  abdomen.

Several  paroxysms  during  night:  of  pain.

Every  morning:  headache  with  nausea;  sweat  in  bed;
cough  and  coryza  with  sneezing  last  till  9  a.m.

Every  evening:  cough;  restlessness  in  legs;  great  pain
and  anguish  in  spot  in  abdomen.

Nightly:  emissions  with  sexual  dreams;  delirium.

Every  Saturday  for  years:  headache.

For  two  days:  postponed  urinating.

Every  third  night:  night  sweat.


SEPIA.  348

Every  three  or  four  days :  laborlike  pains.

For  four  days :  stitches  over  hip.

For  several  days :  pain  in  teeth.

Eight  or  ten  days :  menses.

Every  eight  to  fourteen  days  in  afternoon  and  evening ;
amenorrhoea.

For  many  nights :  chilliness.

Every  two  weeks :  gallstone  colic.

Of  three  weeks'  standing:  painless  diarrhoea.

Every  four  wrecks :  to  the  day  taken  wuth  severe  chill,  then
fever  and  sweat.

For  five  weeks  :  passed  no  urine.

For  three  months:  jaundice.

For  four  months :  menses  suppressed.

Every  Spring :  for  three  years,  tendency  to  reappearance
of  carcinoma  of  lip ;  ringworm-like  eruption.

Every  Summer: for twenty  years, from beginning of
warm  weather  in  Spring  until  its  close  in  the  Fall.

Every  Winter:  catarrh  with  cough.

Since  a  year:  recurring  attacks;  agglutination,  photopho-
bia, pustules,  pain.

A  year  and  a  half  standing :  gleet.

Of  several  years'  duration  :  painless  diarrhoea.

Of  two  years' standing :  hard,  indurated  tarsal  tumor  on
lid;  costiveness;  gleet;  eruption  on  face.

For  five  or  six  years :  headache  ;  affection  of  lungs.

Eight  years'  standing:  crick  in  back.

Of  thirteen  years' standing:  ozaena.

For  fifteen  years :  scaly  eruption  on  legs.
"Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  tearing  in  side  of  fore-
head ;  headache  follows  perspiration  on  side  of  head ;
stitching  pains  in  side  of  head ;  hemicrania ;  boring
stinging  over  eye;  as  if  eye  were  gone  and  cool  wdnd
blew  through  socket;  pressure  in  eye ;  biting  in  eye;
eye  inflamed;  side  of  face  much  swollen,  deep  red;
eye  seemed  much  smaller  than  left ;  angle  of  mouth
drawn  upward  ;  stitches  into  ear ;  heaviness  in  ovarian
region;  pain  running  down  leg;  stitches  in  hypochon-
drium  ;  drawing  through  chest  into  shoulder;  pain  from
hepatic  region  to  shoulder ;  tender  spot  on  side  of  abdo-
men ;  hypochondrium  tender  and  heavy ;  aching  in
shoulder;  pelvic  pain  to  knee;  pain  and  stitching  in
side  of  abdomen;  scirrhous  tumor  of  breast;  stitches  in
hypochondrium;  pain  in  spot  under  nipple;  pleuritic
adhesions  in  chest;  diseased  condition  of  lung;  stitch-
ing darting  through  lung;  pressure  and  pain  through
chest;  determination  of  blood  to  temple;  stitches  in
shoulder  blade;  stitches  over  hip;  could  not  lie  on  side.


349  SEPIA.

stitches  in  hip;  herpes  circinatus  on  side  of  neck;  last
joint  of  thumb  inflamed;  acute  rheumatism  in  knee;  as
if  she  could  feel  every  muscle  and  fibre  of  her  side;
clonic  spasm  of  leg;  twitching  of  arm  when  leg  is  held;
twitching  of  side;  swelling  of  submaxillary  gland-  a
roundish  bright-red  spot  on  ball  of  hand.

Left:  tearing  in  frontal  eminence;  stitches  over  orbit;
tearing  in  temple  and  side  of  head  ;  pressing  pain  over
eye;  fulness  deep  in  orbit;  shooting  over  eye;  sore  pain  in
eye  and  temple;  pain  in  temple  downv^^ard;  stitching  in
zygoma  ;  severe  pain  in  head  ;  pain  beginning  in  parietal
region  becoming  throbbing  in  occiput;  violent  stitches
in  forehead;  lashes  of  eye  gone,  edges  raw  and  sore;
sticking  in  eye;  stuffiness  of  nostril;  small  pustules  on
wrist;  panaritia  of  thumb  and  middle  finger;  dry  coryza
in  nostril;  offensive  greenish  discharge  from  nostril;
neuralgic  pains  commence  in  temple  over  side  of  face;
fistula  in  cheek;  rales  at  apex;  tearing  through  ear;
tingling  then  tearing  in  hand;  toothache;  inflammation
of  throat  < ;  violent  pressure  under  ribs ;  stitches  in  hypo-
chondrium;  pain  from  side  of  urethra  to  a  spot  between
sternum  and  shoulder;  inclination  of  fundus  to  side;
numb  feehng  in  lower  half  of  side  of  body;  pain  in  lung;
stitches  to  scapula;  pressure  on  chest;  stitch  in  side  of
chest  and  scapula  as  if  knife  were  thrust  into  top  of
lung;  flatulency  on  side  of  abdomen ;  cannot  lie  on  side
on  account  of  flatulency;  feels  pulse  beat  through  chest;
aching  under  scapula  into  lung;  severe  pains  in  thigh-
of  umbilicus,  tender  spot;  pain  in  shoulder  and  under
arm ;  peculiar  stiffness  of  arm  ;  numbness  of  side  and
limbs;  paralysis  of  arm;  tettery  eruption  on  thigh-
humid  tetter  in  axilla.  '

From  within  out;  pains  over  1.  eye;  stinging  pain  in  side
of  head;  boring  pain  in  head.

From  below  upward:  pain  in  vagina;  coldness.

From  above  downward:  night  sweat.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  heart  stood  still ;  as  if  every  object  were
in  motion;  as  if  suspended  in  air;  as  if  brain  were
crushed ;  as  if  head  would  burst ;  as  of  waves  6f  pain
rolling  up  and  beating  against  frontal  bone;  as
if  eyes  would  fall  out;  stitches  as  from  needles  in
head;  vertigo,  as  if  intoxicated;  as  of  a  weight  over
eyes;  as  if  roots  of  hair  were  sore,  as  if  cut  short  near
roots;  as  if  eyes  were  gone  and  a  cool  wind  blew  out  of
socket ;  eyes  as  if  bruised ;  as  of  a  grain  of  sand  in  eye ;
as  if  hds  were  too  heavy  to  open  ;  eyes  as  if  balls  of  fire;
as  if  eyelids  were  too  tight  and  did  not  cover  eyeballs;


SEPIA.  350

as  if  eyelids  were  too  heav}' ;  as  if  lids  were  paralyzed  ;
hollow  molar  as  if  swollen  and  elongated  ;  gums  as  if
burned ;  gums  as  if  beginning  to  suppurate ;  tongue
and  cavity  of  mouth  as  if  scalded  ;  as  if  something  had
lodged  in  her  throat;  as  of  a  plug  in  throat;  throat  as
if  raw;  as  if  everything  in  abdomen  were  turning
around;  as  if  viscera  were  turning  inside  out;  as  if
stomach  were  sore  internally ;  as  if  ribs  were  broken
and  sharp  points  were  sticking  in  flesh  ;  as  of  a  strap  as
wide  as  her  hand  drawn  tightly  around  her  waist;  liver
as  if  bursting;  as  if  menses  would  appear;  as  of  a  load
in  abdomen;  as  if  everything  would  issue  through
vulva;  as  of  something  adherent  in  abdomen;  as  if
something  alive  were  in  abdomen  ;  as  of  a  weight  in
anus ;  as  if  bladder  were  full  and  contents  would  fall
out  over  pubes ;  as  if  drops  came  out  of  bladder ;  as  if
bladder  and  urinary  organs  would  be  pressed  out;  as  if
ever^^hing  would  fall  outof  uterus;  uterus  as  if  clutched;
as  if  vulva  were  enlarged ;  as  if  something  heavy  would
force  itself  from  vagina ;  as  from  a  weight  in  sides  ;  as
if  mammary  glands  were  enlarged ;  as  if  cough  came
from  stomach  and  abdomen  ;  as  if  something  remained
lodged  in  stomach  ;  chest  as  if  hollow  ;  chest  as  if  sore;
throat  as  if  filled  with  phlegm  ;  as  if  stomach  were  being
scraped  ;  as  if  knife  were  thrust  into  top  of  1.  lung,  then
turned  around  ;  as  if  intestines  were  drawn  into  a  lump;
small  of  back  as  if  sprained ;  back  as  if  she  could  not
turn  or  raise  herself,  or  as  if  she  had  lain  in  a  wrong
position,  almost  as  if  parts  had  gone  to  sleep ;  sudden
pain  in  back  as  if  struck  by  a  hammer ;  pain  in  back  as
from  subcutaneous  ulceration ;  as  if  limbs  would  refuse
to  act;  as  if  something  were  going  to  break  in  back  ;  as
if  shoulder  were  dislocated;  feet  as  if  asleep;  r.  hip
joint  as  if  bruised ;  lower  limbs  as  if  beaten ;  as  of  a
a  mouse  running  in  lower  limbs ;  as  if  bones  of  legs
were  decaying ;  as  if  she  could  feel  every  muscle  and
fibre  of  her  r.  side  from  shoulder  to  feet ;  as  of  a  ball  in
inner  parts ;  as  of  an  icy  hand  between  scapulae ;  as  if
she  would  suffocate;  something  twisting  in  stomach
and  rising  to  throat ;  as  of  a  weight  pressing  on  thighs ;
as  if  feet  stood  in  cold  water  up  to  ankles ;  as  if  hot
water  were  poured  over  one.
Pains  :  in  occiput ;  in  back  down  to  legs  and  feet ;  in  hips
and  back ;  in  lids ;  in  r.  ovarian  region ;  down  r.  leg ;
in  stomach ;  in  liver ;  in  tender  spot  in  side  of  abdo-
men ;  in  liver  going  across  to  stomach  and  spleen  and
around  back  ;  in  abdomen  from  sacrum  ;  in  rectum  ;  in
rectum  into  genitals;  in  1.  side  of  face;  in  back  and  ex-


^^1  SEPIA.

tremity  of  sacrum,  through  both  ovarian  regions;  in
uterus;  in  small  of  back;  in  kidneys;  in  mammse;
above  pubes;  between  shoulders  and  down  back;  in
small  of  back  ;  in  back  across  hips ;  in  sacrum,  through
hips  and  thighs  to  below  knee ;  from  other  parts  to  back;
m  hips  and  thighs;  in  1.  shoulder  and  down  1.  arm  ;
along  spine;  in  hypogastric  region.

Terrific  shocks  :  of  pain  in  head.

Severe  pain:  in  teeth;  in  pelvis;  in  small  of  back;  in
back ;  in  stomach.

Acute  pain  :  in  orbit.

Violent  single,  undulated  jerks  of  pressing  headache:  in
forehead.

Throbbing  pain:  in  temple;  in  forehead;  in  teeth;  in
head.

Tearing :  in  upper  part  of  r.  side  of  forehead ;  in  frontal
eminence ;  in  1.  temple  to  upper  part  of  1.  side  of  head;
stitching  in  r.  side  of  head ;  in  1.  temple;  in  swelling  on
side  of  head;  in  face  and  nose;  in  arm;  in  teeth;  in
hmbs;  in  knees  and  feet;  in  rectum  and  anus;  in  tibia;
in  back;  in  arm  and  armpit  to  fingers;  in  1.  thigh  along
sciatic  nerve  to  calf  and  toes;  in  upper  and  lower  limbs ;
from  ear  to  ear ;  in  forearms  from  elbows  into  fingers
and  both  knees.

Shooting:  over  1.  eye;  from  forehead  to  vertex  and  sides
of  face;  in  rectum  and  anus;  from  1.  side  of  urethra  to
sternum  down  to  bones  of  pelvis;  in  neck  of  uterus;  in
last  joint  of  r.  thumb.

Lancinating  stitches :  with  coxagra.

Stitches:  over  1.  orbit;  in  forehead;  in  eyes;  in  ears;  in
parotid  glands ;  in  ear  going  into  brain  ;  in  stomach  ;
in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  in  region  of  liver;  in  1.  hypo-
chondrium;  in  abdomen  ;  in  rectum;  along  urethra;  in
vagina;  in  cervix  uteri;  in  mammary  glands;  in  chest
and  back ;  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  scapula;  in  breast;  in
shoulder  blade;  in  back;  posteriorly  over  r.  hip;  in
joints  of  arms,  hands  and  fingers;  in  heels  and  corns;
m  splenic  region  ;  in  back  ;  all  over  body.

Stitching,  pressive  pain  :  in  lower  part  of  forehead.
Stitching  pain :  in  temple ;  in  1.  zygoma  and  teeth ;  in
throat;  in  forehead,  epigastrium  and  small  of  back ;  in
female  urethra; in cervix uteri; in  neck  of  uterus;

^  m  vagina;  in  centre  of  chest;  through  r.  lung.
Cutting  pain:  in forehead;  from  stomach  to  spine;  in

abdomen  ;  in  testes.
Darting  pains:  from  1.  eye  toward  occiput;  through  hips

and  sides  ;  through  r.  lung.
Pressing,  throbbing  pain  :  in  occiput.


SEPIA.  352.

Jerking  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  vagina.

Pulsating  pain  :  in  cerebellum.

Dragging  pain:  in  ears;  from  sacrum  to  lumbar  region;
over  sacrum.

Boring  pain :  in  head  ;  over  r.  eye ;  from  region  of  stom-
ach to  spine ;  through  liver.

Gouty  pains:  in  head.

Laborlike  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Pinching  pain  :  in  epigastrium.

Griping  :  in  prsecordial  region.

Severe  cramping:  in  stomach.

Cramps:  in  stomach  ;  in  hip  joint  and  thighs;  in  buttocks
and  calves;  in  feet;  of  chest.

Neuralgic  pains;  in  1.  temple  and  side  of  face  to  ramus  of
jaw  in  plexus  mesogastricus ;  in  limbs.

Sore  pain:  in  1.  eye  and  temple;  in  nose;  in  region  of
liver;  in  larynx.

Stinging  pain  :  in  one  side  of  head  or  forehead;  in  throat;
in  abdomen;  in  ovaries;  in  tumor  of  breast;  in  limbs.

Burning:  in  eyes ;  of  pharynx;  in  stomach;  in  anus;  in
abdomen ;  at  rectum  and  anus  ;  in  bladder  and  urethra;
in  forepart  of  urethra ;  in  neck  of  uterus ;  on  vertex;  in
centre  of  chest;  in  rectum;  in  vagina;  in  vulva;  in
mammary  tumor;  in  a  fixed  spot  under  r.  nipple;  be-
tween nates;  of  feet;  of  palms  of  hand  ;  in  last  joint  of
r.  thumb.

Smarting  pain:  in  both  eyes;  in  anus;  in  urethera;  in
chest.

Pricking  pains:  through  hips  and  sides.

Bruised  pain:  in  arms.

Soreness:  in  external  can  thus;  at  internal  canthi;  of  lower
lip;  of  gums;  of  tip  of  tongue;  r.  hypochondrium ;  of
abdomen  of  pregnant  women  ;  in  rectum  ;  between  but-
tocks; in  1.  side;  in  uterus,  and  external  organs;  in
perineum;  of  limbs;  of  nipples;  of  labia,  in  perineum
and  between  thighs;  of  abdomen;  of  larynx  and  throat;
in  bends  of  knees  and  elbows;  in  neck  and  behind  ears;
in  middle  of  chest ;  in  sacral  region;  between  nates;  of
feet.

Tenderness :  in  abdomen ;  of  sexual  parts ;  of  os  uteri ;  of
vagina;  along  spine;  of  spot  below  umbilicus.

Sensitiveness:  of  roots  of  hair;  of  abdomen.

Burning  pressure:  in  spine,  across  dorsal  region  and  under
scapula.

Drawing  pain:  on  forehead  back  to  occiput;  in  1.  parietal
region;  in  external  canthus;  in  face  and  nose;  in  upper
molars;  from  stomach  through  chest  into  shoulder.

Aching:  over  eyes;  in  eyeball;  in  r.  shoulder;  in  small


353  SEPIi^.

of  back ;  in  pelvic  region  ;  between  shoulders  and  under
1.  scapula;  in  small  of  back;  across  loins;  in  sacrum;
in  calves ;  through  whole  body.

Dull  aching  pain :  all  around  body.

Bearing  down  :  in  pelvis.

Dull  heavy  pain :  in  ovaries ;  in  sacrum  and  abdomen,
into  thighs  and  legs.

Contractive  pain :  in  r.  side  of  abdomen;  in  rectum;  in
vagina ;  in  chest.

Constrictive  pain  :  in  stomach.

Dull  pain:  in  sacrum.

Heavy  pressing  pain  :  over  1.  eye.

Pressing  pain :  around  eyes ;  in  root  of  nose ;  in  hepatic
region,  thence  to  r.  shoulder ;  in  side  of  abdomen ;  over
sacrum  ;  in  region  of  stomach.

Tensive  pain  :  in  metacarpal  joints  of  fingers ;  in  feet.

Violent  pressure :  under  1.  ribs.

Beating :  headache ;  at  pit  of  stomach.

Tired  pain  :  in  small  of  back.

Sticking:  in  1.  eye.

Biting  :  in  r.  eye.

Painful  stiffness:  in  uterine  region.

Painful  cracking :  in  occiput.

Painful  confusion  :  of  head.

Tingling :  in  fingers.

Tickling :  in  bladder ;  in  larynx  and  bronchi ;  from  larynx
to  stomach.

Heat :  in  eyes  ;  on  margins  of  lids ;  of  palms  and  soles ;  in
head  ;  in  sacrum  ;  in  hands.

Painful  emptiness :  in  stomach  and  abdomen.

Distress:  in  r.  shoulder  and  scapula;  pelvic,  in  hypogas-
tric region ;  in  abdomen.

Anxiety :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Pressure :  on  vertex ;  in  forehead ;  in  occiput ;  over  eyes ;
in  eyes ;  in  stomach ;  in  region  of  liver ;  drawing,  ten-
sive in  abdomen ;  on  bladder;  in  ovaries;  into  vagina;
in  pelvis ;  painful,  in  sides ;  in  chest ;  in  r.  shoulder-
blade.

Drawing: in  arm  and  armpit  to  fingers;  in  thighs.

Constriction  :  in  throat ;  of  chest.

Paralytic  drawing :  in  arm  and  armpit  to  fingers.

Heaviness :  of  upper  lids ;  in  r.  ovarian  region ;  over  eyes
and  nape  of  neck;  in  back  ;  in  feet;  of  limbs.

Fulness:  in  temples  and  forehead;  great,  deep  in  1.  orbit;
in  region  of  liver ;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  pelvis ;  in  chest.

Weight :  in  upper  lids ;  in  anus ;  aching,  in  r.  hypochon-
drium  ;  in  abdomen  ;  at  anus ;  in  ovaries ;  in  rectum ;
in  epigastrium  ;  in  part  from  which  blood  flows.

VOL.  IX. — 23.


SEPIA.  354

Tightness :  in  region  of  liver.

Tension  :  in  forehead ;  painful,  in  parotid  glands  ;  in  lower
abdomen  ;  in  tendo-achillis.

Throbbing:  in  gums;  in  teeth;  in  small  of  back;  in  last
joint  of  r.  thumb  ;  in  temples.

Jerking :  from  anus  into  rectum  and  abdomen.

Twisting:  in  stomach.

Restlessness:  in  legs.

Discomfort:  in  rectum.

Uneasiness:  in  stomach.

Empty,  deathly  sensation  :  in  epigastrium.

Emptiness;  in  epigastric  region;  in  chest.

Empty,  gone  sensation  :  at  pit  of  stomach.

Goneness :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  epigastrium.

Weakness:  in  knees;  in  small  of  back;  of  sacro-iliac  re-
gion ;  in  lower  limbs.

Lameness :  of  arms  and  fingers.

Stiffness:  in  small  of  back;  of  elbow  and  wrist  joints;  of
legs  to  hip  joint ;  in  knee  and  ankle  joints ;  of  tongue.

Dryness:  of  margin  of  lids;  in  nose  and  fauces;  in  throat;
in  choanse;  of  lips;  of  mouth;  of  tongue;  in  posterior
nares ;  of  vulva  and  vagina  ;  in  larynx.

Numbness:  of  1.  side  and  limbs.

Numb  feeling :  in  lower  half  of  1.  side  of  body.

Itching :  of  scalp  ;  on  occiput  or  behind  ears  ;  of  internal
canthus  ;  on  margin  of  lids ;  in  ears ;  of  face ;  of  erup-
tion on  hands  and  thighs  ;  over  whole  body ;  in  rectum
and  anus;  in  region  of  bladder;  around  genitals;  of
prepuce ;  of  eruption  on  inner  labia ;  of  eruption  on
chin,  cheek  and  temples  ;  of  vulva ;  in  chest ;  of  exter-
nal chest;  in  bends  of  knees,  elbows  and  on  hands;
of  forehead;  in  face;  on  tip  of  nose;  on  arms,  hands,
back,  hips,  feet,  abdomen,  genitals ;  of  pimples  on  chin ;
in  various  parts  of  body ;  in  ulcer ;  of  nipples ;  in  hands ;
of  elbows  ;  on  posterior  part  of  elbow  ;  of  ringworm  on
face  ;  of  tetter ;  of  warts.

Coldness:  in  vertex  ;  of  feet;  in  swelling  on  side  of  head  ;
in  abdomen;  in  hands;  of  lower  limbs;  in  legs  and  feet;
over  whole  body.
*^  Tissues. 1 1  Uterine  troubles.

I  Bad  effects  from  loss  of  fluids ;  bleeding  from  inner  parts.

■  Sensation  of  weight  in  part  from  which  blood  flows.

■  Considerable  swelling  of  veins  of  affected  limbs,
i Disposition  to  gout  and  hemorrhoids.
■Painless  swelling  of  lymphatic  glands.

■  Erysipelas,  generally  pustulous.

■  Rheumatism,  chronic  cases,  or  obstinate  remains  of  acute.

■  ■Arthritic  affections  of  joints;  lithiasis.


355  SEPIA.

I  Crippled  nails.

I  Atrophy  of  children,  emaciated,  face  like  old  people,  big
belly,  dry,  flabby  skin,  mushy  passages.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  hair  of  head
sensitive  ;  on  swelling  on  side  of  head  pain  <  ;  roots  of
hair  sore;  of  teeth,  toothache  <  ;  gums  bleeding;  stitches
in  hypochondrium  ;  abdomen  sensitive  ;  spot  on  1.  side
sore;  sexual  parts  tender;  tumor  of  breast  tender;  of  r.
hip  pain  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration;  pain  in
back  > ;  external  lateral  ligament  of  knee  sensitive ;
abdomen  very  tender.

Pressure :  boring  headache  >  ;  of  eyelids  together,
eyes  <  ;  facial  neuralgia  >  ;  slight,  on  stomach  causes
great  pain  ;  spot  on  1.  side  sore;  gentle,  >  symptoms  of
prolapsus  uteri ;  with  hand  on  chest,  >  symptoms ;  flat-
ulency >  ;  of  back  against  something  hard  >  pain ;
aching  in  sacrum  >  ;  spine  tender.

Binding  head  tightly  :  sick-headache  >.

Loosening  chothes:  >  pressure  in  stomach.

Rubbing :  pressure  in  eye  <  ;  biting  of  internal  canthus
and  lachrymation ;  yellowish-brown  spots  about  neck
scale  off.

Scratching :  eruption  on  vertex  feels  sore ;  roots  of  hair
burn  ;  itching  changes  to  burning ;  does  not  >  itching
of  spot  on  r.  hand  ;  pimples  become  dry.

Riding  in  a  carriage :  nausea ;  fainting.

Riding:  stitches  in  region  of  liver;  causes  pain  in  hypo-
chondria ;  hurts  back  severely.

■  Seasickness.

Jar  :  hurts  back  severely.

Misstep  :  hurts  back  severely.

Slightest  blow :  nosebleed.

From  a  blow  upon  spine :  tenderness  along  whole  course.

Accidentally  kicking  foot  against  something  causes  pain-
ful stitches  and  must  walk  stooping.

Injury  from  overlifting:  dyspepsia;  crick  in  back.
*®  Skin. I  Delicate  skin  ;  least  injury  tends  to  ulceration.

I  Itching:  on  face;  on  tip  of  nose;  on  arms,  hands,  back,

hips,  feet,  abdomen  and  genitals;  pimples  on  chin ;  in
various  part  of  body  >  by  scratching,  after  which  there
is  a  pinkish  color ;  in  ulcer ;  of  nipples,  at  times  bleed
and  seem  about  to  suppurate ;  in  bends  of  elbows ;  on
posterior  parts  of  each  elbow.
Hitching  often  changes  to  burning,  when  scratching.

I I  Soreness  of  skin  ;  humid  places  in  bends  of  knees.

1 1  Brown  or  claret-colored  tetterlike  spots ;  chloasma.
Eruption  on  face,  a  red  roughness  of  skin.
Painful  eruption  on  tip  of  nose.


SEPIA.  356

llHerpetic  eruption  on  lips  and  about  mouth.

Red  herpetic  spots  on  both  sides  of  neck  witli  much  itching.

Yellowish-brown  spots  about  neck  that  scale  off  on  rub-
bing.

Red  spots  on  glans  penis.

Reddish  herpetic  spots  above  hips.

Lentil-sized  brown  spots  on  elbows,  surrounded  with  a
herpetic-looking  skin.

A  roundish  bright-red  spot  on  ball  of  r.  hand,  with  violent
itching  not  >  by  scratching,  evening.

Fine  rash  over  body,  particularly  about  bends  of  elbows
and  knees;  prickling,  tingling  and  itching;  in  a  warm
room  it  remained  out  and  she  felt  well,  if  she  passed  into
a  cold  room  it  disappeared  and  she  had  the  most  severe
rheumatic  pains  in  and  about  these  joints.

Moist  pimply  eruption  at  margin  of  vermilion  border  of
upper  lip.

i Vesicular  eruption  on  back;  humid  tetter  in  1.  axilla.

Itching  eruption  followed  by  desquamation.

1 1  Herpes  circinatus.

I  Ringworm-like  eruptions  every  Spring  on  different  parts
of  body.

I  I  Numerous  bullae,  on  face  near  mouth,  on  wrists  and
backs  of  hands ;  two  largest  were  on  wrists,  symmetri-
•  cal  in  position  and  size;  smaller  blebs  on  arms  and

below  knees ;  considerable  itching  and  irritation  of  der-
mis beneath  vesicles ;  bullae  on  wrists  were  as  large  as  a
hen's  egg. ^Pemphigus.

1  I  Urticaria ;  burning,  stitching,  itching  appearing  every
time  she  went  out  into  open  air;  first  appeared  on  face,
neck  and  forearm,  five  years  ago,  gradually  spread  over
whole  body,  with  the  exception  of  back,  abdomen  and
lower  legs;  attacks  preceded  by  nausea  and  pressing
headache;  face  swollen  as  in  erysipelas.

iNettlerash  :  most  on  face,  arms  and  thorax;  breaks  out
during  a  w^alk  in  cold  air,  disappears  in  a  warm  room.

I  Brownish  spots  on  chest.

I I  Brown-red  herpetic  spots  on  skin.

1 1  Brown  spots  on  skin  with  leucorrhoea.

II  Uneasiness  in  presence  of  strangers,  a  slight  quivering
of  whole  system  when  approached  ;  although  she  strove
to  appear  calm  her  face  flushed  up  suddenly  but  soon
returned  to  its  usual  sallowness ;  skin  disease  of  long
standing ;  at  night  an  itching  and  burning  of  skin  in
bends  of  elbows  and  knees,  small  pimples  would  rise  up,
discharging  a  small  quantity  of  serous  fluid,  on  scratch-
ing they  would  become  dry,  leaving  skin  roughened
with brown  herpetic  spots  here and  there ; chlorotic


357  .  SEPIA.

look;  pulse  soft;  starting  at  trifles ;  dreams  with  good
sleep;  more  fever  in  afternoon;  decayed  teeth;  tongue
coated  with  thick,  slimy  fur,  dark  at  root,  lighter  near
edges,  clearing  off  in  patches,  leaving  exposed  surface
very  red;  immediately  after  eating,  severe  pains  in
stomach  causing  her  to  bend  over,  with  vomiting  of
food  and  considerable  amount  of  slimy  fluid ;  even
when  pain  was  not  so  severe,  and  when  she  did  not
vomit  she  spat  a  great  amount  of  this  fluid,  after  her
meals ;  lived  almost  entirely  on  crackers  with  as  little
drink  as  possible;  constipation;  menses  suppressed  for
nearly  four  months;  slight  pains  in  hypogastric  re-
gion most  of  time;  back  and  limbs  very  weak.  ^Chlo-
rosis.

I  I  Red  spots  and  papules  isolated  and  in  large  oval  patches
covered  with  shining,  white,  adhesive  scales,  looking
like  stearine,  on  head,  face,  chest,  back,  arms  and  legs,
particularly  on  extensor  surfaces  (used  sapo  viridis
locally). ^Psoriasis.

I  Large  suppurating  pustules  constantly  renewing  them-
selves. ^Acarus  itch.

lAcarus  itch,  after  previous  abuse  of  sulphur;  itching  <
evenings;  especially  in  women.

■  Eruptions  during  pregnancy  and  nursing.

■  Dry  ringworm,  especially  on  face  of  children  ;  dry  off'en-

sive  eruption  on  vertex  and  back  of  head ;  itching  and
tingling,  with  cracks  behind  ears.

■  Pruritus,  with  vesicles  on  acrid  base  over  all  parts  of  body,

face,  eyelids,  hands,  feet,  armpits,  vulva,  anus,  ears,
hairy  scalp,  etc.

■  Itching,  crusty  tetters.
I  iTettery  eruptions.

■  Stitches all over  body,  with breaking forth of  little

pustules.

■  Eruption  very  moist,  almost  constantly  discharging  pus-

like matter ;  the  child  often  jerks  its  head  to  and  fro.

■  ■Humid  tetter  with  itching  and  burning.

■  Ringworm;  boils;  pustules;  pemphigus.

■  Ulcers:  painless,  on  joints  and  tips  of  fingers,  stinging

and  burning  ;  flat  with  a  bluish-white  base.

■  The  least  injury  tends  to  ulcerate,  in  thin,  delicate  skins.

■  Warts:  on  hands;  on  neck  with  horny  excrescence  in

centre ;  small,  itching,  flat  on  hands  and  face.

■  Large,  hard,  seed  warts;  dark  color  and  painless.

■  Varicose  veins.

" Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■■Suited  to  persons  of  dark
hair,  rigid  fibre,  but  mild  and  easy  disposition.

■  Especially  suitable  for  persons  with  dark  hair  and  for


SEPIA.  358

women,  especially  during  pregnancy,  in  childbed  and
while  nursing.

I  Children  take  cold  readily  when  the  weather  changes.

■  Scrofulous  persons.

I  Men  who  have  been  addicted  to  drinking  and  sexual  ex-
cesses.

I  Pot- bellied  mothers,  yellow  saddle  across  nose,  irritable,
faint  from  least  exertion,  leuco-phlegmatic  constitutions.

Girl,  £et.  5  months ;  cough.

Child,  aet.  8  months,  blonde,  fat,  teeth  developing  rapidly,
had  measles  three  weeks  ago,  attending  cough  had  never
quite  subsided  ;  whooping  cough.

Infant,  £et.  1,  suffering  several  weeks;  cough.

J.  T.  H.,  set.  1 ;  cough.

Boy,  set.  2 ;  conjunctivitis.

Girl,  set.  3 J,  fleshy,  leuco-phlegmatic,  suffering  three  years;
impetigo.

Child,  set.  4,  strong,  healthy  ;  ophthalmia.

Child,  set.  5,  blonde;  vaginitis.

Girl,  set.  5,  delicate,  face  pale,  waxen,  emaciated,  suffering
fifteen  months ;  leucorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  5,  father  scrofulous  as  a  child,  suffering  three
months ;  eruption  on  legs.

Boy,  set.  6 ;  catarrh  of  stomach.

Boy,  set.  7,  ill  three  weeks,  said  to  be  suffering  from  inter-
mittent fever ;  functional  derangement  of  liver.

Girl,  set.  7,  delicate;  epistaxis.

Girl,  set.  8,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  fair  complexion,  of  scrof-
ulous parents ;  warts  on  face.

Girl,  set.  10,  strong,  well  built,  brunette ;  incontinence  of
urine.

Girl,  set.  11 ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  12  ;  tarsal  tumor.

Girl,  set.  14,  blonde,  delicate  skin,  subject  to  eruptions  of
skin,  not  yet  menstruated ;  eruption  on  hand.

Boy,  set.  14,  blonde,  lymphatic-nervous  temperament,  slen-
der, delicate  white  skin,  subject  to  herpetic  eruption
every  Spring ;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  16,  tall,  slender,  fair  complexion,  light  hair  and
eyes,  suffering  six  months  ;  ague.

Girl,  set.  16,  sanguine-nervous  temperament,  tall,  slender,
fine  sensitive  skin  ;  chlorosis.

Girl,  set.  16,  delicate  ;  hysteria.

Girl,  set.  17,  blonde,  fair  hair,  pale,  delicate,  sensitive  skin ;
displacement  of  uterus.

Girl,  set.  18,  blonde,  stout,  began  menstruating  a  year  ago,
menses  absent,  when  a  child  had  tinea  capitis;  matting
of  the  hair.


359  SEPIA.

Girl,  set.  19,  sanguine  temperament,  brunette,  rheumatic ;
headache.

Miss  L.  S.,  set.  20,  dark  complexion,  hair  and  eyes,  and
living  in  affluent  circumstances,  suffering  six  years;
cystitis  and  irritablity  of  bladder.

Young  country-woman,  set.  20;  sweating  of  hands  and
feet.

Girl,  set,  20,  scrofulous,  ill  several  years ;  nasal  catarrh.

Miss  P.,  set.  20  ;  psoriasis.

Cigarmaker,  set.  21 ;  gonorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  22,  single ;  ophthalmia.

Girl,  set.  22,  menses  always  scanty,  suppressed  three  months
after  catching  cold ;  chlorosis.

Man,  set.  22^  dark-brown  hair,  short  build;  quotidian  ague.

Man,  set.  22,  after  catching  cold,  tertian  ague,  was  given
quinine,  etc.,  two  years  later  quartan  ague,  China  given,
attacks  would  cease  for  a  time  but  always  reappear ;
ague.

Man,  set.  22 ;  eruption  on  feet.

Young  lady,  sanguine,  married  ;  ague.

Mrs.  R.  L.,  black  hair,  moderately  well  nourished,  suffer-
ing three  years ;  cough.

Woman,  pregnant,  blonde,  delicate,  gentle  disposition ;
toothache.

Woman,  set.  23,  four  months  ago  miscarried  in  her  third
month  ;  menstrual  disturbance.

Man,  set.  23,  greatly  debilitated  by  onanism,  from  which
he  rid  himself  two  years  ago ;  seminal  emissions.

Washerwoman,  set.  23,  affected  since  3  years  old ;  profuse
sw^eating  of  hands.

Artilleryman,  set.  24,  irritable  disposition,  blonde;  icterus.

Woman,  set.  24,  single,  brunette,  menstruation  normal,  suf-
fering five  years ;  urticaria.

Man,  set.  24,  dark-brown  hair,  suffering  four  days;  oph-
thalmia.

Woman,  set,  24;  perimyelitis.

Man,  set.  24 ;  gastric  fever.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  25 ;  leucorrhcea.

Man,  «t.  25,  light  hair,  rough  scurfy  skin;  tertian  ague.

Woman,  set.  25,  single,  strong,  healthy  ;  dysmenorrhoea.

Man,  set.  25,  blonde,  slender;  fistula  of  neck  and  cough.

Woman,  set.  25,  dark  hair,  pale  sallow  face,  suffering  sev-
eral years  ;  oppression  of  breathing.

Girl,  set.  26,  after  heavy  lifting ;  uterine  displacement.

Woman,  set.  26,  eight  months  pregnant;  sciatica.

Girl,  set.  27,  dark  hair;  boils  and  offensive  foot  sweat.

Woman,  set.  27,  nervous  temperament ;  hemicrania.

Woman,  cet.  27  ;  headache.


SEPIA.  360

Miss  H.,  fet.  28,  dark  brunette,  sisters  died  of  consumption,
six  years  ago  had  an  affection  of  the  lungs  and  haemop-
tysis, is  a  nurse;  cough.

Woman,  get.  28,  of  sedentry  habits  ;  cardialgia.

Schoolmaster,  set.  29,  suffering  five  or  six  years;  headache.

Woman,  set.  29,  single  ;  amenorrhoea.

Mrs.  J.,  set.  30,  scrofulous  habit,  since  two  weeks ;  cough.

Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  several  years  from  loose  cough,
a  few  days  ago  delivered  of  her  first  child  which  died,
had  pneumonia  during  pregnancy ;  phthisis  pulmo-
nalis.

Woman,  set,  30,  blonde,  sanguine  temperament,  mother  of
several  children,  twelve  weeks  pregnant;  prolapsus
uteri.

Woman,  set.  30,  brunette,  choleric  temperament,  married
several  years,  three  weeks  ago  delivered  of  a  child,  after
exertion ;  prolapsus  uteri.

Man,  set.  30 ;  scirrhus  of  lip.

Woman,  set.  30,  single,  three  years  ago  lifted  a  heavy  arti-
cle, since  then  suffering  more  or  less ;  uterine  displace-
ment.

Man,  set.  30,  dark-brown  hair,  after  being  rapidly  cured
of  an  ulcer  on  leg ;  headaches.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  four  weeks;  pains  in  back,

Man,  set.  30,  palpitations  of  heart.

Lady,  set.  30,  ill  ten  days,  her  disease  is  said  to  have  been
functional  derangement  of  liver.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  32,  sick  several  months;  asthenopia.

Woman,  set.  32 ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  32,  mother  of  several  children,  now  three
months  pregnant,  first  attack  of  ague  when  twelve  years
old,  since  then  frequently  recurring,  and  always  sup-
pressed by  quinine ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  33,  brunette,  suffering  several  weeks ;  leucor-
rhoea.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  35,  nervous  temperament,  has  had  three  chil-
dren, the  youngest  seven  months  old,  suffering  since  last
pregnancy ;  hydrometra.

Woman,  set.  36,  blonde,  sanguine  temperament,  no  child
for  last  ten  years,  now  seven  months  pregnant ;  disorders
of  pregnancy.

Woman,  set.  36,  small  stature,  suffering  many  years ;  gas-
tric disorder.

Man,  set.  36,  gunner  on  ship ;  psoriasis.

Miss  E.,  set.  37,  lymphatic  temperament ;  vaginitis.

Woman,  set.  37,  mother  of  five  children,  last  one  still-born
four  years  ago  ;  amenorrhoea.


361  SEPIA.

Woman,  set.  37,  dark  hair,  pale  face,  mother  of  four  chil-
dren; pemphigus.

Tailor,  set.  37,  dark  hair,  pale,  lean ;  rheumatism.

Mrs.  P.,  set.  38,  black  hair  and  eyes,  married,  mother  of
three  children,  says  she  has  been  under  treatment  most
of  the  time  for  the  last  four  years. ^Falling  of  the  womb.

Woman,  set.  38,  tall,  slim,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  bilio-nerv-
ous  temperament,  married  fourteen  years,  has  never  con-
ceived ;  sterility.

Jewess,  set.  38,  blonde,  plethoric,  in  poor  circumstances,
suffering  since  last  childbirth  three  years  ago  ;  amen-
orrhoea.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  40,  suffering  nine  years;  facial  neuralgia.

Miss  St.,  set.  40,  suffering  several  days;  toothache.

Woman,  «t,  40,  single,  tall,  slim,  mild  disposition,  first  no-
ticed growth  six  months  ago ;  scirrhus  of  breast.

Farmer,  set.  40,  hardworking,  robust  man,  dark  complex-
ion, jovial  temperament ;  stitches  in  ear,  etc.

Woman,  set.  40,  suffering  since  fourteen  years  old;  head-
aches.

Woman,  set.  41,  married,  no  children ;  pain  in  liver.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  43 ;  gastralgia.

Mrs.  R.,  set.  45,  large,  fat,  light  complexion ;  urinary  dif-
ficulty.

Man,  set.  45,  dark  hair,  muscular;  dyspnoea.

Woman,  set.  48,  is  said  to  have  passed  through  four  attacks
of  meningitis  since  fifteen  years  old ;  since  last  attack,
mental  disturbance.

Lady,  set.  49,  stout  and  fleshy ;  cough.

Woman,  set.  49,  corpulent,  when  five  years  old  had  scarlet
fever,  since  then  hoarse,  and  in  Winter  afflicted  with  a
loose  cough,  after  repealed  exposure  to  drafts  cough  be-
came dry  ;  severe  cough  and  orthopnoea.

Woman,  set.  50,  single,  good  health  until  five  years  ago,
when  she  ceased  menstruating ;  headache.

Mrs.  R.,set.  51,  black  hair,  thin,  jaundiced  for  three  months;
hepatic  disorder.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  52 ;  pain  in  vagina  and  rectum.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  55,  caught  cold  six  or  eight  weeks  ago,  since
then  ill ;  pain  in  abdomen.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  56 ;  procidentia.

Lady,  set.  67  ;  cataract.

Man,  set.  75,  afflicted  fifteen  or  sixteen  years;  eruption  on
legs.

Lady,  set.  76,  suffering  forty  years ;  constipation.
*^  Relations. Antidotedby:  YegetahlG  acids,  Nitri  spir.  dulc,
Aeon.,  Ant.  crud..  Ant.  tart.,  Rhus  tox.  \

It  antidotes:  Calc.  ost.,  Cinchon.,  Mercur.,  Natr.  mur.,
Natr.  phos.,  Phosphor.,  Sarsap.,  Sulphur.


SEPIA— SILICA.  362

Incompatible: Lachesis.

Complementary  :  Natr.  mur.

Compare:  Borax,  Mezer.,  in  vesicular  eruptions  and  ulcers
about  joints;  Arsen.,  Ars.  jod.,  in  psoriasis;  Lycop.,  Nux
vom.,  Sulphur,  Curare,  in  chloasma;  Calc.  ost.,  Tellur.,  in
ringworm;  Caustic,  Fulsat.,  in  sadness;  Bellad.,  Iris,
Nux  vom.,  Fulsat.,  Sanguin.,  Therid.,  in  hemicrania ;
Natr.  mur.,  Lilium,  Kali  carb.,  Jaborandi,  Cyclam.,
Pulsat.,  Graphit.,  Thuja,  Alumina,  m  eye  troubles;  Aloes,
Lycop.,  Sulphur,  in  abdominal  troubles  ;  Murex,  Kreos.,
Stonnum,  Podoph.,  Pulsat.,  Secale,  Cauloph.,  Natr.  carb.,
Natr.  mur.,  Actsearac,  Aletris,  Helon.,  in  diseases  peculiar
to  women.


SILICA.

Pure  Silica  triturated.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Froissac,  Goullon,  Gross,  Hering,  Stapf,  Wahle,
Knorre,  Ruoff,  Baker,  Robinson  (with  liigh  dilutions),  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,
vol.  9,  p.  1.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Mental  disturbance,  Jahr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  476;
Vertigo,  Martin,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa,  1880,  p.  241 ;  Berridgp,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.
198;  Headache,  Tietze,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  203;  St  ens,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.
723 ;  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  188 ;  (with  Calc),  Weber,  p.  156 ;  Allen,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.
4,  p.  61;  Cochran,  H.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  396  ;  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  264;  P^arley,
Med.  Adv.,  Apr.,  1890,  p.  212;  Neuralgic  headache,  Hirsch,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,
p.  243 ;  Chronic  headache,  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  41 ;  Meningeal  sclerosis,
Baldwin,  A.  H.  O.,  Sept.,  1877  ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  196;  Tenderness  of  scalp,  Mar-
tin, Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  364;  Eruption  of  occiput,  Becker,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  261 ;
Eczema  capitis  (3  ca-es),  Aroularius,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  285  ;  Impetigo  capitis.
Small,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  314;  Abscesses  on  head,  Richards,  Hom.  World,  Apr.,
1870,  p.  84;  Cephalhmnatoma,  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  151 ;  (locally),  Goul-
lon, Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  18;  Enchondrosis  on  head,  Grauvogl,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,
p.  29;  Keloid  on  temporal  region,  Clarke,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  108;  Parenchyma-
tous iritis,  Schlosser,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  515;  Ulcer  on  cornea.  Skinner,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  113 ;  Lead  particles  in  cornea,  Shiildham,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  107 ;  Use
in  opacity  of  cornea,  3 onez,  Med.  Art.  Jour.,  1876,  p.  227;  Ophthalmia,  Stens,  A.
H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  188;  Miller,  H.  M.,  vol.  12,  p.  309  ;  Stens,  B.  J.  H.,  voh  34,  p.
724;  Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  Becker,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  279;  Schlosser,  N.  A.
J,  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  514  ;  Recurrent  phlyctenular  conjunctivitis.  Corneal  ulceration,  Foster,
Amer.  Hom.,  Aug.,'  1878,  p.  67 ;  Blepharitis,  Norton,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  355 ;
Swelling  of  lids,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  109  ;  Tumor  on  lid,  Stens,  A.  H.
Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  1 56  ;  Inflammation  of  lachrymal  sac.  Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  135 ;
Fistula  lachrymalis,  Payr,  N.  Z.  H.  Kl.,  vol.  14,  p.  124;  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  101;


363  SILICA.

Curies  of  the  orbit,  Norton  (see  Oplitli.  Thei'ap.,  p.  166) ;  Dysecoia,  GoiiUon,  A.  H.
Z.,  vol.  81,  p.  29  ;  Affection  of  ear,  Goullon,  Horn.  Recorder,  vol.  3,  p.  73,  from  Pop.
Zeit.  f.  Horn.,  Jan.,  1888 ;  Use  in  suppurative  inflammation  of  labyrinth,  Searle,  A.
H.  O.,  Dec,  1872,  p.  368  ;  Otorrhcea,  Cliamberlin,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  497  ;  Nan-
kivell,  H.  W.,  1871,  p.  136  ;  Chronic  sinus  in  front  of  ear,  Kankivell,  H.  W.,  vol.  7,
p.  106;  Loss  of  smell  and  taste,  Hirsch,  I.  Pr.,  1873,  p.  348 ;  Ivflammation  of  nasal
duct,  Chapnsot,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  26;  Coryza,  Kafka,  Rane's  Rec,  1870,  p.  129;
Chronic  coryza,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  168;  Ozcena,  Guernsey,  A.  H.
Z ,  vol.  1 10,  p.  143,  from  Med.  Adv.,  Oct.,  1884  ;  Itchiny  of  nose,  Hale,  H.  M.,  vol.
9,  p.  265;  Hard  swellincj  of  face,  Goullon,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  197  ;  Eruption  on  face,
Kampfer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  261  ;  Rhagades  around  lids  and  lips,  Goullon,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p  379 ;  Induration  of  cheek,  Kretsclimar,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
1,  p.  446;  Tumor  of  lip,  Petroz,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  312;  Cancer  of  lip,  Pancin,
(de  Corveirac),  Bib.  Horn.,  p.  150;  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  81 ;  Mastoid  periostitis,
Sherman,  Boericke  and  Dewey's  Tissue  Remedies,  p.  135;  Toothache,  Bonningh.,
Alts.,  T.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  478;  Cancer  of  tongue,  K.  in  L.,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  499;  Tumor  of  moidh,  Slocomb,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  5,  p.  485;  Angina,
Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  541  ;  Affection  of  throat,  Berridge,  Horn.  Rev.,
vol. 16,  p.  499;  Anorexia,  Krummacher,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  164;  Pressure  in

stomach,  Payne,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  199 ;  Gastric  disorder, Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,

vol.  ],  p.  663;  Hepatic  disorder,  T.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  703;  Ascites,  Brew-
ster, H.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  57 1  ;  Tnguincd  abscess  and  hernia,  Slocomb,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.
5,  p.  486 ;  Use  in  enteritis,  Bauer,  Hom.  Times,  vol.  5,  p.  177  ;  Summer  complaint,
Moore,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  Jour.,  Jan.,  1871 ;  Chronic  diarrhoea,  Maischler,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  19,  p.  415;  Constipation,  Bowie,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1885,  p.  184;  Nichols,  Org.,
vol.  3,  p.  345;  Johnson  (see  Hemple  and  Arndt's  Mat.  Med.) ;  Hemorrhoids  and
constipcdion,  Miller,  H.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  372  ;  Anal  abscess,  Clements,  Hom.  World,
vol.  6,  p.  81  ;  Fistula  in  ano,  Stow,  Hali.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  353;  Slow,  Raue's  Rec,
1874,  p.  202;  (6  cases),  Hendricks,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  103,  p.  175;  Enuresis,  Gause,
Hom.  CL,  vol.,  4,  p.  132;  Incontinence  of  urine,  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  342;
Seminal  emissions,  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  53;  Masturbation,  Gallavar-
din,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  242;  Hydrocele,  Hartm.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  215;
Guernsey,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  242;  Richardson,  Med.  Inv.,  Oct.,  1868,  p.  2;  Re-
moved putrid  odor  in  uterine  cancer,  James,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  179 ;  Peri-uterine
cellulitis,  Carr,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  110 ;  Metrorrhagia,  Teste,  Boericke  and  Dewey's
Tissue  Remedies,  p.  171;  Vaginismus,  Skinner,  Orij.,  vol.  1,  p.  76 ;  Leucorrhnea,
Hahnemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  366 ;  Gro.ss,  H.  M  ,  vol.  10,  p.  409;  Tumor
in  breast,  Bell,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  242;  Scirrhus  mammce,  Schneider,  Hom.  CI.,
vol.  3,  p.  94;  Bell,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  243;  Thompson,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  80;
Mammary  fistula.  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf ,  vol.  2,  p.  425;  Suppressed  lochia,  Miller,
H.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.  43;  Asthma,  Stem,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  156;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
34,  p.  719;  Cough,  Williamson,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  205;  Temple,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.
3,  p.  101;  Boyce,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  167;  Pertussis,  Pomeroy,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.
8,  p.  168 ;  Pain  in  r.  lung,  Durand,  Med.  Adv.,  1890,  p.  179 ;  Lung  affection,  Stens,
I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  1,  p.  357 ;  Compression  of  lung  after  pleuritic  exudation  and  curvature
of  spine,  Schmitt,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  132;  Phthisis,  Hartm.,  Gauwerky,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  398;  Brigham,  Boericke  and  Dewey's  Tissue  Remedies,  p.  180,
from  Brigham's  Phthisis;  Pomeroy,  Med.  Inv.,  Jan.,  1871,  p.  169;  Brigham,  Cin.
Med.  Adv.,  vol.  6,  p.  97  ;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Brauns,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  3,  p.  95 ;
Svjelling  on  chest,  Nunez,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  324;  Absces,i  on  chest,  Fornias,
Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  169;  Necrosis  of  acromio-clavicidar  articulation,  Mass.  Trans.,


SILICA.  364

vol.  4,  p.  94;  Swellinrj  of  neck,  Berridge,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  496  ;  Goitre,  Beebe,
Tr.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,  p.  768;  Carbuncle  on  neck,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  195;  Recurrent  fibroid  on  neck,  Kent,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  193;  Pain
and  swelling  in  cicatricial  tissue  about  neck,  Strong,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  368 ;  Disease  of
cervical  vertibrce,  Nankivell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  209;  Psoas  abscess,  0.  M.  and  S.
E.,  vol.  7,  No.  5;  Affection  of  sacrum  and  spine,  Pope,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  549;
Coxitis,  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  52 ;  Bone  disease  of  vpper  limbs,  Seidel,  Hart-
laub,  Heichelheim,  Goullon,  Cliai-ge,  Kiimpfer,  Gauwerky,  Kirsch,  Theiierkauf,
Battmann,  Schindler,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  441  ;  Inflammation  of  arm,  Berridge,
H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  108  ;  Fungous  growth  on  slump  of  arm,  Preston,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,
p.  83;  Caries  of  ulna,  Biegler,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  472;  Swelling  on  wrist.  Swan,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  254 ;  Contraction  of  fingers,  Holcombe,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
4,  p.  615,  from  Phil.  Jour,  of  Horn.,  vol.  1,  p.  548;  Swelling  and  suppuration  of
thumb,  Theuerkauf,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  19;  Caries  of  metacarpal  bones,  Grauvogl,
from  text-book  ;  Caries  of  bone  of  forefinger,  C.  T.  M.,  Boericke  and  Dewey's  Tis-
sue Remedies,  p.  107;  Enchondroma  on  finger,  Knickerbocker,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  193;
Swelling  of  finger,  Sager,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  90,  p.  203;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  155;
Injury  to  fingers,  Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  191 ;  Glass  in  finger,  Turrill,
Hom.  Ph\s.,  vol.  4,  p.  102;  Panaritium,  Hg.,  Sommer,  Holeczek,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  3,  p.  566;  McClatchey,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  179,  from  Bib.  Hom.,  May
1874 ;  Felon  on  finger,  Gallupe,  Org.j  vol.  1,  p.  482 ;  Whitlow,  Stow,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.
8,  p.  353  ;  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  53;  Abscess  in  buttocks,  Goullon,  H.  M.,
vol.  13,  p.  443  ;  Sciatica,  Willard,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1882,  p.  159  ;  Luxation  of  femur,
Schnapfauf,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  917  ;  Necrosis  of  femur,  Gilchrist,  Med.  Inv.,
vol.  8,  p.  8;  Gilchrist,  Med.  Inv.,  1870,  p.  7  ;  Fistuke  of  thigh,  Cigliano,  Horn.  CI.,
vol.  4,  p.  133;  Swelling  of  knee,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  589;  Billig,  Riick,
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  926;  Bell,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  327 ;  White  swelling  of  knee,  Bil-
lig, Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  927;  Housemaid's  knee,  Newton,  Hom.  World,  vol.
4,  p.  TOO;  Swelling  and  suppuration  at  knee,  Schmitt,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  472;
Hygroma  of  patella.  Swan,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  254 ;  Enlarged  patella  bursa,  New-
ton, Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  474;  Chronic  bursitis,  Newton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  14,  p.
539  ;  Gonitis,  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  317  ;  Periostitis  of  tibia,  Eidherr,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  27,  p.  52 ;  Injury  of  tibia,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  26 ;  Boil  over  tibia,  Ber-
ridge, H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  108  ;  Pain  in  leg,  Low,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  916  ;  Sup-
puration of  leg,  Pavis,  Med.  Inv.,  1875,  p.  155;  Chronic  suppuration  of  leg,  Gallupe,
Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  482;  Pain  in  feet,  Guernsey,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  92;  Guernsey,  Med.
Couns.,  vol.  1,  p.  62;  Traumatic  inflammation  of  foot,  Sircar,  Calcut.  M.  J.,  vol.  1,
p.  416;  Abscess  of  foot,  McClatchey,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  180;  Abscess  of  foot  and
caries,  McClelland,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  358;  Suppuration  of  foot.  Sircar,  Calcut.
Jour.,  vol.  1,  p.  416  ;  Ulcer  on  foot,  McClatchey,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  180,  from  Bib.
Hom.,  May,  1874;  Enchondroma  of  toe,  Knickerbocker,  T.  W.  H.  Conv.,  1876,  p.
864;  Suppressed  foot  sweats,  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  81,  p.  47  ;  Abnormal  foot  sweats,
Gallavardin,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  137;  vol.  15,  p.  60;  Hysteria,  Knorre,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  289 ;  Spasms,  Schonfeld,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  591 ;  Sparnis
after  vaccination,  H.,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  374;  Convulsions,  C.  Hg.,  Raue's  Rec,
1870,  p.  18;  Epilepsy,  Hartm.,  Bonningh.,  Weber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.
690;  Lindsay,  Org.,  vol.  ],  p.  471 ;  Hoyne,  Boericke  and  Dewey's  Tissue  Reme-
dies, p.  137 ;  Somnambulism,  Lindsay,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  471 ;  Night  sweats  of  phthisis,
_Holcombe,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  9 ;  ///  effects  of  vaccination,  Hering,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  7,  p.  374;  Scrofulosis,  Knorre,  Griessel.,  Sollier,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  410;
Ulcerations,  Knorre,  Gross,  Billig,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  289 ; Use  in  suppura-


365  SILICA.

tion,  Noack,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  424;  Marwick,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  12,  p.  552 ;  Chronic
suppurations,  Armstrong,  Med.  Inv.,  1875,  p.  228 ;  Use  in  caries,  Eadcliff,  N.  E.
M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  251 ;  Areolar  hyperplasia,  Yeomans,  Horn.  Times,  vol.  4,  225;
Threatened  cancer,  McClatchey,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  180;  Multiple  cheloid,  Clarke,
Hom.  AVorld,  Aug.,  1885;  Enchondroma,  Laird,  H.  M.,  vol.  15,  p.  193;  Furuncle,
Neumann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  182;  Acne  simplex.  Cooper,  Hom.  Kev.,  vol.
14,  p.  33;  Eczema  squamosum,  Cooper,  Hom.  Kev.,  vol.  14,  p.  36  ;  Herpetic  eruption
and  hydrocele,  Williamson,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  205;  Lupus,  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
34,  p.  724;  McClatchey,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  180,  from  Bib.  Hom.,  May,  1876;  Ele-
phantiasis Arabum,  Sana,  N.  A.  J.  H ,  vol.  22,  p.  443.

^  Mind. Indifferent,  apathetic.

iConfusion  of  mind;  difficulty  in  fixing  the  attention.

■  Mental  labor  is  very  difficult.

I  Reading  and  writing  fatigue,  cannot  bear  to  think.
Becomes  confused,  makes  mistakes ;  she  is  unable  to  con-
trol herself
Affections  from  egotism.
I  Compunction  of  conscience  about  trifles.

■  Overanxious  about  himself; low-spirited; weeps  every

evening.
Longing  for  his  relations  and  home.

■  Very  irritable,  low-spirited,  peevish  mood.

I  I  Sensitiveness  to  noise  and  anxiety  therefrom.

■  Very  sensitive,  weeping  mood.

■  Desponding,  melancholy,  tired  of  life. ^Spermatorrhoea.

■  Gloomy,  feels  as  if  she  would  die.

■  Wishes  to  drown  herself

■  Yielding,  faint-hearted,  anxious  mood.

■  Restless,  fidgety,  starts  at  least  noise.

■  Child  becomes  obstinate,  headstrong;  cries  when  kindly

spoken  to.

i  I  When  crossed  has  to  restrain  himself  to  keep  from  doing
violence. ^Megrim.

I  I  Screaming  violently,  groaning. ^Epilepsy.

I  I  She  screams  during  increase  of  moon. ^Somnambulism.

Imagines  to  be  in  two  places  at  the  same  time.

I  I  Complains  of  pain  in  throat  on  swallowing ;  although
there  is  no  indication  of  any  inflammation,  the  condi-
tion of  her  throat  is  the  sole  thing  occupying  her  mind  ;
believes  she  has  swallowed  pins,  and  asks  those  about  her
whether  she  has  not  done  so ;  seeks  for  hours  for  lost  pins ;
will  take  no  sewing  into  her  hand,  and  carefully  examines
her  food  for  fear  of  pins ;  very  indifferent  to  friends  and
former  amusements ;  restlessness ;  anxiety  ;  vertigo,  <
stooping ;  headache  daily,  <  mornings ;  loss  of  appe-
tite; constipation;  emaciation;  entire  absence  of  menses ;
<  during  increase  of  moon.  ^Hysteria.
^  Sensorium. ■Vertigo  :  as  if  one  would  fall  forward  ;  ascend-


SILICA.  366

ing  from  dorsal  region,  through  nape  of  neck  into  head ;
inclining  to  fall  backward ;  <  from  motion  or  looking
upward ;  accompanied  by  nausea  ;  with  rachitis ;  from
excessive  use  of  eyes;  when  riding;  with  sleepiness;
all  day,  while  stooping  at  work ;  during  sleep ;  when
rising  from  a  recumbent  position  ;  is  obliged  to  walk
to  the  r.  side;  commencing  in  cerebellum  ;  in  neuras-
thenia and  epilepsy;  as  if  drunk;  is  obliged  to  sit
down  ;  when  closing  eyes  ;  from  lying  on  1.  side.

The  brain  feels  muddled  and  thick.

I  I  Heaviness  in  head. ^Paralysis.

Disagreeable  feeling,  as  if  head  were  teeming  with  live
things  whirling  around  it.

■  Fainting;  when  taking  cold  ;  from  suppressed  foot  sweat.
'  Inner  Head, l  Headache  or  cold  feeling  rising  from  nape

of  neck  to  vertex  ;  extreme  heaviness  of  head.
iCongestion  to  head  ;  cheeks  hot ;  slight  burning  in  soles
of  feet.

■  Burning  in  head,  with  pulsation  and  sweat  of  head  ;  <

at  night  from  mental  exertion,  talking  ;  >  by  wrapping
head  up  warmly.

■  Shooting  from  nape  to  vertex.

I  Violent  periodic  headache,  in  vertex,  occiput  or  forehead  ;
one-sided,  as  if  beaten;  throbbing  in  forehead;  coming
in  night,  with  nausea,  vomiting.

■  Violent  headache,  with  loss  of  consciousness  or  reason.

■  Loud  cries,  nausea  to  fainting;  subsequent  obscuration

of  sight. ^Megrim.

■  Obstinate  morning  headaches,  with  chilliness  and  nausea.

■  Headaches,  with  or  followed  by  severe  pain  in  small  of

back;  heaviness  and  uncomfortable  feeling  in  limbs.

■  Tearing,  frequently  one-sided,  with  stitches  through  eyes

and  in  cheek  bones.

■  Pulsating,  beating,  most  violent  in  forehead  and  vertex,

with  chilliness.

■  Headache  worse:  from  mental  exertion  ;  excessive  study;

noise ;  motion,  even  jarring  of  room  by  footstep  ;  light ;
stooping;  pressing  at  stool ;  talking; cold  air; touch.

■  Headache  better:  from  wrapping  head  up  warmly;  hot

compresses ;  in  warm  room  ;  lying  down  in  dark.

■  Headache  every  seventh  day.

■  Vibratory  shaking  sensation  in  head  when  stepping  hard,

with  tension  in  forehead  and  eyes.

■  Headache  caused  by  hunger.

■  Headache  as  if  everything  would  press  out  and  burst

skull ;  as  if  brain  and  eyes  were  forced  forward.

■  Headache  wakes  him  at  night.

Tearing  in  whole  head  starting  from  occipital  protuber-
ances and  extending  upward  and  forward  over  both  sides.


367  SILICA.

Tearing  pain  as  if  head  would  burst,  with  throbbing  in  it,
commencing  at  crown  as  if  internal  and  external  at  same
time,  with  chilliness;  was  obliged  to  lie  down  and  tossed
about  in  bed  for  four  hours ;  >  by  binding  head  tightly.

Violent  tearing  in  head  asif  forehead  would  be  torn  asunder.

A^iolent  headache  above  eyes  so  that  he  could  scarcely
open  them.

Stitches  in  temples.

Hard  jerklike  pressure  in  top  of  head,  extending  deep  into
brain,  in  paroxysms  lasting  one  or  two  minutes.

The  hat  causes  acute  pain  in  occipital  protuberance.

Pressive  headache  in  occiput  as  if  in  bone.

Pressure  in  occiput,  followed  by  stitches  in  forehead,  with
chilliness  in  nape  of  neck  and  back.

Pressure  in  both  sides  of  occiput.

Bruised  pain  above  eyes,  could  scarcely  open  them ;  first
affected  1.  side  of  forehead,  a  sticking  extending  to  r.
side,  pressive,  <  by  opening  eyes.

Pressive  jerking  in  middle  of  forehead  renewed  by  sud-
denly turning  around,  stooping  or  talking.

Pressure  as  from  a  heavy  weight  in  forehead  over  eyes.

Tearing  in  frontal  region.

Acute  sticking  pain  in  forehead.

Roaring  and  shattering  in  brain  when  stepping  hard  or
knocking  foot.

Tension  and  pressing  in  head  as  if  pressed  or  forced  asunder.

Pressive  headache  at  night;  could  not  remember  where  she
was;  everything  turned  around,  with  throbbing  at  heart.

Violent  pressive  headache  in  morning,  extending  into
eyes,  with  violent  chill  in  afternoon,  nausea  and  weak-
ness, thought  she  would  faint ;  eyes  painful  on  turn-
ing them  sideways  or  closing  them,  and  when  closed  are
still  more  painful  to  touch.

Constant  pressive  headache  from  above  downward  over
whole  head,  with  intermittent  itching  at  vulva.

Pressure  at  occiput  and  nape  of  neck  in  morning.

■  Headache  wnth  small  lumps  or  nodules  on  scalp.

I  Diseases  of  brain,  spinal  marrow  and  nerves  of  a  para-
lytic nature.

Fluttering  feeling  in  both  temples  and  aching  at  occiput.

I  1  Frontal  sinus  affected;  pounding  and  throbbing  in
forehead  and  up  into  head. ^Chronic  coryza.

Feeling  like  water  pipes  bursting  in  head.

■  Headache  from  organic  causes,  excessive  study,  nervous

prostration  with  vertigo  and  weak  memory.
Sickening  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  <  from  pressure  or  least

movement.
When  coming  into  dark  s!ie  feels  a  pressure  on  vertex  as

if  a  tremendous  weight  were  falling  on  it.


SILICA.  368

Strange  coldness  about  breadth  of  two  fingers  across  vertex
in  a  line  with  forepart  of  ears;  rush  of  blood  to  forehead.

■  Extreme  heaviness  of  head;  she  cannot  hold  it  up,  it

feels  so  weighty.

■  Rushes  of  blood  to  forehead.

I  I  Congestion  to  head,  hot  cheeks  and  burning  in  soles  of
feet. ^Chronic  hepatitis.

I  Heat  in  head. ^Spermatorrhoea.

I  I  For  years  terrible  headaches  coming  on  in  evening  in
bed,  with  shivering  and  coldness  over  body ;  the  pain
began  in  cervical  vertebrae,  extending  to  cerebellum
and  from  there  went  to  forehead  where  it  was  most  se-
vere ;  pain  >  wrapping  head  warmly  ;  feeling  in  neck
as  if  some  one  pulled  downward  on  cords  of  neck.

I  I  Chronic  headache ;  never  entirely  free,  at  times  fearful ;
when  it  reaches  its  height  scalp  becomes  covered  with
papules  and  is  then  so  sensitive  that  she  cannot  comb
her  hair ;  these  violent  spells  are  caused  by  draft  and
scrubbing  ;  cannot  bear  cold  or  heat  ;  during  headache
she  has  violent  roaring  in  ears,  as  if  something  alive  were
in  them ;  chronic  sweat  of  feet ;  habitual  constipation.

I  I  Head  felt  constantly  as  if  it  were  in  a  cushion  and
some  one  were  pressing  his  two  fingers  in  it  at  occi-
put, as  if  feeling  for  pins  in  side ;  with  occasional
lightning-like  flashes  in  eyes  and  feeling  as  if  some-
thing obscured  vision ;  <  in  cold  weather  or  in  a  draft ;
>  wrapping  head  up  warmly.

I  I  Cephalalgia  from  spinal  irritation  ;  pain  began  in  spine
and  neck,  coming  up  and  over  r.  temple  and  thence  to
1.  temple  ;  scalding  feeling  in  vertex  ;  burning  pain  in
head  ;  feeling  of  internal  soreness  as  if  sore  brain  col-
lided with  skull ;  pain  very  hard  to  bear ;  <  from
light,  noise,  least  jar  and  odors  ;  sore  aching  in  nape,  <
by  moving  head,  >  from  wrapping  head  in  pillow  and
from  contact  of  any  warm  hand.

I  I  Pain  at  one  time  in  vertex  and  occiput,  at  another  in
forehead  ;  sometimes  affects  only  one  side,  head  then
paining  as  if  bruised  and  being  very  sensitive  to  touch ;
throbbing  in  forehead,  with  weakness  of  sight ;  is  awak-
ened from  sleep  by  the  pain  and  has  then  nausea  and
vomiting;  pain  <  from  touch,  motion,  open  air;  food
tastes  like  clay ;  discharge  of  particles  of  tapeworm ;
trembling  of  limb  and  general  feeling  of  weakness  with
the  pains. ^Headache.

I  I  Severe  headache,  every  two  or  three  weeks,  lasting  from
thirty-six  to  fortj^-eight  hours  ;  pain  commences  in  nape
of  neck  and  base  of  brain  and  extends  up  and  over  whole
head  in  paroxysms ;  pain  so  severe  that  she  calls  for
some  one  to  hold  her  head  tightly  to  keep  it  from  bursting.


369  SILICA.

I  I  Feeling  of  waves  of  water  from  occiput  over  vertex  to
forehead,  making  her  feel  with  each  wave  as  if  she
would  gradually  lose  her  senses,  >  from  warm  wraps
around  head  ;  vomiting  of  bitter  yellow  substance  on
moving,  >  when  perfectly  quiet.

I  I  Chronic  sick  headaches  since  some  severe  disease  in
youth  ;  rising  from  nape  of  neck  to  vertex,  as  if  coming
from  spine  and  locating  in  one  eye,  especially  r ;  >
by  pressure  and  wrapping  up  warmly.

■  Congestive,  gastric,  nervous  and  rheumatic  headaches.

I  Headaches  from  excessive  mental  exertion,  from  over-
heating, from  nervous  exhaustion.

■  Cerebral  apoplexy,  preceded  by  deep-seated  stitches  in  r.

parietal  region  and  dull,  heavy,  crampy  pain  in  arms.

■  Child  grasps  at  its  gums  continually,  as  if  they  were

painful ;  profuse  sweat  about  head  at  night,  scrofulous
diathesis. ^Meningitis. ^Hydrocephalus.
■*  Outer  Head. ■■Open  fontanelles;  head  too  large  and  rest
of  body  emaciated,  with  pale  face;  abdomen  swollen,
hot.

■  Rolling  of  head  from  side  to  side.

■  Head  feels  as  if  too  large.

Head  feels  as  if  falling  off,  causing  straining  pains  at
back  of  neck  as  if  head  were  hanging  by  a  piece  of  skin
at  nape.

■  Head  falls  forward. ^Spinal  disease.

Strange  coldness,  about  breadth  of  two  fingers,  across  ver-
tex, in  a  line  with  forepart  of  ears.

■  ■Tendency  to  take  cold  in  head,  which  cannot  be  un-

covered.

■  Tearing  in  scalp,  <  from  pressure  and  at  night.

I  I  Tenderness  of  scalp  in  region  of  coronal  suture ;  brush-
ing or  combing  hair  causes  violent  attacks  of  sneezing.

■  ■Head  sore to  touch  externally;  sensibility  of  pericra-

nium ;  scalp  sensitive  to  pressure  of  hat  and  to  contact ;
she  cannot  brush  her  hair,  the  scalp  is  so  tender.

■  Much  itching  on  scalp.

■  ■  Itching  spots  on  head  painful,  as  if  sore,  after  scratching.

■  ■Itching  on  occiput.
Pricking  and  itching  of  scalp.

Burning  and  itching,  mostly  on  back  part  of  head  ;  <
from  scratching,  which  causes  burning  and  soreness ;.
<  when  undressing  in  evening  and  on  getting  warm  in
bed.

■  ■Lumps  rise  on  head,  hair  falls  out,  scalp  sensitive  to>

touch ;  tearing  pains.

■  ■Profuse head  sweat ; body dry; likes wrapping up;,

sweat  sour ;  face  pale  ;  emaciated  ;  large  abdomen  ;  wenk
ankles.

VOL.  IX. — 24.  »


SILICA.  370

■  Profuse  sweat  of  bead,  body  being  dry  or  nearly  so.
llHead wet  from  sweating,  particularly  at  nigbt,  likes

wrapping  up.

■  Profuse  perspiration  on  bead,  sour-smellingand  offensive,

in  first  sleep.

■  Patcbes  of  eruption  on  scalp,  exfoliated  tbin,  dr}^  furfur-

aceous  scales.

■  ■Eruption on  back of  bead, moist or dry, offensive,

scabby,  burning,  itching,  discharging  pus.
I  I  Impetigo  capitis;  entire  bead  covered;  eruption  liumid,
discharging  a  greenish  fluid  of  somewhat  putrid  odor.

■  Eczema  capitis ;  patch  of  eruption  on  scalp,  over  occip-

ital protuberance,  dry,  furfuraceous  scales,  with  some
itching ;  enlarged  cervical  glands ;  headache  with
shooting  pains  from  nape  of  neck  to  vertex  ;  leucorrboea ;
backache.

■  Scaly  eruption  on  scalp;  >  in  Summer,  but  <  upon  ap-

proach of  Winter  ;  cervical  glands  enlarged.

■  Itching  pimples  on  head  and  nape  of  neck.

■  Itching pustules  on  scalp  and  neck  very  sensitive,  >

wrapping  up  warmly.

■  ■Moist  eruption  on  occiput.

■Scalp  becomes  covered  with  papulae  and  is  then  so  sensi-
tive that  she  cannot  comb  her  hair. ^Chronic  headache.

■  Itching  pustules  and  bulbous  swellings  on  hairy  scalp

and  on  neck.

■  Hair  falls  out;  premature  baldness.

■  Suppurating  wound  of  scalp.

■  Phagedenic  ulcer  on  forehead  painful  and  discharging

offensive  pus.

I  I  Keloid  on  temporal  region  ;  frontal  headache.

I  iCephalhaematoma  ;  almost  the  whole  1.  parietal  bone  is
covered  with  a  large,  soft,  elastic  swelling  ;  the  charac-
teristic ring  of  the  bone  can  be  traced  by  the  finger.

■  Cephalatoma  neonatorum.

I  lEnchondrosis ;  large,  hard  swelling,  but  soft  in  some
places,  on  a  child's  head,  beginning  above  ears  and  ex-
tending to  larynx  ;  whistling,  breathing  and  suffocative
attacks.

■  Painful  distension  of  frontal  bone;  periostitis.
'Sight  and Eyes. ■Long-lasting  photophobia; daylight

dazzles  the  eye.

■  ■Letters  run  together,  appear  pale.

■  Dim  vision  after  suppressed  foot  sweat.

■  Occasional  lightning-like  flashes  in  eyes  and  a  feeling

as  if  something  obscured  vision  ;  nervous  sensation  in
head.
8  Black  spots,  or  sparks,  before  eyes  ;  a  persistent  speck  be-
fore r.  eye.


371  SILICA.

■  Momentary  loss  of  sight,  with  uterine  affections;  preg-

nanc3^

Eyes  weak ;  vision  indistinct,  misty,  with  flickering  before
eyes.

Dimness  of  vision;  could  neither  read  nor  write;  every-
thing ran  together  ;  as  if  looking  through  a  grey  cover.

lAnablyopia:  from  checked  foot  sweat;  from  abuse  of
stimulants ;  nervous,  sensitive  persons ;  after  diphtheria.

I  I  Momentary  attacks  of  sudden  blindness.

I  Day  blindness,  with  sudden  appearance  of  furuiicles.

Slight  fluttering  before  eyes.

I  I  Cataract ;  a  decided,  greyish  cloudiness  of  lens  of  r.  eye
was  reduced  to  a  small  spot  size  of  head  of  pin ;  smoke
or  vapor  before  eyes,  cannot  discern  objects  ;  eyes  red,
inflamed,  watering.

I  iSclero-choroiditis  ant.  relieved  by  this  remedy;  con-
junctiva and  sclera  injected  and  a  bluish  irregular  bulg-
ing around  cornea ;  retina  hazy,  no  vitreous  opacities ;
severe  pains  extending  from  eyes  into  head  on  one  side,
>by  warmth;  severe  aching  in  back  of  head  on  one
side,  corresponding  to  eye  which  is  worse ;  symptoms
alternate  from  one  eye  to  the  other.

I  I  Choroiditis  in  a  myope,  in  w^hom  upon  any  exertion  of
eye  excessive  pain  extended  to  head  and  ears.

Ilrido-choroiditis  and  other  forms  of  inflammation  of
uveal  tract.

I  I  Irido-choroiditis  and  other  forms  of  inflammation.

I  I  Irido-choroiditis,  great  tenderness  of  eye  to  touch,  deep
ciliary  injection,  contraction  of  pupils,  posterior  syne-
chias, excessive  sensitiveness  to  a  draft  of  air.

I  I  Parenchymatous  iritis  with  abscess  in  upper  part  of  iris,
violent  supraorbital  pain,  night  and  day.

■  Ciliary  neuralgia.

■  Iritis,  with  hypopion  and  corneitis.

■  Fungus  medullaris.

I  I  Formation  of  abscess  size  of  a  lentil  in  upper  portion  of
iris,  having  appearance  of  a  yellowish-red  swelling,  col-
oring the  pupil ;  the  pus  of  which  a  small  portion  had
entered  the  anterior  chamber  was  absorbed.

■  Cataract:  after  suppressed  foot  sweat;  preceding  worms.

I  I  Cataract  of  right  eye  (diagnosis  confirmed  by  two  phys-
icians) cured  in  one  year  by  repeating  Silica  once  a
month. <?Cataract.

I  I  Cataract  of  r.  eye  in  a  man,  set.  61.

■  Perforating  or  sloughing  ulcer  of  cornea.

■Small  round  ulcers,  with  a  tendency  to  perforate,  espe-
cially if  situated  near  centre  of  cornea  and  having  no
bloodvessels  running  to  them.


SILICA.  372

■  Deep  or  cresceiitic  ulcers  of  cornea.

I  I  Sloughing  ulcer  with  hypopion  in  a  syphilitic  patient;
iris  inflamed  ;  ulcer  quite  deep  with  profuse  purulent
discharge,  small  flakes  on  cornea,  chemosis  of  conjunc-
tiva,

I  Ulcus  corneee  sloughed  through  ;  sticking  pains  night
and  morning.

■  Pustular  keratitis  after  psoriasis.

■  Opaque  cornea  after  smallpox.

■  Spots  and  cicatrices  on  cornea.

■  Corneal  fistula.

I  I  Total  pannus  in  a  boy  set.  9;  both  cornese  completely
opaque,  presenting  a  wholly  whitened  appearance.

I  I  Cornea  thick,  rough,  -warty  as  if  it  were  a  mass  of  hyper-
trophied  tissue  loosened  up  little  by  little  and  scaled  off
from  cornea  leaving  it  clear  and  healthy.

I  lUlceration  of  cornea;  painless  tumefaction  of  lids.

■  Fungus  hsematodes.

I  \  Silica  3x  caused  the  discharge  of  lead  particles  (arising
from  lead  lotion)  from  cornea.

■  Eyes  painful  as  if  too  dry  and  full  of  sand  in  morning.
Tension  in  eyes  and  forehead,  with  weakness  of  body.
Piercing  stinging  pain  in  1.  eye.

■  Tearing,  shooting,  or  at  times  throbbing,  stinging  pains

in  eyes,  in  paroxysms.

■  Smarting  of  eyes.

Aching  in  upper  lid,  with  severe  stitches  in  it  as  from  a
splinter,  with  vanishing  of  sight.

■  Pressure  and  soreness  in  orbits.

■  Ciliary  neuralgia:  especially  over  r.  eye  ;  darting  pain&

through  eyes  and  head  upon  exposure  to  any  draft
of  air  or  just  before  a  storm.

I  I  Every  day  about  1  o'clock,  severe  burning  pains  in  r.
eye  and  flow  of  tears  over  cheek,  which  feel  scalding ;
these  symptoms  last  for  several  hours ;  r.  conjunctiva
injected  ;  pain  on  pressure  in  r.  lachrymal  sac,  which
feels  somewhat  swelled ;  mucous  secretion  in  eye  in
morning;  finally  great  swelling  of  lachrymal  sac,  form-
ing a  little  lump  at  coriKer  of  eye  exquisitely  painful  to
touch,  the  seat  of  throbbing  pains,  the  skin  over  it  being
red ;  hot  tears  run  over  cheek  ;  nasal  duct  quite  ob-
structed.

A  feeling  as  if  both  her  eyes  were  dragged  back  into  head
with  strings.

■  Pain  over  eyes  from  wearing  steel  spectacles.
Pressive  pain  over  1.  eye  about  size  of  a  sixpence.

Pain  from  occiput  to  eyeball,  mostly  r.,  sharp  darting  and
a  steady  ache  ;  eyeball  sore  and  painful  when  revolved.


373  SILICA.

Smarting  and  pricking  in  1.  eye.

Redness  at  first  around  eyes  then  also  of  conjunctivae,  with
inflammation  and  lachrymation.

■  Redness  of  whites  of  eyes  with  pressive  pain.

I  I  Trachoma  of  conjunctiva  of  r.  eye,  hyperaemia  and
swelling  of  conjunctiva  and  copious  secretion  of  tears
and  mucus,  after  exposure  to  a  storm  the  inflammation
increased  and  there  was  also  cloudiness  of  lenticular
capsule ;  horizontal  oval  dilatation  of  pupil ;  violent
supraorbital  pain  day  and  night;  urine  strongly  am-
moniacal,  deposited  a  yellowish  sediment  and  con-
tained a  large  amount  of  albumen ;  sight  very  much
diminished  ;  copious  muco-serous  secretion  from  con-
junctiva; after  some  time  there  was  an  abscess  arising
from  upper  part  of  iris,  having  a  yellowish-red  colora-
tion, and  covering  whole  pupil. ^Parenchymatous  iritis.

I  I  Pain  and  photophobia  and  inability  to  open  eyes  even
in  dark;  ulceration  of  r.  cornea,  with  a  deep, transparent
base,  threatening  perforation ;  great  hypersemia  of  lids,
of  conjunctiva,  and  of  epithelial  layer  of  cornea;  en-
gorgement of  submaxillary  gland  ;  moist  vesicular  erup-
tion on  back  of  head. ^Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I  I  Woman,  set.  28,  has  suflPered  for  two  months  with  recur-

rent phlyctenular  conjunctivitis ;  phlyctenules  have
varied  both  in  size  and  location,  being  at  times  very  large
and  isolated,  appearing  almost  like  pustules  and  coming
on  any  part  of  ocular  conjunctiva;  again  they  are  smaller,
like  minute  vesicles  but  more  numerous,  and  some-
times form  almost  a  complete  circle  at  sclero-corneal
junction  ;  conjunctival  redness,  profuse  lachrymation,
intense  photophobia,  at  times  very  severe  pain ;  pain
neuralgic,  <  at  exit  of  supraorbital  nerve ;  duration  of
attacks  from  eight  to  twelve  days.

I I  Eye  inflamed  from  traumatic  causes  ;  foreign  particles
have  lodged  in  the  eye ;  abscesses.

1 1  Hypopion.

I  Blennorrhoea  with  suppuration  ;  sensitive  to  cold  air,
wishes  to  keep  warmly  covered.

I  I  Twitching  of  eyelids.

•  Blepharitis:  with  agglutination  in  morning ;  caused  or
aggravated  by  M^orking  in  a  damp  place  or  from  being
in  cold  air ;  objects  seem  as  if  in  a  fog,  >  by  wiping
eyes,  fluent  coryza,  corners  of  mouth  cracked,  with
])soriasis  on  arm.

I  I  For  four  months,  constant  discharge  and  ulceration  un-
der r.  lower  lid,  the  result  of  a  severe  inflammation  ;
over  r.  inferior  orbital  ridge,  cicatrices  which  everted
tlie  lid and three  openings  as  found  over  dead  bone,


SILICA.  374

(liscbargiDg  a  yellow  white  pus,  on  probing  caries  of
lower  orbital  arch  was  found  extending  over  malar  and
superior  maxillary  bones  and  connected  by  sinuses  with
the  upper  jaw  opening  over  first  molar  tooth,  through
which  opening  the  discharge  escaped  into  mouth.
I  Boils  around  eye  and  lids.

■  Cystic  tumors  of  lids.

■  Tarsal  tumors;  styes.

I  I  Cystic  tumor  of  lower  lid  existing  one  year.

■  Styes,  nodules  and  indurations  on  eyelids.

■  Affections  appearing  in  angles  of  eyes.

■  Swelling  in  region  of  r.  lachrymal  gland  and  sac.

■  Lachrymation  in  open  air.

■  ■Fistula  lachrymalis;  bone  affected.

I  I  Swelling  of  r.  lachrymal  sac,  skin  over  it  inflamed;
glistening  ;  throbbing  pain  ;  tears  hot ;  <  evening.

I  I  Obstruction  of  canaliculi  attending  an  attack  of  oph-
thalmia of  six  weeks'  standing  and  affecting  both  eyes;
acrid  tears  overflowed  lower  lids.

I  I A  completely  established  fistula  of  sac,  with  disorgani-
zation of  walls  of  sac,  denudation  of  internal  horny
w^all  and  closure  of  nasal  canal.

■  Stricture  of  lachrymal  duct.

■  Blennorrhoea  of  lachrymal  sac.

I  1  Swelling  of  r.  tear  bag  forming  a  perceptible  protrusion,
skin  covering  it  inflamed  and  glistening;  throbbing  in
it;  the  flowing  tears  are  hot,  particularly  in  evening.
^Swelling  of  lachrymal  sac.
Soreness  and  smarting  of  eyelids,  she  cannot  close  them.
®  Hearing  and  Ears.  ■  Oversensitive  to  noises ;  ears  painfully
sensitive  to  loud  sounds.

■  Ringing  or  roaring  in  ears.
The  ears  seemed  stopped.

■  Stoppage  of  ears,  which  open  at  times  with  aloud  report.

■  Difficult  hearing,  especially  of  human  voice  and  during

full  moon.

■  Diminished  hearing  from  roaring  in  head.

I  I  Hardness  of  hearing,  of  long  standing;  <  from  wash-
ing and  changing  of  linen  ;  >  from  application  of
electricity.

Dulness  of  hearing  with  swelling  and  catarrh  of  Eus-
tachian tubes  and  tympanic  cavity.

■  Deafness  without  noise  in  ear,  disappearing  on  blowing

nose  and  coughing.

■  Hardness  of  hearing:  of  nervous  origin  ;  suddenly  after

a  faint;  ringing  in  ears  and  deafness  with  paralysis.

■  During  headache  roaring  in  ears  as  if  something  alive

were  in  them.


375  SILICA.

I  I  Deafness in a  hemorrhoidal patient  of  twelve  years'
standing.

■  Meniere's  disease.

I  Itching:  in  Eustachian  tubes,  chronic  coryza ;  in  both
ears,  in  ear,  especially  on  swallowing.

Drawing  pain  in  meatus  auditorius,  like  otalgia.

I  Stitches  in  ears.

I  Otalgia;  with  stitches  from  within  outward.

Shooting  pain  in  1.  ear,  with  a  feeling  as  if  humor  were
flowing  from  it.

Pricking,  aching  and  itching  in  ears,  1.  chiefly.

I  I  Sleep  disturbed  by  pain  in  ears. ^Scarlatina.

I  I  Boring  pain, /^Otorrhoea.

I  Inflammation  of  labyrinth  after  cerebro-spinal  menin-
gitis.

I  I  After  overexertion,  heaviness  of  head,  earache  and
difficulty  of  hearing ;  hypersensitiveness  to  sounds,  even
sound  of  voices  in  speaking  ;  catarrhal  cough,  pain  in
stomach  and  severe  pain  in  back  ;  between  the  shoul-
der blades  any  pressure  on  spinal  column  produced  a
violent  and  long-continued  pain,  so  that  she  had  a  well-
marked  spinal  irritation.

■  Constant,  watery,  curdy  and  ichorous  discharge  without

pain  except  after  a  fresh  cold  ;  pain  drawing,  shooting
<  at  night  and  from  change  of  weather  or  movement,
also  after  being  long  seated.

I  External  meatus  dry  at  outer  portion,  ulcerated  farther
in  and  at  drumhead.

I  Child  bores  into  its  ears  with  fingers  when  asleep,  caus-
ing a  discharge  of  blood  and  pus  ;  it  enjoys  having  the
ear  cleansed.

•  Feeling  of  sudden  stoppage  in  ear,  >  by  gaping  or  swal-
lowing.

I  Hissing  sounds  in  perforated  ear.

■  Increased  secretion  of  thin  cerumen.

llOtorrhcEa:  off'ensive,  watery,  curdy;  with  soreness  of
inner  nose  and  crusts  on  upper  lip,  after  abuse  of  mer-
cury ;  with  caries.

I  1  Constant  discharge,  usually  thin  and  watery,  sometimes
ichorous  and  curdy,  from  r.  ear ;  quite  deaf  on  affected
side ;  after  scarlatina,  six  years  ago. ^Otorrhoea.

■  Purulent  discharges  from  ears.

■  Swelling  of  external  ear,  with  discharge  of  pus  from  ear.
1  I  Discharge  of  bloody  mucus. /^Suppuration  of  middle

ear.
I  I  Offensive  discharge  from  ears,  of  several  years' stand-
ing, with  soreness  of  inner  nose  and  crusts  on  upper
lip. ^Otorrhoea  scrofulosa.


SILICA.  376

I  Discharge  from  ear  after  abuse  of  mercury.

I  I  Chronic  sinus  in  front  of  1.  ear;  an  ill-conditioned  fis-
tulous wound,  had  existed  three  years. ^

I  I  For  six  days  pain  in  mastoid  region ;  membrana  tym-
pani  highl}^  injected  ;  tuning  fork  heard  indifferently
on  either  side  when  pressed  against  parietal  bones ;
temperature  1(J2 ;  very  weak  and  nervous;  complete
muscular  paralysis  of  r.  side  of  face ;  found  some  relief
and  sleep  by  placing  head  in  a  warm  poultice  of  Indian
meal. ^Mastoid  periostitis.

I  I  Child  put&  hand  behind  ears. ^Scarlatina.

I I  Caries  of  mastoid  process.
1 1  Scabs  behind  ears.

I  Itching  of  outer  ears.

I  Hard  swelling  of  parotid  ;  suppuration,  especially  if  slow,

painless.
^  Smell  and  Nose, i  iLoss  of  sm^ll.

I  I  Smell of  blood or of recently slaughtered animals.

^Chronic  corj'za.
I  Fetor  from  nose. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■  Nosebleed.

Complete  stoppage  of  nose,  could  scarcely  speak.

Soreness  on  back  of  nose  as  if  nasal  bone  had  been  beaten.

Drawing  in  root  of  nose  and  in  r.  malar  bone.

I  Itching  in  nose.

I  Much  sneezing,  sometimes  ineffectual ;  with  acrid  coryza.

■  Painful  dryness  of  nose.

■  Troublesome  itching,  feeling  of  dryness  in  nose  extend-

ing to  forehead  and  antrum  ;  periosteum  is  affected.

■  Dryness  and  stoppage  after  checked  foot  sweat.

■  Long-continued  stojDpage  of  nose  from  hardened  mucus.

■  Coryza:  fluent;  violent  for  several  weeks;  dr}^  could  not

get  air  through  nose ;  long-lasting,  oft-returning  ;  acrid,
corroding;  chronic,  with  swelling  of  mucous  membrane  ;
constant.

■  Nose  stuffed  up,  or  alternately  dr}^  and  fluent;  obstructed

mornings,  fluent  during  day.

■  With  every  fresh cold,  stoppage  and acrid discharge;

makes  inner  nose  sore  and  bloody.

■  Obstruction  of  nose  in  morning,  followed  by  coryza  dur-

ing day.

■  Discharge  of  acrid  water  from  nose,  making  inner  nose

and  nostrils  sore  and  bloody. ^Chronic  coryza.

■  Food  and  drink  rise  into  choanse.

■  Nose  inwardly  dry,  excoriated,  covered  with  crusts.

■  Swelling  of  nasal  mucous  membrane. ^Chronic  coryza.
A  smarting,  painful  scab  deep  in  r.  nostril.

■  ■Gnawing  and  ulcers  high  up  in  nose,  with  great  sensi-

tiveness of  place  to  contact.


377  SILICA.

I  Sore,  painful  scabs  below  septum  of  nose,  with  sticking

pain  when  touched.
llOz^nawith  fetid,  offensive  discharge  when  the  affection
is  seated  in  submucous connective tissue  or  in  peri-
osteum.

I I  Offensive  smelling  nasal  catarrh  ;  every  morning  blows
from  nose  hard,  dry  masses  of  mucus,  followed  by  a
quantity  of  offensive-smelling  pus ;  headache ;  lassitude ;
loss  of  appetite ;  miserable  appearance ;  profuse,  offen-
sive-smelling foot  sweat ;  excoriation  between  toes  when
walking  much.

II Chronic  catarrh:  with  stoppage  of  nose,  loss  of  smell
and  taste ;  slimy,  tough,  purulent  secretion  stopping  fre-
quently in  morning;  swelling  of  nasal  membrane;
chronic  inflammation  of  tonsils  and  painless  swelling
of  submaxillary  glands;  tough  slime  in  fauces,  with
hoarseness  and  rough  cough  ;  stoppage  in  morning  fol-
lowed by  thick,  green-yellow  fetid  masses  after  getting
up  ;  frontal  sinuses  inflamed,  with  pounding  and  throb-
bing pain  in  forehead ;  fauces  dry  and  painful ;  uvula
swollen;  Eustachian  tubes  itching;  chronic  inflamma-
tion of  tonsils  and  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.

I  1  Miss  A.,  set.  26,  lymphatic  and  delicate,  suffers  since
two  years  from  inflammation  of  nasal  duct,  discharging
large  clots  of  blood  mixed  with  dry  mucus  of  a  very  foul
smell;  corner  of  eye  red,  oculo-palpebral  mucous  mem-
brane slightly  inflamed  and  itching,  sac  on  1.  side  swol-
len so  that  the  sore  appears  larger;  frontal  headache.

I  Caries  of  nasal  bones  from  syphilis  or  scrofulosis.

I  Intolerable  itching  of  tip  of  nose.

I  I  Man,  set.  48,  ten  years  ago  was  much  shocked  on  seeing
tip  of  a  friend's  nose  destroyed  by  cancer;  since  then
his  own  has  itched  intolerably,  <  when  thinking  of  it,
and  often  keeping  him  awake  at  night.

Voluptuous  itching  about  nose  obliges  constant  rubbing
in  evening.

Tip  of  nose  red.

iNose  cold.

Herpetic  eruption  around  nostrils  and  lips.

Burning,  shooting  pains  in  tip  of  nose  flying  up  to  fore-
head.

■  Tetters  on  nose  (after  Calc.  osir.).
*  Upper  Face. iFace:  pale; cachectic,  body  cool,  sweaty;
earthy  ;  yellow,  distorted  ;  waxy  ;  white  and  red  spots.

Paleness  of  face  before  fainting.

iPale,  cachectic  appearance.  ^Eczema  capitis.  ^Cancer  of
lip.  /? Panaritium.  i^Coxalgia.  /^Mastitis.  ^Tumor  of
eye. /^Caries  of  tibia.


SILICA.  378

I  I  Yellowish color of  face. ^Gastralgia. ^Perforating

ulcer  of  stomach.
I  I  Face  emaciated,  pale,  yellowish. ^Abscess  of  1.  arm

after  dissecting  wound.
iRhagades  about  lids  and  lips.
I  Skin  of  face  cracks.
I  Acne  on  forehead  and  back  of  hands.
Face  distorted,  eyes  closed.

■  Neuralgia  of  face,  head,  eyes,  teeth  and  ears;  pains  <

after  being  in  bed  a  short  time.
I  I  Boring,  tearing  pains  day  and  night,  <  during  night,
spreading  over  whole  chest,  also  in  bones  of  face.

■  Prosopalgia;  with  hemorrhoids;  with  affection  of  peri-

osteum; itching,  with  sensation  of  dryness  in  inner  nose,
extends  into  frontal  cavities  and  antrum ;  with  small
lumps  and  nodules  on  scalp  and  face.

I  I  Large  hives  on  face  and  body  before  appearance  of  caries
on  lower  jaw;  after  caries  got  well,  vesicles  appeared  on
whole  body,  with  fever.

I  I A  thick  crop  of  papules  on  forehead,  face  and  back  of
both  hands. ^Acne.

I  I  Slight  papular  eruption  upon  forehead,  similar  to  vari-
cella. ^Pertussis.

I  I  An  induration  extending  from  1.  corner  of  mouth  to  a
great  portion  of  cheek.

I  I  Liduration  of  cellular  tissue  on  one  side  of  face,  after
parulis.

I  Lupus;  serrated  ulcers,  with  greyish  purulent  surfaces;
corroding,  threatening  to  perforate  cheek.

1  I  Lupus;  whole  face  corroded;  tubercles  on  face,  with
ulceration  of  their  apices;  suppressed  perspiration  of
feet  (improved).

I  I  Lupus  in  face,  at  interior  extremity  of  cicatrix  a  deep
ulcer  threatening  to  perforate  cheek,  border  of  ulcer  ser-
rated, its  surface  greyish,  bathed  in  a  purulent  sanies.

I  I  Lupus  in  face,  began  on  r.  ear  lobe,  healing  one  side,
corroding  on  other,  advancing  downward  and  forward,
leaving  irregular  cicatrix  (after  Bellad.).

■  Comedones.

1  I  Swelling  on  r.  cheek,  made  its  appearance  after  scratch-
ing a  pustule  ;  burning  pain  on  centre  of  swelling  formed
a  black  vesicle  which  broke  and  discharged  burning
ichor.

I  Red  spots  on  cheeks  with  burning  heat.

I  Blood-boils  on  cheeks.

Sycosis  menti.

■  Herpes  on  chin.

^  Lower  Face. ■Articulation  of  jaw  spasmodically  closed.


379  SILICA.

Rheumatic  pains  in  jaw  and  decayed  teeth  extending  to

temple.
Aching  of  both  jaws.
I  I  Pricking  and  lancinating  pains  in  region  of  r.  inferior

maxillary,  with  cancerous  diathesis.
I  I  Pains  more  in  jawbone  than  in  teeth,  swelling  of  jaw.
I  I  Bony  swelling  of  the  inferior  maxillarj^  size  of  half  a

walnut.

■  Swelling  and  caries  on  lower  jaw.
I  I  Caries  of  1.  lower  jaw.

■  Necrosis  of  lower  jaw.

Boil  on  chin,  with  stinging  pain  when  touched.

Ulceration  of  corners  of  mouth.

Painful  ulcer  in  corner  of  mouth.

Corner  of  mouth  ulcerated  with  an  itching  sensation  with

scabs  for  many  days.
I  Nose  and  lips  large,  swollen  and  distorted.
I  Dry  and  parched  feeling  of  lips.
I  I  Foam  ^t  mouth. ^Epilepsy.
Swelling  of  lower  lip.
I  I  Blisters  on  margins  of  lips.

■  Scabby  eruption  on  lips,  which  smarts.

■  Large,  hard, brownish  crusts  on  lips,  especially  about

corners  of  mouth.

I  I  Woman,  set.  61,  cancer  of  lower  lip  after  having  picked
lip. ^Cancer  of  lip.

I  I  External  third  of  lower  lip  on  r.  side  swollen  and  con-
gested with  an  induration  size  of  an  apricot-stone  in
centre  of  swelling,  on  red  border  superficial  ulceration
with  greyish  base;  excrutiacing  pain. ^Cancer  of  lower

lip-  .  . ,

I  I  For  more  than  a  month,  felt  an  itching,  sometimes  burn-
finally  succeeded  by  intolerable  shooting  pains;  a  hard
spot  became  perceptible  in  thickness  of  lip  which  soon
made  its  appearance  externally  in  shape  of  a  conical
pimple  ;  tumor  soon  became  black,  wrinkled  and  as
large  as  a  good-sized  hazelnut.

■  Cancer  of  lower  lip;  ulcer  greyish,  superficial,  excruciat-

ingly painful.

■  ■Painful  or  painless  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.

'°  Teeth  and  Gums.  ■■Difficult  dentition  :  teething  delayed;
gums  sensitive,  blistered  ;  frequently  grasping  at  gums;
scrofulous  children  having  worms,  with  profuse  saliva-
tion ;  fever  toward  evening  and  all  night  with  heat  in
head  ;  difficult  stools ;  stool  recedes  before  child  can
effect  its  passage ;  feet  smell  badly,  notwithstanding
every  effort  to  prevent  it;  profuse  sour-snielling  perspi-


SILICA.  380

ration  upon  head  in  evening;  fontanelles  large,  head
larger  in  proportion  than  rest  of  body  ;  protruding  gum
seems  blistered  and  is  sensitive;  stools  when  loose  are
usually  dark  and  sometimes  offensive.
I  Teeth  feel  too  large  and  too  long  for  the  mouth.

■  Looseness  of  teeth.

Teeth  loose  and  gum  painful  to  slightest  pressure.
iCaries  of  teeth,  pains  <  at  night  and  on  inhaling  cold

air.
•  Throbbing  toothache,  swelling  of  periosteum.

■  Stinging  toothache,  preventing  sleep.
Constant  aching  in  all  the  teeth.

i  I  Neuralgia  in  all  the  teeth,  with  heat  and  tearing  pain
in  head ;  constant  spitting  of  tenacious  slimy  saliva ;
raging  at  night;  not  affected  by  cold  or  warmth.

In  scrofulous  and  rachitic  subjects  with  carious  teeth  tooth-
ache is  particularly  <  at  night  from  inhaling  cold  air.

■  Throbbing toothache with swelling  of  periosteum or

lower  jaw^,  where  the  pain  is  more  severe  than  in  teeth  ;
unable  to  sleep  on  account  of  general  heat ;  every  hurt
festers  and  is  slow  to  heal.

I  I  Erysipelatous  swelling  on  gums  and  roof  of  mouth  after

extraction  of  teeth.

■  Tedious,,  boring,  tearing  pains  day  and  night,  <  during

night,  spreading  over  whole  cheek,  and  into  bones  of
face;  discharge  of  offensive  matter  from  openings  near
roots  of  teeth  or  from  gums  ;  swelling  of  jaw.

■  Burning stitching  in  several  teeth,  <  at  night,  <  by  cold

air  in  mouth,  with  heat  in  head  and  burning  in  chest;
pain  in  submaxillary  glands,  with  or  without  swelling.
Gum  is  painfully sensitive  on taking cold water into
mouth.

■  ■Gums  very  sore,  inflamed;  gum-boils.

Cool  feeling  in  upper  gums,  soreness  of  palate,  lips  feel
much  parched.

I I  Tumor,  size  of  a  walnut,  in  place  of  two  bicuspid  teeth.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Taste:  of  blood,  morning;  of  soap-
suds ;  bitter,  morning,  with  thick  mucus  in  throat ;  of
rotten  eggs.

■  Loss  of  taste  and  appetite.

■  Water  tastes  badly  ;  vomits  after  drinking.

■  Tongue  feels  sore.

Sensation  as  if  a  hair  were  on  tip  of  tongue  extending
into  trachea,  where  it  causes  a  crawling  so  that  he  is
frequently  obliged  to  cough  and  hack.

I  I  Whitish,  trembling  tongue. ^Abscess  of  1.  arm.

Soreness  of  tongue.

■  Tongue  coated  with  brownish  mucus.


381  SILICA.

I  Glossitis.

I  Indurations  in  tongue.

I  I  Ulcer  on  r.  border  of  tongue  eating  into  it  and  discharg-
ing a  great  deal  of  pus. ^Carcinoma.

■  One-sided  swelling  of  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth, i  l  Acidity  in  mouth,  after  eating.

■  Bad  odor  from  mouth  in  morning.

■  Constant  dryness  in  mouth  ;  without  thirst.
■Accumulation  of  mucus  in  mouth.

■  Saliva  runs  out  of  mouth.

■  ■Inflammation  and  suppuration  of  salivary  glands.

I  I  Irritable  condition  of  mucous  membrane  of  mouth ;
skin  of  body  pale  and  flabby. ^Neuralgia.

■  Stomacace  ;  mouth  gangrenous,  with  perforating  ulcer  of

palate.
^^  Throat. Soreness  of  palate,  which  assumed  a  pale  yellow
color.

■  Swelling  in  palate;  swelling  of  uvula. ^Chronic  coryza.
I  i  Fauces  affected,  dry  painful  throat. ^Chronic  coryza.

■  Tough  slime  in  fauces.

■  Hawking  up  of  thick,  green,  yellow,  fetid  mucus,  or  yel-

low, very  offensive  balls.

I  I  Swelling  in  front  of  throat,  region  of  thyroid  body  ex-
tending around  to  parotids,  commencing  on  1.,  extending
to  r.  side,  cannot  move,  holds  neck  stiffly.

Sensation  as  of  a  lump  in  r.  side  of  throat ;  she  could  only
swallow  with  great  difficulty.

■  Pricking  in  throat,  as  from  a  pin,  causing  cough,  1.  side.

■  Tonsils  swollen,  each  effort  to  swallow  distorts  face.

■  ■Tonsillitis  when  suppurating  gland  will  not  heal ;  pu&

continues  to  flow,  but  gets  thinner,  less  laudable,  darker
and  more  fetid.

■  Periodical  quinsy.

■  ■Inflammation  of  tonsils  when  too  late  for  absorption.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  tonsils.

■  Throat  feels  as  if  filled  up,  as  if  he  could  not  swallow;.

frequent  cough  bringing  up  white,  frothy,  saltish  mucus ;
<  toward  evening.

■  Swallowing  painful,  no  inflammation. ^Hysteria.
Sore  throat,  as  from  a  lump  in  I.  side,  on  swallowing.
Burning  in  throat.

Dryness  of  throat  as  from  a  cold.

Soreness  of  throat,  as  if  he  swallowed  over  a  sore  spot,  at

times  stitches  in  it.
Pressive  soreness  on  1.  side  of  throat  when  swallowinj.
Sticking sore  throat  only  on swallowing,  with p. tin  in

throat  even  to  touch.

■  Feeling  as  if  throat  were  filled up,  as  if  he  could  not

swallow. ^Chronic  sore  tliroat.


SILICA.  382

iWlien  swallowing,  soreness  and  stitches  in  throat.
I  When  swallowing  food  easily  gets  into  choanae.
iSequelse  of  diphtheria  ;  amaurosis.

■  Swallowing  difficult  as  from  paralysis.

■  Paralysis  of  velum  pendulum  palati.

■  Chronic  pharyngitis  with  constipation.

■  Mouth  gangrenous  with  perforating  ulcer  of  palate.

■  Swelling  of  submaxillary  and  cervical  glands.

■  Submaxillary  glands  painful  to  touch  but  not  swollen.

■  Enlarged  thyroid  gland.

^' Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. ■Excessive  hunger.

■  Canine  hunger,  but  on  attempting  to  eat  has  sudden  dis-

gust for  food.

■  Canine  hunger,  with  nervous,  irritable  persons.

■  Want  of  appetite  ;  excessive  thirst.

No  desire  for  anything  but  small  quantities  of  preserves.

■  I  Thirst.

■  Averse  to  warm,  cooked  food  ; desires  only  cold  things,

disgust  for  meat.

■  ■Aversion  to  mother's  milk  and  vomiting  whenever  tak-

ing it.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. •  i  While  eating,  pain  in  head  much
better.
In  evening,  while  eating,  an  acute  pain  extending  from
abdomen  to  testes.

■  After  eating: sour  eructations,  fulness  and  pressure  in

stomach  ;  waterbrash  and  vomiting; sleepiness,  vomits

large  masses  of  water.
I  I  Painfulness  of  epigastrium  upon  pressure,  griping  pain

also  after  eating. ^Gastralgia.
I  I  Regularly  after  eating  chilliness  on  back  ;  icy-cold  feet

in  evening. ^Chronic  hepatitis.
I  I  Pyrosis  and  vomiting  after  eating. ^Perforating  ulcer.

■  Hectic  fever  in  debilitated  persons, <  after  meals.
Small  quantities  of  wine  cause  ebullitions  and  thirst.
Vomits  after  drinking.

I  1  Screwing,  pressing,  twisting  pain  in  stomach  after  drink-
ing. ^Perforating  ulcer.

■  Dry  cough  after  drinking  cold  water.
Diarrhoea  after  milk.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  Eructa-
tions :  sour  ;  tasting  of  food  ;  loud,  uncontrollable,  with
pain  in  stomach.

■  Intense  heartburn,  sensation  of  a  load  in  epigastrium.

■  Waterbrash:  with  chilliness;  with  a  brownish  tongue.
Ineffectual  retching,  waterbrash  with  nausea.

■  Nausea:  with  violent  palpitation;  after  every exercise

that  raises  bodily  temperature ;  after  eating  a  little  ;  and


383  SILICA.

vomiting  of  tenacious  mucus,  hiccough ;  sense  of  empti-
ness at  stomach  ;  after  stools.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  what  is  drunk  <  in  morning.

■  Vomiting while drinking, especially if drinking  be

hasty.

■  Water  tastes  badly  ;  vomits  after  drinking.

■  Child  vomits  as  soon  as  it  nurses.

■  Vomits  :  ingesta,  at  night.

Morning  vomiting,  with  nausea,  much  exhaustion.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  during  pregnancy.

1  I  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  mucus  in  morning,  much  ex-
hausting a  young  and  vigorous  man. ^Suppressed  foot
sweat.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Anguish  in  pit  of  stomach,
attacks  of  melancholy.

■  Burning  or  throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Sensitiveness  of  pit  of  stomach  to  pressure.

■  Pressure  as  after  eating  too  much.

■  Heaviness  like  lead  in  stomach.

■  Cutting  feeling,  at  other  times  weight,  crampy  sensation,

tightness  at  pit  of  stomach.

Felt  as  if  knives  were  running  into  her  stomach.

Cold  pain  at  epigastrium  as  if  a  cold  stone  were  in  stomach.

I  I  Nearly  every  morning  after  partaking  of  any  kind  'of
drink  a  digging  and  twisting,  followed  by  retching  and
vomiting  of  bitter,  salty  water,  coming  with  such  force
as  to  make  him  sweat  and  tremble  all  over. ^Gastralgia.

■  Gastralgia  :  with  pyrosis,  hiccough  or  nausea  and  glairy

vomiting ;  heat,  weight,  sensitiveness  and  a  feeling  of
constriction ;  flatulency,  eructations,  somnolency,  lan-
guor, coldness  of  extremities,  loss  of  appetite,  slow  and
painful  digestion,  often  hunger  which  cannot  be  satisfied.

I  I  After  a  meal,  load  as  of  a  stone  or  lead  in  stomach,  par-
ticularly after  eating  raw  vegetables.

I  I  Yellowish  complexion;  screwing,  pressing,  twisting
pain  after  drinking,  pyrosis  and  vomiting  after  eating.
^Ulcer  of  stomach.

■  Induration  of  pylorus.

^^  Hypochondria. Pressure or aching pain in hypochon-
drium.

■  Beating  soreness  in  liver; <  on  motion,  when  walking,

when  lying  on  r.  side.
I  I  Sore,  ulcerative  pain  and  frequent  throbbing,  two  fin-
gers' breadth  below  r.  floating  ribs ;  cannot  tolerate  least
pressure;  cannot  step  upon  r.  foot  without  greatly  aggra-
vating pain  to  an  intolerable  degree;  confusion  of  head;
dull  pain  in  occiput;  pressing  pain  in  forehead;  ver-
tigo on  stooping;  loss  of  appetite;  pressure  in  stomach


SILICA.  384

after  eating;  stool  delayed  two  or  three  days;  constant
severe  cough  all  day,  awakening  her  at  night,  <  from
motion;  scanty,  slimy  expectoration;  sensation  as  if
sternum  were  grasped ;  tearing  in  limbs,  stitches,  and
a  dropping  or  running  sensation  ;  muscles  weak,  flabby;
emaciation;  after  eating,  chilliness  along  back,  conges-
tion to  head,  heat  in  face,  slight  burning  in  soles  of  feet;
feet  ic3'-cold  in  evening;  sweat  on  slight  motion,  pro-
fuse and  debilitating  in  morning  in  bed ;  pulse  small,
weak,  rapid,  irregular ;  lassitude,  desire  to  sleep,  restless
sleep,  at  night  suddenly  starts  from  sleep,  trembling  and
frightened  ;  despondenc}'.  ^Hepatic  disorder.
iLiver  complaint  with  obstinate  constipation;  want  of
expulsive  power  in  rectum ;  hardness  and  distension  in
region  of  liver;  abscesses;  throbbing,  ulcerative  pain
<  from  touch  and  motion;  <  at  night  and  during  new
and  full  moon  ;  scrofulous  diathesis.

I  I  Neurosis  of  chest  with  pain  in  region  of  spleen  and  inde-

scribably quick  breathing.
Morbus  maculosisWerlhofli,  with  disorganization  of  spleen.
'^Abdomen. ■  Pressure  in  abdomen,  especially  after  eating,
clothing  feels  too  tight.

■  Tightness  transversely  across  abdomen.

Abdomen  constantly  hard,  greatly  distended,  making  him
very  uncomfortable.

■  Hard,  hot,  distended  abdomen,  especially  in  children.

I I  Large  abdomen  in  children.

Abdomen  feels  thick  and  heavy  like  a  weight.

Abdomen  hot,  tense,  constant  rumbling  and  grumbling  in
it,  diarrhoea.

1 1  Flatulence:  much  rumbling;  incarcerated;  very  offen-
sive; shifting;  difficult  to  discharge;  with  costiven ess;
with  distended  abdomen ;  rumbling  and  gurgling  in
abdomen  ;  fetid,  smelling  like  wet  brass.

Violent  cutting  in  lower  abdomen  with  incarcerated  flatus;
every  step  is  painfully  felt.

Colicky  pains  in  lower  abdomen,  with  straining  and  in-
creased pain  during  stool.

I  Tenderness  about  hernial  tumor.

I  Colic;  from  worms;  with  constipation  or  difficult  stool;
with  yellow  hands,  blue  nails;  with  reddish,  bloody
stools ;  >  by  warmth.

Momentary  pinching  pain  at  navel.

Cutting  pain  in  region  of  navel  going  through  to  back
and  coming  on  at  intervals.

llAbdominal  pains  relieved  by  warmth.

I  I  Abdominal  dropsy;  eff'usion  so  great  that  his  weight
was  thirty-six  pounds  in excess; frequent  attacks  of


385  SILICA.

watery  diarrhoea,  lasting  several  clays,  leaving  him  ex-
hausted, emaciated  and  unable  to  leave  his  bed ;  would
then  rally  and  filling-up  process  recommence.

■  Rhagades  and  cracks  on  surface  of  abdomen.

I  I  Discharge of  pus, intestinal gases and fecal matter

through  abdominal  fistula.
I  Inflamed  inguinal  glands,  painful  to  touch.

■  Inguinal  hernia.

I  I  Mr.  D.,  fet.  67;  abscess  in  r.  groin,  hernia  both  sides;
irritation  of  truss  the  supposed  cause;  syphilitic  taint;
tumor  increased  till  it  contained  as  much  as  two  gills
of  matter ;  got  well  without  breaking ;  both  hernia  got
well  without  further  treatment.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  I  Stools  :  frequent,  scanty,  liquid,  offen-
sive as  carrion ;  pasty;  paplike;  offensive;  contain  un-
digested food,  with  great  exhaustion,  but  painless;
mucous,  followed  by  itching  in  anus ;  watery,  weaken-
ing; liquid,  slimy,  frothy,  mucous  or  bloody;  mushy,
horribly  offensive;  purulent;  cadaverous-smelling;  pu-
trid; sour  (during  dentition).

I  Diarrhoea  .-from  exposure  to  cold  air;  after  vaccination;
with  griping  pains  in  bowels;  in  morning  before  rising',
from  6  to  8  a.m.;  watery,  weakening;  chronic,  from  ulcer-
ation of  bowels ;  in  thin,  scrawny  children  with  sweaty
head  and  sweaty,  offensive-smelling  feet;  child  very
much  emaciated,  nurses  well  but  food  passes  through
undigested,  open  fontanelles :  much  perspiration  about
head;  great  thirst;  emaciation;  cold  hands  and  feet  with
cold  sweat  on  them;  rolling  of  head;  suppressed  secre-
tion of  urine.

Before  stool :  pain  in  bowels.

During  stool :  chilliness  and  nausea  in  throat;  colic;  itch-
ing and  stinging  in  rectum  ;  piles ;  succus  prostaticus.

After  stool :  burning  and  smarting  in  anus ;  remission  of
abdominal  pains;  pressing  and  burning  in  anus ;  burn-
ing in  prepuce;  eructation.

I  I  Child,  1  year  old;  on  mother's  side  dyscrasia,  scrofula,

softening  of  brain,  tuberculosis;  teething  process  delayed ;
relapsing  summer  complaint;  feet  very  dry  and  smelled
like  an  old  person's.
■  Natural  stool,  evacuated  with  much  pressure  and  strain -

I I  Constipation:  very  hard,  unsatisfactory  stools,  with  very
great  effort;  constant  but  ineffectual  desire  for  stool  in
evening;  stool  dry,  hard  and  light-colored;  stool  very
hard,  followed  by  burning  in  anus;  very  hard,  nodular,,
like  clay  stools,  evacuated  only  with  great  effort;  stool
scanty,  difficult,  after  great  urging  and  straining  until,

VOL.  IX. — 2j.


SILICA.  386

abdominal  walls  are  sore,  the  stool  that  has  alredy  pro-
truded slips  back  again;  stool  remains  a  longtime  in
rectum  as  if  there  were  no  power  to  expel  it ;  from  inac-
tivity in  rectum,  with  pain  and  inefiectual  desire  for
stool ;  prolonged  efforts  during  stool  render  muscles  of
abdomen  sore;  before  and  during  menses;  stool  conies
to  verge  of  anus  then  slips  back  into  rectum  ;  with  spinal
affections,  as  if  rectum  w^ere  paralyzed.

I  Loss  of  expulsive  power  with  a  large  but  soft  stool.

I  I  Constipation;  large  slime-covered  feces  ;  stools  five  to
seven  days  apart  and  occurred  then  only  upon  use  of
injections  or  cathartics ;  copious  sweat  on  head  and  face
directly  upon  falling  asleep  ;  child,  set.  8  mos.,  suffering
since  birth.

I  In  rectum  :  sharp  stitches  when  walking ;  jerking,  almost
dull  sticking  pain;  cutting;  stinging;  burning,  sting-
ing, itching  during  stool.

■  Hemorrhoids;  intensely  painful,  boring  cramping  from

anus  to  rectum  or  testicles;  protrude  during  stool,  be-
come incarcerated ;  suppuration  ;  discharge  of  bloody
mucus  from  rectum  ;  intense  pain  wdth  slight  protru-
sion.

I  In  anus:  tension ;  boring  cramplike  pain  extending  into
rectum  and  testicles ;  pain  as  if  constricted,  during
stool;  sticking;  burning  after  a  dry  hard  stool  ;  itching;
stitches  and  shooting  pains  ;  moisture.

iFissura  ani,  great  pain  half  an  hour  after  stool,  lasting
several  hours.

I  IFissura  ani  and  fistula  in  ano.

I  I  Aching,  beating  throbbing  pain  in  lumbo-sacral  region,

with  occasional  perineal  tumefaction  which  discharged
blood  and  pus  ;  constipation,  stools  slipping  back  after
much  effort;  great  anxiety.

I I  Fistula  in  ano;  also  with  chest  symptoms.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Suppuration  of  kidneys  ;  abscesses.

■  Diabetes  mellitus.

■  Purulent  blennorrhoea  of  bladder.

■  Tenesmus  of  bladder  and  anus.

■  Paralysis  of  bladder.

Obliged  to  rise  nearly  every  night  to  urinate.
Desire  to  urinate  without  emission.

■  Continuous  urging,  with  scanty  discharge;  also  at  night.

■  Weakness  in  urinary  organs  ;  constant  desire  to  urinate.

■  Profuse  urination  relieves  headache.

■  Involuntary  micturition  at  night;  also  in  children,  with

worms  and  in  chorea.
I  1  Nightly  incontinence  of  urine,  after  a  blow  upon  head,
when  three  years  old,  in  a  girl  set.  7.


387  SILICA.

1 1  A  boy,  set.  15,  troubled  ever  since  his  recollection  with
nocturnal  enuresis  nearly  every  night,  until  he  was
thirteen,  when  he  left  home  ;  by  a  strong  effort  of  will
and  care  it  was  not  so  frequent,  but  still  quite  beyond
his  control.

■  Enuresis  nocturna,  complicated  with  worms  or  chorea.

I  Urine:  light-colored;  suppressed;  turbid;  sediment  of
red  or  yellow  sand.

During  urination  :  burning  and  soreness  in  urethra  ;  press-
ure in  bladder;  itching  of  vulva;  cutting  pain.

Strangury.

After  urination  :  involuntary  discharge  of  urine.

Suppression  of  urine.

I  Renal  and  vesical  calculus.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i Sexual  desire  increased,  or  decreased.

■  Painful erections, before rising in  morning;  frequent

violent  erections.

■  Sexual  erethism,  with  spinal  or  paralytic  disease.

■  After  an  embrace,  sensation  on  r.  side  of  head  as  if  par-

alyzed with  soreness  of  limbs.

■  Lascivious  thoughts  and  dreams;  nocturnal  emissions,

followed  by  great  exhaustion;  prostatitis.
Violent  erections  without  sexual  desire.

■  Sexual  desire  very  weak.

I  I  After  masturbation  seminal  emissions  twice  a  week,  be-
tween 3  and  5  a.m.;  great  depression  of  spirits ;  aching
in  sacrum ;  sweat  of  scrotum ;  heat  in  head ;  burning
of  feet  with  sweat;  weakness  and  heaviness  of  arms;
melancholy  ;  <  a.m.  and  before  an  emission  ;  >  after  an
emission.

■  ■Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  while  straining  at  stool.

I  I  Prostate  gland  enlarged,  without  pain,  but  irregularly
indurated,  one  point  being  hard,  another  soft.

■  Prostatitis  ;  suppuration,  thick  fetid  pus  from  urethra.

I  I  Gonorrhoea,  with  thick  fetid  pus  ;  <  after  exertion  to
the  extent  of  sweating.

■  Gonorrhoea;  pus or puslike bloody discharge;  slight

shreddy  discharge.

■  Chronic  syphilis  ;  suppurations  and  indurations.

■  Chancres:  with  raised  edges; inflamed,  painful,  irrita-

ble, discolored ;  thin  bloody  discharge ;  granulations  in-
distinct or  absent.

■  Red  spots  and  itching  on  corona  glandis.

■  Painful eruptions on  mons  veneris;  itching,  moist  or

dry eruptions of red  pimples  or spots on  genitals.
/^'Syphilis.

■  Slight  swelling  of  penis  and  testicles.

■  Squeezing  pain  in  testicles.


SILICA.  388

At  the  height  of  chill  penis  and  testicles  are  hot.

Sharp  pricking  pains  in  penis.

Prepuce  red  and  itching;  swollen  and  itching  humid  pim-
ples on  it.

I  Itching  moist  spots  on  genitals,  mostly  on  scrotum  ;  sweat
on  scrotum.

I  I  Pale-red,  sensitive  swelling  hard  as  a  stone  extending^
from  1.  inguinal  region  across  mons  veneris,  with  burn-
ing stinging  tearing  pain  in  swelling,  sacrum,  and  1.
thigh,  preventing  sleep  ;  slimy  fluid  discharges  from  twO'
fistulous  openings.

llHydrocele;  men  and  scrofulous  children.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Sterility.

■  Increased  sexual  desire,  with  paralytic  or  spinal  affec-

tions.
I  I  She  feels  nauseated  during  coition. ^Uterine  c.incer.

■  Nymphomania  due  to  plethora  or  spinal  irritation.

■  Prolapsus  uteri  in  consequence  of  myelitis.

■  Serous  cysts  in  vagina.

■  Pressing-down  feeling  in  vagina.

■  Indurations  of  cervix  uteri.

■  Ulceration  of  neck  of  womb  and  os.

■  Periuterine  cellulitis;  areolar  hyperplasia.

I  I  Metrorrhagia  of  six  weeks'  duration  in  a  washerwoman
who  attributes  her  sickness  to  constantly  standing  in
cold  water.

■  Metrorrhagia:  offensive  foot  sweat;  icy-cold  body;  pain-

ful hemorrhoids.

■  Bloody  discharge  between  periods.

■  Menses:  too  early  and  scanty;  too  late  and  profuse;  ir-

regular, every  two  or  three  months ;  during  lactation  ;
strong-smelling,  acrid  ;  repeated  paroxysms  of  icy  cold-
ness over  whole  body.

■  Before  menses :  pressing  pain  in  forehead;  violent  colic,,

shuddering  all  over  body  whole  day,  acrid  leucorrhoea ;
sensation  as  if  vulva  were  enlarged,  with  soreness  in
perineum.

■  During menses: pain in abdomen;  tearing pain in

tibia  ;  toothache  and  obscuration  of  sight ;  violent  press-
ure in  forehead,  with  discharge  of  plugs  from  nose;
constipation ;  sensation  as  of  a  heavy  lump  in  anus ;
cold  feet ;  burning  and  soreness  about  vulva  ;  eruption
on  inside  of  thighs;  drawing  between  shoulders;  mel-
ancholy, anxiety  and  weariness  of  life.

■  Discharge  of  a  quantity  of  white  water  from  uterus  in-

stead of  menses.

■  ■Amenorrhoea  with  suppressed  foot  sweat ;  pain in  ab-

domen.


389  ^  SILICA.

M  Mucous  surfaces  of  external  genitals  red,  vascular,
moist  and  exquisitel}'  sensitive  to  touch ;  married  six
months,  but  there  was  no  possibilit.y  of  sexual  inter-
course ;  examination  of  internal  surfaces  impossible  with-
out inducing  anaesthesia  artificially;  chronic  headache  of
a  pressing,  pulsating  or  tearing  character,  <  by  mental
exertion,  stooping,  talking,  or  cold  air ;  >  by  warmth
and  warm  wraps;  frequently  profuse,  sour  perspiration
on  head  in  evening  ;  tendency  to  take  cold  in  head  from
slight  causes,  especially  if  head  is  uncovered  ;  weight  or
pressure  in  vagina,  with  painful  bearing  down,  vagina
being  tender  to  touch, ^Vaginismus.

Discharge  of  a  quantity  of  white  watery  fluid  from  vagina.

1 1  Serous  cysts  of  vagina ;  vaginal  fistula.

I  lltching  of  pudenda.

■  Violent  burning  and  soreness  of  pudenda,  with  eruption

on  inner  sides  of  thighs,  during  menses,
lltching  of  vulva;  acrid  leucorrhoea,

■  Ascarides  of  vulva.

I I  Leucorrhoea :  profuse,  acrid,  corroding;  milky,  preceded
by  cutting  around  navel ;  causes  biting  pain,  especially
after  acrid  food;  during  urinating;  in  gushes;  with
cancer  of  uterus.

I  I  Profuse,  yellow,  excoriating  leucorrhoea;  discharge  te-
nacious ;  astringent  injections  produced  a  peculiar  sen-
sation at  pit  of  stomach  ;  continual  headache ;  feels  >
with  head  covered  up  warmly.

IS  Inflammation,  induration,  and  suppuration  of  breasts;
fistulous  ulcers,  discharge  thin  and  watery  or  thick  and
offensive  ;  substance  of  mamma  seems  to  be  discharged
in  pus;  one  lobe  after  another  ulcerates  and  discharges
into  one  common  ulcer,  often  with  pain,  or  there  may
be  several  orifices,  one  for  each  lobe.

I  Inflammation  of  nipples;  they  crack  and  ulcerate.

I  I  Hard  nodular  tumor  of  breast.

I  iScirrhus  of  r.  breast  in  an  old  lady,  set.  70;  great  itch-
ing of  swollen  gland.

I  iScirrhus  mammae,  in  a  woman  set.  40,  weakly  constitu-
tion ;  since  frequent  catarrhal  affections,  somewhat  asth-
matic; for  some  time  observed  a  lump  in  r.  mamma;
near  nipple  toward  right,  a  scirrhus  as  hard  as  carti-
lage, of  uneven  surface,  movable,  and  size  of  a  hazelnut.

I  I A  lady,  set.  65,  thin  ;  for  six  months  a  tumor  of  r.  breast,
making  it  twice  natural  size  ;  had  itch  twenty  years  ago  ;
palpation  showed  fluctuation  ;  trochar  detected  pus  ;
further  examination  showed  carious  rib.
'*'  Parturition.  Pregnancy.  Lactation,  i  Threatened  abor-
tion ;  liemorrliaiie  after  abortion.


SILICA.  ^  390

I  I  Hemorrhage  after  abortion,  <  from  least  motion,  men-

tal or  sexual  excitement;  painful  hemorrhoids  and  ob-
stinate constipation.

■  Promotes  expulsion  of  moles  ;  shooting  pains.
liSFausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnancy;  menses  had  been

accompanied  by  palpitation.
Soreness  and  lameness  of  feet  from^  instep  to  sole,  during
pregnancy.

■  Too  violent  motion  of  foetus.

■  After-pains  felt  in  hips.

Suppressed  lochia  followed  by  boring  pain  in  1.  temple,  1.
supraorbital  nerve,  and  orbit  of  eye ;  <  by  talking,  or
mental  exertion  ;  before  suppression,  nursing  produced
a  venous  metrorrhagia.

I I  While  nursing:  sharp  pain  in  breast  or  uterus,  pain  in
back,  increase  of  lochia ;  pure  blood  flows  every  time
child  nurses ;  complains  every  time  she  puts  child  to
breast.

1 1  Aversion  to  mother's  milk;  child  refuses  to  nurse,  or  if
it  does  nurse,  it  vomits.

I  Milk  suppressed.

iMammte  sw^ollen,  dark  red,  sensitive,  burning  pains  pre-
vent rest  at  night.

I I  Hard  lumps  in  mammae.

I  Great  itching  of  swollen  mammae. ^Scirrhus.

■  Inflammation  of  nipples.

I  Darting,  burning  in  1.  nipple.

I  Nipple  is  drawn  in,  like  a  funnel.

I  iScirrhus  near  r.  nipple,  hard  as  gristle,  uneven  surface.

I  Nipple  ulcerates  ;  is  very  sore  and  tender.

I  Hard-edged  fistulous  ulcers  remaining  after  mammary
abscesses.

I  Fistula  of  mammae  discharging  serum  or  milk.

iRhagades  of  mammse,  or  other  parts  covered  with  deli-
cate skin,  or  on  parts  affected  by  tettery  eruptions.

I  I  Pain  in  nodular  swelling  of  1.  breast,  cutting  pains  in
abdomen.

■  Inflamed  breast,  deep-red  in  centre,  rose-colored  toward

periphery,  swollen,  hard  and  sensitive  to  touch;  con-
stant burning  pain  prevents  her  from  resting  at  night ;
high  fever,  face  sunken,  but  excited. ^Mastitis.
*^  Voice  and  Larnyx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Hoarse-
ness, roughness  of  larynx.
I  Husky  voice  ; <  in  morning;  chronic  coryza.
1  I  Fibrous,  painless swelling  of  larynx,  connected  with
thyroid  cartilage.

■  Foreign  bodies  in  larynx.

•  Laryngeal  morning  cough  commencing  immediately  on


391  SILICA.

rising,  with  tough,  gelatinous  and  very  tenacious  ex-
pectoration,

■  Bronchial  affections  of  rachitic  children ;  copious  puru-

lent or  transparent  expectoration.
Tickling  in  larynx  with  slight  cough  and  hoarseness.
•Roughness  and  soreness  in  trachea  and  bronchia.
'^  Respiration. Deep  sighing  breathing.

I  Shortness  of  breath  and  panting  from  walking  fast,  or

from  manual  labor.

■  Dyspnoea :  when  lying  on  back;  when  stooping;  when

running;  also  after  running;  when  coughing.

■  Oppression  of  chest,  cannot  take  a  long  breath.

I  Asthma  :  <  when  lying  down  ;  spasmodic  cough  ;  spasm
of  larnyx ;  pulsations  in  chest ;  often  with  profuse,  pur-
ulent sputa ;  cannot  bear  a  draft  of  air  on  back  of  neck.

I  I  Nervous  asthma,  dry  spasmodic  cough;  oppression  does
not  permit  him  to  lie  down  or  stoop ;  spasm  of  larynx
and  pulsations  in  chest.

I  I  Breathing  so  difficult  that  eyes  seemed  to  protrude  from
their  sockets  and  the  doors  and  windows  had  to  be
thrown  open;  attacks  came  only  during  a  thunder-
storm.

I  Hay  asthma  coming  on  about  the  last  of  August.
^^  Cough.  I  Cough  :  dry,  with  hoarseness;  with  soreness  in
chest;  excited  by  tickling  in  throat  pit;  hollow,  spas-
modic;  loose,  day  and  night;  with  profuse  expectora-
tion; vomiting  of  tenacious  mucus  in  morning;  with
thick  purulent  sputa ;  awakens  him  at  night;  <  from
motion ;  scanty  mucous  expectoration ;  especially
troublesome  after  lying  down  in  evening  and  after
waking  in  morning;  hacking  caused  by  nightly  tick-
ling in  pharynx ;  at  first  caused  by  tickling  in  throat,
gradually  seeming  to  come  from  lower  down  in  throat
until  it  came  from  chest  and  shook  the  abdomen,  during
day  consisting  of  sudden  explosive  coughs  without  ex-
pectoration, <  in  evening.

•  Cough  and  sore  throat  with  expectoration  of  small  badly
smelling  granules.

I  I  Cough  with  purulent  expectoration  ;  prevented  the  ul-
cers in  lungs  from  spreading.

■  Phthisis;  cough  with  profuse  expectoration,  vomiting  of

tenacious  mucus  in  morning,  during  attack  of  cough;
dyspnoea;  blood-spitting;  night  sweats.
I  I  Child  3  years  old,  strongly  marked  scrofulous  constitu-
tion ;  suffocative  cough  ;  obstructed,  difficult,  rattling
respiration;  profuse  expectoration  of  purulent  matter;
great  emaciation ;  frequent,  copious,  fetid,  papescent
stools,  with  great  exhaustion  ;  slight  pustular  eruption,
(similar  to  varicella)  upon  forehead.


SILICA.  392

iCough  <  from  cold,  >  from  warm  drinks.  ^Chronic
bronchitis.

I  Influenza  with  difficulty  of  hearing,  at  times  ringing  in

ears.

I I  Stonecutters'  pulmonary  affections,  copious  fetid  expec-
toration.

I  I  After  artificial  evacuation  of  an  empyema  continuing

suppuration,  hectic  fever,  emaciation,  night  sweats  and
diarrhoea. ^Phthisis.

I I  Expectoration :  profuse,  fetid,  purulent,  green;  only
during  day ;  of  viscid,  milky,  acrid  mucus  ;  at  times
pale  frothy  blood ;  tastes  greasy;  makes  water  turbid,
that  which  sinks  to  bottom  has  an  offensive  odor ;  when
thrown  into  water  falls  to  bottom  and  spreads  like  a
heavy  sediment.

^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Lungs  feel  sore.
I  Stitches  in  chest  and  sides  through  to  back.
I  Excruciating  deep-seated  pains  in  chest.
I  Pain  under  sternum.

■  Painless  throbbing  and  beating  in  breast  bone.

■  Sticking  pains  in  chest  on  inspiration.
Pressive  pain  in  sternum  toward  pit  of  stomach.

■  Pressing  pain,  stitches;  general  sensation  of  weakness  in

chest ;  can  hardly  speak,  is  so  weak. ^Phthisis.

I  I  Severe  stitching  pain  in  r.  lung  two  inches  below  nip-
ple, extending  through  to  back;  <  on  motion  of  any
kind  and  deep  breathing.

Painful  stitches  in  chest,  shooting  from  sternum  around  to
back.

Tensive  pain  across  chest  lasting  for  some  hours.

Tight  feeling  around  chest,  as  if  she  were  tted  in  with
a  tape.

Pressure  at  lower  sternum  as  from  a  stone;  pain  under
sternum.

■  ■Inflammation  of  lungs  resulting  in  suppuration.

■  Dropsy  of  chest,  or  empyema;  motion  produces  severe

palpitation  of  heart ;  from  anaemia  and  lack  of  nutrition  ;
also  in  stonecutters.

■  Empyema  after  pleuris3^

■  Congestion  to  chest;  body  chilly.

■  Chronic  neglected  pneumonia,  passing  over  into  suppura-

tion.

■  ■Chronic  bronchitis  and  phthisis.

■  Phthisical  abscess  of  lungs ;  formation  of  cavities.

I  I  Several  attacks  of  hsemoptysis,  after  which  he  gradually
declined  ;  about  eight  months  afterward  large  cavity  in
r.  lung  at  second  intercostal  space  about  three  inches  to  r.
of  sternum  ;  heavy  rales  in  1.  bronchus  with  decided  in-


393  SILICA.

dications  of  breaking  down  of  parench^^matous  struct-
ure and  cavernous  lesions  there,  also  sputa  very  heavy
and  largely  purulent;  cadaverous  odor  present,  musty
and  offensive;  no  appetite;  could  hardly  sit  up  long
enough  to  have  bed  made  ;  skin  cold,  clammy  ;  drench-
ing night  sweats ;  marked  absence  of  vital  warmth.
^Phthisis.
I  I  Hemorrhage  from  lungs  for  nine  months;  cavities  in  both
lungs  ;  symptoms  of  septicsemia  from  absorption  of  pus
from  cavities;  clammy,  cadaverous  sweat  covering
whole  body',  which  had  the  feeling  as  if  mould  was  form-
ing ;  no  appetite ;  large  quantities  of  thick,  heavy  muco-
pus,  largely  purulent. ^Consumption.

I  Stonecutters'  consumption.

"Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i Palpitation:  while  sit-
ting, the  hand  in  which  he  is  holding  something  trem-
bles ;  violent  hammering  after  every  quick  or  violent
motion;  and  throbbing  over  whole  body  while  sitting.

Awoke  with  rapid  pulse,  palpitation  and  sensation  of  heat.

Orgasm  of  blood  at  night;  throbbing  in  all  the  vessels.

The  circulation  is  easily  agitated.

■  Heart  troubles  from  nervous  exhaustion.

iPulse:  small,hard,  rapid  ;  frequently  irregular  and  then
slow; imperceptible, with earthy complexion (car-
buncle).
^  Outer  Chest. I Painless  throbbing  in  sternum.

■  Tightness  across  chest ;  after  suppressed  foot  sweat.

I I  Sensation  as  if  a  hand  had  grasped  her  breast  bone.
^Chronic  hepatitis.

llA  scrofulous  child  set.  11,  swelling  size  of  a  plum,
occasionedby  closing  of  an  issue;  between  fifth  and  sixth
ribs  on  r.  side,  below  nipple.

A  man,  «t.  about  60,  had  a  tumor  in  1.  breast,  one  and  a
quarter  inches  in  diameter,  and  a  half  inch  in  depth,
the  nipple  occupying  the  centre;  it  slowly  increased  and
became  painful,  pain  sharp,  stinging  and  twinging;
almost  intolerable  itching  of  whole  breast,  had  an  ulcer
about  three  inches  long  and  one  inch  wide  on  r.  leg,
over  upper  end  of  fibula,  which  had  been  carious  and  a
part  of  it  removed,  but  the  ulcer  did  not  heal.  ^Can-
cerous tumor.

nWhen  convalescing  from  a  severe  attack  of  typhoid
fever,  a  tumor  appeared  in  one  of  the  right  intercostal
spaces,  which,  after  being  frequently  poulticed,  broke
open  and  commenced  to  discharge  first  a  thick,  creamy
pus,  mixed  with  some  blood,  but  becoming  thinner  and
more  offensive  every  day  ;  was  pale  and  weak,  and  the
discharge,  which,  by  its  long  duration,  was  causing  de-


31


SILICA.  394

cided  harm  to  the  organism,  consisted  of  thin,  dirty,
fetid  ichorous  fluid,  and  the  surrounding  parts  were
hard,  swollen  and  bluish ;  pain  in  ribs  <  in  a  warm
room,  but  as  soon  as  he  would  go  out  into  cold  air  (be-
ing Winter)  his  sufferings  became  unbearable.

I  I  Necrosis  of  acromio-clavicular  articulation  with  com-
plete anchylosis  of  1.  shoulder  joint.

I  I  Malignant  scrofulous  ulcers  and  fistulous  openings  of
lymphatic  glands  of  neck,  with  caries  of  clavicle.

I  I  Fistulous  opening  near  sixth  rib  from  an  abscess,  with
gnawing  pain ;  a  spongy  growth  size  of  a  nut,  broken
by  fistulous  openings,  protrudes ;  fistulous  openings  have
a  scarlet  border,  discharge  ichorous,  stinking  pus.

I  I  Small  tumor  in  1.  breast  of  a  man,  set.  60,  with  sharp,
stinging,  twinging  pain  and  intolerable  itching.

■  Eruption  like  varicella,  covering  breast  and  itching  vio-

lently.
An  eruption  like  -chicken  pox  covering  the  breast,  with
vehement  itching,  which  obliges  one  to  scratch  and  rub
the  affected  parts  with  force.
Neck  and  Back, i '  Pain  in  nape  of  neck  follows  lumbar
pain. ^Spinal  disease.

■  Rheumatism  of  lower  cervical  vertebrae.
Stiffness  and  chilliness  at  nape  of  neck,  and  chilliness  all

down  back.

■  Stiffness:  of  nape  of  neck;  of  one  side  of  neck,  cannot
turn  head  on  account  of  pain;  of  nape  of  neck,  with
headache.

■  A  recurrent  fibroid  tumor  the  size  of  a  hen's  egg  and  very
hard  in  1.  side  of  neck,  not  connected  with  parotid,
though  growing  a  little  below  it,  he  w^as  >  by  wrap-
ing  up,  even  head ;  timid  about  going  into  a  new  enter-
prise ;  lacks  confidence  in  his  own  ability.

I  I  Purulent  infiltration  of  tissues  of  neck,  following  car-
buncle.

■  ■Cervical  glands  and  parotids  swollen,  indurated.

■  ■Glandular  swellings  of  neck  and  in  armpits,  with  sup-
puration.

■  Scrofulous  swelling  and  induration  of  cervical  and  paro-
tid glands,  coming  gradually,  of  long  duration,  often
attaining  an  enormous  size ;  hot  skin,  without  pain  or
redness.

■  ■Boils  or  carbuncles  on  nape  of  neck;  anthrax;  want  of
vital  warmth  ;  slow  progress  of  disease.

I  I  Swelling  hard,  discolored,  purplish-red,  discharging
from  an  opening  near  edge,  acrid,  corroding,  stinking,
yellowish-green  ichor. ^Carbuncle.

I  I  Large  dusky  patch  on  front  of  neck,  and  another  on


395  SILICA.

nape  of  neck,  extending  to  scalp,  covered  with  minute
scales. ^Eczema.

Itching  pimples,  like  nettlerash,  on  nape  of  neck.

1 1  Swelling  and  soreness  in  old  cicatricial  tissues  about
neck  and  breast,  the  result  of  scrofulous  abscesses.

I  I  Right  lobe  of  thyroid  gland  swollen,  having  the  appear-
ance of  an  elastic  cyst.

■  Struma,  with  suppurating  fistula.

I  Rheumatism  of  lower  cervical  vertebrae;  violent  tearing

pain  between  scapulee.

Tearing  pain  beneath  scapulae  while  walking.

Frequent  sticking  in  r.  scapula.

lln  small  of  back  :  violent  pain;  pain  after  stooping;  pain
as  if  beaten,  at  night;  pain  when  getting  out  of  bed  in
morning;  feeling  as  if  dead  after  suppressed  foot  sweat;
spasmodic  pain  does  not  allow  him  to  rise ;  stiffness  and
pain  on  rising  from  a  seat ;  spasmodic  drawing  compel-
ling him  to  lie  still.

Weakness  of  back  and  a  paralyzed  feeling  in  lower  ex-
tremities, could  scarcely  walk.

II  Pain  in  curved  spine.

Burning  in  back  while  walking  in  open  air  and  becoming

warm.
Violent  shooting  pain  in  back  between  hips.
I  Aching,  beating,  throbbing  in  back.
Stiff,  sore  feeling  down  r.  side  of  spine,  then  across  loins

and  over  r.  hip  joint.

I  Constant  aching  in  centre  of  spine.

I I  Spinal  irritation,  paralytic  symptoms;  cold  feet;  consti-
pation.

I  Aching  in  loins,  shooting  down  legs.

iSpinal  curvature  to  the  right,  painful  to  touch  and
motion.

I  IH.,  £et.  16,  eighteen  months  ago  fell;  after  first  shock
felt  well  until  nine  months,  when  pain  appeared  in
sacrum  and  hip;  applied  Rhus  liniment;  now  suffers
from  pain  from  sacrum  upward  to  lumbar  region,  and
across  1.  ilium  to  superior  spinal  process ;  pain  throb-
bing, <  on  pressure  over  lumbar  vertebrae,  and  this,
when  severe,  gives  rise  to  a  pain  in  nape  of  neck  and  a
sense  of  loss  of  power  in  lower  extremities;  stooping
causes  severe  pain  darting  up  spine.  ^Traumatic  peri-
ostitis of  sacrum  and  lower  vertebrae.

I  I  Disease  of  cervical  vertebrae  in  a  boy,  set.  3  ;  when  six-
teen months  old  head  would  fall  forward,  chin  resting
on  sternum,  and  he  began  instinctively  to  support  head
by  placing  hands  under  chin,  and  when  lifted  up,  espe-
cially if  hands  were  not  supporting  chin,  opened  his


SILICA.  396

mouth  in  u  gaping  manner;  by-and-by  had  no  longer
any  power  to  hold  things  in  hands,  soon  after  the  power
of  walking  and  then  of  standing  ceased,  nor  could  he
even  sit  up;  bowels  costive;  urine  free;  intellect  preco-
cious ;  memory  excellent ;  emaciation.

I  I  Bony  structure  of  spine  affected  ;  chronic  gouty  nodosi-
ties."  ^Myelitis.

iCaries  of  lumbar  vertebrae.

■  Spina  bifida.

I  Psoas  abscess.

■  Diseases  brought  on  by  exposure  of  back  to  draft  of  air.

I  Aching  in  sacrum. ^Spermatorrhoea.

I I  Lame  feeling  in  region  of  sacrum.

I  I  Aching,  beating,  throbbing  pain  in  lumbo-sacral  region.
I  I  Coccyx  hurts  after  riding ;  coccygodynia.
Elevated  scabby  spots  on  coccyx  above  fissure  of  nates.
Stinging  in  os  coccygis,  which  is  painful  to  pressure.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  shoulder  and  arm  at  night,  >  by
w'arm  wrappings.
Momentary  sharp  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint.
Acute  pain  in  r.  shoulder  blade.

I  I  Swelling  on  1.  scapula  seven  inches  broad,  five  inches

long,  of  thickness  of  a  finger,  raised  in  middle  and  in-
flamed, after  two  weeks  it  opened  in  several  places  and-
discharged  profuse  matter.

I I  Swelling,  induration  and  suppuration  of  axillary  glands.
iiOfFensive  axillary  sweat.

iBones  of  arm  feel  bruised.
I  I  Shaking  of  1.  arm  ;  before  epilepsy.
Arms  and  hands  feel  heavy,  paralyzed ;  as  if  filled  with
lead.

■  Right  arm  and  wrist  weak  ;  cannot  raise  anything  heavy.
I  Arms  go  to  sleep  when  resting  on  them;  pricking  in

them.
I  I  Limbs  tremble;  forearm  jerks  so  could  not  feel  pulse;

after  bleeding.
Numb  feeling  in  r.  arm,  like  pins  and  needles.
I  I  Arms  cold  after  the  fever. ^Intermittent.

I  I A  child,  aet.  2,  vaccinated  three  weeks  ago;  about  ninth

or  tenth  day,  arm  was  inflamed  and  swollen ;  in  a  few
days  an  ulcer  as  large  as  a  half-penny,  excavated,  laying
bare  the  muscles,  occurred  in  the  spot  where  the  oper-
ation had  been  performed.

I I  After  vaccination,  red  and  inflamed  swellings  sometimes
extending  over  whole  arm  ;  fever;  sickness  at  stomach;
headache  ;  backache  ;  abscess  in  axilla,  etc.

■  Blood-boils  and  warts  on  arms.

I  I  Abscess  and  oedematous  swelling  of  arm  after  dissection
wound.


397  SILICA.

I  Caries  or  necrosis  of  humerus.

I  I  Inflammation  of  elbow  joint,  with  considerable  swelling,
a  fistulous  opening  led  to  rough  bone  discharging  thin,
greenish  pus ;  hectic  fever  and  great  emaciation.  ^Ca-
ries of  elbow  joint.

I  I  Anchylosis  of  elbow  joint,  with  swelling  and  pain  at
every  attempt  to  move,  almost  complete  stiffness  of
fingers.

I  I  Stinging,  drawing,  tearing  pain  in  bones  of  elbows  day
and  night,  <  from  slightest  touch  or  motion.

I  1  Suppuration  of  cellular  tissue  of  whole  r.  forearm.

I  I  Caries  of  ulna.

I  I  Fungous  growth  involving  stump  of  arm  after  amputa-
tion for  cancer.

I  I A  large  fleshy  wart  on  1.  forearm.

■  Furuncle  on  arms.

Tearing  pain  in  wrist  and  ball  of  hand.

Stitches  in  wrist  at  night,  extending  to  arm.

I  Caries  of  wrist  joint.

1  I  Exudation  of  synovial  fluid  in  wrist  resulting  from  a

strain.
I  I A  ganglion  or  elastic  cyst  on  extensor  side  of  1.  wrist.
Cramplike  pain  and  lameness  of  hand  after  slight  exertion.
Sense  of  numbness  in  hands  and  pricking  in  both  arms.
Falling  asleep  of  hands  at  night.
Frequently  obliged  to  lay  down  the  pen  while  writing  on

account  of  lameness  in  r.  hand.
Tonic  spasm  of  hand  while  writing.

■  Paralysis  of  hands. ^Leprosy.

llEnchodroma  on  r.  hand,  metacarpal  bones  enlarged,
all  the  joints  stiff",  exposed  in  many  places  by  ulceration
of  skin,  bones  carious.

1  I  Wen  on  tendons  of  extensors  of  middle  finger;  hygroma.

A  pustule  on  back  of  hand.

Cracking  of  skin  on  arms  and  hands.

A  bursa  on  back  of  hand.

I  Moist  tetter  on  hand.

I I  Profuse  sweat  on  hands.

iContraction of  flexor tendons; painful when moving

fingers.
Left  middle  finger  flexed  and  stiff'ened,  on  bending  it  out

great  pain  along  whole  extensor  tendon  in  back  of  hand.
Pain  as  from  a  splinter  in  flexor  surface  of  one  finger.
Pain  in  1.  index  finger  as  if  a  panaritium  would  form.
Sensation  as  if  tips  of  fingers  were  suppurating.
Feeling  of  numbness  of  one  finger,  as  if  it  were  thick  and

tlie  bone  enlarged.
Paralytic  drawing  in  fingers.


SILICA.  398

Tearing  in  fingers  and  in  joints  of  fingers  and  thumbs.

Sticking  pain  as  if  asleep,  now  in  one  now  in  another  fin-
ger, also  in  arms.

Stitches  in  ball  of  thumb.

Drawing  feeling  in  joints  of  r.  finger  as  if  they  were  being
pulled  out  of  their  sockets.

I  Atrophy  and  numbness  of  fingers.

■  Burning  in  finger  tips.

I  Gouty  deposits  in  large  joints  of  fingers.

I  I A  corroding  blister  with  violent  itching  on  first  joint  of
index  finger.

I  I A  robust  middle-aged  man  was  bitten  in  1.  thumb  by  a
man,  four  weeks  previous ;  the  thumb  was  swollen  to
double  its  size ;  the  whole  length  was  hot,  red  ;  a  small
opening  on  the  inside  of  the  middle  of  the  first  phalanx
surrounded  by  a  red  elevated  margin ;  the  probe  could
be  introduced  to  ball  of  thumb ;  there  was  great  pain
on  pressure  with  a  ver}^  copious  discharge  of  a  very  offen-
sive fluid,  appearing  like  the  yeast  of  wine;  burning,
shooting  pain,  <  on  pressure,  from  motion  and  at  night.

A  small  crack  in  index  finger  began  to  burn  and  pain,  a
lymphatic  becomes  inflamed,  extending  thence  over
wrist,  and  in  the  sore  spot  a  corroding  vesicle  forms  with
burning,  pressing,  stinging  pains.

I  I  Mrs.  H.,  set.  about  50,  called  to  have  r.  index  finger  am-

putated ;  one  year  ago  she  ran  a  fine  splinter  of  glass
into  apex  of  index  finger  and  did  not  succeed  in  remov-
ing all  the  glass,  as  it  became  finely  comminuted ;  gave
no  trouble  until  early  last  Summer,  when  end  of  finger
became  painful  and  very  sensitive ;  pain  extended  up
r.  arm  to  axilla,  thence  to  r.  side  of  thorax ;  some  lym-
phatic swellings  and  loss  of  power  in  r.  arm,  threaten-
ing paralysis;  was  unable  to  perform  household  duties
without  pain;  pain  no  longer  durable;  worn  out  in  body
and  mind;  face  pale,  cachectic;  scrofulous  diathesis;
restless,  fidgety ;  r.  arm  and  wrist  weak ;  felt  as  if  she
could  not  lift  or  do  anything;  nails  yellow  and  brittle;
insomnia  from  pain ;  feels  unrefreshed  in  morning ;
after  Silica  fine  splinters  of  glass  came  out ;  general
health  improved  and  she  resumed  her  duties,  which  are
arduous,  and  has  had  no  more  pain  or  trouble  in  side,
arm  or  finger.

I I  Whitlow;  panaritium;  lancinating  pains;  inflammation
extends  deep  to  tendons  and  cartilages  and  bones.

I  I  Burning,  itching,  stinging,  aching  in  r.  forefinger.
^Whitlow.

I  Caries  on  fingers.

I I  After  a  bite  thumb  swollen  to  double  its  size,  hot,  in-
flamed, painful  to  pressure.


399  SILICA.

I  I  After  cuttiDg  one  finger  andgrazingthe  skin  off  another
the  wounds  would  not  heal ;  they  suppurated,  pus  being
a  dirty  white  color  ;  throbbing  pain  in  abraded  surface.

I  I  Painful  hard  swelling  on  middle  joint  of  little  finger,
with  reddened  skin  over  swelling.

I  I  Disease  of  bone  of  forefinger  midway  between  knuckle
and  next  joint;  slight  whitish  discharge  from  a  minute
opening  and  flesh  much  swollen  and  discolored  at  the
place.

I  I  Metacarpal  bones  of  first  four  fingers  of  r.  hand  swollen

to  such  a  degree  that  oval,  hard,  knobby  masses  of  uni-
form surface  were  formed  ;  joints  obliterated  and  immov-
able ;in  places  ulcerated  surfaces  under  which  the  bones
gave  a  rough  sound  to  the  probe ;  formation  of  sinuses ;  no
appetite ;  great  pain ;  drowsiness  during  day  ;  lassitude
and  depression.

I I  Bone  felons;  deep-seated  pains;  <  from  warm  bed;
burning  stinging,  aching  in  superficial  parts.

I  I  Felon  on  lower  third  of  second  phalangeal  bone  of  r.
middle  finger,  from  the  first  very  painful  and  much
swollen,  preventing  sleep  ;  a  free  opening  had  been  made
(lengthwise)  an  inch  long  and  was  now  widely  spread
out  in  centre,  but  this  had  only  relieved  for  two  or  three
hours  and  it  had  been  much  more  painful  since ;  it  was
much  swollen  and  highly  inflamed  nearly  to  wrist  with  a
red  streak  extending  nearly  to  elbow ;  pain  felt  up  to
shoulder,  severe  throbbing,  twinging;  ichorous  dis-
charge ;  felt  exhausted  from  pain.

I  I  Whitlow  on  r.  forefinger  where  matter  had  already
formed ;  the  whole  finger  was  swollen,  bluish-red  and
painful  to  touch;  palm  of  hand  also  much  swollen  ;  in
a  few  days  four  separate  deposits  of  pus  were  formed,  one
in  each  of  the  three  phalanges,  the  fourth  on  metacarpal
bone  of  r.  forefinger ;  the  destruction  of  soft  parts  was  so
great  that  in  some  places  the  bone  was  visible;  small
necrosed  osseous  splinters  came  away  from  metacarpal
bone  and  the  first  phalanx.

iRun-arounds;  ulceration  about  nails ;  hang-nails.

I  I  Subcutaneous  whitlow  of  r.  forefinger;  finger  swollen,

red,  on  its  dorsum  a  large  collection  of  pus  beneath  skin  ;
burning,  itching,  stinging,  aching;  every  little  injury
caused  ulceration.

I I  Nails  :  rough,  yellow,  crippled,  brittle ;  white  spots  ;  blue,
in  fever;  stimulates  growth  of  new  ones.

Great  dryness  in  tips  of  fingers,  in  afternoon.
**  Lower  Limbs, i  Hip  joint  inflammation.
1  Hip  disease  with  fistulous  openings.
Tearing  pain  in  hips.


SILICA.  400

Violent  bruised  sensation  in  hips  and  small  of  back,  pain-
ful on  stooping,

I  iSuppuration  and  caries  of  hip  joint;  fistulous  openings
very  tender  to  touch.

I  I  Spontaneous  luxation  of  head  of  femur  backward,  in
a  babe  eight  days  old  ;  shortening  of  limb  half  an  inch.

I  I  Severe  pain  extending  from  hip  to  foot;  >  at  night  so
that  she  moans  and  cries  and  cannot  sleep ;  slightest
pressure  causes  trembling  of  whole  body  and  at  times
spasms;  cannot  move  foot;  temperature  elevated;  loss
of  appetite;  great  thirst ;  stool  difficult ;  emaciation.

I  I  Sciatica  of  seven  years'  standing.

Weakness  of  lower  extremities ;  great  weariness  from  a
short  walk.

Heaviness  of  lower  extremities.

Limbs  and  feet  feel  very  tired  and  as  if  paralyzed.

■  Trembling  of  legs  with  extreme  nervousness.

■  Sensation  of  loss  of  power  in  legs.

I  I  Left  thigh  affected  below  trochanter. /^Necrosis.

Aching  pains  in  loins,  shooting  down  both  legs.

Pricking  and  shooting  pain  in  left  thigh.

Dragging  feeling  from  r.  hip  down  to  toes.

The femur  pains as  if beaten while walking,  sittings

and  lying,  even  in  morning  on  waking.
Frequent  pain  in  thigh,  drawing  and  sticking.
Drawing  in  thighs,  extending  to  feet.
Tearing  or  sticking  pain  in  thighs.
Pulsative  sensation  in  r.  thigh.
I  iGressus  gallinaceus.

■  Phlegmasia  with contraction  of  tissues  and  sheaths  of

tendons.
I  I  Inflammation of  cellular tissue  of  thigh which has-

reached  double  its  size,  rest  of  body  emaciated  ;  motion

and  touch  cause  violent  pain.
I  I  Abscess  on  inside  of  r.  thigh  ;  1.  ankle  and  foot  swollen.

■  Furuncles  on  thighs.

I  I  Two  fistulse  at  inferior  third  of  femur. ^Caries.

1  I  Pains  and  fistula  in  upper  third  of  r.  leg. ^Caries.

I  I  Necrosis  of  femur  of  two  years'  standing.

I  I  Swollen  and  necrosed  femur  with  sequesters.

I  iTwo  fistulse  at  inferior  third  of  femur,  which  (in  spite  of
caustics)  refused  to  close ;  whole  foot  swollen  and  red,,
and  caries  easily  demonstrated.

I  I  Boy,  set.  15,  two  years  ago  had  a  painless  soft  swelling  on
outer  side  of  1.  femur,  just  below  trochanter,  as  large  as
a  hen's  egg,  which  in  a  few  days  opened  and  discharged
thin,  excoriating,  watery  pus;  soon  spicules  of  bone  of  a
dark  color  were  thrown  out,  some  almost  black  and  oc-


401  SILICA.

casionally  in  form  of  scales  ;  there  were  three  openings
about  size  of  a  wheat  straw,  with  elevated  rounded
edges ;  limb  flexed,  walked  with  the  aid  of  a  cane  ;  oc-
casional attacks  of  constipation,  when,  after  much
straining,  feces  were  brought  to  verge  of  anus,  they
seemed  to  slip  back. ^Necrosis  of  femur.

I  Blood-boils  on  thighs  and  calves.

■  Weakness  of  knees.

Knee  is  painful  as  if  too  tightly  bound.

Tearing  in  knees,  while  sitting,  disappearing  on  motion.

Weakness  of  legs  particularly  on  descending  steps,  trem-
bling of  knees.

I  1  Violent  stinging  or  lacinating  pains  in  knees.  ^Gonor-
throcace.

I  I  Inflammation  of  knee  joint  with  considerable  swelling
and  lacinating  pain  deep  in  joints.  ^Tumor  albus  of  1.
knee.

I  I  Left  knee  joint  double  size  of  healthy  one,  white  shiny

doughy  swelling,  temperature  but  slightly  raised,  motion
limited,  leg  contracted,  moderately  emaciated.

I I  For  years  inflammation  of  r.  knee ;  unable  to  get  about
at  times;  joint  fully  one-half  larger  than  its  mate,  oede-
matous  and  painful  on  pressure,  or  from  exercise.

1 1  Enlarged  bursa  over  patella.

I  I  Large  cyst  on  r.  patella,  not  inflamed  but  extremely

sensitive  to  contact,  interfering  with  walking,  or  work-
ing on  sewing  machine ;  cold  feet,  especially  at  night,
and  cramps  in  calves;  feet  always  cold  during  menstru-
ation. ^Hygroma  of  patella.

I I  Gonocace,  pains  stinging,  lancinating ;  swelling  doughy ;
flstulous  openings  with  hard  edges,  discharging  green-
ish-yellow pus.

I  Chronic  synovitis  of  knee  with  great  swelling  and  anchy-
losis.

I  I  Gonitis  after  suppression  of  gonorrhoea ;  pale  swelling,
great  stiffness ;  <  at  night ;  sensation  of  heat  in  aff'ected
part;  painful  to  touch;  sweaty  skin;  restlessness  in
bed  ;  >  from  warmth.

I  I  Incipient  anchylosis  of  knee. ^Caries.

I  I  In  bend  of  1.  knee,  thin  crusty  eruption  eating  its  way

and  discharging  thin,  corroding  ichor.

I I  Elephantiasis  Arabum;  both  feet,  legs  and  lower  part
of  thighs  affected ;  back  of  hand  also  aff'ected  ;  now  and
then  erysipelatous  manifestations.

Red,  smarting  spot  on  r.  tibia.

Ulcers  on  lower  leg  on  tibia.

1 1  Caries  of  tibia.

1 1 A  boy,  set.  18  months,  injury  of  tibia  after  a  fall  about

VOL.  IX. — 26.


SILICA.  402

nine  months  ago;  almost  entirely  deprived  of  use  of  leg,
walked  with  apparently  great  pain;  upper  part  of  tibia
much  inflamed,  pus  discharged  from  two  openings.

I  I  Periostitis  on  inside  and  anterior  ridge  of  tibia  from  its
upper  third  to  within  two  inches  of  ankle.

I  I  Boy,  set.  16,  lymphatic  temperament,  from  a  bruise
eighteen  months  ago,  the  leg  sore,  discharging  a  thin
excoriating  watery  pus  ;  spiculse  of  bone  were  thrown
out.

I  I  Anterior  border  of  tibia  hypertrophied. ^Caries.

I I  Caries  of  tibia  and  fibula.
Pressive-stinging  pain  in  ulcerating  part  of  leg.
Sticking  and  burning  in  and  about  an  ulcer  on  leg.
Nightly  pains  in  ulcer.

I  1 A  swelling  size  of  a  walnut  in  r.  popliteal  space.

Furuncle  on  calves.

Lameness  of  legs,  <  in  morning  with  heaviness  in  head

and  buzzing  in  ears.
When  one  leg  is  in  great  pain  the  other  is  quite  numb.

■  Ulcers  on  lower  leg  with  pale  face.

I  Cold  legs  and  feet  after  suppressed  foot  sweat.

When  walking  sensation  as  if  calves  were  too  short,  im-
mediately disappearing  on  sitting.

■  Tension  in  calves  as  from  cramp  when  walking.

I I  Cramps  :  in  calves  ;  in  soles.
Calves  tense  and  contracted.

I  1  Four  months  after  cutting  r.  calf  of  leg  with  an  axe ;
wound  was  about  three  and  a  half  inches  long  and  mid-
dle spread  out  a  full  inch  and  filled  up  with  soft  fungoid
granulations,  discharging  a  thin  serous  secretion  like
meat-washings,  of  fetid  odor,  which  had  also  traversed
down  fascia,  covering  muscles  to  ankle  so  as  to  fill  space
just  above  and  beside  ankle,  it  got  quite  full  during  day,
had  to  raise  foot  above  knee  to  let  it  discharge  by  the
opening ;  cavity  was  about  nine  inches  deep ;  whole  calf
swollen  and  in  hard,  knotted  bunches,  tender  to  press-
ure, with  dull,  heavy  aching.

I  Boils  on  calves.

■  Weak  ankles.
Spasmodic  pain  in  ankle.

I  I  John  D.,  set.  34,  sat  with  his  feet  in  water;  next  day
glands  of  neck  swollen  ;  a  large  abscess  then  formed  on
inside  of  r.  thigh,  and  at  same  time  1.  ankle  and  foot
swelled  up,  with  formation  of  pus;  seven  weeks  later
abscess  in  thigh  still  discharging,  and  from  five  to  six
fistulous  openings  in  ankle  and  foot  a  large  quantity  of
unhealthy  pus  is  being  discharged;  foot  enormously
swollen  ;  general  health  greatly  impaired  ;  hectic  fever ;


403  SILICA.

pulse  130;  appetite  poor;  amputation  probable  result;
openings  were  enlarged  by  free  incisions;  internal  mal-
leolus was  found  to  be  carious  and  tarsal  bones  similarly-
affected;  after  ISilica  2c.,  one  dose  a  day  and  warm
poultices  of  linseed  meal,  there  was  marked  improve-
ment in  two  weeks;  abscess  in  thigh  had  closed;
after  Silica  6m.,  in  four  weeks  more,  sw^elling  was  almost
gone  and  discharge  had  ceased  ;  there  was  slight  motion
in  ankle  joint,  this  gradually  improved,  and  when  the
man  left  the  hospital  several  weeks  later  he  could  walk
with  a  cane.

I  Weakness  of  feet.

I  I  Cannot  walk  on  account  of  a  lameness  or  soreness  in
feet,  from  instep  down  through  foot  to  sole,  and  all
through  that  part  of  foot. ^Pregnancy.

Painful  tonic  spasm  in  feet  and  toes  during  a  long  walk.

Pains  through  foot  from  ankle  to  sole.

Feet  insufferably  tender.

Burning  of  feet.

Feet  give  way  under  her  when  w^alking.

Swelling  of  feet  as  far  as  ankles.

Swelling  of  feet  with  redness  in  which  pressure  caused
a  white  spot  in  a  short  time;  with  pains  extending
from  toes  to  malleoli.

I  I  Man,  £et.  55,  from  wearing  tight  boots,  a  blister  size  of
silver  quarter  on  dorsum  of  r.  foot  which  peeled  leaving
an  ulcer  which  did  not  heal,  increasing  in  depth.

I  I  Woman,  set.  80,  sprained  toes  of  r.  foot  lay  slipping ;  signs
of  abscess  here  and  there;  on  opening  one  of  them,
blood  and  fluid  oozed  out ;  blisters  formed ;  gangrene
threatened.

I  I  Mme.  P.,  set.  25,  in  delicate  health,  had  been  afflicted  for
three  years  with  a  malady'  which  annually  began  at
commencement  of  Winter  and  caused  intense  suffering
for  two  or  three  months,  during  which  time  she  was
obliged  to  remain  in  bed  ;  there  appeared  on  dorsum  of
foot,  pains,  redness  and  swelling;  this  became  an  abscess
and  suppurated  for  two  or  three  months  with  much  vio-
lent pain ;  discharge  ichorous  and  sometimes  brought
away  fragments  of  bone.

I  Caries  of  tarsus.

Pricking  and  stitches  in  1.  heel.

I  I  Cramps  in  soles.

■  Voluptuous  tingling  in  soles,  driving  to  despair.

I  Caries  in  bones  of  heel.

I  Icy-coldness  of  feet.

I  Hot  feet  in  evening,  at  other  times  extremities  are  cold.

I  I  Feet  very  dry,  smelled  like  an  old  person's.  ^Diarrhoea
of  dentition.


SILICA.  404

■  Burning  of  soles  of  feet.

Intolerably  bad,  sour  or  carrion-like  odor  of  feet,  without
perspiration,  every  evening.

liFoot  sweat:  offensive,  making  feet  sore;  rawness  be-
tween toes ;  fetid,  suppression  causes  other  ailments ;
excessive.

I  I  Extreme  perspiration  of  feet  which  were  cold  in  Winter
and  sore  in  Summer.

I  I  Feet  perspire  constantly  but  get  easily  cold,  then  follows
fainting,  afterward  great  exhaustion ;  before  fainting
fit,  paleness  of  face  and  trembling ;  must  sit  down  ;  for-
merly had  nosebleed  almost  every  week.

I  I A  young  vigorous  farmer,  who  had  never  been  sick,
caused  a  suppression  of  sweat  of  his  feet  by  getting
them  wet;  from  that  time  on,  two  months  since,  he  can-
not get  his  feet  warm ;  feels  prostrated  and  as  if  beaten
all  over;  has  pressure  and  tightness  over  chest;  small
of  back  and  whole  of  back  feel  as  if  dead ;  in  morning
nausea  and  vomiting  of  slimy  substances,  whereby  he
becomes  much  exhausted.

■  ■Suppressed foot sweat: mist before eyes; cataract;

continual  toothache ;  loss  of  appetite ;  icy-cold  feet  even-
ings in  bed.

A  large  corrosive  ulcer  with  violent  itching  on  heel.

Constant  violent  pain  in  great  toe  so  that  he  can  scarcely
step.

■  Pains  beneath  nail  of  great  toe  and  stitches  in  it.
Frequent  boring  pain  in  great  toe.

Tearing  in  great  toe  in  evening.

Violent  stitches  in  corns.

Stitches  in  corn,  jerking  up  the  feet.

Itching  cutting  pain  beneath  toe  nail.

Itching,  suppurating  scabs  upon  toes  that  had  been  frozen.

■  ■Ingrowing  toe  nails.

I  I  Ulceration  of  big  toe,  with  stinging  pain.

I  I  Enchondroma  in  a little  boy  began  in  index  finger,

this  was  amputated ;  soon  the  other  had  the  same  history

and  the  toe  became  affected.

■  ■Offensive  toe  sweat.

Drawing  feeling  in  joints  of  toes  as  if  being  pulled  out
of  their  sockets.

■  ■Caries  of  1.  great  toe  and  metatarsal  bone  discharging

watery  fluid  through  fistulous  openings.
I  I  Abscess  after  spraining  toes  of  r.  foot.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Trembling  of  limbs,  especially  arms.

■  Weakness  in  limbs.

■  Twitching  of  limbs  day  and  night.

■  Limbs:  go  to  sleep  easily;  sore  and  lame,  evenings.


405  SILICA.

■  Stinging  in  limbs  at  night.

I  Limbs  cold  ;  transient  local  sweats  of  feet  and  armpits.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs.

■  Obstinate  pains  in  limbs, < when  weather changes ;

after  a  cold.
I  I  Tearing  pain  in  limbs,  dropping  and  running  sensation.

^Chronic  hepatitis.
■Sweat  on  hands  and  feet  after  fever.

■  Frequent  ulceration  about  nails.

■  Nails  grey,  dirty  as  if  decayed,  when  cut  scattering  like

pow^der  and  splitting  into  layers.

■  ■Crippled  nails  on  fingers  and  toes.

^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest :  feeling  of  waves  of  water
over  head  >.

Lying  down :  asthma  < ;  compulsory  drawing  in  back ;
femur  pains.

Lying  on  side :  fainting.

Lying  on  r.  side:  pains  in  liver  <.

Lying  on  1.  side :  vertigo.

Lying  on  back  :  dyspnoea.

Wants  to  lie  down  :  sense  of  great  weariness ;  debility.

Must  lie  down  :  headache.

Cannot  lie  down  :  oppression.

Resting  on  arms :  they  go  to  sleep.

Sitting :  long,  earache  <  ;  palpitation ;  throbbing  over
whole  body;  femur  pains;  tearing  in  knees;  sensation
as  if  calves  were  too  short  disappears ;  long,  great  rest-
lessness of  body.

Gaping  or  swallowing:  stoppage  in  ear  >.

Must  sit  down  :  vertigo.

Stooping:  vertigo;  headache;  renews  jerking  in  forehead;
headache  <;  dyspnoea;  pain  in  small  of  back;  severe
pain  up  spine;  bruised  sensation  <.

Rising  from  recumbent  position:  vertigo;  impossible;
pain  in  back.

Rising  from  a  seat:  pain  in  small  of  back.

Motion :  vertigo  <  ;  headache  <  ;  pains  in  head  <  ;  vom-
iting of  bitter,  yellow  substance  ;  pain  in  ears  <  ;  beat-
ing soreness  in  liver  <  ;  cough  <  ;  sweat ;  pain  in  re-
gion of  liver  <  ;  least,  <  hemorrhage ;  pain  in  lungs ;
curvature  of  spine  painful ;  pain  in  stiff  fingers ;  pain
in  elbows  <  ;  of  fingers,  flexor  tendons  painful ;  of  sore
swollen  thumb  pain  <  ;  of  foot  impossible  from  pain;
tearing  in  knees  disappears;  of  leg  limited,  swelled
knee ;  muscles  painful ;  causes  chilliness.

Opening  eyes:  pressive  pain  <.

Writing:  tonic  spasms  of  hand.

Sudden  turning  around  :  renews  jerking  in  forehead.


SILICA.  406

Walking :  excoriation  between  toes ;  beating  soreness  of
liver  <  ;  sharp  stitches  in  rectum  ;  shortness  of  breath
and  panting ;  difficult,  weakness  and  paralyzed  feeling
in  back,  burning  in  back;  causes  great  weariness ;  femur
pains;  as  if  calves  were  too  short;  tension  in  calves;
long,  tonic  spasms  in  feet  and  toes ;  feet  give  way.

Stepping  hard  :  vibratory  shaking  sensation  in  head.

Every  step  is  painfully  felt ;  incarcerated  flatus.

Cannot  step  upon  r.  foot  without  greatly  aggravating  pain
in  liver.

Descending  stairs :  weakness  of  legs  and  trembling  of
knees.

Exercise :  after  every,  nausea ;  to  sweating  gonorrhoea  <  ;
inflamed  knee  painful ;  want  of  vital  warmth.

Exertion  :  slight  pain  and  lameness  of  hand  ;  least,  sweat.

Running:  dyspnoea.
^^  Nerves, n  Strong  desire  to  be  mesmerized.

1 1  Sense  of  great  weariness  and  debility,  wants  to  lie  down.

Great  weakness,  in  morning.

Very  weak  and  tremulous,  after  walking  in  evening,

I  I  Excessive  debility. ^Typhus.

I  I  Protracted  convalescence. ^Cerebro-spiiial  meningitis.

Sensation  of  great  debility  and  sleepiness  during  a  thunder-
storm .

Great  nervous  debility  ;  emaciation  ;  fainting  when  lying
on  side.

The  child  is  slow  in  learning  to  walk.

I  I  Cannot  hold  things. ^Spine  disease.

I I  Feels  prostrated  and  as  if  beaten  all  over.  ^Suppressed
foot  sweat.

1 1  Great  nervous  debility  ;  exhaustion  with  erethism;  de-
pression may  be  overcome  by  will  force.

1 1  Dissipation,  hard  work,  with  close  confinement,  cause
obstinate  neuralgias,  hysterical  attacks  or  paralysis.

I  Oversensitive  persons  imperfectly  nourished,  not  from

want  of  food  but  from  imperfect  assimilation,  they  are
usually  constipated  and  are  subject  to  sudden  neural-
gias, erethism  and  melancholy.

Dreadful  trembling  in  limbs,  hands  in  particular  at  times
quite  unable  to  lift  a  cup  of  tea.

iTremulousness  when  working.

■  Great  restlessness  in  body  when  sitting  long.
Internal  restlessness  and  excitement.

•  Restless;  fidgety;  starts  at  least  noise.

I I  Sensitiveness  to  cold  air;  takes  cold  very  easily.

■  Takes  cold  easily,  especially  when  uncovering  head  or

feet.

■  Want  of  vital  warmth,  even  when  taking  exercise.


407  SILICA.

I  The  limbs  go  to  sleep  easily,  especially  the  parts  on  which

one  lies.
Easy  orgasm  of  blood,  and  constant  excitement.

■  Ebullition  with  thirst  from  drinking  small  quantities  of

wine.

Easily  overstrained  by  lifting.

Bruised  pain  over  whole  body,  as  if  he  had  lain  in  an  un-
comfortable position.

Bruised  feeling  over  whole  body,  after  coition.

All  the  muscles  are  painful  on  motion.

■  Progressive  sclerosis  of  posterior  column.

Great  coldness  of  whole  1.  side  of  body,  followed  by  fre-
quent slumbering  and  starting  up,  as  if  she  would  go
away  without  knowing  whither,  then  she  begins  to  lose
consciousness,  speaks  unintelligibly,  recognizes  no  one,
and  becomes  so  weak  that  she  cannot  turn  over  alone ;
after  this  violent  convulsion,  with  staring  look,  distor-
tion of  eyes,  twitching  of  lips,  lolling  of  tongue,  stretch-
ing and  distortion  of  head  and  limbs,  lasting  quarter  of
an  hour.

■  Epilepsy: spasms  spread  from  solar plexus  to  brain;

come  at  night  or  at  new  moon ; attacks  preceded  by
coldness  of  1.  side,  shaking  and  twisting  of  1.  arm.

■  ■Convulsions  after  vaccination.

I  I  Spasms  (probably  due  to  worms)  in  a  child,  set.  H,  with-
in three  weeks  gradually  increasing  in  number  until
there  were  fifteen  attacks  daily,  and  finally  paralysis  of
r.  side.

■Spasms  or  paralysis  from  checked  foot  sweat.

■Spasms  or  paralysis  depending  on  alterations  in  connec-
tive tissue  in  brain  or  spinal  cord.

■Spasms ;  aura,  like  a  mouse  running  through  limbs  or
from  solar  plexus  to  brain;  1.  side  cold;  1.  arm  twists;
starts  in  sleep  ;  moaning,  loud  groaning.

■  Spasms  from  slight  provocation.

I  I  Woman,  set.  30,  epileptic  convulsions  occurring  monthly
at  exact  full  of  the  moon.

■  Paralysis  from  tabes  dorsalis.

■  Progressive  locomotor  ataxia.
''  Sleep. Excessive  gaping.

Drowsiness  with  lassitude  and  depression.

Sleepiness  :  after  eating  ;  in  evening.

Restless  sleep:  frequent  waking  with  chilliness;  dreams

crowding  one  upon  another  ;  starting  with  trembling  of

whole  body.
Woke  at  2  a.m.  and  could  not  fall  asleep  again  on  account

of  rush  of  thoughts.

■  During sleep:  whining and laughing; loud talking;


SILICA.  408

starts,  jerkings  of  limbs,  snoring ;  night  sweats  ;  night-
mare.

iNight  walking;  gets  up  while  asleep,  walks  about  and
lies  down  again ;  somnambulism.

I  'Child  wakes  and  throws  arms  about  and  screams.
^Scarlatina.

I  I  Sleep  walking  at  new  and  full  moon.  ^Lumbricoid
worms.

I  Sleepy  but  cannot  sleep.

■  Sleepless;  from  ebullitions,  orgasm  of  blood.
Sleeplessness  or  sleep  broken  by  lascivious  or  frightening
dreams  ;  heat  and  congestions.

I I  Sleeplessness  with  tuberculosis.

I  Dreams:  pleasant;  lascivious;  anxious,  of  murders,
horrid  things  ;  vivid  of  past  events  ;  with  violent  weep-
ing ;  of  some  one  choking  her.

I  Night  sweats  ;  obstinate  morning  headache  ;  chilly,  nau-
seated.

Erections  and  urging  to  urinate  awake  him.

1  Feels  unrefreshed,  wishes  to  remain  in  bed.
^  Time. Between  1  and  7  a.m.  :  violent  chill.

2  A.M. :  woke  and  could  not  go  to  sleep  again  from  rush
of  thoughts.

6  A.M.:  sweat.

From  6  to  8  a.m.:  diarrhoea.

Morning:  headaches;  violent  headache ;  pressure  at  occi-
put and  nape  of  neck  ;  sticking  pains  in  cornea ;  mucous
secretion  in  eye ;  agglutination  of  eyes;  nose  obstructed  ;
taste  of  blood  ;  bitter  taste ;  bad  odor  from  mouth  ;  nau-
sea and  vomiting ;  profuse  debilitating  sweat ;  diarrhoea;
painful  erections  before  rising ;  husky  voice  <  ;  vomit-
ing of  tenacious  mucus ;  cough  after  waking ;  pain  in
small  of  back  when  getting  out  of  bed;  unrefreshed;
femur  pains ;  lameness  of  legs  < ;  great  weakness ;  obsti-
nate headache ;  sweat.

Day:  supraorbital  pain;  coryza ;  tearing  pains  in  chest
and  bones  of  face ;  sudden  explosive  cough  ;  expectora-
tion only;  drowsiness;  chilliness;  acne  eruption  itch-
ing only.

Afternoon :  violent  chill ;  dryness  of  finger  tips ;  chilli-
ness ;  violent  heat  and  thirst.

3  to  5  p.m.:  sweat.

5  p.m.:  shaking  chill.

Evening :  terrible  headaches ;  pain  in  swelling  of  lachry-
mal sac  <  ;  the  flowing  tears  are  hot ;  itching  of  nose
causes  constant  rubbing ;  fever ;  toward,  throat  <  ;  acute
pain  from  abdomen  to  testes;  icy-cold  feet;  constant
desire  for  stool ;  perspiration  on  head  ;  cough  after  lying


409  SILICA.

down ;  cough  <  ;  hot  feet ;  cold  feet ;  tearing  in  great
toe;  limbs  sore  and  lame;  very  weak  and  tremulous
after  walking ;  sleepiness ;  chill  in  bed  ;  legs  icy-cold ;
violent  heat  and  thirst;  sweat  on  scrotum;

Day  and  night :  toothache ;  trembling  of  limbs.

11  P.M.:  sweat.

Night :  burning  in  head  <  ;  headache  wakes  him  ;  sweat
about  head  ;  tearing  in  scalp  <  ;  head  wet  from  sweat-
ing ;  supraorbital  pain  ;  sticking  pains  in  cornea ;  shoot-
ing in  ears  < ;  tearing  pains  over  whole  chest  < ;
fever ;  pain  in  teeth  < ;  neuralgia  in  teeth  raging ;
toothache  <  ;  vomiting  of  ingesta ;  pain  in  region  of
liver  <;  urging  to  urinate,  involuntary  micturition;
burning  pain  prevents  rest;  cough  wakes  him  ;  orgasm
of  blood  ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  pain  in  shoulder  and
arm  ;  stitches  in  wrist ;  falling  asleep  of  hands ;  pain  in
thumb  <  ;  pain  from  hip  to  foot  <  ;  cold  feet;  gonitis
<  ;  stinging  in  limbs ;  epilepsy ;  sweats ;  chilliness ;
violent  heat  and  thirst ;  fever  <  ;  profuse  sweat ;  itch-
ing and  pricking  in  various  parts  of  body  <.
^®  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  compresses :  headache  >.

Overheating :  headaches.

Sitting  near  fire  :  shivering;  a  cold,  starved  feeling.

Warmth :  pains  in  eyes  >  ;  colic  >  ;  abdominal  pains
>  ;  headache  >  ;  burning  in  back ;  gonitis  >.

Wrapping  up  warmly:  burning  of  head  >;  feeling  of
waves  of  water  over  head  >  ;  chronic  sick-headache  >  ;
desires  it ;  itching  pustules  on  scalp  >  ;  headache  > ;
feels  >  if  head  is  wrapped ;  tumor  on  neck  >  ;  pain  in
shoulder  >.

Wishes  to  keep  warmly  covered  :  blennorrhoea.

Warm  poultice :  >  pain  in  mastoid  region.

Warm  room  :  headache  >  ;  pam  in  ribs  >  ;  chilliness.

Getting  warm  in  bed :  burning  and  itching  of  head  < ;
pain  in  felons  <.

After  being  in  bed  a  short  time :  neuralgia  <.

Contact  of  warm  hand  :  cephalalgia  > ,

Warm  food  :  averse  to.

Warm  drinks  :  cough  >.

Uncovering  head  or  feet:  takes  cold.

Cannot  uncover  head :  tendency  to  take  cold.

Undressing:  burning  and  itching  on  back  part  of  head  <.

Changing  linen  :  hardness  of  hearing  <.

Open  air :  headache  <  ;  lachrymation ;  burning  in  back.

Draft :  causes  headache ;  eyes  sensitive ;  cannot  bear  it  on
back  of  neck  ;  on  back  causes  trouble.

Cannot  bear  cold  or  heat :  headache.

Cold  air :  headache  <  ;  sensitive  to,  blennorrhoea ;  bleph-


SILICA.  410

aritis  <  ;  inhaling,  toothache  <  ;  diarrhoea  from  expo-
sure ;  headache  < ;  sufferings  unbearable ;  sensitive-
ness to.

Change  of  weather:  pain  in  ears  <  ;  pains  in  limbs  <.

Washing : <  hardness  of  hearing.

Cold  water:  gum  is  painfully  sensitive;  dry  cough;  stand-
ing in,  causes  metrorrhagia.

Cold  drinks:  desire  for;  cough  <.

Getting  feet  wet:  suppressed  foot  sweat.

After  sitting  with  feet  in  water :  abscess  on  thigh.

Just  before  a  storm  :  ciliary  neuralgia.

During  a  thunderstorm :  attacks  of  difficult  breathing
come  only;  great  debility  and  sleepiness.

After  exposure  to  storm:  inflammation  in  eye  <.
*Tever. nWant  of  animal  heat;  always  chilly,  even  when
exercising.

■  Suffering  parts  feel  cold.

iLeft  side  suddenly  cold;  before  epilepsy.
I  Chill,  in  evening  in  bed.

I  Frequent  chilliness,  with  occasional  feverishness.

I I  Chilliness:  constant,  internal ;  on  every  movement,  all
day;  at  night,  while  half  awake;  in  evening;  in  after-
noon, especially  in  arms,  in  a  warm  room  ;  in  evening
in  bed  so  that  he  shivered.

Did  not  dare  to  put  her  hands  out  of  bed.

Shaking  chill  at  5  p.m.

Icy-cold  shivering,  frequent  creeps  over  whole  body.

The  legs  so  far  as  knees  and  feet  are  icy-cold  in  evening.

Shivering  all  over,  a  cold,  starved  feeling,  if  he  sat  ever  so

near  the  fire  he  .could  not  get  warm.
Violent  chills  between  1  and  7  a.m.

■  Frequently  short  flushes  of  heat,  principally  in  face  and

head.
I  Violent  general  heat,  violent  thirst  in  afternoon,  evening

and  all  night.
I  Fever  <  at  night.

■  Periodical  returning  heat  during  day,  no  previous  chill ;

followed  by  slight  sweat.
llSweat:  on'head;  of  a  strong  odor;  running  from  face;

wetting  pillow;  on  scrotum,  in  evening;  profuse  sweat

on  hands ;  only  on  head  and  face ;  from  least  exertion  ;

warm,  after  epilepsy  ;  profuse  in  typhus ;  periodically

11  P.M.,  6  A.M.  or  3  to  5  P.M.;  profuse  at  night ;  on  loins ;

in  morning.
I  Night  sweats  ; sour  and  off'ensive  ;  debilitating;  mostly

after  midnight;  profuse  from  suppuration  or  in  phthisis.

■  Fever  during  dentition.

I  I  In a child, set. 21  months,  every day on awaking


411  SILICA.

after  morning  sleep,  about  12  or  1  p.m.,  fever  lasting
till  4  or  5  P.M.,  followed  by  sweat  on  bands  and  feet;
wdth  the  fever  short,  quick  breathing,  cold  feet,  no  ap-
petite; lies  still ;  arms  cold  and  has  cutis  anserina.

I  Worm  fevers  assume  a  slow  chronic  form  in  scrofulous

children  with  large  bellies  and  much  perspiration
about  head.

I I  Hectic  fever,  particularly  during  long  suppurative  pro-
cesses.

■  Intermittent  fever,  heat  predominating.

iTj^phoid  forms  of  fever,  great  debility,  profuse  sweat;
desire  to  be  magnetized.

■  Spotted  fever;  also  in  slow  convalescence.
"Attacks, Periodicity. Paroxysms: one or  two  minutes,

jerklike  pressure  in  head;  pains  in  eyes.

Attacks:  of  whistling  breathing  and  suffocation.

Periodic:  headache;  heat  during  day;  sweats.

Alternation;  symptoms  from  one  eye  to  the  other;  dry
and  fluent  nose.

Lasting  several  hours:  pain  after  stool;  pain  across  chest.

For  four  hours:  tossed  in  bed  with  headache.

Every  morning:  blows  from  nose  hard,  dry  masses  of
mucus  followed  by  pus.

Every  day ;  about  1  o'clock,  severe  burning  pains  in  r.  eye;
on  waking,  about  12  or  1  p.m.,  fever  lasting  till  4  or  5  p.m.

Daily :  fifteen  attacks  of  spasms.

Every  evening:  intolerable  odor  of  feet  without  perspi-
ration.

Nightly:  incontinence  of  urine;  tickling  in  pharynx.

Nearly  every  night :  obliged  to  rise  to  urinate ;  nocturnal
enuresis.

For  several  days :  attacks  of  watery  diarrhoea.

Twice  a  week:  seminal  emissions.

Five  to  seven  days:  stools  apart.

For  six  days :  pain  in  mastoid  region.

Every  seventh  day:  headache.

Almost  every  week :  nosebleed.

For  several  weeks:  violent  coryza.

Every  two  weeks:  menses.

Every  two  or  three  weeks:  severe  headaches  lasting  thirty-
eight  to  forty-eight  hours.

Of  six  weeks' standing:  ophthalmia.

For  six  weeks:  metrorrhagia.

During  new  and  full  moon:  pains  in  region  of  liver  <.

At  new  moon:  epilepsy;  sleep  walking.

At  full  moon:  epileptic  convulsions;  sleep  walking.

For  two  months :  phlyctenular  conjunctivitis.

Every  two  or  three  months:  menses.


SILICA.  412

For  four  months:  discharge  and  ulceration  under  r.  lower
lid.

For  nine  months :  hemorrhages  from  lungs.

Last  of  August :  hay  asthma.

Summer:  scaly  eruption  on  scalp  >;  sore  feet.

Approach  of  Winter:  scaly  eruption  of  scalp  <;  pain,
swelling  and  suppuration  of  foot.

Winter:  cold  feet.

For  one  year:  cystic  tumor  of  lower  lid.

For  two  years:  suffered  from  inflammation  of  nasal  duct ;
necrosis  of  femur.

For  three  years:  pain,  redness  and  swelling  on  dorsum  of
foot,  then  abscess.

For  years:  terrible  headaches;  inflammation  of  knee.

Of  several  years' standing :  offensive  discharge  from  ears.

Seven  years'  standing:  sciatica.

Of  twelve  years'  standing:  deafness.
** Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  must  walk  to  side,  ver-
tigo ;  stitches  in  parietal  region  ;  persistent  speck  before
eye ;  cloudiness  of  lens  of  eye ;  cataract ;  neuralgia  over
eye ;  burning  pains  in  eye ;  conjunctiva  injected ;  pains
in  lachrymal  sac;  trachoma  of  conjunctiva  of  eye ;  ulcer-
ation of  cornea;  discharge  and  ulceration  under  lower
lid ;  cicatrices  over  inferior  orbital  ridge;  swelling  in
region  of  lachrymal  gland  and  sac ;  swelling  of  tear-
bag;  ichorous  discharge  from  ear;  muscular  paralysis
of  side  of  face ;  drawing  in  malar  bone ;  painful  scab
deep  in  nostril ;  lupus  on  ear  lobe ;  swelling  on  cheek ;
pain  in  region  of  inferior  maxillary ;  side  of  lower  lip
swollen ;  ulcer  on  border  of  tongue ;  as  of  a  lump  in  side
of  throat ;  lying  on  side  soreness  of  liver  <  ;  below  float-
ing ribs  ulcerative  pain  ;  cannot  step  upon  foot  without
<  pain  in  liver ;  abscess  in  groin ;  as  if  side  of  hand
were  paralyzed ;  scirrhus  in  breast;  lump  in  mamma;
tumor  of  breast ;  scirrhus  near  nipple  ;  great  itching  of
swollen  mamma ;  stitching  pain  in  lung ;  large  cavity
in  lung ;  swelling  below  nipple ;  ulcer  on  leg ;  lobe  of
thyroid  gland  swollen ;  sticking  in  scapula ;  sore  feel-
ing side  of  spine  over  hip  joint ;  pain  in  shoulder  joint;
acute  pain  in  shoulder  blade ;  weakness  of  arm  and
wrist;  numb  feeling  in  arm;  suppuration  of  cellular
tissue  of  forearm  ;  lameness  in  hand  ;  enchondroma  on
hand  ;  drawing  in  joints  of  finger ;  index  finger  injured
by  splinter  of  glass,  pain  extending  to  arm,  thence  to
thorax ;  loss  of  power  of  arm ;  weakness  of  arm  and
wrist;  aching  in  forefinger;  bones  of  fingers  swollen;
felon  on  middle  finger ;  whitlow  on  forefinger ;  drag-
ging from  hip  to  toes; pulsative  sensation  in  thigh;


413  SILICA.

abscess  on  inside  of  thigh  ;  pains  and  fistula  on  leg ;  in-
flammation of  knee;  large  cyst  on  patella; smarting
spot  on  tibia;  swelling  in  popliteal  space;  wound  in
calf  of  leg ;  aoscess  on  thigh ;  blister  on  dorsum  of  foot ;
abscess  after  spraining  toes ;  paralysis.
Left:  lying  on  side,  vertigo ;  sickening  pain  in  side  of  head ;
parietal  bone  is  covered  with  a  large,  soft,  elastic  swell-
ing ;  piercing  stinging  in  eye  ;  pressive  pain  over  eye ;
shooting  pain  in  ear ;  pricking,  aching,  itching  in  ear ;
chronic  sinus  in  front  of  ear ;  sac  swollen  and  itching  ;
abscess  of  arm  ;  induration  from  corner  of  mouth  to
cheek  ;  caries  of  lower  jaw ;  abscess  of  arm  ;  pricking  in
throat  as  of  a  lump  in  side  of  throat;  soreness,  swelling
from  inguinal  region  across  mons  veneris;  tearing  in
thigh ;  boring  pain  in  temple,  supraorbital  nerve  and
orbit  of  eye ;  darting  in  nipple ;  pain  in  nodular  swell-
ing of  breast ;  heavy  r^les  in  bronchus ;  tumor  in  breast ;
anchylosis  of  shoulder  joint;  small  tumor  in  breast;
tumor  side  of  neck;  swelling  of  scapula;  shaking  of
arm ;  a  large  fleshy  wart  on  forearm  ;  a  ganglion  on
wrist;  middle  fingers  flexed  and  stiffened;  pain  in  index
finger ;  thumb  swollen  from  a  bite ;  necrosis  of  thigh ;
shooting  in  thigh  ;  ankle  and  foot  swollen ;  painless  soft
swelling  on  femur;  knee  joint  double  size  of  healthy
one;  eruption  in  bend  of  knee;  pricking  and  stitches
in  heel;  caries  of  great  toe;  coldness  of  side;  shaking
and  twisting  of  arm.
From  r.  to  1.:  pain  in  temples.
First  1.  then  r.:  bruised  pain  above  eyes ;  swelling  in  front

of  throat.
From  above  downward  :  pressive  headache.
From  within  outward  :  stitches  in  ears.
^^ Sensations.  Susceptible  to  nervous  stimuli,  to  magnetism;
as  if  she  were  divided  into  halves  and  that  the  1.  side
did  not  belong  to  her ;  as  if  one  would  fall  forward ;
vertigo  as  if  drunk ;  as  if  head  were  teeming  with  live
things  whirling  round  in  it ;  headache  as  if  beaten ;  as
if  everything  would  press  out  and  burst  skull ;  as  if
brain  and  eyes  were  forced  forward ;  as  if  head  would
burst  with  throbbing  in  it,  internal  and  external  at  same
time ;  as  if  forehead  would  be  torn  asunder ;  as  from  a
heavy  weight  over  eyes ;  as  if  head  were  forced  asunder  ;
as  of  water  pipes  bursting  in  head ;  as  if  tremendous
weight  were  falling  on  vertex ;  as  if  some  one  pulled
downward  on  cords  of  neck  ;  as  if  something  alive  were
in  ears ;  head  as  if  in  a  cushion  and  some  one  were
pressing  two  fingers  into  it  at  occiput ;  as  if  feeling  for
pins ;  as  if  something  obscured  vision ;  as  if  brain  col-


SILICA.  414

lided  with  skull;  head  as  if  bruised;  as  of  waves  of
water  from  occiput  over  vertex  to  forehead;  as  if
gradually  losing  senses ;  sick-headaches  as  if  coming
from  spine  and  locating  in  one  eye;  head  as  if  too
large ;  as  if  head  were  falling  off;  as  if  head  were  hang-
ing by  a  piece  of  skin  at  nape ;  as  if  looking  through
a  grey  cover ;  as  if  cornea  were  a  mass  of  hypertrophied
tissue ;  eyes  as  if  too  dry  and  full  of  sand ;  as  of  a  splin-
ter in  upper  lid ;  as  if  both  eyes  were  dragged  back
into  head  by  strings ;  objects  as  if  in  a  fog  ;  as  if  nasal
bone  had  been  beaten ;  as  if  a  hair  were  on  tip  of
tongue  extending  into  trachea ;  as  of  a  lump  on  r.  side
of  throat;  as  of  a  pin  in  throat;  throat  as  if  filled
up ;  as  if  he  could  not  swallow ;  as  if  he  swallowed  over
a  sore  spot;  as  of  a  load  in  epigastrium;  as  if  knives
were  running  into  her  stomach  ;  as  if  a  cold  stone  were
in  stomach ;  as  of  lead  in  stomach  ;  as  if  sternum  were
grasped ;  as  if  there  were  no  power  in  rectum  to  expel
stool ;  as  if  rectum  were  paralyzed  ;  as  if  anus  were  con-
stricted ;  r.  side  of  head  as  if  paralyzed ;  as  if  vulva  were
enlarged;  as  of  a  heavy  lump  in  anus;  as  if  she  were
tied  around  chest  with  a  tape ;  as  of  a  stone  under  ster-
num ;  as  if  mould  were  forming  over  whole  body ;  as  if
a  hand  had  grasped  her  breast  bone ;  small  of  back  as  if
beaten  ;  small  of  back  as  if  dead  ;  arms  and  hands  as  if
filled  with  lead  ;  as  of  a  splinter  in  finger ;  as  if  a  pana-
ritium would  form. in  index  finger;  as  if  tips  of  fingers
were  suppurating ;  as  if  finger  were  thick  and  bone  en-
larged ;  as  if  joints  of  fingers  were  being  pulled  out  of
sockets ;  limbs  and  feet  as  if  paralyzed ;  as  of  loss  of
power  in  legs  ;  femur  as  if  beaten  ;  knee  as  if  too  tightly
bound  ;  as  if  calves  were  too  short ;  as  if  spasms  in  an-
kles ;  whole  of  back  feels  as  if  dead  ;  as  if  joints  of  toes
were  being  pulled  out  of  their  sockets;  nails  as  if  de-
cayed ;  as  if  beaten  all  over ;  as  if  he  had  lain  in  an  un-
comfortable position  ;  feels  as  if  she  would  die.
Pain :  in  spine  and  neck  up  and  over  r.  temple,  thence  to  1. ;
in  vertex  and  occiput,  at  another  time  in  forehead ;  first
in  nape  and  base  of  brain,  then  up  and  over  whole
head;  in  r.  lachrymal  sac;  over  eyes;  in  stomach;  in
mastoid  region  ;  in  jaw  bones;  in  submaxillary  glands;
in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  region  of  spleen;  in  bowels;
in  abdomen;  in  back;  in  nodular  swelling  of  1.  breast;
under  sternum;  in  ribs;  in  nape  of  neck;  in  curved
spine;  from  sacrum  up  to  lumbar  region,  across  1.  ilium
to  superior  spinal  process ;  in  shoulder  and  arm  ;  in
flexor  surface  of  one  finger;  up  r.  arm  to  axilla,  thence
to  r.  side  of  thorax ;  in  ulcer;  through  foot  from  ankle


415  SILICA.

to  sole;  from  toes  to  malleoli;  beneath  nail  of  great  toe;
in  limbs.

Excruciating  pain :  in  cancer  of  lower  lip ;  deep-seated
pain  in  chest.

Terrible  pain :  from  cervical  vertebrae  to  cerebellum,  thence
to  forehead.

Excessive  pain :  from  eye  to  head  and  ears.

Violent  pain:  vertex,  occiput  or  forehead;  above  eyes;  in
small  of  back;  in  abscess  on  foot;  in  great  toe;  in  joints.

Severe  pain :  in  small  of  back ;  from  eyes  into  head  on  one
side;  in  back;  from  hip  to  foot.

Great  pain :  along  extensor  tendon  on  back  of  hand.

Acute  pain:  in  occipital  protuberances;  from  abdomen  to
testes;  in  r.  shoulder  blade.

Sharp  pain:  in  breast  or  uterus;  in  r.  shoulder  joint.

Anguish  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Sickening  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Lancinating  pains:  in  region  of  r.  inferior  maxillary;
whitlow;  in  knees;  deep  in  joints  of  knees ;  gonocace.

Tearing:  one-sided  in  head;  in  whole  head  in  frontal  re-
gion ;  in  lumps  on  head  ;  in  eyes ;  over  whole  chest  and
bones  of  face  ;  in  teeth  and  cheeks ;  in  limbs ;  in  swell-
ing; in  sacrum  and  1.  thigh;  in  tibia;  between  scapulse ;
beneath  scapulae ;  in  bones  of  elbows ;  in  wrist  and  ball
of  hand ;  fingers,  joints,  thumbs ;  in  thighs ;  in  knees ;  in
great  toe ;  in  limbs.

Cutting:  at  pit  of  stomach;  violent,  in  lower  abdomen ;
in  region  of  navel  to  back ;  in  rectum ;  around  navel ;
beneath  toe  nail.

Pounding  pain :  in  forehead  and  into  head.

Beating:  in  lumbo-sacral  region;  in  breast  bone;  in  back.

Throbbing  pain:  in  forehead  and  into  head;  in  eyes;  in
lump  in  corner  of  eye ;  in  teeth ;  in  lumbo-sacral  re-
gion ;  in  abraded  surface  of  finger.

Darting  pains :  through  eyes  and  head ;  sharp,  from  occi-
put to  eyeball ;  in  1.  nipple;  up  spine.

Spasmodic  pain :  in  small  of  back.

Shooting :  from  nape  to  vertex ;  in  eyes ;  in  1.  ear ;  in  tip
of  nose ;  in  anus ;  from  sternum  around  to  back ;  in  back
between  hips ;  down  both  legs ;  in  1.  thigh.

Piercing,  stinging  pain  :  in  1.  eye.

Stitches :  through  eyes  and  in  cheek  bones ;  in  temples ;
in  forehead ;  deep-seated  in  r.  parietal  region ;  in  upper
lid;  in  ears;  in  throat;  in  rectum;  in  anus;  in  sides
and  chest  to  back ;  in  wrist ;  in  ball  of  thumb  ;  in  1.  heel;
in  great  toe  ;  violent,  in  corns.

Acute  sticking  pain  :  in  forehead.

Burning  stitching:  in  several  teeth.


SILICA.  416

Stitching  pain  :  in  r.  lung.

Sticking  pain  :  in  ulcer  on  cornea ;  below  septum  of  nose ;

in  rectum;  in  anus;  in  chest;  in  r.  scapulae;  in  fingers;

in  thighs  ;  in  ulcer  on  leg.
Ulcerative  pain  :  below  r.  floating  ribs.
Screwing  pain  :  in  stomach.
Pinching  pain  :  at  navel.
Twinging  pain  :  in  tumor  of  breast.
Squeezing  pain :  in  testicles.
Twisting  pains:  in  stomach.
Boring  pains :  in  ears ;  over  whole  chest  and  bones  of  face ;

in  teeth  and  cheek ;  in  1.  temple,  1.  supraorbital  nerve

and  orbit  of  eye ;  in  great  toe.
Boring  cramping :  from  anus  to  rectum  or  testicles.
Crampy  pain :  dull,  heavy,  in  arms;  at  pit  of  stomach ;  in

hand.
Griping  pain  :  after  eating ;  in  bowels.
Digging :  in  stomach.
Gnawing:  high  up  in  nose; in  fistulous  opening  near

sixth  rib.
Colicky  pains :  in  lower  abdomen.
Cramps :  in  calves ;  in  soles.
Pressive,  stinging  pain  :  in  ulcerating  part  of  leg.
Pressive  pain  :  in  occiput ;  in  head  ;  over  1.  eye ;  in  eyes ;

in  stomach  ;  in  forehead  ;  in  sternum  ;  in  chest.
Neuralgic  pains :  at  exit  of  supraorbital  nerve ; of  face,

head,  eyes,  teeth  and  ears ;  in  all  the  teeth.
Rheumatic  pains  :  in  jaws  and  teeth  to  temple ;  of  lower

cervical  vertebrae ;  in  limbs.
Drawing  pain:  in  meatus  auditorius;  in  ears;  in  thigh.
Tensive  pain  :  across  chest.
* Pressive  jerking:  in  middle  of  forehead.
Aching :  at  occiput ;  sore,  in  nape ;  severe,  in  back  of  head,

one  side;  in  upper  lid ;  from  occiput  to  r.  eyeball ;  in

ears  ;  of  both  jaws ;  in  all  the  teeth ;  in  hypochondrium  ;

in  lumbo-sacral  region  ;  of  sacrum  ;  in  back ;  in  centre  of

spine ;  in  loins ;  in  sacrum  ;  in  r.  forefinger ;  in  wound

in  calf.
Dull  pain  :  in  occiput.

Burning  pain:  in  r.  eye;  in  tip  of  nose  in  centre;  in  breast.
Stinging  pains :  in  eyes ;  in  boil  on  chin ;  in  teeth ;  in

rectum;  in  tumor  of  breast;  in  os  coccygis;  in  bones

of  elbows ;  in  sore  spot  on  finger ;  in  r.  forefinger ;  in

felon ;  in  whitlow ;  in  knees ;  in  ulcerated  big  toe ;  in

limbs.
Pricking :  of  scalp  ;  of  1.  eye ;  in  ears ;  in  region  of  r.  infe-
rior maxillary ;  in  throat ;  sharp,  in  penis ;  in  arms ;  in

1.  thigh  ;  in  1.  heel.


417  SILICA.

Smarting :  in  eyes ;  of  1.  eye ;  of  eyelids ;  of  scab  deep  in
r.  nostril ;  of  eruption  on  lips ;  in  anus ;  spot  on  tibia.

Scalding  feeling:  in  vertex.

Bruised  pain :  above  eyes  ;  in  hips  and  back ;  all  over  body.

Beating  soreness:  in  liver.

Soreness :  in  limbs ;  in  perineum ;  about  vulva ;  of  pu-
denda ;  of  feet ;  in  trachea  and  bronchia ;  in  chest ;  in
lungs ;  in  feet.

Soreness :  internal,  in  head ;  in  orbits  ;  of  eyelids ;  of  inner
nose;  on  back  of  nose;  of  palate;  of  tongue;  of  throat;
in  urethra.

Stiff,  sore  feeling :  down  r.  side  of  spine.

Burning:  in  soles;  in  head;  on  back  of  head;  in  chest;
in  throat ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  anus ;  in  prepuce ;  dur-
ing stool  in  rectum;  in  urethra;  of  feet;  of  swelling;
sacrum  and  1.  thigh  ;  about  vulva ;  of  pudenda ;  in  1.
nipple;  in  back  and  finger  tips;  in  sore  spot  on  finger;
in  r.  forefinger ;  in  felon  ;  in  whitlow  ;  in  and  about  ulcer
on  leg  ;  of  feet ;  of  soles  of  feet.

Painfulness  :  of  epigastrium.

Tenderness:  about  hernial  tumor.

Peculiar  sensation:  at  pit  of  stomach.

Running  sensation :  in  limbs.

Dropping  sensation  :  in  limbs.

Shattering ;  in  brain.

Vibratory  shaking :  in  head.

Violent  tearing :  in  head.

Dragging:  from  r.  hip  to  toes.

Fulness :  in  stomach.

Heaviness :  in  head  ;  in  all  the  limbs ;  in  stomach ;  of
arms ;  of  lower  extremities.

Hard,  jerklike  pressure:  in  top  of  head  deep  into  brain.

Pressure:  in  occiput;  in  both  sides  of  occiput;  in  fore-
head ;  nape  of  neck  ;  on  vertex  ;  in  orbits  ;  in  stomach ;
in  hypochondrium ;  in  abdomen ;  in  bladder ;  down-
ward in  vagina;  at  lower  sternum;  over  chest.

Pressing :  in  head :  in  sore  sjDot  on  finger.

Drawing:  in  root  of  nose  and  in  r.  malar  bone;  between
shoulders;  in  fingers;  in  joints  of  r.  finger;  from  thighs
to  feet;  in  joints  of  toes.

Tension  :  in  forehead  and  eyes ;  in  eyes  and  forehead ;  in
anus ;  in  calves.

Tightness :  at  pit  of  stomach ;  transversely  across  abdo-
men ;  around  chest ;  over  chest.

Throbbing:  in  forehead;  at  heart;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in
breast  bone;  over  whole  body;  in  all  the  vessels;  in
back  ;  in  lumbo-sacral  region.

Pulsative  sensation  :  in  r.  thigh.
VOL.  IX. — 27.


SILICA.  418

Pulsations:  in  chest.

Lameness :  of  feet ;  of  hand  ;  of  legs.

Lame  feeling :  in  region  of  saci-um.

Stiffness :  at  nape  of  neck in  small  of  back  ;  of  fingers.

Heat:  in  head;  in  penis  and  testicles;  in  affected  parts;

in  feet.
Painful  dryness :  of  nose.
Dryness:  in  inner  nose  into  frontal  cavities  and  antrum;

of  lips;  in  mouth  ;  of  throat;  in  finger  tips.
Roughness:  of  trachea  and  bronchia.
Tingling :  voluptuous  in  soles.
Fluttering  feeling:  in  both  temples.
Tickling:  in  larynx;  in  throat  pit;  in  pharynx.
Emptiness :  at  stomach.
Trembling :  of  limbs.
Weakness:  of  body;  of  arms;  in  chest;  in  back;  arm  and

wrist;  of  lower  extremities;  of  legs  ;  of  feet;  of  limbs.
Paralyzed  feeling:  in  lower  extremities.
Itching:  at  vulva;  on  scalp;  spot  on  head;  on  occiput;

on  back  part  of  head ;  of  eruption  on  back  of  head  ;  of

eczema  capitis;  of  pimples  on  head  and  nape;  pustules

on  scalp  and  neck;  in  Eustachian  tubes;  of  outer  ears;

in  nose;  of  tip  of  nose;  in  ulcerated  corner  of  mouth;

in  anus ;  in  rectum ;  in  rectum  during  stool ;  of  vulva ;

on  corona  glandis  ;  of  eruptions  on  genitals ;  of  prepuce ;

of  pudenda;  of  breast;  of  swollen  mammse ;  of  whole

breast ;  of  eruption  covering  breast ;  of  pimples  on  nape

of  neck;  on  first  joint  of  index  fingers;  in  r.  forefinger;

in  whitlow ;  on  heel ;  beneath  toe  nail ;  of  scabs  on  toes ;

of  face,  arms  and  back.
Voluptuous  itching :  about  nose.
Numb  feeling :  in  r.  arm ;  in  hands ;  in  one  finger.
Chilliness  :  in  nape  of  neck  and  back.
Cool  feeling:  in  upper  gums.
Cold  feeling:  rising  from  nape  of  neck  to  vertex;  about

breadth  of  two  fingers,  across  vertex.
Coldness:  of  nose;  of  feet;  over  whole  body;  icy,  of  feet;

of  extremities ;  of  1.  side;  in  ulcers.
Cold  pain :  at  epigastrium.
^'  Tissues. ■  I  Emaciation  with  pale,  suffering  expression.

I  Fungi  easily  bleeding.

■  Discharges  and  excretions  offensive:  pus,  stools,  sweat  of

feet,  etc.

■  Hemorrhages  from  nose,  stomach,  bowels  and  lungs.

I I  Swelling,  inflammation  and  suppuration  of  glands,  cer-
vical, parotid,  axillary,  inguinal,  mammary,  sebaceous.

■  Inflammation  of  lymphatic  vessels.

I  iHard  lumps  on  neck,  not  of  glands,  extending  to  1.  side,
in  a  gouty  subject.


419  SILICA.

I  1  Painless  swelling  of  glands,  very  unpleasant  itching.

I I  Inflammation,  swelling,  caries  and  necrosis  of  bones.
llExostoses;  curvatures.

1 1  Inflammation  of  fibrous  portions  of  joints,  particularly
knee.

•  Children  or  young  people  suffering  during  growth  with

fever,  violent  pains  in  joints,  swelling  of  limbs  and  con-
gestions.

I  Gout.

M  Multiple 'cheloid,  which  appeared  after  excision  of  a
tumor,  but  rapidly  returned  and  increased  in  size.

I I  Rachitis  ;  open  fontanelles;  head  too  large,  rest  of  body
emaciated  ;  head  sweats  and  body  dry.

I  Cellular  tissues  inflamed;  deep-seated  suppurations,  in-
cluding tendons,  ligaments  and  bone.

•  Suppuration  :  pus  copious  or  scanty  ;  brown  and  w^atery ;

gelatinous ;  thin  and  watery  ;  very  putrid.

■  Suppurating  chilblains.

■  Neglected  cases  of  injury  if  suppuration  threatens.

■  Inflammation  followed  by  suppuration  or  gangrene.

■  Suppurative  conditions  after  protracted  disease.

■  i  Proud  flesh.

I  Chronic  gouty  nodosities.

■  Mercurio-syphilitic  ulceration  of  skin  and  bones.

■  Swellings  which  became  hard  after  threatening  to  sup-

purate.

■  Indurations  hardening  as  of  a  stye  on  eyelid,  hardening

of  tissues  around  a  part  formerly  acutely  diseased.

■  Anasarca. ^Stonecutters.

■  Old  ulcers  with  burning  and  lancinating  pains.

I  Boils,  carbuncles,  felons,  and  malignant  pustule,  during
suppurative  stage.

■  Boils,  little  lumps,  not  mattering;  blood-boils.

■  Carbuncles, if  intractable  and  very  Imrd,  or  with  very

profuse  discharge  of  matter.
I  During  process  of  ulceration  it  seems  to  clear  wound  of
its  decayed  masses  and  to  promote  healthy  granulations.
^Carbuncle.

■  ■  Ailments  following  vaccination,  abscesses,  etc.,  even  con-

vulsions.
I  Ulceration  constantly  extending  in  depth ;  edges  irreg-
ular.

■  ■Malignant  and  gangrenous  inflammations.

■  Tumors  in  persons  with  herpetic  dyscrasia  ;_wens  smooth

and  shining  on  scalp ;  sebaceous  cysts,  particularly  when
atheromatous;  pus  scanty  and  smelling  like herring-
brine.
I  I  Palpebral  cyst.


SILICA.  420

■  Synovial  cysts.
I  Fibrous  tumor.

■  Epulis.  *

■  Encephaloma  oculi.

■  Scirrhus  mammae;  cancer.

1  I  Uterine  cancer,  strong  putrescent  odor.

■  Enchondroma.

■  Tumor  albus.

■  ■Fistulous  openings,  discharge  offensive,  parts  around

hard,  swollen,  bluish-red.

■  ■Disease caused by suppressed foot sweat: exposing

back  to  any  slight  draft  of  air,  from  vaccination ;
chest  complaints  of  stonecutters,  with  total  loss  of
strength.

Suffering  parts  feel  cold.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  headache  <  ;
eyes  painful;  scalp  sensitive;  head  very  sensitive;  <pain
in  head;  scalp  tender;  eye  very  tender;  sticking  pains
in  scabs  below  septum  of  nose ;  stinging  in  boil  on  chin  ;
submaxillary  gland  painful ;  pains  in  region  of  liver  <  ;
inflamed  inguinal  glands  painful ;  vagina  tender ;  cur-
vature of  spine  painful ;  pain  in  elbows  <  ;  whitlow
painful ;  fistulous  openings  on  hip  joint  tender;  gonitis
painful.

Contact :  ulcerated  place  in  nose  sensitive  ;  cyst  on  patella
very  sensitive.

Combing  hair:  causes  violent  attacks  of  sneezing;  im-
possible, scalp  covered  with  papulse.

Wiping  eyes :  blepharitis  >  ;  wants  head  tightly  held.

Binding  tightly :  headache.

Pressure :  of  hat  causes  pain ;  pain  in  head  <  ;  chronic
sick-headache  >  ;  tearing  in  scalp  <  ;  of  hat,  scalp  sen-
sitive ;  pains  in  lachrymal  sac ;  gum  painful ;  epigas-
trium painful ;  sensitiveness  of  pit  of  stomach ;  cannot
tolerate,  below  floating  ribs ;  over  lumbar  vertebrae  pain
<;  OS  coccygis  painful ;  pain  in  swollen  thumb ;  slightest
on  hip  causes  trembling  of  whole  body;  inflamed
knee  painful ;  whole  wounded  calf  tender  ;  causes  white
spots  in  swelled  feet ;  the  parts  upon  which  he  lies  go  to
sleep.

Riding :  vertigo  ;  coccyx  hurts.

Scratching :  itching  spots  on  head  painful.

Irritation  of  truss :  supposed  cause  of  abscesses.

From  tight  boot ;  blister  on  dorsum  of  r.  foot.

From  a  bruise:  sore  leg.

Strain :  caused  exudation  of  synovial  fluid  in  wrist.

Sprain  of  r.  foot :  signs  of  abscess.

Every  little  injury  causes  ulceration;  every  hurt  festers.


421  SILICA.

Pricked  lip  with  a  sharp  point :  cancer.

Splinter  of  glass :  in  r.  index  finger,  pain  and  swelling.

From  a  bite:  thumb  swollen  and  painful.

After  a  cut :  wound  would  not  heal.

After  a  fall :  pain  in  sacrum  and  hip  ;  injury  of  tibia.

After  a  blow  upon  head :  nightly  incontinence  of  urine.

Ailments  following  vaccination,  abscesses,  etc.,  even  con-
vulsions.

1 1  Small foreign  bodies  under  skin  or  in  larynx; fish-
bones ;  needles  in  hands  or  elsewhere ; to  promote  ex-
pulsion of  bone  splinters.
*^Skin. I  Skin  waxlike:  tuberculosis,  caries,  etc.

•  Icterus.

I  Cutis  anserina.

I  Earthy,  yellowish,  dry,  relaxed  skin  sometimes  covered

with  pityriasis.
I  Skin  painful  and  sensitive.
I  Itching  over  whole  body.

Itching  and  pricking  of  skin  of  arms,  face  and  back.
Itching  and  sticking  in  various  parts  of  body,  especially

at  night.

■  Itching  exanthema;  small  pustules  filled  with  lymph,

drying  quickly.
I  Acne:  eruption,  itches  and  burns  only  by  day;  Solaris

and  rosacea.
I  Eczema  of  scalp,  hands  and  forearms.
I  I  Small  wounds  in  skin  heal  with  difficulty  and  easily

suppurate.
I  Small  wounds  suppurate  profusely.

•  Suppuration  of  skin  and  cellular  tissues  beneath  it.

■  Intertrigo;  impetigo;  psoriasis  inveterata;  scabies  ma-

ligna;  herpes  exedens; pemphigus; zona;  zoster;  ec-
thyma.

■  Eczematous,  impetiginous,  or  herpetic  eruptions.

■  Rhagages  around  eyelids,  lips,  etc.

■  Rose-colored  blotches;  brownish-white  spots.

■  Small  blisters.

■  Phlegmonous  erysipelas; excessive,  ichorous,  offensive

suppuration ;  tendency  to  extend  in  depth  rather  than
superficially.
I  I  Large  diisky  patch  on  front  of  neck  as  large  as  a  me-
dium-sized orange,  first  appearing  about  a  year  ago  as
a  very  small  discoloration  after  some  boils  on  back  had
healed ;  similar  one  on  nape  of  neck  rapidly  extending
up  scalp;  spots  covered  with  minute  scales, place  being
redder  and  darker  than  surrounding  skin ;  menses  too
profuse,  every  two  weeks. ^Eczema.

■  Variola-like  pustules  on  forehead,  occiput,  sternum  and

spine,  extremely  painful  and  at  last  suppurate.


SILICA.  422

iCrusta  lactea.

I  Small  foreign  bodies  under  skin  or  in  larynx.

■  Papulous  psoric  impetiginous  forms  of  eruption  with  dry-

relaxed  skin,  furuncle.
I  Boils  come  in  crops ;  tendency  to  boils ;  leave  indurations.
I  Abscesses  speedily  point,  but  secretion  of  pus  is  too  scanty.

■  Malignant  pustule.

■  ■  Ulcers :  form  suppuration  of  membranous  parts ;  pha-

gedenic ;  extend  in  depth ;  after  abuse  of  mercury  ;  flat,
with  bluish-white  base;  offensive,  with  ichor,  proud
flesh,  stinging,  burning,  itching;  edges  hard,  high  or
spongy ;  readily  bleeding  ;  carcinomatous.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  in  ulcers.

■  Large  fleshy  warts,  suppurating.

■  Variola;  suppuration  exhausts  patient  and  desiccation

delays  ;  bone  diseases  as  sequelae.
I  I  Elephantiasis  of  lower  limbs  in  a  negro.
''^Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■■Especially suitable  for
children,  large  heads,  open  sutures  ;  much  sweat  about
head ;  large  bellies.

■  Nervous,  irritable  persons,  with  dry  skin,  profuse  saliva,

diarrhoea,  night  sweats.

■  Weakly  persons,  fine  skin,  pale  face;  light  complexion;

lax  muscles.

■  Scrofulous  diathesis.

■  Rachitic,  ansemic  conditions  ;  caries.

■  Oversensitive,  imperfectly  nourished,  not  from  want  of

food  but  from  imperfect  assimilation.

■  Stonecutters ;  chest  affections  and  total  loss  of  strength.

■  Scrofulous  children,  who have  worm diseases,  during

dentition.

Baby,  set.  4  days ;  hydrocele.

Child,  set.  8  months,  fair  and  vigorous,  suffering  since
birth ;  constipation.

Boy,  «t.  18  months,  after  a  fall ;  injury  of  tibia.

Child,  set.  21  months,  suffering  six  days ;  ague.

Child,  set.  1,  scrofulous ;  summer  complaint.

Boy,  set.  2  ;  enchondroma  of  toe.

Child,  set.  2;  ulceration  after  vaccination.

Boy,  set.  3,  strumous  constitution,  after  scarlet  fever  three
weeks  ago  ;  abscesses  on  head.

Child,  set.  3  months  ;  pertussis.

Boy,  set.  4 ;  light  hair  and  complexion,  lymphatic  temper-
ament ;  psoas  abscess.

Boy,  set.  4,  swelling  and  suppuration  of  knee.

W.  B.,  set.  5,  after  scarlet  fever;  otorrhoea  and  cough.

Boy,  set.  7,  affected  since  birth  ;  impetigo  capitis.

Girl,  set.  7,  scrofulous,  frequently  troubled  with  cutaneous


423 ,  SILICA.

eruptions  and  inflammation  of  eye,  since  her  vaccina-
tion ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  7,  suffering  three  years  ;  sinus  before  1.  ear.

Girl,  set.  7,  after  a  blow  upon  head  when  three  years  old ;
incontinence  of  urine.

Girl,  aet.  7,  blonde,  blue  eyes,  four  weeks  ago  had  pleu-
risy; compression  of  lung  after  exudation  and  curva-
ture of  spine.

Boy,  £et.  8  ;  eczema  capitis.

Girl,  set.  8,  had  scarlatina  six  years  ago,  since  then  af-
fected ;  otorrhoea.

Boy,  set.  10,  after  vaccination  ;  spasms.

Boy,  set.  11,  tall;  phthisis.

Scrofulous  child,  set.  11 ;  swelling  on  chest.

Girl,  set.  11 ;  swelling  of  knee.

Boy,  set.  12  ;  caries  of  mastoid  process.

Boy,  set.  12  ;  palpitation  of  heart.

G.  N.,  set.  12,  cachectic  and  ansemic  ;  fistulse  of  thigh.

Girl,  set.  13,  scrofulous  ;  caries  of  bones  of  leg.

Girl,  set.  14,  blonde,  pale,  phlegmatic,  short  in  stature,  cor-
pulent; keloid  on  temporal  region.

Girl,  set.  14,  suffering  four  months  ;  caries  of  orbit.

Boy,  set.  14;  caries  of  metacarpal  bones.

Boy,  «t.  15,  suffering  ever  since  his  recollection  ;  noctur-
nal enuresis.

Boy,  set.  15,  suffering  tw^o  years ;  necrosis  of  femur.

Boy,  set.  15,  laborer  ;  acne.

Girl,  set.  16 ;  eruption  on  occiput.

Girl,  set.  16,  servant,  after  a  fall  eleven  months  previously  ;
affection  of  spine  and  sacrum.

Boy,  set.  16,  lymphatic  temperament,  from  a  bruise,
eighteen  months  since  ;  suppuration  of  leg.

Boy,  set.  16,  after  revaccination  ;  convulsions.

Boy,  set.  17,  farmer,  light  complexion,  blue  eyes,  scrofu-
lous during  childhood,  about  nine  months  ago  had  ty-
phoid pneumonia,  has  been  suffering  four  months  ;  ab-
dominal dropsy.

Girl,  set.  17  ;  goitre.

Girl,  set.  17,  after  some  boils  on  back  had  healed,  a  year
ago;  eczema  squamosum.

Girl,  set.  18  ;  mental  disturbance.

Miss  B.,  set.  18,  suffering  many  months  ;  headache.

Negro,  set.  18  ;  contraction  of  fingers.

Girl,  set.  18,  strong  ;  caries  of  tibia.

Girl,  set.  18,  phlegmatic,  torpid  disposition,  mind  poorly
developed,  subject  to  skin  eruptions  ;  hysteria.

Girl,  set.  20,  suffering  for  weeks;  hard  swelling  of  cheek.

Girl,  set.  20 ;  epilepsy.


SILICA.  424

Girl,  set.  21,  nine  months  ago  had  nephritis,  since  then  suf-
fering ;  hepatic  disorder.

Man,  set.  21,  pale,  transparent  skin,  suffering  eight
months  ;  fistula  in  leg.

Man,  set.  23,  light  complexion  ;  seminal  emissions.

Woman,  set.  23,  single,  suffering  five  years ;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  24,  married  six  months;  vaginismus.

Man,  set.  24;  phthisis.

Governess,  set.  24 ;  housemaid's  knee.

Woman,  set.  25,  brunette  ;  swelling  of  eyelid.

Miss  A.,  set.  26,  lymphatic  and  delicate,  suffering  two
years;  inflammation  of  nasal  duct.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  26,  mother  of  three  children,  suffering  since
birth  of  last  child,  three  months  ago ;  constipation.

Mrs.  C.,  set.  26,  has  had  two  children ;  periuterine  cellu-
litis.

Woman,  set.  26,  single ;  pain  in  leg.

Housemaid,  set.  26,  suffering  eighteen  months;  bursitis.

Mme.  P.,  set.  26,  delicate  health,  suffering  three  years;
abscess  of  foot.

Country-woman,  set.  26;  elephantiasis.

Woman,  set.  28,  single,  brunette,  suffering  a  long  time,
headache.

Mrs.  K.,  set.  28,  suffering  four  months ;  recurrent  phlyc-
tenular conjunctivitis.

Woman,  set.  29 ;  chronic  headache.

Mrs.  T.,  set.  29  ;  ulceration  of  cornea.

Man,  set.  30,  sanguine  bilious  temperament,  five  feet  ten
inches  high,  weight  in  health  160,  family  consumptive,
two  sisters  and  a  brother  having  died  of  this  disease ;
phthisis.

Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  since  death  of  her  husband,  six
years  ago ;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  30 ;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  32,  blonde,  sanguine  temperament,  formerly
had  scrofulous  ophthalmia ;  eruption  about  mouth.

Man,  set.  32,  in  good  health,  a  little  pale,  habitually  sad
and  anxious,  having  lost  his  father  at  the  age  of  60
from  cancer  of  face ;  threatened  cancer.

Woman,  set.  33,  single  ;  tumor  albus.

Man,  set.  34;  abscess  of  ankle  and  foot  with  caries.

Man,  set.  36,  four  months  ago  cut  leg  with  an  axe,  since
then  suffering ;  chronic  suppuration.

Man,  £et.  37,  cigarmaker,  after  attack  of  typhoid  fever;
abscess.

Lady,  set.  40,  school-teacher,  single ;  vertigo.

Woman,  set.  40 ;  swelling  of  lachrymal  sac.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  40 ;  inflammation  of  lachrymal  sac.


425  SILICA.

Woman,  eet.  40,  suffering  seven  months;  cancer  of  tongue.

Man,  set.  40,  face  somewhat  yellowish,  with  red  cheeks,
suffering  six  years ;  gastric  disorder.

Woman,  set.  40,  weakly  constitution,  subject  to  catarrhal
affections,  somewhat  asthmatic;  scirrhus  mammse.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  42,  strong,  well  nourished;  headache.

Woman,  set.  44,  married,  medium  stature,  weak  constitu-
tion, light  complexion,  still  menstruates  regularly,  has
been  cured  of  catarrh  of  stomach,  and  psoriasis  diffusa;
parenchymatous  iritis.

Green-grocer,  set.  45 ;  enlarged  bursa  over  1.  knee.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  47  ;  scirrhus  mammse.

Man,  set.  48,  ten  years  ago  saw  a  cancer  of  nose,  since  then
affected ;  itching  of  nose.

Woman,  set.  50,  married,  Irish ;  eczema  capitis.

Man,  set.  50,  large,  apparently  good  constitution  ;  pain  in
lung.

Miss  M.,  set.  55,  suffering  for  a  year ;  tumor  in  mouth.

Man,  set.  55,  suffering  five  days ;  felon  on  finger.

Mrs.  G.,  set.  55  ;  glass  in  finger.

Man,  set.  55,  in  good  health,  after  wearing  tight  boots ;
ulcer  on  foot.

Man,  set.  60,  formerly  suffering  from  glandular  swellings  ;
induration  of  cheek.

Man,  set.  60 ;  tumor  in  breast.

Mrs.  P.,  set.  60,  tall,  dark  complexion,  dark  hair,  rather
masculine  appearance,  predisposed  to  lung  disease;
cough  for  several  weeks.

Woman,  set.  60  ;  carbuncle  on  neck.

Woman,  over  60,  in  moderately  good  health ;  elephan-
tiasis.

Madam  X.  de  Cerveirac,  set.  61,  enjoying  good  health,
never  been  seriously  sick,  melancholic  disposition ;  can-
cer of  lip.

Mme.  C.,  set.  63,  apparently  in  good  health  but  having  a
leaden-hued,  earthy  complexion,  for  about  twenty  years  ;
lupus.

Man,  set.  67,  syphilitic;  inguinal  abscess  and  hernia.

Lady,  set,  70  ;  scirrhus  mammse.

Woman,  set,  80,  after  a  sprain  ;  inflammation  of  foot.

Young  lady ;  tumor  of  lip.

Young  w^oman,  delicate  health,  pale,  earthy  complexion,
suffering  a  month  ;  panaritium.

Washerwoman,  fat,  robust,  brown  complexion,  standing
much  in  cold  water;  metrorrhagia.

Mrs.  .J.,  mother  of  four  children,  apparently  healthy,  suf-
fering several  months ;  constipation.

Robust,  middle-aged  man,  bitten  in  thumb  by  a  man  four
weeks  ago;  swelling  and  suppuration  of  thumb.


SILICA— SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.  426

Lady,  ten  years  past  climacteric ;  leucorrhoea.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Camphor,  Hepar,  Fluor,  ac.
It  antidotes :  3Ierc.  cor.,  Sulphur.
Compatible :  After  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Calc.  ost.,  Cina,  GraphiL,

Hepar, Ignatia, Nitr. ac, Phosphor. ; before Hepar,

Fluor,  ac,  Laches.,  Lycop.,  Sepia.
Incompatible : Mercur.
Compare:  Phos.  ac.  Picric  ac,  Mur.  ac,  Sulphur,  Kali  carb.,

Nux  vom..  Opium,  Arnica,  Hypericum,  Ruta.


SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.

Black  and  White  Mustard.  Oruciferse.

Provings  by  Butler,  N.  Am.  Jour,  of  Horn.,  1872,  p.  541 ;  some  symptoms  by
Cattel,  Brit.  J.  of  Horn.,  vol.  11,  p.  524.

The  symptoms  belonging  to  Sinapis  alba  are  designated  a.

Clinical  Authorities. — Coryza,  Hay  fever,  Butler,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  21,  p.  353 ;
Sore  mouth,  Ellis,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  61,  from  Hom,  Jour.  Obstet.,  Nov.,  1888;
Cough,  Walser,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  134 ;  Variola,  Kockwith,  Med.  Union,
vol.  1,  p.  59.

Note. — Found  of  use  in  Philadelphia  with  potassium  cyanide  as  a  means
of  prevention  in  the  epidemic  of  smallpox,  1870-71,  by  Hering,  Korndoerfer,
Farrington,  Knerr,  and  others.

^  Mind. Irritable  disposition.

Cross,  dissatisfied  without  cause  ;  must  guard  himself  con-
stantly or  be  uncivil  and  pettish.

I  '  From  fright  during  coition,  impotence.

Cannot  keep  his  attention  fixed.

From  least  mental  exertion  :  sweat.
^Sensorium. i  Vertigo  of  old  people.

I  Violent  attacks  of  vertigo,  with  hard  hearing  after  eating
heavy  food  ;  mostly  after  fat.

Every  evening  while  conversing  sudden  headache  and  loss
of  consciousness  of  surrounding  objects, a.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  pain across  forehead commencing  at
outer  angle  of  each  eye,  more  severe  around  edges  of
orbits  and  across  bridge  of  nose.

Dull,  dragging-down  sensation  in  anterior  part  of  head,
not  amounting  to  decided  pain.

Heavy  headache  in  top  and  sides  of  head.


427  SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.

Dull  headache,  with  qualmishness  about  pit  of  stomach.
Dull  headache,  replaced  (at  11  a.m.)  by  burning  prickling

in  face,  moderately  full  pulse,  dull  feeling  in  top  of  head,

as  if  empty.
Headache  does  not  interfere  with  mental  exertion,  in  fact,

is  forgotten  during  it ;  <  when  attention  is  drawn  to  it ;

in  warm  room ;  better  in  open  air,  eating  and  lying

down.
Pains  are  <  on  one  side,  r.;  sometimes  on  the  other,  1.;

mostly  anterior  part  of  head  and  less  often  vertex  is  in-
volved (no  prover  had  it  in  occiput).
Headache  as  if  she  had  taken  cold,  with  tired  feeling  all

over.
Dull,  heavy,  drawing  or  pressing  pain  in  head.

■  Apoplexy.

*  Outer  Head. Sensation  as  if  scalp  were  adherent  to  bones.

Forehead  hot  and  dry.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. When  pressing  on  eyeballs,  sensation  as
of  pins  sticking.

Eyeballs  as  if  pressed  on  from  above,  with  tired  feeling  of
eyes  and  some  dull  pain  in  them,  >  closing  eyes  and
by  eating.

Sudden  feeling  of  warmth,  with  stitching  in  1.  eye;  it  fills
with  tears,  which  relieve.

Sticking  or  smarting  in  1.  eye.

Eyes  sore,  weak.

Eyes  feel  tired.

Pain  over  eye,  sometimes  r.,  sometimes  1. ;  sometimes  pass-
ing from  outer  angle  to  root  of  nose.

Eyes  smart  with  profuse  lachrymation.

Hard  work  to  keep  eyes  open.

Headache  and  confusion,  especially  over  eyes,  <  on  mov-
ing about, a.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Hard  hearing,  with  vertigo.
^  Smell  and  Nose, i  Dryness  of  anterior  nares,

■  Nostrils  dry;  1.  <  with  discharge  of  some  dried  mucus;

tender  to  pressure.
Dryness  of  posterior  nares  and  pharynx,  >  swallowing

and  clearing  throat  of  small  white  lumps  of  tenacious

mucus  with  slight  hacking.
Scanty  acrid  discharge  from  anterior  nares,  makes  skin

red.

■  Left  nostril  stopped  up  all  day;  scanty  acrid  discharge

from  nose.
I  I  Mucous  membrane  of  nose  dry  and  hot;  no  discharge;
symptoms  <  in  afternoon  and  evening;  either  nostril
may  be  affected  alone  or  alternately  with  the  other.
^Hay  fever.


SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.  428

Dryness  in  posterior  nares  and  pharynx  >  by  swallowing
and  attempts  to  clear  throat,  which  brings  up  small
lumps  of  white  tenacious  mucus  with  slight  hawking.

Much  discharge  of  mucus  from  posterior  nares,  it  ac-
cumulates there  and  requires  an  effort  to  dislodge;
tasteless,  cold  and  in  quite  large,  tenacious  white  masses.

Accumulation  of  mucus,  usually  w^hite,  at  times  yellow,
drops  from  posterior  nares,  causing  nausea  and  even
vomiting.

■  Scurvy,  with  copious  and  frequent  nosebleed.

I  I  Profuse,  thin,  watery  discharge  from  anterior  nares,  ex-
coriating and  acrid  ;  wings  of  nose  red  and  sore ;  draws
considerable  mucus  into  throat  from  posterior  nares  ;
voice  thick,  nasal ;  frequent  short,  hacking  cough,  pain-
less, <  during  day  ;  >  by  lying  down. ^Acute  coryza.

I  I A  man  of  nervous  temperament  was  caught  in  a  thun-
der-shower and  wet  through ;  nasal  passages  feel  stopped
up  while  a  thin  acrid  mucus  is  discharged  profusely
from  anterior  nares ;  wings  of  nose  red ;  eyelids  smart
and  itch.

I  1  For  some  years  subject  to  severe  colds ;  severe  acrid
nasal  discharge  with  much  lachrymation  and  irritation
of  eyelids;  sneezes  frequently,  with  coryza;  hacking
cough  harder  and  more  paroxysmal,  lasts  for  weeks ;
nose  feels  stopped  up,  especially  at  bridge,  although  he
has  considerable  nasal  discharge  which  irritates  and
reddens  skin ;  voice  very  nasal ;  partial  loss  of  taste  and
smell.

I  I  Feeling  as  if  nostrils  were  stopped  up  although  they  dis-
charge profusely  a  thin  mucus,  which  excoriates  nose
and  lip ;  itching  and  smarting  of  eyelids;  post-nasal  dis-
charge ;  continually  clearing  throat ;  infrequent  hack-
ing cough;  dull  frontal  headache;  voice  nasal.  ^ Acute
coryza.

I  I  Hay  fever;  eyes  suffused,  itched  and  smarted;  nose
swollen  and  discharging  continually  a  thin  acrid  mucus;
oppression  of  chest,  as  if  movement  were  impeded  all
around  her  chest,  not  a  contraction,  but  as  if  something
heavy  oppressed  her  in  all  sides  from  her  neck  to  dia-
phragm ; <  at  night  lying  down.

I  I  Subject  to  hay  fever  for  eight  years ;  comes  on  July  28th
of  each  year  and  stays  until  after  first  hard  frost ;  two
weeks  after  commencement  of  attack,  smarting  and  itch-
ing of  eyelids,  <  tow^ard  inner  canthi ;  margins  of  lids
reddened  ;  eyes  filled  wdth  tears ;  nasal  discharge  pro-
fuse, watery  and  excoriating;  much  sneezing,  <  in
morning  for  a  while,  and  on  lying  down  at  night,  but
continuing  more  or  less  all  day  long;  itching,  burning,


429  SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.

tickling  in  nostrils  high  up  ;  frequent  hacking  cough
during  day,  but  none  at  night ;  dull  frontal  headache  ;
mentally  irritable.

I  1  Has  been  for  two  weeks  suffering  from  her  annual  attack
of  hay  fever,  which  came  on,  as  usual,  about  middle  of
August;  nose  swollen,  alse  nasi  excoriated,  while  lips
w^ere  but  little  reddened ;  eyes  w^atery,  must  keep  wiping
them  ;  eyelids  itch  ;  voice  nasal ;  nose  feels  stopped  up
at  bridge  and  posterior  nares;  post-nasal  discharge,
which  she  draws  down  in  considerable  quantities  and
expectorates ;  it  is  thick,  of  browaiish  color  and  tastes
cold ;  breathing  much  oppressed  all  the  time,  but  <  at
night;  every  night  she  iias  attacks  of  asthmatic  breath-
ing, which  last  an  hour  or  more;  during  attacks  must
sit  upright  and  has  a  dull  pain  from  upper  part  of  chest
through  to  shoulder  blades,  and  dull,  hard  aching  in
temples ;  can  never  lie  with  head  low  because  it  brings
on  attacks;  attacks  more  frequent  in  damp  weather,
and  <  on  lying  down  and  moving,  >  by  sitting  up  in
bed  with  shoulders  drawn  forward  (round-shouldered
position)  and  by  perfect  quiet.

I  I  Mrs.  D.,  set.  71,  small,  dark,  dried-up  old  woman,  bron-
chial asthma;  sat  in  one  chair,  leaning  her  head  upon
back  of  another;  breathing  labored  and  noisy,  wdieez-
ing  and  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest  plainly  audible  all
over  room ;  anxious  for  death  that  she  might  be  relieved ;
intensely  despondent  and  sure  that  she  would  not  re-
cover ;  acrid  nasal  discharge  reddened  skin  about  nose
and  slightly  on  upper  lip.
®  Upper  Face. Sensation  as  if  cheeks  were  bulged  out  by  a

bubble  of  air  just  below  malar  bone.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  dry,  skin  as  if  stiff;  smarting  of  lips ;  red

around  mouth.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth,  especially  such  as  have  been  filled,
sensitive  to  warm  drinks  or  cold  air.

Gums  sore,  tender  to  touch,  can  hardly  eat  hard  food.

•  Swollen,  bleeding  gums.

Convulsions  during  dentition.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Tingling,  scalded  feeling  of  tongue.

Tongue  can  hardly  bear  weight  of  teeth  ;  raw,  sore. •

Tongue  feels  dry,  sticky,  sense  of  blisters  on  tip.

Tongue  dirty  white  in  middle,  edges  and  tip  hot.

Fissure  down  median  line.

Tongue  yellow  at  base,  on  waking, a.

I  Black  tongue.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Breath  offensive,  smelling  like  onions.

Mouth  dry.

Burning  in  mouth  to  stomach  ;  with  nausea,  >  by  eating.


SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.  430

Saliva  increased ;  alkaline.

■Sore  mouth,  accompanied  by  hot,  burning,  sour  eructa-
tions; burning  started  in  stomach  and  would  come  up
throat  to  mouth,  with  sour  eructations ;  mouth  very  sore
all  over,  with  little  white  points  surrounded  by  red
mucous  membrane.

•  Ulcers  in  mouth,  especially  on  tongue,  with  violent  burn-
ing pain,  where  whole  buccal  cavity  is  so  sensitive  that
even  blandest  food  or  drink  is  unbearable.

I A  woman  eight  months  pregnant,  constantly  suffering
with  burning  in  stomach  extending  up  oesophagus  to
throat  and  mouth  ;  mouth  full  of  canker  sores ;  <  from
food  or  drink.
13  TJij-oat.  Left  side  sore,  felt  only  on  swallowing  saliva  and
forcing  mucus  from  choanse ;  very  slight  when  eating
or  drinking.

Throat  behind  uvula  injected  light  red.

Sore  throat  r.  to  left.

■  Burning  along  oesophagus, a.

■  Angina  oedematosa;  pale  swelling  with  much  phlegm.
^*, Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. '  i  Appetite  good.

■  Averse  to  sweets.
Toward  evening,  thirst.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. While  eating :  headache  >  ;  nausea
>  ;  pain  in  eyes  >.
After  eating :  vertigo  <  ;  desire  for  stool ;  fulness  after  a

little,  must  loosen  garments.
After  eating  or  drinking :  fulness  and  heaviness ;  disten-
sion, clothing  must  be  loosened.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Obstinate
hiccough.

■  Heartburn.

I  I  Frequent  belching :  tasteless,  or  tasting  like  horseradish
or  of  ingesta ;  of  hot  air  which  increases  heartburn.

Nausea :  >  in  repose,  <  from  motion, a.

Copious  vomiting,  much  straining ;  it  relieves  nausea.

Vomit  contains  pieces  of  mucus  mixed  with  dark  lines  like
coagulated  blood, a.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  a  load  in  stomach.

Burning,  later  sharp  and  intermittent  with  faintness,  >
bending  forward  in  sitting  posture.

Burning  in  stomach  and  umbilical  region.

Burning,  nausea  and  waterbrash. a.

After  a  moderate  meal,  aching  and  pressure  in  stomach,
as  if  a  hard  body  lay  there,  <  from  touch  and  pressure,
extending  to  both  sides  under  false  ribs. a.

Burning  pressure  under  ensiform  cartilage,  frequent  itch-
ing, abundant  salivation, a.


431  SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.

Burning  pressure  in  cardiac  region,  with  frequent  inodor-
ous, tasteless  belcliing. a.
Ulceration  of  stomach  and  intestines.
■  Chronic  catarrh  of  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. Pressure  in  epigastric  region.

Dull  pain  across  epigastrium  on  bending  forward,  >  sit-
ting erect.
Dull  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium.
^^  Abdomen. Abdomen  and  epigastrium  sensitive  to  press-
ure, a.
After  a  scanty  breakfast,  weight  and  distension  of  abdo-
men, with  tenderness  on  respiration  and  touch, a.
All  day  fulness  and  tension  in  abdomen,  with  qualmish-
ness and  an  occasional pain  in  stomach  and epigas-
trium, a.
Pains  <  about  navel;  sometimes  in  lumbar  region.
Pains  from  navel  down  to  1.  inguina.
Rumbling  of  flatus.

Heavy,  dull  pain  below  navel  as  from  a  weight.
Fulness  and  tension  in  abdomen,  with  qualmishness  and

occasional  pain  in  stomach  and  epigastrium, a.
Continuous  dull  pain  in  r.  groin,  >  by  pressure.
Sharp  pain  in  r.  groin.

Dull,  heavy  pain  in  1.  groin,  at  times  sharp  and  sticking.
Gland  in  1.  groin  swollen,  painful.
■  Chronic  catarrh  of  intestines.
Stool  and  Rectum. Stool  once  in  three  days.

Stool  large  in  amount  and  rather  hard,  with  no  difficulty

in  passing ;  or  loose,  scanty,  expelled  with  difficulty.
Frequent  desire  without  any  passage,  passage  small,  in

balls  or  lumps,  at  first  large  then  tapering.
After  stool  feeling  as  if  all  had  not  passed ;  sharp  smart-
ing pain  in  lower  rectum  and  anus.
Dark  blackish-green,  not  copious  stool,  of  normal  consist-
ency, a.
A  small,  friable,  hard,  dark-green  stool  in  evening, a.
A  dark  green  stool,  of  which  one-half  is  normal  in  consist-

tency,  and  the  other  pappy,  after  8  a.m. a.
Scanty,  pappy,  dirty  brown  stool,  with  much  undigested

food. a.
Copious  pappy  stools  of  dirty,  grey  yellow  color, a.
Copious,  half  hard,  half  soft,  pappy  stool,  preceded  by  urg-
ing desire ;  first  part  dark  brown,  second  part  yellow,
with  many  worms  and  covered  with  dark-red  blood, a.
A  dark,  blackish  green,  not  copious  stool,  of  normal  con-
sistency, a.
Pappy,  dark  brown  stool,  with  burning  in  anus;  much
undigested  food  with  mucus  and  dead  worms.


20


SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.  432

Copious,  half  hard,  half  pappy  stool,  preceded  by  urging;
first  part  dark  brown,  later  dark  yellow,  with  many
worms  and  covered  with  dark  red  blood, a.

Stitching  in  anus  while  sitting,  so  severe  he  nearly
screamed  out. a.

In  evening  small,  blackish  stool  covered  with  mucus,  fol-
lowed by  pricking  and  burning  in  anus. a.
':  Cholera,  with  cyanosis.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine  frequent  but  normal  in  quantity;
of  a  pale  straw-color ;  sometimes  increased  ;  sp.  gr.  1025.

Large  quantities  of  urine  are  passed  during  night,  pas-
sage preceded  by  a  violent  erection.

After  urinating :  sensation  as  if  more  would  be  voided
and  a  little  later  dribbling  of  a  few  drops.

Urine:  darker;  golden,  acid;  clear  yellow;  a  cloud  sus-
pended in  it  with  little  granules  like  frog  spawn.

■  Catarrh  of  bladder.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  excited.

Violent  erections  during  the  day  with  lascivious  thoughts.
Obstinate  and  violent  erections  at  night,  usually  with  las-
civious dreams  and  even  emission  of  semen.
I  I  Impotence,  from  a  fright  during  coition.
^*  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  appeared  in  a  few  hours,
long  before  period.
lAmenorrhoea  and  chlorosis.

■  Cessation  of  catamenia.

'^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Hoarse-
ness ;  toward  night  and  in  evening,  with  frequent  at-
tempts to  clear  throat.
Rough  scraping  sensation  in  throat  extending  to  trachea,
with  a  continual  desire  to  clear  throat  and  a  slight  hack-
ing cough,  <  in  evening.
Continual  desire  to  clear throat,  with  difficult  dislodg-
ment  of  small  lumps  of  tenacious  white  mucus,  freer  in
forenoon,  scanty  at  night.
^®  Respiration, i  Asphyxia.

I  Pituitous  asthma.
^^  Cough, Short,  hacking  cough  in  evening,  leaves  on  retir-
ing; usually  dry,  but  sometimes  sputa  in  small  tena-
cious lumps  of  white  mucus ;  excited  by  laughing ;  <
in  cold  air ;  >  on  lying  down  and  while  eating ;  sensa-
tion of  an  obstruction  low  down  in  trachea.
I  I  Neurosis  of  nerves  of  respiration  since  two  years  ;  loud
coughing  spells,  lasting  about  ten  minutes  at  a  time ;
loud  barking  respirations  could  be  heard  at  a  distance.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  r.  side  as  if  heart  were
there  and  one  could  feel  its  beating.
Sharp,  severe  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  in cardiac  region,
passing  off  soon.


433  .  SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.

Wandering  pains  in  chest.

I  Catarrh  of  lungs.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Uneasiness  and  occasional
dull  pains  in  region  of  heart,  unaltered  by  pressure,  deep
inspiration  or  motion.

Occasional  sensation  of  oppression  and  pricking  in  region
of  heart,  soon  passing  off.

apex.

Pains  about  heart  recur  daily  about  10  a.m.,  and  from  4  to
6  P.M.,  lasting  a  short  time  only,  sometimes  quite  per-
sistent, with  a  feeling  of  dread  and  oppression.

Pulse  grows  less  frequent  and  later  rises  until  it  is  a  little
too  frequent.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Dull  but  quite  severe  pulsating  pain
under  lower  angle  of  1.  scapula.

Cannot  sleep  on  account  of  pain  in  small  of  back  and  hips;
>  by  motion.

Pain  in  small  of  back,  becoming  intolerable  near  bedtime.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Drawing  pain  at  insertion  of  r.  biceps  bra-
chialis  on  flexing  and  extending  arm.

Occasional  dull  pains  in  1.  shoulder  joint.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Weakness  of  muscles  of  calves.

Cramps  in  calves.

Dull,  heavy  aching  in  legs,  calves  and  ankles.

Qildema  of  feet.

■  Ulcers  on  legs.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest: oppressed breathing;
nausea  >.

Lying  down:  headache  >;  hay  fever  <;  oppressed  breath-
ing >  ;  short,  hacking  cough  <.

Sitting :  burning  in  stomach  >  ;  erect,  pain  across  epigas-
trium >  ;  stitches  in  anus.

Sitting  up  in  bed  with  shoulders  drawn  forward  :  hay  fever
and  oppressed  breathing  >.

Must  sit  upright :  oppressed  breathing.

Bending  forward:  pain  across  epigastrium.

Movement:  hay  fever  <;  oppressed  breathing  <;  nau-
sea <  ;  pain  in  back  and  hips  >  ;  sweats  easily.

Flexing  and  extending  arm  :  pain  at  biceps.
^^  Nerves. Weak,  languid,  with  desire  to  sleep  during  day.

I  Chorea.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Sleepless  at  night,  but  no  inconvenience  from  loss
of  sleep.

Sleepy  during  day,  vivid  or  lascivious  dreams.

Sleep  after  dinner  with  anxious  dreams.

Dreams  of  the  dead  and  of  thieves.
^''Time. Forenoon:  desire  to  clear  throat  >.

VOL.  IX. — 28.


SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.  434

11  A.M.:  headache  replaced  by  prickling  and  burning  in
face.

Day  :  acute  coryza  <  ;  frequent  hacking  cough  ;  desire  to
sleep.

Evening:  toward,  thirst;  dark  green  stool;  small  blackish
stool ;  hoarseness  <  ;  short,  hacking  cough.

Night:  hacking  cough  <;  oppressed  breathing  <;  large
quantities  of  urine  passed;  hoarseness;  desire  to  clear
throat.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  warm  room :  headache  <.

Warm  drinks  :  teeth  sensitive  to.

In  open  air:  headache  >.

Damp  weather:  attacks  of  oppressed  breathing  <.

After  getting  wet  through :  nose  feels  stopped  while  thin
mucus  is  discharged.

Cold  air:  teeth  sensitive;  short,  hacking  cough  <;
^^  Fever. Chilly  all  over,  with  cold  hands  and  feet,  after  vom-
iting.

Heat  through  whole  body,  <  down  spine.

Sweat,  with  feeling  of  hot  water  in  bloodvessels,  disappear-
ing when  nausea  comes  on.

Sweat  general ;  more  on  forehead  and  upper  lip.

Sweats  easily  from  least  exertion,  mental  or  physical.

iQuartan  ague  and  inflammatory  fever.

iTyphoid  and  putrid  fevers;  delirious;  great  prostration;
petechia.

iFebris  mucosa.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Daily :  return  of  pains  about  heart
about  10  A.M.,  and  from  4  to  6  p.m.

Every  evening :  sudden  headache  while  conversing.

Every  night :  attacks  of  asthma.

Middle  of  August :  hay  fever.

Since  two  years :  neurosis  of  nerves  of  respiration  lasting
ten  minutes.

For  eight  years :  subject  to  hay  fever ;  comes  on  July  28th
and  lasts  until  after  first  hard  frost.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  dull  pain  in  groin ;  sharp
pain  in  groin  ;  pain  in  side  as  if  heart  were  there ;  draw-
ing pain  at  insertion  of  biceps  brachialis.

Left :  nostril  stopped ;  pain  in  hypochondrium ;  dull,
heavy  pain  in  groin ;  gland  in  groin  swollen,  painful ;
severe  pain  in  side  of  chest;  pain  under  lower  angle  of
scapula;  dull  pain  in  shoulder  joint.
^^  Sensations.  Head  as  if  empty;  as  if  she  had  taken  cold;
as  if  scalp  were  adherent  to  bones ;  as  of  pins  sticking  in
eyeballs ;  eyeball  as  if  pressed  on  from  above ;  as  if  nos-
trils were  stopped  up ;  as  if  movements  were  impeded
all  around  her  chest;  as  if  something  heavy  oppressed


435  SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.

her  on  all  sides  from  neck  to  diaphragm ;  as  if  cheeks

were  bulged  out  by  a  bubble  of  air  below  malar  bone ;

skin  of  lips  as  if  stiff;  as  of  blisters  on  tip  of  tongue;

as  of  a  load  in  stomach ;  as  of  a  hard  body  lying  there ;  as

if  more  urine  could  be  voided ;  pain,  as  if  heart  were  on  .

r.  side ;  as  of  hot  water  in  bloodvessels.
Pain  :  over  eyes ;  in  ej'es ;  about  navel ;  from  navel  down

to  1.  inguina ;  in  stomach  and  epigastrium ;  in  r.  side ;

about  heart ;  in  small  of  back  and  hips.
Sharp  pain :  in  r.  groin ;  in  lower  rectum  and  anus  ;  in  1.

side  of  chest.
Dull  but  quite  severe  pulsating  pain:  under  angle  of  1.

scapula.
Stitching:  in  1.  eye.
Wandering  pains :  in  chest.
Aching :  in  stomach.
Dull  pain :  across  forehead  ;  in  eyes ;  upper  part  of  chest

through  to  shoulder  blades ;  across  epigastrium ;  in  1.

hypochondrium ;  in  r.  groin  ;  in  region  of  heart;  in  heart

toward  apex;  in  1.  shoulder  joint.
Heavy  pain  :  in  top  and  sides  of  head ;  below  navel ;  in  1.

groin.
Dull,  hard  aching :  in  temples.
Dull,  heavy  aching  :  in  legs  ;  in  calves ;  in  ankles.
Dull,  heavy,  drawing  or  pressing  pain  :  in  head.
Drawing  pain  :  at  insertion  of  r.  biceps  brachialis.
Dull  feeling :  in  top  of  head.

Dull,  dragging-down  sensation  :  in  anterior  part  of  head.
Burning  pressure:  under  ensiform  cartilage;  in  cardiac

region.
Pressure :  in  stomach ;  in  epigastric  region.
Tension :  in  abdomen.
Heaviness :  in  stomach.
Fulness:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.
Tired  feeling :  all  over.
Violent  burning  pain  :  in  ulcers  in  mouth.
Sticking:  in  1.  eye.

Burning :  in  nostrils ;  in  mouth  to  stomach ;  from  stom-
ach up  to  throat  and  into  mouth ;  along  oesophagus ;  in

stomach  and  umbilical  region  ;  in  anus.
Burning  prickling :  in  face.
Smarting :  in  1.  eye ;  of  eyelids ;  of  lips.
Soreness :  in  eyes ;  of  tongue ;  of  mouth ;  of  throat.
Sudden  feeling  of  warmth  :  in  1.  eye.
Tingling  scalded  feeling:  of  tongue.
Pricking :  in  region  of  heart.
Rough,  scraping  sensation  :  in  throat.
Tickling :  in  nostrils.


SINAPIS  NIGRA  ET  ALBA.  436

Dryness:  of  anterior  nares ;  of  nostrils  ;  of  posterior  n ares
and  pharynx  ;  of  lips;  of  tongue;  of  mouth.

Itching:  of  eyelids;  in  nostrils.
"Tissues. Great  muscular  weakness.

Mucous  secretion  increased,  tenacious,  lumpy.

Anasarca  after  intermittents.

Rheumatalgia.

Pituitous  dyspepsia.

Constipation  from  want  of  action  of  bowels.

Flatulency.

Disposition  to  nervous  apoplexy.

Epilepsy.

Hypochondriasis. ■

Chlorosis.

Asthma.

Intermittent  fever  in  swampy  districts.

Autumnal  intermittent,  quartan  septimana.

Pleurisy.

Smallpox.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  gums  sore;
pressure  in  stomach  <  ;  abdomen  tender.

Pressure :  nostrils  tender ;  abdomen  and  epigastrium  sen-
sitive ;  pain  in  r.  groin >  ; pain  in  region  of  heart
unaltered.
*^Skin. iiGeneral  ecchymosis.

I  Eczema  chronica.

I I  Smallpox;  to  be  given  until  sulphocyanides  reappear
in  saliva.

Ulcers  on  legs.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Vertigo  of  old  people.

Convulsions  of  teething  children.

Girl,  set.  13,  tall,  slender,  dark  complexion;  hay  fever.

Mr.  H.  B.,  dark  complexion,  grey  eyes ;  acute  coryza.

Mrs.  K.,  set.  28,  small,  dark  complexion,  slender  figure,
nervous  temperament ;  hay  fever.

Lawyer,  set.  36,  dark  complexion,  nervo-bilious  tempera-
ment; coryza.

Mrs. D., widow,  short,  stout,  florid,  light complexion;
acute  coryza.

Mr.  A.,  light  complexion,  nervous  temperament,  after  ex-
posure; coryza.
*^  Relations. Antidoted by : Sa2)o sodse  for blisters from
external application ; Nux  vom. when abused as a
condiment.


437  SPIGELIA.


SPIGELIA.

Pinkroot.  Loganiacese.

An  annual,  growing  in  the  West  Indies  and  South  America.

The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  tlie  dried  herb.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Becher,  Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann,  Hartmann,  Herr-
mann, Hornburg,  Kummer,  Langhammer,  Meyer,  Stapf,  Walther,  Wislicenus
and  others,  Hahnemann's  Mat.  Med.,  vol.  5.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Tietze,  Nehrer,  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
1,  p.  203  ;  Meyer,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  353 ;  Stens,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  318  ;  Cephal-
algia, Lehmann,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  171 ;  Iritis,  Woodyatt,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.
Jour.,  vol.  8,  p.  201 ;  Ophthalmia,  Angell,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  108,  p.  23 ;  Conjunctivitis,
Eummel,  Lobethal,  Lorbacher,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  pp.  294,  302 ;  Lippe,  Tulff,
Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  pp.  138,  140 ;  Supraorbital  neuralgia.  Pitcher,  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  vol.  1,  p.  77  ;  Dinsmore,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  14,  p.  748  ;  Ciliary  neuralgia,  Norton,
N.  Y.  S.  T.,  1877,  p.  68  ;  Allen,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  211 ;  Stapf,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  89  ;  p.  94 ;  Norton,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  119 ;  Nasal  catarrh,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  168 ;  Korndcerfer,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1879  ;  Eruption  on  nose,  Eosen-
berg, Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  174;  Facial  neuralgia,  Gross,  Bonningh.,  Hrg.,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  432 ;  Schron,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  297  ;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  254 ;
Small,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  Jour.,  vol.  7,  p.  158;  Greenleaf,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  257  ;
Payr,  Hom.  Kl.,  1869,  p.  4;  Stens,  Hendrichs,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  136;  Hinks,
Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  366  ;  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  148  ;  Birdsall,  Hom.
Phys:,  vol.  9,  p.  190;  Prosopalgia,  Hirsch,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  108;  Heyberger,
H.  K.,  vol.  12,  p.  126 ;  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  235 ;  Smith,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.
267  ;  Toothache,  Hirzel,  Knorr,  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  1,  p.  478  ;  Kunkel,  A.
H.  Z.,  vol.  110,  p.  29 ;  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  136;  Stens,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.
318;  Morgan,  H.  W.,  vol.  12,  p.  70;  Neuralgia  of  tongue,  Leboucher,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  502;  Stuttering  speech,  Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  5,  p.  18 ;  Gastric
disorder,  E.  W.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  391 ;  Worm  affections,  Hartm.,  Maly,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  808 ;  Rheumatic  pain  in  chest,  Lehmann,  A.  J.  H.  M,  M.,
vol.  3,  p.  106 ;  Palpitation  of  heart,  A.  H,  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  36 ;  Angina  pectoris,
Jousset,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  127  ;  Kendall,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  157 ;  Pericar-
ditis, Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  4;  Rheumatic  pericarditis,  Hansen,  Horn.
World,  Feb.,  1889;  Endocarditis,  Weber,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  181 ;  Rheumatic  car-
ditis, Wesselhceft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  1,  p.  257  ;  Carditis  (probably  peri  or  endo)  56
cases  reported  cured,  Fleischmann,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  28 ;  Insufficiency  of  mitral
valve,  Schneider,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  83 ;  Cardiac  disorder,  Bethmann,  Weber,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  456  ;  Use  in  aneurism,  Nichol,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  106.

^  Mind. ■  Weak  memory.
I  Disinclined  to  work.
iRestless  and  anxious;  solicitude  about  the  future.


SPIGELIA.  438

■  Gloomy  suicidal  mood.

I  Afraid  of  pointed  things,  pins,  etc.

■  Easily  irritated  or  offended.

^  Sensorium.  i Vertigo:  as  if  he  would  fall,  <  in  morning
on  rising,  with  headache,  depriving  him  of  his  senses ;
when  looking  down  or  turning  e3^es ;  with  nausea ;  with
heart  disease.
Vertigo  while  sitting,  standing  or  walking  (most  tolerable
while  lying) ;  head  sinks  backward  with  nausea  at  pal-
ate and  discomfort  in  abdomen  and  thorax ;  in  abdo-
men a  pinching  pain,  with  a  sensation  as  if  he  would  be
obliged  to  go  to  stool,  whereupon  he  loses  all  conscious-
ness.
I  I  Stumbling  and  falling  as  if  intoxicated  ;  pressing  pain
in  top  of  head,  <  from  stooping,  walking  and  talking;
>  when  lying;  feeling  of  fainting.  ^Hypertrophy  of
heart.

^  Inner  Head.  iNervous  headache,  <  from  thinking,  from
noise  or  jarring;  face  pale;  anxious  palpitation;  nau-
sea and  vomiting.

■  Boring  from  within  outward,  in  forehead,  vertex  or  cere-

bellum.

■  Pulsating  stitches  in  frontal  protuberances.

■  Stitches  in  1.  side  of  head  and  out  of  1.  eye.

■  Pressing  headache,  mostly  in  r.  temple;  <  from  stoop-

ing, least  motion  or  noise ; >  at  rest  and  h'ing  with
head  high.

■  Headache  beginning  at  cerebellum  (in  morning),  spread-

ing over  1.  side  of  head,  causing  violent  and  pulsating
pain  in  1.  temple  and  over  1.  eye,  periodical.

■  Dull  stitches  from  within  outward,  on  top  of  head; <

from  touch  and  after  washing,  but  >  while  washing.

■  Feels  as  if  head  would  burst.

■  Painfulness  of  cerebellum,  with  stiff  neck.

■  Headache  when  stooping,  as  from  a  band  around  head.
Sensation  in  brain  as  if  head  were  tightly  bound.
Headache  like  a  heaviness ;  on  drawing  facial  muscles  it

seems  as  if  skull  would  burst,  upward  and  asunder.

Does  not  dare  to  shake  head  ;  it  hurts  in  brain  and  he  be-
comes dizzy.

Swashing  in  brain  when  walking;  he  feels  every  step.

Fine  burning,  tearing  pain  in  brain ;  violent  pain  in  1.  pari-
etal bone  on  motion  or  walking,  or  making  a  misstep ;
toward  evening.

Violent  pressure  and  pressing  outward  in  forehead  ;  <  on
stooping;  <  by  pressure  with  hand.

Tensive,  tearing  pain  in  forehead,  especially  beneath
frontal  eminence  extending  toward  orbits.


439  SPIGELIA.

Thrustlike  tearing  pain  in  forehead,  <  in  r.  frontal  emi-
nence, causes  an  involuntary  fixing  of  eyes  on  object  on
which  he  is  looking,  while  standing  and  sitting.

■  Very  violent  tearing  in  forehead,  occiput  and  temple.

■  Shooting  pain  through  forehead.

■  Sharp  sticking  just  behind  and  above  frontal  eminence.

I  Burning  pain  in  r.  side  of  forehead,  extending  to  eye,
could  not  move  it  without  pain.

Burning  paiij  in  1.  side  of  frontal  bone.

Violent  pressure  from  without  inward,  in  both  temples,
especially  in  right.

Jerking  tearing  in  r.  zygoma.

Violent,  fine  stitches,  as  from  electric  sparks,  in  1.  temple.

Pressive  drawing  in  r.  side  of  vertex  and  occiput.

Pressive  pain  in  r.  side  of  head,  involving  r.  eye,  in  morn-
ing in  bed,  but  still  more  after  rising ;  pain  deeply  seated,
unaffected  by  pressure,  very  acute  on  motion ;  on  sud-
denly turning  head  brain  seemed  to  be  loose;  <  from
every  jar,  step  or  straining  at  stool.

Burrowing  and  tearing  pain  in  occiput,  in  1.  side  of  ver-
tex and  in  forehead,  <  on  motion,  from  loud  noise  and
when  he  speaks  loudly  or  even  on  opening  mouth
slightly ;  >  when  lying  down.

Pain  darting  from  behind  forward  through  eyeball,  caus-
ing violent  pulsating  pain  in  1.  temple  and  over  1.  eye.

Pulsating  headache,  miostly  in  r.  temple;  <  from  least
motion  or  noise;  >  at  rest  and  lying  with  head  high.

Painfulness  of  cerebellum  with  stiff  neck.

Headache  every  morning  at  sunrise,  at  its  height  at  noon,
gradually  declines  till  sun  sets,  appearing  even  in  cloudy
weather.

■  When  moving  muscles  of  face,  sensation  as  if  skull  would

burst.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  band  around  head.

■  Severe  stitches  in  1.  temple.

I  I  Supraorbital  neuralgia,  especially  on  1.  side;  pain  recurs
at  regular  intervals,  tends  to  spread  to  face  or  neck  and
to  involve  eyes ;  <  from  least  concussion  or  motion,  but
especially  by  stooping ;  pale  face ;  restlessness ;  palpi-
tation.

■  ■Neuralgia,  pain  centres  in,  above  or  below  eye,  from

cold,  in  damp  rainy  weather ;  hypersesthesia  of  filaments

of  fifth  pair.
I  I  Violent  throbbing  shooting  pains  over  1.  eye;  moderate

fever ;  attack  followed  by  general  perspiration ; urine

dark  but  without  sediment ;  after  confinement.
I  I  Excruciating,  burning,  stitching  pains,  that  seemed  to

come  from  deep  in  head,  affecting  1.  eye,  and  seemed  to


SPIGELIA.  440

follow  supraorbital  nerve  of  same  side ;  attacks  every
morning  at  4  o'clock,  growing  <  each  succeeding
morning ;  at  time  of  attack  eye  slightly  congested  with
profuse  acrid  lachrymation ;  nausea,  vomiting  and  no
thirst,  tongue  clean  ;  >  by  being  bolstered  up  in  bed.
^Suppressed  intermittent.

I  I  Headache  several  times  a  week,  begins  soon  after  rising,
generally  lasts  whole  day;  tearing,  rooting  up  pain,  <
from  motion,  especially  walking  in  open  air,  when  every
step  is  attended  by  a  violent  jerk  in  head,  but  especially
severe  when  lying  down ;  >  sitting  still,  or  walking
about  room  a  long  time ;  head  confused,  often  a  feeling
of  emptiness,  almost  destroying  power  of  thought;  any
concussion,  even  loud  speaking,  aggravates  headache;
feeling  as  if  brain  were  shaking  in  skull  on  quickly
moving  head. ^Chlorosis.

I  Migraine,  affecting  either  supraorbital  region  during  cold
rainy  weather ;  severe  throbbing  or  tearing  stitching
pains,  with  redness  and  lachrymation  of  eye  of  affected
side ;  attacks  last  twenty-four  hours.

I  I  Severe  uninterrupted  twitching,  tearing,  at  times  saw-
ing pains,  as  if  nerves  were  being  torn  out  by  a  fine  in-
strument, in  r.  side  of  forehead  and  temple,  extending
over  eye  and  into  malar  bone ;  r.  eye  inflamed,  profuse
lachrymation,  sensation  as  if  eye  would  be  pushed  out
of  head,  photophobia ;  burning  heat  in  affected  parts  of
face ;  distension  and  violent  pulsation  of  temporal  arte-
ries; coryza;  disturbed  sleep.

1  I  Frequent  headaches,  sometimes  on  r.,  sometimes  on  1.
side,  then  in  forehead,  vertex  or  occiput,  often  spreading
to  face  and  shoulder ;  throbbing,  shooting,  drawing,
pressing;  weak  digestion  and  catarrh  of  stomach  after
eating  fat  food  ;  after  catamenial  period,  attacks  of  pain
in  upper  and  lower  jaw,  tearing  lightning-like  twitches,
with  palpitation  and  fluttering  of  heart ;  <  from  cold
water,  cold  air,  and  chewing.

I  Any  quick  movement  converts  the  dull  aching  pains  into
acute  stabbing.

I  Headache  <  :  from  thinking ;  by  a  bright  light ;  by  noise ;
by  sneezing;  by  motion  of  eyes  or  facial  muscles;  by
opening  mouth ;  by  speaking  aloud  ;  by  cough  ;  from
stooping  ;  shaking  or  jarring  head  ;  making  a  misstep  ;
from  least  motion  ;  by  touch  ;  by  warmth.

■  Headache  >  :  when  lying  with  head  high  ;  from  pressure,
and  laying  hand  on  it;  from  washing  head  with  cold
water ;  while  at  rest.
*  Outer  Head. I  Shaking  in  brain,  <  when  moving  head  or
stepping  hard.


441  SPIGELIA.

I  Tension  of  scalp;  feels  sore  externally  and  is  sore  to
touch.

I  Head  feels  as  if  too  large.
*  Sight  and  Eyes. Illusion  as  if  hairs  or  feathers  were  on
lashes ;  <  on  wiping  them.

lAVeakness  and  dimness  of  vision;  sparks  before  eyes.

Farsighted.

I  Photophobia  :  oversensitive  retina.

I  Accommodative  asthenopia  with  slight  retinitis,  neu-
ralgia, antemia  of  optic  nerve  from  excessive  tea-
drinking.

Sparks  before  eyes.

On  shutting  eyes  a  sea  of  fire  appears.

Vanishing  of  sight ;  all  things  appear  as  if  through  a  mist ;
dimness  of  lens.

I  I  Rheumatic  cataract  of  1.  eye.

•  Dilated  pupils. ^Helminthiasis.

lEyes  look  dim  and  faint;  upper  lid  hangs  down  as  if
paralyzed.

llSharp,  stabbing,  sticking  pains  through  eyeball  back
into  head,  or  radiating;  <  from  moving  eyes  and  at
night.

■  Eyeballs  feel  too  large.

Violent  burrowing  stitch  in  middle  of  eye  and  in  inner
canthus,  does  not  prevent  vision  but  presses  upper  lid
downward.

■  Intolerable  pressive  pain  in  eyeball,  <  on  turning  eyes,

dizzy  on  attempting  to  move  eyes,  is  obliged  to  turn

whole  head  to  see.
Pressive  pain  in  eyeballs.
Contractive  burning  pain  in  r.  eyeball.
Tensive  pain  in  1.  eyeball.
Constant  sticking  pain  in  r.  eyeball.
Itching  stitch  in  r.  eyeball,  returns  after  rubbing.

■  Eyes  hurt  on  motion,  as  if  too  large  for  their  orbits.
Pain  as  if  sand  were  in  eyes.

I  I  Shooting  pain  through  r.  eye  going  back  into  head,
causing  eye  to  fill  with  hot  water.

■  Pains  as  if  needles  were  thrust  into  r.  eyeball.

■  Stabbing  pains  through  eye  and  around  it,  often  com-

mencing at  one  point  and  then  seeming  to  radiate  in
every  direction. ^Choroiditis.

■  Dry  heat  and  burning  in  eyes ;  is  compelled  to  close  them .

■  Excruciating  pains  as  if  eye  would  be  pressed  out  of

socket.
I  I  Eyeball  sensitive  to  touch. ^Iritis.

■  Eyes  <  when  thinking  about  them.
I  I  Pain  in  eye  <  at  night.


SPIGELIA.  442

Ej^es  pain  in  open  air.

1 1  Pain  spreads  from  eye  to  frontal  sinuses  and  head.

Eyeball  painful  when  moved,  feels  tense.

1 1  Sensation  as  if  eyes  were  too  large  for  their  orbits.

1  I  Muscles  of  eyeball  stiff  on  movement. ^Iritis.

I  1  Squinting ;  convergent  strabismus. ^Helminthiasis.

■  Severe  neuralgic  pains,  particularly  in  rheumatic  arthri-

tic inflammations,
i  lPter3''gium,  from  inner  canthus  of  r.  eye  some  distance
over  cornea,  beginning  after  a  severe  pain  two  years  ago;
pain  in  1.  eye  as  if  it  would  fly  into  pieces,  <  on  stoop-
ing and  in  morning,  continuing  till  noon,  then  suddenly
disappearing.

I  Pains  of  glaucoma  and  sclero-choroiditis.

1  I  Rheumatic  iritis  in  1.  eye  with  excessive  ciliary  neural-
gia, for  three  weeks ;  much  redness,  deep  ciliary  injection
and  posterior  synechias,  with  violent  pain  from  3  a.m.,^
for  two  or  three  hours,  continuing  more  or  less  until
3  P.M.  {Atropine  was  used  externally  and  Sulphur  in-
ternally), the  adhesions  were  torn  and  pain  relieved  the
first  night;  on  second  night, although  pupil  was  widely
dilated,  pain  returned  more  severely  than  ever;  pain
as  if  eye  were  being  pulled  forward  and  backward,  with
numb  pain  through  head,  which  woke  him  at  2  a.m.,  and
continued  the  remainder  of  the  night  and  all  the  fore-
noon ;  it  seemed  as  if  it  would  drive  him  crazy ;  each
attack  of  pain  was  accompanied  by  a  chill.

Redness  of  conjunctiva  ;  vessels  strongl}^  injected.

Inflammation  of  cornea.

I  i  Inflammation  of  1.  eye  of  four  weeks' standing  ;  lachry-
mation  ;  photophobia ;  high  degree  of  injection  ;  severe
stitching  pains  in  eye,  and  1.  temple  ;  sleeplessness.

■  Scrofulous  conjunctivitis  and  keratitis,  if  accompanied  by

sharp  pains.

I  Rheumatic  ophthalmia,  profuse  lachrymation  with  or
without  pain ; ptosis.

iGonorrhoeal  Ophthalmia,  nocturnal  pains  in  eye  ex-
tremely severe  and  extend  to  bones  of  cavity  of  eye.

Bluish  ring  around  cornea  ;  iris  discolored.

I  I  Ten  years  ago  was  struck  over  1.  eye  with  a  brick,  leav-
ing a  large  scar  and  considerable  depression  over  supra-
orbital nerve  ;  at  irregular  intervals  extreme  pain  over
site  of  wound,  at  times  so  severe  that  he  feared  he  would
lose  his  mind  ;  pain  came  about  10  a.m.  and  reached  its
height  about  3  p.m.,  sharp  and  cutting,  extending  over
temple  and  forehead,  with  profuse  flow  of  water  from
eyes;  >  in  a  dark  room,  when  quiet,  and  almost
entirely  relieved  at  night.


443  SPIGELIA.

I  Upper  lids  feel  hard  and  immovable.

I  Lids  inflamed  and  ulcerated.

I  Great  inclination  to  wink.

I  Lids  lax  and  paralyzed,  they  hang  low  down  and  must
be  raised.

iLachrymation ;  tears  acrid.

a  Pricking  in  lids.

Agglutination  of  eyelids  by  a  viscous  gum.

I  I  Everted  eyelids.
^Hearing  and  Ears. lOv^ersensitive  hearing,  in  neuralgia
and  headache.

1  I  Sensation  of  distant  ringing  in  both  ears,  with  a  sensa-
tion as  if  ear  were  loosely  stopped  or  a  thick  mist  were
in  front  of  it.

I  Periodical  deafness  ;  ears  feel  as  if  stuffed.

I  Otalgia,  pressing  pain  as  from  a  plug.

« Neuralgia  of  ear,  sudden  stitch  extending  to  eye,  zygoma,
jaw,  teeth,  throat.

■  Pinching,  drawing,  itching  pain  in  external  ear;  loud

noises  painful,  when  speaking  the  sound  of  one's  voice

resounds  like  a  bell  through  brain.
I  I  Itching  in  r.  concha.
^  Smell  and  Nose, l  Tickling  and  itching  in  nose.

I  1  Tickling  on  back  of  nose,  as  if  lightly  touched  by  hairs,

or  as  if  a  gentle  wind  were  blowing  across  it,  lasting  a

long  time.
I  I  Smarting  in  nose. ^Helminthiasis.
I  I  Violent  nosebleed. ^Endocarditis.
iCoryza:  fluent  or  dry;  with  dry  heat,  no  thirst;  eyes

water  ;  headache,  with  hoarseness ;  anxiety  about  heart ;

discharge  so  profuse  that  it  causes  coughing  and  suffo-
cating fits  as  soon  as  patient  lies  down.
Stoppage  of  anterior  part  of  nose,  with  profuse  discharge

of  mucus  through  posterior  nares.
I  I  Flow  of  water  from  nose. ^Prosopalgia.
I  I  Discharge  of  large  quantities  of  mucus  through  choanse,

nose  being  dry. ^Nasal  catarrh.
I  I  Mucus  from  choanse  tastes  and  smells  badly. ^Nasal

catarrh.

■  Copious  offensive  mucus  flows  through  posterior  nares,

causing  choking  at  night.

■  Chronic  nasal  catarrh.

■  Herpetic  eruption  on  nose.

^  Upper  Face.  ■Face:  bloated,  distorted,  <  morning  on
awaking ;  pale,  sickly ;  yellow  around  eyes ;  red  ;  sweaty ;
anxious,  in  rheumatism.

■  ■Prosopalgia: mostly  1.  sided,  with tearing,  shooting,

burning  into  eye, malar  bone  and  teeth  ; periodical ;


SPIGELIA.  444

from  morning  till  sunset,  <  at  noon;  <  from  motion
or  noise  ;  with  lachr3aiiation,  ciliary  neuralgia,  palpita-
tion ;  cheek  dark  red.

•  Neuralgia  affecting  infraorbital  and  maxillary  branches
of  fifth  pair  of  nerves.

■  Periodical  faceache;  pains  burning  and  tensive,  espe-
cially in  cheek  bones,  above  eyebrows,  in  1.  side,  spreads
out  over  face  ;  frequent  nosebleed  ;  red  face.

I  I  For  fourteen  days  neuralgia,  comes  on  between  11.15
and  11.30  p.m.,  about  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  after
lying  down  in  bed ;  beginning  in  1.  malar  bone,  extend-
ing down  face  sometimes  to  neck  and  only  on  1.  side ;
pain  shooting  downward,  with  burning  and  throbbing,
parts  feel  swollen  ;  continues  till  about  3.15  or  3.30  a.m.,
when  she  gets  to  sleep;  <  lying,  >  directly  she  stands
up ;  >  by  hard  pressure,  and  either  cold  or  warm  ap-
plications ;  during  day  1.  side  of  face  feels  as  if  it  had
been  scorched,  no  actual  pain,  only  a  throbbing  ;  pain

>  after  eating.

I  I A  heavy  cold  in  head  developed  into  severe  neuralgia
of  1.  side  of  head  and  face,  involving  eye  ;  pains  seemed
to  start  from  1.  occipital  region  and  extend  forward,
sharp  and  tearing,  especially  in  and  around  eye  ;  much
lachrymation,  constant  nausea  and  occasional  vomiting
of  bile;  least  noise,  even  talking,  <  pain;  light  is
intolerable.

I  I  Feeling  as  if  all  muscles  of  1.  side  of  face  from  forehead
to  neck  and  1.  axilla  were  pierced  with  red-hot  needles  ;
muscles  of  cheek  and  around  eye  spasmodically  affected,
muscles  of  eye  contracted,  making  eye  look  smaller;
dreadful  banging,  throbbing,  burning,  tearing  pains  ;

>  when  lying  quietly  on  her  face ;  <  from  coffee ;  after
the  pains  affected  side  of  face  almost  paralyzed ;  very
weak,  inclined  to  weeping;  pain  preceded  by  violent
beating  of  heart ;  attacks  renewed  by  eating.

I  I  Stinging,  darting  pains  on  1.  half  of  face,  commencing
under  1.  eye,  going  downward  to  cheek  bone,  where  they
were  severest,  and  toward  1.  side  of  nose  and  farther,
radiating  not  so  painful  down  to  teeth  of  upper  jaw ;

>  from  heat.

I  I  Facial  neuralgia,  1.  side  ;  zygomatic  region  and  eyelids
slightly  reddened  and  swollen  ;  conjunctiva  injected,
slight  dacryorrhoea ;  pain  commences  near  infraorbital
foramen  and  extends  into  eye,  temple,  ear,  nose  and
teeth,  jerking  and  tearing;  increased  flow  of  saliva  and
increased  temperature  of  parts,  which  are  very  sensitive
to  touch  ;  usually  commences  in  afternoon,  rages  until
midnight,  drives  out  of  bed,  and  remits  toward  morn-


445  SPIGELIA.

ing,  when  patient  falls  asleep  from  sheer  exhaustion ;
during  spell  acceleration  of  pulse;  prsecordial  anxiety;
palpitation  and  great  nervous  agitation,  with  trembling
of  limbs ;  at  first  pain  >  by  application  of  water,  later
this  could  not  be  borne;  <  in  open,  damp  cold  air;
from  lying  upon  affected  side,  and  chewing;  >  from
rest  and  wrapping  up  head.

I  I  Facial  neuralgia  of  r.  side ;  pain  distributed  about  and
within  r.  orbit,  darted  through  from  frontal  to  occipital
region  (>  by  Oimicif.,  cured  by  Spigel.).

I  I  Facial  neuralgia,  1.  side,  suddenly  coming  and  suddenly
going,  with  palpitation  of  heart  and  sleeplessness.

1  I  Facial  neuralgia,  r.  side ;  pain  began  in  lower  jaw,  ex-
tending upward  to  ear  and  temple  ;  hot  feeling  around
eye ;  teeth  feel  too  long ;  pain  occurs  whenever  she  lies
down. /^Prosopalgia.

I  I  Severe  tearing,  burning  pain  shooting  from  1.  side  of
forehead  to  temple,  especially  in-1.  supraorbital  ridge
with  ptosis  of  1.  upper  lid.

■  Prosopalgia  from  drinking  tea.

I  When  moving  muscles  of  face  sensation  as  if  skull  would

burst.
Stitches  from  upper  maxilla  to  vertex.
Burning  or  tearing  pressive  pains  in  1.  zygomatic  region,

leaving  a  dull  sensation  of  swelling.

■  Facial  pains  :  <  from  stooping,  slightest  motion,  concus-

sion, noise  and  during  stool.
Sweat  on  face.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  dry,  pale,  cracked.

Burning  tension  in  upper  lip  during  rest.

Burning  in  r.  side  of  upper  lip  even  on  touch.

Tearing  in  lower  jaw  extending  to  ear  and  about  it,  as  far

as  into  nape  of  neck,  so  that  he  could  not  move  head

without  pain.
Pain  as  if  r.  side  of  lower  jaw  would  be  torn  out  of  its

joint.

■  Neuralgia  radiating  to  nose,  face,  temples  and  neck.

'^  Teeth  and  Gums. Painful  jerks  in  nerve  of  a  hollow  tooth ;
tobacco  smoke  seemed  to  relieve.

■  Toothache:  throbbing,  tearing  in  decayed  teeth;  press-

ing outward,  teeth  feel  cold;  >  while  eating  and  lying
down ;  <  after  eating,  from  cold  air  and  water,  from
stooping,  at  night,  driving  out  of  bed;  from  tobacco
smoking.
I  I  Burning,  twitching  pains  in  carious  teeth;  they  feel
loose  and  too  long;  cold  sensation  when  touched;  pain
<  from  pressure  and  stooping,  extending  into  neck  and
toward  r.  ear  and  temple,  so  that  she  could  not  locate
the  pain  ;  had  hot,  pale  face,  feet  cold.


SPIGELIA.  446

I  I  Sudden  twitching  pain  in  several  teeth,  r  side,  >  from
warmth  of  bed,  <  from  shghtest  draft  of  air;  >  sitting
quiet  with  eyes  closed.

I  1  Toothache,  r.  side ;  free  from  pain  all  day,  but  when
laying  head  upon  pillow  at  night  pain  comes  on,  must
sit  up  or  walk  about,  pain  then  leaves  but  returns  when
she  places  head  upon  pillow.

■  Throbbing  toothache  attended  by  a  rending,  burning
pain  in  malar  bone,  paleness  and  swelling  of  face,  with
yellow  rings  under  eyes ;  pain  in  eyes,  frequent  urging
to  urinate,  with  copious  discharges,  palpitation  of  heart,
a  sensation  in  chest  resembling  purring  of  a  cat,  chilli-
ness and  great  uneasiness.

Digging  pain  in  carious  teeth.

iToothache  returns  when  thinking  about' it.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  foul  like  putrid  water.

Stammering,  with  abdominal  ailments.

I  I  Repeats  first  syllable  of  a  word  three  or  four  times.  ^Hel-

minthiasis.

I I  Tongue:  coated  yellow  or  white;  burning,  with  blis-
ters ;  cracked.

Fine  stitches  in  r.  side  of  tongue.

I  I  Stitches  in  r.  side  of  tongue,  <  from  least  motion  of
tongue;  formication  in  tongue  extending  into  head;
pain  prevents  her  turning  head  to  r.  side ;  swelling  be-
low chin  as  large  as  a  hazelnut,  <  mornings.  ^Neu-
ralgia of  tongue.
"  Inner  Mouth. Breath  fetid,  putrid.

Mouth  dry  on  awaking  mornings,  with  stinging.

Mouth  feels  dry  and  pricks  as  from  pins,  yet  filled  with
tenacious  and  nauseous  saliva.

White  or  yellow  mucus  in  mouth  and  throat.

I  I  Much  spitting  of  frothy  saliva,  or  slimy  mucus. ^Rheu-
matic dyspepsia.
i3  Throat. Sensation  as  of  a  worm  rising  in  throat,  >  after
eating. ^Helminthiasis.

Tingling  in  oesophagus.

Sensation  as  if  a  half-fluid  body  were  ascending  in  throat.

I  I  Neuralgic  affection  of  pharynx. ^Sclerotitis.

I I  Phlegm  from  choanse  drops  down  into  throat.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Ravenous  hun-
ger, with  nausea  and  thirst.
Loss  of  appetite,  with  violent  thirst.
Desire  for  alcoholic  drinks.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Better  during,  and  generally  after

eating,  excepting  toothache.
^*^ Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i Nausea:
before  breakfast,  with  sensation of  a  worm  rising  in
throat ;  >  after  eating ;  sickly,  pale  face.


447  SPIGELIA.

Vomits  food,  with  sour  rising  like  vinegar.
^"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Pit  of  stomach  sensitive  to

touch.
Dull  stitches  in  pit  of  stomach  and  oppression  of  chest  <

on  inspiration.
I  Pressure  on  stomach  as  from  a  hard  lump.

■  Neuralgic  pains  in  stomach.

I  I  Acrid,  sour  regurgitation  after  eating,  followed  by  vom-
iting of  food  taken  ;  constant  severe  pressing,  corrosive
pain  in  stomach ;  pressure  in  head  and  vertigo ;  stom-
ach not  sensitive  to  pressure  ;  four  years  ago  discharged
a  segment  of  tapeworm.
^^  Hypochondria.  Stitches  in  region  of  diaphragm,  1.  side,
arresting  breathing.

Heavy  pressure  in  prsecordial  region,  causing  constriction
and  anxiety ;  with  cutting  and  griping  in  bowels  as  from
wind.
'^  Abdomen, i Cutting  colic  at  navel.

Pressure  in  umbilical  region,  as  from  a  hard  lump.

Stitches  in  abdomen.

Painful  pressure  in  lower  abdomen,  as  if  it  would  burst,
especially  in  evening  before  a  soft  stool,  after  which  it
was  somewhat  ]-elieved.

Griping  in  abdomen  as  if  all  the  intestines  would  be
constricted,  caused  great  anxiet}^  and  made  respiration
difficult.

Sharp  stitches,  like  spleen  stitches,  in  abdomen  in  region
of  OS  innominatum,  only  when  walking,  and  disappear-
ing after  thirty  or  forty  steps.

Lancinating  pain  in  abdomen,  with  falling  back  of  head
and  loss  of  senses.

I  I  Pinching  and  cutting  pain  in  abdomen.

I  Intestinal  irritation. ^Strabismus. ^Helminthiasis.

Noisy,  sometimes  painful  borborygmus.

■  Swelling  of  abdomen.
Tension  in  groin.

I  Hernia  inguinalis.
""  Stool  and  Rectum. Emission  of  fetid  flatus.

I  Stools:  of  mucus,  with  tenesmus;  large  lumps  of  mucus,
without  feces;  of  feces,  with  masses  of  worms  ;  hard,  like
sheep's  dung,  and  enveloped  in  mucus  ;  thin,  mushy.

Frequent  inefficient  urging  to  stool.

Iltching  and  tickling  in  anus  and  rectum ;  ascarides  and
lumbricoides.

Itching  in  anus  and  on  coccyx.

llPIelminthiasis  :  dilated  pupils;  strabismus;  putrid  smell
from  mouth,  itching  of  nose,  griping  pain  in  belly;
throat  inflamed,  swallows  often,  pale  redness  in  throat
and  swelling  of  mucous  membrane;  palpitation.


SPIGELIA.  448

Boring  stitch  in  perineum.


21


Urinary  Organs, i  Diabetes  insipidus.

I  Urine:  copious;  with  frequent  urging,  mostl}^  at  night;

drips  involuntarily,  with  burning  in  orifice  of  urethra ;

whitish  sediment ;  water}^,  frequent,  nervous.

"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Erections  with  voluptuous  fancies,

but  without  sexual  desire.

Itching stitch in r. testicle and penis, from behind

forward.
I  I  Prostatic  fluid  presses  out  of  urethra.
Swelling  of  one-half  of  corona  glandis.
Tingling  around  corona  glandis.
2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Stitches  under
either  nipple.

I  I  Puerperal  peritonitis.

^' Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Chronic
hoarseness.
Catarrh with  hoarseness ; continuous  coryza ; dry  heat
without thirst ; protruded eyes ; violent headache ;
lachrymation.
Tickling  in  windpipe.

■  Influenza  accompanied  by  facial  neuralgia.
^"Respiration. iShort  breath,  <  when talking,  with red
cheeks  and  lips.

I I  Dyspnoea  and  suffocating  attacks  when  moving  in  bed
or  raising  arms ;  must  lie  on  r.  side  or  with  head  high.
^Heart  disease. ^Hydrothorax.

I  !  Hardly  speaks  or  takes  a  deep  breath  for  fear  of  aggra-
vating the  pain. ^Cardiac  rheumatism  or  neuralgia.

I  Oppression  of  chest  with  palpitation  when  walking  fast
or  from  other  bodily  exertion. ^Insufficiency  of  valves.

I  Suffocating  spell  from  least  motion.  ^Carditis.
"'^  Cough.  I  Cough:  at  night,  with  catarrh;  dry,  hard;  with
worm  affections ;  with  dyspnoea,  <  when  bending
forward  ;  suffocating,  as  if  from  a  quantity  of  water
flowing  into  windpipe;  dry,  violent,  hollow,  from  an
irritation  in  trachea.

I  Catarrh  of  air  passages  with  fever,  hot  skin,  but  no  thirst
or  sweat.
^^  Inner Chest  and  Lungs, i  Constriction  in chest,  with
anxiety  and  difficult  breathing.

Violent  pressure  upon  chest  beneath  1.  clavicle,  and  on
middle  of  chest.

Cutting  constriction  in  chest,  with  anxiety.

Dull  stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest,  only  during  inspiration.

>  I  Stitches  in  chest,  <  from  least  movement  or  when
breathing.

Violent  stitch  in  1.  side,  just  beneath  heart.


449  SPIGELIA.

Dull  sticking  at  point  where  beat  of  heart  is  felt.
Recurrent  dull  stitches,  rhythmical  with  pulse,  at  point

where  impulse  of  heart  is  felt  or  rather  more  externally.
I  Sensation  of  tearing  in  chest.
Tearing boring pain,  extending  from within  outward,

beneath  r.  nipple,  pain  always  extends  to  sternum  and

becomes  a  sharp  pressive  tearing  pain.
Dull  sticking  pinching  pain  beneath  r.  nipple,  in  thorax,

from  within  outward,  violent  only  on  inspiration.
I  I  Stitching  needlelike  pains  in  chest.
I  I  Cutting  piercing  pain  through  1.  chest,  near  sternum  to

back; heart  not  beating,  but  an  uninterrupted  rush

of  blood  through  it;  pulse  not  beating,  but  appeared

to  finger  like  a  thread  quickly  pulled  through  artery ;

hands  icy  cold  with  cold  sweat;  great  anguish  expressed

in  face. ^Cardiac  rheumatism.
iTrembling  feeling  in  chest  on  moving  arms,  or  from  any

movement.

I  Can  lie  only  on  r.  side,  with  head  high. ^Hydrothorax.

I I  Rheumatic  troubles,  especially  in  1.  side  of  chest.

^^ Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  n Stitches  about  heart:
synchronous  with  pulse  ;  with  anxiety  and  oppression  ;
with  commencing  valvular  disease,  endocarditis,  etc. ;
can  only  lie  on  r.  side,  or  with  head  very  high,  least
motion  aggravates.
I  Stitches  in  heart,  and  violent  throbbing  motion  of  heart

may  be  seen  through  clothing.
1  I  Drawing  sensation  in  region  of  heart. Aneurism. _
I  Violent  stitch  in  1.  side,  just  under  heart,  returns  period-
ically.

I  Stitches  between  heart  and  epigastrium.

•  Feeling  as  if  heart  were  compressed  or  squeezed  with  a
hand.

iPurring  feeling  over  heart;  wavelike  motion,  not  syn-
chronous with  pulse.

I I  Palpitation  :  violent,  <  bending  forward;  high  fever;
when  he  sits  down,  after  rising  in  morning ;  from  deep
inspiration  or  holding  breath  ;  from  worms;  from  least
motion  ;  with  anxious  oppression  of  chest.

I  I  Violent  palpitation  of  heart  and  frequent  attacks  of
fainting;  blowing  murmur  with  first  sound  of  heart.
6'Chlorosis.

I  Waving  palpitation,  not  synchronous  with  pulse;  purr-
ing feeling  over  heart;  trembling  of  carotids.  ^

I  I  In  morning,  as  soon  as  he  sat  down,  after  rising  from
bed,  heart  began  to  beat  violently,  with  great  oppression
and  cutting  pains  in  lower  abdomen  as  from  incarcerated
flatulence.

VOL.  IX.— 29.


SPIGELIA.  450

■  Unusually  violent  palpitation,  could  hear  pulsation,  and
beats  could  be  seen  through  clothes.

I  Tremulous  action  of  heart  in  nervous  and  hysterical
disorders.

I  I  Sudden  severe  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest,  about  region  of
heart,  so  violent  it  "  almost  knocks  her  down  ;  "  it  then
passes  rapidly  around  body,  from  1.  to  r.,  seemingly  on
inside  to  scrobiculum  cordis,  where  it  remains  about
twelve  hours;  pain  spasmodic,  often  induces  vomiting;
attacks  every  four  weeks,  but  with  no  distinct  regularity,
for  fifteen  years. ^Angina  pectoris.

I  I  Severe  pains  in  all  the  limbs;  hands  stiff,  cannot  move
them,  particularly  fingers ;  pressing  cutting  pain  in
abdomen,  beneath  floating  ribs ;  terrible  palpitation;
audible  beating  of  heart,  causing  pains  in  back  ;  period-
ical cutting  pains  extending  to  shoulders,  head  and
arms  ;  constriction  of  chest ;  great  dyspnoea,  cannot  get
enough  air,  with  great  oppression  of  chest  and  anxious
face ;  extreme  emaciation  ;  must  be  careful  while  eating
lest  pain  be  <  to  an  intolerable  degree.  ^Arthritic
rheumatism.

I  I  Attacks  of  cramplike,  grinding  pain  across  chest ;  body
convulsed ;  face  pale ;  dyspnoea,  nausea,  anxiety  and
faintness  accompanied  attack,  which  lasted  uninter-
ruptedly for  half  an  hour ;  rapid  and  strong  beating  of
heart ;  bellows'  sound  during  diastole,  and  friction  sound
during  systole ;  <  by  slightest  motion ;  pulse  very
feeble ;  extremely  sensitive  to  cold.  ^Rheumatic
carditis.

I  I  Severe  stitching  pains  in  cardiac  region  ;  violent  palpi-
>tation,  perceptible  to  eye  ;  dyspnoea  on  moving  in  bed  ;
-oppression  of  chest;  anxiety;  slight  cyanosis  of  upper
lip  ;  heartbeat  weak  ;  increased  area  of  dulness  on  per-
cussion ;  friction  sounds ;  pulse  weak,  120  ;  had  swelling
of  joints  of  r.  thumb,  knee,  foot  and  elbow  ;  dark  brown
sediment  in  urine ;  loss  of  appetite ;  sleeplessness.
^Pericarditis.

5l  I  Acute  pericarditis  with  anxiety  and  weight  in  prae-
cordia.

tl Neurotic  form  of  suffocative  breast  pang  with  cardiac
hyperthophy.

il  I  ^Hlndocarditis  with  insufficiency  of  mitral  valve,  after
;acute  articular  rheumatism,  in  a  girl  set.  14;  purring
over  region  of  heart,  noise  with  first  tick  ;  throbbing  of
carotids  and  subclavian  ; violent  nosebleed.

1  I  Strong  systolic  blowing  sound  at  apex  of  1.  ventricle.
^Insufficiency  of  mitral  valves.

)  1  Constant pressing, burning and ulcerative pain in


451  SPIGELIA.

thorax;  dyspnoea,  with  fear  of  suffocation  on  motion,  so
that  she  is  afraid  to  get  out  of  bed;  tremulous  sensation
in  chest  and  in  temples,  <  from  least  motion  of  arms,
particularly  when  raising  them  toward  head,  when
there  is  a  sensation  as  of  something  tearing  in  chest,
with  great  dyspnoea  and  anxiety ;  flushing  with  sweat
on  face  on  touching  epigastrium,  she  cannot  bear
pressure  of  clothing ;  at  times  cramping  sensation,  be-
ginning in  abdomen  and  extending  into  chest,  causing
dyspnoea  ;  at  times  violent  palpitation  with  sensation  as
if  heart  were  being  crushed,  or  with  stitches  and  trem-
bling sensation  ;  at  other  times  as  if  everything  in
chest  were  too  short,  loose  and  wabbling  about;  is
very  careful  when  moving  and  is  filled  with  anxiety  on
seeing  any  one  move  quickly  ;  frequent  wabbling  sensa-
tion in  abdomen  ;  head  rests  upon  chest  when  lying  and
sitting,  if  she  raises  it  she  becomes  anxious,  feels  as  if
something  were  tearing  in  chest  and  is  seized  with
nervous  spasmodic  respiration,  with  violent  and  con-
vulsive efforts  at  distension  of  chest,  face  becomes  bluish-
red  and  heart  beats  tumultuously,  also  violent  pulsation
in  all  the  arteries  ;  pulse  80  when  lying,  93  sitting,  and
not  synchronous  with  beat  of  heart ;  heartbeat  weak,
indistinct,  one  running  into  the  other ;  change  from
systole  to  diastole  indicated  rather  by  a  wavelike  motion
than  by  any  distinct  sound  or  impulse.

i  I  Systolic  blowing  at  apex.

1 1  Rheumatic  affections  of  heart.

I  Pulse  :  irregular ;  strong,  but  slow ;  trembling ;  weak
and  irregular,  at  one  time  rapid,  at  another  slow;
quicker  than  beating  of  heart;  like  a  thread  quickly
pulled  through  artery ;  intermitting,  every  other  beat
drops  out.

I  I  Aneurism  ;  a  girl  set.  15,  light  complexion  ;  a  few  itch-
ing pustules  on  forehead  and  chin  ;  for  two  years,  visible
and  felt  by  hand,  a  throbbing  lump  in  second  intercostal
space;  feels  lump  when  stretching  either  arm  back-
ward ;  from  stooping  or  lifting  throbbing  in  chest,  with
vertigo;  drawing  in  region  of  heart;  stethescope  over
tumor  reveals  continuous  rushing  sound,  more  marked
during  heart's  systole  ;  first  sound  somewhat  confused ;
second  sound  usually  prolonged,  and  of  increased  in-
tensity ;  a  murmur  upward  from  each  side  of  sternum ;
frightened  when  examined;  headache  like  band  around
head  when  stooping ;  nausea  {Spigel.  cured,  assisted  by
Carb.  veg.  and  later  Bryon.).
^^  Outer  Chest.  I  Violent  shootings  in  walls  of  chest,  mostly
on  1.,  under  clavicle  or  on  a  line  with  heart.


SPIGELIA.  452

I  Painful  contraction  of  muscles  of  chest.
'^  Neck  and  Back, i  Rheumatism  of  nape  of  neck  with  pain-
ful numbness;  <  lying  on  back.

Stitches  in  back  ;  also  when  breathing.

Bruised  feeling  in  spine,  even  during  rest.

I  Throbbing  of  carotids  and  subclavian. ^Endocarditis.
'^  Upper  Limbs. iTrembling  of  arms.

iStitches  in  bends  of  elbows  and  joints  of  hands  and
fingers.

Twitching  in  muscles  of  1.  forearm  just  above  wrist,  only
during  rest.

Pressive  pain  above  r.  wrist,  during  rest.

Painful  drawing  on  first  joint  of  thumb  where  it  unites
with  the  metacarpal  bone.

Tearing  pain  in  phalanges  of  r.  thumb.

Burning  itching  in  palms.

I  I. Hands  ic}^  cold  with  cold  sweat. ^Rheumatism.

I  Cold  viscous  sweat  in  hands.

Subcutaneous  tubercles  in  palms  of  hands.

Hard,  burning  itching  nodosities  in  hands.

Contraction  of  flexor  of  fingers.
*' Lower  Limbs. Drawing  tearing  in  r.  thigh,  while  sitting.

Persistent  tensive  stitch  in  1.  thigh,  while  walking,  ceases
on  standing,  returns  on  sitting.

Persistent  itching  stitch  in  1.  thigh.

Tearing  pain,  like  a  sprain,  in  1.  knee,  only  when  walk-
ing, at  times  he  limped  because  he  could  not  bend  knee
as  usual.

Stitching  in  calves,  with  jerking  and  pulsating,  in  both
patellae,  if  knees  are  held  stiffly  stretched  out.

Stitches  in  joints  of  legs  and  feet,  and  in  thigh.

Pulling  in  legs  from  below  upward,  with  heat,  or  from
above  downward  with  coldness  of  feet.

Contusive  pain  in  knee.

Sprain  of  foot  (after  Arnica).

Burning  pain  in  instep,  without  redness.

Deep-seated  and  lancinating  pain  in  sole  of  foot  when
resting  body  upon  it.

Wartlike  excrescences  on  toes.
'*  Limbs  in  General. Constant  restlessness  during  night.

Pressive,  pulling  or  cutting  pain  in  limbs,  running
lengthwise.

Stinging  pain  in  limbs,  principally  in  joints.

Trembling  of  limbs,  lassitude  and  heaviness.

iStinging  pain  in  limbs.

■  Stinging  or  stitching  in  joints.

Tearing  pains  in  limbs,  with  great  weakness  of  body;
tearing  in  joints  ;  rheumatism.


453  SPIGELIA.

Acute  inflammatory  rheumatism  ;  very  sensitive  to  cold
air  and  to  touch  ;  slightest  jar  or  knock  causes  intense
pain.

■  Twitching  of  limbs. ^Fracture  of  bones.

Hard  nodosities  on  hands  and  toes.
"Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  headache  >  ;  facial  neu-
ralgia >  ;  burning  tension  of  upper  lip ;  bruised  feel-
ing in  spine;  twitching  in  muscles  of  forearm;  pressive
pain  above  r.  wrist.

Lying:  vertigo  >  ;  pressing  pain  in  head  >;  headache
very  severe ;  causes  suffocating  fits ;  neuralgia  in  face
<  ;  on  face,  pains  >  ;  upon  affected  side  facial  neural-
gia <;  toothache  >;  head  rests  upon  chest;  pulse  80.

Lying  on  back  :  rlieumatism  of  nape  of  neck  <.

Laying  head  upon  pillow  at  night:  toothache  comes  on.

Lying  with  head  high:  pressing  headache  >.

Bolstered  up  in  bed:  suppressed  intermittent  >.

Must  lie  on  r.  side  or  with  head  high :  heart  disease;  hydro-
thorax.

Sitting:  vertigo;  pain  in  forehead;  headache  >  ;  toothache
>  ;  palpitation  ;  head  rests  upon  chest ;  pulse  93  ;  tear-
ing in  thigh  ;  stitch  in  thigh  returns.

Standing:  vertigo;  pain  in  forehead ;  facial  neuralgia  <;
stitch  in  thigh  ceases.

Must  sit  up  or  walk  about:  toothache.

Knees  stiffl}^  stretched  out:  stitches  in  calves.

Rising:  vertigo  <  ;  headache  <  ;  from  a  seat,  body  feels
sore  and  heavy.

Bending  forward :  cough  <;.  palpitation  <.

Stooping :  pressing  pain  in  head  <  ;  headache  as  of  a
band;  neuralgia  <;  pterygium  <;  toothache  <;  throb-
bing in  chest.

Raising  arms  toward  head :  sensation  of  something  tear-
ing in  chest.

Stretching  arms  backward:  feels  lump  in  intercostal  space.

Motion:  of  eyes  <  vertigo;  pressing  headache  <;  vio-
lent pain  in  parietal  bone ;  headache  very  acute ;
neuralgia  <  ;  rooting  pain  in  head  <  ;  quick,  as  if
brain  were  shaking  in  skull ;  quick,  converts  dull  pain
into  acute ;  shaking  in  brain  <  ;  of  eyes  <  pains ;  of
eyes,  dizzy;  eyeball  stiff;  prosopalgia  <;  of  muscles
of  face  sensation  as  if  skull  would  burst;  of  tongue
pain  <  ;  in  bed  suffocating  attacks ;  least,  suffocating
spells;  stitches  in  chest  <  ;  of  arms,  trembling  feeling
in  chest;  palpitation;  pain  in  chest  <;  in  bed,  dysp-
noea; fear  of  suffocation;  of  arms,  trembling  sensation
in  chest  and  temples  <  ;  least,  chill.

Very  careful  when  moving.


SPIGELIA.  454

Opening  mouth  :  headache  <.

Exertion  :  oppression  and  palpitation.

Walking:  vertigo;  pressing  pain  in  head  <;  swashing
in  brain  ;  pain  in  parietal  bone ;  in  open  air,  headache
< ;  about  room  a  long  time,  headache  >  ;  sharp  stitches
in  abdomen  disappeared  after  thirty  or  forty  steps  ;  fast,
oppression  of  chest  and  palpitation  ;  stitches  in  thigh  ;
pain  in  knee;  sensation  of  lightness  in  body;  after,
weakness.

Making  misstep:  violent  pain  in  parietal  bone.

Every  step  attended  by  violent  jerks  in  head.

Resting  body  upon  foot :  pain  in  sole.

Lifting:  throbbing  in  chest.
^*  Nerves. Exaltation  of  special  senses.

Great  agitation  of  nerves.

Restlessness  ;  cannot  keep  limbs  still  at  night.

Body  painfully  sensitive  to  touch,  it  sends  a  shudder
through  whole  frame;  part  touched  feels  chilly;  tin-
gling through  body ;  if  he  knocks  against  any  part  there
is  a  sudden  painful  crawling  through  whole  body  to
head.

Body  feels  heavy  and  sore  when  rising  from  a  seat.

Sensation  of  lightness  in  body  when  w^alking.

Weakness :  in  morning  on  waking ;  after  walking.

Sense  of  weariness  all  over,  with  sensation  of  or  real  cold-
ness of  body.
^^  Sleep. Sleepy  by  day,  even  mornings ;  goes  to  sleep  late.

Sleep  restless,  unrefreshing.

Confused  dreams,  in  which  he  seemed  so  busy  that  he  felt
weary  in  morning;  could  either  indistinctly,  or  not  at
all,  remember  his  dream,
'^Time. •  Morning:  vertigo  <;  headache  beginning;  ptery-
gium <  ;  face  bloated  <  ;  neuralgia  of  tongue  <  ;  mouth
dry  on  waking  ;  palpitation  ;  weakness  ;  sleepy ;  feels
w^eary  after  dreaming.

Day :  side  of  face  as  if  it  had  been  scorched ;  free  from
toothache ;  sleepy.

Noon  :  headache  at  height ;  headache  suddenly  disappears;
prosopalgia  <.

Afternoon :  neuralgia  commences,  raging  until  midnight.

Toward  evening :  violent  pain  in  parietal  bone.

Evening:  painful  pressure  in  abdomen.

Night:  pains  through eyeballs <;  choking; toothache
commences ;  frequent  urging ;  cough  ;  constant  restless-
ness ;  heat  in  flushes  ;  sweat.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Heat:  pains  in  face  >.

Warmth:  headache  <;  toothache  >.

Warm  applications : >  neuralgia.


455  SPIGELIA.

Wrapping  head  up  :  facial  neuralgia.

Open  air:  walking,  headache  <  ;  eyes  pain.

Slightest  draft  of  air :  toothache  <.

Damp,  rainy  weather :  neuralgia ;  migraine  affecting
supraorbital  region;  facial  neuralgia  <.

Water :  applied  in  facial  neuralgia  >  at  first,  afterward
could  not  be  borne.

Washing:  stitches  in  head  <  ;  during,  stitches  >.

Cold  water  :  pain  in  jaws  <  ;  head  >.

Cold:  neuralgia;  air,  <  pain  in  jaws;  applications  >
neuralgia;  air,  facial  neuralgia  <;  rheumatic  carditis,
extremely  sensitive.
*° Fever.  Chill:  often  recurs  at  same  hour  each  morning;
alternating  with  heat  or  sweat,  on  some  parts,  others
being  hot;  from  least  movement;  spreads  from  chest.

I  Heat:  especially  in  back;  flushes,  at  night,  with  thirst
for  beer ;  on  face  and  hands,  with  chill  in  back ;  with
desire  to  uncover.

I  Sweat:  chiefly  on  upper  part  of  body ;  night  sweats ;  offen-
sive smelling,  with heat  at  same time; clammy,  on
hands;  cold.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate:  chill  and  heat  or  sweat.

Periodical :  pain  in  head ;  supraorbital  neuralgia ;  deaf-
ness ;  prosopalgia ;  cutting  pains  to  shoulders,  head
and  arms.

3  A.M.  for  two  or  three  hours :  violent  pain  in  eyes,  con-
tinuing until  3  P.M.

From  10  a.m.  to  3  p.m.  pain  increases.

Every  morning :  at  sunrise,  headache ;  attacks  of  excru-
ciating pain  in  head  at  4  o'clock;  each  succeeding
morning  attack  <  ;  chill  at  same  hour.

From  morning  until  sunset :  prosopalgia.

Sunset :  headache  declines.

For  half  an  hour  :  attacks  of  pain  in  chest.

For  twelve  hours:  pain  in  scrobiculum.

For  twenty-four  hours :  migraine.

For  fourteen  days:  neuralgia  comes  on  between  11.15  and
11.30  P.M.,  about  fifteen  minutes  after  lying  down  in  bed.

Several  times  a  week  :  headache.

For  three  weeks:  rheumatic  iritis.

For  four  weeks  :  inflammation  of  eye.

For  four  weeks :  attacks  of  angina  pectoris  for  fifteen  years.

For  two  years :  a  throbbing  lump  in  second  intercostal
space.

Ten  years  ago :  struck  over  eye  with  a  brick,  extreme  pain
at  irregular  intervals.
"Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pressing  pain  in  temple  ;
tearing  in  frontal  eminence;  jerking  tearing  in  zygoma;


SPIGELIA.  456

pressive  drawing  in  side  of  vertex  and  occiput;  cutting
pain  in  forehead  and  temple,  extending  over  eye;  eye
inflamed;  contractive  burning  pain  in  eyeball;  stick-
ing pain  in  eyeball ;  itching  stitch  in  eyeball ;  shooting
pain  through  eye;  as  if  needles  were  thrust  into  eye-
ball; itching  in  concha;  facial  neuralgia;  burning  in
side  of  upper  lip  ;  pain  as  if  side  of  lower  jaw  would  be
torn  out  of  its  joint ;  pain  from  teeth  into  temple  and
ear ;  pain  in  teeth  ;  stitches  in  side  of  tongue ;  cannot
turn  head  to  side  on  account  of  pain  ;  itching  stitch  in
testicle;  dull  stitches  in  side  of  chest;  tearing  boring
pain  beneath  nipple ;  pinching  pain  beneath  nipple ;
swelling  of  joints  of  thumb,  knee,  foot  and  elbow  ;  press-
ive pain  above  wrist;  tearing  pain  in  phalanges  of
thumb  ;  tearing  in  thigh.

Left :  stitches  in  head  and  out  of  eye ;  headache  spreading
to  side  of  head,  temple  and  eye ;  violent  pain  in  parietal
bone ;  burning  pain  in  side  of  frontal  bone ;  violent
stitches  in  temple  ;  burrowing  pain  in  vertex  and  fore-
head ;  violent  pulsating  pain  in  temple  and  over  eye ;
neuralgia  ;  violent  throbbing  shooting  over  eye  ;  ex-
cruciating pain  from  deep  in  head  affecting  eye ;  cataract
of  eye  ;  tensive  pain  in  eyeball ;  rheumatic  iritis  ;  pro-
sopalgia <  ;  neuralgia,  beginning  in  malar  bone  ;  side  of
face  as  if  it  had  been  scorched  ;  as  if  muscles  of  side  of
face  from  forehead  to  neck  and  axilla  were  pierced  with
red-hot  needles ;  stinging  darting  in  half  of  face;  facial
neuralgia  coming  and  going  suddenly  ;  tearing,  shooting
from  side  of  forehead  to  temple  <  in  supraorbital  ridge,

■  with  ptosis  of  upper  lid;  tearing  pain  in  zygomatic
region  ;  stitches  in  region  of  diaphragm  ;  pressure  upon
chest  beneath  clavicle  ;  violent  stitch  just  beneath  heart ;
piercing  pain  through  chest;  rheumatic  troubles  <  on
side  of  chest;  severe  pain  in  side  of  chest;  systolic
blowing  sound  at  apex  of  ventricle.

Shooting  in  walls  of  chest,  under  clavicle  or  on  a  line  with
heart;  twitching  in  muscles  of  forearm;  stitch  in
thigh  ;  itching  stitch  in  thigh  ;  tearing  pain  in  knee.

From  1.  to  r.:  pain  passes  around  body.

From  within  outward:  boring  in  head;  dull  stitches  on
top  of  head ;  tearing,  boring  pain  beneath  nipple ;
pinching  pain  beneath  nipple.

From  without  inward  : pressure  in  temples.

From  behind  forward  :  pain  through  eyeball ;  stitch  in
testicle  and  penis.

From  below  upward  :  pulling  in  legs.
"Sensations. As  if  he  would  fall ;  as  if  he  would  be  obliged
to  go  to  stool ;  as  if  intoxicated ;  as  if  head  would  burst ;


457  SPIGELIA.

as  of  a  band  around  head  ;  as  if  head  were  tightly  bound ;
as  of  electric  sparks  in  temples  ;  brain  seemed  to  be  loose  ;
as  if  brain  were  shaking  in  skull ;  as  if  nerves  were  being
cut  by  a  fine  instrument  in  forehead  and  temple  ;  as  if
eye  would  be  pushed  out  of  head  ;  head  as  if  too  large;  as
if  hairs  or  feathers  were  on  lashes  ;  upper  lids  hang  as
if  paralyzed  ;  eyeballs  as  if  too  large  ;  as  if  sand  were  in
eyes  ;  as  if  needles  were  thrust  into  eyeball ;  as  if  eye
w^ould  be  pressed  out  of  socket ;  as  if  eye  would  fly
into  pieces ;  as  if  eye  were  being  pulled  forward  and
backward ;  pain  in  eye  as  if  it  would  drive  him  crazy  ;
as  if  ear  were  loosely  stopped  or  a  thick  mist  were  in
front  of  it ;  ears  as  if  stuffed  ;  as  if  back  of  nose  were
lightly  touched  by  hairs,  or  as  if  a  gentle  wind  were
blowing  across  it;  face  feels  as  if  it  had  been  scorched ;
as  if  all  muscles  of  1.  side  of  face  from  head  to  neck  and
1.  axilla  were  pierced  with  red-hot  needles  ;  teeth  as  if
too  long  ;  as  if  1.  side  of  lower  jaw  would  be  torn  out  off
its  joint;  sensation  resembling  purring  of  cat;  as  of  a
worm  rising  in  throat ;  as  if  a  half  fluid  body  were  ascend-
ing in  throat ;  as  of  a  hard  lump  in  stomach  ;  as  if  abdo-
men would  burst ;  as  if  all  the  intestines  would  be  con-
stricted ;  suffocating  as  if  from  a  quantity  of  water  flow-
ing into  windpipe  ;  pulse  as  if  a  thread  pulled  through
arteries;  as  if  heart  were  compressed  or  squeezed  with
a  hand ;  as  if  heart  were  being  crushed  ;  as  if  everything
in  chest  w^ere  too  short,  loose  and  wabbling  about;  as  if
something  were  tearing  in  chest.

Pain  :  at  cerebellum  ;  in  upper  and  lower  jaw.

Excruciating  pains  :  in  eye.

Extreme  pain  :  over  eye.

Molent  pain  :  in  1.  parietal  bone.

Sudden  severe  pain :  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  about  region  of
heart.

Severe  pains  :  in  all  the  limbs.

Excruciating,  burning,  stitching  pains  :  from  deep  in  head
to  eye.

Dreadful  banging,  throbbing,  burning,  tearing  pains  : in
face  and  neck.

Sharp,  stabbing,  sticking  pains  : through eyeball back
into  head.

Stabbing  pain  :  through  eye.

Lancinating  pain:  in  abdomen  ;  in  sole  of  foot.

Violent  throbbing,  shooting  pains  :  over  1.  eye.

Cutting,  piercing  pain  :  through  1.  chest,  near  sternum  to
back.

Cutting :  in  bowels ;  at  navel ;  in  abdomen  ;  extending  to
shoulders,  head  and  arms.


SPIGELIA.  458

Pressing  cutting  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Shooting  pain  :  through  forehead.

Shooting  pain  :  through  e3'e,  back  into  head  ;  in  walls  of

chest.
Darting  pain  :  through  eyeball.
Stinging,  darting  pains :  in  1.  half  of  face.
Burning,  twitching  pains : in  carious  teeth.
Twitching  pain  :  in  several  teeth.
Painful  jerks  :  in  nerves  of  a  hollow  tooth.  '

Violent  stitch  :  in  1.  side,  just  below  heart.
Severe  stitching  pains  :  in  cardiac  region.
Stitching,  needlelike  pain  :  in  chest.
Stitching  pain  :  in  eye  and  temple  ;  in  calves.
Sudden  stitch :  extending to eye, zygoma, jaw,  teeth,

throat.
Violent  burrowing  stitch :  in  middle  of  eye  and  in  inner

canthus.
Boring  stitch  :  in  perineum.
Pulsating  stitches  :  in  frontal  protuberances.
Stitches :  in  1.  side  of  head  and  out  of  1.  eye ;  dull,  on  top

of  head;  in  1.  temple; from  upper  maxilla  to  vertex;

in  region  of  diaphragm  ; in  abdomen ; under  either

nipple  ;  in  chest ;  about  heart ;  in  heart ;  between  heart

and  epigastrium ; in back ; in  bends  of  elbows  and

joints  of  fingers  and  hands  ;  in  joints  of  legs  and  feet  and

in  thigh.
Fine  stitches :  in  1.  temple ;  in  1.  side  of  tongue.
Persistent  itching  stitch  :  in  1.  thigh.
Persistent  tensive  stitch  :  in  1.  thigh.
Itching  stitch  :  in  r.  eyeball ;  in  r.  testicle  and  penis.
Dull  stitches :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  where

heartbeat  is  felt.
A  violent  jerk:  in  head.

Very  violent  tearing :  in  occiput,  forehead  and  temple.
Tearing  pains :  in  occiput,  in  vertex  and  in  forehead  ;  in

lower jaw  to ear and nape  of  neck ; in chest ; in

phalanges  of  r.  thumb;  in  1.  knee;  in  limbs;  in  joints.
Tearing,  boring  pain  :  beneath  r.  nipple.
Tearing :  rooting  up  pain.
Tearing,  lightning-like  twitches  :  in  head.
Jerking  tearing :  in  r.  zygoma.
Thrustlike  tearing  pain  :  in  forehead.
Throbbing,  tearing  :  in  decayed  teeth.
Burning  or  tearing  pressive  pain :  in  1.  zygomatic  region.
Tearing,  burning  pain  :  shooting  from  1.  side  of  forehead

to  temple.
Burning,  tearing  pain  :  in  brain.
Tensive,  tearing  pain  :  in  forehead.


459  SPIGELIA.

Drawing,  tearing  : in  r.  thigh.

Rending,  burning  pain  :  in  malar  bone.

Digging  pain :  in  carious  teeth.

Burrowing  pain  :  in  occiput.

Pinching  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Griping :  in  bowels.

Cramplike  grinding  pain  :  across  chest.

Boring:  in  forehead,  vertex,  cerebellum.

Pinching,  drawing,  itching  pain  :  in  external  ear.

Pulsating  pain:  in  1.  temple,  and  over  1.  eye.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  and  about  eye  ;  in  face  ; radiating  to-
nose,  face,  temple  and  neck.

Cutting  constriction  :  in  chest.

Constant  pressing  burning  and  ulcerative  pain  :  in  thorax.

Contractive,  burning  pain  :  in  r.  eyeball.

Burning  pain  :  in  r.  side  of  forehead  to  eyes ;  in  1.  side  of
frontal  bone  ;  in  face  ;  in  instep.

Pressive,  corrosve  pain:  in  stomach.

Contusive  pain  :  in  knee.

Sharp  sticking :  just  behind  and  above  frontal  eminence.

Constant  sticking  pain  :  in  r.  eyeball.

Dull  sticking :  at  point  where  beat  of  heart  is  felt ;  beneath
r.  nipple ;  in  thorax.

Rheumatic  pain  : at  nape  of  neck.

Tensive  pain  :  in  1.  eyeball ;  in  face.

Intolerable  pressive  pain  :  in  eyeball.

Pressing  pain  :  in  top  of  head ;  in  r.  temple ;  in  r.  side  of
head  and  eye  ;  in  eyeballs ;  in  ears  ;  above  r.  wrist.

Numb  pain  :  through  head.

Stinging  :  in  mouth  ;  in  limbs.

Smarting:  in  nose.

Burning  :  in  r.  side  of  upper  lip  ;  in  orifice  of  urethra.

Burning  tension  :  in  upper  lip.

Burning  itching :  in  palms.

Soreness  :  of  body.

Painfulness :  of  cerebellum.

Bruised  feeling  :  in  spine.

Soreness :  of  scalp.

Painful  numbness :  of  nape  of  neck.

Cramping  sensation  :  from  abdomen  into  chest.

Violent  pressure :  in  forehead  ;  in  both  temples.

Painful  drawing  :  on  first  joint  of  thumb.

Pressive  drawing  :  in  r.  side  of  vertex  and  occiput.

Drawing  sensation :  in  region  of  heart.

Jerking  :  in  both  patellae.
•  Pulling:  in  legs.

Throbbing  : in  face ;  in  teeth ;  in  lump  in  second  inter-
costal space  ;  in  chest ;  of  carotids  and  subclavian.


SPIGELIA.  460

Pulsating:  in  both  patellae.

Heat:  in  back;  on  lace,  and  hands.

Dry  heat  and  burning  :  in  eyes.

Tingling:  in  oesophagus;  through  body.

Tension  :  of  scalp  ;  of  groin.

Pressure:  in  stomach;  in  head  ;  in  prsecordial  region;  in

umbilical  region ;  in  lower  abdomen  ;  violent  upon  chest.
Constriction  :  in  chest.
Heavy  feeling :  of  body.
Weight:  in  prsecordia.
Oppression:  of  chest.
Tickling  :  in  nose;  on  back  of  nose;  in  anus  and  rectum  ;

in  windpipe.
Pricking :  in  lids.

Painful  crawling:  through  w^hole  body  to  head.
Dryness:  of  mouth.
Anxiety:  in  prsecordia.
Discomfort :  in  abdomen  and  thorax.
Lightness:  of  body.
Wabbling  sensation  :  in  abdomen.
Swashing:  in  brain.
Purring  feeling :  over  heart.
Trembling:  of  arms.
Trembling  feeling:  in  chest.
Tremulous  sensation  :  in  chest  and  temples.
Formication:  in  tongue,  extending  up  into  head.
Itching:  in  r.  concha;  in  nose; in  anus  and  rectum;  on

coccyx;  in  pustules.
Coldness:  of  feet;  of  body.
^'  Tissues. Neuralgic  affections  ;  sensitiveness  to  concussion

or  shock.
Dropsy  of  internal  parts.
Painful  glandular  swellings.
Rheumatism  attacking  heart.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  dull  stitches

in  head  <  ;  headache  <;  scalp  sore;  eyeball  sensitive;

face  during  neuralgia  sensitive;  burning  in  upper  lip  ;

cold  sensation  in  teeth ;  pit  of  stomach  sensitive ;  on

epigastrium,  flushing  with  sweat  on  face ;  acute  inflam-
matory rheuriiatism  ;  sends  a  shudder  through  whole

frame.
Lying  on  hand  :  headache  >.
Wiping  eyes:  as  if  hairs  were  on  lashes  <.
Pressure :  >  pressing  headache  ;  headache  >  ;  neuralgia

>  by  hard ;  toothache <  ;  stomach  not  sensitive ; of

clothes  unbearable.
Rubbing :  itching  stitch  in  eyeball  returns.
Jar,  every :  headache  <  ;  or  knock  causes  sudden  painful

crawling  through  whole  body  to  head.


461  SPIGELIA.

*^  Skin. Pale,  wrinkled,  yellow,  earthy  skin.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Light  hair,  debilitated,  pale,
thin,  bloated  persons,  complaining  of  weakness.

1 1  Worse  from  every  shaking,  commotion,  or  concussion.

Adapted  to  ansemic,  debilitated  subjects,  of  rheumatic  dia-
thesis ;  scrofulous  children  afflicted  with  ascarides  and
lumbrici.

Boy,  set.  5;  stuttering  speech.

Boy,  set.  10,  three  years  ago  had  an  attack  of  rheumatism,
a  year  thereafter  another  attack,  followed  by  dropsy,  six
weeks  ago  a  third  attack;  cardiac  disorder.

Girl,  set.  14,  after  acute  articular  rheumatism;  endocarditis.

Girl,  set.  15,  suffering  seven  years ;  headache.

Boy,  set.  17,  well  developed,  natarally  vigorous  and  active,
dark  hair,  blue  eyes,  fair  complexion;  rheumatic  car-
ditis.

Girl,  set.  19,  suffering  from  chlorosis  ;  headache.

Young  man,  set.  19;  iritis.

Miss  R.,  set.  23,  complexion  fair,  hair  dark,  lymphatic  tem-
perament, after  suppression  of  ague ;  supraorbital  neu-
ralgia.

Alice  T.,  set.  23,  suffering  a  month  ;  prosopalgia.

Miss  W.,  set.  23,  suffering  two  years ;  mitral  insufficiency.

Man,  set.  25,  choleric-sanguine  temperament,  strong  con-
stitution ;  neuralgic  headache.

Woman,  set.  26,  ill  since  birth  of  last  child,  which  was  her
fourth ;  cardiac  disorder.

Woman,  set.  27,  nervous,  ill  seven  years;  gastric  disorder.

Woman,  set.  28,  single,  suffering  four  years;  neuralgia  of
tongue.

Woman,  set.  35,  suffering  one  month ;  conjunctivitis.

Woman,  set.  36,  cook  ;  toothache.

Laborer,  set.  36,  after  rheumatism  pericarditis.

Man,  set.  38,  German,  ten  years  ago  was  struck  over  1.  eye
with  a  brick,  since  then  suffering;  supraorbital  neu-
ralgia.

A  lady,  set.  38,  a  brunette,  of  robust  habit,  mother  of  sev-
eral children,  had  always  a  tendency  to  nervous  affec-
tions, especially  when  under  external  influences;  neu-
ralgia of  face.

Miss  H.,  set.  44,  suffering  fourteen  days ;  facial  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  51,  suffering  from  rheumatic  iritis;  ciliary  neu-
ralgia.

Shoemaker,  set.  52 ;  toothache.

Lady,  ast.  54  ;  ciliary  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  56  ;  facial  neuralgia.

Watchmaker,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  always  suffered
when  compelled  to  use  persistently  the  eye-glass ;  facial
neuralgia.


SPIGELTA— SPONGIA  TOSTA.  462

''^Relations. Antidoted  by: Aurum,  restlessness  in  limbs;

CoccuL,  Pulsat.
It  antidotes :  Mercur.
Compatible:  Aeon.,  endocarditis;  Arsen.,  Digit.,  Kali  carh.,

heart  symptoms; Jm,  prosopalgia  ; ^rmc,  carbuncle ;

Zincum,  heart  disease.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.

Common  Sponge  roasted.  Spongia.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Hahnemann,  assisted  by  F.  Hahnemann,  Gutmann,
Hartmann,  Haynel,  Hornbnrg,  Langhammer,  Wagner,  Wislicenus,  Stapf  and
Lehmann,  Hah.  Materia  Medica,  voh  2;  Fincke,  Am.  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  317;
"Bell,  Am.  Jour,  of  Hom.  Mat.  Med.,  vol.  2,  1869,  p.  211 ;  Berridge,  N.  E.  Med.
•Gaz.,  vol.  9,  p.  403.

Clinical  Authorities. — Basedow's  disease,  Hirsch,  H.  Kl.,  1870,  p.  113;
Allen,  Norton's  Oph.  Ther.,  p.  171  ;  Diphtheria,  Baynum,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  14,
,p.  605;  Pain  in  abdomen,  Veit  Meyer,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  8,  from  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  71,  p.  197 ;  Constipation,  GouUon,  A..  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  199 ;  Bane's  Bee,  1870,

jp.  251 ;  Epididymitis,  orchitis,  Hornby,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  82,  p.  88  ;  Orchitis,  Hartmann,
Schmid,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  210;  Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  277  ;  Williamson,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1873;  Affection  of  testicle.  Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  137;
Irritabdity  of  larynx,  Nankivell,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  15,  p.  137 ;  Laryngitis,  Lobethal,
Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  100;  Hendricks,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  105,  p.  166 ;  Perichondritis

daryngea,  Unsin,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  740 ;  Laryngeal  affections,  Lobethal,
Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  172 ;  Catarrh  of  air-passages,  Kiiseman,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,

^o\.  3,  p.  27 ;  Croup,  Elb,  Miiller,  Schneider,  Billig,  Bolle,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  765;  Stapf,  Tietze,  Hartmann,  Hartlaub,  Weigel,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  294;
Kiiseman,  Bosch,  Schwarze,  Hartmann,  Frank,  H.  in  F.,  Hartung,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,

-vol.  3,  p.  137  ;  Morgan,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  240  ;  McNeil,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  481 ;
Asthma,  Gaspary,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  281 ;  Gaspary,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,

•p.  198;  Gee,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  18;  Cough,  Schleicher,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  696 ;  Bell,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  211 ;  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  37  ;
Chauvet,  Bib.  Horn.,  vol.  9,  p.  47  ;  Nash,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  94 ;  Med.  Couns.,
vol.  1,  p.  181 ;  Chronic  cough,  Williams,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  267  ;  Pertussis,
H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  123 ; Use  in  phthisis,  Hathaway,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  231  ;

-Aneurism  of  aorta.  Fanning,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M,  vol.  3,  p.  10;  Endocarditis,  Bell,
A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  211  ;  Affection  of  heart,  Wells,  Hering's  Anal.  Ther.,
vol.  1,  p.  223 ;  Hering,  Wells,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  134 ;  Goitre,  B.  in  D.,
Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  380;  Bernard,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1883,  p.  204;  Bronchocele,
(3  cases.  Barlow,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  17,  p.  Ill;  also  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  670;
Enlargement  of  thyroid  gland,  Stumm,  A.  J.  H.  M..M.,  vol.  3,  p.  108;  Ringivorm,

3fuller,  B.  J.  H.,  ivol.  23,  p.  373.


^^^  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

^  Mind. Conscious,  but  unable  to  act  upon  her  limbs
ilnsensibility  (loss  of  feeling)  with  the  chills.
Mental  dulness;  difficult  comprehension.
I  Irresistible  desire  to  sing,  excessive  mirth,  followed  bv
sadness.  *'

■  Paroxysms  of  anxiety  or  anguish. ^Cardiac  troubles.

linear  of  the  future;  tired  of  life. ^Chronic  orchitis

Aggravation  from  excitement.

I  i  Fancies  appear  on  shutting  eyes. ^Typhus.

Taciturn  and  discontented  mood,  not  disposed  to  talk

I  Delirium  :  with  the  heat;  when  falling  asleep,  with  the
chills.  ^

Crazy  feeling,  head  feels  blown  up.

Feels  awkward  about  her  work,  which  she  cannot  accom-
plish satisfactorily.

Alternating  merry,  peevish,  vexed  and  scolding  mood

JJuiness  with  gloominess  over  root  of  nose

Inconsolability,  would  rather  die  on  the  spot;  with  the
neat.

i  Weeping  and  inconsolable  mood.

i Inclination  to  weep:  with  the  dreams;  with  whoopine
cough  ;  with  heat ;  with  sweat.

J I  Anxiety:  in  features;  looks  around  anxiously;  with
the  dreams;  and  heat,  suddenly ;  nausea,  pallor,  after
exercise  out-doors;  restlessness;  with  attacks  in  throat-
m  croup ;  with  dyspnoea ;  in  typhus.  '

i  I  She  is  very  fretful  and  anxious  about  her  condition,
tears  she  will  die  of  suffocation.

I  Anxious  sweat  and  faintness;  with  angina  pectoris.

bhe  IS  very  timid,  and  is  especially  pursued  and  incessantly
tormented  by  a  frightful  scene  of  some  mournful  event
of  the  past.

She  is  very  timorous,  and starts at  every  trifle,  which

affects  her  feet,  so  as  to  make  them  feel  heavy
iTimidity  of  mind  with  the  sweat.
I  Terror  and  fear:  of  approaching  death; that  she  will

die  of  suffocation;  with  heart  disease;  with  whooping

cough;  with  the  heat;  with  the  sweat.
He  IS  anxious,  as  if  some  misfortune  would  occur  of  which

he  has  a  presentiment.
J  Apprehension  of  a  fatal  termination  of  his  disease
iGreat  alarm,  agitation,  anxiety,  difficult  respiration.
J  Jb  right  awakens.

iNervous,-  desponding  about  loss  of  sexual  power,
ibatiety  of  life,  with  the  heat.
Ill-humored  ;  dislikes  to  talk  and  answer
Out  of  temper  and  lazy; would  rather  rest,  and  is  not

disposed  to  talk.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  464

Peevish,  vexed  and  scolding  mood.
Sulky,  obstinate  and  improper  behavior.

■  Obstinacy,  with  whooping  cough.
liEver}'  excitement  increases  the  cough.
Thinking  of  it  increases  onesided  heat  of  face.

^  Sensorium.  ■  Vertigo:  with  danger  of  falling;  at  night,  when
awaking,  with  nausea ;  when  sitting,  as  if  head  would
fall  to  one  side,  with  a  feeling  of  heat  in  head ;  as  if  one
would  fall  backward  ;  as  if  tipsy ;  after  sleep,  with  the
heat;  with  rush  of  blood  to  head.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  throbbing  and  pressure

in  forehead.

■  Heaviness  and  fulness  in  head,  as  if  all  blood  were  mount-

ing to  head,  with  vertigo.
'Inner  Head. Stitches  in  temples.

Sharp  stitches  externally  in  1.  temple,  extending  to  fore-
head.

While  lying  feels  a  strong  pulsation,  <  about  ear  on  which
she  is  lying.

Dull  headache  in  r.  side  of  brain,  on  coming  into  warm
room  from  open  air.

Headache  as  if  skull  would  burst,  in  vertex  and  forehead.

Pressing  sensation  :  in  r.  temple,  from  within  outward  ;
downward  drawing  pain  in  r.  side  of  head  and  neck ;
outward  on  r.  parietal  bone,  while  lying.

Pressing  headache  in  vertex.

■  Pressing  headache  in  r.  frontal  eminence,  from  within

outward,  <  while  sitting,  on  entering  warm  room  after
walking  in  open  air,  and  from  looking  at  anything
sharply ;  >  when  lying  in  horizontal  position,  espe-
cially when  lying  on  back.

■  Forehead:  blood accumulated, pressing out; burning

heat;  violent  heat;  pain;  stitches  from  temples;
pressure.

■  Occiput: headache; stitches; pain; heaviness before

fever ;  stitch  on  turning  head  ;  burning.

■  Headache:  when  gazing steadily; on rising, >  after

washing  and  taking  breakfast;  from  dry,  cold  weather;
after  intoxication  ;  with  the  chill ;  with  heat  of  face.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  pressing,  knocking  and

pulsating  in  forehead ;  redness  of  face,  with  anxious
mien  ;  >  when  lying  in  a  horizontal  position.

While  lying,  she  feels  a  dull,  tremulous  roaring  (wuw-
wern),  like  a  strong  pulsation,  each  time  with  a  double
stroke,  in  head,  in  region  of  ear  upon  which  she  lies  in
bed  ;  when  turning  on  other  ear  she  feels  it  in  that  side.

Bursting  pain  in  head,  with  whooping  cough.

■  Meningitis,  scrofulous  or  tuberculous;  congestion  of  blood


465  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

to  head,  with  pressing,  knocking  and  pulsating  in  fore-
head ;  redness  of  face  with  anxious  mien  ;  >  when  lying
in  horizontal  position ;  heat  in  head ;  bending  head
backward,  with  tension  in  neck  ;  eyes  staring,  lids  wide
open;  double  sight;  face  pale  and  cold,  with  heat,  or
alternately  red  and  pale;  twitching  of  muscles  with
fever;  frequent  waking  with  a  start;  tossing  about;  stu-
pid slumber.
*  Outer  Head.  _  l  l  Sharp  stitches  in  1.  temple,  externally,  ex-
tending into  forehead.

Sharp  stitches  in  scalp,  with  heat  of  scalp.

I  Sensation  as  if  hair  were  standing  on  end  on  vertex-
during  chill.  '

Sharp  pressure  externally,  at  both  temples.

Gnawing  pain,  externally  on  crown  of  head.

Forehead  painful  to  touch.

Disagreeable  sensitiveness  of  cranial  integuments,  particu-
larly on  moving  scalp.

■  Violent  itching  on  scalp.

I  Yellow,  scabby  eruption.

Turning  head:  a  stitch  in  occiput;  to  right,  neck  pains;
neck  stiff;  tensive  pain  in  neck.

I  Bending  head  back:  tension  in  neck;  in  croup  and  suf-
focative attacks.

Jerks  head  downward.

iBending  backward  and  sinking  of  head,  with  painful
stiffness  of  neck  ;  piping,  anxious  inspiration,  with  dry
barking  cough. ^Croup.  '

Holding  head  in  an  upright  position,  >  dull  pressure  in
occiput.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Sees  visions  on  closing  eyes.

Double  vision  ;  >  lying  down.

Pressing  and  stinging  in  eyes.

Coldness  of  eyes.

Lachrymation  and  headache,  when  looking  fixedly  at  one

spot.
Things  appear  in  flames,  at  night.
Objects  appear  to  move  up  and  down.
Could  not  distinguish  objects.

She  can  recognize  distant  objects  only  with  great  exertion.
Looking sharply at anything increases headache and

causes  lachrymation.
Pressing  in  outer  half  of  1.  eye.
Tension  about  1.  eye,  near  temple.
Tearing  and  stinging  in  1.  eye,  after  fever.
Stinging  about  eye.

Stinging,  finally  pressing  pain  in  both  eyes,  in  evening.
Stingmg  itching  under  1.  eye,  >  by  rubbing.

VOL.  IX. — 30.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  466

Coldness  or  heat  in  eyes.

Redness  of  conjunctiva;  eyes  fill  with  puslike  matter.

Burning  in  1.  eye  about  eyeball.

■  Heaviness  and  nightly  agglutination  of  lids.
Tears  exude  from  between  closed  lids.

Sudden  stinging  drawing  at  outer  canthus  of  1.  orbit,
which  spreads  around,  above  and  below  to  inner  can-
thus.

Tensive  stinging  pain  in  1.  outer  canthus,  most  severe
on  moving  eyes;  disappearing  when  touched.

Eyes  close  involuntarily,  almost  spasmodically.

Pressing  under  eyelids.

Burning  pain  on  external  surface  of  1.  lower  lid.

Itching  of  eyelids.

I  Redness  of  eyes,  with  lachryniation  and  burning.

I  Eyes  protruding,  staring,  or  deeply  sunken.

I  I  Inflammation  with  dryness  of  lids.

Eyes  have  a  dull,  swollen  look,  as  after  intoxication.

Pressing  pain  over  r.  eye,  externallj^

I  Macules  of  cornea.

I  I  Eyeballs  staring  and  perceptibly  protruding ;  stitches
in  balls  and  burning  around  eyes,  with  lachrymation,
>  from  any  sudden  light ;  often  eye  feels  as  if  twisted
around  ;  there  is  constant  flashing  of  colors,  mostly  deep
red,  with  figures  of  light,  etc.,  even  when  eye  is  closed,
especially  at  night ;  thyroid  gland  is  considerably  hyper-
trophied  ;  palpitation  very  marked,  makes  her  uneasy,
restless  and  easily  frightened,  especially  at  night.
^Basedow's  disease.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Hardness  of  hearing.

Congestion  of  blood  to  ears  ;  burning.

Dull  ringing  in  ears ;  ringing  in  r.  ear  ;  hears  a  pulsating
roar  in  ear  upon  which  she  lies ;  as  if  a  battery  of  guns
were  discharged,  at  night.

Cramplike  pain  in  1.  ear,  while  walking  in  open  air.

Pressure  in  ears,  and  crowding  sensation  in  same.

Drawing  pain  in  internal  r.  ear.

Earache  of  a  contracting  kind.

Fine  stitches  in  r.  ear,  outwardly,  as  if  passing  through
tympanum.,

Digging  stitches  in  depth  of  1.  ear.

I  Heat  in  ears.

Burning :  in  ears  from  throat ;  behind  ear.

■  Suppuration  of  external  ear.
Pain  in  cartilages  of  ears.
Burning  in  orifice  of  r.  ear.

An  inflamed  nodule  finally  covered  with  a  scab,  pain-
ful to  touch  and  remaining  several  days,  in  1.  concha,


467  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

close  to  entrance  of  meatus  auditorius ; tensive  pain,

creeping as if  it would gather and  l3reak,  at  times

stitches.
Red  swelling  of  r.  helix,  with  a  pimple  on  same,  exuding

moisture like an ulcer, for  nine days; painful on

external  pressure.
Boils  on  1.  ear,  painful  to  touch.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Bleeding  of  nose : when  blowing  it ;

during  dinner ;  with  whooping  cough.
Dulness  and sensation  of  gloominess  over  root  of  nose

like  that  preceding  a  common  cold.
Tensive  constricting  sensation  above  root  of  nose.
Tearing  in  nose.

Creeping  stitches  in  1.  nasal  bone.
I  Nose  stuffed  up. ^Coryza. ^Whooping  cough.
iCoryza: fluent; hoarseness; croupy  cough;  after  dry,

cold  winds  ;  with  chills  ;  in  measles.
I  I  Breathing  through  nose  obstructed by  a  swelling in

fauces.
I  Dryness  of  nose.

■  Retention  and  thickening  of  nasal  mucus.
I  Nasal  mucus  viscous,  grows  thick. ^Membranous  croup.
I  Chronic  dry  nasal  catarrh  ;  nose  entirely  occluded.
I  I  Coryza ; nose running, or stopped up, with fever ;

hoarseness ;  at  same  time  catarrhal  affection  of  larynx,

with  hollow  or  crouplike  cough ;  respiration  difficult,

with  a  noise  sounding  as  in  laryngo-stenosis.
I  I  Nostrils  wide  open  ;  fanlike  motion.
I  Nose  pinched  ;  cold.
Eruption  on  point  of  nose,  and  on  lips.
^Tipper  Face. iFace:  distressed,  in  croup ;  anxious;  livid;

pale  and  bloated;  blue;  pale,  with  sunken  eyes;  red,

with  anxious  expression ; alternately  red and pale ;

1 1  cold  sweat.
Heat  on  one  side  of  face,  <  when  thinking  of  it.
Swelling  of  cheeks.
Itching  and  stinging  in  cheeks.
Cramplike  pain from  1.  articulation  of  jaw to  cheek  ;

evenings,  while  eating  or  when  walking  in  open  air.
A  vexed  expression,  with  cough  at  night.
Coldness,  pallor  and  sweat  of  face,  with  heat  of  body.
I  Cold  sweat  in  face,  in  evening.
Flying  heat  in  face and in blood,  with excitement  of

nerves.
I  Herpes  on  face,  especially  in  scrofulous  persons,  after  a

cold,  with  dry,  croupy  cough.
^  Lower  Face. Tearing  and  stinging  in  1.  cheek  after  fever.
Into cheeks  throbbing, down  from head ; down from

articulation  of  jaw  ;  tearing  from  cheek  to  neck.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  468

Pressing,  tearing  sensation  in  r.  zygomatic  arch.

I  I  Pricking  pains  passing  transversely  across  upper  jaw.

Jerking  fine  stitch  from  posterior  portion  of  r.  upper  jaw

into  r.  internal  ear,  at  night  in  bed.
I  I  Cramplike  pain  extending from  1,  articulation  of  jaw,

down  cheek  ;  evenings  while  eating.
Tension  in  articulation  of  1.  jaw  when  walking  in  open

air.
Pain  in  articulation  of  jaw  as  if  dislocated.
Lower  jaw  drawn  by  cramp;  painful  to  touch.
Swelling  of  cheeks.
Stinging,  itching  in  1.  cheek.
Fine  stitches  beneath  lower  lip.
I  I  Mouth firmly closed, only slightly opened with a

groaning  breath.
Lips  livid.

■  Eruptions  on  lips;  after  fever.
iSwelling  of  maxillary  glands,  with  tension.

After  opening  mouth  wide,  and  then  biting  teeth  firmly

together,  cramp  in  neck.
Protracted  violent  burning  under  r.  angle  of  mouth,  near

chin,  as  if  eruption  were  to  appear ;  <  on stretching

skin.
Left  side  of  chin  to  angle  of  mouth  painful  to  touch,  as  if

ulcerated.
•  Numbness  in  chin.
Heat  in  chin.

Pimples  beneath  chin,  on  neck,  painful  to  pressure.
^°  Teeth and Gums. Teeth feel dull and loose when

masticating.
Itching  and  stinging  in  teeth.
Pain  as  if  something  had  got  jammed  between  teeth  in

chewing.
Pain  in  posterior  molars  of  r.  lower  jaw,  as  if  gums  and

teeth  were  swollen  and  latter  being  lifted.
Burning  pain  in  1.  upper  molars.
I  I  Heat  in  teeth.

Itching  in  upper  and  lower  teeth.
Gums  painful  while  chewing,  with  swelling  ;  thin  white

coating.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue, i Taste  :  bitter,  only  in  throat ;  bitter,

with  dry  tongue ;  bitter,  with  chill ;  sweetish,  in  mouth ;

like  glycerine  ;  of  fresh  nuts ;  coffee  is  bitter  and  dis-
gusting; tobacco  has  a  scratchy,  bitter  taste  in  mouth

and  fauces.
■Tongue:  brown,  dry ;  dry  and  red;  vesicles  at  edge  of

tongue,  with  soreness.

■  Difficulty  of  speech.  •


469  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

"Inner  Mouth. Mouth  raw.

Mouth  and  tongue full of  vesicles,  with  burning  and
stinging  pains,  cannot  eat  solid  food.

I  I  Mouth  burning,  dry. /9Croup.

Saliva  diminished  ;  or  with  whooping  cough,  increased.
"Throat. ■  Burning  and  stinging  in  throat; rawness  and
scratching.

■  Penetrating  tickling  in  throat,  toward  ear.

I I  Sore  throat,  <  after  eating  sweet  things.

■  Thyroid  gland  swollen,  even  with  chin  ;  at  night  suffo-

cating spells,  barking,  with  stinging  in  throat  and  sore-
ness in  abdomen.

■  Throat  externally  swollen;  suffocating  attacks.

■  Relief  of  throat  symptoms,  when  lying  on  back.
Stitches  in  goitre,  even  when  not  swallowing.
Constantly recurring needlelike stitches above pit  of

throat,  externally,  in  lower  portion  of  goitre.
I  I  Pulse  100;  respiration  50,  wheezing,  whistling,  occasion-
ally sawing ;  head  thrown  back,  muscles  of  chest  work-
ing, abdomen  contracted  under  ribs  with  every  effort  to
inflate  lungs ;  cold,  clammy  sweat  all  over ;  lies  quietly
on  side,  anxious  for  breath  ;  does  not  want  to  be  fanned  ;
eyes  fixed,  pupils  dilated;  does  not  notice  attendants;
loose  involuntary  discharge  from  bowels  in  morning.
^Diphtheria.

7t  Tension  and  pressure  in  throat  (relieved  by  Calc).

I  I  Pain  in  throat  when  coughing  and  speaking.

Stinging  in  throat,  particularly  after  eating,  and  a  sensa-
tion outside  of  throat  as  if  something  were  being  pressed
out  ; <  morning  and  evening.

■  Stitches  in  throat.

■  Dryness  in  throat;  <  by  hawking.

Roughness  of  throat  on  coughing ;  in  whooping  cough.

Scraping  in  throat.

Quick  and  strong  hawking  ends  a  suffocating  attack.

■  Tickling  in  throat  causes  cough.

Continual  very  bitter  taste  deep  in  throat,  not  in  mouth.

Burning  in  throat,  in  front,  and  then  in  ears.

Attack  of  sudden burning  and compression ; drawing

toward  throat ;  and  anxiety,  passing  off  on  sitting  up

in  bed.

■  Frequent  burning  and  dryness  in  throat.

■  Tonsils,  soft  palate  and  uvula  somewhat  swollen  and

highly  reddened.

Painful  pressure  above  thyroid  cartilage,  <  by  palpitation.

Very  disagreeable  sensation  of  relaxation  in  oesophagus
and  stomach,  as  if  he  had  drunk  a  great  deal  of  luke-
warm water.


SPONCtIA  TOSTA.  470

Heat  in  oesophagus.

1 1  Swelling  in  fauces,  with  a  broad  basis,  projecting  from  r.
to  1.,  allowing  in  1,  but  a  small  passage  of  food  and
obstructing  breathing  through  nose ;  voice  somewhat
nasal;  snoring  and  rattling  breathing  at  night ;  wakes
up  several  times  during  night  with  want  of  breath,  in-
creasing to  suffocation  ;  a  slight  cough  and  a  numbness
in  chin  and  in  front  of  throat,

I  I  Deglutition  prevented.

■  Difficult  swallowing. ^Croup.

■  On  swallowing:  stitches  in  neck  pass  off;  violent  strain-

ing pain  ;  pain  in  goitre  ;  a  moving  sensation  in  goitre.
^'Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i  Insatiable  appetite

and  thirst;  or  diminished  appetite,  out  of  humor.
Desire  for  dainties.

iThirstlessness;  rarely  thirst  with  the  chill.
I  1  Thirst,  but  is  only able to swallow small quantity

and  with  difficulty.
Violent  thirst  after  smoking.
^*  Eating  and  Drinking, ii Eating and drinking relieve

cough.

■  Drinking  milk,  ale  or  spirits,  or  cold  or  hot  tea,  or  cold

water  brings  on  cough.
During  dinner,  nosebleed.
While  eating,  cramp  in  articulation  of  jaw.
On  chewing :  gums  pain  ;  pain  in  molars.
After eating: stinging  in  throat;  sweet  things <  sore

throat ; fulness  and  distress  ; cutting  in  upper  part  of

abdomen  ;  colic.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  '  Hiccough.
Eructations  :  repeated  ;  empty  ;  sour  ;  bitter.
Nausea :  continuous ;  and  vertigo,  when  waking  ;  when

smoking ;  and  waterbrash.
Retching  of  mucus.
Sense  of  sickness  and  faintness  at  stomach  as  if  one  had

drunk  a  quantity  of  warm  water.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. She cannot endure tight

clothing about  body,  particularly around epigastric

region.
Pressure  in  epigastrium,  in  afternoon.
Internal  sensation  of  coldness  in  epigastrium,  with  ful-
ness in  that  region.
Pressing  pain  in  gastric  region,  lasting  all  forenoon.
Beneath  short  ribs  pain  on  coughing.
I  I  Chill  in  pit  of  stomach.
I  Pit  of  stomach  drawn  in  during  croup.
Ulcerative  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  must  lie  on  back.
Drawing,  as  if  growing  together,  in  pit  of  stomach  as  far


471  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

as  throat,  when  it  seems  to  press  windpipe  so  that  she
can  hardly  breathe.

I  Craves  dainties ;  after  eating  has  dyspeptic  distress  and
fulness  of  stomach  ;  >  from  warm  drinks,  particularly
colicky  pains  in  abdomen.

Cannot  tolerate  tight  clothing  about  stomach.

Stitches  in  region  of  stomach.

I  I  Stomach  feels  flaccid  and  as  if  standing  open.  ^Whoop-
ing cough.

I  '  Craving  at  stomach  before  menses.

■  Dyspeptic  distress  and  fulness  in  stomach,  after  eating.
^^Hypochondria, i  i  Pressure  in  hypochondria. ^Whooping

cough.

I  I  Chronic  pancreatitis.
'^  Abdomen. Rumbling  in  abdomen  <  evenings  and  morn-
ings.

■Violent  action  of  abdominal  muscles  during  inspiration.

■  Viscera  drawn  up  against  diaphragm.

■  Cannot  bear  tight  clothing  on  abdomen. ^Whooping

cough. ^Dyspepsia.
I  I  Pain  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  ;  digging  and  choking  ;  >
after  discharge  of  wind ;  at  times  as  if  something  alive
were  moving  there.

■  Pain  in  abdomen,  instead  of  catamenia.

Tensive  pain  from  middle  of  hypogastrium  to  anus ;  cut-
ting in  hypogastrium,  extending  toward  1.  breast,  in
evening.

Boring  stinging  in  1.  hypogastrium  on  expiration,  <  on
stooping.

Tense  abdomen.

Tensive  pain  in  upper  abdomen  while  sitting  or  walking,
<  on  stooping.

While  sitting,  painful  constriction  in  1.  side,  beneath  stom-
ach, particularly  when  lying  on  r.  side.

■  ■Cramps  in  abdomen;  pinching  colic.

Lower  part  of  abdomen  feels  empty ;  viscera  drawn  up

against  diaphragm.
I  I  Gurgling  in  abdomen,  urging  and  rumbling  before  stool.
Sensation  like  a  fine  digging,  as  if  something  alive  were

beneath  skin  of  abdomen,  above  1.  hip  in  the  side  upon

which  he  lies,  in  morning.
A  twisting  sensation  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  <  when  pressed

with  hand.
Stitches  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  in  region  of  liver.
Fine  stitch,  externally,  on  navel.

■  Colic:  before  menses,  before  chill;  with  the  sweat.

I  I  Violent  commotion  of  abdominal  muscles  during  inspi-
ration. ^Whooping  cough.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  472

Squalmishness  in  abdomen,  with  frequent  fluid  stools,  like

diarrhoea.
When  smoking  tobacco,  heat  in  abdomen  rises  into  chest,

rest  of  body  chilly.

■  Heat  in  abdomen.
I  I  Peritonitis.

Cramplike  pain  in  1.  groin,  while  sitting.

Stitches  below  groin.

Pain  in  abdominal  ring  as  in  inguinal  hernia.

Only  while  sitting,  pressing,  tearing  pain  in  region  of  ab-
dominal ring,  on  both  sides.

Itching  near  groin.

Glandular  swelling  in  r.  groin,  with  tensive  pain  while
walking.

Small  boil  in  1.  groin,  very  painful.

Swelling  of  inguinal  glands.
^" Stool  and  Rectum. iDiarrhoeic  stools: with  tenesmus;
frequent,  fluid  ;  white.

■  After  cholera,  croup.

I  I  Occasional  diarrhoea  with  a  large  number  of  ascarides,

after  which  she  always  feels  great  relief.
I  I  Stools  small  and  hard,  with  tenesmus.

■  Before  stool :  noise  in  abdomen;  urging  and  rumbling;

itching  in  anus.
During  stool :  pressure,  caused  by  flatus  in  lumbar  region;

straining  in  anus  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue ;  sore  pain

in  anus  lasting  for  some  days.
After  stool :  blood  passes  from  anus.

■  Costive;  hard  stool,  insuflicient,  with  tenesmus;  soreness

of  anus.
I  I  Formication  in  rectum.
Pain  from  hypogastrium  to  anus.

■  Smarting  in  anus.

Stitches  in  anus,  and  snarling  noise  in  abdomen,  before

each  stool.
Itching,  biting  and  soreness  at  anus,  discharge  of  ascarides.
I  I  Ascarides  with  whooping  cough.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Very  thin  stream  of  urine.

■  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  small  discharges;  at

times  without  discharge ;  at  others  with  discharges  of
acrid  smelling  urine, which  deposited  a dirty-white
sediment.
Increased  flow  of  urine. .

■  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Urine  frothy  ;  sediment  thick,  greyish  white  or  yellow.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Drawing,  painful  stitches,  extending

from  body  through  glans  penis.
Voluptuous  itching  at  point  of  glans  penis,  for  several
hours,  urging  him  to  rub  the  part.


473  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

Itching,  burning  in  scrotum  and  body  of  penis.

Total  want  of  sexual  desire.

I  I  Chronic  enlargement  of  prostate  gland.

•  Swollen,  painful  spermatic  cords.

I  I  Stitches  into  spermatic  cord  ;  drawing.

Large,  somewhat  blunt  stitch,  shooting  from  testicle  into

spermatic  cord.
Pressive  swelling  of  testicles.
Simple  pain  in  testicles,  also  when  touched.
A  pinching,  bruised,  squeezing  pain  in  testicles.

I  I  Shooting  up  entire  cord  ;  any  motion  of  bed  or  clothing

brought  on  throbbing,  in  addition  to  constant,  heavy,
dragging  pains.

I I  Since  two  years  swelling  of  1.  testicle  as  large  as  a  hen's
egg,  smooth  and  hard;  obstruction  of  vasa  efferentia  ;
shooting  pain  from  testicle  into  inguinal  region.

I  I  After  checked  gonorrhoea  orchitis,  first  r.  then  left.

■  Maltreated  orchitis;  also  after  checked  gonorrhoea.

I  I  Right  epididymis  enlarged  and  hardened,  with  little
pain  ;  cord  also  thickened  and  hard  ;  fistulous  opening
(in  connection  with  lower  part  of  epididymis),  discharges
a  little  thick,  whitish  matter  ;  scrotum  has  an  irregular
and  discolored  appearance  from  a  sinus  and  cicatriza-
tion of  former  abscesses  and  sinuses;  urine  always
thick ;  total  want  of  sexual  desire ;  both  testicles  soft
and  small ;  nervous  and  despondent  about  loss  of  sexual
power;  apprehensive  of  a  fatal  termination.

I  I  Scirrhous  testicle.

iHeat  in  male  genitals;  in  penis,  scrotum,  testicle  and
spermatic  cords.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. Enlargement  and  induration  of
ovaries.

■  Menses  too  soon,  too  profuse.

■  Before  menses :  colic,  backache,  soreness  in  sacrum  and

craving  in  stomach,  palpitation.

■  During  menses:  drawing  in  all  the  limbs; awakes  with

suffocating  spells.
Catamenia  suppressed  ;  at  the  time  violent  pains  in  small
of  back  and  abdomen.

■  Violent drawing in upper and lower limbs, during

menses.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  i  i  A  particular
condition  of  placenta  seems  only  cause  for  protracted,
painful  and  unsuccessful  labor.
I  I  Twice,  after  a  few  doses  of  Spongia  200,  miscarried  at
about  six  or  eight  weeks ;  a  few  doses  brought  on  flow-
ing like  menses,  continuing  several  days.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  ■  Hoarse-
ness, cough,  coryza.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  .  474

I  Hoarse, voice cracked or faint, choking sensation;
whistling  inspiration.

■  Hoarseness  with  soreness  and  burning.

■  Feeling  of  a  plug  in  larynx;  larynx  sensitive  to  touch

and  when  turning  neck  ;  talking  hurts.
Pressure  in  larynx  when  singing.
Cracked  voice  in  evening ;  increasing  hoarseness,  can  only

speak  with  difficulty.

■  Voice: nasal; hollow; low; lisping; weak ; cracked ;

not  clear  ;  failing,  when  talking  or  singing  ;  giving  oui,
with  chronic  hoarseness.

■  Chronic  catarrhal  hoarseness.

■  Hoarseness:  withcoryza;  with  cough;  whooping  cough  ;

typhus ;  sweat ;  measles  ;  after  laryngotomy.

■  Rough,  crowing  cry  with  the  cough.

I  1  Aphonia in  a  boy,  set.  3,  who  had  undergone  laryn-
gotomy for  removal  of  a  bean.

■  Chronic  sore  throat,  <  when  reading  aloud,  talking  or

singing ;  <  after  eating  sweet  things.

■  ■Laryngeal  phthisis.

■  Great  dryness  of  larynx.

■  Laryngismus  stridulus.

■  ■Talking,  singing  or  swallowing  hurts  larynx.

■  Inflammation  of  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchia.

■  Attacks of mucous" rattling in windpipe; at times

strangling.

■  Feeling  of  stoppage  in  windpipe.

■Starts  Irom  sleep  suddenly  with  contraction  of  larynx.

■  Region  of  thyroid  gland  indurated.

■  Contraction in larynx, constriction, suffocation; also

during  sleep.

■  As if a stopper or valve  were in larynx. ^Croup.

^Whooping  cough.

■  After  plastic  lymph  has  been  deposited  a  foreign  body

is audible  in  larynx  or  trachea  moving  to  and  fro;

child coughs  up cutaneous masses or tough,  thick

phlegm.
Severe  pressing  inward  in  larynx,  as  if  with  a  nail,  when

moving,  in  evening.
Drawing toward larynx and contraction therein, in

evening.
Jerking,  fine  stitches  externally  in  region  of  larynx.

■  Irritation  in  upper  part  of  larynx.
■Tickling  in  larynx,  with  whooping  cough.

■  Burning,  tickling  in  larynx  and  trachea.
■Scraping,  roughness,  in  larynx  and  trachea.

■  Dryness  of  larynx;  <  by hawking;  with  the  sweat;

with short, barking cough, embarrassed breathing


475  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

as  if  larynx  and  trachea  were  narrower;  with  difficult
speech,  hoarseness ;  expectoration  of  more  or  less  yellow
mucus,  consisting  of  little  lumps;  beginning  phthisis
laryngea.

■  Laryngeal  catarrh: with  coryza ;  with  dry  cough,  tor-

menting during  night ;  with  ulcers  in  larynx.

1 1  Larynx  sensitive  to  touch. ^Croup. ^Whooping  cough.

I  I  Perichondritis  laryngea ;  hollow,  barking,  dry  cough,
day  and  night,  constriction  in  larynx ;  pain  in  larynx
on  touching  it,  and  on  turning  neck  ;  whistling  breath-

I  I  Larynx elevated and depressed, during respiration.

^Croup.
I  I  Swollen  larynx,  almost  protruding  above  chin.
I  Glandular  swellings  about  larynx  and  trachea,
iln trachea: pain; shock upward, like a suffocative

paroxysm,  starting  out  of  sleep  ;  contraction  ;  burning ;

rattling ;  pain  on  coughing ;  dryness.

■  Catarrhal  affections  of  air  passages  with  dry  cough  and

hoarseness,  no  fever,  in  grown  persons.
I  I  Fever and irritation in throat,  with hoarse,  croupy
cough, < in  evening ; breathing wheezy ; spells of
choking  in  middle  of  night. ^Laryngitis.

■  Dry  bronchitis,  with  terrible,  hard,  dry,  racking  cough;

much  dyspnoea  and  slight  expectoration ;  <  in  hot
room,  >  by  eating  or  drinking.

■  Spasmodic  paroxysms  of  cough  and  dyspnoea;  <  from

a  sudden  change  of  atmosphere,  a  wind  arising  or  an
unpleasant  moral  impression  ;  wheezing,  sibilant  ronchi.

■  ■Cough  dry  and  sibilant,  sounding  like  a  saw  driven

through  a  pine  board. ^Croup.

I  I  Awoke  with  a  violent,  harsh,  hollow-sounding  cough;
voice  hoarse ;  respiration  quick,  little  impeded,  but
with  much  rattling;  high  fever;  skin  hot  and  dry.
^Croup.

I  I  After  cessation  of  coryza,  hollow,  barking,  dry  cough,
with  croupy  sound;  short  attacks  of  rattling  in  wind-
pipe while  breathing;  skin  hot;  frequent  stretching
and  yawning ;  while  coughing,  makes  faces  and  com-
plains of  pain  under  larynx ;  cough  <  in  afternoon ;
lachrymose  humor ;  pulse  hard,  rapid. ^Croup.

I  I  Sat  up  in  bed;  face  bloated  and  bluish;  anxious
expression ;  breathing  difficult,  rattling,  with  much
effort  of  chest  and  distortion  of  face  ;  eyes  project;  head
bent  backward  ;  cough  whistling  and  resonant ;  seizes
hold  of  nearest  object,  grasps  at  larynx,  which  is  painful;
anxious  sweat;  pulse  110;  great  heat,  constant  thirst;
involuntary  discharge  of  feces  and  urine  while  cough-
ing. /^Croup.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  476

I  I  Burning  fever;  face  red ;  skin  dry;  violent  thirst;
constipation  ;  hoarse,  rough,  deep,  barking  cough,  which
he  tries  to  suppress  ;  rattling,  whistling  respiration ;
starting  up  in  sleep  and  anxious  breathing ;  when  lying
bores  head  backward  into  pillow. ^Croup.

I  I  After  a  chill,  at  night  burning  heat  of  skin,  redness
of  face,  headache,  delirium ;  violent,  hoarse,  hollow,
barking  cough,  with  great  pain  in  larynx  ;  rough,  hoarse
voice ;  rattling,  whistling  respiration. ^Croup.

I  I  High  fever,  frequent  attacks  of  suffocation  and  cough ;
hoarse,  rough  voice;  whistling  respiration,  audible  at  a
distance ;  region  of  larynx  painful ;  starting  up  in  bed
as  if  she  would  suffocate ;  boring  backward  of  head ;
ill-humor,  crying,  indifference  to  everything. ^Croup.

I  I  Sudden  attack  of  croup  about  9  p.m.  ;  thrcM^  back  her
head;  face  first  red,  then  blue,  cold  and  moist;  eyes
red  and  suffused  ;  cough  dry  and  painful ;  limbs  cold
and  moist;  during  paroxysms  struggled  and  writhed
into  erect  position.

I  1  Hoarseness,  cough,  and  dryness  of  Schneiderian  mem-
brane for  two  days ;  sudden  development  of  croup ;
child  sits  on  mother's  lap  with  head  thrown  back ;
fanlike  motion  of  nostrils ;  laborious  breathing,  with
a  sawing  sound  ;  now  and  then  sharp  whistling  cough  ;
protrusion  of  eyes ;  eyelids  wide  open ;  great  anxiety
depicted  on  countenance.

I  I  Sits  up  in  bed  ;  cannot  lie  on  account  of  want  of  breath ;
eyes  protruding,  staring ;  nose  pinched  and  cold ;  face
pale  and  bloated;  mouth  firmly  closed  or  only  slightly
opened,  with  a  groaning  breath ;  loss  of  voice ;  deglu-
tition prevented ;  head  drawn  backward ;  swollen
larynx  almost  protruding  above  chin ;  lower  part  of
abdomen  feels  empty ;  viscera  drawn  up  against
diaphragm ;  groaning  respiration  without  any  motion
of  chest;  pulse  imperceptible;  hands  and  feet  cold;
whole  body  covered  with  a  cold,  clammy  sweat.

I  I A  little  girl,  2|-  years  old ;  aroused  by  cough,  sits  up
suddenly  in  bed,  looks  around  anxiously;  gasps  for
breath  as  if  it  could  not  get  any ;  in  a  short  time
a  second  attack,  more  violent  than  first,  followed  by
repeated  attacks,  each  more  violent ;  infrequent  dry
cough ;  hoarseness ;  breathing  somewhat  accelerated
and  difficult;  every  quarter  of  an  hour  restlessness  and
anxiety  increased ;  wanted  to  be  carried  about,  threw
its  head  back,  or  imploringly  stretched  out  its  hands
for  relief;  face  turned  dark  red  when  in  height  of
attack ;  eyes  protruded  and  neck  commenced  to  swell
rapidly ;  between  attacks  child  showed  signs  of  thirst,


477  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

but  is  unable  to  swallow  but  a  small  quantity,  and
with  difficulty;  frequent  urging  to  urinate,  at  times
without  discharge,  at  others  with  discharge  of  normally
colored,  acrid-smelling  urine,  which  deposited  a  dirty
white  sediment.

I  I A  young  lady,  set.  24 ;  three  days  after  convalescence
from  cholera,  face  bluish-red,  somewhat  bloated,
anxious  and  distorted ;  increased  bodily  temperature,
with  diminished  warmth  of  extremities  ;  tonsils,  soft
palate  and  uvula  somewhat  swollen  and  highly
reddened;  breathing  very  rapid  and  short;  on  deeper
inhalation  a  whistling  noise  in  larynx,  with  sinking  in
of  intercostal  spaces;  weak,  vesicular  breathing;  at
times  sudden,  dull  concussions  of  cough,  ending  in  a
long-drawn  whistling  inspiration;  dyspnoea;  anxiety;
blueness  of  face;  lisping  voice;  weak  pulse,  100;
violent  straining  pain  on  swallowing;  pain  in  throat
when  coughing  and  speaking ;  larynx  sensitive  to
touch ;  constant  anxiety ;  great  heat  and  feeling  of
exhaustion  ;  thin,  white  coating  on  gums.

llCroup  <  before  midnight  (<  before  morning,  Hepar).

I  Cough  rough,  dull,  hollow  and  barking;  either  perfectly
dry,  or  difficult  loosening  of  phlegm ;  breathing  slow
and  drawing,  noisy,  whistling,  sawing  (when  phlegm
commences  to  rattle,  Hepar).

I  Fair  complexion; <  before midnight; dry  sound  of

breathing  and  cough.

I I  Cough  is  dry  and  sibilant,  or  sounds  like  a  saw  driven
through  a  pine  board,  each  cough  corresponding  to  a
thrust  of  the  saw ;  no  mucous  rattle ;  cough  dry  and
hoarse,  causes  pain  in  throat. ^Croup.

I  Wakes  with  suffocation  about  larynx  on  falling  asleep,
early  at  night.
^^Respiration. i Breathing: wheezing,  anxious,  <  during
inhalation,  with  violent  laboring  of  abdominal  muscles
piping,  anxious ; whistling,  sawing between coughs
with  whooping  cough  or  croup;  rattling ;  loud  ;  snoring
noisy  ;  weak,  slow  and  drawn ;  accelerated  and  difficult

.  very  rapid  and  short ;  very  quick,  gasping  ;  laborious
gasping;  panting;  groaning,  without  motion  of  chest
slow,  deep,  as  after  exhaustion  ;  as  if  through  a  sponge

I  Dyspnoea:  with  palpitation;  severe,  on  lying  down
exhaustion  in  chest,  <  after  every  exertion ;  sudden
weakness,  tottering  while  walking,  blood  seems  to  rush
into  chest  as  if  it  would  burst;  with  frothy,  white  sputa
and  much  retching;  an  hour  after  slight  coughing
brings  up  grey  lumpy  mucus;  >  by  bending  body
forward.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  478

1 1  Asthma:  from  taking  cold,  cannot  lie  down;  sibilant
ronchi;  after  menses;  breathing  always  tight,  cannot
inspire  nor  expire  freely;  in  consequence  of  goitre;
breathing,  rattling  and  panting;  after  every  slight
motion  loses  her  breath  and  becomes  faint ;  blood  rushes
to  her  chest  and  head;  hot  in  face,  anxious;  fears  she
will  die  of  suffocation  ;  spasmodic,  with  organic  disease
of  heart ;  must  throw  head  back  ; <  at  full  moon.

I  Awakes  with  suffocative  sensation;  wakes  up  choking
when  falling  asleep.

I  I  Came  slowly  into  office,  walked  stooped,  sat  down
carefully,  leaned  forward  and  kept  very  quiet  and
seemed  to  be  much  exhausted ;  labored  inspiration
involving  abdominal  muscles,  quite  marked ;  had  not
slept  for  two  nights,  obliged  to  sit  upright  in  his  chair ;
leaning  backward,  lying  down,  or  exertion  takes  his
breath  away.

■  Dyspnoea  and  great  weakness  in  chest,  could  hardly  talk
after  exercise.

Suffocation  on  moment  of  falling  asleep.

I  I  Wakes  with  suffocation  about  larynx ;  on  falling  asleep

early  at  night ;  fair  skin.
Suffocative  paroxysm,  with  pain  in  chest.

II  On  deep  inhalation,  whistling  in  larynx  and  sucking
in  of  intercostal  spaces.

On  slow,  deep  inspiration,  stitch  in  chest.

I  On  breathing,  sensation  of  air  passing  into  glands  of
neck. ^Goitre.

On  expiration,  pain  in  hypogastrium.
"  Cough.  1 1  Cough  :  dry,  barking,  hollow,  croupy ;  wheezing,
asthmatic;  caused  by  burning  or  tickling  in  larynx,
sensation  like  a  plug  or  valve,  or  by  feeling  of  accumu-
lation of  mucus  and  weight  in  chest ;  dry,  with  burn-
ing in  chest ;  loose,  suddenly  changing  to  dryness  and
hoarseness  (typhus) ;  without  expectoration,  with  chill ;
incessant,  from  a  place  low  down  in  chest,  where  it  pains,
as  if  sore  and  bloody  ;  slight,  from  swelling  in  fauces ;
short,  infrequent ;  short,  dry,  irritating,  with  feeling  of
roughness  in  larynx,  and  pains  in  chest ;  dry,  rough,
barking,  with  dyspnoea ;  sudden  concussion  ;  spasmodic ;
violent;  dry,  hollow,  wheezing,  <  in  evening;  dry  or
sibilant,  or  sounds  like  a  saw  driven  through  a  pine
•  board,  each  cough  corresponding  to  a  thrust  of  the  saw ;
hollow,  with  some  expectoration,  day  and  night ;  hollow
in  croup  or  remaining  after  croup  ;  in  measles ;  with  a
high  crowing  sound ;  sharp,  whistling ;  exceedingly
painful,  in  croup  ;  hurting  larynx.
I  I  Cough  caused  by  tickling  in  throat ;  expectoration  easy,


479  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

sometimes  salty ;  <  on  rising  from  bed  and  when  in-
doors ;  brought  on  by  smoking,  lying  on  back  or  r.  side,
drinking  milk,  ale,  spirits,  cold  tea,  or  cold  water;
>  b}^  eating  or  by  warm  tea  or  warm  coffee ;  disturbs
sleep ;  <  in  wet  weather ;  >  in  frosty  weather.

■  Frequent  night  cough  in  paroxysms  of  two  minutes,  with

a  vexed  expression.

I  I  Aneurism  of  descending  aorta,  a  paroxysmal,  dry,  suffo-
cative cough,  coming  at  irregular  intervals,  but  espe-
cially on  lying  down,  or  when  drinking  hot  tea;  dys-
peptic distress  and  fulness  in  stomach  after  eating
(relieved).

I  i  When  coughing,  sweat.

■  On  coughing,  pain  in  chest  and  trachea,  with  roughness

of  throat.

On  coughing,  painful  pressure  beneath  short  ribs.

I  Whooping  cough,  deep,  hollow,  barking,  caused  by  sen-
sation of  a  plug  in  larynx,  with  expectoration  only  in
morning  of  small  quantities  of  tough,  yellow,  hardened
mucus,  compelling  one  to  swallow  it  again.

I  I  Cough  caused  by  feeling  of  a  plug  in  throat;  brought
on  by  movement  and  lying  down,  especially  on  r.  side
or  back ;  >  by  sitting  up  or  eating ;  dyspnoea  <  by
talking  or  moving,  or  lying  down,  especially  on  r.  side  or
back,  and  by  bending  back  or  stooping,  or  by  lying  with
head  low ;  >  by  bending  forward  slightly,  by  eating  or
by  drinking  warm  cocoa ;  excited  b}^  a  feeling  of  large
accumulation  of  mucus  and  weight  at  chest ;  voice  lost
at  times,  subject  to  such  attacks,  in  cold  weather,  for  six
years.

I  Chronic  cough,  violent  attacks,  brought  up  small,  hard
tubercle.

■  Expectoration  :  scanty,  of  saltish  tasting  mucus  ;  scanty,

tenacious,  yellow,  indurated,  slightly  sour-tasting;  loos-
ened mornings,  but  must  be  swallowed  again ;  profuse,
mucous,  cannot  lie  down  (pneumonia  in  stage  of  resolu-
tion); smelling  like  milk  (whooping  cough);  of  yellow
mucus  in  little  lumps;  of  cutaneous  masses.
^-  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Pain  in  chest  and  bronchi,  with
rawness  in  throat  when  coughing.

After  exertion  suddenly  exhausted,  chest  particularly
affected,  could  hardly  speak  ;  heat  in  face  and  nausea ;
heaviness  in  head.

I  Oppression  of  chest.

Weight  dragging  down  on  r.  chest ;  tightness  of  chest  from
a  cold.

■  Constricting  or  coiitracting  pain  in  chest ;  spasmodic  con-

striction. ^Whooping  cough. ^Heart  disease.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  480

Pressure  in  1.  chest,  sometimes  stitches.

Pressing,  cutting  pain  on  deep  inspiration,  in  1.  side  of
chest.

Sudden  pain,  in  chest  and  dorsal  muscles  of  1.  side,  as  if
a  broad  body  armed  with  points  were  pressing  upward,
a  broad  pressure  with  many  fine  stitches.

Drawing  stitches  beneath  second  rib  of  1.  side  of  chest,  only
on  walking.

Drawing  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  while  sitting  with  back
slightly  bent,  but  particularly  on  slow,  deep  inspiration.

Severe  intermittent  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Transient,  painful  stitches  on  r.  side  of  chest;  when  the
part  is  rubbed  it  seems  as  if  a  weight  were  dragging
down  in  that  place,  under  skin

Severe  pricking  pain  in  r.  breast,  from  within  outward.

Stinging,  pinching,  crawling  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  in  re-
gion of  sixth  and  seventh  ribs,  <  from  pressure.

A  pinching  jerk  in  1.  side  of  chest,  from  without  inward.

Boring  stitch  in  r.  costal  muscles,  continuous  on  inspira-
tion and  expiration.

I  Constrictive  spasmodic  pain  through  chest  and  larynx.  .

I  Stitches,  resembling  pleuritic  stitches,  in  both  sides.

I  Pain  in  chest  on  coughing.

A  spot  deep  in  chest  causes  coughing.

iHeat  in  chest;  sensation  as  if  she  had  something  hot
inside  of  chest.

Heat  from  abdomen.

Burning  in  chest,  with  cough.

She  grows  weak  after  every  trifling  motion  of  body;  blood
rushes  up  into  chest,  face  grows  hot,  body  begins  to  glow,
bloodvessels  are  hard  and  distended  and  she  loses  her
breath ;  she  recovers  only  after  a  long  rest,

■  Burning,  soreness,  rawness,  heaviness  in  chest.
iCongestion  to  chest  from  least  movement  or  exertion;

dyspnoea,  nausea,  faintish  weakness.

Orgasm  of  blood  in  chest  after  least  exertion,  with  dysp-
noea, anguish,  nausea  and  faintish  weakness.

After  moderate  motion  out  of  doors,  she  suddenly  grows
weak  and  totters  to  a  chair ;  amid  great  anxiety,  nau-
sea, pallor,  short  gasping  breath,  blood  seems  to  rush
from  heart  up  into  chest  as  if  to  burst  out  above ;  eyes
close  involuntarily,  almost  spasmodically,  tears  exude
from  between  closed  lids ;  she  is  conscious,  but  is  unable
to  act  upon  her  limbs  by  means  of  volition.

■  Bronchial  catarrh  :  with  dry  cough  and  hoarseness,  with-

out fever  ;  with  measles.
I  Acute  bronchitis,  with  profuse  secretion  of  mucus  ;  much
oppression  of  breathing  ;  all  symptoms  <  by  lying  with


29


481  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

head  low ;  cough  <  by  room  getting  too  warm ;  >  by
eating,  even  eating  a  little.
I  Inflammation  of  air-passages,  with  dry,  irritating  cough
and  burning  tickling  in  larynx.

I  Bronchitis: with continuous, dry, fatiguing cough;

mucous rales subcrepitant,  whistling and sonorous ;
following  croup.

I I  Chronic  bronchitis,  with  a  dry  spasmodic  cough.

A  spot  deep  in  chest  as  if  raw  and  bloody  from
coughing.

I  Broncho  and  croupous  pneumonia.

Pneumonia  :  in  stage  of  resolution,  with  profuse  secretion
and  expectoration  of  mucus ;  inability  to  lie  down ;
cough  >  by  eating  and  drinking.

■  Tuberculous  consumption: beginning in apex  of  (1.)

lung ;  severe  dyspnoea  on  lying  down  ;  exhaustion  after
every  exertion,  especially  of  chest ;  hoarseness,  with
sudden  aphonia  while  speaking  ;  chilliness  in  back,  not
removed  by  artificial  heat,  yet  if  the  room  becomes  too
warm  the  cough  is  increased ;  cough  <  from  evening
until  midnight,  from  cold  air,  from  talking,  singing  or
moving ;  >  from  eating  or  drinking.
Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i  Constricting  pain  in  cardiac
region  with  anxiety ; anxious  sweat. ^Angina  pectoris.

Heart  beating  a  double  stroke ; pulsating  sound  in  ear.

;rSuffering  with  an  organic  affection  of  heart,  she  ate  and
swallowed  a  piece  of  sponge,  just  roasted;  sudden  and
terrible  beating  of  heart  and  suffocation;  lips  livid;
respiration  violently  gasping,  great  pain  in  heart ;
terror  and  fear  of  approaching  death.

I I  Attacks  of  oppression  and  cardiac  pain;  <  lying  with
head  low.

I  Rheumatic  endocarditis,  loud  blowing  with  each  heart-
beat.

■  Stinging  pressing  pains  in  prsecordial  region.

I  I  Violent  palpitation,  awakens  after  12  p.m.;  sensation  of
suffocation;  bellows'  murmur;  loud  cough,  which  is
hard,  tight,  dry ;  great  alarm,  agitation,  anxiety,
dyspnoea.

I I  Palpitation:  violent,  with  pain,  gasping  respiration;
suddenly  awakened  after  midnight,  with  suffocation,
great  alarm,  anxiety ;  valvular  insufficiency ;  before
catamenia;  with  congestion  to  chest.

I  I  Rheumatism  left  lumbar  muscles  and  seized  heart
(second  similar  metastasis) ;  awakened  between  1  and  2
A.M.  by  a  sense  of  suffocation,  accompanied  by  loud,
violent  cough,  great  alarm,  agitation,  anxiety  and  diffi-
cult respiration  ;  action  of  heart  violent  and  rapid,  and

VOL.  IX. — 31.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  482

each  beat  accompanied  by  a  ItDud  blowing  as  of  a
bellows.

I  I  Irregular  action  of  heart,  suffocating  palpitation  on
making  even  slight  exertion,  or  on  going  up  stairs  or
ascending  ground ;  if  she  raises  arms  above  head  she
becomes  faint ;  lay  in  bed  with  her  head  high  ;  awoke
often  in  a  fright  and  felt  as  if  she  were  suffocating;
physical  signs  of  valvular  deposit  unmistakable.

I  In  fibrinous  deposit  upon  valves  of  heart,  it  causes  a
gradual  disappearance  of  valvular  murmur.

I  Rheumatic  endocarditis,  valvular  insufficiency  (usually

mitral),  systolic  murmur.

■  Valvular  insufficiency ; awaking  at  night  with  fear  and

terror.

I I  Angina  pectoris;  contracting  pain  in  chest,  heat,  suffo-
cation, faintness,  and  anxious  sweat.

I  I  Aneurism  of  descending  aorta;  paroxysmal,  dry,  suffo-
cative cough,  coming  at  irregular  intervals,  but  espe-
cially on  lying  down  or  drinking  hot  tea ;  dyspeptic
distress  and  fulness  in  stomach  after  eating  (relieved).

Pulse :  frequent,  hard,  full  or  feeble ;  rapid,  full ;  very
rapid,  full  and  hard ;  hard,  small,  full ;  imperceptible.

■  Symptoms  of  circulation  are  <  :  from  mental  lassitude;

from  coughing;  when  lying  on  r.  side;  before  menstru-
ation ;  after  lying  down ;  sitting  bent  forward ;  from
smoking  ;  from  going  up  stairs.

■  Congestion  to  head,  ears,  nose  (nose  bleeding),  face,  chest,

abdomen,  lower  limbs.

■  Ebullition  of  blood,  distension  of  veins.

^^  Outer  Chest. Fine  stitches  externally  on  chest  and  arms.
Stinging  itching  on  1.  breast  near  shoulder.
Induration  of  1.  breast,  a  space  of  two  inches  in  length  by

half  inch  thickness,  painful  to touch,  coming  on  in

evening  and  disappearing  in  morning.
Itching  on  breast.

■  Intercostal  spaces  sinking  in  with  inhalation.
^^Neck  and  Back. ■Pricking  sensation  above  throat  pit.

■  Numbness  in  front  of  throat.
Carotids  pulsating  perceptibly.

I  I  Throat  pressed  forward;  croup.

■  External  swelling  of  throat.

Glandular  swellings  under  r.  lower  jaw  hinder  motion  of
neck  and  are  painful  to  touch.

Pain  as  if  cervical  glands  were  swelling  by  side  of  trachea
and  larynx.

I  I  Swelling  of  glands  of  neck,  with  tensive  pain  on  mov-
ing neck,  or  when  pressing  on  them.

■  Scrofulous  swelling  and  induration  of  cervical  glands.


483  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

Painful  sensation  of  stiffness  in  1.  side  of  neck  on  turning
head  to  r.  side.

Stiffness  of  neck  on  stooping  and  turning  head.

■  Painful  stiffness  of  muscles  of  neck  and  throat.

After  opening  mouth  wide,  and  then  biting  teeth  firmly
together,  a  painful  cramp  in  cervical  muscles  ;  violent
drawing  in  lower  jaw,  with  pain  in  articulation  of  jaw
as  if  it  would  be  dislocated.

Crampy  pain  in  cervical  muscles.

Frequently  returning,  pressing,  cracking  pain  on  1.  pos-
terior side  of  neck,  near  shoulder  blade,  not  changed  by
any  motion.

The  back  of  neck  snaps  on  stooping.

Intermittent,  slow  pressure  on  r.  side  of  neck,  as  if  skin
were  compressed  between  fingers  ;  downward  in  region
of  carotid  artery,  also  painful  externally  to  touch.

Tension  of  cervical  muscles,  particularly  of  r.  side,  on
bending  head  backward.

Painful  tension  in  1.  side  of  neck,  near  thyroid  cartilage,
on  turning  head  to  r.  side.

Transient  creeping  sensation  on  neck.

-Great,  slow  stitches  in  r.  cervical  muscles,  just  after  wak-
ing from  sleep,  passing  off  while  swallowing,  but
returning  again  soon  afterward.

A  transient  stitch  in  1.  side  of  neck.

Drawing  pricking  through  1.  side  of  neck.

Twitching  of  r.  cervical  muscles  while  lying.

I  Neck  cold  in  evening;  distended  veins.

Sensation  in  thyroid  and  cervical  glands  on  breathing
as  if  air  were  passing  up  and  down  those  glands.

I  Thyroid  gland  very  much  swollen,  painful  on  touching
neck  and  on  pressure.

Region  of  thyroid  gland  seems  as  if  hardened.

Pressing  sensation  in  goitre,  several  times  daily.

vTjerking  pain  in  side  where  small  goitre  exists ;  throbbing
in  head,  descends  into  cheeks,  and  extends  thence  into
neck  in  shape  of  tearing  pain.

^Stinging  pain  in  goitre  on  swallowing;  slight  pain  when
parts  are  at  rest.

TrStitches  in  goitre,  when  not  swallowing.

jrSensation  in  goitre  as  if  everything  were  shaking  and
moving  about  in  same,  as  if  it  were  alive,  particularly
on  swallowing.
I  'Sensation  in  goitre  like  motion,  a  working  about,  dis-
tension and  bracing.

ii  Goitre  occurring  with  the  inhabitants  of  valleys.

4  I  Goitre;  three  years'  growth,  very  large,  unsightly,
lumpy,  irregular,  hard,  slightly  tender,  always  on  having
a  cold.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  484

1 1  Goitre ;  six  years'  growth,  constantly  increasing,  becom-
ing somewhat  fuller,  with  some  slight  pain  and  tender-
ness on  handling  every  time  she  has  a  cold.

I  I  Goitre ;  of  many  years'  standing,  extremely  unsightly
and  repulsive;  larger  than  both  her  breasts;  hard,
knotty,  somewhat  tender.

I  I  Goitre :  from  earliest  youth  (aet.  19)  has  attained  a  con-
siderable size.

I  1  Thyroid  gland  of  both  sides  swollen,  even  with  chin  ;  at
night  suffocating  spells  and  stinging  in  throat,  with
soreness  in  abdomen.

I  I  For  four  years,  large  goitre,  rather  soft,  located  espe-
cially in  r.  lobe  of  thyroid  body;  menses  profuse;
nervous  palpitation.

■  Pressing  pain  in  small  of  back.

Feeling  of  coldness  in  back,  in  region  of  last  ribs.

Chill  on  back,  in  small  of  back.

Itching  on  back.

Pressing  sensation  passing  up  and  down  through  spine,
while  sitting  erect.

Pressure  in  lumbar  region.

Dull  stitch  in  r.  lumbar  muscles.

Dull  pain  in  region  of  symphysis  of  r.  ilium  and  sacrum,
while  standing.

A  pressing  pain  in  sacral  region  only  while  walking,  and
particularly  on  setting  down  1.  foot.

Pressing  pains  in  small  of  back  with  whooping  cough.

A  fine  tearing  pain  in  sacrum,  while  sitting  only,  passing
from  r.  to  1.  side  and  upward.

Severe  stitch  in  small  of  back.

I  Pain  in  small  of  back  instead  of  catamenia.

I  Sacrum  sore  before  menses.

Small  of  back  and  nates  are  very  numb.
^*  Upper  Limbs. Very  painful  flying  stitch  on  r.  shoulder-
blade.

I  I  Muscular  twitching  about  1.  shoulder  joint.

Burning  on  1.  shoulder.

Pain  in  scapulae  as  if  a  pointed  instrument  were  thrust
in,  a  continuous  stabbing  pain,  combined  with  soreness.

Fine  stitches  in  armpit,  while  sitting.

Continuous  prickling  itching  in  1.  armpit,  while  sitting.

In  1.  armpit  drawing  pressure,  by  jerks,  alternating  with
similar  sensation  in  1.  popliteal  space.

Arms  most  tired.

Stretching  of  arms.

I  I  Pains  in  upper  limbs  with  chills.

Stinging  drawing  through  upper  arm.

Bruised  pain  in  arms,  almost  like  soreness.


485  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

Burning  in  arms  and  hands.

I  I  Heat  in  upper  limbs,  shoulders  and  hands.
Beneath  upper  arms,  itching.

Stitches  in  elbow  joint  on  motion.

Stitches  in  point  of  elbow  and  then  tearing  in  joint  as

long  as  he  holds  his  arm  bent.
Pressing  pain  in  joint  of  1.  elbow.

I I  Boring  pain  at  elbow.

A  cramplike  pain,  with  slow  throbbing,  beneath  elbow
joint,  at  upper  end  of  forearm,  particularly  on  support-
ing arm.

Heaviness  in  forearms.

Trembling  of  forearms  and  hands.

Pain  in  1.  forearm  as  if  bones  were  being  pressed  together.

Pain  from  thumb  into  forearm.

Drawing  pain  in  forearms.

Severe  stitches,  boring  from  within  outward,  in  internal
muscles  of  r.  forearm.

■  Drawing  stitches  in  forearms  and  hands.

A  feeling  in  and  between  wrists  as  if  parts  were  weakened

by  decay.
Heaviness  and  trembling  of  forearms  and  hands.
Large  vesicles  on  forearms.
Swelling  of  hands  and  stiffness  of  fingers.
Several  stitches  in  r.  wrist,  during  rest.
Severe  drawing  in  1.  wrist.
Drawing,  pressing  pain  above  r.  wrist.
I  I  Stretches  hands  out  for  relief.
Hands  trembling.
I  I  Stitches  in  hands.
I  Hands: cold; cold  and  bluish, with  chill; burning;

hot,  with  chill ;  swollen,  could  not  bend  fingers.
I  I  Cramplike  pain  in  balls  of  thumbs.
I  Redness  and  swelling  of  finger  joints,  with  tension  on

bending  them.
Painful  drawing  in  posterior  joint  of  1.  thumb,  extending

into  forearm.
A  protracted  stitch,  combined  with  sore  pain  in  anterior

joint  of  thumb.
Itching  in  ball  of  1.  thumb  not  dispelled  by  rubbing.
The  tips  of  index  fingers  lose  their  feeling,  without  grow-
ing pale.
Pressing  pain  in  metacarpal  joint  of  middle  finger  of  r.

hand.
Middle  joint  of  1.  middle  finger-  became  thick  and  red

and  seemed  tense  on  motion.

■  Numbness  of  tips  of  fingers,  with  whooping  cough.
^  Lower  Limbs. Nates  numb.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  486-

Rapid  twitching  of  a  portion  of  r.  gluteal  muscles.

Stitch  near  hip.

Thigh  spasmodicall}'  drawn  forward  or  backward.

Thighs  numb,  cold,  with  fever.

Thighs  numb  and  chilly,  while  the  rest  of  body  is  hot.

■  Numbness  or  coldness  of  thighs,  with  fever.

Tension  as  if  a  muscle  were  too  short,  in  upper  end  of

thigh,  on  stepping,  accompanied  each  time  by  a  stitch.
Protracted,  drawing  stitches  at upper  part  of  1.  thigh ^

below  groin,  particularly  when  walking.
Itching,  tickling  on  1.  thigh,  near  groin,  with  desire  to  rub

the  part.
Severe stitches, boring outward  in r. thigh, in front,,

near  hip.
Fine,  very  sensitive  stitch  in  skin  of  inner  r.  thigh.
In  morning,  while  in  bed,  pulsating,  sharp  stitches  through

r.  thigh,  above  knee.
Pain  in  inner  side  of  thigh,  above  r.  knee,  pressing  toward

posterior  part.
Pressing,  stinging  pain  above  r.  knee,  while  sitting.
Pain  from  foot  to  thigh.
Heaviness  in  knee  joints,  felt  on  walking.

■  Feeling  of  lameness  from  r.  knee  to  r.  hip.

While  walking,  tiredness  in  knee  as  if  they  would  give
way,  although  he  sets  his  foot  down  firmly.

Severe  drawing  in  1.  knee,  followed  by  profuse  sweat,  for
several  nights.

Dull  stinging  in  1.  knee,  in  evening,  while  lying  down.

Tearing  in  tibia  all  afternoon.

During  rapid  walking,  a  feeling  at  lower  end  of  1.  tibia  as
if  a  weight  were  hanging  on  it.

Pain  in  ankles  extending  up  tibia.

Tearing  from  ankle  to  knee.

Drawing  pressure,  coming  by  jerks,  in  1.  popliteal  space^
arising  only  on  bending  knee  and  alternating  with  a
similar  sensation  in  1.  armpit.

Pressing  pain  in  external  tendon  of  flexor  muscle,  in
popliteal  space  (r.  leg),  more  violent  on  walking  than
while  sitting.

Sharp  stitches  in  r.  calf,  while  walking.

Continuous  prickling  itching  in  popliteal  spaces  while
walking,  with  desire  to  scratch  parts.

Numbness,  first  of  r.  then  of  1.  lower  leg,  after  brief  after-
noon naps;  when  he  tried  to  walk,  1.  lower  leg  was
spasmodicall}'-  drawn  up  to  thigh  ;  even  when  sitting  he
could  not  keep  it  stretched  out,  it  was  then  drawn
spasmodically  backward.

■  Stiffness  of  legs.


487  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

Drawing:,  tearing  from  r.  ankle  joint  to  knee.

Tearing  in  ankles;  feet  heavy  as  lead,  heaviness  extend-
ing up  tibia.

Pressing  pain  in  r.  heel,  <  while  walking.

While  standing,  a  severe  stitch  out  at  r.  heel.

Stitches  passing  upward  in  r.  heel  while  sitting.

Severe  intermitting  stitches  in  1.  heel,  from  within  out-
ward, while  standing,  passing  off  on  motion.

After  a  long  walk,  pricking  as  if  from  pins  in  heels.

Feet  heavy  as  lead.

Her  feet  are  affected ;  she  starts  at  every  trifle.

Feet  feel  heavy.

iHeat  in  feet:  veins  distended ;  with  the  chill;  particu-
larly in  heels.

Creeping  in  lower  portion  of  1.  foot.

Itching  on  feet.

Tiredness  in  lower  limbs.

Great  commotion  and  restlessness  in  both  lower  legs ;  is
obliged  to  change  his  posture  frequently.

■  Drawing  pain  from  lower  portion  of  r.  foot  to  thigh;

drawing  during  menses;  pains  in  lower  extremities  with
chill  and  fever.
Cold  feeling  in  legs  ;  legs  are  cold.
I  Chill  on  lower  limbs,  especially  on  thighs.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Stiffness  in  limbs.

■  Trembling  in  all  the  limbs.

Sense  of  weariness  in  upper  portion  of  body  as  if  bruised

and  of  numbness  in  lower  portion.
Stretching  of  limbs.
I  I  Hands  and  feet  cold.

Protracted,  exhausted  and  tired  lameness  of  all  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Slight  pain  in  goitre ;  stitches

in  wrist.
Lying :  strong  pulsation  about  ear  on  which  she  is  lying ;

dull,  tremulous  roaring  in  head  ;  double  vision  >  ;  bores

head backward ; dyspnoea  <  ; suffocative  cough <  ;

after,  symptoms  of  circulation  <  ;  twitching  of  cervical

muscles ;  stinging  in  knee.
Lying  in  a  horizontal  position  :  headache  >  ;  congestion

of  blood  to  head  >.
Lying  on  back :  pressing  headache  >  ;  throat  symptoms

>  ;  brings  on  cough  ;  dyspnoea  <.
Must  lie  on  back  :  ulcerative  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach.
Lying  on  r.  side :  painful  constriction  of  1.  side ;  brings  on

cough  ;  symptoms  of  circulation  <.
In  side  on  which  he  lies :  digging  in  hip.
Cannot  lie :  on  account  of  want  of  breath  ;  asthma ;  pneu-
monia.


SPONGIA  TOST  A.  488

Lying  with  head  low  :  dyspnoea  <  ;  all  symptoms  of  bron-
chitis <  ;  attacks  of  oppression  and  cardiac  pain  <.

{Sitting :  as  if  head  would  fall  to  one  side ;  pain  in  frontal
eminence  <  ;  up  in  bed,  sudden  burning  and  compres-
sion passes  off;  tensive  pain  in  abdomen;  painful  con-
striction in  1.  side ;  cramplike  pain  in  1.  groin  ;  pressing
tearing  pain  in  region  of  abdominal  ring ;  cough  >  ;
stitches  in  1.  chest;  fine  tearing  pain  in  sacrum.

Stitches  in  armpit ;  prickling  in  armpit ;  stinging  above
r.  knee ;  could  not  keep  leg  stretched  out ;  stitches  in
heels.

Sits  up  in  bed :  croup ;  suffocative  paroxysm  passes  off.

Must  sit  up  :  on  account  of  shortness  of  breath.

Stooping :  stinging  in  1.  hypogastrium  <  ;  tensive  pain
in  abdomen  <  ;  dyspnoea  < ;  stiffness  of  neck  ;  back  of
neck  snaps.

Bending  body  forward :  dyspnoea  >  ;  symptoms  of  circu-
lation <.

Bending  back  :  dyspnoea  <.

Holding  head  upright:  dull  pressure  in  occiput  >.

Bending  head  backward ;  congestion  of  blood  to  head ;
tension  in  neck ;  in  croup ;  tension  of  cervical  muscles.

Bending  fingers :  tension.

Could  not  bend  fingers :  swollen.

When  holding  arm  bent :  tearing  in  joint.

Kaising  arms  above  head  :  becomes  faint.

Erect  position :  writhed  and  struggled  into  with  croup ;
pressing  sensation  up  and  down  spine.

Standing  :  pain  in  ilium  and  sacrum  ;  stitch  out  at  heel.

Rising:  headache;  cough  <.

Must  change  posture  frequently  :  restlessness  in  legs.

Motion  :  of  scalp,  sensitiveness  of  cranial  integuments ;  of
eyes,  <  stinging  pain ;  every  slight,  loses  her  breath  and
becomes  faint ;  brings  on  cough ;  every  trifling,  grows
weak;  congestion  to  chest;  after  moderate,  grows  sud-
denly weak ;  cough  <  ;  of  neck,  pain  in  swollen  glands;
stitches  in  elbow  joint;  finger  seemed  tense;  stitches  in
heel  pass  off.

After  every  exertion:  dyspnoea  <.

Exertion :  suddenly  exhausted ;  congestion  to  chest ;  ex-
haustion of  chest;  slight,  suffocating  palpitation.

Opening  mouth  wide,  then  biting  teeth  firmly  together :
cramp  in  neck.

Masticating :  teeth  feel  dull  and  loose  ;  gums  painful ;  pain
in  molars.

Swallowing:  stitches  in  neck  pass  off;  violent  straining
pain;  pain  in  goitre;  a  moving  sensation  in  goitre;
stinging  pain  in  goitre ;  as  if  goitre  were  alive.


489  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

Turning  bead :  stitch  in  occiput;  neck  pains;  neck  stiff;
tensive  pain  in  head;  larynx  sensitive;  to  r.  side,  stiff-
ness of  left.

Stepping:  tension  in  thigh.

Walking :  tensive  pain  in  abdomen  and  r.  groin ;  totter-
ing ;  stitches  beneath  second  rib ;  pain  in  sacral  region,
particularly  setting  down  1.  foot ;  stitches  in  thigh  <  ;
heaviness  in  knee  joint;  tiredness  in  knees ;  as  if  weight
were  hanging  to  tibia;  stitches  in  calf;  itching  in  popli-
teal space ;  1.  lower  leg  spasmodically  drawn  up ;  pain
in  heel  <  ;  long  time,  pricking  in-  heels.

Going  up  stairs:  suffocating  palpitation;  symptoms  of
circulation  <.

Ascending  ground :  suffocating  palpitation.

After  exercise:  heat.
^*  Nerves. Excitement  of  nerves.

I  Stiff,  w^ithout  ability  to  move.

Strange  feeling  all  over.

Tendency  to  start.

I  I  Twitching  of  muscles,  with  fever.

Unable  to  act  upon  her  limbs  by  means  of  volition.

I I  Clumsiness  of  body.

iWeak: after  every trifling motion; suddenly, after

motion  out-doors  ;  exhausted  after  exercise.
Tiredness  of  whole  body,  especially  arms.
Great  tiredness  and  inclination  to  sleep.
Lassitude  of  body  and  mind ;  prefers  to  be  inactive  and

rest.
I  I  As  if  she  were  going  to  faint,  with  heat  in  face,  and

anxiety,
I  Faint  when  losing  her  breath.
Feeling  of  numbness  of  lower  half  of  body.
'^  Sleep. I  I  Sleepiness  with  yawning.
Stupid  slumber,  with  fever.
I  I  When  falling  asleep,  awakes  choking.
I  Falling  asleep  early  at  night ;  suffocation  awakens.
I  Lies  asleep  with  head  low.
Restless  slumber  after  chills,  with  heat.
Sleeplessness  until  midnight.
Sleepless,  with  violent  ebullitions.
Dreams : about murder and assassination ; fatiguing ;

vexatious, with anxiety and disposition to weep ;

mournful.
As  soon  as  he  fell  asleep,  his  mind  wandered  and  he  was

delirious.
Spoke  aloud  in  her  sleep,  but  not  anxiously.
Very  short sleep,  with many dreams,  four  consecutive

nights ;  wakes  at  midnight,  but  cannot  sleep  again  on


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  490-

account  of  restlessness;  whenever  he  closes  his  lids,  the
most  vivid  pictures  would  immediately  arise  before  his
vision,  while  waking  ;  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  a  battery
of  guns  were  discharged,  or  as  if  everything  were  in
flames  ;  again  scientific  subjects  forced  themselves  upon
his  mind,  in  short,  a  mass  of  subjects  crossed  each  other
in  his  imagination,  disappearing  at  once  when  opening
his  eyelids,  but  reappearing  as  soon  as  the  lids  were
closed.

1 1  Awakens  in  a  fright  and  feels  as  if  suffocating.

I  Awakening  with  fear  and  terror.

I  Frequent  waking  with  a  start.

■  Starting  out  of  sleep toward  morning  from  a  shock  in
trachea  upward  like  a  suffocative  paroxysm,  passing  off"
after  sitting  up  in  bed.

I  I  Awakened  between  1  and  2  a.m.  by  sense  of  suffocation. -
Tossing  about  at  night.

After  siesta  legs  numb.

I I  Worse  after  sleep.

^^  Time. Toward  morning :  starting  out  of  sleep.

Between  1  and  2  a.m.:  awakened  by  suffocation.

Morning :  involuntary  discharge  from  bowels ;  stinging,
in  throat  <  ;  rumbling  in  abdomen  <  ;  digging  in  hip ;
expectoration  only  of  small  quantities  of  tough,  yellow,
hardened  mucus ;  pulsating,  sharp  stitches  through
thigh ;  early,  sweat.

Forenoon  :  pressing  pain  in  gastric  region.

Day  and  night :  dry  cough ;  hollow  cough,  with  some-
expectoration.

Afternoon:  pressure  in  epigastrium;  cough  <;  tearing
in  tibia ;  after  brief  naps  numbness  of  legs  ;  chill  <.

Evening :  stinging  and  pressing  pain  in  eyes  ;  cramplike-
pain  from  jaw  to  cheek ;  cold  sweat  in  face  ;  stinging  in^
throat  <  ;  rumbling  in  abdomen  <  ;  cutting  in  hypo-
gastrium  ;  cracked  voice ;  pressing  inward  in  larynx ;
contraction  in  larynx  ;  croupy  cough  <  ;  till  midnight
cough  <  ;  induration  of  breast  comes  on ;  neck  cold ;:
stinging  in  knee;  chill  <.

9  P.M.:  sudden  attack  of  croup.

Night :  vertigo  when  awaking,  with  nausea  ;  things  appear-
in  flames;  figures  of  light;  restless  and  easily  fright-
ened; as  if  a  battery  of  guns  were  discharged  in  ears;;
a  vexed  expression,  with  cough  ;  stitch  from  jaw  to  ear ;
suffocating  spells ;  rattling  breathing,  terminating  cough ;:
in  middle,  spells  of  choking ;  after  a  chill  burning  heat
of  skin ;  suffocation  about  larynx ;  awakes  in  fear  and
terror ;  tossing  about ;  chill  <  ;  heat ;  sweat.

Before  midnight :  croup  <  ;  dry  sound  of  breathing  and
cough ;  sleepless  until.


491  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

At  midnight :  wakes  and  cannot  get  to  sleep  again.

After  12  p.m.:  awakes,  violent  palpitation;  awakes  with
suffocation.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat  does  not  >  chilliness
of  back.

Hot  room  :  dry  bronchitis  <.

Hot  tea:  cough  <.

Near  warm  stove :  chill  with  shaking.

Warm  room:  coming  into  from  open  air,  headache;
cough  <.

Warm  drinks :  distress  in  stomach  >  ;  cough  >  ;  dysp-
noea.

In  bed:  chill  <.

Indoors:  cough  <.

Open  air :  pain  in  1.  ear ;  pain  from  jaw  to  cheek ;  tension
in  articulation  of  jaw;  grows  suddenly  weak  ;  after  walk-
ing, chill.

Sudden  change  of  atmosphere:  spasmodic  paroxysms  of
cough  and  dyspnoea  <.

After  taking  cold :  asthma.

Dry,  cold  weather:  headache  >.

Dry,  cold  winds :  coryza.

Washing:  headache  >.

Wet  weather:  cough  <.

Cold :  tea  or  water  brings  on  cough ;  weather,  subject  to
attacks  of  dj^spnoea;  air,  cough  <.

Frosty  weather :  cough  >.
^°  Fever. Coldness : all over  ;  of  eyes ;  of  neck  ; in  epigas-
trium ;  of  hands  of  thigh  ;  pallor  and  sweat  of  face  with
heat  of  whole  body.

Cold  feeling :  in  head ;  in  stomach  ;  on  back ;  on  lower
limbs  ;  on  small  of  back  ;  on  thighs.

When  feeling  cold  an  itching  arises.

Shuddering  across  back.

■  Chill:  with  shaking,  even  near  a  warm  stove;  mostly
across  back ;  after  walking  in  open  air ;  <  in  bed ;  in
afternoon ;  in  evening ;  at  night ;  with  coryza ;  with
internal  heat ;  with  heat  at  same  time  ;  alternating  with
heat.

I  Chill,  then  heat,  then  sweat.

i  I  Strong  heat  soon  after  chill,  with  dry,  burning  heat
over  whole  body,  with  exception  of  thighs,  which  remain
cold,  numb  and  chilly.

iHeat:  with  external  chill ;  rises  from  abdomen,  rest  of
body  chilly;  with  thirst,  at  night;  anxious,  dry,  with
red  face  and  weeping,  and  inconsolable  mood,  or  with
whooping  cough  ;  after  exercise ;  in  bed  ;  with  sweats.

He  suddenly  grows  anxious  and  warm  over  whole  body^
with  heat  and  redness  in  face,  with  sweat.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  492

Daily  several  attacks  of  heat  with  anxiety,  pain  in  region
of  heart,  weeping  and  inconsolability  ;  she  would  rather
die  on  the  spot.

I  Dry,  hot  skin  and  congestion  to  head.

■  Attacks  of  spreading,  flying  heat.
iSynochal  fever,  in  croup.

Flushes  of  heat  returning  when  thinking  of  them.
Heat,  sw^eat  and  itching  of  skin.

■  Sweat:  anxious;  cold,  clammy  ; copious,  during  night;

over  whole  body  early  in  morning;  with  whooping
cough  ;  cool  on  face,  evenings  ;  of  itching  parts ;  profuse,
follows  drawing  pain  in  knee  ;  breaking  out  too  easily.

I  Stupid  sleep  with  the  sweat.

I  Worse  with  the  sweat ;  >  after  it.

I  1  Want  of  perspiration.

I  Typhus;  loose  cough  suddenly  changing  to  dryness  and
hoarseness,  increasing  to  dyspnoea,  with  anxiousness.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternately : face  red and pale ;
pressure  in  armpit  and  popliteal  space ;  chill  and  heat.

Attacks:  repeated,  of  want  of  breath.

Frequent  paroxysms  of  two  minutes:  cough.

For  several  hours :  itching  at  glans  penis.

Daily  :  several  times,  pressing  sensation  in  goitre;  several
attacks  of  heat,  with  anxiety.

Nightly:  agglutination  of  lids;  wakes  up  several  times
with  want  of  breath.

For  two  days :  dryness  of  Schneiderian  membrane.

For  several  nights :  drawing  in  knee  and  sweat.

Four  consecutive  nights :  very  short  sleep  with  many
dreams.

For  nine  days :  red  swelling  of  r,  helix.

For  several  days :  sore  pains  in  anus ;  flowing  like  menses.

Full  moon  :  asthma  <.

Since  two  years :  swelling  of  1.  testicle.

Three  years'  growth  :  goitre.

Four  years'  growth  :  goitre.

For  six  years :  subject  to  attacks  of  dyspnoea.

Six  years'  growth  :  goitre.

Many  years'  standing :  goitre.
*^ Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  dull  pain  on  side  of
brain ;  pressing  sensation  in  temple ;  downward  draw-
ing pain  in  side  of  head  and  neck ;  pressing  outward  on
parietal  bone ;  pressing  in  frontal  eminence ;  pressing
pain  over  eye ;  ringing  in  ear ;  drawing  pain  in  ear ;
fine  stitches  in  ear ;  burning  in  orifice  of  ear ;  red  swell-
ing of  helix;  tearing  in  zygomatic  arch;  jerking  fine
stitch  from  upper  jaw  into  internal  ear;  violent  burn-
ing under  angle  of  mouth  ;  pain  in  molars  of  lower  jaw;


493  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

stitches  in  side  of  abdomen ;  glandular  swelling  in  groin ;
epididymis  enlarged  and  hardened;  weight  dragging
down  in  chest ;  painful  stitches  in  chest ;  severe  prick-
ing in  breast ;  crawling  pain  in  side  of  chest ;  boring
stitch  in  costal  muscles ;  glandular  swelling  under  lower
jaw ;  slow  pressure  on  side  of  neck  ;  tension  of  cervical
muscles ;  slow  stitches  in  cervical  muscles ;  twitching  of
cervical  muscles ;  goitre  in  lobe  of  thyroid  body ;  dull
stitch  in  lumbar  muscle ;  dull  pain  in  region  of  sym-
physis of  ilium  and  sacrum ;  flying  stitch  in  shoulder
blade  ;  stitches  in  muscles  of  forearm  ;  stitches  in  wrist ;
drawing  pressing  pain  above;  pressing  pain  in  middle
finger ;  rapid  twitching  of  portion  of  gluteal  muscles ;
stitches  in  thigh ;  stitch  in  inner  thigh ;  pain  in  thigh
above  knee;  pressing  stinging  above knee; lameness
from  knee  to  hip;  stitches  in  calf;  tearing  from  ankle
joint  to  knee ;  pressing  pain  in  heel ;  stitch  at  heel.
Left :  stitches  in  temple  to  forehead ;  pressing  in  outer  half
of  eye;  tension  about  eye;  stinging  in  eye;  stinging
itching  under  eye; burning  in  eye;  sudden  stinging
drawing  at  external  canthus  of  orbit ;  tensive  stinging
pain  in  external canthus; burning  pain  on  external
surface  of  lower  lid;  cramplike  pain  in  ear;  digging
stitches  in  depth  of  ear ;  boils  on  ear ;  creeping  stitches
in  nasal  bone;  cramplike  pain  from  articulation  of  jaw
to  cheek ;  tearing  stinging  in  cheek  ;  tension  in  articu-
lation of  jaw ;  stinging  itching  in  cheek  ;  side  of  chin  to
angle  of  mouth  painful  to  touch ;  burning  pain  in  upper
molars ;  pain  in  side  of  abdomen  ;  cutting  toward  breast;
boring  stinging  in  hypogastrium ;  painful  constriction
in  side ;  fine  digging  above  hip ;  twisting  sensation  in
side  of  abdomen ;  cramplike  pain  in  groin ;  small  boil
in  groin  ;  swelling  of  testicle ;  pressure  in  chest ;  cutting
in  side  of  chest ;  broad  pressure,  with  many  fine  points
in  side  of  chest ;  drawing  stitches  beneath  second  rib ;
pinching  jerk  in  side  of  chest ;  consumption  beginning
at  apex  of  lung ;  rheumatism  in  lumbar  muscles  ;  sting-
ing itching  on  breast ;  induration  of  breast ;  stiffness  in
side  of  neck ;  cracking  pain  on  posterior  side  of  neck  ;
tension  in  side  of  neck  ;  transient  stitch  in  side  of  neck  ;
pricking  through  side  of  neck  ;  setting  down  foot  pain
in  sacral  region ;  muscular  twitching  about  shoulder
joint;  burning  on  shoulder;  prickling  itching  in  arm-
pit ;  drawing  pressure  in  armpit ;  drawing  pressure  in
popliteal  space ;  pressing  pain  in  joint  of  elbow  ;  pain  in
forearm  ;  drawing  in  wrist ;  painful  drawing  in  poste-
rior joint  of  thumb;  itching  in  ball  of  thumb;  middle
joint  of  middle  finger;  stitches  in  thigh;  itching  tick-


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  494

ling  in  thigh ;  severe  drawing  in  knee ;  dull  stinging  in
knee,  as  if  weight  were  hanging  to  tibia ;  leg  drawn  up
when  walking ;  stitches  in  heel ;  creeping  in  lower  por-
tion of  foot.

From  r.  to  1.:  swelling  in  fauces;  orchitis;  pain  in  sacrum  ;
numbness  of  legs.

From  within  outward :  pressing  in  temple ;  pressing  in
frontal  eminence;  pricking  in  breast;  stitches  in  r.  fore-
arm ;  stitches  in  thigh  ;  stitches  in  heel.

From  without  inward :  jerk  in  chest.
'*'  Sensations.  As  if  head  would  fall  to  one  side ;  as  if  one
would  fall  backward ;  as  if  tipsy  ;  as  if  all  her  blood  were
mounting  to  head ;  as  if  skull  would  burst ;  as  if  hair
were  standing  on  end  ;  eye  as  if  twisted  around  ;  as  if  a
battery  of  guns  were  discharged  in  ears ;  stitches  as  if
passing  through  tympanum ;  nodule  in  concha  as  if  it
would  gather  and  break ;  jaw  as  if  dislocated  ;  as  if  erup-
tion were  to  appear  near  chin ;  1.  side  of  chin  as  if  ulcer-
ated ;  as  if  something  had  got  jammed  between  teeth  in
•chewing;  as  if  gums  and  teeth  were  swollen,  and  latter
being  lifted  ;  outside  of  throat  as  if  something  were  be-
ing pressed  out;  as  if  he  had  drunk  a  great  deal  of  luke-
warm water,  relaxation  of  stomach  and  oesophagus ;  pit
of  stomach  as  if  growing  together  ;  stomach  as  if  stand-
ing open ;  as  if  something  alive  were  moving  in  abdo-
men;  as  if  something  alive  were  beneath  skin  of  abdo-
men ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue ;  as  of  a  plug  in  larynx ;
as  of  a  stopper  or  valve  were  in  larynx ;  as  of  a  nail
pressing  in  larynx ;  as  if  larynx  and  trachea  were  nar-
rower ;  as  if  she  would  suffocate ;  as  if  child  could  not  get
■breath ;  as  if  breathing  through  a  sponge ;  as  if  chest
would  burst ;  chest  as  if  sore  and  bloody  ;  as  of  a  plug  in
throat;  as  of  a  large  accumulation  of  mucus  and  weight  at
chest;  as  if  abroad  body  armed  with  points  were  pressing
upward;  as  if  a  weight  were  dragging  down  in  chest;
^s  if  she  had  something  hot  inside  of  chest ;  as  if  blood
would  burst  out  of  chest;  as  if  cervical  glands  were
swelling;  as  if  jaw  would  be  dislocated;  as  if  skin  of
neck  were  compressed  between  fingers;  as  if  air  were
passing  up  and  down  thyroid  and  cervical  glands ;  thy-
roid gland  as  if  hardened  ;  as  if  everything  were  shak-
ing and  moving  about  in  goitre ;  as  if  goitre  were  alive ;
as  if  a  pointed  instrument  were  thrust  into  scapulae;  as
if  bones  of  forearm  were  being  pressed  together;  as  if
parts  in  and  between  wrists  were  weakened  by  decay ;
as  if  a  muscle  were  too  short  in  upper  end  of  thigh ;  as
if  knees  would  give  way ;  as  if  a  weight  were  hanging
on  lower  end  of  tibia ;  as  of  pins  in  heels ;  as  if  she  were


-495  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

going  to  faint;  as  if  everything  were  in  flames;  as  if

sweat  would  break  out.
Pain :  in  vertex  and forehead  ;  in  occiput ;  in  neck ;  in

cartilages  of  ears;  in  articulation  of  jaw;  in  posterior

molars;  in  gums  while  chewing ;  in  throat;  in  goitre;

beneath  short  ribs;  in  1.  side  of  abdomen;  in  abdominal

ring; from hypogastrium to anus; in testicles; in

larynx; in trachea;  in chest; in  bronchi; in  small

of  back ; in scapulae ; in  upper limbs ; from thumb

into  forearm ;  in  inner  side  of  thigh  ;  from  foot  to  thigh ;

in  ankles  up  tibise ;  in  lower  extremities ;  in  region  of

heart.
"Violent  pains :  in  small  of  back  and  abdomen.
-Great  pains :  in  larynx  ;  in  heart.
-Sudden  pain :  in  chest  and  dorsal  muscles;  of  1.  side.
Stabbing  pain  :  in  scapulae.
'Cutting :  in  upper  part  of  abdomen ;  from  hypogastrium

to  breast ;  in  1.  side  of  chest.
Tearing:  in  1.  eye; in  nose; in  cheeks;  from  cheek  to

neck ;  in  r.  zygomatic  arch ;  in  elbow  joint ;  in  tibia ;

from  ankle  to  knee ;  in  ankles.
-Fine  tearing  pain:  in  sacrum.

Pressing  tearing  pain :  in  region  of  abdominal  ring.
-Drawing  tearing:  from  r.  ankle  joint  to  knee.
-Bursting  pain:  in  head;  in  trachea.
-Pinching  pain :  in  1.  side  of  chest.
-Pinching,  bruised,  squeezing  pain  :  in  testicles.
-Boring  pain  :  at  elbow.
Boring  stitch :  in  r.  costal  muscles.
■  Stitches :  in  temples  ;  externally  in  1.  temple;  in  forehead;

in  occiput ;  in  scalp ;  in  eyeballs ;  in  nodule  in  concha ;

in  goitre ;  above  pit  of  throat ;  in  throat ;  in  region  of

stomach;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen;  below  groin;  in  anus;

into  spermatic  cord;  in  chest;  in  both  sides;  in  goitre;

in  elbow  joint;  in  point  of  elbow  ;  in  hands;  near  hip  ;

in  heel.
-Severe  stitch  :  in  small  of  back ;  in  internal  muscles  of  r.

forearm;  in  r.  wrist;  in  r.  thigh;  out  at  heel.
Sharp  stitches:  in  r.  calf.
Flying  stitch  :  on  r.  shoulder  blade.
Transient,  painful  stitches:  on  r,  side  of  chest;  in  1.  side

of  neck.
-Severe  intermittent  stitches:  in  1.  side  of  chest;  in  heel.
Pulsating  sharp  stitches :  through  thigh.
■Great  slow  stitches:  in  cervical  muscles.
Protracted  stitch :  in  joint  of  thumb.
-Drawing  painful  stitches :  from  body  through  glans  penis ;

beneath  second  rib  of  1.  side  of  chest ;  in  forearms  and

hands  ;  at  upper  part  of  thigh.


SPONGIA  TOST  A.  496

Digging  stitches :  in  depth  of  1.  ear.

Jerking  fine  stitch:  from  posterior  portion  of  r.  upper  jaw
into  r.  internal  ear;  external,  in  region  of  larynx.

Fine  stitches:  in  r.  ear;  beneath  lower  lip;  externally  on
navel;  externally  on  chest  and  arms;  in  armpits;  in
skin  of  inner  thigh.

Large,  somewhat  blunt  stitch :  from  testicle  into  spermatic
cord.

Dull  stitch :  in  r.  lumbar  muscles.

Creeping  stitches  :  in  nasal  bone.

Itching  stitch  :  as  if  caused  by  a  very  fine  needle.

Shooting :  up  entire  cord ;  from  testicle  into  inguinal
region.

Jerking  pain ;  in  side  where  goitre  exists.

Pinching  jerk  :  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Violent  straining  pain  :  on  swallowing.

Pressing  pain  :  in  vertex ;  in  r.  frontal  eminence ;  over  r.
eye ;  in  gastric  region  ;  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  in  praecordial
region ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  joint  of  elbow ;  in  meta-
carpal joint  of  middle  finger ;  in  tendon  of  flexor  mus-
cles ;  in  heel.

Pressing  cracking  pain :  on  1.  posterior  side  of  neck.

Contracting  pain  :  in  ear ;  in  chest.

Gnawing  pain  :  on  crown  of  head.

Heavy,  dragging  pains :  in  spermatic  cord.

Drawing  pain :  in  internal  ear ;  in  forearms ;  in  joint  of
1.  thumb ;  from  lower  portion  of  r.  foot  to  thigh.

Colicky  pains  :  in  abdomen.

Painful  cramp  :  in  cervical  muscles.

Cramp:  lower  jaw  drawn;  in  neck;  in  abdomen.

Cramplike  pain:  in  1.  ear;  from  1.  articulation  of  jaw  to
cheek ;  in  1.  groin ;  in  cervical  muscles ;  below  elbow
joint;  in  balls  of  thumbs.

Boring  stinging:  in  1.  hypogastrium.

Tensive  stinging  pain  :  in  external  canthus.

Stinging  drawing :  at  external  canthus  of  1.  orbit ;  through
upper  arms.

Pressing  stinging  pain  :  above  knee.

Stinging  itching :  under  1.  eye ;  on  1.  breast  near  shoulder.

Stinging :  in  eyes ;  about  eye ;  in  cheeks ;  in  teeth ;  in
mouth ;  in  throat ;  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  in  prsecordial
region  ;  in  goitre.

Biting :  in  anus.

Burning  pain:  on  external  surface  of  lower  lid  ;  in  1.  upper
molars.

Violent  burning:  under  r.  angle  of  mouth.

Burning  heat:  in  forehead  ;  over  whole  body.

Burning: in  occiput; in  1.  eye;  in  ears;  in  ears  from


497  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

throat;  behind  ears;  in  orifice  of  r.  ear;  in  mouth;  in

throat ;  in  larynx  and  trachea ;  in  chest ;  on  1.  shoulder ;

in  arms  and  hands.
Itching  burning :  in  scrotum  and  body  of  penis.
Heat :  in  head  ;  in  forehead ;  in  scalp ;  in  «yes ;  in  ears ;

on  chin ;  in  teeth ;  in  oesophagus ;  in  male  genitals ;  in

chest;  from  abdomen  in  upper  limbs,  shoulders  and

hands ;  in  feet.
Flying  heat :  in  face ;  in  blood.
Sore  pain :  in  anus ;  in  joint  of  thumb.
Bruised  pain  :  in  arms.
Itching  biting :  on  breast,  epigastrium,  back  and  beneath

arms ;  on  feet.
Smarting :  in  anus.
Soreness :  of  tongue ;  of  throat ;  in  abdomen  ;  of  anus ;  in

sacrum ;  in  chest ;  of  sacrum  ;  of  scapulae.
Pricking  pains:  across  upper  jaw;  in  r.  breast; above

throat  pit ;  in  heels.
Crawling  pain :  in  1.  side  of  chest.
Tensive  pain :  in  neck ;  from  hypogastrium  to  anus ;  in

upper  abdomen  ;  in  r.  groin  ;  in  1.  side  of  neck.
Dull  pain :  in  r.  side  of  brain  ;  in  region  of  symphysis  of

r.  ilium  and  sacrum.
Painful  constriction :  in  1.  side  beneath  skin ;  in  chest ;

spasmodic,  through  chest  and  larynx ;  in  cardiac  region.
Severe  drawing :  in  knee.
Drawing:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  all  the  limbs;  toward

larynx ;  in  1.  wrist.
Drawing  pressure :  in  armpit  and  popliteal  space  ;  above

r.  wrist.
Severe  pressing:  in  larynx.
Pressure :  in  forehead ;  sharp,  at  both  temples ;  in  ears ;

in  throat ;  above  thyroid  cartilage ;  in  epigastrium ;  in

hypochondria ;  in  larynx ;  in  1.  chest ;  on  ,r.  side  of  neck ;

in  lumbar  region.
Pressing :  in  eyes ;  in  outer  half  of  1.  eye  ;  under  eyelids.
Pressing  sensation :  in  r.  temple ;  in  r.  side  of  head  and

neck ;  on  r.  parietal  bone ;  in  r.  zygomatic  arch ;  in

goitre ;  up  and  down  spine.
Violent  drawing :  in  upper  and  lower  limbs ;  in  lower

jaw.
Tension :  in  neck  ;  about  1,  eye,  near  temple ;  in  articula-
tion of  r.  jaw ;  of  maxillary  glands ;  in  throat ;  of  cervi-
cal muscles  ;  in  finger  joints.
Tensive  constrictive  sensation :  above  root  of  nose.
Constriction :  in  larynx.
Heaviness :  in  head ; in  occiput ;  of  lids ; in  chest ; in

forearms ;  in  knee  joints ;  of  feet.

VOL.  IX. — 32.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  498

Crowding  sensation  :  in  ears.

Weight :  dragging  down  on  r.  chest.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Fulness :  in  head  ;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  stomach.

Tightness :  of  chest.

Pulsation:  about  ear;  in  forehead.

Knocking:  in  forehead.

Twitching :  of  r.  cervical  muscles.

Throbbing:  in  forehead;  into  cheeks;  in  spermatic  cord;
in  head,  thence  into  cheeks  and  neck.

Twisting  sensation :  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.

Itching  tickling:  on  1.  thigh.

Prickling  itching :  in  1.  armpit ;  in  popliteal  space.

Drawing  pricking:  through  1.  side  of  neck.

Penetrating  tickling :  in  throat,  toward  ear.

Tickling:  in  throat;  in  layrnx ;  in  trachea.

Ulcerative  feeling :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Irritation  :  in  upper  part  of  larynx.

Sensitiveness :  of  cranial  integuments.

Rawness :  of  throat ;  in  chest.

Roughness :  of  throat ;  in  larynx  and  trachea.

Scratching:  in  throat.

Scraping :  in  throat ;  in  larynx  and  trachea.

Dryness :  of  lids ;  of  nose  ;  of  tongue  ;  of  throat ;  of  larynx;
in  trachea ;  of  Schneiderian  membrane.

Moving  sensation  :  in  goitre.

Restlessness :  in  both  lower  legs.

Lameness :  from  knee  to  hip.

Stiffness :  in  neck  ;  of  muscles  of  neck  and  throat ;  of  fin-
gers ;  of  legs ;  in  limbs.

Strange  feeling:  all  over.

Dyspeptic  distress :  in  stomach.

Craving :  in  stomach.

Empty  feeling :  in  lower  abdomen.

Weariness :  of  upper  portion  of  body.

Tiredness :  in  lower  limbs ;  of  whole  body,  especially  arms.

Faintness :  at  stomach.

Weakness :  in  chest.

Relaxation  :  in  oesophagus  and  stomach.

Numbness:  on  chin;  in  front  of  throat;  of  small  of  back
and  nates;  of  tips  of  fingers ;  of  thighs ;  of  lower  legs ;  of
lower  portion  of  body.

Dulness :  over  root  of  nose.

Gloominess  :  over  root  of  nose.

Creeping:  in  nodule  in  concha;  on  neck;  in  lower  por-
tion of  foot ;  in  skin.

Formication  :  in  rectum.

Voluptuous  itching :  at  point  of  glans  penis.


499  SPONGIA  TOSTA.

Itching :  violent,  on  scalp ;  of  eyelids ;  in  cheeks ;  in  teeth ;

near  groin ; in  anus ; on breast ; on back  ; beneath

upper  arms ;  in  ball  of  thumb  ;  on  feet;  of  skin.
Cold  feeling :  in  head ;  in  stomach ;  on  back ; on  lower

limbs ;  on  small  of  back ;  on  thighs.
Coldness :  of  eyes ;  of  nose ;  in  epigastrium  ;  of  neck ;  in

back;  of  hands;  of  thighs;  in  epigastrium.
"Tissues. I  Ebullitions;  distended  veins.

II Swelling  and  induration  of  glands;  goitre.

I  Dropsy  in  cavities  of  body.

iScrofulosis;  skin  and  muscles  lax;  light  hair.

iRheumatic  affections  of  valves  of  heart;  fibrous  deposits

upon  valves.
I  Inflammation  of  larynx,  trachea  or  bronchia.

I  Croup;  bronchitis;  tuberculous  phthisis.

I I  Tubercular  diathesis.

^' Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  forehead
painful ;  nodule  in  1.  concha  painful ;  boils  on  ear  pain-
ful ;  lower  jaw  painful ;  chin  at  angle  of  mouth  painful ;
pain  in  testicle;  larynx  sensitive;  pain  in  larynx  ;  in-
duration painful ;  swelling  under  lower  jaw  painful ;  r.
side  of  neck  painful ;  thyroid  gland  painful ;  goitre
tender ;  skin  sensitive.

Pressure :  pimples  beneath  chin  on  neck  painful ;  of  hand
<  twisting  sensation  in  abdomen  ;  crawling  pain  in
chest  <  ;  on  glands  causes  pain ;  thyroid  gland  painful.

Cannot  endure  tight  clothing  about  body,  particularly
epigastric  region ;  and  abdomen.

Rubbing :  >  itching  under  eye  ;  seems  as  if  weight  were
dragging  down  in  r.  side  of  chest;  does  not  >  itching
in  thumb;  makes  red  spots;  does  not  >  itching  stitch.

Scratching :  does  not  diminish  biting  itching.
*^  Skin. Sensitive  to  touch.

Red,  itching  blotches  on  skin.

Herpes.

Particularly  when  she  feels  cold,  there  arises  an  itching
biting  on  breast,  epigastrium,  back  and  beneath  upper
arms,  at  other  times  it  is  only  on  feet ;  rubbing  makes
spot  red,  which  seems  to  bite  more  severely  for  a  short
time,  vesicles  arise  on  these  spots,  which,  however,  soon
vanish  again.

iRingworm.

Here  and  there,  about  whole  body,  a  protracted  itching
stitch,  as  if  caused  by  a  very  fine  needle,  making  it
necessary  to  rub  the  part  without  being  relieved  thereby.

Burning  itching,  with  desire  to  scratch.

■  Itching  on  skin  :  pricking  with  fever  ;  as  if  sweat  would
break  out ;  with  heat  and  sweat.


SPONGIA  TOSTA.  500

First  a  creeping  sensation  in  skin  ;  then  spot  becomes  red
and  hot,  followed  by  biting  itching,  like  a  flea  moving
along  (without  stinging),  upon  which  rashlike  pimples
appear;  scratching  does  not  dimish  biting-itching,  it
appears  to  make  it  last  longer.

iMeasles;  barking  cough,  with  hoarseness,  coryza  and
bronchial  catarrh.

■  Pruritus  universalis;  biting  itching,  in  chronic  cases.

I  I  Fistulous  opening  in  scrotum ;  discharges  little  thick
whitish  matter.

I  I  Ulcers  with  scanty  discharge  ;  erysipelas ;  erythema.

"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Often  indicated  with  chil-
dren and  women.

I I  Light  hair,  lax  fibre ;  fair  complexion.
■Scrofulous  affections.

Child,  set.  6  months  ;  croup.

Girl,  eet.  6  months ;  croup.

Girl,  set.  11  months ;  irritability  of  larynx.

Boy,  set.  18  months,  strong  and  lively ;  croup.

Girl,  set.  18  months,  neck  had  been  leeched  and  calomel

given ;  croup.
Girl,  set.  2  ;  croup.
Girl,  set.  2 ;  croup.
Boy,  set.  3^  years  ;  croup.

Boy,  set.  4,  scrofulous,  cachectic-looking  ;  croup.
Boy,  set.  5,  robust,  after  a  chill ;  croup.
Girl,  set.  6,  frail,  slender,  dark  hair  and  eyes ;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  19,  lymphatic  temperament,  affected  four  years;

goitre.
Young  lady,  set.  19,  well  built,  well  nourished,  scrofulous

until  her  fourteenth  year,  has  bronchocele;  asthma.
Lady,  set.  23,  suffering  two  years ;  enlargement  of  thyroid

gland.
Miss  M.,  set.  25,  healthy,  plump,  ruddy,  weight  150,  dark

hair  and  eyes,  affected  three  years ;  bronchocele.
Man,  set.  30,  suffering  eighteen  months;  pain  in  abdomen.
Lady,  set.  30,  lymphatic  constitution  ;  Basedow's  disease.
Lady,  set.  32,  single,  tall,  slender,  thick  skin  and  thick  lips,

strumous,  affected  many  years;  bronchocele.
Man,  set.  35  ;  affection  of  testicle.
Man,  set.  '^0,  dark  hair  and  complexion,  after  pneumonia;

Woman,  set.  40 ;  Basedow's  disease.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  45,  mother  of  six  children,  spare  habit,  scrofu-
lous, affected  six  years;  bronchocele.
Man,  set.  53,  suffering  fourteen  years ;  cough.
*^ Relations. Compatible: after Aeon.,  Hepar ; before  Bro-

mium,  Carbo  veg. ,  Hepar.


501  SQUILLA.

SQUILLA.

Squills,  Sea  Onion.  Liliacese.

A  bulbous  plant,  bearing  a  long  spike  of  whitish  flowers,  found  on  the  sandy
shores  of  the  Mediterranean.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  Becher,  Hartmann,  Hornburg,
Mossdorf,  Stapf,  Teuthorn,  Walther  and  Wislicenus,  Mat.  Med.  Pura,  vol.  3,  p.  265.

CiiiNicAii  Authorities. — Affection  of  eye,  Sawyer,  Med.  Adv.,  June,  1889,  p.
398  ;  Phlyctenule  of  conjunctiva,  Deady,  Norton  s  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  171 ;  Enuresis
nocturna,  Blaisdell,  Stitson,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.  390;  Asthma,  Frank,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  9,  p.  257 ;  Bronchitis,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  27  ;  Neidhard,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  20,  p.  27 ;  Pertussis,  A.  R,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  729 ;  Whooping  cough
Wesselhceft,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  3 ;  Pneumoma,  Deschere,  T.  A.  J.  H.,  1886,
p.  323 ;  Dropsical  affections,  Hahnemann,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  355.

^  Mind. Great  anxiety  of  mind,  with  fear  of  death.
Angry  about  trifles.
Aversion  to  mental  or  bodily  labor.

*  Sensorium. Vertigo  in  morning,  with  nausea.

Head  beclouded  and  dizzy.
'  Inner  Head. Drawing  lancinating  headache.
Pulsation  in  head  when  raising  it.
Headache  in  morning  on  waking,  with  pressing  pains.
Contractive  pain  in  both  temples.
Quickly  passing  pain  in  occiput,  from  1.  to  right.
Stitching  pain  in  r.  side  of  forehead.
Affections  of  brain :  child  rubs  its  face  and  eyes  a  great

deal,  especially  its  eyes,  as  if  to  relieve  itching ;  profuse

or  scanty  urination.

*  Outer  Head. Painful  sensitiveness  of  vertex,  mornings.

*  Sight  and  Eyes, i Staring  look,  eyes  wide  open.

I  i  Left  eye  looks  smaller  than  right ;  upper  eyelid  swollen.
Contraction  of  pupils.

The  eyes  feel  as  if  swimming  in  cold  water.
I  I  For  two  weeks  a  large  phlyctenule  of  conjunctiva  on
outer  side  of  cornea ;  sensation  as  of  cold  water  in  eye,
when  in  a  cold  wind.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Tearing  pain  back  of  1.  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. I Sneezes  during  cough  ;  eyes  water ;  rubs
eyes  and  nose. ^Measles.
I  Acrid,  corrosive,  fluent  coryza,  in  morning;  a  regular
general  snizzle ;  coryza ;  mucous  cough,  with  spurting
of  unne,  and  even  of  watery  stools.


SQUILL  A.  502

I  Nostrils  painful  as  if  sore,  with  violent  coryza.
Humid  eruptions  under  nose,  with  stinging  itching.
®  Upper  Face. Changeable  expression  and  color  of  face.

During  heat,  redness  of  face,  followed  by  paleness,  without

coldness.
Distorted  countenance,  with  red  cheeks,  no  thirst.
^  Lower  Face. Lips :  twitch  and are  covered  with  yellow
crusts ;  black  and  cracked.
Humid  spreading  eruption  on  upper  lip.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue. Food  tastes  bitter,  especially  bread ;  or

sweetish,  especially  soup  and  meat.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Open,  dry  mouth.
Much  viscid  mucus  in  mouth.
Burning  in  mouth  and  throat.
13  T]ii.oat. Burning  in  palate  and  throat ;  dryness  in  throat.
I  I  Irritation  in  throat,  with  heat  and  tickling,  causing  con-
stant cough.
Irritation  to  cough  in  pit  of  throat,  in  upper  part  of  trachea.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Insatiable  appe-
tite.
Desire  for  acids.

Thirst  for  cold  water,  but  dyspnoea  allows  her  to  take  but
a  sip  at  a  time.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Empty
eructations.
Nausea : during  morning cough ; continuous  in pit  of
stomach,  alternating  with  a  pain  in  abdomen,  as  with
diarrhoea.
I  I  Excessive  nausea.
I  I  Nausea  in  back  of  throat,  almost  constant  accumulation

of  saliva  in  mouth.
Nausea  in  pit  of  stomach,  alternating  with  pain  in  abdo-
men, or  sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  stomach  as  from

a  stone.
^^  Abdomen. Cutting  pain  in  abdomen  as  from  flatulence.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  abdomen  and  region  of  bladder.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Frequent  discharge  of  very  fetid  flatus.
Diarrhoea,  stools  very  ofi^ensive,  watery,  during  measles,

or  looking  black.
■  Stools:  dark -brown  or  black,  slimy,  fluid,  in  frothy  bub-
bles; very  offensive;  painless;  involuntary  (when  cough-
ing, sneezing  or  passing  urine).
Painless  constipation.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Continuous,  painful  pressure  on  bladder.
Tenesmus  of  bladder  after  micturition.
Frequent  calls  to  urinate,  especially  at  night,  with  scanty
or  profuse  discharge  of  pale  urine.


503  SQUILLA.

Sanguinolent  urine  with  a  deposit  of  red  sediment.
Violent  urging  to  urinate,  with  frequent  emission  of  pale,

limpid  urine,  looking  like  water. ^Diabetes  insipidus.
1 1  Involuntary  micturition,  especially  when  coughing.
I  I  Continuous  painful  pressure  on  bladder  and  inability'

to  retain  urine. ^Enuresis  nocturna.
Unable  to  retain  urine,  because  the  amount  is  too  large.
I  Urine:  increased,  pale,  with  frequent  urging;  involun-
tary, scanty,  dark-red. ^Hydrothorax.
When  urinating  feces  escape.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Atony  of  cervix  uteri.
^^  Respiration. Moaning, with open mouth ; wheezing ;

rattling,  with  pleurisy,  must  sit  up ;  short,  with  least

exertion.
Dyspnoea,  cannot  drink  ;  child  seizes  cup  eagerly,  but  can

drink  only  in  sips.
DiflBcult  or  embarrassed  respiration.
Frequently  obliged  to  take  a  deep  breath,  which  provokes

cough.

■  Dyspnoea and stitches in chest, most distressing on

inspiration.

Oppression  across  chest,  as  if  it  were  too  tight.

Shortness  of  breath  from  every  exertion,  especially  when
ascending.

Difficulty of breathing, with stitches in chest when
breathing  and  coughing.

I  I  Dry  asthma  for  three  years,  and  persistent  panting
respiration,  no  actual  loss  of  breath  at  first ;  finall}''  was
obliged  to  get  out  of  bed  and  sit  at  open  window ;  could
not  lie  on  r.  side  without  bringing  on  oppression ;  drawing
pain  through  both  hypochondrise ;  urine  scanty,  reddish-
yellow  and  neutral.
"^  Cough.  1 1  Cough :  dry,  night  and  morning ;  short,  rattling,
disturbing  sleep ;  spasmodic,  from  mucus  in  trachea,  or
tickling  creeping  sensation  in  chest;  with  headache,
dyspnoea,  spurting  of  urine,  stitches  in  chest  or  pain
in  abdomen ;  caused  by  cold  drinks ;  during  measles ;
after  eating ;  from  every  exertion ;  by  changing  from
warm  to  cold  air,

■Frequent  irritation  to  a  short  dry  cough  in  four  or  five
shocks  caused  by  tickling  beneath  thyroid  cartilage.

■A  violent  sudden  cough  in  morning,  with  stitch  in  side
with  every  cough,  with  expectoration.

■  Cough,  in  morning,  with  profuse  slimy  expectoration.

■  ■Constant  expectoration  of  mucus.

Cough  in  morning,  with  copious  expectoration  of  thin,
frequently  reddish-colored  mucus.

■  ■The  loose  cough  in  morning  is  more  fatiguing  than  the

dry  in  evening.


SQUILLA.  504

I  'Cough  seems  to  proceed  from  lowest  ramifications  of
bronchial  tubes,  with  wheezing  in  lower  part  of  lungs.
/^Bronchitis.

lEvery  fit  of  coughing  winds  up  with  sneezing  and
involuntary  urination.

I  Sputa:  white  or  reddish  mucus;  sweetish,  or  empyreu-
matic  or  offensive  in  odor ;  in  small  round  balls,  very
difficult  to  expectorate.

I  I  Dry  spasmodic  cough,  brought  on  by  taking  a  deep
inspiration,  causing  pain  in  abdomen  as  from  a  shock
and  sensation  as  if  intestines  would  burst  out  through
abdomen,  with  retching,  stitches  in  sides,  pressure  upon
bladder  and  involuntary  escape  of  urine ;  white,  slimy,
often  sweetish-tasting  expectoration  in  morning;  none
in  evening ;  rattling  of  mucus  before  onset  of  paroxysm.
^Pertussis.

I  I  Cough  less  troublesome  in  daytime,  yet  somewhat
spasmodic  and  with  whooping,  but  every  night  at  11
o'clock,  or  between  11  and  3  o'clock,  she  has  a
sudden  attack  of  suffocation ;  it  is  very  severe  and
compels  her  to  spring  to  her  feet  and  stand  on  tiptoe  on
her  bed,  stretching  her  body  and  arms  upward  in  her
agony ;  she  cannot  gain  her  breath  for  many  seconds ;
anxiety  and  fear  is  extreme ;  at  length  the  breath
returns,  with  a  whooping  sound  on  inspiration  ;  this  is
soon  followed  by  a  milder  attack ;  the  rest  of  the  night
is  comparatively  quiet;  but  drinking  of  cold  water
always  brings  on  severe  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  ii  Stitches  in  chest,  especially
when  inhaling  and  coughing ;  in  sides  of  chest ;
pleurisy.

Compressive  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest,  ending  in  a  stitch.

Broad  pressive  stitches  beneath  last  ribs  of  both  sides.

I  On  inspiration,  jerking  stitches  in  r.  and  1.  sides  of  chest,
not  far  from  sternum.

iStitches  in  1.  and  r.  true  ribs,  at  same  time.

Drawing  stitch  from  last  true  rib  to  shoulder.

I  Broad  blunt  stitches  in  last  ribs  of  1.  side,  in  morning
in  bed,  that  awakened  him.

A  contracting  stitch  in  1.  side,  just  beneath  last  ribs.

Drawing  pain  in  chest.

Sharp  stitches  in  scapular  end  of  clavicle  during  inspira-
tion and  expiration.

Severe  stitches  near  sternum,  extending  downward  so  that
he  could  with  great  difficulty  get  his  breath.

I  Pains  in  chest  <  in  morning.

■  Heaviness  on  chest;  Congestion  of  blood  to  chest.

■  Chronic catarrh,  profuse secretion  of  tenacious white


505  SQUILLA.

mucus,  which  is  only  expectorated  after  severe  cough ;
especially  in  children.

I  1  Circle  of  size  of  palm  of  hand,  dull  on  percussion,  in
chest  of  a  young  lady.

I  I  Pneumonia  r,  side;  cough  very  painful;  high  fever;
breathing  short  and  anxious,  with  general  anxiety;
dulness  over  r.  lung  on  percussion,  fine  whistling
breathing  on  auscultation ;  in  some  places  no  respira-
tory murmur ;  excessive  dyspnoea,  suffering  during
cough  making  child  almost  frantic ;  could  take  no
nourishment  on  account  of  cough  not  allowing  him  to
swallow;  during  fits  of  coughing,  in  his  agony  would
rub  his  face  all  over  briskly  with  his  fist.

■  Especially  suitable in pneumonia and pleurisy,  after
bloodletting.
-^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  small  and  slow,

slightly  hard.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Stiff'ness  of  neck.

Painful  jerking  above  1.  scapula.

Painless  drawing  in  1.  scapula.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sweat  in  armpits.

Convulsive  twitching  in  arms;  cold  hands.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Convulsive  twitching  of  legs.

Cold  foot  sweat.

Sweat  only  on  toes.

Soles  red  and  sore  when  walking.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Tearing  and  restlessness  in  upper  and
lower  extremities.

Convulsive  twitching  and  motions  of  limbs,  <  morning
and  evening  and  during  motion.

Soreness  in  bends  of  joints.

Dull  rheumatic  pain  ;  <  when  exercising,  >  while  at  rest.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Pest:  rheumatic  pains  >.

Could  not  lie  on  r.  side  without  bringing  on  oppression.

Raising  head  :  pulsation  in  it.

Must  sit  up :  pleurisy.

Sitting :  chilliness  ceases.

Motion:  twitching  of  limbs  <.

Least  exertion  :  short  respiration  ;  cough.

Ascending :  shortness  of  breath.

Walking :  soles  red  and  sore ;  chilliness.

Exercising:  rheumatic  pains  <.
^^  Sleep. Frequent  yawning,  without  sleepiness.

Restless  sleep  with  much  tossing  about.

^Time. Morning:  vertigo  and  nausea; headache; painful

sensitiveness  of  vertex ; fluent  coryza ;  nausea  during

cough;  dry  cough;  violent  sudden  cough  in  morning;

cough,  with  profuse  expectoration ;  loose  cough,  very


SQUILLA.  506

fatiguing ;  stitches  in  ribs ;  pains  in  chest  <  ;  twitch-
ing of  limbs  <.
Daytime ;  cough  less  troublesome.
Afternoon  :  great  heat  in  body.
Toward  evening :  chilliness.
Evening :  dry  cough  ;  sweetish  expectoration ;  twitching

of  limbs  <  ;  great  heat  in  body.
Night: frequent  calls  to  urinate; dry  cough;  internal
chill.
^'Temperature  and  Weather. From  warm  to  cold  air:
cough.
Aversion  :  to  being  uncovered,  with  heat.
Must  get  out  of  bed  and  sit  at  open  window.
Cold  wind  :  sensation  as  of  cold  water  in  eye.
Cold  drinks  :  caused  cough.
*''  Fever. Chill  internally  at  night,  with  external  heat.

Chilliness  toward  evening  when  walking,  not  when  sitting.
Icy-cold  hands  and  feet,  with  warmth  of  rest  of  body.
Icy-cold  feet.

Heat  dry,  burning,  mostly  internally.
Heat  of  whole  body,  with  cold  hands  and  feet,  with  aver-
sion to  being  uncovered  ;  face  pale  after  heat.
Sensation  of  great  heat  in  body,  in  afternoon  and  evening,

generally  with  cold  feet.
Whenever  he  uncovers  himself  during  heat,  he  suffers

from  chilliness  and  pain.
Sweat  wanting.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternating :  nausea  in  pit  of  stom-
ach, with  pain  in  abdomen.
Every  night  at  11  o'clock  or  between  11  and  3:  sudden

attacks  of  suffocation.
For  three  years :  dry  asthma.
*^ Locality  and  Direction. Right:  pain  in  forehead;  com-
pressive pain,  side  of  chest;  blunt  stitch  in  last  ribs;
pneumonia,  dulness  over  lung.
Left :  eye  smaller  than  right ;  pain  back  of  ear ;  stitch  in

side;  jerking  above  scapula;  drawing  on  scapula.
From  1.  to  r. :  pain  in  occiput.

Right  and  left :  stitches  in  side  of  chest ;  stitches  in  true
ribs  at  same  time.
*^  Sensations. Eyes  as  if  swimming  in  water ;  nostrils  as  if
sore ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in ;  as  if  chest  were  too
tight ;  as  if  intestines  would  burst  through  abdomen.
Pain  :  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest.

Tearing  pain:  back  of  1.  ear  ;  in  upper  and  lower  limbs.
Cutting  pain  :  in  abdomen.
Drawing  lancinating  pain  :  in  head.
Severe  stitches  :  near  sternum.


507  SQUILLA.

Sharp  stitches :  in  scapular  end  of  clavicle.

Jerking  stitches :  in  r.  and  1.  side  of  chest.

Stitches :  in  chest ;  in  side ;  in  1.  and  r.  true  ribs.

Contracting  stitch  :  in  1.  side.

Drawing  stitch  :  from  last  true  rib  to  shoulder.

Broad  pressive  stitches :  beneath  last  ribs.

Broad  blunt  stitches  :  in  last  rib  of  r.  side.

Stitching  pain :  in  forehead.

Contractive  pain  ;  in  both  temples ;  in  occiput.

Compressive  pain  :  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Drawing  pain  :  through  both  hypochondrias  ;  in  chest.

Pressing  pain  :  in  head.

Dull  rheumatic  pains  :  in  limbs.

Painful  jerking :  above  scapula.

Painful  pressure :  on  bladder.

Painful  sensitiveness:  of  abdomen  and  region  of  bladder.

Soreness:  of  soles;  in  bends  of  joints.

Burning:  in  mouth  and  throat;  in  palate.

Great  heat :  in  body.

Dryness :  of  mouth  ;  of  throat.

Pulsation :  in  head.

Painless  drawing :  on  scapula.

Stiffness :  of  neck.

Pressure :  in  stomach,  as  from  a  stone.

Heaviness:  on  chest.

Tickling  creeping  sensation  :  in  chest.

Stinging  itching :  under  nose.

Icy-coldness:  of  hands;  of  feet.
*^  Skin. Eruptions  like  itch,  with  burning,  itching.

Excoriation  in  bends  of  limbs.
*^ Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  9,  negro;  pneu-
monia.

Miss  H.,  set.  15,  fleshy,  light  complexion,  blue  eyes,  large
for  her  age,  recovering  from  varicella;  affection  of  eye.

Man,  set.  25,  suffering  two  weeks;  phlyctenule  of  conjunc-
tiva.

Widow,  set.  63,  suffering  three  years;  asthma.
*^  Relations. Compatible :  after  Bryon.


STANNUM.  508


STANNUM.

Tin.  The  Element.

Trituration  of  the  pure  metal.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  Franz,  Gross,  Guttmann,  Hart-
mann,  Haynel,  Herrmann,  Langhammer,  Wislicenus,  Chronische  Krankh.,  vol.  5.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  610 ;  Schron,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  301 ;  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  193;  Ciliary  neuralgia,  Nash,
Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  94;  Nash,  Med.  Couns.,  vol.  1,  p.  181 ;  Facial  neuralgia,  Guern-
sey, Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  172;  Toothache,  Villers,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  148;
W.  V.  R,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  391 ;  Oastralgia,  Hartmann,  Lobethal,  Kiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  663;  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  161  ;  Solar  neuralgia  (5  cases),
Jones,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  197  ;  Colic,  Lilienthal,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  447  ;
Kock,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  103,  p.  161 ;  Hernia,  Guernsey,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  63 ;  Use
in  tapeivorm,  Hahnemann,  Riickert,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  809  ;  Leu-
corrhcea,  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  44;  Complaints  during  pregnancy,  Kunkel,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  176 ;  Affection  of  larynx,  Wurda,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.
173;  Asthma,  Cheney,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  9,  p.  56;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  415;
Affection  of  larynx  simulating  phthisis,  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  790 ;
Asthma,  Cheney,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  9,  p.  56,  also  Br.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  415 ;  Asthma,
and  Albuminuria,  Villers,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  108;  Cough,  Spooner,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  107;  Grant,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  539;  Pertussis,  A.  R.,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  729;  Affections  of  chest,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,vol.  107,  p.  20;
Chronic  catarrhal  affection  of  chest,  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  28  ;  Miiller,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  790  ;  Phthisis,  B.  in  A.,  Gross,  Riickert,  Schreter,  Diehl,  Schulz,
Schubert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  399  ;  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  843;
Brigham,  C.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  96 ;  Intercostal  neuralgia,  Villers,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  1,  p.  149 ;  Scrivener^ s  cramp,  Battmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  615  ;  Neural-
gia, Villers,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  79;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  17,  p.  165;  Riickert,  A.  H.
Z.,  vol.  8,  p.  77 ;  Spasms,  Epilepsy,  Altmiiller,  Caspari,  Hartmann,  Attorn.,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  592 ;  Hemiplegia,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  484.

^  Mind.  Sadness,  with  aversion  to  men  and  disinclination  to
talk.

Continued  restlessness  and  anxiety.

i  I  Uneasy,  does  not  know  what  to  do  with  himself,  pains
>  by  walking,  yet  so  weak  he  soon  must  rest.  ^Anaemia.

Sullen,  answers  unwillingly  and  shortly.

Her  distress  of  mind  ceases  as  soon  as  menses  begin  to
flow.

1  I A  woman,  set.  39,  pregnant  in  fourth  month ;  continued
anxiety  and  restlessness ;  must  keep  in  bed  not  only  on
account  of  bodily  weakness,  but  also  on  account  of  her
inability  to  do  anything,  as  she  cannot  muster  sufficient


509  .  STANNUM.

courage,  and  is  forgetful  and  absent-minded  ;  feels  like
crying  all  the  time,  but  crying  makes  her  feel  worse;
great  palpitation  of  heart  and  anxiety,  especially  if  she
has  to  give  directions  in  her  domestic  affairs ;  thinking
makes  her  feel  wretched,  and  she  cannot  get  rid  of  what
once  gets  fixed  in  her  mind  ;  oversensitive  smell ;  ver-
tigo on  moving  head ;  visions  in  morning  and  through
day  of  all  kinds  of  fancied  things ;  drawing  pains  in  dif-
ferent places ;  difficult  evacuation  even  of  soft  stool ;  urg-
ing to  stool;  urine  profuse  and  pale  and  then  scanty  and
brown,  sometimes  white  like  milk;  flatus;  dry,  tire-
some cough ;  lies  always  upon  her  back  with  one  leg
stretched  and  the  other  drawn  up.  ^Pregnancy.
^Sensorium.  Vertigo:  when  reading,  with  loss  of  thought;
<  walking  in  open  air  or  raising  head ;  it  seems  as  if
all  objects  were  too  far  off;  dizzy  pressure  through  head;
head  feels  heavy,  with  sadness.
^  Inner  Head.  Sharp  jerking  pains  in  anterior  lobe  of  brain
above  orbit.

Headache  in  frontal  region.

Pain  as  if  forehead  were  shattered.

Dull  pressure  from  within  outward,  in  forehead.

Pressive  tearing:  in  forehead;  in  r.  half  of  forehead,  at  in-
tervals ;  <  by  stooping.

■  Pressure  in  1.  temple  beginning  slight,  then  increasing

and  so  again  diminishing  as  if  forehead  would  be  pressed

inward.
Crushing  pain,  like  a  pressing  inward  in  temples,  all  day.
I  Painful  jerks  through  1.  temple,  forehead  and  cerebellum,

leaving  a  dull  pressure,  <  during  rest,  >  from  motion.

■  Throbbing  headache  in  temples.
Stupefying,  aching  pain  in  brain.

Constriction  and  sudden  pressure  in  whole  upper  part  of
head,  slowly  increasing  and  decreasing. .

■  Heaviness  in  head,  during  rest  and  motion,  evenings.

■  Headache  every  morning,  over  one  or  other  eye,  mostly

1.,  gradually  extending  over  whole  forehead,  increasing
and  decreasing  gradually ;  often  with  vomiting.

I  I  Soon  after  rising,  dull,  stupefying  pain  over  eyes,  some-
times more  over  1.,  increasing  gradually  in  intensity  and
involving  whole  forehead,  attaining  its  climax  in  about
two  hours,  after  which  it  as  gradually  subsided  and  in
about  two  hours  was  quite  gone ;  pain  of  a  pressing  in,
cramping,  crushing  character.

I  I  Regularly  at  5  a.m.  awakened  by  headache,  occupying
forehead  and  both  eyes ;  severe  pressive  or  grinding
pains,  <  from  motion;  great  sensitiveness  to  noise  and
light;  pain  not  particularly  severe  at  first,  but  it  gradu-


510  STANNUM.

ally  increased,  maintained  its  intensity  when  at  its
height  for  some  time  (generally  from  8  to  9),  then  gradu-
ally diminished,  finally  disappeared.
I  I  Violent,  glowing,  beating  pain,  extending  from  upper
part  of  forehead  to  vertex ;  felt  as  if  head  would  burst
from  inward  blows;  skin  of  forehead  seems  swollen,  eye-
lids were  forced  together  and  could  be  but  slightly
opened ;  least  noise  increased  pain  to  an  intolerable  de-
gree, so  that  he  crept  to  farthest  corner  of  house ;  daily
paroxysm  lasting  from  10  a.m.  to  4  p.m.,  attaining  its
greatest  intensity  about  noon.
I  I  For  a  week  past  has  had  a  slight  cold,  sneezing,  some
heated  excoriating  water  running  from  nose  and  eyes ;
after  third  day  of  this  cold  he  had  an  aching  pain  over
1.  eye,  in  1.  temple,  coming  on  about  4  a.m.,  very  gradu-
ally increasing  until  11  a.m.,  and  from  3  p.m.  as  slowly
decreasing,  until  by  6  p.m.  it  was  entirely  gone,  not  to
return  until  4  a.m.  ;  at  first,  pain  only  aching,  but  after
a  few  days  it  became  sharp,  cutting  and  boring,  with  a
terrible  sense  of  fulness ;  by  end  of  a  week  so  excruciat-
ing at  its  acme  that  patient,  whose  ability  to  bear  pain
was  more  than  ordinary,  would  roll  or  toss  over  bed,
exhibiting  usual  expressions  of  greatest  agony ;  lachry-
mation  of  eye  on  affected  side,  with  slight  excoriation  of
lower  lid ;  pain  >  for  a  time  by  pressure.  ^Solar  neu-
ralgia,

ilNeuralgia  of  head  ;  begins  lightly  and  increases  gradu-
ally to  its  highest  point  and  then  gradually  declines.
*  Outer  Head. Burning  in  forehead,  with  nausea,  >  in  open

air.
^  Sight  arid  Eyes. Sees  a  rainbow  about  the  candlelight.

Weak,  sunken,  lustreless  eyes.

Pupils  contracted,

I  1  Neuralgia  in  1.  eye,  gradually  increasing  from  10  a.m.
to  noon,  then  gradually  decreasing,  with  lachrymation
during  pain.

Biting  in  eyes,  as  from  rubbing  with  a  woolen  cloth.

Agglutination  of  lids  at  night.

Pressure  in  1.  inner  canthus  as  from  a  stye,  with  lachry-
mation.

Pustular  swelling  at  inner  canthus  of  1.  eye ;  like  a  lach-
rymal fistula.

Pressive  pain  in  r.  inner  canthus.

Burning  stitches  in  eyelids. ^Styes.

I  I  Blennorrhoea  of  lachrymal  sac;  profuse  yellow-white  dis-
charge.

I  I  Ptosis  from  sympathetic  paralysis ;  returning  every
Tuesda3^


511  STANNUM.

^Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  1.  ear.

Shrieking  noise  in  ear  when  blowing  nose.

Ulceration  of  ear-ring  hole.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Oversensitive  smell.

Stuffed  feeling  and  heaviness,  high  up  in  nostrils.

Dry  coryza  on  one  side,  with  soreness,  redness  and  swell-
ing of  nostril.
^  Upper  Face, i  Flushes  of  heat  in  face  from  any  movement,
>  in  open  air;  one  cheek  hot  and  red.

I  Face  pale,  eyes  sunk,  mind  dull.

I  Face  pale  and  sunken,  sickly,  features  elongated.

I  Face  pale,  sickly-looking,  flushing  easily  on  exertion.
Drawing  pain  in  face,  in  malar  bone  and  orbits.

Malar  bone  painful  to  touch  before  menses,  during  the

flow  it  is  painful  even  to  move  muscles  of  face.
Oontusive  pain  in  region  of  malar  bone  during  menses.

I I  Prosopalgia:  pains  increase  and  decrease  gradually;
after  suppressed  chills  by  quinine.

I  Intermittent  supraorbital  neuralgia  from  10  a.m.  to  3  or  4
P.M.,  gradually  increasing  until  attaining  its  acme,  and
then  again  decreasing  as  gradually;  after  abuse  of  qui-
nine.

I  I  Violent  neuralgia  of  face  and  head,  pains  stealing  on  in
a  "  slow-and-sure"  fashion,  requiring  hours  to  reach  its
maximum,  then  beginning  its  decrease,  which  is  quite
as  slow.

'"  Teeth  and  Tongue. Teeth  feel  loose,  elongated,  with  pain-
ful jerking  shortly  after  eating.
I  I  Neuralgia  from  temples  down  over  upper  and  lower  max-
illa and  lips,  a  drawing,  gnawing  pain,  begins  at  a  cer-
tain hour  for  several  days,  rises  up  to  its  greatest  severity
and  then  decreases  again  gradually  (from  morning  until
evening).
I  I  Pain  in  upper  incisors  for  four  days ;  pains  severe,  com-
ing at  first  lightly,  gradually  increasing  in  intensity,
and  then  gradually  subsiding.
I  i  Epileptiform  convulsions  from  teething ;  child  is  more
comfortable  by  lying  with  abdomen  across  some  hard
substance ;  clenching  of  thumbs.
"Taste  and  Tongue, l Taste:  sour;  sweet;  offensive;  every-
thing bitter  but  water.
I  iDifficult,  weak  speech,  occasioned  by  weakness,  particu-
larly in  chest.
Tongue :  red  ;  yellow ;  coated  with  yellowish  mucus.
1^  Inner  Mouth, i  Fetid  smell  from  mouth.
'* Throat. Permanent  rawness  and  dryness  in  throat;  during
deglutition  a  painful  feeling  of  being  denuded.
Extreme  rawness  and  dryness  of  throat,  without  thirst,


STANNUM.  512

these  sensations  are  much  more  painful  during  degluti-
tion ;  thick  greyish  or  greenish  mucus  adheres  to  throat;
strong  efforts  are  required  to  raise  it,  and  these  excite
inclination  to  vomit.
I  Rawness  in  throat,  in  morning. ^Chronic  catarrh.

■  Stinging  dryness  in  throat.  ,

Cutting  in  throat  as  from  knives,  when  swallowing.

I  Hawks  mucus,  with  soreness  in  throat;  voice  then  be-
comes clearer  for  singing.

Inclination  to  hawk  up  much  mucus  from  throat,  in  even-
ing, followed  by  a  sore  pain  in  throat.

I  Mucus  sticks  in  throat,  efforts  to  raise  it  excite  vomitu-
rition.

Thick,  grey-green  mucus,  mixed  with  blood,  is  detached
from  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Canine  hunger
during  day,  with  loss  of  appetite  in  evening.

Appetite  irregular,  with  hypochondriasis.

Aversion  to  beer ;  it  tastes  flat  or  bitter.
'*  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions: bitter,  after  eating;  sour.

Nausea  after  eating,  followed  by  vomiting  of  bile,  or  undi-
gested food.

Vomiting :  of  blood ;  of  bile  and  mucus  on  awaking  in
morning ;  of  water  on  smelling  cooking.
^'' Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Sinking,  gone  feeling  in
epigastrium.

I  I  Pressure  and  obstruction  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Heavy  pressure  in  stomach,  with  soreness  of  it  to  touch.

■  Oppression  of  stomach  in  hysterical  women,  with  nau-

sea, pale  face,  great  weakness,  phlegmatic  temperament.

I  Uneasy,  knows  not  what  to  do  with  himself;  pains  >  by
walking,  yet  so  weak  he  must  soon  rest.

iCardialgia,  pains  gradually  come  and  go,  extend  to  navel
and  are  >  from  hard  pressure ;  sickly  expression ;  un-
easy, does  not  know  what  to  do  with  himself;  >  by
walking,  yet  so  weak  he  must  soon  rest.

I  Gastralgia ;  clawing,  kneading  pain,  extending  to  umbil-
icus ;  epigastrium  sensitive  to  pressure ;  tension,  press-
ure, shortness  of  breath,  with  anxiety  and  nausea;
chronic  diarrhoea ;  frequent  bitter  belching ;  distension
of  stomach ;  hunger.

iHsematemesis,  <  when  lying,  >  from  pressure  on  stom-
ach ;  slight  touch  causes  a  feeling  of  subcutaneous  ulcer-
ation.
^^  Hypochondria. Occasionally  through  day  great  epigastric
weakness  and  hunger,  but  cannot  eat.

I  I  Burning  in  hepatic  region  ;  cutting  pains  about  navel ;
pain  as  if  from  an  ulcer ;  empty  feeling  after  eating.


513  STANNUM.

Burning  in  hepatic  region  ;  stinging.
Boring  stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium.
Hysteric  spasms  in  region  of  diaphragm.
^^  Abdomen. Empty  feeling,  even  after  eating.

Sensation  of  soreness  in  whole  abdomen,  <  by  touch.
I  I  Digging  in  abdomen  before  every  stool.

■  Cutting  about  navel;  with  bitter  eructations,  hunger  and

diarrhoea;  >  from  hard  pressure.

■  Sensitiveness  of  abdomen  to  touch;  sore  as  from  subcu-

taneous ulceration.

■  Stitches  from  both  sides  through  hips; <  from  slightest

motion,  or  touch,  and  when  lying  on  r.  side ;  >  by  bend-
ing double  against  a  chair  or  table;  vomiting  of  water
when  smelling  any  kind  of  cooking. ^Colic.

I  I  Colic  and  twisting  pains  in  region  of  spleen,  lasting
about  six  hours ;  usually  coming  on  at  night,  and  when
going  off  leaving  a  soreness,  which  wears  off  during
course  of  week;  for  last  few  days  pains  were  constant;
pain  commences  lightly,  gets  worse  and  worse  until  it
reaches  its  acme  and  then  decreases,  leaving  a  feeling
as  if  there  were  a  hole  in  his  side.

Spasmodic  colic  above  and  below  navel.

■  Colic  >  by  hard  pressure  or  by  laying  abdomen  of  child

across  knees,  or  against  shoulder.
I  I  Babe  4  months  old,  double  inguinal  hernia;  diarrhoea
of  green,  curdy  stools  and  much  colic,  >  by  laying  its
abdomen  across  nurse's  knee,  or  against  point  of
shoulder.
^  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■Stools:  green,  curdy,  with  colic;
mucous;  with  bitter  eructations;  hard,  dry,  knotty  or
insufficient,  with  renewed  desire  afterward.

■  Diarrhoea:  in  nursing  infants;  it  is  exhausting  to  talk

much  or  read  aloud  ;  it  is  more  difficult  to  descend  than
to  ascend,  to  sit  down  than  to  rise  up ;  although  stool
has  been  fully  accomplished  does  not  feel  relieved.

Before  stool :  motion,  pinching  and  distension  in  abdomen.

Daring  stool :  cutting  in  anus ;  drawing  from  back
through  thighs ;  rigors.

■  Rectum  inactive;  much  urging  even  with  soft  stool.

■  Constipation;  stool  hard,  dry,  knotty,  or  insufficient  and

green.
I  I  Constipation  appearing  every  Monday  or  on  days  after
a  fete,  but  only  in  winter,  while  for  the  rest  of  the
week  the  stools  were  regular ;  fulness  in  lower  part  of
abdomen,  with  swelling,  malaise,  great  heat  in  head,
>  in  open  air,  returning  when  in  house,  with  ill-humor
and  sadness ;  felt  hungry  at  noon  but  no  appetite  in
evening.

VOL.  IX. — 33.


STANNUM.  514

■  Passes  worms; lumbrici ; colic; sickly  face; spells  of

abdominal  pain,  during  which  wishes  to  lean  over  on
something  hard  for  relief.

■  Taenia.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine : profuse  and  pale,  then  scanty,
brown,  and sometimes  white like milk; scanty  and
loaded  with  phosphates.
After  urination  continued  urging.

Urging  to  urinate  is  wanting  as  if  there  were  no  sensation
in bladder ; only a sensation of fulness indicates
necessity  to  urinate ;  atony  of  bladder.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Voluptuous  sensation  in  genitals,
ending  in  an  emission.

■  Irritation,  with  great  weakness  and  nocturnal  emissions;

marked  neurasthenia.

■  Spermatorrhoea  with  excessive  prostration,
i  I  Emissions  without  lascivious  dreams.

^* Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Excited sexual desire; easy
orgasm.

■  Scratching  arm produces an intolerable sensation  of

j)leasure  in  genital  organs  which  extends  to  uterus  and
produces  sexual  orgasm. ^Neurasthenia.

■  ■  Bearing  down  in  uterine  region ;  prolapsus  uteri  and

vaginse ; <  during  stool ;  feels  so  weak  must  drop  down
suddenly,  but  can  get  up  readily. ^Neurasthenia.

■  Prolapse  strangulated,  tends  to  gangrene.

■  Menses:  too  early  and  too  profuse;  preceded  by  melan-

choly ;  pain  in  malar  bones,  continues  during  menses.

■  iLeucorrhoea :  with  great  debility;  weakness,  seems  to

proceed from chest ; of  yellow,  white  or  transparent

mucus ; thin,  watery,  in  debilitated  subjects ; profuse

white  or  yellow,  causing  great  general  debility.
2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  i  Melancholia.

See  Chapter  1.

■  Spasmodic  labor  pains;  they  exhaust  her,  she  is  out  of

breath.
Child  refuses  mother's  milk.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Voice

husky,  deep,  hoarse,  hollow ; clearer  or  higher after

hawking  up  mucus.
I  Roughness  and  hoarseness,  momentarily  >  by  coughing.

■  ■Talking  weakens,  particularly  the  chest.

I  I  Cannot  read  to  her  children,  it  causes  aching  in  throat,
chest  and  deltoids.

i  I  Complete  aphonia ;  pain  in  larynx ;  severe  cough,  with
profuse  purulent  expectoration  ;  hectic  fever ;  debilitat-
ing night  sweats ;  diarrhoea.

■  Hoarseness,  weakness  and  emptiness  in  chest  on  begin-


515  STANNUM.

ning  to  sing,  so  that  she  was  constantly  obliged  to  stop
and take  a  deep breath  ; at times  a  few expulsive
coughs  removed  hoarseness  for  a  moment.
*  I  Rawness  in  larynx.

I  Irritation  to  cough  in  trachea,  as  from  mucus,  on  breath-
ing, with  a  cough  neither  loose  nor  dryjfelt  more  while
sitting  bent  over  than  when  walking.

I  Mucus  in  trachea,  in  forenoon,  easily  expelled  b}''  a
forcible  cough,  with  great  weakness  of  chest  as  if
eviscerated;  weakness  of  body  and  limbs,  in  which
sensation  of  weakness  extended  upward  and  downward,
several  mornings  in  succession.

■  Bronchial  dilatations,  with  purulent  expectoration.

I  I  Cough,  tickling  in  throat,  loss  of  appetite,  fever,  debili-

tating night  sweats ;  deglutition  gradually  became  more
difficult,  caused  severe  cough  and  attacks  of  suffocation,
expectoration  more  and  more  profuse,  at  first  mucous,
finally  purulent,  more  than  a  pint  in  twenty-four
hours ;  hoarseness ;  emaciation  ;  epiglottis  ulcerated,
edges  eaten  away.

I I  Laryngeal  phthisis,  with  constant  short  hacking  cough
and  aphonia;  empty  feeling  in  chest.

1 1  Accumulation  of  great  quantities  of  mucus  in  trachea,
easily  thrown  off  by  coughing. ^Bronchitis.
^^  Respiration. Disposition  to  take  a  deep  breath,  causing  a
feeling  of  lightness.

Crowing,  snoring  respiration.

■  Oppressed  breathing:  from  every  movement;  when  lying

down;  in  evening;  from  coughing.
Short,  difficult  respiration,  caused  by  weakness  of  respira-
. tory organs,  with great emptiness in chest,  though

without  dyspnoea.

■  Dyspnoea  and  want  of  breath  on  ascending  steps  and  on

slightest  motion.

■  Evening  dyspnoea;  must  loosen  clothing.

I  I  Mrs. ,  set.  37,  spare,  brunette,  subject  to  asthma  for

many  years ;  attacks,  preceded  by  symptoms  of  ordinary
cold,  usually  set  in  about  4-5  a.m.,  lasting  from  thirty-six
to  forty-eight  hours ;  attacks  increase  and  decrease  grad-
ually.

1 1 A  man,  set.  40,  had  for  a  year  and  a  quarter  asthmatic
attacks  which,  day  or  night,  did  not  permit  him  to  lie
down ;  paroxysms  increased  and  decreased  gradually ;
retinitis  albuminurica ;  albumen  in  urine  and  (^dema
of  feet.
^^  Cough.  ■  ■  Cough  :  in  fatiguing  paroxysms ;  epigastric  region
painful,  as  if  beaten ;  violent,  shattering,  deep ;  short,
from  time  to  time,  as  from  weakness  in  chest,  witli  a


STANNUM.  516

hoarse,  weak  sound  ;  tickling  as  from  soreness  low  down
in  trachea,  a  scraping  extending  upward  into  throat ;
constant  inclination  to  hack,  as  if  caused  b}"  much
mucus  in  chest,  with  an  internal  sensation  of  scraping
and  rattling;  frightful,  with  expectoration  and  spitting
of  blood;  dry,  in  evening  in  bed;  concussive  in  par-
oxysms of  three  coughs ;  caused  by  mucus  in  chest  and
by  stitches  in  trachea,  and  dryness ;  with  copious,  green,
salty  sputum,  most  profuse  in  morning.
Scraping  cough,  with  greenish  expectoration  of  an  offensive
sweetish  taste,  <  in  evening  before  lying  down  with  a
hoarse  voice ;  a  sore  sensation  in  chest  and  trachea  after
every  cough  (the  irritation  which  provokes  it  is  low
down  in  trachea).

■  Accumulation  of  much  mucus  in  trachea,  easily  thrown

off  by  coughing ;  afterward,  soreness  or  stitches  in  chest.

I  Cough  caused  by  talking,  singing,  laughing,  lying  on  side

and  from  drinking  anything  warm.

I I  Phthisis  pituitosa.

I  I  Cough,  particularly  during  day,  with  shortness  of  breath ;
profuse,  white,  thick,  tasteless  expectoration,  without
effort.

I  i  Cough,  returned  every  February  and  lasted  until  Sum-
mer or  warm  weather ;  had  measles  three  years  before,
and  taken  cold ;  severe  racking  cough ;  inclination  to
vomit  during  cough;  <  in  morning;  expectoration  of
yellowish  mucus  of  a  sweetish  taste.

I  Whooping  cough,  with  hoarseness,  loss  of  breath,  sore-

ness and  heaviness  in  chest,  inclination  to  breathe
deeply,  sore  or  empty  sensation  in  epigastrium,  profuse
offensive  or  salty  tasting,  yellowish  or  greenish  expecto-
ration, <  at  night  lying  down,  face  pale  and  emaciated,
eyes  sunken.
Expectoration  of  a  globular,  greyish  lump  of  thick  mucus,
containing  a  clot  of  black  blood,  and  appearing  to  come
from  throat.

I I  Sputum:  like  white  of  an  egg;  yellow  green  pus;
sweetish  ;  putrid,  sour  or  saltish  ;  during  day.

^  Inner  Chest. Oppression  of  chest  as  if  it  were  internally
constricted.
Distressing  oppression  in  upper  part  of  chest,  was  fre-
quently obliged  to  take  a  deep  breath,  with  a  sensation
of  great  emptiness  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Tension  across  upper  part  of  chest  with  emptiness  in

lower.
•  Constriction  of  chest  with  anxiety  in  evening.
1 1  Chest  so  weak  he  cannot  talk  ;  empty  feeling  in  chest.
Great  dyspnoea,  with  anxiety,  in  evening,  compelling  one

to  loosen  clothing.


517  STANNUM.

Drawing  a  lonoj  breath  causes  a  pleasant  sensation  of
lightness,  for  a  short  time.

iGreat  sore  feeling  in  chest;  bruised  pain.

Stitches  in  chest  and  sides  hinder  respiration.

Sudden,  sharp,  knifelike  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest.

■  Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  when  breathing  or  lying  on
that  side.

Sudden  drawing  beneath  1.  breast  on  rising  up  in  bed,  fol-
lowed by  sharp  knifelike  stitches,  extending  thence  into
clavicle,  toward  shoulder,  where  pain  persisted,  and
into  1.  side,  extending  downward  into  lower  abdomen,
<  by  bending  inward,  pressing  upon  it,  and  especially
by  inspiration  and  hacking  which  also  caused  a  painful
shock.

Itching  tickling  in  chest.

Tension  in  chest. ^Hydrothorax.

I  I  After  great  fright,  and  in  consequence  of  a  severe  cold,
dull  paralyzing  pain  in  1.  arm  which  on  continuing  to
walk  extended  to  1.  side  of  chest,  obstructing  respiration
and  forcing  him  to  stand  still,  pain  then  soon  dimin-
ished, but  was  soon  obliged  to  make  another  halt ;  dur-
ing night  suddenly  aroused  by  violent  pain  at  a  point
in  1.  breast  which  could  not  be  definitely  pointed  out ;
pain  increased  gradually  and  was  accompanied  by  an
indescribable  terror  which  drove  him  out  of  bed  ;  could
find  relief  in  no  position  ;  profuse,  cold  sweat  on  head
and  upper  part  of  trunk ;  when  pain  was  at  its  height
was  unable  to  make  a  motion  or  utter  a  sound ;  for  an
hour  was  obliged  to  remain  sitting,  with  head  and  trunk
bent  forward,  with  gasping,  noisy  respiration,  spas-
modically clutching  arms  of  a  chair  ;  pain  then  dimin-
ished as  gradually  as  it  had  increased  and  disappeared
by  morning. ^Neuralgia  of  1.  phrenic  nerve.

I  I  Several  days  after  a  fright,  while  walking,  an  unusual
feeling  of  weakness  which  appeared  to  proceed  from
chest  and  obliged  her  to  loosen  her  dress  and  lie  down  ;
after  remaining  quiet  for  an  hour  the  attack  disap-
peared, but  returned  in  a  few  days  and  gradually
changed  into  a  gnawing  pain,  seated  at  middle  of  ster-
num, commencing  gently,  gradually  increasing  for  two
hours  and  then  disappearing  just  as  gradually;  at  be-
ginning of  paroxysm,  which  returned  more  and  more
frequently,  irresistible  inclination  to  lie  down,  and  at  the
height  of  attack  was  unable,  for  half  an  hour,  to  make
any  motion  or  sound ;  she  became  more  chlorotic  and
menses  more  scanty  and  pale. ^Neuralgia.

I  iHsetnoptysis;  tendency  to  copious  expectoration.

I I  Weakness  in  chest:  with  copious  expectoration;  as  if


STANNUM.  518

eviscerated,  with  weakness  of  whole  body  and  limbs ;
and  emptiness  on  beginning  to  sing,  she  was  constantly
obliged  to  stop  and  take  a  deep  breath.
■  Chronic  catarrhal  affections  of  chest,  with  copious  expec-
toration of  yellowish,  greenish,  offensive-tasting  mucus ;
great  prostration  ;  emaciation  ;  oedema  of  limbs.

I  I  Shortness  of  breath;  profuse  but  difficult  expectoration

of  thick,  offensive,  salty-tasting  mucus;  expectoration
entirely  absent  for  nine  or  ten  weeks,  then  recurs  and
lasts  for  five  or  six  weeks  ;  oozing  of  a  watery  clear  fluid
from  umbilicus  during  the  periods  when  she  expecto-
rates ;  sleep  disturbed ;  sleeps  upon  back  with  head
flexed  upon  chest ;  cannot  lie  upon  side  ;  stooping  pos-
ture; great  prostration;  large  mucous  and  whistling
rales  in  chest ;  after  a  pneumonia  several  years  pre-
viously.

I I  Profuse  expectoration ;  wheezing,  oppressed  breathing,

<  from  motion ;  cough  day  and  night,  with  nausea ;
expectoration  white,  thin,  slimy;  frequent  stitches  in
sides  of  chest,  <  from  breathing  and  coughing ;  pros-
tration ;  cannot  sleep  on  account  of  shortness  of  breath  :
can  do  no  work ;  menses  and  stool  normal.

I  I  Cough  with  copious,  greenish,  or  yellowish  offensive-
tasting  expectoration ;  cough  generally  dry  in  evening
and  at  night,  or  else  expectoration  is  difficult,  while
during  day  and  in  morning  it  is  profuse  and  easy.
<?Phthisis.

I  I  Pulse  150  to  160 ;  hectic  fever ;  racking,  exhausting
cough  day  and  night ;  expectorating  every  twenty-four
hours  about  a  quart  of  tough  glairy  mucus,  mixed  with
purulent  matter ;  large  cavity  in  upper  third  of  r.  lobe ;
Calc.  30  reduced  pulse  to  120  and  diminished  sputa
about  one-fourth ;  in  four  or  five  weeks  pulse  quick-
ened and  improvement  ceased,  Stannum  then  cured.
<?Phthisis.

I  1  Cough  which  seemed  to  come  from  low  down  in  chest,

<  at  night,  with  profuse  expectoration ;  tension  across
chest ;  dyspnoea  <  from  motion ;  cannot  lie  down  at
night ;  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest ;  anorexia ;  night
sweats ;  prostration  ;  weakening  of  limbs ;  emaciation.
/^Phthisis.

I  I  Teeth  loose,  feel  too  long ;  accumulation  of  much  mucus
in  throat ;  scratching  in  throat  in  evening  ;  hoarseness  ;
tickling  cough ;  cough  with  greenish  expectoration,  of
offensive  whitish  taste,  <  evenings;  constriction  of
chest  and  anxiety  in  evening ;  shortness  of  breath,  <
from  least  motion;  must  unloosen  clothing;  stool
scanty, greenish;  intense  burning  of  hands  and  feet;


519  STANNUM.

general  prostration;  very  tired  and  sleepy;  profuse
sweats  every  morning  at  4  o'clock ;  emaciation ;  de-
spondent, will  not  talk,  is  dissatisfied. ^Phthisis.

I  1  Cough  day  and  night,  copious  expectoration ;  great
emaciation  ;  pulse  weak,  rapid  ;  burning  heat  of  palms
of  hands,  <  in  afternoon ;  profuse  sweats  early  in  morn-
ing ;  tongue  red ;  severe  diarrhoea ;  great  prostration,
compelling  her  to  stay  in  bed. ^Phthisis.

I  I  Prostration  ;  pain  in  all  limbs;  constant  irritation  to
cough ;  frequent  shivering  during  day,  and  profuse
sweats  early  in  morning  in  bed ;  is  no  longer  able  to  get
up ;  constant  cough  ;  copious  expectoration  of  masses  of
tasteless  white  mucus;  unquenchable  thirst;  craving
for  sour  things. ^Phthisis.

I  I  Pale  and  emaciated; respiration rapid,  short;  cough

often  dry,  often  with  profuse  greenish-yellow  sweetish-
tasting  mucus;  <  morning  and  evening;  stitching
pains  in  head,  <  in  forehead,  <  after  paroxysms  of
cough ;  abnormal  appetite ;  pressure  in  stomach  after
eating ;  scanty  stool ;  heaviness,  coldness  and  swelling
of  hands  and  feet ;  in  evening  transient  flushes  of  heat
and  thirst.  ^Phthisis.
■  Mucous  expectoration  in  first  stage  of  consumption,  or
when  a  neglected  catarrh  or  grippe  threatens  to  pass
into  phthisis ;  can  talk  only  a  few  words  at  a  time  for
want  of  breath ;  more  or  less  hoarseness  ;  roughness  of
throat  and  sore  pain  in  chest ;  feeling  of  weakness  in
chest  as  if  deprived  of  its  contents  after  expectorating
or  talking ;  constriction  of  chest  and  constant  chilliness,
alternating  with  flushes  of  heat ;  profuse  night  sweats ;
pressure  and  bloatedness  of  stomach  always  after  eating ;
great  lassitude,  hands  and  feet  heavy  and  cold  or  else
burning  hot. ^Phthisis.

I I  Phthisis  mucosa,  with  the  characteristic  cough,  weak-
ness and  sputa ;  profuse  sweats.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  frequent  and  small.

^"  Outer  Chest,  i  l  A  lady,  eet.  50,  formerly  healthy,  suf-
fers since  her  climaxis  from  disease  of  liver ;  looks  yel-
low, has  no  appetite,  nauseous  taste,  tongue  coated  yel-
low, obstinate  constipation ;  tongue  villous,  yellow,
heavily  coated,  somewhat  dry ;  weak  voice,  sounds  of
heart  slow,  weak,  hardly  60  to  minute,  but  regular ;
urine  strongly  saturated  with  sour  secretion  and  ver-
milion precipitate  firmly  adhering  to  walls  of  vessels ;
some  withered  varices  on  anus;  whole  appearance
anaemic ;  every  Saturday  morning  wakes  up  with  nau-
sea and  choking;  feels  a  shock  in  region  of  liver,  leav-
ing behind,  along  second and  third false  ribs,  a  spas-


8TANNUM.  520

modic  pain,  which  increases  gradually  in  severity  up  to
8  or  4  P.M.,  when  she  vomits  up  food  taken  day  before,
and  then  pain  decreases  gradually  so  that  by  10  o'clock
in  evening  she  is  entirely  relieved  ;  next  two  days  so
weak  that  she  is  obliged  to  keep  in  bed  ;  next  four  days
tolerably  well,  until  Saturday  brings  on  return  of  her
sufferings;  during  paroxysm  passes  a  large  quantity  of
watery  urine.  ^Intercostal  neuralgia.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Weakness  of  nape  of  neck.

Stitches  in  back,  in  small  of  back  and  into  limbs.
^^ Upper  Limbs. Jerking  in muscles  of  arm when resting
it;  fingers  jerk  when  holding  pen.

Weakness  and  heaviness  of  arms,  especially  r. ;  <  from
motion.

Paralytic  weakness  of  arms,  if  he  holds  a  light  weight  for
only  a  short  time.

iThe  arms  easily  become  fatigued  from  moderate  exercise,
so  that  everything  he  holds  is  allowed  to  fall.

Aching  in  deltoids  from  reading.

Swelling  of  hands  evenings.

I  Weakness  and  trembling  of  hands.

iCramping  of  fingers  of  writers  and  shoemakers;  on  at-
tempting to  pick  up  a  small  object,  as  a  needle  or  a  pen,
or  when  they  have  been  used  a  long  time,  fingers  be-
come suddenly  rigid,  distorted,  spread  out  or  contracted,
in  which  position  they  remain  for  some  time;  the
spasm  can  often  be  ended  by  opening  fingers  with  un-
affected hand ;  usually  r.  hand  is  affected ;  the  toes  in
one  case  were  also  affected.

Burning  in  hands.

Chilblains  on  hands.

Painful  hangnails.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Weakness  and  heaviness,  especially  of  thigh
and  knee  joint,  must  sit  down.

I  I  Paralytic  heaviness  and  weakness,  especially  in  thighs
and  knee  joints.

Stiffness  and  tension  in  bends  of  knees.

Swelling  of  ankles,  evenings.

Burning  of  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Paralytic  heaviness  of  limbs ;  <  using
arms  or  walking,  particularly  descending.

■  Insupportable  restlessness  of  all  the  limbs.

Swelling  of  hands  and  feet  in  evening.

iPains  in  limbs  increase  gradually  and  decrease  in  same
manner.
^*B,est. Position. Motion. Rest:  pains  in  head  <;  heavi-
ness in  head  ;  of  arm,  jerking  in  muscles.

Lying  :  hsematemesis  <  ;  asthma  does  not  permit ;  whoop-
ing cough  <.


521  STANNUM.

Lying  on  back :  one  leg  stretched,  other  drawn  up  during
pregnancy;  head  flexed  on  chest;  shortness  of  breath.

Lies  on  stomach  :  when  asleep.

Lying  on  r.  side :  pain  through  hips  <  ;  causes  cough.

Constantly  wishes  to  lie  or  sit  down  :  excessive  prostration.

Must  lie  down  :  weakness  of  chest.

Cannot  lie  down  :  phthisis.

Obliged  to  remain  sitting  with  head  and  trunk  forward:
pain  in  1.  breast.

Sitting  bent  over:  irritation  to  cough  >,

Bending  double  against  chair  or  table  :  >  pains  through
hips.

Bending  inward:  stitches  in  abdomen  <.

Must  sit  down :  weakness  and  heaviness  of  thighs  and
knee  joint.

Stooping:  tearing  in  forehead  <  ;  with  shortness  of  breath.

Raising  head  :  vertigo  <.

Rising  up  in  bed :  drawing  beneath  1.  breast.

Rising  from  bed  :  sudden  weakness.

Motion :  pains  in  head  >  ;  heaviness  in  head ;  headache
<  ;  flushes  of  heat  in  face ;  stitches  through  hips  <  ;
oppressed  breathing  ;  want  of  breath ;  impossible  from
pain  in  breast;  impossible,  neuralgia  of  chest;  wheez-
ing <  ;  dyspnoea  <  ;  shortness  of  breath  <  ;  weakness
of  arms  <.

Walking:  pains  >,  but  must  soon  rest:  vertigo  <  ;  pain
goes  from  arm  to  chest;  heaviness  of  limbs  <;  great
lassitude.

Ascending  steps :  want  of  breath  ;  weariness  of  body  <.

Descending  more  difficult  than  ascending,  sitting  than
rising;  heaviness  of  limbs  <.

Going  down  stairs :  faintness.

Exertion  :  face  flushes  easily.

Exercise:  arm  easily  fatigued;  slow  trembling  <.
'^  Nerves. Feels  as  if  she  would  faint.
Faintness  from  going  down  stairs.

■  Great  lassitude  when  walking.

■  Weariness of  whole body, especially after ascending

steps.
Was  suddenly  attacked  by  weakness ;  she  could  scarcely
breathe,  while  dressing,  after  rising  from  bed.

■  Great  weariness  during  day;  was  obliged  to  lie  down.
Excessive prostration ; constantly wishes to sit or lie

down,  and  when  about  to  sit  down  falls upon  chair
because  she  has  not  the  power  to  sit  down  slowly.

■  Extreme  exhaustion  of  mind  and  body.

■  Loss  of  power  as  if  limbs  were  beaten.

■  ■Very  much  exhausted  from  talking  or  reading  aloud.


STANNUM.  522

1 1  Great  sense  of  weakness  in  larynx  and  chest,  thence
all  over  body.

I  Trembling,  <  from  slow  exercise.

I I  Neuralgia ;  the  pain  increases  gradually  to  a  very  high
degree,  and  decreases  again  as  slowly.

■  Hysterical spasms, with pain in abdomen and in

diaphragm.
Hysteria  with  frightful  pains  in  head ;  full  of  notions.

■  Renewal  of  convulsions with cutting  of  every  tooth;

also  in  consequence  of  worms ;  child  is  weak ;  looks
miserable.

■  Epilepsy: with tossing  of  limbs, clenching  thumbs;

opisthotonos;  unconsciousness;  with  sexual  complica-
tions ;  during  dentition,  with  symptoms  of  worms ;  in
evening ;  paleness  of  face,  twitching  of  hands  and  eyes.

■  Hemiplegia, paralyzed parts constantly moist from

perspiration ;  especially  on  1.  side,  with  a  feeling  of  a
heavy  load  in  affected  arm  and  corresponding  side  of
chest,  and  frequent  night  sweats.

■  Paralysis,  from  worms,  onanism,  spasms,  emotions.
^'^  Sleep. ■  ■  Sleeplessness.

■  Sleepy  during  day;  goes  to  sleep  late  at  night.
Restless,  child  moans  during  sleep,  or  supplicates  in  a

timid  manner.

So  weak  on  waking  it  puts  her  out  of  breath  to  dress.
^®  Time. Morning :  visions  of  all  kinds  of  fancied  things;  raw-
ness in  throat ;  vomiting  of  bile  and  mucus ;  mucus  in
trachea ;  inclination  to  cough  < ;  expectoration  easy ;
debilitating  sweats  ;  sweat  <  after  4  a.m.

10  A.M.:  finger  tips  numb.

During  day :  canine  hunger ;  great  epigastric  weakness  and
hunger;  copious  green  salty  sputa;  cough  <,  with  short-
ness of  breath  ;  expectoration  easy ;  cough  exhausting ;
frequent  shivering ;  great  weariness ;  sleepy.

Afternoon  :  burning  heat  of  palms  of  hands  <.

Evenings :  heaviness  in  head ;  inclination  to  hawk  up
much  mucus  from  throat;  loss  of  appetite;  dyspnoea;
dry  cough;  cough  <  before  lying  down;  constriction
of  chest ;  dyspnoea ;  scratching  in  throat ;  cough,  with
expectoration  <  ;  swelling  of  hands ;  swelling  of  ankles;
swelling  of  feet ;  epilepsy.

Night :  agglutination  of  lids ;  colic  comes  on  ;  whooping
cough  <  ;  cough  exhausting ;  cough  <  ;  goes  to  sleep
late ;  debilitating  sweats.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  drinks :  cause  cough.

Open  air :  while  walking  vertigo  <  ;  burning  in  forehead
>  ;  flushes  of  heat  in  face  >.
*Tever. Chill:  10  a.m.,  finger  tips  numb;  in  evening,  over


523  STANNUM.

back;  only  on  head,  with  thirst;  slight,  but  with
chattering  teeth,  as  from  convulsions,  of  masseter
muscles ;  over  whole  body,  lasting  half  an  hour.

I  Heat:  from  4  to  5  p.m.,  with  sweat;  burning,  in  limbs,
mostly  in  hands,  every  evening;  anxious,  as  if  sweat
would  break  out.

I  Sweat:  smells  mouldy,  musty;  debilitating,  night  and
morning,  most  profuse  on  neck  ;  debilitating,  from  least
movement;  profuse,  after  4  a.m.,  every  morning;  in
morning,  mostly  on  neck,  nape  of  neck  and  forehead.

Sweat  principally  on  forehead  and  nape  of  neck,  in
morning  after  4  a.m.

■  Hectic  fever.

I  I  Worm  fever,  in  a  very  excitable  and  restless  boy;  pain
in  stomach,  lay  upon  stomach  when  asleep.
'^Attacks,  Periodicity.  Increasing  and  decreasing  gradu-
ally :  headache  over  eyes  ;  cramping,  crushing  pain  in
head ;  grinding  or  pressive  pains ;  neuralgia  of  head ;
neuralgia  in  1.  eye;  colic  and  pain  in  region  of  spleen;
paroxysms  of  asthma;  pain  in  1.  breast;  weakness  in
chest;  spasmodic  pain  in  region  of  liver;  pains  in
limbs.

Alternating  :  chilliness  and  flushes  of  heat.

Every  morning :  headache ;  profuse  sweat  at  4  o'clock.

Several  mornings  in  succession:  weakness  of  body  and
limbs.

At  5  A.M.:  regularly  awakened  by  headache.

Daily  :  paroxysms  from  10  a.m.  to  4  p.m.

Every  evening :  heat  in  limbs.

Half  an  hour  :  chill  lasts.

From  4  to  5  p.m.:  heat.

For  six  hours  :  colic  or  twisting  pains  in  region  of  spleen.

Every  twenty-four  hours:  expectorates  about  a  quart.

For  four  days :  pain  in  upper  incisors,  increasing  and
decreasing  gradually.

Several  days  after  a  fright :  weakness  in  chest.

Every  Monday  :  constipation.

Every  Tuesday  :  ptosis  from  sympathetic  paralysis.

Every  Saturday  morning:  wakes  up  with  nausea  and
choking.

For  nine  or  ten  weeks :  expectoration  absent,  then  recurs
and  lasts  for  five  or  six  weeks.

Every  February :  cough  returned.

For  a  year  and  a  quarter :  asthmatic  attacks.
"  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  tearing  in  half  of  fore-
head ;  pressive  pain  in  inner  canthus ;  heaviness  and
weakness  of  arm  ;  spasm  of  hand.

Left : pressure  in  temple ;  jerks  through  temple ;  head-


STANNUM.  524

ache  <  over  eye;  aching  over  eye  and  in  temple ;  neu-
ralgia in  1.  eye :  pressure  in  inner  canthus ;  pustular
swelling  at  inner  canthus;  ringing  in  ear;  boring
stitches  in  hypochondrium ;  stitches  in  side  of  chest
when  lying  on  side ;  drawing  beneath  breast;  paralyz-
ing pain  in  arm,  thence  to  side  of  chest ;  violent  pain
at  a  point  in  breast.

From  within  outward  :  pressure  in  forehead.
"  Sensations.  As  if  all  objects  were  too  far  off;  as  if  forehead
were  shattered  ;  as  if  forehead  would  be  pressed  inward  ;
pain  as  if  from  an  ulcer  in  hypogastrium ;  as  if  there
were  a  hole  in  his  side  ;  as  if  there  were  no  sensation  in
bladder;  chest  as  if  eviscerated  ;  epigastric  region  as  if
beaten ;  tickling  as  from  soreness  in  trachea ;  inclina-
tion to  hawk  as  if  mucus  were  in  chest ;  as  if  it  were
internally  constricted  ;  as  if  chest  were  deprived  of  its
contents  ;  as  if  she  would  faint ;  as  if  limbs  were  beaten  ;
as  of  a  heavy  load  in  affected  arm  and  side  of  chest ;  as
if  sweat  would  break  out.

Pain:  in  frontal  region;  in  upper  incisors;  larynx;  in  all
limbs  ;  in  abdomen  and  in  diaphragm  ;  in  stomach.

Violent  pain:  at  a  point  in  1.  breast.

Frightful  pains  :  in  head.

Sharp  jerking  pains  :  above  orbit.

Beating  pain :  from  forehead  to  vertex.

Throbbing  pain  :  in  temples.

Cutting  pain:  in  forehead  and  eyes;  in  throat;  about
navel ;  in  anus.

Pressive  tearing:  in  forehead  ;  in  r.  half  of  forehead.

Boring  pain  :  in  forehead  and  eyes.

Crushing  pain  :  in  temples.

Stitches  :  from  both  sides  through  hips ;  in  trachea  ;  in
chest ;  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  in  back ;  in  small  of  back
and  into  limbs.

Burning  stitches :  in  eyelids.

Boring  stitches  :  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Sharp,  knifelike  stitches :  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  from  chest
into  clavicle.

Stitching  pains  :  in  head.

Bruised  pain  :  in  chest.

Gnawing  pain  :  seated  at  middle  of  sternum.

Twisting  pains  :  in  region  of  spleen.

Pinching  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Grinding  pain  :  in  forehead  and  eyes.

Clawing,  kneading  pain  :  about  umbilicus.

Digging :  in  abdomen.

Severe  pressive  pain  :  forehead  and  both  eyes.

Pressive  pain  :  in  r.  inner  canthus.


525  STANNUM.

Stupefying  pain  :  in  brain ;  over  eyes.

Dull  paralyzing  pain  :  in  1.  arm.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  1.  eye ;  of  face  and  head  ;  from  temples
to  lower  maxilla  and  lips.

Glowing  pain  :  from  forehead  to  vertex.

Aching  pain  :  in  brain  ;  over  1.  eye ;  in  1.  temple;  in  throat;
in  deltoids.

Drawing  pain  :  in  different  places ;  in  face,  in  malar  bone
and  orbits;  beneath  1.  breast.

Painful  jerks  :  through  1.  temple  and  cerebellum.

Sore  pain  :  in  chest.

Contusive  pain  :  in  region  of  malar  bone.

Biting :  in  eyes.

Stinging  :  in  throat ;  in  hepatic  region.

Soreness :  in  nostrils  ;  in  throat ; of  stomach  ;  in  abdo-
men ;  in  chest.

Burning:  in  forehead;  in  hepatic  region;  of  hands  and
feet ;  of  palms  of  hands  ;  of  feet.

Heat :  in  head.

Scraping :  in  throat.

Rawness :  in  throat ;  in  larynx.

Pressure :  dizzy,  through  head  ;  in  forehead  ;  in  1.  temple ;
in  1.  inner  canthus ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  stomach.

Sudden  pressure  :  in  whole  upper  part  of  head.

Constriction  :  in  upper  part  of  head  ;  of  chest.

Tension  :  across  upper  part  of  chest ;  in  bend  of  knees.

Heaviness :  in  head ;  in  nostrils ;  in  chest ;  of  hands  and
feet;  of  arms;  in  thighs  and  knee  joints;  of  limbs.

Distressing  oppression  :  in  upper  part  of  chest.

Weakness :  in  chest ;  of  body  and  limbs ;  in  nape  of  neck ;
of  arms ;  in  larynx  and  chest.

Stuffed  feeling :  in  nostrils.

Empty  feeling :  in  epigastrium.

Gone  feeling :  in  chest ;  in  epigastrium ;  in  pit  of  stomach.

Dryness:  in  throat;  in  trachea.

Pleasant  lightness:  by  drawing  a  long  breath.

Insupportable  restlessness :  of  all  the  limbs.

Fulness :  in  abdomen.

Itching  tickling :  in  chest.

Coldness :  of  hands  and  feet.
^'^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  malar  bone
painful; stomach  sore; slight,  causes  feeling  of  sub-
cutaneous ulceration ; soreness  of  abdomen  <  ; pain
through  hips  <.

Pressure:  headache  >  for  a  time;  cardialgia;  pains  go
to  navel,  are  >  by  hard  pressure;  epigastrium  >  ;  on
stomach  >;  hsematemesis  >  ;  hard  >,  colic;  stitches
in  abdomen  <.


STANNUM.  526

Must  loosen  dress:  weakness  in  chest.

Lying  across  something  hard :  abdomen  more  comfortable.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Child,  set.  4  months;  hernia.

Girl,  set.  15 ;  phthisis.

Girl,  set.  18,  weak,  poorly  nourished,  suffering  ten  weeks;
cough.

Girl,  set.  18,  of  remarkable  beauty,  somewhat  scrofulous  in
early  childhood,  temperament  lively  and  cheerful,  after
a  violent  shock  ;  neuralgia.

Miss  W.  P.,  set.  18,  plump,  healthy,  active ;  solar  neuralgia.

Mr.  M.  E.,  set.  22,  hardy,  active,  muscular,  accustomed  to
outdoor  exercise ;  solar  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  25,  kicked  by  a  horse  in  region  of  spleen  thirteen
years  ago,  since  then  suffering  ;  colic.

Man,  set.  25,  just  recovered  from  typhoid  fever,  after  a  cold ;
affection  of  larynx.

Man,  set.  27  ;  cough.

Lady,  set.  30,  good  constitution,  somewhat  reduced  by  the
exhausting  mode  of  life  peculiar  to  iSt.  Petersburg,  and
by  domestic  troubles ;  headache.

Man,  set.  30,  bottlemaker ;  headache.

Man,  set.  30,  for  several  years  had  cough ;  j^hthisis.

Man,  set.  32,  ill  two  years;  phthisis.

Woman,  set.  36,  single,  five  months  ago  had  severe  catarrh
of  chest ;  phthisis.

Woman,  set.  36,  for  several  years  had  cough  in  Spring  and
Autumn ;  phthisis.

Man,  set.  36 ;  phthisis.

Mrs. ,  set.  37,  spare,  brunette,  suffering  many  years ;

asthma.

Man,  set.  37,  ill  two  years ;  phthisis.

Mr.  E.  J.,  set.  38,  fleshy,  hearty,  plethoric;  solar  neuralgia.

Mrs. ,  set.  39,  four  months  pregnant;  disorders  of  preg-
nancy.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  fifteen  months ;  asthma.

Woman,  set.  40,  nurse,  suffering  several  weeks ;  headache.

Mrs.  W.  S.,  set.  42,  somewhat  broken  down  by  other  dis-
eases, suffering  many  days ;  solar  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  45,  large  frame,  six  feet  high ;  solar  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  50,  tall,  thin ;  phthisis.

Man,  set,  50,  powerful,  after  a  violent  fright ;  neuralgia.

Lady,  set.  50,  formerly  always  healthy,  suffering  since  cli-
maxis  with  supposed  disease  of  liver ;  intercostal  neu-
ralgia.

Woman,  set.  53,  single,  weak,  irritable,  after  la  grippe ;
phthisis.

Man,  set.  54,  had  itch,  in  consequence  of  much  scratching
foot  became  ulcerated,  for  five  years  was  subjected  to


527  ST  ANNUM.

heroic  treatment,  and  constitution  was  finally  completely
ruined,  had  many  digestive  disturbances,  jaundice,
dyspnoea,  etc.;  affection  of  larynx  simulating  phthisis.

Woman,  set.  59,  several  years  ago  had  pneumonia,  since
then  suffering ;  affection  of  chest.

Woman,  rather  stout,  sanguine  bilious  temperament,  lost
her  husband  a few  months previously,  after  having
a  scrofulous tumor discussed from neck by iodine ;
phthisis.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Pulsat.

Compatible :  after  Caustic,  Cina,

Complementary :  Pulsat.
