The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. X
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. X. Philadelphia: Globe, 1891.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri10).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF  OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA


BY


0.  HERING,  M.  n


VOLUME  X.


PHILADELPHIA:
rUJ?LISHEl)  BY  THE  ESTATE  OF  CONSTANTINE  IIEEING^

112  and  114  North  Twelfth  Street.


'Copyright,  1891,  by  TJieresa  Hering.


Author's  Mark.


PRESS  OF  GLOBE  PRINTING  HOUSE, PHILADELPHIA.


PREFACE.


AT  last  the  tenth  and  final  volume  of  The  Guiding
Symptoms  is  completed,  and  the  promise  made  to
Dr.  Hering,  shortly  before  his  death,  and  subsequently  to  the
homoeopathic  profession,  that  the  literary  executors  would
finish  the  colossal  work,  is  fulfilled.  Too  much  cannot  be  said
in  praise  of  the  assiduity  and  faithfulness  of  Drs.  Raue,
Knerr  and  Mohr  in  the  execution  of  their  editorial  labors,
covering  a  period  of  nearly  a  dozen  years.  And  to  Walter  E.
Hering  belongs  the  credit  of  furnishing  the  means  for  the
mechanical  execution  of  his  father's  chef-d^oeuvre.

It  now  remains  for  the  homoeopathic  profession,  for  whose
weal  the  genius  and  fifty  years'  labor  of  Dr.  Constantine  Hering
were  ungrudgingly  given,  to  receive  the  completed  work,  and
use  it,  as  intended  by  its  projector,  for  the  healing  of  the
nations.

THERESE  HERING.

Philadelphia,  October  31,  1891.


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


Materia  Medica.


STAPHISAGRIA.

Stavesacre.  Ranunculacese.

A  native  of  the  south  of  Europe.

The  alcoholic  solution  is  prepared  from  the  ripe  seed.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  and  proved  by  himself,  Cubitz,  Franz,  Gross,  Gut-
mann,  Hartmann,  Hornburg,  Haynel,  Hermann,  Kummer,  Langhammer,  Stapf,
and  Teu  thorn,  Arzneimittellehre,  vol.  5,  p.  291.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  disturbance,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  269;  Want
of  memory,  Neidhard,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  554 ;  Brain-fag,  Kent,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.
6,  p.  317;  Tinea  capitis,  Bell,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  373;  Adams,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  361;
Scald-head,  McNeil,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  382 ;  Tinea  capitis,  and  blepharitis  marginalis.
Way,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  86 ;  Syphilitic  iritis,  Bacon,  Norton's  Ophth.  Therap.,
p.  172 ;  Laceration  of  cornea,  Gilchrist,  M.  I.,  vol.  2,  p.  659 ;  Affection  of  eye,  Ber-
ridge,  N.  ^.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  194 ;  Hordeolum,  Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.
242;  Ostrom,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  204;  Chalazion,  Lorbacher,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  100;
Steatoma  of  eyelid,  Koch,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  221 ;  Tumors  of  eyelid  (2  cases),
Allen,  Am.  Horn.,  Aug.,  1878,  p.  75;  Allen,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  131 ;  Affection  of  eyelids,
Nash,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  220;  Prosopalgia,  Neumann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  433;
Bayes,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,  p.  181 ;  Caries  of  lower  jav),  Lentin,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,  p.
181;  Toothache,  Clarke,  Horn.  World,  Oct.,  1889  ;  Vascular  tumor  of  gums,  Faucon-
nier,  H.  M.,  vol.  13,  p.  318;  Stomacace,  Eummel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  512;
Affections  of  tonsils,  Hirsch,  Hendrichs,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  251 ;  Cardialgia,
Gauthier,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,  p.  180 ; Oall-stone  colic,  Tompkins,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.

9,  p.  131 ;  Diarrhoea,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  878  ;  Constipation, ,

H.  W.,  1876,  p.  129;  Hemorrhoids,  Preston,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,  p.  253 ;  Pain  in  kid-
neys. Miller,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  33;  Enuresis,  L.  in  Z.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,
p.  45  ;  Gross,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  28,  p.  101 ;  Nocturnal  emissions,  Williamson,  T.  H.  M.


STAPHISAGRIA.  6

■S.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  150 ;  Impotence,  Chamberlain,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  5 ;  Orchitis,
Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  210 ;  Atrophy  of  testicle,  Hubbard,  Med.  Inv.,
•vol.  7,  p.  526 ;  Cough,  E.  E.  S.,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  170 ;  Pain  in  the  chest,
Dunham,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  164;  Affection  of  finger,  Schindler,  Eiick.  Kl.
lErf.,  vol.  4,  p.  447  ;  Sciatica,  Payne,  H.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  354;  Qrural  neuralgia,  Pres-
ton, T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  118;  Prickling  in  feet,  Berridge,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.
'78;  Morbus  coxarius,  Lefferts,  H.  M.,  vol.  21,  p.  232;  Convulsions,  Cigliano,  A.  J.
H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  134;  Crusta  lactea.  Eczema,  Hartmann,  Schubert,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  262;  Lichen,  Macfarlan,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  203;  Itch  (5
cases),  Stapf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  214 ;  Gout  and  rheumatism.  Caries,  Neuralgia
of  scalp.  Toothache,  Sciatica,  Tonsillitis,  Blepharitis,  Prostatitis,  Clifton,  Horn.  Eev.,
vol.  21,  p.  469  ;  Syphilis,  Eummel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  168;  After  amputations,
McClelland,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  271 ;  Use  after  operation,  Franklin,  Eaue's  Eec,
1870,  p.  344.

^  Mind.  1  Want  of  memory :  with  heavy  weight  between  eyes ;
a  few  minutes  after  reading  anything,  the  sense  escapes
him,  and  he  is  scarcely  able  to  recall  it  after  long  re-
flection.

II Indifference,  low-spirited,  dulness  of  mind;  after  onan-
ism.

I  Listless,  sad,  dreaming  of  the  future.

iSad  distressing  thoughts  about  one's  illness.

I  Aversion  to  mental  or  physical  labor ;  inability  to  think.

I  Hypochondriasis;  apathy;  weak  memory;  caused  by
unmerited  insults,  sexual  excesses,  or  by  persistently
dwelling  on  sexual  subjects.

•  Suffering  from  pride,  envy  or  chagrin.

I  Fretful  peevishness,  with  excessive  ill-humor.

I  Very  sensitive  to  least  impression;  least  word  that  seems

wrong  hurts  her  very  much.

II  Children  are  ill-humored,  and  cry  for  things,  which,
after  getting,  they  petulantly  push  or  throw  away;  <
early  in  morning.

II Great  indignation  about  things  done  by  others  or  by
himself;  grieves  about  consequences.

1 1  Ailments  from  indignation  and  vexation,  or  reserved
displeasure ;  sleeplessness.

I  Continual  concern  about  the  future.

I  1  Brain-tire,  with  great  genital  weakness;  irritability,  in-
ability to  sustain  a  mental  effort ;  was  insulted,  being
too  dignified  to  fight,  subdued  his  wrath  and  went  home
sick,  trembling  and  exhausted.

I  I  For  sixteen  years  attacks  of  mental  disturbance,  every
four  years,  beginning  on  the  4th  of  January,  always
lasting  two  months ;  great  restlessness,  would  go  about
house  in  search  of  something,  not  knowing  what,  but  if
attracted  by  any  object,  would  put  it  in  his  pocket  if


7  STAPHISAGRIA.

possible,  and,  if  not,  would  hide  it  in  his  coat ;  excessive
loquaciousness ;  inability  to  read,  on  account  of  letters
running  together ;  firmly  believed  he  would  lose  his
fortune,  constantly  told  his  wife  to  be  careful  that  they
did  not  starve ;  thinks  his  wife  will  run  away  from  him ;
sleep  greatly  disturbed,  lies  down  a  few  moments,  and
suddenly  jumps  from  bed  to  middle  of  room,  stands
there  about  a  minute,  scratches  his  head,  and  looks
about  as  if  a  new  idea  had  struck  him  ;  constant  chilli-
ness, sits  by  fire  for  hours  without  getting  warm,  amuses
himself  by  throwing  into  the  fire  any  article  near  at
hand,  regardless  of  value ;  at  times  more  violent,  strikes
at  any  one  coming  near  him,  although  he  is  conscious
something  is  the  matter  with  him,  and  tells  his  wife  he
will  try  not  to  kill  any  one ;  great  thirst ;  canine  hunger,
eats  anything  set  before  him,  complete  loss  of  taste;  gen-
eral appearance  is  marked  by  extreme  nervous  excite-
ment ;  face  wears  an  anxious  expression ;  shuffling  gait ;
hands  tremble,  cannot  retain  anything  in  their  grasp,
not  even  long  enough  to  drink  water  without  spilling
it;  all  symptoms  <  about  midnight;  in  intervals  be-
tween attacks,  feeling  of  pressure  over  nape  of  neck;  at
times  this  disappears,  and  is  followed  by  a  throbbing
sensation,  and  a  rush  of  blood  to  crown  of  head ;  ver-
tigo, especially  when  walking  in  open  air ;  from  slight-
est gust  of  wind  legs  feel  as  if  they  were  going  out  from
under  him,  and  that  he  will  fall  backward.
^  Sensorium.  Dull  feeling  of  head,  with  inability  to  perform
any  mental  labor.

I  I  Heaviness  of  head,  >  by  resting  it  upon  hand.

I  Vertigo  :  only  in  room,  as  if  stupefied,  particularly  when
sitting,  diminished  by  walking  about ;  on  stooping  and
turning  head  rapidly.
^  Inner  Head, l  Dull  feeling  in  head,  with  inability  to  per-
form any  mental  labor.

iSensation  of  a  round  ball  in  forehead,  sitting  firmly  there
even  when  shaking  head.

iPressive  stupefying  headache,  especially  in  forehead,  <
on  moving  head  and  while  standing.

Sensation  as  if  head  would  burst,  especially  in  forehead
and  when  stooping.

I  Headache  as  if  brain  were  compressed,  mostly  in  fore-
head, with  paroxysms  of  roaring  in  ears,  which  ceases
much  sooner  than  headache.

Dulness  of  head,  anteriorly  in  middle  of  forehead,  in  a
small  spot  as  large  as  tip  of  finger;  had  to  be  very  careful
when  walking  in  street,  did  not  know  whether  he  was
going  to  the  r.  or  left.


STAPHISAGRIA.  8

I  I  Hard  pressure  in  r.  side  of  forehead.

A  pressing  boring  stitch,  lasting  for  a  minute,  in  morning,
from  within  outward,  in  1.  half  of  forehead,  so  violent
that  it  awoke  him  twice.

Hard  pressure  in  head  in  region  of  r.  temporal  bone  and
on  vertex.

Sharp,  burning,  needlelike  stitches  in.  1.  temple.

I  I  Dull  stitches  in  r.  temple,  internally  and  externally,  as
if  bones  would  be  pressed  out,  <  by  touch.

I  Brain  aches,  as  if  torn  to  pieces,  morning  on  rising  from
bed,  <  from  motion,  >  from  rest  and  warmth ;  head-
ache passes  off  with  much  yawning.

iSharp,  burning,  needlelike  stitches  in  1.  temple.

Dull  stitches  in  r.  temple,  <  from  touch.

I  Feeling  in  occiput  as  if  hollow,  or  as  if  brain  were  not
large  enough  for  the  space.

Feeling  as  if  occiput  were  compressed  internally  and  ex-
ternally.

I  I  Neuralgia  of  scalp,  in  a  literary  man,  who  had  taken
mercury  and  was  debilitated ;  pain  <  by  excitement,
worry,  mental  work,  pressure  of  hat,  and  change  of  air;
>  by  quiet,  solitude,  rest  and  a  warm  room ;  pain  dull
and  stupefying,  producing  a  muddled  feeling  in  brain,
or  as  if  a  hard  substance  were  pressing  on  skull ;  all
mental  work  was  a  trouble  to  him  ;  could  not  find  right
word,  and  ideas  were  slow  in  coming.
*  Outer  Head,  l  Painful  drawing  in  several  places  in  head,
externally;  <  by  touch.

I  Itching  on  scalp  which  was  scurfy  and  moist.

Fine  burning  needle  stitches  externally  on  vertex.

Itching  biting  on  scalp ;  <  by  rubbing ;  lasting  several
days.

I  Biting  itching  on  upper  part  of  occiput;  with  sore  pain;
recurring  in  same  place  about  same  time  in  evening.

I  Humid,  itching,  fetid  eruption  on  occiput,  sides  of  head
and  behind  ears ;  scratching  changes  place  of  itching,
but  increases  oozing.

I  I  Chronic  tinea  capitis  sicca ;  whole  hair}^  scalp  covered
with  a  dark  scaly  eruption,  thickest  at  occiput,  gradu-
ally thinning  out  till  it  reaches  line  of  hair  on  forehead ;
violent  itching,  <  at  occiput;  scratching  causes  bleeding
and  discharge  of  clear,  non-glutinous  fluid,  which  dries
very  quickly;  hair  is  rapidly  disappearing;  accumu-
lated scales  at  thickest  part,  about  on  a  line  with  mastoid
process,  measure  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  thickness;  the
head  is  generally  waslied  with  soap  and  water  daily,
detaching  all  scales  and  leaving  scalp  red  and  moist;
after  washing  there  is  a  feeling  of  tension  over  whole  scalp,


)  STAPHISAGRIA.

very  disagreeable,  and  particularly  so  around  occiput,
where  it  is  actually  painful ;  marginal  blepharitis  and
ectropion  of  1.  eye.

I  I  Purulent  scald-head  on  occiput,  with  sour  stinking  smell,
pediculi  capitis,  and  itching  preventing  sleep.

I  iCrusta  lactea  ;  crusts  from  under  which  oozes  a  yellow-
ish excoriating  discharge;  small  vesicles  form  where
crusts  have  been  removed,  soon  burst  and  discharge
a  yellowish  corrosive  fluid.

■  Painful  sensitiveness  of  scalp,  skin  peels  off,  with  itching

and  smarting,  <  in  evening  and  from  getting  warm.

■  Hair  falls  off,  mostly  from  occiput  and  around  ears,  with

humid,  fetid  eruj)tion,  or  dandruff  on  scalp.

■  Pressing,  stinging  and  tearing  pains  in  bones  and  in  peri-

osteum on  cranium  ;  swelling  and  suppuration  of  bones
(caries),  with  putrid-smelling  sweat,  day  and  night;  <
from  motion  and  contact.

■  Burning  stinging  on  head,  mostly  on  1.  temple ; <  from

heat  of  bed,  at  3  p.m.,  and  when  lying  on  it.
Sight  and  Eyes, l  lOn  looking  at  sun,  hot  water  runs  out
of  1.  eye,  scalding  cheek  and  making  eye  smart.

■  Dimness  of  sight,  scintillations  or  flames before eyes,

especially  at  night;  halos  around  candle.
The  eyes  lie  excessively  deep,  with  blue  raised  rings  around

them,  as  after  great  excesses.
Pupils  dilated.
I  I  Syphilitic  iritis,  with  bursting  pain  in  eyeball,  temple,

and  side  of  face,  <  from  evening  to  morning,  and  upon

using  eyes  by  any  light.
I  I  Laceration  of  cornea,  with  prolapse  of  iris,  in  a  man,  set.

25,  who  was  struck  by  a  chip  while  chopping,  tearing

cornea  from below  upward. {Aeon. 30,  followed by

St  aphis.  2c.)

■  Lacerated  or  incised  wounds  of  cornea;  after  operation

for  cataract.

■  Dryness  of  eyes :  in  morning  on  waking;  in  evening,  with

sensation  of  pressure.
■Arthritic  ophthalmia, pains  extending  to  teeth  ;  eyes  burn

on  least  exertion,  as  if  very  dry,  yet  lachrymation  is

constant.
■Sympathetic  forms  of  chronic  conjunctival  catarrh,  with

inflammation  of  meibomian  or  ciliary  glands.
Pain  as  if  a  hard  substance  were  lying  beneath  1.  upper

lid.
Pressure  in  upper  lid,  <  on  closing  eye.
I  I  Itching  of  margins  of  lids.
I  I  Anchylosis,  every  month  before  full  moon,  leaving  a

small,  hard  tumor;  tensive  pains  from  eye  to  teeth  and


STAPHISAGRIA.  .  10

cheek,  aggravated at night,  with  headache,  sneezing,
coryza,  etc.

■  Dryness  of  margin  of  lids,  with  hard  nodules  on  borders,

and  destruction  of  hair  follicles.
1 1  Blepharitis,  margins  of  lids  dry,  with  hardened  styes,  or
tarsal  tumors.

I  I  Left  upper  tarsal  edge  itches ;  >  by  rubbing.

I I  Styes,  nodosities,  chalazse  on  eyelids,  one  after  another,
sometimes  ulcerating.

■  Steatoma  on  conjunctiva  palpebrarum.

■  Polypi  of  conjunctiva.

1  I  For  eight  months,  st3^es  on  1.  upper  eyelid  ;  severe  pain ;
pain  confining  her  to  a  dark  room,  and  usually  to  bed ;
>  from  application  of  cold  water;  thick,  creamy,  mild
leucorrhoea.

I  I  Eyelids  ulcerated  and  covered  with  styes  and  nodosities,
look  like  a  mass  of  corruption ;  many  sore  places  and
ulcerated  spots  on  face.

I  I  Mrs.  B.,  set.  32,  six  years  ago  had  a  steatoma  cut  out  as
large  as  a  pea,  on  1.  upper  lid ;  two  years  ago  had  an-
other on  lower  lid  of  same  side  similarly  removed ;  a
third  on  same  place,  size  of  a  lentil,  situated  on  conjunc-
tiva palpebrarum ;  itching.

I  I  Steatoma  of  upper  lid  as  large  as  a  large  bean,  growing
for  years;  had  one  removed  by  knife  only  to  make
room  for  present  one,  much  larger  than  first.

I  Stye  does  not  suppurate  and  break,  but  remains  a  hard
nodule.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears  on  moving  head  ;  re-
ports in  ears;  sensation  as  if  wind  blew  into  them.

■  Hardness  of  hearing,  with  swelling  of  tonsils,  especially

after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Stitches  in  ears.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Scratching  in  choanse.

Ulceration  of  nostrils,  with  scabs  deep  in  nose.
I  I  Frequent  sneezing,  without  coryza.
Coryza ;  at  first  discharge  of  thick  mucus,  afterward of
thin  water.

■  Violent  coryza,  one  nostril stuffed  up,  much  sneezing

and  lachrymation  ;  nasal  voice.
® Upper Face, ■Countenance sunken, nose peaked, eyes
sunken,  with  blue  margins  around  them.

■  Brown  and  blue  color  of  face,  when  getting  angry.
Sharp burning stitches in 1. cheek, which provoke

scratching.
1  I  Prosopalgia  in  an  old  lady,  made  life  unendurable;  on
touching  spoon  or  fork  to  lips  inexpressible  pains  shot
from  lips  over  face;  fluid  food  had  to  be  eaten  with  fin-
gers, could  take  no  solid  food,  mastication  impossible.


11  STAPHISAGRIA.

I  I  Tearing  pain  beginning  in  a  carious  tooth  of  1.  upper
jaw,  and  extending  through  all  upper  teeth  of  that  side;
pain  in  1.  cheek;  pain  most  severe  in  pes  anserina,
<  from  touch  ;  when  very  severe,  pain  extends  behind
1.  ear  and  into  1.  arm  ;  sensation  as  if  cheek  were  swollen;
spasm  of  oesophagus ;  griping  in  abdomen ;  spasmodic
weeping;  oppressed  breathing;  cold  hands;  cold  sweat
on  face. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Pressing  and  beating  pain  extending  from  decayed  tooth
to  eye;  <  from  pressure  or  from  contact  of  a  metallic
substance,  >  from  heavy  pressure ;  pains  stitching,
burning,  drawing,  cutting,  with  sensation  of  swelling
of  affected  side.

I  Inflammation  of  bones  of  face.

I  I A  boy  set.  3  months,  with  lichen,  or  a  dry,  itchy,
pimply  eruption  over  face  and  behind  ears,  skin  rough,
free  from  natural  color  and  moisture,  due  to  subcuta-
neous effusions  of  plastic  lymph.

I  I  Serpiginous  ulcer,  with  excruciating  pain.
•Lower  Face. Lips  full  of  ulcers  and  scurfs,  with  burning
pains.

Easy  dislocation  of  jaw.

Painfulness  of  submaxillary  glands,  with  or  without
swelling.

Induration  like  a  cartilage,  as  large  as  a  hazelnut,
as  if  the  glands  were  swollen  beneath  the  chin
anteriorly  by  the  symphysis,  with  a  hard  pressive  pain,
when  swallowing  or  when  touched,  or  when  rubbed  by
the  neckband.

I  I  Caries of  lower  jaw, following osteitis, latter being

broughtabout  by  injury  to  jaw  bone  during  extraction
of  a  carious  tooth.
"Teeth  and  Gums. Black, crumbling,  carious,  exfohate;
very  sensitive  to  touch  and  to  cold  drinks.

I I  Teeth  turn  black,  or  sliow  dark  streaks  ;  gums  ache.
A  piece  scales  off  from  posterior  surface  of  an  incisor.
Pain in a hollow  tooth,  always  after  eating,  a biting

drawing  (in  incisors  a  pressure)  excessively  <  in  open

air,  even  while  mouth  is  closed,  gradually  ceased  in

house.
Hollow  teeth  sensitive  to  slightest  touch,  if  after  eating

slightest  food  remains  in  cavities,  a  violent  pain  extends

into  roots,  gum  becomes  painfully  sore.
Cold drinks seem to penetrate teeth, as  if  they  were

hollow.
Piercing-drawing  in  carious  tooth  and  in  corresponding

one  on  other  side  in  morning.
Tickling-sticking  in  back  teeth  of  r.  lower  jaw.


STAPHISAGRIA.  L2

1 1  Toothache:  in  decayed  teeth;  in  roots  of  teeth;  in  a
whole  row  of  teeth;  during  menses;  gnawing  tearing  ;
shooting  into  ear,  throbbing  in  temples ;  <  from  cold
drinks  and  touch,  not  from  biting  on  teeth ;  <  from
drawing  in  cold  air,  <  after  eating.

I  Gums  :  spongy,  fall  away  from  teeth,  or  present  fistulous-
looking  ulcers ;  pale,  white,  ulcerated  and  swollen ;
aching  when  touched ;  bleed  when  pressed  upon  and
on  cleaning  teeth,  burning-swelling  with  heat  in  cheek  ;
fungous  excrescences ;  nodosities.

I  I  Toothache  for  three  days  and  nights;  pain  gnawing
and  jumping,  affected  1.  upper  bicuspid ;  palate  swollen,
but  apparently  no  abscess,  tooth  not  decayed ;  pain  <
when  tooth  is  touched,  especially  by  hot  things ;  also
<  out  of  doors,  or  drawing  cold  air  into  mouth,  and  at
night.

I  I A  woman,  set.  32,  had  upon  gum  of  upper  jaw,
before  and  behind,  two  central  incisors,  a  vascular
tumor  size  of  a  hazelnut;  upper  lip  swollen  and  pushed
out;  tumor  movable,  general  condition  good  ;  salivation
so  abundant  patient  is  obliged  to  have  constant  recourse
to  handkerchief;  tumor  excised,  in  consequence  a
violent  hemorrhage,  yielding  only  to  cautery ;  some
time  afterward  tumor  recurred,  and  was  cured  by
Sta2:)h.  30.

■  Fistula  dentalis.

■  Dentition: child  very  sensitive  to  mental  or  physical

impressions;  winces  and  shrinks  from  every  wry  look
or  harsh  word,  and  cries  from  least  pain ;  pale  white
appearance  of  gums,  which  are  tender  to  touch  ;
pot-bellied  children ;  frequent  desire  for  stool,  not
relieved  even  by  a  free  evacuation ;  moist  scald-head,
with  yellow  scabs,  offensive ;  teeth  decay  as  soon  as  they
are  cut.
'^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  fiat;  of  food,  bitter.

I  I  Glossitis ;  mercurialized  cases ;  pain  excessive,  patients
frantic;  beg  to  be  killed,  etherized  or  narcotized,  as
they  cannot  live  in  such  agony ;  threatened  ulceration,
or  deep,  foul,  painful,  sloughing  ulcers.

■  Ulcerations  or  numerous  vesicles  in  mouth  or  on  tongue ;

swelling of glands of neck and of follicles under
tongue.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Constant  accumulation  of  saliva.
Painful  excrescence  on  inside  of  cheek.
I  Mouth  and  tongue  ulcerated  and  covered  with  blisters ;
discharge of  saliva, at times bloody ; fetid breath ;
sickly  complexion,  with  sunken  cheeks; hollow  eyes
with blue rings; swelling of cervical glands, and
blisters  under  tongue. /^Stomatitis.


13  STAPHISAGRIA.

I  Thrush  changing  into  canker  sores,  with  a  bluish-red
or  yellowish  bottom ; more  or  less  flow  of  saliva  and
bad  smell.
^^  Throat. Throat  dry  and  rough,  with  soreness  when  talking
and  swallowing.

While  talking  she  swallows  continually.

■  Swelling  of  tonsils,  also  after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Induration  of  tonsils;  hypertrophy  of  tonsils  with  nasal

voice.

I  Chronic  tonsillitis,  tonsils  are  not  large,  but  hard  from

previous  attacks  of  acute  tonsillitis,  strumous  diathesis,

cross  and  irritable.

/*Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions, i  Extreme  hunger,

even  when  stomach  is  full ;  ravenous  hunger  for  days.

Appetite  for  bread  or  milk.

Longing  only  for  thin,  fluid  food  (soup).

Great  desire  for  wine,  brandy  or  tobacco.

Want  of  thirst.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Child  cries  as  soon  as  it  eats.

I  After  eating:  cutting  in  abdomen;  dysenteric  stool;
meat,  cough  worse.

After  drinking  :  cutting  in  abdomen  ;  dysenteric  stool.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Frequent
hiccough.

Belching  makes  a  scratching  in  throat,  irritable  larynx,
and  then  is  followed  by  cough.

Bitter  eructations  after  sour  food.

Waterbrash.

I  Nausea  from  vertigo,  as  in  seasickness.
"^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i Sensation  as  if  stomach  were
hanging  down,  relaxed.

iCardialgia;  aching  and  tensive  pain  in  stomach,  at  times
<,  at  other  times  >  ;  after  eating,  especially  bread,  with
frequent  nausea  and  constipation  ;  1 1  after  indignation.

I  I  After  becoming  angry,  trembling  of  whole  body,  oppres-
sion of  chest  and  dyspnoea,  so  that  he  feared  he  would
suffocate;  pressure  as  of  a  heavy  weight  lying  upon
stomach,  severe  tension  in  epigastrium  ;  nausea,  and
salty-bitter  eructations;  pains  so  severe  that  he  wished
death  would  relieve  him.
^^  Hypochondria, l  Biliary  colic,  after  domestic  disturbances ;

after  indignation.
'^Abdomen. lA  feeling  of  weakness  in  abdomen,  as  if  it
would  drop ;  wants  to  hold  it  up.

Hard  painful  pressure  in  r.  side  beneath  umbilicus.

Griping  pain,  twisting  about,  here  and  there,  in  whole
abdomen.

■  Spasmodic  cutting  in  abdomen  after  eating  and  drinking.


STAPHISAGRIA.  14

I  Sufferings  of  pot-bellied  children,  with  much  colic  and

humid  scald-head ;  pains  caused  by  a  fit  of  chagrin  or
indisposition  of  nurse ;  children  in  bad  humor,  cry  for
things,  which,  after  getting,  they  petulantly  push  or
throw  away.

I I  Colic:  after  indignation;  after  lithotomy ;  with  urging
to  stool,  or  with  urging  to  urinate  and  squeamishness,
<  after  food  or  drink.

I  I  Incarceration  of  flatus  in  abdomen.

Painful  swelling  of  inguinal  glands.

I  Stitching  toward  1.  groin  and  testicle,  each  dart  or  stitch
followed  by  such  itching  that  patient  was  compelled  to
scratch ;  darts  and  stitches  began  deep  in  flesh,  and
ended  upon  surface,  point  of  ending  being  place  that
itched.

Eruption  of  pimples  as  large  as  peas  over  whole  abdomen
and  thighs,  which  itch,  and  when  scratched  off  are  moist,
but  then  have  a  burning  pain.
^•^  Stool  and  Rectum, l Flatus:  hot;  smells  like  rotten  eggs.

Stool:  yellowish,  slimy;  mucous;  I  hot;  excoriating;
bloody ;  offensive ;  I  smelling  like  rotten  eggs  ;  involun-
tary when  passing  flatus.

iDiarrhoea :  <  after  drinking  cold  water ;  <  after  eating  ;
in  children.

I  Before  stool :  cutting  pain  ;  urging.

I  During  stool :  tenesmus  of  bladder  and  rectum  ;  discharge
of  hot  flatus.

I  After  stool:  cutting  pain;  smarting  in  rectum;  itching
of  anus.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea,  or  even  dysentery,  of  weak,  sickly
children  ;  humid,  fetid  eruptions.

■  Dysenteric  yellowish  slimy  stools,  with  much  tenesmus,
cutting  colic,  and  general  prostration.

•  After  least  food  or  drink,  or  after  chagrin,  griping  and
dysenteric  stool.

iStool:  retarded  but  soft;  costive,  with  much  urging;  fre-
quent enough,  but  hard  and  insufficient;  inertia  of  rec-
tum ;  impaction.

IIA  fair-haired,  delicate-looking  girl  is  much  troubled
with  constipation,  bowels  only  act  once  a  week  ;  motions
are  hard,  round,  and  dry,  and  come  away  like  dog's
feces.

Constipation  with  bad  taste  in  mouth,  pain  in  gums,  ir-
regular appetite;  when  Mercur.  has  been  insufficient.

Itching  in  anus  while  sitting,  when  not  at  stool.

I  Hemorrhoids,  with  enlarged prostate; intense  pain  in
back  and  through  whole  pelvis.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Itching  needlelike  stitches  in  region  of
kidneys.


15  STAPHISAGRIA.

I  Constant  darting  pain  in  region  of  1.  kidney,  <  from
cold,  lying  in  cold  bed,  >  from  heat,  when  becoming
warm  in  bed.

I  Urine  scanty,  dark,  heavily  loaded  with  mixed  urates.

Pressure  upon  bladder.

■  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  a  scanty  discharge  in  a

thin  stream,  or  discharge  of  dark  urine  in  drops.
Urging  to  urinate;  scarcely  a  spoonful  was  passed,  mostly

of  a  dark  yellow  red  color,  in  a  thin  stream ;  at  times

dribbling  of  urine,  always  followed  by  a  sensation  as  if

bladder  were  not  yet  empty,
I  Frequent  urging  to  urinate  in  newly  married  people,

especially  the  women  ;  great  irritability  of  bladder  and

urethra.
I  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine,  acrid  and  corroding,  with

burning; <  from  motion;  constipation.

■  Straining  or  external  pressure  causes  no  discharge  of

urine ;  after  difficult  confinement.
Micturition  copious  and  very  frequent.

■  Profuse  discharge  of  pale  urine  with  urging.

■  Burning  in  urethra  during  and  after  urinating.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  excited.

■  Impotence.

■  Impotency with irritability of  bladder and urethra^

brought  on  by  sexual  excess.

■  ■Effects  of  onanism  or  sexual  excesses;  loss  of  memory;

hypochondriasis;  taciturnity;  face  sunken;  abashed
look  ;  nocturnal  emissions ;  backache ;  weak  legs  ;  re-
laxed organs ;  deficiency  of  vital  heat  and  tendency  to
take  cold;  deep-sunken,  red,  and  lustreless  eyes ;  hair
falls  out ;  loss  of  prostatic  fluid  and  impairment  of  sex-
ual desire;  dull  and  contusive  pains  in  testicles;  volup-
tuous itching  of  scrotum ;  atrophy  of  testicles.

■  ■Seminal  emissions  followed  by  great  chagrin  and  morti-

fication ;  prostration ;  dyspnoea.
I  I  A  man,  set.  25,  sanguine  temperament,  single,  general
health  good ;  emissions  followed  by  prostration ;  three
succeeding  nights  profuse  and  sticky ;  spermatic  cord
full  and  knotty  before  emissions;  r.  testicle  lower  than
1. ;  less  fulness  and  no  knots  in  cord  after  emission  ;.
shooting  pains  through  r.  testicle  and  up  cord  of  that
side ;  emissions  take  place  before  dawn,  seldom  waking
him;  subject  to  headache ;  restless,  unrefreshing  sleep  ;
unpleasant  dreams,  in  trouble,  sees  naked  women  ;  scro-
,tal  perspiration,  with  unpleasant,  fleshy  odor  after  sleep,
not  noticed  during  day  ;  sticky  smegma,  not  acrid  ;  dis-
contented, low-spirited  (Staphis.  controlled  emissions,.
Selenium  cured).


STAPHISAGRIA.  16

I  Chronic  prostatitis  in  old  men;  pain  extending  from
anus  along  urethra,  coming  on  after  walking  or  riding,
with  frequent  micturition  by  day,  urine  passing  in  small
quantities,  with  dribbling  afterward.

Pressive  pain  in  1.  testicle  while  walking,  also  after  rub-
bing ;  still  more  violent  when  touched.

I  I  Stitching  toward  1.  groin  and  testicle,  each  dart  or  stitch
followed  by  such  itching  that  he  was  compelled  to
scratch ;  darts  and  stitches  began  deep  in  flesh  and
ended  upon  surface,  point  of  ending  being  place  that
itched.

I  Testicles  inflamed,  with  burning,  stinging,  pressing  and
drawing  pains ;  shooting  and  drawing  in  cords ;  r.  tes-
ticle feels  as  if  compressed.

I  I  Atrophy  of  testicle  in  a  man,  set.  50,  of  robust  constitu-
tion; about  twenty-five  years  ago  had  mumps  on  1.  side;
on  exposure  to  cold,l.  testicle  began  to  swell  until  it
nearly  reached  size  of  a  goose-egg;  as  swelling  receded  tes-
ticle dwindled  down  to  size  of  little  finger,  very  soft  and
flabby ;  nearly  ever  since  he  has  suffered  from  an  aching
pain  in  it,  especially  on  outer  side ;  great  sensitiveness
to  touch ;  pain  more  violent  after  touching  it,  or  after
any  friction,  with  sharp  shooting  pain  up  cord  into  ab-
domen ;  walking  upon  frozen  ground  causes  uneasiness ;
at  times  so  sensitive  at  night,  he  cannot  sleep  without
keeping  his  knees  widely  separated  ;  there  does  not
seem  to  be  any  inflammation  in  it;  unpleasant  sensa-
occipital  protuberance  to  1.  ear,  seems  as  if  it  were  hol-
low, yet  there  is  a  dull  ache,  a  feeling  as  if  brain  were
not  large  enough  to  fill  space  ;  when  he  happens  to  hurt
testicle,  head  trouble  is  <  ;  region  of  head  alluded  to
is  sensitive  to  pressure;  >  after  sexual  intercourse;  at
times  thoughtful;  if  reading,  and  some  one  calls  his
attention  suddenly,  he  forgets  where  he  was  reading  and
what  about;  scrotum  on  that  side  contracts,  itches, and
he  has  often  to  pinch  and  rub  it  between  thumb  and
finger.

Atrophy  of  testicles.

I  Soft,  humid  excrescences  on  and  behind  the  corona
glandis.

iLarge,  easily-bleeding  lardaceous  ulcer  on  penis;  condy-
lomata about  anus,  and  erosion  like  a  chronic  eczema,
with  profuse  discharge  of  offensive-smelling  serum ;
burning,  twitching,  stitching  pains,  <to  an  intolerable
degree  during  stool,  and  allowing  him  no  rest.

■  Mercurial  syphilis;  dry,  pediculated  fig-warts,  and  mu-
cous tubercles ;  nervous  weakness.


^'^  STAPHISAGRIA.

''Female  Sexual  Organs,  i Nymphomania,  with  extreme
sensitiveness  to  mental  and  physical  impressions  •  mind
has  been  dwelling  too  much  on  sexual  subjects.

I  Very  sharp  shooting  pains  in  ovary,  which  is  exquisitely
sensitive  to  pressure;  pains  extending  into  crural  reo-ion
and  thighs.  ^

Flow  of  blood  from  genitals,  a  long  time  after  critical  age

IMenses:  irregular,  late  and  profuse;  sometimes  wanting •
hrst  of  pale  blood,  then  dark  and  clotted ;  occasionally
spasmodic  uterine  contractions.

Amenorrhcea  in  consequence  of  chagrin  with  severe  indie-
nation.  ^

I  Scorbutic  diathesis,  granular  vegetations  of  vagina

I  Painful  sensitiveness  of  sexual  organs,  especiallv  when

sitting.
I  Spasmodic  pains  in  vulva  and  vagina.

■  Stinging  itching  of  vulva.

^_ I  Prurigo  senilis,  or  from  parasites.
'Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i Feeble
voice  from  weakness  of  vocal  organs,  after  anger.
I  Hoarseness,  with  much  tenacious  mucus  in  larvnx  and

chest.  "^

Nasal  voice  from  stoppage  of  posterior  nares.
While  talking  she  swallows  continually.

■  Rawness  in  lar^aix  from  talking.

■  Sensation  of  constriction  and  pressure  in  throat  pit  after

anger,  <  when  swallowing.
''Respiration, l Dyspnoea:  with  constriction;  after  seminal
emissions ;  toward  end  of  coition.
Shortness  of  breath  from  fulness  and  constriction  in  hypo-
27  n ^"^^^^"^  ^1^^  upper  portion  of  abdomen.
Cough. ■Cough:  spasmodic,  hollow,  with  expectoration  of
yellow,  tough,  purulent  mucus  at  night;  only  during
day; after vexation  or  indignation; < after eating-
meat;  excited  by  cleaning  teeth.
■  Sputum  loosened  at  night  and  generally  swallowed
I  iCroupy  cough  in  Winter,  alternating  with  sciatica  in
Summer;  cough  drove  him  out  of  bed  compelling  him
to  sit  up  all  night,  could  not  breathe  while  lying  down,
sensation  as  if  something  were  loose  in  pit  of  stomach i
like  loose  flesh,  that  pulled  every  time  he  coughed  •  couo-h
excited  by  tobacco  smoke.  ' ^^

''Inner  Chest  and  lungs. "Soreness  and  rawness  in  chest,
especially  when  coughing.
Sticking  itching  between  costal  cartilages.
Sharp  stitches  with  intermissions  of  several  seconds,  in  re-
gion of  fourth  costal  cartilage  of  r.  and  1.  sides;  they

VOL.  X.— 2.


STAPHISAGRIA.  18

slowly  penetrate  from  within  outward,  without  affecting
inspiration  or  expiration.

Fine  itching  sharp  stitches,  which  provoke  scratching  in
upper  part  of  sternum,  just  beneath  pit  of  throat.

I  Pain  in  muscles  of  chest,  as  if  bruised,  in  morning  when
she  moves  in  bed,  and  by  day  when  she  folds  her  arms ;
no  sensitiveness  to  touch,  and  none  in  breathing.

!  I  Pain  sometimes  sticking,  in  and  through  diaphragm
and  lower  part  of  chest,  affecting  her  only  on  turning
and  rising  in  bed  after  waking  in  morning,  especially
when  she  goes  to  bed  early,  i.e.,  has  been  lying  a  long
time,  and  when  stretching  out  arms  in  drawing  for  a
long  time  during  day.

Tightly  adherent  mucus  in  chest.
^^ Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i Palpitation:  from  least
motion ;  from  mental  exertion  ;  from  music ;  after  siesta ;
nervous;  so  marked  it  can  be  seen,  shakes  the  whole
body.

I  Stitching  pains  in  heart,  or  region  of  heart,  stopping
breathing.

■  Trembling  beating  of  heart.

Pulse  frequent  and  small ;  often  trembling.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Painful  swelling  of  glands  of  throat,  neck
and  axillae.

I  Itching  pimples  on  nape  of  neck.

I  Rheumatic  drawing,  pressure  and  tension  in  neck,  with
stiffness.

Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  r.  shoulder,  only  in  motion.

Violent  pressive  pain  in  1.  shoulder  joint,  not  >  by  any
motion.

Dull  sticking  pains  in  shoulder  joint,  <  on  touch  and
motion.

Itching  stitches  in  both  axillae.

Pain  in  small  of  back  as  if  broken  to  pieces,  in  morning
in  bed.

iPain  in  small  of  back  as  after  overlifting;  <  at  rest,  at
night  and  in  morning,  and  when  rising  from  a  seat.

In  small  of  back  stitches  and  pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  dur-
ing rest,  ceasing  on  walking.

All  joints  are  stiff  in  morning  on  rising  from  bed,  espe-
cially shoulders,  and  sacral  and  hip  joints.

Violent  stitches  upward  in  back.

Suppurating  swelling  in  psoas  nmscles.
^^  "Upper  Limbs. Paralytic  pressure  in  both  upper  and  fore-
arms, <  by  motion  and  touch.

'I Herpes:  with  scabs  on  elbows;  on  hands.

il  I  Eruption  of  small  pustules  on  arms  and  hands,  gradu-
ally spreading,  and  exuding  a  yellowish  corroding  dis-
charge ;  severe  tensive  burning  pains.


19  STAPHISAGKIA.

I  Tetter  on  hands,  itclies  in  evening  and  burns  after
scratching.

■  Numbness  in  tips  of  fingers.

Sensation  as  if  a  hard  skin  were  drawn  over  tips  of  fingers

of  1.  hand  ;  there  is  little  feeling  in  them,  and  sensation

of  touch  is  suspended.
Paralytic  drawing  pain  in  first  joints  of  fingers  at  union

of  metacarpal  bones,  <  b}^  motion.
Fine  jerking  tearing  in  muscles  of  several  fingers  and  in

thumb,  especially  in  tips.*
Deep  burning  itching,  sharp, needlelike  switches  in  1.  thumb,

provokes  scratching.

■  Osteitis  of  phalanges  of  fingers.

I  I  First  phalanx  of  1.  index  finger  affected  ;  ulceration  and
swelling  about  joint.

Bones,  especially  of  fingers,  imperfectly  developed.

I  Arthritic  nodosities  on  fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs, l  '  Nates  ache  while  sitting ;  pain  extend  sto
small  of  back,  sacrum  and  hip  joint.

Sticking  itching  in  gluteal  muscles.

Pulsating  in  hip  joint,  as  from  beginning  suppuration.

Aching  pain  around  hip  joint  when  walking  and  sitting.

Daily  pains  beginning  at  crest  of  ilium,  r.  side,  extending
backward  and  downward  to  thigh,  <  early  morning,
on  rising  or  on  sitting  down,  >  standing  and  from
warmth.

i  I  Exceedingly  severe  pain  in  r.  leg,  extending  into  geni-
tals, particularly  testicles;  attacks  followed  by  great
prostration. ^Sciatica.

I  I  Morbus  coxarius,  with  abscess  in  r.  iliac  region;  tem-
perature 103.2°,  pulse  120 ;  r.  leg  one-half  inch  shorter
than  1. ;  r.  foot  everted  and  gluteo-femoral  crease  on
that  side  obliterated;  limps  in  walking ;  night  sweats;
had  a  severe  fall  before  present  series  of  symptoms.

I  Crural  neuralgia,  stinging,  stitching  pains  during  move-
ment.

I  I  Mrs.  A.,  £et.  30,  never  pregnant ;  menses  irregular,  un-
certain, always  late,  sometimes  wanting,  but  profuse,
continuing  a  week  or  longer,  consisting  at  first  of  pale
blood,  which  became  dark  and  clotted ;  occasionally
spasmodic  uterine  contractions ;  from  ten  days  to  two
weeks  previous  to  menses,  sharp  pains  during  motion,
extending  from  point  of  egress  of  r.  crural  nerve  on
thigh  down  over  inner  surface  of  knee,  to  great  toe;
constant  aching  of  limbs,  with  great  heaviness  during
rest;  after  first  sense  of  pain,  paralysis  of  leg,  till  cata-
menia  fully  appeared,  when  it  gradually  became  normal ;
dull  aching  of  nates  while  sitting,  extending  to  sacral  and


STAPHISAGRIA.  20

hip  joint  regions  and  small  of  back;  dull  stitches  dur-
ing movement,  and  drawing  sensation  during  rest,  about
knee  and  patella ;  paroxysms  of  stinging  pain  along
fibula,  near  malleolus;  sweat  at  night,  great  general
prostration ;  sinking  feeling  in  stomach  and  abdomen  ;
complete  amelioration  of  all  pains  during  rest  at  night.
6'Sciatica.

Aching  in  thighs,  when  walking.

Fine  itching  stitches  in  inner  side  of  thigh  provoke
scratching.

■  Legs  painfully  weak,  especially  knees.
iStitches  in  knee  and  knee  joint.

Drawing  stitches  in  r.  knee  joint,  <  by  motion.

Dull  stitches  in  knee  joint  near  j)atella ;  on  touch  stitches
change  to  pressive  pain.

Dull  stitches  in  r.  knee  joint,  immediately  after  rising  in
morning,  <  by  motion.

I  I  Burning  stitches  on  outer  side  beneath  1.  knee,  at  in-
tervals.

ISensation  of  stiffness  and  contraction  in  hollows  of  knees;
dribbling  of  urine.

Tearing  pain  in  muscles  of  one  or  other  leg,  while  stand-
ing and  sitting.

Burning  stitch  in  r.  tibia  during  rest.

Sticking  tearing  in  and  beneath  r.  calf  and  above  1.  heel.

Sticking  itching  just  above  r.  outer  malleolus;  provoker
scratching  but  leaves  no  special  sensation.

On  putting  foot  to  ground,  pricking  in  balls  of  feet  as  if
toes  would  be  drawn  down.
•^'  Limbs  in  General. All  the  limbs  are  affected  ;  everything
is  sore.

■  Osteitis  of  phalanges,  with  sweating  and  suppuration.

■  Arthritic  nodosities  of  joints,  especially  of  fingers.

■  Gout,  rheumatic  gout,  and  gouty  nodosities,  in  corpulent

men  advanced  in  life,  feeble  pulse,  palpitation,  dyspnoea
on  exertion,  pains  in  smaller  joints  of  hands  and  feet,
with  much  swelling  and  hardness;  generally  skin  co-
affection,  alternating  with  pains  in  joints ;  soles  of  feet
tender,  knees  weak.

■  Acute  articular  rheumatism  of  fast  or  debilitated  men,

with  shifting  pains.
^'"Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  aching  of  brain  >;  neu-
ralgia oi'  seal])  >; ])ain  in small  of  back  <; drawing
aljout  knee  and  patella  ;  burning  stitch  in  r.  tibia  ;  great
heaviness  of  limbs,  and  aching.

Lying:  on  head,  stinging  in  head  <;  impossible  to  breathe:
a  long  time,  pain  through  diaphragm.

Resting  head  upon  hand:  heaviness  of  head  >.


21  STAPHISAGRIA.

Sitting:  vertigo  < ;  itching  in  anus;  painful  sensitive-
ness of  sexual  organs;  nates  ache;  aching  around  hip
joints ;  pain  from  crest  of  ilium  to  thighs  <  ;  pain  in
muscles  of  legs.

Standing :  pressive  headache  <  ;  pain  from  crest  of  ilium
to  thighs  >  ;  pain  in  muscles  of  legs.

Stooping :  vertigo ;  as  if  head  would  burst.

Turning  or  rising  in  bed :  pain  through  diaphragm  and
lower  part  of  chest ;  all  joints  are  stiff.

Rising  from  a  seat :  pain  in  small  of  back  <  ;  pain  from
crest  of  ilium  to  thighs.

Motion :  headache  <  ;  tearing  pains  in  bones  and  peri-
osteum; cranium  <  ;  head,  ringing  in  ears;  involuntary-
discharge  of  urine  <  ;  least,  palpitation  ;  pain  in  shoul-
der; pain  in  1.  shoulder  not  >  ;  pain  in  shoulder  joint
< ;  pressure  in  arms  <  ;  drawing  pain  in  joints  of  fingers
<;  crural  neuralgia;  sharp  pains  before  menses;  dull
stitches  about  knee ;  stitches  in  knee  joint ;  sharp
pains;  chill.

Turning  head  rapidly :  vertigo.

On  putting  foot  to  ground  :  pricking  in  balls  of  feet.

Walking :  vertigo ;  vertigo  >  ;  pain  from  anus  along
urethra ;  pressive  pain  in  testicle  ;  pain  in  small  of  back
ceased ;  aching  pain  around  hip  joint ;  aching  in  thighs  ;
weakness  of  whole  body  ;  knees  <.

Exercising  :  in  open  air,  chill.

Riding :  pain  from  anus  along  urethra.

Swallowing:  pressure  in  throat  pit  <.
^^  Nerves. iVery  sensitive  to -least  impression,  either  mental
or  physical.

■  Neuralgia:  facial;  of  shoulder  joint  and  arms  ;  crural;
sharp  pains  during  motion,  aching  of  limbs  with  great
heaviness  during  i-est.

Weakness  of  w^hole  body,  especially  knees,  when  walking.

Weariness  and  weakness,  in  morning.

Great  weariness  and  sleeplessness ;  after  eating  feels  the
need  of  lying  down.

Painfulness  of  whole  body  as  if  bruised,  with  an  exces-
sively weak  sensation.

II Nervous  weakness;  a  feeling  as  if  done  up  after  much
hard  work.

Paralysis  on  one  side,  from  anger.

Twitches  at  night.

i  I  Convulsions,  with  loss  of  consciousness,  retraction  of
thumbs  and  foaming  at  mouth,  brought  on  by  domestic
troubles  (being  unjustly  accused  of  infidelity);  intervals
between  fits  from  two  to  three  days,  at  first,  later  a  fit
every  month  or  two;  duration  of  each  attack  in  pro-


STAPHISAGRIA.  22

portion  to  free  interval;  from  1850  to  1865  was  continu-
ally under  allopathic  treatment,  without  least  benefit ;
in  spite  of  her  many  years  of  sickness  she  still  looked
robust ;  neither  cranium,  spine  nor  any  other  part  of  her
body  showed  an34hing  remarkable,  only  her  physiog-
nomy was  rather  stupid  and  her  intellectual  faculties
weak ;  she  complained  of  loss  of  memory  and  impossi-
bilit}^  to  think.
^^  Sleep.  Violent  yawning,  forces  tears  from  eyes ;  as  if  he
had  not  slept  enough ;  with  desire  to  stretch.

Amorous  dreams  with  emissions.

iSleepy  all  day,  awake  all  night,  body  aches  all  over.

■  Goes  to  sleep  late:  from  crowding  of  ideas ;  because  herpes
or  ulcers  burn  and  itch.

I  Child  wakes,  pushes  everything  away  and  wants  every-
body to  go  away ;  restless  at  night,  as  from  frightful
dreams,  calls  for  mother  often.
^*  Time.  Morning :  child's  ill-humor  <  ;  brain  aches ;  dry-
ness of  eyes ;  piercing  drawing  in  carious  tooth  ;  chest
as  if  bruised ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  all  joints  are  stiff;
pain  from  crest  of  ilium  to  thighs  <  ;  after  rising
stitches  in  knee  joints ;  weariness  and  weakness ;  sleepy.

During  day :  fleshy  odor  about  genitals  not  noticed  ;  cough
only  ;  when  folding  arms  chest  as  if  bruised.

3  P.M.:  stinging  on  head  <  ;  chill.

Day  and  night:  putrid-smelling  sweat.

Evening:  sensitiveness  of  scalp  ;  dryness  and  pressure  of
eyes ;  tetter  on  hands  itches  ;  chill,  with  heat.

From  evening  to  morning:  pain  in  eyeball,  temple  and
side  <  ;  pains  from  eye  to  teeth  <.

Night:  scintillations  before  eyes  <  ;  toothache  <  ;  testicle
very  sensitive ;  expectoration  of  mucus  with  cough ;  pain
in  small  of  back  <  ;  sweat ;  sciatica,  symptoms  <  ;
twitches ;  awake  ;  restless ;  burning  heat  on  hands  and
feet ;'  fetid  sweat.

Midnight:  all  symptoms  <.

After  12  p.m.:  external  heat  followed  by  chill.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat:  pain  in  kidney  <.

Hot  things :  touching  teeth  <  pain.

Heat  of  bed  :  stinging  on  head  <.

Warmth:  sensitiveness  of  scalp  <  ;  pain  from  crest  of  ilium
to  thighs  >.

Becoming  warm  in  bed:  pain  in  kidney  >.

Warm  room  :  neuralgia  of  scalp  >.

In  room:  vertigo;  warm,  chill  <.

Change  of  air  :  neuralgia  of  scalp  <.

Open  air:  vertigo  when  walking;  toothache  <.

Slightest  gust  of  wind  :  legs  feel  as  if  they  were  going  out
from  under  him.


23  STAPHISAGRIA.

Cold:  pain  in  kidney  <.

Cold  bed  :  pain  in  kidney  <

Cold  air:  drawing  in,  <  toothache.

Application  of  cold  water :  pain  in  stye  >.

Cold  water:  teeth  and  gums  very  sensitive.

Washing  causes  feeling  of  tension  of  scalp.

Winter:  croupy  cough.
*" Fever. Chill:  predominates;  without  thirst  or  subsequent
heat ;  3  p.m  ;  >  exercising  in  open  air ;  in  evening,  with
heat  in  face ;  ascending  from  neck  over  head,  or  running
down  back  ;  more  in  a  warm  room.

I  Heat:  wants  to  uncover;  thirst;  external,  after  12  pm.,
followed  by  chill  toward  morning;  burning  at  night,
mostly  on  hands  and  feet.

I  Sweat:  profuse;  cold  on  forehead  and  feet;  smelling  like
rotten  eggs  ;  with  desire  to  uncover;  at  night,  fetid.

I  Tertian  fever,  with  symptoms  of  scurvy  ;  constipation.

■  Before  and  after  ague,  ravenous  hunger.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate :  croupy  cough  and  sci-
atica.

Daily :  pains  from  crest  of  ilium  to  thighs. '

Nightly :  twitching.

Same  time  in  evening:  biting  itching  on  upper  part  of
occiput.

Several  days :  itching  biting  on  scalp.

For  three  days  and  nights :  toothache.

For  three  successive  nights:  profuse  emissions.

From  two  to  three  days :  convulsions,  later  one  fit  every
month  or  two.

Once  a  week  :  bowels  act.

Every  month  before  full  moon  :  anchylosis.

For  eight  months :  styes  on  upper  eyelid.

Six  years  ago:  had  a  steatoma  cut  out  as  large  as  a  pea,
two  years  ago  had  another  cut  out,  then  a  third.

For  sixteen  years :  attacks  of  mental  disturbance  every
four  years,  beginning  at  4th  of  January  and  lasting  two
months.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  hard  pressure  of  forehead ;
pressure  in  temporal  region  ;  dull  stitches  in  temple ;
sticking  in  back  teeth  of  lower  jaw ;  painful  pressure  in
side  beneath  umbilicus;  shooting  through  testicle;  tes-
ticle lower  than  1.,  feels  as  if  compressed;  pain  in  shoul-
der ;  from  crest  of  ilium  to  thigh  ;  abscess  in  iliac  re-
gion;  leg  one-half  inch  shorter  than  1.;  foot  everted;
severe  pain  in  leg ;  from  egress  of  crural  nerve  on  thigh
to  knee  and  toe;  stitches  in  knee  joint;  stitch  in  r.  tibia ;
tearing  in  and  beneath  calf;  sticking  itching  just  above
outer  malleolus  ;  boring  stitch  in  tibia.


STAPHISAGRIA.  24

Left :  pressing  stitch  in  half  of  forehead ;  stitches  in  tem-
ple ;  marginal  blepharitis  and  ectropion  of  eye ;  burn-
ing stinging  on  temple ;  looking  at  sun  hot  water  runs
out  of  eye ;  as  of  a  hard  substance  beneath  upper  lid ;
upper  tarsal  edge  itches ;  styes  on  upper  eyelid  ;  burn-
ing stitches  in  cheek ;  tearing  pain  in  upper  jaw  and  in
cheek  ;  severe  pain  behind  ear  and  into  arm  ;  toothache
in  upper  bicuspid  ;  stitching  toward  groin ;  pain  in  re-
gion of  kidney:  pressive  pain  in  testicle;  stitching
toward  groin  and  testicle;  had  mumps  on  side;  testicle
swelled  ;  occipital  protuberance  to  ear,  as  if  it  were  hol-
low ;  pain  in  shoulder ;  as  if  a  hard  skin  were  drawn
over  tips  of  fingers ;  stitches  in  thumb  ;  ulceration  and
swelling  about  joint  of  index  finger;  burning  stitches
beneath  knee ;  tearing  above  heel.

From  within  outward :  stitches  in  sides.
*'  Sensations.  As  if  legs  would  go  from  under  him  ;  as  if  stu-
pefied ;  as  of  a  round  ball  in  forehead ;  as  if  head  would
burst ;  as  if  brain  were  compressed ;  as  if  bones  would
be  pressed  out;  brain  as  if  torn  to  pieces;  as  if  occiput
were  hollow  ;  as  if  brain  were  n*^""  ''arge  enough  for  space;
as  if  occiput  were  compressed  ^  i^ernally  and  externally;
as  if  hard  substance  were  pressing  on  skull ;  as  if  eyes
were  veiy  dry;  as  if  a  hard  substance  were  lying  be-
neath 1.  upper  lid  ;  as  if  wind  blew  into  ears ;  as  if  cheek
were  swollen  ;  as  if  glands  beneath  chin  were  swollen ;
as  if  teeth  were  hollow ;  as  if  stomach  were  hanging
down  ;  as  of  a  heavy  weight  lying  upon  stomach  ;  as  if
abdomen  would  drop;  as  if  bladder  were  not  yet  empty;
testicle  feels  as  if  compressed  ;  as  if  something  were  loose
in  pit  of  stomach  ;  as  if  chest  were  bruised  ;  as  if  small
of  back  were  broken  to  pieces ;  as  if  a  hard  skin  were
drawn  over  tips  of  fingers  of  1.  hand  ;  as  if  toes  would  be
drawn  down ;  whole  body  as  if  bruised ;  as  if  done  up
after  much  hard  work.

Pain:  in  a  hollow  tooth;  in  roots  of  teeth;  in  gums;  from
anus  along  urethra;  in  muscles  of  chest;  in  shoulder;
in  small  of  back ;  from  nates  to  small  of  back,  sacrum,
hip  joint;  at  crest  of  ilium;  in  smaller  joints  of  hands
and  feet;  in  bones.

Inexpressil^lc  pain  :  shot  from  lips  over  face.

Intense  pain  :  in  back  and  through  pelvis.

Violent  pain  :  in  teeth.

Severe  pain  :  in  styes ;  behind  ear  into  arm ;  in  r.  leg  to
genitals.

Sliarp  pain  :  from  point  of  egress  of  r.  crural  nerve  on
tliigh  down  over  inner  surface  of  knee  to  great  toe.  ■

Stupefying  pain  :  in  liead.


25  STAPHISAGRIA.

Cutting  pain  :  in  teeth  ;  in  abdomen.

Tearing  pains :  in  bones  of  head ;  through  upper  teeth ;

in  muscles  of  one  or  other  leg.
Fine  jerking  tearing:  in  muscles  of  several  fingers  and  in

thumb.
Gnawing  tearing:  in  teeth.

Sticking  tearing:  in  and  beneath  r.  calf  and  above  1.  heel.
Bursting  pain :  in  eyeball,  temple  and  sides  of  face.
Beating  pain :  from  tooth  to  eye.
Shooting:  pain  from  teeth  into  ear;  through  r.  testicle

and  up  cord ;  sharp,  in  ovary.
Throbbing :  in  temples.
Darting  pain :  in  region  of  1.  kidney.
Jumping  pain  :  in  teeth.
Spasmodic  pains :  in  vulva  and  vagina.
Severe  tensive,  burning  pains;  in  pustules  on  arms  and

hands.
Gnawing  pain  :  in  teeth.

Griping  pain  :  in  abdomen.  *■

Stitching  pain:  in  teeth;  toward  1.  groin  and  testicle;  in

heart  or  region  of  heart ;  crural  neuralgia.
Stitches:  in  ears;  in  region  of  fourth  costal  cartilage;  in

small  of  back;  violent;  in  knee  and  knee  joint.
Boring  stitches  :  in  r.  tibia.
Pressing  boring  stitch  :  in  forehead.
Drawing  stitches:  in  r.  knee  joint.
Burning  stitches:  on  outer  side  beneath  1.  knee;  in  r.

tibia.
Sharp,  burning,  needlelike  stitches:  in  1.  temple;  exter-
nally on  vertex ;  in  1.  cheek ;  in  1.  thumb.
Fine  itching  sharp  stitches :  in  upper  part  of  sternum  ;  in

both  axillae.
Itching  needlelike  stitches  :  in  region  of  kidneys ;  in  inner

side  of  thigh.
Dull  stitches :  in  r.  temple ;  in  knee  joint  near  patella.
Biting  drawing :  in  hollow  tooth.
Piercing  drawing :  in  carious  tooth.
Paralytic  drawing  pain  :  in  first  joints  of  fingers.
Drawing  pain  :  in  testicles.
Pressing  pain:  from  teeth  to  eye;  in  induration  beneath

chin ;  in  1.  testicle  _;  in  1.  shoulder  joint.
Aching:  in  gums;  in  stomach;  in  1.  testicle;  in  nates;

around  hip  joint;  of  limbs;  in  thighs.
Tensive  pains:  from  eye-teeth  and  cheeks;  in  stomach.
Contusive  pain :  in  testicles.
Dull  pain  :  in  testicles.

Tickling  sticking:  in  back  teeth  of  lower  jaw.
Sticking  itching: between costal cartilages; in gluteal

muscles ;  just  above  r.  outer  malleolus.


STAPHISAGRIA.  26

Burning  stinging  :  on  head.

Itching  biting:  on  scalp;  on  upper  part  of  occiput.

Burning  itching :  in  1.  thumb.

Stinging  itching :  of  vulva.

Sticking  pain:  through  diaphragm  and  lovrer  part  of  chest;

in  shoulder  joint.
Burning  pain :  in  teeth  ;  in  testicles.
Stinging:  in  bones  of  head  ;  in  testicles ;  crural  neuralgia;

along  fibula.
Smarting:  of  scalp;  of  eyes;  in  rectum  ;  in  ulcer.
Burning:  in  urethra;  in  ulcers.
Pricking :  in  balls  of  feet.
Rawness:  in  larynx;  in  chest.
Scratching:  in  choanse;  in  throat.
Soreness :  in  chest.
Heat :  in  cheek  ;  in  face.
Painful  drawing:  in  several  places  in  head.
Rheumatic  drawing:  in  neck.
Hard  painful  pressure :  in  abdomen.
Constriction  :  in  throat  pit ;  in  hypochondria.
Tension:  over  whole  scalp  ;  in  epigastrium ;  in  neck.
Drawing :  about  knee  and  patella.
Pressing:  m  bones  of  head  ;  in  testicles;  in  neck.
Paralytic  pressure :  in  both  upper  and  forearms.
Pressure : over  nape  of  neck ;  in  r.  side  of  forehead  ; in

head;  in  upper  lid;  in  incisors;  upon  bladder;  in  throat

pit;  in  outer  part  of  tibia.
Heavy  weight :  between  eyes.
Heaviness:  of  head;  in  limbs.
Pulsating:  in  hip  joints.
Dull  feeling:  of  head.
Sensation  of  fatigue :  in  all  joints.
Sinking  feeling:  in  abdomen  and  stomach.
Unpleasant  sensation  :  in  cerebellum.
Muddled  feeling:  in  brain.
Dryness :  of  eyes  ;  of  margins  of  lids.
Stiffness :  in  hollows  of  knees ;  in  all  joints.
Numbness:  in  tips  of  fingers.
Itching:  on  scalp;  at  occiput;- in  margins  of  lids  ;  toward

groin and  testicle;  of  anus;  of  scrotum;  of  pimple  on

nape  of  neck  ;  of  tetter  on  hands;  in  ulcers.
**  Tissues. iStiffness  and  sensation  of  fatigue  in  all  joints,  on

motion.
IPainful  swelling  of  glands.

■  Swelling  and  suppuration  of  bones  and  of  periosteum.
I  Arthritic  nodosities  on  joints.

■  Large  abdomen  ;  voracious  and  canine  hunger ;  swelling

of  submaxillary  and  cervical  glands;  frequent  and  con-


27  STAPHISAGRIA.

stant  attacks  of  catarrh;  unhealthy  and  readily  ulcer-
ating skin;  fetid  night  sweats;  frequent  hoils;  teeth  as
they  appear,  turn  dark  or  crumble ;  mouth  aphthous,
gums  appearing  pale,  spongy  and  bleeding  when
touched ;  nostrils  sore  from  catarrh  ;  eyelids  and  corners
of  mouth  ulcerated  ;  colic  after  least  food  or  drink  ;  stools
hot,  smelling  like  rotten  eggs  or  dysenteric ;  irritability.
^Atrophy  of  children. ^Rachitis.

■  Mercurial  bone  diseases :  pain  in  bones  with  a  debilitated

feeling  in  joints;  swelling  of  bones;  boring  stitches  in
r.  tibia  ;  drawing,  with  pressure,  in  outer  part  of  tibia  ;
periostitis,  and  osteitis,  running  their  course  together,
with  very  severe  pains ;  scrofulous  osteitis.
I  Caries,  following  syphilitic  nodes,  in  broken-down  pa-
tients ;  there  is  a  painful  ulcer,  with  scanty  or  watery  dis-
charges; bone  is  easily  broken  down  under  probe;  skin
for  some  distance  around  ulcer  is  dusky-red  or  brown,
with  vesicles  or  pin-holes  discharging  a  watery  fluid.

■  Scorbutic  ulcers;  itching  and  burning  in  ulcers;  gnaw-

ing, jerking,  tearing  or  shooting  pains;  pus  excessive,
acrid,  ichorous  and  fetid,  or  scanty,  <  from  touch  and
pressure,

■  Mechanical  injuries  from sharp,  cutting instruments;

after  surgical  operations,  colic,  f.  i.  lithotomy  or  ovari-
otom3^

■  Injuries  caused  by  sharp,  cutting  instruments,  glass,  etc.

■  ■Incised  wounds.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : stitch  in

temple;  drawing  in  head  <;  of  spoon  or  fork  to  lips

caused inexpressible pain ; toothache <  ; pain in

induration  beneath  chin  ;  teeth  and  gums  very  sensitive;

gums ache; pressive pain in testicle more  violent;

1.  testicle  very  sensitive ; pain  in  shoulder  joint  <  ;

pressure  in  arms  <  ;  stitches  turn  to  pressive  pain  in

knee  joint;  gums  bleed;  ulcers  <.
Contact:  pains  in  bones  and  periosteum  <.
Pressure: of  hat,  neuralgia  of  scalp  <; toothache  >;

on  gums  causes  bleeding ;  occipital  protuberance  to  ear

sensitive;  ovary  very  sensitive ;  ulcers  <.
Rubbing :  itching  biting  on  scalp  <  ;  itching  of  upper

tarsal  edge  >  ;  of  neckband  caused  pain  in  induration  ;

after,  pressive  pain  in  1.  testicle.
Scratching: causes  bleeding  of  scalp  and  discharge  of

non-glutinous fluid  ; tetter on hands burns ; causes

burning.
Lacerated  or  incised  wounds.
After  severe  fall :  morbus  coxarius.
*®Skin. ■Herpes:  dry,  with  scabs  on  joints; chronic,  with

nightly  twitching;  burn  after  scratching.


STAPHISAGRIA.  28

I  Ulcers:  in  scurvy ;  mercurial;  syphilitic.

I  Fig-warts:  dry,  pediculated  ;  after  abuse  of  mercur5^

Eczema;  yellow,  acrid  moisture  oozes  from  under  crusts;

upon  denuded  surface  new  vesicles  form  which  burst ;

by  scratching  one  place  itching  ceases,  but  appears  in

another.
1  I  Whole  body  covered  with  pustules,  spots,  stripes  and

pimples ;  severe  itching.
Itching  or  burning  in  ulcer;  gnawing,  jerking,  shooting

or  tearing pains ; smarting in  ulcer ; pus  excessive,

acrid,  ichorous,  and  fetid  or  scanty.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  3  months ;  lichen.
Girl,  get.  3  ;  affection  of  finger.
Boy,  set.  12,  slender  build,  light  complexion,  scrofulous ;

morbus  coxarius.
Woman,  set.  23^  moderately  strong  constitution,  confined

6  months  ago,  labor  very  severe  and  instrumental,  since

then  suffering;  enuresis.
Man,  set.  25 ;  laceration  of  cornea.
Mrs.  T.,  set.  25,  suffering  eight  years ;  tinea  capitis  and

inflammation  of  eyelids.
Mr.  B., set.  25,  sanguine temperament, single, general

health  good ;  nocturnal  emissions.
Woman,  set.  30,  rheumatic;  prosopalgia.
Mrs.  A.,  set.  30,  never  pregnant;  crural  neuralgia.
Man,  set.  32,  of  Irish  parentage ;  mental  disturbance.
Mrs.  B.,  set.  32 ;  steatoma  of  eyelid.
Woman,  set.  32 ;  tumor  of  gums.
Woman,  set.  36,  suffering  since  last  pregnancy,  seven  years

ago  ;  eruption  on  arms.
Man,  set.  44,  formerly  had  frequent  attacks  of  conjunc-
tivitis; styes.
Man,  set.  50,  robust  constitution ;  atrophy  of  testicle.
Man,  set.  54,  hotel-keeper,  mild,  amiable,  blonde,  sanguine

sympathetic  temperament,  years ago supposed  to  be

dying  of  consumption  ;  cough.
Woman,  set.  60;  convulsions.
Girl,  fair  hair,  delicate-looking;  constipation.
Young  woman,  tall  and  slender,  dark  complexion,  mild

and  gentle  disposition,  suffering  eight  months ;  hordeo-
lum.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Camphor.
It  antidotes  :  Mercur.,  Thuja.
Compatible : Colocyn.,  Caustic.
Incompatible :  Ban.  bulb.
Compare:  Coccul,  Coffea.


29  STICTA  PULMONARIA.

STICTA  PULMONARIA.

Lungwort  Lichen.  Lichens.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  lichen  grown  on  the  sugar  maple.

Introduced  by  S.  P.  Burdick,  proved  by  liim,  N.  Am.  J.  of  Horn.,  vol.  12,  p.  202 ;
Lutes,  Hale's  N.  E.,  p.  992 ;  observations  by  Lilienthal,  Am.  Jour,  of  Horn.  Mat.
Med.,  vol.  2,  p.  234,

Clinical  Authorities. — Talkativeness,  Carr,  M.  I.,  1875,  p.  245;  Catarrh  of
head  and  chest,  Burdick,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  203;  Headache,  Burdick,  N.  A.  J.
H.,  vol.  12,  p.  207 ;  Nascd  catarrh,  Sweating  of  hands,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  183 ;
Chronic  nascd  ccUarrh,  Smith,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  37 ;  Coryza,  Burdick,  N.  A.  J.
H.,  vol.  12,  p.  205;  Pain  in  stomach,  Carr,  M.  I.,  1875,  p.  245;  Influenza,  Martin,
A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  234;  Boyce,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  117;  Hay  fever,  Dart,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  532 ;  Lewis,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  168 ;  Affection  of  chest,
Scheurer,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  596 ;  Rheumatic  pain  in  chest,  Chase  (see  Hale's
Therap.) ;  Cough,  Whooping  cough,  Blake,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  406  ;  Cough,  Mil-
ler, Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  403;  Conant,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  229;  Cough  in  consumption,
Blake,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  375 ;  Cough  cfter  measles,  Burdick,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,
p.  210;  Affection  of  heart,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  208;  Rheumatic  bursitis,  Has-
brouck,  Horn.  Times,  vol.  3,  p.  94;  Price,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  9,  p.  163;  Bursitis,  Price,
A.  H.Z.,  vol.  102,  p.  119,  fromHom.  Times,  vol.  8,  p.  249;  Hasbrouck,  M.  L,
vol.  6,  p.  564 ;  Pott's  disease,  Moore,  M.  I.,  vol.  6,  p.  344 ;  Chorea  and  sleeplessness,
Burdick,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  207  ;  Rheumatism,  Corliss,  C.  M.  A,,  vol.  2,  p.  459  ;
Price,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  9,  p.  162 ;  Burdick,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  205.

^  Mind. General  confusion  of  ideas,  inability  to  concentrate

them.
1  I  Great  desire  to  talk  about  anything  and  everything,  does

not  care  whether  any  one  listens  or  not,  she  must  talk ;

feels  as  if  she  cannot  keep  her  tongue  still.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  sensation  in  head,  with  sharp  darting

pains  through  vertex,  side  of  face  and  lower  jaw.
Darting  in  temporal  region.

Dull  heavy  pressure  in  forehead  and  root  of  nose,  increas-
ing during  day.
■  Catarrhal  headache  before  nasal  discharge  sets  in.
I  I  Sick-headache;  must  lie  down,  <  from  light  and  noise;

nausea  and  vomiting,  nearly  to  faintness.
I  I  Headache,  with  severe  pain  in  eyes,  felt  very  sore  on

closing  lids  or  turning  eyeball.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  l  Burning  in  eyelids,  with  soreness  of

ball  on  closing  lids  or  turning  eyes.
I  I  Profuse  mild  discharge ;  catarrhal  conjunctivitis.


STICTA  PULMONARIA.  30

^  Smell  and  Nose.  1 1  Constant  need  to  blow  nose,  but  no  dis-
charge results  on  account  of  dryness.

lExeessive  and  painful  dryness  of  mucous  membrane;
secretions  dry  rapidly,  forming  scabs  difficult  to  dis-
lodge. ^Influenza.

llNoseis  stuffed  up,  nasal  secretion  drying  up  so  rapidly
that  it  cannot  be  discharged.

I  I  Almost  incessant  sneezing,  with  a  feeling  of  fulness  in
r.  side  of  forehead,  extending  to  root  of  nose,  tingling  in
r.  side  of  nose. ^Coryza.

I  I  Desire  to  put  finger  in  nose  to  clear  out  gluish  secretion.

•  Acute  coryza  with  fever.

•  Chronic  catarrh  of  head.

I  Influenza :  excessive  and  painful  dryness  of  mucous  mem-
brane; secretions  rapidly  dried  and  formed  scabby  con-
cretions, requiring  great  effort  to  discharge  them ;  soft
palate  felt  like  dried  leather,  making  deglutition  pain-
ful ;  irritation  in  chest,  more  in  evening  and  night.

I  1  Violent  coryza,  stuffed  feeling  at  root  of  nose ;  feels  well
in  morning,  much  <  in  afternoon,  >  in  open  air.
^Influenza.

I  1  Catarrh  of  head  for  four  years;  sneezing  mornings  with
green  discharge;  frontal  headache  and  epistaxis.

I  I  Obstruction  of  nose,  blows  to  no  purpose ;  interfered
with  breathing  and  changed  his  voice;  <  at  night,  de-
priving him  of  sleep  ;  constant  perspiration  of  hands  so
severe  as  to  interfere  with  comfort;  could  not  wear  a
pair  of  kid  gloves  a  second  tim«.

I  I  Chronic  catarrh  of  fifteen  years'  standing;  constantly
blowing  his  nose,  without  secretion ;  dry  scales  frequently
formed  upon  mucous  surface,  which  not  only  added
greatly  to  his  misery,  but  also  prevented  his  smoking
with  any  degree  of  comfort  on  account  of  obstruction  of
breathing.

I  I  Constant  desire  to  blow  nose  without  discharge. ^Ter-
tiary syphilis.
^  Upper  Face. Darting  j)ains  in  side  of  face.
'  Lower  Face. Darting  pains  in  lower  jaw.
^*  Throat, i  Excessive  dryness  of  soft  palate,  feels  like  dried
leather,  causing  painful  deglutition.

■  Dropping  of  mucus  from  posterior  nares,  throat  feels  and
looks  raw.

I  I  Soreness  of  throat;  coryza  from  slightest  cold;  subject

to  attacks  for  last  ten  to  fifteen  years.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  i  Severe  pain  from  sternum

to  spinal  column,  and  a  feeling  of  rumbling,  turning  in

stomach,  as  if  full  of  yeast.

^®  Hypochondria. Dull  pain  in  r.hypochondrium. ^Catarrh.


^^  ■  STICTA  PULMONARIA.

Full  feeling  in  1.  hypochondrium.
Abdomen. Rumbling  as  if  full  of  yeast,  with  severe  pain
irom  sternum  to  spine.
Z  Stool  and  Rectum, i  i  Diarrhoea  mucosa,  and  loose  cough
Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. iTicklino
in  larynx  and  bronchi  causing  cough.
Tickhng  in  r.  side  of  trachea  below  larynx.
■  Clergyman's  sore  throat,  characterized  by  great  dryness

o^t  mucous  membranes.
I  I  For  last  twelve  years,  annual  attack  of  hay  catarrh  ■
slight  Itching  and  tingling  in  anterior  nares,  followed
immediately  b}^  paroxysms  of  sneezing,  frequently  re-
peated for  first  forty-eight  hours ;  mucous  membrane  of
nose  reddened  and  swollen,  highly  hyperc^mic; dull
headache;  stuffed  up  feeling  in  frontal  sinuses;  con-
junc  iva  reddened,  swollen,  dry;  pulse  accelerated,  tem-
perature above  normal;  great  thirst;  during  day  pro-
fuse, thin,_  excoriating  discharge  from nose;  burning
lachrymation  ;  hacking  cough,  preceded  by  tickling  and
burning  in  larynx;  at  night  discharges  almost  cease,
air  passages  become  dry,  paroxysms  of  sneezing  more
irequent,  explosions  seem  to  number  more  at  eaoh'parox-
vsm,  until  sneezing  and  coughing  are  almost  incessant;
very  little  sleep  until  toward  morning;  when  hyner-
£emia  gradually  subsides,  air  passages  become  moist,
and  at  sunrise  there  is  again  a  profuse  discharge  from
eyes  and  nose,  M^hich  is  hot  and  excoriating,  causing
rawness  and  soreness  of  cheeks,  borders  of  nose  and
upper  hp;  throat  and  mouth  burn  as  if  scalded,  sneez-
ing and  coughing  continue,  and  considerable  thin,  glairy
expectoration  is  coughed  up  during  day;  at  night  dry
stage  again  comes  on,  breathing  is  more  laboi^ed  and
diflicult,  wheezing,  whistling,  sibilant  sounds  in  chest
with  rhonchus  sufficiently  to  be  heard  across  a  large
room; obliged  to  breathe  with  mouth open; drinks
often  but_  not  m  large  quantities;  becomes  weak  and
irritable,  is  worn  out  with  sneezing  and  coughing  and
for  want  of  sleep ;  has  a  horror  of  night,  for  then  he  suf-
fers most, may  catarrh.
I  I  Severe  catarrh  of  head,  obliging  him  to  keep  his  room
lor  a  week  at  a  time;  discharge  of  quantities  of  bloody
pus  from  nose  and  throat;  distressing  cough  and  op-
pression of  lungs,  causing  sensation  of  a  hard  mass  col-
ectedm  them;  cough  at  first  dry  and  hacking,  from
tickling  m  larynx,  which  finally  extended  to  lungs-  dur-
ing day  comparatively  free  from  cough,  but  returned
every  evening  about  6  o'clock,  continued  entire  night
a  most  incessant;  could  not  sleep  or  lie  down; com-
pletely worn  out.


STICTA  PULMONARIA.  32

^^  Cough.  I  Cough:  dry,  <  evening  and  night,  can  neither
sleep  nor  lie  down ;  dry,  noisy ;  severe,  dry,  racking,
caused  by  tickling  in  r.  side  of  trachea,  below  larynx;
splitting  frontal  headache ;  loose  morning,  less  free
during  day;  pain  1.  side,  below  scapula;  tickling  in
larynx  and  bronchi;  incessant,  wearing  or  racking,
in  consumptives ;  croupy ;  incessant,  at  night,  compar-
atively free  during  day;  hard,  dr}^,  barking;  dry  and
noisy,  spasmodic  stage  of  whooping  cough ;  causing
splitting  headache.

I  1  During  or  closely  following  influenza,  incessant,  short,
dry,  hacking  cough ;  sputa  scanty,  w^hitish  or  frothy,
or  entirel}^  absent ;  dull  aching  or  heaviness  in  upper
chest ;  frontal  headache,  <  from  coughing.

I  I  Cough,  <  night  and  morning;  diarrhoea,  pain  before
each  passage,  <  in  morning ;  emaciation ;  restless  sleep
on  account  of  cough. ^After  measles.

I  I  After  taking  a  severe  cold,  hard,  racking  cough,  <  at
every  inspiration ;  considerable  oppression  of  chest.

I  Cough  at  first  dry  and  hacking,  from  tickling  in  larynx,
which  finally  extends  to  lungs.

I  I  Barking  cough,  like  whooping cough,  after  catching-
cold.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest  and  feeling
of  a  hard  mass  there ;  hard,  racking  cough,  excited  by
inspiration.

1  I  Sudden  pain  reaching  through  chest  from  sternum
to  spinal  column ;  constant,  <  on  movement ;  arms
powerless  from  extreme  pain,  if  an  attempt  w^as  made
to  move  them  ;  difiicult  breathing  and  speaking.

I  I A  lady  contracted  a  bad  cold,  characterized  by  a
pulsation  from  r.  side  of  sternum  down  to  abdomen.

i  1  Every  cold,  damp  spell  brings  on  a  cough,  with
expectoration  of  dark  blood  ;  loose  cough  in  morning,
expectoration  less  free  during  day;  pain  in  1.  side,
below  scapula  ;  foul  taste  in  mouth  ;  tickling  in  larynx
and  bronchi;  constipation;  menses  regular;  nervous
headache  in  temples;  haemoptysis  three  years  ago.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Dull,  oppressive  pain  in
cardiac  region.

I  1  Attacks  of  great  anxiety  about  heart;  very  nervous;
has  had  much  mental  trouble;  awakes  at  night  with  a
strange  sensation  about  heart,  and  for  a  few  moments
after  feels  as  if  she  were  floating  in  air.
^^  Upper  Limbs,  i  i  Rheumatism  in  r.  shoulder  joint,  deltoid
and  triceps,  extending  at  times  to  forearm  ;  commencing
at  night;  arm  nearly  helpless,  could  not  put  on  coat;
during  day  lameness  nearly  disappears;  no  heat  or
swelling.


33  STICTA  PULMONARIA,

I  I  Rheumatism  of  wrist  joints  of  three  months'  duration ;

wrists  and  hands  swollen,  little  redness,  very  painful  on

moving.
^^  Lower  Limbs. '  l  General  confusion  of  ideas ;  legs  felt  as  if

floating  in  air;  she  felt  light  and  airy,  staggering  gait.
I  I  Rheumatism,  larger  joints  principally  affected; dull,

heavy  pains; no  appetite; steak  tastes  like  sand,  or

has  no  taste  at  all;  restless  at  night,  little  or  no  sleep;

weak,  debilitated,  general feeling  of  malaise ; much

pain  in  head,  catarrhal.
I  I  Rheumatism  in  r.  ankle  joint,  swollen  and  very  painful ;

could  not  get  about  without  help  of  cane.
I  I  Severe  rheumatic  inflammation  of  knee  in  a  boy  set.  8 ;

pain,  soreness  to  touch,  redness,  followed  by  an  effusion,

patella  being  lifted  up,  with  elastic  swelling  underneath

and  around.
!  I  Two  years  ago  fell  upon  knee,  which  has  since  been

painful  and  sensitive;  several  months  after  fall  knee

began  slowly  to  swell  until  there  was  a  large  collection

of  fluid  in  patellar  bursa ;  swelling  about  an  inch  and

a  half  in  diameter,  and  also  projects  forward  about  so

much  ;  distinct  fluctuation. ^Bursitis.
• i  I  Large  swelling  over  r.  patella;  knee  painful,  especially

in  joint,  which  is  very  stiff,  particularly  after  having

sat  a  few  minutes ;  must  stretch  leg,  or  get  up  and  move

about  for  relief; had  applied  some  liniments,  which

were  followed  by  aggravation. ^Bursitis.
llBursitis  of  knee  joint,  simple  or  diffused.
^'  Limbs  in  General. ■  Darting  pains  in  arms,  fingers,  joints,

thighs  and  toes.
■  Swelling  and  stiffness  of  hands  and  feet.

subsequent  synovitis  with  exudation  of  serum. ^In-

flammator}^  rheumatism.
I  1  Rheumatism affecting knee, ankle, toes, wrists and

fingers; on  second day  large collection  of  water in

knee  joint.
I  I  Sharp,  darting,  lancinating  pain,  first  in  knee  joints,

then  in  elbow  and  shoulder ; finger-joints  were  next

involved,  gradually  extended  to  every  joint  in  body ;

intense pain  in  neck  and  head ;  joints  swollen and

stiff;  cannot  sleep  for  pain,  can  scarcely  walk ;  of  six

months'  duration. ^Rheumatism.
^*  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down  : limbs  feel  as  if

floating  in  air.
Motion  :  pain  in  chest  <;  of  wrists,  rheumatism  <.
Must  get  up  and  move  about  for  relief  from  pain  in  knee.
Turning  eyeballs  :  eyes  feel  sore.

VOL.  X. — 3.


STICTA  PULMONARIA.  34

Attempt  to  move  arms :  they  are  powerless  from  excessive
pain.
^^  Nerves. Legs  as  if  floating  in  air ;  she  felt  light  and  airy,
without  any  sensation  of  resting  on  bed.

■  General  feeling  of  dulness  and  malaise,  as  when  a  catarrh
is  coming  on.

■Hysteria:  after  loss  of  blood;  strange  sensation  about
heart;  I  hysterical  chorea;  migraine;  she  has  to  lie
down ;  light  and  noise  aggravate ;  nausea  and  vomiting
with  faintness.

I  I  After  severe  hemorrhage  from  bowel  controlled  by
Hamam. :  could  not  sleep  for  over  a  week ;  as  soon  as
night  comes  on  feet  and  legs  dance  and  jump  around  in
spite  of  her,  so  that  she  is  compelled  to  hold,  or  have
them  held  to  floor ;  on  lying  down,  limbs  feel  as  if  float-
ing in  air;  as  light  as  feathers.  ^Hysterical  chorea.
"Sleep.  I  Sleeplessness:  from  nervousness;  from  cough;  of
children ;  after  surgical  operations,  e.  g.,  setting  fractured
leg.
^^  Time.  During  day :  pressure  in  forehead  and  nose  <  ;
profuse  thin,  excoriating  discharge  from  nose ;  coughing
up  glairy  mucus ;  comparatively  free  from  cough ;
cough  <  ;  pain  before  each  passage  <  ;  rheumatism  of
arms  <.

Afternoon:  influenza  <.

Evening:  irritation  in  chest  <;  cough  <.

Night :  irritation  in  chest  <  ;  obstruction  of  nose  <  ;  dis-
charge almost  ceases ;  dry  stage  of  catarrh  ;  incessant
cough;  awakes  with  strange  sensation  about  heart;  rheu-
matism of  shoulder  commences;  restless;  feet  and  legs
dance  and  jump  around.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Open  air:  influenza  >.
^'  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Every  evening  about  6  o'clock :
cough  returned.

Second  day  after  rheumatism :  large  collection  of  water  in
knee  joint.

Three  months :  rheumatism  of  wrist  joints.

Six  months :  rheumatism.

Two  years  ago  :  fell  upon  knee,  swelling  and  painfulness.

For  twelve  years:  annual  attack  of  hay  catarrh.

Fifteen-years'  standing:  chronic  catarrh  ;  attacks  of  coryza.
^^ Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  feeling  of  fulness  in  fore-
head ;  tingling  in  side  of  nose ;  dull  pain  in  hypochon-
drium ;  tickling  in  side  of  trachea ;  pulsation  from
side  of  sternum  down  to  abdomen ;  rheumatism  of
shoulder  joint;  rheumatism  of  ankle  joint ;  large  swel-
ling over  patella.

Left:  full  feeling  in  hypochondrium;  pain  below  scapulae;
pain  in  side.


35  STICTA  PULMONARIA.

*' Sensations.  As  if  she  cannot,  keep  her  tongue  still;  as  if
stomach  were  full  of  yeast ;  throat  and  mouth  burn  as
if  scalded;  as  of  a  hard  mass  collected  in  lungs;  as
if  floating  in  air ;  legs  as  if  floating  in  air.

Pain  :  1,  side  below  scapula ;  in  head.

Intense  pain :  in  neck  and  head.

Severe  pain :  in  eyes ;  from  sternum  to  spinal  column.

Splitting  pain :  in  forehead.

Sharp  darting  pains :  through  vertex ;  side  of  face  and
lower  jaw;  in  temporal  region;  in  side  of  face;  in  lower
jaw;  in  arms,  fingers,  joints,  thighs  and  toes;  in  knee
joints,  then  elbow  and  shoulder  and  finger  joints.

Sudden  pain :  through  chest,  from  sternum  to  spinal
column.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  r.  shoulder  joint,  deltoid  and  triceps;
of  wrist  joint.

Dull  aching :  in  upper  chest.

Dull  oppressive  pain :  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  joints.

Dull  pain :  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Burning:  in  eyelids;  in  larynx;  of  mouth  and  throat.

Soreness:  of  eyeball;  of  throat;  of  cheeks;  of  nose  and
upper  lip.

Tingling :  in  anterior  nares ;  in  r.  side  of  nose.

Tickling:  in  larynx  and  bronchi;  in  r.  side  of  trachea,
below  larynx.

Dryness:  of  nose; of  soft  palate ;  of  mucous  membranes.

Dull,  heavy  pressure :  in  forehead  and  root  of  nose.

Dull  sensation  :  in  head.

Strange  sensation :  about  heart.

Pulsation:  from  r.  side  of  sternum  down  to  abdomen.

Stiff'ness :  of  hands  and  feet.

Heaviness:  in  upper  chest.

Fulness:  in  side  of  forehead  and  root  of  nose.

Full  feeling:  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Stuff'ed  feeling :  in  nose ;  in  frontal  sinuses.

Itching :  in  anterior  nares.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  knee  sore.

After  a  fall  upon  knee  :  swelling.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  aet.  4,  after  measles ;
cough.

Boy,  £et.  7,  after  catching  cold ;  cough.

Boy,  set.  7  to  8,  had  severe  attack  year  before,  followed  by
heart  disease,  was  under  treatment  four  months,  present
attack  cured  in  nine  days;  rheumatism.

Boy,  set.  8  ;  rheumatic  bursitis.

Girl,  set.  10,  nervous  sanguine  temperament,  medium  size,
skin  pale,  transparent,  freckled,  hair  auburn ;  rheuma-
tism.


STICTA  PULMONARIA.  36

Boy,  set.  12,  suffering  four  years;  catarrh  of  head.

Girl,  set.  12,  lively  ;  influenza.

Girl,  set.  19,  scrofulous,  had  haemoptysis  three  years  ago;

cough.
Young  lady,  set.  20,  married,  nervous  sanguine  tempera-
ment, slightly  built,  hair  deep  auburn,  suffering  six

months ;  rheumatism.
Woman,  set.  30,  after  catching  cold  two  or  three  weeks

ago ;  pulsation  in  chest.
Woman,  set.  38,  two  years  ago  fell  upon  knee,  since  then

suffering;  bursitis.
Negro,  set.  38,  suffering  four  weeks ;  bursitis.
Mrs.  G.,  set.  about  40,  suffering  three  months ;  rheumatism.
Mrs.  F.,  set.  40,  after  hemorrhage  from  bowels,  which  was

arrested  by  Hamam. ;  chorea.
Woman,  set.  41 ;  rheumatic  pain  in  chest.
Man,  set.  45 ;  rheumatism  of  arm.
Man,  set.  48;  rheumatism.
Lady,  set.  50,  nervous, has had much mental trouble ;

affection  of  heart.
Man,  set.  50,  suffering  six  months;  rheumatism.
Man,  set.  56 ;  soreness  of  throat.
Farmer,  set.  58 ;  hay  fever.
^^ Relations. Compare:  Drosera,  Nuxvorn.,  Eumex,  Sambucus,

in  catarrhs  and  coughs;  Ad.  7'ac.,in  rheumatism;  Asarum,

larent.,  in  nervous  phenomena.


37  STILLINGIA  SYLVATICA.

STILLINGIA  SYLVATICA.

Cockup  Hat,  Queen's  Root.  Euphorbiacese.

Grows  in  pine  barrens  from  Virginia  to  Florida.

The  male  and  female  flowers  are  distinct  upon  the  same  plant,  they  are  yellow
and  grow  in  the  form  of  a  spike ;  the  plant,  if  wounded,  emits  a  milky  juice.

Provings  by  Frost,  Nichols,  Eckles,  Cunningham,  Ingraham,  Hale's  New  Rem.,
2d  ed. ;  Preston,  Tr.  Penn.  Soc. ;  Taber,  Lype,  Ohio  Med.  and  Surg.  Eep.,  vol.  9.

Clinic Ai,  Authorities. — Laryngitis,  Hale,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  7,  p.  537 ;  Bone  pains,
Martin,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1870,  p.  78 ;  Secondary  syphilis,  McMechan,  Hale,  A.  H.
O.,  vol.  7,  p.  31 ;  Martin,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  126 ;  Scrofulosis,  Hale,  N.  E.  M.
G.,  vol.  12,  p.  445.

^  Mind. Depression  of  spirits,  gloomy  forebodings,

I  I  Deplorably downhearted; suffering extreme torture

from  bone  pains;  immense  nodes  on  head  and  legs;

looks  thin  and  miserable. ^Secondary  syphilis.
^  Sensorium. Dizziness  with  throbbing  in  head.
^  Inner  Head, i  Mercurial,  syphilitic  or  catarrhal  headaches.

*  Outer  Head, Persistent  dull  headache  in  vertex.

Dull  heavy  pain  in  r.  side  of  head.

In  frontal  region  a  feeling  as  of  a  heavy  substance  press-
ing upon  brain,  becomes  sharp  and  darting,  almost  unen-
durable.

Pains  in  head,  with  inflamed  and  watery  eyes,  and  gen-
eral soreness  of  muscles.

I  Bone  swellings  on  head  and  forehead,  on  latter  as  large
as  a  hen's  egg.

■  Mercurial  periostitis  of  skull. ^Syphilis.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. E3^es  inflamed  and  watery,  with  severe

headache  and  general  muscular  soreness,  as  if  he  had
taken  cold.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. Burning  in  1.  ear  in  evening ;  next

morning  a  vesicular  eruption.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Catarrhal  discharge  from  nose,  at  first
watery,  then  muco-purulent,  with  soreness  of  mucous
membrane,  followed  by  a  small  abscess  on  inside  of  r.
nostril.

■  Influenza.

llnflammation  and  necrosis  of  bones  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Stinging,  darting  pains  in  face,  with  frontal
headache.


STILLINGIA  SYLVATICA.  38

Pain  under  malar  bone,  extending  transversely  across
face.

■  Periostitis  of  facial  bones.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Paroxysms  of  neuralgic  toothache.
"  Taste and Tongue. Tongue coated : yellowish white ;
heavily ;  white ;  slightly,  in  morning.
Scalded  sensation  on  tongue,  with  soreness  in  region  of
larynx.  *
^^  Throat. '  l  Smarting, stinging, dryness and raw^ness of
fauces.
Constriction  of  throat.

Slight  inflammation  of  1.  tonsil,  lasting  several  days.
Burning  in  throat,  wdth  painful  deglutition.
^^  Hypochondria. ■  Torpidity  of  liver,  with  jaundice  and  great

depression  of  mind,  with  constipation.
^^  Abdomen. Colic,  periodical.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Dull  pain  in  region  of  kidneys.

Incontinence  of  urine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sharp  pains  in  penis.

I  I  Violent  smarting burning pains throughout entire

length  of  urethra;  difficult  micturition.
While  urinating  has  a  sharp  pain  in  glans  penis,  extend-
ing up  urethra.
Pains  in  urethra  so  severe  as  to  cause  perspiration.
Urethral  irritation  and  chordee.

■  Gonorrhoea;  gleet.

■  Syphilis;  primary,  secondary  and  mercurial.

^* Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Copious  muco-purulent  leucor-
rhoea,  with  rheumatic  pains.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Laryn-
gitis, especially  if  syphilitic,  w4th  hoarseness  and  dry
spasmodic  cough,  or  it  may  be  loose.

■  Hoarseness  and  chronic  laryngeal  affections  of  public

speakers.

■  Croup.

Slight  uneasiness  and  tickling  in  trachea  and  bronchi,  <
on  rising  in  morning.

■  Tickling  sensation  in  tracliea  toward evening,  which

caused  a  dry,  spasmodic  cough.

Dryness  and  soreness  in  region  of  larynx.

After  exerting  her  voice  unusually  and  catching  cold,
tickling  in  larynx,  with  loose  cough  ;  sensation  of  lame-
ness in  cartilages  of  larynx  and  trachea;  constriction
in  region  of  larynx ;  bruised  sore  feeling  in  cartilages
of  larynx.

■  Bronchial  troubles,  asthma,  wdiooping  cough,  etc.
^  Cough. ■Short  hacking  cough.

Toward  evening,  excessively  dry,  spasmodic  cough,  pro-
duced by  a  tickling  in  trachea.


39  STILLINGIA  SYLVATICA.

I  Cough  deep  and  loose.

Short  hacking  cough  with  inflammation  of  fauces.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest.

Darting  pains  in  thorax,  with  tickling  in  throat,  and  short

hacking  cough.
Sharp,  darting  pains  through  chest  and  shoulders.

■  Incipient  phthisis,  in  strumous  habits.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i '  Pulse  weak  and  irregular.
Boring  pains  about  region  of  heart,  with  irregular  pulse
and  a  feeling  of  distress.
Pulse  about  90 ;  weak  and  very  irregular,  except  at  times
during  day,  when  he  has  spells  as  if  room  were  too
warm,  and  pulse  becomes  regular,  with  general  perspi-
ration.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sharp  shooting  pains  in  both  arms,  from
middle  third  of  humerus  down  to  fingers.
Sharp  shooting  pains  in  upper  third  and  inner  side  of

forearm.
I  I  Very  large  node  upon  olecranon.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Aching  pain  in  r.  leg.
Pains  in  1.  lower  anterior  third  of  leg.
I  I  Burning  itching  of  legs.

I  I  Enlargement  of  tibia  to  such  a  degree  as  to  deprive
child  of  all  power  of  motion ;  limbs  contracted  and
swollen.

■  Ulcers  on  legs,  venereal,  chronic  and  indolent.
I  I  Periostitis  and  nodes  of  tibia.

■  Syphilitic  and  gonorrhoeal  sciatica;  left-sided  complaints.
^*  Limbs  in  General. In  evening  pains  in  r.  elbow  and  leg,

aching  and  pulsating,  with  soreness.
^  Sleep. Unusual  drowsiness  all  day,  with  general  malaise
and  headache.

Very  sleepy  after  eating.

Dull  and  sleepy.
^  Time. Morning :  after  burning  vesicular  eruption,  tongue
slightly  coated ;  slight  tickling  in  trachea  and  bronchi
<  on  rising.

During  day :  pulse  90,  except  at  times  when  room  seems
too  warm,  then  normal.

All  day:  drowsiness.

1  P.M. :  fever ;  gets  into  heavy  sleep.

Toward  evening:  tickling  sensation  in  trachea;  exces-
sively dry  spasmodic  cough.

Evening :  burning  in  1.  ear ;  pain  in  elbow  and  leg ;  fever-
ish heat.

At  night :  excessive  warmth.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth  :  itching  of  legs  >.
Exposure  to  cold  air :  legs  itch.


STILLINGIA  SYLVATICA.  40


<0


Fever. Cold  on  going  to  bed  ;  immediately  after,  broke  out

in  perspiration,  with  excessive  warmth  all  night.
Feverish  heat  in  evening.
Fever  at  1  p.m.  ;  gets  into  a  heavy  sleep.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodical :  colic.
For  six  or  eight  weeks :  itching  of  legs.
"Locality  and  Direction. Right: heavy  pain  in  side  of

head  ;  abscess  on  inside  of  nostril ;  aching  in  leg pain

in  elbow  and  leg.
Left :  burning  in  ear  ;  slight  inflammation  of  tonsil ;  pain

in  lower  anterior  third  of  leg;  syphilitic  complaints.
"  Sensations. As  of  a  heavy  substance  pressing  upon  brain  ;

tongue  as  if  scalded  ;  as  if  room  w^ere  too  warm.
Pains:  in  head;  under  malar  bone;  in  urethra;  in  lower

anterior  third  of  leg;  in  r.  elbow  and  leg.
Sharp  pain  :  in  penis;  in  glans  penis.
Sharp darting : in  frontal region  in  face ; in thorax ;

through  chest  and  shoulders.
Sharp  shooting  pains :  in  both  arms.
Violent  burning  pain  :  along  urethra.
Boring  pains  :  about  region  of  heart.
Throbbing:  in  head.
Aching  pain  :  in  r.  leg ;  in  long  bones.
Dull  pain:  in  vertex;  in  r.  side  of  head; in  region  of

kidneys.
Burning:  in  1.  ear;  in  throat.
Burning  itching:  of  logs.
Stinging :  in  face ;  of  fauces.
Smarting:  of  fauces;  along  urethra.
Soreness :  of  muscles  ;  of  mucous  membrane ;  in  region  of

larynx  ;  in  elbow  and  leg.
Rawness:  of  fauces.

Constriction :  of  throat ;  in  region  of  larynx.
Lameness :  in  cartilages  of  larynx  and  trachea.
Tickling :  in  trachea  and  bronchi.
Dryness :  of  fauces ;  in  region  of  larynx.
"Tissues. I  Secondary  syphilis; eruptions,  bone  affections;

great  depression  of  spirits ;  sciatica ;  patient  is  broken

down,  mercury  cannot  be  used,  iodide  of  potassium  is

useless,

■  Chronic  periosteal  rheumatism.

■  Distressing aching pains in long bones,  with nodes.

^Secondary  syphilis.

■  Malaise,  drowsiness,  and  feeling  of  distress.

■  Scrofulous  periostitis.

■  Enlarged  cervical  glands; moist,  brownish,  excoriating

eruption  on  scalp ;  muco-purulent  discharge  from  nose,
with  excoriations  of  upper  lip  and  alae  nasi;  dull,  pasty


41  STILLINGIA  SYLVATICA— STRAMONIUM.

complexion;  capricious  and  unnatural  appetites;  tumid
and  enlarged  abdomen ;  white,  pasty  stools,  very  fetid  ;
dull,  red,  tubercular  (or  syphilitic)  eruption  on  skin,
ulcerating,  and  discharging  a  large  quantity  of  un-
healthy pus ;  tendency  to  laryngeal  cough.  ^Scrofulosis
of  children.
*^Skin. I  I  Pustular  eruption  on  arm.

I  Ulcers,  with  unhealthy  skin.

■  Scrofulous,  venereal,  and  other  skin  diseases.

I  Chronic  eruptions  on  hands  and  fingers.

Excessive  itching  of  legs  below  knees,  continuing  six  or
eight  weeks,  but  no  eruption  ;  this  itching  occurred  onlj'-
on  exposure  of  parts  to  atmosphere  or  cold,  >  by
warmth  and  in  bed.

Elephantiasis ;  lepra.
*^  Relations. It  antidotes  :  Mercur.

Compare  :  Staphis.  in  bone  affections ;  Natrum  sulph.  in

• sycosis.


STRAMONIUM.

Jamestoivn  Weed,  Thorn  Apple.  Solonacese.

The  plant  is  found  in  vicinity  of  cultivation,  on  rank  soil,  where  refuse  is  de-
posited, in  all  parts  of  the  world.

The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  ripe  seed,  finely  powdered.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  Fr.  Hahnemann  and  Franz,
Reine  Arzneimittelehre,  vol.  3;  Berridge,  Mon.  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  298;
vol.  16,  p.  34;  N.  Am.  Jour,  of  Hom.,  N.  S.,  vol.  2,  1871,  p.  62.  Toxicological
reports  are  numerous ;  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  9,  p.  175.

Clinical  Authorities. — Melancholia,  Smith,  H.  W.,  vol.  11,  p.  27  ;  Hallucina-
tion, Fanning,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1870,  p.  769;  Delirium,  Kitchen,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  2,  p.  237  ;  Hendricks,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  109,  p.  15 ;  Gifre,  H.  W.,  vol.  12,  p.  165  ;
Mania,  Pfander,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  202;  (2  cases),  Sztaraveski,  B.J.  H.,  vol.  1,
p.  361 ;  Miiller,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  472  ;  Hartlaub,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  233  ;
Butler,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1875 ;  Photomania,  Farrington,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.
212  ;  Hydrophobia,  Hahnemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  625 ;  Morgan,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  8,  p.  439  ;  Delirium  tremens,  Ng.,  Hirzel,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  147  ;
Gerson,  Ruck,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  66;  (4  cases),  Mossa,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  90,  pp.  178-
195  ;  Mossa,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  p.  53 ;  vol.  93,  p.  133 ;  Fincke,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.
3,  p.  57;  Insanity,  Jones,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  677;  Mental  discrder,  Hartlaub,


STRAMONIUM.  42

Trinks,  Sztar,  Schellh.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  46 ;  Gerson,  Hermel,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  11 ;  Mental  disturbance,  Huber,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  101,  p.  6 ;  Mental  de-
rangement after  fright,  Mossa,  Horn.  Eec,  vol.  3,  p.  246 ;  Mental  disturbance,  Ber-
ridge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  166  ;  Morgan,  H.  W.,  vol.  12,  p.  70  ;  Vertigo,  Schron,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  23;  Schron,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  303  ;  Guernsey,  A.  J.H.
M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  207  ;  Headache,  Schron,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  304;  Congestive  head-
ache, Leibold,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  247  ;  Neuralgic  headache,  Price,  Med.  Inv.,
vol.  2,  p.  194;  Meningitis,  Stapf,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  129;  Bcenning-
hausen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  46,  p.  133;  Alvarez,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  35;  Affection  of
brain,  Gueyrard,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  56;  Otalgia,  Eeil,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
5,  p.  161;  FiillgrafF,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  333;  Prosopalgia  (3  cases),  Schron,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  434 ;  Schron,  Kiisemann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  193 ;
Facial  erysipelas,  Wes?elh(,eft,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  210;  Aphagia,  Hull,  Eaue's
Eec,  1870,  p.  155;  Loss  of  speech,  Parsenow,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  18;  Rigors
during  urination,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  103 ;  Ovarian  tumor.  Miller,
Med.  Inv.,  Nov.,  1875,  p.  416;  Dysmenorrhoea,  Guernsey,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  147 ;
Martin,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  316  ;  Watery  menses,  Williamson,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1873 ;
Puerperal  convulsions,  Baer,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1872,  p.  226 ;  Graham,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  6,
p.  255;  Asthma  (7  cases  cured  by  smoking  Stram),  Frank,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.
257  ;  Whooping  cough,  A.  E.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  730 ;  Pneumonia  (2  cases),
Schmidt,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  243 ;  Affection  of  heart,  Hilberger,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  862;  Morbus  coxarius,  H.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  404  ;  Traumatic  neuritis,  Gilchrist,
Med.  Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  269  ;  Spasms,  Parsenow,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  594 ;  Eummel,
Eiickert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  609  ;  Trinks,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  874 ;  Trinks,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  318  ;  Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  191 ;  Hysterical  convulsions,
H.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  408 ;  Chorea,  Miiller,  Kirschlyer,  Bethm.,  Gross,  jEgidi,  Bicking,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  514;  Muller,  B.  J.  H.,  vol".  23,  p.  374;  Payne,  H.  M.,
vol.  6,  p.  354;  White,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  124;  Epilepsy,  Lobelh.,  Kleinert,  Euck.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  593;  Periodical  fever,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  112,  p.  42;  Ague,
Fahnestock,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  9,  p.  364;  Typhoid  fever,  Low,  Bojanus,  Eau,  Knorre,
Eiickert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  787 ;  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  197  ;  Neidhard,
A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  208 ;  Lippe,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  196 ;  Lee,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  9,  p.  42;  Measles,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  101  ;  Malignant  scarlatina,
Bell.,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  7,  p.  1.

^  Mind. iDulness  of  senses;  before  a  rash.

I  Coma,  spasms;  later  snoring,  unconscious,  jaw  hangs,
hands  and  feet  twitch,  eyes  roll;  pupils  dilated;  auto-
matic grasping  of  hands  toward  nose,  ears,  etc.;  difficult
to  swallow  liquids.

Continual  motions  with  hands  and  arms  as  if  spinning  or
weaving;  frequent  lifting  up  head,  red  face,  staring
eyes,  with  large  immovable  pupils,  constant  murmur-
ing, frequent  sighing,  total  stupefaction  of  senses.

iSemi-conscious;  dilatation  of  pupils  marked.

Consciousness  totally  lost;  did  not  answer  questions;
stared  around  stupidly;  pupils  much  dilated,  insensible
to  light;  signs  of  vertigo,  aversion  to  fluids.

Face red;  eyes uneasy, shining; pupils much dilated,


43  STRAMONIUM.

staring,  immovable;  drunken  look;  unconscious;  dis-
connected talk;  jumped  up;  restless;  started;  grasped
about  in  air,  catching  at  imaginary'  things,  no  fever;
slow,  tardy  pulse;  chills;  perspired,  s-kin  warm;  drink
swallowed  hastily.

■  Unconscious;  snoring;  lower  jaw  hanging  down;  twitches

of  hands  and  feet;  rolling  eyes;  dilated,  immovable
pupils;  automatic  motions;  grasping  about  with  hands;
skin  cool;  pulse  somewhat  frequent,  single  beats  omit;
greatest  difficulty  to  swallow  liquids.

Sat  up  in  bed  unconscious,  continually  babbling,  occa-
sionally starting  up  suddenly,  his  hands  apparently
directed  to  imaginary  things  in  air;  pulse  very  slow,
no  fever,  intense  thirst  and  violent  sweat  from  incessant
motion.

He  was  mute,  did  not  move;  pulseless;  limbs  lame  for
six  or  seven  hours;  lying  without  consciousness;  after
that  tossed  about  in  bed  with  great  rage,  made  innu-
merable signs  to  those  around  him,  which  were  not
understood,  and  then  became  quiet  again.

■  Unconscious  and  stupid:  during  chill;  <  in  hot  stage,

sometimes  during  sweat;  in  typhus.
I  Stupor: weakened intellect; torpor and fits; extreme
excitement  of  sexual parts,  constipation; resembling
highest  state  of  intoxication  from  spirituous  liquors.

■  Loss  of  memory.

■  Paroxysms  of  loss  of  memory,  during  which  he  recog-

nizes neither  persons  nor  objects;  questions  remain  un-
answered.

■  Memory  confused;  great  restlessness ;  red  face  and  star-

ing eyes;  sadness,  weeping,  thoughts  of  dying;  stam-
mering, gets  words  out  with  great  difficulty;  cold  feet,
restless  sleep,  with  visions;  fear  of  wild  animals  and
black  dogs.

■  Memory  weak;  loses  thoughts  before  she  can  give  them

utterance; weeps  about  her  weak  mind. ^After  sun-
stroke.
Loss  of  recollection  appears  connected  with  an  inward
uneasiness  and  to  proceed  from  it.

■  Does  not  recognize  his  friends  and  family,  calling  by-

standers as  if  absent, ^Typhus.
After  awaking  he  recognizes  nothing  about  him.
Recognizes  no  one,  did  not  take  any  notice  of  loudest

calling,  moved  her  head  constantly  from  one  side  to

other;  forehead  covered  with  perspiration.
Does  not  recognize  the  one  to  whom  he  is  speaking.
Does  not  seem  to  notice  objects  around  him.
Calls  things  by  wrong  names,  his  boots  logs  of  "wood;  his

bedroom  the  stable,  and  this  without  knowing  it.


STRAMONIUM.  44

No  correct  estimation  of  distance,  or  size  of  objects;  reach-
ing hands  to  catch  hold  of  objects  across  room,  and
running  against  persons  and  things,  which  they  ap-
peared to  view  as  distant.

I  1  During  fever  she  cannot  speak  or  reply  to  any  ques-
tion; shows  with  hands  where  pain  is  seated,  and  when
writing  down  has  to  think  what  letters  to  use.

I  I  Uses  wrong  words  in  talking.

Desires  to  relate  a  story,  but  cannot  connect  a  sentence;
cannot  find  right  words,  and  becomes  displeased  at
this  interruption.

Inability  to  give  a  proper  answer,  rapid  change  of  ideas,
so  that  he  seldom  completed  a  sentence,  but,  e.  g.,  united
the  half  sentence  of  answer  to  a  question  addressed  to  a
person  not  present.

I  I  Conversing  in  different  languages. ^Typhus.

I  I  Talking  in  Jewish  jargon. /^Mania.

I  I  Tries  to  find  right  expression.

I  Dull,  difficult  thinking;  cannot  think  clearly  about  any-
thing; loses  thoughts  before  she  can  give  them  utterance.

I  After  getting  out  of  bed,  vertigo  and  loss  of  thought;
everything  hovers  dimly  and  distantly  before  his
memory,  there  seems  to  be  a  veil  before  his  eyes.

Walks  about  room,  absorbed  in  himself,  with  fixed,  spark-
ling eyes,  surrounded  by  blue  circles,  takes  no  notice  of
surrounding  objects,  is  solely  occupied  with  objects  of
his  fancy.

Sits  silent,  with  her  eyes  fixed  on  ground,  as  if  absorbed
in  contemplation,  while  her  hands  are  occupied  in
picking  at  her  clothes.

Talks  disconnected  words  in  a  high  screaming  voice.

Mind  wandering,  and  unusual  quick  motions  with  eyes
and  hands.

■  Confusion  of  mind.

I  I  Wild  thoughts  when  she  is  awake;  frightful  sensations,
without  perspiration.

Mental  derangement;  violent  headache,  followed  by  ex-
cessive delirium,  loss  of  sight  and  hearing,  striking
about  with  hands  and  feet,  excessive  dilatation  of
pupils,  slow  pulse.

Mental  derangement,  with  spasmodic  symptoms,  staring
look,  attempts  to  escape  with  shrieks,  frightful  visions,
fever  heat,  redness  of  face,  moist  skin.

Aberration  of  mind;  one  carries  home  all  sorts  of  wood,
in  order  to  manufacture  brandy;  another  placed  two
axes  across  each  other  in  order  to  split  wood  in  this
way;  a  third  burrowed  in  ground  like  a  pig  with  his
mouth ; a  fourth  alleged  he  was  a  wheelwright  and


45  STRAMONIUM.

began  to  bore  holes;  a  fifth  ran  into  forge  to  catch  fish,
which  he  saw  swimming  there;  a  lacemaker  threw
about  her  bobbins  incessantly,  and  threw  everything
into  confusion;  another  girl  ran  about  the  room  and
cried  out  that  all  evil  spirits  were  pursuing  her.

Stares  stupidly;  looks  vacantly  around.

I  I  She  feels  dull;  stupid  in  head,  almost  insensible  and
indifferent  to  everything  and  everybody.

Stupid,  unable  to  articulate,  with  a  certain  peculiar  wild-
ness  of  countenance  and  flushed  face,  lying  in  bed.

I  Physiognomy  expresses  stupidity  and  perturbation;  in-
sensibility to  mental  impressions,  with  fixed,  weeping
eyes  and  enlarged  pupils,  hardly  responding  to  irrita-
tion.

■  Stupid,  after  delirium.

He  is  like  one  enchanted  and  beside  himself.

I  Ecstatic.

I  1  Alternations  between  exalted  states  and  settled  mel-
ancholy.

I  I  After  spasms  she  fell  into  a  trance,  says  she  is  under
influence  of  spirits,  and  has  had  conversation  with  spirits,
communications  from  God;  delivers  emphatic  sermons,
prophecies.

i  I  Very  restless  in  evening  in  bed  ;  converses  with  spirits
who  approach  his  bed,  lays  hold  of  a  stick  and  strikes
about  him,  to  drive  fiend  who  is  after  him  from  room  ;
red  face,  glistening  eyes,  great  thirst,  distended  abdomen
and  great  sexual  excitement.

The  things  and  persons  around  him  appear  to  be  changed ;
although  he  knows  that  his  friends  are  there  he  forgets
it  immediately  afterward;  imagines  he  is  quite  alone
in  a  wilderness,  abandoned;  is  afraid;  animals  jump
suddenly  out  of  ground  sideways,  so  that  he  moved
quickly  to  other  side,  where,  however,  others  start  up
pursuing  him,  so  that  he  runs  forward.

I  I  Dreaming  with  open  ej^es. (^Typhus.

■  Hallucinations  which  terrify  patient ;  sees  ghosts,  hears

voices  back  of  his  ear ;  sees  strangers.

He  thinks  that  he  is  dying  and  that  he  will  not  live  over
night,  rejoices  and  gives  directions  about  his  funeral.

I  I  Believes  to  be  in  his  grave;  shrives,  prays,  asks  to  be
killed ;  accuses  his  wife  of  infidelity ;  scolds,  strikes  at
everybody  who  wishes  to  restrain  him  ;  thinks  they  are
dogs  and  barks  at  them  to  m.ake  himself  understood.

■  Strange,  absurd  ideas ;  thinks  herself  tall,  double  or  lying

crosswise ;  one-half  of  body  cut  off;  bed  is  full  of  creases;
that  he  was  killed,  roasted  and  being  eaten.
I  I  Imagines  objects  smaller  than  they  really  are.


STRAMONIUM.  46

I  Imagines  he  is  alone,  and  is  frightened.

Started  with  great  force  and  alarm,  crying  out  that  she  is
going  to  fall,  clings  to  her  mother  with  as  much  despera-
tion as  if  she  were  going  to  be  thrown  from  a  precipice.

Imagines  that  he  is  very  large  and  tall,  but  surrounding
objects  small.

Thinks  she  is  not  fitted  for  her  position.

Imagines  she  sees  a  number  of  strange  people,  and  tries
to  seize  them,  though  there  are  none  present.

'  I  An  old  lady  had  a  vision  every  night  since  six  weeks,
in  which  many  persons,  all  strangers,  came  into  her
room  and  to  her  bedside,  causing  her  such  fear  that  she
had  to  leave  bed.

I  I  Saw  people  coming  out  of  all  corners.

"  There,"  he  replied,  "  a  long  train  of  bedbugs,  and  after
them  a  procession  of  beetles,  and  here  come  crawling
over  me  a  host  of  cockroaches ;"  sank  back  in  alarm,  then
suddenly  said :  "  I  believe  I  know  they  are  not  really
bugs,  but,  except  once  in  a  while,  they  seem  real  to  me."

I  I  Woke  suddenl}^  in  night  and  said  there  were  snakes
under  and  about  her;  looked  wild,  screamed  and  pointed
to  them.

After  waking,  all  things  appeared  to  him  as  if  they  were
new,  even  his  friends,  as  if  he  had  never  seen  them.

I  I  Hears  dancing,  music,  sees  men  and  hears  them  talk  in

foreign  tongues.

I I  Hallucinations,  as  if  near  r.  mastoid  process  a  voice  were
scolding  her,  <  at  night,  sometimes  voice  seemed  to  be
under  bed.

I  I  Hallucinations  bring  him  into  a  rage.

Fears :  he  will  lose  his  senses ;  his  lips  will  grow  together ;

to  suffocate;  falling;  everything  is  falling  on  her.
■  Frightful fancies  take hold  of  his  mind,  his  features

express  fright  and  terror.

I  Sees  more  horrifying  images  at  his  side  than  in  front  of

him,  and  they  all  occasion  terror.

I I  Hallucinations  cause  fear  and  fright.

Exclaims  about  cats,  dogs  and  rabbits  approaching  her
from  above,  from  side  and  middle  of  room.

I  I  Frightful  figures,  rats,  mice ;  saw  animals  moving,  cats,
dogs,  etc.

He  converses  with  absent  individuals  as  if  they  were  pres-
ent, and  addresses  inanimate  objects,  as  chessmen,  by
names  of  such  persons,  but  observes  none  of  those  stand-
ing about  him.

Patient  had  a  constant  vision  of  an  executioner  standing
before  him,  in  spite  of  which  he  was  lively,  talkative,
laughed  and  joked  about  liis  hallucination,  yet  it  seemed
to  him  a  reality.


47  STRAMONIUM.

Boy  seemed  to  see  black  objects,  spoke  of  black  people  and
black  clouds,  and  grasped  at  air.

I  Awakens  with  a  shrinking  look,  as  if  afraid  of  first  thing

she  sees. ^Metritis.

I I  Delirium:  bland;  murmuring;  violent;  foolish;  joy-
ful ;  loquacious ;  incoherent ;  chattering ;  with  open
eyes;  vivid;  merry;  with  spasmodic  laughter ;  furious;
raving;  wild,  attempts  to  stab  and  bite;  with  queerest
notions ;  with  sexual  excitement ;  fear,  as  if  a  dog  were
attacking  him;  conscious  of  her  condition;  calls  for
papa  and  mamma,  who  are  present  and  trying  to  con-
sole child;  with  open  eyes;  noisy,  with  hallucinations;
shy,  hides  himself;  tries  to  escape;  full  of  fear;  talks
incessantly,  absurdly,  laughs,  claps  her  hands  over  head,
wide-open  eyes.

■Rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  furious  loquacious  delirium.

■  Loquacious  delirium;  disposed  to  talk  continually,  with
desire  to  escape  out  of  bed ;  exposes  genital  organs.

Delirious  and  unintelligible,  patient  was  busy  with  a  thou-
sand not  unpleasant  fantasies,  made  known  his  wants
by  gestures,  without  speaking,  ran  about  for  several  days
busy  with  his  fantasies  with  a  joyful  mood.

Delirium  of  a  live]}^  active,  vivid  character,  alternating
in  short  periods  with  apparent  horrified  fright,  seeming
to  dread  approach  of  some  imaginary  monster,  and  giv-
ing utterance  to  most  piteous  appeals  for  help.

I  I  She  rapidly  became  furiously  delirious,  struck  at,  pushed
or  attempted  to  bite  every  person  who  came  near,  or  any
object  that  was  offered  to  her.

1  I  Delirium  by  day  and  night,  without  rest  or  sleep;  sang
or  whistled  or  entertained  himself  in  different  languages
with  departing  people,  or  jumped  wildly  from  bed  to
run  away  or  to  attend  to  business.  ^Vesicular  erysip-
elas.

I  I  After  a  dreadful  shock,  occasioned  by  the  death  of  his
brother,  who  fell  dead  in  his  arms,  talked  incoherently,
struck  at  all  around  him  with  his  feet  and  hands,  raved
and  spat  in  face  of  his  attendants,  tore  his  clothes,  spoke
at  one  time  in  Hungarian,  and  then  in  Wallachian  lan-
guage; sang  Latin  paternosters,  declared  that  he  was
God,  and  then  that  he  was  the  devil ;  talks  incessantly
unintelligible  nonsense ;  sits  down  and  rises  again ;
kneels  and  then  pushes  against  wall,  alternately  stretch-
ing out  his  hands  to  full  extent,  and  laying  his  finger
in  his  mouth ;  tore  his  clothes  and  broke  a  very  strong
chain  and  padlock,  with  wonderful  rapidity  ;  bored  large
holes  in  wall  with  his  fingers;  will  not  answer  any  ques-
tions, avoids  the  eye ;  pupils  are  contracted,  eyes  weary
and  collapsed ;  cannot  sleep  or  eat.


STRAMONIUM.  48

I  I  Furibund  delirium,  during  an  attack  of  erysipelas  faciei
et  capitis ;  suppression  of  urine ;  singing  and  whistling
between  paroxysms.

I  I  Delirium,  tendency  to  throw  herself  out  of  bed,  great
restlessness  and  sleeplessness. ^Facial  erysipelas.

I  I  Loquacious  delirium,  with  desire  to  escape  out  of  bed;
tongue  yellowish-brown,  dry  on  centre ;  lips  sore  and
cracked;  sordes  on  teeth. ^Bilious  typhoid.

I  Mania:  with  fits  of  rage,  hallucinations  of  sight  and
hearing,  loss  of  memory ;  complains  that  a  dog  is  biting
and  tearing  flesh  off  his  chest ;  merry  exaltation ;  with
pride  and  affectation ;  runs  about,  complains  of  violent
headache ;  claps  his  hands  together,  steals  from  his  room-
mates everything  he  can  get  hold  of;  with  anxiety,  and
disposition  by  words  and  deeds  to  scold  persons  whom
he  otherwise  loved.

I  I  Mania;  thinks  he  is  lying  on  his  sepulchre  ;  confessing,
praying,  wants  to  be  killed  ;  laughs  as  if  tickled  ;  wants
to  be  kissed  ;  accuses  his  wife  of  being  faithless ;  scold-
ing, beating  in  a  rage,  will  not  be  taken  hold  of  by  at-
tendants ;  takes  them  for  dogs,  and  barks  at  them  ;  talk-
ing in  Jewish  jargon ;  supposes  his  house  to  be  sur-
rounded by  carts,  Jews  and  geese,  offending  him,  driving
him  into  a  rage;  pale,  eats  nothing,  does  not  sleep,  while
muscles  of  face  are  in  constant  twitching  motion.

I  I  Mania ;  great  restlessness,  confused  memory ;  a  hot  face,
with  coldness  of  body  alternating  with  anxiousness  and
thirst ;  frequently  a  red  face,  with  a  staring  look ;  sad-
ness, weeping,  thoughts  of  death ;  stammering  and  mut-
tering before  a  word  comes  out ;  cold  feet ;  nervous,
anxious  sleep,  with  strange  visions;  fear  of  malicious
animals,  black  dogs ;  a  young  man  of  loose  habits.

I  I  Conjunctiva  injected,  pupils  immensely  dilated;  whole
expression  of  eyes  brilliant,  restless,  suspicious  and
roving ;  brow  corrugated.

I  I  Mania,  with  convulsive  attacks  every  half  hour;  sudden
falling;  grasping  with  fingers;  intended  to  scream,  but
could  not,  as  mouth  was  full  of  rattling  phlegm  and  froth
on  lips ;  bending  spine  backward  ;  beating  with  one  arm,
grasping  with  other  ;  face  pale ;  no  consciousness.

I  Mania  puerperalis.

I  I  Mania  ;  affects  being  a  distinguished  person,  of  high
rank  ;  is  full  of  fear.

I  Acute  mania ;  frenzy  ;  tears  his  clothing ;  hallucinations ;
violent  impulse  to  be  active ;  threatens  to  use  knife  on
those  about  him.

I  I  Paroxysms,  during  which  he  threatens  to  knock  every-
body down,  to  break  furniture,  to  throw  himself  out  of
window.


49  STRAMONIUM.

1 1  Mania  for  light  and  company,  cannot  bear  to  be  alone.

I  I  Mania,  with  insomnia ;  very  talkative ;  thinks  he  has
every  imaginable  disease  ;  that  he  has  power  over  all
disease;  masturbates;  at  times  perfectly  rational;  fills
his  pockets  with  anything  he  can  find ;  thinks  he  bias
snakes  in  him.

I  I  Had  many  strange  fancies,  such  as  imagining  his  wife
had  lovers  concealed  behind  stove ;  wandered  restlessly
about,  and  could  only  be  restrained  by  force  from  run-
ning out  into  street ;  afterward  had  a  fit  that  looked  so
much  like  apoplexy  that  he  was  bled.

iMania  puerperalis  in  course  of  peritonitis;  phlebitis
puerperalis.

I  IMania,  originating  in  childbed;  sitting  up,  talking  in-
cessantly, in  one  strain  for  fifteen  minutes,  and  with
great  vehemence;  always  wants  to  go  away.

I  I  Timid  mania,  in  childbirth.

■  ■Delirium  tremens:  hallucinations  which,  especially  at
night,  put  patient  in  wildest  restlessness,  is  chased  about
as  if  crazy ;  heard  continually,  on  r.  side  of  occiput,  a
loud  voice,  scolding,  vituperating  and  accusing  him  of
ungodliness ;  region  of  bladder  distended,  urine  very
scanty,  for  a  few  days  previous,  since  day  before,  almost
entirely  suppressed;  constipated;  tongue  white;  con-
junctiva dirty  yellow;  on  reading  letters  blended,  and
danced  before  eyes;  talked  continually,  sometimes
prayed,  expecting,  with  great  anxiety,  the  flash  of  light-
ning which  was  to  kill  him;  considerable  thirst;  pro-
fuse, fetid,  warm  sweat;  on  lower  extremities,  which
sweat  much,  a  red,  granular,  itching  eruption  (lichen);
trembling  of  limbs  violent ;  pulse  small;  makes  mis-
takes about  time,  speaks  of  all  sorts  of  aff'airs,  which
have  happened  at  his  office ;  people  seem  to  appear  be-
fore him;  night  very  restless,  talked  much  to  himself,
wanted  to  leave  bed  ;  quaking,  trembling  of  limbs ;  mis-
places words  in  speaking ;  glittering  eyes,  with  sharp,
staring  look,  pupils  generally  dilated;  inability  to  dis-
tinguish objects  at  a  short  distance ;  on  looking  at  objects
a  little  way  off  (twenty  to  thirty  steps)  fantasies  dis-
appeared, hence  sought  the  open  air.

I  I  Young  man  with  delirium  tremens,  had  received,  shortly
before,  a  cut  in  cheek,  and  wound  was  in  an  inflamed
condition ;  pain  in  forehead  ;  tendency  to  sweat ;  mo-
tions unsteady,  hasty ;  hands  and  tongue  tremble ;  appe-
tite poor ;  chills  in  back ;  continuous  scintillations
before  eyes ;  spoke  of  lizards  and  worms  being  on  his
clothes,  and  in  air  before  him ;  starts  up  suddenly  as
from  fright;  pulse  weak.

VOL.  X. — 4.


STRAMONIUM.  '^  50

Often  leaves  his  chair  to  rush  at  people  whom  he  thought
lie  saw  fighting  and  quarrelling  before  him.

I  I  Has  been  drinking  too  hard,  weather  very  hot;  since
about  five  days,  is  walking  day  and  night,  can  find  no
rest ;  could  not  sleep ;  saw  a  door  open  where  there  was
none ;  frightful  dreams  about  fighting  and  killing;  takes
offensive  in  imaginary  quarrels,  and  attacks  aggressor ;
runs  against  supposed  object  to  attack  it;  personifies
voices,  hears  clock  talk,  and  argues  with  it ;  sores  in
mouth  and  tongue,  probably  from  biting ;  unquenchable
thirst ;  tingling  in  hands,  which  sometimes  get  cold  ;
heavy,  dull  sensation  in  head  ;  1.  nostril  closed  ;  feels  >
in  cold  air;  would  like  to  die;  rolling  of  eyes;  trembling
of  hands  ;  urine  scanty,  red  ;  pulse  full  and  hard  ;  afraid
of  delirium  tremens  ;  weather  very  hot.
Nymphomania;  with  diaphragmitis;  violent  attacks,  even
to  rage;  exalted  sexual  passion.

■  Religious  mania ;  pious  looks,  praying;  restless  nights;

inspired  talking,  singing;  despairs  of  her  salvation.

■  Hydrophobia;  water,  a  mirror,  or  anything  bright,  ex-

cites convulsions ;  screams  or  howls  in  a  high  voice ;
bites ;  mouth  dry  ;  pupils  large ;  unconscious  ;  afraid  to
be  alone ;  great  desire  to  bite  and  to  tear  himself  with
his  teeth ;  wants  to  bite  those  around  him,  with  a  ter-
rible cry  and  rage  ;  fancies  full  of  fright  and  terror,  star-
ing eyes,  dilated  pupils,  turgid,  swollen  face,  bloody  froth
at  mouth,  excessive  restlessness;  aversion  to  watery
liquids;  frequent  spitting,  slaver  hanging  from  mouth;
horrible  convulsions  ;  stiffness  of  whole  body.

I  I  Very  violent;  loquacious;  wild;  difficult  of  restraint;
seeing  rats  and  cats  in  room,  and  on  walls  ;  pulse  120 ;
high  fever;  several  men  required  to  prevent  him  from
getting  out  of  bed,  or  jumping  out  of  window ;  wanted
a  razor ;  would  take  nothing  out  of  a  spoon  or  cup.
^Erysipelas  of  head  and  face.

iRage:  unmanageable;  grasping  with  his  hands;  laughing;
rolling  and  creeping  around  in  bed;  unable  to  stand  on
his  feet ;  pupils  wide  open ;  insensible;  wants  to  kill
people  or  himself.

With  horrible  cries  he  strikes  at  those  around  him,  and
is  furious.

Uncontrollable  fury,  can  scarcely  be  restrained  ;  flies  at
people ;  strikes  and  endeavors  to  seize  them.

Very  changeable  disposition,  alternate  anticipations  of
death  and  rage  ;  laughable  gestures,  and  melancholy
deportment ;  affected  haughtiness  and  inconsolableness;
loud  laughing  and  groaning.

I  I  A  woman,  tet.  50,  became  weak-minded,  childish,  and


51  STRAMONIUM.

laughed  without  cause  ;  had  two  paralytic  attacks,  each
at  2  A.M.;  lay  quietly  on  her  back,  with  closed  eyes;
delirious  talk,  <  in  evening  ;  wants  to  get  away,  throws
things  out  of  window ;  at  3  a.m.  violent  spasms,  return
every  half  hour;  wants  to  scream  but  cannot;  gurgling
sound  in  throat;  foams  at  mouth;  opisthotonos;  strikes
with  one  arm,  grasps  with  other ;  pale  face ;  unconscious-
ness.

■  Incoherent  talking; incessant; like  that  of  dementia;

says  many  curious,  incomprehensible,  foolish  things ;
prattling ;  continual  babbling ;  constant  senseless  chat-
tering; talking in one strain, with distressed face.
^Typhus.
Talkative ;  but  talking  is  impeded.

■  Excessive  loquacity  each  time  during  menses;  tears  and

prayers  and  earnest  supplications.
I  I  Inspired  talking.
I  I  Great  talkativeness ;  full  of  wit,  but  indecent,  sometimes

in  a  rage,  tearing  his  clothes ;  pulse  frequent,  full  and

hard.
I  I  Talkativeness  about  lewd  subjects.

■  Talks  incessantly  foolish  things  which  nobody  can  under-

stand ;  sits  down,  rises  up,  kneels,  or  takes  other  queer
positions ;  tears  his  clothing  and  breaks  chairs  with
remarkable  celerity ;  gives  no  answer,  and  evades  care-
fully looks  of  other  persons.

■  Ceaseless  talking,  mostly  devout ;  very  earnestl}'  beseech-

ing. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Constant  muttering  to  himself.

I  I  His  thoughts  ran  upon  obscene  things,  frequently  put
his  hands  to  erected  penis ;  sought  to  bite  or  to  catch
flies.

I  I  Talks  in  a  foreign  tongue. ^Typhus.

■  Loquacious,  talks  all  the  time,  sings,  makes  verses.

■  Child  awakens  terrified,  knows  no  one,  screams with

fright,  clings  to  those  near.
Sings,  talks,  fancies  there  are  dogs  in  room,  which  he  de-
feet,  and  as  suddenly  toppling  over.

■  Sings  and  utters  obscene  things.

Delirious  laughing,  making  faces  and  behaving  generally
like  an  intoxicated  person  or  like  a  fool,  pulling  his
clothes,  making  laughing  grimaces,  with  a  staring  look.

Prattling  incessantly,  without  any  sense  or  understanding.

Screams  until  he  is  hoarse,  or  loses  his  voice.

■  Crazy  with  distress;  jumps  out  of  bed  ;  acts  as  if  bed  were

being  drawn  from  under  her ;  with  spasmodic  motions
of  head.


STRAMONIUM.  52

I  1  Falling  down  with  a  scream  ;  loud  shriek,  during  fits.

Screams  about  growling  in  abdomen.

1  I  Would  like  to  scream,  but  could  not  on  account  of
phlegm.

iMoaning;  tossing  about.

He  uttered  constant  moans,  with  occasional  shrieks,  and
could  only  be  pacified  by  holding  his  chest  pressed  close
to  his  mother's  breast.

I  I  Groaning ;  moaning  after  menses ;  restless  motions.

I  I  Wife  complains  of  husband  neglecting  her;  man  accuses
his  wife  of  being  faithless.

1  I  He  is  mute,  does  not  answer ;  expresses  a  wish  by  point-
ing to  things.

He  talks  little  and  utters  single,  broken  words  in  higher
voice.

At  times  active  efforts  at  utterance.

I  I  Could  not  utter  a  word ;  sitting  silent  and  brooding.

■  Disposed  to  weep:  violently;  involuntarily;  during  day  ;
at  night ;  about  her  mental  weakness.

I I  Laughing.

I  I  Making  all  kinds  of  faces  and  imitating  motions,  gest-
ures and  voices  of  different  animals.

I  I  After  suffocative  paroxysms  with  elevations  of  sternum
had  been  >  by  tine,  amygd.  amarse:  face  red  all  over,
eyes  glassy  and-  staring  impudently  or  spitefully,  fol-
lowed with  her  eyes  her  little  brother,  moving  her  lips
backward  and  forward,  lips  covered  with  shining  moist-
ure; choking  frequently  ;  bitten  by  dog  a  year  ago,  dog
not  known  to  be  mad.

When  his  father  got  him  to  recognize  him,  boy  said:
"Why,  papa,  is  that  you?"  and  commenced  stroking,
or  rather  clawing,  with  his  fingers  his  father's  face

I  I  Tears  clothes  ;  breaks  chairs  with  incredible  quickness;
destroys  things.

I  I  Disposition  to  suicide;  wanted  a  razor  to  cut  his  throat.

I  1  Endeavors  to  escape,  imagines  he  is  alone  all  the  time,
and  is  afraid.

I  1  Wandering  up  and  down  floor.

Starts  involuntarily,  quick  as  if  a  shock  of  electricity  had
passed  through  her  body,  with  an  air  of  affright  and  a
loud  shriek;  limbs  writhed  with  convulsive  motions,
and  her  countenance  and  body  distorted  in  every  direc-
tion.

Grasps  at  things  quickly  and  in  a  hurry,  thinks  he  has
seized  a  thing  before  touching  it;  if  he  does  hold  the
object  he  does  not  feel  that  he  has  hold  of  it.

iHe  makes  all  motions  hastily,  with  great  force  and  hur-
riedly, so  that  he  feels  an  anxiety  if  he  cannot  finish
them  at  once.


53  STRAMONIUM.

While  sitting  on  a  sofa,  fancied  she  was  falling  off,  kept
holding  on  to  everything;  while  in  bed  said  that  bed
was  being  drawn  from  under  her.

In  his  conscious  moments,  he  asked  to  be  held  because  he
was  falling.

I  I  Cries  out  fearfully,  hides  face  in  pillow,  is  terrified  by
presence  or  approach  of  physician ;  after  an  attack  of
typhoid.

I  I  Intense  pain  in  r.  side  of  head,  with  profuse  lachryma-
tian ;  had  frightful  imaginings,  would  start  up,  scream
out ;  if  spoken  to  would  answer  correctly,  but  immedi-
ately relapse  into  her  wild  state,  head  drawn  spasmodi-
cally to  one  side,  not  continuous.

Inclination  to  climb  up.

I  Hasty ;  hurries  off  too  fast,  with  all  his  might,  if  he  wants
to  go  to  another  place.

Gay  excitement,  alternations  of  laughing,  crying  out,  sing-
ing, whistling,  leaping  up,  catching  at  flies,  picking  at
flocks.

5  I  Phlegmatic,  with  weariness  of  mind  and  sadness  of
heart;  everything  is  indifferent  to  him.

i  I  Not  disposed  to  any  real  work.

■  Doleful,  weeping,  thoughts  of  death.

I  Crying  mood,  with  inclination  to  give  offence  and  to  feel
offended.

i  Downcast  and  full  of  anguish,  believes  herself  unworthy
of  eternal  bliss,  because  she  is  unable  to  perform  her
duties.

i  I  Feels  as  if  nothing  could  give  her  any  enjoyment.

I  I  In  evening  after  lying  down,  very  sad,  with  thoughts
of  death,  and  violent  weeping.

Sad ;  apprehends  evil  consequences  from  trifling  things.

I  I  Melancholia,  with  walking  about,  crying  and  lamenta-
tions; complains  her  husband  has  neglected  her.

Inconsolable ;  much  affected  by  trifles ;  disposed  to  weep,
sometimes  vexed ;  neglects  her  duties,  thinks  she  is  not
fitted  for  her  position  ;  <  after  Fall  equinox;  in  dark-
ness, when  alone,  and  in  morning;  wants  light  (sun-
shine) and  company ;  heat  and  anxiety,  rise  from  abdo-
men, causing  redness  of  checks.

A  peculiar  sensation  of  anxiety ;  anguish ;  despair.

\  I  Pangs  of  conscience ;  thinks  he  is  not  honest.

Ill-humor  unto  vehemence,  followed  immediately  by  a  dis-
position to  laugh,  even  aloud.

When  spoken  to  appeared  peevish  and  irritable,  and  an-
swered by  a  sharp  cry,  or  said  sharply,  "  Let  me  alone,"
all  his  words  being  curtailed  in  a  curious  way.

1  I  Formerly  an  obedient  boy,  he  is  now  headstrong  and


STRAMONIUM.  54

obstinate ;  but  in  presence  of  strangers  timid  and  anx-
ious.

Very  passionate,  easily  provoked  into  a  rage.

Extreme  irritabilit}^ ;  makes  all  his  motions  so  fast  that
finally  he  cannot  move  any  more,  and  all  turns  black
before  his  eyes.

I  I  Slightest  contradiction  irritates  her  so  much  that  she
sobs  with  anger.

Continued  violent  scolding ;  senseless  quarrelling.

I  Child  is  very  cross,  and  strikes  or  bites.

■  After  fright:  mania;  melancholy;  chorea;  epileptic
attacks;  spasms.

I  On  being  reprimanded  pupils  dilate  immediately.
^  Sensorium. Drunkenness;  reeling,  loss  of  voluntary  mo-
tion.

Unsteady  when  walking  in  dark,  with  tendency  to  fall  to
1.  or  backward,  in  evening  after  sunset.

1  I  Staggers  as  if  dizzy;  gait  unstable;  impossible  for  him
to  walk  in  a  straight  line;  must  be  led.

Staggers,  yet  limbs  obey  will  so  readily  that  he  feels  as  if
he  had  none;  they  seemed  to  him  much  longer  than
they  were,  so  that  when  walking  he  thinks  he  has
already  touched  floor,  when  foot  is  six  inches  away
from  it,  hence  he  always  puts  down  foot  too  quickly.

Stumbles  against  door  before  going  through  room.

TiWhen  sitting  on  a  sofa  she  fancied  she  was  falling  off,
kept  holding  on  to  everything.

TrWhen  in  bed,  lying  on  r.  side,  screamed  and  said  that  bed
was  being  drawn  from  under  her  and  that  everything
was  falling  on  her,  kept  holding  on  to  walls;  asked  her
mother  not  to  leave  her  as  something  was  going  to  hurt
her;  from  9.30  p.m.  until  midnight.

I  Vertigo:  cannot  walk  in  dark,  or  with  eyes  closed;  stag-

gering, obscuration  of  vision,  or  flickering  before  eyes,
red  face;  reeling  as  if  drunk;  head  feels  as  if  drawn
backward,  at  same  time  excessively  sleepy;  with
colicky  pain  and  diarrhoea;  with  heat;  before  catalepsy ;
with  hallucination  of  sight  and  confusion  of  thoughts.

II  Vertigo,  especially  at  night;  <  lying  on  side,  had  to
lie  upon  back;  pressure  like  heavy  load  in  forepart  of
head;  could  only  half  open  eyes,  could  not  raise  eyes  to
ceiling;  painful  twitching  over  face,  followed  by  spasms
in  chest,  which  entirely  arrested  respiration  for  a
minute,  alternating  with  fits  of  laughter,  lasting  a
quarter  of  an  hour.

I  Stupefaction,  from  which  he  at  times  started  up  in  a
wild  manner,  opened  his  eyes,  which  were  partly  closed,
but  could  not  keep  them  open;  spoke  disconnectedly,


^^  STRAMONIUM.

quarrelled  with  his  mother,  whom  he  did  not  know
face  very  red,  cheeks  glowing  hot,  with  dry  heat  over
whole  body;  at  times  he  moved  lips  and  tongue,  called
for  liquid;  throbbing  carotids,  full,  very  rapid  pulse,
rapid  respiration,  pupils  excessively  dilated,  insensible '
swallowing  difficult.  '

iDulness  of  sensorium,  especially  noticeable  when  talkincr
by  confounding  words.  ^

■  Stupefaction with  vanishing vision and hearing and

convulsive  movements  of  head.

■  Fainting,  with paleness  of  face,  dryness  in  throat  and

subsequent  red  face.

■  Suddenly falls, with pale  face and almost  insensible

breathing;  sometimes  face  is  bloated  red;  fainting  may
continue  a  long  time.
^  Inner Head. Lightness, weakness, dulness and stupid
feeling  in  head.
I  I  Heaviness  of  head;  before  catalepsy.

■  Congestion  to  head,  beating  of  carotids;  sparkling  eyes;

pulsation  in  vertex,  loss  of  sight  and  hearing,  bloated^
turgid  face,  total  loss  of  consciousness.

■  Head  hot,  also  whole  body.

■  Heat of head: during chill; with headache; then

general  coldness,  followed  by  heat  with  thirst;  with
sweat  on  forehead.
•  I  After  a  sunstroke,  a  tormenting  sensation  of  heat  in
whole  head,  most  on  vertex,  with  great  dulness;  pain
m  nape  of  neck,  preventing  bending  of  head  further
than  to  a  certain  point;  got  in  habit  of  supporting  head
with  hands  while  bending  or  rising;  constant  pain  in
cervical  and  upper  dorsal  vertebrae;  memory  and  power
of  thinking  disturbed ;  loses  thoughts  before  she  can
give  them  utterance;  tries  to  find  right  expressions  and
weeps  about  her  weakness  of  thought;  very  sensitive  to
noise;  slightest  contradiction  irritates  her  so  much  that
she  sobs  for  anger.

■  Violent  affections ,  of  brain, during or  after  vesicular

erysipelas.

■  Meningitis:  eyes  red  and inflamed,  wild  and  staring,

shrinking  look  as  if  from  fear,  accompanied  by  some
degree  of  delirium,  dilated  pupils,  pain  in  head  and
nausea;  convulsive  motions  of  head  and  frequently
lifting  it  from  pillow;  head  is  thrust  forward;  con-
junctivae injected;  pupils  contracted;  desire  for  light,
or  bright  light  and  glistening  things  cause  spasms;
calls  for  parents,  who  are  present,  and  does  not  know
them;  violent  delirium;  stammering;  great  dryness  of
mouth; dysphagia;  urine  suppressed;  trembling  and


STRAMONIUM.  56

convulsive  movements  of  limbs ;  striking  with  hands
and  feet;  frequent  torsions  of  trunk;  frightful  visions;
screaming;  pleading  for  help,  or  very  irritable,  with
raving  or  disposition  to  strike,  bite  or  injure  others;
suppressed  miliary  eruptions.

■  Hydrocephalus;  convulsive  motions  of  head,  sensation

of  lightness  of  head,  and  frequently  raising  head  up;
great  loquacity;  merr}^  delirium;  desire  to  escape  from
bed  and  room;  grinding  of  teeth;  glittering  eyes;
staring  look;  dark-colored  stools;  during  convulsions
head  is  jerked  from  pillow  and  falls  back  again.

■  Apoplectic  seizures; paroxysms  of  syncope,  with  ster-

torous breathing;  bloody  froth  at  mouth;  dark-brown
face;  lies  on  back  with  open  staring  eyes;  fetches
breath  with  great  difficulty.

■  Paralysis,  after  apoplex}^  spasmodic  drawing  of  head  to

either  side;  screaming,  with  convulsive  movements  of
arms  above  head,  especially  in  eclampsia.

I  I  When  rising,  pressure  on  forehead ;  could  open  eyes
only  half;  could  not  look  upward.

Squeezing,  clawing  headache.

■  Throbbing  headache: in  forehead;  in  r.  temple,  with

diarrhoea;  in  vertex;  in  typhus,  with  fainting  fits.
Pain  in  r.  temple,  sticking  and  stabbing,  from  8  p.m.  until

he  fell  asleep  at  11  p.m.
Headache  in  both  temples,  shooting  to  back  of  head,  with

thirst.
Dull  pain  in  occiput.
I  I  Pain  in  head  and  nausea.

Headache,  with  dryness  of  throat,  nausea  and  vomiting.
Alternate  headache  and  tumefaction  of  abdomen.

■  Headache  from  being  exposed  to  sun.

■  Periodical  neuralgic  pain  in  forehead  over  either  eye-

brow, commences  about  9  a.m.;  <  until  about  noon,
when  it  begins  to  decline,  and  by  3  p.m.  has  passed  off,
but  returns  at  9  next  morning.

■  Tormenting  sensation  of  heat  in  whole  head,  mostly  ver-

tex, with  great  dulness  ;  after  sunstroke.

■  Pressure  on  forehead  when  rising,  could  only  half  open

eyes,  could  not  look  up.

■  Congestive  headaches,  in  morning,  <  toward  noon,  grad-

ually >  toward  evening;  pains  terrible,  fears  going
mad,  runs  or  presses  head  again.st  wall.

■  Heat,  pulsating  in  vertex,  attacks  of  fainting,  loss  of  sight

and  hearing,  face  bloated,  turgid ;  convulsive  motions
of  head,  frequently  raising  head  from  pillow  or  bend-
ing it  backward  ;  >  lying  still.

■  Sensation  of  lig-htness  of  head.


57  STRAMONIUM.

I  Pain  in  head,  nausea,  delirium,  eyes  wild,  staring,  in-
flamed ;  frenzy,  convulsive  spasms  and  twitching  of
nerves;  hands  and  feet  become  cold,  pulse  sinking.
^Meningitis.

■  Headache  with  loss  of  sight  and  hearing.
Rheumatic  headache,  with  dulness;  difficult  thinking;  <

in  vertex  or  forehead,  <  evening  and  night.

■  Tearing  in  neck  and  over  head,  shunning  light;  >  from

warmth ;  <  from  cold;  <  on  getting  up  in  morning

■  Rheumatic  inflammatory  aff"ections  of  brain  with  chil-

dren under  seven  years,  epidemic  during  a  Winter  sea-
son ;  starting  in  sleep ;  moaning  with  restless  motions ;
when  awake  they  look  with  staring  eyes  and  despair  in
their  faces,  to  one  point,  and  either  move  slowly  and
shyly  backward  or  run  away  with  a  violent,  fearful
scream ;  taking  hold  of  things  near  them ;  feverish  heat,
red  face;  moist  skin.

I  I  Rheumatic  pain,  for  several  years,  on  top  of  head.

I  I  When  getting  up  in  morning,  tearing  in  neck  and  over
head;  impaired  sight; shunning  light;  chilly  crawls
over  whole  body ;  fingers  and  heels  numb,  latter  some-
times painful ;  >  in  warmth,  <  in  cold.
*  Outer  Head. "Jerks  head  up  from  pillow.

■  Boring  head  into  pillow.

■  Head  bent  backward.

■  Moves  head,  thrusts  it  in  all  directions;  in  spasms  mostly

to  right.
■Supports  head  with  hands  while  bending  or  rising;  after
sunstroke.

■  Head  drawn  to  one  side;  rolling  of  head,  or  spasmodic

raising  and  dropping  of  head.
I  I  Head  numb  on  1.  side.

■  Head  and  forehead  hot  to  touch.
^  Head  perspires  more  than  usual.

^ Sight  and  Eyes.  ■Light  dazzles ;  shuns  light ;  convulsions
from  bright  light,  water  or  brilliant  objects;  eyes  water.

Change  of  light,  either  going  from  dark  to  light,  or  sud-
denly from  a  light  to  a  dark  place  causes  pain  in  eye-
ball.

Greatest  sensitiveness  to  daylight,  and  desire  for  lamplight.

I  I  Hemeralopia.

■  Dimness  of  vision:  complained  of  darkness,  wanted  a

light ;  vision  cloudy  as  through  a  veil ;  total  blindness,
in  typhus;  like  a  fog,  or  gauze  before  eyes;  like  seeing
through  a  glass  of  turbid  water;  things  seem  as  if  dis-
solved, or  too  distant;  in  morning. '

■  Visual  illusions:  when  looking  at  an  object  believes  he  sees

cats,  dogs,  rats  and  all  sorts  of  insects  in  continual  mo-


STRAMONIUM.  58

tioii ;  fieiy  visions ;  flickeriiig  before  eyes ;  the  silk  he
supposes  to  wind  is  blue  ;  he  seems  to  see  a  reddish-grey
border  around  white  things;  black  things  seem  to  him
grey ;  the  black  letters  seem  to  him  grey,  and  as  if  a  sec-
ond one  of  the  same  light-grey  color  were  placed  sideways
or  above  (a  kind  of  diplopia) ;  writing  an  F  he  went  with
pencil  a  second  time  over  same  line,  supposing  to  have
drawn  a  second  one ;  sees  objects  multiplied,  and  in  dif-
ferent colors;  all  things  appear  awry,  in  an  oblique
position ;  sometimes  cannot  see  entire  object,  and  then
again  sees  it  double;  he  saw  things  as  if  through  coarse
linen,  only  b}'  pieces,  and  as  if  cut  through,  of  a  face  he
only  saw  nose  etc. ;  as  if  eyes  had  but  a  small  circle  of
vision,  and  he  was  only  able  to  see  a  small  point  at
once ;  half  hour  after  dinner  sees  everything  double ;
objects  seem  smaller  and  at  a  greater  distance.

When  reading  he  was  unable  to  distinguish  a  syllable ;
letters  seemed  to  move  and  become  blurred.

Suddenly  he  feels  very  strangely,  because  everything  ap-
pears in  a  green  color ;  at  same  time  he  gets  confused
in  head,  and  says  he  cannot  help  to  strike  with  his
spade  (while  working  in  garden)  strange  blows  in  air^
and  to  make  strange  gestures,  as  if  he  were  possessed.

1 1  Hallucinations  dark  {Bellad.,  fiery,  shining).

I  If  attention  was  fixed  upon  objects  only  twenty  or  thirty
paces  distant,  though  they  could  not  distinguish  them
exactly,  still  the  moving  figures  were  lost  when  they
looked  again.

■  In  morning  hours,  cannot  distinguish  objects,  although

he  sees  them ;  knocks  against  them  as  if  he  were  in  the
dark.

■  Strabismus  from  brain  affections,  epilepsy,  eclampsia  or

chorea,  if  <  by  mental  emotions,  terror,  fear,  etc.
Small  things,  such  as  point  of  a  pin,  patient  was  unable  ta

discern.
Long-lasting farsightedness; he  was  only  able  to read

print  at  a  distance.
When  going  down  stairs,  he  takes  two  steps  for  one,  and

is  not  aware  of  it  until  he  falls.
I  I  On  fixing  attention  on  objects  not  very  far  off",  they  saw

animals ;  looking  at  a  distance  over  thii'ty  yards  all  dis-

ai)peared.
•  Amblyopia  amaurotica.
Darkening  of  sight,  could  not  read,  or  see  thread  when

spinning.
The  eyes  were  open,  but  he  took  no  notice  of  anything  or

anybody  about  him,  and  when  objects  were  held  before

his  eyes  he  could  not  see  them.


59  STRAMONIUM.

■  Eyes  insensible  to  strongest  light;  to  bright  sunlight,  in

tj'phus.

I  I  Caught  cold  when  eruption  was  out;  at  once  cannot  see
or  hear,  everything  looks  black  before  eyes ;  calls  for
persons  standing  close  by,  and  cannot  believe  in  their
presence,  although  they  speak  to  him  in  a  loud  voice ;
grasps  with  hands  and  kicks  with  feet.

Almost  complete  blindness  for  six  hours;  on  day  follow-
ing, a  pressure  as  from  middle  of  eyeball,  at  every  change
of  light,  either  when  going  from  a  dark  place  into  a
lighter,  or  from  a  light  place  suddenly  into  a  darker.

llPupils  dilated;  sometimes  immovable  and  insensible
to  light.

lE^'CS  wide  open,  prominent;  pupils  exceedingly  dilated,
insensible ;  injected  conjunctivae,  as  if  vessels  were  filled
with  dirty  liquid.

Pupils  dilate  when  child  is  reprimanded.

Pupils  dilated  to  their  fullest  capacity,  immovable  and
insensible  to  light,  yet  holding  a  lighted  candle  before
eyes  caused  violent  convulsions  of  extremities,  particu-
larly opisthotonic  spasms  with  rigidity.

Ti  Paralj^sis  of  iris.

Contraction  of  pupils ;  paralysis  of  oesophagus  and  lower
limbs ;  involuntary  passage  of  urine  and  bloody  feces ;
face,  hands  and  feet  blue  and  cold.

M  Pupils  contracted  after  vinegar  or  lemonade.

lEyes:  restless,  glistening,  wide  open,  staring,  with  a  pe-
culiar intoxicated  look;  brilliant;  glassy  ;  wild  and  red;
protrude;  vacillate,  vessels  injected;  contorted;  rolling;
squinting;  half  open  in  sleep;  inflamed;  in  constant
motion.

■  Contortion  of  eyes  and  eyelids.

I  I  Fixed  and  sinister  look  from  time  to  time.

I  I  Stares  fixedly  from  eyes,  which  are  surrounded  by  a  dull

bluish  border.
I  I  Eyes  anxiously  fixed  sideways,  on  one  point,  where  she

imagines  to  see  a  terrible,  hostile  figure.
I  I  Eyes  dull  and  heavy.

■  Sensation  as  if  eye  were  forced  out,  with  twitching  of

lids.
General  suffusion  of  eyes.
Whites  of  eyes  and  margins  of  eyelids  red  ;  tears  run  from

eyes ;  sheds  tears  unconsciously.
Dimsightedness,  blear-eyes, sore, running, as with old

people.

■  Profuse  lachrymation,  with  headache;  during  fever  heat;

from  otalgia.
Upper  eyelid  hangs  down,  as  if  caused  by  a  cramp  of  or-
bicularis.


STRAMONIUM.  60

I  I  Could  open  eyes  only  half,  not  look  upward.

■  Eyes  half  open  in  sleep.

Closed  eyes,  opening  only  when  spoken  to.

Pressure  in  eyelids,  as  if  swollen,  which  is  the  case,  or  as

if  oppressed  with  sleep.
Swollen  and  inflamed  eyelids.
Agglutination  of  eyelids  at  night.
Suppurating  eyelids.
^Hearing  and  Ears. Sense  of  hearing  very  acute,  while

vision  was  lost,
I  I  Very  sensitive  to  noises,  least  noise  startles  him.

■  Hardness  of  hearing;  complete  deafness.
Sensation  as  of  wind  rushing  out  of  ears.

I  Hallucination  of  hearing;  talks  about  a  train  in  his  ear;
singing  in  ears  with  giddiness.

Pain  in  1.  ear,  passing  down  to  1.  side  of  cheek.

I  I  Shooting  in  ears.

I  I  Otalgia,  1.  side,  pain  violent,  without  intermission,  onl}'
remitting  somewhat  at  night,  when  covering  head,
warmly ;  tears  come  from  1.  eye  when  pains  are  most
violent.

I  I  Neuralgia  in  cheek,  near  1.  ear,  as  if  sawing  bone,  on  a
small  spot  as  if  a  hole  were  there,  and  when  touched
horrible  sensation  as  if  brain  were  touched  ;  muscles  of
1.  face  in  an  oscillating  motion ;  eye  feels  as  if  it  were
driven  out  of  its  socket ;  at  first  warmth  >  pain,  now
<  ;  patient  in  constant  motion,  throwing  his  arms
about ;  evening  and  night.
^  Smell  and  Nose.  Nasal  discharge  yellow,  bad  smelling ;
quickly  liquefies.

Nosebleed  :  dark,  in  lumps ;  with  whooping  cough.

Spasmodic  sneezing.

Feels  as  if  nose  were  stopped,  although  he  breathes  freely.

Stoppage  of  nose  with  feeling  of  dryness.

Influenza.

I.I  In  wing  of  nose,  tearing  and  shooting.

Intolerable  itching  in  nose.

Alse  nasi  white,  face  red.

Erysipelas  on  nose.
® Upper  Face,  l Expression:  wild  and  staring;  vacant,  be-
wildered; anxious;  of  great  fear  and  terror;  that  of  a
drunken  person;  maniacal;  wild,  idiotic;  despairing,
on  awaking;  constantly  changes;  makes  foolish  faces;
stupid  and  disturbed  ;  as  if  he  were  seeking  something.

■  Forehead wrinkled,  corrugated;  frowning  in  brain  dis-

eases.
I  I  Tingling  feeling,  as  if  pins  and  needles  were  in  her  fore-
head; redness  and  swelling  about  r.  eye.


61  STRAMONIUM.

•  An  old  cicatrix  on  forehead  became  very  red.

■  Sardonic  grin.

■  Thinks  face  elongated. ^Hysteria.

I  I  Painful  twitchings  over  face,  spasms  of  chest  spasmodic
laughter.

■  Facial  muscles  constantly  in  play  during  delirium.

I  I  Prosopalgia,  in  evening  after  lying  down,  <  in  1.  cheek,
close  to  ear,  seizing  temporal  and  zygomatic  region,  with
sensation  as  if  bones  were  sawed  through,  radiating  to
OS  petrosum,  with  sensation  at  a  small  place  as  if  there
w^ere  a  hole  in  bone,  which  feels  at  touch  as  if  brain
were  touched.

I  I  Prosopalgia  began  over  1.  eye,  with  severe  stitches  in
ear ;  passed  over  1.  cheek  to  1.  ala  nasi ;  stitching,  tear-
ing at  different  times  for  three  or  four  days.

■  Prosopalgia  nervosa,  pains  maddening,  spasmodic  starts

and  shocks  through  body,  throws  arms  upward  ;  skin  of

forehead  wrinkled.
I  I  Pain  spreads  over  all  branches  of  facial  nerve,  from

foramen  stylo-mastoideum  to  ala  nasi;  tearing,  and  of

such  severity  as  to  produce  oscillation  of  facial  muscles,

with  distortion.
I  I  Left  side  of  face  is,  for  moments,  distorted  with  painless

convulsions;  contractions  of  zygomatic  muscles  draw

cheeks  and  mouth  from  below  upward,  and  from  face

backward  to  temples.
I  1  Since  three  days,  at  9  a.m.,  severe  tearing  pain  over

whole  r.  side  of  face,  with  cold  extremities  and  very

warm  face.
I  I  Painful  twitching  over  face  and  chest,  with  spasmodic

laughing.

■  Face:  red,  bloated,  hot;  red,  eyes  wild;  ■■hot  and  red,

cheeks;  pale;  blue,  with  difficult  breathing;  swollen
and  very  red,  puffy,  purple;  dark-brown,  copper-colored.

■  ■Hot  cheeks.

■  ■Blood  rushing  to  face.

Felt  as  if  1.  side  of  her  face  were  swollen,  which  was  not
the  case.

I  I  Swelling  of  face  before  formation  of  vesicles,  with  mut-
tering delirium. ^Smallpox.

Face  covered  with  patches  of  irregular  shape,  not  elevated
above  rest  of  skin,  and  of  a  brilliant,  fiery-red  color.

Erysipelas  on  r.  side  of  cheek,  nose  and  face.

I  I  Erysipelas  in  face;  on  1.  cheek,  after  catamenia  ;  with
mania

■  One-sided  erysipelas,  with  meningitis;  spasmodic  symp-

toms alternate  with  paralytic.


STRAMONIUM.  62

1 1  Facial  erysipelas,  eruption  was  smooth,  patient  delirious,
with  constant  talking,  and  wild  staring  eyes.

Itching  eruption  on  face,  petechise.

Frequent  sweat  on  face  and  forehead.
^  Lower  Face. Moves  lips  backward  and  forward.

Lips:  red;  with  yellow  streak  on  vermilion  border,  as  in
malignant  fevers ;  dry ;  sore  and  cracked ;  tremble ;  con-
vulsed ;  have  a  yellow  streak  along  their  red  part,  as  in
malignant  fevers,  and  stick  together,  he  fears  they  will
grow  together ;  bluish,  swollen ;  covered  with  shining
moisture.

Swelling  of  under  lip.

I  Froth  on  lips;  white  or  bloody.
Crawling  sensation  on  chin.
Pain  in  submaxillary  glands.

I I  White  circle  around  mouth.  ^Diarrhoea  of  cliildren.
^Hysterical  mania.

I  I  Puts  fingers  on  mouth.

I  I  Distortion  of  mouth,  drawn  to  one  side.

■  Chewing  motion  of  mouth.

I  Mouth  spasmodically  closed.
Mouth  open,  but  tongue  immovable.
Thick  frothy  saliva  about  mouth.

Lower  jaw  :  hanging  down;  convulsed;  tension;  locked,
with  closed  lips.

■  Lockjaw  after  convulsions.

^°  Teeth  and  Gums.  Grinding  teeth,  with  shuddering  over
whole  body ;  raises  hands  above  head,  and  moves  them
as  if  he  were  winding  a  ball  of  thread;  with  gloominess
in  head;  contortion  of  hands  and  shuddering;  with  chill.

Throbbing  toothache,  as  if  some  teeth  would  fall  out.

I  I  Sudden  pain  in  upper  teeth,  then  in  lower;  teeth  feel
pressed  together.

I  I  Pains  begin  in  carious  bicuspid  of  r.  lower  maxilla,  spread
hence  over  all  branches  of  facial  nerve  on  that  side  of
head ;  tearing.

iSordes  on  teeth. ^Typhoid.

Dentition  :  grinding  of  teeth  ;  moving  of  fingers  in  sleep
as  if  searching  for  something ;  desire  for  light ;  disposi-
tion to  stammer ;  convulsions,  with  cries  as  if  from  sight
of  hideous  objects;  throwing  about  of  limbs,  especially
upper  ones.
"Taste  and  Tongue,  i Taste:  bitter;  all  food  tastes  bitter,
or  like  straw  to  her,  or  sand;  a  loss, of  taste,  drank  vin-
egar without  tasting  it.

Tongue:  whitish,  with  fine  red  dots;  point  redder  than
usual ;  dry,  red ;  dry  and  parched  ;  pale  red,  in  constant
motion;  swollen,  coated,  dry;  yellow  in  centre;  dry;


63  STRAMONIUM.

swollen,  hangs  out  of  mouth ;  moist,  papillae  enlarged
and  projecting  through  a  soft,  white  fur;  swollen,  stiff,
and  difficult  to  move ;  feels  blistered.

Scratched  their  tongues  with  their  nails.

IlSpeech:  stammering;  difficult  and  unintelligible;  in-
distinct; has  to  exert  himself  a  long  time  before  he  can
utter  a  word,  stammers,  and  utters  unconnected  sounds.

iStammering;  distorts  face ;  makes  great  efforts  to  speak;
mouth  drawn  now  to  r.  again  to  left.

I  I A  family  had  gone  to  bed,  when  suddenly  from  a  room
near  sleeping  chamber  there  came  a  crash  awaking  a
2-year-old  boy  out  of  sleep  in  affright;  cause  of  disturb-
ance was  the  breaking  of  an  oaken  table  leaf;  boy  a
blonde,  light-haired  child,  with  prominent  forehead,
lively  and  intelligent,  was  a  considerable  time  in  get-
ting quieted  and  to  sleep  again ;  on  next  day,  parents
observed  that  boy,  who  had  formerly  spoken  with  cor-
rectness, now  stuttered,  and  that  his  tongue  was  in  in-
voluntary motion  in  different  ways ;  toward  evening
he  appeared  fearful  and  anxious,  that  some  one  was
under  bed;  the  fearfulness  disappeared  in  a  few  days,
but  stuttering  and  disordered  movements  of  tongue  con-
tinued, until  relieved  by  Stramon.  30.

I  I  Speechlessness,  with  a  girl  4  years  old,  since  weeks,
with  spasmodic  laughter,  clapping  of  hands ;  spasmodic
laughter  at  night,  weeping  during  day.

I  I  Speechlessness,  for  several  days,  with  a  girl  of  seven
years. ^Cholera  Asiatica.

I  Could  not  talk,  in  typhus.

I  Aphasia.
*^  Inner  Mouth.  (Dryness  of  mouth:  and  fauces ;  dry,  sticky
lips ;  glistening ;  is  unable  to  spit,  although  tongue  looks
moist  and  clean ;  can  hardly  take  a  mouthfal  of  bread,
drinks  a  great  deal ;  and  no  taste ;  has  to  moisten  it,  no
thirst.

■Saliva:  increased;  drivelling;  with  chills  and  fever;
glairy,  dribbling  from  mouth.

Viscid  slime  in  mouth.

Whole  inner  mouth  as  if  raw.

I  I  After  dinner,  sudden  ebullition  and  spitting  of  blood;
with  a  little  hawking,  his  mouth  got  full  of  bright,  red
blood;  oppression  of  chest,  palpitation  and  headache.

•  Bloody  froth  before  mouth.

Soft  palate  as  if  drawn  down;  food  and  drink  pass  with
difficulty  under  it,  and  with  a  scratching  pain  in  it.

Palate  feels  parched,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  eat  a  mouth-
ful of  bread.
^'  Throat. Burning  in  throat,  great  thirst,  dryness  of  tongue,
which  is  verv  rtd.


STRAMONIUM.  64

Burning  in  throat,  violent  thirst,  pain  in  stomach,  stupor.-
I  Feeling  as  of  boiling  water,  rising  in  throat.
II Dryness  of  throat:  and  fauces;  not  benefited by  any
sort of  drink; and  copious  urination; with difficult
sw^allowing.
-  iSwallowing  difficult: impeded,  with  stinging  pain in
throat;  with  pain  in  submaxillary  glands;  with  con-
vulsions ;  particularly  fluids ;  from  spasmodic  constric-
tion of  throat.

■  Paralysis  of  pharynx  and  oesophagus.

Contracting  burning  pain  in  throat,  and  a  sensation  as  if
ball  were  wedged  in  throat;  after  this  delirium,  with
queerest  notions;  later,  blindness  with  dilated  pupils.

Choking  in  throat.

■  Constriction about throat; frequent hemming and

hawking.

■  Constriction  of  muscles  of  throat  in  attempting  to  swallow.
I  I  Spasmodic  affection  of  oesophagus. ^Measles.

■  Averse  to  fluids;  shrinks  from  the  proffered  cup;  became

enraged  when  his  lips  were  moistened.

■  Averse  to  water;  even  sight  of  it  causes  spasm;  constric-

tion of  throat,  froth,  spitting.

■  H3^drophobia;  restlessness,  violent  convulsions,  patient

being  so  violent  that  he  had  to  be  tied ;  rolled  about  in
bed,  sleepless,  uttering  shrill  screams;  delirious,  with-
out memory  or  consciousness;  pupils  extremely  dilated;
violent  desire  to  bite  and  to  tear  everything  with  his
teeth;  extreme  dryness  of  inner  mouth  and  fauces;
sight  of  a  light,  a  mirror,  or  water  excited  horrible  con-
vulsions; constriction  and  spasms  of  oesophagus,  froth
at  mouth  and  frequent  spitting.

■  Drink  is  swallowed  hastily.
Throat  feels  sore  with  stiff'  neck.

■  Inflammation  of  posterior  wall  of  pharynx;  spasmodic

contractions.

■  Tetanic  spasms  of  muscles  of  glottis;  added  to  angina,

after  copious  venesections,  with  impending  danger  of
a  local  motory  paralysis.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Increased  appe-
tite; with  diarrhoea;  with  sweat;  with  chorea.

■  Loss  of  appetite:  with  oppression  at  pit  of  stomach;  with

sweat;  cannot  eat  bread.
While  eating:  arms  tremble.
After  eating:  double  sight;  fauces  constricted.

■  Thirst:  with  great  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat;  intense

and  unallayed  by  water;  ■■violent;  with  desire  for  sour
drinks;  in  mania;  with  vertigo;  with  headache;  ab-
domen inflamed;  for  large  quantities, drinking  with


65  STRAMONIUM.

avidity;  with  dim  sight;  even  with  much  saliva;  and
vomiting;  after  vomiting;  with  bellyache  and  looseness
of  bowels;  with  copious  secretion  of  burning  urine;
when  awakening;  violent,  with  heat;  followed  by  sweat;
between  heat  and  sweat;  with  sweat.
Thirstless:  sometimes  with  cold  or  hot  stage  and  sweat;
averse  to  water  during  fever.

■  Great  desire  for  acids.

1 1  Fear  of  water  and  aversion  to  all  fluids.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. iiVery
violent  spasmodic  hiccough.

■  Singultus in most obstinate form, in children,  with

restlessness in night, and screaming during sleep.
^Singultus.
I  Sour  eructations,  with  cardialgia.

■  Nausea:  flow  of  very  salt  saliva;  but  cannot  vomit;  and

disgust;  with  anxiety;  with  sensation  as  if  falling;
with  profuse  salivation,  in -evening;  with  incessant
hiccough;  with  inability  to  bring  up  anything;  as  if
he  would  vomit,  but  it  never  comes  to  it.

■  Watery  vomiting:  of  mucus  in  evening;  of  a  sour-smell-
.  ing  mucus;  of  green  mucus,  with  thirst;  of  bile,  with

mucus;  of  a  dark  greenish  substance,  mixed  with  food;
of  bile,  after  least  motion,  even  after  sitting  up  in  bed;
as  soon  as  he  raises  head  from  pillow;  from  exposure
to  bright  light;  in  morning;  of  sour  mucus,  or  green
bile;  all  food,  with  cardialgia;  or  whooping  cough;
rarely  with  chill,  often  with  heat;  sometimes  with  sweat.
After  vomiting:  thirst;  deep  sleep;  fever  and  sweat.

■  Diaphragmitis; delirium; burning along  diaphragm;

short-breathed;  spasms;  struggles  against  water  offered.
^''  Scrobicullim and Stomach. Great  distress  at pit  of
stomach.
Anxiety  at  pit  of  stomach,  with  dyspnoea.

■  Burning  in  pit  of  stomach,  extending  to  both  sides.

■  Epigastrium  tense,  hard,  painful.
Stomach  very  sensitive  to  touch.
Inflammation  of  stomach,  burning;  anxiety.
Pressing  pain  in  stomach.

Violent  pressing  pain  in  1.  half  of  stomach,  <  by  pressure,
i  I  Drawing  pain  in  back  part  of  stomach.

■  Pain  in  stomach  and  ceecum.
Corroding  pain  in  stomach.

I  I  Intense  pain,  vomits  nearly  all  food ;  since  ten  years.

I  I  Cardialgia  for  several  years ;  several  attacks  every  day,
ending  with  vomiting  and  eructation;  tongue  pale,
somewhat  furred  at  back;  retarded  stool;  small,  weak
pulse;  emaciation.

VOL.  X. — 5.


STRAMONIUM.  6Q

^^  Abdomen. Heat  and  anxiety  in  abdomen.

Pain  in  abdomen;  pressing,  creeping;  writhing;  drawing.

Tearing ;  as  if  navel  were  to  be  torn  out,  pain  goes  into
chest;  colicky.

Colic :  vertigo ;  watery  vomiting,  and  diarrhoea ;  with
rumbling  and  diarrhoea;  with  sweat;  coming  on  sud-
denly in  evening,  with  sensation  of  fainting  and  cold
shivers;  as  if  puffed  up,  abdomen  painful,  even  when
touching  side.

Abdomen:  hard,  tense;  tympanitic;  distended,  but  not
hard.

Hysterical  spasms  in  belly.

Wind  in  abdomen  awakens  her ;  screams,  thinking  herself
full  of  creeping  things.

Sensation as  if  abdomen were  expanded to extremest
degree.
*°  Stool  and  Rectum, ll  Stool  and  urine  suppressed.

Constipation :  unsuccessful  urging  to  stool ;  with  convul-
sions ;  cardialgia ;  alternating  with  diarrhoea,  and  bleed-
ing hemorrhoids.

Diarrhoea :  with  vertigo  ;  with  headache ;  with  paleness  of
face ;  with  increase  of  appetite  ;  ceasing  after  a  profuse
sweat;  evacuations  involuntary ;  lof  typhoid  fever ;  lin
childbed.

iStools:  black,  preceded  by  writhing  in  bowels,  and  deli-
rium; blackish;  smelling  like  carrion,  painless,  diar-
rhoeic.

iCholera  infantum:  foul-smelling  stools;  strabismus;
awakes  with  fright;  pale  face.

Coagulated  blood  passes  from  anus.

Hemorrhoidal  flux  for  several  days.

I  I  Hemorrhoids :  painful;  bleeding.

Before  stool :  twisting  in  bowels ;  writhing  pain  in  ab-
domen.

During  stool :  colic,  distension  of  abdomen,  rolling  in  ab-
domen, vomiting,  paleness;  perspiration.

Worms ;  abdominal  spasms,  and  frequent  desire  for  stool ;
on  awaking  child  shrinks  from  sight  of  objects,  even
from  those  with  which  it  is  familiar.
^'  Urinary  Organs.  Retention  of  urine  :  with  sensation  as  if
urine  could  not  be  passed  on  account  of  narrowness  of
urethra;  after  straining  a  while  a  few  drops  are  passed,
no  stream  being  formed  in  spite  of  all  straining;  with-
out any  painful  sensation,  but  as  if  a  cylindrical  body
were  being  pushed  through  urethra,  >  after  drinking
vinegar.

Urine  discharged  in  drops,  with  constant  painful  urging.

J  Kidneys  secrete  less  urine  than  usual,  or  none,  in  acute


G7  STRAMONIUM.

diseases,  especially  of  children,  eruptive  fevers,  etc.,  also

ill  typhoid,  or  typhus  ;  after  miscarriage  or  labor ;  great

desire  to  urinate,  although  secretion  is  suppressed.
Often  obliged  to  make  water,  but  passage  was  delayed  for

a  minute  before  it  came,  and  although  it  came  out  merely

in  drops,  yet  during forenoon  a  large  quantity  was

discharged.
Suddenly,  at  night,  an  astonishing  quantity  of  urine  as

clear  as  water ;  after  delirium.
Profuse  flow  of  burning  urine.
Urine  passes  without  any  power ;  was  able  to  retain  it,  but

felt  as  if  he  had  not  power  to  close  neck  of  bladder;

sometimes  a  sensation  as  if  urethra  were  too  narrow  and

unable  to  expand.
Passed urine involuntarily ; in bed ; in walking  and

sitting.

■  Micturition  dribbling;  dribbles  away  very  slowly  and

feebly.
I  Rigor  during  urination,  rumbling  in  abdomen.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Exalted  sexual  passion.

iLasciviousness; priapism; penis in erection, as in

chordee ;  testicles  drawn  up.
I  Sexual  irritation;  constantly  uncovering  sexual  parts;

■  indecent  talking.

■  Very  little  consciousness;  keeps  his  hands  constantly  on

his  genitals.

■  Constant  pulling  at  genitals  in  little  boys.

■  Onanism,  causing  epilepsy.

Impotence;  from  onanism,  often  but  temporary.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Nymphomania ;  sexual  delirium;

■  talks  about  lewd  subjects;  sings  obscene  songs;  insati-
able sexual  desire ;  has  a  lascivious  smell  of  semen ;  ex-
cessive menstrual  flow,  with  drawing  in  thighs,  abdomen
and  upper  limbs;  after  menses,  sobbing  and  whining.

I  I  Ovarian  tumor,  size  of  hen's  egg,  lancinating  pain;  hys-
terical convulsions,  during  which  patient  shrinks  back
with  fear  on  seeing  any  one.

■Shrinking  look,  when  awaking,  in  metritis.

Discharge  of  black  blood  from  uterus.

Menorrhagia.

■  Metrorrhagia,  with  excessive  loquacity,  singing,  prayers,

and  praise ;  full  of  strange  and  absurd  ideas ;  drawing
pains  in  abdomen,  upper  and  lower  extremities ;  some-
times passing  large  coagula.

■  Menstrual  flow:  excessive;  drawing  in  thighs,  abdomen,

and  upper  limbs ;  very  watery ;  too  profuse,  of  black
blood,  in  large  clots;  every  three  weeks,  lasting  longer
than  usual.


STRAMONIUM.  68

iDysmenorrhoea;  ceaseless  talking,  mostly  devout;  very
earnestly  beseeching ;  drawing  in  thighs  and  aching  in
knees,  with  a  sensation  of  being  very  tall ;  pains  are
unbearable,  drive  patient  to  despair.

•  During  menses:  loquacity;  extreme  degree  of  nervous
erethism;  convulsions;  trembling  and  restlessness;
strong  smell  as  of  semen ;  rank  smell  of  body.

I  After  menses:  sobbing,  whining;  erysipelas  of  1.  cheek.
'*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i  During  pregnancy:
mania;  faceache  ;  is  full  of  strange  ideas.

■  Threatened  abortion; unceasing  talking,  singing,  im-

ploring.

I  Puerperal  convulsions :  frightened  appearance  before
and  during  convulsions;  sardonic  grin  ;  stammering  or
loss  of  speech  ;  loss  of  consciousness  and  sensibility  ;
frightful  visions ;  laughter,  singing  ;  attempts  to  escape;
fits  are  renewed  by  sight  of  some  brilliant  object,  some-
times by  contact;  with  copious  sweating  and  great  fear.

I  I  Convulsions :  epileptic  form  ;  skin  hot  and  dry ;  pulse
sharp  and  quick  (130);  face  red  and  bloated  ;  eyes  spark-
ling and  projecting,  with  frothing  at  mouth ;  arms  and
limbs  convulsed ;  head  drawn  backward.  ^Puerperal
convulsions.

IIA  woman,  set.  32,  during  fourth  labor,  was  harshly
manipulated  in  attempt  to  dilate  os,  became  excited,
scolded,  struck,  spat  about  her,  cried  and  laughed,  face
flushed,  pupils  dilated,  in  great  terror;  spasms  with
w^rithing  and  floundering  in  manifold  gyrations;  every
muscle  in  play,  especiall}^  flexors  and  extensors;  puden-
dum swollen,  tender;  os  uteri  tilted  back,  dilatable;
child  was  born  during  spasm. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

■  Cadaverous  odor  of  lochia;  she  is  full  of  strange  fancies

and  visions.
Too  profuse  secretion  of  milk  in  nursing  women.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i Voice:

higher  and  finer;  screeching;  indistinct;  vocal  organs

partly  paralyzed;  weak.
Attempts  to  speak  hastily,  cannot  utter  a  word,  only  a

bellowing  or  stammering;  voice  hoarse  and  croaking.
I  Constriction  of  larynx  and  thoracic  muscles.
Hoarseness  from  screaming;  with  salivation ;  in  morning.
I  Aphonia  from  great  mental  excitement,  with  hysterical

and  maniacal  symptoms.

■  Aphasia  in  cerebral  disease.

I  I  Laryngeal  spasm  for  an  hour,  in  cholera,  at  midnight,
patient  nearly  suffocated,  seemed  to  pray  for  help,  with
folded  hands  and  despairing  look.

1  I  Tries  in  vain  to  speak  a  word;  facial  muscles  become


69  STRAMONIUM.

distorted,  and  an  attack  of  suffocation  sets  in,  lasting

several  minutes.
I  I  Spasmodic laughing at night; spasmodic weeping

during  daytime;  perfect  aphonia.
I  I  Loss  of  speech  in  cholera;  total  dumbness  for  several

days.
^^Respiration, l Rattling  breathing: toward midnight; in

whooping  cough;  in  chill  or  sweat.
Breathing: at times stertorous and labored; snoring;

hurried  and  difficult;  very  deep,  with  great  exertion;

inspiration slow, expiration quick; oppressed, with

feeling  of  tightness  across  chest;  anxious,  during  heat

or  sweat;  oppressed  in  a  high  degree;  stertorous  as  in

croup.
Frequent  sighs.

■  Excessive  sense  of  suffocation.

■  Angina  pectoris;  tightness  across  chest;  oppression,  con-

traction; interrupted  breathing.

■  Spasms  of  muscles  of  chest; single  parts  twitch;  spas-

modic motion  of  arms;  sometimes  chest  fixed;  breathing
only  with  diaphragm  and  abdominal  muscles.

■  A  mixture  of  hyperaemia  and  spasm  in  consequence  of

affections  of  spine  and  diaphragm,  with  hiccough,
sympathetic  spasms  of  epiglottis.

■  Spasms  of  chest,  particularly  in  hysterical  females,
■Spasmodic  asthma.

Hard  pressure  on  cartilages  of  third  and  fourth  ribs,  with
difficult  breathing;  he  is  unable  to  inhale  enough
breath  without  great  anxiety.
*^  Cough.  ■Cough:  periodical,  painless,  spasmodic,  shrill,
screeching  tone;  <  in  evening  iand  morning,  from
touching  throat,  from  walking  in  wind,  in  vaulted
rooms,  after  debauch,  after  fright,  from  looking  at
bright  objects,  from  drinking  water;  of  drunkards;
dry,  with  excessive  sense  of  suffocation;  sonorous,
croupy,  barking.

When coughing while sitting, lower extremities are
jerked  up.

■  Whooping cough,  barking,  crouplike,  with  suffocating

contraction  of  chest,  violent  beating  of  heart,  rattling,
anxiety,  congestion,  blood-spitting;  convulsions;  vomits
all  food,  extremely  emaciated,  crying  day  and  night,
bleeding  from  nose  with  violent  attacks.

During  cough:  palpitation,  anxiety;  constriction  of  chest,
convulsions.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Feeling  of  dryness  in  chest.

Aching  pain  in  chest  and  sternum,  excited  by  talking.

Feeling  as  if  something  turned  around  in  chest;  after-
ward heat  in  face.


STRAMONIUM.  70

Pain  in  breast,  cough  and  other  peri-pneumonic  symptoms
during  recover}^  from  meningitis.

1  I  Spasms  in  chest  preventing  breathing. ^Prosopalgia.

I  iDiaphragmitis;  violent  burning  in  region  of  pit  of
stomach,  extends  along  diaphragm,  both  sides ;  short,
difficult  breathing;  pulse  frequent,  hard ;  laughing  and
crying;  spasms;  delirium,  but  is  conscious  of  her  con-
dition and  bursts  out  in  bitter  complaint  about  her  mis-
fortunes; on  offering  her  water  she  struggles  against  it.
^Nymphomania.

I  I  Pulse  132;  temperature  103.3;  breathing  very  short
and  labored,  with  a  continuous  rattling  in  chest,  >  by  a
profuse,  slimy,  watery  expectoration,  mixed  with  reddish
purulent  matter;  large  bubbling  rales  all  over  both
lungs,  percussion  sound  flat  over  entire  back;  urine
had  not  been  voided  since  morning,  but  there  had  been
a  loose  alvine  evacuation  at  1  p.m.  ;  as  soon  as  she  falls
into  a  doze,  a  profuse  perspiration  breaks  out  all  over
her;  cough  <  by  cold  drinks;  fits  of  suffocation  follow
cough,  with  desire  to  have  doors  and  windows  open;
craving  for  beer;  great  desire  for  light,  if  room  is  dark
she  thinks  she  will  be  smothered. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  Right-sided  pneumonia  four  days;  pulse  102;  tempera-
ture 103;  very  thirsty  for  cold  water;  moaning  and
great  loquacit}'-,  with  high  delirium ;  wants  to  jump  out
of  bed,  can  hardly  be  kept  there;  talks  about  horses  in
a  barn  that  he  has  to  feed,  etc.;  thinks  one  of  his  legs
is  cut  off;  wants  his  wife  with  him  all  the  time,  and
light  in  room ;  imagines  he  is  going  to  die ;  counte-
nance besotted ;  coughs  considerably  and  raises  yellow
and  bloody  mucus;  severe  frontal  headache  ;  high  fever
from  4  P.M.  until  5  a.m.  ;  no  movement  from  bowels
since  commencement  of  sickness ;  urine  clear,  but  dark-
red  ;  bronchial  breathing  and  dulness  on  percussion
over  lower  1.  lung.
'^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pressure  about  heart.

Heart's  action  feeble  and  slow.

Beating  of  heart  could  not  be  felt.

■  Palpitation;  with  anxiety.

I  I  Beating  of  heart  so  increased  by  motion  he  cannot  speak
for  hours ;  trembling,  twitching  as  in  chorea ;  murmurs
instead  of  regular  sounds;  after  fright.

I  Angina  pectoris. (See  26.)

iPulse:  full,  strong;  frequent,  hard;  irregular;  small  and
spasmodic ;  slow,  in  typhus ;  trembling  or  impercepti-
ble ;  double  and  very  quick,  with  quiet  respiration ;
rapid;  soft  and  feeble ;  quick,  intermitting;  tremulous,
weak,  unequal,  sometimes  intermitting.


71  STRAMONIUM.

I  I  Pulse  small,  weak,  scarcely  perceptible,  heart  tumultu-
ous, carotids  full,  pulsating.
'"  Outer  Chest. Cutting  pain  in  sternum  after  lying  down  in
night,  ceases  when  wind  passes  off,  but  returns.

Chest  eruptions.

I  Red  rash  on  chest. ^Typhus.

■Spasms  in  pectoral  muscles.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Throat  externally  swollen,  as  in  mumps.

Great  rigidity  of  muscles  of  neck  and  back.

I  I  Neck  stiff;  cannot  bend  head  backward.

Drawing  rheumatic  pain  from  side  of  neck  into  limbs.

I  1  Pain  in  nape  of  neck  ;  from  neck  over  head.

I  Pain  in  cervical  and  upper  dorsal  vertebrae.

I  I  Tearing  burning  pains  from  neck  to  1.  axilla.

Great  sensitiveness  along  spine  in  cervical  region,  slight-
est pressure  caused  most  violent  outcries  and  raving.

Trunk  equally  rigid  as  limbs.

Back  very  stiff,  not  very  painful.

I  I  Red,  stupid,  staring  visage;  inability  to  articulate;  lying
on  1.  side  and  constantly  thrusting  his  r.  side  forward
by  spasms  of  r.  erector  spinal  muscles.  ^After  sun-
stroke.

■  Drawing  pains  in  middle  of  spine,  with  drawing  pain.

opposite  to  it,  on  back  part  of  stomach.

Spot  in  back  pains  when  touched.

I  I  Puts  r.  arm  to  small  of  back  and  draws  mouth  as  if  he-
had  severe  pain.

Pain  as  if  beaten  in  back,  shoulder  and  abdomen,  excited
by  motion.

Chilly  along  back,  like  coW  water.

Sweat  on  back.

Eruption  on  back.

Severe  pains  in  loins.

Pains  in  lumbar  region,  like  rheumatism.

Drawing  pains  in  small  of  back.

The  back  is  drawn  backward.

■  Myelitis:  trembling  contractions;  tonic  epileptoid  convul-

sions, consciousness  undisturbed;  sudden  jerks  through
body,  spots  in  back  pain  when  touched  ;  constant  pain
in  cervical  and  upper  dorsal  vertebrae ;  muscles  will  not
obe}^  will ;  alternate  exaltation  and  melancholy ;  ver-
tigo when  walking  in  dark  ;  diplopia,  cloudiness  of  vis-
ion ;  strabismus ;  stammering  speech,  or  aphonia ;
spasms  of  muscles  of  face,  or  twitching  of  single  parts '
trembling,  or  paralysis  of  limbs.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  shoulder  and  back.

Fine,  sharp  stitches  in  forearm,  and  a  rheumatic  constrict-
ive pain  in  deltoid.


STRAMONIUM.  72

I  I  Aching,  drawing  pain  in  r.  arm,  above  elbow.
Jerks  of  elbows ;  stitches  in  forearm.
I  Arms  thrown  about;  in  neuralgia;  thrown  upward.
Constant  motion  of  hands  and  arms  as  if  spinning  or
weaving.

■  Convulsive  movement  of  arms  over  head.

■  Raises  arms  over  head,  claps  hands,  makes  graceful,  gyra-

tory motions.
Spasmodic  motions  of  hands  and  forearms.
I  Arms  convulsed,  more  than  legs. ^Spasms.

■  Beating  with  one  arm,  grasping  with  other.

Motion  with  hands,  as  if  child,  which  was  bent  backward,

feared  every  moment  to  fall  deep  down.
Grasping  about  wdth  hands,  not  trembling  and  uncertain,

but  firm.

■  Trembling  hands  incessantly. ^Typhus.

■  I  Moving  hand:  strangely,  in  different  directions;  straight

forward  ;  as  if  keeping  off  something ;  as  if  doing  some
work ;  as  if  searching  something  ;  as  if  endeavoring  to
seize  some  object  which  he  indistinctly  perceives  in
air;  catching  at  imaginary  things;  picking;  searching
with  hands  on  bedcovers ;  toward  nose,  ears  and  head ;
grasps  throat,  with  sighing  and  groaning.

■  Contortion  and  wringing  of  hands.

Hands:  opening  and  shutting;  many  motions  with  fin-
gers; jerking;  twitching;  clenched  (not  thumbs),  but
can  be  opened ;  could  not  close  hands  to  make  a  fist ;
dropped  things ;  loosened  in  joints ;  trembling.

I  I  Difficult  to  bring  hand  to  tumbler,  or  tumbler  to  mouth.

■Fingers  numb.

■  Hands  and  arms  tremble.

Trembling  of  hand  when  he  seizes  anything;  when  eating.

Upper  extremities  hot.

Hands  constantly  cold.

Itching  blotches  in  palms  of  hands.

Spots  on  arms  like  flea-bites.

■  Panaritium,  pain  intolerable,  drives  to  despair;  relieves

pain  of  suppuration.
'^  Lower  Limbs. ■  iCoxalgia,  1.  hip ;  violent  distracting  pains,
when  abscesses  form.

■  Morbus  coxarius,  1.  limb  affected  and  about  half  an  inch

longer  than  sound  limb  ;  fistulous  openings  from  1.  hip.
I  I  Drawing  pains  in  thighs.
Sharp  stitches  on  r.  shin  bone.
Rheumatic,  drawing,  pressing  pain  in  1.  tarsus.
Numbness  and  stiff"ness  of  1.  leg,  with  tickling,  creeping

feeling  under  cutis.
Creeping;  in  thigh ;  in  foot;  in  toes.


73  STRAMONIUM.

iHeels  numb,  sometimes  painful.

Feet  and  lower  extremities  cold  and  palsied,  rest  of  body

agitated.
•  Paralysis  of  lower  limbs,  loss  of  speech  ;  staring.
Feet  loose  in  joints.
When  placed  on  his  legs,  he  would  kick  them  forward,  but

could  not  stand  on  them,  they  could  not  remain  quiet

one  minute.
Weariness  of  feet.
Spasmodic  rigidity  of  lower  limbs.
Twitching  in  limbs.
Trembling  of  feet.

Legs  give  way  when  walking ;  falls  over  his  own  feet.
Convulsions  of  1.  lower  limb ;  they  commence  with  shocks,

drawing  limb  inward  and  upward.
Spasms  in  leg.

Jerking  in  thigh  ;  in^knee  joints,
i  I  Drawing  up  leg  in  sleep.
I  I  Pushing  with  feet. ^Typhus.
In  afternoon,  a  tremulous  tossing  of  knees  and  feet,  as  of

a  violent  chill,  his  mind  being  intact.
Twitching  of  toes.
Constant  trembling  of  feet.

■  Inferior  extremities  cold.

■  Always  cold  feet.
Burning  on  dorsum  of  foot.
Burning  and  itching  of  feet.

Lowef  part  of  paralyzed  lower  limbs  covered  with  sweat.

Limbs  deep  red.

Copper  color  visible  on  1.  knee.

I  I  Inside  of  r.  thigh,  red  and  swollen. ^Typhus.

Eruption  on  leg ;  itching  on  feet.

Inflamed,  painful  pustules  on  r.  leg,  emitting  an  acrid
water.

Several  boils  on  feet.
"^^Limbs  in  GeneraL lArms  agitated,  lower  limbs  quiet.

Drawing,  laming,  somewhat  spasmodic  pains  in  muscles.

I  I  Fingers  and  heels  numb,  latter  at  times  painful,  rheu-
matic headaches.

I  Limbs  paralyzed  after  apoplexy,  or  from  spinal  softening.

Limbs  feel  numb,  as  if  gone  to  sleep ;  hands  and  feet  very
cold,  in  nervous  diseases,  brain  highly  congested.

■  Twitching  of  hands  and  feet.

^' Rest. Position. Motion. Lying : on  side  vertigo  <  ;
pulsating  heat  in  vertex  >  ;  in  evening  prosopalgia  in
1.  cheek ;  cutting  pain  in  sternum.
Sitting:  passed  urine  involuntarily;  while  coughing  lower
extremities  are  jerked  up.


STRAMONIUM.  74

Supports  head  with  hands  while  bending  or  rising,  after
sunstroke.

As  soon  as  he  raises  head  from  pillow :  vomiting.

Puts  r.  arm  to  small  of  back  :  as  if  in  pain.

Rising:  pressure  in  forehead.

After  motion :  vomiting  of  bile ;  beating  of  heart  very-
much  increased;  pain  in  back,  shoulder  and  abdomen.

Walking :  involuntary  passing  of  urine ;  in  dark,  vertigo.
^*  Nerves. iGreat  inclination  to  lie  down.

Weariness  of  limbs.

I  Great  debility  ;  lassitude  and  weariness.

Fainting  :  with  headache ;  in  forenoon,  with  great  pale-
ness of  face;  with  great  dryness  in  mouth  ;  with  colic;
during  cold  stage ;  in  typhus.  '^-r—

I  I  Fainting  fits  every  day ;  suddenly  falls  as  if  dead,  with
pale  face,  almost  imperceptible  breathing,  waking  after
one  to  three  hours;  if  disturbed  during  paroxysm,  she
rolls  about  floor,  becomes  enraged,  bites  those  around
her.

iTotters  as  if  giddy ;  cannot  make  even  a  few  steps  without
help.

I  I  Falls  down  with  full  consciousness,  and  bent  backward

so  that  heels  touch  occiput; suddenly  snaps  forward
again.

■  Falling  in  dark;  can  walk  well  in  light.

■  Excessive  uneasiness  and  restlessness.

I I  Constant  restless  movements  of  limbs  and  of  whole
body.

Great  mobility  of  all  extremities,  still  he  is  not  able  to

rise.
The  muscles  of  voluntary  motion  fail  to  follow  influence

of  will ;  with  great  labor  he  carries  a  glass  to  his  lips.

■  Entire  loss  of  voluntary  motion,  although  conscious.

I  I  Voluntary  muscles  do  not  obey  will,  in  spite  of  his  ex-
ertions to  moderate  his  disagreeable  motions.
Lameness  of  different  parts  of  body.

■  Paralyzed  limbs,  after  apoplexy.

■  Paralytic  symptoms  alternating  with  spasmodic.

■  Trembling: of  lips; of  limbs; of  hands  and  feet ; of

whole  body  ;  as  if  child  were  in  a  great  fright ;  of  limbs,
with  mania-a-potu.

■  Jerking: of  head  from  pillow  ;  of  extremities  ;  through

body.

■  ■Twitching:  of  hands  and  feet;  of  tendons;  of  extrem-

ities; during  chill;  through  body,  like  chorea.
Starts  and  shocks  through  body.
Continual  cramp  in  hands  and  feet.
Slow  contracting  and  stretching  of  limbs,  repeatedly  in

paroxysms.


75  STRAMONIUM.

Alternate  contractions  of  hands  and  feet.

1 1  Convulsions:  alternating  with  rage ;  opisthotonic,  from
bright,  dazzling  objects,  a  lighted  candle,  a  mirror,  or
touch,  child  rigid  as  a  board  ;  when  loudly  spoken  to,  or
when  touched ;  rejects  every  kind  of  liquid,  like  in  hy-
drophobia, moment  it  touches  lips  spasms  return  with
great  violence;  shrieks  violently  in  a  hoarse  voice.

Throwing  about  of  arms  and  legs,  most  of  arms;  with
opening  and  shutting  of  hands,  and  many  motions  of
fingers.

■  Great  movability  of  limbs.

I  Strange  involuntary  motions,  great  agility.

False  perception  of  his  limbs,  missing  steps  going  down

stairs.
Sensation  in  joints  as  if  all  parts  of  limbs  were  completely

separated  from  each  other.
Sensation  in  arms  and  legs  as  if  they  were  separated  from

body.
Hands  and  feet  feel  as  if  loosened  in  joints,

■  Progressive  locomotor  ataxia.

■  Chorea  is  preceded  for  some  length  of  time  by  great  irrit-

ability and  sensitiveness,  inclination  to  weep,  with
laughing  and  sprightly  humor;  trembling  in  one  or
more  extremities;  movements  of  extremities  are  per-
formed with  ease  and  with  force;  walking  degenerates
into  hurried  running ;  crawling  in  extremities.

■  Chorea  in  persons  of  weakly  constitution,  with  increased

action  of  higher  nervous  system,  easy  mobility  of  mus-
cles subject  to  will,  with  simultaneous  depression  of  ab-
dominal nervous  system,  lassitude  and  retention  of  stool
and  urine.

■  Chorea: from  fright; creeping  in  limbs,  then  violent

movements,  generally  crosswise,  of  1.  arm  and  r.  foot;
rotate  arms  over  head ;  jump  up,  climb  over  tables,
etc. ;  caused  by  cerebral  disease ;  severe  involuntary
motion  of  tongue,  with  impossibility  to  utter  a  word.
I  I  Sardonic  grin;  on  attempting  to  pick  an  object  up  from
floor,  hand  would  steer  quite  wide  of  it  in  spite  of  best
efforts. ^Chorea.

■  Hysteria:  preceded  by  great  sensitiveness,  weeping  and

laughing  alternately;  sexual  excitement;  full  of  strange
and  absurd  fancies ;  full  of  fear,  starts  back  and  stares
wildly,  even  at  familiar  objects  ;  does  not  wish  to  be  left
alone;  great  loquacity;  pufFed-up  face ;  praying  and
imploring;  convulsions;  rigid;  nervous  chills;  frothing
at  mouth ;  faces  appear  elongated  ;  shrinks  back  with
fear,  tries  to  escape;  without  loss  of  consciousness;  from
fright;  attacks  sudden,  with  screams,  afterward  drowsy,


STRAMONIUM.  76

but  cannot  sleep ;  attacks  periodical,  and  there  are  pre-
monitory symptoms;  tonic  spasms,  as  catelepsy,  limbs
can  be  moved  by  others ;  stiffness  of  body,  with  loss  of
consciousness,  preceded  by  headache,  with  vertigo.

Opisthotonos  and  trismus,  with  congestion  to  head ;  red
face;  heat  of  body,  profuse  urine;  deep,  snoring  sleep.

I  I  Screams,  then  draws  legs  up  and  arms  across  chest,
grinds  and  clenches  teeth,  becomes  blue  under  eyes  and
around  mouth,  sometimes  nausea  or  retching;  urine
high-colored  when  attacks  are  most  frequent ;  asks  for
something  to  eat  directly  after  attacks ;  pain  in  stomach,
with  attacks;  during  attacks,  face  first  flushed,  then
pale,  followed  by  blueness;  skin  dry  and  hot;  body
becomes  stiff  and  bent  backward,  head  retracted,  knees
drawn  up,  elbows  pressed  into  sides,  and  hands  clenched;
eleven  to  twelve  attacks  daily,  each  lasting  three  min-
utes; moans  in  sleep  after  having  had  attacks;  has
thread-worms.

■  Convulsions  of  head  and  arms,  with hiccough; moves

head  to  and  fro,  this  movement  is  only  interrupted  by
hiccough.

■  Severe spasms,  opisthotonos,  emprosthotonos, alternat-

ing with  somnambulism.
■Spasms:  alternation  of  clonic  and  tonic;  body  very  hot;
continually  change  character;  abdomen  puffed;  nightly;
from  suppression  of  eruption,  or  exanthem  failing  to
come  out ;  suppression  of  all  secretions  and  excretions.

■  Epilepsy: from  fright; attacks  sudden,  with  screams,

afterward  drowsy ;  aching  in  stomach  ;  periodical ;  gives
warning  of  approach  by  premonitory  symptoms.

I  I  Epileptiform spasms, thrusting head continually in

quick  succession  to  r.;  continual  rotary  motion  with  1.
arm  ;  pain  in  pit  of  stomach ;  obstinate  constipation ;
deep,  snoring  sleep ;  low-spirited,  fear  of  death ;  desire
to  be  alone.

I I  Epilepsy,  after  onanism.

I  I  Spasmodic  symptoms,  alternating  with  a  trance;  a
woman  suffering  for  three  years,  every  Summer.

Immobility  of  limbs;  unable  to  make  least  motion.
^Catalepsy.

I  I  Cataleptic  attacks,  limbs  easily  moved  by  others,  re-
maining in  given  position  ;  before  attacks  headache,
vertigo  and  heaviness  of  head.

I  I  Cataleptic  state,  after  a  wound  on  r.  parietal  bone ;
picking  with  hands  on  bedcovers.

I  I  Tetanus  and  trismus.

I  I  He  can  only  slowly  advance,  as  legs  can  only  be  raised
in  a  stiff  manner  and  feet  remain  in  full  extension ;


77  STRAMONIUM.

patient  falls  easily,  and  tip  of  foot  pointed  inwardly,
only  touches  ground.
I  I  Extremities  retain  any  position  given  to  them,  only  eye-
lids reopen  after  they  are  closed ;  head  remains  wher-
ever it  is  put,  and  when  foot  is  flexed  forward  or  back-
ward on  joint  it  remains  so,  or  returns  only  slowly  to
its  former  position.

■  Paralysis  of  one,  convulsions  of  other  side.

■  Left side paralyzed, stammering  unconnected words;

sheds  tears.

•  Paralyzed  limbs  after  apoplexy.

I  I  Lies  perfectly  quiet,  eyes  half  open,  staring  and  tired-
looking,  upper  eyelids  move  spasmodically,  trembling
mouth  open,  does  not  reply  to  any  question.

■  Traumatic  neuritis.

Said  to  be  effective  for  hydrophobia  (vary  dose  even  to

production  of  symptoms).
^^  Sleep. Drowsy  and  staggering.

After  sleeping  in  daytime,  wakes  with  an  important  and

solemn  look.
Great  desire  to  lie  down  and  sleep.

■  Drowsiness  succeeded  by  coma.

I  iSleep}^,  but  cannot  sleep;  after  convulsions.

■  Stupefied half slumber, or  deep sleep with snoring;

stertorous  breathing.

■  Coma, rattling respiration, bloody froth at mouth.

^Scarlatina.

■  ■Child  will  riot  go  to  sleep  in  dark,  but  soon  falls  asleep

in  a  lighted  room.

■  Restless  sleep,  lies  with  legs  drawn  up;  moves  arms  in

different  directions;  snores  and  utters  inarticulate
sounds.

■  Walking about  at  night;  got  up  after  midnight,  con-

fused; rising  up  in  bed;  sat  up  in  bed.
I  I  Dreams  with  open  eyes. ^Typhus.
I  I  Strange  dreams  of  a  frightful  kind.

■  Insomnia,  with  low  adynamic  fevers.

■  During  sleep: laughs; screams;  starts; sexual excite-

ment ;  twitching  of  limbs ;  emissions ;  spasms ;  sits  up,
looks  up,  talks  incoherently.

■  Restless  sleep,  full  of  dreams;  tossing  about  in  bed.

■  Hallucinations:  dancing  in  churchyard ;  hears  two  per-

sons talk,  but  does  not  know  who  they  are;  as  if  bed
were  being  drawn  from  under  her.

■  Awakens:  does  not  know  where  he  is;  with  a  solemn

air  of  importance;  screaming,  seems  frightened,  knows
no  one,  shrinks  away,  or  jumps  out  of  bed  ;  with  staring
eyes  at  one  point; assumes  a  comically  majestic  ap-


STRAMONIUM.  78

pearance;  sees  as  through  a  gauze;  violent  thirst;
tired ;  with  itching.
'*  Time.  Morning:  inconsolable;  congestive  headache  on
getting  up,  tearing  in  head  and  neck  <  ;  dimness  of
vision ;  vomiting ;  cough  <  ;  feet  cold  early ;  itching
over  whole  body.

2  A.M. :  paralytic  attacks.

3  A.M. :  violent  spasms.
Forenoon :  fainting.

During  day :  weeping ;  after  sleep  wakes  with  an  im-
portant and  solemn  look.

1  P.M. :  alvine  evacuation.

Afternoon:  tremulous  tossing  of  knees  and  feet;  chilli-
ness along  back ;  first  heat  of  head  and  face,  then
general  coldness ;  fever.

Evening :  delirious  talk  <  ;  sad  with  thoughts  of  death ;
after  sunset  unsteady  gait;  congestive  headache  >  ;
rheumatic  headache  < ;  neuralgia  of  cheek ;  proso-
palgia in  1.  cheek ;  nausea  with  profuse  salivation ;
vomiting  of  mucus ;  sudden  colic ;  cough  <  ;  fever.

Night:  hallucinations  <;  disposed  to  weep;  vertigo  <;
rheumatic  headache  <  ;  agglutination  of  eyelids  ;  neu-
ralgia of  cheek;  spasmodic  laughing;  singultus  with
restlessness ;  suddenly  an  astonishing  quantity  of  clear
urine  was  passed,  after  delirium;  cutting  pain  in
sternum  after  lying  down  ;  walking  about;  shuddering
of  limbs ;  profuse  sweat.

Midnight:  laryngeal  spasm  for  an  hour;  toward,  rattling
breathing.
^'  Temperature and  Weather. Warmth :  tearing  in  neck
and  head  >  ; otalgia  >  ;  neuralgia  of  cheek  first  >
then  <.

Wind:  walking  in,  cough  <.

Cold:  tearing  in  neck  and  head <;  drinks,  cough  <;
very  sensitive  to  draft.
*'^  Fever. Shivering  sensation  in  chin.

Chills:  run  down  back;  and  general  coldness,  with  red
face  and  twitchings;  with  great  sensitiveness  to  un-
covering; with  heat  of  head  and  shuddering  of  limbs;
at  night;  through  whole  body,  with  single  jerks,  partly
of  whole  body,  partly  of  single  limbs,  of 'elbows  and
knee  joints,  without  any  thirst.

Creeping:  under  skin;  from  1.  side  into  thigh,  or  into
toes  of  same  side,  thence  into  abdomen,  whence  creep-
ing again  descends  into  r.  thigh  and  foot.

Chilliness :  along  back  in  afternoon  ;  chilliness  and  trem-
bling, feels  as  if  cold  water  were  poured  down  her  back ;
of  limbs.


79  STRAMONIUM.

Cold  shivers  with  colic.

Shuddering:  and  diuresis ;  over  whole  body,  and  grind-
ing teeth.

Skin  cold,  hands  and  feet  cold ;  pulse  threadlike,  easil}^
compressed,  small.

Feet  cold  early  in  morning,  nevertheless  very  sensitive  to
least  cold  draft.

Coldness  of  whole  body ;  limbs  and  trunk  are  cold  all
over.

I  Cold  body,  hot  face.

•  Stiffness  and  coldness  of  extremities,  with  unusual  red-
ness and  bloatedness  of  face.

iFever  in  children:  cry  out  in  sleep;  start,  jerk;  eyes
half  open,  pupils  large;  urine  suppressed.

Afternoon,  first  heat  of  head  and  face,  then  general  cold-
ness, then  general  heat.

Heat:  anxious  with  vomiting;  delirium,  thirst  and  sweat;
in  face;  of  whole  body,  face  vivid  red;  at  same  time
sweat ;  dry  over  whole  body ;  in  face,  when  coldness
and  chilliness  passed;  and  talking  during  sleep;  covers
himself  carefully,  if  he  puts  a  finger  out  from  under
cover,  pain  becomes  very  violent.

Covers  up  during  heat.

Fever:  in  afternoon;  in  evening;  first  heat  in  head,
afterward  coldness  of  whole  body,  followed  by  heat  of
whole  body  with  anguish,  sleeps  during  heat,  after
awaking  violent  thirst,  feels  a  stinging  in  palate  until
he  drinks.

During  hot  stage:  restless  and  anxious,  often  with
screams;  thoughts  of  suicide;  excitable;  talking,  sing-
ing and  trilling;  vertigo,  headache,  pains  in  eyes;  im-
paired speech;  puffed-up  abdomen.

During  heat  and  sweat,  numbness  or  crawly  trembling  of
limbs,  drowsiness  and  stupid  sleep.

I  Heat  of  face,  alternating  with  coldness  of  body.

■  Fever,  with  profuse  sweat,  which  does  not  relieve.

Sweat :  with  great  thirst ;  cold  all  over ;  with  delirium ;
with  impaired  vision  or  shunning  light ;  oily  or  putrid
odor;  on  forehead;  in  back;  covers  paralyzed  limbs;
profuse  at  night.

During  sweat:  dulness  and  dizziness;  apoplectic  symp-
toms; anxiety,  violent  screaming,  sighing  and  moan-
ing ;  sometimes  changeable  mood  and  often  trilling  and
singing.

I  I  Boy,  set.  12|^,  suffering  since  three  years  old  with  pecu-
liar febrile  attacks,  for  first  six  years  accompanied  by
an  asthmatic  condition  and  blueness  of  face ;  fever  ap-
pears every  two  or  three  weeks,  with  intermissions  of


STRAMONIUM.  80

same  duration,  appears  every  afternoon  between  three
and  four ;  no  chilliness ;  presence  of  fever  can  often
only  be  determined  by  use  of  thermometer;  no  sweat;
extreme  activity  during  fever;  writes  constantly,  al-
though he  cannot  form  his  letters;  distorts  face  and
talks  a  great  deal;  duration  of  fever  variable;  sleep
disturbed  by  many  dreams;  pupils  normal;  functions
of  body  normal ;  hearing  somewhat  impaired,  particu-
larly during  attacks ;  during  fourth  and  fifth  years  had
various  hallucinations.

I  IE.  C,  set.  25,  had  sunstroke  twice,  afterward  was  sub-
ject for  some  time  to  epileptic  convulsions,  which  only
occur  at  present  during  febrile  stage  of  paroxysm  ;  has
had  quotidian  ague  four  or  five  times  in  last  three
months,  each  time  palliated  by  chloral  hydrate  and
suppressed  by  quinine ;  chill  usually  began  at  9  or  10
A.M.,  with  pain  in  head  and  limbs,  great  thirst,  head-
ache, nausea  and  vomiting;  fever  comes  on  slowly
with  congested  face,  eyes  heavy  and  dry,  pain  becomes
intense,  with  general  muscular  twitchings ;  during
convulsions  eyes  become  bright  and  staring,  body  rigid,
jaws  locked,  frothing  at  mouth,  with  insensibility ;  du-
ration of  paroxysm  from  five  to  fifteen  minutes,  after
which  he  is  unconscious  of  all  that  transpired ;  some-
times three  or  four  spasms  in  succession. ^Ague.

I  I  Congestive  fever;  heat  of  face  with  moist  and  cold
limbs.

I  1  Nightly  fever,  child  cries  out  in  its  sleep ;  .starts  and
jerks;  sleeps  with  its  eyes  half  open,  pupils  widely
dilated,  urine  and  feces  suppressed,

I  I  Worm  fevers.

I  I  In  bilious  fever ;  shrieking  voice,  false  conception  of
things.

■  Gastric  fevers,  with  jerking  of  arms  and  fingers-

I  1  Bilious  typhoid  fever;  loquacious  delirium  with  con-
stant desire  to  get  out  of  bed  ;  yellowish-brown  tongue
dry  on  centre;  lips  sore  and  cracked  and  sordes  on
teeth.

I  I  Bilious  typhoid  fever;  swelled,  dry,  coated  tongue,  with

no  desire  for  water,  although  his  mouth  is  dry,  he  has  to

moisten  it;  suppression  of  urine;  lies  constantly  on  r.

side,  as  it  is  painful  to  lie  on  1.  side.
II Typhus; moving her trembling hands incessantly;

could  not  talk.
M Typhus;  delirious,  singing, whistling, conversing in

different  languages,  or  jumping  out  of  bed  to  run  away,

or  to  go  to  his  business.

II  Typhus;  after  throbbing  headache,  black  before  eyes.


81  STRAMONIUM.

fainting  away ;  grasping  with  hands  and  pushing  with
feet,  confused  talking;  did  not  know  his  family  or
friends;  calling  bystanders  as  if  they  were  absent;
pupils'  extremely  dilated,  insensible  to  bright  light  or
sunlight,  pulse  slow ;  called  for  help,  thought  he  would
die ;  next  day  sopor,  with  loud  snoring.

I  I  Typhus,  with  loss  of  consciousness;  lying  flat,  with
staring,  immovable  pupils;  desire  to  run  away;  with
rage,  talkative,  furious  delirium,  singing,  laughing,
whistling,  constant  restlessness,  involuntary  strange
motions  with  great  agility,  dreaming  with  open  eyes,
loss  of  sight,  loss  of  speech,  red  pimples  on  chest.

I  I  Typhoid  fever  of  remittent  character,  pains  beginning
in  1.  ear  and  terminating  in  1.  side  of  chest,  with  dry
cough,  which  <  pain.

I  In  typhus,  typhoid,  or  other  fevers,  when  patient  fre-
quently raises  or  jerks  head  from  pillow.

I  Typhoid  fever,  with  parched  and  dry  tongue;  eyes  dull
and  heavy ;  passages  from  bowels  very  dark,  almost
black.

I  Typhoid  fever,  involuntary  muscular  motions  character-
ized by  extraordinary  celerity,  also  a  peculiar  morbidly
altered  state  of  mind,  risus  sardonicus,  spasmodic  dis-
tortion of  facial  muscles,  oblique  appearance  of  objects  ;
lies  either  unconscious  with  staring  eyes,  dilated,  im-
movabte  pupils,  or  talks  continually,  and  dreams  with
open  eyes,  trying  to  grasp  everything  with  hands.

I  I  Stupor,  with  delirious  muttering;  constant  raising  of
head  from  pillow  or  boring  into  pillow,  so  that  he  finally
pushes  head  against  headboard  of  bed ;  raises  hands  to
face,  ears,  etc.,  or  waves  them  in  air,  or  scratches  on  wall;
violent  twitching  of  muscles ;  rigidity  of  back,  and
limbs;  masseter  muscles  rigid,  clenching  jaws;  pupils
dilated,  eyes  injected  and  staring;  frowning;  moving
of  lips  back  and  forth  ;  coldness  of  face,  chin,  nose,  ears,
hands  and  feet ;  involuntary  loose  but  small  stools ;  no
urine ;  hot  sweat  on  body ;  tongue,  when  last  seen,  red
on  edges  and  tip  dry,  and  heavily  coated  in  centre ;  de-
lirium constant;  patient  unconscious,  yet  wanted  to  get
up  and  dress,  or  to  walk  about  room  ;  fever  and  deli-
rium <  from  4  P.M.  to  midnight.

I  I  Abdominal  typhus,  in  a  boy,  set.  14 ;  on  looking  at  him
he  stared,  and  there  appeared  on  his  forehead,  and  in
his  emaciated  face,  deep  wrinkles ;  cried  out  loud  till
he  became  hoarse ;  mouth  and  lips  ulcerated  to  such  a
degree  that  he  declined  to  drink  on  account  of  severe
pain  caused  by  any  fluid  or  solid  coming  in  contact  with
his  mouth ;  lips  peeling  off,  and  bleed  when  he  picks

VOL.  X. — 6.


STRAMONIUM.  82

them ;  abdomen  sunken,  and  tender  to  contact ;  vom-
ited occasionally  mucus,  with  specks  and  streaks  of
blood ;  frequent  watery,  offensive  stools ;  no  sleep ;  no
appetite ;  urine  scanty ;  pulse  very  frequent  and  not
regular ;  great  emaciation.

I  I  Very  restless,  uttering  inarticulate  cries  day  and  night;
tossing  arms,  legs  and  head  about  continually;  high
fever ;  tongue  coated  yellow,  and  dry  ;  mouth  open,  and
covered  with  a  thick,  dry  coating ;  lips  sooty ;  snoring
breathing;  thin,  fetid  profuse  diarrhoea,  involuntary;
conjunctiva  bulbi  much  injected  ;  much  muco-purulent
matter  in  inner  angles  of  eyes.  ^Typhoid  fever.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Periodical:  neuralgic  pains  in  fore-
head from  9  A.M.  until  noon,  by  3  p.m.  has  passed  away,
but  returns  in  morning ;  cough ;  attacks  of  hysteria ;
epilepsy.

Alternation:  exalted  states  and  settled  melancholy;  lively
delirium  and  fright;  coldness  of  body  anxiousness  and
thirst;  anticipations  of  death  and  rage;  laughing  and
crying  out ;  spasms  of  chest  and  fits  of  laughter  ;  head-
ache and  tumefaction  of  abdomen ;  spasmodic  and  para-
lytic symptoms;  constipation  and  diarrhoea;  exalta-
tions and  melancholy  ;  paralytic  and  spasmodic  symp-
toms; contractions  of  hands  and  feet;  convulsions
and  rage;  weeping  and  laughing;  severe  spasms  and
somnambulism;  clonic  and  tonic  spasms ;  heat  of  face;
and  coldness  of  body.

Every  half  hour :  convulsive  attacks ;  spasms.

For  six  hours:  complete  blindness.

For  six  or  seven  hours :  limbs  lame.

Every  day :  fainting  fits,  eleven  to  twelve  attacks.

Every  afternoon :  fever  appears.

Every  night:  since  six  weeks  had  visions.

Nightly :  spasms ;  fever.

From  4  p.m.  to  5  a.m.  :  high  fever.

From  4  p.m.  to  midnight:  fever;  delirium  <.

From  8  p.m.  until  11  p.m.:  pain  in  r.  temple.

From  9.30  p.m.  until  midnight:  as  if  bed  were  drawn  from
under  her.

For  several  days :  speechlessness ;  hemorrhoidal  flux.

Since  three  days :  at  9  a.m.  severe  tearing  pain  over  r.  side
of  face.

For  three  or  four  days:  stitching  tearing  at  different  times;
prosopalgia.

For  five  days:  walking  day  and  night.

Every  two  or  three  weeks :  fever.

After  Fall  equinox  :  inconsolable.

For  several  years :  rheumatic  pain  on  top  of  head.


^^  STRAMONIUM.

42  T ^^?*^^  ^^"  ^^^^^  ■  ^^^®^^^®  P^"^  and  vomiting  of  food
Locality  and  Direction. Eight:  hallucinations  as  if  near
mastoid  process ;  heard  loud  voice  on  side  of  occiput;
intense  pain  in  side  of  head;  when  lying  on  side  felt  as
if  bed  were  being  drawn  from  under  her;  throbbing
headache  m  temple ;  in  spasms  moves  head  mostly  to
side; redness and  swelling about eye; erysipelas of
cheek,  nose  and  face ;  sided  pneumonia ;  thrusting  side
forward  by  spasms  of  erector  spinal  muscles;  drawing
pain  m  arm ;  stitches  on  shin  bones ;  inside  of  thigh
red  and  swollen;  pustules  on  leg;  violent  movements
crosswise  of  foot;  thrusting  head  to  side;  creeping  into
thigh  and  foot ;  lies  constantly  on  side.
Left :  tendency  to  fall ;  head  num.b  on  side ;  pain  in  ear
down  to  cheek ;  tears  come  from  eye  when  otalgia  is-
noost  violent ;  neuralgia  in  cheek  near  ear;  muscles  of
side  of  face  in  an  oscillating  motion;  prosopalgia  of
cheek;  prosopalgia  began  over  eye  to  pass  over  cheek
ala  nasi;  side  of  face  distorted  with  painless  convul-
sions; as  if  side  of  face  w^ere  swollen; erysipelas  on
cheek ;  pressing  pain  in  half  of  stomach  ;  dulness  on
percussion  over  lung ;  after  sunstroke  lying  on ;  coxal-
gia; morbus coxarius; fistulous  openings  from hip -
pain  m  tarsus ;  numbness  and  stiffness  of  leg ;  convul-
sions of  lower  limb;  copper  color  visible  on  knee;  vio-
lent movement  crosswise  of  arm  ;  rotary  motion  of  arm
during  spasm ;  side  paralyzed ;  pains  beginning  in  ear
and  terminating  in  side  of  chest ;  eruption  of  small  blis-
ters on  leg.
'^Sensations. As  if  spinning  or  weaving;  as  if  objects  were
smaller  than  they  really  are;  as  if  dizzy;  as  if  he  had
no  hmbs;  as  if  drunk;  head  as  if  drawn  backward -
starts  as  if  a  shock  of  electricity  had  passed  through  her
body;  as  if  eyes  were  forced  out;  eyelids  as  if  swollen  or
as  if  oppressed  with  sleep;  as  of  wind  rushing  out  of
ears;  as  if  sawing  cheek  bone ;  as  if  hole  were  there  and
as  if  bram  were  touched ;  as  if  nose  were  stopped  ;  as  if
pins  and  needles  were  in  forehead;  as  if  he  were  seeking
something;  as  if  bones  were  sawed  through ;  as  if  1.  side
of  face  were  swollen ;  as  if  some  teeth  would  fall  out ;
teeth  as  if  pressed  together;  moving  fingers  as  if  search-
ing for  something; cries  as  if  from  sight  of  hideous
objects; inner  mouth  as  if  raw;  soft  palate  as  if  drawn
down; as  of  boiling  water  in  throat; as  if  a  ball  were
wedged  in  throat ;  as  if  falling ;  as  if  he  would  vomit ;
as  if  navel  were  to  be  torn  out;  abdomen  as  if  puffed
up ;  as  if  abdomen  w^ere  expanded  to  extremest  degree;
as  if  urine  could  not  be  passed  on  account  of  narrowness


STRAMONIUM.  84

of  urethra ;  as  if  a  cylindrical  body  were  being  passed
through  urethra ;  as  if  he  had  not  power  to  close  neck
of  bladder ;  as  if  urethra  were  too  narrow ;  as  if  very
tall;  as  if  something  turned  around  in  chest;  limbs  feel
as  if  gone  to  sleep  ;  as  if  parts  of  limbs  were  completely
separated  from  body;  hands  and  feet  as  if  loosened  in
joints ;  as  if  cold  water  were  poured  down  her  back.

Pain :  in  nape  of  neck ;  in  cervical  and  upper  dorsal  ver-
tebrae ;  in  head;  in  r.  temple;  in  eyeball ;  in  1.  ear,  down
to  cheek;  spreads  over  all  branches  of  facial  nerve;  in
submaxillary  glands;  pain  in  upper  teeth,  then  in  lower;
in  stomach;  in  csecum;  in  abdomen;  in  breast;  in
nape  of  neck ;  from  neck  over  head ;  in  cervical  and
upper  dorsal  vertebrae;  as  if  beaten  in  back,  shoulder
and  abdomen ;  in  lumbar  region ;  in  cervical  and
upper  dorsal  vertebrae;  in  shoulder  and  back;  in  pit  of
stomach.

Terrible  pain:  of  hip  disease.

Intense  pain:  in  stomach;  in  r.  side  of  head.

Severe  pain:  in  loins.

Great  distress:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Cutting  pain :  in  sternum.

Lancinating  pain :  ovarian  tumor.

Tearing:  in  neck  and  over  head;  in  wing  of  nose;  over
whole  r.  side  of  face  ;  in  abdomen  into  chest.

Tearing  burning  pains:  from  neck  to  1.  axilla.

Stabbing:  in  r.  temple.

Shooting:  to  back  of  head  ;  in  ears;  in  wing  of  nose.

Stitches:  in  ear;  fine,  sharp  in  forearm;  on  r.  shin  bone.

Clawing  pain:  in  head.

Corroding  pain :  in  stomach.

Neuralgic  pain:  in  forehead ;  in  cheek.

Sticking:  pain  in  r.  temple.

Scratching  pain:  in  palate.

Stinging  pain:  in  throat;  in  palate.

Contracting  burning  pain:  in  throat.

Pressing  pain:  in  stomach;  in  1.  half  of  stomach;  in  ab-
domen; in  1.  tarsus.

Drawing  pain:  in  back  part  of  stomach  ;  in  abdomen;  in
upper  and  lower  extremities;  from  side  of  neck  into
limbs;  in  middle  of  spine  and  opposite  to  it;  in  small
of  back;  in  r.  arm;  in  thighs;  in  1.  tarsus;  in  muscles
of  limbs.

Rheumatic  pain:  on  top  of  head;  in  deltoid;  in  1.  tarsus.

Dull  pain:  in  occiput.

Aching:  in  knees;  in  chest  and  sternum  ;  in  r.  arm.

Writhing:  in  abdomen.

Cramps:  in  hands  and  feet.


85  STRAMONIUM.

Throbbing:  in  head;  in  teeth.

Burning:  in  throat ;  along  diaphragm  ;  at  pit  of  stomach;
in  region  of  pit  of  stomach  ;  on  dorsum  of  foot;  of  feet.

Soreness:  of  throat.

Sensitiveness:  along  spine.

Heat:  in  whole  head;  in  abdomen;  in  face.

Pulsating:  in  vertex.

Jerking:  in  thigh  ;  in  knee  joints.

Drawing:  in  thighs,  abdomen  and  upper  limbs.

Pressure:  in  forepart  of  head  ;  on  forehead;  on  cartilages
of  third  and  fourth  ribs ;  about  heart.

Constriction:  about  throat;  of  muscles  of  throat;  of  oesoph-
agus ;  of  chest.

Tightness:  across  chest.

Heaviness :  of  head.

Oppression :  at  pit  of  stomach.

Anxiety:  in  abdomen.

Lightness:  of  head.

Dulness:  of  head.

Weariness:  of  feet;  of  limbs.

Lameness :  of  different  parts  of  body.

Stiffness:  of  1.  leg.

Numbness:  on  1.  side;  of  1.  leg;  heels;  of  fingers.

Dryness :  of  mouth  ;  of  tongue ;  of  fauces ;  of  throat ; in
chest.

Tingling:  in  hands;  in  forehead.

Creeping:  in  abdomen;  under  cutis  of  1.  leg;  in  thigh;
in  foot;  in  toes;  in  limbs.

Crawling :  on  chin  ;  in  extremities.

Itching:  in  nose;  of  feet;  over  whole  body.

Shivering  sensation:  on  chin.

Coldness:  of  face,  chin,  nose,  ears,  hands  and  feet,
**  Tissues. Abscess,  with  redness,  heat  and  intolerable  pain.

Mitigates  terrible  pains  of  hip  disease,  tumors,  abscesses,
anthrax,  whitlow,  etc.

■  Plethoric,  especially  young  persons.

■  Emaciated,  cries  day  and  night;  cough.

■  Anasarca,  after  scarlatina.

*** Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  on  spot  on
OS  petrosum,  as  if  brain  were  touched ; stomach  very
painful ;  on  side  abdomen  painful ; spot  in  back  pains.
Pressure:  pressing  pain  in  stomach  <;.
Rubbing:  increases  itching.
*^Skin. Skin  :  hot  and  dry;  flabby  and  dry;  dirty.
I  I  Anasarca  after  scarlatina.

I  I  Emaciation ;  like  an  old  man ;  with  cardialgia.
Itching  over  whole  body,  early  in  morning,  after  waking.
After  dulness  of  senses,  and  anxiety,  a  red  rash  breaks
out  on  back,  with  sweat.


STRAMONIUM.  86

Violent  fever ;  delirium  ;  tremors  in  limbs ;  general  erup-
tion on  skin,  swelling,  itching  and  inflammation.

Agony,  high  fever,  burning  heat  and  redness  of  skin,  with
itching  eruption  over  whole  face  and  trunk.

■  ■Suppression  of  an  eruption,  or  eruption  fails  to  come  out.
Petechise  on  face,  neck  and  breast.

Many  pimples,  like  blotches  on  several  parts  of  body,
also  in  palms  of  hands,  with  a  stinging  itching  like
nettles,  increased  by  rubbing.

Spots  on  arm  like  flea-bites.

■  Measles: fever  before  eruption,  great  heat  of  body  and

copious  sweat;  very  great  redness  of  puffed-up  face ;  pe-
culiar delirium  ;  full  of  fear  and  anxiety  ;  children  see
frightful  figures,  rats  and  mice,  attempted  to  hide;  spas-
modic afffection  of  oesophagus.

■  Scarlet  redness  over  whole  body ;  peculiar  boiled-lobster

hue  of  scarlatina.

1  I  Intensely  red  rash  on  skin,  resembling  scarlet  fever,  but
having  a  more  shining  appearance.

Very  marked  flushing  of  hands,  arms,  face,  neck  and  back ;
rash  resembled  that  of  scarlatina  simplex,  the  bright
red  disappearing  under  pressure,  and  immediately  re-
turning after  removal  of  pressure.

■Scarlatina,  similar  to  Bellad.,  but  eruption  is  less  bright,
shows  a  disposition  to  recede  or  fade,  and  urine  is  small
in  quantity  or  secretion  suppressed ;  parenchymatous
nephritis;  delirium,  hallucinations,  convulsions;  great
dryness  of  throat,  compelling  frequent  drinking ;  swell-
ing or  paralysis  of  tongue ;  it  hangs  out  of  mouth.

I  I  Child,  set.  6,  violent  vomiting ;  high  fever ;  restlessness,
with  somnolence;  pulse  140;  tongue  dry;  throat  sore;
tonsils  swollen  ;  fetid  breath;  fifth  day  parotid  and  sub-
maxillary glands  much  swollen,  especially  r.;  swallow-
ing difficult  and  painful ;  could  scarcely  open  mouth ;
respirations  snoring  or  rattling,  whether  asleep  or  awake,
as  in  diphtheria ;  breath  very  offensive ;  deafness;  dirty,
putrid  sanies  from  mouth  and  nose;  pulse  150;  rash
fading;  wild  mania,  with  terror,  imagined  he  was  to  be
killed,  but  struck  friends  who  came  to  help  him ;  desire
to  leave  bed,  imagined  he  was  driving  a  horse ;  feigned
he  would  take  medicine,  often  poured  it  out.  ^Malig-
nant scarlatina.

iRestless;  skin  itching;  rash  coppery  red  ;  skin  dry,  hot.

Skin  suddenly  turning  dark,  red-brown,  like  an  Indian's.

Front  of  chest  copper-colored.

Fifth  day,  many  vesications  on  skin,  filled  with  a  pellucid
fluid,  extremely  numerous  and  very  small, many  of  them
not  larger  than  a  pin's  head,  covering  her  whole  face
and  trunk,  drying  up  on  sixth  day.


87  STRAMONIUM.

Eruption  of  small  blisters  on  1.  leg  near  calf;  spreading
over  whole  leg ;  blisters  very  painful,  with  much  heat
and  redness,  and  oozing  a  hot,  sharp,  acrid  fluid.

Boils :  several  on  feet.  •

■  Burns,  and  scalds.

■  Abscesses  and  tumors,  with  intolerable  pain,  driving  to

desperation.

I  I  Ulcers : irritable,  with  thickened  edges,  and  a  sanious

discharge;  promotes  granulation  and  cicatrization;  syj^h-
ilitic;  after  mercury;  scrofulous,  of  ill  condition.
Old  cicatrix  very  red.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  ■  ■  Children  especially ;  chorea,
mania,  fever.

I I  Young,  plethoric  persons.

Boy,  £et.  2,  light  hair,  lively  and  intelligent,  after  fright ;

stuttering  speech.
Boy,  aet.  3,  father  insane;  mental  derangement.
Boy,  set.  3,  ill  a  year ;  spasms.
Girl,  set.  4;  loss  of  speech.
Girl,  set.  4;  spasms.
Girl,  set.  5 ;  mental  disturbance.
Child,  set.  6 ;  typhoid  fever.
Boy,  set.  6 ;  malignant  scarlatina.

Boy,  set.  10,  scrofulous,  after  a  fall  from  swing ;  spasms.
Girl,  set.  10,  pale,  ansemic,  slender,  unable  to  study  much,

with  sore  eyes,  etc. ;  chorea.
Boy,  set.  11,  after  fright;  mental  derangement.
Boy,  set.  11,  after  fright  four  months  previously;  chorea.
Girl,  set.  11,  weak,  sensitive  ;  chorea.
Girl,  set.  12,  lively  disposition;  chorea.
Boy,  set.  12J ;  periodical  fever.

Girl,  set.  13,  severe  attack  of  facial  erysipelas;  delirium.
Girl,  set.  13;  chorea.
Young  man,  set.  14;  typhoid  fever.

Girl,  set.  16,  nervous,  blonde,  delicate  skin,  frequently  suf-
fering from  headache ;  prosopalgia.
Young  man,  set.  18,  tall,  slim  ;  typhoid  fever.
Miss  S.,  set.  19,  delicate,  blonde,  blue  e3^es;  pneumonia.
Young  man,  set.  22,  frivolous,  has  had  three  previous

attacks ;  mental  disturbance.
Man,  set.  22,  suffering  several  days ;  mania.
Young  woman,  set.  22,  single,  strong  and  healthy,  dark

hair,  brown  eyes ;  prosopalgia.
Mrs.  S.,  set.  23,  bilious,  nervous  temperament ;  puerperal

convulsions.
Woman,  set.  23,  single,  choleric  temperament;  spasms.
Man,  set.  24,  has had several attacks during last  fivp

years ;  delirium  tremens.
Man,  set.  25,  after  severe  fright;  affection  of  heart.


STRAMONIUM.  88

Man,  set.  25,  had  sunstroke  twice,  for  some  time  afterward
subject  to  epileptic  convulsions ;  ague.

Man,  set.  26,  sanguine  temperament, after  fright;  mania.
.  Man,  set.  28;  delirium  tremens.

Man,  set  29,  short,  thick  set;  delirium.

Woman,  set.  30,  single,  weak,  timorous  disposition,  after
fright ;  melancholia.

Lady,  set.  30,  leuco-phlegmatic  temperament,  had  five  chil-
dren, each  time  lost  much  blood  ;  vertigo.

Woman,  set.  30  ;  vertigo.

Man,  set.  30,  blonde,  robust;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  32  ;  delirium  tremens.

Woman,  set.  82,  during  fourth  labor,  was  harshly  manipu-
lated in  attempts  to  dilate  os ;  convulsions.

Man,  set.  33,  tendency  to  obesity;  prosopalgia.

Man,  set.  35,  light  complexion,  mild,  taciturn,  blue  eyes,
light  sandy  hair,  amiable  disposition,  during  an  attack
of  erysipelas  of  head  and  face ;  delirium  tremens.

Man,  set.  36,  suffering  several  months ;  mental  disorder.

Man,  set.  37,  tall  and  thin,  irritable  nervous  system  ;  pro-
sopalgia.

Woman,  set.  37,  emaciated,  phthisical ;  typhoid  fever.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  three  weeks ;  mental  disorder.

Man,  set.  40  ;  delirium  tremens.

Woman,  set.  40 ;  spasms.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  four  years  ;  epilepsy.

Man,  set.  41;  delirium  tremens.

Woman,  set.  42 ;  delirium  tremens.

Woman,  set.  42 ;  delirium  tremens.

Man,  set.  42  ;  mental  disturbance.

Lady,  set.  42,  robust,  dark  complexion,  black  oyes,  subject
to  rheumatism ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  42,  after  uterine  hemorrhage ;  prosopalgia.

Woman,  set.  42,  strong,  dark  skin,  eyes  black ;  prosopalgia.

Man,  set.  43  ;  mania.

Man,  set.  45,  strong;  typhoid  fever.

Lady,  set.  62,  suffering  several  weeks ;  mental  derange-
ment.

Weaver's  wife,  set.  62,  had  in  her  first  childbed  puerperal
mania ;  got  better,  but  had,  for  fifth  time,  several  attacks,
even  after  six  years;  mania.

Woman,  set.  65,  nervous  temperament;  insanity.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  : Vinegar,  lemon  juice,  tobacco
injections ;  senna  for  cerebral  symptoms  ;  Bellad.,  Hyosc,
Nux  vom.

It  antidotes :  Mercur.,  Plumbum.

Compatible :  after  Bellad.,  Cuprum.

Incompatible :  coffee.

Compare:  iSeca/Ie  (delirium,  metrorrhagia).


89  STRONTIANA  CARBONICA.

STRONTIANA  CARBONICA.

Carbonate  of  Strontian.  S2  0,  CO^-

Proved  by  Nenning,  Schreter,  Seidel,  Trinks  and  Woost,  Hartlaub  and  Trinks,
R.  A.  M.  L.

Clinical  Authorities. — Cardalgia,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  664;
Cramps  in  legs,  Veith,  Horn.  Eec,  vol.  3,  p.  151 ;  Sprain  of  ankle,  Hg.,  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  vol.  4,  p.  60.

'  Mind. Apprehensive  and  anxious,  as  from  a  bad  conscience.

Ill-humored,  angry,  impetuous ;  is  inclined  to  beat  every-
thing that  comes  in  his  way.

Great  forgetfulness.

Disinclined  to  talk.
^ Sensorium.  Vertigo:  and  nausea,  in  morning;  at  noon,
with  pressive  headache  in  1.  side  ;  in  afternoon,  with
sticking  headache  in  forehead ;  in  evening,  with  weari-
ness ;  with  pressing  sensation  from  within  outward,  in
temples  ;  as  from  drinking  wine.
^  Inner  Head. Burning  in  forehead.

■  Threatening  apoplexy,  with  violent  congestion  of  head;
hot,  red  face  every  time  patient  walks;  exertion  increases
circulation  toward  head;  some  erethism  of  chest;  smoth-
ering feeling  about  heart;  cannot  rest;  feeling  as  of  a  load
on  chest;  during  climaxis;  >  wrapping  head  up  warmly,
cannot  bear  least  draft  of  air.

Tension  from  vertex  to  upper  jaw,  as  if  head  were  ex-
panded from  within,  and  as  if  scalp  were  too  tight,  <
in  evening  when  lying  low  with  head,  slowly  increasing
and  decreasing,  >  from  heat.

Stitches  in  head.

Dull  or  pressive  pain  in  occiput.

Boring  pain  in  a  small  spot  in  r.  side  of  occiput.

I  Headache  >  when  wrapping  head  up  warmly.

*  Outer  Head. iChilliness  over  scalp  and  upper  back;  <  at

night  and  in  cold  air.
Tension  on  head  (externally  and  internally),  <  in  evening

and  from  cold,  >  from  warmth,  especially  in  heat  of

sun.
Sensation  of  heat  of  head  and  face,  with  red  face,  anxiety

and  sleepiness.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Burning  in  eyes ;  <  when  moving  them;

followed  by  sticking ;  with  lachrymation.


STRONTIANA  CARBONICA.  90

Pressing  pain  on  upper  surface  of  eyes.

Pressing  in  eyes  after  rubbing  them,  which  causes  one  to
see  red  and  blue  margins.

Green  spots  before  eyes  in  dark.

Luminous  vibrations  before  eyes;  flickering.

I  I  Photopsia,  remaining  after  an  operation,  particularly
when  objects  appear  covered  with  blood.

Twitching  of  1.  upper  lid.

Itching  in  inner  canthi.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Roaring  and  tearing  pains  in  r.  ear,  in
paroxysms.

Sticking  in  front  of  1.  ear,  extending  into  it.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nosebleed.

Dark  bloody  scabs  are  blown  from  nose.
^Tipper Face, l  l Itching of  r. cheek, becoming < after
scratching.

Violent  boring  pain  in  r.  cheek  bone.

Neuralgic,  tearing  pain  in  face.

Flushes  in  face  and  violent  pulsation  of  arteries.
^  Lower  Face. Face  red,  burning  hot.

Tearing  pain  in  r.  lower  jaw.

Stitch  in  1.  side  of  chin,  extending  into  articulation  of
jaw.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Front  teeth  feel  on  edge.

Violent  clawing  in  teeth.

A  screwing-together  sensation  in  teeth.

Jerking,  tearing  pain  in  teeth  and  in  roots.

Swelling,  burning,  and  stitches  in  gums,
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter,  in  morning ;  dry,  earthy.

Tongue :  tip  painful ;  coated  with  mucus,  feeling  dry.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Bad  odor  from  mouth.

Mouth  slimy,  or  dry  on  awaking.

Sensation  of  numbness  in  mouth,  early  on  waking.

Heat  emanating  from  mouth  and  nose,  with  thirst.

Faucesinflamed  and  painful  (stinging)  during  deglutition.
13  Throat. Rawness  and  dryness  provoke  hawking  and  hack-
ing cough.

Pain  in  1.  side  of  throat  on  swallowing.

Itching  in  pharynx,  on  swallowing.
''  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. No  appetite ;  meat
disgusts  him.

Hunger  soon  after  dinner.

Violent  thirst,  especially  for  beer.
'''Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Violent
long-continued  hiccough,  causes  pain  in  chest.

Empty  eructations.

Nausea :  with  burning  heat  in  face ;  with  diminished  ap-
petite; with  weakness  and  ill-humor.


91  STRONTIANA  CARBONICA.

*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,
aching  in  stomach,  especially  after  a  meal,  with  fulness.
Pressure  in  stomach  ;  >  by  eating ;  <  on  walking.

■  Severe  pressure  in  stomach,  after  eating;  chronic.
Constriction  in  stomach,  with  uprisings  of  clear  water.
Burrowing  in  stomach  and  upper  abdomen.
Twinging  feeling  in  stomach.

Cutting  in  epigastric  region.

Stitches  in  stomach,  now  in  r.,  now  in  1.  side.
^^Hypochondria. Pressive  bruised  pain  in  hypochondria.
^^  Abdomen. Colic  with  flatulent  distension,  diarrhosa,  and

chilliness.
2°  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea  of  yellow  water.

■  Diarrhoea,  <  at  night,  is  scarcely  off  vessel  before  he

must  return,  >  toward  morning,  at  3  or  4  o'clock.
Stool  retarded,  compact  and  in  large  lumps ;  expelled  with
great  effort  and  violent  pain  in  anus.
, After  stool :  contractive  sensation  in  rectum ;  burning  at
anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine : pale,  strongly  smelling  of  am-
monia; diminished.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses :  too  early,  and  of  too  short
duration ;  retarded,  discharge  being  serous  at  first,  later
clots  of  blood.
Leucorrhoea  while  walking.
'''Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse
voice.
Irritation  in  larvnx  causes  violent  dry  cough  at  night.
^^  Respiration. Dyspnoea,  with  hot,  red  face,  while  walking.
^'  Cough. Cough  :  constant,  <  at  night ;  short,  now  and  then
with  pressive  pain  in  chest ;  dry,  hacking,  in  evening ;
from  irritation  in  larynx  or  trachea.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. In  chest :  constriction ;  pressive
pain,  especially  on  motion.
Spasmodic  drawing  and  clawing ; stitches  on  coughing
and  inspiring.
'^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Dull  intermitting  pressure
in  prsecordial  region.
Violent  beating  of  arteries  and  of  heart.
^"  Outer  Chest. Sternum  painful  to  touch ;  burning  in  1.  side,
extending  upward; pressure; pressive  pain  beneath;
lightning  stitches  from  both  sides  through  chest,  in  a
vertical  direction.
Stitches  below  ensiform  cartilage.
Drawing  pain  in  r.  pectoral  muscles.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Tearing  tension  in  nape  of  neck,  as  if  ten-
dons were  drawn  up.
Drawing,  sticking  pain  in  small  of  back.


STRONTIANA  CARBONICA.  92

Sensation  as  if  bruised  in  back  and  sacrum,  <  from  stoop-
ing and  when  touched.

Slight  drawing  pain  along  spine  in  afternoon,  changes  to
a  seated,  dull  tearing  in  joints  of  legs,  <  by  walking.
^*  Upper  Limbs. Painful  paralytic  sensation  in  1.  shoulder,
and  elbow  joint,  at  night.

Constant  burning  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint.

Tearing  rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders  and  arms,  particu-
larly in  joints.

Veins  of  arms  and  hands  injected  and  tense;  prostration  ;
ill-humor.

Weakness  of  r.  arm as  if  all  power  had  left  it,  >  on
motion.

Violent  tearing  pains  in  joints  of  r.  arm,  <  in  evening,
in  bed ;  1.  arm  slightly  affected.

Trembling  and  numbness  of  fingers.
*^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic,  paralytic  pain,  tearing,  draw-
ing, jerking  ;  gnawing  as  if  in  marrow  of  bones.

■  Swelling  and  caries  of  femur,  usuall}''  in  scrofulous  chil-

dren ;  diarrhoea.

■  Cramps  in  calves  and  soles  of  feet,  especially  in  persons

who  suffer  from  cold  feet.

■  Chronic  sprains,  particularly  of  ankle  joint,  after  failure

of  Ruta  and  Arnica;  oedema  about  joint.

■  (Edematous  swelling  of  r.  foot,  sprained  some  years  ago

{Bovista  in  some  cases).

Sensation  of  icy  coldness  on  outer  surface  of  calf,  the
length  of  a  finger.

Icy-cold  feet  in  evening.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  pains,  especially  in  joints,
<  in  evening,  and  at  night  in  bed.

Great  emaciation.

Immovability  of  limbs  (on  one,  r.,  side  of  body)  like  pa-
ralysis, in  evening.

Most  symptoms  can  hardly  be  determined  as  to  locality,
but  seem  to  be  in  marrow  of  bones.

One  side  of  body  is  generally  only  affected  (r.  side).
^^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying :  low  with  head,  tension
in  head  <.

Stooping:  bruised  sensation  in  back  and  sacrum  <.

Walking :  causes  hot,  red  face ;  pressure  in  stomach  <  ;
leucorrhoea;  tearing  in  joints  of  legs  <.

Motion  :  of  eyes  <  burning ;  pressive  pain  in  chest  <  ;
weakness  of  r.  arm  >.
^^'  Nerves, l  l  Great  weakness  in  morning ;  weak,  tremulous
sensation.

A  single  sudden  jerk  through  upper  part  of  body  on  fall-
ing asleep,  makes  her  wide  awake.


93  STRONTIANA  CARBONICA.

Pains  appear  like  phantoms,  can  scarcely  tell  where  they
are.
^  Sleep. Restless  sleep ;  frequent  waking.

When  going  to  sleep:  twitching  and  starting;  jerk  through

body  awakens  her.
Dreams:  of  fire;  grieving;  filled  with  joy.
^  Time. Morning :  nausea ;  taste  bitter ;  diarrhcea  <  toward
2  or  3  o'clock ;  great  weakness ;  perspiration  ;  trembling
sensation  in  body  <.
Forenoon:  chill.

Noon :  nausea,  with  pressive  headache  in  1.  side.
Afternoon :  nausea,  with  sticking  headache ;  drawing  pain

along  spine.
Evening :  nausea,  with  weariness ;  tension  over  head  <  ;
drv,  hacking  cough ;  tearing  in  joints  of  arm  <  ;  icy-
cold  feet ;  rheumatic  pains  <  ;  immovability  of  limbs,
like  paralysis ;  tension  of  skin  on  various  parts ;  trem-
bling sensation  in  body  <.
Night :  chilliness  over  scalp < ;  diarrhoea  <  ;  irritation
in  larynx  causes  cough  ;  cough  <  ;  paralytic  sensation
in  shoulder  and  elbow ;  rheumatic  pains  <  ;  dry  heat,
with  thirst ;  perspiration  mostly  on  aff'ected  parts.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat  of  sun :  >  tension  on
head.
Heat:  tension  over  head  >.
Wrapping  up  warmly:  threatened  apoplexy  >.
Desire  to  keep  warm.
When  uncovering:  pains  <.

Cannot  bear  least  draft  of  air :  threatened  apoplexy.
Cold  air:  chilliness  over  scalp  and  back  <.
*^  Fever. Pulse  full  and  hard,  with  violent  pulsation  in  ar-
teries.
Chill  in  forenoon,  descending  from  sacrum  to  posterior

part  of  thighs.
Chilliness  from  head  over  shoulder  blades.
Dry  heat  at  night,  with  thirst.
Heat  seems  to  stream  from  mouth  and  nostrils.
Perspiration  during  morning  hours;  at  night,  mostly  on
affected  parts ;  pain  <  when  uncovering.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternations :  of  pain  and  itching.
"' Locality  and  Direction. Right:  boring  pain  in  spot  of
occiput ;  boring  in  ear ;  itching  of  cheek ;  violent  bor-
ing in  cheek  bone  ;  pain  in  lower  jaw ;  pain  in  pectoral
muscles ;  burning  pain  in  shoulder  joint ;  weakness  of
arm ;  tearing  pain  in  joints  of  arm ;  swelling  of  foot ;
immobility  of  limbs.  •  ^  •  -

Left:  headache  in  side.;  twitching  of  upper  lid;  sticking
in  front  of  ear : stitch  in  chin ;  pain  in  throat  when


STRONTIANA  CARBONICA.  94

swallowing; burning  in  side; paralytic  sensation  in
shoulder  and  elbow  joint.

One  side  of  body  is  generally  only  affected  (r.  side).

Now  r.  now  1.  side:  stitches  in  stomach.

From  within  :  as  if  head  were  expanded.

From  within  outward:  pressing  in  temples.
^^ Sensations.  As  of  a  load  on  chest;  as  if  head  were  ex-
panded from  within ;  as  if  scalp  were  too  tight ;  as  if
tendons  of  neck  were  drawn  up ;  as  if  bruised  in  back
and  sacrum ;  as  if  all  power  had  left  r.  arm  ;  gnawing
as  if  in  marrow  of  bones ;  symptoms  as  if  in  marrow
of  bones ;  as  of  phantoms,  difficult  to  locate.

Pain :  in  1.  side  of  throat ;  in  chest.

Violent  pain  :  in  anus.

Tearing  pain :  in  r.  ear ;  in  face ;  in  r.  lower  jaw ;  in  teeth ;
in  joints  of  legs;  in  joints  of  r.  arm ;  in  limbs.

Cutting:  in  epigastric  region.

Violent  clawing :  in  teeth.

Lightning  stitches:  from  both  sides  through  chest.

Stitches:  in  head;  in  1.  side  of  chin  into  jaw;  in  gums:
in  r.  and  1.  side ;  in  chest ;  from  ensiform  cartilage.

Jerking  pain :  in  teeth  and  in  roots.

Tearing  rheumatic  pain:  in  shoulder  and  arms ;  in  limbs;
in  joints.

Boring  pain :  in  a  small  spot  in  r.  side  of  occiput ;  in  r.
cheek  bones.

Drawing  pain  :  in  r.  pectoral  muscles ;  in  small  of  back  ;
slight,  along  spine ;  in  limbs.

Burning  pain  :  in  r.  shoulder  joint.

Sticking  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  in  eyes ;  in  front  of  1.  ear;  in
small  of  back.

Dull  pressive  pain :  in  occiput.

Pressive  pain :  in  1.  side  of  head  on  upper  surface  of  ej'^es  ;
in  chest;  beneath  sternum.

Pressive  bruised  pain:  in  hypochondria.

Cramp :  in  calves  and  soles.

Aching :  in  stomach.

Stinging:  in  fauces.

Burning:  in  forehead;  in  eyes;  in  gums;  at  anus;  in  1.
side.

Heat :  of  head  and  face ;  seems  to  stream  from  mouth  and
nostrils.

Tearing  tension  :  in  nape  of  neck.

Burrowing:  in  stomach  and  upper  abdomen.

Twinging  feeling:  in  stomach.

Painful paralytic  sensation : in 1.  shoulder and elbow-
joint.

Pressure:  in  eyes;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  stomach.


95  STRONTIANA  CARBONICA.

Smothering  feeling:  about  heart.

Contractive  sensation :  in  rectum.

Screwing- together  sensation  :  in  teeth.

Tension:  from  vertex  to  upper  jaw;  of  various  parts  of
skin.

Pulsation  :  of  arteries.

Twitching:  of  1.  upper  lid.

Weakness :  of  r.  arm.

Numbness:  in  mouth;  of  fingers.

Chilliness:  over  scalp  and  upper  back.

Itching:  in inner  canthi; of  r.  cheek;  in  pharynx;  of
pimples  on  skin ;  of  sycotic  eruption.
**  Tissues. I  I  Emaciation.

S3^mptoms  seem  located  in  marrow  of  bones.

Chronic  sequelse  of  hemorrhages;  great  forgetfulness ;
bright  colors  before  eyes;  semilateral  (r.  side)  affec-
tions; rheumatic  pains,  debility,  trembling,  emaciation,
desire  to  keep  warm  ;  old  sprains.
*^ Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  sternum
painful;  bruised  sensation  in  back  and  sacrum  <.

Rubbing:  eyes  causes  pressing,  and  objects  have  red  and
blue  margins.

Scratching:  <  itching  of  cheek  ;  increases  itching,
*^  Skin. Itching  pimples  on  skin.

iSycotic  eruption  on  face  or  other  parts  of  body,  is  moist,
itches  and  burns.

Tension  of  skin,  on  various  parts,  in  evening  in  bed.

Itching  grows  <  from  scratching.

When  pains  cease,  itching  begins,  and  vice  versa.

Rheumatic  pains  are  <  in  evening,  and  at  night.

Trembling  sensation  in  body,  and  debility,  <  in  evening
(and  morning).

Tension  of  skin  in  various  parts.

Skin  adherent  to  scar  in  forearm,  becomes  looser.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Baryta  carb.,  Ferrum  (congestion  to
head  and  chest) ;  Silica  and  Mag.  mur.  (head  symptoms
better  from  wrapping  up  warmly) ; Ariiica  and  Buta
(sprains  of  joints  with  oedema).


SULPHUR.  96


SULPHUR.

Brimstone;  Flowers  of  Sulphur.  The  Element.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Nenning,
Wahle,  Walther,  Chronische  Krankh.,  vol.  4,  p.  27  ;  Gross,  Archiv,  vol.  19 ;  Hel-
big,  Heraclides,  p.  64;  Knorre,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  6,  p.  37  ;  Molin,  Archiv  de  la  Med.
Horn.,  vol.  3,  1835,  p.  377  ;  Wurmb,  Zeit.  des  Ver.  Hom.  Aertze  Oestr.,  vol.  1, 1857  ;
Eobinson,  Brit.  Jour,  of  Hom.,  vol.  25,  1867,  p.  388 ;  Berridge,  N.  Am.  Jour,  of
Horn.,  N.  S.,  vol.  3,  1873,  p.  499,  and  Am.  Jour,  of  Hom.  Mat.  Med.,  vol.  9,  1876,
p.  257  ;  also  symptoms  by  Macfarlan  and  Swan.

Clinical  Authorities. — Melancholia,  Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  51 ;
Dulac,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  129;  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  9,  p.  145;  Diitton,
Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  380 ;  Melancholia  and  epilepsy,  Fincke,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  396 ;
Hypochondriasis,  Emmerich,  Eiick.  KI.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  594  ;  Mental  disorder,  Hoopes,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  471 ;  Religious  insanity,  Kershaw,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  367  ;  Mania,
Morgan,  H.  W.,  vol.  12,  p.  70;  Crying  spells,  McNeil,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  481 ;  Head-
ache, Hah.,  Hrg ,  Black,  Schelling,  Hartl.,  Bernstein,  Hirscli,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
1,  p.  208 ;  Hg.,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  114;  Wakeman,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  21,  p.
118 ;  Cooper,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  683  ;  Cooper,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  12,  p.  613  ;  Cooper,
Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  163;  Neuralgic  headache,  Lowder,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  690;
Sick-headache,  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  172 ;  Chronic  headache,  Skinner,  Med.
Adv.,  May,  1890,  p.  278;  Syphilitic  headache,  Thayer,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  146;
Affection  of  brain,  Nankivell,  H.  W.,  vol.  8,  p.  57 ;  Meningitis,  Weber,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  130;  Hydrocephalus,  Wahle,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  138;  Wil-
liams, N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  407  ;  Sanguineous  occipital  tumor,  Farrington,  H.  M.,
vol.  7,  p.  273;  Eczema  of  scalp  (3  cases),  Frye,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  226 ;  Eczema
impetiginoides  of  scalp,  Eichards,  H.  W.,  vol.  7,  p.  261 ;  Impairment  of  vision,  Skin-
ner, Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  50  ;  Blindness  of  I.  eye,  Emmerich,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  118;
Amaurosis,  Diez,  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Ki.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  pp.  345,  346;  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  79,  p.  133 ;  Asthenopia,  Bell,  H.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  289  ;  Weakness  of  r.  eye,  Dixon,
Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  18,  p.  564 ;  Subretinal  tumor,  Allen,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1871,  p.  312 ;
Incipient  sclerotitis,  Fanning,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  22;  Cortical  cataract,  Os-
trom,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  207  ;  Cataract,  Kirsch,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  45 ;  Keratitis,  Nor-
ton, N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1873-4,  p.  432 ;  Wound  of  cornea,  Ussher,  H.  W.,  vol.  9,  p.
271 ;  Opacity  of  cornea,  Baker,  H.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.  197;  Pterygium  (Sulph.  and  Calc.
ostr.),  Miller,  H.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  402  ;  Hypopion,  Hills,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  104  ;
Allen,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  86  ;  Conjunctivitis,  Cowperthwait,  M.  I.,  1875  ;  Oph-
thalmia, Segin,  Heichelheim,  Ng.,  Eupprich,  Stapf,  Hartlaub,  Schnieber,  Tietze,
Fielitz,  Knorre,  Griesselich,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  pp.  243-94,  303;  Ophthalmia,
catarrhal,  scrofulous,  arthritic,  Dudgeon,  Croserio,  Hartlaub,  N.  G.,  ..^Egidi,  Knorre,
Gross,  Heichelheim,  Griesselich,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  532 ;  Ophthalmia,  Hypopion,
Gallavardin,  Eummel,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  346 ;  Ophthalmia,  Buchner,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  2,  p.  208;  Beretti,  Eiv.  Om.,  1875;  Wakeman,  Cowper,  Med.  Inv.,  Jan.  15,
1875;  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  194;  Schmitt,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  357;


97  SULPHUR.

Hail,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  148;  Ophthalmia  and  diarrhcea,  Hooker,  Horn.
Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  359;  Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  Wakeman,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  21,  p.  119;
Meissler,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  363  ;  Ophthalmia  neonatorum,  Kallenbach,  H.  in  F.,  Ktick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  253;  Affection  of  lids,  Berridge,  C.  M.  A.,  vol.  5,  p.  139;  Swelling
of  lids,  Berridge,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  109 ;  Epiphora,  Goullon,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.
4,  p.  il2;  Entropium,  Ectropium,  Hg.,  Eaue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  57;  Blepharitis,  Hig-
gins,  Hall.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  398;  Prenatal  eye  deformity,  Webster,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.
24,  p.  255  ;  Neuralgia  in  l.  eye  and  ovary,  Kershaw,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  565  ;  Dyse-
coia,  Hartlaub,  E.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  381 ;  Goodno,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.
4,  p.  118;  Deafness,  Berghans,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  53;  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.
125;  Ussher,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  244;  Miller,  H.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  44;  Impaired  hearing,
Miller,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1871,  p.  617;  Otorrhea,  Holeczek,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
p.  381  ;  McNeil,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  255;  McNeil,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  97;
Burchfield,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  432 ;  Chronic  coryza,  Wakeman,  Med.  Adv.,
vol.  21,  p.  120;  Coryza,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  130;  Nasal  catarrh,  Hirsch,  J.  Pr.,
1873,  p.  348 ;  Affection  of  nose,  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  47 ;  Berridge,  Horn.
Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  147;  Nasal  polypi,  Schreter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  403;  Tic
douloureux,  Nankivell,  H.  W.,  vol.  6,  p.  55 ;  Facial  neuralgia,  Cooper,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
29,  p.  681 ;  Kershaw,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  115 ;  Kershaw,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  230 ;  Lowder,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  688  ;  Facial  erysipelas,  Hartlaub,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  155 ;

Eruption  on  face, ,  H.  W.,  vol.  6,  p.  80 ;  Enlarged  submaxillary  gland,  Buck,

Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  20,  p.  622 ;  Toothache,  Hrg.,  Bonningh,,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
p.  480 ;  Abscess  of  gums.  Fungous  groivth  on  gums,  Knorre,  Thorer,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  481;  Stomatitis,  Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  512;  Stomacace,
Nankivell,  H.  W.,  vol.  6,  p.  136  ;  Dryness  of  throat,  Dixon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  372  ;
AS'o?-e  throat,  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  541 ;  Chrorvic  pharyngeal  catarrh,  Urber,  A.
H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  141 ;  Diphlheritis,  Payr,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  80,  p.  90  ;  Heartburn,  Schron,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  594 ;  Vomiting,  Diez,  Elwert,  Trinks,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
1,  p.  558;  Cardialgia,  etc.,  Heichelheira,  Diez,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
p.  664;  Gastrcdgia,  Pellicer,  El.  Grit.  Med.,  June,  1874;  Cooper,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,
p.  692;  Gastric  disturbance,  Berridge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  14;  Nasi,  A.  J.  H,
M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  70 ;  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  38,  No.  9 ;  Affection  of  stomach,  Hofrichter,  B.
J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  578 ;  Gardiner,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  79 ;  Dyspepsia,  Fincke,
Med.  Adv.,  March,  1890,  p.  149  ;  Hussey,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  168;  Chronic
gastritis,  Clifton,  H.  W-,  vol.  6,  p.  203;  Gastro-enteritis,  Weber,  A.  H.  Z,  vol.  95,
p.  141 ;  Jaundice,  Baertl,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  704;  Heyn--,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.
22,  p.  447 ;  Hepatic  disorder,  Martin,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  54 ;  Enlargement  of
liver,  Hofrichter,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.11,  p.  577;  Acute  and  chronic  hepatitis,  Wesselhoeft,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p.  102;  Colic,  Griessel.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  762;  Weber,
A.  H.  Z  ,  vol.  95,  p.  141 ;  Hills,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  283;  Abdominal  complaints,
Lobeth.,  Heichelh.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  594;  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh,  Bo-
janus,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  112 ;  Peritonitis,  Heyne,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  152 ;
Hernia,  Hrg.,  Gauwerky,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  792 ;  Constipation,  Hahnemann,
Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  818  ;  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  84 ;  Way,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  83  ;  Constipation  and  piles,  Skinner,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  347  ;  Diar-
rhcea, Hrg,,  Hartm.,  Baertl,  Bethm.,  Tietze,  Hartl.,  Nunez,  Jean,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  850;  (3  cases)  Weber,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  pp.  140,  146;  Weber,  A.H.  Z.,
vol.  91,  p.  145  ;  Fischer,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  p.  62;  Sorge,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  6  ;
Theobald,  H  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  331  ;  Korndoerfer,  H.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.  442 ;  Berridge,
H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  77  ;  Higgins,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  398  ;  (Sulph.  and  Calc.  carb.)  Nan-
VOL.  X. — 7.


SULPHUR.  98

kivell,  H.  W.,  vol.  8,  p.  12;  Hawkes,  H.  W.,  vol.  9,  p.  15  ;  Hg.,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  1,  p.  123; Hg.,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  115; Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  4,  p.  108;  AVesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p.  104  ;  Dunham,  Jones,  N.  E.  M.
G.,  vol.  6,  p.  381 ; (2  cases)  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  121 ;  Hale,  Org.,
vol.  3,  p.  87,  from  Horn.  Rev.,  1879 ;  Kippax,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  96  ;  Gee,  Hom.  Phys  ,
vol.  6,  p.  451; Strong,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1882,  p.  171; Diarrhoea  and  vomiting,
Eichardson,  Med.  Inv.,  Oct.,  1868,  p.  1 ; Dian^hoea  and  cholera  infantum,  Wessel-
hoeft, Trans.  A.  I.,  1873,  p.  380 ;  Chronic  diarrhoea,  Gallinger,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,
p.  495 ;  Fellows,  Carfrae,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  507 ;  Thomkins,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,
p.  353;  Summer  complaint,  Jalir,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  203; Cholera  infantum,
Miller,  H.  M.,  vol.  9,  p.  202  ; Dysentery,  Gwynn,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  457  ; Chronic
dysentery,  Hawkes, Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  113 ; Cholera,  Hg.,  A.  H. Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  99 ;
Hemorrhage  from  bowels,  Morgan,  H.  W.,  1876,  p.  131 ;  Prolapse  and  hemorrhage  of
rectum,  Berridge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,vol.  10,  p.  388 ;  Hemorrhoids,Tie{ze,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  1004;  Berridge,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  498;  Guernsey,  H.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.
240  ;  Heath,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  200  ; Fincke,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  34;
Itching  of  anus,  Berridge,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  78  ; Ascaris  vermicularis,  Middleton,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  220  ;  Morbus  Brightii,  Sten?,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  451 ;
Irritable  bladder,  Laurie,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  493 ; Retention  of  urine,  Brisken,
Kafka,  N.  A.  J.,  vol.  22,  p.  448 ; Guernsey,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  271 ; Dysuria,  H.  in
F.,  Schron.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  31 ; Enuresis  nocturna,  Gauwerky,  Nusser.,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  46 ; Goodno,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  122 ; Danforth,
U.  S.  M.  and  S.  Jour.,  Oct.,  1870 ;  Villeneuve,  H.  M.,  vol.  9,  p.  222;  Urinary  diffi-
culty,  Lilienthal,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  51  ; Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.
84;  Fistula  urinaria,  Bernstein,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  52;  Sexual  weakness,  P>er-
ridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  208  ;  (Sulph.  and  Con.),  Marshall,  N.A.J.  H.,  vol.  4,
p.  80; Spermatorrhoea,  Love,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  230  ; Gonorrhoea,  Miller,
H.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  403 ;  Harris,  N.  A.J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  344;  Oleet,  Attomyr,  Lobeth.,
Bernstein,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  2,  p.  99  ;  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  61  ;  Sechrist,
H.  M  ,  vol.  9,  p.  36 ;  Prostatitis  (Sulph.  and  Sep.),  B.  F.  J.,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  1,  p.  474  ;
JJlcer  on  penis;  on  leg,  Goullon,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  17,  p.  223;  Hydrocele,  Guinness,
A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  88  ; Uterine  affection.  Skinner,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  154 ;
Prolapsus  uteri,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  346  ;  Cancer  uteri,  Thompson,  A.
J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  81  ;  Hav?ley, Hom. Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  470;  Metrorrhagia,
Weber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  335  ;  Menorrhagia,  Swan,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  1873,  p.
146  ;  Dysmenorrhcea,  Minton,  A.  J.,H.  M.  M.,  1873;  Amenorrhcea,  Tietze,  Knorr,
Bernstein,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  256;  Gorton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  462;  Allen,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1S83,  p.  306  ;  Menstrual  disturbance,  Berridge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,
p.  77  ;  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  418 ; Vaginitis,  Gorton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  514 ;
Leucorrhrm,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  197  ;  Brown,  Hom.  World,  1879,
Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  89  ; Vomiting  of  pregnancy,  Sherman,  Mass.  Trans.,  1876,  p.  750  ;
After-pains,  Morgan,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  317  ;  Affections  of  the  breasts,  Gross,  Beth-
mann,  Knorr,  Bernstein,  MuUer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  425 ;  Spasmus  glottidis,
Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  160 ;  Aphonia,  B.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  70 ;
Wesselhoeft,  Trans.  A. I., 1873,  p.  380;  Holcombe,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  10;
Laryngitis,  We-selhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p.  101;  Influenza,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.  vol.  3,  p.  50 ;  Payne,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  232 ;  Bronchitis,  Fairbanks,  Med.
Inv. vol.  8,  p.  416;  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  160;  Acute  bronchial  catarrh,
Miller  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  403;  Asthma,  Hoflendahl,  Riick.  Kl. Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.
199  •  Owens,  O.  M.  &  S.  Rep.,  vol.  5,  p.  348  ;  Cough,  Hartlaub,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  voh^S,


99  SULPHUR.

p.  173;  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  43  ;  Rushmore,  Med.  Adv.,  March,  1890,  p.
164;  Martin,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  124  ;  Roberts,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.
219  ;  Chronic  cough,  Nankivell,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  11,  p.  216,  Pertussis,  B.  in  D.,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  84  ;  Fulness  in  chest,  etc.,  Farrington,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,
p.  385  ;  JPain  in  chest,  C.  M.  A.,  vol.  5,  p.  381  ;  Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.
289  ;  Berridge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  164 ;  Neuralgia  of  chest,  Cooper,  N.  A.  J.
H.,  vol.  29,  p.  686 ;  Pneumonia,  Miiller,  Wurm,  Holeczek,  Noack,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  3,  p.  335 ;  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  1875,  p.  165 ;  (5  cases),  Wurmb  and  Caspar,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  381 ;  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p.  103;  Wesselhoeft,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  218  ;  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1873,  p.  380 ;  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  vol.  4,  p.  59 ;  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  317  ;  Pearson,  Med.  Inv.,  Jan.,.
1875  p.  28  ;  Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  187  ;  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  338  ;  Pleurisy,.
Cigliano,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  30;  Kunkel,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  296;  Pleuritic
effu4on  (Sulph.  and  Arsen.),  Sorge,  H.  KL,  1873,  p.  129;  Kraizell,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol,
78,  p.  54 ;  Hydrothorax,  Talbot,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  pp.  219-225 ;  Hmmoptysis,
Heichelheira,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  224  ;  Phthids,  Hartlaub,  Jahr,  Schelling,
Kreussler,  Haiistein,  Attomyr,  Vehsem,  Griessel.,  Riick.  Kl  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  407  ;
O.  M.  and  S.  Rep.,  1873,  No.  5  ;  Brigham,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  6,  p.  95 ;  Affection  of
lungs,  Goullon,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  267  ;  Pains  about  heart,  Fincke,  Med.
Adv.,  March,  1890,  p.  148;  Affection  o/ Aear/,  Noack,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.
459  ;  Lippe,  Org.,  vol  2,  p.  430 ;  Keloid  on  sternum,  Keghel,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,
p.  107,  from  A.  H.  Z. ;  Goitre,  Peschier,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1883,  p.  210;  Backache,
Hartlaub,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf ,  vol.  3,  p.  475;  Ulcer  on  back,  Wakeman,
Med.  Adv.,  vol.  21,  p.  117 ;  Oaroature  of  spine,  Goodno,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.
24;  Gallupe,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  480  ;  Pott's  disease,  Cooper,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  270  •
Ulcer  on  shoulder,  Cranch,  Med.  Inv.,  May,  1875,  p.  393  ;  Pain  in  finger,  Sherbino,
Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  419;  Panaritium,  Hartlaub,  Bernstein,  Holezeck,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  569 ;  Whitloiv,  Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  171  ;  Coxafgia,
Kretschraar,  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  576  ;  Coxitis,  Lutze,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  110,
p.  172  ;  Paralysis  of  leg,  Owens,  Ohio  M.  and  S.  Rep.,  vol.  5,  p.  349  ;  Pain  in  legs,
Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  553 ;  Swelling  of  knee,  Tietze,  Ohlhaath,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  589  ;  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  87 ;  Gonitk,  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.
25,  p.  316;  Enlarged  vein  of  leg,  B3rridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  289  ;  Ulcer  of  leg,
Rushmore,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  38  ;  Swelling  of  foot,  Berj-idge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.
4,  p.  291 ;  Herpetic  eruption  on  foot,  Lilienthal.  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  444  ;  Offen-
sive smell  of  feet,  Hawkes,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  113  ;  Prickling  in  feet,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.
M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  Ill;  Corns  and  frostbite,  Harman,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,
p.  438;  Pebility,  Dixon,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  17,  p.  234;  Intermittent  neuralgia-
(6  cases),  Brown,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  93;  Spasms,  Riickert,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  596;  Ruckert,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  80,  pp.  100-125;  Korndoerfer,
A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  127;  Sawyer,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  336;
Chorea,  Goodno,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  120;  Payne,  H.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  352  •
Epilepsy,  Riickert,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  21 ;  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p,
100;  McNeil,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  481 ;  Baker,  Med.  Inv.,  1875,  p.  371 ;  N.  Y.  S.  Tr.,
1874,  p.  174 ;  Baxter,  Proc.  H.  M.  S.  Ohio,  1874,  p.  108 ;  Nankivell,  Hom.  Rev.,
vol.  17,  p.  234;  Stens,  H.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.  555,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  pp.  12,  128;
Paralysis  after  miscarriage,  Farrington,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  92 ;  Terrifying  dreams,  Atto-
myr, Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  60 ;  Night  terror,  Nankivell,  Hom.  World,  March,
1873,  p.  57  ;  Attacks  of  chill,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  82 ;  Continued
fever,  Gardiner,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  105,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  104;


SULPHUR.  100

Ague,,  Miller,  H.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  404;  (2  cases),  Watzke,  Horn.  Jour.,  vol.  1,  p.  219;
Cooper,  Horn.  Kev.,  vol.  13,  p.  169 ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p. 668 ;  Steinrauf,  Horn.
Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  359  ;  Fornias,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  169  ;  Jennings,  Allen's  Int.
Fever,  p.  236  ;  Bemitlent  fever,  Wesselhoeft,  Trans.  A.  I.,  1873,  p.  380;  (2  cases),
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  119 ;  Rheumatic  fever,  Theobald,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  248  ;
Typhoid  fever,  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p.  104; Chagres  fever,  Cooper,  B.
J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.  698  ;  Anrmiia,  Burr,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  2,  p.  150 ;  Chlorosis,  Hart-
man,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  280 ;  Defective  assimilation.  Miller,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,
p.  164; Marasmus,  Middleton,  H.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  150; Scrofulosis, Griesselich,
Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  413  ;  Ailments  of  children,  Ring,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,
p. 263; Hereditary  syphilis, Beckwith, Med. Adv., vol.  2,  p.  227; Saorbutus,
Mackechnie,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.  320 ;  Rheumatism,  Bethmann,  Emmerich,  Tietze,
Kiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  546 ;  Small,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  Jour.,  vol.  7,  p.  291 ;  Wes-
selhoeft, T.  A.  I.  H.,  1873,  p.  380 ;  Burr,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  2,  p.  148 ;  Rheumatic
gout,  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  124  ;  Mentagra,  K.  in  L.,  Horn.  Klin.,  1869,  p.  53  ;
i?ad  e/ecte  o/ wtccmafoon.  Skinner,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  193;  Nankivell,  H.  W.,
vol.  7,  p.  206;  Cystic  tumor,  Shepard,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  324; Chloasma,  McComber,
A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  20  ;  Erysipelas,  Lilienthal,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  373  ;  Scar-
let fever,  Weber,  Lorbacher,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p  66  ;  Wells,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.
24,  p.  386;  Measles,  Weber,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  102; Use  in  variola,  Ber-
rldge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  110  ;  Furunculi,  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,
•p. 102; Vesicular eruption and cough, Higgins, Hah. Mo., vol.  10, p. 399;
Scabies,  Hahnemann,  Kammerer,  Lobethal,  Bredenoll,  Hartmann,  Valenti,  Kiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  215;  Blair,  Trans.  Ohio  State  Med.  Soc,  1869,  p.  7;  Thayer,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  145;  Hartlaub,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  82,  p.  41 ;  Jahr,  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  vol.  2,  p.  203 ; Urticaria,  Pettet,  Ohio  M.  and  S.  Kep.,  vol.  5,  p.  287  ;  Acne
punctata,  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  122;  Eczema,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.
4,  p.  113;  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  118;  Eczema  umbilicale,  Arcularius,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  147;  Eczema  impetiginoides,  Heinrich,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  79,  p.  15;
Arcularius,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  146;  Chronic  eczema,  Sherbino,  Horn.  Phys.,
vol.  9,  p.  422;  Impetigo,  Psoric  pustulation,  Nankivell,  Horn.  Kev.,  vol,  11,  p.
271-2;  Psoriasis,  Arcularius,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  412;  Stow,  N.  Y.  S.,  Trans.,
1871,  p.  617  ;  Crusta  serpiginosa,  GouUon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  54 ;  Porrigo  favosa,
H.  W.,  vol.,  7,  p.  260  ;  Molluscum,  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E. M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p.  103  ;
Ichthyosis  (Sulph.  and  Ars.),  Pratt,  Tr.  H.  M. S.  N.  Y.,  1 870,  p.  480  ;  Riqna  syphilitica,
Belts,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  101 ;  Rupialike  eruption,  McClelland,  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  vol,  1,  p.  113 ;  Rhus  poisoning.  Waltz,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  21,  p.  232 ;  Repelled
eruption  of  Rhus  poisoning,  Biegler,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  106;  Eruption,  Tietze,
Kuck. Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  167;  Stow, N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1869,  p.  304;  Chronic
exanthema  (Sulph.  followed  by  Calc),  Kraizell,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  26 ;
Chronic  eruption,  Kraizell,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  159  ;  Syphilitic  skin  eruption,  Ful-
ton, Med.  Adv.,  Oct.,  1889,  p.  269  ;  Skin  diseases,  Lobethal,  Altmiiller,  Engle-
hardt,  Knorre,  Griesselich,  Heichelheim,  Attomyr,  etc.,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  pp.
225,  263,  292,  307,  311,  314,  318 ;  Dixon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  371-378.

^  Mind. Unconsciousness.

I  Weak  memory,  particularly  for  names;  no  memory  for

what  transpired  recently ;  forgetfulness.
I  I  After  meals  congestion  to  head,  with  throbbing  and  for-
getfulness; feels  as  if  crazy; does  not  know  whether


101  SULPHUR.

she  has  done  what  she  intended  or  whether  objects  seen

are  really  there,  or  whether  she  only  imagines  them  to

be,  until  she  has  touched  them ;  menses  scanty  and  late.
Repeats  everything  said  to  him  on  account  of  difficult

comprehension.
Great  distraction  of  mind  ;  cannot  fix  his  mind  on  present

objects,  and  does  his  work  awkwardly.
I  Seems  stupid,  senseless,  confused,  avoids  conversation,
iDulness; difficult  thinking ; misplaces  or  cannot  find

proper  words  when  talking  or  writing.
Numerous  morbid  ideas,  extremely  disagreeable,  causing

rancor ;  neglect  of  business ;  <  in  evening  in  bed,  when.

ideas  prevent  falling  asleep.

I  Rack  their  brains  about  metaphysical  subtleties.

■  Fantastical  illusions;  monomania;  fancies.

I I  Foolish  happiness  and  pride,  thinks  himself  in  posses-
sion of  beautiful  things ;  even  rags  seem  beautiful.

I  Delirium;  imbecility;  insanity.

IIA  little  girl  with  religious  insanity,  takes  passages  of

Scripture  literally  and  acts  upon  them.
I  I  Furiously  mad ;  wanders  about  streets ;  after  suppression

of  tinea  capitis.

■  Greatly  inclined  to  weep  without  cause.

Moaning  and  complaining,  with  wringing  of  hands  day
and  night,  much  thirst,  little  appetite,  swallows  food
hastily.

I  1  About  an  hour  after  he  falls  asleep,  he  suddenly  starts

up  and  screams,  leaps  out  of  bed,  and  runs  about  like  a
maniac,  two  or  three  times  every  night; wrings  his
hands,  sweats  profusely  and  trembles.
Involuntary  haste  when  taking  hold  of  anything  and  when
walking.

I I  Indisposed  to  everything,  work,  pleasure,  talking  or
motion  ;  indolence  of  mind  and  body.

■  Great  obstinacy;  dislikes  to  have  any  one  near  him.
: ■Satiety  of  life,  longing  for  death.

■  ■Disgust,  to  nausea,  about  any  effluvia  arising  from  his

own  body.

■  Sentimental;  changing  mood.
■Sensitive  disposition.

■  Weeps  easily  at  slightest  provocation.

■  Sadness:  without  cause ;  without  courage ;  weary  of  life.
During  day  sad,  lachrymose ; weeps  if  one  attempts  to

console  her.

In  evening  sudden  sadness  and  disinclination  for  every-
thing.

While  walking  in  open  air  sudden  sadness;  is  filled  with
anxious,  despondent  thoughts,  from  which  she  cannot


SULPHUR.  102

free herself,  they  make her suspicious,  peevish and
lachrymose.
Greatly  depressed,  hypochondriacal  and  sighing.

■  Depressed  about  her  illness,  and  out  of  humor.

J  iMelancholy  mood  ;  dwelling  on  religious  or  philosophic
speculations ;  anxiety  about  soul's  salvation ;  indiffer-
ence about  lot  of  others.

1  I  Sleepless,  disgusted  with  life,  fears  the  future,  where  she
sees  nothing  but  misery  and  suffering. ^Melancholia.

I  1  Woman,  set.  41;  menses  irregular;  profound  melan-
chol}^ ;  considers  herself  disgraced  ;  speaks  of  dying,
finds  life  insupportable ;  noise  and  odors  irritate  her
greatly,  also  least  contradiction  or  advice  {Nux  vom.^^'^
restored  menstruation).

I  I  Melancholia  and  epilepsy,  with  strong  impulsive  ten-
dency to  suicide,  by  drowning  or  by  precipitating  her-
self from  window ;  epileptic  fits,  as  many  as  five  a  day,
with  at  times  two  hours  of  unconsciousness,  always  <
during  menstruation,  Sulph.  10™-  cured.

Frequently  during  day  attacks  of  melancholy  lasting  a
few  minutes,  feels  extremely  unhappy  without  cause,
she  wishes  to  die.

I  I  Great  dejection,  with  thoughts  of  suicide;  feels  inferior

to  everybody ;  can  decide  nothing ;  listless,  unable  to
work ;  can  understand  nothing  she  reads ;  great  disgust,
amounting  to  nausea,  at  odors  of  her  own  body ;  chronic
catarrh,  with  a  bland  yellow  discharge  ;  a  lump  comes
in  her  throat,  must  swallow  continually ;  <  in  a  warm
room  ;  constipation  with  frequent  ineffectual  desire  for
stool,  with  passage  of  fetid  flatus  which  disgusts  her
much ;  amenorrhoea  of  five  months'  standing  ;  a  sense  of
weight  in  pelvic  region  when  walking ;  muddy  com-
plexion with  occasional  acne.

■  Destroys  clothing,  imagines  she  has  everything  in  abun-

dance.

I I  Too  lazy  to  rouse  himself  up,  and  too  unhapp}'  to  live.

■  Hypochondriac  mood  through  day,  merry  in  evening.
1 1  Hypochondriasis  after  suppression  of  eruption.

I  I  Worried  by  trifles. ^Uterine  displacement.

Vexations  and  morbid  ideas  of  past  arise  from  most  indif-
ferent thoughts,  and  from  every  occurrence  in  life,  which
continue  to  be  united  with  new  vexations,  so  that  she
cannot  free  herself  fi-om  them.

Violent  starting  up,  even  when  his  name  is  called.

■  Anxious,  fearful.

i  I  Great  anxiety,  fear  lest  she  should  come  to  ruin  ;  went
about  wringing  her  hands;  tried  to  run  away;  pale  face;
dull  eyes;  pressure  on  head ;  pain  in  epigastrium ;  stools
white,  hard  ;  frequent  rigors.


103  SULPHUR.

■  Anxiety  :  in  evening  in  bed  ;  with  heat  of  head  and  cold

feet;  on  awaking,  with  heat  at  night;  as  if  some  great
misfortune  were  impending  ;  with  palpitation,  prevents
falling  asleep.
Very  much  excited  and  very  passionate.

■  Excitable  mood,  easily  irritated,  but  quickly  penitent.

■  Irritable  mood;  easily  excited  and  always  absorbed  in

himself.
llDread  of  being  washed  (in  children).

■  Peevish;  irritable;  quick-tempered.

■  Ill-humored  and  fault-finding.

■  Bad  humor  and  great  disinclination  to  speak.

■  Ill-humored  ;  vexed  with  herself;  everything  makes  her

impatient.
He  could  tear  himself  to  pieces  with  vexation.
Child  is  intolerably  violent  and  difficult  to  quiet.
So  obstinate  and  morose  that  he  answers  no  one,  and  will

tolerate  no  one  about  him ;  he  cannot  obtain  quickly

enough  what  he  wants.

■  Egotism.

Has  no  rest  anywhere  day  or  night.
^  Sensorium. ■Dulnessof  head:  in  evening;  on  waking  at
night;  in  morning,  with  pressure  in  forehead  until  noon;
after  walking  in  open  air;  and  confusion  ;  as  from  rush
of  blood,  especially  on  ascending  steps.

■  Heaviness  in  head  :  every  motion  was  disagreeable;  while

sitting,  lying,  moving  and  stooping;  and  dizziness;  and
confusion.

■  Heaviness  and  fulness  in  forehead,  <  when  raising  head,

after  sleep,  after  talking ;  >  when  sitting,  or  lying  with
head  high.

■  Confusion  of  head:  as  from  insufficient  sleep;  on  awaking,

in  morning;  frequently  recurring;  painful;  after  sleep-
ing; after  dinner;  in  forenoon ;  with  giddiness;  long-
continued;  11  A.M.,  and  giddiness,  with  dimness  of  vis-
ion; and  aching  in  occiput,  as  if  a  band  were  tied  tightly
around  forehead  ;  and  weight  of  head,  after  sleeping  ;
in  evening;  and  pressing  in  forehead.
Head  seems  distended.

■  Vertigo:  while  sitting  or  standing ;  with  nosebleed,  in

morning ;  when  stooping ;  when  rising  from  bed  ;  when
walking  in  open  air;  with  nausea;  with  vanishing  of
sight;  with  inclination  to  fall  to  1.  side;  <  after  meals,
particularly  after  dinner;  in  forenoon;  when  walking
over  running  water  or  looking  at  objects  in  rapid  mo-
tion ;  as  if  swinging  and  as  if  bed  were  not  large  enough
to  hold  him  ;  like  reeling,  when  walking;  while  walk-
ing in  open  air,  could  not  step  firmly ;  did  not  dare  to


SULPHUR.  104

stoop  or  look  down,  was  obliged  to  steady  herself  to  avoid
falling; tendency  to  fall  forward  on suddenly  rising
from  a  seat;  in  morning,  as  if  one  stood  on  wavering
ground;  from  venous  stagnation,  and  feeling  of  fulness
in  abdomen,  constipation,  flatulency;  suppressed  hem-
orrhoids; from  receded  or  suppressed  cutaneous  erup-
tion; chronic,  with  irritating  discharges.
iStupor,  with  pale  face,  dropping  of  lower  jaw,  eyes  half
open,  cold  sweat  on  face,  suppression  of  urine,  and  fre-
quent twitching  of  muscles.
^ Inner  Head. iRush  of  blood  to  head:  a  pressure  out  at
eyes ;  with  roaring  in  ears,  and  heat  of  face ;  during
menses;  during  a  soft  stool;  at  night  in  bed;  arising
from  chest  with  throbbing;  <  when  stooping,  talking,
in  open  air;  >  sitting  in  warm  room.
■  Headache:  in  forehead  in  morning;  as  from  a  weight
pressing  upon  top  of  brain,  and  a  cord  tied  around  head ;
>  by  shutting  eyes;  with  nausea;  on  stooping;  on  as-
cending steps;  as  if  brain  were  beating  against  skull,
on  nodding  head;  every  step  is  painfully  felt;  violent,
at  night,  disturbing  sleep;  pressive  in  forehead,  in  morn-
ing after  rising,  also  in  afternoon,  during  menses  ;  press-
ive, from  one  temple  to  other ;  pressive,  in  vertex,  morn-
ing and  evening,  as  if  eyes  would  be  pressed  down ;
jerking; tensive; tearing,  as  with a saw; stitching;
stitches  out  at  eyes ;  hammering,  from  vivacious  talk-
ing; like  blows  through  head ;  throbbing,  in  morning;
aching  in  forehead,  and  confusion  as  if  he  had  taken
too  much  alcoholic  drink,  in morning,  lasting  until
noon ;  in  forehead  on  waking,  going  off  after  getting
up  and  washing;  pressive,  in  occiput;  pressive,  over
eyebrows,  almost  all  day ;  above  r.  eye,  lasting  until
noon ; over eyes, every morning ; as from stopped
coryza ;  as  from  a  board  in  front  of  head ;  as  if  screwed
together,  in  and  over  forehead ;  tearing,  in  forehead  ;
pinching, from one temple to other ; shooting, in
temples  close  to  eyes,  on  moving  them  or  on  looking  at
anything;  sticking,  in  temples;  violent,  in  vertex,  in
evening  as  if  hair  would  be  torn  out,  it  bristles  on  most
painful  spots ;  boring,  on  top,  beneath  vertex,  the  spot
is  painful  to  touch ;  pressive,  in  vertex,  compels  wrink-
ling forehead  and  screwing  up  eyes ;  burning,  on  vertex
on  awaking,  succeeded  by  a  cool  feeling  in  same  place ;
aching  throbbing,  in  crown ;  in  1.  side  of  occiput,  as
from  congestion,  after  waking;  pulsating,  in  1.  side  of
occiput,  at  last  changes  to  a  jerking  every  day,  as  if
head  would  burst ;  throbbing,  at  night ;  pressive,  in  oc-
ciput,  at night ; nightly, with sleeplessness ; every


105  SULPHUK.

seventh  day;  congestive;  nervous;  catarrhal;  rheu-
matic ;  gouty ;  S3^philitic ;  from  suppressed  eruptions ;
from  abuse  of  spirits  or  metallic  substances,  hairwashes,
etc. ;  from  debility,  loss  of  animal  fluids,  severe
study,  etc.

■  Tearing  or  stitches  in  forehead  or  temples,  from  within

outward ;  <  from  eating  or  stooping ;  >  when  press-
ing head  together,  or  when  moving  about.
I  Painful  tingling  on  vertex,  and  in  temples.

■  Sensation  of  emptiness  in  occiput;  <  in  open  air,  and

from  talking  ;  >  indoors.

■  Drawing  and  tearing  through  head.

■Sick  headache,  very  weakening,  once  a  week  or  every
two  weeks ;  pain  lacerating,  stupefying,  numbing.

■  Feeling  of  coldness  about  head,  a  cold  spot  on  vertex

continually ;  piercing,  with  buzzing  in  ears.
Feeling  as  if  head  were  enlarged.

■  I  Heat  on  crown  of  head  ;  cold  feet;  frequent  flushing.

I  I  Severe  tearing  in  frontal  region ;  particularly  around
eyes  and  nose,  affected  parts  extremely  sensitive  to
touch,  as  if  a  blister  had  been  applied ;  at  same  time,
coldness  in  head  and  of  body  ;  on  application  of  warmth,
pulse  becomes  more  rapid ;  stitches  through  eyes ;
attacks  daily,  paroxysmal,  also  at  night,  preceded  by
formication  in  nose,  as  if  she  would  sneeze,  short  cough,
yawning,  followed  by  sweat. ^Headache.

I  I  Throbbing,  tearing  pains  in  occiput,  extending  forward,
with  nausea,  vomiting  and  pressure  in  eyes ;  attacks
preceded  by  flatulency;  after  two  or  three  days  head-
ache disappears,  then  vesicles  form  in  mouth,  with  heat
of  mouth,  which  disappear  and  are  followed  by  pains
in  throat ;  attacks  every  three  or  four  weeks.  ^Head-
ache.

I  1  Every  morning  9  o'clock,  severe  pressive  pain  in  fore-
head with  heat,  humming  in  head,  increasing  until
midday,  and  disappearing  4  p.m.  ;  of  several  months'
duration  ;  after  suppressed  itch. ^Headache.

I  1  Severe  throbbing,  pressing  pains  in  head,  <  from  warm
food,  warmth  of  room  and  in  sun;  congestion  to  head
with  loss  of  consciousness,  >  sprinkling  with  cold
water ;  at  times,  itching  of  anus  ;  constipation ;  flatu-
lency ;  after  suppression  of  itch.

I  I  About  10  A.M.  pain  begins  at  inner  point  of  1.  eye-
brow and  passes  steadily  along  until  it  involves  whole
superciliary  ridge,  which  becomes  very  sensitive  to
touch  ;  lachrymation  of  1.  eye  and  impairment  of  sight ;
pain  reaches  its  acme  by  midday,  then  gradually  de-
clines and  by  evening  has  worn  away  ;  average  dura-


SULPHUR.  106

tion  of  attacks  ten  days ;  pain  <  from  worry,  and  dur-
ing menses ;  often  hysterical  and  faint ;  acne  of  face ;
usually  passes  a  week  without  action  of  bowels.  ^Sick
headache.

1  Nocturnal  headaches  <  from  least  motion  in  bed;
heaviness  in  head,  particularly  in  occiput;  pains  in
head  as  if  head  would  burst;  stitching,  humming  in
head ;  throbbing  pain  in  vertex,  coldness,  a  cold  spot
on  head.

I  I  For  three  years,  headache;  symptoms  get  worse  and
worse  until  middle  of  Summer,  and  then  steadily  de-
cline; cannot  endure  being  excited;  cannot  remain
long  in  a  heated  place;  frequently  faints  with  pain;  is
extremely  nervous ;  paroxysms  generally  every  two  or
three  days ;  pain  begins  1.  side  of  head,  sometimes  ex-
tends all  over  it ;  >  from  cold  ;  <  from  warmth,  medi-
tation, excitement  and  after  food ;  generally  lasts
twenty-four  hours.

I  Pain  confined  to  one  spot  on  top  of  head,  near  middle
line,  inclining  to  1.  side;  came  on  about  a  year  and  a
half  ago  from  cold ;  quinine  temporarily  >  pain ;
pain  at  its  acme  about  5  or  6  p.m.,  continues  to  be  violent
until  2  A.M.,  when  it  quits  him  instantaneously ;  <  in
Winter,  and  whenever  weather  is  unusually  cold ;  pain
appears  to  be  in  brain,  and  when  violent  almost  drives
him  mad;  dyspeptic,  foul  breath;  furred  tongue,  very
weak,  perspires  profusely,  low-spirited,  nervous,  cannot
bear  moving  about.

I  I  For  two  years,  severe  headache,  extending  from  fore-
head to  occiput ;  <  when  he  catches  cold ;  begins
every  morning  after  rising;  gets  a  little  >  through
day;  violent  pains  in  shoulders  flying  to  head;  pain
prevents  him  raising  arms  to  head,  particularly  r. ;
tightness  on  chest.

I  iFor  two  months,  constant  pricking  pain  across  forehead,
with  giddiness,  <  on  stooping,  in  evening;  cannot  sleep
uxitil  after  1  or  2  a.m.  ;  after  checked  diarrhoea.

I  I  Pain  in  forehead  and  vertex  extending  to  eyes;  sharp,
violent,  >  by  warmth  ;  scalp  tender  when  pain  is
worst.

I  I  Pain  coming  on  at  10  a.m.,  sometimes  as  early  as  6  a.m.,
and  lasting  an  hour,  seldom  longer ;  confined  to  occiput ;
sensation  as  if  head  had  been  beaten.

I  I  After  cessation  of  chronic  diarrhoea,  which  was  more
frequent  in  morning  than  evening,  a  headache  ensued
which  awakened  her  at  night,  with  sensation  as  if  top  of
head  were  being  pressed  against  wall,  with  heat  in
whole  head ;  headache  lasts  all  day.


107  SULPHUR.

I  I  Severe,  sharp,  darting  pains  in  and  about  1.  eye,  ex-
tending to  inner  ear  of  same  side;  pains  suddenly
leave  eye  and  manifest  themselves  about  1.  ovary ;  great
tenderness  of  scalp.

I  I  Headache  apt  to  commence  in  1.  side  and  go  round  to
r. ;  vomiting  of  acid  matter,  usually  little  or  no  thirst.

I  I  Pain  commences  in  1.  temple,  extends  to  r.,  over  r.  eye-
ball to  occiput ;  pain  from  superior  portion  of  sternum
through  to  back,  and  crosswise  between  shoulders,  ten-
derness on  pressure ;  swelling  and  soreness  of  1.  side  of
cervical  spine ;  sudden  vertigo,  nausea  and  vomiting ;
loss  of  memory,  forgets  his  own  name ;  deafness  in
1.  ear.

I  Intermittent  periodic  neuralgia,  <  every  twenty-four
hours,  generally  at  12  m.  or  12  p.m.,  and  analogously
<  in  midsummer  and  midwinter.

I  I  Chronic  headache  of  four  years'  standing;  scarcely  a
day  without;  generally  begins  about  5  or  6  p.m.,  front
or  back,  splitting,  with  nausea  and  anorexia;  ceases  as
he  falls  asleep  ;  forehead  is  hot,  >  by  sponging  with
cold  water;  head  always  more  or  less  painful ;  emotional,
easily  moved  to  tears ;  strong  desire  for  highly  spiced
food,  apples,  pickles,  cider,  etc.

I  I  Periodic  neuralgic  headache,  affecting  greater  part  of
head,  and  coming  on  about  noon  every  day,  and  lasting
until  evening,  when  it  gradually  subsides.

■  Headache  with  throbbing,  increasing  with  increase of

fever.

I  Headache  is  attended  by  nausea;  hair  falls  out;  fore-
head is  covered  with  acne.

iPressive  headache  in  forehead,  <  on  motion,  with  great
restlessness.

iSick  headache  once  a  week  ;  pains  stupefying;  numbing;
walking  painful ;  <  at  night  and  damp,  cold  weather.

Head  symptoms  <:  when  awaking;  in  evening;  from
motion;  stooping;  talking;  mental  exertion  and  out
doors;  every  seventh  day;  during  rest;  sitting;  from
pressure  ;  moving  head  ;  in  a  warm  room.

■  Meningitis: soporous sleep, from which they awake

every  ten  to  twenty  minutes  with  loud  screams ;  grind-
ing of  teeth ;  chewing  motion  of  lower  jaw ;  vomiting
of  food;  photophobia;  constipation;  small,  frequent
pulse;  thirst;  dry,  white  tongue;  sour  smell  from
mouth;  cheeks  alternately  red  and  pale,  or  one  cheek
red,  one  pale;  changes  color  frequently;  head  hot,  skin
of  rest  of  body  dry  and  cool ;  head  sweats  and  has  odor
of  musk;  can  only  lie  in  one  certain  position,  that  is
with  occiput  drawn  far  backward,  on changing  this


SULPHUR.  108

position,  screaming  and  vomiting;  delirious  talking,
during  which  they  fall  asleep;  startled  awaking;  sopor,
cannot  be  aroused  by  loud  calls.

1 1  Brain  affections  in  children  who  do  not  like  to  be  washed,
have  pimples,  boils  and  other  eruptions  on  head,  face
and  everywhere,  pick  at  nose,  have  red  lips,  crave  sour
things,  feel  faint  in  forenoon,  may  have  diarrhoea  early
in  morning;  sleep  restless,  start  when  falling  asleep,
cry  out  during  sleep,  or  murmur,  moan,  whine  or  snore;
feet  cold  in  morning  and  hot  in  evening;  they  run
about  but  do  not  like  to  stand,  sit  hunched  and  walk
stooping.

I  I  Fell,  striking  on  back  of  head,  was  taken  up  insensible;
following  night,  restless,  followed  by  vomiting,  dizziness
on  stooping,  or  standing  on  an  elevation,  with  a  ten-
dency to  fall  backward;  darting  pain  through  eyes;
frontal  cephalalgia,  pupils  dilated.

I  Hydrocephalus :  developing  slowly  after  psoric  eruptions ;

head  drops  backward;  likes  to  lie  with  head  low;  face
changing,  often  red  or  pale;  nausea  while  lifting  head
up;  breath  sour;  urine  as  if  mixed  with  flour;  sub-
acute and  chronic,  in  scrofulous  children,  where  effusion
has  not  progressed  too  far;  spasms,  in  scrofulous  chil-
dren ;  regularly  protrudes  and  retracts  tongue.
*  Outer  Head,  l Sensitiveness  of  vertex,  pressing  pain  when
touched;  <  in  evening,  from  heat  of  bed,  in  morning
when  awaking;  smarting  and  burning  after  scratching,
iRoots  of  hair  painful,  especially  to  touch.

I I  Severe  itching  on  forehead  and  scalp.
Feeling  of  coldness  about  head.

■  Falling  out  of  hair.

Iltching  or  painful  pimples  on  scalp.

1 1  Itching  pimples  on  forehead ;  inflamed,  painful  to  touch.

I  On  forehead  patches and  groups  of  black  points,  like

comedones.
I  Humid  eruption  on  top  of  head,  like  tinea  capitis,  small,

grainlike pustules,  filled  with pus, drying up into

honeylike  scabs.
On  two  spots  on  vertex,  tender,  scabby  elevations,  size  of

a  pea.
Illnflamed  and  suppurating  pimples  on  hairy  scalp.
■Small  vesicles  on  top  of  head,  filled  with  limpid  fluid;

itch  a  great  deal  and  form  yellow  or  brown  crusts.
I  I  Eruption  on  scalp;  pus  oozing  out  on  different  parts  of

liead;  scalp  and  hair  matted  with  scales  of  dry  pus;

small  boils  behind  ears;  rash  over  body. ^Impetigo.
1  I  Eruption  on  scalp  since  two  years;  part  covered  with  a

thick  scab;  when  crust  is  removed  from  poulticing  an


109  SULPHUR.

eruption  appears,  which  is  vesicular  at  beginning,  but
soon  becomes  pustular,  these  burst,  fluid  concretes,  and
a  thick  crust  is  developed. ^Eczema  impetiginodes.

I  I  Thick,  yellowish  crust,  somewhat  moist,  covering  whole
scalp  and  matted  in  with  hair. ^Eczema.

1  I  Large,  thick,  moist  crust  on  back  of  head. ^Eczema.

I  I  Thick,  moist,  greenish-yellow  crust  covering  nearly
whole  1.  side  of  head;  has  a  tendency  to  suppurate  and
has  suppurated,  leaving  a  large  scar;  of  four  years'
duration. ^Eczema.

I  I  Eczema  around  margin  of  hairy  scalp,  from  ear  to  ear,

posteriorly.

I I  Humid,  offensive  eruption  on  top  of  head,  filled  with
pus,  drying  up  into  honeylike  scabs. ^Tinea  capitis.

1 1  Dry,  offensive,  easily  bleeding,  burning  eruption,  begins
on  back  of  head  and  behind  ears;  pains  and  cracks;
>  from  scratching.

1 1  Humid,  offensive  eruption,  with  thick  pus,  yellow
crusts,  bleeding  and  burning.

I  Hair  dry,  falling  off;  scalp  sore  to  touch,  itching  vio-
lently, in  evening,  when  getting  warm  in  bed;  dandruff.

1  I  Eruption  on  head  since  seven  years;  commenced  with
a  few  pustules  and  gradually  spread  over  a  surface
about  three  times  as  large  as  a  silver  dollar;  crusts
thick,  yellow  and  very  adherent;  part  devoid  of  hair;
eyes  weak,  lids  much  inflamed  and  agglutinated  in
morning. ^Porrigo  favosa.

■  Contractive  pain  as  from  a  band  around  cranium,  with
sensation  as  if  flesh  were  loose,  followed  by  inflamma-
tion, swelling  and  caries  of  bones;  <  in  wet,  cold
weather  and  when  at  rest;  >  from  motion.

I  Fontanelles  close  too  late.

I  Dandruff'.

I  I A  sanguineous  tumor,  size  of  a  black  walnut,  on  r.  of

occipital  bone ;  anterior  fontanelle  closed,  posterior
open  and  connected  with  tumor;  after  Cole,  phos.^'^'^,
tumor  lessened,  but  came  to  a  standstill;  anterior  fon-
tanelle opened  more,  and  connection  between  posterior
and  tumor  disappeared;  Sulphur ?^^  one  dose,  completed
cure.
^  Sight  and  Eyes,  l Sensitiveness  of  eyes  to  daylight;  in-
tolerance of  sunlight;  photophobia,  with  stitches,  <  in
sultry  weather;  shuns  light  during  sweat.

I I  Dimness  of  vision:  as  of  a  veil  or  gauze  before  eyes;
as  from  a  fog;  with  headache;  as  if  cornea  had  lost  its
transparency;  sudden  paroxysms  of  nyctalopia;  while
reading;  objects  seem  more  distant;  for  near  and  dis-
tant objects;  with  weakness  of  eyes,  blindness,  cataract,


SULPHUR.  110

glaucoma;  with  innumerable,  confused,  dark  spots
floating  before  eyes.

I  Hallucinations  of  sight:  flickering  before  eyes;  small
dark  specks;  dark  points  and  spots;  black  flies  seem  to
float  not  far  from  eyes;  gas  or  lamp  lights  appear  to  be
surrounded  with  a  halo  (cataract  or  glaucoma);  like
black,  gauze  or  feather  dust;  scintillations  and  white
spots;  black  points  or  stripes  before  eyes.

I  llmpairment  of  vision  of  both  eyes,  when  attempting  to
read,  letters  become  instantly  so  muddled  and  blurred,
one  running  into  other,  that  it  is  impossible  for  him  to
read  at  all,  without  powerful  convex  glasses  ;  wears  con-
there  was  no  organic  change  in  eye,  and  no  objective
symptoms  to  account  for  impairment;  sinking,  hungry
and  exhausted  feeling  at  epigastrium,  at  11  a.m.  daily ;
heat  rising  to  face,  especially  after  washing  ;  faint  feel-
ing on  going  into  a  bath ;  feet  cold ;  very  timid  and
easily  startled ;  teeth  and  gums  tender,  bleed  at  times,
<  from  chewing,  especially  cheese ;  feeling  of  a  lump
in  epigastrium  after  food ;  at  times  canine  appetite ;  food
returns  if  he  runs.

I  I  Amaurosis  after  a  sudden  disappearance  of  an  eruption
on  head;  can  only  see  outlines  of  objects; spots  and-
weblike  forms  appear  before  eyes ;  single  objects  seem
double  and  indistinct;  pupils  greatly  dilated,  do  not
contract  in  strong  light.

I  I  After  disappearance  of  a  severe  tearing  pain  in  1.  side

of  forehead,  from  which  she  suffered  four  months,  muscse
volitantes;  for  last  four  days  gradual  impairment  of
sight ;  can  scarcely  distinguish  day  from  night ;  burn-
ing, tearing  pains  in  eyes. ^Amaurosis.

I I  Amaurosis  in  a  child  4  years  old  ;  no  structural  change
in  eye,  but  eyeballs  in  continual  motion  from  side  to
side ;  has  had  an  eruption  suppressed ;  itchiness  of  skin
(removed  by  Arsen.).

■  Asthenopia, muscular and accommodative; gaslight

hurts  more  than  sunlight.

■  Amaurosis  and  amblyopia,  with  or  without  diplopia,  from

suppression  of  an  eruption.

1  I  After  severe  neuralgia  in  head,  especially  on  1.  side,  an
appearance  of  threads  before  eyes  which  she  could  not
wipe  away ;  increased  until  she  could  only  distinguish
day  from  night;  burning,  tearing  in  eyes,  and  conjunc-
tiva slightly  red. ^Amaurosis.

I  I  Has  abused  eyes  by  reading,  writing,  sewing ;  trouble
began  in  r.  eye,  w'hich  is  <  ;  sensation  as  if  eye  were
gone,  and  a  cool  wind  blew  out  of  empty  socket ;  severe


Ill  '  SULPHUR.

pains  and  itching  around  back  of  eye;  when  closing
eyes,  flashes  of  light ;  mist  like  a  veil  or  cloud  before
eye;  <  from  strong  light;  using  eyes  causes  intense
headache  over  them ;  desire  to  spasmodically  close
eyes,  which  gives  relief;  menses  regular,  accompanied
by  severe  bearing-down  pains,  w^ith  pain  in  hips  and
back,  and  sexual  excitement ;  using  eyes  causes  nausea,
heartburn,  faintness  at  stomach,  with  a  desire  to  eat
between  meals  {Sepia  relieved,  Sulphur  finished  the
cure). ^Asthenopia.

I  I  Blindness  of  1.  eye  after  suppressed  itch  ;  eye  has  a  dead
look  ;  pupil  enlarged  and  immovable ;  in  middle  of  Ions
an  opacity,  as  if  it  had  been  punctured  by  a  needle ;  lids
and  conjunctiva  somewhat  reddened  ;  on  holding  hand
quite  near  to  eye,  he  can  dimly  discern  fingers.

iHypersemia  of  retina.

■Retinitis,  from  overuse  of  eyes;  congestion  of  optic  nerve;
outlines  ill-defined,  pain  around  eye,  and  itching  in
internal  canthi.

iChorio-retinitis,  and  uncomplicated  choroiditis ;  darting
pains ;  chronic  trouble,  based  upon  abdominal  venosity,
stagnation  in  portal  circulation,  habitual  constipation
and  cerebral  congestion  ;  psoric  taint.

■  Opacities  in  vitreous,  resulting  from  choroideal  exuda-
tions, old  hemorrhages,  etc.

I  I  Sympathetic  irritation  of  r.  eye,  after  removal  of  1.;  sharp
pain  in  stump,  extending  in  stitches  to  healthy  eye,  in
which  there  is  considerable  irritation  and  photophobia,
occasional  obscuration  of  vision  and  commencing  pres-
byopia ;  constant  discharge  from  stump,  which  is  exces-
sively sensitive  to  touch.

I  I  For  three  years,  dimness  of  vision  of  1.  eye,  finally  so
marked  as  to  prevent  recognition  of  friends  without  aid
of  r.  eye;  sees  a  bright  halo  around  flame  of  candle;
skin  of  face  dry  and  hard ;  his  work  frequently  obliged
him  to  stand  in  water  for  a  length  of  time.  ^Cortical
cataract.

I  I  Mrs.  E.,  set.  48,  complains  of  heaviness  of  eyelids ;  mist
and  grey  fog  before  eyes,  and  a  feeling  as  of  sand  in
eyes;  nursing  a  baby;  in  r.  eye  beginning  of  cataract;
burning  in  forehead  ;  flashes  in  r.  eye ;  pain  as  if  beaten
in  small  of  back ;  nebulous  sight ;  eruption  on  ears
{Caustic.^*^  finished  cure).

•  Cataract  after  suppression  of  an  eruption.

Redness  of  iris.

Ilritis,  scrofulous  and  syphilitic ;  chronic  cases;  drawing
pain  around  eye,  sharp  sticking  pains  in  eyes,  <  at
night  and  toward  morning;  eyeball  painful  on  motion.


SULPHUR.  ^  112

■  Adhesions  (posterior  synechiee)  after  iritis.
Hypopion ;  from  iritis,  or  other  circumstances.

■  Trachoma,  acute  and  chronic;  pains  sharp  and  sticking

in  morning,  lids  glued  together ;  water  is  not  a  favorite
application,  and  usually  aggravates  trouble.

■  Pterygium,  dependent  upon  hereditary  psora.

■  Pannus,  in  patients  of  strumous  diathesis;  true  pannus

crassum,  whole  of  cornea  presenting  appearance  of  a
piece  of  fresh  raw  beef;  green  halo  around  candlelight;
herpetic  pannus,  resulting  from  phlyctenules,  etc.

I  I  Wound  of  cornea,  wdth  hemorrhage  into  eye,  and  pro-

lapse of  iris.

II  Hypopion,  with  deep  ulceration  of  centre  of  cornea
involving  one-third  its  surface.

■  ■Pustular  inflammation  of  cornea,  or  conjunctiva,  with

marked  lachrymation ;  pains  sharp  and  stitching,  as  if
a  needle  or  splinter  were  sticking  in  eye.

■  Superficial  and  deep  ulcers  on  cornea,  intense  redness  of

eye,  great  photophobia.

■  Specks  or  ulcers  on  cornea  ;  opacities.

■  ■Keratitis  parenchymatosa  in  a  scrofulous  subject,  cornea

like  ground  glass,  photophobia,  lids  swollen  and  bleed
easily.

■  Keratitis  pustulosa:  with  sharp  pain  in  eye  at  2  p.m.,
also  awakened  early  in  morning  by  pain;  of  seven  years'
duration,  cornea  hazy,  and  very  fine  vessels  on  edge,
with  pustules,  conjunctiva  injected,  sharp  pain  in  1.  eye
like  knives,  moderate  photophobia,  and  lachrymation  ;
in  a  large,  fat,  unhealthy  child,  much  photophobia,  dis-
charge from  ears  and  nose,  eruptions  on  head  and  face,
head  dry  and  hot,  so  that  it  dries  rapidly  after  washing,
restless  at  night,  etc.;  photophobia  <  morning  and
evening,  face  rough  and  nose  sore ;  photophobia,  lach-
rymation and  cracking  of  external  canthi,  restless  first
part  of  night;  from  suppression  of  an  eruption  behind
ears ;  dislikes  having  eye  washed,  appetite  poor,  and
restless  at  night;  with  sharp  sticking  pains  and  pustular
eruptions  around  eye;  from  a  cold,  with  much  sharp,
darting  pains  in  eye ;  <  in  morning  and  darting  pain
through  temples.

I  I  Conjunctivitis  pustulosa;  child  restless  at  night;  with
sharp  sticking  pain,  <  by  moving  eyes;  at  first  >  by
bathing,  afterward  <  ;  stinging  pain,  >  by  washing  in
warm  water;  with  great  redness  and  sharp  sticking
pains;  with  sore  pain  in  1.  eye,  >  by  cold  applications,
burning  in  palms  of  hands;  with  dryness  of  lids.

I  llncipient  sclerotitis;  feeling  of  fulness  and  largeness  of
ball,  <  by  use,  or  bright  light,  especially  gaslight.


113  SULPHUR.

I  iSubretinal  tumor,  in  a  girl  9  years  old  ;  a  year  previous,
slight  drooping  of  lid  of  r.  eye,  has  slightly  increased ;
child  cannot  see  from  this  eye ;  had  suffered  from  en-
larged glands  and  abscesses  in  neck,  scars  of  which
remained ;  in  r.  e3'e  a  partial  ptosis  and  a  divergent
squint  of  about  half  a  line;  movement  of  eye  seems  per-
fect in  all  directions;  no  external  congestion  or  inflam-
mation ;  pupil  sensitive  to  changes  of  light  before  1.  eye,
but  sluggish  to  light  and  shade  before  its  own  eye;  vis-
ion is  for  fingers  only  at  eight  inches;  examination  re-
vealed a  tumor  under  or  in  the  retina,  which  covered
macula  lutea ;  vessels  could  be  traced  over  tumor  and
small  hemorrhagic  spots  were  found  around  it;  size
of  tumor  equalled  two  diameters  of  optic  disk,  and  its
elevation  nine  millimetres.

Eyes  sunken,  surrounded  by  blue  rings.

Biting  of  eyes  and  lachrymation,  every  evening.

I A  feeling  as  of  sand  in  ej'es.

•Stitches  as  with  a  knife  in  r.  eye.

I  Itching  and  burning  of  eyes.

llBurning  heat  in  eyes;  painful  smarting.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  foreign  body  in  eyes.

I  Burning  and  easy  fatigue  of  eyes  when  reading.
Burning  of  eyes  without  redness.

■  Burning  shooting  beneath  lids  of  1.  eye,  as  if  sand  had

got  into  it.
I  Heaviness  of  eyes.
I  Dryness  of  eyes.

Eyeballs  are  painful  on  moving  them.
Pressure  in  eyeballs  on  walking  in  open  air.

■  In  evening,  dull  aching  and  feeling  of  weight  in  both

eyeballs,  with  loss  of  vision  as  if  a  thick  veil  were  before
eyes.
I  Pain as  from  dryness  of  eyeballs,  and  a  sensation  as  if
they  rubbed  against  lids.

■  Violent  pains  in  1.  eye,  as  if  it  were  rubbed  against  spiculse

of  glass,  and  drawn  in  toward  pupil.
■Severe  cutting  in  r.  eye.

■  Shooting  in  1.  eye,  <  from  reading.

■  Redness  of  eyes  during  day;  itching  in  evening.

■  Purulent  mucus  in  eyes.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes  or  lids ;  aching;  smarting,  burning,

or  a  feeling  like  sand.

■  Painful  inflammation  of  eye,  from presence  of  foreign

body  (after  Aeon.).
I  I  Left  eye  very  red,  lids  puffy,  upper  one  heavy  and  raised
with  difficulty ;  sensation  as  of  a  foreign  body  in  eye ;
pustule  on  lower  part  of  conjunctiva ;  lids  covered  with

VOL.  X.— 8.


SULPHUR.  114

secretion,  agglutinated  in  morning;  dark  circles  around
eyes,  mist  before  them ;  headache  above  eyebrows  as  from
a  blow ;  forehead  painful  to  touch  ;  constant  desire  to
vomit;  disgust  for  food;  repugnance  for  meat;  wishes
for  nothing  but  vinegar  and  raw  things;  after  eating,
suffocating  weight  on  stomach,  causing  rush  of  blood
to  head  and  ringing  in  ears;  uterus  presses  upon  blad-
der when  she  walks;  on  rising  up,  limbs  totter.  ^Ca-
tarrhal ophthalmia.

1  I  Sclerotic  of  1.  eye,  highly  injected  and  puffy;  naturally
brown  iris  appears  reddish  ;  at  lower  portion  of  iris,  a
white  spot,  as  large  as  a  lentil ;  photophobia;  profuse
lachrymation ;  agglutination  of  lids  at  night;  eyeball
pains  when  moved;  drawing  pains  round  about  eye;
pain  in  occiput  as  if  hollow,  when  lying;  stool  hard.

I  I  For  twelve  days  ophthalmia  and  diarrhoea;  severe  par-
oxysmal cutting  pains  in  abdomen,  with  diarrhoea  and
tenesmus,  <  at  night;  pulse  rapid,  feverish.

I  I  Conjunctiva  and  meibomian  glands  swollen  and  in-
flamed; eyes  injected  ;  a  thin,  acrid,  excoriating  dis-
charge on  opening  eyes;  pain  as  if  salt  were  in  them  ;
cornea  dim  ;  photophobia;  cannot  clearly  distinguish
objects ;  sobs,  cries,  fears  she  will  become  blind.

I  I  Conjunctiva  of  r.  eye  greatly  injected  and  inflamed;
cornea  very  dim,  dirty,  dusty-looking,  as  if  covered  by
a  film  ;  vision  greatly  impaired  ;  objects  appear  as  if
through  a  fog,  are  indistinct;  lids  red,  burning  pains,
tenacious,  acrid,  excoriating  discharge ;  agglutination  of
lids  at  night;  constant  lachrymatton,  <  in  damp  weather;
boy,  set  18,  after  an  attack  of  smallpox,  when  5  j^ears
old.

I  I  For  many  years,  periodical  attacks  of  conjunctivitis,
frequently  lasting  three  months;  conjunctiva  of  1.  eye
highly  injected ;  pressing,  tensive  burning,  itching  pains
through  eye;  fog  before  eyes;  tearing  pain^in  1.  side  of
head;  constipation;  chilliness  during  day;  heat  at
night;  pulse  hard,  irritable.

I  Caught  cold  in  r.  eye,  about  two  months  ago,  which
caused  lachrymation  and  pricking  pains;  application
of  rose-water ;  three  weeks  ago  both  eyes  were  affected  ;
constant  lachrymation,  of  a  rather  gelatinous  char-
acter, all  day,  but  <  morning  and  evening ;  in  morning
sees  a  halo  around  artificial  light,  yellow  inside,  then
green,  then  yellow  outside;  removed  by  washing;  gas-
liglit  looks  dim  ;  smarting  in  external  canthi,  which  are
red  and  prick  at  times.

I  1  Redness  of  both  eyes,  cannot  stand  light;  headache  al-
most every  day,  commencing  in  occiput,  spreading  to


115  SULPHUR.

forehead ;  tongue  coated  red  in  middle,  borders  red ;
papillse  on  apex  prominent;  hungr}^  gone  feeling,  be-
tween 19  and  11  a.m.

I  I  Eyes  red  and  hot,  occasional  stitches  or  stinging,  ob-
scuration of  sight,  mist  before  eyes,  lachrymation  when
looking  sharp  out  of  doors.

I  I  Arthritic  ophthalmia,  frequent  attacks  for  years,  intense
photophobia,  confining  him  to  a  dark  room  for  weeks
and  months ;  sclerotic  red ;  cornea  surrounded  by  a  blu-
ish ring ;  pains  about  eyes.

I  I  For  3^ears  attacks  of  arthritic  ophthalmia,  which  made
him  blind  for  weeks  or  months ;  photophobia,  could  not
bear  least  exercise  of  eyes;  conjunctiva  but  slightly
reddened ;  sclerotic  bright,  rose-colored ;  bluish  circle
around  cornea  ;  pain  around  eye.

I  I  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes  since  birth  ;  1.  eye  <  ;
looks  like  a  piece  of  raw  meat,  was  larger  and  protruded
from  socket;  r.  eye  also  considerably  affected;  with  1.
eye  €Ould  not  see  anything  by  day,  while  at  night  ho
could  distinguish  a  light ;  sight  of  r.  eye  good  ;  feeling
as  if  eye  were  full  of  sand  ;  green  halo  around  light.

i  I  Attack  of  scrofulous  ophthalmia  ever}'  eighth  year  of
her  life,  in  month  of  January,  or  February ;  ulcers  on
cornea,  wuth  almost  total  blindness  for  six  or  eight
weeks;  always  aflects  1.  eye.

I  I  Whole  1.  eye  seems  to  have  grown  larger,  and  its  cover-
ings are  extraordinarily  swollen ;  albuginea  is  blood-red
from  turgid  vessels  in  it;  cornea  appears  dimmed,  as  if
covered  with  fine  dust;  an  ulcer  on  cornea  which  had
recently  cicatrized  was  now  again  in  full  suppuration
and  had  become  deeper  and  broader  ;  intolerance  of
light ;  constant,  violent,  pressive  pains  all  around  orbit,
increased  to  a  frightful  degree  on  moving  eyes,  or  ex-
posure to  light  of  sun,  even  though  lids  are  closed,  pain
then  almost  drives  him  to  despair,  includes  whole  head,
and  deprives  him  of  all  rest  and  sense.  ^Scrofulous
ophthalmia.

I 'Right  eye  greatly  injected;  iris  obscure;  lids  swollen,
red,  suppurating;  photophobia;  shooting  pain  above
eye  traversing  head;  great  lachrymation  ;  little  appetite;
from  time  to  time,  pain  in  stomach  and  abdomen.
^Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I  I  From  her  youth  has  been  subject  to  weak  e3-es,  with
occasional  epiphora,  injection  of  eyes  with  much  pain ;
now  lay  in  bed,  eyes  covered  with  a  bandage,  as  light
was  intolerable;  conjunctiva  and  meibomian  glands
swollen  and  inflamed ;  sclerotic  red  ;  on  opening  lids,  a
large  quantity  of  acrid,  corrosive  water  gushed out,


SULPHUR.  116

which  excoriated  skin ;  eyes  pain  as  if  salt  had  gotten
into  them  ;  cornea  dim ;  could  not  distinguish  objects
rightly;  fears  she  will  become  blind.

I  I  Borders  of  lids  thick  and  puffy,  ulcerated  ;  cornea  cov-
ered with  maculae,  and,  independently  of  these,  visual
power  of  e^^e  so  diminished  that  she  could  not  see  small
objects  at  all,  and  larger  ones  appeared  as  if  enveloped
in  smoke  and  mist;  general  health  much  affected;  after
Salph.,  there  appeared  an  eruption  of  pocks,  warts,  he-
patic spots,  pustules,  herpetic  scabs  in  different  parts  of
body,  this  lasted  eight  days  after  leaving  off  remedy,
after  which  eyes  were  completely  cured.  ^Scrofulous
ophthalmia.

I  I  Scrofulous  ophthalmia;  much  photophobia  and  lach-
rymation,  lids  convulsively  closed  and  could  not  be
opened.

■  Traumatic  ophthalmia ;  violent  palpebral  conjunctivitis  ;
opacity  of  cornea ;  abscess  in  layers ;  hypopion.

llOpthalmia  neonatorum,  profuse,  thick,  yellow  dis-
charge, swelling  of  lids,  etc. ;  tendency  to  relapse ;  non-
syphilitic.

I  I  Paresis  of  r.  nervous  abducens:  w^oman,  set.  40,  had  for
three  months  been  troubled  with  double  images  to  r.  and
downward;  no  perceptible  diminution  in  movements  of
eye,  no  apparent  cause  for  paresis ;  some  pain  in  eye  on
looking  upward;  headache  and  restlessness  at  night.

llLachrymation :  in  morning,  followed  by  dryness;  and
burning  in  morning;  profuse  and  burning  from  acrid,
excoriating  tears;  in  open  air,  dry  in  room  ;  itching  and
biting  in  eyes.

I  Lids:  dryness  of  inner  surface;  pressure,  in  evening;
burning,  inflamed,  red,  tense  on  motion;  burning,  ex-
ternally; burning,  in  afternoon,  with  flow  of  tears;
burning  in  edges  in  morning;  cutting-burning  in  bor-
ders; smarting,  in  inner  side,  after  midnight,  followed
by  a  rubbing  dryness  upon  inner  surface;  smarting  as
from  dryness  of  margins;  with  inclination  to  rub  them;
sensitiveness  of  edges  in  morning;  itching  as  if  they
would  become  inflamed;  itching,  with  intolerance  of
light;  itching,  burning,  redness  and  swelling;  itching
in  morning,  on  awaking;  prickling,  causing  him  to
scratch  and  rub;  agglutinated  mornings;  twitching,
jerking;  ulceration  of  margins;  drawn  together  spas-
modically, in  morning;  itching  pustules  on  margins;
granulated  ;  dry,  crusts  in  lashes  ;  lashes  fall  out;  ecze-
matous;  chronic  blepharitis;  ectropium  or  entropium ;
<  from  bathing  eyes.

Itching,  burning  and  smarting  in  canthi.


117  SULPHUR.

I  Dryness  of  eyes  in  room,  lachrymation  in  open  air.
I  Recurrence  of  successive  crops  of  styes.
iBlennorrhoea  of  laclirymal  sac.

I  Lachrymal  fistula.

■  Itching  in  eyebrows.
^Hearing  and  Ears. Sensation  as  if  sounds  did  not  come
through  ears,  but  through  forehead  and  brain.

I I  Deafness:  preceded  by  oversensitiveness  of  hearing;
especially  for  human  voice;  from  disposition  to  catarrhs;
<  after  eating,  or  blowing  nose.

I  I  Deafness  of  r.  ear  from  aural  catarrh;  mild  conjuncti-
vitis ;  dry  throat;  empty  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach ;  swol-
len toes,  with  large  corns,  so  that  he  had  to  slit  his
shoes ;  gleet  of  ten  years'  duration.

I  I  After  scarlatina  eleven  years  ago,  gradually  lost  hear-
ing; can  hear  loud  noises,  such  as  locomotive  whistle,
when  near,  but  only  with  great  effort  voice  in  conver-
sation ;  at  times  slight  purulent  discharge  from  ears ;
feeling  of  hunger  at  10  a.m.

1  I  Impaired  hearing;  heat  and  heavy  pressure  on  top  of
head,  with  soreness  of  brain  extending  to  inner  ear.

I  I  Hardness  of  hearing  of  long  standing,  with  hissing  and
humming  in  ears.

I  I  Deafness;  surging  noise  in  r.  ear  ;  <  on  excitement  or
moving ;  had  rheumatism  in  Winter ;  <  when  warm  m
bed ;  at  night,  pain  in  face,  comes  on  11  to  12  p.m.

B  Frequent  stoppage  of  ears,  especially  when  eating,  or  blow-
ing one's  nose,  also  on  one  side  only.

■  Undulating  feeling  in  ears,  as  of  water,  or  whizzing  and

roaring.

■  Sounds  in  ears:  much  ringing;  swashing  as  from  water;

humming  or  hissing.

■  Something  seems  to  have  come  before  1.  ear.
Stinging,  tearing  and  itching  in  1.  ear.

Sharp,  shooting,  stitching  pains  in  ears,  to  throat.
Stitching,  tearing,  pressing  pains  in  ears,  from  ulceration.
Violent  pressure  in  ears  on  swallowing  and  sneezing.
Tingling  in  ears.

■  ■Otitis:  in  psoric  patients  with  tendency  to  skin  erup-

tions, coryzas,  and  cerebral  congestion  ;  from  a  furuncle
in  meatus ;  in  children  who  suddenly  cry  out  with  pain,
while  they  appear  listless  and  unobservant,  and  where
it  seems  doubtful  whether  irritation  is  in  brain  or  m
intestinal  canal;  in  complication  with  meningitis  or
eruptive  fevers;  lancinating,  stinging,  tearing  in  ear,
extending  to  head  and  throat,  <  by  disturbance,  mu-
sical sounds,  and  all  noises,  and  human  voice  is  heard
imperfectly  ;  chronic  with  a  purulent  discharge.


SULPHUR.  118

■  Discharge  from  both  ears,  dirty,  very  offensive;  profuse,

of  a  penetrating  odor,  at  times  causing  an  eruption  about
auricles ;  very  much  objects  to  have  ears  washed  out.

I  I  For  ten  years  has  had  otorrhcsa  from  both  ears,  result-
ing from  scarlatina ;  constant  discharge  of  a  very  offen-
sive, sour-smelling  odor,  so  disagreeable  that  stench
could  not  be  removed  by  washing  or  syringing.

I  I  Diphtheria  a  month  ago,  left  her  with  a  running  of  ears,
eczematous  eruption  behind  ears;  discharge  very  fetid  ;
dislikes  to  be  washed ;  mucous  discharge  from  nose.

I  I  Purulent  offensive-smelling  discharge  from  ears;  eczema
behind  ears,  bleeding  from  scratching;  nose  and  1.  upper
eyelid  covered  with  crusts.

I  Fetid,  thin,  corroding  discharge  from  ear.

I  Discharge  from  ears,  every  seventh  day.

I  Purulent,  offensive  otorrhoea,  <  in  1.  ear.

I  Ears  very  red,  with  children.

I  Itching  in  external  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. '  l Smell  before  nose  as  of  an  old  catarrh  ;
as  of  old  offensive  mucus.

Pressure  in  r.  nasal  bone,  in  evening.

Burning  in  septum  of  nose.

Crawling  in  nose,  as  in  coryza.

■  Stoppage  and  dryness  of  inner  nose.

I  At  one  time  acrid  fluid  from  nose,  again  dry  and  stiff  as

parchment.
On  inside  of  nose,  especially  in  aloe  nasi,  great  itching  and

feeling  as  if  nose  were  swelled,
lltching  and  burning  in  nostrils,  as  if  sore.

I I  Frequent  sneezing.

iCoryza:  with  sneezing,  chilliness,  catarrh  and  cough;
fluent  like  water,  trickling  from  nose;  with  bloody
mucus;  distressing,  dry;  yellow, glutinous,  strong-smell-
ing; profuse  discharge  of  burning  water;  fluent,  burn-
ing, outdoors,  stopped  up  indoors ;  with  soreness  and
ulceration  of  nostrils;  chronic,  with  loss  of  taste  and
smell.

I  I  Mucus  passes  down  choanse. ICoryza. ^Scarlatina.

iPains  in  nose,  which  is  swollen,  or  ulcerated  within,  with
5'ellowish,  ropy  fluid  trickling  from  nostrils.  ^Scarla-
tina.

■  Secretion  increases  from day  to  day,  runs  freely  from

nose,  and  is  blown  into  little  crepitant  bubbles. ^Scar-
latina.

■  Mucus  removed  by  a  handkerchief,  wells  forth  again

from  nostrils,  taking  its  way  over  cheeks,  nose  and  lips,
making  them  sore  and  red.

■  Nosebleed  :  for  seven  days;  at  3  p.m.,  with  vertigo,  after-

ward nose  sore  to  touch.


IIQ  SULPHUR.

■  Bloody  discbarge  when  blowing  nose.

iCbronic  stoppage,  also  of  one  nostril.

I  I  On  blowing  nose,  a  stinging  pain,  beginning  m  r.  side
of  nose  and  going  up  to  forehead  in  middle  line ;  swell-
ing of  a  vein  in  forehead  just  above  nose  ;  darting  pain
in  r.  knee,  <  when  r.  leg  is  lifted  to  step,  or  wlien  it  is
off  floor  while  sitting,  or  if  it  is  too  far  back  in  walking,
or  if  she  puts  it  too  far  back  when  sitting.

I  I  Two  reddish  growths  in  nose,  as  large  as  peas,  stitching
pains  when  touched. ^Nasal  polypi.

I  i  Ulcers  and  scabs  in  nose ;  bloody  discharge  on  blowing
nose ;  profuse  nauseous  saliva.

I  Dry  ulcers,  or  scabs  in  nose.

llSwelling  and  inflammation  in  nose;  red  nose.

I  Freckles  and  black  pores  on  nose.

■  Shining  red  swelling  of  point  of  nose.

■  Wings  of  nose  inflamed,  swollen.
Herpes  across  nose,  like  a  saddle.

I  lEc^'.ema  narium,  with  piles.

■  Lipoma  nasi,  lobulated  arrangement,  no  subjective  symp-

toms, old  cases.
^  Upper  Face.  ■  Face :  pale  and  collapsed,  with  expression  of
great  anxiety,  as  if  worn  out  by  long  suff"ering ;  pale,
sickly-looking;  pale,  eyes  sunken,  with  blue  margins;
freckled;  sallow,  yellow,  rough;  covered  with  cold
sweat.

■  Tearing  pain  :  in  r.  half  of  face;  in  malar  bone,  also  at

other  times  in  lower  jaw,  as  if  parts  would  be  torn  out.
Boring  above  root  of  nose.

■  Burning:  in  face  and  throat,  without  redness;  recurring

several  times  during  day  ;  seeming  to  rise  from  chest.
Painful  pressure  on  malar  bone,  and  beneath  eye.

I  I  Pain  in  all  three  divisions  of  fifth  pair  of  nerves,  1.  side ;
exposure  to  cold,  draft  of  air,  worry  or  anxiety  always
brings  on  an  attack ;  generally  begins  about  5  p.m.,  and
lasts  with  little  intermission  three  or  four  days;  besides
sharp  dartings  which  occur  every  few  moments,  aff'ected
side  of  face  is  extremely  sore  and  tender,  while  scalp  is
so  sensitive  that  she  can  hardly  bear  touch  of  comb,  and
cannot  find  a  pillow  soft  enough.

I  I  Sharp  stabbing  pains  below  1.  zygoma,  at  times  darting
up  to  side  of  head,  implicating  gums  and  dental  nerves ;
teeth  sound ;  chewing  and  talking  very  difficult,  at  times
impossible;  sleep  greatly  disturbed  ;  pains  come  and  go
suddenly.

I  1  Pains  extending  up  1.  side  of  face,  teeth  and  head,  stiff
neck ;  face  greatly  swollen ;  pain  <  in  cold  air,  >  from


SULPHUR.  120

warmth  and  walking  about;  <  in  evening;  pain  often
comes  on  with  a  twinge  when  sucking  teeth,  and  darts
up  side  of  head  and  then  as  suddenly  leaves ;  at  times
pains  shoot  up  to  eyes,  sometimes  one  side,  sometimes
other;  pain  in  back  of  head  as  if  scalp  had  been  beaten,

I  I  Neuralgic  pains  in  r.  infraorbital  region,  along  course
of  r.  inferior  maxillary  nerve,  down  back  of  head  and
on  both  sides  and  back  of  neck  ;  sight  of  r.  eye  extremely
dim,  with  profuse  lachrymation  and  constant  desire  to
rub  eye  to  remove  dimness ;  sense  of  heat  on  vertex  and
down  back  of  neck  ;  great  tenderness  of  scalp,  is  so  sore
can  scarcely  touch  it  with  comb;  hair  comes  out  in
handfuls  when  combing;  nervous,  restless,  fingers  and
feet  moving  constantly ;  restless  desire  to  move,  and
while  telling  her  story  walks  about  room  nervously
pulling  and  rubbing  her  fingers;  very  miserable,  and
])rofoundly  depressed,  determination  to  commit  suicide,
but  cannot  make  up  her  mind  how ;  all  cervical  ver-
tebrse  extremely  sensitive  to  pressure ;  slightest  press-
ure on  spinous  processes  <  pain  in  infraorbital  region,
side  of  face,  and  side  and  back  of  neck,  makes  her  shrink
and  almost  leap  from  chair;  feels  as  if  air  just  in  front
of  her  were  hot;  cannot  get  a  full,  easy  and  satisfactory
breath.

I  I  Since  three  months,  pain  in  r.  side  of  face  and  head;
pain  commences  in  upper  and  lower  jaw  bones,  extends
to  infra  and  supraorbital  nerves  and  up  side  of  head ;
Qomes  on  in  afternoon,  lasts  three  or  four  hours,  and
returns  again  late  at  night,  continuing  until  1  a.m.,
comes  on  again  in  morning  and  disappears  before  after-
noon.

I  I  Pain  comes  on  about  noon  and  lasts  till  evening,  pain
centres  in  r.  temple;  going  up  to  top  of  head  over  eye-
brow, below  eye  and  down  along  inferior  maxilla.

I  I  For  two  days,  pain  in  r.  side  of  face  and  head,  extending
over  jaw  of  that  side  and  to  top  of  head;  comes  on  in
evening,  lasts  all  night,  >  toward  morning.

I  I  For  several  days,  pain  all  over  lower  jaw,  extending  to

shoulders  and  supra  and  infraorbital  nerves  on  both
sides  and  over  whole  head  ;  pain  commences  in  evening
and  lasts  all  night,  keeping  her  awake.

I I  Severe  intermittent  pains  in  r.  side  of  head,  for  a  month  ;
pain  commences  over  malar  bone  and  extends  back-
ward over  side  of  head,  <  at  night;  commences  gradu-
ally at  9  P.M.,  becoming  more  severe  till  about  3  a.m.,
when  at  its  height,  it  gradually  subsides;  also  comes  on
at  breakfast  and  lasts  till  4  p.m.

I  I  After  catching  cold,  neuralgia  of  jaws  and  temples,  some-


121  SULPHUR.

times  one  side,  sometimes  other;  at  first,  attacks  come
on  at  a  regular  hour  at  night,  and  lasted  about  an  hour
and  a  half;  he  then  caught  fresh  cold,  and  pams  were
almost  incessant,  <  during  night;  dull  aching,  often
very  severe.

I  I  Tic  douloureux,  r.  cheek  ;  several  decayed  teeth  on  same
side.

1  I  Erysipelas  of  face,  following  an  attack  of  congestion  to
head,  for  which  leeches  were  applied  ;  eyes  lustreless,
sopor;  fever  irregular,  begins  with  coldness  of  hands,
then  heat  and  sweat  on  forearms,  thirst,  rest  of  body
dry,  parchment-like;  emaciation;  debility.

■  Erysipelas,  beginning  at  r.  ear  and  spreading  over  face.

■  Swelling  of  cheek,  with  pricking.

I  Acne;  great  itchiness  and  bluish  color  of  face.

I  I  For  three  months,  itching  of  face  and  scalp;  bruised
feeling  there;  twisting  pains  in  abdomen;  fluttering  in
chest ;  painful  menses ;  leucorrhoea.

I  Red  spots  in  face.

I  Acne  punctata,  completely  covering  face.

I  I  Whole  surface  of  forehead  and  cheeks  red  and  scurfy.
^After  vaccination.

I  1  Eruption  on  face,  crusta  serpiginosa,  with  terrible  itch-
ing; child  scratched  herself  raw;  <  on  cheeks  and
around  eyes;  hands  and  arms  cold,  swollen  and  bluish,

■  Excoriations,  pimples, vesicles; violent  itching, < at

night ;  bleeding  from  scratching ;  diarrhoea  in  morning.
^Crusta  lactea.
lAVhole  face  covered  with  a  moist,  much  itching  tetter,
eruption  thickest  on  nose,  and  about  eyes.
^  Lower  Face. iSore  pain  in  oral  commissures.

■  Glandular  swellings  on  lower  jaw.

■  Drawing  jerking  on  1.  lower  jaw.

A  scabby  ulcer,  with  burning  pain  on  margin  of  lower  lip.

■  Swelling  of  upper  lip.

■  Swelling  of  lower  lip,  with  eruption  on  it.

On  internal  surface  of  1.  lower  lip,  a  group  of  greyigh-
white  aphthse,  rather  painful.

■  ■Painful  eruptions  about  chin.

■  Herpes  at  corners  of  mouth.

■  ■Bright  redness  of  lips,  particularly  with  children,  com-

plexion sallow.

■  ■Lips  dry,  rough  and  cracked.

■  Burning,  twitching  or  trembling  of  lips.

■  Corners  of  mouth  ulcerated. (^Scarlatina.

I  I  Eczema  impetiginoides,  on  nose  and  lips,  of  several  years'
standing;  itching  and  burning  terribly;  nose  and  lips
swollen,  presenting  a  loathsome  appearance.


SULPHUR.  122

I  iMentagra,  commencing  a  year  and  a  half  ago,  as  a  no-
dous,  crusty  eruption  below  nose,  spreading  gradually
through  whiskers,  and  finally  to  chin ;  nodous  infiltra-
tion and  pustules,  with  and  without  crusts;  each  pus-
tules and  node  is  pierced  by  a  hair  which  sits  quite  fast ;
on  pulling  a  few  hairs  out  and  examining  the  roots
under  microscope,  found  them  thoroughly  invested  by
microscopic  fungus  tricophyton.

I  I  Enlarged  submaxillary  gland  ;  swelling  as  large  as  hen's
egg,  under  ramus  of  jaw ;  gland  tender  to  touch,  painful
on  swallowing;  skin  covering  it  slightly  red;  consti-
pation.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i Great  sensitiveness  of  teeth.

I  Teeth  feel  too  long.

■  Tearing  toothache  on  1.  side.

■  Pulsating  and  boring  in  teeth,  <  from  heat.
llToothache  coming  on  in  open  air,  from  least  draft,  at

night  in  bed,  from  washing  with  cold  water;  with  con-
gestion to  head,  or  stitches  in  ears.

■  Painful  feeling  of  looseness  of  teeth.

■  Pain  in teeth: drawing;  tearing; throbbing; boring;

boring,  as  with  a  hot  iron;  pressive;  sticking,  extend-
ing into  ear.

■  Jumping  pain  in  hollow  teeth,  extending  to  upper  and

lower  jaw,  or  to  ear.

■  Violent  stitches  through  teeth  from  every  cold  drink.

■  Throbbing  toothache  after  suppressed  eruptions.

■  Swelling of  gums: with throbbing pain; about old

stumps.

■  Gums  bleed  and  recede  from  teeth. ^Scorbutus.

■  Abscess  of  gum,  r.  side,  lower  jaw  ;  hard  round  swelling

from  which  there  ooze  pus  and  blood  through  a  small
opening  at  side  of  a  carious  tooth  ;  r.  submaxillary
gland  swollen  and  painful;  cheek  swollen,  painful,  red,
in  streaks,  especially  directly  over  seat  of  abscess;  mouth
opened  with  difficulty;  tearing  pain  in  teeth.
I  I  Easily  bleeding,  fungous  growth,  looking  like  raw  meat,
recurring  after  excision,  seeming  to  spring  from  cavities
remaining  after  extraction  of  teeth,  and  growing  to
about  same  height  as  teeth  ;  stitching  pains  in  lower
jaw;  gums  greatly  swollen,  dark-red;  congestion  of
blood  to  head  ;  fever  toward  evening;  chill,  fever  with
constant  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

■  P^istula  den  talis.

"  Taste  and  To  ague.  ■  Taste:  sour;  bitter;  sweetish;  bitter,
or  foul,  when  awaking  in  morning;  bitter  soon  after
eating;  metallic;  coppery;  pasty;  vinegary;  sweetish;
sour;  putrid;  sweet,  nauseating.


123  SULPHUR.

I  Food  tastes  like  straw  or  too  salt.

I  Tongue :  white,  with  red  tip  and  borders ;  red  and  cracked ;
white  or  yellow;  brown,  parched,  rough;  furred  in  morn-
ing, but  wears  off  during  day  ;  very  dry,  particularly  in
morning.

■  Burning  pain  on  tongue.

On  r.  anterior  border  of  tongue  a  hard  raised  spot  size  of
a  lentil ;  on  moving  tongue,  shooting  pain  in  it.

A  smarting  blister  on  r.  side  of  tongue.

I  Ulcerated  tongue.
"Inner  Mouth. iBad  odor  from mouth: after  eatmg;  m
scarlatina; sour  smell.

I  Great  dryness  of  palate  with  much  thirst;  is  obliged  to
drink  much.

■  Dryness  of  mouth:  after  eating;  in  morning  on  awak-

ing ;  insipid,  and  sticky,  in  morning.
I  Heat  in  mouth  and  much  thirst  at  night.
Saliva :  collects  even  after  eating ;  bloody ;  salty  ;  sour ;

bitter;  profuse,  with  nauseous  taste.
iPtyalism,  from  abuse  of  mercury,  during  a  fever,  or  m

scarlatina.
Vesicles  on  palate,  and  ulcer  on  uvula,  making  eating  and

talking  painful.
I  I  White  or  sore  patches,  similar  to  those  of  diphtheria  ;

sore  throat  when  swallowing,  with  redness  and  swelling

of  tongue  and  uvula. ^Scarlatina.
I  I  Vesicles  in  mouth,  with  burning  pain;  vesicles  on  roof

of  mouth. ^Scarlatina.
I  I  Exfoliation  of  membrane  of  mouth. ^Scarlatina.
iBlisters  in  mouth. 6/Scarlatina.

I  Thrush.  -, •  ,

1  1  Stomatitis :  whole  mouth,  tongue,  and  lips  covered  with
aphthffi ;  restlessness ;  greenish  evacuations  with  severe
tenesmus;  emaciation;  rash;  excoriation  of  inner  sur-
face of  thighs;  pustular  eruption  on  back,  pustules  con-
taining thin,  yellow  pus.

llStomacace;  aphthse.  , .

■  Child  grasps  everything  within  reach  and  thrusts  it  into
mouth.
13  Throat. Feeling  of  roughness  in  fauces  and  uvula.

Burning  in  fauces.

A  hard  ball  seems  to  rise  in  throat,  close  pharynx  and
take  away  breath.

Sensation  as  if  swallowing  a  piece  of  meat,  during  empty
deglutition.

I  Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat.

I I  Dryness  of  throat:  exciting  cough;  at  night;  constant
desire  to  swallow  saliva  in  order  to  moisten  affected
parts.


SULPHUR.  124

■  Roughness  in  throat; scraping;  hawking  and  clearing.
I  Rawness  of  throat.

■  Sore  throat  with  swelling  of  cervical  glands.
Choking  and  sensation  of  soreness  in  throat,  as  if  tonsils

were  swollen,  with  stitches  extending  into  ears,  always
on  swallowing.

I  Sore  throat,  great  burning  and  dryness,  first  r.,  then  1.
side.

Violent  sore  throat  with  redness  of  tonsils,  frequent  cough-
ing and  dyspnoea  ;  agitation  and  sleeplessness.

On  swallowing,  pressive  pain  in  throat,  as  from  swelling
of  palate.

llStitches  in  throat  on  swallowing;  painful  contraction.

■  Burning  coming  up  into  throat,  with  sour  eructations.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  hair  in  throat.
Coldness  in  throat  during  an  inspiration.

Spasmodic  contractive  sensation  in  middle  of  pharynx,
food  will  not  go  down.

■  Burning  in  pharynx,  with  sour  eructations.

■  Rawness  in  fauces,  with  hoarseness  and  aphonia.
Needlelike stitches in submaxillary  glands,  which  are

painful  to  touch.
Violent  stitches  in  swollen  parotid  glands.

■  ■Swelling  of  palate  and  tonsils,  elongation  of  palate.

■  Whole  back  part  of  pharynx  in  a  state  of  ulceration  or

sloughing ;  much  nauseous  saliva ;  after  suppuration
parts  heal  slowly.

■  Posterior  walls  of  fauces  look  dry,  dryness  causing  a  con-

stant inclination  to  swallow.
I  I  Frequently recurring and long  lasting sore throat;
throat,  tonsils  and  uvula  swollen  ;  difficult  deglutition  ;
stitches  in  throat;  sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat;  as  if
throat  were  too  narrow ;  dryness  and  rawness  in  throat.

■  Enlargement  of  1.  tonsil.

■  Tonsillitis:  after  bursting  of  abscess  parts  remain  irritated,

and  patient  is  slow  in  recovering.
I  I  Fauces,  palate,  and  uvula  bluish-red;  considerable  dis-
charge of  transparent  mucus;  continuous  necessity
to  swallow  and  clear  throat,  which  is  painful,  from
constant  irritation  down  to  upper  part  of  chest;  <  in
evening,  and  raw  air,  and  from  cold  food  and  drink  ;
warm  things  are  agreeable.

■  Angina  gangrenosa.

■  Diphtheria:  yellow  deposit  about  posterior  wall  of  phar-

ynx ;  quick  pulse  ;  flashes  of  heat ;  faintness;  sinking
spells;  complaining  of  closeness  of  room;  sluggish
cases;  empty  swallowing  more  painful  than  that  of
liquids ;  inflamed  parts  purple ;  dryness  of  throat;  diph-


125  SULPHUR.

theritic  membrane  yellowish,  commencing  on  each  side
of  throat,  or  on  r.  side  going  to  1.;  mucous  membrane
livid  or  bright  red  ;  tongue  coated  white  with  red  border,
or  yellow  as  if  sprinkled  with  sulphur;  thirsty,  but
vomits  everything ;  very  restless,  must  move  about  in
bed,  but  movements  start  chills  on  back,  running  from
below  upward ;  clammy,  cold  perspiration ;  shooting
pains  from  back  of  neck  into  1.  ear  ;  empty  gone  feeling
in  stomach;  cold  drinks  do  not  agree  with  stomach ;
desire  for  beer;  when  the  indicated  medicine  does  not
have  the  desired  effect ;  useful  as  an  intercurrent.
^'Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  n Appetite:  ex-
cessive ;  canine ;  ravenous,  obliged  to  eat  frequently,  if
he  does  not  he  has  a  headache  and  great  lassitude,  and
has  to  lie  down  ;  feeling  of  faintness  with  strong  craving
for  food,  at  11  a.m.  ;  voracious  children  put  everything
they  see  into  mouth,  sw^allow^  everything,  w^atch  every
one  eating.

I  Complaints  after  eating,  even  a  little.

iHe  is  hungry,  but  as  soon  as  he  sees  food  his  appetite
vanishes  and  he  feels  full  in  abdomen;  when  he  begins
to  eat  he  is  averse  to  it.

I  Loss  of  appetite:  complete;  nothing  is  relished;  with
constant  thirst.

llDrinks  much,  but  eats  little.

I  Violent  thirst  for  ale  or  beer;  longing  for  brandy.

I I  Desire  for  sweets;  diseases  from  eating  sweet  things,
candy,  etc.

I  Milk  disagrees,  causing  sour  taste  and  sour  eructations.

I I  Desire  to  imbibe  alcoholic  drinks,  from  morning  until
night  {Sulphur  tincture).

I  Aversion:  to  meat;  to  sour  and  sweet  things;  to  smoking
tobacco;  to  wine.
*^  Eating  and  Drinking, i Feels  fulness  in  stomach  after  eat-
ing but  little.

I  Milk  causes  much  distress;  is  vomited  curdled;  sour
taste,  sour  eructations.

Complaints  from  farinaceous  food.

llDrinks  much,  eats  but  little.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

lEructations:  generally  empty,  or  tasting  of  food;  sour;
after  eating;  as  soon  as  he  presses  on  stomach;  tasting
of  bad  eggs ;  empty,  every  morning ;  empty,  after  eating.

I  i  Heartburn  all  day ;  waterbrash.

1  I  Severe  heartburn  ;  is  afraid  to  eat  anything  but  soup ;
emaciation.

Food  rises  into  throat.

I  Regurgitations  :  sour;  of  food  and  drink.


SULPHUR.  126

iNausea:  in  morning;  before  or  after  each  meal;  during
stool,  in  evening;  qualmish,  in  morning;  retching.

■  Vomiting:  of  food,  especiall}^  in  morning  and  in  even-

ing; first  watery,  then  of  food;  bitter;  sour;  of  blood
in  evening,  of  food  at  noon  ;  in  morning,  with  trembling
of  hands  and  feet ;  sour  or  bitter,  with  cold  perspiration
in  face ;  chronic.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i Sensitiveness  to  touch  in  re-
gion of  stomach  ;  even  bedcover  causes  pain.
1 1  Weak,  empty,  gone  or  faint  feeling  in  stomach  about

11  A.M.

■  Fulness  in  stomach  :  and  empty  eructations;  after  eating

but  a  little ;  as  if  puffed  up ;  and  swelling ;  with  nau-
sea and  vomiting.

■  Pressure  in  stomach:  after  eating;  at  night;  >  by  eruc-

tations; with  headache,  after  midnight;  causing  anx-
iety at  night,  with  palpitation;  during  menses;  very
violent,  while  lying  down.

■  ■  Heaviness  in  stomach  ;  feeling  of  weight.

■  Burning  in  stomach:  like  violent  heartburn;  in  morn-

■Stitches  in  stomach  :  in  pit  of  stomach  on  deep  breathing.

I  I  Pain  in  chest  for  last  eight  years,  like  spasms  and
cramps,  coming  on  generally  before  dinner,  at  noon,
somewhat  >  by  eating,  getting  <  before  tea,  and  ceas-
ing on  partaking  of  it;  is  then  free  from  pain  until  mid-
night, when  he  is  awakened  by  an  intensely  severe  but
short  paroxj^sm;  must  lean  against  something  for  relief,
must  bend  double ;  at  height  of  paroxysm,  arms  and
hands  seem  paralyzed;  >  from  warm  food;  much  flat-
ulence and  audible  gurgling  and  rumbling  in  abdomen;
symptoms  appear  to  come  on  with  slight  dyspepsia,  such
as  heartburn,  etc.;  tongue  white,  irritable  looking;
stomach  acid. ^Gastralgia.

I  I  Chronic  cardialgia ;  constant  pain  in  epigastrium  and
back ;  loss  of  appetite ;  constipation.

I  'Pressing,  constricting  pains  in  region  of  stomach,  <
from  eating ;  fixed  stitching  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest.

I  I  Constant  bloating  of  epigastrium,  with  oppression  of
breathing,  even  in  morning  before  breakfast,  <  after
eating  slightest  amount  of  food ;  empty  and  sour  belch-
ing, nausea,  at  times  vomiting;  constant  pressure  in
stomach,  and  a  periodical  burning;  constipation.

■  Gastralgia: pain in r. hypochondrium extends over

stomach  to  1.;  cannot  lie  on  either  side;  when  lying  on
back,  pain  spreads  to  chest  under  sternum,  and  hinders
respiration ;  must  get  up  and  walk  about ;  after  reper-'
cussion  of  eruptions.


127  SULPHUR.

I  I  Pressing  pain  and  swelling  of  stomach;  some  pain  in
back  opposite  stomach,  coming  on  an  hour  or  so  after
meals,  causing  difficulty  of  breathing  and  speaking,
faint  feeling,  giddiness  and  weakness;  feeling  of  cold-
ness in  centre  of  chest,  which  makes  mouth  water;  for
about  four  weeks  cough  only  in  morning  while  dressing,
with  easy  green  sputa;  wakes  with  pain  above  1.  eye,
increases  graduall}'',  is  <  from  2  to  5  p.m.,  then  decreases
gradually  (but  more  quickly  than  it  increased)  after  tea;
sleepy  during  day;  when  stomach  swells,  cannot  bear
pressure  of  clothing;  shooting  from  centre  of  chest  to
between  scapulae,  soon  after  meals,  generally  preceding
pain  in  stomach  ;  palpitation  after  meals.

I  I  Violent  pains  in  stomach,  sickness  and  vomiting  of  food
soon  after  eating;  pain  <  after  eating;  emaciation;  a
tender  spot  on  spine  at  about  centre  of  dorsal  vertebrae.

I  iTight,  crampy  pain  in  stomach,  preventing  him  from
rising  from  a  seat,  and  felt  when  laughing  or  sneezing,
<  waking  in  morning  and  attempting  any  muscular
exertion.

I  I  For  several  years,  a  hard  swelling  could  be  felt  in  abdo-
men ;  abdomen  greatly  but  regularly  distended,  as  in
ascites;  region  of  stomach  sensitive  to  pressure;  when
two  fists,  could  be  felt  in  epigastrium,  extending  toward
liver ;  at  times  severe  tearing  pains  in  intestines ;  flatu-
lency and  belching;  watery  diarrhoea  of  four  weeks'
standing;  anorexia;  after  eating,  oppression  of  chest,
bloating  and  pain  in  abdomen;  pale,  emaciated;  febris
lenta ;  menses  regular,  preceded  by  severe  pains  in  lower
abdomen ;  after  »bWp/i.  aggravation,  followed  by  discharge
of  masses  of  mucus  per  rectum  and  complete  cure,

I  I  Nocturnal  heat;  much  thirst  and  desire  for  beer;  press-
ure in  stomach ;  urine  like  beer ;  no  alvine  evacuation  ;
.  craves  sour  things.

I  I A  cute  dyspepsia;  food  taken  in  morning  distresses  him
all  day;  sour  vomiting,  especially  after  meals;  irritat-
ing condition  of  scrotum  every  summer,  until  fourteen
or  fifteen  years  ago,  after  this  all  over  body ;  when  18
years  old,  had  boils  in  different  parts  of  his  body.

Cramp  in  stomach  immediately  after  a  meal.

I  1  Dyspeptic  symptoms,  from  eating  too  rapidly ;  oesopha-
gus from  cardia  to  pharynx  ached  incessantly,  proceed-
ing from  place  where  she  felt  pressure.
'^Hypochondria. iSore  feeling  in  hypochondria,  tender  to
touch.

Iln  hepatic  region,  dull  pain,  accompanied  by  a  little  dry
cough ;  pressing  pain ;  stitches ;  fine  burning  stitches
while  sitting  bent  over.


SULPHUR.  128

■  Pressure  in  region  of  liver;  wind  accumulates  in  1.  side;
feeling  of  weight  in  abdomen. ^Chronic  indigestion.

•Swelling  and  induration  of  liver;  increased  secretion  of
bile.

I  1  Acute  hepatitis ;  engorgement,  enlargement  and  tender-
ness; protracted  jaundice ;  stinging  or  aching  pains  in
r.  side,  tenderness  on  pressure;  weight  and  heaviness;
depression  of  spirits.

I  1  Fulness  in  region  of  liver ;  fulness  and  pressure  across
stomach,  with  distension  of  transverse  colon  ;  chronic
diarrhoea,  has  to  get  out  of  bed  in  a  hurry;  sometimes
dizzy  in  morning,  bed  whirls  when  turning  over  at
night;  dizzy  when  going  down  stairs;  constant  inclina-
tion to  sleep ;  neuralgia  of  liver,  >  by  application  of
mustard,  and  by  lying  on  painful  side ;  faint  and  hun-
gry by  11  A.M.;  disinclination  to  bathing;  partial  pa-
ralysis of  muscles  of  1.  side  of  face.

I  I  Chronic  inflammation,  enlargement  and  tenderness  of
liver  of  fifteen  years'  standing  ;  inclination  to  dwell  con-
stantly on  her  condition  ;  tendency  to  fainting;  menses
either  too  early  or  too  late,  thick,  blackish,  acrid.

I  Icterus;  skin  has  a  greenish-yellow  tint;  lassitude;  itch-
ing of  skin  at  night ;  in  psoric  persons  with  or  without
hardness  and  swelling  of  liver;  vomiting  of  ingesta  or
blood  ;  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  and  r.  hypochondrium  ;
abdomen  bloated ;  stool  constipated  ;  sleeplessness  ;  hec-
tic fever ;  red  lips.

I  I  Pain  from  stomach  through  to  back,  with  a  forcing-
asunder  feeling  in  back ;  all  action  of  bowels  stopped  ;
urine  loaded  with  bile. ^Biliary  obstruction.

•  Frequent  shoots  in  splenic  region.

Movements  of  flatus  cause  painful  sticking,  especially  in

1.  hypochondrium.
I  Stitches  in  spleen  <  when  taking  a  deep  inspiration,  and

when  walking.
iStitches  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  when  coughing.
'^Abdomen, l  Intestines  feel  as  if  strung  in  knots.

•  Griping  about  navel  extending  upward  toward  stomach,

disappearing  on  emission  of  flatus.

•  Tension  and  pressure  in  umbilical  region.

Pressure  across,  above  navel,  with  little  appetite;  cannot

sleep  at  night  on  account  of  it.
Pinching,  constrictive  pain  about  navel,  while  sitting.
Stitches  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  on  deep  breathing.

•  Distension  and  hardness  of  abdomen.

•  •Inflation  of  abdomen  with  wind;  rumbling  and  gur-

gling in  bowels.

•  •Emission  of  flatus: especially  in  evening  and  night;


129  SULPHUR.

having  odor  of  bad  eggs,  or  sulphuretted  hydrogen  ;  in-
odorous.

1 1  Rumbling  and  gurgling  in  bowels ;  painless  diarrhoea,
driving  patient  out  of  bed  at  5  a.m.

I  Rolling  and  rumbling  in  bowels  as  if  empty.

I  Incarcerated  flatus  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  with  heavi-
ness, fulness  and  constipation.

■  Movements  in  abdomen  as  of  the  fist  of  a  child.
Anxiety  in  abdomen,  followed  by  a  feeling  of  weakness  of

feet,  extending  above  malleoli,  like  an  internal  trembling.
I  Feeling  of  fulness  and  tension  in  abdomen  :  bearing  down
toward  anus,  and  excessive  tickling  there;  in  morning;
after  eating ;  immediately  after  a  little  food,  with  dysp-
noea ;  as  from  incarcerated  flatus

■  Tension in abdominal muscles, could not readily

straighten  up.

■  Griping  in  abdomen  :  before  morning  stool;  after  stool;

with  diarrhoea ;  at  night ;  followed  soon  by  a  liquid
motion,  whereupon  pain  ceased.

■  Drawing  colic  during  menses.

■  Pressure  downward  :  toward  anus;  while  lying  in  bed  at

night ;  as  if  a  hernia  would  form,  toward  female  genitals.

■  Colic,  always  after  eating.

■  Sensitiveness  of  upper  part  of  abdomen;  clothes  press

disagreeably.
"Feeling  of  soreness  in  intestines  before  stool.

■  Sore  feeling  in  abdominal  walls,  as  if  muscles  of  abdomen

and  peritoneum  had  been  bruised.
Sore  pain  in  whole  abdomen  as  if  raw,  particularly  on
taking  a. full  breath,  coughing  on  taking  violent  exer-
cise.

■  Cutting  in  abdomen,  loins,  and  sacrum,  >  from  dry  heat.

■  ■Big  belly  and  emaciated  limbs;  children  dislike  to  be

washed.

■  Painful  sensitiveness  of  abdomen  to  touch,  as  if  internally

raw  and  sore.

■  Awakens  about  5  a.m.  with  cutting,  colicky  pain  in  ab-

domen, compelling  instant  resort  to  stool.

■  Colic  after  eating or drinking,  obliging  one to bend

double,  <  from  sweet  things.
I  I  Cystic  tumor  just  within  abdominal  walls,  with  pyo-
genic membrane,  caused  by  heavy  lifting ;  large  quan-
tities of  serum  and  sanious  pus  discharged  through  a
drainage  tube ;  cachectic  appearance ;  no  appetite ;  great
emaciation ;  diarrhoea ;  stools  brown,  watery,  frothy,  at
times  undigested,  painless,  more  frequent  in  morning
and  early  forenoon  ;  pulse  120,  weak  ;  wakeful  at  night,
sleep  disturbed  by  dreams.


SULPHUR.  130

I  I  Eczema  umbilicale ;  soreness  and  itching  about  navel,  so
that  child  is  continually  picking  at  it,  and  augmenting
trouble.

I  Itching  eruption  over  abdomen.

I I  Portal  stasis:  hemorrhoidal  congestions;  with  indiges-
tion, constipation,  etc.

■  Abdominal  infarctions.

■  Incarcerated  hernia  (after  Aeon.).

■  Ascites;  dropsy.

■  Painful  swelling  of  inguinal  glands.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum. ■■  Sudden  call  to  stool  on  waking  in
morning.

■  ■Desire  to  stool,  with  colic,  awakes  him  about  5  a.m.
Constant  urging  to  stool  and  to  urinate,  with  evacuation

of  a  few  drops  of  blood  immediately  after  urinating,  and
violent  stitching  in  urethra,  with  apprehension  and  dis-
comfort.

■  ■Thin  stool  every  morning,  with cutting  in  lower  ab-

domen.
Soft  stool  with  tenesmus  and  burning  in  anus,  in  evening;
preceded  by  distension  of  abdomen,  followed  by  emis-
sions of  hot,  offensive  flatus,  with  gripings  in  small  of
back.

■  Stools:  soft  and  very  thin ;  frequent,  pasty  ;  semi-liquid;

brown,  watery,  fecal ;  green  mucous;  bloody  mucous;
undigested;  frothy ;  sour ;  changeable;  fetid;  bloody  in
evening;  green,  watery;  leaving  pale  green  stain  on
diaper;  brown  mucous;  white  mucous;  bloody  in  streaks;
bilious;  purulent;  corrosive;  sometimes  painless;
putrid  ;  expulsion  sudden,  often  involuntary.

■  Diarrhoea:  at  night,  with colic,  tenesmus,  watery  white

mucous  stools,  of  sour  smell ;  driving  out  of  bed  in  morn-
ing, painless;  fetid,  watery,  or  involuntary;  of  scrofu-
lous children  ;  as  if  bowels  were  too  weak  to  retain  their
contents ;  stools  involuntary,  with  a  sensation  as  if  wind
would  pass  ;  alternating  with  constipation  ;  after  taking
cold;  in  damp  weather;  after  taking  milk  or  acids;
during  dentition  ;  after  ale  or  beer;  from  artificial  food ;
during  sleep ;  during  pregnancy.

I  I  Abdomen  distended;  stools  watery,  flocculent,  occasional
lienteria,  large  and  very  offensive  and  passed  by  day
and  night,  none,  however,  during  morning  hours;  little
or  no  fever;  great  thirst,  particularly  at  night;  urine
passed  frequently  and  in  large  quantities ;  great  desire
for  meat,  would  scarcely  eat  anything  else;  cross  and
peevish  ;  emaciation. ^Marasmus.

I  I  Sudden  attack  of  diarrhoea,  during  heat  of  Summer;  ten
discharges  in  seven  hours,  watery,  greenish ;  next  day


131  SULPHUR.

had  twenty  discharges  in  twelve  hours,  more  frequent
in  morning,  consisting  of  green,  slimy,  watery  fluid ;
eyes  swollen ;  lies  very  quiet  and  pale;  in  evening  stool
every  half  hour.

I  I  Diarrhoea,  stools  only  during  sleep ;  if  kept  awake  whole

day,  no  stool  occurred ;  stools  of  green  and  yellow  mucus ;
stools  sudden,  would  come  before  child  could  tell  of  it,
though  she  invariably  awoke  before  stool ;  aversion  ta
bathing.

I I  Diarrhoea  after  midnight;  painless,  driving  out  of  bed-
early  in  morning ;  as  if  bowels  were  too  weak  to  retaiii.
their  contents.

•  Several  thin,  watery  stools,  driving  patients  out  of  bed
about  5  A.M.,  after  which  they  had  one  stool  every  hour
until  9  A.M.

I  I  Violent  diarrhoea  every  night ;  after  midnight  and  later,
five  to  eight  times,  with  much  painful  urging ;  had  to
wait  a  long  time,  then  it  came  as  thin  as  water,  slimy,
bright  yellow,  and  burning  hot ;  slept  and  was  >  when
waking  at  5  o'clock ;  movements  in  bowels,  rumbling
and  grumbling;  >  when  sitting  up;  <  when  lying
down ;  weak  in  legs ;  had  not  right  kind  of  appetite,,
except  sometimes  in  evening;  tongue  coated  thinly
white;  he  could  not  bear  milk;  after  drinking  beer  he
must  vomit;  after  brandy  burning  aching,  especially
burning  in  abdomen ;  after  eggs,  and  anj^hing  prepared
with  eggs,  he  must  vomit ;  after  a  glass  of  wine  with  nut-
meg, tearing  and  twitching  in  legs,  heat  and  burnings
especially  in  stomach,  a  tearing  as  if  stomach  were  torn
with  pincers ;  burning  rising  in  throat ;  stomach  swells;
after  eating,  eructation,  which  ameliorates ;  had  sweat
every  night,  especially  in  neck ;  distended  veins.

I  I  Diarrhoea  acrid,  excoriating  anus,  producing  an  erup-
tion ;  emaciation ;  abdomen  hard,  distended  ;  diarrhoea
after  every  cold.

M Vomited  night  or  morning;  impaired  appetite,  fecu-
lent diarrhoea,  with  undigested  food,  what  he  ate  in
morning;  febrile  symptoms,  with  prostration,  languor
and  fretfulness ;  felt  like  a  lump  of  ice  in  r.  chest.

I  I  After  having  a  diarrhoea  checked  with  opium,  a  pain  in
belly;  attempts  to  induce  a  passage  from  bowels  pro-
duced vomiting,  finally  of  fecal  matter;  whole  lower
belly  swollen,  in  1.  side  in  region  of  sigmoid  flexure,  an
elastic  swelling,  quite  fixed,  as  large  as  two  fists,  and
painful  to  pressure;  rest  of  abdomen  not  sensitive  to
touch;  tongue  red,  cracked  and  dry;  pulse  full,  soft,
not  accelerated ;  much  thirst  and  great  weakness.

I  I  Stool  of,  first,  small  round  lumps,  very  dark  green,  al-


SULPHUR.  132

most  black,  difficult,  remaining  part  softer  and  larger ;
stool  sometimes  slips  back  when  about  to  escape;  with"
stool  passes  blood,  sometimes  bright,  sometimes like

J  I  Diarrhoea,  with  great  emaciation,  excessive  prostration ;
child  conscious,  but  lies  as  if  unable  to  move ;  <  be-
tween 10  P.M.  and  1  A.M.;  stools  watery,  putrid.

1  I  After  childbirth,  offensive-smelling  diarrhoea,  frequent,
with  faint  feeling  before  and  after  stools.

I  After  stool,  continued  urging,  anus  swollen,  sore,  stitch-
ing and  pulsating  pain  all  day.

I  1  Chronic  diarrhoea;  stools  watery,  greenish,  like  chopped
eggs,  painless,  of  a  very  offensive,  putrid  odor ;  belch-
ing, followed  by  vomiting ;  abdomen  distended  and
hard  in  places;  constant  rumbling  in  abdomen;  sleep-
lessness ;  thirst,  constant  desire  to  drink  ;  great  emacia-
tion.

I  i  Diarrhoea  of  eighteen  months'  duration,  after  suppres-
sion of  gonorrhoea  by  BaU.  copaiva.

I  I  Great  debility,  can  only  sit  up  a  few  minutes  at  a  time ;
pulse  100;  skin  sallow,  dry;  tongue  coated  ^^ellow;  bit-
ter taste ;  no  appetite ;  what  little  she  eats  occasions
distress  in  stomach  and  bowels,  especialy  latter ;  pain
<  about  an  hour  after  eating ;  bowels  bloated  and  ten-
der to  touch ;  urine  high-colored  and  scanty ;  lower
limbs  cold ;  burning  pain  in  vertex ;  diarrhoea  <  in
morning,  obliging  her  to  get  up  usually  before  daylight;
ten  evacuations  before  noon,  not  more  than  two  or  three
after  that  time  until  early  morning  again ;  stools  undi-
gested, frothy,  yellow,  watery ;  pain  before,  during  and
after  stool;  weakness  and  faintness  after  stool.  ^Chronic
diarrhoea.

I  Smell  of  stool  follows  him  all  around,  as  if  he  had  soiled
himself.

■  Before  stool:  sudden  and  violent  urging,  driving  out  of
bed  ;  cutting  colic ;  rumbling.

I  During  stool :  heat ;  warm  sweat ;  rush  of  blood  to  head  ;
chilliness;  fainting;  nausea;  tenesmus;  headache;  sore-
ness in  abdomen ;  itching  in  anus  and  rectum ;  spas-
modic constricting  pain  extending  to  chest,  groins  and
genitals;  cutting  pains,  <  from  pressure  or  bending
backward;  prolapsus  ani;  cramps  in  legs;  burning  in
aims.

I  After  stool:  tenesmus;  burning  in  anus;  cold  sweat  on
face  and  feet ;  excoriation  about  anus ;  soreness  in  whole
intestines;  pressure  in  rectum;  prolapsus  ani  ;  lichild
falls  asleep  as  soon  as  tenesmus  ceases.

I  Accompaniments  to  diarrhoea:  sleepiness  in  daytime,  af-


133  SULPHUR.

ternoon  and  after  sunset;  sleeping  with  eyes  half  open;
wakefulness;  awaking  often ;  aversion  to  washing.

■  Dysenteric  stools  at  night,  with  colic  and  violent  tenes-
mus.

1 1  Dysentery:  child  was  faint  regularly  at  11  a.m.;  early
morning  aggravation.

I  I  Five  or  ten  bloody  stools  in  twenty-four  hours,  gener-
all}'^  one  or  two  at  night ;  <  always  early  morning ;  had
to  rise  in  a  hurry  at  6  a.m.  ;  considerable  straining  and
tenesmus;  cold  feet  by  day,  burning  of  soles  at  night;
faint  and  empty  about  11  a.m.  ;  feeble,  cannot  walk  ;  has
lasted  four  or  or  five  years. ^Chronic  dysentery.

iD^^sentery:  after  Aeon,  has  removed  acute  symptoms^
when  tenesmus  has  ceased  but  blood  is  still  discharged ;.
when  remedies  have  failed  to  act ;  during  stool  burning,,
cutting,  pressing  and  prolapsus  recti,  cutting  in  urethra^
catching  of  breath,  palpitation,  chills  about  lower  part
of  body,  afterward  straining  and  throbbing  in  rectum,
bruised  pains  and  itching  in  abdomen,  chills  and  lassi-
tude ;  <  early  in  morning,  driving  out  of  bed  ;  faintish
feeling  in  pit  of  stomach  about  10  or  11  a.m.  ;  passages
make  perineum  red  all  around  anus;  frequent  relapses;
child  seems  to  be  doing  well  when,  without  any  appar-
ent cause,  it  gets  <.

iSulphur  follows  well  after  Niix  vom.,  especially  when  <  at-
night;  discharge  of  blood,  slime  and  pus,  with  fever,,
loss  of  appetite,  pain  in  bowels  often  so  violent  as  to
cause  nausea  and  drenching  perspiration  ;  fever  con-
sists of  dry  heat  without  thirst. ^Dysentery.

I  Cholera  infantum,  generally  begins  after  midnight;  diar-

rhoea and  vomiting;  discharges  from  bowels  watery,
green  and  involuntary;  sometimes  smell  sour,  at  other
times  very  offensive;  vomiting  frequent,  often  sour,  with
cold  perspiration  on  face ;  face  pale,  fontanelles  open ;
hands  and  feet  cold ;  child  lies  in  a  stupor  with  eyes
half  open ;  not  much  thirst  and  entire  suppression  of
urine;  psoric  patients  prone  to  eruptions,  and  excoria-
tions; hydrocephaloid  symptoms.

I I  Cholera  Asiatica;  as  a  prophylactic,  a  pinch  of  the  pow-
dered milk  of  sulphur  worn  in  stockings  in  contact
with  soles  of  feet;  diarrhoea  commences  between  mid-
night and  morning,  with  or  without  pain,  with  or
without  vomiting,  ineffectual  desire  to  evacuate ;  diar-
rhoea and  vomiting  at  same  time ;  numbness  of  limbs,
cramps  in  soles  of  feet  and  calves ;  blueness  under  eyes;
coldness  of  skin ;  indifference  of  mind ;  during  conva-
lescence, red  spots,  furuncles,  etc.;  susceptibility  to  tem-
perature, warm  things  feel  hot ;  nerve  symptoms.


SULPHUR.  134

I  Stool,  with  a  sensation  as  if  something  remained,  and  as
if  stool  had  been  insufficient.

1  1  Chronic  constipation;  bowels  had  not  moved  for  years
without  aid  of  purgatives ;  dull  feeling  in  brain  ;  heavi-
ness on  top  of  head ;  weak,  hungry  feeling  in  stomach
before  dinner ;  burning  of  soles  of  feet  at  night.

■  First  part  of  stool  in  small  round  lumps,  very  dark  green,

almost  black,  difficult ;  remaining  part  softer  and  larger;
stool  sometimes  slips  back  when  about  to  escape ;  with
stool passes  blood,  sometimes bright,  sometimes  like

I  Constipation,  especially  in  hemorrhoidal  and  hypochon-
driac persons ;  in  pregnant  women  and  newborn ;  alter-
nating with  diarrhoea;  with  paralysis ;  with  skin  trouble.

I  Frequent  unsuccessful  desire  for  stool ;  first  effort  is  pain-
ful ;  is  compelled  to  desist.

Constipated  stools:  hard,  knotty  and  dry,  as  if  burnt;  in-
sufficient ;  chestnut-  or  olive-shaped ;  fiat ;  like  sheep's
dung.

I  After  constipated  stool :  prolapse  of  rectum  ;  lancinating
pains  from  anus  upward ;  stinging,  sore,  burning,  itch-
ing, pulsating  pains  in  anus.

I  Passage  of  fetid  flatus  ;  smelling  like  rotten  eggs.

llBurning  and  pressure  in  rectum.

■  Constant  bearing  down  in  rectum;  feeling  of  fulness.
I  Cutting  in  rectum  during  normal  stool.

■Violent  stitches  in  rectum,  especially  in  evening.
I  Violent  sticking  in  rectum  even  when  not  at  stool,  taking
away  breath.

■  Crawling  and  biting  in  rectum  as  from worms,  while

sitting,  in  evening.
i  i Itching  in  rectum.

■  Throbbing  pain  in  rectum.

I  I  Passes  blood  with  stool  for  two  years,  since  he  had
scarlatina;  prolapsus  of  rectum  for  three  weeks;  hem-
orrhage has  been  <  for  last  month;  easily  tired;
restless  at  night ;  pain  in  back ;  overexertion  will  bring
prolapsus  and  bleeding;  stools  very  dark,  almost  black.

■  Hemorrhage  per  anum,  looks  blanched  and  bloodless,

with  a  passive  flow  of  blood  from  anus ;  almost  pulse-
less, lips  pale  and  quiver;  talks  and  answers  questions
~  only  in  a  whisper. ^Cirrhosis  of  liver,
iRectocele;  stools  flat  and  thin.

■  ■Increased  congestion  of  hemorrhoidal  vessels.

i  I  Hemorrhoids:  painful  and  bleeding;  regular,  hard
stools;  tongue  coated;  bad  taste  in  mouth;  appetite
good,  but  everything  turns  sour;  much  wind  in  bowels  ;
aching  in  pit  of  stomach,  making  her  faint;  must  ex-


135  SULPHUR.

ercise  hard,  then  feels  >,  when  sitting  or  lying  down,
faint;  despondent.

I  I  Hemorrhoids  so  large  and  painful  that  he  could  not
stand  up;  constipation,  with  continual  urging  in  rectum ;
frequent  involuntary  discharge  of  mucus  and  feces
covered  with  blood ;  stitching  pains  from  anus  upward ;
painful  tension  in  anus  and  small  of  back  preventing
rising  or  walking;  loss  of  appetite;  sleepless  at  night;
every  four  to  eight  weeks  swelling  of  hemorrhoids  and
discharge  of  blood.

I  I  Piles,  now  internal,  at  first  external;  during  and  after
stool  throbbing,  burning,  smarting  in  piles  and  shooting
upward,  catches  breath ;  also  dull  aching  in  coccyx  and
sacrum,  extending  around  side  of  pelvis,  lasting  seven
hours  after  stool;  stool  once  in  two  to  four  days;  pain
makes  her  feel  faint,  trembling,  sick,  inclined  to  move
about,  hot  and  as  if  she  would  lose  her  senses;  pain  at
anus  >  when  standing  than  lying.

I  I  Shooting  pains  in  anus,  with  heat  and  soreness;  sleeps

lightly  and  awakens  very  often;  falls  asleep  when  he
attempts  to  read;  least  exertion  fatigues  him;  pain  in
1.  pelvis  extending  to  foot  of  that  side,  <  when  sitting
after  a  long  walk;  at  every  stool,  which  is  not  hard,
passes  much  blood. ^Hemorrhoids.

I I  Hemorrhoids,  moist,  blind,  or  flowing  dark  blood,  with
violent  bearing-down  pains  from  small  of  back  toward
anus.

1 1  Suppressed  hemorrhoids,  with  colic,  palpitation,  con-
gestion to  lungs;  back  feels  stiflJ"  as  if  bruised.

I  Piles  with  chronic  hemorrhages  from  bowels,  great  itch-

ing and  sore  feeling  of  anus;  burning  and  intolerable
itching  of  anus  at  night;  cannot  sleep  from  itching.

I I  Large  hemorrhoids,  violent  burning  and  sticking  in
anus;  pressing  in  rectum  during  and  after  stool;  it
feels  full.

I  Sore  feeling  at  anus  and  escape  of  moisture;  itching  in

skin  surrounding  anus.

I I  Burning  in  anus:  after  sitting  a  while;  after  soft  stools
in  evening.

I  Pressure  and  burning  in  anus.

I I  Constant  bearing  down  toward  anus;  forcing  down
after  sitting.

I  Aching  in  anus.

■  Frequent  stitches  through  anus.

I I  Itching  in  anus.

Itching  in  perineum  with  soft  stool.

I  Swelling  of  anus  with  burning  itching.

llBleeding  from  anus.


SULPHUR.  136

Discharge  of  liquid  from  anus,  followed  by  feces  at  night
during  sleep.

I  Involuntary  discharge  of  moisture  from  anus  followed

by  itching.

■  Feeling  of  soreness  of  anus  and  exudation  of  a  viscid,

slimy  fluid.

I I  Excoriation  about  anus.
I  Anal  fissures.

1  I  Burning,  tearing  and  itching  in  rectum  and  anus,  with
feeling  of  fulness;  cannot  bear  to  have  hemorrhoidal
tumors  washed ;  constant  desire  to  scratch  parts.

I  Lancinating  pain  from  anus  upward,  especially  after
stool.

■  Pulsating  pain  in  anus  all  day.

■  Itching,  burning  and  stinging  in  anus.

■  Anus  swollen,  with  sore,  stitching  pains.
Broad  flat  condylomata  in  anus.

■  Thread- worms  with  stool;  ascarides;  lumbrici ;  taenia.

^^  Urinary  Organs'. Violent  jDain  in  region  of  kidneys  after
stooping  a  long  time.

■  Retention  of  urine.

■  Frec[uent  micturition,  especially  at  night;  large  quanti-

ties of  colorless  urine  after  hysteria.

■  Nocturnal  enuresis.

■  Burning  in  orifice  of  urethra,  during  micturition.

■  Redness  and  inflammation  of  orifice  of  urethra.

■  Painful  desire,  with  discharge  of  bloody  urine,  requiring

great  effort.

■  Mucous  discharge  from  urethra.

■  Stream  of  urine  much  thinner  than  usual;  intermits.

■  Urine: profuse,  colorless;  scanty; reddish;  very  off'en-

sive;  turbid;  greasy  j)ellicles  upon  it.

■  Constant  desire  to  urinate ;  a  few  drops  pass  involuntarily.

■  Great  desire  to  urinate,  with  burning  in  urethra.

■  Hard  pressure  upon  bladder.

A  feeling  in  urethra  as  if  he  were  constantly  obliged  to
urinate.

■  ■Burning  in  urethra.

Pains  in  urethra  as  in  beginning  of  gonorrhoea.

In  morning  on  passing  water,  flying  shoots  in  urethra.

Painful  shoots  in  urethra,  with  rigor.

■  Stitches  in  forepart  of  urethra.

■  ■Itching  in  urethra.

■  Weak,  slow  stream  of  urine  from  paresis  of  sphincter

vesicte. •

■  Desire  to  urinate  comes  suddenly  and  is  imperative;  if

not  gratified,  urine  passes  involuntarily.
.  ■Hemorrhage  from  urethra.


137  SULPHUK.

I  I  Irresistible  desire  to  urinate  on  seeing  water  running
from  hydrant  {Cantliar.  and  Lyssin).  ^Irritability  of
bladder.

I  Diabetes;  morbus  Brightii.

iHsematuria;  stitching  and  burning  in  urethra  during
micturition.

I  I  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  but  only  a  few  drops  are
discharged,  accompanied  by  severe  cutting  pains  in
vesical  region  and  burning  sensation  in  urethra;  urine
escapes  slowly  in  drops  from  urethra;  pains  continue
after  urination;  urine  brown,  turbid,  slimy,  depositing  a
tenacious  mucous  sediment;  loss  of  strength  and  weight.

I  I  Constant  painful  urging  to  urinate,  with  frequent  dis-
charge of  a  few  drops  of  urine,  with  increase  of  pain
and  followed  by  drawing  pain  along  ureters,  compelling
her  to  bend  double;  thirty  to  forty  efforts  to  urinate  in
twenty-four  hours;  urine  brown,  turbid,  depositing  a
mucous  sediment;  dyschesia;  complaining  mood;  loss
of  appetite;  fever  toward  evening;  great  lassitude.

I  I  Four  years  ago  while  on  a  journey  wanted  to  urinate,
but  suppressed  it  for  the  time,  and  when  finally  he
wished  to  urinate  could  not  pass  any;  only  after  several
days'  catheterizing  was  enabled  to  pass  water,  but  always
with  excessive  tenesmus,  so  that  he  had  to  try  it  twelve
to  twenty-four  times  in  a  day.

I  I  Chronic  irritability  of  bladder;  must  rise  several  times
at  night  to  urinate,  and  rush  from  his  work  during  day
to  relieve  bladder,  at  risk  of  wetting  his  clothes  if  he  did
not  jneld  to  urgency  of  case ;  profuse  sweats  at  night,

I  I  Involuntary  urination  at  night,  for  two  years;  scarcely
a  night  passed  without  his  wetting  bed;  disagreeable
sensation  of  hunger,  with  flushes  of  heat,  about  11  a.m.

■  Enuresis:  pale,  lean  children,  with  large  abdomen,  who

love  sugar  and  highly  seasoned  food,  and  abhor  to  be
washed  ;  micturition  copious  after  midnight.

I  Urine  excoriates  parts.

I I  Both  flow  of  urine  and  discharge  of  feces  are  painful  to
parts  over  which  they  pass.

"Male  Sexual  Organs. i Coldness  of  penis; weak  sexual
power;  impotence.

■  Unvoluntary discharge of semen, with burning in

urethra.

■  Increased  sexual  desire,  with  stitches  in  testicles ;  chronic

prostatitis  after  gonorrhoea.
I  Too  quick  discharge  of  semen  during  coition,  or  before

erection  is  complete,  or  before  he  succeeds  in  inserting

penis.
I  iTesticles  relaxed,  hanging  down  ;  soreness  and  moisture

of  scrotum,  or  offensive  sweat  of  genitals.


SULPHUE.  138

■  Itching  of  prepuce.

I  Waning  of  sexual  desire  from  overindulgence,  with  weak-
ness of  back  and  threatening  paralysis.

■  Offensive  sweat  about  genitals.

■  Prepuce  and  glans  penis  icy  cold.

■  Burning  and  redness  of  prepuce.

■  Stitches  in  penis.

■  ■  Itching  on  glans  penis.

Pressure  and  tension  in  testicles  and  spermatic  cords.

■  Itching  at  mouth  of  urethra  as  at  commencement  of  gon-

orrhoea ;  of  great  value  in  second  stage.

■  Chronic gonorrhoea,  with  shooting burning pains, or

without  pain,  with  discharge  of  white  or  yellow  acrid
mucus.

■  Inflammation  of  urethra,  and  especially  prepuce,  with

acrid  discharge.

■  Inflammation  and  swelling,  with  deep  rhagades,  burning

and  redness  of  prepuce  with  phimosis.

■  Deep  suppurating  ulcer  on  glans  and  prepuce,  with  puffed

edges.

■  Phimosis,  with  discharge  of  fetid  pus.

■  ■Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  after  micturition  and  stool.

■  Mercurial  syphilis ;  itching  ulcers  which  are  soon  covered

with  a  crust,  discharging  pus  from  underneath  ;  cocks-
comblike excrescences  on  glans,  soft,  spongy,  easily
bleeding ;  excoriations  on  genitals  with  burning  ;  cop-
per-colored spots  on  forehead;  hard,  large  inflamed
buboes.
I  I  Chancre,  phagedenic,  destroying  lower  half  of  glans
penis  ;  paraphimosis ;  ulcer  consists  at  first  in  numer-
ous little  specks  of  pus,  sievelike,  dispersed,  gradually
unite  into  one  wdiole ;  sudden  eruption  of  varicella  sy-
philitica over  whole  body  (followed  by  Cinnab.).

■  Chancres,  .with  boardlike  hardness  of  red  and  swollen

prepuce.

1  I  Ulcer  on  dorsum  of  penis ;  discolored,  greenish  crust ;
not  much  pain.

I  1  Fistula  urinaria,  after  gonorrhoea,  edges  indurated,  dis-
charge of  pus  and  urine  from  fistula ;  formication  in
rectum,  tenesmus,  burning  during  stool ;  constipation.

■  Suppressed  gonorrhoea.

I  1  Scanty,  light  yellow  discharge  from  urethra;  burning
on  beginning  to  urinate  and  during  coitus;  hemor-
rhoids, with  pains  in  head  and  back;  itching  and  stitches
in  anus,  constipation,  flatulency. 6'Gleet.

■  Varicocele,  continuous  relaxation  of  scrotum.

I  I  Hydrocele,  in  a  boy  set.  5,  for  several  years;  tumor
large,  very  tense  and  shining,  prevents  running  and
playing;  general  health  suffering.


139  SULPHUR.

I  Old  discharging  buboes  which  do  not  heal.

I  Moist  excoriation  about  genitals.

I I  Soreness  and  moisture  of  scrotum;  soreness  between
thighs  when  walking.

I  Chronic  enlargement  of  prostate  gland.

I I  Fetid  perspiration  on  genital  organs,  with  soreness  and
excoriation  destroying  most  of  hair,  painful  in  walking,
with  thickening  and  induration  of  scrotum.

^'  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Sterility,  with  too  early  and  too
profuse  menstruation.

I A  weak  feeling  in  genital  organs.

I  Sore  feeling  in  vagina  during  an  embrace.

Pain  alternating  between  eye  and  ovary;  pains  from
ovarian  region  to  back.

I  Continued  bearing  down:  in  pelvis  toward  genitals;
congestion  to  uterus.

I  Laborlike  pain  over  symphysis.

Uterine  pains,  running  from  groins  to  back.

iMoroseness  and  apprehension  with  uterine  pain;  menses
two  days  too  late,  with  anxious  and  uncomfortable
feeling.

I  I  Cancer  of  uterus;  offensive,  corrosive,  ichorous  leucor-
rhoea ;  sensation  of  heat  in  crown  of  head ;  coldness  of
feet,  or  burning  in  soles  of  feet  at  night ;  flushes  of  heat,
pass  off  in  a  perspiration  with  faintness;  remarkably
weak  at  pit  of  stomach  from  eleven  in  morning  until
noon;  violent  burning  in  vagina,  with  painful  soreness
during  sexual  intercourse.

■  Prolapsus  from  reaching  high;  prolapsus,  with  pain  in

hypogastrium,  in  r.  side  especially.

■  Prolapsus  uteri ;  metritis;  dropsy  of  uterus.

I  I  Uterine  discharge,  watery,  whitish,  copious,  in  gushes,
and  scalding;  sometimes  thicker,  whitish-yellow,  stain-
ing napkins  a  mustard  yellow,  with  yellow  granules  like
crushed  mustard-seed  and  of  fecal  odor.

I  I  Leucorrhoea,  greenish-j^ellow,  excoriating  parts.

\  I  Chronic  leucorrhoea,  thin  and  very  profuse,  or  scanty,
yellow,  causing  burning  and  smarting  of  vulva  and
thighs.

I I  Hot  flushes  at  climacteric  period,  with  hot  head,  hands
and  feet,  and  a  great  goneness  in  stomach.

■  Menses:  too  early,  too  profuse,  last  too  long;  every  four-

teen to  eighteen  days,  lasting  eight  days,  discharge
scanty,  dark  ;  dark,  putrid,  clotted  ;  thick,  acrid,  makes
thighs  sore;  smelling  sour ;  pale;  too  late,  of  short  du-
ration, or  suppressed;  late,  with  constipation  and  dis-
tended abdomen  ;  scanty,  recurring  at  long  and  variable
intervals ;  absent  four  months  ;  suppressed,  causing  con-
gestion to  other  parts.


SULPHUR.  no

\  I  Menorrhagia;  profuse,  with  liability  to  miscarriage;  has
not  been  well  since  her  last  miscarriage;  strong-smell-
ling  perspiration  in  axillae;  heat  in  sacral  region;  dull
aching  in  ovarian  region;  hunger  at  11  a.m.,  cannot
wait  for  dinner ;  inflation  of  abdomen  every  afternoon  ;:
sleep  restless,  feet  cold.

iDysmenorrhoea;  spasmodic  pain  in  hypogastrium,  as  if
intestines  were  strung  up  in  knots,  scanty  flow,  with
colicky  pain  in  small  of  back.

I  'A  young  lady,  unmarried,  had  not  menstruated  for  a
year,  although  she  did  not  in  any  way  feel  unwell.

lAmenia  in  scrofulous  constitutions,  tendency  to  papular
skin  eruption,  or  portal  and  pelvic  congestion.

I  iGirl,  set.  19,  menstruated  but  once  ten  months  ago,  no
reappearance  of  flow;  after  Sulph.  regular  menstruation.

■  Before  menses:  headache;  cough,  in  evening;  nosebleed;

leucorrhoea ;  itching  of  vulva ;  lumbar  pains ;  cramp  in
splenic  region;  restless  and  anxious;  headache;  tooth-
ache; heartburn;  cough,  in  evening  in  bed;  night
sweat.

I  During  menses :  nosebleed  ;  rush  of  blood  to  head  ;  w^eak,
faint  spells  ;  colic ;  irritability  ;  day-sleepiness ;  pressure
in  forehead ;  vertigo  ;  excitement  of  circulation  ;  palpi-
tation; epistaxis ;  sore  throat;  lassitude  and  heaviness
of  feet;  pressure  in  epigastrium;  laborlike  pains  in  abdo-
men and  back.

<  I  Burning  in  vagina,  scarcely  able  to  keep  still.

I  Violent  itching  of  clitoris  and  vagina.  ^Nymphomania.
^Pruritus  vulvse.

llTroublesome  itching  of  vulva,  with  pimples.

•  Leucorrhoea:  very  profuse,  pudenda  sore  and  burning;
milky ;  smarting  like  salt,  must  scratch  till  parts  bleed  ;
<  at  night,  must  rise  and  bathe  parts;  mucous,  a  fort-
night before  menses;  yellow,  excoriating,  accompanied
by  palpitation  during  motion,  followed  by  burning  in
abdomen ;  preceded  by  cutting  or  pinching  around
navel;  <  in  moring  after  rising;  scanty,  acrid;  mild.

lAscarides  of  vulva.

■  Swelling  of  mammae.

■  Nodosities  in  mammae.

■  Nipples  cracked,  stinging  and  burning,  bleeding  when

nursing;  areolae  covered  with  yellowish  scales  oozing
acrid  fluid,  itching  and  burjiing  in  night.
I  I  Scirrhus  of  breast.
^'  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Promotes  expul-
sion of  moles.

■  Pelvic  sufferings,  with  flushes  of  heat  and  weak,  fainty

spells.


141  SULPHUR.

iMorning  sickness  of  pregnancy,  not  amounting  to  vomit-
ing, with  faint,  sickish  spells  during  forenoon ;  profuse
salivation,  taste  of  which  causes  nausea ;  aversion  to
meat;  craving  beer  or  brandy.

I  1  Constant  nausea,  vomits  everything  that  is  taken  into
stomach ;  obstinate  constipation ;  heat  on  top  of  head ;
faintness  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  icy-cold  feet.

■  Cramps  in  calves,  hot  flushes,  weak,  faint  spells;  burn-

ing of  soles ;  must  put  them  outside  of  covers  or  in  a

cool  place.
llFeels  hungry  and  faint  about  11  a.m.;  cannot  wait  for

dinner.
I  Labor :  frequent  weak,  fainty  spells ;  wishes  to  be  fanned  ;

wants  more  air;  flushes  of  heat  and  cold  feet,
i  Puerperal  mania.
I  After-pains  begin  in  sacrum,  pass  around  pubes  and  run

down  thighs.

■  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

I  I  Swelling  of  r.  breast  as,  large  as  a  hen's  egg,  after  an  at-
tack of  erysipelatous  mastitis;  surface  of  swelling  cov-
ered with  excessive  granulations;  severe  itching;  dis-
charge of  thin,  sanious  pus.

■Suppuration  of  mamrnse,  with  chilliness  in  forenoon,  heat
in  afternoon ;  inflammation  runs  in  radii  from  nipple.

■  Soreness  of  nipples.

■  Nipples cracked, sore, bleeding, burn like  fire; deep

cracks  at  base  of  nipples,  as  if  they  would  drop  off.

■  After  nursing,  nipples  smart,  burn  and  bleed;  chapped

nipples.

■  Hemorrhoids  during  pregnancy  and  in  childbed.

^' Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Hoarse-
ness: evening  or  morning; roughness  of  voice,  with
dryness  of  throat  and  burning  on  swallowing ;  in  morn-
ing, with  irritation  of  throat.
A  rough  nasal  sound,  like  snoring,  in  trachea.

■  Voice  rough,  hoarse,  with  much  mucus  on  chest;  aphonia.
Talking  excites  pain  and  fatigues  whole  body ;  shooting

pains  through  1.  chest  to  back.

■  Chronic  aphonia  on  a  psoric  basis.

M Complete  aphonia;  hoarse,  suffocating  cough,  with
smarting  in  chest,  when  coughing.  /^Sequel  of  pneu-
monia.

I  I A  boy,  set.  10,  sudden  aphonia ;  emaciation  ;  aversion  to
everything  sweet.

■  Great  hoarseness,  gradually  ending  in  complete  loss  of

voice.
I  I  Suddenly  awakes  from  sleep  with  a  cry,  cannot  breathe,
face bluish,  eyes  projecting  from head,  throws  arms


SULPHUR.  142

above  head,  trembling  and  rigidity  of  limbs;  after  a
minute,  rapid  whistling  respiration  and  cough,  face  gets
pale,  cries,  is  greatly  prostrated ;  attacks  <  after  crying
or  getting  angry. ^Spasmus  glottidis.

Drawing  and  dryness  in  larynx  at  times.

I  I  Perfect  aphonia;  with  hg^rassing  dry  cough,  preceded
by  hoarseness ;  cough  caused  by  constant  pricking,  and
itching  or  tickling  in  1.  side  of  larynx  ;  coughs,  particu-
larly at  night  in  bed,  after  midnight  until  2  a.m.;  hack-
ing all  day,  with  frequent  paroxysms  of  cough ;  loss  of
smell  and  taste ;  coughs  always  after  eating ;  subject  to
these  attacks  since  childhood,  each  lasting  usually  two
or  three  weeks. ^Laryngitis.

iChronic  laryngitis;  cough  in  evening  before  and  when
going  to  bed  ;  catarrh  of  mucous  membranes ;  disposi-
tion to  skin  affections ;  suppressed  eruptions.

I  Catarrh,  with  fluent  coryza,  chilliness,  rawness  of  chest
and  cough.

I  I  Cough  of  several  weeks'  duration,  with  soreness  of  upper
portion  of  chest  and  slight  whitish  expectoration ;  <
during  day  and  in  evening  when  lying  down;  cough  oc-
casioned by  an  itching  sensation  in  bronchi,  accompanied
by  retching;  hot  flushes;  cold  feet;  faint  and  hungry  at
10  A.M.;  rheumatic  pains  in  knees  and  hips  at  night,
with  soreness  and  coldness;  itching  of  skin  on  retiring.
^Acute  bronchial  catarrh.

I  I  Night  sweats  and  cough  with  copious  expectoration  of
blood  streaked  mucus ;  fever  and  cough  ;  hoarseness ;  a
sensation  as  of  ice  in  chest  when  chilled,  or  perspiration
is  checked. ^Bronchitis.

I  Chronic  bronchitis,  wdth  arterial  and  venous  vascular  ir-

ritability, great  impressionability  of  skin,  which  suffers
from  slightest  atmospheric  variation;  in  rheumatic,
gouty,  herpetic  and  scrofulous  individuals,  also  when
seemingly  well-indicated  remedies  refuse  to  act.
iDilatation  of  air  tubes  and  putrid  sputa.
^"Respiration.  ilShortness  of  breath:  and  oppression  on
bending  arms  backward;  from  talking  much;  when
walking  in  open  air;  in  evening  in  bed.

I I  Feels  suffocated  ;  wants  doors  and  windows  wdde  open  ;
particularly  in  night.

I  Labored,  heavy  breathing;  audible  beats  of  heart.

I  Asthma  at  night.

I  I  Asthma:  attack  every  eight  days; has  rough,  harsh

hair ;  stooping  posture ;  hunger  and  weakness  every  day

at  11  A.M.
I  I  Asthmatic  attacks  following  swelling  of  hemorrhoids;

chest  oppressed,  constricted ;  nightly  attack  of  suffoca-


143  SULPHUR.

tion ;  great  anxiety,  rush  of  blood  to  chest,  sudden  ces-
sation of  respiration,  gasps  for  air,  jumps  out  of  bed  for
relief;  several  attacks  every  night,  followed  by  palpi-
tation.

I  Asthma:  alternating  with  fits  of  gout  or  attacks  of  lepra
and  psoriasis.

I  Asthma,  arising  from  suppressed  eruptions,  especially
itch ;  or  from  suppressed  chronic  discharges;  periodical,
spasmodic  stinging  in  back  ;  congestion  to  chest;  comes
on  in  sleep,  when  turning  over  in  bed,  or  in  evening.

I  Rattling  in  chest,  <  after  expectorating.
^^  Cough.  Cough  :  dry,  choking;  short,  dry,  with  stitches  in
chest,  or  under  1.  scapula;  dry,  with  hoarseness,  dryness
in  throat,  and  watery  coryza;  with  much  rattling  of
mucus  in  chest;  loose,  with  soreness  and  pressure  in
chest ;  with  expectoration  of  thick  mucus ;  with  rattling
in  trachea,  hoarseness ;  with  expectoration  of  greenish
lumps  of  sweetish  taste ;  caused  by  roughness  in  throat;
short,  in  evening,  while  sitting  asleep ;  when  going  to
sleep,  with  heat  in  head  and  face,  and  cold  hands;  only
at  night;  with  shooting  pains  in  chest;  caused  by  raw-
ness in  larynx ;  woke  him  from  sleep  at  night ;  dry,  with
hoarseness,  dryness  of  throat,  and  fluent  coryza  of  clear
water;  short,  dry,  violent,  with  pain  in  sternum,  or
stitches  in  chest;  excited  by  tickling  in  larynx,  as  if
caused  by  down,  evening  and  night  without,  morning
and  day  with,  expectoration  of  dark  blood,  or  of  yellow,
greenish,  purulent,  or  milk-white  watery  mucus,  usually
of  sourish,  sometimes  putrid,  flat,  or  saltish  taste,  or  like
offensive  discharge  of  an  old  catarrh ;  dry,  a  long  time
in  evening  in  bed,  before  falling  asleep.

Expectoration  of  bloody  pus.

I  'Dry  cough,  for  seven  weeks,  <  at  night;  tosses  about  at
night ;  kicks  off  covers ;  much  itching  of  nose ;  itching
over  body,  <  at  night ;  great  thirst.

I  I  For  four  months,  cough  with  salty  expectoration;  pain
in  head  from  nape  to  eyes ;  feels  sick  at  times.

I  I  Following  pleurisy,  a  cough  for  nearly  two  years ;  in
pleurisy  had  great  sinking  of  stomach  ;  cough  only  on
lying  down  in  daytime,  not  severe,  always  ending  with
a  little  easy  expectoration.

I  I  Cough  ever  since  a  child ;  hollow,  hard,  like  a  stroke  of
a  sledge-hammer  on  a  piece  of  timber;  short,  dry  shock,
in  paroxysms,  racking  her  to  pieces.

I  I  Chronic,  severe  dry  cough  in  evening  in  bed  and  in
morning ;  hoarseness,  voice  deeper  than  usual  ;  <  in
cold,  damp  weather;  sensation  as  of  something  in  larynx,
followed  by  cough  and  expectoration  of  mucus.


SULPHUR.  144

I  I  Chronic  cough,  <  at  night;  wlieezing  in  chest;  child
coughs  like  an  old  man  ;  feet  and  hands  cold ;  pain  in
chest ;  disease  confined  to  large  bronchial  tubes.

I  When  coughing:  headache  as  if  bruised  or  torn;  some-
times vomiting ;  hoarseness ;  soreness  in  trachea ;  con-
striction of  air  passages  ;  sensation  as  if  lungs  came  in
contact  with  back;  pressing,  tension,  cramplike  pain,
cutting,  stinging,  soreness  and  bursting  pain  in  chest ;
pain  in  sternum  ;  jarring  of  chest  and  abdomen  ;  rever-
beration in  crown  of  head  ;  bursting  pain  in  head,  >  by
pressure,  during  cough  ;  cervical  pain,  epistaxis,  palpi-
tation ;  rattling;  retching  and  vomiting;  paleness  with
cold  hands;  sleeplessness;  night  sweats;  hypochondriac
pains;  pains  in  abdomen,  back,  hips  and  legs ;  discharge
of  feces;  convulsions.

■  Chronic  bronchial  catarrh,  with  excessive  collection  of

mucus  or  muco-purulent  matter,  with  loose  rattling-
cough  and  easy  expectoration,  especially  in  daytime;  at
night  mucus  is  more  tenacious  and  raised  with  difficulty ;
becomes  easy  in  morning ;  patient  very  sensitive  to  rainy
weather,  feels  least  change.

■  Spasmodic  whooping  cough : two  paroxysms  in  quick

succession ;  successions  follow  each  other  rapidly ;  sup-
pressed and  choking,  without  being  pronounced ;  with
tickling  in  larynx  as  if  caused  by  down,  evening  and
night;  expectoration  of  dark  blood,  or  of  yellowish
greenish,  purulent,  white,  watery  mucus ;  sour,  or  putrid
saltish  taste  ;  face  becomes  pale  during  paroxysms ;  fre-
quent relapses  without  any  known  cause ;  third  stage.
I  Aggravation  of  cough  :  from  afternoon  to  midnight;  from
cold  ;  cold  damp  weather;  in  open  cold  air;  driving  in
an  open  wagon ;  after  sleep ;  lying  upon  side  ;  standing ;
talking;  after  eating;  from  highly  seasoned  food  ;  vine-
gar and  other  acids ;  before  menses.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Anxiety  in  chest.

■  Weakness  of  chest  when  talking  or  reading  aloud;  dur-

ing evening,  while  lying  down.
Weak feeling  in  chest,  could  get  her  breath  only  with
difficulty.

■  Fulness  in  chest  before  menses,  is  frequently  obliged  to

take  a  deep  breath.

■  Sensation  as  if  lungs  touched  back.

■  Feeling  as  if  a  lump  of  ice  were  in  r.  chest.

■  ■Oppression,  heaviness  and  pressure  in  chest.

■  Oppression  of  chest  with  stitches  in  1.  side.
Pain  in  chest  as  if  strained,  with  oppression.
Chest  painful  on  moving  arm.

Pain  in  upper  part  of  chest  as  if  he  had  fallen  upon  it.


145  SULPHUR.

Pains  in  wliole  thorax.

I  Pains  in  chest  from  overlifting,  or  after  inflammation  of

lungs.

I I  Burning  in  chest,  rising  to  face.

I  Pain  as  if  chest  would  fly  to  pieces,  when  coughing  or
drawing  a  deep  breath.

■  Roughness  and  soreness  in  chest.
Pain  in  sternum  ;  aching.

■  Violent  cramp  in  chest.

■  Tightness  of  chest  as  if  something  had  grown  fast;  con-

striction; occasional  shootings.
I  On  taking  a  deep  breath,  chest  feels  constricted.
■Tightness  and  constriction  of  chest  on  bringing  arms

together  in  front.

■  Painful  constriction  of  chest.

Tormenting  shootings  behind  lowest  rib  of  1.  side,  toward
back,  <  by  breathing  deeply.

■  ■Shooting  in  1.  side  of  chest  through  to  back.
Thrusts  in  1.  chest  toward  heart,  which  took  away  her

breath ;  great  thirst  at  night.
Stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest,  through  stomach  and  pit  of
stomach.

■  A  stitch  extending  from  r.  side  of  chest  into  scapula.
Painful  shattering  stitches  shoot  into  r.  chest.

■  Stitches  in  1.  chest  when  breathing.

■  ■Stitches  through  chest,  extending  into  1.  scapula; <

lying  on  back  and  during  least  motion.
Flying  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  <  by  walking  quickly
and  going  up  stairs,

■  Stitches  in  sternum.
Sensation  of  coldness  in  chest.

I  I  Burning  pain  all  around  1.  side,  below  heart  and  across
stomach,  <  evenings;  it  sometimes  extends  down  as
far  as  kidney;  it  causes  him  to  shake  all  over;  hands,
legs  and  whole  body  tremble;  retching,  frequent  aching
in  forehead,  increasing  with  pain  in  sides,  latter  <
every  third  night,  lasts  two  or  three  hours,  and  gradually
leaves  him;  often  feels  it  when  drawing  a  deep  breath.
^Remittent  neuralgia  of  chest.

■Severe  acute  pain  deep  in  1.  lung,  outside  of  nipple;  <
in  evening.

■  ■Congestion  of  blood  to  chest.

I  1  Dry  cough,  oppression  of  chest,  emaciation ;  daily  ex-
pectoration of  red,  frothy  blood,  particularly  in  morn-
ing; voice  hoarse;  painful  pressure  beneath  sternum
and  in  region  of  stomach;  occasional  stitches  in  1.  side;
after  suppression  of  an  eruption. ^Haemoptysis.

■  Neglected  influenza  and  pleuritis;  dull  stitches  in  r.  side

VOL.  X. — 10.


SULPHUR.  146

and  severe  oppression  of  chest,  so  that  he  cannot  talk,
on  taking  a  deep  inspiration,  or  coughing;  respiration
difficult;  pulse  weak,  small.

I  I  Yesterday  morning  cough,  afternoon  feverish  or  hurried
breathing,  also  last  night;  this  morning  cough,  which
sounds  loose;  pulse  184;  skin  hot;  palms  and  body
perspire;  breathing  very  rapid,  could  not  well  be
counted,  as  it  was  interrupted  every  few  seconds  by
cough,  it  was  certainly  72;  tongue  dry;  sibilous  all  over
chest,  especially  lower  r.  lobe ;  crepitation  in  both  lower
lobes;  chilly  yesterday;  no  alee  nasi  movement  except
when  she  voluntarily  moves  them;  breathing  ver}"  loud
when  lying  on  r.  side,  less  loud  when  lying  on  1.;  during
cough  noisy  escape  of  flatus  per  anum;  1.  chest  dull  on
percussion. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  Three  days  ago  several  chills  lasting  till  afternoon ;  then
intense  heat  <  in  evening,  with  headache  and  thirst,
calling  for  frequent  mouthfuls  of  cold  water;  great
restlessness  during  night;  next  morning  when  heat  had
somewhat  subsided  pulse  112;  during  heat  it  was  130;
paroxysms  of  heat  came  every  two  hours  without  any
more  chills;  congestion  of  lower  half  of  1.  lung  and
lower  two-thirds  of  r.  lung,  very  distinct;  marked  dysp-
noea; short,  troublesome  cough;  anxious  and  distressed
for  breath. t^Pneumonia.

I  I  Four  days  ago  shivering,  heat,  severe  stitch  in  side,  dry
exhausting  cough,  distressing  heat  at  night,  with  thirst
ness of  cheeks,  moist  coated  tongue,  rapid  short  breath-
ing, 1.  side  less  raised  during  respiration  than  r. ;  per-
cussion sound  on  1.  side  posteriorly  as  far  as  fourth  rib
tympanitic,  and  from  fifth  rib  downward  dull ;  increased
vocal  fremitus;  on  auscultation  consonating  rale  and
indeterminate  respiratory  murmurs  at  fourth  rib  ;  from
fifth  rib  downward  strong  bronchial  respiration ;  on  r.
side  superiorly  and  posteriorly  feeble  but  distinct  crepi-
tation, and  in  upper  part  of  chest  respiration  was  sharp
and  expiratory  murmur  distinct;  pulse  100,  hard;  cough
frequent;  expectoration  moderate  in  quantity,  tough,
adherent,  without  bubbles  and  colored  with  blood;  urine
scanty,  turbid;  giddiness  on  rising;  general  heat,  espe-
cially of  head;  prostration;  pain  in  all  limbs;  anxiety;
urgent  thirst;  dryness  of  mouth;  pappy  taste;  want  of
appetite ;  nausea ;  stabbing  pain  in  1.  chest,  on  least  move-
ment; coughing  on  breathing  deeply. ^Pneumonia.

■  Pneumonia,  with  hepatization  after  violence  of  fever
has  abated;  before  red  hepatization  and  afterward  grey
hepatization;  dry  hacking  cough  especially  at  night;


147  SULPHUR.

severe  dyspnoea  and  suffocation,  <  at  night,  with
stitches  and  soreness  on  coughing,  stitches  in  chest,
dulness  in  mind,  stupidity,  forgets  what  he  has  to  say;
cannot  make  an  exertion  to  think;  ahnost  complete
hepatization  of  both  lungs. ^Typhoid  pneumonia.

■  Pneumonia,  badly  treated  cases;  hepatization  or  abscess,

with  pale,  cold,  damp  skin,  emaciation,  hectic  fever,
swelling of  extremities;  purulent  sputa,  quick,  weak
pulse.
I  I  Pneumonia:  1.  lower  lung;  can  lie  on  back  or  1.  side,,
not  on  r.;  fanlike  motion  of  nostrils.

■  Pneumonia  assumes  a  torpid  character  with  slow  solidifi-

cation; rattling  in  chest;  frequent  weak,  faint  spells
and  flushes  of  heat;  feels  suffocated,  wants  doors  and
windows  open;  constant  heat  on  top  of  head.

■  Torpid  typhoid  pneumonia,  with  short  rapid  breathing,

a  mere  heaving  of  chest;  cough  and  expectoration
nearly  impossible;  patient  responds  sluggishly,  com-
prehends slowly;  <  about  midnight.

■  Neglected  or  occult  pneumonia  in  psoric  patients,  threat-

ens to  terminate  in  tuberculosis  or  in  phthisis  pituitosa.

■  Pneumonia  passes  through  its  first  stages  normally  and

then  remains  stationary;  deficiency  of  reaction;  absorbs
infiltration  and  prevents  suppuration.
I  I  Left  thorax  overfilled  with  pleuritic  exudations,  not  a
.  trace  of  respiratory  murmur;  vertebral  column  strongly
bent  to  r.  side;  wall  of  thorax  perforated  near  1.  nipple;
decided  fluctuation  and  formation  of  abscess,  which
broke  and  discharged  a  large  quantity  of  pus;  after  a
week  cannot  get  a  trace  of  respiratory  murmur;  every-
where dull  sound  on  percussion.

■  ■Pleurisy  (after  Aeon.)  acute,  plastic  form,

■  Parenchymatous  pleuritis  after  removal  of  febrile  erup-

tions, at  termination  of  process  of  exudation  and  to
render  innocuous  those  parts  of  exudation  which  are
not  absorbed ;  pleuritis  in  course  of  acute  articular
rheumatism,  or  articular  gout;  fibrous  pleuro-pneu-
monia.

■  Hydrothorax,  with  sudden  arrest  of  breathing  at  night

in  bed  when  turning,  going  off  when  sitting.

1  I  Sensation  of  fulness  in  chest,  alternating  with  a  sense
of  weakness  in  evening  on  going  to  bed ;  eruption  on
arms,  which  are  numb  after  scratching;  quite  costive;
feels  hungry  10  a.m.

I  I  Since  an  attack  of  pleurisy  about  twenty  years  ago,  pain
in  1.  lower  thorax,  back  and  front,  as  if  something  fell
forward  on  turning  over  on  r.  side  when  lying ;  if  she
continues  to  lie  on  r.  side  it  feels  as  if  it  pressed  against


SULPHUR.  148

front  lower  chest;  if  she  still  continues  in  that  position,
there  is  also  heat  in  part  affected ;  pressure  causes  dysp-
noea when  lying  on  r.  side.

J  I  Pressure  and  tension  in  chest  and  in  region  of  stomach;
sensation  as  if  chest  were  too  narrow,  frequently  draws
shoulders  back  to  overcome  this  and  to  get  air;  has  had
several  attacks  of  haemoptysis;  salty -tasting,  purulent
blood-streaked  expectoration ;  hemorrhoids ;  sleep  rest-
less, dry  heat  prevents  him  falling  asleep,  much  thirst
at  night. ^Phthisis.

I  i  A  boy,  set.  7,  sickly  since  a  long  time,  fevered  at  night,
slept  badly,  restless  whole  night;  upper  parts  of  supe-
rior lobe  of  lungs  without  respiratory  murmur,  empty,
dull  percussion  sound  ;  exudative  condensation  of  lung
tissues.

I  I  Difficult  expectoration  of  small  quantities  of  muco-puru-
lent  matter;  night  sweat;  forenoon  chills  followed  by
mild  hectic ;  dulness  in  apex  of  1.  lobe  extending  down
to  third  intercostal;  bronchial  rale,  with  distinct  voice
sounds;  pain  in  chest  from  front,  back  into  shoulder
blade  ;  small  cavity  in  this  part  of  1.  lobe. ^Phthisis.

I  I  Cough  so  severe  as  to  cause  retching,  extreme  prostra-
tion, paleness  efface  and  cold  sweat  on  forehead ;  stitches
in  various  parts  of  chest  on  coughing ;  cough  <  at  night,
constant  as  soon  as  he  closes  his  eyes;  expectoration
profuse,  purulent,  of  very  offensive  odor ;  appetite  poor ;
extreme  prostration ;  copious  night  sweats ;  despairing
mood. ^Phthisis.

I  !  Severe  harassing  cough,  with  thick,  yellow,  purulent

expectoration ;  thirst ;  night  sweats ;  hectic  ;  pulse  125 ;
loss  of  appetite ;  hurried  respiration ;  oppression  on  chest
and  occasional  looseness  of  stools,  running  off  in  pain-
less diarrhoea,  cold,  clammy  hands  and  feet  and  sting-
ing in  same,  with  flashes  of  heat  and  coldness  through-
out body ;  ears  discharge  profuse  offensive  pus ;  chronic
ulceration  of  external  meatus  with  perforation  and  com-
plete destruction  of  drums.
■  Tuberculosis  of  lungs;  esj)ecially  indicated  as  a  prevent-
ive when  tliere  are  congestions  to  head  and  chest ;  dry,
teasing  night  cough;  i)reath  hot;  pain  like  a  rivet
through  upper  third  of  1.  lung  to  scapula ;  sweats ;  flashes
of  heat ;  burning  of  feet,  with  desire  to  uncover  them.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. iRush  of  blood  to  heart.

I I  Palpitation  :  anxious;  in  evening  in  bed;  and  flutter-
ing of  heart ;  without  anxiety,  at  any  time  of  day  ;  dur-
ing stool ;  violent  at  night,  on  turning  in  bed ;  violent
and  rapid  on  falling  asleep ;  when  going  up  stairs  or
when  climbing  a  hill ;  visible.


149  SULPHUR-

1 1  Sensation  as  if  heart  were  enlarged.

iStitclies  in  region  of  heart,  or  in  r.  side  of  chest,  at  night,

while  lying  on  back,  on  slightest  motion.
1 1  Short  stitches  in  praecordial  region.
I  Pericarditis;  pericardial  effusion  ;  exudation.

I  Stitches  in  cardiac  region,  <  taking  a  deep  breath.

I I  Sharp  pain  at  heart  going  through  chest,  to  between
shoulders ;  especially  with  dyspeptic  symptoms.

I  I  Cutting  pains  about  heart  as  with  knives,  which  decrease
or  increase,  last  a  few  hours,  with  redness  of  face,  fol-
lowed by  general  coldness ;  attacks  only  when  waking  up.
I  I  Has  been  sick  over  a  year;  failing  appetite  and  dimin-
ishing strength ;  skin  very  yellow,  like  icterus ;  six:
months  ago  began  to  complain  of  palpitation  whenever
he  took  exercise ;  oedema  on  both  sides  of  tibia ;  for  a
month  confined  to  bed,  slightest  exercise  caused  dysp-
noea and  palpitation;  insufficiency  of  mitral  valve;  (re-
ceived Quinine,  Strychnia,  Arsenic,  Digitalis,  Bromide
of  Potassium,  etc.),  debility  and  sleeplessness  increased  ;
stomach  retained  no  food  or  drink  ;  nausea  continued,
had  not  slept  for  five  nights,  great  emaciation  ;  very
weak  ;  dyspnoea  caused  by  talking  even  in  a  low  voice  ;
could  only  lie  on  back  ;  when  he  turned  head,  he  heard
a  noise  in  r.  carotid  artery,  as  from  escaping  steam ;  skin
dry ;  mouth  and  throat  very  dry,  not  >  by  drinking  ;:_
frequent,  scanty  micturition  ;  urine  pale ;  constipated  ;
aversion  to  food  ;  aversion  to  light ;  pulse  feeble,  140.
I  Pulse :  full,  hard  and  accelerated,  at  times  intermittent.
llGreat  orgasm  of  blood,  with  violent  burning  in  hands.
^^  Outer  Chest. iShootings  in  sternum.

I  Does  not  walk  erect;  stoops  or  bends  forward  in  walking

or  sitting  ;  morning  sweat  after  walking.
I  I  Seven  years  ago  noticed  a  deep  yellow  spot,  size  of  a
silver  dollar,  on  1.  breast ;  now  covers  her  person  from:
hips  to  neck;  inordinate  hunger  from  10  to 11  a.m.
^Chloasma.
I  I A  keloid  on  sternum  which  had  a  diameter  of  one  and
one-half  inches,  and  an  elevation  of  one-tenth  of  an
inch ;  it  was  hard  and  shone  like  mother  of  pearl  and
pained  at  times ;  man  suffered  from  enteritis,  which  by
bad  treatment  had  become  chronic.
^^  Neck  and  Back, i  Glands  of  neck  swollen.

■Stiffness  of  neck  :  in  nape,  with  paralytic  sprained  pain  ;

with  cracking  of  vertebrae  on  bending  head  backward.
Tearing  and  tension  in  1.  side  of  nape,  before  midnight,
after  waking  feels  as  if  too  short ;  in  morning  must  cry
out  with  pain;  >  during  rest.
Drawing  pain  in  nape  of  neck  and  scapulae.


SULPHUR.  150

I  Stitches:  in  nape  of  neck,  on  stooping;  in  cervical  mus-
cles ;  beneath  scapulae,  which  take  away  breath,  and  do
pot  permit  stooping ;  in  scapulae.

I  I  An  itching  tetter  on  nape  of  neck  below  hair.
Pressive  pain  in  back,  beneath  scapulae,  in  evening.
Tensive  pain  between  scapulae  while  lying  or  moving.

I I  Pain' in  small  of  back :  could  not  walk  erect,  was  obliged
to  walk  bent  over;  violent  only  on  stooping,  tensive  as
if  everything  were  too  short;  on  rising  from  a  seat;
gnawing;  after  heavy  lifting  and  taking  cold  at  same
time ;  violent,  as  if  bruised,  also  in  coccyx ;  tiresome
feeling,  as  if  bruised ;  stitches.

Sticking  pain  in  lumbar  vertebrae  with  every  expiration.
Stitches  transversely  across  small  of  back.
Pain  in  back  as  if  sprained,  or  from  a  false  step.
Sensation  as  if  vertebrae  were  gliding  one  over  the  other

when  turning  in  bed.
Stiffness,  now  in  back,  now  in  hips,  painful  on  turning

over  in  bed  ;  obliged  to  hold  breath.
Pain  in  back  on  stooping.

Pulsating  stitches  in  region  of  loins  and  kidneys.
I  I  Pain  in  loins; urine  thick,  dark; pains  in  chest; hot

sweats ;  jBatulence.
Piercing  pain  and  tension  in  sacrum.

I  Cannot  lie  on  her  back  on  account  of  rush  of  blood  to

head. ^Nightmare.

I I  Finds  himself,  in  night,  lying  on  back.

1 1  Does  not  walk  erect;  stoops  or  bends  over  forward  in
walking  and  sitting.

I  I  Large  goitre,  interfered  with  respiration,  caused  oppres-
sion when  ascending  heights  or  walking  quickly  ;  snor-
ing during  sleep ;  for  past  year  chills,  night  sweats,  and
difficult  expectoration  ;  stammering  and  deafness;  after
vaccination  pustular  eruption  on  head.

I  I  Woman,  aet.  60,  removed  a  mole  from  1.  shoulder;  an
ulcer  two  inches  in  diameter  was  result,  a  year  later ;
had  been  treated  with  ointments ;  sore,  intolerant  of
water,  heat  in  vertex ;  distressing  headache,  a  "  breeze
of  pain  "  as  it  was  called.

I  I  Constant  backache  for  several  years.

I  I  For  seven  weeks,  constant  pain  in  small  of  back,  <  from
motion  and  stooping,  disturbing  sleep  at  night ;  pain  as
if  he  would  have  to  sink  down,  shooting,  stitching,
causing  a  sensation  of  lameness  in  thighs ;  can  hardly
walk  ;  must  lie  on  1,  side  at  night;  hands  cold.  ^Lum-
bago.

■  Burning  and  tensive  aching  between  scapulae ;  heat  on  top
of  head  ;  palpitation  of  heart ;  sleeplessness ;  remedies
do  not  seem  to  take  effect. ^Myelitis.


151  SULPHUR.

I  I  Child,  3  years  old,  of  psoric  constitution,  dorsal  inflam-
mation, and  an  ill-conditioned  ulcer,  two  inches  in  front
of  spine,  and  one  inch  above  spine  of  ilium,  with  hard,
elevated  edges,  no  granulations,  deep  and  long  enough
to  receive  half  of  a  hen's  egg  divided  longitudinally,
from  edges  of  which  were  growing  twenty  or  thirty  black
and  coarse  hairs.

■  Tabes  dorsalis;  unsteady  gait ;  great  debility  and  trem-

bling ;  limbs  go  to  sleep.

I  Pott's  curvature  ;  muscles  soft  and  flabby ;  great  prostra-
tion ;  well-marked  curvature  in  lumbo-dorsal  region.

I  Spinal  curvature  occurring  after  suppression  of  scabies
by  ointment.

I  I  Angular  curvature  and  abscess  in  a  child,  set.  8,  result

of  a  fall ;  great  and  rapid  emaciation ;  violent  hectic ;
skin  hot  and  dry,  covered  with  fine  rash ;  thirst ;  in-
flamed eyelids ;  constipation  ;  no  appetite  ;  urine  scanty
and  high-colored  ;  breathing  difficult,  especially  inspira-
tion ;  neuralgic  pains  in  thoracic  and  abdominal  walls,
extending  from  back ;  abscess  discharging  large  quan-
tities of  pus  daily  (had  been  punctured);  hump  promi-
nent and  increasing  very  fast.

I I  Curvature  of  spine,  vertebrae  softened.

'^Tipper  Limbs.  iPain  as  if  sprained,  or  as  if  bruised,  in  1.
shoulder.

1 1  Rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders,  especially  in  left.

•  Lacerating  pains  in  shoulders  and  shoulder  joints,  espe-
cially at  night.

I  Pain  in  1.  shoulder  as  if  luxated,  or  bruised.
Pressure,  like  a  weight,  in  shoulder  when  walking  in  open

air.
Drawing  pains  in  shoulder  joint,  arms  and  hands.
Stitches  extending  from  shoulder  into  chest,  on  motion.
Stitches  beneath  r.  axilla.
Weakness  of  upper  arm,  could  not  raise  it.
Jerking  pressure  in  deltoid  muscle.

I I  Perspiration  in  armpits,  smelling  like  garlic ;  offensive
to  patient.

Sensation  as  if  something  heavy  w^ere  hanging  on  upper

arm.
Heaviness  and  tension  in  humeri.

■  Arms  pain  as  if  beaten.

■  Drawing  and  tearing  pain  in  arms  and  hands.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  mouse  running  up  arms  and  back  be-

fore a  fit.
M  Scabs  on  r.  arm. ^Eczema.
I  llrritating  rash  on  arms  for  two  months,  pustular,  on

elbow  apparently  from  contact  with  coarse  shirt;  in


SULPHUR.  152

some  parts  patches  like  lichen;  in  others  linear  appear-
ance of  psoriasis.

I  I  Erysipelas  under  1.  elbow  ;  joint  very  painful,  skin  hot,

very  red  and  infiltrated  ;  arm  sensitive,  slightest  motion
<  pain  ;  headache  ;  thirst ;  restless  sleep  ;  constricting
sensation  in  throat;  pulse  small  and  thin;  erysipelas
extending  from  elbow  all  around  to  extensor  side  of
forearm,  and  continued  to  progress  to  upper  arm,  show-
ing at  first  a  pale  reddish  hue,  which  finally  became
darkened  and  reached  its  acme  in  production  of  vesicles
of  different  size;  enormous  tension  and-swelling  of  skin,
with  excessive  burning  pain ;  extension  of  redness  up-
ward, copious  hemorrhages  from  blisters,  w^hich  turned
black  and  dried  up  slowly ;  spread  steadily  upward ;
soon  reached  shoulder,  and  began  to  radiate  toward
neck  and  head ;  pulse  became  still  smaller  and  senso-
rium  not  quite  free ;  excessive  prostration.

Stiffness  of  w^rists,  especially  in  morning.

Pain  in  wrist  as  if  sprained.

I I  Tremulous  sensation  in  hands  when  writing ;  cold  trem-
bling hands.

1 1  Burning  of  hands.

I  I  Crawling  in  hands.

I  I  Psoriasis  inveterata,  with  dry,  scaly  eruption  on  backs

of  hands ;  intense  itching  when  warm ;  after  scratching

relief, followed by burning  and at times bleeding ;

knuckles  crack ;  at  night  in  bed,  feet  burn,  is  obliged  to

put  them  in  a  cool  place.
I  iRhagades  on  hands,  especially  between  fingers,  on  finger

joints  and  in  palms.
Perspiration  of  hands,  and  in  palms  of  hands.

■  Hands  covered  with  sweat,  particularly  palms.

Pain  in  flexor  surface  of  r.  middle  finger  as  from  a  stick-
ing splinter.
Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  first  joint  of  thumb.
I  Cramp  in  three  middle  fingers.

■  Burning  in  balls  and  tips  of  fingers.
I  Stitches  in  tips  of  fingers.

Crawling  and  prickling  in  tips  of  fingers,  very  acute,  <

on  hanging  arms  down.
I  1  Pain  in  end  of  finger  like  a  brier  sticking  there ;  redness

and  swelling  so  painful  she  had  to  desist  from  work  ;

burning  and  stinging,  >  in  cold  water  {Apis  had  been

given  without  relief).
I  i  Panaritium  in  1.  index  finger ; pus  collected  beneath

nail  which  soon  came  off  and  was  succeeded  by  a  thick,

yellow  distorted  one,  from  beneath  which  pus  continued

to  discharge ;  point  of  finger  swollen,  shining,  yellowish-


3i


153  SULPHUR.

white  ;  frequent  severe  stitching  pains  ;  pain  on  touch-
ing nail;  whole  hand  at  times  as  if  lame.

I  1  Panaritium  affecting  thumb:  great  swelling  and  inflam-
mation ;  formation  of  pus  around  and  beneath  nail ;
intolerable  throbbing  and  boring  pains,  <  at  night.

I  I  For  three  weeks,  whitlow  on  1.  forefinger,  whole  finger  in-
flamed, last  phalanx  contains  pus  along  its  entire  extent,
except  at  dorsum ;  shooting  pain  in  ulnar  surface  of
last  phalanx,  throbbing  all  along  finger,  aching  to  axilla
and  scapula ;  burning  in  whole  finger,  it  is  very  tender ;
sleep  disturbed  by  pain  ;  >  by  cold  water,  holding  arm
up ;  <  by  letting  it  hang  down  and  from  hot  water ;  a
lump  as  large  as  a  marble  in  ulnar  side  of  bend  of  elbow,
with  aching  in  it;  often  has  hangnails;  has  had  five
whitlows  in  nine  years.

I  Deadness  of  fingers  in  morning.

I  Thick,  red  chilblains  on  fingers.

Cracking  and  chapping  on  finger  joints.

Erysipelatous  swelling  of  fingers  with  numbness.

■  Hangnails.

I  Cold  hands  and  feet.
Lower  Limbs, l  iCoxalgia  after  catching  cold;  leg  longer
than  sound  one ;  gluteal  fold  sunken ;  foot  on  afi'ected
side  thrown  forward,  and  is  supported  by  great  toe.
Sudden  cramp  like  very  painful  jerks  about  hip  joint.

■  Tensive  pain  in  hip  joint  on  walking.

■  Drawing  pain  in  1.  hip.

In  morning  violent  shooting  pains  in  r.  hip  joint,  com-
pelled him  to  keep  his  bed,  as  he  could  not  raise  himself,
nor  move  without  greatest  effort ;  shooting  extended
through  r.  half  of  pelvis  and  down  r.  femur,  avoided
knee  and  reappeared  as  severely  in  foot.

Shooting  pains  in  hip  in  evening,  extending  to  upper
third  of  thigh,  <  when  at  rest,  >  by  motion  and
pressure.

Pain  in  1.  hip  as  if  bruised,  or  luxated.

I  I  Dull,  heavy  pain  in  r.  hip  extending  to  knee,  produc-
ing lameness,  soreness  and  tumefaction ;  tendons  form-
ing lateral  boundaries  of  popliteal  space  contracted,  hard
and  sensitive  to  touch,  making  it  difficult  for  her  to
touch  heel  to  floor ;  sense  of  confusion  and  fulness  in
head ;  heat  and  weight  in  vertex. ^Rheumatism.

Pain  in  posterior  muscles  of  thigh  while  sitting.

■  Soreness  between  thighs,  especially  on  walking.

■  Cramp  in  thighs.
Drawing  and  bruised  pain  in  thighs.

■  Middle  of  thigh  as  if  broken.
1  I  White  painless,  elastic  swelling  of  r.  knee;  no  heat.


SULPHUR.  154

I  I  Doughy  swelling  of  r.  knee,  especially  above  patella ;
pain  on  pressure;  cannot  straighten  leg  on  account  of
pain.

I  I  Periodical,  transient,  shooting  pains  in  1.  knee ;  constant
pain  <  in  paroxysms,  in  1.  hip  joint,  <  walking,  from
external  pressure,  and  especially  by  pushing  leg  upward
toward  hip  joint;  affected  leg  one  inch  longer  than
sound  one,  flexed  at  knee  and  thrown  outward ;  limping
gait.

Cramplike  pressure  in  hollows  of  knee,  extending  to  ankles.

Pressure  in  1.  patella  and  knee  joint.

Violent  drawing  and  tearing  through  knees  and  tibia,
especially  in  evening,  does  not  know  where  to  lay  legs.

Tearing  and  a  feeling  as  if  sprained  in  1.  knee.

■Stitches  in  knee.

I  1  Stitching  pain  in  r.  knee  extending  to  toes,  <  after  mid-

night, then  so  severe  as  to  cause  spasmodic  twitchings ;
burning  in  knee ;  knee  and  leg  swollen ;  severe  pain  on
inner  surface  of  knee  from  least  touch ;  constant  severe
chilliness,  not  followed  by  heat;  stool  hard.

I I  Stiffness  in  knees  and  cracking.

■  Tightness  in  hollows  of  knees,  as  if  too  short  on  stooping.

■  Pain  in  knees  as  from  stiffness,  on  rising  from  a  seat.

I  I  Knee  red,  swollen,  painful,  has  a  doughy  feel,  synovial
fluid  in  surrounding  cellular  tissue ;  feels  <  at  night  in
bed,  when  it  burns  and  itches;  >  moving  about,  <
keeping  quiet,  with  stiffness  when  beginning  to  move.
^Gonitis.

I  I  Swelling  of  r.  knee ;  every  Summer  is  troubled  with  an
eruption  on  one  hand,  terribly  itching  and  burning  after
scratching,  <  at  night,  spreads  up  arm  to  shoulder;
knee  pan  feels  elastic,  as  if  some  fluid  were  in  joint;
burning  pain  during  rest.

■  Dropsy  of  knee  joints;  subacute  and  chronic  synovitis.

■  Sciatica:  subacute  and  chronic;  pain  in  small  of  back;

stitching  drawing  on  rising  from  a  seat ;  tensive  pain
in  hip,  <  on  1.  side;  drawing  down  limb,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  bruised ;  limb  feels  heavy,  as  if  paralyzed,  <
walking ;  knees  rigid ;  feet  swollen.
Bruised  sensation  in  lower  extremities.

■  Drawing  pain  in  lower  extremities  in  morning  and  even-

ing in  bed.
He  puts  lower  extremities  out  of  bed  on  account  of  tear-
ing pain  in  them.

■  Heaviness  and  weakness  of  limbs  when  walking.

■  Pains  in  limbs  are  greatly  <  by  heat  and  at  night.

■  Arthritic  swelling  of  joints,  with  cracking  on  motion.

I  I  On  going  to  sleep,  one  leg  is  suddenly  drawn  up,  and
shot  out  again,  partially  rousing  him.


155  SULPHUR.

Inclined  to  cramp  in  leg,  on  stretching  out  foot.
Tearing  in  legs  from  knees  to  feet,  while  walking  and
sitting.

I  I  After  convalescence  from  pneumonia,  pain  in  both  shins,

especially  1.,  <  when  standing ;  outer  side  of  1.  lower
leg  swelled ;  boring  pain  in  1.  lower  leg,  like  a  gimlet
going  from  just  below  knee  to  ankle.

I I  Ulcer  on  tibia  in  a  man  broken  down  by  rheumatism
and  strong  drink.

•  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

•  Erysipelas  of  legs.

I  '  Chronic  abscess  at  head  of  tibia,  with  serous  discharge.

I I  Cramps  in  calves  and  soles,  particularly  at  night;  loose-
ness of  bowels. ^Asiatic  cholera.

I  Cramps  in  calves:  while  dancing;  when  walking;  in
stretching  out  legs ;  at  night ;  in  morning  in  bed.

Weary  pain  iri  calves,  at  night  in  bed.

I  I  Enlarged  vein  in  r.  calf  for  last  six  days,  with  aching,
tingling  and  burning  in  it.

I  iStiffness  of  ankle  joints.

Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  1.  ankle  on  standing  and  walking.

I  Ankles  weak.

I  I  Ulcer  of  more  than  two  years'  duration  on  1.  leg,  above
outer  malleolus,  as  large  as  a  quarter  dollar,  with  areola
much  swelled,  very  hard,  dull  purplish  red ;  stinging
pains ;  scanty  watery  discharge  ;  before  appearance  of
ulcer  had  much  rheumatism,  >  in  Winter,  <  before  a
storm  ;  feet  hot  at  night,  keeps  them  out  of  bed.

I  I A  deep  ulcer  on  inner  side  of  r.  ankle,  discharging  thin
ichor  of  bad  odor ;  some  swelling  about  ulcer.

i  I  Swelling  and  redness  of  inner  side  of  r.  foot  and  r.  inner
malleolus;  part  very  tender;  sharp  darting  pain  from
r.  inner  malleolus,  going  up  to  knee,  and  down  along  in-
step toward  toes ;  <  by  standing  on  it  with  foot  flat ;
can  stand  a  little  on  toes.

I  Aching,  drawing,  tearing  pains  in  feet.

■  Tensive  pain  in  r.  foot,  after  dinner  and  in  morning.
Drawing  in  feet  extending  up  to  hips,  with  cracking  of

joints  on  every  movement.

•  Great  heaviness  of  feet,  especially  of  ankles.
Stitches  :  in  ball  of  r.  foot.

iiBurning  in  feet,  wants  to  find  a  cool  place  for  them;

puts  them  out  of  bed  to  cool  them  off.
i  I  On  putting  feet  to  ground  prickling  in  balls  of  feet,  as

if  it  would  draw  toes  down.

■  Cliildren  kick  off  clothes  to  cool  their  feet.
Sensation  of  cold  feet,  though  they  really  are  not  cold.
I  Cold  feet  and  hands ;  cold  soles.


SULPHUR.  15S

I  Feet  cold,  or  covered  with  cold  sweat.

■  Intense  icy  coldness  of  feet;  <  when  head  is  congested,
I  I  Herpetic  eruption  on  foot,  from  a  blow  received  six

months  ago;  heals  and  then  breaks  out  again,

■  Ulcer  on  instep.

I  I  Chronic  badly  smelling  feet;  gnawing  empty  feeling
at  pit  of  stomach  an  hour  or  so  before  dinner ;  dry,  burn-
ing heat  in  soles  at  night,  even  when  cold  through  day  ;
had  itch  suppressed  by  Sulphur.

Sticking,  crawling  in  r.  heel.

Cramp  in  soles  of  feet  at  every  step.

■  ■Burning  in  soles:  on  stepping  after  sitting  a  long  time;

and  itching,  especially  on  walking ;  wishes  to  find  a  cool
place  for  them,  puts  them  out  of  bed  ;  wants  them  un-
covered.

■  Soles  cold  and  sweating.

Pressive  pain  and  soreness  on  inside  of  great  toe.

Sudden  sharp  cutting pain  from  behind  forward  in L

great  toe ;  also  shoots  as  from  a  fine  needle.
Sharp  shoots  as  from  a  blunt  nail,  in  rapid  succession,  at

root  of  nail  of  great  toe.

■  Cramps  in  toes  on  stretching  out  feet.

■  Red,  shining  swelling  of  toes.

■  Eczema  under  toes.

■  Itching  in  toes  that  had  been  frozen.

■  Pain  in  corns.

I  I  Corns  and  frost-bite ;  had  not  been  able  to  wear  boots
for  two  years;  feet  very  sore,  tender,  swollen,  inflamed;
burning,  boring  and  stitching  pains.

■  Redness  and  swelling  of  chilblain,  with  tendency  to  sup-

puration ;  chilblain  thick,  and  red,  with  cracks  on  joints ;.
itching  <  in  warm  bed.
^^ Limbs  in  General. ■Trembling  of  limbs,  hands  and  feet^
with  weariness  and  prostration.

■  Unsteady  gait ;  tremor  of  hands.

■  Limbs  go  to  sleep  easily.

■  Tearing  in  limbs,  muscles  and  joints,  from  above  down-

ward.

■  Weariness,  cracking,  swelling  of  joints.

■  Arthritic  swelling  and  heat.

■  Pains  in  knees,  ankles  and  elbows,  every  night  about

11  P.M.,  continuing  till  7  a.m.

■  Gouty  or  rheumatic  complaints,  with  or  without  swelling.

■  Pains  in  limbs,  <  when  covered  with  feather  covering.

■  Severe  inflammation  of  joints,  much  redness,  swelling^

and  excruciating  pain  on  motion  ;  all  joints  may  be  suc-
cessively attacked  ;  is  apt  to  begin  in  feet  and  pass  from
them  successively  to  upper  joints;  pains  decidedly  <  at
night. ^Rheumatism.


157  SULPHUR.

I  Chronic  rheumatism; stiffness  of  joints,  and  pain in

lumbar  region.
I  In  second  stage  of  articular  rheumatism,  where  deposits

are  to  be  removed ;  feet  in  particular  are  affected  and

very  stiff.

■  Chronic  rheumatism;  podagra;  tearing,  stitching  pain

or  when  after  Bryon.,  stitch-pain  leaves  and  a  dull,  ach-
ing, pressive  pain  remains ;  sleeplessness ;  hot  head  and
cold  feet.
I  Burs£e,  hard  or  soft,  inflamed  ;  feeling  of  formication.

■  Eruption  of  minute,  almost  confluent  vesicles,  on  arms

up  to  elbows,  and  on  legs  below  knees,  on  no  other  part
of  body;  excessive  pruritus,  <  scratching;  for  three
weeks  harsh,  dry  cough,  <  at  night ;  spells  almost  con-
tinuous, cough  provoked  by  tickling  in  throat  below
glottis ;  constant  sensation  of  weight  in  centre  of  ster-
num, with  a  heavy,  dull,  aching  pain  ;  has  pains  at  times
in  lower  edges  of  pleura.

■  Chilblains,  thick  and  red,  with  cracks  on  joints.

■  Corns  with  aching  and  stinging  pain.

■  Hands  and  feet  cold  ;  or  palms  and  soles  burning  hot.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  head  symptoms  <  ;  ca-
ries of  bones  of  cranium  <  ;  >  pain  in  nape  of  neck ;
shooting  pain  in  hip  <  ;  <  pain  in  knee.
Sitting :  heaviness  of  head  >  ;  vertigo ;  head  symptoms

<  ;  hunched,  in  brain  affections;  bent  over,  stitches  in
hepatic  region  ;  pain  about  navel ;  rumbling  and  grum-
bling >  ;  pains  in  anus  <  ;  burning  in  anus ;  forcing
down  in  anus;  pain  in  posterior  muscles  of  thigh;
tearing  in  legs ;  restlessness.

Standing:  vertigo;  >  hemorrhoids;  pain  in  shins  <  ;  on
foot  flat,  <  swelling  of  foot  and  ankle.

Can  only  lie  in  one  position,  with  occiput  drawn  far  back-
ward.

Lying :  heaviness  of  head ;  occiput  as  if  hollow ;  very  vio-
lent pressure  in  stomach ;  rumbling  <  ;  hemorrhoids

<  ;  weakness  of  chest ;  on  r.  side  as  if  something  fell
forward  in  thorax;  pain  between  scapulse;  constantly
moving  feet;  chilliness  >.

Lying  on  back:  hard  mass  in  epigastrium;  stitches
through  chest  into  1.  scapula ;  stitches  in  region  of  heart
or  in  chest ;  rush  of  blood  to  head  ;  assumes  position  in
sleep.

Lying  on  painful  side  :  neuralgia  of  liver  >.

Likes  to  lie  with  head  low :  hydrocephalus.

Lying  with  head  high :  heaviness  and  dulness  >.

Stooping :  heaviness  of  head ;  rush  of  blood  to  head ;  ver-
tigo ;  headache ;  stitches  in  forehead  <  ;  pricking  across


SULPHUR.  158

forehead  <  ;  head  symptoms  <  ;  pain  in  region  of  kid-
neys ;  when  walking  or  sitting  ;  stitches  in  nape  of  neck;
pain  in  back ;  tension  in  bends  of  knees.

Must  bend  double :  painful  urging  to  urinate.

Motion  :  disagreeable  from  heaviness  of  head ;  of  head  >
stitches ;  headache  <  ;  cannot  bear,  with  headache ;
head  symptoms  <  ;  caries  of  bones  of  cranium  >  ;  eye-
ball painful ;  lids  tense ;  noises  in  ears  <  ;  >  hemor-
rhoids ;  soreness  between  thighs ;  <  stitches  through
chest;  stabbing  pain  in  1.  chest;  pain  between  scapulae;
<  pain  in  erysipelas  on  arm  ;  <  shooting  pain  in  hip
joint ;  >  shooting  pain  in  hip  ;  >  pain  in  knee ;  crack-
ing of  joints  ;  in  bed,  chilliness.

Walking :  painful,  with  sick-headache ;  pressure  upon
bladder ;  pain  in  face  >  ;  prevented  by  hemorrhoids ;  <
stitches  in  1.  chest ;  tensive  pain  in  hip  joint;  soreness
between  thighs ;  <  pain  in  hip  joint ;  sciatica  < ;  heavi-
ness and  weakness  of  limbs ;  tearing  in  legs ;  cramp  in
calves;  burning  in  soles;  weariness  disappears;  lassi-
tude; sleepiness;  in  open  air,  sweat;  in  open  air,  stick-
ing itching.

Moving  arm  :  chest  painful.

At  every  step :  cramp  in  soles  of  feet;  burning  in  soles.

Regularly  protrudes  and  retracts  tongue.

Raising  head :  heaviness  and  fulness  <.

Nodding  head :  as  if  brain  were  beating  against  skull.

Bending  head  backward  :  cracking  of  vertebrse.

Bending  arms  backward  :  shortness  of  breath  and  oppres-
sion.

On  bringing  arms  together  in  front:  tightness  of  chest.

When  turning  over  in  bed:  asthma;  as  if  vertebrae  were
gliding  over  each  other;  stiffness  in  back  <.

Talking :  fatigues  whole  body.

Dancing:  cramp  in  calves.

Stretching  out  feet:  cramps  in  toes.

When  r.  leg  is  lifted  to  step :  pain  in  knee  <.

Stretching  out  foot:  cramp  in  leg.

Rising  :  limbs  totter ;  rising  from  seat  prevented  by  pain
in  stomach ;  pain  in  small  of  back  < ;  stiffness  and  pain
in  knees;  sciatica  <.

Ascending:  confusion  and  dulness  of  head ;  headache;
stitches  in  1.  chest  <  ;  palpitation;  oppressed  respiration,
with  goitre.

Going  down  stairs:  dizzy.

Writing :  tremulous  sensation  in  hands.
^^  Nerves, l  Feels  tired  and  used  up;  not  rested  in  morning.

I  Weariness  disappears  on  walking.

•  Lassitude:  in  morning;  in  evening;  after  walking,  with
sleepiness.


159  . .  SULPHUR.

I  Weakness :  after  a  short  walk ;  after  a  stool ;  in  afternoon.

I  Exhaustion  of  whole  body;  extreme  faintness;  uneasi-

ness.
lUneasiness and excitation of nervous system ; could
not  sit  long ;  even  while  lying  was  constantly  moving
feet.

I I  Uneasiness  in  blood  ;  orgasm.

I  Unsteady  gait,  tremor  of  hands.

I  Cannot  walk  erect,  stoop-shouldered.

iGreat  debility  and  trembling;  talking  fatigues.
•  Weak,  faint  spells,  frequently  during  day,  after  nursing
or  night- watching,  with  great  sleepiness.

■  Excessive  prostration  and  rapid  emaciation.

■  Great  prostration  with  entire  loss  of  appetite  and  general

coldness  of  surface.

I I  Weak,  fainting  spells  frequently  during  day;  feels  very
faint  and  weak,  with  a  strong  craving  for  food,  from  11
to  12  every  morning.

■  Child  easily  fatigued;  sits  bent  forward  ;  refuses  to  stand

long,  but  crawls  about.

I  I  Since  an  attack  of  diphtheria  five  years  ago,  exhaustion

on  least  exertion  ;  nausea  or  vomiting  in  morning ;  at-
tacks of  diarrhoea  occasionally;  micturition  frequent
and  painful ;  urine  turbid ;  complexion  sallow  and
pallid.

I I  Excessively  sensitive  to  open  air  and  will  not  be  washed ;
very  much  inclined  to  take  cold.

■  Universal  tremors.

I  Hysteria :  she  comes  out  of  her  spasms  feeling  very  happy,
everything  seems  very  beautiful  to  her;  discharges  a
large  quantity  of  colorless  urine.

■  Child  jumps,  starts  and  screams.

■  Frequent  spasmodic  jerking  in  whole  body.

I  I  Lays  her  head  upon  table ;  sighs  and  groans ;  uncon-
sciously slides  to  and  fro  upon  bench ;  struggles  with
her  limbs;  throws  herself  upon  floor  and  rolls  about;
falls  into  a  sleep  and  wakes  up  well.

I  I  Spasms  set  in  with  twitching  of  hands,  then  general
convulsed  movements  of  body  and  limbs ;  sensitiveness
of  abdomen,  felt  even  in  stupor  which  followed  spasm,
causing  wincing  from  firm  pressure  over  r.  ovarian  re-
gion ;  face  red,  spotted ;  had  complained  for  several
days  of  a  violent  pain  in  vertex.

■  Spasms  after  suppressed  eruptions;  often  removes  ten-

dency to  convulsions.

■  ■Chorea;  in  chronic  cases,  particularly  after  suppressed

eruptions;  frequent  spasmodic  jerking  of  whole  body;
tremor  of  hands ;  unsteady  walk  ;  peevish,  irritable,  ob-


SULPHUR.  160

stinate ;  faint  and  hungry  spells  at  10  a.m.  ;  soles  of  feet
burn.

I  I  Epilepsy  since  infancy  in  a  boy  set.  4;  attacks  occur  at
periods  varying  from  three  to  six  months;  often  has
severe  attacks  in  rapid  succession;  comes  in  after  playing
and  running,  leans  head  against  a  chair  and  complains
of  headache ;  feels  tired  and  exhausted ;  falls  asleep  with
jerkings,  and  anxious  starting  in  sleep,  which  is  followed
by  a  iit:  froth  at  mouth,  eyes  set,  throws  hands  above
head,  and  grows  stiff;  trembling  of  limbs;  attacks  last
some  minutes  with  only  slight  remissions ;  body  jerks,
legs  rapidly  drawn  up  and  extended  with  force,  thumbs
clenched ;  coldness  of  extremities ;  blueness  around
mouth ;  attacks  preceded  by  vertigo,  soporific  sleep,
gritting  of  teeth,  nausea  and  vomiting ;  unconscious  of
what  has  happened.

I  I  Epilepsy  Iot  six  days ;  as  many  as  twenty -three  fits  in
one  night;  convulsions  confined  to  upper  extremities
and  trunk ;  head  moving  about  in  all  directions,  but
mostly  to  side;  trying  to  rise;  eyes  constantly  moving
up  and  down :  foaming  at  mouth ;  hands  clenched,
thumbs  not  turned  in  ;  both  arms  nearly  in  position  of  r.
arm  when  standing  at  guard  in  boxing,  and  trembling
as  if  in  a  shaking  chill;  lower  extremities  unmoved
and  rigid ;  convulsions  began  in  1.  side  and  went  to  r. ;
now  more  frequently  they  are  reversed.

i  I  JEt.  IS,  good  health  until  eighth  year,  when  he  was  sud-
denly seized  with  epileptic  fits ;  sometimes  had  three  or
four  paroxysms  a  day,  seldom  passing  twenty-four  hours
without  one ;  produced  by  sudden  noise,  touch  or  excite-
ment ;  contracted  itch  at  school  when  about  S  years  old,
which  had  been  repelled  by  external  treatment ;  erup-
tion disappeared  almost  immediately  after  application
of  ointment,  and  within  three  weeks  thereafter  had  his
first  fit;  after  taking  Sulphur,  an  eruption,  resembling
small  boils,  appeared,  sometimes  painful,  and  when
touched  would  throw  him  into  a  spasm ;  febrile  symp-
toms increased  and  finally  assumed  a  typhoid  form.

I  I  Had  fallen  from  a  ladder  upon  back  of  his  head  ten
years  ago ;  three  days  after  fall,  an  epileptic  fit,  repeat-
ing ever  since  a\  intervals  from  five  days  to  six  weeks ;
before  each  fit  aura  from  hands  into  head;  fits  mostly
in  morning,  one  to  two  hours  after  rising;  on  days  of
attack  two  diarrhoeic  stools,  otherwise  stool  normal ;  after
fit  sour  taste  in  mouth  and  dejected  spirit;  during  well
time  every  morning  throbbing,  pressing  pain  in  front
of  liead ;  restless  sleep ;  in  air,  during  windy,  cold
weather,  jerkings  in  arm  and  about  mouth,  without  a


161  SULPHUR.

fit,  >  in  warm  room  ;  when  a  child  was  subject  to  scrof-
ulous eruptions;  grandmother  and  stepbrother  were
epileptic.

I  I  Epilepsy,  three  or  four  attacks  a  week;  general  health
and  strength  much  deteriorated,  cannot  walk  much,
memory  has  quite  failed  him,  has  become  partly  an
imbecile.

i  I  Epilepsy  of  five  years'  standing.

■  Epilepsy;  before  spell  crawling  and running as of  a

mouse  up  back  and  arms,  or  a  sudden  feeling  as  if  a
mouse  were  running  from  r.  foot  up  leg  to  r.  side  of  ab-
domen ;  after  attack,  which  consists  of  various  convul-
sive motions,  he  wipes  tears  from  his  eyes ;  soporous
sleep ;  great  exhaustion ;  jerking  in  arms  and  about
mouth  in  cold  air;  chronic  cases  of  psoric  taint;  sup-
pressed itch.

1  I'Paralysis  of  1.  leg ;  could  not  bear  to  have  head  raised
from  pillow;  constipation;  paralysis;  everything  ap-
pears dark  to  her;  sinking  sensation ;  lay  coiled  in  bed.

I  I  Involuntary  stool,  with  retention  of  urine  and  partial
paraplegia,  after  miscarriage.

Palsy,  from  repercussion  of  eruptions.

I  Rheumatic  paralysis.
^'' Sleep. I  Totally  disinclined  to  rise  from  bed  in  morning;
not  refreshed  by  sleep.

I  Sudden  jerking  of  limbs  when  going  to  sleep.

I  Child  kicks  clothes  off  at  night.

I  Yawning  and  sleepiness  during  day.

I  Dropsy  in  afternoon  and  after  sunset;  wakeful  at  night.

I I  Irresistible  drowsiness  in  daytime,  wakefulness  at  night.

■  Sleepiness  in  evening,  but  night  is  full  of  unrest,  tossing,

nervous  excitement,  orgasm  of  blood  ;  pains  of  various
kinds  and  but  little  sleep  throughaut  night.

■  Difficult ftiUing asleep: on account of  great flow of

thoughts;  with  inclination  to  perspire;  with  itching  on
skin.

■  Wakes  as  with  fright  from  a  fearful  dream,  and  after

waking  was  still  occupied  with  anxious  thoughts,  as  of
ghosts,  from  which  he  could  not  free  himself.

■  Anxious,  frightful  dreams  of  dead  and  dying;  speaks,

weeps  and  shouts  in  her  sleep,  so  as  to  wake  herself,  and
after  waking  remains  long  in  a  confused  state.

■  Much  sighing  and  groaning  in  sleep.

■  Sleeping  with  half-open  eyes.

■  Frequent  turning  over  in  bed  without  waking.

■  ■Wakes  up  at  3,  4  or  5  a.m.,  and  cannot  fall  asleep  again.

■  Screaming  out  in  sleep  ;  lamentation  and  moaning;  talks

loudly.

VOL.  X.— 11.


SULPHUE.  162

Dreams  of  fire  and  death.
llHeavy,  unrefreshing  sleep.

■  Jerks  and  twitches  during  sleep.

I  Awakes  with  a  start  or  scream.

■  Easily  awakened,  takes  short  naps.

I I  Finds  himself  in  night  lying  on  his  back.

I  Has  happy  dreams,  wakes  singing,  is  very  happy.

I I  Nightmare.

1 1  Dreams:  vivid,  anxious,  as  if  pursued  by  wild  beasts;
vivid,  comic,  with  loud  laughter,  continued  for  some
time  after  waking ;  vivid,  believing  she  sits  on  chamber
causes  her  to  wet  bed  ;  horrible,  with  great  palpitation;
that  he  has  been  bitten  by  a  dog;  that  he  is  falling.

I  I  About  an  hour  after  he  falls  asleep  he  suddenly  starts
up  and  screams ;  leaps  out  of  bed  and  runs  about  like
a  maniac;  wrings  hands,  sweats  profusely  and  trembles.

i  I  Crying  attacks  at  night  in  a  child  set.  8  months ;' would
have  to  be  carried  most  of  time;  cried  <  if  it  approached
fire ;  rubbing  head  seemed  to  quiet  it.

I  I  Aggravation  after  a  long-protracted  sleep ;  diarrhoea  and
fever,  <  after  sleep.
^^Tim©.  Morning:  dulness  of  head  with  pressure  in  forehead
until  noon ;  confusion  of  head ;  vertigo ;  after  rising,
headache;  throbbing  headache;  diarrhoea  early;  cold
feet ;  when  waking,  sensitiveness  of  vertex ;  on  waking,
lids  agglutinated;  pains  in  eyes  sharp  and  sticking;
photophobia  <  ;  sees  halo  around  artificial  light ;  dry-
ness of  eyes  following  lachrymation ;  burning  of  ej^es ;
burning  in  edges  of  lids ;  sensitiveness  of  eyelids ;  itch-
ing of  lids ;  lids  drawn  together  spasmodically ;  diar-
rhoea; taste  foul  and  bitter;  tongue  furred;  tongue  dry
mouth  sticky ;  nausea ;  vomiting ;  pain  in  stomach  <
fulness  and  tension  in  abdomen  ;  griping  before  stool
stools  undigested,  more  frequent ;  vomiting ;  dysentery
<  ;  on  passing  water,  flying  shoots  in  urethra ;  leucor-
rhoea  <  ;  sickness  of  pregnancy ;  hoarseness ;  irritation
of  throat;  stiffness  of  wrists ;  deadness  of  fingers;  shoot-
ing pain  in  hip  joint;  in  bed,  cramp  in  calves;  tensive
pain  in  foot;  tired,  not  rested  ;  epileptic  fits ;  in  bed,  dry
heat;  hot  head,  glowing  face;  sweat,  profuse  on  itching
parts;  sweat  during  sleep.

Toward  morning :  sweat.

3,  4  or  5  A.M.:  wakes,  cannot  fall  asleep  again.

5  A.M.:  painless  diarrhoea,  driving  out  of  bed.

6  or  7  A.M.:  sweat,  after  waking.

8  or  9  A.M.:  every  second  day,  febrile  attacks.

9  or  10  A.M.:  febrile  attacks,  posti)oning  ten  to  fifteen  min-
utes each  dav.


163  SULPHUR.

10  A.M. :  pain  at  1.  eyebrow  to  superciliary  ridge ;  feeling
of  hunger ;  faintish  feeling.

Between  10  and  11  a.m.  :  gone  feeling.

11a.m.:  weak,  empty,  gone  or  faint  feeling  in  stomach;
hungry  and  faint,  in  pregnancy.

Forenoon ;  confusion  of  head ;  children  feel  faint ;  sick
spells  in  pregnancy;  chilliness  with  suppuration  of
mammae  ;  chills,  followed  by  hectic.

Afternoon :  headache ;  lids  burning  with  flow  of  tears ;
pain  in  face  comes  on ;  heat,  with  suppuration  of
mammae;  weakness;  drowsy.

2  P.M.:  sharp  pain  in  eye.

At  3  P.M.:  nosebleed  with  vertigo.

All  day:  heartburn;  pulsating  pain  in  anus.

During  day  :  sad,  lachrymose  attacks  of  melancholy  for  a
few  moments;  hypochondriac  mood  ;  pressive  pain  over
eyebrows ;  headache  lasts ;  redness  of  eyes  ;  chilliness ;
could  not  see  anything  with  1.  eye ;  sleepy;  cold  feet;
drowsiness.

Toward  evening: febrile  heat.

From  6  to  8  p.m.  :  chilliness  in  back.

At  11  or  12  p.m.:  pain  in  face  comes  on.

Evening :  dulness  of  head ;  confusion  of  head  ;  morbid
ideas  <  ;  sudden  sadness ;  merry ;  anxiety  in  bed ;  tear-
ing in  vertex ;  pricking  across  forehead  ;  feet  hot ;  sen-
sitiveness of  scalp  <  ;  photophobia  <  ;  dull  aching  and
weight  in  eyeballs ;  itching  of  eyes  ;  pressure  in  lids ;
pressure  in  nasal  bone ;  pain  in  face  <  ;  toward,  fever;
throat  and  chest  painful;  nausea  during  stool;  vom-
iting ;  vomiting  of  food  eaten  at  noon ;  emission  of  flatus

<  ;  burning  in  anus ;  bloody  stools ;  stool  every  half
hour ;  stitches  in  rectum ;  crawling  in  rectum  as  from
worms ;  burning  in  anus;  hoarseness ;  cough  before  and
when  going  to  bed ;  shortness  of  breath  in  bed ;  asthma ;
burning  in  1.  side  <  ;  palpitation ;  pressive  pain  in  back ;
shooting  pains  in  hip  to  thigh ;  drawing  and  tearing
through  knees  and  tibia;  lassitude;  drowsiness;  chilli-
ness; in  bed,  burning  hot  feet;  sweat;  sweat,  most  on
hands  ;  in  bed,  itching  and  prickling  of  skin.

Before  midnight :  tearing  and  tension  in  nape  of  neck.

About  midnight:  typhoid  pneumonia  <.

Night:  dulness  of  head;  rush  of  blood  to  head;  violent
headache;  awaking  with  heat  and  anxiety;  throbbing
pain  in  head ;  pressive  pain  in  occiput;  headache  awoke
her ;  sick-headache  <  ;  pains  in  eyes  <  ;  restless  flrst
part ;  agglutination  of  lids ;  diarrhoea  and  tenesmus  <  ;
could  distingush  light  with  1.  eye ;  pain  in  side  of  head

<  ;  neuralgia  of  jaw  and  temples  <  ;  itching  < ;  in  bed.


SULPHUR.  164

toothache;  heat  in  mouth  and  much  thirst;  pressure  in
stomach,  with  palpitation ;  emission  of  flatus ;  griping
in  abdomen ;  pressure  downward  while  lying  in  bed ;
diarrhoea;  great  thirst;  vomiting;  dysenteric  stools;  itch-
ing in  anus ;  during  sleep,  discharge  of  liquid  feces;  fre-
quent micturition ;  wetting  the  bed;  must  rise  several
times  to  urinate;  profuse  sweat;  smarting  leucorrhoea
< ;  pain  in  nipple  < ;  asthma ;  feels  suffocated ;  dis-
tressing heat ;  dry,  hacking  cough  of  pneumonia  < ;
palpitation;  pain  in  shoulders;  pain  in  panaritium  <;
in  bed,  pain  in  knee  < ;  itching  eruption  on  hand  < ;
pains  in  limbs  <;  cramp  in  calves  and  soles;  weary
pain  in  calves;  pains  of  rheumatism  <;  wakefulness;
chilliness;  heat  over  whole  body;  sweat  about  knees,
all  over  body,  with  restless  sleep;  sweat  on  nape  and
occiput ;  itching  over  whole  body ;  burning  in  parts  on
which  he  lies;  itching,  has  to  walk  floor  nude.

After  midnight:  smarting  on  inner  side  of  lids;  pressure
in  stomach;  diarrhoea;  cholera  infantum  begins;  cholera
Asiatica  ;  copious  micturition  ;  until  2  a.m.  cough ;  pain
in  knee  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  ■  >  Wants  doors  and  windows
open. ^Asthma. ^Pneumonia.

■  Susceptibility  to  temperature;  warm  things  feel  hot.
^Cholera.

Indoors:  emptiness  in  occiput  >;  nose  stopped  up.

Slightest  atmospheric  variation  : <  chronic  bronchitis.

Open  air :  after  w^alking,  dulness  of  head ;  rush  of  blood
to  head  <  ;  vertigo ;  sudden  sadness ;  emptiness  in  occi-
put <  ;  head  symptoms  <  ;  walking,  pressure  in  eye-
balls; when  looking  sharp,  lachrymation ;  burning
coryza;  toothache  comes  on;  shortness  of  breath  <  wdien
w^alking;  chilliness  as  if  naked;  sweat  when  walking;
walking,  sticking  itching.

Warm  room :  rush  of  blood  to  head  >  ;  dejection  <  ;
headache  <  ;  eyes  dry.

Exposure  to  cold  draft  of  air  brings  on  attack  of  pain  in
fifth  pair  of  nerves.

Raw  air:  throat  and  chest  <.

Least  draft:  toothache.

Wishes  to  be  fanned  :  during  labor.

Warm  bed:  itching  in  chilblains  <.

Is  obliged  to  uncover  feet.

Feather  covering:  <  pains  in  limbs.

Warm  applications;  pulse  becomes  rapid.

Warm  food :  throbbing  pain  in  head  <  ;  is  agreeable  to
throat.

Warm  water :  washing  eyes  >  stinging  pain ;  <  pain
in  whitlow.


165  SULPHUR.

Warmth  :  headache  <  ;  pain  in  forehead  >  ;  of  bed,  deaf-
ness <  ;  pain  in  face  >  ;  of  bed  <  itching  of  scabies.

Cannot  remain  long  in  heated  place :  headache.

Heat:  boring  in  teeth  <;  dry  >  cutting  in  abdomen,
loins  and  sacrum  >  ;  itching  <  on  backs  of  hands  ;  <
pains  in  limbs;  of  stove  does  not  relieve  chilliness;  of
bed  <  itching.

Sun:  headache  <.

Sultry  weather:  stitches  in  eyes  <.

Aversion  to  bathing:  hemorrhoidal  tumors ;  children  suf-
fering from  enuresis.

Going  into  bath :  faint  feeling.

After  washing:  aching  in  forehead  >  ;  heat  rises  to  face;
eyes  first  >  then  <  ;  halo  around  light  removed  ;  ectro-
pium  or  entropium  <  ;  rhagades  <.

Dread  of  being  washed.

Objects  to  washing  out  ears.

Cold  water:  sprinkling,  >  pain  in  head;  sponging,  head-
ache >  ;  sore  pain  in  1.  eye  >,  toothache  <  ;  >  pain  in
end  of  finger  ;  >  pain  in  whitlow.

Cold  food  and  drink ;  throat  <.

Cold,  damp  weather:  cough  and  hoarseness  <.

Cold :  headache  >  ;  pain  in  face  <  ;  drink  causes  violent
stitches  through  teeth.

During  windy  cold  weather :  jerking  in  arm  and  about
mouth.

Damp  cold  weather:  sick  headache  < ;  swelling  and  caries
of  bones  of  cranium  <  ;  diarrhoea.

Before  a  storm  :  ulcer  on  leg  <.
^^^ Fever,  l Chilliness:  after  dinner;  at  night;  creeps  from
small  of  back  up  back,  from  6  to  8  p.m.  ;  with  headache,
in  evening ;  and  shivering  over  whole  body,  without
subsequent  heat,  or  thirst;  and  rigor,  with  blue  nails,  pale
face,  heavy,  giddy  head,  not  >  by  heat  of  stove,  but  by
lying  down  ;  in  open  air,  as  if  naked ;  shivering,  on
slightest  movement  in  bed ;  in  back,  in  evening  for  an
hour  without  subsequent  heat ;  constantly  creeps  from
sacrum  up  back,  without  subsequent  heat  or  thirst;
sometimes  >  by  warmth  of  stove ;  about  lower  part  of
body ;  every  evening  in  bed,  followed  by  heat  and  pro-
fuse perspiration ;  in  forenoon,  heat  with  cold  feet  in
afternoon.

Coldness  transient,  of  nose,  hands,  feet,  chest,  arms,  back
and  abdomen.

Hands  and  feet  very  cold,  with  livid,  pale  face.

1  Chill:  with  delirium;  begins  in  feet,  hands,  fingers  or
toes ;  mostly  internal  and  without  thirst,  generally  in
evening,  also  at  other times  of  day; external,  with


SULPHUR.  166

simultaneous  internal  heat  and  red  face ;  with  thirst,
preceded  by  heat ;  running  up  back.

I  Chill  and  fever:  no  reaction  ;  stupid,  sinking.

I I  Orgasm  of  blood  ;  frequent  flushes  of  heat.
Heat  of  face  every  evening  from  5  to  9.

I  Heat  and  burning  in  face.

■  Redness  and  heat  of  face  with  burning,  especially  about

mouth.
iGreat  heat  of  face  with  chilliness  over  back.

I I  Flushing  heat  in  face,  with  febrile  shivering  over
whole  body.

At  night  feeling  of  heat  over  whole  body,  especially  in

palms  of  hands.
I  I  Dry  heat  in  morning  in  bed.

I  Violent  dry  heat  in  head,  with  glowing  face  in  morning

on  waking.
llHeat  in  head:  prevents  falling  asleep;  in  morning;  in
evening,  with  cold  feet.

■  Burning  heat  of  palms  of  hands.

Dry  heat  in  thighs  and  small  of  back,  with  coldness  of
back.

■  Heat  of  feet,  with  a  burning  sensation  in  evening  in  bed,

so  that  she  was  obliged  to  uncover  them  for  several
hours ;  followed  by  uneasiness,  itching  and  crawling  in
them  ;  was  obliged  to  rub  them.

I I  Hot  flushes  with  spells  of  faintness,  or  passing  off  with
a  little  moisture,  faintness  or  debility.

Continued  dry  heat  or  coldness  and  cold  sweat.

iHeat:  afternoon  or  evening,  skin  dry,  much  thirst;  with
thirst ;  frequent  flushes  in  face,  with  shivering  sensation
over  body  ;  and  sinking  sensation  in  stomach;  burning
of  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet ;  and  redness  of  face
with  burning  in  single  parts,  as  on  malar  bones,  around
eyes,  nose,  ears  and  mouth ;  alternates  with  chilliness.

■  Sweat:  on  slightest  motion  ;  offensive,  in  axillge;  profuse,

between  fingers ;  of  hands ;  about  knees,  at  night ;  pro-
fuse in  morning  on  itching  parts;  always  after  waking
about  6  or  7  a.m.;  in  morning  during  sleep,  disappear-
ing on  waking;  in  evening  in  bed ;  at  night,  with  restless
sleep ;  at  night,  all  over  body ;  while  walking  in  open
air;  smelling  of  sulphur;  profuse,  sour-smelling  all
night;  in  evening,  mostly  on  hands  at  night, only  on  nape
and  occiput;  only  on  one  side  of  body ;  only  on  back
part  of  body.
I  I  Pulse  94;  great  weakness ;  no  appetite;  face  flushed;
mind  sluggish  and  depressed  ;  answers  questions  slowly
and  with  effort;  nights  restless;  fever  paroxysms  most
marked  in  evening,  with  much  thirst  at  night.  ^Con-
tinuous remittent  fever.


167  SULPHUR.

I  Fever  of  continuous,  remittent  type,  occurring  in  Autumn
and  Winter;  rigors  of  various  intensity  precede  heat,
never  follow  it ;  chills  remittent,  lasting  half  an  hour,
or  appear  in  paroxysms  for  a  whole  day,  accompanied  by
thirst;  heat,  also  in  paroxysms,  there  may  be  from  five  to
seven  in  a  day ;  pulse  from  130  to  160 ;  heat  most  intense
toward  evening  and  forepart  of  night,  with  sweat  after
midnight;  thirst  and  dryness  of  mouth,  >  by  small
quantities  of  water  frequently  repeated  ;  headache  and
restlessness  at  night ;  jaundiced  appearance  of  skin  and
dryness  of  tongue ;  craving  for  acids ;  typhoid  symp-
toms with  great  dulness  of  mind,  slowness  in  responding
to  questions.

I  I  Continued  fever,  no  sweat;  skin  hot  and  dry,  with  scal-
ing into  bed  ;  pulse  intermits  every  third  or  fourth  beat;
could  not  speak  a  word  from  debility,  but  nodded  his
head  in  answer  to  questions ;  ash-colored,  emaciated,
cadaveric  face ;  tried  to  find  a  cool  place  in  bed ;  urine
yellow,  color  of  sulphur  ;  violent  spells  of  loose  cough,
no  expectoration.

I  I  Boy,  set.  10,  sick  nineteen  days,  commencing  with  diar-
rhoea; unconscious  last  five  days;  pulse  135  to  140,
small,  hard  ;  no  eruption  ;  febrile  aggravations  very  in-
distinct, recognizable  only  by  periods  of  restlessness  and
screaming,  is  appeased  b}"  a  little  water ;  mouth  closed
and  jaw  rigid;  sordes  on  teeth  and  tongue;  stiffness  of
jaw  apparently  caused  by  inflammation  and  gangrenous
sloughing  of  buccal  mucous  membrane;  off'ensive  bloody
ichor  runs  from  corner  of  mouth.

I  I  Chronic  rheumatic  fever  with  heart  disease  and  mitral
regurgitation;  very  passive,  quiet  disposition;  no  swell-
ing or  redness ;  pain  on  moving,  but  afterward  >  by
movement.

I  Hectic :  febrile  heat  especially  toward  evening,  with  sharply
with  thirst ;  thin,  pale  face ;  dry  or  diarrhoeic  and  slimy
stools ;  short,  oppressed  breathing ;  palpitation  ;  sweat
toward  morning;  debility,  tired  feeling  in  limbs,  with
heaviness,  dry  cough,  etc.

I  I  Febrile  attacks  every  second  day  at  8  or  9  a.m.,  last  eight
or  nine  hours ;  cold  sweat  first,  then  heat ;  thirst,  with
heat  in  mouth,  both  stages ;  cold  stage  lasts  only  two
hours,  remainder  of  time  consumed  by  hot;  at  times
ver}^  violent  pains  in  back ;  is  very  weak ;  can  hardly
eat  anything ;  great  restlessness ;  perspires  much  at
night ;  has  taken  much  quinine. ^Ague.

I  I  For  two  years  shivering  fits  like  ague  every  three  or  four
weeks ;  attacks  last  three  or  four  hours ;  duration  of  cold


SULPHUR.  168

stage  depending  upon  way  in  which  he  wraps  up,  if
warmly  wrapped  it  lasts  an  hour;  if  not,  two  or  three
hours ;  this  is  succeeded  by  extraordinary  heat  of  entire
body,  but  no  sweat ;  when  attack  seizes  him,  he  piles
blankets  upon  himself  until  he  begins  to  get  warm,  he
then  becomes  sick,  and  vomits  contents  of  stomach  ;
there  follows  fearful  pain  in  head,  which  generally  con-
tinues two  or  three  days  after  paroxysm  has  ceased.
/9Ague.

M  Intermittent  fever  of  long  duration,  repeated  attacks,
suppressed  by  large  doses  of  quinine,  with  much  detri-
ment to  an  already  broken-down  constitution ;  very
weak  and  emaciated ;  violent  burning  in  palms  of  hands
*  and  soles  of  feet ;  burning  heat  on  vertex  ;  marked  ven-
osity  of  hands.

I  I  Intermittent  fever  a  month  after  passing  through  a  stage
of  bilious  fever ;  had  two  paroxysms,  tertian ;  severe
gastrosis,  that  nothing  could  allay  ;  diarrhoea  driving
liim  out  of  bed  early  in  morning.

J  I  Obstinate  case  of  intermittent  fever,  characterized  by  hot
flushes  and  hot  soles  at  night ;  massive  doses  of  quinine
had  failed  even  to  suppress  paroxysms;  loss  of  health
and  flesh.

1  I A  boy,  set.  8;  for  three  days  chill  beginning  in  belly,
then  going  around  to  back  and  all  over  body,  six  times
a  day ;  for  one  day,  cold  feeling  on  r.  side  of  head,  which
quickly  rises  to  vertex,  making  hair  on  vertex  feel  as  if
it  stood  on  end.

1  Patient  partiall}^  recovers,  and  then  relapses;  chronic
cases;  enlarged  spleen;  constitutional  symptoms;  no  re-
action ;  stupid,  constantly  sinking.

I  I  Appears  particularly  dull  and  forgetful,  cannot  remem-
ber what  he  was  about  to  say,  is  very  slow  to  answer,
it  requires  some  effort  to  rouse  him;  lies  in  a  dull,
stupid  state,  with  muttering  delirium,  talking  incohe-
rently. ^Typhoid  fever.

iTyphoid  fever  in  psoric  individuals;  well-selected  remedy
has  no  effect;  sleepless  nights;  slow  comprehension;
heat  and  fulness  in  head;  sore  and  inflamed  eyelids;
dryness  of  ears;  pale,  sickly  aspect;  bright,  red  lips;
undefined  redness  on  tip  of  tongue ;  bleeding  from  nose,
teeth  and  gums;  offensive  smell  from  mouth;  diarrhoea,
<  early  in  morning,  unpainful  or  with  tenesmus;  great
prostration  after  stool ;  offensive  urine  ;  catarrh  and  in-
flammation of  lungs,  especially  during  commencement
of  infiltration,  recognizable  by  crepitation  sound.
^Typhoid  fever.

■  Yellow fever: melancholic; fearful; undecided;  sad;


169  SULPHUR.

.  absentminded  ;  dizziness  ;  headache ;  face  pale  or  yel-
lowish ;  eyes  red,  or  yellowish  ;  itching  and  burning  in
eyes ;  noises  in  ears ;  tongue  dry,  red,  or  with  white  or
brown  coating ;  aphthae  in  mouth ;  nausea  with  trem-
bling and  weakness ;  vomiting  of  sour,  bilious,  or  bloody
and  black  masses ;  pressure  in  stomach ;  pain  in  back
and  loins.

1  I  Febrile  attacks  every  morning  about  9  or  10,  generally
ten  to  fifteen  minutes  later  each  day;  tremendous  shiv-
ering and  chill  lasting  ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  shortened
by  rolling  up  in  blankets ;  hot  stage  lasts  two  hours,
followed  by  sweat;  with  heat,  thirst,  vertigo,  and  peculiar
cough,  he  coughs  twice,  and  twice  only,  a  heavy  strain-
ing cough,  which  strains  pit  of  chest,  and  a  light  hack-
ing cough,  which  seems  to  come  from  pit  of  chest ;  sweat
lasts  half  an  hour,  is  not  free,  depends  upon  amount  of
covering;  thirst  greater  during  heat  than  sweat;  parox-
ysm ends  about  4  o'clock,  followed  by  complete  prostra-
tion ;  bowels  sometimes  confined,  sometimes  diarrhoea,
latter  generally  after  breakfast;  at  times  stools  undi-
gested. ^Chagres  fever.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. ■  ■  Complaints  continually  relapsing.

Alternate :  pale  and  red  cheeks ;  diarrhoea  and  constipa-
tion ;  asthma,  or  gout,  and  skin  eruptions.

Periodical:  neuralgia;  stinging  in  back  with  asthma.

In  paroxysms  :  pain  in  knee.

Climacteric  period:  hot  flushes;  goneness  in  stomach.

I  or  2  A.M.:  cannot  sleep  ;  headache.
Every  morning :  pain  over  eyes.

9  A.M. :  severe  pain  in  forehead  with  heat,  increasing  until
midday,  disappearing  at  4  p.m.;  after  rising  headache
begins;  empty  eructations;  thin  stool.

10  A.M.,  sometimes  6  a.m.:  pain  in  head  comes  on,  lasting
an  hour;  pain  at  eyebrow  and  superciliary  ridge,  reaches
its  height  about  midday.

II  A.M.:  regularly,  child  was  faint.

About  noon  :  pain  comes  on  and  lasts  till  evening.
Beginning  afternoon  :  pain  in  face  lasts  three  or  four  hours,

returns  late  at  night  continuing  till  1  a.m.,  comes  again

morning  and  disappears  before  afternoon.
Prom  2  to  5  p.m.:  pain  over  1.  eye  gradually  increasing

and  decreasing.
About  5  P.M. :  pain  in  fifth  pair  of  nerves,  last  three  or  four

days.
5  or  6  P.M. :  headache  at  acme,  continues  violent  until  2

A.M.,  quits  instantaneously.
5  to  9  P.M. :  heat  of  face.
9p.m.:  pain in  head  commences,  < till about  3  a.m.;

also  comes  on  at  breakfast  and  lasts  till  4  p.m.


SULPHUE.  17a

11  P.M.  until  7  A.M. :  pain  in  knees,  ankles  and  elbows.

Every  evening :  biting  of  eyes  and  laclirymation.

10  P.M.  to  1  A.M.:  diarrhoea  <.

From  morning  until  night :  desire  for  alcoholic  drinks.

During  day  :  weak,  faint  spells.

Every  da}^ :  pain  as  if  head  would  burst ;  severe  tear-
ing in  frontal  region ;  neuralgic  headache  comes  on  at
noon  and  lasts  until  evening;  at  11  a.m.  exhausted  feel-
ing at  epigastrium.

Every  night:  headache;  at  regular  hours  neuralgia  of  jaw
and  temple,  lasting  one  and  a  half  hours ;  violent  diar-
rhoea; sweat.

Every  ten  to  twenty  minutes :  awoke  from  soporous  sleep
with  screams.

Every  half  hour :  stools,  in  evening.

Several  times  during  day  :  burning  in  throat.

In  twenty-four  hours :  five  or  ten  bloody  stools.

Every  two  hours :  paroxysms  of  heat.

Every  twenty-four  hours  :  intermittent  neuralgia  <,  gen-
erally at  12  M.  or  12  p.m.

Twenty-three  fits  in  one  night:  epilepsy.

Twelve  to  twenty -four  times  a  day  :  efforts  to  urinate.

Every  second  day  :  febrile  attacks.

Every  two  or  three  days  :  paroxysms  of  headache.

Every  third  night :  pain  in  side  <  ;  neuralgia  of  chest.

Three  or  four  attacks  a  week  :  epilepsy.

Every  seventh  day  :  headache ;  head  symptoms  <  ;  dis-
charge from  ears.

Every  eight  days :  asthma.

Every  three  or  four  weeks :  attacks  of  headache ;  fits  of
ague,  for  two  years.

Every  four  to  six  weeks :  vesicular  eruption.

At  intervals :  three  to  six  months,  epileptic  fits ;  from  five-
days  to  six  weeks,  epileptic  fits.

Lasting  half  an  hour  :  remittent  chills.

For  seven  hours:  after  stool,  aching  in  coccyx  and  sacrum^
with  hemorrhoids.

For  two  days:  pain  in  side  of  face,  comes  in  evening,  lasts-
all  night,  >  toward  morning.

For  three  days  :  chills,  six  times  a  day.

For  several  days :  pain  over  lower  jaw.

For  seven  days :  nosebleed.

For  twelve  days:  ophthalmia  and  diarrhoea.

Once  a  week  :  sick-headache.

Every  two  weeks :  sick-headache.

For  three  weeks:  prolapsus  of  rectum.

For  six  or  eight  weeks:  total  blindness.

A  fortnight  before  menses :  leucorrhoea.


171


SULPHUR.


For  four  weeks :  watery  diarrhoea.

For  seven  weeks  :  dry  cough  at  night;  constant  backache.
For  two  months :  pricking  pain  across  forehead.
For  three  months :  pain  in  r.  side  of  face  and  head  ;  itch-
ing of  face  and  scalp.
For  four  months :  menses  suppressed ;  cough,  with  salty

expectoration.
For  ten  months :  menses  suppressed.
For  a  year  :  menses  suppressed.
Eighteen  months :  diarrhoea.
A  year  and  a  half  ago  :  mentagra.

For  two  years :  severe  headache ;  eruption  on  scalp ;  passes

blood  with  stool ;  nocturnal  enuresis  ;  cough,  following

pleurisy  ;  not  able  to  wear  boot  on  account  of  corns,  and

frostbite ;  ague  fits  every  three  or  four  weeks.

For  three  years :  headache,  symptoms  <  till  midsummer,

then  >;  dimness  of  vision  ;  eczema.
For  several  years :  eczema  impetigenoides ;  a  hard  swelling

in  abdomen  ;  hydrocele  ;  constant  backache.
For  many  years:  attacks  of  conjunctivitis  lasting  three

months ;  attacks  of  arthritic  ophthalmia.
Of  five  years'  standing  :  epilepsy.

Since  seven  years :  eruption  on  head,  keratitis  pustulosa.
In  nine  years  :  five  whitlows.
For  ten  years :  has  had  otorrhoea  from  both  ears.
Fifteen  years'  standing :  inflammation  of  liver.
For  ten  vears :  gleet.

Eleven  years  ago  :  scarlatina,  gradually  losing  hearing.
Every  eighth  year  of  her  life  in  months  of  January  or

February  :  attacks  of  scrofulous  ophthalmia.
Every  Summer :  eruption  on  hand.
Midsummer:  neuralgia  <.
In  Autumn :  remittent  fever.
Midwinter:  neuralgia  <.

Winter :  headache  < ;  ulcer  on  leg  >  ;  remittent  fever.
'Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  pain  in  side  of  occiput;
pulsating  in  side  of  occiput;  pain  in  inner  point  of  eye-
brow ;  lachrymation ;  headache  begins  on  side ;  severe
pains  about  eye,  leave  suddenly  and  appear  about  ovary ;
headache  apt  to  commence  in  side ;  swelling  and  sore-
ness of  side  of  cervical  spine;  deafness;  thick  crust  on
head  ;  tearing  pain  in  side  of  forehead ;  neuralgia  in
head  <  side ;  blindness ;  dimness  of  vision  ;  like  knives
in  eye ;  sore  pain  in  eye ;  shooting  beneath  lids ;  vio-
lent pain  in  eye ;  shooting  in  eye ;  eye  agglutinated ;
sclerotic  of  eye ;  could  not  see  anything  by  day ;  whole
eye  seems  to  have  grown  larger;  deafness;  somethnig
seems  to  have  come  before  ear ;  itching  in  ear ;  upper  lid


SULPHUR.  172

covered  with  crusts ;  discharge  <  from  ear ;  pain  in
fifth  pair  of  nerves;  stabbing  beneath  zygoma;  pain
extending  up  side  of  face;  drawing  jerking  in  lower
jaw;  aphthse  on  lower  lip ;  tearing  toothache;  enlarge-
ment of  tonsil;  pain  from  back  of  neck  into  ear;  pain
in  pelvis  to  foot ;  side  of  chest,  shooting ;  stitching  pain
in  side  of  chest ;  pain  over  eye ;  wind  accumulates  in
side ;  partial  paralysis  of  face ;  painful  sticking  in  hypo-
chondrium ;  stitches  in  side  of  abdomen ;  incarcerated
flatulence  ;  belly  swollen  ;  thrusts  in  chest  toward  heart;
stitches  through  chest  into  scapula;  burning  pain  in
side ;  severe  acute  pain  deep  in  lung ;  pneumonia  >
lying  on  side;  pleuritic  exudation,  thorax  perforated
near  nipple ;  dulness  in  apex  of  lung ;  cavity  in  lung ;
tearing  and  tension  in  neck  ;  ulcer  on  shoulder  after
removing  a  mole;  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder;  erysi-
pelas under  elbow;  panaritium  in  index  finger;  draw-
ing pain  in  hip ;  bruised  or  luxated  feeling  in  hip ;  knee,
shooting  pains  ;  sprained  feeling  in  knee ;  tensive  pain
in  hip ;  boring  pain  in  leg ;  sprained  pain  in  ankle  ;
ulcer  on  leg ;  cutting  pains  in  great  toe ;  paralysis  of
leg;  sleeps  best  lying  on.

After  removal  of  1.  eye,  sympathetic  irritation  of  right.

Right :  pain  above  eye ;  pain  over  eyeball  to  occiput ;  tu-
mor on  side  of  occipital  bone ;  beginning  of  cataract ;
drooping  of  lid ;  partial  ptosis ;  knifelike  stitches  in
eye;  severe  cutting  in  eye;  conjunctiva  injected  and
inflamed;  paresis  of  nervous  abducens;  surging  noise
in  ear ;  pressure  in  nasal  bone ;  stinging,  beginning  on
side  of  nose ;  darting  pain  in  knee ;  tearing  pain  in  half
of  face ;  pains  in  infraorbital  region  ;  sight  of  eye  dim  ;
pain  in  temple ;  severe  pain  side  of  head ;  erysipelas
begins  at  ear;  abscess  of  gums;  submaxillary  glands
swollen  and  painful ;  on  anterior  border  of  tongue  hard
raised  spot ;  smarting  blister  on  side  of  tongue ;  sting-
ing aching  pains  in  side,  felt  like  lump  of  ice  in  chest;
swelling  in  breast  as  large  as  a  hen's  egg;  stitches  in
chest;  stitch  from  chest  into  scapula;  shattering  stitches
in  chest;  dyspnoea,  when  lying  on  it;  stitches  in  side;
stitches  beneath  axilla;  scabs  on  arm  ;  pain  in  middle
finger  ;  shooting  in  hip  joint;  dull  pain  in  hip  to  knee  ;
knee,  white  swelling;  knee,  doughy  swelling;  stitches
from  knee  to  toes;  enlarged  vein  in  calf;  ulcer  on  inner
side  of  ankle;  foot  and  inner  malleolus  swollen;  ten-
sive pain  in  foot;  stitches  in  ball  of  foot;  sticking  crawl-
ing in  lieel;  from  foot  up  leg,  running  as  of  a  mouse,
epilepsy ;  cold  feeling  on  head,  rises  to  vertex ;  muscu-
lar swelling  aftei'  measles.


173  SULPHUR.

From  1.  to  r.:  pain  in  temple.

flight  to  1.:  sore  throat;  pain  from  hypochondrium  to
stomach.

From  within  outward  :  stitches  in  forehead  and  temples.

From  above  downward :  tearing  pain  in  limbs.

Only  on  one  side  of  body  :  sweat.

Only  on  back  part  of  body :  sweat.

Migrating:  erysipelas.
^^  Sensations. As  if  a  band  were  bound  tightly  around  fore-
head; vertigo  as  if  swinging;  as  if  bed  w^ere  not  large
enough  to  hold  him ;  as  if  one  stood  on  wavering  ground ;
as  if  hair  on  vertex  stood  on  end ; as  from  a  weight
pressing  upon  top  of  brain,  and  a  cord  tied  around  head  ;
as  if  brain  were  beating  against  skull;  as  if  eyes  were
pressed  down ;  as  if  he  had  taken  too  much  alcoholic
drink ;  forehead  as  if  screwed  together ;  as  if  hair  would
be  torn  out ;  as  if  head  would  burst ;  as  if  head  were  en-
larged ;  as  if  she  would sneeze ;  as  if  head  had  been
beaten ;  as  if  top  of  head  were  being  pressed  against
wall ;  as  of  a  band  around  cranium ;  as  if  flesh  of  scalp
were  loose ;  as  if  cornea  had  lost  its  transparency ;  as  if
eye  were  gone,  and  a  cool  wind  blew  out  of  socket;  as
if  eyes  had  been  punctured;  as  of  sand  in  eyes;  small
of  back  as  if  beaten  ;  as  if  a  needle  or  splinter  were  stick-
ing in  eye ;  as  of  a  foreign  body  ;  as  if  a  thick  veil  were
before  eyes ;  as  if  eyeballs  were  dry;  as  if  balls  rubbed
against  lids ;  as  if  eye  were  rubbed  against  spiculse  of
glass ;  occiput  as  if  hollow ;  as  if  salt  were  in  eyes ;  cor-
nea as  if  covered  with  fine  dust ;  as  if  eyelids  would  be-
come inflamed  ;  as  if  sounds  did  not  come  through  ears
but  forehead  ;  as  of  water  in  ears ;  as  if  nose  were  swelled ;
nostrils  as  if  sore ;  as  if  lower  jaw  would  be  torn  out ;  as
if  scalp  had  been  beaten ;  as  if  air  just  in  front  of  her
were  hot ;  teeth  as  if  too  long  ;  as  of  a  hot  iron  in  teeth  ;
as  of  a  hard  ball  rising  in  throat ;  as  if  swallowing  a
piece  of  meat ;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat ;  as  if  tonsils  were
swollen;  as  of  a  hair  in  throat;  as  if  throat  were  too
narrow^ ;  stomach  as  if  puffed  up ;  intestines  feel  as  if
strung  in  knots;  as  if  hernia  would  form;  as  if  muscles
of  abdomen  and  peritoneum  had  been  bruised ;  abdomen
as  if  raw;  as  if  bowels  were  too  weak  to  retain  their  con-
tents ;  as  if  stool  were  insufficient ;  as  if  wind  would  pass ;
as  if  stomach  were  torn  with  pincers ;  as  of  a  lump  of  ice
r.  chest;  as  if  obliged  to  urinate,  in  urethra;  as  of  ice  in
in  chest ;  as  of  something  in  larynx ;  as  if  lungs  came  in
contact  with  back ;  as  if  strained  in  chest ;  as  if  he  had
fallen  upon  chest ;  as  if  chest  would  fly  to  pieces  when
coughing  or  drawing  a  deep  breath ;  as  if  heart  were


SULPHUR.  174

enlarged ;  as  if  muscles  of  neck  and  back  were  too  short ;
as  if  vertebra  were  gliding  one  over  the  other ;  a  breeze
of  pain  in  head  ;  1.  shoulder  and  hip  as  if  luxated  ;  like
a  weight  in  shoulder ;  as  if  something  heavy  were  hang-
ing on  upper  arm ;  arms  as  if  beaten ;  as  of  a  mouse
running  up  arms  and  back ;  thigh  as  if  broken ;  as  if
too  short  in  popliteal  region ;  skin  as  if  denuded  and
sore.

Pain  :  in  epigastrium ;  inner  point  of  1.  eyebrow  to  super-
ciliary ridge,  appears  to  be  in  brain ;  in  forehead  and
vertex  ;  leaves  eye  and  appears  about  1.  ovary ;  from  1.
temple  to  r.,  over  r.  eyeball  to  occiput ;  from  superior
portion  of  sternum  through  to  back  ;  in  hips  and  back ;
in  stomach  and  abdomen;  in  nose;  in  scalp;  in  r.
side  of  face  and  head;  centres  in  r.  temple;  all  over
lower  jaw ;  in  chest ;  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  to  chest
under  sternum  ;  in  back  opposite  stomach ;  above  1.  eye ;
in  abdomen ;  in  pit  of  stomach  and  r.  hypochondrium  ;
in  belly ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;  from  ovarian  region  to
back  ;  in  sternum ;  in  thorax ;  in  loins ;  in  corns.

Violent  pain :  in  shoulders  flying  to  head  ;  in  1.  eye ;  in
stomach.

Severe  pain :  around  back  of  eye ;  in  r.  side  of  head ;  in
lower  abdomen.

Severe  cutting :  in  r.  eye.

Cutting  pains :  in  abdomen  ;  loins  and  sacrum ;  in  urethra;
in  vesical  region;  in  chest;  about  heart;  in  great  toe.

Lacerating  pain :  in  head ;  in  shoulders  and  shoulder
joints.

Splitting  pain:  in  head;  in  nipples;  in  chest;  of  skin.

Lancinating  pain:  in  ears;  from  anus  upward.

Piercing  pain  :  in  sacrum.

Darting  pains :  severe,  in  and  about  1.  eye  to  ear ;  through
eyes ;  through  temples ;  in  r.  knee ;  from  r.  inner  mal-
leolus toward  knee  and  toes.

Sharp  stabbing  pains :  below  1.  zygoma.

Shattering  stitches :  into  r.  chest.

Violent  stitches :  through  teeth;  in  parotid  glands.

Stitching  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  ears;  in  growths  in  nose ;  in
lower  jaw;  in  1.  side  of  chest;  in  urethra;  in  corns;  in
chilblains.

Stitches:  out  at  eyes;  in  r.  eye;  in  ears;  in  throat;  in
stomach  ;  in  spleen  ;  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  ;  in  rectum ;
in  anus  ;  in  urethra ;  in  testicles  ;  in  penis ;  in  1.  side ;
in  r.  side  of  chest  through  to  scapula;  in  sternum;  in  r.
side ;  in  region  of  heart ;  in  nape  of  neck ;  in  cervical
muscles;  in  and  beneath  scapula;  in  small  of  back ;
pulsating,  in  loins  and  kidneys; from  shoulders  into


175  SULPHUR.

chest;  beneath  r.  axilla;  in  tips  of  fingers;  in  pana-
ritium ;  in  knees ;  in  r.  knee  to  toes ;  in  sciatic  region ;
in  ball  of  r.  foot.

Needlelike  stitches :  in  submaxillary  glands.

Fine  burning  stitches :  in  hepatic  region.

Sharp  sticking  pains :  in  eyes.

Sticking :  in  temples ;  in  teeth  ;  in  1.  hypochondrium ;  in
rectum ;  in  anus ;  in  sternum  ;  in  bones  of  small  of  back ;
as  of  splinter  in  r.  middle  finger ;  like  a  brier  in  end  of
finger  ;  in  r.  heel ;  itching  when  walking  in  open  air.

Soreness :  of  1.  side  of  cervical  spine ;  of  brain ;  of  nostrils ;
of  throat ;  in  hypochondria ;  in  intestines ;  in  abdominal
walls;  in  anus;  in  hemorrhoids;  of  scrotum ;  between
thighs;  in  vagina;  in  great  toe.

Stinging  pain  :  in  eye;  in  1.  ear;  in  ears;  from  r.  side  of
nose  to  forehead ;  in  r.  side ;  in  anus ;  of  nipples ;  in
chest ;  in  end  of  finger  ;  in  ulcer  on  1.  leg.

Boring :  on  top  of  head  ;  above  root  of  nose ;  in  teeth  ;  in
panaritium  ;  in  1.  leg  ;  in  corns  ;  in  chilblains.

Shooting:  in  temples;  in  1.  eye;  above  eye;  in  ears;  up
to  eyes;  in  tongue;  from  back  of  neck  into  1.  ear;  from
centre  of  chest  to  between  scapulae ;  in  anus ;  in  urethra;
in  gonorrhoea;  through  1.  chest  to  back;  1.  lower  rib  to
back  ;  in  chest  through  to  back  ;  in  r.  hip  through  pel-
vis, down  femur,  into  foot;  from  hip  to  upper  third  of
thigh  ;  in  1.  knee  ;  in  1.  great  toe  ;  at  root  of  nail  of  great
toe.

Frequent  shoots :  in  splenic  region.

Pricking  pain  :  across  forehead;  in  eye;  in  cheek.

Prickling :  of  eyelids  ;  in  tips  of  fingers ;  in  balls  of  feet.

Tearing  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  forehead  ;  in  vertex ;  in  fore-
head and  temples;  in  eyes  ;  in  1.  side  of  head ;  in  1.  ear;
in  r.  half  of  face ;  in  malar  bone  ;  in  lower  jaw ;  in  teeth;
in  intestines  ;  in  rectum  and  anus ;  in  1.  side  of  nape  ;
in  arms  and  hands;  through  knees  and  tibia ;  in  lower
extremities ;  in  feet.

Jerking  pain  :  in  head  ;  about  hip  joint.

Drawing  pain  :  around  eye  ;  in  teeth ;  during  menses ;
along  ureters;  in  nape  of  neck  and  scapulae;  in  shoulder,
arms  and  hands;  in  1.  hip;  in  thighs;  through  knees
and  tibia  ;  in  lower  extremities ;  in  feet ;  from  feet  to
hips.

Drawing :  through  head  ;  in  larynx ;  in  sciatic  region.

Drawing  jerking:  in  lower  jaw.

Sharp  pain  :  in  stump  ;  in  eye.

Pain  like  a  rivet :  through  upper  third  of  1.  lung  to
scapula.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  r.  infraorbital  region ;  down


SU.T;PHUR.  176

back  of  head  and  on  both  side  and  back  of  head ;  in
thoracic  and  abdominal  walls  from  back  ;  of  liver.

Jumping  pain :  in  hollow  tooth  to  lower  jaw  or  to  ear.

Spasmodic  pain  :  in  hypogastrium.

Spasmodic  constricting  pain  :  to  chest,  groin  and  genitals.

Twisting  pains  :  in  abdomen.

Griping :  about  navel.

Pinching :  from  one  temple  to  other.

Crampy  pain :  in  stomach ;  in  chest ;  in  middle  finger ;
of  hip  joint.

Cramps  :  in  legs  ;  in  thighs  ;  in  calves  and  soles  ;  in  toes.

Contractive  sensation  :  in  middle  of  pharynx.

Sprained  pain:  in  back;  in  1.  shoulder;  in  wrist;  in  thumb ;
in  1.  knee  ;  in  1,  ankle.

Burning  shooting  :  beneath  lids  of  1.  eye.

Cutting  burning :  in  eyelids  ;  in  urethra.

Burning  pain  :  in  eyes;  on  margin  of  lower  lip ;  on  tongue ;
in  vesicles  in  mouth ;  in  vertex;  in  gonorrhoea;  excoria-
tions on  genitals ;  of  vulva ;  of  nipples ;  around  1.  side
below  heart.

Burning:  on  vertex;  in  forehead;  in  palms;  of  eyes;  of
lids ;  in  septum  of  nose ;  in  nostrils ;  in  face  and
throat;  of  eczema;  in  fauces;  in  pharynx;  in  stomach
in  abdomen;  in  urethra;  in  anus;  in  hemorrhoids;  of
prepuce;  between  scapulae;  of  hands;  in  balls  and  tips
of  fingers;  in  end  of  finger;  in  knee;  in  feet,  particu-
larly at  night;  in  soles;  in  corns;  in  chilblains;  in  skin
of  whole  body,  and  in  parts  on  which  he  lies  ;  in  hands
and  feet.

Burning  heat:  in  eyes.

Biting:  of  eyes;  in  rectum.

Smarting:  of  eyes;  in  external  canthi;  of  eyelids;  of  hem-
orrhoids; of  vulva;  inchest.

Sore  pain:  in  1.  eye;  in  oral  commissures;  in  whole  abdo-
men.

Rawness:  of  throat;  of  fauces.

Bruised  pain:  in  abdomen;  in  back  ;  in  small  of  back  and
coccyx;  in  1.  shoulder;  in  1.  hip;  in  thighs;  in  sciatic
region;  in  lower  extremities.

Constricting  pain:  in  region  of  stomach;  about  navel.

Bursting  pain  :  in  chest,  when  coughing.

Gnawing  pain:  in  small  of  back.

Rheumatic  pains  :  transient,  through  body  ;  in  shoulders.

Tensive  pain  :  in  head;  through  eye;  in  anus  and  small
of  back  ;  between  scapulae;  in  hip  joint;  in  r.  foot.

Dull  pain :  in  hepatic  region ;  in  r.  hip  to  knee.

Dulness:  of  head.

Dull  aching:  in  jaws.


177  ■  SULPHUR.

Aching:  in  occiput;  in  forehead;  in  eyeballs;  of  eyes;  in
oesophagus;  in  r.  side;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  dull,  in  cocc3'x
and  sacrum  ;  in  sternum  ;  in  feet.

Looseness:  painful,  of  teeth.

Hammering  pain  :  in  head.

Throbbing  pain:  in  head  ;  in  crown  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  gums;
in  rectum  ;  in  anus;  in  hemorrhoids  ;  in  panaritium.

Pulsating:  in  1.  side  of  occiput;  in  teeth.

Pressive  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  from  one  temple  to  another  ;
in  vertex;  over  eyebrows;  through  eye;  in  ears;  in
teeth  ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  beneath  scapulae ;  in  great
toe.

Bearing-down  pain :  from  small  of  back  to  anus ;  in  pel-
vis toward  genitals.

Numbing  pain:  in  head.

Stupefying  pain  :  in  head.

Lameness :  in  thighs.

Numbness  :  of  fingers.

Roughness :  in  throat.

Fulness :  in  forehead ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  region
of  liver ;  across  stomach ;  in  abdomen ;  in  rectum ;  in
chest.

Heaviness :  in  head ;  in  forehead ;  of  eyes ;  in  stomach  ;
in  chest;  in  humeri;  of  feet  and  ankles.

Weight :  in  eyeballs ;  in  abdomen.

Pressure :  in  forehead  ;  out  at  eyes ;  in  eyeballs  ;  on  top  of
head ;  in  ears ;  in  r.  nasal  bone ;  in  malar  bone,  and
beneath  eye;  in  stomach;  in  region  of  liver;  in  umbili-
cal region ;  in  rectum  ;  upon  bladder ;  in  testicles  and
spermatic  cord;  in  chest;  beneath  sternum  ;  cramplike,
in  hollow  of  knee  to  ankles ;  in  1.  patella  and  knee  joint.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Suffocating  weight:  on  stomach.

Constriction:  inchest;  of  air  passages.

Tightness :  in  chest.

Stiffness:  in  back  and  hips;  of  wrists;  in  knees.

Tension  :  in  testicles  and  spermatic  cords ;  in  chest ;  in  1.
side  of  nape ;  in  humeri ;  in  sacrum ;  in  hollows  of  knees  ;
in  umbilical  region ;  in  abdomen ;  of  abdominal  muscles.

Jerking  pressure:  in  deltoid.

Bursting  full  sensation :  in  face,  with  Rhus  poisoning.

Undulating  feeling:  in  ears.

Empty  feeling :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Weakness :  in  genital  organs ;  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  chest.

Faintish  feeling :  pit  of  stomach.

Tremulous  sensation  :  in  hands.

Itching :  of  pimples  on  scalp  ;  of  scalp ;  around  back  of
eye;  in  internal  canthi;  of  eyes;  of  eyelids;  in  eyebrows;

VOL.  X.— 12.


SULPHUR.  •  178

in  Lear;  in  external  ears ;  in  nostrils;  efface;  of  scalp;
in  abdomen ;  in  anus  and  rectum  ;  in  perineum  ;  in
urethra;  of  prepuce;  on  glans  penis;  of  vulva  ;  of  nip-
ples; in  swelling  of  r.  breast;  in  larynx;  in  bronchi;  of
toes;  of  chilblains  ;  and  burning  of  hives;  of  eczema.

Itching  pain  :  through  e3'e ;  about  navel.

Tickling:  in  larynx.

Tingling:  painful,  on  vertex  and  temples;  in  ears ;  itch-
ing in  scabies.

Crawling :  in  nose;  in  hands ;  in  tips  of  fingers ;  in  r.  heel ;
in  rectum.

Formication:  in  rectum  ;  over  skin  of  whole  body.

Heat:  on  crown  of  head  ;  of  mouth  ;  on  vertex  and  down
back  of  neck;  in  mouth;  in  anus;  of  face,  bands  and
feet.

Coldness:  of  hands;  of  feet;  in  throat;  in  centre  of  chest;
in  chest;  of  feet  and  soles;  on  r.  side  of  head.

Cool  feeling:  on  vertex.

Dryness:  of  lids;  of  eyes;  of  inner  surface  of  eyelids;  of
nose;  of  palate;  of  throat.
*'  Tissues. 'Dry,  flabby  skin.

•  Scrofulous  and  rickety  complaints;  face  has  an  old  look.

I  Emaciation  of  children,  face  has  a  very  old  look ;  atrophy ;

marasmus.

I I  Offensive  odor  of  body  despite  frec[uent  washing;  averse
to  washing.

1 1  Does  not  walk  erect;  stoops  or  bends  over  forward  in
walkingor  sitting;  standing  is  most  disagreeable  position.

■  Defective  assimilation  and  derangement  of  sympatheticus.

■  Debility  of  children  ;  complexion  dark,  muscular  system

flabby,  hair  long  and  lank,  skin  moist.

■  Bad  effects  of  vaccination.

■  Serous  exudations; paralysis; difficulty  in  learning  to

walk ;  venous  engorgement.

I  I  Face  pale  and  bloodless;  ears  and  lips  white;  easily
fatigued,  cannot  walk  far;  moving  arms  wearies  her
very  much  ;  menses  delayed,  scanty,  of  short  duration;
during  menses,  swelling  of  face,  abdomen  and  legs,  also
pain  in  back  and  uterine  region  ;  sleep  disturbed,  unre-
freshing;  unpleasant  dreams;  awakes  with  exclama-
tions, falls  asleep  again  and  has  more  frightful  dreams;
jerking  in  limbs  at  night,  and  frequent  cramps  in  legs;
face  bloated  in  morning ;  cannot  wait  for  her  food,  espe-
cially in  morning;  a  little  food  causes  sense  of  fulness
in  stomach  ;  <  in  morning,  after  eating,  during  motion,
during  menses,  when  left  alone;  >  in  open  air;  sleeps
best  lying  on  1.  side. ^'Antemia.

I  iScrofulosis;  abdomen  tense,  not  painful ;  limbs  emaci-


179  SULPHUR.

ated  ;  skin  dry,  face  distorted,  old-looking;  whining,
crying,  will  not  be  looked  at,  cannot  be  pleased  ;  pulse
irritable;  diarrhoea,  stools  undigested,  very  offensive;
craves  meat.

■  Glandular  swellings,  particularly  cervical,  axillary  and

inguinal,  indurated  and  suppurating.

■  Ulcers  with  raised,  swollen  edges,  bleeding  easily,  dis-

charging fetid  pus,  surrounded  with  pimples.

I  Humid  offensive  eruptions,  with  thick  pus,  yellow  crusts,

itching,  bleeding  and  burning.
llScrofulous  chronic  diseases  that  result  from  suppressed
eruptions.

■  Scrofulous  and  rickety  complaints  ;  curvature,  softening,

swelling,  caries,  and  other  bone  diseases.

I I  Discharges  in  every  outlet  of  body  acrid,  excoriating
skin  wherever  they  come  in  contact.

■  Affects  whole  lymphatic  system  as  well  as  all  secreting

surfaces  and  glands.

■  Discharge  of  both  urine  and  feces  is  painful  to  parts  over

which  they  pass.

■  ■Congestion  to  single  parts ;  eyes,  nose,  chest,  abdomen,,

arms,  legs,  etc.

■  Transient  rheumatic  pains  through  body.

■  Subacute  and  chronic  rheumatism  with  profuse  sweating^.

■  Suppuration:  pus  thin,  black,  putrid.

■  Large  varix,  induced  from  slight  cause,  in  weakly  indi-

viduals.

■  Bedsores  with  gnawing  pains; putrid,  turning  to  gan-

grenous sores ;  sloughing  phagedsena.

■  Furunculi;  coming  in  crops  in  various  parts  of  body^

very  painful,  with  inflamed  base,  terminating  in  sup-
puration, opening  at  apex,  discharging  unhealthy  pus,,
sometimes  bloody,  healing  up  and  then  soon  followed
by  another  crop  ;  at  other  times  only  one  boil  at  a  time,,
succeeded  by  another  in  another  place,  when  first  wa&
healed.

■  Abscesses  :  pus  yellow,  offensive,  full  of  air  bubbles.

■  Dropsy  and  other  affections  of  drunkards;  chronic  alco-

holism.

■  ■Complaints  are  continually  relapsing;  seems  to  get  al-

most well  when  disease  returns.
Sulph.  30  caused  elimination  of  Sulphur,  which  had  beea
stored  up  in  system  for  more  than  twenty-five  years..
"Touch,  Passive  Motion  Injuries.  Touch:  spot  beneath
vertex  painful ;  around  eyes  and  nose  sensitive ;  super-
ciliary ridge  sensitive;  pressing  pain  in  vertex;  roots  of
hair  painful; pimples  on  forehead  painful;  scalp  sore;,


SULPHUR.  180

stump  of  eye  very  sensitive  ;  forehead  painful ;  nose  sore
to  touch  after  nosebleed ;  nasal  polypi  sore  when  touched ;
scalp  very  sore ;  gland  tender ;  region  of  stomach  sensi-
tive; hypochondria  tender;  bowels  tender;  tendons
forming  boundaries  of  popliteal  space  sensitive.

Pressure :  upon  head  >  pain  ;  shoulders  tender ;  head
symptoms  < ;  cervical  vertebrae  sensitive ;  on  spinous
processes  <  pain  in  infraorbital  region  ;  upon  stomach
causes  eructations ;  tenderness  of  r.  side  to  pressure ;
lower  belly  painful;  cutting  pain  <;  >  pain  in  head
when  coughing ;  causes  dyspnoea  lying  on  r.  side ;  >
shooting  pain  in  hip  ;  <  pain  in  swollen  knee ;  pain  in

- knee  <  ;  over  r.  ovarian  region  causes  wincing.

Hanging  arms  down :  crawling  and  prickling  in  tips  of
fingers.

Pushing  leg  upward  : <  pain  in  hip  joint.

Scratching :  vertex  smarts  and  burns ;  eruption  on  back
of  head  and  behind  ears,  > ;  pruritus  < ;  >  itching,
after  it  burning,  aching,  numbness,  swelling,  or  ulcera-
tion.

Overexertion  :  prolapsus  and  bleeding.

From  reaching  high  :  prolapsus  uteri.

From  overlifting : pain  in  chest ;  pain  in  small  of  back.

From  a  blow :  herpetic  eruption  on  foot.

After  a  fall :  spinal  curvature  and  abscess.

Fall  on  back  of  head  :  insensible,  brain  symptoms  ;  three
days  after,  epileptic  fit.

After  vaccination :  pustular  eruption  on  head,  ears,  face,
groins  and  legs  ;  otorrhoea.

■  Bedsores.
Skin.  1 1  Itching :  all  over  body  ;  spots  painful  after  scratch-
ing ;  itching  spots  bleed  and  bite  after  scratching ;  in
various  parts,  disappearing  after  scratching,  at  times
followed  by  sticking  or  burning ;  over  whole  body,  re-
curring every  night  in  bed ;  on  and  between  fingers ;
and  biting  on  nates ;  violent  on  thighs  and  legs,  at
night ;  about  knees ;  on  toes ;  of  toes  that  had  been
frozen ;  at  night,  in  heat  of  bed,  now  in  one  place  now
in  another,  especially  on  nape  of  neck ;  in  palms  of
hands,  sometimes  sticking,  burning;  is  obliged  to  rub
them,  after  which  they  burn ;  on  backs  of  hands ;  in
eyebrows;  on  abdomen,  at  night;  in  scrotum  ;  on  in-
side of  thighs;  in  axillae  and  hollows  of  knees;  as  if
she  were  alive  beneath  skin ;  as  if  vermin  were  running
about;  <  at  night,  and  in  morning,  in  bed,  after  wak-
ing; above  1.  eyebrow;  in  ears  externally;  of  nose  ex-
ternally; about  chin;  on  neck;  on  chest;  of  old  tetter,
is  obliged  to  scratch  until  it  bleeds.


46


181  SULPHUR.

Skin  very  painful  for  a  long  time  after  rubbing,  as  if  de-
nuded and  sore.

I  Spots  feel  hot  after  scratching.

I I  Burning  in  skin  of  whole  body.

■  Night's  rest  often  disturbed  by  burning  pains  in  skin  of

parts  upon  which  he  lies.

■  Burning  in  hands  and feet,  with weakness of  whole

body.

■  I  Formication  over  skin  of  whole  body.

■  Stitchlike  prickling  in  skin,  in  evening  after  getting  warm

in  bed.
Sticking  itching,  especially  when  walking  in  open  air.

■  ■Voluptuous  itching;  scratching  relieves,  after  it  burn-

ing ;  sometimes  little  vesicles.

■  ■After violent scratching aching, numbness of skin,

swelling  of  skin,  even  ulceration.

■  Cracks  and  cuts  (rhagades)  in  skin  of  hands,  especially

on  joints,  painfully  sore.

■  Skin  of  hands  hard  and  dry.

■  ■Nettlerash: W'ith  fever; on  face,  arms,  neck  and  lower

extremities ;  on  back  of  hand,

■  ■Itching  hives  over  whole  body,  hands  and  feet.
Itching  pimples  on  inner  side  of  thigh.

Tetter  on  nape  of  neck.

■  Itching  vesicular  eruption  on  back  of  hand.

■  ■Boils.

Eruption  of  furunculous  pimples,  with  a  red  areola  and
very  itching  sensation,  especially  on  face.

■  Ulcers  about  nails;  nails  crumble  off.

■  Skin  dry  and  flabby:  cold,  pale,  dry.

■  Skin  harsh  and  wrinkled;  child  looks  like  an  old  man.

■  Bright  redness  of  whole  body. ^Scarlatina.

■  Freckles;  yellow,  brown,  fiat  spots;  liver  spots.

■  ■Skin  rough,  scaly,  scabby.

■  Herpes,  scabby  and  scurfy.

■  Sore  feeling  of  skin,  with  disposition  to  excoriation.

■  ■Soreness  in  folds  of  skin.

■  Ecchymosis  from  a  slight  bruise;  every  little  scratch  has

a  tendency  to  fester.

■  Rhagades,  <  after  washing.

■  Furuncles,  particularly  on  nates.

■  Dropsical,  burning  swelling  of  external  parts.

■  Ulcers:  cancerous;  crusty;  pricking;  pulsating,  swollen,

tearing,  with  tension ;  pus  from  them  offensive ;  spongy,
proud  flesh  ;  raised,  swollen  edges,  bleeding  easily,  sur-
rounded with  pimples;  tearing,  stinging  pains,  discharg-
ing fetid  pus.
Hangnails.


SULPHUR.  182

lEr3^sipelas  with  throbbing  and  stinging ;  migrathig  from
place  to  place.

I  I  For  several  years,  ever}'  four  to  six  weeks,  eruption  of

vesicles  as  large  as  peas  on  upper  and  lower  limbs,  ap-
pearing over  night,  filled  with  watery  serum,  soon
becoming  purulent,  lasting  six  to  seven  days,  then
becoming  scurfy,  rapidly  dry,  and  falling  off;  severe
itching.

I I  Comedones ;  black  pores  of  skin,  particularly  in  face.
I  Acne  punctata.

1  Prurigo  and  intertrigo  in  children;  sore,  raw  places.

i  I  Eczema  of  three  j^ears'  standing;  appeared  on  face  and
head  in  usual  form,  going  through  papulation,  pustula-
tion,  incrustation,  and  in  some  parts  of  skin,  desquama-
tion ;  covered  entire  surface  of  body ;  it  had  become
infiltrated  and  thickened,  divided  by  an  innumerable
number  of  fissures  running  in  all  directions  like  so  many
rivulets  made  to  carry  off  exudation  ;  child  had  a  vulgar,
filthy  look,  was  intensely  irritable  day  and  night;
bleeding  from  some  of  fissures.

3  I  Eruption  on  face,  neck  and  arms;  yellow  scabs  thickly
cover  diseased  surface,  while  fissures,  especially  on
elbows,  occasion  soreness  and  bleeding ;  there  is  much
itching.

1  I  Shortly  after  local  treatment  of  a  chancre,  an  eruption
appeared  on  skin,  and  grew  <  until  he  was  completely
covered ;  itching  so  bad  that  he  had  to  walk  floor  at
night  nude,  could  get  no  sleep  until  3  or  4  a.m.;  scrotum
and  lower  limbs  looked  raw  and  red.

J  I  Disgusting  crop  of  pustules  on  hands  and  wrists;  also  a
few  on  face,  like  those  of  pocky  itch ;  around  eruption,
'epidermis  is  undermined  as  with  shingles ;  a  few  pocks
ihave  dried  and  desquamated;  much  burning  and  itch-
ing about  hands  and  wrists. ^Psoric  pustulation.

I  I  Soon  after  vaccination  pustular  eruption  aff'ecting  scalp,
ears,  face,  groins  and  legs  ;  also  otorrhoea.

I  I  Crops  of  scabs  upon  scalp,  arms  and  legs  ever  since  he
was  vaccinated  ;  head  covered  with  hard,  elevated  scabs,
very  much  like  rupia;  scabs  on  arms  and  legs  not  so
thick,  because  he  scratched  them  off"  as  fast  as  they
formed  on  account  of  their  being  so  very  itch3^

llMolluscum  in  a  child  ;  body  and  limbs  covered  with
soft,  round,  smooth,  apparently  painless  tumors  with
broad  base;  at  first  of  color  of  skin,  then  assuming  a
bluish,  and  finally  a  purple  or  pinkish  hue;  found  on
puncture  to  contain  a  semi-fluid,  sebaceous  (atheroma-
tous) matter;  these  tumors  originated  apparently  in  seba-
ceous follicles  of  skin,  varied  in  size  from  a  bean  to  a


183  SULPHUR.

filbert,  and  were  in  all  stages  of  development,  about
eighty.

■  Scabious  eruptions  with  burning  itching,  surrounded  by

a  yellowish  or  brownish  areola ;  secretion  of  a  sanious,
fetid  or  thick  and  yellow  pus ;  spots  covered  with  small
vesicles  discharging  serous  lymph.

I  I  Eruption  and  sores  upon  arms  and  chest,  commencing
as  small  vesicles  filled  with  serum,  mattering  to  pustules
and  afterward  covered  with  thick,  dirty-looking  scabs,
often  close  together,  arms  itch  very  much  when  he  gets
warm. ^Rupia  syphilitica.

I  I  Hereditary  syphilis  in  a  girl,  a^t.  13,  from  infancy  ;  erup-
tion appearing  on  bend  of  elbow,  and  spreading  over  a
large  portion  of  arms  and  body.

iScabies:  voluptuous  tingling  itching,  with  burningand
soreness  after  scratching;  <  in  warm  bed;  disposition
to  excoriation  ;  glandular  swellings.

■  Miliaria :  inveterate  cases,  skin  rough  and  scaly.

■  Varicose  ulcers,  bleed  easily,  secrete  a  fetid  pus,  and  burn

and  itch  much.

■  Indolent  and  ill-conditioned  ulcers,  devoid  of  granula-

tions, and  a  healthy  pus  formation.

■  After  suppression  of  measles:  cough  with  muco-purulent

expectoration  ;  roaring  in  ears  and  deafness ;  hard  swell-
ing of  muscular  structures,  in  r.  side,  painful  to  touch.

■  Measles,  during  first  stage  when  eruption  makes  a  tardy

progress,  or  after  complaints  such  as  chronic  coughs,
originating  in  remnants  of  partial  pneumonia;  chronic
diarrhoea;  hardness  of  hearing;  chronic  discharge
from  ears.

I  I  Constant  delirium;  face  swollen  and  distorted,  bright
red;  tongue  dry,  cracked  bright  red,  here  and  there
covered  with  brown  mucus;  angina,  could  hardly  swallow
water;  nose  stopped  up  ;  pulse  rapid,  small,  hard,  in-
compressible; bright-red  eruption  over  whole  body;
skin  dry  ;  constipation. ^Scarlet  fever.

I  I  Eruption  bluish;  skin  cold  ;  pulse  scarcely  perceptible;
faint  rattling  in  chest  and  slight  twitching  of  body  alone
indicated  that  child  was  not  dead. ^Scarlet  fever.

I  I A  girl,  get.  5,  chills,  vomiting,  violent  headache,  prostra-
tion, peevishness,  flushed  face,  injected  eyes  ;  eruption
in  miliarv  form,  patchy  and  evanescent ;  at  times  bright
and  full," then  faded  and  partially  disappeared;  mind
wandering,  character  of  delirium  being  active  rather
than  muttering;  heat  of  skin  great,  skin  dry,  hard  and
somewhat  roughened  ;  throat  moderately  swollen,  inter-
nally and  externally,  impeding  somewhat  speech  and
deglutition  ;  Bellad.  until  evening  of  fourth  day,  rather


SULPHUR.  184

<  than  >  ;  apparently  wide  awake  but  positively  asleep
as  far  as  perception  or  recognition  of  her  surrounding
relations  were  concerned ;  no  longer  knew  her  attend-
ants or  heeded  what  was  said  to  her ;  great  agitation
and  anxiety,  with  loud  outcries,  calling  out  that  she
wished  to  go  to  bed,  though  she  was  upon  bed  ;  eyes
^  injected  and  staring ;  aspect  dull  and  heavy  though
ver}'^  anxious,  and  apparently  apprehensive.

■  Scarlatina  in  children  of  psoric  diathesis  who  are  prone
to  skin  affections ;  patient  lies  quietly  in  an  unconscious
condition,  apparently  sleeping;  rash  appears  faintly,
and  skin  is  hot  and  itching;  heat  seems  to  come  in  flashes;
clothing  is  thrown  of;  efflorescences  coalesce  into  large
spots  as  red  as  a  boiled  lobster,  around  these  skin  is  un-
usually white ;  cerebral  affections,  with  sopor,  sudden
starting,  distortion  of  eyes ;  bloated  and  shining  red
face;  dry  nose;  dry,  cracked,  red  tongue,  covered  with
a  brownish  mucus;  thirst  and  difficulty  of  swallowing;
lethargic  condition  ;  diarrhoea  <  in  morning.

•  Variola:  metastasis  to  brain  during  suppuration ;  pustules
fill  with  pale,  bloody  serum ;  pocks  do  not  heal ;  they
are  inclined  to  itch  and  ulcerate;  an  intercurrent  remedy
when  others  seem  to  fail ;  stage  of  desquamation.

1 1  Varicella.

I  I  Repelled  eruption  of  Rhus  poisoning;  legs,  ankles,  feet,
toes  enormously  swollen ;  skin  distended  as  if  oede-
matous,  and  spotted  as  if  eruption  were  underneath,
showing  through  skin;  terrible  itching,  especially  at
night ;  bursting  feeling  in  skin  of  legs  when  standing.

I  I  Bursting,  full  sensation  in  face  with  terrible  itching;

eruption  on  face  and  hands. ^Rhus  poisoning.
^'^  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. iiLean,  stoop-shouldered
persons  who  walk  and  sit  stooped ;  standing  is  the  most
uncomfortable  position.

I I  Persons  of  nervous  temperament,  quick-motioned,  quick-
tempered, plethoric,  skin  excessively  sensitive  to  atmo-
spheric changes.

1 1  Dirty,  filthy  people,  prone  to  skin  affections.

1 1  Children  cannot  bear  to  be  washed  or  bathed ;  emaciated,
big-bellied  ;  restless,  hot,  kick  off  clothes  at  night ;  have
worms.

1 1  Adapted  to  persons  of  scrofulous  diathesis,  subject  to
venous  congestions,  especially  of  portal  system.

lLym|)liatic  temperaments,  venous  constitutions  disposed
to  hemorrhoids,  with  constipation  or  morning  diarrhoea;
scrofulous  diseases  seem  to  get  almost  well  when  they
return ;  diseases  caused  especially  by  suppressed  erup-
tions, peevishness,  sudden  and  frequent  flushes  of  heat


185  SULPHUR.

all  over  body,  followed  by  perspiration,  hot  palms,  soles
and  vertex ;  at  10  a.m.,  faintness  in  epigastrium.
iChildren,  emaciated,  with  faces  like  old  people,  big  belly,

dry,  flabby  skin.
I  Full-blooded, with great irritability, restlessness and

hastiness.
I  Old  people.

Boy,  Eet.  3  days ;  sanguineous  occipital  tumor.
Child,  set.  8  days ;  stomatitis.
Child,  set.  2  months ;  chronic  diarrhoea.
Child,  £et.  2 J  months,  suffering  six  days ;_  epilepsy.
Boy,  set.  5  months ;  ill  effects  of  vaccination.
Infant,  set.  6  months ;  constipation,  sleeplessness,  etc.
Child,  set.  8  months ;  crying  spells.
Boy,  £et.  11  months,  suffering  eight  days  ;  otorrhcea.
Girl,  set.  19  months,  since  birth  ;  diarrhoea.
Baby,  set.  21  months ;  diarrhoea.
Boy,  set.  1 ;  diarrhoea.
Boy,  set.  1 ;  chronic  diarrhoea.
Child,  set.  1 ;  crusta  serpiginosa.
Child,  ^t.  1,  of  scrofulous  parents,  suffering  several  months;

molluscum.
Girl,  set.  1^  years,  suffering  fourteen  days  ;  spasmus  glot-

tidis.
Boy,  set.  1| ;  chronic  diarrhoea.
Boy,  set.  li ;  measles.
• Girl,  set.  2,  suffering  nine  months ;  diarrhoea.
Boy,  set.  2  ;  ague.
Girl,  set.  2;  scrofulosis.
Girl,  set.  2J  years ;  hypopyon.
Boy,  set.  21,  delicate  looking,  large  head,  fine  features;

spasms.
Boy,  set.  2J  ;  scarlet  fever.
Boy,  set.  2J;  meningitis.

Boy,  set.  2 J,  light  hair,  fair  skin,  blue  eyes,  under  allo-
pathic treatment  five  days ;  hydrocephalus.
Girl,  set.  2^;  diarrhoea.
Child,  set.  2|,  pale  face,  dark  hair,  suffering  seven  weeks ;

cough.
Boy,  set.  3 ;  meningitis.

Boy,  set.  3,  colored,  affected  one  year ;  eczema  of  scalp.
Girl,  set.  3 ;  eczema  urabilicale.
Boy,  set.  3,  suffering  two  years  ;  eczema.
Boy,  ^t.  3,  psoric  constitution  ;  ulcer  on  back.
Boy.  ^t.  3,  ill  eleven  months ;  marasmus.
Child,  set.  4;  amaurosis.
Boy,  set.  4;  stomacace.

Boy,  set.  4,  two  years  ago  had  scarlatina,  since  then  suffer-
ing; prolapsus  and  hemorrhage  of  rectum.


SULPHUR.  186

Boy,  8et.  4,  suffering  since  infancy ;  epilepsy.

Girl,  a3t.  4,  suffering  three  years ;  eczema.

Two  girls,  set.  5 ;  meningitis.

J.  F.,  set.  5,  affected  three  or  four  years ;  eczema  of  scalp.

Boy,  set.  5,  weak,  pale;  eczema  of  scalp.

Girl,  set.  5,  parents  very  poor,  four  months  ago  had  mea-
sles, since  then  suffering ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Girl,  set.  5 ;  enlarged  submaxillary  gland.

Boy,  set.  5,  troubled  several  years  ;  enuresis  nocturna.

Boy,  set.  5,  treated  allopathically  several  years;  hydrocele.

Girl,  set.  5,  had  attack  several  years  ago ;  pneumonia.

Girl,  set.  5  ;  scarlet  fever.

Child,  set.  6 ;  ophthalmia.

Child,  set.  6 ;  chronic  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  6,  delicate ;  erysipelas  of  face.

Boy,  set.  6,  suffering  several  months ;  cough.

Boy,  set.  6 ;  tertian  ague.

Girl,  set.  7,  has  had  an  exanthema,  suffering  six  weeks  ;
scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  7 ;  diarrhoea  and  vomiting.
.  Boy,  set.  7,  sickly  a  long  time ;  affection  of  lungs.

Boy,  set.  7  ;  pneumonia.

Girl,  set.  7,  suffering  since  birth  ;  impetigo.

Boy,  set.  7J;  amaurosis.

Boy,  set.  8 ;  curvature  of  spine.

Girl,  set.  8,  cachectic-looking  ;  coxalgia  of  spine.

Boy,  set.  8;  attacks  of  chill.

Boy,  set.  8 ;  eruption  over  body.

Boy,  set.  8| ;  measles.

Boy,  set.  9,  suffering  two  years  ;  affection  of  brain.

Girl,  set.  9,  poor  Irish  parents,  living  in  an  overcrowded
alley ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Girl,  set.  9;  subretinal  tumor.

Girl,  set.  9,  when  one  year  old,  had measles,  which  were
repelled  by  cold,  since  then  suffering ;  opacity  of  cornea.

Boy,  set.  9,  Hungarian,  suffering  six  years;  otorrhoea.

Girl,  iGt.  9,  ill  nine  weeks;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  9,  scrofulous ;  swelling  of  knee.

Girl,  set.  9;  spasms.

Girl,  £et.  9,  badly  neglected  and  exposed  to  all  hardships;
spasms.

Boy,  set.  9,  affected  two  years ;  terror  at  night.

Boy,  set.  10,  suffering  four  years;  headache.

Boy,  £et.  10,  ill  ten  days  ;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  10,  suffering  two  months;  aphonia.

Boy,  set.  10,  sick  nineteen  days ;  remittent  fever.

Girl,  set.  10, sanguine-choleric temperament, brunette;
rheumatism.


187  SULPHUR.

Boy,  set.  10  ;  measles.

Girl,  set.  11,  suffering  two  years;  headache.
G.  M.,  set.  11;  cough.
Boy,  set.  11 ;  eczema  impetiginodes.

Girl,  set.  12,  well  developed,  suffering  six  months;  vom-
iting.
Boy,  set.  12,  healthy  and  cheerful ;  vomiting  of  food.
Girl,  set.  12,  delicate,  cachectic  ;  vaginitis.
Girl,  set.  13,  growing  rapidly,  quite  tall,  nervous  for  some

time  preceding  attack  ;  chorea.
Girl,  set.  13  ;  paralysis  of  leg.
Boy,  set.  13  ;  psoric  pustulaiion.
Miss  T.,  set.  13  ;  hereditary  syphilis.
Boy, set. 14,  eyes steadily  getting < for  last  eighteen

months ;  impairment  of  vision.
Girl,  set.  14,  suffering  ten  years ;  diarrhoea.
Boy,  set.  14,  suffering  six  weeks,  after  catching  cold  ;  cox-

algia.
Girl,  set.  14 ;  Rhus  poisoning.
Girl,  set.  15,  after  measles;  mental  disorder.
Boy,  set.  15,  suffering  two  years;  nocturnal  enuresis.
Boy,  set.  16,  blonde,  slender,  stoop-shouldered,  suffering

ten  years ;  otorrhoea.
E.  T.,  set.  16 ;  tic  douloureux.
Girl,  set.  16,  after  having  diarrhoea  checked  by  opium ;

pain  in  abdomen,  fecal  vomiting,  etc.
Girl,  set.  16,  not  yet  menstruated,  thorax  rachitic;  cardiac

disorder.
Girl,  set.  16,  not  yet  menstruated,  suffering  eight  years;

chorea.
Boy,  8st.  16,  peasant,  suffering  three  months;  ague.
Girl,  set.  17,  suffering  from  earliest  childhood;  scrofulous

ophthalmia.
Girl,  set.  17,  suffering  six  months;  amenorrhoea.  -
Young  man,  set.  17 ;  pleuritis.
Young  man,  set.  17;  goitre.

Young  man,  set.  18,  strong,  after  suppression  of  itch  ;  head-
ache.
Boy,  set.  18,  when  five  years  old  had  smallpox,  since  then

suffering ;  conjunctivitis.
Boy,  ^t.  18,  under  treatment  fifteen  years ;  ophthalmia.
Boy,  set.  18,  suffering  since  birth ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.
Youth,  set.  18;  nasal  polypi.

Miss ,  set.  18,  scrofulous,  leuco-phlegmatic ;  vomiting.

Girl,  set.  18,  strong,  health}^  cheerful,  suffering  for  years;

enuresis  nocturna.
Boy,  set.  18,  tall,  healthy,  strong,  suffering  since  childhood;

enuresis  nocturna.


SULPHUR.  188

Two  sisters,  Eet.  18  and  20,  farmer's  daughters,  strong  and
healthy,  suffering  since  childhood ;  enuresis  nocturna.

Girl,  set.  18,  blonde,  robust,  lively  disposition;  amenor-
rhoea.

Young  man,  set.  18,  healthy,  strong;  pneumonia.

Girl,  set.  18;  pains  about  heart.

Young  man,  set.  18;  epilepsy.

Miss  R.,  set.  18,  suffering  two  years ;  ansemia.

Youth,  set.  19,  four  years  ago  lost  hearing  in  r.  ear  from
catarrh,  had  gleet  for  last  two  years ;  deafness.

Girl,  set.  19,  blonde,  strong,  well  nourished ;  amenorrhoea.

Seaman,  set.  19,  contracted  ague  in  West  Indies  a  year  ago ;
chagres  fever.

Miss  G.,  set.  20,  tall,  fair,  slight,  suffering  two  or  three  years ;
sick-headache.

Girl,  set.  20,  light  hair,  sallow  complexion,  suffering  five
years ;  pain  in  occiput.

Man,  set.  20,  had  itch  year  and  a  half  ago,  later  ague,  cured
with  pepper  and  whisky ;  blindness  of  1.  eye.

Young  man,  set.  20,  suffering  four  years;  retention  of  urine.

Woman,  set.  20,  small,  blonde,  has  aborted  several  times,
now  three  months  pregnant ;  prolapsus  uteri.

Miss  D.,  set.  20,  suffering  three  weeks  ;  whitlow.

Miss ,  set.  20,  suffering  fifteen  weeks  ;  panaritium.

Nicholas  H.,  set.  20 ;  herpetic  eruption  on  foot.

Housemaid,  set.  20  ;  scorbutus.

Girl,  set.  21,  suffering  three  years;  headache.

Mme.  B.,  set.  21,  music  teacher,  small,  blonde,  blue  eyes,
lively,  gay,  wilful,  a  mother  at  18,  is  pregnant  six  and
a  half  months  for  second  time;  ophthalmia.

Girl,  set.  21,  pale,  delicate-looking;  facial  neuralgia.

Miss ,  set.  21,  suffering  seven  weeks;  gastric  disturb-
ance.

Girl,  set.  21,  strong,  healthy-looking;  swelling  of  knee.

Woman,  set.  21 ;  rheumatism  of  knee.

Man,  set.  21,  publican  and  violinist;  acne  punctata.

Man,  set.  22,  had  scarlatina  eleven  years  ago,  since  then
suffering;  dysecoia.

Woman,  set.  22,  single,  dressmaker,  nervo-lymphatic  tem-
perament, weakly,  slight  built,  when  a  child  got  a  severe
fall ;  gastralgia.

Man,  set.  22  ;  asthma.

Man,  set.  22  ;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  22,  slender,  pale,  suffering  several  years;  erup-
tion on  limbs.

Man,  set.  23,  dark  complexion,  freely  perspiring  skin;  facial
neuralgia.

Miss  R.,  set.  23,  in  poor  health  ;  facial  neuralgia.


189  SULPHUR.

Man,  set.  23,  suffering  all  his  life;  irritable  bladder.

Scotchman,  aet.  23,  shipping  clerk,  slender  frame,  four
years  ago  after  lifting  a  heavy  load  vomited  blood,  since
then  had  trouble  with  stomach ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  23,  had  inflammation  of  chest,  not  well  since;
neuralgia  of  chest.

Miss  H.,  set.  23,  blonde,  very  fair  complexion ;  chloasma.

Young  lady,  set.  24,  from  childhood  deaf,  subject  to  attacks
of  tinea  capitis,  when  7  years  old  tinea  and  ophthalmia
cured  by  cold  washing  ;  soreness  of  eyelids.

Woman,  «et.  24,  confined  with  first  child,  5  weeks  old;  con-
stipation.

Man,  set.  24,  conductor  on  horse  car;  pneumonia.

Woman,  set.  24,  mulatto,  no  children,  house  servant;
vesicular  eruption  and  cough.

Miss  M.,  set.  25,  since  death  of  mother  seven  years  previ-
ously ;  melancholia  and  epilepsy.

Miss  A.  W.,  set.  25,  suffering  several  weeks ;  affection  of
stomach.

Miss  F.,  set.  25,  dark,  choleric-looking,  menses  irregular
since  puberty ;  amenorrhoea.

Young  lady,  set.  25,  suffering  from  childhood  ;  cough.

Man,  set.  25,  during  childhood  had  itch,  which  was  treated
by  external  applications;  phthisis.

Man,  set.  25,  tall,  lank,  spare  built,  stoop-shouldered,
brother  died  of  phthisis;  phthisis  pulmonalis.

Woman,  set.  26,  suffering  seven  years ;  melancholia.

Farmhand,  set.  26,  when  17  had  itch  ;  gastric  disorder.

Man,  set.  26,  seaman,  yellowish  complexion,  sickly-looking,
had  typhus  fever  in  West  Indies  three  weeks  before;
ague.

Miss ,  set.  26 ;  scarlet  fever.

Man,  set.  27,  sanguine-choleric  temperament,  strong,  bru-
nette, suffering  for  years ;  periodical  attacks  of  conjunc-
tivitis.

Man,  set.  27,  lymphatic  temperament,  red  hair,  suffering
eighteen  months,  after  suppression  of  gonorrhoea ;  diar-
rhoea.

Man,  set.  27,  subject  to  epileptic  attacks,  three  weeks  ago
had  quotidian  fever  suppressed,  after  fourth  paroxysm,
by  quinine;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  28,  tailor,  dark  hair,  swarthy,  greasy  complexion ;
headache.

Woman,  set.  28,  suffering  several  months;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  28;  diarrhoea.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  28,  dark  hair,  blue  eyes,  no  children,  suffer-
ing since  childhood ;  constipation.

Man,  set.  29;  sexual  weakness.


SULPHUR.  19a

Man,  set.  29,  sanguine  temperament,  light  complexion,,
married ;  prostatitis.

Woman,  set.  29,  mother  of  several  children,  subject  ta
attacks  since  childhood  ;  larj^ngitis.

Mrs.  A.,  set.  29 ;  spasms.

Mulatto,  set.  30,  fireman  on  locomotive;  blepharitis.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  30,  seven  months  pregnant;  facial  neuralgia^

Miss ,  set.  30,  blonde,  suffering  since  her  fourteenth

year;  fungous  growth  on  gum.

Man,  set.  30,  bootcloser,  pale  complexion,  suffering  six
weeks;  gastralgia.

Man,  set.  30  ;  enlargement  of  liver.

Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  twelve  days;  diarrhoea  and  con^
junctivitis.

Man,  set.  30 ;  chronic  diarrhoea.

Mrs. ,  set.  30,  confined  seven  weeks  ago,  suffering  four

or  five  years;  hemorrhoids.

Man,  set.  30;  hemorrhoids.

Man,  set.  30,  short  stature,  as  a  student  was  greatly  dissi-
pated, chest  affected  for  last  eight  years ;  phthisis.

Miss  T.,  set.  30,  dressmaker,  had  diphtheria  five  years  ago,,
since  then  ill ;  debility,  etc.

Man,  set.  30,  ten  years  ago  fell  from  a  ladder  on  back  of
head,  since  then  suffering;  epilepsy.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  31,  brown  hair,  blue  eyes,  pregnant  for  third
time ;  gastric  disturbance.

Woman,  set.  32,  black,  married,  no  children  ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  33,  suffering  two  years;  cephalalgia.

Woman,  set.  34,  several  years  ago  rapidly  cured  of  itch  by
a  salve,  eye  affected  three  months;  arthritic  ophthalmia^

Mrs,  T.,  set.  34,  suffering  three  months;  arthritic  oph-
thalmia.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  34,  nine  years  married,  no  children,  had  three
miscarriages,  suffering  since  first  one;  uterine  affection.

Man,  set.  34,  suffering  three  weeks ;  continuous  remittent-
fever.

Mrs.  ,  set.  35,  several  children,  scrofulous  tempera-
ment ;  ophthalmia.

Mrs.  P.,  set.  35,  delicate-looking,  has  symptoms  of  phthisis^
has  a  child  thirteen  months  old  which  she  weaned  a
fortnight  ago,  has  been  suffering  a  week ;  facial  neu-
ralgia.

Man,  set.  35,  onanist  since  childhood,  married  eight  years;,
spermatorrhoea.

Man,  set.  30  ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  several  years ;  backache.

Man,  set.  38,  after  suppression  of  tinea  capitis ;  mania.

Man,  set.  38  ;  hypochondriasis.


191  SULPHUR.

Woman,  set.  38,  suffering  one  month ;  facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  39,  suffering  several  years ;  affection  of
stomach.

Man,  set.  40,  bilious  temperament,  of  good  habits,  active,
hard  worker,  suffering  thirty  years  ;  coryza.

Woman,  set.  40,  sick  two  years  ;  gastro-enteritis.

Miss  S.,  set,  about  40,  had  pleurisy  at  age  of  twenty-two,
since  then  suffering;  pain  in  chest.

Miller,  set.  40,  robust,  athletic  build,  after  suppressed
eczema ;  hsemoptysis.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  seven  weeks ;  backache.

Man,  set.  40,  phlegmatic  temperament,  strong ;  rheumatism
in  shoulder.

Man,  set.  40  ;  swelling  of  knee.

Man,  set.  40,  strong,  healthy,  married  nineteen  years,  suf-
fering two  years ;  epilepsy.

Mrs.  G.,  set.  40 ;  melancholia.

Man,  set,  41,  suffering  tw^o  months  ;  rash  on  arms.

Woman,  set.  41,  blonde,  scrofulous;  swelling  of  knee.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  41 ;  swelling  of  knee.

Man,  set.  41,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  strong  constitution  ;  por-
rigo  favosa.

Man,  set.  42,  father  of  a  family,  had  syphilis  five  or  six
years  ago,  afterward  ague  in  arm}^  took  large  doses  of
quinine;  rupia  syphilitica.

Man,  set.  43,  suffering  five  days;  ophthalmia.

Lady,  set.  44,  suffering  for  years ;  psoriasis.

Woman,  set.  45,  catamenia  had  ceased;  mental  disturb-
ance.

Woman,  set.  45,  hysterical  disposition,  suffering  fifteen
years;  chronic  inflammation  of  liver.

Woman,  set.  45,  brunette,  choleric  temperament,  mother
of  several  children ;  menstrual  disorder.

Man,  set.  45,  suffering  a  long  time,  broken-down  condition,
taken  large  doses  of  quinine;  ague.

Man,  set.  46,  vigorous  and  strong  constitution,  suffering
several  years ;  enuresis.

Mary  F.,  set.  46,  servant,  robust,  clear  complexion,  healthy-
looking,  having  had  change  of  life  two  years  ago;  nine
years  ago  confined  to  hospital  three  months  with  same
knee;  gonitis.

Woman,  set.  47,  suffering  since  childhood  ;  ophthalmia.

Woman,  set.  47,  delicate,  mild  temper,  mother  of  ten  chil-
dren, suffering  from  her  youth  ;  ophthalmia.

Mrs.  L.,  set.  47,  suffering  three  months;  facial  neuralgia,

Mrs.  E.  C,  set.  47,  bilious  temperament,  suflFering  over  a
year;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  48  ;  amaurosis.


SULPHUR.  192

Mrs.  E.,  set.  48 ;  cataract.

Man,  Eet.  48  ;  ophthalmia.

Man,  set.  48,  carpenter,  suffering  eight  years ;  gastralgia.

Man,  set.  50,  apoplectic,  suffering  for  years;  arthritic  oph-
thalmia.

Man,  set.  50,  clerk  ;  weakness  of  r.  eye.

Woman,  set.  50,  has  cirrhosis  of  liver ;  hemorrhage  from
bowels.

Man,  set.  50 ;  pneumonia.

Miss  H.,  set.  50,  suffering  sixteen  years ;  rheumatic  gout.

Man,  set.  50,  nine  years  ago  had  a  chancre  burned,  since
then  suffering ;  eruption  on  skin.

Man,  set.  50  ;  corns  and  frostbite.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  51,  widow,  light  complexion,  light  auburn
hair,  heavy,  flabby  features,  large  red  nose;  hepatic  dis-
order.

Man,  set.  52,  suffering  thirty  years  ;  cough.

Man,  set.  53,  sanguine  choleric  temperament,  suffering  sev-
eral years ;  intestinal  catarrh.

Woman,  set.  54;  dysecoia.

Mrs.  N.,  set.  54 ;  neuralgic  pains  in  limbs.

German,  set.  55 ;  cortical  cataract.

Mrs. ,  set.  about  55 ;  affection  of  lids.

Man,  set.  55 ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  56;  rheumatism.

Workingman,  set.  58,  two  months  ago  had  diarrhoea  which
was  checked,  since  then  suffering ;  cephalalgia.

Man,  set.  58;  affection  of  stomach.

Man,  set.  60,  healthy  ;  dysuria.

Woman,  set.  60,  suffering  several  months ;  dysuria.

Man,  set.  60,  gouty;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  60,  after  removing  a  mole  from  shoulder ;
ulcer.

Woman,  set.  62,  robust ;  headache.

Lady,  set.  62  ;  gouty  ophthalmia.

Man,  set.  62,  short  stature;  colic.

Dr.  W.,  set.  62,  nervous  temperament,  over  six  feet  in
height,  but  never  fleshy,  very  abstemious,  and  leading
a  very  careful  life,  a  ripe  scholar  and  a  hard  student,
subject  to  frequent  attacks  of  diarrhoea  for  twenty  3^ears,
invariably  checked  by  bismuth  and  chalk,  has  been  sick
over  a  year ;  supposed  heart  disease,  with  mitral  incom-
petency.

Man,  set.  64;  dryness  of  throat.

Man,  set.  64,  apoplectic,  strong,  suffering  from  hemor-
rhoids; asthma.

Mrs.  0.,  set.  65 ;  neuralgic  headache.

Lady,  set.  68,  after  operation  for  cataract;  hypopyon.


193  SULPHUR.

Man,  set.  70 ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  73,  farm  laborer,  once  a  stalwart,  able-bodied
man,  but  now  bending  under  years ;  ague.

Lady,  set.  80,  suffering  three  weeks ;  diarrhoea.

Young  man,  suffering  thirteen  years  ;  headache.

Young  lady,  suffering  from  phthisis  ;  terrifying  dreams.

Kl -,  a  man  at  the  best  period  of  life,  of  robust  consti-
tution, suffering  several  years  ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Miss  S.  F.,  maiden  lady,  very  tall,  spare,  black  hair  and
eyes ;  gastric  disorder.

Middle-aged  German,  strong  built,  in  America  one  year,
formerly  given  to  drinking;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  middle-aged,  suffering  three  years ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  married  five  years,  suffering  seven  years ;  gleet.

Man,  in  good  circumstances,  florid  complexion,  single,
after  impure  coition ;  ulcer  on  penis.
*^  Relations.  Sulphur  frequently  serves  to  rouse  the  reactive
power  of  the  system,  when  carefully  selected  remedies
have  failed  to  produce  a  favorable  effect,  especially  in
acute  diseases.

Antidoted  by:  Aeon.,  Camphor.,  Chamom.,  Cinchon.,  Mercur.,
Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia.

It  antidotes:  Aeon.,  Cinchon.,  lodium,  Mercur.,  Nitric  acid.,
Rhus  tox..  Sepia.  Ailments  from  abuse  of  metals  gener-
ally.  _

Compatible:  Calc.ost.,  Lycop.,Sarsap., Sepia,  Pulsat.;  Sulphur,
Calc.  ost.  and  Lycop.,  or  Sulphur,  Sarsap.  and  Sepia,  fre-
quently follow  in  the  order  given.

Complementary :  Alos  soc.


VOL.  X. — 1?.


SULPHUEICUM  ACIDUM.  194

SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.

Sulphuric  Acid,  SO3,

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  F.  Hahnemann,  Franz,  Gross^
Langhammer,  and  Ng.,  Chronische  Krankheiten,  vol.  6,  p.  405.

Toxicological  reports  are  numerous;  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  9,  p.  417.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  dejection,  Eussell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  550 ;
Sensation  of  lump  iii  canthus,  Berridge,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  Ill ;  Facial  neural-
gia, Theobald,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  Ill ;  Epistaxis,  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.
196;  Toothache,  Bruckner,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  417  ;  A-phthm,  Ehrhardt,  Gross,
Hrg.,  Buck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  513 ;  Hirsch,  Schmidt,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  225 ;
Diphtheria,  Kafka,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  90,  p.  181 ;  Williams,  111.  Trans.,  p.  143  ;  Dip-
somania, Hrg.,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  l,p.  555;  Hiccough,  Schneider,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,
p.  458 ;  Gastrulgia,  Cooper,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  704  ;  Indigestion,  Mitchael,  M.  I.,
vol.  4,  p.  439  ;  Dyspepsia,  Kurtz,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  66  ;  Williamson,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  46;  Pain  in  groin,  Berridge,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  312;  Hernia,
Traub,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  793 ;  Diarrhaia,  Farrington,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  132 ;
Buck,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  20,  p.  620;  Dysentery,  Murray,  M.  I.,  1876;  Vomitivg  of
pregnancy,  Morrow,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  356 ;  Cough,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.
6,  p.  211 ;  Hcemoptysis,  Kiickert,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  225  ;  Pleuritic  exudation  ;
Palpitation  of  heart,  Sybel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  pp.  5,  20 ;  Phthisis,  Stens,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  22,  p.  445  ;  Excoriation  of  thighs.  Crushes,  Seidel,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  1030 ;
Ague,  Cooper,  H.  M.,  vol.  13,  p.  59;  Yellow  fever.  Wade,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  7,  p.  72;
Purpura  haemorrhagica,  Stens,  N.  A..  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  451 ;  Purpura,  Schnappauf,
Battmann,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  207  ;  Ecchymoses,  Guernsey,  M.  I.,  vol.  3,  p.
280;  Pruritus,  Buck,  Hom.  Kev.,  vol.  20,  p.  620;  Scrofulous  eruptions,  Johannsen,.
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  415.

^  Mind. Mental  excitability.

Must  do  everything  in  a  great  hurry ;  nothing  can  be  fin-
ished quickly  enough.
Unwilling  to  answer;  says  yes  or  no  with  difficulty;  pulse

small  and  frequent.
Disheartened  ;  inclined  to  weep.
Irritable,  restless ;  fretful  and  peevish  if  his  work  is  not

done  to  suit.
I  I  Extreme  mental  dejection  ;  unfit  for  work,  would  sit  and
weep  whole  day  long;  constant  pain  at  vertex;  after  a
fall  upon  head.
^  Sensorium. l  Vertigo,  in  room,  going  off  in  open  air;  must
lie  down,  as  soon  as  he  raises  himself  dizziness  returns.
^  Inner  Head. Sensation  in  forehead  as  if  brain  were  loose
and  falling  from  side  to  side ;  <  walking  in  open  air;  >
sitting  quiet  in  room.


195  SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  head,  headache.

Painful  shocks  in  forehead  and  temples,  <  in  forenoon  and
evening.

Headache  as  if  a  plug  were  thrust  quickly,  by  increasingly
severe  blows,  into  head.

Gradually  increasing  and  suddenly  ceasing  headache.

I  Chronic  headache  in  leuco-phlegmatic  people,  with  re-
laxed muscles  and  general  debility.
*  Outer  Head. Hair  turns  grey,  falls  out ;  eruption  on  scalp
very  sore ;  <  in  open  air.

Cold  sweat  on  forehead  when  eating,  even  warm  food.

I  Pain  of  outer  parts  of  head,  as  from  subcutaneous  ulcera-
tion, parts  painful  to  touch.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, Eyes  fill  with  tears  when  reading.

Tension  in  lids  in  morning ;  difficult  to  open.

Sensation  of  a  foreign  body  in  r.  outer  canthus,  in  morn-
ing, when  walking.

I  I  Feeling  as  of  a  lump  in  r.  outer  canthus;  on  closing  eye
seems  to  move  to  inner  canthus,  and  to  return  on  open-
ing it.

Deep  blue  circle  under  r.  eye.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  eyes; frequently  useful  in  be-
ginning (later  Sulph.).
^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Hardness  of  hearing ;  feeling  as  of  a
leaf  lying  before  ear.

Buzzing  in  r.  ear;  neuralgia.
^ Smell  and  Nose, i Nosebleed  ;  oozing  of  dark,  thin  blood;
evenings;  <  from  smelling  coff'ee; of  old  people;  in
cachectic  persons.

iCoryza: alternately  dry  and  fluent; with  loss  of  smell
and  taste,  hunger,  sore  eyes  and  tension  in  forehead.
^  Upper  Face. ■  Face : deadly  pale ; feels  swollen  and  as  if
white  of  e^g  had  dried  on  it.

Dry,  shrivelled  spots  in  face. ^Hemorrhoids.

I  I  Crusta  lactea,  with  stringy,  yellow  stools.

II Gnawing  pain  commences  at  9  p.m.;  afl'ects  ramus  of
lower  jaw,  and  temple  of  r.  side,  >  by  warmth  and  ly-
ing on  affected  side ;  comes  on  gradually  and  leaves
suddenly.

I  I  Right-sided  neuralgia,  affecting  face  from  temple  to  lower
canine  teeth,  aching  and  jerking  pain,  with  twitches
and  contortion  of  face,  and  deep  blue  circle  under  r..
eye;  chattering  of  teeth ;  dimness  of  sight;  black  ap-
pearance of  objects ;  wavering  of  objects.

I  I  Buzzing  in  r.  ear;  frequent  sensation  as  if  skin  of  cheek
and  chin  were  pinched ; pain  came  gradually  and  left
suddenly;  <  in  bed,  and  from  excess  of  heat  or  cold.
Lower  Face. Shooting,  stinging  pain  in  a  red  scar  on  lower
jaw.


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.  196

Lips  peel  off.

Swelling  and  inflammation  of  submaxillary  glands.

Pain  in  submaxillary  gland,  extends  to  tongue ;  tongue
feels  burnt.
^^ Teeth,  and  Gums,  i Toothache:  <  in  evening  in  bed,  and
from  cold;  >  from  heat;  dull,  concentrating  in  r.  eye-
tooth,  hurts  when  eating  and  on  pressure ;  pain  increases
slowly,  ceases  suddenly  when  reaching  highest  point.

Dulness  of  teeth;  teeth  on  edge.

Destruction  of  teeth. ^Diabetes  mellitus.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Loss  of  taste.

Talking  difficult,  as  from  want  of  elasticity  of  parts.

Tongue  dry.

I  Ulcers  on  inflamed  tongue. ^Glossitis.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Sensation  of  dryness  in  mouth.

Profuse  flow  of  tasteless  or  sweetish  saliva.

I  Breath  very  off'ensive.

Vesicles  on  inside  of 'cheek.

■  Aphthous  mouth  and  gums;  painful  yellowish  or  whit-

ish ulcers. ^Stomatitis  ulcerosa. ^Thrush.

■  Swollen,  ulcerated  and  readily  bleeding  gums.

■  Aphthous  ulceration  of  entire  inner  mouth  surface;  sour

eructations  and  heartburn  ;  longing  for  acids,  especially
fresh  tart  fruits ;  pallor  of  skin  ;  trembling  and  weak-
ness all  over ;  sense  of  general  soreness ;  capricious
temper ;  restless  or  irritable.

I  Hemorrhage  from  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  from
gums  on  slightest  motion  of  tongue,  also  when  speak-
ing, drinking,  or  blowing  nose ;  purpura  spots  over
body.

iCancrum  oris,  not  so  much  sloughing,  but  rapid  exten-
sion of  ulceration  ;  parts  seem  to  be  eaten  away ;  ulcers
irregular  in shape, edges sharp cut  and  flat; much
bleeding  but  not  violent  or  long-continued,
^^  Throat. Throat  sensitive.

Roughness  and  rawness  in  throat.

Lancinating  pain  in  throat.

Stinging  in  chest  and  throat  at  same  time.

Constricted  feeling  in  throat.

Great  difficulty  in  swallowing.

Throat  swollen  as  if  there  were  a  lump  in  it.

Uvula  and  root  of  palate  oedematous.

Mucous  membrane  of  palate  and  pharynx  swollen  and
injected ;  several  ulcerations.

I  I  Thick  yellow  membrane  on  fauces,  tonsils,  teeth  and  lips,
sticks  like  glue;  impeded  deglutition;  voice  thick;  pa-
rotids swollen,  hard;  sopor;  stench  from  mouth.
^Diphtheria.


197  SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.

I  Diphtheria ;  ulceration  of  throat,  with  large  exudations,
thick,  greyish  or  yellowish,  sticky  and  tenacious;  ton-
sils bright  red  ;  liquids  run  out  of  nose ;  speech  and  res-
piration difficult  on  account  of  accumulation  of  exuda-
tion in  fauces  ;  excessive  salivation ;  fetor  oris ;  pulse
frequent,  small,  weak ;  apathy,  somnolency ;  excessive
paleness  and  weakness.

■  Swelling  of  mucous  membrane  of  palate  and  pharynx,
with  white  spots  which  cannot  be  removed ;  difficult
swallowing  ;  over  entire  cavity  of  mouth  a  thick,  white
coating ;  large,  painful  swelling  of  1.  parotid ;  excessive
paleness;  weakness,  languor;  severe  sopor.

I  I  On  bright-red  swollen  tonsils  a  white  coating,  which
changed  after  a  few  days  to  a  thick  greyish  or  yellow-
ish-white substance,  also  on  hard  palate  and  inside  of
cheeks ;  when  pressing  tongue  down  a  quantity  of  exu-
date was  squeezed  out  of  fauces ;  it  feels  like  paste,  and
is  so  tenacious  that  it  can  scarcely  be  crushed  between
fingers ;  very  difficult  swallowing,  all  liquids  run  out
of  nose ;  no  appetite  ;  apathy,  somnolency;  child  whines
when  being  lifted  ;  pulse  frequent,  small ;  excessive  fetor
oris. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  On  fourth  day  teeth,  lips  and  inside  of  cheeks  covered
with  a  thick,  yellow,  membranous  substance,  which  can
be  removed  only  with  greatest  difficulty,  and  is  very
sticky  ;  tonsils  cannot  be  seen;  speech  thick,  indistinct;
swallowing  almost  impossible;  frequent  loose  cough;
both  parotids  swollen  and  very  hard ;  great  apathy ;
sopor ;  very  fetid  breath ;  pulse  frequent  and  weak ;
breathing  difficult  on  account  of  accumulation  of  exu-
date. ^Diphtheria.
"Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i Desire:  for  fresh
fruit ;  for  brandy.

I  Loss  of  appetite  and  great  debility.

I  Chronic  alcoholism ;  vomiting  in  morning ;  acidity  of
stomach ;  burning  in  oesophagus  and  stomach ;  sour,
acrid  or  foul  eructations.*

Aversion  to  smell  of  coffee.
^'  Eating  and  Drinking, i  Water  chills  stomach  if  not  mixed
with  alcoholic  liquor.

I  Ailments  from  drinking  brandy  (symptoms  are  palliated
by  drinking  wine).

After  eating,  pain  in  stomach  and  rising  of  food  by
mouthful.

After  warm  food :  sweat.

*  Successfully  used  in  subduing  craving  for  liquor  by  taking  for  two  or  four
weeks,  three  times  daily,  from  ten  to  fifteen  drops  of  a  mixture  of  one  part  of  sul-
phuric acid  with  three  parts  of  alcohol.


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.  198

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Hiccough :
violent;  obstinate;  causing  great  suffering  and  ex-
haustion.

Belching  after  cough :  sour.

I  Chronic  heartburn;  acidity  of  stomach.

Nausea  with  chilliness.

I  Vomiting :  of  drunkards ;  of  cachectic  persons  ;  sour,  first
water,  then  food.

Rising  of  mucus  so  sour  that  it  sets  teeth  on  edge.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Coldness  of  stomach,  with
relaxed  feeling ;  loss  of  appetite  and  great  debility.

I  Cold  water  chills  stomach  and  is  rejected  unless  mixed
with  alcoholic  liquor.

I  Acidity  of  stomach.

iGastralgia;  pains  contractive  and  violent  or  of  a  dull,
heavy,  aching  character,  with  pyrosis  and  much  flatu-
lence,

I  I  For  two  years  pains  in  pit  of  stomach,  first  with  sick-
ness and  severe  gastralgia ;  for  months  unable  to  walk
about  house  from  excessive  weakness  and  painfulness  of
limbs  and  cramp ;  pains  across  stomach  terrific,  causing
him  to  writhe  in  agony ;  too  powerless  to  get  in  and  out
of  bed  without  help ;  one  attack  confined  him  to  house
seven  weeks,  and  from  this  he  has  never  fully  recovered ;
pain  at  lower  part  of  chest,  commences  at  1.  and  extends
around  hypochondria  to  r.  side ;  comes  on  every  now
and  then  during  day  so  that  he  can  do  only  ver}"  light
work,  but  is  <  at  night ;  pain  <  about  an  hour  before
going  to  bed,  wakens  him  before  midnight,  beginning
about  11  and  lasting  till  about  1  or  2  a.m.;  commences
ver}^  suddenly  and  with  intense  severity,  and  declines
gradually ;  urine  thick  and  high-colored,  with  red  sedi-
this  to  effects  of  strong  medicines  he  has  taken.  IGas-
tralgia, probably  due  to  metallic  poisoning.

I  I  Indigestion  in  a  child  from  too  frequent  and  too  rapid
feeding;  stool  of  chopped-up  yellow  and  green  matter,
held  together  by  long  strings  of  yellowish  matter ;  irri-
table, feverish  and  exceedingly  prostrated.

1  Dyspepsia;  vomiting  in  morning;  constant  acidity  of
.stomach;  empty,  sour,  acrid,  offensive  belching;  sour
vomiting,  particularly  after  eating.

1  Dyspepsia,  with  great  debility,  constriction  of  throat,  rais-
ing of  mucus  so  sour  that  it  sets  teeth  on  edge.

•  Increased  secretion  of  gastric  mucus,  which rises  into
mouth  and  sets  teeth  on  edge.
^  Hypochondria, i Spleen  enhirged :  hard  and  painful;  hurts
when  coughing;  after  intermittent  fever.


199  SULPHtJRICUM  ACIDUM.

I  Stitches  in  liver  and  spleen.
^®  Abdomen. Weak  feeling  in  abdomen,  as  if  menses  would
come  on.
Laborlike  pains  in  abdomen  extending  to  hips  and  back.

■  Lead  colic  (antidote).

I  I  Pain  like  an  instrument  going  through  r.  groin  into

abdomen.
Colic,  with  sensation  as  if  a  hernia  would  protrude.

■  Inguinal  hernia.

I  Incarcerated  hernia  in  old  people,  constriction  coming  on
in  a  very  gradual  manner ;  pinching  constricted  feeling
in  hernia ;  sensation  of  fulness  in  abdomen ;  periodical
nausea  and  constipation;  hernia  not  very  sensitive;
incarcerated  part  not  very  hard  or  tense,  but  has  a
doughy  feel;  incarceration  may  last  for  days  without
symptoms  growing  severe;  gradual  accumulation  of
flatus,  pinching  in  abdomen,  periodical  transient  tear-
ing pains,  constant  nausea,  belching  of  sweet,  salty  or
bitter  fluid,  finally  vomiting ;  hernia  on  1.  side ;  melan-
cholic-phlegmatic temperament.
^^ Stool  and  Rectum.  Stools:  yellowish-white;  diarrhoeic,
with  passage  of  much  flatus ;  saffron-yellow ;  bright
yellow,  mucous,  looking  stringy  or  chopped  (cholera
infantum) ;  of  hard,  small,  black  lumps,  mixed  with
blood,  with  violent  pinching  in  anus;  green,  watery ;
black,  undigested;  watery  and  ofl'ensive,  smelling  like
rotten  eggs  ;  soft,  followed  by  a  feeling  of  emptiness  in
abdomen ;  soft,  pasty,  with  pressing  in  anus.

Aggravation:  in  children  during  dentition;  after  eating;
■  after  oysters.

Before  stool :  pressing  in  anus.

During  stool :  burning  in  rectum.

After  stool :  empty,  weary,  exhausted  feeling  in  abdomen;
pressing  in  anus.

■  Diarrhoea  with  great  debility  and  nervous  prostration;  a

sensation  of  trembling  all  over  body.

I  I  Diarrhoea  of  yellow,  stringy  mucus. ^Crusta  lactea.

■Summer  diarrhoea  from  eating  bad  or  unripe  fruit;  com-
mencing with  nausea,  sweat,  violent  colic,  pinching  and
burning  in  abdomen.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea: bowels  moved  frequently; during

intervals  free  from  pain  in  abdomen,  nausea,  etc.

■  Violent  pricking  in  anus,  she  has  to  rise  up  on  account

of  pain.

■  Varices  feel  damp  and  are  painful  to  touch ;  itch  violently;

pain  at  stool,  as  if  rectum  were  torn  to  pieces ;  stool  like
sheep's  dung;  piles  in  hard  drinkers.
"  Urinary  Organs. Diabetes  ; lassitude ; debility  ; despon-


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.  200

dency  ,  dulness  of  mind  and  of  sight,  itching  over  whole
body;  flatulency;  stitches  in  hepatic  region ;  skin  com-
pletely inactive,  cold  and  dry;  large  quantities  of  sugar
in  urine ;  typhoid  condition.

Diminished  secretion  of  brown  urine  becoming  turbid,
like  loam  water,  on  standing.

Sediment  like  blood  and  a  cuticle  on  urine.

Pain  in  bladder  if  call  to  urinate  is  postponed,
^"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Orchitis,  r.  side.
*'  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse,
preceded  by  distressing  nightmare.

Oozing  of  dark,  thin  blood.

Prolapsus  of  vagina ;  parts  look  greenish  and  smell  badly.

I Leucorrhcea :  acrid  or  burning;  milky  or  transparent;
of  bloody  mucus,  with  sensation  as  if  menses  would
appear.

■  Climacteric  age,  with  constant  hot  flushes,  and  a  feeling
of  tremor  all  over  body,  with  great  debility,  and  as  if
everything  must  be  done  in  a  hurr}^;  spitting  of  blood ;
constipation;  symptoms  are  <  by  smelling  (not  drink-
ing) coffee.
2*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i Nausea  and  vom-
iting during  pregnancy.

Sterility ;  menses  too  early  and  too  profuse.

I  I  Never  vomited  food,  but  could  not  eat  because  it  increased
distress  in  stomach  and  vomiting  of  mucus.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness
with  dryness  and  roughness  in  throat  and  larj^nx.

Larynx painful ; feels inelastic, causing difficulty in
swallowing.
^^  Respiration. Shortness  of  breath.

Respiration  :  rapid  with  shooting  in  cervical  muscles,  and
movement  of  wings  of  nose;  very  difficult,  larynx  moved
up  and  down  violently.
'^  Cough.  Cough :  dry,  two  short  hacks,  soreness  between
scapulae,  tiredness;  from  irritation  in  chest,  with  expec-
toration in  morning  of  dark  blood,  or  of  a  thin,  yellow,
blood-streaked  mucus  tasting  sour ;  followed  by  belch-
ing (phthisis);  in  open  air,  <  from  walking,  riding,
cold  water  and  odor  of  coffee ;  and  haemoptysis  after
typhus.
*®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Stitches  :  in  chest ;  about  heart;
through  upper  part  of  1.  chest  to  shoulder  blade.

Sensation  of  great  weakness  in  chest.

Burning  in  1.  side  of  chest  to  throat.

Shooting  stinging,  now  in  scapula,  again  in  armpit,  or  in
chest.

Pressure  on  1.  side  of  chest  and  in  pit  of  stomach.


201  SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.

Irritation  in  chest  with  cough  and  expectoration  in  morn-
ing of  dark  blood,  or  of  thin,  yellow,  blood-streaked
mucus,  generally  of  a  sourish  taste.

■  Profuse  hemorrhage  from  lungs. ^Tuberculosis.

■  Haemoptysis ;  after  pneumonia ;  in  climacteric  period.
Ulceration  in  different  parts  of  lungs.

I  I  Abundant  pleuritic  exudation,  patient  could  not  sit  up,
heart  displaced  ;  legs  had  to  hang,  otherwise  oppression
of  chest.
I  I  Phthisis ; severe  hemorrhages  ; ulcers  in  lungs  broke
and expectoration was exceedingly foul,  exhausting
sweats,  great  prostration.
^'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation,  without  fear
or  anxiety.
Shooting  through  heart.

Pulse : small,  feeble,  accelerated ; affected  by  alcoholic
drinks.
'"  Outer  Chest. Sternum  sore,  as  if  beaten.
^^  Neck  and  Back, l  '  Pain  in  small  of  back.
Weakness  in  back,  can  scarcely  stand  alone.
Stiffness  in  back  on  rising  in  morning.
Blood-boils  on  back.

Large  suppurating  swelling  on  r.  side  of  neck.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Stitches :  in  shoulder  joints  on  lifting  arms ;
in  finger  joints.
Tension  in  elbow  joint.

■  Blue  spots  on  arms;  purpura.
Chilblains  on  hands.

Red  swelling  on  back  of  hands,  not  painful.

After  erysipelas,  inflamed  swelling  of  little  finger.
'^  Lower  Limbs, l  '  Inner  surface  of  thighs  red,  sore,  exco-
riated after  riding.

Knees  painfully  weak.

Red  itching  spots  on  tibia.

Blood-red  very  painful  scar  on  tibia.

Ankles  weak,  cannot  walk.

Feet  cold,  swollen.

Distension  of  veins  of  feet.

Stitches  in  corns.
"  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down  :  dizziness  >  ;  on
affected  side,  gnawing  in  face  >.

Sitting:  could  not,  pleuritic  exudation.

Legs  have  to  hang :  otherwise  oppression  of  chest ;  pleu-
ritic exudation.

Motion:  of  tongue  causes  bleeding  of  gums;  coughing
hurts  spleen.

On  rising :  vertigo  returns ;  stiffness  in  back.

On  lifting  arms :  stitches  in  shoulder  joints.


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.  202

Walking:  in  open  air,  brain  as  if  loose;  cough  <.
Riding :  cough  <  ;  soreness  of  thighs.
^^  Nerves, i  Great  debility ;  sensation  of  tremor  all  over  body,
without  trembling,

■  Great  exhaustion  and  nervous  prostration.
Restlessness ;  does  everything  hurriedly.

^^  Sleep. Falls  asleep  late  and  wakens  too  early.

During  sleep  twitches,  especially  of  fingers.
^^  Time. Morning :  tension  in  lids,  difficult  to  open ;  as  of  a
lump  or  foreign  body  in  r.  outer  canthus  ;  vomiting,  in
alcoholism,  and  dyspepsia ;  expectoration  of  dark  blood ;
stiffness  in  back  ;  sweat.
Forenoon:  painful  shocks  in  head  <.
Evening :  painful  shocks  in  head ;  nosebleed ;  toothache

<  :  heat  <.

9  P.M. :  facial  neuralgia.

Night:  gastralgic  pain  <,  wakes  him  before  midnight,
lasts  until  2  a.m.  ;  sweat.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air :  soreness  in  scalp

<  ;  cough.
Indoors:  chilliness  <.
Warmth:  gnawing  pain  in  face  >.
Heat:  toothache  >.

Cold:  toothache  <.
Cold  water:  chills  stomach;  cough  <.
Excess  of  heat  or  cold :  <  faceache.
*° Fever. Frequently  chilly  during  day;  <  indoors,  >  out-
doors when  exercising.
Frequent  chills  running  down  body.
Heat  in  evening  and  in  bed.

■  Flushes  of  heat,  with  sweat. ^Climaxis.

Sweat:  excessive,  mostly  on  upper  body;  from  motion,
continued  after  sitting  down ;  sour ;  cold,  immediately
after  eating  warm  food ;  mornings ;  at  night,  profuse,
>  by  drinking  wine ;  with  great  debility.

I  I  Pains  across  loins,  much  shaking  of  whole  body,  with
shivering  as  from  cold,  coming  in  paroxysms ;  attacks
begin  with  coldness  and  trembling,  then  comes  general
tremor ;  keeps  about  for  two  or  three  days,  attacks  come
irregularly,  sometimes  in  evening,  sometimes  in  morn-
ing; tongue  parched,  appetite  failing,  urination  painful,
much  ardor  urinse  and  tenesmus;  after  cold  shivers
cease  gets  warm  and  perspires ;  thirst  throughout.
^Ague.

I  Typhus  putridus,  with  great  disposition  to  hemorrhage
from  capillaries  and  rapid  sinking  of  vital  forces;  ooz-
ing of  dark,  thin  blood ;  face  deadly  pale ;  tendency  to
gangrene.

I  I  Black  vomit. ^Yellow  fever.


203  .  SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Attacks  come  on  regularly :  ague.

Commences  suddenly,  declines  gradually  :  gastralgia.

Gradually  increasing  and  suddenly  ceasing :  headache ;
gnawing  pain  in  face;  toothache.

Climacteric  period  :  hot  flushes ;  haemoptysis.

For  two  years :  gastralgia.

For  seven  weeks :  attack  of  gastralgia.

Every  Spring:  pustular  eruption  after  itch.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  swelling  of  parotis ; her-
nia ;  stitches  from  chest  to  shoulder  blade  ;  burning  in
chest ;  pressure  on  chest.

Right :  outer  canthus  as  of  a  lump  or  foreign  body ;  blue
circle  under  eye ;  buzzing  in  ear ;  neuralgia  in  ear ;
gnawing  pain  in  temple  and  jaw;  pain  in  eyetooth;
pain  in  groin ;  suppurating  swelling  in  neck.

Left  to  r.:  pain  around  hypochondria.
"  Sensations.  As  if  brain  were  loose  and  falling  from  side  to
side ;  as  if  a  plug  were  thrust  quickly  into  head  ;  as  from
subcutaneous  ulceration  in  scalp ;  as  of  a  foreign  body
in  r.  outer  canthus ;  as  of  a  lump  in  r.  outer  canthus ;  as
of  a  leaf  lying  before  ear ;  as  if  white  of  egg  had  dried
on  face ;  as  if  skin  of  cheek  and  chin  were  pinched ;  as
of  want  of  elasticity  of  vocal  organs ;  as  if  there  were  a
lump  in  throat;  as  if  menses  would  come  on ;  as  of  an
instrument  going  through  r.  groin  into  abdomen ;  as  if
a  hernia  would  protrude;  as  if  rectum  were  torn  to
pieces  during  stool.

Pain :  in  submaxillary  glands ;  in  stomach  after  eating ;
in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  spleen ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  scar
on  tibia ;  across  loins.

Terrific  pain  :  across  stomach.

Painful  shocks:  in  forehead  and  temples.

Lancinating :  in  throat.

Jerking  pain  :  from  temple  to  lower  teeth.

Tearing  pain :  in  abdomen ;  in  knees,  joints  of  feet,
arms,  etc.

Laborlike  pains :  in  abdomen,  hips  and  back.

Stitches :  in  liver ;  in  spleen ;  in  chest ;  about  heart ;
through  upper  1.  chest  to  shoulder  blade;  in  shoulder
joints ;  in  finger  joints ;  in  corns.

Shooting  stinging:  in  scar  on  lower  jaws;  in  scapula;
armpit  and  chest.

Shooting :  in  cervical  muscles ;  through  heart.

Stinging :  in  chest  and  throat.

Pricking :  in  anus.

Gnawing  pain :  in  ramus  of  lower  jaw  and  temple ;  in
ulcers.

Burning:  in  oesophagus  and  stomach ;  in  rectum;  in  abdo-
men ;  in  1.  chest  to  throat.


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.  .  204

Burnt  feeling :  on  tongue.

Pinching:  in  abdomen;  in  anus.

Contractive  pain  :  in  stomach.

Constriction  :  in  throat ;  in  hernia.

Dull,  heavy  pain  :  in  stomach.

Aching  pain :  from  temple  to  lower  teeth  ;  in  stomach.

Soreness :  general ;  between  scapulse ;  of  sternum,  as  if
beaten  ;  of  skin.

Rawness :  in  throat.

Pressure :  on  1.  chest ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  painful,  in  dif-
ferent parts,  increases  slowly,  suddenly  disappears.

Stiffness :  in  back.

Tension  :  in  lids ;  in  forehead ;  in  elbow  joints.

Roughness  :  in  throat.

Tingling :  of  skin.

Weakness :  in  abdomen ;  in  chest ;  in  back ;  of  knees ;  of
ankles.

Trembling  sensation  :  all  over  body.

Emptiness :  in  abdomen.

Fulness :  in  abdomen.

Dulness :  of  teeth.

Coldness:  and  relaxed  feeling  in  stomach.

Itching :  in  varices ;  over  whole  body ;  spots  on  tibia ;  of
eruptions.

Dryness :  in  mouth.
**  Tissues. iPurpura  hsemorrhagica.

Scars  become  blood-red  or  blue,  and  painful.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  glands.

Veins  (of  feet)  distended ;  venous  plethora.

1 1  Weak  and  exhausted  from  deep-seated  dyscrasia.

1 1  Hemorrhages  of  black  blood  from  all  outlets  of  body.

Marasmus. in  nervous,  restless,  weakly  children;  they  do
everything  hurriedly  but  without  vim ;  child  smells
sour  despite  most  careful  washing.

I  In  injuries  from  being  bruised  or  cut,  especially  when

ecchymosed.

■  Pressing  pains  in  different  parts,  increasing  slowly  and
suddenly  disappearing.
*' Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. iBad  effects  from
mechanical  injuries,  when  there  are  bruises,  chafing^
lividity  of  skin.

Scratching  seldom  relieves  itching,  but  changes  its  locality.

Touch :  scalp  painful.

Pressure:  pain  in  eyetooth  <.
*®Skin. I  Distressing  itching  and  tingling  of  skin  with  erup-
tions ;  urticaria ;  pemphigus ;  pruritus  vulvte.

Scars  turn  blood-red  and  hurt.

I I  Blue  spots  like  ecchymosis,  or  as  from  suggillation ;  pur-
pura hsemorrhagica.


205  SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM.

Red  itching  blotches  on  skin.
Yellow  skin,  livid  spots.

■  Gangrenous  tendency  after  bruises;  particularly  in  old

people.

Soreness  of  skin;  chafed  when  walking  or  riding;  gan-
grenous ulceration.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  glands.

Gnawing  pain  in  ulcers.

I  I  Itchiness  of  skin;  single  pustules  appear  every  Spring,
after  imperfectly  cured  itch.

Secondary  syphilis,  aphthee,  maculae,  etc.

■  Hemorrhages  from  all  outlets  of  body. /^Purpura.

I  Boils,  bruises,  bedsores,  contusions,  injuries  by  falling,
knocking,  etc.,  chilblains.

Erythema  nodosum.

I  I  Appearance  of  small,  red  spots  about  ankles,  thence
spreading  rapidly  over  whole  body,  becoming  grouped,
coalescing,  forming  suggillations  as  large  as  palm  of
hand,  at  first  bright-red,  then  bluish,  violet-colored,
finally  greenish-yellow ;  mucous  membrane  of  nose  and
mouth  affected ;  hemorrhages  from  these  parts.

I  I  Man  syphilitic,  taken  large  quantities  of  Mercury,  and
had  been  salivated ;  during  war  ball  entered  r.  eye,
destroying  it,  and  remained  embedded  in  brain ;  tearing
pains  in  knees,  joints  of  feet,  arms  and  nearly  all  joints;
purpura  hsemorrhagica;  gums  bleed  and  fall  off  in  pieces;
at  inside  of  cheeks  cancrum  oris,  with  disgustingly  foul
odor ;  whole  face  swelled  and  general  anasarca ;  urine
showed  seven-eighths  albumen.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Frequently  indicated  for  old
people,  particularly  women.

Child  sour  despite  careful  washing.

Light-haired  people.

In  climacteric  years,  flushes  of  heat.

When  some  deep-seated  dyscrasia  prevails,  the  child  weak
and  exhausted,  with  no  other  symptoms.

Child,  set.  2 ;  diphtheria.
. Child,  aet.  3 ;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  9,  delicate,  slender,  ansemic;  purpura.

Girl,  set.  9  ;  morbus  maculosis.

Young  man,  set.  17 ;  pleuritic  exudation  and  palpitation
of  heart.

Lady,  set.  25 ;  facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  30 ;  pleuritic  exudation.

French  woman,  set.  35;  toothache.

Man,  set.  36,  during  rheumatic  attack  ;  purpura.

Woman,  set.  36,  always  had  a  very  irritable  stomach ;  dur-
ing fourth  pregnancy,  vomiting.


SULPHURICUM  ACIDUM— SUMBUL.  206

Man,  aet.  46,  apparently  strong  and  healthy,  suffering  two

years;  gastralgia.
Man,  set.  49,  gardener,  fine  hearty  looking,  three  years

ago  fell  thirty  feet  and  struck  top  of  head,  after  which

he  was  unconscious  five  weeks, since  then  suffering;

mental  dejection.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Pulsat.
It  antidotes :  lead  poisoning.
Compatible:  after  Arnic.
Complementary:  Pulsat


SUMBUL

Musk  Root.  Umbelliferse.

The  plant,  a  perennial,  is  a  native  of  the  Orient ;  the  root  enters  commerce  by
way  of  Russia;  from  it,  finely  powdered,  is  prepared  the  alcoholic  tincture.

Provings  by  Lembke,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  34,  p.  273;  Cattell,  Brit.  Jour.  Horn.,  vol.
9,  p.  256,  1852;  Muranjew,  Med.  Zeit.  Euss.,  1853;  Hirschel's  Arch.,  vol.  1,  p.
241;  Altschul,  Brit.  Jour,  of  Horn.,  vol.  11,  p.  678,  1853.

CiiiKiCAii  Authorities. — Diarrhoea,  Altschul,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  435  ;
Ascarides,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  289 ;  Chorea,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  289 ;
Porrigo,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  290.

^  Mind. I  Intellect  dull  in  morning; inability to study;
clearer  in  evening  and  in  warmth.
Happy  disposition  with  continued  smiling; expression

idiotic ;  fear  of  becoming  insane. /^Chorea.
I  I  Hysterical  mood,  even  in  men ;  alternate  laughter  and
tears;  easily  excited; emotional;  irritable;  fidgety,  at
first  spirits  are  exalted,  then  depressed.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  on  stooping,  using  warm  water,  mov-
ing about  or  rising  from  a  seat,  feeling  a  want  of  security.
Hysteria,  with  tendency  to  faint  from  slightest  cause.
Fits,  with  falling  forward.
^  Inner  Head. Cold  in  head,  <  in  morning.
^  Outer  Head. ■  Porrigo  in  infants,  1.  side  of  scalp ; spots
round  and  dry,  slightly  raised,  and  reddened  at  edges,
with  branlike  scales  in  centre.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Stuffing  in  nose.

Tenacious  yellow  mucus  in  nose;  <  in  1.  nostril.
^  Upper  Face. Acne  punctata,  black  pores  on  face.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue. Brown  coating  on  tongue  in  morning.
Tongue  feels  rough  as  if  scraped,  with  heat  in  throat.


207  .  SUMBUL.

IS  Throat. Erosion,  burDing  heat  and  rawness  in  throat,  with
tenacious  mucus.
Catarrhs  of  children,  with  great  nervous  irritation,  sleep-
lessness and  spasms.
^^  Abdomen. Tensive  pain  and  gnawing  in  r.  hypogastrium.

Abdomen  full,  distended,  painful.
*" Stool  and  Rectum. iiAscarides,  with bloated,  drumlike
abdomen  and  constipation ;  picking  at  nostrils.
I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea  due  to  torpid,  inert  condition  of  intes-
tinal canal ;  discharges  cause  atony ;  diarrhoea  in  typhoid
fever.
^*  Urinary  Organs. Urine  clear,  yellowish-red,  cloud  on  bot-
tom, and  an  oily  pellicle  on  surface.
Constant  desire  to  urinate.
Much  urinary  difficulty.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Absence  of  erections  and  all  sexual

desire.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i '  Corkscrew  pains  in  1.  region  of
uterus  and  its  appendages.
Tensive  pain  like  a  string  pulling  in  r.  breast.
Tightness,  tensive  stretched  feeling  across  chest  between  1.

breast  and  sternum  and  in  1.  breast,  <  on  inspiration.
White  leucorrhoea,  <  after  sitting.
Menses  too  early.
Flushings  at  climacteric  period.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness.
^^Respiration, i  Asthma,  catarrhal,  but  more  especially  spas-
modic, hysterical.
^^  Cough. Hacking  cough.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Pulse  very  irregular,  com-
pressible ;  want  of  elasticity  in  vessels.
I  Nervous  affections  of  heart  ;  rheumatic  carditis;  heart's
impulse  strong,  jerking,  especially  after  exertion  or  dur-
ing digestion;  action  of  heart  full  and  sharp,  strokes  at
times  irregular ;  beating  rapidly  eight  or  ten  times,  then
slowdy  ;  bellows  sound  of  heart,  with  violent  and  irreg-
ular palpitations  and  flushes  of  heat  in  floods  from  back;
sharp  pains,  like  a  knife,  in  chest ;  oppression  in  1.  chest,
clogged  sensation;  <  on  stooping;  1.  arm  numb,  heavy
and  weary,  with  sharp,  wiry  shooting  in  fingers ;  hys-
terical mood.
■  Nervous  palpitation  in  hysterical  subjects,  or  at  change

of  life.
Heart  beats  softly,  as  if  in  water,  with  sinking  of  heart,

and  sickliness  and  faintness  all  over.
Palpitation  at  least  exertion,  <  by  paying  attention  to  it.
Posteriorly  over  1.  scapular  region,  an  indistinct  mixed
murmur  and  purring  sound,  associated  with  rheuma-
tism ;  not  heard  anteriorly.


SUMBUL.  208

^^  Neck  and  Back. Cannot  keep  warm ; least  draft  is  felt

down  spine.
'^  Rest. Position. Motion. Stooping : vertigo ; heart
symptoms  <.
Sitting:  leucorrhcea  <  after.
Motion :  vertigo ;  palpitation.
Rising :  vertigo.
^^  Nerves. Chorea :  constant  jerking  of  head  and  limbs,  with
protrusion  of  tongue ;  voracious  appetite.
I  I  Dropsy  dependent  on  impaired  nervous  vitality.
I  I  Hysteria  and  hysterical  spasms.
I  I  Epilepsy,  she  falls  suddenly  forward,  foaming  at  mouth ;

unconsciousness.
■  Tendency  to  faint  from  slightest  cause.
'^Time. Morning: intellect  dull ; cold  in  head  <; brown
coating  on  tongue.
Evening :  intellect  clearer.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Least  draft  is  felt  down  spine.

Warmth :  intellect  clearer.
^^  Fever. Dry,  transient  heat  all  over  body.
Coldness  of  body,  pulse  66.

■Typhoid  fever  with  cerebral  excitement;  low  and  nerv-
ous fevers  succeeding  to  typhus.
Numbness  and  coldness  of  tips  of  fingers.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Irregular action of  heart, beats
rapidly  eight  or  ten  times,  then  slowly.
Climacteric  period  :  flushes ;  nervous  palpitation.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  porrigo  on  scalp ;  yellow
mucus  in  nostril ; corkscrew  pains  in  uterus ;  oppres-
sion in  chest ;  arm  numb ;  shooting  in  fingers ;  mur-
mur over  scapular  region.
Right :  tensive  pain  and  gnawing  in  hypogastrium  ;  ten-
sive pain  in  breast;  miliary  spots  on  shoulder  blade
and  hip.
^  Sensations. As  if  scraped,  tongue ;  like  a  string  pulling  in
r.  breast ;  clogged  sensation  in  1.  chest;  as  if  heart  were
beating  in  water.
Knifelike  pains  in  chest.

Corkscrew  pains  in  region  of  uterus  and  appendages.
Sharp  wiry  shooting  :  in  fingers.
Burning  heat :  in  throat.
Gnawing:  in  r.  hypogastrium.
Rawness :  in  throat.

Tensive  pain  :  in  r.  hypogastrium ;  in  r.  breast.
Tightness:  across  chest;  in  1.  breast.
Numbness :  in  1.  arm  ;  of  tips  of  fingers.
Heaviness:  in  1.  arm.
^^  Tissues. Deranges  action  of  inhibitory  nerves,  while at


209  SUMBUL-SYMPHYTUM.

same  time  it  causes  a  paresis  of  cardiac  branches  of

Vertigo,  faintness;  dreams  and  mental  conditions  show
deficient  innervation.

Anomalous  functional  disorders  of  heart,  occurring  in  per-
sons possessing  a  peculiarly  sensitive  nervous  system,
especially  in  hysterical  subjects.

Weakened  heart.
*^  Skin. Acne  punctata,  black  pores  on  face.

I  iPorrigo  in  infants  on  1.  side  of  scalp;  spots  round  and
dry,  slightly  raised  and  reddened  at  edges,  with  bran-
like scales  in  centre.

Skin  cold,  white,  shrunken  and  dry  as  if  washed  in  acrid
water.

Miliary  spots  on  back,  r.  shoulder  blade  and  hip.

Reddish  spots  on  forehead,  chin  and  cheeks,  containing
either  water,  or  thick,  white,  curdy  matter.

Itching  in  skin.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Child,  set.  2;  ascarides.

Girl,  set.  10,  bilious-sanguine  temperament;  chorea.
*^ Relations. Compare: Asajwt.  and  Moschus  in  low  fevers,

hysteria,  etc.


SYMPHYTUM,

Comfrey;  Healing  Herb.  Borraginacese.

A  native  of  Europe,  where  it  grows  on  banks  of  streams  and  in  meadows  ;  also
found  in  United  States.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root.
Introduced  by  Jeaues.
Fragmentary  proving  by  Macfarlan.

Clinical  Authorities. — Injury  to  eye,  Gross,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  317 ;
Inflammation  of  inferior  maxillary  bone,  Gate,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  378 ;  Paiii  in  knee,
Funk,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  928  ;  Fracture  of  bones,  Gilchrist,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.
9,  p.  79;  Non-union  of  fracture,  Hendrichs,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  71.

^  Inner  Head.  Headache  in  occiput,  in  top  of  head,  in  fore-
head, changing  places.

*  Sight  and  Eyes,  i  iPain  in  eyes  after  a  knock  or  contusion
of  an  obtuse  body.

VOL.  X. — 14.


SYMPHYTUM.  210

.  I  I  After  being  struck  upon  eye  with  a  cane  by  a  child,  no
visible  injury,  but  a  sensation  on  closing  eye  as  if  upper
.  lid  passed  over  an  elevation  on  bulb  of  eye ;  on  waking
eye  could  not  be  easily  opened,  seemed  spasmodically
closed.
^Hearing  and  Ears. Cannot  hear  well ;  feels  as  if  ears  were
stopped  up.
Inflamed  ears.
® Lower  Face. '  i Inflammation  of  inferior  maxillary  bone;

hard,  red  swelling.
"  Scrobieulum  and  Stomach. Pains  across  epigastrium  from
one  side  to  other,  <  opposite  spleen,  in  walking;  when
sitting  <  about  navel ;  griping  pain.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  stopped ;  headache,  weight
in  forehead  when  she  stoops  ;  has  it  almost  all  time;  a
good  deal  of  fever  every  other  hour ;  cold  all  day,  cramp
and  diarrhoea ;  nose  sore  inside  alee,  wants  to  pick  it ;
wants  to  rub  her  eyes;  inflamed  ears;  feels  as  if  some-
thing were  in  them,  stopped  up,  cannot  hear  well.
^^  Neck  and  Back. '  i  Psoas  abscess.

^^  Lower  Limbs. '  i  More  than a  year  ago  fell  and  struck
knee  upon  a  stone ;  wound  healed  and  left  scarcely  any
trace,  but  there  remained  an  acute  stitching  pain  in
place,  felt  when  clothing  touched  part,  or  when  knee
was  bent.
I  I  Man  suffering  with  a  spontaneous  luxation  of  thigh
since  childhood,  fell  and  received  a  fracture  of  affected
thigh  ;  after  two  months  fragments  were  quite  movable,
and  as  union  was  despaired  of,  an  apparatus  was  made
which  allowed  him  to  sit  on  a  chair  during  day;  Sym-
pJiytum  4,  four  globules  every  six  hours,  brought  about
complete  union  in  twenty  days.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting :  pain  about  navel.
Stooping :  weight  in  forehead.
Walking:  pain  opposite  spleen.
*^  Attacks,  i?eriodicity. Every  other  hour :  fever.

All  day :  cold.
*^  Sensations. As  if  upper  lid  passed  over  an  elevation  on  clos-
ing eye ;  as  if  ears  were  stopped  up.
Peculiar  pain:  in  periosteum,  after  wounds  have  healed.
Pain  :  in  eyes  after  a  knock  or  contusion ;  across  epigas-
trium.
Stitching  pain :  in  healed  wound  on  knee.
Griping  pain  :  about  navel.
Weight:  in  forehead  when  stooping.
*' Tissues. Bruises,  sprains;  sore  breasts.

I  I  Inflammation  of  bones;  diseased  spinous  processes.
I  I  Psoas  abscess.


211  .  SYMPHYTUM— SYPHILINUM.

I  Facilitates  union  of  fractured  bones  and  lessens  peculiar
pricking  pain  ;  favors  production  of  callous.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  of  clothing :
acute  pain  in  injured  knee,  after  wound  healed.
Wants  to  rest  eyes.
■  Mechanical injuries, bad effects from blov.'s, bruises,

thrusts  on  eye.
Non-union  of  fracture,  particularly  when  trouble  is of

nervous  origin.
Injury  to  bones;  for  example,  when  a  blow  on  eyes  injures

orbital  plates  of  frontal  bone.
Irritable  stump  after  amputation.

Peculiar  pain  in  periosteum  after  wounds  have  healed.
Irritability  of  bone  at  point  of  fracture.
Gunshot  wounds.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  eet.  7,  psoas  abscess.

Miss  P.,  set.  48;  inflammation  of  inferior  maxillary  bone.
^'^ Relations. Compare: Arnic.  in  blows;  Fluor, ac,  Hepar,
Calc.  phos.  and  Silica  in  injuries  to  bones.


SYPHILINUM. (Luesinum.)
Syphilitic  Virus.  A  Nosode.

Provings  by  Swan,  Med.  Adv.,  1880,  vol.  21,  pp.  123-142.

Authorities  quoted  by  Swan,  Boardman,  Wildes,  Ballard,  Eggert,  Morgan,
Ostrom,  Bradshaw,  Skinner,  Theobald,  Morrison,  Clausen,  Berridge,  Burritt,
Nichols,  Jackson,  Foster,  Nash,  Schmidt,  Boyce,  Hawley,  Morrow,  Haynes,  Carr,
Allen,  H.  C,  Kent,  etc.

The  collection  of  cures  and  observations,  by  Thomas  Wildes,  Kingston,  Jamaica
published  in  the  Homoeopathic  Physician,  1891,  is  incorporated.

The  n  signifies  nosodes  or  symptoms  from  cases  of  disease.

Clinical  Authorities. — Chronic  syphilitic  headache  affecting  mind,  Wildes,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.11,  p.  272;  Rheumatic  ophthalmia,  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  461 ;  Inflam-
mation of  cornea,  Norton,  Ophth.  Tl;er;ip.,  p.  180  ;  Ozana  syphilitica,  Wildes,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.  11,  p.  274;  Ptosis,  Wildes,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  11,  p.  269;  Cancer  of  r.
maxilla  (relieved  nightly  pain),  W.  L.  Eeed,  MSS.,  per  Kent ;  Faded  paralysis,
W^ildes,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  11,  p.  269  ;  Aphasia,  Parcdysis,  Wildes,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  11,  p.  269  ;  Pain  along  spermatic  cords,  Boardman,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  448  ;  Pubo,
etc.,  Swan,  MSS.;  Leucorrhma,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  194;  Asthma,  Os-
trom, Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  262 ;  Caries  of  spine,  Nash,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  15 ;  Nervous
chills,  etc.,  Swan,  MSS.;  Rheumatism,  Schmitt,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  293  ;  Papular


SYPHILINUM.  .  212

eruption, 'Wilde'f,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  11 ;  Blood-boil,  Xepra-syphilis  from  vaccination,
Wildes,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  11 ;  Osteosarcoma  in  labia,  Wildes,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  11 ;
Syphilitic  destruction  of  hard  and  soft  palates,  Wildes,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  11,  p.  274;
Syphilis,  Skinner,  Med.  Iiiv.,  vol.  4,  p.  568;  Syphilitic  neuralgia  (worse  at  night),
W.  L.  Keed,  MSS.,  per  Kent;  Syphilitic  prurigo  and  herpes,  Wildes,  Horn.  Phys.,
vol.  11.

^  Mind. Loss  of  memory, n.

Loses  remembrance  of  passing  occurrences,  names,  dates,
etc.,  while  all  occurrences  previous  to  inception  of  dis-
ease are  remembered  as  distinctly  as  ever. n.

Great  difficulty,  and  sometimes  impossibility  of  concen-
trating thoughts  on  particular  subjects;  yet  at  same
time  can  recollect  consecutive  events  and  details  which
occurred  twenty-five  or  thirty  years  previously,  in  order
of  occurrence,  almost  without  effort, n.

Cannot  remember  names  of  persons,  books  or  places.

Difficulty  in  making  arithmetical  calculations.

Very  nervous,  weeping  without  cause.

I  I  Cross,  irritable,  peevish. ^Periodical  neuralgia  in  head.

I  I  Very  despondent,  does  not  think  will  ever  get  better.
^Syphilitic  sore  mouth.

I  I  Terrible  dread  of  night,  not  on  account  of  cough  so
much  as  on  account  of  mental  and  physical  exhaustion
when  she  awakes ;  it  is  intolerable,  death  is  preferable ;
she  fears  to  prepare  for  night  and  is  positively  in  abject
fear  of  suffering,  in  form  of  exhaustion,  on  waking ;  it  is
<  by  cough,  but  it  is  quite  independent  of  cough  as
she  wakes  in  this  awful  state ;  always  <  as  night  ap-
proaches; leaves  her  about  daylight,  which  she  prays
for. ^Spring  cough.

Feeling  as  if  going  insane,  or  about  to  be  paralyzed.

A far-away feeling, with apathy and indifference to
future.
^  Sensorium, Vertigo  on  looking  up,  seems  to  be  caused  by

heat.
^  Inner  Head.  ■  Headache :  linear,  from  or  near  one  eye
backward  ;  lateral ;  frontal ;  from  temple  to  temple ;
deep  into  brain  from  vertex;  as  from  pressure  on  ver-
tex ;  in  either  temple,  extending  into  or  from  eye,  >  by
warmth ;  in  bones  of  head  ;  <  by  heat  of  sun  ;  after  sun-
stroke.

Sick-headache,  pains  intolerable,  arteries  of  head  full  and
pulsating  violently  ;  high  fever,  frequent  retching  on
trying  to  vomit;  menses  regular,  but  very  scanty.

I  I  Lancinating  pain  in  occiput,  invariably  <  at  night, n.

Headache  and  great  debility.

I  Neuralgic  cephalalgia  causing  sleeplessness  or  delirium


213  .  SYPHILINUM.

at  night,  always  commencing  about  4  p.m.;  <  at  from
10  to  11,  and  ceasing  at  daylight.

Great  loss  of  hair. n.

I  I  Nervous  chills  preceded  by  aching  pains  in  head,  espe-
cially in  occiput  and  integuments  thereof,  head  feeling
heavy,  sore,  congested  ;  also  frontal  headache  about  one-
half  or  two-thirds  inch  wide  across  forehead  under  eye-
brows; aching  pains  below  waist,  in  pelvis  and  extrem-
ities, especially  in  tibia,  which  is  sensitive  to  touch ;
pains  commence  about  4  p.m.,  culminate  about  midnight
in  delirium,  and  cease  entirely  at  daylight.

Bursting  sensation  in  vertex  as  from  severe  cold.

Pain  from  eyes  through  to  occiput,  with  sensation  of
weight  in  occiput  drawing  head  back,  or  as  if  it  were
pulled  back  ;  eyes  ache  and  smart.

I  I  Constant  linear  headache,  commencing  at  both  angles
of  forehead  and  extending  in  parallel  lines  backward —
a  precursor  of  epileptic  attack.

Heavy,  crushing,  cutting  pain  across  base  of  cerebellum.

Heavy,  clouded,  dull  feeling  in  base  of  brain.

1  I  Syphilitic  cephalalgia  in  occiput,  intolerable,  extending
to  nervous  ganglia  of  ne<3k,  causing  hardening  of  cords ;
attacks  at  irregular  intervals,  especially  after  excitement.
^Secondary  syphilis.

I  Headache  through  temples,  thence  vertically,  like  an
inverted  letter  T.

I  I  Coronal  headache. ^Secondary  syphilis.

■  Headaches  accompanied  by  great  restlessness,  sleepless-
ness and  general  nervous  erethism.

I  1  Syphilitic  headache  for  many  months,  piercing,  pressing,
excruciating  over  r.  eye,  extending  deep  into  brain ;
losing  continuity  of  thought  and  memory;  makes  re-
peated mistakes  in  figures.
*  Outer  Head.  Suffusion  and  full  feeling  in  face,  throat  and
head,  with  innumerable  small  enlarged  cervical  glands.

Sore,  one  and  a  half  inches  in  diameter,  on  occipital  bone,
covered  with  a  thick,  yellow-white  scab.

I  I  Dirty  eruption  on  scalp.
^  Sight  and  Eyes,  l  iRed  papulous  eruption  around  1.  inner
canthus,  with  isolated  pimples  on  side  of  nose,  cheek
and  eyebrow;  these  pimples  were  red,  with  depressed
they  were  most  dense;  pimples  bleed  when  scabs  come
off;  agglutination  of  lids.

Myopia, n.

Sensation  of  heat  with  a  little  pain  in  outer  half  of  1.  lids.

Sharp  pulsating  pain,  occasionally  at  outer  end  of  supe-
rior border  of  r.  orbit,  apparently  in  periosteum.


SYPHILINUM.  214

■  Upper  lids  swollen.

I  During  sleep  lids  adhere. ^Infantile  syphilis.

■  Ptosis : paralytica; eyes  look  sleepy  from  lowering  of

upper  lid.
Diplopia,  one  image  seen  lower  than  other.
Strabismus  paralytica,  eye  turning  inward,  and  pupil  can

only  be  turned  outward  as  far  as  median  line.

■  Paralysis  of  superior  oblique.

■  Chronic  recurrent  phlyctenular  inflammation  of  cornea;

successive  crops  of  phlyctenules  and  abrasion  of  epi-
thelial layer  of  cornea;  intense  photophobia;  profuse
lachrymation  ;  redness  and  pain  well  marked  ;  delicate
scrofulous  children,  especially  if  any  trace  of  hereditary
syphilis  remains.
Interstitial  keratitis.

■  Chronic  congested  spots  on  eye,  more  often  on  temporal

side,  usually  about  one  to  three  lines  behind  cornea,  of
a  dark-red  color,  apparently  embedded  in  sclera.  ^Syph-
ilis.

Photophobia,  black  spots,  shreds  or  veils  before  sight.

Itching  of  1.  inner  canthus.

I  I  Left  eyeball  covered  with  funguslike  growth,  pain  in-
tense, <  at  night.

I  I  Eyes  red  and  inflamed.

■  Acute  ophthalmia  neonatorum, n.

I  I  Eyes  swollen  and  closed  with  syphilitic  ophthalmia,  pus
running  out  of  them. ^Infantile  syphilis.

I  I  Redness  and  swelling  of  outer  halt  of  both  lower  tarsal
edges.

I  1  Acute  ].  conjunctivitis,  with  considerable  pain  in  eye-
ball, photophobia  and  lachrymation,  followed  by  iritis;
nocturnal  aching  in  eyeball,  pain  extremely  violent  from
2  to  5  A.M.;  sight  impaired.  ^After  syphilis  three  or
four  years  ago.

I  I  Syphilitic  iritis,  intense  pain  steadily  increasing  night
after  night;  <  between  2  and  5  a.m.,  coming  almost  to
the  minute  and  ceasing  same  way. ^Secondar}'  syphilis.

Iritis  with  photophobia,  congestion  of  conjunctiva  and
sclerotica,  with  puffiness  of  conjunctival  mucous  mem-
brane ;  chemosis,  pupil  immovable,  diminution  of  sight;
supraorbital  pain.

I  I  Pain  in  r.  inner  canthus  as  if  blood  went  there  and
could  go  no  further,  also  in  r.  temple.  ^Rheumatic
iritis.

I  I  At  1  P.M.  scalding  lachrymation  of  r.  eye  with  shooting
therein,  followed  by  shooting  from  around  eye  into  eye;
eye  red  and  closed  ;  this  lasted  about  an  hour,  then  de-
creased, ceasing  about  3  p.m.;  recurred  for  two  succes-


215  SYPHILTNUM.

sive  da^^s  and  again  four  da3'S  afterward  in  a  slighter
degree,  but  at  same  hour. ^Rheumatic  iritis.

I  I  On  turning  eye  to  1.  feels  momentary  coldness  in  inner
half  of  r.  eye. ^Rheumatic  iritis.

I  I  On  waking,  gum  in  r.  canthus. ^Rheumatic  iritis.

I  I  On  walking  across  room,  r.  eye  sensitive  to  air,  aches  on
using  it. ^Rheumatic  iritis.

I  1  Both  eyes  glued  in  morning;  conjunctiva  injected;
photophobia,  constantly  wears  a  shade. ^Ozsena.

I  I  Eyes  dull. ^Infantile  syphilis.

i  I  Ophthalmic  pains,  <  at  night,  >  by  cold  water.

I  I  Right  eye  alone  affected,  congestion  of  conjunctiva  and
sclerotica,  with  some  chemosis;  lids  inflamed,  espe-
cially at  outer  canthus;  sensation  of  sand  in  eyes;  lids
agglutinated  in  morning ;  great  photophobia.  ^Heredi-
tary syphilis.

I  I  Left  eye  closed,  upper  lid  swollen  as  large  as  half  an
English  walnut ;  deep  red,  not  much  pain,  with  oozing  of
purulent  matter  from  between  lids.

I  I  Neuralgia  every  night,  beginning  about  8  or  9  p.m.,
gradually  increasing  in  severity  until  it  reached  its
height  about  3  or  4  a.m.,  and  after  continuing  thus  for
two  or  three  hours  gradually  decreased  and  finally
ceased  about  10  a.m.  ;  attacks  gradually  get  more  severe
and.  last  longer ;  first  feels  cold  all  over,  almost  a  shiver;
then  soreness  as  if  beaten  in  r.  half  of  head,  extending
a  little  beyond  middle  line  on  vertex ;  in  about  thirty
minutes  scalding  lachrymation  from  r.  eye,  with  shoot-
ing backward  increasing  to  a  boring  backward  therein;
eye  is  very  red  and  closes,  with  photophobia;  gnawing
pains  extend  down  r.  side  of  face  and  whole  of  nose;
head  is  worst  when  eye  is  bad ;  during  paroxysm  r.  eye
feels  as  if  lids  were  open  wide,  and  cold  air  blowing  on
exposed  eye ;  she  perceives  a  horizontal  band  across
pupil  of  r.  eye  hindering  sight;  this  came  on  soon  after
paroxysms  commenced;  eye  >  by  placing  handker-
chief on  head  and  letting  it  hang  over  eyes,  also  by
gentle  pressure, though  she  cannot  bear  much  pressure;
it  is  more  painful  when  lying  on  r.  (aff'ected)  side  when
also  r.  side  of  head  feels  sore ;  r.  eye  red,  and  red  vessels
run  all  over  it, converging  toward  iris;  r.  pupil  horizon-
tally oval ;  r.  iris  looks  dull  and  there  is  a  slight  brown
hue  around  pupil ;  1.  eye  normal ;  attacks  seem  to  have
originated  from  sitting  at  a  window  in  a  cold  draft,  r.
eye  being  next  window.  ^Rheumatic  ophthalmia.
^  Hearing  and  Ears.  '  '  Intense  earache  in  r.  ear,  incisive
pains  thrusting  into  ear;  purulent,  watery  discharge
from  ear  with  pain.


SYPHILINUM.  216

I  I  Gathering  in  1.  ear  which  discharges  a  great  quantity  of
pus. ^Hereditary  syphilis  in  a  child.

I  I  Deafness  gradually  increasing  until  she  could  scarcely
hear  at  all.

I  I  Complete  deafness ;  nothing  abnormal  to  be  seen.

I  Catarrhal  or  nerve  deafness  with  marked  cachexia.

I  I  Calcareous  deposit  on  tj^mpanum.

I  I  Small,  acrid,  water}'^  discharge  occasionally  from  ears,
no  deafness. ^OzEena.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Left  side  of  nose,  inside  ala,  itching.

Nose  stuffed  up  and  burning.

I  Attacks  of  fluent  coryza.

I  I  Offensive,  thick  yellow-green  nasal  discharge ;  during
sleep  dry  scabs  form  in  both  nostrils ;  following  an  ap-
plication of  salve  for  sore  eyes ;  1.  submaxillary  gland,
which  had  been  swollen  and  indurated,  softens,  dis-
charges and,  after  forty-five  days,  begins  to  heal  slowly.

I  I  Ozsena  syphilitica;  /^p/i.  brought  out  an  eruption  of  sores
with  a  fiery-red  base  on  nose  and  over  frontal  sinuses.

I  I  Left  side  of  nose  inside  and  out  very  sore,  likewise  lips
and  chin  ;  sores  itching  and  scabbing  over.  ^Heredi-
tary syphilis.

Iltching  in  nostrils.
^  Upper  Face. Face  drawn  to  one  side,  difficulty  of  speak-
ing, masticating,  blowing, n.

I  I  Spasmodic  twitching  of  many  muscles,  especially  in  face
(paralysis  agitans),  with  great  melancholy  and  depression
of  spirits.

'  (Facial  paralysis  r.  side,  thick  speech,  hemicrania,  jacti-
tation of  r.  eye  and  lid.

An  old  gentleman  has  had,  for  some  years,  cancer  on  r.
malar  bone ;  no  rest,  his  agonies  excruciating  in  ex-
treme (relieved).

I  I  Face  pale. ^Curvature  and  caries  of  cervical  spine.

Iltching,  scabby,  eczematous  eruptions  singly  or  in  clus-
ters, looking  like  herpes.

I  I  Nose  and  cheeks  covered  with  eruptions  and  scabs;
scabs  in  layers  rising  to  a  point.

I  Dark  purple  lines  between  alse  nasi  and  cheeks.

I  I  A  boy,  £et.  20  months,  fretful,  peevish,  cross  and  crying,
tossing  in  his  sleep,  grinding  his  teeth,  face  dotted  with
papules  filled  with  a  watery  yellowish  matter,  most  on
edges  of  lids ;  teeth  irregular,  arms  and  legs  emaciated,
very  tottery  on  his  feet,  very  nervous.
■*  Lower  Face,  l  '  Lips  and  teeth  covered  with  bloody  mucus.
^Infantile  syphilis.

Sores  on  lips  and  chin,  especially  1.  side  scabbing  over.
'°  Teeth  and  Gums. Single  small  lunse  cleft  in  upper  inci-


217  SYPHILINUM.

sors,  permanent  set,  which  incisors  are  dwarfed  in  their
general  dimensions,  and  converge  at  their  tips;  inherited
syphilis, n.

First  central  upper  incisors  serrated,  permanent  teeth  point
toward  each  other,  inner  side  concave,  edges  serrated, n.

Children's  teeth  are  cupped.

Teeth  decaying  at  edge  of  gum  and  breaking  off. n.

Pain  in  r.  upper  jaw,  as  if  from  teeth,  with  swelling  of
face.

Painless  fluttering  occasionally  in  teeth,  very  peculiar,  as
of  something  alive,  cannot  detect  which  tooth  it  is.

I  I  Felt  like  a  worm  in  tooth,  could  not  tell  which  tooth.

Singular  feeling  as  if  teeth  had  all  got  out  of  place,  and  on
closing  jaws  teeth  do  not  come  well  together.

Occasional  aching  in  1.  upper  teeth.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  red  and  thick ;  two  deep  cracks
running  lengthwise  in  it;  one  on  each  side  of  median
line.

I  1  Aphasia;  facial  paralysis  1.  side;  ptosis  and  sudden  pa-
ralysis of  1.  optic  nerve,  causing  many  weeks  of  blind-
ness ;  partial  paralysis  of  tongue,  which  also  protruded,
crooked  ;  sluggish  heaviness  of  speech,  complete  hemi-
plegia for  first  thirty-six  hours,  afterward  partial  for
several  weeks.

I  I  Aphasia,  difficulty  of  finding  words ;  debility.
'^  Inner  Mouth, l  l  Fetid  breath. ^Secondary  syphilis.

I  Tongue  coated  ;  white,  edges  indented  by  teeth.

Tongue  turns  to  one  side  when  protruded ;  difficulty  in
mastication,  cannot  turn  food  with  tongue  so  readily
from  r.  to  1.,  as  in  other  direction, n.

I  I  Putrid  taste  in  mouth  before  epileptic  fit.

I  I  Tongue  very  red  and  thick;  covered  with  herpetic  erup-
tion, two  deep  cracks  running  lengthwise  on  each  side
of  median  line,  making  it  difficult  to  swallow,  ^Secon-
dary syphilis.

Tongue  thickly  coated,  dirty,  edges  indented  or  serrated
by  teeth, n.

I  I  Twenty  ulcers  in  mouth,  every  part  of  which  was  in-
volved, on  top  and  under  side  of  tongue,  on  lips,  in .
buccal  cavity,  fauces  and  in  nose;  two  large  ones,  one
on  each  side  near  apex  of  tongue,  very  much  swollen,
one  on  r.  side  had  a  gangrenous  centre,  rest  lardaceous
bottoms  with  bright,  fiery-red  edges,  and  were  cut  down
as  with  a  knife,  felt  hard  like  an  indurated  chancre;
septum  of  nose  threatened,  both  alee  nasi  very  painful,
smarting  with  burning  as  if  on  fire ;  pains  and  burning
prevented  sleep ;  hungry  but  could  eat  nothing  but
fluids  as  mastication  was  impossible;  tongue  heavily


SYPHILINUM.  218

coated  white,  large'  quantities  of  stringy  viscid  saliva
ranning  from  mouth,  of  a  sweetish  taste  ;  a  putrid  sick-
ening odor  filled  whole  house ;  all  symptoms  <  toward
night. ^Secondary  syphilis.

■  Herpetic  eruption  in mouth,  tonsils,  hard  palate  and

fauces,  completely  covering  inside  of  mouth  and  throat,
making  it  very  difficult  to  swallow  even  liquids.  ^Sec-
ondary syphilis.

I  I  Syphilitic  destruction  of  hard  and  soft  palates.
"Throat. l Chronic hypertrophy  of  tonsils. ^Hereditary
syphilis.

I  iChancrous  ulcer  extending  across  velum  palati  to  1.  pil-
lar of  pharynx. ^Secondary  syphilis.

lAcute  pharyngitis. ^Secondary  syphilis.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  i  Appetite  indif-
ferent and  capricious. ^Psoas  abscess.

I  'Total  loss  of  appetite  for  months,  little  or  nothing  satis-
fies him  ;  formerly  was  generally  ravenous.  ^Caries  of
dorsal  vertebrae.

I  I  Loss  of  appetite. ^Rheumatism.

Thirst.

■  Tendency  to  heavy  drinking;  alcoholism.

■  Aversion  to  meat.

■  Dyspepsia; flatulence,  belching  of  wind; nervous  dys-

pepsia.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea.

■  Heartburn  with  pain  and  rawness  from  stomach  to  throat

pit,  often  with  cough.

I  I  Vomiting  for  weeks  or  months  due  to  erosion  from  super-
ficial ulceration  of  lining  of  viscus,  herpetic,  of  S3''phi-
litic  origin.
^  Abdomen. Pain or distress deep in abdomen as if  in
omentum.

Feeling  of  heat  internally  in  hypogastric  region.

Pains  in  r.  groin  followed  by  swelling  of  glands.

I  I  Large  painless  bubo  in  r.  groin  opened  and  discharged
freely. ^Secondary  syphilis.

Slight  lancinating  pains  in  one  groin,  <  at  night.

■  Inguinal  bubo.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum, l  i  Bowels  torpid  for  five  weeks. ^Peri-
odical neuralgia  in  head.
I  I  Obstinate  constipation  for  many  years;  rectum  seemed
tied  up  with  strictures ; when  injections  were  given
agony  of  passage  was  like  child-bearing.

■  Chronic constipation, with fetid breath, earthy com-

plexion, gaunt  appearance.
I  I  Stools  very  dark  and  offensive. ^Infantile  syphilis.
I  I  Stools  too  light-colored. ^Rheumatism.


219  SYPIIILINUM.

I  I  Bilious  diarrhoea  at  seashore,  painless,  driving  her  out
of  bed  about  5  a.m.  ;  stools  during  day,  later  causing
excoriation  ;  face  red,  suffers  from  heat ;  occasional  pain-
less, whitish  diarrhoea  when  at  home,  always  >  by
going  to  mountains.

■  Obstinate  cases  of  cholera  infantum.

I  I  Lower  portion  of  rectum  hanging  out  like  a  ruffle,  look-
ing like  a  full-blown  rose  fully  three  inches  in  diameter,
and  sensitive;  constant  weak  dragging  sensation  in  rec-
tum, extending  as  far  as  sacrum.

I  I  Fissures  in  anus  and  rectum.

1  I  Two  indurated  ulcers  at  mouth  of  anus  somewhat  sore;
slight  itching  of  moist  anus. ^Primary  syphilis.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Itching  in  orifice  of  urethra.

-A  sensation,  in  morning  on  going  to  urinate,  as  if  male
urethra  were  stuffed  up,  or  clogged,  about  an  inch  from
orifice.

Scalding  urine.

I  I  Urination  difficult  and  very  slow;  no  pain,  but  a  want
of  power,  so  that  he  has  to  strain. ^Secondary  syphilis.

I  Urine  infrequent,  not  oftener  than  once  in  twenty-four
hours,  scanty,  of  a  golden-yellow  color.

I  I  Profuse  urination  after  chill;  passed  during  night  nearly
a  chamberful.

I  I  Rich  lemon-yellow  scanty  urine.

1  I  Frequent  urging  to  urinate  all  night,  at  least  from  5
to  7  P.M.  until  5.  A.M.
'^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i Chancre  on  prepuce.

I  Buboes.

Burning  in  chancre  size  of  a  split  pea,  on  prepuce  above
corona  glandis;  edges  red  and  raised,  bottom  covered
with  lardaceous  deposit ;  glans  purple,  on  1.  side  covered
by  an  exudation.

I  I  Chancre  on  penis,  third  in  two  years,  all  on  same  spot.
^Secondary  syphilis.

Aching  of  genitals,  could  not  sit  still  for  over  a  month.

1  I  After  suppressed  chancre,  disease  attacked  testes  and
scrotum,  wdiich  became  painful  and  swollen  ;  this  was
supposed  to  be  cured,  but  ever  since,  every  few  weeks,  if
exposed  at  all  to  damp  weather,  would  be  seized  with
pains  as  if  in  kidneys,  seemingly  traversing  ureters,  but
instead  of  passing  into  bladder  followed  spermatic  cord,
down  groins  and  into  testes;  pain  agonizing,  chiefly  in
cord,  in  present  attack  in  r. ;  pricking  in  chancre.

I  I  Constant  pain  in  anterior  part  of  r.  thigh,  <  while
standing,  painful  all  night,  preventing  sleep;  bubo  in  1.
inguinal  region  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg,  purple,  fluctuat-
ing ;  night  sweats.


SYPHILINUM.  220

I  I  Chancroid,  phagedenic,  spreading  rapidly;  buboes  com-
mencing in  each  groin.

Ilnflammation  and  induration  of  spermatic  coi"d.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  '  Uterus  and  all  surrounding
parts  loose,  soft  and  flabby;  profuse,  thick,  yellow  leu-
corrhcea;  constant  pain  across  small  of  back.

Slight  whitish  leucorrhcea.

lYellow  offensive  leucorrhcea,  watery  or  not,  so  profuse  it
daily  soaks  through  napkins  and  runs  to  heels  of  stock-
ings if  much  on  her  feet.

■  Profuse  yellow  leucorrhcea,  <  at  night ;  in  sickl}^,  nervous

children. ^Inherited  syphilis.
I  iSoreness  of  genitals,  and  muco-purulent  discharge,  in

a  child.
I  I  Acrid  discharge  causing  violent  itching  and  inflamma-
tion of  external  organs,  <  at  night  from  warmth  of  bed,

parts  very  tender;  itching  and  inflammation  >  during

menses.
I  i  Nocturnal  aggravation  of  r.  ovarian  pain,  preventing

sleep.
I  I  Sore  on  r.  labium  majora,  extending  to  left. ^Secondary

syphilis.
Intense  itching  of  vulva  on  rising  in  morning,  continuing

until  10  o'clock.
Menstruation  painful,  two  weeks  too  soon ;  pink-red,  bright,

profuse,  running  free  for  some  days;  napkins  wash  easily.
I  I  Painful  menstruation.
Sensitiveness  of  os  uteri,  increasing  to  intolerable  pain  at

menses,  or  on  introduction  of  fingers  or  penis;  frequently

causes  abortion, n.
Sharp  zigzag  shooting  pains  in  region  of  uterus.

■  Ovaries  congested  and  inflamed; tendency  to  ovarian

tumors.

Sore  aching  in  1.  ovarian  region,  extending  to  r.  with  dart-
ing pains.

Left  ovary  swollen,  during  coitus,  at  moment  of  orgasm,  a
sharp  cutting  pain  like  a  knife,  and  twice  there  was
smarting  as  of  a  sore ;  ovary  swelled  so  much  that  its
size  and  shape  could  easily  be  felt  through  abdominal
walls  (caused  by  Buboin).

■  Uterine  and  ovarian  diseases  with  pronounced  nervous

disorders,  especially  in  married  women.
Mammae  sensitive  to  touch,  feeling  sore;  during  menses,
and  at  other  times.
"Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse,
almost  complete  aphonia,  day  before  menses.

■  Diseased  cartilages  of  larynx. ^Tertiary  syphilis.

^® Respiration, l  i Chronic  asthma; in Summer, especially


221  SYPHILINUM.

when  weather  was  warm  and  damp ;  most  frequently  in
evening,  passing  off  at  daybreak  ;  soreness  of  chest,  with
great  anguish  and  inability  to  retain  a  recumbent  posi-
tion ;  in  Winter,  severe  bronchial  cough  succeeded
asthmatic  attacks;  a  regular  type  of  chills  and  fever
developed  ;  suffered  from  this  many  years  before.

Oppression  of  chest  to  such  an  extent  as  almost  to  arrest
breathing;  asthma  caused  by  sensation  as  if  sternum
were  being  gradually  drawn  toward  dorsal  vertebrse;
expansion  of  chest  difficult;  confusion  of  mind,  as  if
unconsciousness  might  follow.

Lack  of  sleep  produces  a  sudden  faintness  and  sinking
sensation  in  chest ;  three  spells  succeeded  each  other
during  a  single  night.

I  I  Attacks  of  spasmodic  bronchial  asthma  for  twenty-five
years ;  they  come  on  only  at  night  after  lying  down  or
during  a  thunderstorm,  producing  most  intense  nervous
insomnia,  entirely  preventing  sleep  for  days  and  nights.

•  Violent  attacks  of  dyspnoea,  wheezing  and  rattling  of
mucus,  from  1  to  4  a.m.
""  Cough. '  I  Hard  cough,  <  at  night,  when  it  is  continuous,
preventing  sleep.

Hard,  constant  cough,  with  thick,  yellow,  tasteless  expec-
toration.

I  I  Dry,  racking  cough,  with  thick,  purulent  expectoration,
caused  by  a  sensation  of  rasping  or  scraping  in  throat,
always  <  at  night. ^Secondary  syphilis.

I  I  Whooping  cough,  with  terrible  vomiting.

I  I  Dry,  sharp,  hacking  cough  without  expectoration,  but
with  rawness,  scraping  and  burning  from  fauces  to  stom-
ach pit ;  with  a  whoop  in  inspiration  and  a  choking
sensation  from  fauces  to  bifurcation  of  bronchia,  great
mental  distress.

I  I  Cannot  lie  on  r.  side,  as  it  causes  a  dry  cough.

Cough  and  dyspnoea  come  on  after  midday  dinner,  has  to
fight  for  breath,  feels  as  if  she  would  be  suffocated;
symptoms  last  all  night,  >  at  daybreak  (improved).

Expectoration  of  white  phlegm.

I  iMuco-purulent  expectoration,  greyish,  greenish,  green-
ish-yellow, tasteless.

I  I  Expectoration  without  cough,  quite  clear  white,  feels
like  a  round  ball  and  rushes  into  mouth. ^Nervous
asthma.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  and  oppression  at  bifurca-
tion of  bronchia  and  in  larynx,  it  hurts  her  to  breathe.

I  I  Rattling  in  chest  and  throat. ^Infantile  syphilis.

Pain  in  centre  of  chest  as  if  skin  were  drawn  uj^,  on  draw-
ing head  back.


SYPHILINUM.  222

Sensation  of  pressure  under  upper  part  of  sternum.

I  Pain  and  pressure  behind  sternum.

I  I  Angina; ptosis  1.  eye;  facial  paralysis  1.  side,  slight
aphasia;  impotence  (relieved).  •
"  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Lancinating  pains  in  heart,
at  night,  from  base  to  apex  {Medorrhinum  has  reverse).

Valvular  disease  of  heart.
^"  Outer  Chest. lEczematous  herpetic  eruptions.
^'  Neck  and  Back. I Heavy  aching  and  stiffness  from  base  of
neck  up  through  muscles  and  cords  into  brain.

I  I  Great  pain  in  back  in  region  of  kidneys,  <  after  urin-
ating. ^Secondary  syphilis.

Pain  in  coccyx  at  its  junction  with  sacrum,  sometimes  in
lower  sacral  vertebrse  ;  <  on  sitting,  with  a  sensation
as  if  swollen,  though  it  is  not.

Pains  commencing  in  sacral  regions  internally,  and  appa-
rently coming  around  to  uterus.

I  I  Caries  of  cervical  spine  with  very  great  curvature  in  same
region,  directly  forward,  occiput  sinking  down  to  a  level
with  it  and  resting  on  protuberance  of  curvature;  often
nearly  a  teaspoonful  of  calcareous  matter  would  be  dis-
charged at  a  time,  and  on  evaporating  it  a  quantity  of
dry  powder,  looking  like  phosphate  of  lime,  would  be
left;  pain  in  curvature  always  <  at  night  (no  proof  of
syphilis).
.Rigidity  of  muscles.

A  heavy,  dragging,  dull  feeling  in  lumbar  region,  with
stiffness  and  want  of  elasticity.

I  I  Caries  of  dorsal  vertebrae  with  acute  curvature,  numer-
ous cloacse  communicating  with  diseased  bone,  one  much
larger  than  rest,  exuding  a  sanious,  offensive  pus,  and
surrounded  with  proud  flesh  ;  great  thickening  and  in-
duration of  surrounding  parts  from  effusion  of  lymph ;
percussion  or  pressure  not  endurable ;  two  abscesses  in
groins,  1.  having  been  opened  a  year  before,  r.  about  a
month  ago;  least  motion  gave  him  great  pain  by  day,
and  terrific  pain  by  night;  for  five  months,  every  night
most  intense  neuralgic  pains,  commencing  generally
from  5  to  7  p.m.  and  never  terminating  till  about  day-
light or  about  5  a.m.;  pains  in  muscles  of  loins,  gener-
ally in  1.,  sharp,  cutting  spasms,  terrible  to  bear,  pre-
venting sleep  and  forcing  him  to  cry  out;  <  by  least
motion,  and  slightly  >  by  warm  poultices.

I  I  Psoas  abscess  first  1.  then  r.,  latter  discharged  more  than
a  quart  of  offensive  greeinsh  pus  when  opened  ;  severe
nocturnal  pains,  affecting  upper  sacral,  lower  dorsal  and
1.  cervico-facial  regions,  steadily  increasiug;  they  oc-
curred twice,  each  time  twenty-one  days  after  either
psoas  abscess  had  been  opened.


223  SYPHILINUM.

I  I  Enlargement  of  cervical  glands  and  a  number  of  pedun-
culated pin-head  warts  on  neck ;  cured  by  Syco-syphi-
Imum. ^Hereditary  syphilis;  girl  £et.  10.

Enlargement  of  glands  in  different  parts  of  body,  particu-
larly abundant  about  neck;  indurated  and  slightly
pamful,  causing  a  sensation  of  uncomfortable  fulness
and  suffusion  in  face,  throat  and  head. n.

I  I  Nocturnal  aggravation  of  pains  in  back,  hips  and  thighs

I  I  Enormous  swelling  of  glands  of  head  and  neck,  ^odg-
kin's  disease.
''Upper  Limbs, l Rheumatism of  shoulder  joint  or  at  in-
sertion of  deltoid,  <  from  raising  arm  laterally.

Can  only  raise  arms  to  a  right  angle  with  axilla ;  trying
to  force  them  higher  causes  muscles  to  suddenly  become
paralyzed  and  they  drop  pendant, n.

Lameness  and  pain  of  arm  on  motion,  particularly  on
raising  arm  up  in  front  as  if  reaching;  pain  located
about  insertion  of  deltoid  in  upper  third  of  humerus
not  painful  to  pressure.  '

M  Fingers and thumbs have runarounds. /^Infantile

syphilis.

I  I  Hands  badly  ulcerated  on  backs. /^Secondary  syphilis.

I  I  Right  second  finger  swollen  and  stiffened. ^Secondary
syphilis.
^' Lower  Limbs. Swelling  of  legs  from  knees  down,  soles
painful  when  standing  on  them  ;  swelling  goes  down  in
morning,  comes  back  at  night.

Pains  in  lower  extremities,  excruciating,  completely  ban-
ish sleep ;  <  from  hot  fomentations ;  >  pouring  cold
water  on  them. n.

Cannot  sit  in  a  low  chair,  or  squat  down,  owing  to  loss  of
control  over  knee  and  hip  joints, n.

Pains  in  long  bones  of  lower  extremities,  also  in  joints, n.

Dull  pam  over  backs  of  feet  to  toes,  began  soon  after  get-
ting into  bed,  lasting  until  4  or  5  a.m.

I  I  For  two  or  three  winters  intense  cold  pain  in  both  legs,
<  m  1.,  came  on  every  night  on  lying  down,  lasting  all
night;  >  by  getting  up  and  walking,  and  in  warm
weather.

Pain  in  three  toes  of  r.  foot  as  if  disjointed.

I  I  Slight  contraction  of  tendons  beneath  r.  knee.  ^Psoas
abscess.

I  I  Tearing  pains  in  hip  and  thighs,  <  at  night,  >  about
daybreak,  >  by  walking,  not  affected  by  weather
(improved).

I  I  Sharp  rheumatic  pain,  burning  like  fire,  in  1.  side  of  r.
instep  and  below  inner  malleolus,  prevents  her  from
moving  foot,  >  when  toe  is  pointed  inward ;  <  in  even-
ing, continuing  during  night,  waking  her  up  suddenly


SYPHILINUM.  224

every  two  or  three  hours,  worst  from  1.30  to  3.30  a.m.,  >

toward  daybreak  (improved).
I  I  Redness  and  rawness  with  terrible  itching  between  toes.

^Secondary  syphilis.
I  I  Bone  pains  in  knees  and  feet. ^Secondary  syphilis.
I  I  Bubo  with  pain  in  spot  on  middle  of  r.  thigh  in  front,

only  when  standing  and  on  deep  pressure,  which  seemed

to  touch  spot,  which  was  apparently  on  periosteum.
I  I  Two  ulcers  larger  than  a  crown  piece,  dirty,  stinking,

sloughing,  with  jagged,  elevated  edges,  one  on  thigh

above  patella,  another  on  head  of  tibia ;  two  large  pieces

of  bone  came  away  from  head  of  tibia. ^Secondary

syphilis.
I  I  Osteosarcoma  in  centre  of  r.  tibia  the  size  of  half  an

ostrich  egg,  pains  agonizing  at  night,  growth  irregular,

spong}^, partly laminated, very hard. ^Secondary

syphilis.
I  I  Severe  attacks  of  aching  in  lower  limbs. ^Secondary

syphilis.

■  Contracted  painful  feeling  in  soles  of  feet,  as  if  tendons

were  too  short.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Aching  pains  in  limbs  like  growing

pains.
Gradual  rigidity  of  all  joints  after  eruption  ;  flexors  seem

contracted.
I  I  Rheumatic  swelling  of  1.  wrist  and  big  toe,  bluish-red,

with  pains  as  if  somebody  sawed  at  his  bones  with  a  dull

saw;  >  by  heat  of  stove;  <  from  sundown  to  sunrise;

no  appetite ;  has  lasted  two  weeks. ^Rheumatism.
Feeling  of  numbness  in  palms  and  soles,  at  times  a  prickly

sensation  as  if  numb  parts  were  punctured  by  a  great

number  of  needles.
I  Excruciating  arthritis ;  swelling,  heat  and  redness  intense.

■  Rheumatism,  muscles  are  caked  in  hard  knots  or  lumps.
Rest. Position. Motion. No  position  suits  him. «9Syph-

ilitic  neuralgia.

Standing  :  pain  in  thigh  ;  soles  painful ;  pain  in  thigh  <.

Sitting:  pain  in  coccyx  <  ;  or  squatting,  can  not  on  ac-
count of  loss  of  control  over  knee  and  hip  joints;  on  stool
>  pain  in  head.

Recumbent  position  :  impossible  with  asthma.

Lying:  on  r.  side  causes  cough;  sore  throat  <.

Motion  :  pain  in  groins  <  ;  raising  arm  pain  in  deltoid  < ;
pain  in  instep  < ;  slow,  >  tearing  pain  through  body.

On  drawing  back  head:  pain  in  chest  as  if  skin  were
drawn  up; pain  in  neck  >.

Pointing  toe  inward  :  pain  in  instep  >.

Walking:  pain  in  hip  and  thighs  >.


225  SYPHILINUM.

^®  Nerves. Utter  prostration  and  debility  in  morning.

■  Epilepsy.

Epileptic  convulsions  after  menses.

I  I  Body,  extremities  and  face  covered  with  syphilides;  a
sticking  soreness  begins  in  throat  every  evening  between
6  and  7  o'clock  and  continues  to  grow  <  during  night;
exceedingly  restless  until  4  a.m.  ;  then  a  restless  sleep
for  a  few  hours ;  can  scarcely  swallow;  when  swallowing
a  sensation  as  of  throat  tearing  to  pieces ;  continual
throbbing  in  throat,  <  from  cold  and  hot  drinks,  and  <
lying  down;  throbbing  in  temples  and  ears,  boring  in
ears  meeting  in  centre  of  brain  ;  sensation  as  if  top  of
head  were  coming  off;  drawing  pain  in  eyes  <  from
lamplight;  teeth  pain  when  eating,  also  when  taking
anything  hot  or  cold,  feel  as  if  they  were  loose,  >  press-
ing teeth  together  and  pressing  throat  with  hands;  ex-
cessive flow  of  saliva,  it  runs  out  of  mouth  when  sleep-
ing; severe  pain  in  neck;  bending  back  head,  >  pain
in  neck;  aching  pain  in  shoulders  and  knees;  rending
tearing  pains  throughout  body,  >  moving  about  slowly ;
had  his  wife  hide  his  revolver  lest  in  a  fit  of  desperation
he  might  kill  himself,  as  was  his  desire  during  extreme
paroxysms  of  pain ;  strikes  wall  with  fist  and  beats  head
against  wall  for  relief;  stools  hard,  dry  like  sheep  dung;
desire  for  stool  three  or  four  times  a  day,  but  only  a
little  scentless  wind  passes  which  gives  relief;  sitting
on  stool  >  pain  in  head;  is  easily  offended,  gets  des-
perate, cannot  bear  to  be  alone,  great  anxiety  about
getting  well ;  at  night  no  position  suits  him,  walks  floor
or  goes  into  street  and  moves  about  slowly;  sleepy  all
time  but  cannot  sleep;  dreams  about  his  disease;  >  in
open  air;  frequent  urination  with  sudden  desire ;  dis-
charges large  quantities  of  muddy  urine.  ^Syphilitic
neuralgia.
"  Sleep.  Great  restlessness  at  night,  impossiblity  to  keep  long
in  one  position, n.

■  Absolute  sleeplessness  (vies  with  Sulphur  in  producing
quiet,  refreshing  sleep).

Wakes  soon  after  midnight  and  cannot  sleep  again  until

6  A.M.

^^  Time. After  midnight :  weary,  tired  pains.
1.30  to  3.30  A.M.:  pain  in  instep  <.
Midnight  until  6  a.m.  :  cannot  sleep.

Morning:  lids  agglutinated ;  urethra  as  if  clogged;  until
10  itching  of  vulva ;  prostration.

I  to  4  A.M.:  attacks  of  dyspnoea.

5  A.M.:  diarrhoea  drives  her  out  of  bed.

II  to  1  P.M.:  fever.

VOL.  X.— 15.


SYPHILINUM.  226

After  midday  dinner :  cough  and  dyspnoea.
2  P.M.:  pains  begin,  reach  acme  9  p.m.,  continue  until  day-
break.

1  to  3  P.M.:  rheumatic  iritis  <.
4  p.m.:  headache  begins.

2  to  5  A.M.:  aching  in  eyeball  <.

6  to  7  P.M.:  sticking  soreness  iii  throat  begins.

8  or  9  P.M.:  neuralgia  begins

Night:  headache  <;  lancinating  in  occiput  <;  delirium;
neuralgic  cephalalgia  <  ;  pain  in  fungous  growth  of
eyeball  <  ;  ophthalmic  pains  <  ;  pains  in  groin ;  profuse
urination ;  frequent  urging  to  urinate ;  pain  in  thigh

<  ;  acrid  leucorrhoea  <  ;  ovarian  pain  <  ;  asthma  <  ;
cough  <  ;  cardiac  }5ain  ;  pain  in  spinal  curvature  <  ;
pain  in  back,  hips  and  thighs  < ;  swelling  of  legs ;  pains
in  feet  <  ;  pain  in  tibia ;  restlessness ;  rheumatic  pains

<  ;  biting  sensation.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth  : >  headache ; of
bed,  syphilitic  eruption  <.

Heat  of  sun  :  <  headache.

Heat  of  stove :  >  pain  in  swollen  wrist  and  big  toe.

Hot  or  cold  things:  toothache  <.

Hot  fomentations :  pains  in  legs  <.

Cold  draft:  rheumatic  ophthalmia.

Cold  water:  ophthalmic  pains;  pains  in  lower  extremi-
ties <.

Damp  weather:  pains  across  kidneys  into  spermatic  cord
and  testes  ;  pains  in  muscles.

Warm  and  damp  weather:  asthma  <,

At  seashore :  bilious  diarrhoea.

Air:  eye  sensitive  to;  syphilitic  neuralgia.

In  mountains:  bilious  diarrhoea  >.

During  thunderstorm  :  bronchial  asthma  <.
*"  Fever, l  l  Great  pain  in  head,  whole  body  extremely  cold,
looked  blue ;  wanted  to  be  covered  with  blankets,  yet
could  not  get  warm,  no  appetite;  sleeping  almost  all
time,  could  scarcely  be  aroused. 6'Secondary  syphilis.

I  I  Nervous  chills  preceded  by  aching  pains  in  head,  espe-
cially occiput  and  in  scalp  over  that  part  of  head  ;  pains
below  waist,  in  pelvis,  in  legs,  especially  in  tibia,  which
is  sensitive  to  touch ;  head  feels  heavy  and  sore,  as  if
congested  ;  bowels  torpid  for  five  weeks ;  cross,  irritable,
peevish ;  pains  commence  every  day  about  4  p.m.,  cul-
minating at  midnight  with  delirium,  and  disappear  at
daylight.

After  retiring,  nervous  chill  commencing  in  anus  and
running  down  legs  with  spasmodic  sensation  ;  followed
by  distress  in  bowels  and  immediate  desire  for  stool ;


227  SYPIIILINUM.

passed  a  little  urine  when chill  and  desire  for  stool
ceased ;  afterward  profuse  urination,  eructations  >  chill.

Dry,  hot  fever  shortly  after  going  to  bed,  with  dry,  parched
lips  and  great  thirst ;  during  fever  intensely  hot,  wants
to  throw  off  covering,  puts  feet  out  of  bed  and  against
wall  to  cool  them  ;  high  fever  in  middle  of  day,  heat
being  intense,  with  sensation  as  if  burning  up ;  thirst
for  large  quantities  often,  sensation  of  burning  internal
heat  very  marked  ;  fever  preceded  by  slight  chill  and
followed  by  sweat  and  great  debility.

I  I  Fever  from  11  to  1  p.m.  daily;  perspires  when  she  be-
gins to  get  over  fever ;  pain  in  back,  <  between  shoul-
ders, no  ambition  or  desire  to  move.

I  I  Profuse  night  sweats,  sleepless  and  restless.

■  Excessive  general  debility  and  continued  night  sweats,
latter  being  most  marked  between  scapulae  and  down  to
waist, n.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Gradually  increasing :  nightly  neu-
ralgia; deafness.

Gradually  increase  and  decrease:  pains  in  muscles.

Three  or  four  times  a  day  :  desire  for  stool.

Three  spells  in  one  night:  faintness  and  sinking  in  chest.

Every  night :  neuralgia,  8  or  9  p.m.

For  days  and  nights  :  nervous  insomnia  with  asthma.

Lasting  a  week  or  two:  rheumatic  neuralgic  pains  in
muscles.

Two  weeks:  rheumatic  swelling  of  wrist  and  big  toe.

For  five  weeks :  bowels  torpid.

For  many  weeks:  blindness.

For  months  :  total  loss  of  appetite.

For  many  months  :  syphilitic  headache.

For  many  years  :  constipation.

For  twenty-five  years:  bronchial  asthma.

Spring:  cough.

Summer :  chronic  asthma.

Winter:  bronchial  cough  succeeding  asthma  in  Summer ;
cold  pain  in  legs.
"  locality  and  Direction.  Left :  eruption  about  inner  can-
thus;  heat  and  pain  in  outer  half  of  lids;  itching  of
inner  canthus;  fungous  growth  on  eyeball ;  conjuncti-
vitis, eye  closed ;  gathering  in  ear ;  itching  in  nostril ;
abscess  in  submaxillary  gland;  nose  sore  inside  and
out ;  sores  on  lips  and  chin ;  aching  in  upper  teeth ;
facial  paralysis;  ptosis  and  paralysis  of  optic  nerve;
chancrous  ulcer  from  velum  palati  to  pillar  of  pharynx ;
exudation  on  glans  penis ;  bubo ;  swollen  ovary  painful
during  coitus ;  swelling  of  wrist  and  big  toe.

Right :  headache  over  eye ;  pulsating  pain  at  outer  end  of


SYPHILINUM.  228

superior  border  of  orbit;  pain  in  inner  canthus ;  gum
in  canthus  on  waking;  eye  sensitive  to  air;  conjunc-
tiva and  sclerotica  congested ;  perceives  a  horizontal
band  across  pupils ;  iris  looks  dull ;  head  as  if  beaten  ;
scalding  lachrymation  ;  gnawing  in  face  and  nose;  eye
feels  as  if  lids  were  open  and  air  blowing  on  it ;  earache ;
facial  paralysis  ;  jactitation  of  eye  and  lid  ;  pain  in  can-
cer on  malar  bone;  pain  in  upper  jaw;  pain  and  swell-
ing in  groin ;  painless  bubo  opens  and  discharges ;  pain
in  anterior  thigh  ;  second  finger  swollen  and  stiff;  pain
in  toes  as  if  disjointed ;  contraction  of  tendons  beneath
knee ;  pain  in  instep.

From  1.  to  r. :  pain  in  ovaries ;  psoas  abscess.

From  r.  to  1.:  cannot  turn  food  readily  with  tongue;  sore
on  labia  majora,

On  turning  eye  to  1.:  coldness  in  under  half  of  r.  eye.

Linear  pain  :  from  or  near  eye  backward.
^^  Sensations.  A  seething  feeling  as  of  hot  water  or  hot  oil
running  through  all  veins  of  the  body,  all  night  long;
as  if  going  insane  or  about  to  be  paralyzed  ;  a  far-away
feeling,  with  apathy ;  as  if  head  were  pulled  back  by
weight;  as  if  blood  went  to  r.  inner  canthus  and  temple
and  could  get  no  farther ;  as  of  sand  in  eyes ;  as  if  r.  eye
were  open  wide  and  cold  air  blowing  on  it;  fluttering  as
of  something  alive  in  teeth ;  as  of  a  worm  in  tooth  ;  as  if
teeth  had  gotten  out  of  place;  distress  as  if  in  omentum ;
as  if  rectum  were  tied  up  with  strictures;  as  if  urethra
were  stuffed  up  or  clogged ;  as  if  sternum  were  being
drawn  toward  dorsal  vertebrae;  as  if  she  would  suffocate
with  cough  ;  as  if  skin  were  drawn  up  in  centre  of  chest
on  drawing  head  back  ;  coccyx  as  if  swollen  ;  as  if  toes  of
r.  foot  were  disjointed ;  like  growing  pains  in  limbs;  as
if  bones  were  sawed ;  palms  and  soles  as  if  punctured
bj''  needles;  as  of  throat  tearing  to  pieces;  as  if  top  of
head  were  coming  off;  as  if  teeth  were  loose;  as  of  a
nervous  chill  commencing  in  anus  and  running  down
legs ;  as  if  bitten  b}'^  bugs.

Pain:  in  e3^eball;  in  r.  upper  jaw;  deep  in  abdomen;  in
r.  groin ;  across  small  of  back ;  in  larynx  and  bifurca-
tion of  bronchia;  in  region  of  kidneys;  in  sacrum;  in
coccyx;  in  long  bones  of  legs;  in  joints;  in  periosteum
and  bones.

Excruciating  pain:  over  r.  eye;  in  cancer  on  r.  malar
bone ;  in  spermatic  cord  ;  in  lower  extremities ;  in  joints,
with  arthritis.

Lancinating:  in  occiput;  in  groin ;  in  heart.

Cutting:  across  base  of  cerebellum;  in  1.  ovary  during
coitus ;  in  muscles  of  loins.


229  SYPHILINUM.

Bursting  :  in  vertex.

Tearing:  in  hip  and  thighs;  throughout  body.

Gnawing  :  in  r.  side  of  face  and  in  nose.

Crushing :  across  base  of  cerebellum.

Piercing:  over  r.  eye.

Shooting :  in  r.  eye  ;•  from  around  eye  into  eye  ;  in  region
of  uterus.

Incisive  thrusting  pain  :  in  r.  ear.

Boring :  in  r.  eye  ;  in  ears.

Sticking  soreness  :  in  throat.

Pricking :  in  chancre ;  in  palms  and  soles.

Darting :  in  ovarian  region.

Neuralgic  pains:  m  r.  side  of  head,  face  and  eye.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  shoulder  joint  and  insertion  of  del-
toid ;  in  r.  instep  and  below  inner  malleolus.

Burning:  in  nose;  in  ulcers  in  mouth;  in  chancre;  from
fauces  to  stomach  pit;  in  r.  instep  and  below  inner
malleolus.

Aching:  in  pelvis  and  extremities;  in  tibia;  in  eyes;  in
eyeball ;  in  teeth ;  in  genitals ;  from  base  of  neck  to
brain ;  in  lower  limbs ;  in  shoulders  and  knees.

Sore  aching :  in  ovarian  region.

Soreness :  in  head ;  as  if  beaten  in  r.  half  of  head  ;  in  nose ;
in  mamma ;  of  chest ;  in  soles.

Smarting :  in  eyes ;  in  ulcers  in  mouth.

Biting:  in  skin  in  different  parts  of  body.

Kawness  :  from  fauces  to  stomach  pit.

Choking:  from  fauces  to  bifurcation  of  bronchia.

Scraping :  from  fauces  to  stomach  pit.

Dragging:  in  rectum;  in  lumbar  region.

Drawing  pain  :  in  eyes.

Pulsating  pain  :  at  outer  end  of  superior  border  of  r.  orbit.

Throbbing  :  in  temple  and  ears ;  in  throat.

Pressing:  over  r.  eye;  under  sternum.

Dull  pain :  over  backs  of  feet  to  toes.

Tired  pain  :  in  limbs.

Cold  pain  :  in  legs.

Contraction :  in  soles  of  feet.

Stiffness :  in  lumbar  region.

Numbness:  in  palms  and  soles.

Full  feeling:  in  face,  throat  and  head.

Heaviness:  in  head;  in  base  of  brain;  in  lumbar  region.

Weight:  in  occiput.

Sinking  sensation  :  in  chest.

Heat:  in  outer  half  of  1.  eyelids;  in  hj'^pogastric  region.

Coldness :  in  inner  half  of  r.  eye.

Itching;  in  1.  inner  canthus  ;  inside  of  nostrils  ;  of  anus  ;
in  orifice  of  urethra ;  of  female  genitals  ;  between  toes.


SYPHILINUM.  230

"Tissues. Shifting  pains  of  a  rheumatic  character  obliging
a  repeated  change  of  position  and  posture, n.

■  Pains  commence  at  2  p.m.,  gradually  increase  until  they

reach  their  acme  at  9  p.m.,  continuing  exceedingly  acute
until  3  or  4  a.m.;  subsiding  with  daybreak.

Pain  more  particularly  <  in,  or  confined  to,  muscles  and
joints  of  lower  limbs,  for  four  or  five  weeks,  then  they
seemed  to  go  to  periosteum  and  bone  itself,  becoming
deeper  and  more  profound n.

Pains  produce  two  sensations,  an  external  one  which  seems
to  lie  in  muscles  and  joints  and  an  internal  one  which
is  deeper  and  much  more  unbearable,  so  much  so  that
it  seems  by  its  profound  nature  to  control  external  ones
and  to  cause  them  to  disappear,  afterward  reappearing
intensified  in  external  sensation, n.

I  I  Pains  in  limbs  every  night  after  midnight,  weary,  tired
pains,  making  rest  impossible,  could  lie  nowhere  with-
out suffering  in  part  on  which  he  rested  ;  <  in  lower
limbs;  much  perspiration  which  partly  relieved.  ^Rheu-
matic fever.

I  I  Rheumatic  neuralgic  pains  in  all  muscles,  even  in  cre-
master,  not  in  joints;  darting  pains  in  irregular  attacks,
sometimes  lasting  a  week  or  two ;  pains  gradually  in-
crease and  decrease ;  <  in  damp  and  especially  in  frosty
weather ;  <  at  4  or  5  p.m.,  attain  their  height  at  2  or  3
A.M.,  ceasing  about  8  a.m.  (improved).

I  I  Rheumatism  with  sweating  of  hands,  wrists  and  legs
below  knees  and  feet,  with  great  soreness  of  soles,  <  at
night.

■  Extreme  emaciation. ^Psoas  abscess. ^Infantile  syphi-

lis. /^Caries  and  curvature  of  cervical  vertebrae..

I  I  Though  17,  looked  12,  was  so  reduced  and  dwarfed;
great  attenuation  of  soft  parts  throughout,  spare  and
hollow ;  confined  to  couch  for  about  three  years  and  for
one  year  scarcely  off  his  back ;  after  disappearance  of
pustular  eruption  a  gradual  rigidity  of  all  joints  ensues
and  all  flexors  seem  to  become  contracted  and  short-
ened ;  this  causes  inability  to  close  fingers  on  a  fork,
knife  or  spoon,  and  a  partial  inability  to  lift  foot  in  order
to  step  up  stairs,  except  with  great  difficulty,  by  using  a
cane  and  only  a  step  up  or  down  at  a  time.

Peculiar  disagreeable  odor  from  body.

Adenitis,  leaving  almond-shaped  kernels  of  varying  sizes
abundant  about  neck.
*'^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  tibia  sensi-
tive ;  OS  uteri  sensitive.

Pressure :  pain  in  spot  on  middle  of  r.  thigh  in  front  < ;  of
teeth  together  >  pain;  throat  better.


231  SYPHILINUM.

Sunstroke:  headache.
"Skin.  Pustular  eruption  on  different  parts  of  body;  in
patches  on  certain  places,  particularly  on  wrists  and
shins,  where  bones  are  nearest  cuticle,  and  isolated  other
large  pustules  on  other  parts,  these  break,  discharging
an  ichorous  fluid  for  one  or  two  days,  then  heal,  leaving
characteristic  pockmark  cicatrice ;  patches  take  longer
to  heal,  discharging  same  fluid  till  healing  process
commences.
After  healing  of  chancre  a  fresh  pustular  eruption  appears
on  different  parts  of  body,  which,  when  pustules  have
discharged  an  ichorous  liquid  and  healed  up,  leaves
fresh,  coppery  pockmarks;  Medorrhinum  removed  it
permanently  causing  it  to  turn  yellow-brown,  dry  at
edges  and  scale  off,  leaving  skin  permanently  clear  and
free.
I  I  Biting  sensation  in  different  parts  of  body,  as  if  bitten

by  bugs,  at  night  only.
I  I  Syphilitic  rash,  very  prominent  on  forehead,  chin,  arms
and  front  of  thorax,  an  abundance  of  fine  scales  peeling
off;  large  prominent  spot  on  centre  of  forehead,  filled
with  fluid,  as  also  are  some  smaller  patches. (^'Second-
ary  syphilis.
I  I  Syphilitic  bullae  discharging  freely  on  cheeks,  under
chin,  on  back  of  shoulders,  on  scalp  and  other  parts  of
body. /^Infantile  syphilis.
I  I  Maculae  over  back,  chest,  abdomen,  arms  and  legs,  but
not on any uncovered part of bod}^ ^Secondary
syphilis.
I  I  Several  elevated  spots  on  arm,  stomach,  leg  and  finger;

has  them  habitually  on  face,  chiefly  on  1.  cheek.
I  I A  blood-boil  on  arm ; face  broken  out  with  a  lumpy

fiery  rash.
I  I  Eruption  over  whole  body  not  elevated,  but  could  be
distinctly  felt  by  passing  hand  over  skin;  after  Syphi-
linum  V^-  eruption  came  rapidly  to  surface ;  at  same  time
a  disagreeable  odor  began  to  be  developed;  eruption
reddish-brown  like  smallpox  pustules,  without  central
depression ;  body  covered  with  it,  except  scrotum  and
penis;  increased,  completely  covering  inside  of  mouth
and  throat,  making  it  difficult  to  swallow  even  liquids ;
eyes  also  covered,  making  him  completely  blind;  intol-
erable smell  from  body ;  tips  of  pimples  became  filled
with  pus ;  <  from  warmth  of  bed ;  fetid  breath ;  erup-
tion developed  still  more,  a  great  quantity  of  pus,  with
intolerable  itching,  yet  could  not  scratch  as  it  was  ex-
tremely sore ;  eruption  left  skin  of  entire  body  covered
with  dull,  reddish,  copper-colored  spots,  which  in  cold
looked  blue. ^Secondary  syphilis.


SYPHILINUM.  232

1 1  Copper-colored  maculae  from  crown  of  head  to  sole  of
foot. ^Secondary  syphilis.

I  Pemphigus  looks  like  a  pock,  often  confluent,  and  per-
sistently reappears.

Skin  is  bluish.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. A  boy,  ^t.  20  months ;  papu-
lar eruption.

A  boy,  set.  4J;  syphilitic  prurigo  and  herpes.

A  boy,  set. 10; destruction  of  tissue in  hard and  soft
palates.

Girl,  set.  10;  enlarged  cervical  glands,  and  warts  in  neck
(Syco-syphilinum) ;  hereditary  syphilis.

Though  17,  looked  12,  emaciated  ;  sj^philitic  eruption  ;  af-
fection of  joints.

A  young  lady,  blood-boil  on  arm,  lepra-syphilis  after  vac-
cination.

A  woman,  set.  29,  delicate  from  a  child ;  ozsena  syphilitica.

A  woman,  set.  40 ;  facial  paral3'sis.

Man,  set.  48,  robust,  weight  250  lbs.,  height  5  feet  9  inches;
rheumatism.

A  man,  syphilitic ;  osteosarcoma  on  tibia,

A  bookkeeper,  chronic  syphilitis ;  headache.

A  man;  aphasia  with  hemiplegia.

Mrs.  — ,  suff'ering  from  diabetes  mellitus,  subject  to  rheu-
matism in  rainy  weather ;  rheumatic  ophthalmia.

Mr.  Y.,  nocturnal  syphilitic  neuralgia.

A  man,  set.  60 ; syphilitic  destruction  of  hard  and  soft
palates,

A  man,  set.  76 ;  aphasia  and  debility.
*^ Relations. Compare:  Aurum,  Mercur.,  Kali  jod.  and  other

anti-syphilitics.


238  TABACUM.

TABACUM.

Tobacco.  , Solanacese.

Introduced  by  Hartlaub.

The  provers  were  Nenning,  Schreter,  Hausbrand,  Hartlaub  and  Trink's  Mat.
Med.;  Seidel's  Collection,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  12,  p.  150;  toxicological  effects,  Allen's
Encyclopedia,  vol.  9,  p.  467.

Clinical  Authorities. — Sick-headache,  Alley,  N.  A.  J.  H.,vol.  2,  p.  394;  Gas-
tric disorder,  Dudgeon,  Horn.  Rev.,  Oct.,  1888 ;  Dynpepsia,  with  craving  for  tobacco
and  stimulants,  Smedley,  H.  M.,  1872,  p.  510;  Constipation,  Dudgeon,  Horn.  Eev.,
Oct.,  1888;  Use  in  chronic  diarrhoea,  Swan,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  254;  Use  in
cholera,  Lippe,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  1,  p.  425 ;  Sporadic  cholera,  Gross,  Knorre,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  894;  Cholera,  Fleischer,  Kurtz,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
p.  964 ;  Riick.  KL  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  484  ;  Constipation,  Minnichreiter,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  397;  Asthma,  Schleicher,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  800;  Whooping
cough,  Schron,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  84;  A.  R.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  730;
Insomnia,  Blake,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  375 ;  Climacteric  affections,  Blake,  Horn.
Rev.,  Feb.  1,  1875;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  375;  Vomiting  of  pregnancy,  Simpson,
Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  18,  p.  211 ;  Debility,  Frost,  H.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  411 ;  Ague,  Allen,
Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  525  ;  Tobacco  habit,  Smedley,  H.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  510.

^  Mind. Forgetful;  slow  perception.

Difficulty  in  concentrating  his  mind  for  any  length  of  time
on  one  subject.

Idiotic  ;  epileptic  idiocy.

Cheerful,  merry, loquacious ; sings  all day ; talks  non-
sense.

Becomes  quite  stupid,  loses  his  senses;  preecordial  anguish,
with  faintness.

Melancholy;  anxiety  >  from  weeping.

I  Sudden  anxiety,  with  angina  pectoris;  also  with  oppres-
sion of  chest,  driving  him  from  place  to  place.

■  Excessive  depression  of  mind,  with  indigestion  and  pal-
pitation ;  intermittent  pulse ;  great  despondency.
'^ Sensorium.  i Vertigo:  excessive  heaviness  in  head;  with
qualmishness  in  stomach ;  deathlike  paleness  of  face
and  sensation  as  if  he  could  not  support  himself,  increas-
ing to  loss  of  consciousness ;  >  in  open  air  and  by  vom-
iting; cannot  rise  up;  face  deathly  pale;  vertigo  <  on
rising  and  looking  upward,  brought  on  by  immoderate
smoking  of  cigars.

Apoplexy  and  paralysis.
^  Inner  Head. ■  Headache :  with  vertigo ;  <  indoors ;  >  in
open  air.


TABACUM.  234

iSick-headache  coming  on  early  in  morning,  intolerable
by  noon ;  deathly  nausea,  violent  vomiting  greatly  <
by  noise  and  light.

I  I  When  Avalking,  indoors  or  outdoors,  suddenly,  as  if
struck  by  a  hammer  or  club  on  r.  side  of  head,  throws
him  to  left. Mgue.

I  I  Periodical  sick-headache,  lasting  one  or  two  days  and
generally  brought  on  by  fatigue  or  excitement;  intense,
agonizing  pain  as  if  head  would  burst,  and  again  as  if
brain  were  being  bored  out;  sought  continually  to  hide
her  head  in  pillow,  or  to  change  it  to  a  position  that
might  relieve ;  faintness,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  food,
and  painful  retching  to  vomit  small  quantities  of  mucus
and  bile;  skin  pale  and  cold  with  clammy  sweat;  breath-
ing oppressed  and  labored  ;  face  sunken  and  anxious.
^  Sight  and  Eyes.  Dimsightedness,  sees  as  through  a  veil,
evenings.

Heat  and  burning  in  ej^es.

Contraction  of  lids.

Retinal  images  retained.

■  Strabismus,  dependent  upon  brain  troubles.

Ambl3^opia,  vision  twenty-one  hundredths,  refraction  nor-
mal, divergence  of  one  and  a  half  lines  behind  a  screen,
diplopia  in  distance ;  dimness  and  confusion  of  sight,  as
if  black  dots  filled  visual  field  ;  <  after  stimulants.

■  Asthenopia;  strabismus;  white  atrophy  of  retina  with

amaurosis.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Nervous  deafness.
Sensation  as  if  ears  were  closed.
Ears  burning  hot  and  red.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Smell  feeble.

*  Upper  Face.  ■  Emaciation,  deathlike  pallor  of  face.  ^Cholera
infantum.

■  Face:  blue,  pinched  ;  sunken;  deathly;  pale;  pale  and

collapsed,  covered  with  cold  sweat;  pale,  with  drawn
features  and  deeply-sunken  eyes,  surrounded  by  blue
rings.
Glowing  heat  in  face,  with  redness,  frequently  only  on  one

side.
Violent  tearing  in  bones  of  face  and  teeth,  in  evening.
"* Teeth  and  Gums. Drawing,  rending  toothache; violent

tearing  [)ains  in  facial  bones.
"  Taste  &nd  Tongue. ■  Cannot  speak. ^Angina  pectoris.
While  reading  cannot  articulate;  hoarse,  reads  very  indis-
tinctly, quite  contrary  to  habit;  speech  difficult,  unin-
telligible.
'^  Inner  Mouth, l  l  Burning  in  mouth  and  throat.
Frothing:  from  mouth.


235  TABACUM.

I  Mouth  full  of  white  tenacious  mucus  which  must  be  fre-
quently expectorated.

■  Increased  secretion  of  thin,  watery  saliva;  spits  much.

1^ Throat. iThroat dry, can hardly  swallow; burning in
throat  and  mouth.

■  Violent  constriction  of  throat. ^Angina  pectoris.
Much  viscid  phlegm  in  throat.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Constant  hunger;
nausea  if  stomach  is  not  satisfied.
Complete  loss  of  appetite.

Thirst:  especially  at  night;  in  cholera  infantum.
Thirstlessness.

Does  not  eat,  but  drinks  eagerly,  <  at  night ;  violent  vom-
iting.
I  1  Dyspeptic ; uses  tobacco ; knows  chewing hurts  him
and  has  tried  in  vain  to  stop;  Tabacum  2c  appeased  crav-
ing for  tobacco  and  stimulants.
^^ Eating  and  Drinking. Sensitive  to  smell  of  wine;  fumes

all  but  intoxicate  her.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

■  Nausea: incessant,  with  frequent  vomiting; as  if  sea-

sick, vertigo  in  paroxysms,  cold  sweat ;  amounting  to
faintness,  disappears  in  open  air;  when  moving  in
least ;  with  a  sinking  feeling  in  epigastrium.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  on  least  motion. ^Cholera.

■  Nausea  and  cold  sweat  remaining  after  Verat.  and  Secale

checked  stools. ^Cholera.

■  Violent  efforts  to  vomit.

■  ■Vomiting:  violent; in morning,  before  breakfast; of

watery  liquid,  sometimes  insipid,  sometimes  bitter;  as
soon  as  he  begins  to  move ;  during  pregnancy,  deathly
nausea;  of  water;  of  sour  fluid,  with  mucus.

■Seasickness,  deathly  nausea;  pallor;  coldness;  <  from
least  bodily  motion ;  >  on  deck  in  fresh,  cold  air.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  ■Sinking  at  pit  of  stomach.

Cardialgia  with  frequent  fluttering  sensation  in  epigas-
trium.

Shocks  in  stomach,  at  night  while  sleeping,  so  great  that
patient  is  awakened.

■  Weakness  of  stomach.

■  Sensation  of  relaxation  of  stomach  with  nausea.

■  ■  Dreadful  faint  feeling  in  stomach.
Spasmodic  pressure  in  pyloric  region.
AVrithing  in  pit  of  stomach. ^Cardialgia.
Sticking  in  pit  of  stomach  through  to  back.
Feeling  of  coldness  in  stomach  with  nausea.
Burning  in  stomach.

I  I A  lady,  set.  about  70,  ailing  for  upward  of  a  year,  always


TABACUM.  236

sick,  constant  pains  in  stomach,  throws  up  all  food,  often
mucus  and  blood,  lives  on  biscuits  and  champagne;
moans  incessantly  from  pain  in  stomach ;  formerly
chronic  diarrhoea,  now  bowels  not  open  freely,  motions
very  small,  light-colored  ;  urine  color  of  blood  ;  sleeps
badly;  feeling  of  sickness  intense  and  constant;  Tabacum2
relieved,  but  patient  was  tormented  by  smell  of  tobacco,
which  seemed  to  be  all  through  her ;  could  not  divest
herself  of  strong  odor  of  tobacco  she  constantly  per-
ceived.
'^  Hypochondria. Pressure,  heaviness  or  stitches  in  liver.

Hepatic  and  renal  regions  sensitive  to  pressure.
^^  Abdomen. Gurgling  in  bowels  ;  shifting  of  flatus.

Abdomen  tympanitic;  constipation.

Violent  burning  in  abdomen,  horrible  pains,  must  shriek.

■  Spasmodic  pressure  in  hypogastrium. ^Cardialgia.

■  Violent  contractions  in  abdominal muscles; navel  re-

tracted.

■  Coldness  in  abdomen.

Tympanitic  bloating  of  abdomen  ;  dj^spnoea.

■  Child  wants  abdomen  uncovered,  which  relieves  nausea

and  vomiting.

■  Spasms  of  bowels;  nausea,  vomiting  and  cold  sweat.

■  Strangulated  hernia;  nausea,  deathly  faintness,  cold;  cold

sweat;  vomiting;  sudden  cerebral  hypersemia.

M Deathly  nausea  and  sickness; slimy  stool. ^Strangu-
lated hernia.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Sudden,  papescent,  yellow-green or
greenish,  slimy  stools  ;  tenesmus  ;  shifting  flatus.

Diarrhoea:  urgent,  watery,  painless  stools;  stools  resem-
bling those  of  cholera;  with  colic,  nausea,  vomiting,
flatulence  and  soreness  of  anus ;  with  sudden  attacks  of
extreme  faintness,  with  cold  perspiration.

Stools:  yellowish,  greenish,  slimy ;  papescent,  fecal.

During  stool :  colic;  I  tenesmus.

Violent  pain  in  small  of  back  during  soft  stool ;  tenesmus

,  and  burning  in  anus. ^Dysentery.

■  Cholera  infantum  :  body  cold,  abdomen hot; not  satis-

fied until  clothing  is  off"  abdomen;  stools  yellow,  some-
times greenish  slime;  vomiting,  debility,  cold  sweat;
icy  coldness  of  legs  from  knees  down  ;  warmth  of  body
with  icy-cold  hands ;  great  thirst;  emaciation  and  death-
like pallor;  nausea  and  vomiting  on  making  least  mo-
tion ;  violent  vomiting  and  diarrhoea  with  debility  and
cold  sweat;  face  blue  and  pinched  ;  <  at  night.

■  Sporadic  cholera: coldness  of  body; distorted  counte-

nance ;  fainting ;  clonic  spasms  ;  cold  sweats  and  nausea
remained  after  copious  evacuations  had  been  checked  by


237  TABACUM.

Verat.  and  Secale;  nausea  and  vomiting  persistent  after
purging  yielded,  recurring  in  constant  paroxysms,  with
cold  sweat,  oppressed  stomach,  anguish  and  restlessness,
cramp  and  tearing  in  limbs,  occasional  drawing  in
calves;  vomiting,  sometimes  in  a  stream;  body  cold,
face  distorted,  spasms,  vomiting,  or  no  stool  or  vomiting,
but  complete  collapse;  all  sphincters  paralyzed.

■  Gastric  cholera,  when  spasmodic  condition  prevails;  cold

skin  covered  with  clammy  perspiration,  cyanosis  not
prominent.

I  I  Sudden  vomiting  and  diarrhoea  in  morning,  discharges
whitish,  colorless;  attacks  of  fainting;  sitting  up  or
moving  caused  vomiting;  stools  every  ten,  twenty  to
thirty  minutes ;  deathlike  pallor  ;  surface  cold  ;  pulse
small  and  weak. ^Sporadic  cholera.

I  I  Attack  of  sporadic  cholera  after  catching  cold  while
overheated;  cramps  with  every  attack  of  vomiting,  at
one  time  tonic,  at  another  clonic;  loss  of  consciousness;
involuntary  evacuations,  generally  accompanied,  or
quickly  followed  by  vomiting;  whole  body  cold;  face
distorted ;  great  prostration  and  thirst.

■  Constipation.

I  I  Chronic  constipation,  great  pain  in  and  tympanitic  dis-
tension of  intestines;  great  dyspnoea.

I  I  An  elderly  lady  whose  bowels  for  last  twenty  years  had
always  been  a  trouble  to  her,  could  not  be  moved  with-
out an  enema,  and  very  often  not  with  one;  when  moved
stools  generally  w^ere  of  a  clay  color,  or  at  least  mottled
clay  color  and  brown.

■  Habitual  constipation;  paralysis  of  rectum ;  spasms  of

anal  sphincter.

I  I  Prolapsus  ani ;  great  drowsiness  during  day  when  trying
to  read  or  study.
^'Urinary  Organs, i Renal  colic; violent  pains  along  ure-
ters; cold  sweat,  deathly  nausea.

Increased  discharge  of  urine,  or  scanty  high-colored  urine.

Paralysis  of  sphincter  vesicse,  constant  dribbling  of  urine.

Enuresis.
"Male Sexual Organs. Nocturnal emissions; without
waking.

Genital  organs  flabby;  no  erections  or  sexual  desire.

Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.

Varicocele.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Hn  climacteric  period,  also  dur-
ing catamenia:  subjective  coldness,  epigastric  sinking,
palpitation,  slight  diarrhoea,  muscular  relaxation,  exces-
sive sense  of  wretchedness.

Leucorrhoea  of  serous  fluid  after  menses.


TABACUM.  238

2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, n Morning  sick-
ness.
Nausea  and  vomiting,  patient  dreads  least  movement.

■  During pregnancy,  insupportable  pruritus  over  whole

body,  pyrosis,  toothache  and  other  gastric  symptoms.
^^Respiration, i Difficult,  oppressed  respiration;  paroxysms

of  suffocation.
Dyspnoea ;  costiveness.
Hurried,  anxious,  irregular  respirations.
Asphyxia
Sticking  under  sternum,  with  inability  to  take  a  deep

breath.
Continual  paroxysms  of  sneezing,  for  weeks. ^Catarrhal

asthma  affecting  nostrils.
iSpasmodic  asthma  ;  laryngismus  stridulus.
iFreely  developed  asphyxia; great  dyspnoea  (almost  as

important  as  Hydrocyanic  acid).
I  I  Periodical  attacks  of  asthma;  sits  up  in  bed  suffering

with  extreme  dyspnoea ;  face  blue ;  terrified  expression ;

respiration  short  and  rapid  ;  gasps  for  air,  fears  suffoca-
tion ; jugular  veins  swollen ; pulse  100 ; heart  beats

very  strong ;  liver  and  heart  displaced  ;  spleen  enlarged ;

had  ague  for  a  year.
^^  Cough, Dry  cough.

I  I  Hiccough  following  a  severe  cough.

1  I  Cough  and  hiccough  at  same  time.

I  Whooping  cough,  violent  straining  and  vomiting,  stitches

in  pit  of  stomach,  inability  to  breathe  deeply ;  hiccough,

as  if  he  would  suffocate,  after  coughing.
Cough  produces  in  pit  of  stomach  sensation  as  of  a  wound

by  some  sharp  instrument.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Very  violent  constriction  of  chest.
On  taking  a  deep  breath  it  seemed  as  if  chest  were  too

tight.
Sensation as  if  a  crowbar  were pressed  tightly  from  r.

breast  to  1.,  till  it  came  and  twisted  in  knot  around  heart,

which  stopped,  then  leaped  violently  ;  after  the  attack

heart  missed  every  fourth  beat.
I  Tightness  across  upper  part  of  chest. ^Angina  pectoris.
Phthisis  is  said  to  make  less  rapid  progress  among  tobacco

workers.
Haemoptysis,  laryngitis,  chronic  bronchitis  with  general

emaciation,  anaemia,  palpitation,  oppression  and  pains  in

shoulders  at  night.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Palpitation :  violent  when

lying  on  1.  side,  goes  off  when  turning  to  r.;  in  attacks,

at  night,  with  tightness  across  chest  (angina  pectoris).

■  Oppression  at  heart ;  pulse  feeble,  irregular. ^Cholera.


239  TABACUM.

Violent  beating  of  heart  and  carotids.

I  Sudden  prsecordial  anguish.

I  Angina  pectoris:  pallor;  features  drawn;  cannot  speak
or  walk  ;  coldness  all  over;  sudden  periodical  anxiety;
violent  constriction  in  throat;  tightness  across  upper
part  of  chest ;  nocturnal  attacks  of  tightness  in  chest,
with  paroxsymal  oppression  and  palpitation;  neuralgia
up  into  neck;  pain  between  shoulders;  pulse  small,
irregular  or  imperceptible.

■  Heart's  action  very  feeble.

■  Dilated  heart;  frequent  pallor,  lividity  of  face;  diarrhoea

alternating  with  constipation ;  palpitation  while  lying  on
1.  side;  muscse  volitantes;  tinnitus  aurium  ;  dry  cough,
cardiac  in  origin ;  paroxysms  of  suffocation  with  tight-
ness across  upper  part  of  chest ;  feeble,  irregular  pulse;
pains  like  those  of  angina  pectoris  shoot  from  heart
down  1.  arm,  or  up  into  neck,  and  involve  different
plexuses  of  nerves;  extremities  cold  and  covered  with
clammy  sweat;  neuralgia  of  face.

■  Functional  diseases  of  heart,  hypochondriasis,  intermit-

tent pulse,  palpitation,  dyspepsia,  sinking,  gone  feeling
in  stomach.

■  Pulse:  quick, full,  large;  small, intermittent;  exceedingly

slow;  soft,  full  and  feeble;  feeble  and  irregular;  imper-
ceptible.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Neuralgic  pains  into  neck  and  between
shoulders. ^Angina  pectoris.

■Violent  pain  in  small  of  back  and  loins. ^Renal  calculi.

Pain  in  small  of  back  most  severe  after  stool.

Throbbing  in  sacral  region,  evening.
^^  Tipper  Limbs. Left  arm  exhausted,  painful.

Cramps  in  arms  and  hands.

Spasmodic  contractions  in  arms  and  hands.

Hands  feel  lame,  cold,  then  burning,  with  bloated  finger-
tips.

■  Hands  icy-cold  ;  body  warm.

■  Trembling  of  hands.

■  Cramps  in  single  fingers,  especially  while  washing;  early

morning.
*^  Lower  Limbs. ■Legs  icy-cold  from  knees  down.

Cannot  walk. ^Angina  pectoris.

Formication  in  1.  leg  from  knee  to  toes.

Tremor  and  disabling  weakness  of  feet.

Cramps  in  legs.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Coldness,  trembling  of  limbs.

Cramp:  tearing  in  limbs;  in  hands  and  arms;  from  toes
to  knee.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  arms,  hands  and  legs.


TABACUM.  240

■  ^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Changes  position :  to  relieve
head.

Lying :  on  1.  side,  palpitation.

Sitting  up  :  asthma  >.

On  rising:  vertigo  <.

On  looking  upward  :  vertigo  <.

Motion:  nausea  and  vomiting  <  ;  seasickness.

Coughing:  causes  hiccough  ;  stitches  in  pit  of  stomach.

Walking:  as  if  struck  by  a  hammer  on  head.
^"Nerves, l Weary,  languid;  tremor;  general  debility;  feel-
ing of  great  exhaustion  ;  profound  prostration  with  cold
sweat.

Restlessness,  requiring  continual  change  of  place.

I  I  Mrs.  H.,  black  eyes,  heavy  black  hair,  nursing  a  babe
of  three  weeks,  complained  of  spells  of  debility,  with
cold  perspiration,  especially  on  feet  and  lower  limbs ;
<  from  least  exposure  to  air;  goose  skin  ;  weakness  and
numbness  in  general ;  pain  in  head  over  eyes  ;  dimness
of  vision  by  spells;  no  appetite;  had  a  hard  labor  and
has  not  been  well  since.

■  Horrid  pains  with  involuntary  contractions.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  of  muscles,  spasms,  general  insen-

sibility, relaxation.

■  Head  drawn  back,  with  rigidity  of  muscles  of  neck  and

back  ;  contraction  of  eyelids  and  masseter  muscles ;  hiss-
ing respiration  from  spasms  of  laryngeal  and  bronchial
muscles;  alternate  tonic  and  clonic  spasms,  followed  by
general  relaxation  and  trembling;  retraction  of  abdo-
minal muscles;  contraction  of  parts  supplied  with  in-
voluntary muscles,  as  intestines,  ureters,  etc.,  accom-
panied by  intense  pains,  nausea,  cold  sweat,  and  speedy
collapse,  with  asphyxia.
From  excessive  use  of  tobacco  :  convulsions,  head  drawn
firmly  back,  with  rigidity  of  muscles  of  posterior  part  of
neck ;  constantly  recurring,  rigid,  tetanic  spasms,
muscles  of  back  being  principally  affected.

■  Spasms  of  paralysis.

■  Collapse,  anguish  and  restlessness,  deathlike  pallor,  cold-

ness, fainting,  cold  sweat,  deathly  nausea,  without  vom-
iting, or  vomiting  of  water,  when  moving.
'^'^  Sleep. Drowsiness,  going  off  in  open  air.
Stupefying  sleep,  at  night.

■  Insomnia;  especially  with  dilated  heart.

^^Time.  Morning:  vomiting;  diarrhoea;  sickness  of  preg
nancy;  cramps  in  fingers;  sick-headache  begins.

During  day:  drowsiness.

Evening:  dim  sight;  tearing  in  facial  bones  and  teeth;
throbbing  in  sacral  region;  coldness  and  shuddering.


24-1  TABACUM.

Night:  thirst;  shocks  in  stomach;  palpitation;  stupefying
sleep ;  msomnia.
^^  Temperature  and  "Weather. Open  air :  vertigo  >  ;  head-
ache >  ; faintness and nausea > ; seasickness > ;
drowsiness  >.

Indoors:  headache  <.
*^  Fever, i  Chilliness,  with  cold  sweat.

I  Cold  skin.

Coldness  and  shuddering  in  whole  body,  evenings,

llcy  coldness  of  legs  from  knees  to  toes.

I  Body  warm,  hands  icy-cold,  or  body  cold. ^Cholera.

iSweat:  cold  on  hands,  forehead  and  face;  viscid,  cold  ;
cold  over  whole  body.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. iSymptoms  come  on  in  paroxysms.

Periodical:  sick-headache;  asthma.

For  weeks:  paroxysms  of  sneezing.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  as  if  struck  on  head  with
a  hammer,  throws  him  to  1.;  spots  on  shoulder.

Left:  pains  in  arm  from  heart;  formication  in  leg.

Right  to  left : as  if  crowbar  were  pressed  through  chest
to  heart.
*^  Sensations, i  Sensation  of  excessive  wretchedness.

As  if  struck  by  a  hammer  on  r.  side  of  head  ;  as  if  head
would  burst;  as  if  brain  were  being  bored  out;  as  if
black  dots  filled  visual  field ;  as  if  ears  were  closed  ;  as
if  seasick  ;  as  if  stomach  were  relaxed  ;  as  if  chest  were
too  tight;  as  if  a  crowbar  were  twisted  around  heart.

Pain  :  in  stomach  ;  between  shoulders.

Agonizing  pain  :  in  head.

Writhing:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Horrible  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Violent  pain:  in  small  of  back  during  soft  stool ;  along
ureters ;  in  small  of  back  and  loins  from  renal  calculi.

Drawing  rending :  toothache.

Stitches  in  liver:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Sticking :  in  pit  of  stomach  through  to  back ;  under
sternum.

Tearing:  in  facial  bones  and  teeth  ;  in  limbs.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  neck  and  between  shoulders;  in  face.

Burning :  in  eyes ;  of  ears ;  in  mouth  and  throat ;  in  stom-
ach ;  in  abdomen ;  in  anus ;  of  hands ;  spots  on  face
and  r.  shoulder.

Drawing :  in  calves.

Pressure :  in  liver.

Spasmodic  pressure :  in  pyloric  region ; in  hypogastrium.

Tightness :  across  chest.

Constriction:  of  throat;  of  chest.

'Cramps:  in  limbs;  in  arms  and  hands;  in  fingers;  in  legs.

VOL.  X.— 16.


TABACUM.  242

Shocks :  in  stomach.

Throbbing :  in  sacral  region.

Oppression :  at  heart.

Dreadful  faint  feeling:  in  stomach.

Sinking  feeling:  in  epigastrium;  in  stomach.

Weakness:  in  stomach.

Heaviness :  in  head ;  in  liver.

Heat:  in  eyes;  of  ears;  in  face.

Coldness :  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen ;  of  hands.

Formication :  in  1.  leg  from  knee  to  toes. .

Lameness:  of  hands.

Itching: in  spots  on  chest  and  shoulders;  of  whole  sur-
face ;  as  from  flea-bites.
*'  Tissues. Diseases  originating  in  cerebral  irritation,  followed
by  marked  gastric  symptoms.

Emaciation,  especially  of  back  and  cheeks.

Adapted  to  diseases  of  nervous  system,  where  there  is  prom-
inent irritation  of  functions  of  vagi,  or  sick-headache
that  comes  on  early  in  morning  and  by  noon  is  intoler-
able, with  deathly  nausea  and  violent  vomiting,  greatly
<  by  noise  and  light,  with  dreadful  faint  feeling  at
stomach.

Spasmodic  contractions  of  muscles;  spasms  and  general
insensibility.

Complete  prostration  of  whole  muscular  S3^stem.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Uncovering:  abdo-
men, >  nausea  and  vomiting.

Pressure :  hepatic  and  renal  regions  sensitive.

Motion  of  vessel :  seasickness.

Strychnia  poisoning:  tetanus.
*®  Skin. Skin  :  cold,  in  cholera  ;  livid,  with  angina  pectoris.

Red  spots  on  face  and  on  r.  shoulder,burning  when  touched.

Itching,  with  red  or  yellow  spots  on  chest  and  shoulders.

Violent  itching  of  whole  surface. ^Prurigo.

Dark,  walnut  color  of  skin  :  jaundice.

Red  eruption  on  back.

Pimples  on  chest  and  fingers.

Pustules  on  nape  of  neck  and  upper  limbs.

Miliary  rash  on  both  cheeks.

Increased  turgescence  of  skin,  which  is  yellow,  hot  and
dry.

Vesicles  contain  a  yellow  serum,  and  are  surrounded  by
a  red  areola.

Itching  as  from  flea-bites.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Woman,  set.  26,  single,  for  a
year  has  suffered  from  ague,  which  greatly  affected  her
health ;  asthma.

Lady,  set.  30,  lymphatic  temperament;  sick-headache.


243  TABACUM— TARAXACUM.

Woman,  set.  70,  thin,  sickly;  sporadic  cholera.

Lady,  set.  70,  suffering  a  year;  gastric  disorder.
^^  Relations.  Antidotedby:  ipec,  vomiting  ;^rsm.,  chewing
tobacco ;  Nux  vom.,  gastric  symptoms  next  morning  after
smoking ;  Phosphor.,  palpitation ;  Ignat.,  Pulsat.,  hic-
cough ;  Clemat.,  toothache ;  Sepia,  neuralgia  right  side
of  face,  dyspepsia,  chronic  nervousness;  X^cop.,  impo-
tence ;  wine,  spasms,  cold  sweat  from  excessive  smoking.

Plant,  maj.  has  several  times  caused  an  aversion  to  tobacco.

It  antidotes : Cicuta,  Stramon.


TARAXACUM.

Dandelion.  Cowpositse.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Hahnemann,  assisted  by  Franz,  Gutmann,  Kummer,
Langhammer  and  Rasazerasky.

CLiNiCAii  Authorities. — Ague,  Bartl.,  Newmarin,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.
990;  Typhoid  fever,  Bcenningliausen,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  54;  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
4,  p.  790.

^  Mind. I  '  Constant  muttering  to  himself. ^Typhus.
Inclined  to  talk,  laugh  and  be  merry.
Undecided,  shunning  labor,  but  after  beginning,  works
well.
^  Sensorium. l  l  Vertigo  when  walking  about ; apyrexia  of
ague.
Dulness  of  head  during  a  walk  in  open  air,  with  reeling
and  dizziness ;  unsteady  gait,  head  inclines  at  times  to
1.,  at  others  to  r.  side.
^  Inner  Head. Drawing  pain  or  needlelike  stitches  in  1,  tem-
ple while  sitting,  ceasing  when  walking  and  standing.
■  Violent  tearing  in  occiput. ^Typhus.
Pressure  with  heaviness  in  lower  part  of  occiput,  after

lying  down.
Sharp  stitches  externally  in  1.  side  of  forehead.
I  1  Pressive  pain  in  r.  temple.
Sensation  in  head  as  if  brain  were  constricted  on  all  sides

by  pressure.
Nausea  with  headache ;  anxiety.
*  Outer  Head. Head  falls  now  to  1.,  now  to  r.  side,  with  ver-
tigo.
I  I  Sweat  on  falling  asleep,  most  on  head. ^Quotidian  ague.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Aversion  to  light.
Burning  in  1.  eyeball.
Burning  sticking  in  1.  eyeball,  toward  external  canthus.


TARAXACUM.  244

^  Hearing  and  Ears. Drawing  pain  in  external  ear.
''Smell  and  Nose. Nosebleed,  1.  side.

I  I  Nose  cold. /^Quotidian  ague.
^  Upper  Face. Face  hot  and  red.

rimples  on  cheeks,  alse  nasi  and  corners  of  mouth.
^  Lower  Face. Upper  lip  cracked.

^'^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  :  feel  dull ;  set  on  edge,  as  from
acids,  when  chewing  food.
Bleeding  from  carious  teeth,  blood  having  a  sour  taste.
"Taste  and  Tongue, i Taste:  bitter,  before  eating;  bitter,
rising  from  pharynx  into  mouth  ;  sour ;  saltish,  espe-
cially of  butter  and  meat.

II  White  spots  on  tongue  among  the  red.

I  Tongue: coated  white; cleans  off  in patches,  leaving
dark-red,  tender,  very  sensitive  spots ;  mapped  tongue.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Tough,  ropy,  sour-tasting  saliva.
Sour  water  accumulates  in  mouth.
Accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth,  with  sensation  as  if

larynx  were  compressed.
Suppurating  pimple  in  right  corner  of  mouth.
Smarting,  burning  and  rawness  in  mouth  and  fauces.
13  Throat. Throat  and  larynx  feel  as  if  closed.

During  and  after  swallowing  of  food,  aching  across  clavi-
cles, up  1.  side  of  her  neck  into  ear;  gullet  feels  too
small  for  food.
Dryness  in  throat.

Hawking  up  of  sour  mucus  setting  teeth  on  edge.
Sharp  pressure  in  anterior  wall  of  pharynx  and  larynx,
disappears  on  swallowing.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Great thirst,
day  and  night.
I  I  Loss  of  appetite. ^Jaundice.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking, i  After  taking  anything  to  eat  or
drink,  great  chilliness. ^Typhus.
Coughs  after  eating.
Bitterish  taste  in  mouth  before  eating.
Empty  belching,  after  drinking.
Burning  in  throat  from  smoking,  >  from  drinking.
Irresistible  drowsiness  after  a  meal.
'^Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i Eructa-
tions bitter;  hiccough.
I  I  Belching,  gagging,  nausea  at  night. ^Ague.
Nausea,  with  headache,  anxiety  ;  after  fat  food.
"' Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Rawness extending from
mouth  to  stomach,  with  burning  in  stomach,  rising  up
toward  throat.
I  I  Digestion  disturbed. ^Jaundice.

I  Bilious  dyspepsia;  bitter  taste;  nausea  as  after  fat  food  ;
mapped  tongue ;  pain  in  legs  >  when  moving.


245  TARAXACUM.

'^  Hypochondria, l  Liver  enlarged,  indurated. /? Jaundice.
I  I  Pain  in  region  of  spleen. ^Ague.

I  Tongue  mapped,  bitter  taste  in  mouth,  chilliness  after
eating  or  drinking,  pain  and  soreness  in  region  of  liver,
bilious  diarrhoea.
'^  Abdomen. Motions  in  lower  abdomen  as  if  bubbles  were
forming  and  bursting.
I  I  Abdomen  puffed. ^Jaundice.
Stitching  pains  in  abdomen,  especially  in  sides.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. '  l  Ineffectual  urging,  with  much  press-
ing; scanty  hard  stool. ^Ague.
I  I  Stool  difficult,  even  if  not  hard. ^Ague.
Voluptuous  itching  in  perineum,  compelling  scratching.
I  Constipation. ^Jaundice.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Frequent,  profuse  pale  urine. ^Diabetes.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. I  l  In  a  hard  swelling  in  1.  epididy-
mis, following  an  inflammation  after  contusion,  violent
shooting  pains,  running  upward  and  spreading  over
whole  pubic  region,  after  urinating.
^'  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  i  Suppressed  menses.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. As  if  larynx
were  compressed,  with  saliva  in  mouth,  hoarse  in  speak-
ing, with  bitter  phlegm  in  throat.
^^  Respiration. With  deeper  inhalations  tensive  pain  in  region
of  diaphragm.
With exhalation,  more than  with inhalation,  burning

pressure  in  sternum.
With  exhalation,  pressure  from  inside  to  short  ribs  in

region  of  liver,  extending  up  chest.
Deeper  respirations  >  pressive  stitch  in  r.  chest.
^'' Cough. Sour- tasting  sputa.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  chest,  during  inspi-
ration.
I  I  Boring,  digging  in  chest.
Pressing  pain  in  chest.
^°  Outer  Chest, l  l  Twitching  in  r.  intercostal  muscles.

Pressure  on  xiphoid  process.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Tearing  from  ear  down  to  neck.

Rolling  and  gurgling  sensation  in  r.  scapula,  feeling  chilly.
Pressing stitches along spine,  mostly  in sacrum,  with

dyspnoea.
Twitching  in  lower  portion  of  side  of- neck.
Sticking,  as  with  a  somewhat  blunt  needle,  in  1.  side  of
nape  of  neck,  disappearing  on  sitting  down.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Twitching  in  muscles  of  arms.
Numbness  in  1.  arm,  side  of  head  and  ear.
Pressive  pain  in  r.  middle,  ring  and  little  fingers.
Hands  hot  or  cold.


TARAXACUM.  246

Finger  tips  icy-cold.
Twitching  of  muscles  of  1.  forearm.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Stitches  in  thighs,  calves  and  soles.
Tension  in  1.  thigh  when  stooping.
Pressive  pain  in  1.  calf.

Jerking  pain  in  r.  calf,  ceases  quickly  when  touched.
I  I  Tearing pains only  in  lower  limbs, < during rest.

^Typhus.
Pressure  in  dorsum  of  r.  foot,  while  sitting.
Burning  in  knees,  legs  and  toes.

Drawing  pain  in  dorsum  of  r.  foot,  when  standing;  ceas-
ing when  sitting.
Severe,  or  fine  stitching  pains  in  r.  sole  from  within  out-
ward, while  sitting.
'*  Limbs  in  General. Can  move  limbs,  but  they  feel  as  if
bound  or  powerless.
Limbs  painful  to  touch  and  when  in  a  wrong  position.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  tearing  pains  in  limbs  <.
Lying :  pressure  in  occiput.

Sitting :  pain  in  1.  temple ;  pressure  in  dorsum  of  r.  foot ;
drawing  in  dorsum  of  r.  foot  > ;  stitching  pains  in  r.
sole;  yawning.
Standing :  drawing  in  dorsum  of  r.  foot.
Stooping :  tension  in  1.  thigh.
A  wrong  position :  causes  pain  in  limbs.
Walking:  vertigo;  in  open  air,  dulness  of  head.
Motion  :  >  pain  in  legs  ;  vertigo.
^*  Nerves. Exhausted, inclined to sit  or lie  down ; semi-
conscious.
I  Debility,  loss  of  appetite,  profuse,  exhausting  night  sweat;
thirst ;  restless  sleep.
^^  Sleep. I  Yawning,  sleepy  when  sitting.

At  night  on  waking,  heat,  mostly  in  face  and  hands.
Sleep  disturbed  by  :  dreams ;  sweat.
Vivid,  unremembered  dreams.

I  I  Unconquerable  desire  to  sleep  on  leaving  table;  fright-
ful dreams,  of  which  he  preserves  no  recollection  other
than  a  painful  impression.
^Time. 8  p.m.:  hands  and  nose  cold.

Night:  nausea;  heat  in  face  and  hands;  chilliness,  with
sweat.
*^  Temperature  and  Weather, i  Inclined  to  open  air.

In  open  air:  chill.
*"  Fever. I  l  Tips  of  fingers  icy-cold.

iChilliness:  all  over;  at  night, with  sweat  and  gastric  ail-
ments ;  after  food  or  drink.
Chill  in  open  air.
I  I  Long-lasting  chill,  copious  sweat;  pain  in  spleen.  ^Ague.


247  TARAXACUM.

Heat:  at  night,  on  waking;  most  in  face  and  hands;
without  thirst.

■  Sweat :  mostly  with  thirst;  copious,  debilitating,  at  night,

causing  biting  on  skin.

I  I  Chilliness  of  long  duration,  often  whole  day,  followed  in
night  by  general  and  profuse  sweat ;  gastric  disturb-
ances; nausea;  belching;  stools  delayed,  scanty,  hard,
with  much  pressing;  pain  in  region  of  spleen. 6  Ague.

I  I  About  8  P.M.  hands  and  nose  get  cold,  desires  to  go  to
bed  and  is  soon  asleep  ;  is  hardly  asleep  before  a  profuse
sweat  appears,  particularly  on  head,  lasting  an  hour;
lassitude ;  tendency  to  vertigo  when  moving  about.
^Quotidian  ague.

I  I  Great  prostration,  loss  of  appetite;  profuse  sweats  at
night,  was  compelled  to  change  his  shirt  three  times
every  night;  great  thirst,  day  and  night;  restless  sleep.
^Ague.

I  I A  hard  chill,  after  eating  or  drinking. ^Typhus.

■  Ague:  where  Cinchona  has  only  slightly  delayed  parox-

ysms, and  where  disease  degenerated  into  a  slow  fever,
especially  in  dry  and  bilious  subjects.

■  Typhoid  fever;  during  rest  intolerable  tearing  pains,  in

lower  extremities;  constant  muttering  delirium;  vio-
lent tearing  pain  in  occiput ;  great  chilliness  after  eat-
ing or  drinking;  mapped  tongue.

■  Violent  pains  of  typhoid  or  typho-malarial  fevers,  par-

ticularly in  thighs.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  drawing  or  stitches  in  tem-
ples; stitches  in  forehead  ;  burning  sticking  in  eyeball ;
nosebleed;  aching  from  neck  into  ear;  epididymitis;
sticking  in  side  of  neck ;  numbness  of  arm  ;  twitching  in
forearm ;  tension  in  thigh  ;  pressive  pain  in  calf.

Right:  pressive  pain  in  temple;  pimple  in  corner  of
mouth  ;  twitching  in  intercostal  muscles ;  rolling  and
gurgling  in  scapula ;  pressive  pain  in  fingers ;  jerking
pain  in  calf;  pressure  in  dorsum  of  foot;  stitching  pains
in  sole.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  were  constricted  ;  as  if  teeth  were
set  on  edge;  as  if  larynx  were  compressed;  as  if  closed,
throat  and  larynx;  as  if  bubbles  were  forming  and
bursting  in  abdomen ;  as  if  rolling  and  gurgling  in  r.
scapula;  as  if  limbs  were  bound  or  powerless.

Pain  :  in  region  of  spleen ;  in  region  of  liver.

Jerking  pain  :  in  r.  calf.

Needlelike  stitches :  in  1.  temple.

Stitches:  in  1.  forehead  ;  in  abdomen,  especially  sides;  in
chest;  in  thighs,  calves  and  soles;  in  r.  sole.

Pressing  stitches :  along  spine ; in  sacrum.


TARAXA.CUM.  248

Shooting:  from  epididymis  over  pubic  region.

Sticking :  in  1.  eyeball ;  as  with  blunt  needle  on  1.  side  of
nape.

Stinging:  in  skin.

Tearing  :  in  occiput;  from  ear  to  neck  ;  in  lower  limbs.

Boring  digging :  in  chest.

Drawing  pain:  in  1.  temple;  in  external  ear;  on  dorsum
of  r.  foot.

Burning :  in  1.  eyeball ; in  mouth  and  fauces ;  in  throat ;
in  stomach  ;  in  knees,  legs  and  toes.

Burning  pressure:  in  sternum,  <  with  exhalation.

Biting :  in  skin  with  sweat.

Smarting  :  in  mouth  and  fauces.

Soreness:  in  region  of  liver.

Rawness:  in  mouth  and  fauces; from  mouth  to  stomach.

Pressure:  in  occiput; from  region  of  liver  into  chest;  in
chest;  on  xiphoid  process;  in  fingers;  upon  back  of  foot.

Aching :  across  clavicles ;  up  1.  neck  into  ear.

Tensive  pain  : in  region  of  diaphragm  with  deep  inhala-
tion.

Pressive  pain:  in  r.  temple;  in  1.  calf.

Tension  :  in  1.  thigh  when  stooping.

Dulness :  of  head.

Heaviness :  in  occiput.

Numbness:  in  1.  arm.

Itching:  in  perineum.
^*  Tissues, I  Gastric  bilious  attacks,  with  mapped  tongue.

Neuralgia  and  rheumatism  during  and  after  typhus.
^^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  >  in  r. calf;

limbs  painful.
*^  Skin. I  I  Unhealthy,  pimply,  sycotic  skin.

Stinging  in  skin.

Eruption  over  body  and  limbs,  itching  severely  and  ap-
pearing to  be  a  mixture  of  lichen  and  urticaria.

Biting  in  skin  with  sweat.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  8 ;  ague.

Girl,  set.  19, servant;  typhoid  fever.

Man,  set.  46 ;  ague.

A  man;  unhealthy,  pimply,  sycotic  skin.
^^ Relations. Compatible:  ^rsm.  in  night-sw^eats.

Compare : Chelid.,  Hydrast,  Pulsat.


249  TARENTULA.


TARENTULA.

Spanish  Tarantula.  Araneidex.

The  male  and  female  Tarantulse  used  in  the  provings  were  collected  by  Dr.
Mariano  de  la  Paz  Grsells,  at  the  royal  residence  of  Pardo,  Spain,  in  the  month  of
July,  during  which  time  the  poison  is  stronger;  dilutions  used,  3,  6,  12  and  200;
the  medicine  was  prepared  from  the  live  spider,  all  its  parts  triturated  in  sugar
of  milk  to  complete  dryness,  and  from  tliis  the  alcoholic  dilution.

The  Mygale  Cubanensis,  which  may  be  called  the  Cuban  Tarantula,  also  found
in  South  Carolina  and  Texas,  is  a  larger  spider  of  a  dark-brown  color,  not  so  pois-
onous, and  covered  with  more  hairs  than  the  Tarantula  Hispanica.  Dr.  Howard
had  some  specimens  sent  from  Cuba,  and  the  medicine  he  uses  is  prepared  by
macerating  the  whole  spider  in  alcohol.  We  have  not  had  a  good  proving  of  it.
In  the  Hah.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  8,  something  has  been  done  in  that  direction,  and  some
interesting  facts  were  collected  by  Dr.  Howard.

Provings  made  by  Monge,  del  Eio,  Tejero,  Fejedor,  Cuesta,  Dubost,  Perry,  Kos,
Iturralde,  Gonzales  and  Chategnier,  were  reported  by  Nunez,  translated  by  Terry,
see  Am.  Jour,  of  Hom.,  N.  S.,  vol.  2,  p.  387.

Clinical  Authorities. — Insanity,  Foote,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  9;  Foote,
Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  227  ;  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  13,  p.  525 ;  Pricking  in  eye,  Berridge,  Org.,  vol
2,  p.  320;  Diphtheria  (16  cases),  Martin,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1884,  p.  64 ;  Diarrhoea
Pearson,  M.  I.,  vol.  5,  p.  430 ;  Weakness  of  sphincter  ani,  Pearson,  M.  I.,  vol.  5,  p
430; Urinary  difficulty,  Pearson,  M.  T.,  vol.  5,  p  430;  Oonorrhcea,  Gonzales,  N.  A

J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  81 ;  ,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  221 ;  Nymphomania,  Nunez,  N

A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  486;  Utenne  neuralgia,  Firmat,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  77
Uterine  disorder,  Swan,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  406  ;  Uterine  disorders,  Cramoisy,  M.
I.,  vol.  4,  p.  421 ;  Uterine  disorder,  Nunez,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  488 ;  Use  in  dys-
menorrhoea,  Bender,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  503 ;  Pruritus  vulrce,  Swan,  Eaue's  Rec,
1874,  p.  237  ;  (2  cases).  Swan,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  446 ;  Swan,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.
282;  Catarrh  of  chest,  Valdes,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  79;  Affection  of  heart,  Sher-
bino,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  339  ;  Burning  sensation  in  a  mole  on  neck.  Young,  Med.
Adv.,  April,  1889,  p.  246;  Irritable  spine,  Farrington,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  87  ;
Coccygodynia,  Gonzales,  Eaue's  Rec,  1874,  p  251 ;  Gonzales,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,
p.  79;  Intermittent  nervous  affection,  Brunn,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  491;  Spasms,
Holcombe,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  91 ;  Nunez,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  488 ;  Hystero-mania,
Hendrichs,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  46  ;  Hysteria,  ,  M.  I.,  vol.  5,  p.  419  ;  Epi-
lepsy and  hysteria,  Lopez,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  75;  Lopez,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.
269 ;  Epileptoid,  Eartlett,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  167 ;  Chorea  (7  cases),  Dewilde,
Lopez,  Gandy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  pp.  486-494 ;  Dewilde,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,
p.  489;  Firmat,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  76;  Valdes,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  79  ;
Gandy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  82 ;  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  309 ;  Chacon,

Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  251,  from  El.  Crit.  Med.,  Aug.,  1874;  ,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,

p.  88;  Hendrichs,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  46  ;  Hofmann,  T  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1880,  p.
211  ;  Firmat,  Valdez,  Gandy,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  262;  Gandy,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  3,


TARENTULA.  . 250

p.  68;  Paralysis  agiians,  Cramoisy,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  421 ;  Cramoisy,  Eaue's  Kec,
1874,  p.  270  ;  Ague,  Nunez,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  489 ;  Intermittent  fever  with
choreic  convulsions,  Firmat,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  85;  Carbuncle,  Martin,  T.  H.  M.
S.  Pa.,  1886,  p.  94;  Pruritus,  Kent,  Horn.  Pliys.,  vol.  6,  p.  316.

^  Mind. Complete  loss  of  memory.

Great  taciturnity  and  irritability ;  desire  to  strike  himself
and  others.

Profound  grief  and  anxiety.

Consciousness  of  unnatural  state  of  mind,  hence  despon-
dency, sadness,  moral  dej)ression,  disgust  for  everything.

I  Mental  chorea;  hypersemia  and  hypersesthesia  of  female
sexual  organs.

Hysteria,  with  bitter  belching  and  repeated  yawning,  >
by  lying  down  and  by  music  ;  restlessness  of  hands  and
legs ;  constant  motion,  cannot  remain  in  one  place ;  heat
in  epigastrium.

Fits  of  nervous  laughter.

Desire  to  joke,  to  play  and  to  laugh ;  extreme  gayety.

Great  excitement  caused  by  music ;  one  hour  after  it,  copi-
ous and  general  perspiration.

Singing  until  hoarse  and  exhausted.

■  Nervous  excitement;  hysteria  and  mania;  restlessness
and  dreaming.

I  I  Sudden  foxlike  destructive  efforts,  requiring  utmost  vigi-
lance to  prevent  damage;  followed  by  laughter  and
apologies.

Cross,  tendency  to  get  angry  and  to  speak  abruptly ;  is
obliged  to  move  limbs.

Paroxysms  of  insanity ;  restlessness  of  legs ;  threatening
words  of  destruction  and  death.

I  1  Suddenly  sprang  away  from  her  attendants  and  swept
ornaments  from  mantelpiece ;  said  she  was  sorry,  but
could  not  help  it;  very  mischievous  and  destructive,
amusing  and  cheerful ;  at  times  j)ain  in  1.  ovary.

I  I  Attacks  of  hystero-mania  appearing  daily  about  same
hour,  beginning  with  great  nervous  irritability,  despon-
dency and  quarrelsome  mood;  sudden  transition  from
this  state  to  one  of  great  exaltation,  hits  and  abuses
every  one,  destroys  whatever  she  can  lay  hold  of,  tears
her  clothing,  sings  and  laughs ;  mocks  aged  people  with
their  old  age,  if  restrained  becomes  violent ;  attacks  end
in  a  comatose  sleep,  during  which  she  answers  questions
correctly;  after  waking  remembers  but  little  of  what
has  occurred ;  during  first  part  of  attack  pulse  is  slow,
artery  greatly  contracted ;  during  second  stage  pulse
frequent  and  full ;  thirstlessness  and  loss  of  appetite ;
pressure  and  confusion  of  head.


251  TARENTULA.

I  I  While  in  a  highly  nervous  state  from  too  close  applica-
tion to  musical  studies,  was  operated  upon  to  remove
lens  of  eye  by  absorption ;  this  was  followed  by  great
nervous  depression  and  prostration,  with  occasional
symptoms  of  mental  aberration ;  was  then  treated  sev-
eral months  for  a  retroverted  and  inflamed  uterus,  with-
out mental  improvement;  severe  pain  through  r.  eye
extending  to  occiput  and  nose;  restlessness;  cold  feet;
mahogany-colored  and  large  papular  eruption  upon  face,
particularly  large  in  region  of  malar  bone ;  sleepless
and  nervous  and  very  troublesome;  retroversion,  with
swollen  uterus ;  finally  violent,  soils  bed  with  feces  and
urine;  furious;  sings  loud  and  continuously,  with  laugh-
ter; no  sleep  for  five  days;  thirst;  suddenly  springs
from  bed  destroying  whatever  she  could  get  hold  of,
this  was  done  so  quickly  that  she  could  not  be  pre-
vented. /^Insanity.
^  Sensorium.  Vertigo :  falls  to  ground  without  losing  con-
sciousness; malaise,  belching,  nausea,  bloating  of  stom-
ach, gagging  and  efforts  to  vomit,  with  vomiting  of  food  ;
after  breakfast,  with  a  bad  taste  in  mouth  ;  when  fixing
sight  on  any  object,  with  headache,  severe  pain  in  cere-
bellum, accompanied  by  incomplete  erection  of  penis,
and  formication  in  soft  palate.
^  Inner  Head.  Headache,  as  if  a  large  quantity  of  cold  water
were  poured  on  head,  and  body,  >  by  pressure  and
rubbing  head  against  pillow;  great  distress  in  cardiac
region.

Migraine ;  cannot  open  eyes ;  tendency  of  head  to  incline
backward.

Frontal  headache,  pain  in  vertex  and  parietal  bones ;  >
by  pressure  and  fresh  air.

Compressive  headache,  with  lachrymation  and  heaviness
of  upper  lids.

Intense  headache  with  restlessness,  compelling  to  move
from  place  to  place.

Pain  flies  to  forehead  and  occiput,  with  photophobia.

Neuralgia  in  temples.

When  waking  in  morning,  headache  as  if  head  were
knocked,  <  to  9  a.m.,  afi'ecting  throat  and  neck ;  stifi"-
ness  of  neck.

Intense  headache,  as  if  thousands  of  needles  were  pricking
into  brain.

Severe  headache,  <  by  touch.

Pain  in  occiput  as  if  struck  with  a  hammer,  extending  to
temples.

Burning,  scorching  heat  in  occiput ;  pricking  and  itching
over  whole  body ;  convulsive  trembling  of  body ;  con-


TARENTULA.  252

vulsions,  paralysis,  complete  retention  of  urine  and  feces.
^Meningitis  cerebro-spinalis.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Right  pupil  much  dilated.

I  I  Feeling  of  a  hair  in  1.  eye,  which  pricked  it ;  pricking

made  her  rub  it ;  < on  waking. ^Chronic  opacity  of

cornea.

^  Upper  Face. Pain  in  angles  of  inferior  maxilla,  so  severe

as  to  think  he  is  going  crazy.

Pain  in  inferior  maxilla,  as  if  all  teeth  were  going  to  fall

out ;  neither  cold  nor  heat  relieves.
Pain  in  direction  of  r.  inferior  maxillary  nerve,  with  a
tickling  sensation  in  stomach.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Great  dryness  of  mouth  and  teeth.
^'Throat. I  l Tonsillitis ;  high  fever,  delirium,  red  face,  ton-
sils so  swollen,  suffocation  was  feared.
I  i  Tonsils  greatly  swollen,  membrane  covering  both,  also
uvula ;  neck  much  swollen,  excessive  fetor  oris,  high
fever  and  cerebral  congestion. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  High  fever,  delirium,  vomiting,  great  prostration  ;  throat
swollen  externally  on  both  sides,  internally  entire  fauces
red,  both  tonsils  covered  by  a  firm  membrane,  color  of
pearl ;  both  sides  equally  affected ;  offensive  odor  from
mouth. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Hot,  fiery-red  face,  pungent  heat  of  surface  of  body,
drowsy  with  starting  in  sleep,  throat  swollen  internally,
both  tonsils  slightly  covered  with  membrane,  distinct
odor  of  diphtheria.
I  I  Tonsils  much  swollen  and  well  covered  with  membrane ;
violent  onset  of  disease ;  high  fever ;  tendency  to  vomit.
^Diphtheria.
I  I  High  fever  and  delirium  for  two  nights;  throat  swollen
externally  and  both  tonsils  covered  by  a  yellowish  mem-
brane ;  fetor  oris. ^Diphtheria.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. '  i  Loss  of  appe-
tite, intense  thirst ;  general  prostration;  vomiting  after
eating  and  getting  out  of  bed ;  craving  for  raw  food.
^Disorders  of  pregnancy.
Opium  habit.
^^ Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Gastric  disturbance;  mouth
dry ;  gums  bleed ;  tongue  ulcerated ;  throat  sore,  swol-
len, inflamed,  constricted ;  great  thirst ;  flat,  bad  taste  ;
appetite  lost,  with  anguish,  nausea  and  vomiting.
'^  Hypochondria. Hepatic  region  painful  to  touch.

I  I  Severe  burning  pain  in  cancer  of  liver  (relieved).
'^  Abdomen. '  l  Sharp  pain  in  umbilical  region ;  violent  burn-
ing in  abdomen  and  rectum  ;  stools  profuse,  dark,  fetid,
bloody,  Avith  violent  urging;  constipation.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Constipation.


253  TARENTULA.

Stools  three  or  four  times  daily,  very  dark,  fetid,  partly
formed,  containing  much  mucus,  expelled  with  difficulty
and  followed  by  smarting  and  burning  in  anus,  but  no
tenesmus;  stools  occur  immediately  on  having  head
washed.

I  I  Nausea  and  vomiting;  diarrhoea;  pain  and  tenderness
in  bowels;  constant  thirst;  tongue  red;  pulse  140;  posi-
tion on  back,  limbs  flexed ;  sleepless  and  restless ;  in-
flammation of  bowels,  probably  caused  by  eating  baked
beans.

I  i Fainting,  sinking,  chill;  great  nervousness;  vomiting;
purging ;  severe  cramps  in  bowels  and  pain  in  bladder ;
pulse  weak,  100;  no  thirst;  tongue  dark  as  if  stained
with  nitrate  of  silver ;  excruciating  pain  in  bowels,  <  at
night ;  evacuations  frequent,  eight  to  ten  every  night,
and  four  or  five  by  day  ;  frequent  and  painful  micturi-
tion, patient  seemed  unable  to  locate  pain  or  to  distin-
guish whether  it  was  <  in  bladder  or  bowels ;  stools
thin  and  brown,  with  very  little  odor ;  great  restlessness;
desire  to  change  position  or  to  get  out  of  bed  and  walk
floor;  face  pale  and  haggard,  with  perceptible  diminu-
tion of  flesh  and  strength  from  day  to  day.  ^After  in-
jecting nitrate  of  silver  for  gonorrhoea.

I  I  Headache,  pain  in  back  and  limbs;  tenderness  in  region
of  liver  and  bowels;  pulse  96;  tongue  brownish  and
dry ;  bilious  diarrhoea ;  fifteen  evacuations,  not  painful,
in  twenty-four  hours,  over  half  of  these  at  night;  stools
dark-brown  and  thin,  with  some  lumps  of  feces  of  same
color;  abdomen  sore;  no  nausea,  but  disgust  of  food.

I  I  Weakness  of  sphincter  ani,  feces  appeared  to  be  natural
but  passed  as  fast  as  accumulated.
^' Urinary  Organs.  Diabetes;  profound  grief  and  anxiety;
great  prostration  and  pain  as  if  whole  body  were  bruised ;
loss  of  memory  and  dimness  of  sight ;  constant  craving
for  raw  articles ;  intense  thirst ;  disgust  for  meat  and
general  wasting  away;  constipation;  polyuria,  with
violent  pains  in  lumbar  region  and  paralysis  of  lower
extremities ;  miliary  eruptions  and  furuncles.

Involuntary  emission  of  urine  when  coughing,  laughing,
or  making  any  effort  whatever.

I  I  Pain  in  region  of  bladder;  urination  frequent,  very  pain-
ful ;  extremely  nervous ;  could  get  no  relief  in  any  po-
sition ;  pulse  somewhat  quickened  from  pain ;  tongue
only  slightly  coated;  all  symptoms  <  at  night;  sleep
disturbed.

Cystitis,  with  high  fever,  gastric  derangement,  excruciat-
ing pains,  and  impossibility  to  pass  a  drop  of  urine;
bladder  seems  swollen  and  hard ;  great  tenesmus  from


TARENTULA.  254

spasmodic  action,  debilitating  patient,  who  passes  only
by  drops  a  dark-red,  brown,  fetid  urine,  with  gravel-like
sediment.
lUrine  hot,  thick,  much  sediment;  difficult  micturition,
incontinence,  and  pain  in  kidneys.  ^Septic  diseases.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  Extreme  sexual  excitement,  lascivi-
ousness,  almost  to  insanity.

■  Onanism,  followed  by  prostatic  ailments  and  hypochon-

driasis.

■  Seminal emissions after onanism; imbecility, stupid

laughter,  progressive  wasting.
I  i  Gonorrhoea ;  five  different  injections,  producing  great
irritation  in  urethra,  particularly  when  urinating,  with
smarting,  unbearable  pains  ;  redness  on  tip  and  edges
of  tongue,  anorexia,  dyspepsia  and  pyrosis,  flatulence
and  stubborn  constipation ;  emaciation  in  face,  eyes
sunken  and  without  expression;  dizziness  when  moving,
dyspnoea,  and  alarming  palpitation  ;  loss  of  memory  so
great,  he  failed  to  recognize  persons  with  whom  he  was
intimately  acquainted ;  little  perception,  inertia  and
weakness  for  any  mental  labor ;  full  of  deep  sadness,
shy,  shuns  his  friends;  nervous  agitation,  restlessness,  in-
ability to  find  a  comfortable  position ;  if  sleep  was  ob-
tained, it  only  lasted  for  three  or  four  hours ;  pains ;
getting  weaker ;  felt  a  general  burning,  more  in  palms
and  soles,  with  shaking,  twitching  and  incessant  move-
ment of  lower  extremities,  especially  when  quiet ;  gon-
orrhoea, though  not  so  profuse,  stains  shirt  a  light  yel-
low ;  seminal  emissions  two  or  three  times  a  week  ;  want
of  appetite.
^'Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Extreme  sexual  excitement:
menses  too  early  and  profuse;  pains  and  spasms  of
uterus;  pruritus  vulvee ;  leucorrhoea.
I  I  Violent  nymphomania;  could  not  suppress  lascivious
inclination ;  <  from  sexual  intercourse ;  has  suffered
since  her  twentieth  year;  woman,  set.  45.

■  Nymphomania;  reflex  chorea ;  hypersemia  and  hyperses-

thesia  of  sexual  organs.

Fibrous  tumors  of  uterus,  with  bearing-down  pains.

Displacement  of  uterus,  with  retention  of  urine  and  diffi-
cult defecation.

Sensation  of  great  weight,  with  burning  in  hypogastrium
and  uterus,  as  if  there  were  not  sufficient  space,  with
upward  pressure.

Pruritus  vulvae;  frequent  hemorrhages;  pale  face,  con-
stant fatigue.

Profuse  menstruation  accompanied  by  frequent  erotic
spasms;  crossness,  ennui,  and  deep  dissatisfaction;  cata-


255  TARENTULA.

menia  too  early,  pain  in  lumbar  region  as  soon  as  menses
commence  and  ceasing  with  it ;  great  pruritus  in  vulva
after  menses ;  hysteria.

I  1  After  a  fall  down  stairs  complains  of  pain  in  lower  part
of  abdomen  and  hij)s;  very  sensitive  to  manipulation,
some  hardness  and  swelling  in  h3^pogastric  region  and
in  uterus,  which  was  seat  of  burning,  crampy  pains,  <
by  every  movement;  sanguineous  leucorrhcea,  constant
desire  to  pass  water,  which  was  clear  but  difficult  to
void,  falling  drop  by  drop,  with  burning  pain  ;  prsecor-
dial  anguish,  sadness,  weeping  and  fear  of  death  {Conium
improved,  Tarentula  cured). ^Uterine  neuralgia.

I  1  Strong  bearing-down  pelvic  pains  for  nearly  a  week  pre-
vious to  catamenia ;  severe  backache  extending  to  hypo-
gastric region  ;  wearying  fidgetiness  of  legs,  pains  felt
more  from  knees  to  feet,  compelling  patient  to  move
about,  >  by  riding  horseback ;  pains  <  as  menses  ap-
proach, severest  at  greatest  flow,  violent  enough  to  pro-
duce convulsive  movements;  chorealike  restlessness,
twitching  and  trembling  of  muscles,  which  worked  pain-
fully from  side  to  side ;  draws  herself  together,  legs  close
to  abdomen  and  head  bent  forward,  hands  clutching  at
bedclothes,  immediately  afterward  seizing  something
else;  motion  of  inferior  extremities  almost  incessant;
hands  and  feet  cold  and  moist;  pains  and  spasms  kept
pace  with  menstrual  flow,  increasing  or  decreasing  with
it;  menses  usually  regular  except  for  last  four  months,
when  they  were  delayed,  owing  to  a  slight  sanguineous
intermenstrual  discharge,  lasting  two  days  and  generally
appearing  at  fifteenth  day,  which  was  painless ;  flow
nearly  right  in  quantity,  light-colored  and  with  small
dark  clots  when  patient  was  recumbent,  darker  and  more
profuse  when  rising  to  chamber;  on  first  day  usually
a  slight  frontal  headache,  increasing  second  day  to  a
violent,  throbbing  pain,  <  from  light  and  motion  ;  dur-
ing headache  exacerbation,  a  remission  of  pelvic  pains,
latter  reappearing  soon  with  original  force,  but  not  re-
maining so  long ;  on  third  day  a  brief  relief,  followed
by  a  return  of  old  pains,  lasting  a  shorter  time;  mean-
time urinary  tenesmus,  nausea,  and  bad  taste  in  mouth;
occasionall}^  globus  hystericus  and  dry  hacking  cough;
with  convalescence  great  weakness  and  shooting,  grasp-
ing pains  at  heart  with  occasional  interruption  of  its
rhythm,  and  with  increased  action  ;  preceding  and  fol-
lowing menses,  j^ellowish  leucorrhcea;  in  morning,hawk-
ing  up  brown  mucus,  often  tinged  with  blood ;  breathing
short,  painful ;  occasionally,  at  long  intervals,  a  sudden
waking  from  dreamless  sleep,  under  a  feeling  of  suflb-


TARENTULA.  256

cation;  violent  palpitation  and  acute  pains  through
heart,  compelling  upright  position ;  pulse  regular,  quick,
irritable ;  r.  heart- ventricle  slightly  dilated  ;  infracla-
vicular pain  in  r.  side  of  chest,  penetrating  to  back,  so
as  to  catch  breath ;  since  childhood  has  wanted  sand,
cuttlefish,  ashes,  etc.,  highly  spiced  food,  cigarettes ;  >
during  warm  weather,  when  outdoors;  <  during  cold.
^Dj^smenorrhoea.

I  I  Engorgement  of  cervix  uteri,  with  granulations,  extend-
ing to  vagina,  whose  mucous  membrane  was  highly  in-
jected ;  violent  convulsions  of  whole  body  during  rest.

I  I  Chronic  vaginitis,  granulations  and  excrescences  in  va-
gina and  neck  of  uterus;  cancerous  ulcer  on  os  destroyed
its  1.  lateral  part ;  induration  of  neck  and  body  of  uterus;
flushes  of  heat  to  face,  perspiration,  congestion  to  head,
menorrhagia;  severe  pains  in  region  of  sacrum,  extend-
ing to  hips  and  terminating  in  uterus;  menstruation
lasted  twelve  to  fifteen  days,  followed  by  pressive,  shoot-
ing pains  in  uterus  and  a  fetid,  bloody  discharge;  nausea,
anorexia,  great  thirst,  slow  and  difficult  digestion,  ob-
stinate constipation,  general  malaise;  at  2  a.m.,  some
days  after,  severe,  violent,  tearing  pains  in  uterus,  ex-
tending to  sacrum,  and  along  vertebral  column,  with
rigidity  of  trunk  and  convulsive  movements  in  head  and
legs ;  icy  coldness,  chattering  teeth,  trembling,  anxiety
and  uneasiness;  small^  contracted  pulse,  oppression  of
chest,  dryness  of  mouth  without  thirst,  and  pale  face.

Burning  smarting  leucorrhoea  and  painful  uneasiness  in
coccyx,  >  by  standing,  <  by  slightest  movement,  sitting
or  lying  on  bed,  or  by  least  pressure.

Leucorrhoea:  alternating  with  bloody  discharge;  follow-
ing hemorrhage,  with  great  weakness.

Expulsion  of  gas  from  vagina.

I  I  Sensation  of  motion  in  uterus,  like  a  foetus;  singing,
like  a  tea-kettle  in  1.  ear ;  obstinate  constipation ;  stop-
page of  urine,  which  is  high-colored,  with  red  sediment;
pain  in  region  of  kidneys;  palpitation;  sensation  of
something  crawling  up  legs,  under  skin,  from  feet  till
it  reaches  uterus,  causing  great  sexual  desire,  intense
pruritus  and  rubbing,  which  it  is  impossible  to  resist,
makes  her  almost  crazy. ^Pruritus  vulv£e.

I  I  Intense,  unbearable  pruritus  vulvae,  extending  into  va-
gina, <  at  night,  with  dryness  and  heat  of  parts ;  white,
thin  leucorrhosa ;  thick  white  sediment  in  urine ;  pain
in  r.  side  of  abdomen  ;  nausea ;  accumulation  of  mucus
in  throat;  mouth  parched  and  dry;  thirst  often  and  for
large  quantities ;  very  restless  at  night.  ^Pruritus
vulvae.


257  TARENTULA.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i  i  Loss  of  appe-
tite ;  intense  thirst;  general  prostration  ;  vomiting  after
eating,  and  getting  out  of  bed  ;  craving  raw  food.  ^Dis-
orders of  pregnancy.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Great  oppression  ;  panting  per-
spiration.

I  I  Chronic  suffocative  catarrh.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Prsecordial  anxiety,  tumul-
tuous beating  of  heart.

Murmurs  and  palpitation  ;  alternate  acceleration  and  sus-
pension of  movements  of  heart.

Trembling  and  thumping  of  heart  as  from  fright.

Prsecordial  anguish  ;  movements  of  heart  not  felt ;  suffo-
cation.

Constant  want  of  air ;  heart  suddenly  ceases  to  beat  and
patient  fears  to  die.

Sensation  as  if  heart  turned  and  twisted  around,  with  pain
in  chest  and  general  perspiration.

Pain  in  heart  as  if  squeezed  or  compressed  ;  also  in  aorta,
under  1.  clavicle  and  in  carotids,  with  violent  throbbing
of  heart  and  arteries ;  rheumatic  pains  in  chest  extend-
ing to  umbilical  region.

■  Angina  pectoris.

I  I  Nervous  spells  with  pain  in  1.  ovary,  pain  seems  to
affect  her  heart  and  she  becomes  unconscious,  seems  to
stop  breathing;  as  spell  comes  on  again  she  begins  to
breathe  short  and  to  call  for  more  air;  pulls  her  dress
away  from  her  heart;  gasping  for  air;  pulse  intermits,
weak  and  slow ;  many  times  she  is  reported  dying.
^*' Outer  Chest,  l  l  Brown-colored  mole  about  the  size  of  a
grain  of  wheat  on  back  of  neck ;  burning,  no  inflamma-
tion ;  when  touching  it  complains  of  needles  sticking
in  it.

I  I  Carbuncle  as  large  around  at  its  base  as  a  silver  dollar,
apex  studded  with  small  openings  on  side  of  chest;  no
pus  discharging;  intense  burning  and  stinging  extend-
ing to  mamma  and  down  arm ;  had  not  slept  for  forty-
eight  hours.
^^  Neck  and  Back,  l  l  Abscess  in  back  of  neck,  burning,  ex-
cruciating pain,  completely  banished  sleep  for  six  or
seven  nights;  fever,  with  great  thirst  and  prostration.
^Anthrax.

I  I  Anthrax  in  interscapular  region,  with  severe  burning
pain  ;  unable  to  sleep  from  excessive  pain.

I  I  Anthrax  in  back  of  neck;  local  applications,  first  emol-
lient, then  caustic,  at  last  knife  was  resorted  to  with
stimulants  internally,  and  hydrate  of  chloral  and  mor-
phine to  relieve  burning,  agonizing  pain,  all  to  no  effect;

VOL.  X. — 17.


TARENTULA.  258

muscular  and  cellular  tissues  destroyed  from  neck  to
waist,  and  from  shoulder  to  shoulder,  leaving  a  cavity
about  six  inches  long  and  four  wide,  at  bottom  of  which
several  dorsal  vertebrae  were  plainly  visible;  infiltra-
tion of  surrounding  tissues ;  quotidian  fever  and  diar-
rhoea ;  on  third  day  after  Tarantula  Cub.  line  of  demar-
cation was  formed,  and  two  days  afterward  surrounding
mortified  tissues  came  off;  with  continuance  of  this
remedy  and  an  occasional  dose  of  Sulphur,  patient  was
entirely  cured  in  seven  weeks.

I  Urritable  spine;  excessive  hypersesthesia,  a  slight  touch
along  spine  provokes  spasmodic  pain  in  chest  and  inde-
scribable distress  in  cardiac  region,  at  times  heart  feels
as  if  twisted  (spiral  fibres) ;  intense  headache,  as  if  thou-
sands of  needles  were  pricking  into  brain;  body  burned
all  over;  trembled  so  she  could  hardly  talk ;  headache
>  by  rubbing  head  against  pillow,  termini  of  nerves
become  so  irritated  that  some  kind  of  friction  is  resorted
to  in  order  to  obtain  relief.

J  I  Multiple  sclerosis  in  consequence  of  fright  and  rheuma-
tism ;  trembling  commenced  in  1.  hand,  always  <  by
mental  trouble;  after  fright  it  affected  all  limbs;  intense
pain  during  night  prevents  her  rest  and  sleep,  and  an
itching  and  crawling  of  1.  leg  make  her  rise  and  walk
about;  bathing  <  pain,  but  fresh  air  >,  even  at  night;
intelligence  and  memory  considerably  diminished ;
trembling  and  pricking  prevent  from  doing  any  fine
work ;  motilit}'  and  sensibilit}^  unaltered ;  neither  pa-
ralysis, ansesthesia  nor  hypersesthesia ;  head  trembles  as
much  as  1.  hand  and  foot,  and  a  slight  tremor  could  be
observed  on  tongue  when  opening  mouth  ;  no  appetite,
chronic  constipation;  since  menopause  acne  in  face;
slight  hypersemia  of  retina.

1  1  Difficulty  of  moving  legs,  they  do  not  obey  will ;  weak-
ness of  legs. ^Tabes  dorsalis.

I  I  Burning,  smarting  leucorrhoea,  and  painful  uneasiness
in  coccyx,  >  by  standing,  <  by  slightest  movement,
sitting  or  lying  on  bed  or  by  least  pressure.  ^Coccygo-
dynia  after  confinement.
^^  Lower  Limbs.  Uneasiness  in  legs  with  necessity  of  con-
stantly moving  them.

■  Weakness  of  legs  not  allowing  feet  when  walking  to  be
placed  squarely  on  ground;  difficult  walking;  inability
to  kneel  down  ;  difficulty  of  moving  legs,  tiiey  do  not
obey  will.

I  1  Large  hard  abscess  in  r.  thigh,  exceedingly  painful  and
inflamed,  no  fever,  glands  in  groin  swollen,  indurated
and  j)ainful.


36


259  TARENTULA.

^' Limbs  in  General.  Rheumatism  checked  by  putting  ex-
tremities in  cold  water,  panting  respiration,  anxiety,
cramps  in  heart  or  twisting  pains;  pulse  full,  hard,  fre-
quent; aorta  feels  full,  tense,  stretched,  with  stitching
pains  ;  morning  and  night  cold  extremities.
^^  Rest.  _  Position.  Motion.  Cannot  keep  quiet  in  any  posi-
tion.

Lying :  hysteria  >  ;  on  back  limbs  flexed.

Sitting  or  lying:  uneasiness  in  coccyx  <.

Standing :  >  uneasiness  in  coccyx.

Motion:  >  headache;  dizziness;  <  crampy  pains  in
uterus ;  <  frontal  headache ;  <  uneasiness  in  coccyx ;
constant,  of  hands,  feet  and  head ;  can  better  run  than
walk.

Walking :  difficult  from  Aveakness  of  legs.

Riding  horseback  :  >  pains  in  legs.
Nerves. Great restlessness  and  agitation,  particularly  of
inferior  extremities;  has  to  change  position; need  of
constantly  moving  hands,  feet  and  head.

■  Trembling  of  body;  limbs  agitated.
iSt.  Vitus'  dance.

■  Great  restlessness,  could  not  keep  quiet  anywhere  or  in

any  position ;  felt  that  he  must  keep  in  motion  though
walking  aggravated  all  symptoms.
I  I  Somnambulism  ;  frequent  desire  to  urinate;  clear  urine;
quantity  lessened  until  secretion  ceased  ;  much  excited
at  night;  convulsions,  a  kind  of  St.  Vitus'  dance,  with
inclination  to  bite  and  tear  everything  that  comes  near
him ;  when  fit  ceases,  falls  asleep,  on  awaking  is  uncon-
scious of  what  has  happened;  has  not  voided  urine  since
fifteen  days ;  exalted  state  of  mind  ;  could  not  speak,  but
could  write ;  falls  every  day  into  a  somnambulistic  kind
of  sleep,  the  exact  time  of  which  he  states  every  morn-
ing ;  this  state  continued  several  months.

■  Trembling  of  body;  all  limbs  agitated;  convulsive  hys-

teria and  chorea,  with  excessive  hypersesthesia.

■  Excessive  hypersesthesia ;  least  excitement  irritates.

I  I  Hysteria  of  two  months'  standing  in  a  girl  set.  11,  par-
ticularly characterized  by  attacks  of  spasmus  glottidis,
occurring  about  every  five  minutes,  and  accompanied
by  a  whistling  tone.

■  Spasmodic,  hysterical  symptoms  from  uterine  irritation.

I  I  Great  disorder  of  motion,  convulsive  form  ;  necessity  for
continual  motion;  fright,  terror,  fear  of  speedy  death,
with  vertigo  and  prsecordial  anguish,  with  intolerance
of  pressure  and  touch,  and  periodicity. ^Hysteria.

■  Choreic  restlessness  of  limbs ;  music  has  a  soothing  influ-

ence.


TARENTULA.  260

I  I  Suffers  on  account  of  deep  grief;  severe  convulsions  at
8.30,  exactl^^,  lasting  about  two  hours ;  they  are  pre-
ceded by  an  intense  chill  all  over,  beginning  with  short
chills  on  back  and  extremities,  lasting  about  half  an
hour,  and  followed  immediately  by  convulsions,  with
severe  involuntary  muscular  contractions,  beginning  in
upper  or  lower  extremities  and  extending  to  whole
body;  consciousness  retained  during  paroxysms,  but  lost
power  of  co-ordination. ^Intermittent  nervous  affection.

I  I  For  several  months  spasms  of  an  extraordinary  charac-
ter, increasing  in  intensity  and  frequency ;  attacks  pre-
ceded by  spells  of  gaping  and  irregular  breathing,  then
muscular  contortions  of  all  kinds,  fixed  look ;  followed
by  wild  shrieks,  long-continued  coma,  occasionally  hys-
terical outbursts  of  laughing  or  crying ;  paroxysms  most
severe  at  menses.

I  I A  few  days  after  getting  out  of  bed  after  fourth  confine-
ment, violent  convulsions  of  whole  body  during  rest,
necessity  of  moving  and  walking  up  and  down  room  ;
on  attempting  to  sit  or  lie  down,  violent  shaking  of  head
and  limbs,  with  bruised  pains  all  over  and  dizziness,  com-
pelling her  to  get  up  again  and  walk  room ;  was  unable
to  sleep  for  nine  days,  dreading  convulsions  every  time
she  attempted  to  sit  down  ;  want  of  appetite,  great  anx-
iety and  malaise;  fear  of  death;  cervix  uteri  engorged,
with  granulations  extending  to  vagina,  mucous  mem-
brane of  which  was  highly  injected.

I  I A  boy,  set.  14,  looks  thoughtful  and  melancholy,  shuns
his  companions  and  stays  most  of  the  time  in  most  re-
tired part  of  house ;  lost  his  appetite,  in  a  few  days  was
taken  with  chorea;  head  drawn  downward,  afraid  to
look  at  strangers,  idiotic  expression  of  face,  great  loss  of
flesh,  dirty  and  ashy  color  of  skin,  impetigo  around  lips,
choreic  movements  of  head,  movements  of  r.  arm  alter-
nating with  those  of  head  ;  all  movements  ceased  in  bed;
involuntary  micturition.

I  I  Inordinate  and  irresistible  movements,  with  alternate
relaxation  and  contraction  of  muscles  of  1.  hand  and
foot. /^Chorea.

I  I  In  constant  motion ;  can  better  run  than  walk ;  speech
impeded ;  feels  best  in  bed. ^Chorea.

I  I  Constant  irregular  movements  of  r.  arm  and  leg;  is  un-
able to  walk  or  feed  herself;  speech  difficult,  tongue
heavy ;  frequent  epistaxis ;  starting  during  sleep  which
is  light;  great  thirst;  constipation;  good  appetite;
changeable  mood  ;  any  observation  or  steady  look  was
enough  to  make  her  cry;  dragged  leg  when  trying  to
walk,  steadily  getting  worse. ^Chorea.


261  TARENTULA.

I  I  Child  can  retain  its  seat  with  difficulty,  arms  tossed  from
side  to  side,  legs  cannot  be  controlled ;  walking  impos-
sible ;  head  turned  violently  from  side  to  side ;  eyes
rotated  and  eyelids  almost  in  constant  motion;  frequent
hideous  grimaces;  violent  contortions  of  trunk;  every
effort  to  take  food  causes  involuntary  movements  of
tongue,  causing  her  to  drop  from  mouth  two-thirds  of
what  she  has  taken  ;  movements  not  so  violent  at  night,
but  cannot  sleep  more  than  a  few  moments  at  a  time.
^Chorea.

I  I  Chorea  of  superior  extremities  without  any  appreciable
cause ;  head  thrown  with  violence  in  different  directions;
nervous  contractions  in  muscles  of  face ;  r.  leg  thrown
about  with  such  violence,  could  hardly  keep  from
falling.

I  I  Disorderly  and  irregular  muscular  movements;  limited
to  1.  arm  or  leg  or  to  one  of  these  parts;  very  seldom  1.
arm  and  r.  leg ;  with  grimaces  of  mouth.

I  I  Inordinate,  irregular  movements  of  hands  and  feet,
which  subside  almost  entirely  on  hearing  notes  of
hornpipe.

N  Chronic  irregular  movements  of  superior  extremities,
also  head  ;  was  thrown  with  violence  in  different  direc-
tions; contraction  of  muscles  of  face ;  legs  somewhat
affected.

I  I  Head,  r.  arm  and  hand  affected,  head  drawn  downward  ;
involuntary  micturition.

I  I  Falling  down  unconsciously  without  any  warning,  gen-
eral rigidity,  grinding  of  teeth,  bites  her  tongue,  squint-
ing of  eyes  which  remain  open  during  attack,  fit  lasting
two  or  three  minutes,  followed  by  dejection  and  dizzi-
ness for  twentj^-four  hours ;  attacks  occurring  every  eight,
fifteen  or  twenty  days. ^Epileps3^

I  I  Dizziness  before  fit;  great  praBcordial  anguish.

I  I  For  five  years  peculiar  fits,  which  begin  with  a  sensation
as  of  a  cloud  before  1.  eye,  gradually  increasing  to  com-
plete blindness  on  that  side;  then  follows  a  numbness
of  1.  arm  and  r.  leg,  gradually  increasing  until  former
becomes  powerless ;  after  this,  drowsiness,  followed  by  a
deep  sleep,  from  which  he  awakes  with  a  throbbing
frontal  headache  and  blindness  in  1.  eye,  these  two  symp-
toms gradually  disappear  together;  urine  normal ;  fun-
dus oculi  normal ;  longest  interval  between  attacks  was
five  months  ;  of  late,  attacks  have  been  coming  every
week. ^Epileptoid.

I  I  During  attack  squinting  of  eyes  which  remain  open ;
after  dizziness  and  dejection  for  twenty-four  hours.
^Epilepsy.


TARENTULA.  262

1  I  Paralysis  agitans  caused  by  great  mental  .distress,  com-
mencing with  pain  in  arms  and  a  continual  itching  and
trembling  in  1.  leg,  with  inability  to  remain  in  bed;  had
to  walk  floor;  trembling  extended  to  head  and  tongue;
appetite  lost ;  sleepless  nights.

I  I  Intelligence  and  memory  diminished;  trembling;  prick-
ing, and  peculiar  sensation  in  phalanges  of  hands  and
feet,  unable  to  perform  any  fine  work ;  motility  and
sensibility  unaltered,  neither  paralysis,  anaesthesia  nor
hypersesthesia ;  head  trembled  just  as  1.  foot  and  arm,
and  a  slight  tremor  could  be  perceived  on  tongue  when
she  opened  her  mouth ;  could  only  sleep  for  a  few  min-
utes, pains  woke  her  in  spite  of  her  sleepiness ;  no  ap-
petite ;  chronic  constipation,  since  menopause  acne  in
face ;  a  slight  hypersemia  of  retina,  excess  of  uric  acid  in
urine. ^Paralysis  agitans.

■  Paralysis;  general  formication  beginning  with  a  severe
pain  in  occiput,  followed by  numbness  of  trunk  and
limbs,  and  complete  loss  of  motory  power.
^'' Sleep. >  Sleeplessness.

^  Time. Morning :  to  9  a.m.  headache  < ;  hawking  of  brown
mucus ;  cold  extremities.

Night : pain  in  bladder  <  ;  pruritus  vulvse  <  ;  restless-
ness ; cold  extremities  ; somnambulism  ;  sleeplessness.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Fresh  air :  >  headache ;  >
pains  of  tabes  dorsalis.

Warm  weather:  dysmenorrhoea  >.
***  Fever. Constant  chill  and  coldness  during  four  days.

Scorching  heat  in  whole  body  alternating  with  icy  cold-
ness.

I  I  Scorching  heat  of  skin  which  is  of  a  scarlet  color.

I  I  Intermittent  febrile  attacks;  during  heat  continued
coldness  of  feet. ^Hysteria.

llntermittent  fever  of  nervous  h3'sterical  women.

I  I  General  emaciation  particularly  of  face,  icteric  color;
tongue  coated  yellowish,  w^ant  of  appetite,  no  thirst,  dry-
ness of  mouth;  constant  pain  in  hepatic  region,  <  be-
fore paroxysms,  with  nausea  and  vomiting ;  severe
headache,  prascordial  anxiety,  sadness,  taciturnity,  de-
spair of  recovery  ;  cold  stage  intense,  with  shaking;  blue
color  of  nails,  lasting  about  two  hours;  gastric  symptoms
<  at  onset  of  heat ;  fever  scorching,  no  thirst ;  great
dryness  of  mouth  ;  hot  stage  lasted  five  to  six  hours,
during  which  time  eyes  were  shut  and  she  lay  in  a  coma-
to.se  condition  ;  sweat  lasted  three  to  four  hours,  followed
by  great  debility  and  prostration. ^Ague.

I  I  Chills  and  fever  with  choreic  convulsions  ;  shakes  al-
most continuously  with  involuntary  movements  in  limbs.


263  TARENTULA.

abdomen,  chest,  trunk  and  face,  <  in  1.  side;  could  not
speak  a  word,  tongue  and  pharynx  being  implicated  ;
after  a  severe  scolding,  or  punishment.

iToxsemic  fevers  of  a  typhoid  or  intermittent  form  ;  chilli-
ness or  burning  heat,  chilliness  predominating.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Daily  at  same  hour  :  attacks  of  hys-

tero-mania.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  pain  in  ovary  ;  feeling  of
ahairineye;  singing  in  ear ;  pain  under  clavicle;  trem-
bling begins  in  hand ;  itching  and  drawing  in  leg ;  al-
ternate relaxation  and  contraction  of  muscles  of  hand
and  foot;  chorea  of  arm  and  leg;  as  of  a  cloud  before
eye,  blindness  ;  numbness  of  arm  ;  trembling  in  leg.

Right:  pain  through  eye  to  occiput  and  nose;  pupil  di-
lated ;  pain  in  maxillary  nerve ;  heart  ventricle  dilated ;
infraclavicular  pain;  pain  in  abdomen;  abscess  in
thigh;  glands  in  groin  swollen;  choreic  movements  of
arm  alternate  with  those  of  head  ;  irregular  movements
of  arm  and  leg;  leg  thrown  about  with  violence ;  numb-
ness of  leg.
*^ Sensations.  As  if  head  were  knocked  in  morning;  as  if
thousands  of  needles  were  pricking  into  brain;  as  if  oc-
ciput were  struck  with  a  hammer ;  as  of  a  hair  in  1.  eye;
as  if  lower  teeth  were  going  to  fall  out ;  as  if  body  were
bruised;  as  if  there  were  not  sufficient  space  in  hypo-
gastrium;  painful  uneasiness  in  coccyx;  motion  in  uterus
asofafoetus;  singing  like  a  tea-kettle  in  1.  ear;  asofsome-
thing  crawling  up  legs  under  skin  from  feet  to  uterus ;
as  if  heart  turned  and  twisted  around  ;  heart  as  if
squeezed  or  compressed;  as  of  needles  sticking  into  mole
on  neck  when  touched  ;  as  of  a  cloud  before  1.  eye ;  as  of
insects  creeping  and  crawling.

Pain:  in  vertex  and  parietal  bones;  in  angles  of  inferior
maxilla;  in  r.  inferior  maxillary  nerve;  in  bladder;  in
back  and  limbs;  in  uterus;  under  r.  clavicle  to  back;
in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

Excruciating  pain:  in  bowels  ;  in  bladder;  in  abscess  on
back  of  neck.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  temples;  in  1.  ovary  affecting  heart.

Severe  pain:  through  r.  eye  to  occiput;  in  cerebellum.

Sharp  pain  :  in  umbilical  region.

Twisting  pains  :  in  heart.

Tearing:  in  uterus;  to  sacrum.

Stitching  pains  :  in  aorta.

Pricking:  over  whole  body.

Shooting  pains:  at  heart;  in  uterus  after  menses.

Stinging :  in  carbuncle  on  side  of  chest.

Burning:  in  occiput;  m  cancer  of  liver ;  in  abdomen  and


TARENTULA.  264

rectum;  in  palms  and  soles;  in  hypogastrium  and  uterus;
leucorrhoea ;  in  carbuncle  on  side  of  chest;  in  abscess
on  back  of  neck ;  in  anthrax  between  shoulder  blades ;
all  over  body,  irritable  spine  ;  of  skin.

Smarting :  in  anus  ;  urethra  ;  leucorrhoea.

Grasping  pain:  at  heart.

Constriction  :  in  throat.

Cramps  :  in  bowels ;  in  heart.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  chest,  extending  to  umbilical  region.

Pressive  pains :  in  uterus  after  menses.

Bearing-down  pains :  in  uterus.

Heaviness :  in  lids ;  in  hypogastrium  and  uterus.

Uneasiness :  in  legs.

Fidgety  feeling :  in  legs.

Trembling:  in  limbs.

Tickling:  in  stomach.

Crawling:  on  1.  leg.

Numbness:  of  trunk  and  limbs.

Formication  :  in  soft  palate  ;  with  paralysis.

Heat:  in  occiput;  in  vagina;  of  skin ;  scorching.

Itching:  on  1.  leg;  of  skin.
*' Tissues.  Termini  of  nerves  become  so  irritated  that  some
kind  of  friction  is  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  relief;
must  move  hands  or  legs ;  must  rub  head  against  some-
thing; must  roll  something  between  fingers;  must  put
fingers  in  mouth.

•  Weakness  of  all  limbs  ;  rheumatic  pains  ;  restlessness;
formication ;  paralysis ;  spasmodic  paralytic  aff'ections :
neuralgia;  rheumatism;  nervous  diseases  where  func-
tions of  vagi  are  more  or  less  disturbed.

I  Anthrax;  carbuncles;  atrocious  pains.

I  Syphilitic  buboes,  painful  boils,  all  kinds  of  abscesses
where  pain  or  inflammation  predominates.
*®  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Music :  hysteria  >  ;
causes  excitement.

Touch :  headache  <  ;  hepatic  region  painful ;  pain  in
mole  on  neck,  as  of  needles;  along  spine  provokes  spas-
modic pain  in  chest  and  distress  in  cardiac  region.

Rubbing:  head  against  pillow  >  headache.

Pressure:  headache  >  ;  uneasiness  in  coccyx.

After  a  fall  down  stairs:  uterine  neuralgia.
^'^Skin. iTerrible  pruritus,  a  sensation  as  of  insects  creeping
and  crawling.

Outer  parts  feel  as  if  worms  or  insects  were  boring  and
crawling,  no  relief  from  cold  or  heat;  continual  irrita-
tion and  titillation.

■  Malignant  ulcers  and  unhealthy  skin  ;  anthrax  and  gan-
grene.


265  TARENTULA.

lltching:  burning;  formication;  ecchymosed spots;  pain-
less vesicular  and  especially  pustular  eruptions.
'*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Nervous,  hysterical  patients,
subject  to  choreic  affections.

Foxy,  mischievous  and  destructive  tendency.

Boy,  eet.  2;  diphtheria.

Child,  set.  3  ;  diphtheria.

Boy,  set.  5  ;  diphtheria.

Boy,  set.  5,  light  complexion,  nervous  temperament;  diph-
theria.

Girl,  set.  6,  stout ;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  6,  delicate;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  6  ;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  7,  nervo-lymphatic  temperament;  chorea.

Girl,  sets,  bright,  healthy,  intelligent-looking;  weakness
of  sphincter  ani.

Boy,  set.  8,  delicate,  scrofulous,  two  children  in  same  fam-
ily died  of  the  disease  ;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  9;  tonsillitis.

Boy,  set.  9,  suffering  a  year ;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  9,  nervous  temperament;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  9,  fleshy,  lymphatic  temperament,  ansemia,  suf-
fering four  months;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  10;  diphtheria.

Boy,  set.  11,  suffering  five  years;  epileptoid.

Girl,  set.  11,  suffering  two  months;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  11 ;  severe  burning  in  mole  on  neck.

Girl,  set.  11,  thin,  delicate,  nervous ;  intermittent  fever  and
choreic  convulsions.

Girl,8et.  12,weak  constitution,  belongs  to  poor  class;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  14,  suffering  four  months ;  hystero-mania.

Boy,  set.  14  ;  chorea.

Young  lady,  set.  18,  dark  complexion,  slender,  delicate,
consumptive;  diarrhoea,  etc.

Miss  B.,  set.  19,  nervo-lymphatic  temperament,  after  a
fright;  chorea.

Man,  set.  21,  dark  complexion,  large,  strong  ;  diarrhoea,  etc.

Girl,  set.  24,  tall,  slender,  lymphatic,  nervous  temperament,
with  scanty  menstruation,  irritable  mood  ;  epilepsy  and
hysteria.

Negro,  set.  26;  abscess  in  thigh.

Woman,  set.  27 ;  insanity.

Miss  M.,  set.  27,  confirmed  dyspeptic  for  years,  a  musical
amateur,  suffering  with  myopia,  amblyopia  and  incipi-
ent cataract,  while  in  a  highly  nervous  condition  from
overstudy,  was  operated  on  to  remove  opacity  of  lens
of  r.  eye  by  absorption  ;  insanity.

Mrs. ,  set.  30,  affected  two  years;  insanity.


TARENTULA.  266

Woman,  set.  32,  single,  blonde,  blue  eyes,  cheerful,  weak
and  emaciated  frame,  suffering  ten  years;  dysmenor-
rlioea.

Lady,  set.  32,  widow,  blonde,  lymjDhatic  temperament;
uterine  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  32,  nervous  temperament,  gastro-hepatic  diathe-
sis, after  great  grief;  intermittent  nervous  affections.

Man,  set.  34,  nervo-sanguineous  temperament,  gonorrhoea.

Madam  B.,  set.  36,  lymphatic  temperament,  after  fourth
confinement;  spasms.

Unmarried  lady,  set.  36,  slim,  bilious,  nervous,  of  irritable
character,  and  scanty  menstruation,  suffering  since  18
years  of  age ;  attacks  of  chorea.

Woman,  set.  36;  carbuncle.

Lady,  set.  40,  blonde;  urinary  difficulty.

Mrs.  C,  set.  40  ;  irritable  spine.

Mrs. ,  set.  40  ;  affection  of  heart.

Mrs.  R.,  sanguine  temperament,  full  habit,  suffering  since
last  confinement,  four  years  ago  ;  coccygodynia.

Lady,  set.  45,  good  constitution,  profuse  menstruation,  suf-
fering since  20  years  of  age;  nymphomania.

Widow,  set.  about  45,  suffering  sixteen  years ;  pruritus
vulvce.

Mrs.  F.,  set.  48,  sanguineous  constitution,  mother  of  seven
children  ;  uterine  affection.

Man,  set.  50,  dark  complexion  ;  diarrhoea.

M^oman,  set.  51,  past  climacteric,  thin,  spare  body,  delicate
constitution  ;  anthrax.

Mrs.  K.,  set.  61,  strong  constitution,  menstruation  ceased
at  age  of  52 ;  paralysis  agitans.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  68,  strong  constitution,  suffering  eighteen
months;  ague.

Man,  set.  72,  good  constitution;  abscess  back  of  neck.

Woman,  set.  84,  delicate  constitution ;  anthrax  back  of  neck.
^^  Relations. Compare  Laches.,  which  is  said  to  be  antidotal.


267  TELLURIUM.

TELLURIUM.

Tellurium.  The  Element.

Introduced  by  Hering  in  1850.

The  triturations  are  prepared  from  the  precipitated  metal.
Provings  by  Hering,  assisted  by  Tietze,  Kitchen,  Gardiner,  Whitey,  Gosewisch,
l)unham  and  Eaue,  Am.  Horn.  Kev.,  vol.  5,  Metcalf,  N.  Am.  Jour.  Hom.,  vol.  2,

1852.

Clinical  Authorities. — Conjunctivitis,  Allen,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  3,  p.  88 ;  Nor-
ton, Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1873,  p.  432  ;  Scrofulous  conjunctivitis,  Haynes,  M.  I.,  vol.  10,
p.  184 ;  Affection  of  lids,  Berridge,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  210 ;  Hom.  Phys.,  June,
1889  ;  Otitis,  Houghton,  Times  Eet.,  1876,  p.  52 ;  Hom.  Times,  vol.  3,  p.  155  ;
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  159  ;  Otorrhoea,  Dunham,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  25  ;  Linsley,
Hom.  CL,  vol.  1,  p.  74  ;  Offensive  axillary  sweat,  Lippe,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  3  ;
Tonic  muscular  contraction  of  leg,  Kershaw,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  311  ;  Fetid  foot  sweat,
Jones,  H.  W.,  vol.  11,  p.  233  ;  Herpes  circinatus,  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.
408 ;  Eczema  behind  ears,  Hah.  Mo.,  1889,  p.  608  ;  Scrofulous  eruption,  Boynton,
Hom.  Times,  vol.  3,  p.  203.

^  Mind. Forgetful ;  when  engaged  in  doing  one  thing,  forgets
and  neglects  others.

Fear  of  being  touched  in  sensitive  places.

Excitable  and  disposed  to  fly  into  a  passion.

Rough,  angular  disposition.

Mind  depressed.
^  Sensorium.  Vertigo :  morning  after  rising  from  bed  ;  <
when  walking,  sitting  up,  or  turning  head;  pulse  ac-
celerated, nausea,  vomiting  of  food  ;  >  lying  perfectly
quiet ;  when  going  to  sleep.
^  Inner  Head.  Brain  feels  as  if  beaten  on  slightest  move-
ment.

Heaviness  and  fulness  in  head  in  morning.

Violent  linear  pain  in  small  spot  over  1.  eye  ;  pain  short,
sharp  and  defined.

Congestion  to  temples  and  forehead  on  awaking  in  morn-
ing ;  <  on  stooping,  when  there  is  a  heavy  full  feeling.

Sudden  rush  of  blood  to  head.

While  sitting,  face  red.

Headache  on  being  awakened  toward  morning.

Congestion  to  head  and  nape  of  neck,  followed  by  weak-
ness, faintness  in  stomach.
*  Outer  Head. Tearing  in  1.  half  of  head.

Itching  in  scalp.


TELLURIUM.  268

Red  spots,  with  fine  blisters  on  occiput,  neck  and  behind

ears,  and  on  posterior  surface  of  ears.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Deposit  of  chalky-looking  white  mass

on  anterior  surface  of  lens. ^Cataract.
Pterygium.

Herpes  conjunctivae  bulbi ;  veins  enlarged,  running  hori-
zontally toward  cornea,  ending  in  little  blisters  near

edge  of  cornea ; <  from  crying.
I  I  Conjunctivitis  pustulosa ;  with  eczema  impetiginoides

on  lids  and  much  purulent  discharge  from  eyes  ;  offen-
sive discharge  from  ears.
I  I  Scrofulous  inflammations; < 1.  upper  lid ;  lachryma-

tion ;  itching  and  pressure  in  lid.
llEyelids:  thickened,  inflamed,  covered  with  pustules;

itching;  pale,  red,  oedematous,  oozing.
I  I A  feeling  as  if  lashes  of  lower  lid  were  turned  in.
I  I  Palpebral  swelling  of  upper  lid,  1.  side;  ulceration  on

outer  surface  of  lid  near  external  canthus ;  pain  <  at

night.
^Hearing  and  Ears. I  iLeft  ear  began  to  itch,  burn and

swell ;  aching  and  throbbing  pain  in  meatus,  followed

by  a  copious,  watery  acrid  discharge.
I  Dull  throbbing  pain  in  ears  day  and  night ;  thin,  watery,

excoriating  discharge.

■  Vesicular  eruption  on  membrana;  suppurating  and  per-

forating.

Membrana  tympani  permanently  injured  and  hearing
greatly  diminished.

Hitching  and  swelling,  with  painful  throbbing  in  ex-
ternal meatus ;  in  three  or  four  days  discharge  of
watery  fluid  smelling  like  fish-pickle,  which  causes  ves-
icles wherever  it  touches  ;  ear  is  bluish-red,  cedematous;
hearing  impaired.

Sensation  as,  if  something  suddenly  closed  in  ear,  or  as  if
air  whistled  through  1.  eustachian  tube;  when  snuff-
ing or  belching,  air  passes  through.

I  I  Waked  during  night  with  dull  aching  deep  in  r.  ear,
continued,  with  great  depression  of  spirits,  for  three
days.

■  Constant  rather  severe  pain  deep  in  r.  ear.

A  transparent  yellowish  watery  fluid  constantly  oozed
from  meatus,  which  was  obstructed  by  amberlike
crusts ;  discharge  offensive,  sometimes  putrid,  but  gen-
erally of  a  musty  smell  like  fish-brine ;  ears  itched ;
outer  ear  swollen,  inflamed  ;  some  pustules  had  arisen
wherever  discharge  had  touched  any  abraded  surface
of  ear  or  face.

I  I  A  girl,  ret.  13;  for  nearly  five  years  discharge  of  pus


269-  TELLURIUM.

and  blood  from  both  ears  ;  frequent  attacks  of  intoler-
able otalgia;  deafness  with  thunderous  roaring  in  ears;
frontal  headache  and  frequent  epistaxis.

I  I  Deaf,  with  a  purulent  offensive  discharge  from  ears;
bleeding  from  ear  very  profuse,  provoked  by  slightest
touch  on  meatus  by  finger  ;  external  ear  swollen  ;  blu-
ish-red, shining  and  studded  with  vesicles;  it  exuded  a
thin  watery  fluid  ;  wdiole  ear  looked  as  if  water-soaked.
^After  scarlatina.

Ulceration  in  external  auditory  meatus.

M Eczema  behind  ears,  with  formation  of  thick  crusts;
scrofulous  conjunctivitis,  blepharitis  and  catarrh  of
middle  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose.  Fluentcoryza,lachrymation  and  hoarse-
ness when  walking  in  open  air,  with  short  cough  and
pressure  in  middle  of  chest  under  sternum  ;  after  being
some  time  in  open  air  it  goes  away.

Nose  dry,  then  becomes  fluent  with  relief  of  headache ;
r.  eye  becomes  hot  with  profuse  lachrymation.

Nose  obstructed,  must  breathe  through  mouth.

Hawks  from  posterior  nares  dried  yellowish-red  phlegm
tasting  salty,  mornings.
*  Upper  Face. tJudden  flushes  of  redness  over  face.

Twitching  in  1.  facial  muscles,  1.  corner  of  mouth  drawm
upward  when  talking.

■  Ringworms  on  face;  barber's  itch.
^•^ Teeth  and  Gums. Salivation;  gums  bleed  easily  and  pro-
fusely.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  earthy,  metallic.

Tongue:  somewhat  swollen;  furred  white;  shows  prints
of  teeth.
^'^  Inner  Mouth. Breath  has  a  garliclike  odor.

Coldness  in  mouth  and  pharynx  on  drawing  in  air.

Tenacious  mucus  runs  from  mouth ;  a  dog.

Copious  saliva.
'^  Throat. Painful  dryness  of  fauces.

In  m.orning  hawking  from  back  of  nose  pieces  of  yellowish-
reddish  phlegm  of  a  saltish  taste.

Rough,  scratching  sensation  in  throat;  <  toward  evening.

Throat  feels  sore,  with  a  prickly,  rough  sensation  evening
and  morning;  throat  sore  on  empty  swallowing;  >
after  eating  and  drinking.

Pain  in  throat  extends  into  ear.
^'  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Hungry  at  night;
wants  an  apple  in  middle  of  night.

Longs  for  beer.
'^  Eating  and  Drinking. Eating  or  drinking :  sore  throat  dis-
appears.


TELLURIUM.  270

After  meals  great  drowsiness.
After  eating  rice  was  obliged  to  vomit.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching,
with  taste  of  what  has  been  eaten.
Heartburn,  with  warmtli  in  stomach  as  from  alcohol.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  weakness,  like
faintness,  in  stomach  after  local  congestion  of  blood  to
head  and  nape  of  neck,  also  with  chest  symptoms.
Fulness  in  pit  of  stomach,  must  lie  down  after  dinner.
Constrictive  feeling,  as  if  strapped  togetlier.
'^Hypochondria. Fulness  and  oppression  in  hypogastrium  ;
her  dress  must  be  loosened.
Pressing,  first  1.  then  r.  side,  as  from  wind.
When  lying  on  1.  side,  throbbing  under  r.  ribs  and  vice
versa.
'^Abdomen. Pinching  in  abdomen.

Frequent  spasmodic  pains  in  bowels  as  from  incarcerated
wind  ;  mostly  from  5  to  9  p.m.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Passes  very  offensive  flatus.
Passes  a  large  quantity  of  thread  worms.
Spasmodic  pains  with  urging  to  stool,  copious  stool  with

feeling  of  flatulence  in  bowels.
Costive.

Tetter  on  perineum,  itching.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Increased  urination.
High-colored,  acid  urine.
A  drop  sticking  at  mouth  of  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  desire,  followed  by
long-lasting  indifference.
A  drop  of  viscid  fluid  glues  meatus  urinarius.
I  I  Secondary  gonorrhoea.
Herpes  on  scrotum  and  perineum.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Painful  soreness  in  region  of  kid-
neys, extending  downward  like  a  weight,  raostl}^  to  r.,
and  in  sacrum ;  <  in  morning,  making  her  irritable.
Shooting  deep  in  pelvis  across  to  left.
Menses  too  early,  in  climacteric  years.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness
in  morning  with  fluent  coryza,  a  rough,  pressing,  tick-'
ling  sensation  in  larynx.
^^  Respiration. Coughing  or  laughing  increases  aching  in

small  of  back.
^^  Cough. Cough  toward  morning ;  after  a  few  days  looser.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  region  of  clavicle.
Cutting  in  1.  nipple,  across  and  through  to  scapula.
Pain  in  middle  of  chest:  going  through  to  back;  from  dor-
sal vertebrae  through  to  sternum  ;  in  or  behind  sternum.
Shooting  in  1.  chest,  fifth  rib.


271  TELLURIUM.

Feeling  as  if  some  fluid wanted  to  discharge,  pressing

downward  in  middle  lobe  of  r.  lung.
For  five  days^  bubbling  in  middle  lobe  of  r.  lung  for  a  few

minutes,  chiefly  in  afternoon.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Dull  pain  in  region  of

heart  when  lying  on  1.  side ;  ">  lying  on  back.
Palpitation  of  heart,  with  throbbing  through  whole  body,

and  full  pulse,  followed  by  sweat.
^"  Outer  Chest.  Eruption  about  nipple.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Painful  sensitiveness  of  spine  from  last

cervical  to  fifth  dorsal  vertehra;  sensitive  to  pressure

and  touch.
Weak  feeling  in  back.
Pain  in  sacrum  passing  into  r.  thigh  ; <  pressing  at  stool,

coughing  and  laughing. ^Sciatica.
^^^  Upper  Limbs, l  Offensive  smelling  perspiration  of  armpit,

smelling  like  garlic.
Pressing  ache  in  r.  scapula,  later  in  left.
Lump  in  anterior  wall  of  1.  axilla,  painful  from  pressure

or  motion.
Tearing  near  thumb  joint.
Finger  tips  feel  dead  on  stretching  hand.
Rheumatism  of  r.  little  finger,  <  moving  finger.
^^ Lower  Limbs, ll Sciatica  of  r.  side; <  when  lying on

affected  side.
Sciatica  accompanied  by  sensitiveness  of  vertebral  column,

pains  radiating  from  sacrum  to  r.  sciatic  nerve,
I  I  Fetid  sweating  of  feet.

I  I  Tonic  muscular  contraction  of  long  standing.
1  i  Contraction  of  tendons  in  bends  of  knees.
Bruised  pain  in  hip  joints  after  walking.
Feet  sweaty,  mostly  on  toes.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Sharp  quick  pains  in  elbows,  ankles

and  other  parts.
Aching  all  over,  mostly  in  limbs,  <  r.  side  and  on  walking..
^^Reat. Position. Motion. Rest:  pricking  <.

Lying:  vertigo  >  ;  on  1.  side,  throbbing  under  r.  ribs  and

vice  versa ;  on  1.  side,  pain  in  region  of  heart,  >  on  back ;

on  affected  side,  sciatica  <.
Sitting  up  :  vertigo ;  face  red.
Stooping:  fulness  on  head  <.
Motion  :  brain  feels  as  if  beaten ;  lump  in  axilla  painful ;

of  finger,  rheumatism  <.
Turning  head  :  vertigo.
Coughing  or  laughing: <  aching  in  small  of  back;  <

sciatica.
Walking :  vertigo,  followed  by  bruised  pain  in  hip  joints  ;

aching  in  limbs.


TELLURIUM.  272

^"Nerves. Restlessness.

Lassitude  and  weakness.
^^  Sleep. Yawning  and  belching.

Drowsy  after  a  meal.

Sleepless ;  restless  turning  from  weariness  and  bruised
feeling.

At  night  pains  all  over.

On  going  to  sleep  feels  as  if  in  air,  quick  drawing  toward
feet  awakens  him.
^^Time. Toward  morning:  cough.

Morning :  vertigo;  heaviness  and  fulness  in  head  ;  on  being
awakened,  headache;  hawking  from  posterior  nares;
soreness  in  region  of  kidneys  <  ;  hoarseness  and  coryza.

Toward  evening:  roughness  and  scratching  in  throat  <.

5  to  9  P.M. :  pain  as  from  wind  in  bowels.

Night:  pain  in  1.  upper  lid  <;  waking  with  dull  aching
deep  in  r.  ear ;  hungry  ;  pains  all  over ;  itching  of  pim-
ples <.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  fluent  coryza  and
hoarseness.

In  cold  or  cool  air:  itching  <.

Cool  breeze :  warm  sweat.
*"  Fever, Chilly,  with  pains.

Sweat:  on  face;  on  spots,  with  increased  itching  of  these
places ;  after  throbbing  through  whole  body  ;  generally
warm,  while  sitting  in  a  cool  breeze.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Day  and  night:  dull  throbbing  pain

in  ears.
*' Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  sharp  pain  in  small  spot
over  eye;  tearing  in  head;  scrofulous  inflammation  of
upper  lid  ;  swelling  and  ulceration  of  upper  lid  ;  inflam-
mation of  ear;  as  if  air  whistled  through  eustachian
tube ;  twitching  in  facial  muscles ;  cutting  from  nipple
to  scapula;  shooting  in  chest;  lump  in  axilla;  small,
red,  itching  points  on  hand;  foot  itches  more;  herpes
between  ribs  and  crest  of  ilium.

Right :  heat  in  eye  with  lachrymation;  pressing  downward
and  bubbling  in  middle  lobe  of  lung ;  pain  in  thigh
from  sacrum;  rheumatism  in  1.  finger ;  sciatica;  aching
in  limbs  <  ;  herpes  above  eye.

Right  to  1.:  shooting  in  pelvis; pressing  ache  in  scapulae.

Left  to  r. :  pressure  in  hypochondria.
^'Sensations. Fear  of  being  touched  in  sensitive  places.

As  if  in  air  on  going  to  sleep;  brain  as  if  beaten;  as  if
lashes  were  turned  in  ;  as  if  something  closed  in  ear ;  as
if  air  whistled  through  1.  eustachian  tube  ;  as  if  strapped
together  in  epigastric  region  ;  as  if  fluid  wanted  to  dis-
charge in  lobe  of  r.  lung.


273  TELLURIUM.

Pain  :  in  region  of  clavicle ;  in  middle  of  chest,  through
to  back  ;  in  or  behind  sternum ;  in  sacrum,  extending
into  r.  thigh.

Spasmodic  pains :  in  bowels  ;  with  urging  to  stool.

Violent  pain  :  linear,  in  small  spot  over  1.  eye.

Sharp,  quick  pain  :  in  elbows,  ankles  and  other  parts.

Cutting :  in  1.  nipple  through  to  scapula.

Tearing:  in  1.  half  of  head;  near  thumb  joints.

Shooting:  in  pelvis;  in  1.  chest,  fifth  rib.

Stinging:  in  skin.

Prickly  sensation  :  in  throat;  in  skin.

Burning:  in  1.  ear.

Aching :  in  meatus  auditorius ;  deep  in  r.  ear ;  in  small  of
back ;  in  shoulder  blades ;  of  limbs.

Soreness :  in  region  of  kidneys.

Bruised  pain  :  in  hip  joints.

Pinching:  in  abdomen.

Dull  pain :  in  region  of  heart.

Constriction  :  in  epigastrium.

Pressure :  in  1.  upper  lid ;  under  sternum  ;  in  hypochon-
dria ;  in  larynx  ;  in  shoulder  blades.

Scratching :  in  throat.

Roughness :  in  throat.

Bubbling:  in  middle  lobe  of  r.  lung.

Throbbing:  in  ears;  under  ribs;  through  whole  body.

Fulness:  in  head  ;  in  pit  of  stomach.

Heaviness  :  in  head.

Weight:  in  back  and  sacrum.

Deadness :  in  finger  tips.

Faintness:  in  stomach  =

Weak  feeling :  in  back.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Itching:  in  scalp ;  in  1.  upper  lid;  in  ears;  of  sweaty
places ;  in  pimples ;  in  small,  red  points ;  of  feet.

Coldness :  in  mouth  and  pharynx  on  drawing  in  air.

Dryness:  of  fauces.
*5 Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch: fear  of,  in
sensitive places; provokes  bleeding  from  ear; spine
sensitive.

Pressure :  lump  in  axilla  painful.
*^Skin. I  Ringworms: on  face; barber's  itch ; cover  whole
body,  more  distinct  on  lower  limbs;  on  single  parts.

Stinging  in  skin.

Small  red  pimples,  very  bright  red,  and  very  sharply  de-
fined, with  minute  vesicles  upon  them,  first  on  lower  ex-
tremities, then  also  on  upper,  most  on  1.  side ;  they
began  first  on  outside  of  calves  and  then  on  inside  of
forearms,  above  wrist,  and  spread  from  that  point,  caused

VOL. X. 18.


TELLURIUM.  _  274

very  severe  itching  day  and  night,  but  most  at  night,
after  going  to  bed.

On  1.  hand,  small  red  points  shining  through  skin,  which
sometimes  itch;  feet  also  itch,  especially  1.,  as  if  there
were  some  heat  vesicles  there.

Little  stinging  prickings  in  various  parts  of  skin  of
whole  body,  continuing  all  afternoon  and  evening  and
forcing  him  to  rub  spot ;  came  on  like  flea-bites  here
and  there,  lasting  all  day;  pricking  continued  very
troublesome  at  times,  principally  when  at  rest,  for  sev-
eral weeks,  but  gradually  subsided ;  a  little  spot  of  herpes
circinatus  made  its  appearance  a  few  days  since,  on  fore-
head, perpendicularly  above  external  eanthus  of  r.  eye,
and  about  half  an  inch  above  brow;  it  was  at  first  a  little
cluster  of  globular  vesicles,  on  an  inflamed  base,  which
dried  into  thin  scales  and  spread  by  circumference  ;
itches  and  pricks  slightly;  the  herpetic  spot  is  now  cir-
cular about  half  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  consists  of  an
elevated  ring  of  vesicles,  some  larger  than  others,  on  an
inflamed  base,  enclosing  a  depressed  area  of  red  skin,
which  desquamates  but  contains  no  vesicles,  it  continues
to  itch  slightly  and  to  furnish  successive  crops  of  thin,
white  scales ;  troublesome  stinging,  very  annoying,  in
evening,  when  sitting  still,  wandering  all  over  body;  a
herpetic  spot  similar  to  one  on  forehead  made  its  ap-
pearance on  1.  side,  midway  between  ribs  and  crest  of
ilium,  accompanied  by  very  troublesome  itching  which
changed  to  smarting  on  being  rubbed ;  it  forms  about
three-quarters  of  a  circle  and  is  irregular;  there  are  in-
dications of  another  spot  just  above  it;  stinging  in  skin
succeeded  by  constant  itching  of  scalp,  which  requires
continual  scratching ;  itching  is  apparently  due  to  erup-
tion of  fine  vesicles  on  a  slightly  inflamed  base,  which
after  remaining. a  few  days  dry  up  and  fall  off"  in  little
white  scales ;  they  are  most  plentiful  on  occipital  scalp,
on  nape,  in  borders  of  hair,  and  on  posterior  surface  of
auricles;  this  itching  has  been  constant  and  annoying
for  a  week,  and  bids  fair  to  continue;  spot  on  forehead
is  breaking  up,  there  being  several  gaps  in  ring,  which  is
now  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  diameter;  just  above  it
another  spot  has  appeared,  precisely  similar  but  smaller;
eruption  has  nearly  disappeared  from  head  and  itching
has  almost  ceased ;  spot  on  forehead  is  no  longer  to  be
discerned,  skin  being  scarcely  reddened  where  it  existed ;
new  one  is  slightly  increasing  and  forms  about  two-
thirds  of  a  circle,  but  not  as  vigorous  as  its  predecessor;
spots  on  side  have  disappeared.

•  Body  thickly  covered  with  elevated  rings  of  herpes  cir-


275  TELLURIUM— TEREBINTHINA.

cinatus ;  eruption  very  marked,  especially  on  lower
limbs;  vesicles  quite  perceptible  at  a  glance;  rings
intersect  each  other  and  in  some  places  so  crowded  as  to
obliterate  specific  character  of  affection ;  great  heat  of
skin ;  restlessness ;  rapid  pulse ;  thirst ;  headache.

Psoriasis.

Fetid  exhalations  from  body.

Prickling  itching  all  over  skin,  with  papular  eruption.

Skin  dry,  hot.

Itching  more  in  cold  or  cool  air.

1  I  Scrofulous  eczematous  eruption.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  3 ;  herpes  circinatus.

Girl,  eet.  4;  conjunctivitis.

Boy,  £et.  9,  had  scarlatina  in  infancy,  since  then  suffering;
otorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  13,  suffering  five  years;  otorrhoea.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Nux  vom.  (epigastric  oppression).

Compare :  Arsen.  (restlessness) ;  Cepa  (coryza) ;  Pulsat.
(otitis);  Rhus  tox.  (restlessness);  Sepia  (ringworm);
Sulphur,  Selenium.


TEREBINTHINA.

Oil  of  Turpentine.  A  Volatile  Oil.

Obtained  by  distilling  the  oleoresinous  exudation  of  various  species  of  pine.

The  dilutions  are  prepared  from  the  alcoholic  solution.

Ozonized  oil  of  turpentine,  recommended  as  a  prophylactic  in  malarial  and
African  fevers,  is  prepared  by  exposing  a  quantity  of  common  oil  of  turpentine,
in  a  partly-filled  bottle,  for  several  days  to  the  influence  of  sun  and  air,  frequently
removing  the  stopper  to  admit  the  air  and  shaking  the  bottle  while  so  exposed.
Take  a  few  drops  several  times  daily  on  a  lump  of  sugar.

Introduced  by  Hartlaub ;  see  Hartlaub  and  Trinks'  Annalen,  vol.  3,  p.  118.

The  collection  of  symptoms  published  by  C.  Hering,  in  N.  Am.  Jour,  of  Hom.,
1877,  is  here  incorporated.

CLiNiCAii  AuTHOBiTiES. — Ciliary  neuralgia  with  conjunctivitis,  Rheumatic  iritis,
Episcleritis,  Amblyopia  potatorum,  Norton,  Liebold,  Fowler,  Norton's  Ophth.
Therap.,  p.  181 ;  Conjunctivitis  (4  cases),  Norton,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  119,  from  A.  H.
O.,  1878 ;  Tympanitic  distension  of  abdomen.  Hale,  Hom.  Kev.,  vol.  3,  p.  457  ;
Hemorrhage  of  bowels,  Hale,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  3,  p.  456 ;  Acute  nephritis,  Hendrichs,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  158 ;  Bright's  disease,  Kidd,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  570  ;  Albu-
minuria, Bell,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  7,  p.  4 ;  Affection  of  kidneys,  Dodge,  Org.,  vol.  2,
p.  127,  from  Am.  Hom.,  1878  ;  Disease  of  kidneys,  Henderson,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  [i.


TEREBINTHINA.  276

9;  Hcematuria,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  32;  Hale,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  3,
p.  454,  B,  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  15  ;  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  112;  Cystitis,  Clapp,  Mass.  Trans.,
vol.  4,  p.  294;  Catarrh  of  urinary  organs,  Goullon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  47;
Spermatorrhoea,  Pad,  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  36  ;  Fibroid  enlargement  of  uterus,  Dodge,  Org.,
vol.  1,  p.  325,  from  Am.  Horn.,  1878,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  424 ;  Pain  in  sternal
region,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys ,  vol.  9,  p.  197  ;  IIcEmoptysis,Ker,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  13,
p.  82 ;  Lumbago,  Brodrick,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  9,  p.  365 ;  Use  in  typhoid  fever.  Hale,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  421  ;  Purpura  hcemorrhagica,  Detwiller,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa ,
1880,  p.  184;  Allen,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  307.

^  Mind. After  easier  thinking,  and  a  clear  mind,  becomes
unconscious.
Inability  to  concentrate  mind.

I  Inability  to  think  or  to  work. ^Nervous  headache.
I  Stupefaction  and  deep  sleep. ^Uraemia. ^Fainting.

■  Slight  delirium,  stupor  and  diarrhoea. ^Typhus.

■  Unconscious,  followed  by  inability  to  concentrate  mind.

■  Dull,  languid  ;  >  by  free  micturition.
1  Maniacal  state  lasting  several  days.

■  Despondency. ^Nervous  headache.

■  Hypochondriasis.

Worse  from  being  engaged  in  mental  work,  dull  pressing

above  1.  eye.
I  I  Weary  of  life. ^Nervous  headache.
Suicide  by  hanging,  in  two  cases  followed  washing of

laces  in  oil  of  turpentine  and  alcohol.
Anxiety  on  going  to  bed.

Fears  apoplexy;  fulness  and  pressure  in  head.
^  Sensorium. Slightly  drunk  for  several  hours.

■  Vertigo: sudden,  with  obscuration  of  sight; he  falls

down;  latter  stage  of  typhus;  and  dulness  with  lassi-
tude; slight,  with  general  chilliness;  with  nausea  and
diminished  appetite.
Dulness  in  head.

■  Tendency  to  syncope. ^Nervous  headache.

■  Comatose;  can  be  roused  only  by  shaking  out  of  appar-

ent stupor,  but  falls  immediately  into  it  again.
^  Inner  Head. Slight  neuralgic  headache  coming  and  going
all  day.

■  Headache  with  thirst. /^Puerperal  peritonitis.
Dull  headache  with  colic.

■  Headache. ^Urethral  catarrh.

■  Pain  in  head  continuous  and  fixed;  chronic,  with  rare

intermissions.
Stitch  in  forehead  as  from  a  knife.
Neuralgic  pains  going  to  r.  side  of  head.

■  Pain  dull  or  shooting,  throbbing  in  top  of  head  or  in

whole  cranium.


277  TEREBINTHINA.

Great  fulness  and  pressure  in  head ;  she  cried,  "  My  head,

my  head ;"  apoplexy  was  feared.
Dull  pressing  above  1.  eye; evening  while  engaged  in

mental  work.
I  I  Pressing  headache  in  whole  head,  coming  and  going,

with  vomituritio.

■  Intense  pressure  and  great  fulness  of  head  ;  dull  head-

ache with  violent  nosebleed. /^Septic  fever. ^Scarlatina.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  band  around  head.
Contusive  headache.

Painful  drawing  extending  from  neck  to  occiput,  whence

it  spread  to  forehead.
Drawing  pain  in  forehead,  extending  to  hips. /^Hsematuria.
Neuralgic  and  nervous  headaches,  >  by  free  micturition.

■  Inaction  of  kidneys,  with  scanty smoky  urine;  brain

poisoned  with  unexcreted  urea.
:  Hydrocephalus,  acute  and  chronic.

*  Outer  Head. Rending  tickling  pain  in  1.  temporal  region,
coming  and  going,  while  in  bed  in  evening;  rubbing
removes  it.
:  Erysipelas  capitis.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. I  i  Ciliary  neuralgia,  with  acute  conjunc-
tivitis; injection  of conjunctiva variable, sometimes
excessive,  again  very  moderate,  amounting  to  hardly
more  than  a  simple  hypersemia,  at  no  time  commen-
surate with  severity  of  pain  ;  redness,  usually  dark,  es-
pecially in  later  stages,  though  during  height  of  inflam-
mation may  be  bright;  chemosis  ;  infiltration  into  cell-
ular tissue  of  orbit;  deep  ciliary  injection,  swelling  of
lids,  photophobia  and  lachrymation  ;  pupil  contracted,
dilates  regularly,  but  slowly,  under  Atropine ;  tension
changeable  even  within  a  short  time,  though  more  fre-
. quently  diminished  than  otherwise;  eyeball  sensitive
to  touch  ;  pain excessive  and  always  present ;  varies
from  a  dull,  grumbling,  aching,  beating,  sore  pain  to  a
severe  sharp  darting,  almost  driving  patient  crazy,  es-
pecially severe  over  and  around  eye,  extending  through
to  occiput  on  corresponding  side,  often  following  course
of  supraorbital  nerve; always < at night  and  fre-
quently accompanied  by  severe  paroxysms,  particularly
in early  morning,  1  to  3  a.m.  ;  corresponding  side  of
face  flushed;  scanty  high-colored  urine;  pain  in  back.
I  I  Amblyopia  potatorum;  for  eight  weeks  sight  began  to
grow  dim;  almost  constant  dull  aching  pain  in  region
of  kidneys;  urine  dark-colored  and  loaded  with  acid
phosphates,  sp.gr.  1028;  vision  ^%  in  both  eyes;  fundus
normal  in  appearance.
Whilewalking  in  open  air  muscse  volitantes  and  transient
dizziness.


TEREBINTHINA.  278

Obscuration  of  sight.

:  Photophobia. ^Scrofulous  ophthalmia-.

Pain  above  1.  eye.

1 1  Episcleritis  in  1.  eye  for  over  three  weeks  ;  eye  very  red,
especially  at  inner  side  of  cornea,  where  there  was  a
hard  bluish-red  elevation  ;  intense  pain  day  and  night
in  eye  and  corresponding  side  of  head ;  pupil  reacted
well ;  urine  very  dark.

I  Rheumatic  iritis;  frequent  desire  to  urinate,  pain  in  kid-
neys, burning  in  urethra,  dark  urine ;  suppression  of
habitual  foot  sweat.

I  Recent  adhesion  of  iris  to  lens. ^Posterior  synechise.

i  Chronic  iritis  of  traumatic  or  rheumatic  origin.

I  I  In  outer  corner  of  each  eye  ecchymosis  of  conjunctiva.
^Purpura  hsemorrhagiea.

Chemosis  of.  1.  eye ;  urine  dark-red,  like  blood,  becoming
thick  after  standing,  and  leaving  red  adherent  sedi-
ment ;  pain  across  kidneys.

I  I  Redness  of  1.  conjunctiva,  iris  sluggish,  much  pain  in
and  above  eye,  always  <  at  night,  tongue  coated  yel-
low at  base;  on  eighth  day  woke  at  1  a.m.  with  much
beating  pain  in  eye,  especially  at  internal  canthus,  for
one  hour ;  now  some  pain  on  1.  side  of  head,  lachryma-
tion  on  looking  down,  eyeball  sensitive  to  touch  and
very  red,  especially  inner  half;  sharp  darting  pains
from  above  r.  eye  down  through  eye,  and  feeling  as  if
sand  were  thrown  violently  into  eye ;  urine  dark  and
scanty,  with  dark  sediment;  pain  in  back.

I  I  Very  severe  pain  over  1.  eye  and  in  1.  temple  day  and
night  (had  chancre  a  year  ago) ;  for  one  year  no  per-
spiration on  1.  side  of  head,  while  profuse  on  r. ;  conjunc-
tiva very  red  with  deep  ciliary  injection,  much  lachr}'-
mation ;  some  photophobia,  aqueous  apparently  hazy.

1  I  Sore  pain  in  1.  eye,  occasionally  shooting  with  much
redness  of  conjunctiva,  adhesion  of  lids  in  morning,
lachrymation  in  evening;  blur  before  vision,  severe  pain
in  back,  dark  urine.

I  Eye  dark-red,  face  red  on  affected  side.

I  Inflamed  eyes  and  eyelids.

Half-open,  upward  turned,  or  rolling  eyes.

Opened  his  eyes  only  when  swallowing,  closed  them  again
at  once  during  sopor.
®  Hearing  and  Ears.  Hearing  affected,  voice  sounds  unnat-
ural, r.  ear  <  ;  sounding  and  humming  in  1.  ear  as  of
a  seashell;  cannot  tell  where  person  is  who  speaks,
unless  she  sees  him ;  talking  loud  to  her  is  very  pain-
ful ;  from  r.  to  1.  ear.

Sensation  in  ears  as  of  striking  of  a  clock.


279  TEREBINTHINA.

Pains  from  forehead  to  r.  ear,  which  feels  to  her  very  hot ;
1.  ear  feels  cold.

Otitis,  with  enlarged  tonsils ;  granular  condition  of  naso-
pharyngeal cavity.

Otalgia  of  children ;  during  dentition  signs  of  cerebral
and  abdominal  irritation.

Eczema  in  front  of  ear  tending  to  affect  eyelids.

Sudden  stitch  in  r.  mastoid  process.
'Smell  and  Nose, i Violent nosebleed. ^Albuminuria.
^Typhus.

■  Passive  epistaxis  in  children.

i  Frequent  watery  coryza,  now  from  one,  then  from  both
nostrils.
®  Upper  Face. '  Spasmodic  sensation,  but  no  visible  contrac-
tions, extending  from  chin  to  superior  maxillary  bones,
followed  by  contusive  headache  over  eyes.

I  I  Drawing  in  bones,  r.  side,  and  forehead.

I  Fulness  and  flushes  in  face. 6'Climaxis. ^Typhus.

I  Hot  flushes  in  face,  followed  by  slight  sweat.  ^Neural-
gia vaga.

I  1  Earthy  color  of  face,  sunken  features.

I  Face  very  pale. ^Albuminuria.

Pale  cold  face.

•  Erysipelas  of  face  ;  chronic.

^  Lower  Face. Lips  cracked  and  slightly  bleeding. ^Albu-
minuria.

•  Lockjaw.

'"Teeth  and  Gums. 1 1 Drawing  in  teeth.
:  Toothache.

■  Scorbutic  affections  with  hsematuria.

I  Gums  burned  every  morning,  were  spongy  and  painful
to  touch  ;  brushing  sets  them  to  bleeding.

I  Bleeding  gums. ^Albuminuria.

Dentition:  suppression  of  urine  with  convulsions;  child
wakeful  at  night,  screaming  as  if  frightened,  has  a  star-
ing look,  clenches  his  fingers;  twitchings  in  different
parts  of  body;  picking  of  nose,  dry,  short  cough ;  ach-
ing in  limbs  and  head ;  burning  soreness  and  intersti-
tial distension  of  gums ;  otitis.
'^  Taste  and  Tongue.  Tongue :  bright  or  red  ;  coating  peels
off"  in  patches  presenting  bright-red  ^ots  here  and  there,
or  whole  substance  cleans  off"  simultaneously;  dry  and
red ;  brown,  dry ;  burning  in  tip  of  tongae ;  elevated
papillae ;  as  if  deprived  of  its  papillae,  or  as  if  glazed  or
varnished.

llTongue  remains  dry,  with  abdominal  tension;  after
cleansing  becomes  dry  again  with  increase  of  tympa-
nitis. ^Typhoid.


TEREBINTHINA.  280

1 1  Tongue  does  not  clean  gradually  but  rapidly  and  in
large  flakes,  first  from  middle,  leaving  tongue  smootli
and  glossy. ^T^'^phoid.

I  Tongue  red  and  glossy. ^Stomatitis. ^Entero-colitis.

I  I  Tongue  swollen  hard  and  stiff  with  violent  fever.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  Foul  breath. ^Helminthiasis.

Burning  in  mouth.

I  I  Ulcers  in  mouth.

':  Mercurial  ptyalism  ;  stomacace.

I  In  mouth  and  at  angles  of  lips,  ecchymosis,  which  bleed.
^Purpura  haemorrhagica.

■  Stomatitis  extending  from  mouth  to  anus;  tongue  ver}^

sore,  red  and  glossy,  burning  like  fire ;  immense  tym-
panitis; no  pain ;  prostration.
'*  Throat. '  l  Scraping,  scratching  in  throat,  frequently  with
coughing  in  evening.

Burning  in  throat.

Warmth  and  scratching  in  pharynx  and  stomach.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Hunger  and  thirst,
with  debility.

Craving  for  drink  ;  appetite  lessened.

•  Loss  of  appetite,  great  thirst. ^Gastro-enteritis.

I  While  engaged  in  pleasant  mental  work  in  evening,  after
a  full  satisfying  meal,  a  sudden  desire  to  eat  rue.

I  I  Aversion  to  meat.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating :  sick  at  stomach ;  loud
rumbling  in  bowels,  while  pain  in  hypochondria  dis-
appears.

After  a  satisfying  meal  strange  appetite.

Pressure  in  epigastrium  as  from  hasty  swallowing.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Eructa-
tions rancid.

■  Flatulent;  acrid  eructations. ^Hsematemesis.
Heartburn  and  waterbrash  in  evening.
Belching  and  nausea;  >  after  belching.

■  Nausea:  and  vertigo;  and  vomiting.

■  Vomiting of  mucus;  of  yellowish  mucus;  of  food  (albu-

minuria) ;  of  blood.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Dull  pain  in  epigastrium.
Pressure  as  if  he  had  swallowed  a  bullet  which  had  lodged

in  pit  of  stomach.
Slight  pressing  pain  in  small  spot  in  epigastrium; >

stooping,  lying  down  or  taking  a  deep  breath.
Pressure  in  scrobiculum  as  from  without.

■  Tension  and  pain  about  epigastrium,  with  faintness  and

a  sense  of  utter  prostration  or  anxiety  in  this  region.
^Hsematemesis.
Pinching  below  pit  of  stomach,  with  belching  and  nausea.


2^1  TEREBINTHINA.

I  I  Burning  in  stomach  and  hypochondria.

I  I  Heat  in  stomach.

■  Intense  burning  in  stomach,  with  nausea  and  vomiting
of  mucus,  bile  or  blood ;  copious  hemorrhages.

Pressing  in  stomach  turning  into  slight  nausea;  >  by

belching.
Pressing  in  stomach  evening  in  bed,  lying  on  1.  side,  pre-
venting sleep ;  >  on  turning  to  r.,  and  passing  wind.

I  I  Gastritis;  cannot  bear  least  touch.
^^Hypochondria. Aching and burning in  hypochondriac
region.

Severe  burning  pressure  in  hypochondrium.
:  Pressing  below  diaphragm  extending  from  1.  to  right.
I  Liver  can  be  felt  below  ribs. /^Emphysematous  asthma.
:  Colic  from  calculi ;  chronic  liver  complaints.
Pressing  and  cutting  pains  in 1.  hypochondriac  region
19  A  -UA  ^^^  ^^  sitting,  disappearing  on  moving  about.
Abdomen. Sensation as if  intestines were being  drawn

toward  spine.
Irritability  and  weakness  of  bowels. /^Albuminuria.
Anxiety  in  epigastric  region  ;  abdomen  fuller  than  usual.
I'ulness  as  after  eating  too  much.
Heaviness  in  abdomen  after  siesta.

Pressure  and  heaviness  in  abdomen  and  passage  of  flatus.
N  Rumbling,  with  bellyache  and  brown  stools.
Rumbling  and  gurgling  in  abdomen  in  evening;  colic  in

morning.
I  Feeling  of  distension  in  abdomen  as  from  flatus,  soon

obliging  him  to  rest.
•  iMeteorismus;  excessive  tympanitis,  abdomen  sensitive.

^Typhus. ^Puerperal  disorders.

■  Distension  and  flatulency;  distended  abdomen  sore  to

touch. ^Puerperal  peritonitis.
I  I  Sensitiveness  of  bowels. ^Uterine  tumor.

■  Distended  abdomen;  frequent  colic,  with  constipation.

■  Abdomen  tender  to  pressure.

■  Colicky  griping  pains  in  abdomen. /^Septic  fevers.

■  Griping,  pinching  colic,  with  muco-purulent  stools.

■  Pain  shooting  across  bowels  from  1.  to  r.  and  upward.
Colic :  with  headache ;  with  diarrhoea ;  with  mushy  stools.
Constant  cutting  extending  into  thighs.

I  I  Colic  with  lively  motion  of  intestines  and  meteorism,
after  warmth  and  scratching  in  pharynx  and  stomach ;
anxiety ;  nausea,  rarely  vomiting.

Cutting  in  abdomen,  with  local  distensions  as  if  a  hernia
would  protrude ;  painfulness  in  groin.

Cold  sensation  in  abdomen  as  if  exposed.

Coldness  in  umbilical  region.


TEREBINTHINA.  282

On  lying  down  umbilical  region  feels  retracted  and  cold,
as  if  covered  by  a  round  cold  plate.

Sensation  as  if  intestines  were  being  drawn  toward  spine.

Pain  in  umbilicus.

Sensation  in  abdomen  as  if  diarrhoea  would  follow.

Burning  itching  on  abdomen.

I  Pain  in  iliac  region. ^Typhus.

Groins  slightly  swollen  and  painful  in  evening,  while  sit-
ting.

I  1  Pains  and  movements  in  groin  as  if  hernia  would  ap-
pear, most  when,  in  sitting,  thigh  is  extended  ;  is  felt
sometimes  in  r,,  sometimes  in  1.  groin.

Urging  and  cutting  pain  in  r.  groin.

i  Strangulated  hernia.

Burning  itching  of  skin  in  r.  groin.

■  Effusion  of  serum  into  abdominal  cavity. ^Typhus.

■  Beginning  of  ulceration  of  bowels. ^Typhus.
■Ulceration  of  bowels,  increase  of  tympanitis ;  tongue  gets

dry  again. ^Typhus.

■  Peritonitis  and  other  inflammatory  affections  of  abdomen.
I  I  On  sixth  day  of  enteritis,  patient  almost  pulseless;  face,

hands  and  limbs  cold ;  great  agitation  of  mind ;  fear  of
death ;  much  difficulty  of  breathing  owing  to  tympanitic
condition  of  abdomen,  which  was  of  enormous  size,  not
sensitive,  but  hard  and  resonant  like  a  drum ;  tongue
dry,  looked  as  if  seared  with  a  hot  iron  in  centre.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. '  i  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool.

I  I  Tenesmus ;  bloody  stools. ^Dysentery.

After  flatus  passes  stomach  is  relieved.

i  I  With  a  loose  stool  immediate  cessation  of  nausea.

Copious  and  frequent  evacuations  upward  and  downward.

Stools  of  mucus  and  water ;  <  in  morning.

Mushy  evacuations,  with  burning  in  rectum  and  colic.

I  I  Copious  discharges  with  burning  in  anus.

■  Diarrhoea,  abdomen  tense  and  tender; tongue  dry or

moist. ^Typhus.

Stools:  ■  watery,  greenish;  mucous  and  watery ;  ■frequent;
■  profuse;  ■fetid;  bloody.

Aggravation  :  in  afternoon  and  evening;  in  mornings  dur-
ing typhoid  fever;  during  nephritis;  from  living  in
damp,  dark  cellars.

Before  stool :  colicky  pain  in  abdomen.

After  stool :  violent  burning  in  rectum  and  anus ;  ■exhaust-
ion ; ■  fainting.

■  Intestinal  catarrh  and  diarrhoea. <?Nephritis.

■  Diarrhcea;  prostration  excessive;  burning  in  anus.
Soon  after  sweat,  toward  morning,  a  very  bad-smelling

diarrhoea.


283  TEREBINTHINA.

I  I  Diarrhoea  with  tetanic  spasms.

I  I  Bilious  diarrhoea. ^Albuminuria.

I  I  Sooty  stools  like  coffee-grounds.  ^Hsematemesis.  ^Pur-
pura hsemorrhagica.

lEntero-colitis,  with  hemorrhages  and  ulceration  of  bowels,
especially  epithelial  degeneration  ;  stools  of  mucus  and
water. ^Typhoid  diseases.

I  Constipation. ^Uterine  tumor. ^Albuminuria.

I  I  Constipation  with  abdominal  distension.

I  'Stools  scanty,  hard  and  dry;  dark  brown.

I I  Hemorrhages:  from  bowels;  with  ulceration  ;  epithelial
degeneration ;  passive.

I  I  On  fourteenth  day  of  typhoid  fever,  profuse  diarrhoea  of
color  of  prune  juice,  dark  red,  showing  under  microscope
a  large  amount  of  branlike  particles  mingled  with  dis-
organized blood  globules  ;  pieces  of  linen  dipped  in  it
became  red  ;  it  had  a  peculiar  fetid  odor;  small  coagula
in  bottom  of  vessel  not  firm,  but  deliquescent;  exces-
sive tenderness  in  1.  iliac  region,  stupor,  mild  delirium,
dry  tongue,  red  at  tips,  heavily  coated  at  back,  subsultus.

■  Hemorrhoids. ^Uterine  tumor.
I  Piles  internal,  bleeding.

■  Hemorrhage  from  anus. ^Typhus.

I  Burning  and  tingling  in  anus  and  rectum,  >  by  aj)ply-
ing  cold  water.

■  Passes  segments  of  tapeworm  ;  ■  ■ascarides.

■  Worms:  with  foul  breath,  choking  sensation ;  dry,  hack-

ing cough  ;  burning  and  tingling  at  anus,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  ascarides  were  crawling  about; sometimes
with  spasms.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■■  Violent  burning  drawing  pains  in  kid-
neys. ^Nephritis. ^Hsematuria.
I  'Pressure  in  kidneys  when  sitting,  >  from  motion.
Transient  drawing  in  r.  kidney  extending  into  r.  hip.

■  Stiff  all  over;  heaviness  and  pains  in  region  of  kidneys.
:  Neuralgia  of  kidneys.

:  Prevents  and  dissolves  renal  calculi.
Dull  pain  and  burning  in  renal  region ;  extending  down
ureters.

■  Burning  during  urination.

I  'Sensation  as  if  he  would  pitch  forward  on  face  when
walking;  at  times  loss  of  sight  and  diplopia;  pain  over
kidneys  when  tired  ;  urine  a  little  darker ;  albumen  and
blood  corpuscles  in  urine ;  lids,  face  and  feet  swell.

'  'Renal  disease  producing  dropsy,  attack  comes  on  rapidly
with  pain  in  lumbar  region,  urine  greatly  diminished,
loaded  with  albumen,  containing  casts  of  tubes  and  blood
disks. ^Post-scarlatinal  dropsy.


TEREBINTHINA.  284

■  Dropsy  dependent  on  congestion  of  kidneys ;  dull  aching

in  renal  region  ;  smoky-looking  urine.

I  i  Fatty degeneration  of  kidney  (enlargement) ; general

dropsy ;  limbs  enormously  swollen,  skin  deeply  pitting  on
pressure  and  distended  nearly  to  bursting,  could  with
difficulty  move  a  step ;  much  general  muscular  weak-
ness; menses  absent  four  months;  urine  of  a  deep,  smoky
opalescent  color,  sp.  gr.  1018,  average  quantity  30  to  35
ounces  in  twenty-four  hours ;  on  boiling  became  a  nearly
solid  mass  of  albumen ;  blood  globules  visible  under
microscope. ^Bright's  disease.

I I  Albuminuria;  early  stages  when  blood  and  albumen
abound  more  than  casts  and  epithelium.

Girl,  set.  9,  scarlatina  mild ;  became  languid  ;  vomiting
yellow  mucus;  tongue  coated  white;  attack  of  lanci-
nating pain  in  head,  would  cry  out  suddenly ;  >  by  hold-
ing head  firmly ;  face  and  abdomen  swollen ;  feet  not
swollen ;  urine  scanty,  turbid,  dark  ;  albumen  abundant.
^Post-scarlatinal  albuminuria.

Sugar  in  urine. ^Diabetes.

:  Suppuration  of  kidneys  and  bladder.

■Affections  of  kidneys,  <  from  living  in  damp  dwellings.

1 1  Sensitiveness  of  hypogastrium,  tenesmus  of  bladder.

Spasmodic  urging  and  pressing  in  region  of  bladder  while
sitting;  going  up  in  streaks  to  either  kidney;  >  from
exercise.

■  Tenesmus  of  bladder. ^Gonorrhoea.

llViolent  burning  and  cutting  in  bladder,  alternating
with  a  similar  pain  in  umbilicus ;  <  at  rest ;  >  when
walking  in  open  air. ^Heematuria.

Suppression  of  urine.

Retained  urine  from  atony  of  fundus  vesicae.

Incontinence  of  urine ;  also  at  night.

■  Catarrh  of  bladder,  particularly  in  old  persons  of  seden-

tary habits.

I  I  Cystitis  and  retention  of  urine;  pressure  in  region  of
bladder  caused  convulsions.

I  I  Man,  set.  62,  suffers  every  year  with  a  sero-purulent  dis-
charge from  urethra,  especiall}''  after  squeezing  a  thick-
ish,  greenish  matter  oozes  from  urethra ;  some  pain  after
urination,  but  no  swelling;  cold  drinking  after  being
heated  seems  to  be  exciting  cause;  patient  complains  of
headache,  febrile  motions,  anorexia,  etc.

■  Dysuria.

■  i  Burning  in  urethra,  when  urinating.

■  ■Strangury;  spasmodic  retention  of  urine. ^Gonorrhoea.

■  ■Frequent  urination  at  night,  with  intense  burning  and

pain  in  small  of  back.


285  TEREBINTHINA.

■  Urine  increased. ^Typhus.

■  Smarting  in  urethra. ^Gonorrhoea,

■  Urine:  violet  odor; fetid;  albuminous; scanty;  dark;

■  ■cloudy  and  smoky,  bloody  ;  clear,  watery,  profuse.

■  ■Hsematuria.

■  Urine  red,  thick,  scanty. ^Articular  rheumatism.

■  Blood  in  urine,  from  a  cut,  extracting  a  tooth,  etc.,  with

bleeders.

■  Scanty  urine  dark,  sometimes  bloody ;  containing  albu-

men, cylindrical coagula,  renal  elements,  oxalate  of
lime. ^Albuminuria.

■  Urine highly charged with blood,  especially  if it  is

bright  and  passing  in  very  small  quantities. ^Albu-
minuria.

■  ■llrine black,  with  coffee-grounds sediment. ^Liver

complaint.

■  Urine  contains  blood  after  scarlatina.

I  I  Dull  pain  in  lumbar  region  and  across  middle  of  ab-
domen ;  pulse  100,  firm,  not  large ;  urine  resembles
port  wine  in  color,  in  a  spoon  looks  quite  clear,  almost
black  on  looking  down  upon  it  in  a  chamber  vessel ;  it
coagulates  very  strongly  by  heat ;  tongue  foul ;  appetite
and  sleep  disturbed. ^Hsematuria  from  kidneys.

I  I  Few  months  previous  to  birth  of  child,  now  1  year  old,
had  unusual  pain  in  back,  renal  region  and  down
ureters  into  bladder,  urine  very  dark  and  of  strong
odor,  depositing  a  black  sediment;  emaciation,  anaemic
appearance  as  of  having  lost  much  blood,  weakness,
exhaustion  on  walking  a  short  distance  ;  after  going  up
stairs,  palpitation,  dyspnoea,  throbbing  in  head  ;  skin
very  pale  and  had  an  unhealthy  feel ;  flushes  of  fever
in  afternoon  followed  by  profuse  night  sweats ;  consti-
pation ;  tongue  pale  and  flabby ;  urine  dark,  almost
black  when  first  emitted,  depositing  a  sediment  amount-
ing to  nearly  one-twelfth  of  its  quantity,  and  black  as
coal ;  urine  not  much  below  its  normal  amount,  looked
smoky. ^Chronic  passive  hemorrhage  from  kidneys.

On  standing  urine  deposits  a  reddish-white  sediment.

■  Urine  deposits  a  slimy,  thick,  muddy  sediment. ^Vesi-

cal catarrh.

■  ■After  scarlatina:  passes  small  quantities  of  dark,  sweet-

smelling  urine,  turbid  and  having  a  sediment  like  cofiee-
grounds ;  sometimes  mind  dull,  or  patient  drowsy,  even
in  a  stupor;  dropsy;  urine,  though  rich  in  albumen
and  blood,  contains  but  few  if  any  casts.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs,  i  i  Spermatorrhoea  in  a  man  set.  25;
no  bad  habits ;  urine  turbid  and  had  a  yellowish  mucous
sediment.


TEREBINTHINA.  286

Tearing  pain  in  os  pubis.

Feels  as  if  symphysis  pubis  were  suddenly  forced  asunder.
Transient  burning  in  posterior  part  of  r.  testicle.
Spasmodic  drawing  in  1.  testicle  and  along  cord.
Cutting  drawing  from  ring  into  1.  testicle;  passes  off  on

stooping.
iChordee;  gleet. ^Gonorrhoea.
iGonorrhoeal  rheumatism.

■  Gonorrhoea  with  strangury,  tenesmus  of  bladder,  smart-

ing in  urethra ;  painful  urination  every  ten  minutes,
relief  by  micturition.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. •  Ovarian  dropsy.

I  i  Terrible  burning  in  uterus,  with  great  bearing-down
pain ;  caused  great  heat  all  over  her;  craves  drink ;  in-
ward heat;  abdomen  fuller  than  usual.

I  I  From  wearing  tight  corsets  peritonitis  after  confine-
ment. ^Uterine  tumor.

I  Uterine  diseases  after  wearing  supporter  of  uterus.
^Traumatic  erysipelas.

■  Fibroid  enlargement  of  uterus  ;  bloody,  offensive  leucor-

rhoea;  burning  in  uterus;  pain  at  crest  of  ilium,  <
from  motion  or  least  jar  in  walking  or  riding  ;  menor-
rhagia,  black  blood.

■  Uterus  and  ovaries  very  painful.

Drawing  in  thighs,  and  colic  as  if  menses  would  set  in,  a

week  after  she  had  had  them,
i  Menorrhagia ;  leucorrhoea  ;  herpes  labialis.

■  Menses  two  days  late  and  scanty,  with  disturbed  men-

strual function,  or  during  climaxis. ^Neuralgia  vaga.

■  During  climaxis:  neuralgia;  flushes;  sweat;  pains.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition. Lactation. During  pregnancy.
^Neuralgia.
I  Abortion.

I  I  Burning  and  bearing  down  in  uterus,  and  burning
urination.

■  ■Metritis  and  peritonitis  puerperalis,  with  tendency  to

mortification ;  lochia  checked,  terrible  burning  in
uterus,  abdomen  fuller  than  usual ;  headache  with
thirst ;  brown  dry  tongue,  nausea  and  vomiting ;  dis-
tended abdomen,  sore  to  touch ;  pulse  small,  frequent,
with  general  debility.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Respira-
tory tract  dry,  mucous  membrane  feels  hot  and  con-
gested.

Burning  in  air  passages,  with  thin  expectoration,  very
difficult  to  detach.

:  Bronchial  catarrh  of  aged  with  muco-purulent  sputa.

■Secretion  of  bronchial mucous membrane greatly  in-


287  TEREBINTHINA.

creased,  with  spasmodic  convulsive  cough  ;  herpes  labi-
alis,  heavy  substernal  pain,  and  tickling  in  trachea,  as
at  commencement  of  bronchitis ;  phlegm  streaked  with
blood.

i  Membranous  croup.
^^Respiration, l  i Short  breathing; difficult respiration  as
from  congestion  of  lungs.

I  I  Difficult  breathing  for  six  months ;  < from  motion.
^Emphysema.

•  Dyspnoea  all  night,  propped  up  in  bed,  scarcely  able  to
breathe. ^Albuminuria.

Choking  sensations. ^Worms.

I  I  Sits  erect,  breathes  rapidly,  cannot  expand  chest,  ab-
dominal respiration;  >  by  a  deep  breath.

With  stupefied  condition,  restless ;  unequal  breathing,
now  heavy,  then  quick,  at  times  interrupted  as  if  it
would  cease.
^''  Cough.  Cough  as  if  a  foreign  body  had  entered  windpipe,
with  a  spasmodic  inspiration  similar  to  pertussis,  but
with  interruptions,  finally  all  inspirations  ceasing.

Cough  with  a  bloody  expectoration,  without  pain  in  chest.

■  Bronchial  catarrh  with  spitting  of  much  phlegm.
Dry  cough,  no  expectoration  or  blood-streaked  sputa.
I  Dry  hacking  cough. ^ Worms.

.  Dry  cough,  <  on  lying  down  after  eating.

■  Copious  mucous  sputa. ^Albuminuria.
I  Bloody  expectoration. ^Typhus.

I  Great  distress  and  restlessness,  followed  by  haemoptysis.

■  Dangerous  bronchial  symptoms  in  cases  of  typhus.
I  I  Frothy  sputa.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. After  spasmodic  cough  with  loss

of  breath,  a  very  pronounced  or  long-lasting  soreness  in

lower  part  of  chest.
Pressing  pain  behind  sternum.
I  I  Warm drinks  cause  in  their  descent  pain  in  sternal

region,  with  tenderness  to touch ; pain is  somewhat

burning.
Burning  in  chest  along  sternum.
I  I  Distension of  air  vessels  to highest degree; apex  of

heart  is  felt  beating  in  pit  of  stomach ;  heart  and  liver

pushed down ; loses  his breath from least  exertion,

avoids  even  walking. ^Emphysema.

■  Typhoid  pneumonia;  unbearable  burning  and  tightness

across  chest,  with  great  dryness  of  mucous  membranes
or  profuse  expectoration  ;  hepatization  of  lungs ;  moist
crepitating  rgiles  in  upper  or  middle  lobes ;  entire  poste-
rior inferior  region  of  r.  side  of  chest  dull  on  percussion ;
pulse  intermitting,  irregular;  great  prostration.


TEREBINTHINA.  288

I  I  Capillary  bronchitis,  child  drowsy,  lungs  all  clogged  up  ;

urine  scanty,  almost  dark  from  admixture  of  blood.
llBronchial  catarrh  and  pneumonia  in  typhus.
Iln  upper  or  middle  parts  of  chest,  moist  crepitating  rales;

1.  side  same,  but  slighter. ^Albuminuria.
lEifusion  of  serum  into  pleural  cavity. ^Typhus.

I I  Hemorrhage  from  lungs.

1  I  Haemoptysis;  great  distress  and  restlessness  before  hem-
orrhage, and  immediately  relieved  by  it.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  with  irregular
pulse  on  going  to  bed.

Organic  diseases  of  heart and large  vessels. ^Morbus
Brightii.

Pulse :  intermitting,  irregular  on  going  to  bed,  with  great
weakness ;  increased  in  force  and  frequency ;  feeble  or
rapid;  slow%  in  diarrhoea  (ty^^hus);  small,  with  general
debility ;  130  to  140  (puerperal  peritonitis) ;  small,  wiry
(typhus) ;  thready  and  scarcely  perceptible.
^^  Outer  Chest.  Burning  in  chest  along  sternum,  gradually
spreading  over  whole  chest;  passes  off  with  stitches
through  nipples ;  after  a  warm  drink.

Stitching  in  1.  pectoralis  major.

Muscular  stiffness ;  contraction  of  muscles  of  thorax.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pressing  pain  in  back,  comes  up  between
shoulders,  is  felt  as  a  throbbing.

Drawing  in  back  while  sitting  down  in  evening.

Drawing  in  back  and  lumbar  muscles,  with  lassitude  on
exercising  in  open  air.

■  Backache  and  soreness  in  kidney  affections.

Severe  pains  in  lumbar  region,  with  fever.

I  I  Severe  rheumatic  pain  in  lumbar  muscles,  contracted

by  removing  his  flannels  too  soon ;  impossible  for  him

to  stoop  or  lie  upon  back ;  pains  sharp,  rendering  motion,

when  not  in  an  erect  position,  intolerable.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Drawing  in  bones  of  upper  arm  in  morning.

Pain  as  if  sprained  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  arm.

Hands  trembling,  with  debility.

Neuralgia  brachialis  or  subscapularis.
^' Lower Limbs. Insensibility of  extremities, particularly
lower.

\  Lumbago ;  ischias.

Pain  going  from  hip  to  forehead ;  or  from  kidneys.

Drawing  tearing  in  r.  hip  joint.

Neuralgia  of  hips.

Drawing  along  thighs.

'Sciatica,  in  rheumatic  patients;  urinary  symptoms.

I  I  Erythema  on  thighs  and  body  resembling  scarlet  rash.

Pain  in  groins  extending  to  thighs.


289  TEREBINTHINA.

Contracting  spasms  of  thigh  muscles  during  remission  of
neuralgia.

■  Swelling  and  stiffness  of  r.  knee,  with  pain  in  calf,  and

swelling  of  vastus  externus.
Profuse  sweat  on  legs  evenings  in  bed.

■  Intense  neuralgia  in  lower  limbs,  especially  in  damp

weather.

■  Tearing  in  feet  now  here  now  there;  principally  in  soles

and  heels. ^Neuralgia  vaga.

■  Legs  cedematous. ^Albuminuria.
Staggering  gait,  as  if  drunk.

^*  Limbs  in  General, i Numbness  of  limbs. ^Nervous  head-
ache.

Heaviness  in  limbs.

Nerves  of  limbs,  particularly  lower,  exceedingly  sensitive.

Intense  pain  along  larger  nerves.

I  Limbs  enormously  swollen. ^Albuminuria.

Coldness  of  extremities.

Limbs  hanging  loosely  without  motion.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Stands  with  feet  far  apart;  can-
not balance  body.

Lying:  umbilical  region  feels  retracted  and  cold  ;  >  pain
in  epigastrium ;  on  1.  side  pressing  in  stomach ;  cough  <.

Sitting :  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  groins  painful ;  press-
ure in  kidneys;  urging  and  pressing  in  bladder;  draw-
ing in  back.

Stooping :  pain  in  epigastrium  >  ;  >  pain  in  1.  testicle.

Motion:  >  pain  in  hypochondrium;  >  pressure  in  kid-
neys; pressure  in  bladder  >  ;  <  pain  at  crest  of  ilium;
<-  difficult  breathing.

Walking:  in  open  air  muscse  volitantes  and  dizziness;
sensation  as  if  he  would  pitch  forward ;  emphysema  <.
^*  Nerves. Tired  feeling.

I  I  Intense  pains  along  tracks  of  large  nerve  trunks.

■  Violent  neuralgia  in  course  of  supraorbital  nerve.

I  I  Sudden  twitching  of  limbs  as  from  electric  shock.
^Neuralgia  vaga.

■  Shooting  pain,  like  lightning  or  heavy  beating,  squeezing.
I  I  Crawling  tingling,  with  a  feeling  as  if  asleep  or  of  heavi-
ness. ^Neuralgia.

■  Neuralgia  with  a  sensation  of  coldness  in  nerve,  occa-

sionally like  hot  water  running  through  a  tube.

■  Prostration,  with  cold  clammy  sweat  and  thready,  almost

imperceptible  pulse.

■  Great  prostration  with  unusual  loss  of  flesh. ^Typhus.
Has  no  power  of  balancing  body,  stands  with  feet  far  apart

(after  large  doses  for  taenia).
Great  weakness. ^Liver  complaint.

VOL. X. — 19.


TEREBINTHINA.  290

iTendency  to  syncope. ^Nervous  headache.
I  Bodily  weakness  increases  rapidly. ^Purpura  hsemor-
rhagica.

■  General  debility.  ^Albuminuria.  ^Neuralgia  vaga.
Nervous  and  muscular  weakness  ;  want  of  sensibility.
:  Paralysis ;  paraplegia.

Occasional  subsultus.

:  Puerperal  convulsions  from  ursemic  poisoning.

lUrgemic  spasms  in  albuminuria,  with  great  prostration.

Spasms. ^Helminthiasis.

i  Tetanic  spasms;  lockjaw.

I  Chorea ;  epilepsy.
^'' Sleep. I  Somnolency. ^Typhus. ^Scarlatina.

Cannot  go  to  sleep,  tosses  in  bed.

Sleep  prevented  by  pain  in  stomach.

Sleepless,  excitable ;  skin  hot.

Nightmare  wakens  him  as  he  drops  off  to  sleep.

I  I  Habitual  dreams.
^^  Time. Toward  morning :  offensive  diarrhoea.

Morning:  gums  burn  ;  colic;  stools  of  mucus  and  water;
drawing  in  bones  of  upper  arm.

Evening :  dull  pressing  above  1.  eye ;  scraping  in  throat
with  cough ;  desire  to  eat  rue ;  heartburn  and  water-
brash  ;  rumbling  in  abdomen ;  groins  swollen  and  pain-
ful ;  in  bed  sweat  on  legs.

Night :  ciliary  neuralgia  <,  particularly  1  to  3  a.m.  ;  pain
in  eye  <  ;  child  wakeful,  dentition  ;  frequent  urina-
tion ;  incontinence  of  urine ;  dyspnoea ;  nightmare.
^^Temperature and  "Weather. Damp  dwellings: kidney
affections  <.

Damp,  dark  cellars:  diarrhoea.

Damp  weather:  neuralgia  in  legs.

Cold  water :  >  burning  in  anus.
^"  Fever, i  Rigors  followed  by  feverish  heat  through  whole
body  ;  headache,  red  face. ^Bright's  disease.

Violent  coldness  with  restless  tossing  about.

Violent  chill,  cold  limbs,  trunk  hot.

I  After  a  strong  chill  violent  pain  in  abdomen.  ^Perito-
nitis puerperalis.

Chilliness.

■  Irregular  chills  and  flushes  of  heat. ^Hsematemesis.
Coldness  and  chill  in  abdomen.

I  1  Great  heat;  inward  heat.

Great  heat  all  over  from  uterine  pain.

I  Skin  hot  and  dry;  diarrhoea. ^Typhus.

I  Fever  with  violent  thirst ;  face  red  ;  mucous  surfaces  feel

dry ;  pulse  hard  and  frequent ;  profuse  sweat,  excessive

prostration.


291  TEREBINTHINA.

I  I  Suddenly  checked  sweat. ^Neuralgia.

I  Cold  clammy  sweat  all  over  body. ^Toxseraic  fevers.

I  Typhoid  fever ;  excessive  tympanitis ;  languor  and  pros-

tration; frequent  loose  stools;  copious  hemorrhages
from  bowels  with  ulceration  of  Peyer's  glands;  mutter-
ing delirium;  toward  end  of  second  week  bright-red
tongue,  smooth  and  glossy,  as  if  deprived  of  its  papillae  ;
vertigo,  fulness  and  flushes  of  face ;  pain  in  iliac  region
or  all  over  abdomen  on  pressure ;  thick  scanty  urine
with  mucus  and  disintegrated  blood  corpuscles  ;  fetid
urine  and  stools;  diarrhoea,  stools  intermixed  with
blood,  small  wiry  pulse ;  hemorrhages  from  nose  and
anus ;  bloody  expectoration ;  profuse  serous  effusions  in
pleural  and  abdominal  cavities ;  great  prostration  and
emaciation.

■  Typhus; stupor; delirium,  subsultus  tendinum; con-

tracted pupils;  dry  tongue;  meteorism ;  bloody  stools;
tongue  becomes  dry  about  middle  or  toward  close  of
second  week.

■  Typhoid  pneumonia.

I I  Malarial  and  African  fevers.*

*^ Attacks,  Periodicity. Spreading  gradually: burning  in
chest.

All  day  coming  and  going:  neuralgic  headache.

Day  and  night :  pain  in  eye.

Lasting  several  days:  maniacal  state.

For  eight  weeks :  sight  dim.

Four  months :  menses  absent.

For  six  months :  difficult  breathing.

During  climaxis:  neuralgia;  flushes;  sweat;  pains.
" Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  pressing  above  eye;  rend-
ing tickling  in  temporal  region ;  episcleritis;  chemosis
of  eye ;  redness  of  conjunctiva  ;  sore  pain  in  eye ;  hum-
ming in  ear;  ear  feels  cold ;  pressing  and  cutting  in
hypochondrium;  tenderness  in  iliac  region;  drawing  in
testicle  and  cord;  rales  in  chest;  stitches  in  pectoralis
major ;  sprained  pain  in  arm.

Right:  neuralgia  in  head;  darting  from  above  eye  through
eye;  perspiration  on  head,  none  on  1.;  hearing  <  ;  pain
from  forehead  to  ear ;  stitch  in  mastoid  process ;  draw-
ing in  bones  of  head ;  pain  in  groin  ;  itching  of  skin  in
groin ;  drawing  from  kidney  to  hip ;  burning  in  pos-
terior part  of  testicle ;  pneumonia ;  drawing  tearing  in
hip  joint ;  swelling  and  stiffness  of  knee ;  erythematous
eruption  on  foot.

*Ozonized  oil  of  turpentine,  a  few  drops  on  sugar,  several  times  a  day  (see  In-
troduction), is  recommended  as  a  prophylactic. — Hg.


TEREBINTHINA.  292

Left  to  r. :  pressing  below  diaphragm  ;  shooting  in  bowel  s..

Right  to  1. :  affection  of  hearing.

Upward  :  shooting  in  bowels.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  he  would  pitch  forward  on  walking ;  as
of  a  band  around  head;  as  if  sand  were  thrown  violently
in  eye ;  as  of  a  seashell  sounding  in  1.  ears ;  in  ear  as  of
striking  of  a  clock ;  as  from  hasty  swallowing  in  epigas-
trium ;  umbilical  region  as  if  covered  with  a  round,
cold  plate ;  as  if  he  had  swallowed  a  bullet,  which  had
odged  in  pit  of  stomach ;  a  sense  of  anxiety  and  utter
prostration  about  epigastrium ;  as  if  intestines  were  be-
ing drawn  toward  spine ;  as  if  abdomen  were  distended
with  flatus;  in  abdomen  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in  ;  as
if  inguinal  hernia  would  appear;  as  if  symphysis  pubis
were  suddenly  forced  asunder ;  as  if  a  foreign  body  had
entered  windpipe;  as  from  electric  shocks,  twitching  of
limbs ;  crawling  tingling  as  if  parts  were  asleep ;  as  if
hot  water  were  running  through  a  tube  in  nerve.

Pain:  above  1.  eye;  in  umbilicus;  in  groins;  in  kidneys;
in  lumbar  region ;  at  crest  of  ilium ;  in  uterus  and
ovaries.

Severe  pain :  over  1.  eye  and  in  1.  temple ;  in  lumbar
region.

Intense  pain  :  in  eye  and  side  of  head  ;  along  tracks  of
large  nerve  trunks.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  head;  in  kidneys;  tracheal,  or  sub-
scapular; in  hips;  in  lower  limbs;  along  larger  nerves;
supraorbital.

Lancinating:  in  head.

Cutting :  in  1.  hypochondriac  region ;  from  abdomen  into
thighs;  in  r.  groin;  in  bladder;  in  umbilicus;  from
ring  into  1.  testicle.

Stitches  :  in  forehead  ;  in  r.  mastoid  process ;  through  nip-
ples ;  in  1.  pectoralis  major.

Darting:  ciliary  neuralgia;  from  above  r.  eye  through  eye.

Shooting :  in  top  of  head  ;  in  1.  eye ;  across  bowels  from
1.  to  r.  and  upward.

Tearing:  in  os  pubis;  in  r.  hip  joint;  in  feet,  soles  and
heels.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Sprained  pain  :  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  arm.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  lumbar  muscles.

Dull  grumbling  pain  :  ciliary  neuralf/a.

Pinching:  below  pit  of  stomach,  in  abdomen.

Scratching:  in  throat;  in  pharynx  and  stomach.

Smarting:  in  urethra.

Burning :  in  gums ;  in  tip  of  tongue  ;  in  mouth  ;  of
tongue  like  fire;  in  throat;  in  stomach  and  hypochon-


293  TEREBINTHINA.

dria ;  on  abdomen  ;  of  skin  in  r,  groin  ;  in  rectum  and
anus;  in  kidneys;  in  bladder;  in  umbilicus;  in  urethra;
in  small  of  back ;  in  posterior  part  of  r.  testicle ;  in  uterus ;
in  air  passages ;  across  chest ;  along  sternum.

Burning  pressure:  in  hypochondrium.

Pressure:  in  head;  in  epigastrium ;  below  diaphragm  from
1.  to  r.;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  stomach;  in  1.  hypochon-
driac region;  in  abdomen;  in  kidneys;  behind  sternum;
in  back,  comes  up  between  shoulders.

Urging  pain  :  in  r.  groin ;  in  region  of  bladder.

Drawing :  from  neck  to  occiput,  thence  to  forehead,  from
forehead  to  hips ;  in  bones  of  head  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  kid-
neys; in  r.  kidney  to  hip;  in  1.  testicle  and  along  cord;
in  thighs;  in  back;  in  lumbar  muscles;  in  bones  of  upper
arm  ;  in  r.  hip  joint ;  along  thighs.

Aching :  in  limbs  and  head,  during  dentition ;  in  hypo-
chondria.

Dull  aching :  in  region  of  kidneys  ;  in  renal  region.

Dull  pain :  in  epigastrium ;  in  renal  region,  down  ureters.

Sore  pain :  in  1.  eye ;  in  gums ;  in  lower  part  of  chest.

Contusive :  headache.

Dull  pressing :  above  1.  eye.

Bearing  down  :  in  uterus.

Rending  tickling  :  in  1.  temporal  region.

Beating  pain  :  in  eyes.

Throbbing:  in  top  of  head;  between  shoulders.

Spasmodic  sensation  :  from  chin  to  superior  maxillary.

Choking:  from  worms.

Fulness :  in  head  ;  in  face ;  in  abdomen.

Heaviness:  in  abdomen;  in  kidneys;  in  limbs.

Tightness  :  across  chest.

Tension :  about  epigastrium.

Tingling:  in  anus  and  rectum.

Numbness:  of  limbs.

Tickling:  in  trachea.

Itching:  on  abdomen;  of  skin  in  r.  groin.

Heat:  in  stomach.

Coldness:  in  abdomen;  in  umbilical  region  ;  in  nerve.
**  Tissues. Passive  hemorrhages.

I  Fresh  ecchymosesin  great  numbers  from  day  to  day.

I I  Purpura  hsemorrhagica.

■  Scorbutic  affections  with  hsematuria; earthy color of

face,  sunken  features ;  exhaustion  and  debility.

Increases  number  of  colorless  blood  corpuscles  (probably
by  causing  hypersemia  of  lymphatic  glands).

1 1  Congestion  and  inflammation  of  viscera ;  kidneys,  blad-
der, lungs,  intestines  and  uterus.

■  Mucous membranes dry, burning; later secretion of

mucus  which  may  be  blood-streaked.


TEREBINTHINA.  294

I  Joints  swollen  stiff;  pain  on  motion. ^Rheumatism.
I  Dropsy  with  kidney  affections; associated  with great
prostration.

■  General  dropsy  dependent  upon  degeneration  of  kidney,

probably  granular.

I  Legs  and  body  oedematous. ^Albuminuria.

I I  Ascites  with  anasarca.

■  General  dropsy. ^After  pleurisy. ^Albuminuria.  ^Scar-

latina.

■  Emaciation. ^Liver complaint. ^Bright's disease.

/^Typhus.
•  •Atonic  gout;  rheumatism  and  gout;  asthenic  inflam-
mation; passive  hemorrhages;  purpura  hsemorrhagica;
burns;  hospital  gangrene;  cold  gangrene;  hydrophobia;
gangrenous  wound  from  bite  of  a  dog;  wounds  of  skin,
tendons  and  nerves ;  dissection  wounds ;  old  ulcers.

':  Chian  turpentine  is  said  to  destroy  cancer  cells,  leaving
vessels  to  become  atrophied,  acting  on  periphery  of
growth  with  great  vigor,  causing  its  speedy  disappear-
ance, and  entire  cessation  of  pain  in  a  few  days.

Gangrene;  locally  on  lint.

Corns  (locally).
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  eyeball  sen-
sitive; gastritis  <  ;  tenderness  in  sternal  region.

Pressure :  in  region  of  bladder  caused  convulsions.

i  Traumatic  iritis ;  dissection  wounds,  etc.

■  Purpura  hsemorrhagica.
Injuries  to  kidneys  from  falls.

1  I  From  a  cut  or  extracting  a  tooth  ;  bleeding ;  haematuria.
^Purpura  hsemorrhagica.
*^  Skin.  I  I  Pulse  67  to  70 ;  skin  dry ;  tongue  thickly  coated
wdth  sordes  and  dark  blood ;  blood  oozing  from  its  side
and  under  surface  as  well  as  from  gums  and  whole
mucous  lining  of  mouth,  palate,  tonsils  and  fauces;  three
isolated  phlyctense  of  size  of  a  large  lima  bean,  resem-
bling thrombi,  on  r.,  and  one  on  1.  inner  surface  of  cheek,
which  was  very  prominent  and  from  which  dark  blood
oozed  freely;  blood  passed  per  anum  without  fecal  ad-
mixture; urine  contained  black,  ropy  blood  which  con-
stituted about  three-fourths  of  its  entire  quantity ;
ecchymotic  spots  on  petechise  were  very  numerous  on
upper  and  lower  extremities,  and  were  increasing  in
number;  Phos.  without  effect.  Tereb.  6th  cent.,  cured.
^Purpura  heemorrhagica.
I  I  Lower  limbs  and  abdomen  covered  with  black  and  blue
spots,  from  size  of  a  pin-head  to  that  of  a  pea;  chest,
arms  and  face  not  so  thickly  spotted  ;  nose  bled  contin-
ually for  five  days  and  nights;  blood  very  thin,  dark;


295  TEREBINTH  IN  A.

very  distressing,  weak,  sore  feeling  all  through  body ;
pure  blood  from  bladder  with  burning. ^Purpura  hsem-
:  orrhagica,

■  Pitting  deeply  on  pressure.  ^Albuminuria.
I  Skin  warm  and  moist,  diarrhoea.  ^Typhus.
Eruption  of  pale-red,  round  and  elevated  blotches;  at  first

isolated,  later  confluent ;  these  vesicles  appear  with  fever
and  itching.

Erysipelas  bullosa;  here  and  there  yellow  vesicles  with
large  red  areola  turning  bluish-black;  tendency  to  gan-
grene.

Erythema  resembling  scarlet  rash,  spreading  over  thigh
and  greater  part  of  body  (after  external  applications  to
r.  knee  for  rheumatism),  for  a  few  hours  parts  swelled
rapidly,  assuming  a  look  like  erysipelas  vesiculosa.

Erythematous,  scrofulous,  even  vesicular  eruptions,  analo-
gous to  those  appearing  after  eating  shell  fish.

Burning  pain«,  irritation  and  fever,  no  sleep,  no  appetite ;
later  desquamation.

I  iScarlatina,  especially  when  kidneys  are  involved,  with
stupor ;  bloody,  smoky  urine. ^Dropsy.

Scarlatina  eruption  slow  in  appearing.

Chronic  icterus.

Scabies ;  pityriasis  of  old  people.
J. lErj^sipelas  of  face  and  lower  leg.

Eruption  in  spots,  often  about  noon,  or  after  vomiting.

Erythematous  eruption  resembling  scarlet  rash,  passing:
from  affected  knee  down  to  ankle  joint,  afterward  ap-
pearing in  chest  and  r.  foot,  spreading  over  better  por-
tion of  body.

A  girl  wore  long  gloves  cleansed  with  turpentine ;  in  half
an  hour  violent  itching  of  skin  as  far  as  covered  by
gloves;  intense  redness  spread  over  hands  and  arms,
with  innumerable  vesicles  filled  with  transparent  lymph,
many  of  them  becoming  confluent,  forming  blisters  re-
sembling pemphigus;  increasingpain  and  fever;  affected
skin  peeled  off.

i  Parasitic  affections  of  skin.
*' Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Children:  nosebleed,  worms.

Bleeders.

■  Nervous  women, amenorrhoea; dysmenorrhoea ; head-

ache.
Complaints of  old  people ; people  of  sedentary  habits,

catarrh  of  bladder.
Chronic  rheumatic  and  gouty  complaints.
Girl,  set.  9,  after  scarlatina;  albuminuria.
G.  G.,  set.  20 ;  purpura  hsem orrhagica.
Mrs.  C,  set.  22,  wife  of  a  clergyman,  mother  of  one  child ;

haematuria.


TEREBIN.— THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.  296

Man,  set.  25 ;  spermatorrhoea.

Man,  set.  26 ;  acute  nephritis.

Miss  D.,  set,  26,  feeble,  relaxed  constitution,  lymphatic,
sanguine  temperament ;  Bright's  disease.

Mr.  R.,  set.  30,  on  fourteenth  day  of  typhoid  fever;  hem-
orrhage of  bowels.

Man,  set.  36 ;  emphysematic  asthma.

Man,  set.  37,  intemperate  for  ten  years  or  more ;  amblyo-
pia potatorum.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  over  three  weeks ;  episcleritis.

Mrs.  F.,  set.  about  45,  stout,  pale,  flabby-looking ;  hsema-
turia.

Man,  set.  59,  bilious  temperament,  deep  sallow  complexion ;
albuminuria.

Widow,  set.  60 ;  purpura  hsemorrhagica.

Man,  set.  62  ;  catarrh  of  urinary  organs.

Man,  set.  65 ;  affection  of  kidneys.

A  widow,  set.  65,  spare  habit,  broken  health,  very  infirm,
after  suffering  for  want  of  food,  arthritic  cough ;  pur-
pura hsemorrhagica.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Phosphor.

It  antidotes  :  Phosphor.,  Mercur.

Compare :  Alum  (hemorrhage  in  typhus) ;  Arnic.  (melsena) ;
Arsen.  (albuminuria,  ischuria,  etc.) ;  Camphor  (passive
hemorrhages,  strangury) ;  Canthar.  (kidneys  and  blad-
der) ;  Copaiba,  Kali  hich..  Laches.,  Lycop.,  Mercur.,  Nitr.
ac;  Pix  liq.  (catarrh  in  children);  Phosphor.,  Rhus
tox.,  Secale,  Sulphur.


THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.

Orange  Spider.  Araneidese.

A  small  spider  known  to  people  as  very  poisonous,  chiefly  found  in  the  island  of
urapoa.

This  spider,  about  the  size  of  a  cherry  stone,  is  found  upon  orange  trees  in  the
West  Indies.  When  young  it  is  velvety-black  in  appearance,  marked  with  antero-
posterior lines  composed  of  white  dots ;  on  posterior  part  of  body  there  are  three
orange-red  spots,  while  upon  belly  there  is  a  large  square  yellow  spot. — Am.
Hom.  Pliarmacopoea.

The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  live  spider  crushed.

Introduced  anl  proved  by  Hering  in  1832;  symptoms  printed  in  Stapf's
Archives,  vol.  14,  p.  157.

Clinical  Authorities.— Fez-^i^^ro,  Cochran,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  24;  Affection
of  head,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  84 ;  Nasal  catarrh,  Korndoerfer,  Hah.


297  THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.

Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  36  ;  Hepatic  disorder, Horn.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  31 ;  Cough,  Simmons,

Hom.  Phys.,  Dec,  1889 ;  Clark,  Horn.  Phjs.,  vol.  9,  p.  135 ;  Spinal  irritation,  Far-
ley, Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  135  ;  Hysteria,  Mohr,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  811  ;  Korn-
doerfer,  MSS. ;  Scrofulosis,  Baruch,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  444;  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  8,  p.  331  ;  Scrofula,  corroborations,  C.  Neidhard,  Philadelphia.

*  Mind, Time  passes  too  quickly.

Talkative,  inclined  to  mental  exertion ;  hilarity.

Want  of  self-confidence. ^Hysteria.

Great  aversion  to  work ;  especially  to  his  usual  avocation.

Great  depression  during  headache  ;  weeping  during  tooth-
ache.
^  Sensorium.  Vertigo :  with  nausea  even  to  vomiting ;  <
from  stooping,  from  least  movement;  Ion  closing  eyes ;
on  board  a  vessel ;  from  every  noise  or  sound ;  with
cold  sweat;  awakes  from  sleep  at  night,  at  11  o'clock;
with  slow  pulse.

It  feels  so  thick  in  her  head  as  if  it  were  another  strange
head ;  nausea  and  vomiting  on  least  movement,  par-
ticularly on  closing  eyes.

I  I  Vertigo  with  blindness  caused  by  pain  in  eyes.

I  I  Whenever  she closes her eyes she is  afflicted with
nausea  and  vertigo,  <  by  noise  and  motion.
^  Inner  Head, l  i  Violent  frontal  headache  with  throbbing
extending  into  occiput.

■  Violent  frontal  headache  with  heavy  dull  pressure  be-
hind eyes.

I  I  Heavy  pressure  on  head  ;  pressing  downward.  ^Hys-
teria.

I  Headache  on  beginning  to  move.

herself.

I  I  For  fourteen  days  feeling  as  if  vertex  did  not  belong  to

her ;  it  felt  as  if  separated  from  rest  of  head,  as  if  she
could  lift  it  off;  felt  she  would  like  to  remove  it.

I I  Headache  deep  in  socket  of  eyes,  <  in  1.  eye ;  head
feels  thick. ^Hysteria,

•  Sunstroke.

It  feels  so  thick  in  her  head  as  if  it  were  another  strange

head,  or  as  if  she  had  something  else  upon  it.
Head  very  much  oppressed  and  heavy.
Oppression  and  fulness  behind  ears.
I  I  Headache  behind  eyes.
Headache  like  a  pressing  band  in  root  of  nose  and  over

and  around  ears.
Pressing  together  in  temples.
Stinging  in  1.  temple.
I  i  Suddenly  in  morning  pressing  pain  over  1.  eye,  <  by

slightest motion, talking; sickness  of stomach with


THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.  29&

retching ;  >  from  drinking  warm  water ;  bowels  open
twice  with  colic  and  flatulency,  after  which  head  is  <.

I  I  Throbbing  over  1.  eye  and  across  forehead  ;  also  in  a
slight  degree  in  r.  eye,  with  sick  stomach,  particularly
on  rising  from  a  reclining  position,  like  seasickness.

Head  internally  hot,  oppressed  and  heavy  ;  at  same  time
joyousness  and  singing.

Evenings  while  walking  is  attacked  with  general  head-
ache with  great  depression.

Owing  to  pains  deep  in  brain  she  must  sit  or  walk ;  it  is
impossible  to  lie.

iHeadache  with  nausea  and  vomiting  like  seasickness,  and
shaking  chills. ^Climacteric  period.

*  Outer  Head. Itching  on  scalp.

Itching  on  head  and  nape  of  neck,  in  evening.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Flickering  before  eyes  in  frequent  par-
oxysms, even  when closing  eyes; like  a  veil  before
eyes ;  she  must  lie  down. ^Hysteria.

Sensitive  to  light ;  things  look  double ;  fluttering,  nausea
and  cold  hands.

1  I  Dizziness  and  confusion  of  vision,  everything  went  to-
gether, and  became  indistinct. /^Hysteria.

■  Hard,  heavy  dull  pressure  behind  eyes.

I  I  Twitching  in  r.  eye.

On  awaking,  burning  pain,  internally,  above  inner
canthus.

I  I  Sensitiveness  to  light;  when  in  light  she  experiences
a  dark  sparkling  before  eyes ;  everything  appears
double,  and  through  this  fluttering  nausea  is  created  ;
cold  hands ;  long  afterward  dares  not  stoop.

TrNausea  while  closing  eyes ;  changed  into  nausea  when
opening  eyes  (relieved  by  Moschus).

I  I  On  closing  eyes  nausea  and  vomiting.
'Hearing  and  Ears, i  Worse  from  least  noise,  every  shrill
sound  and  reverberation  penetrates  her  whole  body,
especially  teeth,  makes  vertigo  <,  and  causes  nausea.

Rushing  in  both  ears  like  a  waterfall ;  roaring.

I  I  Itching  behind  ears  ;  would  like  to  scratch  them  off.

Pressure  above  ears;  fulness  behind  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing;  watery  discharge,  <  in  evening.

I  Chronic,  offensive-smelling  discharge,  thick,  yellow  or
yellowish-green. ^Nasal  catarrh. ^Scrofulous ozsena.

Pressure  in  root  of  nose  and  heaviness.

Nose  dry  as  if  too  much  air  passed  in  ;  itching  in  nose.

Paroxysms  of  frequent  violent  sneezing,  and  frequent
necessity  of  blowing  nose ;  heaviness  deep  in  upper  nose.

*  Upper  Face. Face  pale.

®  Lower  Face. In  morning  on  awaking  and  sometimes  at
other  times  of  day,  lower  jaw  is  immovable. ^Tetanus.


299  THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.

Froth  before  mouth  with  shaking  chill.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. '  iCool  water  affects  teeth  as  if  too  cold.
I  Every  shrill  sound  penetrates  teeth.
Toothache  in  afternoon  and  evening  causes  weeping.
Burning,  tensive  pain  in  teeth,  gums  and  palate.
Soreness  of  gums.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Mouth  feels  furred,  benumbed ;  no
proper  taste;  tongue  as  if  burned.
I  I  Salty  taste,  hawking  of  salty  mucus.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  feels  numb  or  slimy.
Foam  at  mouth  during  chill.

Mouth  and  nose  feel  too  dry ;  as  if  too  much  air  were  pass-
ing into  mouth.
13  Throat. Sore  throat ;  chilly ;  bones  sore ;  difficult  swallow-
ing ;  constipation ;  urine  scanty  and  high-colored.
"Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Desire  for  wine,
brandy,  tobacco  and  acidulous  fruits  and  drinks.
I  I  Much  thirst.

I  1  Desire  for  food,  does  not  know  what  to  eat ;  craves  oranges
and  bananas. ^Hysteria.
^® Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea:
with  headache ; on  rising  in  morning ;  from  sounds ;
with  vertigo;  on  closing  eyes;  like  seasickness;  from
sparkling  before  e3'es ;  when  gazing  steadfastly  on  an
object ;  on  motion ;  from  talking ;  from  fast  riding  in  a
carriage.
A  woman  having  had  in  childbed  a  violent  spell  of  sick-
ness at  end  of  first  week  and  apparently  recovered,  was,
in  third  week  after  washing  clothes,  suddenly  attacked
by  nausea  and  vomiting ;  after  it  very  pale  and  sick  at
stomach  as  soon  as  she  closed  her  eyes,  with  vanishing
of  thoughts.
1  I  Nausea  increased  to  vomiting  during  vertigo.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  like  seasickness,  with  headache.
Vomiting:  from  vertigo,  on  least  motion;  first  of  slimy,

acrid  water,  then  ineffectual  retching ;  of  bile  in  morn-
ing; of  bile  at  4  A.M.,  chronic  consumption,  cough.
I  I  Nausea  and  retching  >  by  drinking  warm  water.

■  Seasickness  of  nervous  women  ;  they  shut  their  eyes  to

get  rid  of  motion  of  vessel,  and  grow  deathly  sick.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Sensitiveness  of  region  of

stomach  and  epigastrium.
^^Hypochondria, l  i  Violent  burning  pain  in  hepatic  region

<  from  touch  ;  retching,  bilious  vomit.

■  Abscess  of  liver;  vertigo  and  nausea.

I  I  Anthrax  of  sheep,  with  great  tumefaction  of  hypogas-
trium  and  great  thirst.
"  Abdomen. Pain  in  groins,  after  coitus.


THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.  .  300

Pains  in  region  of  groin  on  motion ;  when  she  draws  up
her  leg  it  seems  as  if  some  one  tapped  her  hard  on  groin.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Small,  soft  stool  daily,  with  much
straining.

Diarrhoea  without  colic,  with  vomiting and  vertigo at
night.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  rectum  and  anus.

1  I  Bowels  open  twice  with  colic  and  flatulency,  after  which
headache  is  <.

Heaviness  in  perineal  region  noticeable  at  every  step ;  it
seems  to  him  as  if  a  lump  were  lying  there.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Increased  urination.

Has  to  get  up  four  or  five  times  at  night  to  pass  water,  does
not  pass  much  during  day.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  lessened  ;  weak  erec-
tion during  coition ;  after  coitus,  pain  in  groins.

Seminal  emission  during  siesta,  with  great  force.

Small  red  spots  upon  glans.

Scrotum  very  much  shrivelled.
^^ Female  Sexual  Organs, i Hysteria:  during  puberty;  at
climaxis.

Menses  omitted  more  than  ten  weeks  in  a  woman  in  cli-
macteric years ;  gave  birth  to  a  son  in  following  year.

I  I  Bruised  sore  pain  in  both  ovarian  regions,  <  from  mo-
tion and  pressure ;  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen,  like
labor  pains,  with  sensation  as  if  a  child  were  bounding
in  body ;  tickling  in  both  sides.  ^Hysteria.
^^  Respiration.  Increased  inclination  to  take  deep  breaths,
to  sigh.

I  I  Difficulty  in  breathing  on  going  up  and  down  stairs.
^Hysteria.
^  Cough. Night  cough.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Violent  stitches  in  chest  beneath
1.  shoulder  through  to  throat.

■  Phthisis  florida,  in  beginning.

Pinching  stitches  in  1.  pectoral  muscle.

Pressure as  if  something in oesophagus  were slipping
toward epigastrium, taking away breath for a few
moments.
"Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, ii Anxiety  about  heart;
sliarp  pains  radiate  to  arm  and  1.  shoulder. ^Climaxis.

I  I  Pulse  slow  with  vertigo.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Itching  in  nape  of  neck,  at  edge  of  shoul-
der and  on  back.

Pain  between  shoulders.

I  Spinal  irritation;  great  sensitiveness  between  vertebrae
sits  sideways  in  a  chair  to  avoid  pressure  against  spine.

I  I  Could  not  bear  least  noise,  and  jar  of  foot  on  floor  was


301  THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.

so aggravating that  it  made her  cry out. ^Spinal
irritation.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Stinging  pain  from  elbow  to  shoulder.

Violent  burning  itching  on  inner  and  upper  part  of  1.  ring-
finger  ;  spot  becomes  very  red,  soon  disappears.

Small  hard  pimple  beside  ball  of  thumb.
'*  Lower  Limbs. Itching  and  nodes  on  nates.

In  evening,  while  sitting,  and  later,  peculiar  drawing  in
r.  thigh ;  it  began  in  hip  and  passed  downward  with  a
cold  sensation  below  knee ;  it  felt  everywhere  cold,  in-
ternally, but  not  to  touch  ;  external  warmth  was  agree-
able.

Little  toe  pains  as  if  pressed  in  walking.

Violent  itching  on  calf.

Swelling  of  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Pains  in  bones  as  if  broken,  as  if  they
were  about  to  fall  asunder.

Heaviness  in  limbs  before  chill.
'®  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying :  impossible,  pains  deep
in  brain ;  must  lie  down  with  flickering  before  eyes.

Sitting :  drawing  in  r.  thigh.

Stooping: <  vertigo.

On  rising:  sick  stomach  <.

Drawing  up  leg:  as  if  some  one  tapped  her  on  groin.

Motion  :  least,  vertigo  < ;  <  headache ;  pain  over  1.  eye
< ;  nausea  < ;  vomiting  < ;  pains  in  groin ;  pain  in
ovarian  regions.

Walking :  headache  with  depression ;  little  toe  pains ;
sweats  easily.

After  every  exertion  ifainting.

Going  up  and  down  stairs :  dyspnoea.

After  washing  clothes :  nausea  and  fainting.
^^  Nerves. ■  Every  shrill  sound  and  reverberation  penetrates
through  her  whole  body,  particularly  through  teeth,  and
increases  vertigo,  which  causes  nausea.

■  Hysteria  during  puberty  and  in  climacteric  years,  and
from  spinal  irritation ;  is  sensitive  to  light,  faints  after
every  exertion,  and  has  weakness,  trembling,  chilliness
and  anxiety ;  restless,  must  busy  herself  about  some-
thing, though  nothing  gives  her  pleasure;  great  sensi-
tiveness to  noise  and  sensitiveness  between  vertebrae,
sits  sideways  in  a  chair  to  avoid  pressure.

I  I  From  washing  clothes  in  third  week  after  confinement,
attack  of  fainting.

TiCould  not  move  hands  or  feet ;  sitting  with  feet  crossed,
could  not  uncross  them  ;  head  bent  down  on  chest ;  eyes
partially  closed,  could  not  move  any  part  of  body;  looks
and  feels  as  if  dying,  but  hears  and  understands  all  that
is  said. ^Hysteria.


THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.  302

Great  lassitude  and  debility  as  if  from  great  losses  of  blood.
^Anaemia.

Tetanus.
^^  Sleep. Sleepy  all  morning.

Deep  night  sleep.

During  sleep  bites  tip  of  tongue.

Long  and  dreamful  midday  sleep ;  dreams  of  journeys  in
distant  regions  and  riding  on  horses;  a  person  who
scarcely  ever  sat  upon  a  horse.

Dreams  that  he  broke  off  a  tooth.
^Time. 4  a.m.:  vomiting  of  bile.

Morning:  lower  jaw -immovable;  nausea;  vomiting  of
bile;  sleepy.

Midday :  long  and  dreamful  sleep.

Afternoon :  toothache.

Evening :  headache  with  depression ;  itching  on  head  and
back  of  neck;  coryza  <;  toothache;  drawing  in  r.  thigh.

11  P.M.:  wakes  with  vertigo.

Night :  cough  ;  deep  sleep ;  vomiting.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  water: nausea  and
retching  >.

Warmth :  agreeable ;  pain  in  r.  leg  with  cold  sensation.
•*" Fever. Shaking  chill ;  with  foam  at  mouth;  during  head-
ache with  vomiting.

Bones  p'ain  as  if  they  would  fall  asunder ;  coldness,  cannot
get  warm.

Sweats  easily  after  walking.

Icy  sweat  covers  body,  with  fainting and  vertigo,  and
vomiting  at  night.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. For  more  than  ten  weeks :  menses
omitted,.

During  puberty :  hysteria.

Atclimaxis:  hysteria;  suppression  of  menses.
*'^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  throbbing  over  eye  and
across  forehead  ;  pain  in  socket  of  eye ;  stinging  in  tem-
ple; pressing  pain  over  eye;  stitches  from  shoulder  to
throat;  stitcnes  in  pectoral  muscle;  pains  from  heart
to  shoulder  and  arm  ;  burning  itching  on  ring  finger.

Right:  twitching  in  eye.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  her  head  were  another,  strange  head ;  as
if  vertex  did  not  belong  to  her;  like  a  pressing  band  in
root  of  nose  and  about  ears;  as  of  a  veil  before  eyes;  as
if  too  much  air  passed  into  nose  and  mouth ;  mouth  as
if  furred,  benumbed ;  as  if  some  one  tapped  her  on  groin
when  raising  leg;  as  if  a  lump  were  lying  in  perineal
region  ;  like  labor  pains  in  lower  part  of  abdomen;  as  if
a  child  were  bounding  in  body ;  as  if  something  in  oesoph-
agus were  slipping  toward  epigastrium  ;  as  if  bones  were
broken  and  would  fall  asunder ;  feels  as  if  dying.


303  THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.

Pain  :  deep  in  brain ;  in  region  of  groin ;  between  shoul-
ders.

Sharp  pain :  from  heart  to  1.  shoulder  and  arm.

Stitches :  beneath  1.  shoulder  through  to  throat.

Pinching  stitches :  in  1.  pectoral  muscle.

Stinging :  in  1.  temple ;  from  elbow  to  shoulder.

Burning:  above  inner  canthus;  in  teeth, gums  and  palate;
in  hepatic  region ;  in  1.  ring  finger.

Bruised  pain:  in  ovarian  regions.

Soreness:  in  throat;  in  bones.

Pressure :  behind  eyes  ;  on  head ;  in  temples ;  over  1.  eye ;
above  ears ;  in  root  of  nose ;  in  little  toe.

Drawing  :  in  r.  thigh.

Throbbing :  over  1.  eye  and  across  forehead ;  in  r.  eye.

Tensive  pain  :  in  teeth,  gums  and  palate.

Fulness :  in  head ;  behind  ears.

Heaviness:  in  head  ;  in  root  of  nose;  in  perineal  region;
in  limbs.

Thickness :  in  head.

Numbness :  in  mouth.

Tickling :  in  both  sides  of  abdomen.

Itching  :  in  head ;  in  nape  of  neck  ;  behind  ears ;  in  nose;
at  edge  of  shoulder  and  on  back;  in  1.  ring  finger;  on
nates  ;  on  calf;  of  skin  on  various  parts.

Dryness :  in  mouth  and  nose.

Coldness:  below  r.  knee.
"  Tissues. Hysteria ;  spinal  irritation.

Scrofula ;  rachitis,  caries,  necrosis.

Bones  pain  as  if  they  would  fall  asunder.

Chronic  catarrh  of  nose,  discharge  offensive,  thick,  yellow
or  yellowish-green.

Phthisis  florida.

Infantile  atrophy,  scrofulous  enlargement  of  glands;  con-
stant desire  for  food  and  drink,  but  does  not  know  what.

Nodosities  on  various  parts,  especially  buttocks;  scrofu-
losis.
^^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch: pain  in
hepatic  region  <.

Pressure  :  pain  in  ovarian  regions ;  spine  sensitive.

Closing  eyes :  vertigo.

On  board  a  vessel :  vertigo  and  seasickness.

Riding  in  a  carriage :  nausea.

From  person  walking  over  floor :  headache  <  ;  spine  sen-
sitive, must  cry  out.

From  least  noise : headache  <  ; vertigo  < ; penetrates
whole  body,  especially  teeth.
*^  Skin. Violent  itching.

I  I  Itching  of  skin  on  various  parts  of  body. ^Hysteria.


THERID.  CUR.— THLASPI  BURSA  PASTORIS.  304

Itching :  on  head  ;  behind  ears ;  in  nose ;  on  back  of  neck;

on  edge  of  shoulders;  on  back;  on  nates;  on  calf.
Pimples  near  ball  of  thumb.
Knots  on  nates,
■  Scrofula.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Mrs.  S.,  set.  38,  rather  fleshy^

bilious  temperament,  suffering  several  weeks;  vertigo.
F.,  in  W.,  suffered  for  five  years  from  painful  pressure  in

region  of  liver,  with  periodical  vomiting.
Mrs. ,  symptoms  of  spasms  during  labor;  second  month

after  confinement  hysteria.
A  woman,  set.  70 ;  sick  headache.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Aeon,  (sensitiveness  to  noises) ;

Moschus  (nausea) ; Graphit.
Compatible  :  after  Calcar.  and  Lycop.
Compare:  Aranea.


THLASPI  BURSA  PASTORIS.

Shepherd's  Purse.  Oruciferse.

An  annual  bearing  small  white  flowers  in  elongated  terminal  corymbs,  native
to  Europe  but  found  in  most  civilized  countries.  It  flowers  from  early  Spring
to  Autumn.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  flowering  plant.

Short  provings  by  Macfarlan  and  McGeorge.

Observations  by  Boenninghausen,  Lippe  and  Hale.

Refer  to  British  Quarterly,  vol.  3,  p.  63 ;  N.  A.  J.  of  Horn.,  vol.  2,  p.  185.

Clinical  Authorities. — Metrorrhagia,  Rafinesque,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.  370 ;
Claude,  T.  W.  H.  Conv.,  1876,  p.  955 ;  Menorrhagia,  Lange,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  63 ;
Bloody  leucorrhcea,  Eafinesque.

^  Inner  Head. Slight  headache.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. Deafness  and  pain  in  1.  ear.

''  Smell  and  Nose. Frequent  epistaxis,  of  a  passive  nature.

Free  discharge  of  blood  and  mucus  from  1.  nostril.

Dull  pain  at  root  of  nose.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  sore.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  sore  on  closing  jaws.

Gums  sore;  neuralgic  feeling  in  teeth.

Inside  of  gums  feels  as  if  full  of  blisters.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Ranula;  caused  enlargement  of  sub-
maxillary duct.


305  THLASPI  BURSA  PASTORIS.

^^  Throat. Soreness  of  upper  part  of  throat.
Swelling  of  throat  and  face,  most  on  1.  side.
Tonsils  swollen.
Dryness  on  swallowing.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea.
'^ Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Crampy  pain  in  stomach;
toes  hurt,  as  well  as  stomach.
Sick  faint  feeling  in  stomach.
'®  Abdomen. Pain  between  end  of  sternum  and  umbilicus,
like  needles  or  like  a  shock  from  a  battery.
Severe  cramp  pains,  >  bending  over.
^' Urinary  Organs. iHsematuria.

Urine  burning,  passing  frequently,  of  strong  odor.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Metrorrhagia;  with  uterine  colic;
in  hemorrhagic  chlorosis; in  sequelae  of  abortion  or
accouchement.
I  I  Premature  menstruation;  first  day  she  hardly  had  a
show,  on  second  a  hemorrhage,  with  severe  colic,  vom-
iting, and  expulsion  of  clots ;  flow  continued  very  long,
eight,  ten,  even  fifteen  days,  then  left  patient  in  a  state
of  exhaustion,  from  which  she  had  not  time  to  recover
before  another  period ; one  period  very  profuse,  next
less  so.
I  Hemorrhages:  with  violent  uterine  colic  and cramps;
consequent  on  abortion  ;  at  critical  age ;  with  cancer  of
cervix.

■  Too  frequent  and copious  menstruation,  especially  in

persons  of  a  relaxed  constitution.

■  Menses  three  days  too  soon,  very  profuse,  uterine  colic

and  discharge  of  clots.

■  Delaying  menses  caused  by  inertia  of  uterus.

I  I  Leucorrhoea ;  bloody,  dark,  fetid,  before  and  some  days
after  catamenia,  which  was  profuse  and  dark.

^* Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■Hemorrhage  after
abortion.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Hoarse  in
morning,  with  slight  sore  throat.

^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pulsating  pain  in  1.  chest.

■  Hgemoptysis.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  1.  shoulder  so  great,  he  thought  neck
and  shoulder  would  break.
Strong,  almost  painful  pulsation  in  r.  radial  artery  ;  pulse

84,  uneven.
Pain  in  finger;  felon,  on  tenth  day.
'^Rest. Position. Motion. Motion:  bending  over  >  cramp.
^^Time. Morning:  hoarseness.
^"^  Fever, Violent  fever  with  panting.
*^ Locality  and  Direction. Left:  deafness  and  pain  in  ear;

VOL.  X. — 20.


THLASPI  BURSA  PASTORIS— THUJA.  306

blood  and  mucus  from  nostril ;  swelling  of  throat  and
face;  pulsating  pain  in  chest;  as  if  neck  and  shoulder
would  break.

Right :  painful  pulsation  in  radial  artery.
*'  Sensations. As  of  needles  or  a  shock  from  a  battery  between
end  of  sternum  and  umbilicus ;  as  if  neck  and  1.  shoul-
der would  break  with  pain.

Pain  :  in  1.  ear ;  in  finger.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  teeth.

Crampy  pain : in stomach and toes ; in  abdomen ; in
uterus.

Bruised  feeling :  all  over.

Pulsating  pain  :  in  1.  chest.

Dull  pain  :  at  root  of  nose.

Faintness :  in  stomach.
"Tissues. I  Profuse  passive  hemorrhage from  all  parts  of

body ;  blood  dark  and  clotted.
*^ Relations. Compare:  Sinapis.


THUJA.

Arbor  Vitse.  Coniferse.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  twigs.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  Fr.  Hn.,  Franz,  Gross,  Hart-
mann,  Haynel,  Hempel,  Langhammer,  Teuthorn,  Wagner,  and  Wislicenus,  E.  A.
M.,  vol.  5 ;  Wolf,  Horn.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  203 ;  Schreter,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  62,  pp.  66  and
68  ;  Austrian  Provings,  Oestr.  Zeit.  fiir  Hom.,  vol.  2,  p.  310.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  depression,  Schweikert,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  99  ;
Mental  aberration,  Kunkel,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  125  ;  Med.  Inv.,  Oct.,  1870,  p.
43;  Imbecility,  Kunkel,  I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  250;  Sunstroke,  ^evr'idige,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  9,  p.  451 ;  Epileptic  vertigo,  Kunkel,  I.  Pr.,  1873,  p.  530;  Headache,  Tietzer,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  211 ;  Desterne,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  82,  pp.  31,  49 ;  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  vol.  4,  p.  74 ;  Goullon,  H.  K.,  vol.  22,  p.  20  (Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  45) ;  Goul-
lon,  H.  M.,  vol.  12,  p.  369  ;  Ulcer  on  head,  Petroz,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  311  ;  Kera-
titis, Kunkel,  I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  247  ;  Syphilitic  iritis,  Hills,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,
p.  105;  Inflammation  of  sclerotic,  Frain,  C.  M.  A.,  May,  vol.  1,  p.  143;  Ophthalmia,
Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  33 ;  Ophthalmia  and  otorrhoea,  Kunkel,  I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.
248 ;  Affection  of  eyes,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  126;  Hordeola,  Tiilff,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  110 ;  Tinea  cUiaris,  Cooper,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  17,  p.  410 ;


307  •  THUJA.

Ulcer  above  eye,  Petroz,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  310 ;  Polypus  of  ear,  Hughes,  Hom.
Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  536  ;  Nasal  catarrh,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  399  ;
Prosopalglh,  Hubert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  195 ;  Claude,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  90 ;
Tumor  of  cheek,  Minor,  Med.  Union,  vol.  2,  p.  154  ;  Wart  on  cheek,  Hawley,  H.  M.,
vol.  7,  p.  527 ;  Wart  on  upper  lip,  A.  E.,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  14;  Fungus  on  loiver
jaw,  Meurer,  Amer.  Horn.,  vol.  4,  p.  118;  Odontalgia,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  4,  p.  39  ;  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol,  1,  p.  221 ;  Affection  of  teeth,  Heyden,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  209  ;  Neuralgic  alveolar  periostitis,  Cooper,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.
24,  p.  254;  Ulceration  of  tongue,  Kunkel,  I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  257  ;  Banula,  Bigler,
A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  54;  Blake,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  583;  Ussher,  Hom.
Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  108 ;  Diphtheria,  Ortleb,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  97 ;  Ileus,  Boen-
ninghansen,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  8;  Umbilical  tumor,  Fischer,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
93,  p.  61 ;  Times  Eet.,  1876,  p.  147  ;  Affection  of  boivels  and  bladder,  Kunkel,  I.  H.
Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  251 ;  Diarrhoea,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  197  ;  J.  T.  M.,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  158 ;  Bigler,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  9,  p.  26 ;  Birdsall,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  9,  p.  191;  Constipation,  Nichols,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  345;  Hemorrhoids,  Haustein,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  1006;  Condyloma  of  anus,  Gerstel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  71
(Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  103) ;  Rhagades  at  anus,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  5  (Times
Eet.,  1877,  p.  103) ;  Anal  fistula,  Eggert,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  143 ;  Perineal  fistula,
Bascom,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  543;  Enuresis,  Smith,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.

28 ;  Incontinence  of  urine,  Polle,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  29 ;  ,  A.  J.  H.  M.

M.,  vol.  1,  p.  74;  Severance,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  251 ;  Med.  Adv.,  Feb.,  1889,  p.
110;  Oonorrhoea,  Hahnemann,  Attomyr,  Bernst.,  Hartm.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
2,  p.  101 ;  Gollman,  Eeil,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  551 ;  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
106,  p.  204  ;  Swan,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  208  ;  Suppressed  gonorrhcea,  Wells,  Hom,
Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  525 ;  Condylomata,  Lobethal,  Schelling,  Wolf,  Eummel,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  172;  Mohnike,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  409;  Helmuth,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,
vol.  1,  p.  509;  Condylomata  on  penis,  Bell,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  372;  Figwarts,  Hoyne,
Med.  Inv.,  1876,  p.  540  (Times  Eet.,  1876,  p.  175);  Uterine  disorder,  Cate,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  5,  p.  205 ;  Uterine  polypus,  Petroz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  641  ;  Herzberger,
H.  K.,  1875,  p.  146 ;  Brigham,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  134 ;  Excrescences  in  vagina,  Hermel,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  306;  Growth  on  labia,  Berghaus,  Trans.  A.  I.,  1872,  p.  339  ;
Polypus  of  vocal  cord,  Hendricks,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  131  (Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  81) ;
McNeil,  C.  M.  A.,  vol.  6,  p.  591 ;  Asthma,  Stens,  A,  H,  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  136  ;  Kunkel,
I,  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  250;  Whooping-cough,  Kunkel,  I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  253;  Bo-
janiis,  H.  Kl.,  1873,  p.  144;  Pain  in  chest,  G.,  A,  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol,  3,  p.  57  ;  ffce-
moptysis,  Knnkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  22  (Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  87) ;  Fungus  excres-
cences on  neck,  Pearson,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  398  ;  Atrophy  of  dorsal  muscles,  Kunkel,
I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  250;  Spinal  curvature,  Kunkel,  T.  Pr.,  1873,  p.  169;  Tumor  on
back,  Gueyrard,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  315;  Atrophy  of  arm,  Kunkel,  I.  Pr.,
1873,  p.  166;  Rheumatism  of  aim,  Mschk.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  548  ;  Ulcera-
tion of  fingers,  Blackley,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  103,  p.  28 ;  Warts  on  hand,  Burnett,  H.  W.,
vol.  8,  p.  38  ;  Paralysis  of  leg,  Kunkel,  I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  255  ;  Sciatica,  Mohr,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1886,  p.  158 ;  Nervous  affection,  Kunkel,  I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  256 ;
Chorea,  Kunkel,  I.  Pr.,  1873,  p.  533;  Eittenhouse,  T.  H.  S.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  213;
Ague,  Allen,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  259 ;  Rheumatic  fever,  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.
8,  p.  449  ;  Eruption,  Kunkel,  I.  H.  Pr.,  vol.  2,  p.  251 ;  Pemphigus,  Kunkel,  B.  J.,
H.,  vol  34,  p.  138  ;  Lu2ms  exedens,  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  488  ;  Warts,  Mayr-
hofer,  Schindler,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  312;  Lindsay,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  472;
Parsons,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1882,  p.  181 ;  Waugh,  Am.  Hom.,  vol.  4,  p.  131; Variola,


THUJA.  308

Bonninghausen,  Trinks,  Croserio,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  115 ;  Herzberger,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  364;  Berridge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol  10,  p.  156;  Moffat,  Guy,  Bond,.
Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  5.  p.  328;  Wells,  T.  W.  H.  Conv.,  1876,  p.  451.

^  Mind.  Forgetfulness,  could  scarcely  collect  his  senses  for
half  an  hour  in  morning  on  waking ;  unable  to  go  on
with  her  dressing,  constantly  requires  reminding.

Makes  mistakes  in  talking,  writing  and  looking.

I  In  reading  or  writing  uses  wrong  expressions,  and  omits
words  and  syllables.

Commences  every  sentence-  anew  without  ability  to  finish
it  in  spite  of  every  eflbrt  of  memory.

Stupefaction  of  head ;  vertigo,  reeling  sensation,  as  after
turning  in  a  circle.

I  Cannot  think,  talks  slowly  as  if  hunting  for  words;  uses
wrong  words.

I  I  Mental  dulness  with  pious  fanaticism ;  no  desire  to  work;
anxious  restlessness,  sleeplessness,  constipation  and  sup-
pression of  catamenia.

I  Very  desponding. ^Gonorrhoea.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  whole  body  were  very  thin  and  delicate,
and  could  not  resist  least  attack;  as  if  continuity  of  body
would  be  dissolved. ^Chronic  hysteria.

I  Fixed  ideas:  as  if  a  strange  person  were  at  his  side;  as
if  soul  and  body  were  separated  ;  that  body,  particularly
limbs,  are  made  of  glass  and  will  readily  break ;  as  if  a
living  animal  were  in  abdomen ;  talks  about  being
under  the  influence  of  a  superior  power.

I  I  Imbecility  of  mind  and  loss  of  speech  after  vaccination;
restless  sleep,  fretfulness,  peevishness;  cries  all  day ;  eyes
stare  vaguely;  occasional  flow  of  saliva  from. mouth;
looks  like  an  idiot.

I  Insane  women  will  not  be  touched  or  approached.

I  I  Nervousness  to  such  a  degree  that  approach  of  a  stranger
gave  her  sudden  twitches ;  when  spoken  to  answered
with  tears  and  sobbing ;  skin  on  chest  and  r.  side  of  ab-
domen deep  yellow.

I  I  Walks  her  room  in  a  circle;  inability  to  accomplish  most
simple  work,  even  dressing;  makes  no  demand  for  food,
has  to  be  reminded  to  take  it,  which  she  does  without
reluctance;  several  old  warts  on  neck,  and  several  of
later  growth,  soft  to  touch,  like  lipoma  and  pointed;
prolapsus  vaginae ;  amenorrhoea.

Talks  hastily  and  swallows  words.
Thoughtlessness;  forgetfulness.

Hurried,  with  ill-humor;  talks  hastily.

I  Speaks  very  slowly,  and  in  monosyllables.
Music  causes  him  to  weep,  with  trembling  of  feet.


S09  THUJA.

Disinclined  to  talk,  <  on  awaking  mornings.

Want  of  disposition  to  do  anything,  ill-humor,  anger.

Indisposition  to  any  kind  of  intellectual  labor.

I  I  Mental  depression,  after  childbirth,  in  consequence  of
being  told  that  there  had  been  a  slight  rupture  of  peri-
neum; grows  quiet;  thinks  she  must  die;  cannot  sleep;
has  no  appetite  ;  shuns  people ;  does  not  answer ;  seems
not  to  understand  a  question  ;  cannot  count;  is  in  con-
stant anguish  ;  wants  to  jump  out  of  window  ;•  does  not
care  for  children  or  her  relatives ;  stares  before  herself;
hydrogenoid  constitution.

Very  depressed,  sad,  irritable.

Exceedingly  out  of  tune ;  sad  and  disposed  to  weep.

■  Mental uneasiness; low-spirited  and  desponding;  pas-

sionate ;  tired  of  life ; morose ; dissatisfied  ; unsteady.

■  Extremely  scrupulous  about  small  things. ^Hysteralgia.

■  Sleeplessness  at  night; restlessness  and  tossing  about ;

anguish  which  does  not  allow  him  to  sleep;  sleep  full
of  dreams  and  startings.

■  Feels  as  if  she  cannot  exist  any  longer;  quiet,  shunning

everybody.

■  Loathing  of  life;  very  ill-humored  and  depressed.

■  Overexcited,  quarrelsome;  easily  angered  about  trifles.
The  child  is  excessively  obstinate.

^Sensorium. Vertigo: with  eyes  shut, ceases  on  opening
them;  when  rising  from  sitting;  on  stooping,  looking
upward  or  sideways.
I  I  Epileptic  vertigo,  hair  dry,  and  finger  nails  ribbed.
^  Inner  Head. Tearing  in  forehead,  temples,  and  occiput,  <
at  night.
Pressing  in  vertex  as  from  a  nail ;  <  afternoon  and  from

3  to  4  A.M.;  >  in  motion  and  after  sweat.
Boring  through  temples.

■  Headache:  <  from  sexual  excesses,  overheating,  over-

lifting  ;  >  from  exercising  in  open  air,  looking  upward,
and  turning  head  backward.

■  Headache  from  tea.

Violent  stitch  through  1.  temple.

Transient  pain  in  vertex  as  if  bone  were  repeatedly  pierced

with  needle  near  sagittal  suture.
Violent  pressing  pain  in  region  of  vertex.
A  feeling  in  vertex  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  from  within

outward.

■  Sensation  in  r.  parietal  bone  and  in  1.  frontal  eminence

as  if  a  nail  were  driven  in,  disappears  on  pressure.

Drawing,  sticking  pain  in  1.  temporal  muscle,  <  by  mas-
tication, >  by  contact.

Boring  pressure  in  head.


THUJA.  -  310

Intolerable  tearing  in  head  drives  him  from  bed  at  night
and  obliges  him  to  walk  about,  <  on  lying  down.

Boring  sticking  in  head  and  r.  eye.

Alternately  boring,  sticking,  griping,  lightning-like  pierc-
ing headache  in  forehead,  in  and  above  eyes  and  in
nasal  bones.

A  drawing,  intermittent  pain  in  1.  side  of  forehead.

Tearing  in  r.  side  of  head  and  face  transversely  across
nose,  extending  into  malar  bone,  teeth  and  across  eye,
<  in  morning  and  evening.

■  Headache  on  1.  side  as  if  a  convex  button  were  being

pressed  on  part. ^Rheumatic  affections.

■  Headache:  early  in  morning;  as  if  head  were  screwed

asunder  in  articulation  of  malar  bone  and  upper  jaw ;
as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  vertex  with  a  jerk ;  as  if
forehead  would  fall  out.

I  I  Intense  nervous  (anaemic)  headache;  remitting  attacks
after  midnight ;  <  raising  head ;  eyelids  affected  ;  could
not  speak  from  severe  pain ;  palpitation  of  heart ;  vom-
iting, nausea,  eructations ;  sleeplessness ;  profuse  men-
struation.

I  17  to  9  P.M.,  latterly  about  midnight,  severe  bone  pains
in  head,  with  sleep  during  intervals;  pain  <  on  sides
of  head,  making  a  circle  round  it ;  continual  pressure
from  outside  deeply  inward,  as  if  bones  were  being
knocked  to  pieces;  sometimes  knocks  so  severe  that  he
cries  out;  sensitiveness  of  affected  spots  to  touch,  even
combing  hair;  cannot  lie  on  pillow,  especially  on  1.  side;
>  by  bending  head  backward,  by  compressing  it  with
hands,  and  remaining  without  least  motion  ;  during
paroxysms  head  bathed  in  perspiration ;  nose  dry,  ob-
structed ;  face  red,  injected,  general  heat  of  body  ;  hard
stool,  with  blood  every  third  day ;  urine  leaves  yellow
sediment. ^Syphilitic  headache.

I  I  Pains  in  head  so  severe  she  screams  constantl}^;  nearly
loses  consciousness  and  is  unable  to  speak ;  pains  and
vomiting  <  when  rising  up;  >  in  rest,  and  horizontal
position;  paroxysm  at  its  height  about  midnight;  pain
prevents  eyes  from  closing,  has  passed  nearl}^  two  weeks
with  hardly  any  sleep;  weak  and  exhausted;  excessive
menstruation  appearing  too  often  and  lasting  too  long;
forehead,  region  of  ears  and  eyes  felt  as  if  stabbed  with
knives,  and  as  if  knives  went  tearing  around  in  her
brain;  chilly;  palpitation.

■  Neuralgia  going  from  before  backward.

■  Violent  headache,  especially  at  night;  tearing  in  fore-

head, temples  and  occiput.

■  Hemicrania  of  sycotic  origin,  <  soon  after  midnight.


311  THUJA.

1 1  Nervous,  sycotic  or  syphilitic  headaches,
I  Meningitis  :  cliildren  of  sycotic  or  syphilitic  taint,  rather
thin  than  fat,  prone  to  eruptions,  which,  on  healing,
leave  purple  spots ;  teeth  soon  turn  black  and  decay  at
gums ;  salivary  glands  swell ;  thrush  or  ranula ;  offen-
sive discharge  from  ears ;  soreness  of  penis  or  vulva  and
about  buttocks;  frequently  recurring  morning  diar-
rhoea ;  pain  in  1.  iliac  region  ;  fetid  foot  sweats  ;  uncov-
ered parts  sweat,  while  covered  parts  are  dry  and  hot ;
parents  have  a  greasy  skin,  warts  and  moles,  and  crave
salt.
1  I  Everything  seemed  jumping,  <  when  sitting  up  or  from
talking  a  long  time,  or  if  she  closes  eyes ;  fears  she  will
lose  consciousness ;  face  red  and  feels  hot ;  vomited  tea^
bitter  as  gall.  ^Sunstroke.
*  Outer  Head.  Scalp  sensitive  to  touch  or  pressure  of  pillow  ;
>  if  rubbed ;  violent  burning,  tearing,  stitching  pains^
<  in  warm  bed;  as  if  beaten;  very  sensitive  to  touch  on.
vertex.

■  Wants  head  and  face  wrapped  up  warm.

I  Dry  herpes  on  head  extending  to  eyebrows;  dandruff.

■  White,  scaly  peeling-off  eruption  over  scalp,  extending

over  forehead,  temples,  ears  and  neck. ^Pityriasis.

I I  White,  scaly  dandruff;  hair  dry  and  falling  out.
Tingling,  biting,  stinging,  itching  in  scalp,  >  by  scratch-

I  I  Sensation  in  occiput  and  temples  as  of  insects.

■  Eruption  moist,  corroding  on  occiput  and  temples; <C

from  touch,  >  from  rubbing.

■  Sweat  smelling  like  honey,  mostly  on  uncovered  parts.

I  I  On  r.  side  of  sagittal  suture  a  round  ulcer,  a  little  over
an  inch  in  diameter,  edges  little  elevated,  but  hard  for
the  space  of  a  centimetre;  bottom  covered  with  a  dull
grey  layer  which  yielded  a  serous,  fetid  pus ;  sharp,,
shooting  pains,  <  evening  and  during  night;  had  first
appeared  several  years  ago  in  the  shape  of  a  large  tuber-
cle which  had  almost  immediately  opened  and  assumed
present  form  ;  paleness  of  face ;  frequent  cough,  followed
by  copious  expectoration  of  frothy  mucus ;  emaciation  ;
great  susceptibility  to  cold.

■  Hair  thin,  grows  slowly,  splits.

^  Sight  and  Eyes.  Flames  of  light  mostly  yellow  ;  looking^
into  light  of  day  sees  spots  like  bottles  of  water  moving ;
colored  flashes ;  clouds  and  streaks  (muscse  volitantes) ;
flickering;  a  luminous  disk,  shining  like  a  firefly;
streaks  of  light  or  sparks  passing  downward,  seen  to  one
side  of  eye  when  in  dusk,  in  daylight  they  appear  like
dark  drops.


THUJA.  312

Double  vision.

Objects  appear  smaller  (before  r.  eye).

I  I  When  looking  into  light  of  day  sees  white  spots  like

bottles  of  water  moving  about.
Mistiness  or  obscuration  of  sight  with  dilatation  of  pupils;

burning  of  eyelids.
Shortsightedness.
Dimness  of  vision  like  a  mist  before  eyes ;  pressure  in  them

as  if  they  would  be  pressed  out  of  head,  or  as  if  swollen.
Dimness  of  vision  in  open  air  like  a  veil,  for  near  and  dis-
tant objects,  with  confusion  of  head.
Weak  eyes;  pressure  as  from  fine  sand  in  them.
I  I  Amblyopia  with  blurring  of  vision,  >  by  rubbing,  black

spots  and  bright  sparks  before  eyes ;  dull  aching  above

eye  to  back  of  head,  with  nausea.
Feeling  of  dryness,  burning,  or  of  sand  in  eyes.
Burning  and  stinging  in  eyes  and  lids,  with  injection  of

cornea.
A  painful  stitch  through  centre  of  1.  eye,  commencing  in

centre  of  brain.
Tearing  pain  in  1.  eyebrow,  disappearing  after  touch.
Aching  over  r.  eye.
Heat  and  dryness  in  1.  external  canthus,  as  if  it  would

inflame.
Constant  aching  in  eye,  <  in  bright  light.

■  Malignant  blennorrhoea,  leuco-phlegmatic  temperaments ;

always  chilly.

■  Better  when  eyes  are  warmly  covered  ;  if  uncovered,  feels

as  if  a  cold  stream  of  air  were  blowing  out  through  them.
I  I  Large  wartlike  excrescences  on  iris  with  sharp,  sticking
pains  in  eye,  <  at  night,  >  by  warmth ;  heat  around
eye  and  side  of  face,  tearing  pain  above  1.  eye,  injection
of  sclerotic  and  conjunctival  vessels,  feeling  of  fine  sand
under  lids,  tears  stand  in  eyes,  lids  swollen  and  indu-
rated. ^Syphilitic  iritis.

■  Inflammation  of  cornea;  ulcerations  of  a  syphilitic  ori-

gin; hypopyon.

I  I  Inflammation  of  cornea  with  excessive  photophobia ;
has  been  kept  for  seven  years  in  a  dark  room  ;  hair  dry,
brittle,  short  and  falls  out;  sleepless  at  night;  toward
morning  slumber,  with  many  dreams;  no  appetite ;  pale,
greyish  color  of  face ;  every  afternoon  at  4  a  shaking
chill,  followed  by  heat  and  thirst;  urging  to  urinate;
many  dreams. ^Chronic  keratitis  after  vaccination.

I  I  Vascular  tumor  of  cornea,  which  covered  nearly  two-
thirds  of  its  inner  surface.

I  I  Small  brown  spots  on  cornea;  photophobia.

■  Episcleritis;  sclero-choroiditis;  staphyloma.


313  THUJA.

■  Sclera  becomes  soft  in  consequence  of  extension  of  in-

flammation of  cornea  and  iris; tenderness  of  globe;

intolerance  of  light;  general  cachectic  condition,  either

scrofulous  or  syphilitic ;  long  deprivation  of  fresh  air.

^Scleritis.
Congestion  of  sclerotic  conjunctiva.
■Suffusion  of  eyes,  especially  in  open  air ;  tears  do  not

flow,  but  remain  in  eye.

■  The  whites  of  eyes  are  blood-red.

Dermoid  swellings  in  conjunctiva ;  polypi ;  carcinoma.

I  I  Great  photophobia;  every  time  he  breathes  it  seems  as
if  cold  air  rushed  in  and  out  of  his  eyes ;  for  this  reason
he  must  cover  them  up  very  warm. ^Ophthalmia.

■  ■Ophthalmia  neonatorum.

I  I  Congestion  of  conjunctival  covering  of  sclerotic  tunic

from  childhood  ;  slight  prurigo.
I  I  Conjunctivitis  after  vaccination ; a  whooping  cough  ;

scanty  urine.

■  Chronic  catarrhal  conjunctivitis,  granulations  large,  like

warts  or  blisters,  with  burning  in  lids ;  <  at  night ;  ex-
cessive photophobia.

■  Chronic  cases  of  large  phyctenules  of  conjunctiva,  very

slow  in  progress,  unyielding  to  treatment,  and  decidedly
involving  subconjunctival  tissue.

I  I  Small  brownish  spots  on  cornea;  photophobia;  watery
purulent  otorrhoea ;  dissatisfied  with  everything,  quar-
relsome ;  sleep  disturbed  by  anxious  dreams ;  after  sleep
miserable,  fretful ;  sighing  inspirations ;  hair  grows
slowly,  splits  at  point ;  potbelliedness ;  tliick  upper  lip
with  a  tumor  in  its  parenchyma  of  size  of  a  pea,  enlarg-
ing when  taking  cold  ;  stings  of  insects  cause  inflamma-
tion of  skin.  ^Chronic  inflammation  of  eyes  and  otor-
rhoea after  vaccination.

I  I  Dry  branny  eruption  upon  eyelids,  chiefly  about  cilia ;
eyelashes  irregular  and  imperfectly  grown  ;  scales  cover-
ing skin  very  fine ;  eyes  weak  and  watery.  ^Tinea
ciliaris.

I  lExophthalmus  consequent  upon  a  tumor  behind  eye-
ball (relieved).

I  I  Fungous  tumor  in  orbit.

■  Agglutination  of  lids  at  night.

Feeling  as  if  eyelids  were  swollen  and  a  foreign  body  in

Burning  and  stinging  in  edges  of  lids,  in  evening.

■  Inflammatory  softening  of  inner  surface  of  lids.

■  Inflammation  of  lids;  they  seem  indurated.

■  Styes  and  tarsal  tumors;  chalazee,  thick,  hard  knots.

■  Verrucse  and  tumors  that  resemble  small  condylomata.


THUJA.  314

■  Granular  lids,  granules  large,  wartlike.

I  I  Epithelioma  of  1.  lower  lid ; two cases,  one  of  eight
months,  the  other  of  three  years'  standing.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Inner  ear  feels  swollen ;  hardness  of
hearing.

Noise  in  ear  as  from  boiling  water.

Creaking  in  1.  ear  when  swallowing  saliva.

Stitches  from  neck  into  ear.

iChronic  otitis  media;  watery  or  purulent  discharge,
smells  like  putrid  meat;  granulations  in  middle  ear
similar  to  condylomata;  polypi.

I  I  Orifice  of  1.  meatus  blocked  up  by  a  polypus,  of  rasp-
berry-cellular variety,  pale-red  in  color,  bleeding  readily
when  touched  by  probe ;  on  detaching  edges  from  rim  of
meatus,  much  muco-pus  issued ;  deafness ;  shooting
pains.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Smell  in  nose  as  of  fish-brine  or  sour  beer.

Coryza  fluent  outdoors,  dry  in  room ;  violent,  sudden.

Troublesome  dryness  and  sensitiveness  of  nose.

Painful  pressure  at  root  of  nose.

In  r.  nostril  a  feelingof  soreness  or  ulceration,  <  by  press-
ure ;  swelling  and  induration  of  1.  ala  with  tensive  pain.

Ulceration  half  an  inch  within  nose,  where  there  is  a  scab.

Discharge  of  offensive  purulent  mucus  from  nose.

I  Blows  out  much  thick,  green  mucus  mixed  with  blood
and  pus ;  later  brown  scabs  form  ;  nose  sore ;  red  erup-
tion on  alse,  often  moist.

■  Painful  scabs  in  nostrils.

IChronic  catarrh  after  measles,  scarlatina,  variola.

Frequent  blowing  of  blood  from  nose.

A  red  itching  spot,  painfully  sore  to  touch,  in  fissure  of  r.
wing  of  nose.

Nose  red  and  hot.

Red  eruption  on  nose,  at  times  humid.

Eruptions  on  wings  of  nose.

Swelling  and  induration  of  alse  nasi.

I  Warts  on  nose.

I  I  Lupas  exedens  on  nostril  (improved).
*  Upper  Face.  Face:  red  and  hot,  with  a  fine  network  of
bloated,  dropsical,  erysipelatous  ;  skin  hot  and  red,  peels
off"  when  washed ;  bloodvessels  on  temples  distended  ;
light-brown  spots,  freckles;  red  nodosities  on  temples ;
eruption  leaves  livid  spots;  scabious  eruption;  perspira-
tion, especially  on  side  on  which  he  does  not  lie;  drop-
sically  bloated.

Gidematous  erysipelas  of  face.

Faceache  originating  in  1.  cheek  bone,  near  ear,  extend-


315  THUJA.

ing  through  teeth  to  nose,  through  eyes  to  temples  into
head  ;  painful  spots,  burn  like  fire  and  are  very  sensitive
to  rays  of  sun.

Faceache,  r.  side,  after  checking  eruption  on  ear,  leaving
numb  feeling.

■  Neuralgia  of  trigeminus  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea  or
eczema  of  ear.

Boring  pain  in  1.  malar  bone,  >  by  touch.

Intense  sticking  between  1.  ear  and  zygomatic  arch.

I  I  Prosopalgia  of  twelve  years'  duration  after  suppression
of  an  eczematous  eruption  on  ear;  during  day  paroxysms
of  pain  every  five  to  six  minutes,  very  intense  but  of
short  duration,  less  often  at  night;  pain  begins  about
lips  and  gums,  spreads  thence  over  whole  r.  side  of  face,
which  is  congested  and  is  followed  by  a  feeling  of  ten-
sion and  numbness.

I  I  Almost  constant  terrible  neuralgia  in  1.  face,  on  level
with  zygomatic  process  and  malar  bone.

I  I  General  feeling  of  illness,  debility  in  extremities,  loss  of
appetite,  sleeplessness  with  agitation,  melancholy  and
inability  to  work  ;  chill  in  morning;  dryness  of  mouth,
thirst;  chill  returned  at  close  of  day;  painful  stiffiiess
of  neck  ;  swelling  of  cervical  glands;  a  pimple  in  middle
of  r.  eyebrow,  conical,  hard  and  red ;  hears  with  difii-
culty;  shooting  pain  in  1.  ear;  ephelides  on  face;  loss
of  taste;  tearing  pain  in  abdomen,  <  walking;  tubercle
opened,  next  day  presented  a  greyish  bottom,  elevated
edges,  hardness  of  which  extended  nearly  a  centimetre
beyond  opening;  violent  shooting  pains  in  ulcer,  ex-
tending to  root  of  nose,  and  internal  angle  of  eye;  to-
ward evening  chill  with  chattering  of  teeth ;  sensation
of  icy  coldness  through  whole  length  of  spine ;  sleep-
lessness; great  depression  of  spirits,  and  discouragement.

I  I  Tumor  on  cheek.

I  I  Large,  hard,  dark-colored  wart  with  a  large  base,  on  a
lady's  cheek,  of  several  years'  continuance,  of  late  rap-
idly increasing  in  size.
^  Lower  Face. Upper  lip  sensitive.

Lips  pale,  swollen,  peeling  off.

On  upper  lip,  an  elevated,  red,  violently  itching  spot.

Twitching  of  under  lip,  and  here  and  there  in  places  on
skin.

Jerking  sensation  in  upper  lip  near  corner  of  mouth.

Pimples  on  lips  and  chin.

I  I A  wart  on  upper  lip;  grew  upon  a  pedicle  and  split
when  allowed  to  grow  into  three  or  four  hard,  horny
portions.

I  I  Thick  upper  lip,  with  a  pea-sized  tumor  in  its  paren-
chyma, enlarging  when  taking  cold.


THUJA.  316.

Cracking  of  articulation  of  jaw.

White  flat  ulcers  on  inside  of  lips  and  corners  of  mouth.

I  1  Fungus  on  1.  lower  jaw,  purplish  and  easily  bleeding,
pedunculated,  more  angry  in  damp  weather;  eruption
like  zoster  around  abdomen.
"^•^ Teeth  and  Gums. ■  Teeth:  decay  at  roots  (as  in  sycosis),
crown  remaining  sound  ;  crumble,  turn  yellow.

I  I  Gnawing  pain  in  second  1.  lower  bicuspid,  which  was
decayed  close  to  gum  ;  excitement  removed  pain  ;  >  by
pressure  of  hand  ;  <  in  bed  ;  it  extended  over  1.  fore-
head and  into  1.  side  of  neck.

I  I A  woman,  set.  72,  faceache,  with  much  soreness  after
pain ;  in  paroxysms,  with  an  hour's  interval,  for  two
months;  unable  to  masticate;  side  of  face  sore  and
throbbing  when  lying  on  it;  pains  extend  all  over  r.
side  of  head,  when  violent  shoot  to  opposite  side ;  <  in
cold  or  very  warm  room  ;  dares  not  venture  into  a  draft;
teeth  decayed,  pain  shoots  up  from  these ;  pains  come
suddenly  and  go  as  suddenly,  sometimes  shoot  into  ear,
attempts  to  read  or  think  bring  on  pain.  ^Neuralgic
alveolar  periostitis.

Toothache  from  drinking  tea.

Gums  swollen,  inflamed,  dark  red  in  streaks.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  sweet ;  of  rotten  eggs,  morn-
ings ;  food  seems  not  salt  enough  ;  of  bread,  as  if  dry  or
bitter.

Bites  tongue  frequently.

Burning  and  redness  of  tip  of  tongue,  frequently  covered
with  sore  points ;  painfully  sore  to  touch.

A  painful  ulcer  on  1.  margin  of  tongue,  afterward  on  right.

Small  white  vesicles  on  tongue  resembling  miliary  rash.

A  white  blister  on  side  of  tongue  close  to  its  root,  painfully
sore.

I  I  Ulcer  of  roundish  shape  under  tongue  in  a  child,  after
vaccination ;  its  edge  consists  of  a  number  of  pointed
condylomata,  which  could  be  separated  by  a  fine  probe.

Tongue  swollen,  <  r.  side.

■  Varicose  veins  under  tongue,  excess  of  venosity  every-
where, especially  in  throat.

iRanula,  bluish,  surrounded  by  varicose  veins.

I  I  Semi-transparent,  jellylike  tumor,  bluish  tumor  size  of
a  small  walnut,  at  root  of  tongue,  1.  side,  painless,  soft;
impeded  speech,  first  noticed  nine  months  ago;  moans
a  good  deal  in  her  sleep ;  is  liable  to  swelling  of  glands
of  neck  ;  slight  swelling  of  thyroid  gland.  ^Ranula.
"  Inner  Mouth. Aphthse;  ulcers  in  mouth.

Inner  mouth  as  if  filled  with  blisters,  or  as  if  burnt.

Flat  white  ulcers  on  inside  of  lips  and  on  corners  of  mouth.


317  THUJA.

While  masticating  food  becomes  very  dry.

I  I  In  1.  lower  jaw,  location  that  of  first  molar  tooth,  a  fun-
gous growth,  purplish,  bled  easily;  father  sycotic;  fun-
gus <  in  damp  weather;  eruption  like  zoster  around
abdomen.
*^  Throat. Redness  in  fauces.

Erosions  in  fauces  with  mucous  tubercles.

Suspicious-looking  ulcers  in  throat.

Throat  dry  and  rough.

Throat  feels  raw,  dry,  as  if  containing  a  plug,  or  as  if  con-
stricted when  swallowing.

Hawking  of  tenacious  mucus  difficult  to  loosen.

Swallowing  painful,  especially  of  saliva.

I  I A  feeling  of  upward  pressure  in  soft  palate. ^Catarrh.

■  Diphtheria.

"Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i Craving  alter-
nates with  want  of  appetite.

■  No  appetite. ^Mental  depression.

I  Thirst,  especially  at  night ;  longs  for  cold  food  and  drinks.
I  I  Dislike  to  fresh  meats  and  potatoes.
^'Eating  and  Drinking, i Bad  effects  from  beer,  fat,  acids,.
sweets,  tobacco,  tea,  wine  and  onions.
Feels  badly  after  eating  even  a  little.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions : rancid  or acrid ; of  air,  while  eating ; afford
instant  relief.
Gulping  up  of  large  quantities  of  acids.
Vomiting  of  mucus  or  of  oily,  greasy  substances.
^^ Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Contraction  of  epigastrium;,
pain.
Drinks  fall  audibly  into  stomach ;  they  enter  with  a  gurg-
ling noise.
Pit  of  stomach  swollen,  sensitive.
Indurations  in  stomach  and  abdomen.
^^  Hypochondria. Stitches  in  hypochondria,  now  r.  then  left.
^^  Abdomen. Tension  in  abdomen  ;  pressure  in  hypogastric
region.

■  Stinging  in  abdomen  as  from  needles,  only  while  sitting.
Cutting  pain  in  lower  abdomen.

I  I  Attacks  of  pain  beginning  in  1.  side,  sometimes  going-
around  to  1.  side  of  back,  on  waking  in  morning;  when
she  begins  to  move,  flesh  there  feels  torn  from  bones ;
slightly  >  by  eructations,  though  eructations  cause-
spasms  across  spleen  and  around  stomach.

Upper  part  of  abdomen  drawn  in.

I  Abdomen  large,  particularly  after  eating.

■  Distension  of  flatus;  rumbling;  croaking  and  grumbling;.

as  if  an  animal  were  crying  in  abdomen.


THUJA.  318

Emission  of  flatus  without  noise.

■  Sensation  of  something  alive  in  abdomen.

•  Movement,  as  of  something  in  lower  abdomen,  like  a
pushing  of  abdominal  muscles  by  arm  of  a  child,  with-
out pain.

A  sudden  starting,  bounding  sensation  in  r.  iliac  region
as  from  something  alive.

I  Abdomen  puffed,  big,  protrudes  here  and  there,  as  from
arm  of  foetus;  motions  therein  as  if  it  contained  some-
thing alive  (in  old  maids).

I  Ileus;  spasmodic  stricture,  feels  as  if  something  alive
were  pushing  out.

!  I  Ileus  in  r.  lower  part  of  abdomen  lasting  two  weeks ;
sweat  only  on  uncovered  parts,  while  covered  parts  were
dry  and  hot. ^Typhlitis.

I  1  After  cord  had  fallen  off  umbilicus  remained  moist,  and
when  seven  days  old,  child  presented  at  navel  a  swelling
size  and  appearance  of  a  raspberry.

■  Soreness  of  navel.

iPainful  swelling  of  inguinal  glands.

Stitches  in  inguinal  glands.

I  I  Tendency  to  hernia  on  1.  side  after  labor;  feet  sore  and
swollen.

I  I  Infantile  hernia  on  1.  side ;  inguinal,  child  cries  all  time,
and  only  quiet  when  1.  inguinal  region  is  relieved  from
pressure  or  when  thigh  is  flexed  on  abdomen.

I  Herpes  zoster ;  zona.

I  Yellowish  or  brownish  spots  upon  abdomen.

Hemorrhoidal  colic.

Intussusception  of  intestines.

iPotbelliedness.
^^ Stool  and  Rectum,  i Diarrhoea:  daily  in  morning  after
breakfast;  with  colic;  <  after  eating;  watery,  painless;
bright-yellow,  watery,  streaming  out  with  much  gas,  as
if  cork  were  pulled  out  of  a  full  jug,  excessive  exhaust-
ion, short  and  difficult  breathing,  anxiety,  intermitting
pulse,  acute  pressive  pain  in  back  opposite  pit  of  stom-
ach with  a  feeling  as  if  no  blood  could  circulate  there,
rapid  disappearance  of  fat;  recurring  at  same  hour;
chronic,  traceable  to  vaccination;  cholera  morbus;
cholera  infantum.

Stool :  pale-yellow,  watery,  copious,  expelled  forcibly  with
much  noisy  flatus;  with  blood;  oily  or  greasy;  gurgling
like  water  from  a  bung-hole.

With  fluid  stools  sensation  in  rectum  as  if  boiling  lead
were  passing  through.

I  I  Stools  grey,  brown,  offensive;  great  thirst,  distended
abdomen; irritable,  moody;  hair  grows  very  slowly,  is


319  THUJA.

thin  and  stiff ;  appetite  poor ;  excoriation  in  inguinal
region  and  at  orifice  of  prepuce ;  at  times  very  frequent
urination. ^Diarrhoea.

I  I  Child  7  weeks  old,  diarrhoea  since  birth ;  two  weeks
ago  stools  began  to  be  watery,  gushing  and  yellow,  would
saturate  everything;  mother  scyotic.

1  I  Pale,  yellow,  watery  stools,  forcibly  expelled,  copious,
great  gurgling  in  bowels ;  oozed  from  anus  during  sleep ;
great  debility  after  stool  with  weakness  by  spells ;  loss  of
appetite,  oppressed  breathing ;  drinks  roll  into  stomach
audibly.

Aggravation :  in  morning ;  I  after  breakfast ;  I  after  coffee ;
after  fat  food;  after  onions;  I  after  vaccination ;  peri-
odically returning  at  same  hour.

Before  stool :  rumbling  of  wind.

During  stool :  passing  of  much  loud  flatus.

After  stool :  debility ;  repeated  ineffectual  urging.

Ineffectual  urging  to  stool  with  erections.

I  I A  boy,  set.  4,  vaccinated  two  years  ago,  since  'then  ail-
ing ;  urging  to  stool  and  urination  at  same  time  with
great  pain  on  discharging  feces  and  urine,  suppresses
urging  as  long  as  possible ;  feces  white ;  oxyuris  vermi-
cularis ;  pale  face ;  often  dejected.

■  Constipation:  stool  in  hard  balls;  obstinate,  from  inac-
tivity or  intussusception  ;  stools  large,  hard,  coated  with
blood  ;  hard,  thick  and  knotty  stools  ;  hard,  followed  by
soft  stool ;  stools  retarded  and  insufficient.

Violent  pain  in  rectum  which  prevents  a  passage,  offensive
perspiration  about  anus  and  on  perineum.

I  1  Extreme  constipation  for  several  years  despite  an  active
country  life;  menses  normal ;  irritable,  easily  provoked;
craving  for  salt ;  hands  and  feet  cold  ;  stools  large  and
very  hard  ;  has  had  rarely  copious  watery  stools.

I  Burning  soreness  in  anus  lasting  all  day.

I  I  Much  flatus,  hard  to  expel,  anus  feels  constricted,  incar-
cerated flatus  below  r.  side  of  diaphragm.  ^Rheumatic
fever.

Stitches  from  rectum  into  bladder.

During  constipated  stool :  only  a  small  quantity  of  stool
passed  each  time,  with  pain  in  anus  as  if  it  would  fly  to
pieces ;  great  trouble  in  passing  stool,  as  if  anus  had  been
constricted  (hard,  followed  by  soft  stool);  violent  pains
in  rectum  compel  cessation  of  effort  at  stool,  especially
with  hemorrhoids;  flow  of  prostatic  fluid.

After  constipated  stool :  repeated  ineffectual  urging.

A  stool  at  6  P.M.,  with  subsequent  burning  in  anus,  and
shortly  after  a  reiterated  discharge  of  mucus,  attended
by  very  violent  stitches  in  rectum,  in  direction  of  a  line
from  anus  to  sacrum.


THUJA.  320

Painful  constriction  of  anus  with  almost  every  stool,

■  Burning  in  anus.

Distinct  violent  stitches  from  anus  into  region  of  1.  iliac
bone.

■  Sticking  in  anus.

Single  flying,  very  painful  stitches,  in  anus  as  from  a  fine

needle  while  sitting.
I  Itching  in  anus.

■  Smarting  in  anus  between  intervals  of  stool.

Anus  became  sensitive  after  a  slimy  discharge,  as  if  skin

were  cracked  and  chapped  there.
Feeling  of  soreness  in  anus.
I  Pains  in  anus  <  from  motion.

■  Hemorrhoids :  during  stool  pains  so  great  that  she  has  to

desist ;  burning  violently  while  walking ;  anus  fissured;
sensitive  to  touch  ;  with  condylomata;  ■burning,  itch-
ing, pressing.

I  I  Two  cases  of  perineal  fistula.

I  I  Two  cases  of  blind  external  fistula ;  cauliflower  excres-
cence at  verge  of  anus  of  size  of  a  quarter  of  a  dollar,
and  off'ensive  perspiration  around  parts  affected.

■  Fistula  in  ano.

Burning  pain  in  perineum,  the  raphus  of  which  was  more
prominent  than  usual,  and  one  inch  from  anus  a  tuber-
cle size  of  a  pea  appeared,  which  increased  for  three
days,  became  moist,  smarted,  in  walking,  and  then  day
by  day  became  smaller,  disappeared  in  about  ten  days.

■  Red  blotches  at  anus  like  figwarts.

Knotty  pufliness  and  excoriations  on  perineum.

■  ■  Condylomata  at  anus.

■  ■Anus  fissured,  painful  to  touch,  often  with  warts,  some-

times immense  numbers  of  flat,  moist,  mucous  tuber-
cles or  condylomata  surround  anus,  especially  in  syphi-
litic subjects.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Kidneys  inflamed  ;  feet  swollen.

Diabetes.

Stitches  to  bladder  from  rectum.

■  Bladder  feels  j^aralyzed,  has  no  power  to  expel  urine.
Pain  in  region  of  bladder,  with  painful  drawing  up  of

testes.
Violent  burning  in  fundus  of  bladder.
A  jerking,  voluptuous  formication  in  forepart  of  urethra.

■  Sensation  of  moisture  running  forward  in  urethra ;  orifice

of  urethra  closed  with  a  slimy  fluid,  a  serous  liquid,  or

a  lump  of  mucus.
Urging  to  urinate  frequent  and  hasty.
Obliged  to  urinate  five  or  six  times  before  bladder  is  empty.
Continued  urging;  passes  a  few  drops  of  blood.


321  . THUJi^.

Wants  to  pass  water,  but  feels  as  if  a  tape  prevented.
Frequent  urging,  with  profuse  flow,  more  toward  and  in
evening;  with  stitches  in  urethra.

■  Burning  in  urethra  during,  and  for  some  time  after  mic-

turition.
Frequent  inclination  to  urinate  ;  stream  often  interrupted.
Has  to  rise  several  times  at  night  to  urinate.
During  micturition  :  cutting  in  urethra ;  burning.
Smarting  and  itching  of  female  pudendum,  with  discharge

of  some  drops  of  urine  after  micturition.

■  After  urination  feels  as  if  a  drop  were  running  down

urethra.
Continued  dropping  of  urine ;  dribbling.

■  Burning,  smarting,  itching,  cutting,  stitching  in  urethra.

Urine :  too  frequent  and  too  copious ;  profuse,  light-yel-
low;  contains  sugar;  foams,  scanty,  exceedingly  dark ;
dark-red  in  morning ;  deposits  a  brown  mucus ;  with
dark,  cloudy  sediment,  in  rheumatism  ;  red,  depositing
a  brickdust  sediment;  highly  colored  and  of  strong
smell.

■  Involuntary  urination  at  night  or  when  coughing.

I  I  Incontinence  of  urine  for  six  weeks;  got  up  at  least  six
times  nightly,  and  saturated  bed  frequently  ;  was  unable-
to  attend  school ;  urine  highly  colored  and  of  a  strong
odor;  had  a  large  wart  on  1.  index  linger,  which  had
fallen  off  three  weeks  previously,  leaving  a  hard,  white
base.

I  I  Incontinence  of  urine;  desire  came  suddenly,  was  not
able  to  retain  urine  an  instant  without  grasping  penis ;
urine  scanty  and  scalding,  slight  backache ;  it  seems  as.
if  a  single  drop  at  a  time  were  running  along.

I  I  For  three  months  subparalysis  of  sphincter  vesicae ;  espe-
cially in  daytime  he  cannot  hold  his  urine  when  ridiug^
or  on  long  walks.

I  I  Warts  on  her  hand ;  incontinence  of  urine  for  three  or
four  years.

Urine  highl}^  colored  and  of  a  strong  smell,  warts  here-
and  there. ^Enuresis  nocturna.

■  Chronic  incontinence  of  urine  from  paralysis  of  sphinc-

ter vesicae  (in  old,  flabby  constitutions).
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, l  Excitation  or  depression  in  genital
system.

■  Nightly  painful  erections  causing  sleeplessness.
Irresistible  inclination  to  onanism  even  during  sleep.

■  Nocturnal  emissions:  wake  him;  followed  by  heaviness

and  ill-humor.

■  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.

,  ■Painful  spermatic  cords  from  suppressed  gonorrhoea.

TOL.  X.— 21.


THUJA.  322

■  Renewed  gonorrhoea  after  coiton.

I  Impotence  after  gonorrhoea.

I I  Prostatic  affections  from  suppressed  or  badly-treated
gonorrhoea.

1 1  Gonorrhoea :  scalding  when  urinating,  urethra  swollen ;

urinal  stream  forked ;  discharge  yellow,  green,  watery  ;

with  warts;  red  erosions  on  glans;  subacute  and  chronic

cases,  especially  when  injections  have  been  used  and

prostate  is  involved.
I  I  Gonorrhoea,  with  a  soft  lump  having  an  abrasion  upon

it,  on  1.  side  of  frenum  preputise;  lump  smooth  and

painless.
1  Checked  gonorrhoea:  articular  rheumatism;  prostatitis;

impotence;  condylomata;  sycosis,  etc.
Jerking  in  penis.

Burning  ■sensation  between  prepuce  and  glans  penis.
Itching  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce.
Round,  flat,  unclean  ulcer  on  corona  glandis.
Small  flat  vesicle  on  glans  penis.

I A  red  growth  like  condyloma  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce.
Moisture  on  glans  penis.
Glans  very  sensitive.
B  Swelling  of  prepuce.
Eczema  on  genitals.

■  Red  excrescence  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce  like  figwarts.
Smooth  red  excrescences  behind  glans  penis.

I  I  Inner  surface  of  prepuce  as  well  as  point  of  penis  below
corona  glandis  covered  with  small,  pointed  condylo-
mata ;  slight  discharge  of  viscid  fluid  ;  whole  perineum
occupied  by  one  broad  condyloma  half  an  inch  in  height;
it  was  constantly  moistened  by  a  slimy,  purulent  dis-
charge ;  could  scarcely  bear  pain,  especially  when  walk-
ing, and  acrid  discharge  had  irritated  thigh  on  inside  of
which  another  small  condyloma  had  formed ;  margin
of  anus  occupied  by  three  large  condylomata.

I  I  For  three  weeks  a  large  number  of  condylomata  sur-
rounding glans  penis,  red,  pedunculated,  growing  rap-
idly, quite  exuberantand  dry,  and  following  gonorrhoea;
weakness  of  back  ;  frequent  urination.

I  Round,  unclean,  elevated  ulcers  with  red  margin,  moist
and  painful ;  condylomatous  excrescences.

■  Erosions  and  rawness  between  legs  and  on  sides  of  scro-

tum ;  constantly  oozing  moisture.
llCondylomata,  mucous  tubercles,  sycotic  cauliflower  ex-
crescences ;  figwarts,  smelling  like  old  cheese  or  herring
brine.

■  Condylomata:  fan-shaped;  moist;  suppurating;  large.
Red  spots  on  prepuce  changing  to  an  ulcer  with  scurf.


^^^  THUJA.

Smallpox  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce,  humid  and  suppu-

ratmg  and  depressed  in  centre.
I  Chancres,  with  pain  as  from  splinters  sticking
•  Itching  ulcers  with  unclean  bottoms,  or  whitiTh  chancres

with  hard  edges.
Feeling  in  testicles  as  if  they  moved.
Left  testicle  drawn  up.

Aching  in  testes  as  if  contused,  <  when  walking.
I  Sweetish-smelling  sweat  on  scrotum.
■  Strong,  sweetish,  honeylike  smelling  sweat  on  genitals
23  -p staimng  linen  yellow ;  humid  pimples  on  scrotum
remale  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Warts,  condylomata  and  other

excrescences  about  vulva.
I  Ulcers  on  internal  surface  of  vulva ;  vulva  has  a  sore  and

smarting  feeling.
Pressing  and  contracting  pain  in  vulva  while  sitting
Cramphke  pain  in  vulva  and  perineum  when  rising  from

a  seat.

Cramp  pain  in  vulva  extending  as  far  as  abdomen
Burning  and  smarting  in  vagina  when  walking  and  sitting
\A  hitish  ulcers  on  inner  surface  of  labium  majorum
I  Coition  prevented  by  extreme  sensitiveness  of  vagina
I  Left  ovary  inflamed,  <  at  each  menstrual  nisus ;  distress-
ing pain,  burning,  when  walking  or  riding  ;  must  lie
down  ;  pain  extends  through  1.  ihac  region  into  groin
and  sometimes  into  1.  leg,  pain  sometimes  burning
I  Cutting,  shooting,  squeezing  pains  in  region  of  1  ovary
I  Jvarian,  or  severe  pain  in  ovaries,  uterus  and  abdomen
result  of  an  overphysiological  action,  always  located  in
ovaries  or  duct.
I  Erosions  on  os  uteri  like  aphtha.

I  I  Uterine  polypus  which  had  been  operated  on  eighteen
months  before;  could  not  walk  or  ride  in  a  carriage  from
distress  of  1.  iliac  region,  extending  up  to  loin  ;  pain  in
1.  groin.  ^

I  I  Sickly  appearance;  oppression  of  breathing;  congestion
to  head  and  face;  impairment  of  memory ;  bowels  irreg-
ular; colicky  pains;  menorrhagia  followed  by  leucor-
rhcea;  pains  m  small  of  back;  tiredness  of  legs-  polv-
pus  attached  by  a  long  pedicle. ^Uterine  polvpus

I  I  Menses  every  two  weeks  and  lasting  too  long  •  blood
dark  and  profuse  for  three  days,  then  remaining  as  a
slightly-colored  secretion  up  to  next  period;  uterus  pro-
lapsed firm,  fleshy;  oval  body  with  a  thick  pedicle
extended  out  of  os  about  size  of  a  thumb;  os  appeared
widely  open  ;  exploring  finger  could  surround  polypus-
Jabiaof  orifice  strongly  hypertrophied  and  swollen'
C' Uterine  polypus.


THUJA.  324

I  Displacement  of  uterus;  prolapsus.

I  Cauliflower  excrescences  of  os  uteri.

I  Cancer  of  uterus  from  sycosis.

I  I  After  several  premature  labors,  womb  twice  its  natural
size ;  no  unnatural  color  of  os ;  os  closed  laterally  on
itself  in  form  of  a  mouth  half  an  inch  wide;  in  anterior
lip  a  hard  tubercle  size  of  a  bean  ;  whole  os  and  cervix
had  a  hard  resisting  feel ;  a  cutting  and  burning  pain
which  patient  was  sure  was  at  point  of  finger,  when  fin-
ger pressed  os;  pricking,  disagreeable  feeling  above
pubis  into  bowels ;  burning  and  at  times  cutting  above
1.  ilium  and  in  region  of  ovary ;  yellowish  leucorrhoea,
causing  smarting  of  vagina ;  menses  seven  to  fourteen
days,  very  profuse,  bright-red,  no  clots;  steady  burning
pain  in  sacrum;  frequent  urination;  smarting  in  anus;
aching  in  1.  hypochondrium.

I  Menses :  too  early  and  too  short ;  preceded  by  profuse
sweat;  scanty,  with  terrible  distressing  pain  in  1.  ovarian
and  iliac  region.

Before  menses :  excitement  and  pulsation  of  arteries,  heat
of  head,  headache  and  toothache;  laborlike  abdominal
pains,  tenesmus  and  faintness;  much  perspiration.

During  menses:  tiredness,  palpitation,  spasmodic  weep-
ing; restlessness  in  legs;  retching,  pressing  in  stomach,
distension,  pain  in  abdomen  and  back ;  bearing  down
out  of  genital  organs;  burning  in  varicose  veins  of
genitals,  sensitiveness  and  swelling  of  breasts ;  general
coldness.

After  menses:  tiredness,  rush  of  blood  upward ;  toothache;
sleeplessness ;  nightmare.

I  I  Dysmenorrhoea ;  interstitial  tumor,  fibroid.

iLeucorrhoea:  mucous,  from  one  period  to  another,  mild,
leaves  a  yellowish-green  stain  ;  sycotic.

I  I  Upon  spots  formerl}^  occupied  by  erosions,  caused  by
extreme  distension  during  labor,  little  pea-sized  excres-
censes,  surface  of  which  was  continuous-,  without  any
pedicle,  with  mucous  membrane  of  vagina ;  three  or
four  were  situated  on  posterior  wall ;  one  at  orifice  on
anterior  wall  and  another  at  fourchette.

I  I  After  a  fall  a  wartlike  growth  on  r.  labium,  painful  to
touch,  bleeding  easily,  preventing  walking.

I  iCondylomatous enlargement of clitoris, vagina and

anus.
iFigwarts  from  syphilis.

I I  Condylomata  moist,  suppurating,  stinging  and  bleeding.
■  Erectile  tumors  with  burning.

I  I  Bleeding  fungus  of  breast  (completed  cure  after  Phos.).
^'Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  i Child  moves  so


325  THUJA.

violently  it  awakens  her,  causes  cutting  in  bladder  with
urging  to  urinate ; pains  in  1.  sacro-iliac  articulation,
running  into  groin ;  eighth  month.
Abortion  at  third  month.

■  Labor:  pains  weak  or  ceasing ;  contractility  hindered  by

sycotic  complications ;  pains  in  1.  sacro-iliac  articulation
running  into  1.  groin  ;  pain  from  walking,  insupportable,
must  lie  down.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Voice  low.
Sensation  as  of  a  skin  in  larynx.
I  I  Polypus  of  vocal  cord.

■  Condylomata. /^Syphilis. '

*®  Respiration.  Short-breathed  :  from  mucus  in  trachea;  from
fulness  and  constriction  in  hypochondria  and  upper  ab-
domen ;  as  from  adhesion  of  lungs ;  at  night.

I  I  Asthma :  with  gonorrhoea,  without  having  been  exposed
to  contagion.

■Asthma,  <  at  night,  with  red  face;  coughing  spells  or
sensation  of  adhesion  of  lungs.

I  I  Asthmatic  attacks  in  longer  and  shorter  intervals,  and
at  different  times  of  day;  palpitation  periodically,  in
rest  and  motion ;  craving  appetite ;  violent  headache,
especially  at  night;  tearing  in  forehead,  temples,  occi-
put ;  nose  stopped  up ;  coryza  after  spells  of  asthma.

I  I  Asthmatic  attacks,  since  a  year,  in  a  child  a^t.  2J,  after
vaccination ;  paroxysms  in  day  as  well  as  night,  with
whistling  respiration,  last  about  two  hours;  sleep  rest-
less; occasional  obstinate  constipation;  singular  dark-
colored  excoriations  on  nates ;  dry,  thin  hair.

I  I  Asthma,  with  little  cough,  but  sensation  as  if  something
were  growing  fast  in  region  of  1.  lower  ribs.

I  I A  man,  set.  47,  had  been  vaccinated,  since  then  com-
plaining; paroxysms  usually  at  night,  with  mucous  rattle
or  whistling  respiration,  also  coughing  spells  with  in-
tense redness  of  face;  very  irritable;  sleeps  poorly;
stitches  in  hypochondria,  now  on  r.  then  on  1.  side;  feels
bad  after  eating  slightest  quantity  of  food ;  excessive
flatulence;  pain  at  times  in  all  joints;  after  asthmatic
paroxysms,  profuse  perspiration,  oily ;  hollow-eyed;  <
every  other  night ;  urine  scanty ;  excretion  slow;  toward
end  of  paroxysm  drawing  in  lower  limbs,  which  are  at
all  times  red  like  a  boiled  lobster;  obstinate  constipation.

I  I  Breathing  short  and  quick,  <  from  deep  inspiration  and
talking,  >  by  lying  on  affected  side,  but  pains  compel

-  him  to  lie  on  back. /^Rheumatic  fever.
^  Cough. Cough:  constant,  without  difficulty  in  breathing;
short,  interrupted,  convulsive ;  frequent,  dry,  hacking ;
during  day; none  after  lying  down; evenings  after


THUJA.  326

lying  down ;  sputum  loose  and  easier  when  he  turns
from  1.  to  r.  side ;  in  morning,  after  rising ;  immediately
after  eating ;  as  soon  as  he  eats  or  drinks  anything  cold.

I  Whooping  cough:  immediately  after  vaccination,  in  two
scrofulous  boys.

I  Sputa:  green;  taste  like  old  cheese.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Spasm  of  lungs  from  drinking
cold  water.

Stitches  in  chest  from  drinking  anything  cold.

Sensation  as  of  falling  drops  in  chest.

Hot  rising  into  chest.

Ebullition  in  chest,  with  audible  palpitation.

I  I  Pain  in  1.  pectoral  region  going  down  to  ant.  sup.  spi-
nous process  of  innominate  bone ;  pain  in  head  sharp  in
back  of  crown ;  <  in  morning  and  in  warm  weather ;  both
pains  <  at  same  time ;  sharp  pain  in  lung ;  has  to  go
to  bed ;  palpitation  on  walking  fast  in  open  air ;  a  jar
seems  to  throw  the  wind  out  of  him ;  when  pain  is  severe,
draws  himself  up  to  1.  side ;  <  when  putting  1.  side  upon
stretch,  and  on  pressure.

I  I  Hemorrhage  from  lungs;  quantity  of  blood  very  great,
smell  terribly  offensive.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  i  Cramp  in  heart.

Palpitation :  periodical,  in  rest  or  motion ;  from  ascending;
anxious,  when  awaking  mornings ;  audible,  with  violent
congestion  to  chest.

Violent  pulsations  in  evening.

Pulse,  full,  accelerated  evening;  slow  and  weak  «morning.

Swelling  of  veins.
'"  Outer  Chest. Skin  blue  over  clavicles.

Brownish  spots  upon  chest.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Cervical  glands  swollen.

Oily  brown  skin  on  back  of  neck.

Blueness  of  external  throat  from  distension  of  veins.

Small  red  pimples  on  neck  close  together.

I  I  Pustular  eruption  on  neck  and  face,  soon  drying  up.

I  I  Large  fungous  excrescence  on  neck,  back  of  1.  ear,  growth
of  three  or  four  years ;  it  measured  about  one  and  a  half
inches  in  diameter  and  about  same  from  base  to  top,
very  tender  and  vascular,  bleeding  from  slightest  touch.
^'Fungus  haematodes.

Painful  stiffness  of  nape  of  neck.

Sensation  of  stiffness  in  nape  of  neck  and  on  1.  side  of
neck,  extending  into  ear,  even  during  rest,  in  no  way
impedes  movement  of  neck.

Drawing  tension  in  nape  of  neck.

Painful  tension  in  r.  side  of  nape  and  in  small  of  back,
slight  in  1.  side  of  nape.


327  THUJA.

Burning  from  small  of  back  and  sacrum  to  between
scapulae.

Drawing  pain  in  small  of  back,  sacrum,  os  coccygis  and
thighs,  preventing  erect  position,  after  prolonged  sitting;
pressive  bruised  sensation  in  back  and  loins,  early  on
rising,  <  on  turning  trunk  and  while  standing,  >  in
walking ;  tensive  pain.

Throbbing  and  pulsation  in  back.

Cramplike  pain  in  lumbar  region  after  long  standing
when  attempting  to  walk  feels  as  if  he  would  fall.

Violent  stitch  between  coccyx  and  anus.

I  i  Spinal  curvature  in  a  boy  set.  11;  spine  from  fifth  to
twelfth  vertebrae  bent  backward,  long  dorsal  muscles  in
this  region  atrophied ;  cannot  stand  erect,  is  bent  for-
ward, and  supports  body  by  putting  hands  upon  his
knees;  on  sitting  on  a  chair,  supports  himself  by  hold-
ing fast  to  back  of  chair;  on  sitting  upon  floor  head
sinks  upon  knees ;  hair  is  thin,  of  slow  growth ;  urethra
reddened  ;  belly  enlarged,  potbellied ;  nose  always
stopped  up. /^After  vaccination.

Boils  on  back.

Boils  near  small  of  back  with  large  red  borders.

I  iSteatomous  tumors,  one  over  first  dorsal  vertebra,  other
over  middle  of  spine  of  1.  scapula,  of  violet  color,  rounded
shape,  slightly  yielding  to  pressure  of  fingers;  they
measure  across  middle,  taken  perpendicularly,  about
two  inches  and  a  half,  rather  more  transversely;  tumors
somewhat  pedunculated,  could  be  handled  without  pain,
but  lying  on  back,  in  bed,  caused  bruised  or  smarting
pain ;  constant  thirst.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sticking  in  shoulders.

I  I  Tearing  throbbing,  ulcerative  pains  in  shoulder  extend-
ing to  fingers;  twitching  of  muscles  of  arm;  forearm
arid  fingers  numb  as  if  dead,  insensible  to  heat  of  stove;
pain  <  when  arm  is  left  hanging,  also  <  from  warmth
of  bed  at  night,  and  when  placing  arm  over  head;  >
from  motion,  in  cold  air  and  during  sweat;  chilliness
and  yawning  after  midnight ;  falls  asleep  late ;  terrify-
ing dreams;  every  three  or  four  days  difficult  stools;
frequent  urging  to  stool;  feces  at  tirnes  colored  with
blood;  thirst  only  at  night;  cold  sensation  in  arms;
audible  palpitation  of  heart  with  nausea ;  despondent.
(!^Rheumatism.

I  I  Involnntary  jerking  of  arm  during  day.

I  I  Atrophy  of  r.  arm  after  revaccination  ;  heavy  sleep,  feels
badly  in  morning,  stool  extremely  hard  ;  bleeding  after
stool;  urine  scanty;  especially  prominent  is  atrophy  of
abductor  pollicis,  flexion  of  thumb  and  forefinger  impos-


THUJA.  328

sible ;  function  of  biceps  wanting ;  extension  tolerable,
normal;  lower  arm  icy-cold.

Burning  pain  in  all  muscles.

Herpes  on  elbow.

Brown  spots  under  arms  like  nsevi  materni.

I  I  Thirty  to  forty  warts  on  hands,  especially  on  dorsa;
surface  of  smaller  ones  smooth,  almost  transparent ;
larger  ones  rough  like  cauliflower.

i  I  Twenty  to  twenty-five  warts  on  r.  hand,  hard,  horny,  with
rough  surfaces ;  spots  of  eczematous  eruption  as  large
as  a  penny,  covered  with  small  scales,  on  extensor  sur-
face of  arm  near  wrist.

i  I  Four  horny,  painful  warts  on  hands,  of  three  years'
duration.

1  i  Very  numerous  warts  on  hands  of  a  girl  aet.  12.

Brown  color  of  dorsum  of  hand.

White  scabby  herpes  on  dorsum  of  hand  and  on  fingers.

Hands  covered  with  cold  sweat.

Finger  tips :  erysipelatous,  with  tingling ;  numb  and  cold
as  if  dead.

Erysipelas  of  fingers.

1  I  Suppuration  of  finger  nails. ^After  vaccination.

■  Finger  nails  distorted,  crumbling  and  discolored.
^  Lower  Limbs. Painful  laxity  in  hip  joints,  as  if  capsules
of  joints  were too  weak  and  relaxed ; when  walking-
legs  feel  as  if  made  of  wood.

Tension  from  hip  joint  to  groin,  and  along  posterior  part
of  thigh  down  to  knee.

Drawing  in  both  hips.

Shooting  in  1.  hip,  with  sensation  of  lower  extremities
being  elongated.

I  I  Sciatica  in  1.  leg,  exacerbations  gradually  growing  more
and  more  severe,  until  she  was  finally  confined  to  bed
for  several  weeks ;  1.  leg  atrophied ;  first  twinges  of  sci-
atica felt  when  she  was  pronounced  cured  of  a  gonor-
rhoea which  had  been  treated  with  injections  three  years
ago.

iCoxalgia,  with  lengthening  of  limb.

1  I  Paresis  and  atrophy  of  r.  leg  with  considerable  coldness
of  same,  after  vaccination,  in  a  child  set.  2 ;  occasional
pain  in  back  and  abdomen ;  pale  face.

Weariness  in  internal  muscles  of  both  thighs  as  if  they
would  break  down.

Ulcers  on  thighs.

I  I  Enlarged  naevus  on  thigh  in  a  child  set.  5  months.

Brown  skin  on  legs,  particularly  on  inner  surface  of
thighs.

iGonorrhojal  rheumatism  located  in  fibrous  part  of  knee
joint.


529  .  THUJA.

Weakness  of  1.  leg  while  sitting,  changing  into  a  cutting

in  muscles  of  calves  when  walking.
White  blotches  on  calves  of  legs.
t I  I  Pains  in  feet  and  ankles  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea,

could  not  walk.
Numbness  of  1.  foot.
Pain  in  heel  as  if  gone  to  sleep.
Stitches  above  heel  in  tendo- A  chillis.
Inflammatory  red  swelling  of  dorsa  of  feet  and  of  toes

with  tension  when  stepping  on  them.
Shining  red  inflammatory  swelling  of  toes.
Burning,  tearing,  stitching  in  corns.
White  nodosities  on  toes.
Tips  of  toes  red  and  swollen.
I  Fetid  sweat  on  toes  ;  suppressed  foot  sweat.
Nets  of  veins  as  if  marbled,  on  backs  of  feet.
Red  spot  on  dorsum  of  foot.

iToe  nails:  brittle  and  distorted;  crumbling;  misshapen.
■  Ingrowing  toe  nails.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Trembling  of  hands  and  feet.

Drawing  and  sensation  of  weariness  with  apparent  dulness

of  feeling.
Limbs  go  to  sleep.
One-sided  complaints ;  paralysis.
Rheumatism,  with  numb  feeling; <  in  warmth,  from

moving,  at  night  after  12  p.m.  ;  >  from  cold  and  after

sweating.
Stitches  in  limbs  and  joints.
Joints  crack  when  limb  is  stretched,
i  Frozen  limbs.
i  Nails  of  fingers  and  toes  become  wavy  and  dry  so  that

they  partly  crumble.
I  Nails  crippled,  brittle,  discolored  or  soft.
Cracking  of  joints  when  they  are  extended.
Numerous  hangnails.
Pimples  on  knee  like  varicella,  others  with  tips  full  of  pus,

surrounded  by  a  red  areola,  especially  on  thighs,  elbows

and  forearms.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  headache  >.

Lying: <  pain  in  head;  <  on  painful  side  of  face;  on

affected  side,  asthma  >.;  cough  > ;  on  back,  pain  in

tumors  < ;  on  1.  side,  anxious  dreams.
Horizontal  position:  headache  >.
Sitting:  stinging  in  abdomen ;  stitches  in  anus;  pain  in

vulva ;  burning  and  smarting  in  vagina ;  pain  in  small

of  back  <  ;  weakness  of  1.  leg.
Standing:  cramplike  pain  in  lumbar  region.
Motion :  pressing  in  vertex  >  ;  pain  in  anus  <  ;  pain  in

shoulder  and  arm  >  ;  rheumatism  <.


THUJA.  330

Stooping:  vertigo.

Sitting  up  :  everything  seems  jumping.

Rising:  vertigo;  headache  and  vomiting  <;  pain  in  vulva,
and  perineum  ;  bruised  sensation  in  back  and  loins  <.

Looking  upward  :  headache  >.

Turning  head  backward  :  headache  >.

Stepping :  tension  in  swelling  of  feet  and  toes.

Walking :  is  obliged  to  at  night  with  pain  in  head ;  pain
in  abdomen  < ;  cannot  hold  his  urine ;  condylomata  < ;
aching  in  testes  <;  burning  and  smarting  in  vagina;
pain  in  ovary  <  ;  prevented  by  wartlike  growth  on  r.
labium;  labor  pains  <  ;  in  open  air,  palpitation;  bruised
sensation  in  back  and  loins  >;  legs  feel  as  if  made  of
wood.

Talking:  asthma  <.

Coughing:  involuntary  urination.

Ascending :  palpitation.

Riding:  cannot  hold  his  urine;  pain  in  ovary  <.
^®  Nerves. Limbs  go  to  sleep.

Sensation  of  lightness  in  body  when  walking.

I  Flesh  feels  as  if  beaten  loose  from  bones.

I  Feeling  as  if  body  were  frail  and  easily  broken.

Frequent  starts  or  jerks  of  upper  part  of  body.  ^Chorea.

Weakness ;  debility,  <  mornings ;  debilitated  all  over  as
from  fatigue.

I  Rapid  exhaustion,  causing  oppressed  and  short  breathing ;

irregular  and  intermitting  pulse.
I  1  After  revaccination,  falling  out  of  hair,  which  is  very
dry; headache; vertigo; poor  sleep; difficult  falling;
asleep;  nightly  restlessness ;  weakness  in  lower  extrem-
ities; constant  thirst ;  pain  in  epigastrium.
I  1  After  revaccination,  cannot  sleep;  canine  hunger;  after
eating,  great  fulness; had  been  drinking  hard  some
weeks  ago,  since  then  sleeplessness; loss  of  appetite*
profuse  sweats  day  and  night;  slight  unpainful  discharge-
from  urethra;  tremulous  limbs ;  visions  of  strange  people
at  night ;  great  anxiety  and  restlessness ;  cannot  remain  in
bed,  must  walk  about;  scanty  urine;  frequent  urination..
I  I  Chorea,  at  night  and  in  morning ;  craving  appetite  ;  dry
hair;  very  ill-humored  and  obstinate; laughs  a  good
deal  without  cause.
I  Chorea;  catalepsy.

Paralysis  of  one  side.
'^  Sleep. Sleep  heavy,  cannot  get  fully  awake  mornings.

I  iSlecplessness: sees  apparitions  on  closing  eyes; parts-
lain  on  painful;  from  heat  and  restlessness;  from  mental
depression  ;  after  revaccination.
I  I  Uneasy  sleep  with  dreams.


331  THUJA.

I  I  Nightmare.

I  Anxious  dreams  when  sleeping  on  1.  side;  of  dying,  or
dead  people  or  corpses.
^*  Time. 3  a.m.  :  chill.

3  to  4  A.M. :  pressing  in  vertex  <.

Morning :  disinclined  to  talk ;  faceache  < ;  headache ;
diarrhoea;  chill;  taste  of  rotten  eggs;  on  waking,  pain
from  1.  side  to  back;  urine  dark-red;  cough;  pain  in  1.
side  <  ;  palpitation ;  pulse  slow  and  weak ;  debility ;
chorea ;  cannot  get  fully  awake ;  chill ;  heat ;  sweat.

Afternoon  :  pressing  in  vertex  < .

During  day  :  cannot  hold  his  urine ;  cough  ;  jerking  of
arm.

All  day :  burning  soreness  in  anus.

5.30  P.M.:  chill.

Evening:  faceache  <;  pain  in  ulcers  on  head  <;  burn-
ing and  stinging  in  lids ;  chill ;  frequent  urging  to  uri-
nate ;  violent  palpitation  ;  pulse  full,  accelerated ;  chill ;
cold  creeps  on  back.

6  P.M.:  stool  followed  by  burning  in  anus.

7  to  9  P.M.:  bone  pains  in  head.

Night:  sleeplessness;  tearing  in  head  <;  violent  head-
ache ;  pain  in  ulcer  on  head  < ;  pains  in  eye  < ;  con-
junctivitis < ;  frequent  urination;  involuntary  urina-
tion; painful  erections;  dyspnoea;  asthma  <  ;  thirst;
chorea;  cold  creeps  on  back;  heat;  itching  and  shoot-
ing in  eruption.

Midnight:  headache  at  its  height.

After  midnight :  hemicrania  <  ;  chilliness  and  yawning ;
rheumatism  <  ;  chill.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth : >  eyes ; <  rheu-
matism.

Warm  air  :  seems  cold  ;  uncovering,  shivering.

Warmth  of  bed :  headache  < ;  toothache  < ;  pain  in
shoulder  and  arm  <.

Warm  weather:  pain  in  1.  side  <.

Cold  water :  drinking,  causes  spasms  of  lungs ;  stitches  in
chest ;  causes  eruption  to  burn.

Cold  air:  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm  >.

Cold  :  great  susceptibility,  ulcer  on  head,  also  in  blennor-
rhoea;  tumor  on  upper  lip  <;  rheumatism  >.

Worse  in  cold  or  very  warm  room :  faceache.

Open  air:  exercising,  headache  >;  dim  vision,  suffusion
of  eye ;  coryza  fluent ;  on  walking,  palpitation.

Least  change  of  weather :  chilly.

Draft:  faceache  <.

Damp  weather:  fungus  on  lower  jaw  <.

Overheating:  headache  <.


THUJA.  332

Rays  of  sun  :  painful  spots  on  face  sensitive.
'"  Fever. I  l  Shivering  through  and  through  from  slightest
uncovering  of  body  in  warm  air.

Cold  creeps  on  back  in  evening  and  night.

Always  chilly  from  least  change  of  weather.

Chilly  and  weak  some  time  before  regular  paroxysms.

Chill :  in  attacks,  mostly  evenings ;  with  yawning,  warm
air  seems  cold  and  sun  seems  to  have  no  power ;  on  1.
side  which  feels  cold  to  touch ;  after  12  p.m.  and  in
morning,  without  thirst;  with  thirst;  beginning  in
thighs;  about  3  a.m.,  followed  by  thirst,  then  profuse
perspiration  all  over  except  on  head ;  as  if  drenched
with  cold  water ;  internal  with  external  heat  and  violent
sweat;  followed  by  sweat.

Heat:  morning,  chill  afternoon  ;  evenings, mostly  on  face;
dry,  of  covered  parts ;  burning  in  face  without  redness;
with  thirst  neither  preceded  nor  followed  by  chilliness.

Sensation  of  burning  heat  in  face  which  causes  neither
real  heat  nor  redness;  or  perspiration  with  icy-cold
hands,  with  moderate  warmth  of  rest  of  body.

Flushes  of  heat  in  face  without  thirst.

Dry  heat :  of  covered  parts  ;  during  sleep.

Sweat:  only  on  uncovered  parts ;  general,  except  head;
when  walking  in  morning,  mostly  on  head;  during
sleep,  stops  when  he  awakens;  oily,  fetid,  smelling
sweetish  ;  with  congestion  of  blood  to  head  ;  sour-smell-
ing, or  fetid,  almost  every  night;  profuse,  at  night,
staining  clothes  yellow  as  if  saturated  with  oil ;  staining
brownish  yellow  ;  most  on  upper  part  of  body ;  profuse
about  genitals;  scrotum,  perineum  and  inner  surface  of
thighs  dripping ;  on  feet ;  >  indoors.

I  I  Chills  began  promptly  at  half  past  five  every  afternoon,
and  lasted  for  an  hour;  very  severe,  always  beginning
in  thigh  from  knee  to  hip,  and  from  there  extending
over  body ;  sits  with  a  leg  on  each  side  of  register  and
remains  until  chill  has  passed ;  fever  several  hours,  fol-
lowed by  a  profuse  drenching  sweat,  which  ends  about
2  or  3  A.M.,  even  wetting  bed.

I  Intermittent  fever  with  chronic  gonorrhoeal  contamina-
tion.
**  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodically:  palpitation.

Recurring  at  same  hour:  diarrhoea.

Every  five  or  six  minutes  :  paroxysms  of  faceache.

Every  hour:  for  two  months,  faceache.

Lasting  two  hours:  asthmatic  attacks.

Every  afternoon  at  4 :  chills.

Every  other  night:  asthma  <.

Every  two  weeks :  menses.


333  THUJA.

Every  three  or  four  days  :  difficult  stools.

Third  month  :  abortion.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  stitch  in  temple ;  as  if  a
nail  were  driven  in  frontal  eminence ;  pain  in  temporal
muscle ;  drawing  pain  in  forehead  ;  as  if  a  button  were
pressed  on  head;  stitch  through  centre  of  eye  from
brain ;  tearing  pain  in  eyebrow ;  heat  and  dryness  in
can  thus ;  tearing  pain  above  eye ;  epithelioma  on
lower  lid ;  creaking  in  ear ;  meatus  of  ear  blocked
up  by  polypus ;  swelling  and  induration  of  nostril;  face-
ache;  sticking  between  ear  and  zygomatic  arch;  shoot-
ing in  ear;  fungus  on  lower  jaw;  gnawing  in  lower
bicuspid;  toothache  extends  to  forehead  and  neck;  pain
from  side  to  back  ;  hernia ;  stitches  from  anus  into  iliac
bone;  a  soft  lump  on  frenum  preputiee;  ovaritis;  pain
in  groin;  pain  in  iliac  region;  as  if  something  had
grown  fast  to  lower  ribs ;  pain  from  pectoral  region  to
anterior  superior  spinous  process  of  innominate  bone ;
fungus  back  of  ear ;  stiffness  of  neck  ;  shooting  in  hip,
sciatica ;  leg  atrophied  ;  weakness  of  leg  when  sitting ;
numbness  of  foot ;  chill ;  red  itching  spot  with  vesicles
on  forearm.

Right :  skin  on  chest  and  abdomen  yellow ;  as  if  a  nail
were  driven  into  parietal  bone;  boring  sticking  in  head
and  eye;  ulcer  on  head;  eye,  objects  appear  smaller;
aching  over  eye ;  soreness  of  nostril ;  faceache ;  pimple
in  eyebrow ;  sudden  motion  in  iliac  region ;  ileus;  incar-
cerated flatus  below  diaphragm ;  wartlike  growth  on  la-
bium; painful  tension  in  nape  of  neck;  atrophy  of  arm
after  vaccination ;  warts  on  hand  ;  paresis  and  atrophy
of  leg  after  vaccination ;  tubercle  between  scrotum  and
thigh.

Left  to  r. :  ulcer  on  tongue.

Right  to  1.:  faceache;  stitches  in  hypochondria.

From  before  backward  :  neuralgia  in  head.
*^ Sensations.  As  if  whole  body  were  very  thin  and  delicate;
as  if  its  continuity  would  be  dissolved ;  as  if  frail  and
easily  broken  ;  as  if  made  of  glass ;  as  if  a  living  animal
were  in  abdomen  ;  as  if  a  nail  were  pressing  into  vertex  ;
as  if  vertex  were  pierced  with  a  needle ;  as  if  a  nail  were
driven  from  within  outward  in  vertex ;  as  if  a  nail  were
driven  into  r.  parietal  bone  and  1.  frontal  eminence;
lightning-like  headache;  as  if  a  convex  button  were
pressed  on  1.  head ;  as  if  head  were  screwed  asunder ;  as
if  forehead  would  fall  out ;  as  if  bones  of  head  were  be-
ing knocked  to  pieces;  forehead,  ears  and  eyes  as  if
stabbed  ;  as  if  knives  went  tearing  around  in  brain  ;  as
if  beaten;  as  of  insects  on  occiput  and  temples;  as  if


THUJA.  334

eyes  were  swollen  and  would  be  pressed  out  of  head ;
as  of  fine  sand  in  eyes ;  as  if  a  cold  stream  of  air  were
blowing  through  eyes ;  as  of  a  foreign  body  in  eye ;  as
if  flesh  were  torn  from  bones  in  1.  side  and  back ;  as  if
abdominal  muscles  were  pushed  out  by  arm  of  a  child  ;
sudden  bounding  in  r.  iliac  region  as  of  something
alive ;  as  if  blood  could  not  circulate  in  back  opposite
pit  of  stomach  ;  as  if  boiling  lead  were  passing  through
rectum ;  as  if  anus  would  fly  to  pieces  during  stool ;  as
if  skin  of  anus  were  cracked  and  chapped  ;  bladder  as  if
paralyzed;  as  of  moisture  running  in  urethra;  as  if  a
tape  prevented  urination  ;  as  of  a  single  drop  running
along  urethra ;  as  if  testicles  moved ;  as  if  testicles  were
contused ;  as  of  a  skin  in  larynx;  as  if  something  were
grown  fast  in  region  of  1.  lower  ribs ;  as  of  falling  drops
in  chest ;  legs  as  if  made  of  wood  when  waking ;  as  if
lower  extremities  were  elongated ;  as  if  muscles  of
thighs  would  break  down ;  lightness  in  body  when
walking ;  as  if  flesh  were  beaten  from  bones ;  as  if  skin
were  pricked  with  needles ;  as  from  flea-bites.

Pain :  in  epigastrium ;  in  abdomen  and  back ;  during
menses.

Cutting:  in  lower  abdomen;  in  urethra;  in  1.  ovary;
above  1.  ilium ;  in  muscles  of  calves.

Piercing  pain  :  in  head.

Boring:  in  temples;  in  head ;  in  r.  eye;  in  1.  malar  bone.

8titches :  through  1.  temple ;  in  scalp ;  through  1.  eye  from
centre  of  brain;  from  neck  into  ear;  in  hypochondria;
in  inguinal  glands;  from  rectum  into  bladder;  from
anus  to  sacrum;  from  anus  into  1.  iliac  bone;  in  anus;
in  urethra ;  in  chest ;  between  coccyx  and  anus ;  in
tendo-Achillis;  in  corns;  in  limbs  and  joints.

Shooting:  in  ulcer  on  head;  in  1.  ear;  in  face;  in  1.  ovary;
ill  1.  hip;  in  eruption.

Sticking:  in  1.  temporal  muscle;  in  head;  in  r.  eye ;  in
eye;  between  1.  ear  and  zygomatic  arch;  in  anus;  as
from  splinters  in  chancres  ;  in  shoulders.

Stinging:  in  scalp;  in  eyes  and  lids;  in  edges  of  lids;  in
abdomen  as  from  needles;  in  condyloma.

Pricking:  above  pubis  into  bowels;  in  ulcers.

Tearing:  in  forehead,  temples  and  occiput;  in  head;  in
face ;  in  scalp  ;  in  1.  eyebrow ;  above  1.  eye ;  in  abdomen ;
in  shoulder  to  fingers;  in  corns.

Drawing:  in  1.  temporal  muscle;  in  1.  forehead;  in  nape
of  neck  ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  sacrum  ;  in  os  coccygis ;
in  thighs;  in  hips;  in  limbs.

Pressure:  in  vertex;  in  head;  in  eyes;  at  root  of  nose;  in
soft  palate,  upward ;  in  hypogastric  region;  in  vulva;
in  stomach  during  menses  ;  in  back  and  loins.


335  THUJA.

Burning  :  in  scalp ;  in  eyes ;  in  lids  ;  in  edges  of  lids ;  in
spots  in  face ;  in  anus ;  in  perineum  ;  in  fundus  of  blad-
der; in  urethra;  between  prepuce  and  glans;  in  vagina;
in  1.  ovary;  above  1.  ilium ;  in  sacrum  ;  in  varicose  veins
of  genitals  during  menses;  in  erectile  tumors;  from
small  of  back  to  between  scapulse ;  in  all  muscles;  in
corns;  in  face;  of  skin;  of  eruption  after  cold  water;  in
fistulous  ulcers.

Biting :  in  scalp.

Smarting:  in  anus;  in  tubercle  near  anus;  in  pudendum  ;
in  vagina ;  in  tumors  on  back.

Throbbing :  in  face ;  in  back  ;  in  shoulder  to  fingers.

Gnawing:  in  decayed  tooth.

Contracting  pain  :  in  vulva.

Cramplike  pain:  in  vulva  and  perineum;  in  heart;  in
lumbar  region.

Constriction :  in  anus.

Bearing  down  :  during  menses.

Ulcerative  pain  :  from  shoulder  to  fingers.

Griping  pain  :  in  head.

Squeezing :  in  1.  ovary.

Jerking :  in  upper  lip  ;  in  penis.

Aching :  above  eye  to  back  of  head  ;  over  r.  eye ;  in  eye ;
in  testes;  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Soreness :  of  penis ;  of  vulva ;  about  buttocks ;  in  r.  nos-
tril ;  after  faceache ;  of  tip  of  tongue ;  of  navel ;  in  anus.

Bruised  feeling :  in  back  and  loins  ;  in  tumors  on  back.

Tensive  pain :  in  1.  ala  nasi.

Tension :  in  abdomen  ;  in  nape  of  neck  ;  in  small  of  back  ;
from  hip  joint  to  groin  ;  along  posterior  part  of  thigh  to
knee ;  in  dorsa  of  feet  and  of  toes.

Swollen  feeling :  in  eyes  and  lids ;  in  inner  ears.

Stiffness:  in  nape  and  1.  side  of  neck.

Heat :  in  1.  outer  canthus ;  around  eye  and  side  of  face ;
in  face.

Tingling:  in  scalp  ;  in  finger  tips.

Numbness:  after  faceache;  in  forearm  and  fingers;  in
heel;  in  1.  foot;  with  rheumatism.

Formication :  in  urethra.

Coldness:  through  whole  length  of  spine;  in  arms.

Dryness :  in  eyes ;  in  1.  outer  canthus ;  of  nose.

Itching:  in  scalp;  in  anus;  in  pudendum;  in  urethra;
on  inner  surface  of  prepuce;  of  ulcers;  on  abdomen;  on
back  ;  on  arms  and  legs  ;  in  ulcers.
*' Tissues.  A  surplus  of  producing  life;  nearly  unlimited
proliferation  of  pathological  vegetations,  condylomata,
warty  sycotic  excrescences,  spongy  tumors  and  spongy
pock exudates  organize  hastily ;  all  morbid  manifes-


THUJi^.  336-

tations  are  excessive,  but  appear  quietly,  so  that  begin-
ning of  diseased  state  is  scarcely  known.

Acts  prominently  on  sclerotic  coat  of  eye.

Rapid  emaciation,  with  deadness  of  affected  parts.

Chlorosis.

Dissolution  of  fluids  of  body,  which  become  acrid,  proba-
bly caused  by  Thvja  perverting  lymphatic  secretions ;;
disturbs  digestion  and  sanguification.

(Edema  about  joints.

Rheumatism  ;  flesh  feels  as  if  beaten  off  bones.

Rheumatic  or  arthritic  pains,  especially  of  a  gonorrhoea!
nature ;  arthritis  deformans.

Cold,  painless  glandular  swellings.

Indurations,  later  softening.

Rachitis.

Bad  effects  from  vaccination.

Sycosis;  syphilis.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  scalp  sen-
sitive to ;  vertex  sensitive ;  eruption  on  head  <  ;  >  pain
in  eyebrow;  <  soreness  of  r.  nostril ;  pain  in  malar  bone
>;  hemorrhoids  sensitive;  fissured  anus  painful ;  ^vart-
like  growth  on  r.  labium  painful ;  causes  fungus  tO'
bleed ;  condylomata  painful.

Pressure :  pain  as  of  a  nail  in  head  >  ;  headache  >  ;  <
sore  nostril;  >  pain  in  tooth  ;  pain  in  1.  side  <.

Rubbing :  >  head  ;  >  eruption  on  head  ;  blurring  of  vis-
ion >  ;  gently,  >  itching;  ulcers  >.

Scratching:  >  scalp.

Closing  eyes :  everything  seemed  jumping.

After  vaccination :  ulcer  under  tongue ;  diarrhoea ;  asth-
matic attacks ;  whooping  cough  ;  atrophy  of  r.  arm ;.
paresis  and  atrophy  of  r.  leg ;  falling  out  of  hair ;  sleep-
lessness.

After  a  fall :  wartlike  growth  on  r.  labium.

Overlifting:  headache  <.
'*^  Skin. Itching  on  diff'erent  parts  or  a  sensation  as  if  skin
were  pricked  with  needles.

Itching  as  from  flea-bites  on  abdomen,  back,  arms  and
lower  extremities.

Biting  itching  on  skin,  >  by  scratching,  but  continuing
to  burn.

Fine  capillary  network  on  skin,  looking  like  veining  of
marble.

Luxuriant  growth  of  hair  on  parts  otherwise  not  covered
by  hair.

Eruption  burns  after  applying  cold  water.

Skin:  looks  dirty;  brown,  here  and  there;  brown-white
spots;  dirty  brownish  discoloration.


337  THUJA.

Cadaverous  exhalation  from  skin.

Eruptions  on  covered  parts.

White,  scaly,  dry,  mealy,  or  itching  crusty  herpes.

Skin  of  whole  body  looks  dirty,  cannot  be  washed  clean.

Ringworm.

Shingles ;  herpes  zoster.

Impetigo ;  eruption  all  over  body  ;  itching  and  shooting,
especially  at  night;  pustular  eruption  about  knee;  >
by  gentle  rubbing.

I  I  Epidermis  on  one-third  of  body  and  almost  half  of  back
raised  as  if  by  an  enormous  blister;  serous  fluid  has
escaped  and  is  still  flowing  through  small  openings
in  epidermis;  great  fever;  indescribable  restlessness;
child  could  obtain  no  ease  in  any  position  and  was
utterly  sleepless. ^Pemphigus  foliaceus.

Pemphigus  especially  when  painful.

I  I  Brown  or  red  mottled  spots  with  itching  shooting  in
evening ;  purulent  pimples  containing  fluid  like  varn-
ish. ^Rupia.

iChicken-pox ;  varicella.

Pocks  appeared  which  reached  their  height  sixth  or  seventh
day,  when  suppuration  diminished,  fever  disappeared
and  pocks  began  to  dry  up,  and  soon  scaled  off  without
leaving  any  mark.

I  I  Variola,  confluent  on  face ;  third  day  of  eruption,  which

extends  all  over  body  and  limbs;  restless  at  night;
feverish ;  r.  upper  lid  swollen ;  begins  to  scab  on  face ;
swelling  under  eyes ;  two  variolous  pustules  on  tip  of
tongue ;  pustules  on  face  and  legs  have  black  centres ;.
diarrhoea  slimy  and  green ;  no  pits.

•  Variola;  pains  in  upper  arms,  fingers  and  hands,  with
fulness  and  soreness  of  throat;  areola  around  pustules
marked  and  dark-red,  pustules  milky  and  flat,  painful
to  touch  ;  especially  during  suppurative  stage  where  it
may  prevent  pitting ;  recommended  as  a  preventive  as
well  as  a  curative  by  Boenninghausen,  who  states  that  it
shortened  all  cases  in  epidemic  of  1849,  and  prevented
scars.

A  red  tubercle  between  scrotum  and  r.  thigh.

On  1.  forearm  a  red,  round,  itching  spot  with  white  vesicles
raised  upon  it.

Wart-shaped  excrescences  size  of  poppy  seed,  on  hands.

I I  Wartlike  excrescences  on  back  of  hand,  on  chin  and  on
other  places..

1 1  Warts  and  condylomata,  large,  seedy  and  pedunculated  ;,

sometimes  oozing  moisture  and  bleeding  readily.
■  Condylomata  about  anus  painfully  sore,  even  to  touch.
I  Ulcers:  flat,  with  a  bluish-white  bottom  ;  with  indurated

VOL.  X. — 22.


THUJA.  338

edges  surrounded  by  blisters  containing  pus ;  deepj
burning,  and  fistulous;  itching,  pricking,  containing
proud  flesh;  spongy  on  edges;  ulcers  with  serrated
edges ; >  from  rubbing  or  scratching.

Epithelioma.

Eruptions  only  on  covered  parts,  burn  violently  after
scratching.

■  Bleeding  fungous  growths..
iNsevus.

i  Moist,  mucous  tubercles.
Blood-boils  on  back.

■  Sweat  only  on  uncovered  parts,  while  covered  parts  were

dry  and  hot ;  very  restless  and  desponding.

Strong  perspiration,  especially  in  axillae.
^'Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Hydrogenoid  constitution  ;
this  constitution  is  distinguished  from  the  oxygenoid
and  the  carbo-nitrogenoid,  in  that  it  is  more  hygroscopic
i.  e.,  it  possesses  an  increased  capacity  to  contain  water ;
hence,  rain,  cold,  damp  weather,  baths,  and  food  that
increases  the  number  of  molecules  of  water  in  the  system,
aggravate  the  symptoms  of  the  hydrogenoid  constitution.

Strumous  and  sycotic  persons.

Lax  muscles ;  light  hair  ;  children.

Child,  aet.  7  weeks,  suffering  since  birth ;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  13  months ;  variola.

Child,  set.  15  months,  after  vaccination ;  swelling  of  glands.

Boy,  set.  1  J,  suffering  seven  weeks ;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  1|,  strong  and  healthy,  after  vaccination  ;  ulcera-
tion of  fingers.

Child,  set.  2,  after  vaccination ;  paresis  of  leg.

Child,  set.  2^,  after  vaccination ;  asthma.

Girl,  set.  3,  after  vaccination  ;  conjunctivitis.

Girl,  set.  3,  after  vaccination ;  imbecility  of  mind  and  loss
of  speech.

Child,  set.  3,  after  vaccination ;  atrophy  of  dorsal  muscles.

Child,  set.  4,  after  vaccination ;  ulcer  of  tongue.

Boy,  set.  4,  vaccinated  two  years  ago,  since  then  ailing;
affection  of  bowels  and  bladder.

Girl,  set.  6;  chorea.

Child,  set.  7,  after  vaccination;  pustular  eruption.

Girl,  set.  8  ;  warts.

Girl,  set.  9,  vaccinated  when  two  years  old,  ailing  ever
since  ;  chronic  ophthalmia  and  otorrhoea.

Boy,  set.  9,  handsome,  well  developed,  suffering  six  weeks;
incontinence  of  urine.

Girl,  set.  9,  brother  died  of  same  disease  ;  pemphigus.

Girl,  set.  10,  father  sycotic;  fungus  on  lower  jaw.

Girl,  set.  11,  vaccinated  when  three  and  a  half  years  old,
ailing  ever  since;  keratitis.


339  THUJA.

Boy,  a3t.  11 ;  spinal  curvature.

Girl,  set.  12,  light  complexion,  scrofulous  diathesis,  suffer-
ing four  years;  enuresis.

Girl,  set.  12;  warts  on  hands.

Girl,  set.  14 ;  ranula.

Girl,  set.  14,  leuco-phlegmatic  temperament,  scrofulous  dia-
thesis, suffering  two  years  ;  enuresis.

Boy,  set.  14,  scrofulous ;  warts  on  hand.

Girl,  set.  14,  dark  hair  and  eyes ;  warts  on  hands.

Girl,  set.  19,  blonde,  in  apparent  health,  suffering  several
years;  constipation.

Miss  C,  set.  21,  thin  and  fair;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  21;  pains  in  chest.

Man,  set.  24,  after  re  vaccination;  nervous  disturbances.

Musician,  set.  25,  gonorrhoea.

Man,  set.  26;  syphilitic  iritis.

Girl,  set.  26 ;  tinea  ciliaris.

Man,  set.  30,  weight  240,  ill  seven  days;  rheumatic  fever.

Man,  set.  32,  dark  ;  hemorrhoids.

Man,  set.  34,  tall,  chestnut  hair,  pale  complexion,  face
puffy,  had  scabies  twice ;  steatomatous  tumors  on  back.

Farmer,  set.  36,  suffering  three  months ;  incontinence  of
urine.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  40,  mother  of  several  children,  has  had  several
premature  deliveries;  uterine  disorder.

Woman,  set.  41,  washerwoman,  suffering  twelve  years;
prosopalgia,

Man,  set.  44,  affected  with  chronic  hemorrhoids,  suffers
since  nine  years  from  syphilis,  had  energetic  treatment
with  Merc,  and  Iodide  of  Potash ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  46,  tall,  stout,  mother  of  three  children ;  poly-
pus of  uterus.

Man,  set.  47,  after  vaccination ;  asthma.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  50 ;  sunstroke.

Man,  set.  50,  lymphatic  sanguine  temperament,  laborer,
of  regular  habits ;  ulcer  above  eye.

Lady,  set.  50 ;  ulcer  on  head.

Man,  set.  52,  after  revaccination  twelve  weeks  ago ;  nerv-
ous disturbances.

A  man,  set.  60,  day  laborer,  poorly  nourished,  had  gonor-
rhoea several  times,  large  l.-sided  hydrocele  from  ingui-
nal hernia ;  incontinence  of  urine.

Mr.  A.,  set.  63,  auctioneer;  polypus  of  ear.

Woman,  set.  72  ;  neuralgic  alveolar  periostitis.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  72,  suffering  three  or  four  years;  fungous  ex-
crescence on  neck.

Young  man,  nervo-sanguine  temperament,  dark  com-
plexion, good  habits;  inflammation  of  sclerotic.


THUJA— TRILLIUM  PENDULUM.  340

Young  married  woman,  of  good  social  standing,  suffering
three  years;  sciatica.
^  Helations. Antidoted  by  : Chamom. (nightly toothache) ;.
Coccul.  (fever) ; Camphor.,  Mercur.,  Pulsat.,  Sulphur.
It  antidotes :  abuse  of  tea,  Mercur.,  lodum,  Nux  vom.
Compatible :  Nitr.  ac,  Sabina.
Complementary:  Sabina,  Silica.
Compare : Cann.  sat.,  Canihar.,  Copaiba,  Staphis.


TRILLIUM  PENDULUM.

Wake  Robin; White  Beth-root.  Smilacese.

Grows  in  Middle  and  Western  States  in  rich  soils,  in  damp,  rocky,  shady  woods.
The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root,  which  is  oblong,  tuberous.
No  provings.

Clinical  Authorities. — Prolapsus  uteri,  Gorton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  514;
Metrorrhagia,  Fackler,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  6,  p.  228 ;  Hawley,  A.  H.  O.,  Oct.,  187.5,.
p.  333;  Menorrhagia,  Gilchrist,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  7,  p.  1.

^  Smell  and  Nose, i  Profuse  epistaxis,  passive.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums, i  i  Bleeding  from  cavity  after  extraction
of  tooth.
I  I  Hemorrhage  from  gums  and  mouth.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  l  Cancrum  oris.
^^  Throat, i  l  Putrid  sore  throat.

^^  Scrobiculum  and.  Stomach, l  l  Sinking  in  stomach. ^Hem-
orrhage.
Heat  and  burning  in  stomach  ;  rising  up  in  oesophagus.
Hsematemesis,  with  erosion  of  mucous  coat  of  stomach.
'^Abdomen. Constipation;  hard,  dry  stool.
^®  Stool and  Rectum, ii  Dysentery, passages almost  pure
blood.
Chronic  diarrhoea  of  bloody  mucus.
^'  Urinary  Organs, i  iHsematuria,  passive.
I  I  Chronic  catarrh  of  bladder.
I  I  Diabetes.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. Displaced  uterus  with  consequent
menorrhagia;  profuse  flow.
I  Gushing  of  bright- red  blood  from  uterus,  at  least  move-
ment, later  blood pale  from  anaemia ; at  times  dark
clots ;  frequent  desire  to  urinate.


341  TRILLIUM  PENDULUM.

I  I  Great  bearing-down  feeling  in  pelvis  when  walking  and
standing ;  backache ;  sore  pains  in  vaginal  and  uterine
regions ;  copious  discharge  of  yellowish,  stringy  leucor-
rhoea;  constipation;  menstruation  inclined  to  menor-
rhagia ;  monthly  flow  lingers  several  days  longer  than
usual.

I  I  Sallow  face  with  white  lips  and  tongue;  tossing  in  bed
from  evening  until  after  midnight,  with  a  feeling  as  if
hips  and  small  of  back  were  falling  in  pieces  and  a  de-
sire to  bind  them  up  tightly. ^Metrorrhagia.

1  Excessive  flooding  with  fainting;  face  pale  and  anxious;
extremities  cold  ;  no  pain  ;  flabby  subjects.

■  Passive  internal  uterine  hemorrhages,  with  occasional
clots  and  much  fetor.

II Flooding  with  fainting.

I  Profuse  uterine  hemorrhage,  at  climacteric  period,  with
prostration,  vertigo,  dimness  of  sight,  palpitation  and
painful  sinking  at  pit  of  stomach.

I  I  Hemorrhage  in  abortion  at  third  month.

I  I  Ante-partum  hemorrhage;  os  uteri  dilated  to  size  of  half
dollar ;  no  pains ;  flooding  excessive.

I  Menses  come  on  after  overexertion,  too  long  a  ride,  etc.,
profuse  flow.

Profuse  flow  every  two  weeks,  lasting  a  week  or  longer ;
yellow  and  thick  leucorrhoea  between  periods.

Leucorrhoea :  bloody,  with  great  prostration ;  yellow,
creamy,  profuse,  between  menses.

iClimaxis  with  weak  sight,  anxious  look; pale; faint;
flow  returns  every  two  weeks.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Threatened  abor-
tion ;  profuse  hemorrhage.

Lochia  too  profuse ;  lasts  tpo  long.

Post-partum  hemorrhage.
^^  Cough. Cough  troublesome,  copious  purulent  sputa;  hectic;
haemoptysis.

I  I  Catarrhal  cough  ;  chronic  bronchitis  or  laryngitis.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Incipient  stage  of  phthisis  with
bloody  sputa,  or  in  advanced  stages  with  copious  puru-
lent expectoration,  hectic  fever  and  troublesome  cough.

Pains  through  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  back,  with  uterine  hemorrhages.

Sacro-iliac  synchondroses  feel  as  if  falling  apart,  wants  to
be  bound  tightl)^ ^Hemorrhage.
^^  Lower  Limbs. iLegs  cold  with  hemorrhages.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Feels  as  if  bones  were  broken ;  with

hemorrhages.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Standing : bearing down in
pelvis.


TRILLIUM  PENDULUM.  342

Motion:  hemorrhages  <.

Walking :  bearing  down  in  pelvis.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  two  weeks :  profuse  menses.

Third  month :  hemorrhage  in  abortion.

Between  menstrual  periods  :  leucorrhoea.

Climacteric  period :  uterine  hemorrhage;  weak  sight;  pale;
faint ;  flow  every  two  weeks.
**  Sensations. As  if  hips  and  small  of  back  were  falling  to
pieces;  as  if  sacro-iliac  synchondroses  were  falling  apart;
as  if  bones  were  broken. .

Pain:  through  chest ;  in  back.

Burning :  in  stomach,  rising  into  oesophagus.

Sore  pain :  in  vaginal  and  uterine  region.

Bearing  down  :  in  pelvis.

Sinking:  in  stomach,  with  hemorrhage.

Heat:  in  stomach,  rising  into  oesophagus.
"  Tissues. Copious  hemorrhages,  especially  of  nose,  kidneys
and  uterus;  active  and  passive,  usually  bright-red,  pro-
fuse.

Tendency  to  putrescence  of  fluids;  fetor  of  critical  dis-
charges.

"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Mrs.  ,  get.  45,  nervo-

sanguine  temperament,  suffering  a  year  and  a  half;
menorrhagia.

Miss  A.  J.,  set.  21,  bilious  temperament;  prolapsus  uteri.
*^  Relations. Compare : Oinchon., Bellad., Kali  carb.,  Sepia,
Laches.


343  TROMBIDIUM.

TROMBIDIUffl.

Acaridse.

A  parasite  found  singly  or  in  groups  upon  the  common  housefly,  of  a  bright-
red  color,  nearly  circular  in  shape.

The  alcoholic  tincture,  a  brilliant  orange  in  color,  was  prepared  from  specimens,
about  one  hundred  and  fifteen  in  number,  collected  in  Frankford,  Philadelphia  in
September,  1864.

The  provings,  under  supervision  of  Hering,  were  made  by  Harvey,  Heath,
J.  F.  E.,  and  Bancroft,  the  potencies  used  3d  dec,  6th  dec,  9th  cent.,  18th  cent.,
and  30th  cent.,  see  H.  M.,  Sept.,  1865,  p.  83.

Clinicat.  Authorities. — Diarrhoea,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  l,p.  364,  vol.2,  p.  205;
Eushmore,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  318  ;  Diarrhoea  and  dysentery,  Lippe,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  5,  p.  232.

^  Mind. Loss  of  memory  ;  inabilit}^  to  collect  ideas ;  absence
of  ideas.
Talkative  during  day  ;  disposed  to  be  contrary  ;  constant
disposition  to  gape.
^  Inner  Head. Dull,  heavy,  sometimes  sharp  pains  in  temples
extending  over  frontal  region,  <  1.  side;  9.30  p.m.
Dull  pain  in  1.  side  of  head ;  <  shaking  head  and  walk-
ing ;  10  P.M.
Shooting  pain  in  r.  side  of  head,  near  parietal  eminence;

11  A.M.

Shooting  pains  in  r.  side  of  head,  just  above  temporal

region  ;  3  p.m.
Dull  feeling  through  head  ;  forenoon.
Oppressive  headache ;  lightness  of  head  ;  dizziness  of  head
from  lightness;  it  felt  as  if  there  were  no  weight  in  head.
*  Outer  Head. Intolerable  itching  of  scalp,  especially  vertex

and  occiput ;  7  a.m.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Redness  of  internal  portion  of  conjunc-
tiva, similar  to  pterygium.
Lachrymation  in  open  air.

Intolerable  itching  in  inner  canthus  of  r.  eye ;  9  p.m.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Shooting  pains  in  r.  ear ;  3  p.m.

Dull,  occasionally  severe  shooting  pains  in  r.  ear,  <  swal-
lowing or  blowing  nose ;  slight  soreness  in  r.  side  of
throat;  shooting  pains  in  1.  heel  and  1.  wrist  in  fore-
noon.
■*  Afternoon  shooting  pains  in  both  ears,  occurring  quite-
frequently,  and  felt  more  severe  in  r.  one.


TROMBIDIUM.  344

Itching  in  ears  soon  after  rising ;  eructations  tasting  of
ingesta,  lasting  an  hour  after  each  meal.

Burning  in  pinna  of  both  ears,  more  especially  in  right.
'^  Smell  and  Nose. Dryness  in  nose,  like  sniffles.

On  rising,  nasal  passages  much  obstructed,  in  afternoon
and  evening  fluent  coryza,  especially  while  eating,  and
in  open  air;  in  evening  dryness  and  scabs  in  nose.

Mucous discharge  from anterior  nares,  <  while eating
dinner.
^  Upper  Face. Evening  congestion  to  head  with red face

and  ears.
^  Lower  Face. Awoke  with  pain  in  1.  mastoid  region  ;  7  a.m.

Itching  in  spots  on  chin  and  among  whiskers.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Severe  dull  pain  in  a  decayed  tooth  of
1.  side,  brought  on  during  evening  by  reading  aloud  ;
prevented  sleep;  <  lying  down,  eating,  talking, and
from cold  air; > taking warm drink into mouth.
{Staphis.  relieved.)
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite.
'^Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions after  meals  tasting  of  ingesta.
^^  Hypochondria. Sore,  dull,  aching  pain  in  region  of  liver,
just  beneath  free  end  of  floating  ribs;  place  very  sensi-
tive to  touch ;  evening.
"  Abdomen. Forenoon  dull,  heavy  pain  over  whole  abdomen,
<  by  drinking  cold  water;  shooting  pain  in  phalangeal
joint  of  third  finger,  at  the  same  time  in  1.  knee  joint ;
pain  in  pit  of  stomach  (dull  griping),  which together
with  abdominal  pain  was  <  from  eating  dinner.

I  Brown  fluid  discharges,  with  or  without  bloody  streaks,
occurring  every  half  hour ;  violent  colic  causing  patient
(a  strong  man)  to  scream  with  pain ;  severe  tenesmus.

Violent  shooting  pain  in  abdomen,  beginning  in  1.  side,  in
hypogastric  region.

Griping  pains  in  abdomen,  <  from  eating  or  drinking.

Abdomen  very  sore.

Entire  abdomen  much  distended  with  flatus;  10  p.m.

Pain  in  abdomen  as  from  incarcerated  flatus.

Dull  pain  in  abdomen  <  from  pressure.

Darting  pain  in  abdomen,  <  r.  side,  above  hips  ;  10  a.m.
'"  Stool  and  Rectum, Sudden  griping  pain  in  abdomen,  more
on  1.  side,  which  induced  a  stool.

Immediately  after  rising  was  seized  with  a  griping  in  ab-
domen, obliging  a  stool  which  was  diarrhoeic,  relieving
pain  for  a  while,  when  it  returned  with  greater  violence
and  induced  a  second  stool,  accompanied  by  severe
tenesmus  causing  prolapsus  ani,  and  followed  by  a  burn-
ing sensation  about  anus.


345  TROMBIDIUM.

Diarrhoeic  stool  of  brownish  color,  followed  by  a  second
at  10  A.M.;  light  brown  in  color;  preceded  and  followed
by  a  dull  pain  in  abdomen ;  at  2  p.m.  another  of  same
nature  with  much  straining.

Stools:  Ithin,  brown,  fecal;  mucous;  I  blood-streaked ;
bloody  ;  purulent ;  mucous  and  bloody  with  hard  fecal
lumps;  frequent;  scanty;  I  in  small  fecal  grains,  con-
stantly oozing ;  soft,  pappy  ;  brown,  with  some  tenesmus
preceded  by  pain  in  abaomen  ;  with  severe  tenesmus
and  slight  prolapsus  ani.

Small,  loose  stools  preceded  by  terrible  sore  pains  in  intes-
tines, attended  with  tenesmus  and  shivering  along  back  ;
on  attempting  to  rise  was  obliged  to  lie  down  instantly,
to  prevent  fainting ;  in  afternoon  fever,  with  pulsation
of  arteries  of  head,  dull  aching  in  occiput,  aching  in
small  of  back ;  awoke  about  5  a.m.  with  pain  and  urg-
ing to  stool.

Tenesmus  with  prolapsus,  followed  by  pain  lasting  for
several  minutes  as  if  excoriated.

Aggravation:  lin  morning;  lafter  eating  and  drinking;
from  fruit;  from  sugar;  in  childbed.

Before  stool:  I  pain  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  with  perspira-
tion; Igriping  pains;  sore  pain  in  intestines.

During  stool :  Ipain  in  abdomen  continues;  Itenesmus;
■  chills  in  back  ; much  urging.

After  stool:  Itenesmus;  Iprolapsus  ani;  I  burning  in  anus;
great  debility ;  weakness  in  knees ;  colic  temporarily
relieved,  but  soon  returns.

'  I  Diarrhoea  after  dinner  and  supper;  before  stool,  colicky
pains;  during  stool,  urging  and  tenesmus;  after  stool,
burning  in  anus.

I  I  Thin,  brown,  sometimes  yellow,  frequent  stools,  expelled
with  force ;  crampy  pains  before,  during  and  after  stools ;
griping  pains  starting  from  both  groins  and  meeting  in
centre  of  abdomen  on  a  line  with  groins ;  then  a  small
passage ;  then  more  pain,  and  so  on ;  prostration  after
stool  and  coldness  of  whole  body  except  face,  which  is
hot;  stools  after  dinner  or  supper,  never  dfter  breakfast;
bearing  down  during  stool,  <  after  stool,  as  if  every-
thing were  coming  out  at  anus;  bloatedness  of  abdomen
after  stool ;  debility  after  stool ;  cramps  in  calf  of  r.  leg
after  one  of  these  paroxysms ;  sensation  as  of  hot  air
blowing  over  lower  part  of  abdomen,  and  over  lower
part  of  thighs  after  stool ;  thirst  after  stool ;  appetite
good ;  bruised  and  dragging-down  feeling  in  abdomen ;
feels  as  if  abdomen  needed  support.

A  man  of  full  habit,  subject  to  attacks  of  rheumatism  and
congestion  of  liver,  complained  that  when  he  began  to


TJROMBIDIUM.  34(>

eat  his  dinner  at  5  p.m.  he  experienced  violent  pain  in
intestines,  pain  increased  until  he  had  to  seek  relief
suddenly,  passed  very  thin  feces  and  some  mucus,  with
flatus  and  great  tenesmus  ;  pains  not  >  until  he  had
three  or  four  similar  passages,  when  he  ceased  to  suff'er
till  he  dined  again  next  day.

I  Great  tenesmus,  prolapsus  ani,  discharge  of  mucus  and
soft  feces,  or  pus,  blood  and  mucus,  with  occasional  ver}^
small  pieces  of  feces ;  skin  dry,  tongue  coated,  thirst
moderate,  pain  in  bowels  moderate. ^Dysenter}^

•  Dysentery;  begins  early  in  morning;  discharges  consist
of  thin  brown  substances,  later  mixed  with  mucus,  and
finally  consisting  of  mucus ;  pain  preceding  discharges,
<  on  1.  side  of  abdomen,  causing  perspiration;  discharge
creates  tenesmus,  from  it  prolapsus  ani,  followed  by
burning  in  anus ;  chills  in  back ;  great  debility ;  pain
and  discharges  <  from  eating  and  drinking.

■  Prolapsus  ani  and  burning  about  anus  after  stool.
""  Cough. Slight  hacking  cough  from  irritation  in  throat.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sharp  pain  in  lower  part  of  L
chest;  7  a.m.

Shooting  pains  in  1.  chest  in  region  of  heart ;  7.30  a.m.

Cutting  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest,  on  r.  of  lower  part  of
sternum  ;  7  a.m.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Dull  pain  in  region  of
heart,  rendered  sharp  by  drawing  a  long  breath ;  4  p.m.

9  a.m.,  pulse  full  and  quick  and  beating  100  per  minute,
usually  70 ;  throbbing  all  over  chest.

Pulse  intermittent.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pimples  on  back  of  neck  ;  itching  sensa-
tion about  neck  and  on  chin  among  whiskers.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Severe  shooting  pains  in  shoulder  joints.

Shooting  pains  in  r.  shoulder,  forenoon.

Dull  intermittent  pain  in  1.  forearm,  afterward  shooting;
11  p.m.

Dull  pain  in  bones  of  1.  forearm;  12  m.

Shooting  pain  in  r.  elbow,  wrist  and  finger  joints,  at  dif-
ferent times,  all  forenoon.

Sharp  stinging  pain  at  a  single  small  spot  on  inner  dorsum
of  wrist,  lasting  about  a  minute  ;  4  p.m.

Pains  in  r.  wrist  joint,  at  first  shooting  and  intermittent,
afterward  constant;  at  noon.

Shooting  pains  in  phalangeal  joint  of  second  finger  on  1.
hand;  8.30  a.m.

Stinging pain  in palmar surface  of  r.  thumb, ungual
phalanx.
•^  Lower  Limbs. Dull  pain  in  1.  hip  joint,  felt  only  after  ris-
ing from  a  sitting  posture  and  attempting  to  walk,  a
limping  gait ; >  after  a  few  steps.


347  TROMBIDIUM.

Tearing  pain  in  lower  part  of  1.  thigh ;  2.30  p.m.

Flying  sharp  pain  in  r.  thigh.

Boring  pain  in  r^  tibia  during  forenoon.

Slight  intermitting  pains  in  r.  knee  joint;  9  a.m.

Dull  pain  in  1.  ankle,  inner  part,  made  sharp  by  bearing
weight  on  it ;  12  p.m.

Shooting  pains  in  r.  ankle ;  3  p.m.

Tearing  pain  in  tarsus  of  1.  foot ;  1  p.m.

Shooting  pains  in  outer  side  of  r.  metatarsus  ;  3  p.m.

Dull  shooting  pain  in  1.  heel  inner  side.

Shooting  pains  in  1.  tarsal  bones  ;  6  p.m.

As  if  three  small  toes  on  1.  foot  would  be  twisted  off.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Shooting  pains  in  joints  of  upper  and
lower  extremities  afternoon  and  evenings.

Heaviness  of  all  limbs.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Inability  to  keep  quiet.

Lying  down  :  toothache  <  ;  prevents  fainting.

Swallowing,  or  blowing  nose :  shooting  in  r.  ear.

Shaking  head  :  pain  in  1.  side  of  head  <.

Reading  aloud  :  brought  on  toothache.

Rising  up :  fainting.

After  a  few  steps:  pain  in  hip  joint  >.

Walking:  pain  in  1.  side  of  head  <  ;  pain  in  hip  joint.
^®  Nerves. Fainting  on  rising  up ;  debility  after  stools.

Inability  to  keep  quiet.
^^  Sleep. Almost  constant  inclination  to  gape.

8p.m.,  sleepiness  and  hoarseness;  restless  during  sleep;
chilliness  during  night,  <  morning  on  waking.

Lewd  dreams  during  night.

Wakeful  and  restless  after  4  a.m.
^^Time. 4  a.m.:  wakeful  and  restless.

5  A.M.:  woke  with  pain  and  urging  to  stool.

Morning:  diarrhoea  <;  dysentery  begins;  chilliness  <.

7  A.M.:  itching  of  scalp;  pain  in  1.  mastoid  region;  pain
in  lower  1.  chest;  cutting  in  r,  chest  near  sternum.

7.30  A.M.:  shooting  in  cardiac  region.

8.30  A.M.:  pain  in  phalangeal  joint  of  second  finger  of
1.  hand.

9  A.M.:  pain  in  r.  knee  joint.

10  A.M. :  darting  in  abdomen.

11  A.M.:  pain  in  r.  side  of  head.

Forenoon:  dull  feeling  in  head;  shooting  in  1.  heel  and
wrist;  dull  pain  in  abdomen;  shooting  in  r.  shoulder ;
shooting  in  elbow,  wrist  and  finger  joints ;  boring  in  r.
tibia.

Noon  :  pain  in  r.  wrist  joint ;  dull  pain  in  bones  of  1.  fore-
arm.

1  P.M.:  tearing  in  1.  tarsus.


TROMBIDIUM.  348

2.30  P.M.:  tearing  in  1.  thigh.

3  P.M. :  pains  in  r.  side  of  head  ;  shooting  in  r.  ear ;  shoot-
ing in  r.  ankle;  shooting  in  r.  metatarsus.

4  P.M. :  pain  in  cardiac  region ;  stinging  pain  in  wrist.
6  P.M.:  shooting  in  I.  tarsal  bones.

Afternoon :  shooting  in  joints.
During  day :  talkative.

Evening:  congestion  to  head;  dryness  and  scabs  in  nose;
pain  in  region  of  liver;  shooting  in  joints.

8  P.M. :  hoarseness  and  sleepiness.

9  P.M.:  itching  in  r.  inner  can  thus.
9.30  P.M.:  pains  in  temples.

10  P.M.:  pain  in  1.  side  of  head;  abdomen  distended.

11  P.M.:  dull  pain  in  1.  forearm.

12  P.M.:  pain  in  1.  ankle.
Night:  chilliness;  lewd  dreams.

^^Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  drink:  toothache  >.
Open  air:  fluent  coryza;  felt  >.
Cold  air:  toothache  <.
Cold  water:  pain  in  abdomen  <.

''"  Fever. Heats  come  over  her ;  thinks  her  breath  is  leaving
her.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  half  hour:  brown  fluid  dis-
charges from  bowels.

*^ Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  pains  in  temple;  pain  in
head ;  shooting  in  heel  and  wrist ;  pain  in  mastoid  re-
gion ;  pain  in  decayed  tooth ;  shooting  in  knee  joints ;
shooting  in  abdomen  begins ;  griping  in  abdomen  <  ;
pain  in  lower  chest ;  shooting  in  region  of  heart ;  pain
in  forearm  ;  shooting  in  joint  of  second  finger;  pain  in
hip  joint ;  tearing  in  thigh ;  pain  in  ankle ;  pain  in
tarsus;  shooting  in  heel;  shooting  in  tarsal  bones;  as
if  toes  would  be  twisted  off*.
Right :  shooting  pain  in  side  of  head  ;  itching  in  inner
canthus;  shooting  in  ear;  sore  throat;  burning  in
pinna  of  ear;  darting  in  abdomen  <;  cramp  in  calf;
cutting  in  chest  near  sternum ;  shqoting  in  shoulder ;
pain  in  wrist  joint;  stinging  in  thumb:  sharp  pain  in
thigh  ;  boring  in  tibia ;  pain  in  knee  joint ;  shooting  in
ankle ;  shooting  in  metatarsus.

^^  Sensations.  As  if  there  were  no  weight  in  head,  lightness  ;
as  from  incarcerated  flatus  in  abdomen ;  as  if  excoriated
after  tenesmus;  as  if  everything  were  coming  out  of
anus ;  as  of  hot  air  blowing  over  lower  part  of  abdomen
and  thighs;  as  if  abdomen  needed  support;  as  if  three
toes  on  1.  foot  would  be  twisted  off*;  as  if  her  breath
were  leaving  her.
Pain  :  in  1.  mastoid  region.


349  TROMBIDIUM.

Sharp  pains :  in  temples  and  frontal  region ;  in  lower  1.
chest ;  in  region  of  heart  when  taking  a  long  breath ;
in  1.  inner  ankle  when  bearing  weight  on  it.

Cutting  pain  :  on  r.  of  lower  part  of  sternum.

Tearing  pain  :  in  lower  1.  thigh  ;  in  1.  tarsus.

Boring  pain  :  in  r.  tibia.

Flying  pain  :  in  r.  thigh.

Darting  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Shooting  pain  :  in  r.  side  of  head  ;  in  ears ;  in  1.  wrist  and
heel ;  in  phalangeal  joints  of  third  finger ;  in  1.  knee
joint;  in  abdomen;  in  region  of  heart;  in  shoulder
joints;  in  r.  shoulder;  in  r.  elbow-,  wrist  and  finger
joints;  in  phalangeal  joints  of  second  finger  1.  hand ;
in  r.  ankle ;  in  outer  side  of  r.  metatarsus ;  in  1.  heel,
inner  side ;  in  1.  tarsal  bones  ;  in  joints.

Stinging  pain  :  at  a  spot  on  inner  dorsum  of  WTist ;  in  pal-
mar surface  of  r.  thumb.

Burning :  in  pinna  of  ears  ;  about  anus ;  in  anus.
*  Dull  aching :  in  occiput ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in  small  of
back.

Soreness:  on  r.  side  of  throat;  of  abdomen;  in  intestines.

Bruised  feeling :  in  abdomen.

Throbbing:  all  over  chest.

Griping :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  abdomen ;  from  groins
meeting  in  centre  of  abdomen.

Crampy  pains:  before,  during  and  after  stools;  in  calf  of
r.  leg.

Dull  pain  :  in  temples  and  frontal  region  ;  in  1.  side  of
head  ;  in  a  decayed  tooth  ;  over  whole  abdomen  ;  in  re-
gion of  heart;  in  1.  forearm;  in  1.  hip  joint;  in  Lankle,^
inner  part.

Heaviness :  of  limbs.

Weakness :  in  knees.

Itching:  of  scalp;  in  r.  inner  canthus ;  in  ears;  on  chin;
in  whiskers ;  about  neck.

Dryness :  of  nose.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  pain  in  re-
gion of  liver  <.

Pressure:  pain  in  abdomen  <.
*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Mrs.  B.,  set.  35 ;  diarrhoea.

Lady,  set.  50,  suffering  every  Summer  for  several  years ;
dysentery.

Gentleman  of  full  habits,  subject  to  attacks  of  rheumatism
and  congestion  of  liver ;  diarrhoea.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Merc.  cor.  (diarrhoea).

Compare :  Ledum  (rheumatism) ;  Sulphur  (diarrhoeaV


TUBERCULINDM.  350

TUBERCULINUM,

The  Nosode.

Fragmentary  provings  by  Swan,  upon  M.  B.  B.  with  cm. ;  Edna  Eose,  with  cmm.

Authorities : — Refer  to  New  Organon,  July,  1879,  pp.  342,  439,  449 ;  Swan's
Morbific  Products,  1886;  Burnett's  New  Cures,  1885  to  1890;  J.  A.  Biegler's
Eeport;  C.  F.  Nichol's  paper  in  Popular  Science  News,  April,  1891.

Clinical  Authorities. — Tubercular  meningitis,  Biegler,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  439 ;
Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  11,  p.  187;  Burnett,  Consumption,  pp.  9,  13,  31,  53;  Chronic
headache,  Swan,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  41 ;  Vomiting,  Kent,  MSS. ;  Tabes  mesenterica,
Burnett,  Consumption,  pp.  52,  82 ;  Cholera  infantum,  Swan,  MSS. ;  Cough,  Board-
man,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  448 ;  Burnett,  Consumption,  p.  15 ;  Threatened  phthisis,
Incipient  tuberculosis,  Burnett,  Consumption;  Tubercular  synovitis  of  knee,  Burnett,
Consumption,  p.  47  ;  Spasms,  Swan,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  342;  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  11,
p.  187  ;  Ringworm,  Burnett,  Consumption,  pp.  96-100.

^  Mind.  '  I  Although  naturally  of  a  sweet  disposition,  became
taciturn,  sulky,  snappish,  fretty,  irritable,  morose,  de-
pressed and  melancholic,  even  to  insanity.  ^Tubercu-
lar meningitis. Burnett.

I  I  Fretful,  ailing,  whines  and  complains ;  mind  given  to
be  frightened,  particularly  by  dogs.  ^Hydrocephaloid.
Burnett.
^  Inner  Head.  TrSevere  headache,  <  on  second  day,  lasting
until  third,  recurring  from  time  to  time  for  many  weeks
and  compelling  quiet  fixedness. Burnett.

I  Headache,  with  frequent  sharp,  cutting  pains  passing
from  above  r.  eye  through  head  to  back  of  1.  ear.
Rose.

1  I  Headache  of  great  intensity  preceded  by  a  shuddering
chill  passing  from  brain  down  spine ;  with  attack  a  feel-
ing as  if  head  above  eyes  were  swollen  ;  became  uncon-
scious with  screaming,  tearing  her  hair,  beating  her
head  with  her  fists  or  trying  to  dash  it  against  wall  or
floor. Swan.

I  I  Headache  of  forty-five  years'  standing,  pain  passing
from  r.  frontal  protuberance  to  r.  occipital  region.
Swan.

I  I  Terrible  pain  in  head,  as  if  he  had  a  tight  hoop  of  iron
around  it ;  trembling  of  hands  ;  distressing  sensation  of
damp  clothes  on  his  spine;  almost  absolute  sleepless-
ness ;  profound  adynamia ;  was  thought  by  his  friends
to  be  on  verge  of  insanity ;  most  of  his  brothers  and


351  TUBERCULINUM.

sisters  had  died  of  water  on  brain ;  r.  lung  solid,  prob-
ably from  healed-up  cavities,  as  he  at  one  time  suffered
from  pulmonary  phthisis. Burnett.

I  I  Sullen,  taciturn,  irritable,  screams  in  his  sleep,  is  very
restless  at  night,  costive  ;  sister  died  of  tubercular  men-
ingitis. Burnett.

I  I  Fretful  and  ailing,  whines  and  complains,  indurated
glands  can  be  felt  everywhere,  child  hot,  drowsy,  urine
red  and  sandy,  much  given  to  be  frightened,  particu-
larly by  dogs ;  was  vaccinated  and  had  a  very  bad  arm
for  four  months  thereafter;  would  not  smile,  whimpers
when  spoken  to,  skin  dingy,  skull  hydrocephalic.  Bur-
nett.

I  I  Boy,  set.  20  months,  ill  for  days  with  head,  high  fever,
restlessness  and  constant  screaming ;  finally  no  sleep
for  forty  hours,  followed  by  a  condition  of  collapse ;
peculiar  smell  of  body ;  family  histor}'-  of  tuberculosis.
Burnett.

I  I  Tubercular  meningitis,  with  effusion ;  head  greatly  en-
larged ;  alternately  wakeful  and  delirious  at  night,
talked  nonsense  by  day,  at  intervals;  nocturnal  hallu-
cinations and  fright;  delirium;  pyrexia;  had  eczema
which  almost  disappeared  after  two  unsuccessful  vacci-
nations, and  which  were  soon  followed  by  above  condi-
tion ;  after  administration  of  remedy  there  occurred  a
severe  pustular  eruption,  then  patches  of  a  lepra  and
eczema  appeared. Burnett.

I  I  Basilar  meningitis. Sinker.

■  Tubercular  meningitis. Sinker.

I  I  Acute cerebral meningitis, with intense strabismus.
Biegler.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Soreness  inside  of  nose,  commencing  as
watery  pimples,  which,  suppurating,  form  scabs;  nose
and  lips  somewhat  swollen;  itched  slightly. Rose.
^  Lower  Face. Slight  swelling  and  itching  of  lips. Rose.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  be-
fore breakfast,  with  sudden  diarrhoea. M.  B.  B.

i  I  Frequent  vomiting.  Kent.
*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  1 1  Windy  dyspepsia,  with
pinching  pains  under  ribs  of  r.  side  in  mammary  line.
Burnett.
^^  Abdomen,  i  '  Fever,  emaciation,  abdominal  pains  and  dis-
comfort, restless  at  night,  glands  of  both  groins  enlarged
and  indurated ;  cries  out  in  sleep ;  strawberry  tongue.
^Phthisis. Burnett.

I  1  Tabes  mesenterica;  swelling  on  1.  side,  also  on  r. ;  com-
plains of  a  stitch  in  side  after  running;  languid  and
indisposed  to  talk;  nervous  and  irritable;  talks  in  his


TUBERCULINUM.  .  352

sleep,  grinds  his  teeth  ;  appetite  poor ;  hands  blue ;  in-
durated and  palpable  glands  everywhere;  a  drum  belly,
spleen  region  bulging  out. Burnett.

I  I  Inguinal  glands  indurated  and  visible;  excessive  sweats;
chronic  diarrhoea. ^Tabes  mesenterica. Burnett.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Sudden  diarrhcea  before  breakfast,  with
nausea.

I  I  Diarrhoea,  furious  fever,  burning  hot  skin,  great  heat  in
head,  red,  flushed  face,  eyes  turned  upward,  quivering
and  rolling ;  peculiar  fetid  smell  of  body.  ^Incipient
tuberculosis. Burnett.

I  I  Cholera  infantum. Swan.

I  I  Severe  hemorrhages  from  bowels,  cough;  emaciation;
family  history  of  phthisis. Burnett.
""  Cough. I  I  Slight  tedious  hacking  cough,  which  had  lasted
for months  in a  girl  of  a distinctly  phthisic habit.
Burnett.

1  I  Hard,  dry  cough,  sometimes  slight,  but  generally  no
expectoration,  slightly  feverish. Boardman.

I  I  Hard,  dry  cough,  shaking  patient,  more  during  sleep,
but  did  not  waken  him. Boardman.

I  I  Expectoration  of  non-viscid,  very  easily  detached,  thick
phlegm  from  air  passages,  followed  after  a  day  or  two
by  a  very  clear  ring  of  voice.  Burnett.
Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i  i  Slight  hacking  cough,  contin-
uing all  day,  <  at  bedtime  and  on  rising ;  emaciation ;
dulness  on  percussion  at  apex  of  r.  lung.  ^Threatened
phthisis. Burnett.

I  I  Girl,  set.  15,  tall  for  her  age  ;  tonsils  enlarged  ;  chronic
discharge  from  nose,  <  early  morning  on  rising;  speech
thick  ;  thorax  of  pigeon-breast  type ;  menstruated  freely ;
perspires  much  across  nose;  very  bad  perspiration  of
chest,  armpits,  palms,  nose  and  feet;  feels  very  chilly;
spleen  swollen ;  distinct  dulness  on  percussion  at  apex
of  r.  lung;  suffered  badly  from  vaccination;  gets  chil-
blains. ^Incipient  tuberculosis. Burnett.

I  I  Hectic  flush  of  cheeks;  shortness  of  breath;  slight
hacking  cough  ;  several  strumous  scars  on  neck  ;  dusky
skin ;  large,  moist  rales  in  both  lungs ;  increased  vocal
resonance  of  r.  lung;  amphoric  sounds  in  r.  lung;  large,
soft-feeling  gland  in  1.  side  of  neck;  very  pronounced
endocardial  bruit,  best  heard  at  apex  beat  {lodoformum
3x  in  four  grain  doses  for  two  months,  with  improve-
ment, followed  by  Tuherculinum  c.  in  very  infrequent
doses). Burnett.

I  I  Incipient  phthisis  in  a  boy  set.  7;  loss  of  flesh;  great
prostration;  morbid  timidity;  glands  of  groins  and  on
both  sides  of  neck  very  much  enlarged  and  indurated,


28


353  TUBERCULINUM.

particularly  glands  over  apex  of  r.  lung;  as  he  had  suf-
fered much  from  vaccination,  Thvja  30  and  Sahina  30
were  first  given,  then  Tuberculinum  c. Burnett.

I  I  Nocturnal  perspirations;  notched  incisors;  indurated
glands  everywhere,  very  large  and  numerous;  drum-
bellied;  grinding  of  teeth  at  night;  great  susceptibility
to  taking  cold ;  perspiration  <  at  back  of  lungs  and  on
head ;  big  head,  with  bulging  forehead ;  subject  to  attacks
of  fever  and  diarrhoea. ^Incipient  phthisis. Burnett.

M Incipient  tubercular  disease;  restless  at  nights;  sleep-
less; grinds  teeth;  tendency  to  diarrhoea;  want  of  appe-
tite; foul  breath;  notched  teeth;  pain  after  food;  vom-
iting of  food;  indurated  glands;  strawberry  tongue;
naughty;  very  irritable  temper;  puny  growth;  very
thin;  girl,  set.  6. Burnett.

I  I A  nasty  little  cough  for  seven  weeks;  much  expectora-
tion; pains  in  r.  lung;  evening  fever;  liver  and  spleen
enlarged;  cough  <  morning  after  breakfast;  neck
slightly  goitrous;  eats  hardly  any  breakfast. Burnett.

I  I  Cough,  <  6  A.M.;  notched  incisors;  thin  and  puny;  cer-
vical and  inguinal  glands  much  enlarged  and  indu-
rated;  strawberry  tongue;  girl,  set.  7.  ^Incipient
phthisis. Burnett.

I  I  No  respiratory  sounds  at  top  of  r.  lung,  and  vocal  reso-
nance slightly  increased ;  pain  in  1.  side ;  profuse  per-
spiration; girl,  set.  18. Burnett.

I  I  Much  fever,  <  evenings;  restless  and  terribly  irritable;
much  depressed  and  in  almost  constant  agitation ;  tongue
very  red  ;  chronic  diarrhoea;  has  lost  fourteen  pounds
during  last  six  weeks;  has  no  appetite;  evacuations  dis-
charged from  bowels  as  from  a  pop-gun.  ^Threatened
phthisis. Burnett.

I  I  Bad  cough  of  about  twelve  months'  duration;  expecto-
ration of  blood;  one  of  apices  was  audibly  diseased ;  has
had  pneumonia;  chest  flat;  respiration  accelerated;
tanned  unduly  in  sun. Burnett.

I  lAnsemic,sickly,  pale;  profound  debility;  dyspnoea,  can-
not mount  or  hurry;  menses  irregular.  ^Phthisis  pul-
monum. Burnett.

I  I  Lady,  set.  26,  in  first  stage  of  consumption;  dyspnoea
and  rapid  breathing;  loss  of  flesh;  greasy,  dingy  skin.
Burnett.

I  I  Stout  man,  bright,  florid  complexion,  mother  died  of
phthisis,  with  which  disease  her  sister  is  suffering;  gets
pneumonia  very  often  in  cold  weather;  hence  travels

.  from  place  to  place  to  avoid  colds;  coughs  much,  brings
up  much  phlegm;  perspired  profusely  and  drank  great
quantities of  fluids; wretched  sleepless nights, with

VOL.  X.— 23.


TUBERCULINUM.  354

almost  constant  fever;  glands  of  neck  much  enlarged.
/^Phthisis. Burnett.
I  I  Complains  that  she  has  been  in  consumption  for  many
years;  is  very  thin  and  consumed  with  fever;  lungs  very
fiat;  respiration  almost  imperceptible;  fever;  poor  appe-
tite; languid. Burnett.
I  I  Ringworm  on  scalp;  lymphatic  glands  everywhere  pal-
pable; ribs  very  flat;  strawberry  tongue,  bad  cough,  <
at  night;  although  11  years  old  she  had  practically  no
teeth,  they  were  rudimentary,  and  not  above  level  of
of  gums. Burnett.
I  I  Pronounced  phthisical  habit;  severe  piles;  constipation;
brown  cutaneous  affection  on  abdomen. Burnett.
^'  Neck  and  Back, i  '  Indurated  cervical  glands.

Lump  size  of  a  walnut  on  cord  of  neck,  is  movable  and
occasionally  itches. Rose.
^' Lower  Limbs. Lame  feet  for  three  weeks,  would  walk  or
stand  on  sides  of  feet  to  rest  them. M.  B.  B.

Cramps  in  calves. M.  B.  B.

I  I  Tubercular  swelling  of  knee;  intermittent  attacks  of
pain  in  it;  has  expectorated  clots  of  blood  and  suffered
from  exhausting  sweats;  family  history  of  phthisis.
Burnett.

I  '  Tuberculous  disease  of  1.  knee ;  for  eleven  months  had
been  limping;  knee  much  enlarged  and  very  tender;
teeth  dirty  and  carious;  strawberry  tongue. Burnett.

I  I  Tubercular  synovitis  of  1.  knee.  Burnett.
^^  Nerves,  l  l Suddenly  became  unconscious  while  sewing  or
talking,  began  screaming,  tearing  her  hair,  beating  her
head  with  her  fists,  or  trying  to  dash  it  against  wall  or
floor;  attacks  daily,  for  a  month,  then  spasms  set  in,
with  rolling  of  head  from  side  to  side  and  moaning;
continuing  five  weeks,  followed  b}^  a  recurrence  of  faint-
ing fits,  at  least  twice  a  week;  a  few  hours  before  an
attack  of  fainting,  a  shuddering  like  a  chill  seemed  to
go  from  brain  down  spine ;  when  questioned  about  an
attack,  she  said  head  would  suddenly  seem  to  swell  over
eyes  and  pain  became  "  horrid,"  and  she  knew  no  more ;
between  attacks  she  was  free  from  all  complaints  except
fatigue  and  an  ever-present  frontal  headache.  Swan.
'^'' Sleep.  J)isturbed,  distressful  sleep.  Burnett.
^^  Time.  Morning:  before  breakfast,  sudden  diarrhoea;  on
rising,  hacking  cough  <  ;  on  rising,  discharge  from
nose  <  ;  after  breakfast,  cough  <.

6  A.M. :  cough  <.

Evening:  at  bedtime,  hacking  cough  <;  fever.

All  day:  hacking  cough.

Might:  wakeful  and  delirious;  restless;  grinding  of  teeth;
cough  <.


355  TU  BERCULINUM.

'"Fever, l  l Fever. (?Phtbisis. Burnett.

*'  Attacks, Periodicity. Intermittent attack : of  pain in

tuberculous  knee.
For  forty  hours :  no  sleep.
Twice  a  week  :  fainting  fits.
For  three  weeks:  lame  feet.
During  six  weeks :  lost  fourteen  pounds.
For  seven  weeks:  a  nasty  little  cough.
For  eleven  months :  limping,  from  tubercular  knee.
For  about  twelve  months :  a  bad  cough.
For  forty-five  years  :  headache.
"Locality  and  Direction. Left: enlarged  gland  on  neck;

pains  in  side;  tuberculous  knee.
Right :  sharp  pain  above  e3^e,  through  to  1.  ear ;  pain  from

forehead  to  occiput ;  pinching  pains  under  ribs;  dulness

in  apex  of  lung ; increased  vocal  resonance  in  lung ;

amphoric  sounds  in  lungs  ;  pain  in  lung.
*^  Sensations. As  if  head,  above  eyes,  were  swollen,  followed

by  unconsciousness ;  as  if  he  had  a  tight  hoop  of  iron

around  head;  as  of  damp  clothes  on  his  spine;  a  shud-
dering like  a  chill  seems  to  go  from  brain  down  spine.
Terrible  pain  :  in  head.

Cutting :  from  above  r.  eye,  through  head  to  back  of  1.  ear.
Stitch :  in  1.  side,  after  running.
Pinching:  under  r.  ribs.
Cramps:  in  calves.

Itching:  of  nose  and  lips;  in  lumps  on  neck.
*^Skin. I  (Very  bad  tempered  ;  very  much  pigmented  where

sun's  rays  impinged  upon  him;  teeth  dirty,  greenish.

^Phthisical  habit. Burnett.
Eruption  of  itching  blotches  all  over  bod}^,  with  exception

of  face  and  hands. Rose.
■  Ringworm. Burnett.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  15  months,  dark,  fat,

sister  died  of  consumption  of  brain ;  incipient  tubercular

meningitis.
Boy,  set.  20  months  ;  threatened  tubercular  meningitis.
Boy,  set.  2  years  and  8  months,  brother  of  two  children

w^ho  died  of  tubercular  meningitis ;  tuberculosis.
Boy,  set.  3 ;  incipient  tuberculosis.
Girl,  set.  6,  daughter  of  a  countr}^  squire  who  was  suffering

from  chronic  phthisis;  phthisis.
Girl,  set.  7 ;  incipient  phthisis.
Girl,  set.  7,  family  history  of  phthisis ;  tubercular  affection

of  knee.
Boy,  set.  7,  family  history  of  phthisis ;  incipient  phthisis.
Boy,  set.  8,  family history of  consumption ; threatened

phthisis.


TUBERCULINUM.  356

Boy,  set.  10;  tabes  raesenterica.

Girl,  set.  11,  family  history  of  phthisis ;  ringworm,  carious
teeth,  cough,  etc.

Girl,  set.  1 3,  overgrown ;  phthisis.

Boy,  set.  14 ;  phthisis.

Girl,  set.  15;  incipient  tuberculosis.

Girl,  set.  17,  sister  died  of  consumption  ;  phthisis.

Girl,  set.  19  ;  pulmonary  phthisis.

Girl,  set.  20,  phthisic  habit,  tall  for  her  age,  long  fingers,
almond-shaped  nails,  long  neck,  indurated  glands  in
neck;  cough.

Lizzie  R.,  set.  21,  when  three  years  old  was  frightened  into
a  fit,  which  was  followed  by  chorea,  which  continued
until  she  was  thirteen ;  has  never  been  in  good  health ;
for  the  last  four  or  five  years  passed  through  a  variety
of  conditions,  at  one  time  being  confined  to  bed  for  six-
teen months,  during  nine  months  of  this  time  could  eat
nothing  but  ice-cream ;  then  had  an  attack  of  trismus,
followed  by  severe  ulceration  of  mouth;  finally  spasms
set  in,  and  after  these  ceased  she  passed  through  a  con-
dition simulating  last  stage  of  phthisis ;  spasms.

Lady,  set.  22,  single,  delicate  habit  of  body,  brother  has
consumption  of  bowels ;  threatened  phthisis.

Lady,  set.  26,  single,  family  history  of  consumption ;
phthisis.

Merchant,  set.  26,  tall,  slim,  long,  thin  neck,  bends  forward,
both  parents  died  of  lung  disease ;  incipient  phthisis.

Man,  set.  30,  married,  ten  of  his  relations  died  of  phthisis  ;
tubercular  swelling  of  knee.

Woman,  set.  38,  mother  of  seven  children,  three  sisters
died  of  consumption  ;  threatened  phthisis.

Lady,  set.  40,  single ;  phthisis.

Lady,  set.  40,  married,  family  history  of  consumption ;
threatened  phthisis.

Man,  set.  50,  family  history  of  phthisis;  hemorrhage  from
bowels.

Man,  set.  50,  an  author  of  eminence,  well  known  in  theo-
logical circles,  brother  and  sister  died  of  water  on  brain,
r.  lung  solid,  probably  from  healed-up  cavities,  he  hav-
ing by  treatment  and  travel  "grown  out"  of  his  pulmo-
nary consumption ;  tubercular  meningitis.

Lady,  set.  50,  fiorid,  mother  and  six  brothers  and  sisters
died  of  consumption  ;  tubercular  synovitis.

Gentleman,  ver}'^  big  and  stout,  of  bright,  florid  complexion,
family  history  of  consumption  ;  phthisis.
*^ Relations. Complementary:  Hydr.  can.  to  fatten  patients
cured  with  TubercuUnum.


357  URANIUM  NITRICUM.

URANIUM  NITRICUM.

Uranium  nitrate.  XJO^'^NO^QH^O.

k  salt  prepared  from  pitch  blende.  The  minerals  which  contain  Uranium  are
found  in  the  lead  and  silver  mines  of  Bohemia  and  Saxony,  Bavaria,  and  in  France
near  Limoges.

The  triturations  are  made  from  the  pure  nitrate.

Provings  by  Blake,  Hah.  Mat.  Med.,  Part  2,  1871.

Toxicological  experiments,  Carniet,  Glycoluries  toxiques,  Paris,  1891.

Clinical  Authorities.—  Ophthalmia,  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  175 ;  Diabetes,
Koeck,  H.  M.,  vol.  12,  p.  493 ;  Koeck,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  102 ;  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  10,  pp.  274,  384;  Hale,  B.  J.  IL,  vol.  20,  p.  166 ;  Hallock,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  May,
1882;  Dudley,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  270;  Magdeburg,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  67;
Hughes,  Bradford,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  pp.  253-269 ;  McLean,  H.  W.,  vol.  7,  p.  132 ;
Cornell,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  594;  Jousset,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  270;  Albumi-
nuria, Walker,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  337;  Diuresis,  Bradford,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,
p.  502 ;  Nocturnal  enuresis,  Blake,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  9,  p.  413 ;  Incontinence  of  urine,
Cook,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p  29.

^  Mind. iGreatdespondencj';  ill-temper;  cross;  disagreeable.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo ;  heaviness  of  head ;  restless  at  night,

with  shivering.
^  Inner  Head. Head  heavy  on  waking; general languor;

aching'  at  occipital  protuberance.
Pain  shooting  from  r.  orbit  to  occipital  protuberance  in

evening.
Frontal  headache.
Dull  aching  in  r.  temple.
iSIight  pain  over  1.  eye,  with  contracted  feeling  in  throat,

and  eructations,  followed  by  diuresis.
Heavy,  burning  pain  in  r.  side  of  vertex  ;  fulness  of  head

and  sensation  of  blood  flowing  to  that  part,  before  eating.
Giddy,  faint ;  flushing  of  upper  body  during  catamenia.
Headache  in  1.  temple,  with  feeling  as  if  he  had  taken  cold.
Severe  pain  at  posterior  edge  of  r.  and  1.  temporal  bones.
I  Headache;  dull,  heavy  pains  in  forehead,  r.  temple  and

occiput.
*  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Pain  over  1.  eye.

lEyelids  inflamed  and  agglutinated;  glands  enlarged.
1  I  Child  12  days  old,  had  from  birth  yellow  discharge  from

1.  eye,  causing  adhesion  of  lids,  1.  eye  red  and  watery ;

afterward  same  kind  of  discharge  from  r.  eye,  but  less;

discharge  chiefly  in  inner  canthus.
^  Smell  and  Nose, l  Nostrils  sore  with  purulent,  acrid  dis-
charge ;  chronic  catarrh.


UEANIUM  NITRICUM.  358

Dry  coryza ;  1.  nostril  stuffed.

Itching  in  nose,  small  scab  in  r.  nostril,  purulent  discharge

from  1.  nostril.
I  I  Scabbing  of  inner  nostril,  chronic.
^^  Inner  Mouth, l  l  Ulcers  in  buccal  cavity,  with  copious  sali-
vation ;  nausea  and  great  thirst.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. iLoss  of  appetite.
^During  catamenia.
I  1  Craves  raw  ham  and  tea ;  amenorrhoea. ^Diabetes.
^^  Eating and Drinking. ■  Excessive thirst, emaciation.

^Diabetes.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Much
nausea ; vomiting ;  intermittent  vomiting, with  great
thirst.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Boring  pain  in  pyloric  region.

■  Dyspepsia,  intermittent  attacks  of  pain,  with  sinking  at

epigastrium  and  acid  eructations,  flatulency  and  copi-
ous urination.
I  I  Dyspeptic  feelings  quarter  of  an  hour  before  dinner,
with  gnawing  sinking  at  cardiac  end  of  stomach  ;  but
without  hunger  or  faintness.

■  Gastric  and  duodenal  ulcers.

I  I  Recurring  hsematemesis. ^Gastric  ulcer.
^'Abdomen. ■  Abdomen bloated; slight diarrhoea; sharp
colic  and  tenesmus,  with  burning  in  rectum.

■  Enteritis  and  peritonitis,  with  meteorism;  great  prostra-

tion.
Peritonitis  followed  by  copious  effusion.
^'Urinary  Organs.  '  lA  corpulent,  temperate  old  man  had
constantly  increasing  debility  and  emaciation ;  oedema
of  legs;  great  pain  and  weariness  of  legs ;  crawling  and
formication  of  limbs ;  clammy  state  of  mouth  and
tongue;  tongue  coated  with  white  fur;  sensation  of  dry-
ness in  mouth  an^l  fauces,  with  intense  thirst ;  severe
acid  dyspepsia;  burning,  cramps  and  faintness  in  pit
of  stomach  ;  bowels  constipated,  feces  pale,  odorless  and
dry;  constant  desire  to  urinate;  enormous  quantity  of
urine  (sixteen  pints  in  twenty-four  hours) ;  perspiration
and  breath  have  a  sweet  odor;  skin  dry  and  hard;
night  sweats ;  pulse  90,  small  (greatly  relieved). ^Dia-

■  betes.

I  I  Profuse  nocturnal  urination;  since  six  months,  in  a
man  set.  40,  accompanied  by  burning  and  scalding;
urine  milky  at  times,  often  straw-colored,  fetid,  voids
ten  to  twelve  pints  in  twenty-four  hours;  dispirited,
morose ;  constipation  ;  mouth  dry ;  saliva  tenacious ;
tongue  coated  white ;  good  ap[)etite,  but  distress  after
eating;  constant  faintness  at  stomach,  even  after  a
hearty  meal ;  debility;  renal  pain.


359  URANIUM  NITRICUM.

I  I  Urination  profuse,  painful,  pale,  milky,  with  ammonia-
cal  odor;  nocturnal  urination  frequent;  great  debility;
night  sweats ;  constant  pain  and  soreness  in  lumbar
region  ;  legs  ache  and  feel  heavy  and  weary ;  <  toward
evening;  almost  complete  loss  of  sexual  power,  organs
cold,  relaxed  and  sweaty  ;  afternoon  fever ;  great  thirst;
canine  hunger;  bloated  abdomen  and  constipation.
^Albuminuria.

I  I A  delicate,  nervous  woman  had  sudden  attacks  of  diu-
resis, followed  by  scanty  urine,  dark-colored,  with  fever.

I  I  Constipation ;  distressing  thirst;  canine  hunger ;  tongue
red;  loss  of  sleep  (^improved), ^uiabetes  mellitus.

I  Diabetes  :  in  two  cases  specific  gravity  decreased  ;  in  one
from  1042  to  1030,  in  other  from  1039  to  1031 ;  thirst,
hunger  and  quantity  of  urine  decreased  greatly.

■  Diabetes  mellitus;  five  cases  improved.

i  llncontinence  of  urine  at  night  and  frequency  during
day.

I  I A  boy,  set.  3,  pale,  dark  circles  around  eyes;  color  in
cheeks  changes  to  deep  red ;  exceedingly  restless  at
night  with  fever;  urine  profuse  and  very  pale;  appetite
capricious. 6'Diabetes  mellitus.

I  I A  man,  set.  70,  hale  and  hearty  for  his  age ;  since  three
years  has  to  urinate  frequently  and  loses  flesh;  drinks
a  great  deal  to  assuage  his  constant  thirst.  ^Diabetes
mellitus.

I  I A  man,  set.  52,  fat  and  full-blooded,  intense  thirst,  had
to  get  up  several  times  at  night  to  drink  ;  good  appe-
tite, loses  strength;  passes  large  quantities  of  urine,
giving  a  specific  gravity  of  1044,  and  containing  85  grs.
glucose  per  litre.

I  I  Commenced  to  decline  five  years  ago  and  has  been  grad-
ually growing  <  ;  could  not  walk ;  was  entirely  color-
less, not  slightest  appearance  of  blood  in  lips,  tongue,
ears  or  over  entire  surface ;  eyes  sunken  ;  cheek  bones
prominent ;  emaciation  ;  acidity  of  stomach  ;  constipa-
tion ;  hemorrhoids;  palpitation;  inordinate  thirst;  roar-
ing in  ears,  with  fainting  spells;  tenderness  of  spine
near  and  extending  to  kidneys;  eight  to  ten  quarts  of
urine  in  twenty-four  hours. /^Diabetes.

I  I  For  three  months  getting  thinner  every  day ;  cannot  eat
enough  to  satisfy  craving;  .excessive  thirst,  especially  at
night,  drinking  four  to  six  quarts  of  water  in  twenty-
four  hours;  abundant  flow  of  urine;  has  to  empty  pot
de  chambre  two  or  three  times  a  night;  urine  contains
sugar.  .

■  Acute  and  chronic  diuresis"  of  children  and  adults.
llncontinence  of  urine  at  night,  from  worms;  urine  often

excoriatins:.


URANIUM  NITRICUM.  860

I  Burning  in  urethra,  with  very  acid  urine;  urinary  te-
nesmus.
I  I  Nocturnal  enuresis. ^Albuminuria.
Urine  greenish  and  smelling  fishy.

I  I  Weakness  of  bladder  from  infancy ;  unable  to  retain
urine  without  extreme  pain,  amounting  almost  to  spasms
during  day ;  at  night  passed  it  freely  without  waking,
and  in  cold  weather  in  very  large  quantities;  on  taking
cold,  bloating  of  bowels  and  extremities,  also  of  face  ;
some  tenderness  of  bowels,  with  frequent  pain  in  1.  side;
appetite  poor,  and  extremely  dainty,  craving  sweets;
always  complaining  of  deranged  stomach ;  very  thin
and  pale.
^^Male  Sexual  Organs, i Completely  impotent,  with  noctur-
nal emissions,
i  I  Almost complete  loss  of  sexual  powers,  organs  cold,
relaxed  and  sweaty. ^Albuminuria.
"Female  Sexual  Organs. During  menstruation:  vertigo;
faint ;  flushing  of  upper  part  of  body.
I  iNo  menstrual  flow  during  diabetic  attack;  pale,  anae-
mic; craving  raw  ham  and  tea.
^'Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Excessive  lacteal

secretion.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Bron-
chitis, with  copious  mucous  expectoration  and  much
emaciation  ;  old  chronic  cases.
^^  Cough. Cough,  with  purulent  discharge  from  1.  nostril;
loss  of  appetite  and  great  prostration ;  lung  infiltrated
with  grey  tubercle.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  at  lower  angle  of  1.  scapula,
<  by  taking  a  deep  inspiration.
Hydrothorax  and  congestion  of  lungs.
^' Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  in  loins.
''  Limbs  in  General. White  vesicles  on  hands  and  legs,  with

red  areolse  ;  burn  and  itch.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Walking:  head  heavy.
^^  Nerves. Extreme  languor  on  rising  from  bed.

Great  prostration  and  drowsiness  during  catamenia.
Debility  and  cold  feeling,  with  vertigo.
Debility,  prostration  resulting  from  severe  organic  lesion.
'^  Sleep. I  I  Sleeplessness. ^Diabetes.
**  Time. During  day :  frequent  urination ;  shivering.
Afternoon :  fever.

Evening:  shooting  from  r.  orbit  to  occiput.
Night:  restless;  shivering;  incontinence  of  urine;  thirst.
^"^ Fever. Shivering: alternately  with heat; at  night,  and
great  restlessness.
Prostration,  somnolence  and  shivering  during  day;  rest-
less at  night  during  menstrual  period.


361  URANIUM  NITRICUM.

"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Intermittent  attacks :  of  pain  with

dyspepsia.
^^ Locality  and  Direction. Left:  pain  over  eye;  headache
in  temple;  adherence  of  eyelids;  nostrils  stuffed  ;  puru-
lent discharge  from  nose;  pain  at  angle  of  scapula.
Right: aching  in  temple; burning  in  vertex; scab  in
nostril.
*^  Sensations. As  if  blood  were  flowing  to  head  ;  as  if  he  had
taken  cold  with  headache.
Pain:  over  1.  eye;  in  renal  region;  in  1.  side;  at  lower

angle  of  1.  scapula.
Severe  pain  :  posterior  edge  of  temporal  bones.
Boring:  in  pyloric  region.
Shooting :  from  r.  orbit  to  occiput.
Aching:  at  occipital  protuberance;  dull,  in  r.  temple;  in

legs.
Gnawing  :  at  cardiac  end  of  stomach.
Burning:  in  r.  side  of  vertex  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  pit  of  stom-
ach; with  urination ;  in  urethra;  in  vesicles  on  hands
and  legs.
Dull  pain :  in  head.
Cramp:  in  pit  of  stomach.
Contraction :  in  throat.
Heaviness :  of  head  ;  in  legs.
Faintness :  at  stomach.
Sinking:  at  epigastrium.
Stiffness:  in  loins.
Formication :  in  limbs.
Dryness :  in  mouth  and  fauces.
^  Itching:  in  nose;  in  vesicles  on  hands  and  legs.
Tissues. Torpor;  somnolency;  coma.

Gastric  and  duodenal  inflammation  and  ulceration.
Great  emaciation ;  diabetes;  tendency  to  general  dropsy ;
effusion  of  serum  from  all  serous  membranes,  especially
pleura  and  peritoneum.
Diabetes  mellitus  and  insipidus; Bright's disease,  and
kmdred  renal  maladies ;  contracted,  gouty  kidneys,  with
gastric  disturbances ;  irritable  condition  of  renal  plexus,
of  sympathetic.
Muscular  paralysis.
*®Skin. Epithelioma;  lupus  exedens;  ecchymosis.
*^ Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Child,  «t.  12  days;  oph-
thalmia.
Boy,  set.  3 ;  diabetes.

Girl,  set.  12,  suffering  from  infancy ;  incontinence  of  urine.
Man,  set.  70,  hale  and  hearty;  diabetes.
*^ Relations. Compare: Phos<.  ac.  (saccharine  urine);  Arsen.
and  Kali  bich.  (gastro-duodenal  symptoms).


URTICA  UEENS.  362


URTICA  URENS.

Nettle.  Urticacese.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant.

Proved  by  Coxe,  Jr.,  and  Shaw,  reported  by  Neidhard,  Hale's  New  Kem.

Clinicai.  Authorities.— /ScaWmgr  of  arm,  MVurmh,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  146;
Helminihiasi.%  Eichards,  H.  W.,  Apr.,  1870,  p.  84;  Richard^*,  H.  W.,  vol.  7,  p.  260;
licking  of  scrotum,  Wesseliioeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  55;  Pruritus  rvlvce,  Wessel-
hoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  55;  Agalactia,  Terry,  Horn.  Times,  vol.  5,  p.  12;
Urticaria,  Chapusot,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  34.

*  Outer  Head. Dull  aching  in  head,  with  stitches  in  region
of  spleen.
I  I  Dull  aching  in  occiput  and  over  eyes.
Urticaria  of  scalp,  suddenly  appearing,  and  determining
internally.
'Sight  and  Eyes. Pain  in  r.  eye  and  r.  parietal  bone,  a
stinging  pain  compelling  one  to  rub  and  press  it.
Pressing  pain  :  over  r.  eye  and  in  ej^eball ;  in  1.  eye;  over

both  ej^es,  they  feel  weak  and  sore.
Pain  in  ej'eballs  as  from  a  blow,  and  a  sensation  as  of
sand  in  eyes.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Itching  of  nose.
''Upper  Face. Fever  blisters  on  lips  itching.

Lips,  nose  and  ears  swollen ;  eyelids  closed  and  oedema-
tous,  followed  by  small  transparent  vesicles  filled  with
serum,  afterward  desquamation.
'^Throat. Burning  in  throat  with  frequent  throwing  up  of
froth}^  mucus,  with  cough  and  frothy  expectoration.
Burning  in  throat  with  nausea.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,
with  burning  in  throat.
I  Vomiting  from  suppression  of  nettlerash,
''Abdomen. Soreness  in  bowels  while  lying  down;  on  press-
ure a  sound  as  if  bowels  were  filled  with  water.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Pain  around  umbilicus,  with  dysenteric
stool  of  whitish  slime.
Stools :  white  and  yellow,  with  slimy  mucus,  tenesmus  and
coliclike  pains; small, dysenteric, of  greenish-brown
slime,  with  urging  and  tenesmus; small  and  painful,
mixed  with  white  matter,  like  the  boiled  white  of  an
egg,  with  much  pain  over  '•■hole  abdomen.


363  URTICA  URENS.

I  Dysentery  accompanied  or  preceded  by  nettlerash ;  dur-
ing and  after  passage  of  stool,  a  sensation  of  rawness
and  burning  in  anus.

1  I  Constipation.

■  Enteritis,  with  stools  of  mucus  and  blood.
I  Diarrhoea,  from  suppression  of  eruption.

A  small  hemorrhoidal  tumor,  itching  and  burning,  at
times  quite  severe.

I  Hemorrhage  from  bowels.

I  Ascarides,  with  great  rectal  irritation.

I  I  Severe  itching  of  fundament,  especially  in  evening,
caused  by  pin-worms.

I  I A  girl,  set.  3|,  for  several  months  itching  of  seat,  vari-
able appetite; slight  attacks  of fever,  restlessness  at
night;  occasional  thread-worms.
^' Urinary  Organs. Suppression  of  urine  for  twelve daj's;
oedematous  swelling  of  whole  upper  body  to  umbilicus.

I  I  Strangury ;  gravel ;  disease  of  bladder  and  kidneys.

i  I  Hemorrhage  from  bladder.
^^Male  Sexual  Organs, l  i  Itching  of  scrotum,  keeping  him
awake  at  night,  and  tormenting  him  nearly  all  day;
scrotum  swollen  ;  stinging  and  itching,  no  moisture.
^^ Female  Sexual  Organs, l Menorrhagia; uterine hemor-
rhage.

Leucorrhoea,  discharge  very  acrid  and  excoriating.

■  Pruritus  vulvae,  with  great  stinging and itching and

oedema  of  parts.
^'Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Insufficiency  or
entire  want  of  secretion  of  milk.
'  Arrests  flow  of  milk  after  weaning.
^' Cough. I  I  Whooping  cough.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iHsemoptysis  from  violent  exer-
tion of  lungs.
^'  Neck  and  Back, i  i  Goitre.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Continuous  pain  in  r.  deltoid.

Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  arm,  <  when  lying  on  it.

A  sharp  stitch  darting  through  arm.

Muscles  of  r.  arm  sore  as  if  bruised.

Inability  to  stretch  or  raise  r.  arm  on  account  of  pain  in  r.

hypochondriac  region.
Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  wrist  and  in  ankles.

■  Blotches,  "hives,"  on  hands  and  fingers,  itching.

■  Urticaria  nodosa  on  hands  and  fingers.
Soreness  on  inside  of  r.  knee  joint.

I  I  Raised red itching blotches on skin  of  hands and
fingers.
^■^Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  soreness  in  bowels;
nettlerash  >.


URTICA  URENS.  364

^^  Sleep. Nocturnal  restlessness.

Lethargic  sleep.
^^  Time. All  day :  itching  of  scrotum.

Evening:  itching  of  fundament;  rheumatic  pain  <.

Night :  itching  of  scrotum.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  year  at  same  season  :  nettle-
rash.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  eye  and  parietal
bone;  pain  in  deltoid;  rheumatic  pain  inarm;  muscles
of  arm  sore;  pain  in  hypochondriac  region;  rheumatic
pain  in  wrist  and  ankle; soreness  on  inside  of  knee
joint.
*^  Sensations. As  from  a  blow  in  eyeballs;  as  of  sand  in  eyes;
as  if  bruised,  muscles  of  r.  arm.

Pain  :  in  r.  hypochondriac  region ;  in  r.  deltoid.

Stitches:  in  spleen;  through  arm.

Stinging :  in  r.  eye  and  parietal  bone ;  in  scrotum ;  in
vulva;  in  nettlerash.

Burning:  in  throat;  in  anus;  in  hemorrhoidal  tumor;  of
skin ;  of  nettlerash ;  of  erythema.

Rawness :  in  anus.

Aching: dull,  in  head  ; dull,  over  eyes;  dull,  in  occiput.

Soreness :  in  eyeballs ;  in  bowels ;  in  muscles  of  r.  arm  ;
on  inside  of  r.  knee  joint.

Pressing :  over  eyes ;  in  eyeballs.

Rheumatic  pain :  in  r.  arm  ;  in  r.  wrist,  and  in  ankles.

Itching:  of  nose;  in  hemorrhoidal  tumor ;  of  fundament;
of  scrotum ;  in  vulva;  in  hives ;  of  nettlerash ;  erythema.
"  Tissues. Hemorrhages  from  various  organs.

I  Burns,  when  integuments  and  subjacent  tissues  are  not
destroyed,  and  when  injury  is  confined  to  skin.

Rheumatism  attending,  following,  or  alternating  with
nettlerash.

Rheumatic  pains  <  in  evening.

I  Dropsy,  chronic  diarrhoea,  urticaria,  etc.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Lying  on  arm :
rheumatic  pain  <.

Violent  exertion :  hsemoptysis.

Burns :  confined  to  skin.
*^Skin. In  skin  of  face,  arms,  shoulders  and  chest,  extremely
distressing  burning  heat  with  formication,  numbness
and  violent  itching.

I  iNettlerash  :  itching  and  burning  of  skin  as  if  scorched ;
raised,  red  blotches;  fine  stinging  points;  pale,  and  re-
quires constant  rubbing ;  attending  or  preceding  rheu-
matism.

■  Consequences  of  suppressed  nettlerash.

I  I  Eruption  and  itching  disappear  as  soon  as  she  lies  down
and  reappear  immediately  after  rising.


365  URTICA  URENS— USTILAGO.

I  I  Nettlerash  affects  patient  every  year  at  same  season.
I  I  Scalding  of  1.  forearm  and  hand;  epidermis  removed;

suppuration  followed  with  much  pain.
1  I  Vesicular  erysipelas.
I  I  Erythema  with  burning  and  itching.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  S^,  suffering  several

months ;  helminthiasis.
Child,  set.  4;  helminthiasis.  >

Girl,  set.  16;  urticaria.
Cook,  set.  33;  scalding  of  arm.
^^  Relations. Compare : Apis, Canthar.,  Rhus  tox.,  in skin

symptoms;  Bicin.,  in  diminished  mammary  secretion.


USTILAGO.

Corn-smut  Fungi.

A  fungus  found  growing  on  Indian  corn.
The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  ripe  fungus.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Burt,  see  Monograph ;  proved  by  Hoyne,  Trans.  Am.
I.  Horn.,  1872,  p.  493.

Clinicai,  Ai'THORiTiES. — Spermatorrhcea,  Burt,  Monog.;  Ovarian imiation,  Burt,
Monog. ;  Ovaritis,  Burt,  Monog. ;  Ovarian  tumor,  Jones,  Burt,  Monog. ;  Metritis,
ovarian  irritation,  Wesselhoeft,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1871,  p.  177  ;  Tumor  of  uterus.  Hale,
T.  A.  I.  H.,  1870,  p.  475;  Suppression  of  menses,  ovaritis  (13  cases),  Slough,  MSS.;
Amenorrhoea,  with  headache,  Slough,  MSS. ;  Uterine  hemorrhage,  Woodbury,  N.  E.
M.  a,  Sept.,  1873,  p.  408  ;  Whittier,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  215  ;  Burt,  Monog. ;
Metrorrhagia,  Wood,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,  p.  369  ;  Frost,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol,  10,  p.  148  ;
Bennett,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  413  ;  Wood,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  6,  p.  328  ;  Menorrhagia,
Backmeister,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1872,  p.  498 ;  Bowie,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1884,  p.  137 ;
Chamberlain,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  pp.  5,  121  ;  Whittier,  T.  H.  M.  S.  N.  Y.,  1870,
p.  172;  Hoyt,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  819;  Burt,  Monog.;  Bysmenorrhoea,  Hunt,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  12 ;  Schley,  A.  O.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  412 ;  Burt,  Monog. ;  Scanty
menses,  Burt,  Monog  ;  Amenorrhoea,  Slough,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1884,  p.  74;  Sup'
pression  of  menses,  Burt,  Monog. ;  Leucorrhcea,  Burt,  Monog. ;  Abortion,  Burt,
Monog  ;  After-pains,  Farrington,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  272 ;  Post-partum  hemorrhage.
Swan,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  449 ;  Agalactia,  Burt,  Monog. ;  Urticaria,  Burt,
Monog.

^  Mind. Great  depression  of  spirits ;  irritable.

I  I  Very  sad,  cries  frequently ;  excessively  prostrated  from
sexual  abuse  and  loss  of  semen ;  sleep  restless.


USTILAGO.  366

^  Sensorium. Frequent  attacks  of  vertigo.

■  Vertigo  during  cliniaxis,  with  too  frequent  and  profuse
menstruation.
'  Inner  Head. Feeling  of  fulness  in  head,  with  dull,  pressive
frontal  headache.
Frontal  headache,  <  by  walking.

Violent  frontal  headache  as  if  forehead  would  burst  open.
Sharp  flying  pains  in  forehead,  congestion  of  brain.
Pain  on  top  and  side  of  head ;  climaxis.
I  Nervous  headache  from  menstrual  irregularities  in  atonic
women.
*  Outer  Head. Scalp  dry,  hot  and  congested,  with  loss  of  hair.
Scald-head  ;  two-thirds  of  scalp  one  filthy  mass  of  inflam-
mation, with  loss  of  most  of  hair;  a  watery  serum  con-
stantly oozing  from  scalp.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Things  whirl  before  eyes,  appear  double;
white  specks  come  into  view  and  blot  all  else.
Twitching  of  eyes,  they  seem  to  revolve  in  circles  and

dart  from  object  to  object.
Eyes  feel  hot  on  closing  lids.
Aching  and  smarting  in  eyeballs,  with  profuse  secretion  of

tears  ;  in  open  air.
Dull  aching  pain  in  r.  eyeball.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Constant  dull  pain  in  1.  ear,  caused  by

extension  from  inflamed  tonsil.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Dryness  of  nostrils  as  if  he  had  taken
cold.
Rhinitis,  bitter  taste,  offensive  odor  noticeable  to  patient
himself.
^ Upper  Face. Sudden  pallor;  evening  while  sitting.

Burning  of  face  and  scalp  from  congestion.
'"Teeth  and  Gums. Constant  dull  aching  pain  in  first  and
second  upper  molars,  which  are  decayed  and  have  ached
before.
Shedding  of  teeth  (in  animals).
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Slimy,  coppery  taste.

Pricking  sensation  in  tongue,  with  a  feeling  as  if  some-
thing were  under  its  root  pressing  it  upward.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Saliva  profuse ;  bitter.

"'Throat. Dryness  of  fauces,  with  difficult  deglutition;  with
burning  distress  in  stomach.
Tonsils  congested,  inflamed,  1.  very  large  dark-colored,

with  dull  pain,  <  from  swallowing.
Feeling  as  of  a  lump  behind  larynx  ;  producing  constant

desire  to  swallow.
Sharp  lancinating  pain  in  r.  tonsil.
Burning  in  oesophagus  at  cardiac  orifice.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite
followed  by  canine  hunger.


867  USTILAGO.

"'Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions of  food,  strongly  acid.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Goneness  in epigastrium.
6'Cliinaxis.

Faint  feeling  in  epigastrium,  with  pain  in  region  of  liver
and  bowels.

Repeated  fine  sharp  cutting  pains  in  epigastrium.

Constant  distress  in  region  of  stomach.

Burning  distress  in  sternum  and  stomach,  accompanied
by  fine  neuralgic  pains  in  same  region,  lasting  about
three  minutes  at  a  time;  come  on  every  ten  or  fifteen
minutes  for  several  hours ;  sharp  cutting  pain  in  stomach.

iHsematemesis  of  a  passive  nature,  profuse,  blood  venous,
accompanied  by  nausea,  which  improves  after  hemor-
rhage.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  region  of  r.  lobe  of  liver.

Dull  pains  in  r.  hypochondrium,  with  distress  in  small
intestines.
'^Abdomen.  Grumbling  pains  in  abdomen  all  afternoon,  fol-
lowed by  dry,  hard  stool,  fine,  cutting  colicky  pains
every  few  minutes  all  day,  >  by  hard  constipated  stool,
followed  by  dull  distress  in  bowels.

Pain  in  1.  inguinal  region,  while  walking.
^'^  Stool  and  Rectum. Black,  dry,  lumpy  stools,  costive.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Urine  first  increased  and  light,  with

great  desire;  later  scanty  and  dark.
^^ Male  Sexual  Organs. > Erotic  fancies;  emissions.

I  Seminal  emissions  and  irresistible  tendency  to  mastur-
bation.

Great  depression  of  sexual  system,  with  relaxed  scrotum.

I  I  One  to  four  emissions  with  sexual  dreams  every  week,
followed  next  day  by  great  prostration,  dull  pain  in
lumbar  region,  with  great  despondency  and  irritability.

1  I  Spermatorrhoea  after  onanism;  emissions  every  night,
talking  about  women  causes  an  emission  ;  very  sad;  cries
frequently;  says  he  cannot  break  ofi'  habit,  has  no  con-
trol of  hitnself  when  passion  is  aroused ;  knows  it  is
fast  killing  him,  cannot  work,  is  so  prostrated.

Chronicorchitis;  neuralgia  and  irritabletesticle;  indurated
testicle.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Burning  distress  in  ovaries.

Acute  pain,  <  in  1.  ovary,  with  swelling;  pains  intermit-
tent ;  shoot  rapidly  down  legs.

Ovaritis,  constant  pains  in  ovary,  sharp  pains  passing
down  legs  rapidly;  ovary  much  swollen  and.  tender,
with  scanty  menstruation.

I  'Intermittent  neuralgia  of  1.  ovary,  which  is  as  large  as
a  hen's  egg  and  very  tender  to  touch.


USTILAGO.  368

1  I  Ovaritis ;  took  cold  after  menstruation ;  constant  dull
pain  in  r  groin  and  back,  three  or  four  times  an  hour;
sharp  neuralgic  pains  in  ovary ;  walking  painful ;  bowels
torpid ;  very  languid.

I  1  Vicarious  menstruation  from  lungs  and  bowels.

I  I  Ovarian  irritation,  constant  pain  in  1.  ovary  passing
down  hip,  has  to  limp  when  walking;  pains  sharp  and
at  times  pass  down  leg  with  great  rapidity ;  every  few
days  has  quite  a  swelling  in  1.  groin ;  cannot  bear  press-
ure over  ovary.

I  I  Every  day  from  about  12  m.  to  about  4  p.m.,  constant
pain  from  1.  ovary  to  uterus ;  every  few  minutes,  pain
in  ovary  is  intensely  severe,  cutting  like  a  knife ;  pain
in  r.  ovary  and  hj^pogastric  region,  but  all  starting
from  1.  ovary ;  ovary  can  be  distinctly  felt  in  groin
about  as  large  as  a  hen's  egg  and  very  hard ;  when
pressed  upon  gives  intense  pain ;  every  day  thinks  she
has  fever  with  paroxysms  of  pain  but  no  chill ;  slight
leucorrhoea ;  loss  of  appetite ;  constipated.

■  Constant  aching  distress  referred  to  mouth  of  womb.
Displaced uterus with menorrhagia; cervix tumefied;

bleeds  when  touched.

■  Hypertrophy  of  uterus  with  a  soft  and  spongy  os  and

cervix ;  sufficiently  dilated  to  easily  admit  fingers.
I  I  Uterus  hypertrophied,  sensitive; blood  bright,  fresh,

without  coagula.
I  I  Subserous  or  interstitial  fibroid  of  uterus  (two  cases),

fibroid  much  diminished.
•  Prolapsus  with  menorrhagia.
I  Cervix  tumefied,  bleeds  when  touched.

■  Menses:  too  scanty,  with  ovarian  irritation;  too  profuse

and  too  early ; blood  clotted ; as  if  everything  would

come  through.
Between  menstrual  periods,  constant  suffering  under  1.

breast,  at  margin  of  ribs.
I  I  For  days  oozing  of  dark  blo,od  with  small  coagula ;  uterus

enlarged,  cervix  tumefied  or  dilated.

■  Metrorrhagia  after  confinement  and  after  miscarriage.

■  ■Oozing  of  dark  blood,  highly  coagulated,  forming  occa-

sionally long,  black  stringy  clots.

■  Chronic  uterine  hemorrhages,  and  passive  congestions.

■  Blood  dark,  but  so  thin  as  to  scarcely  color  fingers.

■  Metrorrhagia  after  miscarriage.

I  I  Extreme  pain  during  menstrual  period;  fiow  very  pro-
fuse and  did  not  cease  entirely  until  next  period ;  most
of  time  confined  to  bed. ^Metrorrhagia.

■  Menorrhagia  at  climacteric  period;  active  and  constant

flowing  with  frequent  clots.


369  USTILAGO.

I  I  Profuse  menstruation,  flow  lasting  from  ten  days  to  two
weeks,  at  first  very  abundant,  gradually  wearing  off;
always  <  from  motion ;  discharge  dark  and  quite
painless.

I  I  Menses  every  three  weeks,  with  dark  coagulum ;  profuse,
with  gushes  of  bright-red  blood  when  rising  from  a  seat,
or  after  having  been  startled  or  frightened  ;  two  days
before  menses,  a  heavy  backache  with  sharp  pain  across
abdomen  from  hip  to  hip,  followed  by  expulsive  pains;
pains  diminish  after  flow  commences  and  stop  with  it;
between  menstrual  periods  heavy  dragging  backache  on
exertion  ;  pain  shooting  up  back  from  hips  to  shoulder ;
abdomen  tender  to  touch;  excessive  bearing  down;
pressure  in  head ;  sensation  of  contraction  in  vertex,
and  feeling  as  if  head  were  lifting  off;  vertigo;  excori-
ating, albuminous  leucorrhoea,  <  before  menses ;  rav-
enous appetite;  excessive  tired  feeling;  pulse  80  and
'.  weak;  mental  depression.

I  I  Subject  to  profuse  menstruation  ;  childless ;  large,  fleshy,
flabby,  bloated-looking,  with  a  very  sallow  complexion,
inclined  to  be  (and  formerly  had  been)  dropsical  from
excessive  loss  of  blood  ;  profuse  menstruation,  which
seems  to  her  to  be  be  principally  water  and  clots;  says
there  is  no  outward  flow  when  she  lies  still,  but  clots
and  water  pass  out  of  uterus  when  she  gets  up ;  feels  so
full  in  uterus  that  she  must  rise  to  get  rid  of  clots ;
flowed  fearfully  during  night ;  very  low,  scarcely  able
to  speak  aloud.

I  I  Severe  menorrhagia  for  past  twelve  years  at  every  men-
strual period,  lasting  a  week  or  ten  days,  sometimes
longer ;  pale,  thin,  weak,  very  nervous.

I  I  Profuse  discharge  of  dark,  clotted  blood  of  fetid  odor,
with  pain  and  tenderness  in  one  or  both  ovaries.  ^Men-
orrhagia.

■  Menorrhagia  at  change  of  life.

iDysmenorrhoea  of  a  congestive  character,  with  much  ova-
rian irritation;  severe  pain  in  ovaries,  uterus  and  back
every  few  minutes;  scanty,  pale  flow  accompanied  by
false  membranes;  poor  appetite,  thickly-coated  tongue.

I  I  Subject  to  headaches  ever  since  menstruation  appeared
at  age  of  flfteen  ;  headache  mostly  on  top  of  head  ;  appe-
tite poor ;  pain  in  1.  che-t  with  some  cough ;  total  sup-
pression of  menses  for  last  eight  months  ;  severe  pain  in
back,  is  unable  to  ride  in  carriage ;  pain  in  uterine  re-
gion, especially  over  ovarian  region,  <  1.  side;  vomit-
ing of  mucus  and  blood  daily ;  no  sleep  ;  some  leucor-
rhoea; hysterical;  no  uterine  displacement,  but  great
congestion  in  pelvic  region.

vol.  X. — 24,


USTILAGO.  370

iSuppression  of  menses  without  apparent  cause;  trouble-
some cough ;  considerable  expectoration;  sometimes  also
dry  cougli ;  stitching  pains  in  chest,  especially  1.  side;
night  sweats ;  loss  of  appetite ;  pain  in  ovaries,  espe-
cially 1. ;  general  debility ;  headache;  leucorrhoea;  chlo-
rotic;  anaemic,  as  if  in  first  stage  of  consumption.

I  I  Menses  suppressed  for  last  fourteen  months;  very  irri-
table and  depressed  ;  uneasiness  in  region  of  stomach ;
pain  in  ovarian  region,  especially  1.;  skin  hot  and  dry;
constipation,  stools  dry  and  hard;  no  appetite;  stitch-
ing pains  in  chest,  <  1.  side ;  constant  hacking  cough ;
considerable  expectoration  ;  night  sweats ;  general  pros-
tration ;  great  uneasiness  in  lower  extremities.

iClimaxis:  vertigo;  frequent  flushing ;  metrorrhagia.

1  I  Mild  leucorrhosa.
2* Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Abortion:  bear-
ing-down pains,  as  if  everything  would  come  from  her;
in  flabby  constitutions;  from  general  atony  of  uterus;
with  or  without  hemorrhage.

I  I  Has  aborted  a  number  of  times  at  third  month ;  is  now
about  three  months  pregnant ;  for  last  ten  days  has  had
more  or  less  hemorrhage  every  day,  some  days  quite
bad ;  not  so  much  at  night ;  blood  passes  a  number  of
times  through  day,  in  dark-colored  clots.

I  Labor  pains  deficient;  os  soft,  pliable,  dilatable.

iPpst-partum  hemorrhages  from  a  flabby,  atonic  condition
of  uterus.

■  Constant  flooding; every  few  minutes,  expulsion  of  a

large  clot  of  bright-red  blood,  with  bearing-down  pains.

^Post-partum  hemorrhage.
I  Persistent  hemorrhage  of  brownish  blood,  with  want  of

uterine  contraction.
I  I  One  and  a  half  hours  after  delivery  commenced  to  flow

violently.

■  Passive  hemorrhage  after  miscarriage,  blood  in  lumps,

flooding  for  days  and  weeks.

I  I  Severe  flooding  two  weeks  after  labor;  large  bright- red

clots ;  no  pain  ;  very  weak.

I I  Lochia  too  profuse,  partly  fluid,  partly  clotted;  pro-
longed bearing-down  pains;  uterus  feels  as  if  drawn
into  a  knot.

Very  profuse  lochial  discharge,  very  dark  in  color,  almost

black.
I  I  Agalactia; chronic inflammation, and induration  of

mammas.
Galactorrhoea.

■  Puerperal  peritonitis,  with  constant  flooding;  high  fever;

secretion  putrid  ;  abdomen  excessively  tender  and  tym-
panitic. ^Abortion.


371  USTILAGO.

I  I  Puerperal  peritonitis;  aborted  about  two  da^'s  since,  at
about  three  months;  constant  fever;  pulse  120;  cannot
bear  least  pressure  on  any  portion  of  bowels;  about  six
times  to-day  has  had  sharp,  cutting  pains  in  1.  ovary;
has  flowed  constantly  for  two  days;  blood  dark,  not  copi-
ous, nor  attended  with  bearing-down  pains;  cannot
move  in  bed;  is  compelled  to  lie  upon  her  back;  con-
stant dull,  frontal  headache;  loss  of  appetite,  tongue  net
furred.

I  I  For  last  year  vertigo  every  day,  some  days  so  bad  she
has  to  go  to  bed ;  menses  every  thyee  weeks  for  last
year,  last  about  ten  days  and  profuse;  flows  as  much
again  as  she  did  when  in  health ;  constant  aching  dis-
tress under  1.  mamma;  rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders
and  back  ;  very  weak,  not  able  to  work. ^Climaxis.

■  Hypertrophy  and subinvolution of  uterus  with great

atony.

■  Fibroids  and  induration  of  os.

I  1  Discharge  of  blood  from  uterus,  bright-red,  partly  fluid,
partly  clotted;  passive  congestion  of  uterus,  so  that  there
is  a  slight  oozing  of  blood  after  each  examination  ;  tis-
sues of  uterus  feel  soft  and  spongy ;  os  patulous.  ^Sub-
involution of  uterus.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Feeling  as
if  there  were  a  lump  behind  larynx,  which  produces
constant  inclination  to  swallow.
"  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sharp  tearing  in  1.  side  from  top

of  chest  down  to  sixth  or  seventh  rib,  <  by  breathing.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Burning  pain  in  cardiac

region.
'"Outer  Chest. Sudden  flying  pains  from  heart  to  stomach,
that  arrested  breathing,  lasted  but  a  moment,  probably
myalgic.
^'  Heck  and  Back. Severe  rheumatic  pains  in  lumbar  region,

<  by  walking;  aching  distress  in  small  of  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Dull  aching  pains  in  slioulder  joints.

Severe  rheumatic  pains  in  muscles  of  r.  shoulder,  all  night.
Rheumatic  pains  in  arms,  hands  and  fingers.
Dull  rheumatic  pains  in  r.  elbow  joint,  <  on  motion.
Rheumatic  drawing  pains  in  finger  joints,  more  especially

in  second  joint  of  r.  forefinger.
Severe  drawing  pains  in  joints  of  all  fingers.
Fine,  sticking  pains  along  metacarpal  bone  of  r.  forefinger,

every  few  seconds.
Sharp,  cutting  pains  along  metacarpal  bones  of  r.  hand.

■  Hypertrophy  or  loss  of  nails.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  legs.

Flying  rheumatic  pains  in  metatarsal  bones  of  r.  foot.


USTILAGO.  372

''  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  pain  in  legs,  arms and

fingers.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rising:  menorrhagia  <.

Motion:  menorrhagia  <.

Walking :  frontal  headache  <  ;  pain  in  1.  inguinal  region ;
pain  in  lumbar  region  <.
^" Sleep. Sleep:  troubled,  tosses  about,  troublesome  dreams;

heat  over  body.
^^  Time. 12  to  4  p.m.  :  pain  from  1.  ovary  to  uterus  and  r.  ovary.

All  afternoon :  grumbling  in  abdomen.

Evening:  sudden  pallor.

All  night:  rheumatism  in  r.  shoulder;  general  heat.

Night :  itching  urticaria.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  a  warm  room : felt  op-
pressed, faint.

Open  air:  aching  in  eyes  and  lachrymation,
^^  Fever. Internal  heat  through  body,  but  <  in  eyes,  which
are  sensitive  to  light  and  sore  to  touch ;  pulse  normal.

General  heat  at  night  during  sleep.

Relapsing  agues ;  very  profuse  sweat ;  slight  nausea;  op-
pression of  chest ; cerebral  disturbance,  and  great  irri-
tability.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Lasting three  minutes :  neuralgic
pains  in  sternum  and  stomach.

Every  few  minutes:  colicky  pains.

Every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes :  neuralgic  pains  in  sternum
and  stomach.

Every  night:  emissions.

For  two  days :  constant  flooding.

Every  week  :  one  to  four  emissions.

Every  three  weeks :  menses.

Third  month :  abortion.

For  eight  months:  suppression  of  menses.

For  fourteen  months:  suppression  of  menses.

For  twelve  years :  menorrhagia,  lasting  ten  days.

Climacteric  period :  vertigo;  frequent  flushing;  pain  on
top  and  side  of  head;  menorrhagia;  metrorrhagia.
^^ Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  dull  pain  in  ear;  tonsil
inflamed;  pain  in  inguinal  region;  pain  in  ovary;
neuralgia  of  ovary  ;  ovary  enlarged  ;  ovarian  irritation  ;
pain  from  ovary  down  hip ;  sufi'ering  under  breast;  pain
in  chest  with  cough;  stitches  in  chest;  aching  distress
under  mamma;  tearing  from  top  of  chest  to  sixth  or
seventh  rib.

Right:  aching  in  eyeball;  lancinating  in  tonsil;  pain  in
region  of  liver;  dull  pains  in  hypochondrium;  dull  pain
in  groin  and  back;  neuralgia  of  ovary  ;  rheumatism  in
shoulder,  elbow  joint  and  second  joint  of  forefinger;


373  USTILAGO.

cutting  pains  along  metacarpal  bones  ;  rheumatic  pains

in  metatarsal  bones.
"  Sensations. As  if  forehead  would  burst  open  ;  as  if  some-
thing were  under  root  of  tongue,  pressing  upward  ;  as  of

a  lump  behind  larynx;  as  if  head  were  being  lifted  off;

excessively  tired  feeling;  as  if  everything  would  come

from  her,  bearing  down ; uterus  as  if  drawn  into a

knot.
Pain:  on  top  and  side  of  head;  in  region  of  liver  and

bowels; in  region  of  liver;  in  1.  inguinal  region;  in  r.

ovary.
Acute  pain  :  in  1.  ovar}'.
Lancinating:  in  r.  tonsil.
Cutting:  in  epigastrium  ;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen;  in  1.

ovary ;  along  metacarpal  bones  of  r.  hand.
Sharp  pain:  across  abdomen  from  hip  to  hip;  in  ovaries,

uterus  and  back
Stitches:  in  chest,  <  1.  side.
Shooting:  down  legs.

Sticking:  along  metacarpal  bone  of  r.  forefinger.
Pricking:  in  tongue.
Tearing:  in  1.  chest.
Drawing:  in  finger  joints.
Pressure:  in  frontal  region ;  in  head.
Aching:  in  eyeballs;  dull,  in  r.  eyeball ;  dull,  in  decayed

molars;  in  mouth  of  womb;  under  1.  mamma;  in  small

of  back  ;  in  shoulder  joints.
Burning:  of  scalp; efface; in  stomach  ; in  oesophagus  ;

in  sternum;  in  ovaries;  in  cardiac  region.
Smarting:  in  eyeballs.

Flying  pains:  in  forehead  ;  from  heart  to  stomach.
Neuralgic  pains: in  sternum  and  stomach; in  testicles;

in  1.  ovary.
Rheumatic  pain :  in  shoulders  and  back ;  in  lumbar  region ;

in  muscles  of  r.  shoulder; in  r.  elbow  joint; in  arms,

hands  and  fingers ;  in  legs ;  in  metatarsal  bones  of  r.  foot.
Bearing  down  :  in  abdomen.
Contraction :  in  vertex.
Dull  pain:  in  1.  ear;  in  tonsils;  in  r  hypochondrium ;  in

lumbar  region;  in  r.  groin  and  back.
Grumbling:  in  abdomen.
Fulness:  in  head;  in  uterus.

Uneasiness :  in  region  of  stomach ;  in  lower  extremities.
Goneness:  in  epigastrium.
Faintness:  in  epigastrium.
Heat :  of  scalp  ;  in  eyes ;  through  body.
Dryness:  of  nostril;  of  fauces.
Itching:  urticaria.


USTILAGO.  374

■** Tissues.  Vascular  system  of  ovaries  is  most  powerfully-
affected,  producing  congestion,  enlargement,  and  great
irritation,  with  ovaralgia,  dysmenorrboea,  and  especially
menorrhagia.
^^Toucli.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  abdomen
tender;  eyes  sore.

Pressure : ovaries  <.

Riding  in  a  carriage :  unable  from  backache.
^^Skin. Whole  skin  is  dry,  hot,  and  congested.

I  I  Negro,  urticaria  of  six  years'  standing,  troubled  more  or
less  all  time;  every  night  itching,  scratching  parts  pro-
duces large  pale  welts  on  body,  arms  and  legs.

Copper-colored  spots  on  skin ;  secondary  syphilis ;  maculse.

Pustular  ulceration  of  skin,  scald-head,  and  various  forms
of  eczema.

Painful  destructive  diseases  of  nails.

Alopecia ; complete  loss  of  hair  from long-lasting  con-
gestion of  scalp ;  tendency  to  small  boils ;  skin  dry  and
hot.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Very  lymphatic  women,
with  clear,  white  skin.

Tall,  slim,  fair  complexion,  ''consumptive  persons."

Miss  E.,  set.  19,  nervous  temperament;  menorrhagia.

Miss  M.,  set.  19,  nervous  temperament;  dysmenorrboea.

Miss  0.,  set.  20,  light  hair,  very  pale  and  ansemic,  slim,
delicate  from  childhood,  history  of  consumption  on
father's  side;  amenorrhoea,  cough,  etc.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  23,  nervous  temperament,  two  weeks  after  third
labor;  metrorrhagia.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  26,  nervo-bilious  temperament ;  suppression
of  menses.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  27,  nervous  temperament;  dysmenorrboea.

Lady,  set.  27,  nervous  temperament;  scanty  menses.

Man,  set.  28,  nervo-sanguine  temperament,  suffering  seve-
ral years ;  spermatorrhoea.

Mrs.  F.,  set  28,  blonde,  scrofulous  bemorrhagic  diathesis,
married  five  years,  never  pregnant;  menorrhagia.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  28,  large,  lymphatic,  weight  about  200,  after
third  labor;  uterine  hemorrhage.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  29,  nervous  temperament;  dysmenorrboea.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  30,  nervo-bilious;  ovarian  irritation.

Irishman,  set.  30,  bilious  temperament;  spermatorrhoea.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  30,  nervous  temperament,  two  months  ago
miscarried  between  third  and  fourth  month ;  metror-
rhagia.

Lady,  set.  30,  tall,  slim,  nervous;  menorrhagia.

Mrs.  D,  set.  31,  nervo-bilious;  ovaritis.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  32,  sanguine  temperament,  nursing  a  babe  14
months  old,  suffering  six  weeks;  metrorrhagia.


375  USTILAGO— UVA  URSI.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  34,  two  cliildren,  youngest  set.  10,  subject  to

headaches  since  puberty  ;  suppression  of  menses.
Mrs.  H.,  set.  34,  bilious  temperament; hemorrhage  after

abortion.
Lady,  set.  35,  suffering  six  years  ;  tumor  of  uterus.
Mrs.  H.,  set.  38,  two  months  ago  miscarried when  three

months  gone;  metrorrhagia.
Mrs.  F.,  set.  39,  nervous  temperament,  married  nine  years,

never  pregnant ;  metrorrhagia.
Mrs.  B.,  set.  40,  large,  fleshy,  flabby,  bloated- looking,  no

children ;  metrorrhagia.
Mrs.  F,,  set.  50,  nervo-bilious;  menorrhagia.
Mrs.  N.,  set.  54,  nervous  temperament;  ovarian  irritation.
Lady,  tall,  slim,  bilious;  suppression  of  menses.
^®  Relations. Compare:  Secale  and  Sabina.


UVA  URSI.

Bearberry.  Ericaccse.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves  gathered  in  Antiimn.
Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Heberden,  Sauvauges,  Noak  and  Trinks; Mitchell,
Essay;  and  Bartram.

Clinical  Authorities. — Cysto-blennorrhosa,  Genzke,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.
56  ;  Dysuria,  Hull,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  350;  Vesical  catarrh,  Nottingham,
N.  Y.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  162 ; Urinary  difficulty,  Kershaw,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  367.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Fluent  coryza,  with  rawness.

'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Weak,  sick  at  stomach,  sore  all
over  as  if  bruised.

^' Urinary  Organs. Hsematuria.

Constant  urging  to  urinate  and  straining,  with  discharge
of  blood  and  slime,  or  constant  straining  without  any
discharge  at  all,  or  only  a  few  drops  of  urine ;  after  this
cutting  and  burning  in  urethra,  which  is  succeeded  by
discharge  of  blood ;  hard  stools.
I  I  Shooting  pains  from  hip  to  hip;  bladder  and  urethra
sensitive;  frequent  urination,  with  pain  and  burning
during  and  after  urinating,  relief  of  all  symptoms  when
lying  upon  back;  tongue  thick,  brown  coat;  pulse  110;


UVA  URSr.  37G

great  thirst,  no  appetite;  second  da}'  drowsy  and  stupid ;
urine  turbid  and  on  fifth  day  passed  blood,  mucus  and
pus. ^Catarrli  of  bladder.

I  i  Man,£et.  48;  sincefour  months  severe  urinary  difficulties;
emaciated,  features  sallow  and  oedematous;  frequent  and
severe  inclination  to  urinate,  with  burning  in  glans
when  urine  passes  guttatim,  and  in  small  quantities,  tak-
ing ten  minutes  and  more  to  pass  a  small  quantity  ;  be-
fore urinating  frequent  and  continued  spasm  of  bladder;
after  great  straining  passes  a  few  drops ;  at  all  times
burning  and  tearing  pains  in  hypogastric  region,  which
is  warmer,  swollen,  and  sensitive  to  touch  ;  frequent
intense  chills ;  severe  heat,  but  no  sweat ;  pulse  86  to
90,  small  and  soft ;  tenesmus  of  bladder  robs  him  of
sleep;  downcast,  wishes  to  die;  no  appetite;  tongue
coated  with  mucus ;  stool  retarded,  hard  and  painful;
thirst  increased,  but  afraid  to  drink;  great  and  general
languor;  unsteadiness  of  lower  extremities;  brown,
muddN^  foul-smelling  urine,  with  large  deposit  of  gre}'-
ish  slimy  sediment,  more  than  one-third  its  quantity;
sediment  showed  alkaline  reaction,  produced  flakes  in
boiling,  and  Nitric  acid  gave  it  a  pink  color;  mem-
branous particles  at  times  clogged  up  urethra,  producing
excruciating  pain  till  they  are  discharged  with  some
blood  (Uva  ursi  relieved  greatly;  Ccm?ia6/s  1,  daily  two
doses,  in  weekly  alternation  with  Uva  ursi  finished  the
cure). ^Cysto-blennorrbcea.

I  I  Pain,  burning  and  straining,  dribbling  of  urine,  some-
times spasms  of  bladder,  could  not  urinate.

I  Painful  dysuria,  witli  frequent  but  difficult  discharge  of
thick,  ropy  urine  of  strong,  pungent  odor.
"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  '  Hoarse-
ness with  pains  in  bones; stopped  up  in  throat; no
appetite.
"''  Cough. Throat  tickles,  feels  like  coughing  all  time,  sore  and
bruised  all  over;  cough;  nose  raw  and  running;  cut-
ting and  burning  on  urinating.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pains  in  chest.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  upon  back : bladder

symptoms  >.
*^  Sensations. As  if  bruised  all  over.

Pain:  in  chest;  in  bones.

Spasmodic  pain  :  in  bladder.

Cutting:  in  uretlira;  on  urinating.

Sbooting:  from  hip  to  hip.

Tearing:  in  hypogastric  region.

Burning:  in  urethra;  in  glans  penis,  when  urinating;  in
hypogastric  region  ;  in  bladder.


377  UA^A  URSI— VACC.  AND  VAR.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  hypogastric

region  sensitive.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man,  set.  48,  suffering  four

months  ;  cysto-blennorrhoea.
Man,  set.  70  ;  dysuria,  etc.
*^  Relations. Compare  :  Secale,  Cannab.


VACCININUM  AND  VARIOLINUM.

The  lymph  from  coupox,  and  fhe  nosode.


Fragmentary  provings  by  Fincke  and  Swan.

Obser%'ations  by  Schuklitsdi,  A.H.  Z.,  vol.  4,  p.  12;  Kanfstatt,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  45,
p.  373  ;  Power,  Pbil.  Jour,  of  Horn.,  vol.  1,  p.  493  ;  Berridge,  Am.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  8,  p.  126;  Le  Normand,  Hygea,  vol.  10,  p.  68;  Hencke,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  45,
p.  373.

Vacc.  stands  for  Vaccininum ;  A'^ar.  for  Variolinum ;  S.,  Swan ;  F.,  Fineke ;
M.,  Morrison;  IMa,  Matthes;  \V.  M.,  for  W.  in  Magdeburg;  C,  Craigin  ;  B.,
Blakly;  Mo.,  Mossa;  A.,  Anderson.

Clinicai.  Authorities. — Chronic  conjunctivitis,  Moirison,  Hum.  Kev.,  vol.  18,
p.  223 ;  Epistaxis,  cured  by  vaccination,  Matthes,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  7  ;  Morbid
fear  of  smallpox,  Swan,  Med.  Inv.,  Jan,  1871,  p.  190;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  172 ;
Eczema,  cured  by  vaccination,  Horn.  Phys.,  Feb.,  1884,  p.  41 ;  Variola,  Kazkowski,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  .599  ;  Craigin,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  8,  p.  538  ;  Med.  Jour.,  vol.  9,  p.
367;  Mossa,  H.  Kl.,  1871,  p.  98  ,  Magdeburg,  H.  KL,  1872,  p.  9  ;  Morrison,  Horn.
Eev.,  vol.  18,  p.  687  ;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  223 ;  Blakly,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  403  ;
Swan,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  490;  (2  cases),  Med.  Adv.,  May,  1890,  p.  287;
Schnappauf,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  470 ;  Dudgeon,  vol.  10,  p.  263 ;  Eussell,  vol  10,
p.  620  ; Blakly,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  122.


^Mind. Crying. Vacc. F.

Ill-humor,  with  restless  sleep. A^acc. A.

Nervous,  impatient,  irritable;  disposition  to  be  troubled
b}'  things. Vacc. F.

Delirium  with  the  initial  fever. Var. S.

Fear  of  death  ;  wild  excitement  and  begging  to  know  if  he
was  to  die,  and  before  the  sentence  was  complete  drops
into  a  heavy  sleep  with  loud  breathing. Var. S.

I  Morbid  fear  of  taking  smallpox. Vacc. S.
^Sensorium. Vertigo. Var. S.


VACCININUM  AND  VARIOLINUM.  378

Syncope  in  attempting  to  rise.
'  Inner  Head. Frontal  headache. Vacc. A.

Forehead  very  hot,  face  red  and  bloated,  carotids  pulsat-
ing violently, Var. S.

Forehead  felt  as  if  it  would  split  in  two  in  median  line
from  root  of  nose  to  top  of  head. Vacc. F.

Stitches  in  r.  temple. Vacc. F.

Headache :  with  or  after  chill ;  all  over  head  ;  particularly
in  forehead ;  severe  in  vertex ;  as  if  a  band  tightly  en-
circled head  ;  severe,  lancinating,  throbbing ;  <  with
every  pulsation. Var. S.

Intolerable  pain  in  occiput. Var. S.

*  Outer  Head. Eruption  like  crusta  lactea. Vacc. A.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  i  Tinea  tarsi and conjunctivitis  in a
woman, set. 28, remaining as result of variola in
infancy,  conjunctivae  painfully  sensitive. Vacc. M.

I  I  Weak  eyes;  feeling  in  forehead  as  if  it  were  split.
Vacc. F.

Inflamed  eyelids. Vacc.

Redness  of  eyes  and  face,  with  small  pimples  on  face  and
hands. Vacc. F.

Keratitis,  with  smallpox  and  after  vaccination.  Vacc.  or
Var.

I  I  Chronic  ophthalmia  with  loss  of  sight. Var. S.

I  I  Pupils  contracted. Var. S.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Deafness. Var. S.
^  Smell  and  Nose, i  i  Chronic  catarrh. Vacc. S.

Full  feeling  of  head,  with  running  at  nose. Vacc. S.

I  I  Bleeding  at  nose  preceded  by  a  feeling  of  contraction
above  and  between  eyebrows,  soon  after  eating  meat;
menses  rather  profuse  and  too  frequent;  cured  byre-
vaccination.  Ma.
^Tipper  Face,  l  l Redness  and  distension  of  face,  chill  run-
ning down  back. Vacc. F.

Skin  of  face  and  neck  deep  dark-purple  hue. Var. S.
®  Lower  Face. Jaw  falling when asleep, with trembling
when  aroused. Var. S.

Swelling  of  neck  under  r.  ear  (parotid  gland)  with  sensa-
tion like  being  cut. Vacc. F.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums, i '  Teeth  covered  with  thick  brown  slime.

Var. S.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  coated,  dryish  yellow,  with
papillae  showing  througli  coat. Vacc. F.

M Thick  dirty  yellow  coating  on  tongue. Var. S.

I  I  When  asleep  tongue  protruded,  black  coating,  when
raised  it  is  with  diffi"ulty  drawn  back;  looks  like  a
mass  of  putrid  flesh. Var. S.


379  VACCININUM  AND  VARIOLINUM.

^^ Inner  Mouth. Diy  mouth  and  tongue. Vacc. A.
^^  Throat. Tliroat  veiy  sore,  redness  of  fauces. Var. S.

1  I  Pharynx  and  fauces  deep  purplish  crimson,  with  gan-
grenous appearance ;  breath  horribly  offensive.  Var.  S.
Painful  deglutition. Var. S.
Sensation  as  if  throat  were  closed. Var. S.
Sensation  as  of  a  lump  in  r.  side  of  throat. Var. S.
Diphtheria  with  horrible  fetor  oris. Var. S.
"Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Food,  especially
water,  tastes  sickish,  sweet. Var. S.
Appetite  gone,  disgust  to  taste,  smell  and  appearance  of

food. Vacc. A.
Coffee  tastes  sour. Vacc. F.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Aching  in  pit  of  stomach,
with  short  breath. Vacc. F.
Soreness  in  pit  of  stomach  and  across  epigastric  region.

Var. S.
Severe  pain  in prsecordial  region,  frequent  nausea  and

vomiting  of  bilious  and  bloody  matter. Var. S.
I  I  Frequent  bilious  vomiting. Var. S.
As  soon  as  he  drinks  milk  he  vomits  it  up. Var. S.
^^Hypochondria. A  stitch  in  hepatic  region,  at  margin  of
last  lower  rib,  axillary  line. Vacc. F.
Stitch  in  splenic  region. Vacc. F.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Thin,  bloody  stools. Var. S.

Several  brown,  green,  at  last  grass-green  stools,  painless,
loose,  of  intolerable  fetid  odor; no  thirst; last  stool
slimy,  with  small  quantity  of  blood. Var. S.
I  I  Dysentery. Var. S.
Constipation. Var. S.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine:  high  colored,  like  brandy;  tur-
bid and  offensive;  stains  a  rose  tea-color,  difficult  to
remove. Var. S.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Enlargement  of  testicle. Var. S.
Hard  swelling  of  1.  testicle  in  consequence  of  a  contusion.
Var. S.
"Respiration. Oppressed  respiration. Var. S.

Short  breath,  with  aching  in  pit  of  stomach,  and  pressure

in  region  of  heart. Vacc. F.
I  I  Asthma. Var. S.
^'^  Cough. Troublesome  cough,  with serous  and  sometimes
bloody  sputa. Var. S.
I  I  Hawking  up  thick,  viscid  slime,  smelling  bad. Var. S.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitch  in  1.  side  of  chest,  ante-
riorly under  short  ribs. Vacc. F.
Stitches  in  r.  side  under  short  ribs  in  front  from  r.  to  J.,
then  at  corresponding  place  in  1.  side,  but  from  1.  to  r.,
lasting  five  minutes,  felt  in  liver  and  spleen. Vacc. F.


VACCININUM  AND  VARIOLINUM.  380

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Febrile  action  of  heart

and  arteries. Vacc. A.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  of  neck,  with  tense  drawing  in
muscles,  <  on  motion. Var. S.

Pain  in  base  of  brain  and  neck. Var. S.

Backache. Vacc. A.

Aching  pain  in  back,  <  in  lumbar  region,  extending
around  waist. Vacc. S.

Chills  like  streams  of  ice-water,  running  down  from  be-
tween scapulae  to  sacral  region. Var. S.

Intolerable  aching  in  lumbar  and  sacral  region. Var. S.

Pain  as  if  back  were  broken. Var. S.

Pains  in  muscles  of  back  like  rheumatism  ; <  on  motion.
Var. S.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Severe  pains  in  1.  upper  arm,  at  vaccination
mark,  could  not  raise  it  in  morning. Vacc. F.

Hands  icy-cold  during  invasion. Var. S.

Tumefaction  of  arm,  which  had  been  half  paralyzed.
Var. S.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  in  wrists  and  hands. Vacc. S.
*^  Lower  Limbs. Tearing  in  1.  thigh  downward. Vacc. F

Soreness  of  lower  extremities,  as  if  heated  or  overexerted.
Vacc. A.

Legs  ached  immoderately,  hardly  able  to  get  about,  a
break-bone  sensation,  and  a  feeling  as  if  bones  were
undergoing  process  of  comminution. Vacc. A.

Muscular  rheumatism  ; <  on  motion. Var. S.
^"  Rest. Position. Motion. Motion  : stiff  neck  <  ; rheu-
matic pain  in  back  <  ; <  muscular  rheumatism.

Carried  :  child  wishes  to  be.
^^  Nerves. Restlessness. Vacc. A.

General  malaise. Vacc. A.

Languor,  lassitude. Vacc. A.

Tired  all  over,  with  stretching,  gaping  feeling;  unnatural
fatigue. Vacc. S.
'^  Sleep. Waked  in  middle  of  night  by  pain  in  forehead  and

eyes  as  if  split,  and  stinging  in  temples. Vacc. F.
*"  Fever. Fever,  with  heat,  thirst,  tossing  about,  crying,  aver-
sion to  food. Vacc. A.

Chill,  with  shaking. Vacc.  F.

Very  severe  chill,  followed  by  high  fever. Var. S.

Intense  fever,  commencing  with  chills  running  down  back
like  streams  of  cold  water,  causing  shivering,  and  chat-
tering of  teeth. Var. S.

Fever,  with  intense  radiating  heat,  burning  hot  to  touch.
Var. S.

Hot  fever,  no  thirst. Var. S.

Very  profuse,  bad  smelling  perspiration. Var. S.


381  VACCININUM  AND  VAPJOLINUM.

*^ Locality  and  Direction. Left:  bard  swelling  of  testicle;
tearing  in  thigh  ;  heaviness  in  arm.

Right:  as  of  a  lump  in  throat;  stitches  in  temple;  swell-
ing under  ear.

From  r.  to  1.:  stitclies  under  ribs.

From  1.  to  r. :  stitches  under  ribs.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  a  band  tightly  encircled  head  ;  as  if  fore-
head were  split;  crazy  feeling  through  brain;  as  if
throat  were  closed  ;  as  of  a  lump  in  r.  side  of  throat;
like  streams  of  ice- water  running  down  back ;  pain  as
if  back  were  broken  ;  as  if  heated  or  overexerted  in  lower
extremities ;  as  if  bones  of  legs  were  broken,  and  under-
going process  of  comminution.

Pain  :  in  base  of  brain  and  neck  ;  in  back.

Intolerable  pain  :  in  occiput.

Lancinating:  in  head.

Cutting :  in  swelling  under  r.  ear.

Tearing:  in  1.  thigh  downward.

Severe  pain  :  in  prsecordial  region  ;  in  vaccination  mark
on  1.  upper  arm.

Stitches:  in  r.  temple;  in  hepatic  region ;  in  splenic  region ;
in  chest  under  short  ribs.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  muscles  of  back;  I  I  in  wrists  and
hands.

Burning:  in  skin.

Aching :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  back  ;  in  lumbar  and  sacral
region.

Drawing:  in  muscles  of  neck;  in  upper  jaw  and  teeth.

Pressure  :  in  region  of  heart ;  in  small  of  back.

Soreness:  in  epigastric  region;  in  lower  extremities.

Heaviness :  in  1.  arm.

Fulness :  in  head.

Tingling:  in  skin.

Crawling:  in  back.

Itching:  of  exanthem  ;  of  pustular  eruption.
*■* Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Contusion: hard

swelling  of  1.  testicle.
^''Skin. Skin  hot  and  dry. Vacc. A.

A  general  eruption  similar  to  cowpox. Vacc. A.

Small  pimples  develop  at  point  of  vaccination  with  fourth
dilution. Vacc. A.

Exanthema  of  sharp-pointed  pimples,  usually  small,  sel-
dom large  and  suppurating,  dry,  resting  upon  small
red  areolae,  frequently  interspersed  with  small  round
spots  of  red  color,  sometimes  severe  itching. Var. S.

Red  pimples  or  blotches  in  various  parts,  most  evident
when  warm. Vacc. A.

Eruption  of  pustules  with  a  dark-red  base  and  a  roundish


VACCiyiXUM  AND  VARIOLIXUM.  382

or  oblong  elevation,  filled  with  pus  of  a  greenish-vellow
color,  resembling  varioloid,  some  as  large  as  a  pea,  some
less,  without  depression  in  centre,  coming  with  a  round,
hard  feel  in  skin  (like  a  shot),  very  itchy. Vacc. F.

Petechial  eruptions,  erythematous,  on  lower  abdominal
region,  apex  of  triangular  form,  being  at  pubis,  and  the
base  crossing  the  abdomen  transversely  in  neighbor-
hood of  umbilicus :  also  on  lateral  surface  of  trunk  to
axilla,  invading  folds  of  axilla,  corresponding  portion
of  arm  and  pectoral  is  major. Var. S.

A  child,  a3t.  S  months,  received  a  drop  of  lymph  from  a
healthy  vaccination,  diluted  with  one  hundred  drops  of
distilled  water,  and  well  shaken ;  on  fourth  day  small
bright-red  pimples  on  face,  which  on  following  day
formed  vesicles  of  a  pearly  look,  with  depressed  tips  and
surrounded  by  red  areolae :  on  eighth  day  very  restless,
screamed  and  cried,  wished  to  be  carried  constantly ;
sleepless,  febrile  heat,  rapid  pulse,  thirst,  desire  to  nurse
constantly  without  taking  mueh  :  constipation,  high-col-
ored urine;  poeks  elastic,  tense,  hard,  pearly;  inflamed
redness  and  swelling  of  face:  on  tenth  day,  on  forehead
and  nose  pocks  became  confluent,  looked  turbid,  were
filled  with  purulent  liquid,  and  somewhat  shrivelled ;  on
eleventh  day  pustules  bur?t  and  discharged  purulent
matter,  which  formed  yellowish-brown  scabs,  which
afterward  became  dark :  these  suppurated  and  exuded
for  a  long  time. gradually  healed  in  about  fourteen  days;
the  whole  course  was  like  that  of  crusta  lactea ;  the  child
was  very  well  afterward,  but  still  had  on  forehead  and
cheeks  some  small,  very  white  spots,  without  scars ;  sub-
sequent repeated  vaccinations  at  six  months'  intervals
were  inefl'ectual. Vacc. A.

Tingling  burning  in  skin  over  whole  body,  most  intense
in  skin  of  forehead  and  in  lower  and  anterior  portion
of  hairy  scalp,  which  parts  are  tinged  with  a  scarlet
blush,  or  elHorescence,  similar  to  the  immediate  pre-
cursor of  variolous  eruption. Vacc. A.

I  I  Terrible  pains  in  back  on  r.  side  of  spine,  and  over  and
below  shoulder  blade ;  muscles  sore  to  touch,  nausea,
pains  all  over,  especially  in  legs;  tongue  clean;  pulse
1"J0:  Variolin.'^-;  body  completely  covered  with  large
pustules,  face  one  mass  of  confluent  pustules,  pulse  still
high,  constant  expectoration  of  viscid  mucus,  mouth
and  fauces  lined  with  pustules,  even  tongue  covered
with  them  ;  bowels  constipated,  mild  delirium  at  times;
eight  days  later  temperature  104^°;  pulse  120,  very
weak  and  stopping  at  intervals;  great  fear  of  death;
begging  to  know  if  he  must  die,  and  before  sentence  was


383  VACCININUM  AND  VAPJOLINUM.

completed  would  drop  into  a  heavy  sleep  with  stertor-
ous breathing,  jaw  dropped  on  breast,  jjupils  contracted,
teeth  covered  with  thick,  brown  slime,  centre  of  tongue
perfectly  black, mucous membrane of njouth and
pharynx  of  a  deep  purplish-crimson,  with  gangrenous
appearance  and  breath  horribly  offensive;  skin  of  face
and  neck  of  a  deep  dark-purple;  odor  from  body  like  a
fetid  steam ;  little  control  over  tongue  or  jaw,  latter  hang-
ing down,  and  tongue  protruding  like  a  mass  of  decayed
liver  when  asleep;  an  effort  to  speak  when  roused" up
caused  violent  trembling  of  jaw  and  tongue,  which  was
drawn  back  into  mouth  with difficulty,  was  stiff,  but
looked  like  a  mass  of  putrid  flesh;  urine  dark-colored,
passing  freely  through whole  attack; had  continued
the  cm.,  till  now,  gave  one  dose  cmm.  dry  on  tongue;
next  day  almost  convalescent;  made  a  good  recovery
with  but  few  marks. Var. S.
I  I  Severe  chill,  followed  by  high  fever; severe  pain  in
back,  as  if  broken ;  pain  all  over  head,  very  severe  and
constant  in  occiput;  frequent  bilious  vomiting;  thick,
dirty,  yellowish  coating  on  tongue;  wild  delirium  and
spasms ;  night  before  eruption  appeared,  obstinate  con-
stipation ;  on  third  day  very  thick  eruption  of  smallpox
pustules,  soon  assuming  confluent  form,  Variolin."'"^ S.
I  Vaccininum  Q,  in  water,  for  one  day  with  strict  diet,  re-
peated after  eight  days,  as  pjreventive  in  six  hundred
cases. "W.  M.
Treated  a  great  many  cases  of  variola  and  varioloid,  dur-
ing last  eighteen  years,  some  of  them  of  most  desperate
character,  and  yet  never  lost  a  case  when  employing  vac-
cine virus  as  a  remedy ;  moreover,  none  of  the  cases  so
treated  were  ever  troubled  with  hemorrhage,  or  with
delirium  or  secondary  fevers,  or  were  ever  disfigured  by
pitting. C.
Have  used  and  seen  it  used  in  many  and  severe  cases,  and
when  treated  with  Variolin.  200^  disease  is  shortened
nearly  or  quite  one-half,  sufferings  of  patient  much  mit-
igated,  secondary fever either absent  or  very  much
lighter,  pjustules  do  not  burst,  but  wither  or  wilt  and
fall  off,  suppurative  stage  immeasurably  hastened  and
shortened,  and  patients  are  not  marked. "^ B.
I  I  Vaccininum  200th  quickly  relieved  severer  symptoms  of
variola,  occurring  in  a  child,  set.  6  months;  two  days  be-
fore appearance  of  eruption  had  been  revaccinated  fafter
an  interval  of  eight  days)  on  a  nsevus  near  r.  nipple ;
deglutition  difiicult  through  implication  of  tongue  and
fauces ;  pustules  many  of  large  size,  scattered  over  scalp,
face,  body  and  limbs. M.


A^ACCININUM  AND  VARIOLINUM.  384

I  I  About  tenth  or  twelfth  day  of  disease,  variola  confluent;
patient  quite  blind  from  swollen  eyelids,  cheeks  and
forehead ;  nothing  of  nose  visible  except  two  bloody
orifices,  exuding  clotted  blood  and  pus ;  similar  matter
was  also  constantly  discharged  from  throat  and  mouth
by  severe  cough  which  attended  disease  from  first;
Vaccin.  3d  cent.  trit. C.

I  I  Smallpox;  peculiar  smell  causes  intense  sickness  of
stomach;  congestion  toward  head,  palpitation  of  heart;
two  hours  after  took  a  dose  Variolin.  30 ;  an  hour  later
crawling  in  back  and  feeling  of  coldness  in  lower  ex-
tremities; cold  feet;  lame,  heavy  feeling  in  1.  arm;  no
appetite;  sleep  disturbed  by  heat;  toward  morning  some
perspiration  over  body;  next  day  continuous  pressing
headache,  especially  in  occiput;  pulse  somewhat  irri-
tated; disinclined  to  mental  work ;  when  reading  heat
in  head  and  forehead;  weak  when  walking;  pain  in
joints  of  upper  and  lower  extremities,  as  if  lame ;  toward
evening  again  feverish ;  pressing  pain  in  small  of  back,
down  to  sacrum  {Glonoin.  3  relieved  headache);  in  bed,
drawing  in  upper  jaw  and  teeth ;  sleep  full  of  dreams  ;
toward  morning  again  perspiration ;  urine  smells  am-
moniacal ;  on  fourth  day  red  pimples  on  back  of  1.  hand,
staying  for  several  days  without  filling  with  pus ;  mental
work  still  causes  heat  in  forehead  and  pressure  in  head ;
escaped  smallpox. Mo.

I  I  On  third  day  of  eruption,  when  pustules  had  filled,  and
were  confluent  on  face,  intense  itching;  Variolin.  1™'
in  water,  every  two  hours;  on  second  day  itching  nearly
gone,  pustules  shrinking ;  third  day  drying ;  fifth  day
crusts  fell  from  face ;  seventh  day  other  crusts  fell  off,
and  tongue  cleaned. S.

■  Tongue  coated  as  if  with  a  piece  of  white  velvet,  in  vari-
ola, with  headache,  backache,  etc. Var, S.

I  I  Eczema  cured  by  vaccination,  in  two  children. A.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  6 ;  variola.

Man,  set.  23  ;  variola.

Man,  set.  25 ;  variola.

A  young  lady,  healthy  and  robust  looking ;  epistaxis  after
eating  meat ;  cured  by  revaccination.

Woman,  set.  28,  suffering  since  infancy;  conjunctivitis.


385  VALERIANA.


VALERIANA.

Valerian.  Valerianaceas.

A  native  of  Europe,  where  it  groAVS  in  damp  woods  and  meadows,  or  on  dry,
elevated  ground. The  root  is  collected  in  Spring  or  Autumn.

The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  powdered  dry  root.

Introduced  by  Franz.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Franz,  Gross,  Stapf,  etc.,  Stapf's  Beitrage;  Jorg,
Provings,  1825;  Abell,  Post.  Med.  and  Surg,  Jour.,  1856,  p.  117.

Clinical  Authoeities.— J?a//«cma^7'o7is,  Schweikert,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  109,  p.  29;
Dlarrhcea  of  children,  Kkht.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  435;  Pain  in  lumbar  region,
Pettit,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  2,  p.  14;  Coxalgia,  Stens,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  131 ;  Sciatica,
Stens,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  908  ;  Nash,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  60 ;  Hysteria,
Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  290;  Spasms,  Marsden,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
4,  p.  599;  Ague,  Pettit,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  2,  p.  13.

^  Mind. Easy  comprehension  ; intellect predominates  over
mind.

Passes  quickly  from  one  subject  to  another;  hysteria.

Intellect  confused  ;  replies  incoherentl3^

I  I  Erroneous  ideas ;  thinks  she  is  some  one  else,  moves  to
edge  of  bed  to  make  room ;  imagines  animals  lying
near  her  which  she  fears  she  may  hurt. ^Typhoid  fever.

Ecstasy.

I  I  Mild  delirium,  with  great  excitement  and  trembling.
^Typhoid.

Fear,  especially  evening  in  dark,  palpitation,  trembling.

Changeable ;  hypochondriacal  anxiety,  or  trembling  exci-
tability.

■  Hysteria,  overexcitable,  changeable  disposition  and  ideas.

Great  melancholy  and  irritability;  morose,  easily  exas-
perated.

I  Hallucinations,  particularly  at  night;  sees  figures,  ani-
mals, men,  etc.
'^  Sensorium. i Feels  light  as  if  flying  in  air.

Vertigo,  with  a  sensation  as  if  flying.

Vertigo  when  stooping.

Oversensitiveness  of  all  senses.
^  Inner  Head. Headache  appearing  suddenly  or  in  jerks.

Pressing  as  from  a  stupefying  constriction  in  forehead,
drawing  into  orbits ;  face  pale ;  <  evenings,  at  rest,  and
in  open  air;  >  from  movement,  in  room,  and  from
changing  position.

VOL.  X. — 25,


VALERIANA.  386

One-sided  drawing  headache  from  a  draft  of  air.
Headache  in  sun.

■  Violent  pressure  in  forehead,  followed  in  a  few  minutes
by  sticking  in  forehead,  and  especially  over  orbits;  soon
sticking  changes  into  pressure,  and  so  on  in  constant
alternation;  sticking  is  like  a -darting  tearing,  as  if  it
would  pierce  eyes  from  within  outward.
Sensation  in  head  of  great  coldness;  hysterical  subjects.
•  Nervous  headaches.
*  Outer  Head. Sensation  of  icy  coldness  in  vertex when
pressing  firmly  with  hand,  or  when  covering  it  with  hat.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Vivid  light  like  lightning,  accompanied
by  dark  spot  to  side  of  line  of  vision.
Frequent  flashes  of  light  before  eyes,  with  dilated  pupils.
Luminous  appearance  before  eyes  in  evening,  in  dark.
Better  from  light;  <  in  dark.

Expression  of  eyes  peculiarly  wild ;  hysterical  neuralgia.'
Edges  of  lids  inflamed,  with  biting  stinging.
Pressure  in  eyes  only  in  morning  on  rising ;  margins  of

eyelids  seem  swollen  and  sore.
Smarting  in  eyes  as  if  occasioned  by  smoke.
Long-lasting  nervous  diseases  of  eye  ;  eye  has  a  wild  look

and  sight  is  much  confused. ^Hysteria.
St^^es.
''Hearing  and  Ears. Nervous  affections  of  ears,  with  ring-
ing and  hissing ;  jerking  and  cramping  pains ;  hyper-
sesthesia.
^  Upper  Face. Cheeks  red  and  hot,  especially  in  open  air.
Fierce  pains  through 1.  side  of  face,  darting  into  teeth

and  ear  ;  muscles  twitch  ;  hysterical  neuralgia.
Facial  pains  appearing  suddenly  and  in  jerks.
Spasmodic  twitching  and  drawing  in  cheek  bones.
AVhite  blisters  with  elevated  red  base  on  cheek  and  upper

lip,  painful  to  touch.
I  I  Twitching  of  muscles  of  face. ^Hysterical  neuralgia.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  incrusted.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Stinging  pain  in  teeth.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  as  of  rancid  tallow.
Tongue  thickly  coated,  foul.

I  I A  greasy  taste  in  mouth,  with  uneasiness  in  throat.
^^Neuralgia  of  limbs.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Flat,  slimy  taste  in  mouth  on  waking.
'^Throat. Nausea,  mostly  in  throat.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  a  thread  were  hanging  down  throat,  with
salivation  and  vomiting. ^Hysteria.
"Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Voracious  hun-
ger, with  nausea.
Worse  on  an  empty  stomach,  >  after  breakfast.


387  VALERIANA.

'^Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructa-
tions: like  putrid  eggs,  morning  on  waking;  frequent,
empty.

Heartburn,  with  gulping  up  of  rancid  fluid,  which,  how-
ever, does  not  rise  into  mouth.

Nausea :  with  sensation  as  of  a  string  hanging  down  throat;
beginning  in  umbilical  region,  rising  into  pharynx ;
with  faintness,  lips  white,  body  icy-cold.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Pressing  aching  in  pit  of
stomach,  as  from  something  forcing  a  passage  through
it. ^Neuralgia  of  limbs.

Cardialgia,  with  sleeplessness  and  migrating  pains.

Sudden warm rising from epigastrium, with difficult
breathing. ^Hysteria.
^*  Hypochondria. Spleen  affections.

jpain  about  lower  ribs.
^^  Abdomen. Abdomen  bloated,  distended,  hard.

I  Colic:  hysterical,  especially  evening  in  bed;  after  din-
ner ;  from  hemorrhoids ;  from  worms.

Involuntary  inclination  to  draw  abdomen  in,  on  account
of  cutting  and  pinching  pain.

Plysterical  cramps  in  abdomen,  most  frequently  evenings
in  bed,  and  after  dinner;  not  >  in  any  position.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Discharge  of  ascarides.

I  Thin,  watery  diarrhoea,  with  lumps  of  coagulated  milk  ;
diarrhoea  of  children.

I  Greenish  papescent  stool,  passing  wnth  blood;  constant
pressing  and  violent  screaming;  diarrhoea  of  children.

I  I  Nightly itching  ; muscular spasms  ; sleeplessness.

^  Worms.
Bubbling  pressure  above  anus  in  region  of  coccyx.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Urine  increased  and  more  frequent.
During  urination,  much  straining  and  prolapsus  recti.
Sediment  of  urine  red  or  white.
^* Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  too  late  and  scanty.

Neurasthenia  of  sexual  organs  of  women.
2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■  Child  vomits  as
soon  as  it  is  nursed,  after  mother  has  been  angry.

I I  Child  vomits  curdled  milk,  in  large  lumps,  the  same  in
stools.

^^Respiration.  Choking  in  throat  pit  on  falling  asleep;
wakens  as  if  suffocating.

Inspirations  grow  less  deep  and  more  rapid  until  they
cease;  then  catches  her  breath  by  a  sobbing  effort,  in
spells. ^Spasmodic  asthma.

On  sitting  down  to  meals  a  sensation  of  constriction  in
pharynx,  as  if  in  chest,  with  a  suffocating  feeling,  fol-
lowed by  frequent  yawning.


VALERIANA.  388

A  sensation  as  if  something  warm  were  rising  from  her
stomach,  arresting  breathing,  with  tickling  deep  in
throat,  and  cough.

I  I  Paroxysm  commences  with  a  very  rapid,  convulsive
movement  of  diaphragm,  giving  rise  to  extreme  inha-
lations somewhat  resembling  panting  of  a  dog.  ^Spas-
modic asthma.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Frequent  jerks  and  stitches  in
chest,  with  a  sensation  as  if  something  pressed  out,  <  in
lower  part  of  chest.

When  walking,  feels  a  pressure  over  lower  half  of  chest,
with  oppression  of  breathing.

Sudden  stitches  in  chest  and  region  of  liver,  from  within
outward.

I  I  Stitches  in  1.  side  and  arm.
■^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Stitches  in  region  of  heart.

Pulse  rapid,  somewhat  tense,  or  small  and  weak.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Spine  irritated,  in  beginning  of  typhoid
fever.

Pain  in  loins  as  from  cold  or  overlifting.

Bubbling  pressure  above  anus,  in  coccygeal  region.

Intense  pain  in  1.  lumbar  region  above  hip,  as  if  he  had
strained  part,  <  standing,  especially  sitting.
^'  Uppei^  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  scapulae.

Darting  along  arms,  shoulders  and  face;  hysterical  neu-
ralgia.

I  In  muscles  of  1.  arm  from  shoulder  to  fingers,  a  very
painful  drawing  mixed  with  single  stitches;  a  sort  of
tearing.

Crampy  darting  tearing,  like  an  electric  shock,  repeatedly
through  humerus,  in  bone,  intensely  painful.

I  Crampy  drawing  in  region  of  biceps,  in  r.  arm,  from
above  downward,  when  writing.
^^  Lower  Limbs. '  iPain  in  hip  and  thigh  intolerable  when
standing,  as  if  thigh  would  break. ^Sciatica.

Crampy  tearing  (tearing- darting)  pain  in  outer  side  of
thigh,  extending  into  hip.

Twinging  pain  in  outer  side  of  calf  when  sitting.

When  laying  r.  limb  across  1.,  tearing  in  1.  calf.

Acute  crampy  tearing  pain  in  posterior  muscles,  especially
those  of  calf,  >  in  morning  and  when  rubbing  affected
part;  <  toward  evening  and  when  quiet.

■  Violent  drawing,  darting,  jerking  pains  in  limbs,  which
appear  suddenly ;  <  sitting;  >  from  motion;  strained
feeling  in  lumbar  region  ;  lumbago.

Pulsative  tearing  in  r.  calf  when  sitting,  in  afternoon.

Drawing  and  weak  feeling  along  tendo-Achillis,  toward
heel,  as  if  part  had  lost  all  strength,  when  sitting;  dis-
appearing when  rising  from  a  seat.


389  VALERIANA.

Transient  pain  as  if  strained  in  r.  ankle ;  pain  came  on
after  running  up  stairs  fast;  it  was  most  felt  when  stand-
ing; >  when  walking.
Sudden  pain  as  if  bruised  in  outer  malleolus  of  r.  foot ;
feels  pain  more  when  standing.

Drawing  in  tarsal  joints  when  sitting.

When  sitting,  heels,  especially  r.  heel,  feel  painful.
I  I  Constant  pain  in  heels.

I  i  Sciatica  of  r.  side  ;  <  when  straightening  out  limb,  espe-
cially while  standing,  could  stand  at  her  work  with  com-
parative comfort  if  she  stood  with  foot  of  affected  side
upon  a  chair.
I  I  Obstinate  coxalgia  of  nine  months'  duration;  pain
greatly  <  by  standing,  with  feeling  as  if  thigh  would
break.

A  feeling  of  lightness  in  leg  after  walking.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs,  rarely  in
joints ;  <  during  rest  after  previous  exertion ;  >  from
movement.

Arms  and  legs  move  normally,  but  when  at  rest,  jerk  and
twitch. ^Hysteria.

Slow  i)ainful  drawing  and  jerking,  as  if  in  bones  of  upper

and  lower  extremities,  when  sitting  quietly.
I  I  Constant  jerking  of  limbs. ^Hysterical  neuralgia.

Heaviness  like  lead  in  limbs,  a  drawing,  feels  as  if  he  must
move  limbs,  but  cannot.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  headache  <;  cramp  in
calf;  rheumatic  pain  <;  arms  and  legs  twitch.

Sitting:  pain  in  lumbar  region  <  ;  twinging  in  calf;  pain
in  limbs  <;  pulsative  tearing  in  r.  calf;  drawing,  weak
feeling  along  tendo-Achillis ;  drawing  in  tarsal  joints;
pain  in  heels;  drawing  and  jerking  in  bones  of  limbs.

Stooping:  vertigo.

Standing:  pain  in  lumbar  region  <;  pain  in  hip  and
thigh  intolerable;  pain  in  r.  ankle  <;  sciatica  <;  cox-
algia <.

Changing  positions:  headache  >.

Laying  r.  limb  across  1.:  tearing  in  1.  calf.

Motion:  headache  >  ;  pain  in  limbs  >;  rheumatic  pain  > .

Straightening  out  limb:  sciatica  <.

Writing:  crampy  drawing  in  r.  biceps.

Walking:  pain  in  r.  ankle  >;  lightness  in  leg,  after.

Running  up  stairs:  pain  in  r.  ankle.
'^Nerves.  Ecstasy,  overexcitable,  changable  disposition  and
ideas;  jerking,  twitching,  trembling;  a  sensation  as  if
something  warm  were  rising  from  stomach,  arresting
breathing,  with  tickling  deep  in  throat,  and  cough  ;
feels  a  sensation  as  if  a  thread  were  hanging  down


A^ALERIANA.  390

oesophagus  from pharynx ; fearfulness,  tremuloiisness
and  palpitation  of  heart. ^Hysteria.

■  Agitation  of  all  nerves;  jerks,  twitches,  trembling.

I  lOversensitiveness  of  all  senses.

I I  Hysterical  complaints.

Drawing  in  many  places,  now  here,  now  there,  like  tran-
sient jerks.

Restlessness  and  spasmodic  movements  of  limbs ;  stagger-
ing gait.

■Spasms  after  slight  injuries.

■  Nervous  affections  when  apparently  well-chosen  remedy

fails ;  defective  reaction ;  slightest  exertion  causes  vio-
lent headache,  slightest  pain  fainting;  warm  sensation
rising  from  stomach  into  throat,  with  globus  hystericus;
pains  simulating  rheumatism  in  limbs,  <  sitting,  >
walking  about;  hysterical  women
I  I  Severe  shooting  pains  in  1.  side  of  face,  teeth,  ear  and
arm ;  complete  sleeplessness ;  convulsive  tossing  about
of  limbs;  twitching  of  muscles  of  face;  lips  covered
with  a  crust;  thick  dirty-looking  coating  on  tongue,
edges  of  which  were  torn  by  teeth  during  convulsions;
gloomy  expression  ;  eyes  staring,  restless,  wild ;  during
conversation,  eyes  wander  from  object  to  object,  and  she
does  not  understand  questions;  menses  normal;  wanders
about  house.

■  Great  excitement  and  trembling. /^Typhoid  fever.

^^  Sleep.  Sleepless,  restless  tossing,  cannot  sleep  before  12  p.m.;
nightly  itching,  muscular  spasms ;  falls  asleep  only
toward  morning,  when  he  had  vivid  dreams.

Worse  on  awaking.
^^Time. Morning:  eructations.

Toward  evening :  cramp  in  calf.

Evening:  headache  <;  in  bed,  colic;  heat  <.

Night :  profuse  sweat.

12  P.M.:  cannot  sleep  before.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  headache  < ;  cheeks
red  and  hot.

Draft  of  air:  headache.
^'^  Fever. Chill:  of  short  duration;  followed  by  long-lasting
heat,  with  dulness  of  head  and  thirst;  begins  in  neck
and  runs  down  back;  fainting  during  cold  stage.

I  I  Chill  almost  wanting,  heat  exceeds  considerably  in  in-
tensity and  endurance,  followed  by  perspiration.

Heat:  in  whole  body,  with  uneasiness;  flushes  over
cheeks;  long-lasting;  with  sweat  on  face;  <  evenings
and  when  eating;  with  thirst;  predominates.

I  I  In  evening  spells  of  fugitive  heat  with  thirst,  no  shiver-
ing. ^Neuralgia  of  limbs.


391  VALERIANA.

Sweat:  profuse,  <  at  night,  or  from  exertion,  with  violent
heat; on  face  with  heat; frequent,  suddenly  ceasing,
mostly  on  forehead  ;  >  after.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Suddenly,  or  in  jerks : headache ;
facial  pains ;  pain  in  limbs.

Alternation  :  of  sticking  pain  and  pressure  in  forehead.

Now  here,  now  there :  transient  jerks,
*^ Locality  and  Direction. Left: prosopalgia; stitches  in
side  and  arm ; pain  in  lumbar  region  as  if  strained ;
drawing  in  arm.

Right:  drawing  in  biceps;  strained  feeling  in  ankle;
bruised  pain  in  outer  malleolus ;  sciatica.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  flying  in  air ;  as  if  eyes  would  be  pierced
from  within  outward  ;  as  of  smoke  in  eyes ;  as  if  a  thread
were  hanging  down  throat ;  as  of  something  forcing  a
passage  through  pit  of  stomach  ;  as  if  suffocating  on  fall-
ing asleep ;  as  if  something  warm  were  rising  from
stomach  ;  as  if  something  pressed  out  in  lower  chest ;  as
from  cold  or  overlifting,  pain  in  loins ;  as  if  he  had
strained  1.  lumbar  region ;  as  of  an  electric  shock  through
humerus ;  as  if  thigh  would  break ;  as  if  strained  in  r.
ankle;  as  if  bruised  in  outer  malleolus  of  r.  foot;  light-
ness in  leg ;  like  lead  in  limbs.

Pain:  about  lower  ribs;  in  hip  and  tlygh;  in  heels;  in
eruptions.

Jerking:  headache;  in  ears;  in  face ;  inchest;  in  limbs;
in  bones  of  limbs.

Darting :  in  forehead  ;  from  face  into  teeth  and  ears ;  in
face;  in  shoulders;  along  arms;  in  humerus;  from
thigh  to  hip  ;  in  limbs.

Cutting:  in  abdomen.

Stitches:  in  chest;  in  region  of  liver;  in  1.  side  and  arm;
in  region  of  heart;  in  1.  arm.

Shooting:  face,  teeth,  ear  and  arms.

Sticking :  in  forehead  ;  over  orbits

Stinging  :  in  edges  of  lids ;  in  teeth.

Tearing :  in  forehead ;  in  1.  arm ;  in  humerus ;  in  thigh
to  hip;  in  1.  calf;  pulsative;  in  r.  calf.

Drawing:  headache;  in  cheek  bones;  in  muscles  of  1.  arm;
in  r.  biceps ;  in  limbs ;  along  tendo-Achillis ;  in  tarsal
joints ;  in  bones  of  limbs.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  scapulse  ;  in  limbs.

Aching :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Smarting :  in  eyes.

Biting :  in  edges  of  lids.

Pressure:  in  forehead;  in  eyes;  in  pit  of  stomach;  over
lower  chest ;  bubbling,  above  anus.

Pinching :  in  abdomen.


VALERIANA.  392

Cramping:  in  ears;  through  humerus;  in  r.  biceps;  in
thigh  to  hip ;  in  posterior  muscles,  especially  in  calf.

Constriction  :  in  forehead  ;  in  pharynx.

Twinging :  in  outer  side  of  calf.

Heaviness:  in  limbs.

Tickling :  in  throat.

Weakness :  in  tendo-Achillis.

Coldness :  of  head  ;  in  vertex.
"  Tissues.  "  Nervous  affections  occurring  in  excitable  tem-
peraments ;  in  hypochondriasis,  it  calms  the  nervous-
ness, abates  the  excitement  of  the  circulation,  removes
the  wakefulness,  promotes  sleep,  and  induces  sensations
of  quietude  and  comfort;  sadness  is  removed;  in  globus,
in  all  asthmatical  and  hysterical  coughs,  and  nervous
palpitation  of  heart,  profuse  flow  of  limpid  urine."

Excessive  nervous  excitability ;  exaltation ;  hysterical
spasms;  tearfulness  and  tremulousness  with  palpitation;
hysterical  element  predominates.

Red  parts  become  white.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  blisters  on
cheek  and  lip  painful.

Rubbing :  >  cramp  in  calf.

Pressure:  of  hand  or  hat,  icy  coldness  in  vertex.

After  slight  injuries:  spasms.

Decubitus:  early  in  typhoid.
^^Skin. Painful  eruptions.

I  I  White  miliaria  on  chest  and  back. ^Typhoid.

I  I  Skin  too  dry  and  warm. ^Hysterical  neuralgia.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Hysterical  women  who  have
taken  too  much  chamomile  tea.

Nervous,  irritable,  hysterical  subjects,  in  whom  the  intel-
lectual faculties  predominate,  and  who  suffer  from  hys-
terical neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  24,  tall,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  mother  of  a
9-months-old  child  ;  spasms.

Woman,  set.  50;  hysterical  hallucinations.

A  man,  set,  50,  of  florid  complexion,  almost  ruddy,  habitual
cheerful  temper;  neuralgia  of  limbs.

Mrs. ,  tall  in  stature,  fair  complexion,  dark  hair  and

eyes,  usually  feeble,  subject  to  nightly  attacks  of  asthma;
spasmodic  asthma.

A  highly  nervous  and  irritable  constitution;  neuralgia.
"Relations. Antidoted  by: Bellad., Camphor,  Cina,  Coffea,
Pulsat.

It  antidotes :  Mercur.,  abuse  of  chamomile  tea.

Compare:  Arnic,  AsafcEt,  Crocus,  Dulcam.,  Hyperic,  Ignat.,
Nux  vom.,  Spigel.,  Sulph.  (spasms  after  injuries).


393  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

VERATRUM  ALBUWI.

White  Hellebore.  Melanthacese.

The  European  Hellebore  grows  in  moist  meadows  in  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees,
through  Russia,  Northern  China  and  Japan.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  powdered  dry  root.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  and  proved  by  himself,  Becher,  Franz,  Fr.  Hahne-
mann, Stapf,  Tenthorn,  etc.,  R.  A.  M.  L.,  vol.  3 ;  Lembke,  N.  Z.  fiir  H.  K  ,  vol.  7,
p.  73; Schelliug,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  19.

Toxicological  reports  are  numerous,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  10,  p.  73.

Clinical  Authorities. — Melancholia,  Dulac,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  56;
Mania,  Schreter,  Woost,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  12;  Knorre,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  19  ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  482;  Insanily,  Jahr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  468 ;  Jahr,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  476 ;  Foote,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  546 ;  Frost,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
vol.  8,  p.  273 ;  Mental  disorders,  Radraacher,  Knorre,  Kretschmar,  Schiiler,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  52 ;  Headache,  Lobethal,  Black,  Hrg.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
211 ;  Barrows,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  97 ;  Hoyne,  Horn.  Ob.,  vol.  12,  p.  18 ;  Men-
ingitis, Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  132;  Affection  of  scalp,  Searle,  A.  H.  O.,
1871,  p.  33  ;  Plica  polonica,  Boeck,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  319  ;  Disease  of  fundus
oculi,  McGuire,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  16,  p  449;  Neuralgia  palpebralis,  Hirsch,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.95,  p.  133;  Epistaxis,  Kieuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.1,  p.  415;  Prosopalgia,
Schleicher,  Kafka,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  195;  Toothache,  Bonninghausen,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  482;  H.  World,  vol.  6,  p.  127  ;  Affection  of  throat,  Schell-
ing,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  252 ;  Bulimia,  Gros-s,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  553 ;
Altschul,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  258;  Vomiting,  Schreiber,  Schmid,  Diez,  El-
•wert,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  560 ;  Vomiting  of  food,  Hale,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,
p.  266;  Gastric  disorder.  Wolf,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  594 ;  Disordered  stomach,
Berridge,  A .  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  73  ;  Indigestion,  Bayes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  154 ;
Gastralgia,  Pope,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  487  ;  Gastrodynia,  Bayes,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  15,
p.  15;  Gastritis,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  603;  Hoematemesis,  Kreussel,
Hartm.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  576 ;  Tympanitis,  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  189 ;
Empty  feeling  in  abdomen,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  553  ;  Neuralgia  of  bowels.
Kitchen,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  20  ;  Colic,  Hahnemann,  Gaspary,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  763;  Lembke,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  371 ;  Lembke,  N.  A.J.  H.,
vol.  4,  p.  343;  Stens,  B  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  725 ;  Colicodynia,  Hahnemann,  A.  J.  H.
M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  85  ;  Intussusception  of  bowels,  Ellinger,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.
376;  Diarrhoea,  Hartlaub,  Schmid,  Kopp,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  voh  1,  p.  851 ;  Kafka,
Hofrichter,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  4.35 ;  Bruckner,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  417 ;
Madden,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  719 ;  Blake,  Hom.  Rev.,  May,  1889 ;  Jahr,  A.  J.  H.
M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  195  ;  Martin,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  148  ;  Lilienthal,  H.  M.,
Dec,  1873,  p.  214 ;  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  47  ;  Dysentery,  Munroe,  Mass.
Trans.,  vol.4,  p.  375  ;  Cholera  infantum,  Jones.  Med.  Adv.,  Jan.,  1890,  p.  23;
Cholera  morbus,  Schreiber,  Rummel,  Schindler,  Schreter,  Weigel,  Tietze,  Nehrer,
Maly,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  891 ; Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  280;  Miller,  N.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  394

y.  S.  Trans.,  1875  ;  Miller,  Obs.,  Nov.,  1875,  p.  418  ;  Holmes,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,
p.  602 ;  Cholera  Asiatica,  Quin,  Schreter,  Seider,  Veith,  Kummel,  Bernst.,  Schmid,
Eoth,  Eeubel,  Lobeth.,  Vehs.,  Montagk,  Henke,  Tietzer,  Adler,  Schweick,  Kurtz,
Gerstl,  Hofricht.,  Widnian,  Schuler,  Kuoff,  Mabit,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  pp.  965-
975 ;  Engelhard,  Findeisen,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  486  ;  (6  cases),  Drysdale,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  155  ;  Curtis,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  16  ;  Constipation,  Hartmann,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  819;  Elwert,  Broackes,  Bernard  and  Strong,  p.  109  ;
Bysmenorrhaa  and  hevieralopia,  Eaue,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  174;  Menstrual
disorder,  Morgan,  Hering's  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  181  ;  Metritis,  Times  Eet.,
1877,  p.  Ill;  Disorders  of  pregnancy,  Eiickert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  387,*
Spasmus  glottidis,  Ohlhaut,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  161  ;  Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  783;  Laryngo-iracheitis,  Mossa,  H.  KL,  1870,  p.  98;  Asthma,  Hrg.,
Hartm.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  200;  Cough,  Berrid<;e,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.
73  ;  Cough  during  measles,  Mossa,  H.  Kl.,  1870,  p.  98  ;  Whooping  cough,  Schmid,
Euramel,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  85 ;  Bonninghausen,  Meyer,  Miiller,
Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  730 ;  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  620 ;  Distress  over
heart,  etc.,  Gushing,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  14,  p.  107  ;  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  381;  Myalgia,
Everett,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  322 ;  Coxalgia,  Stens,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  131 ;  Pains
in  arms,  C.  M.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  59  ;  Sciatica,  Stens,  Bruckner,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  909 ;  Debility  and  toothache,  Bonninghausen,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.
373 ;  Cramps,  Barton,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  602 ;  Chorea,  Cooper,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
29,  No.  115;  Ague,  Bartl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  998;  Watzke,  Horn.  Jour.,
vol.  1,  p.  219;  Gilchrist,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  7,  p.  99;  Pearson,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,
Apr.,  1866;  Typhoid  fever,  Kreiiss,  Schleicher,  Wurmb,  Schelling,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  791 ;  Wurmb  and  Caspar,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,.p.  198  ;  Nichols,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  16,  p.  168  ;  Yellow  fever,  Taft,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  667  ;  Measles,  Kreuss,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  103;  Scarlatina,  Kreuss,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  67;
Antidote  to  opium  poisoning,  Todd,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  49.

^  Mind. I  lis  conscious  only  as  in  a  dream.
Stupid  from  excess  in  alcoholic  drinks.

■  Fancies  herself  pregnant,  or  that  she  will  be  delivered

soon; that  she  is  in  throes  of  childbirth. ^Hysterical
mania.

■  Erroneous  and  haughty  notions.

I  I  Never  speaks  the  truth  ;  does  not  know  herself  what  she

is  saying.

iShe  is  inconsolable  over  a  fancied  misfortune,  runs  about
room  howling  and  screaming;  or  sits  brooding,  wailing
and  weeping;  <  in  evening;  sleeps  only  till  2  a.m.

Alternation  of  laughing  and  moaning.

Attempts  a  great  many  things,  but  accomplishes  nothing.

Rage,  with  great  heat  of  body ;  eats  his  own  feces.

Suicidal  tendency  from  religious  despair.

II  Thinks  himself  distinguished ;  squanders  his  money;
proud  of  his  position.

I  I  For  six  days  no  sleep ;  sees  people  about  her  constantly,
speaks  to  them;  cries  out;  sings;  knows  nobody,  takes
no  notice  of  anything; laughs frequently; does  not


395  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

answer  when  talked  to ;  wants  nothing ;  passes  urine
and  feces  unconsciously  ;  no  heat  of  face ;  pulse  regular ;
confined  two  weeks  previously.

I  I  After  a  severe  illness,  aversion  to  husband  and  children ;

desire  to  leave  house ;  hallucinations,  room  appeared
full  of  people,  crowding  in  where  there  was  no  longer
room ;  each  apparition  personating  some  one  in  particu-
lar, and,  keeping  her  company  for  hours;  she  would  both
see  and  converse  with  forms  sitting  beside  her,  nor  could
she  always  distinguish  semblance  from  reality.

I I  Attacks  of  pain  with  delirium,  driving  to  madness.

•  Delirium:  religious  or  exalted; heavy,  soporous  sleep;

restless,  thirsty,  cramps  in  legs,  cold  sweat,  tingling;
irregular  pulse;  in  cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

Slight  delirium  ;  coldness  over  whole  body,  open  eyes,  with
cheerful,  sometimes  laughing  expression;  prattles  about
religious  subjects  and  about  vows  to  be  performed,  prays,
believes  that  he  is  not  in  his  own  house.

I A  tendency  to  violent  outbreaks,  desire  to  strike  those
about  him.

Attacks  of  rage  with  swearing; inclination  to  run  away.

I  lA woman,  set.  30,  has  lectrophilie,  red burning face,

anxiet}^  hopelessness,  despair,  continual  moaning  and
screaming  without  a  cause  ;  does  not  eat  or  drink,  is
sleepless ;  brought  on  by  sexual  excitement.

•  Persistent  raging,  with  great  heat  of  body.

I I  Mania:  with  desire  to  cut  and  tear  everything,  especially
clothes ;  with  lewdness  and  lascivious  talk ;  religious  or
amorous;  de  grandeur.

I  I  Nymphomania,  with  violence  and  destructiveness;  had

been  disappointed  in  love;  melancholia;  at  times  loqua-
cious; great  desire  for  sexual  intercourse;  void  of  shame;
obscenity ;  very  troublesome,  requiring  close  confine-
ment; had  been  confined  a  year  in  an  asylum.

■  Puerperal  mania  and  convulsions,  with  violent  cerebral

congestion;  bluish  and  bloated  face;  protruded  eyes;
wild  shrieks,  with  disposition  to  bite  and  tear.

I I  Disposed  to  silence,  or  to  talk  about  faults  of  others;  if
irritated  scolding  and  calling  names.

A  desire  to  w^ander  about  house. ^Hysteria.

1  I  Chases  his  family  out  of  house;  declares  the  sun  travels

around  the  earth  ; fear  of  death,  restlessness,  despair ;

foolish  actions.

■  Loquacity,  he  talks  rapidly.

■  Talks  much  on  religious  subjects;  praying;  is  overcon-

scientious.
I  I  Sleeplessness; face  distorted  ;  cries; prays,  says  it  is  a
secret  and  a  misfortune ;  refuses  to  talk,  only  motions


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  396

with  hands ;  turns  hands  around  in  a  circle,  saying  she
must  strengthen  herself,  and  then  motions  become  more
violent;  complains  of  dust  in  throat;  imagines  herself
in  heaven  talking  with  God. ^Mania.

I  I  Constant  talking,  wild  expression  of  eye,  constant  smil-
ing, at  times  loud  laughter;  distorts  face  and  repulses
any  one  approaching  him ;  will  answer  no  question ;
runs  behind  table  and  scolds ;  refuses  food.

I  I  Complete  sleeplessness;  talks  constantly ;  on  hearing
any  sound,  as  striking  of  clock,  etc.,  becomes  wild,  dances
about,  must  be  held ;  rapid  speech.

I  He  groans,  is  beside  himself.

I  Cursing  and  howling  all  night.

■  Curses  all  night  and  complains  of  stupid  feeling  with

headache  and  ptyalism.

I  I  Roaring  and  raving,  five  men  could  scarcely  control  her;
tears  her  clothes ;  pale  distorted  features ;  look  threaten-
ing, wild  ;  hair  dishevelled ;  utters  sounds  more  like  a
beast  than  a  human  being;  bites,  strikes  about  her,
spits;  body  in  constant  swaying  motion  ;  murmurs  and
groans;  takes  no  notice  of  questions;  eats  nothing;
quite  sleepless.

I  Kisses  everybody ;  before  menses.

■  Impudent  behavior  in  childbed.

I  I  Taciturn;  disinclined  to  talk,  except  in  delirium.
Cannot  bear  to  be  left  alone.

■  Depression  and  despondency.

■  Fear  and  anxiety;  fear  takes  breath  away.

■  Fearfulness:  starts;  with  running  about  and  shouting.

■  Anxious,  restless,  easily  frightened,  whining,  weeping,

apathetic,  delirium,  blue  face. ^Typhoid.

■  ■Cold  sweat  on  forehead,  with  anguish  and  fearof  death.
Unable  to  rise  for  eight  hours,  obliged  to  either  sit  or  lie;

if  he  stands  he  is  tormented  by  fearful  anxiety,  where-
with forehead  becomes  covered  with  cold  sweat  and  he
becomes  sick  to  vomiting.

■  Anxiety  as  from  a  bad  conscience,  as  if  he  had  committed

a  crime.

■  Anxiety  as  after  committing  an  evil  deed,  <  evening  and

after  dinner.
I  I A  crippled  girl  fell  down  suddenly  in  convulsions,  was
brought  to  bed  and  had  a  shaking  chill;  sat  up  in  semi-
conscious state,  refusing  assistance,  food  or  drink  ;  anx-
iety with  groaning  and  sighing  all  night  long;  chides
her  father  for  taking  part  in  revolution  ;  thinks  she
hears  drum  which  proclaims  his  execution;  this  is  fol-
lowed by  silent  brooding  and  occasional  starts;  menses
checked,  abdomen  tense,  face  pale,  arms  cold,  eyes  fixed


397  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

with  contracted  pupils ;  pulse  slow  and  almost  imper-
ceptible.

iMelancholy,  head  hangs  down,  sits  brooding  in  silence.

■Religious  melancholy  or  nymphomania,  with  desire  to
embrace  everybody,  even  inanimate  objects;  much
thirst  for  very  cold  water ;  constantly  craving  cool  and
refreshing  things. ^Puerperal  mania.

I  Despair ;  hopelessness,  loss  of  courage.

■  Despair  about  his  position  in  society,  feels  very  unlucky.

I I  Despair  other  salvation;  with  suppressed  catamenia.
I  I  Despair  of  his  recovery ;  attempts  suicide, ^Mania.

■  After  fright:  fear,  anxiety; coldness; fainting; invol-

untary diarrhoea.
I  1  Consequences  of  injured pride  or  honor. ^Insanity.
^Hysteria.
^Sensorium. ■Vertigo:  with  cold  sweat  on  forehead;  with
loss  of  vision;  sudden  fainting;  from  opium  eating;
from  abuse  of  tobacco  or  alcohol.
Heaviness  of  head,  things  seem  to  whirl  in  a  circle: ^Ty-
phoid.

■  Faints  from  least  exertion,  turning  in  bed,  straining  at

stool,  retching  as  if  to  vomit,  etc.;  from  slight  wounds;

from  violent  pains ;  after  loss  of  fluids ;  anxiety,  nausea,

convulsive  twitchings.
Fainting  preceded  by  great  anguish  or  despondency,  or

attended  by  spasms,  lockjaw,  convulsive  motion  of  eyes,

eyelids,  etc.
^  Inner  Head. Burning  in  brain.

Paroxysmal  pain  here  and  there  in  brain,  consisting  of  a

bruised  sensation  and  pressure.

■  ■Sensation  of  a  lump  of  ice  in  vertex.

■  Neuralgia  of  head,  with  indigestion;  features  sunken.
Head  hot  and  covered  with sweat; children  rub  head,

cannot  bear  to  be  left  alone ;  put  hands  to  head.  ^Ty-
phoid.

■  Headache:  with  nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  pale  face;

with  vomiting  of  green  mucus;  like  a  pressure  on  ver-
tex ;  stiff  neck ;  frequent  and  profuse  micturition  ;  as  if
brain  were  torn  to  pieces ;  chronic,  coming  on  in  after-
noon, lasting  through  night;  drawing  in  both  arms;  >
toward  morning;  violent  pains  drive  to  despair ;  great
prostration;  fainting,  with  cold  sweat  and  great  thirst;
with  obstinate  constipation ;  nervous,  at  every  menstrual
period,  in  girls  and  hysterical  women  ;  <  by  movement,
especially  stooping.
I  I  Pressing,  throbbing,  nervous  headache  affecting  one
side,  with  stiffness  of  neck  and  sensation  as  if  head
would  burst;  vomiting.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  398

iHemicrania.

•  Neuralgia  of  head,  with  dyspepsia;  sunken  eyes  and  chest

cold  limbs.

I  Sick-headache  in  which  diuresis  forms  a  crisis.

I  Blood  rushes  violently  to  head  on  stooping.

iHypersemia  of  brain  from  whooping  cough.

I  i Sopor;  eyes  half  closed;  face  pale,  emaciated;  tosses
head  about  and  screams ;  bores  head  into  pillow ;  tran-
sient flushes  of  face;  kicks  coverings  off;  when  raised
up  head  falls  to  1.  side  ;  eyes  dull,  pupils  contracted;
cornea  looks  like  ground  glass,  is  covered  with  a  thin
layer  of  mucus,  which  has  become  dry  at  angles  of  eyes;
loud  cries  do  not  rouse  him  from  stupor;  when  raised
up  eructations  and  retching;  pulse  weak,  slow;  refuses
to  nurse ;  head  hot,  rest  of  body  cool. 6'Meningitis.

iCerebro-spinal  meningitis ;  cold  sweat  all  over  body,  vom-
iting, with  cramps  in  stomach  ;  great  thirst  for  icy-cold
water  or  craves  ice ;  muscles  of  head  too  weak  to  sup-
port head ;  pulse  irregular,  very  weak  and  slow ;  cold-
ness predominates;  great  debility  persistent;  cramps  in
legs;  wants  to  escape  from  bed;  heavy  comatose  sleep.

■  Meningitis;  violent  headache  with  delirium  or  uncon-
sciousness ;  copious  vomiting,  pale,  cold  and  cadaverous
face ;  stiffness  of  neck,  choking  in  throat,  feeling  as  if
head  would  burst ;  rolling  head  violently  from  side  to
side,  with  short  screams,  bores  head  into  pillow ;  con-
vulsive shocks  and  vomiting  as  soon  as  head  is  raised ;
clonic  and  tonic  spasms,  with  loss  of  sense  and  motion  ;
cramps  in  limbs ;  tingling  and  coldness  in  limbs ;  chol-
eraic collapse,  simultaneously  with  intense  congestion,

iHydrocephaloid ;  great  inequality  in  division  of  heat;
skin  cold  and  clammy ;  vomiting  and  all  symptoms  <
when  raising  himself  up,  and  comparatively  well-feel-
ing in  horizontal  position;  least  motion  produces  nau-
sea and  vomiting ;  loss  of  strength  in  extremities ;  stiff
neck,  great  tendency  to  convulsions ;  great  thirst  for  ice
water  or  ice;  disfigured  pale  face  or  redness  of  one
cheek ;  great  prostration  after  a  stool.
*  Outer  Head.  Head  burning  hot ;  limbs  alternately  hot  and
cold.

I  Scalp  very  sensitive,  with  headache.

•  Sensation  like  a  piece  of  ice  on  head ;  or  of  warmth  and

coldness  at  same  time,  on  scalp,  hair  being  sensitive.
Sensation  in  hair  on  r.  side  of  head  as  if  a  bunch  of  hair
were  electrified,  crawling  and  bristling  of  hair,  with
slight  shivering  of  skin  under  hair.

•  Sensation  of  soreness  of  head,  with  nausea.

•  Plica  polonica.


399  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

1 1  Cold  sweat  on  forehead.

Compelled  to  rub  forehead,  with  a  kind  of  insensibility.

/^Typhoid.
I  Neck  too  weak  to  hold  head  up. ^Whooping  cough.

^Meningitis.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Black  motes  or  specks  before  eyes,  with

diplopia ;  photophobia ;  <  on  rising  from  bed  or  chair.
iHemeralopia.

I  I  Hemeralopia,  with  nightly  diarrhoea.
Impaired  vision ;  dilated  pupils.
' I  Eyes:  turned  upward,  showing  only  whites;  distorted,

protruding; fixed,  watery,  sunken,  lustreless; full  of

tears;  lids  livid,  blue  edges;  surrounded  by  black  rings;

have  a  weak  look ;  look  yellow  or  blue.
I  Pupils: contracted; dilated,  with  weak  sight;  fails  to

recognize  those  near,  or  does  so  but  slowly.
Tearing  pains  in  eyes,  depriving  one  of  sleep ;  <  in  cold,

damp  weather. ^Rheumatic  ophthalmia.
Pressing  in  eyes.
Heat  in  eyes.

■  Extreme  dryness  of  lids  ;  especially  after  sleeping;  pain-

ful, as  if  rubbed  sore ;  stiff  and  agglutinated.
I  Acute  sensation  of  dryness  in  upper  lid,  as  if  salt  were
between  it  and  ball.

■  Lids:  heav}^,  can  scarcely  lift  them  ;  trembling;  paralysis.
Profuse  lachrymation  and  cutting  pains,  with  feeling  of

dryness  and  heat.

Frequent  lachrymation,  with  redness  of  eyes  as  in  coryza.

I  I  Neuralgia  palpebralis  in  upper  lid,  r.  side ;  pain  severe
on  slightest  pressure  or  least  touch,  as  if  hundreds  of
fine  needle-points  were  suddenly  thrust  into  lid  ;  in
morning  on  first  waking  could  not  open  eyes,  it  seemed
as  if  inner  surface  of  lids  were  too  dry,  and  that  they
stuck  fast  to  ball.
^  Hearing  and  Ears.  Deaf,  as  if  ears  were  stopped.
^  Smell  and  Nose.  Smell  before  nose  as  from  manure  or
smoke.

I  Nose:  grows  more  pointed,  seems  longer;  icy-cold.

lEpistaxis:  right-sided,  only  at  night  in  sleep;  face  deathly
pale,  body  cold  ;  pulse  slow,  intermittent.

Sensation  as  if  nose  internally  were  completely  dry.

Boring  in  nose.

Frequent  sneezing.
^  Upper  Face. ■  Restless,  wild  look ;  pale,  distorted  face.

I  Blue  or  green  circles  around  eyes.

iFace:  collapsed,  pale,  bluish;  nose  pointed;  of  leaden
hue;  red  in  bed,  becomes  pale  on  rising;  alternately
pale  and  red ;  risus  sardonicus ;  sunken,  with  anxious
expression ;  pinched  up,  deathlike,  hippocratic.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  400

1 1  Cold  sweat  on  face,  particularly  on  forehead.

■  Neuralgia,  drawing,  tearing  pains,  with  bluish,  pale  face,

sunken  eyes ;  prostration.

■  Tearing  in  cheeks,  temples  and  eyes,  with  heat  and  red-

ness, driving  to  madness;  <  in  damp  weather;  r.  side
or  1.  to  r. ;  especially  in  anaemic  persons.

I  I  Suddenly  aroused  from  sleep  by  severe  attack  of  proso-
palgia ;  1.  side  of  face  and  head  affected ;  constant  cry-
ing ;  pain  continuous,  not  >  by  warmth  ;  face  red,  par-
ticularly affected  side,  which  is  hot  and  bluish-red  ;  1.
eye  is  injected ;  pain  in  supra-  and  infraorbital  nerves
and  branches ;  trembling  of  whole  body ;  twitching  of
limbs  ;  after  attack  general  cold  sweat  and  prostration.

I  I  Intermittent  frontal  neuralgia;  face  very  pale,  eyes
sunken,  dull ;  coldness  of  limbs ;  nearly  every  fifteen
minutes  vomiting  of  greenish-yellow  serum,  ceasing  as
pain  abates. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Neuralgia  of  trigeminus,  with  vomiting,  pale,  sunken

face.

■  Acne  rosacea.

^  Lower  Face.  Lips :  bluish  or  hanging  down ;  rubbing
mouth  and  nose ;  dry,  black,  parched ;  wrinkled,  pale
or  black,  and  cracked.

■  Black  around  mouth  and  nostrils. ^Typhoid.
Twitching  in  cheeks,  sparks  before  1.  eye,  paleness  of  face

and  faintness,  followed  by  vomiting  of  a  quantity  of

white  froth.
Spasms  of  muscles  when  masticating.
Lockjaw.
Risus  sardonicus.

■  Stiffness  of  masseter  muscles.
Froth  from  mouth.

'^ Teeth  and  Gums.  ■Violent  toothache,  throbbing;  face
swollen,  cold  sweat  on  forehead;  sickness  at  stomach,
vomiting  of  bile,  lassitude  of  extremities,  great  sinking
of  strength,  even  to  fainting,  external  coldness,  and
internal  heat,  thirst  for  cold  drinks  scarcely  to  be  sat-
isfied.

■  Violent  throbbing  toothache  driving  to  madness;  nerv-

ous, excitable  persons.
Teeth  feel  heavy,  as  if  filled  with  lead.
Toothache,  with  pain  in  head,  and  red,  swollen  face.
Grinding  teeth.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter;  and  coolness,  as  from

peppermint; flat or sweetish; putrid; diminished;

pasty ;  sour.

■  Tongue:  pale,  cold,  withered;  swollen,  dry,  cracked  and

too  red;  white,  with  red  tip  and  edges;  coated  yellow-
ish-brown ;  back  part  black.


401  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

iSpeecli  lisping,  stammering ;  as  if  tongue  were  too  heavy.
^Typhoid.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Froth  at  mouth ;  spasms.
iMouth  dry  and  sticky;  saliva  lessened.
iDryness  of  mouth  and  palate,  with  thirst.

■  Burning  in  mouth  and  throat.

Cool  sensation  in  mouth  as  from  peppermint,

■  Constant  flow  of  saliva  like  waterbrash.
Salivation,  with  nausea  and  sharp,  salty  taste.

^^  Throat. Dryness  in  throat,  cannot  be  removed  by  drinking.
Scraping  or  roughness  in  throat;  sensation  of  dust.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  or  burning  in  throat.

■  Sensation  of  constriction  of  throat;  spasmodic,  with  suf-

focation.

■  Spasmodic  affections  of  oesophagus,  resulting  in  paralysis

of  tube ;  nearly  all  food  and  drink  taken  is  thrown  up,
with  suffocating  sensation,  redness  and  heat  of  face.

I  I  Chronic  catarrh  of  oesophagus  with  asthma.

Feeling  of  distension  in  pharynx.

I  I  Swelling  of  sublingual  or  r.  submaxillary  gland,  also
of  cheek,  external  neck,  throat  and  soft  palate;  tensive
stitching  pains  ;  constant  accumulation  of  saliva  which
he  cannot  swallow ;  fear  of  suffocation  ;  cannot  talk  dis-
tinctly ;  remitting  fever,  <  every  other  day,  evening
exacerbation;  delirium  at  night;  anorexia;  prsecordial
anxiety;  dry  cough;  pain  in  back  and  hips;  dry  stool ;
reddish-brown  urine;  swelling  increases  or  grows  less
as  fever  rises  or  falls.
^'Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■  Appetite  vora-
cious. ^After  typhoid.

Hunger  :  between  paroxysms  of  vomiting;  with  diarrhoea.

I  I  Attacks  of  bulimia,  intense,  but  of  short  duration,  even
soon  after  a  full  meal,  particularly  after  exercise  in  open
air ;  if  craving  is  not  at  once  satisfied,  is  seized  with  great
weakness,  nausea  and  vomiting,  darkness  before  eyes
and  ringing  in  ears ;  becomes  dizzy,  hands  tremble,
raves,  and  finally  falls  into  a  fit  of  deep  unconscious-
ness; attack  prevented  by  eating  a  little  food  at  onset;
attack  preceded  by  feeling  of  warmth  and  prickling  in
fingers  and  toes,  and  twitching  of  muscles  of  face.

Appetite  diminished,  mouth  as  if  lined  with  mucus;  fiat
or  sweetish  taste.'

■  Thirst: drinks  frequently  but  only  a  little  at  a  time;

wants  everything  cold  ; during  perspiration  ;  for  large
quantities  of  very  cold  water  and  acid  drinks.

■  ■Thirst  for  coldest  drinks;  craves  ice.

■  Craves  fruit,  juicy  or  cold  food,  saltish  things,  herring,

sardines,  etc.
VOL.  X. — 26.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  402

I  I  Better  from  eating  meat  and  drinking  milk.
Aversion  for  warm  tilings.

I  Bad  effects:  of  opium  eating;  tobacco  chewing.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Hiccough :
after  hot  drinks;  by  spasms  of  oesophagus  with  nausea.
Eructations  violent,  empty,  sour,  or  bitter.
■  Nausea:  with  weakness,  is  obliged  to  lie  down;  with  sen-
sation of  fainting ;  with  violent  thirst,  followed  by  vio-
lent and  frequent  vomiting ;  with  profuse  salivation ;
with  great  appetite  and  thirst;  <  from  least  motion;
qualmishness  with  frothing  from  mouth.

I I  Vomiting:  forcible,  excessive;  violent  wdth  continued
nausea,  retching  and  great  prostration  ;  of  thin  blackish
or  yellowish  substances;  of  bile  and  blood,  black;  of
food  and  drink,  or  drink  only  ;  of  food,  or  of  acid,  bitter,
foamy,  white  or  j^ellowish-green  mucus;  whenever  he
moves  or  drinks  ;  with  vertigo,  pale  face,  clean  tongue,
good  appetite  ;  with  hiccough  and  fainting ;  with  pain-
ful retraction  of  abdomen ;  with  painful  distortion  of
face;  with  cold  sweats;  with  diarrhoea  and  pressure  in
pit  of  stomach.

Before  vomiting,  cold  hands,  becoming  hot  afterward.

I  I  Food  causes  pain  when  passing  along  oesophagus ;  chok-
ing sensation  when  swallowing  food  or  drink ;  regurgi-
tation of  a  portion  of  food  eaten ;  for  nearly  two  years,
nearly  all  food  and  beverage  taken  has  been  thrown  up
very  soon  after  meals;  vomiting  with  a  suffocating
sensation,  redness  and  heat  in  face;  ver}^  much  emaci-
ated and  weak  ;  a  strong  longing  for  food,  but  dreaded  to
eat;  constipated,  low^-spirited;  palpitation,  weak  pulse
and  cold  extremities.

I  I  On  rising  in  morning  nausea,  belching,  ptyalism,  vertigo,
diarrhoea  and  vomiting;  appetite  good,  but  must  vomit
immediately  after  eating ;  vomiting  day  and  night ;
three  to  six  thin,  slimy,  brownish  stools;  vertigo;  ema-
ciation ;  lassitude.

I  I  Spasmodic  retching  and  vomiting  of  watery  tasteless
fhiid;  constipation  ;  tearing  pains  in  limbs.

I  I  Vomiting  of  food  and  large  masses  of  mucus.

I  I  Frothy  vomiting,  followed  by  yellow  matter  or  bile;
intermittent  pulse. ^Meningitis. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  Child,  set  6  months,  lay  quiet  and  stupid; face  pale;
forehead  cold  and  damp  on  vomiting.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. In  pit  of  stomach :  languish  ;
painful  distension  ; pressure ; acute  pain  ; great  sensi-
tiveness; burning.

Pain  in  stomach  as  from  ravenous  hunger.

Sensation  of  weakness  in  stomach,  with  internal  sensation
of  coldness.


403  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

I  Hysterical  cramps  in  stomach.

iPain  coming  gradually,  first  in  epigastrium,  thence  radi-
ating upward  and  to  both  sides,  reaching  to  back  be-
tween lowest  point  of  scapulae ;  becomes  agonizing,  then
gradually  subsides;  shakes  with  cold. ^Gastrodynia.

I  I  Great  distress  over  heart  and  epigastrium,  deathlike
look,  could  only  speak  a  few  words,  cold,  pulse  weak
and  fluttering,  and  just  perceptible,  nausea  and  attempt
to  vomit,  >  from  rubbing  spine  between  shoulders;
followed  application  of  strong  liniment  for  neuralgia  of
shoulders,  back  and  arms.

I  I  Ten  minutes  after  eating,  food  began  to  return  in  mouth-
fuls,  and  continued  doing  so  at  intervals  for  two  hours;
cramplike  pain  in  epigastrium ;  <  for  a  week  after
menses,  vomiting  with  violent  pain  in  loins;  menses
regular,  but  too  profuse ;  constipation  ;  extremely  weak  ;
throbbing  pain  in  r.  temple. ^Gastralgia.

I  I  Intense  burning  sensation  extending  into  oesophagus;
vomiting  of  greenish  masses; great  anxiety ; coldness
of  limbs;  slow,  intermitting  pulse. ^Gastritis.
:' iHsematemesis,  with  slow  pulse,  coldness,  fainting  fits,  cold

sweat.

I  I  Pains  under  scapulae;  loss  of  sight;  vertigo;  urine  thick
when  passed  and  very  dark,  sometimes  almost  black;
cold  sweats  at  times;  food  has  no  taste;  smoking  makes
throat  dry  and  he  does  not  enjoy  it ;  craving  for  food  ;
nausea  when  eating,  cannot  get  food  down  without
retching;  tongue  white.

I  I  Thick  brownish- white  coating  on  tongue;  aversion  to
food;  attempting  to  eat  causes  nausea  and  vomiting-
pappy,  flat,  but  especially  sweetish  taste  in  mouth;  dul-
ness  of  mind ;  want  of  animal  heat ;  chilliness,  seeks
warmth. ^Gastric  disturbance.

I  I  Pain  half  an  hour  after  food  or  after  walking  or  other
fatigue. ^Indigestion.

I  I  Dyspepsia ;  severe  pain  an  hour  after  eating ;  water-
brash;  relaxed  motions,  three  or  four  during  night;
urine  loaded  with  lithates ;  great  debility.

I  Chronic  weakness  of  stomach ;  from  dampness  of  climate
and  want  of  fresh  air ;  from  abuse  of  quinine.

I  I  All  fruits  cause  painful  distension  of  stomach,

I I  Gastric  catarrh,  great  weakness,  cold,  sudden  sinking.

I  I  Softening  of  stomach; nausea  before  fainting; vomit

greenish,  acid;  copious,  watery,  without  smell; colic,

collapse,  convulsions.
I  I  Softening  of  stomach  in  children,  in  course  of  hydro-

cephaloid.
iHaematemesis,  with  slow  pulse,  coldness,  fainting  fits,  cold

sweat ;  nausea  when  moving  or  rising.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  404

^''Hypochondria. sHyper^emia  of  liver,  gastric  catarrh,  pu-
- trid  taste,  disgust  for  warm  food,  great  pressure  in  hepatic

region,  alternating  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.
lH3'per8emia  of  liver,  with  cholera-like  s3'mptoms,  or  with

asthma  and  bronchial  catarrh.
Spleen  swollen. ^Intermittent  fever.

•  Spasms  of  diaphragm  during  prevailing  south  winds,  in

persons  with  cold  hands,  great  oppression  and  anxiety
in  chest.
iDiaphragmitis,  with  peritonitis,  vomiting  and  coldness.
^^  Abdomen. iGreat  sinking  and  empty  feeling.

I  I  Empty  feeling  in  abdomen  after  stool  as  if  she  needed

food ;  headache  on  vertex  about  5  p.m.

I I  Cold  feeling  in  abdomen.

■  Burning  in  abdomen  as  from  hot  coals.

I  Cutting  in  abdomen  as  with  knives.

Griping  in  abdomen,  at  times  above,  at  times  below  navel,
in  afternoon  soon  after  eating.

I  I  Intermittent  neuralgia  of  bowels;  about  4  p.m.  com-
mences throwing  up  quantities  of  wind,  about  5  p.m.
intense,  agonizing  neuralgia,  like  knives  cutting  her
bowels,  chiefly  affecting  1.  side,  coming  on  at  intervals
of  a  few  minutes,  so  intense  that  it  took  three  or  four
men  to  hold  her ;  attacks  lasted  from  3  o'clock  to  9  p.m.,
then  terminated  by  two  deep  sighs  or  gapes.

I  I  Violent  attacks  of  neuralgia;  a  certain  movement  felt
about  navel,  then  suddenly,  always  at  same  place,  a
pinching  as  by  pincers,  with  most  intolerable  pain  last-
ing half  or  a  whole  minute;  each  time  it  went  away
with  borborygmus,  extending  to  csecal  region ;  sensa-
tion of  constriction  above  and  below,  preventing  flatus
from  passing ;  attacks  of  anxiety  and  pain  increase  from
half  to  a  whole  hour,  abdomen  swelled  and  became  pain-
ful to  touch;  inclination  to  vomit,  chest  constricted,
breathing  shorter,  more  and  more  difficult,  cold  sweat,
stupefaction  and  total  exhaustion;  could  not  swallow  a
drop  of  liquid,  much  less  an}-  solid  food;  lay  many
hours  stupefied,  unconscious,  with  a  swollen  face  and
protruding  eyes,  without  sleep;  >  after  wind  passes  up
or  down.

*  I  Colic;  face  pale;  abdomen  sunken,  bloated  during  par-

oxysm ;  pain,  particularl}'  in  epigastrium ;  burning  pain
under  l.ribs;  sensitiveness  to  pressure;  pain  over  whole
abdomen  extending  to  back  and  thighs ;  here  and  there
hard  spots  in  abdomen ;  finally  belching  of  wind  with
relief;  constipation  ;  loss  of  appetite ;  tongue  coated  ;  at
times  vomiting,  chilliness;  lassitude;  sleeplessness.
llColic:  with  burning;  as  if  intestines  were  twisted  into


405  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

a  knot;  after  a  cold;  turning,  twisting,  pressure,  con-
striction, cutting,  tension  ;  after  abuse  of  quinine;  from
fruits  and  vegetables;  abdomen  swollen,  sensitive;  no
flatus  either  way;  cold  sweat;  with  burning  pain,  twist-
ing, cutting,  nausea  and  vomiting,  <  from  food ;  >  after
wind  passes;  with  morning  diarrhoea.

I  I  For  several  years  distension  of  abdomen,  sometimes  in
stomach  and  sometimes  in  bowels,  with  violent  eructa-
tions, coming  on  about  4  a.m.  and  lasting  for  two  hours,
somewhat  >  drinking  warm  fluids.

lAbdomen  distended,  very  sensitive.

I  Painful  retraction  of  abdomen  during  vomiting.

I  Intussusception  of  bowels ;  great  anguish  ;  rushes  about
bent  double,  pressing  abdomen.

I  I  Sudden  severe  pains  in  1.  hypochondrium,  with  attacks
of  vomiting;  sleeplessness;  severe  pains  in  descending-
colon;  obstinate  constipation  ;  rumbling  and  gurgling
in  abdomen  on  pressure. ^Intussusception.

■  Peritonitis,  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  skin  cold  ;  fea-

tures sunken;  pulse  small,  weak;  restless,  anxious.

Ilncarcerated  hernia,  not  inflamed;  anti-peristaltic  action ;
cold  sweat,  nausea.

Protrusion  of  inguinal  hernia  during  cough.
^^ Stool  and  Rectum.  uStools:  frequent;  Avatery,  greenish,
mixed  with  flakes;  gushing,  profuse;  rice-water  dis-
charges, w^ith  tonic  cramps,  commencing  in  hands  and
feet,  spreading  all  over;  sunken,  even  hippocratic  face;
w^atery,  inodorous  ;  watery,  gushing,  flaky  ;  thin,  papes-
cent,  mucous;  green,  gushing,  exhausting  after  fright;
brownish,  watery;  blackish,  watery;  bloody;"  bilious;
mucous;  corrosive;  sometimes  painless;  involuntary
(while  passing  flatus);  from  least  movement  of  body;
thin  and  painless,  with  rumbling  of  bowels.

■  Before  stool:  chilliness,  anxiousness,  nausea,  vomiting;

severe  pinching  colic;  rumbling  in  abdomen  ;  weakness
in  hypogastrium  like  faintness.

■  During  stool: chills and shivering; anxiety, nausea,

vomiting ;  faintness ;  paleness ;  cold  sweat  on  forehead;,
pinching  colic;  burning  in  anus  and  cold  perspiration
on  forehead  ;  weakness.

■  After  stool:  improvement  of  cervical  pains;  squalmish-

ness  in  epigastrium;  nausea,  vomiting;  colic;  great
sinking  and  empty  feeling  in  abdomen;  weakness;  faint-
ness; great  exhaustion.

■  Diarrhoea :  with  vomiting  of  turbid  water,  and  cold  sweat

on  forehead;  as  Autumn  comes  on,  when  vomiting  is
superadded  to  purging,  and  intestinal  evacuations  are
expelled  in  a  forcible  gush,  with  little  or  no  griping.


VERATHUM  ALBUM.  406

^  colic,  with  hiccough  and  suffocation  ;  stools  involuntary,
watery  ;  hippocratic  countenance,  and  cold  extremities ;
stools  frequent,  violent,  profuse  and  painful;  much  ex-
haustion after  every  passage,  with  cold  sweat  upon  fore-
head and  skin  in  general ;  in  frequent  attacks,  face
sunken,  greyish  ;  after  wet  feet;  of  phthisical  patients.

I  I  Diarrhoea  after  drinking  much  cold  water  on  a  hot  day  ;
bilious  vomiting,  with  water}^,  painful  stools;  great  pree-
cordial  anxiety ;  long-lasting  faintlike  nausea ;  skin
pale;  limbs  cold.

I  I  Several  diarrhoeic  stools  during  day,  particularly  directly
after  eating;  pressure  in  stomach  after  eating,  <  at
night,  with  nausea,  becoming  a  cutting  pain  on  motion  ;
sensation  of  trembling  in  stomach;  thirst.

I  I  For  some  years,  morning  diarrhoea,  with  despair  of  sal-
vation.

I  I  Sharp  pains  in  hypogastric  region  for  two  weeks ;  by  day
very  profuse  light-brown,  watery  diarrhoea,  almost  in-
voluntary, preceded  b}''  sharp  pain  in  same  region,  >
after  stool ;  very  weak ;  profuse  warm  sweat ;  red  face
and  lips;  urine  diminished.

I  I  Diarrhoea  for  three  weeks;  three  or  four  stools,  some-
times more,  every  day ;  stools  dark,  clay-colored,  rather
slimy,  very  offensive;  before  stool,  cold  in  face,  with  cold
sweat  on  face  and  forehead  ;  diarrhoea  <  from  time  of
rising  till  10  a.m.,  then  >  till  3  p.m,  when  it  gets  <
again;  <  directly  after  food  ;  came  on  with  hot  weather.

I  iFor  ten  months  lassitude,  coated  tongue,  malaise,  nau-
sea and  diarrhoea ;  vomiting  first  of  food,  then  of  yellow,
bitter  bile,  without  pain ;  stools  liquid,  always  occur
with  vomiting  as  well  as  at  other  times ;  pain  in  lower
abdomen  before  diarrhoea,  except  when  she  vomits,  then
diarrhoea  is  painless;  exhausted  after  vomiting;  after
much  straining  there  was  froth  in  vomit.

■  Simultaneous  purging  and  vomiting. ^Cholera.

1  I  Sudden  attack  of  diarrhoea  coming  on  during  dinner;
while  eating  suddenly  seized  with  colic  in  transverse
colon,  followed  speedily  by  urgent  desire  for  stool,  which
gushed  out  suddenl}',  and  consisted  of  dark-brown,
frothy  feces.

I  I  Severe  diarrhoea  from  fright;  stools  liquid,  gushing  out
with  force ;  feels  exhausted ;  cold  sweat  all  over  body
with  every  stool,  but  especially  on  forehead.

I  I  Diarrhoea,  discharges  white,  prostrating  urging  to  stool ;
great  prostration,  with  attacks  of  fainting.

I  I  Unconscious  discharge  of  thin  feces  while  passing  flatus.

I  I  Diarrhoea  of  six  months'  duration;  stools  brown,  pain-
less, one  to  four  daily,  <  from  manual  labor  and  after


407  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

potatoes ;  loss  of  appetite ;  great  thirst ;  sensation  as  if
something  alive  were  rising  from  stomach  into  throat.

I  I  Extreme  collapse;  coldness  of  surface;  clammy  sweat;
pale  face;  sunken  eyes;  great  thirst;  vomiting  and
purging  of  almost  colorless  fluid  very  freely ;  pain  not
excessive,  but  feeling  of  weakness  intense. ^Dysentery.

Illntestinal  catarrh,  diarrhoea  coming  on  suddenly  at
night,  in  Summer;  vomiting  and  purging.

■  Cholera  infantum:  attack  sudden;  violent  watery  vom-
iting and  purging,  cold  surface,  prostration,  vomiting
excited  by  least  amount  of  liquid  taken  ;  great  thirst  for
large  quantities  of  water,  excessive  weakness;  stools
watery  and  inodorous ;  tongue  and  breath  cold ;  diffi-
culty in  breathing;  desire  to  sit  up;  blueness  around
eyes ;  skin  seems  drawn  tightly  over  bones  of  face ;
wrinkling  of  skin  of  hands  and  fingers ;  sensitiveness
over  abdomen.

I  I  Face  ashy  pale,  of  a  waxy  hue;  cold,  eyes  sunken,  with

dark  rings  around  them  ;  nose  pinched,  lips  and  nose
blue ;  extremities  cold  as  ice ;  pulse  imperceptible ;  tem-
perature in  axilla  104.2  F. ;  abdomen  warm,  soft,  though
distended;  eyes  look  wild,  rolls  them  up  showing  only
sclerotic;  head  rolling  from  side  to  side,  constant  moan-
ino;  (meningeal  irritation) ;  tongue  coated  at  base,  clean
at  lips,  dry;  mouth  and  lips  parched;  thirst  constant;
very  restless ;  >  by  being  carried  ;  vomiting  and  retch-
ing; had  not  kept  anything  on  his  stomach  for  three
days ;  from  twelve  to  fifteen  stools  in  twenty-four  hours,
green,  watery,  gushing,  changing  to  a  blue-slate  color
on  standing;  pain  in  abdomen  before  stool,  which  ap-
peared to  be  of  a  griping  nature,  >  after  passing  stool ;
much  weakness  and  exhaustion  after  a  motion,  child
lying  perfectly  limp;  skin  dry;  emaciation  especially
marked  about  face  and  neck ;  sleeplessness,  had  not
slept  for  three  days  and  nights ;  <  at  night,  >  toward
morning;  next  morning  coiistant  twitching  and  jerking
of  arms  and  legs ;  head  rolling  from  side  to  side.
^Cholera  infantum.

I I  Cholera  morbus:  <  at  night ;  cold  sweat  on  forehead;
vomiting  and  purging  at  same  time;  after  fruits;  with
profuse  brownish  discharges,  thirst,  cramps  in  calves,
feet  and  fingers ;  prostration ;  cold  sweat ;  great  weak-
ness after  stool.

I  I  Bathed  in  a  cold  perspiration,  verj''  weak  and  badly
frightened ;  had  been  vomiting  and  purging  for  about
two  hours ;  severe  cramping  pains  through  bowels  and
lower  extremities ;  stools  thin,  green  and  watery ;  con-
stant thirst  and  drinking  large  quantities  of  cold  water.
^Cholera  morbus.


' VERATRUM  ALBUM.  .408

M Sporadic  cholera;  blueness  of  hands,  face  and  feet;
cramps  in  calves;  contraction  of  abdominal  muscles;
great  prostration ;  hippocratic  countenance ;  vomiting ;
green  flocculent  discharges ;  surface  of  body  cold  as
marble  (3  cases).

I  I  Cold  sweat  on  forehead  ;  dilated  pupils;  lachrymation  ;
froth  at  mouth;  shuddering  after  eating;  vomiting  of
food  and  of  green  mucus,  soon  followed  by  acrid,  watery
stools ;  great  prostration  ;  craving  sour  things ;  abdo-
men distended;  outcries;  flexing  of  legs  on  abdomen;
grasping  at  abdomen  ;  somnolency.

I  I  Ten  to  twenty  greenish  evacuations  in  twenty-four
hours,  preceded  by  severe  pains  in  umbilical  region,
causing  her  to  cry  out ;  sweat  over  body  ;  abdomen  pain-
ful to  touch,  but  not  bloated;  epigastrium  and  r.  hypo-
chondrium  tense,  sensitive  to  pressure;  bitter  vomiting
of  fluids  which  have  been  taken ;  mouth  dry,  yellow
coating  on  tongue,  moist;  hoarseness;  ringing  in  ears  ;
vertigo;  cramps  in  calves  of  legs;  skin  cool;  after  cold
and  fright.

I  I  Distorted  hippocratic  face,  constant  hiccough,  anxious,
restless  tossing  about;  cramping  of  hands  and  feet;
pains  in  abdomen ;  speechless ;  severe  retching  with
vomiting  of  yellowish  fluids,  <  after  drinking;  stools
watery,  pass  unconsciously;  surface  of  body  cold;  face
bathed  in  cold  sweat. ^Sporadic  cholera.

I D  Cholera  Asiatica  :  great  torpor  of  vegetative  system ,  with-
out any  great  mental  or  sensory  disturbance ;  little  de-
pression of  spirits;  fear  of  death  or  indifference;  vertigo;
violent  evacuation  upward  and  downward  ;  icy  coldness
of  body ;  great  debility;  cramps  in  calves;  vomiting,
with  constant  desire  for  cold  drinks ;  copious,  watery,
inodorous  stools,  mixed  with  white  flocks;  face  pale,
without  any  color,  or  bluish  ;  blue  margins  around  eyes;
deathly  anguish  in  features;  cold  tongue  and  breath  ;
hoarse,  feeble  voice ;  great  oppressive  anguish  in  chest,
giving  patient  a  desire  to  escape  from  bed  ;  violent  colic,
especially  around  umbilicus,  as  if  abdomen  would  be
torn  ojjen;  abdomen  sensitive  to  contact,  with  drawing
and  cramps  in  fingers ;  wrinkled  skin  in  palms  of  hands ;
retention  of  urine.
I  I  Profuse  rice-water  dejections  every  fifteen  to  twenty
minutes,  with  slight  burning  in  anus;  frequent  watery
vomiting,  especially  after  drinking;  excessive  thirst  for
cold  drink ;  nose  and  ears  icy-cold,  body  and  limbs  tol-
erably warm ;  chilliness  on  motion ;  tongue  moist,
slightly  furred  ;  soft,  accelerated  pulse ;  dry  skin  ;  vio-
lent tonic  cramps  in  calves,  thighs  and  masseter  muscles,
occurring  after  vomiting  or  purging. ^Cholera.


409  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

i  I  Vomiting  and  purging;  stools  watery,  flocculent;  severe
burning  in  epigastrium;  great  desire  for  cold  water;
severe  cramps  in  calves  of  legs;  great  prsecordial  anx-
iety; face  pale,  anxious;  pulse  small,  frequent;  white-
coated  tongue. ^Cholera.

I  I  Sudden  vomiting  and  purging;  anxious,  disturbed  look
of  face;  eyes  sunken,  surrounded  by  dark  circles;  tem-
perature of  skin  of  body  slightly  elevated,  limbs  cold;
skin  dry;  pulse  weak,  130;  great  thirst  but  vomits
immediately  fluids  taken  into  stomach;  watery  stools
every  half  hour;  paroxysmal  cramps  in  calves  of  legs,
with  tossing  about  and  crying. ^Cholera.

I  I  Vomiting  and  purging;  very  cold  surface;  constant
nausea;  watery  vomiting  on  moving  or  drinking;  wa-
tery purging;  great  thirst;  pulse  small;  tongue  white;
skin  warm  ;  no  cramps. ^Cholera.

i  i  Rice-water  purging;  vomiting;  eyes  sunken,  surrounded
by  dark  circles ;  tongue  white ;  face  pale ;  pulse  quick,
feeble. /^Cholera.

I  I  Weakness  bordering  on  syncope;  cold  sweat;  very
quick,  empty,  weak  pulse ;  stools  loose,  quite  white,  like
a  solution  of  starch,  passed  with  fatiguing  straining,  and
followed  by  excessive  prostration  and  failure  of  senses;
no  nausea  or  vomiting.

Unsuccessful  urging  to  stool.

■  Constipation  on  account  of  hardness  and large  size  of

stools. ^Paralysis.

■  Constipation  :  chronic,  stools  large  and  hard,  or  first  part

hard,  latter  part  smaller ;  stools  in  round  black  balls ;
chronic,  with  children  ;  as  from  inactivity  of  rectum  ;  in
cold  weather;  of  nursing  infants;  in  hypochondriacs
and  maniacs.
I  I  Obstinate  constipation  ;  bitter,  sour  eructations,  fulness
of  stomach  and  bowels  after  eating ;  pain  in  hepatic
region ;  eruption  over  body.

■  Constipation  of  infants  after  Nux  vom.  or  Lycopodium.
Before  constipated  stool:  no  desire;  desire  for  stool  felt  in

epigastrium;  pressure  toward  anus,  with  blind  hemor-
rhoids; tenesmus.

■  During  constipated  stool:  great  straining ;  cold  sweat  on

forehead  ;  heat  in  anus ;  painless  discharge  of  masses  of
blood  in  clots,  with  sinking  feeling.

■  After  constipated  stool:  weakness  or  prostration.
Fecal  mass  flattened  and  thin  like  a  ribbon.

.  ■Hemorrhoids  with  diseases  of  lungs  or  pleura;  painless
discharge  of  masses  of  blood  in  clots,  with  sinking  feel-
ing; bruised  feeling  in  sacral  region.

■  Attacks  of  vomiting  and  purging,  with  cold  sweat  on  fore-

head, and  symptoms  of  worms.


VERATHUM  ALBUM.  410

I  I  Tapeworm.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ContiDuous  urging  to  urinate.

Frequent  micturition,  with  violent  thirst  and  hunger.

I  Urine:  scanty,  red-brown  or  suppressed;  greenish.

I  Involuntary  urination;  during  cough,  also  during
typhoid.

I  I  Urine  thick  when  passed  and  very  dark,  sometimes  al-
most black ;  cold  sweats  at  times ;  food  has  no  taste ;
smoking  makes  throat  dry  and  he  does  not  enjoy  it;
craving  for  food ;  nausea  when  eating,  cannot  get  food
down  without  retching ;  tongue  white.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Nymphomania :  before  menses ;
from  unsatisfied  passion  or  mental  causes;  puerperal
mania ;  violent  and  destructive,  loquacious ;  from  dis-
appointed love;  during  confinement.

■  Metritis,  with  fits  of  vomiting,  delirium,  anxiety,  and
diarrhoea ;  body  hot,  limbs  cold.

I  1  Aborted  four  months  after  marriage,  flooding  and  vio-
lent uterine  pains,  following  great  weakness;  pale  face;
eyes  sunken  with  a  dull  expression,  revealing  great  suf-
fering ;  extremities  cool ;  violent  uterine  pains,  stitch-
ing, particularly  in  posterior  wall  of  uterus;  palpitation
shows  volume  of  womb  increased,  hard  and  sensitive  to
touch ;  inspection  reveals  congestion  of  neck  of  uterus,
which  is  hard  and  appears  a  little  flattened  in  its  antero-
posterior diameter;  slightest  touch  causes  patient  to
scream;  cannot  rise  on  account  of  pain  produced  by
doing  so ;  entire  loss  of  appetite ;  slimy  diarrhoeic  stools ;
constantly  cold,  particularly  in  extremities. ^Metritis.

I  I  Chronic  womb  disease,  <  at  night,  then  cold  sweat ;  in
morning,  vomiting  of  frothy  mucus.

I  Menses:  too  early,  too  profuse;  suppressed,  with  despair  of
salvation  or  with  blood-spitting;  very  exhausting.

Before  menses  :  headache,  vertigo,  bleeding  of  nose,  night
sweats.

During  menses:  morning  headache,  nausea,  ringing  in
ears,  thirst,  and  pain  in  all  limbs.

At  end  of  menses:  grinding  of  teeth  and  bluish  face.

I  Menorrhagia,  with  nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  cold  sweat

on  forehead,  and  weak  pulse.
iDysmenorrhoea:  with  prolapsus;  nausea,  vomiting,  diar-
rhoea, exhaustion; cold  sweat;  coldness  of  body;  with
chilliness;  with  pain  in  kidneys  and  uterus  before  and
during  menses.

II  Since  three  months,  on  awaking,  nausea,  vomituritio
and  constricting  sensation  in  throat;  dulness  in  head,
sometimes  sensation  as  of  a  piece  of  ice  lying  on  vertex ;
frequent  chilliness,  can  scarcely  get  warm,  feet,  hands


411  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

and  nose  icy-cold  ;  catamenia  irregular,  generally  every
three  weeks ;  early  on  day  on  which  menses  appear
diarrhoea,  nausea,  chilliness,  four  to  six  watery  evacua-
tions with  burning  pain  in  rectum ;  irritability ;  sensi-
tive, gets  angry  at  trifles  or  weeps  about  little  things.

I  I A  girl,  set.  19,  ailing  for  several  years;  almost  constant
headache;  scanty  and  delayed  menses;  several  months  ago
suddenly  attacked  with  hemeralopia  some  six  or  eight
days  before  her  menstrual  period,  every  afternoon  toward
sundown,  increased  as  night  came  on  ;  then  could  not
see  anything,  consequently  could  not  walk  out  of  doors,
was  unable  to  discern  things  only  when  quite  near  can-
dlelight ;  also  in  morning  for  half  an  hour  after  wak-
ing, sight  was  deficient ;  dizziness  in  head,  as  if  all  blood
were  mounting  into  head ;  menses  delayed  as  usual
some  two  or  three  weeks,  when  they  finally  came,  was
seized  as  often  before,  with  vomiting  and  purging,  last-
ing until  flow  was  fully  established  ;  at  other  times  con-
stipated, passage  only  every  three  days  of  round,  hard,
black  lumps;  monthly  discharges  always  scanty,  partly
fluid,  partly  clotted  ;  never  lasting  over  two  days;  dur-
ing period  headache  much  more  severe ;  felt  so  weak
she  had  to  lie  down.

lAmenorrhoea,  with  nervous  headache,  leaden  face,  nau-
sea, vomiting  and  diarrhoea.

■  Strangulated  prolapsed  vagina,  with  cold  sweat,  exhaust-

ing vomit  and  diarrhoea.
"Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Threatened  abor-
tion ;  pains,  with  cold  sweat,  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  During  pregnancy :  wants  to  wander  about  house;  taci-

turn; haughty;  thirsty;  vomiting;  wants  everything
cold;  craving  for  acids  and  salt  food ;  canine  hunger;
feels  very  weak  and  faint;  cramp  in  extremities,  with
cold  perspiration;  hardness  of  feces  and  inactive  rectum.
I  I  Vomiting  during  pregnancy  of  four  months'  duration;
constantly  feels  cold ;  feet  cold  as  ice ;  occasionally  flushes
of  heat  with  thirst ;  on  eating,  pressure  in  stomach  ;  hic-
cough, retching,  waterbrash,  bitter  taste  in  mouth  ;  cut-
ting pains  in  abdomen;  tearing  pains  in  legs;  lassitude
and  prostration.

■  Craves  fruit  and  juicy  articles.

■  Labor  pains  exhaust  her;  fainting  on  least  motion;  cold

sweat.

■  Lochia  suppressed,  with  nymphomania.

■  In  childbed: impudent  behavior;  nymphomania; ex-

haustion.

■  Mania  puerperalis,  wants  to  kiss  everybody;  religious;

despairs  of  her  salvation.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  412

lEclampsia  parturientium ;  pallor,  collapse,  ansemia  or
violent  cerebral  congestion,  with  bloated  face,  wild
shrieks,  tearing  clothing.

Pain  fulness  of  mammae.

Suppression  of  milk.
^' Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, n  Voice
weak,  hollow,  hoarse,  husky. ^Cholera.

■  Spasmus  glottidis.

■  Paroxysms  of  constriction  of  larynx; suffocating  fits,

with  protruding  ej^es.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  glottis  with  contraced  pupils.

I  I  Suddenly  awakes  from  sleep  with  a  long,  harsh,  crow-
ing inspiration,  lasting  four  to  six  seconds,  no  expira-
tion follows,  there  being  a  cessation  of  respiration  from
forty  to  sixty  seconds,  face  becomes  blue  and  covered
with  cold  sweat ;  eyes  protruded,  staring ;  mouth  widely
opened,  thorax  distended,  pulsations  of  heart  normal ;
finally  child  begins  to  toss  about  arms  and  legs,  which
are  bathed  in  cold  sweat,  and  there  occurs  a  long,  loud
expiration  sounding  like  a  sigh,  and  respiration  becomes
re-established  ;  diarrhoea ;  abdomen  bloated ;  emacia-
tion; frequently  cries  during  sleep.  /^Spasmus  glot-
tidis.

I  1  Suddenly  awakes  from  sleep  with  a  whistling  cry,  suf-
focation seems  imminent,  face  becomes  cyanotic,  only
regains  his  breath  after  a  few  minutes  have  elapsed ;
attacks  also  excited  by  crying. ^Spasmus  glottidis.

Tickling  very  low  down  in  trachea,  provoking  cough,
without  expectoration.

M  Laryngo-tracheitis,  cough  •  excessively  straining  and
shaking,  giving  no  rest  day  or  night,  with  pain  in  head,
chest  and  abdomen  from  concussion.

■  Debility  great,  catarrhal  symptoms  slight. ^Influenza

during  cholera  season.

■  Capillary  bronchitis;  blue  face;  oedema  of  lungs,  and

great  fear  of  suffocation.

■  Bronchitis,  especially  of  old  people;  constant  rattling  of

mucus  without  being  able  to  expectorate ;  prostration,
frequent,  irregular  pulse,  and  sticky  perspiration  about
head.
^^Respiration. ■  Respiration  weak,  interrupted.

■  Shortness  of  breath  on  slight  movement,  even  in  house;

>  if  he  sits  still.
Extremely  difficult  and  distressing  respiration;  seems  in

danger  of  suffocation.
Excessive  anguish  arresting  breathing,  with  desire  to  sit

up  or  jump  out  of  bed.
Oppression  on  chest  when  coughing.
I  Contractive  spasm  of  chest.


413  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

lAsthma:  in  damp,  cold  weatlier;  in  early  morning;  >
throwing  head  back;  inclination  for  motion  ;  cold  sweat
of  upper  part  of  body;  chronic  cases.

I  iCold  breath.  ^Cholera.
^^  Cough.  Cough:  dry,  tickling  after  walking  in  sharp,  cold
air;  dry,  spasmodic,  rattling,  but  nothing  loosens;  deep,
hollow,  ringing,  whooping,  excited  by  tickling  in  lowest
branches  of  bronchi,  expectoration  of  yellow,  tough,
tenacious  mucus  of  bitter,  saltish,  sour  or  putrid  taste;
spasmodic,  cyanosis,  cold  sweat;  with  blood-spitting;
after  great  exertion  ;  loud  barking,  in  hysteria;  hollow,
in  shocks,  with  cutting  pain  in  abdomen;  with  blue-
ness  of  face,  with  involuntary  micturition  ;  <  morning,
and  late  evening  until  12  p.m.;  on  going  into  warm
room;  on  getting  warm  in  bed;  <  in  change  of  weather;
from  eating  and  drinking  cold  things,  especially  water,
with  crying  and  vexation.

i  I  Spasmodic  cough,  with  great  burning  and  dryness  in
mouth  and  fauces;  long-continued  sleeplessness;  anxiety
in  praecordial  region  ;  irritability  of  senses. ^'Measles.

I  I  Babe,  skin  very  hot;  cold  sweat  on  forehead  when
coughing;  eyes  half  open  during  sleep.

iTitillation,  with  sensation  of  constriction  in  throat;  op-
pression, nausea,  vomiting  of  food  and  mucus  after
cough.
•  I  Whooping  cough:  convulsive  stage;  great  exhaustion,
children  fail  to  recover  strength  after  a  paroxysm,  and
are  inclined  to  lean  head  against  something  for  sup-
port; fever,  with  cold  perspiration,  especially  on  fore-
head; intense  thirst;  small  quick  pulse;  emission  of
urine  when  coughing;  cough  ceases  on  lying  down  and
recurs  when  rising;  spells  brought  on  by  entering  a
warm  room  or  drinking  cold  water;  face  pale  and
sunken;  restlessness  and  anxiety;  vomiting  of  tough,
thin  mucus;  Fall  and  Spring  epidemic.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Constriction  of  chest.

Pressing  in  region  of  sternum  after  eating  and  drinking.

I  Constant  rattling  of  mucus,  but  cannot  expectorate ;  sticky
sweat  about  head ;  weak ;  frequent  irregular  pulse ;
bronchitis  of  old  people.

iCapillary  bronchitis ;  livid  face,  blue  nails,  cold  extrem-
ities and  tumultuous  irregular  contractions  of  heart;
cold  sweat  on  forehead  when  coughing;  eyes  half  open
during  sleep.

I  Acute  bronchial  catarrh  in  emphysematous  subjects,

iRattling  in  lungs,  fear  of  suffocation;  frothy,  serous  sputa;
blue  face;  oedema  of  lungs.

Stitches  in  sides  of  chest.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  414

I  Croupous  pneumonia; pneumonia supervenes during

whooping  cough.
Diaphragmitis  and  peritonitis  with  vomiting.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, ii  Strong  palpitation  of

heart,  with  chorea.

■  Violent,  visible  anxious  palpitation  with  fainting.
■Tumultuous  irregular  contractions  of  heart,  forerunner

of  paralysis. ^Capillary  bronchitis.

■  Intermittent  action  of  heart  in  feeble  persons,  with  some

obstruction  to  hepatic  circulation.

■  Palpitation  in  the  anaemic ;  nervous ;  agony  of  death,  legs

cold ;  difficult  breathing ;  >  at  rest  or  lying  down  ;  with
anxiety  and  rapid  audible  respiration;  at  night;  with
prostration  or  fainting ;  driving  out  of  bed.

■  Angina  pectoris; periodical  attacks  of  pain  in  1.  chest,

or  cutting,  with  excessive  agony  extending  to  shoulders;
general  prostration,  skin  cold  and  clammy;  difficulty  of
breathing;  suffocative  constriction  of  chest,  so  distress-
ing that  he  sweats  from  agony ;  general  prostration ;
cramps  in  limbs;  skin  cold  and  clammy.

■  Pulse: frequent,  small,  hard; slow,  soft,  intermittent;

slower  than  heart  beat;  very  small,  irregular;  imper-
ceptible.

■  The  blood  runs  like  cold  water  through  veins.
Great  activity  of  arterial  system.

^'  Neck  and  Back. Muscles  of  nape  of  neck  seem  paralyzed.

■  Neck  too  weak  to  hold  head  up. ^Whooping  cough.

I  I  Constant  pp-in  in  shoulders  of  ten  years'  standing,  ex-
tending thence  to  occiput  and  arms,  <  from  motion,
and  in  damp  weather. ^Myalgia.

Rheumatism  between  scapulae,  extending  from  nape  of
neck  to  small  of  back  ;  burning  along  spine.

■  Myelitis ;  painful,  paralytic  weakness  in  upper  and  lower

limbs ;  tingling  in  fingers,  causing  anxiety ;  painful
jerkings  in  limbs ;  electric  jerks  in  limbs,  <  in  bed,  sits
up,  legs  hanging  out  of  bed,  or  must  walk  about.

Bruised  feeling  in  sacral  region.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Neuralgia  in  brachial  plexus  as  if  beaten  or
bruised.

I  I  Aroused  from  sleep  every  morning  at  4  or  5  o'clock  by  in-
tense, indescribable  pains  in  arms ;  they  feel  as  if  bruised
or  broken,  pains  extend  from  shoulder  to  wrist,  can
hardly  move  arm ;  pain  continues  as  long  as  he  lies  in
bed,  can  tolerate  no  covering ;  >  getting  up  and  mov-
ing about ;  trembling  of  arm  rest  of  day,  particularly  1.;
<  in  bad  weather,  Spring  and  Autumn  ;  of  three  years'
duration. ^Neuralgia  in  brachial  plexus.

Arms  feel  cold  when  raising  them ;  feel  as  if  too  full  and
swollen.


415  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

Arm  trembles  when  aiij^thing  is  grasped.

I  I  Pain  in  middle  of  1.  forearm,  as  if  bones  were  pressed.

■  Tingling  in  hands  and  fingers,  causing  anxiety.  ^Myelitis.
I  I  Crawling  in  hands  as  if  they  had  been  asleep,

I iHands  icy-cold,  blue.

I  Wrinkling  of  skin  of  hands  and  fingers. ^Cholera.
^^  Lower  Limbs, l  i  Violent  coxalgia  coming  on  every  morn-
ing about  4  o'clock.

I  I  Tearing  pain  in  1.  leg  from  thigh  to  toes;  frequent
shocks  therein ;  leg  sensitive  to  touch,  at  other  times
cold  and  insensible;  frequent  restlessness  of  leg;  pain
<  at  night  after  being  in  bed  a  while,  must  rise  and  let
leg  hang  over  side  of  bed,  or  walk  about ;  r.  leg  also
affected,  but  to  a  less  degree.

Shocks  in  r.  hip.

■  Electric  jerks  in  limbs;  <  in  bed,  must  sit  up  and  let

legs  hang  out  of  bed  or  must  walk  about;  rheumatism.
/^Myelitis.
Walking  very  difficult; like  paralysis,  changes  from  r.
to  1.  hip  (or  in  patients  from  1.  to  r.).

■  Trembling  of  limbs;  spasms;  great  debility  following.

■  Complete  muscular  prostration;  rapid  sinking  of  forces;

sinks  down  completely  exhausted; great  paleness  of
face.
Violent  cramps  in  extremities.

■  I  During  wet  weather  pains  in  legs,  <  by  warmth  of  bed,

>  in  walking  up  and  down.

■  Legs  stiff  in  forenoon  and  while  standing;  rheumatism;

alternately  hot  and  cold,  head  hot ;  cold.
Pain  in  shin  bones  as  if  broken.

■  I Cramps  in  calves. ^Cholera.

■  Pains  in  feet,  especially  knees,  as  if  heavy  stones  were

tied  to  parts ;  must  move  about  for  relief.
Sudden  swelling  of  feet;  they  are  cold  and  anasarcous.

■  iFeet  icy-cold.

■  Very  cold  feet,  with  colic.

Transient  stinging  pain  in  toes  of  r.  foot,  while  standing.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Limbs  go  to  sleep,  also  when  lying
down.

■  ■Painful  paralytic  weakness  in  limbs.

■  Paralysis  of  limbs.

■  Pains  in  limbs,  as  if  exhausted  by  excessive  fatigue.

■  Pains  in  limbs,  <  during  wet  cold  weather;  <  in  warmth

of  bed ;  >  when  walking  up  and  down.

■  Nails  blue  on  account  of  coldness.

^*Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  palpitation  >.

Horizontal  position :  vomiting  > ;  comparatively  well
feeling.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  •  416

Lying:  cough  ceases;  palpitation  >  ;  limbs  go  to  sleep.

Sitting:  still,  breathing  >  ;  with  legs  hanging  out  of  bed,
myelitis,  jerks  in  limbs.

Stooping:  headache  <  ;  rush  of  blood  to  head.

Standing:  stiffness  in  legs;  stinging  in  toes  of  r.  foot.

Motion:  headache  <;  least,  produces  nausea  and  vomit-
ing; cutting  pain  in  stomach  <  ;  shortness  of  breath ;  in-
clination for,  asthma;  neuralgia  in  arms  <  ;  debility  <.

Rising :  black  motes  or  specks  before  eyes ;  cough  <.

Desire  to  sit  up  or  jump  out  of  bed  :  asthma.

Rushes  about  bent  double :  intussusception.

Raising  head:  causes  vomiting.

Raising  arms :  they  feel  cold.

Manual  labor:  diarrhoea  <.

Throwing  head  back  :  asthma  >.

Grasping :  arm  trembles.

Driving  out  of  bed  :  palpitation  ;  jerks  in  limbs,  myelitis.

After  getting  out  of  bed  :  chill  >.

Walking:  must  walk  about,  to  >  jerks  in  limbs;  neuralgia
in  arms  >  ;  neuralgia  in  legs  >  ;  very  difficult,  like
paralysis  in  hip;  >  pains  in  feet  and  knees.

Exertion : least, causes fainting ;  causes cough ; causes
sweat.
^^  Nerves. I  '  Nervous,  as  if  she  would  have  to  fly  away.

iFaintness ;  faints  from  least  exertion  or  from  slight  pain.

1 1  Rapid  sinking  of  forces;  complete  prostration;  cold
sweat  and  cold  breath  ;  collapse.

iGeneral  debility,  with  blue  hands  and  cold  feet.

I  I  Excessive  weakness  ;  is  obliged  to  move  very  slowly ;  so
weak  she  can  hardly  raise  her  hand,  and  every  motion
seems  to  increase  debility;  even  a  movement  of  bowels
causes  great  debility;  very  weak,  almost  imperceptible
pulse ;  cold  sweat,  particularly  on  forehead ;  thirst  for
icy-cold  water.

iSudden  sinking  of  strength.

•  Excessive  weakness  after  abuse  of  Cinchona.

I  I  Child  feeble,  with  a  sort  of  hectic. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Must  lie  down ;  anguish;  cold  sweat  on  forehead  when

he  rises.

I I  Extreme  collapse,  coldness  of  surface,  clammy  sweat,
pale  face,  sunken  eyes,  great  thirst,  vomiting  and  purg-
ing of  almost  colorless  fluid ;  feeling  of  intense  weak-
ness.

iChronic  weakness;  trembling  of  whole  body.

■  Trembling;  jerking;  spasms;  convulsions.
Tetanic  stiffness  of  body.

•  Convulsions:  puerperal;  caused  by  religious  excitement;

hysterical;  of  children;  anxiety,  pale  face,  cold  sweat


417  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

on forehead ; cough before or after ; syncope after
spasms;  with  cyanosis.

I  Tonic  spasms  with  contraction  of  palms  of  hands  and
soles  of  feet.

I  I  Cannot  dress  herself;  constant  twitches  and  sill}^  mo-
tions; legs  twitch  even  in  sleep;  cannot  walk ;  vomits
food  ;  cries  at  least  trifles.

I  I  Cold  as  ice;  breath  cold;  tongue  cold;  great  weakness;
distorted  face ;  expression  of  terror. ^Shock  from  injury.

iParalysis:  after  cholera ;  from  debilitatiDg  losses.
^^  Sleep. Yawning.

Sleepiness.

I  I  Uninterrupted  sleep  for  three  daj's. ^Typhoid.

Drowsy,  starts  as  if  frightened,  preventing  sleep ;  fever
follows.

Arms  stretched  above  head,  moaning  during  sleep.

Nightly  anxiety  and  sleeplessness.

Dreams  :  of  being  drowned  ;  of  being  bitten  by  a  dog  and
cannot  escape ;  of  being  hunted  ;  of  robbers,  with  fright-
ened awaking  and  a  fixed  idea  that  dream  is  true.
^^Time. 4  a.m.:  eructations.

Toward  morning:  headache  >  ;  diarrhoea  >.

Morning :  on  waking  could  not  open  eyes ;  lids  seemed  to
stick  to  ball ;  diarrhoea  ;  twitching  and  jerking  of  limbs  ;
headache  during  menses;  asthma;  cough  <;  sweat;
chill.

Forenoon  :  stiffness  in  legs.

From  time  of  rising  until  10  a.m.:  diarrhoea  <.

From  10  a.m.  until  3  p.m.:  diarrhoea  >.

Afternoon  :  griping  in  abdomen.

3  to  9  p.m.:  neuralgia  of  bowels.

4  p.m.:  neuralgia  of  bowels.

5  p.m.  :  headache  on  vertex.

Evening: anxiety;  remitting  fever  <; late,  cough <;

heat;  sweat.
Night : cursing and howling ; groaning and sighing ;

headache,  beginning  in  afternoon;  in  sleep,  epistaxis ;

delirium,  remitting  fever;  pressure  in  stomach  <;  in

Summer  sudden  diarrhoea;  cholera  morbus  <;  womb

disease  <;  hemeralopia;  palpitation;  sweat.
^® Temperature and  Weather. Open  air: after  exercise,

bulimia.
Warmth:  does  not  >  prosopalgia;  of  bed,  cough  <;  of

bed,  neuralgia  in  leg  <.
Warm  room  :  going  into,  cough  <.
Hot  day :  drinking  cold  water  causes  diarrhoea.
Hot  weather:  diarrhoea;  scarlatina.
Cold :  eating  and  drinking,  cough  <.
VOL.  X.— 27.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  418

In  sharp,  cold  air  :  dr}',  tickling  cough.
Cold,  damp  weather:  rheumatic  ophthalmia;  asthma.
Damp  weather :  neuralgia  in  face.
Wet  weather:  pains  in  limbs.
Bad  weather :  neuralgia  in  arms.
Change  of  weather :  cough  <.
*Tever. Chill  and  coldness:  mostly  external,  with  internal

heat,  and cold,  clammy  sweat; running  downward;

shaking  chill  with  sweat,  which  soon  passes  off  into

general  coldness;  of  nursing  children;  with  desire  for

cold  drinks.
Chill  increased  by  drinking;  >  after  getting  out  of  bed.
1 1  Whole  body  icy-cold.
Chill  and  heat  alternating,  now  here  now  there,  on  single

parts.
1 1  Internal  sensation  of  chilliness  running  from  head  to

toes.
1 1  Cold  skin;  cold  clammy  sweat.
1 1  Face  cold,  collapsed.

■  ■Coldness  over  back.
I  lExtremities  cold.

I  Heat:  of  head;  and  redness  of  face;  mostly  internal,  with
thirst,  but  no  desire  to  drink  ;  in  evening,  with  sweat;
ascends;  alternating  with  chilliness.

■  Sweat:  profuse;  morning,  evening or  all  night;  with

every  stool ;  cold",  clammy  ;  offensive;  bitter  smelling;
staining  yellow;  with  deathly  pale  face ;  general,  cold,
<  on  forehead  ;  from  least  exertion.

■  Intermittent  fever,  often  pernicious,  during  cholera;  also

after  abuse  of  quinine.

I  I  Quotidian  ague,  chill  lasts  an  hour,  with  blueness  of
nails,  then  heat  mingled  with  chilliness,  finally  general
profuse  cold  sweat;  thirst  during  fever  and  particularly
during  sweat;  nausea;  bitter  vomiting;  diarrhoea;  urine
dark,  depositing  brick-red  sediment.

I  I  Several  chills  every  other  day;  chill  commences  with
coldness  in  abdomen,  spreading  thence  all  over  body ;
frequent  stools,  thin  and  water}' ;  coldness  became  gen-
eral, but  no  shaking;  breathing  oppressed  and  labored;
stools  became  bloody,  finally  nothing  but  pure  blood
running  from  bowels  steadily ;  vomiting  of  blood,  part
of  time  blood  thin  and  bright-red,  afterward  dark  and
thick  ;  prostration  excessive;  speechlessness;  chill  lasted
eight  hours  and  patient  seemed  at  the  point  of  death.

I  I A  boy,  aet.  12,  had  ague  for  two  months;  at  first  chill
every  other,  now  every  day,  alternately  weak  and  strong;
shivering,  with  thirst  for  half  an  hour,  followed  by  heat,
lasting  some  hours,  with  dry  cough  and  headache;  per-


419  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

spiration  profuse,  with  thirst;  soon  after  chill  sets  in
patient  falls  asleep;  during  hot  stage  sleep  turns  into
coma,  out  of  which  he  awakes  occasionally  and  asks  for
drinks  ;  during  whole  intermission  sleeps  and  drinks  a
good  deal,  but  has  little  appetite.

■  Intermittent  fever  coming  on  early  in  morning.
I  I  After  chill  no  heat,  but  sweat.

■  Pernicious  intermittent;  collapse  during  chill.

■  Bilious  fever; cramps  in  stomach; costiveness; colic;

depression ;  despair.

■  Rheumatic fever,  with  profuse  sweat,  great  weakness,

diarrhoea.

■  ■Typhoid  forms  of  fever,  especially  in  cholera  season;

also  when  vital  forces  suddenly  sink  ;  cold  sweat ;  coma ;
vomiting  and  watery  diarrhoea ;  bluish  face ;  pointed
nose;  wrinkled  skin.
I  I A  boy,  set.  5,  lay  on  his  r.  side ;  excited,  loquacious ;  an-
swered sometimes  clearly,  again  irrelevantly;  delirious
talk  or  moaning;  kicked  off  bedclothes;  head  hot,  feet
and  body  cool ;  liked  cool  water  on  head  ;  skin  dry ;  red
spot,  came  and  went  on  abdomen  and  nape;  abdomen
full  but  not  hard ;  stool  had  been  painful,  now  painless,
clay-colored,  thin,  copious,  frequent ;  for  ten  days  has
been  vomiting  everything  at  once,  but  is  hungry  while
nauseated;  thirst  sudden  and  occasional;  tongue  dry,
thickly  coated,  white,  papillae  project;  mucus  in  mouth
and  on  teeth,  sticky,  dark.

■  Yellow  fever;  gastro-hepatic  type,  with  thin  blackish  or

yellowish  diarrhoea  ;  thin,  blackish  or  yellowish  vomit-
ing of  bile  or  blood ;  burning  in  stomach ;  lips  and
tongue  dry,  brown  and  cracked ;  cold  perspiration  on
forehead;  great  exhaustion  and  small  intermitting
pulse;  face  yellowish,  bluish,  cold,  covered  with  sweat;
eyes  dull,  yellow,  watery ;  deafness ;  difficult  swallow-
ing; hiccough;  thirst;  cold  hands  and  feet;  trembling,
cramps;  coma;  unconsciousness,  delirium ;  vertigo;  fear,
depressed,  restless.
;*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Intermittent :  frontal  neuralgia ;
neuralgia  of  bowels.

Gradually :  pain  radiating  from  epigastrium  to  sides  and
back.

Every  few  minutes  :  neuralgia  in  bowels.

Every  fifteen  minutes :  vomiting.

For  two  hours :  vomiting  and  purging  in  cholera.

For  eight  hours :  chills.

Every  morning  4  or  5  a.m.  :  pains  in  arms  ;  coxalgia.

Every  day :  chills.

Every  other  day :  remitting  fever  ;  chills.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  420

For  three  days  :  uninterrupted  sleep.

For  two  weeks :  pain  in  hypogastric  region.

For  three  weeks :  diarrhoea.

For  six  months :  painless  diarrhoea.

For  ten  months :  exhaustion  with  diarrhoea.

For  nearly  two  years :  vomiting  after  meals.

For  some  years  :  morning  diarrhoea.

For  ten  years  :  myalgia.

Fall  and  Spring:  whooping-cough  epidemics ;  neuralgia
in  arms.
*^ locality  and  Direction.  Left:  head  falls  when  raised  up;
prosopalgia,  eye  injected  ;  sparks  before  eye ;  neuralgia
in  bowels  <;  burning  pain  under  ribs;  severe  pain  in
hypochondrium  ;  pain  in  chest ;  pain  in  forearm  ;  tear-
ing in  leg.

Right:  as  if  a  bunch  of  hair  were  electrified.;  neuralgia
palpebraris;  epistaxis;  facial  neuralgia;  hypochondri-
um tense,  sensitive  to  pressure  ;  shocks  in  hip ;  stinging
in  toes.

Left  to  r.:  facial  neuralgia.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  pregnant  or  in  throes  of  childbirth  ;  as  if
he  had  a  bad  conscience  or  had  committed  a  crime;  as
if  things  whirled  in  a  circle ;  as  of  a  lump  of  ice  on  ver-
tex ;  as  if  brain  were  torn  to  pieces ;  as  if  head  would
burst;  as  of  heat  and  cold  at  same  time  on  scalp  ;  as  if
a  bunch  of  hair  were  electrified ;  eyelids  as  if  rubbed
sore;  as  if  salt  were  between  upper  lid  and  eyeball ;  as
if  inner  surface  of  lids  were  too  dry;  as  if  hundreds  of
fine  needle  points  were  thrust  into  eyelids;  as  if  ears
were  stopped  ;  as  if  nose  were  dry ;  teeth  feel  as  if  filled
with  lead  ;  as  if  tongue  were  too  heavy ;  coolness,  as
from  peppermint  in  mouth;  as  of  dust  in  throat;  as
if  mouth  were  lined  with  mucus;  as  if  something
alive  were  rising  from  stomach  into  throat;  as  from
ravenous  hunger,  pain  in  stomach  ;  radiating  pain,  from
abdomen  ;  distress  over  heart  and  epigastrium  ;  sinking
and  empty  feeling  in  abdomen ;  as  of  knives  cutting
bowels;  as  of  hot  coals  in  abdomen;  pinching,  as  with
pincers  in  abdomen ;  as  if  intestines  were  twisted  into  a
knot;  as  if  cold  water  were  running  through  veins;
arms  as  if  bruised  or  broken;  as  if  bones  of  1.  forearm
were  pressed;  as  if  arms  were  too  full  and  swollen,  feel
cold  when  raising  them  ;  as  if  hands  had  been  asleep  ;  as
if  heavy  stone  were  tied  to  feet  and  knees;  limbs  pain
as  if  exhausted  by  excessive  fatigue;  as  if  she  would
have  to  fly  away.

Pain:  under  scapulae;  in  hepatic  region  ;  in  shoulders;
in  shin  bones,  as  if  broken.


421  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

Intense  pain  :  in  arms,  waking  from  sleep,  at  4  or  5  a.m.

Violent  pain  :  in  hip,  4  a.m.

Severe  pain:  in  stomach,  an  hour  after  eating ;  in  1.  hypo-

chondrium  ;  in  descending  colon.
Sharp  pain  :  in  hypogastric  region.
Cutting:  in  abdomen;  colic;  in  stomach;  in  1.  chest.
Tearing: in  eyes; in  face; in  cheeks,  temples  and  eyes;

in  legs;  in  1.  leg  from  thigh  to  toes.
Stitches : in  submaxillary  gland ; in  posterior  wall  of

uterus;  in  sides  of  chest;  in  corns.
Stinging;  in  toes  of  r.  foot.

Pricking:  in  fingers  and  toes  before  unconsciousness.
Burning:  in  brain;  in  mouth  and  throat;  in  pit  of  stom-
ach;  in  stomach  and  oesophagus;  in  abdomen;  under

1.  ribs;  colic;  in  anus;  in  rectum.
Aching:  in  bowels.

Bruised  sensation  :  in  brain;  in  sacral  region.
Drawing:  in  face;  in  fingers.
Pressure :  in  brain  ;  on  vertex ;  in  eyes ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;

in  hepatic  region ;  in  region  of  sternum ;  in  bones  of  1.

forearm.
Griping :  in  abdomen,  above  and  below  navel.
Twisting:  colic.
Neuralgic  pain  :  in  head ;  in  face ;  in  bowels ;  in  brachial

plexus.
Rheumatic  pain :  between  scapulse;  in  limbs.
Soreness :  of  head  ;  of  eyelids,  as  if  rubbed.
Scraping:  in  throat
Roughness:  in  throat.
Pinching:  colic.
Cramps:  in  calves,  feet  and  fingers;  in  bowels;  in  masseter

muscles;  in  thighs.
Cramplike  pain  :  in  epigastrium.

Constriction:  of  throat;  in  bowels;  inchest;  of  larynx.
Choking :  when  swallowing.
Suffocating:  with  vomiting.

Stiffness:  of  neck;  of  eyelids;  of  masseter  muscles.
Throbbing:  headache;  toothache;  in  r.  temple.
Distension :  in  pharynx ;  in  pit  of  stomach.
Fulness ;  of  stomach  and  bowels.
Heaviness :  of  head ;  of  eyelids ;  in  teeth ;  in  tongue.
Tension :  in  abdomen.

Tingling:  in  limbs;  in  fingers;  in  hands;  all  over.
Tickling : in  trachea ; in  bronchi,  lowest  branches ; in

throat.
Crawling:  in  hands.
Weakness:  in  stomach;  hypogastrium.
Trembling :  in  stomach.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  422

Fainting:  with  nausea.

Sinking:  in  abdomen;  during  or  after  stool.

Warmth :  in  fingers  and  toes,  before  unconsciousness.

Heat:  in  eyes;  in  anus;  all  over.

Coldness:  in  mouth;  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.

Chilliness:  running  from  head  to  feet.

Dryness :  of  eyelids ; of  mouth  and  palate ; in  throat ;  of

fauces.
*'  Tissues. Rapid  sinking  of  vital  forces ;  collapse.
Whole  body  and  face  pale ;  cold  sweat.
Skin  and  muscles  lax.
Pyaemia,

Anasarca ;  vo-miting,  purging,  great  prostration.
Cramps,  in  limbs.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch: abdomen

painful.
Pressure  r slightest, neuralgia palpebraris  < ; 1,  hypo-

chondrium  sensitive.
Slight  wounds:  cause  fainting.
I  Shock  from  injury.
^^Skin. I  Skin  blue^  purple,  cold; wrinkled; remaining  in

folds  when  pinched.
I  I  Skin  livid,  cold;  pulse  thready;  drowsy  and  restless.
Rash  over  body,  or  on  face  and  hands.
Dry  eruptions  like  itch.

Desquamation  of  indurated  or  thickened  portions  of  skin.
Erysipelas.

Burning  after  scratching.
Heat  and  tingling  all  over.
Itching  and  corrosive  itching.
Severe  stitches  in  corns  while  sitting.
I  Skin  anaemic,  or  cyanotic.
■  Measles  tardy  and  pale ;  skin  livid ;  hemorrhages,  but  no

relief;  drowsy;  weak;  cold;  thready  pulse ;  spasmodic

pulse  and  vomiturition.
■Scarlatina  in  hot  Summer  weather;  eruption  bluish;  pulse

feeble; burning  heat  of  limbs,  alternating  with  cold-
ness.
Ulcers  bluish,  hard,  indurated,  itching,  painless,  but  with

redness  of  areola ;  pus  scanty.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Children  and  old  people.
Anaemia.

Lean,  choleric  or  melancholy  persons.
Young  people  and  women  of  a  sanguine  or  nervo-sanguine

temperament;  also  people  who  are  habitually  cold  and

deficient  in  vital  reaction ;  gay  dispositions ;  fitful  mood.
Boy,  eet.  6  months,  ill-nourished, fretful, suffering five

weeks  with  pertussis;  spasmus  glottidis.


423  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

Child,  set.  9  months;  spasmus  glottidis.

Baby,  set.  9  months ;  cholera  infantum.

Boy,  eet.  11  months  ;  meningitis.

Girl,  set.  15  months;  cholera  morbus.

Boy,  set.  3,  suffering  three  weeks;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  5 ;  cholera.

Boy,  set.  5  ;  typhoid  fever.

Boy,  set.  9,  after  typhoid  fever ;  bulimia.

Boy,  set.  9 ;  vomiting.

Girl,  set.  11,  has  had  ague;  neuralgia  of  bowels.

Boy,  set.  12;  ague.

Boy,  set.  13  ;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  15,  delicate-looking;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  17 ;  cholera.

Girl,  set.  18,  strong,  pale,  slender;  prosopalgia.

Girl, ^t. 19, ailing  several  years; dysmenorrhoea  and
hemeralopia.

Jewess,  set  20,  rest  of  family similarly affected ; plica
polonica.

Miss ,  set.  20 ;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  21,  ill  three  months;  gastralgia.

Compositor,  set.  24,  lean,  pale,  earthy  complexion;  colico-
dynia.

Miss  B.,  set.  26  ;  insanity.

Mrs.  C,  set.  26,  light  complexion,  mild ;  insanity.

Man,  set.  29 ;  mania.

Woman,  set.  30,  confined  two  weeks  previously;  insanity.

Woman,  set.  30 ;  insanity.

Woman,  set.  30 ;  insanity.

Woman,  set.  30,  nervous;  prosopalgia.

Mrs.  B.,  ast.  30;  empty  feeling  in  abdomen.

Man,  set.  30 ;  ague.

Peasant  woman,  set.  32;  mania.

Man,  set.  32,  strong,  suffering  three  years;  pains  in  arms.

Miss ,  set  33 ;  mania.

Woman,  set.  34,  ill  one  week ;  dyspepsia.

Woman,  ast.  36,  suffering  eight  days ;  insanity.

Man,  set.  36,  delicate,  after  a  cold  drink  six  months  previ-
ously ;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  38 ;  insanity.

Woman,  set.  40 ;  vomiting.

Woman,  set.  40,  ill  five  weeks ;  dyspepsia.

Woman,  set.  43,  suffering  three  years  since  cessation  of
menstruation ;  vomiting.

Woman,  a^t.  44,  ill  six  months ;  dyspepsia.

Woman,  set.  47,  weak,  emaciated  ;  colic.

Man,  set.  50,  suffering  from  rheumatism  and  hemorrhoids;
affection  of  throat.


VERATRUM  ALB.— VERATRUM  VIRIDE.  424

Man,  set.  50  ;  gastric  disorder,

Man,  set.  50 ;  cholera  morbus.

Woman,  set.  54  ;  gastrodynia.

Woman,  set.  55,  ill  six  years ;  dyspepsia.

AVoman,  set.  56,  medium  height,  weak,  gouty;  colic.

Man,  set.  60,  miller  ;  insanity.

Man,  set.  60;  intussusception  of  bowel.

Woman,  set.  60,  after  fright;  diarrhoea.

Merchant,  set.  62,  strong,  well  nourished,  leading  a  life  full

of  excitement  and  care ;  bulimia.
Miss  F.,  ill  ten  months ;  diarrhoea.
Old  lady,  small,  thin,  weak,  is  hard  of  hearing  and  has  an

impediment  of  speech  ;  sciatica.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Aeon.,  Camphor.,  Cinchon.,  Coffea.
It antidotes: Arsen., Cinchon., Cuprum (colic), Ferrum,

Opium,  and  removes  bad  effects  of  alcohol  and  tobacco.
Compatible:  Arsen.,  Arnic,  Cinchon.,  Cuprum.,  Ipec.


VERATRUM  VIRIDE

American  or  Green  Hellebore.  Melanthacese.

This  species  of  Veratrum  is  found  from  Canada  to  the  Carolinas,  growing  in
swamps,  wet  meadows  and  along  mountain  creeks.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root  gathered  in  Autumn.

Introduced  by  Burt,  proved  by  him.  Hales  New  Kem.,  p.  1033 ;  Am.  Obs.,  vol.
7,  p.  1870 ;  Berridge  and  Lillie,  N.  A.  Jour,  of  Horn.,  N.  S.,  vol.  2  (1872),  p.  505 ;
Sullivan,  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  10,  p.  97.

Clinicai,  Authorities. — Insanity,  Briry,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  429  ;  Conges-
tion of  brain,  F-e^mer,  N.  Y.  S.  Tr.,  pp.  635-641;  Cerebral  and  cerebrospinal  affec-
tions, Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  576;  Diseases  of  fundus  oculi,  McGuire,  Hah.
Mo.,  Aug.,  1881,  p.  449;  Gastric  disorder,  Winterburn,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Mich.,  1888;
Cholera  morbus,  Criley,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  17  ;  Amenorrlma,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.
H.,  vol.  8,  p.  409 ;  Abortion,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  410 ;  Puerperal  convul-
sions, Kitchen,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  271 ;  Hand,  N.  Y.  S.  Tr.,  1871,  p.  295  ;  Young-
husband,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  5,  p.  466  ;  Puerperal  fever,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  411 ;
Puerperal  peritonitis,  Brown,  Med.  Union,  vol.  1,  p.  42;  Puerperal  complication,
Winterburn,  T.  M.  S.  Soc.  Mich.,  1888;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  24,  p.  320;  Pneumonia,

Drasche,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  135 ;  Briry,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  451 ;  ,  A.  H.

O.,  Sept.,  1873,  p.  468;  Turrell,  Med.  Inv.,  Jan.  1871,  p.  149;  Bilious  pneumonia,
Dayfoot,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  468;  Acute  synovitis  (4  cases),  Moore,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
25,  p.  256  ;  Spasms,  Small,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  vol.  7,  p.  159  ;  Williamson,  T.  H.  M.
S.  Pa.,  1873 ;  Chorea,  Winterburn,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Mich.,  1888 ;  Cooper,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
34,  p.  272;  Malarial  fever,  Morse,  M.  I.,  vol.  2,  p.  359;  Remittent  and  bilious  fevers.


425  VERATRUM  VI RIDE.

Pope,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p  99;  Rheumatism,  Searle,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  Ill ;
Hasbrouck,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  255  ;  Dayfoot,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  468;  Green-
leaf,  Habbrouck,  Day  foot,  A.H.  O.,  1873,  pp.  256,  258,  468;  Erysipelas,  Searle,
A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  Ill ;  Erysipelas  of  face,  J.  W.  E.,  Am.  Hora.,  vol.  1,  p 115.

^Mind. Stupefaction;  congestion.

Mental  confusion,  loss  of  memory;  vertigo.  ^Cerebral
hyperaemia.

From  sudden  cerebral  congestion:  quarrelsome  delirium;
great  mental  depression  and  fear  of  death  ;  semi-stupor,
sometimes  complete  coma;  puerperal  convulsions;
insanity.

I  I  Puerperal  mania:  silent,  suspicious;  will  not  see  her
physician,  he  seems  to  terrify  her ;  fears  being  poisoned;
sleepless,  can  hardly  be  kept  in  her  bedroom.

Depression  of  spirits.

I  I  Loquacity,  with  exaltation  of  ideas,  or  an  exalted  opin-
ion of  her  own  ideas  and  powers;  everything  seems
clear  to  her;  now  clearly  understands  former  mysteri-
ous things;  wants  no  medicine,  as  that  will  restore  her
to  former  condition;  at  times  talks  and  laughs;  some
days  laughter  is  constant;  talks  long  about  one  thing;
persists  in  talking  and  will  pay  no  attention  to  what  is
said  to  her;  will  not  answer  questions;  knows  all  that
is  going  on  about  house,  does  not  want  anything  said
that  she  cannot  hear;  lies  in  bed  and  does  not  want  to
get  up  long  enough  to  get  clothes  changed ;  says  head
feels  bad ;  eyes  red,  vision  not  affected  ;  appetite  poor,  or
capricious;  bowels  torpid;  limbs  cold  and  moist;  pulse
small  and  frequent.  /^Insanity.
^  Sensorium.  iSunstroke,  with  prostration,  febrile  motion,
accelerated  pulse.

Headache,  with  vertigo,  dimness  of  vision  and  dilated
vessels.

Head  felt  full  and  heavy.

■  Vertigo:  with  nausea; with  vomiting as soon as  he

rises.
^ Inner  Head. Frontal  headache:  severe;  with  vomiting;
dull,  with  neuralgic  pain  in  r.  temple,  close  to  eye.

■  Headache  from  nape  of  neck,  with  vertigo,  dim  vision,

dilated  pupils.
•  Congestion  to  head:  from  high  living,  abuse  of  stimu-
lants; during  dentition.

■  Fulness  in  head,  throbbing  arteries;  increased  sensitive-

ness to  sounds;  buzzing  in  ears;  double  or  partial  vision.
^Sunstroke.
Great  pain,  with  fulness  in  head ;  face  much  flushed;  burn-
ing in  head;  spots  before  eyes;  delirium  or  a  kind  of
stupefaction.


VERATKUM  VIRIDE.  426

J  Congestive  headache  from  suppression  of  menses ;  intense
congestion,  ahnost  apoplectic,  accompanied  by  violent
nausea  and  vomiting.

I  Nervous  or  sick-headaches.

I  Intense  cerebral  congestion:  feeling  as  if  head  would
burst  open;  with  nausea  and  vomiting;  sudden  spasms;
from  plethora,  vascular  irritation,  coup  de  soleil,  alco-
holic stimulants,  teething  in  children,  and  from  sup-
pressed discharges;  weight  or  distension  of  head;  gid-
diness; intense  headache;  fulness  and  throbbing  of
arteries;  stupefaction;  increased  sensitiveness  to  sounds,
with  buzzing,  roaring,  etc.,  and  double  vision.

I  I  Constrictive  pain  in  head,  increased  by  warm  drinks.

■  Congestive  apoplex}'';  intense  headache;  stupid,  ringing

in  ears,  bloodshot  eyes,  thick  speech,  hot  head;  slow,
full  pulse,  hard  as  iron;  convulsions;  dimness  of  vision,
nausea  and  vomiting.

■  Cerebro-spinal  congestion.

■  Acute  inflammatory  meningitis.

■  Meningitis;  high  fever,  intense  congestion,  later  rolling

of  head  or  vomiting;  face  haggard,  cold,  pulse  slow;
breathing  labored;  trembling,  as  if  child  were  fright-
ened and  on  verge  of  spasms.

I  I  Cerebro-spinal  disease ;  pulse  quick  and  wiry ;  pupils
dilated;  muscles  of  back  and  neck  contracted,  drawing
head  back  on  shoulders;  delirium;  spasmodic  cough;
finally  tetanic  convulsions  every  five  or  ten  minutes,  for
five  days;  opisthotonus;  cold,  clammy  sweat  over  body.

M Cerebro-spinal  disease  in  a  child;  burning  fever,  fre-
quent vomiting,  cries  out  on  attempt  to  move  him,  draws
head  backward,  rolls  up  eyes,  puts  hand  back  of  ears,
rolls  head  from  side  to  side,  pulse  wiry,  rapid,  150;  spi-
nal column  pungently  hot  and  dry,  with  petechise.

I  I A  child,  set.  3  months,  very  much  emaciated,  head  much
enlarged  and  misshapen,  drawn  back,  from  contraction
of  spinal  muscles  is  compelled  to  lie  on  side,  eyes  rolled
upward,  rolling  of  head,  moaning  and  screaming,  great
heat  in  back  of  head  and  spine,  respiration  feeble  and
sighing,  pulse  160  and  feeble,  watery  diarrhoea,  urine
scanty  and  high-colored.

■  Basilar  meningitis.

■  Cerebral  irritation;  threatening  hydrocephalus.

*  Outer  Head.  '  i  Right  side  of  head  and  face  much  swollen
and  covered  with  large  blisters;  headache;  high  fever;
no  sleep;  no  appetite;  intermitting  attacks  of  nausea;
occasional  vomiting  of  water  drunk. ^Erj^sipelas.

■  Phlegmonous  erysipelas  of  scalp;  red  streak  down  centre

of  tongue,  yellow  at  edges.


427  VERATRUM  VIRIDE.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. '  i  Double  vision.

Photophobia  and  vertigo  >  by  closing  eyes  and  resting
head.

■  Unsteady  vision.

iDimness  of  vision:  with  dilated  pupils;  from  congestion

of  blood  to  base  of  brain,  with  nausea  and  vomiting;

when  assuming  erect  position,  with  partial  syncope;

walking  brings  on  blindness,  with  fainting;  after  loss

of  vital  fluids.
Immense  green  circles  appear  around candle,  which,  as

vertigo  comes  on,  turn  to  red.

■  Amaurosis:  from  irritation  or  congestion  of  optic  nerve;

from  anaemia.

I  iMrs.  ■ •,  set.  32,  never  had  any  previous  eye  trouble;

vision  good  at  all  distances;  has  always  suffered  from
dysmenorrhoea,  with  severe  cejthalalgia  just  before  or
after  menses;  for  last  six  years  has  had  occasional  epi-
leptiform convulsions,  all  of  which  were  interrupted
during  her  only  pregnancy,  and  subsequent  period  of
lactation;  child  died  when  9  months  old,  and  with  re-
establishment  of  menstrual  function  occurred  dysmen-
orrhoea, head  pains  and  convulsions,  latter  more  frequent
than  ever;  at  menstrual  period  pain  in  orbital  region,
gradually  extending  backward  through  base  to  cord;
opisthotonos,  body  and  limbs  highly  hypersesthetic,
consecutively,  from  above  downward,  following  course
of  development  of  pain ;  a  few  hours  later  these  parts
ansesthetic,  followed  by  marked  atrophic  changes  in  mus-
cles; particularly  in  lower  extremities;  sudden  com-
plete loss  of  qualitative  vision  of  r.  eye,  with  contracted
pupil ;  vision  of  1.  eye  only  slightly  hazy ;  no  pain  or
uneasiness  in  eyes  until  two  days  after  loss  of  vision  was
noticed,  when  she  had  a  severe  attack  of  cephalalgia,
lasting  one  week  with  unconscious  state,  fainting  and
vomiting,  objects  appearing  like  balls  of  fire  before  eyes;
aching  in  one  or  other  eye  constantly,  <  in  evening,
with  appearance  of  stars,  flashes  of  fire,  etc. ;  L.  E.  V.  ^^ ;
R.  E.  V.  =^  perception  of  light;  choroiditis  circum-
scripta, a  single  nodule  just  external  to  macula;  nodule,
and  tissues  between  it  and  macula,  having  characteristic
prominence  and  yellow-red  color,  while  small  lines  and
dots  of  choroidal  pigment  gave  evidence  of  approaching
atrophy  in  that  tissue;  alter  Veratr.  vir.,  R.  E.  V.  |-f  5
same  dimensions,  remaining  portions  of  choroid  and
retina  in  all  respects  normal ;  no  return  of  headache,
dysmenorrhoea  or  convulsions,  vision  remaining  good.

I  I  Mrs. ,  set.  21,  brunette; brown  irides; good  phy-


VERATRUM  VIRIDE.  428

sique ;  family  history  j^araplegia,  hemiplegia  and  apo-
plexy; attacked  six  weeks  ago  with  violent  pain  in
small  of  back,  and  through  pelvis;  burning  as  if  boil-
ing water  were  being  poured  over  parts;  pain  and  vio-
lent cramping  in  calves  and  feet,  with  numbness  and
itching;  preceding  these  symptoms,  violent  cephalalgia
beginning  in  nape  and  base;  <  lying  down ;  scalp  sen-
sitive;.  menses  infrequent  and  scanty;  acute  metritic
cellulitis ;  dull  pain  in  1.  eye,  with  gradual  failure  of
vision ;  some  heavy  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  >  by  press-
ure, <  by  lying  down;  L.  E.  V.  y\;  inspection  of  fun-
dus shows  a  typical  "congestion  papille,"  papillary
margins  being  entirely  obscured,  and  presenting  char-
acteristic grey,  woolly  appearance ;  both  veins  and  arte-
ries large  and  tortuous;  R.  E.  V.  ^-f,  with  +  ^ig-  =  ^f ;  ret-
inal veins  markedly  tortuous  and  dilated;  after  Veratr.
mr.,  R.E.V.if;  L.E.V.if.
I  I  Became  suddenly  blind  in  upper  half  of  visual  field ;
R.  E.  V.  ff-;  L.  E.  V.  ff ;  optic  disk  can  be  distinctly  out-
lined; only  superior  retinal  vessels  can  be  with  difficulty
traced,

■  Twitching  in  lids,  contortion  of  eyes,  rolling  of  eyeballs,

paralysis  of  lids.
I  I  Traumatic  erysipelas  of lids; excessive  dryness  with

difficulty  of  moving  them ;  great  heat  in  interior  of  eyes.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. Deafness  from  moving  quickly,  with

faintness.
Roaring  in  ears,  congestion ;  nausea,  vomiting.
Humming  in  ears  and  sensitiveness  to  noise.
Paralysis  of  auditory  nerve,  producing  deafness.
Neuralgia  of  auditory  nerve.
Acute  otitis.
Ears  cold  and  pale.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Profuse  secretion  of  mucus  from  nose.

Itching  first  in  r.,  then  in  1.  side  of  ala  nasi.
® Upper  Face. Face:  cold,  bluish,  covered  with  cold  sweat;

nose  pinched,  cold,  blue; paleness  of  lips  and  around

alse  nasi.
Convulsive  twitchings  of  facial  muscles.

■  Face  flushed;  cerebral  congestion.

I  I  Right  eye  completely  closed  from  inflammation  and
swelling  of  upper  lid ;  half  of  forehead  and  most  of  scalp
on  same  side  inflamed  and  covered  with  large  blisters ;
much  pain;  restless;  sleepless;  fever;  headache;  tongue
coated  dirty  yellow;  breath  offensive ;  noa[)petite;  at
times  considerable  thirst;  nausea  from  one  to  three
hours,  seldom  vomiting,  and  then  of  water  drunk.
^Erysipelas  bullosum.


429  VERATRUM  VIRIDE.

1  I  Phlegmonous  erysipelas  of  face  and  head ;  furious  deli-
rium, screaming,  howling,  striking  so  that  it  required
several  to  keep  her  on  bed  ;  pulse  high,  strong;  no  sleep
for  sixty  hours;  tongue  very  red,  inclined  to  a  brown
color  on  edges,  with  a  red  dark  streak  through  centre;
about  three-quarters  of  an  inch  wide.
®  Lower  Face. Mouth  drawn  down  at  one  corner.

]jips  dry ;  mouth  dry,  or  thick  mucus  in  mouth.
^'^  Teeth  and  Gums. iDentition;  cerebral  congestion,  excited

pulse ;  convulsions.
"  Taste  and  Tongue.  iiTongue:  white  or  yellow,  with  red
streak  down  middle ;  dry  or  moist  with  white  or  yellow
coating,  or  no  coating  at  all  on  either  side;  feels  scalded ;
inclined  to  be  dry.
^^  Inner  Mouth.  '  l  A  peculiarly  characteristic  odor  of  breath,
not  offensive,  but  reminding  one  of  a  faint  odor  of  chloro-
form or  ether. ^Malarial  fever.

Dry  lips  and  mucus  of  mouth  thick;  dry  mouth  and  lips
all  day.

Copious  secretion  of  saliva.
'^Throat. Dryness  and  heat  in  throat,  with  severe  hiccough.

I  Burning  in  fauces  and  oesophagus,  with  constant  inclina-
tion to  swallow.

I  Spasms  of  oesophagus,  with  or  without  rising  of  frothy,
blood}''  mucus.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  ball  rising  into  oesophagus.

I  Acute  inflammation  of  whole  length  of  oesophagus,  with
constant  hiccough  ;  nausea  and  violent  vomiting.

I  Acute  spasmodic  stricture  of  oesophagus.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Thirst.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Hiccough :
almost  constant ;  painful ;  with  spasms  of  upper  part  of
oesophagus.

I  Heartburn,  with  bitter,  sour  rising.

Nausea:  and  vomiting,  with  cold  sweat;  with  dizziness,
followed  by  heat  of  surface ;  painful  empty  retching,
with  ejection  of  only  a  little  bloody  mucus.

I  Vomiting:  long  continuing;  of  glairy  mucus  after  food ;
of  blood;  of  bile;  with  inflammatory  and  cerebral  dis-
eases ;  smallest  quantity  of  food  or  drink  is  immediately
rejected ;  with  collapse,  very  slow  pulse  and  cold  sweat.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Sharp,  flying  pains  in  epigas-
trium and  umbilical  region,  passing  to  pubes.

■  Excruciating  pain  covering  space  size  of  hand,  in  lower

part  of  stomach.
Twisting  tearing  pain  in  stomach.
Intense  drawing  twisting  pains  in  stomach,  as  if  it  were

tightly  drawn  against  spine,  causing  pain in  dorsal

region.


VERATRUM  VIRIDE.  430

Pains  culminate,  every  five  minutes,  in  severe  vomiting.

I  Acute  gastritis.

I  Neuralgicorspasmodic  affections  of  stomach,  accompanied
by  vomiting,  retching  and  excessive  irritation.

i  I  Heartburn  and  sour  eructations ;  could  take  any  form
of  hot  food  or  drink,  but  a  single  mouthful  of  ice  water
would  cause  immediate  vomiting,  without  much  nausea,
followed  by  empty  retching  often  lasting  for  hours ;
stabbing  pain  in  dorsal  region,  sometimes  extending
through  to  umbilicus.
^^  Abdomen.  Abdomen  as  if  drawn  in,  following  cramp  in
stomach.

Pain  and  soreness  across  abdomen,  just  above  pelvis.

Pain  in  lower  portion  of  bowels.

I  I  Neuralgic  pains  at  r.  side  of  umbilicus,  passing  down
to  groin.

i  I  Cutting  aching  pains  in  umbilical  region,  with  rum-
bling in  bowels  and  desire  for  stool.

I  Enteritis,  with  high  fever,  great  vascular excitement;
vomiting;,  dark,  bloody  stools.
^^ Stool  and  Rectum. Stools: bloody; black,  in  typhoid;
copious,  light,  mornings ;  mushy,  preceded  and  followed
by  cutting  in  bowels.

lAcute  enteritis,  with  high  fever,  dark  and  bloody  stools.

■  Cholera  and  cholera  morbus.

I  I  Purging  and  vomiting  almost  constantly  from  1  until
10  p.m.;  lies  doubled  up  with  agony ;  profuse  cold  sweat;
frequent  attempts  at  vomiting,  at  same  time  watery  stool
mixed  with  small  flakes  of  mucus;  burning  in  stomach
which  was  cramped  and  felt  like  a  stone  to  external
pressure. ^Cholera  morbus.
Hemorrhoids  red  or  dark  blue.
Neuralgic  pains  in  rectum.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine  increased,  pale,  deposits  a  reddish
sediment;  specific  gravity  diminished.
I  Acute  cystitis,  with  fever.
^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Acute  orchitis  takes  an  erysipelatous

nature.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Acute  metritis  and  ovaritis,  with
a  high  grade  of  fever.

■  Pelvic  cellulitis.

■  Congestion  of  pelvic  organs,  tenderness  of  uterus ;  fever  ;

heat;  restlessness;  palpitation;  local  or  general  hyper-
sesthesia.

■  Menstrual  colic,  preceded  by  great  congestion  or  trouble-

some strangury;  plethoric  women.

■  ■Menstrual  colic  or  dysmenorrhoea;  much  nausea  and

vomiting ;  plethora ;  cerebral  congestion.


431  VERATRUM  VIRIDE.

I  I  Menses  regular,  preceded  for  three  days  by  most  terrible
menstrual  colic ;  pains  extend  all  over  body  ;  face  and
head  bloodshot ;  pains  running  into  head  from  neck ;
pulsations  in  head,  neck  and  carotids;  sight  disappears
at  times,  and  at  others  everything  is  moving  in  confu-
sion before  eyes ;  tongue  feels  heavy,  but  is  clear  and
looks  natural;  great.thirst;  pulse  full  and  bounding.
^Dysmenorrhoea.

I  I  Membranous  dysmenorrhoea ; soreness  as  of  a  boil  in

uterine  region.

I I  Suppressed  menses,  with  cerebral  congestion;  plethora.
I  I  After  being  caught  in  a  shower  a  few  days  before  menses,

chill,  followed  by  intense  fever,  congestion  to  head,
throbbing  and  fulness  of  carotid  and  temporal  arteries,
great  heat  of  head  with  coldness  of  feet,  intense  pain  in
head,  occasional  delirium,  pulse  120,  hard  and  full.
^Amenorrhcea.

I  I  Amenorrhoea  from  exposure;  chill, complete  suppression
of  discharge;  heavy  pressive  aching  in  uterine  region  ;
intense  pain  in  head  with  heat,  fulness  and  beating  of
arteries;  mind  wandering;  hysteric  sobbing  and  ten-
dency to  tonic  spasms.
^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i Vomiting  during
pregnancy.

I  Rigid  OS  uteri  during  labor.

I  I  Puerperal  convulsions  during  labor  after  blood-letting;
furious  delirium;  arterial  excitement;  cold,  clammy
sweat.

■  Intense  congestion  of  blood  to  brain,  blue,  livid  face,  pro-
found coma  or  wild  delirium. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

I  I  During  nearly  whole  period  of  pregnancy,  severe  vomit-
ing, constant  nausea  with  severe  burning  pain  in  stom-
ach, entire  inability  to  retain  food  except  a  very  small
quantity  of  thin  gruel  or  beef  broth,  these  would  often
excite  protracted  vomiting;  constant  pressure  and  con-
fused feeling  in  head,  with  paroxysms  of  intense  burn-
ing pain,  prostration  of  strength,  coldness  of  limbs,
dryness  of  mouth,  without  much  thirst ;  pain  and  press-
ure in  head,  extending  over  entire  head,  with  a  confused
feeling,  partial  loss  of  memory;  face  flushed  ;  heat  in
head  and  face;  pulse  wiry  and  increased  in  frequency;
dryness  in  mouth  with  some  thirst,  no  pain  except  in
head  ;  premonitory  to  convulsions,  slight  chilliness  with
a  little  nausea  and  twitching  of  muscles  of  face,  followed
by  a  rapid  convulsed  movement  of  muscles  of  body  and
limbs;  dilated  pupils,  difficult  breathing,  continuing
with  slight  intermissions  for  fifteen  minutes;  stupor
from  which  she  could  not  be  aroused  for  fifteen  minutes;


VERATRUM  VIRIDE.  432

afterward  pain  and  pressure  in  head,  with  nausea  and
faintness.  ^Puerperal  convulsions.
I  I  Violent  convulsions  setting  in  as  head  of  child  was
passing  through  vagina,  and  continuing  after  expulsion
of  placenta ;  face  turgid,  livid,  expression  hideous,  great
activity  of  arterial  system  ;  violent  clonic  spasms.

■  Convulsions  with  mania,  or  mania  continues  after  con-

vulsions have  ceased.

I  I  Puerperal  mania :  silent,  suspicious  and  distrustful ;
would  not  see  her  physician,  his  presence  seemed  to
terrify  her,  feared  he  would  poison  her;  complete  sleep-
lessness, could  be  with  difficulty  confined  to  bedroom.

I  I  After  excitement  during  confinement,  sixth  day,  semi-
unconscious  state,  muttering  to  herself;  face  hot  and
flushed,  extremities  cold;  pulse  full  and  bounding,  IGO,
temperature  105.5°  F.

■  Puerperal  fever:  sudden  suppression  of  milk  and  lochia;

intense  fever,  restlessness;  excessive  pain,  tenesmus,
tympanitis;  skin  cold  and  clammy;  quick,  weak  or
bounding  hard  pulse,  cerebral  congestion  and  delirium.

I  I  After  abortion,  retained  placenta;  high  fever;  severe
congestion  to  head ;  abdomen  distended  and  very  ten-
der over  uterine  region ;  sudden  cessation  of  profuse
hemorrhage.

I  I  Sudden  suppression  of  lochia  on  fourth  day  after  labor,
from  exposure  to  a  draft;  severe  chills,  mingled  with
and  followed  by  intense  fever;  bursting  headache;
throbbing  of  arteries;  occasional  delirium;  slight
spasms;  tenderness  of  abdomen ;  with  sharp  pain  in
uterus  and  ovaries;  breasts  flaccid  ;  no  secretions  of  milk.
^Puerperal  fever.

■  Mastitis,  with  great  arterial  and  nervous  excitement.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  •  Membran-
ous croup  (after  Aconite).

'^^  Respiration.  Breathing :  labored,  must  sit  up,  cold  sweat  on
face:  tt  decreased  from  40  to  16,  pneumonia;  difficult,
convulsive,  almost  to  suffocation ;  sensation  as  of  a
heavy  load  on  chest;  patient  has  to  sit  up,  cannot  lie
down ;  cold  sweat  on  face.
Oppression  of  chest;  anxiety.

"Cough. Cough: short, dry, hacking; loose,  rattling; <
going  from  warm  to  cold.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lung's,  i Congestion  of  chest,  with  rapid
respiration,  nausea,  vomiting;  dull  burning  in  region
of  heart.
llPneumonia,  pulse  hard,  strong,  quick;  engorgement  of
lungs,  with  faint  feeling  in  stomach,  nausea,  vomiting,
slow  or  intermittent  pulse.


433  VERATRUM  VIRIDE.

I  I  After  exposure,  severe  chills  and  headache,  pain  in  r.
side,  cough;  after  five  days,  fever,  quick  pulse,  pain  in
r.  side  of  chest,  cough,  frequent  and  labored  respiration  ;
profuse,  bloody  expectoration ;  clear,  bloody  mucus.
^Pneumonia.

I  I  Tongue  feels  as  if  scalded ;  violent  nausea  and  vomiting
every  fifteen  minutes ;  soft  mushy  stool ;  anxious  op-
pression of  chest ;  high  fever. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  Holding  his  side  complaining  that  he  cannot  breathe;
cannot  take  a  full  inspiration  ;  stitching  pleuritic  pain,
very  severe  in  r.  side. ^Pleurisy.

I  I  High  fever ;  face  flushed  ;  vomiting ;  labored  breathing
and  expectoration  of  pus  and  florid  blood ;  tongue  has  a
red  streak  through  centre. ^Pneumonia.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. In  cardiac  region :  burn-
ing ;  prickling ;  dull  aching.

■  Heart's  beat:  loud,  strong,  with  great  arterial  excitement;

low  and  feeble;  fluttering.

Palpitation  with  dyspnoea.

Faintness  and  blindness:  when  rising  from  lying;  from
sudden  motions;  lying  quietly.

Idiopathic  and  rheumatic  peri-  and  endocarditis ;  violent
fever;  full,  hard,  bounding  pulse;  congestion  to  head,
without  delirium;  throbbing  carotids;  constant  burn-
ing pain,  with  oppression  of  chest;  sensation  as  of  a
heavy  load  on  chest;  heart's  action  violent  and  tremu-
lous ;  respiration  rapid,  labored  and  sighing.

■  Pulse  :  suddenly  increases  and  gradually  decreases  below

normal ;  slow,  soft,  weak  ;  irregular,  intermittent.
^'  Neck  and  Back, l  Aching  in  back  of  neck  and  shoulders.

Muscles  of  back  contracted,  drawing  head  backward.

Opisthotonos:  arterial  excitement;  hands  and  feet  cold;
shocks  in  limbs;  congestion  of  brain  and  spine;  loss  of
consciousness.

Heat  and  redness  down  spine;  back  of  head  hot;  spotted
fever.
^' Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  either  great  trochanter  when  lying
on  it.

Much  pain  in  hip  joints  and  about  condyles.

Lancinating  pain  in  r.  hip.

•  Inflammatory  rheumatism  afl'ecting  knees,  ankles  and
hips ;  joints  swollen,  red,  very  painful  and  tender ;  high
fever;  loss  of  appetite;  much  sweat  without  relief;  red
streak  down  centre  of  tongue,  white  at  edge.

I  I  After  wrenching,  knee  tender  and  swollen  ;  severe  pain
preventing  sleep;  excruciating  jumping  of  limb,  con-
trolled by  a  splint. ^Synovitis.

Right  ankle  feels  as  if  dislocated,  can  scarcely  walk  ;  later
left.

voii.  X.— 28.


VERATRUM  VIRIDE.  434

^*  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatism,  especially  in  1.  shoulder,
hip  and  knee ;  high  fever ;  scanty,  red  urine.
I  I  Acute  rheumatism;  knees,  ankles,  wrists  and  fingers
much  swollen  and  very  painful;  some  general  fever;
tongue  exhibited  central  red  stripe  with  coated  edges.

■  Flying  pains;  pains  in  joints;  shuddering.  ^Rheumatism.
Galvanic  shocks  in  limbs  of  great  violence.

Cramps  of  legs,  fingers  and  toes.
Pains,  especially  about  condyles.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Lying:  headache  <;  doubled

up,  cholera  morbus ;  cannot,  difficult  breathing;  quietly,

faintness  and  blindness  >  ;  on  back  with  thighs  flexed

on  pelvis.
Rising:  faintness  and  blindness.
Sudden  motion  :  faintness  and  blindness.
^^  Nerves. Faintness  after  rising  from  recumbent  position.
Trembling  as  if  child  were  frightened  and  on  verge  of  a

spasm.
I  I  Convulsive  motions  of  facial  muscles. ^Chorea.

■  Chorea;  twitchings  and  contortions  of  body,  unaffected

by  sleep,  froth  about  lips;  champing  of  teeth  ;  difficult
swallowing;  head  jerking  or  continually  nodding;  sex-
ual excitement.
Violent  spasms  like  galvanic  shocks.

■  Convulsions: of  all  limbs;  trembling  of  whole  body;

coming  on  suddenly,  frothing  at  mouth  and  violent  jac-
titations of  all  voluntary  muscles;  twitching  and  con-
tortions of  body,  cramps  in  legs  and  fingers,  ankles  feel
as  if  dislocated ;  hysterical ;  after  scarlet  fever,  great
dilatation  of  pupils,  inability  to  sleep ;  during  dentition ;
puerperal,  with  mania,  which  keeps  on  after  cessation
of  spasms;  face  flushed,  pulse  wiry,  thirst;  epileptiform;
with  opisthotonus,  aneemia  from  diarrhoea ;  trismus.

1  I  Epileptiform  convulsions,  with  high  fever,  pulse  190,
rapid  respirations,  76  in  a  minute,  and  much  cerebro-
spinal irritation.

I  I  Chorea  in  a  woman,  childless  and  subject  to  menorrha-
gia;  continual  nodding  of  head,  and  violent  convulsive
action  of  one  arm  and  jactitation  of  one  leg.

I  I  Chorea  of  two  months'  duration,  entire  muscular  system
in  a  continuous  and  tumultuous  motion,  face  worked
into  most  horrible  and  ludicrous  contortions;  head  con-
stantly jerking;  writhing  of  whole  body,  no  sleep.

I  I  Chorea  in  a  lady,  set.  3(J,  constant  moving  of  head^  lower
jaw,  larynx  and  tongue,  twitching  of  head,  jerking  of
arras  and  lower  extremities,  when  these  symptoms  sub-
side she  is  attacked  by  violent  palpitation  of  heart.

II Chorea  for  a  month; movements  continue  in  sleep;


435 •  VERATRUM  VIRIDE.

throws  about  arms  and  legs  while  asleep;  is  unable
to  hold  a  spoon ;  speech  affected,  drops  his  words
when  speaking;  complains  of  pain  in  hands  if  he  keeps
them  still  for  a  few  moments  ;  constantly  "  on  move ''  as
to  his  legs  and  arms;  since  choreic  movements  showed
themselves  has  been  continually  eating;  pain  extending
up  arms  and  shoulders  to  head,  and  a  like  pain  in  legs.

I  I A  girl,  set.  13,  began  having  choreic  symptoms  during
her  eleventh  year;  at  times  quite  well  then  for  several
days  making  faces;  bobbing  head;  face  livid  and  cov-
ered with  cold  perspiration;  pain  in  back  of  head,  desire
to  press  it  against  pillow;  pulse  slow  but  heavy;  on
attempting  to  rise  makes  a  series  of  springs,  apparently
from  impossibility  of  raising  one  foot  from  ground  with-
out lifting  both.

I  I A  boy,  set.  13 ;  St.  Vitus'  dance  for  four  years ;  began
throwing  arms  and  legs  about  before  being  put  to  bed,
when  spoken  to  harshly ;  frightened  by  a  chimney
sweep  previous  day;  fractious,  obstinate  boy ;  becomes
much  <  when  he  cannot  have  his  own  way.

Paralysis  ;  tingling  in  limbs  ;  cerebral  hypersemia.
^^  Sleep. Sleeplessness.

Coma;  blue  face;  spasms.

Restless  sleep;  dreams  of  drowning;  of  being  on  water.
^^  Time. All  day  :  dry  mouth  and  lips.

From  1  to  10  p.m.:  purging  and  vomiting.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Going  from  warm  to  cold :
cough  <.

After  exposure:  chills  and  headache.
*°  Fever. Coldness  of  whole  body,  cold  sweat  on  hands,  face
and  feet.

Chilliness  with  nausea.

Coldness  with  pale  skin,  flabby  muscles;  quick  but  weak
pulse.

■  Profuse,  cold,  clammy  perspiration.

■  Irritative  fever,  with  cerebral  congestions,  causing' con-

vulsions; particularly  in  children.

■  Fevers  during  dentition,  with  irritation  of  brain,  spasms

or  tendency  to  them.

■Scarlatina,  during  first  or  febrile  stage,  when  arterial  ex-
citement is  intense,  and  there  is  cerebral  congestion.

I  I A  girl,  set.  13,  had  been  suffering  with  continued  fever
for  ten  days ;  violent  pain  in  back ;  inclination  to  sleep
most  of  day ;  very  sick  at  stomach ;  black  diarrhoea  ;
pulse  varying  from  98  to  110  during  day;  pain  and
weakness  in  lower  limbs. ^Typhoid.

I  I A  man,  set.  18;  sick  two  weeks;  high  fever;  pulse  120;
face  very  flushed ; fulness  with  slight  pain  and  great


VERATRUM  VIRIDE.  '  436

buzzing  ill  head  ;  gnats  and  bugs  flying  before  eyes ;
inclined  to  jump  out  of  bed  ;  talking  at  random;  slight
bearing-down  pain  in  bowels,  attended  with  black  diar-
rhoea; great  weakness  in  lower  extremities,  general
prostration.

I  i  A  girl,  £et.  20;  violent  inflammation  of  bowels  for  three
days;  pulse  110.

I  I A  girl,  set.  14;  high  fever;  face  flushed,  white  spots  as
large  as  a  quarter  here  and  there.

■  Ephemeral  fevers  with vertigo, headache, dimness of

sight,  nausea  and  weakness.

■  Remittent  and  bilious  fevers  not  dependent  on  miasmatic

influences.

I  Congestive  fevers  of  malarial  districts.

I  I A  girl,  set.  9,  unconscious  for  four  or  five  hours;  com-
plete anaesthesia;  heart  laboring  tumultuously  ;  pulse
weak  at  wrist,  150  per  minute;  breathing  panting  and
irregular ;  extremities  cold  and  clammy  ;  back  and  neck
very  hot;  complexion  ashy  pale,  with  purplish  lips;
now  and  then  a  spasmodic  twitching  of  arms  and  hands.

iCerebro-spinal  fever  in  first  stage.

■  Typhoid  fever:  pulse  is  full,  hard,  frequent;  pain  violent

in  back  of  head  ;  delirium  ;  black  stools;  constant  talk-
ing and  muttering  unintelligibl}'',  with  open  eyes;
squinting;  ocular  conjunctiva  injected;  secretion  of
yellow  mucus  at  inner  canthus;  nightly  agglutination;
face  pale  with  cold  sweat ;  boring  occiput  into  pillow,
jerking  head  backward,  sometimes  forward  ;  pupils  di-
lated; dropping  of  lower  jaw;  corner  of  mouth  drawn
down  on  1.  side;  champing  teeth  ;  tongue  coated  white;
red  streak  down  centre;  beating  of  heart  when  turning
over  in  bed,  shaking  1.  side  of  thorax;  pulse  irregular;
urine  dark  and  turbid,  fetid,  involuntary  ;  great  rest-
lessness; constant  moving,  thrusting  out  one  leg,  then
drawing  it  up ;  position  on  back,  with  thighs  flexed  on
pelvis;  picking  at  bedclothes;  subsultus  tendinum,  like
galvanic  shocks;  twitching  of  facial  muscles.

■  Yellow  fever; intense  fever  with  occipital  pains,  and
•  vascular  and  nervous  erethism,  threatening  convulsions;

development  of  local  inflammations; prsecordial  dis-
tress; vomiting  with cold sweat on  face;  great  and
sudden  changes  in  pulse.
"Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  five  minutes:  pains  culmi-
nate in  vomiting.
For  hours:  empty  retching.
For  a  month  :  chorea.
For  four  years:  St.  Vitus'  dance.
*'^  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  vision  hazy ;  dull  pain  in


437  VERATRUM  VIRIDE.

eye;  heavy  pain  in  head  ;  rheumatism  in  shoulder,  hip
and  knee;  corner  of  mouth  drawn  down.
Right:  neuralgic  pain  in  temple;  head  and  face  swol-
len, with  blisters;  loss  of  vision;  inflammation  and
swelling  of  upper  lid ;  neuralgic  pains  from  umbilicus
to  groin;  pain  in  chest;  lancinating  in  hip.

Right  then  1.:  itching  in  ala  nasi;  ankles  feel  as  if  dis-
located.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  head  would  burst ;  as  if  boiling  water
were  being  poured  over  parts;  as  of  a  ball  rising  into
oesophagus  ;  as  if  stomach  were  tightly  drawn  against
spine;  confused  feeling  in  head  ;  tongue  as  if  scalded  ;
as  of  a  Joad  on  chest ;  as  if  ankles  were  dislocated ;  as  of
galvanic  shocks  in  limbs.

Pain:  in  orbital  region;  in  calves  and  feet;  in  lower  por-
tion of  bowels;  all  over  body  from  uterus;  into  head
from  neck;  in  r.  side;  in  joints;  about  condyles;  in  back
of  head;  in  lower  limbs.

Intense  pain:  in  head,  with  dysmenorrhoea.

Sharp  pain:  in  uterus  and  ovaries.

Sharp  flying  pains:  in  epigastrium  and  umbilical  region
to  pubis.

Excruciating  pain :  in  lower  part  of  stomacli.

Violent  pains :  in  small  of  back  and  through  pelvis;  in
back.

Lancinating:  in  r.  hip.

Cutting:  in  umbilical  region;  in  bowels.

Stabbing:  in  dorsal  region,  sometimes  to  umbilicus.

Stitches:  pleuritic  in  r.  side.

Pricking:  in  skin.

Prickling:  in  cardiac  region.

Tearing:  in  stomach.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  r.  temple;  in  stomach;  r.  side  of  umbil-
icus to  groin;  in  rectum.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  joints.

Twisting  pain :  in  stomach.

Drawing:  in  stomach.

Pressure:  in  head.

Heavy  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Bearing  down :  in  bowels.

Constrictive  pain:  in  head.

Cramp:  in  stomach;  in  calves  and  feet;  of  legs,  fingers
and  toes.

Dull  pain:  in  1.  eye.

Soreness :_  across  abdomen;  as  of  a  boil  in  uterine  region.

Aching:  in  umbilical  region;  heavy  pressive,  in  uterine
region;  dull,  in  cardiac  region;  in  back  of  neck  and
shoulders.


VERATRUM  VJRIDE.  438

Burning:  in  liead;  in  fauces  and  oesophagus;  in  stomach;
dull,  in  region  of  heart;  in  chest;  in  skin.

Fulness:  in  head;  in  arteries.

Distension :  of  head.

Faint  feeling:  in  stomach.

Numbness:  in  calves  and  feet.

Tingling:  in  limbs;  in  skin.

Heat:  in  eyes;  in  head  and  face;  down  spine.

Dryness:  in  mouth.

Itching:  in  calves  and  feet;  in  ala  nasi;  in  skin.
^'Tissues. 81  Congestions,  especiall}^  to  base  of  brain,  chest,
spine  and  stomach.

Dropsy:  with  fever  ;  after  scarlatina.

Violent  pains  attending  inflammations.

Acute  rheumatism  with  high  fever,  full,  hard,  rapid  pulse,
pains  in  joints  and  muscles ;  scanty  red  urine.

Inflanimatory  rheumatism  with  gastric  complications;
tongue  coated  on  sides  with  a  red  streak  through  cen-
tre; creeping  chilliness;  aching  in  all  bones,  followed
by  headache  and  fever;  afiects  especially  1.  shoulder,
hip  and  knee.

Endo-  and  pericarditis ;  cardiac  oppression  with  passive
congestion.
^^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Rubbing: >  pain
and  itching.

I  Sunstroke.

Pressure:  >  pain  in  head.
*^  Skin. Itching  of  different  parts  from  rubbing.

Tingling  and  pricking  in  skin.

Itching  and  burning  of  skin  ;  high  fever.

Skin  cold,  clammy,  bluish,  insensible,  shrivelled.

Eruptions,  with  intense  fever.

Erythema  and  vesication  of  skin.

Phlegmonous  and  vesicular  erysipelas.

iSkin  cold  and  moist,  or  hot  and  burning.

■  Scarlatina: with intense arterial excitement; during

febrile  stage  cerebral  congestion  or  irritation  of  spinal
centres ;  convulsions,  with  greatly  dilated  pupils,  per-
fect sleeplessness;  sequelae,  as  rheumatism, dropsy;  when
inflammator}'  symptoms  are  present.

■  Measles  during  febrile  stage,  especially  if  pulmonary  con-

gestion is  impending;  convulsions  before  eruption.
■Smallpox  before  erui)tion  ;  cerebral  congestion  and  ex-
cessive nausea,  vomiting  and  great  prostration.

■  In  erysipelas,  if  cerebral  symptoms  should  set  in  from

metastasis  of  inflammation  to  brain,  with  hard,  very
full  pulse.
*^  Stages of  Life, Constitution. Full-blooded, plethoric
persons.


439  VERATRUM  VIRIDE.

Boy,  set.  5  ;  rheumatism.

Girl,  set.  6;  erysipelas.

Boy  set.  7,  delicate  constitution,  sickly  aspect  and  color,
has  passed  through  several  pulmonic  attacks;  pneu-
monia.

Boy,  set.  10,  scrofulous;  rheumatism.

Boy,  set.  11,  suffering  one  month  ;  chorea.

Boy,  set.  13,  suffering  four  years ;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  13;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  13,  ill  ten  days;  continued  fever.

Girl,  set.  14;  fever.

Mr.  H.,  set.  18,  ill  two  weeks ;  typhoid  fever.

Miss  C,  set.  20;  inflammatory  fever.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  26,  primipara ;  puerperal  convulsions.

Lady,  set.  30;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  35;  rheumatism.

Widow,  set.  36,  has  two  children,  since  death  of  husband
nervous  and  excitable,  rather  insane  for  years;  after  an
attack  of  erysipelas  ;  insanit3^

Mrs.  B.,  set.  55 ;  bilious  pneumonia.

Young  lady,  strong  and  plethoric,  after  sweeping  a  cold,
damp  floor  in  her  slippers;  amenorrhoea.  '

Mrs.  G.,  delicate,  after  being  caught  in  shower;  amenor-
rhoea.

Lady,  middle-aged,  sick  five  days ;  erysipelas  of  face.

Lady,  middle-aged,  fleshy ;  erysipelas  of  scalp.
*®  Relations. Verat.  vir.  cured  spasms  from  Strychnine.


VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.  440


VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.

Mullein.  Scrophulariacese.

A  native  of  Europe,  naturalized  in  North  America.  Inhabits  fields  and  waste
places;  the  tall  stems  and  leaves  are  woolly,  flowers  yellow  on  a  cylindrical  ppike.
The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant,  chop[  ed  and  pounded  to
a  pulp.

Proved  Ly  Hahnemann,  Gross,  Hartmann,  Langhammer,  Mossdorf,  R.  A.  M
L.,  vol.  5.

Clinical  Authorities.— ifijrrame,  Miiller,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  19;  Deafness,
Gushing,  A.  H.  O.,  1876,  p.  563;  Prosopalgia,  Battmann,  Gersung,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  196;  Berridge,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  495;  Y.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
436;  Facial  neurahjia,  Gersung,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  299;  Nocturnal  enuresis  (2
cafres).  Gushing,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  548  ;  Cough,  Kurtz,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  697 ;  Hirsch,  K  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  337.

*  Mind. Diminished  memory  ;  it  was  with  great  difficulty  he
could  recall  thoughts  he  had  just  had.

Excited  phantasies,  especially  of  a  sensual  nature.

Excessive  joy  with  laughter.

Very  fretful  and  morose  without  cause ;  desire  and  incli-
nation for  work  ;  he  finds  satisfaction  in  having  people
about  him,  and  in  talking  with  them.

Anxious  mood  all  day ;  more  lively  toward  evening.

Depressed  all  day,  all  his  efforts  and  hopes  seem  un-
availing.

Indifferent  to  things  to  which  he  is  usually  attentive.

Disinclination  for  work.

Distraction  of  mind ;  different  trains  of  thought  and  phan-
tasies throng  upon  him.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo :  on  pressing  1.  cheek,  while  supporting
head  ;  sudden  as  from  pressure  on  whole  head.

Dulness  of  head.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  painful  heaviness  of  head.

Violent  pressure  in  whole  forehead.

Pressing  stupefying  headache,  especially  affecting  both
sides  of  forehead,  in  every  position.

Incessant  pressure  from  within  outward,  in  forehead,  espe-
cially between  eyebrows ; >  on  stooping.

Head  dull  and  confused,  as  if  everything  would  press  out
at  forehead.

Slow  hammering  in  1.  frontal  eminence.

Sticking  in  1.  frontal  sinus.


441  VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.

Intermittent,  fine  needlelike  stitches  in  1.  side  of  forehead.

Violent,  slowly  appearing  and  disappearing  stitch  extend-
ing from  within  outward  in  1.  frontal  eminence.

Benumbing  drawing  in  1.  frontal  eminence  in  a  draft  of
air.

Violent  benumbing,  pressing  inward  in  1.  side  of  frontal
bone.

Intermittent  pressure  and  beating  near  1.  frontal  eminence.

Deep,  sharp,  intermittent  stitches  between  1.  frontal  emi-
nence and  parietal  eminence.

Violent  intermittent  deep  sticking  behind  1.  parietal  emi-
nence.

Violent  stupefying  pressure  deep  in  r.  frontal  eminence  on
going  from  cold  into  warmth.

Pressing  headache  on  crown.

Tension  in  1.  side  of  vertex,  which  gradually  becomes  a
sharp  pressure,  at  same  time  1.  ramus  of  lower  jaw
seems  pressed  against  upper  jaw.

Burning  and  prickling  in  1.  temple.

Pressure  from  behind  forward  in  1.  temple.

I  I  Dull  pressure  in  articular  eminence  of  temporal  bone,
just  in  front  of  1.  ear.

Sharp,  benumbing,  knifelike  stitches  just  above  r.  temple.

A  pressing  pain  in  r.  temple.

I  I  Benumbing,  sticking  piercing,  deeply  in  r.  temple  while
eating,  <  by  external  pressure;  after  a  few  hours  is  ex-
tended into  upper  teeth  of  same  side  like  a  tearing.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  both  articular  eminences  of  temporal
bones  were  violently  pinched  and  crushed  together  with
pincers.

Sticking  jerking,  externally,  first  in  1.  temple,  then  in  r.

Jerking  pressure  in  1.  half  of  brain.

A^iolent  pressing,  but  very  transient  pain,  extending  from
within  outward  in  whole  r.  half  of  brain,  which  gradu-
ally diminishes.

Tearing  pressure  in  r.  half  of  brain.

Benumbing  pressure  in  whole  1.  side  of  head  and  face.

I  I  Pressing,  long-drawn  stitch  from  behind  forward,  through
1.  hemisphere  of  brain.

Stitch  in  1.  side  of  occiput.

Pressing  pain  in  occiput.

Violent  pressure  in  r.  occipital  protuberance.

Tingling  in  head  while  walking.

I  I  Migraine  of  twenty  years'  standing;  peculiar  sympa-
thetic affection  of  ear  on  affected  side ;  at  height  of
headache,  which  mainly  consisted  in  pressure  and  pinch-
ing in  temple  and  z3'goma,  there  commenced  an  intoler-
able drawing  in  ear,  with  a  sensation  as  if  something
stopped  it  up,  <  moving  jaw  and  masticating.


VERBASCUM  THAPSUlS.  442

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Pupils  dilated.

A  short-sighted  person  became  still  more  short-sighted;
could  scarcely  recognize  objects  a  yard  away,  on  account
of  watery  dimness  of  vision  ;  objects  seemed  indistinct
and  enlarged,  daylight  less  bright.

Pressing  pain  above  1.  orbit.

Heat  in  eyes  and  sensation  of  contraction  of  orbits.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Difficult  hearing,  as  if  ears  closed,  as
if  something  had  fallen  before  ear,

I  I  Numbness  in  1.  ear.

A  tearing  stitch  in  1.  ear,  while  eating.

I  I  Painful  tearing  and  drawing  in  1.  ear,  extending  inward.

Tearing  stitches  in  front  of  1.  ear,  extending  downward.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  1.  ear  would  be  drawn  inward.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  something  stopped  ears;  first  1.  then  r.

Violent  tearing  within  r.  ear.

Sudden  pressure,  with  a  violent  stitch  behind  r.  ear,  dis-
appears gradually.

Sensation  as  if  ear  (nose  and  larynx)  were  stopped  up
when  reading  aloud.

Deafness  caused  by  water  filling  ears  (oil  of  Verbascum
thapsus).
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Sensation  of  stoppage  in  nose,  larynx
and  ears  which  does  not  affect  hearing,  while  reading
aloud.

■  Painful  coryza  from  frontal  sinuses,  with  hot,  burning,

profuse  lachr3'-mation,
^  Upper  Face. Violent  pressure  on  r.  malar  bone.
Intermittent,  frightful  sticking  in  1.  malar  bone.

■  Sensation  as  if  one  were  violently  pressing  upon  1.  malar

bone  as  far  as  ear,  <  by  pressure  with  hand,  frequently
during  day,  in  evening  before  going  to  bed,  and  in
morning  on  waking.

I  I  Tension  in  1.  malar  bone,  in  articular  elevation  of  tem-
poral bone,  and  in  frontal  eminence,  on  going  into  open
air,  and  in  a  draft  of  air.

I  I  Benumbing,  intermittent  pressure  in  upper  margin  of
1.  malar  bone.

I  I  Dull,  pressing-sticking  sensation  in  1.  zygoma.

1  I  Whole  cheek  becomes  involved  in  a  dull  pressure  in  1.
articulation  of  jaw,  and  on  pressure  becomes  a  benumb-
ing tension.

■  Facial  neuralgia,  like  a  crushing  with  tongs,  often  occurs

twice  a  day.
I  I  For  two  years  almost  constant  pain  in  face;  lightning-
like pain  shoots  over  r.  side  of  face  on  talking,  sneezing,
biting  hard,  or  touching  teeth  with  tongue;  attacks  <
in  morning,  lasting  from  ten  minutes  to  an  hour;  tear-


443  VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.

ing,  twitching,  stitching,  frequently  intolerable  pain
from  r.  temple  to  angle  of  mouth  ;  during  attacks  face
red,  head  hot,  belching  of  wind,  expectoration  of  tena-
cious saliva,  severe  vertigo,  pressing,  tearing  pains  in  1.
side  of  head.

1  I  Prosopalgia,  1.  side,  <  at  exit  of  supraorbital  nerve,
tearing  cutting  pains  from  thence  to  forehead,  zygoma
and  cheek,  and  during  height  of  paroxysm  affecting
also  r.  side;  painful  spots  very  sensitive  to  touch,  not
entirely  lost  during  free  periods;  attacks  appear  about
9  A.M.,  attain  their  height  about  noon,  then  gradually
diminish  in  intensity  until  4  p.m.,  and  disappear;  dur-
ing attack  eyes  dim,  dull,  look  smaller  than  usual,  par-
ticularly 1.  eye,  which  is  swollen,  face  red,  sees  as  if
through  a  fog;  despondency  ;  pain  <  from  least  motion.

I  I  For  two  days  dull  hot  pains  in  r.  face,  and  shooting
from  r.  face  into  r.  eye ;  r.  face  swollen  and  watery
swelling  below  r.  eye;  r.  eye  waters,  and  partly  closed
from  swelling  under  it;  tensive  pain  in  vertex,  >  on
sitting  up;  face  pain  <  from  a  draft  of  air;  cause,  expo-
sure to  cold  air  after  perspiring.

I  I  Facial  neuralgia;  seemed  mad  with  agony,  howling,
inarticulate  sounds.

I  I  Left-sided  prosopalgia  seated  in  supraorbital  nerve.
^  Lower  Face. '  '  Violent  tension  in  integuments  of  chin,
masseter  muscles  and  throat.

I  I  Pressing  pinching  pain  on  side  of  lower  jaw.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Tearing  in  large  molars  of  r.  lower  jaw.

Intermittent  tearing  in  small  molars  of  1.  lower  jaw.
*'  Taste  and  Tongue. Root  of  tongue  brown,  with  a  flat,
nauseous  taste  in  forenoon.

Tongue  brownish-yellow,  coated  with  tenacious  mucus,
without  a  bad  taste.

Flat  taste  for  some  time  after  dinner.

Flat  taste  with  an  offensive  odor  to  breath,  with  brownish-
yellow  coated  tongue  in  morning.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Salt  water  collects  in  mouth.
*^ Throat. '  iVery  severe  pain  in  throat  on  swallowing;  had

it  many  years.
"Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Hunger  without
appetite  throughout  day; nothing  is  relished,  yet  he
wishes  to  eat.

Unquenchable  thirst.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

Eructations:  bitter,  qualmish  ;  tasteless;  empty.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  stomach.

Sensation  of  great  emptiness  in  pit  of  stomach,  which  dis-
appears with  a  rumbling  below  1.  ribs.


VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.  444

*^  Hypochondria. Incessant  rumbling  and  gurgling  in  region

beneath  1.  ribs.
A  deep,  sharp  stitch  in  1.  side  where  ribs  cease.
Sticking  pinching  in  r.  hypochondrium.
'^  Abdomen. Sharp  intermittent  stitches  in  1.  side  above  navel.
Intermittent  dall  sticking  in  1.  side  beneath  navel,  <  on

bending  body  forward  after  eating.
Abdomen  tympanitic,  followed  by  frequent  rumbling  in

region  beneath  1.  ribs,  which  caused  violent  eructations.
Acute,  deep,  knifelike  stitches  in  r.  side  of  lower  abdomen,

above  pubis.
Intermittent  dull  needle  stitches  in  r.  side,  by  navel.
Tearing  sticking  in  abdomen  extending  downward.
. Pain  in  abdomen  extending  low  down,  causing  spasmodic

contraction  of  sphincter  ani  and  a  transient  desire  for

stool.
I  I  Hard,  painful  pressure  as  from  a  stone  upon  umbilicus,

<  by  stooping.

Stitches  as  from  many  needles  in  umbilical  region  round
to  back  and  even  in  dorsal  vertebrae,  on  deep  inspira-
tion and  on  stooping.

Sensation  as  if  intestines  at  umbilicus  were  adherent  to
wall  of  abdomen  and  were  being  torn  away  forcibly,

<  by  external  pressure.

Griping  in  abdomen  as  from  incarcerated  flatus,  in  every
position.

Cutting  griping  in  whole  abdomen,  with  frequent  eructa-
tions.

Cutting  griping  colic,  here  and  there,  though  always  rising
toward  ribs,  where  it  becomes  seated.

Gurgling  in  lower  abdomen.

Constriction  of  abdomen  at  umbilical  region  at  various
times.

Cramps  around  navel,  seems  as  if  pain  would  give  her  a
twist,  burning  on  making  water,  made  it  often ;  heels
hurt  her  awfully;  great  stiffness  in  1.  ankle  joint.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Fearful  diarrhoea  on  third  day,  eigh-
teen to  twenty  movements  a  day  ;  griping;  a  great  deal
of  pain,  as  if  pierced  with  a  lance,  through  inside  of  1.
ankle  joint;  pain  in  both  cheek  bones  and  above  eye-
brows; menses  came  on  early  this  time,  and  she  has
coughed  a  good  deal.

Soft  stool,  with  straining.

iStool  like  sheep's  dung,  scanty,  very  hard,  and  expelled
with  great  effort.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  scanty  or
profuse  discharge.

■  Enuresis  nocturna.


445  VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.


^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Emissions  without  lewd  dreams.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness

from  reading  aloud  ;  deep  voice.
^ Cough. Dry,  hoarse  cough,  <  at  night;  in  children  dur-
ing sleep.

I  Frequent  attacks  of  a  deep,  hollow,  hoarse  congh,  with
sound  like  a  trumpet,  caused  by  tickling  in  larynx  and
chest.

■  Spasmodic,  rough,  deep-sounding  night  cough.

The  cough  is  lessened  as  soon  as  the  patient  succeeds  in
taking  a  deep  breath.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. A  benumbing,  oppressive  stitch,
taking  away  breath,  in  region  of  first  and  second  costal
cartilages.

Sharp  pressure  beneath  1.  nipple.

Violent  stitch  on  inspiration,  several  times,  beneath  1.
nipple,  which  slowly  disappeared,  but  which  always
returned  on  deep  inspiration.

Intermittent,  dull,  needlelike  stitches  near  1.  side  of  ensi-
form  cartilage.

Intermittent,  benumbing,  frightful  cutting  near  1.  side  of
ensiform  cartilage,  below  last  ribs.

Painful  tension  across  chest,  with  stitches  in  region  of
heart,  immediately  after  lying  down  in  bed  in  evening.

Pressing-sticking  pain  in  next  to  last  rib  where  it  passes
into  cartilage,  suddenly  disappearing  on  external  press-
ure, but  immediately  returning.
'^  Neck  and  Back. Sharp  intermittent  stitches  in  1.  scapula.

A  very  fine  persistent  stitch  in  last  dorsal  vertebra,  when
sitting  bent  over.

In  middle,  between  r.  loin  and  spine,  intermittent,  deep,
sharp,  knifelike  stitches,  quite  internal,  in  intestines.

Backache,  <^  from  pressure.
'^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  on  top  of  shoulder,  pressing  rather
than  tearing,  disappearing  on  motion.

Cramplike  pressing  in  1.  elbow,  extending  into  forearm,
in  every  position.

Tearing  extending  downward  in  1.  ulna.

Tensive  pain  in  1.  wrist  during  rest  and  motion.

I  I  Some  dull  stitches  in  joint  where  carpal  bone  of  thumb
articulates  with  radius,  like  a  kind  of  sprain  (or  numb-
ness).

Tearing  sticking  in  palm  of  hand.

Pain  in  back  of  r.  hand,  pressing  rather  than  tearing.

Cramplike  pressure  now  in  r.,  now  in  1.  metacarpus,  on
moving  arm,  disappearing  during  rest.

Sharp  sticking  in  first  phalanx  of  1.  thumb.

Cramplike  pressure  in  first  phalanx  of  r,  thumb,  disap-
pearing on  motion.


VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.  446

Numbness  and  insensibility  of  thumb.
Violent  sticking  as  with  a  dull  knife,  in  thick  flesh  be-
tween metacarpal  bone  of  r.  thumb  and  index  finger.
Violent pricking,  intermittent,  dull  stitches in  middle

joint  of  index  finger.
Violent  dull  intermittent  sticking  in  last  phalanx  of  index

finger;  on  moving  finger  pain  extended  into  first  joint.
Paralytic  drawing  in  whole  of  1.  index  finger.
Violent  tearing  stitch  through  whole  of  1.  little  finger.
Pain  on  outer  side  of  metacarpal  bones  of  little  fingers,  as

from  a  bruise,  only  noticed  on  touch.
Paralytic  pain  in  1.  fingers,  especially  in  their  metacarpal

joints.
*^  Lower  Limbs. Weariness  of  lower  extremities.
Tearing  from  above  downward  in  leg.
Paralytic  pain  in  inner  side  of  r.  thigh,  while  leg  is  drawn

up  in  a  sitting  position;  on  stooping  pain  extended

toward  knee,  painful  like  a  sticking.
While  riding  r.  thigh  over  1.,  weakness  and  sensation  of

weariness  in  bone  of  r.  thigh,  not  noticed  on  walking.
I  I A  cramplike  pain  in  muscles  of  r.  thigh,  while  walking

in  open  air.
Drawing,  pressing  sensation  extending  from  middle  of  r.

thigh  to  knee,  while  sitting.
A  pressing,  cramplike  pain  in  muscles  above  r.  knee,  while

sitting  and  standing.
Dull  stitches  just  above  1.  patella  only  on  stepping.
Knees  tremble  as  if  one  had  received  a  great  fright.
I  I  Sudden  pain  through  r.  knee,  while  standing,  sitting

and  walking.
Cramplike  pressure  in  1.  leg  near  ankle.
I  I A  cramplike  pressure  in  sole  of  r.  foot,  while  standing,

which  disappears  on  walking.
Violent  intermittent  dull  sticking  in  metatarsal  bones  of

great  and  adjacent  toes  of  1.  foot  during  rest.
Gait  tottering,  while  walking  in  open  air,  as  if  limbs  could

not  support  body  on  account  of  weakness.
Very  great  heaviness  in  lower  extremities,  as  if  a  weight

were  hanging  upon  them  on  going  up  and  down  stairs.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Stretching  in  limbs.

Stinging  pains  in  limbs.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  sticking  in  1.  metatarsal

bones.
Lying:  tension  across  chest,  stitches  in  region  of 'heart.
Sitting :  drawing  pressing  from  middle  of  r.  thigh  to  knee;

cramplike  pain  in  muscles  above  r.  knee ;  pain  in  r.

knee.
Sitting  up :  >  pain  in  vertex.


447  •  VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.

Riding  r.  thigh  over  1.:  weakness  and  weariness  in  bone
of  r.  thigh.

Standing :  cramplike  pain  in  muscles  above  r.  knee  ;  in  r.
knee;  cramplike  pressure  in  sole  of  r.  foot.

Motion  :  least,  prosopalgia  <  ;  >  pain  on  top  of  shoulder;
cramplike  pressure  in  metacarpus.

Bending  body  forward  :  stitches  near  navel  <.

Stooping:  >  pressure  in  forehead;  <  pressure  as  from  a
stone  upon  umbilicus;  stitches  in  umbilical  region;
sticking  from  r.  thigh  to  knee.

Stepping:  stitches  above  1.  patella.

Walking:  tingling  in  head;  cramplike  pain  in  muscles
of  thigh ;  pain  in  r.  knee ;  >  cramplike  pressure  in
sole  of  r.  foot ;  in  open  air,  tottering  gait ;  up  and  down
stairs,  heaviness  in  legs.
^^  Sleep.  Frequent  yawning  and  stretching,  as  if  he  had  not
slept  enough.

He  cannot  keep  awake  immediately  after  dinner,  lids  close.

Restless  sleep  at  night,  he  tosses  from  side  to  side.

Sleep  only  till  4  a.m.,  filled  with  dreams  of  war  and  of
corpses,  several  nights.

Indolence  and  sleepiness  in  morning  after  rising.
^''Time. After  4  a.m.:  no  sleep.

Morning:  facial  neuralgia  <;  flat  taste  and  offensive
breath,  with  coated  tongue ;  lassitude  and  sleepiness.

Forenoon:  flat,  nauseous  taste.

All  day : anxious  and  depressed.

Night:  cough  <;  restless  sleep.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Draft  of  air :  causes  drawing
in  frontal  eminence;  pain  in  malar  bone;  faceache  <.

Exposure  to  cold  air  after  perspiring :  faceache.

Going  from  cold  into  warmth :  pressure  in  frontal  emi-
nence.
^^  Fever. Slight  transient  coldness  over  whole  body,  even  per-
ceptible externally  on  hands  and  feet.

External  and  internal  sensation  of  coldness  over  whole
body.

Coldness  and  chill  predominate.

Shivering,  especially  over  one  side  of  body  from  shoulder
to  thigh,  as  if  cold  water  were  poured  over  it.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Attacks :  appear  9  a.m.,  attain  their
height  about noon,  gradually  diminish  until  4  p.m.;
prosopalgia.

Intermittent:  benumbing  pressure  in  malar  bone;  tear-
ing in  molars;  stitches  near  navel;  stitches  near  ensi-
form  cartilage ;  stitches  in  back  ;  stitches  in  index  fin-
gers ;  stitches  in  1.  metatarsal  bones.

From  ten  minutes  to  an  hour :  attacks  of  facial  neuralgia.


VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.  448

Twice  a  day  :  facial  neuralgia.

For  two  days :  faceache.

For  two  or  three  days :  pimple  on  neck  near  thyroid  car-
tilage.

For  two  years:  facial  neuralgia.
^"Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  hammering  in  frontal  emi-
nence ;  sticking  in  frontal  sinus ;  needlelike  stitches  in
forehead;  benumbing  drawing  in  frontal  eminence;
benumbing  pressure  in  side  of  frontal  bone;  pressure  and
beating  near  frontal  eminence ;  stitches  between  frontal
and  parietal  eminence ;  sticking  behind  parietal  emi-
nence ;  tension  in  vertex ;  ramus  of  lower  jaw  seems
pushed  upward;  burning  and  prickling  in  temple;
pressure  from  behind  forward  in  temple;  pressure
in  front  of  ear;  jerking  pressure  in  brain;  benumb-
ing pressure  in  side  of  head  and  face ;  stitch  from
behind  forward  through  brain;  stitch  in  occiput;  press-
ing above  orbit;  numbness  in  ear;  tearing  stitch  in  ear;
tearing  and  drawing  in  ear;  stitches  in  front  of  ear
downward;  sticking  in  malar  bone;  tension  in  malar
bone;  pressing  sticking  in  zygoma;  dull  pressure  in
articulation  of  jaw;  pressing  tearing  in  head;  proso-
palgia; eye  swollen,  prosopalgia ;  tearing  in  lower  mo-
lars; rumbling  below  ribs;  sharp  stitch  under  ribs;
stitches  above  navel ;  stitch  beneath  navel;  stiffness  in
ankle  joint;  pressure  below  nipple;  stitch  below  nip-
ple ;  stitches  and  cutting  near  ensiform  cartilage ;
stitches  in  scapula ;  pain  in  elbow ;  tearing  down  ulna ;
tensive  pain  in  wrist;  sticking  in  thumb;  paralytic
drawing  in  index  finger;  stitch  through  little  finger ;
paralytic  pain  in  fingers ;  stitches  above  patella ;  stick-
ing in  metatarsal  bones ;  itching,  crawling,  tickling  on
side  of  middle  finger.

Right:  pressure  in  frontal  eminence;  stitches  above  tem-
ple; pressing  in  temple;  sticking  piercing  in  temple;
pressing  outward  in  brain  ;  tearing  pressure  in  brain ;
pressure  in  occipital  protuberance;  tearing  in  ear;
pressure  and  stitch  behind  ear;  pressure  on  malar  bone;
lightning-like  pain  in  face ;  shooting  from  face  into  eye  ;
face  swollen  ;  eye  waters ;  pressing  pinching  in  lower
jaw;  tearing  in  lower  molars;  sticking  pinching  in
hypochondrium  ;  knifelike  stitches  in  lower  abdomen  ;
stitches  near  navel ;  stitches  between  loin  and  spine ;
pain  in  back  of  hand;  cramplike  pressure  in  thumb;
sticking  between  thumb  and  index  finger;  paralytic
pain  in  thigh  ;  cramplike  pain  in  muscles  of  thigh  ;
sudden  pain  through  knee;  cramplike  pressure  in  sole
of  foot;  pimple  in  front  of  ear.


449  VERB ASCUM  THAPSUS.

Left  then  r.:  sticking  jerking  in  temples  ;  as  if  something
stopped  ears;  prosopalgia.
*^  Sensations. As  if  everything  would  press  out  at  forehead  ;
as  if  1.  ramus  of  lower  jaw  were  pressed  against  upper
jaw ;  as  if  temples  were  pinched  and  crushed  ;  as  if  ears
were  stopped  up ; as  if  nose  and  larynx  were  stopped
up  ; as  if  something  had  fallen before  ear ;  as  if  one
were  violently  pressing  on  1.  malar  bone;  as  of  a  crush-
ing with  tongs; facial  neuralgia; pressure,  as  from  a
stone  upon  umbilicus; as  from  needles  in  umbilical
region  to  back ; as  if  intestines  were  adherent  to  wall
of  abdomen,  and  were  being  torn  away; as  of  a  twist
around  navel ; as  if  a  weight  were  hanging  on  lower
extremities; as  if  cold  water  were  poured  over  side  of
body  from  shoulder  to  thigh.
Sudden  pain :  through  r.  knee.
Lightning-like  pain  :  over  r.  side  of  face.
Severe  pain  :  in  throat,  on  swallowing.
Jerking:  in  temples;  in  1.  half  of  brain.
Lancinating:  in  1.  ankle  joint.
Cutting: in  1.  side  of  face; in  abdomen  ; near  1,  side  of

ensiform  cartilage.
Stitches  : in  1.  side  of  forehead  ; sharp,  deep,  between  1.
frontal  eminence  and  parietal  eminence;  above  r.  temple;
from  behind  forward  in  1.  half  of  brain ; in  1.  side  of
occiput;  in  1.  ear;  in  front  of  1.  ear;  behind  r.  ear;  in
r.  side  of  face; in  1.  hypochondrium  ; in  1.  side,  above
navel ; in  r.  side  of  lower  abdomen  ; in  umbilical  re-
gion ; in  region  of  first  and  second  costal  cartilages;
beneath  1.  nipple;  near  ].  side  of  ensiform  cartilage;  in
region  of  heart; in  1.  scapula; in  last  dorsal  vertebra;
between  r.  loin  and  spine; in  wrist; dull,  in  middle
joint  of  index  finger  and  last  phalanx;  through  little
finger ;  above  1.  patella.
Sticking:  in  1.  frontal  sinus;  behind  1.  parietal  eminence;
in  r.  temple  and  upper  teeth  ; in  temples ; in  1.  malar
bone; in  1.  zygoma; in  r.  hypochondrium ; in  1.  side
beneath  navel ;  in  abdomen ;  in  next  to  last  rib,  where
it  passes  into  cartilage ;  in  palm  of  hand ;  in  first  pha-
lanx of  1.  thumb; in  r.  thumb  and  index  finger; in
metatarsal  bones  of  great  and  adjacent  toes  of  1.  foot.
Pricking:  in  middle  joint  of  index  finger.
Stinging  :  in  limbs;  in  pimple  in  front  of  r.  ear.
Burning:  in  1.  temple;  on  urinating.
Hammering:  in  1.  frontal  eminence.

Tearing :  in  r.  temple  and  upper  teeth  ;  in  r.  half  of  brain ;
in  1.  ear ;  in  front  of  1.  ear ;  in  r.  ear ;  r.  side  of  face ;  in
1.  side  of  face;  in  1.  side  of  head; in  molars;  in  abdo-
VOL.  X. — 29.


VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.  450

men;  on  top  of  r.  shoulder;  in  1.  ulna;  in  palm  of  hand  ;
in  back  of  r.  hand  ;  in  1.  little  finger,  in  leg.

Drawing :  benumbing,  in  1.  frontal  eminence ;  in  ear ;  in  1.
ear ;  in  1.  index  finger ;  from  middle  of  r.  thigh  to  knee.

Bruised  pain  :  in  outer  side  of  metacarpal  bones  of  little
fingers.

Pressure  :  in  forehead  ;  benumbing,  in  I.  side  of  frontal
bone;  stupefying,  in  r.  frontal  eminence;  on  vertex;  on
1.  side  of  vertex;  in  1.  temple;  in  articular  eminence  of
temporal  bone;  in  front  of  1.  ear ;  in  r.  temple;  in  1.
half  of  brain  ;  in  r.  half  of  brain  ;  in  1.  side  of  head  and
face;  in  occiput;  aboVe  1.  orbit;  behind  r.  ear;  on  r.
malar  bone;  in  upper  margin  of  1.  malar  bone;  in  1.
z3^goma ;  in  1.  side  of  head ;  in  r.  side  of  lower  jaw  ;  in
stomach;  beneath  1.  nipple;  in  next  to  last  rib,  where
it  passes  into  cartilage ;  on  top  of  r.  shoulder ;  cramplike,
from  1.  elbow  into  forearm  ;  in  back  of  r.  hand  ;  in  meta-
carpus; in  first  phalanx  of  r.  thumb;  from  middle  of  r.
thigh  to  knee.

Pinching :  in  r.  side  of  lower  jaw ;  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Contraction  :  of  orbits  ;  at  umbilical  region.

Cramps:  around  navel.

Cramplike  pain :  in  muscles  of  r.  thigh  ;  in  muscles  above
r.  knee ;  in  1.  leg  near  ankle ;  in  sole  of  r.  foot.

Tension  :  in  1.  side  of  vertex  ;  in  1.  malar  bone;  in  articu-
lar elevation  of  temporal  bone;  in  frontal  eminence;  in
vertex;  in  integuments  of  chin,  masseter  muscles  and
throat ;  across  chest ;  in  1  wrist.

Paralytic  pain  :  in  1.  fingers ;  in  inner  side  of  r.  thigh.

Tickling:  in  larynx  and  chest;  on  side  of  1.  middle  finger.

Tingling:  in  head.

Weariness :  in  bone  of  r.  thigh.

Heaviness:  of  head,  painful.

Emptiness:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Dull  hot  pain  :  in  r.  face.

Heat :  in  eyes.

Numbness:  in  1.  ear;  of  thumb.

Benumbing:  in  head  ;  in  face;  in  region  of  first  and  sec-
ond costal  cartilages.

Crawling:  on  side  of  1.  middle  finger.

Itching:  on  forearm  ;  on  side  of  1.  middle  finger.
*°  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touching  teeth :
iieuralgia  of  face  <.

Touch  :  painful  spots  on  face  <  neuralgia;  stinging  pain
in  pimple  in  front  of  r.  ear.

Pressure:  <  pain  in  r.  temple;  <  pressing  pain  in  1.  ma-
lar bone ;  <  sensation  as  if  intestines  were  adherent  to


451  VERBASCUM  THAPSUS— VESPA.

wall  of  abdomen  ;  >  pressing  sticking  in  next  to  last
rib ;  <  backache.
*^Skin. Pimple  on  cheek  in  front  of  r.  ear,  with  stinging  pain
when  touched.

A  large  red  pimple  on  neck  near  thyroid  cartilage,  pain-
ful pressure  lasting  two  or  three  days.

Itching  on  forearm.

Itching  crawling  tickling  on  side  of  1.  middle  finger,  pro-
voking scratching.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  8 ;  enuresis.

Boy,  set.  12;  enuresis.

Woman,  set.  32,  suffering  two  years ;  prosopalgia.

Woman,  set.  45,  brunette,  thin,  lively  disposition,  suffering
five  days ;  prosopalgia.

Woman,  set.  50,  suffering  twenty  years ;  migraine.
*^  Relations. Compare :  Platin.  in  facial  neuralgia.


VESPA.

The  Wasp,  including  Hornet  and  Yellow  Jacket.

Introduced  by  Hering,  Amerikanische  Arzneipriifungen  (see  Bienengifte).
There  are  no  provings  with  the  exception  of  those  by  Berridge  of  Vespa  crabro,
the  hornet,  30th  dilution,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  1,  New  Ser.,  1875,  p.  100.
The  symptoms  quoted  are  mainly  the  results  of  the  sting.
Authorities  :  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  10,  pp.  119  and  639.

Clinical  Authorities. — (Edema  nf  face,  etc.,  Blake,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  320,  from
Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  22,  p.  270 ;  Ophthalmia  (Vespa  crabro),,  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.
318  ;  Vesical  catarrh,  Hering,  MSS.

^  Mind. Insensibility; loss of  consciousness; inability to
move.

Anxiety  and  universal  distress.

Low-spirited.
^  Sensorinm. Fainting,  loses  consciousness.

A  violent  heat  came  over  him,  felt  sick;  then  turned  giddy
and  spun  round  and  round  like  a  top  till  he  fell  head-
long into  a  currant  bush ;  managed  to  stagger  like  a
drunken  man  to  house,  got  into  chair,  in  a  moment  fell
out  of  it  upon  his  knees,  all  but  fainting ;  dashed  water


YESPA.  452

into  his  face,  at  length  he  was  able  to  lie  down  upon
his  bed.
^  Inner  Head. Headache.

*  Outer  Head. Face  swollen  and  inflamed ;.  swelling  extends
upward  over  head.

Alopecia.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, Vision,  especially  r.  eye,  growing  dim.

Eyes  turned  red  and  twitched.

Swelling  and  puffiness  of  lower  lids.

Eyes  nearly  closed,  two  or  three  hours  after  sting.

Injection  of  conjunctiva  of  r.  eye.

Itching  of  eyelids ;  adhesion  in  morning.

Itching  and  redness  in  eyes.

.  Itching  of  r.  lid  in  evening,  slight  tumefaction  ;  lids  more
swollen  and  painful ;  swelling  increased,  considerable
pain  in  eyeball  and  lids  all  night;  lids,  greatly  tume-
fied with  what  seemed  to  be  erysipelatous  inflammation;
whole  side  of  face  painful  and  swollen;  on  opening
lids  discovered  almost  complete  chemosis  of  conjunctiva,
it  being  raised  up  on  sclerotic  membrane  more  than
half  over  eye  to  border  of  cornea,  as  if  fatty  matter  were
underneath  it,  caused  by  effusion  of  lymph;  an  abscess
opened  upon  inside  of  upper  lid  about  its  centre  ;  swell-
ing began  to  abate  and  chemosis  to  flatten  down,  assum-
ing instead  of  a  semi-transparent,  a  reddish  hue,  as  in
common  ophthalmia;  discharge  from  abscess  piofuse;
in  fourteen  days  chemosis  entirely  disappeared.

I  I  Right  eye  inflamed  for  six  days;  it  had  commenced
with  lachrymation;  had  taken  Aeon,  without  relief;  now
there  is  redness  of  conjunctiva  of  r.  lower  lid  ;  in  1.  lower
half  of  r.  eye  is  a  semi-transparent  baggy  swelling  of  con-
junctiva extending  up  to  cornea,  and  on  pressing  it  up-
ward it  partly  covers  cornea;  much  lachrj'mation  of  r.
eye,  <  in  open  air,  r.  eyelids  adhere  in  morning;  man,
set.  60.
^  Hearing  and  Ears.  Subdued,  stitchlike  pain  deep  in  r.  ear.
^  Upper  Face.  Face:  anxious;  livid;  bluish;  smooth,  dark-
red  and  bloated.

Facial  neuralgia.

An  ulcer  lasting  three  months  after  a  sting  in  cheek.

Stings  in  face,  swelling  closing  eyes.

Swelling  and  redness  of  face  like  erysipelas.

After  a  sting  in  cheek  a  violent  sensation  burning  like
fire,  as  if  it  were  going  deep  in  ;  a  sensation  followed  as
if  something  were  sticking  deep  in,  like  a  harpoon,  and
were  drawn  on  frequently  ;  place  of  sting  bright-red,  ele-
vated, and  a  hard  swelling  followed ;  there  was  a  very
marked  chilly-cold  sensation  all  around  red  middle  and
this  was  followed  by  a  general  chill.


453  VESPA.

Face  and  ears  became  red  as  if  covered  with  scarlet  rash.

Face,  especially  eyelids,  swollen  and  puflfy.

I  iFace  swollen  and  puffy;  skin  transparent  and  etiolated;
scalding  nrine,  followed  by  itching;  itching  of  r.  arm  ;
vision,  especially  of  r.  eye,  growing  slowly  dim ;  palpi-
tation on  exertion ;  flatulence.

Next  day,  about  4  a.m.,  I  was  suddenly  awakened  by
a-  burning,  stinging  sensation  in  cheek,  and  a  great
soreness  and  smarting  along  course  of  lymphatics  down
into  neck;  I  found  my  cheek  much  swollen  and  red,
and  there  was  a  patch  of  redness  about  size  of  a  florin
that  felt  as  if  it  were  being  pierced  with  red-hot  needles;
temporo-maxillary  joint  stiff  and  painful,  and  a  feeling
of  soreness  ran  along  gums  to  tonsils  on  that  side  of
face ;  after  bathing  for  a  while  affected  parts,  I  got  into
bed  again,  feeling  somewhat  >,  and  fell  asleep  again;
about  two  liours  afterward  I  was  again  suddenly  aroused,
this  time  by  a  sense  of  suffocation  and  difficulty  of  swal-
lowing with  renewal  of  former  distress  with  intensified
severity;  feeling  alarmed,  I  obtained  some  hot  water,
to  which  I  added  a  few  drops  of  tincture  of  Ledum  and
fomented  whole  of  affected  part  until  severity  of  symp-
toms abated;  during  remainer  of  that  day  and  for  four
days  afterward  attacks  continued  to  r.eturn  in  parox-
ysms of  more  or  less  severity ;  submaxillary  and  cervi-
cal glands  on  that  side  of  face  became  increasingly
swollen  and  tender  until  fourth  day,  when  these  condi-
tions began  gradually  to  abate ;  in  immediate  locality''
of  wound  pains  began  to  assume  a  more  constant  char-
acter, throbbing,  smarting  and  burning  ;  still  there'was
a  marked  periodicity  about  stinging  and  lancinating
pains  experienced  for  more  than  a  month  afterward,
although  wound  suppurated  and  discharged  freely;  gen-
eral constitutional  disturbances  were  marked  b}^  slight
rigors  and  febrile  conditions  felt  mostly  in  evening.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Quaked  and  trembled  ;  teeth  chattered

as  if  he  had  a  paroxysm  of  ague.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue.  Pain  for  a  minute  or  two  intense,  fol-
lowed by  a  peculiar  taste,  a  singular  combination  of
palatal  and  nasal  sensation,  such  as  is  noticed  when  a
nest  of  these  wasps  is  disturbed  and  they  dart  about
through  air;  for  a  week  constant  and  annoying,  then
intermittent  and  very  pungent,  and  whenever  heated
by  exercise  or  near  a  hot  fire.

Swelling  of  tongue,  could  scarcely  talk  ;  pain  exceedingly
violent,  burning  stinging  (Apis  30  relieved).

Tongue  very  red,  greatl}^  swollen  and  rounded  ;  could  not
move  it  about  or  protrude  it,  it  appeared  to  entirely  fill


VESPA.  454

mouth ;  could  not  speak,  only  mumble,  swallowing  pain-
ful and  difficult.

Tongue  very  much  swollen  and  tense;  considerable  swell-
ing immediately  below  chin,  between  that  and  hyoid
bone;  pain  referred  to  a  point  in  middle  line  of  tongue
about  three-quarters  of  an  inch  from  apex.

Found  her  in  a  state  of  terrible  anxiety,  with  eyes  and
face  oedematous,  and  quite  unable  to  articulate  or  to
protrude  her  tongue,  but  she  could  open  her  mouth  a
little  and  I  could  see  sting  embedded  in  middle  third
of  tongue ;  I  at  once  extracted  it ;  tongue  itself  with  its
root  and  whole  floor  of  mouth  swelled  so  that  cavity  of
mouth  was  entirely  filled  therewith  and  then  nothing
else  could  be  seen ;  she  could  not  articulate  a  single
afterward  as  burning,  throbbing  and  aching ;  great
anxiety,  appearance  of  face,  mouth  and  throat  that  of
severe  cynanche ;  great  dysphagia ;  surface  of  tongue
and  lining  of  cavity  of  mouth  did  not  seem  especially
red,  swelling  being  diffused  and  deep-seated.
^^  Inner  Mouth.  Sting  on  roof  of  mouth  caused  immediately
swelling  in  mouth  and  throat;  burning  pain ;  nausea
and  vertigo ;  two  hours  afterward  violent  fever,  pulse
126  per  minute ;  loss  of  consciousness,  delirium  ;  face,
neck,  arms  and  chest  swollen  and  red  and  glistening;
breathing  oppressed ;  swallowing  very  difficult.  (Spir-
its of  Camphor  relieved )
^2  Throat. Sore  throat.

Sensation  of  heat  in  throat.

Throat  greatly  swelled.

Dangerous  swelling  in  oesophagus.

Erythema  spread  into  mouth  and  down  into  stomach,
causing  vomiting  with  temporary  relief.

Tonsils  repeatedly  inflamed.

Pharyngeal  varicosis.

Hypertrophied  tonsils  secreted  a  cheesy  matter.

Swelling  of  mouth  and  throat  with  violent  burning  pains,
nausea  and  vertigo  so  that  patient  was  obliged  to  go  to
bed  ;  after  two  hours  a  violent  fever,  unconscious  and
delirious,  face,  neck  and  arms  swollen  and  shining  red;
respiration  impeded,  swallowing  very  difficult;  pulse
126 ;  heart's  action  irregular  and  tumultuous.  (Cured
by  Camphor.)
'' Eating and  Drinking. Indigestion  with  flushing  after

meals.
'•^Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions.

Nausea,  with  faint  feeling  and  trembling.

Vomiting.


455  VESPA.

*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Weight  in  stomach  with
nausea.

Heat  or  cold  feeling  in  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Uneasiness  in  bowels.

Restlessness  in  abdomen.

Flatulence.
^•^  Stool  and  Rectum. Constipation.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Marked  tenderness  on  deep  pressure  over
renal  region.

The  pelves  of  kidneys  shrunk  irregularly  to  one-third  of
their  usual  capacity.

Kidneys  enlarged  and  flabby,  lobulated  in  outline,  soft  on
section ;  cortical  part  pale,  medullary  portions  deep  red
and  hypertrophied.

Mucous  membrane  lining  both  ureters  much  thickened
and  loaded  with  tenacious  mucus.

Bladder  free  from  disease ;  mucous  membrane  thickened
and  tuberculated  from  previous  inflammation.

Urine  sometimes  red  and  hot,  always  too  frequent.

In  urine  frequent  blood  disks,  no  casts  of  any  kind.

Irritation  invaded  urinary  passages;  remittent  dysuria
with  backache.

Incessant  enuresis.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  In  less  than  an  hour  his  hand  be-
came greatly  swollen  and  painful,  followed  by  swelling
and  puffiness  of  lower  lids  and  scrotum,  together  with
integuments  of  penis ;  parts  swollen  more  than  twice
their  usual  size;  almost  immediately  skin  on  abdomen,
arms,  legs,  neck  and  nearly  all  of  back  turned  purple
(almost  black),  followed  by  an  eruption  of  urticaria,
which  completely  covered  body ;  two  or  three  hours
after  sting  his  eyes  were  nearly  closed,  and  this  dark
color  and  urticaria  were  fully  developed ;  they  all  con-
tinued about  twenty-four  hours,  when  they  gradually
disappeared  in  order  in  which  they  came.
^'  Female  Sexual  Organs. Pain  in  1.  ovarian  region.

Catamenia:  intermittent;  sometimes  brown  ;  always  ac-
companied by  pain  and  flatulence,  preceded  by  mental
depression,  pain,  pressure  and  constipation.

Fundus  purple  from  congestion,  dark  blood  oozing  from
incised  surface.

An  irritable  ulcer  surrounded  os  tincse.

Vagina  healthy,  an  ulcer  encircled  os  and  extended  irregu-
larly into  cavity  of  cervix,  half  an  inch  in  deepest  part.

Irritation  passing  into  pudenda,  gives  rise  to  ulceration.

Irritation  especially  painful  in  inguinal  regions;  thence
passing  to  pudenda.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness ;
entire  loss  of  voice.


VESPA.  456

^^Respiration. Dyspnoea;  suffocation.

Kespiration :  hurried,  34,  not  particularly  labored,  and  not
strikingly  laryngeal ;  and  deglutition  much  impeded.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Aching  in  heart.

Slow  beating  of  heart,  hardly  perceptible.

Palpitation  on  exertion.

Pulse:  small  and  quick;  feeble,  quick;  64;  160.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Beating  of  carotid  arteries  violent.

Woke  with  pain  in  1.  neck,  preventing  her  from  turning
it  to  1.  side ;  felt  least  when  lying  on  back,  best  on  r.
side.

Aching  of  part  (r.  side  of  neck)  all  day ;  next  burning,
lasting  all  night;  cold  water  >  burning  for  a  time,  but
afterward  it  returned  <  than  before.

Part  (r.  side  of  neck)  began  to  swell  that  night,  and  was
red  and  burning;  swelling  gradually  increased  to  size
of  an  egg  and  lasted  three  weeks.

Much  pain  and  soreness  on  shoulder  blade  where  stings
were  received.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Itching  of  r.  arm.

Hand  and  arm  painfully  inflamed  and  swollen.

Pain  in  shoulder  in  region  of  wasp  sting;  glands  in  r.
axilla  swollen.

Pain  in  1.  shoulder  joint  on  moving  it,  as  if  sprained;  <
on  lifting  whole  arm  and  on  twisting  it.

Aching  of  hand  and  arm  up  to  shoulder,  lasting  all  day.

Burning  of  part  (r.  thumb),  then  swelling  red,  with  burn-
ing pain.

Within  ten  minutes  his  thumb  became  considerably  swol-
len, and  whole. of  his  face,  especially  eyelids,  became
swollen  and  puffy  ;  very  shortly  face,  and  more  particu-
larly ears,  became  very  red,  as  if  covered  with  scarlet
rash  ;  child  very  restless  during  night ;  complained  of
a  sensation  of  heat  and  much  irritation ;  wherever  he
scratched  there  arose  little  spots,  like  blains  of  nettle-
rash  ;  there  was  some  swelling  with  redness  of  1.  hand
and  arm,  but  most  marked  symptom  was  swelling  and
redness  of  face,  which  reminded  him  of  erysipelas;  after
forty  hours  there  was  considerable  oedema  of  eyelids,
especially  of  lower,  and  face  was  pallid  and  puffy.
^^  Lower  Limbs.  Feet  cold,  except  in  Summer,  when  they
burn  uncomfortably.

Slight  oedema  of  feet.

Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  instep  lasting  a  week.
^*  Limbs  in  General. It  seemed  as  if  a  cutting  instrument
were  piercing  all  joints;  he  likened  sensations  to  elec-
tric shocks;  arm,  face  and  head  became  swollen;  eyes
became  red and  twitched ; red  lines  extending  along


457  VESPA.

absorbents;  itching  over  whole  body;  complete  insen^
sibility,  after  ten  minutes ;  vomiting;  pulse  slow;  heart's
action  scarcely  perceptible.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Motion: pain in 1.  shoulder

joint  <.
^^  Nerves. Convulsions,  if  pain  is  violent.

Great  lassitude ;  cannot  stand  up,  cannot  move.

Universal  distress.

Felt  once  or  twice  as  if  actually  dying.

Faint  feeling  and  trembling  all  day,  with  nausea.

Great  prostration  for  several  days.

Faintness.

Marked  nervo-muscular  excitement.
^^  Sleep. Sleeplessness.

Desire  for  rest  and  sleep.

Disturbed  sleep ;  restless.
^^  Time. 3  or  4  a.m.  :  itching  of  r.  side  of  neck  ;  itching  of  r.
thumb.

4  A.M  :  woke  with  burning  stinging  in  cheek.

Morning :  adhesion  of  eyelids.

8  or  9  A.M.:  itching  of  r.  thumb.

3  P.M. :  itching  of  r.  thumb.

Evening :  rigors  and  febrilQ  conditions.

Night :  pain  in  eyeball  and  lids.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  water  relieved  burning
for  a  time,  it  returned  <  than  before.

Open  air:  lachrymation  <.
*" Fever. A  chilly-cold  sensation  in  a  circle  all  around  red
middle  of  sting,  soon  followed  by  chill  running  all  over
him,  in  short  intervals,  like  waves.

Quaked  and  trembled  and  teeth  chattered  as  if  he  had  a
paroxysm  of  ague.

Complained  much  of  sensation  of  heat  and  much  irri-
tation.

A  lady  was  stung  by  a  wasp  on  back  of  1.  middle  finger;
pain  extremely  intense;  in  a  few  moments  whole  body
tumefied,  skin  became  red,  and  violent  fever  developed.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  pain  in  ovarian  region ;  pain
in  neck;  pain  in  shoulder  joint;  swelling  and  redness  of
hand  and  arm;  pain  in  middle  finger;  erythematous
blush  on  body.

Right :  vision  dim ;  injected  conjunctiva ;  itching  of  eye-
lid; eye  inflamed  ;  lower  lid  inflamed;  1.  lower  half  of
eye  a  baggy  swelling ;  lachrymation  eyelids  adhere ;
stitches  in  ear;  itching  of  arm;  glands  in  axilla  swol-
len ;  itching  of  neck ;  itching  of  thumb.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  a  harpoon  were  sticking  deep  in  and  were
drawn  on; chilly-cold sensation  around  sting; as  if


VESPA.  458

pierced  with  red-hot  needles ;  patch  of  redness  on  cheek;
as  if  about  to  suffocate ;  as  if  1.  shoulder  joint  were
sprained;  as  if  a  cutting  instrument  were  piercing  all
joints,  like  an  electric  shock  ;  as  if  dying.

Pain  :  in  1.  ovarian  region  ;  in  1.  stomach  ;  in  shoulder
blade;  in  1.  shoulder  joint;  in  1.  middle  finger.

Lancinating:  in  wound.

Stitches :  in  r.  ear.

Stinging:  in  wound.

Burning:  like  fire,  in  place  stung;  in  wound;  in  tongue;
in  throat;  r.  side  of  neck ;  in  r.  thumb.

Aching:  in  tongue;  in  heart;  r.  side  of  neck.

Soreness :  and  smarting  along  course  of  lymphatics ;  along
gums  to  tonsils ;  in  shoulder  blade.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  1.  instep.

Throbbing :  in  wound ;  in  tongue.

Weight :  in  stomach.

Uneasiness :  in  bowels.

Heat :  in  throat.

Cold  feeling :  in  stomach  ;  around  sting ;  like  waves  all
over  body.

Itching:  of  eyelids;  in  eyes;  of  r.  lid;  of  r.  arm  ;  over  whole
body;  of  r.  thumb.
**  Tissues. Red  lines  showed  the  course  of the  absorbing
vessels.

Rapid  decomposition  of  body.
■*^  Skin. Cheek  much  swollen  and  skin  of  bright-red  tint ;  red-
ness spread  rapidly  in  all  directions  over  head  and  down
neck,  shoulders,  back  and  front  of  chest;  wherever  it
traveled  it  w^as  accompanied  with  pain  and  tenderness.

Hands,  feet  and  chest  becoming  as  red  as  if  he  had  scarlet
fever.

Erythematous  blush  on  1.  half  of  body,  from  head  down-
ward, lasted  eight  to  ten  days  and  desquamated  ;  then
rheumatic  pain  in  1.  instep  lasting  a  week.

Prurigo-like,  pinkish,  lentil-shaped  spots  on  hand  and
forehead,  on  neck  and  all  over  to  feet.

Sting  followed  by  a  burning  sensation  as  if  something
were  sticking  and  drawing  out;  part  stung  was  bright-
red,  elevated,  with  a  hard  swelling,  redness  surrounded
by  a  circle  of  cold,  chilly  sensation,  soon  changing  to
general  chill,  repeated  at  short  intervals  that  seemed  to
extend  in  waves  all  over  body.

Intense  itching  of  part  (r.  side  of  neck)  every  day  about  3
or  4  A.M.,  lasting  about  half  an  hour,  slightly  >  by  vine-
gar applications  (after  third  day);  immediately  after
itching  there  was  burning  for  half  an  hour.

Intense  itching  of  part  (r.  thumb);  it  came  on  about  3  or


459  VESPA— VIBURNUM  OPULUS.

4  A.M.,  about  8  or  9  a.m.,  and  again  3  p.m.;  it  lasted  half
an  hour  each  time  and  was  immediately  followed  by
burning  for  half  an  hour;  itching  >  by  application  of
salt  and  vinegar ;  this  lasted  four  days;  for  next  three
days  itching  only  came  between  8  and  9  a.m.  and  was
shorter  and  less  severe.

Itching  all  over  to  a  dreadful  degree.

Subsequent  desquamation  of  whole  abdomen.

Was  stung  all  over  by  wasps  four  or  five  years  ago,  fol-
lowed by  abscesses  all  over  body,  that  caused  great
emaciation  ;  every  now  and  then  gets  seizures  of  prostra-
tion, with  enuresis  somni ;  heat  especially  overpowers
him;  purulent  catarrh  of  middle  ear  of  both  sides.

An  ulcer,  lasting  three  months  after  sting.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, ^t.  16,  scrofulous  since
birth,  stung  by  a  wasp,  carious  bones,  severe  rheuma-
tism, suppurating  in  hands.

A  pale,  light-haired,  worn-looking  woman;  swollen  face.

Mrs.  E.,  set.  58 ;  oedema  of  face,  etc.

Man,  set.  66,  suffering  six  days;  ophthalmia.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Apis,  salt  water  and  vinegar.

Incompatible:  Argent,  nitr.


VIBURNUM  OPULUS.

High  Cranberry  bush.  CaprifoUacese.

This  shrub,  belonging  to  the  honeysuckle  family,  grows  from  five  to  ten  feet
liigh,  is  common  in  Canada  and  the  Northern  and  Western  States,  abundant  in
the  Catskill  and  Allegheny  Mountains.  It  flowers  in  June  and  July.  The  bright-
red  acid  fruit  is  a  substitute  for  cranberries.  The  Viburnum  prunifolium  (black
haw)  should  not  be  confounded  with  it.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  bark.

Provings  by  H.  C.  Allen,  assisted  by  eleven  provers,  male  and  female;  Trans.
Am.  I.  of  Horn.,  1881,  p.  160.

The  tincture  and  first  and  thirtieth  dilutions  were  used.

Clinical  Authorities.' — Dysmenorrhcea,  Palmer,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.4,  p.  216;
Hale,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  66  ;  Am.  Horn.,  vol.  ],  p.  96  ;  King,  vol.  13,  p.  80  ;
J.  H.  W.,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  121  ;  Hale,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  67  ;  Weinke,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  163;  King,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  80;  Allen,  H.  C,  Trans.
Am.  I.  of  Hom.,  1881,  p.  169; Owens  (3  cases),  Tians.  Am.  I.  of  Hom.,  1881,  p.


VIBURNUM  OPULUS.  4G0

176  ;  Mewhranous  dysmenorrhea,  Hunter,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  255  ;  Threatened
abortion,  C.  F.  M.,  Horn.  Kecorder,  vol.  4,  p.  58 ;  Farrington,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,
p.  54 ;  James,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  91 ;  Violent  after-pains,  Allen,  4.sa,  Trans.  Am.
I.  of  Hom.,  1881,  p.  170 ;  Cough,  Burnett,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  345.

^  Mind. Depressed.

Unable  to  concentrate  mind  on  usual  mental  labor.

Inability  to  study.

Stupid  /eeling,  as  if  she  could  not  tell  where  she  was  or
what  to  do  on  awaking  in  morning.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo : inclines  to  turn  to  1. ;  in  rising,  as  if

would  fall  forward  ;  on  closing  eyes.
^  Inner  Head. Slight  frontal  headache  in  forenoon.

I  Dull  frontal  headache.

Dull  throbbing,  frontal  headache,  extending  to  eyeballs,
<  by  mental  exertion,  and  >  by  moving  about.

Dull,  confusing  frontal  headache,  extending  to  temporal
regions,  as  after  night  watching,  or  loss  of  sleep,  so  severe
as  to  compel  cessation  of  mental  exertion.

A  severe  frontal  headache  with  occasional  vertigo  set  in,
continuing  with  severity  for  six  or  seven  days,  almost
incapacitating  for  study,  and  accompanied  by  profuse
and  frequent  urination.

Severe  pain  in  1.  parietal  region;  pain  sharp  and  pene-
trates into  brain,  <  by  every  cough,  moving  head  and
when  bowels  move.

Diill  aching  pain  over  1.  eye.

Dull,  heavy  headache,  mostly  over  eyes,  <  on  1.  side,  at
times  extending  to  vertex  and  occiput  (principally  when
delayed  menses  should  appear),  <  by  a  sudden  jar  or
bending  over,  false  step  and  movement.

Dull  supraorbital  and  frontal  headache,  with  profuse  flow
of  watery  clear  urine.

Severe  pain  in  head  just  over  eyes  on  opening  them  ;  sore-
ness extending  back  into  head.

Severe  pressive  pain  in  r.  supraorbital  region.

Severe  l.-sided  headache;  eyes  heavy;  felt  sick  enough  to
go  to  bed.

Headache  beginning  about  3  p.m.,  <  at  night.

Dull,  throbbing  headache,  continuing  all  evening,  and
so  severe  on  retiring  that  she  felt  sick  all  over.

Every  cough  hurts  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ' '  Amaurosis.

Heaviness  over  eyes  and  in  balls,  at  times,  must  look
twice  to  be  sure  of  seeing  an  object.

Sore  feeling  in  eyeballs;  sharp  jerking  pains  as  from
knife.

Eyes  burn ;  can  hardly  see  on  account  of  profuse  flow  of
tears.


461  VIBURNUM  OPULUS.

®  Hearing  and  Ears. Awakes  daring  night  with  great  pain
.  in  ears,  I  I  deep  in  bone.

Sharp  jerking  pains  in  ears,  as  if  stabbing  with  a  sharp
knife,  lasting  nearly  an  hour,  with  more  or  less  severity.

I  I  External  ear  sore  as  if  bruised;  could  not  lie  on  affected
side  (of  head).

Would  have  to  rub  ear  and  seemed  as  if  she  would  have
to  straighten  it  out;  as  if  it  were  pinned  to  head;  would
lie  on  other  side  and  be  awakened  with  same  feeling  in
that  ear ;  compelled  to  change  position  many  times  dur-
ing night  in  consequence.
^  Upper  Face. Face  flushed  and  hot.

^'  Taste  and  Tongue, l  '  Tongue  dry ;  broad  and  white,  centre
brown,  takes  print  of  teeth.

I  I  Taste  coppery;  disagreeable.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Lips  and  mouth  dry.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  i  Nausea
and  faintness;  every  little  while,  at  noon,  is  obliged  to
lie  down ;  >  by  eating,  but  felt  immediately  afterward.

I  I  Constant  nausea  (no  inclination  to  vomit),  >  by  eating.

Deathly  sick  feeling  at  stomach,  as  if  she  could  not  live,
every  night,  not  >  by  any  position.

When  lying  perfectly  quiet  had  no  unpleasant  feeling,  but
as  soon  as  she  moved  a  I  i  deathly  nausea  at  pit  of  stom-
ach came  on  ;  every  time  she  tried  to  get  up  she  fainted.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Food  lies  heavily.

I  I A  sensation  of  goneness,  as  if  empty  and  had  been  for
days.

Aching  pain  in  stomach  in  afternoon,  >  by  stretching
body  and  throwing  stomach  forward.

I  I  Dyspepsia  with  constipation  and  incontinence  of  urine.
^^  Hypochondria. Severe,  sticking  darting  pain  in  1.  hypo-
chondrium,  deep-seated  as  if  in  spleen,  with  a  sensation
as  if  some  hot  fluid  were  running  through  splenic  ves-
sels ;  >  by  walking  about  room.

Pain  in  1.  lumbar  and  1.  hypochondriac  regions  so  intense
as  to  produce  faintness;  although  night  was  cool  a  warm
perspiration  broke  out  all  over  body,  giving  relief.

Violent  throbbing  in  1.  hypochondrium  if  he  attempted
to  lie  on  1.  side;  could  not  lie  on  1.  side.

Retired  at  11  p.m.,  but  was  unable  to  remain  in  bed  on  ac-
count of  severe  throbbing  pain  under  floating  ribs  of  1.
side,  walked  room  until  3  a.m.,  pain  >  by  pressure.
'^  Abdomen. Whole  abdomen  tender  and  sensitive  to  press-
ure, especially  about  umbilicus.

Rumbling,  darting  pains  in  bowels.

Cramping  pains  in  lower  abdomen  as  before  catamenia,
mostly  or  wholly  at  night.


VIBURNUM  OPULUS.  462

I  She  has  cramping  colic  pains  in  lower  abdomen  almost
unbearable,  pains  come  suddenly  and  with  terrible
severity.

I  Cramplike  colic  pains  in  lower  abdomen  (during  men-
struation).

Severe,  heavy,  aching,  bearing-down  pain,  accompanied
by  drawing  pains  in  anterior  muscles  of  thighs,  and
occasionally  by  sharp,  shooting  pains  in  ovarian  regions.

Bearing-down  pains  in  abdomen  as  during  menstruation,
with  heavy  aching  pain  over  pubes.
^*' Stool  and  Rectum.  Diarrhoea  at  menstrual  period  profuse,
watery,  four  or  five  stools  in  an  hour,  accompanied  by
terrible  chills,  at  same  time  cold  sweat  would  roll  off
her  forehead. ( Veratrum  relieved.)

I  I  Great  inactivity  of  rectum  ;  no  inclination  to  stool.

I  1  Constipation :  stool  small,  dry  and  composed  of  hard,
round  balls,  evacuated  with  much  effort ;  stool  large,
dry,  painful  and  so  difficult  that  mechanical  assistance
is  needed ;  stool  large,  hard,  and  when  passed  attended
with  a  I  I  cutting  sensation  in  rectum  and  anus ;  stool
long,  large,  hard,  and  difficult  to  expel,  having  a  desire
to  evacuate,  but  when  attempted  feels  as  if  there  were
nothing  there,  and  evacuation  occurs  slowly  and  only
after  long  straining ;  urging  to  stool  as  if  it  would  be
dangerous  to  postpone,  but  stool  was  I  i  large  and  diffi-
cult to  pass;  desire  for  stool,  with  much  straining;
stool  hard,  dry*  with  blood  and  I  I  great  soreness  of  anus.

During  and  immediately  after  stool,  profuse  hemorrhage
of  dark-red  blood.

Stool  scanty  and  hard,  with  hemorrhage;  a  sensation  of
constriction  of  rectum  and  anus.

Constipation,  during  entire  proving,  I  I  with  great  tenes-
mus ; when  bowels moved  a  pain felt  in 1. orbital
region.
^^  Urinary  Organs. iSpasmodic  dysuria  in  hysterical  subjects.

I  I  Urine  profuse  and  pale,  specific  gravity  1021.

Profuse,  clear,  watery,  must  be  voided  every  hour  or  two ;
specific  gravity  1019.

I  I  Profuse  discharge  of  pale  watery  urine,  repeated  quite
regularly  every  hour  during  afternoon  and  evening.

Profuse  discharge  of  clear,  watery  urine  for  several  days
in  succession ;  specific  gravity  low,  but  no  morphologi-
cal elements  were  found.

Profuse  and  frequent  flow  of  clear,  watery  urine,  accom-
panying frontal  headache.

Following  each  act  of  urination  was  a  sensation  as  if  urine
continued  to  flow.

During menses, obliged  every  hour  or  two  to  urinate,


463  VIBURNUM  OPULUS.

passed  at  each  time  large 1 1  quantities  of  clear,  light-
colored  urine.

"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Seminal  emissions  without  dreams.
Severe  pain  and  swelling  of  epididymis  and  testicle  of  1.

side.
Epididymis  of  r.  side  painful  and  swollen,  was  obliged  to
use  a  suspensory  bandage. {Aconite  relieved.)

^^ Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Before  menses:  severe  bearing
down ;  drawing  in  anterior  muscles  of  thighs ;  heavy
aching  in  sacral  region  and  over  pubes;  occasional
sharp,  shooting  pains  in  ovaries,  pains  make  her  so
nervous  she  cannot  sit  still;  excruciating  cramping,
colicky  pains  in  lower  abdomen,  and  through  womb;
pains  begin  in  back  and  go  around,  ending  in  cramps
in  uterus.

■  During  menses:  nausea  ;  cramping  pain  and  great  nerv-

ous restlessness ;  flow  ceases  for  several  hours,  then  re-
turns in  clots.

■  Menstrual  flow  scanty,  thin,  light-colored,  with  sensation

of  lightness  of  head,  faint  when  trying  to  sit  up ;  spas-
modic or  membranous  dysmenorrhoea.

■  Leucorrhoea  thin,  yellow-white  or  colorless,  except  with

stool,  when  it  is  thick,  white,  blood-streaked.

■  ■Neuralgic  and  spasmodic  dysmenorrhoea.

Pain  in  back,  loins  and  across  lower  abdomen,  as  if  menses
were  coming  on ;  <  in  early  part  of  evening  and  in  a
close  room  ;  >  in  open  air  and  by  moving  about.

■  Pain  beginning  in  back  and  going  around  to  loins  and

across  to  pubic  bone  like  labor  pains.

I  I  Excruciating  colicky  pain  through  womb  and  lower
abdomen  coming  on  quite  suddenly,  just  preceding
menstrual  flow,  sometimes  lasting  ten  or  twelve  hours.
^Dysmenorrhoea.

I  I  Cramping  pains  in  lower  abdomen  as  if  menses  were
about  to  appear.

Menses  delayed  ten  days.

Uneasy  sensation  in  pelvic  region  and  slight  bearing-down
pains  continuing  all  week.

I  I  Leucorrhoea  thin,  yellowish-white,  for  two  days  follow-
ing menstruation.

■  Irritable  ovaries,  with  dysmenorrhoea.

1  Cramplike  pains  and  spasms  of  stomach,  bowels,  bladder
or  other  organs  when  reflex  from  uterine  irritation.

I  I  Flushes  of  heat,  pain  in  1.  side,  dizziness  when  stooping.
^Uterine  affection.

I  I  Painful  menstruation  and  monorrhagia  for  six  years;
always  discharged  a  large  clot  at  each  period,  after
which  pain  diminished ;  on  being  requested  to  wash


ALBURNUM  OPULUS.  464

out  the  next  clot,  a  perfect  membrana  decidualis  was
revealed.  ^Membranous  dysmenorrhoea.
^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  During  pregnancy:
cramps  in  abdomen  and  legs.
I  I  Threatened  abortion  ;  intense  cramp  in  uterus  and  bear-
ing down ;  or  pain  around  from  back,  ending  in  excru-
ciating cramps  in  lower  abdomen.

■  Spasmodic  pains,  shooting  from  abdomen  into  legs;  fre-

quent and  very  early  miscarriages,  so  that  ovum  is  ex-
pelled at  every  menstrual  period,  thus  causing  sterility.

I  1  Threatened  miscarriage  with  severe  backache;  severe
cramping,  bearing-down  pains  almost  unbearable,  caus-
ing constant  restless  moving  about  in  bed ;  cannot  sit
or  lie  still,  so  severe  are  the  pains.

Labor  pains:  false  pains  precede  the  real  pains;  cramps
in  abdomen,  shooting  down  legs.

■  Cramps  in  abdomen  and  legs  of  pregnant  women.

I  Will  prevent  miscarriage  if  given  before  the  membranes
are  injured,  and  when  the  pains  are  spasmodic  and
threatening.

1  I  Mrs.  R- ,  five  months  pregnant,  while  out  driving

received  a  severe  strain  from  holding  her  frightened
horse;  three  days  after  severe  bearing-down  pains  be-
gan in  abdomen  and  back,  interspersed  with  colicky,
crampy  pains  through  abdomen  from  hip  prominences
downward  toward  vagina ;  irritable,  would  hardly  an-
swer questions,  twisted  about  when  pains  came  on,  plac-
ing her  fists  under  hips,  and  raising  them  from  couch ;
complained  of  nausea  and  dizziness  when  rising  from
couch;  twice  within  an  hour  felt  preparatory  symptoms
of  vomiting,  which  did  not  occur;  face  flushed  (prob-
ably from  straining),  pupils  dilated,  warm  perspiration
on  forehead  ;  frontal  headache;  crampy  pain  down  face
of  thighs,  with  heaviness  of  lower  limbs ;  dizziness  on
attempting  to  rise;  urging  to  urinate.

^^  Cough.  Cough  during  second  month  of  pregnancy;  <
night  and  morning,  and  on  lying  down ;  urine  spurting
out  when  coughing.

^^ Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Severe  throbbing  pain  under  1.
floating ribs, > from hard pressure and walking;
cannot  lie  on  1.  side.
Sharp shooting pains in 1. chest  over  sixth  rib near
sternum.

''''Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  During  proving  an  old
heart  trouble,  an  irregularity  of  pulse  (remission  every
third  beat),  of  which  she  had  felt  nothing  for  over  six
months,  returned.
Felt  as  if  her  breath  would  leave  her  body,  and  her  heart
would  cease  beating  (during  severe  menstrual  pain).


465  VIBURNUM  OPULUS.

^'  Neck  and  Back. A  stiff,  sore  feeliDg  in  nape  of  neck.

Neck  stiff  for  several  days,  with  pain  in  occiput.

Muscles  of  back  lame  and  bruised,  as  after  severe  physical
exertion.

Tired,  bruised  pain  in  muscles  of  back  extending  from
points  of  scapulae  to  ilium  on  each  side  of  spine,  >  by
firm  pressure.

Wandering,  tired  pains  in  muscles  of  back,  <  1.  side.

Most  intense  pain  in  1.  lumbar  region  between  floating
ribs  and  ilium  ;  pressure  >  its  intensity,  but  must  keep
continually  moving.

Dull  throbbing  pain  in  1.  lumbar  region,  <  by  lying
down ;  was  compelled  to  walk  room  with  a  walking-
stick  pressed  across  back  to  obtain  relief.

Severe  pain  in  back,  region  of  kidney, >  by  pressure
across  back  with  arms  crossed.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Buzzing  feeling  in  hands,  as  if  they  would

burst.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Cramps  in  feet  after  long  walking.

Wandering,  tired  pains  extending  to  hips  and  knees,  with
disinclination  to  move  about.
'*  Limbs  in  General, i  Cramps  and  contractions  of  extremi-
ties, especially  during  pregnancy.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Inability  to  lie  on  1.  side.

Lying :  on  affected  side  ear  <  ;  quiet,  nausea  >  ;  cough
during  pregnancy;  pain  in  lumbar  region  <.

Stooping:  dizziness.

Rising:  fainting;  nausea  and  dizziness.

Motion :  frontal  headache  <  ;  pain  in  1.  parietal  region
<  ;  nausea  <  ;  menstrual  colic  >  ;  backache  >.

Stretching  body :  >  aching  in  stomach.

Straining  at  stool :  headache  <.

Walking:  about,  >  pain  in  hypochondrium;  long,  cramps
in  feet.
^®  Nerves. nParalytic  conditions,  coming  on  after  convul-
sions.

I  Hysterical  convulsions  from  uterine  irritation,

■  General  irritation  of  nervous  system.

iCramps  and  contractions  of  extremities,  especially  during
pregnancy.
^^  Sleep. Sleep  restless,  unrefreshing.

Sleepy  after  dinner.

Tired  in  morning  on  rising.
^^Time. Morning:  cough  during  pregnancy  <;  tired.

Noon  :  must  lie  down,  nausea  and  faintness.

Afternoon  :  aching  in  stomach.

3  P.M.:  headache  begins.

Afternoon  and  evening :  profuse  urination.

\oii.  X.— 30.


VIBURNUM  OPULUS.  466

Evening:  throbbing  headache;  early,  pain  in  back,  loins
and  abdomen.

Night:  headache  <  ;  awakes  with  pain  in  ears;  deathly
nausea;  cramp  in  abdomen;  cough  during  pregnancy  <.

11  P.M.  to  3  A.M.:  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Close  room :  menstrual  colic  <.

Open  air:  menstrual  colic  >.
*"  Fever. Chill,  followed  by  severe  headache.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Suddenly :  cramping  colic.

For  an  hour:  jerking  pains  in  ears.

Every  hour  or  two:  profuse  urination.

For  ten  or  twelve  hours  :  menstrual  colic.

For  several  days :  profuse  urination  ;  stiff  neck.

For  six  or  seven  days  :  frontal  headache.

All  week  :  uneasy  sensation  in  pelvic  region.

For  ten  days:  menses  delayed.

Second  month  of  pregnancy  :  cough.

For  six  years :  painful  menstruation.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  inclination  to  turn,  vertigo ;
pain  in  parietal  region;  dull  aching  over  eye;  pain  in
hypochondrium  ;  throbbing  under  floating  ribs;  shoot-
ing pains  in  chest  over  sixth  rib  near  sternum  ;  pain  in
back  <  ;  muscles  of  entire  side  of  body  sore,  as  if  bruised
or  strained  by  overlifting.

Right :  pain  above  eye.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  she  could  not  tell  where  she  was  or  what
to  do  on  awaking;  as  if  stabbing  with  a  sharp  knife  in
eyes  and  ears ;  ear  as  if  bruised ;  as  if  ear  were  pinned
to  head  ;  as  if  she  could  not  live,  sick  feeling  at  stom-
ach ;  goneness,  as  if  stomach  were  empty;  as  if  a  hot
fluid  were  running  through  splenic  vessels;  as  if  urine
continued  to  flow  after  urinating;  as  if  menses  were
coming  on ;  pain  in  back  and  across  lower  abdomen ;
as  if  breath  would  leave  body  and  heart  would  cease
beating ;  bruised  feeling  in  back,  as  after  severe  physi-
cal exertion;  buzzing  in  hands  as  if  they  would  burst;
1.  side  as  if  bruised  or  strained  by  overlifting.

Pain:  in  ears  deep  in  bone;  in  1.  lumbar  and  hypochon-
driac regions;  produces faintn ess;  in  testicles;  in  occiput.

Excruciating  pain  :  through  womb  and  lower  abdomen.

Intense  pain  :  in  1.  lumbar  region.

Severe  pain :  in  1.  parietal  region  penetrates  into  brain;
over  eyes  on  opening  them.

Jerking:  in  eyeballs;  in  ears.

Cutting:  in  rectum  and  anus.

Darting:  in  1.  hypocliondrium ;  in  bowels.

Stabbing :  in  eyes  and  ears.

Sticking :  in  spleen.


467  VIBURNUM  OPULUS.

Shooting :  in  ovarian  regions ;  in  1.  chest  over  sixth  rib
near  sternum.

Burning:  in  eyes.

Aching:  dull,  over  1.  eye;  in  stomach;  over  pubes;  in
sacral  region.

Bruised  pain:  in  muscles  of  back.

Soreness :  in  eyeballs ;  in  anus ;  in  nape  of  neck.

Pressure :  in  r.  supraorbital  region.

Throbbing:  headache;  in  1.  hypochondrium ;  in  1.  lum-
bar region.

Drawing :  in  anterior  muscles  of  thighs.

Cramp :  in  lower  abdomen ;  through  womb ;  in  extremi-
ties during  pregnancy.

Constriction :  of  rectum  and  anus.

Bearing  down :  in  lower  abdomen ;  before  menses.

Uneasy  sensation  :  in  pelvic  region.

Stiffness :  in  nape  of  neck.

Heaviness :  over  eyes  and  in  balls.

Dryness :  in  lips  and  mouth.
"  Tissues. Amenorrhoea.

Dysmenorrhoea,  spasmodic  or  membranous.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. A  sudden  jar:  head-
ache <.

Pressure:  >  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium;  backache  >.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Tall,  slender,  dark- or  fair-
haired  hysterical  subjects.

Girl,  set.  16,  suffering  four  years;  dysmenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  17,  slender,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  thin,  fair  skin,
suffering  since  first  menstruation,  two  years  previous  ;
dysmenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  20,  servant,  large,  florid ;  dysmenorrhoea.

Mrs. ,  set.  24,  two  months  pregnant ;  cough.

Mrs. ,  set.  25,  short,  heavy  set,  light  hair  and  eyes,

thick,  white  skin,  suffering  since  girlhood ;  dysmenor-
rhoea.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  26,  tall,  slender,  eyes  and  hair  black,  mother
of  one  child,  one  miscarriage  at  six  months ;  dysmen-
orrhoea.

Miss  ,  set.  27,  suffering  six  years;  membranous  dys-
menorrhoea.

Miss  B.  L.,  set.  28,  dark  complexion,  bi"0wn  hair  and  eyes,
heavy,  languid  manner,  compl-aining  and  anxious;  dys-
menorrhoea.

Mrs.  McK.,  set.  30,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  divorced  ;  dysmen-
orrhoea for  about  six  years.

Mrs. ,  set.  35,  tall,  large  frame,  dark  hair,  eyes  and

skin,  scrofulous;  dysmenorrhoea.

Mrs.  H.  T.,  set.  38,  mother  of  several  children  ;  violent
after-pains.


VIBURNUM— VINCA  MINOR.  468

Mrs.  D.,  married  fourteen  years,  never  pregnant,  dark  hair
and  eyes,  sallow  complexion,  subject  to  eczema;  dys-
menorrhcea  since  she  began  to  menstruate,
*^  Relations. Antidoted by : Aeon, (epididymitis), Veratr.
(diarrhoea).

Compare :  Act.  rac.  (nervous,  rheumatic  diathesis),  Caulophl.
(cramplike  abdominal  pains  and  menstrual  symptoms).


VINCA  MINOR.

Lesser  Periwinkle.  Asdepiadacese.

A  native  of  Europe,  found  in  shaded  wcods;  cultivated  in  gardens,  flowers  in
April  and  May.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant.
Proved  by  Eosenburg,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  17,  p.  41.

CLiNiCAii  Authorities. — Eruption  on  head, Schiiler,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,
p.  268.

^  Mind. Lachrymose.

Sadness,  with  fear  of  death.

Peevish  and  quarrelsome,  soon  followed  by  repentance.
^  Sensorium. Whirling  vertigo  with  flickering  before  eyes.
^  Inner  Head. Headache.
Pressure  in  temples.

Sticking  in  1.  temple  extending  toward  malar  bone.
Tearing  pain  in  vertex,  with  a  feeling  as  if  a  hammer  were

beating  from  within  outward.
Dulness  of  sinciput,  with  slow  pressure  toward  eyes  and

dimness  of  eyes,  <  by  stooping  when  writing.
*  Outer  Head. Pressure  upon  head  externally.

■  Spots  on  scalp,  oozing  moisture,  matting  hair  together;

hair  falls  out  on  single  spots,  and  white  hair  grows  on

it. ^Crusta  lactea. ^Favus. /!?Plica  polonica.
Corrosive itching on scalp, with irresistible desire to

scratch.
Itching  biting  on  scalp,  especially  on  vertex,  frequently

provoking  scratching.
Humid  eruptions  on  head,  with  vermin,  nightly  itching,

burning  after  scratching.
Bald  spots,  covered  with  short  woolly  hair.


469  VINCA  MINOR.

I  I  Chronic,  moist, offensive-smelling  eruption on head,
face,  and  behind  ears.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Obscuration  of  vision,  like  fog  before  eye,
while  reading,  at  times  also  when  walking.
So  little  secretion  in  eye  that  on  getting  snuff  into  it  he

was  obliged  to  wash  it  out  with  water.
Itching  and  burning  of  lids  which  become  red.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  and  whistling  in  ears,  with  a

feeling  of  cold  wind,  especially  in  1.  ear.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Frequent  nosebleed.
Itching  in  nose.
Distressing dryness and heat in nose,  extending into

frontal  sinuses.
Stoppage  of  nose,  mostly  of  one  nostril,  with  discharge  of

much  mucus  through  posterior  nares.
Tip  of  nose  becomes  red  on  getting  least  angry.
Moist  eruption  on  septum  of  nose,  discharging  a  moisture
which,  drying,  formed  a  light-brown  scab;  skin  was
dirty  white,  elevated,  with  red  areola.
^  Upper  Face. Paleness  of  face.
Tearing  in  malar  bones.
Swelling  of  face  with  papular  eruptions.
'■' Lower  Face. Lips  dry.

Swelling  of  upper  lip  and  corner  of  mouth.
Itching  of  upper  lip,  which  provokes  scratching.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Insipid  taste:  in  mouth;  to  all  food.
'^ Inner  Mouth. Toothache;  tearing  in  teeth  >  by  warmth
of  bed.
Increased  secretion  of  saliva.
Aphtha)  in  mouth.
13  Throat. Frequent  hawking  through  day.

Sensation  as  if  something  were sticking low  down in

oesophagus,  which  provokes  swallowing.
Sore  throat  with  difficultv  in  swallowing.
Ulcers  in  throat.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Hunger,  with  loss
of  appetite  before  hunger  has  been  satisfied.
Scarcely  any  thirst.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Empty
eructations  after  drinking  beer,  and  generally  <  from
taking  liquids.
Nausea  after  coffee.

Violent,  bitter,  copious  vomiting  of  yellowish-green  liquid.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  emptiness  in
stomach.
Gastric  disturbances.
^^  Abdomen. Griping  in  abdomen.

Rumbling  and  gurgling  in  abdomen,  with emission  of
much  offensive  flatus.


VINCA  MINOE.  470

Abdomen  full,  tense,  but  painless.

Distension  of  abdomen  after  stool.
'•^  Stool  and  Rectum. Flatulence.

Urging  to  stool.

Stool  first  hard,  then  soft.

Stool  exhausting,  with  burning  in  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Diminished  secretion  of  urine.

Urine  pale  yellow.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. lExcessive,  profuse  menses,  flow-
ing like  a  stream,  with  great  debility.

I  Passive  uterine  hemorrhage  from  fibroid  tumors.

■  Passive  uterine  hemorrhage  in  women  long  past  their
climacteric  period.
"^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness.

Tenacious  mucus  in  trachea.
^^  Respiration. Rapid  respiration.

^^  Cough. Spasmodic  cough,  with  little  tickling  in  larynx.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pains  in  chest,  with  sticking  and

dyspnoea.
-®  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  full  and  hard.
*"  Outer  Chest. Stitches  in  sternum.

Pressure  in  sternum,  with  feeling  of  emptiness  in  chest.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Painful  tension  and  stiffness  of  cervical
muscles,  with  a  sensation  as  if  a  weight  were  lying  upon
them.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Cramplike  drawing  in  upper  arm  and  tips
of  fingers.

Swelling  and  stiffness  of  first  joints  of  fingers,  with  burn-
ing pain  in  nails.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Cramplike  drawing  in  feet  and  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Inclination  to  stretch  limbs.

Tearing  pains  in  limbs.

Arthritic  tearing  in  bones.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Stooping:  pressure  in  head.

Walking :  fog  before  eye.
^®  Nerves. Great  weakness  and  prostration.

Weakness  as  if  he  would  die.

Tremulous  feeling,  especially  in  upper  extremities,  with
tendency  to  start,  especially  on  exerting  mind.

Tremulous  feeling  in  bloodvessels.
^^  Sleep. Frequent  yawning.

Sleeplessness  and  restlessness  at  night.

Lascivious  dreams.
^^Time. Night:  sleeplessness;  restlessness.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Most  of  symptoms  >  by  mov-
ing in  open  air.

Warmth:  toothache  >.
^Tever. Sudden  paroxysms  of  shivering.


471  VINCA  MINOR.

Great  sensation  of  warmth  in  scalp,  with  jDrickling.

Heat:  of  cheeks  without  redness;  with  full,  hard  pulse.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  sticking  in  temple ;  a  feel-
ing of  cold  wind  in  ears ;  ulcers  on  nates.

Right :  moist  spots  on  ankle.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  a  hammer  were  beating  from  within  out-
ward in  vertex ;  a  feeling  of  cold  wind  in  ears ;  as  if
something  were  sticking  low  down  in  oesophagus;  as  if
a  weight  were  lying  upon  cervical  muscles;  as  if  he
would  die  from  weakness.

Stitches:  in  sternum.

Sticking :  in  1.  temple  to  malar  bone ;  in  chest.

Prickling :  in  scalp.

Tearing :  in  vertex ;  in  malar  bones ;  in  teeth  ;  in  limbs  ;
in  bones.

Burning: of  lids; in  anus; in  fingers; in  ulcers  on  1.
natis.

Biting :  on  scalp.

Pressure:  in  temples;  toward  eye  in  sinciput;  upon  head
externally ;  in  sternum.

Griping :  in  abdomen.

Cramp: in  upper  arm  and  tips  of  fingers; in  feet  and
toes.

Tension  :  and  stiff'ness  of  cervical  muscles.

Tremulous  feeling:  in  upper  extremities;  in  bloodvessels.

Emptiness:  in  stomach  ;  inchest.

Heat:  in  scalp;  of  cheeks.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Itching :  on  scalp ;  of  lids ;  in  nose ;  of  upper  lip  ;  corro-
sive, of  skin ;  in  moist  spots  on  upper  part  of  r.  ankle.

Dryness :  in  nose.
**  Tissues. Passive  uterine  hemorrhages.

Arthritic  tearing  in  bones.
*^  Skin. Corrosive  itching  provoking  scratching.

Great  sensitiveness  of  skin,  with  redness  and  soreness,  even
from  slight  rubbing.

Itching  moist  spots  on  upper  part  of  r.  ankle.

Burning  in  ulcers,  like  bedsores,  on  1.  natis.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Child,  set.  6; eruption  on

head,
*^  Relations. Compare : Oleander, Viola  tri.,  Arctium  lappa
and Staphis. in eruptions; Cinchon. and Secale in
hemorrhages.


VIOLA  ODORATA.  472

VIOLA  ODORATA.

Sweet-scented  Violet.  Violacese.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant  in  flower.

Introduced  by  Wm.  Gross.

Provings  by  Gross,  Hahnemann  and  Stapf,  Archiv  fiirHom.,  vol.  8,  p.  182.

CLiNicAii  Authorities. — RImumatism,  Kitchen,  Phila.  Jour.  Horn.,  vol.  1,  p.
49;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  314;  Hysteria,  P.  Pop.  Horn.  Zeitschr.,  vol.  13.

^  Mind.  Very  great  intellectual  and  emotional  activity,  with
constant  weak  memory,  followed  by  headache.

Weakness  of  memory ;  or  increased  mental  activit}^,  easy
comprehension  ;  intellect  predominates  over  emotions.

Momentary  vanishing  of  thought.

Weakness  of  memory;  when  he  reaches  a  period  in  read-
ing, he  has  already  forgotten  beginning  of  sentence.

Confusion  of  thought;  when  he  attempted  to  express  his
thoughts  in  words,  they  immediately  disappeared,  and
strange  thoughts  took  their  place ;  he  could  not  recall
former.

He  seems  able  to  recognize  but  half  an  idea;  he  puts  it  in
proper  place  but  cannot  hold  it;  he  makes  great  effort
to  grasp  the  other  half,  but  at  same  moment  half  of  an-
other incomplete  idea  presses  upon  him,  and  so  on;
thoughts  chase  one  another,  but  he  always  has  but  half
a  thought  which  he  cannot  hold  to  and  cannot  think
out;  judgment  remains,  he  recognizes  morbid  fancies,
but  cannot  prevent  them;  he  looks  like  one  meditating
and  despondent.

Disconnected  thoughts  thronged  one  upon  the  other,  he
was  able  to  grasp  none  of  them ;  his  judgment  remained
good  because  he  knew  how  little  he  would  be  under-
stood if  he  expressed  his  thoughts;  on  this  account  he
kept  quiet,  yet  for  most  part  was  unable  to  express  his
phantasies  even  by  a  word.

■  Hysterical;  inclined  to  weep  without  knowing  why.

Sadness  turning  to  gloomy  despondency ;  hypochondria-
cal mood.

Aversion  to  all  music,  especially  violin.

Aversion  to  talking.

Very  restless,  talking  much. ^Measles.

I  I  Insane  confusion,  childish  behavior,  disobedience,  refus-
ing nourishment,  talks  in  a  low,  soft  voice.


473  VIOLA  ODORATA.

^Sensorium. Vertigo: while sitting; everything  in head

seems  to  whirl  around.
'  Inner  Head. Dull,  confused  headache.

I  I A  prickling  in  forehead  from  rush  of  blood.

I  I  Heaviness  of  whole  head,  it  sinks  forward,  cervical  mus-
cles seem  very  weak.

Headache,  with  cramp  in  one  eye,  with  vision  of  a  fiery
tremulous  half-circle.
*  Outer  Head. Drawing  in  1.  frontal  eminence.

Head  feels  heavy  and  sinks  forward.

Tension  in  scalp  extending  to  upper  part  of  face.

Tension  of  scalp  of  occiput  even  when  not  moving,  though
<  on  bending  head  forward  and  backward  ;  a  painful
sensation  which  compels  him  to  wrinkle  frontal  muscles.
^  Sight  and  Eyes.  '  l  Toward  evening  a  feeling  of  dryness
and  burning  in  lids;  sensitiveness  to  light;  painful
forcible  drawing  together  of  lids  as  from  irresistible
sleep.

Sharp  vision,  ease  in  looking.

Contours  of  letters  are  not  sharply  defined  while  reading,
they  seem  to  run  together.

Is  obliged  to  hold  objects  somewhat  nearer  than  usual  in
order  to  see  distinctly.

It  seems  thick  before  eyes  and  everything  seems  dim.

Illusion  of  vision  ;  at  point  to  which  he  looks  he  seems  to
see  a  half  point  which  then  becomes  a  tremulous  light,
constantly  more  fiery,  at  last  looks  like  a  half  circle,  and
a  zigzag  fiery  appearance  following  a  serpentine  course
which  at  last  becomes  weaker  and  gradually  disappears ;
white  of  eye  looks  red.

Pupils  contracted.

It  seems  to  him  as  if  each  eyeball  were  compressed  from
both  sides.

ITeat  and  burning  in  eyes.

Burning  pain  in  1.  eye.

Cramplike  spasms  in  eyelids,  extending  to  malar  region,
especiall}^  of  1.  side.

Heaviness  of  lids,  as  from  sleepiness.

Tendency  of  lids  to  close  without  physical  sleepiness.

Tension  beneath  eyes.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Rushing  and  ringing  in  ears.

Aversion  to  music,  especially  to  violin ;  <  from  music.

Stitches  in  and  around  ears.

Drawing  and  tension  in  1.  ear,  rather  externally.

Sticking  from  within  outward  in  1.  ear.

Deep,  transient  stitches  alternately  beneath  one  or  other
ear,  especiall}'^  left.

Pressing  pain  behind  1.  ear,  externally.


VIOLA  ODORATA.  474

^  Smell  and  Nose. Numbuess  of  tip  of  nose,  as  if  it  had  been

beaten  and  blood  -^ere  pressing  out.
^  Upper  Face. Hot  forehead.

Tension  below  eyes  and  above  nose  to  temples.
I  iTension  in  scalp,  which  at  times  extends  to  upper  half
of  face,  especially  of  nose,  then  to  forehead  and  temples,
as  far  as  ears,  alternating  with  a  similar  sensation  in
occiput  and  cervical  muscles.
Pressure  on  malar  bone.

Violent  drawing  pressure  from  malar  bone  to  temple.
^  Lower  Face. Tearing  pain  in  1.  lower  jaw  extending  to  ear.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Tearing  in  teeth  of  r.  lower  jaw.
^^  Inner  Mouth. A  sensation  in  hard  palate  as  if  it  were  com-
pletely dried  up.
Aphthse  of  infants.
'^  Abdomen. Distension  of  abdomen.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Helminthiasis.
Constipation.

Itching  of  anus,  every  afternoon.
^^Male  Sexual  Organs. Extremely  unusual  nocturnal  emis-
sion, which  does  him  no  good,  followed  by  headache.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. During  pregnancy,

dyspnoea.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse-
ness, followed  by  coryza.
^^  Respiration. Short  breath.

■  Difficulty  of  breathing,  with  painful  exhalation,  anxiety

and  palpitation.
Dyspnoea,  with  occasional  cough ; <  in  daytime  than  at

night. ^Pregnancy.
Shortness  of  breathing  and  violent  dyspnoea,  as  if  a  stone

were  lying  on  chest.
Soft,  noiseless  breathing,  respiration  is  scarcely  noticed.
^  Cough. By  day  chiefly,  in  long-lasting  spells,  dry,  short,
violent,  with  much  dyspnoea.
Whooping  cough  in  nervous,  thin  little  girls.
Sputum  profuse,  clear,  ropy,  jellylike.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest  as  from  a
weight,  awakening  her  at  night. ^Hysteria.
Frightful  oppression  of  chest  and  dyspnoea,  with  pain  in
chest  as  from  a  stone  lying  upon  it.
'^  Neck  and  Back. Jerking  drawing  in  cervical  muscles  near
nape  of  neck,  extending  downward,  in  evening,  while
lying  on  opposite  side.
^^ Upper  Limbs. Slight  trembling  of  arms;  dyspnoea.
I  Rheumatic  affections  of  upper  limbs.

■  Aching  in  wrists,  particularly  right.
Drawing  in  elbow  joint  and  in  dorsum  of  hand.


475  VIOLA  ODORATA.

I  I  Rheumatism  of  deltoid  muscle  for  nearly  two  weeks;
wrist  and  hand  of  same  side  also  affected.

Drawing  pain  in  r.  elbow.

I  I  Pressing  pain  in  r.  wrist.

Drawing  pain  in  back  of  1.  metacarpus,  extending  toward
wrist

Cramplike  pain  in  first  joint  of  1.  index  finger,  even  dur-
ing rest.

Sticking  in  tip  of  middle  finger.

Man,  set.  31,  rheumatism  of  joints  of  r.  hand;  robust,  slightly
lymphatic,  not  scrofulous;  swelling  of  r.  wrist,  also
hand  and  fingers  of  same  side,  with  intense  heat  in  these
parts;  acute  pains  ;  motion  impossible,  hand  being  half
flexed  on  forearm  ;  slight  pains  and  swelling  in  1.  wrist ;
sleeplessness ;  temperature  of  skin  greatly  elevated  with
some  acceleration  of  pulse;  sounds  of  heart  normal.

I  Rheumatism  afi'ecting  r.  carpal  and  metacarpal  joints.
^  Lower  Limbs. Qiidematous  swelling  of  lower  limbs,  with

stitching  pains.
^* Limbs  in  GeneraL  '  'Rheumatism  of  r.  side;  upper  and
lower  extremities  ;  lancinating  pains  in  joints  of  fingers
of  r.  hand  :  r.  wrist  joint  painful,  swollen,  stiff  and  can-
not be  moved  without  great  pain  ;  r.  shoulder  slightly
painful,  but  no  swelling ;  r.  foot  and  ankle  joints  pain-
ful, swollen,  least  motion  painful,  almost  impossible  ;  r.
knee  joint  swollen  and  painful;  wandering  pains,  occa-
sionally in  r.  side  of  head;  no  fever;  heart  normal;
slightly  emaciated  ;  motion  of  r.  side  almost  impossible.

I  I  Trembling  of  limbs.

Bruised  pain  in  all  bones  in  morning,  in  bed,  after  wak-
ing, disappears  after  rising.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Lies  on  back  during  sleep,  1.
h^nd  above  head,  knees  bent.

Bending  head  forward  and  backward :  tension  in  scalp  <.
^^  Nerves. Trembling  of  limbs.

Relaxation  of  all  muscles.

Great  nervous  debility.

Hypochondriasis.

Hysteria;  much  weeping  without  knowing  why;  difiiculty
of  breathing;  anxiety  and  palpitation.
^'  Sleep. Yawning :  and  stretching  without  sleepiness ;  every
morning  so  that  eyes  fill  with  water.

1  I  Sleepiness  in  eyes  and  lids,  they  will  close.

He  lies  on  back  at  night  during  sleep  with  1.  hand  above
head  contrary  to  habit,  and  with  knees  bent  and  lying
far  to  side.
^  Time. Morning : bruised pain in bones on awaking ;
vawning:.


VIOLA  ODORATA.  476

Daytime:  dyspnoea  and  cough  <.

Toward  evening :  dryness  and  burning  in  lids.

Evening :  pain  in  cervical  muscles.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. After  staying  in  a  cold  room

during  Fall  season :  hoarseness.
*"  Fever. Forehead  hot.

Chilly  disposition.

Febrile  shivering.

Night  sweats.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Every  afternoon  :  itching  of  anus.
*^ Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  drawing  in  frontal  emi-
nence; burning  in  eye;  cramp  in  eyelids  to  malar  re-
gion ;  drawing  and  tension  in  ear;  sticking  from  within
outward  in  ear;  pressing  pain  behind  ear;  tearing  in
lower  jaw  to  ear;  drawing  pain  in  back  of  hand  toward
wrist ;  cramplike  pain  in  index  finger.

Right:  tearing  in  teeth  of  lower  jaw;  drawing  in  elbow;
pressing  pain  in  wrist;  rheumatism  of  wrist;  rheuma-
tism <.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  everything  in  head  whirled  around  ;  as
if  eyeballs  were  compressed  :  as  if  nose  had  been  beaten
and  blood  were  pressing  out;  as  if  hard  palate  were
dried  up;  as  if  a  stone  were  lying  on  chest;  burning
like  a  small  transient  flame  in  spots  here  and  there.

Lancinating :  in  joints  of  lingers  of  r.  hand.

Stitches:  in  and  about  ears;  in  swelling  of  lower  lids.

Sticking:  from  within  outward  in  1.  ear;  in  tip  of  middle
finger.

Prickling:  in  forehead.

Jerking :  in  cervical  muscles.

Tearing:  in  1.  lower  jaw  to  ear;  in  teeth  of  r.  lower  jaw.

Aching:  in  wrists.

Pressure:  behind  1.  ear;  in  malar  bone;  in  r.  wrist.

Burning:  in  lids;  in  eyes;  transient,  in  various  places.

Drawing:  in  1.  frontal  eminence;  in  1.  ear;  from  malar
bone  to  temple;  in  cervical  muscles ;  in  elbow  joint  and
dorsum  of  hand  ;  in  r.  elbow  ;  on  back  of  1.  metacarpus
toward  wrist.

Bruised  pain :  in  bones.

Cramp:  in  eye,  with  headache;  in  eyelids;  in  first  joint
of  1.  index  finger.

Tension:  in  scalp;  beneath  eyes;  in  1.  ear.

Heaviness:  in  head  ;  of  lids.

Numbness :  of  tip  of  nose.

Heat:  in  eyes.

Itching:  of  anus.

Dryness:  in  lids.
"Skin. Dry,  warm  skin,  want  of  sweat;  only  palms  moist;
measles  running  an  irregular  course.


477  VIOLA  ODORATA— XANTHOXYLUM.

Transient  burning  here  and  there  on  body;  seems  con-
centrated in  a  small  spot,  like  a  small  transient  flame,
while  sitting  during  day,  as  well  as  while  lying  at  night.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Hysteria.

Tall,  thin,  nervous  girls;  mild,  impressive,  of  fair  com-
plexion ;  tuberculous.

Boy,  set.  19;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  29,  robust ;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  31,  robust,  slightly  lymphatic;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  61 ;  rheumatism.

Mrs. ,  set.  70;  rheumatism.

**  Relations. Compatible:  Corall.  in  whooping  cough;  Cina
in  helminthiasis.


VIOLA  TRICOLOR  (See  Jacea).


XANTHOXYLUM.

Prickly  Ash.  Rutacese.

A  shrub  from  five  to  ten  feet  in  height,  growing  in  woods  and  moist,  shady
places  throughout  the  Northern,  Middle  and  Western  States,
The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  bark.
Proved  by  CuUis,  Pub.  Mass.  Hom.  Soc,  vol.  2,  1861-6,  p.  267.

Clinicai,  AtrTHOBiTlES.-^DysmenorrAcea,  Burck,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  484;  Wood-
vine,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  22;  Frantz,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  382;  Amenorrhoea-,
N.  N.,  Anal.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  129;  Williams,  U.  S.  M.  &  S.  J.,  Oct.,  1871;
Davis,  M.  I.,  vol.  11,  p.  584;  Incipient  phtkisia,  Conant,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  324;  Coug'>,
Davis,  M.  I.,  vol.  11,  p.  584.


XANTHOXYLUM.  478

'  Mind. Nervous,  frightened  feeling.
Depression  and  weakness.
Indifference  and  malaise.
'Inner  Head. Pain  over  eyes,  with  throbbing  above  root  of

nose.
Head  dull  and  aching.
Frontal  headache.

Severe  frontal  headache  with  dizziness.
A  dull  headache,  in  a  space  not  larger  than  half  a  dollar,

over  nose.
Diffused  pain  in  upper  part  of  forehead ;  <  in  r.  side ;

pain  extends  to  base  of  brain,  with  soreness.
Throbbing  headache  over  r.  eye,  with  nausea.
Darting  pain  in  1.  temple,  recurring  again  and  again.
A  tightening  of  scalp  and  heavy  pain  in  temples ;  increase

of  head  difficulties  with  a  great  heat  and  quiet  flowing

(menstrual),  being  two  days  in  advance  of  proper  time;

some  headache.
Pain  in  1.  side  of  head  and  1.  elbow.
Heavy  feeling  in  top  of  head.
About  upper  part  of  cranium,  an  achy  feeling  accompanied

by  flashes  of  throblike  pain,  as  if  top  of  head  were  about

to  be  taken  off.
Pain  in  back  of  head,  also  a  bewildered  sensation.
I  I  Head  feels  full.

Pressure  in  head,  with  fulness  of  veins.
Tightness  of  head,  with  pain  increasing  over  eyes.
Headache,  with  sleepy  feeling  in  morning.
Shaking  head  produces  a  feeling  of  looseness  or  quivering

of  brain,  followed  by  dizziness.
I  I  As  if  head  were  surrounded  by  a  tight  band. ^Dysmen-

orrhoea.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Watering  of  eyes  and  nose.
Lachrymation,  pain  in  lid  of  r.  eye.
Dull,  heavy,  grinding  pain  in  1.  eye.
I  I  Ophthalmia.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears,  more  particularly  in  r.
Dull  pain  in  r.  ear  seeming  to  affect  jaw  socket;  does  not

know  whether  his  tooth  or  his  ear  aches.
Darting  pain  under  and  back  of  r.  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Right  nostril  seems  filled  up  ;  discharge

of  dry  and  bloody  scales  of  mucus.
Dryness  of  both  nostrils.
Discharge  of  mucus  from  nose,  with  congested  feeling,  as

if  it  were  about  to  bleed.
Fluent  coryza.
®  Upper  Face. Pain  in  r.  jaw-socket.
'Lower  Face. UDuU  pain  in  1.  side  of  lower  jaw.


479  XANTHOXYLUM.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Ptyalism ;  tongue  coated  yellow.

''^  Inner  Mouth. Peppery  taste  in  mouth,  fauces  and  throat.

Burning  and  dry  feeling  in  mouth  and  tongue.
'^  Throat. Peppery  sensation  ;  soreness,  with  expectoration  of
tough  mucus.
Feeling  of  a  bunch  in  1.  side  of  throat  when  swallowing,
shifting  to  right.
.. Pain  and  soreness  in  r.  side  of  throat.

Throbbing  in  throat,  and  sensation  of  swelling.
A  feeling  of  enlargement  of  throat.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. No  appetite.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Anorexia,  could  eat  but  a  few
mouthfuls  at  breakfast,  and  could  only  drink  half  a  cup
of  coffee,  which  was  vomited  soon  afterward.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Empty
eructations,  with  slight  taste  of  ingesta.
Nausea,  with  headache.

Slight  nausea,  with  sense  of  oppression  at  stomach;  nausea
increased,  accompanied  by  frequent  chills.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Feeling  of  fulness  or  pressure

in  epigastrium  ;  fluttering.
'^  Hypochondria. Some  pain  in  r.  side  below  ribs.
^"Abdomen. Colic  pain  in  r.  iliac  region.
Rumbling,  with  soreness  on  pressure.
Flatulence.

Soon  after  waking,  at  7  a.m.,  severe  griping  abdominal
pains,  with  thin,  brown,  diarrhoeic  discharge,  mixed
with  some  mucus.
Griping  pain,  on  waking,  in  morning,  continued  at  inter-
vals through  day,  with  general  feeling  of  indifference
and  malaise.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Constipation  in  morning.

Griping  pains  7  a.m.,  with  thin,  brown  stools,  mixed  with

mucus.
I  I  Epidemic  dysentery,  characterized  by  spasmodic  tenes-
mus, intestinal  spasms,  tympanitis,  etc.
Inodorous  discharges,  with  tenesmus.
I  I  Cholera,  in  stage  of  collapse.
^'Urinary  Organs. Urine  at  night  and  next  morning,  scanty
and  high-colored.
Profuse,  light-colored  urine  ;  nervous  women.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Ovarian  pain  :  with  scanty  and
retarded  menses;  extending  down  genito-crural  nerves;
and  sacral  pains  during  pregnancy.
I  I  Menses  appeared  one  week  before  usual  time ;  attended

with  a  good  deal  of  pain.
llDysmenorrhoea:  with  agonizing  pains,  driving  patient
almost  distracted;  neuralgic  pain  runs  along  course  of


XANTHOXYLUM.  480

genito-crural  nerve;  in  women  of  spare  habit  and  of  a
delicate,  nervoustemperament;  with  headache, especially
over  1.  e^^e,  commencing  day  before  menses;  fulness  in
head;  eyes  congested,  with  photophobia;  face  flushed
and  feverish  ;  agonizing  bearing  down  ;  abundant  dis-
charge ;  excruciating  pain  in  loins  and  lower  abdomen.

■  Menstrual  flow:  tooearly  and  profuse;  pains  down  thighs;

scanty  and  retarded.

I  I  Constant  headache,  <  during  menses,  at  which  time  she
also  suff'ered  agonizing  pains  in  pelvic  region.

I  I  Severe  headache,  generally  over  1.  eye,  commencing  day
before  menses ;  sense  of  fulness  in  head,  with  feeling  as
if  surrounded  by  a  tight  band ;  eyes  congested,  great
photophobia ;  noises  aggravate  symptoms ;  face  flushed
and  feverish ;  constant  agonizing  bearing-down  in  ab-
domen as  if  everything  were  being  forced  out;  pain  in
back  as  if  broken  ;  pain  starting  at  iliac  crest  and  shoot-
ing down  limbs  to  knees;  screams  out  in  agony;  no
relief  in  any  position ;  discharge  very  scanty,  thick,
almost  black,  in  strings  and  clots,  intermitting  every
other  day,  and  lasting  two  weeks;  perfectly  well  between
periods. ^D3'smenorrhcea.

I  I  Amenorrhoea  for  five  months ;  face  and  legs  oedematous;

very  nervous,  sensitive  to  least  noise,  hysterical  mood ;
voice  tremulous;  fears  she  is  going  to  die;  general
chlorotic  appearance,  constipation,  scanty  frequent  and
dark  urine.

I I  Amenorrhoea  for  five  months,  with  severe  pains  in  r.
ovary ;  constant  headache ;  bearing  down  and  tension
in  hypogastric  region.

I  I  Amenorrhoea  from  getting  feet  wet ;  lasting  six  months  ;
emaciation  with  cough ;  dirty-grey  expectoration ;  pale
face,  night  sweats.

I  I  Miss ,  set.  19,  four  months  ago  took  cold  by  getting

her  feet  wet;  no  menses  since ;  no  appetite ;  the  sight  of
food  almost  nauseates,  smallest  amount  distresses;  can-
not sleep  ;  bowels  constipated,  bloated  ;  urine  scant  and
high-colored;  nervous;  discouraged,  don't  care  whether
she  lives  or  dies;  limbs  below  knees  bloated;  shortness
of  breath;  cheeks  colorless. ^Amenorrhoea.

■  Great  increase of leucorrhoea during the time when

menses  should  appear.
^'Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i After  pains.

I  Profuse  lochia.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness,
with  husky  feeling  in  throat; obliged  to  clear  throat
frequently.
I  I  Aphonia  from  cold  or  general  debility.


481  XANTHOXYLUM.

^®  Respiration. Shortness  of  breath.

Constant  desire  to  take  a  long  breath.
^  Cough. Slight  hacking  cough.

I  I  Dry  cough  night  and  day,  from  sheer  exhaustion  could
scarcely  turn  herself  in  bed;  face  pale,  bloated ;  dark
rings  about  eyes ;  head  full  and  heavy ;  lips  colorless ;
tongue  pale  and  flabby;  shortness  of  breath;  no  appe-
tite; bowels  constipated;  urine  light-colored,  alkaline,
sp.gr.  1025;  fluttering  in  stomach,  pain  in  1.  side;  limbs
weak  and  bloated.
''Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Tightening  about  chest,  with
inclination  to  gape.

Tightness  of  chest,  difficulty  to  inflate  chest.

Pain  in  1.  side,  under  fourth  rib.

Sharp  pains  in  r.  side,  of  a  neuralgic  character.

Oppression  of  chest,  with  a  desire  to  take  deep  inspiration.

Sharp  shooting  pains  in  r.  side  (like  pleurisy  pains),  occa-
sionally extending  through  to  shoulder  blade ;  continual
desire  to  take  a  long  breath.
I  I  Menses  irregular  and  scanty; tight,  dry  cough,  which
hurts  chest  and  shoulders ; bowels  almost  constantly
loose;  profuse  night  sweats;  is  getting  very  much  wasted
and weakened; frequent violent headache, affecting
whole  head,  and  sometimes  accompanied  by  vomiting  ;
feet  and  ankles  oedematous ;  bubbly  mucous  rales,  espe-
cially distinct  in  apex  of  1.  lung; whole  appearance
bloodless  and  miserable; family history  of  phthisis;
thinks  she  is  "going  into  a  decline."
^'  Neck  and  Back. Slight  pain  in  1.  side  and  under  1.  shoul-
der blade,  also  in  1.  hip.
*'^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm.

I  I  Pain  and  pricking  feeling  in  r.  arm,  extending  to  third
finger.

I  I  Pricking  and  throbbing  sensation  in  1.  arm  and  fingers.

Severe  pain  in  r.  arm,  commencing  just  above  bend  of
elbow.

Whole  1.  arm  and  shoulder  numb.

Pain  in  1.  elbow  and  1.  side  of  head.

Dull  pain  in  1.  elbow,  passing  to  palm  of  hand,  then  to
shoulder.

Pain  in  both  elbows.

Severe  pain  in  wrist,  extending  to  thumb.

A  flash  of  pain  in  r.  thumb,  extending  to  hand.
^^  Lower  Limbs. iSevere  neuralgic  pains  in  course  of  genito-
crural  nerves. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

Excessive  weakness  o^f  lower  limbs. /^Chlorosis.

Pain  in  1.  leg,  between  hip  and  knee.

Weakness  in  lower  limbs,  with  pain  in  knees;  pain  of
extremities  increased,  accompanied  by  frequent  chills.

VOL.  X. — 31.


XANTHOXYLUM.  482

Legs  and  feet  feel  tired.

Pain  in  1.  knee  very  severe;  pain  has  lasted,  without  ces-
sation, a  little  more  than  half  an  hour.

Dull  pain  in  r.  knee.

A  flash  of  pain  in  calf  of  r.  leg.

Pain  in  ankle.

Pain  in  1.  heel.

Pain  in  both  feet,  shooting  up  to  knees.
^* Limbs  in  General. Pain  in  limbs,  neuralgic,  shooting;
numbness  and  weakness.

Dull  pain  in  1.  knee;  also  in  1.  elbow,  extending  to  hand,
then  in  1.  side  and  top  of  1.  foot.
^^  Nerves. '  '  Paralysis  of  single  members.

i  I  Hemiplegia  (after  Nux  vom.  failed).

Pricking  sensation,  shocks  as  from  electricity.

Numbness,  <  on  1.  side.
^'^  Sleep. Continued  gaping;  drowsiness.

Slept  hard  and  heavy ;  dreamed  of  flying  about  over  tops
of  houses.

Awoke  in  morning,  languid  and  depressed.
'*  Time. Morning : headache,  with  sleepy  feeling ; griping
pain  on  waking;  languid  and  depressed.

7  A.M. :  griping  pains  in  abdomen.

Night  and  day  :  dry  cough.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Getting  feet  wet :  amenorrhoea.
^^  Fever, Sense  of  heat  all  over  veins,  with  a  desire  to  be  bled ;
flash  of  heat  from  head  to  foot.

Frequent  chills,  with  pains  in  extremities ;  nausea.

I  Typhoid  fever,  in  stage  of  collapse.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Intermittent :  darting  in  1.  temple.

At  intervals:  griping  pain.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. A  feeling  of  numbness  through
whole  of  1.  side  of  body  from  head  to  foot,  the  division
made  perceptible  in  head,  affecting  half  of  nose;  this
feeling  lasted  two  or  three  minutes.

Left:  darting  in  temple;  pain  in  head  and  elbow;  pain
in  eye;  pain  in  lower  jaw;  headache  over  eye;  pain
under  fourth  rib;  pain  under  shoulder  blade;  pain  in
hip;  pricking  and  throbbing  in  arm  and  fingers;  arm
and  shoulder  numb ;  pain  in  thigh ;  pain  in  knee ;  pain
in  heel;  pain  in  top  of  foot;  numbness  <.

Right:  pain  in  forehead  <  ;  throbbing  over  eye;  pain  in
eyelid  ;  ringing  in  ear  <  ;  dull  pain  in  ear  and  jaw-
socket;  darting  under  and  back  of  ear;  pain  and  sore-
ness in  throat;  pain  below  ribs;  neuralgic  pain  in  side;
pain  in  shoulder  and  arm  ;  pricking  in  arm ;  flash  of
pain  in  thumb ;  pain  in  knee ;  pain  in  calf.

Left  to  r. :  feeling  of  a  bunch  in  throat.


483  XANTHOXYLUM.

**  Sensations.  As  if  top  of  head  would  be  taken  off  by  flashes
of  throblike  pain;  as  if  bewildered,  with  pain  in  back  of
head;  a  feeling  of  looseness  or  quivering  of  brain  ;  as  of
pepper  in  mouth  and  throat;  as  of  a  bunch  in  throat;
as  if  throat  were  swollen  and  enlarged ;  as  if  head  were
surrounded  by  a  tight  band ;  as  if  legs  and  feet  were
tired ;  pricking  as  from  electric  shocks.

Pain  :  over  eyes ;  in  1.  side  of  head  ;  in  back  of  head  ;  in
lid  of  r.  eye;  in  r.  jaw-socket ;  in  r.  side  of  throat;  in  r.
side  below  ribs ;  in  1.  side  under  shoulder  blade  and  in
hip ;  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm ;  in  r.  arm  to  third  finger;
in  1.  elbow;  in  elbows;  in  1.  leg  between  hip  and  knee;
in  knees;  in  ankle  and  1.  heel.

Agonizing  pain :  dysmenorrhoea.

Excruciating  pain  :  in  loins  and  lower  abdomen.

Severe  pain  :  in  r.  ovary ;  in  r.  arm  above  bend  of  elbow ;
in  wrist  to  thumb.

Dull,  heavy,  grinding  pain :  in  1.  eye.

Shooting :  like  pleurisy,  in  r.  side ;  from  feet  to  knees ;  in
limbs.

Pricking:  in  r.  arm  to  third  finger;  in  1.  arm  and  fingers.

Darting  :  in  1.  temple;  under  and  back  of  r.  ear.

Neuralgic  pain :  along  course  of  genito-crural  nerve ;  in
r.  side;  in  limbs.

Colic  pain :  in  r.  iliac  region  ;  after  waking.

Throbbing:  above  root  of  nose;  over  r.  eye;  in  vertex;
in  throat.

Burning:  in  mouth  and  tongue.

Soreness :  in  r.  side  of  throat.

Dull  pain:  in  r.  ear  and  jaw-socket;  in  1.  side  of  lower
jaw;  in  1.  elbow  to  palm  of  hand,  then  to  shoulder;  in
r.  knee ;  in  I.  knee ;  in  top  of  1.  foot.

Pressure:  in  head;  in  epigastrium.

Tension  :  in  hypogastric  region ;  about  chest.

Tightness :  of  head.

Fulness :  in  head ;  in  veins ;  in  epigastrium.

Heaviness :  in  top  of  head.

Heat:  in  veins ;  in  flashes  from  head  to  foot.

Dryness:  of  nostrils  ;  in  mouth.

Numbness:  in  1.  arm  and  shoulder;  in  limbs;  of  1.  side.
**  Tissues.  Acts  upon  nervous  system,  mostly  upon  sensory
nerves,  but  causes  a  marked  depression  of  vitality,  a
non-reactive  state ;  hence  its  use  in  chlorosis,  measles,
neuralgia,  etc.,  when  there  is  sensorial  and  bodily  de-
pression.

Mucous  membrane  smarts  as  from  pepper.

Old  and  indolent  ulcers,

Dysmenorrhoea.


XANTHOXYLUM— ZINCUM.  484

^^Skin. Measles,  dulness,  bewilderment,  drowsiness,  want  of

sufficient  development  of  the  eruption.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Spare  habit,  nervous  tem-
perament, delicate  organization.
Girl,  set.  JG,  suffering  four  years;  dysmenorrhoea.
Girl,  set.  17,  family  history  of  phthisis;  incipient  phthisis.
Girl,  set.  20,  well  developed  and  healthy-looking,  nervous
temperament ;  dysmenorrhoea.
*^ Relations. Compare:  ^d.  rac.  (headache),  Bryon.  (lack  of
eruption  in  measles,  etc.),  Colocyn.  (dysmenorrhoea  with
reflex  neuralgias),  Gnaphal.  (sciatica).


ZINCUM.

Zinc.  The  element.

Introduced  by  Franz.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Franz,  von  Gersdorff,  Hartlaub,  Hartmann,  Haubold,
Lesquereux,  Nenning,  Ruckert,  Eummell,  Schwickert,  Stapf,  Chronische  Krank-
heiten,  vol.  5,  p.  428;  Fianz,  Archiv  fiir  Horn.,  6,  2,  p.  188;  Schreter,  Neues
Archiv  fiir  Horn.,  vol.  3,  p.  187  ;  Wernek,  Hygea,  vol.  14,  p.  481 ;  Berridge,  Am.
Jour.  Horn.  Mat.  Med.,  N.  S  ,  vol.  4,  p.  125.

Numerous  toxicological  reports,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  10,  p.  176.

Clinical  Authorities. — Insanity,  Schmid,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  66  ;  In-
viluntary  fits  of  laughter,  Altschul,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.4,  p.  600;  Headache,  Scliulz,
Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  212 ;  Kafka,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  95 ;  Stearns,  Ames-
bury,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  260;  Chlorotie  headache,  Newton,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  15,
p.  213;  Hydrocephalus  acutus,  Lilienthal,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.2,  p.  424;  Hydro-
cephalus, Gushing,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  263;  Forbes,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  261 ;
Barrows,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  5,  p.  80 ;  Affection  of  the  brain,  Gonllon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  70;  Craig,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  442;  Hale,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  266;
Keratitis,  Allen,  U.  S.  M.  &  S.  J.,  July,  1870 ;  Pterygium,  Allen,  U.  S.  M.  &  S.  J.,
July,  1870;  Dunham,  Fahnestock,  T.  A.  I.  H,  1888,  p.  249 ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.
495 ;  Syphilitic  iritis,  Allen,  U.  S.  M.  &  S.  J.,  July,  1870  ;  Affection  of  eyes,  Berridge,
Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  221 ;  Swelling  of  nose,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  399 ;
Prosopalgia,  Perry,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  436;  Usein  facial  neuralgia,  Mohr,
H.  M.,  vol.  14,  p,  18;  Affection  of  throat,  Knorr,  Riick,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  543;
Gastric  disorder,  Eaer,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  106 ;  Affection  of  liver,  Hg.,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  3,  p.  29 ;  Pain  in  abdomen,  Berridge,  A.  J,  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p  108 ;  Colic,
Schwarze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  765 ;  Diarrhoea,  Korndoerfer,  H.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.
442;  Dysentery,  Houghton,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  263;  Cholera  infantum,  Patton,
T.  A.  I.  H  ,  1888,  p.  263 ;  Constipation,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  108  ;
Hmnaiurla,  Heichelheiin,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  35;  Paralysis  of  bladder,  New-


485  ZINCUM.

comb,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  263;  Urinary  difficulty,  Heath,  Horn.  Pliys.,  vol.  6,  p.
233;  Affection  of  ovaries,  Mohr,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  267  ;  Dysmenorrhoea,  Lippe,
Med.  Adv.,  Jan.,  1889,  p.  35;  Menstrual  disorders,  Hahnemann,  Hartmann,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.2,  p.  259;  Use  during  childbed,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.
456;  Asthma,  Nankivell,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  11,  p.  332  ;  Pertussis,  B.,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  o,  p.  732;  Bronchitis,  Linnell,  T.  A.  I.H.,  1888,  p.  262;  McNeil,  Horn.  Phys.,
vol.  9,  p.  97  ;  Use  in  aortic  insufficiency,  Klosterman,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  863 ;
Intercostal  neuralgia,  A.  H.  Z ,  vol.  115,  No.  25;  Spinal  irritation,  Bingham,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1885,  p.  181  ;  Pain  in  back,  Nankivell,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  11,  p.
334;  Excoriation  of  thighs,  Morgan,  A  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  356  ;  Convulsions,
Swain,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  262;  Sircar,  Calcutta,  M.  J.,  vol.  2,  p.  452 ;  McGeorge,
H.  M.,  vol.  11,  p.  395 ;  Epilepsy,  Garrison,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  16 ;  Typhoid
fever,  Hirschel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  797 ;  Rheumatism,  Med.  Inv.,  Sept.,
1877;  p.  244,  Scarlet  ftver,  Elb,  Meyer,  Loeb,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,-  p.  68;
Korndoerfer,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  129;  Hoag,  T.  A.  I.  II.,  1888,  p.  268  ;
Meyer,  N.  A.  J.  H ,  vol.  4,  p.  546  ;  Measles,  Linnell,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  263.

'Mind.  1  Unconscious;  signs  of  effusion  into  brain;  feet
constantly  moving;  often  from  undeveloped  eruptions.

I  Weak  memory,  with  stinging  pains  in  head.

I  Great  forgetfulness ;  forgetful  of  what  has  been  accom-
plished during  day.

I  Mental  operations  very  difficult;  difficult  to  grasp  ideas
and  to  co-ordinate  thoughts.

■  Repeats  all  questions  before  answering  them.

I  I  Loss  of  thought  and  a  soporous  condition  of  mind.

■  Stares  as  if  frightened  on  waking,  head  rolls  from  side

to  side.
Imaginative  power  lively  and  excited; attacks  of  great

loquacity.
Fanciful  illusions  when  holding  head  down,  as  if  she  had

a  large  goitre  which  she  could  not  see  over.
Anxiety  on  account  of  thieves  or  horrible  apparitions,

while  awake,  like  a  feverish  fancy.
Apprehensive  and  lachrymose  mood,  which  disappears  in

evening.
Apprehension  and  ennui,  she  seeks  society.
Anxious  mood  as  from  a  misfortune.
Very  uneasy  mood  as  if  he  had  committed  a  crime.
I  I  Anxiety: makes her restless in morning; during

menses.

■  Thinks  of  death  calmly;  hypochondriacal,  with  gastric

symptoms ;  pressure  in  spine  and  fear  of  death.

■  Low-spirited  at  noon;  lively  in  evening,  or  vice  versa.

■  ■Sensitive  to  others  talking  and  to  noise.

Talking  or  listening  is  distressing;  much  talking  of
other  people,  even  of  those  of  whom  he  is  fond,  affects
his  nerves  and  makes  him  morose  and  impatient.

Mood  uneasy,  unsteady.


ZINCUM.  486

Irritable,  startled.

At  noon  irritable,  peevish,  terrified  ;  >  in  evening.

Fretful,  morose;  for  several  days  inclined  to  have  a  secret
grudge,  and  to  vexation;  quiet;  it  frets  him  to  be  obliged
to  speak  a  word.

1  I  Fretful,  despondent  mood,  especially  in  evening.

iChild  cross  toward  evening;  brain  affected.

Very  impatient,  but  not  bad- humored.

I  I  Easily  angered  and  very  much  affected  thereby.

He  wishes  that  he  might  get  hold  of  some  one  on  whom
he  might  vent  his  anger.

I  llracible,  impatient;  sad,  weeps  frequently;  despairs  of
her  recovery;  is  querulous;  objects  to  noise,  or  talk-
ing of  others;  dislikes  work,  cannot  or  will  not  walk.

Morose  in  morning,  afternoon  and  evening

Answers  were  slow,  and  he  spoke  as  if  in  a  bad  temper.

I  I  Sobbing  on  account  of  vexation,  without  obvious  reason,
with  pressive  pain  in  top  of  head.

Ill-humored  and  sad.

She  looks  very  morose,  gloomy  and  disturbed,  even  in
morning.

Peevish  and  lachrymose  during  menses.

Indifferent ;  despondent ;  disinclination  to  work.

Overpowering  sadness.

Quiet  thoughts  of  death  in  afternoon,  with  weakness.

Hypochondriacal  mood  three  hours  after  dinner,  with
pressure  under  short  ribs,  especially  of  r.  side,  with
aversion  to  work  and  discomfort  over  whole  body.

Extremely  variable  mood;  alternately  fretful,  irritable,
quarrelsome,  despondent  and  depressed.

He  is  frequently  able  to  laugh  excessively  over  a  trifle,  but
is  just  as  easily  vexed.

I  Delirium,  with  attempts  to  get  out  of  bed  ;  staring  eyes;
constant  trembling  of  hands  and  coldness  of  extremities.

I  I  Great  fear,  as  if  persecuted  b}'  men  or  the  devil,  on  ac-
count of  crimes  which  he  has  never  done;  is  .afraid  of
becoming  imprisoned,  or  poisoned,  or  shot,  or  buried
alive,  with  great  excitation,  pappy  taste,  whitish-coated
tongue,  eructations,  loss  of  appetite,  retarded  stool,  vertigo
and  heat  in  head  and  face. ^Delirium  tremens.

1  I  After  an  attack  of  typhoid  fever,  repeated  over  and  over
again,  in  a  singing  tone,  any  question  put  to  him,  until
interrupted  by  a  second  question,  which  he  repeated  as
the  first,  and  so  on.

I  I A  teacher  of  leuco-phlegmatic  habit,  frequently  vertigo,
for  several  months  an  involuntary,  periodically  ap-
pearing fit  of  laughing,  which  he  cannot  suppress;  fits
appear  several  times  a  clay  and  cause  severe  convulsions


487  ZINCUM.

of  chest  and  abdomen,  rush  of  blood  to  head  and  brain;
a  tendency  to  constipation  and  apoplexy.

I  I A  woman  in  her  climacteric  years  suffered  from  delu-
sions caused  by  grief  and  anger;  believed  herself  to
be  called  before  court  on  account  of  her  wicked  actions;
at  night  she  could  not  sleep,  and  during  day  sleep
was  light  and  not  refreshing ;  believes  the  devil  is
after  her;  face  and  head  feel  hot,  features  sunken,
moderate  heat  alternates  with  chill  all  over  body;
vertigo,  gait  tottering,  loss  of  appetite,  constipation ;
muddy  urine,  with  brickdust  sediment;  after  waking
up  feels  languid  and  cannot  rouse  herself;  is  very  sen-
sitive, weeps  easily  ;  pulse  not  frequent,  but  irregular  in
strength  of  beats.

I  I A  gracile,  delicate,  but  healthy  girl  of  23,  who  made
her  living  by  embroidery,  nursed  her  old  father  during
a  long  and  tedious  sickness,  and  then  felt  mentally  and
bodily  exhausted ;  after  recovery  of  her  parent  she  re-
turned to  her  usual  labors,  but  a  sleepiness,  without  any
other  morbid  symptom,  set  in,  with  loss  of  appetite,
though  her  tongue  was  perfectly  clean  ;  when  sitting  at
her  embroidery  or  at  her  sewing  table  she  heaved  a
deep  sigh,  needle  fell  from  her  hand,  she  fell  back  in
her  chair,  and  slept  with  eyelids  spasmodically  closed
and  eye  whirled  around  in  circle ;  after  sleeping  from
five  to  fifteen  minutes,  she  began  to  weep,  or  to  sing,  or
to  speak  incoherently,  waked  up  then,  after  a  few  mo-
ments to  fall  again  asleep,  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to
awake  again  in  a  similar  manner.
^  Sensormm.  ■  Vertigo :  violent,  after  stooping,  as  if  every-
thing were  whirling  round,  with  buzzing  in  head,  in
morning ;  as  if  he  would  have  apoplexy,  with  anxiety
and  fear  of  falling  headlong;  he  could  scarcely  stand;
in  morning  on  waking,  as  if  head  were  moving  up  and
down,  with  a  similar  floating  of  images  of  his  fancy,  all
during  semi-consciousness ;  after  dinner;  as  if  he  saw
through  a  mist,  after  eating;  in  occiput,  in  evening
while  sitting  and  smoking,  with  desire  for  stool;  in
whole  brain,  especially  in  occiput,  as  if  he  would  fall
over;  in  occiput  as  if  he  would  fall  to  left,  while  walk-
ing; with  headache,  in  morning;  while  sitting  up  in
bed,  as  if  bed  were  constantly  swaying  back  and  forth ;
while  sitting  and  standing,  disappears  on  walking;
when  standing  on  a  height,  as  if  he  would  fall  to
riglit;  with  weakness  of  head  and  abdomen,  she  is
obliged  to  lie  down  ;  from  morning  till  noon,  it  fre-
quently seems  as  if  she  would  fall ;  with  flushing  heat.

Dizzy,  nauseating  weakness  on  remaining  up  rather  late  in
evening,  as  after  smoking  too  strong  tobacco.


ZINCUM.  488

I  Frequent  attacks  of  vertigo,  preceded  by  sharp  pressure
at  root  of  nose,  and  a  sensation  of  drawing  together  of
eyes,  as  if  by  a  cord,  followed  immediately  by  excessive
menses,  faintness,  and  trembling  of  hands.

Fainting.
^  Inner  Head. Dulness  of  head:  on  waking;  after  a  meal.

Heaviness  of  head,  as  if  it  would  fall  down.

Inability  to  support  head  in  evening.

Head  heavy,  dizzy  and  confused  in  morning,  as  from  loss
of  sleep.

Weak  feeling  in  head,  especially  in  eyes.

Head  oppressed;  stupefied  and  dizzy  at  noon.

Dizzy  stupefaction  in  short  paroxysms,  with  blackness  be-
fore eyes  and  general  weakness,  especially  in  forenoon
and  evening.

Stupefying  headache,  as  from  coal  gas,  all  morning.

Pressure  in  head,  with  dulness.

Headache:  at  night,  with  vertigo  ;  intense,  with  violent
shivering;  >  by  washing  in  cold  water;  >  in  open
air ;  <  in  warm  room,  after  eating  and  from  wine.

Intense  pain  in  brain,  almost  driving  one  mad,  followed
by  excessive  vomiting  of  bile  and  trembling.

Pain  as  from  a  tearing  in. whole  brain.

Sticking  and  tearing  in  head  and  cutting  in  abdomen,
with  yawning  during  and  after  dinner.

IB  Headache  from  drinking  even  small  quantities  of  wine.

Painful  raging  here  and  there  in  head.

Tingling  and  resounding  in  head,  when  speaking  loud.

Violent  throbbing  and  tearing  in  whole  head,  especially
in  r.  frontal  region,  from  morning  until  evening,  after
lying  down.

Headache  in  region  of  1.  frontal  eminence  after  dinner.

■  Pressure  on  root  of  nose,  as  if  it  would  be  pressed  into
head.

Continual  dull  pain  across  frontal  sinuses,  with  extreme
sensibility  of  cartilages  of  ear  and  nose.

In  forehead :  constant  dull  pain ;  heaviness  during  menses,
with  a  feeling  as  if  head  would  be  drawn  backward  in
evening  ;  pressing  headache  every  morning ;  pressing  in
r,  frontal  eminence;  pressure  with  dulness,  makes
thought  difficult;  a  sharp  pressure  in  morning  on  wak-
ing, afterward  becomes  a  simple  pressure  in  temples;
sensation  as  if  air  forced  itself  into  frontal  sinuses ;  ex-
treme sensitiveness ;  tension  and  pressure ;  pressing
headache,  with  dulness  in  head,  sleepiness  and  pain  in
eyes  in  forenoon  ;  sharp  pressure  upon  a  small  spot  in
middle,  in  evening;  pressing  tearing  in  frontal  emi-
nence, after  dinner; drawing; throbbing; sticking;


489  ZINCUM.

tearing ;  tearing  and  crawling,  during  supper ;  sticking
tearing,  with  violent  ineffectual  inclination  to  sneeze;
sticking,  with  a  tearing  as  if  head  would  burst;  a  dull
boring  stitch  above  r.  frontal  eminence  ;  gnawing  as
from  worms.

In  temples :  sharp,  pinching  pressure  in  1. ;  transient  tear-
ing; tearing  in  r.;  jerking  tearing  above  1. ;  sticking
tearing;  dull  stitches  in  r.  from  time  to  time;  stitches
as  with  needles  in  1.;  sense  of  tightness;  cramplike  tear-
ing; tearing,  after  dinner,  with  stitches  in  r.  ear;  a
persistent  aching  and  pressure;  dull,  cramplike  press-
ure; pressure  in  r.  suddenly  shooting  inward  ;  pressure
in  1.

In  vertex :  drawing,  pressing,  throbbing  tearing ;  press-
ing tearing  near  r.  side;  sharp  tearing,  also  in  1.  parietal
bone;  fine  burning  stitches,  in  middle;  dulness  and
heaviness;  tense  and  dull  pain;  pressure,  <  after
dinner.

iHemicrania,  <  after  dinner;  tearing  and  stinging.

In  r.  side  of  head:  tearing  and  sticking,  alter  dinner;
painful  boring  and  pressure;  pulsating  pressing,  and
twinging;  boring  in  parietal  bone,  with  a  sensation  of
bursting,  in  evening,  while  standing;  throbbing  pain,
in  evening.

In  1.  side  of  head :  dull  pain ;  pressing,  drawing,  boring,
after  dinner;  boring  in  parietal  bone ;  drawing  tearing.

Frequent  screwing-together  pain  in  both  sides  of  head,  in
evening.

In  occiput:  dulness  and  acute  heaviness;  a  pressing  asun-
der in  r.  side;  pressure,  for  several  hours  after  walking
in  open  air;  drawing;  drawing  in  1.  side;  painful  forc-
ing asunder,  in  1.  side,  close  to  cervical  vertebrae;  gnaw-
ing in  r.  occipital  protuberance  as  by  a  mouse;  con-
tinual gnawing  in  upper  part;  bruised  pain;  boring;
painful  raging  like  beating  of  waves,  with  a  feeling  of
heat  in  a  spot  on  r.  side,  extending  up  over  vertex,  in
evening;  tearing  in  r.  and  1.  sides;  tearing  in  r.  side,
with  dull  stitches  on  top  of  head  ;  tearing  in  r.  side
when  laughing;  dull  sticking  pressure  in  a  small  spot.

Periodic  attacks  of  cephalalgia,  with  impairment  of  vision,
as  if  a  thick  fog  lay  before  eyes,  cannot  distinguish  even
large  objects;  pressure  in  vertex  and  forehead  from
without  inward;  great  confusion  of  head;  face  pale;
loss  of  appetite ;  despondency^;  irritability;  pains  grow
more  severe  as  day  advances,  and  are  very  severe  in
evening;  at  times  vomiting;  with  appearance  of  pain,
amblyopia,  <  as  pain  increases;  on  cessation  of  pain,
sight  normal ;  attacks  every  ten  to  fourteen  days,  last


ZINCUM.  490

two  to  three  days  with  varying  intensity ;  stool  every
two  to  three  days.

I  I A  girl,  set.  24,  robust  and  regularly  menstruating,  suf-
fered for  four  years  from  pressing  tearing  pains  in  occi-
put ;  stitches  in  r.  eye  and  tearing-stitching  in  ears,
sometimes  in  teeth;  pains  steadily  increase  from  year
to  year,  till  her  mind  begins  to  suffer  {Bellad.  30  relieved
stitches  in  eye).

I  I A  man,  set.  34,  suffered  for  years  from  severe  paroxysms
of  vertigo,  fell  down  several  times  a  day  without  losing
consciousness;  dull  pressing  frontal  headache  and  at
vertex ;  loss  of  memory,  pains  in  back ;  obstinate  con-
stipation, sometimes  bright-red  blood  passed  with  stool;
intestinal  gurgling,  followed  by  flatus  and  heat  in  rec-
tum; urine  pale;  deep,  not  refreshing  sleep,  with  rest-
less dreams,  felt  sleepy  all  day  ;  very  irritable.

I  I  Headache;  pain  began  in  forehead,  ran  to  vertex,  then
down  to  occiput,  then  settled  on  top  of  head,  and  while
it  lasted  seemed  intolerable ;  >  by  squeezing  both  hands
upon  sides  of  head.

I  I  Chronic  occipital  headache;  pain  at  times  extending  to
eyes,  makes  her  feel  weak  and  good  for  nothing ;  sensa-
tion of  heavy  weight  on  top  of  head;  scalp  and  hair
feel  sore  (bruised  feeling) ;  a  feeling  in  occiput  as  if
stunned ;  stupid  feeling  during  pain ;  pain  lasts  all  day.

I  I  Occipital  headache;  great  dulness;  indescribable  heavy
"dragging  pain  in  occiput ;  sensation  as  if  scalp  wrinkled
up  and  kept  tightening  and  remained  so  ;  sometimes  as
if  insects  were  crawling  from  occiput  to  forehead  ;  scalp
felt  sore,  even  to  touch  the  hair;  pain  always  came  on
when  the  gas  was  lighted  and  continued  till  he  retired  ;
could  not  keep  still,  had  to  keep  moving;  <  from
liquors.

I  iChlorotic  cephalalgia  for  two  years;  pressure  on  top  of
head  and  in  forehead,  gradually  increasing  in  intensity
after  dinner;  frequently  dizzy,  followed  by  nausea  and
vomiting  of  bile;  face  pale;  pulse  quick  and  small;
tongue  coated ;  anorexia  and  constipation,  stools  hard,
small  and  dry;  menses  absent  two  years;  well-marked
cerebral  depression.

IChlorotic  headaches,  especially  in  patients  whose  blood
has  been  saturated  with  iron.

■  Cerebral  and  nervous  exhaustion  ;  chronic  sick-headache,
with  great  weakness  of  sight;  fidgety  feeling  in  legs  and
feet.

I  Brain-fag  from  anaemia  of  brain.

iGreat  cerebral  and  nervous  depression,  with  melancholy.

I  I  Headache  in morning from overstudy ; temperature


491  ZINCUM.

105°;  skin  cold,  particularly  on  head;  pulse  slow  and
soft;  wanted  to  be  in  a  dark  room,  did  not  want  to  be
annoyed  or  touched,  simply  said  she  was  sleepy  and
had  headache.

I  t  Constant  slumber,  with  occiput  deeply  pressed  into  pil-
low; eyes  half  open,  with  dilated  and  upward-drawn
pupils;  squinting,  staring,  rolling  of  eyeballs:  features
peculiarly  changed,  collapsed,  pale,  cold,  or  alternating
with  heat  and  redness  of  cheeks;  frequent,  penetrating,
loud  screaming,  with  trembling,  continuous  moaning;
pulling  at  dry  fissured  lips,  or  boring  with  fingers  in
nose  till  it  bleeds;  automatic  motions  with  head  and
hands;  respiration  irregular;  short,  dry,  spasmodic
cough;  pulse  small,  frequent,  very  changeable ;  wants
to  drink  hastily  ;  does  not  want  to  nurse ;  abdomen  hot,
dry,  sunken  in,  with  constipation  ;  involuntary  mictu-
rition; child  lies  in  perfect  apathy,  is  restless  during
motion,  which  aggravates  cough  and  vomiturition.

I  I  Epidemic  meningitis  cerebro-spinalis  ;  short  breathing,
anguish,  pressure  in  chest,  and  frequently  returning  dry
tussiculation,  pulse  remarkably  slow ;  pulse  small,  fre-
quent, very  changeable,  breathing  irregular;  short,  dry,
spasmodic  cough  ;  mental  disturbance.

■  Threatening  paralysis  of  brain;  complete  unconscious-

ness; child  lies  motionless,  or  jerking  of  whole  body
and  twitchings  of  single  limbs  ;  grating  of  teeth  ;  shrill,
frightful  screams,  with  altered  voice;  cannot  speak;
occiput  very  hot;  forehead  cold,  covered  with  cold  per-
spiration ;  white,  pale,  distorted  face;  breathing  short
and  quick,  but  no  rattling;  discharge  from  bowels  and
bladder  involuntary;  limbs  icy-cold,  and  whole  body
cool;  bluish-red  all  over;  pulse  threadlike,  scarcely
countable;  convulsions,  followed  by  stupor;  occiput
hotter  than  forehead  ;  screams  before  spasms ;  trembling
of  muscles;  constant  motion  of  feet  between  attacks;
urine  scanty,  bloody.  /^Scarlatina.
I  I  Concussion  of  brain,  resulting  in  inflammation  after
a  fall ;  did  not  fully  recover,  but  after  a  few  weeks
began  to  lose  appetite,  complained  of  constant  pain  in
head,  <  walking  or  riding;  pale,  languid,  indisposed
to  move,  dragged  her  feet,  especially  r.,  when  walking.

■  Meningitis,  stage  of  irritation  [Bellad.  does  not  act).

■  Hydrocephalus  following  gastro-enteritis;  comatose  from

narcotic  convulsions,  had  been  frequent  the  past  twenty-
four  hours.

■  Hydrocephalus ;  child  has  its  feet  in  constant  motion ;  dis-

tension of  abdomen;  constipation,  with  hard  and  dry
feces ;  on  awaking  child  gives  evidence  of  fear,  and  rolls


ZINCUM.  492

its  head  from  side  to  side;  it  cries  out,  starts  and  jumps
during  sleep.
*  Outer  Head.  I Sensation  of  soreness  of  vertex,  as  from  ulcer-
ation ;  <  in  evening  in  bed  and  after  eating ;  >  after
scratching.
iHair:  falls  out  on  vertex,  causing  complete  baldness,
with  sensation  of  soreness  of  scalp  ;  falls  out  profusely ;
sensation  as  if  it  bristled,  especially  above  1.  ear;  on
vertex  ;  painful  on  slightest  touch.

■  Forehead  cool,  base  of  brain  hot.
Itching  pimples  on  scalp.

Itching  moist  eruption  on  and  above  both  temples.
Suppurative  pain  on  one  side  of  scalp.
Sharp  tearing  sticking  in  skin  of  1.  forehead  above  eyebrow.
Feeling  as  if  scalp  were  drawn  together  to  one  spot.
Drawing  in  skin  on  vertex.

Painful  sore  feeling  in  a  small  spot  on  r.  side  of  scalp.
Frequent  sore  itching  in  a  small  spot  in  middle  of  scalp.
^ Sight  and  Eyes. Photophobia; dread  of  sunlight,  with
dim,  watery  eyes.

■  Sensitive  to  light;  brain  affected.

■  Amaurosis:  during  severe  headache,  passing  away  with

headache;  with  contracted  pupils.

■  Eyes  dim,  watery;  brain  affections.

■  Sees  luminous  bodies;  after  operations.

When  looking  up,  a  dark,  diagonal  line  before  1.  eye,  di-
rectly upward  and  to  r ,  about  six  feet  in  length.

Yellow,  blue  and  green  rings  before  eyes,  with  a  suffering
look  and  sleepiness.

Objects  apparently  elongated  and  at  times  double.

Flickering  before  eyes.

Fiery  flakes  float  in  large  circles  in  front  of  eyes,  when
looking  at  sky.

Dimness  and  mistiness  of  vision  in  morning  after  waking.

Vanishing  of  vision  :  with  absence  of  mind  ;  with  lachry-
mation  and  burning,  after  dinner  and  frequently  when
writing.

Diplopia:  1.  eye  more  affected  than  r.;  increased,  and  de-
cided strabismus  developed.

Pupils  alternately  dilated  and  contracted,  usually  dilated.

Profuse  moisture  of  eyes  during  day,  agglutinated  lids  in
morning.

Lachrymation  in  morning  on  waking,  also  in  open  air.

Eyes  turned  outward.

Weak,  sick  feeling  in  eyes.

Eyes  feel  as  if  she  had  wept  much.

Pain  in  eyes  as  if  pressed  inward.

Great  uneasiness  and  intolerable  pain  in  1.  eye,  frequently
with  great  weakness  of  head.


493  ZINCUM.

Pressure:  on  ej^es,  also  toward  evening;  tensive,  in  r.  eye

like  rheumatism; violent  in  r.  eye,  and  in  temples;

violent  in  1.  eye  while  walking  in  open  air;  and  tearing

in  1.  eye ;  constant  in  1.  eye,  in  evening.
Tearing  stitch  above  1.  eye,  at  same  time  in umbilical

region.
Prickling  biting  in  lower  portion  of  1.  eye,  and  below  it

upon  cheek.
Biting  in  1.  eye,  >  by  rubbing.
Sticking  tearing  in  eyes  and  head.
Cutting,  pressing  stitch  in  r.  eye.
Twitching  in  1.  eyeball.

■  Constant  burning  in  eyes  in  afternoon.

iMuch  burning  in  eyes  and  lids,  in  morning  and  evening,

with  feeling  of  dryness  and  pressure  in  them.
I  I  Burning  and  biting,  with  photophobia  of  eye,  which

waters,  especially  in  evening,  and  is  agglutinated  in

morning.
I  Tickling  in  r.  eye,  as  from  dust.
I  I  Sore  painful  biting  in  eyes,  toward  evening,  especially

in  r.  eye.

■  Itching  of  eyes.

■  Agglutination of  inner canthus, in morning,  with  a

pressing  sore  feeling.
I  I  Burning  of  1.  lid,  as  if  too  dry.

■  Feeling  of  soreness  in  inner  canthi.

I  (Pressure  on  margin  of  1.  lower  lid,  near  inner  canthus.

I  I  Soreness  and  almost  constant  itching  in  inner  canthus
of  r.  eye;  also  of  itching  in  other  portions  of  body,
back,  hands  and  arms ;  all  symptoms  <  toward  night ;
r.  lower  lid  literally  filled  with  small  tumors,  in  upper
lid  several  making  their  appearance;  caruncle  swollen
and  bright-red,  ocular  conjunctiva  congested  toward
inner  canthus  ;  margin  of  lower  lid  thickened,  indu-
rated, bright-red,  somewhat  everted. ^Tarsal  tumors.

I  I  Painful  pressure  in  r.  inner  canthus,  with  redness  of
conjunctiva.

Biting  in  r.  inner  canthus  >  by  rubbing.

■  Itching  and  sticking  pain  in  inner  angles  of  eyes,  with

cloudiness  of  sight.

■  Feeling  of  dryness  in  eyeball.

I  I  Kerato- iritis  with  severe  night  pains,  especially  in  inner
angle  of  eye.

I  I  Attacks  of  amblyopia  came  on  suddenly,  with  severe
pressure  in  vertex  and  forehead,  from  without  inward,
<  in  afternoon  and  evening;  amblyopia  appeared  as  a
thick  cloud,  grew  worse  until  she  became  completely
blind,  and  then  disappeared  with  the  pain;  face  pale,
appetite  poor,  very  irritable.


ZINCUM.  494

I  I  Syphilitic  iritis;  pains  did  not  come  on  until  he  lay
down  at  night,  then  profuse,  hot,  scalding  lachrymation;
pains  dull,  involved  balls  and  brows ;  cannot  sleep  over
ten  minutes ;  must  wake  with  eyes  full  of  burning  water;
no  discharge  of  mucus  or  pus,  rather  dryness  of  con-
junctiva, ball  and  lids  very  much  inflamed ;  <  on
lying  down.

I  I  Keratitis  pustulosa  {Euphrasia  relieved);  a  persistent
redness  of  conjunctiva  remained,  without  any  discharge ;
<  toward  evening  and  in  cool  air.

I  I  Pterygium  covered  one-half  of  pupil  and  growingrapidly;
much  conjunctival  injection,  lachrymation 'in  evening,
discharge  and  photophobia,  especially  by  artificial  light,
pricking  pain  and  soreness,  <  in  inner  angle  and  in
evening ;  great  pressure  across  root  of  nose  and  supraor-
bital region.

I  I  Pterygium  ;  in  r.  eye  just  encroaching  on  cornea  ;  in  1.
eye  extending  to  pupil  from  internal  canthus;  had  a
breadth  of  one  and  a  half  lines,  and  was  thick  and  vas-
cular; interior  portion  of  conjunctiva  much  injected;
inner  surface  of  lids  contracted,  lashes  inclined  to  turn
in,  though  they  do  not  rest  against  ball ;  external  canthi
sore  and  cracked  ;  eyes  feel  sore  and  hot  on  going  into
cold  air,  >  in  warm  room  ;  at  night  itching,  heat  and
profuse  lachrymation ;  she  sees  a  green  halo  around  even-
ing light  with  1.  eye ;  only  counts  fingers  at  ten  feet ;
attacks  of  rush  of  blood  to  head  and  over  face,  followed
by  perspiration  over  body.

I  1  Redness  with  intense  burning  and  smarting  as  from
salt  in  1.  eye,  especially  upper  part,  and  intolerable  itch-
ing, especially  in  lower  part;  scalding  lachrymation
from  eye  ;  1.  lids  adhere  on  waking,  either  in  night  or  in
morning,  with  yellow  discharge;  conjunctiva  of  1.  eye,
and  that  of  inner  surface  of  1.  lower  lid,  is  red,  and  there
is  a  pink  zone  around  1.  cornea,  which  is  dim  ;  aching
over  1.  eye;  photophobia,  especially  to  sunlight,  even
light  falling  on  sound  eye  causes  pain  in  diseased  one;
blisters  form  on  eyeball,  with  intense  burning  throbbing
pain,  like  a  whitlow,  they  break  and  discharge  a  white
gummy  matter,  eye  gets  well  next  day;  with  the  attacks,
discharge  from  1.  nostril ;  pressure  >  pains  and  itching;
burning  and  smarting  are  <  from  application  of  cold
water ;  >  by  warm  water ;  <  by  lying  on  back  or  r„
(unpainful) side ;  >  by  lying  on  1.  (painful)  side;  burn-
ing after  8pm.;  attacks  always  come  in  the  night,
sometimes  waking  her;  all  symptoms  <  at  night.

Inflammation  and  redness  of  conjunctiva  of  r.  eye;  sup-
puration in  inner  canthus ;  eyes  most  painful  in  even-


495  ZINCUM.

ingand  night,  as  from  sand,  with  frequent  lachrymation;
even  upper  lid  toward  inner  canthus  is  red  and  swollen.

I  I  Inflammation  of  eyes  during  menses.

I  I  Persistent  redness,  especially  at  inner  angle,  <  in  even-
ing and  in  open  air,  remaining  after  pustular  keratitis.
^Phlyctenular  ophthalmia.

I  Conjunctivitis,  pains  <  at  night;  inflammation  more- in
inner  canthus.

I  I  Inflammation  and  redness  of  conjunctiva  of  r.  eye,  and
matter  in  inner  canthus;  eye  pains  most  evening  and
night,  as  from  sand  in  it;  frequent  lachrymation;  upper
lid  red  and  swollen  toward  inner  canthus.

Jerking  in  1.  eyebrow.

Pressure  above  r.  eye  sudden  and  painful,  with  a  pressing-
down  sensation  in  lids.

Fine  sticking  tearing  in  and  above  1.  brow.

Twitching  of  1.  lower  lid.

Falling  of  upper  lid  and  oedema  of  lower.

Feeling  of  soreness  in  r.  upper  lid.

Soreness  of  outer  canthus  with  biting  pain.

A  pressing  burning,  especially  in  1.  eyelid,  when  reading.

Fine  sticking  as  with  needles  in  r.  lower  and  1.  upper  lids.

Itching  in  margin  of  1.  upper  lid.

■  Intense  burning  after  operations.
iStrabismus.

■  Upper  lids  heavy,  as  if  paralyzed  ;  ptosis.

■  Granular  lids;  after  ophthalmia  neonatorum.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Loss  of  hearing.

Noise  in  ears :  continuous  during  night ;  dull  whizzing,
in  evening  pulsating,  very  annoying  while  writing;
whizzing  in  front  of  r.  ear;  ringing;  violent  roaring;
ringing  in  r.  ear  at  night ;  cracking  and  beating  in  ear
after  breakfast ;  a  crash  as  from  breaking  of  a  pane  of
glass,  on  falling  asleep.

I  I  Tearing  in  ears.

I  I  Frequent  persistent  cutting-tearing  stitches  deep  in  r.
ear,  near  drum.

Otalgia,  with  tearing  stitches  and  external  swelling,  espe-
cially with  children.

■  Neuralgia  of  middle  ear,  pains  tearing  and  cutting,  often

with  suppuration.

■  Earache  of  children,  especially  boys.

■  Otorrhoea  of  fetid  pus.

Much  purulent  discharge  from  1.  ear  day  and  night ;  ori-
fice swollen  and  hot,  with  l.-sided  headache.

Offensive  moisture  from  1.  ear.

Increase  of  earwax  in  1.  ear  thinner  than  usual,  impeded
hearing ;  beating  of  pulse  very  distinct,  causes  roaring
in  ear.


ZINCUM.  496

Extreme  sensibility  of  cartilages  of  ear  and  nose,  with
pain  across  frontal  sinuses,  least  friction  or  bending  of
ear  or  nasal  cartilages  causes  acute  pain.

Violent  cramplike  pain  in  lobule  of  1.  ear,  extending  into
neck,  on  boring  finger  into  ear.

Pain  as  after  a  blow,  on  touch,  beneath  and  in  front  of  r.
ear,  in  bone.

Tearing  in  bone  in  front  of  1.  ear.

Pressive  constrictive  pain  in  bone  beneath  and  in  front  of
r.  ear,  with  dulness  in  forehead.

Pinching  drawing  behind  1.  ear,  extending  into  lower  jaw.

Earache  jerklike,  from  mouth  along  eustachian  tube.

Tearing  in  ears  at  various  times,  at  times  with  itching,  or
in  morning  with  crawling,  in  evening  with  burning.

Sticking  and  tearing  in  1.  ear  close  to  lobule.

A  kind  of  pinching  jerking  within  ear.

Tickling  in  1.  ear  not  >  by  rubbing.

Itching  in  r.  ear,  >  by  boring  into  it.

Itching  in  1.  ear,  with  a  feeling  on  putting  finger  into  it
as  if  fleas  were  jumping  about.
^ Smell  and  Nose. iNose  dry;  brain  affected.

Frequent  blowing  of  blood  from  nose.

Nosebleed  for  a  short  time  on  blowing  nose,  after  dinner,
followed  by  stupefaction  in  forehead  as  from  a  stroke  of
apoplexy,  with  swimming  of  objects  before  eyes.

I  I  Sneezing:  preceded  by  cutting  crawling  in  nose,  in
morning  and  afternoon;  after  a  meal;  frequent,  without
coryza.

iCoryza  :  with  hoarseness  and  burning  in  chest ;  with  sore
sensitiveness  of  nostrils;  with  feeling  of  stoppage;  fluent,
with  crawling  in  nose  and  frequent  sneezing ;  profuse,
with  a  raw  throat;  fluent,  toward  evening,  with  press-
ure in  r.  tonsil  on  swallowing  and  yawning;  violent,
dry,  all  day,  with  pain  in  back,  especially  while  sitting;
sudden,  in  evening  after  lying  down ;  fluent,  alternat-
ing with  dryness,  especially  in  evening.

■  Stoppage  of  nose.

iNose  feels  sore  internally.

■  Swelling  of  one  side  of  nose,  with  loss  of  smell.

■  Boring  of  fingers  into  nose,  or  pulling  at  dry  lips.

I  I  Feeling  of  soreness  high  up  in  nostrils,  a  tearing  in  r.
nostril.

Sharp  cutting  on  inner  margin  of  1.  wing  of  nose.

Swelling  and  painfalness  of  1.  wing  of  nose.

Itching  in  1.  nostril,  followed  by  frequent  sneezing,  suc-
ceeded b}^  profuse  nosebleed,  stopped  by  cold  water.

Itching  in  r.  nostril.

Drawing  and  tearing  in  r.  nostril  after  dinner.


497  ZINCUM.

Sticking  pain  in  septum  of  nose  when  touched.

Fine  tearing  in  r.  side  of  nose  externally.

Swelling  on  r.  side  of  nose.

Pinching  in  root  of  nose:  with  dulness  in  forehead;  ex-
tending into  eye;  with  stitches  in  jaws.

■  Pressure  upon  root  of  nose,  as  if  it  would  be  pressed  into
head,  almost  intolerable.

iRedness  of  nose,  remaining  after  freezing;  tip  of  nose  is
easily  frosted.
'  Upper  Face.  Face :  vacant ;  apathetic ;  irritable  ;  cadaver-
ous; pinched;  unnatural;  earthy,  as  after  a  long  ill-
ness ;  cachectic  complexion,  bluish-white ;  flushed  ;  pale,
alternately  red,  in  brain  affections  and  with  vertigo ;
earthy,  with  wandering  expression ;  waxy,  white  or
yellow,  in  typhus ;  pale,  in  chronic  diseases,  with  much
emaciation ;  pewterlike  hue,  with  scirrhous  tumors.

I  I  Tearing  in  malar  bone,  extending  into  upper  jaw.

I  I A  sudden  pressing  stitch  from  r.  zygoma  to  upper  mar-
gin of  orbit,  deep  in  bone,  followed  by  great  sensitive-,
ness  of  spot,  in  evening.

Spasmodic  twitching  of  musculi  risores,  with  constant
inclination  to  laugh.

Contraction  and  spasmodic  twitching  of  muscles  of  face,
with  nausea  and  incessant  vomiting.

Bruised  pain  in  bones  of  face  and  orbit.

Jerklike  stitches  as  from  needles  in  face.

Swelling  and  itching  of  1.  cheek.

Pressing  pain  in  upper  jaw  near  1.  wing  of  nose.

Tearing  in  1.  cheek.

Tearing  in  r.  malar  bone,  with  bruised  pain  in  that  spot
on  pressure.

Neuralgia  of  fifth  pair,  <  from  touch  and  in  evenings.

I  I  Severe  burning,  lancinations  and  lightning-like  shocks
and  jerks  from  foramen  infraorbitale  over  r.  side  of  head
to  occiput  and  mandibula ;  face  on  r.  side  swollen,  tense
and  hot,  eye  smaller  and  retracted  into  orbit,  eyelids
bluish,  a  sensation  in  teeth  as  if  they  would  be  pulled
out,  tongue  numb,  throat  constricted,  secretion  of  saliva
increased ;  attacks  mostly  after  eating  (between  5  and
7  p.m),  lasted  one  to  three  hours,  and  during  that  time
patient  could  not  bear  least  touch  of  head,  and  screamed
from  severity  of  pain.

I  I A  scirrhous  lump  on  r.  cheek,  size  of  a  walnut,  cold
sweat  on  forehead.
'  Lower  Face. Swelling  of  lips ;  dry,  cracked.

Thick  viscid  humor  on  lips,  without  odor  or  taste.

Dryness  of  lips.

Upper  lip : violent  muscular  twitches  in  1.  side ; sore,

VOL.  X. — 32.


ZINCUM.  498

■alcerating  in  middle ;  a  jerking  tearing  in  r.  side ;  a
transient  stitch ;  fine  stitches.

Lower  lip:  tensive,  painful  smarting;  burning  smarting
on  inner  surface.

I  Lips  and  corners  of  mouth  cracked,  with  yellowish  ulcer-
ation.

Cramplike  tearing  here  and  there  in  lower  jaw,  especially
in  chin.

Tearing  stitches  which  pass  into  one  another,  in  chin  and
throat.

Sticking  pain  in  articulation  of  jaw,  beneath  and  in  front
of  1.  ear,  on  moving  jaw  backward  and  biting  strongly,
and  on  pressing  finger  upon  joint.

Redness  and  itching  eruption  on  chin.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  feel  on  edge.

Toothache:  painful  jerking;  jerking,  violent  tearing  in
last  lower  molars ;  jerking  in  r.  lower  molars  in  even-
ing, after  lying  down ;  jerking  in  1.  teeth  from  time  to
time;  jerking  stitches  in  1.  lower  molars,  also  in  even-
ing after  falling  asleep,  suddenly  waking  from  sleep;
sharp,  jerklike  drawing,  suddenly  in  all  incisors  ;  tear-
ing in  roots  of  r.  upper  teeth ;  tearing,  in  1.  upper  mo-
lars ;  tearing  extending  from  root  of  r.  upper  tooth
toward  temple,  in  evening  after  lying  down ;  tearing  in
a  hollow  molar,  on  sucking  it  blood  comes,  and  on  press-
ure pain  is  for  a  time  <  ;  tearing  in  last  lower  1.  molars
in  evening;  tearing  in  1.  last  molars  above  and  below,
then  in  cheek,  extending  to  temple  and  forehead ;  tear-
ing and  drawing  in  1.  lower  teeth,  especially  in  incisors;
sticking  in  roots  of  1.  upper  canine  and  adjacent  incis-
ors; sticking  in  1.  lower  molars,  constantly  in  evening;
stitches  in  1.  row  of  teeth  and  jaw,  extending  into  neck;
drawing  in  1.  upper  incisors;  drawing,  now  in  r.,  then
in  1.  side  of  lower  back  teeth  ;  drawing,  or  smarting  and
stinging  in  roots  of  (upper)  front  teeth  and  in  hard  pal-
ate; pressing  drawing  in  r.  lower  back  teeth;  drawing
in  roots  of  upper  front  teeth,  and  at  same  time  in
pharynx,  extending  into  cervical  muscles;  throbbing
in  a  hollow  tooth  after  eating  or  after  becoming  heated
and  getting  cold  ;  throbbing  drawing  alternately  of
back  teeth  of  r.  and  1.  sides;  painful  burning  in  front
teeth,  with  biting  on  lower  surface  of  tongue.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  of  teeth.

■  Teeth  feel  long  and  loose,  with  swelling  of  submaxillary

glands.

■  Grits  teeth.

Picking  and  prickling  in  sound  teeth,  with  drawing  pains
in  jaws.


499  zincum:

Ulcer  at  root  of  a  bad  tooth,  sensitive  to  touch,  with  an
elongated  feeling  in  tooth ;  when  pressing  upon  it  blood
comes.

Water  seemed  to  come  from  r.  last  lower  back  tooth;  when
she  touched  it  with  tongue  there  was  a  violent  sticking
in  it.

Gums:  white;  swollen  ;  sore,  painful;  cannot  chew;  white
pellicles ;  biting  and  itching  on  inner  surface ;  inner  side
painful,  as  if  sore;  and  separated  from  teeth;  painful
while  eating,  ulcerated,  white,  bleed  easily;  bleed  on
slightest  touch.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue.  Taste :  sweetish;  metallic ;  like  spoiled
cheese;  bloody;  bitter,  in  fauces;  flat;  of  a  sweetish
'  powder,  in  throat ;  sweet,  beneath  forepart  of  tongue ;
of  blood  in  mouth,  and  a  disagreeable  sweet  rising  from
stomach  ;  of  blood,  with  a  feeling  of  dryness  in  throat,
and  sensation  of  soreness  rising  from  chest ;  of  bad
cheese  in  forepart  of  mouth,  disappearing  on  swallow-
ing, to  which  he  is  impelled  on  account  of  mucus  in
throat;  bitter,  slimy,  in  morning  on  waking;  coppery;
clammy;  saltish,  with  dryness  in  throat;  as  after  eat-
'  ing  raw  peas.

Tongue :  dry,  does  not  want  to  talk ;  coated  at  root,  and
dry  (brain  diseases);  swollen  on  1.  side,  hindering  talk-
ing; covered  with  vesicles;  white,  or  yellowish-white;
white,  as  from  cheese,  without  taste;  dirty,  moist;  dry;
painful  as  if  sore ;  covered  with  white  mucus ;  blistered,
painful  on  eating.

I  I  Echo  speech; patients  repeat  in  a  monotonous,  sing-

'  ing  way  words  and  sentences  of  their  neighbors  without
being  conscious  of  it.

I  I  Weakness  of  organs  of  speech  when  reading.
^^  Inner  Mouth, l  '  Sticking  biting  on  palate  close  to  and  in
roots  of  incisors.

I  I  Increased  flow  of  saliva,  with  crawling  in  inner  surface

of  cheeks.

Collection  of  sour,  bitter  water  in  mouth.

Accumulation  of  saliva :  with  qualmishness;  with  a  me-
tallic taste ;  with  inclination  to  vomit ;  with  stitches  in
tip  of  tongue ;  with  tingling  on  inside  of  cheek.

Swelling  of  palate  and  cavity  just  behind  incisors,  with
pain  on  touch.

Inflammation  of  palate.

Yellow  ulcers  on  inner  surface,  lower  lip,  and  1.  cheek,
especially  painful  in  morning.

Fetid  breath.

Pain  in  palate  and  velum  palati,  especially  on  yawning.

I I  Tetters  on  tonsils,  soft  palate,  and  root  of  tongue;  whit-


ZINCUM.  500

-  ish,  somewhat  elevated,  ulcerated  spots  in  mouth,  sequelae
to  gonorrhoea.

Herpes  (yellowish)  in  mouth  from  sea-bathing.

Swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.
^^  Throat.  Dryness  of  throat:  in  evening;  with  accumulation
of  mucus  in  larynx,  and  constant  inclination  to  hawk
up  tenacious  mucus,  which  soon  again  collects  and
causes  irritation  ;  when  swallowing,  or  when  not,  after
dinner;  mucus  collects  from  posterior  nares.

Soreness  in  throat;  tearing  in  posterior  fauces,  more  be-
tween acts  of  empty  deglutition  or  after  eating.

Rawness  and  dryness  in  throat  and  larynx  frequently  and
at  various  times,  especially  in  morning  or  after  dinner,
compelling  to  hawk  or  cough,  at  times  disappearing
after  food.

Hoarseness  and  rawness  in  throat,  could  scarcely  breathe.

Sore  throat,  swelling  and  ulceration  of  tonsils.

Anxious,  sore  feeling  in  throat,  especially  at  night.

Sore  pain  in  throat  and  a  feeling  of  fulness  in  oesophagus.

Pain  in  throat  on  swallowing,  with  swelling  of  throat  ex-
ternally and  in  tonsils.

I  I  Pain  in  throat  as  from  an  internal  swelling,  also  on
empty  swallowing.

Violent  pain  in  throat  and  at  angle  of  jaw  and  laryngeal
region.

Spasmodic  and  cramplike  feeling  in  pit  of  throat  or  upper
part  of  oesophagus,  like  a  pressure  from  below  upward,
or  as  when  swallowing.

■  Constriction  and  spasm  in  throat.

Feeling  of  constriction  in  throat  on  swallowing,  with  de-
sire to  swallow  frequently.

Swelling  and  painfulness  of  tonsils,  especially  on  swallow-
ing, she  could  not  even  swallow  mucus  without  pain.

Pressing  pain  in  tonsils  on  swallowing,  in  evening  and
through  night.

Frequent  biting  scraping  posteriorly  in  fauces,  as  in  vio-
lent coryza.

Dryness  posteriorly  in  fauces,  in  morning  on  waking,  and
also  afterward  with  thirst.

Pressure  from  pharynx  down  into  abdomen,  as  if  a  hard
body  were  opposing  from  below.

After  dinner  food  seemed  to  remain  sticking  in  pharynx.

Acrid  rising  up  into  pharynx  after  eating  sweets,  which
caused  a  distressing  scraping  in  larynx,  like  heartburn.

Scraping  rawness  in  pharynx  toward  evening.

Sharp  jerking  tearing  extending  from  pharynx  into  1.
cervical  muscles.

Raising  of  much  black,  clotted  blood,  preceded  by  rawness


501  ZINCUM.

and  dryness  in  throat,  and  hawking  of  mucus  in  morn-
ing while  walking,  with  sore  pain  low  down  in  throat,
followed  all  day  by  sweet  taste  in  mouth,  dryness  in
throat  and  bloody  saliva.

Large  lumps  of  white  mucus  pass  through  posterior  nares
into  mouth  without  hawking.

Greenish  mucus  low  down  in  throat,  is  expectorated,  with
sore  pain  in  upper  part  of  chest.

Something  like  blood  with  a  sweetish  taste  comes  into
throat,  in  evening  after  lying  down.

A  peculiar  and  persistent  inflammation  of  throat,  with
extensive  ulceration  of  pharynx  and  tonsils ;  ulcers
round,  sharply  defined,  with  red,  everted  edges;  they
gradually  coalesce ;  were  filled  with  yellowish- white
matter.

Burning  in  throat;  like  heartburn,  even  on  swallowing;
a  hot  vapor  rises.

Sensation  of  choking  in  r.  side  of  throat,  only  when  not
deglutition.

I  I  Dryness  in  throat;  speaking  difficult,  had  to  clear  his

throat  constantly.

II  Pain  in  throat  as  from  an  internal  swelling.

I  Tearing- drawing  sore  throat  posteriorly  in  both  sides  of
pharynx,  more  when  not  swallowing  than  on  empty
swallowing.

I  Cramplike,  strangling  pain  externally  in  muscles  of
throat  when  swallowing.

I  Pain  in  posterior  part  of  hard  palate  and  in  velum  palati,
especially  when  yawning.

I  I  Bitter  taste  in  fauces,  mostly  at  night  and  when  belch-
ing, with  liver  complaint.

iHerpetic-like  eruption  on  tonsils,  soft  palate  and  root  of
tongue;  whitish,  somewhat  elevated  ulcerated  spots  in
mouth.  /^Sequelae  to  gonorrhoea.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  Hunger :  raven-
ous, especially  about  11  or  12  a.m.,  with  weakness  of
legs  and  trembling;  scarcely  to  be  satisfied  ;  greediness
and  hasty  swallowing;  insatiable,  but  no  appetite  for
breakfast,  with  hurried  deglutition ;  insatiable  at  noon
and  in  evening;  after  eating,  a  feeling  of  full  disten-
sion ;  desire  to  eat,  in  pharynx,  even  after  a  ineal,  after
satisfying  it  an  overloaded  feeling  in  stomach,  and  press-
ure in  head.

I  Loss  of  appetite.

I  I  Loss  of  appetite,  with  a  perfectly  clean  tongue.  ^Som-
nambulism.

I  Thirst:  from  forenoon  until  evening;  with  heat  in  palms,
in  afternoon;  burning;  extreme;  in  evening  until  lying


ZINCUxVr.  502

down,  with  increased  warmth  of  body;  in  afternoon,  dur-
ing menses ;  with  hasty  drinking ;  for  beer,  in  evening.
Aversion :  to  meat,  fish  and  sweet  things ;  to  cooked  or
warm  things;  to  veal.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Worse  from  : sugar  (heartburn) ;
wine  (nearly  all  symptoms) ;  milk  (sour  eructation).
■  Hasty  eating.
^*  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Hic-
cough :  especially  after  breakfast ;  for  half  an  hour ;  vio-
lent in  evening;  disappearing  after  eructations  of  bile.
Eructations :  frequent,  empty;  after  drinking,  or  after  din-
ner; with  pressure  in  middle  of  spine;  sour,  especially
after  drinking  milk  ;  gaseous;  at  first  empty,  afterward
tasting  of  fat  eaten  ;  frequent,  loud,  with  at  times  rapid,
at  times  weak,  slow  pulse;  bitter;  bitter,  of  yellow  water
and  bile,  after  eating,  followed  by  vomiting  ;  sweetish  ;
acid ;  at  night,  of  food  eaten  at  noon  ;  tasting  of  milk,
in  afternoon  ;  tasting  of  meat  eaten  ;  inefi'ectual. .
Pyrosis.

■  Heartburn :  with  swollen  feet  and  varicose  veins  (during

pregnancy) ;  after  taking  sweetish  things.

■  Sweetish  rising  into  throat,  with  sweet  taste  in  mouth,

or  taste  of  blood.

Nausea :  continual ;  and  retching ;  with  eructations,  sali-
vation ;  and  colic;  and  perspiration;  with  trembling
and  weariness ;  in  morning;  during  breakfast;  during
day;  was  obliged  to  sit  down,  would  vomit,  but  could
not,  with  eructations  and  desire  for  stool ;  with  general
sick  feeling  in  head  and  chest ;  with  a  dreadful  sensa-
tion in  stomach  ;  renewed  by  least  motion.

Nausea,  with  retching  and  vomiting  of  bitter,  slimy  liquid,
and  at  last  of  food,  with  shocks  of  coughing,  with  a  feel-
ing of  warmth,  especially  in  abdomen,  perspiration,
chilliness  over  arms,  shuddering  of  body,  empty  eruc-
tations, hiccough,  rumbling  and  griping  in  abdomen;
nausea,  >  by  sitting  bent  over;  on  sitting  erect,  on
moving  and  on  pressure  on  abdomen  nausea  and  vom-
iting immediately  return.

Qualmishness:  after  breakfast  and  dinner;  in  morning
in  bed,  disappearing  after  rising.

■  Nausea  and  headache,  <  from  taking  even  a  small  sip

of  wine.

■  Retching  of  bloody  mucus.

1  I  Vomiting:  as  soon  as  first  spoonful  of  liquid  reaches
stomach ;  of  pregnancy ;  of  blood  or  of  sanguineous
mucus,  with  effort;  of  mucus;  first  of  mucus  then  bile;
easy,  of  watery  bile,  followed  by  great  relief;  of  almost
all  food  immediately  after  swallowing  it;  acrid,  caus-


503  ZINCUM.

ing  burning  on  face  and  rawness  in  throat;  almost  con-
tinuous.
''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  In  epigastrium  :  burning,
when  pressing  thereon,  in  evening;  burning,  before
breakfast,  extending  into  oesophagus;  burning,  when
fasting;  dull  pain,  and  on  r.  side  of  umbilicus;  pain,
during  inspiration ;  pain,  caused  by  excitement  and
spasmodic  pressure;  cramplike  pain;  cramplike  drag-
ging ;  sharp  pains ;  oppression  ;  pressure ;  griping  deep
in,  <  by  deep  breathing;  sensation  like  a  worm  creep-
ing up  into  throat,  causing  coughing ;  screwing-together
sensation;  frequent  pinching;  drawing;  tearing  and
sharp  sticking,  frequently  repeated;  sudden  tightness
and  oppression  during  menses,  everything  must  be
loosened.

I  Patient  has  sudden  oppression  at  stomach,  has  to  un-
fasten her  dress;  tendency  to  clonic  spasms  in  children.

In  stomach:  burning;  stitches  from  both  sides;  tearing
and  sharp  sticking ;  constriction  from  both  sides,  with
anxiety  and  increased  warmth  ;  pressure,  with  pain  in
abdomen  ;  pressure,  after  eating,  in  evening ;  pressure,
afterward  sticking  in  prsecordial  region,  in  morning
after  rising ;  pressure,  and  a  feeling  of  coldness,  at  noon  ;
pain,  as  if  stomach  were  compressed,  in  morning,  fast-
ing; aching,  as  from  emptiness,  with  nausea;  heavy
pains;  oppression  and  pain;  disgust,  distension  and
qualmishness  after  dinner  and  supper,  with  inclination
to  eructate;  gurgling  and  rumbling  while  yawning,  at
noon,  also  in  evening  ;  motion,  with  feeling  of  coldness,
at  noon ;  fulness,  with  heaving ;  feeling  of  emptiness,
soon  after  eating;  feeling  of  uneasiness,  with  shudder-
ing of  body  on  washing,  and  while  sitting  down  after
stooping;  tenderness  to  pressure;  deathly  sinking,  for
hours  after  eating  anything  acid;  disagreeable  feeling
in  cardiac  orifice,  extending  upward  along  oesophagus ;
burning,  with  qualmish  eructations.

Stomach  considerably  dilated  as  far  down  as  navel,  its
peristaltic  movement  at  times  appreciable  through  ab-
dominal wall ;  pylorus  hypertrophied,  sunken  and  mov-
able, formed  a  tumor  sensible  to  touch,  sometimes  to  r.,
sometimes  to  1.  of  umbilicus ;  under  r.  false  ribs  another
hard  tumor,  slightly  indented,  not  well  defined,  but  pain-
ful when  pressed,  giving  rise  to  idea  that  a  new  growth
depended  from  liver;  its  size  was  variable,  prolonged
pressure  of  fingers  caused  its  gradual  disappearance,  it
was  most  evident  during  violent  gastric  crises;  it  was
caused  by  contraction  of  hypertrophied  muscle,  on  r.
side,  resting  on  a  solid  surface  formed  by  increased  mass
of  liver.


ZINCUM.  504

I  I  Spasm  of  stomach  and  hypochondria,  and  a  constriction
in  oesophagus,  with  dyspnoea  and  increased  heat  of  body ;
<  during  inspiration.

I  I  Very  irritable  stomach,  with  constant  burning,  nausea,
and  a  sweetish  rising,  with  a  sensation  of  worms  creep-
ing in  oesophagus;  downward  pressure  on  bladder,  rec-
tum and  uterus,  compelling  her  to  sit  cross-legged,  and
trembling ;  bloody,  mucous  and  corroding  leucorrhoea.

I  I  After  supper  gastralgia,  with  nausea;  a  tensive  pain  in
sides  of  abdomen.

I  I  Before  appearance  of  scanty  and  irregular  menses  pal-
pitation, dyspnoea,  pains  in  back  and  spasmodic  con-
striction in  gastric  region ;  every  afternoon  between
3  and  4,  severe  stitching  pain  in  stomach,  with  nau-
sea, vomiturition,  sometimes  vomiting  of  tough  phlegm
and  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium ;  tongue  clean,  appetite
normal ;  after  a  meal  for  two  hours  pressure  over  stom-
ach, hardy  food  is  more  easily  digested;  constipation
and  lassitude. ^Cardialgia.

I  I A  lady  of  delicate  constitution,  set.  52,  having  passed
her  climaxis,  complained  for  the  last  two  years  of  palpi-
tations, anxious  respiration,  pains  in  head  and  back,
tension  in  abdomen,  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  nausea,
sometimes  vomiting  and  a  sensation  as  if  cold  water
were  poured  down  her  back;  tongue  clean,  appetite  good,
but  after  eating,  especially  sweet  things,  severe  pressure
in  stomach,  constipation ;  looks  weak,  pale  and  ema-
ciated.

iHsematemesis.
'*  Hypochondria. In 1. hypochondrium : pressure with
stitches; stitches,  also  in  evening  while  walking  and
standing;  slow  pulsating  sore  feeling;  pressing  pinching.

In  r.  hypochondrium  :  jerklike  tearing-drawing  and  press-
ure, as  from  incarcerated  flatus,  <  by  motion;  sticking
during  sour  eructations,  and  on  inspiration ;  pressure
in  a  small  spot.

In  hepatic  region :  intermittent  tearing;  sharp  jerking
stitches,  after  supper ;  sticking,  also  in  r.  hip ;  pinch-
ing griping  pressure  in  a  small  spot;  cramp-pains,  with
dyspnoea  and  hypochondriasis  after  eating.

Heaviness  and  pain  in  hypochondria  and  loins,  followed
by  prostration.

Feeling  of  a  heavy  weight  in  hypochondria.

I  I  Cramplike pains in h3''pochondria, alternating with

oppression  of  chest  and  difficult  breathing.

I I  Pressure  under  short  ribs,  after  eating,  with  depression
of  spirits.

I  I  Dull  sticking  in  region  of  spleen.


505  ZINCUM.

I  I  Liver  hard,  enlarged,  sore  to  touch,  could  be  felt  much
more  to  left  and  above  navel  as  a  small  hard  lump ;
several  hard  lumps  in  abdomen;  abdomen  enlarged,
soft  as  mush,  softest  around  navel ;  sore  pains  all  over
belly,  most  around  navel ;  hectic  fever,  unquenchable
thirst;  when  swallowing  he  feels  a  small  hard  lump  in
throat,  sometimes  like  a  worm  creeping  up  from  pit  of
stomach  into  throat,  which  makes  him  cough;  frequent
gagging  and  vomiting  of  a  little  bloody  phlegm  or  thin
blood,  sometimes  pus,  of  a  saltish  taste,  particularly  with
coughing;  cough  <  at  night,  with  a  shooting  in  scro-
biculum,  a  kind  of  a  weak  but  very  deep  cough,  has  to
cough  until  he  raises ;  stool  either  in  little  lumps  or
frothy;  rumbling  in  bowels;  cannot  lie  on  1.  side;  dur-
ing night  a  dull  moaning,  feels  so  weak  that  he  talks
with  difficulty;  feet  commence  to  swell  and  swelling
rises  gradually  upward.

■  Neuralgia  of  spleen  and  intercostal  neuralgia.
"Abdomen. Sticking  in  diaphragm.

Fulness  in  abdomen,  immediately  after  eating,  as  if  filled
with  flatus.

Heaviness,  pressure  and  tension  in  abdomen.

Pressure  and  gurgling  in  upper  abdomen  after  eating.

I  I  Severe  stabbing  pains.

I  I  Pressure  and  aching  in  pubic  region.

Aching  pressure  and  griping  in  sides  of  abdomen  and
umbilical  region,  with  feeling  as  if  abdominal  walls
were  retracting  against  spine.

I  I  Hard  pressure  as  from  flatulence  in  sides  of  abdomen,
hypochondria  and  back,  even  in  morning  in  bed,  <  by
walking,  without  emission  of  flatus;  only  somewhat  >
after  a  stool,  and  again  renewed  on  moving  about  when
walking.

Pressure  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  close  to  hip.

Dull  stitches  from  an  internal  ulcer  on  a  small  spot  on  r.
side  above  navel,  <  by  touch  and  motion.

Stitches  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

Sudden  violent  stitches  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  <  by  breath-
ing and  by  pressure.

I  I  Rumbling  and  gurgling  in  whole  abdomen,  followed  by
painful  retraction,  with  a  feeling  as  if  stool  would  occur.

I  I  Rumbling  and  rolling  in  abdomen  :  in  morning;  with
frequent  emission  of  flatus  in  evening ;  with  cutting  in
lower  abdomen  after  dinner;  violent  and  frequent,  with-
out pain  ;  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  in  evening.

Flatus  causes  biting  pain  in  abdomen,  extending  toward
chest.

Flatus:  frequent  emission,  hot,  very  offensive ;  frequently


ZINCUM.  506

after  dinner  till  night;  much  in  abdomen,  which  is  not
passed,  afterward  pressing  flatulent  colic ;  incarcerated  ;
presses  out  hemorrhoids,  which  are  then  very  painful,
especially  when  lying  down;  moves  about  in  abdomen  ;
hot,  loud  and  soft,  in  evening;  noisy,  offensive,  in
evening.

Violent  pain  in  abdomen,  head  and  eyes,  in  evening  on
lying  down.

Pressure  in  middle  of  abdomen  soon  after  a  moderate
supper.

Cramplike  drawing  in  middle  of  abdomen,  with  dull  colic.

Dragging  pains  and  rumbling  in  abdomen.

Acute  drawing  and  crawling  from  abdomen  into  urethra.

I  I  Severe  stabbing  pains  in  abdomen,  without  diarrhoea  or
constipation,  continuing  several  hours  and  returning
periodically  every  seven  days,  or  once  in  three  weeks.

Cutting:  in  upper  abdomen,  also  while  eating;  from  even-
ing after  lying  down  until  morning;  transversely
through  abdomen,  below  navel ;  violent  after  milk,  with
rumbling  and  frequent  emission  of  flatus.

Griping :  here  and  there  in  abdomen ;  in  upper  abdo-
men, after  soup  and  during  dinner;  as  far  as  stom-
ach, where  it  is  a  constriction;  is  obliged  to  bend  up
in  evening;  with  profuse  emission  of  flatus,  and  with
itching  over  hips  in  evening;  tensive,  followed  by  dull
sticking  toward  pit  of  stomach,  <  from  ajar  or  on  re-
tracting abdomen ;  or  cutting,  followed  by  soft  or  diar-
rhoea-like stools.

Twisting  pain  in  abdomen  before  emission  of  flatus,  in
morning  in  bed.

Pains  in  diaphragm  and  between  shoulders,  extending  to
sacrum.

Stitches  in  abdomen  with  distension.

Sticking  pain  in  abdomen  after  a  natural  stool.

Sharp  sticking  in  abdomen  as  if  intestines  were  pierced
with  fine  needles.

Sticking  pains  in  diaphragm  and  between  shoulders.

Burning  stitches  in  abdomen.

Feeling  of  coldness  within  abdomen.

Occasional  soothing  pain  in  hypogastrium  on  rising.

Pressing  feeling  low  down  in  lower  abdomen,  with  crawl-
ing extending  to  beginning  of  urethra.

Constrictive  pain  in  1.  side  of  lower  abdomen,  on  walking
and  on  pressure;  disappears  while  sitting,  after  dinner.

Bruised  sensation  in  r.  side  of  lower  abdomen,  as  if  a  spot
there  were  diseased.

Dull  tearing  low  down  in  r.  lower  abdomen,  extending
into  groin.


507  ZINCUM.

Dull  tearing  deep  in  1,  side  of  lower  abdomen,  beginning
in  region  of  hip.

Stitches  in  1.  side  of  lower  abdomen.

Violent  penetrating  stitch  through  r.  ilium,  from  above
downward,  on  bending  body  over,  with  a  hard  abdomen.

Colic:  constrictive;  takes  away  breath  ;  violent,  constricts
whole  abdomen,  even  while  lying  down  after  midnight,
still  more  on  rising;  below  navel,  tearing  from  one  side
to  other;  below  navel  as  from  flatus,  while  walking;
dull,  above  and  below  navel ;  tensive,  in  1.  side  of  ab-
domen, >  by  eructations;  awoke  at  night  with  it,  fol-
lowed by  thick  leucorrhoea ;  and  repugnance  to  food,  and
wine  and  brandy;  violent,  at  times  with  nausea  and
running  of  water  from  mouth,  often  accompanied  by
offensive  mucus,  which  took  away  her  appetite;  after  a
copious  stool ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on  ;  with  every
stool  and  emission  of  flatus;  severe,  rolled  on  floor;  in
an  aggravated  form,  was  confined  to  bed  for  about  a
month  on  account  of  exhaustion  produced  by  want  of
sleep  and  almost  total  anorexia;  about  the  navel.

I  I  Dull  pressure  on  a  small  spot  beneath  navel,  as  from
internal  induration,  <  from  external  pressure  and  by
drawing  in  abdomen.

Sharp  pressure  between  pit  of  stom.ach  and  navel,  espe-
cially <  by  drawing  in  abdomen,  but  >  by  eructations
caused  thereby.

Tearing  stitches  in  umbilical  region.

Cutting  stitch  transversely  across  umbilical  region.

I  'Griping  in  abdomen,  at  various  times,  sometimes  when
yawning,  or  after  breakfast,  or  with  cutting  pain  after
dinner.

M  Great  distension  of  abdomen.

I  I  Flatulency :  before  setting  in  of  catamenia,  menstrual
spasms  ;  for  several  years,  frequent  noises  and  gurgling
in  abdomen,  especially  below  navel  and  in  1.  hypochon-
drium,  accompanied  by  pressing  pain  ;  neither  food  nor
drink,  nor  passing  flatus,  made  any  diff'erence,  only  firm
lacing  moderated  it.

■  Oppressive  wind  colic  after  supper,  or  later,  after  mid-

night.

■  Flatulent  colic,  <  from  wine,  toward  evening  or  dur-

ing night,  and  at  rest; loud rumbling  and rolling;

retraction  of  abdomen ;  hot,  moist,  fetid  flatus,  passing

off  without  relief ;  lead-colic.
I  I  Violent  bearing  down  in  abdomen  after  a  difficult  scanty

stool ;  >  by  passing  flatus.
I  I  Cutting  upward  in  1.  iliac  region,  in  paroxysms;  in  a

pregnant  woman.


ZINCUM.  508

I  Inguinal  hernia.

Jerking  from  groin  toward  penis.

Painful  pressing  in  1.  groin,  as  if  hernia  would  occur.

Screwing-together  sensation  in  1.  inguinal  region,  extend-
ing up  into  chest.

Jerking  pressure  in  r.  inguinal  region.

Sticking  pressure  somewhat  above  inguinal  region.

Violent  pinching  in  r.  groin  and  inguinal  region,  as  in
retention  of  urine  during  rest  and  motion,  and  renewed
on  rising  from  seat.

Drawing  pain  in  1.  inguinal  region  while  sitting.

Drawing  and  pressure  in  groin  and  pubic  region.

Prickling,  alternating  with  drawing,  in  1.  groin,  at  night,
disturbing  sleep.

Stitches  in  1.  groin  in  morning  after  waking.

A  hernia  presses  downward  forcibly.

Feeling  as  if  an  inguinal  gland  were  swollen.

I  Buboes,  syphilitic  or  otherwise,  in  1  inguinal  region.
^ Stool  and  Rectum.  Stool:  frequent,  small,  sometimes  in-
voluntary; profuse;  soft,  papescent,  or  thin,  with  pale
or  bright-red,  foamy  blood;  difficult;  hard,  dry,  insuf-
ficient, expelled  with  much  pressure;  bilious;  blood}'' ;
offensive,  diarrhoeic,  alternating  with  constipation;  pasty,
without  pain,  onl}'^  some  straining  after  a  stool  as  if  more
were  to  pass;  diarrhoea-like,  followed  by  leucorrhoea;
involuntary,  thin,  in  morning  on  waking;  loose,  with
griping  and  tenesmus  in  anus,  at  night;  soft,  mushy,
enveloped  in  bright-red,  frothy  blood,  preceded  by  colic;
soft,  difficult  to  evacuate,  with  emission  of  prostatic
flaid;  light-colored,  first  part  large  and  hard,  last  part
soft;  scanty,  hard,  preceded  by  soft  and  small  evacua-
tions; at  first  solid,  then  liquid;  in  morning  hard,  with-
out pressure;  immediately  after  dinner  very  soft,  accom-
panied and  followed  by  vertigo  and  roaring  in  head  ;
scanty,  tenacious,  followed  by  straining  and  heat  and
burning  in  anus ;  tenacious,  light-yellow,  with  sticking
in  anus.

Diarrhoea  in  evening,  with  griping  in  abdomen.

I  Diarrhoeic  stools,  involuntary,  with  stupor. ^Typhus.

I  I  Frequent  small  discharges  from  anus,  sometimes  invol-
untary; either  like  pitch,  or  dry,  brittle  and  granulous.

I  I  Diarrhoea,  with  stupor,  seeming  to  call  for  Opium,  which
failed.

iLater  stages  of  diarrhoea  or  dysentery,  when  cerebral
symptoms  indicate  approaching  hydrocephaloid ;  de^
ficient  nerve  power,  convulsions,  pale  face,  without  any
increase  of  temperature.

Before  stool :  colic.


509  ZINCUM.

During  stool :  painful  tenesmus ;  burning  at  anus ;  pro-
longed desire,  which  is  only  satisfied  atter  great  efforts,
although  materials  are  soft;  emission  of  prostatic  fluid;
slight  discharge  of  blood  (with  hard  stool) ;  pressure  and
clawing  in  anus.

After  stool :  tenesmus ;  burning  at  anus.

■  Nervous  diarrhoea  from  de])ression  of  nerve-centres.

I  Cholera  morbus:  feet  constantl}'  fidgety;  on  waking  child
appears  frightened,  head  rolls  from  side  to  side;  during
sleep  it  cries  out,  starts  and  jumps;  painless  papescent
diarrhcea  for  many  days,  some  colic  after  stool ;  emis-
sion of  flatulence;  hydrocephaloid.

I  I  Frequent  discharges  of  green  mucus  from  bowels,  little
or  no  fecal  matter,  pain  and  tenesmus;  face  pinched,
contracted ;  face  and  head  cool ;  eyes  staring,  pupils
contracted,  head  thrown  back  and  rolling  on  pillow,
crying  out,  starting  in  sleep,  sleeping  with  eyes  half-
closed,  at  times  strabismus,  throwing  its  limbs  around,
urine  high-colored  and  passed  at  long  intervals  and
rarely. ^Dysentery.

I  I  Child,  8  months  old,  bottle-fed;  head  cold,  with  slight
alternations  of  heat,  rest  of  body  fairly  warm  ;  continued
rolling  of  head  and  eyes,  violent  crying  out  during
sleep,  frequent  spasms  of  facial  muscles,  less  frequently
of  muscles  of  extremities;  pulse  maintained  a  high  rate ;
temperature  105°  to  107°,  with  slight  fluctuations;  com-
atose. ^Cholera  infantum.

Desire  for  stool:  with  movement  in  abdomen;  morning
and  after  eating.

Ineffectual  desire :  long  urging,  at  last  follows  soft,  with
great  effort.

■  Constipated stool: stool  large  in size,  evacuated  only

with  great  effort  of  abdominal  muscles ;  stool  dry,  un-
satisfactory;  hard,  often  crumbling,  and  in  pieces,  with
pressure  and  clawing  in  anus ;  hard,  small,  rather  dry,
with  much  pressure  and  rumbling  in  abdomen,  in  even-
ing ;  dry,  hard,  insufficient,  difficult ;  dry,  brittle,  gran-
ulous.

■  Unusual  dryness  of  stool,  with  difficult  defecation,  lol-

lowed  by  involuntary  urination.

■  Constipation  due  to  spasmodic  action  of  intestines.

■  Constipation  of  the  newborn.

I  I  For  two  and  a  half  hours  violent  bearing  down  in  abdo-
men, after  a  difficult,  scanty  stool;  >  by  passage  of
flatus  up  or  down.

Heaviness  in  rectum  while  standing,  disappearing  on
emission  of  flatus.

Soreness  in  rectum.


ZINCUM.  510

Pressing  and  boring  from  rectum  into  abdomen,  on  ac-
count of  which  she  could  not  sit  down.

Rectum  seems  pressed  by  flatus,  though  none  passes.

A  feeling  in  rectum  as  if  flatus  were  pressing  against
coccyx,  by  which  it  was  retained.

Drawing  pain  in  rectum  extending  into  abdomen.

Cutting  and  smarting  in  rectum.

Jerking  stitches  extending  from  rectum  into  root  of  penis.

Itching  in  rectum.

■  Burning  in  anus;  also  during  or  after  a  stool.
I  1  Crawling,  as  from  worms,  in  anus.

I  I  Violent  itching  in  anus.

I  I  Soreness  and  itching  at  anus.

Tingling  at  anus,  as  from  ascarides.

■  Chronic dysentery; extreme emaciation; thin, pale,

bloody  stools,  with  painful  tenesmus;  great  desire  for
food,  which  fails  to  be  assimilated.

Jerklike  cutting ;  tearing  in  anus.

Burning  sticking  in  anus,  in  evening  while  walking.

Stitches  in  anus.

A  twinging  stitch,  like  lightning,  from  anus  into  rectum,
causing  him  to  start.

Itching  in  anus,  ending  in  a  dull  pain.

Itching  in  anus  and  oozing  of  corrosive  moisture.

Itching  in  anus  after  a  soft  stool.

Protrusion  of  hemorrhoids,  with  smarting.

Discharge  of  blood  from  anus.
*'  Urinary  Organs.  In  region  of  both  kidneys :  pain  ;  pinch-
ing; sticking  pressure ;  sore  pain  in  1.;  pressure  in  1.,
at  times  violent  pinching ;  1.  sensitive  to  touch  ;  sharp
intermittent  tearing  in  1. ;  tearing  in  r.,  at  times  stick-
ing ;  stitches,  extending  toward  chest ;  dull  stitches  in
r. ;  stitches  in  1.  at  intervals ;  sticking  and  bruised  pain
in  1.,  while  standing  and  walking;  cutting  tearing,  at
times  drawing  pressure  in  r.

I  I  Very  acute  drawing  in  forepart  of  urethra  and  penis.

Burning  micturition  during  menses.

Flow  of  blood  from  urethra  after  painful  micturition.

Much  blood  flows  from  urethra.

Profuse  emission  of  prostatic  fluid  without  apparent  cause.

Sore  pain  in  forepart  of  urethra  when  not  urinating.

Burning  in  urethra  before,  during  and  after  micturition.

Tearing  burning  in  urethra.

Drawing  and  tearing  in  forepart  of  urethra.

Cutting  in  orifice  of  urethra,  in  evening  while  sitting.

Biting  in  orifice  of  urethra  after  urinating.

Tearing  and  biting  in  forepart  of  urethra,  when  not  uri-
nating.


511  ZINCUM.

Sharp  tearing  cutting  in  middle  of  urethra,  extending
forward.

Stitches  in  orifice  and  through  urethra.

Twinging  stitch,  like  lightning,  from- before  backward  in
urethra.

Itching  in  urethra.

Feeling  of  cramp  in  bladder,  preceded  by  colic.

Pressure  upon  bladder,  but  not  to  urinate.

Urine  in  bladder  presses  her  greatly.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  at  night,  with  scanty  discharge.

Urging  to  urinate  after  urinating,  every  evening  on  lying
down,  but  only  three  or  four  drops  pass  each  time,  but
without  pain.

Excessive  desire  to  urinate;  very  much  urine  is  passed.

Frequent  and  rather  increased  micturition  of  a  watery  or
lemon-yellow  color.

Frequent  micturition,  not  very  copious,  very  light  urine,
after  midnight.

■  Involuntary  urination  while  walking,  blowing  nose,
coughing  and  sneezing.

Emission  of  urine  very  slow  and  in  a  thin  stream.

Dribbling  discharge  of  urine  in  evening.

I  I  Violent  pressure  of  urine  on  bladder; sits  with  legs

crossed,  and  though  bladder  feels  full,  none  passes.
I  I  Can  only  pass  water  while  sitting  bent  backward;  much

sand  in  urine.
I  I  Urine  passed  at  night  is  turbid  and  muddy  in  morning.
I  I  Frequent  micturition  of  pale-yellow  urine,  which,  on
standing,  deposits  a  white,  flaky  sediment.

Diminished  secretion  of  urine  approaching  at  one  time
entire  suppression.

Urine:  dark  and  turbid ;  scanty,  not  unnatural ;  reddish;
deposits  a  flocculent  sediment ;  scanty,  becomes  turbid
like  clay  water ;  very  yellow,  deposits  white  flakes  on
standing  a  long  time;  yellow,  deposits  a  mealy  sedi-
ment.
I  i  Paralysis  of  bladder,  with  pruritis ;  leucorrhoea  with
much  itching;  pain  in  1.  ovary  >  by  flow;  nervous
insomnia  with  intolerable  itching  of  skin  at  night
without  eruption ;  no  itching  in  daytime ;  headache,
with  nervous,  fidgety  feet,  has  to  cross  feet  to  keep
them  still.
I  I  Paretic  condition  of  sphincter  vesicae,  with  frequent
micturition  of  pale-yellow  urine;  hsematuria,  or  a  dis-
charge of  blood  per  anum  (vicarious  menstruation) ;
constant  desire  to  urinate,  but  urine  can  only  be  passed
while  sitting,  bent  backward.
■Sitting  with  legs  crossed,  bending  forward,  and  cannot


ZINCUM.  512

make  water,  or  but  very  little,  and  feels  as  if  his  bladder

would  burst.
I  I A  man,  set.  about  45,  cannot  pass  his  water  standing,

can  only  do  so  when  sitting  down,  brought  on  or  <  by

any  kind  of  worry.
I  I  Atony  of  cervix.

■  Vesical  irritability  from  nephritic  irritation.

■  Vesical  neuralgia,  especially  if  vesical  symptoms  are  pre-

ceded by  nephralgia.

I  I  Vicarious  bleeding  through  urethra  in  consequence  of
suppressed  menstruation,  with  pain  in  bowels,  diarrhoea,
and  night-cough' with  expectoration  of  mucus.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Tearing  in  tip  of  glans  penis.

Excoriation  on  upper  surface  of  glans  penis  near  tip  just
to  1.  of  mesial  line,  sore  to  touch ;  it  healed  next  day,
but  scab  remains  on  it  till  to-day.

Dull  stitches  in  glans  penis  coming  up  from  scrotum.

Tearing  drawing  in  root  of  penis,  preceded  by  dull  stick-
ing in  lower  abdomen  near  genitals.

Painful  jerking  in  root  of  penis.

Penis  painfully  sensitive  when  walking,  as  if  shirt  were
rough  and  rubbed  it.

I  I  Persistent,  strong  erections  with  pain,  also  pressure  in
abdomen.

■  Easily  excited;  emission  during  an  embrace  too  rapid,

or  difficult  and  almost  impossible.
■Spermatorrhoea: emissions  without  dreams; face  pale,
sunken,  blue  rings  around  eyes.

■  Copious  discharge  of  prostatic  juice,  without  any  cause.
Prickling,  drawing  pain  in  testicles,  mostly  while  sitting

and  stooping,  at  times  extending  up  along  spermatic
cord.

Drawing  pain  in  1.,  afterward  in  r.  testicle.

I  I  Drawing  up  of  r.  or  1.  testicle,  with  some  pain  and
swelling.

Transient  pressing  stitches  in  1.  testicle  during  rest.

I  1  Orchitis  from  a  bruise,  with  drawing  and  retraction  of
one  or  other  testicle,  goes  from  r.  to  1.  ^After  checked
otorrhoea.

A  farmer,  of  sanguineous  temperament,  injured  his  testi-
cle, and  complained  of  pain,  with  periodical  aggrava-
tion ;  <  from  walking ;  it  feels  as  if  testicles  were  too
tight,  compressed  and  drawn  upward  ;  stitches  when
making  a  wrong  step;  in  inguinal  region,  sensation  of
increased  heat;  during  micturition,  a  peculiar  sensa-
tion in  urethra ;  when  he  answers  call  immediately,
urine  flows  freely,  but  when  he  delays,  he  feels  a  con-
stant pressure  downward ;  feels  breathing  and  cough-
ing down  into  testes.


513  ZINCUM.

Atrophy  of  testicles.

Shrivelling  of  scrotum.

Pain  in  r.  side  of  scrotum,  especially  when  touched.

Sore  sensation  in  sides  of  scrotum  and  contiguous  parts  of

thighs.
I  Hair  falls  off  from  genitals.
iRemoves  buboes,  syphilitic  or  otherwise,  in  1.  inguinal

region.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Irresistible  sexual desire at

night;  desire  for  onanism.
I  I  Complete  loss  of  sexual  desire.
■  Nymphomania  caused  by  onanism,  menses  which  were

suppressed  suddenly  appear,  with  alternate  redness  and

paleness  of  face,  severe  pains  and  pressing  in  abdomen

and  back.

I  I  Boring  pain  in  1.  ovarian  region,  >  from  pressure,  en-

tirely relieved  during  menstrual  flow.
Ovarian  tumor ;  a  sensation  as  of  boring  in  tumor,  which
requires  pressure  and  shaking  of  part  for  relief.

I I  Ovarian  neuralgia,  particularly  of  1.  ovary,  in  women
who  have  had  overwork  ;  tenderness  along  spinal  cord ;
when  walking  any  distance  they  become  very  tired ;
stooping,  or  descending  stairs  will  cause  legs  to  give
out;  <  from  using  sewing  machine;  pains  are  boring,
burning,  felt  between  menstrual  periods,  >  when  flow
sets  in.

lOvarian  pains  are>  by  excessive  flow;  heaviness  and
tremulous  weakness  of  lower  extremities;  trembles  as
if  chilly  and  is  easily  frightened ;  we  find  a  constant
drawing  in  knees,  as  if  they  would  be  twisted  off;  pain
so  severe  in  limbs  that  she  cannot  keep  them  still,  but
moves  them  constantly.

I  lA  maiden  lady,  set.  42,  ovarian  difficulties;  obstinate
constipation,  stools  quite  small,  passed  with  pain;  digi-
tal examination  discovered  a  tumor,  which  involved
rectum;  severe  pains  in  rectum,  urging  similar  to  that
of  Nux  vom.;  fidgety  feet,  preventing  sleep.

I  I  Miss ,  £et.  30,  had  been  healthy  up  to  her  seventeenth

year,  at  which  time  she  was  caught  in  a  rainstorm  during
her  menstrual  period ;  suffered  greatly  at  each  period  ;
menses  very  profuse,  long  lasting  and  light-colored  ;
neuralgia  through  face  and  brain  continually,  <  at
menstrual  period,  was  obliged  to  lie  with  her  head
hanging  over  side  of  bed,  her  body  in  a  prone  position  ;
the  only  nourishment  she  had  taken  for  two  years  was
a  crust  of  dry  bread  and  a  cup  of  clear  tea  three  times  a
day ;  the  thought  of  food  made  her  sick,  the  sight  of
meat  or  anything  oily  nauseates  her ;  eats  ice  cream

VOL.  X. — 33.


ZmCUM.  514

occasionally ;  whole  length  of  spine  burned  and  pained,
sharp  pains  >  by  lying  on  back ;  tender  in  epigastric
region,  slightest  touch  causes  pain  ;  in  middle  of  Sum-
mer requires  six  blankets  over  her,  and  four  hot  water
bottles  before  she  would  be  comfortable;  hands  and
feet  icy-cold,  clammy;  eyes  bright;  clear  complexion
and  red  cheeks;  least  noise  makes  her  frantic;  every
morning  about  6  o'clock,  had  a  sensation  as  if  a  web  were
drawn  across  throat,  >  by  drinking  hot  tea  or  hot  water;
whenever  a  stranger  came  into  ward  a  jerking  of  r.  limb
commenced,  which  she  was  powerless  to  control.
I  Ulceration  of  uterus,  discharge  bloody,  acrid,  but  ulcers
are  rather  destitute  of  feeling.

■  Varicose  veins  of  external  genitals,  wnth  fidgety  feet.

■  Pruritus  vulvae  causes  masturbation;  irresistible  sexual

desire  at  night.

I  I A  very  severe  and  obstinate  pain  in  brain  accompanies
uterine  ulcer,  and  is  of  an  intermitting  character.

•  Uterine  cancer  ;  sleeplessness  and  pain  ;  fidgety  feet.

iHysteralgia;  flow  of  menses  relieves  all  her  sufferings,
but  they  return  after  cessation  of  menses;  boring  pain
in  1.  ovary ;  fidgety  feet.

Menses :  too  early  and  too  profuse,  lumps  of  coagulated
blood  pass  away  mostly  when  walking;  flow  most  pro-
fuse at  night;  preceded  by  toothache  in  a  hollow  tooth  ;
with  alternation  of  paleness  and  redness  of  face ;  with
violent  cutting  and  dragging  in  abdomen  and  small  of
back  ;  with  sticking  biting  and  itching  in  pudenda,  and
a  feeling  as  if  swollen ;  too  early,  painful,  with  bloating
of  abdomen.

■  After  menses,  discharge  of  bloody  mucus,  causes  itching

on  pudenda.

■  Dysmenorrhoea,  when  during  menses  limbs  feel  heavy,

with  violent  drawing  about  knees,  as  if  they  would  be
twisted  off;  sudden  oppression  of  stomach,  has  to  loosen
her  dress;  chilliness;  sore  eyes;  soreness  of  vulva  and
mammae ;  pale  face ;  weakness  of  memory.

■  Coughing  during  catamenia.

■  Amenorrhoea,  with  alternately  red  and  paleface;  great

weakness  in  hands  and  feet,  with  cramp  in  hypochon-
dria and  knees,  especially  at  noon,  when  she  is  hungry;
sensation  of  goneness  at  pit  of  stotnach  at  11  a.m.;  ano-
rexia, with  constipation,  hard,  small  and  dry  stools;  with
painfulness  of  breasts  and  genitals.

■  Leucorrhoea:  preceded  by  cutting  colic ;  of  thick  mucus;

of  bloody  mucus  after  menses,  causing  itching  of  vulva;
of  thick  mucus,  three  days  before  and  after  menses;  acrid,
with  burning  in  pudenda;  slimy,  with  griping  in  upper


515  ZINCUM.

abdomen ;  of  thick  mucus,  especially  in  morning  and
evening;  also  before  and  during  menses;  especially
after  stool ;  thick,  slimy,  with  great  sensitiveness  of  sex-
ual parts,  cutting  and  pressing  in  abdomen,  bloatedness
of  abdomen;  acrid  and  excoriating;  instead  of  menses;
discharge  white  or  yellowish.

I  I  White  ulcer  inside  of  labia  majora,  first  causing  a  pain
as  if  sore  when  touching  it,  afterward  smarting,

1  I  Smarting  pain  in  pudendum,  as  if  parts  were  sore,  espe-
cially during  micturition.

Stinging  in  pudendum  when  walking.

I  Itching  of  vulva  during  menses.

I  Pruritus  vulvae  causes  masturbation.

■  Varicose  veins  of  external  genitals,  with  fidgety  feet.

■  Mammge  swollen  and  sore  to  touch ;  sore  nipples;  cata-

menia  suppressed.

Pressure  on  pudenda  and  rectum.

Pressure  toward  pudenda,  with  cutting  pain  about  navel.

Profuse  falling  of  hair  from  genitals.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  During preg-
nancy: metallic  taste; taste  of  blood  in  mouth  and
sweetish  risings  from  stomach.

Terrible  heartburn  after  taking  sweetish  things ;  great
greediness  when  eating,  cannot  eat  fast  enough,  from
canine  hunger ;  aversion  to  meat ;  much  nausea  and
vomiting;  fidgety  feet;  swollen  feet  and  varicose  veins.

I  I  Cutting  upward  in  1.  iliac  region,  in  paroxysms,  in  a
pregnant  woman.

■  Sensation  of  stagnation  of  blood  in  1.  leg;  varices  during

pregnancy.

■  Tendency  to  miscarry.

I  I  Puerperal  convulsions  if  an  eruption  (especially  a
chronic  one)  has  recently  disappeared.

■  Nymphomania, lochia suppressed,  scanty secretion of

milk,  painful  sensitiveness  of  internal  and  external
genital  organs.

■  Mammae swollen and sore  to touch; catamenia  sup-

pressed.

■  Soreness  of  nipples.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Weakness

of  vocal  organs  while  talking  loud.
I  I  Hoarseness ;  with  burning  in  trachea ;  as  if  chest  were

filled  with  mucus.
Accumulation  of  mucus  in  larynx  and  posterior  nares,

with  obstruction  of  both  nostrils,  and  with  nasal  speech.
Accumulation  of  mucus,  causing  tickling  in  larynx.
Tickling  in  larynx,  together  with  sticking  in  it.
Frequent  acute  tickling  in  region  of  larynx.


ZIXCUM.  516

"^Respiration.  iRespiration :  oppressed  and  difficult;  very
heav}'^  and  deep;  through  nose,  impeded,  with  appre-
hension and  oppression  ;  difficult,  especially  in  1.  lung.

Spasmodic  oppression  of  breathing.

Shortness  of  breath  from  flatulence  after  eating.

I  Tight  breathing  and  oppression,  especially  in  evening.

Severe  croupy  condition,  with  symptoms  of  paralysis  of
cervical  muscles.

■  Asthma,  evening  after  eating,  from  flatus,  with  increase
of  dyspnoea  when  expectoration  stops,  decreasing  when
it  recommences

I  I  Asthma  for  several  years;  fits  of  dyspnoea,  very  severe
at  night,  but  is  never  quite  free  even  during  day.
^' Cough.  Cough:  with  stitciies  in  head;  all  night,  with  dull
pains  in  chest;  violent;  Ispasmodic,  child  puts  hands
to  genitals;  with  varicose  veins  on  legs;  with  shooting
in  scrobiculum,  leaving  when  sputum  is  raised;  <  after
eating  sweets,  I  lor  taking  wine;  I  during  menses  ;  does
not  permit  him  to  sleep  all  night,  with  sticking  in  chest
and  slight  thirst;  hacking,  but  seldom,  with  persistent
rawness  in  throat,  in  evening;  tickling,  very  fatiguing
during  day,  <  at  night ;  short,  caused  by  tickling  be-
neath sternum;  frequent,  dry  hacking,  without  pain;
dry,  in  evening,  with  heaviness  in  chest,  which  disap-
pears after  lying  down,  in  evening;  dry,  frequently
wakes  her  at  night,  during  menses;  dry,  with  violent
stitches  in  chest,  and  a  feeling  as  if  it  would  burst,
could  only  breathe  and  talk  with  difficulty ;  suffocative,
a  tickling  irritation  takes  away  breath;  and  oppres-
sion ;  troublesome,  as  soon  as  he  brings  up  something
he  feels  much  relieved;  spasmodic,  with  such  as  have
large  varicosities  on  legs,  disposed  to  burst  and  bleed.

Incessant  tendency  to  cough  and  spit.

Bloody  expectoration,  with  dry  cough,  with  burning  and
sore  pain  in  chest,  morning  and  evening,  always  before
and  during  menses.
I  I  Frequent  short  cough;  abundant  easy  expectoration  of
frothy  mucus ;  cough  <  at  night  and  in  recumbent  posi-
tion, could  not  go  to  bed,  sat  in  chair  whole  night,  cough
almost  incessant. ^Bronchitis.

I  I  For  last  three  months  frightful  cough,  so  constant  as  to
leave  him  but  little  sleep,  took  away  his  appetite ;  much
reduced  in  flesh  and  strength ;  irritation  to  cough,  a
constant  tickling  in  upper  third  of  chest  on  both  sides;
dyspnoea,  anxiety ;  coughed  a  long  time  and  then  raised
a  little  mucus;  some  soreness  in  chest;  has  a  hernia,
every  cough  presses  down  on  sac  and  testicles.

I  Whooping  cough: exhausting,  spasmodic, exerted by


517  ZINCUM.

a  tickling  in  larynx  and  trachea  and  as  far  down  as
middle  of  chest;  in  evening  and  at  night  without  ex-
pectoration, in  morning  and  during  day  with  expecto-
ration of  a  yellow,  purulent,  blood-streaked,  tenacious
mucus,  having  a  repulsive,  sweetish,  putrid  or  metallic
taste,  or  of  bright  blood  ;  children  grasp  genitals  when
coughing.

iSputa:  yellow,  purulent;  blood-streaked;  bloody;  tena-
cious; sweetish;  putrid;  metallic  tasting;  pure  blood,
morning  and  during  day ;  raises  a  large  amount  of  mu-
cus of  a  milky  color;  of  tenacious  mucus  like  old  catarrh,
with  cough,  after  expectoration  a  sensation  as  if  hollow
and  cold  in  chest.

Expectoration  of  bloody  mucus  when  coughing,  preceded
by  stitches  in  side.
^' Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. il  Roughness  and  rawness  in
chest,  with  heat  and  sweat  at  night.

I  I  Anxiety  in  chest;  angina;  oppression,  pressure,  tight-
ness.

Tightness  in  chest  on  walking  in  open  air,  as  if  constricted
by  a  band  transversely  across  it.

Tightness  like  a  constriction  about  chest,  with  a  pain  as
if  cut  to  pieces.

Tensive  pains  in  chest.

Pressure:  upon  chest;  in  whole  thorax;  here  and  thereupon
chest  and  back;  cramplike, 'in  chest  and  pit  of  stomach;
as  from  rheumatism  and  incarcerated  flatus;  in  morn-
ing, at  r.  extremity  of  1.  clavicle;  coming  up  from  pit
of  stomach,  >  by  eructations;  extending  into  throat,
as  if  a  foreign  substance  were  rising  up ;  like  a  rheu-
matic drawing  just  beneath  clavicle  near  shoulder  joint;
intermittent,  outward,  with  drawing  tension,  here  and
there  in  1.  chest;  sharp,  in  r.  chest  near  axilla;  in  1.  side,
or  here  and  there  over  whole  chest;  on  1.  clavicle;  and
sticking  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  tearing,  in  lower  portion  of
1.  chest.

Pain  in  chest  as  if  beaten,  while  riding  in  a  carriage.

Pain  in  chest,  especially  in  r.  side,  as  if  blood  were  forc-
ing its  way  into  finest  vessels  in  lungs.

Pain  in  a  small  spot  in  upper  part  of  chest,  as  if  internally
there  were  a  sore  bruised  spot.

Sensation  of  cramp  in  chest,  extending  to  stomach  and
abdomen,  7  to  8  p.m.

Pinching  and  twinging  pain  in  chest,  from  time  to  time.

Pinching  pain  in  chest  at  intervals,  with  qualmishness,  in
morning.

Dull  tearing  pain  in  chest  above  pit  of  stomach.

Tearing  stitches  in  chest  beneath  axilla,  followed  by  a  sore
feeling.


ZINCUM.  518

Dull  pressing  sticking  and  tension  in  chest  beneath  r.
axilla.

Violent  stitches  in  chest  when  walking  in  open  air,  ex-
tending to  1.  side  of  neck,  with  difficult  breathing.

Sticking  in  one  spot  in  chest  on  deep  breathing.

Chest  symptoms  <  by  motion,  or  when  she  lifts  or  takes
hold  of  anything  with  hands.

A  feeling  of  weakness  and  burning  in  sternum.

Tightness  in  middle  of  chest,  beneath  sternum,  in  evening.

Tightness  of  chest,  with  dull  sticking  and  pressure  in
middle  of  sternum,  with  small,  rapid  pulse.

■  Burning  in  chest.

I  Dull  stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest.

•  Sticking  pain  in  a  spot  in  1.  side  of  chest  as  large  as  a
hand,  with  a  feeling  as  if  part  were  corroded  and  bruised.

■  Convulsive  tightness  of  chest.

I  Chest  is  loaded  with  mucus,  fails  to  hawk  up  mucus  for
some  time,  becomes  dyspnoeic,  without  anguish,  passes
off  as  soon  as  mucus  is  expectorated.

Coldness  in  chest.

Stitches  in  1.  chest  and  in  heart  at  every  beat.

Sensation  of  emptiness  behind  sternum.

Tension  in  sternum.

Pressure  upon  upper  part  of  sternum  or  lower  portion  of
chest  after  eating.

Sticking  pain  in  sternum.

Sticking  and  tightness  in  middle  of  chest  during  and  after
inspiration.

Stitches  in  middle  of  sternum,  at  times,  on  stooping,  so
severe  that  he  cried  out,  at  times  followed  by  painful
pressure  deep  internally,  extending  up  into  throat.

A  stitch  in  upper  part  of  sternum,  extending  into  1.  lum-
bar region,  with  a  fear  of  stooping.

Dull  stitch  beneath  sternum  while  eating.

Pain  in  1.  pectoral  muscles  as  if  beaten  or  sore.

Ribs  of  whole  1.  thorax  painful  and  sensitive  to  touch.

Burning  in  a  small  spot  in  r.  side  of  chest,  near  pit  of
stomach,  also  above  1.  nipple.

Tension,  bruised  pain,  and  stitches  in  whole  r.  side  of  chest.

Tension  and  drawing  in  1.  clavicle.

Tearing:  in  r.  upper  ribs  near  back;  in  r.  chest;  in  1.
chest  beneath  axilla.

Pinching  pain  in  forepart  of  r.  chest,  followed  by  stitches
in  hypochondrium,  extending  to  praBcordial  region,  with
long-remaining  bruised  pain  in  part.

Stitches:  in  r.  side  of  chest,  at  times  on  turning  body  to
r.  or  after  dinner,  followed  by  pressure,  or  alternating
with  stitches  in  r.  groin  and  side  of  abdomen ;  constant,


519  ZINCUM.

pressing,  in  r.  side  of  chest,  especially  <  by  violent  ex-
piration;  sharp,  deep  within  r.  chest;  dull,  in  r.  short
ribs;  beneath  r.  nipple;  in  1.  chest,  at  times  very  vio-
lent; in  side,  at  night;  in  region  of  1.  ribs  opposite  pit
of  stomach,  with  ulcerative  pain;  in  1.  side  of  chest  on
moving  arm ;  in  1.  chest,  in  evening,  while  standing,
with  bruised  pain  in  spot;  dull,  in  upper  part  of  1.  chest;
beneath  heart,  pleuritic,  in  evening;  violent,  in  1.  side,
<  by  breathing,  >  on  stretching  out ;  acute,  in  1.  clav-
icle.

Sticking  in  1.  thorax,  with  painful  sensation  in  1.  nipple.

Sharp  sticking  tearing  in  1.  chest.

Painful  pulsating  throbbing  in  1.  chest,  near  axilla.

I  I  Left  chest;  painfulness  of  1.  nipple;  spasmodic  sensa-
tion in  lungs  and  heart;  cough  lasting  all  night,  with
shooting  pains  passing  to  stomach ;  spitting  of  blood
after  a  hard  coughing  spell,  followed  by  burning  and
soreness  in  chest;  sputa  sometimes  yellow,  purulent,
tenacious  or  sweetish,  with  a  metallic  taste;  jerking  of
body  during  sleep ;  cramps  in  external  muscles  of  neck
when  swallowing. /^Phthisis.

I  1 A  young,  delicate  girl,  set.  19,  with  a  very  fine  skin  and
constantly  ailing,  passed  through  three  attacks  of  pneu-
monia, treated  antiphlogistically ;  attacked  anew  with
pneumonia;  on  sixth  day  both  lungs  implicated,  a
stitching  pain  in  trachea,  increased  by  pressure,  by
breathing  and  by  continuous  short  cough;  lies  on  her
back,  does  not  stir,  every  motion  increases  pain;  an-
swers only  by  signs,  every  word  spoken  and  every  move-
ment causes  excruciating,  tearing  pain  in  occiput  and
from  there  to  forehead,  as  if  it  would  tear  it  asunder;
bruised  sensation  in  trachea  and  above  manubrium
sterni;  respiratio  nasalis ;  burning  hot,  dry  skin  ;  pulse
full  and  exceedingly  rapid ;  cold  hands,  with  sensation
of  numbness,  <  at  night;  segophony  and  mucous  rales
on  r.  side.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Severe  pain  in  region  of
heart,  with  a  slight  swelling  externally;  great  tender-
ness over  cardiac  region.

Pressure,  spasmodic  tension,  and  heaviness  in  heart.

Cramplike  feeling  in  heart  and  lungs.

Stitches  above  heart  in  evening.

Sharp  stitches  in  prsecordial  region,  <  by  violent
expiration.

I  1  Tension  and  stitches  in  prsecordial  region.

First  cardiac  sound  hoarse  and  rather  prolonged.

Palpitation  :  and  a  stitch  with  every  beat  of  heart ;  fre-
quent; momentary;  with  anguish,  irregular  spasmodic


ZINCUM.  520

movements  of  heart;  beat  of  heart  so  strong  that  it  takes
breath  away ;  beat  of  heart  intermits.
1  I  Feels  as  if  a  cap  were  over  heart;  spine  affected.

■  Irregular,  spasmodic  action  of  heart; occasionally  one

violent  thump.
I  I  Man  subject  to  rheumatism  and  suffering  from  aortic
insufficiency  and  albuminuria;  legs,  scrotum  and  ab-
domen enormously  swollen ;  heart's  action  very  irreg-
ular ;  fearful  attacks  of  dyspnoea.

iViolent  pulsations  in  bloodvessels,  during  heat.

Pulse :  irregular;  small  and  frequent  evenings,  slow  morn-
ings ;  increased  by  wine ;  scarcely  perceptible ;  tense,
accelerated,  irregular,  hard ;  small  and  hard ;  slow,
easily  compressed ;  slow,  very  feeble ;  40  and  intermit-
ting ;  wiry  and  irregular.
^^  Outer  Chest.  '  l  Left-sided  intercostal  neuralgia,  <  on  mo-
tion and  on  becoming  tired,  at  times  with  palpitation.

Burning  on  r.  chest  as  if  in  skin,  extending  to  back.

Pressure  beneath  1.  nipple.

Fine  sharp  drawing  about  1.  nipple,  with  sore  pain  when
touched  ;  soon  becomes  pulsating.

A  stitch  beneath  r.  mamma.

Sticking  beneath  1.  breast.

Stitches  in  1.  mamma,  dull  and  painful  in  morning.

Feeling  of  distension  in  1.  mamma.

Left  nipple  very  painful  and  sensitive.

Violent  pressing  pain  in  r.  mamma.

Pressing  sore  pain  about  r.  nipple.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Nape  of  neck  feels  weary  and  tired  from
writing  or  any  exertion.

■  Stiffness  and  tension  in  neck.
Tearing  pains  in  neck.

■Stiffness  and  pain  in  cervical  and  upper  dorsal  muscles,

in  morning.
Cramplike  stiffness  in  1.  side  of  neck.
I  I  Pains  as  if  beaten,  and  as  if  wearied  by  too  great  effort,

in  neck  and  back.
•  I  Pain  in  cervical  muscles,  at  night,  as  if  head  had  been

held  in  an  uncomfortable  position,  even  felt during

sleep.
I  I  Tearing  in  r.  side  of  neck.
Pain  in  side  of  neck  extending  to  shoulder,  with  stiffness

of  part,  several  mornings  in  bed,  disappearing  during

day.
Tension  and  drawing  in  r.  side  of  neck.
Tension  in  anterior  cervical  muscles.
Pressure  as  with  finger  on  r.  side  of  neck  when  talking.
A  pinching  feeling  on  both  sides  of  neck,  near  trunk.


521


ZINCUM.

Cramplike  drawing :  down  cervical  muscles  while  chew-
ing ;  on  r.  side  of  neck  while  holding  head  erect,  as  if
neck  were  stiff.

Tearing  stitches  which  pass  into  each  other  in  neck  and
chin.

I  I  Tearing  in  r.  side  of  neck  posteriorly,  also  just  below
jaw,  and  behind  and  beneath  ear.

Tearing  in  1.  side  of  neck,  extending  behind  1.  ear.

Frequent  violent  tearing  in  1.  side  of  neck,  always  disap-
pearing on  pressure,  in  morning.

Sticking  tearing  posteriorly  and  inferiorly,  in  a  small  spot
in  r.  side  of  neck.

Stitches  in  cervical  muscles.

Pain  in  back,  more  while  sitting.

Bruised  pain  in  back  while  walking  in  open  air.

Burning  pressure  upon  spine,  somewhat  above  small  of

back.  1 1 1 •

Burning  drawing  pain  in  back  and  small  of  back  during

sleep,  in  morning,  also  a  sensation  of falling asleep,

in  shoulder  joint,  disturbing  sleep, disappearing on

waking.
Tensive  pressure  upon  a  small  spot  on  back,  by  border  ot

r.  scapula.
Tensive  rheumatic  pain  in  spine.
Pinching  and  burning  pain  in  small  spots  in  back.
Stiffness  and  pain  in  upper  dorsal  muscles,  especially  on

movement,  <  at  night.
Burning  tearing  between  spine  and  r.  scapula.
Burning  in  1  side  and  1.  scapula.
Pain  between shoulders; extending through small of

back  to  sacrum.
Pressure :  in  r.  side  near  middle  of  spine ;  in  back  beneath

1.  scapula;  sharp,  in  back,  close  to  r.  scapula;  in  lower

portion  of  spine,  in  small  of  back.
Pressing  tension  in  back  beneath  r.  scapula,  extending

down  back  and  toward  axilla.
Tensive  pain  between  shoulders  during  rest  and  motion;

as  from  an  adhesive  plaster,  near  inner  margin  of  r.

scapula.
Stitches:  dull,  beneath  r.  scapula ;  sharp,  close  to  upper

part  of  r.  scapula,  most  acute  during  eructations ;  vio-
lent, in  middle  of  spine  and  in  abdomen,  immediately

after  supper ;  violent,  in  middle  of  back  while  standing;

beneath  1.  scapula,  extending  forward  into  1.  pectoral

region;  extending  into  1.  scapula.
Sticking :  from  r.  to  1.  scapula ;  constant,  in  margin  of  1.

scapula,  extending  toward  axilla,  so  violent  that  she

started,  with  rising  of  heat  to  head ; dull  jerking,  just

beneath  and  near  1.  scapula.


ZINCUM.  522

Beating  throbbing  under  lower  third  of  1.  scapula.
Aching  in  lumbar  region  with  a  feeling  of  languor.
Pain  in  lumbar  region  of  spine.
Tensive  pains,  very  violent,  rheumatic,  in  lumbar  region

and  in  shoulders.
Cracking  in  small  of  back  while  walking.
Feeling  of  weakness  in  small  of  back  and  transient  weak-
ness in  lower  extremities,  on  beginning  to  walk.
Paralyzed  feeling  in  small  of  back,  extending  to  hips,  and

1.  side.
Pressing  paralytic  pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  one  had

been  lying  in  an  uncomfortable  position,  <  on  rising

from  a  seat  and  beginning  to  walk.
Pain  in  small  of  back  ;  on  turning  over  in  bed  at  night ;

and  loins  on  stooping ;  when  walking  and  sitting  down ;

and  abdomen,  with  stitches  in  1.  side  and  drawing  pain

in  lower  extremities.
Feeling  of  tension  and  weakness  in  small  of  back  while

sitting,  with  tension  in  head.
Screwed-in  sensation  in  small  of  back,  on  rising  from  a

seat.
Drawing  burning  in  back  and  small  of  back.
Drawing  like  a  painful  weakness  in  small  of  back  and

spine,  while  sitting  and  stooping.
Violent  cutting  in  small  of  back  from  slightest  movement,

extending  into  calves  and  feet,  so  that  he  could  neither

walk,  stand  nor  lie.

■  Burning  along  whole  spine,  <  sitting.

I  Pain  in  small  of  back,  when  sitting,  or  when  in  act  of

sitting  down ;  diminishes  by  continuous  walking.
I  Pain  at  last  dorsal  vertebra.

I  I  Violent  bruised  pain  in  back,  while  walking  in  open  air,

with  weakness.

I I  Violent  pain  in  small  of  back,  when  walking,  was  fre-
quently obliged  to  stand  still,  though  it  was  steadily
relieved  by  continuing  to  walk.

I  I  Constant  pain,  night  and  day;  either  in  back  or  loins;
severe  pains  now  here,  now  there. ^Neuralgia.

■  Violent,  long-lasting, aching  pain  about last lumbar

vertebrse.

I  Patients  cannot  sit  at  all;  they  are  so  much  <  from  sit-

ting, particularly  backache ;  burning  along  whole  spine.

I I  Spinal  affections.

■  Pushing,  aching,  or  at  times  pinching  pain  in  coccyx  ;

lancination  in  sacrum ;  pressure,  tension  and  weakness
in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions.
I  I  Numbness  and  formication  in  lower  extremities;  spinal
irritation,  with  great  prostration  of  strength.


523  ZINCUM.

I  I  Sexual  power  lost.

iTwitcbing  in  back  or  any  part  of  body;  sensitiveness  of

spine  to  touch.
I  I  Burning  along  whole  spine,  <  worse  when  sitting ;  pain

in  small  of  back,  <  by  walking.
I  Burning  in  shoulder  blades,  tensit)n  between  shoulders;

extreme  restlessness  of  legs. ^Spinal  irritation.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Burning  in  1.  axilla.
Dull  sticking  tearing  in  r.  axilla.

Stitches  in  1.  axilla  and  down  the  forepart  of  chest,  arrest-
ing breath  in  evening.
Sticking  tearing  on  top  of  r.  shoulder.
Dull  stitches  beneath  r.  shoulder.
Stitches  in  1.  shoulder.
Bruised  pain  in  1.  arm,  he  is  unable  to  raise  it  on  account

of  pain  in  deltoid  muscle.
Pressure  and  heaviness  in  both  shoulders  on  waking.
Feeling  of  soreness  as  after  a  bruise,  in  a  small  spot  in

axilla.
Falling-asleep  sensation  in  shoulder  joint.
Rheumatic  pains  in  both  deltoid  muscles,  <  by  raising

arm.
Acute  rheumatic  drawing  extending  from  top  of  shoulder,

in  deltoid  muscles  down  both  arms,  <  by  raising  arms.
Jerking in  r.  shoulder,  followed by bruised pain  in  1.

scapula.
Tension  and  tearing  in  both  shoulder  joints.
Rheumatic  tension  in  head  of  1.  humerus.
Tearing  arthritic  pain  in  shoulder  joint,  extending  down

to  fingers.
Tearing  pain  deep  in  r.  shoulder.
Tearing  in  r.  shoulder,  with  pressure  in  middle  of  upper

arm,  disappearing  on  scratching.
Tearing  pressure  in  1.  shoulder,  about  beginning  of  neck.
Violent  tearing  in  shoulder  joint  upon  which she  was

lying,  deep  in  bone,  in  evening  in  bed.
Tearing,  extending  into  axilla,  beneath  1.  arm.
Tearing  in  both  upper  arms  from  deltoid  downward.
Tearing  in  anterior  surface  of  1.  upper  arm,  near  elbow,

in  r.  arm  near  shoulder.
Intermittent  tearing  in  middle  of  inner  side  of  1.  upper

arm.
I  I  Tearing  in  1.  upper  arm  near  shoulder.
Sticking  in  r.  upper  arm,  in  morning.
Sticking  and  burning  in  anterior  surface  of  1.  upper  arm,

after  dinner.
Bubbling  in  1.  upper  arm.
I  I  Burning  in  1.  .forearm.


ZINCUM.  524

Dull  pain  in  r.  upper  arm.

Bruised  pain  in  bone  of  r.  upper  arm.

Drawing  in  1.  upper  arm  close  to  elbow.

Tearing  in  both  upper  arms  close  to  elbows.

Prostration  of  both  arms  with  tension.

Loss  of  power  in  arm  and  pain  at  wrist.

■  Paralytic  feeling  in  arms ; in  brain  diseases; paralysis

from  cerebral  hemorrhages.
Twitching  of  1.  arm  in  morning  during  sleep.
Drawing  pain  extending  from  tips  of  fingers  up  both  arms.
I  I  Tearing  in  r.  elbow  joint,  >  by  rubbing,  in  morning.
Constant  painful  heaviness,  as  if  paralyzed,  in  bend  of  1.

elbow.
Disagreeable  jerking in  elbow  "joint,  between  olecranon

and  on  inner  condyle  of  humerus.
Bruised  sensation  in  bend  of  r.  arm.
Rheumatic  pressure  in  elbows.
Rheumatic  drawing  in  r.  elbow.
Tearing  in  bend  of  elbows.
Tearing  up  and  down  in  1.  elbow,  in  a  spot  of  a  hand's

breadth.
Sticking  and  tension  in  r.  elbow  joint  in  evening,  when

yawning.
Bruised  pain  in  forearm  on  touch  and  on  turning  arm,  at

times  with  tearing  in  thick  portion  of  it.
Drawing  pain  in  forearm  as  if  in  bone.
Cramplike  drawing  in  forearm  or  in  fingers.
Dull  bubbling  tearing  in  muscles  of  inner  side  of  r.  fore-
arm, not  far  from  elbow.
Sharp  tearing  in  1.  forearm,  mostly  in  upper  part.
Burning  in  forearm  above  r.  wrist,  on  moving  arm.
Tension  in  r.  wrist  as  if  muscles  were  too  short.
Rheumatic  tension  above  1.  wrist.
Drawing  pain  in  r.  wrist  as  if  sprained.
Rheumatic  drawing  and  tearing  in  r.  wrist.
Tearing  internally  in  wrist.
Tearing  in  middle  of  r.  wrist,  followed  by  tearing  toward

backs  of  fingers.
Tearing  in  bend  of  1.  wrist,  with  tearing  stitches  on  back

of  1.  hand.
Burning  pain  in  r.  wrist  and  ball  of  hand.
Tearing  and  painful  throbbing  in  1.  thumb  toward  tip  as  if

in  an  ulcer,  with  falling  asleep  and  a  numb  sensation  in

it,  and  with  externally  perceptible  lieat.
Tearing  in  tips  of  index,  middle  and  little  fingers.
Tearing  drawing  in  last  phalanges  of  1.  middle  and  ring

fingers.
Drawing  tearing  in  r.  thumb.


525  ZINCUM.

Jerking  tearing  extending  from  first  finger  joint  of  1.  hand

toward  tips  in  evening.
Sharp  sticking  tearing  in  last  joint  of  r.  thumb.
Tearing  stitches  in  fingers.
Tearing  stitches  in  middle  joints  of  last  three  fingers  of

both  hands.
Sharp  cutting  stitches  in  tips  of  both  thumbs.
Large  needle  stitches  through  first  phalanx  of  1.  thumb.
Crawling  and  throbbing  frequently  in  1.  thumb,  with  a

feeling  of  heat  in  it.
Jerking  in  first  joint  of  r.  thumb  without  pain.
Tearing  in  r.  thumb  and above  it,  and  in  two  adjacent

fingers.
Tearing  beneath  nail  of  r.  thumb.
Tearing  in  metacarpal  bones  of  both  index  fingers.
Pressing  pain  in  middle  joint  of  r.  index  finger,  and  at

intervals  in  its  first  phalanx.
•  Tearing  in  first  joints  and  phalanges  of  fingers.

■  Tearing  in  back  of  1.  hand.

■  Spasmodic  tension  of  r.  hand.

■  Weakness  and  trembling  of  hands  while  WTiting.

■  Trembling  of  hands  during  menses.

■  Lameness  and  deadness  of  hands;  they  look  bluish.
Trembling  of  hand,  more  when  resting  it  quietly  upon

table  than  when  leaning  upon  elbow.

Stiffness  of  back  of  hand  and  a  feeling  of  cramp  in  ex-
tensor muscles  of  thumb,  while  playing  piano.

Rigidity  of  hands,  mostly  of  r.  hand.

Tension  in  metacarpal  bone  of  little  finger,  extending
toward  wrist.

I  I  Spasmodic  tension  of  r.  hand  ;  it  was  quite  blue,  cadav-
erous, heavy  and  insensible,  with  a  small  thready  and
scarcely  perceptible  pulse

Hands  are  asleep  in  morning  on  waking.

Pressure  in  ball  of  1.  hand.

Burning  in  a  small  spot  in  1.  hand.

Pinching  or  bruised  sticking  in  ball  of  1.  hand,  above
little  finger,  very  painful.

Tearing  in  hand  extending  from  wrist  to  first  phalanx  of
thumb,  while  riding  in  a  carriage.

Sticking  tearing  in  r.  hand  in  bend  of  wrist,  and  in  palm
near  little  finger.

Sharp  tearing  in  r.  hand  just  beneath  joints.

Pressing  tearing  at  root  of  hand  near  region  of  pisiform
bone.

Tearing  on  back  of  r.  hand,  in  fourth  and  fifth  metacarpal
bones  and  in  wrist.

Tensive  tearing  in  r.  palm.


ZmCUM.  526

I  I  Tearing  in  back  of  1.  hand,  also  at  times  alternating

with  tearing  of  r.  hand.
Tearing  drawing  in  palm  of  1.  hand,  between  thumb  and

index  finger.
Cracks  between  fingers.
Dry  herpes  on  hands  and  fingers ; they  are  rough  and

itch.

■  Cracked  and  dry  skin  "of  hands,  even  in  mild  weather.

■  Chilblains  itch  and  swell.

'^  Lower  Limbs.  Tearing  anteriorly  on  crest  of  ilium  while
sitting.

Sticking  tearing  on  r.  natis  below  hip.

Tearing  in  natis  beneath  1.  hip.

Pulsation  in  1.  natis.

Bubbling  in  r.  natis.

Pressing  drawing  just  above  r.  natis.

Drawing  pain  in  nates  after  drinking  wine.

Bruised  pain  in  gluteal  and  posterior  femoral  muscles.

Sticking  on  posterior  surface  of  thigh  while  yawning,  in
evening.

Tearing  just  beneath  both  hips,  and  posteriorly  on  r.  hip.

Pressing  drawing  on  posterior  portion  of  thigh,  so  that  he
could  not  sit  down ;  when  walking  it  gradually  disap-
peared.

Bruised  pain  with  pinching,  heat  and  burning  in  region
of  1.  hip,  extending  to  middle  of  thigh,  wdth  weakness
of  leg,  and  persistent  sensitiveness  in  hip,  while  walking
and  standing,  pain  disappears  while  sitting.

Bruised  pain  in  hip  joint,  as  if  flesh  were  loosened  from
bone.

Violent  pain  in  hip  joints,  as  if  beaten,  tension  and  pain
on  motion.

Left  hip  painful  posteriorly.

Dull  pressure  above  r.  hip.

Drawing,  tearing  and  burning  posteriorly  in  1.  hip.

Pressing  tearing  in  1.  hip.

Painful  sensation  of  heaviness  and  lameness  in  r.  thigh
while  walking.

Heaviness  and  paralytic  pain  in  1.  femur,  above  knee,
very  violent  while  walking,  standing  and  sitting,  in
evening.

Paralytic  pain  in  r.  thigh,  first  in  upper  part,  then  extend-
ing downward  toward  knee,  while  standing,  >  by  sit-
ting, in  evening.

Bruised  pain  on  anterior  surface  of  1.  thigh,  sore  on
pressure.

■  Rheumatic  drawing  in  thighs.
■Tearing  in  thighs.


527  ZINCUM.

Drawing  pain  in  inner  side  of  r.  thigh.

Drawing  sore  pain  in  outer  muscles  of  thigh.

Dull  jerking  pain  on  inner  side  of  thigh.

I  I  Tearing  in  thighs,  especially  in  their  thick  portions,  vio-
lent and  persistent.

Violent  tearing  on  outer  side  of  thigh  as  if  in  bone,  ex-
tending from  hip  down  middle  of  thigh,  while  sitting.

Painful  tearing  in  1.  thigh,  extending  upward  from  knee
to  middle.

Tearing  in  inner  side  of  1.  thigh,  disappearing  on  motion.

Tearing  stitches  in  thigh  while  walking  and  lying.

I  I  Severe,  extensive,  but  superficial  moist  excoriations  of
inner  and  upper  parts  of  thighs.

I  I  Itching  of  thighs  and  hollows  of  knees,  in  evening.

■  Varices  in  thigh,  extending  to  labise.
. Falling  asleep  of  r.  leg,  as  far  as  knee,  at  night.

Great  weakness  in  hollows  of  knees  and  in  small  of  back,
while  walking.

Dull  pain  in  knee  gradually  increasing  and  decreasing.

While  walking  a  feeling  of  pain  in  bend  of  knee,  as  if  mus-
cles were  too  short.

Pain  in  r.  ligamentum  patellae  on  pressure  or  walking,
especially  on  ascending  or  descending.

Pain  in  joints  of  knees  and  ankles.

Violent  pains,  first  in  r.,  then  in  1.  patellae  and  in  heel,  in
evening  and  night.

Bruised  feeling  in  knee  joints.

Gnawing  and  boring  in  1.  knee,  with  tension  in  upper  part
of  calf,  renewed  after  sitting  down.

Frequent  dull  boring  pain  in  knees.

Painful  boring  in  knees,  especially  in  r.  in  evening.

Painful  tension in hollows  of  knees  while  walking  in
open  air.

Tension,  then  burning,  just  below  r.  knee,  in  upper  part
of  tibia.

Tensive  pain  in  r.  knee  joint  while  walking.

Drawing  pain  in  knee  at  night.

Rheumatic  drawing  in  r.  knee,  and  downward  in  tibia.

Tearing  and  bruised  pain  in  bends  of  knees,  <  while  walk-
ing, >  while  sitting,  in  morning.

Tearing  in  r.  knee  and  also  in  outer  margin  of  bend  of
knee,  extending  into  calf.

Tearing  in  r.  knee  disappearing  on  rubbing.

Tearing  on  outer  side  of  1.  patella.

Tearing  and  gnawing  in  1.  knee,  extending  upward  and
downward.

Tearing  and  contraction  in  1.  knee,  as  if  in  bone,  very
painful  during  rest  and  motion.


ZINCUM.  528

Tearing  in  1.  knee  joint  or  from  knee  upward,  with  bruised
pain  in  spot.

Pressing  stitch  on  inner  side  of  r.  knee  during  rest.

Stitches  in  knee.

Stitch  like  a  flea-bite  on  inner  side  of  r.  knee.

Beating  in  knees  while  sitting  after  a  short  walk.

Frequent  crawling  in  1.  knee  joint.

I  I  Violent  itching  on  r.  knee  joint.

Tightness  and  stiffness  of  muscles  of  calf  while  walking.

Tension  and  pressure  in  leg  down  along  tibia.

Tensive  pain  in  1.  leg.

Tension  and  drawing  in  calves.

Alternating  pressure  and  drawing  in  both  bones  of  r.  leg.

Pressure  followed  by  tearing  on  inner  side  of  1.  leg,  between
ankle  and  calf.

Cramp  in  leg  in  morning  in  bed  drawing  it  up.

I  I  Tearing  in  calves.

Tearing  downward  in  tibia  to  back  of  foot.

I  I  Piercing  stitches  in  tibia.

I  Burning  pain  in  tibia.

Cramp  in  calves  threatens  on  turning  over.

Cramplike  pain  in  calf  and  1.  foot,  also  at  night.

Jerking  in  1.  calf.

Drawing  pain  in  legs  in  evening.

Rheumatic  drawing  and  tension  in  r.  tibia.

Drawing  pain  in  r.  tibia  and  down  both  calves.

Tearing  in  r.  leg  beneath  knee  followed  by  a  bruised  pain.

Tearing  in  1.  leg  between  tibia  and  ankle.

Tearing  in  calf  extending  to  malleoli.

Tearing  in  lower  end  of  r.  tibia.

Sticking  pain  in  both  tibise  while  walking.

Swelling  about  malleoli  of  foot  formerly  diseased.

Rheumatic  tension  in  1.  ankle  during  rest.

Pain  as  if  sprained  in  ankle  on  moving  foot.

Pressing  pain  beneath  outer  malleolus.

Tearing  beneath  r.  inner  malleolus,  extending  to  heel  in
evening  while  sitting.

Tearing  in  bend  of  ankle  and  also  in  margin  and  on  back
of  1.  foot.

Tearing  in  r.  outer  malleolus  disappearing  on  rubbing.

Pulsating  tearing  in  both  tendons  Achillis.

Burning  beneath  r.  inner  malleolus.

Violent  inflamed  swelling  of  foot.

Trembling  of  feet ;  on  raising  them  when  sitting.

Trembling  of  feet  and  difficulty  of  raising  them,  with  fre-
quent stumbling.

During  menses  weakness  and  trembling  of  feet.

Burning  beneath  r.  heel,  <  when  stepping  and  walking
than  while  sitting,  in  evening.


529  ZINCUM.

Burning  and  ulcerative  pain  in  both  soles,  in  morning.

Pain  in  outer  margin  of  foot  as  if  bone  would  break
while  walking,  on  raising  foot,  also  on  holding  it  side-
ways and  resting  it  upon  tip.

Pain  in  soles  on  stepping- upon  thenr,  they  seem  swollen,
with  a  feeling  as  if  scratched  by  toothed  instrument.

Frequent  acute  falling  asleep  of  feet  during  evening.

Paralyzed  feeling  in  whole  r.  foot.

Tension  in  r.  foot,  as  if  foot  had  been  sprained  or  muscles
were  too  short.

Tension  in  r.  sole,  as  if  tendons  were  too  short,  while  step-
ping or  walking,  in  evening.

Drawing  in  bones  of  1.  foot.

Drawing  tearing  in  r.  foot  extending  into  malleoli,  with  a
feeling  of  heaviness  during  rest.

I  I  Drawing  tearing  about  both  malleoli,  and  in  tendons
Achillis.

Tearing  in  outer  margin  of  r.  foot  toward  toes,  disappear-
ing on  rubbing.

Tearing  and  crawling  on  back  of  1.  foot,  with  a  feeling  of
numbness  in  soles,  disappearing  on  walking.

Tearing  and  pain  in  heels,  feet  seem  beaten  from  body.

Tearing  in  both  soles.

Sticking  tearing  in  soles,  in  bend  of  joints  of  r.  little  toe.

A  stitch  above  r.  foot  while  running.

Burning  stitches  in*  bones  of  back  of  foot,  here  and  there.

Stitches  in  heel.

Piercing  stitches  in  ball  of  foot.

Toes  painful,  as  if  sore  after  walking.

Ulcerative  pain  in  r."  great  toe,  in  evening.
"  Pain,  like  suppuration  in  nail  of  great  toe,  when  touched.

Feeling  as  if  there  were  blisters  on  toe,  as  after  walking.

Drawing,  tearing,  sticking  in  toes  and  forepart  of  foot.

Tearing  in  lower  portion  of  first  two  r.  toes.

Tearing  sore  pain  in  tip  of  great  toe  and  beneath  nail.

I  I  Sprained  pain  in  bend  of  first  joint  of  toes.

I  I  Sticking  tearing  in  first  joint  of  r.  great  toe.
Sticking  tearing  in  bends  of  first  joints  of  first  two  r.  toes.
Tearing  in  r.  great  toe,  with  jerking  tearing  in  outer  side

of  1.  calf.
Tearing  in  r.  little  toe  in  evening.
Burning  and  sticking  in  ball  of  great  toe,  as  if  part  had

been  frozen.
Prickling  stitches  in  1.  great  toe.
Pulsating  sticking  in  tip  of  r.  great  toe.
■  Paralj^sis  of  feet  from  spinal  or  chronic  nervous  disease,

softening  of  brain  or  cerebral  hemorrhage.

I I  Feet  sweaty  and  sore  about  toes;  fetid  suppressed  foot
sweat,  with  much  nervous  excitement.

vol;.  X. — 34.


ZINCUM.  530

1 1  Chilblains,  <  from  friction;  painful.

1 1  Excessive  nervous  moving  of  feet  in  bed  for  hours  after

retiring,  even  when  asleep.
I  I  Great  weakness  of  feet,  in  morning  in  bed,  disappearing

after  rising  and  walking  about.
I  1  Intolerable  boring  pain  in  heel  after  drinking  wine.
I  Ulcerative  pain  in  heels,  <  when  walking.

■  Tearing  and  tension  in  margins  of  r.  foot.

I  I  Paralysis  of  feet  from  suppressed  foot  sweat,  by  getting

wet;  <  from  wine.
I  Coldness  of  feet  at  night.
Great  heaviness  of  lower  extremities  during  menses,  with

violent  drawing  about  knees,  as  if  they  would  be  twisted

around.

■  Uneasiness  in  lower  extremities  at  night,  could  not  keep

them  still.
In  morning  in  bed  cannot  allow  one  leg  to  be  bent  on

account  of  discomfort ;  is  obliged  to  stretch  it  out.
Feeling  of  congestion  of  blood  in  1.  leg.
Attacks  of  tremulous  weakness  in  lower  extremities,  with

paleness  of  face.
Weakness  of  lower  extremities,  especially  of  calves,  as  after

a  long  walk,  on  rising  from  a  seat.
Paralytic  weakness  and  heaviness  of  lower  extremities,  in

afternoon  on  beginning  to  walk,  disappearing  on  con-
tinuing to  walk.
Weakness  and  pain  in  lower  extremities,  she  could  scarcely

step,  with  sensitiveness  to  draft.
I  I  Heaviness in lower extremities,  with tearing,  could

scarcely  raise  them.

■  ■Varices  in  legs,  with  fidgety  feet.

■  Stiffness  of  leg,  could  not  walk.

■  Great  weakness  of  limbs;  formication  and  cold  feet  at

night;  chronic  neurasthenia.

■  ■Incessant  and  violent  fidgety  feeling  in  feet  or  lower

limbs,  must  move  them  constantly.
I  llnflammation  of  tendo-Achillis,  erysipelatous; <  from

touching  heel  to  ground  and  from  wine.
I  I  Sensation  of  drawing  and  contraction  in  r.  tendo-Achillis.
I  I  Legs  oedematous.
^*  Limbs  in  General. '  '  Weakness  and  weariness  of  limbs.

■  Sudden sensation of  weakness in limbs,  with  canine

hunger.

■  Great  weakness  of  limbs,  lumbar  region  and  bends  of

knees,  when  walking  in  open  air.
Trembling  of  limbs,  with  twitching  of  muscles  of  thighs.
Aching  of  limbs.
■Rheumatism,  tearing,  lameness  and  trembling ;  or  crampy


^^^  ZINCUM.

pains;  twisting  in  affected  limbs  and  frequent  jerking
of  whole  body  during  sleep;  <  from  being  overheated
and  from  exertion.
Piercing  sticking  in  joints.

Acute  darting  pain  through  joints,  especially  in  ankles,

knees  and  elbows,  with  numbness  of  adjacent  parts  and

an  exhausted,  paralyzed  sensation  in  muscles  of  upper

arms  and  thighs,  <  on  r.  side.

Sticking  and  tearing  in  limbs,  <  after  being  heated,  while

sitting.
Tearing  in  limbs  after  physical  effort  and  rapid  walking.
Drawing  in  limbs;  sometimes  ending  in  slow,  dull  stitches.
I  I  Violent  drawing  tearing  in  middle  of  almost  all  bones

of  limbs ;  unsteadiness  on  account  of  pain.
1  I  Bruised  feeling  in  limbs  and  weariness,  in  morning  on

waking.
Pressure  on  joints  produces  soreness  and  pricking  pains.
Cramp  in  extremities,  especially  in  calves  of  legs.
I  I  Stiffness  of  joints,  with  sharp,  lancinating  pains  above

joints,  transverse.
Tetanic  stiffness  and  rigidity  of  limbs,  with  soreness.
Here  and  there  oscillatory  movements  and  frequent  for-
mication of  limbs.
I  I  Violent  itching  in  all  joints  in  succession.
Itching  in  bends  of  joints.
Itching  in  extremities,  not  in  joints.
55 -n  ^^^^®"*  itching  in  all  joints  in  succession,  last  in  hip  joint.
Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  stitch  in  r.  knee;  rheu-
matic tension  in  1.  ankle;  heaviness  in  r.  foot;  stitches
in  1.  testicle;  puerperal  convulsions  <;  crawling  and
formication  in  calves  extending  into  toes.
Lying:  vertigo  >  ;  on  back,  conjunctivitis  <  ;  on  painful
side,  conjunctivitis  >;  on  1.  side,  pain  in  liver  <;  hem-
orrhoids painful  from  pressure  of  flatus; with  head
hanging  over  side  of  bed,  body  prone,  dysmenorrhoea ;
on  back,  >  pain  in  spine ;  bronchial  cough  <  ;  feels
numb  all  over;  on  back  typhoid.
Sitting:  in  bed,  as  if  bed  were  swaying;  backache,  with
coryza; nausea  >; >  constrictive  pain  in  1.  side  of
lower  abdomen; drawing  in  1.  inguinal  region;  pre-
vented by  pressing  and  boring  in  rectum ;  cutting  in
orifice  of  urethra; can  only  pass  water  while  sitting
bent  backward; pain  in  back <; pain  in  small  of
back; tension  and  weakness  in  small  of  back  ;  drawing
and  painful  weakness  in  small  of  back;  burning  alono-
spine ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  backache  <  ;  burning  in
spine <  ; could not ;  pressing  drawing  on  posterior
portion  of  thigh ;  sensitiveness  of  hip  disappears ;  tear-


ZINCUM.  532

ing  anteriorly  on  crest  of  ilium ;  heaviness  and  para-
lytic pain  in  femur;  paralytic  pain  in  r.  thigh  >;  pain
in  bends  of  knees  >;  beating  in  knee;  tearing  beneath
r.  inner  malleolus;  prickling  drawing  in  testicles;  stick-
ing and  tearing  in  limbs;  burning  in  small  places.

Sits  with  legs  crossed  ;  pressure  of  urine  on  bladder,  none
passes.

Holding  head  down  :  illusion  as  if  she  had  a  large  goitre.

Stooping:  vertigo;  after,  while  sitting,  uneasiness  in  stom-
ach ;  stitches  in  sternum ;  pain  in  small  of  back  and
loins;  drawing  and  painful  weakness  in  small  of  back;
prickling  drawing  in  testicles.

Standing :  vertigo ;  stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  heavi-
ness in  rectum  ;  sticking  and  bruised  pain  in  region  of
1.  kidney;  sensitiveness  of  hip ;  heaviness  and  paralytic
pain  in  femur ;  paralytic  pain  in  r.  thigh.

Inclination  to  stretch.

I  I  Sliding  down  in  bed. ^Typhoid.

Motion :  nausea  <  ;  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium  <  ;  <
stitches  in  internal  ulcer  above  navel ;  chest  symptoms
<  ;  intercostal  neuralgia  <  ;  stiffness  in  dorsal  muscles
<;  slightest,  causes  cutting  from  small  of  back  into
calves  and  feet ;  knee  painful ;  constant,  of  feet ;  crawl-
ing and  formication  in  both  calves,  extending  into  toes.

Turning  in  bed  :  pain  in  small  of  back.

Blowing  nose,  coughing  or  sneezing :  involuntary  urina-
tion.

Writing :  neck  weary  and  tired  ;  chilliness.

Playing  piano :  stiffness  in  back  of  hand;  cramp  in  exten-
sor muscles  of  thumb.

Yawning:  sticking  and  tension  in  r.  elbow  joint;  sticking
in  posterior; surface  of  thigh.

Eating:  neuralgia  <;  gums  painful.

Laughing:  tearing  in  r.  side  of  occiput.

Moving  arm :  burning  in  forearm  above  r.  wrist.

Raising  arm:  pain  in  deltoids  <.

Rising:  shooting  in  hypogastrium  ;  from  a  seat, pinching
in  r.  groin ;  from  a  seat,  sere  wed-in  sensation  in  small
of  back ;  from  a  seat,  weakness  of  lower  extremities,
especially  calves.

Stepping:  upon  feet,  pain  in  soles;  tension  in  sole.

Walking:  vertigo  in  occiput;  headache  <;  stitches  in  1.
hypochondrium;  flatulent  colic  <;  constrictive  pain
in  l.side  of  lower  abdomen ;  burning  sticking  in  anus  ;
sticking  and  bruised  pain  in  region  of  1.  kidney;  invol-
untary urination;  lumps  of  coagulated  blood  during
menses;  in  open  air,  tightness  of  chest;  in  open  air,
stitches  in  chest ;  bruised  pain  in back ;  cracking  in


533  ZINCUM.

small  of  back ;  weakness  in  small  of  back  and  legs  on
beginning;  pain  in  small  of  back;  pain  in  small  of
back  >  ;  pressing  drawing  in  posterior  portion  of  thigh
gradually  disappeared ;  sensitiveness  of  hip;  heaviness
and  lameness  in  r.  thigh;  heaviness  and  paralytic  pain
in  femur ;  pain  in  bend  of  knee ;  pain  in  r.  ligamentum
patellae ;  painful  tension  in  hollows  of  knees ;  tensive
pain  in  r.  knee  joint ;  pain  in  bends  of  knees  <  ;  stiff-
ness of  calf;  stickingin  tibise  ;  burning  beneath  heel;
pain  in  outer  margin  of  foot,  as  if  bone  would  break;
tension  in  sole;  after,  toes  painful  as  if  sore;  ulcerative
pain  in  heels  <  ;  on  beginning,  paralytic  weakness  and
heaviness  in  lower  extremities ;  penis  sensitive;  weak-
ness in  lumbar  region  and  bends  of  knees;  tearing  in
limbs ;  sweat ;  stinging  pain  in  bunion  on  1.  little  toe
and  ball  of  foot.

Running :  stitch  over  r.  foot.

Exertion:  neck  feels  weary  and  tired;  rheumatism  <;
tearing  in  limbs. -

Lifting:  chest  symptoms  <.

Trembling  of  feet  on  raising  them.
^^  Nerves. General  internal  discomfort.

Every  slight  emotional  excitement  causes  trembling.

Sensation  of  general  trembling  without  trembling.

Frequent  fainting  several  times  daily,  followed  by  pros-
tration and  general  numbness.

Faintness,  unconsciousness,  almost  without  pulse.

Sudden  faintlike  weakness  while  standing,  so  that  she
could  scarcely  reach  a  chair.

AVeariness,  frequent  yawning,  great  exhaustion  in  whole
body ;  heaviness  and  weariness  in  morning  in  bed.

Lassitude,  prostration  and  pains  in  limbs.

Feeling  of  languor,  with  aching  in  lumbar  region.

Body  weak  and  prostrate,  especially  after  dinner,  at  times
with  tremulousness  and  heaviness  of  head.

General  lassitude  and  sensation  all  over,  as  if  beaten.

General  exhaustion,  sleepiness,  aversion  to  noise,  and  yet
difficult  hearing,  a  dreamy  condition,  as  after  a  sleepless
night,  with  shivering  and  cold  creepings.

On  waking  in  morning,  inability  to  move  head  and  limbs,
with  extreme  sensibility  to  contact  over  whole  surface ;
after  about  an  hour  this  paralytic  state  improved  enough
to  permit  walking,  but  with  a  staggering  uncertain  gait,
and  a  marked  tendency  to  fall  to  I.  side.

Decrease  of  sensibility  to  touch  ;  tickling,  on  contrary,  was
more  quickly  responded  to  than  in  normal  state.

When  he  lies  down  feels  numb  all  over ;  fears  apoplexy.

Great  inclination  to  stretch  body  and  limbs.


ZINCUM.  534

Uncomfortable  feeling  of  pressure  and  pressing  upon  inner
walls  of  trunk,  as  if  whole  body  would  be  forced  asun-
der, without  trace  of  flatulence,  rather  caused  by  nerves,
<  in  r.  than  in  1.  side.

Cramplike  pain  here  and  there  in  muscles.

Sensation  of  swelling.

I  Hands  tremble;  grasps  at  flocks,  or  slides  down  in  bed.
Much  visible  twitching  of  body  and  face.

Twitching  and  jerking  in  various  muscles.

I I  Fidgety  feet;  must  move  them  constantly.
•  Jerking  through  whole  body  during  sleep.

iSpasms;  child  cross  before  attack,  body  hot,  restless  at
night,  cries  out  in  sleep,  looks  afraid  and  anxious  on
awakening;  involuntary  or  more  frequent  urination;
body  very  hot;  rolls  head  anxiously  from  side  to  side;
child  has  been  cross  and  irritable  for  days  previous,
with  hurried  motions,  distended  abdomen  ;  fidgety  feet,
r.  side  twitches;  pale  children  during  teething;  with
hydrocephaloid  after  cholera  infantum,  great  emacia-
tion and  prostration  ;  after  disappearance  of  old  erup-
tions ;  coma  from  cerebral  exhaustion  ;  loss  of  sensation
of  whole  body ;  with  mania  from  mental  excitement ;
somnambulism.

I  I  Puerperal  convulsions  after  Phos.,  apparently  indicated,
had  failed ;  cerebral  epilepsy ;  symptoms  felt  mostly
during  rest;  <  after  dinner  and  toward  evening;  twitch-
ing in  various  muscles ;  whole  body  jerks  during  sleep.

■  Convulsions  during  dentition,  with  pale  face  and  no  heat,
except  in  occiput;  ushered  in  with  twitching  of  single
muscles,  fidgety  feet  or  loud  screams;  gnashing  of  teeth;
rolling  of  eyes ;  sharp  cries,  caused  by  pain  in  head ;
automatic  motion  of  hands  and  head,  or  of  one  hand
and  head;  coma,  pulse  coming  in  long  waves;  sleep
restless,  with  starting,  jumping,  screaming  out,  twitch-
ing of  muscles  and  jerking  through  whole  body,  wakes
frightened,  stares,  rolls  head  from  side  to  side,

I  I A  young  mulatto  girl,  eet.  18,  in  good  health  until  a  few
months  ago,  when  she  hurt  her  leg,  and  had  a  running
sore,  which  was  dried  up ;  at  next  menstrual  period  she
had  convulsion,  which  lasted  several  hours;  Zincum  200,
in  water,  every  two  hours,  for  two  days;  it  stopped
spasms,  but  was  followed  by  suppression  of  urine  last-
ing two  weeks.

I  I A  young  lady,  set.  21,  small,  slender,  and  a  brunette,
from  injuries  received  three  years  ago,  had  a  very  weak
and  tender  spine ;  touching  her  on  spine  would  give  her
pain,  and  a  child  slapping  her  on  back  threw  her  into
a  tonic  spasm  which  lasted  several  hours ;  Zincum  200


535  ZINCUM.

in  four  months  (a  powder  once  in  two  weeks)  cured
weakness  of  back,  but  almost  invariably  produced  sup-
pression of  urine  for  two  or  three  days.

I  I  After  sitting  in  spiritual  circles,  shocks  in  upper  and
lower  limbs;  gradually  they  became  more  and  more
threatening,  and  two  months  later  he  received  nervous
shocks  in  hands  and  legs,  during  prayer  and  sleep  at
night,  sometimes  at  other  hours ;  felt  great  heat  in  head ;
peace  of  mind  forsook  him  ;  heard  voices  speaking  from
within  him  in  abusive  and  filthy  language;  felt  depres-
sion of  spirits ;  it  seemed  that  small  balls  coursing  along
hands  and  legs  caused  the  shocks ;  Nux  vom.  did  some
good,  lessened  heat  of  head,  but  mesmerizing  made  him
<,  as  if  nerves  were  violently  torn  ;  as  if  fire  were  cours-
ing through  body,  running  from  1.  foot  to  head,  burning
forehead,  eyebrows,  ears  and  eyes;  constant  desire  to
put  an  end  to  his  life ;  always  restless ;  feels  <  in  morn-
ing, >  in  evening;  sleep  disturbed;  peace  of  mind
gone  ;  prejudices  and  superstitious  beliefs  began  to  trou-
ble him;  shocks  convulsed  him  frightfully;  vicious
and  abominable  thoughts,  chiefly  lustful,  trouble  him  ;
sometimes  workings  of  limbs  ludicrous,  sometimes
grave;  had  to  laugh  or  cry  against  his  will;  sensation  of
creeping,  warm,  throbbing,  shifting,  running,  encircling,
in  all  parts  of  his  body  ;  visions  of  living  and  dead  ;  did
not  speak,  suff'ering  continually  his  shocks  ;  sometimes
falling  down  as  if  paralyzed  ;  walks  with  heavy  steps,
or  runs  as  if  in  fright ;  utters  in  agony  the  loudest  lam-
entations and  cries ;  would  not  eat  unless  forced  to;  pale
and  emaciated,  suffering,  distracted  countenance;  after
Zmcum  a  small  abscess  a  little  below  middle  of  r.  clavicle.

I  Chorea,  depressed  spirits,  general  health  sufl^ers ;  caused
by  fright,  suppressed  eruptions ;  fidgety  condition  of
feet  whilst  lying  in  bed  ;  jerks  through  whole  body  dur-
ing sleep,  sometimes  with  screaming;  chronic,  starting
and  rolling  from  side  to  side  on  waking;  cries  out  as  if
frightened  ;  <  after  drinking  wine,  after  dinner,  toward
evening,  during  rest;  >  from  exercise. ^Chorea.

I  I  After  spending  weeks  with  friends,  on  returning  could
remember  nothing  she  had  said  or  done ;  Zincwm  30,
followed  by  cure  of  epilepsy  of  more  than  three  years'
standing.

■  Neuralgia  after  herpes  zoster.

Sensation  of  soreness  in  internal  and  external  parts.
Violent  throbbing  through  whole  body.

■  Neuralgic  pains  between  skin  and  muscle,  in  subcuta-

neous cellular  tissue ;  great  weakness  of  limbs ; defi-
ciency of  vital  power.


ZmCUM.  536

I  I  Nervous  insomnia,  with  intolerable  itching  of  skin  at
night  without  eruption.

I  Weakness,  numbness  and  tremor  of  hands  when  writing.

Paralysis  after  suppressed  foot  sweat.
^^  Sleep. Sleeplessness.

Falling  asleep  prevented  by  mental  activity.

Loud  screaming  out  at  night  in  sleep  without  knowing  it.

Child  cries  out  during  sleep,  if  awakened,  expresses  fear,
and  rolls  its  head  anxiously  from  side  to  side.

In  evening  immediately  after  lying  down,  rises  up  in  bed,
talks  unintelligibly,  with  short,  tremulous  respiration.

I  I  Starting  from  sleep  with  involuntary  jerking  in  1.  lower
extremity.

I  I  Unconscious  starting  during  night's  sleep,  during  menses.

Frequent  waking  at  night  on  account  of  anxiety.

Woke  frequently  at  night,  could  not  sleep  after  5  a.m.

Sleep  very  restless,  full  of  dreams.

Frequent  waking  at  night,  with  difficult  falling  asleep;
anxious  dreams  toward  morning.

Very  restless  sleep,  full  of  fantasies  and  thoughts  upon
which  he  was  obliged  to  reflect.

Sleep  at  night  frequently  interrupted;  nights  seem  very
long.

Restless  night ;  awoke  screaming  as  if  delirious,  as  if  geese
were  biting  him.

Uneasiness  during  sleep  after  midnight;  awoke  much  too
early,  with  great  weariness  and  a  feeling  as  if  eyes  lay
deep  in  head.

Waking  about  midnight  from  vivid  dreams,  with  a  feel-
ing of  great  heat  over  whole  body,  without  being  warm,
without  sweat,  with  a  feeling  of  dryness  and  without
thirst,  is  obliged  to  uncover  arms  and  limbs.

Sleep  disturbed  by  violent  headaches  and  painful  cramps
in  calves  of  legs.

Sleep  agitated  and  unrefreshing,  with  occasional  nightly
sweat,

1  I  Could  not  go  to  sleep  for  three  or  four  hours  after  retir-
ing, because  of  a  sensation  as  if  bugs  were  crawling
from  her  feet  to  her  knees,  extending  later  to  thighs ;
this  sensation  would  also  rouse  her  from  sleep.

Constant  yawning.

Drowsiness:  with  frequent  gaping;  yet  cannot  sleep,  head
feels  so  light;  in  morning;  immediately  after  dinner;
with  dulness  of  head,  without  being  able  to  sleep ;  at
her  work,  >  in  open  air.

Deep  exhausting  sleep  with  many  dreams.

I  I  Awoke  frequently,  with  violent  palpitation  and  scream-
ing, from  anxious  dreams  of  thieves.


537  ZINCUM.

Reveries  during  sleep.

Dreams:  anxious;  anxiety  continued  after  waking;  with
mental  excitement,  talking  about  midnight  about  his
dreams  ;  vexatious ;  quarrelsome ;  sad ;  as  if  she  were
being  strangled,  in  morning,  fear  lest  the  man  who
strangled  her  would  return;  disgusting,  of  being  smeared
with  human  excrement;  of- corpses  and  horses  which
changed  into  dogs  under  him ;  vivid,  feeling  weary  in
morning  on  waking;  anxious,  of  water  and  of  drown-
ing; of  fire;  of  fleeing,  followed  by  sweat.

During sleep: cries  out,  awakes  with  fear; limbs and
body  jerk;  nightmare.
^^Time. Toward  morning:  anxious  dreams ;  sweat.

After  5  a.m.  :  could  not  sleep.

Morning:  anxious  restlessness ;  morose;  vertigo;  head-
ache; head  heavy,  dizzy  and  confused;  headache  as
from  coal  gas ;  pressing  headache ;  dimness  of  vision  ;
lids  agglutinated;  lachrymation ;  burning  in  eyes  and
lids;  inner  canthus  agglutinated;  crawling  in  ears;
sneezing;  bitter,  slimy  taste;  pain  in  ulcer  on  inner  sur-
face of  1.  cheek  <  ;  rawness  and  dryness  in  throat;  dry-
ness in  fauces ;  hawking  of  mucus  ;  nausea ;  burning
from  epigastrium  into  oesophagus ;  pressure  in  stomach  ;
sticking  in  prsecordial  region  ;  rumbling  and  rolling  in
abdomen ;  twisting  pain  in  abdomen ;  stitches  in  1.  groin ;
involuntary  diarrhoea;  hard  stool;  expectoration;  press-
ure on  clavicle ;  pinching  in  chest,  with  qualmishness ;
pulse  slow;  stitches  in  1.  mamma;  stiffness  in  cervical
and  upper  dorsal  muscles ;  burning  drawing  in  back ;
sticking  in  r.  upper  arm  ;  during  sleep,  twitching  of  1.
arm  ;  tearing  in  r.  elbow  joint;  cramp  in  leg;  burning
and  ulcerative  pain  in  soles;  in  bed,  weakness  of  feet;
in  bed,  cannot  allow  one  leg  to  be  bent;  bruised  pain  in
limbs;  heaviness  and  weariness;  inability  to  move
head  and  limbs;  morning  in  bed,  chilliness;

Forenoon:  headache  with  pain  in  eyes;  until  evening,
thirst;  chilliness;  febrile  paroxysms;  hot  face,  cool
body.

11  or  12  A.M.:  ravenous  hunger,  with  weakness  of  legs  and
trembling.

Noon:  low-spirited,  lively  in  evening;  irritable,  peevish,
terrified,  stupefied  and  dizzy;  insatiable;  pressure  and
coldness  in  stomach ;  gurgling  and  rumbling  in  stomach ;
motion  with  feeling  of  coldness  in  stomach.

After  dinner:  sticking  and  burning  in  anterior  surface  of
1.  upper  arm.

Afternoon:  morose;  quiet  thoughts  of  death ;  dizzy  stupe-
faction; burning  in  eyes ; sneezing; thirst,  with  heat


ZINCUM.  538

in  palate;  during  menses,  thirst;  eructations;  paralytic
weakness  and  heaviness  in  lower  extremities;  sensitive
to  open  air ;  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.

Toward  evening:  child  cross;  pressure  on  eyes;  biting  in
eye ;  keratitis  pustulosa  <  ;  fluid  coryza ;  flatulent  colic ;
puerperal  convulsions  <.

3  to  4  P.M.:  cardialgia.

During  day:  moisture  of  eyes;  nausea.

All  day  :  frontal  headache;  dry  coryza;  sweet  taste.

Night  and  day :  pain  in  back  and  loins.

From  4  to  8  p.m.:  chill.

Evening :  low-spirited,  lively  at  noon  ;  soreness  in  vertex;
fretful,  despondent,  morose;  vertigo  in  occiput;  inability
to  support  head  ;  dizzy  stupefaction  ;  heaviness  in  fore-
head ;  pressure  upon  a  small  spot  in  forehead ;  throb-
bing in  head  ;  screwing  together  in  sides  of  head ;  pain-
ful raging  in  r.  side  of  occiput;  pressure  in  1.  eye;
burning  in  eyes  and  lids ;  photophobia  and  lachryma-
tion ;  pterj^gium  <;  green  halo  around  light;  feeling
of  sand  in  eye;  pulsating  in  ears;  burning  in  ears;
sudden  coryza ;  alternate  fluent  and  dry  coryza ;  neu-
ralgia of  fifth  pair  <;  toothache;  pressing  pain  in  ton-
sils; sweetish  blood  in  mouth ;  insatiable  thirst;  thirst
for  beer;  violent  hiccough;  burning  in  epigastrium ;
pressing  in  stomach ;  stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;
frequent  emissions  of  flatus;  rumbling  in  1.  side  of
abdomen;  offensive  flatus;  pain  in  abdomen,  head
and  eyes;  diarrhoea  with  griping;  burning  sticking  in
anus ;  cutting  in  orifice  of  urethra ;  urging  to  urinate ;
dribbling  of  urine;  asthma;  hacking  cough  ;  no  expec-
toration ;  stitches  above  heart;  pulse  small  and  frequent;
stitches  in  1.  axilla  and  down  on  forepart  of  chest,  arrest-
ing breathing;  sticking  and  tension  in  elbow  joint  ;
jerking  tearing  from  first  finger  joints  of  1.  hand  toward
tips;  sticking  on  posterior  surface  of  thigh;  heaviness
and  paralytic  pain  in  femur;  paralytic  pain  in  r.  thigh,
fierce  in  upper  part, then  extending  down  toward  knee;
pain  in  patellae  and  heels;  painful  boring  in  knees;
drawing  in  leg§ ;  tearing  beneath  r.  inner  malleolus;
tension  in  sole ;  ulcerative  pain  in  r.  great  toe;  tearing  in
little  toe;  sensitive  to  open  air;  cold  feet;  could  not  get
warm  in  bed  ;  chills ;  coldness  in  abdomen ;  hot  head
and  cheeks;  burning  in  soles;  coldness  of  forehead";
itching  on  face ;  itching  on  scrotum  ;  itching  between
scapulae;  itching  of  thighs  and  hollows  of  knees,  as  if
toes  had  been  frozen  ;  violent  sticking  itching  in  anterior
ball  of  great  toe;  sticking,  pricking,  itching  on  forehead,
thigh,  malleoli,  feet  and  other  parts  of  skin,  in  bed;
sudden  itching  here  and  there.


539  ZINCUM.

After  8  p.m.:  burning  in  eye  <.

Night:  headache;  pain  of  kerato-iritis  <;  sypliilitic  iritis
<  ;  itching  and  heat  in  pterygium  <  ;  ophthalmia  <  ;
noise  in  ears ;  an  anxious  sore  feeling  in  throat ;  bitter
taste  in  fauces;  eructations;  cough  with  indurated  liver
< ;  dull  moaning,  indurated  liver;  cutting  in  abdomen,
colic  followed  by  thick  leucorrhoea;  prickling  and  draw-
ing in  1.  groin;  loose  stool  with  griping  and  tenesmus;
frequent  urging  to  urinate ;  irresistible  sexual  desire  in
women;  fits  of  dyspnoea;  cough  prevents  sleep ;  tickling
cough  <;  heat  and  sweat;  stiffness  in  dorsal  muscles
< ;  falling  asleep  of  r.  leg  as  far  as  knee ;  pains  in
patellae  and  heels;  drawing  in  knee  ;  cramplike  pain  in
calf;  coldness  of  feet;  uneasiness  in  lower  extremities;
restless,  fidgety  feet ;  unconscious  starting ;  frequent
waking;  sweats;  nightmare;  chill;  sense  of  heat  with-
out heat;  itching  as  from  flea-bites;  itching  of  soles,  and
calves  and  thighs ;  twitching  of  limbs,  shocks  through
whole  body,  violent  screaming,  scarlatina ;  skin  hot  and
dry;  muttering  during  sleep;  threatened  convulsions;
scarlatina.

About  midnight:  talks  about  her  dreams.

After  midnight:  wind  colic; frequent  micturition; un-
easiness during  sleep.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Wants  to  uncover:  during
sweat.

Overheating:  rheumatism  <.

After  becoming  heated  and  getting  cold :  throbbing  in
hollow  tooth.

Warm  room  :  headache  <.

Warm  water:  conjunctivitis  >.

Open  air:  headache  >;  after  walking,  pressure  in  occiput;
lachrymation ;  violent  pressure  in  eye  while  walking ;
painful  tension  in  hollows  of  knees  while  walking;
drowsiness  >  ;  sensitive ;  chills  ;  sweat.

Draft:  sensitiveness.

Cold :  tips  of  fingers  and  feet  sensitive ;  touching  anything
causes  chill ;  dry  rhagades  on  hands.

Cold  air:  eyes  feel  sore  and  hot,  pterygium;  conjunc-
tivitis <.

Cold  water :  headache  > ;  stopped  nosebleed.

Washing:  uneasiness  in  stomach  and  shuddering.

Sea-bathing :  herpes  in  mouth.

Cold  weather:  roughness  and  irritation  on  back  of  r.  hand.

Approach  of  a  storm  :  chills.
*^  Fever. Sensitiveness  to  open  air  in  afternoon  and  evening.

Great  sensitiveness  to  cold,  especially  in  tips  of  fingers
and  in  feet.


ZINCUM.  540

Cold  nose,  hands  and  feet.

Cold  feet:  awaken  at  night;  in  evening,  lasting  a  long
time,  in  bed.

Frequent  febrile  shivering  down  back.

I  I  Violent  trembling  of  limbs.

Rigors,  trembling  of  limbs.

Chilliness:  and  coldness  of  whole  body;  in  forenoon;  fol-
lowed by  febrile  symptoms,  over  whole  body,  with  chilly
creeping  and  drawing  through  back  ;  with  nausea;  for
a  quarter  of  an  hour  while  writing,  with  a  sensation  as
if  a  foreign  stony  hard  substance  were  in  throat,  with
constant  yawning;  over  upper  and  lower  abdomen  ;  dur-
ing menses;  constant,  with  increased  internal  warmth  ;
with  general  sick  feeling;  on  waking  in  morning  in
bed.

Shivering:  with  intense  headache;  with  shuddering  nau-
sea; on  scrotum,  with  shrivelling  and  gooseflesh  on  it
and  neighboring  parts ;  in  evening,  could  not  get  warm
in  bed  for  a  long  time;  in  open  air,  in  evening ;  from
penetrating  wind,  not  from  cold  ;  with  discomfort,  like
premonition  of  a  storm  ;  followed  by  cold  sweats.

Febrile  paroxysms  several  times  a  day,  recurring  in  fore-
noon and  afterward ;  chilliness  and  shivering,  flushes
of  heat  over  whole  body,  violent  trembling  of  all  limbs,
extreme  sickness,  even  to  faintness,  qualmish  taste,  with
loathing  of  morsels  of  food  in  mouth,  feeling  of  empti-
ness in  stomach,  violent  throbbing  through  whole  body,
with  short  hot  breath,  with  very  dry  mouth,  hot,  dry
hands.

Chills:,  begin  after  eating  dinner;  in  open  air;  on  ap-
proach of  a  storm ;  run  down  back ;  alternate  with  heat;
external,  with  increased  internal  warmth ;  from  touch-
ing anything  cold;  in  evening;  followed  by  nausea,
eructations,  and  accumulation  of  sour  water ;  from  4  to
8  P.M.,  on  lying  down,  with  subsequent  heat  and  sweat.

Shaking  chill  with  pale,  sunken  face,  weak,  rapid  and
irregular  pulse,  often  with  nausea  and  vomiting ;  at  last
pulse  became  large  and  full,  with  general  heat,  red  face,
skin  swollen,  followed  by  restless  sleep,  with  distressing
dreams  and  exhaustion,  at  last  copious  sweat;  attack
usually  lasted  from  eight  to  ten  hours,  began  at  end  of
a  day's  work,  continued  through  night  and  ceased  in
morning.

I  I  Violent  throbbing  through  whole  body,  with  short,  hot
breath.

Increased  warmth  of  whole  body;  only  a  feeling  of  coldness
in  abdomen  in  evening;  except  of  feet,  as  if  sweat
would  break  out,  in  afternoon;  with  sweat  in  axillae.


541  ZINCUM.

Flushes  of  heat.

Febrile  flushes,  with  sudden  crying  out  to  be  fanned,  and
thirst.  :

Heat:  internal,  with  cold  sensation  in  abdomen  and  on
feet;  anxious  sensation  of  heat,  without  any  external
heat,  during  night ;  of  face,  with  cool  body,  in  forenoon ;
in  flushes,  with  violent  trembling,  and  short,  hot  breath ;
with  redness  of  face  in  •  after n on ;  in  head,  in  evening-
wdth  redness  and  increased  warmth  indieeks;  in  head,
eyes  burned;  especially  in  back;  of  fingers,  followed
by  heat  about  throat  and  in  face,  with  redness  of  face,  fol-
lowed by  a  sensation  of  coldness  in  nape  of.  neck ;  almost
burning,  in  various  small  places,  while  sitting,  for
example  between  thigh  and  abdomen,  on  sides  of  lower
abdomen;  and  burning  in  soles  in  evening;  with  cold-
ness of  forehead  in  evening;  and  thirst  with  cold  skin,
over  almost  M'hole  body  ;  in  evening;  in  evening  after
lying  down,  with  anxiety  all  night;  followed  by  cold
sweat.

Sweat:  profuse  all  night,  wants  to  uncover;  easy,  during
day,  from  exercise ;  offensive ;  sour-smelling ;  sour,  with
fine  sticking  itching  over  whole  body ;  very  profuse;
profuse  on  feet;  on  exercising;  on  head  and  hands;
toward  morning;  while  walking  in  open  air,

I  Night  sweat.

I  Hands  very  sweaty.

I  Profuse  sweat  on  feet,  of  a  bad  odor;  he  walks  feet  sore.

Night  sweat,  especially  on  low^er  extremities;  all  night,
with  heat,  cannot  tolerate  any  covering.

■  Typhoid:  staring  eyes;  delirium  with  attempts  to  get
out  of  bed ;  complete  unconsciousness  ;  lying  on  back
and  sliding  down  in  bed;  grasping  at  flocks;  subsultus
tendinum  ;  constant  trembling  of  hands  and  coldness
of  extremities;  relaxation  of  muscles  of  face  ;  hippocratic
face;  pale,  waxy  complexion  of  face;  decubitus  on  sac-
rum and  trochanter;  impending  paralysis  of  brain;
constant  restlessness,  tosses  about,  throws  limbs  about,
slides  down  in  bed;  automatic  convulsive  motions  of
hands  and  feet,  as  in  hydrocephalus;  utters  inarticulate
sounds  and  cries  of  pain;  head  hot;  lids  ulcerated,  half
closed;  pupils  fixed,  do  not  react  to  light;  tongue
reddish-brown,  cracked ;  lips  and  nose  sooty ;  fluids
swallowed  eagerly  but  with  difficulty;  involuntary
stool  and  urination;  stools  contain  threads  of  epithe-
lium ;  pulse  very  rapid,  weak,  irregular,  or  small,
intermittent,  scarcely  perceptible ;  upper  extremities
cool,  often  covered  with  cold,  clammy  sweat.

I 'r Typhus  in  a  man  set.  32,  second  stage ;  stupefaction  with


ZINCUM.  542

staring  eyes ;  spoke  unconnectedly,  with  a  kind  of  half-
smiling  garrulity  ;  pneumonic  symptoms,  painful  cough,
sero-sanguineous  sputa,  quick  superficial  breathing,  lim-
ited pneumonic  exudation,  frequent  involuntary  stools,
eyes  set,  facial  muscles  relaxed,  nearly  hippocratic,
features  looked  waxy;  subsultus  tendinura,  continuous
trembling  of  hands  and  coldness  of  extremities,  perfect
unconsciousness,  murmuring  deliria,  with  desire  to  leave
bed;  small,  frequent  filiform  pulse;  decubitus.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Periodic  attacks:  cephalalgia,  witli
impaired  vision.

At  intervals:  stitches  in  region  of  1.  kidney;  pressing  pain
in  first  phalanx  of  r.  index  finger.

Intermittent :  tearing  in  1.  kidney ;  pain  in  brain ;  press-
ure in  1.  chest ;  action  of  heart ;  tearing  in  middle  of
inner  side  of  1.  upper  arm.

Alternating:  prickling  and  drawing  in  1.  groin;  chills
and  heat.

Every  morning,  6  a.m.  :  sensation  as  if  a  web  were  drawn
across  throat.

As  day  advances :  headache  grows  <.

For  half  an  hour :  hiccough.

Three  hours  after  dinner:  hypochondriac  mood.

Every  seven  days:  stabbing  pains  in  abdomen.

Every  ten  to  fourteen  days :  cephalalgia  with  amblyopia.

Once  in  three  weeks:  stabbing  pains  in  abdomen.
"  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  as  if  he  would  fall  to,  ver-
tigo ;  frontal  headache ;  pressing  tearing  in  frontal
eminence;  pressure  in  temple;  jerking  tearing  above
temple;  stitches  in  temple;  pressure  in  temple;  sharp
tearing  in  parietal  bone ;  dull  pain  in  head ;  pressing,
drawing,  boring  in  head;  boring  in  parietal  bone;  draw-
ing tearing  in  head;  drawing  in  occiput;  forcing  asun-
der in  occiput;  a  dark  diagonal  line  before  eye;  diplo-
pia <  ;  intolerable  pain  in  eye ;  violent  pressure  in  eye;
tearing  in  eye;  tearing  stitch  above  e3''e;  prickling
biting  in  lower  part  of  eye  and  on  cheek ;  twitching
in  eyeball ;  itching  of  eye  ;  burning  of  lid ;  pressure  on
margin  of  lower  lid  near  inner  canthus;  green  halo
around  light;  burning  and  smarting  in  eye;  scalding
lachrymation;  lids  adhere  on  waking;  jerking  in  eye-
brow; sticking  tearing  in  and  above  brow;  twitching
of  lower  lid  ;  pressing  burning  in  lid  ;  sticking  as  with
needles  in  upper  lid ;  itching  in  margin  of  upper  lid  ;
purulent  discharge  from  ear;  offensive  moisture  from
ear;  cramplike  pain  in  lobule  of  ear;  tearing  in  bone
in  front  of  ear;  pinching  drawing  behind  ear;  sticking
tearing  in  ear;  tickling  in  ear;  itching  in  ear;  cutting


543  ZINCUM.

in  wing  of  nose;  swelling  and  painfulness  of  wing  of
nose ;  itching  in  nostril ;  swelling  and  itching  of  cheek  ;
pressing  pain  in  upper  jaw;  tearing  in  cheek;  muscu-
lar twitches  in  upper  lip;  jerking  in  teeth  ;  stitches  m
lower  molars ;  tearing  in  upper  molars  ;  tearing  ni  mo-
lars, cheek  and  temple ;  tearing  and  drawing  in  lower
incisors ;  sticking  in  roots  of  upper  canines  and  incisors ;
sticking  in  lower  molars ;  stitches  in  teeth  and  jaw  to
neck  ;  drawing  in  upper  incisors ;  tongue  swollen  ;  ulcer
on  inner  surface  of  cheek  ;  pressure  and  stitches  in  hypo-
chondrium;  stitches  in  abdomen;  rumbling  in  abdo-
men ;  constrictive  pain  in  lower  abdomen  ;  pain  in  lower
abdomen  beginning  in  region  of  hip ;  stitches  in  lower
abdomen  ;  tensive  pain  in  abdomen  ;  as  if  hernia  would
occur  in  groin  ;  screwing-together  sensation  in  inguinal
region;  drawing  in  inguinal  region;  prickling  and  draw-
ing in  groin ;  stitches  in  groin ;  soreness  in  region  of
kidney  ;  tearing  in  region  of  kidney  ;  stitches  in  region
of  kidney;  bruised  pain  in  region  of  kidney ;  boring  in
ovarian  region  ;  pressure  on  clavicle ;  a  spot  as  large  as
a  hand  in  chest  feels  corroded  and  bruised ;  soreness  as  if
beaten  in  pectoral  muscles ;  ribs  painful ;  burning  above
nipple;  pressure,  drawing  tension  in  chest;  pressure  and
sticking  in  chest;  tearing  in  lower  chest;  tearing  beneath
axilla;  stitches  in  ribs  opposite  pit  of  stomach; dull
stitches  in  upper  part  of  chest ;  sticking  tearing  in  chest ;
pain  in  nipple;  stitch  in  clavicle;  pulsating  near  axilla;
intercostal  neuralgia ; pressure  beneath  nipple ;  draw-
ing about  nipple,  pulsating;  sticking  beneath  breast;
stitches  in  mamma ;  feeling  of  distension  in  mamma;
cramplike  stiffness  in  neck ;  tearing  in  neck ;  burning
in  side  and  scapula;  pressure  beneath  scapula,  sticking
in  margin  of  scapula  to  axilla ;  sticking  beneath  scap-
ula;  jerking  beneath  scapula;  throbbing  under  lower
third  of  scapula;  burning  in  axilla;  sticking  in  axilla;
stitches  in  shoulder ;  bruised  pain  in  arm  ;  bruised  pain
in  scapula;  rheumatic  tension in  head  of  humerus;
tearing  pressure  in  shoulder;  tearing,  extending  into
axilla  beneath  arm  ;  tearing  in  anterior  surface  of  upper
arm;  intermittent  tearing  in  middle  of  inner  side  of
upper  arm  ;  tearing  in  upper  arm  near  shoulder ;  stick-
ing and  burning  in  anterior  surface  of  upper  arm  ;  bub-
bling in  upper  arm ;  burning  in  forearm ;  drawing  in
upper  arm  close  to  elbow ;  twitching  of  arm  in  morn-
ing ;  constant  painful  heaviness,  as  if  paralyzed,  in  bend
of  elbow;  tearing  up  and  down  in  elbow ;  sharp  tear-
ing in  forearm  ;  rheumatic  tension  above  wrist ;  tearing
in  bend  of  wrist,  with  tearing  stitches  on  back  of  hand  ;


ZINCUM.  544

tearing  and  painful  throbbing  in  thumb  toward  tip;
tearing  drawing  in  last  phalanges  of  middle  and  ring
fingers;  jerking  tearing  from  first  finger  joints  toward
tips;  needle  stitches  through  first  phalanx  of  thumb;
crawling  and  throbbing  in  thumb ;  tearing  in  back  of
hand  ;  pressure  in  ball  of  hand ;  burning  in  a  small
spot  in  hand ;  pinching  or  bruised  sticking  in  ball  of
hand  above  little  finger;  tearing  on  back  of  hand;  tear-
ing drawing  in  palm  of  hand  between  thumb  and  index
finger ;  tearing  in  nates  beneath  hip  ;  pulsation  in  nates ;
bruised  pain  with  pinching,  heat  and  burning  in  hip

.  to  middle  of  thigh;  hip  painful  posteriorly;  drawing,
tearing  and  burning  on  hip ;  pressing  tearing  in  hip  ;
heaviness  and  paralytic  pain  in  femur ;  bruised  pain  on
anterior  surface  of  thigh ;  painful  tearing  in  thigh  ;  tear-
ing on  inner  side  of  thigh  ;  gnawing  and  boring  in  knee;
tearing  in  patella  and  knee;  contraction  in  knee ;  crawl-
ing in  knee  joint ;  tensive  pain  in  leg ;  pressure  between
ankle  and  calf;  cramp  in  calf  and  foot ;  jerking  in  calf;
tearing. in  leg;  rheumatic  tension  in  ankle;  tearing  in
ankle  and  back  of  foot ;  drawing  in  bones  of  foot ;  tear-
ing and  crawling  in  back  of  foot;  jerking  tearing  in
outer  side  of  calf;  prickling  stitches  in  great  toe;  feel-
ing of  congestion  of  blood  in  leg ;  stitches  in  testicle ;
buboes;  involuntary  jerking  in  leg,  waking  from  sleep;
pimples  on  third  toe;  swelling  on  wing  of  nose;  furun-
cle in  pubic  region ;  boil  on  upper  arm  ;  biting  burning
in  skin  of  upper  arm  posteriorly;  painful  burning
cracks  between  two  fingers;  sticking  itching  in  a  small
spot  on  fourth  finger ;  bunion  on  little  toe  and  ball  of
foot.

Right:  frontal  headache;  pressing  in  frontal  eminence;
dull  boring  stitch  above  frontal  eminence;  tearing  in
temple;  stitches  in  temple;  stitches  in  ear ;  pressure  in
temple  shooting  inward  ;  pressing  tearing  near  Vertex;
tearing  and  sticking  in  head;  boring  and  pressure  in
head  ;  pulsating,  pressing  and  twinging  in  head ;  burst-
ing sensation  in  head;  throbbing  pain  in  head;  press-
ing asunder  in  Occiput;  gnawing  in  occipital  protuber-
ance; painful  raging  in  a  spot  in  occiput;  tearing  in
occiput;  tensive  pressure  in  e3'e;  violent  pressure  in
eye  and  temple;  cutting,  pressing  stitch  in  eye';  tick-
ling in  eye ;  biting  in  eye ;  soreness  and  itching  in  inner
canthus;  painful  pressure  in  inner  canthus  and  redness
of  conjunctiva;  biting  in  inner  canthus;  conjunctivitis;
pressure  above  eye;  pressing  down  in  lids;  soreness  in
upper  lid ;  sticking  as  with  needles  in  lower  lid  ;  whiz-
zing in  front  of  ear ;  ringing  in  ear ;  stitches  in  ear ;  pain


545  ZINCUM.

beneath  and  in  front  of  ear;  itching  in  ear;  pressure  in
tonsil;  tearing  in  nostril;  itching  in  nostril;  drawing
in  nostril;  tearing  in  nose  externally;  nose  swollen;
pressing  stitch  from  zygoma  to  upper  margin  of  orbit ;
tearing  bruised  pain  in  malar  bone  ;  neuralgia  in  head  ;
face  swollen;  eye  smaller  and  retracted  with  neuralgia;
scirrhous  lump  on  cheek  ;  jerking  tearing  in  upper  lip  ;
jerking  tearing  in  lower  molars ;  tearing  in  upper  teeth  ;
tearing  from  tooth  to  temple ;  pressing  drawing  in  lower
back  teeth;  phantom  tumor  in  region  of  liver;  jerkliko
tearing  drawing  and  pressure  in  hypochondrium  ;  press-
ure in  abdomen  close  to  hip; stitches  in  abdomen;
bruised  sensation  in  lower  abdomen;  dull  tearing  from
lower  abdomen  into  groin  ;  jerking  pressure  in  inguinal
region  ;  pinching  in  groin  ;  tearing  in  region  of  kidney ;
dull  stitches  in  region  of  kidney;  cutting,  tearing  or
drawing  pressure  in  region  of  kidney  ;  stitches  in  chest;
burning  in  chest  near  pit  of  stomach ;  tensive,  bruised
pain  and  stitches  in  side  of  chest;  pressure,  sharp  near
axilla; tearing  in upper  ribs  and  chest; stitches  in
short  ribs;  stitch  beneath  nipple;  burning  in  skin  of
chest;  stitch  beneath  mamma;  pressing  pain  in  mamma;
sore  pain  about  nipple ;  pressure  as  with  finger  on  neck
when  talking;  tearing  in  neck;  pressure  near  scapula;
pressure  near  middle  of  spine,  and  below  scapula;  ten-
sion near  inner  margin  of  scapula; stitches  beneath
scapula ;  tearing  in  neck  ;  dull  sticking  tearing  in  axilla;
sticking  tearing  on  top  of  shoulder;  dull  stitches  be-
neath shoulder;  jerking  in  shoulder;  tearing  deep  in
shoulder;  sticking  in  upper  arm ;  dull  pain  in  upper  arm ;
bruised  pain  in  bone  of  upper  arm;  tearing  in  elbow
joint;  bruised  sensation  in  bend  of  arm;  rheumatic  draw-
ing in  elbow;  sticking  and  tension  in  elbow  joint;  dull
bubbling  tearing  in  muscles  of  inner  side  of  forearm,  not
far  from  elbow;  burning  in  forearm  above  wrist;  tension
in  wrist;  drawing  pain  in  wrist;  rheumatic  drawing
and  tearing  in  wrist;  tearing  in  middle  of  wrist;  burning
pain  in  wrist  and ball  of  hand  ;  drawing  tearing  in
thumb;  sharp  sticking  tearing  in  last  joint  of  thumb;
jerking  in  first  joint  of  thumb ;  tearing  in  thumb,  above
it  and  in  two  adjacent  fingers ;  tearing  beneath  nail  of
thumb;  pressing  pain  in  middle  joint  of  index  finger,
and  at  intervals  in  its  first  phalanx;  spasmodic  tension
of  hand  ;  sticking  tearing  in  hand  in  bend  of  wrist,  and
in  palm  near  little  finger ;  sharp  tearing  in  hand  beneath
joints;  tearing  on  back  of  hand,  in  fourth  and  fifth  meta-
carpal bones  and  in  wrist;  tensive  tearing  in  palm;
tearing  in  palm  near  fingers;  sdcking  tearing  in  natis
VOL  X.— 35.


ZLNCUM.  546

below  hip;  bubbling  in  natis;  tearing  posteriorly  on
hip ;  pressing  drawing  above  natis ;  dull  pressure  above
hip;  heaviness  and  lameness  in  thigh;  paralytic  pain
in  thigh,  first  in  upper  part,  then  down  toward  knee;
drawing  pain  in  inner  side  of  thigh  ;  falling  asleep  of
leg  as  far  as  knee ;  pain  in  ligamentum  patellse;  pain-
ful boring  in  knee  <  ;  tension,  then  burning  beneath
knee,  in  upper  part  of  tibia;  tensive  pain  in  knee  joint;
drawing  in  knee;  tearing  in  knee;  stitch  in  knee;  itch-
ing in  knee  joint;  pressure  and  drawing  in  bones  of
leg;  drawing  in  tibia;  tearing  in  leg;  tearing  in  end
of  tibia;  tearing  beneath  inner  malleolus;  tearing  in
outer  malleolus ;  burning  beneath  inner  malleolus ;
burning  beneath  heel;  paralyzed  feeling  in  foot;  ten-
sion in  foot;  tension  in  sole;  drawing  tearing  in  foot
extending  into  malleoli ;  tearing  in  outer  margin  of
foot  toward  toes ;  sticking  tearing  in  bend  of  joints  of
little  toe;  stitch  above  foot;  ulcerative  pain  in  great
toe;  tearing  in  lower  portion  of  two  first  toes;  sticking
tearing  in  first  joint  of  great  toe ;  sticking  tearing  in
bends  of  first  joints  of  first  two  toes;  tearing  in  great
toe ;  tearing  in  little  toe ;  pulsating  sticking  in  tip  of
great  toe ;  tearing  and  tension  in  margins  of  foot ;  draw-
ing and  contraction  in  tendo-Achillis;  pain  in  scrotum;
pimple  on  neck;  burning  in  skin  of  scapula;  eruption
and  fissure  on  hand ;  burning  in  skin  on  margin  of
hand ;  roughness  of  skin  on  back  of  hand ;  itching
burning  on  outer  side  of  thigh  above  knee;  burning  in
skin  of  lower  portion  of  calf;  ulcerative  blisters  on  back
of  foot;  as  if  toes  had  been  frozen;  itching  on  sole.
• Left,  then  r. :  drawing  pain  in  testicles.

Right  to  1.:  drawing  in  lower  back  teeth;  sticking  in  scap-
ula; drawing  and  retraction  of  testicle.
Alternately  r.  and  1.:  throbbing  drawing  in  back  teeth;
pains  in  patella  and  heel.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  she  had  a  large  goitre  which  she  could
not  see  over;  as  if  hair  bristled;  uneasy,  as  if  he  had
committed  a  crime;  as  if  he  would  have  apoplexy,
vertigo ;  as  if  scalp  were  drawn  together ;  as  if  head
were  moving  up  and  down,  with  a  similar  floating  of
images  of  his  fancy ;  as  if  he  saw  through  a  mist ;  as  if
he  would  fall  over  to  other  side ;  as  if  bed  were  swaying
back  and  forth ;  nauseating  weakness,  as  after  smoking
too  strong  tobacco  ;  as  if  eyes  were  drawn  together  by  a
cord  ;  stupefying  headache,  as  from  coal  gas;  as  if  root
of  nose  would  be  pressed  into  head  ;  as  if  head  would
be  drawn  backward;  as  if  air  forced  itself  into  frontal
sinuses;  as  if  head  would  burst;  asif  stunned  in  occi-


547  ZINCUM.

put;  as  if  scalp  wrinkled  up  and  kept  tightening;  as  if
insects  were  crawling  from  occiput  to  forehead :  pain
like  beating  of  waves  in  a  spot  on  r.  side  of  occiput  to
outer;  as  if  she  had  wept  much,  feeling  in  eyes ;  as  from
1.  eye,  smarting;  like  a  whitlow,  burning  and  throbbing
in  eye;  as  from  sand  in  eyes;  as  if  upper  lids  were
paralyzed ;  as  if  teeth  would  be  pulled  out,  with  neu-
ralgia; as  if  teeth  were  long  and  loose;  as  if  a  hard
body  were  opposing  pressure  from  pharynx  into  abdo-
men ;  as  if  food  remained  sticking  in  pharynx  after
dinner;  as  if  choking  in  r.  side  of  throat;  as  of  a  worm
creeping  up  throat  from  stomach  ;  as  if  stomach  were
compressed  or  empty ;  disagreeable  feeling  in  cardiac
orifice  of  stomach  extending  upward ;  as  if  cold  water
were  poured  down  her  back;  as  of  a  heavy  weight  in
hypochondria;  as  if  tilled  with  flatus;  as  if  abdominal
walls  were  retracting  against  spine ;  as  if  intestines  were
pierced  with  fine  needles;  as  if  hernia  would  occur  in
1.  groin  ;  as  if  inguinal  gland  were  swollen  ;  as  if  flatus
were  pressing  against  coccyx ;  as  from  worms  crawling
in  anus;  trembling,  as  if  chilly;  as  if  knees  would  be
twisted  off;  as  if  a  web  were  drawn  across  throat;  as  if
pudenda  were  swollen  ;  goneness  at  pit  of  stomach  at  11
A.M.;  as  if  chest  would  burst,  cough  and  stitches;  as  if
chest  were  hollow  and  cold  ;  as  if  chest  were  constricted
by  a  band ;  as  if  chest  were  cut  to  pieces ;  as  if  a  foreign
substance  were  rising  up  throat ;  as  if  beaten  in  chest ;
as  of  blood  forcing  its  way  into  finest  vessels  in  lungs;
as  if  there  were  a  sore  braised  spot  in  upper  chest ;  as  if
corroded  and  bruised  in  a  spot  as  large  as  a  hand  in  1.
chest;  emptiness  behind  sternum  ;  as  if  a  cap  were  over
heart;  as  of  finger  pressed  on  r.  side  of  neck  when  talk-
ing ;  as  if  shoulder  joint  were  asleep ;  as  from  an  ad-
hesive plaster  near  inner  margin  of  r.  scapula ;  as  if
weary  and  beaten  in  neck  and  back;  as  if  head  had
been  held  in  an  uncomfortable  position,  pain  in  cervical
muscles;  as  ]f  one  had  been  l3'ing  in  an  uncomfortable
position,  pain  in  small  of  back;  as  if  muscles  in  r.  wrist
were  too  short ;  as  if  sprained  in  r.  wrist ;  as  if  flesh
were  loosened  from  bone  in  hip  joint;  as  if  muscles  iu
bend  of  knee  were  too  short,  contraction  in  1.  knee,  as  if
in  bone;  stitch  like  a  flea-bite,  on  inner  side  of  r.  knee;
ankle  as  if  sprained ;  as  if  bone  on  outer  margin  of  foot
would  break ;  as  if  soles  were  swollen  and  scratched  by
a  toothed  instrument ;  as  if  foot  had  been  sprained ;  as
if  tendons  in  r.  sole  were  too  short ;  as  if  feet  were  beaten
from  body ;  as  if  toes  were  sore  from  walking ;  as  if
there  were  blisters  on  toe ;  as  if  toes  were  sprained  ;  as  if


ZINCUM.  548

ball  of  great  toe  bad  been  frozen ;  as  of  congestion  of
blood  in  1.  leg;  as  if  shirt  were  rough  and  rubbed  penis
when  walking;  as  if  testicles  were  tightly  compressed  and
drawn  upward;  as  if  body  would  be  forced  asunder  from
pressure  upon  inner  walls  of  trunk  ;  as  of  swelling;  as
if  eyes  lay  deep  in  head  ;  as  if  a  foreign,  stony,  hard  sub-
stance were  in  throat;  irritation  of  skin  on  back  of  r.
hand,  when  rubbed  seems  to  go  through  whole  body;
as  if  toes  had  been  frozen  ;  as  if  covered  with  ants.

Intolerable  pain  :  in  1.  eye.

Violent  pain:  in  throat;  at  angle  of  jaw;  in  laryngeal
region  ;  in  patella  and  heel.

Severe  pain:  in  region  of  heart.

Sharp  pain:  in  stomach  and  pit  of  stomach.

Heavy  pressure:  in  stomach.

Painful  raging: in  head,  from  r.  side  of  occiput over
vertex.
; Lightning-like  shocks  and  jerks:  neuralgia  in  r.  side  of
head.

Boring:  above  r.  frontal  eminence;  in  r,  side  of  head;  in
1.  side  of  head;  in  occiput;  from  rectum  into  abdomen;
in  1.  ovarian  region  ;  in  knee;  in  heel.

Lancinations :  burning,  from  foramen  infraorbitalis,  over
r.  side  of  head  to  occiput;  in  sacrum;  in  suppurating
herpes.

Stabbing:  in  abdomen.

Stitches:  above  r.  frontal  eminence;  in  temples;  in  r,  ear;
burning,  in  middle  of  vertex ;  dull,  on  top  of  head  ;  in
r.  eye ;  in  ears ;  in  jaw ;  from  r.  zygoma  to  upper  margin
of  orbit;  in  face;  in  upper  lip;  fine,  in  upper  lip;  in  1.
lower  molars;  from  1.  teeth  into  neck;  in  1.  liypochon-
drium ;  in  spleen ;  dull,  from  an  internal  ulcer  on  r.
side  above  navel ;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen ;  in  lower  ab-
domen; through  r.  ilium;  in  umbilical  region;  in  groins;
in  glans  penis;  in  1.  testicle ;  from  rectum  into  root  of
penis ;  in  anus ;  like  lightning,  from  anus  into  rectum  ;
in  region  of  kidneys  toward  chest;  dull,  in  region  of
r.  kidney;  in  region  of  1.  kidney;  in  urethra;  beneath
axilla;  in  r.  side  of  chest;  in  1.  chest  and  heart;  in
middle  of  sternum  ;  in  upper  part  of  sternum  to  lumbar
region ;  beneath  sternum ;  from  r.  hypochondrium  to
prsecordial  region;  deep  in  r.  chest;  dull,  in  r.  short
ribs;  beneath  r.  nipple;  in  region  of  1.  ribs  opposite  pit
of  stomach;  in  upper  part  of  1.  chest;  beneath  heart;
in  1.  clavicle;  in  trachea;  above  heart,  in  prsecordial
region;  beneath  r.  mamma;  in  1.  mamma;  in  neck  and
chin;  in  cervical  muscle;  beneath  r.  scapula;  close  to
upper  part  of  r.  scapula;  in  middle  of  spine;  beneath  1.


549  ZINCUM.

scapula;  in  1.  axilla;  dull,  beneath  r.  shoulder;  in  1.
shoulder;  on  back  of  1.  hand;  in  fingers;  in  middle
joints  of  last  three  fingers;  in  tips  of  thumbs;  through
first  phalanx  of  1,  thumb;  in  thigh;  in  knee;  on  inner
side  of  r.  knee ;  in  tibia ;  above  r.  foot ;  in  bones  of  back
of  foot ;  in  ball  of  foot ;  in  heel ;  in  1.  great  toe.
Sticking:  in  head,  above  1.  eyebrow;  in  forehead;  in
temples;  in  r.  side  of  head  ;  in  a  small  spot  in  occiput;
in  eyes  and  head;  in  inner  angles  of  eyes;  above_  1.
brow  ;  in  eyelids ;  in  1.  ear ;  in  septum  of  nose ;  in  artic-
ulation of  jaw  ;  beneath  and  in  front  of  1.  ear;  in  roots
of  1.  upper  canine  and  adjacent  molars;  in  1.  lower  mo-
lars; in  palate;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  prsecordial  region ;
in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  dull,  in  region  of  spleen  ;  in  dia-
phragm ;  in  abdomen  ;  between  shoulders ;  above  in-
guinal region;  in  anus;  in  region  of  kidneys;  in  pu-
denda; in  larynx;  beneath  r.  axilla;  in  middle  of
sternum  ;  in  sternum  ;  in  middle  of  chest ;  in  1.  thorax ;
beneath  1.  breast;  from  r.  to  1.  scapula;  in  margin  of  1.
SL-a|)ula  to  axilla;  beneath  1.  scapula;  in  r.  axilla;  on
toi)'ofr.  shoulder;  in  r.  upper  arm  ;  in  anterior  surface
of  1.  upper  arm;  in  r  elbow  joint;  in  last  joint  of  r.
thumb  ;  in  ball  of  1.  hand  ;  in  bend  of  r.  wrist  and  palm
near  little  finger;  in  r.  natis  below  hip;  on  back  of
thigh;  in  tibiae;  insoles;  in  toes;  in  first  joint  of  r.
great  toe ;  in  bends  of  first  joints  of  first  two  r.  toes  ;  in
ball  of  great  toe;  in  top  of  r.  great  toe;  in  joints;  in
limbs;  in  a  small  spot  in  1.  fourth  finger,  followed  by  a
red  pustule;  in  anterior  ball  of  great  toe.

Darting:  through  joints.

Stinging:  in  head;  in  roots  of  upper  front  teeth  and  in
hard  palate;  in  pudenda;  in  bunion;  nettlerash.

Cutting:  in  abdomen  ;  in  r.  eye;  in  r.  ear;  in  nose ;  in  1.
ala  nasi ;  across  umbilical  region  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  anus  ;
in  region  of  kidney;  in  urethra;  in  abdomen  during
menses;  in  small  of  back  during  menses;  upward
in  1.  iliac  region  during  [)regnancy ;  in  small  of  back  to
calves  and  feet;  in  tips  of  thumbs.

Shooting:  in  r.  temple;  in  hypogastrium.

Prickling :  in  1.  eye  and  cheek  ;  in  pterygium  ;  in  sound
teeth;  in  1.  groin  ;  in  1.  great  toe;  in  testicles.

Picking:  in  sound  teeth.

Jerking:  above  1.  temple  ;  earache;  in  upper  lip  ;  tooth-
ache ;  in  last  lower  r.  molars ;  tearing,  from  pharynx
into  1.- cervical  muscles;  in  r.  hypochondrium;  from
groin  toward  penis;  in  r.  inguinal  region  ;  from  rectum
into  root  of  penis;  in  anus;  beneath  1.  scapula :  in  r.
shoulder; in  elbow  joint; from  first  finger  joints  of  1.


ZINCUM.  550

hand  toward  tips;  in  first  joint  of  r.  thumb;  dull,  on
inner  side  of  thigh  ;  in  1.  calf;  in  root  of  penis.
Tearing:  in  brain;  in  head,  above  1.  eyebrow;  in  1.  frontal
eminence;  in  forehead;  in  temples;  above  1.  temple;
cramplike  in  temples;  in  vertex;  in  1.  parietal  bone ;  in
r.  side  of  head  ;  in  r.  side  of  occiput;  in  ears ;  in  1.  eye ;
stitch  above  1.  eye  and  in  umbilical  region ;  in  eyes  and
head ;  above  1.  brow;  in  ears ;  in  front  of  1.  ear ;  in  1.  ear
close  to  lobule ;  in  r.  nostril ;  in  1.  cheek ;  in  r.  malar
bone;  in  upper  lip;  craraplike  in  lower  jaw,  especially
chin;  stitches  in  chin  and  throat;  in  roots  of  r.  upper
teeth  ;  in  1.  upper  molars;  from  root  of  r.  upper  tooth
toward  temple;  in  a  hollow  molar ;  in  last  lower  1.  mo-
lars ;  in  posterior  fauces  ;  in  pharynx  ;  in  pit  of  stom-
acli ;  in  r.  hypochondrium;  from  r.  lower  abdomen  into
groin  ;  in  1.  side  of  lower  abdomen,  beginning  in  region
of  hip;  in  umbilical  region;  in  anus;  in  region  of  1.
kidney;  in  region  of  r.  kidney;  in  urethra;  above  pit
of  stomach;  beneath  axilla;  in  r.  upper  ribs  near  back;
in  r.  chest;  in  1.  chest;  in  neck  and  chin  ;  in  r.  side  of
neck  and  below  jaw;  in  neck  behind  1.  ear  ;  between
spine  and  r.  scapula ;  in  r.  side  of  neck  ;  in  r.  axilla ;
on  top  of  r.  shoulder;  in  shoulder  joints;  arthritic,  in
shoulder  joint  to  fingers;  deep  in  r.  shoulder;  in  1.  shoul-
der; in  shoulder  joint  deep  in  bone;  in  1.  axilla;  in  upper
arms  from  deltoid  down  ;  in  anterior  surface  of  1.  upper
arm  near  elbow;  in  r.  arm  near  shoulder;  in  middle  of
innersideofl.  upper  arm;  in  1.  upper  arm  near  shoulder;
inarmsclosetoelbow;  in  r.elbow  joint;  in  bend  of  elbows;
in  thick  portion  of  forearm ;  dull  bubbling,  in  muscles
of  inner  side  of  r.  forearm  near  elbow ;  in  1.  forearm  ;  in
r.  wrist  toward  backs  of  fingers;  in  bend  of  1.  wrist;  in
1.  thumb  toward  tip ;  in  tips  of  fingers ;  in  last  phalanges
of  1.  middle  and  ring  finger;  in  r.  thumb;  in  last  joint
of  r.  thumb  ;  in  fingers;  in  middle  joints  of  last  three
fingers;  beneath  nail  of  r.  thumb;  in  metacarpal  bones
of  index  fingers;  in  first  joints  and  phalanges  of  fingers;
in  back  of  1.  hand  ;  from  wrist  to  first  phalanx  of  thumb ;
in  bend  of  r.  wrist  and  palm  near  little  finger;  in  r.
hand  ;  at  root  of  hand  ;  on  back  of  r.  hand  and  in  wrist;
in  r.  palm;  in  back  of  1.  hand;  in  1.  palm;  in  nates
below  hips;  on  back  of  r.  hip;  posteriorly  in  1.  hip;  on
crest  of  ilium  ;  in  thighs;  in  thick  portions  of  thighs;
on  outer  side  of  thigh  as  if  in  bone;  in  1. thigh  upward
from  knee;  in  inner  side  of  1.  thigh ;  in  bends  of  knees;
in  r.  knee;  in  r.  calf;  in  outer  side  of  1.  patella;  in  1.
knee;  on  inner  side  of  1.  leg,  between  ankle  and  calf;  in
'  calves;  in  tibia  to  back  of  foot;  in  r.  leg  beneath  knee;


551  ZINCUM.

in  1.  leg  between  tibia  and  ankle ; in  calf  to  malleoli ;
in  lower  end  of  r.  tibia;  in  r.  outer  malleolus ;  beneath
r.  inner  malleolus  to  heel ;  in  bend  of  ankle  ;  on  margin
and  on  back  of  1.  foot ; in  tendons  Achillis ; in  r.  foot
and  malleoli ; in  inner  malleoli ;  in  outer  margin  of  r.
foot;  on  back  of  1.  foot; in  heels;  in  soles;  in  toes;  m
tip  of  great  toe  and  beneath  nail ;  in  first  joint  of  r.  great
toe ;  in  bends  of  first  joints  of  first  two  r.  toes ;  in  r.  great
toe ;  in  r.  little  toe ;  in  margins  of  r.  foot ;  in  tip  of  glans
penis;  in  root  of  penis;  in  limbs;  in  middles  of  bones
of  limbs.
Drawing:  in  forehead  ;  in  vertex  ;  in  1.  side  of  head  ;  m  r.
parietal  bone ;  in  r.  occiput ;  in  1.  side  of  occiput ;  behind
1.  ear; in  r.  nostril;  jerklike  in  incisors; in  1.  lower
teeth; in  1.  upper incisors; in lower  back  teeth; in
roots  of  upper  front  teeth  and  in  hard  palace ;  in  r.
lower  back  teeth ;  alternately  of  back  teeth  of  r.  and  1.
sides;  in  jaws;  in  pharynx;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  r.
hypochondrium; cramplike in middle of  abdomen;
from  abdomen  into  urethra;  in  1.  inguinal  region;  in
groin and pubic  regions; in  1.  groin; from rectum
into  abdomen  ;  in  region  of  r.  kidney ;  acute,  in  fore-
part of  urethra  and  penis; rheumatic,  beneath  clav-
icle ;  tension  here  and  there  in  1.  chest;  about  1.  nipple;
in  r.  side  of  neck;  in  cervical  muscles;  in  back;  from
top  of  shoulder  down  arms; in  1.  upper  arm  close  to
elbow  ; from  tips  of  fingers  up  arm  ;  rheumatic,  m  r.
elbow;  in  bone  of  forearm;  cramplike,  in  forearm  and
fingers; in  r.  wrist; rheumatic,  in  r.  wrist; in  I.  pha-
langes of  1.  middle  and  ring  fingers  ;  in  r.  thumb  ;  in  1.
palm ;  in  nates ;  above  r.  natis ;  on  posterior  portion  of
thigh  ;  posteriorly  in  1.  hip  ;  in  thighs ;  in  inner  side  of
r.  thigh;  in  outer  muscles  of  thigh ;  in  r.  knee ;  in  calves;
in  bones  of  r.  leg  ;  in  legs;  inr.  tibia;  in  bones  of  1.  foot;
in  r.  foot  and  malleoli ; in  inner  malleoli  and  tendons
Achillis;  in  toes;  in  root  of  penis;  in  testicles;  in  sper-
matic cord ;  in  middles  of  bones  of  limbs.

Twinging:  in  r.  side  of  head ;  stitch  like  lightning  in
urethra;  in  chest.

Twisting  pain:  in  abdomen.

Gnawing:  as  from  worms  in  forehead;  in  r. occipital  pro-
tuberances; in  upper  part  of  occiput;  in  1.  knee.

Pinching:  behind  1.  ear ;  in  ear ;  in  root  of  nose ;  m  pit
of  stomach ;  in  hepatic  region ;  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  in
r.  groin;  in  region  of  kidneys;  in  chest;  in  forepart  of
r.  chest;  in  both  sides  of  neck  near  trunk;  in  small
spots  in  back  ;  in  coccyx ;  in  region  of  1.  hip ;  in  ball
of  1.  hand.


ZINCUM.  552

Screwing-together  sensation:  in  sides  of  head ;  in  pit  of
stomach  ;  in  1.  inguinal  region.

Screwed-in  sensation  :  in  small  of  back.

Griping :  deep  in  epigastrium  ;  in  hepatic  region ;  in  sides
of  abdomen  and  umbilical  region  ;  in  abdomen.

Cramplike  pain:  in  lobule  of  1.  ear;  in  pit  of  throat;  in
muscles  of  throat  externally  when  swallowing;  in  pit
of  stomach;  in  hepatic  region;  in  hypochondria;  in
bladder;  inchest  to  stomach  and  abdomen;  in  heart
and  lungs;  in  leg;  in  calves;  in  calf  and  1.  foot;  in
muscles.

Cramplike  dragging : in  pit  of  stomach and  epigastric
. region.

Tensive  pain  :  in  sides  of  abdomen;  inchest;  in  spine;
between  shoulders;  in  lumbar  region  and  shoulders;  in
hip  joints;  in  hollow  of  knee;  in  r.  knee  joint;  in  1.
leg.

Distension  :  in  1.  mamma.

Bursting :  in  r.  parietal  bone.

Pressure:  on  top  of  head;  under  short  ribs,  especially  r.
side ;  at  root  of  nose ;  and  dulness  in  head ;  on  root  of
nose ;  upon  a  small  spot  on  forehead  ;  on  forehead ;  in
r.  frontal  eminence  ;  in  1.  frontal  eminence ;  in  1.  temple;
in  temples;  cramplike,  in  temples;  in  r.  side  of  head ;
in  1.  side  of  head  ;  in  occiput ;  in  a  small  spot  in  occi-
put; eyes  as  if  pressed  inward  ;  tensive,  in  r.  eye;  in  r.
eye  and  in  temples;  in  1.  eye  while  walking  in  open  air;
in  eyes  and  lids ;  in  margin  of  1.  lower  lid  near  inner
canthus;  across  root  of  nose;  above  r.  eye;  in  r.  tonsil ;
in  upper  jaw ;  in  r.  lower  back  teeth  ;  from  below  up-
ward in  oesophagus ;  in  tonsils ;  from  pharynx  down
into  abdomen ;  in  middle  of  spine  with  eructation ;  in
pit  of  stomach ;  in  stomach ;  downward  on  bladder,
rectum  and  uterus;  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  in  r.  hypo-
chondrium;  under  short  ribs;  in  abdomen  ;  in  pubic
region  ;  in  sides  of  abdomen  and  umbilical  region ;  in
r.  side  of  abdomen  close  to  hip  ;  low  down  in  abdomen  ;
between  pit  of  stomach  and  navel ;  in  r.  inguinal  region ;
in  groin  and  pubic  region  ;  from  rectum  into  abdomen;
in  region  of  kidneys;  upon  bladder;  on  pudenda  ;  upon
chest ;  in  thorax ;  cramplike,  in  chest  and  pit  of  stom-
ach ;  at  r.  extremity  of  1.  clavicle;  beneath  r.  axilla;  in
middle  of  sternum  ;  on  upper  part  of  sternum  ;  sharp,
near  r.  axilla;  here  and  there,  over  whole  chest;  on  1.
clavicle;  in  1.  side  of  chest;  tearing,  in  lower  1.  chest;
in  heart;  beneath  1.  nipple;  in  r.  mamma;  sore,  about
r.  nipple;  as  with  finger,  on  r.  side  of  neck,  when  talking;
in  spine;  upon  small  spot  on  back,  near  r.  scapula;  r.


553  ZINCUM.

side,  near  middle  of  spine;  beneath  1.  scapula;  close  to
r.  scapula ;  in  lower  portion  of  spine;  beneath  r.  scapula ;
in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions;  in  shoulders;  in  middle
of  upper  arm;  in  1.  shoulder;  rheumatic,  in  elbows;  in
middle  joint  and  first  phalanx  of  r.  index  finger ;  in  ball
of  1.  hand  ;  at  root  of  hand  ;  above  r.  natis  ;  on  posterior
portion  of  thigh;  dull,  above  r.  hip ;  along  tibia;  in
bones  of  r.  leg ;  on  inner  side  of  leg,  between  ankle  and
calf;  beneath  outer  malleolus;  upon  inner  walls  of  trunk.

Pressing  asunder:  in  r.  side  of  occiput;  in  1.  side  of  oc-
ciput.

Bearing  down  :  in  abdomen  after  stool.

Pushing  pain  :  in  coccyx.

Dragging  pain:  in  abdomen;  in  occiput;  in  abdomen
and  small  of  back,  during  menses.

Bruised  pain:  in  occiput;  in  bones  of  face  and  orbit;  in
r.  malar  bone;  in  r.  side  of  lower  abdomen  ;  in  region  of
1.  kidney  ;  in  r.  side  of  chest;  in  back  ;  in  1.  arm  and
deltoid;  in  a  small  spot  in  axilla;  in  1. scapula;  iiibone
of  r.  upper  arm  ;  in  bend  of  r.  arm  ;  in  forearm  ;  in  ball
of  1.  hand;  in  region  of  1.  hip;  in  hip  joint;  in  gluteal
and  posterior  femoral  muscles  ;  on  anterior  surface  of  1.
thigh;  in  knee  joints ;  in  bends  of  knees;  in  1.  knee;  in
limbs.

Biting:  in  1.  eye  and  cheek;  in  eye;  in  r.  inner  canthus;
in  outer  canthus;  on  lower  surface  of  tongue;  on  inner
surface  of  gums;  in  palate;  from  flatus;  on  abdomen
toward  chest;  in  orifice  of  urethra;  in  pudenda;  in  skin
of  1.  upper  arm  posteriorly ;  on  back  of  r.  hand ;  in
ulcer.

Burning:  in  1.  side  and  scapula;  in  back  and  small  of
back;  along  whole  spine ;  in  shoulder  blades;  in  1.  ax-
illa; in  anterior  surface  of  1.  upper  arm;  in  1.  forearm  ;
above  r.  wrist;  in  r.  wrist  and  ball  of  hand  ;  in  a  small
spot  in  1.  hand  ;  in  region  of  1.  hip';  posteriorly  in  1.  hip  ;
below r.  knee;  in  tibia;  beneath  r.  inner  malleolus;  be-
neath r.  heel ;  in  soles ;  in  bones  of  back  of  foot ;  in  ball
of  great  toe;  in  small  places;  insoles;  in  skin  of  r.  scap-
ula; in  skin  of  1.  upper  arm  posteriorly;  in  skin  on
margin  of  r.  hand;  in  cracks  between  fingers  of  1.  hand;
in  pustule  on  1.  fourth  finger;  on  flexor  surface  of  fingers;
on  outer  side  of  r.  thigh  above  knee ;  in  skin  of  lower  r.
calf;  in  ulcer.

Soreness :  in  head  ;  in  vertex  ;  of  scalp  and  hair  ;  in  r.
inner  canthus;  in  pterygium;  iii  r.  upper  lid ;  of  outer
canthus;  in  nose;  of  teeth;  in  inner  side  of  gums;  of
tongue;  in  upper  part  of  chest;  in  1.  hypochondriura ;
in  rectum  ;  at  anus  ;  in  region  of  1.  kidney  ;  in  forepart


ZINCUM.  554

of  urethra ;  as  if  beaten,  in  1.  pectoral  muscles ;  in  chest;
in  a  small  spot  in  axilla;  in  outer  muscles  of  thigh;  in
sides  of  scrotum  and  thigh  ;  in  pimples.

Rawness:  in  throat;  in  pharynx;  inchest.

Scraping :  in  larynx ;  in  pharynx.

Aching :  in  temples ;  in  stomach  ;  in  pubic  region  ;  in
sides  of  abdomen  and  umbilical  region  ;  in  lumbar
region ;  about  last  lumbar  vertebrse ;  in  coccyx.

Smarting:  in  1.  eye;  in  lower  lip;  on  inner  surface  of  lower
lip  ;  in  roots  of  upper  front  teeth  and  in  hard  palate ;  in
rectum;  in  hemorrhoids;  in  pudenda.

Dull  pain :  across  frontal  sinuses ;  in  forehead  ;  in  vertex ;
in.  1.  side  of  head  ;  in  epigastrium  and  r.  side  of  umbil-
icus ;  in  r.  upper  arm ;  in  knee.

Throbbing:  in  head;  in  r.  frontal  region;  in  forehead;  in
vertex;  in  r.  side  of  head;  in  eye;  in  a  hollow  tooth;
alternately  of  back  teeth  of  r.  and  1.  sides ;  near  1.  ax-
illa ;  under  lower  third  of  1.  scapula ;  in  1.  thumb  toward
tip  ;  in  knees  ;  through  whole  body  ;  in  pustule  on  1.
fourth  finger.

Pulsating  :  in  1.  hypochondriuni ;  in  1.  nipple;  in  1.  natis  ;
in  tendons  Achillis  ;  in  tip  of  r.  great  toe.

Suppurative  pain :  in  scalp ;  in  nail  of  great  toe.

Ulcerative  pain :  in  soles  ;  in  r.  great  toe ;  in  heels ;  in
pimple  on  neck.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue;  follow-
ing herpes  zoster.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  spine;  inlumbar  region  and  shoulders;
in  deltoids.

Paralytic  pain  :  in  small  of  back ;  in  1.  femur ;  in  r,
thigh.

Contraction  :  in  r.  tendo- Achillis.

Constriction:  in  throat;  in  oesophagus;  in  1.  side  of  lower
abdomen.

Tightness:  in  temples;  in  vertex;  in  muscles  of  calf;  in
pit  of  stomach  during  menses ;  in  chest ;  beneath
sternum.

Tension  :  in  abdomen  ;  beneath  r.  axilla  ;  in  sternum  ;  in
r.  side  of  chest ;  here  and  there  in  1.  chest ;  spasmodic
in'  heart ;  in  neck ;  in  r.  side  of  neck ;  in  cervical
muscles;  beneath  r.  scapula;  in  small  of  back;  in
lumbar  and  sacral  region;  between  shoulders;  in
shoulder  joints;  rheumatic,  in  head  of  1.  humerus;
in  both  arms  ;  in  r.  elbow  joint ;  in  r.  wrist ;  rheu-
matic above  1.  wrist;  in  hand;  in  metacarpal  bone  of
little  finger;  below  r.  knee;  along  tibia;  in  calves;
in  r.  tibia  ;  in  1.  ankle  ;  in  r.  foot ;  in  r.  sole  ;  in  margins
of  r.  foot.


555  ZINCUM.

Stiffness:  in  neck  ;  in  cervical  and  upper  dorsal  muscles;
of  muscles  of  calf ;  of  legs.

Dulness  :  in  forehead  ;  in  occiput.

Lightness :  in  head.

Heaviness:  of  head  ;  in  forehead  ;  in  vertex;  in  occiput;
in  hypochondria  and  loins;  in  abdomen;  in  rectum;
in  heart;  in  shoulders;  in  bend  of  1.  elbow ;  in  r.  thigh  ;
in  1.  femur  ;  in  r.  foot  and  malleoli ;  in  legs.

Fulness  :  in  oesophagus  ;  in  abdomen.

Uneasiness :  in  legs.

Bubbling  :  in  1.  upper  arm  ;  in  r.  natis.

Formication  :  in  calves  and  toes.

Tickling :  in  r.  eye  as  from  dust ;  in  1.  ear ;  in  larynx ;
beneath  sternum  ;  in  trachea  and  middle  of  chest ;  in
upper  third  of  chest,  both  sides.

Crawling:  in  forehead;  in  ears;  in  nose;  from  abdomen
into  urethra  ;  in  anus;  in  1.  thumb;  in  1.  knee  joints  ;
of  back  of  1.  foot ;  in  calves  to  toes  ;  in  skin  of  whole
body.

Tingling  :  in  head  ;  inside  of  cheek  ;  at  anus.

Itching:  of  eyes  ;  in  r.  inner  canthus  ;  in  inner  angles  of
eyes  ;  in  margin  of  1.  upper  lid  ;  in  ears  ;  in  nostrils  ;
of  1.  cheek ;  on  inner  surface  of  gums  ;  in  rectum  ;  in
anus;  in  urethra;  in  pudenda;  of  vulva;  of  thighs  and
hollows  of  knees;  on  r.  knee  joint;  in  joints  and  bends
of  joints  ;  as  from  flea-bites  on  back  and  abdomen  ;  on
scrotum  ; -about  nipples  ;  between  scapulse  ;  spots  on
back;  papular  eruption  on  forearm;  points  in  skin;  on
outer  side  of  r.  thigh  above  knee;  on  thigh  above
"knee;  of  thighs  and  liollows  of  knee  ;  pimples  on  legs;
on  r.  toes ;  of  great  toe  as  if  frozen  ;  on  anterior  ball  of
great  toe;  in  r.  sole;  in  soles ;  on  flexor  surface  of  joints;
nettlerash.

Roughness :  in  chest.

Weakness:  in  head  and  eyes  ;  in  hands  and  feet;  in  ster-
num ;  in  small  of  back  and  legs  ;  in  lumbar  and  sacral
regions ;  in  arms  ;  of  hands ;  in  hollows  of  knees  ;  of
limbs.

Numbness:  of  tongue;  of  shoulder  joint ;  in  1.  thumb;  of
r.  leg  ;  of  feet ;  in  soles.

Lameness  :  of  hands  ;  in  r.  thigh.

Deadness  :  of  hands.

Paralyzed  feeling:  in  small  of  back  and  hips;  in  arms;  in
bend  of  1.  elbow  ;  in  r.  foot.

Fidgety  feeling  :  in  legs  and  feet.

Heat:  in  eye;  in  palate  ;  in  1.  thumb  ;  in  region  of  1.  hip.

Coldness:  in  stomach  ;  within  abdomen;  in  chest;  in  nape
of  neck.


ZINCUM.  556

Dryness:  in  eyes  and  lids;  in  eyeballs;  of  lips;  in  throat;
*' Tissues. Cerebral  exhaustion.

Emaciation;  feeble  appearance,  face  wrinkled  and  bluish.

Paleness  of  mucous  surfaces,  with  disappearance  of  sub-
cutaneous cellular  tissue,  and  atrophy  of  muscular
system.

Weak  digestion,  depressed  function  of  nutrition,  with
cerebral  affections;  constipation,  with  affections  of  liver
or  flatulent  colic ;  gastric  troubles  during  pregnancy.

Anaemia;  brain  exhausted;  notable  to  develop  exanthe-
mata.

Drops}'',  with  uneasiness  in  renal  region.

A  state  of  the  blood  which  in  its  qualitative  analysis  ap-
proaches chlorosis ;  want  of  vitality,  as  we  find  it  after
physical  and  psychical  depression;  heaviness  and  weak-
ness in  all  organs,  as  we  see  in  suppressed  catamenia,
but  when  menses  flow  it  relieves  all  her  suflerings;
cough  harassing  and  troublesome,  strength  is  wanting
for  expectoration ;  feels  as  if  his  bladder  would  burst,
still  there  is  not  energy  enough  to  pass  a  good  stream,
small  quantities  only  are  discharged  ;  stools  scanty,  dry,
brittle,  granulous.

Dyspeptic  symptoms;  subdued  nausea,  with  a  universal
tremulous  feeling;  irregular  spasmodic  action  of  heart.

Clonic  spasms,  as  well  as  following  coma,  find  their  cause
in  cerebral  exhaustion.

General  articular  rheumatism,  with  tearing  pain,  lame-
ness, trembling  and  crampy  pain ;  twisting  in  affected
limbs,  frequent  jerking  of  whole  body  during  sleep,  <
from  being  overheated  and  from  exertion.

I  I  Rheumatism  affecting  muscles  of  sacrum,  coccyx,  ilium
and  1.  hip  joint,  and  leg  of  1.  side;  soreness  of  })arts
upon  pressure  by  ends  of  fingers,  and  sore  pains  from
any  movement  requiring  exercise  of  muscles;  when
sitting  or  lying  down  little  or  no  pain  ;  <  rising  from
chair,  from  stooping,  turning  body  or  bending  it  ba<'k-
ward, drawing  a  long  breath,  coughing  or  sneezing;  pains
in  hip  joint  and  knee,  occasionally  passing  along  course
of  great  ischiatic  nerve  to  foot.

Ulcers:  old;  indolent;  herpetic;  bleeding  and  burning;
destitute  of  feeling;  redness  of  surrounding  skin,  with
sensation  of  tenseness;  pus  bloody  and  corroding.

A  large  abscess  on  1.  heel  matured  more  quickly  after
Ziitcum  30.

QEdema  and  general  anasarca  of  cellular  tissue ;  dropsies
following  scarlet  fever.

Dropsical  effusions  of  all  serous  cavities.

Relief  of  thoracic  symptoms  by  expectoration;  relief  of


557  ZINCUM.

cystic  symptoms  by  urination;  in  male,  relief  of  back-
ache by  seminal  emission,  and  in  female,  general  ame-
lioration from  menstrual  flow.
^' Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  scalp  feels
sore ;  pain  as  after  a  blow  beneath  and  in  front  of  r.  ear ;
neuralgia  fifth  pair  <  ;  ulcer  at  root  of  a  bad  tooth  sen-
sitive; gums  bleed;  swelling  of  palate  painful;  enlarged
liver  sore;  <  stitches  in  internal  ulcer  above  navel ;  1.
kidney  sensitive;  mammse  swollen  and  sore;  ribs  of  1.
thorax  painful ;  tenderness  over  cardiac  region  ;  1.  nip-
ple sore;  spine  sensitive;  bruised  pain  in  forearm;  sore-
ness of  glans  penis ;  r.  side  of  scrotum  painful ;  decrease
of  sensibility  ;  soreness  of  pimples  ;  tetter  on  back  pain-
ful ;  itching  here  and  there  in  skin  >.

Contact:  itching  >.

Pressure:  conjunctivitis  >  ;  bruised  pain  in  r.  malar  bone;
pain  in  hollow  molar  <  ;  in  abdomen,  nausea  and  vom-
iting; tenderness  over  stomach;  stitches  in  spleen  <;
stitches  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  <  ;  constrictive  pain  in
lower  abdomen;  pain  in  1.  ovarian  region  >;  stitches
in  trachea  <  ;  1.  thigh  sore;  pain  in  r.  ligamentum  pa-
tellse ;  soreness  and  pricking  pains  in  joints.

Squeezing  hands  upon  sides  of  head: headache  >.

Must  unfasten  dress:  during  menses.

Rubbing :  >  biting  in  1.  eye ;  biting  in  r.  inner  canthus

>  ;  tearing  in  r.  elbow  joint  >  ;  tearing  in  r.  knee  >  ;
tearing  in  r.  outer  malleolus  >  ;  skin  on  back  of  r.  hand
sends  irritation  through  whole  body;  feeling  as  if  toes
had  been  frozen  <  ;  stinging  itching  in  skin,  with  net-
tlerash  ;  general  formication  >.

Scratching:  soreness  of  vertex  >  ;  tearing  in  r.  shoulder

>  ;  causes  itching  to  appear  in  another  place;  urtica-
ria-like eruption  on  thighs  and  hollows  of  knees;  ">
itching  in  pimples  on  thigh;  feeling  as  if  toes  had
been  frozen  <.

Jarring:  pain  in  abdomen  <.

Riding  :  headache  <  ;  tearing  in  hand  from  wrist  to  first
phalanx  of  thumb.

Bruise :  orchitis.

After  operation  to  eye: sees luminous bodies; intense
burning.
*'  Skin. Skin  dry.

Pains,  seemingly  between  skin  and  flesh.

Itching:  of  skin;  in  bends  of  joints;  sudden,  here  and
there,  especially  in  evening  in  bed,  goes  off  by  contact;
as  from  lice  at  night,  after  scratching  it  appears  in  an-
other place.

Pimples  on  forehead,  back  and  third  1.  toe,  with  sore,
pressing  pain  when  touched.


ZINCUM.  558

Small  white  pimples  with  some  moisture,  on  upper  lip,
chin  and  forehead  after  moderate  wine  drinking.

Papular  eruption  on  face.

Crusty  eruption  on  face.

Itching  on  face  in  evening.

A  red,  hard,  painful  swelling  on  1.  wing  of  nose,  painful
to  pressure.

Clear  water  blisters  or  suppurated  pimples  on  upper  lip.

Papular  eruption  on  upper  lip.

Flat  red  pimples  in  middle  of  upper  lip,  in  margin  pain-
ful to  touch.

Itching  on  upper  lip,  chin  and  about  mouth  without
eruption.

Very  itching  pimples  almost  in  middle  of  chin.

Violent  itching  and  redness  over  whole  protruding  por-
tion of  chin.

Many  small  pustules  near  together  beneath  chin,  with  vio-
lent itching.

Large,  yellowish-white  itching  pimples  on  lower  lip.

Frequent  violent  itching  as  from  numerous  flea-bites,  at
night,  especially  on  back  and  abdomen.

A  red,  finally  a  dark-red  furuncle,  with  a  hard  areola,
containing  a  dark-yellow  pus  developed  on  pubic  region,
somewhat  to  1.  side.

Itching  on  scrotum  violent,  almost  sore,  not  >  by  scratch-
ing, several  evenings  in  succession.

A  small,  red,  painfully  sore  pimple  at  root  of  hair  on
scrotum.

Red  pimples  on  chest  and  face.

Itching  about  nipples,  she  constantly  wanted  to  scratch.

A  pimple  with  ulcerative  pain  on  pressure  on  r.  side  of
neck.

Small  pimples  like  boils  on  both  shoulders.

Itching  between  scapulae  in  evening,  with  much  eruption.

Burning  on  skin  of  r.  scapula.

Small  boils  on  back  and  between  scapulae.

Itching  spots  on  back ;  tetter  painful  to  touch.

A  large  boil  on  1.  upper  arm.

Biting  burning  posteriorly  in  upper  part  of  skin  of  1.  arm.

Eruption  of  rash  in  bend  of  elbow.

Papular  eruption  on  forearm,  itching  violently  during  day.

Right  hand  very  much  broken  out  with  well-marked  ten-
dency to  formation  of  painful  fissures.

Itching  pimple  on  back  of  hand.

Biting  on  back  of  r.  hand,  extending  above  wrist,  as  if  an
eruption  would  appear.

Some  itching  points  in  skin,  especially  on  hands,  without
external  redness  or  elevations.


559  ZINCUM.

Small  round  red  spots  on  hands  and  fingers.

A  pimple  beneath  skin  of  bend  of  last  joint  of  ring  finger.

Burning  in  skin  on  margin  of  r.  hand.

Koughness  of  skin  on  back  of  r.  hand,  accompanied  by

very  intense  irritation  when  rubbed,  seems  to  go  through

whole  body; discharging  vesicles; < when  he  takes

cold,  and  in  cold  weather.
Epidermis  of  hands  cracks  from  slight  cold,  becomes  fis-
sured and  painful.
Large  chilblains  on  hands,  which  swell  and  itch  violently,
lihagades, mostly between fingers, bad even in mild

weather.
Painful  burning  cracks  between  two  fingers  of  1.  hand.
Sticking  itching  in  a  small  spot  in  1.  fourth  finger,  soon

followed  by  a  red  pustule  with  throbbing  burning  pain.
Burning  on  flexor  surface  of  fingers.
Itching  burning  on  outer  side  of  r.  thigh  above  knee.
Itching  on  anterior  part  of  thigh  above  knee,  five  minutes

in  succession,  with  pimples  which  are  easily  scratched  off.
■  Itching  of  thighs  and  hollows  of  knees  in  evening,  very

violent  with  urticaria-like  eruption  after  scratching.
Eruption  of  itching  rash  in  hollow  of  knees.
A  red  spot  on  leg  becomes  covered  with  a  scab,  with

itching.
Small  pimples  on  thigh,  calves  and  about  knees,  with  vio-
lent itching  which  ceases  immediately  after  scratching.
Crawling  and  formication  in  both  calves,  extending  into

toes.
Burning  in  skin  of  lower  portion  of  r.  calf.
Ulcerative  blisters  on  back  of  r.  foot,  as  after  a  burn.
Painful  itching,  with  heat,  redness  and  swelling  on  r.  toes,

as  if  they  had  been  frozen,  in  evening; <  rubbing  and

scratching.
Itching  of  great  toe  as  if  it  had  been  frozen.
Violent  sticking  itching  in  anterior  ball  of  great  toe,  in

evening.
Bunion  on  1.  little  toe  and  ball  of  foot,  with  stinging  pain

on  walking.
Painful  itching  on  r.  sole.
Itching  on  soles.

Itching  on  flexor  surface  of  joints.
Violent  itching  over  whole  of  lower  extremities.
Itching  of  soles  of  feet,  calves  of  legs  and  thighs,  almost

intolerable  at  night.
Sticking,  pricking,  itching  in  evening  in  bed,  on  forehead,

thigh,  malleoli,  feet  and  other  parts  of  skin.
Sudden  itching  here  and  there,  especially  in  evening  in

bed,  immediately  disappearing  on  touch.


ZINCUM.  560

Itching  over  whole  body  without  eruption.

Fine  sticking  itching  over  whole  body,  with  sour  sweat.

Crawling  in  skin  of  whole  body.

Stinging  itching  in  skin,  with  nettlerash  after  rubbing.

General  formication  as  if  covered  with  ants,  >  only  by
rubbing.

Slight  injury  of  skin  bleeds  very  profusely.

Biting  and  burning  pain  in  an  ulcer.

I  Dry  herpes  over  whole  body.

Suppurating  herpes;  with  lancinating  pains.

■  Neuralgia,  following  herpes  zoster.

I  After  disappearance  of  old  eruptions:  coma  from  cere-
bral exhaustion ;  loss  of  sensation  of  whole  body ;
mania;  somnambulism.

lExanthematic  fevers,  brain  exhausted;  not  able  to  de-
velop eruption;  fever  in  flashes,  or  violent  convulsions
from  suppressed  eruptions.

I  I  Lies  unconscious  and  motionless;  pulse  weak,  cannot  be
counted ;  limbs  icy-cold ;  skin  of  body  bluish-red,  ex-
cept about  eyes,  forehead  and  chin,  which  were  white;
eruption  very  scanty. ^Scarlatina.

I  I  Scarlet  fever  eruption  appeared  two  days  ago,  now  of  a
■  dark-brownish  or  purple  look  ;  skin  flabby  ;  cold  ;  child
lying  unconscious,  having  neither  feeling,  sight  nor
hearing;  remained  quiet,  apparently  having  no  power
of  motion  ;  involuntary  urination  and  defecation  ;  one
pupil  contracted,  the  other  dilated,  acting  feebly  and
slowly  to  light;  face  puffed  and  red.

I  I A  child,  set.  2|,  somewhat  scrofulous;  in  night  twitch-
ing of  limbs,  shocks  through  whole  body,  violent
screaming,  face  pale  and  sunken,  forehead  cold,  covered
with  clammy  perspiration ;  skin  cool  and  dry,  pulse
small,  quick,  easily  compressed,  breathing  short  and
quick,  stool  involuntary. ^Scarlatina.

I  I  During  desquamation  took  cold,  following  night  skin
hot  and  dry,  muttering  during  sleep ;  symptoms  of
convulsions,  urine  scanty,  brown ;  face  oedematous.
^Scarlatina.

I  I  Child,  set.  4,  scrofulous,  overfed ;  does  not  move,  pulse
filiform;  perfect  unconsciousness ;  extremities  icy-cold,
body  cool,  skin  everywhere  livid  except  parts  around
eyes,  forehead  and  chin,  which  were  white;  exanthera
here  and  there.

I  I  While  suffering  with  scarlatina,  witli  the  eruption  fully
out,  ran  out  of  doors  during  his  delirium  ;  eruption
rapidly  disappeared;  was  soon  seized  with  convulsions;
collapse.

MA  woman  set.  34,  slight  eruption on  neck  and  upper


561  ZINCUM.

part  of  chest ;  head  and  face  swollen  like  a  case  of  con-
fluent smallpox,  all  the  same  color,  brown  mahogany ;
high  fever;  hoarse,  croupy  cough;  conscious  but  con-
vulsed ;  it  was  with  great  difflculty  hands,  especially
thumbs,  could  be  moved ;  wrists  and  arms  stiff,  numb
and  dead. ^Measles.

Retrocession  of  eruption ;  child  lies  motionless  and  un-
conscious ;  involuntary  jerking  and  twitching  of  mus-
cles ;  grinding  of  teeth ;  screaming  spells ;  loss  of
speech ;  occiput  very  hot  and  forehead  covered  with
cold  perspiration;  face  distorted;  body  and  limbs  cold
and  of  a  bluish-red  hue;  pulse  threadlike  and  difficult
to  count.  ^Scarlet  fever.
*' Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Girl,  set.  2|,  well  nourished,
scrofulous;  scarlet  fever.

Girl,  8et.  3;  meningitis.

Boy,  set.  3,  blonde,  well  nourished,  ill  ten  days;  typhoid
fever.

Boy,  set.  4,  tall,  strong,  scrofulous ;  scarlet  fever.

Boy,  set.  4,  after  an  attack  of  typhoid ;  affection  of  brain.

Child,  set.  4 ;  scarlet  fever.

Girl,  set.  16,  blonde;  hsematuria.

Girl,  set.  18,  mulatto;  spasms.

Miss,  set.  21,  small,  slender,  brunette;  spasms.

Miss,  set.  24,  robust,  suffering  four  years ;  headache.

Miss,  set.  24,  tall,  suffers  with  dysmenorrhoea ;  colic.

Miss  B,,  set.  24,  suffering  two  years;  chlorotic  headache.

Miss  T.,  set.  30,  caught  cold  when  17  years  old,  during
menstruation,  since  then  suffering;  neuralgia,  dysmen-
orrhoea, etc.

Man,  set.  32,  sanguine-choleric  temperament ;  typhoid
fever.

Woman,  set.  34,  dark-skinned,  had  taken  arsenic  for  an
eruption  on  face ;  measles.

Miss,  set.  37 ;  affection  of  eyes.

Woman,  set.  38,  brunette,  thin, nervous,  gentle  disposition;
prosopalgia.

Woman,  set.  40;  pterygium.

AVoman,  set.  40,  suffering  several  years ;  asthma.

Woman,  set.  40,  strong,  suffering  two  years;  headache.

Miss,  set.  42 ;  ovarian  difficulty.

Man,  set.  45  ;  urinary  difficulty.

Man,  set.  48,  sandy  hair,  blue  eyes;  tarsal  tumors.

Woman,  set.  48,  suffering  three  years;  epilepsy.

Captain  Erickson,  set.  50,  sailor,  after  great  exposure ;
bronchitis.

Woman,  set.  55;  pain  in  back.

Farmer,  set.  55,  suffering  three  years;  pterygium.
VOL.  X. — 36.


ZINCUM— ZINGIBER.  562

Man,  set.  70,  suffering  three  weeks;  bronchitis.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Hepar,  Ignat.
Incompatible:  Wine,  Chamom.,  Nvx  vom.
Compare :  Pulsat.  and  Lycop.  in  colics ;  Plumb,  and  Podoph.

in  abdominal  symptoms;  Kohalt.  and  !Sepia  in  spinal

pains ;  Argent,  nitr.  in  tremors.


ZINGIBER.

Ginger.  Zingiberaceae.

Introduced  by  Franz,  Stapf 's  Archiv,  vol.  13,  p.  182 ;  Gundelach's  provings,
containing  observations  by  Hering,  Eaue  and  Lippe.

Clinical  Authorities. — Asthma,  C.  Hg.,  MSS. ;  Diarrhcea,  Hoopes,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  271;  C.  Hg.,  Tafel,  MSS. ;  Suppression  of  urine,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  2,  p.  27.

^  Mind. Cheerful,  good-humored,  a  pleasing  sensation  in  his

system.
1  iNot  in  the  least  anxious,  in  physical  suffering  from

threatened  suffocation. ^Asthma.
Increased  activity  of  brain.
1  I  Forgetful ;  weak  memory.

Irritable  and  chilly,  in  evening,  also  during  menses.
Nervous  and  fidgety.

I  I  Felt  very  uncomfortable,  did  not  know  what  to  do.
^Sensorium. iiComa.
Vertigo,  limbs  heavy.
Head  feels  too  large.
Feels  confused  and  empty  in  his  head.
I  I  Dizziness ;  vertigo.
Dizziness  and  heaviness  in  all  her  limbs.
'  Inner  Head. Frontal  headache  in  morning.

Sensation  as  if  contents  of  head  pressed  into  forehead  and

root  of  nose,  when  stooping.
Drawing :  frontal  headache,  especially  over  root  of  nose,

at  6  A.M.
Frontal  headache  over  eyes  and  root  of  nose ;  also  when

he  exerts  himself.
Very  fine,  but  violent  stitches  in  forehead.
Headache  when he  exerts  himself;  a  drawing  pressure

on  frontal  bone.
Frontal  headache, especially  over  eyes;  <  when  laughing,

talking  or  stooping.


563  ZINGIBER.

Pressing-drawing  headache,  as  if  r.  eye  were  pressing  out.

Headache,  at  first  over  1.  forehead,  then  changing  about,
at  11  A.M.

Slight  dull  pain  over  1.  eye,  v;ith  stitches  now  and  then ;
<  by  going  into  cold  air,  afternoon  and  evening;  dull,
heavy,  with  stitches  now  and  then  during  day.

Stinging  pain  over  1.  eye,  at  5  p.m.,  when  it  passed  off  she
had  a  pressing  frontal  headache,  eyes  somewhat  sensi-
tive to  light.

Drawing-pressing  pain  over  1.  eye,  at  7  p.m.

Over  1.  eye  a  dull  headache,  from  9  till  10  p.m.

Twitching  over  r.  eye  and  in  muscles  of  neck.

Sharp  aching,  drawing  pain  over  eyebrows ;  followed  by
nausea,  lasting  but  a  few  moments  in  a  warm  room  ;
later,  more  aching  with  heavier  sensation  than  in  morn-
ing, extending  all  around  head,  more  heavy  on  1.  ver-
tex ;  afterward  heavier  over  r  eye  and  in  1.  occiput ;
this  diagonal  direction  it  took  after  circular  pain  passed
off;  later  pain  over  r.  eye,  and  heavy  pressing  pain  in
1.  occiput,  all  in  a  warm  room,  continuing  in  cold,
damp  air,  and  in  motion,  and  by  sitting  at  rest.

Dull  pressing  headache,  more  in  forehead  and  temples,
with  same  pain  in  1.  eye.

;rPressing  pain  and  numbness  in  both  temples,  pressure
on  eyes,  heat  in  face,  fainting  weakness.

TiHeavy  pressure  in  forehead,  especially  in  temples ;  head
feels  too  large,  with  heat  in  face,  and  humming  in  ears.

Rush  of  blood  to  head,  especially  in  temples.

A  beating  pain  in  1.  temple.

Drawing  pain  in  1.  temple  and  over  1.  eyebrow,  at  5  p.m.

Dull  aching-pressing  pain  in  1.  temple  till  she  went  to
sleep,  8  p.m.;  pressing  headache  in  temples  in  after-
noon and  evening.

Headache  internally,  above  temples,  like  a  pressing-draw-
ing while  walking  iixopen  air,  with  head  covered;  >
when  standing  still,  uncovering  head,  and  in  a  warm
room.

Slight  headache  in  both  temples ;  dull  and  sore  feeling
over  1.  eye  at  11  p.m.;  dull  pressing-drawing  headache,
which  at  last  settled  in  r.  temple.

After  eating  bread,  immediately  a  pressing  headache  in
temples.

Headache  in  temples,  and  stiff  neck.

Left  vertex  sore,  <  on  touching.

Dull  heavy  pain  in  1.  vertex  and  in  arms  and  legs,  at  11  a.m.

Pulsating  pain  in  vertex,  r.  side ;  <  by  rising.

Dull,  pressing  headache  on  1.  side,  with  heat  in  head  and
much  thirst,  in  evening.


ZINGIBER.  564

Pressing-drawing  frontal  headache,  more  on  L  side,  at
noon;  dull  drawing  with  oppressive  heat;  afterward
pain  over  eye;  dull,  pressive,  heavy  all  over,  but  more
on  forehead,  with  stiff  neck.

When  in  church,  pain  over  1.  eye,  drawing  extended  a
little  to  r.,  and  then  settled  in  r.  occiput,  where  she  felt
heavy  drawing  pain  for  about  two  hours,  with  head-
ache in  front,  with  nausea,  and  as  if  she  were  going  to
faint;  at  same  time  very  chilly.

Beating  pressure  in  1.  occiput.

Pain  encircling  head;  dull,  heavy  pain,  like  a  board
pressing  through  w^hole  head,  continuing  for  one  and
a  half  hours,  at  11  a.m.

Circle  of  pain  extended  in  a  line  around  head  through
cerebellum ;  shifting.

Dull,  heavy  pain  encircling  head  above  eyes,  to  occiput.

Headache,  with  stiffness  of  neck  on  1.  side.

Head  feels  as  if  pressed.

Heavy  pressure  in  head  from  without  inward,  when  walk-
ing in  cold,  damp  air.

Pressing  pain  with  heat  all  over  head,  in  morning.

Headache  <  from  moving,  stooping  and  noise;  >  after
dinner  and  in  a  room.

Headache,  with  heat  in  head.

Head  feels  sore 'to  touch;  dull  headache.

iHemicrania;  nervous  headache.
Outer  Head. Itching  on  scalp,  head  and  cheeks.
Sight  and  Eyes. Sudden  glimmering  before  eyes.

Eyes  sensitive  to  light:  with  headache;  in  evening;  with
stinging  pain  in  eyeballs.

Weakness  of  sight ;  dimness  of  cornea.

Smarting  burning  in  eyes.

In  1.  eye  a  sensation  as  from  a  grain  of  sand,  ceases  on
rubbing.

Sharp,  drawing  pain  through  and  around  eyeballs  and
superciliary  ridges.

Pressure:  on  eyes;  in  1.  eye;  dull,  in  1.  eye,  with  head-
ache; in  and  over  1.  eye;  beating  pressure  in  1.  occiput,
in  evening.

Watery  eyes.

Fine  stitches  inside  eyelids.

Transient  sensation  on  margin  of  eyelids,  like  a  cutting
from  above  downward.
^Hearing  and  Ears. During  day  more  sensitive  to  noise,
increases  her  headache.

TrHumming  in  ears.

Drawing  tearing  in  r.  ear;  tearing  at  7  p.m.
^  Smell and Nose. Sneezing  and ineffectual attempts to
sneeze.


565  ZINGIBER.

While  her  cough  is  worse,  streaks  of  blood  in  watery  dis-
charge from  nose.

Discharge  of  pure  water  from  r.  nostril,  later  all  symp-
toms of  a  cold  in  head ;  running  from  r.  nostril  seems
<  ;  1.  nostril  is  becoming  affected  like  r. ;  watery  dis-
charge from  both  nostrils,  especially  in  open  air.

Sense  of  painful  dryness  in  nose.

Dryness  and  obstruction  in  posterior  nares,  with  discharge
of  thick  mucus.

I  I  Ozsena.

Intolerable  itching  of  nose,  not  >  by  scratching.

Red  pimples  on  both  sides  of  alse  nasi.

Nose  feels  obstructed; much  thirst,  dryness  in  mouth,
cannot  breathe  through  nose  ;  when  obstruction  passed
off  she  had  more  watery  discharge.
^  Upper  Face. TrFace  red  and  hot.

Exhausted  look,  blue  under  eyes,  before  menses.

Two  large  red  pimples  on  1.  cheek.

Drawing  in  1.  upper  jaw  to  temples.
"  Lower  Face. Soreness  in  r.  lower  jaw,  with  a  little  swell-
ing, in  morning.

Drawing  pain  :  in  1.  lower  jaw;  in  two  molar  teeth  ;  from
second  molar  tooth  to  first  incisor ;  in  all  teeth,  at  5  p.m.  ;
at  9  P.M.  ...

iDrawing,  stinging  pain  from  1.  lower  jaw  to  first  incisor
at  10  P.M.  and  in  night.

Dry  lips  and  mouth  in  morning.

Itching  in  beard.

Large  scarlet-red  pimples  on  face,  on  forepart  of  head  and
on  neck.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Pressure  and  drawing  in  roots  of  teeth.

All  teeth  of  lower  jaw  began  to  be  painfully  sensitive
with  a  pressing-drawing  in  roots.

Drawing  pain  in  1.  lower  teeth,  has  a  decayed  tooth  in
this  side,  at  7  p.m.,  returns  after  being  in  air.  _
"Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  of  food  remains,  especially  that
of  bread.

Slimy  bad  taste  in  morning,  with  diarrhcea.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Breath  smells  foul  to  herself,  as  from  dis-
ordered stomach.

Great  dryness  of  roof  of  mouth  and  posterior  nares,  which
are  entirely  stopped.

Slimy  mouth, in  morning;  very  slimy  taste  on  rising.

Burning  in  mouth.

Much  saliva,  with  little  vesicles  on  tongue  and  gums,
which  feel  sore.
^^  Throat. Choan^  stopped  up ;  increased  mucous  secretion,
no  fever.


ZINGIBER.  566

Tickling  in  throat,  more  on  1.  side,  irritates  to  cough.

Soreness  in  throat  and  pit  of  stomach,  with  looseness  of
mucus  in  throat.

On  awaking,  dryness  of  throat  and  difficult  swallowing,
it  is  as  if  there  were  an  obstacle  in  the  way ;  same  dry-
ness in  throatpit  in  swallowing  ;  there  is  something  in
way  over  which  it  has  to  pass,  raised  thick,  hard  mucus.

Dryness  of  throat,  feeling  of  swelling  externally,  constant

desire  to  swallow,  and  pressure  with  slight  stinging  pain.

^'Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Much  thirst;

mouth  dry;  with  heat  in  head  and  headache;  at  night;

in  morning ;  dry  lips  and  mouth.

No  desire  to  smoke.

Drinks  water  on  account  of  rancid  feeling,  with  cough.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  bread :  headache,  pressure
in  stomach.

1 1  Complaints  from  eating  melons,  particularly  canteloupes.
^Colic. ^Diarrhoea.
^''Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions: of  wind; incomplete  eructations;  in  evening;
with  diarrhoea.

Nausea :  on  rising ;  much  rumbling ;  after  morning  stool ;
with  empty  feeling  in  stomach  ;  with  headache  ;  with
backache ;  after  a  short  unrefreshing  sleep,  could  not
get  to  sleep  again  ;  with  colic  after  drastics.

Sickness,  sick  feeling  through  whole  day  and  night.

Frequently  a  nauseous  rising  from  stomach  into  chest.

On  rising,  qualmishness;  much  wind  and  rumbling
in  bowels,  preceded  by  a  slight  drawing  pain  in  lower
part  of  abdomen,  at  7  a.m.

Nausea  ;  vomiting  of  mucus  in  drunkards.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Acidity  of  stomach,  eructa-
tions.

■  Weak  digestion;  stomach  heavy  like  a  stone;  retarded
stool.

Soreness  in  pit  of  stomach  and  in  throat.

Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating  bread.

Pain  in  stomach  and  back.

Heaviness,  like  a  stone  in  stomach,  cannot  sleep,  feels
nervous  and  fidgety,  with  cramps  in  soles  and  palms,  and
hoarseness  such  as  she  had  in  cholera;  drawing  pain
from  pit  of  stomach  under  sternum,  w^here  it  feels  like
flatulence.
^^  Hypochondria.  Heavy  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium,  toward
back,  <  from  deep  breathing.

Stitches  in  spleen  and  pressure  in  1.  eye ;  slight  headache,

<  by  moving.
Stitching  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium.


567  ZINGIBER.

Stinging  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  at  night.
'^Abdomen. Sensation of nausea  in  abdomen two hours
after  usual  stool  in  morning.
Abdomen  distended  ;  moving,  rolling  in  bowels.
Rumbling  in  1.  side  of  abdomen;  flatus;  sometimes  a

slight  pain  through  bowels.
A  sudden  drawing-stinging  pain  in  1.  iliac  region,  going

upward,  at  3  p.m.
Sore  pain  in  a  small  place  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.
Contracting  colic  passes  through  abdomen,  while  stand-
ing; soon  followed  by  desire  for  stool.
I  I  Colic  and  nausea  after  drastics.
Colic  whole  night,  feeling  of  weight  and  drawing,  with

much  wind.
Slight  cutting  pain  in  1.  umbilical  region.
Pressing-stinging  pain in bowels,  especially  m 1.  iliac

region,  at  6.15  p.m.
Pressing  pain  in  1.  inguinal  region,  with  superficial  sore-
ness in  a  small  spot  at  2  p.m.,  over  Poupart's  ligament
at  8  P.M.
Pressure  in  1.  and  r.  iliac  region  till  he  sleeps,  5  p.m.  ;
pressing  pain  in  1.,  in  evening  ;  sore  with  pressing  pain
at  5  P.M.
Drawing  pain  in  lower  abdomen  and  back,  had  to  go  to

stool.

Toward  evening  a  drawing  downward  in  bowels  and  lower
abdomen,  especially  in  both  sides,  and  when  this  passed
off  she  had  nausea ;  pressing  downward  in  abdomen ;
drawing  downward  in  bowels  at  8  p  m.

Slight  drawing  pain  low  down  in  abdomen,  passing  from
r.  to  1.  side ;  it  went  higher  up  before  passing  off.
Stool  and  Rectum.  Diarrhoea :  of  brown  mucus,  in  morn-
ing; in  morning,  followed  by  nausea;  from  impure
water;  from  water  containing  coal  oil;  from  deranged
stomach;  from  cold,  damp  weather;  frequent  mucous
stools  during  day,  with  much  wind  ;  with  acidity  of
stomach,  and  a  bad,  slimy  taste.

;rExtremely  loose  bowels  and  griping  all  night,  for  two
days ;  stools  previously  black,  are  now  light  m  color.

Stools  soft ;  is  thirsty  all  the  time.

I  I  Mr.  N.,  set.  18,  tall,  slender,  fair,  healthy;  drank  impure
water  impregnated  with  coal  oil;  watery  diarrhoea,  at  first
copious,  afterward  scanty,  with  much  flatulence,  cutting
pain  in  bowels;  great  depression  of  spirits,  and  fear
that  something  would  happen  to  him  before  he  got
home;  weakness;  anorexia;  sphincter  ani  relaxed;
four  or  five  stools  in  twenty-four  hours.
I  I  Had  been  chilled  by  the  northeast  wind,  in  Summer  at


20


ZINGIBER.  568

the  shore,  felt  hot  and  chilly  at  same- time;  and  after
improper  food  had  disagreed  with  her  stomach,  much
belching  and  diarrhoea,  pain  in  stomach,  felt  very  un-
comfortable, did  not  know  what  to  do;  could  eat
nothing,  as  taste  of  everything  remained,  particularly
for  hours  after  eating  bread,  and  still  more  after  toast.

Constipation  with  belching.

Hot  and  painfully  sore  feeling  in  anus  continually.

Redness,  inflammation,  burning-itching  at  anus.

I  I  In  and  arv^und  anus  a  redness,  inflammation,  burning,
itching  extends  higher  up  to  back ;  hemorrhoidal  tu-
mors very  hot  and  painfully  sore  {Nux  vom.  cured).

TiChewing  ginger  for  an  asthma  which  it  did  not  relieve ;
very  soon  hemorrhoidal  tumors  very  hot  and  painfully
sore ;  the  same  whether  sitting  or  lying  {Nux  vom.
cured).

I  iHot  and painfully  sore  feeling  in  anus;  continually
during  pregnancy.
^'  Urinary  Organs. '  iDull  aching  and  hot  sensation  in  kid-
neys, with  frequent  desire  to  urinate.

Stinging-burning  in  orifice  of  urethra,  no  pain  while
urinating;  urine  very  pale.

Urine:  thick,  turbid  ;  dark  brown  ;  of  strong  smell;  clear,
bright  and  in  great  quantity;  very  pale.

While  urinating,  acute  pain  in  orifice  of  urethra  (cured  by
Nux  vom).

After  urinating  urine  continues  to  ooze  in  drops.

■  Complete  cessation  of  function  of  kidneys,  up  to  fifty
hours'  duration,  in  reconvalescents  from  typhus.
^^  Male Sexual  Organs. Yellow,  nightly  discharge  from
urethra  (cured  by  Nux  vom).

Excites  sexual  desire.

Painful  erections  (cured  by  Nux  vom).

Increases  secretion  of  sperma.

Emissions  at  night.

Itching  on  prepuce ;  which  feels  cold  and  moist.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  too  early  and  profuse,
dark-clotted; irritable;  exhausted  look  before;  draw-
ing pain  in  sacrum.

During menses:  felt very sick and irritable;  pain in
lumbar  region,  more  on  1.  side.
2' Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. During  pregnancy:

hot  and  painfully  sore  feeling  in  anus.
"Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse-
ness, such  as  she  had  in  cholera.

1  I  Smarting  below  larynx  followed  by  cough,  with  mu-
cous rattling.

Scratching  in  larynx  irritates  to  a  dry  hacking  cough,
feels  rancid,  makes  her  drink  water.


569  ZINGIBER.

Soreness  in  upper  larynx,  like  a  ridge  in  it.
^^  Eespiration. '  l  Asthma  humidum  ;  loosens  the  phlegm.

Breathing  difficult,  had  to  sit  up  ;  pain  in  r.  lung.

Breathing  shorter  for  fifteen  minutes.

Difficult  breathing  from  pain  in  r.  lung.

I  Violent  asthma  after  a  proving  of  Caladium ;  most  labori-
ous breathing,  but  without  anxiety  of  mind;  chewing
fresh  ginger  root  caused  a  burning  of  mouth,  a  running
of  saliva,  and  loosening  of  white,  easy  phlegm  from
larynx,  and  difficulty  in  breathing  passed  away.

I  I  Asthma:  respiration  very  painful ;  oppression  ;  scratch-
ing sensation  in  throat,  which  excites  cough  ;  burn-
ing and  smarting  in  throat;  cough  dry,  with  pains  in
chest  and  copious  expectoration  only  in  morning;  at
night,  difficulty  of  breathing  greater  ;  patient  is  obliged
to  remain  sitting  up  in  bed;  aggravation  for  two  hours
in  morning.
^^  Cough.  Dry,  hacking;  from  tickling  in  larynx  or  I.  side  of
throat ;  from  smarting  or  scratching  ;  with  pain  in  lungs,
difficult  breathing ;  morning  sputa,  which  is  copious.

Cough:  excited  by  a  contraction  of  skin  in  region  of
larynx,  without  previous  pain;  from  scratching  ni
larynx,  1  to  2  a.m.;  from  tickling  and  dryness  of
larynx ;  especially  in  morning,  with  much  expectora-
tion, which  she  has  to  swallow;  before  midnight;  in
night;  excited  by  a  burning  and  smarting;  dry,  hack-
ing, with  pain  in  lungs  and  difficult  breathing.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Stitches  and  pleuritic  pains
through  chest.

Stinging  pains  after  motion,  also  stinging  pressing  m
region  of  heart.

Slept  very  well  until  2  a.m.,  when  she  awoke  with  a  vio-
lent stinging  pain  in  lower  portion  of  r.  lung,  breathing
difficult,  had  to  sit  up  in  bed  ;  a  dry,  hacking  cough
made  pain  and  difficultj^in  breathing  worse ;  in  mormng
much  expectoration,  pain  in  r.  lung  lasting  whole  day,
with  external  soreness.

After  motion,  now  and  then,  stinging  pain  in  lungs.

Asthenic  pleurisy.

External  soreness  of  chest,  with  internal  pain.

TiBroken  feeling  around  chest  in  evening.

A  soft  pressure  on  chest  while  walking,  the  time  when  he
does  not  cough.

Dull,  pressing  pain  in  r.  lung,  from  second  to  sixth  rib  ;
in  front,  <  at  intervals,  somewhat  difficult  breathing,
at  7  P.M.

Several  times  pain  through  middle  lobe  of  1.  lung  at  1»  p.m.

Stitches :  through  chest  in  1.  lower  lung ;  in  r.  side  of  chest.


ZINGIBER.  570

All  day  pain  under  breast  bone.

Pain  under  sternum  from  pit  of  stomach.

Pressure  from  within  outward  under  upper  part  of  sternum,

more  on  r.  side.
Pressing  pain  under  sternum  at  4  p.m.
Violent  stinging  pressing  pain  on  1. side  of chest, in

region  of  heart  at  4  p.m.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Fluttering  of  heart.

She  feels  exhausted ;  fluttering  of  heart ; languid ;  has

an  empty  sensation.
Accelerated  circulation.
Pulse,  hard  and  full,  heat  with  redness  in  face  ;  humming

in  ears;  in  evening,  full,  hard  and  slow;  from  72  and

weak  to  84  and  full,  with  rush  of  blood  to  head.
^*  Neck  and  Back. ;rStiffness  in  neck,  <  on  motion.
Stiffness  of  back  of  neck,  with  headache  and  nausea.
Backache  as  from  weakness ;  >  when  sitting  and  leaning

against  something.
Lower  part  of  back:  as  if  beaten;  lame  from  walking  or

standing  ;  feels  stiff  and  heavy.
Stiffness  of  neck  on  1.  side,  with  headache.
Cracking  sound  in  first  cervical  vertebra  :  on  rising  from

sitting,  with  stiffness  in  1.  side  of  neck ;  on  looking

upward,  in  evening.
Dull,  aching,  drawing  pain  in  back,  between  shoulders,

at  6  P.M.
Dull  pain  in  r.  lumbar  region.
Stiffness  and  heavy  feeling  in  lower  part  of  back.
Pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  beaten  while  walking  or

standing.
Drawing,  sometimes  stitching,  pain  in  small  of  back,  and

lower  down  in  abdomen  ;  could  not  sit  erect ;  this  pain

went  up with  stitches  through chest,  and  settled as

stingy  pains  under  1.  shoulder  blade ;  pain  increased

by  deep  breathing  at  7  p.m.
Stitching  pain  in  small  of  back.
Backache,  first  low  down,  but  passing  off,  he  feels  it  higher

up  at  8  p  M.,  several  times  with  nausea.
In  1.  loin  a  shocklike  moving  downward,  as  from  a  drop-
ping fluid.
Backache  in  sacral  region.
Drawing  pain  in  1.  sacral  region,  in  evening,  first  day  of

menstruation.
Pain  as  from  weakness  in  sacral  region  after  lying  down

in  evening  (cured  by  Nux  vom.).
'^^  Upper  Limbs. Heavy,  lame  feeling  in  1.  arm  ;  numbness,

<  in  forearm.
Rheumatic  drawing  pains  in  backs  of  hands.


571  ZINGIBER.

Heat  of  palms  and  face.

Dull  aching  pain  in  r.  arm  going  down  to  wrist.
Jumping  twitching  in  muscles  of  1.  arm  downward.
Drawing  pain  :  in  1.  arm ;  first  in  r.,  then  in  1.  arm.
After  coming  into  a  warm  room,  at  noon  (in  December),
drawing  pain  in  1.  arm,  continuing  all  afternoon  and
evening,  especially  in  1.  upper  arm.
After  working  some,  she  felt  violent  drawing  pain  from  r.
axilla  to  sternum,  from  third to  sixth  ribs,  in  inter-
costal muscles.
Drawing  pain  in  1.  shoulder,  at  11  p.m.
Fell  on  ice  and  strained  1.  shoulder  joint ,  his  arm  felt  as
if  paralyzed,  could  not  use  it  much,  very  difficult  and
painful  to  raise  it,  much  more  than  was  to  be  expected
from a  fall ;  had  all  through  proving  a  weakness  and
drawing  pain  in  1.  shoulder  joint.
Pain  along  1.  deltoid  as  from  overwork  ;  a  sensation  of

lameness,  <  from  motion.
Heavy  feeling,  a  kind  of  lameness  in  upper  arms.
Twitching  in  muscles :  of  r.  upper  arm ;  of  back  part  of

r.  humerus,  and  in  r.  thigh.
Pulling-tearing  pain  along  triceps  of  r.arm.
Drawing  pain  in  r.  upper  arm,  in  evening.
Felt  a  loud  crack  in  1.  elbow  on  moving.
Internal  trembling  of  muscles  of  forearm  while  holdmg

something.
Twitching  in  muscles  of  1.  forearm.

Drawing  pain:  in  r.  forearm  toward  wrist;  in  back  of
hand,  like  rheumatism  ;  cramplike,  in  palm  of  1.  hand
at  5  P.M.
^^  Lower  Limbs, l  l  Pains  in  hip  joints ;  joints  stiff,  lame.
Burning,  stinging,  tingling  in  feet.
I  I  Painful  swelling  of  feet.

Broken  feeling  around  hips,  very  tired  when  standmg.
Drawing  pain  in  both  hip  joints,  with  a  feeling  of  lame-
ness afterward  ;  pain  came  by  spells  ;  after  two  draw-
ing pains  followed  a  little  rest,  then  pain  again  ;  it  is  <
in  1.  joint.
Had  long  ago  a  fall  injuring  1.  hip,  but  for  several  weeks
felt  nothing  of  it  at all; as  soon  as he  commenced
proving,  same  soreness  returned  as  after  fall.
Drawing  pain:  in  thighs ;  in  outer  side  of  1.  thigh ;  below

1.  patella,  in  afternoon  ;  along  inner  side  of  r.  patella.
A  pain  as  from  overstraining  muscles  in  bend  of  knee.
Dull  aching  drawing  pain,  first  in  1.,  then  in  both  knees,

extending  down  to  feet.
Exceedingly  painful  crawling,like  that  in  parts  that  have
gone  to  sleep,  and  prickling  in  balls  and  soles  of  feet
while  sitting ;  evenings.


ZINGIBER.  572

A  very  acute  drawing  (digging)  pain  on  top  of  foot  while

it  is  stretched  out.
Heels  ache  after  long  standing.
Cramps  in  soles.
Prickling  crawling  pains  in  sole  of  foot,  while  walking  or

standing.
While  sitting  in  evening  a  fine  pricking  crawling,  almost

like  a  sore  pain,  in  sole  of  foot.
Burning  pricking  crawling  in  soles,  heels  and  toes  while

sitting, particularly burning in a corn on sole,  in

evening.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Very  weak  in  all  joints ;  in  back  a  kind

of  lameness;  had  been  walking  much  day  before.
Dull,  heavy  feeling;  lassitude  also  with  dizziness.
Joints  weak  ;  back  lame
I  I  Dull,  heavy  pain  in  1.  vertex  and  in  arms  and  legs;

1]  A.M.

Drawing  and  stinging  pain  in  all  her  limbs,  as  after  tak-
ing cold.

Cramps  in  soles  and  palms.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Lying: breathing difficult;
weakness  in  sacral  region.

Sitting:  leaning  back,  backache  >;  prickling  in  balls  and
soles  of  feet;  prickling,  crawling  in  sole  of  foot;  burn-
ing, prickling  crawling  in  soles,  heels  and  toes.

Standing:  headache  internally  above  temples  >;  con-
tracting colic  passes  through  abdomen  ;  lower  part  of
back  lame;  tired;  long,  headache;  prickling  crawling
in  sole  of  foot.

Stooping:  sensation  as  if  contents  of  head  pressed  into
forehead  and  root  of  nose;  headache  <.

Motion  :  headache  <  ;  after,  stinging  pains,  also  stinging
pressure  in  region  of  heart;  after,  stinging  pain  in
lungs ;  stiffness  in  back  <.

Rising:  pulsating  pain  in  vertex  <  ;  cracking  in  cervical
vertebrae.

Laughing  or  talking:  frontal  headache  <.

Deep  breathing:  heavy  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Exertion :  frontal  headache.

Walking :  soft  pressure  on  chest ;  lower  part  of  back  lame ;
prickling  crawling  in  sole  of  foot.
'^  Nerves. Foaming  at  mouth,  free  urination,  spasms.

TT  Faintish  weakness;  wants  to  lie  down.

TT  Prostrated  and  feverish.

Sensation  as  if  she  were  going  to  faint.

I  I  Hypochondriasis.

Brings  on  spasms  in  epileptics.

Feels  tired  all  over  in  afternoon.


573  ZINGIBER.

Feels  very  unwell  all  day.
^^ Sleep. Coma:  sleepy  morning ;  afternoon;  as  from  spring

fever.
Awakens  3  a.m.  ;  falls  asleep  again  late  in  morning.
After  a  good  sleep  at  night,  very  sleepy  all  morning,  with

frequent  yawning.
Sleepless  till  toward  morning;  falls  from  one  dream  into

another;  dreams  of  fire,  fright,  etc.
Cannot  sleep,  feels  nervous  and  fidgety.
Wakefulness  latter  part  of  night.
Dreams:  of  dancing, throwing  somersaults  (by  an  old  man),

incomplete  emissions ;  of  fire;  frightful;  anxious.
^^  Time. 1  to  2  a.m.  :  cough,  from  scratching  in  larynx.

2  A.M. :  awoke  with  stinging  pain  in  lower  portion  of  r.  lung.

6  A.M. :  drawing  frontal  headache.

Morning:  frontal  headache;  pressing  pain,  with  heat  over

head  ;  soreness  in  r.  lower  jaw ;  dry  lips  and  mouth  ;

slimy,  bad  taste;  on  awaking,  dryness  of  throat  and

difficult  swallowing ;  much  thirst ;  two  hours  after  usual

stool, nausea in abdomen; copious expectoration;

cough ;  sleepy.
11  A.M. :  headache  over  forehead ;  dull,  heavy  pain  in  1.

vertex  and  in  arms  and  legs;  dull,  heavy  pain  encir-
cling head.
Toward  noon :  chilly.

Noon  :  pressing,  drawing  frontal  headache.
After  dinner:  headache  >.
Afternoon :  stitches  over  1.  eye  <  ;  pressing  headache  in

temples ;  tired  all  over ;  sleepiness  <  ;  drawing  pain  in

1.  patella.

2  P.M. :  pressing  pain  in  1.  inguinal  region.

3  P.M. :  drawing,  stinging  pain  in  1.  iliac  region.

4  P.M. :  pressing  pain  under  sternum ;  stinging,  pressing
pain  on  1.  side  of  chest.

Toward  evening :  drawing  downward  in  bowels.
All  day :  pain  under  breast  bone  ;  feels  unwell.
During day : more sensitive to noise ;  diarrhoea, with
much  wind.

5  P.M. :  stinging  over  1.  eye ;  drawing  pain  in  1.  temple  and
over  1.  brow;  drawing  pain  in  all  teeth;  pressing  in  iliac
regions;  cramplike  pain  in  palm.

6  P.M. :  aching  between  shoulders.

Evening:  irritable  and  chilly;  stitches  over  1.  eye  <  ;
pressing  headache  in  temples ;  dull,  pressing  headache
on  1.  side,  with  heat  on  head,  and  much  thirst;  eyes
sensitive  to  light;  beating  pressure  in  1.  occiput;  eruc-
tations; pulse  full,  hard  and  slow;  chill  goes  upward;
chilliness, more  about  trunk ;  irritable ; prickling  in


ZINGIBER.  574

balls  and  soles  of  feet  while  sitting ;  burning  in  corn  on

sole.
Day  and  night :  sick  feeling.
6.15  P.M. :  pressing,  stinging  pain  in  bowels,  especially  1.

iliac  region.

7  P.M. :  drawing  pressing  over  1.  eye ;  tearing  in  r.  ear ;
drawing  pain  in  1.  lower  teeth ;  difficult  breathing.

8  p.m.:  dull,  aching-pressing  pain  in  1.  temple;  pressing
pain  over  Poupart's  ligament;  drawing  downward  in
bowels.

Night:  drawing,  stinging  pain  from  1.  lower  jaw  to  first
incisors;  much  thirst;  stinging  pain  in  hypochondrium  ;
colic;  loose  bowels  and  griping;  emissions;  difficulty
of  breathing  <  ;  cough  ;  sleepless.

9  p.m.  :  drawing  pain  in  1.  lower  jaw;  pain  in  lung;  pain
through  middle  lobe  of  r.  lung.

9  to  10  p.m.  :  dull  headache  over  1.  eye.

10  p.m.  :  drawing,  stinging  pain  from  1.  lower  jaw  to  first
incisors.

11  p.m.  :  dull  and  sore  feeling  over  1.  eye ;  drawing  in
shoulder.

Before  midnight :  cough.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Uncovering  head :  headache

internally  above  temples  >•
Head  covered  :  headache  internally  above  temples.
Open  air :  headache  internally  above  temples ;  watery  dis-
charge from  nostrils  <  ;  drawing  pain  in  1.  lower  teeth

returns;  chilly.
Cold  air:  stitches  over  1.  eye  <.
Cold,  damp  air:  headache;  pressure  in  head.
In  a  room  :  headache  >.
Warm room : nausea, headache ; headache internally

above  temples  >  ;  drawing  in  1.  arm ;  chilliness,  more

about  trunk  in  evening.
Crawling:  in  sole.
Heat:  in  head;  in  kidneys;  in  anus;  of  palms  and  face;

in  ears;  in  skin.
Itching : on head and cheeks ;  of  nose ; in beard ;  at

anus ;  on  prepuce ;  on  scalp  and  in  pubic  parts.
Dryness:  of  nose;  of  lips  and  mouth  ;  of  roof  of  mouth

and  posterior  nares  ;  in  throat;  of  larynx.
^° Fever. Chilly  in  open  air;  in  evening;  chill  goes  upward.
I  I  Hot  and  chilly  at  same  time.
Cold  shiverings.

Chilly  toward  noon;  first  cold  feet,  then  cold  hands.
Creeping  chilliness,  more  about  trunk,  evenings  in  warm

room.
I  I  Sensibility  to  open  cold  air.


575  ■  ZINGIBER.

I  I  Irritable  and  chilly  in  evening.

Heat  in  face  and  in  palms  of  hands.

Chilliness  with  headache.

Very  chilly  with  faintness  and  sick-headache.

Cold  hands  and  feet  alternately.

Heat :  with  headache ;  in  ears ;  in  face ;  in  palm.

Profuse  perspiration.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. At  intervals :  dull,  pressing  pain
in  r.  lung  <.

Alternately  :  cold  hands  and  feet.

For  fifteen  minutes :  breathing  shorter.

Lasting  one  and  a  half  hours  :  pain  encircling  head.

For  two  days  :  loose  bowels  and  griping  at  night.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  headache  over  forehead  ;
stitches  over  eye;  stinging  over  eye;  drawing  over  eye;
pressing  over  eye  ;  dull  headache  over  eye ;  pressing  in
occiput ;  pressing  in  and  over  eye ;  beating  in  temple ;
drawing  pain  in  temple  and  over  eyebrow;  dull  aching-
pressing  pain  in  temple  ;  dull  and  sore  feeling  over
eye;  vertex  sore;  dull,  heavy  pain  in  vertex;  dull,
pressing  headache,  pain  over  eye ;  beating  pressure  in
occiput ;  stiffness  of  neck  ;  sensation  as  from  a  grain  of
sand  in  eye;  beating  pressure  in  occiput;  two  large
red  pimples  on  cheek  ;  drawing  pain  in  upper  jaw  to
temples ;  drawing  in  lower  jaw  ;  drawing  stinging  pain
from  lower  jaw  to  first  incisors ;  drawing  pain  in  lower
teeth  ;  tickling  in  throat  <  ;  pressure  in  eye ;  stitching
pain  in  hypochondrium ;  stinging  pain  in  hypo-
chondrium ;  rumbling  in  abdomen  ;  drawing-stinging
pain  in  iliac  region ;  slight  cutting  pain  in  umbilical
region  ;  pressing  stinging  in  iliac  region;  pressing  pain
in  inguinal  region;  pressing  in  iliac  region;  pain  in
lumbar  region  <  ;  tickling  in  throat ;  pain  through
middle  lobe  of  lung ;  stitches  in  lower  lung ;  stinging
pressing  pain  on  side  of  chest;  stiff  neck;  stinging
pains  under  shoulder  blade;  a  shocklike  moving  down-
ward as  from  a  dropping  fluid  in  loin;  drawing  in
sacral  region  ;  lame  feeling  in  arm ;  twitching  in  mus-
cles of  arm;  drawing  in  arm;  drawing  in  shoulder;
pain  along  deltoid;  cracking  in  elbow;  twitching  in
muscles  of  forearm ;  cramplike  pain  in  palm  ;  pain  in
hip  joint  <;  drawing  pain  on  outer  side  of  thigh;
dull  aching  drawing  in  knee.

Right :  as  if  eye  were  pressing  out ;  twitching  over  eye
and  in  muscles  of  neck;  dull  pressing  drawing  head-
ache in  temple;  pulsating  pain  in  vertex;  drawing
tearing  in  ear ;  discharge  of  pure  water  from  nostril ;
soreness  in  lower  jaw  ;  heavy  pain  in  hypochondrium;


ZINGIBER.  576

sore  pain  in  a  small  place  in  abdomen  ;  pressing  in
iliac  region;  pain  in  lung;  stinging  pain  in  lower  por-
tion of  lung ;  dull,  pressing  pain  in  lung ;  stitches  in
side  of  chest;  pain  in  lumbar  region;  aching  in  arm  ;
drawing  from  axilla  to  sternum,  and  from  third  to
sixth  ribs ;  twitching  in  muscles  of  upper  arm  and
thigh ;  pain  along  triceps;  drawing  in  forearm  to  wrist;
drawing  along  inner  side  of  patella.

Right  to  1.  drawing  pain  low  down  in  bowels;  drawing
in  arms.

Without  inward  :  pressure  in  head.

Diagonal  direction :  headache  in  1.  vertex  or  occiput,  and
r.  eye.

Circular  direction  :  aching  around  head.
"  Sensations.  As  if  head  were  too  large;  confused  and  empty
in  head ;  as  if  contents  of  head  pressed  into  forehead
and  root  of  nose  on  stooping ;  as  if  r.  eye  were  pressing
out,  like  a  board  pressing  through  head;  as  if  head
were  pressed  ;  as  from  a  grain  of  sand  in  1.  eye ;  as  if
there  were  an  obstacle  in  throat  to  swallow  over;  as
of  a  stone  in  stomach;  empty  feeling;  as  if  beaten,
lower  back ;  a  shocklike  moving  downward,  as  from  a
dropping  fluid  in  1.  loin  ;  pain  as  from  weakness  in  sa-
cral region  ;  pain  as  from  overwork  in  1.  deltoid  ;  as  from
overstraining  muscles  in  bend  of  knee;  as  if  she  were
going  to  faint.

Pain:  in  stomach  and  back;  in  lumbar  region;  in  r.
lung;  through  middle  lobe  of  1.  lung;  under  breast
bone;  in  hip  joints.

Acute  pain  :  in  orifice  of  urethra.

Cutting:  on  margin  of  lids;  in  1.  umbilical  region;  in
bowels.

Digging:  on  top  of  foot.

Stitches :  in  forehead  ;  over  1.  eye ;  inside  eyelids ;  in
spleen  ;  through  chest ;  in  1.  lower  lung ;  in  r.  side  of
chest ;  in  small  of  back.

Stinging:  over  1.  eye;  in  eyeballs;  in  1.  lower  jaw  and
teeth;  in  throat;  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  in  1.  iliac  re-
gion ;  in  bowels;  in  orifice  of  urethra;  in  chest;  in
region  of  heart ;  in  lower  r.  lung  and  under  1.  shoulder
blade;  in  feet;  in  all  her  limbs;  in  skin.

Prickling:  in  sole.

Drawing :  frontal  headache ;  over  1.  eye ;  over  eyebrows  ;
in  1.  temple  and  over  eyebrow;  above  temples;  in  r.
temple  ;  sharp,  through  and  around  eyes  ;  in  r.  ear  ;  in
1.  upper  jaw  to  temples,  1.  lower  jaw  and  in  teeth ;  in
roots  of  teeth  ;  in  lower  abdomen  and  back  ;  in  pit  of
stomach  and  under  sternum ;  in  1.  iliac  region  ;  on  sa-


577  ZINGIBER.

crum;  between  shoulders;  in  small  of  back;  in  1.  sacral
region  ;  in  backs  of  hands ;  in  arms ;  from  r.  axilla  to
sternum,  and  third  to  sixth  ribs;  in  1.  shoulder;  in  r.
upper  arm ;  iu  r.  forearm  to  wrist ;  in  hip  joints ;  in
thighs ;  in  outer  side  of  1.  thigh ;  below  1.  patella  ;  along
inner  side  of  r.  patella ;  on  top  of  foot ;  in  all  her  limbs.

Pressure  :  in  frontal  bone ;  over  1.  eye ;  in  1.  occiput ;  in
temples ;  in  1.  eye ;  1.  side  of  head  ;  in  head  from  with-
out inward ;  in  and  about  eyes ;  in  roots  of  teeth  ;  in
stomach  after  bread;  in  bowels  and  iliac  regions;  in  1.
inguinal  region  ;  in  region  of  heart ;  on  chest  while
walking ;  in  r.  lung  ;  under  upper  sternum.

Tearing  :  in  r.  ear;  along  triceps  of  r.  arm.

Scratching :  in  larynx.

Broken  feeling :  in  head  ;  around  hips.

Pulling  pain  :  along  triceps  of  r.  arm.

Pleuritic  pains  :  through  chest.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  backs  of  hands.

Aching :  over  eyebrows ;  in  1.  temple ;  in  kidnej^s ;  be-
tween shoulders ;  in  r.  arm  to  wrist ;  in  knees ;  in
heels.

Burning :  in  eyes ;  in  mouth  ;  in  anus ;  in  orifice  of  ure-
thra; in  throat;  in  larynx  ;  in  feet;  in  soles,  heels  and
toes  ;  in  a  corn  on  sole.

Smarting :  in  eyes  ;  below  larynx  ;  in  throat.

Soreness:  over  1.  eye;  of  1.  vertex;  in  r.  lower  jaw;  in
vesicles  on  tongue  and  gums ;  in  throat  and  pit  of
stomach  ;  in  a  small  place  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  ;  over
Poupart's  ligament,  1.  side ;  about  anus ;  in  upper
larynx,  like  a  ridge  ;  of  outer  chest ;  of  1.  hip.

Griping :  in  bowels,  with  loose  stools.

Cramps :  in  soles  and  palms.

Dull  pain  :  in  1.  vertex,  arms  and  legs  ;  encircling  head ;
in  r.  lumbar  region.

Pulsating  pain :  in  vertex,  r.  side.

Beating  :  in  1.  temple  ;  in  1.  occiput.  .

Heavy  pain  :  from  r.  hypochondrium  to  back.

Heaviness :  in  all  her  limbs;  in  stomach,  like  a  stone;  in
lower  back  ;  in  upper  arms.

Weight :  in  abdomen  with  colic.

Stiffness :  in  neck  and  back  ;  in  hip  joints.

Lameness:  in  upper  arms ;  in  1.  deltoid;  in  hip  joints  ;  in
back.

Numbness  :  in  temples ;  in  forearm.

Tickling  :  in  throat ;  in  larynx.

Tingling :  in  feet.
"  Tissues. 1 1  Dropsy.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  sore  feeling
in  1.  vertex  <  ;  head  sore.

VOL.  X. — 37.


ZINGIBER— ZIZIA.  578

Rubbing:  seDsation  as  from  a  grain  of  sand  in  1.  eye  >.
Scratching:  itching  of  nose  not  >.
*^  Skin. Skin  feels  relaxed,  soft  and  pliable.

Itching  on  scalp,  in  beard,  and  on  pubic  parts.
Reddening  of  skin,  with  sensation  of  heat  and  stinging.
Large  scarlet-red  pimples  on  face,  on  forepart  of  head  and

on  neck.
Two  large  red  pimples  on  cheek.
Red  pimples  on  both  sides  of  alse  nasi.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man,  set.  18,  tall,  slender,
fair  complexion, strong and  healthy, after  drinking
water  impregnated  with  coal  oil ;  diarrhoea.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Nux  vom.


ZIZIA.

Meadow  Parsnips.  Umbelliferse.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  root.

Proving  by  Marcy,  assisted  by  Fulgraff,  in  1855,  N.  Am.  Jour,  of  Horn.,  vol.  4,
p.  52.

^  Mind.  Exhilaration :  like  intoxication ;  of  all  faculties,
followed  by  a  strong  desire  to  sleep ;  lasting  twelve
hours,  then  great  depression  for  several  days.

Laughing  and  weeping  moods  in  alternation.

Depression  of  spirits :  with  disgust  of  life,  followed by
great  exhilaration  and  desire  for  conversation.

Irritability,  with  lowness  of  spirits  and  indifference  to
everything.

Nervous  irritability  and  depression'  of spirits ; self-dis-
satisfaction, with  weeping.

Indolence,  with  contentment.

Dreamy,  imaginative  mood.

Behavior  quiet,  with  much  apparent  suffering  and  sadness.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness  ;  swimming  in  head.
^  Inner  Head. Rush  of  blood  to  head  and  face,  with  feel-
ing of  fulness.

Sensation  of  tightness  around  head.

Headache  sharp  over  r.  eye,  begins  slightly  on  second


579  ZrZIA.

day  and  increases  until  eighth  {Pulsatilla  6,  which
promptly  relieved  it  until  third  day,  acts  but  feebly  on
seventh) ;  in  its  full  development  on  seventh  day,  head-
ache is  grievous,  with  nausea,  inclination  to  bilious
vomiting,  need  to  lie  still  in  a  darkened  and  quietroom  ;
<  from  light,  noise  and  jar;  permanent  on  r.  side,  not
shifting;  at  its  worst  pain  descends  behind  r.  ear  into
neck ;  lips  parched  as  from  fever ;  severe  backache
between  or  at  borders  of  shoulder  blades ;  forehead  is
affected  by  a  sharp  cutting  pain  by  jar  of  coughing.

Severe  pain  in  r.  temple,  with  nausea.

Pressure  upon  top  of  brain.

Acute  aching  pain  in  whole  1.  side  of  head,  increased  by
light  or  noise.

Dull  pains  in  occipital  region,  extending  down  muscles
of  neck.

I  I  Affections  of  brain  and  nervous  system.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  sensitive  to  light,  watery.

Redness  of  both  eyes.

While  both  eyes  exhibit  a  diffused  injection,  r.  eye  is  more
particularly  the  seat  of  painful  and  quite  unaccustomed
symptoms.

Smarting  of  lids.

Shooting  pains  through  orbits.

Sharp  pains  in  r.  orbit,  <  by  moving  eyeball,  by  stooping
or  stepping.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nasal  catarrh  with  sneezing  and  coughing.

Nasal  discharge  of  thick  mucus.

Obstruction  and  soreness  of  r.  nostril,  which  is  painful  to
touch.

Right  nostril  only  is  affected,  it  became  sore  and  tender
to  external  touch  ;  a  diffused  injection  of  mucous  mem-
brane covering  arches  of  pharynx,  with  ordinary  sensa-
tions of  catarrhal  sore  throat;  conjunctival  membrane
exhibited  a  similar  diffused  injection.

I  I  Catarrhal,  asthmatic  and  pleuritic  maladies.
^  Upper  Pace. Face  pale  and  puffy.

Redness  of  one  cheek  and  paleness  of  other.

Boring  pains  in  cheek  bones.
^  Lower  Face. Dull  pains  in  jaws.

Painful  tenderness  over  lower  jawbone,  an "  inch  below
root  of  ear.
'^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  bitter ;  bitter,  bilious,  after  sick-
headache.

Redness  of  tongue,  with  unusual  sensitiveness  to  cold  and
warm  drinks.

Tongue  covered  with  a  whitish  fur.

Yellow  fur  upon  tongue,  and  oppressed  respiration.


ZIZIA.  580

Tongue  broad,  furred  in  middle  and  reddened  at  tip  and
sides.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  mouth.
^^  Throat. Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  throat.

Slight redness of  tonsils  and  palate,  with  soreness of

throat.
Inflammation  of  mucous  membrane  of  pharynx.
'^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Craving  for  acids
and  stimulants.
Loss  of  appetite.
Thirst.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea.

Acid  and  bilious  vomiting.
^'' Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Stomach  sensitive  to  touch.

Pressure  occasioning  nausea  and  faintness.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Involuntary  emissions  two  nights
in  succession.
Excitement  of  male  genital  organs.
I  I  Lassitude  and  prostration  after  connection.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Profuse  menstrual  discharge,  fol-
lowed by  acrid  leucorrhoea.
Catamenia  appeared  in  due  time,  but  ceased  after  twelve

hours.
Sudden  suppression  of  menses.

Leucorrhoea  :  bland  and profuse ;  acrid  ;  commences  on
second  day  and  continues,  slight  as  to  quantity,  and  at
first  acrid,  afterward  more  bland  and  copious  ;  with
retarded  or  suppressed  menses ; chronic,  attended  by
irritation  of  spine  or  brain.
Uterine  affections,  with  increased  vascular  and  nervous
excitement.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Roughness
in  upper  portion  of  larynx  when  inspiring  or  coughing.
Raw  and  smarting  sensation  in  larynx  from  coughing.
Sensitiveness  of  trachea  to  touch.
^^  Respiration. Respiration  accelerated  and  oppressed.
Respiration  oppressed,  yellow  fur  upon  tongue.
Asthmatic  respiration,  with  inability  to  retain  recumbent

position.
She  cannot  draw  .a  full  breath,  without  severe  pain,  it
catches  her  about  sixth  rib  in  front,  and  pierces  through
to  back,  r.  side.
^^  Cough. Dry  cough,  with  shooting  pains  in  chest.

Tight  cough  caused  by  taking  a  deep  inspiration,  or  by

dryness  of  larynx.
Short,  dry  cough,  attended  by  severe  stitching  pains  in  r.

side,  and  a  sense  of  suffocation.
Cough  hard,  dry  and  short,  with  stitching  pain  in  r.  side,


581  ZIZIA.

from  region  beneath  sixth  rib  down  as  far  as  two  inches
below  xiphoid  cartilage.
*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Dull,  aching  pains  under  r.
scapula.

Severe  shooting  pain  extending  from  front  part  of  thorax
to  scapula.

Sharp  pains,  extending  from  sides  of  chest  to  both  shoul-
der blades.

Severe  stitching  pains  in  chest,  accompanied  by  feverish
symptoms.

Pleuritic  stitches  in  r.  side,  much  increased  by  coughing,
or  taking  or  attempting  to  take  a  long  breath.

Pleural  symptoms  severe,  painful.
^"  Outer  Chest. Bruised  feeling  in  muscles  of  chest.

Pressure  excites  pain  in  intercostal  muscles.

each  side,  about  size  of  a  fifty-cent  piece,  two  inches
below,  there  is  a  painful  tenderness  to  external  touch.
^'  Neck  and  Back.  Dorsal  symptoms  painful,  perhaps  sym-
pathetic with  uterine  sphere ;  their  seat  is  at  posterior
lateral  margins  of  scapulae,  generally  <  on  1.  side;
pains  aching,  smarting  and  stinging.

Dull  pains  in  loins  increased  by  movement.

Smarting-burning  pain  in  small  of  back.
*'^  Upper  Limbs. Lameness  in  muscles  of  both  arms,  from
shoulders  to  elbows.

Pricking  sensation  in  r.  arm,  with  slightly  diminished
sensibility  of  part.
^*  Lower  Limbs. Dragging  sensation  in  both  hips.

Unusually  tired  feeling  of  legs,  after  slightest  muscular
exertion.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Lying:  asthmatic  breathing  <.

Stooping:  pain  in  r.  orbit  <•

Motion  :  of  eyeball,  pain  in  r.  orbit  <  ;  pains  in  loins  < ;
desire  for,  but  causes  fatigue;  spasmodic  movements  <.

Coughing :  cutting  pain  in  forehead ;  pleuritic  stitches  in
r.  side  <.

Stepping :  pain  in  r.  orbit  <,
^^  Nerves. Increased  physical  strength,  with  inclination  for
muscular  exertion.

General  aspect  and  sensation  of  prover  were  those  of  grave
and  chronic  deterioration  of  health.

Sensitiveness  of  entire  surface  of  body  to  touch.

Great desire  to  move  about,  with  apparent  increase  of
strength,  but  slight  exercise  causes  fatigue.

Spasmodic  movements  of  muscles  of  face  and  extremities.

Before  spasms  labor  pains  cease,  and  feels  pains  in  epigas-
trium.


ZIZIA.  582

Convulsions,  epilepsy.

Chorea,  with  twitchings  during  sleep  ;  spasmodic  move-
ments of  muscles  of  face  and  extremities ;  <  by  move-
ment, noise,  light  or  contact.

Intermittent  neuralgia  of  1.  ovary.
^^  Sleep. Drowsiness,  with  a  sense  of  lassitude  and  fatigue.

Sleep  is  sound  until  sixth  night,  when  it  is  prevented  by
pain.

•Spasmodic  twitching  during  sleep. ^Chorea.

Talking  during  sleep.

Sleep  disturbed  by  unpleasant  dreams.
^^Time. Morning: eyelids  adhere.

*"  Fever.  Chilliness  and  heat,  alternating  with  faintness,
nausea,  pain  in  r.  temple,  redness  of  eyeballs,  dry  and
red  tongue,  and  thirst  for  cold  water.

Chilliness,  accompanied  with  spasmodic  twitching  of
muscles  of  face  and  lower  extremities,  followed  by  fever.

Fever,  with  headache,  pain  in  back,  thirst.

Feverish  symptoms,  accompanying  severe  stitching  pains
in  chest.

Severe  sense  of  heat  and  fulness  in  both  cheeks.

Flushed  cheeks,  hot  head,  visible  pulsations  of  carotid
and  temporal  arteries,  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  drow-
siness and  irritability.

Redness  and  heat  of  cheeks.

Hot  flushes  in  face  and  head  followed  by  perspiration.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. In  alternation :  laughing  and  weep-
ing moods.

For  twelve  hours:  great  exhilaration ;  duration  of  cata-
menia.

Two  nights  in  succession  :  involuntary  emissions.

For  several  days :  great  depression.
"Locality and  Direction. Left: acute  aching  in head;
neuralgia  of  ovary.

Right:  sharp  pain  over  eye;  headache;  pain  in  temple;
pain  descends  behind  ear  into  neck;  severe  pain  in
temple ;  eye  < ;  stye  upon  lid ;  sharp  pain  in  orbit ;  ob-
struction and  soreness  of  nostril ;  piercing  pain  from
sixth  rib  in  front  through  to  back ;  stitches  in  side ;
dull  aching  under  scapula;  pricking  in  arm.
*^  Sensations. Pain  :  in  r.  temple ;  in  back.

Severe  pain:  in  r.  temple.

Sharp  pain:  over  r.  eye;  in  r.  orbit;  from  sides  of  chest
to  shoulder  blades.

Cutting:  in  forehead.

Boring:  in  cheek  bones.

Piercing  pain :  from  sixth  rib  in  front  through  to  back,
r.  side.


583  ZIZIA.

Stitches:  iii  r.  side;  in  chest;  pleuritic  in  r.  side.

Shooting:  through  orbits;  in  chest;  from  front part  of
thorax  to  scapula.

Pricking :  in  r.  arm.

Stinging :  in  lateral  margins  of  scapulae.

Severe  aching :  between  shoulder  blades ;  in  whole  1.  side
of  head.

Aching :  in  back.

Smarting  :  of  lids ;  in  larynx ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  lateral
margins  of  scapulse.

Burning:  in  small  of  back.

Dull  pain :  in  occipital  region  down  muscles  of  neck ;  in
jaws ;  in  loins.

Soreness :  of  r.  nostril ;  of  throat.

Rawness :  in  larynx.

Dull  aching :  under  r.  scapula.

Pressure :  on  top  of  brain.

Dragging :  in  both  hips.

Bruised  feeling :  in  muscles  of  chest.

Tenderness :  over  lower  jawbone,  an  inch  below  root  of
ear.

Tightness :  around  head.

Lameness  :  in  muscles  of  arms.

Tired  feeling :  in  legs.

Roughness :  in  larynx.

Fulness :  in  head  and  face ;  in  cheeks.

Heat:  in  cheeks.

Coldness:  of  hands  and  feet.

Itching:  pimples  on  forehead,  wrist  and  legs.

Dryness  :  of  mouth ;  of  larynx  ;  of  tongue.

Pains  increased  by  movement,  noise,  light  or  contact.
**  Tissues. White  and  puffy  appearance  of  whole  body.

Surface  of  whole  body  paler  than  natural.

Face  and  ankles  csdematous.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  r.  nostril
painful ;  stomach  sensitive ;.  trachea  sensitive  ;  tender-
ness  over  xiphoid cartilage;  entire surface of  body
sensitive.

Contact:  spasmodic  movements  <.

Pressure :  on  stomach  causes  nausea  and  faintness ;  ex-
cites pain  in  intercostal  muscles.

Jarring:  headache  <.
*®  Skin. Itching  pimples  upon  forehead,  wrists  and  legs.  .
*®  Relations. Compare  :  Mygale  and  Tarent,  in  chorea.
