The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. VI
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. VI. Philadelphia: Globe, 1882.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri6).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Boston  Medical  Library
in  the  Francis  A.  Countway
Library  of  Medicine  ^Boston


COLUMBIAN NATURAL CLASP NO.  ijh
PALLE9G,Q83  PAT.  1,593,048

THEHNITFD  STATES- EUVFLnPE.CO: SPRINRF1E-LD,MASS.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF  OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA


BY


C.  HERING,  M.  n


VOLUME  VI.


PHILADELPHIA:

PUBLISHED  BY  THE  ESTATE  OF  CONSTANTTNE  HERING,

1 1 2  and  114  North  Twelfth  Street.


Copyright,  1888,  hy  Theresa  Hering.


Author's  Mark.


Press  op  Globe  Printing  House,  Philadelphia.


PREFACE.


IN  giving  Volume  VI  to  the  profession,  we  recognize
that  our  labor  has  been  one  of  unusual  pleasure
and  satisfaction,  for  it  contains,  besides  a  large  number
of  valuable  medicines,  Lachesis  trigonocephalus,  the
pet  child  of  Dr.  Hering.

We  quote  a  circular  he  issued  in  1878,  addressed
"  To  All  Friends  of  Lachesis  •"

"Be  it  known  that  next  28th  of  July  it  will  be  fifty  years
since  the  first  trituration  and  first  dilution  in  alcohol  of  the
snake  poison  Trigonocephalus  Lachesis  was  made.

"We  intend  to  celebrate  that  day  by  closing  a  collection  of
reports,  consisting  of  provings,  toxicological  eff'ects,  cures,
characteristics,  corroborations,  etc.,  etc.  Quotations  from
books  or  journals  where  Lachesis  has  been  mentioned  are
solicited,  since  it  is  possible  that  some  may  have  escaped  the
author's  notice.

"  In  the  life  of  the  author  the  order  of  the  ParcEe  or  Fates  has
been  reversed.  Atropos,  the  inevitable,  who  cuts  the  thread,
came  to  him  first  when  a  little  boy  in  the  form  of  a  caterpillar
on  his  father's  grapevine  and  gave  the  incentive  to  the  study
of  natural  history.

"Then  came  Lachesis,  the  disposer  of  destinies;  and  Uotho
comes  last  and  holds  the  distaff  while  the  author  spins  the
fabric  of  symptoms.

"The  son  and  daughter  of  Lachesis,  by  name  PsorMum  and
Lyssinum,  heretofore  called  Hydrophobinum,  are  receiving  a
careful  revision  and  will  be  printed  before  long.  The  several
brothers  and  sisters  of  Lachesis  are  waiting  to  be  acknowl-
edged and  proved,  particularly  the  Naja  of  East  India,  and  the


PREFACE.  iv

Lance  viper  of  Martinique. We  do  not  even  have  a  complete
collection  of  the  effects  of  the  bite  of  any  of  these  snakes.

"  The  Lachesis  Jubilee  could  not  be  better  celebrated  than  by-
sending  contributions  to  such  a  collection;  also  cured  cases,
provings,  etc.,  etc.,  all  of  which  will  be  gratefully  acknowledged
by  the  author  and  embodied  in  the  monograph.

"  CONSTANTINE HeRING."

To  all  who  responded  to  the  invitation  (their  names
are  printed  in  the  list  of  Clinical  Authorities  heading
Lachesis)  the*  editors  return  thanks  in  the  name  of  the
author,  who  did  not  live  to  publish  his  monograph.

In  collecting  the  clinically  verified  symptoms  of  Lac
Caninum  and  Lac  Defloratum,  remedies  that  are  fast
growing  in  usefulness  and  popularity,  Ave  are  indebted
for  valuable  assistance  to  Drs.  S.  Swan,  of  New  York,
and  E.  W.  Berridge,  of  London,  besides  others  in  the
profession.

Charles  G.  Raite,  ^
Calvin  B.  Knerr, V  Editors.
Charles  Mohr, )


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


Materia  Medica.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

Sulphuret  of  Lime.  Ca.  S.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  who  used  the  white  interior  of  oyster  shells  and
pure  flowers  of  sulphur,  from  which  are  prepared  the  triturations.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Stapf,  etc. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  572.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mania  ivith  scabies,  Sztaraveszki,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.
],  p.  56;  Affection  of  mind,  Dulac,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  9,  p.  145;  Kaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.
A^ ;  Headaches,  Simmons,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  6Q ;  Sensitiveness  of  scalp,  Chase,  Or-
ganon,  vol.  3,  p.  377  ;  Eruption  about  ears,  Edgar,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  98 ;  Iritis  with
hypopyon,  Hills,  Kaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  70 ;  Kerato-iritis,  Payr,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.
107;  Hypopyon  (3  cases),  Gallavardin,  Calcutta  Jour.,  vol.  1,  p.  274;  Farrington,
Korndoerfer,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  75;  Bicking,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  l,p.  254;
Epithelioma  of  cornea.  Hills,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  Hom.,  1872,  p.  521;  Herpes  cornea,
Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  58 ;  Ophthalmia  argenti,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  271 ;  (6
cases),  Gallavardin,  Calcutta  Jour.,  vol.  1,  p.  274;  Traumatic  ophthalmia,  Caspari,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  366 ;  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  eyes,  Knorre,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.
364 ;  Inflammation  of  eyes,  Schreter,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  365  ;  Scrofidous  inflammation
of  eyes,  Tiilff,  Kallenbach,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  125;  Bicking,
Allg.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  268;  Inflammation  of  lids,  Griesselich,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
6,  p.  364;  Itching  of  ears  after  scarlatina  (2  cases).  Walker,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,
p.  91;  Goryza,  ozczna,  Kafka,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  124;  Boyce,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
34,  p.  494 ;  Charg^,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  397 ;  Affection  of  nose,  Starr,  Hom.
Clinics,  vol.  3,  p.  17 ;  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  nose,  Sattorordin,  Calcutta
Journ.,  vol.  1,  p.  274;  Affection  of  cheek,  Bathig,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  p.  171;  Af-
fection of  inferior  maxillary,  Ostrom,  Times  Eetros.,  1875,  p.  19;  Parotitis,  Sircar,
Eaue's  Eec,  187,  p.  87 ;  Tonsillitis,  Wurmb,  Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  239;

VOL.  VI. — 1.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  2

Laurie,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  233 ;  Peters,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  535 ;  Chronic  tonsil-
litis (2  cases),  Boyce,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  494;  Chronic  inflammation  of  throat,  Low,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  188 ;  Throat  affection,  Ussher,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  269 ;
Diphtheria,  Cameron,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  87  ;  Van  Peene,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  lOU  ;
Bilious  attacks,  Boyce,  B.  J.  H.,'vol.  34,  p.  493;  Hepaiogenous  jaundice,  Boyce,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  34,  p.  499 ;  Perityphlitis,  Arnold,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  251 ;  Iliac  ab-
scess, Turrell,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  3,  p.  16 ;  Dysentery,  Griessel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.

1,  p.  868 ;  Hemorrhoids,  Boyce,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  494;  Prolapsus  recti  after  abuse
of  mercury,  Boyce,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  499  ;  Nocturnal  emissions,  Jahr,  Horn.  Clinics,
vol.  3,  p  39;  Bubo,  Sommers,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  118;  Chancre,  Gollnian,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  559 ;  Syphilitic  bubo,  Hofrichter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,
p.  118;  Spasmus  glottidis,  Elb,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  780;  Laryngitis  (3  cases),
Eidherr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  681 ;  Laryngecd  cough,  Nankivell,  Eaue's  Eec,
1875,  p.  90;  Chronic  tracheitis  (S  cases),  Schron,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  167;
Bronchial  catai-rh  with  bronchiectasia,  Stens,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  105 ;  Spasnu>dic
croup,  McNeil,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  125;  Croup,  Kreuss,  Gross,  Goullon,  Weber,
Fielitz,  Schron,  Jahr,  Kiisem,  Tietze,  Attomyr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  124  to
130;  Gneyrard,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  292 ;  (3  cases).  Gross,  Hartman,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
5,  p.  291 ;  Cough  during  typhoid,  Warren,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  457  ;  Emphysema,
Stillman,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  119 ;  Pleurisy,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  819;
Wurm,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  297  ;  Gross,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  112 ;  Pyothorax,
Orth,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  161 ;  Pidmonary  abscess,  Childs,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc
Pa.,  1877,  p.  296 ;  Pleuro^pneumonia,  Biihr,  Hughes,  p,  402 ;  Tuberculosis,  Gallavar-
din,  Calcutta  Journ.,  vol.  1,  p.  274;  Schron,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  369;  Chest
troubles  succeeding  repelled  itch,  Lytle,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  108;  Angina  pectm-is,
Stillman,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  127  ;  Spinal  irritation,  Simmons,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.
66;  Suppuration  of  finger  joint,  Pancin,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  193;  Onychia,  Jahr,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  559;  Whitlow,  W^urda,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  p.  19;  (2
cases),  Lawrence,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  327  ;  Berridge,  Times  Eetros.,  1877,  p.  26  ;
Abscess  of  thigh,  Orth,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  161 ;  Pains  in  legs  ami  feet,  Goullon,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  17.  p.  223 ;  Attacks  of  debility,  Koch,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  p.  7 ;
Paralysis,  Koch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  470;  Intermittent  fever  (6  cases),  Baertl,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  921 ;  Scarlet  fever,  Siegel,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  141  ;  Se-
quelce  of  scarlatina  (3  cases),  Siegel,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  207 ;  Glandular  swellings,
Eaue's  Eec ,  1875,  p.  292 ;  Adenitis  ;  caries  ;  ulcers  ;  fistula,  Gallavardin,  Calcutta
Journ.,  vol.  1,  p.  274;  Anthrax  (4  cases),  James,  Trans  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1883,
p.  279;  Carbuncle,  Smith,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg,  vol.  108,  p.  190;  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  183;  Post  scarlatinal  dropsy,  Kafka,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  226;  Ostrom^
Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  207  ;  Crusta  lactea,  Miller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  241 ;  Herpes  (2
cases),  Hoyne,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  231  ;  Eruption  on  skin,  Simmons,  Organon,  vol.

2,  p.  66;  Suppression  of  exantliemata  (5  cases),  Gallavardin,  Calcutta  Journ.,  vol.  1,
p.  274 ;  Lupoid  ulceration,  Ussher,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  269 ;  HI  effects  of  mercury,
Nichols,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  346;  Bojanus,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  330;  Boyce,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  494.

^  Mind. I  I  Great  weakness  of  memory  with  the  irritability.
I  Dementia,  with  complete  stupidity,  sits  silent  and  speech-
less in  a  corner.
DDelirious  mutterings,  with  burning  heat  of  body.
1  I  Frightful  imaginings.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

iFrightful  visions  of  fire  and  of  dead  persons.
1 1  Hasty  speech  and  hasty  drinking.

■  Violent,  fretful,  passionate;  spoke  with  great  volubility,

would  not  listen  to  any  remarks  offered.  ^Mind  affection.
I  On  awaking,  rushed  home  with  frightful  gestures,  threat-
ened to  murder  wife  and  children,  attempted  to  set
house  on  fire,  and  was  with  difficulty  controlled;  after
being  received  in  an  asylum,  sat  in  corner  of  room  silent
and  motionless;  urine  and  feces  passed  involuntarily;
wdiole  surface  of  body  covered  with  scabious  eruption ;
restless  at  night. ^Scabies.

■  Malicious  mood;  feels  as  if  he  could  murder  some  one

with  pleasure.
■Repulsive  mood,  with  desire  to  be  left  alone.

■  Child  does  not  incline  to  play  or  to  amuse  itself  in  any

way;  does  not  laugh.

■  Depressed  or  irritable  mood.

■  Sad  mood  for  hours;  must  cry  vehemently.
■Low  spirited,  even  to  thoughts  of  suicide.

■  Great  anxiety  in  the  evening.

■Melancholy  humor,  cries  bitterly;  unreasonably  anxious.
I  I  Impelled  by  unaccountable  attacks  of  internal  anguish,

which  sometimes  come  on  quite  suddenly,  to  attempt

suicide.
I  I  Violent  fright  on  slumbering.

■  The  slightest  cause  irritates  him  and makes  him  ex-

tremely vehement.
■Violent,  passionate  fretfulness ;  she  spoke  with  such  volu-
bility that  one  could  not  always  get  a  chance  to  reason
with  her,  and  she  would  not  listen  to  the  most  just  re-
marks. ^Affection  of  mind.

■  Hypochondriasis.

■  Temper  obstinate  and  cross,  a  ferocious  spleen  which

would  lead  to  cold  blooded  murder  even  among  those
habitually  gay  and  benevolent.

■  Wrathful  irritability,  even  to most extreme  violence,

threatening  to  end  in  murder  and  arson.

■  Extreme  discontent,  indisposition  to  everything.

■  Peevish ;  angry  at  least  trifle.

Sensorium. ■Vertigo: mornings; when closing  eyes, at

siesta;  evening,  with  nausea;  when  riding  in  a  carriage;

during  dinner,  after belching,  with  blackness before

eyes,  when  shaking  head.
I  1  Short  attacks  of  stupidity,  vertigo,  dulness  of  mmd  and

want  of  memory.
Forepart  of  head  feels  stupefied  and  heavy.
I  I  Painty  giddiness  when  riding  in  a  carriage  or  when

shaking  head,  with  headache  and  obscuration  of  sight.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  4.

1 1  Fainting  from  slightest  pains;  evenings.
^  Inner  Head. I Aching  in  forehead:  as  if  bruised;  Hke  a

boil ;  from  midnight  till  morning.
I  I  Burrowing  headache  in  frontal  region  as  if  an  abscess

were  forming.
I  I  Violent  headache,  at  night,  as  if  forehead  would  be  torn

out,  with  general  heat,  without  thirst.

■  Headache  with  a  feeling  as  if  eyes  would  be  drawn  back

into  head.
I  Tensive,  aching  pain  above  nose.
I  Headache  over  eyes  pressing  down  upon  eyes.
I  I  Pressure  and  drawing  in  temples  by  day.

■  Painful  throbbing  in  r.  temple.

I  Aching  in  vertex,  with  palpitation  of  heart,  in  evening,
iStitches  in  head,  when  stooping;  sensation  as  if  skull

would  burst,  waking  him  at  night.
•Sticking  headache.

■  Hammering  sensation  in  head.

■  Burrowing,  sharp  headache,  neuralgic  in  character.

■  Boring  headache:  at  root  of  nose,  every  morning; in  r.

temple,  from  without  inwards;  <  from  motion  or
stooping.

■  Pressure  in  head,  semi-lateral,  as  from  a  plug  or  dull

nail,  at  night,  and  when  waking  in  morning;  <  when
moving  eyes  and  on  stooping;  >  when  rising  and  from
binding  head  up  tight.

■  ■Constant  pressive  pain  in  one-half  of  brain,  as  from  a

plug  or  nail.

■  Wabbling  as  of  water  in  brain,

■  Sense  of  swashing  in  head.

■  Headache  when  shaking  head.

■  Headache  >  by  tying  something  tightly  around  head.

■  Dull  headache  every  morning  in  bed,  >  after  rising.

■  Morning  headache,  <  from  every  concussion.

■  Lancinating  headache,  >  when  walking  in  open  air.

■  ■Headache  from  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Traumatic  cerebritis,  in  infants  and  children,  with  spasms.
I  I  Pulse-like  stitches  in  lower  portion  of  occiput.

■  Pressive  pain  externally  right  of  occiput,  gradually  ex-

tending to  nape,  throat  and  shoulder  blades.

■  Severe  stitches  in  occiput  and  both  temples,  as  if  a  plug

or  nail  were  being  driven  in.
*  Outer  Head. ■Head  bent  backward,  with  swelling  below
larynx ;  violent  pulsation  of  carotids,  rattling  breathing.
■Sensitiveness  of  scalp  to  touch,  with  burning  and  itching
in  morning  after  rising  (after  abuse  of  mercury).

■  Extreme  sensitiveness  of  scalp,  could  hardly  bear  to  comb

her  hair  or  have  anything  touch  the  head.


>  ^  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

ilDisposed  to  take  cold  from  uncovering  head.

I  Burning  itching  on  scalp,  from  forehead  to  occiput.

■  Nightly  pain  in  skull  bones.

■  Nodosities  on  head,  sore  to  touch,  >  by  covering  head

warmly  and  from  sweat.

■  Painful  tumors  on  head;  sebaceous  tumors  inflamed  and

ready  to  discharge.

■  Boils  on  head  and  neck,  very  sore  on  contact.

■  Falling  off  of  hair,  with  very  sore,  painful  pimples,  and

large  bald  spots  on  scalp.

■  Loss  of  hair  following  mercurialization  or  chronic  head-

ache.

■  Cold,  clammy  perspiration,  smelling  sour,  principally  on

head  and  face,  with  aversion  to  being  uncovered ;  <
from  least  exercise  and  during  night;  >  from  warmth
and  when  at  rest.

■  Fissured  eruption  behind  and  on  both  ears,  exuding  a

thick,  gluey  secretion,  which  mats  hair;  resents  with
force  an  attempt  to  place  finger  on  head ;  utter  abhor-
rence to  be  bathed,  during  which  she  would  scream  and
fight.

■  i  Humid  eruptions:  feel  sore;  of  fetid  odor; itching  vio-

lently on  rising  in  morning;  burning  and  feeling  sore
on  scratching;  scabs  easily  torn  oli;  leaving  a  raw,
bleeding  surface.

■  Favus,  extending  to  nape  of  neck  or  face.
Sight  and  Eyes. ■Photophobia.

■  Objects  appear  to  be  red.

■  Feeling  of  blindness  before  eyes  on  rising  and  standing

up  after  sitting  bent  over.

■  Sight  becomes  dim  when  reading.

■  Eyes  become  dim,  cannot  see  well  in  evening  by  candle

light.

■  Anaesthesia  of  retina,  the  result  of  looking  at  an  eclipse;

sees  a  light  spot  in  centre  of  field  of  vision,  surrounded
by  a  dark  ring,  and  again  by  a  lighter  ring,  all  of  which
were  constantly  turning  and  changing  into  various
colors,  especially  green;  <  coming  into  room  from
bright  sunlight;  feeling  as  if  eyes  were  being  pulled
back  into  head,  with  photophobia;  vision  y^o ;  field  of
vision  very  much  contracted.

■  Flickering  before  eyes;  pupils  dilated  and  insensible  to

light;  after  abuse  of  mercury.
I  I  Inflammation  of  ciliary  body.

■  Purulent  capsulitis  after  extraction  of  cataract.

■  Prolapsus  iridis.

■  Iritis  with  hypopyon  or  associated  with  small  abscesses

in  iris  (suppurative  iritis).


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  6

■  Anterior  chamber  about  half  filled  with  pus;  eye  sensi-

tive to  light  and  air,  and  must  be  covered;  no  syphilitic
origin. ^Iritis  with  hypopyon.

I  After  injury  to  eye,  violent  inflammation;  sclerotica  looks
like  raw  beef;  light  intolerable;  feeling  as  of  sand  in
eye;  in  anterior  chamber  a  collection  of  pus  apparently
about  two  lines  in  diameter;  meditates  suicide,  especi-
ally in  evening. ^Hypopyon.

I  Onyx.

iCornea  dim,  opaque  and  bulging,  with  a  blister-like  ele-
vation, as  large  as  end  of  knitting  needle,  in  centre,
forming  base  of  an  open  ulcer;  hypopyon;  fever  with
pressing,  burning,  bruised  pain  in  eyes,  extending  into
head. ^Hypopyon.

iFor  three  months  1.  cornea  so  hazy  that  iris  could  hardly
be  seen,  and  for  two  months  r.  cornea  had  gradually  be-
come involved  from  periphery  toward  centre;  both  cor-
nese  opaque  and  vision  lost;  considerable  pain  in  eyes
and  head,  with  iritis;  great  ciliary  injection  and  exces-
sive dread  of  light;  lachrymation ;  no  history  of  syphilis.

■Severe  inflammation  in  cornea  and  iris  of  1.  eye;  cornea
ulcerated  superficially,  much  ciliary  injection,  pupil
contracted,  iris  sluggish,  great  photophobia  and  lachry-
mation, much  pain  extending  from  eye  into  correspond-
ing side  of  head,  <  at  night,  especially  about  2  or  3
A.M. ;  seat  of  pain  in  head,  as  well  as  eye,  quite  sore  to
touch ;  lids  considerably  swollen  and  slight  discharge.
^Kerato-iritis.

iKerato-iritis  with  ulceration  of  cornea,  hypopyon,  sensi-
tiveness to  air  and  touch.

■  Ulcers  and  abscesses  of  cornea,  especially  for  deep  slough-

ing form  and  when  hypopyon  is  present;  intense  photo-
phobia; profuse  lachrymation;  great  redness  of  cornea
and  conjunctiva,  even  chemosis;  pains  severe,  of  a
throbbing,  aching,  stinging  character;  >  from  warmth,
so  that  he  constantly  wishes  to  keep  eye  covered;  <
from  any  draught  of  air;  at  night  or  in  evening  lids
often  swollen,  spasmodically  closed  and  very  sensitive
to  touch,  or  may  be  red,  swollen  and  bleed  easily  upon
opening.

■  Sclerotic  violet  red,  cornea  dim;  great  photophobia  and

lachrymation ;  lower  lids  swollen. ^Ulceration  of  cornea.

■  Recurring  ulceration  of  cornea  in  ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  Torpid  ulceration  of  cornea;  where  there  is  a  want  of

lachrymal  secretion.

■  Red,  vascular,  elevated  ulcer,  like  a  piece  of  red  flesh,  at

margin  of  cornea.

■  Opacities  of  cornea.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

I  Acute  aggravation  of  pannus,  which  tends  toward  ulcer-
ation, especially  in  mercurialized  subjects.

I  I  Epithelioma  of  cornea.

I  Herpes  conjunctivae  bulbi;  enlarged  veins,  run  nearly
horizontally  towards  cornea,  and  terminating  in  little
blisters  near  edge  of  cornea; <  from  crying.

I  Eyes  very  red,  great  photophobia,  lids  red  and  swollen,
with  burning  pain  in  affected  parts. ^Ophthalmia.

I  Inflammation  of  eyes  and  lids;  sore  to  touch;  lachry-
mation.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation  and  blenorrhoea  of  eyes;  lids  in-

flamed, excoriated,  running,  as  if  corroded,  especially  at
inner  canthus;  internal  surface  of  lids,  especially  of
lower,  of  deep  red  color  and  inflamed;  heat,  especially
in  morning  on  waking;  pain,  as  of  a  burn,  smarting,
itching  in  lids;  lids  and  angles  agglutinated  in  morning
by  purulent  mucus;  conjunctiva  red,  traversed  by  large
vessels;  photophobia;  in  evening,  vision  of  colored  and
dim  halos  around  candle,  with  pressive  pain  forcing  her
to  shut  eyes  occasionally.

■  Inflammation  of  eye,  small  ulcer  on  1.  cornea;  ej'^eballs

slightly  swollen;  eyes  closed  by  swelling  at  night,  and
discharging  much  purulent  mucus;  hair  fell  off  pro-
fusely, leaving  bald  places  on  scalp;  scabs  on  head,  face
and  neck,  painful  when  touched;  itching  in  scalp;
frequent  calls  to  stool,  with  difficult  evacuations;  sour
smelling  sweat  at  night;  peevish,  fretful  humor.

■  Violent  pain  over  r.  eyebrow;  excessive  lachrymation  of

1.  eye;  photophobia  alternating  with  unusually  clear
and  distinct  vision  in  dark  part  of  room;  everything  ap-
pearing illuminated;  at  times  objects  appeared  red;  1.
pupil  much  dilated,  not  sensitive  even  to  strong  light;
r.  pupil  normal;  conjunctiva  reddened  from  canthi,  but
not.  on  cornea;  sensation  as  if  eyes  projected;  painful
pressure  in  eyeball  as  if  bruised;  acute  bruised  pain  on
slightest  touch. ^Foreign  body  in  eye.

■  ■Purulent  conjunctivitis  with  profuse  discharge  and  ex-

cessive sensitiveness  to  air  and  touch.

■  Catarrhal conjunctivitis after inflammatory  stage has

passed.

■  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes,  especially  in  phlegmatic,

fat,  large  bellied  children,  with  fine  white  skin,  light
hair,  thick  neck  and  swollen  glands,  subject  to  eruptions
and  ulcerations  of  skin.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  eyes,  with  great  photophobia,

lachrjnnation  and  mucous  discharge;  formation  of  ul-
cers with  pressing,  burning  pains  as  if  eyes  were  bruised.

■  Symptomatic  forms  of  chronic  catarrh  of  conjunctiva  with


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  8

infarction  of  Meibomian  glands  and  purulent  secretion,
in  scrofulous  subjects.
I  Stitches  in  the  eyes.

■  Pressure  in  eyes,  especially  on  moving  them,  with  redness.
I  Eyes  ache  from  bright  daylight,  when  moving  them.

I  I  Pain  in  eye  at  each  step.

■  Eyeballs  sore  to  touch;  pain  as  if  they  would  be  drawn

back  into  head.

■  Pressing  pain  in  eyeballs,  feel  bruised  when  touched.

0  Pressure  in  eyes  as  from  sand.
BEyes  are  protruded. ^Croup.

iDacryo-cystitis  and  orbital  cellulitis,  especially  if  pus  has
formed  and  there  is  great  sensitiveness  to  touch,  with
throbbing  pain;  prevents  formation  of  pus  or  accelerates
its  discharge.

■  Inflammation  6f  lachrymal  sac  after  pus  has formed;

blenorrhoea,  with  great  sensitiveness  to  touch  and  to
cold,  with  profuse  discharge.

■  Lachrymal  duct  closed  by  an  exudative  swelling;  con-

stant lachrymation;  had  existed  a  long  time.

1  I  Burning  pains  in  bones  above  orbits.

■  Smarting  pain  in  external  canthus,  with  accumulation

of  hardened  mucus.
I  I  Cutting  pain  in  outer  canthus.
I  lAnchylops

■  Redness,  inflammation  and  swelling  of  upper  lid,  with

pain  more  pressing  than  sticking.

■  Kedness,  inflammation  and  swelling  of  upper  lid,  with

pressive  pain.

■  Lids  closed  in  morning  on  w^aking,  cannot  open  them  for

a  long  time.

■  Blepharophthalmiawhen  Meibomian  glands  are  involved,

and  when  little  pimples  surround  the  inflamed  eye.

■  After  frequent  straining  of  eyes,  inflammation  of  glands

of  both  eyelids;  lids  swollen,  palpebral  conjunctiva  in-
flamed, erysipelatous;  at  outer  canthi  lids  as  if  corroded
and  ulcerated;  secretion  of  glands  increased;  eyes  ag-
glutinated in  morning;  every  effort  and  light  cause
pain.

■  Upper  lid  margins  unevenly  rounded,  swollen  and  red;

tough  mucus  in  lashes  and  canthi;  scleral  conjunctiva
injected  with  red  vessels  running  towards  cornea,  w'here
they  form  little  vesicles  with  turbid  secretion;  lachry-
mation; pain  in  evening,  agglutination  in  morning;  r.
eye  worse;  small  pimples  or  little  furuncles  on  face,  or
elsewhere,  in  complication  with  tinea.

■  Acute  phlegmonous  inflammation  of  lids,  which  tends

toward  suppuration;  lids  swollen,  tense  and  shining,  as


9  -  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

if  erysipelas  bad  invaded  them,  with  tiirobbipg,  achiiu_^,
stinging  pain  and  sensitiveness  to  touch;  pains  <  cold,
>  warmth.

■  Blepharitis; after the first stage, when suppuration

threatens; lids  inflamed,  throbbing,  aching,  stinging,
very  sensitive  to  touch;  ameliorated  by  heat.
I  Chronic  ciliary  blepharitis  complicated  with  swelling  of
Meibomian  glands,  or  ulcers  and  swellings  on  margin
of  lid,  which  are  painful  in  evening  and  upon  touch.

■  Palpebral  tumors.

I  [Spasmodically  closed  eyelids  (at  night).

I  Eczema  palpebrarum,  where  scabs  are  thick  and  honey-

combed.

I I  Little  pimples  surround  inflamed  eyes.

«  Hearing  and  Ears. "Whizzing  and  throbbing m  ears,
with  hardness  of  hearing.
I  Cracking  in  ear  when  blowing  nose.

■  Darting  pain  in  ears.

■  Increase  of  earwax.

■  Discharge  of  fetid  pus  from  ears.

■  Canal  filled  with  white,  cheesy,  bloody  pus,  and  surround-

ing skin  scurfy  and  irritated;  little  pustules  in  meatus
and  auricle,  wherever  pus  touched;  hemorrhage  from
slightest  touch;  >  from  hot  applications,  cannot  bear
anything  cold.

■  Itching  of  ears,  green  discharge;  liquid  wax.

■  Itching  in  ears.

'  Smell  and  Nose, i "  Hypersesthesia  of  smell.

■  Sense  of  smell  acute,  also  with  vertigo.

■  Loss  of  smell.

■  Nosebleed  (after  singing).  _ ■ ^ -i f

■  On  blowing  nose  unpleasant  sensation  m  1.  side  ol  nose

with  whizzing  and  snapping  in  ear.

■  Blowing  nose  causes  a  raw  feeling  in  side  of  nose.

■  rhe  nose  feels  sore  as  if  bruised.
I  I  Contractive  sensation  in  nose.

■  Itching  in  nose,  causing  sneezing.

■  Nose  stopped  up  in  morning.

■  Febrile  fluent  coryza  if  it  gets  dry,  especially  with  scrofu-

lous and  rachitic  children;  hoarseness,  or  hollow,
croupy  cough.  ,  . .  .,

■  Heat  and  burning  in  nose;  ulcerative  pam  m  nostrils ,

drawing  pain  in  nose  passing  into  eyes,  becoming  a
smarting  there;  pain  lasts  far  into  night;  annoying
occlusion  of  nostrils;  crusts  and  scabs;  interior  of  nose
painful  and  sensitive  to  air  and  touch.

■  Fluent  coryza,  with  continual necessity  to  blow  nose,

which  yields  a  thin,  badly  smelling  slime;  sometimes
yellowish,  sticky  matter  drops  out  of  one  nostril.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  10

llCoryza,  with  inflammatory  swelling  cf  nose,  painful  like
from  a  boil;  also  with  cough.

■  Blowing  of  Oiiensive  mucus  from  nose.

I  Mucus  from  posterior  nares  mixed  with  blood.

I  Nasal  discharge  thick  and  purulent,  sometimes  tinged
with  blood.

lOffensive  smelling  discharge  from  nose,  which  is  swollen
and  red;  scabs  in  nose;  loss  of  smell;  eyes  inflamed,
lids  red,  excoriated  and  burning,  as  if  raw;  photophobia.

iViolent  pain  in  bony  part  of  nose  with  thick  muco-
purulent discharge  from  one  nostril;  >  in  dry  weather;
<  on  approach  of  rain,  or  in  changeable  weather;  after
abuse  of  mercury.

I  Four  years  ago  discharge  of  bone  as  large  as  pea  from  1.
nostril,  preceded  by  severe  neuralgic  pains  in  region  of
1.  orbit,  followed  by  discharge  of  mucus,  which,  after  a
few  months  became  very  profuse  and  purulent;  dizzi-
ness and  headache.

I  Scurfy  formation  in  r.  half  of  nose,  extending  down  upon
lip  with  a  deep  fissure,  very  sore  and  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  nose  with  loss  of  sense  of

smell.
iScrofulous  coryza  with  formation  of  crusts  and  painful

inflammation  of  alse  nasi.
ElOzaena  scrofulosa.
i  Bones  of  nose  painful  to  touch.
BSore  pain  on  dorsum  of  nose,  when  touching  it.
Unflammation  (redness  and  heat)  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face, i  Yellow  color  of  face,  with  blue  rings  around

eyes.

■  Yellowness  of  face  and  skin.

I  Heat  and  fiery  redness  of  face.

I  I  Heat  of  face,  night  and  morning,  on  waking  at  7  p.m.

I  I  Erysipelatous  color  of  face.

■  Chronic neuralgia of  face, extending in streaks  into

temple,  ear,  alse  nasi  and  upper  lip;  particularly  if  <  in
open  air,  and  >  wrapping  up  warmly.
■Spasmus  facialis,  especially  if  caused  by  diseased  bones
or  teeth.

■  Hard  swollen  cheek,  and  upon  it  an  outgrowth  size  of

walnut,  as  hard  as  cheek.

■  Pains  in  malar  bones,  <  from  touch,  extending  to  ears

and  temples,  <  in  fresh  air,  and  >  by  wrapping  up  face;
at  same  time  coryza,  hoarseness,  much  sweating  and
rheumatic  pains

■  Bones  of  face  painful  to  touch.

■  Erysipelatous  swelling  of  cheeks  in  morning.
■Nettlerash  eruption  on  face.


11-  -  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

I  Humid  herpes,  especially  on  face.

I  Eruptions  scurfy  and  very  painful  to  touch,

I  Crusty  pimples  on  face  of  young  people.

I  Boils  very  painful  to  toucn.

I  Lupoid  ulceration  of  face,  intolerance  of  touch,  every

breath  of  air  caused  pain.
^  Lower  Face. isGreat swelling  of  upper lip,  painful  to

touch,  but  otherwise  only  tense.
iSore  smarting  pimple  on  vermilion  border  of  upper  lip.

■  Middle  of  lower  lip  cracked.

■  Eruption,  with  sensation  of  heat  in  corners  of  mouth.
I  Ulcer  at  corner  of  mouth.

iHydroa  around  mouth. ^Tertian  ague.
I  Itching  around  mouth.

I  Red,  itching  spot  beneath  lower  lip,  soon  becoming  cov-
ered with  many  yellow  blisters,  which  change  to  a  scurf.
I  Boils  on  lips  and  chin,  very  painful  to  touch.
I  I  White  blisters  on  lips,  chin  and  neck.
I  Itching  pimples  on  chin.

■  Acute  inflammation  of  r.  parotid  gland;  threatened  sup-

puration ;  a  few  pimples  appeared  on  face
I  High  fever,  eyes  inflamed  and  half  open;  involuntary
discharges  from  bowels  and  bladder;  great  restlessness.
^Parotitis  after  scarlet  fever.
I  Fungous  growth  on  inferior  maxillary,  with  necrosis.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■  Throbbing  pain  as  if  blood  were  en-
tering tooth,  or  a  drawing  pain;  pains  <  after  eating
and  in  a  warm  room,  or  at  night.

■  Toothache  in  all  teeth,  immediately  after  drinking  cold

things,  or  opening  mouth.

■  Toothache, < in  warm  room,  and  when  biting  teeth

together.

■  Hollow  teeth  feel  too  long  and  painful.

■  Loose  molar  teeth;  mouth  sore;  breath  offensive;  small

aphthae  on  gums  and  roof  of  mouth.

■  Looseness  of  teeth;  gums  tender.

■  ■Gums  and  mouth  very  painful  to  touch,  bleed  easily.

■  Gums  ulcerated,  tender  and  painful.

■  ■Mercurio-syphilitic  diseases  of  gums.

"Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  putrid;  sour;  metallic;  bitter;
of  rotten  eggs  in  morning.

■  Bitterness  in  back  of  throat,  with  natural  taste  of  food.

■  Coating  on  back  of  tongue  resembling  dry  clay.

■  Tip  of  tongue  very  painful,  and  feels  sore.

■  D  Hasty  speech.

^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Offensive  odor  from  mouth,  as  from  disor-
dered stomach,  which  he  himself  notices.

■  White  aphthous  pustules  on  inside  of  lips  and  cheeks  and

on  tongue.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  12

I  I  Thrush  <  on  inside  of  lower  lip.

■  Ulcers  on  gums  and  in  mouth,  base  resembling  lard.

13  Throat,  l  Elongated  flabby  uvula,  with  tickling  sensation
in  back  of  throat  and  enlargement  and  inflammation  of
mucous  follicles.

I  I  Roughness  of  fauces.

iSwollen  tonsils  and  hard  glandular  swellings  on  neck,
with  sticking,  when  swallowing,  coughing,  breathing,  or
turning  neck.

iSore  throat;  tonsils  so  much. swollen  as  to  leave  no  open-
ing visible;  pulse  high,  about  100;  intense  pain,  could
neither  speak,  move  nor  swallow;  extreme  uneasiness.
^/Quinsy.

iTonsils  enlarged,  red;  throat  and  pharynx  raw,  and
studded  over  with  enlarged  reddish  follicles;  could  not
venture  out  in  slightest  damp  without  being  in  fear  of
inflammation  of  throat,  which  at  last  produced  a  nervous
sort  of  terror  of  being  choked;  incapacitated  from  work,
as  the  damp  from  the  clay  afl'ects  him  with  hoarseness
and  irritability  of  chest.

I  Tonsillitis  recurring  regularly  every  two  or  three  years;
difficult  deglutition ;  severe  pain ;  r.  tonsil  particularly
red  and  swollen;  twenty  days  after  beginning  of  attack
pus  is  discharged.

llChronic  tonsillitis,  especially  when  accompanied  by
hardness  of  hearing.

■  Dryness  of  throat.

■  Scraping  in  throat  when  swallowing  saliva.
■Scraping  sore  throat,  impeding  speech  but  not  swallowing.

■  Smarting,  rawness  and  scraping  in  throat,  <  swallowing

solid  food.
■Violent  pressure  in  throat,  believes  that  it  is  quite  con-
stricted and  that  she  must  suffocate.

■  Pain  in  throat,  on  swallowing,  as  from  an  intense  swell-

ing; sensation  as  if  he  had  to  swallow  over  a  swelling.

■  A  f-eeling  in  throat  as  of  a  plug  of  mucus  or  an  internal

swelling  at  entrance  of  throat.

■  Sticking  in  throat,  extending  to  ear  on  turning  head.

■  ■Sticking  in  throat  as  from  a  splinter,  on  swallowing,  ex-

tending towards  ear  on  yawning.

■  Stitches  in  throat,  extending  to  ear,  <  when  swallowing

food.

■  Sore  ulcerative  pain  in  throat  as  of  a  splinter,  very  severe

from  afternoon  to  midnight,  preventing  sleep.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  a  fish  bone  or  splinter  were  sticking  in

throat.
I  Hawking  up  of  mucus.

■  After  violent  inflammation  of  throat  when  there  still  re-


13  ^  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

mains  some  redness,  dr3'ness  and  swelling  of  mucous
membranes.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  i  Unusual  hun-
ger in  forenoon.

I  I  Excessive  thirst  from  morning  till  evening.

•  Craving  for  condiments,  sour,  highly  flavored,  pungent
articles.

I I  Great  desire  for  vinegar.

I  Longing:  for  acids;  wine;  sour  and  strong  tasting  things.

■  Appetite  for  something  at  times,  and  when  he  gets  it  he

does  not  like  it.

■  Aversion  to  fat.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking, i  i  Strong  and  comfortable  feeling
after  a  meal.
I  I  Child  seems  to  be  better  after  eating.

■  Heaviness  and  pressure  in  stomach  after  moderate  eating.

■  ■Hasty  speech  and  hasty  drinking.
Better  from  tobacco.

^®  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and Vomiting. ■Con-
stant sensation  of  water  rising  in  oesophagus,  as  if  she
had  eaten  sour  things
I  I  Eructations  frequent,  odorless  and  tasteless.

■  Fetid  eructations,  with  sensation  of  burning  in  throat.

■  Eructations  after  eating.

■  Hot,  sour  regurgitation  of  food.

■  Heartburn.

■  Inclination  to  vomit,  with  flow  of  saliva  from  mouth.
I  i  Frequent  but  momentary  attacks  of  nausea.

■  Attacks  of  nausea,  with  coldness  and  paleness.

■  Vomiting  of  green,  acrid  water.

■  Sour  vomiting.

Vomiting  of  bile,  in  morning,  after  long,  violent  retching.
I  I  Vomiting  every  morning.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1 A  feeling  of  hard  body  in
epigastrium,  immediately  followed  by  haemoptysis.

■  Tension  across  pit  of  stomach;  is  obliged  to  loosen  his

clothes,  and  then  cannot  tolerate  sitting.

■  Empty  sinking  feeling  of  stomach,  >  by  eating.

I  I  Pressure  in  stomach  after  moderate  eating,  as  if  lead
were  in  it,

■  Pressure  and  pain  in  stomach,  >  by  eating,  eructation,

and  by  passing  flatus.

■  Frequent  desire  to  loosen  clothing  about  stomach  after  a

meal.

■  Dull  aching  pain  in  stomach  after  moderate  eating.

■  Stomach  painful  when  Walking,  as  if  it  hung  loose.
I  I  Drawing  pain  from  region  of  stomach  to  back.

■  Burning  in  stomach.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  14

I  Gnawing  in  stomach,  as  from  acids,  which  also  rise  up

into  throat.
I  Acrid  feeling  in  stomach  during  digestion.

■  Distension  of  pit  of  stomach,  has  to  loosen  clothing.
■Swelling  and  pressure  in  region  of  stomach.

I  Stomach  frequently  and  easily  disordered.
iStomach  inclined  to  be  out  of  order;  longing  for  sour  or
strong  tasting  things.

•  Indigestion  with  burning  pain  in  stomach  and  up  oesoph-

agus, palpitation  of  heart  when  pain  is  severe.
I  Indigestion  characterized  by  eructation  of  quantities  of

wine,  especially  in  nervous  persons,  with  craving  for

condiments.
I  Dyspepsia  of  herpetic  and  hemorrhoidal  subjects,  with

flatulency  and  even  tympanitis.
^^  Hypochondria. '  l  Sticking  in  hepatic  region  when  walking.
iStitches:  in  region  of  liver;  in  region  of  spleen,  when

walking.

■  Hepatitis  with  jaundice,  stools  white  or  greenish.

•  Frequent  bilious  attacks  especially  in  Spring  and  Autumn ;

engorgem,ent  of  liver  with  jaundice;  lassitude,  inability
for  work,  want  of  appetite  and  obstinate  constipation ;
everything,  even  cold  water,  has  a  bitter  taste;  skin
and  sclerotic  yellow;  urine  dark;  stools  whitish;  over-
fatigue or  chill  in  damp  weather  brings  on  attacks  of
white,  frothy  diarrhoen ;  exposure  to  rays  of  July  sun  fol-
lowed by  intense  colic  which  was  >  by  copious  and
perfectly  white  stools;  paroxysms  of  ungovernable  irri-
tability; enlargement  of  1.  lobe  of  liver;  in  Autumn
attacks  are  accompanied  by  great  sexual  weakness;  is
extremely  sensitive  in  change  of  weather  to  rain;  pre-
dicts the  approach  of  rain ;  ver}^  sensitive  to  damp  winds.
•Liver  enlarged,  extending  two  or  three  inches  beyond
ribs;  every  kind  of  food  disagrees;  chronic  constipation  ;
skin  dirty  yellow,  like  the  hue  of  malignant  disease;
uterus  enlarged  and  anteverted  with  congestion  of  ova-
ries; coitus  intolerable;  ovum  could  not  be  retained.
^ After  abuse  of  mercury.

•  Hepatogenous  jaundice,  mercurial  history.

•  Chronic  engorgement  of  liver.

•  •Hepatic  abscesses.

•  During  inflammatory  process  in  cirrhosis  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. ••Abdomen  distended,  tense.

•  Abdomen  swollen  and  somewhat  tender.

•  Rumbling  in  abdomen.

I  I  Fermentation  above  navel,  with  eructation  of  hot  air.

•  Sensation  of  soreness,  as  if  bruised,  in  abdomen,  morning.

•  Contractive  pain  in  abdomen.


15  ^  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC."

I  I  Spasmodic  contraction  in  abdomen.

■  Cutting  pains  in  abdomen.

B  Clawing  in  umbilical  region,  extending  from  both  sides
of  abdomen  towards  middle,  and  sometimes  up  to  pit  of
stomach,  causing  nausea,  with  anxious  heat  of  cheeks,
by  paroxysms;  almost  like  the  effects  of  taking  cold,  or
the  preliminaries  of  menstruation.

I  Colic,  with  dry,  rough  cough.

on  back,  with  r.  knee  drawn  up.

I  I  Decreased  peristaltic  motion.

■  Mesenteric  tubercles.

■  Chronic  abdominal  affections.

■  ■Swelling  and  suppuration  of  inguinal  glands.

^  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■Stools:  white  and  fetid,  child  has  a
sour  smell;  sour  smelling  and  whitish;  clay  colored;
green,  slimy,  of  sour  smell;  light  yellow  faecal;  greenish;
black;  thin  or  papescent;  watery;  undigested;  painless.
Diarrhoea:  <  during  day;  after  eating,  and  after  drinking
cold  water;  with  colic;  with  every  cutting  of  teeth;  in
morning;  colliquative.
I  I  Cholera  infantum  from  irritation  of  teeth,  chiefly  with
morning  aggravation.

■  Dysenteric  stools;  difficult  evacuation  of  soft  stool  or  of

bloody  mucus  witli  tenesmus.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea:  after  abuse  of  mercury  or  quinine;

after  suppression  of  scabies.

■  rS tools  soft,  yet  passed  with  great  exertion.

I  I  Difficult  expulsion  of  a  small  quantity  of  soft  excrement
with  great  efforts  and  tenesmus.

■  Sluggishness  and  inactivity  of  bowels,  in  consequence  of

which  abdominal  muscles  must  bear  down  in  order  to
effect  an  evacuation.

■  Constipation:  stools  hard  and  dry;  with  eruption  in  bend

of  elbows,  or  in  popliteal  space,  from  congestion  and  in-
action of  rectum.

Before  stool:  pinching  in  abdomen.

During  stool:  abdominal  pain,  straining,  pressing,  rum-
bling and  nauseous  feeling  in  abdomen;  succus  prostat-
icus;  heat  in  hands  and  cheeks;  inclination  to  lie  down.

After  stool:  sore  pain  in  anus  and  sanious  secretion;  sore-
ness of  rectum  with  ichor;  tympanitis;  obstruction  of
nose.

■  Burning  in  rectum,  swelling  of  anus.
I  I  Creeping  in  rectum.

■  Promotes  speedy  suppuration  in  periproctitis,  the  swell-

ing being  hard  and  inflamed.

■  Prolapsus  of  rectum,  which  protruded  at  every  stool  about


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  16

two  inches,  with  slight  oozing  of  blood; bowel  very
difficult  to  return;  engorgement  of  veins  but  no  distinct
piles;  mercurial  history.
iHeraorrhoids  from  engorgement  of  liver,  with  great  ab-
dominal distress;  preventing  abdominal  respiration.

■  Hemorrhoids  with  engorged  liver  from  abuse  of  mercury,
llnflammation  and  suppuration  of  hemorrhoidal  tumors.

■  Hemorrhage  from  rectum,  with  soft  stool.

■  Sweat  on  perineum.

^'  Urinary  Organs.  ■Pain  in  kidneys  with  constant  urging
to  urinate,  later  purulent  sediment  in  urine;  emaciated;
renal  region  sensitive  to  slightest  touch;  incessant,  pain-
ful urging  to  urinate,  voiding  of  few  drops  of  purulent
urine;  violent  fever  with  unquenchable  thirst;  colli-
quative diarrhoea  and  night  sweats. ^Kidney  disease.

■  Croupous  nephritis  passing  into  suppurative  stage,  with

fever,  chills,  alternating  with  burning  heat.

■  Albuminuria  accompanying  and  following  diphtheria.

■  Enuresis;  hot,  acrid  discharge;  head  thrown  back  dur-

ing sleep.

■  ■Micturition  impeded;  is  obliged  to  wait  awhile  before

urine  passes,  and  then  it  flows  slowly.

■  ■Weakness  of  bladder;  urine  drops  vertically  down,  is

obliged  to  wait  awhile  before  any  passes.
I  Urine  passed  tardily  and  without  force,  feels  as  if  bladder
could  not  be  emptied  thoroughly.

■  ■Is  never  able  to  finish  urinating;  it  seems  as  though

some  urine  always  remains  behind  in  bladder.

■  Painful  micturition.

■  Urine:  dark  red  and  hot;  bloody;  sharp,  burning,  cor-

roding prepuce  and  pudenda;  dark  yellow,  scalding
whilst  discharged;  brown  red,  the  last  drops  mixed  with
blood;  blood  red;  pale,  clear,  on  standing,  turbid  and
thick,  and  deposits  a  white  sediment;  pale,  with  floccu-
lent,  muddy  sediment;  milky,  turbid,  even  while  pass-
ing, with  a  white  sediment.

■  Greasy  pellicle  on  urine,  or  glistening  with  various  colors.
During urination:  sensation in r. shoulder-blade  as  if

something  were  running  or  creeping.
I  I  Burning  and  soreness  in  urethra.
Stitches  in  urethra.

■  Inflammation  and  redness  of  orifice  of  urethra.

■  Discharge  of  mucus  from  urethra.

■  Wetting  the  bed  at  night.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Sexual  desire  increased,  but  erec-
tions feeble.
I  I  Diminished  sexual  instinct;  feeble  erections.

■  Nocturnal  emissions; sudden  appearance  of  furuncles;


17  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

attacks  of  blindness  during  day ;  waterbrash,  with  brown
coated  tongue.

■  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid,  also  after  micturition  and

during  hard  stool.

■  Prostatitis.

■  Discharge  of  mucus  from  urethra.

8  Ulcer  similar  to  a  chancre,  externally  on  prepuce.

■  Chancres  not  painful  but  disposed  to  bleed  readily.

■  Easily  bleeding  chancres  with  lardaceous  edges  and  fetid

discharge.

■  Chancres  secreting  waterj^  pus  with  diffuse  borders  and

red  bottoms,  elevated  above  surface.

■  Mercurialized  chancres.

■  Itching  on  penis  and  at  freenura  preputii.

■  Phimosis  with  discharge  of  pus,  accompanied  by  throb-

bing.
iFigwarts,  smelling  like  old  cheese  or  herring  brine.

■  Herpes  praeputialis; small  vesicles  in groups,  whitish,

with  red  bases,  and  intolerable  itching  of  parts;  erup-
tion exceedingly  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Long  standing  hydrocele;  large  swelling  of  scrotum,  con-

taining dark,  thick  fluid;  throbbing  in  scrotum.

■  Large  bubo,  stony  hard,  in  r.  groin. ^Syphilis.

I  Bubo  in  1.  groin  as  large  as  a  hen's  egg,  stony  hard.

■  ■Buboes  after  mercurial  treatment.

■  Scrofulous  buboes.

■  i Humid  soreness  on  genitals,  scrotum,  and  folds  between

scrotum  and  thigh.

■  Secondary  sypliilis.

^Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Uterus  enlarged  and  anteverted,
with  congestion  of  ovaries;  coitus  intolerable;  frequent
abortions.

■  Uterine  ulcers,  with  bloody  suppuration,  smelling  like

old  cheese;  edges  of  ulcer  sensitive,  frequently  a  pulsa-
tive  sensation  in  ulcers.

■  Metritis,  with  burning,  throbbing  pains.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  uterus.

■  Hemorrhage  from  uterus.

■Menorrhagia,  in  women  with  chapped  skin  and  rhagades
of  hands  and  feet.

■  Menses  delayed  and  too  scanty.
Before  menses:  constricting  headache.
During  menses:  itching  of  vulva.

I  I  Discharge  of  blood  between  menses.

■  Discharge  of  white,  yellowish,  or  discolored  pus,  attended

with  fetid  smell,  particularly  when  occasioned  by  scrof-
ulous leucorrhoea,  or  after  repeated  attacks.

■  Leucorrhoea,  with  smarting  of  vulva.

VOL.  VI. — 2.


25


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  18

I  I  Pruritus  pudendi  during  menses.

■Mastitis  in  hysterical  and  nervous  patients;  pain  as  if  in
bones  of  arms  and  thighs;  suppuration  preceded  by  fre-
quent crawls  in  affected  part,  which  remains  hard,  with
scanty  discharge.

I  Scirrhous  ulcer  on  mamma,  with  stinging  burning  of
edges,  smelling  like  old  cheese.

I  Much  itching,  or  little  pimples  around  ulcer  on  mammae.

I  Itching  nipples.

2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. i '  Frequent mo-
mentary attacks  of  nausea.
iMammse  swollen,  not  sensitive  to  touch,  but  she  cannot
walk  up  or  down  stairs.

■  Cancer  of  breast,  with  stinging  burning  of  edges;  smells

like  old  cheese.
■Little  pimples,  or  smooth  ulcers,  surround  scirrhous,  or
principal  ulceration.
Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Weak-
ness of  organs  of  speech  and  of  chest,  she  cannot  speak
aloud.

■  Hoarseness,  roughness  in  throat.

■  Obstinate  hoarseness;  scraping  in  throat  causing  rough,
barking  cough;  voice  toneless,  weak;  scarcely  audible
in  evening;  pale  swelling  of  tonsils  and  uvula;  lassi-
tude in  limbs.

■Hoarseness,  grating,  irritation  in  larynx  or  lower  part  of
fauces;  mucous  rales.

I I  Sensation  of  down  in  larynx.
■Scraping  in  larynx.

■  Pressure  beneath  larynx,  immediately  after  supper,  as  if
something  were  sticking  in  throat.

■  Pain  in  one  spot  of  larynx,  <  by  pressure,  speech,  cough
and  breathing.

■  ■Sensitiveness  of  larynx  to  cold  air.

■  Wheezing  in  larynx,  and  painfulness  of  a  small  spot  in
larynx.

■  Sudden  attacks  of  suffocation;  child  looks  anxiously
about  and  attempts  to  cry  without  being  able  to  do  so;
loud,  w^histling  inspiration ;  face  dark  red ;  lips  bluish ;
bends  head  back  and  gasps  for  breath;  after  attacks  have
lasted  ten  minutes,  they  end  with  a  whistling,  crowing
sound,  and  are  followed  by  hoarseness.

■Spasmodic  croup;  violent  fever,  face  indicating  great  an-
guish ;  weeping ;  restless ;  cough  hoarse  and  rough  with-
out sputa.

■  Lies  with  head  thrown  back,  buried  in  pillow,  face  swol-
len, neck  stretched;  mucous  and  sibilant  rales;  clucking
noise  in glottis;  respiration noisy; cough loud and


19


HEPAP.  SULPH.  CALC.

harsh,  with  distinct  croupy  tone;  exhaustion;  pulse  140,
hard  and  full. ^Croup.

■  Assumes  a  sitting  posture,  on  account  of  anxiety  wnicn
sets  in  when  lying  down;  somnolence,  with  restless  toss-
ins  about;  respiration  snoring,  hoarse,  whisthng,  ana
often  so  short  and  oppressed  that  he  starts  from  sleep
with  violent,  dry,  hoarse  cough,  which  causes  retching;
grasps  at  larynx,  in  the  greatest  fear;  begins  to^cry;
red  face,  protruding  eyes,  and  frequent  throwing  back
of  head-  after  several  minutes  the  paroxysms  again
return;  frequent  drinking;  great  heat;  sweat;  pulse
quick  and  hard;  hasty  speech;  frequent  passages  o±
dark  urine. ^Croup.  . .

■Respiration  somewhat  whistling;  on  every  inspiration
great  retraction  of  diaphragm,  abdominal  muscles  and
nbs  so  that  a  large  concavity  is  formed;  hoarse  cough,
occasionally  croupy  in  tone;  voice  hoarse  at  times
entirely  lost;  clammy  sweat  on  head,  rest  of  body  dry
and  hot;  color  of  face  changing  constantly;  pulse  hard,
cannot  be  counted; tossing  about,  or  sits  up  hastily.

■  Crourwith  great  dryness  of  larynx  and  respiratory  pass-
ages, whistling  respiration,  dry  cough  with  ineffec  ual
?ftching,  nothing  but  a  slight  quantity  of  frothy  saliva
being  discharged;  cough  ending  with  a  short  sneeze

■Lies  upon  his  mother's  arm  with  head  thrown  back,
mouth  open,  bluish  redness  of  face,  protruding  eyes;
S)dy  bathed  in  sweat;  fearful  anxiety  and  dyspncea;

with great dyspnoea, grasps at  larynx;  great  thiist,
r^nlse  120  •  respiration  anxious  and  noisy. ^Croup.

..group  after  exposure  to  dry,  cold  wind,  with  swening
below^arynx;  great  sensitiveness  to  -f^^^^lJ^^Jl^'
high  fever,  hoarseness  and  rattling  of  ^o^^t  ^^^^''''
whkh  child  is  unable  to  get  rid  of,  but  still  little  or  no
difficulty  in  breathing ;  after  midnight  or  towar"^^^^
ing-  sensation  as  if  there  was  a  fishbone  m  throat,  or  ot
internal  swelling,  when  swallowing  .  ^^^.^ggg  ^^

.CrouD-  with  deep,  rough,  barking  cough,  hoarseness  or
""Z^of  voice  witlfslighlsuffocatingspasmss^^^^^^^^^^^
of  mucus-  with  swelling  below  larynx;  with  great  sen
s toeness  to  cold  air  or  water ;  cough  <  before  midnight,
or  toward  morning.

■  Croupy  cough,  with  continual  hoarseness.

■  Catarrhal  croup  with  or  without  fever.  ^^^sinelas

■  Croup,  when  panaritise,  angina,  urticaria  or  erysipelas

prevail.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  20

■Light  attacks  of  croup  in  teething  children.

■  Violent  attacks  of  croup  from  time  to  time,  as  if  suffoca-

tion or  vomiting  would  ensue.

■  After  influenza  violent  attack  of  croup;  restless;  tossing

back  of  head;  anxious,  sawing,  metallic  cough.

■  Violent  respiratory  efforts,  during  which  chest  scarcely

moves;  anxious  throwing  back  of  head;  convulsive
twitchings;  irritation  of  gums  and  Schneiderian  mem-
brane; vomiting  of  mucus,  mixed  with  portions  of
membrane. ^Croup.

■  Much  green  mucus  in  larynx.

■  Severe  laryngeal  catarrh,  with  roughness  and  pain  in

upper  part  of  throat ;  sensation  as  of  a  clot  of  mucus  or
internal  swelling  when  swallowing ;  stitches  and  pain
extending  from  ear  to  ear.

■Laryngeal  catarrh,  grafted  on  an  organism  of  tubercular
disposition;  scanty,  tenacious,  rauco-purulent  secretion,
with  difficulty  of  expectoration;  hoarseness  remains
some  time.

I  Acute  catarrh  of  larynx  and  bronchi  with  tickling  and
roughness  in  larynx,  and  hoarseness  or  aphonia;  also
acute  catarrh  of  lungs  with  scratching,  tickling  sensa-
tion in  air  tubes,  pressure  and  heaviness  under  sternum,
and  frequent,  dry,  tearing  cough ;  rough,  whistling,  re-
spiratory sounds,  indicating  a  dry  condition  of  mucous
membranes;  such  inflammations  are  usually  of  long  du-
ration; constant  oppression  of  chest  and  irritation  to
cough,  which  become  <  by  long  continued  and  fatiguing
coughing,  finally  gasping  for  breath,  and  expectorating
very  little  sputa ;  <  sitting  and  bending  over,  must  lean
back  or  get  up  and  walk  about;  <  breathing  cool  air.

■  After  catching  cold,  cough  next  day,  tickling  and  dry-

ness in  air  passages,  followed  by  hoarseness  and  finally
aphonia;  redness  and  swelling  of  posterior  wall  of  phar-
ynx; rough,  whistling  sound  in  trachea,  extending  to
large  bronchi;  larynx  and  trachea  sensitive  to  touch;
on  forced  inspiration  stitching  in  larynx  and  cough.

■  Chronic  tracheitis  (the  beginning  of  tracheal  or  laryngo-

tracheal phthisis) ;  voice  hoarse,  and  if  exerted  for  any
length  of  time  accompanied  by  stitching  pain  in  larynx;
in  morning  on  rising,  severe  cough  with  stitching  pain
in  larynx  and  scanty  expectoration  of  mucus;  when
walking,  particularly  against  wind,  and  when  eating
warm  food,  stitching  and  burning  in  throat;  no  fever.
■Tracheal  and  bronchial  inflammation  in  children,  with
continual  fever  and  headache,  difficult,  short,  anxious
breathing,  hoarse  voice,  violent,  dry,  painful,  alternating
rough  and  hollow  sounding  cough,  <  by  eating  and
drinking  anything  cold,  by  cold  air,  talking  or  crying.


21  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

"^^  Respiration. I Breathing:  rattling;  anxious,  wheezing;  fre-
quent deep  breaths,  like  after  running;  anxious,  short,
wheezing, threatening  to  suffocate; must bend head
back  and  sit  up.
Involuntary  deep  inspirations.

■  Attacks  of  asthma,  awaking  patient  from  sleep,  face  be-

comes blue,  saliva  increased;  sensation  as  of  dust  in
lungs;  smoking  and  throwing  head  back  >;  after  at-
tack, expectoration  frothy.

B Difficult  respiration,  preventing  sleep  at  night;  whistling,
wheezing,  with  copious  mucous  expectoration;  just  as
he  has  fallen  asleep  is  aroused  and  startled  by  -threat-
ened suffocation;  must  get  up  to  relieve  dyspnoea;  >
during  day. ^Asthma  after  suppressed  eruption  of  skin.

1  Suffocative  attacks,  compelling  him  to  raise  himself  up
and  bend  the  head  backwards.

I  I  Dyspnoea.
^  Cough. I  Spasmodic  cough  in  paroxysms,  with  titillation  in
larynx  and  efforts  of  vomiting.

•Violent,  deep  cough,  consisting  of  several  impulses  which
strike  painfully  against  larynx  and  occasion  retching.

I  Almost  uninterrupted  cough,  from  tickling  in  upper  part
of  1.  side  of  throat,  <  talking  and  stooping,  constantly
getting  <  till  late  in  evening,  and  then  suddenly
ceasing.

8 Titillation,  as  from  dust  in  throat,  inducing  cough,  which
is  deep,  wheezing;  expectoration  only  in  morning  of
mucus,  bloody  or  like  pus,  generally  tasting  sour  or
sweet.

1  Chronic  laryngeal  cough,  very  distressing,  especially  at
night,  compelling  her  to  spring  up  in  bed,  from  a  feeling
of  choking  or  suffocation.

iDeep,  dry  cough,  with  obstructed  breathing  on  inspiring,
and  pain  in  top  of  chest  at  every  cough.

■  Dry  cough,  <  taking  deep  inspiration,  or  speaking  any

length  of  time;  roughness  in  throat;  pressure  under
sternum ;  difficult  respiration ;  pressive  headache.

■  Suffocative  cough,  simply  caused  by  tightness  of  breath.
I  I  Subdued  cough  from  oppression  of  chest.

■  Dry  cough  wdth  tightness  of  chest  and  sore  throat.

■  Deep,  dull,  whistling  cough,  in  evening  without,  in  morn-

ing with  expectoration  of  masses  of  mucus,  purulent
and  bloody,  sour,  or  of  a  sweet  taste  and  offensive  odor.

■  Deep,  dry,  wheezing,  hoarse  cough;  bloody,  pus-like,  mu-

cous expectoration ;  rheumatic  pains  in  limbs  and  joints;
pulse  hard,  full,  acelerated,  and  at  times  intermitting;
symptoms  <  at  night  and  from  cold  air;  >  by  wrap-
ping up  and  keeping  warm.  ^Chest  troubles  succeed-
ing repelled  itch.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  22

■  Cough  so  aggravated  by  deep  breathing  that  it  caused

vomiting.
I  Troublesome  hacking  cough  as  soon  as  he  was  about  to
fall  asleep,  continuing  all  night,  coughs  even  on  shut-
ting eyes;  >  during  sleep;  < 1  p.m.  to  1  a.m. ^Ty-
phoid.

I  Dry,  nervous  cough  all  night.

I I  Paroxysms  of  cough,  as  from  taking  cold,  with  excessive
sensitiveness  of  nervous  system,  as  soon  as  slightest  por-
tion of  body  becomes  cold.

I  Coughs  when  any  part  of  body  is  uncovered.

■  Cough  <  from  exposure  to  chilly  night  air,  and  from

drinking  cold  water.

■  Paroxysms  of  dry  cough,  in  evening.

■  Hacking  cough,  immediately  after  eating.

■  The  child  cries  when  coughing.

■  Cough  with  expectoration  during  day,  no  expectoration

at  night.

■  ■Croup  or  cough  from  exposure  to  dry  West  wind.

■  ■Croupy  cough,  with  rattling  in  chest,  but  without  expec-

toration.

■  Rattling,  choking,  moist  cough,  depending  on  an  organic

or  catarrhal  basis;  <  towards  morning  and  after  eating.

■  Cough:  croupish,  hoarse; scraping,  rough; suffocative;

loose  and  choking;  with  bloody  expectoration;  whoop-
ing, croupish  sound,  pain  in  larynx,  choking  from  mu-
cus in  larynx,  <  in  morning;  spasmodic;  deep,  wheez-
ing; deep  and  dry;  deep,  dull,  whistling;  hacking;  dry,
nervous;  barking,  after  measles.

Cough  caused  by :  limb  getting  cold ;  eating  or  drinking ;
anything  cold ;  cold  air;  lying  in  bed;  talking;  crying;
drinking.

During  cough:  stitches,  burning  and  swelling  in  throat;
burning  in  chest  and  stomach;  catching  of  breath;  nau-
sea, retching,  vomiting;  reverberation  in  head,  throb-
bing in  forehead  and  temples;  dulness;  sneezing;  chills;
anxiety  and  bending  backwards  of  body  in  lying.

After  cough:  sneezing;  crying.

■  ■Cough  <  from  evening  till  midnight.

■  Abundant  expectoration  of  tenacious  mucus  with  relief

to  the  rattling  breathing.

■  Dirty  yellowish,  purulent,  badly  smelling  expectoration,
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Sensation  as  if  hot  water  were

floating  in  chest;  as  of  drojDs  of  hot  water  in  1.  chest.

■  I  Soreness  in  chest.

I  I  Shattering  shocks  and  soreness  in  chest.

■  Weakness  of  chest;  cannot  talk,  from  weakness.

■  Spasmodic  constriction  of  chest,  after  talking.


23  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALO.

I  I  Stitching  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest,  in  direction  of  back.

I I  Tenacious  mucus  in  chest.

■  Constant  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest  of  infants,  threaten-

ing suffocation  at  times.

■  Extreme  emaciation,  skin  cadaverous  and  dry,  counte-

nance of  yellowish  hue,  eyes  deeply  sunken  in  sockets,
dull  and  feverish;  tongue  dry  and  yellow  in  middle;
thirst,  disgust  for  food,  distended  epigastrium;  hard
stool ;  urine  scanty,  brownish  red ;  night  sweats ;  alter-
nations of  rigor  and  heat;  pulse  small,  136;  sleepless-
ness on  account  of  stitches  in  anterior,  inferior  and  pos-
terior part  of  chest  to  shoulder-blade;  cough,  internal
uneasiness,  fearful  disposition;  delirium  of  frightened
character ;  great  inclination  to  cry ;  lies  immovable  on
r.  side,  with  knees  drawn  up  to  chest;  on  r.  hip-joint
commencing  bedsore;  great  fear  of  being  touched,  as
every  movement  causes  pain  in  chest,  cough  and  dysp-
noea; r.  side  of  chest,  arched  like  a  barrel  from  axilla
downwards;  intercostal  spaces  prominent,  motionless
during  respiration;  dull  sound  to  percussion;  entire
absence  of  respiratory  sounds  and  vocal  fremitus;  dull
sound  on  percussion  over  large  surface  at  base  of  heart;
heart's  sounds  and  impulse  diminished.  ^Pleuritis  with
plastic  exudation.

■  Pleurisy,  croupous  exudation,  with  a  yellow  or  yellowish-

brown  tint  in  face,  in  scrofulous  and  lymphatic  persons.

■  Pleurisy  with  fibrinous  exudation.

■  Diaphragmitis  (after  Bryon.),  in  fibrinosis;  promotes  re-

sorption.

■  8  Bronchitis.

■  On  r.  side  of  chest  in  nipple  line,  in  fifth  intercostal  space,

dull  percussion  sound  and  weak  respiratory  murmur;
after  coughing  and  profuse  expectoration,  there  was  on
that  place  tympanitic  percussion  sound  and  bronchial
breathing;  other  portions  of  chest  revealed  catarrhal
symptoms;  expectoration  of  dirty  yellowish  masses,
badly  smelling;  respiration  accelerated;  no  fever;  cough
<  in  morning. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■Bronchitis  from  repelled  eruptions.

■Subacute  catarrhal  processes;  characterized  by  incipient
collection  of  glutinous,  sticky  mucus  in  air  cells,  giving
rise  to  violent  and  suffocative  paroxysms  of  coughing,
often  attended  by  retching  preceding  its  expulsion.

■  ■Habitual bronchial catarrhs, with loud rattling of

mucus.

■  Chronic  catarrh  of  scrofulous  subjects,  especially  when

morbid  process  shows  a  tendency  to  invade  pulmonary
vesicles.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  24

■  Great  emaciation;  slight  hectic  fever;  constantly  troubled

by  cough,  sometimes  spasmodic,  with  purulent  and  fetid
expectoration,  diarrhoea  and  loss  of  appetite;  r.  side  of
thorax  considerably  hollowed,  with  perfectly  empty
sound  on  percussion,  and  intense  bronchial  respiration
and  slight  rales;  1.  side  abnormally  bulging.  ^Pleuro-
pneumonia.
I  Pneumonia,  mild  suppurative  stage,  extending  only  over
small  part  of  a  lung,  with  lentescent  fever.

■  Pneumonia,  during  stage  of  resolution.

■  Chronic  pneumonia,  with  profuse  purulent  expectoration.

■  iPulmonary  abscess ;  empyema ;  pyothorax.

■  Pain  in  r.  occipital  protuberance;  fluent,  acrid,  nasal

coryza,  swelling  at  root  of  nose,  upper  eyelid,  upper  lip;
white  ulcers  in  mouth;  uvula  elongated,  pale;  appetite
for  fat  meat  and  sweet  food;  thirst  for  cold  water  at
night;  stomach  distended  after  eating;  eructations  of
fluid,  then  of  food;  more  at  night;  constipation  alter-
nating with  diarrhoea;  cough  constant,  moist;  moist
rales  in  1.  lung;  feeble,  vesicular  respiration;  upper
part  of  1.  side  of  thorax  dilated  backward ;  curvature  of
spine  between  shoulders;  agonizing  dyspnoea,  could  not
lie  in  a  recumbent  position;  cough  constant  from  12  m.
till  morning;  sleeps  with  head  thrown  back,  restless;
the  least  exposure  aggravates  all  the  symptoms.  ^Em-
physema.

■  Broiichiectasia.

■  In  tuberculosis  when  there  is  oppression  of  breathing;

periodic  stitches ;  cough  before  midnight  and  in  morn-
ing, dry  at  first  but  finally  accompanied  by  a  serous
expectoration  containing  small  flocculi;  occasionally  pa-
tient will  spring  up  and  after  coughing  expectorate  a
mass  as  large  as  a  pea  which  when  crushed  between
fingers  emits  a  carrion-like  odor;  in  afi'ected  parts  (par-
ticularly upper  portions  of  chest)  faint  respiratory  mur-
mur, with  percussion  dulness.

■  Tubercles  of  lungs  in  herpetic  patients,  especially  after

suppression  of  exanthems,  in  scrofulous  and  in  hemor-
rhoidal subjects.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Palpitation,  with  fine
stitches  in  heart  and  1.  half  of  chest.
I  I  Anxious  feeling  of  debility  about  heart  with  paljoitation.
^Hypertrophy.

■  Dyspnoea,  pain  in  neck,  faintness  and  inability  to  recline;

dry,  nervous  cough,  commencing  towards  evening  and
lasting  all  night. t^Angina  pectoris.

■  Sequelte  of  angina  pectoris;  dyspnoea  after  attack;  dry,

nervous  cough  from  evening  all  through  night;  pain  in


25  '  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

neck  after  attack ;  faintness  and  inability  to  recline  after
attack.
I  Pulse  hard,  full,  accelerated;  at  times  intermitting.
^•^  Outer  Chest. iTettery  eruption  on  chest.

■  Suppurating  pimples  on  sternum.
I  I  Ulcer  on  last  rib  of  r.  side.

^'  Neck  and  Back, i  Violent  pulsation  of  carotids.

■  Hard,  glandular  swellings  around  neck.

■  Carbuncle  on  back  of  neck;  surrounding  tissues  highly

inflamed  and  extremely  sensitive  to  touch.
I  Carbuncle  on  1.  side  of  back,  extending  from  upper  bor-
der of  scapula  downward  about  six  inches,  surrounded
by  small  pustules;  pus  offensive  and  scanty;  pain  in-
tense, depriving  him  of  sleep ;  great  weakness  and  pros-
tration.

■  Drawing  between  scapulae.
Great  weakness  in  whole  of  spine.

■  Sensation  as  if  bruised,  in  small  of  back  and  thighs.

I  I  Sharp  pressure  and  pain,  as  from  bruises;  in  small  of
back  and  lumbar  vertebra,  especially  in  region  of  sacro-
iliac symphysis,  extending  into  lower  limbs;  the  pain  is
felt  when  sitting,  standing  or  lying,  and  causes  a  sort
of  limping  when  walking.

■Stitches  and  rheumatic  pains  in  back.

■  Blood  boils  on  the  back.

I  I  Red  tubercle  on  r.  buttock.
I  I  Boil  on  buttock.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l  l  Pain  in  shoulder  as  if  a  weight  were  rest-
ing on  it.

■  Suppuration  of  axillary  glands.

■  Offensive  sweat  in  axillse.

■  Tearing  in  arms,  extending  toward  the  suppuration  in

breast.
I  i  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  os  humeri.

■  Encysted  tumor  or  steatoma  at  point  of  elbow.

■  Violent  itching  in  bend  of  elbow.

I  I  Intensely  violent  itching  in  bends  of  elbows,  on  hands,
wrists  and  in  palms.

■  Carbuncle,  size  of  silver  half-dollar,  on  forearm;  very

painful,  with  three  spots,  like  boils,  near  it.
Swelling  of  r.  hand.
I  I  Itching,  with  rough,  dry,  shrivelled  or  scaling  skin  on

hands.
I  I  Itching  in  palms.

■  Red  and  hot  swelling  of  joints  of  hands  and  fingers.
Swelling  of  fingers  of  both  hands,  with  stiffness,  while

lying.

■  Cold  perspiration  of  hands.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  26

■  Fingers  as  if  dead.
■Tingling  in  tips  of  fingers.

■  Corrosive  blister  on  thumb,  stinging  when  pressed.

■  Thumb  livid;  violent  throbbing,  cutting,  burning  pain;

lymphatics  inflamed;  lump  in  axilla.

■  Whitlow  in palmar surface of  ungual phalanx  of  r.

thumb;  skin  yellow,  matter  could  be  seen  and  felt  under
it;  throbbing,  burning  pain;  cannot  bear  weight  of
poultice;  pain  kept  her  awake.

■  Inside  of  r.  thumb  swollen,  livid,  with  beating,  cutting,

burning  pain,  so  violent  that  it  drove  her  to  madness.

■  Whitlow  on  middle  finger  of  r.  hand;  severe  throbbing

pain  in  last  joint;  hard,  red,  swollen  state  of  pulp;  lym-
phatics of  arm  inflamed,  lump  in  axilla;  fever  and  irri-
tation.

■  ■Whitlow;  violent,  throbbing,  "gathering  pain;"  accele-

rates suppuration.

■  Whitlows  occurring  every  winter  for  several  years.

■  Panaritium.

■  After  injury,  suppuration  of  middle  joint  of  r,  index

finger ;  whole  finger  involved  in  phlegmonous  inflam-
mation.
■Superficial  erysipelatous  inflammation  around  root  of  nail.

■  Onychia.

^^  Lower  Limbs. ■Left  hip  pains  as  if  sprained,  when  walk-
ing in  open  air.
I  I  Buttocks  and  posterior  thighs  painful  when  sitting.

■  Hip  disease,  suppurative  stage,  patient  wants  to  be  tightly

covered.

■  Caries  of  hip-joint.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  in  thighs.

I  I  Bruised  pain  in  anterior  muscles  of  thighs.

■  Raised, flat,  purplish swelling on 1. thigh;  it had  a
0  doughy  feel for  a  space  larger  than  a  silver  dollar;

small  openings;  pus  ichorous;  for  a  considerable  dis-
tance around  was  red,  swollen  and  painful,  with  two
prominent,  indurated  and  painful  spots,  like  boils;  pain
intense,  no  sleep  for  several  nights;  when  this  had
healed,  a  second  carbuncle,  or  at  least  a  flat,  purplish
and  painful  swelling  showed  itself,  about  six  inches  from
first,  which  Hepar  healed  without  suppuration.

■  Carbuncle  of  r.  thigh,  nearly  three  inches  in  diameter;

had  it  for  a  week;  exceedingly  painful  and  leg  swollen;

no  evidence  of  boils  or  pustules;  several  openings  and

centre  looking  gangrenous.
■Knee  pains  as  if  bruised.
!  I  Swelling  of  knee.


27  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

terrible  corroding  itching  "  as  from  salt  water;"  both  legs
swollen  round  ankles,  with  watery  discharge;  color  of
legs  either  red  or  bluish.

I  I  Cramp  in  calves.

■Swelling  of  feet  around  ankles,  with  difficult  breathing.

■  After  catching  cold,  pains  in  foot  as  after  taking  a  mis-

step; pains  occasionally  wander  up  to  thigh;  no  redness
nor  swelling;  depression  of  mind.

■  Tickling  in  soles  of  feet.

■  Cramps:  in  soles  and  toes.

■  Pricking  in  both  heels.

■  I  Coldness  of  feet.

■  Cracked  skin  offset.

■  Tingling  in  toes.

■  Burning,  stinging  pains  m  toes.

■  Violent  stitch  extending  into  great  toe.

^*  Limbs  in  General. iWeakness  in  limbs;  they  feel  bruised.

■  Drawing  pains  in  limbs,  especially  in  morning,  when

awaking.

■  Mercurial  rheumatism,  especially  in  scrofulous  subjects;

tearing  and  shooting  in  limbs  and  joints,  <  at  night,
especially  during  a  chill;  excessive  nervous  excitability,
so  that  all  impressions  on  body  or  mind  cause  internal
trembling.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs  and  stitches  in  joints.

■  Dry,  herpetic  eruption  in  bends  of  joints,  greatly  itching.

■  Chapped  skin  and  rhagades  of  hands  and  feet.

■  The  limb  upon  which  the  ulcer  has  healed  cannct  bear

its  own  weight  by  suspension.

■  Continued  dull  itching  of  soles  of  feet  and  palms  of  hands.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  cold  perspiration  >.

Lies  immovably  on  r.  side  with  knees  drawn  up  to  chest.
Side  on  which  he  lies  becomes  painfully  sore,  must  change

his  position.
Lies  with  head  thrown  back  to  escape  suffocation.
Lying  in  bed :  causes  cough ;  pain  in  back  and  limbs.
Lies  on  back  with  r.  knee  drawn  up.
Inclination  to  lie  down.

Inability  to  recline;  could  not  lie  in  recumbent  position.
Head  thrown  back,  sitting  up  >.
Sitting:  cannot  tolerate  it  from  tension  of  stomach ;  acute

catarrh  of  larynx  < ;  pain  in  back  and  limbs ;  buttocks

and  posterior  thighs  pain;  falls  asleep.
Stooping:  stitches  in  head ;  boring  headache  <;  pressure

in  head  < ;  cough  <  from  tickling  in  throat.
Standing  up  after  sitting  bent  over:  feeling  of  blindness.
Rising:  pressure  in  head  >;  feeling  of  blindness;  great

difficulty  from  feeling  of  stiffness  of  limbs.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  28

Moving:  pressure  in  eyes;  headache  during  fever.

Shaking  head:  headache.

From  slightest  motion :  sweats  easily.

Every  movement:  causes  pain  in  chest.

Walking:  stomach  painful ;  stitches  in  region  of  liver;  >

catarrh  of  larynx;  against  wind,  itching  and  burning

in  throat;  pain  in  thigh,  back  and  lower  limbs;  causes

limping;  in  open  air  1.  hip  pains.
Cannot  walk  up  and  down  stairs.
Exercise:  cold  perspiration  <;  attacks  of  debility  <.
Springs  up  in  bed :  from  cough.
Child  throws  itself  about  unconsciously.
^^  Nerves, l Disinclination  for  mental  or  bodily  exertion.
lOversensitiveness  to  pain;  fainting  from  slight  pains.
Every  impression  upon  body  or  mind  is  followed  by  trem-

ulousness.
Nervous  trembling.

■  Excessive  nervousness  from  abuse  of  mercury.
I  Trembling  weakness,  after  tobacco  smoking.

(Daily  attacks  of  indescribable  sudden  debility,  com-
mencing with  a  chilly  and  creeping  sensation  in  r.  leg,
traveling  slowly  upward  to  chest,  with  profuse  perspi-
ration on  head;  suddenly  and  soon  after  a  feeling  of
weakness,  as  if  he  was  dying,  with  trembling  of  limbs
so  that  he  is  unable  to  stand  or  sit ;  consciousness  re-
tained ;  attack  lasts  two  or  three  hours,  when  strength
gradually  returns,  coupled  with  a  dull,  pressing  head-
ache about  vertex,  which  continues  for  some  hours;  <
in  Summer,  after  cooling  rains,  and  after  bodily  exer-
tions and  walking;  about  every  four  months  scabby
eruption,  moist  at  base,  of  yellowish  color,  on  scalp  and
forehead,  as  far  down  as  eyes,  and  sometimes  on  chest.

■  General  exhaustion.

■  Paroxysms  of  fainting  in  evening,  preceded  by  vertigo.

■  Coldness  of  head,  chiefly  forehead;  severe  headaches,  with

sensation  of  weight  at  back  of  eyeballs,  and  a  feeling  as
though  eyes  would  be  draw^n  back  into  head;  stiffness
of  nape  of  neck ;  on  rising  from  seat  great  difficulty  from
a  feeling  of  stiffness  of  limbs;  pain  in  bottom  of  back,
around  waist,  also  around  shoulders  and  nape  of  neck;
numbness  of  r.  arm  and  hand;  burning  sensation  from
pit  of  stomach  to  throat  and  ears,  >  by  eating;  fixed
coldness  at  pit  of  stomach,  felt  occasionally  when  burn-
ing sensation  was  not  present;  fatigue  from  least  exer-
cise. ^Spinal  irritation.

■  Cramp  in  1.  hand  which  becomes  spasmodically  closed,

with  formication  and  creeping  up  arm,  extending  to
throat,  with  sensation  as  if  something  was  sticking  there


29  -  HEPAR  SULPII.  CALC.

and  that  he  would  choke;  face  bluish  red ;  mouth  drawn
to  1.  side;  complete  consciousness;  after  half-hour,
another,  less  violent  attack,  accompanied  by  tickling  in
arm  and  paralysis  of  1.  side;  after  four  weeks  a  very
violent  attack  occurred  followed  by  complete  paralysis
of  arms  and  legs,  so  that  he  could  not  move;  lameness
of  tongue,  speech  unintelligible.  ^After  suppressed
eruption  and  abuse  of  mercury.
I  Traumatic  convulsions,  caused  by  excessive  pressure  on
brain  during  delivery;  trismus  of  newborn  babes.

■  Paralysis  from  suppressed  eruptions,  or  after  mercurial

poisoning.
^^  Sleep. So  sleepy  and  fatigued,  in  evening,  that he  falls
asleep  while  sitting.
Great,  irresistible  inclination  to  sleep  in  evening;  must  lie
down  immediately  after  supper  and  sleeps  till  morning.

■  Sleepiness  during  day,  <  toward  evening,  with  frequent,

almost  spasmodic  yawning.
I  I  Restless,  soporous  slumber,  with  head  bent  backwards.

■  Side  on  which  he  lies  at  night  becomes  painfully  sore;

must  change  his  position.
I  I  Fright  during  sleep.

■Starts  from  sleep,  feeling  as  if  about  to  suffocate.
I  I  Violent  starts,  when  falling  asleep,
i  I  Loss  of  sleep  after  midnight.
I  I  Excess  of  thoughts  prevent  sleep,  after  midnight.
I  I  Wakes  at  night,  with  erection  and  desire  to  urinate.

1  I  Dreams:  anxious;  of  fire.

^^  Time.  Morning:  vertigo;  on  awakening  pressure  in  head
as  from  a  nail ;  burning  and  itching  of  scalp ;  violent
itching  of  humid  eruption  on  head;  heat  in  eyes  on
awaking;  lids  and  angles  agglutinated;  lids  closed;
nose  stopped  up;  heat  of  face;  erysipelatous  swelling
of  cheeks;  putrid  taste;  excessive  thirst  from  morning
till  evening;  vomiting  of  bile;  sensation  of  soreness  in
abdomen;  chronic  tracheitis;  expectoration  only;  rat-
tling, choking  moist  cough  < ;  croupy  cough  < ;
eczema.  <.

2  A.M.:  chill.

Day:  pressing  and  drawing  in  temples;  diarrhoea;  attacks
of  blindness ;  dyspnoea  > ;  cough  with  expectoration ;
sleepiness;  chill;  sweats  easily;  restless;  stools  <.

From  4  p.m.  all  night:  heat,  delirium,  thirst.

From  4  to  8  p.m.:  febrile  chill.

7  P.M.:  heat  of  face.

8  p.  M.:  violent  chill.

Evening:  great  anxiety;  vertigo  with  nausea;  fainting;
aching  in  vertex ;  meditates  suicide;  lids  swollen;  pain


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  80

in  eyes;  swellings  on  lids  painful;  voice  almost  in-
audible; cough  <  till  late;  deep  whistling  cough;  dry
cough;  cough  <  till  midnight;  cough  commencing
toward  evening  and  lasting  all  night ;  irresistible  incli-
nation to  sleep.

Night:  violent  headache;  sensation  as  if  skull  would
burst  wakes  him;  pressure  in  head;  cold  perspiration
<;  photophobia  and  lachrymation  <,  about  2  or  3
A.M.;  lids  swollen;  vision  of  colored  and  dim  halos
around  candle;  eyes  closed  by  swelling;  sour  smelling
sweat;  spasmodically  closed  eyelids;  pain  in  nose  lasts
far  into  night;  heat  of  face;  toothache  <;  wetting  bed  ;
difficult  respiration  prevents  sleep;  chronic  laryngeal
cough ;  deep  wheezing  cough  < ;  dry,  nervous  cough ;
thirst  for  cold  water;  eructations  <;  wakes  with  erec-
tion and  desire  to  urinate;  febrile  chill;  pain  <;  dry
heat  of  body;  sweat;  sleepless;  restless;  pains  in
tumors  <  ;  burning  and  throbbing  in  ulcers.

Midnight:  aching  in  forehead  till  morning;  croup  <
before;  cough  constant  from  12  m.  till  morning;  loss  of
sleep  after  midnight;  excess  of  thought  prevents  sleep;
sweat  before  midnight.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Exquisite  sensitiveness  to
open  air.
.  Better  from  warmth;  desire  to  be  w^armly  covered,  even
during  hot  weather  or  in  a  warm  place;  <  from  wrap-
ping up  warmly.

1 1  Cannot  bear  to  be  uncovered;  coughs  when  any  part  of
body  is  uncovered.

S I  Ailments  from  West  or  Northw^est  wind  (dry,  cold  wind),
or  soon  after  it;  improved  by  warmth.

I  iGreat  chilliness  in  open  air.

s Extremely  sensitive  to  cold  air;  must  be  wrapped  up  to
face  even  in  hot  weather;  cannot  bear  to  be  uncovered.

Warmth:  cold  perspiration  >;  pains  in  eyes  >;  ears
> ;  neuralgia  > ;  pains  in  malar  bones  > ;  toothache
< ;  cough  > ;  chilliness  > ;  nettlerash  > .

Covering head  warmly:  > soreness  of  head.

Patient  with  hip  disease  wants  to  be  warmly  covered.

Summer:  attacks  of  debility  <.

Dry  weather :  pain  in  nose  > .

Air:  eyes  sensitive;  eyes  <  from  draught;  interior  of
nose  painful  and  sensitive.

Open  air:  lancinating  headache  >;  neuralgia  of  face  <  ;
pains  in  malar  bones  <  ;  1.  hip  pains  as  if  bruised  when
walking;  sensitive  to;  great  chilliness  in  open  air.

Least  exposure  <  all  symptoms;  chill  returns.

Dampness:  <  throat;  overfatigue  or  chill  in  damp
weather  brings  on  attacks  of  white  frothy  diarrhoea.


31  ^  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

On  approach  of  rain:  pains  in  nose  <.

Damp  winds:  sensitive  to.

After  cooling  rains:  attacks  of  debility  <.

Changeable  weather:  pain  in  nose  <.

Cool  air:  acute  catarrh  of  larynx  <;  cough  <.

Cold:  pain  in  eyes  <;  great  sensitiveness;  cough  <;  any
part  of  body  exposed  causes  cough;  skin  very  sensitive;
pains  in  tumors.

Cold  air:  deep,  wheezing  cough  <;  least  draught  causes
catarrh.

Cold  drink:  causes  toothache;  cough  <;  causes  cough.

Dry,  cold  wind:  causes  croup.

Exposure  to  chilly  night: cough  <.
^  Fever, l  iSensitiveness  to  open  air,  with  chilliness  and  fre-
quent nausea.

I  Great  chilliness  in  open  air;  must  get  to  warm  stove;

heat  feels  agreeable  but  does  not  relieve.

I I  Desire  to  be  covered  even  in  a  warm  room.

I  Internal  chill,  with  weariness  and  soreness  in  all  the
limbs.

■  Internal  shivering  from  below  upwards.

•  Violent  shaking  chill  with  chattering  of  teeth,  icy  cold-
ness and  paleness  of  face,  hands  and  feet,  unconscious-
ness and  coma.

■Violent  chill  every  morning,  at  6  or  7  o'clock,  without
subsequent  heat.

■  Chill  during  day,  alternating  with  heat  and  photophobia.

■  Excessive  shivering  followed  by  feverishness.

■  Chill  at  2  A.M.,  with  febrile  shivering  and  hot,  dry  skin.

■  Febrile  chill  from  4  to  8  p.m.,  or  in  night,  could  not  get

warm,  with  aggravation  of  all  complaints;  without  sub-
sequent heat.

■  Pain  <  during  febrile  chill  at  night.

■  Nightly  chill  in  bed,  with  aggravation  of  all  complaints.

■  iNettlerash,  with violent itching  and  stinging,  disap-

pears as  heat  begins.

■  Burning,  febrile  heat,  with  almost  unquenchable  thirst,

distressing  headache  and  slight  delirium,  lasting  from
4  P.M.  all  night,  without  chilliness.

■  Violent  fever  with  flushing  heat  in  face  and  head.

■  Dry  heat  of  body  at  night,  with  sweaty  hands,  which  can-

not tolerate  being  uncovered.

■  Dry  burning  heat,  with  redness  of  face  and  violent  thirst,

all  night.

■  Fever  blisters  around  mouth  during  pyrexia.

■  During  heat  larynx  much  affected,  hoarse,  weak  voice.

I  I  Morning  fever  preceded  by  bitter  taste  in  mouth,  re-
turning twice  a  day.
I  I  Fever,  without  chill,  4  p.m.,  lasting  all  night.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  32

I  Heat  very  slight  in  comparison  with  chill.

■  Flushes  of  heat,  with  sweat.

■  Patient  sweats  easily  from  least  exertion  and  turns  pale,

afterwards  burning  redness  of  face  and  heat  and  dryness
of  palms  of  hands.
■Sweats  easily  during  day,  from  every  exertion  of  mind  or
after  slight  motion.

■  ■Sweats  easily,  by  every,  even  slight  motion.

■  Frequent  breaking  out  of  sweat  over  body,  only  momen-

tary and  without  heat.
■Sweat  on  perineum,  groins  and  inside  of  thighs.

■  ■  Cold,  clammj^  frequently  sour,  offensive  smelling  sweat.

■  Night  or  morning  sweat,  with  thirst.

■Sweats  day  and  night,  without  relief;  or  first  can't  sweat
at  all,  and  then  sweats  profusely.

■  Profuse,  sour  smelling  sweat  at  night.
I  I  Sweat  before  midnight.

■  Itching  nettlerash precedes paroxysm; chill of  three

hours'  duration  followed  by  heat;  during  fever  head-
ache when  moving;  loss  of  consciousn  nreceded  b}^
vertigo;  bitter  taste  in  mouth;  white  coated  tongue;
vomiting  of  food ;  pain  and  rumbling  in  abdomen;  then
follows  sweat  which  covers  whole  body;  thirst  in  all
stages. ^Tertian  ague.

■  Paroxysm  preceded  by  an  itching  urticaria;  chill;  fever

with  thirst,  diarrhoea,  rumbling  in  abdomen,  bilious
vomiting,  formication  in  arms  and  dark  urine;  by  the
time  fever  has  passed  eruption  has  disappeared.  ^Quo-
tidian ague.

■  One  hour  before  chill,  thirst;  after  chill,  fine,  stinging

nettlerash,  with  bleeding  at  nose,  bitter  taste  in  mouth,
and  greenish  diarrhoea;  chill  followed  by  heat  with
sweat  and  discharge  of  reddish  urine;  during  termina-
tion of  latter  stage  eruption  disappeared;  during  apy-
rexia  great  debility,  yellow  color  of  face.  (^Tertian  in-
termittent.

■  Chill  generally  in  evening,  preceded  by  bitter  taste  in

mouth;  itching,  stinging  nettlerash  before  and  during
chill,  when  he  constantly  desires  to  be  coveired;  sweat
and  from  the  least  uncovering  chill  again.

■  Violent  chill,  8  p.m.,  with  chattering  of  teeth;  hands  and

feet  cold;  followed  by  heat  with  perspiration,  especially
on  chest  and  forehead,  with  slight  thirst.
■After  catching  cold,  heat  and  sweat,  with  thirst;  pain  in
1. hypochondrium and  arm; sweats again at night.
<9Tertian  ague.

■  Pain  in  limbs,  then  sweat  with  thirst,  followed  by  shak-

ing chill  with  thirst;  after  chill  belching,  bitter  taste,
yellow  tongue. ^Tertian  intermittent  fever.


33  ^  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

I  Chill,  then  thirst;  one  hour  later,  much  heat,  with  inter-
rupted sleep. ^Intermittent.

Apyrexia  never  clear,  constitutional  symptoms  always
present.

Type:  simple,  quotidian;  period  the  same  every  day.

I  Hectic  fever  with  intermittent  paroxysms.

■Catarrhal  fever;  general  exhaustion,  with  great  sensitive-
ness of  skin  to  touch  and  to  slightest  cold;  constant
chilliness,  with  sore  throat,  as  if  raw,  painful  on  swal-
lowing saliva;  muscles  of  nape  of  neck,  especially  at
sides  beneath  ears  very  painful  to  touch;  dry  cough;  no
appetite;  no  thirst;  sleepless  the  whole  night,  with
groaning  and  moaning.

■Scarlatina  preceded  by  cerebral  symptoms  and  parotitis;
restlessness  day  and  night;  mouth  could  not  be  opened,
eyes  injected  and  half  open;  continuous  fever;  involun-
tary evacuations;  temperature  low;  child  throws  itself
about  unconsciously;  dysuria;  puffing  under  lower
eyelids.

iScarle^^ '?"l' with  hydrops  and  albumen  in  urine;  con-
vulsions, bloated  face;  nosebleed.

I  After  scarlet  fever,  anasarca  and  ascites ;  urine  suppressed ;
tongue  clean;  next  day  convulsions  followed  by  vomit-
ing; conscious,  but  complains  of  a  sensation  as  if  a  veil
were  hanging  over  eyes;  urine  very  scanty;  legs  and
scrotum  greatly  swollen;  skin  cool,  pulse  little  accele-
rated and  pretty  full;  next  day  recurrence  of  convul-
sions with  more  or  less  unconsciousness  and  complete
blindness;  deafness.

■  Scarlatina;  sequela  retarding  convalescence;  croupy  in-

flammation of  nasal  -mucous  membrane;  swelling  of
parotid  and  submaxillary  glands;  early  decrease  of
urinary  secretion,  with  traces  of  albumen  and  cylindri-
cal tubuli;  fully  developed  dropsy  from  Bright's  disease.

■  After  scarlet  fever,  anasarca  and  convulsions.

■  Measles,  characterized  by  croupy  cough  <  in  morning,

without  expectoration  and  rattling  in  chest.
*' Attacks,  Periodicity. Attacks:  last  ten  minutes  then  end
in  hoarseness;  of  debility  last  two  or  three  hours.

After  scarlet  fever:  anasarca  and  ascites,  urine  suppressed,
tongue  clean;  next  day  convulsions  and  vomiting;
next  day  recurrence  of  convulsions.

One  hour  before  chill:  thirst.

For  three  hours:  chill  followed  by  heat.

Twice  a  day :  fever  and  bitter  taste.

Every  morning:  boring  headache;  dull  headache;  vomit-
ing; violent  chill  at  six  or  seven  o'clock.

Daily  attacks:  of  sudden  indescribable  debility.

VOL.  VI. — 3.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  34

Every  night:  pain  in  skull  bones;  chill.

Four  weeks  alter  slight  paralysis  another  attack  of  com-
plete paralysis  of  arms  and  legs.

Every  four  months:  scabby  eruptions  on  head.

Every  Winter:  whitlows.

Spring  and  Autumn:  bilious  attacks.

For  three  months:  1.  cornea  so  hazy  that  iris  could  hardly
be  seen.

Repeated  attacks:  tonsillitis.
^Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  painful  throbbing  in
temple;  headache  in  temple;  pressive  pain  in  occiput;
cornea  involved  from  periphery  toward  centre;  violent
pain  over  eyebrow;  pain  in  eye  <;  scurvy  formation
in  half  of  nose;  acute  inflammation  of  parotid  gland;
sensation  in  shoulder  as  of  something  creeping;  large
bubo,  stony  hard  in  groin;  stitching  pain  in  chest;  lies
immovable  on  side;  lies  on  hip-joint;  side  of  chest
arched  like  a  barrel  from  axilla  downward;  side  of
chest  dull  percussion  sound;  side  of  thorax  considera-
bly hollowed ;  pain  in  occipital  protuberance;  ulcer  on
last  rib;  red  tubercle  on  buttock;  swelling  of  hand;  in-
side of  thumb  swollen,  livid ;  whitlow  on  middle  finger;
suppuration  of  middle  joint  of  index  finger;  carbuncle
on  thigh;  chilly  creeping  sensation  in  leg;  numbness
of  arm  and  hand.

Left:  cornea  so  hazy  that  iris  could  hardly  be  seen;  severe
inflammation  in  cornea  and  iris ;  small  ulcer  on  cornea ;
excessive  lacbrymation  of  eye;  pupil  much  dilated;
unpleasant  sensation  in  side  of  nose;  discharge  of  bone
as  large  as  pea  from  nostril;  severe  neuralgic  pain  in
region  of  orbit;  bubo  in  groin;  upper  part  of  side  of
throat  tickling  causing  cough;  as  of  drops  of  hot  water
in  chest,  side  of  thorax  abnormally  bulging;  moist
rales  in  lung;  upper  part  of  side  of  thorax  dilated  back-
wards; fine  stitches  in  half  of  chest;  carbuncle  on  side
of  back ;  hip  pains  as  if  sprained ;  raised,  flat,  purplish
swelling  on  thigh;  cramp  in  hand  ;  mouth  drawn  to
side;  paralysis  of  side;  pain  in  hypochondrium  and
arm.

From  below  upwards:  internal  shivering.
^■^  Sensations. I  Bruised  sore  feeling  of  body,  <  from  any
motion.

I  Burning,  throbbing  pain,  with  chilliness.

■  Fainting  with  the  pains.

I  Painful  throbbing  in  different  parts.

As  if  he  could  murder  some  one ;  forehead  as  if  bruised ;
as  if  an  abscess  was  forming  in  head;  as  if  forehead
would  be  torn  out;  as  if  eyes  would  be  drawn  back  into


35  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

head;  as  if  skull  would  burst;  as  from  a  plug  in  head;
wabbling  as  from  water  in  brain ;  sense  of  swashing  in
head;  as  if  a  nail  was  driven  into  occiput;  as  of  sand
in  eye ;  eyelids  as  if  corroded ;  as  of  a  burn  in  eyelids ;
as  if  eyes  projected;  as  if  eyeballs  were  bruised;  nose  as
if  bruised;  as  if  blood  was  entering  tooth;  tooth  as  if
too  long;  pain  in  throat  as  from  an  intense  swelling;  as
of  a  plug  in  throat;  sensation  of  water  rising  in  cesoph-
agus;  as  if  she  had  eaten  sour  things;  as  of  a  hard  body
in  epigastrium;  as  if  stomach  hung  loose;  abdomen  as
if  bruised;  as  if  bladder  could  not  be  emptied  thor-
oughly ;  as  if  something  were  running  or  creeping  in  r.
shoulder-blade;  pain  as  if  in  bones  of  arms  and  thighs;
as  if  there  was  a  fishbone  in  throat;  as  of  dust  in  lungs;
nose  as  if  bruised ;  as  from  a  splinter  in  throat ;  as  if  hot
water  was  floating  in  chest;  as  of  drops  of  hot  water  in
1.  chest;  as  if  bruised  in  small  of  back  and  thighs;  as  if
a  weight  was  resting  on  it;  pain  as  if  bruised  in  os
humeri;  fingers  as  if  dead;  left  hip  pains  as  if  sprained;
knee  pains  as  if  bruised ;  pain  in  foot  as  after  taking  a
misstep;  as  if  something  w^as  sticking  in  throat;  as  if
he  would  suffocate;  throat  as  if  raw;  as  if  a  veil  was
hanging  over  eyes.

Pain:  in  skull  bones;  in  tumors  on  head;  in  pimples;  in
eyes  and  head;  on  inside  of  nose;  malar  bones;  in
tooth;  in  tip  of  tongue;  in  throat;  in  abdomen ;  in  kid-
neys; in  one  spot  of  larynx;  in  upper  part  of  throat;
extending  from  ear  to  ear;  in  top  of  chest;  in  r.  occipi-
tal protuberance;  in  neck;  in  small  of  back  and  lumbar
vertebra;  in  shoulder;  in  bottom  of  back;  around  waist
and  shoulders;  in  abdomen;  in  1.  hypochondrium  and
arm;  in  limbs;  in  bones.

Intense  pain:  in  throat;  in  carbuncle  on  back.

Violent  pain  in  head;  over  r.  eyebrow;  in  bony  part  of
nose;  in  thumb.

Sharp  pain:  in  head.

Severe  pain :  in  r.  tonsil ;  in  lower  extremities.

Tearing:  in  arms  extending  toward  suppuration  in  breast;
in  limbs  and  joints.

Cutting  pain:  in  outer  canthus;  in  abdomen;  in  thumb.

Lancinating  pain:  in  head;  in  tumors.

Violent  stitch  :  extending  into  great  toe.

Stitches:  in  head;  in  eyes;  in  region  of  liver;  in  region
of  spleen;  in  urethra;  extending  from  ear  to  ear;  in
larynx;  in  throat;  in  lungs;  in  heart;  in  back;  in
joints.

Pulse-like  stitches :  in  lower  portion  of  occiput.

Burning  stinging  pains:  on  toes.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  36

Stinging  pain :  in  lids.

Stinging:  of  ulcers  on  breast;  of  blister  on  thumb.

Stitching: in head; in throat; in hepatic region; in

larynx;  in  r.  side  of  chest.
Severe  neuralgic  pains:  in  region  of  1.  orbit;  of  face,  ex-
tending in  streaks  into  temple,  ear,  alse  nasi,  upper  lip.
Darting  pain :  in  ears.
Ulcerative  pain :  in  nostril ;  in  throat.
Drawing  pain:  in  nose;  in  tooth;  from  region  of  stomach

to  back;  between  scapulae; in  limbs.
Throbbing  pain:  in  r.  temple;  in  eyes;  in  ears;  in  tooth;

in  scrotum;  in  thumb;  in  last  joint  of  middle  finger,  r.

hand;  in  abscess.
Clawing:  in  umbilical  region.
Gnawing:  in  stomach.

Cramp:  in  calves;  in  soles  and  toes;  in  1.  hand.
Pinching:  in  abdomen.
Burrowing:  headache.

Boring:  headache;  at  root  of  nose;  in  r.  temple.
Burning,  bruised  pain :  in  eye.
Burning  pain:  in  eyes;  in  bones  above  orbits;  in  nose;  in

thumb.
Burning  itching:  on  scalp.
Burning:  of  body; in throat;  in stomach;  in rectum;

prepuce  and  pudenda;  in  urethra;  on  edges  of  ulcers;

in  throat;  from  pit  of  stomach  to  throat  and  ears;  in

ulcers.
Smarting  pain:  in  eyelids;  in  pimple  on  upper  lip;  in

throat;  of  vulva.
Pressive  pain:  in  eyes;  in  lids.
Aching:  in  forehead;  in  vertex;  in  eyes.
Constriction :  of  chest.
Contractive  sensation:  in  abdomen.
Tensive  aching  pain :  above  nose.
Dull  aching  pain :  in  stomach.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  limbs  and  joints;  in  back.
Acute  bruised  pain:  in  eyeballs.

Bruised  pain:  in  anterior  muscles  of  thighs;  in  limbs.
Oversensitiveness  to  pain.

Sore  pain:  on  dorsum  of  nose;  in  anus;  in  rectum.
Soreness: of  urethra; on  genitals;  of  scrotum;  of  folds

between  scrotum  and  thigh ;  inchest;  in  thighs;  of  all

limbs.
Hammering:  in  head.

Throbbing:  in  ears;  in  forehead  and  temples.
Pulsative  sensation :  in  ulcers  on  female  sexual  organs.
Violent  pressure :  in  throat.
Anxious  feeling:  about  heart.


37  HEPAH  SULPH.  CALC.

Pressure:  in  head;  in  eyes;  in  stomach;  beneath  larynx;
under  sternum;  sharp  in  small  of  back  and  lumbar
vertebrae;  on  brain  during  delivery.

Distressing  headache.

Dull  headache.

Empty,  sinking  feeling:  in  stomach.

8craping:  in  throat.

Raw  feeling:  in  side  of  nose. *

Scratching:  in  air  tubes.

Acrid  feeling:  in  stomach.

Unpleasant  sensation :  in  1.  side  of  nose.

Heaviness:  in  stomach.

Sensation  of  weight :  at  back  of  eyeballs.

Numbness :  of  r.  arm  and  hand.

Stiffness:  of  nape  of  neck ;  in  limbs.

Pricking:  in  both  heels;  in  tumors.

Tickling  sensation:  in  back  of  throat;  in  air  tubes;  in
soles  of  feet;  in  arm.

Tingling:  in  toes;  in  tips  of  fingers.

Dry  heat:  of  body.

Dryness:  of  palms  of  hands.

Creeping:  in  rectum;  in  r.  leg;  from  1.  hand  up  arm.

Formication:  in  arms.

Intensely  violent  itching:  in  bend  of  elbows;  on  hands,
wrists  and  in  palms;  in  lower  extremities.

Itching:  on  scalp;  in  ears;  in  nose;  around  mouth;  on
spot  beneath  lower  lip;  on  penis;  of  vulva;  of  nipples;
in  throat;  of  ears;  violent  at  bend  of  elbow ;  on  hands;
in  palms;  of  eruption  in  bends  of  joints;  dull  itching  of
soles  of  feet  and  palms  of  hands.
^  Tissues.  Child  looks  plump,  yet  the  flesh  is  flabby,  the
muscles  withered,  digestion  weak;  intolerant  of  pressure
about  stomach  after  eating;  food  temporarily  >  the  de-
bility; stools  green,  watery,  undigested,  or  white,  sour
smelling  and  painless;  <  during  day;  little  tendency
to  cerebral  symptoms;  glands  swollen  and  child  subject
to  catarrhs  from  least  draught  of  cold  air;  eczema,  <
morning,  when  it  itches,  burns  and  smarts.

■  Chlorosis  with  flatulent  dyspepsia,  delayed  menses  and

leucorrhoea.
I  Hard,  burning  nodosities.
I  Pains  in  bones;  caries.

■  Caries  with  watery,  foul  smelling  pus.

■  ■Rheumatic  swelling,  with  heat,  redness  and  sensation

as  if  sprained.

■  Useful  in  promoting  suppuration  when  a  former  acute

pain  suddenly  ceases  after  a  chilly  feeling,  and  is  fol-
lowed by  a  beating  pain,  or  throbbing,  indicating  forma-
tion of  pus.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  38

iStrumous  patients,  where  suppurative  process  has  not
been  arrested  by  Mercur.,  or  where  suppuration  seems
inevitable ;  it  hastens  formation  of  abscess.

iFor  elimination  of  foreign  bodies  by  process  of  suppu-
ration.

■  Suppuration  of  soft  parts,  of  carious  bones,  of  ulcers,  of

fistulous  tracts,  of  exanthems.

■  Lacerating  and  pricking  pains  in  tumors;  throbbing  and

beating  in  abscess;  skin  over  abscess  highly  inflamed,
hard,  hot  and  swelling;  pus  scanty,  bloody,  corroding,
smelling  like  old  cheese;  pains  <  night,  and  by  expos-
ure to  cold.
I  Felons.

■  Tendency  to  formation  of  abscesses.

■  Suppurative  adenitis  of  armpit  and  of  groin.

■  Suppurating  buboes  in  inguinal  and  axillary  regions.

■  Open  buboes,  which  do  not  heal,  especially  after  mer-

cury or  iodine.

■  Glandular swellings,  particularly  when obstinate and

after  abuse  of  mercury ;  suppuration  of  axillary  and  in-
guinal glands;  strumous  suppuration  of  joints  with  pro-
fuse sweats  day  and  night.

■  Absorption  of  old  glandular  swellings.

■  Anasarca  with  tendency  to  formation  of  boils,  on  hairy

scalp;  tonsils  and  submaxillary  glands  enlarged;  albu-
minous urine. ^After  scarlet  fever.

■  Anasarca  from  Bright's  disease,  especially  after  so-called

light  cases  of  scarlatina.

■  Preventive  of  dropsy  after  scarlet  fever  as  soon  as  traces

of  albumen  are  discovered  in  urine.
■The  child  has  a  sour  smell,  and  white,  fetid  evacuations.
■Sour  smell  of  the  excretions.

■  ■Scrofulosis.

■  Gout  with  arthritis,  without  tophus.

■Secondary  syphilis,  especially  after  mercury  and  iodide
of  potassium.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. ■■  Extreme  sensitive-
ness to  contact;  dread  of  contact,  out  of  proportion  to
actual  pain.

Touch:  scalp  sensitive;  nodosities  sore;  boils  on  head  and
neck;  head  and  eye;  cornea  sensitive;  slightest  touch
acute  bruised  pain;  swelling  in  lids  painful;  hemor-
rhage from  ear  on  slightest  touch ;  interior  of  nose  sen-
sitive; nose  very  sensitive;  bones  of  nose  sensitive;
pains  in  malar  bones  <;  bones  of  face  painful;  boils
very  sensitive;  ulceration  of  face,  intolerance  of  touch;
great  swelling  of  upper  lip;  gums  and  mouth  very  pain-
ful; renal  region  sensitive  to  slightest  touch ;  eruption


39  '  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

on  male  sexual  organs  sensitive;  larynx  and  trachea
sensitive;  skin  very  sensitive;  muscles  of  nape  of  neck
sore.

Pressure:  <  pain  in  one  spot  in  throat;  on  corrosive  blis-
ter causes  stinging.

Binding  head  up  tight:  >  pressure.

Has  to  loosen  clothing.

Riding  in  a  carriage:  vertigo.

When  shaking  head :  vertigo.

From  concussion:  morning  headache  <.

After  injury:  to  eye  violent  inflammation;  suppuration
of  middle  joint  of  r.  index  finger.
"^  Skin. Yellowness  of  the  skin.

llConstant  offensive  exhalations  from  body.

I  Child  smells  sour.

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  skin  to  touch  and  to  slightest  cold.
llUnhealthy,  suppurating  skin;  even  slight  injuries  mat-
urate; every  cut  or  hurt  suppurates.

■  Cracking  of  skin  and  smarting  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Bruised  sensation,  or  as  of  subcutaneous  ulceration,  <  by

contact.

■Suppression  of  exanthems,  followed  by  mania;  melan-
cholia; ophthalmia;  laryngismus  stridulus,  with  epilep-
tiform convulsions.

I  I  Erysipelatous  inflammation  on  external  parts.

■  Suppuration  of  long  inflamed  boils  on  body,  or  on  limbs,

commencing  with  blisters.

■  Burning  itching  on body, with white vesicles, after

scratching.

■  Itching  rash  in  bend  of  knees  and  elbows.

■  ■Eczema,  spreading  by  means  of  new  pimples  appearing

just  beyond  the  old  parts.

■  Humid  soreness  on  genitals,  scrotum  and  folds  between

scrotum  and  thighs.

■  Herpes  zoster,  from  spine  around  1.  side  to  median  line;

vesicles,  bullae, some  containing  dark  pus;  acute  neural-
gic pains  in  seat  of  eruption ;  vesicles  on  an  inflamed
base,  with  severe  itching  and  scratching,  and  nightly
aggravation.

■  Dry  and  slightly  cracked  condition  in  both  axillae,  espe-

cially left;  much  itching,  <  when  body  becomes  heated;
rash  generally  dry;  occasionally  slight  moisture  exuded;
similar  eruption  about  mouth;  severe  headache,  pain  <
back  of  eyeballs,  which  felt  as  if  they  would  be  drawn
back  into  head.

■  ■Nettlerash.

■  Chronic  urticaria,  eruption  chiefly  in  hands  and  fingers.

■  Crusta  lactea;  tetters;  rhagades;  excoriations.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  40

iFat,  pustular  and  crusty  itch.
I  Dry,  pimply  eruptions.

•  Miliary  rash  in  circles.

I  Adenitis;  acne  punctata;  boils;  crusta  lactea  and  serpi-
ginosa;  herpes;  intertrigo;  scurvy;  encysted  tumors;
varices.

•  Eruption  after  mercurialism.

•  Eruptions  very  sensitive  and  sore  to  touch.

•  Skin  inclined  to  ulcerate;  the  large  sore  surrounded  by

small  pustules.

•  Ulcers  very  sensitive  to  contact,  easily  bleeding,  burning

or  stinging,  with  corrosive  pains.

•  •Bleeding  of  an  ulcer,  even  on  slight  wiping.

•  Ulcers:  discharge  bloody  pus,  smelling  like  old  cheese;

edges  very  sensitive,  and  have  a  pulsating  sensation;
discharge  corroding;  burning  in  ulcers;  burning  in
night  only;  pains  resembling  recent  excoriations;
throbbing  and  shooting;  jagged  edges,  and  surrounded
with  pustules;  bluish,  bleeding  ulcers;  pus  laudable,
acrid  or  sanguineous;  fetid  and  ichorous.
•Margins  of  ulcers  elevated  and  spongy,  without  granula-
tions in  centre.

•  Little  pimples  or  smooth  ulcers  surrounding  principal

ulceration.

•  Severe  stitching  pain  in  ulcers  when  laughing;  burning

and  throbbing  at  night.

•  The  ulcer  itches  very  much.

•  Stinging  burning  of  edges  of  ulcers.

•  •Mercurial  ulcers.

•  Warts  become  inflamed  and  stinging,  as  if  ulceration

would  set  in.

•  Scabs  easily  torn  off,  leaving  a  raw  and  bleeding  surface.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Torpid,  lymphatic  consti-
tutions; persons  with  light  hair  and  complexion,  slow  to
act,  muscles  soft  and  flabby.

•Slow,  torpid  constitutions,  with  lax  fibre  and  light  hair;
great  sensitiveness  to  slightest  contact  of  ulcers,  erup-
tions and  parts  affected.

•  Figure  lean,  complexion  bilious;  pimply  and  subject  to

erysipelatous  inflammation;  pallor  of  face  when  excited
by  movement,  or  very  red  and  flushed.
•Suitable  to  scrofulous  and  debilitated  subjects.

•  Psoric  scrofulous  diathesis.

•  Psora  of  children.

•Strumous,  outrageously  cross  children.

•  Purulent  diathesis,  great  tendency  to  suppuration.
Child,  set.  4J  months;  crusta  lactea.

Girl,  set.  J  year,  weak,  scrofulous;  laryngismus  stridulus.


41  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.

Boy,  set.  |  year;  croup.

Strong  boy,  set.  8  months,  since  birth  has  had  an  eczema
of  face  and  head,  which  five  weeks  ago  began  to  get  bet-
ter of  itself,  as  eruption  was  nearly  healed,  epileptiform
spasms  set  in;  laryngismus  stridulus.

Boy,  set.  21  months;  dropsy  after  scarlet  fever.

Boy,  set.  2,  had  tinea  capitis,  for  which  Sabad.  was  given ;
inflammation  of  eyes.

Boy,  set.  2J;  croup.

Boy,  set.  2J;  croup.

Boy,  set.  3;  parotitis.

Boy,  set.  3;  scarlet  fever.

Child,  set.  3|;  parotitis.

Boy,  set.  4;  croup.

Girl,  set.  4,  lively  temperament;  croup.

Boy,  set.  4|,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  pale  face,  of  mild,  mis-
chievous disposition,  had  pneumonia  when  an  infant;
emphysema.

Boy,  set.  5,  healthy  and  strong;  pleurisy.

Boy,  set.  5;  croup.

Boy,  set.  5,  weak,  excitable,  after  a  catarrh  which  had
lasted  eight  days;  croup.

Boy,  set.  6,  delicate,  weak,  muscles  flabby,  face  puffed,
upper  lip  swollen,  eyes  sunken,  frequent  swelling  of
glands  of  neck;  abnormal  passages  from  bowels.  ^Oph-
thalmia.

Boy,  set.  6,  twenty  wrecks  after  pneumonia,  treated  allo-
pathically;  pleuro-pneumonia  of  r.  side,  with  absorption
of  pleuritic  exudation,  but  continued  presence  of  pneu-
monic infiltration  in  a  state  of  purulent  dissolution.

Boy,  set.  7,  scrofulous  constitution;  ulceration  of  cornea.

Boy,  set.  8 ;  anasarca  and  convulsions.

Boy,  set.  12;  anasarca  and  convulsions.

Boy,  set.  13,  suffering  one  year;  ozsena.

Boy,  set.  16,  robust,  blonde,  exposed  to  chills  and  must  fre-
quently strain  his  sight;  inflammation  of  glands  of  eye-
lids.

Girl;  whitlow.

Young  girl,  three  months  after  puberty;  mind  affection.

Mr.  K.,  set.  18,  fast-living,  German;  affection  of  cheek.

Girl,  set.  18,  strong,  healthy,  very  excitable  and  has  been
suffering  three  months;  affection  of  throat.

Girl,  set.  18,  after  catching  cold;  laryngitis.

Miss  M.,  set.  18;  chest  troubles  succeeding  repelled  itch.

Needle-woman,  set.  19;  whitlows.

Young  man,  while  fencing,  received  small,  scarcely  visible
fragment  of  steel  in  eye,  which  stuck  into  cornea;  trau-
matic ophthalmia.


HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC.  42

Housemaid,  set.  22;  whitlow.

Miss  S.,  aet.  24,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  pale  face;  angina  pec-
toris.

Woman,  single,  set.  25,  menstruation  scanty,  suffering  for
three  years;  skin  eruption.

Tenor  singer,  three  years  ago  had  an  herpetic  eruption  in
epigastric  region  which  returned  after  the  asthma  had
been  cured;  asthma.

Stonecutter,  gonorrhoea  one  year  ago,  had  taken  much
mercury,  struck  in  eye  by  small  piece  of  stone ;  hypopyon.

Waiter,  after  catching  cold  when  going  into  cellar;  pains
in  foot.

Mr.  R.,  had  been  suffering  for  two  weeks,  Arsen.  and  Laches.
without  benefit;  carbuncle.

Man,  after  drinking  iced  milk  while  in  a  heated  condition;
sensation  as  if  a  splinter  or  fishbone  were  sticking  in
throat.

Woman,  psoric  constitution;  catarrhal  inflammation  of
eyes.

Woman,  suffering  for  years;  indigestion.

Professional  man,  afflicted  for  twenty  years,  has  frequently
taken  mercury ;  bilious  attacks.

Sculptor,  suffering  for  twent^'-five  years,  has  been  over-
dosed with  mercury;  chronic  tonsillitis.

Man,  set.  30;  kidney  disease.

Man,  eet.  30;  syphilitic  bubo.

Man,  set.  30;  bubo.

Woman,  set.  33,  suffered  severely  from  rheumatic  pains,
no  history  of  syphilis;  keratitis  parenchymatosa.

Man,  set.  34,  married,  tall,  slender,  dark  complexion,  lym-
phatic, torpid  temperament,  has  epilepsy  and  heart  dis-
ease, also  a  recurring  eruption  which  he  treated  with
binoxide  of  mercury;  attacks  of  debility.

Man,  set.  36,  phlegmatic  temperament,  healthy,  strong  con-
stitution, for  half  a  year  had  itch,  after  bodily  exhaus-
tion slept  upon  ground ;  affection  of  brain.

Unmarried  woman,  set.  36,  has  had  repeated  attacks  since
eighteenth  3^ear;  father  affected  same  way;  tonsillitis.

Man,  set.  36,  another  set.  45;  chronic  tracheitis.

Miss  H.,  set.  37,  supposed  she  was  bitten  by  some  insect  on
forearm;  carbuncle.
, Man,  set.  37,  big,  strong,  after  suppressed  syphilitic  erup-
tion; paralysis.

Woman,  set.  38,  weak  and  flabby,  scrofulous  during  youth,
corneitis;  hypopyon.

Mrs.  P.,  set.  40;  affection  of  nose.

Scrofulous  woman,  set.  40,  subject  to  suppurating  sore
throat;  tonsillitis.


3  HEPAR  SULPH.  CALC— HIPPOMANES.

Mr.  W.,  set.  40 ;  carbuncle.

Woman,  set.  44,  has  suffered  for  many  years,  has  taken

large  doses  of  quinine  and  mercury;  hepatic  and  uterine

disease.
Man,  set.  45;  ill  effects  of  Merc.  sol.
Man,  set.  47,  carbuncle.

Widow,  set.  52,  suffering  six  years;  spinal  irritation.
Mrs.  H.,  set.  about  60,  large,  fleshy  woman  with  frequent

attacks  of  jaundice;  carbuncle.
Patient,  set.  63,  sick  since  five  years;  bronchial  catarrh.
Man,  set.  67,  has  spent  much  of  his  life  in  foreign  stations,

mercurial  history;  hepatogenous  jaundice.
Relations. Antidoted  by:  Acet.  ac,  Bellad.,  Chamom.,  Silic.
It  antidotes:  mercurial  and  other  metallic  preparations;

iodine,  and  especially  the  iodide  of  potash;  cod-liver  oil.
Removes  weakening  effects  of  ether.
Compatible:  Acofi.,  Arnic,  Bellad.,  Laches.,  Mercur.,  Nitr.  ac,

Silic,  8pongia,  Zincum.
Compare:  Alumina  (constipation);  Calc.  ost.,  Jodum,  Kali

bich.,  Mercur.,  Rheum,  Sulphur.
Complementary:  to  Calend.,  in  injuries.


HIPPOMANES.

A  normally  white,  usually  dark  olive  green,  soft,  glutinous,  mucous  substance,
of  a  urinous  odor,  which  floats  in  the  allantois  fluid,  or  is  attached  to  the  allantois
membrane  of  the  mare  or  cow  chiefly  during  the  last  months  of  pregnancy.

Triturations  were  made  from  the  dried  substance  obtained  from  Rev.  John
Helfrich  (one  of  the  provers  and  an  associate  of  the  Allentown  Academy)  who  took
it  from  the  tongue  of  a  newly  born  filly.

The  provings  are  by  Hering,  Helfrich,  Floto,  Reichhelm,  Husman  and  Neid-
hard. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  589.

As  the  remedy  has  not,  thus  far,  had  frequent  clinical  application,  we  give
but  a  condensed  extract  from  the  provings.

^  Mind. 1 1  Melancholy;  a  young  man  sits  in  the  corner  and
does  not  want  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  world.
Restlessness;  must  move  from  place  to  place.
^  Sensorium. Sensation  of  lightness  in  head.
^  Inner  Head. Pressive  pain  in  temples.

Headache,  with  giddiness,  heat  in  head,  sleepiness,  yawn-
ing, thirst.
Violent  headache ;  heaviness  on  vertex ;  when  walking  it
feels  as  if  head  would  fall  forward.


HIPPOMANES.  44

Headache  >  when  lying  on  painful  side; <  when  walk-
ing in  sun.
*  Outer  Head. The  head  feels  so  heavy  that  it  falls  forward
if  he  raises  himself.
The  hair  becomes  nearly  dry ;  falling  off  of  hair.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. The  light  of  the  candle  looks  blue.
Stitches  in  eyes  (with  headache).

Painfuhiess  of  eyes  when  moving  them,  with  headache.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sensation  of  coldness,  when  drawing  t'
air  in.
Bleeding  of  nose  in  morning.
^  Lower  Face. Involuntary  twitching  of  under  lip.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste  in  mouth.

Tongue  coated  white,  with  redness  of  tip.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Increased  secretion  of  saliva,  with  headache

or  sore  throat.
^^  Throat. Painfulness  of  1.  tonsil.

Sensation  of  plug  in  throat  (1.  side).
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Desire  for  acids,

and  aversion  to  sweet  things.
^•^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,

especially  in  a  draft  of  air,  with  headache.
^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Hey  coldness  in  stomach.

Sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach  (and  head).
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Soft  stool,  with  vomiting; discharge
of  prostatic  fluid  after  micturition.
Hard  stool,  in  balls.
Spasmodic  contraction  of  sphincter  ani.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  discharge  of  watery  urine.

Urine  discharged  in  a  small  stream,  with  straining — it

feels  as  if  a  swelling  retarded  it;  prostatitis.
Drawing  pain  from  anus  through  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  increased.
Prostatitis.

Drawing  pain  in  testicles.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menstruation  too  early.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Larynx

feels  raw,  as  if  air  were  too  cold.
'^'^  Respiration. Tickling  in  throat  when  breathing.
^^  Cough. Cough,  barking,  during  sleep.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Left  arm  feels  as  if  paralyzed.
I  I  Violent  pain  in  wrists. ^Chorea.
I  1  Paralysis  of  wrist,  every  morning  in  bed.
Sensation  in  wrist  as  if  sprained,  especially  left.
Great  weakness  of  hands  and  fingers,  so  that  he  cannot

hold  anything.
Formication  on  r.  hand.


45  -  HIPPOMANES.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Weakness,  and  as  if  sprained,  in  knees.

Weakness  and  sensation  of  dryness  in  foot  joints  and  soles
of  feet.

Cramps  in  soles  of  feet,  in  evening.

Cold  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Heaviness  in  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying:  on  painful  side,  head-
ache >.

Desire  to  lie  down,  with  no  relief  in  doing  so.

If  he  raises  himself:  head  feels  heavy.

Must  move  from  place  to  place.

Walking:  head  feels  as  if  it  would  fall  forward;  in  sun
headache  <.
^^  Nerves. I Great  weakness  of  body  and  mind.

Great  weakness  and  debility,  with  pale  face.

Desire  to  lie  down,  with  no  relief  on  doing  so.

I  Chorea.
^^  Time. Morning:  bleeding  of  nose.

Evening:  cramps  in  soles  of  feet;  heat,  with  dull  headache.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Sun :  <  headache.

Draft  of  air :  nausea.

Chill:  >  being  warmly  covered  in  bed.
*"  Fever. Chill,  beginning  in  back.

Chill,  >  being  warmly  covered  in  bed.

Heat  in  evening,  with  dull  headache.
**  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  morning  in  bed: paralysis

of  wrists.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  formication  on  hand.

Left:  painfulness  of  tonsil;  sensation  of  plug  in  throat;
stitches  in  side  of  chest;  arm  feels  paralyzed.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  head  would  fall  forward  when  walking;
as  of  a  plug  in  throat;  as  if  a  swelling  retarded  urine;
as  if  air  was  too  cold  for  larynx;  left  arm  feels  as  if
paralyzed ;  left  wrist  as  if  sprained.

Violent  pain : in  head ;  in  wrists.

Stitches:  in  eyes;  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Drawing  pain:  in  testicles;  from  anus  through  urethra.

Cramps :  in  soles  of  feet.

Dull  headache.

Painfulness:  of  eyes;  of  1.  tonsil.

Heat:  in  head.

Heaviness:  on  vertex;  in  limbs.

Raw  feeling:  in  larynx.

Sensation  of  dryness :  in  foot  joints  and  soles  of  feet.

Sensation  of  emptiness:  in  stomach.

Great  weakness:  of  hands  and  fingers;  of  foot  joints  and
soles  of  feet;  of  body  and  mind.

Lightness:  in  head.


HIPPOMANES— HIPPOZ^NIK  46

Tickling:  in  throat.

Formication :  on  r.  hand.

Itching :  on  skin,  especially  on  chest,  between  shoulders.

Coldness :  in  nose  when  drawing  air  in ;  in  stomach.
^^  Skin. I  I  Itching  as  from  flannel on  skin, especially on

chest  and  between  shoulders.
^^  Stages  of  Life, Constitution, i  After  growing  too  fast.

^Chorea.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  coffee.

Caustic,  relieved  paralysis  of  wrist.


HIPPOZiENIN.

Glanderine  and  Farcine.  A  Nosode.

Introduced  by  Drysdale.

The  extracts  (made  by  Hering)  are  from  Wilkinson,  Spinola,  Bollinger
(Ziemsen)  and  Virchow.  They  are  the  effects  observed  on  horses  and  men  affected  •
with  this  disease.

Gl.  =  Glanderine.  F.  =  Farcine.  Symptoms  so  marked  are  suggested  for
clinical  use  by  Wilkinson.

Clinical  Authorities. — Ozcena,  Wilkinson,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  627 ;  Mor-
gan, Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  79;  Chronic  ozcena,  Hiller,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  381;
Diphtheria,  Wilkinson,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  627 ;  Bronchitis,  Wilkinson,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  15,  p.  625;  Putrid  fever,  Wilkinson,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  627 ;  Glanchroid  influ-
enza, Baer,  Eaue's  Kec,  1873,  p.  108 ;  Scrofulous  swelling  of  parotid  glaml,  Nichols,
Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  345.

Cases  by  Berridge  not  found.

^  Sensorium. Fainting  turns  with  headache.

^  Inner  Head. Inflammation  of  membranes  of  brain.

Purulent  collections  between  bones  of  skull  and  dura  mater.

Scattered  abscesses  in  brain  substance.

Tubercles  may  appear  in  periosteum  of  skull,  in  dura
mater,  in  plexus  choroides.

A  diffused  myelitis  malleosa,  attributable  to  infiltration.
*  Outer  Head. Bones  of  skull  and  face,  most  frontal,  necrosed.

Hair  loses  its  glisten. Gl.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  full  of  tears  or  slime.

Pupils  dilated,  with  collapse.

Papules  on  choroid  coat  of  eye.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Tinkling  sounds  in  ears.

Hoarse  and  deaf,  before  fatal  termination.


47  HIPPOZ^NIN.

Inflammation  of  parotid  gland.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Swelling  and  redness  of  nose  and  adja-
cent parts,  with  severe  pain.

Difl'used  redness  of  nose  spreading  over  forehead  and  face.

Upper  portion  of  nose  specially  sensitive  to  touch,  exhibit-
ing a  diffuse,  erysipelatous  swelling.

Erysipelas  especially  upon  nose  and  face.

Gangrenous  erysipelas  of  external  integuments  of  nose,
discharge  of  pus  and  viscid  mucus  down  one  or  both
nostrils. Gl.

Discharge  of  a  thin,  viscid,  light  colored  mucus  from  nose.

Offensive  muco-purulent  discharge  from  nose.

Nasal  secretions  have  a  foul  appearance,  before  fatal  ter-
mination.

Nasal  discharge  often  from  one  side  only.

Discharge  from  nose  becomes  later  of  a  thicker  consistency,
more  purulent,  often  of  a  brownish-yellow  color,  san-
guineous and  offensive.

I  Catarrh:  nose  inflamed  with  thick  and  tinged  defluxion;
tonsils  swollen,  fauces  gorged. Gl.

■  Obstinate  catarrh. Gl.
Ozsena;  ulcers  inside  of  nose.

Discharge:  often  one-sided,  albuminous,  tough,  viscous,
discolored,  gray,  greenish,  even  bloody  and  offensive;
acrid,  corroding.

One  nostril  appears  smaller  from  swelling.

Little  yellow  pustules  size  of  a  hemp  seed  on  nose.

Ulcers  deep,  lard-like  fundus;  edges  pectinated,  elevated,
viscous  secretion,  no  scurfs,  most  in  groups  at  first  size  of
a  lentil,  running  together.

Ulcerations  progress  from  below  upwards.

I  Chronic  ozsena.

Small  papules  of  yellowish  color  are  seated  upon  mucous
membrane  of  nose.

Distinct  tubercles  situated  mostly  upon  alee  nasi.

Pustules  and  ulcers  on  mucous  membrane  of  nose,  ter-
minating in  erosion  of  perichondrium  and  perforation
of  septum  and  vomer.

Nostrils  covered  with  foul,  crustaceous  deposits.

Nostrils  covered  with  a  viscous  phlegm. Gl.

■  Nose  and  mouth  ulcerated. ^Catarrh. Gl.
I  I  Malignant  ozsena.

Gangrene  of  swollen  root  of  nose.

Cartilages  of  nose  become  exposed  and  necrosed,  septum,

vomer  and  palatebone  disorganized.
Cartilages  of  the  nose  are  destroyed. Gl.
i  Caries  of  nasal  bones.
Catarrhal,  inflammatory,  ulcerative  processes  in  other  mu-


HIPPOZ^NIN.  48

cous  membranes  than  of  nose,  conjunctiva  of  eyes,  rau-
cous membranes  of  mouth,  gums,  fauces  and  entire  res-
piratory canal.

iCliecks  the  liability  to  catarrhal  affection. Gl.
^  Lower  Face. Maxillary  gland  swollen,  like  a  distinct  ball
or  sausage,  firmly  attached  to  the  maxilla,  uneven,  rug-
ged, tuberculated; mostly painless, burning only  at
times.

Submaxillary  and  sublingual  glands  swollen  and  painful
at  times;  abscesses  are  formed  which  open  externally.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Gums  show  a  tendency  to  bleed.

Gums  covered  with  a  black,  sooty  deposit.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Act  of  speaking  difficult.

Tongue  dry,  thickly  covered  with  a  black,  sooty  deposit.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  mucous  membranes  of  mouth
and  pharynx,  before  fatal  termination.

Stomatitis.

Ulcers  appear  in  mouth.

i  Buccal  passages  filled  with  tenacious  lymph  and  mucus.
(^Scarlatina. Gl.

Croupous  exudation  upon  mucous  membrane  of  mouth
and  throat.

■Apparently  suffocating  from  diphtheritis  in  mouth  and
nose,  agonized  with  buccal  ulcerations. ^Diphtheria.  Gl.

\  Odor  of  breath  putrid. ^Scarlatina. Gl.

■  Scrofulous  swelling  of  1.  parotid  gland  in  a  child.
13  Throat. Ulcerations  upon  velum  of  palate.

I  Swollen  tonsils  closing  posterior  channels.  ^Scarlatina.
Increased  difficulty  in  swallowing,  before  fatal  termination.
Mucous  membrane  of  fauces  ulcerated,  yellow,  like  bacon.
Upon  mucous  membrane  of  pharynx  ecchymoses,  redness,

swelling,  eruptions  and  foul  ulcers.
Inflamed  condition  of  pharynx  makes  swallowing  difficult.

■  Patient apparently suffocating from diphtheritis in

mouth  and  nose;  buccal  ulceration  present.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Appetite  failing;

loss  of  appetite. Gl.
Thirst  excessive,  especially  with  diarrhoea.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Gastrointestinal catarrh ;

loss  of  appetite,  indigestion,  constipation,  in  later  stage

diarrhoea.
Large  ecchymoses  on  mucous  lining  of  stomach.
Papula  shaped  formations  in  substance  of  lining  mem-
brane of  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. Liver  greatly enlarged, often showing

signs  of  fatty  degeneration.
Hepatitis  with  gangrenous  and  ulcerative  inflammation

of  gall  ducts.
Enlargement  of  spleen.


23


24


49  HIPPOZiENIN.

Spleen  enlarged,  filled  with  blood ;  softened  and  liquified,
of  a  grayish-red  or  dark  color;  wedge-shaped  abscesses
in  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. Inguinal  glands  swollen.

^'^  Stool  and  Rectum. Colliquative  diarrhoea  with  a  general
cachexia  and  exhaustion  precede  the  fatal  termination.

Involuntary  evacuations  with  collapse.

Constipation.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Tubercles  and  abscesses  in  kidneys.

Suppuration  in  one  kidney. Gl.

Albumen  in  urine,  also  leucine  and  tyrosine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Tubercles  and  abscesses :  of  glans
penis;  of  testicles ; in  kidneys.

Sarcocele  malleosa.

Swelling  and  inflammation  of  testicles. Gl.

:'  Syphilis.
Female  Sexual  Organs. Slimy  discharge  from  vagina.

i  Uterine  phlebitis. F,
^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Abortion.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx Trachea  and  Bronchia. Papules
and  ulcerations  m  frontal  sniuses,  pharynx,  larynx  and
trachea.

Extensive  lesions  in  larynx,  subsequent  oedema  of  glottis.

Hoarseness  from  the  altered  condition  of  larynx.

■  Neglected  cases  of  bronchitis.

1 1  Bronchitis:  in  the  worst  forms;  especially  in  elderly  per-
sons; where  suffocation  from  excessive  secretion  is  im-
mment. Gl.
^Respiration Noisy breathing; loud snoring  respiration
before  fatal  termination ;  breath  fetid.

Respiration  short  and  irregular,  with  collapse.

Slight  difficulty  in  breathing.

II  Cough  and  obstructed  respiration,  resulting  from  cic-
atricial contraction  of  mucous  membrane  of  nose  and
larynx;  had  lasted  eleven  years;  patient  jDresented
picture  of  decided  cachexia.

Respiration  at  first  partially  impeded,  later  absolute  dysp-
noea.

Actual  dyspnoea  from  affection  of  larynx  or  lungs.

1 1  Suffocation  from  excessive  secretions. ^Bronchitis. Gl.

•  Bronchial  asthma. Gl.
^  Cough. Irritative  cough.

Slight  cough  and  hoarseness,  sputa  often  bloody.

I  Cough  comenced  at  Christmas  and  lasted  till  June. Gl.

I  Whooping  cough. Gl.

Patients  cough  severely  and  expectorate  profusely,  sputa
usually  bearing  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  discharge
from  the  nostrils.

VOL.  VI. — 4.


HIPPOZ^NIK  50

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, Extensive  rhonchi  are  heard
over  walls  of  chest.

Large  sections  of  lungs  in  a  state  of  gray  hepatization  and
purulent  infiltration,  while  other  portions  are  in  a  state
of  collateral  hypersemia.

Pneumonia  with  rysty  sputa. Gl.

Pneumonia  malleosa;  nodules  larger,  forming  isolated
hepatizations  and  abscesses.

One  or  two  infarctions  in  lungs,  size  of  a  bean  developed
and  around  wdiich  lie  small  abscesses.

Nodules  in  lung  size  of  a  pea,  of  a  gray  whitish  appear-
ance and  a  firm,  lardaceous  consistence.

Tubercles  in  lungs.

Tubercles,  size  of  millet  seed  to  a  pea,  of  a  firm  texture  and
of  a  gray,  yellowish  or  reddish  color.

Tubercles  in  lungs  are  never  missed  in  glanders,  rarely
in  farcy.

Tubercles  in  lungs,  nodules  and  specific  inflammatory
processes.

Small  tubercles  upon  pleura;  subpleural  ecchymoses.

Pulmonary  abscesses  with  pleuritis.

:  Given  in  phthisis,  it  diminishes  expectoration,  abates
constantly  recurring  aggravations  of  inflammation,  and
checks  liability  to  catarrhal  aff'ections.

Suppuration  of  lungs. Gl.

I  Lung  diseases  of  cattle. F.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  very  frequent  and

small  in  volume,  110  to  120;  in  some  cases  retarded.
^^  Upper  Limbs. With  sore  finger,  swelling  of  arm,  phleg-
monous and  erysipelatous  with  pustules  and  ulcers.
^  Lower  Limbs. •  Hip  disease.

':  Psoas  and  lumbar  abscesses. F.

i  Old  bad  legs  (ulcers). Gl.

Suppuration  in  each  knee-joint;  a  large  quantity  of  pus
in  bursa  of  knee-joint. Gl.

•  Anasarca  of  lower  limbs. F.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Obscure  pain  in  limbs,  most  in  mus-
cles and  joints.
^'^  Nerves. Weakness,  fatigue,  general  discomfort;  they  give
up  their  business  (not  in  carbuncle).

Malaise,  fatigue,  prostration,  accompanied  by  headache
and  chills.

General  prostration  with  considerable  emaciation.
^  Sleep. Insomnia  and  great  restlessness.

Nocturnal  delirium.
*''  Fever, Frequent  chilliness. Gl.

Chills  and  fever  in  cases  of  abscesses  or  ulcers.


HIPPOZ^NIN.

Skin  becomes  cool  with  collapse.

Symptoms  like  the  early  stage  of  typhoid  fever.

Fever  exacerbations  irregular  or  of  a  regular  intermittent
character.

Febrile  disturbances  constantly  increasing.

As  the  pains  become  more  severe,  regular  fever  turns  often
supervene  or  a  continued  fever  prevails.

Fever  when  a  series  of  abscesses  follow  in  rapid  succession.

Temperature  reaches  104°  F.  and  over.

Fever  raging  without  intermission,  even  in  morning,  tem-
perature 106°  F.

Fever  increases,  pulse  grows  weaker,  delirium  sets  in,
stupor.

I  Putrid  fever. Gl.
Plague. Gl.

May  be  tried  in  scarlatina,  where  odor  of  breath  is  putrid,

buccal  passages  filled  with  tenacious  lymph  and  mucus,

tonsils  greatly  swollen,

"  Attacks, Periodicity. At  times: burning in  maxillary

glands; pain  in  submaxillary  and  sublingual  glands.

Cough  commenced  at  Christmas  and  lasted  till  June.

Lasted  eleven  years:  cough  and  obstructed  respiration.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  scrofulous  swelling  of  pa-
rotid gland.
*^  Sensations.  Pain  is  excessive  in  acute  articular  rheumatism.

Attacks  of  muscular  cramps  before  fatal  termination.

Violent  pains:  in  joints  and  muscles.

Severe  pain:  in  nose  and  adjacent  parts.

Obscure  pain:  in  limbs;  in  muscles  and  joints.

Painfulness:  of  tumors  and  abscesses;  of  submaxillary
and  sublingual  glands.

Painful  swelling:  of  joints.

Burning:  in  maxillary  glands.

Dryness:  of  mucous  membranes  of  mouth  and  pharynx.
**  Tissues. Greatly  debilitated  and  emaciated,  presenting  a
very  similar  appearance  to  that  seen  in  chronic  tuber-
culosis with  hectic  fever.

Extrusion  of  contents  overbalances  supply  of  nutrition.

Numerous  ecchymoses  in  internal  organs.

Inflammation  of  lymphatic  vessels  and  swelling  of  glands.

':  Lymphatic  swellings  and  inflaftimation.

On  legs,  head,  sides,  chest,  near  genitals,  in  long  strings,
hard  swellings  from  size  of  a  pea  to  that  of  a  hazel  or
walnut ;  after  enlarging  they  break  open  and  discharge
a  viscous,  yellow  brownish  ichor.

•  Phlegmasia  dolens.

Entire  process  presents  a  strong  resemblance  to  certain
forms  of  pyaemia.


HIPPOZ^NIN.  52

I  Pyaemia  and  inflammation  of  veins  and  lymphatics,  par-
ticularly when  pus  is  formed.

The  mucous  membranes  (first  of  all  that  of  the  nose)
manifest  symptoms  of  inflammatory  and  ulcerative
disease.

Inflammatory  aff'ection  of  mucous  membrane  of  mouth
followed  by  swelling  of  tongue,  salivation,  ulcers
upon  gums  and  throat,  finally  angina.

Purulent  inflammation  in  serous  membranes,  especially
lining  membrane  of  joints,  particularly  of  knee,  hips
and  hand.

Painful  swelling  of  joints.

Pain  in  joints  and  muscles  become  violent.

i  Enlarged  joints.

Periarticular  nonfluctuating  tumefactions.

Large  projecting  tumors  and  abscesses  becoming  ex-
tremely painful  and  hard,  then  gradually  changing  to
a  doughy  consistence;  fluctuating;  after  opening,  appear
as  extensive  ulcers  with  irregular  edges  covered  with  a
white  deposit.

The  specific  nodules  mostly  in  biceps,  flexors  of  forearm,
rectus,  pectoralis  and  at  point  of  insertion  of  deltoid.

Beneath  larger  blebs  well  defined  sloughs  of  a  dull  gray
color.

I  I  Putrescence,  destructive,  quasi  malignant  ulcerative
tendency  to  decomposition  of  tissues. Gl.

1  Malignant  erysipelas,  particularly  if  attended  with  large
formation  of  pus,  destruction  of  parts. Gl.

:  Dropsy.

All  the  attacked  parts  swell,  get  cedematous.

Beneath  oedema  are  small  nodules,  varying  in  size  and
filled  with  reddish  pus.

Skin  cracks  in  bend  of  joints,  a  brownish  fluid  oozes  out,
and  gets  ulcerous.

Purulent  infiltrations  of  skin  and  cellular  tissues,  especially
upon  forehead  and  eyelids  and  in  vicinity  of  joints.

Abscesses  in  various  parts  of  body  in  course  of  absorbents.

I  Carbuncle.

I  Plague.
Cancer.
Elephantiasis.

Obstinate  syphilitic  sores,  with  great  fetor.
Scrofula.

I  Abates  recurring  aggravation  of  inflammation.

i  Murrain  of  cattle.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  upper  por-
tion of  nose  sensitive.


53  HIPPOZ^NIN.

i  Putrid  bedsores. Gl.
^®  Skin. Erythema,  erysipelatous  or  phlegmonous  processes,
abscesses,  pustules  and  ulcers  are  spread  so  extensively
over  surface  of  body  that  hardly  any  part  remains  free.

■  Malignant  erysipelas,  particularly  if  attended  by  large

formations  of  pus,  and  destruction  of  parts. Gl.

:  Scarlatina. Gl.

Sensation  of  pain  on  part  of  inoculation  followed  by  a  red-
ness and  inflammation,  fever,  finally  swollen,  inflamed
lymphatic  vessels.

On  different  parts  of  skin  red  spots,  changing  into  pus-
tules like  those  of  small-pox,  less  often  into  pemphigus
blebs.

Pustules  of  size  of  pea  often  arise  in  large  numbers,  burst-
ing by  discharging  a  thick,  mucous,  sanguineous  pus,
often  emitting  an  offensive  odor.

Surrounding  subfascial  abscesses  the  numerous  layers
are  pale,  discolored  and  readily  torn.

Large  abscesses  upon  different  regions  of  the  body,  with
inflamed  lymphatic  vessels  and  glands.

New  abscesses  are  constantly  forming  in  vicinity  of  the
ulcers,  especially  about  joints.

Contents  of  abscesses  often  tinged  with  blood,  have  a  more
viscous  consistence,  while  connective  tissue  or  muscular
substance  is  softened.
Malignant  pustule. Gl.
Carbuncle. GL

Boils  and  ulcers.

i  Confluent  small-pox. Gl.

i  Malignant  external  ulcerations;  putrid  bedsores;  obsti-
nate syphilitic  sores  attended  with  great  fetor.

Ulcers  often  penetrate  so  deep  as  to  lay  bare  the  tendons
and  bone.

Ulcers  deep,  lard-like  fundus,  elevated,  pectinated  edges,
slow  healing,  leaving  a  star-shaped  white  scar.

:  Putrescence,  destructive  or  quasi  malignant  ulceration,
and  tendency  to  decomposition  of  tissues.

■  Malignant  external  ulcerations. Gl.
Ulcers  have  no  disposition  to  heal,  livid  appearance.
Ulcers  assume  a  corroded,  chancroid  character  and  a  dirty

white  hue.
Ulcers  enlarge, edges  and base  acquire an unhealthy

aspect,  pus  offensive.
Sinuous  and  fistulous  ulcers,  secreting  an  ofiensive,  watery

pus,  showing  no  tendency  to  throw  out  granulations.
Pustules  appear  gradually  on  every  part  of  body.
Pustules  contain  caseous  purulent  contents.


HIPrOZiENIN— HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  54

I  Malignant,  phagedenic  skin  diseases. Gl.

\  Pustular  ringworm. Gl.

i  Lupus  cxedons.


Fluctuating  tumors  in  muscular  tissue.

Frequently  upon  the  limbs  nodular  tumors  discharging,

on  being  opened,  thick,  purulent  masses  mixed  with

blood  and  serum.
Icterus  appears  before  fatal  termination.
Here  and  there  healing  by  forming  cicatricial  tissue.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

Golden  Seal;  Oravge  Root.  Ranunculacese.

Grows  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  in  rich  woodlands,  most  abundantly
in  the  states  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Kentucky  and  West  Virginia.

Tlie  tinc^ture  is  ])re]>arod  from  the  fresli  root.

This  plant  was  lirst  mentioned  by  Linna'us,  in  17r);?.  The  first  provingswere
made  under  Hale,  by  Nichols,  Kurt  and  others.  (8ee  Hale's  New  Rem.)  About
tiie  year  KSdt),  j)rovings  were  made  by  Whitesides,  Weaver  and  others  (see  Am.
llom.  Obs.),  and  a  year  or  two  later  Hydrastis  was  proved  under  Lippe  by  a  class
of  students  of  the  Hahnemann  College  of  I'hiladelphia,  with  diflerent  dilutions,
mostly  the  30th.

A  monograph  on  Hydrastis,  by  Chas.  Mohr,  was  printed  in  the  Hah.  Mo.,
November,  188G.

Clinical  Authorities. — Ophthalmia,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  467;  Nasal  catarrh,
Palmer,  Raue's  Ree.,  1871,  p.  05 ;  Webster,  Raue's  Rec.,  1871,  p.  84 ;  Moore,  Times
Retros.,  1877,  p.  26  ;  Diphtheritic  deposit  in  nose  and  vagina,  Smith,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,
p.  469;  Epithelial  cancer  of  lip,  Blake,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  18,  p.  491  ;  Cancerous  tumor
of  hard  palate,  Nankivell,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  24f^;  Sore  mouth,  Morgan,  Hom.
C'liuics,  vol.  3,  ]).  131  ;  Williamson,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  106;  Mercurial  salivation,
Lodge,  II  ale's  Therap.,  p.  320;  Affection  of  mouth  and  throat.  Hale,  Hale's  Therap.,
p.  319 ;  Use  in,  diphtheria,  Oehme,  Therapeutics,  p.  38  ;  Epigastric  tumor  with  inaras-
nuis.  La  Rrunnc,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  322  ;  [Veakness  of  digest  ion,  Smedley,  A.  II.O.,
vol.  4,  p.  29 ;  Dyspepsia,  McClatchey,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  141  ;  Rradshaw,  B.  J.  II.,
vol.19,  p.  592;  Cancer  of  stomach,  Hendricks,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  137;  Sub-
acute inflammation  of  liver,  Bradshaw,  B.  J.  II.,  vol.  19,  p.  591 ;  Jaundice,  Albertson,
A.  II.  ().,  vol.  3,  p.  462;  Constipation  (3  eases),  Rogerson,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.  526 ;
Hughes,  B.  J.  II.,  vol.  23,  p.  257;  Ilibbard,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  201;  Hale,
TInle's  Therap.,  p.  325;  Brown,  A.  H.  0.,  vol.  3,  p.  466;  Martin,  Trans.  Hom.
Med.  Soc  Pa.,  1882,  p.  204;  GonstipaHon  of  infants,  Hibbard,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.
254;  Constipation  and  hemon-hoids,  Clark,  A.  II.  ().,  vol.  3,  p.  465  ;  Brown,  A.  II.  ().,
vol.  3,  p.  464;  Hemorrhoids,  Hunt,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  202;  Brown,  Bernhard


55  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

:m(i  Strong;  Bradsljaw,  B.  J.  IT.,  vol.  11),  p.  595;  Ulceration  of  rectum,  Mitcluill,
U.  S.  M.  and  8.  J  ,  July,  1871;  Fidula  ani,  Morgan,  liauc'H  Kw;.,  1.S70,  p.  219;
(7o?io?T/t«;a,  Brown,  A.  H.  ().,  vol.  8,  p.  4G7  ;  ProlapHm  uteri,  Jloyr.e,  Itauc'H  Jiw;.,
1870,  p.  248 ;  Uterine  affection,  Wigand,  A.  H.  ().,  vol.  2,  ji).  2;52 ;  Uterine  hemorrhage,
Hale,  Times  Retros.,  1877,  p.  20;  MemsLrual  disturbances,  affections  of  uterus,  Kelialz,
Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  109,  p.  24 ;  Tumor  in  breast,  Freeman,  B.  J,  II.,  vol.  20,  p.  8  ;
Scirrhous  of  breast,  Maelimont  and  Marston,  B.  J.  II.,  vol.  21,  p,  G39 ;  Mansion,
Hughes  Pliarm.,  p.  409  ;  Mammary  cancer,  Bayes,  B.  J.  11.,  vol.  19,  p.  150 ;  B.  J.  i  1.,
vol.  20,  p.  4 ;  Coucjh,  Small,  Hale's  Tlierap.,  p.  329 ;  Di^iease  of  heart,  Sinedley,
A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  21 ;  Ulcers  on  leg,  (jjlchrist,  A.  II.  ().,  vol.  3,  p.  465,  Scrofulous
■ulcers  on  leg,  Eadon,  A.  II.  O.,  vol.  8,  p.  409;  Typhoid  fever,  Molir,  Organon,  vol.  3,
p.  374;  General  marasmus,  liebslier,  liaue's  Itec,  1870,  p.  312;  Serofidous  inpmmia-
lion  of  glands,  Bradshaw,  B.  J.  II.,  vol.  19,  p.  590;  Cwto,  burns,  intertrigo,  Saxton,
Hale's  Therap.,  p.  315 ;  Cancer,  Bradshaw,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  588;  Epithelioma,
Blake,  Raue's  Rec.,  1875,  p.  299 ;  Erysipelas,  Woodvine,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  1874,  p.  28 ;
Smallpox  (3  cases),  Cleveland,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  204 ;  Eczema,  Cooper,  Ratio's  Rec,
1872,  p.  250; Ulcers  (3  cases),  Hastings,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  450.


'Mind. I  Forgetful;  cannot  remember  what  he  is  reading
or  talking  about.
I  Irritable;  disposed  to  bo  spiteful.

■  Moaning,  with  occasional  outcries  from  pain.
I  Despondency.

■  Depression  of  spirits,  sure  of  death  and  desires  it.

^  Sensorium. ■Foeliugas  if  intoxicated;  headache;  weakness.
^  Inner  Head. ■Dull,  heavy frontal  headache  over  eyes;
catarrhal.

■  Dull  frontal  headache,  with  dull  pain  in  hypogastrium

and  small  of  back.
I  I  Severe  frontal  headache.

■  Sharp  cutting  in  temples  and  over  eyes;  <  over  left;  >

from  pressing  with  hand.

I  I  Dull,  pressing  pain  on  top  of  head,  pressing  outward
from  ears,  at  10.30  a.m.

I  I  Vertex  headache  in  paroxysms,  every  other  day,  com-
mencing about  11  A.M.,  with  excessive  nausea,  retching
and  anguish.

■  Headache  of  a  nervous  gastric  character,  almost  constant.

■  Frontal headaches; headaches arising from catarrh,

gastric difficulties, indigestion, dyspepsia,  acidity  of
stomach,  as  well  as  from  bilious  disorder,  constipation,
piles,  uterine  disorder,  etc.
^  Outer  Head. ■Myalgic  headache,  in  integuments  of  scalp
and  muscles  of  neck.

■  Weeping  eruj)tion  on  forehead  along  margin  of  hair,  after

taking  cold;  <  from  warmth  of  room  after  having  been  in
cold  air;  itching  when  warm;  <  washing. ^Eczema.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  56

I  Scalp  and  face  covered  with  thick  crusts,  which  upon  re-
moval, expose  red,  raw  and  infiltrated  patches.  ^Eczema.

I  Scalp  caked  over  with  a  thick,  sebaceous  secretion;  hair
dry  and  lustreless;  debility  and  insufficient  nourish-
ment after  typhoid  fever. t/Seborrhoea  sicca.

iLaceration  of  scalp  above  1.  temple,  several  inches in
length,  crescentic  in  shape;  wound  suppurated  and  be-
came a  troublesome  sore.
^  Sight and Eyes. iDark greenish  yellow colored con-
junctiva.

IJaundiced  eyes.

I  Lack  of  accommodative  power  of  eyes  and  asthenopia.

•  Opacity  of  cornea;  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  with  or  with-
out ulceration ;  thick  mucous  discharge.

I  Profuse  secretion  of  tears;  smarting  of  eyes;  burning  of
eyes  and  lids.

I  Pain  and  burning  in  eyes.

Unflammation  and  ulceration  of  conjunctiva.

lAcute  catarrhal  ophthalmia,  the  result  of  daily  exposure
to  harsh  dry  winds;  inflammation  nearly  extended  to
border  of  iris;  lids  greatly  swollen  and  excoriated ;  pro-
fuse catarrhal  secretion.

llOphthalmia:  catarrhal;  scrofulous;  thick  mucous  dis-
charge.

B  Chronic  inflammation  of  eyes.

iMucous  membrane  of  eyelids  much  congested ;  profuse,
thick,  white  mucous  discharge.

■  Discharge  of  matter  from  eyes,  resulting  from  catarrhal

inflammation.

■  Conjunctivitis siccus with sensation of dryness and

scratching,  and  feeling  of  weight  and  heaviness  of  upper
lids.

■  Blepharitis  marginalis.
Large  painful  stye  on  1.  lid.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Deafness.

■  Roaring  in  ears,  like  from  machinery.

■  Tinnitus  aurium,  from  catarrh  of  inner  ear.

■  Membrana  tympani  purplish  and  bulging.

■  Perforation  of  membrani  tympani.

■  Mucous  membrane  of  middle  ear  eroded,  granular  and

exuberant  with  polypoid  growths.

■  Purulent  inflammation  of  middle  ear,  with  thick,  tenacious

discharge,  more  mucus  than  pus.

■  Bland  mucous  discharge,  associated  with  dropping  in

posterior  nares.

■  Thick,  offensive,  irritating catarrhal  and  purulent  dis-

charges from  external  auditory  meatus.


57  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

lOtorrhoea,  thick  mucous  discharge.

I  Ears  red,  thickened  and  covered  with  scales;  skin  back
of  each  pinna  red,  thickened  and  fissured  at  their  con-
nection with  side  of  head.
^  Smell  and  Nose, l  '  Tickling,  like  a  hair,  in  r.  nostril.

I  The  air  feels  cold  in  nose.

■  Stuffed  up,  smarting  sensation  in  posterior  nares,  with

discharge  of  thin,  clear  mucus.
I  Stuffiness  of  nares,  and  discharge  of  thick,  white  or  yellow
tenacious and stringy mucus,  or freciuent dropping
down  of  mucus  from  posterior  nares  into  throat.

■  Sharp,  raw,  excoriated feeling  in  both  nares,  with  con-

stant inclination  to  blow  nose ;  hoarseness.

■  Posterior  nares  clogged  with  mucus.

■  Secretion,  more  from  posterior  nares,  thick,  tenacious.

I  I  Sneezing,  with  fulness  over  eyes,  dull  frontal  headache,
pain  in  t.  breast  and  down  arms.

■  Coryza  watery,  excoriating; burning  in  nose,  more  r.

nostril;  discharge  scanty  in  room,  profuse  out  of  doors;
rawness  in  throat  and  chest

■  Coryza,  with  copious  secretion  of  white  mucus  and  tears.

■  Fluent  coryza,  followed  by  thick  catarrhal  discharge.

■  Bloody  purulent  discharge  from  nose.

■  Influenza  in  cold,  weak,  debilitated  persons,
i Catarrhal  influenza.

■Secretions  so  profuse  as  to  be  removed  in  long  tenacious
shreds  or  pieces.

■  Constant thick  white mucous discharge, with frontal

headache ;  discharge  of  yellowish  stringy  mucus  into
throat.

■  Constant discharge  of  thick white mucus  from nose;

coryza  with  frontal  headache. ^Nasal  catarrh

■  Discharge  of  thick  white  mucus  from  nose;  lachryma-

tion ;  thickening  of  membrane  of  posterior  nares ;  swell-
ing of  turbinated  bones;  large  crusts  forming  in  nasal
fossae;  occasional  thin  mucous  discharge;  raw,  smart-
ing sensation  in  nostrils;  pains  in  ears. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■  Profuse  discharge  of  thick,  yellowish,  stringy  mucus  from

nasal  passages.
I  I  Discharge  of  thick  yellow  matter  from  nose.

■  Chronic  nasal  catarrh.

■  Ozsena,  with  bloody,  purulent  discharge.

■  Obstruction  of  nasal  passages.

■  Soreness  of  cartilaginous  septum,  bleeding  when  touched;

inner  edge  of  r.  ala  sore  and  thickened.

■  Nosebleed,  1.  nostril,  with  burning  rawness;  followed  by

itching.
■After  apparent  recovery  from  diphtheria,  formation  of  a


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  58

. diphtheritic  membrane  in  1.  nostril  and  in  vagina,  the

former  being  completely  plugged  up.
I  Diphtheritic  affections  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face, l Expression  weary,  dull,  skin  pale,  or  yellow-
white.

■  Pale  face,  worn,  wearj'^  expression.
I  Yellow  complexion.

■  Erysipelatous  eruption  following  flushes  of  heat.

I  Chills  passing  down  back,  followed  by  burning  fever;
pulse  120;  headache  in  supraorbital  region,  excruciat-
ing pain  in  lumbar  region;  face  red,  1.  side  of  nose
swollen;  great  tenderness  of  cervical  glands,  urine  high
colored ;  inflammation  passed  from  1.  side  of  nose  to  r.
ear,  eye,  scalp  and  whole  face,  r.  eye  being  closed;  ex-
treme restlessness,  disturbed  by  least  noise ;  urine  sup-
pressed for  twenty-four  hours;  delirium.  ^Erysipelas
erratica.

iLeft  cheek  swollen;  1.  eye  closed;  pain  and  burning,
chills,  flushes;  pulse  100. ^Erysipelas.

■  Forehead,  cheeks  and  nose  slightly  red  and  very  greasy;

follicles  plugged  with  comedones;  skin  dirty  in  patches.
^Seborrhoea  oleosa.

■  Forehead,  cheeks  and  chin  covered  with  small  red  eleva-

tions with  black  points — acne  punctata — and  papulo-
pustules; digestion  feeble,  bowels  torpid.
lUlcer  on  nose  and  eyelid;  base  of  ulcer  of  a  dingy,  red-
dish-yellow color,  dry,  glazed  and  free  from  granula-
tions, and  discharge  but  slight.

■  Itching,  tingling  and  swelling  of  face. ^Smallpox.
^  Lower  Face. ■Aphthae  on  lips;  tongue  swollen.

I  I  Pimples  about  mouth  and  chin.

■  Epithelial  cancer  of  lip.

■  Tenacious  mucus  hangs  in  shreds  from  mouth.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. iGums  dark  red  and  swollen.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  flat;  peppery;  bitter  or  saltish.

■  Tongue  and  lips  parched,  red  and  dry.

■  Dryness of  tongue, with sensation  as  if  it  had  been

burned.

■  Tongue  as  if  burned  or  scalded,  later  a  vesicle  on  tip.

■  Tongue  coated  yellowish-white.

■Tongue  foul  and  coated  with  thick  white  fur.

■  Large,  flabby,  slimy  looking  tongue.

■  Tongue  large and flabby, showing imprint of  teeth.

^Stomatitis.

■  Tongue:  swollen,  showing  marks  of  teeth;  coated  white,

or  with  a  yellow  stripe.

■  Tongue  raw,  dark  red,  with  raised  papillae.

■  Cancerous  affections  of  tongue.


59  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

^^  Inner  Mouth.  i Excessive  secretion  of  thick,  tenacious
mucus.  .

I  Gums  and  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  dark  red  and
swollen;  uvula  relaxed  and  sore;  hawking  of  large
quantities  of  yellow  tenacious  mucus  from  throat,  leav-
ing a  sensation  of  rawness.

iMucous  membrane  of  fauces  studded  with  round,  protu-
berant spots  of  a  red  color,  as  if  injected  with  blood,  <
from  least  exposure  to  cold.

■  Soreness  and  rawness  of  mouth,  with  raised  papillse  and

dark  red  appearance  of  mucous  membranes.

■  Follicular  and  catarrhal  ulcers  with  exceedingly  tena-

cious mucus  in  mouth.  ,

llStomatitis:  after  mercury  or  chlorate  of  potash;  in
nursing  women  or  weakly  children;  with  peppery  taste;
tongue  as  if  burned,  or  raw,  with  dark  red  appearance
and  raised  papillae ;  during  course  of  eruptive  fevers.

■  Aphthous  sore  mouth.

IJaws  set;  liquids  swallowed  with  difficulty;  power  of  ar-
ticulation lost;  ulceration  of  mouth.  ^Mercurial  sali-
vation.

■  Gangrenous sore mouth  after abuse of  mercury  and

chlorate  of  potash.
■Syphilitic  affections  of  mouth,  throat  and  nares.

■  Syphilitic  angina.

■  Dense,  irregular  tumor  in  hard  palate,  painful  to  touch,

and  somewhat  elastic,  disposed  to  bleed  and  to  discharge
offensive  matter;  climacteric. ^Cancer.
13  Throat. ■  Uvula  sore  and  relaxed.

■  Hawking  of  yellow  tenacious  mucus  from  posterior  nares

and  fauces; rawness  of  fauces;  ulcers  in  throat;  after

mercury  and  chlorate  of  potash.
I  I  Pain  on  swallowing  as  from  excoriation.
■Sensation  of  rawness  in  throat,  after  hawking  up  large

quantities  of  tenacious  mucus.
1  I  Tingling  and  smarting  in  throat.
■Soreness  of  neck  and  throat,  with  relaxation  of  palate.
I  I  Great  swelling,  redness  and  itching,  and  great  soreness

of  throat.

■  Sore  throat  arising  from  irritation  of  stomach  and  lower

portion  of  oesophagus.

■  Sore  throat  from  gastric  derangement.

■  Ulcerated  sore  throat:  with  putrid  odor;  from  sahvation

by  mercury  or  after  chlorate  of  potash.

■  Angina  with  ulceration,  accompanying  scarlatina.

■  Chronic  angina,  with  round,  protuberant  red  spots  m

throat,  with  sensation  of  roughness  and  stiffness when
swallowing.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  60

I  I  Chilliness  although  well  covered;  headache  of  a  beating
or  darting  character,  and  not  confined  to  any  one
locality;  stools  consist  entirely  of  blood;  epistaxis.
^Diphtheria.

I  Pseudo-membranes,  or  tenacious  mucous  secretions,  re-

. sembling  dipthheria,  with  or  without  ulceration.

I  Diphtheritic  sore  throat.

I  I  Syphilitic  angina.

I  Syphilitic  sore  throat.

■  Results  of  mercurial  salivation.

■  Chronic  catarrhal  affections  of  throat.
I  Follicular  pharyngitis.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Anorexia.

I  Poor  appetite,  with  constipation  of  seven  or  eight  weexs'

standing.
I  Little  thirst,  with  loathing  of  food.
'^  Eating and Drinking. i Indigestion from atony of

stomach.
I  Bread,  or  vegetables  cause  acidity,  weakness,  indigestion.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Eructa-
tions putrid,  or  more  commonly  sour.
iVomits  all  she  eats,  except  milk  and  water.
'^  Scrobiculum and Stomach, i  i  Sinking  at  epigastrium

and  palpitation  of  heart.
iV^iolent  pulsations  in  epigastrium,  and  palpitation  of

heart,  with  heavy,  dull,  hard  thumping,  fulness  of  chest

and  dyspnoea.
I  Even  slight  pressure  of  hand  reveals  strong  pulsations  in

pit  of  stomach.
I  Feeling  of  weight  in  stomach  and  epigastrium.
■Anorexia  with  dyspeptic  feeling  in  epigastrium.
I  I  Pain  at  pit  of  stomach  and  extreme  emaciation,  with

vomiting  of  all  food  save  milk  and  water. ^Cancer

of  stomach.

■  Pains  in  stomach  five  or  six  years,  then  loss  of  strength,

great  sensitiveness  of  epigastric  region,  in  which  pulsa-
tions isochronous  with  pulse  were  perceived,  and  a  flat-
tened, resistant  tumor  of  some  two  inches  in  diameter;
in  a  few  months  pains  became  insufferable,  loss  of
appetite  and  sleep  alarming,  frequent  vomiting  and
great  anguish  about  heart  almost  permanent;  tumor
pronounced  scirrhous.  ^Epigastric  tumor  with  maras-
mus.

■  Flat,  resistant  tumor,  two  inches  in  diametet  in  epigas-

trium, sensitive  to  pressure,  pulsations  synchronous  with
pulse,  insufferable  pains,  frequent  vomiting,  loss  of  ap-
petite, anguish  about  heart,  sleeplessness,  loss  of  strength.
^Cancer.


61  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

iFaintness  at  stomach;  sinking,  gone  feeling,  with  con-
tinued violent  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Dull,  aching  pain  in  stomach,  which  causes  a  very  weak

faintish  feeling,  goneness  in  epigastric  region ;  acidity;

constipation.
I  Stomach  actually  sunken;  weak,  faint. ^Marasmus.
I  Weight  and  fulness  in  stomach,  or  an  empty,  aching,

"gone"  feeling,  more  or  less  constant,  <  by  a  meal.
iFood  seems  to  lie  heavy  in  stomach.
iPain  in  pit  of  stomach.
I  Acute,  distressing,  cutting  pains  in  stomach.

■  Weakness  of  digestion,  with  heavy,  dull,  hard,  thumping

fulness  of  chest  and  dysjDUoea.

■  Weakness  of  digestion,  pale  tongue,  fulness  and  uneasi-

ness in  stomach  after  eating,  weakness  of  body  and
limbs,  with  depression  of  spirits.

■  Weakness  of  digestion  with  debility,  particularly  in  dis-

eases from  exhaustion,  and  in  latter  stages  of  nervous
fevers.

■  ■Indigestion from an atonic state of stomach, with

debility.

■  Indigestion,  with  acidity  and  general  w^eakness.

■  Constant  acid  mucous  vomitings;  obstinate  constipation ;

wretched  nights;  tongue  coated ;  looks  ill  and  pale;  is
thin  and  hysterical;  pulse  quiet;  faintings  every  day
from  exhaustion;  appetite  good,  but  nearly  all  food  re-
turning intensely  acid;  no  actual  disease  could  be  de-
tected about  her;  has  taken  great  quantities  of  acid  and
alkaline  mixtures  and  has  habitually  used  purgatives.
^Mucous  irritation  et  morbus  medicinalis.
■Sympathetic  affections  of  digestive  organs  arising  from
uterine  disease.

■  Gastric  disorders  of  intemperate  people.

■  Flatulency,  distension  and  painful  digestion  of  dyspeptics.

■  Chronic  gastric  catarrh;  chronic  dyspepsia.

■  Gastro-duodenal  catarrh;  sense  of  sinking  and  prostra-

tion at  epigastrium,  wdth  violent  and  continued  palpi-
tation of  heart.

■  Chronic  ulceration  of  mucous  membrane  of  stomach.

■  Chronic  affections  of  stomach,  especially  of  mucous  mem-

brane.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  stomach.

I  I  Carcinoma,  with  emaciation ;  goneness.
''  Hypochondria. '  '  Fulness  and  dull  aching  in  r.  hypochon-
drium.

■  Torpor  of  liver,  with  pale,  scanty  stools.

■  Jaundice,  with catarrh  of  stomach  and  duodenum.

■  Skin  very  yellow;  stools  w^hite  and  frequent;  urine  very


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  62

dark;  skin  hot;  tongue  coated;  great  weariness  and
depression;  legs  anasarcous;  bad  nights;  no  appetite;
slight  difficulty  of  breathing;  much  fulness  and  tender-
ness over  hepatic  region;  great  aching  in  shoulder-
blades. ^Subacute  inflammation  of  liver.

■Severe  pain  in  stomach  and  bowels;  skin  and  eyes  dark,
greenish-yellow;  urine  very  dark;  feces  light  colored;
great  debility. ^Jaundice.

i  Jaundice  from  structural  disease  of  liver.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  mucous  lining  of  gall  bladder

and  biliary  ducts.

■  Functional  disorders  of  liver  in  connection  with  inter-

mittent fever.

■  Chronic  derangement  of  liver.

I  I  Liver  enlarged,  indurated,  nodulated,  and  sensitive
to  pressure;  tumor  in  epigastrium  as  large  as  a  hen's
egg,  doughy  in  consistency,  and  in  centre  a  small  spot
as  if  filled  with  fluid;  after  eating,  vomiting  of  food  in-
corporated with  sour,  putrid  mucus;  thirst,  loss  of  ap-
petite, diarrhoea,  weakness,  emaciation,  sleeplessness.

■Liver  atrophied. ^Marasmus.

■Sharp  pain  in  region  of  spleen,  with  constant  dull  pain
in  stomach  and  bowels,  with  hot,  burning  sensation.

■  Severe  cutting  pains  in  splenic  and  csecal  regions,  and  in

hypogastrium.
^^  Abdomen. Burning  in region of  navel, with goneness
and  faintness  in  epigastrium.
■Severe  cutting  pain  in  hypogastric  region,  extending  into
testicle,  occurring  after  stool,  with  faint  feeling.

■  Sense  of  constriction  in  hypogastric  region.

I  I  Loud  rumbling,  with  dull  aching  in  hypogastrium  and
small  of  back;  <  moving.

■  Flatulent  colic,  accompanied  by  faintness.

■  Flatulent  colic;  sensation  of  a  lump  of  the  size  of  a  hen's

egg,  rising  and  falling  in  r.  iliac  and  lumbar  regions;
sharp  pains  around  umbilicus  extending  to  1.  ovarian
and  splenic  regions;  moaning  with  occasional  outcries;
very  restless,  no  sleep;  abdominal  walls  pahiful  on
pressure;  discharge  of  flatulency,  sounding  like  the
report  of  a  pistol;  tongue  and  lips  parched  and  dry;
little  thirst  and  loathing  of  food ;  constipation  of  bowels ;
offensive  pus-like  discharge  from  vagina;  great  tender-
ness of  OS  uteri;  countenance  pale  and  haggard;  hic-
cough ;  hectic  fever;  cold  sweats  and  bedsores.

■  Cutting,  colicky  pains,  with  heat  and  faintness;  constipa-

tion; >  after  passing  flatus.

■  Colicky  pains,  with  fainting  turns  and  heat  in  bowels,

following  constipation.


63  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

■  Griping,  with  profuse  light  colored  diarrhoea.

■  Griping,  with  light  acrid  stools.

■  Sharp  pain  in  region  of  spleen,  with  dull  pain  and  burn-

ing in  stomach  and  bowels.
Pain  in  large  intestines  and  rectum.

■  Sharp  pain  in  csecal  region.

■  Sensation  of  great  fulness  in  1.  iliac  region.

■  Dull  dragging  in  groins,  cutting  pains  extending  into

testicles.

■  Pains  in  groin,  as  if  he  had  strained  himself;  clothing

uncomfortable.

■  Intestinal  catarrh,  followed  bj'- ulceration.
I  I  Blenorrhoea  of  the  intestines.

■  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh.

■  Chronic  catarrhal  or  croupous  enteritis.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. '  l  Urging  to  urinate,  and  sensation  as
if  bowels  would  move,  but  only  wind  passes.

■  Discharge  of  flatus  with  great  noise.

■  Fetid  flatus.

■Stools  loose,  soft,  light  colored,  with  flatus.

■  Soft  stool,  followed  by  severe  cutting  pain  in  hypogas-

trium,  with  dull  aching  in  testicles  and  faintness.

■Slimy,  tenacious  discharges  with  tenesmus;  or  when
feces  are  in  form  of  hard  balls  coated  over  with  yel-
lowish, tough  mucus. ^Chronic  enteritis

■Stool:  light  colored,  soft;  acrid;  greenish;  lumpy,  cov-
ered with  mucus;  hard,  knotty.

■Stools  hard  and  nodulated,  of  a  gray  or  browm  color.

■  Constipation;  feces  like  bullets.

■  One  or  two  stools  a  week,  very  hard  but  of  natural  color.
■Scanty  stools  occasionally,  alternating  with  discharge  of

membranous  casts.

■  Torpidity  and  want  of  desire  for  stool.

■  Constipation  more  from  sluggish  state  of  bowels  than

from  diseased  condition  of  system.

■  Obstinate  constipation  where  catarrhal  indigestion  is  co-

incident.

■  Obstinate  constipation  and  its  attendant  dull  headache

in  forehead;  weak  feeling  in  epigastric  region;  sour
eructations  and  "  dyspeptic  cough,"  with  copious  expec-
toration of  thick  mucus.

■  Constipation  of  long  standing,  aggravated  by  cathartic

medicines;  patients  weak  and  feeble;  complexion  sal-
low; tongue  foul;  pain  in  lower  bowels  and  rectum;
indigestion;  stools  hard  and  nodulated.

■  Constipation,  one  or  two  stools  a  week  for  eight  years,

and  then  only  after  use  of  purgatives;  continual  pain
in  head,  especially  in  morning;  bad  taste  in  mouth  with


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  G4

coated  tongue;  pain  in  back  and  shoulders;  sensation
'  of  constriction  in  hypogastric  region,  >  only  by  purga-

tion; yellow  or  rather  bilious  tint  of  face,  skin  smooth
and  dry ;  severe  pain  after  each  stool,  which  is  hard  and
knotty,  and  of  a  brown  color.

■  Constipation:  headache  and  piles;  after  stools,  for  hours

severe  pain  in  rectum  and  anus;  colic  pains  with  faint-
ing turns  and  heat  in  bowels;  anaemia;  remittent  fever;
after  purgative  medicines.
I  Three  weeks  after  confinement  was  seized,  while  at  stool,
with  severe  burning,  stinging  pains  in  rectum  and  anus,
lasting  six  to  eight  hours  after  each  evacuation;  and  ac-
companied with  a  sensation  of  heat  in  intestines,  colic
pains  and  fainting;  every  week  one  or  two  very  hard,
but  natural  colored  stools.

■  Sore  neck,  sore  throat  which  is  much  relaxed  and  in-

flamed; headache;  cough  and  expectoration;  pain  in
side  while  stooj)ing  and  rising  from  recumbent  position ;
foul  breath;  tongue  foul  and  coated  with  a  thick  white
fur;  appetite  poor;  constipated;  after  purgatives.

■  Constipation  and  hemorrhoids  during  pregnancy,  with

severe  pain  during  stool,  no  hemorrhage.

■  Constipated  habit  since  birth,  after  failure  of  cathartics

and  enemas.
SI  Constipation:  Avith  piles; of  hepatic  origin;  following

rheumatic  fever;  the  cause  of  other  ailments.
After  stool:  long  lasting  pain  in  rectum; hemorrhoids

and  fainting;  exhaustion.

■  Smarting,  burning  pains  in  rectum,  during  and  after

each  stool.

■  Proctitis.

■  Ulceration  of  rectum,  after  bad  cases  of  dysentery.

■  Prolapsus  of  rectum;  simple  prolapsus  in  children,  with

congestion  and swelling of  mucous membrane,  and
marked  constipation.
I  Fistula  ani  with  constipation,  piles  and  ulceration.

■  Fissures  and  excoriations  of  anus.

■  Hemorrhoids,  when  a  small  loss  of  blood  is  followed  by

excessive  weakness.

■  Painful  hemorrhoids,  with  paroxysms  of  headache  and

constipation;  severe  burning,  smarting  pains  in  rectum,
before  and  after  each  stool;  colic  pains,  with  attacks  of
faintness  and  heat  in  intestines,  often  follow  evacuations,
after  a  constipation  of  several  days.
I  i  Hemorrhoidal  swellings  which  bleed  profusely  at  times;
much  prolapsus  recti;  offensive,  dirty-looking,  hemor-
rhoidal discharge  from  anus,  obliging  him  to  wear  a
bandage.


65  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

I  Piles  and  headache  with  constipation.
''  Urinary  Organs. iDull  aching  in  region  of  kidneys.

I  Catarrh  of  bladder,  with  thick,  ropy,  mucous  sediment  in
urine.

■  Chronic  cystitis;  diabetes;  gravel.

■  Symptoms  of  ulceration  of  bladder.

■  Difficulty  in  making  water.

■  Suppression  of  urine.

■  Incontinence  of  urine.

Urine  increased  and  of  neutral  reaction.
High  colored urine  which  deposits  a  cloudy  sediment
while  standing.

■  Urine  smells  as  if  decomposed.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Debility,  after  spermatorrhoea.

■  Spermatorrhoea,  incipient  stricture,  chronic  gonorrhoea,

gleet,  inflammation  and  ulceration  of  whole  internal
coat  of  bladder.

■  Gonorrhoea,  second  stage,  thick,  yellow  discharge.

■  Long  lasting  gonorrhoea,  accompanied  by  great  moral

and  physical  depression.
■Acute  or  chronic  gonorrhoea;  feeling  of  debility  and  faint-
ness  after  each  passage  from  bowels.

■  Catarrh  of  urethra;  after  acute  gonorrhoea,  a  gleety  dis-

charge remains;  copious,  painless,  urethral  discharge;
spurious  gonorrhoea;  relaxation  of  urethral  mucous
membrane,  and  a  consequent  weeping,  the  discharge
being  almost  watery  in  character.

■  Gleet  with  debility;  copious,  painless,  sometimes  thick

discharge.

■  Dragging  in  r.  groin  to  testicle,  thence  to  1.  testicle,  thence

to  1.  groin.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Aching  pains  in  small  of  back
at  change  of  life;  uterine  affections,  accompanied  by  de-
bility and  disorder  of  digestive  functions.

■  Offensive,  pus-like  discharges  from  vagina.

■  Great  tenderness  of  os  uteri.

■  Discharge  of  tough,  stringy  mucus  from  os  uteri.
■Mucous  leucorrhoea;  uterine  and  vaginal  catarrh.

■  Epithelial  abrasion  of  os  and  cervix  uteri  and  vagina,

with  superficial  ulceration  of  parts.

■  Cervix  uteri  swollen,  indurated  and  eroded.

■  Ulcerationof  OS,  cervix  and  vagina;  leucorrhoea;  debility;

prolapsus  uteri.

■  Hot,  watery  discharge  from  uterus.

■  Uterine  diseases  with  sympathetic  affections  of  digestive

organs.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage,  menorrhagic  form; bleeding ex-

cessive for  ten  days  during  each  period,  attended  with

vol;.  VI. — 5.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  '  66

pain  and  ansemia;  hemorrhage  from  fibroid  tumor;
congestive  dysmenorrhoea;  subinvolution  of  uterus;
metritis;  endometritis;  menopause.

I  Metrorrhagia:  consequent  upon  fibroid  tumors;  in  girls
fifteen  to  eighteen  years  of  age;  puerperal  hemorrhages;
endometritis.

■  Profuse  menses  for  a  year,  flowing  ten  days  or  more;
dysmenorrhoea;  great  prostration  and  ansemia.

lAfter  catching  cold  by  getting  feet  wet  during  menstrua-
tion, severe  pains  in  bowels  and  uterine  region,  "it  felt
like  wind;"  a  lump,  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  rises  and  falls  in
r.  iliac  and  lumbar  regions;  sharp  pains  around  um-
bilicus, extending  to  1.  ovarian  and  splenic  region ;  con-
tinual moaning  and  distressing  outcries;  very  restless;
sleepless;  abdominal  walls  painful  to  pressure;  dis-
charge of  flatus  which  sounds  like  report  of  pistol.

Tongue  and  lips  parched  and  dry;  little  thirst;  loathing
of  food;  constipation;  injections  per  anum  followed  by
bullet-shaped  feces;  offensive,  pus-like  discharge  from
vagina;  great  tenderness  of  os  uteri ;  pale  and  haggard ;
hiccough;  hectic  fever;  cold  sweats;  bedsores.  ^Uter-
ine affections.

I  Regurgitation  of  food  by  mouthful,  without  nausea,
which,  however,  affords  relief;  despondent  and  gloomy;
when  food  is  retained  suffers  from  headache,  palpitation
of  heart  and  nervousness,  or  restlessness;  bad  taste  in
throat  from  breath ;  mouth  very  dry  in  morning,  and
tongue  thickly  coated ;  sour  risings  from  stomach ;  great
quantities  of  wind  m  stomach  causing  distress  until  dis-
charged; after  eating  must  keep  quiet  or  she  becomes
feverish  and  distressed ;  pain  in  bowels  three  or  four
hours  after  eating  with  inclination  to  stool;  pain  and
soreness  of  liver;  after  dinner  nervous  and  irritable,
cannot  bear  to  be  spoken  to;  becomes  so  nervous  that
to  hear  any  one  speak  is  unbearable  and  head  aches  in-
tensely; on  closing  eyes  sees  sparks  and  light  spots;
pain  in  and  over  eyeballs;  pain  on  opening  eyes;  can-
not sleep  until  after  midnight;  epigastric  region  very
tender  to  touch ;  sensation  as  of  a  tight  band  around
waist,  <  at  night;  constant  coldness  of  hands,  feet  and
limbs  while  head  is  hot;  constipation,  feces  at  first  dry
and  lumpy,  afterwards  like  white  of  egg;  great  strain-
ing at  stool;  nosebleed  before  menses;  menses  delayed,
preceded  and  accompanied  by  severe  pains  in  back  and
headache;  constant,  acrid,  corroding  leucorrhoea  <  ten
days  after  menses  cease;  when  standing  feels  as  if  every-
thing would  fall  out;  very  tender  about  vulva;  dis-
charge like  white  of  egg,  coming  on  immediately  after


G7  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

menses  cease,  lasting  ten  days  or  longer,  profuse  and  de-
bilitating; severe  pain  in  small  of  back  and  in  back
part  of  legs ;  pain  in  inside  of  legs  above  knees ;  coition
very  painful,  with  almost  constant  desire,  especially  dur-
ing the  time  she  has  "  white  of  egg  "  discharge,  amount-
ing to  furor  uterinus;  after  coition  prostration  and  dis-
tress in  stomach ;  commences  at  once  to  spit  up  the  last
meal,  or  has  taste  of  it  in  mouth;  the  "white  of  egg"
discharge  usually  becomes  red,  bloody  fluid,  and  soon
as  it  ceases  she  becomes  irritable  and  angry  with  every
one,  and  cannot  endure  idea  of  coition,  any  reference  to
it  making  her  angry ;  constant  desire  to  pass  water,  and
when  a  little  is  passed  she  is  relieved,  and  it  seems  to
her  that  if  she  could  pass  a  great  quantity  of  water  she
Vi^ould  feel  still  better;  in  morning  this  desire  is  less;  at
times,  discharges  of  hot  water  from  womb,  which  is  so
profuse  as  to  wet  bed  and  all  her  clothes;  uterus  pro-
lapsed; OS  indurated  and  congested;  all  symptoms  >
by  lifting  womb  into- place  and  holding  it  there;  >  in
recumbent  posture.

1 1  Tenacious,  viscid  teucorrhoea,  uterine  or  vaginal.

■Mucous  leucorrhoea,  discharge  hanging  from  os  in  long
viscid  strings.

■  Yellow,  tenacious  leucorrhoea,  long  threads  or  pieces  in

it;  sometimes  offensive.

■  ■  Leucorrhoea  tenacious,  ropy,  thick,  yellow.

■  Leucorrhoea  complicated  with  hepatic  derangement  and

constipation.

■  Pruritus  vulvae,  with  profuse  leucorrhoea;  sexual  excite-

ment.

■  Lancinating  pain  in  breast,  extending  up  to  shoulder  and

down  arms.

■  Pain  in  1.  breast,  so  bad  as  to  prevent  all  rest  at  night.

■  Pain  in  breast,  almost  unbearable,  causing  a  worn  and

haggard  appearance  of  countenance.

■  Pains  accompanying  cancer  in  breast.

■Scirrhous  tumor  of  1.  breast;  hard,  heavy  and  adherent
to  skin,  which  is  dark,  mottled  and  vei^  much  puck-
ered, the  nipple  being  retracted;  pains  like  knives
thrust  into  the  part;  cachectic  appearance  of  face.

■  Stony  hard,  nodulated  tumor  in  1.  breast,  unattached  to

skin,  perfectly  movable  and  as  large  as  a  filbert;  lan-
cinating pains.

■  Cancer  of  1.  breast  as  large  as  a  small  egg,  with  retraction

of  nipple.

■  Hard,  irregular  enlargement  of  1.  breast;  nipple  retracted,

and  glands  of  1.  axilla  enlarged  and  painful;  mother
had  died  of  cancer  of  tongue. ^Cancer.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  G8

llrregular  nodule  of  scirrhus  of  mamma,  with  retraction
of  nipple;  enlargement  of  axillary  glands;  health  poor;
sallow  complexion.

■  Epithelioma  of  mamma.

In  a  case  of  open  cancer  of  1.  breast,  which  had  been  ulcer-
ated for  four  or  five  years,  it  diminished  the  ulcerated
surface,  which  was  as  large  as  half  crown,  to  a  size  not  as
large  as  a  pea.

I  In  open  cancer  of  r.  mamma,  relieved  the  constant  burn-
ing pain  and  favored  healing,  healthy  granulations
making  their  appearance.
^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  iSore  mouth  of
nursing  women;  tongue  large,  and  retains  the  impres-
sion made  by  teeth.

I  Abraded,  cracked  and  sore  nipples  of  nursing  women.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia.  iScraping
in  larynx.

I  Cough,  with  rawness  of  larynx;  tingling  and  smarting
in  throat;  hawks  up  tenacious,  yellow  or  white  mucus;
pain  on  swallowing  as  if  throat  were  excoriated;  cough
rough,  harsh  and  rattling,  and  continued  day  and  night;
abdominal  congestion.  ^Laryngo-tracheitis.  ^Bronchitis.

■  Bronchial  catarrh  of  old  people,  with  debility,  loss  of  ap-

petite, and  a  general  cachectic  condition.

■  Catarrhal  cough  of  long  standing,  with  febrile  symptoms

in  evening  and  night,  with  debility  in  children.

■Rough,  harsh  and  rattling  cough,  day  and  night.
^'  Cough. 'Dry,  harsh  cough,  from  tickling  in  larj'nx.

■Chronic  catarrhal  cough,  with  febrile  paroxysms  in  eve-
ning and  night,  with  debility;  cough  rough,  harsh  and
rattling,  continued  day  and  night.

■Chronic  cough,  accompanied  by  febrile  paroxysms  eve-
nings and  night,  and  excessive  prostration ;  sputa  thick,
yellowish,  very  tenacious,  stringy  and  profuse.

■  Old  man's  cough;  senile  catarrh.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Rawness,  soreness  and  burn-
ing in  chest.

■  Bronchitis  of  old,  exhausted  people;  thick,  yellow,  tena-

cious, stringy  sputa.

■  Phthisis,  to  relieve  goneness  in  stomach,  emaciation,  loss

of  appetite.
I  I  Cancer  of  r.  lung,  with  nodules  in  external  walls  of
chest  (relieved).
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Palpitation,  with  faint-
ness.

■  Dyspnoea,  with  heavy  beating  of  heart.

■  Intermittent  pulsation  of  heart.

■  Palpitation  of  heart,  with  heavy,  dull,  hard,  thumping


69  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

fulness  of  chest  and  dyspnoea,  in  connection  with  dys-
pepsia.

■  Palpitation,  pain  shooting  from  chest  to  1.  shoulder,  with

numbness  of  arm ;  irregular,  and  at  times  labored  action
of  heart;  cannot  lie  on  either  side;  feeling  of  immediate
suffocation  on  attempting  to  lie  on  1.  side;  unable  from
weakness  and  dizziness  to  sit  in  erect  posture;  sounds  of
chest  dull  on  percussion;  heart  has  a  muffled  sound,  as
if  laboring  in  a  sac  of  water;  a  blowing  and  rushing
sound  in  under  portion,  and  peculiar  noise  at  each
stroke,  like  striking  knuckle  against  a  hard  substance;
swelling  of  abdomen,  particularly  upper  portion;
oedema  of  legs;  urine  scanty  and  turbid;  constipation;
tongue  yellowish-white;  no  appetite;  food  causes  nau-
sea; frequent  sinking  spells.  ^Heart  disease.
I  Pulse  slow,  during  the  chill.

^  Outer  Chest* l  '  Pain  in  r.  breast  and  down  arm.
I  Thoracic  or  intercostal  myalgia.

^^  Neck  and  Back. I Ulcers  under  r.  and  1.  inferior  maxilla
from  broken  down  lymphatic  glands.

■  Chronic  suppuration  and  swelling  of  cervical  glands;

great  weakness. ^Scrofula.
I  I  Excoriations  in  folds  of  skin  of  neck. ^Intertrigo.
I  Muscles  of  neck  feel  sore.

■  Pain  in  back  and  shoulders.

■  Aching  pain  in  small  of  back  in  women,  at  change  of  life.

■  Debility  and  weakness  in  back  and  lower  limbs,  >  by

walking  about.

■  Tired  aching  across  small  of  back  and  in  limbs;  knees

ache.
■Stiffness  in  muscles  of  lumbar  region  while  bending  over
for  a  short  time,  causing  great  difficulty  when  assuming
an  erect  posture;  dull,  heavy,  dragging  pain  and  stiff-
ness of  back,  especially  across  lumbar  region,  necessitat-
ing use  of  arms  to  rise  from  a  seat;  must  walk  about
some  time  before  being  able  to  straighten  up.
^^  Upper  Limbs.  iPain  from  head  to  shoulders,  with  aching
in  both,  more  the  left.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  elbow,  forearms,  right  shoulder  and

first  finger  of  1.  hand.

■  Right arm, from tips of  fingers to  shoulder,  greatly

swollen,  and  one  mass  of  sores,  discharging  fetid  pus;
glands  in  axilla  tender  and  swollen;  elbow  enlarged
and  full  of  sores;  exceedingly  weak  and  nervous,  owing
to  severe  pain  and  constant  loss  of  sleep;  emaciation.
Small  boils,  two  or  three  inches  apart  on  hands,  arms  and
shoulders,  some  papular  with  inflamed  area,  others  pus-
tular.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  70

I  Ulcer  from  a  burn,  on  back  of  hand,  greatly  inflamed
and  very  painful;  could  hardly  move  wrist.
^  Lower  Limbs. <  Pain  from  r.  hip  to  knee,  while  walking ;
cannot  stand  or  bear  one's  weight.

I  Legs  feel  weak ;  knees  weak;  aching.

I  Outer  part  of  1.  knee  aches  while  sitting,  <  when  w-alking.

■  Erysipelas  of  lower  extremities.

I  Bright  efflorescence  from  patella  to  bend  of  foot;  scaly
skin  slightly  broken  here  and  there,  having  in  some
places  a  jagged  and  cracked  appearance;  slight  serous
moisture;  intolerable  itching.

■  Irritable  and  indolent  ulcers  on  legs.
I  Atonic  old  ulcers  on  legs.
■Scrofulous  ulcers  on  leg  and  foot.

■  Ulcers  on  both  legs  resulting  from  injuries.

■Dry,  superficial,  angry  looking  ulcers  on  legs;  covered  by
a  yellow  scab;  stinging  burning  pain;  areola  inflamed,
and  covered  by  pimples,  which  frequently  degenerate
into  ulcers;  faint  fetid  odor;  circular  shape  with  flat
edges;  one  of  ulcers  had  high  and  thick  edges;  no  pus;
<  at  night  also  from  warmth  of  bed,  on  motion,  or  on
touching  them ;  1.  side.

■  Three  large  ulcers  each  one  of  which  seems  to  belong  to

a  separate  class,  around  r.  ankle;  one  in  front  is  circular
with  high  elevated  edges  slightly  rounded,  surrounded
by  inflamed  skin;  irregular  base,  bleeds  readily  and
discharges  a  thin  corrosive  ichor;  one  on  outside  is  cir-
cular, with  clean,  sharp  cut  edges,  deep,  smooth,  shining
base,  but  with  ichorous  discharge;  inside  one  is  largest,
ragged,  irregular  and  deep;  rough  base;  high,  rounded
and  swollen  edges  at  upper  part,  well  defined  at  the
lower;  discharge  of  grayish,  putrid,  thick  pus  and  has
one  or  two  patches  of  large,  flabby,  pale  granulations;
pain  from  motion  and  from  warmth  of  bed;  on  stepping
on  ground  pricking  sensation  in  sores,  apd  on  sitting
down  to  rest  after  motion,  shooting  or  lancinating  ain
in  ulcers.
I  Extensive  oedema  of  foot  and  ankle.

■  Aching  in  sole  of  1.  foot;  no  >  from  change  of  position.

■  Dorsal  surface  of  feet  red,  infiltrated,  especially  about  toes,

between  which  are  deep  fissures;  aggravations  from
ointments;  poor  digestion;  constipation  alternating
with  diarrhoea.

■  Hard,  nodulated  tumor  as  large  as  a  walnut  on  dorsum

of  foot;  occasionally  painful.

■  Scrofulous  ulcers  in  hollow  of  sole  of  foot,  and  over  tarsal

and  metatarsal  bones,  discharging  pus  and  sanious  mat-
ter; loss  of  appetite ;  paleface;  melancholia.


71  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

^*  Limbs  in  General. iLimbs  tired  and  aching. ^Coryza.

I  Shifting  pains  in  r.  arm  and  leg,  then  1.  leg.
^■^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying:  on  1.  side  causes  feeling

of  immediate  suffocation;  cannot  lie  on  either  side.
Recumbent  position:  >  womb  complaints.
Sitting:  outer  part  of  1.  knee  aches  after  motion;  shooting

pains  in  ulcers;  in  erect  posture,  dizziness.
Standing:  feels  as  if  everything  would  fall  out.
Dull,  heavy,  dragging  pain  and  stiffness  of  back  especially

across  lumbar  region,  necessitating  use  of  arms  to  rise

from  a  seat;  must  walk  about  some  time  before  being

able  to  straighten  up.
Rising  from  recumbent  position :  pain  in  side.
Stooping:  pain  in  side;  causes  stiffness  of  muscles  in  lum-
bar region.
Walking:  weakness  in  back  and  lower  limbs;  pain  in  r.

hip  and  knee;  outer  part  of  1.  knee  aches.
Moving:  <  rumbling  in  abdomen  with  dull  aching  in

hypogastrium  and  small  of  back; can  hardly  move

wrist  on  account  of  ulcers;  ulcers  on  legs  <.
^®  Nerves. ■  Frequent  sudden  attacks  of  fainty  spells,  with

profuse  cold  sweat  all  over. ^Cancerous  ulcers  on  1.

side  of  throat,  inside.
iCachectic  condition  with  loss  of  appetite  and  fainting.
I  After  measles,  great  emaciation,  depression  of  spirits;

easily  excited  to  anger;  liver  reduced  in  size; urine

scanty  and  high  colored. ^Marasmus.

■  General  debility.

I  Debility  from  gastric,  bilious  and  typhoid  fevers.

>  Faintness,  goneness,  great  weakness  and  physical  pros-
tration.
^^  Sleep. I  Awakened  by  backache  and  dull  pains  in  navel
and  hypogastric  region.

■  Dreams  worrisome;  restless  sleep,
i  I  Difficulty  in  awaking.

^  Time. Morning:  continual  pain  in  head;  mouth  very  dry;
desire  to  pass  water  >  ;  chill.

10.30  A.M.:  dull,  piercing  pain  on  top  of  head,  outward
from  ears.

Day:  cough.

Evening:  febrile  symptoms;  chill;  dull,  burning  pain.

10  P.M.:  great  heat  of  whole  body.

Night:  feeling  of  tight  band  around  waist  <;  cannot
sleep  on  account  of  pain  in  1.  breast;  cough ;  febrile  symp-
toms; ulcers  on  legs  <;  chilliness;  delirium;  erysipe-
latous rash;  pains  <,

Before  midnight:  cannot  sleep.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  <  weeping  erup-


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  72

tion  on  forehead  after  having  been  in  cold  air;  causes

itching;  ulcers  on  legs.
In  room :  discharge  scanty  from  nose.
Washing:  <  eruption  on  forehead.
Getting  feet  wet  during  menses:  severe  pain  in  bowels.
Harsh,  dry  winds:  cause  acute  catarrhal  ophthalmia.
Out  of  doors :  discharge  from  nose  profuse.
^"  Fever. I Chill  morning  or  evening;  chilliness,  especially  in

back  or  thighs,  with  aching,  or  around  shoulders  and

chest;  pulse  slow.
I  Chilliness  at  night.

I  Heat,  in  flushes,  over  face,  neck  and  hands.
I  Great  heat  of  whole  body,  dull,  burning  pain  all  evening.
I  Great  heat  of  whole  body,  at  10  p.m.,  followed  by  great

debility.

■  Profuse,  offensive  sweat  of  genitals.

I  Gastric,  bilious  or  typhoid  forms  of  fever,  with  gastric
disturbances,  jaundice  and  great  debility  following.

■Fevers  which  do  not  reach  a  high  grade  of  inflammatory
action,  but  wdiich  are  attended  with  gastric  and  bilious
disturbances,  or  complicated  with  jaundice,  and  the  del-
eterious eff'ects  of  mercury  or  quinine.

■  Intermittent  fever: cachectic  subjects;  gastric  and  he-

patic symptoms,  showing  atony  and  torpor;  vertex
headache  in  paroxysms  every  other  day,  commencing
at  11  A.M.,  with  excessive  nausea,  retching  and  anguish.

■  Quotidian  fevers,  with  gastric  disturbance;  jaundice.

■  Catarrhal  symptoms  which  frequently  precede  measles;

also  favors  development  of  eruption.

■  Typhoid  fever  with  characteristic  temperature;  for  days

before  attack  feeling  of  entire  goneness  in  pit  of  stomach,
with  no  desire  for  food ;  abdominal  tenderness,  gurgling
in  ileo-csecal  region,  with  bloated  abdomen;  delirium
at  night;  a  feeling  that  he  could  not  recover.

■  Typhoid  fever;  retarded  convalescence;  will  eat  nothing;

tongue  large,  flabby,  thickly  coated,  and  shows  imprint
of  teeth;  bowels  constipated;  urine  scanty;  copious
sweats;  sleeplessness.

■  Hectic  fever.

"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  day:  faintings.
For  hours :  after  stool,  severe  pain  in  rectum.
Three  or  four  hours  after  eating:  pains  in  bowels.
Twenty-four  hours :  urine  suppressed.
Every  other  day:  vertex  headache  at  11  a.m.
For  days  before  attack  of  typhoid  fever:  feeling  of  entire

goneness  in  pit  of  stomach.
For  ten  days: excessive  bleeding,  uterine  hemorrhage;

after  menses  leucorrhoea  <.


73  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

Three  weeks  after  confinement:  seized  after  stool  with
severe  burning,  stinging  pains  in  rectum  and  anus,
lasting  six  or  eight  hours  after  each  evacuation.

For  a  year:  profuse  menses  flowing  for  ten  days.

For  four  or  five  years:  open  cancer  of  1.  breast.

For  eight  years:  one  or  two  stools  a  week.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  tickling  like  a  hair  in
nostril;  pain  in  breast;  burning  in  nostril;  inner  edge  of
ala  nasi  sore  and  thickened;  inflammation  in  ear;  eye
closed  from  inflammation ;  dragging  in  groin  to  testicle ;
lump  rising  and  falling  in  iliac  and  lumbar  region;
fulness  and  dull  aching  in  hypochondrium ;  open  can-
cer of  mamma;  cancer  of  lung;  pain  in  breast  and
down  arms;  ulcer  under  inferior  maxilla;  rheumatic
pains  in  shoulder;  arm  greatly  swollen;  pain  from  hip
to  knee;  three  large  ulcers  around  ankle ;  shifting  pains
in  leg  and  arm.

Left :  sharp  cutting  over  eyes  < ;  laceration  of  scalp  above
temple;  stye  on  lid;  nosebleed  1.  nostril;  formation  of
diphtheritic  membrane  in  nostril;  side  of  nose  swollen;
inflammation  from  nostril  to  r.  ear;  dragging  in  testicle
to  groin;  sharp  pain  extending  to  ovarian  region;  ful-
ness in  iliac  region;  scirrhous  tumor  of  breast;  stony
hard  nodulated  tumor  in  breast;  cancer  of  breast;  hard,
irregular  enlargement  of  breast;  glands  of  axilla  en-
larged and  painful;  open  cancer  of  breast;  pain  shoot-
ing from  chest  to  shoulder;  ulcer  under  inferior  maxilla;
aching  in  shoulder;  rheumatic  pains  in  first  finger  of
hand;  outer  part  of  knee  aches;  ulcers  on  legs;  aching
,in  sole  of  foot;  cancerous  ulcer  on  side  of  throat.

Shifting  pains  from  r.  leg  to  left.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  intoxicated ;  tickling  like  a  hair  in  r.  nos-
tril; as  if  tongue  had  been  burned;  pain  on  swallowing
as  from  excoriation ;  food  seems  to  lie  heavy  on  stomach ;
small  spot  in  epigastric  tumor  as  if  filled  with  fluid ;  as
if  a  lump  of  size  of  a  hen's  egg  rising  and  falling  on  r.
iliac  and  lumbar  regions;  pains  in  groins  as  if  he  had
strained  himself;  pain  in  uterine  region  felt  like  wind;
as  of  a  tight  band  around  waist;  as  if  everything  would
fall  out  when  standing ;  as  if  knives  were  thrust  into
breast;  as  if  throat  was  excoriated.

Pain:  in  eyes;  over  eyeballs;  in  r.  breast  and  down  arms;
in  ears;  at  pit  of  stomach;  in  large  intestines;  in  rec-
tum; in  groin;  in  back;  in  shoulders;  in  bowels;  in
liver;  on  opening  eyes;  in  1.  breast;  from  head  to
shoulders;  from  r.  hip  to  knee.

Insupportable  pains:  in  epigastric  region.

Excruciating  pain:  in  lumbar  region.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  74

Intense  pain:  in  head.

Severe  pain:  in  forehead;  in  stomach  and  bowels;  in  ab-
domen after  stool;  in  rectum  and  anus;  in  uterine  re-
gion ;  in  back ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  back  part  of  legs.

Lancinating  pain :  in  breast  extending  up  to  shoulder  and
down  arms;  in  ulcers.

Cutting  pains :  from  groins  into  testicles.

Acute,  distressing,  cutting  pains:  in  stomach.

Sharp  cutting:  in  temples;  in  splenic  and  csecal  regions;*
in  hypogastric  region,  extending  into  testicle;  in  lower
bowels  and  rectum;  on  inside  of  legs  above  knees.

Cutting,  colicky  pains:  in  abdomen.

Sharp  pains :  in  region  of  spleen ;  around  umbilicus ;  ex-
tending to  1.  ovarian  and  splenic  regions;  in  csecal  re-
gion; around  umbilicus.

Great  anguish :  about  heart.

Shooting  pains:  from  chest  to  1.  shoulder;  in  ulcers.

Darting  pain :  in  head.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Beating  pain:  in  head.

Stinging  pains:  in  rectum  and  anus;  in  ulcers  on  legs.

Severe  burning  pain:  in  rectum.

Pricking  pains:  in  ulcers.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  elbow,  forearm,  r.  shoulder  and  first
finger  of  1.  hand.

Shifting  pains:  in  r.  arm  and  leg,  then  1.  leg.

Continual  pain :  in  head.

Tired  aching:  across  small  of  back;  in  limbs.

Aching:  in  shoulder-blades;  in  small  of  back;  in  knees;
in  head  and  shoulders;  in  outer  part  of  1.  knee;  in  soles
of  1.  foot.

Dull  dragging:  in  groins;  from  groin  to  r.  then  to  1.  testi-
cles across  lumbar  region.

Dull,  aching  pains:  at  stomach;  in  r.  hypogastrium;  in
hypogastrium  and  small  of  back;  in  region  of  kidneys.

Dull,  burning  pains:  all  over  body.

Dull,  heavy  frontal  headache.

Dull  pain  in  hypogastrium;  in  small  of  back;  on  top  of
head;  in  stomach  and  bow^els;  in  navel.

Fulness:  over  eyes;  of  chest;  of  stomach;  of  r.  hypogas-
trium; in  hepatic  region;  in  1.  iliac  region.

Great  sensitiveness:  of  epigastric  region.

Tenderness:  of  cervical  glands;  over  hepatic  region;  of  os
uteri;  of  abdomen.

Soreness:  of  cartilaginous  septum ;  of  inner  edge  of  r.  ala ;
of  uvula;  of  mouth;  of  neck  and  throat;  of  liver;  of
nipple;  in  chest.

Pricking  sensation :  in  ears.

Burning  heat:  of  skin.


75  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

Burning:  of  eyes  and  lids;  in  nose;  in  r.  nostril;  1.  nostril;
in  stomach;  in  bowels;  in  region  of  navel;  in  rectum
and  anus;  in  chest;  in  ulcers;  on  legs.

Heat:  in  intestines;  of  whole  body.

Smarting:  of  eyes:  in  posterior  nares;  in  nostrils;  in
throat;  in  rectum.

Sharp,  raw,  excoriated  feeling:  in  both  nares.

Sensation  of  roughness  and  stiffness :  on  swallowing.

Scraping:  in  larynx.

Rawness:  in  nares;  in  throat  and  chest;  of  1.  nostril;  of
mouth ;  of  fauces ;  of  larynx ;  in  chest.

Tickling:  in  r.  nostril.

Tingling:  of  throat.

Dryness :  of  upper  lids ;  of  tongue.

Constriction:  in  hypogastric  region.

Stuffed  up  sensation :  in  posterior  nares.

Heaviness:  of  upper  lids.

Weight:  in  stomach  and  epigastrium.

Roaring:  in  ears.

Stiffness :  in  muscles  of  lumbar  region.

Numbness:  of  arm.

Faintness:  at  stomach;  in  hypogastrium.

Goneness:  at  epigastrium;  in  pit  of  stomach.

Debility:  in  back  and  lower  limbs.

Weakness:  of  body  and  limbs.

Itching:  of  1.  nostril;  of  face;  of  throat;  of  foot;  of  skin.
**  Tissues.  I  Great  emaciation;  weight  reduced  70  pounds;
very  moody  and  depressed  in  mind;  averse  to  conversing;
at  times  so  excited  as  to  curse  his  mother  for  the  least
thing,  and  throwing  food  or  medicine  across  room;  liver
atrophied,  not  more  than  two-thirds  the  natural  size;
kidneys  affected,  urine  scanty  and  high  colored.  ^Gen-
eral marasmus.

B  Small  wounds  bleed  much.

■General  anasarca;  great  difficillty  in  passing  water,  which
is  high  colored  and  deposits  a  cloudy  sediment  on  stand-
ing; constipation.

Mucous  membranes:  secretions  inc];eased,  tenacious,  ropy;
erosions.

■  Catarrhal  affections:  in  patients  of  a  cachectic  habit.

■  ■Muscles  greatly  weakened;  atony.

■  Marasmus;  scrofula;  cancer  cachexia.

■  Cancers:  hard,  adherent,  skin  mottled,  puckered;  cutting

like  knives;  in  mammae.

In  cancer  it  removes  the  pain,  modifies  the  discharge,  de-
priving it  of  its  offensiveness,  and  improves  the  general
health  in  a  marked  degree.

In  early  stage  of  scirrhus,  and  chiefly  when  its  situation
is  in  a  gland  or  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  a  gland.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  76

Stage  of  degenerative  softening  in  scirrlius.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  causes  bleed-
ing of  cartilaginous  septum  which  is  sore;  epigastric
region  very  tender;  ulcers  on  legs  <.

Pressure:  cutting  over  eyes  >;  abdominal  walls  painful;
liver sensitive; of  hand >  head; clothing  feels un-
comfortable about  groins.
■'*'  Skin. iSkin  jaundiced,  of  a  dark  greenish -yellow^  color.

BSkin  of  a  dark  purplish  hue,  with  heat  and  tingling,  <
from  motion.

I  Hot,  dry  skin,  with  fever.

I  I  Burning  heat  and  itching  of  skin.

■  Itching  in  small-pox.

I  Yellowish  looking  vesicles,  filled  with  a  limpid  fluid.
iHyperidrosis;  excessive  sweat  of  axillse  or  about  genitals;
offensive.

■  Obstinate  excoriations  of  skin,  intertrigo,  in  children.
Nettlerash  from  head  to  foot,  next  day  face  affected,  and

through  scratching  became  much  swollen;  lids  puffed;
itching,  burning  and  stinging,  <  at  night;  rash  resem-
bled scarlatina,  both  in  color  and  in  disappearing  a
long  time  on  pressure.
lErysipelatoid  rash  on  face,  neck,  palms,  joints  of  fingers
and  wTist,  with  maddening,  burning  heat,  later  skin
exfoliates;  pains  <  at  night.

■  Fissures  around  mucous  outlets,  as  on  lips,  about  anus,

or  on  flexor  surfaces,  and  between  fingers  and  toes  of
syphilitic  subjects,  who  have  used  too  much  mercury  or
iodide  of  potash;  debilitated  subjects,  broken  down  by
excessive  use  of  alcohol.

■  Margins  around  anus thickened and  fissured, fissures

extending  into  mucous  membrane.

■  Ulcers  with  indolent  granulations;  unhealthy  and  scanty

pus;  scrofulous  or  cachectic  persons.

■  Chronic  ulcers  arising  from  contusions,  incised  and  lace-

rated wounds,  burns,  scalds,  or  some  disease  of  skin.

■  Ulcers  following  removal  of tumors,  pricking  pain  on

motion  of  part.

■  Bedsores.

■Small-pox;  itching;  tingling  of  skin  ;  great  redness,  sw^ell-
ing  and  aching  of  skin;  very  sore  throat;  intense  ach-
ing in  small  of  back  and  legs ;  pustules  dark  ;  ulcers
in  mouth  and  fauces;  sleeplessness.

■Variola,  itching  tingling  of  eruption :  face  swollen ;
throat  raw  ;  pustules  dark  ;  great  prostration.

■  Face  greatly  swollen,  eyes  closed,  nose  enormously  large

and  entirely  stopped  up;  throat  very  sore;  pustules
dark ;  almost  unconscious,  having  no  hope  of  recovery
^Small-pox.


77  - HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

I  Face  covered  with  a  fine  rash  which  subsequently,  proved
to  be  confluent  small-pox;  face  greatly  swollen,  eyes
closed ;  throat  sore.

In  small-pox  it  relieves  the  irritation  almost  instantly,
removes  the  swelling,  diminishes  the  odor,  obviates  sec-
ondary fever,  prevents  pitting  to  very  great  degree,  and
destroys  the  contagious  character  of  the  disease.

I  Lupus;  lupus  exedens  and  ulcerative  stage  of  leprosy.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Weakened,  debilitated  sub-
jects, with  mucous  discharges.

Cachectic  persons,  with  marked  disturbance  of  gastric  and
hepatic  functions.

■Scrofulous  diathesis.

■  Old  people.

Child,  set.  1 ;  constipation.

Boy,  get.  6,  light  complexion,  light  curly  hair,  had  not
been  vaccinated ;  small-pox.

Girl,  set.  8,  after  a  fall ;  lacerated  wound  of  scalp.

Little  girl,  after  burn ;  ulcer  on  back  of  hand.

Girl,  set.  14,  as  she  was  about  recovering  from  an  attack
of  diphtheria ;  diphtheritic  deposit  in  nose  and  vagina.

Man,  set.  18,  cachectic,  consumptive  appearance;  scrofu-
lous ulcers  on  leg.

Woman,  set.  20,  brunette,  black  eyes,  delicate  features,  but
strong  and  energetic,  two  months  pregnant  with  third
child  ;  constipation  and  hemorrhoids.

Woman,  set.  21,  mother  of  one  child,  nervous  tempera-
ment, blue  .eyes,  light  hair,  has  prolapsus  uteri  and
leucorrhoea  of  several  3^ears  standing ;  uterine  affection.

Unmarried  woman,  set.  22 ;  cancer  of  breast.

Man,  set.  22,  after  measles  two  and  one-half  years  ago ;
marasmus.

Miss ,  set.  25,  a teacher,  was  given  up  by  the  old

school ;  cancer  of  stomach.

Married  woman,  set.  26,  light  hair,  pale  complexion,  feeble
constitution,  tea  drinker,  has  suffered  for  twelve  years;
headache  and  constipation.

Young  unmarried  woman,  for  two  years  under  allopathic
treatment ;  cancer  of  breast.

Sanguine  young  lady,  after  confinement ;  sore  mouth.

Unmarried  woman ;  erysipelas.

Man,  suffering  from  itch,  for  which  corrosive  sublimate
was  used  ;  salivation.

Man,  set.  28,  blue  eyes,  light  hair,  unmarried,  of  dissipated
habits,  has  had  three  epileptic  seizures,  has  had  gonor-
rhoea three  times ;  gonorrhoea.

Man,  set.  29,  after  habitual  use  of  purgatives;  constipation.

Woman,  set.  29,  mother  of  two  children,  habitually  takes
castor  oil  and  senna;  constipation.


HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.  78

Colored  woman,  set.  30,  next  day  after  confinement;  small-
pox.

Woman,  set.  32,  blue  eyes,  light  hair,  delicate  skin,  mother
of  two  children,  has  used  tea  and  coffee  for  fifteen  years;
suffering  for  three  years;  hemorrhoids.

Man,  set.  32,  mason,  three  years  ago  fell  from  a  scaffold
and  injured  r.  arm;  ulceration  of  arm.

Man,  set.  35,  mill  operator,  habits  moderately  temperate;
ulcers  on  leg.

Mrs.  J.,  set.  37,  laundress,  health  good;  tumor  in  1.  breast.

Woman,  set  38,  bilous  temperament,  dark  hair,  suffering
eight  years,  has  taken  much  purgative  medicine-  con-
stipation.

Man,  set.  40 ;  jaundice.

Man,  set.  40,  railroad  engineer;  small-pox.

Woman,  set.  45 ;  cancerous  tumor.

Man,  set.  46,  during  Crimean  campaign  was  attacked  with
rheumatic  fever,  consequent  upon  exposure;  anasarca
and  constipation.

Woman,  set  50,  has  suffered  many  years;  cancer  (improved).

Woman,  single,  set.  52,  of  phthisical  family,  ill  fourteen
years,  but  always  delicate;  dyspepsia.

Mrs.  D.,  set.  55,  suffering  two  years ;  tumor  on  foot.

Woman,  set  60,  widow,  seven  children,  previously  stout
and  healthy,  after  getting  wet  one  year  ago,  affection  of
liver  for  which  she  was  leeched,  blistered  and  salivated,
since  which  she  has  not  been  well;  subacute  inflamma-
tion of  liver.

Woman,  set.  70 ;  sore  leg.

Man,  set.  70;  epigastric  tumor.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by: Sulphur  (head  symptoms  and
sciatic  pains).

It  antidotes:  Mercur.  and  chlorate  of  potash.

Compare:  Amm.  mur.,  Ant.  cnid.,  Kali  bich.,  Pulsat.
(action  on  mucous  membranes);  Aloes.,  Collin.,  Sepia,
Sulphur  (action  on  lower  bowels);  Berber.,  Digit,  Gel-
sem.  (gastro-duodenal  catarrh  involving  bile  ducts) ;  Nux
vom.  (gastric  catarrh  of  alcoholism);  Amm.  mur.,  Gra-
phit,  Nux  vom.  (constipation);  Ant.  crud.  (indigestion);
Kali  bich.  (otorrhoea);  Arsen.,  Merc,  corr.,  Euphras.
(ophthalmia);  Arg.  nitr.,  Kali  bich.  (nasal  catarrh);
Hepar  (syphilitic  ozsena  after  abuse  of  mercury  or  iodide
of  potash);  Aloes,  Sulphur  {coMgh.  with,  abdominal  con-
gestion); Arsen.,  Aurum  mur.,  Hydrocotyle,  Kali  bich.
(lupus);  Ant.  tart.,  Baptis,  Thuja  (variola);  Thuja
(epithelioma);  Arsen.,  Baptis.,  Conium-,  Condur.,  Kreos.,
Phytol.,  Trifol.  prat,  (cancer  of  mammary  glands);
Cinchon.  (intermittents) ;  Strychnia  (action  on  spinal
cord).


79  HYDROCOTYLE  ASIATICA.

HYDROCOTYLE  ASIATICA.

Indian  Pennywort.  UmbeUiferas.

A  small  plant  long  known  as  an  Indian  remedy,  growing  in  India  and  South-
ern Africa. First  employed  by  Boileau  in  the  treatment  of  leprosy.
Experiments  by  Andouit ;  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  625.

Clinical  Authorities. — Lupus  exedens  of  nose,  Andouit,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p,
585;  Lupus,  tuberculous,  erythematic,  Martin,  Hom.  Kec,  vol.  2,  p.  177;  Ulceration
cervix  uteri,  Andouit,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  588;  Pruritus  vagime,  Andouit,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  16,  p.  588;  Eczema,  Andouit,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  pp.  586-87 ;  Lepra  tuberculosa,
Andouit,  B.  J.  H.,.  vol.  16,  p.  584;  Gangrene  after  operation,  Andouit,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  16,  p.  589;  Lepra,  Boilieu,  Sinnasamy,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  462;  Syphilitic
lesions,  l^Lartin,  Hom.  Kec,  vol.  2,  p.  177

^  Mind. Gayety  or  gloomy  thoughts.

'^  Sensorium. i  Vertigo.

*  Outer  Head. Intense  pain  with  some  tumefaction  in  poste-
rior portion  of  skull;  occiput  acutely  sensitive,  especially
to  touch.
Tinea  favosa;  painful  constriction  of  posterior  and  superior
integuments  of  skull ;  general  lassitude  and  prostration.

^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  l  Tumors  of  lid,  especially  in  epithelioma.

®  Upper  Face.  iCopper  colored  eruption  on  face;  large
tubercle  on  r.  alse  nasi,  as  large  as  sixpence,  and  cov-
ered with  a  thick  crust,  under  which  yellowish  matter
mixed  with  blood;  edges  of  ulcer  irregular  and  livid;
five  other  tubercles,  as  large  as  lentils,  near  root  of  nose
at  both  sides,  and  painless. ^Lupus  exedens.

■  Papular  eruption  on  face.

■  Neuralgic  affections  of  supra  and  infraorbital  nerves.
^^  Inner  Mouth. 1 1  Stomatitis  aphthosa.

I  I  Syphilitic  patches  in  mouth.

"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Loathing  of  food.

^^Hypochondria.  ■Cirrhosis  of  liver;  hypertrophy  and  in-
duration of  connective  tissue;  obstruction  in  whole
hepatic  region;  slight  pain  in  upper  portion  of  liver:
crampy  pains  in  stomach,  without  nausea.

^^  Abdomen. ■Flatulent  colic.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Constipation.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Acute  and  secondary  gonorrhoea.

■  Gonorrhoea,  which  had  been  suppressed  for  fifteen  years.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Dull  pain  in  region  of  ovary.


HYDROCOTYLE  ASIATICA.  80

Pains  in  uterus,  especially  of  1.  side.

Violent  pains  in  uterus  and  neighborhood,  like  labor  pains.

I  I  Uterus  feels  heavy.

I  I  Redness  of  os  uteri  and  cervix.

■  Partly  fungous,  partly  granular  ulcer on  upper  lip  of

neck  of  uteiais,  with  profuse  leucorrhoea.
I  Granular  ulceration  of  entire  neck  of  uterus,  which  is

very  red;  prolapsus  of  uterus;  profuse  leucorrhoea.
Menses  too  early.
I  Deep  seated  heat in  vagina; shooting and  itching  in

orifice.
I  Insupportable  itching  of  vagina.
I  I  Heat  and  redness  of  vagina  and  vulva.

■  Profuse  leucorrhoea.

■^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  i  Alleviated  the  sufferings

in  stenosis  of  aorta.
^"  Outer  Chest. ■Two  small  pustules  on  chest.
^'  Neck  and  Back, l  i  Swelling  of  lymphatic  vessels  of  neck.

■  On  lower  third  of  inner  surface  of  1.  loin  a  large  oval

patch,  about  four  and  three-fourths  inches  in  length,
covered  with  a  powder  resembling  pulverized  chalk;  the
edges  of  a  yellowish  color;  small  eruption  having  the
appearance  of  millet.
^^  Lower  Limbs. ■Yellowish  spots  on  legs.

■  Insupportable  itching  of  soles  of  feet.

■Back  of  r.  foot,  over  a  space  of  two  inches  in  diameter,
was  covered  with  small  indurations,  having  a  large
thick  crust,  some  grayish-white,  others  light  yellow,  the
whole  resting  on  a  purj)le  base.  ^Tuberculous,  erythe-
matic  lupus.
^^  Nerves. ■  General  weariness.

■  Depression,  heaviness  and  dull  feeling.

■  Bruised  feeling  in  all  the  muscles.
Hypersemia  of  nervous  centres.

Acts  especially  upon  nervus  trigeminus.
■*'  Locality  and  Direction. Right: large  tubercle  on  alas
nasi;  back  of  foot  covered  with  small  indurations.

Left:  pains  in  side  of  uterus.
*'  Sensations. Pains :  in  uterus.

Intense  pain :  in  posterior  portion  of  skull.

Violent  pains:  in  uterus  and  neighborhood.

Shooting:  in  orifice  of  vagina.

Crampy  pains:  in  stomach.

Neuralgic  affections:  of  supra  and  infraorbital  nerves.

Gout:  with  very  severe  paroxysms.

Dull  pain :  in  region  of  ovary.

Slight  pain :  in  upper  part  of  liver.

Painful  constriction: of  posterior and  superior integu-
ments of  skull.


81  HYDROCOTYLE  ASIATICA.

Acute  sensitiveness:  of  occiput.
Bruised  feeling:  in  all  muscles.
Deep  seated  heat:  in  vagina.
Heavy  feeling :  of  uterus.

Insupportable  itching:  in  orifice  of  vagina;  of  vagina;  of
soles  of  feet.
*'  Tissues. '  Rheumatic  disorders.

I  I  Gout  with  very  severe  paroxysms.

■  Gangrene  in  newly  formed  flap  on  little  finger.

■  Syphilitic  affections  of  skin  and  mucous  membranes.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  occiput  acutely

sensitive.
^^  Skin. ■  Intolerable  itching  in  several  places.

■  Pricking  on  different  parts.

■  Erysipelatous  redness.

■  Eczema.

■  Three  spots,  almost completely circular,  with slightly

raised,  scaly  edges.

■  Pemphigus  benignus.

■  Lepra  tuberculosa,  especially  in  face,  abdomen,  thighs

and  genitals ;  in  latter  there  was  a  large  tubercle,  secret-
ing a  reddish  pus.

■  Arabian  elephantiasis.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. It  had  a  beneficial  effect  in

fifty-seven  cases  of  leprosy  treated  by  Boileau.
Boy,  set.  15;  lupus,  tuberculous  and  erythematic,  on  r.  foot

and  1.  loin.
Man,  8st.  16,  has  never  suffered  either  from  syphilis  or

scrofula,  has  lived  for  a  long  time  in  a  damp  dwelling,

suffering  about  six  months;  lepra  tuberculosa.
Young  woman,  set  20,  delicate,  weakly,  during  childhood

suffered  frequently  from  swelling  of  glands,  mother  has

a  copper  colored  eruption  on  face; suffered  for  eight

years;  lupus  exedens  of  nose.
Man,  set  22,  after  an  operation ;  gangrene  of  flap.
Lady,  set.  30,  suffering  for  two  months;  pruritus  vaginae.
Woman,  set.  34,  childless,  tolerably  robust constitution,

melancholic,  skin  yellow,  has  suffered  much  from  grief;

ulceration  of  cervix  uteri.
Woman,  set.  40,  melancholic  temperament,  mother  of  three

children;  affection  of  uterus.
Married  woman,  set.  46,  delicate,  has  had  nine  children,

and  much  anxiety ;  ulcer  on  neck  of  uterus.
*^  Relations. Compare  Hydrast.  (in  lupus  exedens).


VOL.  VI.— 6.


HYDROCYANIC  ACID.  82

HYDROCYANIC  ACID.

Prussic  Acid.  HCy.

Provings  by  Jcerg  and  pupils,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  1.

Most  of  the  symptoms  are  toxicological,  clinically  verified.

ClinicaIj  Authokities. — Catarrh  of  stomach  and  small  intestines,  Moore,  Allg.
Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  105,  p.  46 ;  Chronic  dyspepsia,  Hendricks,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.
105,  p.  144;  Asthma  (3  cases),  Frank,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  89 ;  Varicose  ulcers  on
^e^s,  Schiissler,  Kaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  330;  Nenous  exhaustion.  Chapman,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  7,  p.  387  ;  Hysteria,  Payne,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  432 ;  Convulsions,  Gallagher,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  447 ;  Epileptiform  seizures,  Cooper,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  783 ;
Hemiplegia  (benefited).  Swan,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  322 ;  Traumatic  tetanus,  Moore,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  506.

^  Mind. Inability  to  think.

Vexed  mood,  despondency,  oppression.

Could  not  remain  in  middle  of  road  when  he  saw  a  vehicle
approaching  him  even  at  a  considerable  distance,  but
was  forced,  as  it  were  against  his  will,  to  stand  aside
without  waiting  for  it  to  come  nearer.  (After  recover-
ing from  poisoning.)

i  Insanity,  when  there  is  much  excitement  present,  as
shown  in  gesture  or  speech.

I  Hysteria, See  Chap.  36.
^  Sensorium. iLoss  of  consciousness.

Dizziness  with  feeling  of  intoxication.

Sudden  feeling  as  though  everything  about  him  moved
slowly;  dizzy  without  reeling;  slight  pressure  1.  side  of
occiput  over  1.  half  of  head  to  frontal  region.

Vertigo  with  reeling;  with  headache.

Insufficiency  of  arterial  contraction,  with  frequent  head-
aches, stupefaction  and  falling  down  ;  cloudiness  of
senses,  objects  seem  to  move;  he  sees  through  a  gauze;
is  scarcely  able  to  keep  on  his  feet  after  raising  head
when  stooping,  or  rising  from  one's  seat,  <  in  open  air.
^  Inner  Head.  Pressure  from  vertex  towards  forehead  on
both  sides  and  to  orbits  where  it  became  fixed,  while
from  occiput  it  extended  down  nape  of  neck ;  it  caused
confusion  of  head.

Violent  pressure  in  occiput  and  forehead,  <  r.  side;  press-
ure soon  leaves,  but  confusion  lasts.

•  Headache  with  giddiness.

Stupefying  headache.

Pricking  in  various  parts  of  head.


83  HYDROCYANIC  ACID.

iSudden  and  desperate  cases  of  cerebro-spinal  meningitis;
insensibility,  with  protruded,  half  open  eyes;  dilated,
immovable  pupils,  with  blindness;  roaring  and  deaf-
ness in  ears;  distorted,  bloated  and  bluish  face;  tongue
paralyzed  and  protruded;  loss  of  speech;  retention  of
or  involuntary  urine  and  stool;  rattling,  slow  respira-
tion; irregular,  feeble  beating  of  heart;  general  cold-
ness with  heat  in  head.
Sudden  cerebral  congestion,  with  profound  coma;  pre-
ceded by  vertigo,  weight  and  great  pain  in  back  of  head.
*  Sight  and  Eyes. •  i  Open  eyes,  with  fixed  eyeballs.

■  Distorted,  half  open  eyes.

I  I  Dimness  of  sight;  gauze  before  eyes.
Pupils  dilated,  immovable,  insensible  to  light;  paralysis
of  lids;  protrusion  of  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Roaring  and  buzzing  in  ears;  hard-
ness of  hearing.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Dryness  of  nose.

Stinging high up in nose, discharge of  disorganized,
greenish  brown  looking  fetid  pieces  of  hardened  mucus.
Enlarged,  bluish  wings  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Sallow  and  gray  complexion.

■  Pale,  bluish  face,  looks  old.
Face  bloated ;  distorted.

Sudden supraorbital neuralgia,  with much  flushing  of
same  side  of  face.
^  Lower  Face. iiPale,  bluish  lips.
Distortion  of  corners  of  mouth.
I  Jaws  firmly  clenched  in  rigid  spasm.

I  I  Froth  at  mouth.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  acrid,  sweet  or  fetid.

Tongue  coated  white.

Lameness  and  stiffness  of  tongue.

Cold  feeling  of  tongue.

Burning  on  tip  of  tongue.
*^  Inner  Mouth. Increased  secretion  of  saliva.
13  Throat. Scraping  sensation  in  throat,  followed  by  secretion
of  mucus  in  bronchia.

Heat  and  inflammation  of  throat.

I I  Drink  which  is  swallowed  rolls  audibly  down  throat,  as
though  it  were  poured  into  an  empty  barrel.

I  Spasm  in  pharynx  and  oesophagus.

■  Paralysis  of  oesophagus.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  Absence  of  thirst,
with  heat  of  whole  body,  or  violent  thirst.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking,  i  Gurgling  noise  on  drinking,  like
fluid  running  into  a  barrel.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Vomiting
of  a  black  fluid.


HYDROCYANIC  ACID.  84

Acidity  and  heartburn.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Anguish  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Great  sinking  sensation  at  epigastrium  and  stomach.
Spasmodic  contraction  of  stomach.

1 1  Fluids  enter  stomach  with  gurgling  noise.
.  iGastrodynia.

■  Attacks  of  indisposition  coming  on  particularly  in  even-

ing, about  two  hours  after  a  delayed  dinner;  during
attack  refuses  all  food;  intense  sourness,  sometimes  pre-
ceded by  waterbrash;  loss  of  flesh  and  depression  of
spirits. '^Catarrh  of  stomach  and  small  intestines.

■  Burning  pain  in  region  of  navel,  extending  to  oesophagus

and  throat,  two  or  three  hours  after  eating;  loss  of  appe-
tite; white  coated  tongue;  pyrosis;  bitter  eructations;
flatulency  and  constipation ;  region  of  navel  sensitive  to
touch,  and  upon  deep  pressure  there  is  a  sensation  as  of
a  resistant  body;  this  condition  frequently  alternates
with  hepatic  disturbance,  which  manifests  itself  by  at-
tacks of  colic;  there  is  also  present  vomiting  of  food,  or
of  a  slimy,  bilious  matter,  <  evening  and  night ;  emaci-
ation. ^'Chronic  dyspepsia.

■  Intense  gastrodynia  and  enterodynia,  with  much  flatu-

lence, especially  when  heart  sympathizes  with  the  dys-
peptic symptoms.
■Dyspepsia  dependent  upon  chronic  inflammation  of  stom-
ach and  bowels.

■  Inflammation  of  stomach  and  bowels.

^^  Abdomen. Coldness  of  abdomen  alternating  with  burning.
Cold  feeling  in  abdomen  with  stitches.

■  Enteralgia,  with  distension  of  abdomen.
Yellow  or  brownish  spots  on  abdomen.

^^  Stool and Rectum. ■  Involuntary stools,  hiccough and
great  prostration.

■  Involuntary  stool  in  bed.

■  Sudden  prostration;  long  lasting  fainting  spells  resem-

bling apoplectic  attacks. ^Cholera  Asiatica.

■  Sudden  cessation  of  all  discharges. ^Cholera.

■Rapid  progress  towards  asphyxia;  marble  coldness  of
whole  body;  pulselessness;  cessation  of  vomiting  and
diarrhoea;  hiccough;  paralysis  of  oesophagus;  when
drinking,  fluid  runs  gurgling  down  the  oesophagus;
long  fainting  spells ;  trismus;  tetanus. ^Cholera.

■Last  stage  of  Asiatic  cholera,  when  diarrhoea  has  ceased
and  the  vomiting  has  decreased,  when  there  is  anguish
with  pressure  on  chest,  and  the  patient  becomes  cold,
with  gradual  extinction  of  pulse.

■  Dry  cholera.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Uraemia,  action  of  heart  diminished ;
pulse  accelerated,  soft;  stagnation  of  circulation  in  heart


85  HYDROCYANIC  ACID.

and  lungs;  palpitation,  with  indescribable  anguish  and
dyspnoea;  depression  of  sensibility;  first  convulsions
and  afterwards  paralysis;  extreme  apathy;  slow  moan-
ing breathing;  rattling  in  trachea;  paralysis  of  larynx
or  sudden  paralysis  of  heart.  ^Asphyctic  form  of  ura3mia.

Retention  of  urine.

Copious  emission  of  watery  urine.

Involuntary  urination.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Gone  or  sinking  sensation  in
epigastrium,  with  frequent  hot  flashes,  at  climacteric
period.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Loss  of
speech.

Tickling  and  scraping  in  larynx  and  bronchial  tubes,  with
expectoration  of  yellowish  or  whitish  mucus.

■  Scraping  and  burning  in  larynx.

■  Sensation  as  if  larynx  were  swollen.

^  Respiration, l  '  Noisy  and  agitated  breathing.
I  Rattling,  moaning,  slow  breathing.
Arrest  of  breathing  caused  by  stitches  in  larynx.
Tightness  in  chest,  sensation  of  suffocation.
Feeling  of  suffocation  with  torturing  pains  in  chest.
Asthma,  especially  when  the  minute  bronchial  tubes  are

chiefly  involved,  with  puffy  face  and  feeble  action  of

heart;  or  heart's  action  may  be  violent.

■  Periodical  asthma,  and  violent attacks of  suffocative,

spasmodic  cough.
■Spasmodic  asthma;  asthma  Millari.
^  Cough.  Violent  paroxysms  of  cough,  or  frequent  cough  ex-
cited by  a  pricking  sensation,  which  begins  in  larynx
and  extends  down  into  trachea,  followed  by  dryness  of
mouth  and  larynx;  slow,  enfeebled  and  anxious  respira-
tion, with  much  rattling  of  mucus.

■  Dry,  tickling  cough  in  consumptives,  especially  if  reflex

from  heart  disease.
Nervous  cough  with  dyspnoea.

■  Whooping  cough;  dry,  spasmodic,  suffocating  cough.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Threatened  pulmonary  apoplexy.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Heart's  action  very  weak.

■  Irregular  feeble  beating  of  heart.

■  Heart's  action  irregular,  pulse  hardly  to  be  felt.

:  Palpitation  and  other  functional  irregularities  of  organ,
of  no  very  energetic  character,  whether  purely  nervous
or  associated  with  organic  disease.

■Sudden  outcry;  spasmodic  sensations;  long  fainting
spells;  heart  disease  with  violent  palpitations;  feeling  of
suffocation  with  torturing  pains  in  chest;  irregularity
of  motions  of  heart ;  feeble  beating  of  heart. ^Angina.

■  Pulse  sometimes  ceases.


HYDROCYANIC  ACID.  86

I  Pulselessness;  cold,  clammy  sweat;  involuntary  stools;

staring,  fixed  look,  with  dilated  pupils;  breathing  slow,

deep,  gasping,  difficult  and  spasmodic,  at  long  intervals ;

apparently  dead.

^  Outer  Chest. Brownish  spots  on  chest  and  abdomen.

^^  Neck  and  Back, i  Muscles  of  back  and  face  are  principally

affected.
^^  Lower  Limbs, i Varicose  ulcers  on  legs.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Languor  and  weakness  of  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lies  on  bed :  with  head  fixed
and  thrown  backwards,  and  legs  fixed  and  rigid;  no
distinct  bend  backwards  or  sideways  of  trunk  and  leg.

Lies  in  an  apparently  unconscious  state,  limbs  and  jaws
rigid,  forearms  flexed  on  arms,  which  are  firmly  pressed
on  side.

Lies  like  one  dead.

Frequently  rises  in  bed,  gazes  vacantly  about  for  a
minute,  then  throws  herself  forcibly  upon  pillow,  or
flings  herself  from  one  side  to  the  other.

Can  scarcely  stand:  after  raising  head  from  stooping;  on
rising  from  one's  seat.

Falls  down  with  vertigo.
^  Nerves. I  General  weakness;  loss  of  power;  great  exhaustion.

Languor  and  weakness  of  limbs,  especially  of  thighs.

I  Long  lasting  fainting  spells.

iNervous  exhaustion,  the  result  of  overwork  and  anxiety;
loss  of  appetite;  circulation  languid;  at  times  is  forced
to  scream  out  suddenly,  she  knows  not  why;  this  scream
is  followed  by  faintness,  sometimes  even  swooning;  at
such  times  either  before  or  subsequent  to  faintness,
tightness  of  chest  and  acute  pain  as  of  spasm  of  heart;
at  times  is  wakened  out  of  sleep  by  this  scream  and
the  overpowering  sensations. ^Nervous  dyspepsia.

■  Lies  in  an  apparently  unconscious  state,  limbs  and  jaws
rigid,  forearms  flexed  on  arms,  which  are  firmly  pressed
to  sides;  eyes  fixed  and  drawn  somewhat  to  the  right;
eyeballs  slightly  sensitive  to  touch ;  constant  succession
of  tears  roll  down  cheeks;  beat  of  heart  very  irregular
and  feeble;  occasionally  utters  a  groan  or  a  sigh,  and
presses  hand  forcibly  over  region  of  heart,  as  if  suffering
pain  there;  at  these  times  limbs  become  more  relaxed,
and  she  frequently  rises  in  bed  and  gazes  vacantly
about  for  a  minute,  then  throws  herself  forcibly  upon
pillow,  or  flings  herself  from  one  side  of  bed  to  the  other ;
at  times  great  force  has  to  be  exercised  to  prevent  her
from  injuring  herself;  if  any  means  are  used  to  extend
the  contracted  arms,  or  open  clenched  teeth,  she  exerts
greater  power  to  prevent  it;  after  twenty-four  hours
this  form  of  attack  ceased,  and  she  became  very  busy


HYDROCYANIC  ACID.

packing  and  folding  bedclothes,  and  placing  them  care-
fully under  head,  or  elsewhere  about  bed,  at  same  time
guarding  them  with  watchful  eyes,  allowing  no  one  to
touch  or  take  them;  if  this  is  attempted,  she  strikes
with  her  full  strength;  seems  to  notice  no  person
in  room,  unless  they  interfere  with  her  plans,  but  if
any  one  enters,  she  seizes  a  pillow  or  anything  within
reach,  and  throws  it  forcibly  at  the  intruder:  at  other
times  fixes  eyes  on  a  particular  spot  on  wall,  or  on  a
picture,  or  follows  an  imaginary  figure  or  object  witli
her  eyes,  as  if  watching  its  motions;  frequently  talking,
laughing  loudly,  or  scolding  vehemently ;  imagines  her-
self surrounded  by  many  friends,  shaking  hands  with
them,  and  calling  them  by  name  as  they  appear  before
her;  she  asks  no  questions  and  returns  no  answers;
during  this  time,  which  lasted  four  days,  she  took  no
nourishment  voluntaril3\  <?Hysteria.
Anxious  feeling  and  fretfulness;  uneasy  confusion  of  head;
hysterical  spasms;  semi-consciousness;  limbs  and  jaws
rigid ;  eyes  fixed.

■  Convulsions  when  muscles  of  back,  face  and  jaws  are

principally  affected,  and  the  body  assumes  a  bluish  tint.

■  Convulsions  complicated  with  whooping  cough.

■  Infantile  convulsions.
Tonic  spasms;  catalepsy.

■Affects  upper  spine,  especially  medulla  oblongata;  blue-
ness  of  surface;  marked  trismus,  face  blue,  threatened
suffocation;  paralytic  weakness  quickly  developed;
water  runs  down  oesophagus  like  through  a  pipe.

■Sudden  complete  loss  of  consciousness  and  sensation;  ex-
treme coma  for  several  hours,  only  interrupted  by  occa-
sional sudden  convulsive  movements;  confusion  of
head  and  vertigo;  jaws  clenched,  teeth  firmly  set,  froth
at  mouth,  forming  large  bubbles;  unable  to  swallow;
involuntary  discharge  of  urine  and  feces;  upper  ex-
tremities contracted  and  hands  clenched ;  unusual  stiff-
ness of  legs;  spasms  commencing  in  toes,  followed  by
distortion  of  eyes,  towards  right  and  upwards,  after-
wards general  spasms;  distortion  of  limbs  and  frightful
distortion  of  face;  trunk  spasmodically  bent  forward;
great  exhaustion,  prostration  and  aversion  to  all  work,
mental  or  physical.

■  Sudden epileptiform seizures  coming on about  every

three  months,  lasting  for  two  or  three  weeks  and  leav-
ing him  completely  prostrated ;  falls  down  with  vertigo
accompanied  by  vomiting  of  food ;  lies  like  one  dead ;
in  some  attacks  the  patient  remains  about  for  several
days,  in  which  case  he  vomits  quantities  of  green  fetid
fluid,  accompanied  by  green  motions  from  bowels;  dur-


HYDROCYANIC  ACID.  88

ing  attacks  can  drink,  but  cannot  eat;  lies  in  a  drowsy,
semi-comatose  state,  at  times  being  plunged  into  con-
vulsions, during  which  he  grinds  his  teeth.

■  Epileptic  form  of  hysteria.

iTetanic  grin;  jaws  firmly  fixed;  masseters  hard;  lies  on
bed  with  head  fixed  and  thrown  backwards,  and  legs
fixed  and  rigid ;  no  distinct  bend  backwards  or  sideways
of  trunk  and  legs;  abdominal  muscles  firmly  contracted
and  hard  as  a  board, .severe  spasms  of  all  muscles,  dur-
ing which  breathing  becomes  hurried  and  labored,  <  at
night,  when  dropping  off  to  sleep;  feels  on  verge  of
suffocation;  can  hardly  be  kept  in  bed;  paroxysms  come
on  without  any  apparent  provocation  and  leave  him
prostrate  with  exhaustion  and  apprehension;  dreads
their  approach,  and  cannot  sleep  for  fear  of  these  attacks
seizing  him  just  as  he  closes  his  eyes;  has  not  slept  for
several  days;  fluids  can  be  swallowed  when  poured  into
mouth,  but  the  act  is  painful  and  difiicult;  pulse  80;
constipated. ^Traumatic  tetanus.

■  Cyanotic  appearance;  cold ;  heart  beats  slower  and  slower,

until  it  almost  ceases,  then  suddenly  rises  in  frequency,
with  each  return  of  spasms. ^Tetanus.

■  Traumatic  tetanus.

■Tetanic  convulsions  during  course  of  diarrhoea  and  dys-
entery.

■  General  coldness,  long  lasting  syncope;  anguish  and  press-

ure on  chest;  hiccough;  rattling,  moaning,  slow  breath-
ing ;  distorted  features ;  pupils  dilated ;  eyelids  paralyzed ;
filiform  pulse. ^Shock.

■  Darting  pains;  inability  to  think;  feeling  of  approaching

paralysis;  unsteadiness  of  gait.

Loss  of  sensation  in  limbs,  with  stiffness  of  same.

Staggering  and  trembling;  immobility;  insensibility;  stiff-
ness of  body.

Paralysis  first  of  lower,  then  of  upper  limbs.

i  I  Paralysis  of  1.  side;  could  recognize  persons,  but  was  un-
able to  speak;  intermittent  pulse  and  heartbeat;  fingers
cold;  nose  pinched,  eyes  turned  up. ^Hemiplegia.

■Diseases  of  cerebro-spinal  system  that  come  on  with  great
suddenness and severity; mind depressed and very
irritable.
^^  Sleep. Irresistible,  constant  drowsiness.

Prolonged  sleeplessness,  or  very  heavy sleep; fear  and
great  anxiety.
^  Time. For  several  hours:  extreme  coma.

Tw^o  or  three  hours  after  eating:  burning  pain  in  region
of  navel,  extending  to  oesophagus  and  throat.

For  several  days:  in  some  attacks  the  sickness  remains;
has  not  slept.


89  '  HYDROCYANIC  ACID.

Evening:  attacks  of  indisposition;  two  hours  after  delayed
dinner;  vomiting  of  food  or  slimy,  bilious  matter  <.

Night:  vomiting  of  food  or  slimy,  bilious  matter;  severe
spasms  of  all  muscles,  during  which  breathing  becomes
hurried  and  labored  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  vertigo  <.
*"  Fever, iColdness  within  and  without,  like  marble.

I  I  Cold  extremities.

I  Heat  in  head  with  coldness.of  extremities.

Heat  and  perspiration  over  whole  body.

I  I  Body  covered  with  sweat.

■  Scarlatina,  when  the  eruption  in  its  early  appearance  is
dark  colored  and  soon  becomes  livid,  only  slowly  regain-
ing its  color  when  this  is  expelled  by  pressure  of  finger;
rapid,  feeble  pulse;  coma  and  great  prostration.

I I  Bad  cases  of  small-pox.

"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Attacks  last  four  days.

At  times :  is  forced  to  scream  out  suddenly,  she  know^s  not
why ;  tightness  of  chest ;  acute  pain  at  heart ;  is  awakened
out  of  sleep  by  this  scream ;  plunges  in  convulsions.  _

About  every  month :  sudden  epileptiform  seizures  lasting
for  two  or  three  weeks.
'^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  side  of  head  violent  pres-
sure.

Left:  slight  pressure  of  occiput  over  1.  half  of  head  to
frontal  region,  paralysis  of  side.

Towards  right  and  upwards :  distortion  of  eyes.
^^  Sensations.  As  though  everything  about  him  moved  slowly ;
as  if  drink was  poured  down  throat like  an  empty
barrel;  as  if  a  resisiant  body  in  region  of  navel;  as  if
larynx  was  swollen.

Torturing  pains :  in  chest.

Acute  pain :  of  heart.

Great  pain :  in  back  of  head.

Darting  pains:  general.

Stitches:  in  abdomen;  in  larynx.

Anguish:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  chest.

Stupefying  headache.

Supraorbital  neuralgia.

Stinging:  high  up  in  nose.

Burning  pain :  in  region  of  navel.

Burning:  on  tip  of  tongue;  on  larynx.

Scraping  sensation:  in  throat;  in  larynx;  in  bronchial
tubes.

Pricking  sensation:  from  larynx  to  trachea.

Pricking:  in  various  parts  of  head.

Tickling:  in  larynx.

Violent  pressure:  in  occiput  and  forehead.

Slight  pressure:  1.  side  of  occiput  over  1.  half  of  head  to


HYDROCYANIC  ACID.  9,0

frontal  region;  from  vertex  towards  forehead  on  both

sides  and  to  orbits,  where  it  became  fixed,  while  from

occiput  it  extended  down  nape  of  neck.
Heat:  in  head;  in  throat.
Confusion :  of  head.
Gone  sensation :  in  epigastrium.
Weight:  in  back  of  head.
Tightness:  in  chest.
Stiffness :  of  tongue ;  of  legs.
Lameness :  of  tongue.
Weakness:  of  limbs.
Dryness:  of  nose;  of  mouth;  of  larynx.
Roaring  and  deafness:  in  ears.
Buzzing:  in  ears.
Coldness:  in  body.

Cold  feeling:  of  tongue;  of  abdomen.
^*  Tissues. Acts  upon  cerebral  veins,  producing  congestion ;

secondarily  upon  heart,  nerves,  etc.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  region  of

navel  sensitive;  eyeballs  slightly  sensitive.
Pressure  of  finger:  scarlatina,  when  eruption,  in  its  early

appearance,  is  dark  colored  and soon  becomes  livid,

only  slowly  regaining  its  color  when  this  is  exnelled  by

pressure  of  finger.
**'  Skin. ■  Paleness  with  a  blue  tinge.
Dryness  of  skin.

Itching;  formication;  erythema.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy, set.  3 ;  epileptiform

seizure.
Joiner,  set.  20,  after  scalding  legs;  traumatic  tetanus.
Married  woman,  set.  23,  after  undergoing  the  most  heroic

treatment,  even  to  trephining,  two  months  after  abortion ;

hysteria.
Woman,  set.  30,  drawing  teacher;  nervous  exhaustion.
Man,  set.  39,  bilious  temperament, dark complexioned,

married;  catarrh  of  stomach  and  small  intestines.
Woman,  set.  80;  hemiplegia  (benefited).
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Ammonia,  Camphor.,  Coffea,  Ipec,

Nux  vonn.,  Opium,  Verat.  vir.
Compare : CaTnphor.  (first  stage  of  cholera) ;  Aeon.,  Cicuta

(action  on  spinal  cord) ;  (Enanthe  crocata  (in  epilepsy).


HYDROPHOBINUM. (See  Lyssin.)


01  '  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

Henbane.  Solonacese.

Provings  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,
p.  25.

Clinical  Authorities. — Affections  of  mind,  Gauwerky,  Woost,  Bathmann,
Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  4;  (2  cases)  von  Stork,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  54
Effects  of  jealousy,  Stapf,  Analytic  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  86;  Melancholia,  Bethmann,
Analytic.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  192;  Hallucinations,  Moore,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p
358;  Hallucination^,  Moore,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  358;  Delirium,  Boenninghausen
Analytic.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  109;  Mania,  Guernsey,  Dunham's  Lectures
Mania  from  jealousy,  Stapf,  Analytic.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  109;  Maniacal  fury.
Chapman,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  229;  Madness,  von  Stork,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3
p.  546 ;  Mania,  Grissel,  Martini  and  Spohr,  Szotar,  Hahnemann,  Thorer,
Hanstein,  Weber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  pp.  26-29;  Insanity,  Sztaraveszki.
Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  p.  55;  Haywood,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  35,  p.  162;  Delirium
tremens,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  143;  Moore,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,
p.  497;  Hydrophobia,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  623;  Affection  of  brain.  Gross.
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  125;  Inflammation  of  brain,  Mossbauer,  EiiCk.  KL  Erf,
vol.  1,  p.  125;  Apoplexy,  Elwert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  92;  Heineralopia
Hauptmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  340 ;  Martin,  Norton's  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  95
Photophobia,  Garay,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  125 ;  Strabismus,  Gallavardin,  Eiick
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  141 ;  Toothache,  Kreuss,  Hering,  Bcenninghausenj  Knorre,  Alt
schul,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  462;  Loss  of  speech,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  18
Hahnemann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  70;  Eampel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  69
Affection  of  throat,  Altschul,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  240;  Vomiting,  Low,  Eiick
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  260;  Flatulent  colic,  Hartman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  753
Diarrhoea,  Miller,  Cin.  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  3,  p.  381 ;  Paralysis  of  sphincter  ani.  Gross,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  1010;  Frequent  micturition.  Chapman,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8
p.  230;  Uterine  hemorrhage,  Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  625;  Hahnemann
Hering,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  311;  Metrorrhagia,  Z.  S.  Hahnemann
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  271;  Affections  during  pregnancy,  Gaspar,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,
p.  382;  Diarrhcea  in  lying-in  woman,  Martin,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1886,  p.  95;  Convul-
sions during  labor,  Eiickert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  407 ;  Cramps  in  calves  of  legs
during  labor,  Wielobicky,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  408 ;  Child-bed  fever,  Hart-
mann, Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  448;  Bronchitis,  Miller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  115;
Cough,  Caspar,  Trinks,  Hartmann,  Elwert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  15 ;  Eidherr,
Low,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  pp.  683,  720;  Chest  affection,  von  Stork,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  546;  Inflammation  of  lungs,  Watzke,  Buchner,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  298;  Catarrhal  pneumonia,  Groos,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  100;  Spasms
of  chest,  von  Stork,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  550;  Cramps  of  diaphragm,  Adler,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  944;  Hcemoptysis,  von  Stork,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  547 ;  Palpi-
tation of  heart,  von  Stork,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  546 ;  Rheumatic  endocarditis,  Marchal
de  Calvi,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  3,  p.  25 ;  Hysteria,  von  Stork,  N.  A.  J.  H.,vol.  3,  p.  550;


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  92

Convulsive  tremors  and  convulsions,  von  Stork,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  545 ;  Chorea,
Kiickert,  Shellhammer,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  510;  Spasms  and  epilepsy,  von
Stork,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  548 ;  Hartmann,  Jahr,  Tietzer,  Miiller,  Riickert,
HofFendahl,  Schubert,  Caspar!,  Knorre,  Kleinert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  562 ;
Sleeplessness,  Schron,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf ,  vol.  3,  p.  517  ;  Remittent  fever,  Morrison,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  222;  Typhoid  fever,  Knorre,  Diez,  Elwert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,
pp.  735-740;  McGeorge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  540;  Typhus,  Smith,  Eaue's  Eec,
1874,  p.  284.

^  Mind-  I  Stupor,  unconsciousness;  does  not  reply  to  questions;
does  not  recognize  any  one ;  answers  properly,  but  im-
mediately stupor  returns.

■  Stupefaction:  depressing  mental  influences;  hypochon-

driacal ;  from  smell  of  flowers,  gas,  etheric  oils,  etc.

I  Imbecility,  or  illusions  of  imagination  and  senses.

I I  Inability  to  think;  cannot  direct  or  control  thoughts.

I  Loss  of  memory.

iQuiet,  reflective  mood;  no  complaints;  no  wants.

I I  Answers  no  questions;  cannot  bear  to  be  talked  to.
■Makes  irrelevant  answers.

I  While  reading,  interpolates  improper  words  and  sentences.

■  Raises  head  from  pillow  and  gazes  about.

■  Thinks  he  is  in  the  wrong  place.

■  Sees  persons  who  are  not  and  have  not  been  present.

I  I  Does  not  know  whether  or  not  to  take  what  is  offered.

■  Dread  of  drinks;  of  water.

■Anxious  apprehension  ;  chronic  fearfulness.

■  I  Fears :  being  left  alone ;  poison,  or  being  bitten  ;  being

poisoned  or  sold ;  being  betrayed,  or  injured  ;  wishes  to
ruii  away.

■  Complains  of  having  been  poisoned.

■  Horrid  anguish,  fits  of  anxiety.

■  Very  suspicious.

■  Reproaches  others,  complains  of  supposed  injury  done  him.

■  Quarrelsomeness;  indomitable  rage.

■  Impatience, precipitate liveliness, talkativeness, tells

everything.

■  ■Picking  at  bedclothes;  mutters  and  prattles.

■  Mutters  absurd  things  to  himself.

■  Makes  abrupt,  short  answers  to  imaginary  questions.

■  Cries  out  suddenly.

■  While  awake  talks  irrationally,  as  if  a  man  were  present.-

■  ■Talks  more  than  usual,  and  more  animatedly  and  hur-

riedly.

■  Constant  unintelligible  chattering.

■  ■Lies  naked  in  bed  and  prattles.

■  I  Delirium  :  talks  of  business  •  of  imaginary  wrongs.

■  Loves  smutty  talk.


93  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

■  Frequently  breaks  out  into  a  loud  laugh.
iScolds;  raves;  abuses  those  about  him.

I  Cries  and  laughs  alternately,  gesticulations  lively.

I  Whittles,  but  knows  not  why.

I I  Silly,  smiling,  laughs  at  everything,  silly  expression.
1 1  Foolish  laughter.

I  Talks  in  an  absurd  way.

I  Does  foolish  things,  behaves  like  one  mad.

llComical alienation of  mind; ludicrous actions like

monkeys ; makes ridiculous gestures  like  a  dancing

clown  ;  like  one  intoxicated.
I  Plays  with  his  fingers  (not  picking  bedclothes).
I  I  Catches  at  air,  or  at  some  imaginary  appearance,  and

pulls  bedclothes  about.
llCarphologia  and  muttering.

I  Sings  constantly  and  talks  hastily,  but  indistinctly.
I  Sings  amorous  and  obscene  songs.
lExcessive  animation,  restless  hurry.

■  Insulting,  shouting,  brawling,  ungovernable  rage,  with

exhibition  of  unusual  strength.
I  Insane  passion  for  work.

■  Tendency  to  action;  wants  to  kill  somebody  or  himself.
Ills  violent,  and  beats  people.

I  Bite,  scratch  and  nip  everyone  interfering  with  them.

■  Child  makes  violent  exertions  to  get  out  of  bed,  tries  to

bite,  and  raves.

■  Tries  to  injure those around him; convulsions after

trying  to  swallow.

■  Working  and  clutching  of  hands,  strikes  his  attendants;

movements  very  quick,  with  difficulty  held  upon  lap ;
wants  to  fight,  attempts  to  bite ;  at  intervals  would  sing
and  at  times  burst  out  laughing;  when  anything  is
offered  him  clinches  hold  of  it  with  both  hands  greedily.

■  ■Delirium:  with  physical  restlessness;  would  not  stay  in

bed ;  moves  from  one  place  to  another ;  complete  ;  lively ;
wild ;  busy,  with  constant  muttering  or  talking,  and
meddling  with  hands;  about  usual  employments;  wants
to  get  up  and  attend  to  business  or  go  home ;  without
apparent  heat;  face  pale,  limbs  cold,  though  temperature
is  high;  with  jerking  of  limbs,  and  diarrhoea,  red  face,
wild,  staring  look,  and  throblDing  of  carotids;  comes
back  to  consciousness  when  spoken  to ;  continued
while  awake;  from^  jealousy  or  vexation  ;  murmurings;
incoherent  talk  ;  from  pain.

■  Delirium  tremens:  with  clonic  spasms;  averse  to  light

and  company;  visions,  as  if  persecuted  ;  preceded  by  an
epileptic  attack;  constant  talking  at  night;  seeks  to
escape  from  men  by  whom  he  imagines  himself  sur-


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  94

rounded  and  who  are  trying  to  capture  him ;  does  not
recognize  his  wife  who  is  standing  by  his  side,  but
imagines  he  sees  her  under  a  distant  bed.
I  Insanity  brought  on  by  drinking ;  will  neither  eat  nor
drink ;  face  flushed,  expression  wild ;  tears  clothes ;
wanders  up  and  down  room  during  night;  strikes  at
keepers,  and  can  scarcely  be  restrained.

■  Trembling  all  over,  looking  very  wild,  and  constantly

pointing  to  serpents  which  she  saw  creeping  up  towards
her,  and  fancied  they  were  in  bed  approaching  her;  had
to  be  held  to  be  kept  quiet ;  metrorrhagia.  ^Delirium
tremens.

■  Epileptiform  fit  precedes  the  attack ;  continuous  talking

at  night ;  wants  to  run  away  for  fear  of  being  persecuted
by  police ;  tremor  of  limbs. 6'Delirium  tremens.

■  Loquacious  and  quarrelsome  mania,  especially  inclined

to  unseemly  and  immodest  acts,  gestures  and  expressions.

■  ■Jealousy: with  rage  and  delirium; with  attempt to

murder.

■  Erotic  mania  accompanied  by  jealousy.

■Serious  illness  from  jealousy  and  grief  about  a  faithless
lover;  fever  <after  midnight;  high  redness  of  face,  with
constant  delirium  and  desire  to  run  away;  continual
throbbing  toothache.

■Violent  and  threatening  nervous  symptoms,  even  spasms ;
hectic  fever ;  sleepless  nights ;  mind  nearly  deranged ;
disturbed  by  unfounded  jealousy.

■A  gentle,  lovable  woman  became  extremely  jealous  of  her
husband,  and  although  fully  realizing  that  she  did  him
injustice,  she  was  so  filled  with  grief  that  she  found  no
rest  day  nor  night,  and  could  neither  eat  nor  drink.

■  Amativeness;  nymphomania;  erotomania.

■  Onanism  since  childhood;  has  always  been  greatly  at-

tracted by  opposite  sex  and  prematurely  busied  himself
with  thoughts  of  marriage ;  for  lasthalfyearhas  been  very
ill  humored  and  irritable ;  memory  impaired  ;  reserved ;
secretly  wrote  his  love  affairs;  speech  incoherent ;  restless-
ness and  sleeplessness ;  attacks  of  mania  with  profuse
sweating,  hasty  and  vehement  talking,  one  idea  rapidly
following  another,  all  in  some  way  concerning  love;  mas-
turbates at  every  opportunity,  and  is  full  of  obscene  talk  ;
constant  walking  about ;  strikes  at  and  destroys  every-
thing; spits  in  face  of  attendant  and  raves;  face  pale  and
sunken ;  eyes  wild,  piercing,  shining ;  severe  pain  in  nape
of  neck  and  small  of  back.

■  ■Lascivious mania,  uncovers body,  especially sexual

parts; sings  amorous  songs.

■  Goes  about  nearly  naked;  will  not  be  covered.


95  -  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

I  Constantly  throwing  off  bedcovers  or  clothes;  entire  loss

of  modesty.
I  He  lies  in  bed  nude  and  chatters; walks  about  insane,

naked,  wrapped  in  a  skin  during  summer  heat,

■  Desires  to  be  naked  (hypersesthesia  of  cutaneous  nerves).

■  Disappointed  love  followed  by :  epilepsy;  melancholy;  rage

or  inclination  to  laugh  at  everything;  despair  and  pro-
pensity to  drown  himself

Morose  dejection,  despair.

■After  a  fit  of  passion,  melancholia,  gradually  developing
into  true  madness;  appetite  gone;  nights  restless;  con-
tinual delirium  attended  with  timorousness;  loss  of
strength ;  complains  of  frequent  shudderings  and  rigors
in  spine  going  up  into  head  during  lucid  intervals;
hard,  constipated  stool.

■After  fit  of  passion  and  sudden  fear,  became  so  melan-
choly and  timorous  as  to  hide  himself  in  every  corner,
and  even  to  dread  and  run  away  from  flies;  speechless,
could  not  get  a  word  out  of  him ;  no  appetite ;  sleepless ;
loss  of  strength;  seemed  as  one  out  of  his  senses.

■Groundless  suspicion  of  being  watched  by  members  of
family  with  whom  he  had  some  slight  misunderstand-
ing; to  avoid  being  recognized  by  them,  clothed  himself
differently  every  day,  and  seldom  left  his  house;  this
monomania  gradually  developed  into  insanity;  recog-
nized his  physician  but  at  once  went  off  again  into
delusions;  uncovered  and  exposed  himself ;  continually
counting,  at  one  time  in  French,  at  another  in  English,
and  at  another  in  both ;  continually  fixing  himself  to
correspond  with  the  points  of  the  compass  and  looking
through  his  fingers;  tracing  the  pattern  of  carpet  with
his  feet  and  twisting  his  legs  till  he  nearly  fell  down ;
grasping  at  imaginary  objects;  watching  his  relations
suspiciously  and  imagining  he  might  be  poisoned;  talk-
ing to  himself ^Insanity.

■  After  being  harshly  accused  of  theft,  continual  delirium;

fancies  herself  surrounded  by  objects  of  a  terrifying
nature;  not  a  moment  quiet,  continual  calling  out  that
she  saw  the  devil;  denies  herself  guilty  of  theft,  or  that
she  has  any  concern  with  witches;  tremor  all  over
body;  struggles  with  such  violence  to  escape,  that  she
must  be  tied  to  bed;  pulse  and  respiration  shift  accord-
ing to  the  various  phantoms  which  offer  themselves  to
her  imagination;  tongue  extremely  moist;  eyes  stern,
grim,  wrathful;  involuntary  stool  and  urine  in  bed.
■Mania  during  lactation;  extreme  irritability;  raving;
when  thwarted  in  anything  scolds  and  strikes  indiscrim-
inately at  persons ; talkative,  irrational  speech ;  crying,


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  9G

alternating  with  a  merry  humor;  anxiety  with  trem-
bling in  limbs ;  very  profuse  secretion  of  milk.

■  Great  restlessness,  piercing,  staring  look;  jerking  motion

of  head  with  rapid  glances  here  and  there ;  face  pale ;
pulse  slow  and  soft;  attempts  to  escape  from  room;
frightful  hallucinations  of  figures  coming  to  seize  him,
hens  bound  with  chains,  numbers  of  large  crabs  being
driven  into  room  ;  general  epileptic  convulsions;  6'In-
sanity.

BRaving,  scolding,  singing;  chatters  day  and  night;  will
not  eat,  drink  or  sleep;  seeks  to  escape;  breaks  the
window;  use  of  straight-jacket  necessary. ^Mania.

■Restless,  talking  delirium,  yet  when  spoken  to  answering
rationally ;  imagining  that  her  deceased  sister  was  sit-
ting by  her  bedside,  and  talking  to  this  imaginary  per-
son;  pulse  80,  full;  head  ached,  but  not  hot;  hearing
decreased;  loquacious. ^Hallucinations.

■  Face  earthy  pale; wild,  strange  expression; constant

talking,  particularly  on  religious  subjects  ;  believes  him-
self poisoned,  or  that  there  is  a  stinking  odor  from  his
mouth ;  occasionally  scolds  and  cries,  and  declares  that
he  hears  loud  noises. ^Insanity.

■  Could  not  bear  the  light,  nor  to  be  spoken  to  ;  repelled

with  rage  and  seeming  disgust  his  mother,  of  whom,  in
his  natural  state,  he  was  doatingly  fond,  did  not  know
her,  said  she  was  not  his  mamma;  talked  wildly  and
could  with  difficulty  be  kept  covered. ^Maniacal  fury.

■  Face  red  and  hot; wild  expression  of  eye; respiration

quick  and  impeded;  constant  scolding  and  cursing;
tears  her  clothes;  walks  about  room  at  night;  strikes
viciously  at  those  about  her  and  can  scarcely  be  re-
strained ;  will  neither  eat  nor  drink. ^Mania.

■  Refused  to  rise  from  bed  and  dress  herself;  assigned  no

reason  ;  after  a  few  hours  insisted  on  rising,  but  would
not  wear  a  single  garment  of  any  kind ;  received  her  phy-
sician without  any  apparent  consciousness  of  her  singular
condition,  conversed  intelligently,  but  would  not  admit
that  she  needed  any  advice  to  clothe  herself;  refused
medicine,  and  cunningly  evaded  all  stratagems  to  give
it;  escaped  from  room,  went  through  house,  and  sought
to  escape  into  street. ^Mania.

■  Frequent  looking  at  hands  because  they  seem  too  large.
I  I  Considers  the  stove  a  tree  and  wants  to  climb  it.

I  I  Looks  at  men  as  hogs.

■  Does  not  know  her  relatives.

■  Puerperal  mania,  with  desire  to  be  uncovered  and  nude.
■Nervous  irritability  without  hypersemia.

■  Consequences  of  fright.


97  ^  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

iSyphilophobia.
^  Sensorium. 1 1  Complete  loss  of  consciousness.

I  Unconsciousness,  from  congestion  of  blood  to  head,with  de-
lirium; answering  all  questions  properly;  pupils  dilated.

Stupor,  loss  of  consciousness,  delirium,  patient  talking  of
his  domestic  affairs.

Stupor,  with  incoherent  speech ;  patient  is  unconscious  of
severity  of  his  case.

I  Sopor  with  loud  snoring,  from  which  she  can  only  be
partially  aroused  by  hard  shaking  or  loud  calling ;  does
not  answer  any  questions;  unable  to  swallow;  involun-
tary stool  and  urine;  face  red;  bloodvessels  of  body
swollen;  pulse  quick  and  full;  this  condition  lasted
several  days  and  was  accompanied  by  numbnes  of  hands.
^Apoplexy.

I  Sudden  falling,  with  a  shriek,  sopor.

I  Apoplexy,  snoring;  involuntary  stool  and  urine.

■  Rolls  head,  stertor,  hiccough. ^Concussion  of  brain.

■  Repeated  attacks  of  fainting.
I  I  Stupefaction.

■  Confusion  of  head.

I  I  Vertigo;  giddiness.

■  Vertigo,  with  drunkenness.

■  Vertigo  from  smell  of  flowers,  gas,  etc.

^  Inner  Head. Constrictive,  stupefying  headache  in  upper

part  of  forehead,  and  general  malaise,  alternating  with

absence  of  all  pain.
Pressing,  stupefying  pain  in  forehead.
Aching,  stupefying  pains  over  eyes.
Pressure  in  vertex  and  drawing  in  nape  of  neck,  v.dien

turning  head.
Heaviness  of  head  and  violent  pains,  alternating with

pains  in  nape  of  neck.

■  Heaviness,  vacant  feeling,  confusion,  severe  pain;  pains

in  meninges;  pressure  in  1.  side  of  forehead,  changing

to  shooting.
I  I  Brain  feels  as  if  loose.
■Sensation  as  if  water  was  swashing  in  head.

■  Shakes  head  to  and  fro;  swashing  sensation  in  brain.
Undulating  sensation  in  brain,  as  if  from  throbbing  in

arteries.

■  Heat  and  tingling  in  head ;  violent  pulsations,  like  waves,

head  shakes;  <  becoming  cold,  after  eating;  >  bend-
ing head  forward,  and  from  heat.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head;  red,  sparkling  eyes;  face

purple  red;  <  in  evening.

■  Cerebral  hypersemia,  unconscious,  blue  red  face; red,

sparkling  eyes.

VOL.  VI.— 7.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  98

Nervous  headaches.

I  Pain  and  heat  in  head,  after  a  meal.

■  Headache,  better  walking.

I  Inflammation  of  brain,  with  unconsciousness;  heat  and

tingling  in  head;  violent  pulsations  in  head,  like  waves;

head  shakes;  <  from  becoming  cold  and  after  eating;

>  bending  head  forward  (stooping)  and  from  heat.
I  Hydrocephalus,  with  stupor;  head  is  shaken  to  and  fro;

twitching  motions.
^  Outer  Head, l  i  Catches  cold  in  head,  especially  from,  dry,

cold  air.
I  Rolling  the  head.
I  I  Head  sinks  on  one  or  other  side.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. iFarsighted,  clearsighted;  pupils  dilated.

I  Illusions;  objects  look  red  as  fire.

I I  Illusions  of  vision;  small  objects  seem  very  large.

■  Deceptive  vision;  flame  of  one  light  seems  smaller,  that

of  another  larger,  though  both  were  of  equal  size.

■  Double  sight.

■  When  reading  the  letters  move  about,  from  mydriasis.

■  Dimness  of  vision,  as  though  a  veil  were  before  eyes;

could  scarcely  see  three  steps.

■  Obscuration  of  vision;  objects  seem  indistinct;  is  near-

sighted and  obliged  to  hold  book  nearer  when  reading.
I  I  Momentary  loss  of  sight.

■  Amblyopia. ^Epilepsy.
■Night  blindness.

■  Hemeralopia  in  a  myopic  eye,  with  shooting  pains  from

eyes  into  nose  and  head;  headache  >  closing  eyes.
I  I  Eyes  become  shortsighted ; distorted,  stare  and pro-
trude.

■  Eyes  open;  distorted;  rolling  about  in  orbits;  squinting.

■  Spasmodic  action  of  internal  rectus.

■  Eyes  red,  wild,  sparkling.

■  ■Constant  staring  at  surrounding  objects,  self-forgetful.

■  Stupid  staring,  distorted  eyes.
I  I  Brilliant  lustre  to  eyes.

■  ■  Pupils  dilated ;  insensible.

I  I  Albuginese  red,  and  pupils  so  widely  dilated  that  irides
seemed  like  a  narrow  circle;  they  were  also  insensible
to  light.

■  Pupils  altered,  dilated  or  contracted ;  slow  respiration.

■  Conjunctiva  red.

■  Excesssive  photophobia  of  scrofulous  ophthalmia.

■  Tearing,  beating  in  r.  eye,  which  waters  and  seems  pro-

jected.
Twitching  in  eyes;  dim  vision,  as  if  a  veil  before  eyes.

■  Quivering  of  eyeball.


99  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.


®  Hearing  and  Ears, i Buzzing,  singing,  rushing  in  ears.

■  Hard  hearing,  as  if  stupefied,  especially  after  apoplexy.

■  Hardness  of  hearing  from  paralyzed  auditory  nerves.
1 1  Deafness.

^  Smell  and  Nose. '  l  Sense  of  smell  weak,  or  lost.

■Sudden  jerking  from  above  downwards  in  root  of  nose.

■  Pressing  pinching  in  root  of  nose  and  in  zygomata.

■  Cramp  pressure  at  root  of  nose  and  malar  bones,

■  Nostrils  sooty,  smoky.

■  Nosebleed  bright  red,  with  salivation.
I  I  Dryness  of  nose.

Liability  to  catch cold  in  head,  principally  from  dry,
cold  air.
*  Upper  Face. ■Heat  and  redness  of  face.

■  Flushed  and  excited  countenance.

■  Face: flushed; dark  red,  bloated;  cold  and  pale; dis-

torted ;  stupid  expression ;  muscles  twitch,  makes  grim-
aces.

■  Distorted,  bluish  face,  with  wide  open  mouth;  approach-

ing cerebral  paralysis. ^Typhoid.

■  Twitching  of  muscles  of  face.

^  Lower  Face. ■  ■  Foam  at  the  mouth.

■  Lips,  dry.

Large  pustules  on  chin.

■  Lockjaw;  fully  conscious.

^°  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Closes  the  teeth  tightly  together.

■  Toothache,  driving  to  despair; tearing,  throbbing,  ex-

tending to  cheeks  and  along  lower  jaw.

■  Violent  attacks  of  toothache  with  sense  of  strangulation

and  difficult  deglutition ;  cramps ;  sense  of  mental  fatigue.
■Violent  tearing  and  pulsating  pain,  causing  spasmodic
jerks  of  fingers,  hands,  arms  and  facial  muscles.

■  Toothache,  driving  to  despair,  in  sensitive,  nervous,  ex-

citable persons.

■  Tearing  in  teeth  as  if  blood  was  forced  into  them,  flushes

of  heat,  congestion  to  head; <  from  cold  air,  morning.

■  Toothache,  jerking,  throbbing,  tearing,  drawing,  extend-

ing into  forehead.
■Throbbing  toothache,  appearing  generally  in  morning,
usually  due  to  a  cold ;  throbbing  in  tooth,  tearing  sen-
sation in  gums,  and  in  masticating  the  tooth  seems
loose  as  if  it  would  fall  out;  congestion  to  head,  with
great  heat  all  over  body.

■  Teeth  feel  loose  when  chewing;  also,  too  long.
Tearing  raging  pain  in  gums,  with  buzzing  sensation  in

tooth.
I  I  Intense  pain  in  gums  after  extraction  of  a  tooth.
I  I  Fresssing  of  gums together,  putting hands to  jaws,

fingers  into  mouth;  during  dentition.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  100

I  sSordes  on  teeth  and  in  mouth.

I I  Grating  the  teeth.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. >  Putrid  or  salt  taste.

i  Parching  dryness  of  tongue.

1 1  Tongue:  red  or  brown,  dry,  cracked,  hard;  looks  like

burnt  leather;  clean,  parched;  white;  tremulous.
I  I  Tongue  shaken  to  and  fro,  with  a  trembling  movement.

■  Tongue  does  not  obey,  difficult  mobility.

■  Tongue  protruded  with  difficulty,  can  hardly  draw  it  in.

■  Biting  the  tongue  when  talking.

■  Paralysis  of  tongue.

■  After  fright  complete  loss  of  speech;  motions  of  tongue

much  impaired  with  sensation  of  numbness  and  lame-
ness; chewing  (.and  swallowing  unaifected;  frequent
stitching  headaches.

■  Loss  of  speech;  utters  inarticulate  sounds.

I  1  Speech  impaired,  difhcult  and  unintelligible,  from  arrest
of  secretion.

■  Speech  embarrassed.

■  Very  talkative.

^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Soft  and  hard  palate  dry  and  glazed.

■  Dryness  of  mouth,  lips  and  fauces.

Soreness  of  soft  parts  between  gums  and  cheeks.

■  Salivation.

■  Foaming,  bloody  saliva,  tasting  salty.

■  Cadaverous  smell  from  mouth,  <  morning  and  evening.
la  Throat. ■  Elongated  palate.

■  Throat  and  mouth  dry,  parched  and  red,  inability  to

swallow.

■  Throat  dry,  burning;  shooting,  pricking  pains,  difficult

swallowing,  as  from  constriction;  dread  of  liquors.

■  Constriction  of  throat,  with  inability  to  swallow  fluids.
■Spasms  of  throat;  an  attempt  to  swallow  renews  spasm.
■Spasmodic  contraction  of  oesophagus  after  injury;  solid

and  warm  food  swallowed  best; fluids cause  spasm-
hiccough,  nausea,  stiff  neck.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  i  Unusually  great
appetite ;  hungry  gnawing.

■  Voracious  appetite  and  thirst,  with  inability  to  swallow.

■  Unquenchable  thirst.

I  I  Much  thirst  with  tenderness  of  stomach.
I  I  Thirst,  drinks  but  little  at  a  time.

■  I  Dread  of  water.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Solid  and  warm  food  are  swallowed

best;  fluids  cause  spasm.
^*'  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  ■  Hiccough :

with  spasms  and  rumbling;  after  eating  and  at  night;

with  inflammation  <^  intestinal  organs.


101  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

Eructations:  empty;  incomplete;  bitter.
Nausea:  with  vertigo  and  vomiting;  with  stiff  neck.
■Vomiting  and  retelling:  with  colic,  extorting  cries;  after
coughing.

■  Vomiting:  of  food  and  drink;  of  blood,  with  convulsions;

of  bloody  mucus,  with  dark  red  blood.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Pit  of  stomach  tender  to  touch.

■  Violent  pain  in  stomach  with  vomiting  and  hiccough.

■  Cramps  in  stomach,  with  loud  shrieks,  vomiting,  convul-

sions ;  cramps  >  after  vomiting.
I  I  Burning  and  inflammation  of  stomach.

■  ■Inflammation  of  stomach,  or  peritonitis,  with  hiccough.

■  Hsematemesis,  pit  of  stomach  sensitive;  dull  aching  about

liver;  abdomen  bloated.
^^  Hypochondria. ■Stitches  or  dull  pain  in  region  of  liver.
'®  Abdomen. ■Abdomen  distended,  sore  to  touch,  tympanitic.
I  I  Pinching  in  abdomen.

■  Colic,  as  if  abdomen  would  burst;  presses  fists  into  sides;

cutting,  vomiting,  belching,  hiccough,  screaming.

■  Colic  >  by  vomiting.

■  Hysterical  colic.

I  I  Abdominal  muscles  sore.

■  Pain,  as  from  soreness  in  abdominal  walls,  when  coughing.

■  Pains  in  abdominal  muscles:  as  if  he  had  fallen  upon

them;  while  sitting; as  after  excessive  exertion  or  a

strain.
■Sticking  in  umbilical  region,  during  inspiration.
I  I  Umbilicus  open,  urine  oozing  through.

■  ■Cutting  low  down  in  abdomen.

■  Distension  of  hypogastrium,  which  is  painful  to  touch.

■  Enteritis  or  peritonitis,  with  typhoid  symptoms.

■  Roseola  on  abdomen.

^  Stool and Rectum, l  '  Frequent desire for  stool ; with
small  discharges.

■  Watery  diarrhoea.

■  Stools:  painless;  watery;  mucous;  nearly  odorless ;  yellow,

watery,  involuntary  during  sleep,  in  old  men.

■  Stools involuntary, unconscious, painless, yellowish,

watery;  attack  coming  on  suddenly  and  without  appar-
ent cause. ^Diarrhoea  in  lying-in  women.

■  Hysterical  females  and  young  girls  whose  bowels  are

apt  to  bloat,  and  who  are  subject  to  attacks  of  diarrhoea,
with  colicky  pains  and  frequent  urging  to  stool,  or
where  sphincters  are  weak,  causing  great  difficulty  in
retaining  the  feces,  and  where  excitement  or  mental
trouble  produces  the  attack.

■  Relaxed  state  of  bowels  depen,dent  on  or  connected  with

irritation  of  uterine  system.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  '  102

I  Involuntary  stool  while  urinating.

I  Diarrhoea:  during  pregnancy;  in  childbed;  at  night;  dur-
ing typhoid  fever.

■  Bright,  staring  eyes;  muttering  delirium;  flushed  face;

dry  tongue;  teeth  incrusted  with  brown  mucus;  scanty
urine;  rolling  of  head;  dilated  pupils;  difficulty  in
swallowing  liquids;  involuntary  stools;  night  cough.
^Cholera  infantum.

■Typhoid  symptoms  after  the  vomiting  diarrhoea  and  cold-
ness have  ceased,  with  dulness  of  sense,  wandering  looks ;
red  and  hot  face;  spasms  and  rumbling  in  abdomen;
hiccough,  with  involuntary  micturition  and  foaming  at
mouth. ^Cholera.

I  I  Stool  small  in  size.

■  Constipation,  with  epilepsy.

I  I  Paralysis  of  rectum,  or  sphincter  ani.

■  Paralysis  of  sphincter  ani  and  vesicae;  involuntary  stool

and  urine.

■  Piles  bleed  profusely;  fulness  of  veins,  full  pulse,  skin

and  muscles  lax.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Paralysis  of  bladder;  after  labor,  and
in  children  with  aflFections  of  head.

■Retention  of  urine  with  constant  pressure  in  bladder;
atony  or  apparent  paralysis  of  bladder.

Urination:  frequent,  scanty;  difficult,  from  spasmodic  or
inflammatory  condition  of  neck  of  bladder;  involun-
tary ;  has  no  will  to  urinate,  difficult,  with  pressing.

Urine:  scanty;  retained  or  suppressed ;  turbid,  with  muco-
purulent deposit;  with  red,  sandy  sediment.

■  Frequent  emission  of  urine  as  clear  as  water.

■  Frequent  urination  at  night,  so  that  his  rest  was  broken

to  such  a  degree  as  to  make  him  miserable;  prostate

slightly  enlarged.
^  Male  Sexual  Organs. iSexual  desire  excessive;  lascivious,

exposes  his  person.
I  I  Impotence.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  ■  Lascivious, uncovers sexual

parts.

■  Lascivious  furor  without  modesty.

■  Excited  sexual  desire  without  excitement  of  fancy.

■  Metritis,  especially  if  inflammation  is  developed  by  emo-

tional disturbances;  typhoid  state.

■  Uterine  cramps,  with  pulling  in  loins  and  small  of  back;

irritable  uterus.

■  Metrorrhagia,  accompanied  by  cramps  of  whole  bod}^,  in-

terrupted by  jerks  and  starts  of  entire  frame,  or  of  single
parts,  succeeded  by  general  stiff'ness  of  limbs.

■  Metrorrhagia in patients who have been subject  to


103  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

cramps  during  pregnancy;  blood  bright  red,  and  issues
more  and  more  freely  at  every  jerk  of  body,  while  action
of  pulse  diminishes.

■  Continuous  bright  red flow,  with  spasmodic  jerkings,

great  vascular  excitement. ^Metrorrhagia.
■Metrorrhagia,  blood  pale,  with  convulsions.

■  Labor-like  pains,  previous  to  menstruation,  with  draw-

ings in  loins  and  small  of  back.

■  Menses preceded by hysterical or epileptic spasms;

loud,  uninterrupted  laughing ;  profuse  sweat  and  nausea.

■  During  menses:  convulsive  trembling  of  hands  and  feet,

headache,  profuse  sweat;  lockjaw;  enuresis.

■  Profuse  menses,  with  delirium;  convulsive  trembling  of

hands  and  feet;  silly  manners,  rage.

■  Menstruation  appears  with  profuse  perspiration,  headache

and  nausea.
I  I  Irregular  menses.

■  Suppressed  menstruation;  suppressed  lochia.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■  Twitching  in
cheeks;  cramp-like  pains  in  abdomen;  violent  pain  in
pit  of  stomach. ^Pregnancy.

■  Cold  perspiration;  pale  face;  suffocating  spells  and  con-

vulsions ;  facial  muscles  greatly  agitated.  ^During  par-
turition.

■  Spasms  during  parturition  with  much  nervous  irritability.

■  Every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  an  attack  of  twitching  of

limbs  and  muscles  of  face;  unconsciousness.  ^Par-
turition.

■  ■Puerperal  spasms,  shrieks,  anguish; chest  oppressed,

unconscious.

■  After  miscarriage  or labor,  hemorrhage  of bright  red

blood,  flowing  steadily;  commences  with  spasms,  single
shocks,  twitchings  and  startings,  with  every  start  more
blood  comes.

■  Puerperal  fever.

■  I  No  will  to  make  water,  in  child-bed.

■  Watery,  painless  diarrhoea  of  lying-in  women.

■  Total  suppression  of  milk  or  lochia.

■  Children  at  breast  have  singultus.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■Loss  of
speech  with  aphonia,  although  she  makes  great  efforts
to  speak  cannot  produce  a  sound  or  syllable.

■  Hysterical  aphonia.

■  Speech  impaired;  confused;  difficult  and  irrational.

■  Hoarseness,  wdth  dry  and  inflamed  throat;  hysteria.

■  Voice  husky,  as  from  mucus.

■  Constriction  of  larynx.

■  ■Much  mucus  in  larynx  and  air  passages,  which  makes

speech  and  voice  rough.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  104

^^  Respiration. Spasms  of  chest  with  arrest  of  breathing,  com-
pelling one  to  lean  forward.
I  Loss  of  breath,  as  from  rapid  running.

■  Oppression  of  chest,  with  internal  stinging,  <  during  in-

spiration.
I  Slow  rattling  breathing.

I  Mucous  rales  during  stupor  or  furious  delirium.
^^  Cough. Tickling  sensation  in  throat  causing  an  incessant

cough,  <  when  lying  down,  >  when  sitting  up.
I  Dry,  tickling,  hacking  cough,  which  seems  to  come  from

air  passages,

■  Violent spasmodic cough; short consecutive coughs,

caused  by  tickling  in  throat,  as  if  palate  was  too  long,
or  as  if  some  mucus  w^as  lodged  there.

■  Shattering  spasmodic  cough,  with  frequent,  rapidly  suc-

ceeding coughs,  excited  by  tickling,  as  from  adherent
mucus,  at  night  without,  in  daytime  with  expectoration
of  saltish  mucus,  or  of  bright  red  blood  mixed  with
coagula.
■Tickling  cough,  with  anxiety  at  night  and  expectoration
of  blood  streaked  mucus. ^Chest  affection.

■  ■Dry,  hacking  or  spasmodic  cough,  <  lying  down,  >  sit-

ting up ;  <  at  night,  also  after  eating,  drinking,  talking  or
singing;  velum  palati  elongated.

■  Dry,  spasmodic,  persistent  cough. ^Bronchitis.

■  ■Frequent  cough  at  night,  which  always  wakes  him,  after

which  he  again  falls  asleep.

■  Paroxysms  of  dry  cough  come  on  more  frequently  at

night;  during  cough  face  reddens  and  respiration  may
be  arrested;  vomiting  of  white  mucus;  after  cough,  ex-
haustion. ^Pertussis.

■  Paroxysmal cough, severely shaking  chest, abdomen,

whole  body,  and  causing  a  sense  of  excoriation  in  ab-
dominal muscles.

■  During  cough:  spasms  of  larynx; painful  epigastrium

and  hypochondria.

■  Cough  <  after  midnight,  when  at  rest,  during  sleep,  in

cold  air,  and  from  eating  and  drinking.

■  Cough  in  incurable  cases  of  pulmonary  and  laryngeal

phthisis.

■  Cough  after  measles.

■  Expectoration of  saltish  mucus, or bright  red  blood,

mixed  with  coagula.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. "Tight  feeling  across  chest,  as
from  overexertion,  running.

■  Spasms  of  chest,  arrest  of  breathing,  must  lean  forward.
■Alternate  difficult  breathing  with  anxiety  or  oppression ;

continual strong convulsive twitchings  of  abdomen;


105  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

diaphragm  apparently  affected  in  same  manner,  for
breast  seemed  suddenly  to  become  strongly  dilated  and
ribs  to  rise  and  sink  suddenly ;  at  intervals  violent  hic-
cough and  risus  sardonicus;  loss  of  voice;  difficult  deg-
lutition; pulse  full,  strong  and  quick  ;  restless  at  night;
feels  as  if  heart  and  breast  were  torn  to  pieces;  after
paroxysms  great  weakness.  ^Spasms  of  chest.
■Exhausted  from  long  talking,  body,  and  especially  chest,
weak;  green  sputum,  weak  pulse.

■  Stitches  in  sides  of  chest.

I Eestless,  delirious;  tongue  and  lips  dry,  brownish;  great
heat  and  great  thirst;  watery,  yellowish  diarrhoea;  in-
tense spasmodic  coiigh,  causing  him  to  jump  up;  dull
percussion  sound  from  lower  edge  of  scapula  down-
wards on  1.  side;  bronchial  breathing;  bronchophony.
^Catarrhal  pneumonia.

■  Pneumonia: cerebral  symptoms,  delirium,  sopor; dry,

fatiguing  night  cough,  or  rattling  in  chest;  senilis,  with
acute  oedema  of  lungs ;  of  drunkards;  complicated  with
typhus;  hypostatic,  in  course  of  chronic  affections.

■  Atelectasis  pulmonum;  bluish  color  of  face;  great  diffi-

culty in  inspiring;  must  be  raised  up.

■  Hsemoptysis,  bright  red,  with  spasms,  also  in  drunkards.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Chronic  palpitation  of

heart  so  that  she  could  not  move  body  without  greatest
anxiety,  or  ^.pprehension  of  suffocation  or  swooning;
unquenchable  thirst  in  morning;  frequent,  copious  dis-
charge of  limpid  urine;  appetite  impaired.
Pulse:  accelerated,  full,  hard  and  strong;  rapid,  intermit-
ting; slow  and  small;  weak  and  irregular;  small,  weak,
scarcely  perceptible.

■  Parotids  beat  violently.

i  I  Inflammation  of  bloodvessels.
^^  Outer  Chest. ■Muscles  of  chest  sore.

■  Roseola  on  chest.
■Spasms  of  muscles  of  chest.

^'  Neck  and  Back. '  l  Stiffness  of  cervical  muscles,  with  ten-
sion as  if  too  short,  on  bending  neck.

■  Contraction  of  muscles  on  one  side  of  neck,  twisting  neck

to  one  side ;  neck  turned  obliquely.
I  I  Herpetic  spots*"  on  nape  of  neck.
I  I  Abscesses  on  1.  side  of  neck.

■  Spinal  meningitis,  with  convulsions,  jerks  of  muscles;

after  injury.
*^  Upper  Limbs, l Trembling  of  arms  and  hands.

■  Arms  tremble,  especially  in  evening  and  after  exercise.
Two  pimples  at  elbow.

I  I  Painful  numbness  of  hands.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  106

I  I  Rigor  of  hands.
I  Fingers  look  and  feel  too  thick.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Weakness  of  legs ;  staggering  gait.

I  Cramps  in  thigh.

II  Gangrenous  spots  and  vesicles  here  and  there  on  lower
limbs.

■  Convulsive  tremor  in  r.  foot,  can  neither  lie,  sit,  nor  walk ;

constipation, stool hard  and  discharged with much
straining;  urine  limpid,  watery  and  inodorous.

■  Coldness  and  swelling  of  feet.

I  I  Toes  spasmodically  contracted,  i,n  walking  or  going  up

stairs.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i Trembling  of  limbs.

I I  Frequent  twitching  of  hands  and  feet.
I  Cramps  and  spasms  of  extremities.

■  Lancinating  pains  in  joints,  especially  on  motion.
I  1  Cold  hands  and  feet.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. When  at  rest:  cough  <.
Lying  down:  cough  <.

Lying  on  back:  suddenly  sits  up,  then  lies  down  again.
Lies  on  back:  eyes  wide  open,  staring  and  immovable.
Bending  head  forward;  >  violent  pulsation.
Spasm  of  chest  compels  one  to  lean  forward.
Pressing  gums  together,  hands  to  jaws,  fingers  into  mouth,

during  dentition ;  presses  fists  into  sides  with  colic.
Must  be  raised  up :  great  difficulty  in  inspiring.
While  sitting:  pain  in  abdominal  muscles;  cough  >.
Motion:  lancinating  pains  in  joints;  bruised  feeling.
Movements  quick.
Moves  from  place  to  place.
Turns  from  one  place  to  another.
Turning  head:  pressure  in  vertex  and  drawing  in  nape

of  neck.
Walking:  headache  >;  toes  spasmodically  contracted.
Attempts  to  jump  out  of  bed  and  run  away.
Jump  up:  cough  causes  patient  to.
Could  not  move  body  without  greatest  anxiety.
Can  neither  lie,  sit,  nor  walk  on  account  of  convulsive

tremor  in  r.  foot.
Going  up  stairs:  toes  spasmodically  contracted.
^®  Nerves. ■Blunted  sensibility.

■  Loss  of  smell  and  taste.

■  Weakness;  uncommon  sinking  of  strength.

■  Long  talking  exhausts  patient.

I  I  Wants  to  get  away,  but  cannot  stand  alone.

■  Repeated  attacks  of  fainting.

■  Restless,  turns  from  one  place  to  another.

■  Contraction of  stomach  with  difficult breathing; can


107


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

hardly  swallow  anything,  even  a  few  spoonfuls  of  broth
cause  great  fatigue;  pulse  unequal;  urnie  limpid;
restless  day  and  night;  perpetually  watchful.  ^Hysteria.
I  About  10  A.M.,  chilliness  in  extremities,  followed  by  heat,
first  in  head,  then  descending  to  extremities;  smgs;
bawls  out  aloud;  covers  face  with  handkerchief;  stands
in  awe  of  those  about  her;  this  continued  for  two  hours
and  was  followed  by  sleep  which  lasted  three  hours,  dur-
ing which  body  was  very  hot,  with  much  sweat,  and
short,  quick  respiration;  on  awakening  does  not  remem-
ber. ^Hysteria.  . c i ^

■  Constant  state  of  erethism;  not  a  single  part  of  whole

body  nor  a  solitary  muscle  in  a  quiet  state  lor  a  mo-
ment; general  uninterrupted,  irregular  motion  lull  ot
impetuosity;  eyelids  opened  and  closed  with  a  sudden
force,  features  fairly  grinned,  made  grimaces,  rubbed
head  steadily  on  pillow,  and  whole  body  twisted  and
turned  continually;  unceasing  spitting,  but  without
saliva;  answers  no  questions,  as  if  it  was  impossible  tor
him  to  collect  his  senses. ^Endocarditis  rheumatica.

■  Hysteric  and  asthenic  deUrium,  with attempts  to  run

away,  prompted  by  fear.

■  Condussive  starlings,  alternating  with  tremblings  and

convulsions.  «

■  ■Angular  motions; jerks  of  single  muscles  or  sets  ot

muscles.

■  Convulsive  jerks;  long  lasting  spasms.

■  ■Subsultus  tendinum.  ^

■  Violent  tearing  and  pulsating  pains  causing  spasmodic

jerks  of  fingers,  hands,  arms,  and  facial  muscles.

■  Convulsions,  beginning  with  twitchings  of  muscles  ot

face,  especially  about  eyes;  dark  colored,  bloated  appear-
ance of  face  and  deep  sleep  after  spasm  goes  off. ^

■  Violent  convulsions,  not  all  over  body  but  wandering,  at

one  time  affecting  breast,  belly,  feet,  arms,  etc.;  great
pain;  strength  and  appetite  impaired ;  sleepless;  vomit-
ing of  large  quantities  of  bile;  while  convulsions  seized
abdomen,  strong  contraction  of  sphincter  am  followed
by  strangury  with  continual  and  very  painful  tenesmus.

■  Falls  suddenly  to  ground,  with  cries  and  convulsions.

■  Every  muscle  in  body  convulsed;  frothing  at  mouth.

■  Eyes  staring  and  distorted,  with  spasmodic  closure  of  lids,

bluish  face,  clenching  of  teeth,  foaming  at  mouth,  con-
striction of  throat.

■  Alternate  convulsions  of  upper  and  lower  extremities

■  ■Convulsions:  of  children,  especially  from  fright;  alter

meals;  child  sickens  after  eating,  vomits  or  shows  dis-
tress at  stomach,  sudden  shriek,  and  then  insensible;
from  intestinal  worms;  puerperal.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  108

iConvulsion  during  deep,  heavy  sleep.

llSuffocating  spells  and  convulsions  during  labor.

I  Rigid  all  over,  as  in  tetanus.

I  The  forces  sink  quickly;  patient  gets  easily  fatigued;
syncope  is  readily  produced;  limbs  become  cold  and
tremble;  these  symptoms,  with  those  of  sleep,  paralysis
of  sphincters,  point  to  its  use  in  some  conditions  occur-
ring in  course  of  continued  fevers.

I  I  Fell  down  unconscious  with  whole  body  cold  and  stiff
like  a  piece  of  wood.

I  The  spasms  flex  the  limbs,  and  the  bent  body  is  tossed
upward.

I  Toes  becomes  spasmodically  flexed,  as  from  cramps,
when  walking  or  carrying  foot  forward,  and  ascending.

I  iStiff'ness  of  arms  and  legs,  jerking  of  hands  and  feet.
After  attack :  sopor,  snoring,  dark  colored,  bloated  appear-
ance of  countenance.

iChorea,  the  result  or  consequence  of  long  and  debilitating

diseases;  every  muscle  of  body  from  eyes  to  toes  twitches;

great  agitation  and  loquacity; tendency  to  laugh  at

everything.
■Throws  arms  about,  misses  what is  reached for,  gait

tottering. ^Chorea.
•  Epileptiform  spasms,  hyperEesthesia  of  skin.

I I  Epilepsy  ;  before  the  attack,  vertigo,  sparks  before  eyes,
ringing  in  ears,  hungry  gnawing;  during  attack,  face
purple,  eyes  projecting,  shrieks, grinding  teeth,  urination,

■  Epileptic fits,  almost  daily;  convulsions  so  violent  that

it  seemed  as  if  joints  or  spine  would  be  broken.
llEpileptoid  spasms.

■  Epilepsy:  from  grief,  after  emotion;  in  consequence  of

drinking.

■  Nervous  apoplexy  with  somnolency;  paralysis  of  oesopha-

gus and  numb  feeling ;  paralysis  of  sphincter  muscles.

■  Paralysis  after  spasms,  or  after  diphtheria.

■  Paralysis  agitans.
I  Lockjaw.
Hydrophobia.

^^  Sleep. Sleepiness ;  falls  asleep  while  answering.
I  I  Very  deep  slumber.

■  Constant  slumber,  wdth  picking.

■  Deep  sleep,  with  convulsions.

■  Deep sleep which continued without interruption at

least  three  days ;  only  by  hard  shaking  and  loud  call-
ing she  could  be  awakened  sufficiently  to  take  hold  of
breast,  but  before  she  had  drawn  a  few  swallows  she
went  off"  again. ^Lethargy.

■  Stupid  and  drowsy,  or  excitable  and  sleepless.


109  -  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

I  Drowsy  or  sleepless;  wild  expression;  delirious;  after
chloroform.

■  Laughing  expression  during  sleep.

■  Child  sobs  and  cries  in  sleep.

■  Sleep,  with  outcries.

■  Drowsy,  jerks  in  sleep,  cries  out,  grates  his  teeth.

■  ■Starts  up  from  sleep  in  affright,  or  after  a  fright.

■  Awakening  with  screams.

■  Restless  sleep.

■  Frequent  micturition  at  night,  preventing  sleep.

■  ■Lying  on  back,  suddenly  sits  up,  then  lies  down  again.

■  Unable  to  sleep  whole  night ;  tried  lying  upon  one  side

then  the  other,  yet  he  was  unable  to  get  quiet ;  only
shortly  before  daybreak  sleeps  a  little  from  time  to
time  ;  during  short  naps  perspiration  all  over,  especially
about  neck.
■Sleeplessness  from  nervous  irritation.

■  ■Intense  sleeplessness  of  irritable,  excitable  persons, from

business  embarrassments,  often  imaginary.

■  ■Sleepless,  on  account  of  a  quiet  mental  activity.

■  Sleeplessness  or  dozing,  with  brain  full  of  ideas,  figures

and  bewildering  images.

■  Excessive  wakefulness,  alternating  with  drowsiness.

■  ■Sleepless,  or  constant  sleep,  with  muttering.
■Sleeplessness,  after  violent  disease.

■  Sleeplessness  from  renal  affections ;  very  excitable.

■  ■Long  continued  sleeplessness.

■  Dreams:  anxious;  lascivious.

^  Time. Morning: toothache <; cadaverous  smell from
mouth;  unquenchable  thirst.

10  A.M.:  chilliness  in  extremities.

Afternoon:  fever.

Day:  chatters;  cough;  restless.

Evening :  congestion  of  blood  to  head  < ;  cadaverous
smell  from  mouth  <;  arms  tremble;  external  heat,
coldness  ceases,  thirst  commences;  inflamed  ulcers  <.

Night:  constant  talking;  tears  clothes;  sleepless;  chatters;
walks  about  room ;  hiccough ;  frequent  urination ;  cough
without  expectoration ;  anxiety;  cough  <;  dry  fatiguing
cough;  restless;  cold;  burning  heat,  with  tearing  cough.

After  midnight:  fever  <;  cough  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cannot  get  warm  in  bed.

Cold:  <  violent  pulsations  in  head.

Cold  air:  toothache  <;  cough  <.

Cold  dry  air:  catches  cold  in  head.

Will  not  be  covered ;  throws  off  bed  clothes.

Getting  warm:  inflamed  ulcers  >.

Heat:  pressure  in  vertex  >.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  110

Bad  effects  from  cold  air.
^  Fever. iCold  at  night,  up  back  from  small  of  back ;  cannot

get  warm  in  bed.
I  Chill  commencing  in  feet  and  running  up  spine  to  nape

of  neck.
I  Sudden  chilliness ;  coldness  of  spine ;  body  cold  and  stiff,

cannot  get  warm  in  bed,

I  Chill  from  feet  upward  ;  shivering,  heat  of  face,

I I  Cannot  bear  to  be  talked  to,  or  least  noise  during  chill.
Chill  without  thirst;  alternate  days,  11  a.m,

■  Congestive  chill  with  cold  extremities,
I  I  Chill,  alternating  with  heat.

I  Whole  body  cold,  with  burning  redness  of  face.

Afternoon  fever,  coldness  predominates;  pain  in  back.

I  Heat  of  head  and  face,  with  general  coldness  of  body,
without  thirst,  followed  in  evening  by  external  heat,
coldness  ceases,  thirst  commences.

I  I  Heat  of  head  and  face,  with  coldness  and  loss  of  sensi-
bility of  external  surface  of  body.

■  Burning  heat  all  over,  every  evening  congestion  to  head;

putrid  taste.

■  Burning  heat  of  body  every  evening,  always  with  thirst.
I  I  Skin  burning  hot  to  examining  hand,  which  leaves  a

burning  in  place  touched.

■  Burning  heat,  no  external  redness ;  blood  burns  in  veins.
I  I  Burning  heat  all  over,  skin  hot  and  dry  to  touch,  with

distended  veins.

I  I  Burning  heat  all  through  night,  with  tearing  cough.

Heat:  over  whole  body,  much  thirst,  or  no  desire  to
drink;  lips  sticky;  along  whole  spine;  runs  up  back;
ascending  from  feet  to  face.

During  heat:  pain  in  region  of  liver;  epileptiform  con-
vulsions; sleeplessness.

■They  throw  the  bedclothes  entirely  off,  not  because  they
are  too  warm,  but  they  will  not  remain  covered.  ^Fever.

Sweat:  cold;  sour;  weakening;  during  sleep;  on  back  and
pit  of  stomach ;  mostly  on  legs.

Violent  sweat  after  thirst.

■  Dry  nocturnal  cough,  disturbs  sleep;  extreme  nervous

excitement,  epileptic  attacks,  or  other  spasmodic  affec-
tions; hot  stage  without  much  sweat;  after  each  parox-
ysm pressure  in  head,  vertigo,  apyrexia,  extreme  weak-
ness, luminous  spots  before  eyes,  dryness  in  mouth  and
frequent  hiccough ;  pulse  small. ^Intermittent.

■  Intermittent  fever,  quartan, with  short, dry, hacking

cough  at  night.
■Pulse  100;  temperature  104°  F.;  tongue  red  and  cracked;
heavy, sour sweats; troublesome  dreams; bronchial


Ill  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

complications,  witli  difficult,  frothy,  hemorrhagic  ex-
pectoration. ^Remittent  fever.

■  Entire  loss  of  consciousness  and  of  functions  of  organs

of  sense;  does  not  recognize  relatives  or  friends;  illusions
of  imagination  and  senses;  delirium  continued  while
awake ;  sees  persons  who  are  not  and  have  not  been
present ;  indistinct  and  muttering  loquacity  ;  muttering
with  picking  of  bedclothes ;  inability  to  think,  thoughts
cannot  be  directed  or  controlled ;  constant  staring  at
surrounding  objects,  with  apparent  entire  self-forgetful-
ness. ^Typhoid  fever.

I  Great  agitation;  restlessness;  jumping  out  of  bed;  at-
tempts to  run  away;  eyes  red  and  sparkling,  staring,
rolling  about  in  orbits ;  squinting ;  deafness ;  distorted
face,  stupid  expression ;  tongue  red  or  brown,  dry  and
cracked,  paralyzed ;  loss  of  speech,  or  indistinct  speech;
cadaverous  smell  from  mouth;  involuntary  or  un-
noticed stools  in  bed ;  suppressed  secretion  or  retention
of  urine;  involuntary  discharge  of  urine,  leaving
streaks  of  red  sand  on  sheet ;  paralysis  of  spincter  ani
and  vesicae;  convulsive  motions;  grating  of  teeth;
jerkings;  subsultus  tendinum ;  trembling;  sleepless-
ness, or  constant  sleep  with  muttering;  coma  vigil;
roseola  spots  on  chest  and  abdomen ;  cold  extremities.
^Typhoid  fever.

iDelirium,  with  attempt  to  jump  out  of  bed  and  run
away,  sometimes  with  fear,  sometimes  without ;  when
spoken  to  answers  correctly  in  whole  or  in  part,  and
then  is  gone  again,  muttering  to  himself;  loquacity;
talks  nonsense  continually  with  his  eyes  open,  but  does
not  pay  attention  to  any  one ;  thinks  he  is  in  the  wrong
place  but  does  not  want  to  go  home ;  picking  at  bed-
clothes and  playing  with  hands ;  throws  off  bedclothes
so  as  to  leave  the  genitals  uncovered ;  plays  with  the
genitals. ^Typhoid  fever.

■  Staring or squinting, either with one or  both  eyes;

involuntary  stools  in  bed  and  involuntary  urination ;
paralysis  of  sphincter  ani  and  vesicae;  marked  sub-
sultus tendinum.  ^Typhoid  fever.
Iln  typhoid  and  typhus  fevers,  especially  typhus,  when
brain  is  active  but  wandering,  patient  laboring  under
hallucination  of  various  kinds,  but  all  centering  in  a
desire  to  escape  from  room  or  from  those  around.

■  Lies  on  back,  eyes  wide  open,  staring  and  immovable;

unconscious ;  face  red,  lips  black,  tongue  dry  and  black;
lower  jaw  hangs  down  ;  urine  involuntary,  it  leaves
large  streaks  of  red  sand  on  sheet ;  skin  dry ;  pulse  over
200;  ill  nine  days. /^Typhus.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  112

I  Fever  cases  in  which  torpor  of  entire  organism  pre-
dominates; dull,  fixed  expression  of  face,  delirium  is
lacking,  or  if  present  it  consists  of  a  confused  farrago
of  complex  images;  the  perceptive  faculty  is  almost
suspended.

■  Convulsions,  mania,  delirium,  cough,  and  sleeplessness,
all  occur  almost  absolutely  without  any  manifestations
of  fever.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Chill and heat: last two hours,
followed  by  sleep  which  lasts  three.

Every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes:  an  attack  of  twitching  of
limbs  and  muscles  of  face.

Every  evening:  congestion  to  head;  burning  heat  of  body.

Alternate  days,  11  a.m.  :  chill  without  thirst.

Almost  daily  epileptic  fits.

Three  days:  sleeps  without  interruption.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:. beating  in  eye;  convul-
sive tremor  in  foot.

Left:  pressure  in  side. of  forehead  changing  to  shooting;
dull  percussion  sound  from  lower  edge  of  scapula  down-
wards on  side;  abscesses  on  side  of  neck;  inflamed  ulcers.

From  above  downwards :  sudden  jerking  in  root  of  nose.

From  within  outward :  pricking  stitches.
^^  Sensations.  Brain  as  if  loose ;  as  if  water  was  swashing  in
head ;  undulating  sensation  in  brain,  as  if  from  throb-
bing in  arteries;  as  though  a  veil  was  before  eyes;
hands  as  if  too  large;  hard  hearing,  as  if  stupefied;  as
if  strangling;  as  if  blood  was  forced  into  teeth;  as  if
tooth  would  fall  out;  teeth  feel  loose  and  too  long;  as  if
abdomen  would  burst;  as  if  he  had  fallen  on  abdominal
muscles;  as  if  heart  and  breast  were  torn  to  pieces;  as
if  cervical  muscles  were  too  short;  fingers  feel  too  thick ;
as  if  palate  was  too  long;  as  if  mucus  was  lodged  in
throat.

Pain:  in  nape  of  neck;  in  meninges;  in  head;  in  teeth;
in  back ;  in  region  of  liver.

Intense  pain :  in  gums.

Severe  pain:  in  head;  in  nape  of  neck.

Violent  pains:  in  head;  in  teeth;  in  stomach;  in  pit  of
stomach.

Tearing  raging  pain :  in  teeth ;  toothache  driving  to  despair.

Violent  tearing  and  pulsating  pains.

Great  pain :  during  convulsion.

Very  painful  tenesmus.

Tearing:  in  r.  eye;  in  teeth,  extending  to  cheeks  and
lower  jaw.

Beating:  in  r.  eye.

Cutting:  low  down  in  abdomen.


113  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

Lancinating  pain:  in  joints.

Stitches ;  in  sides  of  chest.
.Stitching  pain:  in  head;  in  region  of  liver.

Shooting:  in  1.  side  of  forehead;  from  eyes  into  nose  and
head ;  in  throat.

Stinging:  in  internal  chest.

Sticking:  in  umbilical  region.

Pricking  pains:  in  throat.

Pinching:  in  root  of  nose;  in  zygomata;  in  abdomen.

Throbbing  pain:  in  teeth.

Jerking:  in  teeth.

Labor-like  pains:  previous  to  menstruation.

Cramp  pressure :  at  root  of  nose  and  malar  bone.

Cramps: in  stomach; of  whole  body; in  thigh;  of  ex-
tremities.

Cramp-like  pain:  in  abdomen.

Hysterical  colic.

Pulsating  pain:  in  teeth.

Painful  epigastrium  and  hypochondria.

Burning  heat:  all  over.

Burning:  in  throat;  in  stomach.

Heat:  in  head;  over  whole  body.

Painful  warmth :  after  applying  hands  to  parts.

Soreness:  of  soft  parts  between  gums  and  cheeks;  of  ab-
dominal muscles;  of  muscles  of  chest;  of  throat.

Constrictive,  stupefying  pain:  in  upper  part  of  forehead.

Pressing,  stupefying  pain:  in  forehead.

Aching,  stupefying  pain:  over  eyes.

Dull  pain:  in  region  of  liver.

Dull  aching:  about  liver.

Bruised  feeling:  on  moving  parts.

Pulling:  in  loins;  in  small  of  back.

Drawing:  in  nape  of  neck;  in  teeth;  in  loins;  in  small  of
back.

Contraction :  of  stomach ;  of  sphincter  ani.

Painful  numbness:  of  hands.

Vacant  feeling:  in  head.

Tickling:  in  throat.

Pressure:  in  vertex;  in  1.  side  of  forehead;  in  root  of  nose
and  zygomata;  in  bladder;  in  head.

Heaviness:  of  head.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Constriction:  of  throat.

Tight  feeling:  across  chest.

Stiffness:  of  cervical  muscles  ;  of  arms  and  legs.

Numbness:  of  hands;  of  tongue;  of  oesophagus.

Weakness:  after  paroxysms;  of  legs.

Tingling:  in  head.

VOL.  VI. — 8.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  114

Buzzing  sensation :  in  teeth.

Buzzing,  singing,  rushing:  in  ears.

Parching  dryness  :  of  tongue.

Dryness :  of  mouth  ;  of  throat.

Violent  pulsation,  like  waves :  in  head.

Tremor  :  of  limbs ;  all  through  body.

Quivering :  in  eyes.

Twitching : in  eyes ; of  muscles  of  face ; in  cheeks ;  of

limbs ;  convulsive,  of  abdomen.
Shudderings  and  rigors :  in  spine  going  up  into  head.
Trembling :  of  arms  and  hands ;  of  limbs.
Convulsive  trembling :  of  hands  and  feet ;  in  r.  foot.
Itching:  around  part.
Coldness :  of  hands  and  feet ;  of  spine.
"  Tissues. iConvulsions,  spasms,  cramps,  epilepsy,  chorea  and

other  spasmodic  affections  ;  in  women  and  children.

■  Expanded  and  puffed  up  veins;  full  pulse.

■  Hemorrhages  usually  light  red.

A  constant  flow  of  bright  red  blood,  with  bluish  face.
Obesity,

Skin  and  muscles  lax.
Obstinate  dropsy.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Touch :  pit  of  stomach
tender; abdomen sore; hypogastrium painful; in-
flamed ulcers  <.
After  applying  hand  to  parts:  painful  warmth.
^^Skin. ■Great  sensitiveness  of  skin.

■  Hot,  dry,  brittle  skin,  want  of  sensation.

■  Painful  warmth  after  applying  hand  to  parts.
■Skin  often  pale,  with  delirium;  body  hot.

■  Skin  red,  or  with  red  rash.

■  Skin  of  bright  red  hue,  resembling  scarlet  fever,  with

dry,  sore  throat  and  much  nervousness.

■Scarlatina,  with  marked  mental  symptoms.

■Stupid  drowsiness,  or  else  great  nervous  excitability  and
sleeplessness;  utter  stupidity,  or  else  illusions  of  invagi-
nation and  senses;  vacant  staring  at  things,  or  else
sparkling  red,  prominent  eyes;  embarrassed,  indistinct
speech;  answers  no  questions,  or  else  indistinct  mutter-
ing loquacity;  mouth  and  throat  dry  and  red  ;  inability
to  swallow;  abdomen  distended,  tympanitic;  watery,
involuntary  and  unnoticed  stools  in  bed. ^Scarlatina.

■  Scarlatina  with  acute  inflammatory  affections  of  brain,  or

when  there  is  a  condition  between  erethism  and  torpor.

■  Miliary  eruption  especially  after  abuse  of  Bellad.
■Varicella; vesicles in crops, sleepless; nervous, dry

cough,  must  sit  up.

■  Large  pustules,  clustering  from  hips  to  knees.


115  HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.

I  I  Eruption  of  dry  pimples  like  confluent  small-pox.
I  Repelled  eruptions,  with  tendency  to  diarrhoea.

■  Frequent  large  blood  boils.

I  I  Ulcers  painful,  bleeding;  bruised  feeling  on  moving
part.

■  Inflamed  ulcers,  surrounding  skin  being  of  a  bright  ver-

milion redness;  large  pustules  around  ulcers;  <  even-
ing, during  menses,  from  touch ;  >  when  getting  warm ;
1.  side.

■  Anthrax  in  nervous  and  hysterical  persons;  coma  vigil;

great  restlessness  caused  by  excessive  nervous  excite-
ment, shaking  of  head  in  all  directions;  constriction  of
pharynx;  itching  around  part.

■  Gangrene,  with  nervous  restlessness.

■  Brown  or  gangrenous  spots.

*^ Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■■Nervous,  irritable,  excit-
able, sanguine  temperaments.
Light  haired  people.

■  Hysterical  women  and  young  girls;  old  men;  drunkards.
Child,  aet.  6  weeks,  without  any  premonitory  symptoms;

lethargy.

Boy,  set.  2,  sudden  attack;  maniacal  fury.

Boy,  set.  6;  catarrhal  pneumonia.

Boy,  aet.  13;  rheumatic  endocarditis.

Boy,  set.  14;  insanity.

Girl,  set.  15 ;  chronic  palpitation  of  heart.

Girl,  £et.  18;  epilepsy.

Girl,  set.  20 ;  spasms  of  chest.

Woman,  set.  21,  strong  and  healthy,  after  fright;  loss  of
speech.

Man,  set.  23,  previous  good  health,  sudden  insanity.

Woman,  set.  24,  suffering  five  weeks;  convulsive  tremor
in  foot.

Woman,  set.  25,  quiet  and  peaceable  disposition,  after  some
mental  shock,  epileptic  attacks,  which,  five  days  after
childbirth,  were  followed  by  mania.

Woman,  set.  27,  suffering  four  weeks;  hysteria.

Young  woman,  apparently  well,  except  recently  had  ir-
regular menses;  mania.

Very  irritable  lady ;  effects  of  jealousy.

Mrs.  R.,  weak,  nervous  temperament,  three  weeks  after
confinement;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  after  having  been  cured  of  a  previous  fit  of  in-
sanity, after  drinking;  insanity.

Brandy  drinker,  within  six  years  has  had  attacks;  delir-
ium tremens.

Woman,  set.  30,  after  being  accused  of  theft;  affection  of
mind.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.  116

Man,  set.  30,  after  fit  of  passion;  melancholia  followed  by-
madness.

Man,  set.  33,  suffering  several  weeks;  chest  affection.

Woman,  set.  36,  tradesman's  wife,  lymphatic  temperament;
delirium  tremens.

Woman,  set.  37,  drunkard;  mania.

Woman,  set.  37,  suffering  from  daily  paroxysms  for  more
than  a  year;  convulsions.

Man,  set.  38 ;  frequent  micturition.

Man,  set.  48;  insanity.

Man,  set.  50,  for  some  years  monomania;  insanity.

Woman,  set.  59,  unmarried;  apoplexy.

Old  man;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  70,  suffering  a  year;  frequent  micturition.

Mrs.  P.,  set.  85,  health  has  been  failing  for  several  weeks,
less  activity  of  mind  and  body,  restless  at  night,  fearing
to  be  alone  in  the  dark ;  hallucinations.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Vinegar,  Bellad.,  Citric  acid,  Cin-
chon.,  Siramon.

It  antidotes:  Bellad.,  effects  of  ether,  Plumbum,  Stramon.

Compatible:  Bellad.,  Pulsat.,  Stramon.,  Veratr.,  all  follow
well  when  indicated ;  Phosphor,  often  cures  lasciviousness
when  Hyosc.  fails ;  Hyosc.  follows  Bellad.  well  in  deafness
after  apoplexy;  Nux  vom.  or  Opium  in  haemoptysis  of
drunkards;  Bellad.  and  Opium  in  congestive  chills.


117  HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.

HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.

Hypericacese.  St.  John's  Wort.

Provings  by  Mueller,  Thorer,  Stokes,  Bruckner  and  Schelling.  See  Allen's
Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  53.

Clinical  Authorities. — Affection  of  mind,  Miiller,  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.
134 ;  Headache,  C.  Hering,  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  332 ;  Bonepains  in  head,  Lyford,
Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  361 ;  Pain  and  irritation  of  eye,  Moffat,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,
[).  95 ;  Spasmodic  asthma,  Ludlam,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  871;  Sjyinal  irritation,
Dornberg,  Kaue's  P.,  p.  798  ;  Traumatic  meningitis,  Winterburn,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.
Soc.  N.  Y.,  1884,  p.  149;  Injury  to  spine;  concussion  of  spine,  Winterburn,  Trans.
Horn.  Med.  Soc.  N.  Y.,  1884;  Affection  of  spine,  Ludlam,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  17,  p.  524;
Crushing  of  foot,  Winterburn,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  N.  Y.,  1884,  p.  148 ;  Injury  to
foot,  Farrington,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  91 ;  Shock,  Winterburn,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.
N.  Y.,  1884,  p.  148;  Tetanic  symptoms,  Hocking,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  264;
Wounds,  Franklin,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  325 ;  Gunshot  wounds,  Franklin,  Trans.
W.  H.  Con.,  1876,  p.  794;  Compound  fractures  and  dislocations,  Franklin,  T.  W.  H.  C,
1876,  p.  194;  Pain  after  operation,  Gilchrist,  Organon,  vol,  2,  p.  241,  vol.  3,  p.  366.

^  Mind. I  I  Makes  mistakes  in  writing;  omits  letters;  forgets
what  she  wanted  to  say;  confused.
Increase  of  intellectual  power.
I  I  Erotic  ideas;  brain  excited,  as  after  tea.
Sees  spirits;  spectres;  delirium.

■  Talking  nonsense  in  her  sleep  at  4  o'clock  in  morning;

disturbed  look,  stares  at  people;  head  hot,  carotids
throbbing;  flushed  and  bloated  face;  eyes  fixed,  pupils
dilated;  frequent  pulse;  hair  moist,  rest  of  body  burning
hot;  great  anxiety;  singing,  followed  by  weeping  and
loud  screaming,  with  gasping  for  breath;  beating  head-
ache, especially  in  vertex;  tearing  stitches  in  brain;
crawling  in  hands  and  feet,  as  if  they  were  numb;  great
thirst;  white  coated  tongue.

I  I  Great  anxiety. ^Meningitis.

Melancholy.

Irritable,  inclined  to  speak  sharply;  slept  badly,  languid
on  waking.

■  Consequences  of  fright;  effects  of  shock.

^  Sensorium. Heaviness  and  dizziness  in  head.

■  Vertigo:  at  night,  with  urging  to  urinate;  with  loathing

on  waking;  with  pain  in  temples;  in  afternoon,  with
feeling  of  weakness  and  trembling  of  limbs;  sensation
as  if  head  became  suddenly  elongated.


HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.  118

iSensation  as  if  being  lifted  up  high  into  air;  tormented
by  anxiety  that  the  slightest  touch  or  motion  would
make  her  fall  down  from  this  height;  with  headache
after  a  fall  on  occiput.

I  Confused  sensation  in  vertex  with  buzzing  sensation  at

night,  as  if  something  living  were  in  brain.

■  Asphyxia  after  a  fall;  when  jerkings  or  shooting  pains

appear.
^  Inner  Head. iTearing  stitches  in  brain;  beating,  mostly
on  vertex. ^Meningitis.

■  Burning  in  vertex,  pulsation  and  heat.

■  Dull  headache,  only  on  vertex,  gradually  increasing  as  if

whole  brain  would  be  pressed  asunder,  with  inability  to
perform  any  kind  of  labor;  loathing;  tingling,  drawing
pains  in  cheeks  and  chin.

■Violent  headache  after  puerperal  rash;  throbbing
in  vertex,  moves  to  cheeks  and  chin,  where  it  changes
to  tingling,  drawing  pains;  brain  feels  compressed,  be-
comes stupefied.

■Throbbing  in  vertex,  and  heat  in  head  in  afternoon.

■Headache  as  if  brain  would  be  torn  to  pieces.

■  Sensation  as  if  head  became  elongated.

■  Dull  headache,  head  heavy;  morning.

II  Headache  after  breakfast.

■  Headache,  with  sore  eyes,  after  a  fall.

■  Headache,  extending  into  zygoma  or  cheeks.

■  Pressive  pain  in  occiput  on  motion;  also  with  drawing

stitches;  tearing;  back  of  head  feels  "bothered;"  severe
scalp  headache  1.  side  of  occiput,  after  breakfast,  at  other
times  dull;  shoot  of  dull  pain  up  1.  occipital  nerve.

■  Headache  after  a  fall  upon  occiput,  combined  with  a  sen-

sation as  if  being  lifted  up  high  into  air;  she  was  tor-
mented by  the  greatest  anxiety  that  the  slightest  touch
or  motion  would  make  her  fall  down  from  this  height.
*  Outer  Head.  Sensation  in  forehead  as  if  touched  by  an  icy
cold  hand,  in  afternoon,  after  which  a  spasmodic  con-
traction is  felt  in  r.  eye.

■  Pressure  in  1.  temple,  after  breakfast.
■Curling  sensation  on  vertex.

■  Head  hot,  carotids  throbbing.

■  Hair  moist,  rest  of  body  burning  hot.
I  I  Heat  and  pressure  on  vertex.
■Severe  bone  pains  in  cranium.

■  Fractured  skull;  bone  splintered.

I  I  Humid  eruption  on  scalp  with  children.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Disturbed  look,  stares  at  people,  eyes
fixed;  pupils  dilated.
■Pain  and  irritation  of  eye,  from  an  anterior  synechia  re-


;119  •  HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.

suiting  from  an  injury  several  years  previously;  healthy

eye  also  irritable.
I  Stitches  in  r,  eye.
I  Stye  on  lower  left  lid.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. "  Sensitiveness  of  hearing ;  during  cat-

amenia.
I  I  Shooting  through  the  ear.
I  I  Ears  hot;  scurf  on  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose, i  Exceedingly  fine  sense  of  smell
I  1  Nose  dry,  very  annoying.
I  I  Sneezing,  leaving  a  raw  sore  feeling  m  throat.
I  Sores  inside  nose,  itching ;  all  the  time  picking  nose.
1  I  Dryness  of  nostrils ;  crusts  in  it.
^  Upper  I'ace. Suffering  expression.
I  Face  hot,  bloated. ^Meningitis.
I  I  Cheeks  red  ;  erysipelatous  redness.
I  I  Dull  faceache,  aching  in  brows ;  afternoon,  evening ;  <

at  night,  disturbing  sleep.

■  Headache  extending  into  zygoma  or  cheek.

iRed  eruption  on  both  cheeks,  chin  and  nose;  sometmies
dry,  with  thin  crusts  ;  sometimes  fiery  red,  oozing  yel-
low drops.
^  Lower  Face. Tension  in  the  cheek.
I  I  Lips  dry,  feel  hot.

■  Eruption  around  mouth  and  on  r.  ear.

■  Yellow-greenish  scabs,  with  cracking  and  moisture.
'"Teeth  and  Gums. "Severe  aching  in  decayed tooth  at

night;  restless,  wakeful;  >  lying  on  affected  side,  and
keeping  quiet.
Injuries  to  dental  nerves.
''  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  insipid;  of  blood.  _

■  Tongue  coated  white  or  yellow;  great  thirst.  ^Meningitis.

■  Great  soreness  of  tongue,  from  lacerated  wounds,  with  in-

ability  to speak,  not from stiffness or swelling,  but
extreme  soreness.
'^  Inner  Mouth. ■Dry,  burning  heat  in  mouth  and  on  lips.
'3  Throat. Expansion  of  throat  and  abdomen.

1  1  Sensation  as  if  a  worm  was  moving  in  throat.

I  I  Hot  rising  in  oesophagus  after  a  fright,  or  with  anxious

feelings.
1  I  With  hemming,  some  bright,  red  blood  comes  up.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■  Desire  for  warm
drinks. ^Meningitis.
I  I  Great  thirst,  white  tongue;  in  morning  after  heat  and

delirium.
■Thirst  with  feeling  of  heat  in  mouth;  violent  thirst.
I  I  Desire  for  wine  ;  for  pickles.
1  I  Appetite  increased  morning  and  evening.


HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM,  120

'^  Eating  and  Drinking. Tastelessness.
I  I  Belching,  when  drinking  water.
I  I  Smoking  tobacco  does  not  taste  well.
After  breakfast:  headache,  eructations,  gastric  symptoms,

pressure  in  stomach  toward  back;  pains  in  limbs.
After  supper ;  flatulence  and  diarrhoea.
^'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructations :
tasteless; bitter; preventing sleep at night;  <  after
drinking  water.
I  Nausea:  weakness  every  morning; abdomen  distended,
pains  in  bowels,  awaking  in  night;  with  headache  on
vertex.
•Vomiting.
''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  at  stomach  on  eating
but  little.
Sticking  in  stomach.

Pain  in  stomach,  nausea,  diarrhoea  and  chill  after  eating.
''*  Hypochondria. Sticking  or  dragging  pain  in  r.  hypochon-

drium.
'^Abdomen. iTympanitic  distension  of  abdomen;  relieved
by  a  stool.
I  I  Cutting  in  belly,  in  region  of  navel.
I  I  Pinching  pains ;  diarrhoea ;  catamenia.
I  Colic.

I  Pain  after  operation  for  incarcerated  hernia.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Awakes  with  distended  abdomen,  re-
lieved by  stool.
I  I  Diarrhoea  driving  out  of  bed  in  morning.
I  I  Loose,  bilious,  yellow  stools  evening  or  morning.

■  Summer  diarrhoea,  with  eruptions  on  skin.

■  Cholera  morbus, slimy  stools;  afterward  constipation;

flesh  sore  all  over  ;  feet  swollen,  urine  lessened.

■  Constipation;  violent  tenesmus,  with  discharge  of  a  hard

little  ball ;  with  nausea.

■  Rectum  feels  dry,  morning.
:  Hemorrhoids.

^'  Urinary  Organs. Vesical  tenesmus.

■Swelling  and  hardness  of  female  urethra,  with  burning,
soreness  and  sensitiveness;  especially  if  caused  by
instruments  for  uterine  prolapsus.

■  Nightly  urging  to  urinate,  with  vertigo.
Retention  of  urine.

Urine: much  diminished;  bloody; turbid; of  peculiar
odor.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  functions  excited.

Tearing  in  genital  organs,  with  desire  to  urinate.
^^  Female Sexual Organs. Inflammatory conditions of
mucous  membranes  of  uterus  and  vagina.


121  HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.

Menses:  delay  a  fortnight;  too  late,  with  tension  in
uterine  region,  as  from  a  tight  bandage;  increased  in
quantity;  three  days  before  their  appearance,  pinching
in  abdomen,  diarrhoea,  cold  feet;  headache,  wrenching
pain  over  eyes,  >  in  motion  ;  severe  headache ;  attended
by  sickening  pain  in  belly  and  sensitiveness  of  hearing.

Leucorrhoea:  with  delayed  menses,  palpitation,  pressure
in  small  of  back ;  with  heaviness  in  lower  bowels;  in  a
child,  milky,  but  corroding.
•  Chlorosis  of  marriageable  girls.
:  Scirrhus  of  breast  caused  by  injury.
^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation. Labor  pains  tardy.

lAfterpains  violent,  in  sacrum  and  hips,  with  severe  head-
ache; after  instrumental  delivery.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse-
ness, with  scraping  and  roughness  in  larynx,  upper  part
of  pharynx  and  nares,  in  a  foggy  atmosphere.
^"Respiration. iSpasmodic  asthmatic  attacks:  with  changes
of  weather  from  clear  to  damp,  or  before  storms;  cannot
lie  for  any  length  of  time  upon back ; attacks  >  by
copious  expectoration  from  bronchial  tubes  ;  after  lesion
of  spinal  cord,  by  a  fall,  years  before.
^'' Cough. I  Spells  of  short,  barking  cough. ^Meningitis.

I  Frequent  dry,  hacking  cough.

I  I  Hacking  cough,  from  irritation  in  throat,  <  by  heat
and  cold  air.

Dry  cough  and  prostration  in  morning.

I  Whooping  cough,  worse  from  6  to  10  p.m.;  great  nervous
prostration.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Anxiety  in  chest,  in  forenoon,
with  short  breath,  dizziness  and  bitter  belching.

I  Tightness  in  chest.

Pressure  and  burning  in  chest.

Stitches  in  chest  between  breasts.

Stinging  in  left  chest,  <  when  moving.

Cutting  in  upper  right  chest,  then  in  lower  left.

':  Consumption  with  haemoptysis.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Violent  beating  of  heart.

Pulse:  quick  and  hard;  frequent.

Local  congestions,  and  capillary  erethism,  with  or  without
hemorrhages  and  great  nervous  depression,  following
wounds.
^"  Outer  Chest. Stitches  under  mammae.

Continual  stitches  from  within  outward,  through  1.  breast
and  sternum,  <  from  motion.

Stinging  burning  pain  on  one  edge  of  1.  pectoral  muscles.

Dull  pressure,  r.  chest,  from  seventh  rib  downwards,  after
breakfast.


HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.  122

^'  Neck  and  Back. ■  Cervical  vertebrae  very  sensitive  to  toucli,
iStinging  near  edge  of  right  scapula  near  spine ;  morning.
I  Cutting  between  scapulae.
I  Back  lame  and  painful.
iStitches  in  small  of  back.
I  Aching  pain  and  sensation  of  lameness  in  small  of  back.

■  Backache  after  confinement.

1  After  falling  out  of  hammock,  great  pain  in  spine,  grow-
ing daily  more  severe  ;  she  could  not  sit  except  upon  an
air  cushion.

■  Every  four  weeks  attack  of  illness  lasting  4  to  8  days,

beginning  with  chill,  followed  by  long  continued  fever,
with  dry,  parched  skin,  headache,  especially  towards
evening,  restlessness,  jactitation,  supersensibility  of  sur-
face of  neck  and  of  superior  extremities,  great  dread  of
motion,  w^ould  not  walk  and  screamed  outright  if  any
one  proposed  to  lift  her  from  one  place  to  another,  in-
sisting all  the  while  that  she  should  be  held  in  lap ;
face  pale  and  anxious,  white  around  mouth,  and  expres-
sion of  suffering  and  uneasiness;  anorexia;  slight  thirst
for  warm  drinks;  dry,  hacking  cough  from  irritation  in.
throat,  <  from  least  exposure  to  cold  air  ;  tongue  white,
taste  insipid;  cervical  vertebrae  very  sensitive  to  touch.
^After  a  fall.

■  After  a  fall:  slightest  motion  of  arms  or  of  neck  extorts

cries  ;  cervical  vertebrae  very  sensitive  to  touch  ;  head-
ache ;  desire  for  warm  drinks  ;  asthmatic  spells,  or  spells
of  short,  hacking  cough.

■  An  ice-man  struck  back  violently  against  curbstone  by

being  thrown  from  wagon  ;  he  felt  a  momentary  intense
pain  shoot,  down  both  legs,  but  was  afterwards  able  to
get  up,  and  serve  out  the  rest  of  his  route ;  in  afternoon
was  unable  to  hold  urine,  which  dribbled  away  without
his  being  aware  of  it;  next  morning  on  attempting  to
rise  legs  seemed  "as  if  drunk;"  pulse  feeble;  tem-
perature normal;  breathing  slightly  labored,  no  pain
along  spine,  nor  any  spasmodic  movement;  sphincter
muscles  partially  paralyzed ;  walks  with  a  rolling
motion  ;  legs  felt  "  as  if  dead." ^Concussion  of  spine.

■  Boy  fell  from  shed,  but  did  not  seem  much  hurt;  next

night, however, began  vomiting;  in  morning  was  slightly
delirious,  but  could  easily  be  aroused  to  answer  ques-
tions; severe  pain  in  head  and  down  spine,  greatly
intensified  b}^  attempting  to  move  arms  or  legs ;  pupils
dilated ;  face  puffed  and  hot ;  tongue  coated  yellowish  ;
mouth  dry,  but  did  not  wish  to  drink  water,  desired
warm  milk ;  pulse  140,  full  and  hard,  temperature
104|  F.; constipated,  stools  consisting  of  small,  hard


123  HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.

lumps ;  urine  thick  and  muddy,  and  had  the  appear-
ance of  beer. ^Traumatic  meningitis.

IBoy,  set.  14,  fair,  of  lively  temperament,  was  attacked
while  husking  corn  with  numbness  of  limbs,  and  pain  in
upper  part  of  spinal  cord;  spinal  column  from  cervical
vertebrse  to  region  of  kidneys,  tender  to  touch ;  |)aroxysms
of  pain  with  symptoms  of  mania,  pains  principally  in
joints  and  changing  about;  almost  constant  dull
headache;  least  touch  on  spine  between  cervical  and
lumbar  regions  made  him  shrink.

I  Violent  pains  and  inability  to  walk,  or  to  stoop  after  a  fall
on  coccyx ;  feet  feel  pith}^,  as  if  pricked  with  needles.

I  Lies  on  back  jerking  head  backward.

I I  Consequences  of  spinal  concussion.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Flying  pains  in  r.  shoulder.

Cutting  under  left  scapula.

Pressure  at  insertion  of  right  deltoid.

Stitches  on  top  of  shoulder  at  every  inspiration.

Hard  pain  running  down  left  median  nerve.

Numbness  in  1.  arm;  >  from  rubbing.'

Dry  herpetic  eruption  on  outer  side  of  arms,  <  on  right.

I  Excruciating  pain  after  amputation  of  arm ;  fainting.

Tension  in  both  arms  and  in  hands.

Cutting  in  fleshy  ends  of  fingers.

•  Compound  dislocation  of  two  fingers,  with  severe  lacera-
tion and  tearing  of  external  structure,  the  members
being  severed  except  by  a  narrow  bridge  of  skin  uniting
them  to  the  body  (applied  locally).

Pain  in  last  phalanges  of  fingers,  <  in  thumb,  fore  and
little  fingers,

I  Panaritium.
^  Lower  Limbs, l  After  severe  injury  to  sciatic  nerve,  sharp,
cutting  pains,  darting  along  course  of  nerve  and  termi-
nating in  a  twisting  or  wrenching  sensation  in  foot.

I  I  Sciatica,  rheumatism,

I  I  Coxalgia  after  confinement,

I  Left  leg  numb,  cold  while  sitting.

Weakening  drawing,  over  front  of  legs;  shoots  of  pain,  as
if  in  periosteum.

Fearful  pains  in  knees,  sharp,  could  hardly  touch  them.

I  I  Articular  rheumatism  in  knee;  effusion  around  joint;
muddy  urine,  looking  like  settlings  of  beer;  pains  sharp,
<  least  touch ;  tearing  pains.

■  The  feet  feel  pithy,  as  if  pricked  with  needles.

B  Lying  in  bed  the  feet  tingle.

Sensation  as  if  1.  foot  was  strained  or  dislocated.

■Same  evening,  after  running  pin  into  foot,  intense  pain
at  seat  of  injury; toes became  rigid,  ankle stiffened,


HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.  124

chills  chased  each  other  down  back,  followed  by  nausea
and  vomiting;  she  fainted,  and  on  coming  to,  still  com-
plained of  the  agonizing  pain;  strange  expression  of
face,  eyes  set,  lips  drawn  tightly  across  teeth.

lAfter  running  pins  in  r.  foot  pain  runs  up  limb  through
spine  to  neck  and  face ;  muscles  of  neck  and  jaw  become
rigid,  <  r.  side,  and  also  muscles  of  abdomen  and
thorax. ^Tetanic  symptoms.

I  Toes  of  r.  foot  crushed  by  heavy  iron  shutter,  and  almost
severed  from  foot,  the  bones  protruding  in  several  places;
considerable  hemorrhage ;  excruciating  pain ;  depressed
and  cold.

:  Gout.

■  Bunions  excruciatingly  painful  (locally),
i Cannot  walk,  spine  affected.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Feeling  of  weakness  and  trembling  of
all  the  limbs.
Bruised  sensation  in  all  the  joints.
Rheumatoid  inflammation  of  joints.

■  Crawling  in  hands  and  feet,  as  if  they  were  numb.
Sensation  of  lameness  of  1.  arm  and  right  foot.

■  Crawling  in  hands  and  feet,  they  felt  fuzzy.

■  Compound  fractures  of  hands  and  feet,  with  great  lacera-

tion of  soft  parts.
I  I  Affections  of  joints.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Keeping  quiet:  toothache  >.
Lying  in  bed :  feet  tingle.
Lying  on  affected  side:  toothache  >.
Lies  on  back:  jerking  head  backwards.
Sitting:  1.  leg  cold.
On  rising:  languor.

Cannot  lie  for  any  length  of  time  upon  back.
Could  not  sit  except  on  air  cushion;  screamed  when  it  was

proposed  to  lift  her  to  ano.ther  place.
Motion:  pressive  pain  in  occiput;  wrenching  pain  over

eyes  >  ;  continual  stitches  through  1.  breast  and  sternum.
Slightest  motions  of  arms  or  neck  extorts  cries,  after  a  fall.
Great  dread  of  motion.
Physical  effort  causes  fainting.
Would  not  walk.

Cannot  walk  or  stoop :  after  a  fall  on  coccyx.
^^  Nerves. ■  ■  Effects  of  nervous  shock.

■  Great  weakness.

Weariness  on  awaking;  goes  off  by  noon.

■  Great  nervous  depression  following  wounds.

■  After  being  frightened  by  a  practical  joke,  became  very

pale  and  hysterical;  pulse  54,  very  weak  and  compres-
sible; respiration  15  and  sighing;  temperature  96°;
skin  cold  and  clammy;  s^^-^^^  ,.--••


125  HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.

Jerks  in  limbs.

I  Convulsions  from  blows  upon  head  or  concussion;  dull

headache,  on  vertex,  or  severe  headache,  with  throbbing

on  top  of  head.

■  Spasms  after  slight  injuries,  in  children.

I  Epileptiform  spasms  after  hard  knocks.

I I  Tetanus  after  traumatic  injuries,
I  I  Opisthotonos.

■  Prevents  lockjaw  from  wounds  in  soles  of  feet,  fingers,  or

palms  of  hands.

■  Removes  ill  effects  of  local  shock,  prevents  in  a  great

measure  sympathetic  irritation  of  system  from  local  de-
rangement and  modifies  subsequent  inflammation  and
sloughing. ^Gunshot  wounds.

■  ■Injuries  to  nerves,  attended  by  great  pain.

■  Especially  adapted  to  mechanical  injuries  of  spinal  cord,

and  nerves  at  their  peripheral  extremities.

■  Nervous  disorders  arising  from  falls  and  hurts.

■  Lacerated  nerves,  causing  excruciating  pain.
^^  Sleep. Constant  drowsiness.

Spasmodic  jerks  of  arms  or  legs  on  going  to  sleep;  twitch-
ings.

On  awaking :  weary,  >  by  noon ;  feels  refreshed ;  bowels
distended.

Dreams:  with  activity,  traveling;  vivid;  distressing.
^  Time. 4  a.m.:  talking  nonsense  in  sleep.

Morning:  dull  headache,  head  heavy;  great  thirst,  white
tongue;  appetite  increased;  diarrhoea  drives  out  of  bed;
loose,  bilious,  yellow  stools;  rectum  feels  dry;  dry  cough
and  prostration;  stinging  near  scapula;  after  a  fall
slightly  delirious.

After  breakfast:  headache;  severe  scalp  headache;  press-
ure in  1.  temple;  eructations;  gastric  symptoms;  press-
ure in  stomach ;  pains  in  limbs;  dull  pressure  in  r.  chest.

Noon:  weariness  >.

Afternoon:  feeling  of  weakness  and  trembling  of  limbs;
throbbing  in  vertex ;  sensation  as  if  forehead  was  touched
by  an  icy  cold  hand,  after  which  contraction  of  r.  eye;
dull  faceache;  brows  ache;  unable  to  hold  urine.

4  P.M.:  eruption  like  nettlerash  on  both  hands.

Evening:  dull  faceache,  brows  ache;  appetite  increased;
loose,  bilious,  yellow  stools;  dry,  parched  skin,  head-
ache; intense  pain  at  seat  of  injury;  eruption  on  both
hands.

After  supper:  flatulence  and  diarrhoea.

Night:  vertigo;  urging  to  urinate;  dull  faceache  <;
severe  aching  in  decayed  tooth ;  eructations  preventing
sleep;  awakening  at  night  from  pain  in  bowels;  vomit-
ing, after  a  fall.


HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.  126

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. '  Sensitiveness  to  cold.

Attacks  return  with  changes  of  weather  from  clear  to  damp,
or  before  storms;  after  lesion  of  spine  by  a  fall,  spas-
modic asthma.

Foggy  atmosphere:  hoarseness,  with  scraping  and  rough-
ness of  larynx,  upper  part  of  pharynx  and  nares.

Heat:  hacking  cough  <.

Cold  air: hacking  cough  <; least exposure < symp-
toms.
^°  Fever. Shuddering  over  whole  body,  with  desire  to  urinate.

Heat,  with  delirium,  wild  staring  look,  hot  head,  throb-
bing of  carotids,  bright  red  bloated  face,  moist  hair
on  head,  burning  heat  of  skin,  great  oppression  and
anguish.

Chill  followed  by  heat,'with  sweat  on  hands  and  feet.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Every  morning:  nausea,  weakness.

From  6  to  10  p.m.:  whooping  cough  <.

Three  days  before  menses:  pinching  in  abdomen.

Every  four  weeks:  attacks  of  illness,  lasting  4  to  8  days.

Summer:  diarrhoea.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  spasmodic  contraction
of  eye;  stitches  in  eye;  dull  depression  inchest;  sting-
ing near  edge  of  scapula  near  spine;  flying  pains  in
shoulder;  pressure  at  insertion  of  deltoid;  dry,  herpetic
eruption  on  outer  side  of  arm ;  pains  through  limb,  spine,
neck  and  face;  excruciating  pain  in  crushed  toes;  lame-
ness of  foot.

Left:  severe  scalp  headache  in  side  of  occiput;  shoot  of
dull  pain  up  cervical  nerve;  pressure  in  temple;  stye
on  lower  lid;  continual  stitches  through  breast  and
sternum;  stinging  burning  pain  on  one  edge  of  pectoral
muscles;  cutting  under  scapula;  hard  pain  running
down  median  nerve;  numbness  in  arm;  leg  numb;  leg
cold  w^hile  sitting;  sensation  as  if  foot  was  strained  or
dislocated.

Before  backward :  pressure  in  stomach.

Upper  r.  to  lower  1. :  cutting  in  chest.

Left  upper  and  r.  lower:  sensation  of  lameness  of  arm  and
foot.

Above  downward :  pain  down  1.  median  nerve ;  pain  down
from  vertex  to  face.
^^  Sensations.  Brain  excited  as  after  tea;  as  if  hands  and
feet  were  numb;  as  if  head  became  suddenly  elongated ;
as  if  being  lifted  up  high  into  air;  as  if  something  alive
was  in  brain ;  as  if  whole  brain  would  be  pressed  asun-
der; brain  feels  compressed;  as  if  brain  would  be  torn
to  pieces;  as  if  forehead  was  touched  by  icy  cold  hand;
as  if  a  worm  was  moving  in  throat;  as  from  a  tight


127  HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.

•  bandage  in  uterine  region;  legs  as  if  dead;  feet  feel
pithy  as  if  pricked  with  needles,  as  if  1.  foot  was  strained
and  dislocated;  hands  and  feet  as  if  numb;  skin  as  if
full  of  knots.

Pain:  in  temples;  in  head;  in  head  extending  to  zygoma
or  cheeks;  in  eye;  in  limbs;  in  bowels;  in  stomach;
after  operation  for  incarcerated  hernia;  in  back;  in
upper  part  of  spinal  cord;  in  joints;  in  last  phalanges
of  fingers;  in  old  cicatrices.

Intense  pain:  in  momentary  shoots  down  both  legs.

Excruciating  pain :  after  amputating  arm ;  in  r.  foot,  after
crushing  toes  with  heavy  iron  shutter;  in  bunions.

Fearful  pains:  in  knees.

Agonizing  pain :  in  foot  after  running  in  a  pin.

Sickening  pain :  in  belly.

Violent  pain  :  in  head.

Great  pain :  in  spine.

Severe  pain:  in  head;  in  spine;  in  cranial  bones.

Severe  headache:  in  scalp;  1.  side  of  occiput.

Sharp  pain:  in  knees.

Sharp,  cutting  pain,  darting  along  course  of  sciatic  nerve
terminating  in  a  wrenching,  twisting  sensation  in  foot.

Cutting:  in  belly  and  in  region  of  navel;  between  sca-
pula; under  1.  scapula;  in  fleshy  ends  of  fingers.

Beating:  headache;  in  vertex.

Tearing:  in  male  genitals.

Tearing  stitches:  in  brain.

Wrenching  pain :  over  eyes  ;  in  foot.

Pinching  pain :  in  abdomen.

Stitches:  in  r.  eye;  under  mammse;  through  1.  breast  and
sternum ;  in  small  of  back ;  on  top  of  shoulder  at  every
inspiration

Drawing  stitches:  in  occiput.

Shooting:  through  ear.

Flying  pains:  in  T.  shoulder.

Tingling,  drawing  pain:  in  cheeks  and  chin.

Dragging  pain:  in  hypochondrium.

Sticking:  in  stomach;  in  hypochondrium.

Stinging:  near  edge  of  r.  scapula.

Throbbing:  in  vertex,  moves  to  cheeks  and  chin.

Severe  aching:  in  decayed  tooth.

Aching  pain:  in  small  of  back.

Pressive  pain :  in  occiput.

Hard  pain:  running  down  1.  median  nerve.

Stinging,  burning  pain:  on  one  edge  of  1.  pectoral  muscle.

Burning  soreness:  of  female  urethra.

Burning  heat:  in  whole  body;  in  mouth;  in  lips.

Burning  in  vertex.


HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.  128

Dull  pressure:  in  r.  chest.

Shoot  of  dull  pain:  up  1.  occipital  nerve;  in  legs.

Dull  pain:  in  head;  in  face;  in  brows.

Soreness:  of  eyes;  of  inside  of  nose;  of  tongue;  all  over.

Bruised  sensation :  in  all  joints.

Sensitiveness:  of  female  urethra.

Raw,  sore  feeling:  in  throat  after  sneezing.

Heat:  in  vertex;  in  ears;  in  lips.

Weakening  drawing:  over  front  of  legs.

"  Bothered  "  sensation  back  of  head.

Confused  sensation:  in  vertex.  «

Spasmodic  contraction  in  r.  eye.

Pressure:  in  l.temple;  on  vertex;  in  stomach  toward  back;

in  small  of  back;  at  insertion  of  r.  deltoid.
Tension :  in  cheek ;  in  both  arms  and  both  hands.
Lame  feeling:  in  back.
Weakness :  of  limbs.
Heaviness:  in  head;  in  lower  bowels.
Pulsation:  in  vertex.
Shuddering:  over  whole  body.
Hot  rising:  in  oesophagus.
Scraping and roughness: in larynx; upper part of

pharynx ;  of  nares.
Dryness:  of  nostrils;  of  rectum.
Fuzzy  feeling:  in  hands  and  feet.
Buzzing  sensation :  in  head.
Curling  sensation :  on  vertex.
Tingling:  in  carotids;  in  feet.
Trembling:  of  limb.
Crawling:  in  hands  and  feet.

Numbness:  of  limbs;  in  1.  arm.  *

Violent  itching:  of  skin;  of  tetter.
Itching:  of  nose;  in  sacral  region.
**  Tissues. iLocal congestions; nervous erethism, with  or

without  hemorrhage;  great  nervous  depression  following

wounds.
Congestion  to  head,  lungs  or  heart.

■  Next  to  nervous  tissues,  the  joints  are  affected;  all  artic-

ulations feel  bruised.

■  Injuries  of  parts rich  in  sentient  nerves,  particularly

fingers  and  toes,  and  matrices  of  nails;  open,  painful
wounds,  with  general  prostration  from  loss  of  blood,  and
great  nervous  depression;  lacerated  wounds.

iMashed,  punctured  and  torn  wounds,  when  nervous  tis-
sues are  mainly  concerned;  lacerations  of  skin;  injuries
of  vertebral  region,  of  tissues  of  animal  life,  as  hands
and  feet.

•  Lacerated  wounds,  or  other  injuries  to  nerves,  in  which
there  is  much  soreness,  with  jerking  in  the  muscles.


129  HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.

I  Violent,  excruciating  pains  from  laceration  of  nerves.

■  Excessive  painfulness  of  affected  parts,  showing  nerves  to

be  attacked.

■  Preserves  vitality  of  torn  and  lacerated  members  when

almost  entirely  separated  from  the  body.

■  Lacerations  when  intolerable  pain  shows  nerves  are  se-

verely involved.

■  In  slighter  forms  of  lacerated  wounds,  if  applied  early,

will  sometimes  arrest,  and  always  modify  the  occurrence
of  ulceration  and  sloughing.

■  Gunshot  wounds  when  the  parts  have  been  extensively

lacerated  and  torn,  with  engorgement  of  the  capillaries,
attended  with  more  or  less  discharge  of  bloody  serum.

■  Piercing  wounds  from  pointed  instruments.

■  ■Punctured,  incised,  contused  or  lacerated  wounds,  when

pains  are  extremely  severe,  and  particularly  if  they  are
of  long  duration ;  pains  like  those  of  a  severe  toothache ;
pains  spread  to  neighboring  parts  and  extend  up  limb.

■  Open,  painful  wounds,  with  general  prostration  from  loss

of  blood,  feeling  of  weakness  and  trembling  in  all  the
limbs;  languor  on  rising,  fainting  from  physical  effort,
thirst  and  heaviness  of  head.

■  Mechanical  injuries,  wounds  by  nails  or  splinters  in  feet;

needles  under  nails;  squeezing  or  hammering  of  toes
and  fingers;  when  the  nerves  have  been  lacerated,
wounded,  or  torn,  with  excruciating  pains.  It  prevents
lockjaw  from  wounds  in  soles  of  feet,  or  of  fingers  and
palms  of  hands.

Always  modifies  and  sometimes  arrests  ulceration  and
sloughing.

I  I  Hard,  yellow  crusts  form  on  the  healing  wound.

■  Pain  in  old  cicatrices.

I  I  Stings  of  insects  and  bug  bites;  burns.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries.  ■■  Punctured  wounds
feel  very  sore:  from  treading  on  nails,  needles,  pins,
splinters,  rat  bites,  etc.;  prevents  lockjaw.

■  Wounds from crushing,  as  mashed fingers,  especially

tips.

■  Nerves  lacerated,  pains  excruciating.

I  I  Painful  wounds  before  suppuration.

■  Rheumatism,  bunions,  corns,  etc.,  when  pains  are  so  dis-

proportionately severe  as  to  show  nerves  are  attacked.
After  a  knock  or  blow  on  head :  spasms.

■  ■  Consequences  of  spinal  concussion. See  chaps.  31  and  44.

Touch:  cervical  vertebrae  sensitive;  on  spine  between  cer-
vical and  lumbar  region  made  him  shrink;  <  sharp
pains  in  knees.

Rubbing:  >  numbness  of  arm.

VOL. VI. — 9.


HYPERICUM  PERFORATUM.  130

After  using  instruments  for  uterine  prolapsus:  burning
soreness  of  female  urethra.

After  a  fall:  asphyxia;  headache  with  sore  eyes;  lesion  of
spinal  cord;  asthmatic  attacks;  great  pain  in  spine;
unable  to  hold  urine;  sphincter  muscles  partially  para-
lyzed; vomiting  at  night;  slightly  delirious  in  morning;
severe  pain  in  head  and  down  spine.

After  a  fall  upon  occiput:  headache  with  sensation  as  if
she  was  being  lifted  high  up  into  air.

After  a  fall  on  coccyx:  violent  pains  and  inability  to  walk
or  stoop.

After  hard  knock :  epileptiform  spasms.

Blows  upon  head :  convulsions.

Following  wounds:  great  nervous  depression.

I  Gunshot  wounds.

I I  Piercing  wounds:  from  sharp  instruments.
Compound  fracture  of  hands  and  feet.

After  severe  injury  to  sciatic  nerve:  sharp  cutting  pains
darting  along  course  of  nerve.

■  Slight  injuries  in  children:  cause  spasms.

■  Injuries  to  dental  nerves.

Injury  several  years  ago:  pain  and  irritation  of  eye  from

anterior  synechia.
■After  running  pins  into  foot:  intense  pain;  toes  rigid,

ankle  stiffened, chills  in  back; pains  run up limb,

"through  spine  to  neck  and  face;  muscles  of  neck  and

jaw  become  rigid.
^^  Skin. Great  itching  when  undressing,  most  in  sacral  region.
Violent  itching;  smarting.
Skin  rough,  as  if  full  of  small  knots.
Pimples  on  forehead,  throat,  back,  hips.
Eruption  like  nettlerash  on  both  hands,  at  4  p.m.  and  in

evening.
Smarting  eruption,  like  nettlerash,  on  hands.

■  Tetters,  beginning  with  sore  places,  and  forming  hard,

yellow  crusts,  with  violent  itching.
I  I  Eruptions  accompanying  diarrhoea  in  Summer  time,

■  Hard,  dry,  yellow  crusts  form  on  wounds  or  open  sores.

■  Foul,  torpid  and  phagedenic  ulcers.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Girl,  set.  6,  three  years  ago
fell  down  steps,  since  which  time  she  has  been  in  poor
health ;  affection  of  spine.

Boy,  eet.  7,  after  falling  from  roof  of  shed;  traumatic  men-
ingitis.

Girl,  set.  14,  timid  and  impressionable,  after  being  greatly
frightened  by  a  practical  joke;  shock.

Robust  young  lady,  after  fall  upon  occiput;  headache.

Mason,  set.  29;  crushing  of  r,  foot.


131  HYPER.  PERF.— IBERIS  AMARA.

Mrs,  E.  M.  C,  aet.  32,  after  falling  from  hammock ;  pain  in
spine.

Ice-man,  set.  32,  after  being  thrown  from  wagon;  concus-
sion of  spine.

Woman,  set.  40,  stepped  upon  a  paper  of  pins,  a  number
of  which  penetrated  sole  of  r.  foot  quite  deeply;  tetanic
symptoms.

Strong  woman,  set.  45,  mother  of  five  children,  in  fifteenth
year  fell  down  steps  and  injured  spine,  has  suffered  with
chest  affection  for  ten  years;  spasmodic  asthma,
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Arsen.  (weakness  or  sickness  in
the  morning); Chamom.  (pains  in  face).

Antidotes :  Effects  of  mesmerism  (Sulphur).

Compare  :  Aco7i.,  Agar.,  1 1  Arnic,  Arsen.,  1 1  Callend.,
Chamom.,  Coccul,  Ruta,  Staphis.,  Sulphur.


IBERIS  AMARA.

Bitter  Candy  Tuft.  Cruciferx.

Provings  by  Sabin  and  Dodge,  under  supervision  of  Hale. See  Allen's  Ency-
clopedia, vol.  5,  p.  60.

Clinical  Authorities. — Hem^t  affections,  Williams  and  Sylvester. See  Note,
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol,  5,  p.  61.

^  Mind. Sad,  downhearted,  oppressed,  with  desire  to  sigh.
I  I  Very  irritable,  with  dulness  of  mind  and  lack  of  memory.
Nervous  and  irritable  on  rising  in  morning.
Feels  as  if  frightened ;  an  indefinable  dread  with  trembling.
An  excited,  frightened  feeling,  with  cold  sweat  on  face.
Peculiar  inability  to  fix  mind  on  any  one  thing
^  Sensorium. Vertigo:  with  dull  pain  and  chilliness;  when

rising,  morning,  had  to  lie  down;  when  making  any

exertion,  with  nausea;  when  standing,  <  on  stooping;

in  back  part  of  head,  as  if  occiput  was  turning  around.
Entering  the  house  after  walking  felt  faint.
Heat  and  fulness  in  neck  and  head,  with  flushed  face  and

cold  feet  and  hands.
Heaviness  of  head,  with  roaring  in  ears.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  r.  side  of  head,

I  I  Frontal  headache:  on  rising  in  morning;  with  nausea

and  loss  of  appetite.
Heat  in  head  and  neck  and  flushed  face.


IBERIS  AMARA.  132

Dull  pain  in  head,  with  vertigo  and  feverish  chilliness.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Red  eyes  with  flushed  face.
I  1  Feeling  in  eyes  as  if  being  forced  outward.
Flashes  before  eyes,  with  dull  headache  and  palpitation  of
heart.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Dulness  of  hearing  and  comprehen-
sion.
Dull  hearing  and  labored  breathing.

Roaring  in  ears,  with  heaviness  of  head,  slight  nausea  and
palpitation  of  heart.
^  Upper  Face. Looks  as  if  he  had  been  ill  a  long  while.
Flushed  hot  face  and  red  eyes,  with  palpitation.
Cold  sweat  on  face,  with  fearfulness.
^^  Throat. Throat  dry  as  if  filled  with  dust.

Throat  feels  as  if  both  tonsils  were  enlarged.

I  I  Constant  hawking  up  of  thick,  viscid,  stringy  mucus

>  after  a  meal.
Choking  sensation:  in  throat,  with  fulness  and  heat;  just

above  cricoid  cartilage.
Constrictive  sensation  in  throat,  with  stabbing  pains  in
heart,  dyspnoea  and  palpitation.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite,
with  feeling  of  indigestion.
Desire  for  stimulants.
^^  Eating and Drinking. After eating: sour belching;

hawking  of  stringy  mucus  >.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,

with  cold,  chilly  feelings  over  body.
^^  Hypochondria. Fulness  and  oppression  in  r.  hypochon-
driac region.
Pain  in  region  of  liver  with  clay  colored  stool.
^^  Abdomen. Fulness  and  distension  of  bowels.

Tenderness  of  bowels,  with  thin,  whitish  stool.
^•^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stool: clay  colored; thin,  whitish;

large,  white.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  but  scanty  urination.

Excessive  evacuation  of  urine.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Choking
sensation  just  above  cricoid  cartilage.
Dryness  in  larynx  and  throat,  with  hawking  up  of  thin,

stringy  mucus,  for  many  hours;  >  after  eating.
Tickling  in  throat,  with  expectoration  of  stringy  mucus.
Tightness  and  constrictive  feeling  in  larynx.
^^  Respiration. '  '  Dyspnoea  and  palpitation  on  going  up  stairs.
Constant  desire  to  draw  a  long  breath,  without  relief.
Respiration  more  frequent  and  labored.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Slight  pain  under  sternum,  at
articulation  of  third  rib.


133  IBERIS  AMARA.

Fulness  and  constriction  under  sternum,  with  lancinating
pain  through  chest.

Continued  feeling  of  weight  and  anxiety  in  chest.

Fulness  in  chest,  with  fulness  and  heat  in  head  and  neck,
and  flushed  face.
^' Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Increased  action  of  heart,
full  feeling  in  neck  and  head.

Palpitation:  with  flushed  hot  face  and  red  eyes;  with
dull  headache  and  flashes  before  eyes;  with  heaviness
of  head,  roaring,  slight  nausea;  on  going  up  stairs.

Stabbing  pains  in  heart  with  constriction  in  throat.

I  I  Palpitation,  with  vertigo  and  choking  in  throat  after
walking,  and  on  entering  house  felt  faint;  tingling  and
numbness  commencing  in  fingers  of  1.  hand,  gradually
extending  up  arm,  with  irregular,  tremulous  and  not
well  defined  pulse;  dull,  heavy  aching  in  1.  arm.

Increase  of  heart's  action  from  72  to  88,  after  fifteen  min-
utes.

A  wavy,  tremulous  sensation  in  radial  artery,  felt  by
finger,  pulse  intermitting  every  third  beat,  easily  com-
pressible.

Pulse  has  peculiar  double  beats,  which  seem  to  run  into
each  other,  full,  soft  and  easily  compressed.

!  I  Palpitation  of  heart  on  slight  exertion  (pulling  down  a
window).

I  Palpitation  plainly  visible  over  whole  chest,  <  by  walking,
>  sitting  still,  but  renewed  by  slightest  exertion.
■  Much  pain  over  base  of  heart  with  dull,  heavy  pain  in  1.
arm,  and  tingling  and  numbness  in  tips  of  fingers.

i  I  Sensation  of  weight  and  pressure  in  region  of  heart,  with
occasional  sharp,  stinging  pains,  passing  from  before
backwards;  heart's  action  from  70  to  96.

■  Hypertrophy  of  heart.

Pulse  rises  from  60  to  94  after  fifteen  minutes,  with  slight
pains  in  region  of  heart.

Pains  darting  through  heart  at  night,  in  bed ;  <  lying  on
1.  side.

Dull,  dragging  pain  in  heart  not  >  by  any  position  nor
by  pressing  with  hand.

I  I  Sharp,  sticking  pain  in  heart,  with  constriction  in  throat,
red  eyes,  flushed  face.

I  I  Pain as if  needle  were  crosswise in ventricles, and

pricked  at  each  contraction.

I I  Palpitation  with  marked  increase  of  force  of  apex  beat,
with  irregular,  jerking  pulse,  and  a  peculiar  thrill  under
finger.

Strong  palpitation,  with  forcible  impulse;  hand  placed  on
heart  was  visibly  moved.


IBERIS  AMARA.  134

Palpitation  when  going  up  stairs,  obliged  to  lie  down,  with

dyspnoea  and  weak  feeling.
Constant  dull  pain  in  heart  <  lying  down.
Distressing  palpitation  with  increase  of  dull  pain,  caused

by  coughing,  laughing  or  slight  exertion.
With  the  full,  intermittently  irregular  pulse  auscultation

revealed  great  excitement  of  heart.
Contractions  at  intervals  of  three  or  four  beats,  after  which

there  was  a  much  longer  interval.
Near  end  of  proving  sounds  of  heart  increased  in  intensity,

especially  region  of  semilunar  valves.
Force  of  apex  beat  visibly  increased,  heart  impulse  raised

the  touching  hand;  pulse  hard,  jerking,  intermitting

every  third  beat;  rising  from  70-90.
Heart's  action  apparently  weakened  for  the  first  few  mo-
ments, in  ten  minutes  pulse  rose  to  100,  full,  strong,

somewhat  irregular.
Heart's  action  weak  and  fluttering,  with  small  weak  pulse.
^^  Neck  and  Back, l  i  Sensation  of  fulness  in  neck  and  head.
^^  Upper Limbs. Tingling  and  numbness  commencing  in

fingers  of  1.  hand,  gradually  extending  up  1.  arm,  with

irregular,  tremulous  pulse,  not  well  defined.
Dull,  heavy  aching  in  1.  arm.

Tingling  and  numbness  in  finger  tips,  <  lying  on  1.  side.
Dull  aching  in  1.  arm,  as  if  he  had  slept  on  it  all  night.
Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  shoulder.
^  Lower  Limbs. Trembling  of  lower  limbs  after  exercise,
^*  Limbs  in  General. Cold  feet  and  hands.
^  Kest. Position, Motion. Any  position :  does  not  >  pain

in  heart.
Lying  down:  dull  pain  at  heart  <.
Lying  on  1.  side :  darting  pains  through  heart  < ;  tingling

and  numbness  in  finger  tips  <.
Had  to  lie  down :  on  rising  in  morning.
Desire  to  lie  down.
Sitting  still :  palpitation  passes  off.
When  stooping  or  standing  :  vertigo.
When  making  any  exertion :  vertigo  with  nausea ;  palpi-
tation ;  trembling  of  lower  limbs.
Walking  causes  indescribable  sensation  under  the  sternum.
After  w^alking:  faint  feeling ;  chokingsensation  in  throat;

palpitation  <.
On  going  up  stairs:  dyspnoea  and  palpitation.
Feeling  of  inability  to  move  even  a  finger.
^^  Nerves. Feels  weary,  with  desire  to  lie  down.
Feeling  of  general  nervous  excitement.
Feeling  of  inability  to  move  even  a  finger;  great  weakness

and  debility.


135  IBERIS  AMARA.

Nervous  and  irritable  on  rising  in  morning.

Feeling  of  lameness  and  soreness  through  whole  body,  as
from  a  cold.

Looks  as  if  he  had  been  ill  a  long  while.

Trembling  sensation  all  over,  had  to  lie  down.

Desire  for  stimulants.
*^  Sleep. At  night  in  bed  darting  through  heart.

I  I  Sleep  at  night  disturbed  by  all  sorts  of  dreams.

Restless,  turning  in  bed,  with  ludicrous  dreams.

I  I  Restless  nights  with  horrid  dreams.
^  Time. Morning:  on  rising  nervous  and  irritable;  dull  pain,
chilliness,  vertigo;  frontal  headache.

Night:  darting  pain  through  heart;  sleep  disturbed  by  all
sorts  of  dreams;  restless  with  horrid  dreams.
*°  Fever. Heat  and  fulness  in  neck  and  head  with  flushed
face  and  cold  feet  and  hands.

Feverish  chilliness.

Cold,  chilly  feeling  with  nausea.

Quickly  passing  febrile  paroxysms.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Quickly  passing  febrile  attacks.

After  ten  minutes:  pulse  rose  from  weak  to  100,

After  fifteen  minutes:  a  wavy,  tremulous  sensation  in  ra-
dial artery,  with  pulse  intermitting  every  third  beat;
pulse  rises  from  60  to  94.

For many hours:  dryness of  larynx  and  throat,  with
hawking  up  of  thin,  stringy  mucus.
Locality  and  Direction. Right:  pain  in  side  of  head;
fulness  and  oppression  in  hypochondriac  region;  rheu-
matic pain  in  shoulder.

Left:  tingling  and  numbness  commencing  in  fingers,  ex-
tending up  arm;  dull,  heavy  aching  in  arm.

From  before  backward :  sharp,  stinging  pains  in  heart.
Sensations.  As  if  frightened;  as  if  occiput  was  turning
around;  as  if  eyes  were  being  forced  out;  as  if  throat
was  filled  with  dust;  as  if  both  tonsils  were  enlarged;
as  if  needles  were  crosswise  in  ventricles;  as  if  he  had
been  asleep  on  1.  arm  all  night.

Pain :  in  r.  side  of  head ;  in  region  of  liver.

Much  pain:  over  base  of  heart.

Stabbing  pains:  in  heart.

Lancinating  pain:  through  chest.

Darting  pains:  through  heart.

Sharp,  sticking  pain:  in  heart.

Sharp,  stinging  pain:  passing  from  before  heart  backwards.

Pricking  pain :  at  each  contraction  of  heart.

Dull,  dragging  pain:  in  heart.

Dull,  heavy  aching:  in  1.  arm.

Dull  pain:  in  head;  in  heart.


42


IBERIS  AMARA.  13G

Rheumatic  pains :  in  r.  shoulder.

Slight  pain :  under  sternum  at  articulation  of  third  rib ;
in  region  of  heart.

Feeling  of  lameness  and  soreness :  all  over  body.

Heat  and  fulness:  in  neck  and  head;  in  throat.

Fulness  and  distension:  of  bowels.

Fulness  and  constriction:  under  sternum.

Fulness  and  oppression:  in  r.  hypochondriac  region.

Fulness :  in  chest.

Tenderness  ot  bowels.

Great  weakness  and  debility.

Faint  feeling:  after  walking.

Weary  feeling.

Choking  sensation:  in  throat.

Constrictive  sensation:  in  throat;  in  larynx.

Tightness:  in  larynx.

Tickling:  in  throat.

Dryness:  in  larynx  and  throat.

Sensation  of  weight  and  pressure:  in  region  of  heart.

Continued  feeling  of  weight  and  anxiety:  in  chest.

Heaviness :  of  head.

Roaring:  in  ears.

Tingling and numbness: commencing in fingers  of  1.
hand,  extending  up  arm.

Wavy,  tremulous  sensation:  in  radial  artery.

Trembling:  of  lower  limbs;  all  over.

Chilly  feelings:  over  body.
^'Tissues. Cardiac  affections; bronchitis; asthma;  dropsy.
^^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  by  hand

does  not  >  pain  in  heart.
^^  Relations, Compare : Amyg.  amara,  Bellad.,  Cad.  grand.,
Digit.


13T  ICTODES  FCETIDA.


ICTODES  F(ETIDA.

Skunk  Cabbage.  Aracese.

Experiment  by  Bigelow,  Amer.  Med.  Botany,  vol.  2,  p.  48. Symptoms  in
Jahr's  Symptomatology  are  from  provings  by  C.  Hering  and  others.

^  Mind. Cross;  impetuous;  inclined  to  contradict.

Absence  of  mind  and  inattention;  enters  sick-room  with-
out knocking,  does  not  listen  to  patient.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  and  dimness  of  sight.
^  Inner  Head. Headache  on  single  places,  lasting  a  short
while,  then  changing  place;  dulness;  pressing  in  tem-
ples now more  in  one,  then  more  in  the  other,  with
violent  pulsation  of  arteries.
Drawing  in  forehead  in  two  lines  from  protuberances  to
glabella,  where  it  draws  outward  as  from  a  magnet.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  of  sight,  with  vertigo.
^  Smell  and  Nose. The  nose  is  swollen  as  far  as  the  nasal
bones  extend,  red  like  a  saddle,  sore  to  touch,  <  1.  side.
Cartilage  cold  and  bloodless,  with  red  spots  on  cheeks  and

small  pimples  on  1.  side  of  face.
Violent  sneezing,  with  pains  in  palate,  fauces  and  oesoph-
agus to  stomach,  hurting  for  a  while  after  in  cardiac  end
of  stomach.
®  Lower  Face. Swollen  submaxillary  glands.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Scurvy.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Numbness  of  tongue,  cannot  touch
teeth  with  it.
Papillae  elevated.

Tongue  red  and  sore  on  tip  and  edges.
13  Throat. Burning  from  fauces  downwards  through  chest.

(Esophagus  painful  on  sneezing.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. Inclined  so  smoke,

but  it  does  not  taste  good.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Nausea  and

vomiting.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. \¥ith  every  firm  step,  pain

in  pit  of  stomach  as  from  something  breaking  loose.
^^  Abdomen. Expansion  and  tension  in  abdomen.
Pain  in  abdomen  here  and  there,  in  single  spots.
When  walking  sensation  as  if  the  entrails  were  hanging
loose  and  flabby,  without  any  pain.


ICTODES  FCETIDA.  138


21


Urinary  Organs. Great  urging ;  urine  darker.
'^  Male  Sexual  Organs. iTitillation  voluptuous,  but  painful,

around  corona  glandis.
■^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Amenorrhoea.
'^  Respiration. B Spasmodic  asthma.

iSudden  anxiety,  with  dyspnoea  and  sweat,  followed  by

stool  and  relief  of  that  and  other  complaints.
Inclined  to  take  a  deep  breath;  with  hollowness  of  chest;

with  constriction  in  fauces  and  chest.
I  I  Asthma,  aggravated  or caused by  dust. ^Heaves  in
horses  from  dusty  hay.
^  Cough. I  Spasmodic  cough.

I  I  Senile  catarrh.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  chest  and  in axillae;
seems  to  have  a  connection  with  burning  in  oesophagus.
'"  Outer  Chest. Pressing  pain  on  sternum.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Glands  on  throat  swollen.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Aching  along  r.  cresta  tibiae,
'^  Rest. Position. Motion. With  every  firm  step  :  pain  in
pit  of  stomach  as  from  something  breaking  loose.
When  walking: sensation as if  entrails  were  hanging

loose  and  flabby.
On  sneezing:  Painfulness  in  oesophagus.
*^  Nerves. >  Hysterics.

':  Epilepsy.
^'^  Sleep. Sleepiness  early  in  evening.
^^  Temperature  and  "Weather. All  complaints  disappear  in

open  air.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  aching  along  cresta  tibiae.
Left:  small  pimples  on  side  of  face.
Outward:  drawing  in  forehead.
*^  Sensations. Erratic  and  spasmodic  pains.

Drawing  as  if  from  a  magnet  in  forehead;  pain  in  pit
of  stomach  as  from  something  breaking  loose;  as  if  en-
trails were  hanging  loose  and  flabby,  without  pain.
Pain:  in  palate;  in  fauces;  in  oesophagus  to  stomach ;  in
pit  of  stomach;  in  abdomen  here  and  there  in  single
spots;  in  chest  and  in  axillae.
Painful  titillation:  around  corona  glandis.
Pressing  pain :  in  sternum.
Drawing:  in  forehead,  in  two  lines  from  protuberances  to

glabella,  where  it  draws  outward  as  from  a  magnet.
Pressing:  in  temples,  now  in  one,  then  in  the  other.
Aching:  along  r.  cresta  tibiae.

Burning:  extends  from  fauces  downwards  through  chest.
Soreness  :  of  tip  and  edges  of  tongue.
Violent  pulsation :  of  arteries  of  temples.
Expansion  and  tension :  of  abdomen.


139  ICTODES  FCETIDA— IGNATIA.

Constriction :  of  fauces  and  chest.

Dulness:  in  head.

Numbness :  of  tongue.
"  Tissues. I  Spasmodic  asthma;  senile  catarrh.

■  Dropsy.

■Chronic  rheumatism.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  nose  sore;

tongue  numb,  cannot  touch  teeth  with  it.
*^  Skin. ■  Herpes  and  cutaneous  affections.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Catarrh  of  aged  persons.
*^  Relations. Compare;  Arum  triph.,  Asaf.,  Mephit.


IGNATIA.

Loganiacese.  Bean  of  St.  Ignatius.

A  species  of  strychos  native  to  the  Phillipine  Islands.  The  tree  bears  a  pear-
shaped  fruit,  containing  intensely  bitter  seed,  from  which  is  obtained  the  alcoholic
tincture.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers.  See  Allen's  Ency-
clopedia, vol.  5,  p.  Q6.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Melancholy,  Gross,  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  178 ;
Effects  of  mortification,  Attomyr,  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  91 ;  Insanity,  Gross,
Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  223;  Affection  of  mind,,  Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  269 ;
Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  31 ;  Griess,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  31 ;  Hermel,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  6;  (6  cases),  Goeze,  AUg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  10;  Vertigo,
Goullon,  Raue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  57  ;  Headache,  Shuldham,  Kaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  213;
Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  285-7;  Stow,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  286;  Schwarze,  Hrg.,
Black,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  177;  Nervous  periodical  headache,  Bender,  Raue's
Rec,  1873,  p.  197;  Hydrocephaloid,  Butman,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  53;  As  a  prophy-
la/itic  in  apoplexy,  Pommerais,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  29;  HypercEsthesia  of  retina.
Fowler,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  97  ;  Ophthalmia,  Tiilff,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  137  ;  Traumatic  ophthalmia,  Dessaix,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  367  ;  Norton,  T.  W.  H.  C,
1876,  p.  601 ;  Catarrhal  conjunctivitis,  Lewis,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  96 ;  Ulcers
on  cornea,  Buffiim,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  96  ;  Herpes  cornea,  Payr,  Raue's  Rec,
1872,  p.  71 ;  Affection  of  eye,  Billig,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg,  vol.  101,  p.  98  ;  Ciliary  neural-
gia, Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  97  ;  Exophthalmus,  Wanstall,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,
p.  96;  Coryza,  Rummell,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  388;  Prosopalgia,  Gerson,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  417;  Neuralgia  of  face,  Kasemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.
186;  Toothache,  Hrg.,  Altschul,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  463;  Ptyalism,  Meyer,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  256 ;  Sensation  of  lump  in  throat,  Hofrichter,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  240;  Angina  of  throat,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  530;  Diph-
theria, Boskowitz ;  (20  cases  cured)  Slough,  Raue's  P.,  p.  303 ;  Guernsey,  T.  H.  M.  S.
Pa.,  1876,  p.  304;  Raue,  MSS. ;  Knerr,  MSS. ;  Singultus,  Hilberger,  N.  A.  J.  H.,


IGNATIA.  140

vol.  8,  p.  278;  Affection  of  stomach,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  636 ;  Affection
of  stomach,  Schlosser,  Huber,  Montgomery,  Hofrichter,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.
310 ;  Colic,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  753 ;  Diarrhoea,  Gross,  Analyt.
Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  246 ;  Constipation,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  223 ;  Hemor-
rhoids, Eafinesque,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  218,  and  1874,  p.  202 ;  Diez,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  999;  Ascarides,  Pierson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  154;  Worms,  Hirsch,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  223;  Tcenia,  Eidlierr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  116  ;  Wurmb,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  388;  Menorrhagia,  Weber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  312;
Knorr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  234;  Amenorrhosa,  Kallenbach,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  2,  p.  234 ;  Dys^nenorrhoea,  Hilberger,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  590 ;  N.  A.  J.  H.-,
vol.  8,  p.  277  ;  Vacjinismus,  Skinner,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  78  ;  Threatened  abortion,
McNeil,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  125;  Puerperal  convulsions,  Johnson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,
p.  192 ;  Sciatica,  Nankivell,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  219 ;  Tumor  on  thigh,  Willard,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.  1869,  p.  43 ;  Spcmns  after  fright,  Eiickert,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  581 ;
Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  205 ;  Convulsions,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  221 ;  Hysteria,
Lobeth,  Eau,  Diez,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  285;  Bartlett,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1885,
p.  193 ;  Chorea,  Hii-sch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  221 ;  Goullon,  Miiller,  Wurmb.,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  511 ;  Epilepsy,  Hilberger,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  278  ;  Herzber-
ger,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  376 ;  Hysterical  paraplegia,  Kapper,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,
p.  471;  Nervous  affections;  epilepsy;  spasms ;  tetanus ;  convulsions;  Lobeth,  Gross,
Tietzer,  Werber,  Segin,  Eothanel,  Sturm,  Bigel,  Tietze,  Biez,  Bethmann,  Hromada,
Hofiendal,  Haustein,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  566-73;  Intermittent  fever,  Hahne-
mann, Hering,  Eummel,  Tripi,  Nagel,  Neumann,  Vehsem,  Seidel,  Kasemann,
Baertl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  922-6;  Miller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  237  ;  (6  cases),
Brigham,  Allen,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,  p.  145 ;  Gosewisch,  MSS. ;  Ague,  Brigham,
Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  133  ;  Typhoid  fever  (report  of  200  cases),  Wohlfart,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  743 ;  Chlorosis,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  603 ;  Rheumatism,
Haustein,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.  vol.  5,  p.  899 ;  Tobacco  poisoning,  Sanborn,  Organon,  vol.
3,  p.  365.

^  Mind. I  Memory  weak  and  untrustworthy.

■  Heaviness  of  head;  very  great  weakness  of  memory;  for-
gets everything  except  dreams;  hardness  of  hearing;
sees  everything  as  if  through  a  fog;  sits  quietly,  with  a
vacant  gaze,  always  thinking  of  the  mortification  en-
dured, and  knowing  nothing  of  what  passes  around
him ;  prefers  to  be  alone ;  thinking  of  the  past  mortifi-
cation prevents  him  from  going  to  sleep  as  early  as
usual;  restless  sleep,  starts  during  sleep,  much  dream-
ing; pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  <  by  pressure  and  con-
tinuous walking;  loses  hair;  face  colorless,  hollow;
voice  low,  trembling,  with  distortion  of  muscles  of  face;
does  not  like  to  talk;  no  desire  to  eat  or  drink;  appetite
is  soon  satisfied;  feels  cold,  especially  in  evening;  very
weak;  staggering  walk;  walks  carefully;  increased
stool  and  urine.  ^Melancholy  after  mortification.
I  I  Absent-mindedness.

1 1 Difii cult  comprehension;  mental  dulness;  mental  effort
is  irksome.


141  IGNATIA.

I  I  Incapacity  for  thought  in  evening.

I  I  Brooding  over  imaginary  or  real  troubles;  is  wrapt  in
thought.

I  Hurry  of  mind,  after  exerting  brain,  especially  in  morn-
ing; is  unable  to  talk,  write  or  do  anything  else  as  rap-
idly as  he  wishes,  whereupon  there  occur  anxious  be-
havior, mistakes  in  talking  and  writing  and  awkward
actions  requiring  constant  corrections.

lA  torrent  of  words  pours  out  of  mind,  and  confusion  of
writing  is  caused  by  profusion  of  thought.

■  Fancies;  delirium;  insanity.

■Spasms  and  insanity  after  fright;  imagines  her  soul  can-
not be  saved  and  cries  very  much;  at  times  rages  and
tears  clothes,  can  scarcely  be  restrained  by  four  strong
persons.

■  After  catamenia,  which  came  at  night  time,  symptoms  of

insanity;  believes  herself  married  and  pregnant;  is  tor-
mented by  remorse  for  imagined  crimes;  seeks  con-
stantly to  escape  to  drown  herself;  terrible  anxiety  from
rush  of  blood  to  head  and  heart;  is  only  quiet  when
lying  undisturbed  and  brooding  over  her  troubles,  which
she  rehearses  in  a  doleful  tone;  if  disturbed,  screams,
strikes  and  tears  things,  crying  all  the  while  "  I  am  neg-
lecting my  duty,  breaking  my  vow;"  face  pale  and  dis-
torted; desire  for  sour  things;  difficulty  to  get  her  to
eat;  conscientious  scruples  after  eating;  menses  sup-
pressed.

■  ■Desire  to  be  alone.

■Sighs  and  sobs;  will  not  be  comforted.

■  Inclined  to  be  very  secretive  and  passive.

■  Changeable  disposition,  laughing  and  crying  almost  in

same  breath.

■  Looks  about  bed  as  if  to  find  something.

■  Taciturn,  with  continuous  sad  thoughts; still,  serious

melancholy,  with  moaning.
I  I  Aversion  to  being  alone.

■  ■Incredible  changes  of  mood;  at  one time  jokes  and

makes  merry,  at  another  is  lachrymose,  alternating
every  three  or  four  hours.

■  ■Apprehensive  feeling.

■  ■Sadness  and  sighing,  empty  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Melancholia  from  suppressed  mental  sufferings,  with  much

sighing;  desire  to  be  alone  so  as  to  give  way  to  her  real
or  imaginary  grief;  weeps  bitterly.

■  Silent  melancholy;  twitching  of  one  muscle  at  a  time.

■  ■Melancholy  after  disappointed  love,  always  combined

with  spinal  symptoms.

■  Fright  is  followed  by  grief.


IGNATIA.  142

1 1  Great  grief  after  losing  persons  or  objects  very  dear.

i  I  Unhappy  love  with  silent  grief.

■Senseless  staring  at  one  object,  with  sighing  and  moaning;

remorse  about  imaginary  crimes,  intolerance  to  noise;

great  inclination  to  have  fixed  ideas.

■  Appetite  and  digestion  left  him  . ^Morbid  grief.

■  Became  bilious,  nervous,  depressed,  and would  scarce

move  from  the  fire,  for  days  together. ^Morbid  grief.

■  A  peculiar  trembling  of  hands  disturbs  her  very  much

in  writing,  most  when  she  has  to  write  in  any  one's
presence,  gets  worse  as  soon  as  she  fancies  any  one
might  notice  it.
I  I  Unusual  tendency  to  be  frightened.

■  Dread  of  every  trifle,  especially  of  things  coming  near  him.

■  Fear  of  thieves,  on  waking  after  midnight.

■  Fearfulness;  does  not  like  to  talk;  prefers  to  be  alone.

■  Anxiety  as  though  something  terrible  had  happened;

cannot  speak  because  of  it;  hurry,  fearfulness,  terror,
alternating  with  irresolution  and  inertness.

■  Tears  wept  inwardly,  the  pain  and  penalty  of  unrequited

love;  desires  solitude  so  that  one  may  nourish  inward
grief;  great  anxiousness  at  night  or  when  awaking  in
morning,  with  taciturnity;  aversion  to  every  amuse-
ment.

■  Anxiety,  as  if  he  had  committed  some  crime.

■  Anxiety and disquiet as  if  she  had  done  something

wrong,  or  as  if  some  great  misfortune  were  about  to
happen,  this  so  overpowers  her,  that  she  can  with  diffi-
culty refrain  from  weeping;  has  oppression  oi  breathing,
but  feels  distinctly  that  oppression  begins  at  stomach
and  spreads  up  into  throat;  becomes  very  weak,  inca-
pable of  work,  and  disinclined  to  company;  no  appe-
tite; bowels  torpid  and  insufficiently  moved;  parox-
ysms about  twice  a  day,  one  lasting  often  for  hours.

■  Anxiety,  sleeplessness,  despair;  severe  palpitation;  loss

of  appetite;  constipation.
Altered  appearance;  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  end
his  almost  unendurable  sufferings,  by  eating  the  phos-
phorus from  matches;  after  business  embarrassments.

■  A  state  of  anguish  in  which  she  shrieks  for  help,  with

suffocating  constriction  of  throat,  difficult  deglutition;
comes  out  of  spasms  with  deep  sighing. ^Parturition.

■  Indifferent  to  everything; seemed  to  live  without  his

usual  good  humor.
■Suppressed  menstruation  with  melancholy;  indifference
to  things  she  loved  best;  sits  alone  and  weeps,  imagines
things,  especially  that  she  might  go  crazy ;  in  all  parts
crawling  sensation  as  if  gone  to  sleep,  as  if  she  had  no


143  IGNATIA.

feeling  in  epigastrium ;  sleep  unrefreshing  and  disturbed

by  dreams.
1 1  Sensitive  disposition  and  hyperacute  feeling.
I  I  Tender  mood,  with  very  clear  consciousness.
llFinely  sensitive  mood,  delicate  conscientiousness.

■  Amiable  disposition  if  feeling  well;  every  little  emotion

disturbs  her.
I  Mild  disposition  ;  bears  suffering,  even  outrage,  without
complaining. ^Leucorrhoea.

I  IJealousy,  disappointed  love.

I I  Inconstant,  impatient,  irresolute,  quarrelsome.

I  The  slightest  contradiction  irritates.

I I  Slight  blame  or  contradiction  excites  him  to  anger,  and
this  makes  him  angry  with  himself.

Peevish,  capricious  and  quarrelsome ;  impatient.
I  Anger,  followed  by  quiet  grief  or  sorrow.
I  Fright;  inclination  to  start.
Headache  <  from  reading  and  writing.

■  Palpitation  while  engaged  in  deep  thought.

■  Spasmodic  affections  of  children,  consequent  on  being

put  to  sleep  soon  after  punishment.

■  After  fright:  disturbed,  introspective,  taciturn;  insomnia

and  great  restlessness ;  anorexia.
■Melancholia  after  great  grief  and  much  domestic  trouble;

complete  sleeplessness;  suicidal  thoughts  and  desire  to

escape.
■Ill  effects  from  hearing  bad  news;  from  vexation  with

reserved  displeasure;  from  grief,  or  suppressed  mental

sufferings;  of  shame  and  disappointed  love.
^  Sensorium. 1 1  Vertigo.

■  Periodical  fits  of  vertigo,  with  intolerable  pain  in  back

following;  slightest  motion  of  head,  especially  stooping,
increases vertigo; gastric symptoms; gaping; coated
tongue;  ansemia;  tingling  as  of  ants;  jerkings;  heavi-
ness of  r.  arm,  which  had  been  paralyzed.
I  I  Epileptic  vertigo.
I  I  Heaviness  of  head.
^  Inner  Head. iPressive  pain  in  frontal  region;  above  root
of  nose,  must  bend  head  forward,  followed  by  qualm-
ishness.

■  Pressive  headache  in  r.  side  of  forehead,  extending  down

into  r.  eye;  it  seems  as  though  eyeball  would  be  pressed
out;  burning  in  eyes  and  increased  lachrymation,  with
much  mucus.

■  Pressive,  drawing  headache  above  r.  orbit  at  root  of  nose,

renewed  by  stooping  low  down.

■  Pressure  in  r.  frontal  region,  above  eyebrow.

■  Intense  pain  over  r.  eye  and  seemingly  through  supra*


IGNATIA.  144

orbital  foramen;  pains  as  though  needle  were  pushed
through  into  brain,  pressure  from  without  inward;
appetite  disordered;  sometimes  mad  delirium;  nausea
and  vomiting;  ej^es  red,  swollen  and  protruding;  pains
come  on  about  9  a.m,  generally  stopping  at  2  p.m.  ;
<  from  noise,  washing  hands  in  cold  water,  dropping
head  forw^ard,  stepping  heavily;  >  from  soft  pressure,
lying  on  back,  and  heat.

■Throbbing  pains  in  r.  side  of  forehead  beginning  at  inner
end  of  r.  eyebrow  and  running  around  eye,  at  8  a.m.
every  morning,  gradually  <  until  10.30  when  gradually
>,  and  entirely  disappear  about  1  p.m.;  when  attack  is
at  its  height,  must  lie  down  ;  lachrymation  and  red-
ness of  eye.

I  Pain  beginning  in  forehead,  drawing,  extending  down
one-half  of  nose;  pain  extends  to  middle  of  vertex,
where  there  is  a  pressure  as  of  a  weight,  with  nausea
and  tendency  to  vomit;  <  morning  till  afternoon,  then
gradually  getting  better  until  evening;  sensitive  to  least
noise  or  loud  talking;  pale  face;  suffering  expression;
great  lassitude  of  limbs.

■  Pressing  pain  over  nose,  >  leaning  forward;  pressure
from  within  outward  ;  twitching,  throbbing,  tearing
pain  in  forehead,  or  as  if  a  nail  was  being  driven  in ;
lancinating,  boring,  deep  in  brain,  with  nausea,  dark-
ness before  eyes,  photophobia,  pale  face,  copious,  watery
urine;  pains  often  >  by  change  of  position,  come  again
after  eating,  in  evening  after  lying  down,  or  early  in
morning  while  rising;  patient  anxious,  fickle,  or  silent
and  depressed.

iPeriodical  headache,  weekly,  fortnightly  or  monthly;
gradual  increase  with  sudden  abatement;  unilateral
headache,  which  affects  chiefly  the  eye,  eyebrow  or  side
of  head,  with  general  chilliness;  crisis  with  secretion  of
copious  limpid  urine;  momentary  disappearance  of  pain
by  change  of  position.

lAnxious  suffering  expression  of  face,  eyes  almost  fear
the  light,  frown  across  brow,  from  frequent  closure  of
eyes  in  pain;  extreme  pain  in  both  temples,  with  pain
in  back  and  nape  of  neck;  great  mental  and  physical
prostration;  bowels  relaxed;  tongue  covered  with  white
fur;  skin  cold;  pain  >  from  pressure  and  rest;  <  from
light,  sound  and  thinking;  pulse  thin  and  weak.

I  Dull  headache,  confined  to  r.  half  of  forehead  and  in-
volving r.  eye,  which  was  very  sensitive.

iPain  extending  from  head  into  1.  eye;  burning  in  eyes
and  lachrymation.

Pressing,  stinging  pain  from  within  to  without,  in  fore-
head and  root  of  nose.


145  IGNATIA.

Pressure  in  temples  sometimes  with  deep  sleep.

Headache  as  if  temples  would  be  pressed  out.

When  lying  in  bed  on  the  side,  furious headache  as  if

pressing  through  temples,  >  by  lying  on  back.
liPain  as  if  a  nail  was  driven  out  through  side  of  head,

>  by  lying  on  it.
Aching  in  one  half  of  head,  when  walking  in  open  air,

<  by  talking  and  reflecting.
8 Headache  in  morning  on  awaking,  as  if  brain  was  beaten

and  bruised;  on  rising  it  disappears  and  a  toothache

takes  its  place,  as  if  nerve  of  tooth  was  shattered  and

crushed,  changes  to  a  similar  pain  in  small  of  back;

headache  always  renewed  on  thinking.
IJerking  headache;  on  ascending  steps;  <  by  raising ej^es.
S Headache  like  a  pressure  with  something  hard  on  upper

surface  of  brain ;  in  paroxysms.
aSudden  pressure  in head,  now  in one place,  now in

another,  in  evening.
Throbbing  headache ;  pain  with  every  throb  of  arteries.
B Congestion  to  head,  from  being  spoken  to  harslily.
I  1  Heat  in  head.
I  I  Talking  aloud  excites  a  headache,  as  if  head  would  burst,

going  off  entirely  when  reading  to  himself  or  writing.

■  Deep  sighing  and  sobbing  with  a  strange  compressed  feel-

ing in  brain.
Headache  with  heaviness  and  heat  in  head.

■  Head  feels  sore,  bruised.

■  Headache  in  highly  nervous  and  sensitive  temperaments,

or  in  those  whose  nervous  system  has  given  way  to
anxiety,  grief,  or  mental  work.

fi Periodical  headache  increases  gradually  in  severity,  and
then  suddenly  abates.

D  Headache  passes  off  with  a  flow  of  pale,  limpid  urine.

BNervous  headaches  in  hysterical  women,  suddenly  appear-
ing and  disappearing.

■  Headache:  from  abuse  of  coffee;  from  smoking,  or  abuse

of  snuff;  from  inhaling  smoke ;  from  being  where  others
smoke ;  from  tobacco  or  alcohol ;  from  close  attention.

■  Headache  >  by  warmth,  rest,  and  sometimes  by  stimu-

lants; <  by  cold  winds,  turning  head  suddenly,  at  stool,
stooping,  change  of  position,  running,  looking  up  long,
from  moving  eyes;  noise  and  light.

■Throbbing  pain  in  occiput,  <  when  pressing  at  stool.

■Pain  in  occiput ;  <  from  cold,  snuffing  or  smelling
tobacco;  >  from  external  heat;  good  appetite,  even
keener  than  usual ;  headache  >  whilst  eating,  but  <
soon  after.

vol..  VI. — 10.


IGNATIA.  146-

■  Weight  at  back  of  head;  tendency  of  head  to  incline

backward.

iStabbing  pain,  deep  seated,  in  eyes,  going  to  occiput  and
nape  of  neck,  and  finally  to  vertex;  pain  very  acute,
driving  him  almost  frantic ;  pain  generally  begins  on
rising  in  morning,  is  at  its  height  at  4  p.m.,  and  passes
off  with  a  night's  rest;  >  from  warmth,  <  from  sound  ;
irritability  of  disposition  day  before  headache  ;  scalp
tender  to  touch,  and  dull,  uncomfortable  feeling  as
if  headache  might  return,  day  after;  headaches  occur
every  month.

1  Nervous  headaches  coming  at  same  hour  and  day,  weekly
lasting  forty-eight  hours;  come  and  go  at  11  a.m.;  their
coming  is  preceded  by  a  sense  of  vacuity  in  stomach  and
chest,  stiffness  of  nuchse  and  muscles  (trapezius)  on  each
side  of  this  ligament;  at  end  of  tw^elve  hours  from  attack,
pain  extends  to  vertex  and  remains  there  several  hours,
being  of  a  compressive  and  burning  character;  after
some  time  they  continue  their  course  tow^ards  sinciput
and  eyes,  latter  feeling  hot  and  heavy;  nausea  and  sali-
vation, but  without  vomiting;  first  night  of  attack  can-
not sleep,  though  with  eyes  closed  perceives  figures  and
objects  moving  about;  in  acute  stage  cannot  lie  down,
but  must,  with  closed  eyes,  remain  in  a  dark  room ;  sleep-
lessness, profuse  diuresis  of  pale  urine,  melancholia,  and
much  sighing  succeed  each  attack.

■Sudden  metastasis  from  bowels  to  brain  during  dentition,
with  sudden  pale  face;  rolling,  tossing  of  head;  difficult
swallowing;  delirium,  with  convulsive  motions  of  eyes
and  lids. ^Hydrocephaloid.

Cerebro-spinal  meningitis;  hysterical  symptoms  or  com-
plications, or  rapid  alternation  of  symptoms.

Threatenings  of  apoplexy;  head  feels  empty,  face  is  pale.

Nervous  apoplexy.
^  Outer  Head. >Trembling  and  shaking  of  head.

I  Pain  in  a  spot  in  r.  parietal  bone,  <  by  stooping,  with
pain  in  r.  breast.

I  Pain  in  outer  part  of  head,  w^iich  is  painful  on  feeling  it.

I  Weight  in  back  of  head,  tendency  of  head  to  incline  back-
w^ard  against  back  of  chair,  probably  from  congestion
to  cerebellum.

■  Head  bent  backward,  during  spasms.

I  I  Inclines  head  forward;  lays  head  forward  upon  table.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. iHypersesthesia  of  retina  wnth  hysteria;
intense  photophobia;  ciliary  neuralgia ;  general  nervous
sj^mptoms.

■  Cannot  bear  glare  of  light;  sunlight  causes  headache.

■  Zigzag  and serpentine  white  flickering  at  one  side  of

field  of  vision.


147  IGNATIA.

I  Dim-sighted.

■Asthenopia  and  amblyopia  in  females,  due  to  onanism  or
ciliary  neuralgia;  hysterical  subjects.

I  Dimness  before  one  eye  while  reading,  as  if  tears  were  in
it,  which  is  not  the  case.

iTwo  "chipping  ulcers"  at  upper  margin  of  r.  cornea,  with
periorbital  pains,  sharp  sticking  generally  in  one  spot
in  superciliary  ridge,  temple  or  side  of  head;  sleep  dis-
turbed; digestion  poor.

I  In  commencement  before  pimples  have  formed,  where
there  is  only  slight  injection,  pain,  dacryorrhoea,  and
photophobia. ^Herpes  cornea.

■  Intense  but  fitful  photophobia.
■Sensation  as  of  sand  in  eyes.

■  Excessively  nervous,  starts  at  slightest  noise;  after  work-

ing late  at  night,  feeling  as  of  sand  under  eyelid,  with
great  dryness. ^^Conjunctivitis.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  eyes  when  subjective  symp-

toms  are  particularly marked,  rather  than  objective;
pressive pain in eyes; photophobia; lachrymation ;
coryza.
Upper  part  of  eyeball,  as  far  as  covered  by  lid,  inflamed.

■  Traumatic  ophthalmia,  with  violent  pains  and  sensation

as  if  sand  was  rolling  around  beneath  lids.

■  Catarrhal  ophthalmia,  with  sensation  of  sand  in  eye  and

great  dryness,  lachrymation  only  in  sunlight.

■  Ophthalmia  of  newborn  infants.

■  Convulsive  movements  of  eyes  and  lids,

■  Pain  under  upper  lid,  as  if  it  was  too  dry.

■  Swelling  of  upper  lid.

■  Nightly  agglutination  of  lids.

■  Morbid  nictation,  with  spasmodic  action  of  various  mus-

cles of  face.
Eyelid  turned  upward.

■  Occasionally  1.  eye appears  smaller than r.  in  conse-

quence marked  ptosis  of  upper  lid ;  lachrymation,  <
when  exerting  eye  in  open  air;  vision  impaired;  oc-
casional twitching  pain  and  sensation  of  pressure  and
heaviness  as  if  eye  would  fall  out,  <  reading,  sewing,
etc.;  loss  of  sense  of  smell;  diminished  sense  of  taste;
foul  odors  seem  to  be  perceived  in  mouth.

■  Very nervous and restless at night, walking and

talking  in  her  sleep;  "swelling  of  eyes,"  lachrymation
and  pain  in  eyes,  with  headache  for  six  months,  after
having  had  tooth  drawn ;  moderate  amount  of  exoph-
thalmus  present,  together  with  palpitation  of  heart;
pulse  120;  congestive  headaches;  no  enlargement  of
thyroid  gland;  menses  regular.
I  I  Sensation  as  if  a  particle  were  in  1.  external  canthus.


IGNATIA.  148.

I  Acrid  tears  in  eyes,  during  day.

I  Ciliary  neuralgia;  severe  pains  extending  from  eye  to
top  of  head,  producing  nausea,  and  often  alternating
with  swelling  in  throat  (globus  hystericus);  pains  begin
very  slightly,  increase  gradually  until  they  become  very
severe,  and  only  cease  when  she  became  exhausted.

I  Pain  from  head  into  1.  eye;  latter  burns  and  waters.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. '  '  Stoppage  of  one  nostril ;  dry  coryza.

■  Fluent  coryza.

i Coryza  in  nervous  persons;  general  hysterical  irritability;
dull  pain  in  forehead.

■  Soreness  and  sensitiveness  of  inner  nose,  with  swelling,
I  Nostrils  ulcerated.

I  I  Itching  of  nose.

^  Upper  Face. iConvulsive  twitchings  of  muscles  of  face.

I I  Face  distorted,  deathly  pale  and  sunken.

■  Face  clay  colored  and  sunken,  blue  rings  around  eyes.
I  Redness  and  heat  of  one  cheek  and  ear.

■  Alternate  redness  and  paleness  efface.
Sweat  on  face  while  eating.

■  Prosopalgia  coming  on  suddenly  without  any  warning,

or  preceded  by  slight  premonitory  symptoms,  such  as
bruised  feeling,  tension,  twdtching  in  face;  duration  of
paroxysm,  and  time  of  occurrence  very  various;  excit-
ing causes  chiefly  mental  emotions;  but  sometimes  they
were  excesses  in  mental  work,  in  musical  performances,
in  venere  and  in  baccho;  also  suppressed  perspiration,
blenorrhoea  and  hemorrhoidal  fluxes,  were  frequently
remote  causes ;  seat  of  pain  usually  in  smaller  twigs
of  facial  nerves,  and  having  no  tendency  to  radiation ;
the  attacks  by  day  are  preceded  by  uneasy  sleep,  w^ak-
ing  with  a  bruised  feeling,  pandiculations  and  ill  humor;
pains  boring,  dart-like  shoots,  giving  quite  a  shock,  dull
drawing,  twisting,  formication,  being  borne  in  dull
resignation;  partial  convulsions  of  facial  muscles;  tris-
mus; paleness  and  coolness  of  face;  lachrymation  and
photophobia;  spasms  in  cheek;  yawning;  shuddering;
diuresis;  urinary  tenesmus;  pulse  quickened,  small;
cutaneous  temperature  cool;  quiet  weeping;  pusil-
lanimity.

■  Prosopalgia:  in  women  of  the  upper  ranks,  delicate,  soft

fibred,  anaemic,  nervous,  of  melancholic  or  melancholic-
sanguine  temperament;  in  those  suffering  from  special
irritation  due  to  sexual  excesses  or  to  inordinate  me-
chanical irritation  of  spinal  nerves,  as  in  case  of  some
musical  virtuosi;  due  to  presence  of  ascarides;  arthritic
form;  in  course  of  typhoid  and  miliary  fevers;  in  roues
during  prolonged  course  of  gonorrhoea ;  due  to  prolonged


149  IGNATIA.

nursing,  pollutions,  musical  excesses,  etc. ;  during  preg-
nancy; after  diuresis;  after  lancinating  uterine  pains;
after  attacks  of  proctalgia.
®  Lower  Face. ■  Twitching  of  corners  of  mouth,

■Spasmodic  closing  of  jaws.

I  Every  evening,  about  half  an  hour  after  going  to  bed,
pains  in  r.  lower  jaw,  which  continue  until  she  falls
asleep;  pains  last  one  to  one  and  a  half  hours,  with  ex-
acerbations, and  are  followed  by  quiet  sleep  and
sweating.

I  Lips  dry,  cracked,  bleeding.

I  I  Ulceration  of  one  of  corners  of  mouth.

I  Inside  of  lower  lip  painful,  as  if  raw  and  sore.

■  Eruption  on  lips  and  corners  of  mouth. ^Intermittent.
iPain  in  submaxillary  glands,  when  moving  neck.

'"'  Teeth  and  Gums. Uaws  feel  as  if  crushed.

■Soreness  and  tenderness  in  teeth,  felt  more  between  meals
than  when  eating.

■  Boring  pain  in  front  teeth.

I  I  Odontalgia  as  if  teeth  were  crushed  into  fragments.
■Toothache  from  cold  in  molars,  as  if  they  were  crushed.

■  Toothache:  <  after  drinking  coffee,  after  smoking  to-

bacco; after  dinner;  in  evening;  after  lying  down;  in
morning  on  awaking; <  in  intervals  between  meals.
I  I  Difficult  dentition,  with  convulsions.
"Taste  and  Tongue. ■■Sour taste in mouth; with  sour
eructations;  saliva  tastes  sour.
Taste:  flat,  like  chalk.

■  Food  has  a  bitter,  repulsive  taste,  or  no  taste.

I  I  Tongue  white,  flabby,  shows  marks  of  teeth,  trembles
protruded.  *

■  ■  When  talking  or  chewing,  bites  cheek  or  tongue.

*^  Inner  Mouth, i  i  Sticking  in  palate  extending  to  inner  ear.

■  Putrid  odor  from  mouth. .

■  Inner  mouth  inflamed  and  sore.

■  Copious  secretion  of  saliva.

I  I  Accumulation  of  acid  saliva.

■  Sudden  attack  of  ptyalisra  without  any  apparent  cause;  <

from  every  motion  of  tongue,  as  in  talking,  chewing,
etc.;  after  eating,  sensation  as  if  food  lodged  over  orifice
of  stomach  and  could  not  get  down;  fluids  taste  bitter;
bitter  belching  and  regurgitation  of  food;  loss  of
strength;  pulse  small,  quick;  slight  fever  in  evening;
papillae  of  tongue  enlarged  and  turgescent;  mucous
membrane  of  mouth  very  red  and  in  several  places  cor-
roded, with  raw  pain ;  orifices  of  salivary  glands  swollen ;
constant  flow  of  saliva  prevents  sleep;  inner  surface  of
lower  lip  pain  as  if  raw  and  sore ;  anterior  half  of  tongue


IGNATIA.  150

as  if  numb ;  when  eating  tongue  feels  as  if  burnt  or  raw ;
painful  swelling  of  orifice  of  salivary  duct;  sensation  as  if
whole  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  was  about  to  become
raw;  difficult  deglutition;  mouth  constantly  full  of  mu-
cus ;  constant  discharge  of  white,  frothy  mucus ;  increased
secretion  of  saliva  with  constant  spitting  of  frothy  saliva ;
everything  eaten,  and  especially  beer,  tastes  bitter  or
putrid;  loss  of  appetite,  could  not  swallow  bread,  as  if  it
was  too  dry;  pain  in  epigastrium  on  pressure,  as  if  it
was  raw  inside.
^^  Throat.  iStitches  in  soft  palate,  extending  to  ear.
I  i  Crawling  in  pharynx.

I  Hysterical  spasm  of  throat  and  gullet,  result  of  sup-

pressed grief;  cannot  swallow  either  liquids  or  solids.
iRetching  (constrictive)  sensation  in  middle  of  throat,  as
if  a  large  morsel  of  food  or  plug  was  sticking there;
felt  more  when  not  swallowing;  disappears  on  contin-
uing to  swallow  but  returns.

I I  Choking  sensation  from  stomach  up  into  throat.

1 1  Sensation  as  from  a  lump  in  throat,  when  not  swallowing.

■  Stinging  in  throat  between  acts  of  deglutition;  sensation

when  swallowing  as  if  swallowing  over  a  bone,  with  a
rolling  around.

IStitches  in  throat,  only  between  acts  of  swallowing.

1 1  Sore  throat;  sticking  in  it  when  not  swallowing,  and
even  somewhat  while  swallowing ;  the  more  he  swallows,
however,  the  more  it  disappears ;  if  he  swallows  anything
solid,  like  bread,  it  seems  as  though  the  sticking  en-
tirely disappeared.

I  Unable  to  swallow  bread,  it  seems  too  dry.

I  Both  tonsils  greatly  swollen  and  inflamed  ;  several  small

openings  filled  with  pus  on  tonsils;  pharynx  red,  in-
flamed; stitching  pains  in  throat  <  swallowing;  stitches
extend  to  ear  when  swallowing;  r.  parotid,  swollen,  hard
to  touch,  but  painless;  stitches  in  parotid;  tongue  cov-
ered with  tenacious  white  mucus;  foul  taste  in  mouth;
offensive  odor  from  same;  chilliness,  in  afternoon  fever
with  red  cheeks,  and  at  same  time  chilliness  and  cold-
ness of  feet;  despondent,  depressed,  tearful. ^Angina.

■  Inflamed,  hard,  swollen  tonsils,  with  small  ulcers.
lAcute  paroxysms  in  chronic  tonsillitis,  with  feeling  of

swelling  in  throat;  painful  soreness  during  deglutition.

I I  Follicular  tonsillitis.

■Whitish  tough  mucus  in  spots  on  tonsils,  simulating
diphtheria.

■  Green  vomiting,  substance  scum-like  or membranous;

putrid  throat,  seldom  painful  (the  painful  cases  were
less  likely  to  prove  fatal);  greenish-yellow  patches;  de-


151  IGNATIA.

lirium;  headache;  pain  in  limbs;  nosebleed;  dilated
pupils;  diarrhoea;  green  stools;  suppression  of  urine;
chilliness;  high  fever.  ^Diphtheria.
iCommences  on  r.  side;  high  fever;  delirium  characterized
by  fearfulness  or  dread;  soreness  of  throat  greatest  be-
tween acts  of  deglutition;  pains  in  back  of  head,  nuchas
and  sometimes  in  ears. ^Diphtheria.

■  Throat  <  when  not  swallowing,  and  when  swallowing

liquids;  >  when  swallowing  food.
'^  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i  Hunger  and  nausea
at  same  time.

■  Feeling  of  hunger  in  evening,  prevents  sleep.

I  I  Good  appetite:  headache  >  while  eating,  <  soon  after.

■  Appetite  for:  sour  things;  bread,  particularly  rye  bread.

■  ■Thirst,  with  a  chill.

■  Desire  for  various  things,  but  when  offered  appetite  fails.
I  I  Fanciful  aversion  to  special  articles  of  food,  or  craving

for  a  particular  article,  and  after  a  small  portion  has
been  enjoyed,  sudden  and  great  aversion  to  it.

■  ■Extreme  aversion  to  tobacco  smoke.

■  Aversion  to :  tobacco ;  warm  food ;  meat ;  spirituous  liquors.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■It  is  difficult  to  persuade  her  to

eat ;  after  doing  so  she  is  tormented  with  conscientious

scruples.
Sweat  on  face  while  eating.
Symptoms  renewed  after  dinner.
Headache  <  from  coffee,  tobacco  and  alcohol.
Better  from  partaking  of  sour  things.
Worse  from  drinking  coffee.
^'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■Hiccough :

after  emotions;  after  eating  and  drinking;  from  smok-
ing; especially  in  children.
I  I  Eructations:  of  food  into  mouth;  of  bitter  fluid;  with

pressure  in  cardia.
■Spasmodic  ructus  and  singultus,  occurring  periodically

every  afternoon,  and lasting  for hours; after  violent

mental  excitement.

■  Qualmishness  from  smoking.
I  I  Nausea,  without  vomiting.

■  Empty  retching,  better  by  eating.
I  I  Vomit:  bitter;  of  food.

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  ■  Weak,  empty  feeling  at  pit
of  stomach,  not  >  by  eating;  involuntary  sighing;  must
.  take  a  long  breath.

■  Sensation  of  weakness,  sinking,  or  "goneness"  in  pit  of

stomach,  with  qualmishness  and  fiat  taste.
■Feeling of weakness in epigastrium, and pain as if
sprained,  with  great  depression.


IGNATIA.  152

I  Fulness,  heaviness  or  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Fulness  and  swelling  in  epigastrium.

■  Burning,  darting  in  epigastrium.

■  Anxious  feeling  in  prsecordia.

■  Feeling  in  stomach  as  from  fasting,  with physical  ex-

haustion.

■  ■Feeling  of  flabbiness  in  stomach; stomach  and  intes-

tines seem  to  hang  down  relaxed.

■  Feeling  of  emptiness  or  goneness  in  stomach,  with  sensa-

tion as  if  a  number  of  pins  were  sticking  in  it;  not  >
by  eating.
Sensation  as  if  stomach  was  shortened.

■  Painful  pressure  as  from  a  stone,  especiall}'  after  eating

or  at  night,  in  region  of  pylorus;  sensitiveness  to  con-
tact, and  burning  in  stomach.

■  Bloated  stomach.

■  Stitches  in  region  of  stomach.

■  Burning  in  stomach,  especially  after  brandy.

■  Gnawing,  cutting  pain  in  stomach.
■Spasmodic  pains  in  stomach;  >  when  eating.

■  Gastralgia,  with  sticking  pains,  brought  on  by  starvation.

■  Gnawing  sensation  in  stomach  in  morning,  >  by  eating;

swelling  in  region  of  stomach,  cannot  button,  or  is  fre-
quently obliged  to  unloosen  clothing;  frequent  sensa-
tion of  rawness  in  throat,  a  little  below  larynx,  and  on
1.  side  of  throat  when  swallowing;  ptyalism  and  accumu-
lation of  saliva  in  throat ;  constipation.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating,  <  at  night,  with  nausea

and  sensation  of  rawness  in  stomach;  on  moving  pain
becomes  cutting  in  character;  trembling  in  stomach.
■Twitching  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  periodical  attacks  of
w^eakness  and  qualmishness,  so  severe  that  she  becomes
pale  and  almost  faints,  accompanied  by  a  sensation  of
hunger.

■  Attacks  of  extremely  severe  pains  in  stomach  7  to  8  p.m.,

but  more  frequently  about  midnight,  lasting  two  to  three
hours;  vomiting  of  slime;  can  only  eat  broths  or  other
fluid  food  with  any  comfort;  digestion  greatly  impaired;
stools  regular;  urine  pale,  watery,  profuse;  nausea  with
great  restlessness  and  anxiety;  pressing  pains;  sensa-
tion in  region  of  stomach  as  if  he  would  like  to  vomit,
W'ith  oppression  and  spasmodic  constriction  of  chest;  <
from  pressure  over  stomach;  frequent  vomiting  of  food
with  great  restlessness  and  anxiety;  hemorrhoidal  pains
in  anus  and  pressure  in  sacrum.

■  Periodical attacks of  cramps in stomach,  coming on

usually  at  night,  or  after  eating;  <  by  slightest  contact,
mitigated  by  change  of  position. ^Gastralgia.


153  IGNATIA.

iCatarrh  of  stomach  from  grief  and  worriment.

1 1  Dyspepsia  with great nervous  prostration,  caused by

mental  depression.
^^  Hypochondria, l  l  Great  distension  of  hypochondria,  pit  of

stomach  and  small  of  back ;  unable  to  breathe  on  account

of  fulness  and  tension  under  ribs.
I  Jaundice,  with  silent  melancholy,  twitching  of  one  muscle

at  a  time.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  spleen.

■  Painful  pressure  in  region  of  spleen  and  pit  of  stomach.

■  Pain  in  1.  hypochondriura  ;  <  from  pressure.

^^  Abdomen. ■■Peculiar  sensation  of  weakness  in  upper  ab-
domen and  pit  of  stomach.
An anxious feeling mounts up from abdomen, after
breakfast.

■  Pulsation  (throbbing)  in  abdomen.

I  1  Drawing  and  pinching  in  umbilical  region,
I  I  Sensation  of  protrusion  in  umbilical  region.

■  Stitching  and  lancinating  in  sides  of  abdomen.
I  I  Sharp  sticking,  above  and  to  left  of  umbilicus.

■  Colic  pains,  first  griping,  then  stitching,  in  one  or  other

side  of  abdomen.

■  Drawing  and  griping  in  abdomen;  in  rectum  it  occurred

like  a  pressure,  with  qualmishness  and  weakness  in  pit
of  stomach,  and  paleness  of  face.

■  Periodical  abdominal  spasms,  colic  particularly  at  night,

waking  out  of  sleep,  with  stitches  running  up  into  chest
and  to  sides;  pains  >  passing  wind,  which,  however,
is  difficult.

■Spasmodic  pains,  cutting  stinging,  like  labor  pains;  spas-
modic colic.

The  colic  pains  are  <  by  brandy,  coffee  and  sweet  things.

■  Flatulent  colic;  flatus  incarcerated,  rumbling  and  rolling

about,  making  a  loud  noise;  rumbling  as  from  hunger.
I  I  Wind  presses  on  bladder.

■  Excessive  flatulence;  hysterical  females.

■  Protrusions  on  various  parts  of  abdomen.

■  Unsatisfactory,  short  and  abrupt  emissions  of  flatus,  of

offensive  odor,  not  without  exertion  of  abdominal  muscles.
^  Stool  and  Rectum,  ll  Bowels  inclined  to  be  loose;  with
stabbing  pains  in  rectum.
Diarrhoea:  painless,  with  rumbling  of  wind;  <  at  night
and  from  fright,  with  great  timidity;  with  smarting  in
rectum;  stools  frequent;  but  scanty.

■  Copious  diarrhoea,  <  at  night,  painless,  with  much  wind;

emaciated;  great  nervousness;  in  a  little  girl,  after  a
great  fright  which  almost  produced  convulsions.

■  Great  nervous  erethism  and  tenesmus,  occurring only

after  stool. ^Dysentery.


IGNATIA.  154

I  Pale,  cold,  fixed,  staring  look,  occasional  screams,  vomit-
ing food. ^Cholera  infantum.

I  Stools  large  and  soft,  but  passed  with  difficulty.

■  Excessive  desire  for  stool,,  more  in  upper  intestines  and

upper  abdomen ;  it  causes  great  urging,  nevertheless
stool  is  insufficient,  though  soft.  '

I I  Great  urgency  and  desire  for  stool,  in  evening,  felt  mostly
in  middle  of  abdomen,  but  no  stool  follows,  only  rectum
protrudes.

■  Constant  urging  to  stool,  which  causes  smarting  pain.
I  I  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool  with  erections.

■  Difficult  stool,  causing  prolapse  of  rectum.
I  Hard  stools,  tries  often,  but  in  vain.
Constipation:  from  taking  cold;  of  a  paralytic  origin.

■  Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation  following  inflamma-

tion of  bowels ;  tenesmus  only  after  a  discharge.
Stools: whitish, yellowish white, slimy; thin; pasty;

mucous;  bloody  mucus;  acrid;  mucous,  with  colic.
Before  stool:  rumbling;  urging,  felt  mostly  in  middle  and

upper  abdomen.

■  ■Sharp,  pressive  pain  in  rectum.

■  Frequent  cutting  deep  in  rectum.

■  Sudden  sharp  stitches  in  rectum,  extending  upwards  into

body ;  <  from  excessive  grief.
Spasmodic  tension  in  rectum.

■  ■Contractive  sore  pain  in  rectum,  like  from  blind  hemor-

rhoids, one  or  two  hours  after  stool.
■Sensation  of  excoriation  and  contraction  in  rectum.

■  Neuralgia  of  rectum;  pains  in  anus,  returning  regularly

every  day ;  <  walking  or  standing ;  >  sitting.
I  I  Dull  pain  in  rectum  as  if  distended  with  gas,  after  stool.

■  Unpleasant  crawling  low  down  in  rectum,  near  anus,  as

from  thread  worms.
■Violent  itching  in  rectum,  in  evening,  in  bed.

■  Passive  hemorrhage from rectum,  after stool  (of  long

standing);  flow  bright  red;  stools  regular;  bowels  flatu-
lent; faintness  when  hemorrhage  is  profuse;  must  lie
down  after  stool.

■  Bleeding  during  and  after  stool;  hemorrhage  and  jDain

are  <  when  stool  is  loose.

■  Ennervation  of  longitudinal  and  circular  muscles  of  rec-

tum, causing a semi-paralyzed state of bowel and
allowing  feces  to  accumulate.
■Anxious  desire  for  stool,  with  inactivity  of  rectum;  is  un-
able to  evacuate  feces  without  danger  of  eversion  and
prolapsus  of  rectum.

■  ■Prolapsus  of  rectum  from  moderate  straining  at  stool.

■  Tenesmus;  prolapsus  recti  after  stool.


355  IGNATIA.

.  I  Prolapsus  of  rectum,  with  a  male  child,  a^t.  4;  parents
have  to  return  the  bowel  after  each  stool,  sometimes
twice  a  day  and  with  great  difficulty.

■  Severe,  constant,  stitching  and  sore,  burning  pains  in  rec-
tum, completely  robbing  her  of  sleep;  prolapsus  of  rec-
tum; hard,  bloody  stools  greatly  aggravating  the  pains;
ulcerated  hemorrhoids  in  rectum,

I  Hemorrhoids:  after  confinement,  with  sharp,  painful
pressure  in  rectum  after  stool,  even  a  soft  stoolj  also
sharp  stitches  from  anus  to  rectum;  bleeding  slightly
and  protruding  at  stool,  followed  by  severe  contractive
pain  in  anus  and  stitches  up  rectum,  lasting  until  ex-
actly 5  P.M.  each  day,  when  pain  suddenly  ceases;  with
sensation  of  excoriation  or  contraction  of  anus;  tumors
prolapse  with  every  stool,  and  have  to  be  replaced ;_  they
are  sore,  as  if  excoriated;  hemorrhage  and  pain  <
when  stool  is  loose;  dragging  pains  around  pelvis.

I  Blind  piles,  pressure  and  soreness  in  anus  and  rectum;
painful  while  sitting  and  standing,  less  while  walking,
though  renewed  and  <  after  taking  fresh  air.

iStitches  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors  during  cough.

I  Pain  in  anus  as  from  blind  piles,  sore  pain  alter  soft  stool.

I I  Sore  pain  in  anus,  without  reference  to  stool.

IIA  coarse  stitch  extending  from  anus  deep  into  rectum.
I  I  Pain in anus  returning at same  hour  each day,  <

walking  and  still  <  standing,  >  on  sitting  down.
I  Constriction  of  anus  after  stool,  <  while  standing.

■  Painless  contraction  of  anus  for  many  days.

■  Itching  and  tingling  in  anus. ^Pruritus.

■  Itching  of  anus: at  night;  child  is  nervous  and  spas-

modic; from  seat  worms.
Fissures  of  anus.
Blotches  at  anus.

■  Stitches,  itching  and  a  creeping  sensation  in  lower  part

of  rectum. ^Ascarides.

■  Ascarides  causing  itching  in  rectum  and  anus.

■  Thread  worms  in  rectum,  especially  when  there  are  traces

of  blood  in  stools.

■  Convulsions;  suddenly  fell  prostrate  and  remained  un-

conscious for  half  an  hour ;  after  which  she  was  unable
to  speak  for  several  minutes;  after  Ignat.  passed  tape-
worm, and  convulsions  did  not  recur.
Increased  accumulation  of  flatus  and  increased  discharge
of  it.
^^  Urinary  Organs. iSudden,  irresistible  desire  to  urinate.
I  I  Painful  pressure,  with  a  scraping  sensation  in  neck  of
bladder,  especially  when  walking;  turbid  urine.

■  Pressure  to  urinate,  from  drinking  coffee.


IGNATIA.  156

llFrequent  discharge  of  much  watery  urine. ^Hysteria.
Urine: nervous,  watery; clear, lemon  colored; scanty,

dark  and  acrid.
I  I  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine.
I  Burning,  smarting  or  soreness  during  urination.
I  I  Itching  in  forepart  of  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual Organs. Lasciviousness  without  erections.

■  Sexual  desire  weak,  or  sexual  desire  with  impotence.

■  Erections  during  stool;  emission  of  prostatic  fluid.

■  Hysterical  spasmodic  stricture.

■  ■Contraction  of  penis,  it  becomes  quite  small.

■  Itching  around  genitals  and  on  penis,  in  evening  after

lying  down;  passes  off  after  scratching.

■  ■Soreness  and  ulcerative  pain,  combined  with  itching,  at

margin  of  prepuce.
1  I  Sweat  on  scrotum.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Cramp  pains  in  uterus,  with
lancinations,  <  from  touching  parts.

■  Uterine  spasms  with  lancinations  or  labor-like pains.
I  Metrorrhagia  from  chamomile  tea.

■  Menses:  too  soon  and  profuse;  scanty,  delayed.
BMenses  too  early  and  profuse,  appearing  ever}^  10-14

days;  before  and  during  menses  heat  and  heaviness  in
head,  severe  pressing  pain  in  forehead,  eyes  sensitive
to  light,  ringing  in  ears,  loss  of  appetite,  sensation  of
emptiness  in  stomach,  cramping  pains  in  abdomen,
chilliness  alternating  with  heat,  anxiety,  palpitation,
extreme  prostration  of  whole  body  and  especially  of
extremities.

iMenstruation  profuse  and  irregular;  leucorrhoea,  with
bearing-down  pain.

iMenorrhagia  with  sighing  and  sobbing,  faint  feeling  at
pit  of  stomach;  great  despondency,  seems  full  of  sup-
pressed grief.

■  Brought  on  a  flow  in  a  lady,  set.  62,  who  had  suffered

from  grief;  also  in  a  lady,  set.  30,  whose  menses  had
been  suppressed  for  three  months.

■  Menstrual  blood  black,  of  putrid  odor,  in  clots.

■  Irregular  menstruation,  especially  dysmenorrhoea,  origi-

nating in  irritation  of  nervous  system,  and  not  in
uterine  congestion.
■Menses  scanty,  attended  by  violent  spasms  and  pains,
lasting  several  days,  and  resembling  pains  of  parturition ;
nervous  system  in  very  excitable  state.  ^Dysmenor-
rhoea.

■  ■Amenorrhoea;  ulcers  on  feet;  ansemic;  region  of  liver

and  spleen  swollen.

■  Suppression  of  menses  caused  by  suppressed  grief;  much


157  IGNATIA.

involuntary  sighing  and  sobbing;  prsecordial  anguish;
weak  and  empty  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach-.

■  During  menstruation  uterine  spasms,  with  crampy  press-

ing, >  by  pressure  and  in  a  recumbent  posture.

■  During  menses:  photophobia;  contractive  colic;  anguish;

palpitation  of  heart;  backache;  lassitude  approaching

faintness.
I  Pain  from  sacral region  through  to  front,  followed  by

leucorrhoea  and  a  numb  and  stupid  feeling  in  brain;

difficulty  in  answering  questions.
I  Violent  labor-like  pain;  purulent,  corrosive  leucorrhoea..

■  Chronic  leucorrhoea,  with  excited  sexual  desire.

■  Menses  scanty,  stringy,  with  dark  clots;  great  dysmenia

both  before  and  after;  fearful  griping  and  cutting  uter-
ine colic;  milky  whites;  constant  burning  heat  in  va-
gina, <  before  menses;  very  acute  darting  pains  in
vulva,  only  during  day;  intensely  sore  pain  at  entrance
of  vagina  during  coitus,  almost  driving  her  frantic;
heavy  and  sleepy  after  meals,  must  lie  down  after  din-
ner; pain  and  sickness  at  stomach  while  standing,  >
sitting  down;  sinking  and  emptiness  at  epigastrium;
total  loss  of  appetite  except  at  supper  time;  stitches  in
breasts;  feet  burning  hot,  or  cold;  feels  as  if  stockings
were  cold  and  damp;  one  cheek  generally  hot,  the  other
not  so;  hysteria;  constipation  with  great  pain,  dreads
to  go  to  closet;  deep  sighing  inspiration;  inflammation
of  vagina  and  vulva. ^Vaginismus.

■  Pruritus  of  young  girls,  with  leucorrhoea  and  associated

with  ascaris  vermicularis.
2*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■Emptiness,  qualm-
ishness and  weakness  in  region  of  stomach,  with  flat
taste;  distension  of  abdomen  after  eating;  hiccough;
sour  eructations ;  frequent  regurgitation  of  food,  and  of
bitter  liquid ;  vomiting  at  night  of  food  taken  in  evening;
empty  retching,  >  by  eating. ^Morning  sickness.

■  After  great  fright,  during  seventh  month  of  pregnancy,

severe  pain  in  epigastrium;  undefined  anxiety;  restless-
ness; falls  asleep  late  at  night;  also  pain  low  down  in
1.  side  of  abdomen.

■  After  fright  during  pregnancy,  trembling,  followed  next

day  by  labor  pains  and  hemorrhage,  >  lying  on  back
without  pillow  and  with  lower  end  of  mattress  elevated.

■  Deep  sighing  and  sobbing  with  strange,  compressed  feel-

ing in  brain;  groaning  and  stretching  of  limbs  at  termi-
nation of  each  spasm. ^Spasms  during  labor.

■  Spasms  with  twitching  of  muscles  of  mouth  and  eyes;

wild  expression ;  eyes  upturned ;  constant  attempt  to
tear  her  hair;  laughing  and  crying;  nervous  and  ex-
citable. ^Puerperal  convulsions.


IGNATIA.  158

I  Puerperal convulsions commence  and  terminate  with

groaning  and  stretching  of  limbs ;  vomiting.
iThe  labor  does  not  progress.
lAfterpains  with  much  sighing,  sadness  and  despondency.

■  Infantile  colic  after  taking  breast  of  mother  or  nurse,  who

suffers  from  grief.
iMilk  diminished.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Voice :

low;  trembling;  hoarseness  from  cold.
■Subdued,  low  voice;  is  unable  to  talk  loud.

■  Hysterical  aphonia,  mental anxiety,  spinal  symptoms.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  in  larynx.

■  Constrictive  sensation  in  trachea  and  larynx.

B  Uninterrupted  provocation  to  a  hacking  cough  in  larynx
(not  tickling)  in  evening  after  lying  down;  it  does  not
disappear  on  coughing,  only  on  suppressing  cough.
^  Respiration. ■  Frequent  sighing.

■Sighing  and  sobbing  continue  long  after  crying.

■Snoring  inspiration  during  sleep.

■  ■  Desire  to  take  a  deep  breath. ^Hysteria. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Frequently  obliged  to  take  a  deep  breath,  which  momen-

tarily relieves  pressure  upon  chest.

■  Impeded  inspiration,  like  from  a  weight  on  chest.

■  Oppressed  breathing,  alternating  with  convulsions.

■  Oppression  of  chest  at  night,  <  after  midnight.
I  I  Slow  breathing.

■  Inspiration  slow;  expiration  quick.

■  Loses  breath  when  running.

^^  Cough. ■Tickling  cough  which  may  be  suppressed  by  an
effort  of  will.

■  Constant,  dry  cough,  excited  by  tickling  in  suprasternal

fossa;  as  from  inspired  feathery  dust,  not  <  by  cough-
ing, but  more  excited  the  more  he  allows  himself  to
cough;  especially  <  towards  evening.

■  Cough  caused  by  constrictive  sensation  above  throat  pit.

■  Constant  hacking  cough  in  evening  in  bed.

■  Dry,  spasmodic  cough.

■  Hollow,  spasmodic  cough,  caused,  in  evening,  by  a  sensa-

tion like  from  fumes  of  sulphur,  or  from  dust  in  pit  of
throat;  in  morning,  from  a  tickling  above  pit  of  stomach.

■  Hollow,  spasmodic  cough,  <  evening,  with  but  little  ex-

pectoration, leaving  pain  in  trachea.
I  I  Cough  dry  and  rough,  with  fluent  coryza,  headache  and
weak  voice.

■  Nervous  cough  and  oppression  frequently  accompanying

catarrhal  affections  in  young  people  and  women.
Spasmodic  cough  in  nervous,  sensitive  persons.
I  I  Cough  every  time  he  stands  still  during  a  walk.


159  IGNATIA.

I  I  Cough  after  warm  drink.

■  The  longer  the  cough,  the  more  irritation  to  cough.
I  Sleepy  after  each  coughing  spell.

During  cough:  nauseous  feeling  in  epigastrium;  concus-
sions in  hypogastrium ;  pain  in  penis;  convulsions.

I  Expectoration:  in  evening,  rarely  in  morning;  clifiicult,
in  evening;  tasting  and  smelling  like  old  catarrh.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Stitches:  in  chest,  from  flatu-
lent colic;  in  1.  side  of  chest.

llSpasmodic  constriction  of  chest.

iChest  feels  as  if  too  small;  spasmodic  yawning.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, n  Anxious  feeling  in  prse-
cordia.

•  After  excessive  anxiety  followed  by  sudden  joy;  uncer-
tain, weak,  weary  sensation  in  chest;  sinking  sensation
and  emptiness  in  pit  of  stomach;  heart's  impulse  feeble;
pulse  small,  soft  and  100  to  110  per  minute.  ^Cardiac,
hypersesthesia.

I  Constriction  at  heart,  with  anxiety  and  disposition  to  cry;
los3  of  appetite;  pressure  in  stomach;  palpitation;
menses  more  profuse  than  usual;  sleepiness;  weakness
of  eyes ;  after  grief.

I  Palpitation :  at  night,  and  in  morning,  in  bed ;  at  night,
with  stitches  in  heart ;  during  deep  meditation.

I  Pulse:  generally  hard,  full  and  frequent,  with  throbbing
in  bloodvessels; less  frequently  small  and  slow;  va-
riable, very  changeable; frequent  in  morning,  slower
during  day  and  evening.
^°  Outer  Chest, l  l  Stitches  in  nipple  on  deep  inspiration.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  i Stiffness  of  nape  of  neck. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Stitch  in  nape  of  neck.

I  I  Pressive  pain  in  cervical  glands.

■  Painless  glandular  swellings  on  neck.
Tensive  pains  in  back  on  standing  erect.

Simple  pains  which  are  apt  to  become  excessive  when

touched;  jerks  through  whole  body. *
Pains  in  back  during  chill.
I  I  Stitches  in  small  of  back.

■  Lancinating stitches as from a sharp knife,  in  back

through  loins,  extending  to  legs.
Pain  in  sacrum,  also  when  lying  on  back,  moraing  in  bed.

■  Spine  disease,  with  gressus  gallinaceus.
I  I  The  back  is  bent  forward.

^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Quivering  jerks  in  deltoid  muscle.

■  After  anxiety  sudden  stroke  as  if  r.  shoulder  had  been

paralyzed  by  a  stroke  of  lightning,  which  extended
through  whole  arm,  extending  to  tips  of  thumb,  index
and  middle  fingers;  use  of  arm  completely lost,  can


IGNATIA.  1GQ

hardly  raise  it;  sensation  as  if  arm  did  not  belong  to
her;  on  touching  objects  it  seems  as  if  they  were  covered
with  fine  felt. ^Hysterical  paraplegia.

I  Pain  in  shoulder-joint  as  if  dislocated,  on  moving  arm.

■Lancinating,  cutting  pain  in  shoulder-joint  when  bend-
ing arm  forward.

iNumb  feeling  of  arms  at  night,  in  bed,  with  it  a  sensation
as  if  something  living  were  running  in  arm.

iPains  in  joints  of  arms,  when  bending  them  backwards,
like  from  overexertion,  or  as  if  bruised.

iWarm  sweat  in  palms  and  on  fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs, l Lancinating,  cutting  pains  in  hip-joint.

I  Pains,  incisive,  throbbing,  intermittent;  at  first  every
other  day,  then  daily;  chilliness;  mild,  melancholic
temperament;  fever,  but  no  thirst;  returns  every  winter.
^Sciatica.

■  Paroxysms  of  excruciating  neuralgia  of  sciatic  nerve  and

its  perineal  branches  preceded  by  intense  coldness
and  shivering,  <  at  night,  obliging  her  to  get  up  and
walk  about  room;  pain  acute,  of  a  tearing,  digging,
boring  character,  and  lasts  sixty  to  ninety  minutes,  when
it  slowly  departs.

■  Tschias:  intermitting,  chronic;  >  in  summer,  <  in  win-

ter; beating as  though it  would burst hip-joint,  ac-
companied  by  chilliness,  with  thirst,  flushes  of  heat,
particularly  in  face,  without  thirst.
Boil  on  inner  side  of  thigh.

■  Tumor  large  as  an  egg,  a  short  distance  above  knee,  quite

movable,  hard  upon  pressure;  great  nervousness,  con-
tinually sighing,  afraid  she  would  die;  great  fear  of
coming  sorrow  or  trouble;  very  despondent;  slight
twitching  of  muscles ;  drawing  limbs  to  body.

■  Knees  are  involuntarily  drawn  upwards  when  walking;

gressus  gallinaceus.

■  Heat  of  knees,  with  coldness  of  nose.
Cracking  of  knees.

■  Tearing  pains  in  back  of  legs.

■  Tearing  pain  in  tendo  achillis  and  calf,  as  though  parts
'would  be  cut  off; < standing,  walking,  or  exerting

muscles.
Numbness  of  feet,  legs,  and  sometimes  of  lower  limbs.
I  I  Coldness  of  feet  and  legs,  extending  above  knee.

■  Heaviness  of  feet.

■  Burning  in  heels,  at  night;  when  they  come  in  contact,

however,  they  feel  cold.

■  Bruised  or  stinging  sensation  in  soles  of  feet.

■  ■Corns  painful  as  if  sore.

■  Convulsive  jerking  of  lower  limbs.


161  IGNATIA.

■  Staggering  walk,

^'  Limbs  in  General. iTrembling  of  limbs;  languor.

■  Single  jerks  of  limbs,  when  falling  asleep.
■Sudden  spasmodic  action  of  a  muscle;  limbs  jerk;

■  Crawling,  asleep  sensation  in  limbs.

■  Tingling  in  limbs.

■  Pain  as  if  sprained  or  dislocated,  in  shoulder,  hip  and

knee-joints.

■  Neuralgic  pain  in  r.  shoulder  when  raising  arm  or  when

turning  it  towards  chest; loss  of  sensation  in  r.  knee
and  tension  in  same  when  stretching  leg.
I  I  Painfulness  of  limbs  on  going  to  sleep.

■  Cold  hands,  and  cold  feet  up  to  knees.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  pains  >:  headache  >.

■  Change  of  position  >  pain.
Lying:  pains. in  head  >;  vertigo.

Lying  down:  pains  come  again;  toothache;  itching  around
genitals;  uterine  pains  >;  hacking  cough;  jerking  in
forearm.

Lying  on  back:  >  headache;  labor  pains  and  trembling
>;  pains  in  sacrum;  chorea  >.

Lying  on  side:  headache  <;  pain  as  if  nail  was  driven
in  head  >.

Must  lie  down:  when  pain  in  head  is  bad;  after  hemor-
rhage from  rectum;  after  dinner.

Must  bend  head  forward;  lays  it  upon  table.

Inclines  head  backward,  or  is  drawn  powerfully  back.

Leaning  forward:  pain  over  nose  >.

Bends  himself  backward,  so  that  he  rests  on  head  and  feet.

Sitting:  pain  in  anus  >;  blind  piles  painful;  pain  and
sickness  at  stomach  >;  tremor  of  legs  <.

Sitting  and  standing  very  difficult:  on  account  of  chorea.

Drawing  limbs  to  body.

Lower  jaw  thrust  forward.

When  fingers  are  extended:  trembling  of  hands.

Change  of  position:  often  >  pains;  headache  <;  cramps
in  stomach  > ;  frequent  at  night  in  bed.

Moving:  pressure  in  stomach  becomes  cutting;  pain  in
shoulder-joint  on  moving  arm.

Slightest  motion :  of  head  <  vertigo;  of  tongue  <  ptyalism.

Slight  motion :  knees  give  way.

Exerting  muscles:  <  tearing  in  tendo  achilles  and  calf

Bending  arm  forward :  lancinating  pain  in  shoulder-joint.

Bending  arms  backward:  pains  in  joints.

Turning  arm  to  chest:  neuralgic  pain  in  r.  shoulder.

Raising  arm :  neuralgic  pain  in  r.  shoulder.

Stretching  leg:  tension  in  it.

Dropping  head  forward:  <  headache.

VOL.  VI.— 11. •


IGNATIA.  162

Turning  head  suddenly  :  headache  <.

Tossing  head :  during  dentition.

Trembling  and  shaking:  of  head.

Stooping:  <  vertigo;  renews  pain  at  root  of  nose;  head-
ache >;  pain  in  a  spot  in  r.  parietal  bone  <.

Walking:  pain  in  anus  <;  blind  piles  less  painful;  pain-
ful pressure  in  neck  of  bladder  <  ;  knees  involuntarily
drawn  upwards;  tearing  pain  in  tendo  achilles  and  calf
<;  as  though  breath  would  fail,  becomes  qualmish.

Standing:  pain  in  anus  <;  blind  piles  painful;  pain  and
sickness  at  stomach ;  tensive  pain  in  back ;  tearing  pain
in  tendo  achilles  and  calf  < ;  goes  to  sleep.

Obliging  her  to  get  up  and  walk  about  rooms:  pain  in
sciatic  nerve.

On  ascending  steps :  jerking  headache.

Stepping  heavily:  headache  <.

Stands  still  during  walk:  on  account  of  cough.

Running:  headache  <.

Throws  himself  wildly  about  in  bed.
^  Nerves, ll Persons  mentally  and  physically  exhausted  by
long  concentrated  grief.

1 1  Oversensitive  to  pain.

iTrembling  and  languor  of  limbs.

■  Trembling  of  hands  when  writing,  most  in  anyone's  pres-

ence, and  getting  <  as  soon  as  she  fancies  any  one
might  notice  it;  appears  also  when  fingers  are  extended.

iHer  trembling  does  not  make  much  difference  to  her
writing,  but  shows  itself  when  she  extends  her  fingers,
more  marked  on  r.  side.

1 1  Great  languor  or  deep  sleep,  with  stertorous  breathing
after  or  during  fever.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  she  had  been  fasting  a  long  time  with
flat  taste  and  languor  in  limbs.

I  Faint  feeling;  false  hunger;  nausea  and  vomiting  of  mu-
cus; habitual  smoking.

■  Great  weakness  of  whole  body; on  walking  seems  as

though  breath  would  fail,  becomes  qualmish  in  pit  of
stomach,  and  then  coughs.

■  Great  weakness  and  exhaustion  of  whole  body;  lassitude

in  evening.

■  Debility  after  arrest  of  hemorrhage,  with  disposition  to

be  vehement  or  vexed.

■A  simple  violent  pain  here  and  there  in  a  small  spot,  as
for  example,  on  ribs,  only  noticed  on  touch.

I  I  Emotional  hypersesthesia  ending  in  depression  and  tor-
por ;  sexual  desire  with  impotence.

■  Hysterical  debility  and  fainting  fits.

■Mind  very  irritable;  easily  becomes  sad;  frequent  attacks


1G3  IGNATIA.

of  pressing,  cramping  pain  in  forehead  and  occiput,  face
red,  lachrymation ;  spasmodic  constriction  of  throat,
with  difficult  deglutition;  much  belching,  hiccough;
constriction  of  chest,  respiration  impeded,  trembling  of
head,  twitching  of  arms  and  legs  with  semi-conscious-
ness, finally  a  deep  sigh  followed  by  profound  sleep.
^Hysteria.

I  After  a  quarrel  with  her  husband,  awoke  next  morning
with  a  rhythmical  tremor  of  entire  1.  leg  which  gradually
involved  both  legs;  <  sitting,  did  not  interfere  with
walking;  on  following  day  was  accompanied  by  choreic
jerking  of  head  from  1.  to  r.,  and  slightly  from  above
downwards. ^Hysteria.

I  Anguish,  shrieks  for  help,  with  suffocating  constriction
of  throat;  difficult  deglutition;  comes  out  of  spasm  with
deep  sighing. ^Hysteria.

I  Hysteria  characterized  by  a  mental  character  which  is
mild,  gentle,  yielding  though  whimsical  and  introverted.

iHemicrania,  globus  hystericus,  or  sudden  toothache
attacking  a  healthy  tooth,  in  hysterical  subjects.

I  Great  tendency  to  start.

IJerkings  and  twitchings  in  various  parts  of  muscles,

■  Jerking,  as  if  a  mouse  was  crawling  under  skin,  in  one

part  of  muscles  of  forearm,  in  evening  after  lying  down.

■  Convulsive  twitchings,  especially  after  fright  or  grief.

■  Screaming  with  violent  trembling  all  over;  single  parts

seem  to  be  convulsed.

■  ■Children  are  convulsed  in  sleep  after  punishment.

■  Convulsions  in  children  in  first  period  of  dentition,  with

pale  complexion,  or  in  consequence  of  irregular  inner-
vation of  capillaries,  with  remarkable  redness  of  one
cheek  and  cold  nose;  increased  temperature  of  body
transient;  skin  cool  to  touch.

■  ■Spasms  in  children:  from  fright  or  from  worms;  child

pale,  cold;  fixed,  staring  look;  occasional  screams;  vom-
its food  ;  preceded  by  hasty  drinking.

■  Spasms  with  cries  or  involuntary  laughter.

■  Convulsions  alternating  with  oppressed  breathing.

■  Convulsions,  with  loss  of  consciousness,  and  temporary

inability  to  speak.

■  Convulsions:  during  dentition,  with  frothing  at  mouth,

kicking  with  legs;  during  commencement  of  exan the-
matic fevers;  of  children,  after  punishment;  after  fear
or  fright;  return  at  same  hour,  daily.
■Suddenly  feels  sleepy  and  lies  down,  or  goes  to  sleep  stand-
ing and  falls ;  lies  quietly  and  unconsciously  for  half  an
hour,  or  several  hours;  eyes  closed;  makes  fists;  hides
under  bedcover,  and  peeps  timidly  from  under  it;  ex-


IGNATIA.  1G4

tremities  jerking  upwards;  body  thrown  upward  and
lower  jaw  thrust  forward ;  suddenly  wakes  up  gasping,
and  complains  of  hunger. ^Spasms  after  fright.

iLoss  of  consciousness,  sudden  or  preceded  by  headache,
especially  at  night;  bends  himself  backward  so  that  he
rests  on  head  and  feet,  throws  himself  wildly  about  and
tumbles  out  of  bed  if  not  prevented ;  violent  shocks  affect
the  body  and  particularly  chest;  froth  mixed  with  blood
escapes  from  mouth;  after  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  spasms
pass  off  but  unconsciousness  lasts  for  five  or  six  hours;
confused  speech  of  which  later  he  remembers  nothing;
passes  stool  or  urine  in  every  corner  of  room  if  not  pre-
vented; severe  chill,  during  which  body  is  cold  as  ice,
ends  the  attack,  which  is  followed  by  great  mental  and
physical  prostration.

iChildren  during  dentition,  or  even  at  an  earlier  or  later
period,  are  suddenly  seized  with  spasms  resembling  epi-
lepsy ;  they  often  occur  without  apparent  cause  or  come
on  after  child  has  been  reprimanded  for  a  fault  and
then  put  to  bed;  twitchings  begin  at  corners  of  mouth
so  that  child  appears  to  smile,  then  spasms  rapidly  affect
muscles  of  face,  forehead,  eyes,  and  often  eyeballs,  or
eyes  may  be  open,  fixed  and  staring,  with  dilated  pupils;
frothing  at  mouth,  biting  of  tongue  or  cheeks,  teeth
firmly  clenched  and  immpvable,  trismus,  twitching  of
arms,  less  often  of  feet,  attacks  last  from  five  minutes  to
half  an  hour,  after  which  child  is  covered  with  sweat
and  presents  all  the  symptoms  of  congestion  of  brain,
followed  by  soporous  sleep,  from  which  they  are  awak-
ened by  renewed  spasms,  or  spasms  return  after  a  com-
plete intermission;  pulse  frequent,  often  delirium  and
involuntary  urination.

I  Clonic  convulsions,  in  hysterical,  fitful  women.

■Violent  convulsions;  often  tonic  spasms  predominate.

■  Tetanic  convulsions,  with  frequent  inclination  to  yawn.

■  Tetanus  after  fright.

■Spasms  and  tetanic  convulsions  in  hysterical  women  and

children;  especially  when  falling  asleep.
I  I  Catalepsy  with  bending  backwards.

■  After  fright,  cataleptic  attacks,  lasting  several  hours  and

returning  regularly  every  two  months;  gradually  at-
tacks became  epileptiform  in  character,  with  violent
convulsions  and  loss  of  consciousness;  attacks  also  be-
came more  frequent,  occurring  every  month,  just  before
or  after  menstruation,  and  finally  occurring  after  any
accidental  excitement;  spasms  and  pain  during  men-
struation.

■  Emotional  trismus  or  opisthotonos;  head  drawn  power-


165  IGNATIA.

fully  back,  countenance  livid,  pupils  dilated,  respiration
and  deglutition  of  fluids  difficult.

I  Children  with  pale  complexion  and  blue  rings  around
eyes ;  there  gradually  ensues  a  great  degree  of  timidity
and  tendency  to  start,  followed  by  involuntary  move-
ments of  facial  muscles,  and  of  upper  and  lower  extremi-
ties, gradually  attaining  the  intensity  of  chorea.

I  Chorea:  after  fright  or  grief;  <  after  eating;  >  lying  on
back.

lEmotional  chorea,  especially  after  fright,  grief,  or  other
mental  excitement,  with  sighing  and  sobbing ;  vacillat-
ing gait;  liability  to  stumble  and  fall  over  small  objects;
trembling  and  twitching  of  various  muscles;  precipi-
tanc}''  of  volition;  patient  expresses  anxiety  in  his  move-
ments; <  after  eating,  especially  after  dinner;  after
deep  grief;  >  while  lying  on  back.

I  Chorea  in  girls  who  have  been  frightened  by  threats  or
punishment;  constant  and  involuntary  twitching  and
throwing  about  of  arms;  objects  are  dropped  from
hands;  twitching  of  eyes  and  shaking  of  head.

■  Sudden and  severe  chorea after  being frightened by

mouse  running  up  arm;  twitching  in  facial  muscles  and
active  movements  in  upper  extremities,  so  that  hands
seemed  always  to  be  engaged  in  some  sort  of  voluntary
work;  at  one  time  put  her  hand  to  hair,  at  another  to
ear,  now  quickly  extended  arm  as  if  to  smooth  dress,
and  so  on  the  whole  day;  voluntary  movements  of
hands  so  far  lost  that  she  could  neither  eat  nor  drink
unassisted.

■  AH sorts of motions and contortions of extremities,

head  also  being  affected;  cannot  walk  nor  use  hands
even  to  eat.  ^Chorea  after  fright.
iCries  out  when  any  one  approaches  bed,  and  at  intervals
repeats  her  crying,  but  is  not  capable  of  speaking  a
single  word;  hands  and  feet  thrown  violently  about;
convulsive  distortion  of  muscles  of  face;  head  one  mo-
ment bent  backward,  at  another  to  side,  and  whole  body
is  thrown  violently  about,  tophi  on  hands  and  feet.
^Chorea.

■  Chorea  in  such  aggravated  form  that  sitting  and  standing

is  extremely  difficult;  previous  bright  and  active  mind

degenerated  almost  to  a  condition  of  idiocy.
I  Chorea;  convulsions  are  greatest  in  mouth,  producing

much  distortion  of  face ;  globus  hystericus.
■Nervous  condition  in  influenza,  with  general  convulsions

and  frothing  at  mouth;  attacks  resembling  epilepsy.

■  Emotional  epilepsy; caused  by  fright  and  suppressed

grief;  especially  suitable  for  children;  recent  cases.


IGNATIA.  166

I  Convulsive  movements  in  limbs  with  spasmodic  closure
of  jaws;  attacks  lasted  about  half  an  hour,  and  recurred
every  four  to  seven  days;  they  came  on  at  all  hours  of
day  and  night,  and  were  occasioned  by  any  mental  ex-
citement; finally  attacks  became  more  violent;  fell
down,  became  unconscious,  thumbs  turned  into  palms,
convulsions  and  foaming  at  mouth,  terminating  in
sleep ;  the  longer  the  attacks  were  delayed  the  more  vio-
lent they  were;  expression  of  face  one  of  extreme  melan-
choly. ^Epilepsy  after  fright.

I  Face  red ;  pulse  full,  100 ;  loss  of  consciousness ;  eyes  fixed ;
convulsions  of  extremities  with  frothing  at  mouth;
thumbs  clenched;  great  thirst  after  consciousness  is
restored.

iSilent,  stupid  state,  with  jerking  of  body,  partial  sjDasms
of  extremities,  one  limb  or  only  certain  muscles  at  a  time;
lassitude  after  a  fit. ^Epilepsy.

I  Chorea-like  and  epileptiform  convulsions;  paresis;  ana3s-

thesia  combined  often  with  hypersesthesia  of  legs;  sub-
sultus  tendinum;  j'erking  of  limbs;  trembling  of  tongue;
delirium  tremens.

I I  Paralysis  after  great  mental  emotion  and  night  watch-
ing in  sick  chamber.

■  Hysterical  paraplegia.

■  Perversion  of  co-ordinations  of  function;  clavus  hysteri-

cus.

■  Great  mobility  in  nervous  phenomena.

^'^  Sleep.  Sleeplessness:  from  grief,  care,  sadness;  anxious
thoughts  and  depressing  emotions;  after  overstraining
mind  by  racking  business  cares;  before  midnight;  from
ebullition  of  blood;  with  starting  when  falling  asleep;
inward  restlessness,  thirst,  fever  with  anxiety  from  2  to

5  A.M.

■  Sleep  very  light,  hears  everything,  even  distant  sounds.

■  Restless  sleep.

■  Spasmodic  yawning:  with  pain  in  lower  jaw,  as  if  dislo-

cated; so  that  water  runs  from  eyes.

■  Hiccough  in  children;  restlessness  at  night,  and  scream-

ing during  sleep.
■When  going  to  sleep  jerks  through  whole  body,  or  in  a
single  limb,  or  a  single  muscle.

■  Very  restless  at  night  in  bed;  hysterical  subjects.

■  Frequently  changes  his  position  at  night  in  bed.

■  Snoring  inspiration  during  sleep.

■  During  sleep  of  children:  chewing  motion  of  mouth  and

startings  (flexors);  stamping  feet  and  grinding  teeth.

■  Child  awakens  from  sleep:  with  piercing  cries  and  trem-

bles all  over;  in  spasms  after  being  punished  and  sent
to  bed.


107  IGNATIA.

again  sees  everything  that  passes  in  street,  but  recollects
nothing  of  it  when  awake. ^Effects  of  wounded  honor.

I  In  his  dream  is  occupied  thinking  of  the  same  object
throughout  whole  night;  a  fixed  idea,  which  does  not
leave  him  on  waking.

B  Dreams  with  reflections  and  deliberations.
^^  Time. The  morning  is  the  best  time  to  give  this  remedy,  H.

Aggravation  at  4  a.m.  and  4  p.m.,  lasting  till  evening.

Morning:  pains  come  on  at  9  o'clock* and  last  till  2  p.m.;
pain  <  till  afternoon ;  when  rising  pains  <  ;  on  awaken-
ing, headache  which  disappears  on  rising ;  h#adache  <  ;
stabbing  pain  in  head  begins  on  rising;  toothache;
gnawing  pain  in  stomach ;  hurry  of  brain;  great  anxious-
ness,  hollow,  spasmodic  cough ;  palpitation ;  pulse  fre-
quent; pains  in  sacrum,  lying  in  bed;  general  heat.

From  2  to  5  a.m.,  inward  restlessness,  thirst,  fever  with
anxiety.

11' A.M.:  hungry.

During  day :  acrid  tears ;  darting  pains  in  vulva ;  pulse  slow.

Afternoon:  pain  gradually  >  till  evening;  fever;  heat  of
whole  body;  severe  shaking  chill.

4  P.M. :  stabbing  pain  in  head  at  its  height.

At  sunset:  chilly.

Evening:  incapacity  for  thought;  hacking  cough;  hollow,
spasmodic  cough  <;  expectoration  difficult;  pulse
slower;  lassitude;  jerking  as  if  a  mouse  was  crawling
under  skin  in  forearm ;  shaking  chill,  with  redness  of
face;  warm  sweat  in  hands;  when  lying  down,  pains
come  on  again;  sudden  pressure  in  head  now  in  one
place,  now  in  another;  toothache;  slight  fever;  feeling
of  hunger;  desire  for  stool;  violent  itching  in  rectum;
itching  around  genitals;  chilliness.

Night:  agglutination  of  lids;  nervous  and  restless  painful
pressure  in  region  of  pylorus;  pressure  in  stomach  <;
cramps  in  stomach;  colic;  rumbling  of  wind  <;  diar-
rhoea <;  itching  of  anus;  anxiousness;  vomiting;  falls
asleep  late;  oppression  of  chest;  palpitation  with  stitches
in  breast;  numb  feeling  in  arms;  sciatica;  burning  of
heels ;  loss  of  consciousness ;  restlessness ;  frequently
changes  position  in  bed;  fever.

After  midnight:  fear  of  thieves  on  waking;  oppression  of
chest  <.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  walking  in,  ach-
ing in  one-half  of  head;  lachrymation  <  when  exerting
eye;  itching  >  when  getting  heated,  out  doors.

Fresh  air:  blind  piles  <.

Warmth:  headache  >;  stabbing  pains  in  head;  chills  <.


IGNATIA.  1G8

Warm  room:  >  chilliness.

Warm  drink:  cough.

Warm  food :  aversion  to.

External  warmth  is  intolerable;  must  be  uncovered  as

soon  as  heat  begins.
Heat:  >  headache.
Lying  on  a  hot  bed:  >  chill.

As  soon  as  back  is  the  least  uncovered :  chill  begins.
Cold :  pain  in  occiput  <  ;  pain  in  teeth.
Cold  air:  causes  chilliness.
Cold  winds:  headache  <.
Cold  water:  washing  hands  <  pain.
^"  Fever. iChill  and  chilliness,  with  increased  pains.

I  I  Chilliness  in  face  and  on  arms,  with  chattering  of  teeth

and  gooseflesh.
I  I  Chill  commences  in  upper  arms,  spreads  to  back  and

chest,  with  heat  of  ears.
I  Coldness  and  chilliness  of  whole  body,  or  only  of  poste-
rior portions,  >  in  warm  room,  or  by  a  warm  stove.
I  Chill  proceeding  from  abdomen.

I  Chilliness  about  knees,  which  are  not  cold  externally.
iChill  of  single  parts  only.

llShaking  chill,  with  redness  efface,  in  evening.
llChill:  with  great  thirst  for  large  quantities  of  water;

>  from  external  warmth.
I  Chilly  at  sunset  or  in  cool  air;  very  cold  all  over,  with

one-sided  headache.
During  chill: ill  humor; violent  thirst; colic;  nausea;

vomiting  of  food,  bile  or  mucus;  great  paleness  of  face;

pain  in  back;  lameness  of  lower  limbs;  urticaria.

■  Chill  >  after  eating.

■  Internal  chill,  with  external  heat.

■  External  coldness,  with  internal  heat.

■  Continuous  quick  alternations  from  heat  to  cold.

■  Hot  knees,  with  cold  nose.

■  One  ear  and  one  cheek  red  and  burning;  the  other  cold

and  pale.

■  Heat  with  cold  feet.

■  Heat  or  coldness  of  single  parts.

■  One-sided  burning  heat  of  face.

■  External  warmth  is  intolerable,  must  be  uncovered  as

soon  as  heat  begins.

■  ■External heat and redness, without internal heat;

flushes.

■  ■Heat  of  whole  body,  in  afternoon,  without  thirst,  with

sensation  of  dryness  of  skin,  though  with  some  perspira-
tion on  face.
I  I  General  heat  in  morning  in  bed,  with  thirst,  does  not
wish  to  be  uncovered.


1G9  IGNATIA.

I  I  Frequent  flushes  of  heat  with  sweat.

■  Fainting  during  the  heat  or  sweat,

I  Sudden  attack  of  continued  fever,  consequence  of  reverse
of  fortune.

During  heat:  deep  snoring  sleep ;  frequent  sighing;  beat-
ing iieadache;  vertigo;  delirium;  pain  in  stomach  and
bowels;  no  thirst;  vomiting  of  ingesta,  with  coldness
of  feet  and  spasmodic  twitching  of  extremities ;  nettlerash
over  whole  body,  with  violent  itching,  easily  relieved
by  scratching,  disappears  with  sweat.

I  I  Hunger  after  fever.

■  Sweat  slight,  or  only  on  face.

■  Sensation  as  if  sweat  would  break  out,  which,  however,

does  not  follow.
I  I  Warm  perspiration  of  extremities.

■  Warm  sweat  on  hands,  or  on  inner  surface  of  hands  and

fingers,  in  evening.

■  Sweat:  at  times  cold,  but  generally  warm  and  somewhat

sour  smelling;  without  thirst;  during  a  meal;  when
eating,  only  on  small  spot  on  face;  often  confined  to
upper  part  of  body;  in  hands.

■  Paroxysm  preceded  by  much  yawning  and  stretching;

in  afternoon  severe  shaking  chill,  particularly  on  back
and  arms,  with  thirst,  lasting  about  an  hour,  followed
by  heat  of  whole  body,  with  cold  feet;  internal  shudder-
ing with  red  cheeks  and  warm  skin  which  is  only  >  by
onset  of  sweat,  which  usually  lasts  several  hours;  dur-
ing heat  and  sw»at  no  thirst;  short  periodical  attacks  of
pressing  pains  in  head  from  within  out;  accompanied
by  tearing  in  forehead,  both  >  lying;  dull,  pressing  pain
in  epigastrium;  oppression  of  chest;  appetite  increased;
ineffectual  urging  to  stool  followed  by  hard  stool;  heavi-
ness in  limbs  with  pain  in  joints;  during  apyrexia
great  lassitude;  knees  give  way  on  slight  motion;  sound
sleep  with  snoring  respiration;  taciturn,  indifferent,
startled  when  spoken  to;  tongue  white  and  moist;  lips
cracked  and  dry;  face  pale;  pulse  small,  and  somewhat
increased  during  fever.  ^Tertian  ague.
■Slight  chilliness  gradually  extending  over  whole  body,
and  finally  becoming  a  shaking  chill  with  chattering
teeth;  stretching,  yawning,  tearing  in  limbs,  and  great
thirst;  nausea  with  vomiting;  vomits  the  water  she
drinks,  mixed  with  slime;  oppression  of  chest;  vomiting
at  end  of  chill,  followed  by  heat  without  thirst;  head-
ache; sweat  without  thirst;  chilliness  of  long  duration,
heat  and  sweat  being  much  shorter. ^Tertian  ague.

■  Paroxysm  assuming  all  types — quotidian,  tertian,  quar-

tan, anticipating  or  postponing,  and  coming  on  at  all


IGNATIA.  170

hours  of  day  or  night;  chill  severe  and  pronounced,  last-
ing usually  about  an  hour,  with  intense  thirst  only
during  chill ;  chill  >  by  external  warmth ;  as  soon  as  chill
began,  although  temperature  was  over  90,  would  go  at
once  to  stove,  and  "  over  a  hot  fire  drink  the  hydrant
dry;"  fever  well  developed,  with  much  headache  and
vertigo, but  no  thirst;  rarely  any  perspiration,  and  with
exception  of  some  vertigo  felt  well  during  apyrexia.

■  Slight  chill  lasting  about  half  an  hour,  and  accompanied

by  violent  thirst  and  vomiting;  after  chill  pains  in
breast,  followed  by  heat  with  headache;  no  sweat.

■  During parox3^sm: vertigo on lying; palpitation of

heart;  chilliness  with  thirst;  chilliness  >  by  external
warmth;  heat  and  sweat  without  thirst;  chill  >  by
lying  in  a  hot  bed ;  great  weakness  during  fever.
■Severe  chill  followed  by  dry  heat,  sweating  stage  absent;
thirst  before,  during  and  after  chill,  with  pains  and  las-
situde in  lower  limbs  and  diarrhoea. ^Quartan  ague.

■  Chill  >  by  wrapping  up  warm;  begins  as  soon  as  back

is  least  uncovered;  jerking  of  limbs;  jactitation.

■  Ague  recurring  each  Spring  for  several  years  and  annu-

ally suppressed  by  Quinine; thirst  during  chill.

■  Quotidian  fever  with  violent thirst  at  commencement  of

violent  and  continuous  chills;  is  quiet  and  taciturn.

■  Return  of  chill  in  one month,  in  a  boy,  set.  7,  of  mild,

quiet  disposition,  very  laconic  in  speech ;  headache  be-
tween paroxysms,  chill  with  thirst  >  from  external
warmth ;  fever  with  heavy  sleep,  perspiration  light.

■  Strumming  sensation  in  body. ^Intermittent.
Apyrexia: heaviness in head; throbbing in temples;

sensation  as  if  head  was  smaller ;  burning  in  head
with  cold  hands  and  feet;  face  pale;  eruption  on  lips
and  in  corners  of  mouth ;  lips  dry  and  chapped ;
pappy  taste  in  mouth;  hungry  about  11  a.m,  but  little
or  no  appetite  at  time  of  meals;  aching  pain  in  pit  of
stomach;  colic,  with  hard  stools  and  ineffectual  urging;
pain  in  back  and  limbs;  irritation  to  cough  in  larynx,
sensation  as  of  a  foreign  body  lying  over  it;  languor,
apathy,  giving  away  of  knees,  starting  in  sleep,  or  sound
sleep  with  snoring;  sleep  usually  continues  from  heat
through  sweating  stage  into  apj^rexia.

Type:  quotidian;  tertian;  quartan;  irregular;  continually
changing,  especially  after  abuse  of  quinine ;  paroxysms
accompanied  by  spasmodic  symptoms.

Time:  irregularity  of  hour;  paroxysm  at  sunset,  late  in
afternoon  or  evening,  then  fever  heat  all  night;  ante-
poning  paroxysms,  usually  postponing.

Attacks  irregular  both  in  periodicity  and  evolution  of
their  stages.


171  IGNATIA.

I  Typhoid  fever  in  women  or  in  young  men ;  for  some  time
before  attack  patient  does  not  feel  well,  then  suddenly
and  without  any  gradual  exacerbations  the  paroxysm
sets  in  and  is  usually  very  severe ;  fever  begins  in  after-
noon and  continues  through  whole  night;  patient  al-
symptoms,  and  does  not  know  where  he  is  ailing  or  what
is  the  matter  with  him;  almost  beside  himself  with  im-
patience and  despair,  and  cries  out  for  help  to  those
standing  about;  easily  frightened,  fears  this  or  that  may
hurt  him ;  sensation  as  if  swung  to  and  fro  in  a  swing
or  cradle;  least  noise  or  jar  aggravates  the  complaints;
during  first  five  days  paroxysms  begin  with  slight  chil-
liness and  coldness,  with  or  without  thirst,  followed  by
heat  with  chilly  creepings  and  thirstlessnness;  as  the
disease  progresses  chilliness  precedes fever;  yawning
and  stretching;  severe  throbbing  headache  in  forehead
and  over  eyes,  <  from  light;  pain  in nape  of  neck,
neck  as  if  stiff;  bitter  taste  and  dryness  in  mouth,  with-
out thirst,  latter  being  only  present  during  chill ;  chok-
ing sensation  from  stomach  up  into  throat  with  oppres-
sion of  chest,  >  from  belching;  pressure  as  from  a  stone
in  pit  of  stomach; indescribable  sensation  in  pit  of
stomach  over  which  there  is  a  feeling  of  constriction  ac-
companied by  shortness  of  breath,  as  if  lower  part  was
tightly  laced;  severe  palpitation  of  heart,  patient  often
losing  consciousness,  eyes are  closed  and  respiration
seems  suspended ;  trembling  and  shaking  of  single  parts;
attacks  begin  and  end  with  stretching  and  yawning;
pressure,  or  weak  and  empty  feeling  in  stomach,  which
is  somewhat  painful  to  touch;  constipation;  severe,  in-
describable pains in back and limbs; strumming
through  limbs;  jerking  of  tendons  ;  at  no  time  sweat,
skin  generally  dry;  great  sleeplessness;  on  falling  into
a  doze  starts  up,  affrighted  by  various  visions;  trouble-
some dreams.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity, i  Complaints  return  at  precisely
the  same  hour.

Acute  paroxysms:  chronic  tonsillitis.

Momentary  disappearance  of  pain  by  change  of  position.

Periodical :  fits  of  vertigo ;  headache  weekly,  fortnightly
or  monthly;  headache  gradually  increases,  suddenly
abates;  attacks  of  weakness;  attacks  of  cramps  in  stom-
ach; abdominal  spasms;  attacks  of  pressing  pain  in
head;  convulsions.

Irregularity  of  hour:  paroxysm  at  sunset,  late  in  afternoon
or  evening.

Every  3  to  4  hours :  merry  and  lachrymose  moods  alter-
nate.


IGNATIA.  172

Twice  a  day:  bowel  must  be  returned  after  stool;  parox-
ysms of  anxiety  lasting  for  hours.

Every  morning  at  8  a.m.  :  <  until  10.30,  when  gradually
>  and  entirely  disappears  at  about  1  p.m.

Every  day:  pain  in  anus;  pains  in  lower  limbs;  at  same
hour,  convulsions.

Periodically  every  afternoon:  spasmodic  ructus  and  sin-
gultus.

7  to  8  P.M.  attacks  of  extremely  severe  pains  in  stomach,
more  frequently  at  midnight,  lasting  2  to  3  hours.

Every  evening:  half  hour  after  going  to  bed,  pain  in  r.
lower  jaw  lasting  from  one  to  one  and  a  half  hours.

Every  other  day:  incisive  pains  in  lower  limbs.

Day  before  headache:  irritable  disposition.

Day  after  headache:  feels  as  though  it  might  return.

Every  four  to  seven  days:  attacks  of  convulsive  move-
ments in  limbs.

Weekly:  same  hour  (11  a.m.)  and  day,  nervous  headache.

Every  ten  to  fourteen  days:  nausea.

Every  month :  headache ;  just  before  or  after  menstruation,
cataleptic  attacks.

Every  two  months:  cataleptic  attacks.

Every  Spring:  ague  recurs.

Every  Winter:  pains  in  lower  limbs.

During  dentition :  metastasis  from  bowels  to  brain ;  spasms.

During  menstruation :  spasms  and  pain.

Five  minutes  to  half  an  hour:  duration  of  spasms.

Lasting  sixty  to  ninety  minutes:  pain  in  sciatic  nerve.

Chill  lasts  one  hour,  sweat  lasts  several  hours.

Lasting  till  5  p.m.  every  day:  contractive  pain  in  anus  and
stitches  up  rectum.

Lasting  several  hours:  cataleptic  attacks.

Lasts  from  five  to  six  hours:  spasms.

For  many  days :  painless  contraction  of  anus.

For  six  months:  lachrymation;  pain  in  eyes  with  head-
ache.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  heaviness  of  arm;  pres-
sive  headache  in  side  of  forehead  exlending  to  eye;
headache  above  orbit  at  root  of  nose;  pressure  in  frontal
region;  intense  pain  over  eye;  throbbing  pains  on  side
of  forehead  from  eyebrow  around  eye;  pain  in  a  spot
in  parietal  bone;  pain  in  breast;  two  chipping  ulcers
at  upper  margin  of  cornea;  pain  in  lower  jaw;  parotid
swollen;  diphtheria  commences  r.  side;  shoulder  as  if
paralyzed;  neuralgic  pain  in  shoulder;  loss  of  sensa-
tion in  knee;  trembling  of  hands  <  r.  side.
■  Left:  pains  from  head  into  eye;  eye  smaller;  as  if  a  par-
ticle was  in  external canthus; pain  in  eye; burning


173 ■  IGNATIA.

and  watering  of  eye;  rawness  on  side  of  throat;  pain  in
hypochondrium  ;  sharp  sticking  left  of  umbilicus;  pain
low  down  side  of  abdomen;  stitches  side  of  chest;  rhyth-
mical tremor  of  entire  leg.

From  1.  to  r. :  choreic  jerking  of  head.

From  above  downward:  jerking  of  head.

From  within  outward :  pain  over  nose  in  forehead ;  press-
ing pain  in  head.

From  without  inward:  in  brain.
*^  Sensations. llOversensitiveness  to  pain.

■  Pressing  pain  from  in  out,  like  from  a  hard,  pointed  body.

I  I  Tension  in  internal  parts.


Pain  as  from  dislocations  in  joints;  cutting  as  from  a
knife;  tingling  as  of  ants;  as  though  eyeball  would  be
pressed  out;  as  though  needles  were  pushed  through
into  brain;  pressure  as  of  a  weight  on  vertex;  as  if  a
nail  was  being  driven  out  through  side  of  head;  as  if
temples  would  be  pressed  out;  as  if  brain  was  beaten
and  bruised;  as  if  nerve  of  tooth  was  shattered  and
crushed;  as  if  head  would  burst;  as  if  headache  might
return;  as  if  tears  were  in  one  eye;  as  of  sand  in  eyes;
as  if  upper  lid  was  too  dry;  as  if  eye  would  fall  out;
as  if  a  foreign  particle  was  in  1.  external  canthus;  as
if  inside  of  under  lip  was  raw  and  sore;  jaws  feel  as  if
crushed;  as  if  teeth  were  crushed  into  fragments;  as  if
food  lodged  over  orifice  of  stomach  and  could  not  get
down;  anterior  half  of  tongue  as  if  numb;  tongue  as  if
burnt  or  raw;  bread  feels  as  if  too  dry ;  as  if  epigastrium
was  raw  inside;  as  if  large  morsel  of  food  or  plug  was
sticking  in  middle  of  throat;  as  from  a  lump  in  throat;
as  if  swallowing  over  a  bone;  feeling  in  stomach  as
from  fasting;  as  if  stomach  and  intestines  were  hang-
ing down  relaxed;  as  if  a  number  of  pins  were  sticking
in  stomach ;  as  if  stomach  was  shortened ;  as  if  a  stone
was  pressing  in  region  of  pylorus;  as  if  he  would  like
to  vomit;  as  if  rectum  was  distended  with  gas;  hemor-
rhoidals as  if  excoriated;  sees  everything  as  through  a
fog;  as  if  all  parts  were  asleep;  as  if  she  had  no  feeling
in  epigastrium;  as  if  stockings  were  cold  and  damp;
chest  as  if  too  small;  pains  as  from  a  sharp  cutting
knife  through  back ;  as  if  r.  shoulder  had  been  paralyzed ;
as  if  arm  did  not  belong  to  her;  as  if  objects  touched
were  covered  with  fine  felt;  looks  around  bed  as  if  to
find  something;  as  if  he  had  committed  some  crime;
as  if  she  had  done  something  wrong;  as  if  some  great
misfortune  was  about  to  happen;  as  if  shoulder-joint
was dislocated; as  if  something living  was running


IGNATIA.  174

in  arm;  pain  in  joints  of  arms  as  if  bruised;  beating  as
though  hip-joint  would  burst;  as  if  back  of  leg  would
be  cut  off;  corns  as  if  sore;  hip  and  knee-joints  as  if
dislocated;  as  if  she  had  been  fasting  a  long  time;  as  if
a  mouse  was  crawling  under  skin  in  forearm ;  as  if  jaw
•was  dislocated;  as  if  sweat  would  break  out;  as  if  head
was  smaller;  as  of  a  foreign  body  lying  over  larynx;  as
if  swung  to  and  fro  in  a  swing  or  cradle;  neck  as  if  stiff;
pressure  as  from  a  stone  in  pit  of  stomach ;  as  if  lower
part  of  stomach  was  tightly  laced;  as  if  flesh  was  loose
on  bones  on  account  of  blows.

Pain:  from  forehead  to  middle  of  vertex;  in  back  and  nape
of  neck;  from  head  to  1.  eye;  in  head  with  every  throb  of
arteries;  in  occiput;  in  a  spot  in  r.  parietal  bone;  in  r.
breast;  in  outer  part  of  head;  in  periorbital  region;  in
upper  part  of  lid;  in  eyes;  from  head  into  1.  eye;  in
smaller  twigs  of  facial  nerves;  in  r.  lower  jaw;  in  sub-
maxillary glands;  in  teeth;  in  limbs;  in  back  of  head,
nucliEe;  in  ears;  in  1.  hypochondrium;  in  anus;  from
sacral  region  through  to  front;  at  stomach  low  down  1.
side  of  abdomen;  in  trachea;  in  penis;  in  back;  in
sacrum;  in  shoulder-joint;  in  joints  of  arms;  in  lower
jaw;  in  back ;  in  stomach  and  bowels;  in  joints;  in  breast;
in  lower  limbs.

Intolerable  pain :  in  back.

Furious  headache.

Intense  pain:  over  r.  eye  and  seemingly  through  supra-
orbital foramen.

Extreme  pain:  in  both  temples;  from  eye  to  top  of  head;
in  epigastrium;  in  stomach.

Intensely  sore  pain :  at  entrance  to  vagina.

Indescribable  pain:  in  back  and  limbs.

Excruciating  neuralgia:  of  sciatic  nerve  and  its  branches.

Simple  violent  pain:  in  small  spots.

Pain  very  acute,  driving  him  almost  frantic:  through  eyes
to  head.

Tearing  pain:  in  forehead;  in  back  of  legs;  in  tendo
achilles;  in  calf;  in  limbs.

Acute,  tearing,  digging,  boring  pain:  in  sciatic  nerve.

Lancinating:  in  sides  of  abdomen ;  in  uterus.

Lancinating,  cutting  pain:  in  shoulder-joint;  in  hip-joint.

Lancinating  boring:  deep  in  brain.

Lancinating  stitches:  in  back  through  loins  to  legs.

Stabbing  pain:  deep  seated  in  eyes,  going  to  occiput  and
nape  of  neck  finally  to  vertex;  in  rectum.

Darting:  in  face;  in  epigastrium;  in  vulva.

Cutting:  deep  in  rectum.

Cutting  stinging:  in  abdomen.


175  IGNATIA.

GnawiDg  cutting:  in  stomach.

Stitches:  in  soft  palate  extending  to  ear;  in  throat;  in
parotid;  in  stomach;  from  abdomen  into  chest;  in  sides
of  abdomen;  up  rectum;  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors;  in
lower  part  of  rectum;  in  breast;  in  1.  side  of  chest;  in
nipple;  in  nape  of  neck;  in  small  of  back.

Sharp  sticking:  generally  in  one  spot;  in  superciliary
ridge,  temple  or  side  of  head ;  above  and  to  1.  of  umbilicus.

Sticking:  in  palate  to  inner  ear;  in  throat;  in  stomach.

Stinging  pain:  in  forehead;  in  throat.

Twisting  pain:  in  face.

Fearful  griping  and  cutting:  in  uterus.

Drawing  and  griping:  in  abdomen.

Pinching:  in  umbilical  region.

Boring  pain:  in  face;  in  front  teeth.

Pressing,  cramping  pain :  in  forehead;  in  occiput.

Cramp  pains:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen;  in  uterus.

Twitching  pain:  in  forehead;  in  eye;  in  stomach.

Incisive,  throbbing  pains :  in  lower  limbs.

Throbbing  pain:  in  r.  side  of  forehead;  in  head  ;  in  occiput;
in  temples.

Labor-like  pains :  in  uterus.

Bearing-down  pain :  in  abdomen.

Neuralgic  pain :  in  head ;  in  eyes ;  in  rectum ;  in  r.  shoulder.

Beating  :  in  hip-joint ;  in  head.

Ulcerative  pain :  on  margin  of  prepuce.

Severe  contractive  pain :  in  anus.

Contractive  colic.

Contractive  sore  pain  :  in  rectum.

Dragging  pains :  about  pelvis.

Crampy  pressure :  in  uterus.

Pressing  pain :  in  head ;  in  forehead  ;  in  stomach.

Pressive  pain :  in  frontal  region  ;  above  root  of  nose ;  in
r.  side  of  forehead,  extending  down  into  r.  eye ;  in  eyes ;
in  rectum  ;  in  cervical  glands.

Pressive,  drawing  pain  :  above  r.  orbit  at  root  of  nose.

Painful  pressure :  on  upper  surface  of  brain ;  in  region  of
pylorus ;  in  region  of  spleen;  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  rec-
tum ;  with  scraping  sensation  in  neck  of  bladder.

Dull,  pressing  pain :  in  epigastrium.

Sudden  pressure:  in  head,  now  in  one  place,  now  in
another.

Pressure :  in  r.  frontal  region  above  eyebrow ;  from  with-
out inward  in  head ;  as  of  a  vv^eight  on  vertex ;  in  temples ;
in  eye;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  stomach;  over  stomach;
in  sacrum;  in  rectum;  in  anus;  on  chest.

Drawing  pain :  beginning  at  forehead,  extending  down
one-half  of  nose;  in  face;  in  umbilical  region.


IGNATIA.  17G

Spasmodic  pains:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.

Jerking :  of  head ; tlirough  whole  body  when  going  to

sleep  ;  in  a  single  limb ;  in  a  single  muscle ;  of  tendons.
. Bruised  pain:  in  small  of  back;  in  soles  of  feet.

Dull  pain :  in  head,  confined  to  r.  half  of  forehead  and  r.

eye ;  in  forehead  ;  in  face ;  in  rectum.
Aching :  in  one  half  of  head  ;  in  pit  of  stomach.
Raw  pain  :  in  mucous  membrane  of  mouth.
Soreness: of  inner  nose; in  teeth; of  inner mouth;  of

throat;  of  anus  and  rectum;  in  urethra;  on  margin  of

prepuce  ;  in  larynx.
Sore,  burning  pain :  in  rectum.
Burning  heat :  in  vagina ;  in  feet.
Burning:  in  head;  in  eyes;  in  epigastrium;  in  stomach;

in  urethra ;  in  heels ;  in  one  ear  and  cheek.
Heat :  in  head  ;  of  whole  body ;  of  knees.
Stinging :  in  soles  of  feet.
Smarting :  in  rectum  ;  in  urethra.
Sore  and  bruised  feeling:  of  head;  of  face.
Tenderness:  of  teeth.
Tensive  pain  :  in  back.

Tension:  under  ribs;  in  rectum  ;  in  r.  knee.
Compressive,  burning  pain :  extending  through  sinciput

and  eyes.
Suffocating  constriction  :  of  throat.
Constrictive  sensation :  in  trachea  and  larynx ;  above  throat

pit;  of  chest ;  of  anus ; -at  heart.
Spasmodic  constriction:  of  throat.
Choking  sensation : from  stomach  up  into  throat,  with

oppression  of  chest.
Anxious  feeling:  in  prsecordia;  mounts  up  to  abdomen.
Hemorrhoidal  pains:  in  anus.
Indescribable sensation:  in  pit  of  stomach  over  which

there  is  a  feeling  of  constriction.
Fulness:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  epigastrium;  under  ribs.
Sensation  of  protrusion :  in  umbilical  region.
Weight:  at  back  of  head.
Heaviness:  of  head ;  of  r.  arm ;  of  eye;  in  pit  of  stomach ;

of  feet;  in  limbs.
Oppression:  begins  at  stomach  spreads  to  throat;  of  chest.
Lameness:  of  lower  limbs.
Weakness;:  in  pit  of  stomach;  of  whole  body.
Lassitude:  of  limbs.
Sinking  sensation:  in  pit  of  stomach.
Peculiar  sensation  of  weakness:  in  upper  abdomen  and

pit  of  stomach.
Weary  sensation:  in  chest.
Empty  feeling:  of  head;  of  stomach  and  chest;  at  pit  of

stomach;  at  epigastrium.


177  IGNATIA.

Faint  feeling:  at  pit  of  stomach.

Sinking:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Flabby  feeling:  in  stomach.

Stiffness:  of  nape  of  neck;  of  nuchse  and  muscles  (trape-
zius) on  each  side  of  this  ligament.

Dryness:  of  skin;  of  mouth.

Strumming:  through  limbs.

Quivering  jerks:  in  deltoid  muscle.

Trembling:  in  stomach.

Ringing:  in  ears.

Numb  feeling:  of  arms;  of  feet;  of  legs.

Numb  and  stupid  feeling:  in  brain.

Trickling:  above  pit  of  stomach.

Tingling:  in  anus;  in  limbs.

Crawling,  asleep  sensation:  in  limbs.

Crawling:  in  pharynx; low  down  in  rectum.

Creeping  sensation :  in  lower  part  of  rectum.

Formication:  in  face.

Itching:  of  nose;  of  anus;  in  lower  part  of  rectum;  in
forepart  of  urethra;  on  genitals;  on  margin  of  prepuce.

Violent  itching:  over  whole  body;  in  rectum.

Chilliness:  in  face;  on  anus  spreads  to  back;  of  whole
body  or  of  posterior  portions  ;  about  knees.

Coldness :  of  nose ;  of  feet  and  legs  ;  of  hands  and  feet  up
to  knees.
"  Tissues. Inflammation  of  external  parts.

External  parts^  become  black.

Hemorrhages,  blood  dark.

Anaemia.

Painless  swelling  of  glands.

Sensation  as  of  dislocation  in  joints.

Chlorosis  in  sensitive,  nervous  and  hysteric  women,
inclined  to  spasmodic  and  intermittent  complaints;
induced  by  mental  emotions,  such  as  grief,  fright,  dis-
appointed love.

Chlorosis;  stomach  very  delicate;  oedema  of  lower  limbs;
globus  hystericus,

Suitable  to  persons  who  had  been  starving  either  from
want  or  other  causes.

Pains  as  if  contused  or  sprained,  or  sensation  as  if  flesh
was  loose  on  bones  in  consequence  of  blows.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries, i  Generally  <  from
slight  touch ;  >  from  hard  pressure ;  >  from  scratching.

Worse  during  passive  motion,  riding  and  after  it.

Touch:  scalp  tender;  head  painful;  region  of  pylorus  sen-
sitive; cramp  pains  in  uterus  < ;  heels  when  they  come
in  contact  feel  cold ;  simple,  violent  pain  in  small  spot

VOL.  VI. — 12.


IGNATIA.  178

here  and  there,  only  noticed  on  touch;  stomach  painful;
ulcers  <.

Pressure:  soft,  >  headache;  pains  > ;  pain  in  epigastrium;
pain  in  stomach  < ;  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  < ;
uterine  pains  > ;  ulcers  >  from  hard  pressure.

Slightest  contact  <  cramps  in  stomach.

Frequently  obliged  to  loosen  clothing.
^''Skin. I  Great  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  to  a  draft  of  air.

Itching:  better  from  gentle  scratching;  when  getting
heated  in  open  air.

Fine  pricking  like  flea  bites.

Eruption  on  face.

Skin  chafed,  sore.

Chilblains,  excoriation  and  vesicles.

Ulcers:  painless;  discharge  scanty;  burning;  generally  <
from  slight  touch,  >  from  hard  pressure.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution,  n  Especially  adapted  to
nervous  temperament;  women  of  a  sensitive,  easily  ex-
cited nature;  dark  hair  and  skin,  but  mild  disposition;
quick  to  perceive,  rapid  in  execution,

iThe  patient  is  sensitive,  peevish,  excitable,  hysterical,
with  sanguine,  nervous  temperament;  is  delicate;  falls
easily  in  love;  is  romantic;  bears  trials  meekly;  readily
falls  into  clonic  spasms  after  mental  agitation.

Stands  in  same  relation  to  children  and  women  that  Nux
vom.  does  to  sanguine,  bilious  men.*

Healthy  child,  set.  9  months ;  mother  suffering  from  nerv-
ous disorders ;  spasms.

Child,  set.  IJ,  mother  had  severe  fright  during  pregnancy  ;
epileptiform  spasms.

Boy,  set.  4,  girl,  set.  6  ;  epilepsy.

Boy,  set.  7,  mild,  quiet  disposition,  laconic  in  speech;  inter-
mittent.

Girl,  set.  9,  after  fright;  spasms..

Boy,  after  fright;  spasmodic  affection.

Girl,  set.  10,  blonde,  graceful;  after  fright;  epilepsy.

Boy,  set.  10,  robust,  but  pale,  had  tapeworm  after  fright;
spasms.

Girl,  set.  10,  after  catching  cold,  pain  in  limbs,  followed  by
gouty  swellings  of  joints;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  11,  sick  eight  days;  angina.

Girl,  set.  11 ;  chorea.

Boy,  set.  12,  suffering  seven  months;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  12,  after  being  frightened  by  a  fire;  spasms.


*  There  are  many  more  Ignatia  persons  in  North  America  than  Nux  vrnn.  per-
sons, at  least  this  side  of  Mason  and  Dixon's  line.— C.  Hg.


179  .  IGNATIA.

Girl,  set.  14;  hysterical  cramps.

Girl,  set.  17,  weak;  affection  of  mind.

Man,  eet.  17 ;  tertian  ague.

Colored  girl,  set.  17;  exophthalmus.

Girl,  set.  18,  delicate  appearance,  white  skin,  somewhat

pale  face,  menses  regular,  has  suffered  several  years;

hysteria.
Italian  girl,  set.  18,  commenced  menstruating  at  12;  four

years  ago  in  consequence  of  fright,  epilepsy.
Girl,  when  five  years  old  was  pushed  into  a  stream,  the  chill

and  fright  bringing  on  violent  fever;  followed  a  fortnight

later  by  attacks from which  she  has  since  suffered ;

menstruation set in at 14 without bringing relief;

epilepsy.
Man,  set.  19;  quartan  ague.
Girl,  set.  19;  amenorrhosa.
Man,  set.  20,  sanguine,  choleric  temperament,  strong  and

well  nourished,  after  deep  mortification;  melancholy.
.  Girl,  set.  20,  deformed;  affection  of  stomach.
Girl,  set.  20,  sanguine  temperament,  very  sensitive  to  joy

or  sorrow;  melancholy.
Girl,  set.  20;  affection  of  mind.

Man,  set.  21,  cheerful  disposition,  after  fright;  epilepsy.
Woman,  set.  24,  since  fifteenth  year  suffering  from  attacks

of  headache,  vertigo  and  vomiting;  for  last  two  years

after  least  mental  disturbance,  convulsions.
Nursing  woman,  set.  24,  after  fright;  convulsions.
Woman,  set.  24,  has  conceived  four  times  within  the  last

seven  months;  headaches.
Girl,  set.  25;  after  grief;  affection  of  stomach.
Woman,  set.  25,  married  eight  years,  but  had  never  borne

children;  hysteria.
Woman,  set.  26,  very  irritable,  dark  hair,  delicate  build,

well  educated,  childless,  has  suffered  since  first  appear-
ance of  menses;  dysmenorrhoea.
Woman,  set.  26,  had  ague  three  years  ago,  delicate,  yellow

skin,  spleen  enlarged,  suffering  four  days;  intermittent

fever.
Married  woman,  set.  27,  strumous"  leuco-phlegmatic  dia-
thesis; vaginismus.
Man,  set.  28,  soldier,  strong  and  healthy,  coming  from  a

swampy  district;  tertian  ague.
Woman,  set.  28,  half  year  ago  was  greatly  frightened  by  a

cat  which  tore  to  pieces  her  canary  bird ;  affection  of

mind.
Woman,  set.  29,  mother  of  two  children,  has  suffered  for

several  years;  hemorrhoids.
Woman,  set,  30,  nervous  temperament,  irritable,  lively  and


IGNATIA.  180

responsive  disposition,  after  long  nursing;  hysterical
paraplegia.

Strong  man,  set.  30,  gardener;  facial  neuralgia.

Delicate  lady,  has  had  children  in  rapid  succession;  pro-
sopalgia.

Lady  artist,  dark  complexion,  excessively  nervous;  con-
junctivitis.

Young  widow,  tall,  slender,  dark  hair,  eyes  and  skin ;  af-
fection of  stomach.

Woman,  after  being  cured  of  headache,  pains  in  stomach
and  fluor  albus,  by  Pulsat.;  affection  of  stomach.

Woman,  suffering  eleven  years,  since  birth  of  first  child ;
hemorrhoids.

Woman,  set.  33,  seven  months  pregnant  with  her  fifth
child;  puerperal  convulsions.

Man,  set.  33,  carpenter,  after  great  mental  excitement,  eight
years  previously;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  34,  during  lactation;  affection  of  shoulder
and  knee.

Plethoric  lady,  set.  35,  mother  of  eleven  children;  proso-
palgia.

Woman,  set.  35,  mother  of  three  children,  for  three  years ;
tumor  above  knee.

Man,  set.  36,  weak,  after  quarrelsome  life;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  36,  thin,  weak,  confined  three  weeks  ago;
hemorrhoids.

Woman,  set.  37,  corpulent,  twelve  years  ago  gave  birth  to
child,  since  which  time  has  been  suffering;  affection  of
eyes.

Woman,  set.  39,  unmarried,  spare  habit,  bilious  tempera-
ment; headache.

Woman,  set.  40 ;  affection  of  mind.

Patient,  set.  40 ;  prosopalgia.

Woman,  set.  40,  pregnant,  after  fright;  pain  in  epigastrium
and  abdomen.

Woman,  set.  42,  from  the  country ;  affection  of  mind.

Woman,  set.  42,  subject  to  attacks  of  migraine,  after  typhoid
fever;  ptyalism.

Woman,  set.  42;  after  being  greatly  frightened  by  seeing
grandson  carried  into  house  apparently  drowned ;  affec-
tion of  mind.

Woman,  set.  44,  wife  of  inn  keeper,  after  grief  and  much
trouble;  melancholy.

Strong  woman,  set.  46;  ague.

Strong  woman,  set.  46,  blonde,  after  being  angered  and
overheated;  spasms.

Strong,  healthy  woman,  set.  46;  neuralgia  of  face.

Man,  set.  48,  married,  red  hair,  blue  eyes ;  headache.


181  IGNATIA— ILLICIUM  ANISATUM.

Woman,  set.  50,  sedentary  habits,  suffering  for  three
months;  sciatica.

Manufacturer,  set,  54,  after  business  embarrassments;  affec-
tion of  mind.

Mrs.  G.,  set.  54,  blonde;  leuco-phlegmatic;  rather  fleshy;
passed  climacteric  four  years  ago ;  till  eight  years  ago
healthy,  since  then  subject  to  nervous  periodical  head-
aches.

Man,  set.  68,  artist,  thin  and  weak,  sanguine  and  lively
temperament ;  affection  of  stomach.

Aged  women,  oversensitive  to  external  impressions;  spinal
affection  (paralysis,  fixed  pain  in  spine);  habitual  con-
stipation ;  r.  half  of  body  weakest ;  vertigo.
^Relations. Antidoted  by:  Arnic,  Caw/plior.,  Chamom.,  Coc-
cuL,  Coffea,  tiPulsat.

It  antidotes  effects  of  brandy,  coffee,  chamomile  tea,
tobacco,  Zincum.

Compatible:  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Cole,  ostr.,  Cinchon.,  Lycop.,
Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  Sulphur.

Incompatible: Coffea,  Nux  vom.,  Tabac.

Compare:  Calc.  ostr.,  Chamom.,  Coffea,  Nux  vom.,  Stramon,


ILLICIUM  ANISATUM.

Star  Anise.  Magnoliacese.

Tincture  of  the  seeds.

Provings  by  Franz  and  Mure. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  91.

Clinical,  Authoeities. — Infantile  colic,  Jeanes,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  4,  p.  132.


^  Inner  Head. Pains  in  head ;  >  evenings,  <  mornings.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Buzzing  in  ears.

Ringing  in  ears,  followed  by  sleep.

Itching  over  1.  ear,  going  off  when  touching  place.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Acute  catarrh.

Watery  discharge  from  nostrils.

Warm  smarting  sensation  in  nose,  succeeded  by  sneezing.

Sharp  stitches  in  tip  of  nose.
^  Lower  Face. Stinging  sensation  in  upper  lip,  as  if  blood
would  press  out,  >  from  touch.

Dryness  of  upper  lip,  which  is  drawn  closer  to  teeth.

Burning  in  inner  surface  of  lower  lip,  with  sensation  as  if
it  had  gone  to  sleep.


ILLICIUM  ANISATUM.  182

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Rye  bread  tastes  good,  its  odor  is
refreshing.
I  Tongue  covered  with  aphthae;  most  on  edges.

■  Edges  of  tongue  folded  like  little  bags.

^^  Throat. ■  Tough,  viscid  phlegm  from  stomach ; with  old

drunkards.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Satiety,  after  eating  but  little.

All  food,  except  rye  bread,  tastes  too  salty  or  bitter,  yet

appetite  is  good.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  in

stomach,  extends  to  chest,  then  ceases.
Nausea,  with  gagging  and  inclination  to  vomit.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Bloating  of  stomach ;  acidity.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  splenic  region.
^^  Abdomen, l Three  months'  colic,  especially  if  it  recurs  at

regular  hours;  bowels  disturbed.

■  Violent  wind  colic.
Rumbling  in  abdomen.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stools: bilious;  compact  and  dark

colored.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Retention  of  urine.
^•^  Respiration. iDyspncea  in  old  asthmatics.
^^  Cough. After  coughing,  feeling  of  emptiness.

■  Frequent  cough,  with  pain.

Spitting  blood in small quantities and with pus-like

phlegm,  pain  in  r.  chest.
Whitish  expectoration.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Tough,  viscous  phlegm,  with
old  drunkards.
Pain  in  region  of  third  rib,  about  one  or  two  inches  from

sternum,  generally  on  r.  side,  but  occasionally  left.
Pain about  junction  of  third  r.  rib  with its  cartilage;
hemorrhage;  cough;  congestion;  enlarged  liver.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i Palpitation,  with  aphthae

and  weakness.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Cramp-like  drawing,  as  from  a  cold,  in

1.  side  of  dorsal  vertebrae.
^  Lower  Limbs. Left  thigh feels  as  if  broken  at  middle,

when  sitting,  ceases  on  rising.
^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion. Sitting:  L  thigh  feels  as  if  broken
at  middle.
Rising:  sensation  as  ifl.  thigh  was  broken  ceases.
^  Time. Morning:  pains  in  head  <.

Evenings:  pains  in  head  >.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Three  months'  colic,  especially  if  it

recurs  at  regular  hours.
^Locality  and  Direction. Right:  pain  in  chest;  pain  in
region  of  third  rib;  pain  about  junction  of  third  rib  with
its  cartilage.


183  ILLICIUM  ANISATUM— INDIGO.

Left:  itching  over  ear;  occasionally  pain  in  region  of
third  rib;  cramps  like  drawing  in  side  of  dorsal  verte-
brae; 1.  thigh  feels  as  if  broken  at  middle.
*^  Seusations.  As  if  blood  would  press  out  of  upper  lip;  as
if  lower  lip  had  gone  to  sleep;  cramp-like  drawing  as
from  a  cold  in  1.  side  of  dorsal  vertebrse;  1.  thigh  feels  as
if  broken  at  middle.

Pain:  in  head;  in  splenic  region;  in  r,  chest;  in  region  of
third  rib ;  generally  on  r.  side,  but  occasionally  left ;
about  junction  of  third  rib.

Sharp  stitches:  in  tip  of  nose.

Violent  wind  colic.

Warm  smarting  sensation :  in  nose.

Stinging  sensation :  in  upper  lip.

Burning :  in  inner  surface  of  lower  lip.

Rumbling :  in  abdomen.

Dryness :  of  upper  lip.

Itching  :  over  1.  ear.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Touch :  itching  ceases

■when  touching  place ;  stinging  sensation  in  upper  lip.
*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Babies  with  three  months' colic.

Old  drunkards,  catarrh  of  stomach.

Old  asthmatics.
^^  Relations. Compatible:  after  Aeon,  and  Bryon.  in  haemop-
tysis.


INDIGO.

Indigo.  Leguminosse.

Proved  extensively  by  German  provers. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  92.

Clinical  Authorities. — Prolapsus  ani,  Schiissler,  Raue'sRec,  1871,  p.  123;
Sciatica,  Preston,  T.  H.  M.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  120;  Epilepsy,  four  cases,  Kenyon,
Kaue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  254-255.

^  Mind. Melancholy,  sadness.

■  Sad,  discontented,  ill  humored,  introverted.
iGloomy;  endeavors  to  hide it,  has  spent  many  nights
alone  crying. ^Epileptic  convulsions.
^  Sensorium. Excessive  giddiness  with  headache.

Vertigo  with  headache,  fulness  of  abdomen,  great  discharge
of  flatus,  and  nausea,  going  off  in  evening  after  remain-
ing some  time  in  open  air.
Undulating  sensation  through  whole  head  from  behind
forward.


INDIGO.  184

^  Inner  Head. Sensation  as  if  head  were  tiglitly  bandaged

around  forehead.
Constant  pain  in  sinciput,  attended  with  an  aching  pain

in  r.  hypochondrium.
Tearing  in  vertex.
Heaviness  of  head,  as  from  a  heavy  load  on  vertex,  when

stooping.
Beating,  with  painful  stinging  in  occiput.
Beating  in  whole  head.
Feeling  as  if  brain  w^as  distending  at  centre.
Headache  with  redness  and  heat  of  face.
Severe,  lacerating  pain  in  head,

■  Sick  headache,  originating  in  a  state  of  debility.

■  Migraine.

Pains  are  characterized  by  great  intensity,  are  <  during

rest  and  w^hen  sitting,  and  can  frequently  be  entirely

suppressed  by  rubbing  and  pressure,  or  by  motion,  or

alleviated,  so  as  to  reappear  with  less  intensity.

■*  Outer  Head. Sensation  as  if  a  bunch  of  hair  was  pulled

from  vertex.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Pressure  in  ball  of  eye.

Inflammation  of  meibomian  glands  on  lower  lids.
Violent  jerking  and  twitching  in  lids.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Excessive  continued  sneezing,  succeeded
by  violent  bleeding  of  nose.
Nose  bleeding,  with  dry  cough.
Epistaxis.
^  Upper  Face. Pricking  in  r.  malar  bone.

Small  blisters  on  1.  side  of  face,  from  forehead  to  neck.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache,  of  a  rheumatic  character.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  i  Metallic  taste  in  tongue,  with  con-
tracted feeling  in  pharynx.
Vesicles  on  tip  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Numbness  of  inner  mouth.

Pain  in  submaxillary  glands,  extending  to  teeth.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Retching
and  vomiting  of  watery  fluid.
A'^omiting  of  glue-like  mucus.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Tingling  pain  in  pit  of  stomach.
Bloating  of  stomach.

Catarrh  of  stomach  and  intestines,  with  colic.
"'^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Emission  of  excessive  quantity  of  flatus.
Diarrhoea;  stool  liquid,  with  flatulence;  creeping  over  skin,
cold  hands  and  colic.

■  Prolapsus  ani  after  each  stool.
Pin  worms.

^^  Urinary  Organs, Inflammation  of  kidneys.
Renal  colic.


185  INDIGO.

Catarrh  of  bladder  with  pustules  and  boils  on  body,  menses

often  appearing  too  early.
.Chronic  catarrh  of  bladder.
Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  burning  in  fundus  of  bladder ;

painful  emissions  of  small  quantities  of  turbid  urine.
Increased emission  of turbid urine, containing much

mucus,  without  thirst,  with  violent  contraction  of  urethra

and  pain  in  bladder.
"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Depressed  sexual  desire.

■  Urethral  stricture  following  gonorrhoea.
Itching  of  urethra,  glans  and  scrotum.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menstruation  too  early.

Burning  in  mammse  during  menses.

Stinging  in  mammae,  going  off  momentarily  by  rubbing.
^^  Cough. 'Dry  cough,  always  attended  by  nosebleed.

Violent  cough ;  inducing  vomiting ;  bleeding  of  nose.

Suffocative  cough  in  evening  and  after  going  to  bed,

■  Cough  dry,  always  accompanied  with  expectoration.
Spasmodic  cough  with  tough,  mucous  expectoration.

"^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Severe  sharp  stitch  in  middle  of

sternum,  passing  through  chest,  when  sitting.
^^  Outer  Chest. Painful  spot,  size  of  hand,  in  region  of  r.  lower
ribs,  with  stitch  extending  to  shoulder  joint  when  sitting,
going  off  by  motion.
Stitch  in  region  of  lower  false  ribs,  toward  small  of  back.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Drawing,  lancinating  pains,  following
course  of  1.  rhomboideus  muscle.
Boils  on  neck  and  buttocks.
Stitch  between  scapulae.

Stitch  in  small  of  back,  >  after  an  evacuation.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Excessive  itching  (preceded  by  a  dull  head-
ache), especially  on  r.  elbow  joint.
Blotches  on  hands.
^^  Lower  Limbs, i  Intense  aching,  stinging  and  bruised  pain
in  middle  of  the  posterior  of  thigh,  extending  to  knee ;
boring  pain  in  knee-joint;  sharp  tearing,  stinging  or
pricking  in  calf  above  ankle;  <  sitting;  >  by  motion,
though  motion  also  painful;  <  afternoon  and  evening;
much  pricking  in  calf  just  below  knee  and  in  popliteal
space ;  must  lie  down. ^Sciatica.

■  Indescribable  pain,  extending  from  middle  of  thigh  to

knee,  in  the  bone,  >  walking,  returning  during  rest,  in
afternoon.

■  Tearing  pain  four  fingers'  breadth  above  1.  knee  joint,  ex-

tending to  a  hand's  breadth  above  ankle ;  in  afternoon
while  sitting,  >  rising  and  walking  about.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  pain  <;  pain  in  thigh
bone  <.


INDIGO.  186

Must  lie  down:  pain  in  calf  so  severe.

Sitting :  pain  < ;  stitch  in  middle  of  sternum ;  stitch  ex-
tending to  shoulder  joint ;  sharp  tearing,  stinging  in  calf
< ;  tearing  above  knee  joint.

Stooping :  heaviness  of  head.

Motion:  pains  >.

Rising:  tearing  above  knee-joint  >.

Walking:  indescribable  pain  in  thigh  bone  >;  tearing
above  knee-joint  >.
^^  Nerves. Excessive  nervous  irritation.

Illusory  sensations.

Subsultus  tendinum.

■  Paroxysms  come  suddenly;  falls  down  or  out  of  chair,

becomes  convulsed  all  over;  frothing  at  mouth;  convul-
sive movements  followed  by  a  rigid  condition  of  body;
before  attacks  he  had  a  furious  disposition,  excitable,
easily  angered,  since  then  had  become  mild  and  even
timid.  6'Epilepsy.
B Paroxysms  lasting  five  minutes,  clonic  and  very  violent;
occur  every  nine  or  ten  days;  very  melancholy,  exceed-
ingly timid ;  did  not  w^ant  to  live. ^Epilepsy.

■  Convulsions  regularly  once  a  week;  gloomy,  but  endeav-

ors to  hide  it,  has  spent  many  nights  alone  crying.
^Epilepsy.

■  Fits  every  day;  exceeding  melancholic. ^Epilepsy.

I  Flushes  of  heat  from  abdomen  to  head,  with  sensation  as
if  head  was  tightly  bandaged  around  forehead;  fits  be-
gin with  dizziness. ^Epilepsy.
■Epilepsy,  originating  from  plexus  Solaris,  or  from  abdom-
inal ganglia,  or  from  a  cold  or  fright.
^  Time. Afternoon  :  sharp  tearing  in  calf  < ;  pain  in  thigh
bone  returns ;  tearing  above  knee  joint.
Evening :  vertigo  with  headache  >  :  suffocative  cough ;
sharp  tearing  in  calf  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Open  air :  vertigo  with  head-
ache.
■"'  Fever. Chilliness,  with  cold  hands  and  violent  headache,
with  constant  desire  to  urinate ;  urine  turbid.
Flushes  of  heat  from  abdomen  to  head.
Great  heat,  particularly  in  face,  with  increased  secretion

of  urine.
I  Worm  fevers  in  children.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Paroxysms :  come  suddenly.
Last  five  minutes :  paroxysms.
Every  day :  fits.
Once  a  week:  convulsions.
Every  nine  or  ten  days :  paroxysms.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  aching  pain  in  hypochon-


187  INDIGO.

drium ;  pricking  in  malar  bone  ;  painful  spot  in  region
of  lower  ribs ;  excessive  itching  on  elbow  joint.

Left :  small  blisters  on  side  of  face,  from  forehead  to  neck;
drawing,  lancinating  pains  following  course  of  rhom-
boideus  muscle ;  tearing  pain  in  knee  joint.

From  behind  forward:  undulating  sensation  through
whole  head.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  head  was  tightly  bandaged  around  fore-
head ;  as  if  a  heavy  load  was  on  vertex ;  as  if  brain
was  distending  at  centre;  as  if  a  bunch  of  hair  was
pulled  from  vertex.

Pain :  in  submaxillary  glands  ;  in  bladder.

Pains :  characterized  by  great  intensity.

Constant  pain :  in  sinciput.

Painful  spot :  size  of  hand  in  region  of  r.  lower  ribs,  with
stitch  extending  to  shoulder  joint.

Indescribable  pain :  extending  from  middle  of  thigh  to  knee.

Severe  lacerating  pain  :  in  head.

Sharp  tearing,  stinging  or  pricking :  in  calf  above  ankle.

Tearing :  in  vertex  ;  four  fingers'  breadth  above  1.  knee-
joint,  extending  to  a  hand's  breadth  above  ankle.

Drawing,  lancinating  pains :  following  course  of  1.  rhom-
boideus  muscle.

Severe  sharp  stitch  :  in  middle  of  sternum.

Stitch :  extending  from  ribs  to  shoulder-joint;  in  region  of
lower  false  ribs  ;  between  scapulge  ;  in  small  of  back.

Boring  pain  :  in  knee  joint.

Intense  aching,  stinging  and  bruised  pain :  in  middle  of
the  posterior  of  thigh.

Stinging :  in  mammas.

Aching  pain :  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Beating,  with  painful  stinging :  in  occiput.

Beating :  in  whole  head.

Tingling  pain  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Toothache:  of  rheumatic  character.

Painful  emissions :  of  small  quantities  of  turbid  urine.

Picking:  in  calf  just  below  knee  and  in  popliteal  space.

Pricking :  in  r.  malar  bone.

Burning :  in  fundus  of  bladder ;  in  mammae.

Heat :  of  face.

Contracted  feeling :  in  pharynx.

Pressure :  in  ball  of  eye.

Heaviness :  of  head.

Fulness :  of  abdomen.

Undulating  sensation :  through  whole  head.

Creeping :  over  chin.

Numbness :  of  inner  mouth.

Excessive  itching :  especially  on  r.  elbow  joint.


INDIGO— INDIUM  METALLICUM.  188

Itching :  of  urethra,  glans  and  scrotum  ;  of  skin.
^^  Tissues. Congestive  condition  of  head  and  lungs,  with  pal-
pitation of  heart.
Rheumatic  and  gouty  affections  of  nerves  and  joints,  ac-
companied by  slight  fever  and  great  debility.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  pains  >.
Rubbing :  pains  >  ;  stinging  in  mammse,  going  off  mo-
mentarily.
*^  Skin. I  Itching  of  skin  with  constipation  (improved).

Pimples  on  face  and  body.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Little  boy ;  prolapsus  ani.
Boy,  set.  9,  suffering  three  years;  epileptic  fits.
Boy,  set.  12,  has  had  fits  ever  since  he  could  remember.
Boy,  set.  17 ;  epileptic  fits.
Woman,  set.  33,  unmarried  ;  epilepsy.
Married  woman,  set.  35,  tall,  slender  build,  phthisical  habit,
nervo-bilious  temperament;  sciatica.
^^  Relations. Compare  Sulphur  in  epilepsy,  hot  flushes,  and
worm  fever.


INDIUM  METALLICUM,

Trituration  of  the  pure  metal.  In.

"  This  metal  was  discovered  by  Reich  and  Richter  in  the  zinc-bl  ende  of  Freiberg.
Its  spectrum  is  characterized  by  two  indigo  colored  lines,  one  very  bright  and  more
refrangible  than  the  blue  lines  of  Strontium,  the  other  fainter  but  still  more  re-
frangible, apijroaching  the  blue  line  of  Potassium.  It  was  the  production  of  this
peculiar  spectrum  that  led  to  the  discovery  of  the  metal.  The  ore,  consisting
chiefly  of  blende,  galena  and  arsenical  pyrites,  was  roasted  to  expel  sulphur  and
arsenic,  then  treated  with  hydrochloric  acid,  and  the  solution  was  evaporated  to
dryness.  The  impure  zinc  chloride  thus  obtained,  exhibited,  when  examined  by
the  spectroscope,  the  first  of  the  indigo  lines  above  mentioned.  The  chloride  was
afterwards  obtained  in  a  state  of  greater  purity,  and  from  this  the  hydrate  and  the
metal  itself  were  prepared.  The  first  line  then  came  out  with  much  greater  bril-
liancy and  the  second  was  likewise  observed." — Am.  Horn.  Pharm.

The  provings,  under  the  direction  of  Bell  (See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.
107),  were  mostly  made  with  the  higher  dilutions,  as  was  also  the  one  by  C.  Mohr.

^  Mind. Mental  depression.

Mind  feels  tired ;  does  not  care  to  work.

Feels  stupid  and  careless;  cannot  fix  thoughts  on  anything.

Restless,  cannot  sit  still,  must  walk  about.

Sleepy  and  irritable  with  headache.


18^  INDIUM  METALLICUM.

Feels  almost  crazed  when  attempting  to  study,  with  head-
ache.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo:  on  rising  from  a  seat;  after  retiring,
with  nausea;  when  sitting  and  stooping  slightly;  be-
tween 3  and  4  a.m.,  <  on  turning  and  on  rising,  cannot
sit  up.
^  Inner  Head. iDull  headache  in temples  and  forehead,
with  sleepiness  and  nausea.
Headache  beginning  at  night  and  continuing  all  next  day ;
pain  mostly  on  r.  side  of  occiput;  occasional  pains  over  L
eye,  with  a  tired,  sick  feeling.
Very  distressing  headache  in  forenoon;  pains  commence

on  r.  side  of  occiput  and  extend  over  head  to  1.  eye.
Pain  at  8  a.m.,  extending  over  r.  side  of  head  from  occiput,

leaving  a  bruised  spot  on  vertex.
Pain  in  r.  occipital  region,  with  occasional  dull,  aching

pain  in  forehead.
Severe  1.  sided  headache  in  evening.
Beating,  throbbing  pain  in  head,  with  much  heat,  and  a

stupid,  cross  feeling;  >  washing  in  cold  water.
Beating,  throbbing  headache  at  3  p.m.,  lasting  till  bed-
time; head  very  hot;  face  red.
Slight  throbbing  headache,  lasting  two  hours,  with  hot
head  and  cold,  clammy  hands;  afterwards,  bruised  feel-
ing of  brain  in  vertex,  >  in  cold  air.
Headache,  in  morning,  on  rising,  >  eating;  an  hour  after-
wards headache  returns  and  lasts  till  noon.
^  Outer  Head. Severe  itching  of  scalp  on  vertex  lasting  sev-
eral days,  <  in  morning.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. People  and  things  look  ghastly  and  pale
or  saffron  colored.
Mist  before  eyes,  in  evening.
Sharp  pain  in  eyeball  from  before  backward,  on  turning  or

moving  eyes.
Irritation  in  1.  eye,  as  if  heavy  with  sleep,  coming  and
gomg,  not  affected  by  daylight,  <  from  artificial  light,
and  from  closing  eye,  with  a  desire  to  close  it; in  even-
ing r.  eye  affected  in  same  way.
Spasmodic  twitching  at  outer  angle  of  1.  eye.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Throbbing  in  ears,  in  evening.

Bright  redness  of  whole  r.  ear,  with  a  row  of  very  sore
pimples  on  helix.
''Smell  and  Nose, i  Violent  attacks  of  sneezing.

Epistaxis;  nose  bleeds  whenever  blown  or  touched.
Nasal  discharge:  green;  bloody;  then  watery;  thin,  yel-
lowish.
®  Upper  Face. Very  painful suppurating  pimples  on  fore-
head; feel  as  though  pierced  with  a  needle;  skin  very
red  far  around  each  pustule.


INDIUM  METALLICUM.  190

Sore  pustules  all  over  face;  burning  and  stinging.

Face:  red  during  headache; red and hot;'  complexion

sallow.
Fiery  red  places  about  an  inch  long  over  1.  eye.
^  Lower  Face. Patches  of  small  vesicles  on  mucous  mem-
brane of  lower  lip;  vesicles  contain  a  colorless,  limpid
fluid.
Corners  of  mouth  cracked  and  very  sore.
^^  Throat. Uvula  greatly  enlarged,  back  part  of  pharynx  cov-
ered with  thick  yellow  mucus,  very  tough  and  hard  to
remove.
I  I  Destructive  ulceration  of  uvula,  soft  palate  and  tonsils,

with  thick  yellow  secretion  in  ulcers.
Left  tonsil  swollen;  pain  and  difficulty  in  swallowing.
Throat  sore  on  r.  side.  ,

Tickling  in  throat  inducing  continual  hawking.
Dryness,  throbbing,  stinging  soreness;  swallowing  painful.
Throat:  <  in  evening;  >  eating  and  drinking  cold  water,
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating  lobster:  taste  of  iodide

of  potash.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Qualmish-
ness.
■Nausea:  with  headache; during  breakfast;  with  faint-
ness  at  11  a.m.  and  on  rising;  after  retiring,  with  dizzi-
ness and  pain  in  liver.
Sick  feeling  at  stomach  for  two  days;  felt  as  if  vomiting
would  relieve.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Fulness and pressure at

stomach  with  soreness.
^^  Hypochondria. Stitches  in  region  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. Colic:  griping;  from  umbilicus  downward;  as

if  diarrhoea  would  set  i-n.
^'^  Stool  and  Rectum, Stool:  pasty,  brownish -yellow,  fetid,
with  particles  of  undigested  food,  preceded  by  colic;  in-
voluntary,  slight, when urinating; small and  hard,
afterwards  pappy;  hard,  with  blood.
Diarrhoea: <  bj^  drinking  beer;  with  headache  on  r.  side.
Burning  tenesmus  and  pain  in  anus,  after  stool.
Violent  pain  in  head  when  straining  at  stool.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Painful  urination.

When  urinating:  loss  of  power  over  sphincter  ani.
llHorribly  offensive  smell  of  urine  after  standing  a  short
time.
^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  and  power  diminished,
emission  too  soon,  thrill  deficient.
I  I  Increase  of  sexual  desire.

Emissions:  twice  the  same  night;  four  nights  in  succes-
sion ;  at  night  without  knowledge.


191  INDIUM  METALLICUM.

Itching  of  glans  penis.

Severe  pain  in  r.  testicle.

I  Testicles  tumefied  and  very  tender  to  touch ;  drawing  pains
along  spermatic  cords  upwards;  1.  testicle  much  <.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Menses  two  weeks  too  soon ;  bear-
ing down  pains,  with  cross  temper  and  weeping  mood ;
face  very  red.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Hoarse-
ness: on  rising;  with  sore  throat.

Habitual  bronchial  expectoration  freer,  but  a  little  blood
appeared  in  mucus.
^^  Respiration, l  Frequent  desire  to  take  a  deep  breath,  when

lying  down ;  <  lying  on  1.  side,  >  lying  on  back.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Severe  pain  behind  lower  r.  por-
tion of  sternum.

Sharp  pains  through  upper  part  of  chest.

Burning  pain  on  1.  side  of  chest  near  sternum,  which  feels
as  if  drawn  towards  back.

I  I  Dull  pain  in  1.  pectoral  region.
^^  Outer  Chest. Dull  pain  in  1.  axilla.
^^  Neck  and  Back, i  Stiffness  of  neck  and  shoulders.

Drawing  through  side  of  head  and  neck  to  clavicle,  first
r.  side,  next  day  left.

Pressing  pain  in  upper  scapular  region,  with  stiffness  on
sitting  still,  pain  <  on  beginning  to  move.

Severe  pain  under  scapula  of  1.  side.

Dull  pain  under  r.  shoulder  blade.

Rheumatic  drawing  across  shoulders  up  to  head;  <  in
riding,  turning  in  bed,  flexure  or  rotation  of  head,  and
morning  and  evening.

Dull,  aching  pain  in  back  and  lumbar  regions.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Constant  pain  in  1.  shoulder,  as  if  bruised.

Intermitting  pains  in  1.  shoulder.

Pain  in  1.  shoulder,  with  soreness  extending  down  arm.

Severe  pain  in  1.  shoulder;  pain  runs  down  to  elbow,  at
times  so  severe  as  to  disable  arm.

Shooting  pains  in  fingers.

Muscles  of  1.  arm  and  shoulder  feel  flabby  and  soft;  no
power  in  arm.

Severe  lancinating  pains  in  biceps  of  1.  arm,  extending  into
shoulder;  pains  <  extending  arm ;  paralytic  weakness.

Left  elbow  feels  sore.

Slight  pains  in  1.  arm.

Palms  of  hands  sweat  continually.

Itching  in  palms.
^^  Lower  Limbs, i  '  Tired  feeling,  weariness  in  legs.

Drawing,  strained  feeling  of  muscles  of  inside  of  r.  thigh,
while  walking.


INDIUM  METALLICUM.  192

Sharp,  shooting  pains  in  r.  leg.

A  narrow  streak  of  severe  pressing  pain  in  back  of  1.  thigh,
sudden,  wiien  sitting.

Severe  pain  and  lameness  in  lower  r.  leg.

Legs  from  knees  downward  and  feet  feel  heavy  as  if  loaded.

Peculiar  hot  tingling  in  legs.

Dull,  boring  pain  in  1.  great  toe  joint,  almost  unbearable,
must  move  foot  to  >  it,  for  three  evenings,  from  8  to  9.

Burning  and  intense  itching  of  all  the  toes  the  whole  day.

Itching  of  toes  in  evening.

Feet  sweat  easily  and  feel  cold.

Profuse  foot  sweat.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Walking:  causes  weak  feeling,
particularly  in  legs.

Restless,  cannot  sit  still,  must  walk  about.

Lying  on  back:  desire  to  take  long  breath  >;  nightmare.

Lying  on  1.  side:  desire  to  take  a  long  breath  <.

Sitting:  vertigo;  stiffness  in  scapular  region;  a  narrow
streak  of  severe  pain  in  back  of  1.  thigh.

Rising  from  a  seat:  vertigo.

Stooping  slightly:  vertigo.

Cannot  sit  up:  on  account  of  vertigo.

On  rising:  vertigo;  headache;  hoarseness.

Beginning  to  move:  pressing  pain  in  upper  scapular
region  <.

Moving:  high  fever  with  chilliness.

Must  move  foot  to  >  pain  in  great  toe  joint.

Turning:  vertigo;  rheumatic  drawing  across  shoulders  <.

Moving  eyes:  <  pain.

Closing  eye:  irritation  <.

Rotation  of  head :  rheumatic  drawing  across  shoulders  <.

Walking:  strained  feeling  in  muscles  of  r.  thigh.
^*^  Nerves. Felt  as  though  he  was  his  natural  size,  during  fever.

Tired  feeling,  weariness  and  restlessness  in  legs;  tremor
of  thighs.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness:  with  headache  and  nausea;  with  irrita-
bility; in  morning;  from  4  to  6  p.m.;  in  evening,  in  a
warm  room.

Dreams:  lascivious;  amorous;  of  having  unsuccessful
intercourse  with  men;  vivid,  of  what  had  occupied  his
mind  during  day;  of  annoying  accidents;  of  being  in
foreign  countries;  chased  by  mad  bulls;  lost  in
mountains.

Nightmare:  from  lying  on  back;  very  stupid  on  awaking.
^^  Time. 3.30  a.m.:  wakes  with  great  restlessness,  especially
.  in  legs.

3  to  4  A.M. :  awake  with  vertigo.

Morning:  headache  on  rising;  itching  of  scalp  <;  rheu-
matic drawing  across  shoulders;  sleepiness.


193  INDIUM  METALLICUM.

8  A.M.:  pain  in  r.  side  of  head.

11  A.M.:  faintness.

Forenoon:  very  distressing  headache.

The  whole  day:  burning  and  itching  of  toes.

3  P.M.:  pain  in  head  lasting  till  bedtime.

From  4  to  6  p.m.:  sleepiness.

Evening:  1.  sided  headache;  mist  before  eyes;  irritation
in  r.  eye;  throbbing  in  ears;  throat  < ;  rheumatic  draw-
ing across  shoulders;  itching  of  toes;  sleepiness.

Night:  headache  begins  lasts  all  next  day;  emission  with-
out knowledge.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  a  warm  room :  sleepiness.

Out  doors:  fever  >.

Cold  air:  headache  >.

Working  in  cold  water:  pain  in  head  >.  v

Cold  water:  throat  >.
^  Fever. Sensitive  to  cold.

High  fever  with  chilliness  on  moving,  great  weakness,
sore  throat;  thirst,  stretching,  violent  headache  and
backache.

Fever:  w4th  nausea,  after  eating;  >  out  doors.

Easy  perspirations.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. One  hour after eating:  headache
returns  and  lasts  till  noon.

For  two  hours:  throbbing  headache.

For  two  days:  sick  feeling  in  stomach.

For  several  days:  itching  of  scalp.

Twice  the  same  night:  emissions.

For  three  evenings  from  8  to  9:  severe  pain  in  toe  joint.

Four  nights  in  succession  :  emissions.

Two  weeks  too  soon :  menses.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  mostly  on  side  of
occiput;  from  occiput  to  side  of  head  ;  in  occipital  region;
eye  as  if  heavy  with  sleep  ;  bright  redness  of  whole  ear;
side  of  throat  sore ;  headache ;  severe  pain  in  testicle ;
severe  pain  behind  lower  portion  of  sternum ;  dull  pain
under  shoulder  blade ;  strained  feeling  of  muscles  of  side
of  thigh ;  sharp  shooting  pains  in  leg ;  severe  pain  and
lameness  in  leg.

Left :  occasional  pains  over  eye ;  headache  in  side ;  irri-
tation in  eye,  as  if  heavy  with  sleep;  spasmodic  twitch-
ing of  outer  angle  of  eye;  fiery  red  place  about  an
inch  long  over  eye ;  tonsil  swollen  ;  testicle  tender  to
touch  ;  lying  on  side  desires  to  take  long  breath  < ;
burning  pain  along  side  of  chest ;  dull  pain  in  pectoral
region;  dull  pain  in  axilla;  severe  pain  under  scapula;
constant  pain  in  shoulder ;  intermitting  pains  in  shoul-
der ;  severe  pain  from  shoulder  to  elbow ;  severe  lanci-

VOL.  VI. — 13.


INDIUM  METALLICUM.  194

nating  pain  in  biceps  of  arm  ;  elbow  sore ;  slight  pains
in  arm ;  a  narrow  streak  of  severe  pressing  pain  in
back  of  thigh  ;  dull,  boring  pain  in  great  toe  joint.

Right  then  left :  drawing  through  side  of  head  and  neck
to  clavicle.

From  before  backwards :  sharp  pain  in  eyeball.
*^  Sensations. Frequent  pressing  pain  here  and  there,  all  over.

Soreness  of  whole  1.  side  of  body.

Soreness  all  over  body ;  severe  pain  in  1.  side,  making  it
difficult  to  move ;  >  after  continued  motion.

Body  feels  sore  all  over ;  sickish  feeling  and  sensation  as
though  bones  would  crush  through  flesh.

Irritation  in  1.  eye  as  if  heavy  with  sleep;  pimples  on  fore-
head feel  as  though  pierced  with  a  needle ;  felt  as  if
vomiting  would  relieve ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in ;
sternum  feels  as  if  drawn  towards  back ;  1.  shoulder  as
if  bruised  ;  legs  feel  as  if  loaded.

Pain  :  in  liver;  in  anus;  in  1.  shoulder.

Violent  pain  :  in  head.

Severe  pain  :  in  r.  testicle ;  behind  lower  r.  portion  of  ster-
num ;  under  1.  scapula;  in  1.  shoulder  down  to  elbow;
in  lower  r.  leg.

Severe  lancinating  pains:  in  biceps  of  1.  arm,  extending
into  shoulder.

Sharp  pains:  through  upper  part  of  chest;  in  eyeballs.

Shooting  pains :  in  fingers ;  in  r,  leg.

Stitches :  in  region  of  liver.

Beating,  throbbing  pain :  in  head.

Griping :  from  umbilicus  downwards.

Pressing  pain  :  in  back  of  1.  thigh.

Burning  pain  :  on  1.  side  of  chest  near  sternum.

Burning,  stinging :  in  pustules  all  over  face.

Burning  tenesmus.

Drawing  pain  :  along  spermatic  cords  upwards ;  through
side  of  head  and  neck  to  clavicle.

Drawing  strained  feeling :  of  muscles  of  side  of  r.  thigh.

Dull,  almost  unbearable  boring  pain:  in  1.  great  toe  joint.

Bearing  down  pains:  during  menses.

Pressing  pain  :  in  upper  scapular  region.

Rheumatic  drawing:  across  shoulders.

Dull  aching:  in  forehead ;  in  back  and  lumbar  region.

Dull  pain :  in  1.  pectoral  region  ;  in  1.  axilla  ;  under  r.
shoulder  blade.

Dull  headache :  in  temples  and  forehead.

Bruised  feeling:  in  vertex  after  pain  in  head.

Constant  pain  :  in  1.  shoulder.

Intermitting  pains :  in  1.  shoulder.

Slight  throbbing :  headache.


INDIUM  METALLICUM.

Slight  pains  :  in  1.  arm.

^ZZTon  Zr  '' "^^*''-  ^'  ^^^^^^'-  ^'  ^^--h ;  down
Burnmg  and  intense  itching:  of  toes,
-tlot  tmghng :  in  legs.
Throbbing:  in  ears.
Tickling:  in  throat.

Spasmodic  twitching:  in  outer  angle  of  1  eve
Fulness:  at  stomach.  6 ^  ^.  «ye.

Pressure:  at  stomach.
Tired  feeling :  in  legs.
Sick  feeling:  at  stomach.
Faintness :  on  rising.

Stiffness:  of  neck  and  shoulders:  in  scanular  remnn
Lameness:  in  lower  r  leg  scapular  region.

'^  Tout'''%^IZ^}^'^^^^^^  i^  P^l«^«;  of  toes.

btd^SLSr '"J"^^^^- Touch:  makes  nose

^«  Skfn'^'''£h!n'''T^''T^'^^^^^  ^^^^^^  shoulders  <.
OKiu. itchmgofscalp,  toes,  etc.

Very  painful  sore  pimples  on  various  narts  of  bnrl..
Relations Compare:  ^.«  (headache  r^enesV^^^

gus  (offensive  urine) ;  Sanguin.  (heada^CrheumatTsmV
^™  (headache, ebullitions lamene  s  ofThS


48


INULA.  196


INULA.

Elecampane;  Scabwort  Corymbiferx.

An  ancient  medicine  known  to  Hippocrates,  Dioscorides,  Eben  Sina,  etc.

The  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  Central  Asia  and  Siberia,  but  grows  wild
along  roadsides  in  the  Northern  part  of  the  United  States.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root  dug  in  Autumn  of  its  second  year.

Proving  with  the  juice  of  the  root  on  a  female  prover,  by  Fischer.  See  Allen's
Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  112.

Clinical  Authokities. — Bronchitis,  Charg^,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  228;
Laryngitis,  Lingen,  MSS.

^  Mind. Excessive anxiety and  trembling  of  whole  body,

chattering  of  teeth  from  cold,  during  menstruation.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo,  on  stooping.

Confusion  of  head  with  nausea,  in  evening.
Headache,  in  r.  side,  afterward  in  left.
Sticking  headache  in  r.  side.
Jerking,  tearing  pain  in  occiput.
^  Inner  Head. Rush  of  blood  to  head  with  sleeplessness.
Tearing,  throbbing  pain  in  forehead  and  vertex,  after  eating.
Burning  headache  in  1.  temple,  in  a  spot  as  large  as  a
silver  dollar,  in  evening.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Twitching  in  upper  lids.
Burning  in  1.  eyeball.

Swimming  before  eyes  and  pressure  in  templesand  forehead.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Dull  stitches  in  1.  ear,  with  transient

sticking  above  r.  eyebrow,  in  evening.
'^  Smell  and  Nose. Stitches  in  r.  side  of  middle  of  nose.

Sticking,  crawling  in  root  of  nose,  extending  to  eyebrows.
®  Upper  Face. Left  side  of  face  red  and  hot,  a  white  spot  near
nose.
Flushes  of  heat ;  1.  cheek  glowing.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Pain  in  decayed  teeth,  <  at  night.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  mouth  with  scraping  and  tick-
ling in  throat,  swallowing  difficult.
13  Throat. Pain in  throat  on  swallowing ; tickling  causing

cough.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Nausea

in  morning  coming  from  stomach.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Twisting  as  of  a  ball  in  epi-
gastric region,  above  umbilicus.


197  INULA.

Sticking  pain  in  epigastric  region.
^^  Hypochondria. Violent  motion  beneath  r.  hypochondrium,
as  though  something  hving  were  moving  about,  during
menstruation.
'^  Abdomen. Sticking:  as  with  two  pins  to  r.  of  umbilicus;
as  from  a  knife  between  umbilicus  and  r.  groin.
Stitches  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  towards  1.  groin.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Pressing  dragging  towards  rectum  and
genitals,  as  in  labor;  as  if  a  substance  would  come  out,
occurring  repeatedly.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urging  to  urinate  ten  times  in  one  hour;
urine  passes  by  drops.
Urine  smells  of  violets.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Movings  about  in  abdomen,  as
at  appearance  of  menstruation,  followed  by  yellowish
leucorrhoea.
Pain  in  uterus,  with  pain  in  small  of  back,  very  violent,
with  pressure  as  in  labor;  urging  to  stool,  which  she
dreads;  is  obliged  to  remain  lying.
Dragging  in  genitals,  with  more  violent  backache  than

she  had  ever  had  before.
Stitches  in  region  of  uterus  and  genitals.
Menses  too  early  and  painful.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Violent
tickling  in  larynx,  producing  dry  cough,  <  lying  down,
<  at  night;  larynx  painful.
■  Cough  with  abundant  thick  expectoration;  accompanied
by  weakness  of  digestive  tract,  general  languor  and  de-
bility and much  leucorrhoea; skin  has  been  the  seat
of  psoric  manifestations; engorged  glands. ^Chronic
bronchitis.
^^  Respiration. Difficult  breathing  with  dry,  tickling  cough.
^^  Cough. Dry,  tickling  cough.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  behind  sternum  and
beneath  1.  seventh  and  eighth  ribs.
Throbbing,  jerking  pain  as  from  suppuration,  in  middle  of
chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iPain  through  back  and  chest,  on  inspi-
ration.
Transient  pain  in  r.  scapula.
Violent  backache  during  menstruation.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Stitches  and  tearing  pain  in  r.  shoulder  and
wrist.
Tearing,  cramp-like  pain  in  tip  of  1.  shoulder;  in  scaleni

muscles  on  1.  side  of  neck,  as  if  pulled  by  pincers.
Tearing,  jerking  in  r.  arm.
Upper  arms  as  far  as  elbow  fall  asleep.
Tearing  in  palm  of  1.  hand,  unable  to  double  fingers.


INULA.  198

Fine  stitches  in  index  finger.

Tearing  in  r.  little  finger,  it  seems  dead.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Tensive  drawing  in  hips  extending  to  nates.

Sticking  in  r.  hip  extending  to  groin;  in  middle  toes  of
r.  foot;  in  r.  heel.

Stitches:  in  thighs;  in  left  ankle,  when  walking;  as  if
sprained;  in  r,  heel.

Spasmodic  sticking  beneath  bend  of  r.  knee,  hot  face  and
chilliness.

Cramp  in  calves  at  night  during  sleep.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down :  tickling  in  larynx.

Obliged  to  remain  lying:  on  account  of  pain  in  uterus.

Stooping:  vertigo.
^^  Sleep. Sleep  restless,  starting  and  crying  out.

Dreams:  lascivious;  disgusting.
^^  Time. Morning :  nausea.

Evening:  confusion  in  head  with  nausea;  burning  in  1.
temple;  sticking  above  r.  eyebrow.

Night:  toothache  <  ;  tickling  in  larynx  <;  cramp  in  calves.
*"  Fever.  Coldness,  shaking  in  bed,  cold,  blue  hands  and  nails.
^^  Attacks. Periodicity. Ten  times  in  one  hour:  urging  to

urinate.
*"  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  sticking  headache;  tran-
sient sticking  above  eyebrow;  stitches  in  side  of  middle
of  nose;  sticking  side  of  umbilicus;  cutting  between
umbilicus  and  groin;  transient  pain  in  scapula;  stitches
and  tearing  pain  in  shoulder;  tearing,  jerking  in  arm;
tearing  in  little  finger;  sticking  in  hip,  in  toes,  in  heel;
spasmodic  sticking  beneath  bend  of  knee.

Left:  burning  in  temple  and  eyeball;  dull  stitches  in  ear;
side  of  face  red  and  hot;  cheek  glowing;  stitches  be-
tween seventh  and  eighth  rib;  tearing,  cramp-like  pain
in  tip  of  shoulder,  in  muscles  of  side  of  neck;  tearing  in
palm  of  hand.

Right  then  left:  headache.
*^  Sensations.  As  though  some  one  was  poking  him  with
finger,  in  various  parts  of  body,  especially  in  diaphragm,
so  painful  he  awoke  and  clenched  his  teeth ;  as  of  a  ball
twisting  in  epigastric  region ;  as  though  something  liv-
ing was  moving  about  beneath  hypochondrium;  stick-
ing as  with  two  pins  to  r.  of  umbilicus;  as  from  a  knife
between  umbilicus  and  r.  groin ;  as  if  a  substance  would
come  out  of  rectum  and  genitals;  pain  as  from  suppu-
ration in  middle  of  chest ;  neck  as  if  pulled  with  pincers;
itching  as  from  fleas.

Pain:  in  decayed  teeth;  in  throat;  in  uterus;  in  small  of
back;  through  back  and  chest.

Violent  pain :  in  back.


199  INULA.

Tearing  pain:  in  r.  shoulder  and  wrist ;  in  palm  of  1.  hand;

in  r.  little  finger.
Tearing,  throbbing  pain :  in  forehead  and  vertex.
Tearing,  cramp-like  pain:  in  tip  of  1.  shoulder;  in  scaleni

muscles  on  1.  side  of  neck.
Throbbing,  jerking  pain :  in  middle  of  chest.
Sticking  pain :  on  r.  side  of  head  ;  in  epigastric  region ;  to

r.  of  umbilicus  ;  in  r.  hip  to  groin ;  in  middle  toes  of  r.

foot.
Jerking,  tearing  pain :  in  occiput ;  in  r.  arm.
Sticking,  crawling:  in  nose,  extending  to  eyebrows;  in  r.

heel.
Spasmodic  sticking:  beneath  bend  of  r.  knee.
Stitches :  in  r.  side  of  middle  of  nose ;  in  1.  side  of  abdomen ;

in  region  of  uterus  and  genitals;  behind  sternum  and

beneath  1.  seventh  and  eighth ribs,  in  r.  shoulder  and

wrist,  in  thighs;  in  1.  ankle;  in  r.  heel.
Fine  stitches:  in  index  finger.
Burning  pain:  in  1.  temple;  in  1.  eyeball.
Transient  stitching:  above  r.  eyebrow.
Transient  pain:  in  r.  scapula.
Dull  stitches:  in  1.  ear.
Burning:  on  skin.
Headache:  in  r.  side,  then  in  left.
Cramp:  in  calves.

Twisting:  as  of  a  ball  in  epigastric  region.
Pressing  and  dragging:  towards  rectum  and  genitals.
Tensive  drawing:  in  hips.
Pressure:  in  temples  and  forehead.
Violent  tickling:  in  larynx.
Scraping  and  tickling:  in  throat.
Dryness:  of  mouth,
Confusion :  of  head.
Twitching:  in  upper  lids.  »

Trembling:  of  whole  body.
Itching:  on  legs.
*®  Skin. Itching:  as  from  fleas;  violent  on  legs  during  menses,

with  burning  after  scratching,  in  bed.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Crocus  and  Thuja  (movements  as  of

something  alive  in  abdomen); Tereb.  (urinary  syrap-

tons);  Ignat.  (cough  <  lying  down  and  in  evening);

Sulphur  (psora).


lODOFORMUM.  200


lODOFORMUM.

Iodoform.  CHI^

Provings  by  Underwood  and  Haines. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  116.

Clinical  Authorities. — Sphacelous  chanci-e,  Windelband,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,
p.  367.

^  Mind. Feels  happy  and  elated.

^  Sensorium. Confusion  of  head,  with  slight  nausea.

Head  feels  as  if  he  had  been  intoxicated  the  day  previous,
^  Inner  Head. Dull  pain  in forehead,  with  shooting  in  r.
ear; <  coming  down  stairs.
Sharp,  neuralgic  pains  in  forehead,  <  stooping.
Dull,  pressing  pain  in  both  temples,  following  the  pain  in
r.  maxillary  bone;  temples  felt  as  if  something  heavy
was  pressing  on  them.
Sharp,  neuralgic  pain  in  temples,  <  r.  side,  extending  to
back  of  head,  behind  ears.
. Stitches  in  temples.

Stitch  pain  in  r.  side  of  head.

Heavy  feeling  in  head,  and  a  dull  aching  in  top  of  head.
Stitching  pains  in  head.

Head  felt  heavy,  as  if  he  could  not  lift  it  from  pillow.
Headache  on  awakening.
^  Outer  Head. Violent  itching  of  occiput.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  sensitive  to  light.
Objects  appear  tesselated,  red.
Pain  in  eyes;  eyes  bloodshot.
Smarting,  burning,  stinging  in  eyes.
Right  eye  felt  sore  and  as  if  bruised.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Hearing  dull ;  must  be  spoken  to  quite
loudly.
Ears  feel  full,  dry  and  feverish.
Shooting  in  r.  ear.
Stitches  in  r.  ear.
Neuralgic  pain  in  1.  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sensation  as  of  smelling  fumes  of  Iodine.
Peculiar  smell,  like  the  odor  arising  from  decaying  leaves

in  a  swamp.
Membrane  of  nose  feels  full  and  dry;  constant  snuffing,
yet  no  discharge.
^  Upper  Face. Dull  pain  in  malar  bones.


201  lODOFORMUM.

Drawing  and  pressing  in  ma;lar  bone.
^  Lower  Face. Feeling  of  stiffness  in  zygomatic  muscles.
Slight  pain  in  zygomatic  muscles, < from  motion  and

bending  forward.
Dryness  and  stinging  of  lips.

Dull  aching,  increasing  to  a  heavy  pain,  like  something
pressing  heavily  in  r.  lower  maxillary  bone.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  feel  sore  and  as  if  too  long.

Toothache; pain leaving teeth and going quickly to

temples.
Sharp  pains  in  upper  teeth.
I  I  Toothache  in  decayed  teeth.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Metallic  taste  in  mouth.
^^  Throat. Dryness  of  throat  and  lips.

Dryness  of  throat,  with  rawness  on  swallowing ;  with  bit-
ter taste.
Stitch  pain  in  r.  side  of  throat.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Nausea.
'^  Abdomen. Rumbling  in  bowels.
Flatulent  colic.
I  I  Cutting  pain  in  bowels.

Feeling  of  warmth  in  bowels  and  rectum,  with  slight  nau-
sea and  desire  for  stool.
Sharp  cutting  in  r.  inguinal  region,  with  desire  for  stool.
Sore  pain  in  r.  inguinal  region.
^^  Stool and Rectum. Desire  for  stool  with  cutting  in  r.  in-
guinal region.
Desire  as  for  a  liquid  stool.

Bowels  not  moved  as  usual;  anus  felt  as  if  drawn  up  into
rectum.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Urine  very  yellow  and  smelling  like  saf-
fron tea.
^®  Respiration. Felt  as  if  something  heavy  was  resting  on
chest,  preventing  free  expansion ;  after  half  an  hour  less
intense,  and  appeared  to  diffuse  itself  to  extremities.
Felt  as  though  smothering;  room  felt  too  close,  although
freely  ventilated.
^^  Cough. Cough  from  dryness  of  throat.

Cough  and  wheezing  from  mucus  in  throat,  going  to  bed.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Chest  feels  sore  when  taking  a
long  breath.
Dull  sore  pain  in  apex  of  r.  lung;  on  breathing  lung  felt

as  though  two  ulcerated  surfaces  were  in  contact.
Both  lungs  felt  as  if  a  heavy  cold  had  settled  there.
Severe pain  concentrated  in  1.  breast,  a  little  to  right  of
nipple;  at  first  felt  as  if  a  deep  ulcer  had  formed  there,
then  became  like  a  hand  grasping  base  of  heart;  aching
in  1.  breast  at  times,  <  night.


lODOFORMUM.  202

Sharp  pain  in  r.  chest.

Stitch  in  r.  chest,  through  to  angle  of  shoulder  blade.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Occasional  stitches  through

heart.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Back  of  neck  sore  as  if  bruised.
Sharp  pain  in  angle  of  shoulder  blade.
Pain  in  back  along  spine.
Spine  feels  sore,  does  not  wish  it  touched.
Pain  along  r.  side  of  dorsal  vertebrae.
Continued  pains  in  lumbar  region,  with  weakness  when

straining.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Stitching  pain  in  1.  arm  and  shoulder.

Severe  aching  in  1.  humerus;  muscles  around  bone  feel  as

if  severely  bruised  ;  <  from  touch.
Pain  in  course  of  median  nerve  of  1.  arm.
Sharp  pains  in  nerves  of  1.  arm  and  back.
Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  arm,  <  when  using  it.
Pain  in  1.  elbow.
Sharp  pain  in  nerves  of  1.  hand.
^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatism  in  flexor  muscles  of  legs.
Pain  along  course  of  1.  crural  nerve.
Weakness  of  knees  when  going  up  stairs.
Weakness  and  pain  in  knees,  <  standing.
Pain  in  inside  of  knees.
Neuralgic  pain  in  1.  knee.
Rheumatic  pain  in  both  gastrocnemii.
Cutting  pain  in  1.  ankle,  when  walking  in  open  air.
Pain  in  1.  foot,  <  walking.
Stitch  pain  in  r.  instep.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Left  arm  and  leg  pain  as  if  bruised ;

as  pain  increases  muscles  feel  as  if  ulcerated.
Severe  pain  in  1.  arm  and  leg,  <  at  lower  half  of  tibia

and  fibula,  extending  into  foot.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Pain  renewed  in  bed :  r.  side

of  head,  r.  shoulder,  r.  arm,  hand  and  fingers,  thigh,

leg,  foot  and  toes.
Stooping :  neuralgic  pain  in  forehead  <.
Bending  forwards:  pain  in  zygomatic  muscles.
Standing:  weakness  and  pain  in  knees  <.
Motion :  pain  in  zygomatic  muscles  < ;  perspires  easily.
When  using  r.  arm:  rheumatic  pain  <.
Coming  down  stairs:  dull  pain  in  forehead  and  shooting

in  ear  <.
Going  up  stairs:  weakness  of  knees.
Going  to  bed:  cough  and  wheezing  from  mucus.
Walking:  cutting  pain  in  1.  ankle;  pain  in  1.  foot.
^^  Nerves. Jerks  and  shocks  in  nerves  when  trying  to  sleep.
Susceptible  to  the  heat  of  the  weather.


203  lODOFORMUM.

Feeling  of  faintness.

Pain  seems  to  sharply  define  course  of  nerves.

Neuralgic  pains  in  various  parts  of  body.

Neuralgic  pains  flying  all  over  him  at  times.
^^  Sleep. Very  drowsy.

Slept  soundly  until  1.30  a.m.,  then  awakened  suddenly;
restless  and  unable  to  sleep  any  more  till  4.30 ;  then
slept  about  an  hour  and  a  half,  being  partially  conscious,
and  then  followed  a  deep,  heavy  sleep ;  on  awaking  it
seemed  as  though  he  could  not  get  aroused.

Wakefulness.

Restless  sleep,  tossing,  turning,  full  of  dreams.  i

Dreams :  confused ;  of  accident.
^  Time. Night:  aching  in  1.  breast  <.  *

1.30  A.M.:  awakened  suddenly,  restless  and  unable  to  sleep
until  4.30.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Lays  covers  off  the  bed.

Open  air :  when  walking,  cutting  pains  in  1.  ankle.

Heat  of  weather:  susceptible  to.
*"  Fever. Shuddering  after  urination.

Heat,  lays  covers  off  the  bed.

Perspiration  on  head.

Perspires  easily  from  motion.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. At  times:  neuralgic  pains  flying  all

over  him.
*^  Lacality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  in  maxillary  bone;
pain  in  temple  < ;  stitch  pain  in  side  of  head ;  shooting
in  ear;  stitches  in  ear;  heavy  pain  in  maxilla;  stitch
pain  in  r.  side  of  throat;  sharp  cutting  in  inguinal  re-
gion; sore  pain  in  inguinal  region;  cutting  in  r.  ingui-
nal region;  dull,  sore  pain  in  apex  of  lung;  sharp  pain
in  chest;  stitch  in  chest;  pain  alongside  of  dorsal  verte-
brae; rheumatic  pain  in  arm;  stitch  pain  in  instep.

Left:  neuralgic  pain  in  ear;  severe  pain  in  breast;  aching
in  breast;  stitching  pain  in  arm  and  shoulder;  severe
aching  in  humerus;  pain  in  course  of  median  nerve  of
arm ;  sharp  pain  in  nerves  of  arm ;  pain  in  elbow ;  sharp
pain  in  nerves  of  hand;  pain  along  course  of  crural
nerve;  neuralgic  pain  in  knee;  cutting  pain  in  ankle;
pain  in  foot;  arm  and  leg  pain  as  if  bruised;  severe
pain  in  arm  and  leg.
*^  Sensations. Feels  strangely.

Thinks  he  has  taken  a  bad  cold.

Fine,  sharp  pains  all  over.

Head  feels  as  if  he  had  been  intoxicated  the  day  previous;
temples  feel'  as  if  something  heavy  was  pressing  on
them;  head  as  if  he  could  not  lift  it  from  pillow;  r.  eye
felt  sore  as  if  bruised;  sensation  as  of  smelling  fumes  of


lODOFORMUM.  204

Iodine;  as  if  something  was  pressing  heavily  on  r.  lower
maxillary  bone;  teeth  as  if  too  long;  anus  felt  as  if
drawn  up  into  rectum ;  as  if  something  heavy  was  rest-
ing on  chest;  felt  as  though  smothering;  on  breathing
lung  felt  as  though  two  ulcerated  surfaces  were  in  con-
tact; both  lungs  felt  as  if  a  heavy  cold  had  been  taken;
breast  felt  as  if  a  deep  ulcer  had  formed  there;  as  if  a
hand  was  grasping  base  of  heart;  base  of  neck  sore  as
if  bruised;  muscles  around  bone  feel  as  if  severely
bruised;  1.  arm  and  leg  as  if  bruised;  muscles  of  1.  arm
and  leg  feel  as  if  ulcerated.

Pain:  in  r.  maxillary  bone;  in  eyes;  in  teeth  extending
to  temples;  in  deca3^ed  teeth;  in  back  along  spine;  along
r.  side  of  dorsal  vertebrae;  in  lumbar  region;  in  1.  elbow;
in  course  of  median  nerve  of  1.  arm ;  along  course  of  1.
crural  nerve;  in  knees;  in  inside  of  knees;  in  1.  foot;  in
1.  arm  and  leg.

Severe  pain:  concentrated  in  1.  breast;  in  1.  arm  and  leg.

Sharp  cutting:  in  r.  inguinal  region.

Cutting  pain :  in  bowels ;  in  r.  inguinal  region ;  in  pharynx ;
in  1.  ankle.

Sharp  pain:  in  upper  teeth;  in  r.  chest;  in  angle  of  shoul-
der blade;  in  nerves  of  1.  arm  and  back;  in  nerves  of  1.
hand.

Shooting:  in  ear.

Sharp,  neuralgic  pains:  in  forehead;  in  temples,  extend-
ing to  back  of  head  behind  ears.

Stitches:  in  temples;  in  r.  ear;  in  r.  chest  through  to
angle  of  shoulder  blade ;  through  heart.

Stitching  pains:  in  head;  in  1.  arm  and  shoulder.

Stitch-like  pain:  in  r.  side  of  head;  in  r.  side  of  throat;
in  r.  instep.

Severe  aching  in  1.  humerus.

Neuralgic  pain:  in  1.  ear;  in  1.  knee.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  r.  arm;  in  flexor  muscles  of  legs;  in
both  gastrocnemii.

Aching  in  1.  breast.

Drawing  and  pressing:  in  malar  bones.

Dull,  pressing  pain :  in  both  temples.

Smarting,  burning,  stinging:  in  eyes.

Dull  pain:  in  forehead;  in  malar  bones.

Sore  pain:  in  r.  inguinal  region.

Heavy  pain:  in  r.  lower  maxillary  bone.

Slight  pain:  in  zygomatic  muscles.

Dull,  sore  pain:  in  apex  of  r.  lung.

Dull  aching:  in  top  of  head;  in  r.  loWer  maxillary  bone.

Sore  feeling:  in  teeth; inchest;  in  base  of  neck ;  in  spine.

Dryness  and  stinging;  of  lips.


205  lODOFORMUM— lODUM.

Feeling  of  stiffness :  in  zygomatic  muscles.

Weakness:  in  knees.

Rawness:  of  throat.

Dryness:  of  throat  and  lips.

Feeling  of  warmth :  in  bowels  and  rectum.

Heavy  feeling:  in  head.

Violent  itching:  of  occiput.
**  Tissues. I  Relieves  pain  of  cancerous  tumors,  (locally).

■Sphacelous  chancre  (locally).
^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  muscles  around
bone  feel  as  if  severely  bruised.

Pains  renewed:  when  riding  in  cars.
*^  Relations. Antidbted  by :  Hepar.

Compare:  lodum,  and  the  iodides;  Mercur.


lODUM.

Iodine.  The  element.

Obtained  principally  from  the  ashes  of  seaweeds.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Jorg,  Hering,  Macfarlan,  Eobinson,  etc.  See
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  119.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Mania,  Spooner,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  452 ;
Inflammation  of  brain,  Schmid,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  126;  Headache,  Alley,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p  395 ;  Acute  hydrocephalus  of  scrofulous  children,  Windelband,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  366 ;  Deafness,  Hughes,  Raue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  119 ;  Catarrh  of
Eustachian  tubes,  Lobeth,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  365 ;  Chronic  nasal  catarrh,
Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  166 ;  Eruption  on  nose,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  172;  Facial  paralysis,  Chaffee,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  271;  Ptyalism,
Trinks,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  120;  Diphtheria,  Goldman,  Hirsch,  Oehme's
Monog.,  p.  39;  Jaundice,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  23.696;  Dudgeon's
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  357;  Moore,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  2,  p.  170;  Affections  of  pan-
creas, Reil,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  331 ;  Tabes  mesenterica,  Hale,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
vol.  10,  p.  191;  Tuberculosis  mesenterica,  Alvarez,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  269;
Diarrhoea,  Preston,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  340 ;  Morning  diarrhoea,  Jacobi,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  36,  p.  366;  Urcemia,  Kafka,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  168;  Chancre,  Gollman,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  559;  Hydrocele,  Black,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  214;
Affection  of  testicles,  Schwarze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  207 ;  Syphilitic  affections,
Lobeth,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  120 ;  Oalactorrhcea,  Selfridge,  Horn.  Obs".,  vol.  4,
p.  396;  Ovaritis,  Martin,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  228;  Ovarian  cyst,  Baldwin,  Trans.
World's  Horn.  Con.,  1876,  p.  676;  Menorrhagia,  Sybel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.
591;  Leucorrhoea,  Mauro,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  363;  Spasmi  of  glottis,  Dunham,
Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  90;  Membranous  laryngitis,  Schlosser,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.
236  ;  Sybel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  781 ;  Bronchitis,  Berridge,  Ruue's  Rec,  1875,


lODUM.  206

p.  114;  Chronic  bronchitis,  Schron,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  168;  Croup,  Hartmann,
Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  132;  (inhalation),  Drake,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.
10,  p.  296 ;  Koch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  297  ;  Arnold,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  236  ;  Elb,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  10,  p.  537  ;  Elb,  Trinks,  Fiedler,  Buck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  758 ;
Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  240 ;  Memhranous  croup,  Bradford,  T.  H.  M.  Soc.
Pa.,  1874,  p.  350;  Cough,  Elb,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  16 ;  Miller,  Eiick.
Kh  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  840;  Lord,  B.  J.  H.,  voL  27,  p.  314;  Hirschel,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,
p.  242;  Berridge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  112;  Whooping  cough,  Syrbius,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  79 ;  A.  E.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  720;  Asthma  (2  cases),  Frank,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  96;  Tuberculosis,  Loebthal,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  370;
Heart  disease,  Eockwith,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  125;  Pneumonia,  Krummacher,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  161 ;  (2  cases),  De  Gersdorfi;  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  1,  p.  30 ;  Goitre
(6  cases),  Tietze,  Kidd,  Schepens,  Trans.  H.  M.  Soc.  Pa.,  1883,  p.  200-3;  Schepens
Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  88  ;  Loebthal,  Tietze,  Gauwerky,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.
379 ;  Mouremans,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.  720 ;  Chronic  hydrarthrosis  of  knee  joint,  Holt,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  184;  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  knee,  Knorre,  Grieselich,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  582;  Epilepsy,  Thompson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  268;  Scarlet
fever,  Helfrich,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  51;  Small-pox,  Schmid,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  4,  p.  112;  Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  35,  p.  154;  Gout,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
3,  p.  51 ;  Primary  syphilis,  Trager,  Windelband,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  365  ;  Syphilis,
Guillemin,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  425;  Serous  cysts  and  dropsies  (17  cases),  cured
by  injection,  Jousset,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  259.

^  Mind.  I  Feeling  as  of  having  forgotten  something  and  does

not  know  what.
Fixed,  immovable  thoughts.
I  Must  keep  in  motion  day  and  night,  brain  felt  as  if  it

was  stirred  up,  felt  as  if  going  crazy.
Restless,  inclined  to  move  about,  not  permitting  to  sit  or

sleep ;  thought  she  could  tear  everything  to  pieces.

■  Melancholy  mood,  low  spirited.

■  Despondency,  with  disposition  to  weep.
Apprehends  an  accident  from  every  trifle.
I  Fear  of  evil,  with  overcarefulness.

Fear  and  anxiety,  shuns  even  the  doctor.

I  Mind  very  sensitive  during  digestion,  felt  like  crying.

■  Irritability  and  sensitiveness.

Cross,  with  excessive  nervous  excitability.

■  Excessive  kind  of  impatience,  she  is  running  about  all  the

time  and  never  sits  down  or  sleeps  at  night.

■  Consequences  of  amorousness.

■  At  night,  especially  when  thinking  of  real  or  imaginary

wrongs,  heart  palpitates  "like  lightning,"  pulsations
being  felt  also  at  pit  of  stomach  and  in  petrous  por-
tion of  temporal  bone,  being  especially  violent  in
latter  locality;  the  violent  palpitation  and  accompany-
ing arterial  excitement  drives  him  out  of  bed ;  by  use
of  cold  baths  and  friction  obtains  temporary  relief;  at
times  most  terrible  thoughts  take  possession  of  him,  and


207  lODUM.

he  hardly  dares  go  home  for  fear  of  doing  some  dread-
ful deed;  on  one  occasion  was  seized  with  an  almost
irresistible  impulse  to  murder  a  woman  who  was  acting
as  a  guide  for  him,  he  having  lost  his  way;  these  attacks
of  mania  come  on  at  most  unexpected  times ;  troubles
all  <  by  quiet  and  meditation ;  must  be  constantly  in
action,  in  some  laborious  occupation.  ^Mania.
^  Sensorium.  l  l  Confusion  of  head,  with  great  aversion  to
earnest  work.

■  Vertigo:  only  on  1.  side,  <  from  stooping;  weakness  in

morning;  with  throbbing  headache;  very  weak  and
tremulous ;  rising  aggravates  it,  and  produces  faintness ;
with  throbbing  all  over  body;  tremor  at  heart  and
fainting,  <  after  just  rising  from  a  seat  or  bed,  or  on
sitting  or  lying  down  ai'ter  slight  exercise;  very  sickly
look  of  patient.

■  Goitre;  hypertrophy  of  1.  ventricle,  with  great  congestions

to  head  and  face;  hysteria  and  nervousness.  ^Vertigo.
^  Inner  Head.  '  i  Sharp  pressive  pain  in  upper  part  of  1.
side  of  forehead.
I  Headache:  1.  side  and  top;  as  if  a  tape  or  band  was
tightly  drawn  around  head;  so  violent  it  almost  makes
him  crazy;  with  paralytic  feeling  of  arms.

■  Pressure  on  a  small  spot  above  root  of  nose.
I  Pressive  pains  in  vertex.

■  Congestions  to  and  pulsations  in  head.

I  I  Throbbing  in  head  at  every  motion;  <  in  warm  air.

■  Brain  feels  as  if  stirred  around  with  a  spoon;  must  keep

in  motion  day  and  night.
Violent  aching  at  base  of  occiput,  in  afternoon.
■Persistent, annoying,  but  not very violent  headache;

head  feels  heavy,  as  though  a  foreign  substance  was

inside  of  brain,  <  by  fatigue;  oppressive,  dull  feeling,

inclining  head  to  seek  a  support.

■  Chronic  headache; dizziness  on  active  exertion; care-

lessly loquacious;  languid,  uneasy,  and  of  fitful  humor.

■  Chronic  congestive headache,  in  old  people  with  dark

hair  and  eyes.
Headache  <:  in  warm  air;  when  riding  a  longtime  in  a
carriage;  from  walking  fast.

■  During  course  of  acute  articular  rheumatism  inflamma-

tion in  hands  subsided  and  brain  symptoms  developed ;
became  delirious  and  very  restless,  sat  up  in  bed  and
then  threw  himself  upon  it.
I  I  Cholera  encephalitica.

■  Acute  hydrocephalus  of  scrofulous  children.
Atrophy  of  brain ;  apoplexy.

*  Outer  Head. Falling  off  of  hair.


lODUM.  208

Scald  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Small  sparks  before  eyes  while  sewing.

■  Optical  illusions  in  bright  colors; flimmering; double

vision ;  obscuration  of  sight,  like  a  veil  before  eyes.

■  Dilatation  of  pupils  with  constant  motion  of  balls.

■  White  of  eye  dirty  yellow.

■  Constant  tearing  pain  around  r.  eye,  passing  backwards

from  inner  can  thus  to  articulation  of  jaw.

■  Smarting  in  eyes;  pain  as  from  excoriation.
I  I  Inflamed  eyes.

■  Scrofulous  conjunctivitis,  with  induration  of  glands.

■  Protrusion  of  balls;  or  feeling  of  protrusion.
Sarcoma  conjunct! vse.

■  iStaring  with  wide,  open  eyes;  lids  seem  to  be  retracted.

■  Twitching  of  eyes;  lower  lids.
(Edematous  swelling  of  lids;  dark  rings.

■  Trembling  of  lids.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Sensitiveness  to  noise.

■  Hearing  first  sensitive,  then  dull.

■  Buzzing  in  ears.

■  Deafness,  due  to  morbid  condition  of  Eustachian  mucous

membrane;  catarrhal  deafness;  scrofulous  subjects.

■  Adhesions  in  middle  ear.

■  Painful  glandular  enlargement  in  front  of  tragus,  with

indolent  ulcers  of  membrana  tympani  and  a  pinched,
dried  up  look  of  face.
^  Smell  and  Nose. '  i  Loss  of  sense  of  smell.

Crowing  in  nares,  like  the  vibrations  of  a  string.

■  Loss  of  smell;  nose  dry  and  stuffed  up,  cannot  breathe

through  it ;  or  painful  and  swollen,  with  chronic  fetid
discharge.

■  Sensation  as  if  alse  were  spread  wide  open  and  nose  dry;

loss  of  smell;  sneezing  in  evening.

■  Dry  coryza,  becoming  fluent  in  the  open  air.

■  Nose  running  a  clear,  continuous  stream.

■  Fluent  coryza,  hot  water  drops  out;  general  heat.

■  Irritation  of  mucous  membrane  and  secretion  of  a  great

deal  of  glassy  mucus;  same  state  of  Eustachian  tube,
with  dulness  of  hearing  and  noises  in  ears ;  stoppage  of
nose  by  mucus,  especially  in  evening;  loss  of  smell;
itching,  stinging  in  front  part  of  septum  narium ;  watery,
fluent  coryza  in  night,  and  with  much  sneezing;  dul-
ness of  head,  with  great  disinclination  to  serious  labor;
thinking  is  difficult;  dull  pressure  in  frontal  sinuses.

■Severe  coryza,  attended  by  fever,  severe  headache  and
excessive  secretion  with  much  sneezing.

■Fever,  fluent  coryza  and  continual  tickling  in  middle  of
chest.


209  lODUM.

I  Nose  runs  a  clear  stream,  hot  fever,  no  appetite,  hot,  dry-

skin  all  day  long,  creepy  sensation,  face  fiery  red,  pain
in  occiput  and  temples,  teeth  sticky  with  yellow  phlegm.

I I  Nasal  catarrh  thin,  excoriating.

■  Ulceration  of  Schneiderian  membrane;  great  fetor.
■Small  scab  in  r.  nostril.

■  Small  yellow  scurf  at  each  nostril  and  concha.

■  Chronic  fetid  discharge  from  nose; nose  painful  and

swollen.

■  Large  discharge  of  yellow  mucus  from  nose.

■  Hard  and  red  condition  of  mucous  surfaces;  scrofulous

subjects; enlargement of  cervical and subcutaneous
glands. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■Nose  bleeding.
^  Upper  Face. Face:  pale or alternately red;  sallow, dis-
tressed; yellowish,  or greenish;  pale yellow  or soon
changing  to  brown.

Brown  color  of  face,  and  copious  and  papescent  stools;
seems  to  be  >  after  eating.

■Coldness  of  face  in  very  fleshy  children.

■  Convulsive  twitchings  of  facial  muscles.

I  I  Facial  paralysis  following  reduction  of  goitre.

■  Red,  burning  spot  on  nose;  under  eyes;  itching  protu-

berance on  nose.
^  Lower  Face. ■  Bluish  lips,  swelling  of  superficial  veins.

■  Lij^s  peel  off.

I  I  Suppurating  ulcer  on  1.  cheek.

■  Swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.

Pain  from  inner  canthus  to  articulation  of  jaw.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. iTeeth  yellow,  covered  with  much  mu-
cus in  morning,  and  more  easily  blunted  than  usual  by
vegetable  acids.

■  Toothache,  gums  swollen  and  bleeding.

■  Little  blisters  form  on  gums.

■  Gums  puffed,  red,  inflamed,  painful  to  touch,  bleed  easily.
■Softening  and  bleeding  of  gums.

I  I  Absorption  of  gums  and  alveolar  processes.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  salty ; sourish ; sweetish ;  on
tip  of  tongue.
Soapy  taste.
Tongue:  dry;  brown  and  dry;  thickly  coated;  brown  in

centre,  white  at  edges.
I  I  Tongue  hypertrophied,  painful,  nodular  or  fissured.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Mouth  filled  with  mucus  on  awaking  in
morning,  with  putrid  taste,  not  >  by  washing  mouth.

■  ■Increase  of  saliva;  mercurial  salivation.

■  Offensive  odor  from  mouth,
voii.  VI. — 14.


lODUM.  210

■Aphthous  ulcers  in  mouth  with  putrid  smell;  profuse

fetid  ptyalism.
I  Gums  red  and  swollen,  receding  from  teeth,  bleeding

slightly; small ash  colored,  painful ulcers; abuse of

mercury.

■  Croupous  inflammation  of  pharynx,  affecting  also  ton-

sils and  softened  gums;  thick,  grayish  white  deposit;
difficult  deglutition;  ptyalism;  very  off'ensive  odor  from
mouth.

I  Thick,  brown,  croup-like  exudation  in  mouth  and  fauces.

Glands  on  inside  of  cheeks  intensely  painful  as  though  he
had  sharp  vinegar  in  the  mouth.

I  I  Discharge  of  mucus  from  posterior  nares.
13  Throat, l Swelling  and  elongation  of  uvula.

I  Deglutition:  so  difficult  that  a  considerable  pause  is  re-
quired between  each  act;  impeded  from  ulceration  of
oesophagus.

I  Ulcers  in  throat,  with  swelling  of  glands  of  neck.

■  Mercurial  cachexia;  salivation  and  ulcers  in  the  throat.

■  Follicular  catarrh  with  ulceration.

■  Inflammation  of  throat,  with  burning  pain.

■  Early  stage of  diphtheria;  much  glandular  irritation;

disease  threatens  to  attack  larynx;  formation  of  speck;
or  patches  of  exudation,  with  sore  throat;  enlargement
of  tonsils  and  of  glands  of  neck;  disinclination  for  food ;
difficulty  of  breathing;  cough  and  alteration  of  voice.

■  Velum  palatinum  and  tonsils  covered  with  thick,  gray-

ish white  exudate;  much  pain  in  throat,  painful  swal-
lowing; salivation;  strong  fetor  oris. ^Diphtheritis.
I  I  Pain  in  oesophagus  increased  by  pressure.

■  Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  oesophagus.

"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. ■Remarkable  and
continued  increase  of  appetite.

■  ■Suff'ers  from  hunger,  must  eat  every  few  hours;  gets

anxious  and  worried  if  he  does  not  eat;  feels  >  after
eating.

■  Eats  too  often  and  too  much;  loses  flesh  all  the  while.

1  I  Great  longing  for  food,  about  11  a.m.;  can  scarcely  wait
for  his  meals.

■  ■Ravenous  hunger,  cannot  be  satisfied.

■  Alternate  canine  hunger  and  want  of  appetite.
I  I  Appetite  for  meat.

■  Thirst;  desire  for  spirituous  liquors.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■  Fasting  causes  pain  in  chest.

■  ■Most  symptoms  are  better  after  eating.
1  I  Food  distresses  her.

Spasmodic  pains  in  stomach  >  by  eating.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  ■  Hiccough.


211  lODUM.

I  lEmpty  eructations  from  morning  till  evening,  as  if  every

particle  of  food  was  turned  into  air.
iSour  eructations,  with  burning  therefrom.

■  Heartburn,  after  heavy  food.

■  Qualmishness,  nausea,  with  spasmodic  pain  in  stomach.

■  Vomiting: of  bile,  with violent colic; of  milk; first

water,  then  food;  of  saltish  tasting,  oily  or  greasy  sub-
stances,

■  Violent  vomiting  renewed  by  eating.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Tenderness  of  epigastrium;
pulsations  in  pit  of  stomach.
Spasmodic  pains  in  stomach,  renewed  by  eating.
I  I  Pains  in  stomach,  gnawing  or  corroding,  >  after  eating.

■  Dyspepsia  with  great  weakness  and  loss  of  energy,

■  Gastric  derangement,  with  constipation.

^^  Hypochondria, i  Region  of  liver  sore  to  pressure.

■  Jaundice  with  much  pain  in  liver  through  to  shoulder-

blade,  no  appetite,  constant  nausea;  sluggish,  clay  col-
ored stools,  porter  colored  urine,  debility,  emaciation;
skin  brownish  yellow;  tenderness  about  hepatic  region.
■Pain  in  hepatic  region,  loss  of  appetite,  emaciation,  ex-
cessive weakness,  diarrhoea;  pressure  and  stitches  in
hepatic  region,  painful  to  touch. ^Cirrhotic  liver.

■  Jaundice: dirty,  yellowish  skin; great  emaciation;  de-

pressed, irritable  mood ;  yellow,  almost  dark  brown  color
of  face;  thickly  coated  tongue;  great  thirst;  nausea;
constipation  alternating  with  white  diarrhoeic  stools;
dark,  greenish  yellow,  corroding  urine;  after  abuse  of
mercury;  in  organic  lesions  of  liver;  dyscratic  states  of
system  accompanied  by  hectic  fever.

■  Eyes,  skin  and  nails  completely  jaundiced;  nausea  and

vomiting  after  eating  almost  any  kind  of  food;  intense
canine  hunger;  every  third  day  attacks  of  gastrodynia;
frequent  eructations;  heartburn;  distension  of  stomach;
pain  when  pressing  on  epigastrium ;  pain  in  r.  hypo-
chondrium ;  constipation;  urine  scanty,  dark  and  turbid;
menses  absent  six  months. ^Chronic  jaundice.

■  Swelling  and  hypertrophy  of  liver.

■  ■Left  hypochondriac  region  hard  and  acutely  painful  to

pressure ;  enlarged  spleen  after  intermittent.

■  Pressure  in  region  of  stomach,  with  much  empty  belch-

ing, occasionally  vomiting  of  small  quantity  of  tough,
sour  mucus;  no  actual  pyrosis;  constipation;  ptyalism,
constant  expectoration;  tongue  moist,  with  mucous
streak  at  sides;  great  thirst;  appetite  appeased  by
smallest  quantity  of  food;  urine  scanty,  brown;  sallow
face;  depressed,  irritable;  constant  profuse  sweat;  from
pit  of  stomach  to  navel  and  in  a  corresponding  region


lODUM.  212

in  back,  sensitiveness  to  pressure;  pancreas  enlarged;
abdominal  pulsations. ^/Chronic  inflammation  of  pan-
creas.
^^  Abdomen. iSwelling  and  distension,  or  emaciation  and
sinking  in  of  abdomen.

■Pulsations  in  abdomen;  throbbing  of  abdominal  aorta.

I  Incarceration  of  flatus  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.

I  I  Rumbling  in  abdomen  with  gnawing  hunger.

ISwelling  of  mesenteric  glands.

■  Marked  irritability  of  mind;  exceedingly  cross,  screamed

in  anger  when  simply  looked  at,  talked  to,  or  touched;
large,  tumid,  doughy  abdomen;  loss  of  appetite;  emaci-
ation; diarrhoea,  with  copious,  slimy,  fetid  stools.
^Tabes  mesenterica.
iTabes  mesenterica,  with  rapid  emaciation,  night  sweats,
slow  fever,  dry  laryngeal  cough  and  diarrhoea.

■  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  mesenteric  glands,  with

bloating  and  distension  of  abdomen,  which  does  not
permit  one  to  lie  down ;  painful  pressure  and  tension  in
abdomen,  with  incarceration  of  gas  in  1.  side,  <  after
eating;  stools  in  beginning  hard,  knotty  and  dark;  then
alternate  constipation  and  diarrhoea  and  finally  profuse,
frothy,  bloody,  even  purulent  diarrhoea,  with  itching
and  burning  in  anus,  especially  at  night;  ptyalism,  con-
striction of  throat,  ulcers  in  mouth  and  putrid  breath ;
constant  and  tormenting  thirst  with  canine  hunger,
which  cannot  be  satisfied;  child  wants  to  eat  all  the
time;  eats  a  large  quantity  and  frequently  without  in-
digestion, yet  becomes  more  and  more  emaciated;  occa-
sionally canine  hunger  is  alternated  with  anorexia;
burning  heat  after  eating  heavy  food,  with  nausea  or
vomiting,  pressure  and  hiccough.  ^Tuberculosis  mes-
enterica.
ISwelling  of  inguinal  glands.
^'^  Stool  and  Rectum,  l  l  Brown  color  of  face,  with  copious
papescent  stools.

■  Diarrhoea  in  morning;  stools  watery,  foaming,  whitish  ;

pinching  around  navel  and  pressive  pain  in  vertex.
■Purulent  stools,  with  cutting  pains  in  intestines,  nausea,

vomiting  and  sour  taste  in  mouth.
■Stools: blackish, watery; brownish; frothy; bloody;

whitish,  mucous ; thick,  mucous ;  purulent ; copious ;

fetid ;  of  mucus  and  blood  ;  whey-like ;  fatty.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea  of  an  exhausting  character,  with  con-

stant desire  for  change  of  place.

■  Morning:  diarrhoea  of  scrofulous  children.

■  Diarrhoea  adiposa  from  pancreatic  affections.

■  Summer  complaint  with  swollen  glands  on  neck.


213  lODUM.

I  I  Dysenteric  mucous  stools  without  feces.

■  Discharges  of  thick  mucus,  or  purulent  matter;  part  of

feces  being  retained.
I  Constipation,  alternating  with  diarrhoea.
I  Stools  hard,  knotty,  dark  colored.
I  I  Constipation  with  ineffectual  urging  >  by  drinking  cold

milk.
During  stool :  cutting  pain  in  bowels ;  bearing  down  in

genitals ;  painful  pressure  on  vertex.
After  stool :  burning  in  anus ;  soreness  in  rectum ;  pressing

in  hypogastrium.

■  Itching  and  burning  of  anus  in  evening.

■  Piles  protrude  and  burn ;  <  from  heat.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  iUrasmia;  croupy  exudation  in  mouth
and  fauces;  tongue  covered  with  thick  brown,  leather-
like coating.  ^Senile  hypertrophy  and  induration  of
prostate,  stricture  of  urethra  and  ammonsemia.

■  Bright's  disease,  with  albuminous  urine;  much  emacia-

tion and  debility.

I  I  Obstinate  retention  of  urine.

■  Copious  and  frequent  or  involuntary  micturition.

I I  Continued  desire  to  urinate;  nocturnal  urination.

■  Incontinence  of  urine  in  the  aged.

■  Urine:  dark,  thick,  ammoniacal ;  dark  yellowish  green;

acrid;  milky;  with  a  variegated  cuticle  on  its  surface;
red  and  turbid.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Complete  loss  of  sexual  power;  tes-
ticles atrophied.

■  Bearing  down,  or  twisting  sensation  in  seminal  cord.
■Aching,  pressing  or  forcing  pain  in  spermatic  cords  and

testicles,  after  sexual  dalliance.

■  Testicles  hypertrophied,  with  sexual  excitement.
■Testicles  swollen  and  hard,  as  large  as  hen's  eggs,  with

pressure  and  tension  extending  into  abdomen;  on  scro-
tum several  swollen  and  inflamed  openings,  from  which
escapes  a  constant  turbid,  w^atery  discharge;  several  of
these  openings  penetrate  through  scrotum,  others  form
canals  running  in  different  directions  through  skin.

■  Painless  swelling  of  testicles,  with  offensive  sweat.
■Swelling  and  induration  of  testicles  and  prostate  gland.

■  After  stool  a  milk-like  fluid  runs  from  urethra.

■  Chancre  with  torpid,  watery  discharge.

■  Hydrocele.

■  Offensive  sweating  of  genitals.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Atrophy  of  ovaries  and  mam-
mary glands,  with  sterility.

■  Induration  and  swelling  of  uterus  and  ovaries.

■  Pain  commencing  in  r.  ovary,  passing  down  broad  liga-

ment to  uterus.


lODUM.  214

I  Great  sensitiveness  of  r.  ovarian  region  during  or  after
menses.

M  Pain  in  ovaries  and  back  during  menses.

I  Dull,  pressing,  wedge-like  pain,  as  if  a  dull  plug  was
driven  from  r.  ovary  toward  womb.

I  Pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen;  <  1.  ovarian  region;
comes  on  about  3  a.m.;  >  by  motion  and  eating;  likes
acid  things;  1.  ovary  tender  to  pressure;  pains  before,
during  and  after  stool ;  leucorrhcea  thick,  yellow,  burn-
ing; vertigo,  staggering  when  walking;  faint  on  get-
ting up  in  morning;  has  to  lie  with  head  high  on
account  of  shortness  of  breath;  menses  too  early;
stoppage  of  urine,  or  it  flows,  stops,  and  flows  again.
^Chronic  ovaritis.

I  Abdomen  as  large  as  in  pregnancy  at  sixth  month  from
accumulation  of  fluid;  rapid,  irritable  pulse;  thirst;
general  prostration,  able  to  sit  up  only  part  of  day;  loss
of  appetite;  pain  and  tenderness  in  r.  ovarian  region,
and  fluid  rapidly  accumulating. ^Ovarian  cyst.

■Pressing,  bearing  down  towards  genitals;  constipation;
acrid  leucorrhcea,  corroding  linen;  dwindling  and  fall-
ing away  of  mammae;  strumous  constitution.  ^Ovarian
dropsy.

I  Swelling  and  induration  of  uterus.

■  Uterine  leucorrhcea  with  swelling  of  cervix,  os  uteri  feel-

ing hard  and  indurated;  uterus  enlarged;  tendency  to
menorrhagia;  corroding  leucorrhcea,  rendering  thighs
sore.

■  During  course  of  inflammatory  disease  affecting  uterus

and  surrounding  parts;  colliquative  sweats;  great  ema-
ciation and  weakness ;  catarrh  of  chest,  constantly  grow-
ing more  severe;  sudden  appearance  of  menses,  very
profuse  and  accompanied  by  severe  abdominal  pains,
particularly  in  region  of  ovary.

■  Cancerous  degeneration  at  neck  of  uterus.

■  Metrorrhagia:  with  acute  pain  in  mammae,  or  mammae

dwindle  away  and  become  flabby;  at  every  stool,  with
cutting  in  abdomen,  pain  in  loins  and  small  of  back;
long  lasting;  after  abuse  of  mercury. ^Cancer  of  womb.

■  Menses:  sometimes  too  early,  at  others  too  late;  prema-

ture, violent  and  copious.

■  Chronic  menorrhagia  in  thin,  delicate  women,  subject  to

corrosive  leucorrhcea,  with  other  indications  of  congested
uterus  and  ovaries.

■  Premature  and  too  copious  menses,  with  goitre;  dwin-

dling away  of  breasts,  and  great  weakness  on  going  up
stairs.
I  I  Violent  dysmenorrhoea  with  very  scanty  discharge.


215  lODUM.

■  Irregular  menses;  delaying  eight  days,  with  vertigo  and

palpitation  of  heart.

■  Chronic  amenorrhoea  of  long  standing.

Before  menses:  flashes  of  heat,  with  palpitation;  tension

and  swelling  of  neck;  abdominal  pains.
During  menses: pains  in  back  and  ovaries; lassitude;

coughing  up  of  blood;  great  weakness  and  loss  of  breath.
After  menses :  palpitation.

■  Thin,  yellow  leucorrhoea  in  scrofulous  women,  with  in-

duration and  swelling  of  os  uteri,  and  engorgement  of
vagina.

■  ■Chronic  leucorrhoea  most  abundant  at  time  of  menses,

rendering  thighs  sore  and  corroding  linen.

■  Mammary  hypersesthesia.

I  I  Heaviness  of  mammse,  as  if  they  would  fall  off.

■  Acute pain and  soreness in mammae,  with metritis;

cachectic  state  of  system,  with  feeble  pulse.

■  Bluish  red  nodosities,  size  of  a  hazel  nut;  in  both  mam-

mae; dry,  black  points  at  tips.
2*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation. Abortion.

■  Excessive  flow  of  very  thin,  watery  milk;  great  weakness

and  rapid  emaciation. 6'Galactorrhoea.

■  Suppression  of  milk  ;  atrophy  and  relaxation  of  mammae.*
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Voice:

nasal,  hoarse ;  has  a  deep,  hoarse,  rough  sound,  becom-
ing continually  deeper.

■  Hoarseness :  in  morning  and  insupportable  tickling  and

tingling  in  larynx ;  lasts  all  day,  phlegm  in  small  quan-
tities and  tough,  constant  hemming  and  hawking.

■  Sensation  of  constriction  (fulness  or  pressure)  in  larynx,

with  impeded  deglution.

■  Tightness  and  constriction  about  larynx,  with  soreness

and  hoarseness.

■  Swelling  and  contraction  of  larynx.
I  I  Contraction  and  heat  in  larynx.

■  Spasm  of  glottis  in  rachitic  children  ;  cannot  bear  warmth.
■Enlargement  and  induration  of  cervical  and  mesenteric

glands ;  loss  of  appetite,  utter  indiff'erence  to  food ;
scanty,  high  colored  urine  ;  clayey  evacuations ;  emaci-
ation ;  yellow  skin ;  action  of  heart  feeble  and  much  in-
creased by  motion. ^Spasm  of  glottis.

■  Region  of  trachea  smarting,  accompanied  by  frequent

lancinating  pain.

■  Pains in  larynx: with  great hoarseness, or complete

aphonia ;  with  desire  to  cough  ;  with  discharge  of  hard-
ened mucus.

*  lodum  should  not  be  given  during  lying-in  period,  except  in  high  potencies.  C.  Hg.


lODUM.  210

I  Painful  pressure  mingled  with  stitches  in  region  of
larynx  and  sublingual  glands,  returning  several  times
during  day.

Roughness,  painful  pressure  and  stitches  in  larynx  and
pharynx,  as  if  swollen ;  increased  secretion  of  mucus  in
trachea;  dry,  short  and  hacking  cough.

Soreness  of  throat  and  chest ;  wheezing ;  drawing  pains  in
lungs ;  child  grasps  throat  and  chest  with  its  hands.

I  Chronic  laryngitis  in  scrofulous  subjects;  more  or  less
hectic  fever,  especially  serviceable  when  the  trachea  is
implicated.

0 Intense  membranous  laryngitis ;  head  and  face  hot;  par-
oxysmal, dry,  short,  barking  cough ;  respiration  irregu-
lar, short  and  quick;  active  motion  of  alee  nasi.

•  Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  trachea;  long  lasting
laryngeal  catarrh.

Paralysis  of  throat.

B  Membranous  croup,  with  wheezing  and  sawing  respiration,
dry,  barking  cough,  especially  in  children  with  dark  eyes
and  dark  hair;  child  grasps  throat  with  hand.

■  Violent attack  of  cough  threatening suffocation,  with

whistling  tone  and  great  anguish. ^Membranous  croup.

■  Tracheal  and  bronchial  croup,  with  tendency  to  torpor;

extensive  membrane;  jerking  breathing.

iCougli  is  peculiar  in  that  it  has  lost  the  metallic,  loud
timbre,  so  characteristic  of  croup,  and  has  become  muf-
fled and  indistinct;  the  more  plastic  the  exudation,  the
more  lodum  is  indicated. ^Croup.

■Suffocating  cough,  can  hardly  get  her  breath  for  it;  >
by  expectorating,  sputa  very  scanty ;  weight  and  tight-
ness at  stomach  after  food;  cough  exhausts  and  chokes
her,  and  causes  retching  and  pain  in  forehead;  <  in  a
warm  room;  during  day  chilly,  cold  chills  run  up  back;
at  night  when  ill  bed  subjective  dry  heat,  especially  of
head;  bitter  taste  of  solid  food,  not  of  drinks;  burning
pain  below  r.  hip  from  back  to  front. <?Bronchitis.

■  Delicate constitutions, with quick  pulse,  tendency to

bronchial  and  pulmonary  congestion  and  hemorrhage;
overgrown  young  people,  with  weak  chest  and  dry
cough,  subject  to  spitting  of  blood  and  cardiac  palpita-
tion; swelling  of  cervical  and  bronchial  glands;  noctur-
nal sweats  and  progressive  emaciation,  notwithstanding
good  appetite  and  regular  function  of  bowels;  cough
from  every  effort  to  expand  chest;  much  dry  cough;
suffocative  feeling;  shortness  of  breath  at  least  exertion.
^Bronchitis.

■  Chronic  bronchitis  in  a  scrofulous  subject;  dyspnoea  at

night,  compelling  him  to  sit  up;  raw  sensation  in  1.


217  lODUM.

bronchus,  particularly  in  morning;  early  in  day  cough
dry,  later  transparent,  occasionally  grayish  sputa ;  exac-
erbation after  every  cold.
^  Respiration, l  l  An  effort  to  expand  chest  produced  cough
but  no  pain.

I  Breath  comes  in  wave-like  expansions.

■Shortness  of  breath,  palpitation  and  feeling  of  weakness
on  going  up  stairs.

■  Tightness  of  respiration ;  out  of  breath  from  least  exercise,
■Respiration,  especially  inspiration,  difficult;  constriction

of  throat  prevents  swallowing.

■Asthma,  breathes  heavily  even  when  quiet.

■Rachitic  children,  swelling  of  bronchial  glands;  tightness
and  constriction  about  larynx,  with  soreness,  hoarse
voice;  enlarged  glands  may  cause  paralysis  of  laryngeal,
tracheal  and  bronchial  nerves;  mesenteric  glands  en-
larged and  indurated ;  tendency  to  marasmus ;  excellent
appetite  and  yet  grows  thin,  or  indifferent  to  food;
stools  clayey;  urine  high  colored,  scanty;  skin  yellow;
heart's  action  feeble  and  increased  by  any  motion;  un-
bearably irritable ;  well  marked,  painless  goitre.

■Swelling  and  distension  of  abdomen;  when  assuming  a
wrong  position  he  is  threatened  with  suffocation  (has  to
lie  on  back).
^  Cough. llDry  morning  cough,  from  tickling  in  larynx.

■  Constant  tickling,  in  trachea  and  under  sternum,  with

inclination  to  cough.

■  Unendurable  tickling  th  rough  whole  chest,  causing  cough ;

during  attack  undulating  inspiration ;  cough  preceded

by  great  anxiety  and  followed  by  depression;  emaciation.
■Cough  as  from  a  feather  in  throat,  especially  in  morning;

sneezing;  vomiting;  stitches  in  chest  and  side,  dyspnoea

and  great  weakness. ^Liver  complaint.
■Annoying,  tickling  cough  in  phthisical  persons.
I  I  Expansion  of  chest  produces  cough  but  no  pain.

■  ■Dry  cough,  with  stitches  and  burning  in  chest.

■  Cough  with  copious  collection  of  mucus  in  bronchi  and

inability  to  expectorate;  moderate  amount  of  fever,

■  Dry,  croupy  cough,  with  titillation;  sensation  of  soreness

in  larynx;  barking,  with  gray  or  white  salty,  sweetish
expectoration;  shrill  whistling  and  rattling  in  chest;
sawing,  hissing  respiration;  oppression;  hoarseness,
difficult  speech;  expectoration  of  tough  mucus;  soreness
and  pain  extending  to  upper  third  of  sternum.

■  Cough  moist  but  harsh  as  from  tickling  all  over  chest;

wheezing,  metallic  cough;  tough  or  slimy  sputa;  con-
striction of  larynx;  <  in  wet  weather; <  in  morning.
■Cough  often  coming  on  in  Fall^  constant  tickling  in  pit  of


lODUM.  218

throat ;  <  by  expiration ;  frequent  paroxysms  of  severe,
short,  but  continuous  coughs,  one  rapidly  following  the
other,  can  scarcely  utter  a  word;  cough  sounds  as  if
mucus  was  deep  down  in  chest;  expectoration  of  yellow
pieces,  tasteless,  or  during  day  salty.

1  Cough  caused  and  aggravated  by  tobacco ;  often  accompa-
nied by  retching ;  could  not  lie  down,  sat  bent  forward.

Cough:  after  catching  cold  on  damp  day;  >  by  expectora-
tion; sputa  very  scanty;  cough  suffocating,  can  hardly
get  breath ;  weight  and  tightness  at  stomach  after  food ;
cough  exhausts  and  chokes  her,  and  causes  retching  and
pain  in  forehead;  <  in  warm  room;  during  day  chilly,
cold  chill  runs  up  back;  at  night  in  bed  subjective,  dry
heat,  especially  of  head;  bitter  taste  of  solid  food,  not  of
drinks;  burning  pain  below  r.  hip  from  back  to  front.

■  Chronic  cough  excited  by  pressure  in  throat,  <  at  night,

in  a  very  nervous,  tall,  thin  and  careworn  old  lady.
I  Dry,  croupy  cough;  mucous  membrane  of  larynx  and

trachea  dry;  mucus  hard  and  tough.
I  Croupy,  hoarse  cough,  <  in  warm,  wet  weather.

■  Patients  are  weak,  sallow,  short  of  breath,  emaciated  and

have  enormous  appetites. ^Tussis  convulsiva.

■  Great  weakness  with  the  cough.

During  cough:  tickling  and  burning  pain  in  throat;  op-
pression, pressing,  burning  and  stitches  in  chest;  rat-
tling; anxiety;  nausea;  vomiting;  sneezing.

■  Cough,  with  expectoration  of  large  quantities  of  mucus,

frequently  blood  streaked.
■Short,  loose  cough,  with  thick  mucus  and  puriform  ex-
pectoration, often  bloody.

■  Cough  <  towards  morning. ^Tuberculosis.
Dyspnoea,  cough,  palpitation  and  pains  <  by  movement.

■  Expectoration:  salty;  sweetish;  sourish ;  putrid ;  gray  or

white;  yellow;  blood  streaked.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. '  i  A  feeling  of  great  weakness  in
chest;  can  hardly  walk  up  stairs.
I  I  Constriction  of  chest.
■Sharp,  quick,  piercing  pains  in  chest.

■  ■Itching:  low  down  in  lungs,  behind  sternum;  causing

cough ;  extends  through  bronchi  to  nasal  cavity.

■  Rattling  in  chest:  yet  nothing  seems  to  loosen;  with

roughness  under  sternum  and  oppression.

■  Tendency  to  bronchial  and  pulmonary  congestion  and

hemorrhage.
■Violent  chills,  followed  by  fever  and  pain  in  chest;  short,
anxious  breathing,  violent  cough;  lip  and  chin  sore;
urine  high  colored  and  scanty ;  creaking,  leathery  noise
over  middle  and  lower  third  of  r.  lung. ^Pneumonia.


219  lODUM.

■Violent  chill,  followed  by  violent  dry  heat,  pain  in  back
and  r.  side,  from  cough  and  dyspnoea;  rust  colored
sputum  and  fresh  blood,  crepitant  rales,  pulse  120,  skin
hot  and  dry. ^Pneumonia.

I  Violent  chill  followed  by  great  pressure  on  chest:  respi-
ration impeded,  interrupted,  imperfect  and  rapid;
pulse  110;  urine  scanty  and  red;  frequent  short  cough,
with  expectoration  of  tenacious,  yellowish  matter,  occa-
sionally tinged  with  blood;  troublesome  "cold  sore"
on  lips  and  nose;  lower  lobes  of  r.  lung  affected.  ^Pneu-
monia.

■  Sensation  of  weakness  in  chest,  with  anxiety,  oppression,

and  burning,  tearing,  stabbing  pains;  sensation  as  if
something  resisted  expansion;  cough,  with  dyspnoea
and  blood  streaked  expectoration;  also  during  third
stage,  where  slow  suppuration  sets  in  without  marked
febrile  symptoms  in  tuberculous  patients,  and  causes  a
slowly  progressing  hectic  condition,  entirely  confined  to
lungs. ^Croupous  pneumonia.

■  Continuous  delirium; great  dyspnoea; respiration  60;

unquenchable  thirst,  tongue  dry;  great  prostration;
sputa  gluey,  rusty  yellow,  mingled  with  blood  streaks,
is  dislodged  with  difficulty  and  sticks  fast  to  handker-
chief ^Pneumonia.

■  Pneumonia,  when  the  disease  localizes.

■  Pleuritic  effusions.

■  Neck  long  and  thin;  clavicular  region,  particularly  r.  side,

sunken  ;  empty  percussion  sound  in  upper  portion  of
chest,  but  especially  on  r.  side;  bronchial  respiration  on
r.  side;  chest  flat,  sunken;  respiration  short  and  ac-
complished only  by  lower  portion  of  chest  and  dia-
phragm; strong  impulse  of  heart;  anaemic  murmurs;
voice  hoarse,  toneless,  weak;  irritation  in  larynx;  con-
stant pressure  and  burning  in  throat;  sensation  of  raw-
ness in  larjmxand  bronchial  tubes  extending  into  chest,
causing  hawking  and  coughing;  disagreeable  tickling
in  throat  at  night,  causing  severe  and  violent  cough ;
short,  dry,  irritating  cough,  <  at  night,  followed  in
morning  by  sw^eat ;  occasionally  severe  attacks  of  spas-
modic cough,  greatly  prostrating  patient,  and  causing
loss  of  breath  and  glowing  heat  in  head  and  face;  scanty,
tough,  slimy  expectoration,  often  streaked  with  blood;
pressure  and  heaviness  on  chest;  loss  of  breath  after
least  exertion  or  talking. ^Consumption.

■  Face  pale,  anxious,  earthy; cheeks  red,  eyes  languid,

appetite  greatly  impaired;  pressure  at  stomach,  par-
ticularly after  eating ;  abdomen  sunken ;  frequent  col-
icky  pains ;  diarrhoea, or  scanty and delayed  stool ;


lODUM.  220

menses  scanty  and  delayed ;  pulse  small,  frequent,  par-
ticularly in  evening;  fever;  every  afternoon  dry  heat,
thirst,  confusion  of  head;  restless  and  sleepless  at  night,
sweat  towards  morning ;  skin  dry,  hot,  pale,  dirty  gray
in  color;  ansemia;  great  emaciation,  lassitude  and  de-
bility. ^Consumption.

■  Voice  weak,  rough,  hoarse; face  pale; respiration  im-

peded; pain  in  chest. ^Tuberculosis.

■  Tickling  all  over  chest; tough,  stringy,  blood  streaked

sputa;  hunger,  yet  emaciation;  cannot  bear  a  warm
room. ^Phthisis.

■  Phthisis  pulmonalis,  with  constant  tickling  and  inclina-

tion to  cough,  in  trachea  and  under  sternum ;  expectora-
tion of  transparent  mucus  streaked  with  blood;  morning
sweats;  emaciation;  wasting  fever;  rapid  pulse;  diar-
rhcea;  amenorrhoea.

■  Emaciated  almost  to  a  skeleton;  for  several  months  has

been  compelled  to  stay  in  bed;  decubitus;  almost  con-
tinual fever,  remitting  only  for  two  or  three  hours  in
afternoon;  profuse  night  sweats ;  continuous  cough  with
copious  expectoration. ^Consumption.

■  For  several  years  obstinate  leucorrhoea,  alternating  with

a  cough  which  greatly  reduced  her  strength  and  threat-
ened to  develop  into  consumption.

■  Advanced  stage  of  tuberculosis,  when  glands  and  lym-

phatics are  affected;  much  expectoration  of  blood,  or
even  hemorrhages.
■Swelling  of  cervical  and  bronchial  glands.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Great  praecordial  anxiety,
obliging  constant  change  of  position.
I  I  Sensation  of  weakness  in  heart.

■  Constant,  heavy,  oppressive  pain,  in  region  of  heart.

■  Sharp,  quick,  piercing,  and  movable,  but  heavy,  oppressive

pain  in  region  of  heart.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  heart  was  squeezed  together.

■  Feeling  as  if  heart  was  grasped  by  an  iron  hand.

■  ■Palpitation of heart: < from least exertion; with

faintness.
I  I  Tumultuous,  irregular  or  intermitting  action  of  heart.

■  Cardiac  action  excessive. ^Exophthalmic  goitre.

■  Pericarditis  in  complication  with  croupous  pneumonia.

■  Mitral  insufficienc}'  and  periodical  attacks  of  pain  about

heart,  following  long  fit  of  sickness  with  typhoid  en-
docarditis; ventral  dilatation  of  heart,  with  marked
projection  of  1.  second  and  third  ribs;  loss  of  strength;
difficult  breathing;  violent  palpitations.

■  Dilatation  of  heart,  after  scarlatina.

■Darker  color  of  skin,  with  sensation  of  heat;  skin  turns


221  lODUM.

brown,  grows  parchment-like,  peels  off,  and  shows
underneath  the  loosened  scales  a  fatty  transpiration ;
thickening  of  epidermis;  sudden  turning  of  yellowish
color  into  brown,  as  if  smoked ;  excessive  weakness  and
debility;  muscular  weakness  and  trembling;  sadness
and  depression  of  spirits;  mental  torpor;  dulness  and
pain  in  head;  vertigo;  nausea;  violent,  continuous
vomiting ;  violent,  excruciating  pain  in  stomach ;  con-
stipation; frequent  attacks  of  gastralgia ;  drawing  and
pressing  in  region  of  kidneys;  twitchings,  convulsions;
epilepsy;  paralysis;  the  formerly  yellow  face  turns
brown ;  red  hair  turns  to  chestnut  brown,  ^Addison's
disease.

Pulse:  large,  hard  and  accelerated,  with  orgasm  of  blood
and  beating  in  bloodvessels;  rapid,  but  weak  and
thread-like;  small,  very  quick,  irregular;  w^eak,  thread-
like; accelerated,  by  every  slight  exertion.

Extremely  troublesome  pulsations  in  larger  arterial  trunks.

Pulsation  in  arteries  at  every  muscular  effort.

Ebullition  in  chest  and  audible  palpitation.
^  Outer  Chest. Burning  stinging  tension  in  integuments  of

chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back.  Redness  on  neck  and  chest  as  if  ecchy  mosed.

Yellow  spots  on  neck.

Neck  swells  up  when  talking.

I  Swelling  and  induration  of  cervical  glands,

I  Hard  and  red  condition  of  mucous  surfaces,  scrofulous
subjects;  enlargement  of  cervical  and  subcutaneous
glands.

■  Enlargement and induration of  glands,  cervical and

mesenteric;  want  of  appetite;  utter  indifference  to  food;
scanty,  high  colored  urine;  clayey  evacuations;  emacia-
tion; yellow  skin;  action  of  heart  feebler  and  much  <
by  motion,

■  Gradual  increase  in  size  of  neck,  especially  on  r.  side,

until  it  measured  fourteen  and  a  half  inches  over  isth-
mus of  thyroid  body;  soft  and  without  any  fluctuation,
^Goitre.

Marked  increase  of  thyroid  gland,  which  had  been  already
slightly  enlarged;  acute  pain  in  gland  upon  pressure  or
on  slightest  movement  of  head,

iNon-lobulated  tumor  in  anterior  and  median  portion  of
neck  as  large  as  a  child's  head ;  rosj^^  red  color  heavy  in
weight  and  of  soft  consistency;  voice  for  past,  two  years
slightly  rough,  and  respiration  difficult,  especially  when
he  lies  on  back. l?Goitre.

■  Hypertrophy  of  two  lobes  of  thyroid  gland;  tumor  be-

coming more  swollen  and  painful  at  each  return  of
menses,  which  were  irregular  and  painful. ^Goitre.


lODUM.  222

I  Sensation  of  constriction  in  goitre.

I  Goitre:  recent  and  soft;  with  marked  hardness ;  hard  and

nodulated.
I  I  Large  boil  between  scapulae,  with  gangrene  of  legs.
Stitches  in  small  of  back;  pains  like  rheumatism.
Pain  in  sacrum  and  coccyx.
iSpinal  complaints,  with  gressus  vaccinus.
^^  Upper  Limbs. iSwelling  of  axillary  glands.

I  Hot,  dark  red,  lymphatic  swelling  in  r. axilla,  size  of  a
walnut,  discharging  a  cheesy  pus.

■  Weariness  of  arms,  as  if  paralyzed,  in  morning,  in  bed.

■  Trembling  of  arms  and  hands.

I  Pain  in  bones  of  arm  on  which  he  lies  at  night.
I  I  Small  boil  on  posterior  surface  of  r.  upper  arm.
I  I  Tearing  in  1.  elbow.
I  Pains  in  elbow.

■  Painful  weakness  in  extensors.
I  iSubsultus  tondinum.

I  I  Back  of  1.  hand  painful,  as  if  swollen,  painful  to  pressure

and  when  turning  hand,  not  when  closing  fingers.
I  I  Brown  discoloration  on  back  of  hand.

■  Sweating  in  palms  of  hands.

■  Coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Fingers  "go  to  sleep."

Round  spot  between  thumb  and  index  finger  covered  with
two  whitish  vesicles.
^^  Lower  Limbs. ■Intermittent,  sharp,  tearing  pains  between
1.  hip  and  head  of  femur,  <  by  moving  joint;  ear  swell-
ings; abuse  of  mercury.

I  I  Jerking  pain  in  legs  each  time  after  taking  cold,  follow-
ing pressure  in  pit  of  stomach. ^'Jaundice.

I  I  Numb  feeling  in  thighs  and  legs.

■  Violent  itching  nettlerashon  thigh  and  inside  of  1.  knee.
Flat  blister  on  knee  looks  as  if  full  of  bile.

■  After neglected injury, large, elastic and fluctuating

swelling  of  knee ;  pale  redness  of  skin  upon  which  there
are  several  very  red,  hot  and  painful  spots ;  temperature
at  knee  elevated;  dull  pain  deep  in  knee-joint  w^hen
lying  quietly  with  leg  stretched  out,  becoming  very  se-
vere upon  least  motion  or  pressure;  foot  must  be  kept
very  quiet;  febrile  attacks;  finally  small  opening  over
patella  through  which  oozed  laudable  pus,  later  followed
by  a  profuse,  clear,  yellow,  serous  discharge,  particu-
larly early  in  evening.

■  Knee  greatly  swollen,  puffed  and  round  on  both  sides;

sensation  of  fluctuation;  temperature  elevated;  pain
when  stretching  leg  or  when  attempting  to  stand ;  limps
when  attempting  to  walk  and  can  only  place  tip  of  foot


223  lODUM.

upon  floor;  pressure  upon  patella  causes  great  pain;  no
pain  during  rest.

■  Hot,  bright  red,  sinning  swelling  of  knee,  with  shooting.

stitches  and  burning;  in  several  places,  small,  highly
inflamed  openings  through  which  oozes  a  watery,
bloody  pus ;  least  motion  of  body  or  foot,  or  least  touch
or  pressure  upon  swelling  cause  very  severe  pain.
^Scrofulous  inflammation.

iHot,  bright  red  swelling  of  knee,  with  inflammation,
pricking  and  burning; <  by  touch  or  pressure.

I  White  swelling  of  knee;  dropsical  swelling  of  knee  joint.

■Second  and  third  stage;  fistulous  openings,  discharging
a  thin,  watery  ichor,  and  surrounded  by  pale,  spongy
edges,  which  bleed  easily;  feverish;  emaciation,  ^Go-
narthrocace.

■  Much  swelling,  with  erratic  tearing  pains. ^Synovitis,

■  Chronic  hydrarthrosis  of  knee  joint.

.■Violent  itching  nettlerash,  particularly  around  knee;  on

outer  side  of  1.  knee  especially.
I  I  Subsultus  tendinum  of  feet.

■  QLdematous  swelling  of  feet.

■  Acrid,  corrosive  sweat  of  feet.

■  Painful  corns.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Great  weariness  of  arms  and  legs  from
excessive  debility.
Subsultus  tendinum  of  both  hands  and  feet.

■  Trembling  of  limbs.

■  Acute  articular  rheumatism,  with  violent  pericarditis  and

pi  euro-pneumonia.

■  ■Chronic  arthritic  affections,  with  violent  nightly  pains

in  joints,  no  swelling.
■Subsultus  tendinum  of  hands  and  feet;  great  drowsiness
and  continual  dreaming  of  eating,  with  great  prostration
on  rising  from  bed;  picking  of  bedclothes  and  short,
dry  cough.

■  Much  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  no  pain  in  knee.
Lying  down:  <  tremor  at  heart  and  fainting.
Lying  quietly  with  leg  stretched  out:  pain  in  knee.
Has  to  lie  with  head  high  on  account  of  shortness  of  breath.
Pain  in  bones  of  arms  on  which  he  lies.
Has  to  lie  on  back:  on  account  of  swelling  of  abdomen.
When  lying  on  back :  respiration  difficult.
Cannot  lie  down:  on  account  of  bloating  and  distension  of

abdomen;  on  account  of  cough.
Sat  up  in  bed,  then  threw  himself  upon  it.
Able  to  sit  up  only  part  of  day.
Is  compelled  to  sit  up :  by  dyspnoea.


lODUM.  224

Sitting:  <  tremor  at  heart  and  fainting;  anxiety  after

mental  labor  >.
Stooping:  <  vertigo.
Hardly  able  to  stand:  chill  two  years  old.
Attempting  to  stand:  pain  in  knee  <.
Head  inclined  to  seek  support:  caused  by  oppressive,  dull

feeling  in  head.
Desire  to  change  position  continually.
Prsecordial  anxiety  obliging  constant  change  of  position.
When  assuming  a  wrong  position  he  is  threatened  with

suffocation.
Inclination  to  move  about:  not  permitting  one  to  eat  or

to  sleep.
Grasps  throat  and  chest  with  his  hand.
Slightest  movement  of  head :  acute  pain  in  thyroid  gland.
Least  motion:  pain  in  knee  <.

Least  exertion :  palpitation  of  heart  < ;  accelerates  pulse.
At  every  muscular  effort:  pulsations  in  arteries.
After  slight  exercise  when  lying  down:  tremor  at  heart

and  fainting  < ;  out  of  breath.
Every  motion :  throbbing  in  head ;  increases  heart's  action.
Rising:  <  headache;  produces  faintness;  tremor  at  heart

and  fainting  <.
Rising  from  bed:  great  prostration.
When  moving  hip  joint:  pain  <.
Stretching  leg:  pain  in  knee  <.
When  turning  1.  hand:  painful.
Attempting  to  walk:  knee  causes  limping;  can  only  place

tip  of  foot  on  floor.
Walking:  vertigo,  staggering.
Can  hardly  walk  up  stairs:  weakness  of  chest.
Walking  fast:  <  headache.
Active  exertion:  causes  dizziness.
Running  about,  never  sits  down  or  sleeps  at  night.
Motion:  > pain  in  lower  part of  abdomen;  dyspnoea,

cough,  palpitation  and  pains  <  ;  action  of  heart  feeble,

much  <•
Must  keep  in  motion  day  and  night.

Restless,  inclined  to  move,  not  permitting  her  to  sit  or  sleep.
Violent  palpitations  drive  him  out  of  bed.
^^  Nerves, i Excessive excitability; irritability and sensi-
tiveness.

■  Restlessness,  with  inclination  to  move  about,  not  permit-

ting one  to  sit  or  to  sleep.

llGreat  weakness  and  loss  of  breath,  on  going  up  stairs.

■Remarkable  and  unaccountable  sense  of  weakness  and
loss  of  breath  on  going  up  stairs ;  leucorrhoea  corroding
the  linen ;  food  does  not  nourish  or  strengthen  her.

■  Great  debility;  sweats,  even  from  talking.


225  lODUM.

I  I  Trembling  of  limbs  or  whole  body.

■  Twitching  of  muscles.

■  Abdominal  reflex  chorea;  the  stomach,  liver,  pancreas,

abdominal  glands,  being  at  fault.

■  Facial paralysis  or  epilepsy,  following suppression of

goitre.
^"^  Sleep. ■  Sleeplessness  after  midnight.

■  Kestless  sleep,  with  vivid  or  anxious  dreams.
^  Time. Towards  morning:  cough  <.

Morning:  weakness;  teeth  yellow,  covered  with  much
mucus;  much  mucus  in  mouth;  diarrhoea;  faint  on
getting  up;  hoarseness,  and  tickling  and  tingling  in
larynx;  raw  sensation  in  1.  bronchus;  dry  cough;  cough
as  from  a  feather;  cough  moist  but  harsh;  sweat  follow-
ing cough;  weariness  of  arms;  debilitating  sweat.

From  morning  till  evening:  empty  eructations.

3  A.M.:  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

II  A.M.:  longs  for  food.
Early  in  day:  dry  cough.

During  day:  chilly;  salty  expectoration.

All  day:  hot,  dry  skin;  hoarseness  and  tickling  in  larynx.

Afternoon:  violent  aching  at  base  of  occiput;  for  several
hours  fever  remits.

Evening:  sneezing;  stoppage  of  nose;  itching  and  burn-
ing of  anus;  pulse  small  and  frequent;  discharge  from
knee  <.

Night:  heart  palpitates  "like  lightning;"  pulsations  felt
at  pit  of  stomach;  watery,  fluent  coryza;  burning  and
itching  at  anus;  subjective  dry  heat;  sweats;  dysp-
noea; chronic  cough  < ;  disagreeable  tickling  in  throat;
cough  <;  restless;  sleepless;  pain  in  bones  of  arms;
pains  in  joints;  cold  feet;  very  profuse  sweats.

After  midnight:  sleeplessness.
^Temperature and Weather. Aggravation: warmth;
wrapping  up  head;  cannot  bear  hat  on.

Amelioration:  cold  air;  washing  in  cold  water.

Rachitic  children  cannot  bear  warmth.

Warm  room:  cough  <;  shaking  chill.

Warm  air:  <  throbbing  in  head.

Warm  weather:  great  tendency  to  take  cold.

External  warmth:  relaxed  mammee  <.

Cannot  bear  warmth  or  a  warm  room.

Heat:  <  piles.

Inclination  to  uncover.

Open  air:  dry  coryza  becomes  fluent.

Wet  weather:  cough  <.

Damp  day:  caught  cold,  cough.

Drinking  cold  milk:  constipation  >.

VOL.  VI. — 15.


lODUM.  226

Cold  baths:  <  violent  palpitations.
^"  Fever. Shaking  chill,  or  chilliness,  in  a  warm  room.
Hands,  nose,  feet  icy  cold ;  cold  feet  the  whole  night.
Chill  predominates,  is  cold  most  of  the  time.
I  Chill,  frequently,  alternating  with  heat.
I  Fever  with  dry  skin,  weak  and  rapid  pulse,  twitching  of
muscles,  and  more  coldness  than  heat  of  skin.

■  Internal  heat,  with  coldness  of  skin.

I  I  Flushes  of  heat;  ebullitions  and  pulsations.
I  I  Heat  or  sweat,  with  inclination  to  uncover.

■  Burning  heat  of  hands.

I  Quartan  fever,  with  diarrhoea  on  days  free  from  fever.
I  Sallow,  distressed  countenance. ^Intermittent.
I  Left  hypochondriac  region  hard  and  acutely  painful  to
pressure. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Intense  pain  in  ileo-csecal  region;  bloody,  watery  diar-

rhoea; great  irritation  of  nervous  system; picking  at
flocks;  delirium. C^Typhoid.

■  Palms  of  hands  sweat  continually.

■  Cold  feet  sweat  easily;  so  acrid  that  it  corrodes  skin.

■  Debilitating,  sour  sweat  in  morning,  with  great  weakness

of  limbs;  much  thirst.
I  I  Sweat  with  thirst.

■  Very  profuse  night  sweat;  profuse,  cold,  viscid  sweat.

■  Profuse  night  sweats,  with  great  emaciation  and  debility,

and  tendency  to  take  cold,  especially  in  warm  weather.

^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent  paroxysms  of  severe  short

but  continuous  coughs,  one  rapidly  following  the  other.

Periodical  attacks  of  pain  about  heart.

Occasional  severe  attacks  of  spasmodic  cough.

Every  time  after  taking  cold:  jerking  pains  in  legs.

Every  few  hours:  must  eat.

For  several  hours  in  afternoon :  fever  remits.

Every  afternoon :  dry  heat;  thirst;  confusion  of  head.

Several  times  during  day:  pressure  in  region  of  larynx.

Every  third  day :  attacks  of  gastrodynia.

Menses  delayed  eight  days.

At  each  return  of  menses:  thyroid  gland  painful.

For  several  months:  has  been  compelled  to  stay  in  bed.

Six  months:  menses  absent.

Often  in  Fall:  cough.

For  several  years:  leucorrhoea  alternating  with  cough.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  constant  tearing  pains
around  eye;  small  scab  in  nostril;  pain  in  hypochon-
drium;  pain  in  ovary;  sensitiveness  of  ovarian  region;
tenderness  and  pain  in  ovarian  region;  burning  pain
below  hip;  creaking,  leathery  noise,  over  middle  and
lower  third  of  lung;  pain  in  side;  lower  lobes  of  lung


227  lODUM.

affected;  clavical  region  sunken;  empty  percussion
sound  on  side  of  chest;  bronchial  respiration  ;  increase
of  size  of  neck ;  swelling  of  axilla ;  small  boil  on  poste-
rior surface  of  upper  arm.

Left :  vertigo  on  side  ;  hypertrophy  of  ventricle ;  sharp,
pressive  pain  in  upper  part  of  side  of  forehead ;  head-
ache on  side ;  suppurating  ulcer  on  cheek ;  hypochon-
driac region  hard  and  acutely  painful  to  pressure;  incar-
ceration of  flatus  in  side  of  abdomen;  pain  in  ovarian
region ;  ovary  tender  to  pressure ;  raw  sensation  in
bronchus  ;  marked  projection  of  second  and  third  ribs ;
tearing  in  elbow ;  back  of  hand  painful ;  sharp  pain
between  hip  and  head  of  femur;  violent,  itching  net-
tlerash,  inside  of  knee ;  outer  side  of  knee  nettlerash ;
hypochondriac  region  painful  to  pressure  and  hard.

Hard  boil  on  forearm  near  wrist.

From  back  to  front :  burning  pain  below  r.  hip.
^^  Sensations.  Brain  felt  as  if  it  was  stirred  up ;  as  if  going
crazy ;  as  if  a  tape  or  band  was  tightly  drawn  around
head ;  brain  feels  as  if  stirred  around  with  a  spoon ;  as
though  a  foreign  substance  was  inside  of  brain  ;  like  a
veil  before  eyes ;  pain  in  eyes  as  from  excoriation  ;  as  if
alee  nasi  were  spread  wide  open  ;  as  though  he  had  sharp
vinegar  in  mouth ;  as  if  every  particle  of  food  was
turned  into  air ;  as  if  a  plug  was  driven  from  r.  ovary
to  womb;  as  if  mammae  would  fall  off;  pharynx  as  if
swollen  ;  cough  as  from  a  feather  in  throat ;  as  if  some-
thing resisted  expansion  in  chest ;  as  if  heart  was
squeezed  together;  as  if  heart  was  grasped  by  an  iron
hand ;  arm  as  if  paralyzed ;  1.  hand  as  if  swollen ;
blister  on  knee  looks  as  if  full  of  bile.

Pain :  in  eyes ;  in  occiput  and  temples ;  from  inner  can-
thus  to  articulation  of  jaw ;  in  throat ;  in  oesophagus ;
in  chest ;  in  liver  through  to  shoulder  blade ;  in  hepatic
region  ;  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  in  r.  ovary  passing  down
broad  ligament  to  uterus ;  in  ovaries  and  back  during
menses  ;  in  lower  part  of  abdomen ;  in  1.  ovarian  region;
in  r.  ovarian  region;  in  loins  and  small  of  back;  in
larynx ;  in  forehead ;  extending  to  upper  third  of
sternum;  in  r.  side,  about  heart;  in  head;  in  sacrum
and  coccyx ;  in  bones  of  arm  on  which  he  lies ;  in  el-
bows ;  in  bones.

Violent,  excruciating  pain  in  stomach.

Intense  pain  :  in  ileo-csecal  region.

Acute  pain:  in  mammae;  in  thyroid  gland.

Violent  nightly  pain  :  in  joints.

Great  anguish  :  with  cough ;  praecordial.

Sharp,  tearing  pain :  between  1.  hip  and  head  of  femur.


lODUM.  228

Constant  tearing  pain :  around  r.  eye,  passing  backwards

from  inner  canthus  to  articulation  of  jaw.
Tearing :  in  L  elbow ;  in  chest.
Lancinating  pain  :  in  region  of  trachea.
Sharp,  quick,  piercing  pains:  in  chest;  in  region  of  heart.
Cutting  pains :  in  intestines ;  in  abdomen.
Erratic  tearing :  in  knee.
Stabbing :  in  chest.
Shooting  stitches :  in  knee.
Stitches :  in  hepatic  region ;  in  region  of  larynx ;  in  region

of  pharynx ;  in  chest  and  side ;  in  small  of  back.
Sharp,  pressive  pain  :  in  upper  part  of  side  of  forehead.
Throbbing  pain  :  in  head.

Burning  pain:  in  throat;  in  chest;  below  r.  hip.
Burning,  stinging  tension :  in  integuments  of  chest.
Corroding  pains :  in  stomach.
Severe  abdominal  pain :  in  region  of  ovary.
Violent  colic  and  colicky  pains.
Drawing  pains :  in  lungs ;  in  region  of  kidneys.
Gnawing  pains :  in  stomach.
Jerking  pains :  in  legs.
Spasmodic  pains :  in  stomach.
Forcing  pain :  in  spermatic  cord  and  testicles.
Pinching :  around  navel.
Pricking :  in  knee.

Dull,  pressing,  wedge-like  pain :  from  ovary  to  womb.
Dull  pain  :  deep  in  knee  joint.
Pain  like  rheumatisms :  in  back.
Violent  aching :  at  base  of  occiput.
Aching,  pressing  pain  :  in  spermatic  cords  and  testicles.
Pressive  pains :  in  vertex.
Heavy,  oppressive  pain :  in  region  of  heart.
Painful  pressure : in  abdomen ;  in  vertex ;  in region  of

larynx ;  of  pharynx.
Smarting :  in  eyes ;  in  region  of  trachea.
Soreness : in rectum ; of  mammse ; about  larynx ; of

throat  and  chest ;  in  larynx  ;  extending  to  upper  third

of  sternum  ;  of  lip  and  chin.
Burning  heat:  of  hands.
Glowing  heat :  in  head  and  face.

Burning:  in  anus;  in  piles;  in  throat;  in  chest;  in  knee.
Heat :  in  larynx.

Bearing  down :  in  genitals ;  in  seminal  cord.
Painfulness :  of  tongue ;  of  ulcers  on  gums ;  in  corns.
Painful  weakness :  of  extensors.
Intense  painfulness :  of  glands  on  inside  of  cheek.
Sensitiveness :  of  r.  ovarian  region.
Kaw  sensation :  in  1.  bronchus ;  in  larynx  and  bronchial

tubes  to  chest.


229  lODUM.

Tenderness :  of  epigastrium ;  about  hepatic  region.

Dull  pressure  in  frontal  sinuses.

Dulness :  in  head.

Pressure :  on  a  small  spot  above  root  of  nose ;  in  hepatic
region;  in  region  of  stomach;  in  testicles  extending  to
abdomen ;  in  throat ;  on  chest ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;
in  pit  of  stomach.

Oppressive,  dull  feeling:  in  head;  in  chest;  under
sternum.

Heaviness :  of  both  mammee  ;  on  chest.

Confusion :  of  head.

Twisting  sensation :  in seminal  cord.

Tightness :  about  larynx  ;  at  stomach.

Tension :  in  abdomen  ;  in  testicles ;  of  neck.

Constriction:  about  larynx;  of  throat;  of  chest;  in  goitre.

Contraction:  of  larynx.

Throbbing:  all  over  body;  in  head  at  every  motion ;  of
abdominal  aorta.

Palpitation :  felt  at  pit  of  stomach.

Pulsations :  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  abdomen.

Sensation  of  fluctuation :  in  knee.

Unendurable  tickling :  through  whole  chest.

Continual  tickling :  in  middle  of  chest.

Tingling:  in  larynx.

Tickling:  in  larynx  ;  in  throat  ;  in  pit  of  throat.

Irritation :  in  larynx.

Roughness :  under  sternum.

Numb  feeling:  in  thighs  and  legs.

Paralytic  feeling :  of  arms.

Great  weariness :  of  arms  and  legs.

Great  weakness :  in  chest ; in  heart.

Weight :  at  stomach.

Creepy  sensation :  in  skin.

Violent  itching  nettlerash  on  thigh  and  inside  of  1.  knee.

Itching, stinging : in front  part  of  septum  narium ; in
protuberance  on  nose  ;  of  anus  ;  low  down  in  lungs  be-
hind sternum,  extending  to  bronchi  and  nasal  cavity;  of
scars.
**  Tissues. I  Gradual  or  rapid  emaciation,  almost  to  a  skeleton.

■  Atrophy  of  children,  with  inordinate  appetite;  restless;

desires  to  change  position  continually;  face  yellow,  or
brownish  and  shrunken;  copious  and  papescent  stools;
glands  swollen  and  painless,  especially  mesenteric  ones.

■  Marasmus  with  intolerable  irritability,  child  will  be  ap-

proached by  no  one.
Scrofulosis  with  emaciation,  in  spite  of  necessity  of  eating

every  few  hours;  swelling  and  induration  of  glands,  the
. whole  of lymphatic system  being  involved; rachitic


lODUM.  230

affections;  inflammation  of  eyes  and  eyelids;  otitis  and
otorrhcea;  swelling  of  mesenteric  glands;  frequent
catarrhs;  bronchocele;  scrofulous  women  with  dwin-
dling of  and  falling  away  of  mammae.

■A  colored  child,  two  years  old,  with  the  face  of  an  old
man,  dry  skin,  large  head  and  stomach,  very  large
genitals,  thin  arms  and  legs,  is  hardly  able  to  stand,  sits
by  preference  out  doors  in  the  burning  sun  of  the
tropics;  is  always  hungry;  has  a  blood  boil  on  1.  fore-
arm near  the  wrist;  lodum  was  followed  by  a  fine  erup-
tion, resembling  itch  when  the  child  began  to  improve
and  got  well.

I  Low  cachectic  state  of  the  system,  with  feeble  pulse.

I  In  strumous  habits,  if  expectoration  or  leucorrhoeal  dis-
charge corrode  the  linen.

Syphilis:  mercurial  cachexia;  salivation;  ulcers  in  throat;
skin  and  muscles  lax;  nightly  bone  pain;  very  hard
chronic  buboes.

I  Arthritic  affections.

I I  Hypertrophy  and  indaration  of  glands.

Inveterate  cases  of  goitre;  the  harder  they  feel,  and  the
more  other  symptoms  are  wanting,  the  better  indicated.

I  Felons.

■Bleeding  ulcers,  destitute  of  feeling;  hard,  spongy,  and
sensitive  ulcers,  with  feeling  of  tenseness  and  soreness;
pus  copious,  bloody,  and  corroding,  or  thin,  watery,  and
yellow.

I  Very  profuse  suppuration;  enormous  quantities  of  pus
with  hectic.
^'^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  gums  pain-
ful; hepatic  region  painful;  knee  <.

Pressure:  <  pain  in  oesophagus;  region  of  liver  sore;
epigastrium  painful ;  1.  hypochondriac  region  very
painful ;  from  pit  of  stomach  to  navel  and  in  corre-
sponding region  in  back  sensitiveness ;  1.  ovary  tender ;
causes  acute  pain  in  thyroid  gland  ;  back  of  1.  hand
painful ;  pain  in  knee  <  ;  on  patella  causes  great  pain;
1.  hychondriac  region  painful.

Friction:  >  violent  palpitations.

When  riding  long  time  in  open  carriage.

After  neglected  injury:  large  swelling  of  knee.
^^  Skin, i  Skin :  rough ;  dry ;  dirty  yellow ;  clammy ;  moist ;  cool.

Eruption:  furfuraceous;  humid;  like  scarlet  rash;  herpes;
ringworm  ;  acne ;  urticaria ;  inveterate  impetigo  scro-
fulosa.

I  High  fever  with  great  weakness;  for  some  days  slight
eruption,  not  distinctly  characteristic;  frequent  attacks
of  anxiety  and  oppression  of  breathing,  wdth  faintness,


231  lODUM.

especially  in  night;  weakness  always  increasing,  so  that

fatal  paralysis  of  heart  was  apprehended ;  developed  the

eruption. ^Small-pox.
■Scarlatina:  ulcers  in  throat;  glands  swollen,  suppurating;

ever3'thing  appears  bright  blue  to  him  in  the  distance.
Small,  dry,  red  pimples  on  arms,  chest  and  back.

■  Scars  itch,  break  open,  or  pimples  break  out  on  them,

■  Tendency  to  papulae,  small  boils  and  abscesses.

■  Nodosities.

I  I  Morbus  maculosus.
Fungus  articularis  after  measles.
Tertiary  syphilis,  with  ulceration  of  skin.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. isDark  hair  and  eyes.

■  Overgrown  boys  with  weak  chest;  aged  persons.

■  ■Scrofulous  diathesis.

■  ■Low  cachectic condition with  profound  debility  and

great  emaciation.

Boy,  set.  6  months,  affection  of  eyes ;  hydrocele.

Infant,  set  10  months,  early  in  life  had  marasmus ;  spasms
of  glottis.

Boy,  set.  14  months,  dark  eyes,  light  hair,  rickets;  laryngis-
mus stridulus.

Colored  boy,  set.  2,  old  face  and  wise  look;  marasmus.

Girl,  set.  2^,  vigorous  constitution;  membranous  laryngitis.

Bo}'^,  set.  4;  diphtheria.

Boy,  set.  8,  scrofulous;  inflammation  of  knee.

Girl,  set.  10,  scrofulous,  had  swollen  submaxillary  glands
for  several  months;  diphtheritis.

Girl,  set.  10,  scrofulous ;  croupous  inflammation  of  pharynx.

Girl,  set.  11;  inflammation  of  knee.

Girl,  set.  12,  lymphatic  temperament,  fair  complexion,
delicate  constitution,  general  health  feeble,  and  menses
not  yet  appeared,  suffering  one  year;  goitre.

Girl,  set.  12,  during  attack  of  rheumatism;  threatened  in-
flammation of  brain.

Girl,  set.  16,  bilious-lymphatic  temperament,  suffering  one
year,  since  date  of  first  menstruation;  goitre.

Girl,  set.  18,  slender  form,  after  exposure  on  ice,  while
skating;  pneumonia.

Girl,  set.  18,  brunette,  features  regular  but  pale,  mild,  peace-
ful disposition,  almost  phlegmatic,  menses  regular  for
some  years  and  of  general  good  health  ;  goitre.

Girl,  set.  20,  after  neglected  injury;  inflammation  of  knee.

Girl,  set.  20,  large,  thin,  phthisical  habits;  threatened
tuberculosis.

Woman,  set.  20,  after  a  long  illness;  heart  disease.

Miss  L.,  set.  21 ;  deafness.

Man,  set.  21,  tailor,  poor and  ill  nourished,  lymphatic


lODUM.  232

temperament  and  scrofulous,  suffering  several  months;
goitre.

Woman,  set.  22,  medium  height,  blue  eyes,  light  auburn
hair,  sanguine-nervous  temperament,  predisposed  to
consumption;  galactorrhoea.

Young  man,  lymphatic  temperament,  full  habit,  suffering
two  years;  headache.

Young man, swollen nose, enlarged thyroid; chronic  _
bronchitis.

Girl,  aet.  22,  of  phthisical  family;  consumption.

Woman,  set.  25,  married  for  three  months,  general  health
good,  sudden  attack;  goitre.

Man,  set.  27,  after  muscular  exertion  and  subsequent  ex;
posure  to  cold;  pneumonia.

Man,  slender,  nervous-bilious  temperament,  of  strong  likes
and  dislikes;  mania.

Woman,  set.  28,  after  being  delivered  of  a  healthy  child,
was  found  to  be  as  large  as  at  full  term,  from  dropsical
effusion ;  a  month  afterwards  four  and  a  half  gallons  of
a  thick,  dark  and  highly  albuminous  fluid  were  removed
by  ordinary  paracentesis;  about  a  year  afterwards,  at
seventh  month  of  a  second  pregnancy,  four  and  a  half
gallons  of  fluid  were  drawn  off',  and  six  weeks  later  a
normal  labor  occurred,  and  again,  in  about  three
months,  four  gallons  of  fluid  were  removed  by  aspira-
tion; the  effusion,  however,  continued,  and  ovariotomy
was  believed  to  be  the  only  remedy;  ovarian  cyst.

Pregnant  woman,  set.  30;  small-pox.

Man,  set.  32,  small  and  weak,  dark  hair,  mild  disposition,
works  much  in  coldw'ater;  has  suffered  from  cardiac
and  hemorrhoidal  troubles;  affection  of  testicles.

Man,  set.  34;  pneumonia.

Woman,  suffering  for  one  and  a  half  years;  chronic  jaun-
dice.

Man,  set.  40,  innkeeper;  affection  of  pancreas.

Colored  woman,  set.  42,  suffered  for  twenty  years;  chronic
ovaritis.

Woman,  set.  50,  has  suffered  very  much  for  several  years;
leucorrhoea.

Man,  set.  58,  general  health  good,  could  not  remember
when  tumor  first  came;  goitre.

Man,  set.  58,  suffering  15  years;  goitre.

Man,  set,  62,  six  years  ago  had  itch;  inflammation  of  knee.

Man,  set.  64;  jaundice.

Woman,  set.  TO,  two  months  ago  caught  cold  on  a  damp
day;  bronchitis.

Woman,  set.  70,  after  catching  cold;  cough.
^^  Relations. Antidoted by : starch  or  wheat  flour  mixed


233  lODUM— IPECACUANHA.

with  water  in  case  of  large  closes ;  small  closes  by :  Ant.

tart.,  Arsen.,  Bellad., Camphor., Cinch,  sulph., Cinchona,

Coffea,  Hepar,  Opium,  Phosphor.,  Spongia,  ISulphur.
It  antidotes :  Mercur.
Compatible :  after  Mercur.,  after  Heparin  croup,  after  Arsen. ;

Aeon.,  Argent,  nitr.,  Calc.  ostr.,  Merc,  sol.,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.

frequently  follow  well.
Compare : Bromine,  Cactus,  Caustic,  Conium,  Digit.,  Kali

bich.,  Phos.  ac.
Complementary :  Lycop.


IPECACUANHA.

Ipecac.  Ruhiacese.

A  plant  native  to  Brazil. The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  dried  and  finely
powdered  root.

Provings  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers.  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,
p.  137.

Clinical  Authorities. — Hypochondriasis,  Hufeland,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  621 ;
Apoplexy,  Eummel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  92 ;  Choroiditis,  Tamhayn,  B.  J.  li.,
vol.  18,  p.  252 ;  Ophthalmia,  Jousset,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  19 ;  Turrel,  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  3,  p.  30 ;  Nasal  catarrh,  Bigel,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  388 ;  Influenza,  Ger-
ner,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  42 ;  Riickert,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  569 ;  Vomiting,
Lobeth,  Genzk,  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  557  ;  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.
38 ;  Nervous  vomiting,  Jousset,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27  p.  622 ;  Chronic  vomiting,  Hughes,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  677 ;  Smith,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  109,  p.  32 ;  Hcetnatemesis,  (5
cases),  Goullon,  Nunez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p,  265 ;  Goullon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,
p.  583;  Melmna,  Pomeroy,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  151;  Diarrhma,  Kafka,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  418 ;  Huber,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  418 ;  Knorre,  Goullon,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  27,  p^  632;  Lobethal,  Boenninghausen,  Muller,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  630;
Jahr,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  195;  Dysentery,  Henke,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  627;  (2
cases),  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  738  ;  Thayer,  Raue's  Rec,  1872.  p.  43 ;  Cholera
infantum,  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  196 ;  Cholerine,  Goullon,  Kafka,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  27,  p.  632 ;  Cholera,  D|:ysdale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  161 ;  Widman,  Rupprig,
Roth,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  948;  Hannaturia,  Gaspary,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  583;
Uterine  hemorrhage,  liawkes,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  132;  Teller,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.
580;  Hartmann,  Kallenbach,  Gaspai-,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  312;  Menorrhagia,
Patzak,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  235 ;  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnancy,  Miiller,
Schreter,  Wolf,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  382 ;  Miiller,  Rummel,  Schreter,
Rau,  Knorre,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  622;  Hemorrhage  with  abortion,  Kiisemann,  Kallen-
bach, B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  582  ;  Eclampsia,  Rummell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  10 ;  Post-
partum hemorrhage,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  271 ;  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  183 ;  Bell,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,  p.  405;  Laryngismus  stridulus,  B.  J.  II.,  vol.  12,  p.  457 ;  Laryngitis,


IPECACUANHA.  234

sp<mn  of  corc?s,  Pemer],  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  156;  Emphysema,  Meyer,  Petroz,
Miiller,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  567 ;  Asthma,  Frank,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  [>.  96  ;  Kreuss,
Sonnenburg,  Kiimpfer,  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  189 ;  Miiller,  Meyer,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  799 ;  Cough,  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.  39 ;  Knorre,
Lobethal,  Bernstein,  Hering,  Kasemann,  Hirsch,  B,  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  568-9 ;  Knorre,
Lobethal,  Bernstein,  Kasemann,  Hering,  Bigel,  Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  16 ;
Hartmann,  Schron,  Kasemann,  Schelling,  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.3,  p.  79 ;
Whooping  cough  Meyer,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  43 ;  Miiller,  Kafka,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,
p.  570;  Hcemoptysis,  ChaAraevs,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  195;  Eidherr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  805 ;  Hysteria,  Eummel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  286 ;  Hysterical  spasms,
Attomyr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  574;  Spasms,  Jahr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.
574 ;  Schreter,  Nenning,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  574 ;  Spasmodic  conditions,  Eum-
mel, Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  573;  Tetanus,  Trismus,  Schneider,  Hahnemann,  Ack-
erman,  Bogel,  B.J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  11;  Epilepsy,  Tietzer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.
573;  Ague,  Hering,  Loebthal,  Nagel,  Tripi,  Escallier,  Hencke,  Hirsch,  Biirkner,
Vehseman,  Miiller,  Horner,  Thorer,  Neumann,  Szontagh,  Kasemann,  Baertl,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  928-40;  Lobethal,  Ecallier,  Wurmb,  Caspar,  Hencke,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  4;  (34  cases),  Muller,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  271-273;  Hawkes,
Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  114;  Allen,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  239 ;  Hoffman,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.
112;  Morrison,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,  p.  152;  Intennittent  fevei^.  Stow,  Eaue'sEec,  1871,
p.  196 ;  Edmundson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  279  ;  Frost,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  272 ;  Carr
Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  204;  Measles,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  97;  Scarlet
fever,  Hahnemann,  Trinks,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  53;  Yellow  fever,  Taft,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  665;  Anceinia,  Haubold,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  604;  Opium
poisoning,  Korndoerfer,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  266.

^  Mind. Is  awkward  and  stumbles  against  everything.
Wrapt  in  thought;  taciturnity.
I  I  Full  of  inexpressible  desires.

iMoaning  and  sighing  with  the  fever. ^Intermittent.
iChild  cries  and  screams  violently  and  incessantly;  sticks
fist  into  mouth ;  face  pale,  body  cool.

■  Every  6  or  8  weeks  anorexia  and  hypochondria,  with

pressure  and  tension,  and  tympanitis  of  epigastrium;
constipation,  with  disgust  and  impatience  of  labor;  at-
tacks preceded  by  nausea,  and  tendency  to  diarrhoea.
^Hypochondriasis.

I  I  Dejected  mood,  morose,  enjoys  nothing.

I  Peevish;  irritable;  impatient;  morose,  scornful  mood.

nil  humor,  despises  everything.

I  I  Fretfulness. intermittent. ^Cholera  in  fjintum.

I  I  Extremely  impatient.

I  I  Morose  mood  that  scorns  everything,  and  desires  also  that

others  shall  not  appreciate  or  value  anything.

I I  Ailments  from  vexation  and  reserved  displeasure.

^  Sensorium.  BApoplexia  nervosa  et  serosa;  vertigo;  droop-
ing of  lips;  impaired  speech;  dribbling  of  saliva  from
mouth ;  paralysis  of  extremities.

■  Vertigo  when  walking  and  when  turning.


235  IPECACUANHA.

^  Inner  Head. iLacerating  pain in  forehead,  excited  and
aggravated  by  feeling  the  heart,  or  by  stooping.
I  Aching  in  forehead ;  fine  stinging  pains  in  forehead.

■  Headache  over  1.  eye.
Stitches  in  vertex,  or  forehead.

■  Lancinating  in  head.

I  I  Short  paroxysms  of  fine  and  violently  stinging  pains  in
head,  increasing  to  an  aching.

■  Stinging  headache,  with  heaviness  of  head,  also  with

drowsiness.

■  ■Headache,  as  if  bruised,  all  through  bones  of  head  and

down  into  root  of  tongue;  nausea,  vomiting;  >  outdoors.

■  ■Headache  as  of  a  bruise  of  brain  and  skull,  which  pierces

through  all  the  cranial  bones  into  roots  of  teeth,  with
nausea.

■  Headache  as  though  brain  were  mashed,  with  nausea  and

vomiting;  miliary  eruptions  on  forehead  and  cheeks  by
spells;  pale  face,  and  pale  mucous  membranes;  scanty
and  short  menses;  weak  pulse,  cold  hands;  morose,
enjoys  nothing. ^Chlorosis.

■  Lacerating  headache,  from  morning  till  noon.
I  I  Dull  drawing  in  head,  to  and  fro.

■  Beating  pain  in  head  and  pit  of  stomach  after  coughing.

■  Heat  and  throbbing  in  head,  with  red  cheeks.

■  Semilateral  headache,  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

I  I  Tensive  headache  in  occiput  and  nape  of  neck,  extend-
ing as  far  as  shoulders.

■  Pain  in  occiput  and  nape  of  neck.

■  ■Gastric  headaches,  occurring  in  nervous,  sensitive  per-

sons, commencing  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  Malarial  headache;  loss  of  appetite  and  vomiting.

■  Hydrocephaloid: fontanelles  open; painful  soreness  of

occiput and neck; blue rings under eyes; frequent
nosebleeding; pale  face;  nausea  and  vomiting;  green,
putrid  discharges  from  bowels.
*  Outer  Head. iCold  sweat  on  forehead. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Open  fontanelles ;  occiput  and  neck  sore.  ^Hydrocephaloid.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Worse  from  light,  especially  of  a  candle.

■  Blue  and  red  halo  around  light.

■  Optical  illusions  in  bright  colors.

■  Obscuration  of  sight;  eyes  inflamed.

I  I  Eyes  sunken ;  blue  margins  around  them. /^Cholera  in-
fantum.
I  I  Dilated  pupils.

■  Severe  shooting  pains  through  eyeballs,  profuse  lachry-

mation  on  looking  steadily ;  blue  and  red  halo  around
flame,  pupil  normal  and  mobile,  with  no  external  in-
flammation or  lesion,  except  slight  palpebral  conjunc-
tivitis. ^Choroiditis.


IPECACUANHA.  236

■Phlyctenules  and  ulcers  of  cornea  or  conjunctiva,  espe-
cially if  there  is  much  photophobia;  cornea  may  be
vascular ;  redness  of  conjunctiva,  lachrymation  and  pain
and  nausea.

■  Pustular  inflammation  of  cornea  and  conjunctiva.

■Child  after  catching  cold :  lids  red  and  swollen ;  photo-
phobia, lids  being  kept  tightly  closed  ;  copious,  purulent
discharge,  <  at  night;  conjunctiva  injected  and  swollen,
especially  on  r.  side,  where  engorgement  was  so  severe
that  pupil  appeared  buried  in  a  circular  depression  ;  dis-
charge from  eyes  so  copious  that  it  soiled  hair  and  ears ;
continual  copious,  green,  diarrhoeic  stools,  with  colic ;
great  emaciation ;  sleepless  day  and  night ;  edges  of  lid
red,  without  oedema;  r.  imbedded  cornea  ulcerated,  also
1.,  but  in  a  less  degree.

■Inflammation  of  eyes ;  on  opening  r.  lids,  which  were
swollen,  copious  gush  of  tears  ;  conjunctiva  of  bulb  in-
jected and  infiltrated,  and  on  close  examination  number
of  small  depressions  were  noticed  ;  intense  tearing  or
tensive  pains  in  eyes ;  great  photophobia.

■Scrofulous  ophthalmia  when  there  is  keratitis  with  ulcer-
ation or  infiltration  of  cornea ;  redness  of  eye,  extreme
photophobia,  pain  in  temples  and  forehead.

■  Catarrhal  conjunctivitis  with  profuse yellow  discharge

and  chemosis.

■  Scleroticse  yellow.

I  I  Hardened  mucus  in  external  canthi.

■  Twitching  of  eyelids.

*^  Hearing  and  Ears, i Cannot  endure  the  least  noise.

■  Ears  cold  during  febrile  heat.

^  Smell  and  Nose.  Coryza:  dry ;  with  stoppage  of  nose ;  loss
of  smell ;  nausea ;  epistaxis.
■Stoppage  of  nose;  loss  of  smell;  heaviness  of  head  ;  dry
cough,  particularly  at  night  coming  on  in  long  lasting
paroxysms,  with  painful  shocks  in  head  and  stomach ;
nausea  followed  by  vomiting,  general  sweat  and  great
weakness. ^Chronic  catarrh.

■  ■Nosebleed,  blood  bright  red;  face  pale.

Nose  itches ;  when  nausea  is  over,  violent  hunger.
*  Upper  Face. BFace :  pale  and  puffed  ;  pale,  and  body  cool;
sunken ;  deathly  pale,  sunken  eyes  with  blue  margins ;
livid,  yellowish.

■  Convulsive  twitches  in  muscles  of  face  and  lips.

■  Rash.

^  Lower  Face. '  iSkin  around  the  mouth  red.

Smarting  eruption  and'aphthse  on  margin  of  lips.

■  Lips:  blue,  during  chill;  W'hite,  during  hemorrhage.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. I Child  thrusts  its  fist  into  mouth ;  screams


237  IPECACUANHA.

violently;  face  pale;  body  cool ;  vomiting  and  watery
stools  ;  prostration  ;  spasms. ^Dentition.

I  I  Pain  in  a  hollow  tooth  when  biting  on  it.

I  I  Pain  in  molars >  while  eating;  <  in  afternoon  and
still  more  at  night.

I  Teeth  chatter,  with  chill. ^Intermittent.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. '  i  Loss  of  taste.

Taste:  bitter;  sweetish, bloody ;  like  rancid  oil, when  swal-
lowing; earthy;  flat,  with  white,  thickly  coated  tongue.

I  Tongue:  clean;  yellow  or  white ;  pale.

■  Disinclined  to  talk;  tongue  dry.

^^  Inner  Mouth, ii Profuse  accumulation  of  saliva;  is  con-
stantly obliged  to  swallow  it.
•Smarting  in  mouth  and  on  tongue.
13  Throat. I  Fauces  dry,  sore,  rough,  stinging.

■Spasmodic contractive sensation in  throat  and  chest ;
difficult  deglutition.

■  Pressure  in  throat,  with  pains  in  diaphragm.
I  I  Deep  red  color  of  tonsils  and  pharjmx.

I  I  Rapid  congestion  of  mucous  membrane  of  pharynx ;
secretion  of  a  thick,  plastic,  whitish,  nauseous  humor,
appearing  at  first  under  form  of  small  white  or  grayish
points,  either  on  tonsils  or  velum  palati  or  pharynx.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  1 1  Thirst  or  thirst-
lessness.

■  Desire  for  dainties  and  sweets.

■  ■Averse  to  all  food,  no  appetite;  earthy  taste;  stomach

feels  relaxed ;  nausea.

■  ■Great  disgust  and  loathing  of  any  sort  of  food.

^^  Eating and Drinking. ■Indisposition  from  indigestible
substances,  lemon peel,  berries,  raisins,  sweets, cake,
pastry  and  unripe  fruit,  salads,  pork,  fats^  sour  beer,  etc.
After  eating:  nausea;  vomiting;  stool.

■  Colic,  with  nausea  and  vomiting,  after  cold  drinks  or  ice

cream.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  Hiccough :
with  nausea;  of  children.

■  Eructations  every  eight  to  ten  minutes;  with  rumbling

in  abdomen.

■  Waterbrash.

■  ■Nausea: distressing;  constant,  with almost all  com-

plaints; as  if  from  stomach;  with  empty  eructations;
accumulation  of  much  saliva;  qualmishness,  and  efforts
to  vomit.

■  Nausea  and  retching  from  smoking;  primary  effects  of

tobacco.

■  Faintness,  nausea,  retching. ^Post-partum  hemorrhage.

■  Inclination  to  vomit  without  nausea.


IPECACUANHA.  238

I  Nausea,  profuse  saliva;  vomiting  of  white,  glairy  mucus;

<  stooping.

I I  Nausea,  with  distension  of  abdomen and  dryness  in
throat;  after  vomiting  inclined  to  sleep.

■  Constant  but  unavailing  desire  to  vomit;  or  immediately  .

after  vomiting  wishes  to  do  so  again.

■  Incessant  retching  with  vomiting  of  watery  fluids  and

cutting  pain  in  belly.

■  Constant  nausea  and  vomiting  of  yellowish  mucus.

■  Vomiting: of  ingesta; of  bile; of  grass  green  mucus;

bilious,  putrid;  copiously  of  jellylike  mucus;  of  blood,
or  of  a  pitchlike  substance;  of  a  dark  colored  liquid,
with  or  without  blood;  of  a  sour  fluid  ;  of  large  quanti-
ties of  mucus;  always  with  nausea;  during  pregnancy;
with  thirst,  sweat,  bad  breath;  with  diarrhoea,  colic,  dis-
tended abdomen;  with  clean  tongue.
I  I  Vomiting  causes  great  pain  in  loins  and  hips.

■  Nervous  vomiting,  frequent  and  with  constant  nausea.
■Vomiting  due  to  irritability  or  other  abnormal  condition

of  nerves  of  stomach,  particularly  when  tongue  is  clean,
and  persons  are  weak  and  nervous,  and  of  large  build ;
constant  nausea  and  retching  of  hysterical  w^omen;
morning  vomiting  in  weakly  persons  who  are  affected
by  worms;  nausea  in  nervous  fevers  and  that  which
remains  after  an  attack  of  indigestion.

■  Vomiting  of  food  soon  after  eating,  tasting  very  sour  and

accompanied  by  much  retching;  tongue  coated  in
middle,  edges  red ;  region  of  stomach  and  hypochondria
sensitive  to  pressure;  three  or  four  stools  daily;  general
weakness;  menses  irregular;  urine  dark,  depositing
urates.
■Vomits  everything  taken ;  food  causes  pain  during  short
time  it  remains  in  stomach;  tongue  brown  and  cleft;
bowels  regular;  urine  thick, ^Chronic  vomiting.

■  Loss  of  appetite  nine  months  ago,  without  assignable

cause;  then  followed  vomiting  of  all  food,  with  great
debility;  bowels  much  relaxed;  smarting  of  eyes;  cata-
menia  regular.

■  Vomiting  almost  constantly  for  days. ^Remittent  fever.

■  Emaciated,  scrofulous child,  suffering  from  disease  of

mesenteric  glands,  vomited  everything  taken  and
cried  the  whole  day ;  the  vomited  matter  and  accom-
panying chopped  stools  smelt  very  sour.

■  ■Constant  nausea  often  M'ith  vomiting  large  masses  of

mucus,  generally  green. ^Diarrhoea  of  children.

■  Tormina  and  bilious  vomiting,  coming  on  at  first  every

fourth  day,  but  latterly  ever}^  Saturday;  nausea  with
extreme  weakness  and  repeated  fainting;  frequent  at-


239  IPECACUANHA.

tacks  of  violent,  bilious  vomiting,  obliging  her  to  keep
in  bed  all  day ;  on  other  days  perfectly  well.

■  Vomiting  of  infants  at  the  breast.

■  Stooping  causes  vomiting,

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  i  Uncomfortable  feeling  in
epigastrium.

■  Violent distress in pit of  stomach; attacks of  pain;

beating.

■  ilndescribable  sick  feeling  in  stomach.

■  iSensation  as  if  stomach  hung  down  relaxed.

I  I  Pressure  in  stomach;  clutching  pains;  beating.
■Cardialgia;  typical  form.

■  ■Pain  most  severe  in  front  of  abdomen,  extending  to  1.

hypochondrium,  to  sides,  to  back,  and  base  of  chest,  with
swelling  of  stomach;  great  agitation;  constant  nausea
proceeding  from  stomach,  with  em[)ty  eructations  and
accumulation  of  much  saliva;  easy  vomiting;  diarrhoea.

■  Stomachal catarrh, with abhorrence of  all  food, and

tobacco;  with  nausea,  vomiting,  colic  and  diarrhoea;
tongue  always  clean.

■  Gastric  catarrh  from  indigestible  food  or  ice  cold  things;

pain  and  mucous  vomiting.

■  After  eating  fat  pork,  headache,  loss  of  appetite,  nausea,

vomiting;  prostration  and  debility;  pain  in  forehead;
pale,  bloated  face;  photophobia  without  redness  of  eyes;
flat  taste,  slimy  coated  tongue;  great  thirst;  frequent
vomiting  preceded  by  pressure  and  pain  in  stomach;
frequent,  offensive,  flocky  stools;  slight,  dry  cough;  oc-
casional twitchings  of  muscles  of  face,  lips  and  eyelids;
restless  sleep  with  frequent  startings.

■  Indigestion,  from  overloading  stomach.

■  Dyspepsia  every  day,  or  every  other  day,  at  same  hour.

■  After  slight  digestive  disturbance,  sudden  vomiting  of

blood,  occurring  three  times  within  seven  daj^s;  blood
at  first  dark  and  coagulated,  in  subsequent  attacks  fluid
and  bright  red,  followed  by  bloody  stools;  great  pros-
tration;  frequent  fainting  fits;  dimness  of  sight;  slight-
est motion  or  cough  causes  nausea;  tongue  brown,  dry,
like  earth;  unquenchable  thirst;  obstinate  constipation.

■  After  chagrin,  constant  pressing  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,

loss  of  appetite,  frequent  nausea;  eight  days  after  this,
in  consequence  of  anger,  sudden  vomiting,  first  of  clotted,
then  of  fluid  blood,  amounting  to  about  two  pounds;
deathly  pale;  almost  pulseless;  faintness.

■  Acute  distress  in  epigastric  region;  forcibly  vomiting  im-

mense quantities  of  black,  tarlike  matter,  gushing  from
nostrils  as  well  as  mouth;  extremities  cold;  hippocratic
countenance;  pulse  almost  imperceptible;  cold,  clammy
sweats;  extreme  prostration  and  exhaustion. ^Meleena.


IPECACUANHA.  240

I  After  long  continued,  pressing  pain  in  stomach,  which
alternated  with  toothache,  sudden  vomiting  of  blood,
with  great  faintness;  blood  dark,  thin,  about  one  pound
in  quantity ;  pulse  full ;  a  second  attack  with  great  faint-
ness, anxiety,  feeble  pulse,  pale,  cold  face  and  cold  hands.

I  Pale,  ansemic  girl,  subject  to  pains  in  stomach  and  irri-
table conditions  of  mind,  was  suddenly  seized  with  vom-
iting of  blood  after  indulging  in  strong  coffee ;  blood  at
first  brownish  black,  then  black  and  half  coagulated,
escaping  in  great  quantities ;  between  each  attack  of
vomiting,  which  occurs  about  every  half  hour,  anxiet}^,
pressure  in  stomach,  fainting;  pulse  small  and  feeble;
face  and  hands  pale  and  cold  ;  thirst  and  internal  heat.

■After  exposure  to  cold  and  wet,  rigors  and  dyspnoea,  fol-
lowed by  copious  spitting  of  blood ;  cannot  speak  ;  sits
on  a  chair,  gasping,  and  every  few  seconds  brings  up  a
large  mouthful  of  bright  colored,  frothy  blood ;  pulse
small  and  frequent;  respirations  short  and  very  fre-
quent; face  livid  and  expressive  of  anxiety.  ^HEemop-
tysis.

iSudden  attack;  blood  dark,  black,  sour;  paleness;  cold-
ness; pulse  scarcely  perceptible;  fainting;  anxiety;
pressure  in  stomach  ;  great  thirst;  oppression  of  breath-
ing. ^Hsematemesis.

iHsematemesis  of  children.
^^  Hypochondria, l Pinching  pain  in  both  hypochondria  and
in  region  of  pit  of  stomach.

I  Pain  in  1.  hypochondrium.

■  Diaphragm  feels  as  if  pressed  between  two  millstones,

front  to  back.
^^  Abdomen, iiDistressing  feeling  in  abdomen,  as  though

stomach  were  hanging  down,  relaxed.
I  Sore  feeling  in  abdomen.
llGriping,  as  from  a  hand,  each  finger  sharply  pressing

into  intestines ;  >  during  rest,  much  <  by  motion.

■  Clutching  and  squeezing  in  abdomen.

■  ■Flatulent colic  about navel,  as  though  bowels were

grasped  with  hand. ^Dysenteric  diarrhoea.

■  ■Cutting  colic  near  umbilicus;  sometimes  shivering.

■  ■Tenderness  and  pain  about  umbilicus,  towards  uterus.

■  Stitches  from  navel  to  uterus.

■  Cutting  pain  almost  constantly  running  from  1.  to  r.  w4th

every  movement.

■  Paroxysms  of  shooting  across abdomen  from  1.  to  r.,

causing  nausea  and  vomiting,  vomits  froth  and  bile
with  difficulty ;  when  vomiting,  coughs  to  bring  it  up  ;
sweats ;  offensive  black  stools ;  vomiting  causes  great
pain  in  loins  and  hips,  as  if  all  the  bones  in  body  were
being  torn  to  pieces.


241  IPECACUANHA.

■  Severe  pains  in  abdomen,  radiating  to  all  sides.

■  Flatulent  colic,  with  frequent  loose  stools.

iColic  of  children:  with  diarrhoea,  uneasiness,  screaming
and  tossing  about";  from  indigestion ;  after  acid  or  un-
ripe fruit,  beer,  etc.

I  Inguinal  hernia,  readily  reducible,  or  strangulated.
^'^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Stool :  bloody ;  as  if  fermented ;  consist-
ence and  appearance  of  fermented  j^east;  spurting  out
with  much  flatus ;  very  oflensive ;  light  yellow ;  lemon
colored;  green  as  grass;  greenish  mucus;  lump}^  greenish
watery;  white  mucous,  bloody;  3'ellow,  liquid,  covered
with  bloody  mucus;  pitchlike  or  like  frothy  molasses;
slimy,  bloody,  offensive,  followed  by  tenesmus;  putrid
smelling;  containing  blood  and  matter.

■  Diarrhoea  of  teething  children,  yellow,  white  or  green

discharges,  no  pain  or  emaciation,  but  serious  because
of  its  long  continuance;  particularly  indicated  at  period
of  weaning  when  food  disagrees.

■  Diarrhoea:  with  pain,  causing  unceasing  screaming  and

tossing  about,  in  children;  from  taking  cold;  from  dis-
ordered stomach,  after  late  suppers;  of  infants,  with
vomiting  of  green  or  whitish  matter;  due  to  chill  or  to
mental  emotions;  after  overloading  stomach  with
sweets,  or  fat  pastry;  in  the  Autumn.
■Summer  complaint  of  children,  with  crying,  tossing,  large
abdomen,  frequent,  small,  yellow,  fermented  stools.

■  Colliquative  diarrhoea  of  dark  colored  stools,  or  of  green-

ish matter,  with  particles  having  appearance  of  coagula.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea,  of  miasmatic  origin;  clean  tongue  and

frequent  nausea,  constant  pain  at  umbilicus.
■Acute  internal  catarrh.

■  Epidemic  dysentery,  with  nausea,  vomiting,  pain  in  epi-

gastrium, pressive  frontal  headache,  loaded  tongue,
tenesmus,  mucous  fetid  diarrhoea,  <  at  night.

■  Dysentery:  stools  frequent,  slightly  tinged  with  blood,  and

often  entirely  composed  of  blood  and  slime;  in  the  Fall,
with  vomiting  of  bile,  tenesmus  after  stool  and  simulta-
neous affection  of  coeliacus;  stools  almost  black,  and  fer-
mented like  frothy  molasses;  of  children;  cold  nights
after  hot  days.

■  Cholera  infantum: nausea,  vomiting,  colic, diarrhoea;

especially  in  fat,  pale  children;  nausea  and  vomiting  of
yellowish  mucus;  lumpy,  greenish,  watery  stools;  pale-
ness of  face;  blue  margins  around  eyes;  wants  to  lie
down,  ill  humor;  copious,  fermented,  flatulent,  lemon
colored  stools,  with  thirst,  fever  and  fretfulness.
■Stools  light  green  or  an  arsenic  green.

■  First  symptoms  of  cholera  Asiatica ;  the  nausea  and  vom-

iting predominates,  headache  and  tightness  of  chest.

VOL.  VI. — 16.


IPECACUANHA.  242

I  Vomiting  after  all  ingesta,  and  as  often  as  every  quarter  of
hour,  without  cause;  vomiting  copious,  preceded  by
shivering  all  over;  no  coldness  or  cramps;  pulse  slow;
tongue  furred. ^Cholera.

Before  stool :  colic,  nausea,  vomiting.

During  stool:  colic,  nausea,  vomiting;  violent  tenesmus;
lassitude,  coldness,  paleness  of  face.

After  stool:  lassitude;  tenesmus;  twitching  of  face.

I  Hemorrhoids  bleeding  very  profusely.

I  Itching  at  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine:  scanty,  dark  red; turbid,  with
red  sediment.

■  Yellowish  red  sediment  in  urine. ^Quotidian  ague.

■  Unsuccessful  urging  to  urinate.

■  Ischuria,  with  convulsions.

■  Hsematuria:  with  cutting  in  abdomen  and  urethra;  from

suppressed  itch ;  with  vesical  spasm.

■  After becoming chilled, felt ill all over;  very  weak;

could  hardly  move  about  from  vertigo;  confused  ideas;
severe  pain  in  kidneys,  with  heat  in  lower  bowels  as  if.
hot  water  was  poured  into  them;  towards  evening  vio-
lent pain  in  abdominal  region  and  bladder,  with  desire
to  urinate,  with  passage  of  scalding  urine  and  blood,
fluid  and  clotted;  next  day,  too  weak  to  stand;  feet
quite  cold,  and  as  if  paralyzed;  head  stupefied,  could
not  sit  up;  more  blood,  followed  by  swoon,  with  deadly
pallor,  hardly  perceptible  pulse,  and  cold  extremities;
could  hardly  speak;  heaviness  of  head,  uneasiness  and
inclination  to  vomit,  pressure  on  pit  of  stomach,  pain  in
lower  bowels  and  kidneys,  weight  and  coldness  of  feet ;
frequent  micturition. ^Hsematuria.

■  During  urination:  burning  in  urethra;  pains  in  back  and

epigastrium.
^Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Prolapsus  and  hemorrhage;
profuse,  clotted  blood,  with  heavy,  oppressed  breathing;
constant  flow  of  bright  red  blood,  with  cutting  about
umbilicus;  constant  nausea  and  vomiting;  feels  cold
and  is  very  pale;  dizziness  and  headache;  chili  and
coldness  of  body  while  internal  heat  rises  up  into  head,
W'ith  a  bearing  down  pressure  to  uterus  and  anus;
fainting;  blood  spitting,  hEematemesis;  faintness  with
convulsions.

■  Great  debility  and  leucorrhoea  during  intervals  of  menses.

■  Continual  discharge  of  bright  red  blood.

Profuse  menstruation,  with  constant  nausea,  not  a  mo-
ment's relief,  not  even  after  vomiting;  nausea  proceeds
from  stomach,  and  the  discharge  of  bright  red  blood  is
increased  with  every  effort  to  vomit,  and  flows  with  a


243  IPECACUANHA.

gush;  violent  pressure  over  uterus  and  rectum,  with
shuddering  and  chilliness;  heat  about  head  and  debility;
gasping  for  breath,  faintness;  after  childbirth,  after  re-
moval of  placenta  or  after  miscarriage;  <  when  getting
out  of  bed. ^Uterine  hemorrhage.

I  Menses  appeared  four  times  in  seven  weeks,  and  last  time
so  seriously  that  blood  passed  in  large  clots,  and  such  a
quantity  of  black  fluid  that  it  brought  on  swooning,  loss
of  consciousness ;  vomiting  of  mucus,  wdth  cold  skin  look-
ing like  wax,  blue  lips,  small,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse.
^Congestive  menorrhagia.

■Menses:  too  early  and  too  profuse;  blood  bright  red;
menses  return  every  two  weeks ;  great  weakness  after
menses;  peevish  humor;  aching  in  head;  lancinating
in  forehead;  pale  face;  blue  rings  around  eyes;  vomit-
ing of  ingesta;  distress  in  umbilical  region.

■  Profuse  menstruation,  with  constant  nausea;  not  a  mo-

ment's relief,  not  even  after  vomiting.
I  Discharge  of  blood  before  the  proper  period.
I  I  Scanty  or  short  menses.
Dysmenorrhoea.
■Severe  pain  about  umbilicus,  extending  towards  uterus,

most  distress  about  navel,  but  it  runs  off  into  uterus

■  With  every  movement  a  cutting  pain,  almost  constantly

running  from  left to  right.

■  Uterine  pains  running  down.

■  Pain  extending  towards  and  passing  off  into  uterus.

^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■■Vomiting of
pregnancy;  in  some  cases  more  nausea  than  vomiting.
I  I  Vertigo  in  pregnancy,  with  pale,  bluish,  puffed  face,  blue
lips  and  nails;  undulation  of  jugular  veins.

■  Threatened  abortion,  often  with  a  sharp  or  pinching  pain

around  umbilicus,  which  runs  downward  to  uterus,  with
constant  nausea  and  discharge  of  bright  red  blood ;  con-
vulsions.

■  In  sixth  week  of  pregnancy  seized  suddenly  with  abdomi-

nal pains,  heat  in  epigastrium  and  vertigo;  flooding  soon
followed  by  shooting  in  kidneys,  weakness  and  heavi-
ness of  thighs  and  general  debility;  flooding  increased
hourly,  soon  passing  through  mattrass,  and  flowing  in
abundance  under  bed;  colic  increased,  face  pale  and
eyes  encircled  with  blue;  miscarriage  followed,  accom-
panied by  acute  pain;  hemorrhage  became  more
serious;  pains  in  heart  followed  by  dryness  of  mouth
and  great  thirst;  great  exhaustion,  could  hardly  speak.

■  After  abortion  occasional  slight  loss  of  blood,  for  four

months,  when  an  alarming  hemorrhage  took  place  with
the  usual  symptoms,  besides  vomiting  after  least  drink.


IPECACUANHA.  244

llncessant  flooding;  complete  prostration;  breathing
heavy;  oppression;  colorless  face  and  lips;  ringing  in
ears;  faint  on  raising  head  from  pillow;  flow  bright  red ;
much  persistent  nausea;  pain  in  umbilical  region,  run-
ning down  to  uterus.

I  During  labor  pains  great  hemorrhage,  apparently  from

placenta.

■  Labor  pains spasmodic; cutting across from 1. to r. ;

nausea;  clutching  about  navel.

I I  Uterine  pains  accompanied  by  severe  cutting  pains  in
umbilical  region,  interfering  with  true  pains;  faintness
and  nausea.

■  Uterine  pains  running  downward.

■  ■Stitches  darting  off  from  umbilicus  towards  uterus.

■After  removal  of  placenta,  sudden  and  alarming  disten-
sion of  abdomen  in  region  of  atonic  uterus;  face  and
tongue  pale;  sighing  respiration;  faintness,  nausea,
retching;  cutting  pains  about  umbilicus.  ^Post-partum
hemorrhage.

■  Arterial  bleeding  from  partial  separation  of  placenta.

■  Post-partum  hemorrhage ;  placenta  attached ;  hemorrhage

frightful,  very  fluid  and  gushing.

■  Metrorrhagia,  often  after  confinement,  heralded  by  slow

pulse,  nausea,  etc. ;  steady  flow  of  bright,  red  blood.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  in  nursing  women.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Voice
hollow.

■  Spasm  of  cords;  constant,  alternate  contraction  and  re-

laxation of  cords,  following  each  other  in  rapid  succes-
sion.

■  Contraction  accompanied  by  a  sensation  of  tickling  at

entrance  of  trachea.
■Spasm  of  glottis;  blueness  of  face  and  coldness  of  extrem-
ities.

■  Inflammation  of  fossa;  very  little  oedema. ^Laryngitis.

■  ■Rattling in bronchi,  when drawing a long breath;

large  accumulation  of  mucus  in  bronchi,  difficult  to  raise.

■  I  Rattling  noises  in  air  passages  during  respiration.

■  Suffocative  attacks  from  foreign  substances  in  windpipe.

■  Bronchitis,  with  loud  mucous  rales;  difficult  expectora-

tion; cough  with  nausea,  even  vomiting,  or  oppression,
>  by  abundant  expectoration.
'^^  Respiration. 'Oppression  of  chest  in  forenoon,  with  short-
ness of  breath,  as  from  inhaling  dust.

■  Breathing: anxious  and  hurried; short and hurried;

short  and  panting;  heavy.
■Rattling  noise  in  bronchi  when  drawing  breath.
■Breath  fetid,  with  vomiting  and  sweat.


245  IPECACUANHA.

1 1  Difficulty  of  breathing  from  least  exercise.

I  I  Pain  in  diaphragm  takes  away  breath.

I I  Violent  degree  of  dyspnoea,  with  wheezing,  and  great
weight  and  anxiety  about  prsecordia.

M Attacks  of  suffocation;  >  in  open  air;  <  from  least
motion ;  constriction  in  throat  and  chest.

■  Threatened  suffocation  from  accumulation  of  mucus.

■  Cough  impedes  respiration,  even  to  suffocation.

■  Loses  breath with  the  cough,  turns  pale  in  face  and

stiffens. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Suffocative  cough  with  dyspnoea,  nausea  vomituritio,  at

end  of  attack. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Urgent  dyspnoea,  with  sense  of  constriction  across  chest,

accompanied  by  violent  and  convulsive  cough.
■Dry,  spasmodic,  shattering  cough;  during  attack  arrest
of  breathing,  patient  falling  senseless  to  floor;  each  at-
tack threatens  to  end  fatally,  and  can  only  be  overcome
by  use  of  cold  water.

■  Difficult  expiration.

■Severe  and  convulsive  paroxysm  of  asthma.

■  Violent  constriction  of  throat  and  chest,  peculiar,  panting

sound;  gasps  for  air  at  open  window;  face  pale;  scarcely
perceptible  pulse;  <  from  least  motion;  threatened  suf-
focation. ^Asthma.

■Spasmodic  asthma:  with  great  constriction  in  throat  and
chest;  with  peculiar  wheezing  noise;  with  danger  of
suffocation;  with  bronchial  catarrh;  of  adults;  in  hys-
terical subjects ;  after  suppressed  miliary  eruptions.

■Asthma,  cyanosis  supervening  during  fit,  with  frequent
dry  cough,  cold  sweat  on  face  and  extremities,  constitu-
tional vomiturition,  nausea  or  even  vomiting  after  cough.

■  Nightly  suffocative  fits. ^Asthma.

■  Asthma  Millari,  with  tickling  in  larynx,  retching  and

vomiting.
■Asthma  of  emphysematous  subjects,  when  auscultation
detects  considerable  quantity  of  mucus  accumulated  in
bronchi,  which  patient  cannot  by  any  effort  throw  up  in
sufficient  quantity;  coughing  brings  on  nausea.
^  Cough.  'Dry  cough,  caused  by  tickling  in  upper  part  of
larynx.

■  Cough  caused  by  a  constrictive  tickling  from  upper  por-

tion of  larynx  to  lowest  extremity  of  bronchi.
•■Cough  dry,  spasmodic,  capricious,  provoked  by  tickling
and  irritation  of  larynx,  after  coryza,  at  first  dry,  then
fluent.

■  Spasmodic  or  catarrhal  titillating  cough,  or  suffocating

cough  with  dyspnoea,  nausea,  vomiturition,  especially
at  end  of  paroxysm, or  with expectoration  of  scanty,


IPECACUANHA.  246

albuminous,  nauseous  mucus;  mucous  rales  and  vom-
iting of  food.
■Violent  spasmodic  cough,  cannot  cough  soon  enough  at
first;  covers  mouth  with  hand,  in  order  not  to  inhale  too
much  air.

■  Frequent  attacks  of  spasmodic  cough,  shaking,  racking,

hollow;  quicklj'  following  coughs  from  tickling  in. up-
per part  of  larynx,  as  from  vapor  of  sulphur;  expecto-
ration of  blood  and  mucus  in  morning.
■Spasmodic  cough  with  tendency  to  vomit,  or  with  vomit-
ing of  whitish  mucus;  mucosity  is  easily  produced  in
chest,  and  cough  produces  sonorous  and  bubbling  rales.

■  Dry,  spasmodic  cough  without  vascular  excitement.

■  Dry,  spasmodic  cough  of  old  persons,  coming  on  in  fits,

particularly  at  night  after  going  to  bed,  or  after  dinner;
tends  to  emphysema.

■  Cough  with  pain  in  abdomen,  especially  about  navel,  or

pressure  on  bladder,  hindering  passage  of  urine;  beat-
ing in  head,  or  in  pit  of  stomach ;  sense  of  excoriation  in
chest;  after  paroxysm  of  coughing  respiration  continues
short,  and  forehead  streams  with  perspiration;  <  in
open  air.
■Cough  coming  on  after  a  meal,  especially  p.m.;  cough  ex-
cited by  each  inspiration;  tickling  and  constriction  of
upper  part  of  trachea,  coming  on  in  open  air;  sudden
precipitate  fit  of  coughing;  failure  of  breath;  danger  of
asphyxia  from  mucus;  anguish  from  choking;  eyes
starting  out  of  head;  face  bluish  red;  buccal  and  nasal
hemorrhage;  eflbrts  at  vomiting;  fit  ending  with  vom-
iting of  food ;  swooning  during  fit.  ^Influenza.
""■Suffocative,  racking,  very  exhausting  cough,  lasting  an
hour,  towards  evening.

■  ■Suffocating  cough,  whereby  child  becomes  quite stiff'

and  blue  in  face.

■  ■Loses  breath  with  cough,  turns  pale  in  face,  and  stiffens.
■Suffocative  evening  cough;  continuous  cough,  with  sweat

on  forehead,  shocks  in  head,  retching  and  vomiting.
■Strangling  with  cough  till  blue  in  face. ^Pertussis.

■  Incessant  and  most  violent  cough  with  every  breath.

■  ■Cough  causing  inclination  to  vomit  without  nausea.

■  Cough,  with  retching,  much  mucous  expectoration  and

considerable  dyspnoea.

■  Cough  causes  gagging,  vomiting  is  followed  by  relief.

■  Cough  with  expectoration  of  blood.

■  Convulsive  evening  cough,  expectoration  having  a  repul-

sive metallic  taste.

■  Cough  especially  at  night,  with  loathing  and  vomiting.

■  Croupy  coughs  occurring  at  night.


247  IPECACUANHA.

I  Cough:  nervous,  spasmodic;  rough,  shakmg;  dry,  from

titillation  in  upper  part  of  larynx ;  with  every  breath ;
returning  after  exertion ;  <  from  cool  air;  with  inclina-
tion to  vomit;  with  spitting  of  blood  from  least  effort;
constant,  no  phlegm  yields,  though  chest  seems  full;
strangling,  so  much  mucus  seems  accumulated  in  bron-
chia; croupy,  at  night;  fat  children;  in  hysterical
women;  in  teething  children.

During  cough:  headache;  sore  pain  in  chest;  paroxysms  of
suffocation,  with  rigidity  of  body ;  painful  concussions
(shocks)  in  stomach  and  head;  pains  in  epigastrium  and
umbilical  region;  bleeding  from  mouth  and  nose;  nau-
sea, retching,  vomiting ;  perspiration  of  forehead ;  blue-
nessof  face;  jarring  of  body;  loss  of  consciousness  and
falling  down.

iSpasm  of  glottis  before  paroxysm;  bleeding  from  nose
and  mouth  during  coughing  fits;  vomiting  of  mucus  or
food;  convulsions  and  stiffening  of  body  backwards;
vomiting  of  food  without  coughing;  rattling  of  mucus
in  bronchial  tubes;  rash,  eruption. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Convulsion  of  glottis  continuing  so  long  that  child  re-

mains for  a  time  without  respiring;  cough  dry,  vomit-
ing after  the  fit  without  expelling  much  mucus ;  dysp-
noea; fine  rales  in  back  at  lower  part  of  thorax.
^Whooping  cough.

■  Violent,  shattering,  hollow  coughs,  following  each  other

in  quick  succession,  and  do  not  admit  recovery  of
breath;  expectorates  mornings  some  light  red  blood,
mixed  with  mucus,  of  a  putrid,  sweetish  taste.  ^Tussis
convulsiva.

I I  Whooping  cough :  with  nosebleed ;  bleeding  from  mouth ;
vomiting;  loses  breath,  turns  pale  or  blue,  and  becomes
rigid.

■  Febrile  cough  (principally  after  Pulsat.  and  Nux  vom.),  in

women  and  children ;  irregular  periods  of  heat,  during
which  the  dry  cough  gets  worse.

■  Tussis  abdominalis,  with  vomiting  which  relieves.

■  I  Phlegm rattling on chest,  sometimes vomited, with

young  children.
Expectoration  of  mucus  with  metallic  taste.
I  I  Sputa  scanty,  albuminous.

■  Expectoration: mornings,  of  a  light  red  blood,  mixed

with  mucus,  or  of  ropy  mucus,  often  vomited;  of  blood
from  least  effort.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ^Spasmodic  tightness  of  chest,
with  contraction  of  throat  and  panting  breathing.

■  Great  oppression  of  chest,  can  hardly  breathe. ^Inter-

mittent fever.


IPECACUANHA.  248

■  Acute  catarrh  of  children ;  suffocating  cough,  with  con-

gested and  bluish  face,  and  loss  of  breath,  or  when  cough
.  .  is  accompanied  by  nausea  and  vomiting,  or  provoked
by  a  tickling  in  larynx,  with  throbbing  of  head  and
heart  and  longing  to  pass  water.
■Rattling  of  large  bubbles;  fever,  but  face  rather  pale;
cough  and  gagging.

■  Collection  of  mucus  which  is  difficult  to  expectorate;

expectoration  gives  but  temporary  relief.
I  I  Strangling  as  if  from  mucus  in  chest.
EBronchitis:  of  children;  with  accumulation  of  phlegm,

which  threatens  to  suffocate;  spasmodic  cough ;  rash  on

chest.

■  Fine,  rattling  noises  in  chest,  spasmodic  cough;  nausea;

oedema  pulmonum.

■  Pulmonary  congestion  and  simple  pneumonia,  consequent

upon  repercussion  of  scarlatinal  eruption.

■  Infantile  pneumonia;  respiration  rapid,  difficult;  surface

blue;  face  pale.

■  Profuse  hemorrhage,  of  a  bright  red  color,  provoked  by

a  dry,  tickling,  racking  cough,  or  even  by  a  little  hawk-
ing, <  from  least  exertion;  preceded  by  a  sense  of  bub-
bling in  chest  and  accompanied  by  nausea,  chills,  heavy
breathing,  oppression,  livid  face,  small  and  frequent
pulse,  anxiety  and  debility ;  cannot  utter  a  word  ;  pro-
tracted taste  of  blood  in  mouth.

■Hemorrhage  from  lungs  after  venesection,  especially  if
bleeding  is  scanty,  constituting  an  expectoration  of
blood  streaked  mucus ;  or  a  blood  spitting,  from  least
effort,  without  cough.

■Blood  frothy  and  bright  colored;  gasping  for  breath
pulse  small  and  frequent ;  face  livid  and  anxious.

■  ■Hemorrhage  from  lungs:  bright  red ;  coming  up  with

slight  effort ;  <  from  least  exertion;  frequent  hacking,
with  expectoration  of  blood  streaked  mucus;  with  or
without  cough ;  after  disturbed  catamenia ;  after  me-
chanical injuries;  after  former  bleedings  have  weakened
lungs  ;  with  dry  cough  in  phthisis.

■  Hsemoptysis ;  recent  cases.

■  Vomiting  and  complication  of  asthma  in  emphj^sematous

subjects. ^Influenza.

■  Cyanotic  symptoms  with  spasms  of  chest  and  d3'spnoea.

■  Spamodic  affections  of  chest.

■Shooting  pain  with  remissions,  not  inflammatory,  can-
not breathe,  puts  both  hands  down,  bends  forward,
opens  windows,  gasps  for  breath ; attacks  <  at  night.

■  Emphysema  of  old  people

'^  Heart, Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse: large  and soft;
accelerated  but  weak ;  sometimes  imperceptible.


249  IPECACUANHA.

^'  Neck  and  Back, l  Swelling  and  suppuration  in  throat  pit.
I  Cramp  between  scapulae  during  motion.
Much  pain  in  back,  at  same  time  in  limbs.
■Shooting  pains,  from  r.  kidney  down  thigh  to  knee,  like
cramp.
^^  Upper  Limbs. iColdnessofonehand,  while  the  other  is  hot.

iCold  hands.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Sensation  in  femur,  as  if  dislocated,  on  sit-
ting down.

■  Cramps  in  thighs,  at  night,  with  lumps  in  thighs.

■  Convulsive  twitchings  of  legs  and  feet. ^Hemorrhage.
I  I  Itching  of  calves.

I  I  Ulcer  with  black  base  on  foot.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Sensation  as  if  joints  had  gone  to  sleep.
I  I  Pain  in  joints,  as  is  usual  when  limb  goes  to  sleep.

■  ■Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  all  the  bones.

■  Cold  hands  and  feet.

^*  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  griping  in  intestines  >.

Restless,  tosses  about  from  side  to  side.

Hands  clenched  and  arms  thrown  violently  forward.

Puts  both  hands  down,  bends  forward:  on  account  of
shooting  pain  in  chest.

Sitting  down :  sensation  in  femur  as  if  dislocated.

Sits  on  a  chair  gasping:  after  blood  spitting.

Could  not  sit  up:  after  pain  in  abdomen.

Falling  down:  during  cough,  with  unconsciousness.

Wants  to  lie  down :  cholera  infantum.

Lies  upon  back  unconscious:  during  spasms.

Head  thrown  back:  during  spasms.

Body  bent  backwards:  during  hysterical  spasm.

Body  rigid,  stretched  out,  jerking  of  arms.

Bod}'^  violently  bent  backwards  and  drawn  in  same  direc-
tion by  spasmodic  jerks.

Slightest  motion  causes :  nausea,  cutting  pain  in  abdomen ;
attacks  of  suffocation ;  constriction  of  throat  < ;  cutting
pain  from  1.  to  r.  through  uterus.

Motion:  griping  in  intestines  <;  sweat  <;  cramp  be-
tween scapulae;  sweat  <.

Least  effort:  'difficulty  of  breathing;  spitting  of  blood;
profuse  hemorrhage.

Exertion:  cough  returns.

On  raising  head  from  pillow:  faintness.

Getting  out  of  bed:  vertigo  and  weakness  of  knees;  men-
struation <.

Tossing  about:  from  diarrhoea.

Tossing  up  body:  during  spasm.
^  Nerves. ■Oversensitive  to  heat  or  cold.

■  Restlessness  with  the  fever. ^Intermittent.


IPECACUANHA.  250

I  Very  weak,  averse  to  all  food ;  nausea;  sudden  prostration.
I  Extreme  prostration  and  exhaustion ;  seemingly  the  last

straits  of  vitality  are  reached.  ^Melsena.
1  I  Wants  to  lie  down.  ^Cholera  infantum.
I  Awkward,  stumbles  against  everything.

■  Fainting;  convulsions;  apoplectic  sopor.

I  Hysterical  spasms,  coming  on  several  times  a  day,  and
gradually  growing  more  severe;  body  bent  backwards;
muscles  of  face  distorted ;  groaning.

■  Hysteria;  every  fresh  development  of  hysterical  symp-

toms brings  on  a  sensation  of  continual  nausea.

■  Nervous  attacks  with  feeling  of  suffocation.

■  Convulsive  twitching  in  limbs,  a  painful  tremor.

■  Spasms  without  loss  of  consciousness.

■  Tetanic  rigidity  of  body  with  bluish  redness  of  face.

■  Body  rigid,  stretched  out,  spasmodic  jerking  of  arms.

■  Body  violently  bent  backwards  and  drawn  in  same  direc-

tion by  spasmodic  jerks. ^Tetanus.

■  Spasms  after  catching  cold  during  purpura;  lies  upon

back  unconscious;  face  pale  and  swollen;  eyes  at  one
time  closed,  again  open;  horrible  twitching  of  muscles
efface,  lips  and  eyelids;  spasms  of  arms  and  legs  often
tossing  up  the  body;  attacks  come  on  every  five  minutes,
lasting  ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  and  are  followed  by  great
prostration;  occasional  retching.

■  Clonic  or  tonic  spasms  in  children  and  hysterical  women;

head  thrown  back ;  loss  of  consciousness;  outcries;  pale,
puffed  face;  distortion  of  muscles  of  face  and  of  half
closed  eyes;  convulsive  twitchings  of  muscles  of  face,
lips,  eyelids  and  limbs;  asthma;  nausea;  vomiting.

■  Awoke  from  sleep  in  evening  with  wide  open,  staring

eyes;  hands  clenched  and  arms  thrown  violently  for-
ward ;  lies  quiet  several  minutes,  then  gasps  and  groans ;
constant  staring  with  spasmodic  contraction  of  r.  arm ;
eleven  attacks  in  twenty-four  hours.

■  Frightful  spasms  affecting  whole  of  1.  side,  followed  by

paralysis;  eyes  fixed  and  turned  to  right;  pupils  dilated
and  insensible ;  frequent  opening  and  shutting  of  lids ;
slight  contractions  of  r.  corner  of  mouth;  at  times  regu-
lar movements  of  r.  arm  and  hand;  pulse  frequent  and
feeble ;  tracheal  rale,  as  in  paralysis  of  lungs ;  discharge
of  brown  mucus  from  mouth;  respiration  irregular;  in-
spiration short,  followed  by  slow,  sighing  expiration;
skin  hot,  but  r.  ear  cold. ^Eclampsia.

■  Eclampsia in  pregnancy  or  childbed; violent  cutting

around  navel;  vomiting;  pale  face.

■  Fainting,  summer  heat  or  hot  rooms,  with  nausea.

■  Convulsions:  in  whooping  cough ;  from  suppressed  exan-

thema ;  from  indigestible  food,  etc.


251  IPECACUANHA.

1 1  Tetanic  spasms  from  swallowing  tobacco.
M  Tetanic  spasms  in  old  lady,  with  starting,  twitching;
coughs  up  bloody  phlegm.

■  Tetanus;  trismus.

■  Opisthotonos  and  emprosthotonos.

■  Catalepsy.

■  Epileptiform spasms,  with shrieks; opisthotonos; face

pale,  puffed ;  gastric  derangement.

■  Epilepsy  of  children or  secondary  epilepsy, when its

starting  point  is  the  pneumogastric  nerve.
^^  Sleep. ■Yawning  and  stretching.

■  Shocks  on  falling  asleep.

■  Sleep,  with  half  open  eyes;  moaning,  groaning.
I  I  Starts  up  in  sleep.

I  I  Sleepless.

■  When  deprived  of  sleep:  nausea  and  languor.

^  Time.  Morning:  vomiting;  expectoration  of  blood  and
mucus;  expectorates  light  red  blood  with  mucus;  par-
oxysms of  chill  lasting  half  an  hour,  heat  lasting  two
hours;  bitter  taste  in  mouth.

From  morning  till  noon:  lacerating  headache.

9  A.M.:  chill.

]  1  A.M. :  chill.

Forenoon :  oppression  of  chest.

Day:  sleepless.

All  day:  cried  continually;  obliged  to  keep  in  bed  on  ac-
count of  bilious  vomiting.

Afternoon :  pain  in  molars  < ;  severe  chill ;  yawning  with
chilliness.

Till  2  P.M.:  nausea  and  vomiting.

3  P.M.:  severe  chill  lasting  one  hour.

Towards  evening:  lasting  one  hour,  suffocative,  racking,
very  exhaustive  cough;  violent  pain  in  abdominal  re-
gion and  bladder.

Evening:  suffocative  cough;  anxious,  dry  heat;  sensation
of  great  weakness;  awoke  from  sleep  with  wide  open,
staring  eyes;  general  heat;  dry  heat  very  troublesome.

Lasts  till  7  P.M. :  fever.

Night:  discharge  from  eyes  <;  sleepless;  dry  cough  <
pain  in  molars  < ;  dry,  spasmodic  cough ;  croupy  cough
attacks  of  shooting  in  chest  <  ;  very  profuse  sour  sweat
disagreeable  heat; epidemic  dysentery  <; cramp  in
thighs;  irritable,  irascible;  fever  <.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. ■Oversensitive  to  heat  and
cold.

Worse  in  winter  and  in  dry  weather.

■  Worse in warm, moist  wind, south winds; catarrhs;

asthma,  etc.


IPECACUANHA.  ,  252

Warm  room:  chill  <.

Summer  heat  or  hot  room :  fainting.

External  heat:  <  chill.

Oversensitiveness  to  heat  or  cold.

Out  of  doors:  headache  >;  sweat  <.

Open air: suffocation >; cough <; cough comes;
chill  <;  chill  >.

Covers  mouth  with  hand  not  to  inhale  too  much  air.

Gasps  for  air  at  open  window:  constriction  of  throat.

Cool  air:  nervous  cough  <.

After  exposure  to  cold  and  rain:  hemorrhages  <.

After  exposure  to  cold  and  wet:  rigors  and  dyspnoea,  then
spitting  of  blood.

After  catching  cold:  lids  red  and  swollen.

Drinking:  chill  >.

After  cold  drink  or  ice  cream :  colic.

Cold  water:  >  spasmodic  cough.
^  Fever. iParoxysm  begins  with  an  internal  chill,  made  <  by
external  heat.

I  Chilliness,  cold  hands  and  feet,  which  are  moist  or  drip-
ping with  cold  sweat.

■  Coldness  of  upper,  part  of  body.

■  Chill  but  slight  with  many  gastric  ailments.

BChill:  preceded  by  violent  retching;  mostly  with  thirst
but  also  without ;  with  great  oppression  of  chest ;  with
nausea  and  vomiting;  with  diarrhoeic  stools;  <  in  a
warm  room  or  from  external  heat;  >  by  drinking, and
in  open  air ;  at  9  a.m.  ;  every  other  day  at  11  a.m.  ;  of
short  duration  soon  changing  to  heat;  with  great  lassi-
tude and  weariness.
I  I  After  a  short  chill,  dry  heat,  with  parchmentlike  skin,
■Severe  chill  in  afternoon  with  nausea,  followed  by  heat
with  sweat  of  several  hours'  duration,  and  ending  with
sour  SW' eat;  during  apyrexia,  coated  tongue;  pressure  at
stomach. ^Quartan  ague.

■  Great  nausea  before  chill  and  during  whole  paroxysm,

cannot  stir  eyes  without  nausea,  but  no  vomiting;  great
thirst  during  chill,  none  during  fever  or  sweat;  very
nervous,  trembling,  during  chill  shook  inside;  intense
headache  during  paroxysm,  and  in  a  modified  degree
during  apyrexia,  extending  dow^i  to  root  of  nose  and
throat;  sweat  like  rain;  paroxysms  irregular. ^Ague.

■  Chill  irregular,  light  and  short;  fever  long,  but  not  very

violent;  no  thirst  during  chill,  but  much  thirst  all
through  heat;  thick,  white,  pappy  coating  on  tongue;
complete  loss  of  appetite ;  great  weakness  and  prostra-
tion during  apyrexia;  constant  nausea  and  occasional
vomiting.


2^3  IPECACUANHA.

I  Chill  from  9  a.m.  to  3  p.m.,  with  intense  aching  in  back
and  bones; nausea  and  vomiting  after  chill; intense
fever  with  thirst  and  throbbing  frontal  headache;  be-
comes unconscious  during  fever,  which  lasts  till  8  p.m.,
when  sweat  comes  on  for  about  one  hour,  together  with
great shaking  all over,  and great  thirst; continued
jumpmg  headache,  very  thirsty  all  the  time  with  ano-
rexia. ^Ague.
lln  afternoon  yawning  with  chilliness,  extending  from
back,  soon  followed  by  coldness  of  extremities,  internal
shaking,  trembling  and  cramps  in  chest;  in  evening,
general  heat  accompanied  by  great  impatience  and  de-
spondency; great  heat,  particularly  in  head  and  face,
cheeks  red,  pulse  soft,  small,  slightly  increased;  pain  in
hmbs  as  if  they  were  broken ;  heat  followed  by  sweat;
no  thirst  during  fever;  loss  of  appetite;  escape  of  saliva
from  mouth  during  sleep;  next  day  lassitude,  headache,
flat  taste,  several  diarrhoeic  stools,  with  cutting  pains  in
abdomen. dAgue.
Paroxysm  at  10  a.m.

■Aching  in  bones  and  pain  through  temples,  with  heavi-
ness m  forehead;  chills  up  and  down  back,  with  great
thirst, ^^ lasting  fifteen  minutes,  was  not  a  "regular
shake,"  accompanied  by  great  languor  and  weakness,
so  that  "he  fell  down  in  a  bunch,"  then  came  nausea
and  vomitmg,  followed  by  a  burning  fever,  which  lasted
until  2  p.m.;  thirst  and  throbbing  headache  during
fever,  followed  by  profuse  sour  sweat;  paroxvsms  post-
poning. ^Ague.

■  Chill  at  9  A.M.;  teeth  chatter;  nails  and  lips  blue;  no

thirst;  next  fever,  slight  thirst,  moaning,  sighing-
slight  heat;  restlessness;  pulse  large  and  soft;  tongue
coated  white  and  thick;  frontal  headache;  diarrhoea
stools  yellow  and  painless;  internal  heat,  with  external
coldness;  drinks  little;  much  nausea  and  vomiting;  al-
bugmese  yellow;  perspiration  stains  linen  yellow

■  External  coldness  with  internal  heat.

■Sujiden  attacks  of  general  heat,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.

■  One  hand  cold,  the  other  hot.

■  Hands  and  feet  icy  cold  and  bathed  in  cold  sweat,  with

redness  of  one  cheek  and  paleness  of  the  other.

■  Heat  all  over,  with  alternate  coldness  and  paleness  of

lace;  cold  sweat  on  forehead.

■  Heat  with  nausea  and vomiting; anxious,  oppressed

breathing ;  dry,  hacking  cough,  often  exciting  nausea
and  vomiting.

■  Anxious  dry  heat  in  evening,

■  Heat,  with  or  without  thirst.


IPECACUANHA.  254

iSweat:  hot,  sudden  attacks  in  room  ;  partial,  cold  ;  on
upper  part  of  body  ;  <  by  motion  ;  pungent,  sour  smell-
ing ;  stains  yellow  ; <  out  of  doors  ;  cold,  clammy.

iSour  sweat  with  turbid  urine.

■  Very  profuse  sour  sweat,  mostly  during  night.
I  Profuse  sweat  after  abuse  of  quinine.

■  Paroxysm  sets  in  with  yawning,  stretching,  and  a  collec-

tion of  saliva  in  mouth;  chill  generally  of  short  dura-
tion, soon  passing  over  into  heat;  internal  chill,  as  if
under  skin,  <  by  hot  applications,  >  by  drinking  and
in  open  air;  no  thirst  or  but  little  during  chill;  violent
thirst  for  large  quantities  during  heat. ^Intermittent.

I  In  evening  sensation  of  great  weakness;  restless,  tosses
about  from  side  to  side ;  slowly  opens  eyes  and  then
closes  them  again  ;  speaks  in  a  low  voice  of  things
which  have  occurred  previous  day  ;  spasmodic  stretch-
ing and  yawning;  cold  feet;  paroxysm  lasts  one  to  two
hours  followed  by  sleep,  after  which  patient  is  not  aware
of  having  had  attacks. ^Quotidian  ague.

■Paroxysms  occur  in  morning  and  consist  of  moderate
chill  lasting  .about  half  an  hour,  followed  by  scarcely
perceptible  dry  heat,  lasting  about  two  hours,  during
which  pulse  is  full,  soft  and  moderately  frequent ;  with
chill  severe  raging  headache,  brings  tears  to  patient's
eyes ;  nausea,  pain  in  stomach,  and  short  dry  cough  ;
headache  continues  until  evening;  during  apyrexia,
vertigo,  loss  of  appetite,  pain  in  small  of  back  and
limbs. ^Quotidian  ague.

■Shivering,  with  goosefiesh,  followed  by  flying  heat,  both
of  short  duration ;  loss  of  appetite ;  tongue  white ;  stool
scanty  and  hard;  heat  in  stomach  and  sensation  of
hunger;  bitter  taste  in  mouth  in  morning;  waterbrash
and  retching;  red,  itching  spot  on  r.  chest,  burning
after  scratching. ^Quotidian  ague.

■  Severe  chill  3  p.m.  without thirst,  lasting  one  hour,  fol-

lowed by  heat  with  stupefying  headache  and  great
thirst;  sweat  long  and  profuse  with  thirst;  during
apyrexia  great  weakness  and  lassitude ;  on  getting  out
of  bed  vertigo  and  weakness  of  knees ;  disagreeable  heat
at  night ;  restless,  unrefreshing  sleep  ;  anorexia ;  bitter
taste ;  white  tongue  ;  thirstlessness. ^Quotidian  ague.

■  Tertian  ague  anteponing  half  hour;  chill  one  and  a  half

hours'  duration ;  high  fever  with  sweat,  lasting  rest  of
day;  during  whole  attack  great  thirst,  water  taken  being-
soon  vomited;  headache  with  the  fever;  during  apyrexia,
earthy  taste,  pressure  in  stomach,  debility.

■  Chilliness  with  yawning  and  vomiting;  after  an  hour

heat  in  head  and  redness  of  face,  hands  and  feet  being


255  IPECACUANHA.

scarcely  warm,  followed  by  sweat  on  face;  during  apy-
rexia  despondent,  will  not  play,  lies  about  a  good  deal,
loss  of  appetite,  grayish  yellow  diarrhoea,  scanty  red
urine,  restless  sleep. ^Tertian  ague.

I  Hard  chill  every  other  day,  at  1  or  2  p.m.  ;  continual  nau-
sea and  vomiting  of  bitter,  bilious  matter,  and  of  every-
thing taken  into  stomach;  chill  very  violent,  with  great
thirst,  and  drinking  only  a  little  at  a  time;  towards  the
last  has  chills  and  flushes  of  heat,  then  great  heat  and
profuse  sweat.

I  Chill  every  other  day,  at  about  11  a.m.;  shivers  awhile,
then  shakes  for  twenty  minutes;  headache;  hands  first
cold;  nausea  all  the  time;  no  thirst  with  the  chill,  but
with  the  heat;  chill  followed  by  fever;  sweat  after  fever.
^Intermittent.

llBackache,  short  chill,  long  fever;  heat,  usually  with
thirst,  headache,  nausea  and  cough.

I  I  Recent  cases,  occurring  in  young,  previously  healthy
persons;  paroxysms  violent  and  regular,  generally  of
tertian  type. 6' Ague.

■  Predominance  of  gastric  S3'^mptoms  during  paroxysm  as

well  as  during  apyrexia. ^Intermittent.

■  Relapses  from  improprieties  in  diet.

■  ■Paroxysms  suppressed  by  quinine.

■  Intermittent  fevers  after  abuse  of  quinine;  also  in  begin-

ning of  irregular  cases,  especially  if  there  is  much  nausea.

■  Worse  during  sweat;  better  after  it.

Type:  quotidian;  tertian;  quartan;  apt  to  postpone  and
become  irregular.

Prodroma:  nausea;  violent  retching;  j^awning,  stretching,
backache,  headache,  and  profuse  flow  of  saliva.

Apyrexia:  never  clear;  disturbed  by  gastric  troubles;  pale
face;  herpes  labialis;  anorexia;  taste  of  insipid  water,
salivation;  sense  of  emptiness  and  weakness  of  stomach,
nausea;  loose  stools;  bruised  feeling  of  limbs;  restless
sleep;  difficulty  in  collecting  one's  thoughts;  sadness.

■  Infantile  remittent  fever.

■  Yellow  coating  on  tongue,  with  dry  mouth;  loathing  of

food,  with  desire  to  vomit;  fetid  odor  from  mouth;  bitter
taste  in  mouth,  and  of  food;  nausea,  with  regurgitation
of  ingesta,  and  vomiting  of  undigested  food;  pressure
and  painful  fulness  in  pit  of  stomach;  colic;  diarrhoeic,
yellowish  stools,  or  fetid,  putrid  stools;  pale,  yellowish
color  of  skin;  headache,  especially  in  forehead;  febrile
heat,  with  thirst  or  shivering.  ^Bilious  fever.
■Yellow  fever,  in  first  stage;  dizziness,  chilliness,  pain  in
back  and  limbs,  uncomfortable  feeling  in  epigastrium,
with  nausea,  vomiting  and  great  weakness.


IPECA.CUANHA,  25G

I  Dry  and  extremely  troublesome  heat,  especially  in  even-
ing, with  thirst;  great  restlessness,  burning  in  palms  of
hands  and  night  sweats;  parchmentlike  skin;  desire
for  dainties  only;  very  listless. ^Hectic  fever.

I  Worm  fever,  with  retching,  blue  rings  around  eyes,  vom-
iting with  a  clean  tongue.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity, i Attacks  of  illness,  with  loathing
of  food.

Paroxysms:  of  abdominal  pains;  of  great  weakness,  last
one  to  two  hours ;  of  suffocation ;  intermittent.

Fits :  of  dry,  spasmodic  coughing.

Following  each  other  in  quiet  succession:  violent  shatter-
ing, hollow  cough.

Sudden  attacks :  of  general  heat.

For  a  time:  child  remains  without  respiring;  during
whooping  cough.

Every  few  seconds:  brings  up  a  mouthful  of  bright  colored
frothy  blood.

Every  five  minutes :  lasting  ten  to  fifteen  minutes;  spasms.

Every  eight  to  ten  minutes:  eructations.

Evening,  10,  15  minutes:  attacks  in  pit  of  stomach.

Every  quarter  of  an  hour:  vomiting.

Fifteen  minutes:  chill  lasts.

Twenty  minutes:  shakes.

Half  hour:  tertian:  ague  anteponing;  attacks  of  vomiting
of  blood.

One  hour:  chill  lasts;  heat  in  head;  sweat  after  chill.

Eleven  attacks  in  twenty-four  hours:  of  spasms.

After  a  meal,  especially  p.m.  :  cough.

After  dinner:  dry,  spasmodic  cough.

Three  or  four  stools  a  day.

Chill  irregular.

Several  times  a  day :  hysterical  spasms.

Every  day  at  same  hour :  dyspepsia.

Every  night :  suffocative  fits.

Every  other  day  at  same  hour :  dyspepsia.

Every  fourth  day  :  tormina  and  bilious  vomiting.

For  days :  constant  vomiting.

Every  Saturday :  tormina  and  bilious  vomiting.
.Every  two  weeks :  menses.

Ever}^  six  or  eight  weeks :  anorexia  and  hypochondria.

Sixth  week  of  pregnancy:  abdominal  pains,  heat  in  epi-
gastrium and  vertigo.

Four  times  in  seven  weeks:  menses.

For  four  months:  occasional  slight  loss  of  blood.

In  Autumn:  diarrhoea;  dysentery.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  eye  <; imbedded  cor-
nea,  ulcerated; opening lid  gush of  tears; shooting


257  IPECACUANHA.

pain  from  kidney  down  thigh  to  knee;  spasmodic  con-
traction of  arm  ;  slight  contraction  of  corner  of  mouth;
regular  movements  of  arm  and  hand;  ear  cold.

Jjeft:  headache  over  eye;  cornea  ulcerated;  pain  in  hypo-
chondrium;  frightful  spasms  affecting  side.

Downwards:  pain  from  umbilicus  to  uterus.

From  1.  to  r.:  cutting  pain  in  abdomen  shooting  across.

Turned  to  right:  eyes.

From  front  to  back :  diaphragm  feels  as  if  pressed  between
two  millstones.

Backwards:  stiffening  of  body.

Down:  uterine  pains  running.
*^  Sensations. Pricking  burning  pains.

Headache,  as  if  bruised,  through  bones  of  head  and  down
to  root  of  tongue;  as  of  a  bruise  of  brain  and  skull;  as
though  brain  was  mashed ;  as  if  stomach  hung  down
relaxed;  diaphragm  feels  as  if  pressed  between  two  mill-
stones; griping,  as  from  a  hand,  each  finger  sharply
pressed  into  intestines ;  as  though  bowels  were  grasped
with  hand;  as  if  all  the  bones  in  body  were  being  torn
to  pieces;  strangling,  as  if  from  mucus  in  chest ;  oppres-
sion of  chest  as  from  inhaling  dust;  tickling  in  upper
part  of  larynx,  as  from  vapor  of  sulphur;  as  if  hot  water
was  poured  into  bowels;  feet  as  if  paralyzed ;  as  if  blood
was  vomited  up;  sensation  in  femur  as  if  dislocated ;  as
if  joints  had  gone  to  sleep;  pain  in  bones  as  if  bruised;
as  if  limbs  were  broken ;  as  if  chill  was  under  skin ;  as
if  forehead  was  being  crushed ;  as  if  all  the  bones  were
b.eing  torn  to  pieces.

Pain  :  over  1.  e3'e;  in  occiput  and  nape  of  neck  ;  in  temples
and  forehead;  in  hollow  tooth;  in  molars;  in  diaphragm ;
in  loins  and  hips;  in  stomach;  most  severe  in  ffont  of
abdomen,  extending  to  1.  hypochondrium  to  sides,  to
back  and  base  of  chest;  in  teeth;  in  1.  hypochondrium;
about  umbilicus  toward  uterus;  in  abdomen;  in  heart;
in  uterus;  in  small  of  back;  in  limbs;  at  umbilicus;  in
epigastrium;  in  lower  bowels  and  kidneys;  in  joints.

Violent  pain :  in  abdominal  region  and  bladder.

Intense  tearing  pains :  in  eyes.

Intense  headache :  extending  to  root  of  nose  and  throat.

Severe  raging  headache.

Acute  pain:  after  miscarriage.

Violent  distress:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Severe  pains:  radiating  in  abdomen;  in  kidneys;  about
umbilicus.

Cutting  pain  :  in  belly ;  near  umbilicus  ;  through  abdomen
from  1.  to  r. ;  in  abdomen  and  urethra.

Anxiety :  about  prsecordia.

VOL.  VI.— 17.


IPECACUANHA.  258

Piercing  pain :  through  all  cranial  bones  into  roots  of  teeth.

Pinching  pain  :  in  both  hypochondria  and  region  of  pit  of
stomach  ;  around  umbilicus  downward  to  uterus.

Shooting  pain:  through  eyeballs;  from  r.  kidney  down
thigh  to  knee;  across  abdomen;  in  kidneys;  in  chest.

Stitches :  in  vertex  or  forehead  ;  from  navel  to  uterus.

Fine  and  violently  stinging  pains  :  in  head.

Stinging  pain  :  in  head ;  in  fauces.

Beating  pain  :  in  head ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  stomach.

Throbbing  :  in  head  ;  of  heart ;  frontal  headache.

Jumping  headache.

Painful  concussions  :  in  stomach  and  head.

Clutching  pains:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.

Cramp:  between  scapulae;  in  thighs;  in  chest.

Griping :  in  intestines.

Squeezing:  in  abdomen.

Stupefying  headache.  •

Pressing  pain  :  in  stomach.

Intense  aching:  in  back  and  bones.

Aching :  in  forehead ;  in  head  ;  in  bones.

Pressive  frontal  headache.

Constant  pressing  pain :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Bearing  down  pressure :  to  uterus  and  anus.

Tensive  pain :  in  occiput  and  nape  of  neck,  extending  to
shoulders ;  in  eyes.

Sense  of  excoriation ;  in  chest.

Painful  soreness :  of  occiput  and  neck.

Burning:  in  urethra;  in  palms  of  hands.

Smarting:  eruption  on  margin  of  lips;  in  mouth  and  on
tongue ;  of  eyes.

Sore  pain :  in  chest.

Sore  feeling:  in  abdomen.

Soreness:  of  fauces.

Bruised  feeling:  of  limbs.

Tenderness :  about  umbilicus.

Painful  fulness:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Violent  pressure:  over  uterus  and  rectum.

Indescribable  sick  feeling:  in  stomach.

Heat:  in  head;  in  epigastrium;  in  stomach;  dry  and  ex-
tremely uncomfortable.

Dull  drawing:  in  head  to  and  fro.

Dryness:  of  fauces;  of  mouth.

Distress:  about  navel.

Sense  of  emptiness:  of  stomach.

Pressure:  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  bladder;  in  pit  of
stomach.

Uncomfortable  feeling:  in  epigastrium.

Constriction :  in  throat  and  chest.


259  IPECACUANHA.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Heaviness:  of  head;  of  thighs;  in  forehead.

Strangling:  with  cough.

Spasmodic  tightness :  of  chest.

Contractive  feeling:  in  throat  and  chest.

Tickling:  at  entrance  of  trachea;  from  upper  portion  of

larynx  to  lower  extremity  of  bronchi.
Bubbling:  in  chest.
Weakness:  of  thighs.
Trembling:  internal.
Coldness:  of  upper  part  of  body;  of  feet;  of  extremities ;  of

one  hand.
Internal  chill.

Itching:  spot  on  r.  chest;  at  anus;  of  calves.
^*  Tissues, i  Muscular  awkwardness.

1 1  Hemorrhages:  bright  red,  from  all  the  orifices  of  body;

after  mechanical  injuries.
After  exposure  to  cold  and  rain.

■  Plethora,  fat  children.

iSkin  and  mucous  membranes  pale;  pulse  small,  soft;
chilliness;  little  appetite;  constipation ;  marked  anaemic
murmurs;  great  debility  and  weakness;  finally  could
hardly  eat  anything;  nausea  and  vomiting  following
slightest  amount  of  food;  great  emaciation;  headache,
as  if  forehead  was  being  crushed,  with  nausea;  erup-
tion on  forehead  and  cheek;  scanty  menses;  querulous,
not  pleased  with  anything;  hands  cold;  hysterical.

iCholerose  gastric  symptoms,  nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhoea.

i  Dropsy  in  internal  parts.

iSkin  and  muscles  lax.

I  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  all  the  bones.

■  Pains  as  if  all  the  bones  were  being  torn  to  pieces;  with

vomiting  and  pains  in  bowels.

■  Icterus;  rickets;  atrophy:

■  Has  an  unmistakable  relation  to  the  voluntary  muscles;

in  every  kind  of  convulsions  in  children,  in  tonic,  and
especially  in  clonic  convulsions,  from  the  distortion  of
face,  rolling  of  eyes  and  clenching  of  thumbs  to  the  most
severe  epileptic  spasms,  particularly  if  there  is  nausea.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  stomach
and  hypochondria  sensitive.
When  biting  on  hollow  tooth :  pain  in  it.
After  mechanical  imjuries:  hemorrhage  from  lungs.
*^  Skin. I  I  Itching,  unchanged  by  scratching.

■  Itching  of  skin,  with  nausea;  has  to  scratch  till  he  vomits.

■  Miliaria  rubra,  with  dyspnoea,  colic  and  nausea.

■  Miliary  rash  on  forehead,  temples  and  cheek.

■  Rash  of  the  lying  in.


IPECACUANHA.  '  260

■  Suppressed  eruption  with  cool  skin.

■  Eruptions  suppressed,  or  tardily  appearing,  with  oppres-

sion of  chest;  vomiting  and  tickling  cough.

Herpetic  eruption  at  wrist  joint  and  anus,  with  red  blotches
after  scratching.

■Erysipelas,  the  redness  leaves  too  soon,  with  renewed  vom-
iting.

■Reaction  so  weak  that  eruption  developes  tardily  or  does
not  appear  at  all;  anxious  oppression,  or  constriction  of
chest;  irascible,  irritable,  particularly  at  night,  prevent-
ing sleep,  and  causing  great  anxiet^^;  severe  tickling
cough,  with  blueness  of  face  and  dyspnoea. ^Measles.

■  Fever,  <  towards  night;  sleeplessness;  complete  loss  of

appetite;  nausea;  despondent  and  lachrymose;  groan-
ing. ^Scarlet  fever.

■Vascular  erethism  with  tardy  development  of  eruption ;
anxious  constriction  of  chest;  restless  tossing  about.
^Scarlet  fever.

■Delayed  eruption  in  scarlatina,  with  vomiting,  diarrhoea,
oppression  and  anxiety.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Women  and  children;  em-
physematous individuals.

Girl,  eet.  6  weeks,  eight  days  after  birth  caught  cold;  in-
flamed eyes.

Girl,  set.  3  months,  after  receiving  eight  drops  of  laud-
anum; opium  poisoning.

Child,  set.  17  weeks,  scrofulous;  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.

Child,  set.  22  weeks;  spasms.

Child,  set.  30  weeks,  pale,  fat;  spasmodic  cough.

Boy,  set.  3,  after  overloading  stomach ;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  4 ;  ague.

Boy,  set.  4;  eclampsia.

Boy,  set.  10,  sanguine,  scrofulous,  after  eating  pork;  diar-
rhoea.

Girl,  set.  11,  black  hair  and  eyes,  subject  to  attacks  of  ague
for  which  quinine  was  taken  ;  intermittent.

Boy,  set.  14;  chronic  vomiting.

Girl,  set.  15;  ague.

Girl,  set.  16;  melsena.

Man,  set.  17,  sanguine  temperament,  suffering  from  pur-
pura, after  catching  cold;  spasms.

Girl,  set.  18,  graceful,  menses  profuse;  ague.

Man,  set.  20,  weak,  brunette,  melancholic;  ague.

Woman,  set.  21;  ague.

Woman,  set.  22;  ague.

Woman,  set.  23,  small,  pale,  irritable,  brown  hair,  menses
appeared  at  17  but  were  very  scanty;  ansemia.

Woman,  set.  23,  blonde;  hsematemesis.


261  IPECACUANHA.

Women,  set.  24,  strong,  good  constitution,  married  three
months,  pregnant  six  weeks ;  uterine  hemorrhage,  with
abortion.
Woman,  primipara,  after  tedious  labor,  terminated  by  in-
strumental delivery;  hemorrhage  from  uterus.
Woman,  suffering  four  weeks;  flooding.
Woman,  set.  24;  hysterical  spasms.
Girl,  ast.  25,  strong;  hsematemesis.
Man,  set.  25;  chronic  nasal  catarrh.
Woman,  set.  26,  large,  robust,  fair  complexion,  has  suffered

four  years;  tormina  and  bilious  vomiting.
Swedish  girl,  ait.  26,  ill  for  three  years,  has  taken  much

quinine;  intermittent  fever.
Woodcutter,  suffering  for  years,  every  spring  and  fall ;  ague.
Man,  suffering  some  weeks;  ague.
Girl,  aet.  28,  anaemic;  hsematemesis.
Man,  aet.  28;  cholera.
Woman,  set.  30,  blonde,  weak;  ague.
Soldier,  set.  34;  dysentery.
Negro,  after  piercing  sole  of  foot  by  stepping  upon  a  fish

bone;  tetanus.
Woman,  aet.  35,  ill  two  weeks ;  ague.
Woman,  aet.  35;  ague.
Woman,  aet.  38;  cough.

Woman,  set.  38,  has  taken  quinine;  intermittent  fever.
Man,  ast.  39,  tuberculous,  after  exposure  to  wet  and  cold  •
haemoptysis.  '

Woman,  set.  39,  married ;  vomiting.

Woman,  set  40,  four  months  after  abortion;  hemorrhage
Woman,  aet.  42,  suffering  2^  years;  vomiting.
Man,  set.  44,  ague.

Man.  aet.  45,  suffering  four  weeks;  constant  vomiting
Woman,  ast.  47,  suffering  six  weeks;  choroiditis.
Man,  aet.  54,  suffering  three  months;  chronic  vomiting.
Woman,  aet.  54,  good  constitution,  menstruation  ceased  six
months  ago  without  inconvenience,  after  taking  journey
during  which  she  became  chilled;  heematuria.
Widow,  aet.  54,  since  attack  of  cholera  four  years  ago,  con-
tinual suffering  in  abdomen;  dysentery.
Man,  aet.  62;  ague.

Woman,  a^t.  72,  melancholic  temperament,  brunette,  thin,
tendency  to  hemorrhoids  and  abdominal  affections'
spasmodic  cough.  '

'Relations. Antidoted by: Arnica,  Arsen., Cinchona,  Nux
vom.,  Tabac.
It  antidotes  Alum.,  Arnica,  Arsen.,  Cinchona,  vapors  of  cop-
per, Dulcam.,  Ferrum,  Lauroc,  Opium,  Sulph.  ac,  Tabac,
Tart.  em.


IPECACUANHA—IPOMCEA.  262

Compatible:  is  followed  well  by  Arsen.  (cholera  infantum,
debility,  colds,  croup,  chills),  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Cadmium
sulph.  (yellow  fever),  Calc.  ost.,  Chamom.,  Cinchona,
Cuprum,  Ignal,  Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat,  Sepia,  Sul-
phur, Tart,  em.,  Tabac,  Veratr.

Complementary:  Cuprum.


IPOMCEA.

Morning  Glory.  Convolvulacese.

Fragmentary  provings  by  Jeanes  from  tincture  of  leaves,  2d  dil.,  in  1843
(marked  1.),  and  from  preparing  tincture  of  seed  in  1845  (marked  s.).

Clinical  Authorities. — Renal  calculus,  Farrington,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  101,  p.  134.

^  Sensorium. Vertiginous  affection,  immediately;  s.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  first  in  r.  then  in  1.  temple ;  s.

Pain  in  r.  temple  and  eye;  1.

Pain  in  1.  temple,  jaw  and  eye;  1.

Great  heaviness  of  head;  s.
*  Outer  Head. Itching  of  scalp;  s.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Smarting  of  eyes;  s.

Itching  of  internal  canthus  of  L  eye;  1.

Pain  in  r.  eye  and  temple;  1.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Very  acute  sense  of  smell;  s.

Smarting  and  dryness  in  nostrils;  s.

■  Purulent  discharge  from  nose;  s.
^  Upper  Face. Pain  in  1.  upper  jaw,  eye  and  temple;  L
^^  Throat. Pain  in  1.  tonsil ;  1.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Rumbling  and  grumbling  in

epigastric  region ;  1.
^^  Abdomen. Sharp  cutting  pain  in  abdomen  above  umbili-
cus; 1.

Rumbling  of  flatus:  wnth  pain  in  1.  superior  flexure  of
colon,  followed  by  speedy  discharge  of  flatus;  in  trans-
verse colon;  in  region  of  sigmoid  flexure;  s.

Pain  in  region  of  descending  colon ;  1.

Shooting  reports  of  flatus  in  abdomen;  s.

Grumbling  in  lower  bowels;  1.

Great  distension  of  abdomen ;  1.

Flashing  heat  in  superior  abdomen  and  stomach;  1,
^^  Urinary  Organs. iSevere  pains  in  1.  kidney,  with  parox-
ysms of  pain  running  along  ureter  and  in  back;  nausea
and  occasional  vomiting. ^Renal  calculus.

Diminution  of  contractile  powder  of  bladder;  1,


42


263  IPOMCEA.

I  Kidney  disorders  or  gravel  with  pain  in  back.
"^  Cough. Disposition  to  cough;  sneezing;  1.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iPain  in  first  dorsal  vertebrae;  1.

Itching  over  1.  scapula ;  s.

Pain  in  lumbar  region;  1.

Pain  in  1.  lumbar  region;  1.

Pain  in  region  of  lumbar  vertebrse;  1.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Aching  in  top  of  r.  shoulder;  s.

Pain  in  r.  biceps  flexor  cubiti  near  elbow;  s.

Pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm ;  s.
*"  Fever. Backache  alternating  with  chilliness ;  1.

Flushing  of  heat  followed  by  copious  sweats.
Locality  and  Direction. Right:  pain  in  temple;  in  eye;
aching  in  top  of  shoulder;  pain  in  l^iceps  flexor  cubiti
near  elbow.

Left:  pain  in  temple,  jaw  and  eye;  itching  of  internal
canthus  of  eye;  pain  in  upper  jaw;  pain  in  tonsil;  pain
in  superior  flexure  of  colon;  severe  pain  in  kidney;
itching  over  scapula;  pain  in  lumbar  region;  pain  in
shoulder  and  arm.
^  Sensations.  Pain  in  r.  then  in  1.  temple;  in  eye;  in  jaw;  in
r.  eye  and  temple;  in  1.  upper  jaw,  eye  and  temple;  in
1.  tonsil;  in  1.  superior  flexure  of  colon;  in  region  of
descending  colon;  along  ureter  and  back;  in  first  dorsal
vertebrse;  in  lumbar  region;  in  1.  lumbar  region;  in
region  of  lumbar  vertebrse;  in  r.  biceps  flexor  cubiti
near  elbow;  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm.

Severe  pain:  in  1.  kidney.

Sharp  cutting  pain:  in  abdomen  above  umbilicus.

Aching:  in  top  of  r.  shoulder.

Backache:  alternating  with  chilliness.

Smarting:  of  eyes;  in  nostrils.

Dryness:  in  nostrils.

Heaviness:  of  head.

Great  distension  of  abdomen.

Flushing  heat:  in  superior  abdomen  and  stomach.

Itching:  of  scalp;  of  internal  canthus  of  1.  eye;  over  1.
scapula.


IRIDIUM.  264

IRIDIUM.

The  metal.  Jr.

One  of  the  metals  of  the  platinum  group,  among  the  heaviest  of  known  sub-
substances  and  almost  indestructible.

Introduced  by  Hering  in  1853.

The  precipitate  made  by  Genth  was  triturated  by  Boericke  ;  one  ten  thousandth
part  of  it  produced  a  vivid  black.

Twenty  grains  of , the  3d  trituration  were  taken  by  A.  J.  Tafel  when  in  a
state  of  perfect  health.  It  is  the  only  proving  of  Iridium  and  not  contained  in
Allen's  Encyclopedia. All  the  symptoms  were  experienced  within  two  hours.

*  Outer  Head. Pain  in  middle  of  occipital  bone.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. A  feeling  as  if  the  eyes  were  being  affected

from  below  upward.
^  Hearing and Ears. Feeling of  numbness  in ears and

throughout  the  body,  lasting  but  a  short  time.

^  Upper  Face. Pain  in  1.  malar  bone,  a  kind  of  stinging;

from  this  place  a  kind  of  warmth  spreads  over  the  whole

face;  the  pain  is  also  felt  in  r.  malar  bone  like  a  pressure.

Feeling  as  of  a  triangle  in  face,  the  base  is  formed  by  the

two  malar  bones,  the  apex  in  the  vertex.

'^  Inner  Mouth. Increased  saliva  with  sensation in  malar

bones  which  is  more  perceptible  on  1.  side.
^^  Upper  Limbs. A  transient  pain on  inner  side  of  wrists,

particularly  the  left,  also  in  bend  of  knee  joint.
^  Lower  Limbs. Pressing  in  anterior  portion  of  1.  thigh  in
middle  of  upper  half,  followed  by  pressing  in  groin.
While  walking,  feeling  of  tension  in  both  thighs,  particu-
larly in  1.;  then  a  dislocated  feeling  in  1.  hip  joint,- and
a  dull  pain  tending  toward  1.  gluteal  region.
Cramp-like  contraction  in  r.  calf  and  middle  of  sole  of  foot.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. While  walking :  feeling  of  ten-
sion in  both  thighs.
"Locality and Direction. Right:  pain in malar  bone;
cramp-like  contraction  in  calf.
Left:  pain  in  malar  bone;  sensation  more  perceptible  in
malar  bone;  transient  pain  in  wrists,  <  1.;  pressing  in
anterior  portion  of  thigh ;  feeling  of  tension  in  thigh ;
dislocated feeling in hip  joint; dull pain tending
towards  gluteal  region.
From  below  upward:  eyes  affected.
*^  Sensations. As  if  the  eyes  were  being  affected  from  below


265  IRIDIUM— IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

upwards;  as  of  a  triangle  in  face,  the  base  formed  by

the  two  malar  bones,  the  apex  in  the  vertex.
Pain:  in  middle  of  occipital  bones.
Stinging  pain :  in  1.  malar  bone.
Cramp-like  contraction: in  r.  calf  and  middle  of  sole  of

foot.
Pressure-like  pain:  in  r.  malar  bone.
Dull  pain:  tending  toward  1.  gluteal  region.
Transient  pain:  on  inner  side  of  wrists;  in  knee  joints.
Pressing:  in  anterior  portion  of  1.  thigh,  in  middle  of

upper  half;  in  groin.
Dislocated  feeling :  in  1.  hip  joint.
Feeling  of  tension :  while  walking,  in  both  thighs.
Numbness:  in  ears  and  throughout  whole  body.


IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

Blue  Flag.  Iridacese.

Provings  by  Kowland,  Burt,  Holcombe,  Berridge,  Croker,  Wesselhoeft,  etc.
See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  153.

CiiiNiCAL  AuTHOBiTiES. — Headache,  Palmer,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  179;  War-
ren, A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  109 ;  Sick  headache,  Kitchen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  464;
Williamson,  Kaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  16 ;  Wesselhoeft,  Kane's  Eec,  1870,  p.  287;  Bilious
headache,  Blake,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  9,  p.  411 ;  Tinea  capitis,  Burt,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.
257  ;  Inflamed  eyelids,  Kitchen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  466 ;  Prosopalgia  (3  cases),
Holcombe,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  512;  Salivation,  Stevenson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  70  ;
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  429 ;  Claude,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  183 ;  Vomiting,  Kitchen,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  462;  Colic,  Kitchen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  465;  Sanford,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  25,  p.  671 ;  Bilioiis  colic,  Hawkes,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  162;  Diarrhaxi,  Oehme,
Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  27;  (2  cases),  Casseday,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  604;
Kitchen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  463  ;  Autumnal  diarrhoea,  cholera,  Lade,  Horn.  Eev.,
vol.  10,  pp.  28,  503  ;  Dysentery,  Kitchen,  N.  A  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  464 ;  Constipation,
Claude,  B.  &  S. ;  Cholera  morbus  (2  cases),  Casseday,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  604;
Kitchen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  462 ;  (Irisin)  Lade,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  476 ;  Menor-
rhagia, Wesselhoeft,  Kaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  25;  Vomiting  of  pregnancy,  Clark,  Eaue's
Eec,  1872,  p.  183;  Cough,  Wesselhoeft,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  180,  Sciatica,  Payne,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,  p.  405 ;  Wesselhoeft,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  293  ;  Neuralgia,  Kitchen,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  467  ;  Typhoid  fever.  Kitchen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  467  ;  Itch  (2
cases),  Burt,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  257  ;  Eczema,  Palmer,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  210;
Impetigo,  Buck,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  508;  Felon,  Gilchrist's  Surg.,  p.  98.

'  Mind. Low  spirited ;  discouraged.
Fears  approaching  illness.


IRIS  VERSICOLOR.  266

Easily  vexed.

Dulness  of  mental  faculties ;  cannot  fix  mind  on  studies.

Muttering.
^  Sensorium. Head  full,  heavy.
^  Inner  Head. Constriction  around  forehead.

Sensation  as  of  a  band  around  head.

I  Dull,  heavy  frontal  headache  with  nausea.

■Severe  frontal  headache,  constant  nausea  and  occasional
vomiting;  sleepless  from  pain ;  no  appetite;  great  weak-
ness.

■  Headache  in  forehead  and  eyes,  <  r.  side;  with  distress-

ing nausea  and  vomiting  of  intensely  sour  or  bilious
matter;  <  in  rest.
llDuU  throbbing  or  shooting  in  r.  side  of  forehead;  nau-
sea; <  toward  evening,  from  rest,  from  cold  air,  or
coughing ;  >  from  moderate  motion.

■  Habitual  headache;  violent  throbbing  on  either  side  of

frontal  protuberance,  <  in  evening  or  after  exertion.

■  Chronic  frontal  headache;  <  sitting  down,  studying  or

sewing;  >  standing  up  or  working;  could  not  attend
school.

■  Headache  with  violent  pains  over  eye,  in  supraorbital  re-

gion, on  either  side,  but  only  on  one  side  at  a  time,

■  Severe  pain  in  head,  through  temples  and  over  eyes,  with

vertigo,  nausea  and  vomiting.
■Shooting  pains  in  temples,  generally  right,  with con-
stricted feeling  in  scalp.

■  Headache  affecting  r.  side,  <  at  rest,  >  by  constant  mo-

tion, accompanied  by  nausea,  vomiting  and  low  spirits.

■  Hemicrania  of  r.  hemisphere.

■  Pain  shoots  like  an  electric  shock  from  r.  temple  to  1.  side

of  occiput;  depression  of  spirits,  debility.

■Slight  dull  pain  at  situation  of  posterior  fontanelle.

■Severe  pain  in  occiput,  <  r.  side.

I  I  Stitches  in  lower  cerebellum,  r.  side.

■Violent,  stunning  headache,  with  facial  neuralgia,  fol-
lowed by  copious,  limpid  urine  and  vomiting.

■  Sick  headache,  every  eighth  day.

■  iSick  headache,  of  gastric  or  hepatic  origin,  always  begin-

ning with  a  blur  before  eyes.
iSick  headache,  seemingly  the  result  of  intense  gastric  and
abdominal  disturbance;  dull,  throbbing,  or  hammering,
and  also  shooting  or  acute  boring  pains  in  one  side  of
forehead,  generally  left,  or  passing  from  r.  to  1.,  with  nau-
sea; pain  begins  in  morning  and  grows  more  violent
towards  afternoon  and  night;  <  from  violent  motion;
>  from  moderate  exercise  in  open  air ;  sometimes  par-
oxysmal, through  day,  or  at  intervals  of  many  days,


2g-,  IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

so  as  to  become  periodical; <  in  cold  air  and  from

coughing.  . „ ..-, ^

I  Headache,  vomits  sweetish  mucus,  occasionally  with  a

trace  of  bile
iSick  headache  in  bilious  subjects,  with  gastric  derange-
ment and  dyspepsia,  tenderness  in  region  ot  stomach  and

iHeldache  reflex  from  acid  stomach,  or  irritation  of  that
organ  from  acid  secretions.

■  Neuralgia,  facial  or  cephalic,  with  nausea  and  vomiting

■  Neuralgia  of  head,  eyes  and  temples;  pains  cutting,  ol

short  duration,  with  acid  vomiting;  bilious  vomiting,
or  vomiting  of  sweetish  water;  great  despondency.

iTired  headache,  from  mental  exhaustion.

I  Chronic headaches with asthenopia and luiness m

stomach.  . -, - u

llSharp,  cutting  pains  of  short  duration,  changing  otten.
*  Outer  Head, l  Shooting  in  temples,  mostly  right,  with  con-
strictive feeling  of  scalp.

I  Pustular  eruptions  on  scalp  m  children.

I  I  Twenty-six  pustules  on  top  of  head,  some  as  large  as  a
three  cent  piece.

I  Whole  top  of  head  one  complete  scab,  yellow  matter
oozing  from  under  crust,  which  has  matted  hair  together;
1  ear  covered  with  eruption,  it  also  gathers  every  two
weeks  and  discharges  a  yellow  greenish  pus;  numerous
yellow  pustules  scattered  over  scalp,  each  pustule  con-
taining a  hair.  ^Tinea  capitis.
'Siffht  and  Eves.  l  Redness  of  conjunctiva,  as  irom  a
cold;  eyes  feel  dull,  with  neuralgia;  burning  m  internal
canthus,  with  effusion  of  tears.

■  Inflamed  eyelids;  simple  palpebral  inflammation,  appa-

rently arising  from  cold.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  eyelids.

'  Smell and Nose. I  l Constant  sneezing; sharp  pains  m
centre  of  temples;  tickling  cough;  light,  mushy  stools.
^  Upper  Face. ■Sunken  eyes  with  blue  circles.

■  Neuralgia, involving supra and infraorbital superior

■  maxillary  and  inferior  dental  nerves ;  begins  after  break-
fast every  morning,  with  a  stupid,  stunning  headache;
copious  urine ;  disposition  to  stool ;  burning  at  anus.

I  I  Neuralgia  in  head,  temples  and  eyes,  attended  with  most
distressing  vomiting  of  sweetish  mucus,  and  occasionally,
when  much  straining,  with  a  trace  of  bile.

■Waked  with neuralgic  pains  in  r.  side  of  face;  darting
stitches  in  two  carious  teeth;  infraorbital  nerves  espe-
cially affected.
^  Lower  Face. ' '  Dry,  cracked  lips.


IRIS  VERSICOLOR.  2G8

I  Pustular  eruptions  on  face,  around  nose,  lips  and  cheeks,
secreting  a  sanious,  irritating  matter.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, l  l  Toothache  in  warm  room;  dental  neu-
ralgia.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  lost;  flat;  bitter  or  putrid.

■Tongue  feels  as  if  scalded;  greasy  feeling  on  arising  in
morning.

I  Tongue  white.

^^  Inner  Mouth, l  Burning  in  mouth  and  fauces,  as  if  on  fire.
1 8 Mouth  and  tongue  feel  as  though  they  had  been  scalded.

■  Salivation  after  diphtheria,  with  swelling  of  parotids.

I I  Profuse  flow  of  saliva.

■  Constant  discharge  of  ropy  saliva,  dropped  from  mouth

during  conversation.
I  Salivation,  first  of  tough  mucus  hawked  from  throat,
which  presented  a  dark  appearance,  and  afterwards  a
profuse,  watery  discharge  from  whole  buccal  cavity;
clammy,  greasy  sensation  in  mouth,  with  bilious  coating
on  root  of  tongue ;  lethargy ;  hunger,  with  inability  to
eat;  general  "bilious"  condition;  constipation,  succeed-
ing a  profuse,  watery,  offensive  pancreatic diarrhoea.

■  Salivation  with  profuse  flow^;  gums  and  tongue  feel  as

though  covered  with  a  greasy  substance.
■Stomatitis,  with  painful  burning  in  mouth  and  fauces.

■  Ulcers  on  mucous  membrane  of  cheeks.
13  Throat. Pain  in  tonsils,  shooting  into  ears.

■  Smarting,  burning  sensation,  wath  feeling  of  enlargement,

like  a  burning  cavern,  while  throat  is  dry  injected,  and
of  bright  red  color.

■  Peculiar  irritability  of  throat,  palate  and  pharynx,  com-

ing on  without  any  appearance  of  inflammation,  and
sometimes  attended  with  cough.

■  Spasms  of  pharynx  while  swallowing  food.

^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. "Loss  of  taste  and

appetite,  nausea  and  empty  eructations.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■Headache  after  breakfast;  aching

in  stomach  before  breakfast  and  after  a  cold  drink.

■  Chronic  indigestion  of  milk;  it  sours  and  is  vomited.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructa-
tions: of  tasteless  gas;  of  wind  from  stomach  with  con-
siderable force;  tasteless;  acid;  of  sour  food.

■  Heartburn.

■  Nausea:  from  riding,  from  overexertion  or  from  irregu-

larities of  diet;  and  retching.

■  ■Nausea  and  vomiting :  of  sour  food,  whole  person  smells

sour;  of  thin,  watery  fluid  of  an  exceedingly  sour  taste.

■Vomiting: an extremely sour fluid which excoriates

throat;  with  burning  in  mouth,  fauces,  oesophagus  and


269  IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

stomach;  of- sweetish  water;  ofingesta;  of  soured  milk
in  children;  of  food  an  hour  after  eating;  of  bile,  with
great  heat  and  sweat.
I  Bilious  vomiting,  with  great  heat  of  head  and  perspiration.

■  Violent  pain  with  every  fit  of  vomiting.

I  Periodical  vomiting  spells,  coming  on  once  every  month
or  six  weeks,  lasting  two  or  three  days.

I  Vomiting  of  ingesta,  then  sour  fluid,  and  at  last  bile  yel-
low and  green,  with  great  heat  of  head,  some  general
fever,  and  great  prostration;  perspiration  warm,  caused
by  efforts  of  straining  and  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  l  Great  burning  distress  in  epi-
gastrium; can  hardly  endure  it.

•Violent  pains  in  epigastric  region,  coming  on  at  intervals.

I  Gastralgia.

I  I  Pain  in  stomach  before  breakfast,  and  from  drinking
water.

Beating,  throbbing,  in  and  about  heart  and  sternum,  then
fearful  cramps  or  spasms  from  middle  of  sternum  to  pit
of  stomach,  with  repeated  vomitings.

Everything  sours  in  stomach.

■  Dyspepsia;  food  vomited  an  hour  or  so  after  meals.

•  Gastric  symptoms  predominate  with  headache.

I  Burning"  distress  in  stomach  and  pancreas,  with  watery
diarrhoea  and  great  prostration.

•  Burning  distress  in  pancreas,  sweetish  vomit.
•Shocks  of  pain  in  umbilical  region  up  to  epigastrium;

nausea,  straining  and  belching  of  wind.
^*  Hypochondria. •  Cutting  in  region  of  liver.

•  Pain  in  r.  hypochondriac  region;  <  from  motion.
•Acute  and  chronic  disorders  of  liver.

•  Increase  of  bile,  then  deficiency  of,  with  jaundice.

•  Anxious  look ;  vomits  almost  constantly  a  greenish  yellow

matter,  very  bitter;  great  tenderness  in  region  of  liver;
urgent  desire  for  stool ;  bowels  torpid ;  pulse  130,  tem-
perature, 103.2;  great  pain  in  abdomen,  <  on  pressure;
tongue  dry,  coated  on  each  side,  red  streak  in  centre;
dull  and  stupid. ^Bilious  colic.

•  Acute  affections  of  pancreas,  inflammation  or  salivation.

•  Pains  above  crest  of  ilium,  right  side,  then  left.

'^  Abdomen. •Colicky  pains,  intermittent  about  navel,  before
each  spell  of  vomiting  or  purging.

•  Pains  in  umbilical  region  and  loud  rumbling  in  bowels.
•Pain  in  region  of  umbilicus,  <  from  motion ;  diarrhoea

threatening  or  actually  existing ;  general  headache,  <  in
anterior  half,  in  individuals  subject  to  headache;  nausea
and  vomiting.
•Sharp,  griping  pains  in  bowels.


mis  VERSICOLOR.  270

I  Colicky  pains,  must  bend  forward  for  relief;  >  after  dis-
charges of  flatus.

iGreat  prostration;  pulse  frequent  and  feeble;  expression
of  great  anguish  in  face;  much  mental  depression;  fre-
quent and  violent  efforts  to  vomit,  resulting,  however,  in
little  more  than  an  enormous  discharge  of  air,  which
seemed  to  roll  off  her  stomach  with  great  force ;  intense
pain  in  umbilical  region,  passing  in  successive  shocks,
like  effects  of  a  galvanic  battery,  upward  to  epigastric
region,  followed  or  accompanied  by  nausea,  straining
and  belching  of  wind;  great  commotion  and  rumbling
of  bowels  above  seat  of  pain,  little  or  none  below;  no
desire  for  stool. ^Colic.

1  Abdomen  very  prominent;  severe  rumbling  of  gas;  ex-
cessive watery  discharges,  preceded  by  soft  and  more
substantial  evacuations  and  intense  aching,  cramplike
pains;  excessive  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  Rumbling  and  cutting  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen,  >

by  pressing  flatus.

■  Periodical  night  colic,  >  by  two  or  three  free  discharges

before  morning.

I  Colic  of  infants  with  flatulency  and  constipation.

•  Abdominal  complaints  of  children  occurring  in  Spring
and  Autumn.

iSyphilitic  sinus  in  1.  groin,  result  of  a  bubo,  discharge
ichorous.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Diarrhoea :  with  colic  and  rumbling
in  bowels;  with  pain  in  bowels,  with  or  without  vomit-
ing; cramps  in  bowels;  thin,  watery;  with  frequent
bilious  stools;  brown  and  very  offensive,  with  cutting,
colicky  pains,  nausea  and  vomiting.

iStool:  thin,  watery,  tinged  with  bile,  copious,  in  a  con-
tinuous stream;  green,  undigested;  mushy,  pappy,  with
fetid  flatus;  bloody  mucus,  with  great  straining;  black,
with  fever,  hot  sweat,  white  tongue,  severe  headache,
despondency;  yellow,  watery,  corrosive;  copious,  watery,
with  or  without  tenesmus;  frequent,  very  green  and
watery;  watery,  mixed  with  mucus;  thin,  yellow,  fecal;
fetid  or  coppery  smelling;  containing  undigested  food.

IS  Watery  stool;  anus  feels  on  fire;  disposition  to  strain
and  bear  down ;  great  burning  in  anus.

■Watery  diarrhoea  and  colic  pains  precede  the  bloody,
mucous  discharges.

I  Bloody,  mucous  discharges,  with  severe  tenesmus  and
rectal  prolapsus.

■Very  soft,  yellow  stools,  with  great  rumbling  in  bowels.

iStool  of  scybalous  matter,  together  with  fluid  mucoid
feces  of  offensive,  putrid  and  coppery  odor.


071  IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

Before  stool:  rumbling  in  abdomen;  cutting  in  lower  part

of  abdomen.
During  stool:  cutting;  severe  cramplike  pains;  tenesmus  ;

burning  at  anus;  fetid,  coppery  smelling  flatus.
After  stool:  pricking  as  of  points  in  anus;  burning  of  anus,

as  though  on  fire;  prolapsus  of  rectum.

■  Periodical  spells  of  diarrhoea,  always  at  night  about  two

or  three  o'clock.

I  Burning  from  mouth  to  anus. ^Diarrhoea.

I  I  Acute  mucous  enteritis.

I  Stools  brown,  slimy,  or  watery,  frequent  and  generally
very  offensive;  attacks  sudden  and  characterized  by
uncommonly  severe  tenesmus,  prolapsus  of  rectum,
frequently  piles,  and  very  intense  feeling  of  exhaustion
from  very  commencement;  appetite  not  much  affected;
generally  no  pain  in  bowels. t/Diarrhcea.

I  Cholera  infantum,  with  profuse,  sour  discharges  from
stomach  and  bowels,  and  pain  in  head.

I  Cholera  morbus:  occurring  in  hottest  part  of  season;  vom-
iting; grumbling  pains  in  bowels,  watery,  green  stools.

■  Severe  pain  in  bowels,  with  much  rumbling;  constant

nausea;  vomiting  and  purging  every  few  moments;  hmbs
and  body  cold ;  occasional  cramps  in  lower  extremities ;
vomited  matter  was  glairy  mucus  with  some  bile  at
times;  stools  thin  and  colorless. ^Cholera  morbus.

■  ■Autumnal  bilious  diarrhcea.

■  Bilious  dysentery;  body  cold;  skin  blue;  vomiting  with

prostration.

■  Constipation:  succeeded  by  thin,  watery  diarrhcea;  with

flatulent  colic;  migraine;  nervousness;  irregular  menses;
colic  and  sick  headache;  headache  affecting  forehead
and  eyes ;  hemorrhoids.

■  Prolapsus  of  rectum.  _ .

■  ■Anus  feels  sore,  or  as  if  sharp  points  were  sticking  m  it.

■  Premonitory  diarrhoea  for  two  or  three  days,  then  purg-

ing suddenly  became  <,  with  vomiting,  cramps  in  body
and  lower  limbs;  two  hours  later  diarrhoea  profuse  and
involuntary,  evacuations  being  wholly  of  rice  water
character;  vomiting  frequent  and  severe,  the  matter
ejected  consisting  principally  of  small  white  flocculent
bodies,  with  bodies  of  undigested  food;  crampy  pains  in
abdomen  and  lumbar  region,  also  less  severely  in  legs;
intense  and  urgent  thirst;  difficulty  and  oppression  of
breathing;  choleraic  expression;  face  limbs  and  body
cold;  tongue  slightly  bluish,  furred  and  icy  cold  to
touch. ^Cholera.

■  Asiatic  cholera,  with  rice  water  discharges,  cramps,  etc.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Cutting  and  pricking  in  urethra  while

urinating.


IRIS  VERSICOLOR.  272

Urine:  scanty,  red;  burning  length  of  urethra  after  pass-
ing it;  clear,  profuse;  copious,  watery  in  nervous  head-
ache; very  high  colored  and  scanty.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Nocturnal  emissions,  with  amorous
dreams.

■  Coldness  and  itching  of  parts.

I  I  Excitement  of  generative  organs  reflex  from  an  exces-
sively acid  stomach.

I  I  Heavy,  dragging  gait  and  excitable  sexual  desire.

I  I  Coldness  and  relaxation  of  scrotum.

■Spermatorrhoea,  with  pale  face,  sunken  eyes;  depression.

■Secondary  gonorrhoea  or  gleet;  syphilis;  mercurial  syphilis.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Neuralgia  and  rheumatism  of
uterus.

■Metrorrhagia.

■  Menses  regular  but  excessive.

■  Uterine  leucorrhoea.

2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■Morning  sickness
during  pregnancy;  vomit  sour  or  bitter.

■  Protracted  nausea  and  vomiting  during  pregnancy;  pro-

fuse flow  of  saliva.

■  Inflammation  and  soreness  of  uterus,  very  sensitive  to

touch ;  pain  across  umbilicus,  with  severe  griping  at  short

^  intervals;  nausea  and  vomiting  of  green  or  yellow  bile,

"^'' with  eructations  of  a  great  deal  of  flatus  during  and

between  times  of  vomiting;  diarrhoea  of  a  yellow,  bilious

character. ^Miscarriage.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 'Dry,  tick-
ling cough,  with  smarting  burning  in  throat.
^^  Cough. iShort,  dry  cough,  excited  by  excessive  tickling  in

larynx,  preceded  or  accompanied  by  dry,  smarting,  or

burning  sore  throat.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. 'Pain  in  1.  side  of  chest,  as  if

ribs  were  pressing  against  lungs.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Crampy  pain  in  r.  lumbar  region.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Acute  rheumatic  pain  r.  shoulder  <  from

motion,  especially  on  raising  arm.

■  Shooting  burning  pain  in  r.  shoulder;  gastralgia  or  en-

teralgia.

■  Pains  shift  rapidly  in  phalanges  and  metacarpal  bones.
I  I  Fingers  pain  on  writing.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■Slight  coxalgia  in  1.  hip.

■  Sciatic  pains,  as  if  1.  hip  joint  was  wrenched.

■  Painful  drawing  and  lameness  behind  1.  trochanter,  ex-

tending down  to  popliteal  space.
■Shooting,  burning,  laming  pain,  affecting  posterior  femo-
ral muscles ;  shooting  along  1,  sciatic  nerve  to  foot,  <
by  motion ;  moderate  motion  aggravates,  violent  motion


273  IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

makes no difference ;  shooting, burning pains in  r.
shoulder.
I  Pain  confined  to  1.  leg,  shooting,  burning,  laming,  affect-
ing posterior  femoral  muscles,  and  shooting  along 1.
sciatic  nerve  to  foot ; <  by  motion. ^Sciatica.
^^  Limbs  in  General, l  Shifting  pains  in  r.  hip,  both  knees,
<  r.  and  in  r.  foot,  especially,  and  first  joint  of  great
toe.
I  I  Tearing,  shooting  and  rapidly  shifting  pains  in  joints
and  extremities,  especially  smaller  joints,  but  more  par-
ticularly in  r.  shoulder.
^  Best. Position. Motion. Rest:  headache  <.
Sitting  down:  chronic  frontal  headache  <.
Must  bend  forward  for  relief:  from  colicky  pains.
Standing  up:  chronic  headache  >.
Raising  arm:  pain  in  shoulder  <.
After  exertion :  headache  <.
Overexertion :  causes  nausea.
Constant  motion :  headache  >.

Motion:  pain  in  r.  hypochondriac  region  <;  pain  in  re-
gion of  umbilicus  < ;  pain  in  shoulder  < ;  pain  along
sciatic  nerve  <.
Moderate  motion:  headache  >.

Violent  motion: sick  headache <; pains  along  scic, ,
nerve  not  affected.
^®  Nerves. I  Great debility;  faint, weak knees, trembling;
sunken  eyes ;  after  protracted  or  severe  serous  or  bilious
stools,  as  in  summer  diarrhoea.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Sleeplessness ;  starts  in  sleep.
^  Time. Aggravation  in  evening  and  at  night;  from  rest,  also
from  motion; >  from  continued  motion.
Morning:  pain  in  head  grows  more  violent  towards  after-
noon and  night;  sickness.
Towards  evening:  headache  and  nausea  <.
Evening:  headache  <;  much  itching  of  eruption.
Night: emissions; chilliness; great  itching  of  eruption;
great  itching  of  eczema.
^'  Temperature and Weather. Warm  room :  toothache.
Open  air:  headache  >.
After  cold  drink:  aching  in  stomach.
Cold  air:  headache  and  nausea  <.
^^  Fever, i  i  Chilliness  all  night.
I  I  Chills,  with  sleepiness.
Head  and  face  cold.

■  Heat  followed  by  chill,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.

■  Chills  over  whole  body,  even  when  well  covered; fever

with  muttering  delirium  and  bilious  diarrhoea.
Skin  hot ;  dry,  black  stool.

VOL.  VI.— 18.


IRIS  VERSICOLOR.  274

■  Sweat  over  whole  body,  particularly  in  groiD.
I  Bilious  fever  after  Bryon.  or  Aeon.

■  Typhoid  fever,  with  symptoms  similar  to  Baptis.

I  Muttering  delirium;  yellow,  watery,  stinking  diarrhoea;
involuntary  passage  of  urine  and  feces  ;  coated  tongue,
dry,  brown,  crusty,  edges  red,  sordes  on  gums  and  teeth,
and  foul  breath. ^Typhoid.

I  Fever;  stupor;  black,  stinking,  involuntary  diarrhoea,
tongue  dry  and  brown;  fetid  breath. ^Typhoid.

I  Fever,  intense headache,  pain  in  small  of  back,  black
dysenteric  passages,  nausea  and  efforts  to  vomit, ^Ty-
phoid.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Paroxysmal :  headache  through  day.

Every  few  moments:  vomiting  and  purging.

At  short  intervals:  severe  griping  in  abdomen.

An  hour  after  eating:  vomiting  of  food.

After  breakfast  every  morning:  neuralgia  of  face;  head-
ache; pain  in  stomach.

Periodical  nightly  colic,  diarrhoea  2  or  3  a.m.

Every  eighth  day:  sick  headache.

At  intervals  of  many  days,  so  as  to  become  periodical:
headache.

Every  two  weeks:  ear  gathers  and  discharges.

Once  every  month  or  six  weeks:  periodical  vomiting  spells,
lasting  two  or  three  days.

Spring  and  Autumn:  abdominal  complaints.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  headache  in  forehead
and  eyes  < ;  dull  throbbing  or  shooting  in  side  of  fore-
head; shooting  in  temple;  hemicrania;  severe  pain  in
occiput  <;  stitches  in  lower  cerebellum;  neuralgic  pain
side  of  face;  pain  in  hypochondriac  region;  crampy
pain  in  lumbar  region ;  acute  rheumatic  pain  in  shoul-
der; shooting,  burning  pain  in  shoulder;  shifting  pains
in  hip,  in  foot;  herpes  zoster  on  side  of  body.

Left:  acute,  boring  pains  on  side  of  forehead;  ear  covered
with  eruption;  syphilitic  sinus  in  groin;  pain  in  side
of  chest;  slight  coxalgia  in  hip;  sciatic  pain  in  hip
joint;  painful  drawing  and  lameness  behind  trochanter;
pain  along  sciatic  nerve  to  foot;  in  leg  vesicular  erup-
tion on  knee.

From  r.  to  1 :  pain  shoots  like  an  electric  shock  from  temple
to  occiput;  acute,  boring  pains  through  forehead;  pain
above  crest  of  ilium.
^^  Sensations.  As  of  a  band  around  head;  tongue  feels  as  if
scalded;  as  if  mouth  and  fauces  were  on  fire;  mouth  as
if  it  was  scalded;  gums  and  tongue  feel  as  though  cov-
ered with  a  greasy  substance;  feeling  of  enlargement
like  a  burning  cavern  in  throat;  pain  like  effects  of  a


275  IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

galvanic  battery  upward  to  epigastric  region;  arms  feel
as  if  on  fire;  pricking  as  of  points;  as  if  ribs  were  press-
ing against  lungs;  as  if  1.  hip  joint  was  wrenched.

Pain:  in  head,  in  forehead  and  eyes;  in  tonsils;  in  stom-
ach; in  r.  hypochondriac  region;  above  crest  of  ilium,
r.  side,  then  1.;  in  umbilical  region;  in  bowels;  across
umbilicus;  in  1.  side  of  chest;  shifts  rapidly  in  pha-
langes and  metacarpal  bones;  in  fingers;  in  1.  leg;  in
small  of  back.

Pain:  like  an  electric  shock  from  r.  temple  to  1.  side  of
occiput.

Intense  pain:  in  umbilical  region.

Violent  pain:  over  eyes;  in  supraorbital  region  on  either
side,  but  only  on  one  side  at  a  time.

Violent  pain:  with  every  fit  of  vomiting;  in  epigastric
region.

Great  pain:  in  abdomen.

Severe  pain:  in  head,  through  temples  and  over  eyes;  in
occiput  <  r.  side;  in  bowels.

Severe  frontal  headache.

Violent  stunning  headache  with  facial  neuralgia.

Great  burning  distress:  in  stomach;  in  epigastrium;  in
pancreas.

Fearful  cramps:  from  middle  of  sternum  to  pit  of  stomach;
in  bowels.

Sharp,  cutting  pains  of  short  duration  in  head.

Cutting:  in  head  ;  in  region  of  liver;  in  lower  part  of  ab-
domen ;  in  urethra.

Tearing,  shooting  and  rapidly  shifting  pains  in  joints  and
extremities,  especially  smaller  joints,  but  more  particu-
larly in  r.  shoulder.  .

Shooting,  burning  pain:  in  r.  shoulder;  affecting  poste-
rior femoral  muscles.

Shooting  pains:  in  temples;  into  ears;  in  r.  shoulder;
along  sciatic  nerve  to  foot.

Acute,  boring  or  shooting  pains :  in  one  side  of  forehead,
generally  left.

Sharp  pains:  in  centre  of  temples.

Darting  stitches:  in  two  carious  teeth.

Stitches:  in  lower  cerebellum,  r.  side.

Violent  throbbing:  in  either  side  of  frontal  protuberance.  *

Beating,  throbbing:  in  and  about  heart  and  sternum.

Dull  throbbing  or  shooting:  in  r.  side  of  forehead.

Dull  throbbing  or  hammering:  in  forehead.

Severe  griping :  in  abdomen.

Sharp,  griping  pains:  in  bowels.

Intense  aching,  cramplike  pains:  in  abdomen.

Colicky  pains  :  about  navel.


IRIS  VERSICOLOR.  276

Neuralgic  pains:  in  r.  side  of  face.

Neuralgia:  facial  or  cephalic;  of  head,  eyes  and  temples;

involving  supra and infraorbital,  superior  maxillary

and  inferior  dental  nerves.
Acute  rheumatic  pain:  in  r.  shoulder.
Sciatic  pains :  in  1.  hip  joint.
Shifting  pains:  in  r.  hip,  both  knees,  in  r.  foot  and  first

joint  of  great  toe.
Grumbling  pains :  in  bowels.

Shocks  of  pain:  in  umbilical  region,  up  to  epigastrium.
Habitual  headache.
Chronic  headaches  with  asthenopia.
Chronic  frontal  headache.

Slight  dull  pain :  at  situation  of  posterior  fontanelle.
Dull,  heavy  frontal  headache.
Sick  headache:  of  gastric  or  hepatic  origin.
Cramps:  in  lower  extremities ;  in  body.
Crampy  pains: in  abdomen  and  lumbar  region; in  r.

lumbar  region.
Aching:  in  stomach.
Pricking:  in  urethra.
Smarting  burning:  in  throat.
Burning: in  internal  canthus;  at  anus; in  mouth  and

fauces;  oesophagus  and  stomach;  from  mouth  to  anus;

in  urethra.
Soreness:  of  uterus.

Painful  drawing  and  lameness  behind  1.  trochanter,  ex-
tending down  to  popliteal  space.
Tenderness :  in  region  of  stomach  and  liver.
Tired  headache.
Full,  heavy  feeling  in  head.
Fulness:  of  stomach.
Greasy  feeling:  in  mouth.
Very  intense  feeling  of  exhaustion.
Constriction:  around  forehead.
Constricted  feeling :  in  scalp.
Great  heat:  of  head.
Tenderness:  in  region  of  liver.
Excessive  tickling:  in  larynx.
Coldness:  of  male  sexual  organs.
Itching:  of  male  sexual  organs;  of  eruption.
*^  Tissues. Excites  secretion  of  glands,  salivary,  pancreatic,

intestinal,  etc.
Acts  powerfully  on  gastro-intestinal  mucous  membrane.
Ascites  and  anasarca  of  hepatic  origin.
Scrofula;  eruptions  on  skin;  glandular  swellings.
I  Will  abort  felon.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion, Injuries. Touch :  uterus  very

sensitive.


277  IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

Pressure:  great  pain  in  abdomen.  <
Riding:  causes  nausea.
^  Skin. Small  bloodboils  on  face,  hands  and  back.

I  I  Fine  eruption,  showing  black  points  after  scratching,

great  itching  at  night.

I I  Herpes  zoster  on  r.  side  of  body.

I  Vesicular  eruption,  becoming  pustular,  on  arms,  abdo-
men, back,  nates  and  1.  knee;  much  itching  in  evening.

■  Vesicular  eruption,  becoming  pustular.

■  Pustular  eruption  on  scalp,  face,  around  mouth  and  other

parts  of  body.

■  Eczema,  with  great  itching,  especially  at  night;  small,

fine  eruptions,  which  show  black  points  after  scratching.

■  Irregular  patches  on  knees,  elbows  and  body,  with  shin-

ing scales,  edges  slightly  raised. ^Psoriasis.

■  Psoriasis  in  relievo,  skin  fissured  and  irritable.

■  Tinea  capitis;  crusta  lactea;  porrigo;  eczema  of  face.

■  Impetigo  capitis,  with  gastric  complaints, nausea and

vomiting.

■  Impetigo  figurata,  eruption  dry,  distinct  and  of  dark  hue.

■  Obstinate  lepra  vulgaris  on  arms.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Scrawny,  scrofulous  child,
few  weeks  after  birth;  impetigo.

Baby,  set.  5  months;  diarrhoea.

Baby,  set.  8  months,  suffering  for  two  months;  diarrhoea.

Baby,  frequently  troubled  with  boils,  mother  had  itch  ;
tinea  capitis.

Girl,  set.  11,  suffering  for  three  or  four  years;  headache.

A  boy,  set.  12;  typhoid  fever.

Man,  set,  20,  has  had  syphilis  and  taken  mercury,  suffer-
ing three  months ;  syphilitic  sinus.

Woman,  set.  20  ;  cholera  morbus.

Woman,  set.  30 ;  bilious  colic.

Woman,  set.  30,  nervo-sanguine,  suffering  from  phlegmasia
alba  dolens  succeeding  an  abortion ;  salivation.

Lady,  set.  31,  debilitated  by  overlactation ;  cholera.

Man,  health  good,  subject  to  sudden  and  often  unaccount-
able attacks;  diarrhoea.

Widow,  set.  42,  tall,  light  complexion  and  hair,  blue  eyes,
suffering  three  weeks;  sciatica.

Woman,  set.  43,  small  in  stature,  black  hair,  blue  eyes,  ac-
tive disposition,  slight  icteric  taint,  uses  strong  tea  and
coffee  to  excess;  constipation.

Middle  aged  woman;  typhoid.

Woman,  set  60;  cholera  morbus.

Woman,  set.  65,  nervous  bilious  temper£tment,  wife  of
farmer,  works  very  hard;  colic.

A  woman,  set.  83:  typhoid.


IRIS  VERSICOLOR— JABORANDI.  278

^^  Relations. Antidoted  by  Nux  vom.

Antidotes:  Mercur.,  Nux  vom.,  Phytol.  -
Compare: Ant.  crud.,  Ant.  tart.,  Arsen.,  Colchic,  Ewpator.
per/.,  Ipecac,  Juglans  cin.,  Lepta7idra, Mercur.,  Pulsat.,
Sanguin.,  Veratr.


JABORANDI.

Jaborandi.  Rutacese.

A  tree  attaining  a  height  of  more  than  twenty  feet,  native  to  Brazil.  Tlie
blossoms,  which  appear  in  September,  are  large  and  violet  colored ;  it  is  from
them  the  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared.  The  Jaborandi  "  is  used  by  South  Amer-
ican Indians  as  antidote  to  the  bite  of  serpents  of  the  Trigonecephalus  group."

The  substance  contains  an  alkaloid  passing  under  the  name  of  Jaborandine,
or  Pilocarpia,  and  is  used  by  the  old  school  as  a  diaphoretic.

Physiological  effects  from  infusions,  extracts  and  23owdered  leaves  have  been
reported  by  Gubler,  Coutinho,  Robin,  Kinger,  Gould,  Martindale,  Smith,  Green,
Craig,  Strumpf  and  Lewi.

Watkins  and  Thayer  have  made  provings  with  the  first  to  fifth  dilutions,  5  to
100  drops. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia^  vol.  5,  p.  165.

Clinical  Authorities. — Hyperopia  et  spasmus  muse,  eil ;  Cataracta  dura  immat.
et  asthenopia;  Torpor  retincB  squint;  Deady,  Buffum,  Norton's  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  98 ;
Night  sweats,  Chase,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  152.

^  Inner  Head.  Headache.
*  Outer  Head.  !  Alopecia.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. iDim  vision,  twitching  of  lids  and  pain

in  eyeballs.
I  For  many  months  could  not  read  more  than  five  minutes

without  the  eyes  tiring;  nausea  on  looking  at  moving

objects. ^Hyperopia  cum  asthenojoia.

■  Hyperopia  et  spasmus  muse.  cil. ; everything becomes

black  before  eyes  on  stooping;  aching  of  eyes  on  read-
ing and  spots  before  vision;  V  1^;  with  concave  42,
V  -^

20-  . .

■  Hyperopia  et  spasmus  muse,  cil.;  constant  pain  m  eyes

even  upon  using  for  distance.

■  Everything  at  a  distance  appeared  hazy,  and  although

he  could  read  moderate  sized  type  at  one  foot,  at  two
feet  it  was  indistinct.

■  Blue  before  eyes  at  times,  especially  on  looking  in  the

distance.


279  JABORANDI.

I  After  constant  and  close  application  to  fine  work;  retinal
images  retained  for  several  minutes;  vision  impaired
and  finally  unable  to  use  eyes  at  all  for  work;  R.  V.,  |-|-;
L.  v.,  fingers  at  eighteen  feet;  convex  42,  R.  V.,  |4;  in-
sufficiency of  each  internal  rectus;  sharp  pains  in  eye
shooting  back  into  head,  with  general  dull  ache  of  head ;
light  is  painful. ^Torpor  retinae.

I  Eyes  very  weak,  could  not  use  them  even  a  few  minutes
without  smarting  and  pain  in  them,  with  nausea;  pain
and  nausea  also  experienced  when  looking  steadily  at
a  distance;  much  vertigo,  as  if  head  was  too  light,  espe-
cially on  moving  or  looking  at  objects;  constant  dull
pain  in  eyes,  or  occasional  sharp  pain.  ^Cataracta  dura
immat.  et  asthenopia.

I  Serous  choroiditis.

■  Tension  of  accommodative  apparatus  of  eye,  with  approxi-

mation of  nearest  and  farthest  ])oints  of  distinct  vision.

■State  of  vision  constantly  changing,  becoming  suddenly
more  or  less  dim,  every  few  moments.

■Spots  before  vision  and  aching  of  eyes  upon  using.  ^Spas-
mus muse.  cil.

■  Spasm  or  irritability  of  ciliary  muscles.

■  Contraction  of  pupil.

■  Heat  and  burning  in  eyes  upon  using.

■  Eyes  tire  easily  and  are  irritable,  especially  on  moving.

■  Headache  upon  using  eyes;  smarting  and  pain  in  globes.

■  Periodic  convergent  squint;  strabismus  of  recent  date  not

dependent  upon  weakness  of  opposing  muscle;  tendency
to  recurrence  of  squint  after  an  operation.

''  S-Hell  and  Nose.  Coryza  with  feverishness;  free  flow  of
saliva;  discharge  from  nostrils;  eyes  weeping;  headache;
soreness  in  nostrils  and  bones;  profuse  perspiration;
dimness  of  sight ;  dulness  alternating  with  hilarity  with-
out cause;  diarrhoea  or  constipation.

^  Upper  Face. ■Face  flushed.

^^  Inner  Mouth. ■■Profuse  salivation. ^Diphtheria.

i  Mumps  with  metastatic  orchitis;  testicle  swollen  twice
natural  size  and  very  painful.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■Loss  of  appetite,
with  bitter  taste.

■  Intense  thirst.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructations.
Great  nausea  and  retching,  often  attended  with  hiccough,
and  sometimes  terminating  in  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Distress  in  stomach,  >by  eating.
'^  Abdomen. Empty,  gone  feeling  in  abdomen.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Thin,  watery,  copious  diarrhoea,  with
slight  nausea.


JABORANDI.  280

Yellow,  watery,  painless,  gushing  diarrhoea;  goneness  and
emptiness  from  diarrhoea,  but  no  pain ;  eructations  and
hiccough;  nausea  and  sudden  vomiting.
Thin,  yellow,  watery,  undigested  stools.
^^  Urinary Organs. •  Renal dropsy, after scarlatina, or
Bright's  disease,
i  Diabetes  insipidus.
lUrine  dark,  scanty;  profuse.
"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. •  Orchitis:  with  incipient  bronchial
trouble  (relieved  pain  and  cough);  metastasis  of  mumps.
^'  Female  Sexual  Organs. Flushings  at  climacteric  period.
24  Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation, i  (Edema  of  preg-
nancy; swelling  efface,  labia,  extremities,
i  Puerperal  convulsions;  symptoms  of  suffocation,  patient
in  her  stupor,  being  unable  to  swallow  the  great  secre-
tion of  saliva  (three  cases),
i  Galactorrhoea.
':  Deficient  secretion  of  milk.
^  Cough. :  Humid  asthma  with  profuse  expectoration ;  bron-
chitis with  abundant  non-purulent  expectoration.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitching  pain  in  chest.

;  Hydrothorax ;  pleuritic  effusions.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Heart's  action  irregular,
intermittent  and  increased,
i  Cardiac  dropsy.

Rapid  pulse,  with  visible  throbbing  of  arteries.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Stooping :  everything  becomes
black  before  eyes.
On  moving:  much  vertigo;  eyes  tire  easily,
^^  Sleep. I  I  Profound,  heavy  sleep.
^  Time. Night:  sweats.
^'^  Fever, l  ■  Profuse  sweat.

■  Copious  sweating  and  salivation;  profuse  secretion  from

most  of  glandular  structures  of  body ;  perspiration  starts
on  forehead  and  face  and  then  spreads  all  over  body,
most  profuse  on  trunk ;  profound  prostration  after  sweat-
ing; unilateral  1.  sided  sweat.

■  Excessive  perspiration  either  during  convalescence  from

diseases,  or  in  course  of  chronic  diseases,  as  in  phthisis.
I  Colliquative  sweating  of  phthisis,  very  profuse,  causing
great  prostration.

■  Profuse  night  sweats.

^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Every  few  moments:  state  of  vision

changing.
For  several  minutes:  retinal  images  retained.
For  many  months:  could  not  read  more  than  five  minutes

without  the  eyes  tiring.
At  climacteric  period:  flushings.


281  JABORANDI.

*^  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  unilateral  sided  sweat.
*^  Sensations. As  if  head  was  too  light.

Pains  in  eyeballs;  in  globes;  in  head.

Stitching  pain :  in  chest.

Sharp  pains :  in  eye  shooting  back  into  head.

Constant  pain :  in  eyes.

Aching:  of  eyes  on  reading.

Dull  ache:  of  head.

Heat  and  burning:  in  eyes.

Smarting:  in  eyes;  in  globes.

Soreness:  in  nostrils  and  bones.

Distress:  in  stomach.

Empty  gone  feeling:  in  abdomen.
**  Tissues. :  Dropsical  effusions,  especially  of  pleura  and  lungs.

\  Ascites.
*®  Skin. •  Prurigo.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  9,  suffering  seven
years;  recurrent  squint  after  operation.

Boy,  set.  14,  after  constant  and  close  application  to  fine
work  on  cardboard  one  year  ago ;  torpor  retina3.

Boy,  set.  17;  hyperopia  and  spasm  of  ciliary  muscle.

Girl,  set.  22 ;  spasm  of  ciliary  muscle.

Man,  set.  28,  for  seven  years  writing  in  poor  light  all  day ;
myopia  and  spasm  of  ciliary  muscle.

Man,  set.  32;  hyperopia  and  spasm  of  ciliary  muscle.

Man,  set.  32;  spasm  of  ciliary  muscle.

Miss ,  set.  40,  suffering  many  months;  hyperopia  and

asthenopia.

Mrs.  ,  set.  52,  suffering four  years; cataracta dura

immat.,  et  asthenopia.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Amylnit,  Atrop.,  Physos.


JACARANDA  CAROBA.  2S2

JACARANDA  CAROBA.

Caroba.  Bignoniacex.

A  tree  common  to  Brazil. The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  flowers.
Provings  by  Mure. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  176.

Clinical  Authorities. — Schiissler,  Gilchrist's  Surg.,  p.  572.

^  Inner  Head. Fulness :  in  head ;  first  in  r.,  later  in  1.  temple,
going  to  nape  of  neck,  where  it  disappears.
Pain,  as  if  a  plug  was  pressing  on  r.  side  of  forehead.
Dull  pain  between  forehead  and  r.  temple,  shifting  to  other
side  and  then  disappearing.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Flapping  in  ears,  as  of  wings.

Stoppage  and  heat  in  1.  ear,  with  burning,  digging  pain,
extending  to  1.  nostril.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing  and  fluent  coryza.

Coryza,  with  heaviness  and  weariness  at  vertex,  forehead
and  eyes.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue. Food  tastes  flat  or  acid.

Raw  pain  at  1.  side  of  tongue.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Dry  mouth  in  morning  in  bed.

Mouth  dry  and  clammy.
^^  Throat. Sore  throat,  with  constriction  of  pharynx  and  dif-
ficult deglutition.
Constrictive  sensation  at  throat.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea

when  eating.
^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Fulness  at  pit  of  stomach,
with  hurried  breathing.
Pressure  at  pit  of  stomach.
Sensation  as  if  heart  beat  in  pit  of  stomach.
'^  Abdomen. Painful  stitch :  between  pit  of  stomach  and  um-
bilicus; in  1.  side  of  navel.
Acute  pain  at  hypogastriura  when  pressing  upon  it.
Swelling  of  r.  groin  painful  to  touch.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Constipation.

Acute  pain,  with  lancination  in  anus.
Pricking  around  anus.
Excrescence  at  anus.
Itching  at  anus  while  sitting.
^^  Urinary  Organs, l  l  Contact  of  urine  with  chancre  causes
tearing  pains,  which  affect  whole  organism. /^Syphilis.


283  JACARANDA  CAROBA.

''  Male  Sexual  Organs. Heat  and  pain  in  penis.

Orifice  of  urethra  looks  like  two  inflamed  lips,  itching  on

being  touched.
Discharge  of  yellowish  white  liquid  from  prepuce.
Prickling  in  prepuce.

Pain  in  prepuce,  as  if  a  small  bundle  of  fibres  was  seized.
Phimosis.

Suppuration  between  glans  and  prepuce.
Itching  and  pricking  at  margin  of  prepuce.
Itching  pimple  at  glans,  suppurating  like  a  chancre,  and

leaving  a  red  point  when  dry.
Acute  pain  in  1.  testicle  when  walking.
Heat  and  swelling  of  scrotum.
Painful  erections  caused  by  swelling  of  prepuce.
I  Prepuce  much  swollen,  could  not  be  drawn  over  glans;
on  attempting  to  do  so,  copious  discharge  of  yellowish
green  pus. ^Secondary  syphilis.
I  I  Chordee  in  gonorrhoea.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. 1 1  Dull  pain  under  sternum  on
raising  head  and  drawing  breath.
Prickings  under  sternum.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Lancinating  pain  in  re-
gion of  heart.
Painful  stitch  at  heart,  extending  to  r.  side.
Sfcitch  at  heart,  which  seems  to  beat  slowly.
32  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  arm  in  morning.
Pain  from  1.  elbow  through  forearm.
Red  spot  with  a  yellowish  pellicle  on  wrist.
Lower  Limbs. Ulcers  on  legs.

Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  knee,  disappearing  on  motion.
Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting:  itching  at  anus.
Raising  head:  dull  pain  under  sternum.
Motion:  >  rheumatic  pains  in  r.  knee.
Walking:  acute  pain  in  1.  testicle.
^^  Sleep. Restless  sleep  with  frightful  dreams.
3^  Time. Morning:  dry  mouth;  rheumatic  pain  in  arm.
*"  Fever. Internal  chill.

Drv,  pricking  heat  all  over.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  fulness  m  temple;  pain
on  side  of  forehead;  swelling  of  groin;  painful  stitch
from  heart  to  side;  rheumatic  pain  in  knee.
Left:  fulness  of  temple;  stoppage  and  heat  in  ear;  burn-
ing in  nostril; raw  pain  on side  of  tongue;  painful
stitch  on  side  of  navel;  acute  pain  in  testicle; rheu-
matic pain  in  arm;  pain  from  elbow  through  forearm.
*^  Sensations. As  if  a  plug  was  pressing  on  r.  side  of  fore-
head; flapping  as  of  wings  in  ears;  as  if  heart  beat  in
pit  of  stomach ;  as  if  a  small  bundle  of  fibres  was  seized.


33


35


JACARANDA  CAROBA.  284

Pain:  from  1.  elbow  through  forearm.

Acute  pain:  at  hypogastrium ;  in  anus;  in  1.  testicle.

Tearing  pains:  when  urine  comes  in  contact  with  chancre.

Lancination:  in  anus;  in  region  of  heart.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  1.  arm;  in  r.  knee.

Painful  stitch:  between  pit  of  stomach  and  umbilicus;  in
1.  side  of  navel;  at  heart,  extending  to  r.  side.

Raw  pain:  at  1.  side  of  tongue.

Pricking:  around  anus;  under  sternum.

Prickling:  in  prepuce.

Soreness :  of  throat.

Heat  and  pain :  in  penis.

Dry  pricking  heat:  all  over.

Dull  pain:  between  forehead  and  r.  temple,  shifting  to
other  side,  then  disappearing;  under  sternum.

Painful  erection.

Constriction:  of  pharynx  ;  at  throat.

Stoppage  and  heat  in  1.  ear,  with  burning,  digging  pain,
extending  to  1.  nostril.

Pressure :  at  pit  of  stomach.

Fulness:  in  head, first  in  r.,  later  in  1.  temple,  going  to
nape  of  neck ;  at  pit  of  stomach.

Heaviness  and  weariness :  at  vertex ;  forehead  and  eyes.

Itching:  at  anus;  at  orifice  of  urethra;  at  margin  of  pre-
puce ;  pimple  at  glans.
^*  Tissues. Gonorrhoeal  rheumatism.

Syphilis;  Hunterian  chancre.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  groin  pain-
ful ;  causes  itching  on  urethra.
*^  Relations. Compare: Coral,  rub.  in  red  and  sensitive  chan-
cres or  chancroids; Thuja  in  gonorrhoeal  rheumatism.


285  JACEA.

JACEA. (Viola  tricolor.)

Pansy;  Heart's  ease.  Violacese.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plants  gathered  when  in  flower.
Proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  10,  p.  1 32.
Clinical  Authorities. — Eczema^  Bigler,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  36 ;  Crusta
lactea,  Toothaker,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  372.

*  Mind. Great  dulness  of  intellect.

Low  spirited  about  domestic  affairs.

Great  indiiference.

Bad,  morose  humor,  with  disinclination  to  talk.

Very  sensitive  and  inclined  to  scold.
^  Sensorium. i  Vertigo  when  walking.

Heaviness  of  head  when  raising  it,  disappears  by  stooping.
^  Inner  Head. ■  Pressing  headache,  chiefly  in  forehead  and
temples.

*  Outer  Head, i Scurfs  on  head,  unbearable  burning,  <  at

night.
I  Tinea  capitis,  with  frequent  involuntary  urination.
Burning  stitches  in  scalp,  especially  in  forehead  and  temples.

■  Impetigo  of  hairy  scalp  and  face.

iCrusta  lactea:  with  violent  cough  and  excessive  oppres-
sion; with  children  recently  weaned;  syphilitic.

■  Thick  incrustations,  pouring  out  a  large  quantity  of  thick,

yellow  fluid,  which  agglutinates  hair.
I  Crusta  lactea ;  hair  falls  off",  scabs  dry,  of  a  light  cream  color,

and  without  discharge.
I  I  Plica  polonica.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Smarting  in  eyes.
Eyelids  sink  down  as  from  sleepiness.
Contraction  and  closing  of  lids.
■Scrofulous ophthalmia  with crusta lactea; lids much

swollen,  and soft  parts  around  so  much  inflamed  that

lids  cannot  be  opened;  face  covered  wdth  a  raw  looking,

excoriating  eruption.

*  Upper  Face. Heat  of  side  of  face  not  lain  on,  evening  in  bed.

Induration  of  skin  of  face.

■  Milk  crust,  burning,  itching,  especially  at  night,  with  dis-

charge of  viscid  yellow  pus.

■  Impetiginous  exanthem  on  forehead.
Tension  in  integuments  of  face  and  forehead.


JACEA.  286

^  Lower  Face, l Pustular  eruption  on  whole  upper  lip  and
chin,  a  thick,  yellow,  friable,  semi-transparent  incrusta-
tion; acne  rosacea  on  chin.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  bitter,  tongue  coated  with  white

mucus.
^"  Inner  Mouth. Sensation  of  dryness,  yet  with  much  saliva

in  mouth.
^^  Throat. iMuch  phlegm  in  throat,  causes  hawking,  at  11  a.m.
I  Swallowing  difficult  and  very  painful. ^Syphilis.
I  Very  prominent  yellow  greenish  ulcer  with  adherent  pus,
in  1.  side  of  throat,  extending  from  velum  palati  over
entire  1.  tonsil. ^Syphilis.
iCliancroid  ulcer  on  posterior  surface  of  fauces  and  soft
palate. ^Syphilis.
'^  Eating  and  Drinking. While  eating,  hot  sweat.

Immediately  after  eating:  dyspnoea;  anxious  heat.
^^  Hypochondria. Pressing  stinging  in  diaphragm.

•  Pain  in  r.  side  of  diaphragm.
'^  Abdomen. Cutting  pains  in  abdomen,  with  urging  to  stool,
crying  and  lamentations,  followed  by  profuse  discharge
of  flatus,  with  large  lumps  of  mucus.
""  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea  with  flatulency.

Stool:  soft,  as  if  minced  ;  of  mucus,  with  much  flatus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urging  to  urinate,  with  profuse  discharge
of  urine.
Urine:  offensive,  smelling  like  cat's  urine;  very  turbid.
Stitches  in  urethra.

Frequent  and  profuse  emission  of  urine.
''  Male Sexual  Organs, i Involuntary  seminal discharges,
with  lewd  dreams.
I  Nocturnal  emissions,  accompanied  by  vivid  dreams,  not
very  exhausting,  but  causing  weariness  of  mind ;  loss  of
seminal  fluid  at  stool  and  in  urine; trembling;  feels
dull,  sleepless,  poor  appetite.
B Suppression  of  gonorrhoea ;  induration  of  testicle.

■  Venereal  ulcers.

I  Swelling  of  prepuce,  with  itching.

1  Stitches  in  penis  or  pressing  in  glans;  burning  of  glans.
I  I  Itching  stitches  in  scrotum.
"^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Leucorrhoea:  with  stitching  pain
in  mons  veneris;  in  children;  in  syphilis,

■  Painful  pustules  on  labia. ^Syphilis.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  1 1  Chancroid  ulcers
about  breasts. ^Syphilis.

^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  1 1  Hoarse-
ness. i^Syphilis.

^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  <
during  inspiration  and  expiration.


287  ■  JACEA.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Oppression  and  stitches
in  heart,  on  bending  forward  when  sitting.
Anxiety  about  lieart  while  lying,  with  beating  like  waves.
Pulse  accelerated.
^°  Outer  Chest. Stitches  in  chest  and  ribs,  sternum  and  inter-
costal muscles.
I  I  Syphilitic  ulcers  on  clavicles.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Tension  between  shoulder  blades,  with
cutting  and  tingling  in  skin.
Swelling  and  induration  of  cervical  glands.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Stitches  in  shoulder  joints,  elbows,  forearms
and  fingers.
I  I  Painful  pustles  in  axillae. ^Syphilis.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Stitches  in  patella,  tibia  and  feet.

Pustulous  and  ichorous  exanthema  on  feet.
^' Rest. Position. Motion. Lying:  anxiety  about  heart.
Raising  head :  heaviness.
Stooping:  >  heaviness  of  head.
Bending  forward  when  sitting:  oppression  and  stitches  in

heart.
Walking:  vertigo.
^^  Nerves.  ■  Nervous  paroxysms  from  suppression  of  milk  crust.
^^  Sleep. ■  Yawning.

Sleepless;  frequent  waking.

Goes  to  sleep  late  on  account  of  ideas  crowding  his  mind.

The child twitches with his hand in  his sleep,  with

clenched  thumbs,  general  dry  heat  and  red  face.
Dreams  pleasant,  or  amorous.
^  Time. 11  a.m.:  much  phlegm  in  throat,  causing  hawking.
Forenoon:  chilliness.

Evening  in  bed:  heat  of  side  of  face  not  lain  on.
Night: burning  and itching  of  milk  crust; dry  heat;
itching  of  eruption  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Aversion  to  the  open  air.
Open  air:  chilliness.

Worse  in  winter,  when  walking  out  in  cold  air.
*"  Fever. Chill  or  chilliness  in  forenoon,  and  in  oJDcn  air.
Dry,  anxious  lieat  at  night  in  bed,  with  red  face.
Night  sweats.
*"  Locality  and  Direction'.  Right:  pain  in  side  of  diaphragm.
Left:  yellow  greenish  ulcer  in  side  of  throat,  extending
over  entire  tonsil ;  stitches  in  side  of  chest.
*^  Sensations. Pain :  in  r.  side  of  diaphragm.

Cutting  pain:  in  abdomen;  between  shoulder  blades.
Burning  stitches:  in  scalp,  forehead  and  temples.
Stitches:  in  urethra;  in  penis;  in  1.  side  of  chest;  in  heart;
in ribs; sternum; intercostal muscles; in shoulder
joints,  elbows,  forearms  and  fingers;  in  patella;  tibia;
in  feet.


JACEA.  288

Stitching  pain :  in  mons  veneris.

Pressing  stinging:  in  diaphragm.

Pressing  pain:  in  forehead  and  temples.

Anxiety:  about  head.

Unbearable  burning  :  in  scurfs  on  head.

Burning:  ofglans.

Smarting:  in  eyes.

Beating,  like  waves:  about  heart.

Painful  pustules:  on  labia;  in  axillae.

Heaviness:  of  head.

Dryness:  of  mouth.

Tingling:  in  skin.

Itching  stitches:  in  scrotum.

Violent  itching:  of  eruptions.

Itching:  of  milk  crusts.
^  Tissues. Swelling  of  glands ;  eruptions ;  syphilis.

Rheumatic  affections  of  muscles.

Rheumatism  or  gout.

Articular  rheumatism,  with  itchlike  eruption  around  joints.

Impetiginous  and  eczematous  diseases,  especially  crusta
lactea.
^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Worse  from  press-
ure on  side  opposite  to  painful  side.

Worse  lying  on  unpainful  side.
*^  Skin. Cutting,  or  stinging  in  skin.

Stinging,  biting  rash.

Miliary  eruption  all  over  body.

Eruption: burning,  dry,  stinging;  violent  itching,  <  at
night;  crusty;  scurfy.

■  Squamous  spots  on  skin.-

■  Dry  scabs  over  body,  exude  yellow  water  when  scratched.

■  Acute  eruption,  confined  principally  to  face,  though  it

may  extend  to  scalp,  tends  rapidly  to  pustular  form ;
yellowish  brown  crusts ;  much  itching  in  all  stages,
temporarily  >  by  rubbing;  sometimes  there  is  a  rather
thin  white  nasal  discharge,  or  a  loose  catarrhal  cough.
^Eczema  of  children  (tea  of  dried  herb).
I  Milk  crust.

■  Impetigo,  recent  cases  in  adults.
I  i  Large  boils  all  over  body.

I  I  Painful  pustules  secreting  yellowish  green  fetid  pus.

I  I  Ichorous  ulcers  with  violent  itching.

I  I  Burrowing  ulcers.

I  Skin  eruptions  of  scrofulous  children.

■  Consequences  of  suppressed  eruptions.
1  iSkin  difficult  to  heal.

*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Scrofulous  children.

A nursing infant,  set.  1  (mother,  set.  42),  covered  with
chancroid  ulcers.


280  JACEA— JALAPA.

Young  girl,  after  suppression  of  milk  crust ;  nervous  par-
oxysms.
*^  Relations.  Antidoted  by :  Camphor.,  Mercur.,  Pulsat,  Rhus  tox.

Compatible:  Palsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  Staphis.

Compare:  Clemat.,  Graphit,  Hepar,  Mezer.,  Oleand.,  Petrol.,
Staphis.,  Vinca  minor.


JALAPA.

Jalap.  ■  Convolvulacese.

Native  to  Mexico,  from  whence  the  first  roots  were  brought  by  Coxe,  in  1 827.
The  flowers  are  large  and  lilac  purple,  the  roots  tuberous.  The  tincture  is  pre-
pared from  the  dried  and  finely  pulverized  root.

It  has  been  much  used  by  the  Old  School  as  an  active  cathartic,  generally  in
connection  with  other  drugs.  Its  action  was  found  to  be  violent,  and  in  overdoses
dangerous.

The  symptoms  contained  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia  are  from  Noack  and  Trinks'
Materia  Medica,  to  which  we  add  a  small  proving  by  Jeanes,  made  with  the  fourth
dilution,  in  1844.

^  Mind. ■  Great  restlessness  with  anxiety.
^  Inner  Head. Violent  headache.

Pain  in  head;  smarting  in  skin  of  forehead.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Humming  in  ears.
^  Lower  Face. Dryness  of  lips.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Biting  and  smarting  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Stinging  on  tongue  and  in  fauces.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Flatulent
and  frothy  eructation  with  abatement  of  pain.
Nausea  and  vomiting.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  r.  hypocbondrium.
^^  Abdomen, l  i  Severe  griping,  cutting  pain  in  bowels,  <  at
night.
Pain  in  middle  of  abdomen  and  in  region  of  1.  superior

flexure  of  colon.
Pain  in  caecum.
Flatulent  rumbling  in  bowels.
Colic;  violent  pains  in  small  intestines,  as  if  abdomen

would  be  cut  to  pieces.
Inflammation  of  intestines.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stools : violent, excessive ;  bloody ;

VOL.  VI. — 19.


JALAPA.  290

watery,  with weak  pulse; sour  smelling; with great
restlessness  and  anxiety.
Before  and  during  stool :  cutting  colic.
Pain  in  sigmoid  flexure  of  colon.
Soreness  of  anus.
I  Diarrhoea  in  infants :  child  is  quiet  all  day,  but  screams

and  tosses  about  all  night.
I  I  Infantile  diarrhoea,  general  coldness,  blueness  of  face.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pain  and  pressure  in  region  of  bladder.
^^  Male Sexual Organs. Thrilling sensation in urethra

whilst  urinating.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Severe  pain  about  superior  margin  of  1.

scapula.
^"  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  thighs.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Smarting  on  inside  edge  and  at  root  of  1.
great  toenail,  with  heat,  tearing  and  pulsation.
Pain  in  large  joint  of  great  toe.
Burning  of  soles  of  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Aching  in  arms  and  legs,  most  r.  side.
^"  Nerves. Fainting  fits;  weakness.

Excessive  uneasiness  and  tossing  about  of  limbs.
^^  Time. Night: severe  cutting,  griping  pain  in  bowels  <;

child  screams  and  tosses.
""^  Fever. Febrile  attacks.

Great  disposition  to  perspiration  of  head  and  superior
parts  of  body.
^"^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  pain  in  hypochondrium;
aching  in  arm  and  leg.
Left:  pain  in  superior  flexure  of  colon;  severe  pain  about
superior  margin  of  scapula;  smarting  on  inside  edge
and  at  root  of  great  toenail.
*^  Sensations. As  if  abdomen  would  be  cut  to  pieces.

Pain:  in  head:  in  r.  hypochondrium;  in  middle  of  abdo-
men :  in  region  of  1.  superior  flexure  of  colon ;  in  region
of  bladder;  in  thigh;  in  large  joint  of  great  toe.
Violent  pains:  in  head;  in  small  intestines.
Severe  pain:  about  superior  margin  of  1.  scapula.
Tearing:  at  root  of  great  toenail.
Severe  griping,  cutting  pain:  in  bowels.
Cutting  colic.
Aching  in  arms  and  legs.
Stinging:  on  tongue  and  in  fauces.
Biting:  of  tongue.
Smarting:  in  skin  of  forehead;  of  tongue;  on  inside  edge

and  at  root  of  1.  great  toenail.
Burning:  of  soles  of  feet.
Soreness :  of  anus.
Pressure:  in  region  of  bladder.


291  JALAPA— JAMBOS  EUGENIA,

Pulsation :  in  great  toe.
Thrilling  sensation  :  in  urethra.
Dryness :  of  lips.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Cam^/iora  (diarrhoea  with  coldness),
Coloc.  (colic).

JAMBOS  EUGENIA.

Malabar  Plum  tree  ;  Rose  apple.  Myrtacess.

A  tree  native  to  the  tropics,  never  without  flowers  or  fruit. The  tincture  is
prepared  from  the  fresh  seeds,  which  are  considered  poisonous.

Introduced  and  proved  by  C.  Hering. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  231.

Clinical  Authorities. — Epidemic  catarrhal  affections  of  respiratory  passages,
Hrg.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  13 ;  Acne,  C.  Hg.  and  others,  MSS.

^  Mind. Constantly  desirous  of  sitting  alone  and  reflecting.

Nothing  seemed  right,  when  sitting,  he  wanted  to  lie ;
when  lying,  he  wanted  to  rise  again.

Slight  but  long  continued  drunkenness,  which  made  him
very  talkative,  but  indolent.

Sudden,  great  change  in  him  after  micturition,  everything
seems  more  beautiful  and  bright,  sky  and  trees  more
joyous  and  clear;  but  after  quarter  of  an  hour  every-
thing became  gloomy  again.
^  Sensorium.  Whirling  in  head  while  sitting;  houses  at  a
distance  seem  to  turn  bottom  upwards.

Vertigo  after  rising  from  lying  down,  caused  by  rush  of
blood  to  head.

Looking  inattentively  objects  waver  or  tumble  one  over
the  other,  on  looking  sharp  all  is  right.

Confusion  of  head,  and  slight  sticking  in  it.

Dulness  and  slight  ticking  in  head.

Dizzy  and  nauseated,  in  evening.
^  Inner  Head. Pressive,  pinching  pain  in  small  spot  deep  in
forehead.

■  Neuralgia  in  1.  forehead  over  eye.

Headache  on  r.  side,  deep  in,  as  if  a  heavy  board  was  lying
there.

Headache  as  from  a  sticking  from  all  sides  at  once,  or  as
if  everything  was  drawn  together  from  within,  recur-
ring like  a  slow  pulsation.

Headache,  as  if  something  was  rolling  in  head,  with  burn-
ing in  it  coming  out  at  eyes,  with  lachrymation ;  no  re-


JAMBOS  EUGENIA.  292

lief  from  cold  water;  at  last  he  became  nauseated,  was
obliged  to  vomit,  but  headache  was  made  <  thereby;
in  evening  lasting  into  night.

In  evening,  headache,  nausea,  vomiting,  with  subsequent
bitterness  of  mouth,  much  thirst  for  cold  water,  and  per-
spiration after  drinking.

Whole  night,  headache,  burning  in  eyes,  great  thirst,  and
much  micturition.

Pressive  pinching  pain  on  vertex,
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Darkness  before  eyes,  everything  seems
double;  on  looking  intently  double  vision  disappears.

On  looking  intently  at  anything  everything  is  in  order,
but  if  he  only  looks  ahead  of  him,  everything  wavers
before  eyes  and  becomes  confused.

Whirling  before  r.  eye,  as  if  it  would  become  dark;  eye
becomes  inflamed.

After  micturition,  suddenly  bright  before  eyes.

Eyes  look  sleepy  and  drunken.

Red  vessels  from  inner  canthus  to  cornea.

It  seems  as  though  fire  came  out  of  eyes,  and  tears  ran  out
of  them  in  streams  in  evening  and  night.

Suddenly,  biting  in  eyes,  as  from  pepper.

Contractive,  pinching  pain  in  eyeball  in  small  spot  above
r.  inner  canthus.

Right  eye  inflamed;  needle-like  stitches  in  inner  canthus.

Unable  to  look  at  sun,  eyes  fill  with  w^ater.

Unable  to  close  eyes  in  evening  on  account  pf  burning  in
them ;  this  also  prevents  sleeping  at  night.

Violent  internal  itching  in  eyes  and  nose  in  evening.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. 1 1  Catarrhal  otitis.
®  Upper  Face. '  i  Pimples  on  face,  painful  for  some  distance

about  them. 6'Acne  rosacese.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Gums  about  hollow  teeth  inflamed  and

painful.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Pain  on  very  small  spot  in  region  of

1.  corner  of  hyoid  bone,  also  when  swallowing.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Frothy  saliva  in  mouth  when  talking.

Mouth  full  of  frothy,  tenacious  saliva;  spits  and  hawks
whole  day.

Tenacious,  yellowish,  bloody  mucus  in  mouth  after  mid-
day nap.
"  Throat. At  night,  burning  in  eyes,  violent  thirst  from  dry-
ness, low  down  in  throat,  so  that  he  did  not  feel  the
drink,  which  also  did  not  >  the  dryness.

Pain  in  a  very  small  place  in  region  of  1,  corner  of  hyoid
bone,  also  on  swallowing.

iThroat  inflamed. ^Catarrhal  fever.

Cough  felt  in  whole  chest,  but  especially  in  pit  of  throat.

Mucus  goes  from  nose  into  throat.


293  JAMBOS  EUGENIA.

"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. Eats  and  drinks

with  a  very  good  appetite,  so  that  he  takes  too  much ;

greater  relish  for  tobacco.
Much  thirst  for  cold  water,  with  perspiration,  in  morning;

on  awaking.
Wants  to  do  nothing  but  smoke  all  day.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough

when  eating,  more  like  eructations  than  loud  hiccough.
Heartburn  at  night.
Nausea,  going  off  by  smoking.
I  I  Vomiting.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sticking  in  pit  of  stomach.
Pain  in  r.  side  near  pit  of  stomach,  under  ribs  as  if  it

would  be  drawn  inward.
Pressure  and  sticking  in  1.  side  under  ribs,  near  pit  of

stomach.
Contractive,  pinching  sensation  deep  in  stomach.
Sensation  as  of  cramp  in  orifice  of  stomach,  which  results

in  nausea.
Nausea  commences  deep  in  stomach  and  rises  uj)  from  end

of  oesophagus.
*^  Abdomen. Flatulence,  rumbling  in  bowels.
Drawing  about  navel  as  from  a  purge.
Confused  feeling  in  upper  abdomen  like  a  coldness  in  it.
Burning  in  abdomen,  as  after  drinking  brandy,  at  first

transversely  across  abdomen,  then  becoming  general.
Colic,  with  laborlike  pressing  downward,  much  urging  to

stool  and  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge.
I  I  Colic.

I  I  Inguinal  hernia  from  a  fall.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Urging  to  stool  and colic;  now  and

then  a  somewhat diarrhoeic discharge is forced out

as  with  a  syringe.
Diarrhoea:  with  much  pressure  backward.
Diarrhoeic  discharge  followed  by  vomiting.
Several  stools  a  day  with  burning  in  abdomen  and  sput-
tering, fetid  discharge.

I  I  Offensive,  sputtering  stool,  without  much  urging.
Several  small  stools,  with  burning  in  abdomen.
Only  wind  is  passed  instead  of  stool.

■  Scanty,  hard  stool,  after  much  pressing,  with  spasmodic
closure  of  anus  after  evacuation.

Very  scanty,  pasty,  gritty  stool.

Pressure  as  in  diarrhoea,  at  first  a  hard,  then  a  pasty  stool.

After  stool,  stitching  in  abdomen  from  above  downward.

It  seems  as  if  a  ten  pound  weight  was  hanging  upon  rec-
tum, and  as  if  everything  below  would  fall  out.

Cramp  or  pinching  pains  in  rectum.

I I  Tenesmus.


JAMBOS  EUGENIA.  294

I  Bleeding  hemorrhoids,  copious  for  days,  with  great  relief
of  mind  and  body.
^^  Urinary  Organs, l  '  Tenesmus  in  bladder,  ischuria.
Burning  during  micturition.

■  Frequent  urination  during  night.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  Violent  erections  with  sexual  desire,
after  midday  nap.

Painful  erections,  with  inward  itching,  without  sexual
desire.

Seminal  discharge:  too  soon  and  almost  without  excite-
ment in  morning;  retarded;  the  orgasm  subsides  sev-
eral times  before  it  leads  to  an  ejaculation.

During  coition  no  seminal  discharge;  penis  relaxed.

No  erections  in  morning.

■  Impotence.

Glans  penis  remains  sensitive  a  long  time  after  coition.
Much  turning  and  twisting  in  scrotum.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Sensation
as  if  larynx  was  narrowed ;  it  prompts  to  a  deep  inspi-
ration, whereby  tightness  is  still  more  felt,  it  makes  him
hoarse.

■  Inflammatory  affection  of  trachea. ^Catarrhal  fever.

^^  Cough. Cough:  from  throat;  in  coughing,  pain  principally

in  throat  pit;  more  frequent  in  evening  and  at  night;

not  the  least  expectoration;  causes  dryness  of  throat.
I  I  Cough  raises  something  from  pit  of  throat,  but  it  always

gradually  falls  down  again.
Loose,  deep  cough,  without  expectoration and without

pain,  especially  in  evening.
Loose  cough  at  night.
I  I  Much  hawking  causing  a  short  cough.
After coughing,  is  obliged to  swallow,  when irritation

passes  off;  as  soon  as  he  swallows  again  is  obliged  to

cough.

■  Epidemic  cough  among  children,  with  coryza,  inflam-

mation of  eyes  and  pain  in  ears.

■  Catarrh:  with  much  phlegm  and  rheumatic  pains ;  with

rattling  in  chest.

Constantly  obliged  to  expectorate.

When  speaking,  is  obliged  to  spit  out  a  frothy  saliva.

Hawking;  mucus  yellowish  and  somewhat  bloody.

Constant  hawking,  something  is  always  loosening,  but  still
something  always  remains  adherent.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Fain  deep  in  r.  side  of  neck  near  oesoph-
agus, a  fine,  sticking,  cramplike,  constant  pain.

Pain  in  nape  of  neck  which  hinders  turning.

Sticking  pain  in  back  as  if  something  was  sticking  in
spine,  <  by  bending  back.


295  JAMBOS  EUGENIA.

Pain  in  back,  which  makes  him  bend  back  inward,  with
heat  in  evening,  disappearing  in  morning.

Sticking,  burning,  itching  in  a  small  spot  on  back,  <  after
scratching.

I  I  Pain  in  small  of  back  and  in  calves.

I  I  Aching  in  sacrum  and  knees.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Skin  recedes  from  thumb  nail  and  suppu-
rates.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Violent  sticking,  extending  obliquely  for-
ward above  1.  crest  of  ilium,  <  when  sitting  erect,  stand-
ing and  bending  toward  1.  side;  >  bending  towards  r.

Pain  as  if  a  band  was  drawn  from  crest  of  one  ilium  to
other;  hip  bones  painful  to  pressure.

Pain  in  thighs  and  calves,  he  could  hardly  stand.

Paralytic  pains  in  1.  tibia  and  feet.

Cramps  in  soles  of  feet  when  moving  at  night

Skin  cracks  between  and  about  toes.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rising from lying down :
vertigo.

Sitting:  whirling  in  head;  sticking  above  1.  crest  of  ilium
<  ;  coldness  as  if  he  was  naked.

Bending  back:  sticking  pains  <.

Bending  inward:  pain  in  back  >.

Bending  toward  1.  side:  sticking  above  1.  crest  of  ilium  <.

Bending  toward  r.  side:  sticking  above  1.  crest  of  ilium  >.

Standing:  sticking  above  1.  crest  of  ilium  <.

Could  hardly  stand:  on  account  of  pain  in  thighs  and
calves.

Moving:  cramps  in  soles  of  feet.

Walking:  much  exhaustive  yawning;  perspiration.
'^^  Nerves. Very  much  exhausted,  but  lively  after  drinking

coffee.
^^  Sleep. Much  exhaustive  yawning  when  walking  in  open  air.

Forgetting  all  his  business  he  crept  into  a  corner  and  said
he  must  sleep;  he  could  not  sleep,  however,  but  still  re-
mained lying  down.

After  a  sound  midday  sleep  difficult  waking,  with  much
thirst  and  bruised  sensation.

Sound  sleep  undisturbed  by  any  difficulties.

Stupid  midday  sleep  with  confused  dream.
^'^  Time. Morning:  seminal  discharge;  no  erections.

All  day:  spits  and  hawks.

After  midday  nap:  yellowish,  bloody  mucus  in  mouth;
violent  erections.

Evening:  dizzy  and  nauseated ;  headache  lasts  into  night;
nausea,  headache,  vomiting;  tears  run  out  of  eyes  in
streams;  unable  to  close  eyes  oh  account  of  burning;
violent  internal  itching  in  eyes  and  nose;  cough  more
frequent;  heat  in  back.


JAMBOS  EUGENIA.  296

Before  midnight:  heat.

Night:  headache,  burning  in  eyes,  great  thirst,  mnch  mic-
turition; tears  run  out  of  eyes  in  streams;  burning  in
eyes  prevents  sleep;  violent  thirst;  heartburn;  frequent
urination;  cough  more  frequent;  cramps  of  soles  of  feet.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Open  air:  much  exhaustive
yawning  while  walking,  mornings.

Cold  water:  does  not  >  burning  in  eyes;  much  thirst  for.
40  Pever. Shiverings  run  over  him  after  micturition.

Coldness,  as  if  he  was  naked,  while  sitting.

I  I  Hot  hands.

Fever;  heat  before  midnight,  with  little  thirst  and  much
perspiration,  thereupon  falling  asleep;  during  fever  and
for  several  hours  in  morning,  pain  in  back,  >  bending
inward.

Perspiration  and  thirst  after  unsatisfactory  coition.

Perspiration  when  walking.

■Catarrhal  fever;  thirst  during  chill ;  heat  before  midnight,
with affection of  trachea, throat, eyes; sweat when
walking.
"  Attacks, Periodicity. During  menstrual period : skin

disease  <.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  headache  on  side;  whirl-
ing before  eye;  pain  in  eyeball  above  inner  canthus;
eye  inflamed ;  pain  in  side  near  pit  of  stomach ;  pain
deep  in  side  of  neck.

Left :  neuralgia  in  forehead  over  eye ;  pain  in  corner  of
hyoid  bone;  pressure  and  sticking  in  side  under  ribs;
violent  sticking,  extending  obliquely  forward  above
crest  of  ilium  ;  paralytic  pains  in  tibia.

Inward  :  as  if  stomach  was  drawn.

Backward  :  pressure  in  rectum.

Downward  :  labor  like  pressing  in  abdomen.

From  above  downward  :  stitching  in  abdomen.
^  Sensations. Internal  pinching  pains  here  and  there.

Crawling,  titillating  pains.

Headache  as  if  heavy  board  was  lying  on  r.  side ;  as  from
a  sticking  from  all  sides  at  once ;  as  if  everything  was
drawn  together  from  within  head  ;  as  if  something  was
rolling  in  head  ;  as  if  vision  of  r.  eye  would  become  dark  ;
as  though  fire  came  out  of  eyes ;  biting  as  from  pepper
in  eyes ;  as  if  stomach  would  be  drawn  inwards ;  as  of
cramp  in  orifice  of  stomach ;  as  if  a  ten  pound  weight
was  hanging  upon  rectum ;  as  if  everything  below  rectum
would  fall  out.

As  if  larynx  was  narrowed ;  as  if  something  was  sticking
spine ;  pain  as  if  a  band  was  drawn  from  crest  of  one
ilium  to  other ;  coldness  as  if  he  was  naked.


297  JAMBOS  EUGENIA.

Pain  :  in  face  some  distance  about  pimples ;  on  very  small
spot  in  region  of  1.  corner  of  hyoid  bone ;  in  r.  side  near
pit  of  stomach ;  in  throat  pit ;  in  ears ;  deep  in  r.  side
of  neck  near  oesophagus;  in  nape  of  neck;  in  back;  in
small  of  back ;  in  calves ;  in  thighs.

Violent  sticking :  above  1.  crest  of  ilium.

Fine,  sticking,  cramplike,  constant  pain  :  in  side  of  neck.

Sticking,  burning,  itching :  in  a  small  spot  on  back.

Sticking:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  1.  side;  under  ribs;  in  back.

Slight  stitching :  in  head.

Stitching :  in  abdomen.

Pressive,  pinching  pain ;  in  small  spot  deep  in  forehead ;
on  vertex.

Contractive  pinching  pain  :  in  eyeball ;  in  small  spot  above
r.  inner  canthus.

Contractive  pinching  sensation :  deep  in  stomach.

Pinching  pains :  in  rectum.

Cramps :  in  soles  of  feet.

Colic,  with  labor  like  pressing  downward  in  abdomen.

Neuralgia:  in  1.  forehead  over  eye.

Paralytic  pain  :  in  1.  tibia  and  feet.

Aching:  in  sacrum  and  knees.

Drawing :  about  navel  as  from  a  purge.

Twisting:  in  scrotum.

Pressure :  in  1.  side  under  ribs ;  backwards  during  diar-
rhoea.

Burning:  in  head  coming  out  at  eyes;  in  eyes;  in  ab-
domen.

Biting :  in  eyes.

Whirling :  in  head  ;  before  r.  eye.

Dryness  :  low  down  in  throat.

Confused  feeling :  in  upper  abdomen  like  a  coldness  in  it.

Violent  internal  itching:  in  eyes  and  nose.

Inward  itching:  in  male  sexual  organs.
**  Tissues. An  old  wound  from  a  thrust  became  painful  again.
I  I  Rheumatic pain wanders from place to  place,  with
catarrh.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  hip  bones
painful  to.

From  a  fall :  inguinal  hernia.
^  Skin. I  Comedones.

I  Acne,  with  pain  extending  for  some  distance  around;  the

skin  disease  is  <  during  menstrual  period.

I I  Pimples  (sore  acne)  on  face.

*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  Coffea;  smoking  tobacco  antidotes
nausea.
Compare: Lavroc. and drugs containing hydrocyanic
acid ;  Pulsat  (fugitive  rheumatic  pains).


JATROPHA.  298

JATROPHA.

Physic  Nut.  Euphorhiacese.

A  shrub  indigenous  to  the  West  Indies  and  South  America.  The  alcoholic
tincture  is  prepared  from  the  powdered  seeds.

Provings  byHering  and  provers;  Jablanczy;  Thorer  and  Lembke.

Clinical  Authorities, — Diarrhoea,  Stow,  Kaue's  Kec,  1870,  p.  209 ;  Hencke,
Eaue's  Kec,  1875,  p.  146 ;  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  63 ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  315  ;  Sammer
diarrhcea  with  vomiting,  Blake,  Horn.  Kev.,  vol.  20,  p.  606 ;  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  2,  p.
14;  Cholera,  Hencke,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  119,  and  Kaue's  Kec,  1872,  p.  148;
Hencke,  Brutger,  Lembke,  Kiedel,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  427  ;  Jablanczy,  Kummel,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  433;  Lumbrici  and  ascarides,  Schulz,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.
434; Vomiting  of  pregnancy,  Chase,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  427.

^  Mind. Apathy  ;  indifference  to  pain.
Anxiety  and  anguish.

Anxiety,  with  burning  in  stomach  and  coldness  of  body.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness,  followed  by  unconsciousness  and
delirium.
Head  hot,  stupefaction,  with  yawning  and  nausea.
^  Inner  Head. Violent  pressing  pain  in  temples,  >  in  open
air,  and  reappearing  when  entering  room.
Headache,  with  nausea  and  vomiturition,  beginning  in

morning.
Heat  and  heaviness  of  head.
*  Outer  Head. Stiffness  of  muscles  on  forehead  and  neck.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i Quivering  in  1.  upper  lid.

I  I  Itching  and  smarting  of  margins  of  lids.
'^  Hearing  and  Ears. Burning  hot  ears,  with  heat  in  back

part  of  head.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Itching  of  nose  while  eating.

Ulcers  in  nose  and  mouth.
®  Upper  Face. Pale  face  with  blue  margins  around  eyes.
^  Lower  Face. Painful  cracked  lips.

"  Taste and Tongue. Metallic,  bloody  taste,  with  much
spitting  of  saliva  (in  morning).
Long  continued  pain  and  burning  of  tongue.
Numbness  of  tongue,  with  heat  and  dryness  of  mouth.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Increased  accumulation  of  thin  saliva.
Burning  in  mouth  and  throat,  followed  by  dryness.
Dryness  of  mouth  and  tongue,  without  thirst  (at  night) ;

mouth  feels  as  if  scalded.
Ulcers  in  nose  and  mouth.


299  JATROPHA.

13  Throat. I  Dryness  in  fauces  and  throat.

Spasmodic  constriction  in  ttiroat,  ascending  from  stomach.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i Inextinguishable

thirst,  not  satisfied  by  drinking  cold  water. ^Cholera.

'^  Eating  and  Drinking, i Dreads  to  drink  on  account  of

nausea.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions.
1  Hiccc^igh,  followed  by  copious  vomiting  of  bile.  ^Cholera.
I  Vomiting :  of  large  masses  of  dark  green  bile  and  mucus ;
of  large  quantities  of  watery,  albuminous  substances;
water  is  almost  immediately  vomited.
I  Very  easy  vomiting  of  a  great  quantity  of  watery,  glairy
fluid,  accompanied  by  watery  diarrhoea;  spasmodically
contracting pains in stomach, burning in  stomach,
cramps  in  calves  and  coldness  of  body. ^Cholera.
•  Uninterrupted  vomiting. ^Cholera.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  sinking,  with
nausea  in  pit  of  stomach.
iCrampy,  constrictive  pains  in  epigastrium.

■  Persistent  dull  pressure  in  stomach.
I  Heat  and  burning  in  stomach.

■  Spasmodically  contracting  pains  in  stomach.

^^  Abdomen. iMuch  noise  in  abdomen,  as  if  a  full  bottle  was
emptied,  followed  later  b}^  thin  stool.
■Rumbling  in  abdomen,  with  colic;  >  when  walking  in
open  air.

■  Abdomen:  distended  and  soft;  very  much  inflated,  dis-

tended, tympanitic ; swollen  and  sore  to  touch ;  con-
tracted. ^Cholera.

■  Pain  in  region  of  navel,  deep.

■  Burning  in  abdomen  ;  seeks  to  cool  himself  by  throwing

off  covering  and  lying  on  ground.
I  I  Lancinating,  stinging  pain  with  colic.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Sudden  desire  for  stool,  and  constant
noises  as  of  liquids  in  abdomen,  especially  in  1.  side.

■  ■Thin  stool,  preceded  and  followed  by  much  rumbling,

and  at  times  a  noise  as  if  a  bottle  was  being  emptied.

■  Colic  followed  by  discharge  of  large,  watery,  odorless

stool.

■  Continued  discharge  of  water  by  stool.

■  Stools  painless,  thin,  watery,  with  loud,  fluid  rumbling,

and  gushing  out  of  stool ;  <  mornings.

■  ■Watery  diarrhoea,  as  if  it  spurted  from  him.
■Diarrhoea  profuse ;  gushing  out  like  a  torrent.

■  Severe  diarrhoea  occurring  suddenly  in  Summer,  in  con-

nection with  a  sharp  attack  of  vomiting.

■  After  taking  cold,  sleepless;  slight  pain  in  bowels;  after


JATROPHA.  300

midnight  profuse  watery  discharge ;  a  few  hours  later,
again  and  again,  weakening  patient  greatly;  stools  pro-
fuse, watery,  without  smell.  ^Diarrhoea.
I  Easy  vomiting  of  large  quantities  of  watery  substance
like  albumen;  diarrhoea,  contents  of  rectum  gush  out
like  a  torrent;  anxiety,  with  burning  at  stomach  ;  an-
guish, with  coldness  of  body;  viscid  sweat;  violent
cramps  in  lower  limbs;  calves  look  like  flat  splints;  ab-
domen flattened  after  many  stools. ^Cholerine.

■  Vomiting,  with  cramp  in  abdomen; frequent,  profuse,

pale,  watery,  urgent  stools;  loud  rumbling,  as  of  water
pouring  from  a  bottle;  abdomen  flat;  face  pale,  shriv-
elled ;  great  thirst  for  water  or  lemonade.

■  During  menstruation,  which  had  ceased  for  thirty  hours,

uninterrupted  vomiting  of  scentless,  white,  gelatinous
fluid;  cramps  in  calves  and  brachial  muscles;  body
blue,  cold  as  marble,  and  covered  with  cold,  clammy
sweat;  pulse  imperceptible;  abdomen  contracted;  un-
quenchable thirst;  drinks  much  cold  water;  burning
in  abdomen,  which  she  seeks  to  relieve  by  lying  on
ground;  mind  placid,  rather  ecstatic,  taking  little  notice
of  her  cramps  and  other  affections.  ^Cholera  morbus.
I  Fearful  vomiting,  coming  up  at  once  in  quantity,  of
watery  or  glairy  fluid,  with  crampy,  constrictive  pains
in  gastric'  region,  or  burning  in  stomach ;  continued  dis-
charge of  water  per  anum;  cramps  in  calves;  general
coldness  of  body. ^Cholera.

I  Sudden,  violent  vomiting  of  watery  fluids,  with  cramps

in  stomach;  cool  skin;  weak,  soft,  slow  pulse;  great  de-
bility; anxiety  and  fear,  as  though  cramps  in  calves
would  set  in;  stool  diarrhoeic  yesterday;  to-day  neither
stool  nor  urine. ^Cholera.

I I  First  stage  of  cholera,  before  period  of  collapse.

■  Constipation.

■Very  abundant  alvine  evacuations,  mushy,  with  a  large
number  of  lumbrici  and  ascarides.

■  Griping,  sticking  pains  in  abdomen,  continuing  a  long

time,  accompanied  by  sensation  as  if  balls  were  rolling
together  in  abdomen;  constipation;  pains  occasionally
so  severe  that  he  shrieked  and  writhed  about  in  bed ;
after  five  drops  a  copious  evacuation  with  a  quantity  of
lumbrici  and  ascarides;  the  same  with  the  following
evacuations.
I  I  Stitches  in  anus  and  rectum.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  desire  to  urinate;  urine  pale
yellow,  frothy.

^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. (Vomiting  dur-
ing pregnancy.


33


38


301  JATROPHA.

''Heart, Pulse and Circulation, i Pulse  imperceptible.
^Cholera.
Upper  Limbs, l Cramps in  brachial  muscles. ^Cholera.
Lower  Limbs. ■  Slight  cramplike  jerkings  in  both  calves,
with  painless  diarrhoea.
I  Cramps  in  calves. ^Cholera.

■  Violent,  cramplike  pain  in  lower  legs,  and  cramps  in

calves,  which  become  knotted.

■  Violent  cramps  in  legs  and  feet.
Tingling  in  toes.

Itching  between  toes  at  night.

The  heels  are  very  sensitive  when  walking  on  them.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Walking:  in  open  air,  rumbling
in  abdomen;  on  heels,  sensitive.
^  Writhed  about  in  bed  with  pain.
Time. Morning: headache  begins;  metallic,  bloody  taste,
with  much  spitting  of  saliva;  stools  <.
Night:  dryness  of  mouth  and  tongue,  without  thirst;  itch-
ing between  toes.
After  midnight: profuse  watery  discharge;  a  few  hours
later  again  and  again.
Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  pressing  pain  in
temples  >  ;  rumbling  in  abdomen.
Entering  room:  pressing  pain  in  temples  returns.
Seeks  to  cool  himself  by  throwing  off  covering  and  lying
on  ground.  '

Fever. Chilliness  in  back,  with  heat  in  face  and  head.
Chilliness  with  cold  hands  and  blue  nails.

■  Coldness  of  body.

■  Body  cold  as  marble  and  mottled  blue. /^Cholera.

■  Cold  hands,  with  heat  in  mouth  and  throat.
Heat  in  head,  face  and  ears.

■  General  cold,  clammy  perspiration.

■  Cold,  clam^my  sweat  on  skin. ■Cholera.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Summer:  severe  diarrhoea  occurring

suddenly.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  quivering  in  upper  eyelid;

noise  as  of  liquids  in  abdomen  on  side.
*'  Sensations. Mouth  feels  as  if  scalded;  as  if  balls  were  roll-
ing together  in  abdomen;  rumbling  as  if  a  bottle  was
being  emptied.
Pain:  in  region  of  navel.
Severe  pain :  in  abdomen.
Lancinating  stinging  pain :  in  abdomen.
Violent  cramplike  pain:  in  lower  legs.
Stitches:  in  anus  and  rectum.
Griping,  sticking  pains:  in  abdomen.
Violent  cramps:  in  lower  limbs.


39


40


JATROPHA.  302

Cramps :  in  calves ;  in  abdomen ;  in  bronchial  muscles.

Violent  pressing  pain :  in  temples.

Contracting  pains :  in  stomach.

Constrictive  pains:  in  epigastrum,  in  gastric  region.

Slight  cramplike  jerkings:  in  both  calves.

Spasmodic  constriction :  in  throat.

Persistent  dull  pressure:  in  stomach.

Smarting :  of  margin  of  lids.

Burning:  in  stomach;  of  tongue;  in  mouth  and  throat;
in  abdomen.

Burning  hot  ears.

Heat:  of  head;  in  back  part  of  head;  of  mouth;  in  face;
in  ears.

Dryness:  of  mouth;  of  tongue;  in  fauces;  in  throat.

Numbness:  of  tongue.

Stiffness :  of  muscles  on  forehead  aiid  neck.

Sinking:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Heaviness:  of  head.

Tingling:  in  toes.

Quivering:  in  1.  upper  eyelid.

Itching :  of  margins  of  lids ;  of  nose ;  between  toes  at  night.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch: abdomen

sore;  heels  sore  when  walking  on  them.
^''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Woman,  set.  22 ;  cholera.

Woman,  set.  31 ;  cholera.

Man,  set.  40 ;  cholera.
*^  Relations. Effects  cease  by  placing  hands  in  cold  water.

Compare: the Euphorbiaceae,  viz.: Crot.  tig.,  Euphorb.
coral.,  Mancinella;  also  Veratr.  in  cholera.


303  JUGLANS  CI^EREA.

JUGLANS  CINEREA.

Butternut.  Juglandacese.

Tincture  of  the  bark  of  the  root.

Provings  by  Paine,  Clark,  Cressor  and  Hale.  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,
vol.  5,  p.  193.

Clinical  Authorities. — Retrosternal  pain,  Burnett,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  32,  p.
205 ;  Scarlatina  (20  cases  reported  cured),  Horton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  8,  p.  174 ;  Erysip-
elas, Horton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  162  ;  Eczema,  Horton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  551,  and
vol.  4,  p.  161 ;  Herpes  cireinatus,  Horton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  551  ;  Impetiginous  erup-
tion, Horton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  551 ;  Impetigo  figurata,  Horton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.
551 ;  Lichen  lividus,  Horton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  162.

^  Mind. Depression  of  spirits.

^  Sensoriuiu. Vertigo,  with  faintness.

^  Inner  Head. I  Aching  pain  in  r.  temple.

Dull  headache  on  rising,  passing  off  on  getting  up.

Fulness  of  head  at  night.

■  Sharp,  shooting  pains  in  occiput,  often  associated  with

liver  disturbance.
*  Outer  Head, i  Eruptions  on  scalp.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Inflammation,  with  pustules  on  lids  and

around  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Pain  on  swallowing,  which  is  deep,

drawing,  tickling.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Coryza  from  1.  nostril.
Dryness  of  nose.
I "  Noli  me  tangere  "  on  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Erythema  of  face.

lErysipelas  of  entire  face,  <  r.  side,  extending  around  to

r.  ear,  which  was  swollen  twice  its  natural  size;  eyelids

turgid  and  infiltrated,  nearly  obscuring  sight,  <  r.  side.

^  Lower  Face. Patch  of  herpes  cireinatus  upon  chin  about

size  of  dollar,  steadily  increasing  in  size.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Tip  of  tongue  sore,  dryness  of  fauces.
^^  Inner  IHouth. iSwelling  in  submaxillary  glands,  <  right.
13  Throat. I  Pain  in  r.  side  of  fauces.

Sore  throat,  with  dry  lips  and  moist  mouth.

■  Throat  feels  swollen,  with  pain  on  r.  side.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  throat,  with  general  debility.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite,
with  coppery  taste.


JUGLANS  CINEREA.  S04

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  in

morning;  vomiting,  retching,  with  colic.
^^  Scrobiculum and  Stomach. Pain  in  epigastrium  and
boring  in  stomach.

Sinking  sensation  at  stomach.

I  Indigestion,  with  gastric  irritability ;  flatulence.
^*  Hypochondria. I  Pain  in  each  hypochondriac  region.

Stitching  pains  about  liver  and  under  r.  scapula.
^^  Abdomen. Flatulence  and  aching  in  abdomen  after  dinner.

Deep  seated  pain  on  1.  side  near  kidneys.

Heat  and  pain  in  hypogastrium.

Irritation  and  inflammation  of  mucous  membrane  of  bow-
els, followed  by  dysentery.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Loose  stool  which  smells  like  onions.

Tenesmus  and  burning  after  stool.

■  Bilious,  yellowish  green  stools  with  burning  and  tenesmus.
I  Constipation  preceded  by  diarrhoea.

■  Colic,  very  severe  and  prostrating,  with  purging.

■  Diarrhoea  of  soldiers  in  camps.

^^  Urinary  Organs. I  Diarrhoea  with  cutting  in  abdomen.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx, Trachea  and  Bronchia. Rattling

in  bronchia  on  coughing,  without  expectoration.
^  Cough. Expectoration  of  very  tenacious  mucus  and  musty

sputa.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Great  oppression  in  chest,  with

cutting  pains  in  lungs.

■  Retrosternal  pain,  <  or  only  felt  when  walking  out  of

doors,  after  meals,  or  when  hurried,  or  going  up  hill,

■  Suffocating  pain  in  chest,  especially  when  walking,  so

that  he  has  to  stand  still. ^Angina  pectoris.
Pain  in  1.  side,  <  on  pressure.
Congestion  of  lungs.

■  Dropsy  of  chest  of  rheumatic  origin,  when  there  are  bright

red  erythematous  spots.

■  Scrofulous  consumption,  with  great  emaciation.

^^  Neck  and  Back, i  Stitchlike  pain  under  r.  scapula,  when
stooping.
Aching  pain  in  small  of  back  on  stooping.
Aching  or  shooting  pain  in  lumbar  region,
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  Aching  in  r.,  pain  in  1.  shoulder.

Great  pain  in  r.  axilla,  extending  down  arms  along  course

of  nerves.
Aching  pains  in  arms  and  wrists,  as  if  sprained.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Heat  on  inner  side  of  thigh,  and  in  feet,

with  cramplike  pain  in  1.  hip  at  night,
^^  Limbs  in  General. ■Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  shoulder,  ex-
tending to  pectoral  muscles,  producing  inability  to  draw
a  deep  inspiration ;  a  single  thickly  set  patch  of  impe-


305  JUGLANS  CINEREA.

tigo  figurata  upon  mside  of  1.  leg,  between  knee  and  in
step  which  soon  became  crusted,  discharging  a  puru-
lent, ichorous  secretion,  irritating  surrounding  skin,
producing  a  wide,  inflammatory  margin;  painful  and
sore;  difficulty  in  walking.
^Rest.  Position.  Motion.  -Rising:  dull  headache  >  when
getting  up.

Stooping: stitchlike  pain under  r.  scapula; aching in
^  small  of  back.

Could  neither  sit  nor  lie  with  any  comfort  on  account  of
eruption.

Going  up  hill:  retrosternal  pain  <.

Walking  out  of  doors:  retrosternal  pain  <;  suffocating
pain  in  chest  so  that  he  has  to  stand  still;  difficult  on
account  of  eruption  on  legs ;  pain  from  rectum  to  blad-
der >.
^  Time. Morning:  nausea.

Night:  fulness  of  head;  cramplike  pain  in  1.  hip.

Attacks  come  on  first  half  of  night :  pain  from  rectum  to
bladder.

Latter  half  of  night  must  walk  his  room.
^^  Temperature  and Weather. When  heated  from  over-
exertion: itching  of  whole  body.
*"  Fever, i Scarlatina;  anginose  symptoms  pretty  well  devel-
oped ;  no  sequela.
*'  Attacks. Periodicity. One  attack  hardly  subsides  before

a  fresh  crop  appears:  eczema.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  aching  pain  in  temple;
erysipelas  of  face  <,  extending  to  ear;  eyelid  turgid  and
infiltrated;  swelling  in  submaxillary  glands  < ;  pain  in
side  of  fauces;  stitchlike  pain  under  scapula;  aching
in  shoulder;  pain  in  axilla;  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder.

Left:  coryza  from  nostril;  deep  seated  pain  on  side  near
kidneys; pain  in  side; pain  in  shoulder; cramplike
pain  in  hip;  a  single  thickly  set  patch  of  impetigo  figu-
rata upon  inside  of  leg.
Sensations. Arms  and  wrists  as  if  sprained.

Pain:  in  r.  side  of  fauces;  in  epigastrium;  in  each  hypo-
chondriac region ;  hypogastrium;  retrosternal;  in  1. side;
in  1.  shoulder;  in  eczema  of  hands.

Great  pain :  in  r.  axilla,  extending  down  arms  along  nerves.

Cutting:  in  abdomen;  in  lungs.

Sharp  pain:  in  occiput.

Shooting  pain:  in  lumbar  region.

Stitchlike  pain:  under  r.  scapula;  in  occiput;  about  liver.

Suffocating  pain  :  in  chest.

Severe  pressing  pain:  extending  from  rectum  to  neck  of
bladder.

VOL.  VI.— 20.


43


JUGLANS  CINEREA.  306

Very  severe  and  prostrating  colic.

Cramplike  pain  in  1.  hip.

Boring:  in  stomach.

Deep  seated  pain  :  on  1.  side  near  kidneys.

Deep,  drawing,  tickling  pain  :  in  ears.

Aching:  in  r.  temple;  in  abdomen;  in  small  of  back;  in

r.  shoulder;  in  arms  and  wrists.
Rheumatic  pain:  in  1.  shoulder; extending  to  pectoral

muscles.
Dull  pain:  in  head.

Heat:  in  hypogastrium ;  on  inner  side  of  thigh;  in  feet.
Soreness :  of  tip  of  tongue.
Unbearable  smarting  pains :  eczema  of  hands.
Dryness:  of  nose;  of  fauces;  of  lips.
Fulness:  of  head.
Oppression:  in  chest.
Sinking  sensation :  at  stomach.
Tension :  eczema  of  hands.

Painful  itching:  of  eruption  upon  body,  face  and  arms.
Intolerable  itching  and  soreness  of  eczema  of  hands
Violent  itching:  over  whole  body  in  spots.
^*  Tissues. I  Scrofulous  swelling  of  glands.
"■^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. "Noli  metangere":

on  nose.
Pressure:  pain  in  1.  side  <.
*®  Skin. iRedness  of  skin,  resembling flush  of  scarlatina;

violent  itching  over  whole body,  in spots,  changing

about,  first  one  place  then  another;  <  when  being  heated

from  overexertion.

■  Erysipelatous  iniiammation  of  skin  of  body  and  extremi-

ties.
I  Numerous  and*  extensive  patches  of  eruption  on  body  and
extremities,  varying  in  size  from  a  dollar  to  a  man's
hand. ^Erythema  nodosum.

■  Eruption  upon  body,  face  and  arms; painful  itching

causing  an  irresistible  inclination  to  tear  off  the  crusts.
/^Ecthyma.

■  Eruption  resembling  eczema  simplex.

■  Eruption  general  and  almost  confluent;  pustules  large

and  thickly  set;  those  upon  face  seemed  to  be  drying,
M^th  steady  increase  and  aggravation  of  those  upon
body  and  extremities;  could  neither  sit  nor  lie  with  any
comfort;  worried;  slept  but  little;  appetite  poor;  diar-
rhoea. ^Ecthyma.

■  Impetiginous  eruption  upon  chin,  which  had  been  torn

and  broken,  producing  hard  crusts,  which  nearly  cov-
ered entire  surface;  some  scattering  crusts  of  same  upon
hands  and  arms;  several  large  aphthous  sores  upon  in-


307  JUGLANS  CINEREA.

side  of  lips  and  upon  tongue;  constipation;  child  fret-
* ful  and  feverish ;  ichorous  secretion  of  sores  had  inocu-
lated mother's  breast,  producing  similar  sores  around
nipples.
Pemphigus.

■  Pustular  eruptions.

I  Various  forms  of  eruptions  emanating  from  a  psoric  or
sycotic  taint.

■  Entire  circumference  of  leg,  from  knee  to  ankle,  covered

with  lichen  lividus;  the  livid  character  of  papulae,  and
ecchymosed  streaks  running  from  pimple  to  pimple,
appeared  almost  like  a  coarse  purple  net  drawn  around
limb;  severe  pressing  pain  extending  from  rectum  to
neck  of  bladder,  thence  radiating  up  spermatic  cords;
attacks  come  on  first  half  of  night  during  sleep;  >
walking;  must  walk  his  room, the  entire  latter  half  of
night.

■  Chronic  eczema  of  hands,  one  attack  hardly  subsiding

before  a  fresh  crop  made  its  appearance,  often  passing
from  simple  to  impetiginous  variety ;  the  ichorous  and
semi-purulent  secretion  oozing  upon  exercising  the
hands,  would  crust  over  again,  causing  most  intolerable
itching  and  soreness;  is  awakened  at  times  from  sound
sleep  and  finds  himself  scratching  the  skin  off  hands;
dyspepsia,  with  bronchial  irritation  and  cough.

■  Simple  eczema  of  hands  and  wrists,  assuming  finally  all

characteristics  of  a  fully  developed  impetigo  figurata  in
its  pustular  stage;  the  patches  had  coalesced  and  erup-
tion had  become  confluent  generally;  pustules  were  dis-
charging and  crusting  over,  and  there  was  an  unbear-
able degree  of  tension  and  pain  about  them.

■  Eczema  of  hands,  disease  having  reached  impetiginoid

degree,  extending  over  entire  back  of  both  hands,  and
around  ball  of  thumbs  nearly  to  middle  of  palms;  upon
removing  bread  poultices  which  patient  had  applied
the  softened  crusts  and  intervening  epidermis  adhered
to  them,  leaving  a  raw  surface,  and  this  was  followed
by  a  copious  discharge  of  blood;  unbearable  smarting
pains.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Girl,  set.  18  mos.,  impetigi-
nous eruption.

Boy,  set.  2,  suffering  three  months;  ecthyma.

Girl,  set.  4;  herpes  circinatus.

Girl,  set.  8 ;  ecthyma.

Boy,  set.  14;  impetigo  figurata.

Man,  had  ill  health  for  some  time;  complained  of  languor;
slight  nausea  at  times,  and  occasional  wandering  pains
about  limbs ;  was  seized  quite  suddenly  during  night


JUGLANS  CINEREA— KALI  ARSENICOSUM.  308

with  acute  pain  through  r.  hypochondriac  region,  dart-
ing upward  into  cliest ;  difficult  respiration  and  cough,
nausea  and  fever ;  Aeon,  relieved,  and  three  days  after
there  appeared  erythema  nodosum.

Man,  after  feeling  indisposed  a  week  or  two ; impetigo
figurata.

Woman,  set.  35,  afflicted  occasionally,  for  years;  eczema.

Man,  set.  65,  formerly  farmer,  debilitated,  broken  down
constitution;  lichen  lividus.

Woman,  set.  80;  erysipelas.
^^  Relations.  Compare:  Bryon.  in  rheumatic  pains,  dropsy  of
chest,  stitching  in  liver,  occipital  headache;  Chelid.  in
liver  pain,  especially  under  r.  scapula,  bilious  stools ;
Nux  vom.  in  jaundice,  liver  pains,  occipital  headache ;
Gelsem.,  Coccul.  and  Carbo  veg.  in  occipital  headaches.


KALI  ARSENICOSUM.

Potassium  Arsenite  [Fowler'' s  Solution).  As2  0^K2  0.

A  short  proving,  Med.  and  Surg.  Joum.,  1848,  p.  459  ;  physiological  and  pa-
thogenetic effects  by  Berndt  and  Cattell ;  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  212;
pathogenetic  effects  observed  by  Hering,  MSS.

Clinical,  Atjthoeities. — Melancholy  and  jealousy,  N.  N. ;  Affection  of  uterus,
Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  350;  Neuropaihia,  Gradowicz,  Med.  Ztg.,  vol.  3,  p.  180,
1846 ;  Psoriasis,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  350.

^  Mind.  I  Scolding,  morose,  retired,  quarrelsome  and  discon-
tented, jealous,  indifferent  to  everything,  scarcely  an-
swered questions  addressed  to  her,  or  replied  to  them  in
a  peevish  tone;  eyes  had  a  fixed  look,  face  looked
frightened  and  anxious;  <  every  third  day.  ^Melan-
choly.

TrThought  her  head  felt  larger.

TrHeadache  in  1.  parietal  bone,  as  if  it  was  sore  and  pressed
upon  by  a  hand;  behaves  like  a  crazy  person.

I  I  Constricted  feeling  in  head,  as  if  there  was  a  wound  on
parietal  bone  which  was  being  scratched ;  the  place  feels
hot ;  pressure  does  not  relieve. ^Neuropathia.
*  Outer  Head. •  Crusta  lactea.

®  Sight  and  Eyes.  •  l  Startled  look,  with  protruding,  brilliant
eyes,  pale  face  and  sunken  cheeks. ^Neuropathia.


309  KALI  ARSENICOSUM.

;rProtrusion  of  eyeballs.
Conjunctiva  glassy.

;rDyspnoea;  injected  conjunctivse,  and  eyeballs  fixed.
y-rRight  eye  weaker;  watery,  as  after  weeping.
^  Upper  Face. •  Nodular  eruption  on  face;  boils.

i  Furfuraceous  eruption  in  beard.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  l  Tongue  coated  on  edges  only  with
mucous  stripes. ^Neuropathia.
I  In  middle  towards  tip  of  tongue  smooth  red  spot  with
troublesome burning and numbness. ^Neuralgia of
tongue.
;rTongue  swollen,  felt  too  large  in  mouth.
^'  Throat. ^Sensation in throat and larynx as if forced

asunder.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  For
one  or  two  hours,  repeated  every  five  or  ten  minutes,
sensation  as  of  a  ball  rising  from  pit  of  stomach  to
larynx threatening  sufibcation, > by  loud  belching.
^Neuropathia.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i '  From  pit  of  stomach  to
spine  an  anxious  feeling,  accompanied  by  palpitation,
not  perceptible  objectively. ^Neuropathia.
1  i  Empty  feeling  in  stomach. ^Neuropathia.
^  Stool  and  Rectum, l  '  Violent  diarrhoea.
^  Female Sexual Organs, i  Cauliflower  excrescence  of  os
uteri,  with  flying  pains,  pressure  below  os  pubis,  and
stinking  discharge.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Pulse  weak  and  con-
tracted. ^Melancholy  and  jealousy.
I  I  Pulse  small,  scarcely  perceptible,  rapid. ^Neuropathia.
^  Lower  Limbs, i  Varicose  veins  of  legs.
■  Ulcers  on  legs  with  general  psoriasis.
^  Best. Position. Motion. Cannot  sit  up  in  bed :  on  ac-
count of  weakness.
Walking:  causes  perspiration.
^®  Nerves, l  iSuch  weakness  she  cannot  sit  up  in  bed;  a  loud
noise  or  sudden,  unexpected  motion  throws  her  whole
body  into  a  tremor. 6'Neuropathia.
^^  Time. Night:  intolerable  itching  of  eruption.
^^  Temperature and  Weather. Warmth : < dry  chronic
eczema.
Undressing:  at  night,  itching  of  eruption  <.
^  Fever. iTemperatureof  surface  diminished. ^Melancholy
and  jealousy.
Lassitude  with  febrile  heat.
Perspiration  when  walking.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. '  '  Worse  every  other  day  in  the
morning. ^Neuropathia.


KALI  ARSENICOSUM.  310

For  one  or  two  hours,  repeated  every  five  or  ten  minutes:
sensation  of  b-all  rising  from  pit  of  stomach  to  larynx.

Every  third  day:  mind  symptoms  <.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  headache  in  parietal  bone.
^^  Sensations.  Head  felt  larger;  as  if  1.  parietal  bone  was  sore
and  pressed  upon  by  a  hand;  as  if  there  was  a  wound
on  parietal  bone  which  was  being  scratched ;  tongue  felt
too  large;  sensation  in  throat  and  larynx  as  if  forced
asunder;  as  if  a  ball  was  rising  from  pit  of  stomach  to
larynx.

Pain:  in  1.  parietal  bone.

Flying  pain :  in  uterus.

Troublesome  burning:  in  middle  towards  tip  of  tongue;
of  eruption  on  trunk,  legs  and  forearms.

Anxious  feeling:  from  pit  of  stomach  to  spine,  accompa-
nied by  palpitation.

Constricted  feeling:  in  head.

Pressure:  below  os  pubis.

Lassitude:  with  febrile  heat.

Numbness:  of  middle  towards  tip  of  tongue.

Intolerable  itching,  stinging:  of  eruption  on  trunk,  legs
and  forehead.
^  Tissues. ■  Phagedenic  ulcers,  deep  base  and  turned  up  edges.

Eruptions;  lichen,  psoriasis,  icthyosis.

i  Rheumatic,  gouty  and  syphilitic  pains.

•  Gouty  nodosities.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  does  not

relieve  constricted  feeling  in  head.
^^  Skin. I  I  Dry,  wilted  skin ;  emaciated  to  a  skeleton. ^Neu-
ropathia.

lAcne,  appearance  like  that  in  early  stage  of  variola.

■  Eruption  covering  entire  body  except  scalp,  comes  out
in  red  papulse,  varjdng  in  diameter  from  size  of  pin's
head  to  that  of  a  three  cent  piece ;  vesicles  form  on  sum-
mit, suppurate,  crusts  form  and  fall  off,  leaving  a  sore
which  heals;  the  places  occupied  by  these  sores  are
marked  by  a  dark  colored  cicatrix,  and  the  skin  gener-
ally has  a  dusky  look;  intolerable  itching,  stinging  and
burning,  especially  on  undressing  at  night ;  it  is  worst
on  trunk,  legs  and  forearms;  mind  much  depressed.

I  I  Lichen  confluens  over  whole  body,  except  face,  palms
and  soles,  and  part  of  chest;  the  rest  studded  with  pap-
ulae, particularly  distinct  about  outer  sides  of  thighs,
arms  and  back;  they  are  covered  with  very  minute,
flimsy,  whitish  scabs,  causing  a  powdery  appearance  of
skin;  head  very  scurfy;  hair  crisp  and  dry;  often  irri-
tation in  skin,  which  becomes  reddened  and  cracked,
particularly  about  bend  of  arms  and  knees.


311  KALI  ARSENICOSUM.

I  I  Dry  chronic  eczema;  skin  of  arms  thicker  and  rougher
than  natural,  covered  with  flimsy  exfoliations  of  epider-
mis; very  irritable,  itching  and  tingling  when  she  gets
warm;  intensely  fissured  about  bends  of  elbows  and
wrists ;  occasional  exacerbation,  with  eruption  of  distinct
vesicles;  languor  and  lassitude;  pale,  sallow  complexion ;
catamenia  irregular.

I  I  Patches  of  psoriasis  on  back,  arms  and  spreading  from
elbows,  and  anteriorly  on  legs,  size  of  a  crown  piece,  and
indolent.

I  I  Lepra.

I  I  Psoriasis:  scaly  itchings,  causing  him  to  scratch  till  an
ichorous  fluid  discharges,  forming  a  hard  cake.

I  I  Discoloration  of  skin  after  psoriasis  and  lej^ra.

I  I  Psoriasis  in  numerous  patches,  with  great  itching;  the
patches  becoming  more  active,  scale  off,  and  are  replaced
by  smaller,  they  leave  beneath  them  a  red  skin.
*^  Relations.  Compare  Arsen.  which  it  greatly  resembles ;
Cinchon.  in  periodicity;  Cicuta  in  fixed  eyeballs ;  /odum,
Kali  bich.,  Merc.  cor.


KALI  BICHROMICUM;  312

KALI  BICHROMICUM.

Potassium  Bichromate.  K^Cr^Oi.

Prepared  from  the  metal  Chromium  discovered  by  Vauquelin  in  1797  in  a
Siberian  mineral,  composed  of  chromate  of  lead.

Introduced  by  Drysdale,  and  extensively  pi'oved  by  himself,  Dudgeon,  Hamil-
ton, Russell,  Wriglit,  Neidhard,  Norton,  Walker,  Taylor,  Turner,  the  Austrian
provers,  Berridge  and  others.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache  (3  cases),  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  39 ;  Mi-
graine, Epps,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  20,  p.  679;  Supraorbital  neuralgia  (2  cases),  Drys-
dale's Monog.,  p.  39 ;  Eruption  on  head,  Wright,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  50 ;  Eczema
of  scalp,  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  678 ;  Boils  on  head,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.
50;  Trachoma  with  pannus,  Allen,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  102;  Ulcers  and  pus-
tides  on  cornea  and  conjunctiva;  opacities  of  cornea;  descemetitis,  Norton's  Oph.  The-
rap., p.  102;  Scrofulous  ophthalmia  and  ulceration  of  cornea  (3  eases),  Drysdale's
Monog.,  p.  40 ;  Catarrhal  ophthalmia,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  40 ;  Rheumatic  inflamma-
tion of  eyes,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  40 ;  Conjunctivitis,  catarrhal  and  scrofulous,  Klau-
ber,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  112,  p.  131  ;  Croupous  conjunctivitis,  Norton's  Oph.  The-
rap., p.  102;  Polypi  of  conjunctiva.  Fowler,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  102;  Stuffing
of  nose,  Russell,  p.  40 ;  Coryza  with  loss  of  smell  and  taste,  Ludbeck,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,
p.  497;  Nasal  catarrh,  Hawkes,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  233;  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.
80;  Gatan-h  of  nose,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  40;  Chronic  nasal  catarrh,  Drysdale,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  676 ;  Chronic  inflammation  of  mucous  membrane  of  nose,  Goullon,
Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  94 ;  Ozoma^,  Lippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  210 ;  Malignant
ulceration  of  nose,  Ransford,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24  p.  304 ;  Syphilitic  affection  of  nose  and
throat,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  40 ;  Nasal  polypi  (2  cases),  Watzke,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  402 ;  Hay  fever.  Black,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  43 ;  Stomacace,  Pope,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  11,  p.  691 ;  Enlarged  tonsils  with  deafness,  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.
676 ;  Affection  of  oesophagus,  Hirech,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  241 ;  Sore  throat,
Lippe,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  249;  Ulcerated  soi-e  throat,  E.  B.  N.,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.
4,  p.  81 ;  Syphilitic  sore  throat,  Watzke,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  41 ;  Syphilitic  ulcera-
tion of  throat;  of  tongue,  Lippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  212;  Diphtheria,  Lippe,
Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  1,  p.  32 ;  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  209 ;  p.  216 ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.
249  ;  (4  cases),  Nichol,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3,  p.  28 ;  Overindulgence  in  malt  liquors,
Lippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  211  ;  Vomiting,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  41 ;  Nausea
and  gastric  disorder,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  41 ;  Gastric  affection,  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  15,  p.  677  ;  Lilienthal,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  98 ;  Dyspepsia,  Lippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  14,  p.  211 ;  Hawkes,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  141 ;  Clifton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol  17,  p.
1 55 ;  Round  ulcer  of  stomach,  Lippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  211;  Chronic  ulceration
of  intestinal  mucous  membrane,  Hilbers,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  42  ;  Diarrhcea,  Lippe,
Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  146;  Chronic  diarrhoea,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  42;  Dysentery,
Lippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  212;  after  a  burn,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  43;  Con-
stipation, Lippe,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  559  ;  Piles,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  43 ;  Affec-
tum of  kidnzys  (2  cases),  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  43 ;  Suppression  of  urine  in  cholera,


313  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

Diysdale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  561,  vol.  8,  p.  161 ;  Vomiting  of  pregnancy,  Simpson,
Eaue's  Eec,  1885,  p.  182;  Hoarseness  {2  cases),  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  44 ;  Acute
laryngitis,  Teller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  739  ;  Russell,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  46;
Chronic  inflammation  of  larynx  and  trachea,  Black,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  pp.  46  and  47  ;
Affection  of  fauces  and  larynx,  Moore,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  41  ;  Croup,  Lippe,
IS".  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  208;  Bayard,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  46 ;  Membranous  croup
(3  cases).  Von  Tagen,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  pp.  128,  130;  Diphtheritic
croup  (5  cases),  Allegheny  Co.  Soc,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  pp.  261,
262,  269,  270,  277 ;  Acute  bronchial  catarrh,  p.  47 ;  Bronchial  attacks  after  whoopincj
cough,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  48 ;  Chronic  bronchitis,  Johnson,  Hah.  ^Mo.,  vol.  7,
p.  96 ;  Cough,  Stens,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  725 ;  Whooping  cough,  Fischer,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  36,  p.  366 ;  Consumption,  Proell,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  9G ;  Impetigo  of  hands,
Guernsey,  Trans.  Horn.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1881,  p.  156 ;  Sciatica,  Wilkinson,  Eaue's
Eec,  1870,  p.  294;  Walker,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1882,  p.  162;  Pain
in  tibia,  Black,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  49 ;  Periostitis,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.
47 ;  Measles,  Lippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  207-8 ;  Syphilis,  Brasol,  Allg.  Horn.
Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  89 ;  Secondary  syphilis,  Schlosser,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  559 ;
Inveterate  syphilis,  Liedbeck,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  498 ;  Syphilitic  periostitis,  Drysdale,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  679 ;  Lupus,  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.  643 ;  Herpes  exedens  or
lupus,  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  677_;  Eczema,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  50;  Pap-
ular eruption,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  50 ;  Pustular  eruption,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  50 ;
Eruption  on  body,  Dudgeon,  Drysdale's  Monog.,  p.  50 ;  Eruption  and  periostitis,  Drys-
dale, B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  679.

^  Mind. Great  weakness  of  memory.

Misanthropy  and  ill  humor,  even  to  disgust  of  life.

Frequent  vanishing  of  thoughts ;  senseless  staring  at  an
object.

iListlessness,  languor;  great  disinclination  for  mental  or
bodily  labor.

■  Indifferent  or  low  spirited  after  least  annoyance,  with
distress  in  stomach.

mi  humored;  low  spirited.

Aversion  to  motion;  inclination  to  lie  down.

Anxiety  arising  from  chest.

Anthropophobia;  taciturnity;  misanthropy.
^  Sensorium. l Lightness  in  head,  across  forehead,  on  stoop-
ing;  <  mornings.

iSudden,  transient  attacks  of  vertigo,  rising  from  a  seat.

I  Vertigo,  with  nausea,  inclination  to  vomit;  pain  in  epi-
gastrium.

I  I  Confusion  and  heaviness  in  head.
^  Inner  Head. Headache  in  forehead  over  one  eye.

I  Soon  after  dinner  a  dull,  heavy  throbbing  above  eyes,  as
if  tread  would  burst;  >  by  lying,  or  pressing  head
against  anything,  or  in  open  air;  <  stooping  or  moving
about.

I  Pain  beginning  in  r.  supraorbital  ridge  and  spreading
over  one  side  of  head,  coming  on  early  in  day  and  last-


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  314

ing  ten  hours,  leaving  soreness  of  scalp.  ^Supraorbital
neuralgia.

I  Pain  in  1.  temple,  stretching  across  forehead  to  r.  temple,
and  round  eye  and  malar  bone  of  r.  side;  complete  loss
of  sight  in  r.  eye,  and  puffy  swelling  on  malar  bone
during  pain ;  attack  begins  9  a.m.  and  goes  off  in  after-
noon. ^Supraorbital  neuralgia.

I  Shooting  pains  over  eyebrow.

lAcute  throbbing  pain  in  centre  of  r.  eyebrow,  commenc-
ing in  morning,  lasting  all  day,  and  accompanied  by
persistent  retching  and  vomiting  of  food  and  bile,  with-
out relief. ^Migraine.

I  Pain  in  1.  side  of  head  and  over  1.  eye  ;  <  at  night ;  pain
in  r.  side  of  chest,  from  scapula  round  to  anterior  part ;
gnawing  at  epigastrium  after  meals  ;  catamenia  scanty ;
leucorrhoea. ^Headache.

■  Sudden  violent  pain  in  tepiples;  a  shooting  outward,  in

temples  and  over  eyes,  continuing  day  and  night,  but
less  severe  during  night ;  <  stooping,  which  also  brings
on  vertigo ;  no  coryza. ^Headache.

Stinging  headache  in  one  temple.

■Blindness,  followed  by  violent  headache,  must  lie  down;
aversion  to  light  and  noise ;  sight  returns  with  increas-
ing headache.

Headache  which  involves  optic  nerve ;  comes  in  morning,
sight  is  blurred ;  as  pain  increases,  dimness  of  sight  de-
creases ;  comes  and  goes  with  sun  and  is  accompanied
by  nausea.

Burning  headache  with  vertigo,  during  which  all  objects
seemed  to  be  enveloped  in  a  yellow  mist ;  >  by  warm
soup.

■Violent  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  at  zygomatic  process;  <
when  lying  on  it;  shooting  inwards  and  towards  throat ;
throat  a  little  reddened  but  not  swelled;  gastric  symp-
toms present. ^Headache.

Periodical  attacks  of  semilateral  headaches  on  small  spots
that  could  be  covered  with  point  of  finger;  nausea,  eruc-
tation, vomiting.

■  Periodic  headache  with  vertigo  and  nausea, morning

awaking,  also  in  evening ;  often  >  by  pressure,  in  open
air,  or  by  eating.

■  Pain  in  head,  at  a  point.

■  In  morning,  on  awaking,  pain  in  forehead  and  vertex;

later  extends  to  back  of  head.

■  Headache  from  suppression  of  discharge  from  nose.

^  Outer  Head.  '  '  Violent  shooting  pains  from  root  of  nose
along  1.  orbital  arch  to  external  angle  of  eye,  with  dim
sight,  like  a  scale  on  eye;  begins  in'  morning,  increases
till  noon,  and  ceases  towards  evening.


3^5  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

I  I  Frontal  headache:  usually  over  one  eye;  shooting  at  in-
tervals in  r.  temple.
iSemilateral  headache  in  small  spots,  or  along  course  ot  a

few  nerves.  .  -, n •

iDarting  or  aching  pains  on  one  side;  hymg  pams.

I  I  Pressure  on  vertex,  as  from  a  weight.

I  I  Bones  of  head  feel  sore ;  sharp  stitches  m  bones.  ^Rheu-
matic headache.

lEczema  of  scalp,  which  all  over  and  down  to  eyebrows
was  red,  raw  and  oozing  a  thin  moisture,  which  dries
into  vellow  scabs  here  and  there;  hair  thm  and  scat-
tered, and  nearly  all  fallen  off;  much  creeping,  itching
and  smarting  of  affected  parts.  _  .

size  commencing  at  supraorbital  regions,  and  covering
nearly  entire  scalp;  eruption  consists  of  a  number  ot
minute  vesicles  closelv  crowded  together,and  failed  with
a  transparent,  viscid  fluid,  which  burst  and  form  thick,
laminated  crusts,  of  a  dirty  grey  color;  no  mflammatioji
or  swelling  of  skin  between  patches  of  eruption  ;  mucii
itching;  agglutination  of  lids,  and  discharge  of  purulent
matter  from  inner  canthus;  patches  of  eruption  on  face,
and  thick  crusts  around  nostrils;  external  ears  greatly
swollen,  red  and  glazed,  behind  ears  excoriated  witfi
profuse  discharge  of  serous  fluid;  patches  of  eruption
about  11  inches  in  length,  deeply  fissured,  m  folds  of
skin  of  neck,  with  sero-purulent  discharge ;  fretful,  rests
badly;  sucks  with  difficulty,  from  stuffing  up  of  nostrils;
emaciation;  green,  shmy  diarrhoea.  ,,,,.. -,

■  Eruption  began  on  ear  and  spread  over  half  the  head ,

greenish  crusts,  with  oozing  of  whitish,  thick  matter.

■  Eruption  of  painful  small  boils  on  back  of  head

5  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Photophobia  only  by  dayhght;  when
opening  lids  they  twitch.

■  Various  colors  and  bright  sparks  before  eyes

I  I  Burning  headache  with  giddiness,  during  which  objects

seem  to  be  covered  with  a  yellow  veil.
M Eyeball  tender  when  rubbed,  especially  the  left;  sees

point  of  pen  double.  ^.  „.UL

■  Sight  dim,  confused:  before  headache ;  with  vertigo,  with

yellow  sight.  ^ ,  .  ,  ,u^^

Indistinct  outline;  figures  vanish  on  looking  at  them
■Granular  lids,  complete  pannus  of  r.  eye  so  could  barely
count  fingers,  and  partial  pannus  of  1.  eye ;  considerable
discharge;  everything  appeared  slightly  red  to  him;  >
when  lying  on  face.  ^Trachoma  with  pannus
■Rheumatic  sclero-iritis,  with  excessive  pam  and  photo-
phobia. ^Syphilis.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  316

iSequelse  of  iritis;  pains- pricking,  stinging,  wandering;
mostly  1.  eye;  lymph  and  pigment  deposited  upon  an-
terior capsule  of  lens,  or  posterior  wall  of  cornea;  pho-
tophobia not  commensurate  with  degree  of  inflamma-
tion; oedema  of  lids;  great  desire  to  rub  lids;  conjunc-
tival chemosis  with  small  spots  here  and  there  like
ecchyrnoses.

I  Indolent  ulcers  of  cornea;  pale  ring  around  cornea.

I  Right  eye  inflamed;  lids  ulcerated;  ulcer  on  cornea;
slight  blepharospasm.

■  Ulcers  and  pustules  of  cornea  with  no  photophobia,  no

redness.

I  Ulcer  with  slight  photophobia  in  morning  and  aggluti-
nation; smarting  <  after  rubbing;  stringy  discharge
from  eye. ^Ulceration  of  cornea.

iCorneal  ulcers  which  have  a  tendency  to  bore  in  without
spreading  laterally.

I  I  Small,  white,  granular  pustules  on  1.  cornea,  with  prick-
ing pain.

■  Cornea  affected  with  a  large  opaque  spot,  to  which  large

red  vessels  ran  from  injected  conjunctiva  across  clear
margin;  a  zone  of  fine  injection  of  bulb  round  cornea.
^Catarrho-strumous  ophthalmia.

■  Much  injection  of  conjunctiva,  both  of  the  bulb  and  eye-

lids of  both  eyes;  very  red  at  edges  of  cornea,  and
phlyctenulse  on  edge;  several  deep  ulcers  on  the  cornea;
great  photophobia  and  flow  of  tears;  no  pain.  ^Scrofu-
lous ophthalmia

■  Long  lasting  dense  opacities  of  cornea.

■  Pustule  on  1.  cornea,  with  surrounding  indolent  inflam-

mation.

■  Left eye  greatly  injected;  cornea  dim;  much  photophobia

in  both  eyes;  upon  r.  eye  an  old  cicatrix ;  eczema  squa-
mosum over  whole  body. ^Conjunctivitis  scrofulosa.

■  Mild  cases  of  croupous  conjunctivitis  (a  condition  midway

between  purulent  and  genuine  croupous  inflammation),
in  which  the  false  membrane  is  loosely  adherent,  easily
detached,  and  has  a  tendency  to  roll  up  and  separate  in
shreds,  which  come  away  in  discharges,  giving  them  a
stringy  appearance;  conjunctiva  very  much  inflamed,
even  chemosis;  lids  swollen  and cornea  may  be  hazy.

■  True  descemititis;  fine  punctate  opacities  in  membrane

of  Descemet,  especially  over  pupil,  with  only  moderate
irritation  of  eye.

■  Iris  muddy  and  sluggish;  cornea  looked  projecting;  fine

sclerotic  injection  round  it,  and  some  conjunctival  in-
jection; sight  very  dim,  like  a  gauze;  lachrymation  on
exposure;  stiff'ness  at  outer  canthus;  burning  pain  on
upper  eyelid  on  touching  it. ^Rheumatic  inflammation.


!17  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

■  Small  white  pustules  in  conjunctiva.

I  On  opening  eyes,  lachrymation  and  burning.
I  Itching  and  burning  in  both  eyes,  lachr3"mation  and  pho-
tophobia.
I  Burning  in  eyes.
I  Heat  and  pressure  in  eyes.
I  Heat  and  redness  in  eyes,  with  desire  to  rub  them.

■  Conjunctiva  red,  traversed  by  large  vessels ;  or  chemosis,

with  small  spots  here  and  there,  like  ecchymoses.
■Inflammation  of  eyes; conjunctiva  reddened,  injected
and  chemosed;  much  flow  of  tears;  eyelids  reddened
and  agglutinated,  with  thick  matter  at  edges.

■  Conjunctivitis,  congestion  of  lids  and  globe;  no  photo-

phobia ;  soreness  in  eyes  <  by  reading  or  using  eyes,
with  smarting  lachrymation  upon  using.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation,  stringy  discharge,  or  scanty  se-

cretion, <  morning  on  awaking.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  yellow  discharge  and  agglu-

tination, in  morning.

■  White  of  eye  dirty  yellow,  puff'y,  and  covered  with  yel-

low brown  points.

■  Lids  agglutinated  in  morning;  yellow  matter  in  canthi.

■  CEdema  of  lids;  great  desire  to  rub  them.

■  Heaviness  of  upper  lids  on  waking;  requires  an  effort  to

open  them.

■  Lids  red,  itching,  tender; tarsi  seem  rough,  causing  a

sensation  as  from  sand  in  eyes;  granular  lids.

■  Margin  of  lids  very  red.

■  Eyelids  burning,  inflamed,  much  swollen;  granular.

■  Large  acute  granulations  of  lids

■  Large  polypus  springing  from  conjunctiva  of  upper  lid.
'Hearing  and  Ears, ■Stitchesinl.  ear  and  1.  parotid  gland,

with  headache.
■Violent  stitches  in  1.  ear,  extending  into  roof  of  mouth,

side  of  head  and  neck;  glands  swollen,  neck  painful  to

touch.
I  I  Stinging  from  external 'meatus  into  internal  ear.

■  Pulsating  pain  at  night,  purulent  otorrhoea;  stitches  ex-

tending into  mouth,  or  down  neck,  enlarged  parotid.

■  Pulsating  pains  in  ears  at  night,  also  stinging;  external

meatus  swollen  and  inflamed.

■  Thick,  yellow,  fetid  discharge  from  both  ears. ^After

scarlatina.

■  ■Chronic  suppuration; membrana  tympani  perforated;

cicatrization  of  edges  of  perforation  complete;  tissues
appear  as  if  changed  to  mucous  membrane,  and  secre-
tion is  often  more  mucus  than  pus;  discharge  yellow,
thick,  tenacious,  so  that  it  may  be  drawn  through  per-


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  318

foration  in  strings;  lancinations,  sticking  sensations
that  cannot  be  located  with  any  degree  of  positiveness.

I  Ulcers  upon  tympanum,  dry  but  not  painful,  excepting
sharp  stitches.

i  Violent  tickling  and  itching  in  ears.

I  I  External  meatus  of  1.  ear  swelled  and  inflamed.

iRedness;  heat  and  itching  of  external  ears.

■  Eruption  covering  both  ears,  and  considerable  portion  of

surrounding  skin ;  hot  and  itching,  and  constant  oozing
of  watery  discharge. ^Eczema.

■  Itching  of  r.  ear  lobe,  waking  him.

I  Mumps  on  r.  side  lip.

^  Smell  and  Nose. iLoss  of  smell.

I I  Fetid  smell  from  nose.
1 1  Dryness  of  nose.

1 1  Nose  very  dry,  with  feeling  of  pressure  in  nasal  bones.
iNose  painfully  dry;  air  passes  with  great  ease  through  it.

■  Dryness  of  nose;  constant  feeling  of  being  stopped  up;

disagreeable  feeling  of  burning  and  swelling,  and  at
times  actual  swelling;  tensive  feeling  as  if  it  must
burst;  hot  upper  lip;  eyes  affected;  <  in  warm,  >  in
cool  temperature.  ^Chronic  inflammation  of  mucous
m^embrane  of  nose.

■  ■Dryness  of  nose  with  pressive  sensation  at  root  as  in

commencement  of  stopped  catarrh;  pressive  pain  ex-
tended to  temples  and  affected  head.

■  Disagreeatjje  sensation in  nose,  as  if  it  were  swollen,

mucous  membrane  dry  ; walls  of  nose  feel  stiff  and

velvety.
■Sensation  of  a  hard  substance  compelling  one  to  blow

nose,  but  there  is  no  discharge.
■Sensation  as  if  nose  was  swollen  and  stiff;  must  blow

out  a  thick  substance,  but  no  discharge;  feels  as  if  a

heavy  weight  was  hanging  from  it.

■  Sensation  as  if  nostrils  were  made  of  parchment.

■  Burning  and  beating  inside  of  root  of  nose;  externally

heat  and  distinct  throbbing  rhythmical  with  pulse;
nose  swollen  at  root  and  hot  without  being  red;  nose
seemed  thick  and  full,  "  spoke  through  it;"  frequently
inclined  to  blow  nose  on  account  of  sensation  of  thick
substance  in  it,  but  nothing  was  expelled ;  nose  dry ;
sensation  as  of  a  heavy  weight  hanging  from  it.

■  Violent  shooting  pains  from  root  of  nose  along  1.  orbital

arch  to  external  angle  of  eye,  with  dimness  of  sight  like
a  scale  on  eye;  beginning  in  morning,  it  increases  till
noon,  and  gives  wa}^  towards  evening /^Ozsena.

■  ■  Pressure  and  pressive  pain  in  root  of  nose,

■  Aching  pain  at  root  of  nose,  with  acrid  discharge.


119  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

I  Soreness  in  nose;  yellow  scab  at  lower  (outer)  surface  of
septum ;  dorsum  of  nose  painful  to  touch.

I  On  blowing  nose  violent  stitches  in  r.  side  of  nose,  as
though  two  loose  bones  were  rubbed  against  each  other.

I  The  nose  feels  too  heavy.

I I  Expired  air  feels  hot  in  nose.

I  Tickling,  as  from  a  hair,  high  up  in  1.  nostril.

■  Frequent  sneezing:  in  morning;  on  going  into  open  air.

■  Constant  snuffling  in  warm,  damp  weather.

■  Watery  secretion,  great  soreness  and  tenderness  of  nose.

■  Burning,  excoriating,  watery  discharge  from  r.  nostril;

whitish  scabs  in  nostril ;  sensation  of  pressure  at  root  of
nose;  eyes  watery,  <  in  wind;  dizzy  on  stooping  and
on  going  up  stairs;  easily  takes  cold. ^Nasal  .catarrh.

■Watery  discharge  with  redness  of  nose  and  putrid  smell.

■Scanty,  acrid,  mucous  discharge  from  nose,  causing  burn-
ing of  septum.

■  Coryza  fluent,  excoriating  nose  and  lip ;  nostrils  sensitive,

ulcerated ;  round  ulcer  or  scabs  on  septum.

■  Small  perforating  ulcer  on  septum.

■  Distress  and  fulness  from  inflammation  in  frontal  sinuses.

■  Coryza,  with  pressure  and  tightness  at  root  of  nose;  <

evenings  and  in  open  air;  in  morning  obstruction  and
bleeding  from  r.  nostril.

■  Troublesome  coryza  and  loss  of  sense  of  smell  and  taste;

after  syphilis  and  large  doses  of  mercury.

■  Constant  running  from  eyes  and  nose,  severe  pain  in

frontal  sinuses,  some  fever  and  great  weakness;  cough
prevents  sleeping ;  always  <  at  night.
■Sneezing,  redness  of  Schneiderian  membrane  and  alee  of
nose,  suff'used  eyes,  lachrymation,  rawness  of  throat  and
great  languor. ^Hay  fever.

■  ■Nose stuffed  up; especially  upper  part,  with  a  diffi-

culty of  detaching  thick  mucus  which  more  readily
passes  by  posterior  nares.

■  ■Formation  of  plugs  in  nostrils.

■  Nose  constantly  full  of  thick  mucus,

■  ■Clinkers  in  nose;  if  allowed  to  remain  a  few  days  can  be

easily  detached;  but  if  pulled  away  too  soon,  it  causes
soreness  at  root  of  nose,  and  intolerance  to  light.

■  Discharge  of  large  masses  of  thick,  clean  mucus  from

nose;  if  that  ceases  he  has  violent  headache;  pain  from
occiput  to  forehead.

■  Pinching  pain  in  bridge  of  nose,  >  by  hard  pressing;

small,  lumpy,  nasal  discharge;  greater  portion,  which
is  tough  and  ropy,  passes  down  from  posterior  nares  into
throat,  and  is  hawked  up  with  difficulty  and  disgust.
^Nasal  catarrh.


KALI  BICHEOMICUM.  320

iRopy,  tough  discharge,  often  from  posterior  nares;  offen-
sive or  not.

I  Nasal  catarrh,  with  acrid  or  thick  yellow,  ropy  discharge
from  posterior  nares.

■Constant  discharge  of  thick  yellow  matter  from  1.  nostril,
mostly  early  in  morning,  and  fetid  smell,  after  any
fresh  cold;  severe  pain  up  muscles  of  1.  side  of  neck  to
one  small  spot  in  side  of  head,  brought  on  and  aggra-
vated by  blowing  nose;  in  1.  nostril,  half  way  up,  severe
smarting  pain,  extending  to  malar  bone  below  eye;  con-
stipation; tongue  white.  6'Clironic  inflammation  of
Schneiderian  membrane.

llDischarge  of  tough,  green  masses,  or  hard  plugs.

I  On,  blowing  nose,  violent  sticking  in  r.  side  of  nose,  as
though  two  loose  bones  rubbed  against  each  other ;  fre-
quent discharge  of  greenish  colored  masses  of  offensive
odor,  that,  passing  through  posterior  nares,  have  very
disagreeable  taste;  r.  nostril  filled  with  hard  masses;
small  ulcers  on  external  borders  of  nostrils.

llMucus  tough,  ropy,  green,  bloody;  in  clear  masses,  and
has  violent  pain  from  occiput  to  forehead  if  discharge
ceases.

■Nostrils  filled  with  a  dry,  hard  crust,  bloody  at  edges  when
discharged;  itching  pains  in  ethmoid  bone;  crista  na-
salis,  or  septum  narium,  which  irritation  often  afi'ects
periosteum  of  superior  maxilla. ^Catarrh.

■  Discharge  of  crusts  slightly  tinged  with  blood.

■  Internal  ulceration,  with  thin,  watery  discharge  or  collec-

tion of  elastic  plugs,  which  cause  great  pain  in  removal,
and  leave  nose  very  sore.

■  Membrane  of  septum  dotted  with  minute  ulcerations.

■  Ulceration  of  septum  narium;  purulent  infiammation  of

whole  nasal  mucous  membrane.

■  ■Entire  cartilaginous  septum  destroyed,  and  whole  nasal

mucous  membrane  in  a  state  of  purulent  inflammation;
disease  mistaken  for  syphilis.

■  ■Septum  narium  completely  ulcerated  away.
■Swelling  of  a  highly  vascular  spongy  texture  in  r.  nostril,

distending  it  and  apparently  growing  upwards,  finally
also  traveling  downward  and  protruding  externally ;  1.
nostril  also  became  affected  in  same  way;  soft  parts  of
alse  nasi  involved,  but  bony  structure  unaffected ;  very
slight  and  occasional  muco-purulent  discharge;  fetor;
occasionally,  severe  paroxysms  of  lancinating  pain  in
aflPected  parts,  making  him  cry  out;  by  the  continued
growth  and  pressure  of  the  tumors  neighboring  soft
parts  were  absorbed,  causing  much  disfigurement;  voice
hoarse. ^Malignant  ulceration  of  nose.


321  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

I  Syphilitic  caries  of  septum  narium.

Small  ulcers  on  edge  of  r.  nostril,  violent  burning  when
touched.

I  Spot  in  r.  lachrymal  bone  is  swollen  and  throbbing;  pro-
fuse secretion  from  nostril.

I  Ulceration  of  frontal  sinuses,  with  violent  headache  at  root
of  nose,  and  in  frontal  prominences,  if  discharge  stops.

I  Nasal  polypi,  recent  or  of  long  standing.

I  Thick,  dark  red  blood  from  nose;  irregular,  small,  con-
tracted pulse.

I  I  Nasal  lupus.
^  Upper  Face. Face: pale, yellowish; red, in blotches;
flushed;  expression  anxious.

I  Sensitiveness  of  bones  of  upper  jaw,  beneath  orbit.

iShooting  pain  in  1.  upper  maxillary  bone,  towards  ear.

■  Shooting  inward  in  1.  malar  bone,  with  pressure;  also

same  across  bridge  of  nose;  hot  and  cold  alternately;
cough  <  in  morning;  sputa  greenish  yellow,  bitter;  in-
clined to  cry;  shooting  sometimes  in  bone  over  the  eye;
cough  hurts  painful  part  of  cheek.

■  Thick  brown  scabs,  under  which  yellow  matter  formed;

much  itching ;  eruption  extended  from  root  of  nose  to
upper  lip. <ySyphilitic  eruption.

■  Twenty  years  previously  small  tubercle  appeared  on  r.

side  of  nose;  this  gradually  melted  away  and  formed
an  ulcer,  which  has  ever  since  slowly  traveled  in  fur-
rows, healing  behind;  there  is  now  present  an  irregular
sulcus  one  inch  and  a  half  long;  besides  this  there  are
scabs  on  nose,  and  scars  indicating  the  sites  of  former
sores;  troublesome  itching.  /^Lupus.
^  Lower  Face.  Twanging  like  wires  in  1.  face  and  neck,  fol-
lowed by  burning  sensation,  as  if  losing  her  reason.
■Sore  on  1.  cheek  about  size  of  large  almond  ;  base  clear
and  raw;  profuse  discharge  of  clear,  watery  fluid,  very
hot  and  scalding. (^Herpes  exedens  or  lupus.

■  Pustules  on  cheeks,  forehead  and  chin,  becoming  cov-

ered with  brownish  scab,  without  oozing  of  matter;
itching  after  washing,

■  Impetiginous  eruption  on  face;  pustules  form  frequently,

discharge  a  watery  pus  and  leave  a  brownish  scab,  and
are  accompanied  with  much  itching.
I  I  Perspiration  on  upper  lip.

■  Lower  lip  swelled,  chapped.

■  Ulcerations  with  indurated  edges  and  smarting  pain  on

mucous  surface  of  both  lips.

■  Digging  in  rami  of  lower  jaw.

■  Mumps  on  right  side.

■  Parotids  swollen;  pains  from  ears  into  glands.

VOL.  VI. — 21.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  822

^^  Teeth  and  Gums.  iGum  of  r.  lower  jaw  very  much  swol-
len, of  a  dirty  white  color,  and  extremely  tender  to
touch;  teeth  on  that  side  quite  loose,  and  will  not  bear
slightest  pressure;  profuse  ptyalism;  gums  of  both
sides  of  mouth  unusually  sensitive;  cannot  masticMte
any  food;  liquid  food  causes  gums  to  feel  very  sore,  and
tongue  rough;  tongue  furred,  dirty  brown  at  sides,  in
centre  red  and  irritable  looking;  throat  swollen  and
painful ;  sour  taste  in  mouth ;  constant  eructation  for
some  time  after  taking  food;  after  meals  aching  pain  in
forehead  and  occiput,  and  a  feeling  of  giddiness  and
faintness;  light  pain  across  lower  part  of  chest,  extend-
ing to  between  scapulae,  particularl}^  when  eating;  is
very  weak  and  has  become  thin. ^Stomacace.

''  Taste  and  Tongue.  Taste:  coppery;  sweetish;  sour;  bitter,
in  morning.
iTongue  dry,  smooth,  red,  cracked;  dry  and  red.
I  Tongue  broad  and  flat,  with  raised,  almost  scollop  shaped
edges,  surface  rough  and  yellowish,  dry  or  moist,  while
underlying  this  yellow  roughness  tongue  is  very  red,
fur  being  thin,  and  lying  on  a  red  ground. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Tongue  coated: yellowish  white; thick  yellow  mucus,

edges  red  and  full  of  small  painful  ulcers,

■  Thick  yellow  fur  toward  base  of  tongue. ^Catarrh  of

stomach.

■  Papillae  of  tongue  very  long  on  dorsum;  with  a  brown

colored  patch.

■  Tongue  coated,  thick  brown,  as  with  thick  yellow  felt,  at

the  root;  papillae  elevated.

■  Syphilitic  ulcers  on  tongue;  deep;  stinging;  yellow  base.

■  Deep  ulcer  on  edge  of  tongue.

■  Stinging  and  pricking  pains  in  tongue.

■  Sensation  of  a  hair  on  back  part  of  tongue  and  velum;

not  >  by  eating  or  drinking.
'^  Inner  Mouth. ■■Dryness  in  mouth.

■  Dryness  of  mouth  and  lips,  >  by  drinking  cold  water.

■  Sticky  saliva  in  mouth  and  upper  part  of  throat  about

uvula.
Saliva:  increased,  bitter,  viscid,  frothy,  tasting  salt.

barley  corn,  colored  red,  as  if  little  ulcers  were  about

to  form.

■  Ulcer  on  roof  of  mouth,  with  sloughing. ^Syphilis.

■  Ulcers  with  hard  edges,  smarting,  at  mucous  surface  of

lips.

■  Aphthous  ulcers,  deeply  corroding.

■  ■Syphilitic  affections  of  mouth  and  fauces.

^^  Throat. sSoft  palate slightly reddened; uvula relaxed,
with  sensation  of  a  plug  in  throat,  not  >  by  swallowing.


323  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

■  Sensation  as  if  an  acid  acrid  fluid  was  running  through

posterior  nares  over  palate,  causing  cough.
I  (Edematous  uvula.

■  Deep,  excavated  sore,  with  a  reddish  areola,  and  contain-

ing a  yellow,  tenacious  matter,  at  root  of  uvula ;  fauces
and  palate  erythematous,  bright  or  dark  red,  or  coppery.
I  Uvula  and  tonsils  red,  swollen  and  painful,  finally  be-
coming ulcerated.

■  Swollen  tonsils  with  deafness  of  children.

■  Tonsils  swollen;  neck  thick  outwardly  below  angle  of

jaw;  Eustachian  tubes  seem  blocked  up;  is  very  deaf;
could  not  hear  watch,  except  when  very  close  to  ear.

■  Sharp,  shooting  pains  in  1.  tonsil,  extending  toward  ear

>  by  swallowing ;  suppuration  of  tonsils.

■  Indolent  enlargement  of  tonsils,  where  there  is  little  per-

ceptible inflammation;  patient  flabby ;  leuco-phlegmatic
habit  of  body;  foul  tongue;  thickening  of  nasal  mucous
membrane,  and  disposition  to  scabby  nostrils.
■Subacute  inflammation  of  tonsils,  with  little  fever,  but
tendency  to  formation  of  small  ulcers  on  tonsils  and
velum.

■  Swelling  of  amygdalae  with  dirty  redness,  violent  pain

on  swallowing;  no  suppuration;  very  little  fever.
■Ulcers  on  tonsils  and  throat,  surface  of  which  seemed
covered  with an ashy slough; surrounding mucous
membrane  dark,  livid  and  swollen.

■  Congestion  of  all  vessels,  ulcers  on  tonsils,  pimples  on

uvula,  uvula  swollen  and  red.

■  Sensation  of  hair  in  fauces.

■  Dryness  in  mouth  and  throat.

■  Dryness  and  burning  in  throat,  morning;  often  coinci-

dent with  inability  to  breathe  through  nose.

■  Throat  pains  more  when  putting  tongue  out.

■  I Much tenacious mucus, sometimes thick,  gelatinous,

hawked  in  morning.

■  Mucus  so  viscid  that  it  draws  out  like  a  long  thread  from

gullet  and  throat;  continually  a  troublesome  retching
and  cough.

■  Very  sore  throat,  pain  much  <  by  swallowing;  throat

full  of  tough  mucus  which  she  could  neither  swallow
nor  hawk  up;  pains  <  putting  tongue  out;  pain  in
side  of  head;  shooting  pain  in  1.  ear;  1.  side  of  neck
painful  to  touch  and  much  swollen ;  tonsils,  especially
1.,  much  swollen  and  inflamed.

■  Burning  in  pharynx,  extending  to  stomach  ;  solids  cause

pain  when  swallowed,  and  leave  a  sensation  as  of  some-
thing remaining  there.

■  Posterior  wall  of  pharynx  dark  red,  glossy,  puffed,  show-


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  324

ing  ramifications  of  pale  red  vessels;  to  1.  of  middle  a
small  crack,  exuding  blood.
I  Two  ulcers  in  back  part  of  throat,  over  one  half  inch  in
diameter,  deep,  filled  with  cheesy  looking  matter,  edges
elevated,  with  well  defined  borders;  also  one  ulcer
which  had  eaten  through  velum  palati,  and  from  which
continually  oozed  matter  like  that  of  the  others;  pale;
emaciated;  loss  of  appetite;  very  weak;  "miserable  all
over." <?Ulcerated  sore  throat.

■  Follicular  enlargement  of  mucous  membrane  of  pharynx,

with  chronic  coryza,  that  forms  hardened  yellow  pieces
of  mucus.

I  Ulcers  in  fauces,  also  in  pharynx,  discharging  cheesy

lumps  of  offensive  smell.

I I  Deep-eating  ulcers  in  fauces,  often  syphilitic,
I  Chronic  ulcer  of  pharynx.

■  Tonsils  red,  ulcerated;  uvula  nearly  destroyed,  only  a

very  small  portion  remaining;  large  ulcer  on  gums
gradually  increasing  in  size,  with  dirty  edges  and  foul
discharge;  destruction  of  nasal  septum,  foul  smelling
ozsena,  thick,  puslike  discharge  from  nose;  upon  drink-
ing water  it  escapes  through  nose;  glands  of  neck  and
lower  jaw  enlarged ;  severe  pain  on  swallowing;  voice
hoarse,  nasal;  excruciating  pains  in  small  of  back.
^Syphilis.
■Ulceration  of  fauces  to  a  great  extent,  with  much  red-
ness of  tissue  surrounding  ulcerated  parts;  at  one  part
ulcer  has  perforated  velum  palati,  forming  a  clean  oval
hole;  much  pain  on  swallowing;  cough  and  thick,
blackish  mucus  in  morning;  frequent  tickling  cough ;
swelling  and  feeling  of  fulness  in  nose  and  sensation  of
a  fetid  smell. ^Syphilis.

■  Syphilitic  mercurial  sore  throat,  full  of  pockets.

■  Increased  redness  of  sound  places  of  mucous  membrane

of  mouth  and  fauces,  with  heightened  sensitiveness.
^Diphtheritis.

■  Pharynx  red  and  swollen; thick,  tenacious,  ashy  grey

membrane,  tough  and  glutinous,  on  tonsils  and  between
them;  thick,  gurgling  sound,  with  a  flapping  noise  as
of  a  piece  of  loose  membrane,  heard  over  larynx;  face
and  especially  forehead,  of  a  bluish  tinge;  nose  pinched ;
mouth  drawn;  low  fever;  unable  to  swallow.  ^Diph-
theria.

■  Entire  throat  much  swollen;  thick,  tenacious  membrane

covering  both  tonsils  and  extending  down  pharjmx,
and  also  to  nostrils  and  eyes;  fetid  discharge  from  nose;
shivering  chills  followed  by  dry  heat;  prostration  ex-
treme. ^Diphtheria.


525  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

1 1  Diphtheria;  pseudo-membranous  deposit,  firm,  pearly,
fibrinous,  prone  to  extend  downwards  to  larynx  and
trachea;  bladder-like  appearance  of  uvula,  much  swell-
ing, but  little  redness.

■  Entire  pharynx  coated  with  tenacious,  greyish,  pseudo-

membrane  of  offensive  odor;  harsh  and  stridulous
breathing;  voice  partially  suppressed;  harsh  cough.
^Diphtheria.

■  During  course  of  diphtheria,  croupy  cough;  epiglottis

covered  on  apex  and  sides  with  membrane;  breathing
labored ;  could  not  lie  down ;  cough  hard,  expectoration
consisting  of  long,  tenacious  mucus;  paroxysms  of  suf-
focation at  night;  great  drowsiness.  ^Diphtheritic
croup.

■  Patch  on  r.  tonsil,  croupy  cough,  bad  odor  from  mouth,

no  appetite ;  temperature  101° ;  pulse  100.  ^Diph-
theritic croup.  {Kali  bich.  during  day  and  Spongia  at
night.)
■Shrill,  croupy  cough,  occasionally  whistling  and  wheez-
ing; rough,  hoarse  sound  of  voice  with  difficult  breath-
ing, as  though  lungs  were  stuffed  with  cotton;  throat
purple,  with  numerous  isolated  patches  of  greenish
yellow  exudation  all  over  fauces;  tongue,  cheeks,  gums
smelling  like  decayed  meat;  pains  extending  to  r.  ear,
when  swallowing;  expectoration  frequently  streaked
with  blood;  exudation  tough  and  firmly  adhering,
spreading  upwards  into  nostrils  and  down  into  larynx ;
tendency  to  diphtheritic  deposits  upon  remote  mucous
membranes;  great  weakness;  cachectic  look;  swollen
glands. ^Diphtheria.

■  Almost  unconscious  condition;  when  aroused  from  it  or

when  awaking  from  apparent  sleep,  complains  most,
or  feels  worse;  awakes  often  with  desire  to  cough,  or
to  hawk  up  detached  portions  of  diphtheritic  deposit;
while  making  this  attempt  throws  off  tough,  ropy,  yel-
low, discolored  mucus;  very  great  fetor;  deposit  covers
throat,  uvula,  tonsils  and  even  roof  of  mouth,  and  is  of
a  yellow  greyish  color;  becomes  hoarse;  tongue  either
quite  red,  or  covered  with  a  thick,  yellow  substance;  the
(r.)  parotid  gland  is  much  smaller  and,  upon  deglutition,
pain  shoots  up  to  ear  and  down  neck  of  affected  side.
^Diphtheria.

■  Diphtheria: pain  in  ear  extending  to  swollen  parotid

glands  and  to  head ;  tongue  coated  yellow,  especially  at
root;  pricking  in  tonsils  and  scraping  with  stitches  in
throat;  burning  in  throat;  after  abuse  of  lod.  of  Mercury.

■  Violent  stitches  in  1.  ear  extending  into  roof  of  mouth,

into  corresponding  side  of  head  and  same  side  of  neck,


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  82G

which  was  painful  to  touch  and  glands  swollen. ^Diph-
theria.

■  Diphtheria on a wounded palate; much  prostration;

exudation  looked  like  mould  on  bread;  discharge  from
nostrils.

■  Extensive,  well  organized  deposit,  exciting  much  cough.

■  Corresponds  to  form  of  disease  in  which  vegetable  parasite

found  in  diphtheritic  deposit  resembles  the  spirobacteria.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires, Aversions. ■Appetite  lost;
thirst  increased ;  foul  tongue  ;  languor.

■  Longing  for  beer;  for  acid  drinks,  which  increases.

■  Dislike  to  meat.

^*  Eating  and  Drinking.  ■Food  lies  like  a  load;  sensation
after  a  full  meal  as  if  digestion  was  suspended.  ^Dys-
pepsia.

■  Pressure  and heaviness  in  stomach,  immediately  after

eating. ^Dyspepsia.

■  After  dinner  external  stitches  in  epigastrium  and  breast

into  nipple  (male),  and  in  r.  hypochondrium.

■  Secondary  bad  effects  from  malt  liquors;  especially  from

lager  beer.
^"Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and  Vomiting. ■  Fetid
eructations.
I  I  Eructations  of  air,  relieving  an  uneasiness  of  stomach,
like  from  pent  up  wind  at  gi'eat  curvature.

■  Sudden  nausea.

■  Nausea:  feeling  of  heat  over  body,  with  giddiness,  rush

of  blood  to  head ;  <  on  moving  about,  in  morning,  at
sight  of  food,  after  meals,  and  after  stool;  excited  by
drinking  and  smoking;  >  by  eating  and  in  open  air.
Nausea,  with  burning  pain  in  anus,  and  erections  lasting
half  an  hour.

■  Giddiness,  followed  by  vomiting  of  an  acid,  white,  mucous

fluid,  with  pressure  and  burning  in  stomach. ^Ulcer  of
stomach.

■  Almost  immediately  after  eating,  vomits  all  her  food,

sour;  appetite  good ;  tongue  red  in  middle;  bitter  taste;
constipation.

■  Vomiting: sour, undigested; of  bile,  bitter; pinkish,

glairy  fluid;  of  mucus  and  blood;  of  blood,  with  cold
sweat  on  hands,  face  hot;  of  yellow,  purulent  mucus.

■  ■  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  drunkards.

^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  ■Swelling  of  stomach  (even-
ing), with  fulness  and  pressure ;  cannot  bear  tight
clothing;  tongue  yellow.

■  Pressure  and  heaviness  in  stomach;  immediately  after

eating.

■  Food  lies  on  stomach  like  a  load;  digestion  suspended.


327  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

I  I  Awakens  with  a  start;  heat  in  pit  of  stomach  and  spit-
ting of  blood ;  2  a.m.

I  Awoke  with  uneasiness,  soreness  and  tenderness,  especi-
ally in  a  small  spot  towards  1.  of  ensiform  cartilage;
headache  in  a  small  spot.

■  Feeling  of  coldness  in  stomach  and  bowels.

I  Pains  and  uneasiness  in  stomach,  alternate  with  pains  in
limbs.

Gastric  pains  >  after  eating  and  rheumatic  pains  re-
appear; when  gastric  symptoms  reach  to  any  height
rheumatic  pains  subside.

■  Organic  cardialgia;  eructations;  nausea  like  sea  sickness;

sensation  of  fulness,  heaviness;  malaise  after  a  meal;
chilliness;  inflation;  gnawing,  burning,  constricting
pain  in  stomach  and  hypochondria,  <  in  morning  and
during  motion,  >  by  eating.

■  After  food,  choking,  as  if  there  was  something  hard  all

down  oesophagus,  then  a  hiccup,  and  a  jumping  and
shaking  as  if  stomach  jerked  up,  not  painful ;  then  a
curious  feeling  as  of  something  eating  in  bowels;  gulp-
ing up  of  food  unchanged  and  not  sour,  with  pain  across
middle  of  back;  constipation. ^Gastric  affections.

■  Constant  nausea  and  at  times  vomiting;  choking  feeling,

like  a  hair  in  back  of  throat,  comes  suddenly  and  causes
sickness;  constant  tearing  pain  at  epigastrium;  smart-
ing between  scapulas;  bad  taste;  tongue  white;  vertigo
on  rising. /^Gastric  disorder.

■  Want  of  appetite ;  fulness  at  chest,  much  flatulence;  taste

of  rotten  eggs  coming  into  mouth,  with  constant  nausea;
great  dislike  to  fat  meat;  tongue  reddisli  and  rough;
sharp,  shooting,  stabbing  pains  all  over  head,  <  after-
noon and  evening;  constipation;  heat  of  whole  body
when  walking;  eyes  weak;  pain  in  eyeballs;  drowsiness
and  languor  in  daytime,  sleeplessness  at  night;  fre-
quently sharp,  shooting,  aching  pains  in  sides  and  back.

■  Nausea  on  moving  about  or  taking  a  short  walk;  fre-

quent sensation  of  nausea  rising  from  stomach  to  pit  of
throat;  paleness  of  face;  flow  of  water  in  mouth;  cop-
pery taste;  faintness  and  general  coldness,  and  desire  to
lie  down;  frequent  pain  at  epigastrium,  pricking
through  to  back,  lasting  about  half  an  hour;  thirst;
brown  tongue  in  morning;  bowels  very  constipated;
abdomen  distended;  constant  hunger  and  craving;  milk
disagrees;  almost  daily  headache,  shooting  from  back
to  front;  pains  in  both  hypochondria  on  walking;  ex-
cessive languor  and  indisposition  to  bodily  and  mental
exertion  ;  sleep  unrefreshing.  ^Affection  of  stomach.
iPain  in  r.  hypochondriac  region,  towards  epigastrium^  <


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  828

by  touch  and  walking;  vomiting  of  greenish,  watery
mucus  in  morning;  thick  yellow  fur  on  tongue;  no  ap-
petite. ^Gastric  derangement.

B Appetite  poor,  but  must  eat  often;  as  otherwise  she  felt
faint;  nausea,  >  after  a  meal;  heartburn;  not  much
flatulence;  risings  after  food;  metallic  taste  in  mouth;
pain  or  weight  at  stomach  immediately  after  taking
food,  especially  after  meat;  headache  and  giddiness;
constipation;  urine  high  colored;  abdomen  bloated;
tongue  too  red  and  dry,  but  with  a  yellowish  or  brown-
ish fur  on  it;  arches  of  palate  red;  catamenia  irregular
and  excessive;  great  weakness;  rheumatism  even  when
well. ^Dyspepsia.

BBBad  effects  of  overindulgence  in  beer  or  other  malt
liquors;  great  weight  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  flatulency;  loss
of  appetite;  oppression  of  food  immediately  after  eating;
nausea,  confused  feeling,  especially  in  morning,  and
vomiting  of  mucus ;  bad  humor.

iDines  at  6  p.m.,  and  in  about  three  hours  has  waterbrash,
raises  phlegm  continually,  vomits  whatever  food  remains
in  stomach,  and  rarely  sleeps  before  midnight,  as  phlegm
chokes  him;  cough;  constipation,  stools  hard  and  passed
with  some  exertion. ^Affection  of  stomach.

B  Vomiting  of  food,  sour,  with  nausea,  coming  on  an  hour
after  eating;  pain  at  pit  of  stomach,  like  a  stone;  tongue
white  and  flabby;  bowels  costive;  meat,  tea  or  cofiee
vomited  immediately. ^Dyspepsia.

BStomach  complaint  when  there  is  pain  in  region  of  liver
and  sodden  looking  tongue,  without  much  acidity  or
'  other  symptoms,  except  general  discomfort  and  some-
times white  stools.

B Gastric  catarrh  with  acid  vomiting;  sudden  dyspepsia
w^hile  eating.

B Dyspepsia  and  vomiting  from  chronic  gastric  catarrh;
tongue  coated  thick,  yellowish.

BChronic  catarrh  of  stomach.

B  Ulceration  of  stomach  and  duodenum.

BRound  ulcer  of  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria, b  Dull  pain  or  stitches  in  r.  hj^pochondrium,
especially  when  limited  to  a  small  spot;  clay  colored
stools;  metallic  taste;  confusion  in  head.

Bin  evening  is  seized  with  a  violent  aching  continued
pain,  drawing  her  downwards,  in  r.  hypochondrium,
stretching  from  epigastrium  round  to  shoulder;  must
undress  immediately,  though  not  perceptibly  swelled;
great  oppression  of  breathing;  pain  lasts  several  hours
and  subsides  gradually,  without  any  evacuation  or
passing of wind; at times it is accompanied with


529  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

nausea  and  some  little  vomiting;  tongue  flat  and
furred;  bowels  regular;  complexion  not  yellow.

I  Pain  in  a  small  spot  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  pretty  con-
stant, but  <  to  a  sharp  stitch  on  sudden  motion  after
sitting;  appetite  good  and  health  not  much  affected.

I  Pain  in  1.  hypochondrium,  under  ribs,  unaffected  by  eat-
ing or  pressure,  or  respiration,  <  by  a  chill,  or  great
bodily  exertion.

■Constant  dull  aching  in  r.  hypochondriac  region.

■  Spasmodic  attacks  resembling  those  accompanying  gall

stones.
I  Dull,  heavy  pressure  or  stitches  in  region  of  liver.
iStitches  in  region  of  spleen,  extending  into  lumbar  region,

<  from  motion  or  pressure.

^Abdomen. iTympanitis;  abdomen  feels  bloated,  followed
by  eructations.
I  I  Sensitiveness  of  abdomen  to  least  pressure.
1  Stitches  through  abdomen,  extending  to  spinal  column.

■  Cutting,  as  from  knives,  soon  after  eating;  colic,  alter-

nating with  cutting  at  navel,  during  niglit.

■  Cutting  pains  in  lower  intestines,  and  rumbling  of  gas

in  upper.
I  I  Dull,  colicky  pain  round  navel,  coming  on  after  any  ex-
posure to  cold  wind.

■  Almost  immediately  after  eating  complains  of  coldness

and  nausea,  looks  pale,  and  has  pain  in  abdomen;  then
vomiting  of  food,  unchanged,  sometimes  sour  or  tinged
with  bile;  vomiting  gives  relief;  during  rest  of  day
languid,  drowsy,  and  complains  of  cold,  though  body  is
hot;  frequent  colicky  pains  in  abdomen;  tongue  white,
furred ;  thirst;  bowels  moved  several  times  a  day ;  stools
pale  and  liquid. ^Gastro-intestinal  irritation.

■  Attacks  of  periodical  spasmodic  constriction  of  intestines,

with  nausea,  followed  by  a  papescent  stool  and  burn-
ing in  anus,  with  tenesmus.

■  Pain  as  in  enteritis;  vomits  in  rapid  succession  bilious,

bloody  matter;  blood  bright  and  clotted;  listless,  indif-
ferent, languid  mood. ^Intussusception.

■  Gastro-intestinal  inflammation,  cramps  here  and  there,

<  in  calves  and  inner  parts  of  thighs.

I  I  Chronic  ulceration  of  mucous  membrane  attended  with
vomiting  of  ingesta,  hectic  and  emaciation.
"  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■  Watery,  gushing  diarrhoea  in  morn-
ing; awakes  from  urgent  desire;  followed  by  violent
tenesmus,  which  prevents  her  rising;  later,  burning  in
abdomen,  nausea  and  violent  straining  to  vomit.

■  ■Diarrhoeic stool,  of  brown,  frothy  water,  with  exces-

sively painful  pressure,  urging  and  tenesmus  in  anus.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  330

iStools  frequent,  clay  colored,  thin,  with  lumps,  blood
streaks,  much  straining;  little  appetite,  no  thirst,  no
fever;  insular  large  patches  on  tongue.

iClay  colored  stools. fc'Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Chronic  morning  diarrhoea;  cough; early  in  morning,

pains  darting  through  r,  lung,  from  below  mamma  to
back  below  r.  scapula ;  very  acute  pains  darting  from
behind  1.  hip  down  on  outside  of  1.  thigh,  and  some-
times to  calf  of  leg;  severe  acute  pains  about  1.  eye  and
1.  side  of  forehead.

I  Chronic  whitish  diarrhoea  with  hepatic  derangement  of
children.

I  Diarrhoea  <  from  lager  beer.

iStools:  blackish,  watery;  yellowish,  watery;  clay  colored,
watery  and  lumpy;  jellylike;  involuntary  and  often
painless  and  odorless;  bloody  and  extremely  painful.

•  Dysentery:  brownish,  frothy,  watery,  or  frequent  bloody
evacuations,  gnawing  about  navel,  tenesmus;  tongue
smooth,  red,  cracked;  after  a  burn.

■  Diarrhoea  or  dysentery  after  rheumatism.

■  Periodical  dysentery  every  year;  early  part  of  Summer.

■  After  Canthar.  has  removed  stools  like  scrapings,  jellylike

stools  will  sometimes  appear ;  Kali  bich.  will  then  com-
plete cure. /^Dysentery.

Before  stool:  abdominal  pains;  erections. '

During  stool:  painful  urging;  burning  and  straining  in
anus ;  succus  prostaticus ;  gnawing  about  navel ;  pain  in
region  of  spleen;  metallic  taste  in  mouth;  offensive
breath;  confusion  in  head.

After  stool:  remission  of  complaints;  tenesmus;  burning
soreness  or  drawing  in  anus  with  nausea.

Papescent  evacuations,  with  much  rumbling  in  intestines.

■  Constipation,  debility,  coated  tongue,  headache,  cold  ex-

tremities ;  stools  dry,  knotty.
i  Great  constipation ;  stools  too large  in  size, and  very
painful  to  expel ;  insular  large  patches  on  tongue.

■  Stool  in  one  mass,  of  excessive  hardness.

■  Hard,  dry,  knotty,  difficult  stools.

■  Hard  evacuation,  followed  by  burning  and  pressure  in

anus.

■  Scanty,  lumpy  stool,  followed  by  burning  in  anus.

■  Habitual  constipation ;  stools  scanty,  knotty,  followed  by

painful  retraction  of  anus.

■  Stools  dry,  with  burning  at  anus. .

■  Tendency  to  constipation,  especially  when  there  exists

an  aggravation  of  general  symptoms  in  consequence  of
its  presence.

■  Periodic  constipation  every  three  or  six  months.


331  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

During  an  emission  of  wind  per  anum,  sweat  all  over
body,  but  especially  on  face,  from  which  it  runs  in
streams.

■  Falling  of  rectum.

Pressing  and  straining  in  anus,  with  tenesmus.

■  Burning  in  anus  after  dry  and  knotty  stool.

■  Sensation  of  plug  in  anus,  can  scarcely  sit  down.
■Soreness  at  anus,  making  it  very  painful  to  walk.

■  Fulness  in  hemorrhoidal  vessels.

■  Painful  dry  piles,  protruding  after  stool.

■  Hemorrhage from bowels; strength much impaired;

lips  completely  blanched;  palpitation  on  slightest  ex-
ertion; tenderness  over  caecum ;  stools  sometimes  natural,
sometimes  mucus  streaked  with  blood,  sometimes  almost
pure  blood  ;  somewhat  distended  abdomen;  stools  never
caused  pain  when  they  were  solid,  but  when  there  was
mucus  or  blood  there  was  some  tenesmus.
^'  Urinary  Organs. iPain  across  back,  w4th  red  urine.

■  Shooting  in  renal  region,  small  pulse,  prostration;  sup-

pressed urine.
Constant  aching  in  region  of  kidneys,  <  in  r.  side,  where
pain  was  frequently  shooting  through  to  bowels ;  sore-
ness at  stomach  and  acidity; urine  high  colored  and
scanty.

■  Continuous  desire  to  urinate  during  day.

■  Frequent discharge of  watery urine,  of  strong  smell,

awaking  him  at  night.

Suppression  of  urine,  with  much  pain  in  renal  region.

■Suppression  of  urine  following  cholera.

I  I  Scanty,  reddish  urine.

■Scanty,  high  colored  urine,  with  copious,  w^hitish  sedi-
ment and  pain  in  back.

■  Scanty  urine,  with  a  white  film  and  whitish  deposit;  mu-

cous sediment.

■  Urine  alkaline  and  ropy.

■  Painful  drawing  from  perineum  into  urethra.

■  Before  urination:  pain  in  coccyx,  extending  into  urethra.

■  During  urination:  heat  in  urethra;  burning  in  glandu-

lar part  of  urethra,  continuing  long  after;  burning  in
fossa  navicularis  or  in  bulbus  of  urethra;  backache.

■  After  urination:  burning  in  back  part  of  urethra,  with

sensation  as  if  one  drop  had  remained  behind,  with  un-
♦ successful  effort  to  void  it;  stitches  in  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■■Sexual  desire  absent,  in  fleshy
people.

■  Constrictive  pain  at  root  of  penis;  morning  on  awaking.

■  Itching  in  hairy  parts,  skin  inflames,  small  pustules  form,

of  size  of  a  pin's  head.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  332

I  Chancres  ulcerating  deeply.

I  I  Indurated  chancre.

I  Pricking  and  itching  at  glans  penis;  ulcers.

iStitches  in  prostate  when  walking,  must  stand  still;  pros-
tatic fluid  escapes  at  stool. ^Chronic  prostatitis.

I  Gleet,  with  stringy  or  jellylike,  profuse  discharge.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Prolapsus  uteri,  seemingly  from
hot  weather.

8 Subinvolution  of  uterus.

B  Membranous  dysmenorrhoea.

I  Menses:  too  soon,  with  vertigo,  headache,  nausea  and
feverishness;  obstinate  suppression  of  urine  or  red  urine.

■Soreness  and  rawness  in  vagina.

I  I  Swelling  of  genitals.

Iltching,  burning  and  excitement  about  vulva;  genuine
pruritus.

iLeucorrhoea  yellow,  ropy;  pain  and  weakness  across
small  of  back,  and  dull,  heavy  pains  in  hypogastrium.

ILeucorrhoea  that  can  be  drawn  out  in  long  strings;  yel-
low, ropy,  stiffening  the  linen.

lAccumulation  of  thick,  tenacious  mucus.

■  Flushes  in  face,  during  climacteric  period.

2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Sudden  nausea ;

yellow  coated  tongue;  inward  coldness  and  heat  of  face;

constipation; violent abdominal pains; faintness.

^Vomiting  of  pregnancy.
I  Long  and  continued  vomiting  during  pregnancy; can

retain  no  food  in  stomach ;  great  emaciation  and  debility.
iMilk,  as  it  flows  from  breast,  has  appearance  of  being

composed  of  stringy  masses  and  water.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, n Rough,

hoarse  or  nasal  voice.
I  Hoarseness  and  accumulation  of  mucus in  larynx,  in

morning.
1  I  Hoarseness  in  evening.
iChronic  hoarseness  with  laryngitis.

iThroat  dry  and  rough,  with  great  hoarseness  or  aphonia.
I  Tickling  in  throat,  causes  cough.
lAccumulation  of  tough  mucus  in  larynx,  causes  hawking.

■  Hawks  copious,  thick  blue  mucus,  in  morning.

■  Sensation  as  from  ulceration  in  larynx.

■Frequent  attacks  of  hoarseness,  cough  and  difficulty  of
swallowing;  sore  throat  and  sensation  of  a  lump,  par-
tially >  by  swallowing;  hoarseness  and  loss  of  voice;
cough  with  blackish  sputa,  most  in  morning,  with  pain
at  sternum  "like  pins  and  needles."

■  Pain  in  throat,  and  feeling  of  swelling  in  larynx;  hoarse,

husky voice; cough with sputa difficult to detach;


'  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

cough  and  dyspnoea  in  morning;  pain  across  epigas-
trium and  abdomen ;  constipation.  ^Affection  of  larynx.
I  After  catching  cold,  sensation  of  dryness  in  throat  some-
tinies  becoming  a  burning,  which  extended  to  larynx;
voice  rough,  hoarse ;  at  times,  short,  dry  cough ;  grey-
ish white  coating  on  posterior  wall  of  pharynx;  debility
and  lassitude. ^Laryngitis.

■  Oppression  of chest; without cough,  expectoration  of

blood  mixed  with  phlegm,  brought  on  by  any  exertion,
or  by  reading  or  talking  loud  or  laughing;  <  morning;
cannot  bear  clothes  tight  over  chest  or  throat,  otherwise
a  sensation  of  faintness  comes  on ;  sore,  smarting  feeling
in  1.  side  of  throat,  somewhat  >  by  swallowing;  feeling
of  throat  as  if  lined  with  wash  leather ;  >  dry,  warm
air;  <  in  damp  weather,  whether  hot  or  cold.  (?Affec-
tion  of  fauces  and  larynx.

■  Catarrhal  laryngitis  and  catarrhal  aphonia;  <  in  even-

ing and  when  weather  is  going  to  change,  and  after  long
talking.

■  Attacks  of  dyspnoea,  and  more  or  less  difficulty  in  taking

an  inspiration  at  all  times;  tough,  offensive  expectora-
tion; constant  hoarseness;  appetite  poor;  emaciation.
/^Chronic  inflammation  of  larynx  and  trachea.

■  Pharynx  bluish  with  varicose  veins;  vocal  cords  and  pos-

terior parts  of  larynx  red  and  puffy  and  covered  with
greyish  mucus;  sensation  of  dryness;  tickling  in  larynx
when  speaking;  voice  rough  and  hollow;  cough  with
,  scanty,  stringy  expectoration,  provoked  by  speaking  and
laughing;  chronic  laryngitis.

■  Chronic  laryngitis,  with  congestion;  swelling  of  tissues

and  increased  secretion  of  a  glutinous  fluid ;  <  towards
morn  ing,  when  tough  mucus  nearly  strangles  him.  ^Fol-
licular laryngitis.

■  Gradual  and  insidious  onset;  at  first  only  slight  difficulty

of  breathing,  when  mouth  is  closed;  as  disease  pro-
gresses there  is  fever,  increased  difficulty  of  breathing,
hoarse  voice,  constant  cough  at  intervals;  cough  hoarse,
dry,  barking,  metallic;  deglutition  painful;  tonsils  and
larnyx  red,  swollen,  covered  with  false  membrane,  diffi-
cult to  detach,  with  expectoration  of  tough,  stringy  mu-
cus; finally  breathing  performed  only  by  abdominal
muscles,  and  those  of  neck  and  shoulders;  head  bent
backwards,  breath  offensive;  diminished  temperature,
prostration,  stupor  and  death  from  asphyxia,  if  not  re-
lieved. ^Membranous  croup.

■  Croupy  cough ;  labored  and  quick  breathing;  epiglottis

slightly  covered  with  a  pale,  pearly  coating;  cough  dry
and  severe;  pain  and  soreness  in  larynx;  expectoration
gelatinous. ^Membranous  croup.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  334

I  Fever,  fluent  coryza,  croupy  cough,  <  in  morning;  mem-
brane throughout  fauces,  tending  to  spread  downwards
to  larynx;  epiglottis  faintly  covered ;  coughed  up  tough,
chunky  mucus. ^Membranous  croup.

I  On  fourth  day  of  slight  attack  of  diphtheria,  sudden
croupy  cough ;  breathing  labored ;  could  not  lie  down  ;
cough  hard;  expectoration  of  long,  tenacious  mucus;
very  drowsy ;  epiglottis  covered  on  apex  and  sides  with
membrane. ^Diphtheritic  croup.

■Croupy  cough  and  difficult  breathing,  with  wheezing;
expectoration  of  yellow,  somewhat  stringy  mucus,  which
had  to  be  removed  with  finger;  tonsils  and  fauces  lined
with  a  white,  pearly  coating,  extending  down  to  larynx;
<  on  r.  side. ^Membranous  croup.

I  After  riding  against  a  cold  west  wind,  cold  in  head  and

throat,  followed  by  croupy  cough;  increased  dryness  of
throat  at  night,  breathing  could  be  heard  distinctly
through  house;  cough  in  paroxysms,  fearfully  increased
after  sleep. ^Croup.

I I  Membranous  or  diphtheritic  croup  invading  larynx,  tra-
chea and  even  bronchi ;  voice  hoarse,  uncertain,  cough
hoarse,  metallic;  deglutition  painful,  tonsils  red,  swollen,
or  covered  with  false  membrane  difficult  to  detach,  with
expectoration  of  tough,  stringy  mucus;  coughs  up  casts
of  elastic,  fibrinous  nature;  loud  mucous  rales;  wheez-
ing rattling  in  sleep;  insidious  approach;  fat,  chubby,
light  haired  children.

I  Early,  formative  stage  of  croup  ;<  2  to  3  a.m.;  tough
mucus  strangles  him.

■  Sensation  of  lump  in  upper  part  of  trachea,  and  of  hairs

across  base  of  tongue,  which  neither  hawking,  swallow-
ing nor  eating  relieves.

■  Catarrh  of  fauces  and  trachea ;  great  accumulation  of  ropy

mucus;  hoarseness;  cough;  suppressed  voice;  burning
of  mucous  membrane,  extending  up  into  nostrils;  ton-
sils enlarged,  causing  dulness  of  hearing;  ulceration  of
pharynx  and  larynx  ;  oppressed  breathing.

■  Burning  sensation  in  trachea  and  bronchi.

I  I  Sensation  of  dryness  in  bronchi  in  morning.

■  Violent  ringing  cough;  difficult,  yellowish  white  expec-

toration; burning,  raw  pain  down  throat  and  along
sternum;  dyspnoea  and  wheezing,  must  sit  partially  up
in  bed;  pulse  quick  and  small;  no  sleep  throughout
whole  night. ^ Acute  bronchial  catarrh.

■  Constant  cough,  keeping  him  awake  whole  night,  and

causing  much  distress  from  pain  in  chest,  which  he
from  nose;  pain  in  frontal  sinuses;  general  feeling  of
lassitude  and  languor. ^Catarrh  of  chest.


335  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

I  Frequent  severe  paroxysms  of  cough,  loose,  wheezing
sound,  no  sputa;  perspiration  <  at  night;  loud  wheez-
ing and  rattling ;  dyspnoea  on  lying  down.  6'Bronchial
catarrh.

■  Violent  paroxysms  of  cough,  with  little  expectoration,

and  that  of  stringy  mucus,  leaving  patient  excessively
exhausted,  sometimes  attended  with  dry  retching.
^Bronchitis.

■  Acute  capillary  bronchitis. .

■  Every  two  or  three  weeks,  after  any  slight  exposure,  is

seized  with  chilliness  and  languor,  with  flushed  face,
headache  and  hot  hands  for  half  a  day ;  then  heat  of
whole  body;  disturbed  sleep  and  screaming  at  night,
followed  by  paroxysms  of  coughing,  with  vomiting  of
tough  mucus  like  white  of  egg  and  yellow,  acid  fluid;
then  for  several  days  cough;  want  of  appetite;  foul
tongue;  constipation.  ^Bronchial  attacks  after  whoop-
ing cough.

■  Common  bronchitis,  vacillating  between  acute  and  torpid

inveterate  character  of  disease,  and  especially  if  attended
by  periosteal  or  rheumatic  pains  of  chronic  character.
■Violent,  tight,  dry  cough,  <  during  day,  and  always  ex-
cited by  any  exposure  to  smoke;  wheezing  at  night  in
bed. ^Chronic  bronchitis.

■  Rattling  in  chest,  dyspnoea  on  l^'ing  down. ^Chronic

bronchitis.

■  Chronic  bronchitis  for  many  months;  cough  slight,  but

much  viscid, expectoration,  in  grey  lumps;  slight  sore
throat;  pain  at  epigastrium;  flatulence.

■After  catching  cold,  one  year  ago,  cough,  with  great  op-
pression of  chest  and  swelling  of  veins  of  neck ;  sputa  in
tough,  black  lumps;  cough  <  after  eating  or  drinking;
dyspnoea  on  exertion. 6'Chronic  bronchitis.

■Stringy  expectoration;  sensation  of  choking  on  lying
down. ^Chronic  bronchitis.

■  Chronic  bronchitis  caused by inhalation  of  vapor  of

arsenic.

■  Subacute  and  chronic  inflammatory  processes  in  larynx

or  bronchial  tubes,  with  congestion  and  swelling  of
tubes  and  increased  secretion  of  glutinous  mucus,  which
veils  and  alters  voice.

■  Bronchial  dilatation  with  fetid  breath  and  expectoration.
^^  Bespiration.  Oppressed  breathing,  awakens  at  2  a.m.  ;  pal-
pitation; orthopnoea,  sits  bent  forward;  caused  by  mu-
cus, croup,  croupous  diphtheria,  chronic  bronchitis,
membranous  bronchitis,  or  from  disturbed  circulation ;
cold  sensation  and  tightness  about  heart,  lower  portions
of  lungs  oppressed.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  836

Pressure  and  heaviness  on  cnest,  as  from  a  weight;  wakens
with  this  sensation  at  night  and  is  relieved  after  rising.

Like  a  heavy  load  on  chest  when  awaking  from  sleep.

I  Wheezing,  panting  on  awaking;  then  cough  wliich  forces
him  to  sit  up,  bent  forward.

I  Wheezing  at  night  after  whooping  cough.

I  Dyspnoea.

■Slight  dyspnoea,  as  if  mucous  membrane  of  bronchi  was
thickened,  on  rising  in  morning.

■Tightness  at  bifurcation  of  bronchi.

■  Sensation  of  choking  on  lying  down.

""  Cough.  I  Cough  excited  by:  tickling  in  larynx,  or  at  bron-
chial bifurcation ;  by  oppression  at  epigastrium,  or  accu-
mulation of  mucus  in  larynx.

I  Dry,  short,  continual  tickling  cough  and  pain  in  larynx,
as  if  from  an  ulcer.

■Cough  accompanied  by  inward  soreness  in  chest,  espe-
cially in  one  point,  as  if  an  ulcer  was  there.

■  ■Cough,  with  pain,  from  mid-sternum  through  to  back  ;

severe  stitching,  or  weight  and  soreness  in  chest.

■  Dry  cough,  with  stitches  in  chest,  pain  in  loins,  vertigo,

dyspnoea,  shootings  in  chest.

■  During  cough:  bloody  taste  in  mouth-;  nausea;  ulcera-

tive pain  in  throat;  pressure  in  sternum  and  larynx,  ex-
tending into  OS  hyoides;  burning  pain  in  sternum,  ex-
tending into  shoulders;  heaviness,  sensitiveness  and
pains  in  chest;  palpitation  with  rattling  in  throat;  pains>
in  sides  and  loins  >  by  pressure.
■Loud,  harsh  cough,  in  single  coughs,  at  different  times,
for  an  hour  or  two,  and  then  not  for  some  hours,  most
in  morning  on  waking.

■  ■Cough  in  morning  on  awakening,  with  dyspnoea, >

by  lying  down.

■  ■Cough, especially  in morning,  with  expectoration  of

white  mucus,  "  tough  as  pitch,"  can  be  drawn  out  into
strings.

■  Constant  hacking  cough,  sometimes  with  expectoration

of  blood;  nocturnal  perspiration;  night  disturbed  by
cough;  tickling  irritation  in  larynx;  no  appetite;  pale;
phthisical  habitus.

■  Continuing  cough,  with  expectoration  of  blood ;  irritation

to  cough  coming  from  larynx ;  sweating  in  sleep  nights.
Cough  <: undressing;  morning  on  awaking;  after  eat-
ing; deep  inspiration;  >  after  getting  warm  in  bed.

■  Wheezing  and  panting,  then  violent  cough,  with  retching

and  difficult  expectoration  of  mucus,  so  viscid  that  it
can  be  drawn  in  strings  down  to  feet.
■Cough  caused  by  eating;  dry  cough  after  dinner.


337  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

I  Cough  witli  smooth  or  follicular  inflammatory  redness  of
pharynx  and  fauces.

■  Dyspnoea  and  dry  cough  for  six  weeks,  followed  by  expec-

toration of  dark  grey  mucus  of  consistence  of  white  of
egg,  with  soreness  and  oppression  of  chest.
I  Cough  resonant,  whistling,  with  nausea  and  expectoration
of  thick  mucus; whistling,  loud  rattling  in  chest.

I  Choking  cough,  with  tough,  stringy  mucus,  which  sticks

to  throat,  mouth  and  lips.

I I  Cough  hoarse,  metallic,  in  croup  (membranous  or  diph-
theritic), with  expectoration  of  tough  mucus  or  fibro-
elastic  casts.

■Stuffing  cough  with  pain  at  chest,  and  expectoration  of
yellowish,  heavy,  tough  matter.

■  Cough  with  expectoration  of  yellowish  green  tough  matter.

■  Cough  with  thick,  heavy  expectoration,  bluish  lumps  of

mucus.

■  Cough  with  transparent,  dirty,  slate  colored  sputa.

■  After  whooping  cough,  six  months  previously,  cough  still

continued,  loose  and  rattling  and  tickling  in  fits  at  night ;
wheezing  during  day  without  cough;  occasional  pitui-
tous  vomiting.

■  Whooping  cough;  mucus  so  viscid  that  it  stretched  in

long  strings  from  mouth  to  ground.

■  ■Expectoration  is  very  glutinous  and  sticky;  adhering  to

fauces,  teeth,  tongue  and  lips,  finally  leaving  mouth  in
long,  stringy  and  very  tenacious  mass.

■  Expectoration  with  traces  of  blood.

Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Pains  from  back  to  sternum;
or,  from  mid-sternum  darting  to  between  shoulders.
■Itching  behind  sternum,  causing violent,  racking,  par-
oxysmal cough.

■  Face  slightly  flushed;  nasal  mucous  membrane  irritable,

either  dry  or  secretes  copiously  a  yellow  mucus;  eyes
now  healthy,  often  catarrh  in  corners;  teeth  all  destroyed
(rnercurial  sequela) ;  tongue  clear  at  tip,  which  is  covered
with  red  points,  root  thickly  coated  yellow;  great  dry-
ness of  mouth,  alternating  with  salivation;  gums  livid;
fauces  and  pharynx  covered  with  red  granulations,  in-
terlaced with  white  streaks  and  reaching  down  to  cesoj^h-
agus;  constant  irritation,  as  from  a  foreign  body  in
throat,  sometimes  severe  burning  and  scratching;  taste
sour,  often  metallic;  great  thirst;  stomach  bloated,  with
sensitiveness,  fulness  and  pressure;  vomits  sometimes;
region  of  rectum  sensitive  to  pressure;  urine  very  acid;
stool  hard  and  defecation  difficult;  dysmenorrhoea;
dull  percussion  sound  over  r.  upper  anterior  and  pos-
terior part  of  chest;  weak,  rattling  murmur  in  apex  of

VOL. VI. — 22.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  338

r.  lung;  same  symptoms  on  1.  side,  only  weaker;
cough  mostly  dry,  but  troublesome,  especially  in  morn-
ing after  dressing  and  late  in  evening;  thick,  tough,
white  sputa;  heat  and  titillation  in  larynx  before  cough-
ing, causing  restlessness  and  impatience. ^Consumption.

I  Cough,  with  profuse,  yellow,  stringy  expectoration,  and
much  sweating;  pain,  as  of  ulceration  of  larynx,  causing
cough  at  almost  every  inspiration;  feeling  of  stifiness  in
larynx. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

I  I  Scirrhous  degeneration  of  both  lungs,  expectoration  so
viscid  that  it  could  be  drawn  a  yard  from  mouth ;  cough
very  violent,  preventing  sleep  and  rest.

B  Hgemoptysis ;  pneumonia.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  iCold  sensation  about  heart;
tightness  of  chest ;  dyspnoea,

■  Pressure  on  heart  after  eating.

■  Pricking  pain  in  region  of  heart.

•  Palpitation,  dyspnoea,  accelerated  pulse,  heat;  awakens
suddenly  with  a  start,  2  a.m.

■  Hypertrophy  of  heart;  insufficiency  of  aortic  valves.

I  Pulse:  irregular,  small,  contracted,  with  nosebleed;  accel-
erated, often  soft,  weak,  even  fluttering.

■  Pulsation  felt  in  all  the  arteries.


<  on  inspiration.

^'  Neck  and  Back. ■Stiffness  of  nape  of  neck  on  bending
head.
Brown  spots  on  throat  like  freckles.

■  Stabbing from third cervical  to  fifth dorsal vertebra,

striking  forward  through  chest  to  sternum,  <  on  motion ;
inability  to  straighten  spine  after  stooping.

■  Pain  in  back  striking  through  to  sternum  with  cough  and

expectoration  of  tough,  black  mucus.
I  I  Pain  in  small  of  back.

■  Sharp,  shooting  pains,  first  1.  then  r.  renal  region,  extend-

ing down  thighs,  <  on  motion.

■  ■Sharp,  stinging  pain  in  region  of  kidneys.

■  Aching  in  back  and  down  1.  side  into  hip.

I  I  Pain:  as  from  a  knife,  through  loins;  cannot  walk.

I  I  Pains  across  loins  with  coldness  of  extremities.

■Pheumatic  pains  in  back,  while  stooping  felt  as  if
something  cracked  across  sacrum,  cannot  stoop  or  move
for  pain,  which  remains  constant  even  while  at  rest,  but

<  on  least  movement  of  trunk  or  legs.

■  A  violent  aching  pain,  "  like  a  gathering,"  in  a  small  spot

in  sacrum,  a  steady,  throbbing  pain,  most  felt  at  night
and  hinders  sleep;  >  in  day,  when  up  and  walking
about,  but  unable  to  lift  anything.


339  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

■  Pain  in  sacrum  ;  cannot  straighten  himself.

I  I  Cutting  pain  in  outer  1.  side  of  sacrum,  shooting  up  and

down,
I  Pains  in  os  coccygis,  <  from  walking,  or  touch,  and  after

rising  after  long  sitting.
llPain  in  coccyx,  while  sitting.
^"  Upper  Limbs, i Rheumatic  pains  in  both  shoulders,  <  at

night.
. I  I  Stitches  at  lower  angle  of  1.  shoulder  blade.
I  I  Stiffness  of  shoulder  joint.
Painful  stiffness  of  r.  arm.

Sensation  of  lameness  in  r.  arm,  as  if  it  had  gone  to  sleep.
BBurning  pain  in  middle  of  forearm,  extending  to  wrist.
Swelling  of  arm,  followed  by  a  boil-like  elevation,  which

turned  into  a  large  ulcer  with  overhanging  edges.
Pustules  on  arms  size  of  split  pea,  with  a  hair  in  centre.
Itching  of  forearms  and  hands,  then  intolerable  pain  and

formation  of  numerous  ulcers,  from  which  above  a  dozen

nearl}'-  solid masses  of  matter  fell  on  striking  the  arm

firmly,  leaving  ulcers  clean,  dry  cavities,  which  slowly

filled  up  and  healed.
■Rheumatic  pains  in  elbows  and  wrist  joints;  stinging  in

I.  elbow.

■  Papular  eruption  on  forearms,  lasting  a  few  days,  and  fre-

quently recurring.
t  I  Redness,  swelling  and  itching  in  a  spot  on  wrist;  then
great  pain;  after  some  time  matter  formed  and  broke
the  skin,  and  continued  to  ooze  out  for  two  or  three
months,  then  healed,  leaving  a  cicatrix  depressed  as  if
scooped  out.

■  Great  weakness  of  hands.
■Spasmodic  contraction  of  hands.

I  I  Psoriasis  diffusa  of  hands,  after  some  time  degenerating
into  impetigo.

■  Hands  completely  covered  with  depressed  cicatrices  which

look  as  if  they  had  been  punched  out  with  a  wadding
cutter.
Hands  become  covered  with  deep,  stinging  cicatrices.

■  Bones  of  hands  as  if  bruised,  when  pressed;  ulcers  on

fingers,  with  caries.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  finger  joints.

After  redness  and  swelling  of  finger,  with  some  throbbing
pain,  an  ulcer  formed  over  joint  of  forefinger,  with  white
overhanging  edges  and  dark,  gangrenous  central  points,
skin  and  cellular  tissue  movable  as  if  separated  from
their  attachments.

■Small  pustules  on  roots  of  nails,  spreading  over  hands  to
wrists;  arm  became  red  and  axillary  glands  suppurated;


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  340

small  pustules  on  hands  secreted  a  watery  fluid  when
broken ;  if  not  touched  fluid  became  thickened  to  a  yel-
low, tough  mass.

Painful  ulcer  under  thumb  nail.
^^  Lower  Limbs. iRheumatic  pains  in  hip  joints  and  knees,
on  walking  or  moving,  also  with  restlessness,  in  diph-
theria.

I  Pain  in  course  of  1.  sciatic  nerve,  from  behind  great  tro-
chanter to  calf;  >  in  motion.

Stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest  and  in  1.  sciatic  nerve.

Sciatica:  in  males;  1.  side, pain  running  from  hip  to  knee;
wandering,  erratic  pains,  sharp  pain  in  knee  and  hip
joint,  aching  in  leg,  with  trembling;  pains  come  on
quickly  and  subside  soon;  jerking  aching  pain  in  hip;
pain  >by  walking  and  flexing  leg;  <  in  hot  weather,  by
standing,  sitting,  or  lying  in  bed ;  pressure  causes  pain
to  shoot  along  entire  length  of  nerve. ^Sciatica.

■Severe  p>ains  in  hip  and  down  outside  of  thigh ;  <  in
afternoon  and  evening,  >  in  bed ;  <  on  any  change  in
weather. ^Sciatica.

iPain  aggravated  by  standing,  sitting,  or  lying  in  bed;  >
by  walking  and  flexing  leg;  pressure  caused  pain  to
shoot  along  entire  length  of  nerve;  1.  leg  aff'ected.
^Sciatica.

■Sciatica  from  getting  her  clothes  damp;  pain  in  1.  hip,  >
from  motion.

I  Pain  in  r.  hip,  extending  to  knee.

■  Heaviness  of  legs;  aching  and weakness  in calves  on

walking  or  going  up  stairs.
Eruption  on  legs  and  thighs  of  reddish,  hard  knots,  from

size  of  a  pin's  head  to  that  of  a  split  pea,  with  a  depressed,

dark  scurf  in  centre,  with  an  inflamed  base.
■Violent  pains  in  shin  bones  and  burning,  extending  up

legs ;  aching  and  shooting  in  front  of  thighs  and  knees ;

<  at  night,  without  swelling.

■  Pain  in  tendons  of  muscles  of  calf,  as  if  stretched,  causing

lameness.

■  Tearing  in  r.  tibia.

■Tearing  pains  in  tibia,  from  tertiary  syphilis.
Pain  in  middle  of  tibia.

■  Periostitis  from  a  blow  on  shin,  leaving  an  ulcer  on  spot

about  size  of  a  shilling,  skin  and  cellular  tissue  around
it  much  inflamed ;  great  pain  in  leg  when  he  stands ;
violent  pain  shooting  up  to  knee;  stiffness  of  flexor
muscles  of  knee.

■  Red,  painful,  doughy  swelling  on  r.  shin;  tender  to  touch

and  after  standing,  but  especially  painful  at  night,  when
gnawing  and  scraping  pains  keep  her  awake;  leucor-
rhoea  and  itching  of  vulva. ^Syphilitic  periostitis.


341  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

I A  number  of  small,  irregular  ulcers  on  leg,  which  leave
a  depressed  cicatrix  on  healing. ^'Syphilis.

Small  pimples  on  legs,  which  spread  into  large  scarlet
blotches,  discharging  yellow  matter.

Sensation  of  dislocation  in  1.  ankle.

I  Violent  burning  heat  around  ankle  and  heel,deep  seated,
and  hindering  sleep;  three  small,  irregular,  shallow
ulcers;  costive  bowels;  fluttering  at  heart.

I  Soreness  in  heels  when  walking.

Blister,  full  of  serum,  on  sole  of  r.  foot.

I  Ulcers  on  previously  inflamed  feet.
^  Limbs  in  General.  iShooting  pricking  pains,  <  in  morning.

■  Frequent  and  severe  pain  in  limljs,  especially  arms,  at-

tended with  cramping  of  hands;  when  free  from  pain
in  limbs  had  pain  and  uneasiness  in  stomach  and  pain
in  malar  bones.

■  Periodical,  wandering  pains,  also  along  bones;  generally

without  localized  inflammatory  processes.
iPain  in  limbs  shifting  from  place  to  place.
Bones  feel  bruised;  cracking  in  joints  iVom  motion.

■  Stiff  all  over,  could  hardly  move  in  morning.

All  the  limbs  stiff,  with  shooting  pains,  <  in  morning. ,

■  Rheumatism  of  limbs,  especially  in  joints.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  limbs;  in  hips  and  fingers,  <  during

day.
Chronic  rheumatism  of  a  cold  variety;  bones  feel  sore  and

bruised.
Periosteal  and  syphilitic  rheumatism.
Audible  cracking  in  joints  on  slight  motion  of  wrists,

ankles  and  spine,  <  by  motion.
^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion. Lying:  throbbing  over  e3^es  >;

on  painful  side <; dyspnoea; sensation  of  choking;

cough  > ;  sciatica  < ;  pains  from  patella  to  foot  <.
Lying  on  face:  pannus  of  eyes  >.
Bending  head :  stiffness  of  nape  of  neck.
Head  bent  backward :  membranous  croup.
Twisting  head:  during  epileptic  attack.
Must  lie  down:  on  account  of  violent  headache.
Inclination  to  lie  down.
Could  not  lie  down:  during  diphtheria.
Stooping:  lightness in head; throbbing over e3^es <;
' shooting  in  temples  and  over  eyes  <;  dizziness;  felt  as

though  something  cracked  across  sacrum.
After  stooping:  cannot  straighten  spine.
Rising  after  sleep:  sensation  of  weight  on  chest  >.
Rising  from  a  seat:  vertigo.

Sitting :  pain  in  coccyx ;  sciatica  < ;  profuse  sweat  on  back.
After  rising  after  long  sitting:  pains  in  os  coccygis  <.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  342

Could  hardly  sit  down :  sensation  of  plug  in  anus.

Must  sit  up  partially  in  bed :  on  account  of  dysj)noea.

Sits  bent  forward:  orthopncea;  on  account  of  wheezing.

Standing:  sciatica  <;  great  pain  in  leg.

After  standing:  doughy  swelling  on  r.  shin.

Motion:  aversion  to;  organic  cardialgia  <;  sudden,  after
sitting,  sharp  stitch  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  pain  through
chest  to  sternum  < ;  shooting  pain  in  renal  region  < ;
rheumatic  pain  <  on  movement  of  trunk  and  limbs;
rheumatic  pains  in  hip  joints  and  knees;  pain  in  course
of  sciatic  nerve  >  ;  cracking  of  joints.

Slightest  motion:  pain  in  blood  boil  on  r.  side  of  spine.

Slightest  exertion:  causes  palpitation;  expectoration  of
blood  mixed  with  phlegm ;  dyspnoea.

Moving  abo'ut:  throbbing  over  eyes  <;  nausea  <.

Cannot  stoop  or  move:  with  pain  across  sacrum  which  re-
mains constant  even  while  at  rest.

Putting  tongue  out:  pain  in  throat  <.

Going  up  stairs:  dizziness;  aching  in  calves.

Flexing  leg:  >  pain  in  hip.

Walking:  heat  of  whole  body;  pains  in  both  hypochon-
dria; in  r.  hypochondriac  region;  painful  on  account  of
soreness  at  anus;  stitches  in  prostate,  must  stand  still;
pain  in  sacrum  > ;  pain  in  os  coccygis  < ;  rheumatic
pains  in  hip  joints  and  knees;  jerking  aching  pain  in
hip  >;  aching  in  calves;  soreness  in  heels.

Must  walk  up  and  down  room  whole  night  on  account  of
burning  itching  of  papular  itching.

Cannot  walk:  on  account  of  pain  through  loins.

Tossing  arms:  during  sleep.
^®  Nerves. '  '  Great  wearines,  and  general  discomfort;  debility,
with  desire  to  lie  down.

■  Weariness  in  limbs  as  the  pains  subside.

■  Prostration;  face  pale,  cold  sweat  on  face  and  body.

■  ■Neuralgia  every  day  at  same  hour.

■Epileptic  attacks;  hands  get  lame;  nausea  followed  by
chill,  gaping,  fainty  feeling  and  headache;  loses  con-
sciousness with  the  headache;  winking  with  eyelids
during  attack;  twisting  the  head;  loud  screaming;  face
changing,  now  pale,  now  red;  froth  at  mouth;  tough,
stringy  fluid  runs  from  mouth,  could  be  drawn  out  in  a
thread  six  yards  long.
^''  Sleep.  Great  inclination  to  yawn  and  stretch.
Drowsy  in  open  air.

■  Unrefreshing  sleep; feels  debilitated,  especially  in  ex-

tremities.

■  During sleep  frequent starts,  incoherent talk,  tossing

arms.


343  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

1  Awakened:  with  desire  to  urinate;  by  dyspnoea;  palpi-

tation; heat;  headache.
^  I  Worse  on  awaking :  head  and  chest  symptoms  especially.
^  Time. Most symptoms appear  in morning,  or are  then
most  severe.

2  A.M. :  h'eat  in  pit  of  stomach  and  spitting  of  blood ;  op-
pressed breathing  awakens;  awakens  with  a  start.

2  to  3  A.M.:  croup  <.

Mornings:  lightness  in  head  <;  pain  in  one  side  of  head
comes  on ;  acute  throbbing  in  eyebrows,  lasting  all  day ;
sight  is  blurred;  on  awakening,  headache;  pain  in  fore-
head and  vertex;  slight  photophobia;  catarrhal  inflam-
mation <  on  awaking;  inflammation  of  eyes  with  agglu-
tination; frequent  sneezing,  obstruction  and  bleeding
from  r.  nostril;  thick,  yellow  discharge  from  1.  nostril;
cough  < ;  taste  coppery,  sweetish,  sour,  bitter;  dry-
ness and  burning  of  throat;  much  tenacious  mucus
hawked;  black  mucus  from  throat;  nausea  <;  organic
cardialgia  <;  brown  tongue;  confused  feeling;  watery,
gushing  diarrhoea;  chronic  diarrhoea;  pains  darting
through  r.  luug;  on  awaking,  constrictive  pain  at  root
of  penis;  hoarseness  and  accumulation  of  mucus  in
larynx;  hawks  copious,  thick,  blue  mucus;  cough  with
blackish  sputa;  cough  and  dyspnoea;  expectoration  of
blood  mixed  with  phlegm  <;  chronic  laryngitis  <
towards  morning,  when  tough  mucus  nearly  strangles
him;  fever  and  croupy  cough  <;  dryness  of  bronchi;
when  rising,  slight  dyspnoea;  loud,  harsh  cough  <;
cough  with  dyspnoea;  cough  <  ;  limbs  stiff  with  shoot-
ing pains  <  ;  great  thirst.

9  A.M. :  attack  of  pain  in  head  begins,  goes  off  in  afternoon.

Begins  morning,  increases  till  noon,  ceases  towards  even-
ing: violent  shooting  from  root  of  nose  to  external  angle
of  eye.

Day:  shooting  in  temples  and  over  eyes;  drowsiness  and
languor;  continuous  desire  to  urinate;  violent,  tight
cough  <;  wheezing  without  cough;  aching  in  sacrum
>;  rheumatism  of  hips  and  fingers  <.

Afternoon:  sharp  pains  all  over  head;  sciatica  <.

Evening:  headache;  coryza  <;  swelling  of  stomach;
sharp  pains  all  over  head;  violent  aching  pains  in  r.
hypochondrium ;  hoarseness;  catarrhal  laryngitis;  ca-
tarrhal aphonia  <;  cough  <;  sciatica  <.

Night:  pain  in  1.  side  of  head  <  ;  shooting  in  temples  and
over  eyes;  pulsating  pain  in  ears;  running  from  nose
and  eyes,  always  < ;  parox3'sms  of  suffocation;  sleepless-
ness; cutting  at  navel;  frequent  discbarge  of  watery
urine  of  strong  smell  awakening  him  ;  dryness  of  throat


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  344

< ;  no  sleep  on  account  of  cough ;  perspiration  <  ;  dis-
turbed sleep  and  screaming;  wheezing  in  bed;  sensation
of  weight  on  chest;  sweats;  cough;  tickling  cough;
aching  in  small  spot  in  sacrum  < ;  rheumatic  pain  in
shoulders;  aching  in  front  of  thighs  and  knees  <;
doughy  swelling  on  r.  shin;  heat  and  itching  of  skin;
burning  itching  of  papular  eruption;  throat  sore  on
swallowing,
^^  Temperature  and  Weather, i  ■  Complaints  in  hot  w  eather.

■  Liability  to  take  cold  in  open  air.

I  I  Eruptions  begin  in  warm  weather. {Bhus  in  cold.)

■  Moderately  cold  air  is  felt  very  unpleasantly.

1  I  General  feeling  better  outdoors,  particularly  vertigo  >
while  walking  in  open  air;  chilliness  and  complaints  of
stomach  <  in  open  air.

I  I  Uncovering  <;  wrapping  up  >.

Open  air:  throbbing  over  eyes  >;  headache  >;  frequent
sneezing  and  coryza  <  ;  nausea  >  ;  drowsy.

In  bed:  sciatica  > ;  pain  from  patella  to  foot  <.

Seeks  a  warm  place :  on  account  of  chilliness  in  back.

Dry,  warm  air:  throat  >.

Warm  temperature:  dryness  of  nose  <  ;  cough  >  ;  itching
of  skin.

Warm,  damp  weather:  constant  snuffling;  throat  <.

Warm  soup:  burning  headache  >.

Hot  weather:  prolapsus  uteri,  seemingly  from ;  sciatica  < ;
violent  itching  of  eruption  <  ;  eruption  begins.

Wind:  watery  discharge  from  r.  nostril  <.

Cool  temperature:  dryness  of  nose  >.

Cold  weather:  itching  of  eruption  >;  ulcers  painful.

Cold,  west  wind:  riding  against  caused  cold  in  head  fol-
lowed by  croup.

Cold  winds:  cause  dull,  colicky  pains  around  navel.

Cold,  damp  weather:  throat  <.

Drinking  cold  water:  does  not  >  dry  mouth  and  lips.

Change  of  weather:  sciatica  <.

When  weather  is  going  to  change:  catarrhal  laryngitis  <.

Undressing:  cough  <.

After  catching  cold :  cough.
Fever, l Chilliness  in  back,  sleepiness;  seeks  a  warm  place.

I  Chilliness  alternating  with  flushes  of  heat.

i Chilliness  with  giddiness  and  nausea,  followed  by  heat,
with  sensation  of  coldness  and  trembling;  periodical
stinging  pains  in  temples ;  without  thirst.

■Attacks  of  chilliness  from  feet  upM^ards,  and  sensation  as
if  skull  at  vertex  became  contracted,  in  frequently  re-
turning paroxysms.

iChill,  followed  in  an  hour  by  heat,  with  dryness  of  mouth


40


45  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

and  lips,  which  have  to  be  moistened  all  the  time;  fol-
lowed in  morning  by  great  thirst  but  no  sweat;  ill
humor.

I  Chilliness,  especially  on  extremities,  and  flushes  of  heat
alternating  with  general  sweat.

I  Burning  heat  of  upper  part  of  body  and  face,  with  inter-
nal chilliness  and  violent  thirst.

II Giddiness;  violent,  painful  vomiting  followed  by  pain
in  forehead,  burning  of  eyes,  great  burning  heat  of
upper  part  of  body  and  face,  with  internal  chilliness  and
violent  thirst.

■  Flushes  of  heat;  in  face. ^Climaxis.

■  Heat  of  hands  and  feet;  nausea;  pain  in  upper  part  of

abdomen;  dryness  of  mouth;  sleeplessness;  followed  by
sweat  of  hands,  feet  and  thighs.

I  I  Flushes  of  heat  alternating  with  general  sweat.

I  I  Hands  cold  and  bathed  in  cold  sweat.

I  I  Sweat  on  forehead ;  rest  of  face  dry.

■Sweat:  on  back,  during  effort  at  stool;  profuse  while  sit-
ting quietly;  cold  on  forehead  and  hands;  on  hands,
feet  and  thighs.
Attacks,  Periodicity. Pains  fly  rapidly  from  one  place  to
another,  not  continuing  long  at  any  place,  and  intermit

■  Symptoms  alternate.

■  Gastric  symptoms  supersede  rheumatic.

■  ■Pains  appear  rapidly,  disappear  suddenly.
Frequently  returning  paroxysms:  sensation  as  if  skull  or

vertex  became  contracted.

Periodical  attacks :  of  semilateral  headaches ;  spasmodic
constriction  of  intestines ;  of  stinging  pains  in  temples.

Periodic:  headaches ;  constipation.

At  intervals:  shooting  in  r.  temple.

An  hour  after  eating :  vomiting  of  food  with  nausea.

One  hour  after  chill:  heat.

Several  times  a  day:  bowels  moved.

Comes  and  goes  with  sun :  headache.

Every  day  at  same  hour:  neuralgia.

Almost  daily:  headache.

On  fourth  day  of  diphtheria:  sudden  croupy  cough.

For  several  days,  after  exposure :  cough,  want  of  appetite.

Every  two  or  three  weeks:  after  slight  exposure  is  seized
with  chilliness  and  languor,  flushed  face,  headache,  hot
hands  for  half  a  day.

For  six  weeks:  dyspnoea  and  dry  cough.  *

Every  three  or  six  months:  constipation.

Fall  and  Spring:  alternately  gastric  symptoms  and  rheu-
matism.

For  many  months :  chronic  bronchitis.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  346

Every  year:  periodical  dysentery.

One  year  ago:  after  catching  cold,  cough.

Dines  at  6  p.m.,  and  in  about  three  hours  has  waterbrash.

Lasting  half  an  hour:  erections;  pricking  through  back.

Lasts  ten  hours:  pain  in  head.

Lasting  a  few  days:  papular  eruptions  on  forearms.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  beginning  in  supra-'
orbital  ridge,  spreading  over  one  side  of  head;  pain
round  eye  and  malar  bone;  loss  of  sight  of  eye;  acute
throbbing  in  centre  of  eyebrow;  pain  in  side  of  chest;
shooting  in  temple;  complete  pannus  of  eye;  eye  in-
flamed; an  old  cicatrix  upon  eye;  itching  of  ear  lobe;
mumps  on  side  of  lip;  on  blowing  nose  violent  stitches  in
side  of  nose;  watery  discharge  irom  nostril;  obstruction
and  bleeding  from  nostril;  violent  sticking  in  side  of
nose  on  blowing  it;  nostril  filled  with  hard  masses;
swelling  of  a  highly  vascular,  spongy  texture  in  nostril;
small  ulcer  on  edge  of  nostril;  spot  in  lachrymal  bone
swollen  and  throbbing;  small  tubercle  on  side  of  nose;
mumps;  gum  of  lower  jaw  very  much  swollen;  patch  on
tonsil;  pains  extending  to  car;  stitches  in  hypochon-
drium  ;  pain  in  hypochondriac  region  ;  aching  in  hypo-
chondrium;  pains  in  a  small  spot  in  hypochondrium ;

(  constant  dull  aching  in  hypochondriac  region;  pains
dart  through  lung  from  below  mamma  to  back  below
scapula;  aching  in  region  of  kidney;  dull  percussion
sound  over  upper  anterior  and  posterior  part  of  chest ;
weak,  rattling  murmur  in  apex  of  lung;  dull  pain  in
stitches  in  side  of  chest;  pain  in  hip  to  knee;  tearing
in  tibia;  red,  painful,  doughy  swelling  on  shin;  blister
full  of  serum  on  sole  of  foot;  blood  boil  on  thigh;  blood
boil  on  side  of  spine;  blisters  full  of  serum  on  sole  of
foot.

Left:  pain  in  temple  stretching  to  r.  temple;  pain  in  side
of  head  and  over  eye;  violent  pain  in  side  of  head,
zygomatic  process;  shooting  pain  along  orbital  arch;
eyeball  tender  when  rubbed;  partial  pannus  of  eye;
pricking,  stinging  pains  in  eye;  small,  white,  granular
pustules  on  cornea;  eye  greatly  injected;  shooting  pains
in  ear;  stitches  in  ear  and  parotid  gland;  violent
stitches  in  ear  extending  to  roof  of  mouth,  side  of  head
and  neck;  external  meatus  of  ear  swelled  and  inflamed;
•  tickling  high  up  in  nostril;  constant  discharge  of  thick,
yellow  matter  from  nostril ;  severe  pain  up  muscle  of
side  of  neck;  half  way  up  nostril  severe  smarting  pain ;
spongy  swelling  in  nostril;  shooting  pain  in  upper  max-
illary bone  towards  ear;  shooting  inward  in  malar  bone;


547  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

twanging  like  wires  in  face  and  neck;  sore  on  chest;
shooting  pain  in  tonsil;  uneasiness,  soreness  and  tender-
ness in  a  small  spot  towards  1.  of  ensiform  cartilage;
pain  in  hypochondrium;  acute  pains  darting  from  be-
hind hip,  down  on  outside  of  thigh ;  acute  pains  about
eye  and  side  of  forehead ;  smarting  feeling  in  side  of
throat;  weak,  rattling  murmur  in  apex  of  lung;  aching
down  side  into  hip;  pain  in  outer  side  of  sacrum;
stitches  at  lower  angle  of  shoulder  blade;  stinging  at
elbow;  pain  in  course  of  sciatic  nerve  ;  stitches  in  sciatic
nerve;  pains  running  from  hip  to  knee;  sensation  of
dislocations  in  ankle.

First  1.  then  r.  renal  region:  sharp,  shooting  pains.

Outward:  a  shooting  in  temples  and  over  eyes.
^  Sensations. H  Pains  in  small  spots,  which  can  be  covered
with  point  of  finger.

1 1  Pains  attack  first  one  part,  then  reappear  in  another.

■  Heavy  feeling  in  many  parts.

As  if  head  would  burst;  pressure  on  vertex  as  from  a
weight;  sensation  as  from  sand  in  eyes ;  as  if  nose  must
burst;  as  if  nose  was  swollen;  a  stiff  sensation  of  a  hard
substance  in  nose;  as  if  a  heavy  weight  was  hanging
from  nose;  as  if  nostrils  were  made  of  parchment;  as  if
two  loose  bones  were  rubbed  against  each  other ;  nose
feels  too  heavy;  tickling  as  from  a  hair  high  up  in  1.
nostril;  as  if  losing  her  reason  from  burning  sensation
in  face;  sensation  of  a  hair  on  back  part  of  tongue;
sensation  of  a  plug  in  throat;  as  if  acid  fluid  was
running  through  posterior  nares  over  palate;  as  if  some-
thing remained  in  throat  after  swallowing;  as  though
lungs  were  stuffed  with  cotton;  as  if  digestion  was
suspended ;  as  if  there  was  something  hard  all  down
oesophagus;  as  if  stomach  jerked  up;  as  if  something
was  eating  in  bowels;  sensation  of  plug  in  anus;  as
from  ulceration  in  larynx;  as  from  a  lump  in
throat;  feeling  of  swelling  in  larynx;  throat  as  if
lined  with  wash  leather;  cutting  as  from  knives  in
abdomen;  sensation  as  if  one  drop  of  urine  had  re-
mained behind;  pain  at  sternum  "like  pins  and
needles;"  as  if  a  lump  was  in  upper  part  of  trachea,
and  of  hairs  across  base  of  tongue;  like  a  heavy  load  on
chest;  as  if  mucous  membrane  of  bronchi  was  thick-
ened; pain  in  larynx  as  if  from  ulcer;  as  if  an  ulcer
was  in  chest;  irritation  as  from  foreign  body  in  throat;
as  from  a  knife  through  loins;  as  if  something  cracked
across  sacrum  when  stooping;  as  if  r.  arm  had  gone  to
sleep;  cicatrices  on  hands  look  as  if  they  had  been
punched  out  with  a  wadding  cutter;  bones  of  hands  as


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  348

if  bruised ;  as  if  tendons  of  muscles  of  calf  were  stretched ;
as  if  skull  on  vertex  became  contracted ;  stitches  in
bones  as  if  from  needles ;  pain  as  if  in  bone  of  foot.

Pain:  in  epigastrium;  in  forehead  over  one  eye;  begin-
ning in  r.  supraorbital  ridge,  spreading  over  one  side  of
head;  in  1.  temple;  across  forehead;  to  1. temple;  around
eye  and  malar  bone  of  r.  side;  in  1.  side  of  head  and
over  1.  eye;  in  r.  side  of  chest;  in  head  at  a  point;  in
forehead  and  vertex;  from  occiput  to  forehead;  from
ears  into  glands;  in  throat  when  putting  tongue  out;  in
side  of  head;  extending  from  throat  to  ear;  in  ear  ex-
tending to  swelled  parotid  gland  and  to  head;  in
stomach;  in  limbs;  across  middle  of  back;  in  eyeballs;
in  epigastrium  ;  in  both  hypochondria;  in  r.  hypochon-
driac region;  at  pit  of  stomach;  in  region  of  liver;  in
abdomen;  as  in  enteritis;  in  region  of  spleen;  acrofc>s
back;  in  coccyx  into  urethra;  at  sternum;  in  throat;
across  epigastrium;  in  larynx;  in  chest;  in  frontal
sinuses;  in  larynx  from  mid  sternum  through  to  back;
in  loins;  in  sides;  in  sacrum;  in  small  of  back;  across
loins;  in  os  coccygis;  in  coccyx;  in  course  of  1.  sciatic
nerve  from  behind  great  trochanter  to  calf;  from  hip  to
knee;  in  1.  hip;  in  r.  hip  to  knee;  in  tendons  of  muscles
of  calves;  in  middle  of  tibia;  in  forehead;  in  upper  part
of  abdomen.

Excruciating  pain:  in  small  of  back.

Intolerable  pain:  in  forearms  and  hands.

Excessive  pain :  in  eyes.

Violent  pain:  in  temples;  in  head;  in  1.  side  of  head  at
zygomatic  process;  from  occiput  to  forehead;  in  throat;
in  abdomen;  in  shin  bones;  from  patella  to  foot.

Severe  pain:  in  frontal  sinuses;  up  muscles  of  1,  side  of
neck  to  small  spot  on  side  of  head;  on  swallowing;
about  1.  eye  and  1.  side  of  forehead;  in  hip  and  down
outside  of  thigh  ;  in  limbs;  in  arms.

Great  pain:  in  nose  on  removal  of  elastic  plugs;  in  a  spot
on  wrist;  in  leg  when  he  stands.

Acute  throbbing  pain:  in  centre  of  r.  eyebrow.

Tearing  pain:  in  chest;  in  r.  tibia.

Constant  tearing  pain :  in  epigastrium.

Cutting:  in  abdomen;  at  navel ;  in  lower  extremities;  in
outer  1.  side  of  sacrum,  shooting  up  and  down.

Stabbing :  from  third  cervical  to  fifth  dorsal  vertebra.

Lancinations :  in  ear  ;  in  nose.

Darting  pains :  in  head ;  through  lungs ;  from  behind  1.
hip  on  outside  of  1.  thigh.

Violent  shooting  pain :  from  root  of  nose  along  1.  orbital
arch  to  external  angle  of  eye,  up  to  knee.


349  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

Sharp,  shooting,  stabbing  pains :  all  over  head.

Sharp,  shooting,  aching  pains :  in  sides  and  back,  first  1.

then  r.  renal  region,  extending  down  thighs.
Shooting  pain  :  over  eyebrow  ;  in  temples  ;  over  eyes ;  in-
ward towards  throat;  in  1.  upper  maxillary  bone;  in  1.
malar  bone ;  in  bone  over  eye ;  in  1,  tonsil ;  in  1.  ear ;
from  back  to  front ;  in  renal  region ;  from  kidneys
through  to  bowels.

Shootings : in  chest ;  thighs  and  knees ;  in  limbs.

Violent  stitches:  in  1.  ear,  extending  into  roof  of  mouth,
side  of  head  and  neck ;  in  r.  side  of  nose.

Sharp  stitches :  in  bones  of  head  ;  in  ulcers  on  tympanum  ;
in  r.  hypochondrium.

Stitches :  in  1.  ear  and  1.  parotid  gland ;  in  throat ;  in  epi-
gastrium and  breast  into  nipple ;  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;
in  region  of  liver ;  in  region  of  spleen ;  through  abdo-
men;  in  urethra;  in  prostate;  in  chest;  at  lower
angle  of  1.  shoulder  blade ;  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  in  1.  sciatic
nerve.

Violent  sticking :  in  r.  side  of  nose.

Sharp  pain  :  in  knee  and  hip  joint.

Pinching  pain  :  in  bridge  of  nose.

Digging :  in  rami  of  lower  jaw.

Constricting  pain  :  in  stomach  ;  in  hypochondria  ;  at  root
of  penis.

Stinging  pains :  in  eyes  ;  in  ulcers  on  tongue ;  in  tongue ;
in  1.  elbow;  in  temples;  in  skin;  in  one  temple;  from
external  meatus  into  internal  ear ;  in  region  of  kidneys.

Severe  smarting  pain  :  extending  to  malar  bone  below  eye.

Scraping  pain:  in  r.  shin.

Pricking  pains :  in  eyes ;  in  granular  pustules  on  1.  cornea ;
in  tongue;  in  tonsils  ;  through  to  back  ;  in  glans  penis ;
in  region  of  heart.

Burning  pain:  in  head  ;  on  upper  eyelid  ;  in  anus;  down
throat,  and  along  sternum ;  in  chest ;  in  sternum  ;  in
middle  of  forearm.

Violent  aching :  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  in  small  spot  in
sacrum.

Steady  throbbing  pain :  in  sacrum.

Ulcerative  pain  :  in  throat.

Pulsating  pains :  in  ears.

Jerking,  aching  pain :  in  1.  hip.

Aching  pain :  on  one  side  of  head ;  at  root  of  nose ;  in
forehead ;  in  sides  and  back ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;
down  1.  side  to  hip ;  in  legs ;  in  hip ;  in  calves ;  in  front
of  thighs  and  knees.

Flying  pains:  in  head  ;  to  all  parts.

Wandering  pain:  in  eyes;  from  hip  to  knee;  along  bones
without  localized  inflammatory  processes;  to  all  parts.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  350

Rheumatic  pains:  in  stomach;  in  back;  in  both  shoul-
ders; in  elbows  and  wrist  joints;  in  finger  joints;  in
hip  joints  and  knees;  in  limbs.

Raw  pain :  down  throat  and  along  sternum.

Pressive  pain:  in  root  of  nose.

Colicky  pains:  in  abdomen.

Gnawing:  at  epigastrium ;  in  stomach;  in  hypochondria;
about  navel;  in  r.  chin.

Cramps:  in  hands;  in  calves  and  inner  side  of  thigh.

Dull  aching:  in  r.  hypochondriac  region.

Throbbing,  dull,  heavy:  above  eyes;  distinct  and  rhyth-
mical with  pulse;  in  r.  lachrymal  bone.

Beating :  inside  of  root  of  nose.

Light  pain  :  across  lower  part  of  chest.

Semilateral  headache :  in  small  spots.

Gastric  pains  :  in  stomach.  .

Dull  pain :  in  hypochondrium  ;  around  navel ;  in  r.  side.

Dull,  heavy  pain :  in  hypogastrium.

Painful  pressure :  in  anus.

Drawing:  in  anus;  painful,  from  perineum  into  urethra.

Twanging  like  wires :  in  1.  face  and  neck.

Bruised  feeling :  in  bones.

Scratching :  in  throat.

Smarting:  of  affected  parts;  between  scapula;  in  1.  side
of  throat;  scabs  of  pustules  on  arms  and  legs;  on  mucous
surface  of  lips. •

Sticking  sensations  :  in  ear.

Soreness :  of  bones  of  head  ;  in  eyes ;  in  nose ;  of  gums ;
in  small  spot  towards  1.  of  ensiform  ;  in  anus;  at  stom-
ach ;  in  vagina ;  of  throat ;  of  larynx ;  of  chest ;  in  heels.

Rawness :  in  vagina.

Violent  burning:  in  small  ulcer  on  r.  nostril;  in  throat;
around  ankle.

Great  burning  heat :  of  upper  part  of  body.

Burning :  in  both  eyes ;  in  eyelids ;  of  nose ;  inside  of  root
of  nose;  of  septum;  in  face;  in  throat;  in  pharynx;
in  stomach;  in  hypochondria;  in  anus;  in  abdomen ;
in  glandular  part  of  urethra ;  in  fossa  navicularis ;  in
bulbous  portion  of  urethra;  about  vulva;  of  mucous
membrane  extending  up  into  nostrils ;  in  trachea  and
bronchi ;  in  shin  bones  and  up  legs ;  in  skin.
Heat:  in  eyes;  of  external  ears;  in  external  nose;  in  pit

of  stomach ;  in  urethra.
Painful  stiffness  :  of  r.  arm.
Dull,  heavy  pressure :  in  region  of  liver.
Constriction :  of  intestines.

Tightness:  about  heart;  at  bifurcation  of  the  bronchi;
of  chest.


351  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

Pressive  sensation :  at  root  of  nose ;  in  temples.

Stiffness :  of  larynx ;  of  nape  of  neck ;  of  shoulder  joint.

Stiff  sensation  :  in  walls  of  nose.

Lameness:  in  r.  arm;  of  hands.

Fulness :  in  stomach ;  at  chest.

Great  weight :  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  chest.

Pressure  :  on  vertex  ;  in  eyes ;  at  root  of  nose ;  in  stomach ;
in  anus ;  on  chest ;  in  sternum  ;  on  heart.

Heaviness :  of  head ;  of  upper  eyelids ;  in  stomach ;  on
chest ;  of  legs.

Oppression :  ot  chest.

Lightness :  in  head ;  across  forehead.

Confusion :  of  head.

Sensation  of  choking :  on  lying  down.

Dryness :. of  nose,  of  mouth  and  lips ;  in  throat ;  in  bronchi.

Velvety  feeling :  on  walls  of  nose.

Gaping,  fainty  feeling  :  with  headache.

Uneasiness :  in  stomach.

Sensation  of  dislocation :  in  1.  ankle.

Tickling:  high  up  in  1.  nostril;  in  throat;  in  larynx;  in
bronchial  bifurcation.

Violent  tickling  and  itching  :  in  ears.

Intense  burning  itching  like  fire :  of  eruption  over  body.

Violent  itching :  over  whole  surface  of  body.

Itching  pain  :  in  ethmoid  bone.

Itching :  of  affected  parts ;  of  eruptions  on  scalp  ;  of  lids ;
of  external  ears;  of  eruption  on  ears;  of  r.  ear  lobe;  of
scabs  on  face ;  of  pustules  on  face ;  in  hairy  parts  of
male  sexual  organs;  at  glans  penis ;  about  vulva;  be-
hind sternum  ;  of  forearms  and  hands;  in  a  spot  over
wrist;  of  chin.

Creeping :  of  affected  parts.

Inward  coldness  and  heat :  of  face.

Feeling  of  coldness :  in  stomach  and  bowels.

Cold  sensation  :  about  heart.
*^  Tissues. Emaciation;  anaemia;  general  cachexia,

I  Diphtheritic  formations  in  nose,  mouth,  fauces,  pharynx,
larynx,  trachea,  bronchi,  and  even  uterus  and  vagina.

I  Plastic  exudations.

i  I  Affections  of  any  mucous  membranes,  with  discharges
of  tough,  stringy,  adherent  mucus,  or  can  be  drawn  out
into  long  strings.

iCatarrh  alternating  with  rheumatic  pains.

■  Rheumatism  alternating  with  gastric  symptoms,  one  ap-

pearing in  the  Fall,  the  other  in  Spring.
I  Bones  feel  bruised;  caries.

■  Cracking  in  all  joints  from  least  motion,

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  nearly  all  joints.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  852

I  I  Bone  pains  with  stitches  as  if  from  sharp  needles.

■Syphilis.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  burning
pain  on  upper  eyelid ;  neck  painful ;  dorsum  of  nose
painful;  violent  burning  in  ulcer  on  nostril;  gum  on
r.  lower  jaw  tender ;  1.  ear  and  neck  painful ;  pain  in
hypochondriac  region  <  ;  pain  in  os  coccygis  <  ;  swell-
ing like  a  knot  painful.

Pressure:  hard,  >  throbbing  over  eyes;  headache  >;
pinching  pain  in  bridge  of  nose  >  ;  teeth  will  not  bear
slightest  pressure ;  stitches  in  region  of  spleen  <  ;  ab-
domen sensitive;  pains  in  sides  and  loins  >  ;  region
of  rectum  sensitive;  causes  pain  to  shoot  along  length
of  sciatic  nerve.

Cannot  bear  clothes  tight  over  chest  or  throat.

Must  undress  immediately  on  account  of  pain  in  r.  hypo-
chondrium.

Desire  to  rub  eyes.

Rubbing:  smarting  of  eyes  <.

After  an  abrasion  :  swelling  like  a  hurt.

From  a  blow  on  chin  :  periostitis.
^^  Skin. I  Burning  stinging  in  skin.

iSkin  hot,  dry  and  red.

■  Whole  of  lower  part  of  body,  from  a  little  below  navel

in  front  and  from  top  of  nates  behind,  down^  thighs  and
legs,  covered  with  a  smooth,  shining,  elevated,  bright
red  eruption,  giving  those  parts  appearance  of  boiled
lobster  shell;  skin  has  an  appearance  of  thickening  and
induration;  not  much  irritation  or  heat.

■  Heat  and  itching  of  skin  at  night,  when  warm  in  bed,

followed  by  reddish,  hard  knots,  from  size  of  pin's  head
to  that  of  a  split  pea;  centre  depressed,  with  a  dark
scurf,  surrounded  by  an  inflamed  base.

■  Dry  eruption  like  measles.

■  Upon  development  of  eruption,  hoarse,  croupy,  distress-

ing cough;  nose  sore,  small  ulcers  in  nostrils,  and  dis-
charge tough,  thick,  viscid,  stiff;  expectoration  stringy
and  tough,  and  detached  with  great  difficulty.
^Measles.
I  Papular  eruption,  began  as  a  spot  on  calf  of  leg  and  spread
all  over  body ;  large  papular  elevations,  red  and  irregu-
lar, like  measles,  but  more  raised,  with  intense  and  ex-
cessive burning  itching  like  fire,  especially  at  night,
compelling  her  to  walk  about  room  whole  night;  gen-
eral debility;  gnawing  and  pain  at  epigastrium,  and
sensation  of  internal  "itching  there,  >  taking  food;
bowels  open ;  urine  hot  and  high  colored,  and  at  times
scanty;  catamenia  regular.


353  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

I  Violent  itching  of  whole  surface; then  small  pustules

form,  mostly  on  arms  and  legs;  scabs  smart,  pain  and

burn;  <  in  hot,  >  in  cold  weather.
iSmall  pustules  over  body  like  small  pox;  they  disappear

without  bursting ;  mostly  on  face  and  arms.
Pustules  over  whole  body,  appearing  on  inflamed  parts  of

skin,  as large  as  a  pea,  with  a  small black  scab  iji

middle.

■  Eruption  all  over  body,  beginning  as  a  small  lump  on

skin,  which  inflames  and  gets  red,  and  finally  discharges
a  bloody  fluid,  and  leaves  a  small,  depressed,  ulcerative
surface  with  an  inflamed  base,  which  heals  and  breaks
out  again;  wherever  discharge  touhes  it  causes  a  fresh
spot;  violent  itching  at  night. ^Pustular  eruption.

I  Small  pustules  on  roots  of  nails,  spreading  over  hands  to
wrists;  arm  red,  axillary  glands  suppurate;  small  pus-
tules on  hands  secrete  a  watery  fluid  when  broken  ;  if
not  touched,  fluid  thickens  into  a  yellow,  tough  mass.

I  Boil-like  elevation  which  turned  into  a  large  ulcer,  with
hard  centre  and  overhanging  edges.

1  Blood  boil  on  r.  thigh;  r.  side  of  spine,  near  last  rib;
painfal  on  least  motion.

Vesicular  eruptions.

■  Blisters  full  of  serum  on  sole  of  r.  foot.

Herpes  after  taking  cold,  with  fluent  coryza  and  bronchial
irritation.

■Scabs  on  fingers,  or  corona  glandis;  deep,  stinging  cica-
trices on  hands.

■  Brown  spots  like  freckles  on  throat.
■Suppurating  tetter  (ecthyma.)

■  Pustular  syphiloderma.

■  Impetigo,  pustules.

■  Zona.

■  Lupus,  chronic  form,  with  burning  and  itching.

■  The  eruption  begins  in  hot  weather.

After  an  abrasion,  swelling  like  a  knot,  forming  an  irreg-
ular ulcer,  covered  with  a  dry  scab  and  painful  to
touch;  under  skin,  hard,  movable  knot,  like  a  corn,  with
small,  ulcerated  spot  in  middle,  where  it  touches  the
cuticle;  the  hard,  knotty  feel  remains  after  the  healed
ulcer  is  covered  with  white  skin.

■  ■Ulcers: deep yellow, dry, oval; edges overhanging,

bright  red  areola;  base  hard,  corroding;  becoming
deeper;  blackish  spot  in  centre;  cicatrix  remains  de-
pressed; deep  as  if  cut  out  with  a  punch,  edges  regular.

■  Syphilitic  ulcers,  deep  with  hard  edges,  on  genitals,  in

throat,  uvula,  septum  of  nose,  etc.
I  I  Ulcers  painful  in  cold  weather.

VOL.  VI.— 23.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  354

■Suppurating,  solitary  skin  tubercles,  forming  deep  holes.

■  Head  and  scalp  covered  with  dry,  red,  scaly  patches  at
roots  of  hair,  and  bringing  out  hair;  much  itching  at
night,  but  no  moisture  or  pain ;  on  face  and  body  brown
flat  spots  and  papulae;  cervical  glands  behind  ears
swollen  and  painful;  violent  pains  from  patella  to  foot,
of  a  "linking"  character,  and  as  if  in  the  bone;  pains  <
in  bed  and  on  lying  down;  at  night  must  get  up  and
walk  about  most  of  the  time;  at  times  much  swelling
along  tibia;  leg  feels  swelled  and  doughy  along  the
bones;  throat  sore  on  swallowing,  especially  at  night,
and  is  red  but  not  ulcerated ;  several  flat,  elevated  ulcer-
ations on  tongue,  and  one  large  patch  in  centre;  voice
hoarse;  constipation;  nausea  after  meals;  flushes  of
heat  and  perspiration ;  catamenia  regular  but  painful.
^Eruption  and  periostitis,  probably  syphilitic.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution,  i  iFat,  light  haired  persons,
who  suffer  from  catarrhal,  syphilitic,  or  scrofulous  affec-
tions.

llFat,  chubby,  short  necked,  children,  disposed  to  croup-
ous inflammations.

Persons  of  florid  complexion,  of  a  blotchy,  red  appearance
and  thick  skin.

■  Dyspeptic  beer  drinkers.

■Suited  to  persons  subject  to  catarrhs  of  mucous  surfaces.

Boy,  eet.  5  months;  constipation.

Child,  get.  5  months,  strumous  constitution,  ailing  three
months;  eruption  on  head.

Boy,  set.  10  months,  bright,  vivacious,  light  complexioned;
membranous  croup.

Child,  set.  11  months;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  18  months;  eruption  on  body.

Child,  set.  1|;  six  months  ago  had  whooping  cough,  since
then  suffering;  cough.

Boy,  set.  2;  scrofulous  conjunctivitis.

Boy,  set.  2^,  suff'ering  nine  months;  hoarseness.

Boy,  set.  3,  good  constitution;  bronchitis.

Girl,  set.  3;  membranous  croup.

Child,  set.  3;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  4;  scrofulous  conjunctivitis.

Child,  set.  4 ;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  4,  fair  complexion;  diphtheritic  croup.

Girl,  set.  4,  light  complexion,  flaxen  hair;  membranous
croup.

Boy,  set.  4,  sanguine  temperament;  chronic  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  5;  diphtheritic  croup.

Girl,  set.  5,  fair  haired,  had  whooping  cough,  after  which
she  caught  cold;  gastro-intestinal  irritation.


355  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

Girl,  aet.  5;  pustular  eruption.

Boy,  get.  6,  suffering  two  days;  catarrhal  ophthalmia.
Boy,  8et.  6;  scrofulous  conjunctivitis.
Child,  set.  6;  diphtheria.

Girl,  £et.  7,  affected  most  of  her  life;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.
Boy,  set.  7,  lymphatic,  pale  complexion,  sanguine  tempera-
ment; eruption.
Girl,  £et.  8,  had  whooping  cough  four  years  ago,  since  then

ill;  recurring  bronchial  attacks.
Boy,  ait.  8,  stout,  large  head,  after  a  burn;  dysentery.
Girl,  set.  8|;  scrofulous  conjunctivitis.
Boy,  set.  9;  scrofulous  conjunctivitis.
Child,  set.  10;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  10,  ill  six  weeks;  eczema.
Girl,  set.  11,  ill  two  months;  vomiting.
Girl,  set.  12,  had  croup  six  years  ago,  since  which  she  has

been  suffering ;  hoarseness;  cough.
Girl,  ait.  13,  suffering  a  month;  scrofulous  ophthalmia  and

ulceration  of  cornea.
Girl,  set.  13 ;  sore  throat.
Girl,  set.  13;  croup.

Girl,  set.  14,  not  yet  menstruated;  affection  of  stomach.
Boy,  set.  14,  lymphatic,  nervous  temperament,  fair  hair,

light  eyes;  pustular  eruption.
Girl,  set.  15,  suffering  for  a  year;  catarrh  of  nose.
Young  lady,  «t.  17,  just  returned  from  India;  pain  in  r.

hypochondrium.
Girl,  set.  17,  caught  cold  one  year  ago,  since  which  she  has

been  suffering;  bronchitis.
Young  girl,  suffering  several  months,  operation  unsuccess-
ful; nasal  polypus
Girl,  sanguine,  lymphatic  temperament,  for  six  years  after

diphtheritis;  pains  in  limbs.
Lady,  set.  22;  pain  in  hypochondriac  region.
Man,  set.  22,  had  syphilis  two  years  ago;  ulcers  on  leg.
Woman,  set.  22;  syphilis.
Man,  ait.  24,  has  gastric  and  rheumatic  troubles;  pain  in

back.
Young  man,  blonde;  gastric  derangement.
Young  tenor  singer,  after  catching  cold ;  laryngitis
Man,  set.  24,  healthy,  suddenly  seized  with  violent  pain  in
temples  a  month ago,  since  which he has suffered;
headache.
Officer,  set.  24,  strong,  plethoric  constitution,  choleric  tem-
perament, 15  months  ago  had  chancre ;  syphilis.
Young  woman,  mother  of  two  children;  ulcerated  sore

throat.
Woman delicate,  married  five  years;  eruption  and  perios-
titis.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  356

Woman,  set.  25,  unmarried,  suffering  for  three  months ;
stomacace.

Lady,  set.  25,  strumous  constitution,  suffering  many  years;
lung  fever.

Man,  set,  26 ;  chronic  bronchitis.

Woman,  set.  26,  blonde,  small  figure,  steel  grey  eyes,  oxy-
genoid  constitution;  gracile,  but  not  phthisicky  habit;
excessively  nervous,  anxiety  at  least  ailment;  irritability
and  tendency  to  spasm,  and  of  tearful  disposition ;
catches  cold  easily  and  then  coryza  and  cough  are  trou-
blesome for  a  longtime;  suffered  from  acute  gastric  and
intestinal  catarrh,  for  which  she  took  very  large  doses
of  nitrate  of  silver;  consumption.

Woman,  set.  27,  married ;  migraine.

Man,  set.  27;  trachoma  with  pannus.

Woman,  set.  28;  ulcer.

Man,  set.  28;  pustular  eruption.

Woman,  set.  30,  had  syphilis  eleven  years  ago,  and  was
treated  with  mercur^'^,  had  one  stillborn  child ;  syphi-
litic sore  throat.

Irishman,  set.  30,  strong  and  hearty,  during  day  is  able  to
work  and  enjoys  his  breakfast  and  lunch;  affection  of
stomach.

Man,  set.  30,  after  being  exposed  to  cold  some  months  be-
fore; affection  of  kidneys.

Lady,  set.  30,  unmarried,  suffering  for  years;  affection
of  fauces  and  larynx.

Woman,  set.  30,  since  confinement  three  months  ago;
cough.

Mrs. ,  set.  30,  delicate,  subject  to  perspirations;  papu-
lar eruption.

Man,  set.  32 ;  supraorbital  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  32,  suffering  three  years;  pain  in  r.  side.

Mrs.  D.,  set.  32,  phthisical  habit,  lymphatic  temperament;
convalescent  from  mild  attack  of  gastric  fever;  pain  in
tibia.

Woman,  set.  33,  had  syphilis  several  years  ago ;  affection
of  nose  and  throat.

Woman,  set.  35,  married,  fair  hair,  stout;  suffering  daily  for
about  ten  days ;  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Policeman,  set.  35,  suffering  for  one  month ;  sciatica.

Maid  servant,  set.  36,  suffering  three  years;  eczema  of
scalp.

Woman,  set.  36,  suffering  two  months;  affection  of  larynx.

Woman,  set.  37,  ill  seven  weeks;  gastric  disorder.

Woman,  set.  38,  suffering  six  months,  headache.

Man,  set.  38,  spare,  blonde,  father  of  four  healthy  children,
four  years  ago  had  syphilis  and  was  subjected  to  severe
mercurial  treatment;  coryza  with  loss  of  taste  and  smell.


557  KALI  BICHROMICUM.

Man,  set.  39,  suffering  IS  months;  dyspepsia.

Woman,  set.  39,  general  health  impaired,  feeble  frame;
ulcer  on  leg.

Man,  set.  40;  boils  on  head.

Man,  set.  40,  in  bad, health  for  two  years,  has  had  rheu-
matic gout  and  rheumatic  iritis;  inflammation  of  eyes.

Lady,  set.  40,  fat,  fair,  of  florid  complexion,  uses  beer  at
meals,  and  whiskey  in  evening,  suffers  from  enlarged
liver  and  jaundice;  dyspepsia.

Middle  aged  woman,  suffering  for  four  years;  gastric
affection.

Man,  tall,  spare  frame,  suffering  for  eight  years;  sciatica.

Florid,  red  haired  woman,  husband  had  syphilis  before
marriage;  five  years  ago,  had  sore  throat  and  ulcer  on
lips,  first  two  children  premature  and  stillborn,  remain-
ing two  delicate,  now  nursing  for  last  six  months;  syph-
ilitic periostitis.

Woman,  set.  44,  suffering  for  a  fortnight;  supraorbital
neuralgia.

Lady,  set.  44,  stout,  florid  countenance,  subject  to  chronic
coughs ;  acute  bronchial  catarrh.

Man,  set.  45;  laryngitis.

Mrs. ,  set.  45,  nervoas  temperament;  chronic  inflam-
mation of  larynx  and  trachea.

Man,  set.  45;  chronic  bronchitis.

Man,  set.  45;  cough.

Woman,  set.  46,  suffering  one  month;  headache.

Man,  set.  46,  suffering  seven  years ;  pustular  eruptions.

Man,  set.  48;  chronic  bronchitis.

Man,  set.  48 ;  pustular  eruption.

Man,  set.  50,  operated  upon  three  times  within  last  23
3^ears;  nasal  polypus.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  50,  subject  to  colds  in  head,  and  determina-
tion of  blood  to  head,  catamenia  ceased  about  two  years
ago,  after  influenza  two  years  previously ;  chronic  ca-
tarrh of  nose.

Man,  set.  50,  stout,  red  faced,  suffering  many  months,  had
been  treated  with  caustics  and  counter  irritants;  en-
larged tonsils  with  deafness.

Woman,  set.  50,  delicate;  laryngitis.

Man,  set.  50,  rheumatic;  general  pains.

Man,  set.  50,  after  a  "blow;  periostitis.

Man,  set.  50;  affection  of  kidneys.

Lady,  set.  52;  polypus  of  conjunctiva

Man,  set.  55,  major;  chronic  inflammation  of  larynx  and
trachea,

Man,  set.  55;  chronic  bronchitis.

Woman,  set.  60,  weak,  rheumatic,  for  several  weeks  has


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  358

been  suffering  from  sudden  and  profuse  discharges  of
clear,  watery  fluid  from  nose  which  suddenly  ceased ;
affection  of  oesophagus.

Man,  set.  60,  fell  and  hurt  leg  16  years  ago;  periostitis.

Mrs. ,  set.  60,  subject  to  attacks  of  dyspepsia  and  sick

headache;  lupus.

Man,  set.  62;  chronic  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  64,  had  S3'^philis  40  years  ago,  but  no  symptoms
of  it  during  intermediate  time,  for  last  ten  years;  sore
on  cheek.

Woman,  set.  65;  cough.

Man,  set.  67;  bronchitis.

Man,  set.  69;  chronic  bronchitis.

Man,  set.  82,  lived  for  thirty  years  in  India,  liad  fever,
dysentery,  bronchitis;  bowels  generally  loose,  habitual
snuff  taker;  malignant  ulceration  of  nose.
*^  Kelations. Antidoted  by:  Arsen.,  Laches,  (croup,  diphtheria,
etc.),  Pulsat.  (wandering  pains).

It  antidotes:  effects  of  beer;  effects  of  arsenical  vapors;
Mercur.,  Merc.jod.

Compatible:  after  Canthar.  in  dysentery;  after  lodum  in
croup,  when  hoarse  cough,  with  tough  membrane,  gen-
eral weakness  and  coldness  are  present ;  Ant  tart,  fol-
lows well  in  catarrhal  affections  and  skin  diseases.

Compare:  Bromium  in  croup;  Cannab.  in  orbital  pains;
Hepar  in  croup,  ulcers,  etc.;  Kali  jod.  in  syphilitic  affec-
tions after  mercury;  Mezer.  in  bone  diseases;  Nitr.  ac.  in
syphilis;  Phytol.  in  syphilitic  bone  affections;  Spongia
in  croup;  Silica  in  bone  affections.


359  KALI  BEOMATUM,


KALI  BROMATUM.

Potassium  Bromide.  K.  Br.

For  general  effects  and  experiments  with  the  crude  drug,  see  Allen's  Ency-
clopedia, vol.  5,  p.  264.

We  need  provings,  particularly  with  the  higher  potencies,  to  bring  out  the
finer  characteristics  of  the  drug.

Clinical  Authorities. — Melancholy  and  loss  of  memory ;  Affection  of  mind  at
climacteric  period,  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  520 ;  Incipient  basilar  menin-
gitis, Hale's  Sympt.,  p.  117;  Diphtheria,  Noack,  (Ehme's  Therap.,  p.  44;  Diabetes
mellitus  (2  cases),  Begbie,  Hale's  Therap.,  Cholera  infantum  (157  cases  reported
cured),  Caro.,  Hale's  Therap. ;  Polypus  of  rectum,  Helmuth,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  745 ;
Nymphxymania,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  212;  Ovarian  e7ilargement,  Hughes,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  793 ;  Ovarian  cyst,  Black,  Trans.  World's  Horn.  Con.,  1876,  p.
763;  Eaue's  Kec,  1870,  p.  244;  Menstrual  disorders,  Cowley,  Trans.  H.  M.  S.
Pa.,  1876,  p.  439 ;  Puerperal  eclampsia,  Woodbury,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  193 ;
Capillary  bronchitis,  Blakelock,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  11 ;  Epilepsy,  menstrual  or  hys-
terical (15  cases),  Locock,  N.  A.J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  210;  Epilepsy,  Cook,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  24,  p.  330;  (3  cases),  Hubbell,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p.  94;  (3  cases),  Neidhard,
Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1881,  p.  354.

^  Mind. Unconscious  of  what  is  occurring  around  them ;  can-
not recognize,  nor  be  comforted  by  their  friends.
iLoss  of  memory.

I  Memory  absolutely  destroyed  ;  anaemia ;  emaciation.

■  Loss  of  memory,  despondency,  inability  to  concentrate

mind  on  any  object;  constant  worry,  fears  to  see  people
or  to  be  spoken  to;  vertigo,  with  falling,  <  from  stoop-
ing; failure  of  mental  and  bodily  strength ;  pricking
sensation  all  over  body,  palpitation;  constantly  busy,
tying  his  shoes,  fumbling  in  his  pockets,  picking  threads,
etc. ^Mental  derangement.

■  Loss  of  memory,  forgets  how  to  talk,  absentmindedness.

I I  Loss  of  memory; had  to  be  told  the  word  before  he
could  speak  it. 6/ Amnesic  aphasia.

■Single  words  forgotten;  syllables  are  dropped.

I  Inability  to  express  oneself

I  I  Mentally  dull,  torpid;  perception  slow,  answers  slowly.

■  Imagines  he  is  singled  out  as  an  object  of  divine  wrath;

extreme  drowsiness.
Imagines  she  is  a  devil;  cannot  sleep;  fears  to  be  alone.
I  I  Positive  delusions  of  various  kinds.
I  I  Delusions  during  and  after  delirium  tremens.


KALI  BROMATUM.  860

III!  first  stage  with  horrid  iUusions,  flushed  face,  red  63^68,

and  hard  and  quick  pulse. ^Delirium  tremens.
I  I  Frightful imaginings at night  (in pregnant  women

during  latter  months),  they  are  under  impression  that

they  have  committed,  or  about  to  commit,  some  great

crime  and  cruelty,  such  as  murdering  their  children  or

husbands.
Hallucinations  of  sight  and  sound,  with  or  without  mania,

precede  brain  and  paralytic  symptoms.
I  Delirium,  with  delusions;  thinks  he  is  pursued ;  will  be

poisoned;  is  selected  for  divine  vengeance; that her

child  is  dead,  etc.
I  Delirium  tremens,  in  first  or  irritative  stage ;  face  flushed  ;

eyes  red ;  delirium  active;  horrid  illusions ;  hard,  quick

pulse.
■Puerperal  mania.
1  I  Acute  mania,  with  fulness  of  bloodvessels  of  brain.

■  Insanity;  manner  excited,  rambling.

■  Feels  as  if  he  would  go  out  of  his  mind.

■She  is  very  fretful,  crying  at  trifles,  constantly  brooding
over  loss  of  a  daughter ;  almost  crazy ;  from  fretting,
loss  of  rest  and  want  of  nourishment,  is  seized  with  ner-
vous dysentery.

■  ■Hands  constantly  busy ;  all  sorts  of  fearful  delusions;

walks  the  room  groaning,  bemoaning  his  fate;  full  of
fear;  unsteady.

■  ■Fits  of  uncontrollable  weeping  and profound  melan-

cholic delusions.

■  Feeling  of  lightness  and  exhilaration  in  place  of  heavi-

ness and  depression.

■  ■Depressed;  lowspirited;  has  nervous  anxiety.
■Remarkably  depressed,  well  marked  amnesic  aphasia.

■  Deep  depression,  with  painful  delusions,  with  persistent

sleeplessness,  and  dread  of  impending  destruction  of  all
near  to  her.
^ M  Great  despondency;  "feel  as  if  they  should  go  out  of
their  minds."

■  Profound melancholic  depression,  with  religious  delu-

sions and  feeling  of  moral  deficiency;  frequent  shedding
of  tears,  lowspirited  and  childish,  giving  way  to  her
feelings;  profound  indifference  and  almost  disgust  for
life. ^Melancholia.

■Profound  melancholy,  from  anaemia.

I  I  Great  despondency,  with  insanity,  a  feeling  of  moral  de-
ficiency, or  a  religious  delusion,  from  ansemia.

■Melancholy,  with  delusions;  often  childish;  fits  of  uncon-
trollable weeping.

■  B  Night  terrors  of  children  (not  from  indigestion),  with


361  KALI  BROMATUM.

screaming,  unconsciousness  of  what  is  occurring  around
them ;  cannot  recognize,  nor  be  comforted  by  their
friends; sometimes  followed  by  squinting.

■  Apathetic,  indifferent.

I  I  Timid,  suspicious,  full  of  fear.

I  Much  concerned  about  health ;  complains  without  cause;
restless  and  trembling  in  evening;  lowspirited,  with
great  and  uncontrollable  sensation  of  fear  and  anxiety ;
thinks  she  is  becoming  deranged ;  change  of  life,

■So  sensitive  and  irritable  of  mind  she  cannot  give  her
music  lessons;  very  thought  of  piano  breaks  her  down,
makes  her  shake  all  over,  and  then  cry  with  fear  and
apprehension  that  she  is  losing  her  mind ;  cries  easily ;
so  easily  confused  that  she  cannot  say  what  she  wishes
to;  least  thing  worries  her;  makes  her  utterly  miserable
to  be  looked  at  or  spoken  to ;  fears  to  see  people ;  always
depressed  and  lowspirited;  memory  weak  and  unreli-
able. ^Melancholia.

■  Overtaxed  brain.

^  Sensorium.  l Congestive  paralysis  approaching  apoplexy;
lay  unconscious  for  twenty-four  hours ;  flushed  face ;
feeble  pulse,  contracted  and  non-reacting  pupils ;  fol-
lowed by  vertigo  and- mental  weakness.

I  I  Heaviness,  confusion  ;  slow  speech,  staggers  as  if  drunk.

I  I  Dizziness,  noises  in  ear ;  nervous  excitement ;  sleepless.

■  Vertigo: palpitation, nausea, even unconsciousness;

memory  growing  weak ;  as  if  ground  gave  away ;  stag-
gering gait;  confusion  and  heat  of  head,  drowsiness,
stupor ;  fainting  and  nausea  followed  by  sound  sleep.

■  Confusion  of  head.

^  Inner  Head.  ■Migraine,  with  flushed  face,  throbbing  tem-
ples, injected  conjunctiva,  photophobia  and  much  con-
gestion of  brain.

■  Constrictive  sensation  in  brain  as  if  too  tight,  with  a

feeling  of  anaesthesia  of  brain.
I  I  Headache  in  r.  frontal  protuberance ;  sleepy.

■  Severe,  throbbing  aching  pains  in  occipital  region,  extend-

ing down  as  far  as  dorsal  region ;  cannot  sit  up  or  walk,
or  shake  head  without  feeling  <  ;  great  weakness  and
depression  of  mind.

■  Violent  headache,  particularly  in  occiput.

■  Brain  irritated,  face  flushed,  pupils  dilated,  eyes  sunken;

rolls  head;  awakes  now  and  then  screaming;  extremi-
ties cold. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Reflex  cerebral  irritation,  with  active  congestion  in  chil-

dren during  teething,  cholera  infantum,  or  scarlet  fever;
first  stage  of  hydrocephaloid  from  cholera  infantum.
I  I  Flushed  face,  throbbing  of  carotids  and  temporals,  suf-
fusion of  eyes ;  feeling  of  fulness  of  head.


KALI  BROMATUM.  8G2

■Headache,  with  dizziness;  staggering  as  if  intoxicated  ;
stupefaction ;  sopor ;  muscular  weakness ;  anaesthesia  of
pharynx  and  velum  palati  and  external  skin ;  sight
weakened  and  hearing  impaired  ;  gastralgia;  vomiting;
colic;  constipation. ^Alcoholism.

■  Active  congestion,  or  first  stage  of  inflammation,  before

effusion  has  occurred.

I  Acute  congestions  or  inflammatory  diseases  of  brain.

I  Incipient  basilar  meningitis  ;  severe  headache,  nearly  all
the  time,  <  at  night;  would  play  a  few  minutes,  then
lay  head  down  on  chair  or  other  support  and  cry  with
headache;  weak,  emaciated,  dull,  heavy  eyed;  no  ap-
petite; sleep  disturbed  by  groans,  grinding  of  teeth,
starting  up  frightened ;  terrible  headache ;  tongue  clean ;
pulse  90  to  100,  quick  and  wiry ;  constipation;  scanty
urine ;  too  much  heat  about  head.

I  I  Anaemia  of  brain  from  loss  of  fluids ;  constant  drowsi-
ness; coma;  pupils  dilated,  eyes  sunken,  eyeballs  mov-
ing in  every  direction  without  taking  any  notice;  feet
and  hands  blue  and  cold ;  pulse  imperceptible.  ^Hy-
drocephalus.

I  I  Bad  results  from  overtaxing  brain  ;  especially  with  grief
or  anxiety ;  nervousness.

I  I  Violent  headache,  from  concussion  of  brain.

I  I  Mercurial  headache.
*  Outer  Head. Drooping  of  head ;  cannot  hold  it  erect.

I  I  Scalp  feels  tight,  brain  numb,  confused ;  difficult  walking.
'^  Sight  and  Eyes. I Vision  dim,  pupils  dilated;  with  heavy
lids  and  invincible  drowsiness.

lEyes  sunken,  lustreless;  gaze  fixed.

I  I  Eyeballs  moving  in  every  direction.

I  I  Dilated  pupils  and  sunken  eyes. ^Cholera  infantum.

I  I  Pupils  dilated,  contract  sluggishly,  vertigo  and  con-
fusion of  head ;  pupils  contracted.

I  Vessels  of  fundus  enlarged  ;  conjunctivae  congested.

■  Eyes  suffused.

■  Squinting;  after  night  terrors  of  children.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. 1 1  Ringing  in  ears.

■  Roaring  in  ears  at  night  synchronous  with  pulse.
■Sounds  echo  in  ears;  headache.

■  Hardness  of  hearing.

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Smell  impaired.

■  Thick  mucus  and  yellow  scabs  in  nostrils.
I  I  Erythematous  swelling  of  nose.

^  Upper  Face.  Expression:  pale,  but  otherwise  appeared  as
one  drunk,  with  hallucinations,  etc.;  wearied,  anxious;
dull,  stupefied;  imbecile.

■  Expressionless  face;  incipient  softening  of  brain.


363  KALI  BROMATUM.

I  Complexion  yellow,  cachectic.
I  Face  flashed.

I  Acne  on  face  in  young  fleshy  people  of  gross  habits.
I  I  Papular  rash.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums, l  '  Odontitis  in  children.
I  I  Difiicult  dentition  of  children.

■  Vomiting  and  diarrhoea  of  teething  children.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  foul;  salty;  lost.

I  Difficult  speech;  action  of  tongue  disordered;  slow  and

difficult  after  waking;  stammering.
Tongue:  red,  dry,  enlarged; red,  later  dry  and  brown;

white,  with  languor  and  sleepiness ;  pale  and  cold.
I  I  White  tongue. ^Dyspepsia.

I  I  Tongue  red  and  tender;  gums  spongy. ^Diabetes.
'^  Inner  Mouth. "Fetid  breath;  a  peculiar  sickening  odor;

tongue  white.
B  Saliva  profuse,  with  fetid  breath.
1  I  Suppressed  salivation  in  teething  children.
'^  Throat. ■  Aneesthesia  of  mouth,  throat  and  pharynx ;  chronic

alcoholism.

■  Dysphagia  of  liquids  (in  infants);  can  swallow  only  solids.
I  Uvula  and  fauces  congested,  then  oedematous.
■Dryness  of  throat.

■  Face  very  red,  throat  swollen;  pulse  150;  impossible  to

move  head;  submaxillary  glands  swollen  and  painful,
especially  on  r.  side;  tonsils  swollen  and  purple;  very
thick  exudate,  covering  tonsils  and  uvula;  distinct,
crooked  line  of  demarcation  between  healthy  and  affected
part;  mouth  dry,  hot;  anxiety ;  excitement  alternating
with  comatose  somnolence. 6'Diphtheria.

■  Diphtheritis  with  quick  pulse;  fever;  dry  tongue;  offen-

sive breath; highly  injected  and dusky red fauces;
patches  of  wash  leather  exudation  on  tonsils  or  pharynx.
''  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Loss  of  appetite;
tongue  white;  languor.

■  Thirst  intense  with  dry  mouth.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. '  i  Children,  from  time  of  birth,  can
swallow  solids  with  ease,  yet  choke  every  time  they  try
to  drink.
I  I  Troublesome  pressure  at  stomach  after  dinner ;  lassitude.

''  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ' '  Repeated
retching  and  emesis;  sick  and  giddy.

■  Hysterical  women  who  vomit  their  food  after  each  meal,

especially  if  subjected  to  exciting  emotions.
■Vomiting:  with  intense  thirst;  when  ganglionic  system
is  affected;  of  drunkards  after  a  debauch;  in  whoopmg
cough;  of  meconium.

■  Chronic  morning  vomiting  of  drunkards.


KALI  BROMATUM.  8G4

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  1 1  Weakness  of  stomach;  dys-
pepsia.

■  Anorexia,  foul  breath,  white  tongue,  involving  edges  as

well  as  dorsum,  and  not  necessarily  furred;  great  lan-
guor; violent  headache;  loathing;  vomiturition  or  vom-
iting of  mucus;  saltish  taste  in  mouth;  vomiting  of
drunkards  after  debauch;  troublesome  pressure  at  stom-
ach after  dinner.
^^  Hypochondria. '  i  Enlargement  of  liver  and  spleen.

1  I  Small  tumor  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen, l  Sensation  as  if  bowels  were  falling  out.

I  Internal  coldness  of  abdomen.

1  I  Abdomen  sunken,  almost  stuck  to  vertebral  column.
^Cholera  infantum.

■Abdominal  spasms,  walls  retracted,  convulsive  motions
of  eyes  and  limbs ;  frequent,  green,  watery  stools.  ^Sum-
mer complaint.

I  I  Colic  in  young  children;  walls  of  belly  are  retracted
and  hard,  while  intestines  can  be  seen  at  one  spot  con-
tracted into  a  hard  lump,  of  size  of  a  small  orange,  and
contraction  can  be  seen  through  abdominal  wall  to
travel  from  one  part  of  intestines  to  another;  attacks
frequent  and  excruciating,  unconnected  with  diarrhoea
or  constipation,  but  often  associated  with  an  aphthous
condition  of  mouth.

■  Periodic  colic  in  infants,  occurring  about  5  p.m.

■  Flatulent  colic  in  children  and  hysterical  women.
I  I  Ascites  of  hepatic  or  splenic  origin.

"^^  Stool  and  Rectum,  l  l  Painless  diarrhoea,  with  great  chilli-
ness, even  in  a  hot  room;  fifteen  or  twenty  passages  in
twenty-four  hours;  burning  in  chest;  internal  coldness
of  abdomen;  pulse  frequent  and  weak;  urine  scanty,
dribbling  of  a  few  drops  in  beginning;  at  every  stool,
sensation  as  if  bowels  were  falling  out;  restless  and  shaky
as  if  from  palsy.

■  Stools:  watery  (like  rice  water) ;  painless.

■  Frequent,  green,  watery  discharges,  with  violent  abdomi-

nal spasms,  during  which  abdomen  gets  hard ;  thrush
in  mouth;  convulsive  motions  of  eyes  and  limbs.
I  I  Bloody  muco-purillent  diarrhoea,  with  intense  thirst,
vomiting,  eyes  sunken,  pupils  dilated,  skin  corrugated
and  spotted  blue,  body  cold,  tongue  red  and  dry,  pulse
imperceptible,  urine  suppressed.

■  Cerebral  irritation  during  cholera  infantum  ;  pupils  di-

lated, eyes  sunken,  eyeballs  moving  in  every  direction
without  taking  any  notice;  feet  and  hands  blue  and
cold;  pulse  imperceptible.

■  Cholera  infantum,  with  reflex  cerebral  irritation  of  brain,

before  eff'usion.


365  KALI  BROMATUM.

i  Cholera  infantum,  sudden  in  onset,  attended  by  great
prostration,  cold  hands  and  feet,  hot  head,  dilated  pupils,
rolling  of  eyes  and  head,  starts,  jactitation,  spasms,
watery,  very  offensive  stools,  vomiting  of  all  drinks  and
intense  thirst ;  nervous  and  vascular  excitement.

I  I  Great  prostration,  coldness  of  surface  and  symptoms  of
hydrocephaloid. ^Cholera  infantum.

I  I  Asiatic  cholera,  first  stage,  vomiting,  cramps,  rice  water
discharges;  restores  secretion  of  urine.

I  I  Constipation ;  stools  very  dry,  hard  and  infrequent.

I  I  Retention  of  meconium,  with  vomiting  of  all  food  and
obstinate  constipation.

■  During  stool:  sensation  as  if  bowels  were  falling  out;

dribbling  of  urine.

■  Spasmodic  stricture  of  sphincter  ani.

■  Constant  diarrhoea  and  more  or  less  tenesmus,  and  pas-

sage of  much  blood ;  on  making  efforts  to  expel,  protru-
sion of  several  elongated  bodies,  resembling  earthworms
in  shape,  but  of  much  more  brilliant  red  color ;  they
presented  a  soft,  vascular,  shreddy  appearance,  bearing
some  resemblance  to  sarcomatous  growths;  with  this
expulsion  there  was  always  a  yellow,  very  fetid  dis-
charge; feces  flattened;  flatulent  distension  of  bowels;
patient  pale  and  sickly  looking. ^Polypus  of  rectum.

■  Blind,  intensely  painful  varices  with  black  stools.

i  Pain in hemorrhoids,  fissure of  rectum,  and painful

growths.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pain  in  region  of  kidneys  extending  in

direction  of  ascending  colon  ;  afterwards  copious  urine.
I  I  Spasmodic  affection  of  neck  of  bladder.
I  I  Neuralgia  of  neck  of  bladder.
1  I  Abnormal  irritability  of  urinary  passages.

■  Diminution  of  sensibility  of  urethra.

■  Urine:  profuse with  thirst; with  abundance  of  phos-

phates; copious,  pale;  scanty,  even  suppressed  in  col-
lapse; scanty,  dribbling  a  few  drops  at  beginning  of
every  stool.

■  Incontinence  of  urine.

I  I  Nocturnal  involuntary  emissions  of  urine.

M  Suppression  of  urine. ^Cholera  infantum.

I  I  Emaciation;  paleness;  skin  cold  and  dry  ;  pulse  rapid
and  feeble ;  tongue  red  and  tender;  gums  spongy  and
bleeding;  thirst  excessive;  appetite  voracious;  bowels
constipated ;  urine  pale,  frequent,  large  quantity,  of
high  density,  and  loaded  with  sugar ;  liver  tumid  and
tender.  ^Diabetes  mellitus.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Sensual  and  lascivious  fancies  and
dreams.


KALI  BROMATUM.  366

■Excessive  sexual  desire,  with  constant  erections  at  night.

■Satyriasis.

I  Diminution  of  sexual  desire;  lessened  even  to  impotence.

I  I  Erections  at  night; backache; uncontrollable  fidget-

tiness.

I I  Impotence  with  melancholy,  loss  of  memory;  nervous
prostration;  epilepsy.

■  Effects  of  sexual  excesses,  such  as  impotency,  paralysis

and  spasms  from  exhaustion  of  spinal  cord.

■  Frequent  pollutions  from  ardent  imagination.
llSeminal  emissions,  with  depressed  spirits,  dull  thought,

backache,  staggering  gait  and  great  weakness.
llslocturnal  emissions,  with  amorous  dreams  and  erections.

■  Spermatorrhoea,  before  paralytic  symptoms  have  set  in;

erections  normal  but  teasing  and  persistent,  with  noc-
turnal emissions  and  nervous  disturbances  growing  out
of  unsatisfied  sexual  desire.
iChordee,  during  gonorrhoea.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Nymphomania.

■  Sterility  from  excessive  sexual  indulgence.

1  I  Abolition  of  all  sexual  feeling  during  coition,

■  Aversion  to  coition  ;  menses  scanty.
■Enlargement  of  uterus  after  parturition,  with  abnormal

discharges.
I  I  Subinvolution  of  uterus.

■  Induration  of  uterus;  enlargement  of  uterus  (after  par-

turition), with  abnormal  discharges.
I  I  Uterine  fibroids.

■  Ovarian  neuralgia  from  ungratified  sexual  desire;  ner-

vous unrest.

■  Neuralgia of  ovaries; pain,  swelling,  tenderness  of  ].

ovary;  diminution  of  sexual  desire.

■  Epilepsy  from  ovarian  irritation.

■  Large  tumor,  smooth  and  tense  in  hypogastric  and  r.  iliac

region ;  tumor  slightly  tender  when  pressed,  and  there
is  indistinct  fluctuation ;  measurement  of  abdomen  taken
in  a  line  with  crests  of  ilium  shows  an  increase  in  size
of  ten  inches;  urine  scanty  and  frequent  calls  to  pass
it. ^Ovarian  cystic  tumor.

■  Abdomen  large  but  not  tense;  on  palpation,  well  defined,

elastic  tumor,  yielding  indistinct  fluctuation,  in  1.  iliac
region,  here  also  movements  are  felt  as  in  quickening.
^Ovarian  enlargement.

■  Ovarian  cystic  tumor,  after  tapping.
■Metrorrhagia  from  reflex  irritation,  or  of  nervous  origin.

■  Menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, nymphomania and men-

strual epilepsy ;  nervous  symptoms  led  to  its  use.

■  Menorrhagia  from  ovarian  irritation  caused  by  strong

sexual  desire.


367  KALI  BROMATUM.

I  Flooding,  especially  in  young  women.
I  Erotomania,  a  few  days  after  menses.
I  Before  menses :  headache.

During  menses :  epileptic  spasms,  nymphomania,  itching,
burning  and  excitement  in  vulva,  pudenda  and  clitoris,
After  menses:  headache,  insomnia  and  heat  in  genitals.

■  Epileptic  attacks  at  or  near  menstrual  periods.
I  I  Scanty  menstruation,  in  fleshy  women.

■  Change  of  life:  restless,  must  be  on  the  move ;  sleepless;

trembling;  flushings  of  face  and  much  congestion  of
blood  to  head ;  palpitation  of  heart ; menorrhagia.

I  I  Vaginismus.

■Voluptuous  itching,  tingling  and  irritation  in  external
genital  organs.

■  Pruritus  of  genitals,  arising  from  irritation  of  uterus,  or

ovaries,  or  any  hypersesthesia  of  veins  of  that  location  ;
sexual  excitement  intense,  often  actual  nymphomania.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■  Nymphomania
during  puerperal  state.

■  Puerperal  mania,  attended  by  ferocious  or  erotic  delirium.

■  Frightful  imaginings  in  pregnant  women,  usually  caused

by  engorged  condition  of  brain,
i  Frightful  imaginings  at  night,  labors  under  impression
that  she  has  committed,  or  is  about  to  commit,  some
great  crime  or  cruelty,  as  the  murder  of  her  children
or  husband. ^Pregnancy.

■  Morning  sickness  and  vomiting  during  pregnancy.

■  Constant  hacking  cough  during  pregnancy;  irresistible

desire  to  urinate,  but  no  flow  except  with  urging  and
difficulty.

■  Nervous  cough  during  pregnancy,  threatening  abortion;

the  cough  dry,  hard  and  almost  incessant.

■  Convulsions  during  labor.

■  Enlarged  uterus.

^^  Voice  arid  Larynx. Trachea and  Bronchia. 1 1  After
parturition  voice  changed,  whispering.
I  I  Hoarseness,  extremely  painful  and  disagreeable.

■  Aphasia,  from  embolism  of  middle  cerebral  artery.
I  I  Hypersesthesia  of  laryngeal  nerves.

■  Loss  of  sensibility.

■  Chronic  catarrh  with  purulent  slate  colored  sputa.

■  Follicular  and  catarrhal  laryngitis.

I  1  Laryngismus  stridulus,  uncomplicated,  from  neurosis  or

reflex  irritation.
I  I  Spasmodic,  dry  croup,  occurring  suddenly  in night ;

from  reflex  irritation,  teething,  worms,  not  catarrhal.
■Spasmodic  croup;  in  earlier  stages  when  child  appears

well  in  daytime;  at  night  is  agitated,  face  flushed,  suf-


KALI  BROMATUM.  3GS

fused  and  bloodshot  eyes ;  after  several  hours  he  sleeps,
breathing  easily  and  naturally,  but  soon  awakens  in  a
paroxysm;  hypersesthesia  of  laryngeal  nerves  followed
at  later  stage  by  natural  reaction  ;  loss  of  sensibility  in
larynx  ;  exudation  of  whitish,  firm  texture,  affecting
trachea  and  bronchi ;  harsh,  painful  voice,  with  hoarse-
ness; hacking  cough  with  dulness  and  confusion  of
head ;  wakes  suddenly  from  sound  sleep  with  sensation
of  suffocation,  with  peculiar  ringing,  dry,  brassy  cough
and  hurried  breathing. /^Croup.

B Membranous  croup,  with  whitish  exudation.

B  Torpid  cases  with  copious  purulent  expectoration.  ^Bron-
chitis.

I  Infantile  capillary  bronchitis  with  severe  dyspnoea,  throw-
ing arms  wildly  about;  spasmodic  action  of  muscles,
opisthotonos.
^®  Respiration, l  '  Breath  hot  and  hurried.

I  I  Breathlessness,  nervous  headache  and  want  of  sleep.

I  I  Asthma  of  nervous  origin.

■Spasmodic  asthma,  with  dry,  nervous,  spasmodic  cough,
great  tightness  of  breathing.

I  I  Spasmodic  asthma  of  children;  great  dyspnoea,  lividity
of  face;  no  sleep,  urine  suppressed,  general  oedema.

■  Severe  dyspnoea,  tossing  arms  about  wildly;  spasmodic

action  of  muscles,  throwing  child  into  a  state  of  opis-
thotonos. ^Capillary  bronchitis.
^^  Cough. I  I  Paroxysmal,  dry  cough.

■  Dry,  fatiguing  cough  at  intervals  of  two  or  three  hours,

with  difficult  respiration,  followed  by  vomiting  of  mucus
and  food,  <  at  night  and  when  lying  down;  tightness
of  chest  when  breathing.

■  Weak,  nervous  children,  arouse  with  a  dry,  spasmodic

cough,  which  greatly  frightens  them,  causing  them  to
cry  out  in  terror.

■  Hacking  cough  with  dulness  and  confusion  of  head.

■  Dry  cough,  due  to  reflex  action  from  stomach,  intestines,

or  uterus.

■  Nervous,  dry,  hysterical  cough  of  women,  especially  if

pregnant,

^ I  I  Whooping  cough,  with  spasmodic,  dry  cough ;  spasm
of  glottis;  with  convulsions.

^'  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  i  Burning  in  chest.
I  Pneumonia  in  drunkards.

^'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  ■  Feeble,  intermitting  action
of  heart;  so  nervous  she  must  be  busy  and  walk;  slow
and  small  pulse;  heart's  beats  wanting  in  energy,  and
its  sounds  distant  and  feeble  ;  action  of  heart  slow  and
fluttering.


809  ^  KALI  BROMATUM.

I  Cardiac  neuroses  from  spinal  or  uterine  irritation.
Pulse :  accelerated,  later  slower ;  slow,  small,  weak  ;  rapid
and  weak;  100,  weak;  50,  small  and  feeble;  40,  skin
cold,  clammy  ;  imperceptible  with  coldness  and  collapse.
I  I  Vascular  bruit  de  souffle.
^'  Neck  and  Back. ■  Tabes  dorsalis  from  sexual  excesses.

I  Backache;  tired  lameness  of  legs. ^Seminal  emissions.
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  Trembling of hands during voluntary
motion;  or,  as  in  delirium  tremens.

■  Hands  and  fingers  in  constant  action ;  bus}^  twitching  of

fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs, i Cannot  stand  erect;  legs  weak.

■  Unsteady  gait ;  frequently  taken  for  a  drunken  man.
iGait  staggering,  uncertain ;  looks  to  see  if  legs  are  really

moving; feels  as  if  his  legs  were all  over  sidewalk.
^Locomotor  ataxia.
•  Loss  of  sensibility;  pinching  or  burning  causes  no  pain.
^Locomotor  ataxia.

I  I  Legs  and  feet  cold  and  blue;  on  being  touched  leave

white impress of  fingers for more than twenty-five

seconds. ^Cholera  infantum.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Difficulty  of  holding  head

erect.
Stooping:  vertigo  <.
Lying  down:  cough  <.
Cannot  sit,  or  walk,  or  shake  head  without  feeling  <  of

headache.
Cannot  stand  erect.

Straightening  out  in  bed  during  spasm.
Restless,  must  be  on  the  move.

Impossible  to  move  head  on  account  of  swollen  throat.
Difficult  walking.
^^  Nerves. iThe  thought  of  something  to  be  done  makes  her

shake  all  over.

I I  Nervous,  restless;  cannot  sit  still,  but  must  move  about
or  otherwise  occupy  oneself;  often  suits  nervous  women.

I  Restlessness,  fitfulness  of  motion,  with  giddiness.

■  Almost  constant  twitching  of  fingers  and  a  busy  occupa-

tion of  them  in  matters  of  no  importance.

■  Nervous  irritability  caused  by  severe  illness  or  death  of

some  dear  friend,  or  loss  of  property  or  reputation  ;  con-
stant fretting ;  will  not  eat,  cannot  sleep,  is  very  irritable;
pulse  quick,  tongue  coated;  fetid  breath.
■Restlessness  and  sleeplessness  due  to  worry  and  grief.

■  Nervous  excitement,  irritation  and  congestion  of  cerebral

meninges,  with  mania.

■  Hysterical  spinal  irritation.
■Reflex  excitability.

VOL.  VI. — 24.


KALI  BROMATUM.  370

B Languor,  disinclined  to  talk,  or  use  mind  or  work,  in-
different, sleepy ;  by  strong  effort  of  will  can  act  as  usual.
I  1  Trembling  sensation  through  body.

■  Mercurial  trembling.

I  Symptoms  from  affection  of  vasomotor  nerves :  occasional
sudden  paroxysmal  feeling  of  numbness;  pins  and
needles;  deadness  and  weakness;  indescribable  feel-
ing of  something  wrong ;  feeling  of  largeness,  or  as  if
limbs  were  swollen ;  aching,  uneasiness  or  actual  pain
not  very  severe;  feeling  of  coldness,  occasionally  obvious
fact  of  coldness;  sudden  weakness;  paralyzed  feeling;
unable  to  retain  grasp  of  an  object,  hastily  putting  it
down,  or  allowing  it  to  fall;  muscles  do  not  respond
readily  to  will ;  co-ordination  of  movement  defective ;
writing  or  needlework  have  to  be  discontinued ;  rubs
the  limbs  by,  as  it  would  seem,  an  almost  instinctive
impulse;  sensations  allied  to  cramp,  or  actual  cramp,
with  varying  amounts  of  pain.

■  General  delirium,  hallucinations,  fancies  about  being  per-

secuted; ataxia;  as  in  general  paralysis.

■Gait:  unsteady,  reeling,  as  if  drunk;  staggering;  false
steps  frequent;  with  rolling  and  staggering;  as  one
walks  with  locomotor  ataxia ;  looks  too  see  if  legs  are
really  moving.

■Weakness  of  extensors  of  legs  and  feet.

I  I  Weakness  of  muscles  of  arms.

Unco-ordination  of  muscles;  nervous  weakness,  even  pa-
ralysis of  motion  and  numbness.

I  I  Great  difficulty  in  getting  and  keeping  right  word,
although  right  idea  is  present  to  mind.  6'An8emia  of
frontal  lobe  of  brain.

■Amnesic  aphasia.

I  Aneesthesia,  particularly  of  gums,  pharynx  and  genitalia.

ilSpasms:  from  fright,  anger  and  other  emotional  causes,
occurring  in  plethoric,  nervous  persons,  or  in  women  at
time  of  menses;  during  parturition;  from  sexual  ex-
citement or  excessive  venery;  too  great  reflex  excitabil-
ity, sleeplessness;  during  teething,  whooping  cough,  or
laryngismus  stridulus;  from  Bright's  disease.

■  Neuroses  involving  brain,  accompanied  by  convulsions.

■  At  intervals  of  seven,  ten  and  fifteen  days,  is  attacked,

usually  at  4  a.m.,  with  spasms;  straightens  out  in  bed
and  makes  the  noise  peculiar  to  this  disease;  face  almost
immediately  becomes  livid,  and  unless  temples  and  face
are  rubbed  during  fit,  dark  purple  spots  remain  for  two
or  three  days;  livid  ring  about  eyes;  after  from  one  to
three  minutes,  muscles  relax  and  she  goes  into  a  coma-
tose sleep,  in  which she  remains  several  hours;  feels


371  KALI  BROMATUM.

languid  on  awaking ;  head  aches,  and  has  a  severe  pain
always  at  pit  of  stomach,  and  sometimes  nausea,  eats
nothing  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  then  feels  nearly  as
well  as  usual. ^Epilepsy.

■Mental  hebetude,  slowness  of  expression,  failure  of
memory;  confusion  and  heat  of  head,  great  vertigo;
dull,  stupefied  expression ;  languor  in  extremities,  whole
mind  and  body  given  up  to  lassitude. ^Epilepsy.

I  At  each  menstrual  period  one  severe  convulsion;  falling
while  at  work ;  stupid  and  prostrated  remainder  of  day.

■  Attacks  at  new  moon,  regularly  at  2  a.m.;  nausea,  trem-

bling in  bowels;  eyes  staring  and  wide  open;  jerking
of  1.  foot  and  then  of  arms  ;  then  deep  sleep ;  complete
unconsciousness,  but  no  foaming  at  mouth ;  urine  in-
voluntary. ^Epilepsy.

iNo  foaming  at  mouth ;  headache  after  attacks ;  menses
deficient,  with  prolapsus  uteri;  undoubted  heredity.
^Epilepsy.

I  Fits  as  often  as  once  a  fortnight,  and  at  times  twice  a
week. ^Epilepsy.

■Fit  each  month,  usually  a  day  or  two  before  menses.

■  Frequent  and  violent  convulsive  seizures;  epileptiform

attacks,  dependent  on  presence  of  a  tumor  or  other
coarse  organic  lesion  of  brain,  are  usually  suspended ;
attacks  especially  occurring  during  daytime;  grand
mal  rather  than  petit  mal.

■  Epilepsy  when  attacks  are  attended  or  caused  by  unmis-

takable congestion  of  brain ;  epilepsy  of  recent  character,
and  not  dependent  on  constitutional  causes;  congenital
and  syphilitic  epilepsy  greatly  modified.

■  Epilepsy  from  cerebral  congestion,  with  vascular  fulness

of  retina.

■Epilepsy  from  tuberculosis.

■Acts  like  a  crazy  person;  enfeebling  of  mental  power;
trembling  of  hands ;  gait  unsteady,  irregular,  staggering,
as  if  drunk ;  eruption  on  lower  extremities,  generally  on
calves  of  legs,  spotted  yellow,  indurated  base,  thick,  yel-
low scabs. ^Chorea.

I  I  Tongue  protruded  with  a  jerk ;  muscles  of  face,  r.  arm
and  legs  in  constant  jactitation,  quite  violent. ^Chorea.

I  1  Unable  to  dress  herself  or  work,  could  hardly  speak;
face,  arm  and  leg  of  r.  side  affected. ^Chorea.

■  Very  violent  chorea  from  fright.-

■  Tetanus.

■  Paralysis  agitans.

^^  Sleep. ■  Sleepiness; deep  sleep,  often  broken  by a  start,
though  waking  is  very  difficult ;  confused  dreams.

■  Sleepy;  drops  asleep  in  his  chair;  if  aroused  falls  right

asleep  again;  during  day.


KALI  BROMATUM.  372

llSleepless;  restless;  can  only  calm  herself  by  incessant
occupation.

•  Sleeplessness:  especially  in  anaemic  patients,  or  nervous
persons  who  are  exhausted  but  irritated ;  from  overful-
ness  of  cerebral  bloodvessels;  during  convalescence  from
acute  diseases ;  in  case  of  mercurial  poisoning ;  accom-
panying mental  anxiety,  hysteria,  pregnancy  and  gen-
eral nervous  irritability.

I  Deep,  profound  and  quiet  slumber.

Profound  and  yet  disturbed  sleep,  always  awakens  with  a
mental  struggle,  not  knowing  at  first  where  he  was  or
what  had  become  of  him.

■  Grinding  of  teeth  during  sleep,  with  moans  and  cries.

■  iNight  terrors of  children; grinding  teeth in sleep,

moans,  cries;  horrible  dreams.
I  I  Somnambulism  in  children.

■  Awakes  from  a  profound  sleep,  not  knowing  where  he  is.

■  Waking  with  severe  headache  in  a  child.
^  Time. During  day:  sleepy.

Evening:  restless  and  trembling.

Night: frightful imaginings; headache <; roaring  in

ears;  involuntary  emission  of  urine;  suddenly  at  night,

spasmodic  croup; child  with  croup is agitated;  face

flushed;  cough  <; itching.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  room :  chilliness.

High  temperature:  itching.
^"  Fever. Body  cold;  skin  corrugated  and  mottled.

■Shivering  with  cold  and  cold  skin,  although  child  was

covered  with  mustard  plasters.
1  I  Chilliness  and  general  feeling  of  coldness,  more  j^ro-

.nounced  about  extremities. ^Ague.
I  I  Heat,  like  cold  stage,  not  very  strongly  marked.

I  I  Heat  in  face  and  fugitive  flushings  here  and  there.

■  Head  hot,  feels  as  if  in  a  furnace,  with  coldness  and  chills.

I I  Sweat  abundant  and  viscid,  all  over  body ;  unusually
long  lasting  and  exhausting. ^Ague.

■  Quotidian  ague.

*^  Attacks, Periodicity, Symptoms  recur  paroxysmally.
5  P.M.:  periodic  colic  in  infants.

At  intervals  of  two  or  three  hours:  dry,  fatiguing  cough.
For  several  hours :  comatose  sleep.
At  every  stool:  sensation  as  if  bowels  would  fall  out.
In  24  hours,  fifteen  or  twenty  passages.
At  times:  fits  twice  a  week.

At  intervals  of  seven,  ten  and  fifteen  days,  is  attacked,  usu-
ally at  4  A.M.,  with  spasms.
Every  fortnight:  fits.
Attacks  at  new  moon:  regularly  at  2  a.m.


S'^3  KALI  BROMATUM.

Before  menses:  headache.
During  menses:  epileptic  spasms.
After  menses:  headaciie;  insomnia;  heat  in  genitals.
At  each  menstrual  attack :  one  severe  convulsion.
In  winter:  slightly  elevated,  smooth,  red  patches  like  ur-
ticaria.
''Locality  and  Direction. Right:  headache  in  frontal  pro-
tuberance; submaxillary  glands  swollen  and  painful;
large  tumor  in  iliac  region ;  muscles  of  arm  in  constant
jactitation ;  chorea  affecting  arm  and  leg.
Left:  tenderness  of  ovary ;  jerking  in  foot.
*^  Sensations. Paroxysms  of  numbness ;  feels  as  if  needles
were  pricking  him.
Parts  feel  as  if  growing  large,  swollen.
1 1  Loss  of  sensibility;  body  generally,  also  fauces,  larynx,

urethra,  etc.
Fe^ls  as  if  he  would  go  out  of  his  mind;  staggers  as  if
drunk  ;  as  if  ground  gave  way  ;  brain,  as  if  too  tight ;
as  if  bowels  were  failing  out ;  restless  and  shaky  as  if
from  palsy;  feels  as  if  legs  were  all  over  sidewalk ;  as  if
limbs  were  swollen ;  as  if  in  a  furnace.
Pain: in r.  frontal  protuberance; in hemorrhoids;  in
region  of  kidneys,  extending  in  direction  of  descending
colon;  in  1.  ovary.
Excruciating  colic.

Violent  pain :  in  head,  particularly  in  occiput.
Terrible  headache.

Intensely  painful  varices  with  black  stools.
Neuralgia :  of  neck  of  bladder.

Severe,  throbbing,  aching  pains :  in  occipital  region.
Ihrobbmg:  m  temples;  in  carotids  and  temporals.
Colic:  in  children.
Pricking  sensation :  all  over  body.
Hoarseness :  extremely  painful.
Tingling: in  external  genital  organs.
Burning:  inchest;  in  vulva.
Heat:  in  genitals.
Confusion  :  of  head.
Fulness: of  head.
Pressure:  at  stomach.
Tight  feeling  :  in  scalp.
Tightness  :  of  chest  when  breathing.
Constrictive  sensation  :  in  brain.
Sensation  of  suffocation.
Dryness :  of  throat.
Lameness :  of  legs.
Jerking :  in  1.  foot  and  then  of  arms.
Trembling  sensation :  through  body ;  in  bowels.


KALI  BROMATUM.  374

Itching  :  in  external  genital  organs.
Internal,  coldness:  of  abdomen.
**  Tissues. Diminishes  reflex  excitability  of  nervous  centres ;
the  functions  of  organic  life  are  not  disturbed.
Great  weakness  of  muscles.

■  Muscles irritated, rendered inco-ordinate and then

paralyzed.
It  is  supposed  to  cause  contraction  of  capillaries.

■  Sedative  effect  upon  action  of  heart.

Septicsemia,  lethargy,  brain  and  spinal  symptoms ;  mul-
tiple abscesses.

Swelling  of  lymphatic  glands.

Sebaceous,  cysts.

■Ascites.

Diseased  organs  are  in  hypertrophic  condition.

I  It  removes  pathological  deposits  of  fatty  matter  only,
while  the  iodide  removes  normal  adipose  matter.

Emaciation ;  decrease  of  temperature ;  pallor.

Lowers  temperature,  with  coldness  of  extremities,  hands
and wrists icy cold and wet,  cerebral irritation,  in
cholera  infantum.
^^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Touch : leaves
white  impress  of  fingers.

Pressure :  tumor  slightly  tender.

Pinching :  causes  no  pain.
*"  Skin. iSkin cold, blue, spotted, corrugated. ^Cliolera
infantum.

■  Moist  eczema  of  legs  with  pityriasis  of  scalp.

■  Moist  eruptions.

■Slightly  elevated,  smooth,  red  patches,  like  urticaria,  but
wdth  hardened  bases,  like  erythema  nodosum;  itching
at  night  in  bed  and  in  a  high  temperature ;  appear  in
winter.

lAcne  simplex  and  indurata;  bluish  red,  pustular,  <  on
face  and  chest;  especially  in  lymphatic  constitutions.

■  Acne  on  face  and  shoulders;  centre  becomes  depressed;

leave  scars.

■  Rose  colored  mammilated  eruption  on  lower  extremities ;

sometimes  pustules  in  centre  of  patches  that  become
umbilicated,  exuding  a  creamy  moisture  and  forming
thick,  yellow  scabs.

■  Eruption  of  small boils  in  successive  crops,  mostly  on

face  and  trunk,  with  troublesome  itching.

■  Large,  indolent,  painful  pustules;  boils.

■  Long  lasting  scrofulous  ulcerations.

■  Syphilitic  psoriasis.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Acts  more  satisfactorily  in
children  than  in  adults.


375  KALI  BROMATUM.

Especially  adapted  to  large  persons  inclined  to  obesit3^

Child,  set.  3 ;  threatened  inflammation  of  brain.

Girl,  set.  5,  delicate,  thin,  complaining  for  several  weeks ;
incipient  basilar  meningitis.

Child,  set.  8,  lymphatic  temperament,  disposed  to  frequent
sore  throats; diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  16,  menses  appeared  at  13  without  any  influence
upon  the  disease,  animal  magnetism  and  electricity
benefited  for  a  short  time;  epilepsy.

Young  lady,  of  robust  habit  and  sanguine  temperament,
usually  modest  and  retiring ;  nymphomania.

Young  woman,  single,  seamstress ;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  19,  stout,  healthy  looking,  began  to  menstru-
ate at  14  years  of  age ;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  20,  dwarfish  appearance,  suffering  eight  years;
polypus  of  rectum.

Woman,  set.  25,  single,  teacher  of  music ;  melancholia.

Woman,  set.  30;  threatened  inflammation  of  brain.

Lady,  set.  32,  unmarried,  dark  hair,  healthy  appearance,
subject  to  severe  cutting  pains  in  hypogastrium  and
headaches;  ovarian  cyst.

Woman,  set.  38,  married ;  ovarian  enlargement.

Woman,  set.  52,  change  of  life;  affection  of  mind.

Man,  set,  65,  weekly  attacks  for  ten  years;  epilepsy.
-^  Relations. Antidoted  by  vegetable  acids,  oleaginous  rem-
edies,  Camphora,  Nux  vom.,  Zincum. It  antidotes  lead
poisoning.

Compatible:  after  Acow.  and  Spongia;  after  Eugenia  jam-
hos  in  acne.

Compare:  Ambra,  Amm.  brom.,  Bellad.  (but  this  drug  is
sthenic),  Camphora  (cholera  collapse),  Gelsem.,  Hyosc,
Natr.  mur,  (mind),  Stramon.,  Zincum.


KALI  CAEBONICUM.  S76


KALI  CARBONICUM.

Potassium  carbonate.  K2O,  C02.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Gersdorff,  GouIIon,  Hartlaub,  Kenning,  Eummell
and  Robinson, See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  281.

CxiNicAL  Authorities. —  Conjunctivitis  and  leucoma,  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.
25,  p.  308  ;  Blepharitis,  Schelling,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  66 ;  CEderaa  of  lids,  Norton's
Opth.  Therap.,  p.  103;  Toothache,  Schelling,  Raue's  Rec.,  1872,  p.  97;  Parotitis,
Hering,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  53 ;  Affection  of  favxxs,  Wesseihoeft,  Horn.  Clin.,
vol.  4,  p.  41 ;  Affection  of  throat,  Schelling,  Hool  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  89 ;  Cardialgia,
Schelling,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  115;  Gastralgia,  Kunkel,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.
G,  p.  222;  AUg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  112,  p.  50;  Gastric  disturbance,  Schelling,
Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  94;  Raue's  Rec.,  1875,  p.  136;  Affection  of  stonmch,  Curtis,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  15;  Schelling,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  93 ;  (2  cases)  Schelling,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.  688;  Pfander,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  203;  Hofrichter,
Riick.  KL  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  312;  Hepatitis,  Houghton,  Raue's  Rec.,  1872,  p.  156 ;
Stitches  in  liver  and  lumbar  region,  Houghton,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  59  ;  Disease  of
liver,  Martin,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  191 ;  Affection  of  liver,  Emmerich,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  697 ;  Constipation,  Bernard  and  Strong,  Stens,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.
150;  Hemorrhoids,  McNeil,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  437  ;  Smith,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.
394;  Bonninghausen,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  494;  Gillet,  Riick.  Ki.  Erf.,  vol.
1,  p.  999 ;  Uterine  affection,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  353 ;  Uterine
hemorrhages,  Goullon,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  129  ;  Menorrhagia,  Goullon,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  27,  p.  683;  Menstrucd  affections,  Goullon,  Hom.  Clia.,  vol.  3,  p.  130;  Menstrual
disturbances,  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  591 ;  Scanty  menses,  Suppressed
menses,  Amenon-hfea,  Dysmenoi^rhcea,  Hahnemann,  Riickert,  Rummel,  Jahr,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  235  ;  Nausea  during  pregnancy,  Wood,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  161  ;
Abortion,  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  314;  Sickness  during  pregnaoicy,  Wood,
Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  93 ;  Bronchitis,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  684 ;  Asthma
(2  cases),  Schelling,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  112,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  94 ;  Cough,
Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  207;  Martin,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1880,
p.  242,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  192;  Schelling,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  90;  Stens,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  pp.  685,  722 ;  Whooping  cough,  Hering,  Becker,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  81 ;  Suffocative  catarrh,  Schelling,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  144 ;  Catarrh
of  chest,  Schelling,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  Ill  ;  Chronic  catarrh.  Skinner,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  150;  Pleurisy,  Schelling,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  122;  Miller,  Cin.
Med.  Adv.,  vol.  3,  p.  380 ;  Pneumonia,  Goullon,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,
p.  298 ;  Hydrotlwrax,  Dropsy,  Heimann,  Weber,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  706 ;  Pneu-
monia, Eidherr,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  821 ;  Lippe,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  120  ;
Sum,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  100;  Phthisis,  Smith,  Raue's  P.,  p.  401 ;  Stens,  Raue's
Rec,  1870,  p.  193 ;  Consumption,  Lobethal,  Kirschmann,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  3,  p.  372 ;  Lumbago  (2  cases),  Farrington,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  254;  Backache;
Proctalgia  during  pregnancy,  Goullon,  Riick.  Kh  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  383 ;  Affection  of
hips,  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  915  ;  Morbus  coxarius  (8  cases),  McNeil,  Cin,
Med.  Adv.,  vol.  6,  p.  349,  Organ  on,  vol.  2,  p.  238;  Spasmodic  affections,  Emmerich,


877  KALI  CARBONICUM.

Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p,  575 ;  Paresis,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  488  ;
Febrile  attacks,  Schelling,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  89  ;  Catarrhal  fever,  Schelling,  Raue's
Eec,  1872,  p.  234;  Ague,  Lippe,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  1,  p.  122;  Schelling,  A.  H.  Z.,
1869,  p.  82;  Typhoid  affection,  Goullon,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  130,  Kane's  Eec,
1871,  p.  199 ;  Puerperal  fever,  Guernsey,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1874,  p.  399,
and  Obs.,  p.  633 ;  Dropsy,  Weber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  349 ;  Urticaria,  Eummel,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  199 ;  Erysipelas,  Eaue,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  7-8.

^  Mind. 1  Sudden  attack  of  unconsciousness.

I  I  Cannot  express  herself;  seems  at  a  loss  to  know  how  to
begin  to  say  or  do  what  she  wishes. ^Puerperal  mania.

I  Absentminded.

■  Dull,  confused,  stupid,  as  after  intoxication.
Imagines  seeing  birds  flying  in  room;  he  tries  to  catch

them.

I I  Great  aversion  to  being  alone.

I  Dread  of  labor.  -

I  Weeps  much.

■  Alternating  mood,  atone  time  good  and  quiet,  at  another

excited  and  angry  at  trifles ;  constantly  in  antagonism

with  herself;  frequently  hopeful,  frequently  despondent;

frets  about  everything; peevish,  impatient,  contented

with  nothing. ^Melancholia.
I  I  Timid  and  apprehensive  of  future  and  about  her  disease.
iFear  of  being  alone;  fears  she  will  die.
I  Anxiety  with  fear.

■  Despondency  in  open  air;  disappears  on  entering  house.

■  Peevish,  irritable;  noise  is  disagreeable;  easily  startled,

especially  if  touched  ;  intolerance  of  human  voice.

■  Irascible  and  passionate.

■  Very  easily  frightened  ;  shrieks  about  imaginary  appear-

ances ;  starts  when  touched.

■  Is  frightened  and  cries  out  whenever  he  is  touched  lightly

on  his  feet.

■  Delirium  in  the  night. ^Pleurisy.

^  Sensorium. ■  Giddiness,  nausea,  pressure  in  stomach.

■  Vertigo:  when  rapidly  turning  head  or  body ;  evening

and  morning ;  on  turning  around ;  as  if  proceeding
from  stomach  ;  loss  of  consciousness  ;  frequent  dulness
of  head  as  after  intoxication,  and  as  if  ears  .were  stopped
up,  with  nausea  almost  unto  vomiting;  when  walking;
as  if  head  was  too  light,  must  take  hold  on  something ;
and  vomiting ;  after  eating,  with  heat  in  head,  red  face,
darkness  before  eyes ;  sometimes  one  cheek  hot  the  other
cold ;  must  lie  down  as  soon  as  attack  comes  on,  other-
wise he  is  thrown  down;  before  he  falls  he  has  stitching
pain  in  forehead,  root  of  nose  and  in  eyes ;  attacks  sev-
eral times  a  day.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  378

^  Inner  Head. I  Pressure  and  drawing  tearing  in  forehead,
extending  into  eyes  and  root  of  nose.

■  Pressure  in  forehead,  with  photopliobia.

I  I  Pressive  headache  in  forehead,  in  afternoon,  while  walk-
ing, with  peevishness.

TiSensation  in  forehead  as  of  a  hot  body  having  descended
into  it  when  stooping,

I  1  Drawing  in  forehead,  in  forenoon  and  at  midnight.

I  I  Pressure  and  tension  in  forehead  and  eyes.

■  Pressing  in  front  of  head  and  temples,  extending  into

eyes,  with  heat  in  face  and  head.  ^Sick  headache.
^Blepharitis. ^Catarrhal  fever.

■  Stitches  in  forehead  and  temples,  <  stooping,  moving

head,  eyes  or  jaw ;  >  raising  head  and  from  heat.

■  Stitches  into  eyes  and  root  of  nose:  with  catarrh;  before

falling  down  with  vertigo.
I  I  Pinching  and  tearing  pain  in  1.  temple  at  intervals.
I  One-sided  headache,  with  nausea.
I  I  Tearing  drawing  in  1.  half  of  head.
I  I  Constant  sensation  of  something  loose  in  head,  turning

and  twisting  toward  forehead.

■  Congestion  to  head,  with  throbbing  and  humming.

I  I  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  intoxication  arising
from  it.

■  Congestive  and  catarrhal  headaches,  with  dry,  hard  cough.

■  Pressive  headache.

■  Headache  :  from  riding  in  a  carriage;  from  coughing  or

sneezing;  on  awaking  from  sleep;  from  coryza;  with
nausea;  with  toothache;  with  backache;  with  inter-
mittent ;  with  great  heaviness  during  menses.

■  Jerking  in  head  from  behind  forward;  dark  before  eyes,

unconscious;  >  from  drink  of  cold  water;  remains
weak  and  nauseated.

■  Pressing  pain  in  back  of  head.

■  Aching  in  occiput,  toward  nape  of  neck,  >  in  open  air,

■  Morning  headache  with  vertigo,  aching  and  stitches  in

occiput,  felt  only  during  motion  ;  sharp,  shooting  pains
from  upper  dorsal  spine  into  occiput.
TrViolent  pressure  over  whole  skull,  down  nape  of  neck,
throbbing  in  head  and  whole  body  <  by  slightest  con-
tact, and  increasing  in  paroxysms  with  violent  nausea
and  vomiting  of  bile.
^  Outer  Head.  ■  Liability  of  head  to  take  cold  from  a  draft,
after  being  heated  causing  headache  or  toothache.

■  Painful  tumors  on  scalp,  like  blood  boils;  <  from  press-

ure and  motion,  >  from  heat ;  itching  as  if  in  bones.

■  Wens  on  scalp.

■  Hair  dry,  brittle,  falling  off,  mostly  from  temples,  eye-


S79  KALI  CARBONICUM.

•  brows  and  beard  ;  scalp  itches  and  burns  morning  and
evening ;  oozes  if  scratched. ^Brain  disease  of  children.
I  Great  dryness  of  hair  after  nervous  fevers.

■  Perspiration  on  forehead  in  morning.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. I  Bright  sparks,  blue  or  green  spots  be-
fore eyes.
■While  reading  or  looking  at  a  bright  light:  muscse  voli-
tantes ;  sharj)  stitches ;  fog  before  eyes.

I  Weakness  of  vision.

I I  Eyes  weak  :  after  coition ;  after  abortion ;  after  measles.
'  I  Inclination  to  stare.

I  I  Painful  sensitiveness  of  eyes  to  daylight;  photophobia.

I  I  Lachrymation,  shunning  light ;  pain  deep  in  eyes.

I  I  Small  round  ulcers  on  cornea  with  no  photophobia.

I  iPannus,  always  <  after  a  seminal  emission.

I  I  Asthenopia  with  sticking  and  drawing  together  of  lids
upon  looking  steadily  at  any  object ;  burning,  pressing
pain  in  eyes ;  borders  of  lids  red  and  swollen  ;  palpebral
fissure  narrowed  and  palpebral  conjunctiva  hypersemic;
constant  photophobia,  compelled  to  keep  eyes  closed
most  of  the  time;  <  after  using;  slight  rheumatism.

■Milky,  whitish  spot  near  middle  of  r.  cornea ;  vessels  of
conjunctiva  injected ;  sees  with  r.  eye  as  if  through  fog
or  smoke ;  when  looking  toward  light  lachrymation ;
dizziness  when  stooping ;  cannot  fix  sight  of  any  object
steadily  without  water  running  from  eyes  and  feeling
of  dizziness ;  artificial  light  appears  to  have  rays  all
around  it;  eye  symptoms  <  morning;  bloating  after
meals ;  flatulency ;  obstinate  constipation  and  stools  too
large  in  size ;  cracking  now  and  then  in  r.  ear ;  expec-
toration of  phlegm  in  morning  with  a  salty  taste.  ^Con-
• junctivitis  and  leucoma.

I  I  Redness  of  white  of  eyes,  with  many  vessels  in  it.

■  Smarting,  burning,  biting,  stitching  pain  in  eye.
I  I  Sharp  tearing  in  r.  orbit  and  eye  at  night.

I  I  Stitches  in  middle  of  eye.
I  I  Pressure  in  and  above  eyes.

■  Eyes  painful  on  reading,  as  if  pressed  inward.

■  Corners  of  eyes  ulcerate.

■Soreness  of  external  canthus,  with  burning  pain.

■  Eyelids  swollen;  edges  and  canthi  red;  caruncula  red

and  swollen  ;  lachrymation  and  pain  from  bright  light;
pressing  pain  in  front  of  head  and  temples  into  eyes,
with  heat  in  face  and  head ;  loss  of  appetite ;  after  eat-
ing pressure  in  stomach;  belching;  nausea  and  empti-
ness in  stomach;  gagging  and  vomiting  up  slime;
pressure  and  anxious  feeling  in  chest;  chilliness;  cold
feet ;  evening  fever,  with  thirst ;  weariness  and  heavi-


KALI  CARBONICUM.  380

ness  in  limbs  ;  face  pale,  dirty  grey ;  restless  sleep ;  great
deal  of  yawning  through  day. ^Blepharitis.
iLids swollen and inflamed; agglutinated, especially
mornings.

■  Lids  red,  swollen,;  tarsi  worse.

I  Eyelids  swollen,  also  left  cheek  and  upper  lip.
I  Lids  of  r.  eye  inflamed,  pain  in  eyes  and  inability  to  read.
llPuffiness;  swelling  between  eyebrows  and  lids,  like  a  sac.
I  Enormous  bag-like  swellings  under  eyes. ^Erysipelas.
Iffidema  of  lids,  especially  if  accompanied  by  sticking
pains  and  heart  indications.

■  Eyes  sunken.

I  Sensation  of  coldness  in  lids.
®  Hearing  and  Ears, i  i  Ringing,  roaring,  whizzifig,  singing,
cracking  noises  in  ears.

■  Headache  with  noises  in  ear  after  a  cold  drink.

■  Hearing  impaired,  dull. fi'Rheumatism.
I  I  Tearing  in  ears.

1  Stitches  from  within  outward ;  also  with  drawing  behind
ears ;  otitis.

■  Face  pale,  sometimes  flushed  ;  head  and  r.  ear  hot ;  pain

stitch-like,  drawing,  especially  behind  ear;  cheek  swol-
len ;  little  appetite ;  mouth  dry ;  high  fever  with  dizzi-
ness; chilliness,  shuddering,  some  thirst  but  little  desire
to  drink;  anxiety  in  chest;  pulse  accelerated,  uneven;
weary  in  all  the  limbs.

1  I  Violent  itching  or  tickling  in  ears.

I  I  Redness  and  heat  of  outer  ear.

■  Right  ear  hot,  left  pale  and  cold. ^Gastritis.

■  Discharge  of  yellow  liquid  cerumen  or  pus.

■  Parotids,  especially  right,  inflamed,  swollen,  hard.

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Dull  sense  of  smell,  especially from
catarrh.

■  Fluent  cor3^za ;  excessive  sneezing;  pain  in  back,  head-

ache and  lassitude.
I  I  Violent  fluent  coryza  in  evening,  with  frequent  sneez-
ing and  headache,  rough  voice.

■  Dry  coryza,  with  loss  of  voice  or  hoarseness;  mucus  in

throat,  or  sensation  of  a  lump.

■  Dryness  or  stoppage  of  nose.

■  Obstruction  of  nose,  making  breathing  through  nostrils

impossible;  >  w^hen  w^alking  in  open  air,  returns  in
room;  itching  in  nose;  fetid,  yellow  green  discharge
from  one  nostril.

■  Coryza:  thick  yellowish  discharge  with  great  lassitude;

purulent,  fetid  discharge  from  one  nostril;  yellow, green
or  bloody  mucus;  sore,  crusty  nostrils ;  complete  closure
of  nostrils.


881  KALI  CARBONTCUM.

I  Burning  in  nose  ;  ulcerated  nostrils;  bloody,  red  nostrils
every  morning;  external  nose  red,  swollen;  stinging
pains.

iSore  nose ;  mucous  membrane  swollen,  covered  with  pim-
ples and  brown  crusts;  tip  and  wings  red,  swollen,  with
sore,  stinging  pain;  headache;  pain  in  stomach ;  nausea;
belching;  pulsation  in  abdomen ;  pain  in  limbs.

I  Nose  thick  and  red.

I I  Nose  swollen,  hard,  red  from  tip  to  root.

I  I  Alae  nasi  red,  swollen,  suppurating,  covered  with  yellow
andgrey  crusts;  burning  pain. ^Stricture  of  oesophagus.
B  Frequent  bleeding  of  nose.

■  Nosebleed:  when  washing  face ;  every  morning  at  9.

I  I  Itching  in  nose.

^  Upper  Face. '  l  Paleness  of  face  after  a  meal.

Face:  red  and  hot;  one  cheek  hot,  the  other  cold  ;  purple,
bloated ;  dark  red  during  cough,  otherwise  pale ;  pale,
with  weakness ;  sickly  ;  with  pale  lips ;  sallow ;  grey ;
yellow ;  bloated,  in  morning.

II  Swelling  of  face,  especially  over  eyes.

■  Stinging  in  cheeks;  tearing  stitches  from  a  molar  into

forehead,  eyes  and  temples.

■  Drawing  pain  in  face.

I  I  Pimples  on  face  and  ej^ebrows,  with  redness  and  swelling.

■  Freckles; light  brown  spots;  old  warts;  impulous  erup-

tions.
^  Lower  Face. ■  Upper  lip  swollen;  bleeding  rhagades.
I  I  Scurf  upon  upper  lip.
I  I  Dry  lips. ^Sick  headache.

■  Lips:  peel,  chap,  swell  or  ulcerate.
I  I  Itching  on  chin.

■  Hard  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.

■Swelling  of  lower  jaw,  with  looseness  of  teeth  and  en-
larged submaxillary  glands.
'"Teeth  and  Gums. ■Toothache,  tearing,  lancinating,  with
pains  in  facial  bones.

■Stitch  pain  and  tearing  from  new  molar  into  temple,
front  of  head  and  eye;  dizzy  heaviness  of  head;  bad
alkaline  smell  from  mouth;  constant  chilliness;  dry
skin,  can't  perspire; <  from  chewing. /^Toothache.

■  Stitches  in  teeth,  with  swelling  of  cheeks.

■  Pressive  toothache  in  root  of  last  hollow  back  tooth  in

evening.

■  Drawing  toothache  as  soon  as  she  gets  into  bed  in  eve-

ning, not  during  day.

■  Boring,  pressive toothache,  always  after  dinner,  as  if

something  got  into  tooth.

■  Toothache only when eating; throbbing; < when

touched  by  anything  cold  or  warm.


KALI  CAKBONICUM.  382

I  Teeth  are  loose.
iBad  smell  from  teeth.
"Taste  and  Tongue, i  Taste  bitter ;  flat.

iToDgue:  white,  with  bad  taste ;  after  cold  drinks;  pale,

greyish,  in  dyspepsia;  coated  grey,  with  sick  headache.
I  Tongue swollen,  covered  with  vesicles,  tip  burns  as  if

raw,  frsenum  sore.
I  Burning  on  tip  of  tongue,  as  if  it  was  raw  or  covered

with  blisters.
■Soreness  of  tip  of  tongue.

■  Painful  pimple  on  tip  of  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth.  iBad  alkaline  smell  from  mouth  (tooth-
ache) ;  smell  like  old  cheese  (scarlatina).

iFoul  taste  in  mouth;  very  slimy  mouth.

I  I  Much  saliva  constantly  in  mouth.

I  Mouth  dry:  with  increased  saliva,  in  otitis;  with  stric-
ture of  oesophagus ;  in  gastritis.

■  Dryness  in  mouth,  without  thirst,  in  evening.

■  Vesicles,  painful,  burning,  all  over  inner  mouth.

I  I  Sticking  and  biting  in  posterior  portion  of  palate.

■  Chronic  catarrhal  inflammation  of  mouth  and  fauces.

^^  Throat.  ■  ■  Sticking  pain  in  pharynx,  as  if  a  fish  bone  was
sticking  in  it,  if  he  becomes  cold.

■Much  mucus  in  fauces,  which  she  is  constantly  obliged  to
remove  by  hawking;  sharp  stitches  in  eyes  while  read-
ing and  sewing.

■Tenacious  mucus  in  fauces  and  posterior  of  pharynx,
mornings;  difficult  to  hawk  up;  sensation  as  of  a  lump.

I  I  Scraping  in  throat,  it  feels  dry,  parched  and  rough.

I  I  Throat  rough,  with  cough.

■  Crawling  in  throat,  causing  hemming  and  coughing,  and

a  feeling  of  tightly  adhering  phlegm.
Throat  feels  as  if  squeezed,  as  if  lungs  came  into  throat.

■  Sensation  as  if  a  stick extended  from  throat  to  1.  side  of

abdomen,  as  if  stick  had  a  ball  on  each  end.

■  ■Difficult  swallowing; food  descends  oesophagus  slowly

and  small  particles  of  food  easily  get  into  windpipe.
■Stinging  when  swallowing; frequent  desire  to  swallow
saliva,  but  frequently  cannot,  causing  a  choking.

■  Pain  in  back  when  swallowing.

■  When  swallowing,  food  remains  half  way,  with  gagging

and  vomiting. ^Stricture  of  oesophagus.

■  Pain  in  throat;  dryness  and  sensation  of  something  hard

in  swallowing;  pain  extended  to  stomach,  burning,
stitching,  but  only  felt  during  deglutition;  finally  pain
concentrated  in  centre  of  chest,  where,  in  a  small  space,
deglutition  of  food  found  an  impediment,  and  remained
fast,  till  it  passed  after  a  while  with  excruciating  pain,


383  KALI  CARBONICUM.

followed  by  rush  of  blood  to  head,  vomituritio  and  nau-
sea; when  swallowing  fluid,  but  especially  solid  food,
pressing,  tensive  pain  at  a  point  of  chest,  with  sen-
sation of  a  hard  body  preventing  food  from  reach-
ing stomach;  simultaneously,  burning,  stitching  pain
in  back;  three  corresponding  vertebrEe  always  painful,
and  patient  shrieks  when  even  slightly  touched  there ;
cannot  sleep  on  back  during  night;  restless  sleep,  after
midnight;  dry  lips;  dry  mouth  and  throat;  tongue
coated  whitish  grey ;  severe  habitual  headache ;  pressing
as  of  a  stone,  in  forehead  and  vertex,  every  morning,
with  vertigo.

B Pointed,  greyish  yellow  complexion ;  dull  eyes,  lids  glued
together  in  morning;  sweUing  of  nose,  hard,  red,  from
top  to  root,  on  tip,  red,  elevated;  ulcerated  nostrils,  cov-
ered with  yellowish  brown  crusts,  with  burning  pains.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  "No  appetite;  dis-
gust for  food,  or  ravenous  appetite.

I  Intense  thirst.

I  Desire:  for  acids;  for  sugar  and  sweets.

a  Aversion  to  food,  especially  meat;  it  has  a  good  taste
wlien  he  eats,  yet  he  does  not  eat  much.

■  Aversion  to  rye  bread.

'"Eating  and  Drinking. iWhen  eating: particles  of  food
easily  get  into  windpipe;  toothache.

■  Eating  or  drinking:  <  cough  after  measles.

■  During  eating:  sleepy.

After  eating:  burning  from  stomach  to  throat;  colic  re-
newed; abdomen,  distended;  pressure  and  fulness  in
stomach ;  stomach  replete,  especially  after  soup  or  coffee ;
sour  eructations;  nausea,  faintness,  pressure  in  stomach
and  gagging,  with  palpitation.

■  Wants  to  eat  frequently  on  account  of  gone  feeling  in

stomach,  but  least  food  oppresses  her. ^Sick  headache.

■  When  hungry,  feels  anxious,  nauseated,  nervous,  tingling;

cough  and  palpitation  >  after  breakfast.
Milk  and  warm  food  disagree.
'^Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Eructa-
tions sour;  frequent  in  morning.

■  Uprisings  of  food  and  acids,  following  great  uneasiness

starting  from  pit  of  stomach.

■  Uprising  of  water  from  stomach,  much  of  which  she  ex-

pectorates.

■  Nausea: and  loathing; from  emotions; with anxiety

and  faintness ;  after  a  meal;  on  every  inward  emotion;
during  pregnancy.

■  Sick  during  a  walk,  no  vomiting,  feels  as  if  she  must  lie

down  and  die ;  pregnancy.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  384

iRetching,  vomiting  of  ingesta  and  slime;  sour.
I  Vomiting  of  food  and  acids,  with  nausea.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, n  Great  sensitiveness  of  epi-
gastric region  externally.
I  Throbbing  in  epigastric  region,  which  is  painful  to  touch.

■  Throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach,  like  a  violent  palpitation.
•  Emptiness  ancf  gone  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  anxiety.

iPit  of  stomach  swollen,  tense,  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Swollen  feeling  about  whole  epigastric  region.

■  Painful  sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach,  and  after  eat-

ing ever  so  little  great  feeling  of  fulness  and  pressure,
which  soon  gives  way  to  sensation  of  goneness ;  burning
after  eating,  and  rising  from  stomach  to  throat.

■  ■Stomach  distended,  sensitive;  feels  as  if  it  would  burst;

excessive  flatulency;  everything  she  eats  or  drinks
appears  to  be  converted  into  gas.

■  Swelling  of  stomach  and  abdomen.

■  I  Constant  feeling  as  if  stomach  was  full  of  water.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  like  a  heaviness,  after  eating.
■Attacks  of  pressure  in  stomach,  extending  up  into  chest.
■Burning  acidity  rising  from  stomach,  with  some  spas-
modic constriction.

■  A  feeling  in  stomach  as  if  cut  to  pieces.

■  Violent  throbbing  and  cutting  in  stomach.
I  1  Digging  in  stomach.

■  Pain  in  great  cul  de  sac  radiating  to  chest,  to  back  and

extremities ;  pains  in  back  and  legs  after  eating.

■  Pressing,  tensive  pain,  awakens  at  2  a.m.

■  Stomach  sore  externally  to  pressure.

■Severe  cutting,  lancinating  pains  in  pit  of  stomach,  <
night,  and  especially  after  midnight;  must  lean  for-
ward ;  mouth,  throat  and  lips  dry  at  night ;  rhagades  on
lips;  thirst  off  and  on;  pulse  100;  constipation,  dis-
charges painful,  or  diarrhcea;  sensitive  spot  in  gastric
region  on  pressure. ^Gastralgia.

■Pain  in  stomach,  <  stooping;  pit  of  stomach  bloated,
tense,  hard  and  sensitive  to  touch ;  eats  little,  and  even
this  causes  pressure  in  stomach;  stool  dry;  urine  red,
three  times  in  night,  the  more  the  pressure  the  less  it
flows ;  chilliness  all  the  time ;  cold  hands  and  feet,  and
paleness  of  face. ^Gastricism.

■  Severe  cardialgia,  stomach  not  tolerating  least  amount  of

food;  vomiting  and  fainting;  continual  severe  pressure,
bloatedness  of  stomach,  in  pit  and  around  lower  edge  or
ribs,  <  from  motion ;  pressure  from  tea  and  milk,  which
is  the  only  food  she  can  take;  eructations;  vomituri-
tion;  pressure  in  the chest  and back; pains  in  the


885  KALI  CARBONICUM.

sacrum;  horripilations;  constant  inclination  to  urinate;
no  sleep.

■  Headache,  pressing,  tense,  from  occiput  to  forehead,  be-

ginning in  morning  after  a  restless  sleep  full  of  dreams,
continuing  more  or  less  during  day,  with  congestion  to
head;  dim  eyes  and  blue  eyelids;  at  same  time  much
nausea;  pressure  in  stomach,  <  after  eating;  aversion
to  food;  sensation  of  bloatedness  and  fulness  of  abdomen;
beating  in  epigastrium;  a  few  mouthfuls  satisfy  her,
food  causing  fulness  and  bloatedness,  with  yawning;
eructations;  congestions;  tongue  coated  white;  urine
pale,  yellow,  muddy;  chilliness;  malaise;  cold  feet;
melancholia;  buzzing  in  ears;  stitches  in  chest  and  back ;
headache  <  during  menses.  ^Cardialgia  and  headache.
I  After  sleepless  night  headache  with  vertigo ;  pressure,  ten-
sion in  forehead  and  eyes ;  greyish  coated  tongue ;  thirst,
dry  lips,  and  total  aversion  to  food ;  fulness  in  stomach
and  nausea;  respiration  difficult,  anxious;  features  pale,
pointed;  eyes  sunken;  horripilations  and  chilliness;
sometimes  heat  in  head;  no  sleep;  sensitive  and  irrit-
able ;  hands  and  feet  cold.

■  Emptiness  in  stomach  with  desire  to  eat;  after  eating

lightest  kind  of  food,  nausea,  gagging  and  vomiting;
throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach,  almost  taking  her  breath,
with  constant  yawning;  stool  dry;  stomach  bloated,
tense  and  painful  to  pressure;  awakens  early  in  morn-
ing with  headache  and  dizziness,  and  feels  nauseated  at
sight  of  food.

■  Pit  of  stomach  swollen,  tense,  sensitive  to  touch  ;  deep  in

that  region  is  felt  a  lump  as  large  as  a  fist,  quite  sensi-
tive to  pressure ;  feet  cold  and  oedematous ;  loss  of  appe-
tite; cough  with  anxiousness  ;  feels  empty,  gone  in  pit
of  stomach,  but  eating  causes  fulness,  heaviness,  tension
in  pit  of  stomach  with  difficult  breathing;  nausea  with
yawning,  and  throbbing  in  prtecordial  region;  stool
torpid,  dry;  palpitation  of  heart,  ebullition  with  heat
from  abdomen  to  head;  pulse  weak  and  uneven,  now
quick,  now  slow;  pain  in  back  and  small  of  back;
weary  in  limbs; chilliness  all  day  ;  restless  sleep.

■  Pressure  and  heaviness  in  stomach  and  chest,  <  in  damp

weather;  desire  to  eat  frequently,  on  account  of  sensa-
tion of  goneness  in  stomach,  but  least  food  oppresses  her,
and  the  first  morsel  produces  nausea,  vomiturition  and
vomiting,  followed  again  by  sensation  of  emptiness  and
goneness  in  stomach;  palpitations  which  nearly  take
her  breath  away ;  must  yawn  continually,  so  that  tears
run  from  eyes;  stool  dry;  must  get  up  several  times
during  night  to  pass  urine,  which  is  pale,  but  muddy,
VOL.  VI. — 25.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  386

as  if  mixed  with  dust ;  abdomen  bloated,  especially  at
pit,  and  painful  to  pressure,  so  that  she  hardly  can  bear
pressure  of  clothing ;  takes  a  long  while,  in  evening,  to
fall  asleep,  but  then  sleeps  quietly ;  in  morning,  awakes
with  headache,  vertigo,  and  even  sight  of  food  produces
nausea.

iBurning,  pressure  and  aching  in  pit  of  stomach,  extend-
ing over  chest  to  pit  of  throat;  after  eating,  cutting  in
1.  side  of  stomach,  and  very  painful  grasping,  extending
over  chest;  in  middle  of  chest  feeling  of  a  hard  ball,
with  great  pressure,  extending  to  back;  gulping  up  of
phlegm  relieves,  but  pain  soon  returns,  with  heavy  beat-
ing in  pit  of  stomach;  frequent  stitch  pains  and  tearing
in  limbs ;  heat  and  ebullitions  towards  head ;  frequent
chilliness  and  shuddering;  cough  <  evening  and  morn-
ing, with  greyish,  greenish,  lumpy  expectoration;  pulse
small.

■Everything  she  eats  produces  continual  pressure;  ten-
sion in  stomach  and  pit  of  stomach;  small  portions  of
coffee  or  weak  soup  fill  her  up,  with  eructations;  nausea
and  vomiturition;  frequent  headache  and  toothache;
hot  flashes,  with  abdominal  pulsations;  vertigo;  con-
tinual chilliness;  cold  feet;  internal  chilliness,  with
constant  inclination  to  micturate,  but  urine  flows
slowly  and  causes  a  burning  sensation ;  stool  dry,  re-
tarded ;  epigastrium  bloated,  tense,  at  pit  hard  and  pain-
ful to  least  touch;  respiration  heavy,  oppressed,  espe-
cially when  walking ;  when  stooping,  pain  at  pit  of
stomach  <,  respiration  more  oppressed  ;  pain  frequently
moves  to  back;  features  pale,  oedematous  around  eyes;
sleep  restless  and  dreamy ;  skin  dry  ;  is  obliged  to  keep
in  bed.

I  Woman,  set.  35,  after  childbed,  pressing,  tensive  pain  in
pit  of  stomach,  wakening  out  of  sleep  about  two  or  three
o'clock  A.M. ;  empty  feeling  in  stomach ;  little  eating  or
drinking  causes  fulness  and  pressure  in  stomach;  latho-
ing,  gagging,  vomiting;  pressure  spreads  to  1.  ribs,  to
liver  and  into  back ;  is  attended  with  belching,  nausea,
pressing  pain  in  forepart  of  head  into  eyes,  and  chilli-
ness and  shuddering;  face  pale;  eyelids  swollen;  tongue
pale  greyish ;  stomach  bloated  and  hard,  painful  to
pressure;  pulse  weak,  uneven.

iBoy,  set.  16,  has  gradually  lost  his  appetite ;  all  food  he
likes  causes  nausea;  frequently,  empty  gone  feeling  in
stomach;  dryness  of  mouth;  dry  stool;  turbid  urine;
face  pale;  eyes  dim;  pressure  in  front  of  head  and  eyes,
with  heat  in  head  and  flashes  of  heat;  r.  ear  hot;  1.  ear
pale  and  cold ;  after  washing  in  cold  water,  red  spots  on


387  KALI  CARBONICUM.

face ;  evening  and  morning  dry  cough  with  burning
in  chest ;  feels  week  and  constantly  chilly,  now  and  then
stitch  pains  in  limbs  and  about  ribs;  eruption  of  vesi-
cles on  back  and  thighs,  which  itch  greatly  in  evening;
weakness  of  sight  since  measles ;  a  fog  before  eyes  when
reading.
I A  boy,  set.  11,  vertigo,  nausea,  vomiting;  after  every
meal  has  vertigo,  pain  in  forehead,  heat  of  head,  redness
of  face,  dimness  of  vision ;  cheeks,  ears  and  forehead  red,
eyes  surrounded  by  rings  and  sunk  in ;  one  cheek  often
hot,  the  other  cold ;  if  he  does  not  at  once  lie  down  he
gets  such  severe  vertigo  that  everything  seems  to  be
whirling  round,  and  even  if  he  catches  hold  of  some-
thing he  falls  to  the  ground,  where  he  lies  with  staring
eyes,  and  objects  seem  distorted;  before  he  falls  has
shooting  pain  in  forehead,  root  of  nose  and  eyes ;  vertigo
chiefly  when  walking,  stooping  at  work  and  on  exertion,
also  sometimes  at  night;  had  frequently  to  be  carried
home  from  his  work  in  fields;  after  attack, stupefaction,
loss  of  consciousness,  sopor  sometimes  with  delirium  and
followed  by  exhaustion;  pale,  greyish  yellow  complex-
ion, with  dim,  dull  eyes,  and  grey,  furred  tongue;  appe-
tite not  deficient,  but  nothing  tastes  good ;  after  least
morsel  feels  too  full,  and  can  eat  no  more ;  pressive  pains
in  stomach  and  scrobiculus ;  rumbling  in  bowels,  much
thirst, frequent  yawning,  urine  scalds  and  is  fetid;  scro-
biculus cordis  distended,  painful  when  pressed  ;  at  night
frequent  desire  to  pass  urine;  diarrhoea;  chilliness  in
evening,  often  cough  with  much  muco-purulent  expec-
toration; difficult,  anxious  breathing,  especially  when
walking;  sleep  disturbed,  full  of  dreams;  in  morning
exhausted,  fetid  smell  from  mouth,  also  noticed  by  day.

■  After  drinking  cold  water  while  overheated,  difficult  res-

piration, formication,  pressure  in  stomach,  nausea  and
vertigo ;  since  then  gastric  derangement,  vertigo,  head-
ache, noise  in  ears,  rumbling  in  bowels,  bellyache,  eruc-
tations, empty  feeling  in  stomach,  debility;  bad  taste,
white  tongue;  feeling  as  if  stomach  was  full  of  water,
wabbling  when  moving  or  stooping;  staggering  and
sensation  of  unsteadiness  of  heart  when  walking  or  driv-
ing, nausea,  yawning,  deep  inspirations,  fulness  in  scro-
biculus cordis  and  beating  there;  frequent  desire  to
urinate,  urine  light  yellow  and  turbid ;  sleep  good,  sleepy
by  day;  eyes  red,  constant  chilliness,  cannot  get  warm
even  at  his  work;  difficulty  of  perspiring; very  weak.

■  Pyrosis  after  eating  or  drinking  (especially  cold  water),

also  at  night ;  fluid  regurgitated,  tasted  saltish,  and  often
like  lime  water;  aching  in  epigastrium  ;  pain  in  1.  hypo-


KALI  CARBONICUM.  388

chondrium,  sharp  aching  or  shooting,  or  with  sense  of
dragging  or  weight,  <  at  night;  dragging  or  creeping
in  r.  side,  extending  to  shoulder;  after  eating,  distension
of  stomach  and  abdomen ;  often  throws  up  tliick  acid
mucus;  <  from  animal,  and  almost  all  vegetable  food,
except  bread  stuffs ;  frequent  stinging  burning  aphthae
upon  tongue,  cheeks  and  inside  of  lips;  sluggish  bow-
els; hemorrhoids,  often  bleeding,  with  burning  and
tenesmus,  and  sore,  swollen  abdomen;  head  heavy  and
confused;  rheumatic  gnawing  pains  about  shoulders
and  joints  at  night,  <  in  damp  and  windy  weather;
has  been  in  habit  of  taking  enormous  doses  of  magnesia.
iBloatednessof  stomach,  headache,  chilliness,  heat,  nausea,
thirst,  bitter  taste,  gagging,  vomiting;  pressure  in  front
of  head  and  eyes;  grey  yellowish  tongue;  thirst;  after
eating,  pressure  and  fulness  of  stomach,  and  loathing ;
breathing  heavy ;  anxious;  face  pale;  heat  in  head  ;  no
sleep.

■  Pressure  in  region  of  stomach,  <  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;

pain  <  after  meals,  >  after  eating  a  very  small  quan-
tity of  food ;  pains  generally  <  in  morning,  not  extend-
ing very  far  and  rarely  going  to  back,  mostly  spreading
over  half  of  sternum  when  there  occurs  also  oppression
of  breathing;  marked  relief  of  pain  when  assuming  a
straight  .position  or  when  bending  backward;  sensitive
to  pressure  in  r.  hypochondrium  over  region  of  stom-
ach ;  every  three  to  four  days  scanty,  hard,  lumpy  stool;
menses  have  not  appeared  for  several  months,  leucor-
rhoeal  discharge  every  four  weeks ;  emaciation.  ^Per-
forating ulcer.

II  Dyspepsia  of  aged  persons  rather  inclined  to  obesity,  or
after  great  loss  of  vitalitj^ ;  repugnance  to  all  food  ;  con-
stant chilliness,  cold  hands  and  feet;  no  sweat  however
great  the  heat.
^®  Hypochondria.  ■  Feeling  of  heat,  burning,  pinching  stick-
ing in  hepatic  region.

■Wrenching  pain  in  liver  on  stooping.

I  Pains  in  liver  through  to  back. ^Keratitis.

I  I  Pressure  extending  towards  liver,  as  if  starting  from  r.
breast,  with  throbbing  in  epigastric  region,  which  is
painful  to  touch.

■  Painful  stitches  in  r.  lumbar  and  region  of  liver,  with

tension  across  abdomen;  stitches  <  on  motion;  must
sit  stooped  forward,  with  elbows  on  knees,  and  face  in
palms  of  hands;  when  walking  stooped  forward  with
hands  on  knees.  ^Hepatitis.
■Stitch  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest  through  to  shoulder;  press-
ive,  sprained  pain  in  liver;  can  lie  only  on  r.  side ;  com-
plete exhaustion ;  neither  thirst  nor  appetite. ^Icterus.


389  KALI  CARBONICUM.

■  Pain  in  lower  extremities;  on  lying  down,  cannot  get

her  breath;  stitching  pain  in  r.  side,  commencing  in
back,  and  going  through  chest,  <  at  night,  wli ether
lying  down  or  rising;  <  in  cold  air;  stitching  pains  in
knee,  wdiich  sometimes  swell;  stitching  pain  through  r.
shoulder  and  shoulder  blade;  appetite  poor;  stitching
])ains  re-appear  every  year  about  time  frost  sets  in ;  ex-
ternal warm  applications  cause  the  pains  to  move  to
other  places. dDisease  of  liver  with  hydrothorax.

■  Painful  stitches  in  r.  lumbar  region  and  region  of  liver,

with  tension  across  abdomen ;  stitches  <  on  motion  or
deep  inspiration,  and  particularly  from  any  unguarded
motion ;  >  sitting  stooped  forward,  elbows  on  knees  and
face  resting  on  palms  of  hands ;  in  moving  about  room
stooped  forward,  steadying  body  by  placing  hands  on
knees  to  guard  against  any  sudden  motion.  ^After
acute  hepatitis.

i  Swelling  of  liver ;  abscess.

B  Icterus,  biliary  colic.
^^  Abdomen. iShooting  and  stitching pains in abdomen.
^Phlegmasia  dolens.

B Epigastrium  swollen,  hard,  sensitive ;  pulsations  therein  ;
pains  in  hepatic  and  umbilical  region,  also  on  both  sides
of  inferior  parts  of  stomach,  down  into  bladder  and
testes.

■  Cutting,  shooting,  darting  stitching  all  over  abdomen.

■  I  Stitch  pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  <  from  motion.

■  Frequent,  slight  cutting  about  umbilicus.

■  iCutting  pain  in  1.  side  of  upper  abdomen,  extending

from  lower  portion  of  1.  chest,  where  there  is  a  sticking
at  same  time.

■  Cutting  in  abdomen,  as  if  torn  to  pieces.

■  Cutting in intestines violent; must sit bent over,

pressing  with  both  hands,  or  lean  far  back  for  relief;
cannot  sit  upright.

■  Cutting  and  drawing  in  abdomen,  like  false  labor  pains.

■  Frequent  cutting  in  abdomen,  as  before  diarrhoea.

■  Laborlike  colic,  with  pain  in  back.

■  Colic,  as  if  intestinal  canal  was  full  of  water,

■  Throbbing  in  abdomen.

I  I  Heaviness  and  unrest  in  abdomen.

■  Feeling  of  coldness  in  abdomen,  as  if  cold  fluid  passed

through  intestines,  during  menses.

■  ■Fulness,  heat  and  great  distension  in  abdomen,  imme-

diately after  eating  a  little.

■  Tension  across  abdomen;  heaviness,  inactivity,  coldness.
■Hard  distension  of  abdomen,  with  painfulness  of  umbili-
cal region  to  touch.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  390

1 1  Abdomen  distended  with  wind,  after  eating.

I  Incarceration  of  flatus  with  colic.

I  Feeling  of  tension  of  lower  abdomen,  and  sensation  of

heaviness  in  it,  while  sitting  and  walking.
I  I  Pressure  in  lower  part  of  abdomen  on  stooping.
I  I  Stitches  in  lower  abdomen.

■  Abdominal  muscles  painful  to  touch.

■  Stitches  and  painful  bloatedness  in  groins.

■  Swelling  of  inguinal  glands. ^Nephritis.

■  Yellow  scaly  spots  on  abdomen  and  about  nipples,  be-

coming moist  when  scratched.

■  Ascites.

^■^  Stool  and  Rectum. '  '  Discharge  of  much  flatus.

■  Diarrhoea: painless, with rumbling  in  abdomen  and

burning  at  anus;  only  by  day  ;  chronic  cases,  with  puf-
finess  under  eyebrows;  chronic,  of  dyspeptics;  alternat-
ing with  constipation.
;rSudden,  vehement  desire  for  stool  as  in  diarrhoea,  al-
though stool  is  hard,  with  colic.

■  Insufiicient  soft  stool;  after  much  pressure  most  of  it

remains.

■  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  with  a  feeling  as  if  rectum

was  too  weak  to  expel  it.

■  Constipation:  in  women  whose  abdominal  organs are

weak,  in  consequence  of  frequent  miscarriages  or  mul-
tiple and  difficult  labors ;  cardiac  palpitations ;  feeling
of  distension  in  breast;  night  sweats.

■  Stools:  every  eight  to  ten  days,  of  large  lumps;  dry,  too
. large  in  size;  rectum  inactive;  feels  distressed  an  hour

or  two  before  a  passage;  like  sheep  dung,  passed  with
pain  and  exertion;  light  grey;  frequent,  soft, pale;  yel-
lowish or  brownish,  fecal;  corrosive;  soft,  bloody;  tough,
dark,  soft.

■  Blood  with  stool.

■  Before  stool:  anxiety,  distressed  feeling;  white  mucous

discharge;  sudden  and  violent  urging;  colic;  pinching
deep  in  abdomen ;  rumbling ;  stitches  in  anus.

■  During  stool:  paleness  of  face;  cramps  of  stomach,  nausea,

eructation;  pinching  abdominal  pain ;  colic;  smarting
at  anus;  nausea;  rectum  feels  too  weak  to  expel  feces;
painful  straining  extending  into  genitals ;  protrusion
and  distension  of  hemorrhoids,  with  pricking  and
burning.

■  After  stool :  itching  about  anus  ;  anus  feels  as  if  lacerated;

burning  at  anus;  pinching  pains;  stinging,  burning,
tearing,  screwing,  biting.

■  Aggravation:  at  night;  at  3  or  4  a.m.;  during  day;  in

evening;  day  and  night;  after  milk. ^Diarrhoea.


391  KALI  CARBONICUM.

iHemorrhoids;  constipation  due  to  inactivity  of  rectum  ;
stool  difficult,  too  large  in  size,  accompanied  by  swelling
and  bleeding  of  hemorrhoids ;  discharge  of  blood  from
hemorrhoids  during  micturition.

■Sensation  as  if  anus  was  fissured ;  can  scarcely  convince
patient  to  contrary :  stinging,  burning,  tearing,  screw-
ing, itching,  biting  following  even  natural  stool,  setting
patient  almost  crazy;  walks  floor  back  and  forth  for
relief;  cannot  sleep  at  night  on  account  of  intolerable
suffering ;  passage  of  feces  difficult,  owing  to  their  great
bulk. ^Hemorrhoids.

■  Feels  as  if  red  hot  poker  was  being  thrust  up  rectum;

temporarily  >  by  sitting  in  cold  water,  and  by  sitting
on  foot  so  as  to  press  on  anus ;  bowels  loose ;  profuse
discharge  of  blood. ^^Hemorrhoids.
I  I  Burning  and  griping  in  rectum.

■  Large  painful  hemorrhoids;  >  after  riding.

■  Large  discharge  of  blood  from  swollen  hemorrhoids,  with

natural  stool.

■  Protrusion  of  hemorrhoids  during diarrhoealike stool,

with  needlelike  stitches  and  burning  for  many  hours.
■Sore  pain  in  hemorrhoids.

■  ilnflammation,  soreness,  stitches  and  tingling,  as  from

ascarides,  in  the  varices.

■  Pain  in  hemorrhoids  during  cough.

■  Proctitis,  with  violent  stitching  pain.

In  anus :  lancinations ;  stitches ;  sticking ; tearing ;  cut-
ting; stitches; soreness; itching;  crawling;  burning.

■  Violent  itching  in  anus  and  scrotum.
Ulcerated  pimples  at  anus.

■  BAnal  fistula.

I  I  Ascarides. ^Infantile  catarrh.
Urinary  Organs. ■Stitches  in  region  of  the  kidneys.

■  Tensive  pain  in  1.  kidney;  swelling  of  inguinal  glands;

cedema  of  1.  foot,  extending  gradually  to  r.  and  upwards
over  whole  body;  blackish  urine,  foams  on  shaking,  on
standing  leaves  a  thick,  reddish,  slimy  sediment;  fre-
quent soft,  pale  stools ;  after  a  blow  on  1.  side,  and
remaining  for  hours  in  wet  clothes. ^Nephritis.

■  Pressing;  stitches,  sometimes  dull,  at  others  acute;  smart-

ing in  both  renal  regions;  cutting  tearing  in  neck  and
region  of  bladder;  frequent  urging  to  "urinate,  with
slow  discharge  after  long  waiting  and  effort ;  frequent
urination,  urine  at  first  increased,  afterwards  dimin-
ished; fiery,  pale,  greenish,  dark  yellow,  muddy  urine.

■  Violent  cutting  and  tearing  in  bladder,  neck  of  bladder

and  urethra.

■  Obliged  to  urinate  frequently,  but  there  is  often  pressure


22


KALI  CARBONICUM.  392

on  bladder  a  long  while  before  urine  comes ;  even  at
night  is  obliged  to  rise  several  times  on  account  of  it,
though  he  drinks  but  little.
•  Frequent urination, especially at night, with much
pressure  and  scanty  emission.

■  Urine  :  hot,  scanty,  frequent,  sediment  red,  slimy  ;  black-

ish,  foaming when shaken; turbid; greenish; fiery,

diminished.
I  Burning  in  urethra  during  and  after  micturition.
I  Urine  flows  slowly,  with  soreness  and  burning.
I  Prostatic  discharge  after  micturition.
Male Sexual Organs. ■  Sexual desire excessive, with

burning  sensation,  or  deficient.
1  I  After  coition,  weak,  especially  the  eyes.
■Emissions,  followed  by  great  weakness.
■Pollutions,  with  voluptuous  dreams.

■  Copious, painful pollutions, with subsequent painful

erections.

■  Swelling  of  testes  and  spermatic  cords.
■Scrotum  feels  as  if  bruised.

■  Dragging  in  1.  testicle  and  penis.
I  I  Itching  on  scrotum.

^Female  Sexual  Organs.  lUterine  tumor:  with  flatulency;
stitching  pains;  spells  of  nausea;  rising  at  night  to
urinate;  dysuria;  tendency  to  uterine  hemorrhage

■  Pain  in  small  of  back  as  though  it  was  pressed  in  from

both  sides,  with  laborlike  colic  and  leucorrhoea  ; also
during  menses. ^Uterine  displacement.

■  Uterine  prolapsus  and  piles.

■Stitching pains  in and  about  uterus ; laborlike  colic,

leucorrhoea;  pain  like  a  weight  in  small  of  back.
■Stitching  pains  about  tender  uterus  or  all  over  abdomen

at  times. ^Hysteralgia.
■Nausea, vomiting, stitches through abdomen; great

weakness.
I  I  Chronic  inflammatory  states  of  womb,  with  nausea  and

vomiting.
I  lUterine  spasms,  especially  with  profuse  menstruation

and  intermissions  in  wave  of  pulse.

■  Severe  uterine  spasms  when  menses  should  appear  but

do  not;  head  heavy  and  dull;  feels  hot  and  restless;
menses  usually  profuse.

■  Acrid,  offensive  smelling,  vitiated  menstrual  discharge,

with  chilliness  and  cramping  pains  in  abdomen.

■  Promotes  expulsion  of  moles.

■  Feels  very  badly  a  week  before  catamenia ;  congestion  to

brain  and  chest,  hot  flashes,  burning  pain  in  region  of
hips,  intermitting  pulse,  stitches  in  chest.


393  KALI  CARBONICUM.

llMenses  too  early,  scant}'-,  of  a  pungent  odor,  acrid,  cov-
ering thigiis  with  an  itching  eruption.
I  Menses  too  early,  too  profuse  and  long  lasting.

■  Continual  profuse  menstrual  hemorrhages.

I  Profuse  and  long  continued  menstration  of  bright  red

blood  in  females  of  sanguine  temperament.
BMenses  suppressed,  with  anasarca  or  ascites.

■  After  severe,  fright,  three  years  previously,  suppression

of  menses;  frequent,  severe  pains  in  abdomen;  tongue
cherry  red  in  color,  sharp  pains  in  1.  hypochondrium,
<  walking,  also  prevents  her  sitting  down ;  <  in  evening
with  difficult  respiration ;  face  now  pale,  again  very
red ;  frequent  attacks  of  one-sided  headache,  particu-
larly at  times  when  menses  should  have  appeared,  with
severe  pains  in  1.  side  of  forehead,  which  become  throb-
bing in  nature,  particularly  when  working,  and  which
cause  tears  to  flow;  headache  in  morning,  >  towards
evening;  pulse  hard  and  full;  frequent  palpitation  and
epistaxis;  lassitude  and  weakness  in  legs,  <  from
slightest  motion.

I  Amenorrhoeic  and  menorrhagic  symptoms  due  to  organic
affection  of  heart,  deficiency  of  healthy  blood;  acrid
discharges.

■Menses  entirely  suppressed,  or  when  menses  do  not  ap-
pear at  age  of  puberty;  difficult  first  menses.

■  Before  menses:  swelling  of  cheeks  and  gums;  sour  eruc-

tations; shooting  pains  over  abdomen;  colicky  pains;
nettlerash;  increased  sexual  desire,  with  sensation  of
thrill  as  during  an  embrace,  especially  on  awaking  in
morning;  sour  eructations;  shooting  or  crampy  pains
in  abdomen;  itching  of  vulva;  nocturnal  restlessness;
chilliness.

■  ■Violent  colicky  pain  in  abdomen  before  menses  appear,

constipation  during  menses.

■  During  menses:  headache  with  heaviness  ;  coryza;  swell-

ing of  parotid  glands;  pains  in  back,  loins  and  abdo-
men, head,  ears  and  teeth  ;  itching  of  skin,  nettlerash ;
lassitude,  sleepiness ;  restless,  dreamful  sleep;  foul  taste
in  mouth,  eructation,  nausea,  vomiting,  distension  and
rumbling  in  abdomen;  excoriation  between  legs ;  heavy
aching  in  small  of  back  and  down  buttocks;  cutting  in
abdomen ;  griping  colic  with  pressure  in  abdomen  and
groins;  painful  weight  in  groins ;  severe  backache  when
walking;  pain  in  back  as  from  a  heavy  weight;  puden-
dum sore,  burns  and  itches;  pressure  in  small  of  back
and  forepart  of  lower  abdomen,  as  if  everything  would
push  out  at  genitals.
■Pain  like  a  weight  in  small  of  back  during  menses.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  894

■  Great  soreness  about  genitals,  before,  during  and  after

menstruation.
I  Sore  pain  in  vagina  during  coition.

■  Tearing  in  ].  labium,  extending  through  abdomen to

chest; pinching  pain  in  labia;  stitches  through  vulva;
soreness,  gnawing,  burning,  itching  in  vulva. ^ Vulvitis^
I  Pimples  on  vulva.

■  Mucous  leucorrhoea.

2i  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■  During  pregnancy,
sickness  coming  on  only  during  a  walk,  without  vomit-
ing, and  accompanied  by  a  feeling,  as  if  she  could  lie
down  and  die.

■  Feels  pulsation  of  all  arteries,  even  down  to  tips  of  toes;

feeling  of  emptiness  in  whole  body,  as  if  body  was  hol-
low; heavy  and  broken  down  feeling;  it  is  only  with
greatest  effort  one  can  make  any  exertion.

■  Vomiting,  with  a  swoonlike  failing  of  strength;  much

colicky,  stitching  pain  in  abdomen. ^Pregnancy.
■Back  aches  so  badly  while  she  is  walking  that  she  says
"  she  feels  as  if  she  could  lie  down  in  the  street "  to  ob-
tain immediate  rest  and  relief.

■  Severe  pains  in  small  of  back  during  pregnancy,  particu-

larly forcing  and  pressing  in  character,  as  if  a  heavy
weight  came  into  pelvis  low  down,  occasionally  becom-
ing very  annoying ;  also  stitching,  pressing  proctalgia.

■  ■Abortion  :  impending,  with  pains  from  back  into  but-

tocks and  thighs ;  discharge  of  coagula ;  habitual;  dur-
ing second  or  third  month.

■  After  abortion,  when  there  is  great  weakness  of  back  and

lower  extremities,  dry  cough,  long  continued  sweats,
attacks  of  chilliness  resembling  ague,  chronic  inflam-
matory condition  of  uterus  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  ■Labor  pains  insufficient; violent  backache,  wants  back

pressed;  bearing  down  from  back  into  pelvis.

■  Sharp,  cutting  pains  across  lumbar  region,  or  passing  off

down  buttocks,  thus  hindering  labor;  pulse  weak.

■  ■The  pains  are  stitching  and  shooting,  or  they  are  in  the

back,  shooting  down  into  glutei  muscles  or  buttocks  ;  or
pass  off  down  thighs.

■  Easy  confinement,  but  adherent  placenta,  w^hich  was  re-

moved eighteen  hours  after  delivery  of  child  ;  one  week
later  a  considerable  metrorrhagia.

■  Sixty  hours  after  delivery,  two  chills,  pricking,  nettle-

like pains  over  whole  back where  it  touched  bed;  fre-
quent shocks  of  a  few  seconds  duration.
■Litense  thirst,  morning,  noon and  night  continually;
very  rapid,  small  pulse;  distressing  cutting,  shooting,
darting  and  stitching  pain  all  over  abdomen,  stitching


505  ^  KALI  CARBONIC  QM.

pains  being  in  ascendency,  come  on  during  perfect  rest,
and  are  not  dependent  upon  motion  of  any  kind ;  ab-
domen much  distended;  great  exhaustion,  with  stu-
pidity ;  does  not  seem  to  care  for  anything  ;  urine  scanty
and  dark. ^Puerperal  fever.

■  Severe  hemorrhage  from  uterus  due  to  atony  of  blood

vessels,  one  week  after  labor.

■  After confinement:  hemorrhage; hemorrhoids;  peritonitis.

DTearing  stitches  in  mammae;  on  flow  of  milk.

iSequelse  following  confinement  and  miscarriage,  especi-
ally in  weak,  debilitated  constitutions ;  weak  back,
sweat,  dry  cough,  prolonged  metrorrhagia.

^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Aphonia,
with  violent  sneezing;  complete  hoarseness.
■Scraping,  dryness,  parched  feeling  in  larynx.
I  I  Roughness  of  throat.

■  Dry  coryza;  total  loss  of  voice  and  hoarseness;  collection

of  mucus  in  throat  and  sensation  of  lump  in  throat;
convulsive  and  tickling  cough  at  night;  choking  and
gagging  unto  vomiting,  especially  in  morning.

■  Mucus  seems  to  run  from  head  to  throat;  hawks  out  easily

white,  thick  and  tasteless  mucus,  <  in  early  part  of  day ;
breath  offensive,  <  evening;  catarrh  alternates  with
leucorrhoea,  which  is  attended  with  backache,  and  is  <
in  morning. ^Chronic  catarrh.

■  Chronic  bronchitis  when  cold  and  damp  have  induced

vascular  irritation  ;  severe,  sometimes  spasmodic,  cough
day  and  night ;  effort  to  bring  up  a  few  lumps  of  grey-
ish mucus  often  determines  retching  and  vomiting;
breathing  difficult  and  labored  after  frequent  paroxysms
of  coughing.

■Dry  cough  as  if  membrane  prevented  breathing  in
trachea,  or  as  if  some  tough  membrane  was  moved
about  by  cough,  without  being  able  to  expectorate  it.
^Cough  after  measles.
^  Respiration,  l  Weakness  and  weariness  of  chest,  from
rapid  walking.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  there  was  no  air  in  chest,  and  he  could
not  breathe.

■  Tension  across  chest,  on  expiration,  while  walking.

■  Stitches  in  chest,  on  inspiration.

I  I  Oppression  of  chest;  shortness  of  breath  in  morning.
■Spasmodic  dyspnoea.

■  Suffocation  from  dryness  of  larynx.

■  ■Difficult,  wheezing  breathing.

■  Breathing  labored  ;  after  paroxysms  of  cough.

■  Dyspnoea,  <  from  drinking,  from  motion,  cannot  walk

fast;  arrest  of  breathing,  awaking  him  at  night.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  ^  396

■  Dyspnoea  with  violent  and  irregular  beating  of  heart;

pulsation  all  over  body,  especially  in  hysteric  women.
1 1  Asthma;  must  lean  forward  with  head  on  knees,  <  in
morning.

■  Continual  pressure  after  eating;  tension  in  stomach  and

pit  of  stomach;  small  portions  of  coffee  or  weak  soup
fill  her  up;  eructations;  nausea  and  vomiturition;  fre-
quent headache  and  toothache;  hot  flashes  with  ab-
dominal pulsations ;  vertigo ;  continual  chilliness ;  cold
feet;  internal  chilliness,  with  constant  inclination  to
micturate,  but  urine  flows  slowly  and  causes  burning
sensation;  stool  dry,  retarded;  epigastrium  bloated;
tense,  at  pit  hard,  and  painful  to  touch ;  respiration
heavy,  oppressed,  especially  when  walking;  when  stoop-
ing, pain  at  pit  of  stomach  < ;  respiration  more  op-
pressed; pain  frequently  moves  over  ribs  to  back  ;  face
pale,  oedematous  around  eyes;  sleep  restless  and  full  of
dreams;  skin  dry. ^Asthma.

■  Asthma,  with  habitual  cough; paroxysm  <  during  ex-

ertion or  when  walking ;  return  every  two  or  three
hours,  especially  during  evening  and  night;  for  several
weeks  paroxysms  alternate  with  nightly  diarrhoea,  com-
bined with  loss  of  appetite,  headache,  nausea,  dry  cough,
restless  sleep,  pressure  in  epigastrium,  hands  and  arms
covered  with  bluish  red  places,  like  ecchymosis ;  extremi-
ties very  tired.
1 1  Terrible  attacks  of  asthma ;  aggravation  at  3  a.m.
^^  Cough.  Cough:  paroxysmal,  from  tickling  in  throat,  larynx
or  bronchi,  with  dislodgement  of  tenacious  mucus  or  pus,
which  must  be  swallowed  ;  spasmodic,  with  gagging,  or
vomiting  of  ingesta  and  sour  phlegm  ;  tormenting,  gets
nothing  up,  sometimes  feels  as  if  a  tough  membrane
was  moved  about,  but  would  not  loosen.

■  Cough  affecting  chest,  caused  by  tickling  in  throat.

■  Convulsive  and  tickling  cough  at  night. ^Coryza.
During  cough: sparks dart from  eyes; rough  pain in

larynx;  scratching  and  stinging  in  throat  and  chest;
pain  in  abdomen  and  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors';  stitches
in  rectum;  nausea,  retching,  vomiting;  stitches  in  r.
side  of  chest  (lower  part); wheezing  in  chest;  asthma.

I  I  Cough  so  violent  as  to  cause  vomiting.

■Suffocative  and  choking  cough  at  5  a.m.,  as  from  dryness
in  larynx ;  cannot  speak  on  account  of  cramp  in  chest,
with  redness  of  face  and  perspiration  over  whole  body.

■  Evening  and  morning  dry  cough  with  burning  in  chest.

■  Great  dryness  of  throat  between  2  and  3  a.m.;  awakes

with  a  dry  cough  at  2  a.m.  ;  coughs  about  an  hour ;
scanty,  yellow  expectoration; cough causes gagging;


897  KAIJ  CARBONICUM.

hard,  caked  swelling  of  1.  submaxillary  glands;  pulse
86,  weak.

II  Cough  at  3  A.M.,  repeated  every  half  hour.

iDry,  hard  cough,  somewhat  troublesome  during  night,
but  much  <  at  4  a.m.  ;  no  expectoration ;  stitching  pain
in  1.  side,  which  goes  up  back,  when  coughing  or  tak-
ing a  long  breath,

■  Dry  cough  at  night,  waking  from  sleep,  with  acute  pain
in  chest  on  coughing;  little  cough  during  day.

I  I  Dry  cough  with  nightly  diarrhoea.

I  Dry,  hacking  cough. ^Metrorrhagia.

I  Dry,  short  cough. ^Pleurisy.

I  Fatiguing  cough  in  evening.

iViolent  cough  evenings,  after  lying  some  time  in  bed.

I  Awakened  at  night  by  cough.

iSensation  of  lump  rolling  over  and  over  on  coughing,
rising  from  r.  abdomen  to  throat  and  back  again.

iWhooping  cough:  <  at  3  a.m.;  gagging  and  vomiting;
inflammation  of  lungs ;  baglike  swelling  between  upper
lids  and  eyebrows.

I  Cough  <  by  day  and  accompanied  by  pains  in  both  sides
of  abdomen  like  two  knives  going  inward  towards  each
other,  doubling  her  up,  >  by  pressing  with  hands;  con-
stant raw  pains  in  pit  of  stomach,  <  on  coughing;
awakes  between  5  and  6  a.m.,  with  aggravation  of  cough
and  pain  in  stomach  and  abdomen ;  sputa,  smoke  col-
ored round  lumps,  a  little  streaked  with  blood,  and  come
flying  out  of  mouth  with  force  without  efitbrt;  cough
causes  sweat  and  exhaustion.

lAfter  measles,  short,  teasing  cough,  two  or  three  parox-
ysms in  rapid  succession,  dry,  as  if  a  membrane  pre-
vented breathing  in  trachea,  or  as  if  some  tough  mucus
was  moved  about  by  cough  without  being  able  to  ex-
pectorate it;  <  eating  or  drinking;  vomiting;  pain  in
lower  part  of  chest  where  percussion  is  dull,  with  normal
sound  in  upper  part;  pressure  in  chest  with  tits  of  suffo-
cation in  morning;  general  malaise;  heat;  headache;
no  appetite;  dry  stool;  pale  face;  small  and  irregular
pulse;  skin  always  dry.

i After  pneumonia:  coughs  up  great  masses  of  blood  and
pus;  night  sweat ;  sleepless.

i  Short,  teasing  cough.

During  evening  cough,  after  lying  down,  he  can  raise  better
if  he  turns  from  1.  to  r.  side.

I  Dislodged  mucus  falls  back  into  stomach.

I  Expectoration:  tastes  like  old  cheese;  sourish;  of  small
round  lumps;  of  blood  streaked  mucus;  of  pus.
"« Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Chest  feels  weak,  faint  from
walking  fast.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  398

I  Spasms  of  chest.

i  I  Cutting  pain  in  chest:  in  evening,  after  lying  down;
does  not  know  how  she  shall  lie ;  <  lying  on  r.  side ;  in
morning;  in  lower  part  of  chest,  especially  in  1.  side;
moving  into  epigastrium  and  leaving  a  stinging  sensa-
tion in  1.  half  of  chest.

llStitches  in  sides  of  chest,  on  inspiration.

■Stitching  pain  in  lower  portion  of  r.  lung. /^Pleurisy.

■  Stitches  beneath  1.  mamma,  at  times  extending  upward

from  low  down  in  chest.
■Stitches  under  1.  mamma,  and  sometimes  descending  deep

into  chest;  also  in  evening.
I  I  Dull,  painful  stitches  in  chest,  from  without  inward,

under  1.  clavicle,  going  off  for  a  short  while  by  pressing

on  parts  in  evening.

■  Dull  stitches  deep  in  1.  chest  under  short  ribs.

■  ■Sticking  pressure  in  1.  side  of  chest,  on  deep  breathing.
■Sticking  pressure  in  r.  side  of  chest.

■  Pressure in  middle  of  chest,  with gulping of  watery

phlegm  ;  stricture  of  oesophagus.

■  Pressure  in  whole  1.  side  of  chest.

■  Pressure,  heaviness,  anxious  feeling  in  chest,
■Throbbing  in  1.  side,  near  pit  of  stomach.

■  Chest  becomes  very  sore,  especially  on  talking.

■Sore  pain  in  upper  part  of  chest,  on  breathing,  touching,
or  lifting  anything  heavy.

■  Pain  through  lower  third  of  r.  chest  to  back.

■  Pain  as  if  lower  lobe  of  r.  lung  was  adhering  to  ribs.
■Dry  cough  day  and  night,  with  vomiting  of  ingesta  and

some  phlegm;  <  after  eating  and  drinking  and  in  fore-
noon; during  cough  face  gets  dark  red,  otherwise  it  is
pale;  eyelids  red  and  swollen ;  breathing  short  and
anxious;  heat,  thirst  without  desire  to  drink;  during
day  chilliness;  cold  extremities;  crying  all  day;  rest-
less sleep,  interrupted  with  crying  and  coughing;  much
yawning  and  sneezing;  watery  diarrhoea;  discharge  of
worms. ^Catarrh  of  chest.

■  Dyspnoea,  <  in  spells, caused by  cough,  motion  and

drinking;  breathing  wheezing,  labored,  whistling  dur-
ing inspiration;  face  purple,  bloated ;  region  of  stomach
distended;  arms  twitch  and  hands  move  convulsively.

■  Difficult  breathing,  cannot  walk  fast;  r.  lung  hepatized;

pulse  106,  small  and  hard;  cannot  lie  on  r.  side,  feels
best  lying  on  1.  side. ^Pneumonia.
■Pneumonia,  with  stitches  through  r.  chest,  hepatic  inflam-
mation; r.  lung  hepatized;  <  lying  on  r.  side.

■  Pneumonia  after  measles;  dry,  hacking  cough; fever;

headache;  stitches  and  pressing  in  chest;  short  breath-


399  KALI  CARBONICUM.

ing,  wheezing,  rattling;  dry  skin;  great  thirst;  whitish
grey  tongue;  loss  of  appetite;  cough  <  towards  morn-
ing, almost  choking,  <  from  eating  or  drinking,  caus-
ing vomiting;  pain  in  lower  part  of  chest,  with  dull
percussion  sound;  pulse  small,  and  somewhat  irregular;
face  pale;  skin  dry;  stool  dry.

I  Infantile  pneumonia,  much  rattling  during  resolution.

fi During  resolution;  exudate  considerable,  and  sometimes
on  both  sides;  great  bubbling  and  rattling  noise;  great
dyspnoea,  preventing  child  from  sleeping  and  drinking;
piiffiness,  with  cyanosis  of  hands  and  feet;  tormenting
cough,  which,  however,  brings  none  of  tough  phlegm
away;  diarrhoea. ^Pneumonia.

B Pleurisy:  stitches  in  1.  chest,  with  violent  palpitation;
dry  cough,  <  3  a.m.;  stitches  in  lower  r.  lung;  after
Aeon.,  when  severe  stitching  pains  and  difficult  res-
piration continue  or  return;  1.  side  particularly  affected:
palpitation  of  heart;  dry,  suppressed  cough ;  exudation
on  r.  side ;  during  course  of  tuberculosis.

■  Predominant  stitches;  incipient  pulmonary  phthi^s  with
exhausting,  dry  cough,  short  breathing;  purulent  ex-
pectoration, weakness  and  emaciation.

In  beginning  of  phthisis,  when  there  is  occasional  discharge
of  masses  resembling  pus;  transient  stitches  through
chest;  dry,  distressing  cough;  great  debility  and  ema-
ciation; during  disorganizing  stage  of  tubercles.

I  Profuse  expectoration  of  whitish  yellow  pus  with  cough,
3-4  vessels  being  filled  daily;  <  at  night;  pressure  and
heaviness  in  head;  vertigo  when  moving;  pinching  and
gripping  in  chest  with  pains  about  epigastrium  and
much  cough;  occasionally  expectoration  is  difficult;
whistling  wheezing  in  chest;  great  dyspnoea;  in  after-
noon much  chilliness,  in  morning  and  at  night  fever  with
sweat;  congestion;  pains  in  limbs;  tearing,  stitching
pains  in  eyes  and  ears,  always  on  same  side ;,  obstinate
constipation;  prostration  so  great  he  must  remain  in
bed;  face  earthy;  pulse  changeable;  offensive  smelling
sweat;  second  stage. ^Phthisis.

I  Stitching  pain  in  temples,  eyes,  ears,  teeth,  chest  and  dif-
ferent parts  of  body;  after  dinner  nausea,  faintishness,
sleep;  about  noon,  chilliness;  at  night,  heat;  about  3
o'clock  A.M.,  cough  <  ;  nursing  mothers. ^Phthisis.

I  After  pneumonia,  dry,  spasmodic,  distressing  cough;
great  emaciation,  eyes  and  cheeks  sunken;  great  depres-
sion of  mind  and  fear  of  death;  painful  oppression  and
scanty  breath;  cough,  <  after  midnight,  causing  sleep-
lessness; cough  short,  hollow,  painful,  paroxysmal;
expectoration of  yellow  pus,  streaked  with blood or


KALI  CARBONICUM.  400

containing  small  lumps  of  blood;  great  difficulty  in  ex-
pectorating loosened  discharge;  profuse  night  sweats;
digestive  disturbances;  painful  diarrhoea  alternating
with  constipation;  pressure  in  occiput.

iCough  <  from  any  exertion  and  <  when  lying  down;
green  scabs  are  sometimes  coughed  up,  and  frequently
hard,  round,  white  masses  fly  from  mouth  when  cough-
ing or  hawking;  burning  in  top  of  head  and  soles  of
cheek;  has  attacks  of  gastric  disorder  which  begin  with
belching  of  putrid  gas,  tasting  like  rotten  eggs  and  end-
ing with  watery  diarrhoea,  <  in  morning;  gets  hungry
and  faint  about  10  a.m.  ;  contraction  of  heel  cords;  erup-
tion of  minute  vesicles  upon  soles  of  feet;  canker  sores
in  mouth;  gums  bleed  easily;  trembling  sensation
through  entire  body,  <  through  pelvic  region;  menses
scanty  and  late;  weeps  very  easily  while  stating  her
symptoms. ^Phthisis.

■Acts  on  lower  part  of  r.  lung.

iFar  advanced  phthisis;  expectoration  of  pus  and  blood;
diarrhoea;  night  sweats;  loss  of  appetite;  falling  away
of  intercostal  spaces;  prostration.

iPleuritis  of  tuberculous  patients;  affects  especially  cla-
vicular region.

IlPersons  suffering  from  ulceration  of  lungs  can  scarcely
get  well  without  this  antipsoric. Hahnemann.

sFar  advanced  hydrothorax;  patient  draws  breath  with
difficulty  and  anxiety;  hippocratic  countenance.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. iStitches  about  heart  and
through  to  scapula.

I  Palpitation:  in  spells,  taking  his  breath;  frequent  and
violent;  on  least  exertion ;  with  ebullitions,  on  waking.

I  Pale  greyish  color  of  face;  scanty  menstruation  ;  spell  of
palpitation  of  heart;  pressure  and  heaviness  in  chest;
evening  chilliness;  stitch  pain  and  great  anxiety  in  pit
of  stomach  and  through  chest;  throat  as  if  squeezed
together,  as  if  lungs  were  in  throat;  good  appetite,  but
after  eating  pressure  in  stomach  and  chest,  and  gagging;
shudders  frequently;  has  dizziness  in  walking;  nausea;
cold  feet;  pulse  feeble,  uneven.

I  Heart's  action  intermittent,  irregular,  tumultuous,  weak.

■  Stitching  pains  in  r.  side,  commencing  in  back  and  going
through  chest,  <  at  night,  when  lying  down  or  rising;
dry,  hard  cough,  especially  <  3  a.m.;  a  blowing  noise
and  a  louder  secondary  tick  of  pulmonary  artery ;  short-
ness of  breath  early  in  morning;  dyspnoea  during  fast
walking;  great  pain  in  chest,  especially  when  talking;
sharp  aching  behind  sternum,  when  breathing;  painful


401  KALI  CARBONICUM.

throbbing  in  clavicle,  sboulders,  side  of  abdomen,  etc.;
frequent  intermission  of  beats  of  heart ;  crampy  pain  in
or  about  heart,  as  if  it  was  hanging  by  bands  firmly
drawn  around;  pain  <  taking  strong  inspiration,  or
when  coughing,  not  during  exercise;  burning  in  region
of  heart;  both  arms  go  to  sleep  even  after  violent  exer-
cise ;  pulsative  pains  in  upper  arms,  at  intervals ;  cold
hands.  ^Angina  pectoris.
I  After  taking  cold  frequent  desire  to  swallow  saliva,  but
often  cannot  do  it,  it  then  causes  a  choking  in  throat ;
can  swallow  food  and  drink;  heart  beats  quicker;  he
feels  weak;  lying  on  r.  side,  heart  feels  suspended  to  1.
ribs  and  seems  dragging  them  to  r.  side;  pain  as  if
lower  lobe  of  r.  lung  was  adhering  to  ribs;  difficulty
of  breathing ;  has  only  been  able  to  sleep  sitting  up,
otherwise  saliva  would  run  down  throat;  heart's  action
irregular,  tumultuous;  systolic  murmur  loudest  at  apex.

■  Systolic  murmur; stitch  pains;  second  tick  loud  from

pulmonary  stagnation;  endocarditis.

I  In  place  of  first  tick,  a  blowing  noise  and  a  louder  second

tick  of  pulmonary  artery. ^Endocarditis.

I I  Insufficiency  of  mitral  valves.

I  Pulse:  rapid  mornings,  less  so  evenings ;  unequal,  irregu-

lar; intermitting;  slow  and  weak.
S  Ebullitions,  with  heat  from  abdomen  to  head ;  pulsations.

I I  Tendency  to  fatty  degeneration  of  heart.

^^  Outer  Chest. >  Falling  away  of  intercostal  spaces. ^Pul-
monary tuberculosis.

■  Small  pimples  on  chest  and  back.

^'  Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  in  nape  of  neck,  morning  in  bed.
iBack  of  neck  stiff;  shooting  pains  through  chest;  uvula
elongated.

■  Stiffness  in  1.  nape  and  down  1.  inner  scapula,  <  after

waking  up  and  after  laughing,
I  I  Stiffness  between  shoulder  blades.
■Neck  feels  large,  clothing  tight;  congestion.

■  Swelling  of  cervical  glands.

■  Tickling  in  glandular  swelling  of  neck  >  on  pressing

with  cold  hand.

I  I  Pimples  on  nape  of  neck.

■Stitches  in  r.  scapula  on  breathing.

■Tearing  in  r.  scapula,  in  morning.

Stinging  pain  as  from  blows  and  bruises,  in  r.  scapula,
when  in  motion ;  may  be  felt  as  far  as  chest.

Violent  stinging  pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  1.  scapula,  ex-
tending into  chest.

I  I  Stitch  from  apex  of  scapula  to  pit  of  stomach,  during
fatiguing  labor.

VOL.  VI. — 26.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  402

I  Burning  tearing  near  r,  side  of  spine,  above  small  of  back.

■  Drawing  pain  in  small  of  back.

iPain  in  small  of  back  <  after  standing  or  walking
I  Pain  in  small  of  back  after  a  fall.

■  Feeling  in  morning  as  if  small  of  back  was  pressed  in-

ward from  both  sides. ^Uterine  displacement.

■  Hard  pressure  in  small  of  back.

BiSharp  pains  in  small  of  back,  with  very  acute  laborlike
pains  running  through  to  front  at  intervals  of  a  few
minutes,  occasionally  shooting  down  to  glutei  muscles.

I  [Pressure  or  stitches  in  region  of  both  kidneys.

llBackache;  while  walking,  she  feels  as  if  she  must  give
up  and  lie  down.

I  I  Bruised  pain  in  back,  during  rest.

Occasional  stitch  from  small  of  back,  through  1.  side  of

abdomen,  toward  chest.
llSharp,  stitching  pains  aw^aken  him  3  a.m.,  he  must  get

up  and  walk  about;  pains  shoot  from  loins  into  nates;

pulse  weak,  soft. ^Lumbago.

I I  Stitching  and  shooting  pains  in  back,  shooting  down  into
gluteal  region  or  hips.

■Back  aches  as  if  broken.

■Tearing  in  lumbar  muscles,  impeding  respiration.

■  Great  weakness  in  small  of  back  and  lower  limbs.

■  Stiffness  and  pain  in  small  of  back. ^Amenorrhoea.

■  Pain  across  sacrum  like  labor  pains;  feeling  of  tighten-

ing of  skin  of  lower  abdomen  ;  feeling  of  weight  in  ab-
domen on  walking,  and  esj)ecially  on  standing.

■  Gnawing  in  os  coccygis.

^^  Upper  Limbs. '  l  Tearing  in  1.  shoulder  joint.

■  Pain,  as  from  blows,  under  r,  shoulder,  when  moving  or

touching  it.

■  Cracking  in  shoulder  joint,  wdien  moving  or  raising  arm,

■  Axillary  glands  swollen,  painful.

■  Sweat  in  axillse.

I  1  Weakness  and  loss  of  power  in  arms.

■  Weakness  in  arms,  mornings;  arms  feel  numb,  cold,  go

to  sleep  when  lain  on.
1  i  Pulsating  pain  in  1.  upper  arm  by  pauses,
i  I  Drawing  and  tearing  in  elbows ;  stiffness.

■  Weakness,  with  cramps  in  hand  and  fingers;  paresis.
I  1  Hands  fall  asleep.

■  Hands  tremble  when  writing,  mornings.
I  I  Laming  pain  in  wrists.

■  Hands  and  arms  covered  with  purplish  spots.
I  I  Skin  on  hands  rough  and  chapped.

■  Palms  itch ;  vesicles  form.

I  I  Dull,  pressive  tearing  in  hands,  between  thumb  and
index  finger.


403  KALI  CARBONICUM.

I  I  Cramping  of  fingers  while  sewing.

I  Burning  pain  like  glowing  coals,  two  fingers  of  1.  hand.
I  I  Stitching  tearing  extending  into  finger  joints.
I  Finger  tips  go  to  sleep  early  in  morning.
I  I  Spreading  vesicles  on  1.  index  finger ;  discharge  watery.
33  Lower  Limbs. iCrampy  tearing  in  hip  joint  and  knee;
bruised  pain  when  moving  or  sneezing. /^Coxalgia.

■  Paralytic  weakness  in  hip  joint.

1  Pains  in  r.  leg,  which  is  a  fingers'  breadth  longer  than
1.;  gluteo  femoral  fold  almost  obliterated;  very  weak,
cannot  stand  alone,  has  not  taken  a  step  for  eight
months ;  spine  curved ;  every  change  of  position  causes
a  pitiable  cry, ^Morbus  coxarius.

I  Left  lower  extremity  elongated  about  two  fingers'  breadth;
gluteo  femoral  crease  obliterated ;  knees  slightly  flexed
as  if  anchylosed,  permitting  neither  flexion  nor  extension
of  leg;  violent  lancinating  pains  in  thigh  and  knee.
^Morbus  coxarius.

I  For  last  ten  days  would  not  walk  ;  considerable  length-
ening of  r.  lower  extremity ;  folds  of  nates  almost  oblit-
erated ;  touch  not  painful. ^Morbus  coxarius.

■  Sharp  drawing  pains  in  r.  knee  and  thigh;  affected  leg

about  three  fingers'  breadth  longer  than  sound  one;
nates  flattened ;  movement  of  joint  painful,  although
pressure  caused  no  discomfort ;  pulse  feverish ;  loss  of
appetite ;  tongue  coated  white ;  pains  <  at  night ;  little
sleep. ^Morbus  coxarius.

iPains  and  heaviness  in  1.  thigh,  <  walking,  and  espe-
cially by  forced  marches ;  1.  leg  a  finger's  length  longer
than  r.,''and  head  of  femur  partly  forced  out  of  acetab-
ulum, threatening  luxation. ^Morbus  coxarius.

I  1  Twitching  of  thigh  muscles. ^Coxalgia.

■  Lower  extremities  frequently  fall  asleep.

I  I  Feeling  of  numbness  and  great  inclination  of  whole  r.

leg  to  fall  asleep.
I  I  Paralytic  drawing  in  whole  thigh.
I  I  Jerkings  in  muscles  of  thighs.

■  Pains  shoot  down  backs  of  thighs. ^Lumbago.

I  I  Cramp  in  r.  thigh  and  calf  woke  him  twice  at  night.

I  I  Swelling,  heat  and  redness  of  thighs. (^Pleurisy.

I  Difficulty  in  knees  on  going  down  stairs,  and  still  more

on  going  up,
I  Dull  pains  in  side  of  knee,  walking  or  extending  leg.

I  I  Frequent  tearing  in  knees.

■  Nightly  rheumatic  pains  in  legs.

I I  Restlessness  of  legs  in  evening.

I  I  Tearing  in  both  tibise,  with  pain  in  periosteum  when
touched  and  a  feeling  of  tension  when  walking.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  404

I  1  Drawing  and  tearing  in  bones  of  legs.

I  Drawing  pain  in  tibia  with  aching  in  joints ;  ulcerative

pain  on  pressure.
•  Burning  and  stinging  in  legs  and  feet.
I  Creepy  chilly  sensation  on  shins.
I  I  Herpes  on  legs  and  thighs.
I  I  Vesicles  on  tibia,  with  inflamed  areola.
I  I  Frequent  tearing  in  ankles.
I  I  Tearing  on  inside  of  foot  and  on  sole.

■  Feet  heavy,  stiff;  fall  asleep  after  dinner.

■  Swelling  of  legs  or  of  feet  to  ankles.
I  Feet  cold  in  evening  in  bed.

iQEdema  of  1.  foot,  extending  to  r.  and  upwards,  becoming

general. ^Nephritis.
I  Profuse  fetid  foot  sweat;  suppressed  foot  sweat.
I  I  Tearing  in  toes ;  in  first  phalanx  of  great  toe.
■Stinging  and  burning  in  ball  of  great  toe.

■  Violent  itching  on  great  toe,  beneath  nail,  with pain

when  touched.
^  Limbs  in  General. Pains  mostly  in  upper  arms  and  lower
part  of  legs,  <  on  going  to  sleep.
I  I  Uneasiness  in  limbs,  in  evening ;  is  obliged  to  move
them  about.

■  Heaviness  in  limbs ;  she  is  scarcely  able  to  lift  feet.
I  ■  Jerking  of  legs  on  falling  asleep.

■  Drawing,  tearing,  stitching  pains  in  limbs.

I  I  Limbs  pain  when  resting  them  upon  any  object.

I  I  Limbs  fall  asleep  while  lying.

I  iPressive  pain  in  joints.

I  I  Sticking  in  joints  and  tendons.

■  Cracking  in  joints  on  motion.

■  Extremities  very  tired,  with  nightly  diarrhoea  and  asth-

matic cough.

■  Limbs  tired  and  cold.  *

■  Puffiness;  hands  and  feet  cyanotic.

I  I  Spasmodic  contraction  of  fingers  and  toes.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  bruised  pain  in  back.

On  lying  down:  cannot  get  her  breath;  cough  <  ;  stitch-
ing pains  in  r.  side  < ;  chill  >.

After  lying  down:  cutting  pains  in  chest;  does  not  know
how  she  shall  lie ;  during  evening  cough;  can  raise  bet-
ter if  he  turns  from  1.  to  r.  side.

Cannot  sleep  on  back  in  night.

Lying  on  r.  side :  pain  in  chest  < ;  heart  feels  suspended
to  1.  ribs.

Can  lie  only  on  r.  side.

Cannot  lie  on  r.  side,  feels  best  when  lying  on  1.  side.

When  lying  on  arm:  it  feels  numb,  cold,  goes  to  sleep.


405  KALI  CARBONICUM.

Desire  to  lie  down.

Must  lie  down:  when  vertigo  comes  on.

Could  lie  down  in  the  street  while  walking,  to  obtain  re-
lief from  backache.

If  he  does  not  at  once  lie  down,  he  gets  such  a  vertigo  that
everything  seems  to  be  whirling  round,  and  even  if  he
catches  hold  of  something  he  falls  to  the  ground,  where
he  lies  with  staring  eyes.

Cannot  stand  alone :  r.  leg  longer  than  left.

Sitting:  feeling  of  tension  of  lower  abdomen;  the  only  po-
sition in  which  patient  could  sleep;  severe  pain  in  1.
hypochondrium.
■  Must  sit  stooped  forward  with  elbows  on  knees,  and  face
in  palms  of  hands.

Must  sit  bent  over  pressing  w^ith  both  hands,  or  lean  far
back  for  relief,  cannot  sit  upright,  with  backache.

Must  lean  forward :  on  account  of  severe  pain  in  pit  of
stomach;  asthma.

Stooping:  stitches  in  forehead  < ;  dizziness;  pain  at  pit  of
stomach  <  ;  vertigo ;  wabbling  in  stomach  ;  wrenching
pain  in  liver;  pressure  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

When  assuming  a  straight  position  or  when  bending  back-
ward: marked  relief  of  pain.

Raising  head:  stitches  in  forehead  >.

Motion :  headache  with  vertigo ;  <  pain  in  tumors  on  scalp ;
severe  pressure  in  stomach  <  ;  wabbling  in  stomach ;
stitches  in  lumbar  region  < ;  stitch  pain  in  abdomen
<;  dyspnoea;  stinging  pain  in  r.  scapula;  of  arm  causes
cracking  in  shoulder  joint;  causes  bruised  pain  in  legs;
of  joint  of  leg  causes  pain;  cracking  in  joints;  chilliness.

From  slightest  motion:  lassitude  and  weakness  in  legs  <.

Any  exertion :  asthma  < ;  cough  < ;  palpitation.

Rising:  stitching  pains  in  r.  side  <.

Moving  head,  eyes  and  jaw:  stitches  in  forehead  <.

Turning  head  or  body :  produces  vertigo.

Raising  arms :  causes  cracking  of  shoulder  joints.

Scarcely  able  to  lift  foot:  on  account  of  heaviness  of  limbs.

Extending  leg:  causes  dull  pains  in  side  of  knee.

In  moving  about  room:  stooped  forward  steadying  body
by  placing  hands  on  knees  to  guard  against  any  sudden
motion.

Any  unguarded  motion:  stitches  <.

Walking:  causes  vertigo ;  obstruction  in  nose  >  ;  respi-
ration oppressed;  difficult,  anxious  breathing ;  sensation
of  unsteadiness  of  heart;  feeling  of  tension  of  lower  ab-
domen; pains  in  1.  hypochondrium  <;  backache;
brings  on  sickness  during  pregnancy;  tension  across
chest, on expiration; respiration heavy, oppressed;


KALI  CAEBONICUM.  406

asthma  <;  dizziness;  dyspnoea;  pain  in  small  of  back
< :  feels  as  though  she  must  lie  down ;  feels  a  tightness  of
skin  of  abdomen;  pain  in  thigh  <;  dull  pain  in  knee;
feeling  of  tension  in  both  tibise;  irksome,  limbs  heavy;
walks  floor  back  and  forth  for  relief.

During  a  walk:  sick,  no  vomiting.

Must  get  up  and  walk:  on  account  of  sharp,  stitching
pains  in  back.

Going  up  and  down  stairs  difficult:  on  account  of  knee
symptoms.

Rapid  walking:  weakness  and  weariness  of  chest.

During  fatiguing  labor:  stitch  from  apex  of  scapula  to
pit  of  stomach.

Violent  exercise  does  not  prevent  arms  from  going  asleep.
^^  Nerves,  l Sudden  shrieking;  redness  of  face  and  e3'es;
striking  about  with  hands;  grasping  at  head  and  chest,
and  incoherent  talk  ;  sees  figures,  old  repulsive  persons
which  fill  her  with  fear ;  head  hot,  temperature  of  rest
of  body  being  normal;  spasmodic  flexion  of  fingers;  after
one  to  five  minutes  attack  passes  off,  followed  by  head-
ache, spasmodic  constriction  of  chest  and  general  sweat;
attacks  come  on  several  times  during  night  or  in  day-
time; several  days  before  attack,  headache,  loss  of  ap-
petite and  nausea ;  during  intermediate  time  perfectly
well. ^Hysteria.

1 1  Cannot  bear  to  be  touched  ;  starts  when  touched  ever  so
lightly,  especially  on  feet.

■  Twitching  here  and  there  in  muscles.

I  Spasms,  with  full  consciousness;  puerperal  spasms  seem

to  pass  off  with  frequent  eructations.
IlFrequent  exhaustion,  feels  she  must  lie  down  or  sit.

I  Whole  body  heavy  or  broken  down ;  it  is  only  with  great

effort  she  can  make  any  exertion. ^After  labor.

■  Complete  exhaustion. Wcterus. ^Tuberculosis.

I I  Debility  and  desire  to  lie  down.

I  Heaviness,  especially  of  feet ;  walking  becomes  irksome.

I  Paresis;  trembling.

(Paralytic  conditions  which  slowly  and  insidiously  de-
velop; attacks  of  vertigo  in  open  air;  finally  paralysis
of  lower  limbs,  upper  limbs  also  becoming  involved.
^'^  Sleep. I  Yawns  continually. ^Sick  headache. ^Blepharitis.
^Infantile  catarrh.

I  I  Great  sleepiness :  during  day  and  early  in  evening ;
while  eating ;  after  eating,  with  chilliness  and  yawning.

I  I  Unable  to  fall  asleep  before  11  or  12  o'clock.

I I  Wakes  about  1  or  2  a.m.,  cannot  sleep  again.

1 1  Awakening  between  2  and  4  a.m.,  with  nearly  all  ail-
nients,  but  especially  those  of  throat  and  chest.


407  KALI  CARBONICUM.

I  Aroused  by  asthma.

I  No  sleep;  gastric  ailments.

I  Restless  sleep.

I  During  sleep:  starting;  limbs  twitch;  gnashing  teeth;

crying;  talking.
I  I  Frequent  awakening,  with  desire  to  urinate.
I  I  Anxious  dreams.

1  Dreams:  of  water;  thieves;  ghosts;  diseases;  dead  people;

misfortunes; erotic,  imaginative,  fantastic,  sentimental.
^  Time. Morning: vertigo; headache  with  vertigo; scalp
itches  and  burns ;  perspiration  on  forehead ;  eye  symp-
toms <;  expectoration  of  phlegm;  eyelids  agglutinated;
face  bloated; tenacious  mucus  in  fauces;  eructations;
headache  begins;  cough  <;  dry  cough,  with  burning;
exhausted ;  pains  in  stomach  generally  <  ;  headache
on  awaking ;  increased  sexual  desire,  with  sensation  of
thrill  as  during  an embrace;  intense  thirst;  choking
' and  gagging  unto  vomiting  ;  leucorrhoea  <  ;  shortness
of  breath;  asthma  <  ;  dry  cough  with  burning  in  chest
pressure  in  chest,  with  fits  of  suffocation  ;  cough <
fever  with  sweat;  gastric  disorders;  shortness  of  breath
pulse  rapid ;^  stiffness  of  neck; tearing  in  r.  scapula
feeling  as  if'  small  of  back  was  pressed  inward  from
both  sides;  weakness  in  arms; hands  tremble  when
writing;  finger  tips  go  to  sleep;  chilliness;  heat;  sweat;
headache  rouses  him.

2  A.M.:  pressing  tensive  pain  in  stomach  awakens;  dry
cough  awakes  him.

2  or  3  A.M.:  awakened  by  tensive  pain  at  pit  of  stomach;
great  dryness  of  throat;  scarlet  fever  <.

Between  2  and  4  a.m.  awakes  with  all  ailments.

3  a.m.:  terrible  attacks  of  asthma;  whooping  cough  <;
dry  cough  <  ;  stitching  pain  awakens  him,  must  get  up
and  walk;  aggravation  regularly.

At  3  or  4  A.M.:  diarrhoea  <.

5  A.M.:  suffocating  and  choking  cough.

Between  5  and  6  a.m.  awakes  with  aggravation  of  cough.

9  a.m.:  headache  worst.

10  A.M.:  gets  hungry  and  faint.
Forenoon:  dry  cough  <.

Noon:  intense  thirst;  chilliness;  headache  >.

Early  part  of  day:  hawking  of  mucus.

During  day:  great  deal  of  yawning ;  toothache  >;  chilli-
ness; sleepy;  burning  at  anus ;  diarrhoea  <  ;  cough  <;
dry  cough;  crying; sleepiness; frequent  shudderings.

Day:  severe  cough.

Afternoon:  drawing  in  forehead;  much  chilliness;  nausea.

Evening:  vertigo;  scalp  itches  and  burns;  fever  and  thirst;


KALI  CARBONICUM.  408

violent  fluent  coryza;  pressive  toothache;  toothache  in
bed;  dryness  in  moutli;  takes  a  long  while  to  fall  asleep;
cough  <;  dry  cough  with  burning  in  chest;  eruption
on  back  and  thighs  itches  greatly ;  chilliness ;  diarrhoea

<  ;  pains  in  1.  hypochondrium  <  ;  headache  >  ;  offen-
sive breath  <;  asthma;  dry  cough  with  burning  in
chest;  fatiguing  cough;  violent  cough  after  lying  some
time  in  bed;  stitches  beneath  1.  mamma;  dull  stitches
in  chest  >;  pulse  less  rapid;  restlessness  of  legs;  feet
cold;  uneasiness  of  limbs;  sleepiness;  chills  begin;
fever.

Night:  delirium;  sharp  tearing  in  r.  orbit  and  eye;  can-
not sleep  on  back;  severe  cutting,  lancinating  pain  in
pit  of  stomach  < ;  mouth,  throat  and  lips  dry ;  sleepless,
then  headache;  sometimes  vertigo;  frequent  desire  to
pass  urine;  sharp  aching  in  hypochondrium  <;  rheu-
matic gnawing  pains  about  shoulders  and  joints;  stitch-
ing pain  in  r.  side  < ;  diarrhoea;  cannot  sleep  on  account
of  intolerable  suffering;  obliged  to  urinate  frequently;
restlessness;  chilliness;  intense  thirst;  convulsive  and
tickling  cough  ;  severe  cough ;  arrest  of  breathing  awak-
ing him;  asthma;  dry,  hard  cough  somewhat  trouble-
some, but  much  <  at  4  a.m.;  awakened  by  cough;
sweats;  dry  cough;  expectoration  <;  fever  with  sw^eat;
heat ;  stitching  pains  in  r.  side  < ;  pains  in  leg  < ;  ulcers
bleeding.

Midnight:  drawdng  in  forehead.

After  midnight :  severe  cutting  pains  in  pit  of  stomach

<  ;  cough  <.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  iiVery  much  inclined  to
take  cold.

Heat:  stitches  in  forehead  and  temples  > ;  pain  in  tumors
on  scalp  >.

Warm  applications:  cause  pain  to  move  to  other  places.

Warm  drinks:  <  sweat.

Warm  room:  chill  >.

In  room:  obstruction  of  nose  returns.

Open  air:  despondent;  aching  in  occiput  >;  obstruction
in  nose  >;  vertigo;  chill  <.

Change  of  air:  sensitive  to.

Anything  cold  or  warm :  <  toothache.

Draft:  easily  gives  cold,  toothache  and  headache.

Windy  weather:  gnawing  in  shoulders  and  joints  <.

Damp  weather:  pressure  in  stomach  <;  rheumatic  gnaw-
ing about  shoulders  and  joints  <.

Washing  face:  causes  nosebleed.

Washing  in  cold  water:  red  spots  on  face.

Sitting  in  cold  water:  temporarily  >  feeling  of  red  hot
poker  thrust  up  rectum.


409  KALI  CARBONICUM.

Cold  water:  drinking  >  jerking  in  head;  while  over-
heated, difficult  respiration,  pyrosis.

Cold  air:  stitching  pain  in  r.  side  <.

When  cold  and  damp  have  induced  vascular  irritation;
chronic  bronchitis.
***  Fever, s  Frequent  shuddering  during  day.

1  I  Great  chilliness.

B  Chilly  in  morning,  also  about  noon.

I  Chill:  <  outdoors;  begins  toward  evening,  >  near
warm  stove  and  after  lying  down.

■  Chilliness:  after  eating;  on  every  motion,  even  in  bed.

■  Chill  after  the  pains. ^Labor.

I  iCold  hands  and  cold  feet  in  bed.
I  Heat  during  morning  hours,  beginning  in  bed.
I  Heat  with  long  yawning,  stitching  pain  in  head  and  chest,
pulsations  in  abdomen.

■  Internal  heat,  external  chilliness.
I  I  Chill  and  heat,  with  dyspnoea.

■  Evening  fever; chilly with thirst,  then  heat  without

thirst;  with  violent,  fluent  coryza;  later  slight  sweat,
with  sound  sleep.
■Constant  chilliness,  violent  thirst  from  internal  heat ;  hot
hands;  loathing  of  food.

■  Chill  and  fever,  with  oppression  of  breathing,  constriction

of  chest,  pain  in  region  of  liver,  thirst  <  during  chill,

■  Entire  want  of  perspiration.

■Sweat:  on  every  mental  exertion,  reading,  writing;  mostly
on  upper  parts;  every  night;  all  night  without  relief ;
in  morning;  after  eating;  <  by  warm  drinks;  easily
excited  by  exercise;  offensive  or  sour  smelling;  of  axillae
and  perineum.

■  Night  sweats,  with  cough. ^After  pneumonia. ^Phthisis.
Type:  quotidian;  same  time  every  day.

■  Intermittent  fevers  with  whooping  cough.

■  After  taking  cold  in  a  draft  of  air,  and  becoming  heated,

heaviness  of  limbs,  tearing  in  whole  body  and  head,  roar-
ing in  ears,  general  coldness,  during  following  night
sour  smelling  perspiration.

■  Chill  severe,  shaking  him  dreadfully  for  two  hours;  after

chill,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  bile;  during  chill  and
fever  breathes  very  quick,  from  oppression  of  chest,  can-
not well  talk  on  account  of  oppression ;  is  not  restless,
but  suffers  from  anguish;  lies  quiet;  much  thirst;  no
sleep,  perspires  all  night;  no  appetite;  pain  in  liver,
which  seems  to  be  smaller  than  usual. ^Ague.

■  Fever,  lasting  from  morning  till  noon,  beginning  with

chilliness,  heat  in  head,  headache,  thirst,  swelling  and
redness  of  face,  and  lasting  till  noon,  with  loss  of  appe-


KALI  CARBONICUM.  410

tite ;  afternoon  free,  with  exception  of  debility  and  sensi-
tiveness to  change  of  air,  ends  at  night  with  slight  joer-
spiration;  during  paroxysms,  headache,  stitches  and
pressure  in  forehead  and  eyes ;  pains  deep  in  eyes,  with
photophobia  and  lachrymation ;  pain  at  first  pressing,
then  stitching,  bringing  tears  to  eyes;  sparks  before  eyes,
and  staring  look;  after  half  an  hour,  dimness  and"  mist
before  eyes;  upper  eyelids  swollen;  face  red,  hot;  head-
ache rouses  him  out  of  sleep  in  morning,  <  in  intensity
up  to  9  A.M.;  thirst;  roaring  and  swashing  noises  in  ears;
towards  noon  >,  but  again  <  by  taking  solids  or  fluids
into  stomach  ;  for  last  two  days  it  never  ceased  during
day  and  rendered  nights  sleepless;  coughing  or  sneez-
ing renders  headache  nearly  unbearable.
iChill  every  morning  till  noon  ;  slight  perspiration  at  night;
headache;  stitch  pain  and  pressure  in  front  of  head
down  into  eyes ;  pain  deep  in  eyes,  with  photophobia
and  lachrymation  ;  pain  first  pressing,  then  stitchlike,
causes  to  cry;  flashes  like  lightning  and  sparks  in  eyes;
staring  look ;  half  an  hour  afterwards  foggy  and  dark
before  ej^es;  upper  lids  swollen  ;  face  red  and  hot;  head-
ache awakens  him  in  morning  out  of  sleep,  <  coughing
and  sneezing;  urine  red  yellow;  stool  dry.

■  Chilliness  with  headache;  pressure  and  stitch  pain  in
front  of  head,  in  temples,  extending  into  eyes;  can
scarcely  see;  must  shut  eyes;  vertigo;  nausea;  swell-
ing of  eyelids,  of  1.  cheek  and  upper  lip,  with  burning,
thirst  and  heat. ^Catarrhal  fever.

I  After  catching  cold,  vomiting;  headache;  nervousness
and  irritability ;  pale  face ;  anorexia ;  pulse  intermit-
tent; disease  finally  becoming  typhoid  in  character.

■Intermitting pulse, vomiting, headache, nervousness,

easily  frightened,  pale,  sickly  complexion. ^Typhoid.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity, i Pains  recur  at  2  or  3  a.m.,  so  that

he  is  unable  to  remain  lying,  and  are  <  than  during

day  while  moving  about.

Two  or  three  paroxysms  of  short,  teasing  cough  in  rapid
succession.

At  intervals:  pinching,  tearing  pain  in  1.  temple;  pulsa-
tive  pains  in  upper  arms ;  sharp  pains  runing  from  back
through  to  front  of  abdomen.

Every  half  hour  after  3  a.m  :  cough.

Every  two  or  three  hours:  asthma  returns.

An  hour  or  two  before  a  passage :  feels  distressed.

Several  times  a  day :  vertigo.

Three  times  at  night:  urine  passes.

Several  times  in  one  night  or  day :  hysteria.

Twice  in  one  night :  awakened  by  cramps  in  r.  thigh  and
calf


411  KALI  CARBONICUM.

Every  morning:  bloody,  red  nostrils;  at  9  a.m.,  nosebleed;
pressing  in  forehead  and  vertex,  vertigo;  chill  till  noon.

Nightly:  diarrhoea;  rheumatic  pains  in  legs;  sweats.

Every  three  or  four  days:  scanty,  hard,  lumpy  stool.

Every  eight  or  ten  days:  stools  of  large  lumps.

One  week  before  catamenia:  feels  very  badly.

Every  four  weeks :  leucorrhoeal  discharge.

Every  year  when  frost  sets  in :  stitching  pain  reappears.

For  two  hours:  violent  chill.

From  morning  till  noon :  fever.

For  two  days :  headache  did  not  cease.

For  last  ten  days :  would  not  walk.

For  several  weeks:  nightly  diarrhoea.

For  eight  months:  has  not  taken  a  step.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  milky  whitish  spot  near
middle  of  cornea;  sees  as  if  through  fog  or  smoke;
cracking  in  ear;  sharp  tearing  in  orbit  and  eye;  lids  of
eye  inflamed;  ear  hot;  parotid  swollen,  inflamed,  hard;
dragging  or  creeping  on  side;  pressure  <  in  hypochon-
drium;  pressure  as  if  starting  from  breast;  painful
stitches  in  lumbar  region;  stitch  pain  in  side  of  chest
through  to  shoulder;  can  lie  only  on  side;  stitching
pain  in  r.  side;  stitching  pain  through  shoulder  and
shoulder  blade;  stitch  pain  in  side  of  abdomen;  oedema
of  foot;  as  of  lump  rising  from  side  of  abdomen  to
throat;  lying  on  side  pain  in  chest  <  ;  stitching  pain
in  lower  portion  of  lung;  sticking  pressure  in  side  of
chest;  pain  through  lower  third  of  chest  to  back;  pain
as  if  lower  lobe  of  lung  was  adhering  to  ribs;  lung  hepa-
tized;  cannot  lie  on  side;  stitches  through  chest;  exuda-
tion in  tuberculosis;  stitching  pains  in  side  from  back
through  to  chest;  lying  on  side  heart  feels  suspended
to  1.  ribs;  stitches  in  scapula;  tearing  in  scapula;  sting-
ing pain  in  scapula;  burning  tearing  near  side  of  spine;
pains  as  from  blows  under  shoulder;  pains  in  leg;  sharp
drawing  pains  in  knee  and  thigh ;  leg  inclined  to  go  to
sleep;  cramps  in  thigh  and  calf;  oedema;  swelling  of
parotid  gland ;  swelling  of  face  beginning  at  eye.

Left:  pinching,  tearing  pain  in  temple ;  tearing  drawing
in  half  of  head ;  cheek  swollen ;  ear  pale  and  cold ;
sensation  as  if  a  stick  extended  from  throat  to  side  of
abdomen ;  cutting  in  side  of  stomach  and  pressure
spreads  to  ribs ;  cutting  pain  in  side  of  upper  abdo-
men, extending  from  lower  portion  of  chest;  tensive
pain  in  kidney;  oedema  of  foot;  dragging  in  testicle;
severe  pains  in  hypochondrium  ;  severe  pain  in
side  of  forehead;  tearing  in  labium;  hard  caked
swelling of submaxillary gland ; stitching pain in


KALI  CARBONICUM.  412

side;  cutting  pains  in  chest;  stinging  sensation  in
half  of  chest;  stitclies  beneath  mamma;  dull  stitches
under  clavicle;  dull  stitches  deep  in  chest  under  short
ribs;  sticking  pressure  in  side  of  chest;  pressure  in
whole  side  of  chest;  throbbing  in  side,  near  pit  of
stomach ;  feels  best  lying  on  1.  side ;  stitches  in  chest ;
when  lying  on  r.  side  heart  feels  suspended  to  ribs  and
seems  dragging  them  to  r.  side ;  stiffness  of  nape  and
down  inner  scapula ;  violent  stinging  pain  in  scapula ;
stitch  from  small  of  back  through  side  of  abdomen  ;
tearing  in  shoulder  joint ;  burning  pain  in  two  fingers  ;
spreading  vesicles  on  index  finger ;  leg  little  longer  than
r. ;  pains  and  heaviness  of  thigh ;  oedema  of  foot ;
erysipelatous  inflammation  on  arm.

From  r.  to  1.  side :  oedematous  swelling  under  eyebrows.

From  within  outward :  stitches  in  ear.

From  without  inward :  stitches  in  chest.

From  behind  forward:  jerking  in  head.

From  upper  to  lower  parts:  rheumatism.
^^  Sensations, l  Feeling  of  emptiness  in  whole  body  as  if  it
was  hollow.

I  Stitches  in  stomach,  abdomen  and  back.

I I  Pains:  stitching,  darting,  <  during  rest  and  lying  on
affected  side.

J|@°'  Sticking,  stitching  pains.

Pinching  pain  in  internal  parts,

■Sensation  of  a  lump  rolling  over  and  over  on  coughing,
rising  from  r.  abdomen  up  to  throat  then  back  again.

Feeling  as  if  bed  was  sinking  from  under  her.

Vertigo,  as  if  proceeding  from  stomach;  dulness  as  after
intoxication  and  as  if  ears  Were  stopped  up;  as  if  head
was  too  light;  as  of  a  hot  body  having  descended  into
it  when  stooping;  as  if  something  was  loose  in  head;
itching  as  if  in  bones;  sees  as  if  through  a  fog;  eyes  as
if  pressed  inward ;  tip  of  tongue  burns  as  if  raw ;  as  if  a
fish  bone  was  sticking  in  throat;  as  of  a  lump  in  phar-
ynx; throat  feels  as  if  squeezed;  as  if  lungs  came  into
throat;  as  if  a  stick  with  ball  at  each  end  extended  from
throat  to  abdomen;  pressing  of  a  stone  in  forehead  and
vertex;  feels  as  if  she  must  lie  down;  stomach  feels  as
if  it  would  burst;  as  if  stomach  was  full  of  water;
stomach  feels  as  if  it  was  cut  to  pieces;  in  middle  of
chest  feeling  as  of  a  hard  ball;  pressure  as  if  starting
from  r.  breast;  as  if  abdomen  was  torn  to  pieces;  as  if
intestinal  canal  was  full  of  water;  as  if  cold  fluid
passed  through  intestines;  as  if  rectum  was  too  weak
to  expel  stool;  anus  feels  as  if  lacerated;  as  if  anus  w^as
fissured; as  if  red  hot  poker  was  thrust  up  rectum;


413  ' KALI  CARBONICUM.

scrotum  feels  as  if  bruised;  small  of  back  as  though  it
was  pressed  in  from  both  sides;  like  a  weight  in  small
of  back;  as  if  everything  would  push  out  at  genitals;  as
if  she  would  lie  down  and  die;  as  if  body  was  hollow;
as  if  a  heavy  weight  came  down  into  pelvis  low  down;
dry  cough  as  if  a  membrane  prevented  breathing,  in
trachea,  or  as  if  some tough membrane  was moved
about  by  cough;  as  if  there  was  no  air  in  chest;  pain
like  two  knives  going  inward  towards  each  other;  as  if
lower  lobe  of  r.  lung  was  adhering  to  ribs;  throat  as  if
squeezed  together;  as  if  lungs  were  in  throat;  as  if  heart
was  held  by  bands  firmly  drawn  round;  neck  as  il  large;
tearing  in  r.  scapula  as  from  blows  and  bruises ;  sting-
ing as  from  a  sprain  in  1.  scapula;  back  aches  as  if
broken;  liver  as  if  smaller  than  usual.
Pain:  in  forehead; in  ears;  deep  in  eyes; in  teeth;  in
back;  from  back  into  buttocks  and  thighs;  in  limbs;
in  facial  bones ;  in  throat  extending  to  stomach ;  in  centre
of  chest;  in  cul  de  sac  radiating  to  chest;  in  stomach;
in  sacrum;  in  small  of  back;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  L
hypochondrium;  in  liver;  through  to  back;  in  lower
extremities;  in  hepatic  and  umbilical  region;  on  both
sides  of  inferior  parts  of  stomach  down  into  bladder  and
testes;  in  hemorrhoids  during  cough;  in  loins;  in  ab-
domen; in  head;  moves  over  ribs  to  back;  on  both  sides
of  abdomen;  in  lower  part  of  chest  where  percussion  is
dull;  through  lower  third  of  r.  chest  to  back;  in  small
of  back;  across  sacrum;  under  r.  shoulder;  in  r.  leg;  in
1.  thigh;  in  region  of  liver.
Excruciating  pain:  in  throat  when  swallowing.
Violent  pain  :  in  back.
Severe  pain:  in  abdomen;  in  1.  side  of  forehead;  in  small

of  back.
Great  pain:  inchest.

Very  acute  laborlike  pains:  from  back  through  to  front.
Acute  pain :  in  chest.

Sharp  pains  :  in  1.  hypochondrium;  in  small  of  back.
Violent  lancinating  pain:  in  thigh  and  knee.
Lancinating:  in  teeth;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  anus.
Sharp,  cutting  pain :  across  lumbar  region  or  passing  off

down  buttocks.
Cutting:  in  stomach;  in  1.  side  of  stomach;  all  over  abdo-
men; 1.  side  of  abdomen  from  lower  portion  of  1.  chest;
in  intestines;  in  anus;  in  neck  and  region  of  bladder;
in  urethra;  in  chest.
Slight  cutting:  about  umbilicus.

Tearing  pain:  in  1.  temple;  in  ears;  in  limbs;  in  anus;
neck  and  region  of  bladder;  in  urethra;  in  1.  labium;


KALI  CARBONICUM.  414

in  r.  scapula ;  in  lumbar  muscles ;  in  1.  shoulder
joint;  in  elbows;  in  knees;  in  both  tibiae;  in  bones  of
legs;  in  ankle;  in  inside  of  foot  and  on  soles;  in  toes;
in  first  phalanx  of  great  toe;  in  limbs;  in  whole  body.

Tearing  stitches:  from  a  molar  into  forehead  ;  in  mammae;
in  eyes;  in  ears;  into  finger  joints.

Sharp  tearing:  in  r.  orbit.

Burning  tearing:  near  r.  side  of  spine.

Crampy  tearing:  in  hip  joint  and  knees.

Drawing  tearing:  in  forehead;  in  eyes;  in  root  of  nose;
in  1.  side  of  head ;  in  bones  of  legs.

Dull,  pressive  tearing:  in  hands  between  thumb  and  in-
dex finger.

Shooting  pain:  in  forehead;  in  root  of  nose  and  eyes;
in  epigastrium ;  in  abdomen ;  over  abdomen  through
chest;  to  glutei  muscles;  from  loins  into  nates;  down
backs  of  thighs.

Sharp  shooting  pains:  from  upper  dorsal  spine  into  occiput.

Stitches:  in  forehead;  in  temples;  in  eyes;  root  of  nose;
in  occiput;  in  eyes ;  in  middle  of  eye ;  in  ears ;  in  teeth ;  in
pit  of  stomach;  in  stomach;  in  back  and  chest;  in  r.  lum-
bar and  region  of  liver;  in  r.  side;  in  lower  abdomen;
in  groins;  in  the  varices;  in  anus;  in  region  of  the
kidneys;  through  abdomen;  through  vulva;  in  and
about  uterus;  in  rectum;  in  r.  side  of  chest;  beneath  1.
mamma,  at  times  extending  upwards  from  low  down  in
chest;  through  r.  chest;  in  1.  chest;  in  lower  lung;  about
heart  through  to  scapula;  in  r.  scapula;  from  apex  of
scapula  to  pit  of  stomach;  in  region  of  kidneys;  from
molar  into  temples;  in  r.  side  from  back  through  to
chest;  in  knees;  in  lower  r.  lung;  in  limbs;  in  abdomen.

Darting  stitching:  all  over  abdomen.

Transient  stitches:  through  chest.

Occasional  stitch:  from  small  of  back  through  1.  side  of
abdomen,  toward  chest.

Dull  stitches:  in  chest;  deep  in  1.  chest  under  short  ribs.

Sticking:  in  posterior  portion  of  palate;  in  pharynx;  in
hepatic  region;  in  1.  chest;  in  anus;  in  joints  and  ten-
dons.

Sticking  pressure:  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Violent  stinging  pains:  in  1.  scapula.

Stinging  pains:  in  nose;  in  cheeks;  when  swallowing;  in
anus;  in  throat  and  chest;  in  r.  scapula;  in  legs  and
feet;  in  ball  of  great  toe;  in  joints  and  inner  parts.

Stinging,  burning  aphthae:  upon  tongue,  cheeks  and  in-
side of  lips.

Nettlelike  pains  :  over  whole  back.

Pricking  pains :  over  whole  back.


415  KALI  CARBONICUM.

Pricking:  in  hemorrhoids.

Beating:  in  epigastrium;  in  scrobiculus  cordis.

Violent  throbbing:  in  stomach.

Painful  throbbing:  in  clavicle,  shoulders,  side  of  abdomen.

Throbbing:  in  head;  whole  body;  in  epigastric  region;  in
pit  of  stomach;  in  prsecordial  region;  in  abdomen;  in
forehead ;  in  1.  side,  near  pit  of  stomach.
, Pulsative  pains :  in  upper  arms.

Biting  pain:  in  eyes;  in  posterior  portion  of  palate;  in
anus.

Burning  pain  :  in  external  canthus;  in  back;  in  region  of
hips;  on  two  fingers  of  1.  hand.

Pinching  pain:  in  1.  temple;  in  hepatic  region;  in  abdo-
men ;  after  stool ;  in  labia ;  in  chest.

Screwing:  in  anus.

Wrenching  pain :  in  liver.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Grasping:  very  painful,  extending  over  chest.

Gripping:  in  chest.

Violent  colicky  pains :  in  abdomen.

Crampy  pain  :  in  or  about  heart ;  in  abdomen.

Cramping  :  of  hands  while  sewing.

Cramp  :  in  r.  thigh  and  calf.

Laborlike  colic,  with  pain  in  back.

Gnawing :  in  vulva ;  in  os  coccygis.

Boring :  in  teeth.

Drawing :  behind  ears ;  in  face ;  in  teeth ;  in  abdomen ;
in  small  of  back ;  in  elbows ;  in  r.  knee  and  thigh ;  in
both  legs ;  in  tibiae.

Dragging :  in  r.  side,  extending  to  shoulder ;  in  1.  testicle
and  penis.

Digging :  in  stomach.

Sore  pain:  in  hemorrhoids;  in  vagina;  upper  chest.

Burning:  in  scalp;  in  eyes ;  in  nose;  on  tip  of  tongue;
all  over  inner  mouth ;  from  stomach  to  throat ;  in  pit
of  stomach ;  in  chest ;  of  hemorrhoids ;  in  hepatic
region;  at  anus;  in  rectum  ;  in  urethra;  in  pudendum;
in  vulva;  in  top  of  head  and  soles  of  feet;  in  region  of
heart ;  in  legs  and  feet ;  in  ball  of  great  toe ;  on  skin ;
of  herpes.

Soreness :  in  external  canthus ;  of  tip  of  tongue ;  in  the
varices ;  in  anus ;  of  pudendum ;  about  genitals ;  in
vulva;  of  chest.

Ulcerative  pain:  in  legs.

Tensive  pain  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  1.  kidney.

Bruised  pain :  in  back ;  in  hip  joint  and  knee.

Pressing  pain :  in  back  of  head  ;  in  eyes ;  in  forepart  of
head  into  eyes;  in  chest.


KALI  CARBONIC  UM.  416

Pressive  pain  :  in  forehead ;  in  root  of  tooth  ;  in  teetli ;  in
chest ;  in  stomach  and  scrobiculus ;  in  Kver ;  in  limbs.

Sprained  pain  :  in  liver.

Rheumatic  gnawing  pains  about  shoulders  and  joints  ;  in
legs.

Sharp  aching  :  behind  sternum.

Constant  raw  pain :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Laming  pain  :  in  wrists.

Rough  pain :  in  larynx.

Dull  pains:  in  side  of  knee.

Heavy  aching :  in  small  of  back  and  down  buttocks.

Aching :  in  occiput ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  epigastrium ;
in  back ;  in  joints  of  legs.

Severe  pressure:  in  stomach;  over  whole  skull;  in  small
of  back.

Pressure:  in  occiput;  in  stomach;  in  forehead,  temples
and  eyes;  in  and  above  eyes;  in  chest;  in  pit  of  stom-
ach; over  chest  to  pit  of  throat;  over  chest,  extending
to  back ;  spreads  to  1.  ribs,  to  liver  and  back ;  in  r.  hypo-
chondrium ;  in  lower  part  of  abdomen ;  in  middle  of
chest ;  in  side  of  chest ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;  in  scars.

Paralytic  drawing:  in  whole  thigh.

Heavy  beating  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Jerking:  in  head  ;  in  muscles  of  thigh  ;  of  legs.

Smarting:  in  eyes;  in  both  renal  regions.

Tingling :  in  the  varices.

Scraping :  in  larynx.

Scratching:  in  throat  and  chest.

Parched  feeling :  in  larjaix.

Tickling:  in  ears;  in  throat;  in  glandular  swelling  of  neck.

Cracking :  in  ear.

Dryness:  of  nose;  in  mouth;  in  throat;  in  larynx.

Humming:  in  head.

Dulness :  of  head.

Sensation  of  lump  rolling  over  and  over,  on  coughing,
rising  from  r.  abdomen  to  throat  and  back  again.

Sensation  of  lump  in  throat.

Sensation  of  unsteadiness  of  heart.

Uneasiness  :  of  heart ;  of  limbs.

Weakness :  in  arms ;  in  hands  and  fingers.

Gone  feeling  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Emptiness  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Painful  weight :  in  groins.

Painful  bloatedness :  in  groins.

Fulness :  in  stomach  ;  of  abdomen  ;  in  scrobiculus  cordis.

Swollen  feeling:  about  whole  epigastric  region.

Great  distension  in  abdomen.

Tension :  in  stomach  ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  legs ;  in  scars.


417  KALI  CARBONICUM.

Constriction :  of  chest.

Heaviness:  of  head  ;  of  limbs;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen;

of  chest ;  of  1.  thigh ;  of  feet.
Feeling  of  weight :  in  abdomen.
Feeling  of  tightening: of  skin  of  lower  abdomen.
Stiffness :  in  nape  of  neck ;  in  1.  nape  and  down  1.  inner

scapula,  between  shoulder  blades ; small  of  back ;  feet.
Numbness  of  arms ;  of  whole  r.  leg.
Crawling :  in  throat ;  in  anus.
Trembling  sensation :  through  entire  body ;  < through

pelvic  region.
Violent  itching :  in  anus  and  scrotum.
Itching:  in  tumors  on  scalp;  of  scalp;  in  ears;  in  nose;

on  chin;  about  anus;  in  anus;  on  scrotum;  of  vulva;

of  skin;  in  pudendum;  of  herpes;  of  warts.
Creeping :  in  r.  side,  extending  to  shoulder.
Creepy,  chilly  sensation  on  shins.
**  Tissues. ■  Paresis.

Twitching  of  muscles ;  muscles  rigid ;  tremulous  lassitude.
I  Atony  of  muscular  tissue;  disposition  to  easy  overlifting.

■  ■Oppression  of  breathing  accompanies  most  complaints.

■  ■Anaemia,  with  great  debility,  skin  watery,  milky  white.

■  Easily  takes  cold.

■  Obesity.

■  Disposition  to  phlebitis.

■  Morbus  coxarius.

■  Dropsical  affections  and  paralysis  of  old  persons.

■  Ascites  in  complication  with  liver  and  heart  affections,

especially  of  old  people.

■  Body,  legs  and  scrotum  dropsically  swollen.
■Rheumatism,  often  attacking  heart,  generally  going  from

upper  to  lower  parts ;  painful  swelling ;  gout.

■  Stinging  pains  in  joints  and  inner  parts.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands.

■  Bleeding,  boring,  burning,  corroding  ulcers;  disposition

to  phlebitis ;  pus  copious,  bloody,  ichorous,  thin,  watery.

■  Ulcers,  bleeding  at  night.

■  Chronic  catarrh,  ozsena,  with  rheumatism  or  gout.

■  Emaciation. ^Stricture  of  oesophagus.

*'  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  After  a  fall :  first
pain  under  1.  shoulder,  afterwards  small  of  back,  into
thigh,  bruised  feeling  between  shoulder  blades,  some-
times in  both  arms.

Slightest  contact :  <  violent  pressure  over  whole  skull.

Slightest  touch,  especially  on  feet:  makes  her  start.

Cannot  bear  to  be  touched.

Touch  :  startles ;  causes  pain  which  makes  patient  shriek ;
epigastric region painful ; pit of  stomach  sensitive ;

VOL.  VI.— 27.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  418

painfulness  of  umbilical  region ;  abdominal  muscles
painful ;  causes  sore  pain  in  upper  part  of  chest ;  of
shoulder  causes  pain ;  causes  tearing  in  both  tibise;  pain
in  great  toe ;  parotid  gland  tender.

Pressure :  <  pain  in  tumors  on  scalp  ;  stomach  sore  ex-
ternally ;  gastric  region  sensitive ;  stomach  bloated  and
painful;  lump  in  pit  of  stomach  sensitive;  scrobiculus
cordis  painful ;  r.  hypochondrium  sensitive;  of  hands
on  abdomen  >  pain ;  dull  stitches  in  chest  >  ;  tickling
in  glandular  swelling  of  neck  >  ;  causes  no  discomfort
in  affected  leg ;  ulcerative  pain  in  tibia.

Can  hardly  bear  pressure  of  clothing.

When  resting  limbs  on  any  object,  pains  in  them.

Driving  :  unsteadiness  of  heart.

Riding :  <  large  painful  hemorrhoids.

Riding  in  a  carriage:  causes  headache.

Aft^r  a  blow  on  1.  side :  nephritis.

After  a  fall :  pain  in  small  of  back.
^'^  Skin. I  I  Burning  in  various  places  on skin,  even under
axillae,  as  from  a  mustard  plaster.

■  Dryness  of  skin; deficient  perspiration.
I  Skin  dry,  itches;  >  from  scratching.

■  Herpetic  spots  on  face;  old  warts.

I  Yellow,  scaly  spots  over  abdomen  or  around  nipples.
iBurning,  itching  herpes; moist  after  scratching.
Blotches  after  scratching ;  corrosive  vesicles.

■  Persons  inclined  to  pulmonary  troubles;  eruption  dry  at

first,  but  when  scratched  exuding  a  moisture. ^Eczema,

■  Erysipelas.

■  From  r.  to  1.  side;  oedematous  swelling  under  eyebrows;

insensible  and  delirious;  external  cuticle  peeling  off,
but  skin  left  livid  and  purple;  when  touched  ever  so
slightly  on  feet,  he  jerks  them  up,  much  frightened;
talks  of  pigeons  fijang  in  room,  which  he  tries  to  catch
with  his  hands ;  gets  regularly  <  about  3  a.m.  ^Ery-
sipelas bullosum  capitis,  suppressed  by  salve.

■  Swelling  of  parotid  gland,  r.  side ;  restlessness;  groaning;

tossing  about,  <  2  or  3  a.m. /^Scarlet  fever.

■  Scarlet  fever  with  swelling  of  r.  parotid,  tender  to  touch,

mouth  sore,  lips  and  tongue  black,  painful,  fetid,  dur-
ing desquamative  stage.
■Secondary  erysipelas  in  an  old  lady,  with  chronic  ulcers
on  1.  limb ;  swelling  of  face,  beginning  about  r.  eye,  ex-
tending gradually  downwards  and  also  to  1.  eye  and  1.
side  of  face ;  enormous  bags  under  both  eyes ;  also  ery-
sipelatous inflammation  on  1.  arm  after  being  scratched
by  a  dog,  whole  lower  arm  and  hand  affected;  head-
ache ;  loss  of  appetite ;  fever.


419  KALI  CARBONICUM.

I  Itching  of  warts.

I  I  Tension,  pressure,  rending  in  scars.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. "Suitable  for  the  aged ;
ratlier  obese ;  lax  fibre.

I I  Dark  hair,  lax  fibre,  inclined  to  obesity.

I  Adapted  to  fleshy,  aged  people,  and  to  complaints  follow-

ing  parturition; diseases characterized by stitching
pains.

I I  Adapted  to  diseases  of  old  people,  dropsies  and  paralysis,
a  I  After  loss  of  fluids,  or  of  vitality,  especially  in  anaemia.
Child,  set.  5  days;  suffocative  catarrh.

Girl,  set.  20  months,  lymphatic  blonde,  very  delicate ;  mor-
bus coxarius.

Child,  set.  2;  catarrh  on  chest.

Child,  set.  3 ;  morbus  coxarius.

Girl,  set.  3 J,  suffering  eight  months ;  morbus  coxarius.

Boy,  set.  5,  lymphatic,  badly  nourished,  limping  for  three
months;  morbus  coxarius.

Girl,  set.  6,  after  measles;  cough.

Girl,  set.  6,  good  constitution,  after  measles;  cough.

Girl,  set.  7,  suffering  six  months;  cough.

Girl,  £et.  9,  blonde,  of  rapid  growth,  affected  last  winter
with  an  offensive  eruption  on  scalp  which  was  allowed
to  heal  without  treatment,  mother  asthmatic,  every
week ;  spasmodic  attacks.

Boy,  set.  11,  four  years  ago  had  scarlet  rash,  which  was
followed  by  general  anasarca ;  affection  of  liver.

Boy,  set.  11,  malaria  nme  months  ago;  typhoid  symptoms.

Boy,  set.  11 ;  affection  of  stomach.

Boy,  set.  11,  lymphatic,  pale,  slight  figure,  suffering  three
months ;  morbus  coxarius.

Girl,  set.  12,  good  constitution,  nervo-sanguine  tempera-
ment; morbus  coxarius.

Girl,  set.  13 ;  pleurisy.

Boy,  set.  14,  sanguine  lymphatic,  weakened  by  loss  of
semen; morbus  coxarius.

Boy,  set.  15,  suffering  four  days;  toothache.

Boy,  set.  15,  sound  constitution ;  febrile  attacks.

Boy,  set.  16 ; dropsy.

Strong  healthy  girl,  menses  inclined  to  be  late;  urticaria.

Girl,  set.  19 ;  amenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  20,  after  severe  fright,  three  years  previously ;
amenorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  20,  delicate,  suffering  one  year;  asthma.

Servant  girl,  set.  20,  suffering  one  year;  gastralgia.

Girl,  set.  20,  blonde;  affection  of  fauces.

Man,  set.  20,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  scrofulous ;  cough.

Man,  set.  20 ;  erysipelas.


KALI  CARBONICUM.  420

Girl,  set.  20,  delicate  constitution,  one  year  ago  had  asthma
and  pain  in  joints,  since  then  suffering ;  gastric  dis-
turbance.

Man,  set.  20,  lymphatic,  in  bed  six  weeks ;  morbus  coxarius.

Man,  set.  21,  since  tenth  year  sufifering  from  cough  with
expectoration ;  phthisis.

Man,  set.  21 ;  pneumonia.

Girl,  set.  21,  blonde,  weakly  constitution ;  aifection  of  throat.

Woman,  set.  23,  blonde,  mother  of  three  children,  tubercu-
lous, one  year  ago  had  abdominal  troubles,  for  which
she  took  much  quinine,  since  then  ill ;  ulcer  of  stomach.

Woman,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  seven  years  previ-
ously was  in  habit  of  taking  enormous  doses  of  mag-
nesia to  correct  acidity  of  stomach  during  pregnancy,
two  years  later  confined  again,  and  had  prolapsus  uteri
and  leucorrhoea;  attacks  of  bilious  colic  for  last  three  or
four  years ;  affection  of  stomach.

Woman,  suffering  six  years;  chronic  catarrh.

Woman,  after  confinement,  weakened  by  nursing,  inclined
to  ansemia ;  metrorrhagia.

Woman,  after  great  exertions  from  nursing  sick  children
and  taking  cold ;  catarrhal  fever.

Ansemic  woman,  after  labor  placenta  retained  by  lower
section  of  uterus,  removed  eighteen  hours  afterward  by
manipulation ;  uterine  hemorrhage.

Woman,  set.  24,  mother  of  three  children,  had  inflamma-
tion of  eye  and  ulcer  on  cornea,  during  lactation  ;  con-
junctivitis and  leucoma.

Seamstress,  set.  24,  atrabilious  constitution,  menses  scanty;
cardialgia  and  headache.

Man,  set.  28,  robust,  after  pneumonia;  cough.

Woman,  set.  29 ;  gastricism.

Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  one  week ;  cough.

Woman,  set  32 ;  palpitation  of  heart.

Woman,  set.  35,  suffering  eight  days ;  affection  of  stomach.

Man,  set.  36,  married ;  constipation.

Farmer,  set.  40 ;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  42,  weakly  constitution ;  affection  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  45,  hard  of  hearing,  rheumatic;  gastric  dis-
order.

Mower,  set.  45,  after  drinking  cold  water  while  overheated  ;
affection  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  51,  sallow,  medium  flesh,  expression  of  intense
suffering;  hemorrhoids.

Man,  set,  60;  ague.

Woman,  set.  60,  seamstress,  has  frequently  suffered  with
arthritic  pains ;  blepharitis.

Woman,  set.  65 ;  asthma.


421  KALI  CARBONICUM.

Old  woman ;  asthma.

Woman,  set.  67,  for  thirty  years  subject  to  arthritic  attacks
and  severe  paroxysms  of  pain  in  stomach,  abdomen  and
limbs;  cardialgia.

Woman,  set.  71,  just  recovering  from  acute  hepatitis,  com-
plicated by  passage  of  biliary  calculi;  stitches  in  liver
and  lumbar  region.
^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Camphora,  Coffea,  Spir.  nitr.  dulc.

Compatible  :  following  Bryon.,  Lycop.,  Natr.  mur.,  Nitr.  ac.  ;
preceding  Carbo  veg.,  Phosphor.,  Fluor,  ac.  (cocalgia),
Arsen.,  Lycop.,  Pulsat,  Sepia,  Sulphur.

Complementary : Carbo  veg.

Compare :  Natr.  mur.,  Stannum.


KALI  CYANATUM.  422

KALI  CYANATUM.

Potassium  Cyanide.  K.  C.  N.

Proved  by  Lembke  in  1st  and  2d  triturations. Toxicological  reports;  see
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  323.

Clinical  Atjthoiiities. — Neuralgic  headaches,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.
348;  Affection  of  chest,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  39.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. 1 1  Double  vision.

^Tipper Face. I Agonizing  attacks  of  neuralgic  pains  be-
tween temporal  region  and  ciliary  arch  and  maxilla,
with  screaming  and  apparent  loss  of  sensibility,  as  if
struck  with  apoplexy  ;  pulse  84;  face  flushed.
iSevere  neuralgic  pains  in  temporal  region  and  1.  upper
jaw,  daily  at  4,  increasing  till  10,  and  ceasing  at  4  p.m.,
in  their  interval  anorexia,  fever,  headache.
■  Torturing  neuralgic  pains  in  orbital  and  supramaxillary
region,  recurring  daily  at  same  hour,  with  much  flush-
ing of  that  side  of  face.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Dulness  on  percussion  ; res-
piration feeble, mixed with  crepitus  and bronchial
rales,  on  r.  side  below  clavicle  ;  troublesome  cough,  pre-
venting sleep  at  night.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Acute  rheumatism  in  articulations.
^^  Time. Night :  cough  prevents  sleep.

^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Daily  at  4:  severe  neuralgic  pains
in  1.  upper  jaw,  increasing  till  10,  ceasing  at  4  p.m.
Daily  at  same  hour:  torturing  neuralgic  pains  in  orbital
and  supramaxillary  region.
''^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  bronchial  rale.

Left :  severe  neuralgic  pains  in  upper  jaw.
^^  Sensations. As  if  struck  with  apoplexy.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  orbital  and  supramaxillary  region.
Agonizing  attacks :  of  neuralgic  pains  between  temporal

region  and  ciliary  arch  and  maxilla.
Severe  neuralgic  pains:  in  temporal  region  and  1.  upper

jaw.
Acute  rheumatism:  in  articulations.
^^ Relations. Compare: Cedron, iStannum, and Platina  in
periodical  neuralgia.


423  KALI  FEREOCYANATUM.

KALI  FERROCYANATUM.

Potassium  Ferrocyanide. K^ Fe  Cy q  .ZH^  0=  K^ Fe  Cq  Nq  .oH^  0.

Proving  by  Bell. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  330.

ClinicAi, Authokities. — Menorrhagia ; Debility ;  Bell,  Hahn.  M.,  vol.  2,
p.  44.

^  Mind. Sad ;  inclination  to  weep.

'^ Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i Acidity  of  stomach;  sour
eructations ;  much  flatulence,  sour  or  tasting  of  ingesta
pressure  at  stomach  after  eating,  accompanying  symp-
toms of  uterus.

"Abdomen. I Feeling  of  weakness  and  bearing down in
bowels,  particularly  if  bearing  down  extends  to  back.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Menses  too  frequent  and  too  pro-
fuse, or  late.
■Menorrhagia,  three  or  four  ounces  a  day,  painless.
1 1  Passive, painless flowing of blood  of  natural  color,
rather  thin,  and  causing  much  debility.

■  Leucorrhoea  like  pus,  yellowish,  creamlike,  profuse,  not

irritating.
I  I  Leucorrhoea  only  after  menses,  usually  in  daytime.
I  Pain  in  small  of  back,  accompanying  leucorrhoea.
^Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Sensitiveness  of
lower  part  of  abdomen  to  pressure,  and  womb  very
tender  to  touch  of  finger. ^Pregnancy.
^'^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Fatty  heart,  with  weak,
irregular  pulse.
I  I  Hypertrophy,  with  dilatation.

■  Functional  disorders  of  heart,  with  anaemia.

^^Neck  and  Back. iPain  in  small  of  back  accompanying

leucorrhoea.
^"Nerves. Debility  ;  paleness  of  lips,  gums  and  whole  skin  ;
cold  hands  and feet;  urine frequent,  profuse,  watery,
and  sometimes  traces  of  coagulated  blood  ; irregular,
wandering,  neuralgic  pains ;  periodic  neuralgia  of  head,
following  the  sun.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodic  neuralgia  of  head.
*^  Sensations. Pain:  in  small  of  back.
Irregular,  wandering,  neuralgic  pains.
Periodic  neuralgia:  of  head  following  the  sun.
Pressure:  at  stomach  after  eating.


KALI  FERR.—KALI  lODATUM.  424

Weakness  and  bearing  down:  in  bowels.
^Tissues.  I  Chlorosis,  with  cardiac  debility.
*^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Touch: of  finger,

womb  very  sensitive.
Pressure:  lower  part  of  abdomen  sensitive.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Woman,  set.  35,  delicate,

brown  hair,  after  confinement,  sufifering  five  months ;

monorrhagia.
^^  Relations. Compare:  Collin.,  Digit,  Ferrum,  Hydr.  ac,  Kali

carb.,  Stannum  (sun  headaches).


KALI  lODATUM  (HYDRIODICUM.)

Potassium  Iodide.  KI.

Observations  have  been  chiefly  clinical,  made  on  the  sick  with  large  doses  of
the  crude  drug. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  331. It  needs  proving.

CLiNicAii  Authorities. — Hydrocephalus,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  345;
Syphilitic  choroiditis;  Disseminate  choroiditis,  Norton's  Opth.  Therap.,  p.  105 ;  Tumors
of  orbit,  Wanstall,  Norton's  Opth.  Therap.,  p.  104  ;  Paralysis  of  nervus  abducens,
Norton's  Opth.  Therap.,  p.  105 ;  Adhesions  of  middle  ear,  Houghton,  Eaue's  Eec,
1875,  p.  77 ;  Ozcena  syphilitica,  Kafka,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  124 ;  Eruption  on  face,
Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  346;  Diseased  submaxillary  gland,  ^LcGeorge,  Eaue's
Eec,  1870,  p.  140;  Diphtheria  (3  cases),  OEhme;  Asthma,  Small,  Eaue's  Eec,
1873,  p.  109  ;  Pleurisy,  Newton,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  112 ;  Pleurisy  with  effusion,  Peters,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  536;  Pleurisy  with  exudation  (4  cases),  Grubenmann,  Allg.
Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  104,  p.  3;  Dropsy  of  chest,  Peters,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  563;
Pnmmmiia,  Kafka,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  100;  Weber,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  148;
Payne,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  189  ;  Pleuro-jmeumonia,  Gersdorff,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.
1,  p.  30;  Aneurism{l2  cases),  Eoberts,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  494;  Sciatica,  Preston,
Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  202  ;  Oout,  Belcher,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  152;  Hirchel,
Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  280;  Epithelioma  of  tongue,  Petroz,  Gilchrist,  p.  161;
Syphilis,  Grubenmann,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  104,  p.  4 ;  McClelland,  Eaue's  Path.,
p.  709.

^  Mind. B  Talkative,  disposed  to  jest.
I  I  Starts  at  every  noise.
1  I  Excited  as  if  intoxicated.
iFrantic  excitation;  catarrhal  or  mercurial  headache.

I  I  Inclined  to  be  vexed,  vehement,  quarrelsome.

I I  Very  great  irritability  and  unwonted  harshness  of  de-
meanor ;  his  children,  to  whom  he  is  devotedly  attached,


425  KALI  lODATUM.

become  burdensome  to  him ;  very  passionate  and  spite-
ful temper ;  inclined  to  sadness  and  weeping,  with  con-
stant apprehension  of  impending  evil. ^Melancholia.

I  1  Torturing  feeling  of  anguish  preventing  sleep.

I  I  Whining ;  apprehensive  as  from  threatened  accident.

■  Sadness  and  anxiety.

I  Intellectual  weakness  and  paroxysms  of  dementia,  accom-
panied by  headache.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo :  with  reeling,  after  meals.

On  awaking,  giddy,  fluttering; must  get  up  or  smother.
^  Inner  Head. iHyperaemia  in  scrofula;  also  in  weak  or
tubercular patients ; hammering  in forehead ; head
feels  inflated ;  anxious,  restless  sleep.

I  Congestion  of  brain  from  suppression  of  long  standing
nasaldischarge.

I  I  Heat  in  head,  with  burning  and  redness  of  face  ;  beat-
ing in  forehead  and  temples ;  >  in  open  air.

■  Terrible  hammering  pains  in  forepart  of  head,  with  sen-

sation as  if  brain  was  compressed  from  both  sides,  or
as  though  head  was  enlarged  to  three  times  its  size.
I  1  Violent  pain  in  frontal  region.

■  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  forehead.

I  I  Tearing  or  jerking  stitches  above  1.  eye,  in  frontal  sinus.

■  ■Lancinating  and  darting  over  1.  eye  and  in  1.  temple.

■  ■Pains  in  sides  of  head,  as  if  screwed  in  ;  >  in  open  air.

■  Irritating,  offensive  discharge,  accompanied  by  boring,

tearing  pains  in  temporal  bone;  during  day  a  dull,
tense,  numb  feeling  in  affected  side  of  head,  during
night  becomes  intolerable  ;  sudden  shocks  of  pain.

■  Pain  in  upper  part  of  head,  as  if  it  would  be  forced  asun-

der; that  part  of  head  hot  to  touch,  though  he  is
generally  chilly,  and  >  by  external  warmth.

■  Tensive,  stinging,  darting,  lacerating  pain  in  head.

■  ■Headache  and  heaviness  in  head,  5  a.m.;  >  after  rising.
■Severe  headache,  with  lachrymation.

■  Catarrhal  headaches  with  inflammation  of  mucous  mem-

branes of  frontal  sinuses,  eyes,  throat  and  chest.

■  ■Syphilitic  or  mercurial  headaches.

■  Headache,  especially  in  occiput;  coryza;  pains  in  upper

maxilla  and  teeth.

■  Acute  hydrocephalus,  with  strabismus,  labored  respira-

tion, convulsions;  or  with  paralysis  of  r.  side;  dilated
immovable  pupils ;  limbs  of  1.  side  in  constant  trem-
ulous motion,  hand  being  often  drawn  to  head  with  an
undulatory,  automatic  movement;  occasional  convul-
sions and  almost  entire  insensibility.

■  Hydrocephalus; effusion; blindness; dilated pupils;

eyes  staring,  watery  ;  crying  out ;  vomiting.


KALI  lODATUM.  426

*  Outer  Head. ■  Violent  headache,  hard  lumps  on  cranium;
after  abuse  of  mercury  ;  syphilis.

■  Periosteal  syphilitic  headache.
I  Scalp  feels  hot  to  touch.

I  Coldness  of  painful  parts  of  head  >>  by  external  warmth.
■Scalp  painful  on  scratching,  as  if  ulcerated.

■  Great  disposition  for  hair  to  change  color  and  fall  out.
^ Sight  and  Eyes. ■Vision  dim  and  foggy;  sees  objects  in-
distinctly.

■  Mistiness  before  eyes; after  scrofulous  ophthalmia or

abuse  of  mercury.

■  Complete  blindness,  from  effusion  of  water  on  brain,  with

dilated  pupils,  staring,  watery  eyes  ;  frequent  crying  out
and  vomiting.

■  Sunken  eyes,  surrounded  by  blue  rings.

I  I  Incipient  glaucoma  in  syphilitic  subjects;  dull,  discol-
ored state  of  iris ;  burning  in  eyes,  lachrymation,  dilated
pupils,  amaurotic  symptoms.

■  Irido-choroiditis,  especially  if  syphilitic.

■  Choroiditis  disseminata,  especially  if  of  syphilitic  origin.
■Fundus  of  r.  eye  shows  extensive  white  patches  (atrophy

of  choroid)  and  deposits  of  pigment;  optic  nerve  hyper-
semi'c,  slight  haziness  of  vitreous;  commencing  atrophic
spots  in  choroid  of  1.  eye  and  hypersemia  of  nerve  ;  R.
V.  ^,  improved  to  f^.  _

■  Syphilitic  choroiditis;  excessive  and  variable  amount  of

haziness  of  vitreous.

■  Sj^philitic  iritis,  especially  if  inflammation  is  very  severe

and  unyielding  to  influences  of  atropine  ;  inflammatory
process  in  iris  so  high,  that  pupil  tends  to  contract,  not-
withstanding frequent  instillation  of  strongest  solutions
of  atropine;  iris  much  swollen  and  aqueous  more  or
less  cloudy ;  ciliary  injection  very  marked  and  of  a
bright  angry  appearance;  pain  may  be  severe,  but  is  <
at  night ;  photophobia  and  lachrymation  are  variable.

■  ■Iritis syphilitica after abuse of mercury; aqueous

cloudy;  ciliary  injection bright,  angry  looking;  pains
<  at  night.
I  1  Pupils  dilated;  eyes  in  constant  motion.

■  Pustules  on  cornea  ;  no  photophobia,  pain  or  redness.

I  I  Photophobia ;  constantly  shields  his  eyes,  and  yet  light
does  not  seem  to  aff'ect  them  much.

■  Conjunctiva  of  one  or  both eyes  often  affected;  attack

commences  by  more  or  less  general  or  more  or  less  rapid
vascular  injection,  to  which  is  speedily  added  a  tume-
faction of  mucous  membrane,  and  an  infiltration,  gen-
erally well  marked,  of  submucous  cellular  tissue;  con-
siderable chemosis  of  eye  and  oedema  of  lids.


427  KALI  lODATUM.

iChemosis;  purulent  secretion;  eyes  burn  and  are  red
from  lachrymation ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  especially
after  mercury.

iCEdema  of  lids  with  lachrymation;  lower  lids  twitch.

■  Injection  of  conjunctivae.

■  Injection  and  tumefaction  of  conjunctiva.

■  Great  redness  of  mucous  membrane  of  eyes,  nose,  throat

and  palate,  with  profuse  lachrymation.  ^Acute  coryza.
■Awoke  in  morning  with  dizziness,  and  afterwards  had
three  similar  attacks ;  had  had  a  severe  cold ;  for  two
days  had  noticed  blurring  of  vision  and  diplopia  which
had  been  steadily  increasing  and  was  only  noticed
when  looking  to  left;  examination  showed  only  slight
action  of  1.  external  rectus ;  syphilitic  history.  ^Paraly-
sis of  1.  nervus  abducens.

■  Several  tumors  on  entire  upper  border  of  1.  orbit,  firmly

adherent  to  bone  and  appearing  to  extend  into  orbit ;
growths  hard  and  encroached  considerable  upon  upper
lid,  especially  at  inner  corner ;  painless,  no  inflamma-
tion and  softening  ;  syphilitic  history.
■Periostitis  of  orbit,  especially  if  syphilitic  ;  more  or  less
swelling  extending  even  to  temple,  with  oedema  of  lids ;
pain  may  be  intense  or  entirely  absent.

■  I  Syphilitic  affections  of  eye.

^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  i  Singing  in  ears.

■  Boring  pain  in  ears ;  darting  in  ears  (right).

1  1  Tearing  in  r.  ear,  which  becomes  sensitive ;  evening.

■  Otitis  in  rickety  children  with  great  tenderness  of  head.
I  After  scarlet  fever;  r.  and  l.membranaj  tympani  depressed

and  adhesions  firm;  throat  tissues  thick;  tonsils  hyper-
trophied  with  excessive  catarrh,  tympanum  dilatable.
''  Smell  and  Nose. '  l  Sensation  of  a  leaflet  at  root  of  nose,
obstructing  the  smell.

■  ■Throbbing and burning pains  in  nasal and frontal

bones,  with  swelling.

■  ■  Sensation  of  fulness  in  nose ;  beating  pains  in  nasal  bones.

■  Gnawing  sensation  in  nasal  bones,  with  lancinating  and

boring  pains,  extending  to  forehead.

■  Acute coryza;  great redness  of  mucous  membrane  of

eyes,  nose,  throat  and  palate,  with  profuse  lachrymation,
violent  sneezing,  and  running  of  water  from  nose ;  fre-
quent irritation  to  cough  and  swelling  of  upper  lids.

■  ■Repeated attacks of  violent, acrid  coryza  from  least

cold ;  violent  sneezing,  eyelids  bloated,  profuse  lachry-
mation, stinging  in  ears,  nose  very  tender;  face  red,  ex-
pressing anguish  and  uneasiness;  tongue  white;  nasal
voice;  violent  thirst;  alternate  heat  and  chill;  urine
dark,  hot;  hammering  in  frontal  region;  sides  of  head
as  if  compressed,  almost  frantic ;  after  much  mercury.


KALI  lODATUM.  428

I  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  Schneiderian  membrane  in  all

its  continuations,  frontal  sinuses,  Highmorian  cavities
and  fauces ;  red,  swollen  nose  with,  continual  secretion
of  a  watery,  colorless,  acrid  fluid  and  violent  painful
sneezing;  swelling  of  eyelids;  injected  conjunctiva,
lachrymation ;  sticking  pain  in  ears;  red  face,  with
anxiety  and  restlessness ;  terrible,  hammering  pain  in
forepart  of  head,  with  a  sensation  as  though  brain  was
compressed  from  both  sides,  or  as  though  head  was
enlarged  to  three  times  its  size;  throwing  about  in  bed ;
frantic  excitation ;  shaking  for  loathing ;  white  coated
tongue;  talking  through  nose;  great  thirst  with  fever,
which  is  marked  by  alternating  hot  and  dry  skin,  and
then  again  body  is  drenched  with  sweat ;  heat  prepon-
derates with  intermitting  shuddering  and  dark,  hot
urine.
lOzsena  syphilitica.

■  Discharge  of  watery,  corroding  mucus.

iNose  red,  swollen;  discharge  acrid,  watery;  tightening
root  of  nose. ^Syphilis.

II  Accumulation  of  very  tenacious  mucus  in  nostrils.
■Purulent  nasal  secretion.

■  ■Discharge from nose of greenish  ^black, or yellow

matter,  of  foul  and  sickening  smell ;  decomposed  green-
ish red  blood

■  Chronic  catarrh  :  chilliness  and  nightly  rheumatic  pains

in  limbs ;  of  frontal  sinuses }  scrofulous  or  syphilitic.
■Ulceration  of  septum. LOzsena.

■  Ulceration of  internal nose, involving  frontal  sinuses

and  antrum  Highmori.
■Syphilitic  ozaena  after  abuse  of  mercury  with  pain  in  shin
bones,  especially  at  night. LOzsena.

■  ■Violent  epistaxis,  after  mercury.

®  Upper  Face. '  i  Anxious  expression  with  restlessness.

■  Paleness  of  face ;  face  colorless  during  spasmodic  attacks.

■  Face  red,  burning. ^Congestion  to  head. ^Pneumonia.

■  Stinging  darting  in  left  cheek  with  coryza ;  after  abuse

of  mercury ;  antrum  of  Highmore  affected.
■Swelling  of  face  and  tongue,  especially  after  mercury.

■  Eruption  on  face;  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue  swollen,

forming  small  tumors  like  tubercles;  violent  pain  in
both  orbital  processes,  and  across  forehead;  1.  nostril
ulcerated  within  and  excoriated  without,  with  occa-
sional troublesome  yellow  discharge  which  concretes
upon  it ;  pallid,  leaden  hue  of  face ;  slightly  curved
concavity  down  centre  of  nose,  from  ulceration  of
septum.
^  Lower  Face.  '  l  Upper  lip,  nose,  mouth  and  fauces  hyper-
sensitive.


429  KALI  lODATUM.

I  I  Dry,  chapped  lips.

I  I  Lips  covered  with  viscid  mucus  in  morning.

I  I  Blotches:  on  cheeks,  surrounded  by  swelling  and  red-
ness; at  corners  of  mouth.

I  I  Gnawing  in  both  sides  of  lower  jaw.

I  I  Small  pustule  on  chin,  discharging  water.

I  Chin  drawn  to  r.  side,  a  running  sore  under  ramus  of
jaw,  bleeding  easily  and  profusely  if  scab  is  removed ;
dizziness,  head  feels  full  at  times  and  then  nose  bleeds;
eyes  weak;  stinging  pain  in  r.  ear  and  r.  submaxillary
gland;  sharp  pain  in  chest  when  moving  about,  >  by
sitting  down;  cramp  pains  in  stomach;  constipation;
menses  scanty,  pale,  regular;  breath  fetid;  sweats  much;
restless  at  night;  has  been  salivated.  ^Diseased  sub-
maxillary gland.

I  I  Enlargement  and  suppuration  of  submaxillary  gland.

^°  Teeth  and  Gums, l Grumbling  in  teeth  and  face;  copious

saliva;  thirst;  violent  darting  in  ears;  abscess  of  antrum.

I  Teeth  feel  elongated ;  painful  in  evening.

■Teeth  decayed;  gnawing  pains;  gums  swollen;  >  from
warmth; <  from  cold;  evening,  and  4  to  5  a.m.

I  Gums  ulcerated  as  after  mercury;  bloody  saliva,  smells
like  onions,  with  sensation  as  if  a  worm  was  crawling
at  root  of  tooth.

BUlcerative  pain  and  swelling  of  gums;  decayed  teeth;
gumboils;  gums  recede  from  loose  teeth.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. '  i  Food  has  no  taste  or  tastes  like  straw.

I  Rancid  taste  in  mouth,  after  eating  or  drinking.

I  I  Bitter  sweet  taste;  morning  after  waking.

B  Bitterness  in  mouth  and  throat,  going  off  after  breakfast.

B  Tongue  white..

B Impression  of  teeth  on  swollen  tongue;  after  mercury.

B Burning  on  tip  of  tongue;  vesicles.

D  Ulceration  of  tongue  and  mouth.

B  Epithelioma  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  i  Numbness  of  mouth;  morning  on  waking.

■  Dryness  of  mouth.

B  Dryness  and  bitterness  in  pharynx  and  mouth.

BHeat  in  whole  mouth,  with  swelling.

BVery  offensive  odor  from  mouth.

B  Copious  salivation.

I  Violent  ptyalism,  with  irregular,  superficial  ulceration  of
mucous  lining  of  mouth ;  surface  looks  white,  as  if  cov-
ered with  milk.

B  Viscid,  saltish  saliva  during  pregnancy.

B Bloody  saliva,  with  sweetish  taste  in  mouth.

B  B Ulceration  of  mucous  membrane  of  mouth.

■  Birregular  ulcers,  looking  as  if  coated  with  milk;  burn-

ing vesicles;  on  tongue,  after  mercury;  stomacace.


KALI  lODATUM.  430

^^  Throat, i Ulceration  of  velum  palati ;  in  scrofulous  subjects.
1 1  Uvula  swollen  and  elongated;  mucous  membrane  as  if
oedematous.

■  Feeling  of  dryness  and  itching  in  throat  with  burning  at

epigastrium,  copious  salivation; running  from  nose;
intense  injection  of  conjunctivae,  and  lachrymation.
I  I  Roughness  and  dryness  of  throat ;  cough.

I  I  Pain  and  dryness  in  throat  and  stomach.

■  Dryness  of  throat,  enlarged  tonsils  and  papulae  on  face;

copious  salivation,  especially  if  from  mercury.

I I  Stinging  and  a  sort  of  painful  pressure  when  swallowing
or  talking.

I  I  Increased  mucus;  choking  sensation  as  if  something  had
lodged  in  throat;  going  off  after  hawking  up  piece  of
thick  mucus.

B I  Terrible  pain  at  root  of  tongue,  night  before  going  to
sleep;  pain  extends  to  both  sides  of  throat,  with  fear  of
death;  sensation  as  if  spasm  would  close  pharynx.

■  Follicular  inflammation;  laryngeal  irritation,  dry  cough;

burning  tickling  in  throat, secondary  syphilis  or  tertiary,
with  deposits  in  throat.

■  Chronic  pharyngitis.

■  Chills;  fever;  pain  in  throat;  pulse,  135;  skin  hot;  exu-

date on  both  tonsils. ^Diphtheria.

■  On  second  day,  headache;  general  indisposition;  languor

and  fever;  fauces  very  red;  uvula  swollen  and  elon-
gated ;  tonsils  covered  with  exudate. ^Diphtheria.

■  Hard  lump  from  right  angle  of  lower  jaw  to  larynx  and

trachea,  intermittent  beating  of  carotid;  face  pale,
anxious;  dyspnoea;  mucous  rales;  submaxillary  gland
enlarged  with  purulent  infiltration  around.

■  Goitre  (sensitive  to  contact).

■  Submaxillary  glands  swollen,  suppurating.

^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. iFood has no
taste ;  tastes  like  straw.

■  Loss  of  appetite;  emaciation.

■  Anorexia.

■  Thirst;  excessive  day  and  night;  with  nausea,  vomiting

and  bloated  abdomen.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating :  bitter  taste  >  (after
breakfast) ;  emptiness  and  qualmish  feeling  not  going
off.
After  food  or  drink  :  rancid  taste.

■  Cold  milk  makes  all  symptoms  worse.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Hiccough ;
evening.

■  Gulping  up  of  large  quantities  of  air.

I  I  Eructations  momentarily  >  burning  and  pressure  in
stomach.


431  KALI  lODATUM.

I  Heartburn  with  flatulence.

■  Nausea.

I  Violent  vomiting,  with  accumulation  of  saliva.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. "Burning  in  pit  of  stomach.
I  I  Empty,  cold  feeling,  not  >  by  eating,
•  Throbbing,  painful burning  in  stomach; cutting  and

burning  around  navel  like  a  coal  of  fire  ;  rumbling  and

shrill  noises  in  stomach  ;  belching. ^Gastritis.
I  Degeneration of  mucous membrane  of  stomach,  with

vomiting,  heartburn,  emaciation  and  diarrhoea.
I  Phlegmasia  of  stomach  and  intestines.
^^  Hypochondria. l  l  Darting  in  r.  hypochondrium,  and  a

similar  dart  in  side  of  abdomen,  when  talking.

■  Syphilitic  affections  of  liver.
■Swollen  spleen  after  intermittent  fever.

^^  Abdomen. ■Sudden,  painful  bloating  of  abdomen  or  about
navel,  followed  by  diarrhoea.

■  Cutting  and  burning  around  umbilicus.

I  I  Abdominal  sufferings  extend  into  groins  and  thighs.

■  Inguinal  glands  swollen  ;  gonorrhoea  or  chancre.

■  After  mercurial  treatment;  ulcerating  bubo,  with  fistu-

lous openings,  and  discharge  of  dark,  thin,  offensive,
corroding  ichor.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Light  green,  yellow,  watery  stools.

■  Diarrhoea  and  tenesmus,  with  pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if

in  a  vice;  after  mercury.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea  in  syphilitic  or  mercurial  subjects.

■  Obstinate  constipation;  stools  hard  and  scanty.

■  Serous  mucus  from  rectum.

■  Syphilitic  affection,  like  cancer,  of  rectum.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Morbus  Brightii,  with  gout  or  mercurio-
syphilis;  granulated  kidney.

■  Urine dark, scanty; painful;  sediment dirty yellow;

heat  in  head;  malaise;  chilliness  from  small  of  back
up  over  body;  flushes;  small  of  back  feels  bruised;
darting  pains  in  renal  region. (^Nephritis.

■  Burning  pain  in  kidneys,  and  bladder  feels  swollen.

■  Urine  suppressed. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  Retention  of  urine ;  prostate  enlarged.

■  Painful  urging  to  urinate ;  disappears  when  menses  come.
Urine:  increased,  unquenchable  thirst;  copious,  frequent,

pale  and  watery ;  red  as  blood  ; streaked  with  blood.

■  Enuresis  at  night,  in  scrofulous  and  syphilitic  children.
^^  Male Sexual Organs. ■Sexual  desire  diminished;  testes

atrophied.

■  Penis swollen, inflamed; constant  semi-erections and

sexual  desire.

■  Muco-purulent  discharge  from  urethra,  with  burning  in

urethra,  and  sometimes  discharge  of  blood.


KALI  lODATUM.  432

■Thick,  green  gonorrhoeal  discharge  ;  no  pain.

■  Chronic  urethritis,  with  secretion.

■  Gangrenous  chancre.

■  Extensive  swelHng  of  glans  penis  with  paraphimosis.

■  Obstinate  vegetation  on  glans  penis.

■  Spermatic  cords  thickened;  secondary  syphilis.

■  Orchitis  and  syphilitic  ulcers  on  scrotum.

■  i  Syphilis ; especially  with  indolent,  swollen  glands ;  deep

chancres,  hard  edges ;  buboes  ulcerating  with  fistulous
openings ;  thin,  offensive,  corrosive,  ichorous  discharge
or  suppuration  slow,  difficult,  curdy,  after  abuse  of
mercury.
^Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Severe  burning,  tearing  and
twitching  pains  in  ovarian  region,  especially  r.  side ;
sensation  of  swelling  and  congestion  of  ovaries,  with
pain  as  from  a  corrosive  tumor  there.

■  Fibroid  tumors,  subinvolution,  hypertrophy  and  enlarge-

ment of  uterus,  predisposing  to  hemorrhage ;  dysmen-
orrhoea,  constant  leucorrhoea ;  emaciation ;  prostration.

■  ■Before  menses:  frequent  urging  to  urinate.

■  During  menses: thighs  feel  as  if  squeezed; pains  go

into  thighs  ;  chilly,  "  goose  flesh  "  all  over  with  heat  in
head ;  bruised  pains  in  groins  and  small  of  back,  <
sitting.

■  Dysmenorrhoea  with  great  urging  to  urinate,  disappear-

ing with  onset  of  flow;  <  from  cold  milk;  pressing  in
groins  obliging  her  to  bend  double.

■  Menses: too  early;  late  and  more  profuse  than  usual;

too  scanty,  in  fleshy  women;  suppressed.

■  Ulcerated  mucous  tubercles,  or  thick,  scabby  eruption  on

labia ; chancre.

■  Itching  and  burning  of  vulva  and  thighs.
8  Discharge  of  mucus  from  vagina.

■  Leucorrhoea: watery, acrid,  corrosive,  with  biting  in  pu-

dendum ;  milky  white ;  like  washings  of  meat ;  green
or  yellow ; putrid.

■  Tumor  of  breast.

i  Atrophy  ofmammse.
2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Galactorrhcea.
^'  Voice  and Larynx. Trachea and Bronchia. ■  Voice
nasal. ^Catarrh. ^Bronchitis.

■  Loss  of  voice.

■  Hoarseness,  pain  in  chest,  oppressed  breathing,  pain  in

eyes  with  cough;  coryza;  pains  in  limbs;  influenza
after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Mucous  membrane  of  rima  glottidis  and  upper  part  of

larynx,  oedematous.

■  ■  Raw  pain  in  larynx,  as  if  from  granulations.


t33  KALI  lODATUM.

■  Arytenoids  of  purplish  color,  tumefied  and  granular;

follicular  ulceration ;  voice  hoarse ;  sounds  above  mid-
dle key  impossible ;  dry  cough  ;  sensation  of  dryness,
burning  and  tickling  in  larynx.

■  Awakened,  especially  5  a.m.,  "with  dry  throat,  oppression,

loss  of  voice;  glands  swollen.  /^Spasmodic  croup  of
scrofulous  children.

■  I  Awakens  with  choking,  can  scarcely  breathe ;  choking

spells,  oedema  of  larynx.

■  Rough  feeling  in  trachea,  compelling  hawking.

■  Laryngophthisis.

'Respiration. iNo  air  enters  lungs;  epigastrium  sunken;
face  livid  ;  laryngeal  obstruction.
Had  to  get  up,  thinking  he  would  be  smothered.

■  Oppression  of  breathing,  awaking  patient  in  morning

hours,  especially  in  oedema  of  lungs.

■  Asthma in young people  that  have  not  gotten their

growth,  with  many  rheumatic  symptoms  about  chest,
and  sleeplessness.
Cough.  ■  Cough  from  constant  irritation  in  throat;  suffoca-
tive; larynx  swollen;  short,  dry,  occasioned  by  rough-
ness; dry,  with  feeling  of  soreness  in  larynx,  evening
or  several  successive  mornings  ;  with  expectoration  of
mucus;  syphilitic  cases.

■  Cough  dry,  hacking;  later  copious,  green  sputum.

■  Deep,  hollow  cough,  with  whitish  and  greenish  expecto-

ration, and  tearing  out  pain,  starting  from  ensiform
cartilage.

■  Hoarse  cough,  with  pain  through  breast.

■  ■Expectoration  greenish,  copious; looks  like  soapsuds.

<?Pneumonia. ^CEdema  pulmonura.
Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Fine  transient  stitches  deep  in
middle  of  chest.

■  Violent stitches in middle of sternum, extending  to

shoulders.

■  Stitches  through  sternum  to  back,  or  deep  in  chest,  while

walking.

■  Pleuritic  stitches;  effusion.  ^Pneumonia.  ^Bright's  disease.

■  Pain  as  from  soreness,  with  sticking  deep  in  chest,  in

region  of  r.  lower  rib,  in  evening.

■  Sharp  pain  through  r.  lung  from  nipple.

■  Pains  through lungs; tired  and  weak; fluttering at

heart ;  nervous. ^Ulcer  on  leg.

■  Pains  in  chest  as  if  cut  to  pieces.

■  After  a  cold;  great difficulty  of  breathing,  inability  to

lie  down  in  comfort,  and  not  at  all  on  r.  side ;  heart  dis-
placed, beats  violently;  1.  side  filled  with  fluid;  com-
plete dulness  and great resistance on percussion;  1.
VOL.  VI. — 28.


KALI  lODATUM.  434

chest  enlarged  and  bulging;  absence  of  respiratory
sounds. ^I)ropsy  of  chest.

■Pleuritic  effusion  in  1.  chest,  in  front  extending  up  to
third  rib,  behind  as  far  as  spine  of  scapula ;  absolute
dulness  on  percussion  and  entire  absence  of  respiratory
sounds;  heart  pressed  to  r.  side;  catarrhal  inflamma-
tion in  upper  portion  of  r.  chest;  despite  the  great
compression  of  1.  lung  dyspnoea  is  not  very  great  when
lying  quietly;  great  weakness,  cannot  sit  up  without
assistance, and must be held during examination;

'  night  sweats ;  loss  of  appetite;  thirst;  fever;  pulse  108;
great  mental  depression,  anaemia  and  emaciation.

■  Subacute pleurisy  and effusion into  chest; 1.  side  of

chest  nearly  two-thirds  filled  with  fluid.

■  Pneumonia,  first stage; also  later for congestion of

brain;  face  bloated,  bluish;  lower  jaw  dropped;  pulse
irregular,  intermittent ;  limbs  as  if  paralyzed ;  urine
suppressed;  complete  hepatization;  awoke  suddenly
with  great  oppression  ;  apoplectic  congestion  to  head.

■  ■Hepatization  of  r.  lung;  bronchial  respiration,  broncho-

phony, dulness  on  percussion ;  abundant  expectoration
of  white  froth,  resembling  soapsuds. ^Pneumonia.

■Upper  part  of  1.  lung  infiltrated,  spreading  to  r.  lung;
face  collapsed; constant  delirium. ^Pneumonia.

■After-  great  bodily  exertion,  shaking  chill ;  deep  sleep,
out  of  which  he  could  not  be  roused;  lies  upon  back,
snoring  loudly,  eyes  closed,  injected  conjunctiva,  hot
head,  dry  tongue,  bluish  lips,  sunken  lower  jaw ;  bluish
fingernails;  irregular,  intermitting  pulse;  extremities,
when  raised,  fell  back  as  if  paralyzed  ;  dull  percussion
sound  in  both  clavicular  region,  on  r.  down  to  third,  on
1.  down  to  second  rib;  bronchial  breathing,  crepitation;
no  cough,  but  on  putting  ear  to  chest,  loud  snoring
appeared  to  come  out  of  these  parts  as  if  through  a
tube;  urine  suppressed. ^Bilateral  croupous  pneumonia.

■  Lobular pneumonia; fever, localized pain, painful

breathing.
BPtyalism,  ulcerated lips and  tongue,  sordes excessive;
great  prostration  ;  short  breathing ;  must  lie  on  back;
serous  eff'usion  in  r.  pleura;  hepatization  of  lower  two-
thirds  of  r.  lung. ^Pleuro-pneumonia.

■  ■Phthisis pituitosa, with purulent  or green sputum;

exhausting  night  sweats  and  loose  stools.

■  ■(Edema pulmonum: with pneumonia;  secondary to

morbus  Brightii ;  sputum  like  soapsuds,  green.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Fluttering  on  awaking,
giddy ;  must  get  up,  fearing  otherwise  he  will  smother.
Fluttering  of  heart  and  nervousness ;  feels  very  weak.


435  KALI  lODATUM.

I  Palpitation,  <  while  walking.

■  Darting  pains  in  heart,  when  walking;  after  abuse  of

mercury ;  after  repeated  endocarditis.
■Valvular  defects  after  repeated  endocarditis,  especially
affecting  r.  ventricle,  which  gradually  becomes  dilated ;
stupor,  and  loss  of  breath;  greatly  annoying  palpita-
tions; pulse  quick,  but  varying  every  moment;  tumul-
tuous, violent,  intermitting  and  irregular  action  of
heart  and  pulse,  with  tensive  pain  across  chest.

■  Pulse  accelerated;  frequent.

i  Aneurism :  of  arch  of  aorta ;  of  carotid ;  at  point  of  origin
of  carotid  and  subclavian ;  of  innominate  artery.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Glandular  swellings  on  neck;  rachitis.

■  Swelling  of  whole  thyroid  gland,  increasing  very  rapidly,

sensitive  to  touch  and  pressure,
i  Bronchocele ; when  enlargement  of  thyroid  is  due  to

hypertrophy,  not  to  cystic  formation  or  other  causes.
■Submaxillary  glands  swollen,  suppurating.
■Small  of  back  feels  as  if  in  a  vice,  very  painful,  not

allowing  to  lie  still  at  night  or  in  daytime  ;  has  to  sit  in

bent  position.

■  Darts  in  small  of  back ;  meningitis  ;  abuse  of  mercury.
I  I  Stitches  in  small  of  back  when  sitting.

I  I  Moving  produces  intense  pain  in  small  of  b^ck ;  chronic
rheumatism  of  chest  and  back.

■  Bruised  pain  in  lumbar  region,  <  sitting  bent;  stitches.
I  I  Chills  from  sacrum  up  over  back.

■  Pain  in  os  coccygis,  as  from  a  fall.

■  Meningeal  inflammation  after  abuse  of  mercury,  or  sec-

ondary syphilis.
^^  Upper  Limbs. iLeft  shoulder  feels  bruised.

I  I  Pain  in  shoulder  as  if  lame,  only  during  motion.

I  I  Tendons  of  r.  shoulder  feel  stretched,  swollen,  <  during

motion  or  from  touch.
I  I  Tearing  in  shoulder  and  then  in  ear.
I  I  Tearing  pain  in  elbows,  shoulders,  and  r.  wrist.
I  I  Tearing  and  contraction  in  inner  surface  of  ring  finger ;

it  remains  some  time  bent;  also  in  thumb  and  index

finger. ^Rheumatism. ^Gout.

■  Tip  of  thumb  ulcerates  and  turns  yellow.

'^  Lower  Limbs. "Gnawing  in  hip  bones;  darting  in  I.  hip
at  every  step,  forcing  him  to  limp.

■  Gnawing,  aching,  tearing  pains  in  r.  thigh  and  leg;  a

darting  from  point  where  sciatic  nerve  leaves  pelvis,  to
within  ten  inches  of  popliteal  space,  then  interrupted  to
appear  about  middle  and  outer  side  of  calf,  continuing
to  external  malleolus  and  heel ;  motion  at  first  painful,
is  after  a  moment  more  bearable ;  she  walked,  leaning


KALI  lODATUM.  436

toward  affected  side,  as  much  as  though  femur  had  been
dislocated  above  acetabulum,  when  standing  an  inch
and  a  half  from  floor ;  <  at  night,  not  able  to  remain
in  bed;  pain  in  thigh,  leg  and  knee  joint,  excruciating
when  lying  down,  eliciting  screams;  gave  up  bed  for
several  weeks,  occupying  a  chair,  in  a  semi-reclining
position;  emaciated  and  prostrated  from  want  of  rest
and  pain ;  pains  bearable  during  day,  <  in  evening,
>  in  open  air  ;  violent  jerking  of  limb  and  muscles  of
thigh  ;  pain  <  in  knee,  tearing  and  lacerating.

■  Pain  >  by  walking  and  flexing  leg;  <  from  standing,

sitting  or  lying  in  bed. ^Sciatica.

■  Tearing  and  pain  in  left  femur.

I  I  Tearing  darting  in  thighs,  joints,  big  toe;  <  at  night
and  lying  on  r.  or  suff'ering  side,  or  on  back.

■  Tearing  in  r.  thigh  and  knee,  awakens  him  at  night,  <

lying  on  aff'ected  side  or  back. ^Sciatica.
■Tearing  in  1.  knee,  as  if  in  periosteum ;  knee  feels  swollen
during  night.

■  Knee  doughy,  spongy,  no  fluctuation  ;  skin  red  in  spots

and  hot ;  gnawing,  boring  or  tearing,  <  at  night,  must
often  change  position ;  white  swelling.
I  I  Violent  gnawing  pain  in  1.  leg,  as  if  in  periosteum.

■  Cramps  in  calves;  after  mercury.

■  Acute  gout  in  both  feet.

■  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  left  instep.

■  Ulcerative  pain  in  heels  and  toes.

^*  Limbs  in  General. ■Tearing,  darting  pains  ;  periosteum
attacked;  from  mercurialization  or  syphilis;  rheuma-
tism ;  gout.
■Violent  rheumatic  pains  in  limbs  every  evening  and
night,  with  preceding  chilliness.

■  Rheumatism  <  at  night,  and  lying  on  suffering  side  or

on  back;  jerking  of  tendons;  contractions;  restless
sleep;  loss  of  appetite;  emaciation;  tearing,  darting
pains.

■  Lies  upon  back  with  bent  knees  ;  arms  drawn  to  thorax;

immovable  and  stiff  in  all  joints;  joints  of  knees,  feet,
shoulders  and  elbows  filled  with  solid  exudate ;  tendons
as  hard  as  bone  and  stiff;  fingers  drawn  tightly  to
palms  of  hands  and  joints  all  swollen;  involuntary
jerking  of  limbs,  <  night;  completely  helpless,  must
be  fed  like  a  child ;  emaciated  to  skin  and  bone ;  loss
of  appetite ;  could  not  sleep  without  opiates ;  pain  in
back  and  gouty  pains  in  joints.  ^Gout.
'^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Lying  down:  difficult  breathing;
excruciating  pains  in  lower  limbs.
Lies  upon  back,  snoring  loudly.


437  KALI  lODATUM.

Must  lie  on  back :  short  breathing.

Lies  on  back  with  bent  knees;  arms  drawn  to  thorax ;  im-
movable in  all  joints.

Lying  on  r.  side  or  on  back:  pains  <.

Cannot  lie  still :  on  account  of  pain  in  small  of  back  ;
pain  in  lower  limbs.

Must  get  up  or  smother.

Sitting:  pain  in  chest  >;  pain  in  back;  stitching  in
small  of  back;  pain  in  leg  <.

Sits  up  in  chair  in  semi-reclining  position,  on  account  of
pains  in  lower  limbs.

Cannot  sit  up  without  assistance ;  .great  weakness.

Siting  bent:  <  bruised  pain  in  lumbar  region.

Obliged  to  bend  double :  on  account  of  pain  in  groins.

Has  to  sit  double:  on  account  of  pain  in  back.

Standing:  pains  in  leg  <.

Must  change  position:  on  account  of  tearing  in  knee.

After  rising:  heaviness  and  pain  in  head  >.

Motion:  at  first  painful  in  lower  limbs  after  a  moment  is
more  bearable.

Moving:  sharp  pain  in  chest;  intense  pain  in  small  of
back;  pain  in  shoulders;  tendons  of  shoulders  feel
stretched.

Throwing  about:  in  bed.

Restless:  moving  about.

Walking:  stitches  in  back,  sternum  and  chest;  palpita-
tion <;  darting  pains  in  heart;  pain  in  leg  >.

Great  bodily  exertion :  shaking  chill.
^Nerves. iSubsultus  tendinum,  or  contractions  of  muscles
and  tendons.

lEestless  moving  about.

I  Great  general  debility;  exhaustion.

I  I  Chorea  of  rheumatic  origin.

■  Paralysis  of  any  of  muscles  dependent  upon  syphilitic

periostitis.

■  Hemiplegia;  paralysis;  spinal  meningitis.

^'^  Sleep. I  I  Frequent  yawning  without  drowsiness.
I  Sleepy  and  drowsy.

■  Sleepless  from  anguish;  restless;  horrid  dreams.
I  I  Loud  weeping  in  sleep,  but  unconscious  of  it.

■  Awaking: suddenly,  pneumonia,  croup;  as  if  smother-

ing ;  heart  fluttering ;  bitter  taste.
^  Time. Morning:  aw^oke  with  dizziness;  lips  covered  with
viscid  mucus  ;  bitter  taste;  numbness  of  mouth;  awak-
ening with  dry  throat,  oppression,  loss  of  voice;  awakes
with  choking;  soreness  of  larynx.

5  A.M. :  heaviness  of  head.

Afternoon :  chill,  sweat.


KALI  lODATUM.  438

During  day :  dull,  tense,  numb  feeling  in  affected  part  of
head;  thirst;  pains  bearable.

4  to  7  P.M.:  chilly  with  thirst.

6  to  8  P.M. :  drowsy.

Evening:  tearing  in  r.  ear ;  teeth  painful ;  hiccough ;  sore-
ness of  larynx ;  sticking  in  region  of  lower  rib ;  pains
in  limbs  <•

Night :  pain  becomes  intolerable ;  pain  in  eye  < ;  syphi-
litic ozsena  with  pain  ;  restless ;  terrible  pain  at  root  of
tongue ;  thirst;  enuresis;  sweats ;  pain  in  lower  limbs  <  ;
J)ains  <  ;  knee  feels  swollen ;  tearing  in  knee ;  rheuma-
tism ;  jerking  of  limbs ;  chilly;  pains  make  him  frantic.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather,  i Irresistible  desire  for  the
open  air ;  walking  in  open  air  does  not  fatigue.

Warmth :  external,  > ;  general  chilliness ;  teeth  > ;
lumps  on  cranium  >  ;  coldness  of  scalp  >.

Can  get  warm  in  bed,  but  not  from  heat  of  stove.

Open  air :  heat  in  head  >  ;  pains  in  head  >  ;  pains  in
limbs  >  ;  coryza  <.

Cold:  teeth  <.
^^  Fever, l Chilly,  with  thirst  (4-7  p.m.),  or  all  night,  with
shaking  and frequent  waking ;  can  get  warm  in  bed,
but  not  from  heat  of  stove.

I  From  lower  part  of  back  upward  and  through  whole
body ;  6-8  p.m.  ;  drowsy.

■Shaking  chill  at  night,  sleepy,  with  frequent  waking;  so
chilly  at  night  that  she  could  not  get  warm.

■  Chilliness  predominates,  fever  marked  by  hot  flushes,

but  little  perspiration,  very  much  aggravated  at  night.
I  At  times  chilly,  with  dry  skin;  at  others  profuse  sweat.

■  Flushes  of  heat,  with  dulness  of  head.
Heat  then  sweat ;  afternoon.

Sweat  in  afternoon  ;  skin  at  times  dry ;  at  others  profuse
sweat ;  night  sweats.

■  Intermittent  fever; thirst  with  chill; chill  not  >  by

warmth;  mouth  dry;  anasarca;  scrofula.

■  Catarrhal  fevers.

^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  evening :  violent  rheumatic
pains  in  limbs.
Every  night:  rheumatic  pains  in  limbs.

^Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  paralysisof side;  fundus
of  eye;  tearing  in  ear;  membrana  tympani  depressed;
chin  drawn  to  side;  stinging  pain  in  ear  and  submax-
illary gland;  darting  in  hj^DOchondrium;  pain  in  ova-
rian region;  sharp  pain  through  lung;  cannot  lie  on
side  on  account  of  difficulty  of  breathing;  heart  pressed
to  side;  catarrhal  inflammation  in  upper  part  of  chest;
lung  infiltrated;  serous  effusion  of  pleura;  hepatization


439  KALE  lODATUM.

of  lower  two-thirds  of  lung;  valvular  defects;  tendons
of  shoulder  feel  stretched;  tearing  in  wrist;  pain  in
thigh  and  leg;  lying  on  side  pains  <;  tearing  in  thigh
and  knee.

Left:  stitches  above  eye;  darting  over  eye;  in  temple;
limbs  of  this  side  in  constant  tremulous  motion ;  atrophic
spots  in  choroid  of  eye;  diplopia  only  noticed  when
looking  to  slight  action  of  external  rectus ;  paralysis  ot
nervous  abducens;  several  tumors  on  upper  border  of
orbit;  membrana  tympani  depressed;  nostril  ulcerated
within,  excoriated  without;  side  of  chest  filled  with
fluid;  chest  enlarged ;  pleuritic  effusion  of  chest;  lung
compressed;  lung  infiltrated;  shoulder  feels  bruised;
darting  in  hip;  pain  in  femur;  tearing  in  knee;  knee
feels  swollen;  violent  pain  in  leg;  pain  in  instep.
^^  Sensations.  Excited  as  if  intoxicated ;  as  if  brain  was  com-
pressed from  both  sides;  as  though  head  was  enlarged
to  three  times  its  size;  head  as  if  screwed  in;  as  if  head
would  be  forced  asunder;  scalp  as  if  ulcerated;  as  if  a
leaflet  was  at  root  of  nose;  as  if  a  worm  was  crawling
at  root  of  tooth;  surface  of  mouth  as  if  covered  with
milk;  as  if  something  had  lodged  in  throat;  as  if  spasm
would  close  pharynx;  back  as  if  in  a  vice;  pain  in  ova-
ries as  from  a  tumor;  thighs  feel  as  if  squeezed;  pain
in  larynx  as  if  from  granulations;  pain  as  from  soreness
in  chest;  chest  as  if  cut  to  pieces;  limbs  as  if  paralyzed;
loud  snoring  appeared  to  come  out  of  chest  as  if  through
a  tube;  shoulder  as  if  lame;  pain  in  os  coccygis  as  from
a  fall ;  tearing  in  knee  as  if  in  periosteum ;  as  if  bruised
in  1.  instep.

Pains:  in  sides  of  head;  in  upper  part  of  head;  in  upper
maxilla  and  teeth;  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  small  of
back;  in  ovarian  region ;  into  thighs;  inchest;  in  eyes;
through  breast;  in  region  of  lower  ribs;  through  lungs;
in  shoulder;  in  os  coccygis;  in  thigh,  leg  and  knee
joint;  in  1.  femur;  in  back.

Terrible  pain:  at  root  of  tongue.

Intense  pain  :  in  small  of  back.

Excruciating  pain:  in  thigh,  leg  and  knee  joint.

Intolerable  nocturnal  bone  pains.

Violent  pain:  in  frontal  region;  in  both  orbital  processes;
across  forehead.

Severe:  headache  with  lachrymation  ;  pain  in  eyes.

Sliarp  pain  :  in  chest;  through  r.  lung  from  nipple.

Tearing :  above  1.  eye ;  in  r.  ear ;  in  shoulder ;  in  elbow ;
in  r.  wrist ;  in  inner  surface  of  ring  finger ;  in  thumb  ;
in  index  finger;  in  r.  thigh  and  leg;  in  knee;  in  1.
femur;  in  thighs,  joints,  big  toe;  in  1.  knee.


KALI  lODATUM.  440

Severe  burning,  tearing,  twitching  pain :  in  ovarian
region.

Tearing  out  pain :  starting  from  ensiform  cartilage.

Boring,  tearing  pains  :  in  temporal  bone  ;  in  knee.

Boring  pain  :  in  ears ;  in  nasal  bones.

Ulcerative  pain  :  in  gums  ;  in  heels  and  toes.

Beating :  in  forehead ;  in  temples ;  in  nasal  bones ;  of
carotids.

Throbbing  pain :  in  nasal  and  frontal  bones ;  in  stomach.

Hammering:  in  forehead.

Darting :  above  1.  eye  and  in  1.  temple ;  in  ears ;  in  1,
cheek  ;  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  in  side  of  abdomen ;  in
renal  region;  in  heart;  in  small  of  back;  from  where
sciatic  nerve  leaves  pelvis  to  within  ten  inches  of  pop-
liteal space,  then  interrupted  to  appear  about  middle
and  outer  calf,  and  to  external  malleolus  and  heel.

Lancinating :  over  1.  eye  and  in  1.  temple ;  in  nasal  bones
to  forehead  ;  in  throat.

Lacerating  pain  :  in  knee.

Cutting :  around  navel.

Violent  stitches :  in  middle  of  sternum.

Stitches:  through  sternum  to  back;  deep  in  chest;  in
small  of  back.

Jerking  stitches :  above  1.  eye ;  in  frontal  sinus.

Fine  transient  stitches :  deep  in  middle  of  chest.

Sticking  pains :  in  ears ;  in  larynx.

Jerking:  violent,  of  limb  and  muscles  of  thigh.

Acute  gout :  in  both  feet.

Violent  rheumatic  pains  :  in  limbs.

Sudden  shocks  of  pain  :  in  head.

Gnawing :  in  nasal  bones  ;  in  both  sides  of  lower  jaw  ;  in
teeth;  in  r.  thigh  and  leg;  in  knee;  in  1.  leg.

Cramp  pains :  in  stomach.

Cramps :  in  calves.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  limbs ;  in  chest  and  back.

Gouty  pains :  in  joints.

Bruised  pains :  in  groins  and  small  of  back ;  in  lumbar
region ;  in  shoulder.

Tensive,  stinging,  darting,  lacerating  pain  :  in  head.

Tensive  pain  :  across  chest.

Aching:  in  r.  thigh  and  leg.

Grumbling:  in  teeth  and  face.

Stinging:  in  ears;  in  1.  cheek;  in  r.  submaxillary  gland;
in  throat.

Painful  burning :  in  stomach.

Burning  tickling  :  in  throat.

Burning :  of  face;  in  eyes  ;  in  nasal  and  frontal  bones;  on
tip  of  tongue ;  at  epigastrium  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  pit  of


441  .  KALI  lODATUM.

stomach  ; around  navel ; in  kidneys ;  in  urethra ;  in

larynx.
Biting :  in  pudendum.
Soreness :  of  larynx.
Heat :  in  whole  mouth  ;  in  head.
Painful  bloating :  around  navel.
Pressing  :  in  groins ;  in  stomach.
Tightening  :  at  root  of  nose.
Stretched  feeling  :  in  tendons  of  r.  shoulder.
Painful:  urging  to  urinate;  syphilitic  nodes;  breathing.
Numbness  of  mouth.

Dull,  tense,  numb  feeling:  in  affected  part  of  head.
Rough  feeling:  in  trachea.
Dryness:  of  mouth ;  of  pharynx;  of  throat;  in  stomach;

in  larynx.
Fulness:  of  nose.
Heaviness:  in  forehead.
Itching  of  throat ;  of  herpes  on  face.
**  Tissues. ■  Emaciation  and  loss  of  appetite.

■  Purpura  hemorrhagica.

■  Hemorrhage  from  nose,  lungs,  rectum.

■  Discharges  from  mucous  surfaces  thin,  ichorous,  corro-

sive, or  green.

■  ■Chronic  periosteal  rheumatism  of  syphilitic  or  mercu-

rial origin  ;  intolerable  nocturnal  bone  pains,  driving
patient  to  despair.

■  Chronic  arthritis,  with  considerable  spurious  anchylosis.

■  ■Swelling of  bones  and  periosteum,  with  nocturnal  pains.

■  Diseases  of  periosteum  and  capsular  ligaments  of  joints.

■  ■Bony  tumors;  interstitial  distension  of  bones;  pains  <

at  night.

■  ■Caries  and  necrosis  after  syphilis  and  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Gout  and  rheumatism  ;  synovitis.

■  Painful  syphilitic  nodes.

■  ■Glands: swollen; goitre; bronchial, submaxillary,

ulcerating;  atrophied;  interstitial  infiltration.

■  ■Glands  suppurate ;  discharge  thin,  corrosive,  or  curdy ;

indolent,  with  hard  edges.

■  ■Glands  atrophy; especially  testes  and  mammae.

■  Dropsy  from  pressure  from  swollen  glands.

■  Distends  all  tissues  by  interstitial  infiltration;  oedema;

enlarged  glands ;  tophi ; exostoses ; swelling  of  bones.

■  Ulcers: vegetations bleed easily and are unhealthy;

canceroid  ;  deep  ;  involving  bone  structure.

■  Scrofula.

■  ■Rupia  syphilitica.

■  Condylomata  of  long  standing  in  cachectic  subjects.

■  Condyloma  accuminatum  after  chancre.


KALI  lODATUM.  442

iBubo  very  hard  with  curdy,  offensive  discharge,  if  sup-
purating; thickening  of  spermatic  cord ;  ulceration  of
nose,  mouth  and  throat,  witli  corroding,  burning  dis-
charge; lancinating  pains  in  throat;  system  depressed ;
effusion  of  serum  into  cellular  tissue;  induration  of
liver. ^Syphilis.

I  After  abuse  of mercury:  tuberculous  pustules  in  face;

roseola  on  chest  and  extremities;  discolored,  large
ulcers  on  skin ;  bone  swelling ;  nightly  bone  pain ;
bloody  stools,  with  tenesmus;  falling  out  of  hair.
^Syphilis.

■  Secondary  syphilis,  especially  after  abuse  of  mercury  or

combined  with  scrofula;  buboes,  chancres,  with  hard
edges,  thin,  corrosive  or  curdy  pus  ;  deep  eating  ulcers.

■  Especially  useful  in  tertiary  syphilis.
'^  Skin. I  Itching  herpes  on  face.

■  Purpura  hemorrhagica.

I I  Roseola  spots. ^Syphilis.

A  kind  of  erythema  nodosum,  in  three  cases,  consisting  of
red,  urticaria-like  elevations,  appearing  on  face,  neck,
arms  and  legs,  and  preceded  by  itching,  leaving,  after
disappearing,  infiltrated  spots;  they  were  observed  only
during  the  winter.

1 1  Papulous  eruption ;  with  dryness  of  throat.

■Papulse  worse  on  face,  shoulders  and  back;  dry  throat.

I  Tubercles  on  face.

■  Tubercular  syphilitic  skin  eruption.

■  Itchlike  pimples  and  vesicles.

■  Herpes,  size  of  dime,  on  cheek.

I  I  Eczema  cruris  ;  pityriasis  capitis.

■  ■Small  boils  on neck,  face,  scalp,  back,  chest,  suppurat-

ing; often  leaving  scars.

■  Pustulous  eruption  often  umbilica,ted  and  leaving  scars.

■  Syphilitic  eruptions,  chiefly  in  cachectic  persons,  pustular

or  squamose.

■  Furuncular  eruption,  epidemic,  of  various  sizes,  from  a

small  pustule  to  a  large  boil;  often  this  latter  becomes
carbuncular  and  is  generally  surrounded  by  little
pustules.

A  kind  of  hard  tumors,  especially  on  legs,  dark  color,
yellow  pustules  interwoven ;  basis  hard  and  painful  to
pressure,  only  their  navel-like  centre  is  not  painful ;
surrounded  by  a  red  halo;  after  discharging  they
gradually  sank  in  space  of  a  month  or  even  a  whole
year,  when  they  finally  covered  themselves  with  thick
crusts  which  remained  for  a  long  time.

iRupia  ;  impetiginous  eruption  ;  herpetic  eruption ;  erup-
tion simulating  acne.


443  KALI  lODATUM.

lEcthymatous  eruption.
^^  Stages of Life. Constitution, n Scrofulous patients;
especially  if  syphilis  or  mercurialization  is  superadded.

Girl,  aet.  5  ;  dropsy  of  chest.

Girl,  set.  10 ;  diphtheria.

Boy,  after  scarlet  fever;  adhesions  of  middle  ear.

Girl,  set. 15,  rapid  growth,  small  chested ;  pleuritic  exu-
dation.

Girl,  set.  18  ; disease  of  submaxillary  gland.

Girl,  set.  20;  sciatica.

Young  lady,  no  history  of  syphilis ;  disseminate  choroi-
ditis.

Man,  set.  23  ;  pleuritic  exudation.

Woman,  set.  25,  in  good  circumstances,  in  fifth  month  of
pregnancy;  pleurisy  with  exudation.

Man,  set.  32;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  36,  thin  and  delicate ;  pleurisy.

Man,  set.  38 ;  diphtheria.

Colored  women,  syphilitic  history ;  tumors  of  orbit.

Man,  set.  40,  had  syphilis  ;  paralysis  of  nervus  abducens.

Woman,  set.  46,  weak  constitution ;  pleuritic  exudation.

Man,  set.  50,  suffering  one  week  ;  pleuro-pneumonia.

Man,  set.  85 ;  bilateral  croupous  pneumonia.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Hepar.

It  antidotes :  Mercvr.,  lead  poisoning.

Compare:  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Conium  (knee),  1 1  Hepar,  I  Uodum,
I  Laches.,  i^Mercur.,  Mezer.,  Pulsat.,  Silica,  Sulphur.


KALI  MURIATICUM.  444

KALI  MURIATICUM.

Potassium  Chloride.  KCl.

The  clinical  symptoms  of  Kali  chloricum  (potassium  chlorate)  of  which  we
have  provings  by  Martin  and  Tully  (see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  316),  are
deemed  sufficiently  similar  to  those  of  Schuessler's  Tissue  Remedies  to  be  included
herein.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Insanity,  Kurtz,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  272 ;  Loss
of  vision  of  r.  eye,  Schuessler,  p.  95 ;  Chorio-retinitis,  Woodyatt,  Norton's  Oph.
Therap.,  p.  107  ;  Parenchymatous  keratitis,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  106  ;  Faceache,
Ilerber,  Frank,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  424;  Faceache,  Martin  (2  cases),
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  424;  Paralysis  of  r.  facial  nerve,  Cramoisy,  Org.,  vol.  3,
p.  112 ;  Caries  of  teeth,  Neumann,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  310 ;  Affection  of  mouth,  Lied-
beck,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  507  ;  Stomatitis,  ulcers  in  mouth,  Henoch,  Hirsch,  Lauri,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  219  ;  Stomatitis  ulcerosa,  Windelband,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  366 ;
Angina,  Goullon,  Eaue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  142;  Diphtheria,  Goullon,  Q^hme's  Therap.;
Dysentery,  Bigler,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  8 ;  Nephritis,  Windelband,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
36,  p.  366;  Albuminuria,  Sanders,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  Hom.,  1883,  p.  669;  Catarrh
of  bladder,  Edlefsen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  134 ;  Gonorrhoea,  Windelband,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  36,  p.  366 ;  Suppurating  buboes,  Windelband,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  366 ;  Leucor-
rhoea,  Schuessler ;  Windelband,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  366 ;  Croup,  Schuessler ;  Whoop-
ing cough,  Ameke,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  366 ;  Catarrhal  pneumonia,  Breuer,  Allg.
Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  105,  p.  171;  Catarrhal  pA<A?>is,  Morgan,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.
Pa.,  1880,  p.  231 ;  Facial  paralysis,  Drysdale,  Hughes;  Open  carcinoma  (locaWj),  Bu-
row,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  310  ;  Infantile  syphilis,  Hughes ;  Variola,  Burow,  A.  H.  O.,
vol.  10,  p.  310;  Read,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  10,  p.  176.

^  Mind. Sad,  apathetic,  with  chilliness  in  evening.

■  Alternate  states  of  sadness  and  cheerfulness,  associated

with  congestion,  >  from  nosebleed.

■  Habitual  loss  of  appetite;  patient  absolutely  refuses  to

take  food,  or  imagines  he  must  starve. ^Insanity.
^  Sensorium. A  glass  of  wine  or  beer  intoxicates  easily.

Confusion  of  head,  also  in  occiput,  with  a  peculiar  sen-
sation in  cervical  muscles.
Vertigo  :  after  violent  exercise,  with  congestion  to  head ;
with  headache.
^  Inner  Head. Tightness  in  occiput,  sneezing  and  coryza.
Aching  in  1.  side  of  temple.
I  I  Headache:  extending  into  jaws;  in  evening;  in  occiput;

with  vomiting,  hawking  up  of  milk  white  mucus.
I  I  Sick  headache; white  coated tongue,  or  vomiting  of
white  phlegm.


445  KALI  MURIATICUM.

*  Outer  Head. Pains  in  head  and  face,  with  hawking  up  of
white  mucus.

Catarrh  of  frontal  cavities;  tumors.

TiMarked  increase  of  dandruff,  faUing  in  small  white  flakes
over  coat  collar,  accompanied  by  itching.

iCrusta  lactea,  sore  or  scaldhead  of  children.
^  Sight and Eyes. Ii  Luminous appearance before eyes
when  coughing  or  sneezing.

I  I  Congestion  to  eyes,  they  feel  irritated ;  redness  in  eve-
ning with  some  pain.

■  Irritable  retina.

■  While walking through fields covered with snow,

sudden  severe  pain  in  r.  eye,  followed  at  once  by  blind-
ness, saw  nothing  with  r.  eye,  all  seemed  smoke  and
mist ;  1.  eye  became  gradually  weaker  from  month  to
month ;  but  little  of  retina  can  be  seen,  there  being  a
kind  of  mist  over  it,  which  seemed  to  spread  from  vitre-
ous humor  over  background  of  eye;  retina  dim  and
misty,  veins  forming  a  dark  network ;  in  some  places
indistinctly  defined  spots,  some  larger  than  others,  ap-
pearing like  residue  of  extravasated  blood;  arteries
scarcely  visible,  and  seemed  pale  and  contracted.
I  Dimness  of  r.  eye,  he  could  not  read  a  newspaper;  cornea,
iris  and  pupil  normal;  no  external  redness;  vitreous
rather  hazy,  with  some  black  shreds  suspended  in  it,
having  very  limited  motion  on  rotating  eye;  optic  nerve
and  bloodvessels  normal;  inside  the  disk,  a  large,  ir-
regular, atrophic  spot,  involving  choroid  and  retina,
surrounded  by  several  small  ones ;  edges  irregular  and
pigmented;  sclerotic  seen  white  through  their  centres ;
choroid  adjacent,  congested  and  thickened  ;  some  ves-
sels lost  in  infiltrated  part  to  appear  on  other  side ;  a
dull  pain,  occasionally,  in  eye  and  over  brow,  with  an
ill  defined  feeling  of  contraction  around  eye ;  vision
^^;  Snellen  11  slowly  deciphered.  At  the  end  of  a
month  vision  rose  to  f-g^  and  Snellen  3  was  read  at  five
inches ;  a  year  afterwards  the  man  could  read  Snellen
2|,  distant  vision  ^^,  but  under  Kali  mur.  for  a  week  it
was  again  ff .  The  patient's  business  engagements  pre-
vented longer  treatment. (Improved.)  <?Chorio-retinitis.

■  Parenchymatous  keratitis;  for  three  months  there  had

been  an  infiltration  into  r.  cornea,  which  commenced  at
outer  side  and  extended  over  whole  cornea;  could  only
count  fingers;  occasional  pain,  moderate  photophobia
and  redness;  pupil  dilated  slowly  and  incompletely,
though  regularly,  and  contracted  quickly.

■  Retinal  exudation.

M  Conjunctivitis  and  keratitis,  with  formation  of  small


KALI  MURIATICUM.  446

superficial  blisters;  small  ulcers  on  cornea  following  a
blister;  feeling  of  sand  in  eye;  white  mucous  secretion
or  yellowish  green  pus  from  eyes.

I  I  Opaque  spots  on  eye;  leucoma.

I  On  lower  edge  of  1.  cornea,  a  little  blister,  from  which  a
bundle  of  small  veins  run ;  feeling  of  sand  in  eye ;  edges
of  eyelids  scabby.

I  iConjunctivitis  and  keratitis  (scrofulous)  with  a  forma-
tion of  phlyctenules,  but  only  superficial.

I  I  Suppurating  points  on  edges  of  eyelids;  edges  scabby;
yellow  crusts  of  pus  on  edges  of  lids.

Secretion:  yellowish  green,  purulent;  white,  mucous.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Deafness :  from  swelling  of  internal
ear;  from  swelling  of  Eustachian  tubes  and  tympanic
cavity;  with  swelling  of  glands,  or  cracking  noise  on
blowing  nose,  or  white  coated  tongue.

I  I  Earache ;  with  gray  or  white  furred  tongue ;  with  swell-
ing of  glands ;  with  swelling  of  throat,  or  cracking  noise
in  ear  when  swallowing.
^  Smell  and  Nose.  Bleeding  of  nose:  at  night;  from  r.  nostril.

Tension  and  tensive  drawing  in  cheeks  inducing  desire  to
sneeze,  with  cramp  in  malar  muscles.

I  I  Stopped  or  dry  coryza.

I  Violent  coryza,  sneezing  and  profuse  secretion  of  mucus;
twitching  of  masseter  muscles;  catarrh  after  mercury.

White  mucous  discharge  in  coryza,  catarrh  of  frontal
sinuses.

Cold:  stuffy,  in  head,  with  whitish  grey  tongue;  with
white,  non-transparent,  or  yellowish  discharge.

I  Hawking  of  mucus  from  posterior  nares.
^  Upper  Face. iSuffering  expression  of  face. ^Stomacace.

I  I  Bloated  face;  sickly  expression.

I  I  Flushes  of  heat.

■  Increased  sensitiveness  of  whole  face,  with  irritation  in

root  of  nose,  twitchings  in  corners  of  eyes;  after  mercury.

iLightning-like  attacks  of  pain  in  face,  gradually  grow-
ing more  frequent ;  1.  side  of  face  fiery  red,  with  twitch-
ing and  trembling  in  muscles  of  face,  lachrymation,
throbbing  of  temporal  artery;  <  speaking,  chewing,
eating  fruit  or  anything  sour ;  excited  by  least  touch.

I  I  Cramplike  drawing  in  cheeks,  extending  to  articulation
of  jaws;  tearing  in  upper  jaw;  after  abuse  of  mercury.

I  I  Faceache,  with  swelling  of  gums  or  cheek.

■  Paralysis  of  r.  facial  nerve;  difficulty  of  speaking,  eating

and  whistling;  could  not  puff  out  cheeks,  because  lips
could  not  be  held  firm  on  r.  side  of  face;  mouth  oblique
in  laughing  or  speaking;  neither  wrinkles  nor  contrac-
tions t)f  muscles  on  paralyzed  side.


447  KALI  MUPJATICUM.

■  Facial  paralysis,  beginning  with  faceache;  tenderness  on

touch  or  pressure  of  affected  side.
Pimple  on  forehead,  face,  and  between  lips  and  chin.
Spots  in  face.
^  Lower  Face, l  l  Tension  and  tensive  drawing  in cheeks,

inducing  a  desire  to  sneeze;  cramp  in  malar  muscles.
I  I  Cramplike  drawing  in  cheeks,  extending  to  articulation

of  jaw,  with  stinging  in  jaw  and  teeth.
I  I  Mumps,  without  fever.
Twitching  in  muscles  of  lower  jaw.
I  I  Swelling  of  lips;  after  mercury.
I  I  Pimples  on  lips ;  chapped  lips  from  cold.
I  I  Barber's  itch.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums, i  iDulness  of  teeth;  toothache  in  upper

jaw.
I  I  Toothache  with  swelling  of  gums  and  flow  of  saliva.
I  I  Painful  caries  of  teeth.

I  Gums:  inflamed,  bright  red;  very  sensitive ;  bleed  easily.
llScorbutis,  especially  after  mercury;  offensive  smell.
I  I  Ulceration  of  edges  of  gums.

■  Gumboil,  before  suppuration.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Taste:  disagreeable;  saltish;  sour;  bit-
ter sour;  stinging  burning,  sourish;  brassy  after  mercury.
I  I  Bitter  taste  with  feeling  of  coldness  on  tongue,  removed

after  breakfast  and  dinner.
■Tongue  coated:  thin,  white,  not  mucous;  dirty  yellow  in
stomacace;  white,  or  only  in  middle;  after  diarrhcEa.

■  White  fur  on  tongue  of  syphilitic  origin.
I  I  Coldness  on  tongue  and  in  pharynx.

I  I  Burning,  stinging  blisters  on  tongue  and  in  buccal  cavity.
Inflammation  of  tongue.

■  Cannot  talk;  epithelioma.

'^  Inner  Mouth. iHeat  and  dryness ;  peeling  off  of  lips.

■  Breath  excessively  fetid,  in  ulceration  and  diphtheria.
I  I  Accumulation  of  mucus.

I  I  Saliva  flows  freely ;  profuse  and  acid  ;  tasting  brassy.
I  I  Stinging  burning  with  sour  taste  in  mouth.
I  I  Pain,  with  swelling  of  gums  and  cheeks.

■  ■Aphthse  and  stomatitis,  simple  or  ulcerative.

■  Sore mouth,  with spongy,  bleeding gums,  patches in

fauces and  on  pharynx,  like  diphtheria or  follicular
disease;  fetor  unbearable.

■  ■Most  acute  ulcerative  and  follicular  stomatitis;  whole

mucous  surface  red  and  tumid,  and  in  cheeks,  lips,  etc.,
were  numerous  grey  based  ulcers.

■  Follicular  ulcers  on  inside  of  lips  and  dorsum  of  tongue;

mouth  full  of  saliva;  glands  enlarged  and  tender,  in
cachectic  people.


KALI  MURIATICUM.  448

■Severe  pain  throughout  whole  body;  dimness  of  vision,
letters  appear  smaller  when  reading;  sensitive,  lachry-
mose ;  their  gums  become  sensitive  and  foul  smelling,
bleeding  easily  and  discharging  pus;  heat  and  dryness
in  mouth  with  salivation ;  earthy  color  of  face ;  face
bloated ;  lips  hot,  swollen,  epithelium  being  thrown  off
in  scabs ;  general  lassitude ;  feels  more  tired  in  morning
than  evening ;  attacks  periodical,  lasting  eight  to  nine
days.

■Stomatitis  ulcerosa,  mercurial  or  scrofulous;  gums  swol-
len, easily  bleeding,  and  usually  projecting  from  a  set
of  bad  teeth;  fetor  oris;  salivation;  aphthous  ulcers  on
tongue  and  cheeks,  particularly  in  children.

I  Aphthae,  thrush  of  little  children  or  nursing  mothers,
without  great  flow  of  saliva.

■Ulceration  in  mouth  wdiich  had  perforated  cheeks.

■  Whitish  exudation  on  mucous  membrane  of  mouth.

I  I  Epithelial  degeneration  of  mucous  membrane  of  mouth;
a  forerunner  of  cancer.

■  Epithelioma;  ulceration  had  reached  face.

■  Tongue  swollen  filling  cavity  of  mouth ;  bears  impression

of  several  parts  of  mouth  ;  ulcerated  places  deep  enough
to  admit  end  of  little  finger;  discharge  ichorous,  terribly
offensive;  small,  superficial  ulcers,  painful  on  sides;
hard,  somewhat  elastic  places  on  tongue;  color  deep
violet.  ^Epithelioma  and  hypertrophy.
'^Throat, ll  Roughness;  dryness  of  fauces.

■  Dryness  of  throat  and  chest,  with  violent  cough,  as  from

vapor  of  sulphur.
I  I  Cynanche  tonsillaris.

■  Tonsillitis,  with  much  swelling.

■  A  syphilitic  furin  cavity  of  mouth  and  fauces.

■  Tonsils  swollen,  cover  white  or  whitish  grey.

■  Catarrh  of  mucous  membrane  of  fauces,  tonsils  and  phar-

ynx, with  white  exudation.
Pharynx  feels  cold.

■  ■Hawks  up  cheesy  lumps  about  size  of  a  split  pea,  hav-

ing a  disgusting  odor  and  taste.  ^Follicular  pharyngitis.

■  Angina,  beginning  with  white  points  on  opening  of  ducts

of  glands,  threatening  diphtheritis.

■  Pain  on  swallowing ;  <  on  one  side ;  considerable  redness

of  fauces;  frequently  white,  diphtheritic  patches  on
tonsils;  dirty  coated  tongue;  fever;  chilliness;  suffering
expression  of  face ;  fetor  oris. ^Angina.

■  ■Croupous,  diphtheritic  exudations.

I  I  Diphtheritis,  if  fauces  are  not  swollen.

■  Diphtheria:  with  offensive  effluvia;  invading  larynx.

I  I  Numerous  grey  ulcers  in  mouth  and  throat;  excessive


449  KALI  MURIATICUM.

secretion  of  tough,  stringy  saliva;  epistaxis;  ravenous
hunger  followed  by  total  anorexia;  dryness  and  pain  in
throat,  with  difficult  swallowing  (beginning  paralysis  of
glosso-pharyngeal  nerve) ;  excessive  micturition ;  hsema-
turia;  albuminuria;  hoarse  voice;  incessant  cough  and
difficult  respiration;  chest  pressed,  together  and  watery
froth  exuding  from  mouth. ^Diphtheria.

I  On  fourth  day,  pulse  120,  bad  sleep,  little  appetite;  entire
fauces  filled  with  exudate;  violent  pain  in  throat;  strong
fetor  oris ;  in  morning  a  fainting  jfit. ^Diphtheritis.

■Secondary  syphilis  affecting  fauces.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Violent  hunger
between  regular  periods  of  eating.

i  I  Canine  hunger  in  attacks,  >  after  drinking  water.

I  I  Want  of  appetite;  increased  thirst.
**  Eating  and  Drinking, i  >  Beer  and  wine  intoxicate  easily.

I  I  After  eating  breakfast  and  dinner,  bitter  taste  renewed.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions: empty;  sourish;  alternating  with  pains  in  chest
and  abdomen.

I  I  Gagging  and  gulping  up  white  mucus.

I  I  Loathing  with  shivering;  nausea  with  eructations.

I  I  Vomiting:  of  white  slime;  of  blood.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Cutting  in  stomach.

I  I  Pressure,  with  empty  feeling  in  stomach;  chilliness;
listlessness.

I  I  White  or  greyish  coated  tongue,  pain  or  heavy  feeling
on  r.  side  over  liver;  fatty  food  disagrees;  eyes  look
large  and  projecting. ^Dyspepsia.

M Gastritis:  from  taking  too  hot  drinks;  second  stage,
white  coated  tongue.

I  I  Hemorrhage  from  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. '  '  Tensive  pressure  in  region  of  liver,  dis-
appearing after  emission  of  flatus.

I  I  Painful  pressure  in  region  of  spleen.

■  Portal  congestion  and  enlarged  liver ;  emptiness  in  stom-

ach ;  pain  in  r.  side,  light  yellow  color  of  evacuations,
white  or  greyish  furred  tongue,  constipation ;  hemor-
rhoidal complaints.

I  I  Liver  disease  with  dropsy.
'^  Abdomen, i  i  Colic  in  pelvic  region ;  diarrhoea ;  shifting  of
flatulence.

I  1  Chill,  resulting  in  catarrh  of  duodenum,  white  coated
tongue;  stools  light  colored. ^Jaundice.

■  Peritonitis.

■  Suppurating  buboes.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Diarrhoea: after  fatty  food,  pastry,
etc.;  evacuations  light  colored,  white  or  slimy;  white
VOL.  VI.— 29.


KALI  MURIATICUM.  450

coated  tongue;  painful,  passing  nothing  but  mucus;  in

typhoid  fever,  stools  like  pale  yellow  ochre;  bloody,  or

bloody  mucus.
1 1  Hard,  dry  stool,  latter  part  mixed  with  mucus.
I  Stool  so  dry  it  almost  crumbles.
I  Constipation  through  want  of  bile  from  sluggish  liver;

light  colored  stools.

I  I  Constant  pains  in  rectum.

I I  Dysentery  ;  much  blood  passing  with  the  slime.

I  Pains  in  abdomen,  cutting  as  if  from  knives;  calls  to
stool  every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  with  tenesmus
extorting  cries;  evacuations  consist  of  only  a  tea  or
tablespoonful  of  blood. ^Dysentery.

I  Hemorrhoidal  bleeding;  dark,  thick  blood.

I  1  Syphilitic  complaints  about  the  anus.

I  I  Chafing  or  rawness  of  skin  in  children.

I  I  Ascarides,  threadworms.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ' '  Inflammation  of  kidneys,  catarrhal  or
crbupy.

I  Nephritis  parenchymatosa ;  much  albumen  in  urine.

I  I  Kidney  disease  with  dropsy.

1  I  Inflammation  of  bladder  with  violent  fever.

I  Acute  and  chronic  catarrh  of  bladder.

■  Cystitis,  second  stage,  wdien  swelling  has  set  in;  discharge

of  thick  white  mucus.

I I  Chronic  catarrh  of  bladder.

iTurbid  urine;  dirty  yellow  sediment. ^Nephritis.
I  I  Itching  in  urethra.

■  Diabetes,  excessive  and  sugary  urine;  stomach  and  liver

deranged,  grey  or  white  coating  on  tongue;  dry  and
light  colored  stools  from  want  of  bile;  pain  in  kidneys.
^'^  Male  Sexual  Organs,  i  Voluptuous  dreams  with  violent
emissions.

■Violent  erections  with  emissions  and  itching  of  scrotum.

■Sexual  desire  diminished,  with  chilliness  and  apathy.

I  I  Itching  in  urethra.

■  Orchitis  from  suppressed  gonorrhoea.

■  Post-gonorrhoeal  induration  of  left  testicle,  from  abuse  of

injections  of  Cuprum  sulph.
I  I  Hydrocele  in  little  children.

■  ■Gonorrhoea of  glans  or  urethra; second stage,  with

chordee.

■  Gleet  combined  with  eczema  (latent  or  visible),  or  a  dis-

position to  glandular  swellings. ^Gonorrhoea.

■  Soft  chancre.

■After  chancre,  pointy  condylomata  on  corona  glandis.

■  Chronic  syphilis.

I  I  Suppurative  bubo.


451  KALI  MURIATICUM.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Menses:  delayed  too  long  or
suppressed;  too  early  or  lasting  too  long;  excessive,
dark  clotted,  or  tough,  black,  like  tar;  too  frequent.

■  Hemorrhages  from  womb.

iLeucorrhoea:  mild  and  white;  not  transparent;  obstinate
and  acrid.
^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Morning  sick-
ness, with  vomiting  of  white  phlegm.

I  Albuminuria  in  gestation.

I  I  Threatened  abortion.

■  First  stage  of  puerperal  fever.

■  Mastitis,  weed,  gathering  breast,  before  formation  of  pus.
^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Hoarseness.

I  I  Fever,  loud  barking  cough,  restlessness  at  night  with
much  rough  and  hard  coughing;  dry  heat  and  great
oppression. ^Spurious  croup.

■  Croup,  membranous  exudation.

■  Bronchitis,  second  stage,  when  thick  phlegm  forms.

^  Respiration, l  l  Constriction of  chest  as from vapors  of
sulphur.
I  I  Oppressed  breathing.

■  Bronchial  asthma  when  secretion  is  white.

■  Asthma;  mucus,  white  and  hard  to  cough  up,  tongue

whitish  or  furred  grejash.
"^  Cough. I  I  Violent  cough  with  coryza.

I  I  Dryness  of  throat  and  chest  with  violent  cough  as  from
vapor  of  sulphur.

■  Acute,  short,  spasmodic  cough,

■  Cough,  stomachy,  noisy,  with  protruded  appearance  of

eyes,  or  itching  at  anus.

■  Croupy  cough;  hard,  white  coated  tongue.

■  Whooping  cough,  much  opaque,  white  mucus.
Cough: in  consumption,  with  thick  white  sputa,  white

coated  tongue;  white  or  yellowish  white  phlegm.

■  ■Sputa  white  as  milk.

■  Yellowish  green  mucous  discharge  from  lungs.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i  i  Oppression  of  chest,  with  vio-
lent beating  of  heart,  sometimes  preceded  by  rush  of
blood  to  chest  or  attended  by  a  sensation  as  if  lungs  were
tied  with  a  thread.

■  Constriction  of  chest  with  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Constriction  in  chest,  as  from  vapor  of  sulphur.

■  Pleurisy,  second  stage;  plastic  exudation.

■  Cold  in  chest,  with  thick  white  or  yellowish  sputa.

■  Lung  disease,  expectoration  whitish,  thick,  or  yellowish

white  and  slimy;  tongue  frequently  coated  with  white
fur  at  back.

■  Inflammation  of  lungs,  second  stage;  tongue  white  coated.
I  I  Catarrhal  pneumonia,  r.  side.


KALI  MURIATICUM.  452

iCroupy  inflammation  of  lungs.

I  Catarrhal  phthisis,  affecting  small  space  m  upper  r.  lung,
with  crackling  respiration  (audible  at  night  to  herself),
dulness  on  percussion;  paleness;  emaciation;  fever
slight;  cough  with  greenish  expectoration.

■  Hemorrhage  from  lungs.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Palpitation  of  heart,  with

constriction  of  chest.
I  I  Perceptible  but  not  accelerated  beating  of  heart,  with

coldness  in  cardiac  region.
I  I  Violent  but uniform  beating  of  heart; oppression  of

chest,  cold  feet.

■  Palpitation  of  heart,  with  sensation  of  coldness  in  region

of  heart.

■  Palpitation  from excessive  flow  of  blood  to  heart; in

hypertrophic  conditions.

■  Pericarditis,  second  stage.

■  Heart  disease  causing  dropsy.

I  I  Pulse  accelerated,  or  soft  and  sluggish,  not  synchronous

with  beats  of  heart.
Right  pulse  full, soft,  sluggish  (68),  intermitting every

twenty -five  or  thirt}''  beats,  not  synchronous  with  beats  of

heart  (80),  1.  pulse  being  at  same  time  small,  soft,  easily

compressible.

■  Embolus;  -for  that  condition  of  blood  which  favors  the

formation  of  clots  (fibrinous),  which  causes  plugs.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Glands  of  neck  swollen.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l  i Coldness  in  arm;  internal  coldness  in  r.

arm.
Drawing,  tearing  in  wrist  joints  or  tearing  ir  r.  wrist  joint

along  ulna.

■  After  dancing  and  cooling  drafts  from  r.  side,  a  stiff  neck

and  pain  in  shoulder  when  moving  r.  arm;  next  night
so  bad  that  she  had  to  cry  out;  three  months  later,  can-
not move  arm,  it  causes  pain  in  shoulder  and  shoulder
blade;  elbow  and  hand  somewhat  movable;  fingers
numb  and  powerless;  pains  are  a  continuous  pressing;
dry  heat  or  letting  sun  shine  on  it,  does  good;  cannot
bear  tight  clothes  or  to  lie  on  affected  side.

■  Tenalgia  crepitans.

I  I  Phlyctsenoidal  pimples  on  backs  of  hands.
I  I  Warts  on  hands.

I  I  Itching  pimples  with  small  vesicles  on  dorsa  of  hands.
^^  Lower  Limbs. '  '  Inflammation  of  hip  joint.

■Hip  joint  disease,  second  stage,  when  swelling  commences

or  is  present.
I  I  Drawing  in  thigh.
I  I  Violent  darting  in  r.  knee.


453  KALI  MURIATICUM.

I  I  Swelling  of  leg  below  knee;  cold  and  very  hard,  and
looked  as  if  ready  to  burst ;  almost  twice  its  usual  size.

•  Chronic  persistent  swelling  of  feet  and  lower  limbs,  swell-
ing soft  at  first,  afterwards  hard  to  touch,  without  pain
or  redness;  itchy;  atone  stage  snowy  white  and  shin-
ing ;  swelling  less  perceptible  in  morning  than  in  even-
ing; great  tension,-with  a  feeling  as  if  it  would  burst.

i  i  Cramp  in  leg.

I  Ulcers  on  legs  with  callous  edges.

I  Cold  feet,  with  palpitation  of  heart.

I  Fresh  chilblains;  bunion.

I  Ingrown  toenails.
^*  Limbs  in General. Lameness: rheumatic;  with shiny,
red  sw^ellings;  chronic,  caused  by  rheumatism  of  joints.

■  Rheumatic  pains.

I  Acute  articular  rheumatism.

I  All  joints  swollen,  could  not  stay  in  bed  a  single  night.

I  Chilblains  on  hands  or  feet  or  any  part.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. When  moving  r.  arm :  pain
in  shoulder.

Violent  exercise :  vertigo  with  congestion  to  head.
^^  Nerves^ l Great  weakness;  with  diarrhoea.

iTwitchings  of  muscles,  especially  about  face  and  head;
<  after  abuse  of  mercury.

I  I  Convulsions  followed  by  delirium.

■  Epilepsy,  if  occurring  with,  or  after  suppression  of  eczema.
I  Asthma;  white  mucus  and  hard  to  cough  up.
iRheumatic  paralysis.

^  Sleep. I  I  Somnolence.

I  I  Snoring  and  oppression  of  breathing;  restless  sleep  with

anxious  dreams,  towards  morning.
^  Time. Toward  morning:  restless  sleep  with  anxious  dreams.
Morning: feels  more  tired  than  evening; fainting  fit;

sickness;  swelling  in  limbs  >.
Evening: chilliness; headache; redness of eyes,  with

pain;  swelling  in  limbs  <.
Night :  bleeding  of  nose ;  restlessness,  with  much  rough
and  hard  coughing ;  crackling  respiration  audible  to
herself;  could  not  stay  in  bed  a  single  night  on  account
of  swollen  joints;  delirium;  itching.
^®  Temperature  and  Weather. In  bed :  itching  of  whole  body.
Dry  heat  and  letting  sun  shine  on  arm  does  good.
Cooling drafts, after dancing: stiff  neck and  pain in

shoulder.
Cold  :  chaps  hands  and  lips.
^  Fever. '  l Shivering  all  over;  or  over  back  and  neck,  with
warm  feet.

I I  Continual  chilliness  with  rigidity  of  hands.


KALI  MURIATICUM.  454

I  Chill  with  vomiting  of  white  (not  transparent)  mucus.

I  I  Chilly  in  open  air ;  in  afternoon.

I  I  Febrile  condition,  violent  beating  of  pulse  and  heart.

I  I  Intolerable  heat  in  head.

■  Intermittent  fever; fur  at  back  of  tongue  greyish  or
white;  vomiting  of  white  (not  transparent)  mucus.

I  Inflammation  of  peritoneum,  pleura,  and  serous  mem-
branes of  brain  and  pericardium.

I  Childbed  fever.

I  Grey  or  white  deposit  on  tongue;  diarrhoea,  with  light
yellow  ochre  colored  evacuations;  abdominal  tenderness
and  swelling. ^Typhoid  fever.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes:
calls  to  stool.

Periodical  attacks  lasting  eight  to  nine  days :  severe  pain
throughout  whole  body.

Twenty-four  hours :  rash  disappears.

For  three  months:  infiltration  into  r.  cornea.

Three  months  after  taking  cold :  cannot  move  arm ;  it
causes  pain  in  shoulder  and  shoulder  blade.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  dimness  of  eye;  bleed-
ing from  nostril ;  paralysis  of  facial  nerve ;  lips  could
not  be  held  firm  on  side  of  face ;  heavy  feeling  on  side
over  liver;  pain  in  side;  catarrhal  pneumonia;  catar-
rhal phthisis  affecting  small  space  in  upper  lung ;  pulse
full,  soft,  sluggish ;  internal  coldness  in  arm ;  tearing
in  wrist  joint;  stiff  neck  and  pain  in  shoulder  when
moving  arm;  violent  darting  in  knee;  pimples  in  cor-
ner of  mouth.

Left:  aching  in  side  of  temple;  eye  became  gradually
weaker  from  month  to  month;  blister  on  lower  edge  of
cornea;  side  of  face  fiery  red;  pulse  small,  soft,  easily
compressible.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  sand  was  in  eye;  as  if  leg  would  burst;
as  if  lungs  were  tied  with  a  thread.

Pains:  in  head  and  face;  on  swallowing  <  on  one  side;

in throat;  in rectum; in abdomen; in kidneys; in

•shoulder  when  moving arm; in shoulder blade; of

gums  and cheeks; in  chest;  in  abdomen;  on  r.  side

over  liver ;  in  r.  side.

Violent  pain :  in  throat.

Severe  pain :  throughout  whole  body.

Sudden  severe  pain:  in  r.  eye.

Violent  darting:  in  r.  knee.

Lightning-like  attacks  of  pain :  in  face.

Tearing :  in  upper  jaw.

Cutting:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.

Drawing  tearing:  in  wrist  joints;  along  ulna.


455  KALI  MURIATICUM.

Cramplike  drawing:  in  cheeks.

Throbbing:  of  temporal  artery.

Colic :  in  pelvic  region.

Tensive  drawing:  in  cheeks.

Drawing:  in  thigh.

Rheumatism:  of  joints.

Aching:  in  1.  side  of  temple;  extending  from  head  into
jaws;  in  face;  in  teeth.

Stinging  burning:  taste;  blisters  on  tongue.

Stinging:  in  jaw  and  teeth.

Twitching:  in  corners  of  eyes.

Irritation :  in  root  of  nose.

Dull  pain :  in  eye  and  over  brow.

Painful  pressure:  in  region  of  spleen.

Tensive  pressure :  in  region  of  liver.

Pressure,  with  empty  feeling  in  stomach.

Constriction :  of  chest.

Heavy  feeling:  on  r.  side  over  liver.

Oppression:  of  chest.

Tightness:  in  occiput.

Peculiar  sensation:  in  cervical  muscles.

Dryness:  in  mouth  ;  of  fauces;  of  throat  and  chest.

Confusion :  of  head  ;  in  occiput.

Emptiness :  in  stomach.

Itching:  in  urethra;  of  scrotum;  on  tongue;  at  anus;  of
whole  body.

Internal  coldness :  in  r.  arm.

Coldness :  in  cardiac  region ;  in  arms.
**  Tissues. I  I  Disturbed  action  of  vasomotor  nerves,  conges-
tions, with  tension,  or  coldness.

I  Congestions;  in  second  stage,  interstitial  exudation;
causes  swelling  or  enlargement  of  parts,  white  coated
tongue  or  white  sputa.

I  Hemorrhage,  blood  clotted,  black,  thick,  viscid.

I  I  Inflammation  of  lymphatic  vessels;  acute  glandular  in-
filtration; hard  swellings.

■  Inflammation  of  serous  membranes  in  second  stage  of

peritonitis,  pleuritis and  pericarditis; acute  articular
rheumatism  and  inflammation  of  lungs.

■  Discharges  of  thick,  white  or  yellowish,  slimy  mucus,

from  nose,  ear,  eyes,  or  any  passage  lined  with  mucous
membrane.

■  Mucus  white,  like  milk-glass.

■  Fibrous  exudation  on  mucous  membranes.

■  Exudations,  fibrinous,  in  interstitial connective  tissues,

causing  swelling  and  enlargement  of  these  parts.

■  Exudations,  after  inflammation,  with  effusion  of  lymph.

■  Sticky  exudations.


KALI  MURIATICUM.  456

I  I  Fibrinous  exudations,  glandular  infiltration,  and  inflam-
matory infiltration  of  skin,  causing  swelling  of  part,
arising  from  a  disturbed  balance  of  organic  (albuminoid)
basis  in  cells  and  of  molecules  of  potassium  chloride,  or
muscle  salt,  which  stands  in  biological  relation  to  albu-
minoid substances — i.  e.,  fibrine.

■  Hard,  scorbutic  infiltration  of  subcutaneous  tissue.

■  Croupous  and  diphtheritic  exudations.

I  I  Diseases  which  arise  from  want  of  this  salt  are  marked
either  by  exudations  (swellings),  torpor  of  liver,  or  by
casting  off  of  effete  albuminoid  substance,  as  seen  in  white
coating  of  tongue,  or  whitish  secretions  and  expectora-
tions.

Dysentery,  diphtheria,  laryngeal  croup,  croupous  pneumo-
nia, fibrous  exudation  in  interstitial  connective  tissue
(e.  g.,  mastitis),  acute  infiltrations  of  lymphatic  glands,
infiltrated  inflammations  of  skin  with  or  without  vesicu-
lation  (erysipelas,  etc.).

■Adhesions, recent, consequent  on  inflammations;  fibrinous
exudations  arising  from  excessive  blood  pressure  on
walls  of  bloodvessels.

Ilf  swelling  remains  on  bruised  parts.

I  Guts,  with  swelling.

I  Proud  flesh.

II  Causes  diminution  and  shrinking  of  granulations,  re-
sorption of  adjacent  infiltrations,  diminution  of  secretion
and  of  sensitiveness,  and  revival  of  drooping  spirits.
^Open  carcinoma  (locally).

■  Carbuncles,  for  swelling.

■  Abscess,  second  stage,  or  when  swelling  (interstitial  exu-

dation) takes  place.

■  Acute  or  chronic  articular  rheumatism.

■  Rheumatic,  gouty  pains.

■  Dropsy:  from  obstruction  of  bile  ducts  and  enlargement

of  liver;  from  weakness  of  heart;  with  palpitation.
Liquid  drawn  off  whitish;  white  mucus  in  sediment  of
urine.

■  Ascites;  anasarca;  sequela  of  fever.

■  Many  disorders,  especially  cutaneous  eruptions,  resulting

from  use  of  bad  lymph  in  vaccination  {Silica).

■  Condylomata;  warty  excrescences.

■  ■Scorbutic mouth; especially after mercury; chronic

scorbutus;  scurvy.

■  Infantile  or  chronic  syphilis.

*^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Touch :  excites

lightning-like  attacks  of  pain  in  face.
Cannot  bear  tight  clothes  or  lie  on  affected  side.
Injuries,  from  falls,  blows, etc.,  with swelling  of  parts;

chilblains;  burns;  proud  flesh  after  mechanical  injuries.


457  KALI  MURIATICUM.

^^  Skin. I  I  Itching  of  whole  body,  in  bed,

I  Jaundice  caused  b}'  gastro-duodenal  catarrh.

lErythema;  swelling  present ;  white  coated  tongue.

I  Excoriation,  chafing  of  skin,  especially  if  inclined to

scab,  tongue  whitish.
I  Intertrigo  of  infants.
I  Chapped  hands  or  lips  from  cold.
I  I  Papulae,  small,  red;  pimples  on  thigh  and  in  r.  corner

of  mouth  ;  small  vesicles  on  extremities  filled  with  pus,

red  areolae,  not  itching  much.
I  I  Rash,  with  single  pimples.
I  Pimples  on  face,  neck,  etc.,  caused  by  disturbed  action  of

follicular  glands.
I  Eruption  with  white  scales.

■  Eruption  of  blisters. ^Intermittent.

■  Eruptions: pustules, pimples; discharging a whitish

mattery  substance ;  on  skin  (rash),  if  connected  with
stomach  derangement;  white  coated  tongue,  accom-
panied by  deranged  menstrual  period.

■  Blisters  arising  from  burns.

■  Little  blisters  on  skin,  filled  with  lymph. ^Intermittent.

■  Vesicles,  with  seroso-fibrinous  contents.

■  Herpes  Zoster.

■Eczema :  arising  after  vaccination  with  bad  vaccine
lymph  ;  from  suppressed  or  deranged  uterine  functions;
oozing  from  inflamed  skin ;  of  white  secretions  from  skin.

■Mealy  scurf.

■  Greenish,  brownish,  yellow  crusts.

■  Milk  crust.

■  Inflammation  of  skin,  with  subcutaneous  swelling.

■  Festers,  gatherings  in  any  part;  boils.
I  I  Proud  flesh  in  ulcers.

■  Miliary  and  venereal  symptoms.

■  Barber's  itch.

I  I  Chilblains ;  recently  contracted.

Inflamed  flaws  in  nails.

Lupus.

I  I  Erysipelas  bullosa.

■  Vesicular  erysipelas  and  shingles.
I  I  Chicken  pox.

■  Measlgs ;  hoarse  cough,  glandular  swellings,  furred  tongue,

white  or  grey  deposit;  after  effects;  diarrhoea,  whitish,
or  light  colored  loose  stools,  white  tongue,  deafness  from
swellings,  etc.

■  Variola.

■Attack  of  slight  scarlatina,  rash  disappearing  after
scarcely  twenty-four  hours;  throat  symptoms  which
threatened  to  be  severe  disappeared  in  three  or  four  days;


KALI  MURIATICUM.  458

on  seventh  day  almost  complete  retention  of  urine  set
in,  although  child  drank  a  good  deal ;  urine  albumin-
ous ;  feet  swollen ;  abdomen  greatly  distended ;  high
fever  ;  delirium  ai  night.
'"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution,  i  Mercurialized  patients  when
a  scorbutic  state  has  been  created.

Boy,  set.  1^ ;  catarrhal  pneumonia.

Girl,  £et.  7 ;  blisters  on  cornea,  scabby  eyelids.

Boy,  set.  7 ;  croup.

Man,  set.  23,  increased  dandruff.

Woman,  set.  24,  blonde,  suffering  five  years ;  affection  of
mouth.

Woman,  set.  29,  melancholic,  suffering  from  mental  dis-
turbance, and  chronic  affection  of  liver;  faceache.

Woman,  set.  33,  married ;  catarrhal  phthisis.

Man,  set.  35 ;  parenchymatous  keratitis.

Woman,  set.  36,  suffering  from  chronic  affection  of  liver,
after  mental  disturbance;  faceache.

]\Ian,  set.  36,  suffering  for  two  years ;  chorio-retinitis.

Man,  suffering  three  days ;  dysentery.

Woman,  set,  44,  gouty ;  faceache.

Woman,  set.  56,  always  wore  blue  spectacles,  three  years
ago,  while  walking  through  fields  covered  with  snow,  on
which  sun  was  shining  brightly;  sudden  loss  of  vision
of  r.  eye.
*^  Relations.  Antidoted  by :  Bellad.,  Cole,  sulph.,  Hydrast,
Pulsat:

It  antidotes:  Mercur.,  especially  when  scorbutic  state  of
blood  exists.

Compatible :  after  Ferr.  phos.  in  glossitis,  bloody  vomiting,
cystitis,  croup,  tussis  and  pertussis,  heart  diseases,  pleu-
ritis,  pneumonia,  typhus,  skin  inflammations,  rheuma-
tism, and  mechanical  injuries;  follows  Kali  phos.  in
ear  diseases  and  suppressed  menses;  is  followed  b}^  Kali
sulph.  in  syphilis,  cramp  and  inflammations ;  is  followed
by  Silica  in  mastitis  and  syphilis.

Compare:  Apis,  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Cadmium,  (con-
stricted chest),  Calc.  phos.  (lupus),  lodium,  Iris,  Mercur.,
Merc.  dulc.  (eustachian  tube  troubles),  Mur.  ac,  Natr.  mur.,
Nitr.  ac,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Spongia,  Sulphur,  Thuja.


459  KALI  NITRICUM.


KALI  NITRICUM.

Nitre.  KNO^.

Proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers,  also  by  Engler,  Hecker,  Heister-
bergkh,  Kneschke,  Kummer,  Kichter,  Siebenhaar,  Jorg,  Assman,  Alexander,  Eum-
mell,  Schroeder,  Lier,  Frinzelberger,  Nicol,Traub,  Frank, Muhlenbein,  and  others.
See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  355.

Clinical  Authorities.— Po/ypiis  of  nose,  Kippal,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  96;  Use  in
dysentery,  Gauwerky,  Buck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  446;  Pams  in  chest,  Gregg,  p.  20;
Affections  of  chest,  Arnold,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  823;  Pneumonia,  Hocking,
Raue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  149  ;  Anthrodynia,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  U,  p.  349  ;  Rheuma-
tism, Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  349.

^  Mind, Depression ;  anxiety ;  peevishness ;  delirium.
^  Sensorium. l  '  Fainting  fits,  with  vertigo  in  morning  when
standing,  >  when  sitting  down;  afterwards  obscuration
of  sight,  with  great  weakness  and  drowsiness;  pain  in
small  of  back  and  constriction  in  abdomen ;  staggering
gait,  with  vertigo. ^Vertigo.
^  Inner  Head. '  l  Headache  in  vertex  on  rising.
^  Smell  and  Nose. '  i  Sore  pain  and  swollen  feeling  in  r.
nostril,  painful  on  pressure.
I  Mucous  polyp  of  r.  side,  very  large,  and  distending  nose.
I  Polypus  of  r.  nostril,  growing  more  rapidly  after  each
attack  of  headache,  which  was  >  by  camphor.
*  Tipper  Face. Small  pustules  on  face.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Sour  taste.

Tongue  coated  white.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Fetid  odor  from  mouth.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Little  appetite,
with  much  thirst.
I  Thirst,  drinks  a  sip  at  a  time  for  want  of  breath.
''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Faintlike  weakness  about

pit  of  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Violent  colic,  more  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  >  by
emission  of  flatus.
I  I  Stitching  and  sticking  pain;  abdomen  swollen  and  very
tender  to  touch ;  coldness  of  lower  extremities ;  numb
and  stiff"  feeling  of  affected  parts,  as  if  they  were  made
of  wood. ^Peritonitis.
Stool  and  Rectum, l  Diarrhoea  after  eating  veal.

Stools:  watery;  thin,  fecal;  bloody;  soft  or  diarrhcea-like ;
sluggish ;  hard,  like  sheep  dung.


20


KALI  NITRICUM.  460

Before  stool:  violent  colic;  urging.

During  stool :  cutting  colic  in  whole  intestinal  canal ;
tenesmus.

After  stool ;  cutting  colic :  tenesmus  ;  burning  and  sting-
ing in  anus.

Frequent  pressing  in  rectum.

In dysentery,  after Aeon.,  when  latter  fails to  remove
cutting  pain,  great  thirst  and  icy  coldness  of  feet ;  fol-
lowed well  by  Nux.
^'  Urinary  Organs. ■  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  at  first  only
a  few  drops,  then  usual  stream.

I  Burning  in  urethra  while  urinating,  and  greatly  dimin-
ished urine.

■  Profuse  emission  of  urine,  as  clear  as  water. ^Diabetes

insipidus.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  '  Suppression  of  menses.

I  Menstrual  blood  black  as  ink,  with  much  suiTering.

iThin,  white,  mucous  leucorrhoea,  with  pain  in  small  of
back,  as  if  bruised.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Violent  stitch  in  upper  part  of
sternum,  from  without  inward,  on  1.  side.

Stitches  in  middle  of  chest,  extending  to  both  sides  and
toward  axilla,  when  walking  (during  menses).

Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  toward  back,  and  below
1.  mamma.

Sticking  below  short  ribs  of  r.  side,  toward  back,  appar-
ently behind  liver.

iStitching  pains  in  chest  greatly  impeding  respiration.

■  Congestion  to  lungs  in  tuberculosis.

■Severe  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest  in  evening,  causing  short-
ness of  breath ;  severe  cough,  with  expectoration  of
blood;  synochal  fever;  full,  hard  and  quick  pulse;
heaviness  and  dulness  of  head;  delayed,  hard  stool;  red
or  turbid  urine;  great  and  constant  thirst.  ^Lung
affections.

iPneumonia,  with  excessive  heat  and  thirst,  >  by  copious
perspiration  and  profuse  hemorrhage.

■Relapse  induced  by  exposure;  distressing  dyspnoea;  can-
not lie  with  head  low;  wants  to  be  fanned  to  keep  from
suffocating;  thirst,  drinks  only  sip  at  time  for  want  of
breath;  pulse  rapid;  cough,  with  purulent  expectora-
tion. ^Pneumonia.

■  Severe,  acute  pains  in  chest,  cutting  like  a  knife,  and

shooting  from  centre  of  sternum  to  armpit  and  sides  of
chest  below;  cough  and  expectoration.  ^Suppressed
syphilis.

■  Oppression  of  chest  in  phthisical  subjects,  when  constant

irritation  to  cough  and  expectoration,  often  bloody  in


461  KALI  NITRICUM.

character,  causes  an  evening  fever  with  liot  hands  and
cheeks.
■  Useful  in  all  stages  of  phthisis,  but  particularly  for  acute
exacerbations  with  much  cough,  dull  headache  and
severe  pain  in  chest;  cough  caused  by  tickling  in  middle
of  chest,  very  severe,  taking  away  breath,  with  audible
palpitation  of  heart,  expectoration  often  mixed  with
coagulated  blood.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. lAcute  rheumatism,  with

endocarditis.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pimples  on  r.  forearm,  discharge  water
when  scratched.
Boil  at  lower  part  of  thumb.
^'  Limbs  in  General. lAnthrodynia  in  several  joints.

Formication  in  hands  and  feet.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Cannot  lie  with  head  low,  on
account  of  dyspnoea.
Standing:  vertigo.

Sitting  down :  vertigo  > ;  debility  <.
Rising:  headache  on  vertex.
Walking:  stitches  in  middle  of  chest.
Gentle  motion:  debility  >.
^^  Nerves. Debility  felt  more  when  sitting  than  during  gentle

motion.
^^  Sleep. Sleep  restless,  with  nightmare.

Insomnia  after  midnight ;  light  morning  sleep.
I  I  On  awaking,  pain  in  small  of  back.
^  Time. Aggravation :  3  a.m.

Morning:  vertigo;  light  sleep.

Evening:  severe  stitches  in  1.  chest;  fever  with  hot  hands

and  cheeks.
After  midnight:  insomnia.
"Locality  and  Direction. Right:  sore  pain  and  swollen
feeling  in  nostril;  mucous  polyp  in  side  of  nostril;  vio-
lent colic more  in  side  of  abdomen;  sticking  below
short  ribs;  pimples  on  forearm.
Left:  violent  stitches  on  side  of  sternum;  or  stitch  in  side

of  chest.
Frorn  without  inward:  violent  stitch  in  sternum.
^^  Sensations. As  if  parts  of  whole  body  were  made  of  wood.
Pain :  in  small  of  back ;  in  vertex.
Severe  pain:  in  chest.

Cutting:  pains  in  chest;  colic,  in  intestinal  canal.
Shooting  pains:  from  centre  of  sternum  to  armpit  and

sides  of  chest  below.
Violent  stitch:  in  upper  part  of  sternum.
Stitches :  in  middle  of  chest;  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  below
mamma.


KALI  NITRICUM.  462

Stitching  and  sticking  pains  in  abdomen.

Sticking:  below  short  ribs  of  r.  side.

Violent  colic:  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

Burning  and  stinging:  in  anus.

Burning:  in  urethra.

Sore  pain:  in  r.  nostril.

Pressing:  in  rectum.

Constriction :  in  abdomen.

Swollen  feeling:  in  r.  nostril.

Heaviness  and  dulness:  of  head.

Faintlike  weakness:  about  pit  of  stomach.

Numb  and  stiff  feeling:  of  affected  parts.

Tickling:  in  middle  of  chest.

Formication:  in  hands  and  feet.

Coldness:  of  lower  extremities.
**  Tissues. I  Acute  rheumatism,  with  endocarditis.
"^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Touch : abdomen
very  tender.

Pressure:  nostril  painful.
*^  Skin. Vesicles  full  of  thin  yellow  fluid.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Asthmatic  constitutions.

Girl ;  polypus.

Man,  set.  35,  syphilitic  subject ;  pains  in  chest.

Woman,  eet.  72;  pneumonia.
^  Relations. Compare : Lycop.  in  lung  affections ;  Canthar.
and  Camphora  in  renal  diseases


4G3  KALI  PERMANGANICUM.

KALI  PERMANGANICUM.

Permanganate  of  Potash.  2  KMnO^.

Proved  by  H.  C.  Allen. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  351.

Clinical  Authorities. —  Ulcerated  throat,  Woodgate,  Horn.  Kev.,  vol.  12,  pp.
151, 152;  Diphtheria  (2  cases),  Sprague,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  360;  Allen,  A.  H.  O.,
vol.  3,  p.  352 ;  Nichol,  GEhme's  Therap.,  p.  45 ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  386.

^^  Throat. iSanious  discharge  from  nares.

■  Tonsils  and  soft  palate  swollen  and  inflamed;  patches

of  whitish  ulceration  on  tonsils;  pain  in  swallowing;
glands  of  neck  tender. ^Ulcerated  throat.

■  Tonsils  swollen,  and  on  each  patches  of  ulceration  of

yellowish  color;  much  pain  internally  and  externally.

■  Diphtheria,  with  ulceration,  and  gangrenous  suppuration

with  fetid  odor.

■  Violent  headache;  throat  swollen and  painful,  profuse

salivation;  cervical  glands  swollen  and  painful;  fauces
covered  with  peculiar  wash  leather,  greyish  membrane;
breath  offensive  from  beginning,  and  thin,  watery,
sanious  fluid  escaping  from  nares  excoriating  upper  lip;
dark  colored  offensive  diarrhoea;  vomiting;  fluids  taken
by  mouth  return  through  nose;  general  prostration.
^Diphtheria.

■  Comatose  state;  prostration  extreme; nares  completely

plugged,  fetor  intolerable ;  pulse  intermitting.  ^Diph-
theria.

■  Pharynx  swollen  very  much  and  covered  with  a  yellow-

ish membrane;  high  fever;  unable  to  speak  or  swallow;
pulse  135;  furred  tongue;  fetid  breath. ^Diphtheria.

■  Pharynx  covered  with  yellowish  pseudo-membrane,  not

very  firmly  attached  ;  extreme  fetor  of  breath ;  inability
to  swallow;  pulse  140  and  feeble;  great  prostration.
^Diphtheria.

■  Underneath  a  fetid,  scablike  membrane  considerable  ero-

sion of  mucous  membrane. ^Diphtheria.

■  Odor  of  breath  unbearable;  fluids  taken  by  mouth  re-

turned by  nose ;  general  and  excessive  prostration ;  great
dyspnoea;  foul  diphtheritic  exudations  all  over  fauces.
^  Cough. I  I  Expectoration  very  fetid.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set  3;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  6,  suffering  one  week ;  diphtheria.


KALI  PERMANG.— KALI  PHOSPHORICUM.  464

Girl,  set.  7;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  9,  stout  build;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  16;  ulcerated  throat.
Woman,  set.  25,  cook ;  ulcerated  throat.


KALI  PHOSPHORICUM.

Phosphate  of  Potash.  K^HPO^.

One  of  the  constituents  of  the  human  body,  obtainable  from  calcined  bones.
Also  obtained  by  adding  carbonate  of  potassium  to  dilute  phosphoric  acid.
One  of  the  Twelve  Tissue  Remedies,  introduced  by  Schuessler.
This  valuable  medicine  needs  proving  on  the  healthy ;  so  far  we  have  but  the
suggestions  of  Schuessler,  and  results  of  limited  clinical  experience.

Clinicai,  Authorities. — Mental  alienation,  Amberg,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Eem-
edies,  p.  70;  Melancholia  religiosa,  Amberg,  Schuessler;  Headache,  Wesselha-ft,
Schuessler,  p.  29 ;  Neuralgia  of  face,  Wesselhoeft,  Schuessler,  p.  29  ;  Stomatitis,  Kapp,
Schuessler,  p.  43 ;  Cholerine,  Schuessler,  p.  84 ;  Enuresis,  Crowell,  Schuessler,  p.  64 ;
Amberg,  AUg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  84 ;  Asthma,  Eapp,  Schuessler,  p.  63.

^  Mind. 'Loss  of  memor}^  or  weak  memory.

I  I  Quiet  delirium. ^Dysentery. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  Delirium  tremens;  horrors  of  drunkards;  fear,  sleepless-

ness, restlessness  and  suspicion;  rambling  talk;  endeav-
ors to  grasp  or  avoid  visionary  images.
iSays  she  is  eternally  and  irretrievably  damned;  continu-
ally weeping  and  crying,  wringing  her  hands,  pulling
to  pieces  and  tearing  her  clothing,  as  well  as  bed  cov-
ering; does  not  recognize  her  surroundings;  no  sleep;
staring  eyes;  often  must  be  held  by  two  persons;  food
and  medicine  must  be  forcibly  administered.  ^Melan-
cholia religiosa.

I I  Anxiety,  nervous  dread  without  special  cause,  gloomy
moods,  fancies,  taking  dark  views  of  things,  dark  fore-
bodings.

iMelancholia  and  other  similar  ailments,  which  arise  from
deranged  mental  function,  caused  by  overstrain  of  mind,
or  from  exhausting  drainings  affecting  nerve  centres  of
spinal  cord.

I  iSighii^  or  moaning,  also  when  occurring  during  sleep.

I  I  Whining  and  fretful  disposition  in  children  and  adults.

I  Crying  or  screaming  in  children,  from  undue  sensitive-
ness.

I  I  Hysterical  fits  of  laughter  and  crying;  yawning.


4G5  KALI  PHOSPHORICUM.

I  I  Shyness,  excessive  blushing,  from  undue  sensitiveness.
I  I  Vexation,  restlessness  and  irritability.

■  Easily  frightened,  and  inclined  to  fear.

■  Depression  of  spirits  and  lassitude.

■  Profound  hypochondria  and  melancholia,  weariness  of

life  and  fear  of  death,  suspiciousness,  weeping  mood.

I  I  Dread  of  noise,  oversensitiveness  to  noise  and  light.

I  I  Homesickness,  morbid  activity  of  memory,  haunted  by
visions  of  past,  and  longing  alter  them.
^  Sensorium. ■Concussion  of  brain.

I  I  Nervous  vertigo ;  cerebral  ansemia.
^  Inner  Head. ■  Excruciating  nervous  headache,  with  great
sensitiveness  to  noise,  during  menses.

I  i  Pains  and  weight  at  back  of  head,  with  feeling  of  weari-
ness and  exhaustion.

■  Headache  of  students ;  brain  fag  from  overwork.
I  I  Headache  >  by  motion.

I  I  Softening  of  brain ;  early  stage ;  hydrocephalus.
I  I  Brain  affections  with  diarrhoea  smelling  like  carrion.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. '  •  Weak  sight ;  from  exhausted  condition
of  optic  nerve ;  strabismus ;  after  diphtheria.
Excited,  staring  appearance  of  eyes.
Drooping  of  eyelids.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. '  '  Deafness,  from  want  of  nervous  per-
ception, weakness,  or  exhaustion  of  auditory  nerve.

■  Noises in  ears  from  nervous  exhaustion;  nervous  roaring.
I  I  Ulceration  of  membr.ana  tympani  and  middle  ear  sup-
purations, with  foul  discharge.

I  I  Atrophic  conditions  of  nerve.
^  Smell and Nose. l  l  Epistaxis ; from predisposition or
weakness ;  ozsena.

I  I  Hay  fever  with  nervous  irritability.
®  Upper  Face. '  '  Face  livid  and  sunken,  with  hollow  eyes.

■  Neuralgia  in  r.  side  of  face,  proceeding  from  hollow  teeth,

>  by  cold  applications.
I  I  Facial  neuralgia ;  great  weakness  after  attack.
I  I  Loss  of  power  in  muscles  of  face,  causing  contortions,  or
an  involuntary  twist  of  mouth. ^Paralysis.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  i  Chattering  of  teeth,  nervous.

1  I  Toothache  of  highly  nervous,  delicate,  pale,  irritable,

sensitive  persons.
I  I  Bright  red  border,  easily  bleeding  gums;  scorbutic.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. '  l Tongue:  coated,  like  stale,  brownish,
liquid  mustard; offensive  breath; excessively  dry  in
morning,  feeling  as  if  it  would  cleave  to  roof  of  mouth.
*^  Inner  Mouth. ■  ■  Breath  offensive,  fetid ;  stomatitis.

■  ■Gums  spongy  and  receding.

■  Noma.
VOL.  yi. — 30.


KALI  PHOSPHORICUM-  466

'"  Throat. '  '  Diphtheria,  with  marked,  putrid,  gangrenous
condition,  and  fearful  stencli  from  mouth  ;  malignant.
''  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. '  i  Excessive  hun-
gry feeling,  soon  after  eating,  caused  by  nervous  depres-
sion or  weakness.
"^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, b Inordi-
nate appetite; wants  to  eat  almost  every  hour; very
tired  and  enervated.
^"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Sweat  during  meals,  with
leeling  of  weakness  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  "gone  sensation."
!  I  Indigestion  with  great  nervous  depression ;  faint  feeling.
I  1  Inflammation  of  stomach;  failing  strength,  dryness  of
tongue.
'^  Hypochondria. '  i  Affection  of  spleen ; leucaemia  lienalis.
'^  Abdomen, i  l  Flatulence  with  distress  about  heart.

I  I  Inflammatory  colic  of  horses  with  incipient  gangrene.
I  I  Abdominal  hernise  and  prolapsus ;  in  weak  persons.
"''Stool  and  Rectum, ll Diarrhoea: painless, watery;  with
heavy  odor;  occasioned  by  fright  and  other  causes  de-
pressing and exhausting nerves; putrid,  carrionlike
stools ;  great  prostration.
II Delirium,  dryness  of  tongue,  tympanites; carrionlike
odor  of  discharges;  dysentery;  pure  blood  is  discharged.
iStools:  like  rice  water;  offensive,  ichorous;  pure  blood.
sVomiting  and  diarrhoea;  painful  cramps  in  calves;  rice

water  stools. ^Cholera,
I  I  Cholera  (second  stage)  caused  by  affection  of  nerves  of

intestinal  canal.
I  Putrid  and  typhoid  dysentery.
^'  Urinary  Organs. '  '  Bright's  disease ;  depressed  condition
of  nerves;  sleeplessness,  irritability,  weary  feeling.
I  I  Diabetes;  nervous  weakness;  breath  peculiar,  with  hay-
like odor,  thirst,  emaciation,  often  voracious  hunger,  all
consequent  on  liver  derangement.
I  I  Inflammation  of  bladder;  asthenic  condition.
I  I  Catarrh  of  bladder;  vomiting,  paleness  of  face,  loss  of

strength  and  dryness  of  tongue,
i  I  Paralysis  of  sphincter,  inability  to  retain  urine,  gener-
ally of  old  people.
I  Incontinence  of  urine,  from  paralysis  of  sphincter.
1  Obstinate  enuresis;  general  weakness.
-^  Male  Sexual  Organs. i  i Phagedenic  chancre; balanitis.
^■^  Female Sexual Organs. '  '  Catamenia : premature and
profuse  in nervous  subjects ;  too  scanty ;  too profuse,
with  heavy  odor,  dark  red,  or  blackish  red,  thin  and
not  coagulating.
llAmenorrhoea,  retention  or  delay  of  monthly  flow,  with
depression  of  spirits,  lassitude,  and  general  nervous  de-
bility.


4G7  KALI  PHOSPHORICUM.

"Pregnancy.  Partutition.  Lactation.  Labor  pains:  feeble

and  ineffectual;  spurious.
I  I  Mastitis,  pus  brownish,  dirty  looking,  with  heavy  odor;

adynamic condition; gangrenous, bad colored, bad

smelling  pus.
I  I  Childbed  fever  wdth  absurd  notions  or  mania.
I  I  Second  stage  of  puerperal  fever.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Speech

slow,  becoming  inarticulate ;  creeping  paralysis.
I  I  Recent  paralysis  of  vocal  cords.

I  I  Hoarseness  from  overexertion  of  voice.

I I  Croup,  last  stage ;  extreme  weakness,  pale  or  livid  coun-
tenance.

^'Respiration,  ii  Nervous  asthma  with  depression;  asthma
after  most  moderate  use  of  food ;  asthma  with  sallow
features,  sunken  eyes,  emaciation.

■  Shortness  of  breath;  asthmatic  when  going  up  stairs.

^  Cough. ■  Whooping  cough  in  highly  nervous  patients,  or

great  exhaustion.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iPain  in  lower  part  of  1,  thorax,

<  on  coughing ;  slight  catarrhal  cough ;  tongue  dry ;

pulse  frequent,  small  and intermittent; no  appetite;

great  weakness.
I  iCEdema  pulmonum;  dyspnoea,  spasmodic  cough,  with

expectoration  of  frothy,  serous  masses;  lassitude and

prostration;  livid  countenance.
^*  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Palpitation :  from  nervous

causes ; on  ascending,  with  shortness  of  breath  ;  with

nervousness,  anxiety ;  with  sleeplessness.

■  Intermittent  action  of  heart:  with  morbid,  nervous  sensi-

tiveness ;  from  violent  emotions,  grief,  care.
I  I  Fainting,  from  weak  action  of  heart.
I  I  Pulse  intermittent,  irregular.
I  I  Sluggish  circulation,  in  sensitive,  nervous  subjects;  to

strengthen  heart's  action.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Spinal  anaemia  from  exhausting  diseases.

■  Softening  of  spinal  cord,  loss  of  power,  stumbles  and  trips*.

■  Paralytic  or  rheumatic  lameness,  stiffness  after  rest,  >  by

gentle  motion.
^  Lower  Limbs, i  i  Rheumatic  or  neuralgic  affections  of  sci-
atic nerve,  >  from  motion.
I  For two days drawing,  laming  pain in  sole  of  foot;

affected  place  size  of  silver  dollar,  bluish.
I  I  Chilblains,  if  recent.
^'  Limbs  in  General. '  l  Paralyzing  pain  in  limbs,  >  by  mo-
tion and  external  warmth.
^■^  Rest. Position. Motion. During  rest:  tearing,  paralytic
pains  <.
After  rest:  stiffness;  severe  rheumatism.


KALI  PHOSPHORICUM.  468

Rising:  neuralgic  pains  <  ;  paralytic  pains  <.

Beginning  to  move:  paralytic  pains  <.

Motion :  headache  > ;  rheumatic  affection  > ;  paralytic
pains  >.

Gentle  exercise:  neuralgic  pains  >;  stiffness  >;  rheuma-
tism >.

Going  up  stairs:  shortness  of  breath.
^^  Nerves. •  '  Starting  on  being  touched,  or  at  sudden  noises.

I  I  Undue  irritability,  after  exhausting  diarrhoea  or  long
continued  use  of  purgatives.

I  I  Disposition  to  feel  bodily  pains  too  acutely.

I  Nervous  attacks,  from  sudden  or  intense  emotion,  or  from
smothering  passion;  in  highly  nervous  and  excitable
persons ;  also  feeling  as  of  a  ball  rising  in  throat.

I  1  Fits,  from  fright,  with  pallid  or  livid  countenance.

I  I  Spasmodic  attacks;  face  pale  and  sunken,  body  and
limbs  cold,  violent  palpitation ^Epilepsy.

I  I  Nervous  affections,  when  occurring  without  reasonable
causes,  such  as  impatience,  irritability,  dwelling  upon
grievances,  merriment  becoming  oppressive,  shedding
tears  about  trifles,  making  mountains  out  of  mole  hills.

■  Neuralgia,  much  reduced  constitutions,  paralyzing  pains.
I  I  Neuralgic  pains,  >  with  gentle  exercise,  <  on  rising.
■Sciatica.

■  Paroxysms  of  pain  followed  by  great  weakness.

I  I  Feeling  of  faintness;  lassitude  and  palpitation.
■General  debility,  with  nervousness  and  irritability.
I  I  Adynamic  typhoid  condition.
I  I  Collapse,  with  livid  countenance  and  low  pulse.
'  I  Tearing,  paralytic  pains  in  nerves,  most  during  rest,  >

from  motion  without  exertion,  especially  felt  after  rising

from  sitting,  or  on  beginning  to  move.
I  I  Lameness:  recent,  paralytic,  from  exhaustion  of  nerves,

with stiffness after  rest,  yielding  to  gentle  exercise ;

rheumatic ;  rigidity  of  muscles.

■  Creeping  paralysis;  course  of  disease  slow;  tendency  to

wasting,  with  loss  of  sense  of  touch.
I  I  Shock  of  paralysis,  with  morbid  sensibility,  or  a  bruised
and  painful  feeling  in  part  affected,  or  rigidity  of  para-
lyzed limbs.

■  Paralysis  dependent  on  exhaustion  of  nerve  power  in  re-

cent cases,  as  after  diphtheria.

I  1  Paralytic  states,  nasal  voice,  strabismus,  etc.,  after  diph-
theria.

I  I  Atrophic  paralysis.

I  I  Infantile  paralysis  recent,  and  if  connected  with  teething.

!  I  Softening  of  spinal  cord,  idiopathic,  with  gradual  dead-
ening of  nerves.
^  Sleep. 1  I  Yawning:  excessive,  unnatural;  hysterical.


469  KALI  PHOSPHORICUM.

I  I  Sleeplessness :  after  worry  or  excitement ;  from  nervous

causes;  simple  wakefulness.
I  I  Night  terrors,  in  children  awakening  with  fright  and

screaming;  somnambulism.
I  I  Noises  in  head  on  falling  asleep,  feeling  as  if  a  rocket  had
passed  through  head.
^Time. Morning:  tongue  dry;  rheumatism.
''Temperature  and  Weather, External  warmth:  >  para-
lytic pain  in  limbs.
Cold  applications:  neuralgia  >.
'"  Fever, l  i  Typhus or  typhoid  fevers ;  haggard  face,  pulse
whizzing  or  very  small.
B  Ileo-typhus.

I  I  Intermittent  fever ;  sweat  profuse  and  exhausting,  fetid.
I  I  In  yellow  fever;  if  Carbo  veg.  is  not  sufficient.
B Excessive,  exhausting,  strong  smelling  sweats.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Almost  every  hour:  wants  to  eat.

For  two  days:  drawing,  laming  pain  in  sole  of  foot.
''Locality  and  Direction. Right:  neuralgia  of  face.

Left:^  pain  in  lower  part  of  thorax.
*^  Sensations. As  if  tongue  would  cleave  to  roof  of  mouth;
as  of  a  ball  rising  in  throat ;  as  if  a  rocket  had  passed
through  head.
Pains :  at  back  of  head ;  in  lower  part  of  1.  thorax.
Lancinating  nervous  headache.
Tearing,  paralytic  pains :  in  nerves.
Paralyzing  pain:  in  limbs.
Painful  cramps:  in  calves.
Drawing,  laming  pains:  in  sole  of  foot.
Rheumatic  or  neuralgic  affections:  of  sciatic  nerve.
Neuralgia :  in  r.  side  of  face.
Bruised  and  painful  feeling :  in  part  affected.
Dryness :  of  tongue.
^  Weight:  at  back  of  head.
'*  Tissues. I  I  Function  of  brain  cells  depressed. ^After  con-
cussion.
All  ailments  which  arise  from  or  denote  a  want  of  nerve
power;  hence  nervous  prostration,  exhaustion,  nervous
rigors;  also  all  affections  in  which  brain,  and  conse-
quently mind,  shows  want  of  vigor.
I  I  Insanity,  mania  or  other  mental  derangement;  from
exhausted  or  depressed  condition  of  brain  or  nerve  cells,
showing  itself  in  perverted  function.
I  I  Anaemia  or  leucaemia,  caused  by  long lasting  mental
depression,  poverty  of  blood  from  continuous  influences
depressing  mind  or  nerves.
■  Too  rapid  decay  of  blood  corpuscles.
I  Hemorrhages;  blood  not  coagulating,  thin,  blackish  or
light  red.


KALI  PHOSPHORICUM.  470

iSeptic  hemorrhages ;  stench  from  mouth  and  stomach ;
discharges  smelling  like  carrion ;  putrid  gangrene  ;  pros-
tration.

■Scorbutus,  gangrene,  noma  or  stomatitis,  gangrenous
angina,  phagedenic  chancre,  offensive,  carrionlike  diar-
rhoea, adynamic  or  typhoid  conditions.

I  Fatty  metamorphosis  in  muscular  fibres.

I  I  Atroph}^  wasting  disease,  putrid  smelling  stools.

I  I  Rheumatism,  acute  and  chronic,  with  pains  disappear-
ing on  moving  about,  severe  in  morning  after  rest,  and
on  first  rising  from  sitting  position.

iRachitis  with  atrophy;  profuse,  discolored,  foul  smelling
diarrhoea;  violent  thirst;  sometimes  discolored  vomit-
ing; brown  covering  of  teeth,  etc.

I  I  Suppurations,  dirty,  foul,  ichorous  fetid  matter.

I  I  Cancer,  encephaloid,  medullary,  soft  (brainlike  convo-
lutions), chiefly  occurring  in  young.

iNoma.

I  I  Chancre,  phagedenic.

I  I  Purpura  hemorrhagica.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  causes  him
to  start.

Mechanical  injuries  :  ichorous  discharge,  gangrene.  '
"'^  Skin. I  I  Urticaria.

I  I  Vesicles,  with  bloody  ichorous  contents.

I  I  Greasy,  offensive  smelling  crusts  or  scales.

I  I  Skin  diseases  with  bad  smelling  discharge.

■  Scarlet  fever:  putrid  condition  of  throat ;  typhoidal.

I  I  Smallpox;  adynamia  and  decomposition  of  blood.

I  Offensive  ulcers;  bad  colored,  ichorous,  bad  smelling.

I  I  Pemphigus  malignus.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Pale,  sensitive,  irritable  persons.

Atrophic  conditions  in  old  people.

Girl,  set.  7  ;  enuresis.

"Woman,  set.  33,  pale  and  thin ;  neuralgia  of  face.

Woman,  set.  44,  formerly  neither  inclined  to  piety  nor
fanaticism;  melancholia  religiosa.

Man,  set.  60;  enuresis,

Man,  set.  80;  mental  alienation.
^Relations. Compare: Arsen., Baptis., Carbo veg., China,
Ignat,  Kreos.,  Laches.,  Mur.  ac,  Phosphor.,  Phytol,  Pulsat.,
Rhus  tox.

Compatible:  0?/cfem.,  disordered  mental  conditions;  Kali
mwT*.,  in  puerperal  fever ;  Magnes.phos.,  bladder  troubles;
Zinc,  phos.,  incipient  paralysis  of  brain,  with  nephritic
irritation;  Natr.  mur.,  Nitr.ac, hemorrhages.

After  weakening  diseases,  mushrooms,  by  virtue  of  con-
taining Kali  phos.,  rapidly  restore  muscle  and  nerve
tissue.


471  KALI  SULPHURICUM.

KALI  SULPHURICUM.

Sulphate  of  Potash.  K^  SO^.

,  One  of  the  Twelve  Tissue  Kemedies  introduced  by  Schuessler. Needs  proving.

Clinical  Atjthoeities. —  Vertigo,  Schlegelmann,  Schuessler's  Biochera.,  p.  75 ;
Falling  off  of  hair,  Wesselhceft,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Kemedies,  p.  27 ;  Ear  affection,
Wesselhceft,  Schiissler's  Tissue  Remedies,  p.  25 ;  Disease  of  antrum  Highnori,  Wessel-
hceft, Schu^sler's  Tissue  Remedies,  p.  26  ;  Ozcena,  Wesselhreft,  Schuessler's  Tissue
Kemedies,  p.  27  ;  Whooping  cough,  Wesselhceft,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Kemedies,  p.  25;
Whooping  cough,  Knerr,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Kemedies,  p.  26;  Chorea  (13  cases),  Cat-
tell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  343;  Articular  rheumatism,  Schlegehiiann,  Schuessler's
Biochem.,  p.  75;  Epithelioma  (2  cases),  Orth,-  Schuessler's  Biochem.,  p.  68;  Itch
eruption  in  children,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  352;  Ivy  poisoning  (Khus  tox.j,
Wesselhceft,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Remedies,  p.  26.

^  Sensorium. ■  Dreadful  vertigo,  especially  on  rising  from
lying,  on  standing  from  sitting,  and  when  looking  up-
wards; every  moment  in  fear  of  falling  and  dare  not
leave  her  room.
^  Inner  Head. '  '  Rheumatic  headache,  <  in  warm  room  and

in  evening,  >  in  open  air.
*  Outer  Head. '  '  Great  pain  on  moving  head  from  side  to
side  or  backwards;  can  move  it  forward  without  pain,
I  Yellow  scales  (dandruff)  on  scalp.

I  Bald  spot  as  large  as  a  silver  dollar  on  1.  side  of  head  ;
hair  falls  out  easily  when  combing,  all  over  head,  also
hair  of  beard. ^After  gonorrhoea.
•  Copious  scaling  of  scalp,  moist  and  sticky.
I  Yellow  dandruff.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  i  Purulent  or  yellow  mucus  in  eye  diseases.

■  Catarrh  of  conjunctiva,  with  yellow  secretion.
I  I  Ophthalmia  neonatorum.

I  Eyelids,  with  thin,  yellow  crusts.

■  Discharge  from  eyes  yellow,  slimy,  or  sticky  watery.
I  I  Cataract.

®  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Deafness  caused  hy  catarrh  and  swell-
ing of  Eustachian  tube  and  middle  ear.

■  Watery,  mattery  discharge  from  ear;  yellow  slimy  tongue.

■  Secretion  of  thin,  yellow,  sticky  fluid  after  inflammation.

i Brown  offensive  secretion  from  r.  ear;  polypoid  excres-
cence closes  meatus  near  opening;  entirely  deaf  in  r.
ear  for  eight  weeks.


KALI  SULPHURICUM.  472

iStinking  otorrhoea  of  four  years'  standing.
''  Smell  and  Nose, i  Taste  and  smell  lost. fe'Ozsena.

iCoryza,  yellow  mucous  discharge.

iThick,  yellow,  offensive  discharge,  alternating  with
watery  discharge  for  eighteen  months;  1.  nostril  <;
catamenia  every  three  weeks;  takes  cold  easily. ^Ozasna.

lAbout  once  a  week  a  thick,  dark  brown,  semi-fluid  accu-
mulation of  pus  formed  in  upper  1.  nostril,  on  being
blown  out  emitted  a  terrible  stench;  about  a  month
previous  a  piece  of  carious  bone  was  taken  from  antrum
Highmori,  through  an  upper  1.  alveolus,  from  which  a
tooth  had  been  drawn  four  years  previous.

I  Old  catarrh  with  yellowish  viscous  secretion.
^  Upper  Face. iFaceache,  <  in  warm  room  and  in  evening;
>  in  cool  or  open  air.

I  I  Epithelioma  on  r.  cheek,  extending  from  lower  eyelid  to
ala  nasi;  size  of  a  silver  dollar;  ulcerating  stage;  in-
durated base  and  wall-like,  hard,  elevated  edges  (greatly
improved).

■  Epithelioma,  size  of  half  dollar,  situated  on  r.  side  of
nose  just  under  canthus  of  eye;  eye  sympathetically
affected,  either  through  extension  of  disease  process,
or  through  irritating  discharge,  entrance  of  which  was
facilitated  by  a  slight  destruction  of  edge  of  lower  lid  at
canthus;  conjunctivitis  palpebrarum  et  bulbi,  with
haziness  of  cornea.
^  Lower  Face,  l  l  Blistered  lips  and  mouth.  ^Whooping  cough.

I  I  Lower  lip  swollen. ^Epithelioma.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, l Toothache  <  in  warm  room  and  to-
ward evening,  >  in  cool  open  air.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. '  i  Loss  of  taste. ^Ozsena.

I  I  Lisipid,  pappy  taste.

iTongue:  coated  with  yellow  mucus;  yellow,  slimy,  some-
times with  whitish  edge.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i Sensation  of  faintness  at
stomach,  and  befogged  feeling  in  head,  fearing  to  lose
her  reason.

I  I  Pressure  and  feeling  of  fulness  in  stomach  with  a  yel-
low mucous  coating  on  tongue.

I  I  Indigestion,  with  sensation  of  pressure  as  of  a  load,  and
fulness  at  pit  of  stomach. ^Dyspepia.

I  I  Chronic  catarrh  of  stomach ;  yellow,  slimy  coated  tongue.

I  Catarrh  of  stomach  and  duodenum,  with  a  yellow  coated
tongue;  jaundice  from  it.
'^  Abdomen. iGastro-duodenal  catarrh;  jaundice.

I  Hard  and  tympanitic  abdomen. ^Whooping  cough.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. '  i Diarrhoea:  yellow,  slimy  or  watery
mattery  stools.


473  KALI  SULPHURICUM.

I  Black,  thin,  offensive  stools. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Habitual  constipation  with  coated  tongue.

I  Hemorrhoids with catarrh of stomach and yellow,
mucus  coated  tongue.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i Gonorrhoea  of  glans  or  urethra;
discharge  purulent,  yellow  mucous,  or  greenish.

■  Orchitis  after  suppression  of  gonorrhoea.
I  Gleet.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Menstruation,  too  late  and  too
scanty,  with  a  feeling  of  weight  and  fulness  in  abdomen.
I  I  Catamenia  every  three  weeks. ^Ozaena.
I  I  Headache  during  catamenia.
I  I  Metrorrhagia.

iLeucorrhoea  yellowish,  or  watery  mattery.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Hoarse-
ness after  taking  cold.

■  Bronchitis,  if  mucus  is  distinctly  yellow  and  slimy,  thin,

or  watery  mattery  and  profuse.

I  Yellow  mucus  coughed  up  without  great  exertion.  ^Bron-
chitic  asthma.
^  Cough. I  Whooping  cough,  with  retching,  without  vomit-
ing; inflammatory  catarrhal stage; decidedly  yellow,
slimy  expectoration.

iLast  stageof  whooping  cough;  blistered  lips  and  mouth;
black,  thin,  offensive  stools  five  times  a  day,  hard,  tym-
panitic abdomen;  wasted  to  a  shadow,  given  up  to  die.

■  Coarse  rales;  cannot  cough  up  large  amount  of  mucus.

^Pneumonia.

■  Yellow  mucous  expectoration.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. "Inflammation  of  lungs,  with

wheezing;  if  yellow,  loose  rattling  phlegm  be  coughed

up  with  difficulty,  or  sputa  consist  of  watery  matter.

I  I  Pneumonia  with  coarse  rales,  cannot  cough  up  mucus.

^'  Neck  and  Back, l  l  Pains  in  back,  nape  of  neck,  or  in  limbs;

periodical  <  in  evening,  or  in  warm  room ;  >  in  cool

or  open  air.

■Backache  and  pains  in  limbs; <  in  warm  room and

towards  evening,  >  in  cool  open  air.
I  I  Stiff  neck,  head  inclined  towards  1.;  shoulder  raised.
^'  Upper  Limbs, l  i  Eruption  in  1.  axilla,  about  neck  and  on

back  of  both  hands  (Rhus  poisoning).
^^ ■Scaly  eruption  mostly  on  arms,  >  from  hot  water.
Lower  Limbs. ■  Varicose  ulcer  on  r.  leg  just  above  instep,
after  kick  of  a  horse  three  years  ago;  eight  inches  in
circumference,  concave,  dark  blue,  emitting  a  stinking
odor.
^  Limbs  in  General, Pain  in  limbs

Acute  and  wandering  rheumatism  of  joints.


KALI  SULPHURICUM.  474

lAfter  being  chilled  while  overheated,  frightful  pains  in
r.  shoulder  and  violent  fever;  pains  leave  shoulder  and
attack  1.  knee,  then  go  from  joint  to  joint,  and  again
several  joints  affected  at  a  time;  maddening  pains,
unceasing,  day  and  night. ^Articular  rheumatism.

iPains  passing  from  joint  to  joint;  serous  exudations.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rising  from  lying : dreadful
vertigo.

Sitting:  dreadful  vertigo.

Standing :  dreadful  vertigo.

Moving  head  from  side  to  side  or  backwards :  great  pain.
^^  Nerves. ■  Chorea.
^^  Sleep. •  I  Very  vivid  dreams.
^*  Time. Evening: rheumatic headache <; faceache <;

toothache  <  ;  pains  in  back  and  limbs  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Pains  grow <  in  warm
room  and  in  evening  ;  >  in  open,  cool  air.

Hot  water :  scaly  eruption  on  arms  >.

Warm  room  :  rheumatic  headache  < ;  faceache  < ;  tooth-
ache <  ;  pains  in  back,  neck  and  limbs  <.

After  being  chilled  while  overheated :  frightful  pains  in
r.  shoulder.

Open  air :  rheumatic  headache  >  ;  faceache  >  ;  tooth-
ache >  ;  pains  in  back,  neck  and  limbs  >.

Cold  water  :  eruption  > .
^^  Fever.  '  '  Intermittent  fever  with  yellow,  slimy  coated  tongue.

I  Rheumatic  fever;  pains  shifting,  wandering.
"*'  Attacks, Periodicity. Five  times  a  day : black,  thin,
offensive  stools.

Periodical  pains :  in  back,  neck  and  limbs  <  in  evening.

About  once  a  week  :  a  thick,  dark  brown  semi-fluid  ac-
cumulation of  pus  formed  in  upper  L  nostril.

Every  three  weeks :  catamenia.

For  eight  weeks :  entirely  deaf  in  r.  ear.

For  eight  months :  effects  of  ivy  poisoning.

For  eighteen  months :  thick,  yellow,  offensive  discharge^
from  nose.

Four  years'  standing :  stinking  otorrhoea.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  brown  offensive  secretion
from  ear;  entirely  deaf  for  eight  weeks;  epithelioma  on
cheek ;  epithelioma  on  side  of  nose ;  varicose  ulcer  on
leg  just  above  instep  ;  frightful  pains  in  shoulder.

Left :  bald  spot  on  side  of  head;  a  thick  dark  brown  semi-
fluid accumulation  of  pus  formed  in  upper  nostril ;  a
piece  of  carious  bone  was  taken  from  antrum  Highmori
through  an  upper  alveolus;  head  inclined  to  shoulder;
eruption  in  axilla;  pains  leave  shoulder  and  attack  knee.
*^  Sensations. Pressure  as  of  a  load  :  at  pit  of  stomach.


475  KALI  SULPHURICUM.

Pains  :  in  back ;  nape  of  neck  ;  in  limbs.

Maddening  pains:  in  joints.

Frightful  pains :  in  r.  shoulder ;  in  1.  knee ;  from  joint  to
joint.

Great  pain :  in  head.

Acute  and  wandering  rheumatism  of  joints.

Rheumatic  headache.

Pressure :  in  stomach.

Feeling  of  fulness :  in  stomach  ;  at pit  of  stomach ;  in
abdomen.

Befogged  feeling :  in  head.

Faintness :  at  stomach.

Burning,  itching  papular  eruption.

Itching  pimples  arising  singly  on  skin.
^^  Tissues. I  I  Its  sphere  of  action is  in  lymphatic  vessels ;
when  there  is  a  lack  of  this  substance,  a  yellow  mucous
catarrh  arises  or  a  yellow  sticky  discharge  from  isolated
places  on  membranes.

Secretions  from  mucous  membranes  yellowish;  green.

Catarrhs,  colds,  with  yellow,  slimy  secretions  or  expectora-
tion of  watery  matter.

Inflammations,  with  yellow,  slimy  or  serous  secretions.

In  third  stage  of  inflammation,  resolution,  when  a  yellow
mucous  discharge  occurs.

Effusions,  watery  matter}';  favors  resorption.

Fungoid  inflammation  of  joints;  white  swelling.

■  Migratory  rheumatism  of  joints.

I  I  Wasted  to  a  shadow. ^Whooping  cough.
Epithelioma;  soft  polypi.

Ailments accompanied by desquamation, peeling off
skin,  or  with  itching  pimples  arising  singly  on  skin.
^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. After  kick  of  a

horse  three  years  ago:  varicose  ulcer  on  r.  leg.
^  Skin. I  I  Jaundice  caused  by  gastro-duodenal  catarrh.

■  Suppressed  rash  of  measles or  other  eruptive diseases,

wdth  harsh  and  dry  skin.

I  I  Abundant  scaling  of  epidermis.

I  I  Promotes  desquamation  after  erysipelas;  accelerates  re-
moval of  scabs  in  smallpox.

I  I  Scarlet  fever;  stage  of  desquamation.

■  Burning, itching, papular eruption exuding puslike

moisture.

■  Recurring  eruption  of  fine  red  pimples  running  together,

presenting  a  red,  swollen  appearance ;  a  thoroughly
alkaline  fluid  oozes  out  copiously;  after  subsiding  cuti-
cle comes  off"  in  fine  scales;  itches  and  stings  intensely
>  ;  formerly  by  cold  water,  lately  by  hot.

■  Scurfs,  scaling,  chapping.


KALI  SULPHURICUM.  476

Sores  on  skin,  with  yellow,  sticky  secretions  on  limited
portions,  or  discharges  of  thin,  watery  matter,  sometimes
with  peeling  of  surrounding  skin.

I  I  Epithelial  cancer,  discharge  thin,  yellow,  serous.

I  Eczema,  or  skin  affections;  discharge  decidedly  yellow,
slimy,  sometimes  sticky  or  watery  mattery ;  when  sud-
denly suppressed.

■  Effects  of  ivy  poisoning  (Rhus  tox.)  for  eight  months;

repeatedly  broke  out  with  small,  hard,  herpetic  vesicles,
forming  a  thin  scab,  with  itching  and  some  moisture;
eruption  appears  in  1.  axilla,  about  neck  and  on  back
of  both  hands;  she  has  a  sensation  of  faintness  at  stom-
ach and  befogged  feeling  in  head,  fearing  to  lose  her
reason;  very  vivid  dreams.

I  I  Nettlerash,  with  or  without  yellow,  slimy  tongue,
generally  caused  by  indigestion.

I  Itch  eruption  in  children.

I  Chafing  of  children.

■  Diseased  condition  of  nails,  shown  in  interrupted  growth.
^''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Child,  set.  18  months ;  whoop-
ing cough.

Boy,  set.  10,  small,  dark,  lean;  whooping  cough.

Girl,  set.  19,  light  complexion,  scrofulous;  ear  affection.

Woman,  set.  25,  single,  dark  complexion,  suffering  eight
months;  ivy  poisoning  (Rhus  tox.).

Woman,  set.  25,  married,  dark  complexion;  ozsena.

Man,  set.  26,  healthy,  powerful;  articular  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  27,  dark;  falling  off  of  hair,  after  gonorrhoea.

Man,  set.  30,  light  complexion;  disease  of  antrum  High-
mori.

Man,  set.  33,  light  complexion;  ozsena.

Woman,  set.  54;  vertigo.

Man,  set.  55,  factory  operative,  ulcer  on  side  of  nose  for
four  years,  at  first  there  was  a  somewhat  reddened  spot
which  was  moderately  elevated,  and  which  became  after-
ward covered  with  a  horny  crust,  which  later,  dropping
off,  left  an  ulcer  which  steadily  increased  in  depth  and
breadth;  epithelioma.

Widow,  set  70,  suffering  for  years;  epithelioma.
^^  Relations. Compare : Kali  mur.,  in  deafness,  hoarseness,
pertussis; Natr.  mur.,  in deafness,  pains in stomach,
coarse  rales,  profuse  exudations.

Compatible:  ^cel  ac,  in  itching  and  redness  of  skin;  Arsen.y
Calc.  osir.,  Hepar,  Pulsat,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  Silica,  Sulphur.


477  KAOLIN.

KAOLIN.

Porcelain  or  China  Clay.  Alumina  SUicata,

Clinical  Authorities. — Croup,  Searle,  Elliott,  A.  II.  O.,  vol.  8,  p.  128 ;
Lilienthal,  Eaue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  80;  Searle,  Elliott,  Parker,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.
106  ;  Landesmann,  Eaue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  171 ;  Boyce,  Times  Retroa.,  vol.  3,  p.  29.

'^  Smell  and  Nose.  ■  Nostrils  feel  sore;  scabs  form  in  nose;
scanty  and  blood  streaked  secretion.

13  Throat.  I  Membrane  covering  both  sides  of  throat.  ^Diph-
theria.

■  Fever,  headache  in  forehead,  with  flushed  face  and  sore

throat ;  r.  tonsil  and  arch  of  velum  covered  with  heavy,
yellowish  white  membrane ;  breath  fetid  ;  great  prostra-
tion. ^Diphtheria. (In  alternation  with  Bellad.)
^"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Husky
voice,  metallic,  rasping  breathing  and  suffocative  cough.

■  Croupous  inflammation  in  lower  part  of  larynx  or  in

upper  part  of  trachea.
■Awoke  from  sleep  with  croupy  cough;  voice  husky,  later
sunk  to  whisper ;  sawing  sound  during  both  expiration
and  inspiration ;  high  fever. ^Croup.

■  Voice  a  little  husky;  during  night  very  feverish ;  next

day  skin  felt  dry ;  wanted  to  be  carried  about ;  appetite
diminished ;  very  little  cough ;  on  auscultation,  metallic,
rasping  sound  increasing  toward  evening;  suff'ocating
spells.  ^Croup.
■Croup,  with  labored,  sawing  respiration,  after  failure  of
Aeon.,  Hepar,  Spongia,  Bromium,  Phosphor,  and  lodum.

■  Croup,  after  failure  of  Spongia.

^  Time. Towards  evening:  metallic,  rasping  sound  increased.

Night:  very  feverish.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  tonsil  and  arch  of  velum

covered  with  heavy,  yellowish  white  membrane.
*^  Sensations. Pain:  in  forehead.

Soreness :  of  nostrils ;  of  throat.

Dryness:  of  skin.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  »t.  16  months,  strong
and  healthy  parentage ;  croup.

Child,  set.  4  ;  diphtheria.

Boy,  set.  4 ;  croup.

Girl,  set.  5 ;  croup.

Boy,  set.  5 ;  croup.

Young  woman,  subject  to  repeated  attacks;  diphtheria,.


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.  478


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.

Mountain  Laurel.  Ericaceae.

An  evergreen  shrub,  found  on  rocky  "hills,  flowering  in  May  and  June.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves.

Introduced  by  Hering  and  proved  by  himself,  Kummer,  Behler,  Bute,  Clark,
Haeseler,  Williamson,  Freitag,  Eeichelm  and  others.  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,
vol.  5,  p.  388.

Clinical  Authorities. — Sun  headache,  Thayer,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  149;
Retinitis  albumimirica,  Allen,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  107  ;  Sdero-choroidiiis  ante-
rior, Allen,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  107 ;  Sclerotitis,  Boyle,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.
112,  p.  77;  Neuralgia  oculorum,  Johnson,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  168;  Chronic  sore
throat,  Clifton,  Times  Ketros.,  vol.  3,  p.  29 ;  Pressure  in  epigastrium.,  Hansen,  Allg.
Hom.  Ztg.,  vol,  113,  p.  62;  Oastralgia,  Clifton,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  29;  Ab-
dominal neuralgia  (5  cases),  Cushing,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  2,  p.  14 ;  King,  Eaue's
Eec,  1874,  p.  260;  Brighfs  disease,  Macy,  A.  H.  Eev.,  vol.  3,  p.  364;  Angina  pec-
toris, Clifton,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  29 ;  Endocarditis,  Dunham,  Dunham's  Lec-
tures, p.  194 ;  Heart  disease,  Hering,  MSS. ;  Dunham,  MSS. ;  Siegrist,  Eaue's  Eec,
1875,  p.  127;  False  pleurisy,  Pretsch,  A.  H.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  326;  Neuralgia,  Clifton,
Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  29 ;  Ball,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  92 ;  Neuralgia  of  spine,
Sonnenschmidt,  MSS. ;  Acute  articular  rheumatisnn,  Clifton,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.
29 ;  Rheumatism,  Pretsch,  A.  H.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  pp.  325-6  ;  Boyce,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  323.

^  Mind. 'In a recumbent posture, mental faculties and
memory  perfect,  but  on  attempting  to  move,  vertigo.

I  Anxiety  with  palpitation.

Toward  evening  and  next  forenoon  very  cross.
^  Sensorium. i Vertigo:  with  headache,  blindness,  pains  in
limbs  and  weariness;  while  stooping  and  looking  down.

I  Vertigo:  with  aching  in  face. ^Neuralgia.

I  Giddiness,  with  headache  and  nausea.
^  Inner  Head. iPulsating  headache  in  forehead.

Pain  in  forehead  in  morning  when  waking,  <  after  rising.

I  Aching  in  forehead,  followed  by  rending  in  bones  of  r.  or
1.  side  of  face;  shooting  downward  into  eye  teeth;  mov-
ing backward  down  neck  and  outwardly  on  both  sides;
succeeded  by  pain  in  1.  shoulder;  rending  in  bones  of
legs  to  feet.

I  I  Pain  over  r.  eye;  giddiness;  eyes  weak  and  watery.

I  I  Pressing  pain  on  a  small  spot  on  r.  side  of  head.

■  Headache  internally,  with  sensation,  when  turning,  of
something  loose  in  head,  diagonally  across  top.


479  KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.

I A  cracking  in  head  frightens  him,  it  ends  in  a  sound  in

ears  hke  blowing  a  horn,
a  A  shuddering  without  coldness  commences  with  cracking

as  if  surcharged  with  electricity.

■  Severe  pressing  headache,  <  and  >  with  sun.
■Sensation  of  heat  in  head  in  morning.
iDulness  in  head;  headache;  backache.

■  Neuralgic  paroxysmal  pains.

■  Headache  <  in  evening  and  in  open  air.

*  Outer  Head.  ■Pain  from  back  of  neck  up  over  scalp  to
top  of  head  and  temples,  also  affecting  face  r.  side ;  ten-
der to  touch;  pain  shooting  twitching;  sometimes  in
spots;  >  from  cold,  <  from  heat;  every  afternoon,  last
with  great  severity,  through  night. ^Neuralgia.

■  Rheuniatic  pain  in  scalp.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Glimmering  before  eyes.

■  Everything  black  before  eye  when  he  looks  downward ;

nausea  and  eructations  of  wind  (in  morning).

■  Dull,  weak  eyes.

■  Retinitis albuminurica, occurring during pregnancy;

pains  in  back.
■Nephritic  retinitis  accompanied  by  much  pain  in  back,
as  if  it  would  break.

■  Sclera  inflamed,  vitreous  perfectly  filled  with  exudation,

and  glimmering  before  eye,  especially  on  reading  with
the  other. ^Sclero-choroiditis  anterior.

■  Sclerotitis, particularly  in  rheumatic  subjects; eyeball

painful  on  motion.

■  Parenchymatous  keratitis.

■  Severe  pain  in  r.  eye,  extending  to  forehead;  commences

at  sunrise,  <  until  noon ;  then  >  and  leaves  at  sunset.
^Neuralgia  oculorum. (After  Aeon,  and  Bellad.  failed.)

■  Pressure  in  r.  eye  (evening);  also  above  r.  eye.

■  Stitches  in  eyes,  ears,  fingers  and  feet.

■  Itching  in  eyes;  when  rubbing  them  they  sting.

■  ■  Pain  in  eyes,  which  makes  it  painful  to  turn  them.

■  ■Sensation  of  stiffness  in  muscles  around  eyes,  and  of

eyelids.

■  ■Asthenopia;  stiff,  drawing  sensation  in  muscles  upon

moving  eyes.

■  Eye  symptoms  <  evening  and  in  open  air.

^  Hearing  and  Ears.  ■Stitches  in  and  behind  r.  ear;  in
neck  and  thighs,  at  night.

■  Sound  like  blowing  a  horn,  after  cracking  in  head.
I  I  Meniere's  disease.

^  Smell  and  Nose.  ■Coryza:  with  increased  sense  of  smell;
with  sneezing,  dulness,  headache  and  hoarseness.

■  Tearing  in  root  of  nose  and  nasal  bones,  with  nausea.


IvALMIA  LATIFOLIA.  480

^  Upper  Face. Face: red,  with  throbbing  headache;  pale.
lAnxious  expression  of  countenance. ^Rheumatism  of
heart.

■  Flushing  of  face,  with  vertigo. ^Neuralgia.

I  I  Pressing  pains  in  r.  side  of  face,  especially  between  eye
and  nose.

■  Prosopalgia,  right  sided;  pains  rending;  agonizing;  stu-

pefying or  threatening  delirium.

■  Fothergill's  faceache.

■Severe  neuralgia  in  r.  cheek,  with  alkaline  taste  in  mouth.

■  Facial  neuralgia,  involving  teeth  of  upper  jaw,  but  not

from  caries.

■  After  exposure  to  cold,  pains  in  r.  side  of  head,  ear  and

face,  and  even  going  down  to  arm,  sometimes  attended
with  numbness,  or  succeeded  by  numbness  in  parts
affected ;  pains  sticking,  teasing,  pressing,  or  shooting
in  a  downward  direction;  pains  occur  at  irregular  times,
continue  for  no  definite  period,  coming  suddenly  or  grad-
ually, and  leaving  as  uncertainly ;  <  by  worry  or  men-
tal exertion;  >  by  food. ^Neuralgia.

■Facial  neuralgia  after  zoster.

I  I  Face  itches  at  night.

I  I  Roughness  of  cheeks  (during  every  Summer).
^  Lower  Face, iLips  swollen,  dry  and  stiff.

I  I  Cracked  lips  with  dry  skin,

I  I  Stinging  in  jawbones.

I  I  Tired  feeling  in  chewing  muscles.

■  Stitches  and  tearing  in  lower  jaw.

'"  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Teeth  tender,  with  neuralgia  of  face.

■  Pressing  pain  in  molars,  late  in  evening.

"  Taste  and  Tongue.  ' '  Bitter  taste  with  nausea,  >  after
eating.

■  Tongue:  white,  dry;  sore  1.  side;  hurts  when  talking.

■  Stitches  in  tongue.

^'  Inner  Mouth.  ■Tingling  in  salivary  glands,  immediately
after  eating,  with  sense  of  fermentation  in  oesophagus
and  copious  salivation.

■  Sublingual  salivary  gland  inflamed.

''  Throat. ■Throat  feels  swollen;  sensation  as  if  a  ball  was
rising.
■Sensation  of  dryness  in  throat,  difficult  deglutition,  thirst.

■  Pressure  in  throat;  stitches  in  eyes  and  nausea.

■  Great  dryness  of  throat,  with  aching  pains,  the  dryness

causing  frequent  cough. ^Chronic  syphilitic  sore  throat.

^'  Eating  and  Drinking. ■Pains  >  by  food. ^Neuralgia.

''  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  Eructa-
tions of  wind. ^Angina  pectoris. ^Gastralgia.

■  Nausea,  everything  becomes  black  before  eyes,  pressure


481  KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.

in  throat,  incarcerated  flatus,  oppression  of  breathing,
rheumatic  pains  in  limbs.

I  I  Wine  relieves  vomiting.
^'  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,
like  a  marble ;  <  sitting  in  a  stooping  position,  >  sit-
ting erect ;  sensation  as  if  something  would  be  pressed
off"  below  pit  of  stomach.

I  Pit  of  stomach  sore  to  touch.

I  Pains  <  sitting  bent,  yet  a  feeling  as  if  to  do  so  was
necessary,  >  by  sitting  or  standing  upright;  crampy
pain,  with  eructations  of  wind, '  palpitation  of  heart.
^Gastralgia.
^*  Hypochondria, i  Pains  in  region  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Incarcerated  flatus,  with  nausea.

I  Sensation  of  weakness  in  abdomen,  extending  to  throat;
>  by  eructation.

■  Sudden  pains  in  paroxysms,  across  abdomen  above  um-

bilicus, from  lower  border  of  liver,  downward  toward
left,  then  ceasing  in  r.  side ;  <  from  motion  and  from
lying  on  either  side,  obliged  to  lie  on  back ;  >  when
sitting  up. ^Abdominal  neuralgia.

■  Neuralgia  of  bowels  in  married  women.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Stool  like  mush,  easily  discharged,
as  if  glazed,  followed  by  pressure  on  rectum.

■  DiarrhcBa,  with  dulness,  dizziness,  weariness,  nausea  and

bellyache.
^'  Urinary  Organs. ■  Frequent  micturition  of  large  quanti-
ties of  yellow  urine.

■  Profuse  micturition  >  headache.
■Albuminuria;  also  with  pains  in  lower  limbs.

■  Abdomen  greatly  distended ;  extremities,  especially  lower

ones,  swollen;  much  difficulty  in  standing  and  walking;
urine  scanty,  high  colored,  5  per  cent,  albumen,  fibri-
nous casts,  large  epithelial  scales,  one  prismatic  crystal
of  triple  phosphate;  vertigo;  occasional  pain  in  head;
much  pain  in  lower  extremities;  complexion  sallow  and
skin  unnaturally  dry.  ^Bright's  disease.
^Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Menses  too  soon;  regular,  but
painful.

■  During  menses,  pain  in  limbs,  loins,  back  and  interior

of  thighs.

■  Suppressed  menses,  with  severe  neuralgic  pains  through-

out whole  body.

■  Leucorrhoea  yellowish;  one  week  after  menses;  symp-

toms <  then.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Pressure
as  if  some  one  squeezed  throat  with  thumb  and  finger.

■  Noise  as  from  spasm  in  glottis  when  breathing.

VOL.  VI. — 31.


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.  482

I  1  Hoarseness,  with  coryza.

■  Tickling  in  trachea.

^^  Respiration. ■  Difficult  and  oppressed breathing ; throat
feels  swollen,  nausea. ^Rheumatism.
•Oppressed and  short breathed,  which  obliges him to
breathe  quickly,  involuntarily.

■  Oppressed  breathing,  with  palpitation  of  heart,  anxiety.

■  Dyspnoea  and  pain. ^Angina  pectoris.

"'^  Cough. ■  Frequent  cough,  caused  by  dryness  or  scraping
in  throat.

■  Expectoration  easy,  smooth,  grey;  tasting  putrid ;  saltish.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Feverish  heat,  with  great  pain

in  chest;  <  when  breathing  and  from  slightest  motion.

■  Pain  in  chest  as  from  a  sprain.

■Shooting  through  chest  above  heart  into  shoVilder  blade;
pain  in  1.  arm.

■  Stitches  in  lower  part  of  chest.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Fluttering  of  heart.

■  Palpitation  of  heart,  with  anxiety  and  oppressed  breath-

ing; with  faint  feeling.

■  Palpitation  up  into  throat,  after  going  to  bed;  trembling

all  over;  <  lying  on  1.  side;  >  lying  on  back;  anxiety.

■  Palpitation,  dyspnoea,  pain  in  limbs,  stitch  in  lower  part

of  chest ;  right  sided  prosopalgia.

■  Heart's  action  very  tumultuous,  rapid  and  visible.

■  Attacks  of  angina  pectoris. ^Fatty  degeneration  of  heart.

■  Angina  pectoris;  slow,  feeble  pulse;  eructations  of  wind,

dyspnoea  and  pain.

■  Severe  pain  in  cardiac  region,  with  slow,  small  pulse.

^Hypertrophy  with  dilation  and  aortic  obstruction.

■  ■Paroxysms  of  anguish  about  heart,  dyspnoea,  febrile  ex-

citement; rheumatic  endocarditis,  with  consequent  hyper-
trophy and  valvular  disease.

■  Pressure  like  a  marble  from  epigastrium  toward  heart,

with  a  strong,  quick  heart  beat ;  every  beat  has  a  strum-
ming as  if  it  would  burst,  along  sternum  to  throat;
third  or  fourth  beat  harder,  followed  by  an  intermission.

■  Pressure  behind  middle  of  sternum,  <  morning  and

evening,  and  when  stooping ;  palpitation  of  heart  with
anxiety;  pulse  regular;  first  sound  of  heart  somewhat
harsh  ;  pressure  behind  sternum  and  in  epigastrium,
>  sitting  erect;  as  if  something  was  being  pressed
away  from  under  sternum.
■Severe  palpitation  of  heart,  with  constriction  of  throat,
<  from  motion,  deep  inspiration,  or  holding  breath;
pressure  and  stitching  in  region  of  heart;  severe  one
sided,  tearing  headache,  <  over  eye  and  in  bulbus  oculi;
during  attack  anxiety  and  shortness  of  breath ;  between


483  KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.

attacks,  dry  cough ;  first  sound  of  heart  strongly  accentu-
ated and  often  intermitting ;  (ictus  cordis)  impulse  of
heart  plainly  visible,  lifting  stethoscope;  pulse  inter-
mittent; pressure  in  epigastrium,  <  in  bent  position,
>  sitting  erect;  pressing  down  sensation  in  epigastrium.

1 1  Wandering  rheumatic  pains  in  region  of  heart,  extend-
ing down  1.  arm.

■Shooting,  stabbing  pain  from  heart  through  to  1.  scapula,
causing  violent  beating  of  heart. /^Rheumatism.

I  Pains  suddenly  leave  extremities  and  go  to  heart;  shoot-
ing, stabbing  pain,  through  to  1.  scapula,  causing
violent  beating  of  heart,  with  anxious  expression  of
countenance,  quick  but  weak  pulse  and  difficult  breath-
ing. ^Rheumatism.

■  Articular  rheumatism  has  been  treated  externally,  and

cardiac  symptoms  ensue,

■  ■Heart  disease,  after  frequent  attacks  of  rheumatism,  or

alternating  with  it.

■  ■Hypertrophy  and  valvular  insufficiency,  or  thickening,

after  rheumatism,  paroxysms  of  anguish  about  heart,
with  dyspnoea  and  febrile  excitement.

■  Propped  up  in  bed,  with  anxious  expression  of  face,  livid

hue  of  countenance ;  visible,  tumultuous  and  very  rapid
action  of  heart;  after  acute  rheumatism. ^Endocarditis.

■  Quickened  but  weak  pulse. /^Rheumatism  of  heart.

■  Pulse:  slow,  weak;  arms  feel  weak;  scarcely  perceptible,

limbs  cold ;  irregular.
■Remarkable  slowness  of  pulse,  48  in  minute. /^Neuralgia.
■Slow,  small  pulse. /^Hypertrophy  of  heart.

■  Pulse  slow  and  feeble. ^Angina  pectoris.

■  Pulse  very  slow. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
■Very  feeble  pulse,  40  beats  per  minute.

^°  Outer  Chest. ■■Pleuritis  falsa  in  winter  season.

■  High  fever; breathing  oppressed,  must  lie  quietly  on

back, every motion attended with  violent pains in
thorax, back and axillary  joints. /^Rheumatism of
muscles  of  thorax  and  back.
*^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Muscles  of  neck  sore  to  touch  and  on
moving  them.

■  Pains  from  neck  down  arm  to  little  and  fourth  finger;

neck  tender  to  touch  ;  pains  paroxysmal,  <  in  early
part  of  night,  and  attended  by  stiffness ;  marked  slow-
ness of  pulse,  48  beats  per  minute. /^Neuralgia.

■  Violent  pain  in  upper  three  dorsal  vertebrae,  extending

through  shoulder  blades.
■Sensation  of  lameness  in  back,  evening  in  bed.
■Constant  pain  in  spine,  sometimes  <  in  lumbar  region,

"with  great  heat  and  burning.


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.  484

■Feeling  of  paralysis  in  sacrum.
I  Aching  across  joints.
^^  Upper  Limbs, i  Pain  in  shoulders.

I  Deltoid  rheumatism,  especially  on  r.  side.

■  Stitches  in  lower  part  of  1.  shoulder  blade,

■  Paroxj^smal  pains  in  r.  arm. ^Neuralgia.

■  Pains  in  1.  arm.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  arms.

■  Cracking  in  elbow  joint.

■Stitches  in  hands;  hands  feel  as  if  they  had  been  sprained.

■  Pain  in  1.  wrist,  causing  hand  to  feel  paralyzed.

I  I  Erysipelatous  eruption  on  hands  extending  further.

■  Weakness  in  arms;  pulse  slow.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■Tearing  pain  from  hip  down  leg  to  feet.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  leg  from  hip  down.

■  Pains  in  lower  extremities.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  leg,  extending  as  far  as  toes,  in

morning.

■  Stitches:  externally  on  knee;  in  feet,  soles,  toes,  big  toe.
■Sensation  of  weakness  in  calves.

■  Feet  feel  sprained.

■  Unable  to  walk;  ankles  swollen;  pains,  though  mostly

confined to ankles,  shift about from  joint to  joint.

^Chronic  rheumatism.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■Rheumatism  often  attacks  heart,  and

generally  goes  from  upper  to  lower  parts;  pains  shift

suddenly.
■Rheumatic  pains,  mostly  in  upper  arms  and  lower  parts

of  legs;  <  when  going  to  sleep.
■Joints  hot,  red,  swollen. ^Acute  rheumatism.

■  Acute  articular  rheumatism  ;  .pains  shift  about  from  point

to  j)oint,  especially  when  beginning  in  upper  extremi-
ties and  subsequently  felt  in  lower;  joints  hot,  red  and
swollen;  pains  <  on  least  motion  and  during  evening,
or  soon  after  going  to  bed;  rheumatoid  pains  from  sud-
den chill  or  exposure  to  cold  wind.

■  Arms  feel  weak,  limbs  cold.

^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  ■Pains  <  :  sitting  bent,  yet  a
feeling  as  if  to  do  so  was  necessary,  but  >  by  sitting  or
standing  upright. ^Gastralgia.

■  Pains  <  on  least  motion. ^Acute  rheumatism.

In  a  recumbent  posture:  mental  faculties  and  memory
perfect,  but  on  attempting  to  move  vertigo.

Lying  on  1.  side,  palpitation  <.

Lying  on  back:  palpitation  >.

Must  lie  on  back:  on  account  of  oppressed  breathing;  ab-
dominal neuralgia.

Sitting  in  a  stooping  position :  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach
< ;  palpitation  <.


37


38


^^^  KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.

Sitting  erect:  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  pains  across  ab-
domen >  ;  pressure  behind  sternum  >;  palpitation  >

fetoopmg:  vertigo;  pressure  behind  sternum  <

After  rismg:  pain  in  forehead  <.

Standing:  difficult  on  account  of  swelling  of  lower  ex-
tremities.

Stands  up  and  walks  in  his  sleep.

Motion:  of  eyeballs  causes  pain;  pains  across  abdomen  <  •
slightest,  pain  m  chest  < ;  palpitation  < ;  attended  with
violent  pains  m  thorax,  back  and  axillary  joints-  of
muscles  of  neck  painful;  pains  <.

Turning  head:  sensation  as  of  something  loose  in  it

Walking:  difficult  on  account  of  swelling  of  lower  ex-
tremities.

Shuns  all  exertion;  weariness  in  all  muscles
^  Npril ^^AV^^^'-  ^"kles  swollen;  can  hardly  go  up  stairs.
Nerves, l  Weariness  m  all  muscles;  shuns  all  exertion,  can
hardly  go  up  stairs.

I  Weary  and  giddy,  with  diarrhoea.

II  Weakness  the  only  general  symptom  with  neuralgia
irembling,  thrilling,  strumming,  with  palpitation.

I  Weakness  and  paralytic  condition  of  limbs.
Sleep. I  I  Restless  sleep,  turns  often.

•  Periosteal  pains  prevent  sleep.

While  sleeping  stands  up  and  walks  about;  talks  in  sleep

Dreams:  racking  his  brains;  fantastic;  of  murder.
lime. iPains  <  during  early  part  of  night,  or  soon  after
going  to  sleep. ^Neuralgia. ^Acute  rheumatism.
JrTS-'^^'V-  ^r^^^d;  heat  in head; nausea  and
eructations  of  wind;  pressure  behind  sternum  <  •  rheu-
matic pains  m  r.  leg.  '

Towards  evening  and  next  forenoon:  very  cross

to'^'i'^>  ""^'^^  <'  .Pr^^s^^re  in  r.  eye;  eye  symp:
toms  <;  pressing  pain  in  molars;  pressure  behind
sternum;  lameness  of  back;  pains  <

TV^'^f'''^'^'  1'*^^'"'  ^^  ^^^k  ^^d  thighs;  face  itches;
early  part,  pains  from  neck  down  arms

Temperature  and  Weather. Pains  are  felt  from  a  sudden

ilrn'  ZxT^'^'^'T^  ^"^  ^  '^^^^^^  w"^d-  ^Acute  rheuma-
tism. t/JNeuralgia.

Heat:  pain  in  head  <.

With  sun:  headache  <  and  >:  pain  in  r.  eye  <  and  >.

Open  air:  headache  <;  eyes  <.

Cold  :  pain  in  head  >.

After  exposure  to  cold :  pain  in  r.  side  of  head,  ear  and  face ;
rheumatoid  pains.  '

Fever, ii Chilliness,  with  coldness;  shaking  chill  in  cold
air;  chills  run  over  back.


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.  '  486

I  Febrile  excitement. ^Endocarditis.

I  I  General  heat ;  with  burning  and  pain  in  back  and  loins.

I  I  Cold  sweat.
^*  Attacks,  Periodicity. iPain  occurring  at  irregular  times,
continuing  for  no  definite  period,  coming  suddenly  or
gradually,  and  leaving  as  uncertainly. ^Neuralgia.

Paroxysmal  pains:  in  head;  across  abdomen  above  um-
bilicus; from  neck  down  arms;  in  arms.

Every  afternoon:  headache,  lasts  through  night.

Every  Summer:  roughness  of  cheeks.

One  week  after  menses:  leucorrhoea.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  rending  in  bones  of  side
of  face;  pain  over  eye;  pressing  pain  on  a  small  spot  on
side  of  head,  severe  pain  in  eye;  pressure  in  eye,  above
eye;  stitches  in  and  behind  ear;  pressing  pains  in  side
of  face;  prosopalgia;  severe  neuralgia;  pains  in  side
of  head,  face  and  ear ;  deltoid  rheumatism  < ;  pains  in
arm  ;  rheumatic  pain  in  leg.

Left:  rending  in  bones  of  side  of  face;  pain  in  shoulder;
tongue  sore  on  side;  pain  in  arm;  lying  on  side  palpi-
tation <;  wandering  rheumatic  pains  down  arm;
shooting  pains  from  heart  through  to  scapula;  stitches
in  lower  part  of  shoulder  blade;  pains  in  arm;  pain  in
wrist.

Downward :  pain  shooting  into  eye  teeth ;  pain  across  ab-
domen from  lower  border  of  liver  down  to  left,  then
ceasing  in  r.  side.

Moving  backward:  pain  dow^n  neck  and  outwardly  on
both  sides.

I  Pains  change  places. ^Rheumatism.

Pains  move  downward:  head;  bones  of  face;  from  ear  to
arm;  down  spine;  down  leg;  arm  to  fingers.

Pains  move  upward: neck  over  head; ball  in  throat;
lower  limbs,  then  upper.
^^  Sensations. Sensation as if  body was surcharged with
electricity.

As  of  something  loose  in  head  diagonally  across  top;  a
shuddering  without  coldness  commences  with  cracking,
as  if  surcharged  with  electricity;  as  if  back  would
break ;  as  if  a  ball  was  rising  in  throat;  as  if  something
would  be  pressed  off  below  pit  of  stomach ;  stool  as  if
glazed;  as  if  some  one  squeezed  throat  with  thumb  and
finger;  pain  in  chest  as  from  a  sprain;  pressure  like  a
marble  from  epigastrium  towards  heart;  a  cracking  in
head  frightens  him,  it  ends  in  a  sound  in  ears  like
blowing  a  horn;  every  heart  beat  has  a  strumming  as
if  it  would  burst,  along  sternum  to  throat;  asjf  some-
thing was  being pressed  away  from  under  sternum;


487  KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.

hands  as  if  they  had  been  sprained;  feet  as  if  sprained;
as  if  furuncles  would  form  here  and  there.
Pains:  in  limbs;  in  forehead;  in  1.  shoulder;  over  r.  eye;
in  head;  in  back;  from  back  of  neck  up  over  scalp  to
top  of  head  and  temples;  in  eyeball;  in  eyes;  in  r.  side
of  head,  ear  and  face;  in  region  of  liver;  in  lower  limbs;
in  loins;  in  interior  of  thighs ;  inchest;  in  1.  arm  ;  sud-
denly leave  extremities  and  go  to  heart;  from  neck
down  arm  to  little  and  fourth  finger;  in  spine;  in  1.
wrist,  causing  hand  to  feel  paralyzed.

Sudden  pains  in  paroxysms:  across  abdomen,  above  um-
bilicus, from  lower  border  of  liver,  downward  toward
left;  in  r.  arm.

Anguish:  about  heart.

Violent  pain:  in  upper  three  dorsal  vertebrse.

Severe  pain:  in  r.  eye  to  forehead;  in  cardiac  region.

Great  pain:  inchest.

Much  pain:  in  lower  extremities.

Tearing:  in  root  of  nose  and  nasal  bones;  in  lower  jaw;
in  one  side  of  head  from  hip  down  leg  to  feet.

Bending:  in  bones  of  r.  or  1.  side  of  face;  in  bones  of  legs
to  feet.

Shooting,  stabbing  pain :  from  heart  through  to  1.  scapula.

Shooting,  twitching  pain:  over  head.

Shooting:  downward  into  eye  teeth;  through  chest  above
heart  into  shoulder.

Stitches:  in  eyes,  ears,  fingers  and  feet;  in  and  behind  r.
ear;  in  neck  and  thighs;  in  lower  jaw;  in  tongue;  in
lower  part  of  chest;  in  lower  part  of  shoulder  blade;  in
hands;  externally  on  knee;  in  feet,  soles,  toes,  big  toe.

Stitching:  in  region  of  heart.

Stitching,  tearing,  pressing  or  shooting  pains:  in  a  down-
ward direction  in  face.

Stinging:  in  jawbones.

Pricking  sensation:  in  skin.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  scalp;  in  heart;  in  limbs;  in  region
of  heart,  extending  down  1.  arm;  in  arms;  in  leg  from
hip  down;  in  r.  leg;  shift  from  joint  to  joint;  mostly  in
upper  arms  and  lower  parts  of  legs;  all  over  body.

Severe  neuralgia:  in  r.  cheek;  throughout  whole  body.

Neuralgic  paroxysmal  pains:  in  head.

Neuralgia:  in  bowels.

Throbbing  headache.

Pulsating  headache:  in  forehead.

Aching:  in  face;  in  forehead;  in  throat;  across  loins.

Severe  pressing  headache.

Pressing  pain:  on  a  small  spot  on  r.  side  of  head;  in  r.
side  of  face;  in  molars.


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.  488

Pressure:  in  r.  eye;  above  r.  eye;  in  throat;  in  pit  of
stomach;  from  epigastrium  to  heart;  behind  sternum;
in  region  of  heart.

Burning:  in  spine.

Great  heat :  in  spine.

Heat:  in  head.

Soreness :  of  1.  side  of  tongue.

Dryness:  in  throat.

Dulness:  in  head.

Swollen  feeling:  in  throat.

Constriction:  of  throat.

Stiff,  drawing  sensation :  in  muscles  on  moving  eyes.

Rigidity  of  skin.

Numbness:  in  affected  parts  after  pain.

Feeling  of  paralysis :  in  sacrum.

Stiffness:  of  muscles  around  eyes  and  of  eyelids.

Lameness:  in  back.

Weakness:  in  abdomen  extending  to  throat;  in  calves.

Tired  feeling:  in  chewing  muscles.

Cracking:  in  elbow  joints.

Tingling:  in  salivary  glands.  .,

Tickling :  in  trachea.

Itching :  in  eyes ;  in  face.
^Tissues. I  Acute  rheumatism,  going  from  joint  to  joint;
violent  fever;  pains  intense;  ankles  most  painful  and
swollen;  <  from  least  movement.

■  Rheumatic  pains  all  over  body.

iPains  shifting,  pains  suddenly  changing  position;  ten-
dency to  metastasis  to  heart. ^Rheumatism.

I  Every  joint  and  every  muscle  of  body  affected;  high
fever;  every  attempt  to  move  attended  with  excruciating
pains;  afterwards  paralysis  of  arms  and  legs.  ^Rheu-
matism.

iDropsy  from  cold  with  rheumatic  complaints.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  face  tender;
pit  of  stomach  sore;  muscles  of  neck  sore.

Rubbing:  eyes  causes  stinging.
^^  Skin. I  I  Sensation  of  rigidity  of  skin.

I  I  Pricking  sensation  in  skin,  with  moderate  sweat.

I  I  Dry  skin.

■Erysipelatous,  inflamed  eruption  on  hand  (similar  to
eruption  caused  by  Rhus  tox),  with  oppressed  breathing.

I  I  Eruption  like  itch.

I  I  Red,  inflamed  places  here  and  there,  exceedingly  pain-
ful, as  if  furuncles  w^ould  form.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  10,  scrofulous  dia-
thesis, suffering  three  months;  Bright's  disease.

Girl,  set.  10,  suffering  ten  days ;  endocarditis.


489  KALMIA  LATIFOLIA— KOBALTUM.

Boy,  set.  12;  rheumati'^m.

Young  German;  chronic  rheumatism.

Servant  girl,  suffering  three  months;  sun  headache.

Woman,  suffering  one  week;  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  27,  fourth  attack  within  ten  years,  each  attack
lasting  from  two  to  four  months;  neuralgia  oculorum.

Man,  set,  33,  formerly  treated  for  ulcer  of  stomach  ;  press-
ure in  epigastrium.

Man,  set.  47,  rheumatic;  pressure  in  epigastrium.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Aeon.,  Bellad.

Compare:  Bellad.  (throbbing  head,  erysipelas);  Benz.  ac.
(gout,  valvular  disease);  Cede.  ostr.  (cardiac  hyper-
trophy) ;  Diose.  (gastralgia) ;  Kali  bich.  (catarrhs,  rheu-
matism) ;  Lith.  carl),  (valvular  disease) ;  Lycop.  (rheu-
matic gout,  urinary  symptoms);  Natr.  mur.  (hemiopia);
Pidsat,  rheumatism,  shifting  pains) ;  Ehus  tox.  (rheuma-
tism) ;  Spigel.  (rheumatic  endocarditis).


KOBALTUM.

Cobalt.  Co.

A  metal  known  to  Hohenheim  in  the  fourteenth  century.  Derives  its  name
from  the  German  word  Kobold,  signifying  mischievous  spirit,  so  named  by  the
miners  who  considered  it  a  profitless  ore.  It  is  found  in  conjunction  with  nickel
from  which  it  has  to  be  separated,  a  process  first  taught  in  1807  by  a  chemist
named  Lougier,  improved  by  Liebig  in  1848,  and  perfected  by  Genth,  a  Philadel-
phia chemist,  who  produced  absolutely  pure  Kobalt  in  1850.

From  this  chemically  pure  Kobalt  Hering  made  his  proving  in  July,  1850.

Further  provings  were  made  by  Koller,  Lippe,  Jones  and  Sparhawk.  See
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  361.

Clinical  Authorities. — Hering,  Lippe,  Pehrson,  MSS.

^  Mind. Great  exhilaration  of  spirits,  vivacity  and  rapid  flov/
of  thoughts.
Desire  for  study.
Indisposed  to  mental  and  physical  labor; low  spirited;

thinks  too  little  of  himself.
All  mental  excitement  increases  sufferings.
^ Sensorium. Dizziness; dulness; feeling  as  if  head  grew

large  (during  stool).
^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  forehead,  with  uneasiness  in  stomach.
Frontal  or  occipital  pain,  <  from  stooping.


KOBALTUM.  490

Dull,  press! ve  pain  in  temples.
At  every  jar,  feels  as  if  top  of  head  would  come  off.
Frontal  headache,  with  pain  back  of  eyes.
Headache  in  morning,  with  beating  and  sore  aching.
Headache  when  getting  up  from  sitting.
^  Outer  Head. Great  itching  on  hairy  scalj),  in  beard  and
under  chin,  burning  when  scratching.
Sore  pimples  along  edge  of  hair  back  of  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dim  vision;  darting  pains  in  eyes  when
writing,  feeling  when  opening  lids,  as  if  little  strings
were  holding  them  together  and  snapping.
Flickering  before  eyes  when  reading;  letters  look  blurred.
Darting,  shooting  pains  in  eyes,  from  bright  light.
Eyes  ache  at  night.
Lachrymation and  pain  from  cold  air; sensation  as  of

sand  under  lids.
Smarting  in  lids  when  using  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Aching,  humming  in  1.  ear.

Stinging  through  1.  ear  from  roof  of  mouth.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Putrid,  sickish  smell  before  nose.
Watery  discharge,  with  sneezing.
Nose  feels  obstructed.

Left  nostril  feels  dry;  filled  with  scales;  itching.
"  Upper  Face. 'Red  hard  lumps  on  r.  cheek.
^  Lower  Face. Peeling  of  lips,  with  soreness  and  bleeding.
Disposition  to  keep  jaws  tightly  closed.
Large  boils,  very  painful,  on  chin  and  1.  lower  jaw.
I A  large  furuncle  in  region  of  1.  lower  jaw.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. '  l  Pain  in  hollow  teeth,  they  feel  too  long ;
gums  swollen,  tender,  as  if  ulcerated ;  <  from  cold  air.
''  Taste  and  Tongue. Flat  taste;  bad  taste,  with  belching  in
morning.
Tongue  coated  white;  cracks  across  middle.
'"  Inner  Mouth. Pricking,  stinging  in  roof  of  mouth,  extend-
ing to  1.  ear.
Constant  watery  secretion,  with  frequent  swallowing.
^^  Throat. Soreness,  with  rawness  when  hawking.
Dryness  and  soreness,  mornings.
Hawking  up  thick,  white  mucus,  which  fills  throat,  in

morning.
Feeling  of  fulness,  from  stomach  to  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Diminished  ap-
petite, especially  for  supper.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough
after  eating,  with  soreness  in  pit  of  stomach.
Belching  of  wind,  mornings  and  after  stool.
Rising  of  sour  or  bitter  water,  with  pain  in  stomach ;  after-
ward, dryness  in  throat.


491  KOBALTUM.

I  I  Qualmishness,  with  fulness  of  stomach.
Nausea,  with  pain  in  forehead.
'''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pain  in  stomach  and  abdomen

after  eating,  uneasiness;  must  move  about.
Stomach  feels  as  if  it  contained  undigested  food.
I  I  Fulness  in  stomach,  extending  to  throat ;  qualmishness.
Soreness  when  inspiring  deeply,  or  from  hiccough.
^^  Hypochondria. Shooting,  stitching  from  region  of  liver

down  into  thigh.
■Shooting  pains  in  hepatic  region  and  sharp  pain  in  region

of  spleen,  <.  on  taking  a  deep  inspiration ;  fulness  in

abdomen  after  a  slight  meal;  constant  dropping  of  blood

with  stool. ^Hepatic  derangement.
Sharp  pain  in  splenic  region,  <  when  inspiring  deeply.
^^  Abdomen. Abdomen  feels  empty  about  umbilicus.
Cutting  before  stool.
Rumbling  in  abdomen.
Fulness  in  abdomen  after  a  light  meal.
CoHc  at  5  A.M.,  followed  by  large  stool  and  tenesmus.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Urgent  desire  for  stool  while  walking,

<  when  standing;  stool  profuse,  watery,  spouting.
Stool  large,  soft,  with  tenesmus  and  aching  in  sphincter

ani;  severe  colicky  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen;  tenes-
mus after  stool;  during  stool,  dizziness.
iCostiveness  alternating  with  diarrhoea.
I  I  Feces  like  hazelnuts,  with  dulnesss  in  head.
Pressure  in  rectum.

I  I  Constant  dropping  of  blood  from  anus  (stools  not  bloody).
^^  Urinary  Organs. ' '  Scanty  urine.
Albuminuria.

Frequent  discharge  of  small  quantities  of  urine.
Increased  secretion  of  pale  urine,  frequent  urination  in

morning,  after  drinking  coffee.
Scanty  urine,  with  greasy  pellicle;  yellow  flocculent,  or

red  sediment,  and  strong,  pungent  smell.
Smarting  in  end  of  urethra  during  micturition.
Burning  in  urethra.
^"  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Frequent  nocturnal  emissions,  with

lewd  dreams;  only  partial  or  no  erections;  impotence.
I  Seminal  emissions  at  night,  with  headache  and  backache.
■  Impotence  and  emissions  without  erections.
Severe  pain  in  r.  testicle,  >  after  urinating.,
I  I  Secondary  gonorrhoea,  with  a  greenish  discharge.
Yellow  brown  spots  on  genitals  (and  abdomen).
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Stitches  in

anterior  part  of  larynx.
^"  Respiration. Frequent  sighing.

On  taking  a  deep  inspiration,  stitches  in  chest,  soreness  in

stomach  and  pain  in  spleen.


KOBALTUM.  492

""  Cough. Cough,  with  soreness  in  throat  and  rawness  when
liawking.
Short,  hacking  cough,  with  expectoration  of  briglit  red

blood,  which  seemingly  comes  from  larynx.
Expectoration  of  thick,  tough  mucus,  mixed  with  blood,
with  fulness  and  pressive  pain  in  larynx;  scratching,
rawness  and  burning  in  throat,  and  a  disposition  to  keep
jaws  tightly  closed; <  from  pressure,  empty  degluti-
tion and  cold  water.
Copious  expectoration  of  sweetish,  frothy,  white  mucus,
with  lumps  in  it.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Deep  stitches  in  lower  part  of
chest,  mostly  1.  side,  from  deep  inspiration.
I  I  Through  chest  fulness  of  stomach  to  throat.
^^  Neck and Back. Pain, between shoulders,  in lumbar
region  and  small  of  back.

I  I  Aching  pain  in  small  of  back,  or  spine;  <  sitting,  >

rising,  walking  or  lying  down.

I I  Backache,  with  seminal  emissions.

TiPain  along  spine,  and  from  sacrum  down  through  legs
into  feet,  <  while  sitting.
^"  Upper Limbs. Aching in  wrist  joints, with  occasional

stitches.
^^  Lower  Limbs.  ;rPain  in  upper  part  of  r.  hip  bone,  <  sitting.

Shooting  into  thigh  from  liver.

Excessive  weakness  of  knees.

Foot  sweat  between  toes,  smelling  sour  or  like  soleleather.

Flushes  of  heat  along  legs.

Stitches  in  legs.

Jerks  in  limbs  when  falling  asleep.

Trembling  of  limbs,  especially  legs,  aching  when  sitting.

Pricking,  as  of  needles,  in  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Bruised  pain  in  all  limbs.

Stitches  in  arms  and  legs.
^' Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  backache  >.

Sitting :  aching  in  back  <  ;  pain  along  spine ;  pain  in  hip
bone  <.

Standing:  desire  for  stool  <.

Rising  from  sitting:  headache,  backache  >.

Stooping:  frontal  and  occipital  pain  <.

Walking:  urgent  desire  for  stool ;  backache  >.

Must  mQve  about:  pain  in  stomach  with  uneasiness.
^^  Sleep, S  Distressing  drowsiness,  in evening,  sleeps  ten  to
eleven  hours  and  still  hardly  able  to  get  up  in  morning.
I  I  Disturbed,  unrefreshing  sleep.

Wakeful;  can  do  with  less  sleep.

On  rising,  pain  in  head  and  small  of  back.

■Lewd  dreams,  emissions;  only  partial  or  no  erections.


493  KOBALTUM.

*^  Time,  Morning:  headache  with  beating  and  sore  aching;
belching  and  bad  taste ;  dryness  and  soreness  of  throat;
hawking  up  thick  white  mucus;  frequent  urinating.

5  A.M.:  colic.

Evening:  distressing  drowsiness.

Night:  eyes  ache ;  seminal  emissions.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Getting  warm  in  bed :  itch-
ing all  over.

Cold  air:  lachrymation  and  pain  in  eyes;  pain  in  teeth  <.

*'^  Fever. Chilly  from  11  to  12  a.m.;  headache,  with  nausea

and  languor  from  noon  to  2  p.m.,  then  fever  and  sweat.

Chilliness,  with  yawning,  from  4  to  5  p.m.  ;  feels  dull  and
weak,  with  aversion  to  mental  exertion.

Flushes  of  heat:  with  sweat;  along  legs,
^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. 11  to  12  a.m.:  chilly.

From  noon  to  2  p.m.: nausea  and  languor.

From  4  to  5  p.m.: chilliness  with  yawning.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  red,  hard  lumps  on  cheek;
severe  pain  in  testicle;  pain  in  upper  part  of  hip  bone.

Left:  aching,  humming  in  ear;  stinging  through  ear  to
roof  of  mouth;  larger  boils  on  lower  jaw;  large  furuncle
in  region  of  lower  jaw;  stitches  in  side  of  chest.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  head  grew  large;  as  if  top  of  head
would  come  off;  as  if  little  strings  were  holding  eyelids
together;  as  of  sand  under  lids;  teeth  feel  too  long;
gums  as  if  ulcerated;  stomach  as  if  it  contained  undi-
gested food:  pricking  as  of  needles  in  feet.

Pain:  in  forehead;  in  head;  in  occiput;  back  of  eyes;
in  stomach;  in  forehead;  in  abdomen;  in  back;
in  spleen;  between  shoulders;  in  lumbar  region;  in
small  of  back;  along  spine;  from  sacrum  down  through
legs  into  feet; in  upper  part  of  r.  hip  bone.

Severe  pain :  in  r.  testicle.

Sharp  pain:  in  region  of  spleen.

Shooting:  in  eyes;  from  region  of  liver  dow^n  into  thigh;
in  hepatic  region ;  into  thigh  from  liver.

Cutting: in  abdomen.

Darting:  in  eyes.

Severe  colicky  pain :  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

Stitches:  in  anterior  part  of  larynx;  in  chest;  in  wrist
joints; in  legs;  in  arms.

Stitching: from  region  of  liver  down  into  thigh.

Stinging: through  1.  ear  from  roof  of  mouth.

Burning :  on  hairy  parts  of  head  when  scratched ;  in  ure-
thra; in  throat.

Sore  aching:  in  head.

Soreness:  of  lips;  of  throat;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  stomach.

Smarting:  in  lids;  in  end  of  urethra.


KOBALTUM.  494

Pressive  pain:  in  larynx.

Bruised  pain:  in  all  limbs.

Aching:  in  eyes  at  night;  in  1.  ear;  in  small  of  back;  in

wrist  joints;  in  legs;  in  sphincter  ani.
Beating:  in  head.
Pricking:  in  roof  of  mouth.
Dryness:  of  throat.
Pressure:  in  rectum.
Dull,  pressive  pain:  in  temples.

Fulness: from  stomach  to  throat ;  in  abdomen;  in  larynx.
Itching:  on  hairy  scalp;  in  beard  and  under  chin;  in  1.

nostril; all  over.
^°  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  disposition

to  keep  jaws  tightly  closed  <.
At  every  jar:  feels  as  if  top  of  head  would  come  off.
*^  Skin. Much  itching  all  over,  when  getting  warm  in  bed.
Pimples  on  shoulders,  pit  of  stomach  and  buttocks;  bleed

easily  when  scratched.
^  Relations. Compare  Agnus  cast.,  impotency ; Zincum,  pain

in  back  <  while  sitting.


495  KREOSOTUM.


KREOSOTUM.

A  product  of  distillation  of  wood  tar.

Provings  by  Syrbius,  Hartung,  Sen.  and  Jun.,  Immisch,  Lange,  Koch,  Heine-
mann,  Lunderstadt,  Wahle,  Eichhorn,  Thomas.  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.
408.

Additional  verified  symptoms  from  provings  by  Hering  and  Kummer,  MSS.

Clinical  Authorities. — Difficulty  of  hearing  during  menstruation,  McClatchey,
Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1881,  p.  157  ;  Syphilitic  deafness,  Teste,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
29,  p.  780 ;  Cancerous  tumor  on  lower  lip,  Thompson,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  97 ;
Carious  teeth,  Liedbeck,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  463 ;  Hemorrhage  after  extraction
of  tooth,  Kleinert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  859  ;  Vomiting,  Wahle,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  557 ;  Gastromalacia,  Kreuss,  Rummel,  Goullon,  Krummacher,  Arnold,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  605 ;  Painful,  hard  spot  in  stomxich,  Wahle,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  1,  p.  637  ;  Diarrhaa,  Kurz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  836 ;  Enuresis,  Perrussell,
Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  137 ;  Boenninghausen,  Sommer,  Rampai,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
2,  p.  43;  Chronic  ovarian  affection,  Proll,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  737  ;  Uterine  affection,
Wahle,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  354 ;  Reisig,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  354 ;  Uter-
ine affections  in  middle-aged  women,  Kurtz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  354 ;  Ulcers  on
neck  of  uterus,  Wahle,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  353  ;  Cauliflower  excrescences  around
OS  uteri,  Neidhard,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  105;  Menorrhagia,  Giilzon,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,
vol.  103,  p.  51;  Wesselhceft,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  87;  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.
178;  Leucorrhosa,  Landrey,  B.J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  166;  Molin,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
2,  p.  363 ;  Puerperal  metritis,  Bentsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  448 ;  Perichondritic
laryngismus,  Unsin,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  740 ;  Whooping  cough,  A.  R.,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  723;  Hemorrhage  from  lungs,  Wahle,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  217;
Consumption,  Frank,  Kurtz,  Lobethal,  Schron,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  pp.  377-379;
Phthisis  (2  cases),  Wahle,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3  p.  216 ;  Gangrene  of  lungs,  Wil-
lard,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1876,  p.  297 ;  Hemorrhages,  Trinks,  B.  J.  H.,  vol,
29,  p.  318.

^  Mind. Stupid  feeling  in  head;  vacant  gaze;  neither  seeing

nor  hearing.
Frequent  vanishing  or  failure  of  thought.
I  I  Weakness  of  memory;  forgetfulness. ^After  nosebleed.
I  I  Thinks  herself  well. /^Metritis.
iSorrowful  mood,  inclined  to  weep,  or  longing  for  death  ;

music  and  similar  emotional  causes  impel  him  to  weep.
Anxious,  apprehensive  mood.

Ill  humor;  moroseness;  peevishness,  ill  temper,  obstinacy.
I  Fretful,  irritable,  agitated,  screams  nights. ^Bronchitis

during  dentition.
Excited  condition;  ailments  from  emotions.


KREOSOTUM.  406

■  Confounding  ideas;  also  in  puerperal  fever  with  putridity.
Seeks  for  unpleasant  things  and  broods  over  them.

^  Sensorium. Stupefaction,  dizziness  and  vacancy  in  head,
with  complete  loss  of  thought,  sight  and  hearing.
I  Painful  dulness  of  head,  as  after  a  carouse.
■Vertigo: mornings,  in  open  air,  with  staggering  like
from  drunkenness,  must  hold  on  to  something ;  passes
off  in  room ;  danger  of  falling  on  turning  round  quickly.
I  I  Roaring  in  head.
^  Inner  Head. ■Throbbing  and  beating  in  forehead  from  1.
side  of  head.

■  Dull  feeling  in  head  as  from  a  board  across  forehead.

I  I  Pulsation in  forehead  and  vertex, when  awaking  in

morning,  with  heat  in  face.
iChronic  periodic  headache  in  forehead,  piercing  pain;

wheals  or  swellings  on  scalp.

■  Heaviness  or  pressure  in  various  parts  of  head,  with  sen-

sation as  if  brain  would  force  through  forehead,

■  Occipital  headache;  much  pain  and  soreness.

■  Headache: after  a carouse; with sleepiness; tearing,

drawing  and  jerking  pains;  jerking,  tearing,  sticking,
burning  pains  in  anterior  part  of  head  ;  semilateral
and  extending  to  cheeks, jaws,  teeth  and  neck;  induced
by  talking,  moving,  sitting  up  or  lying  on  side  not
affected,  with  great  excitability  and  nervous  irritabilit3\
*  Outer  Head. ■Eruptions  on  forehead,  as  with  drunkards.

■  Falling  off  of  hair,

■  Sensibility  of  scalp  to  touch,  and  when  hair  is  combed.

■  Scales  in  large,  indurated  masses  fall  off  freely,
■Scald  head.

'^  Sight  and  Eyes.  ■Dimsighted:  as  if  looking  through
gauze ;  as  if  something  was  floating  before  eyes,  obliging
to  wipe  them  constantly.

■  Staring,  dull,  lifeless  and  stupid  look.

I  I  Itching  and  smarting  sensation  in  eyes,  on  edges  of  lids;
<  rubbing.
• II  Suggilation  on  conjunctiva  of  r.  eye.
I  I  Burning  and  redness  of  conjunctiva.

■  Acute  aggravations  of  chronic  keratitis;  hot,  smarting

lachrymation.

■  Blenorrhoea of conjunctiva,  with moderately  profuse

discharge  and  much  smarting  in  eyes.

■  Heat  in  eyes,  with  ulceration.

■  Burning  heat  in  eyes,  with  tears,  <  by  bright  light,

I  I  Hot,  acrid,  smarting  tears,  like  salt  water ;  <  in  a  bright

light,  on  rubbing  eyes  and  early  morning.
1  I  Slight  inflammation  of  Meibomian  glands.

■  Eyes  sunken,  with  blue  rings  around,  or  protruding.


497  KREOSOTUM.

1 1  Chronic  swelling  of  eyelids  and  their  margins ;  agglu-
tination of  lids.

I  I  Uncontrollable  twitching  of  lids.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. >  Hardness  of  hearing  with  buzzing.

iRoaring  in  head ;  also  humming  and  difficulty  of  hear-
ing before  and  during  menses.

■  Girl,  set.  9,  syphilitic  deafness;  teeth  wedge  shaped;  old

looking ;  had  snuffles  when  a  baby ;  attacks  of  vomiting.

■  Stitches  in  ears;  otitis.

I  Heat,  burning,  swelling  and  redness  of  1.  outer  ear,  pro-
ceeding from  a  pimple  in  concha,  stiffness  and  pain  in
1.  side  of  neck,  shoulder  and  arm.

I  I  Itching  in  ears.

I  Humid  tetter  on  ears,  with  swelling  of  cervical  glands
and  livid  grey  complexion.

I  I  Affections  of  external  ear.
''Smell  and  Nose, i  i Subjective  putrid  smell  with  loss  of
appetite ;  in  morning,  on  awaking.

iNosebleed:  with  heaviness  and  throbbing  in  forehead,
sleepiness  ;  thin,  bright  red  blood.

■  Frequent  sneezing;  especially  in  morning;  with  stoppage

of  nose ; rough  and  scraping  sensation  in  throat ;  with

dry,  nasal  catarrh.
Nasal  secretion  thick.
I  I  Catarrh  fluent  or  dry,  with  much  sneezing.

■  Chronic  catarrh  with  old  people.

■  Epithelial  cancer  on  right  ala  nasi,

■  ■Lupus  on  nose;  1.  side.

®  Upper Face. iSick, suffering expression ; old looking
children.

■  Complexion: wretched;  earthy;  livid;  pale,  green,  with

swelling  of  cervical  glands ;  pale,  bloated ;  coppery  ap-
pearance.

■  Burning  pains;  <  from  talking  or  exertion,  >  lying  on

affected  side ;  nervous,  excitable.

■  Face  cold,  of  pale,  bluish  tinge,  especially  on  temples  and

around  nose  and  mouth.


■  Face  hot,  cheeks  red,  feet  cold.

■  Great  heat  and  brown  redness  of  face  (during  siesta),  with

throbbing  in  cheeks  and  forehead,  and  frequent  mictu-
rition. •
I  I  Scaly  herpes  on  eyelids,  cheeks  and  around  mouth.

■  Acne  in  face.

^  Lower  Face. ■  Dry  lips,  peeling  off,  easily  cracked.

■  Wants  to  moisten  lips  frequently,  without  being  thirsty,
I  I  Tumor,  size  of  a  pea,  on  lower  lip,  with  acrid,  watery

ichor,  making  surrounding  parts  sore.
vol..  VI.— 32.


KREOSOTUM.  498

I  I  Eruption  on  under  lip.

I  I  Pustulous  pimples,  with  yellow  scabs  on  chin  and  cheek.
^*^  Teeth,  and  Gums. liBad  odor  from  decayed  teeth.

II Toothache:  extending  to  temples  and  to  1.  side  of  face;

drawing,  extending  to  inner  ear  and  temples ;  caused

by  caries.
I  I  Teeth  wedge  shaped. ^Syphilitic  deafness.

I  I  Great  restlessness,  wants  to  be  in  motion  all  the  time,

and  screams  whole  night. ^Dentition.
IB  Teeth  show  dark  specks  and  begin  to  decay  as  soon  as
they  appear.

I I  Gums :  bluish  red,  soft,  spongy,  easily  bleeding,  inflamed,
ulcerated,  scorbutic.

i Protruding  gums  infiltrated  with  dark  watery  fluid.

■  After  extraction  of  tooth,  persistent  oozing  of  dark,
slightly  coagulated  blood,  finally  checked  by  application
of  alum ;  hemorrhage  reappeared  at  shorter  or  longer
intervals,  at  first  only  from  teeth,  later  entirely  from
nose,  continuing  one  year,  and  causing  great  debility.

I  Absorption  of  gums  and  alveolar  process.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. '  i  Bitter  or  flat  taste.

•  Bitter  taste,  especially  in  throat

I  I  Everything  eaten  tastes  bitter ;  bitter  taste  of  food,  not
perceived  until  just  as  it  is  being  swallowed.

I  Tongue  dry;  with  mucous  coating;  coated  white.
^"  Inner  Mouth, n  Putrid  odor  from  mouth.
^^  Throat. '  i  Pressure  on  r.  side  of  throat  when  swallowing.

iScraping  in  throat,  with  roughness  and  dryness.

I  I  Small,  round,  bluish  red  spots  (petechise)  on  throat.

I  Diphtheria;  malignant  form,  when  confined  to  fauces,
with  terrible  fetor  oris.

I  Fever,  vomiting,  loss  of  appetite,  restless  sleep,  general
languor,  swelling  of  glands;  three  days  later,  suddenly,
very  much  exudate  in  fauces ;  fetor  oris. ^Diphtheria.

•  Scrofulous  and  lymphatic  patients,  with  black  softening

and  decomposition  of  mucous  membrane,  with  atony
and  extension  of  softening,  especially  towards  oesopha-
gus. ^Diphtheria.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Greedy  drinking
followed  by  vomiting ;  great  thirst.

•  Keen  appetite,  especially  for  meat;  craves  smoked  meats.
I  i  Loss  of  appetite,  aversion  to  meat,  vomits  after  it.

I  Desire  for  spirituous  drinks,  weakening  leucorrhoea.
I  I  Stomach  aches,  from  acid  food.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking, n Water,  after  it  is  swallowed,
tastes  bitter.
Worse  from  eating  cold  food ;  >  from  warm  diet.
Dares  not  remain  fasting.


409  KREOSOTUM.

'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Belching

and  hiccough,  especially  when  sitting  up  or  being  carried.

iBelching: sour;  empty;  after  dinner,  with  throwing  off

of  frothy  saliva,  and  with  scraping  roughness  in  throat.

■  Deep  and  lasting  disgust  for  food  in  convalescents.

1  Nausea :  during  pregnancy ;  constant  inclination  to  vomit
without  doing  so;  with  chilliness  morning  and  evening.

II Vomiting:  of  sweetish  water;  of  undigested  food;  in
evening  of  all  food  eaten  during  day;  of  undigested
food  two  or  three  hours  after  eating ;  with  dimness  of
vision;  of  everything  eaten;  of  large  quantities  of  sour,
acrid  fluid,  or  of  white,  foamy  mucus.

I  I  Continuous  vomiting  and  straining  to  vomit.

■Sympathetic  vomiting,  as  of  phthisis,  of  cancer  of  liver
or  uterus,  of  pregnancy,  and  of  chronic  kidney  disease.

■Seasickness.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Cold  feeling  at  epigastrium
internally,  as  if  cold  water  or  ice  was  there.

■  Feeling  of  fulness,  as  after  having  eaten  too  much.

■  Tension  over  stomach  and  scrobiculum;  tight  clothing

is  intolerable.

■  I  Painful  hard  spot,  at  or  to  left  of  stomach.
■Malignant induration, fungus  and  ulcers  of  stomach;

painless gastromalacia  ; pressing,  gnawing,  ulcerative
pain  in  stomach,  with  hsematemesis.

■  Gastromalacia,  preceded  by  great  restlessness  and  sleep-

lessness, and  accompanied  by  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.
■Sudden  vomiting  of  all  food,  soon  followed  by  lienteric
stools;  slimy  coating  on  tongue;  rapid  and  extreme
emaciation;  constant  whining;  sleeplessness.  ^Gastro-
malacia.

■  For  several  weeks  diarrhoea,  finally  smelling  cadaverous;

vomiting; extreme blueness  of  face,  as  from  nervous
congestion. ^Gastromalacia.

■  Rapid  emaciation in  children,  vomiting,  intense  thirst,

bloating  in  region  of  stomach,  greyish  white  or  chopped
offensive  stools. ^Gastromalacia.

■  Very  frequent  and sudden  vomiting  of  food;  frequent

hiccough,  belching,  especially  when  raised  up ;  remark-
ably rapid  emaciation  of  whole  body,  but  particularly
-  of  neck  and  face  ;  bluish  pale  appearance  of  face,  espe-
cially about  temples,  nose  and  mouth;  dull,  staring,
vacant  look,  eyes  sunken,  surrounded  by  blue  rings;
coldness  of  face  and  hands ;  drowsiness,  with  half  open
eyes;  feeble  whining;  quick,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse;
red,  slightly  elevated  eruption  on  1.  forearm.  ^Gastro-
malacia.
^^  Hypochondria. ■Stitches  in  region  of  liver. ^Pregnancy.


KREOSOTUM.  500

iBruised  pain  in  region  of  liver,  with  sensation  of  fulness.
I  I  Constriction of hypochondria, cannot tolerate tight

clothing.
I  I  Pressure  in  region  of  spleen  ;  spleen  painful  to  pressure.
^^  Abdomen, l  '  Ulcerative  pain  in  abdomen.
I  I  Pain  in  region  of  umbilicus.
I  I  Sensation  of  contraction  in  abdomen,  as  if  a  hard  twisted

ball  was  lying  in  umbilical  region.

■  Distension  of  abdomen,  as  after  a  copious  meal.
I  Abdomen  distended  and  tense,  like  a  drum.

■  Burning  in  bowels.

I  Laborlike  payis  in  abdomen,  with  drawing  in  upper
abdomen,  extending  to  small  of  back  and  pressing
toward  lumbar  vertebrae,  with  flushes  of  heat  in  face,
palpitation  of  heart,  frequent  pulse  and  ineffectual  urg-
ing to  urinate,  finally  small  quantities  of  hot  urine  are
passed ;  after  paroxysm  chill,  and  discharge  of  milky
leucorrhoea.

I  I  Sore  pain  in  abdomen  during  deep  inhalation.

1  I  Shattering  sensation  in  abdomen.

■  Painful  sensation  of  coldness  in  abdomen;  icy  coldness

in  epigastrium. ^Dyspepsia.
■Violent  abdominal  spasms,  <  in  groins.

■  Colic,  resembling  pains  of  labor.

■  Tabes  mesenterica,  with  hypertrophied  glands  in  fleshy,

flabby  subjects.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stools:  watery ;  papescent;  dark  brown ;
watery,  putrid,  containing  undigested  food ;  greyish  or
white,  chopped,  very  fetid;  frequent,  greenish,  watery;
cadaverous  smelling.
1  I  Ineffectual  painful  urging  to  stool.
1  I  Constipation,  stool  hard,  expelled  after  much  pressing.

■  Cramplike  pain  in  rectum  during  stool.

■  Children  struggle  and  scream  during  act  of  defecation,

and  seem  as  if  they  would  go  into  fits.

■  Diarrhcea  in  nursing  infants  during  dentition.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  vomiting; continued  vomiting,  strain-

ing to  vomit  predominates;  child  resists  tightening  of
anything  around  abdomen,  which  increases  restlessness
and  pain;  much  thirst;  gums  hot;  coldness  of  hands
and  feet.

■  Cholera  infantum,  second  and  third  stages,  with  bloody,

shreddy,  mucous  evacuations,  with  or  without  oppres-
siveness, gagging,  dull,  leaden  countenance,  somnolence;
incipient  hydrocephaloid.

■  Constant  vomiting and  greedy  drinking; belching  or

hiccoughing  when  carried. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Much  blood,  often  in  clots,  in  diarrhoeic,  thin,  fetid  stools,

which  are  always  followed  by  great  prostration.  ^Typhus.


501  KREQSOTUM.

iStitches  in  rectum,  extending  towards  1.  groin.

I  Constriction  of  rectum  in  case  of  uterine  cancer.
^^  Urinary  Organs, n  Frequent  urgency  to  urinate,  with  co-
pious, pale  discharge;  at  night  cannot  get  out  of  bed
quick  enougli.

B Diminished  secretion,  though  drinking  much.

i  Urine :  chestnut  brown  ;  clouded;  reddish,  with  red  sedi-
ment ; depositing white sediment ; colorless ; fetid ;

. alkaline.

I  Wets  bed  at  night,  wakes  with  urging,  but  cannot  retain
urine,  or  dreams  he  is  urinating  in  a  decent  manner.

I  Urine  flows  during  deep,  first  sleep,  fjcom  which  child  is
roused  with  difficulty. ^Enuresis  nocturna.

iChronic  enuresis;  patient  thin,  emaciated.

llSmarting  and  burning  in  pudenda  during  and  after
micturition.

1  Diabetes  mellitus.
^  Male  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Sexual  desire  too  weak.

■  Burning  in  genitals,  during coition,  with  swelling  of

penis  next  day.

B  Prepuce  bluish  black  with  hemorrhage  and  gangrene.
^Syphilis.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs,  b  After  chill  menses  suppressed
for  six  months;  unable  to  lie  on  either  side;  dull  pain
in  region  of  ovaries,  could  not  bear  strong  pressure;
morning  urine  colorless;  brownish  yellow,  acrid  leucor-
rhoea;  constipation. ^Chronic  ovarian  affection.

B During  coition,  burning  in  parts,  followed  next  day  by
discharge  of  dark  blood.

BHard  lump  on  neck  of  uterus;  ulcerative  pain  during
coition.

i  Ulcerative  pain  in  cervix  uteri.

BSevere  pain  in  small  of  back  and  uterine  region,  extend-
ing to  thighs;  deep  in  pelvis  burning  as  of  red  hot  coals;
whimpering  and  whining;  discharge  of  offensive  blood
in  large  clots;  vagina  swollen  and  burning  hot,  mucous
membrane  greatly  puffed ;  uterus  high  up,  neck  hard
and  swollen ;  at  orifice  of  uterus  small,  warty  growths ;
parts  extremely  irritable  and  painful  to  touch;  exter-
nally, fundus  of  uterus  swollen,  painful  like  a  blood  boil
on  slightest  touch;  pulse  small  and  hard;  great  debil-
ity; sleeplessness.

■  Painful  pressure  towards  genitals ;  stitches,  from  small  of

back  through  pelvis  to  external  genitals;  constant  burn-
ing pain  in  small  of  back ;  bland  leucorrhcea  finally
acrid,  watery,  occasionally  ichorous,  bloody,  with  pun-
gent, off'ensive  smell ;  severe  pain  during  coition,  with
fear  and  trembling  at  thought  of  it;  general  aggrava-


KREOSOTUM.  502

tion  during  menstruation;  sick,  suffering  appearance;
prostration  from  least  exertion;  >  during  rest;  dwin-
dling and  falling  away  of  mammae,  with  small,  hard,
painful  lumps  in  them ;  cervix  scirrhous,  hard  and  very
painful  to  touch ;  os  open,  almost  everted,  inner  surface
like  cauliflower;  pulse  small,  weak,  100 ;  anxious,  fearful.

I  Putrid  state  of  womb  after  childbirth.

I I  Inveterate  ulcers  on  neck  of  uterus.

lUterine  affections  of  middle  aged  women;  long  lasting
leucorrhoea,  or  frequently  recurring  uterine  hemor-
rhages, both  accompanied  by  pressing  sensations ;  finally
discharges  become  offensive,  bloody  and  watery,"
acrid,  ichorous  or  clotted ;  burning,  occasionally
stitching  in  back  and  lower  abdomen;  on  standing  sen-
sation as  if  a  load  was  resting  in  pelvis ;  coition  pain-
ful ;  general  aggravation  during  menstruation ;  exami-
nation painful ;  vagina  hot,  mucous  membrane  puffed
and  follicles  often  hypertrophied ;  at  mouth  of  uterus
w^arty  or  cauliflower  excrescences.

I  Cancer  of  uterus  (much  improved).

iMenses:  too  early,  too  profuse  and  too  protracted;  suc-
ceeded by  an  acrid  smelling,  bloody  ichor,  with  itching
and  biting  in  parts  ;  more  or  less  pain  during  flow,  but
much  <  after  it ;  flow  intermits,  at  times  almost  ceasing,
then  recommencing;  in  third  month  of  pregnancy.

IMenses  very  profuse;  blood  clotted  ;  sometimes  with  ute-
rine pain,  and  always  a  week  too  late,  with  severe  head-
ache before  and  during  menses.

■  Menorrhagia,  <  lying,  >  getting  up  and  walking  about.

■  Before  menses :  hardness  of  hearing ;  foamy  eructation  or

vomiting  of  mucus ;  bloatedness ;  griping  about  navel ;
burning  in  back ; leucorrhoea ;  excitement  and  restless-
ness ;  looks  swollen  as  if  pregnant.
iBuzzing  in  head,  before,  during  and  after  menses.

I I  Severe  headache  before  and  during  menses.
iCatamenia  with  uterine  pain.

■  During  menses:  hardness  of  hearing;  rushing  sound  in

ears ;  humming  and  pressing  outwards  in  head  ;  stitches
in  side;  cutting  pain  in  abdomen;  borborygmi;  diar-
rhcea;  chills; sweat  on  chest  and  back.

■  Painful  urging  toward  genitals.

■  Bearing  down  and  weight  in  pelvis;  as  if  something

w^as  coming  out  of  vagina ;  <  by  motion.
■She  thinks  she  is  almost  well  when  the  discharge  reap-
pears. ^Menses. ^Metrorrhagia.

■  ■Her  hemorrhage  seems  to  pass  into  a  corrosive,  ichorous

discharge,  and  then  to  freshen  up  again  and  go  on.
After  menses:  laborlike  abdominal  cramps;  uterus  ten-


503  KREOSOTUM.

der;  constricting  pain  in  vagina,  followed  by  fluor
albus;  prolapsus.

I  Metrorrhagia:  blood  dark  and  offensive;  in  large  clots;

fainting;  pulseless.

■  Metrorrhagia  continuing  four  weeks ;  fainting  and  pulse-

less; discharge  dark  and  offensive.

■  Constant  flow  of  thin,  watery  and  offensive  blood,  <

lying;  emaciation;  debility.  ^Menorrhagia.
ULeucorrhoea:  putrid,  acrid,  corrosive;  stains  clothing
yellow,  stiffens  like  starch  ;  mild  or  acrid,  causing  much
itching;  milky,  after  coccyodynia;  <  between  menses ;
or  for  a  few  days  before  menses;  with  great  weakness ;
<  standing  or  walking,  not  sitting ;  flowing  like  menses.

I I  Discharge  from  vagina  frequently  looks  quite  white,  and
then  had  odor  of  green  corn.

■  Bland,  yellow  leucorrhoea,  preceding  each  urination,  with

frequent  desire  to  micturate.

■  Drawing  pains  along  coccyx  down  to  rectum  and  vagina,

where  a  spasmodic,  contractive  pain  is  felt;  > when
rising  from  sitting ;  subsequent  milky  leucorrhoea.
■Sterile  from  leucorrhoea.

■  Electric-like  stitches  in  vagina,  seem  to  come  from  abdo-

men, always  make  her  start.

■  Voluptuous  itching  deep  in  vagina.

■  ■Violent  itching  of  vagina,  so  that  she  is  obliged  to  rub

it;  posteriorly  there  is  smarting;  external  genitals
swollen,  hot  and  hard ;  on  urinating,  vagina  pains  as  if
sore ;  in  evening.

■  ■Corrosive itching in vulva;  sore and burning  after

scratching.

■  iScirrhus  of  vagina,  painful  to  slight  touch,

■  Burning  and  swelling  of  labia.

■  Violent  itching  between  labia  and  thighs.

■  Aphthous  or  inflammatory  state  of  external  parts,  symp-

tomatic of  ovarian  or  uterine  disease.
^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■■During  preg-
nanc}'^:  nausea  and  vomiting;  ptyalism  ;  vomiting  of
sweetish  water  before  breakfast;  vomiting  after  supper;
metrorrhagigi  threatening  abortion  (third  month) ;  leu-
corrhoea; tightness  across  pit  of  stomach.

■  ■Lochia:  blackish,  lumpy,  very  offensive;  excoriating;

almost  ceasing,  freshen  up  again ;  persistent,  brown  and
offensive.

■  Chill,  then  general  heat,  finally  sweat;  pulse  soft  and

quick ;  trembling,  anxiety,  confusion  of  mind,  weakness
of  memory,  thinks  herself  well ;  lochia  dark,  lumpy  and
very  offensive;  vagina  moist,  not  very  hot;  abdomen
soft  and  sensitive ;  constipation. ^Puerperal  fever.


KREOSOTUM.  504

iMammse:  stitches;  dwindling  away;  small,  hard,  pain-
ful lumps  in  them ;  hard,  bluish  red  and  covered  with
little  scurfy  protuberances,  from  which  blood  oozes
whenever  scurf  is  removed.
^'^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Scrap-
ing and  roughness  in  throat;  hoarseness,  ceasing  in
morning,  after  sneezing.

■Perichondritis  of  larynx,  septic  form,  with  softening  and
degeneration  affecting  mucous  membrane  of  larynx,  and
particularly  that  of  oesophagus.

■  Heavy  pressure  on  sternum. ^Bronchitis.

■  Bronchial  irritation  accompanying  dentition;  child  ex-

tremely fretful,  irritable,  much  agitated,  and  screaming
in  night.

■  Chronic  bronchial  and  laryngeal  catarrh,  with  hoarseness;

hawking  mucus  from  trachea  and  bronchi,  sometimes
bloody,  especially  that  from  trachea;  heavy  pressure
on  sternum  when  turning  over  in  bed  in  morning ;  <
on  approach  of  warm  weather ;  no  cough.

^^  Respiration.  ■Shortness  of  breath,  heaviness,  anxiety,  fre-
quent desire  to  take  a  deep  breath ;  chest  feels  bruised,
as  if  beaten ;  as  if  sternum  was  being  crushed  in.
^Nervous  asthma.

^  Cough.  Cough:  whistling;  dry;  tormenting;  evening,  in
bed  ;  caused  by  crawling  below  larynx,  or,  as  if  in  upper
bronchi;  with  dyspnoea;  convulsive,  with  desire  to
vomit;  dry,  spasmodic,  in  morning,  causing  retching;
concussion  of  abdomen  and  escape  of  urine;  with  easily
detached  white  expectoration;  scraping,  with  profuse,
thick,  yellow,  or  white  mucous  expectoration ;  dry,
wheezing,  hollow;  during  dentition;  with  pain  inchest
and  sternum,  compelling  to  press  hand  on  it ;  stitches
and  soreness  in  chest.
I  Aggravation  of  cough:  morning  and  evening;  while
exhaling;  from  motion;  from  music;  when  awaking,
when  lying  on  side  or  turning  in  bed.
■During  cough :  scratching  in  throat;  stitches  and  bruised
pain  in  chest;  asthma;  jarring  of  abdomen;  retching;
discharge  of  urine ;  chills  and  heat;  sleepiness.

■  After  coughing  spell,  copious,  purulent  expectoration.

■  Periodical  blood  spitting,  greenish  yellow,  puslike  sputa.

■  Expectoration: white; thick  yellow;  black  coagulated

blood.

■  Frequent  blood  spitting,  severe  pains  in  chest,  afternoon

fever,  and  morning  sweat.

■  Fatiguing  cough  with  old  people,  copious  sputa.

■  Violent  winter  cough  of  old  people,  with  spasmodic  turns

at  night,  and  very  copious  light  colored  mucous  sputa;
pain  or  pressure  referable  to  sternum.


505  KREOSOTUM.

I  Whooping  cough.

I  Cough  for  several  weeks;  vomiting  of  tough,  white
phlegm  with  the  cough,  sometimes  of  a  yellowish  color;
cough  <  in  evening  and  morning;  after  lying  down
and  from  exercise;  crawling  below  larynx,  which  ex-
cites cough;  perspires  after  coughing  and  feels  weak;
stomach  swells  in  evening,  has  to  unfasten  clothes;
sometimes  sneezes  when  he  coughs.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  a  Dreadful  burning  in  chest;
constriction.

■  Stitches:  in  1. chest,  just  over  heart;  across  chest,  dur-

ing morning  till  noon ;  first  in  1.  then  in  r.  chest ;  in  r.
chest,  interrupting  breathing;  under  scapula.
I  Acute  stitches  in  middle  of  chest,  <  during  inspiration,
attended  with  feeling  of  lameness  and  extending  to
elbow  joint  across  r.  shoulder,  where  pains  are  most  vio-
lent on  lifting  arms;  chronic  leucorrhoea.

■  Pains  in  chest,  >  from  pressure.

■  Anxious  feeling  of  heaviness  and  oppression  in  chest.

■  Breath  quick  and  labored,  puffing  of  chqeks  and  violent

working  of  nostrils. ^Pneumonia.
•  Periodic  attacks  of  blood  spitting,  with  fever,  and  expec-
toration of  greenisli  yellow  pus;  pains  in  chest;  can  lie
only  on  one  side. ^Phthisis.

■  Suddenly  seized  with  cough  and  expectoration  of  blood;

lies  in  bed,  greatly  emaciated ;  is  afraid  to  open  mouth ;
heaviness  and  oppression  of  chest;  constipation;  during
night  coughed  up  much  black  blood ;  appetite  lost ;  pulse
weak,  suppressed,  intermittent ;  face  greyish  yellow.

■  Coughing  spells  every  Autumn  and  Spring,  with  expec-

toration of  yellowish  green  pus  and  blood,  fever  and  in-
ability to  lie  on  one  side. ^Phthisis.

■  After  whooping  cough,  accompanied by  inflammatory

affection  of  lungs  and  larynx,  phthisis  purulenta;  with
every  paroxysm  of  cough,  expectoration  of  a  large  mass
of  pus,  followed  by  such  great  prostration  that  he  can
hardly  speak;  severe  evening  exacerbations;  loss  of
appetite;  emaciation;  must  stay  in  bed. ^Consumption.

■  After  neglected  pulmonary  catarrh, severe,  persistent,

spasmodic  cough,  often  attended  by  vomiting;  expecto-
ration, profuse,  slimy  and  purulent;  must  sit  up  nearly
all  night;  constant  stitches  in  1.  chest;  bitter  taste  in
mouth ;  fetor  oris ;  frequent  greenish,  watery  diarrhoea ;
hectic  fever, /^Consumption.

■  Must  stay  in  bed; face and body  greatly  emaciated;

cough  with  profuse  and  frequent  expectoration ;  frequent
blood  spitting;  severe  pains  in  chest;  fever  in  after-
noon; sweats  in  morning;  consumption.


KREOSOTUM. .  506

lEmaciation;  intense  hectic  fever;  night  sweats;  short-
ness  of  breath ; dry, teasing cough ; great debility.

1 1  Gangrene  of  lungs.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i Anxiety  at  heart; op-
pression of  breathing.

I  I  Stitches:  over  heart;  in  heart.

■  Pulsation  in  all  arteries,  when  at  rest.

Pulse  :  small,  weak  and  quick  ;  soft,  quick  and  trembling;

small  and  hard  ;  slow;  rapid,  scarcely  perceptible ;  falls

from  eighty  to  sixty,  even  to  forty-seven.
I  I  Pulse  small  and  weak,  with  orgasm  of  blood.
''  Neck  and  Back, i  Glands  of  neck  swollen.
I  I  Pain  in  back:  at  night; <  when  lying.
I  Pain  as  if  small  of  back  would  break; <  during  rest,  >

from  motion.
I  Pain  in  small  of  back  and  sacral  region,  like  labor  pains;

urging  to  urinate  and  ineffectual  desire  for  stool.

■  Spasmodic  drawing  from  behind  forward,  into  genitals,

or  down  into  thighs ;  stitches. ^Cancer  uteri.

■  Drawing  pain  along  coccyx  to  rectum  and  vagina,  where

a  spasmodic,  contractive  pain  is  felt.
I  I  Continuous  burning  in  small  of  back.
^' Upper  Limbs, l  iPain  in  shoulders  as  if  they  had  been
uncovered  all  night.

■  Scapulae  as  if  bruised.

■  Stitches  in  arm,  from  shoulder  joint  through  to  fingers,

wliich  feel  as  if  asleep,  without  power  or  feeling.
I I  I  Pain  as  if  bruised  when  touched  inner  side  of  upper  arm.

I  I  Pain  in  elbow  joint,  as  if  tendons  were  too  short.

Slightly  elevated  red  blotches  on  1.  forearm.

I  1  Pain  in  ulnar  muscles,  extending  to  little  finger;  cramp-
like in  1.  arm; drawing,  with  lameness  in  right.

I  I  Fingers become white and insensible, especially in
morning  after  rising.

■  ■Left  thumb  pains  as  if  sprained  and  stiff.
I  I  Cracking  of  skin  of  hands.

^^  Lower  Limbs.  I  '  Bruised  pain  on  crest  of  ilium,  as  if  from
a  heavy  burden,  or  after  running;  stitches  from  same
through  abdomen ;  pain  in  same  and  in  lumbar  ver-
tebrae, in  morning,  as  if  tired.

■  Pain  in  1.  hip  joint,  as  if  luxated  ;  as  if  leg  was  too  long

when  standing.

■  Boring  pain  in  r.  hip,  alternating  with  numbness  and

loss  of  sensation  of  whole  thigh. ^Rheumatic  gout.
I  I  Tingling  or  buzzing  sensation  in  lower  limbs.

■  Pain  in  whole  leg,  as  from  an  ulcer.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  knee  joint  would  suddenly  give  way.
I  I  Alternate  swelling  of  knee  joints  and  wrists,  with  sensa-
tion of  numbness  and  rigidity  of  limbs.


507  KREOSOTUM.

I  1  Swelling  and  stiffness  of  feet;  white,  cold  swelling.
I  I  Stitches  in  r.  ankle  and  1.  heel.
I  I  Ulcerative  pain  in  soles ;  burning  itching  in  soles._
^^  Limbs  in  General. I  Alternate  swelling  of  knees  and  joints
of  hands,  with  disagreeable  sensation  of  numbness  and
stiffness  in  limbs. ^Rheumatic  gout.
iPain  in  all  limbs,  as  if  beaten,  or  as  after  a  long  walk;

lassitude  or  heaviness  with  drowsiness.
I  Stitches  in  joints.

I  I  Red,  scaly  skin  on  bends  of  knees,  like  herpes.
I  I  Skin  on  extremities  dry  and  rough.
^'Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  symptoms  of  female  or-
gans >  ;  pulsation  in  all  arteries ; pain  in  back < ;
restlessness  <  ;  chill  <  ;  seems  to  increase  pains.
During  repose :  a  sensation  as  if  all  parts  of  body  were  in

motion.
Lying  down  :  cough  <  ;  pain  in  back  <.
Lying  on  side  :  cough  <.
Lying  on  side  not  affected :  causes  pains  in  anterior  part

of  head ;  burning  pains  in  upper  face.
Can  lie  only  on  one  side :  phthisis.
Unable  to  lie  on  either  side.
Sitting:  leucorrhoea  >.
Must  sit  up  nearly  all  night:  cough.
Sitting  up :  causes  pains  in  anterior  part  of  head  ;  belching

and  hiccough.
Standing:  sensation  as  if  a  load  was  resting  on  pelvis;

leucorrhoea  <.
Rising  from  sitting  up:  contractive  pain  in  vagina  >.
Least  exertion  :  causes  great  prostration ;  faintness.
Motion:  causes  pains  in  anterior  part  of  head;  bearmg
down  and  weight  in  pelvis  <  ;  cough  <  ;  pains  in  back
>  ;  restlessness  > .
Wants  to  be  in  motion  all  the  time.
She  cannot  keep  quiet  after  getting  up  from  sleep.
Turning  over  in  bed  :  heavy  pressure  on  sternum ;  cough  <«
Turning  around  quickly :  danger  of  falling.
Lifting  arms :  pains  most  violent.
Walking:  leucorrhoea  <.

Staggering,  must  hold  on  to  something:  vertigo.
^^  Nerves. ■  General  weakness  and  prostration ;  great  debility.
I  Faintness  in  morning,  when  rising  earlier  than  usual.
I  Fatigue  from. least  exertion.
■  Weariness,  as  if  from  too  long  a  foot  journey.
I  I  Prostration,  with  sleeplessness.
I  I  Great  restlessness  and  excitation  of  whole  body,  <  in

repose  than  during  motion.
Spasms  during  dentition  ;  swelling  over  a  tooth  not  quite
through.


KREOSOTUM.  508

I  Child  moans  constantly,  or  dozes  with  half  open  eyes,  or

is  cross  and  sleepless ;  during  dentition.
I  Very  severe,  old,  neuralgic  affections,  with  tearing  pain.
I  Perfect  depression  of  trophic  nervous  system.
^^  Sleep. I  Great  drowsiness,  with  frequent  ^-awning.
Sleeplessness,  <  before  midnight.
I  I  Will  only  sleep  when  caressed  and  fondled.
I  Tosses  about  all  night,  without  any  apparent  cause.
iStarting,  when  scarcely  fallen  asleep.
I  I  Laughs  aloud  during  sleep.
I  Dreams :  of  crying ;  of  falling  from  a  height ;  of  being  out

in  a  snow  storm ;  of  being  poisoned ;  of  bright  fire ;  of

very  dirty  (clothes) wash;  that  he  is  urinating,  and

awakes  to  find  the  dream  a  reality.

■  Very  difficult  to  waken  child  out  of  sleep. ^Enuresis.

■  Generally  better  after  sleep.

^®  Time.  Morning:  vertigo;  pulsation  of  forehead  and  ver-
tex ;  hot,  acrid  tears ;  loss  of  appetite ;  frequent  sneezing;
chilliness  after  sneezing ;  hoarseness  >  ;  turning  over
in  bed  pressure  on  sternum ;  dry,  spasmodic  cough ;
cough  <;  sweat;  stitches  across  chest;  fingers  white
and  insensible;  pain  in  lumbar  vertebrae;  faintness;
sweat.

Afternoon :  fever.

Evening :  chilliness ;  vomiting ;  vagina  as  if  sore ;  cough
<  ;  stomach  swells ;  exacerbations ;  itching  drives  him
almost  wild ;  herpes  on  palms  of  hands,  in  ears,  elbows,
knuckles  and  malleoli  <.

Before  midnight :  sleeplessness  <.

Night:  screaming;  cannot  get  out  of  bed  quick  enough
to  urinate;  wets  bed; spasmodic  cough;  coughed up
much  black  blood  ; sweats ;  pain  in  back ;  tosses  about.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth:  herpes  >.

On  approach  of  warm  weather :  heavy  pressure  on  sternum.

Open  air:  vertigo;  herpes  <.
*"  Fever, i  i  Transient  chill  without  thirst.

i  I  Chill,  predominating  when  at  rest.

I  I  Shaking  chill,  with  severe  flushes  of  heat  in  face,  red
face  and  icy  cold  feet ;  after  the  chill,  thirst.

I  I  Chill :  great  bodily  restlessness ;  alternating  with  heat.

■  Coldness  of  face  and  hands.
I  Heat  mostly  in  face.


I  I  Sweat  scant  and  only  during  morning,  with  heat  and
redness  of  cheeks.

■  Putrid  fever.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodic :  headache ;  blood  spitting.
Two  or  three  hours  after  eating:  vomiting  of  food.


^^^  KREOSOTUM.

For  several  weeks:  diarrhoea.

Before  aiicr  during  menses:  humming  and  difficulty  of

hearing; headache;  buzzing  in  head.
For  six  months: suppression  of  menses.
Every  Autumn  and  Spring :  coughing  spell.
Winter : cough.

For  one  year: hemorrhage  from  teeth  and  nose.
^^y  ^^*®^'  coition :  swelling  of  penis ;  discharge  of  blood
Locality  and  Direction. Right:  suggilation  on  conjunc-
tiva of  eye ;  pressure  on  side  of  throat;  stitches  in  chest ;
lameness  in elbow  joint  and  shoulder; drawing  and
lameness  in  arm;  boring  pain  in  hip ;  stitches  in  ankle
Left: throbbing and beating in side of head; heat
burning,  swelling  and  redness  of  outer  ear;  stiffness  of
neck;  lupus  on  nose; toothache  extending  to  side  of
face ;  slightly  elevated  eruption  on  forearm ;  stitches  in
groin; stitches in chest; red blotches on forearm-
cramplike  pain  in  arm ;  pain  in  hip  joint ;  stitches  in
heel.
First  1.  then  r. :  stitches  in  chest;  pain  in  wrists.
From  behind  forwards :  drawing  into  genitals.
Stitching  downward ;  pressing  inward.
*^  Sensations. As  if  a  board  was  across  forehead  ;  as  if  brain
would  force  through  forehead;  as  if  looking  through
gauze;  as  if  something  was  floating  before  eyes;  as  if
cold  water  or ice was in epigastrium;  as if  a hard
twisted  ball  was  lying  in  umbilical  region ;  as  if  chil-
dren would  go  into  fits  during  defecation ;  burning  as  of
red  hot  coals  deep  in  pelvis;  as  if  a  load  was  resting  on
pelvis;  as  if  something  was  coming  out  of  vagina;  va-
gina as  if  sore ;  chest  as  if  beaten ;  as  if  sternum'  was
being  crushed  in ;  as  if  small  of  back  would  break ;  as
if  shoulders  had  been  uncovered  all  night;  scapulse  as
if  bruised  ;  fingers  as  if  asleep  ;  inner  side  of  upper  arm
as  if  bruised ;  as  if  tendons  of  elbow  joint  were  too  short;
1.  thumb  as  if  sprained;  as  of  a  heavy  burden  on  crest
of  ilmm ;  lumbar  vertebrae  as  if  tired ;  hip  joint  as  if
luxated;  as  if  leg  was  too long  when  standing;  pain
m  leg  as  if  from  an  ulcer;  as  if  knee  joint  would  sud-
denly give  way;  limbs  as  if  beaten,  or  as  if  after  a  long
walk;  weariness  as  if  from  too  long  a  foot  journey;  sei>
sation  in  skin  as  from  ulceration.
Pain:  in  occiput;  in  1.  side  of  neck,  shoulder  and  arm;  in
teeth  extending  to  temples  and  1.  side  of  face;  in  region
of  umbilicus; in uterus; in vagina; in chest and
sternum  ;  in  small  of  back  and  sacral  region;  in  shoul-
ders; in  arm;  in  elbow  joint ;  in  ulnar  muscles;  in  1.
thumb; in abdomen  and lumbar  vertebras; in  1.  hip
joint;  in  whole  leg;  in  all  limbs.


KREOSOTUM.  510

Violent  pain  :  elbow  joint  across  r.  shoulder.

Severe  pain :  in  head ;  in  small  of  back  and  uterine  re-
gion, extending  to  thighs;  during  coition;  in  chest.

Violent  spasms:  in  groins.

Cutting :  in  abdomen.

Tearing,  drawing,  jerking  pains:  in  head.

Piercing:  in  head.

Stitches:  in  ear;  in  region  of  liver;  in  rectum;  from
small  of  back  through  pelvis  to  external  genitals;  in
side;  in  chest;  just  over  heart;  across  chest;  in  r.
chest;  under  scapula;  in  middle  of  chest;  in  heart;
from  back  into  genitals ;  in  arm  from  shoulder  joint
through  to  fingers ;  from  crest  of  ilium  through  abdo-
men ;  in  r.  ankle  and  1.  heel ;  in  joints.

Electric-like  stitches: in  vagina.

Stitching :  in  back  and  lower  abdomen ;  in  chin  and  cheeks.

Ulcerative  pain :  in  abdomen;  during  coition,  in  cervix
uteri ;  in  soles.

Pressing,  gnawing,  ulcerative  pain :  in  stomach.

Drawing:  in  teeth,  extending  to  temples  and  inner  ear;
in  upper  abdomen ;  along  coccyx  down  to  rectum  and
vagina ;  from  behind  forward  into  genitals  or  down  into
thighs ;  in  r.  arm.

Griping :  about  navel.

Cramplike  pain:  in  rectum  ;  in  1.  arm.

Laborlike  pains:  in  abdomen.

Contractive  pain  :  in  vagina.

Colic:  in  abdomen.

Throbbing  and  beating :  in  forehead  ;  in  cheeks.

Burning  pain :  in  r.  hip.

Bruised  pain:  in  region  of  liver;  on  crest  of  ilium.

Shattering  sensation  :  in  abdomen.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  joints.

Pulsation :  in  forehead  and  vertex.

Burning  pains:  in  face;  in  small  of  back.

Sore  pain :  in  abdomen.

Burning:  of  conjunctiva;  of  outer  ear;  in  bowels;  in
pudenda ;  in  genitals ;  in  female  sexual  organs ;  in  back
and  lower  abdomen ;  of  vagina ;  of  labia ;  in  chest ;  in
small  of  back.

Soreness:  in  head;  in  chest.

Smarting :  in  eyes; in  pudenda ;  in  vagina.

Biting :  of  female  organs.

Heat :  in  face ;  in  eyes.

Constriction:  hypochondria;  rectum;  vagina;  chest.

Painful  dulness :  of  head.

Dull  pain  :  in  region  of  ovaries.

Painful  pressure :  towards  genitals.


511  KREOSOTUM.

Painful  hard  spot:  at  1.  of  stomach  ;  in  mammse.

Scratching:  in  throat.

Rough  and  scraping  sensation :  in  throat.

Dull  feeling:  in  head.

Fulness :  in  stomach ;  in  region  of  liver.

Tightness:  across  pit  of  stomach.

Contraction: in  abdomen.

Bearing  down  and  weight :  in  pelvis.

Pressure :  on  sternum ;  in  region  of  spleen.

Anxious  heaviness  and  oppression :  in  chest ;  at  heart.

Heaviness  or  pressure:  in  various  parts  of  head;  of  fore-
head; on  r.  side  of  throat.

Stiffness :  of  1.  side  of  neck,  shoulder  and  arm ;  in  limbs.

Stupid  feeling:  in  head.

Numbness: of  thigh.

Roaring:  in  head.

Buzzing :  in  head.

Tingling  and  buzzing:  in  lower  limbs.

Crawling: below  larynx.

Burning  itching :  in  soles.

Voluptuous  itching:  deep  in  vagina.

Itching :  in  eyes  ;  in  ears ;  of  female  organs ;  from  leucor-
rhoea;  in  vagina;  between  labia  and  thighs.

Painful  sensation  of  coldness :  in  abdomen.
^  Tissues. I  Hemorrhages;  small  wounds  bleed  much.

■  Profuse,  passive  hemorrhages,  epistaxis,  hsemoptysis  and

hsematuria.
I  Typhoid  hemorrhages,  with  fetid  stools,  followed  by  great

prostration.
I  Fetid  evacuations and  excoriation  of  mucous  surfaces

generally ;  skin  wrinkled ;  restless  and  sleepless  nights.

■  Profuse  and  offensive  secretions  of  mucous  membranes

and  ulcerations  of  same,  with  greatly  depressed  vitality.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  joints,  also  stitches,  most  of  hip  and

knee ;  numbness  of  whole  limb  as  if  asleep.

■  Rapid  emaciation.

■  Scrofulous  and  psoric  affections.

■  Spongy,  burning  ulcers;  pus  acrid,  ichorous,  fetid,  yellow.

■  Gangrenous,  cancerous  and  putrefying  ulcers.

■  Epithelioma;  carcinoma  ventriculi  or  uteri.

■  Carbuncle.

■  Tendency  to  decomposition;  great  irritability,  <  at  rest.

^Anthrax.
**  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  scalp  sen-
,  sitive ;  orifice  of  uterus  painful ;  fundus  of  uterus  pain-

ful like  a  blood  boil ;  cervix  scirrhus  very  painful ;  on
inner  side  of  upper  arm,  pain.
Pressure:  region  of  spleen  sensitive,  in  region  of  ovaries
unbearable;  of  hand  >  pain  in  chest  and  sternum.


KREOSOTUM.  512

Rubbing :  smarting  in  e3'es  <  ;  hot,  acrid  tears.
Tight  clothing  is  intolerable :  constriction  of  hypochondria.
*®  Skin. ■  I  Itching ;  toward  evening  so  violent  as  to  drive  one
almost  wild.

■  Wheals  like  urticaria.

I  I  Sensation  in  skin  as  from  ulceration,  especially  on  face

and  chin.
I  I  Eruption  of  nodosities  and  blisters  like  bug  bites.

■  Eruption  dry  as  well  as  moist,  in  almost  all  parts  of  body,

especially  on  backs  of  hands  and  feet,  in  palms,  in  ears,
in  popliteal  region,  and  on knuckles  of  hands,  with
much  itching.
I  Large,  greasy  looking,  pockshaped pustules,  over  whole
body;  skin  tense,  shining,  deep  red;  greasy  moisture.

■  Painless,  pustular  eruption  all  over  body,  especially  on

chin  and  cheeks;  sticking. pain.

■  Watery  or  sero-purulent  herpes,  on  back  of  hands  and

fingers  and  joints,  itching  violently  towards  evening.

■  Herpes  in  palms  of  hands,  in  ears,  elbows,  knuckles  and

malleoli,  <  evenings  and  in  open  air,  >  from  warmth.

■  Old  ulcers,  painful,  putrid.

■  Skin  remarkably  pale.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Dark  complexion,  slight,  lean.

Complexion  livid,  disposition  sad,  irritable.

Often  indicated  for  old  women.

Torpid,  leuco-phlegmatic  temperament.

Old  looking  children,  hard  to  awaken.

Child,  8et.  6  weeks,  bottle-fed;  gastromalacia.

Girl,  fet.  3  months ;  gastromalacia.

Boy,  set.  6  months,  bottle-fed;  gastromalacia.

Boy,  eet.  2J,  weak,  delicate,  irritable  and  wilful ;  suffering
nine  months;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  5,  blonde,  delicate ;  enuresis.

Child ;  daily  attacks  of  vomiting.

Girl,  £et.  8,  two  sisters  sick  with  violent  diphtheritis ;  diph-
theria.

Girl,  set.  9,  had  snuffles  when  a  baby,  teeth  wedge  shaped,
very  old  looking,  syphilitic  dyscrasia;  deafness.

Boy,  set.  10,  strong;  hemorrhage  after  extraction  of  tooth.

Girl,  set.  13,  tall  for  her  age,  fair,  blonde,  delicate;  men-
strual ailment.

Boy,  set.  18,  dark  complexioned,  slight  and  lean,  stature  ill
developed,  suffering  since  childhood;  enuresis.

Girl,  set.  18,  suffering  3  months;  consumption.

Man,  set.  18,  weak,  poor  circumstances,  suffering  since
childhood ;  incontinence  of  urine.

Girl,  set.  20;  consumption.

Woman,  set.  25,  brunette,  with  bright  red  complexion  and
not  very  mild  disposition  ;  chronic  ovarian  affection.


513  KREOSOTUM.

Woman,  set.  26,  full  blooded,  after  two  abortions,  a  birth,

then  two  more  abortions ;  affection  of  uterus.
Young  woman,  after  difficult  labor,  two  years  ago ;  attacks

of  vomiting.
Young  woman,  scrofulous ;  frequent  attacks  of  pneumonia.
Woman,  phlegmatic,  mother  of  four  children ;  puerperal

metritis.
Man,  set.  30,  tall,  good  constitution,  cheerful  disposition;

hemorrhage  from  lungs.
Woman,  set.  32,  married,  suffering  ten  years ;  leucorrhoea.
Woman,  set,  33,  small  build,  childless ;  uterine  affection.
Woman,  set.  40,  mother  of  three  children;  menorrhagia.
Woman,  set.  41 ;  rheumatism.
Tailor,  set.  46,  weak,  drunkard  ;  consumption.
Woman,  set.  50;  painful,  hard  spot  in  stomach.
^Relations. Antidoted  by:  Jcon.  (vascular  erethism);  Nux

vom.  (violent  pulsations  in  every  part  of  body).
Compatible: before  Sulphur; before  Arsen.,  in cancer;

frequently  followed  well  by  Bellad.,  Calc.  ostr.,  Kali  carb.,

Lycop.,  Nitr.  ax:.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia.
Incompatible: Carbo  veg.
Compare: Ant. tart.,  Carbo an.,  Graphit.,  Hepar,  lodum,

Ipec,  Laches.,  Mercur.,  Petrol.,  Phosphor.


VOL.  VI. — 33.


LAC  CANINUM.  514


LAC  CANINUM.

Dogs'  Milk.

The  use  of  dogs'  milk  in  medicine  is  of  ancient  date.  "  Dioscorides,  Ehasis,
Pliny  and  Sextus  recommend  it  for  the  removal  of  the  dead  foetus.  Sammonicus
and  Sextus  praise  it  in  photophobia  and  otitis.  Pliny  claims  that  it  cures  ulcera-
tion of  the  internal  os. It  was  considered  an  antidote  to  deadly  poisons."

The  remedy  was  revived  by  Reisig,  of  New  York,  who  used  it  successfully  in
the  treatment  of  diphtheria.  After  Reisig  the  remedy  was  used  by  Bayard  and
by  Swan,  to  whose  indefatigable  exertions  we  owe  the  present  status  of  this  valu-
able medicine. Swan's  potencies  were  prepared  from  Reisig's  17th.

Provings  (with  potencies  from  the  30th  upwards)  by  Laura  Morgan,  Hazlitt,
Miss  W.,  Mr.  J.  L.  H.,  H.  K.,  Mrs.  Wheelwright,  White,  Grant,  Swan,  Taylor
and  family,  and  numerous  others.  See  Swan's  Materia  Medica  of  Nosodes  and
Morbific  Products,  1888,  arranged  by  Berridge.

CuNiCAL  Authorities.— ASensatiora  oj film  before  eyes,  Swan,  Raue's  Eec.,  1875,
p.  61 ;  Sore  throat,  Fowler,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  102 ;  Biegler,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  410;
Hills,  Hah.  Mon ,  vol.  10,  p.  279 ;  Gale,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  69 ;  Diphtheritic
sore  throat,  Carr,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  204;  Baillie,  Raue's  Rec,,  1874,  p.  112;  Diph-
theria (4  cases),  Hiller,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  339;  Swan,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3,  p.  29;
Hills,  Payne,  Cin.  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  5,  pp.  83,  84 ;  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  364;  Finch,
Wildes,  Wesselhceft,  Nichols,  Cin.  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  5,  pp.  178-182;  Croupal  diph-
theria, Wesselhoeft,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  362;  Affection  of  stomach,  Hiller,  Org.,  vol.  2,
p.  238;  Syphilitic  ulceration  of  penis,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  342;  Injurious  effects  of
tveaning,  Granim,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa ,  1884  p.  47  ;  Parenchymatous  metritis,  Biegler,
MSS. ;  Sciatica  and  sore  throat.  Swan,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  411 ;  Rickets  (4  cases),
Bernard,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3,  p.  29;  Sciatica  and  rheumatism,  Hiller,  Org.,  vol.  3,
p.  338;  Aeide  rheumxttism,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  484;  Rheuraatism,  Butler,  Hom.
Phys. ;  Nervous  affection,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  217 ;  Acute  neuralgia,
Hiller,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  338.

^  Mind. ■  Very  forgetful ;  in  writing,  nses  too  many  words  or

not  the  right  ones ;  very  nervous.
lOmits  final  letter  or  letters  of  a  word,  when  writing;  in

speaking  substitutes  name  of  object  seen,  instead  of  ob-
ject thought  of.
■  Very  absentminded ; makes  purchases and  walks off

without  them ;  goes  to  post  a  letter,  brings  it  home  in

her  hand.
I  Cannot  collect  her  thoughts;  confused  feeling.
■Very  restless ;  cannot  concentrate  her  thoughts  or  mind

to  read ;  wants  to  leave  everything  as soon as it  is

commenced.


515  LAC  CANINUM.

Dis  impressed  with  idea  that  all  she  says  is  a  lie.

Every  time  a  symptom  appears  she  feels  very  confident

that  it  is  not  attributable  to  medicine,  but that  it  is

some  settled  disease.

■  Sensation  as  if  she  was  going  deranged,  when  sitting

still  and  thinking;  sometimes  she  has  most  horrible
sights  presented  to  her  mental  vision  (not  always
snakes),  feels  horribly  afraid  that  they  will  take  objective
form  and  show  themselves  to  her  natural  eye.

I  I  Thinks  she  is  looked  down  upon  by  everyone,  that  she
is  of  no  importance  in  life.

I  I  Imagines  he  wears  some  one  else's  nose. ^Diphtheria.

I  Imagines  to  be  dirty.

■  Imagines  she  sees  spiders. ^Diphtheria.

Woke  at  daylight  feeling  that  she  is  a  loathsome,  horrible
mass  of  disease  (while  the  breasts  were  affected) ;  could
not  bear  to  look  at  any  portion  of  her  body,  not  even
hands,  as  it  intensified  feeling  of  disgust  and  horror ;
could  not  bear  to  have  any  one  part  of  her  body  touch
another,  had  to  keep  even  fingers  apart;  felt  that  if  she
could  not  in  some  way  get  out  of  her  body,  she  should
soon  become  crazy.
I  I  After  inhaling  gas  for  extraction  of  teeth,  very  strange
sensation  in  head  (such  as  he  felt  when  going  off  under
gas);  sometimes  imagines  heart  or  breathing  are
going  to  stop,  or  otherwise  frightens  himself,  and  this
makes  heart  beat  violently  ;  occasionally  very  depressed,
and  fancies  he  is  going  out  of  his  mind.

Sensation  or  delusion  as  if  surrounded  by  myriads  of
snakes,  some  running  like  lightning  up  and  down  in-
side of  skin  ;  some  that  are  inside  feel  long  and  thin ;
fears  to  put  her  feet  on  floor,  lest  she  should  tread  on
them  and  make  them  squirm  and  wind  around  her
legs;  is  afraid  to  look  behind  her,  for  fear  that  she  will
see  snakes  there,  does  not  dream  of  them  and  is  seldom
troubled  with  them  after  dark  ;  on  going  to  bed  she
was  afraid  to  shut  her  eyes  for  fear  that  a  large  snake,
the  size  of  her  arm,  would  hit  her  in  the  face.

Worries  herself  lest  pimples  which  appear  during  menses
will  prove  to  be  little  snakes,  and  twine  and  twist  around
each  other.

On  lying  down  either  by  day  or  night  begins  to  think
how  horrible  it  would  be  if  a  very  sharp  pain,  like  a
knife,  should  go  through  her,  and  thought  of  it  causes
great  mental  distress.

I  I  Attacks  of  rage,  cursing  and  swearing  at  slightest  pro-

vocation.

I I  Cannot  bear  to  be  left  alone  for  an  instant.  /^Diphtheria.


LAC  CANINUM.  516

I  I  No  desire  to  live.

Sits  and  looks  under  chairs,  table,  sofa  and  everything
in  room,  expecting  yet  dreading  to  see  some  terrible
monster  creep  forth  and  feeling  all  the  time,  that,  if  it
does,  it  will  drive  her  raving  mad;  she  is  not  afraid
in  dark,  it  is  only  in  light  where  she  can  imagine  that
she  can  see  them.

I  I  Fits  of  weeping  two  or  three  times  a  day.  ^Parenchy-
matous metritis.

I  I  Child  cries  and  screams  all  the  time,  especially  at  night,
and  will  not  be  pacified  in  any  way.

I  I  When  paroxysms  of  intense  nervousness  come  on,  feels
like  tearing  off  her  clothes ;  takes  off  her  rings ;  cannot
bear  anything  to  touch  her,  especially  over  1.  ovarian
region,  from  which  she  frequently  lifts  bed  clothes.

I  Had  to  keep  her  fingers  apart  from  each  other.

■  Depression  of  spirits,  doubts  her  ability  and  success,
thinks  she  will  have  heart  disease  and  die  of  it.

iChronic  "blue  "  condition ;  everything  seems  so  dark  that
it  can  grow  no  darker.

I  I  Gloomy  feelings,  <  as  headache  gets  worse.  ^Parenchy-
matous metritis.

I  I  Fears  she  will  become  unable  to  perform  her  duties.

I  I  Fear  of  death,  with  anxious  expression  of  countenance.

I  I  Very  nervous;  constant  dread;  a  feeling  as  if  she  was
going  to  become  unconscious. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Wakes  distressed,  and  obliged  to  rise  and  occupy  herself
in  some  manner ;  fears  she  will  be  crazy.  ^Parenchy-
matous metritis.

Has  great  fear  of  falling  down  stairs  at  times.

BVery  cross  and  irritable  only  while  headache  lasts.

I  I  When  awake,  very  irritable  and  cries  constantly.

I  I  Feels  insulted  because  she  thinks  she  is  looked  down
upon  by  everyone.

I  Intense  ugliness  and  hatefulness ;  writes  to  her  best
friends  all  sorts  of  mean  and  contemptible  things.

I  I  Easily  excited. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.

I  I  Too  excited  to  allow  examination  of  throat.

I  I  Feels  weak,  and  nerves  so  thoroughly  out  of  order,  that
she  cannot  bear  one  finger  to  touch  another.  ^Nervous
throat  affection.

I  I  Exceedingly  nervous  and  irritable.  ^Parenchj^matous
metritis.

1  I  Very  easily  startled. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.
^  Sensorium. l  Dizzy  sensation  with  slight  nausea.

I  I  After  inhaling  diphtheritic  breath,  light  headed,  with
tingling  on  vertex  and  slight  sore  throat.

1  I  Constant  noise  in  head,  very  confusing;  <  at  night  and
at  menses. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.


^l''  LAC  CANINUM.

1 1  Wakes  at  night  with  sensation  as  if  bed  was  in  motion ;
noise  in  head  bad  beyond  description;  first  thought  on
waking  that  headboard  was  swaying,  and  so  occasion-
ing distress,  but  found  it  arose  from  internal  causes.
^Parenchymatous  metritis.
^  Inner  Head, l  Frontal  headache.

I  On  going  into  cold  wind,  terrible  pain  in  forehead  as  if
It  would  split  open,  >  on  going  into  warm  room.

I  I  After  midnight,  very  severe  frontal  headache,  and  a
piercmg  pain  on  vertex. /^Typhoid  pneumonia.

•  I  Headache  both  frontal  and  occipital,  <  by  turning  eye-
balls upwards.

I  I  Headache  over  eyes,  <  when  sewing. /^Pharyngitis.

■Headache:  in  afternoon,  principally  over  1.  eye;  over  1.
eye  on  first  awaking.

I  I  Pains  and  throbbing  in  temples. /^Dyspepsia.

I  I  Headaches,  mostly  through  temples,  darting,  stabbing;
sometimes  begin  on  r.  side,  and  sometimes  on  1.;  always
going  from  one  side  to  other.

B Pains  in  head  during  day,  first  on  one  side,  then  on
other;  seem  perfectly  unbearable;  >  on  first  going
into  air.

1  I  Headache  from  below  eyes  over  whole  head  and  top  of
shoulder. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.

I  I  Severe  pressure  on  brain. /^Parenchymatous  metritis.

■Arose  m  morning  with  heavy,  dull,  frontal  headache,  and
at  9  A.M.,  severe  sharp  pain  on  top  of  head,  coming  from
nape  of  neck,  then  stretching  across  head  forward;  pain
so  severe  that  he  presses  top  of  head  with  hands;  neck
stiffened;  bending  head  forward,  or  lying  down,  causes
congestion,  increasing  pain;  again,  pains  subside  for
short  time,  and  begin  anew,  either  in  front  part  of  head,
or  in  nape  of  neck,  or  all  over  head  at  once;  when  pain
is  frontal  it  causes  lachrymation. ^Acute  neuralgia.

!  I  Frequently  wakes  with  sick  headache,  which  seems  to
commence  at  nape. /^Nervous  throat  affection.

I  I  Sick  headaches,  beginning  in  nape;  pain  settling  grad-
ually in  r.  or  1.  forehead.

I  I  Darting  pains  from  occiput  to  forehead;  beating.  dFav-
enchymatous  metritis.

I  I  Headaches  seem  unbearable,  and  are  attended  by  pain
in  lumbar  region;  all  pains  cease  as  soon  as  throat  gets
worse. ^Diphtheria.

■  Headache  <  by  noise  or  talking,  >  by  keeping  quiet;
confused  feeling  in  head.
^  Outer  Head. Head  very  sore  and  itches  almost  all  the  time.

Sore  pimples  on  scalp  which  discharge  and  form  a  scab;
extremely  painful  when  touched  or  on  combing  hair.


LAC  CANINUM.  518

^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  lEyes  sensitive  to  light. ^Rheumatism.

I  I  Must  have  light,  yet  is  intolerant  of  sunlight.  (/Diph-
theria.

■Tendency  in  retina  to  retain  impression  of  objects,  espe-
cially of  colors;  or  somewhat  of  object  last  looked  at  is
projected  into  next.

"While  looking  at  an  object,  appears  to  see  just-beyond  or
out  of  axis  of  vision,  an  object  passing  across  field  of
sight;  but  on  adjusting  eye  to  see  it,  is  gone;  it  always
appears  as  a  small  object,  I  I  like  a  rat  or  bird,  sometimes
on  floor,  at  others  in  air.

I  I  Sees  faces  before  her  eyes,  <  in  dark;  the  face  that
haunts  her  most  is  one  that  she  has  really  seen.

I  I  Sees  big  eyes  and  creeping  things. ^Diphtheria.

I  iDifliculty  in  distinguishing  objects;  in  reading,  letters
run  together. ^After  diphtheria.

■  When  reading,  page  does  not  look  clear,  but  seems  cov-

ered with  various  pale  spots  of  red,  yellow,  green  and

other  colors.
I  iWhen  looking  in  a  mirror  by  gaslight,  after  exerting

eyes,  sees  a  green  spot  or  a  green  band  before  her  1.  eye,

the  band  slanting  downward  from  1.  eye  to  r.  cheek.

^Glaucoma.
I  I  Square  or  round  green  spots  or  brown  spots  before  1.

eye,  when  sun  is  bright;  sometimes  bright  spots  before

1.  eye. ^Cataract.
I  1  Frequent  sensation  of  a  film  before  eyes,  with  vertigo,

and  while  thus  suffering  would  see  a  small  dark  object,

like  a  mouse  or  bird,  coming  up  to  her  left.
I  I  Film  over  eyes  from  reading  or  looking  closely.
I  I  Eyes  blurred. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.
I  I  Heavy  pain  in  eyeballs,  with  outward  pressure.
I  I  Burning  in  1.  eye. ^Rheumatism.
I  I  Eyes  watery  and  discharging. ^Diphtheria.
I  lEyes  dull  and  lustreless. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Dark  brown  areolae  under  eyes. ^Retarded  menses.
I  iNon-oedematous  swelling  of  upper  and  lower  lids;  pink

color  of  lower  lids,  most  noticeable. on  r. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Heaviness  of  1.  upper  eyelid,  with  pain  above  1.  eye.

■  Upper  eyelids  very  heavy,  could  scarcely  keep  eyes  open,
I  I  Agglutination  of  1.  eyelids. ^Rheumatism.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. '  i  Sounds  seem  very  far  off.

Pain  in  both  ears;  noises;  as  if  ears  were  full.

I  I  Deafness  from  hereditary  syphilis.

1  I  Green  odorless  discharge.
^  Smell  and  Nose. '  '  Nose  cold. ^Diphtheria.

■  Fluids  escape  through  nose  while  drinking. ^Diphtheria.
I  lEpistaxis:  when  speaking  or  swallowing;  at  4  p.m.,  re-
turning at  intervals. ^Diphtheria.


S19  LAC  CANINUM.

■  Considerable  sneezing.

I  Head  so  stuffed  she  can  hardly  breathe.

I  Stuffed  feeling  in  head,  as  of  a  severe  cold  in  head.

I  I  One  side  of  nose  stuffed  up,  the  other  free  and  discharg-
ing thin  mucus  at  times  and  thin  blood;  these  con-
ditions alternate,  first  one  nostril  stopped  up  and  the
other  fluent,  and  vice  versa. <?Diphtheria.

■  Nasal  discharge,  excoriating  nostrils  and  upper  lip.
DiCoryza,  with  discharge  of  thick  white  mucus.

■  Fluent  catarrh  from  both  nostrils,  with  sensation  of  ful-

ness of  upper  part  of  nose.

■  Coryza;  constant  watery  discharge  from  nose,  excoriating

nostrils  and  upper  lips.

I  I  Profuse  nocturnal  nasal  discharge,  like  gonorrhoea,  stain-
ing pillow  greenish  yellow.

I  I  Nose  became  so  bad  that  there  was  fear  of  destruction
of  bones;  bloody  pus  discharged  several  times  daily;
nasal  bones  sore  on  pressure.

■  Sore  on  r.  side  of  septum  of  nose;  next  day  nose  sore,

constant  inclination  to  pick  at  it  and  get  scab  off.

I  I  Two  very  angry  gatherings,  one  under  1.  side  of  nose,  and
one  on  upper  1.  nostril;  both  came  to  a  head,  and  dis-
charged matter  and  blood,  and  afterw^ards  scabbed  over;
before  discharge  shooting  pain. ^Sick  headache.
®  Upper  Face, l  iFace  indicates  great  anxiety. /^Diphtheria.

I  I  Countenance  pale  and  careworn. /^Diphtheria.

I  I  Face  very  red,  and  then  suddenly  pale.

■  Face  flushed;  cheeks  red. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Face  flushed,  swollen  and  hot;  burns,  feels  dry.

■  Dark  brown  areolae  under  eyes. /^Retarded  menses.

I  I  In  morning,  1.  superior  maxillary  feels  sore;  most  of
tnne there  is  dull  pain,  <  by  exertion;  sometimes  throb-
bmg  pain,  burning,  throbbing,  aching  heat,  sensation  of
fulness;  cannot  wear  her  false  teeth  from  soreness  and
swelling  of  maxillary;  an  exacerbation  of  pain  leaves
face  very  sore;  pains  >  by  warm  applications,  but  only
cold  applications  >  soreness.
^  Lower  Face,  i  i  Red  ci  rcular  spot  below  r.  malar  bone,  burn-
ing to  touch.  '^Dyspepsia.
I  I  Flushes  on  1.  cheek. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Lips  dry  and  peeling  off;  dry  and  parched,  but  mouth

constantly  full  of  frothy  saliva.
I  I  Seems  to  affect  lower  lip  most,  and  blisters  and  fever

sores  on  lips  are  amenable  to  its  influence.
I  IJaw  cracks  while  eating. ^Dyspepsia.
I  I  Submaxillary  glands  swollen. /^Diphtheria.
I  I  Swelling  of  1  parotid,  with  sore  throat  and  loss  of  appetite.
I  I  Parotid  gland  first  attacked,  and  disease  extends  to  other


LAC  CANINUM.  520

glands  of  neck;  throat  and  sides  of  neck  not  tender  to

external  touch. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Swelling  of  parotid  passes  from  r.  to  1.,  but  more  often

from  1.  to  r.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. '  •  Paroxysmal  gnawing  pain  in  1.  upper

canine,  temporarily  yields  to  any  cold  application. ^Sick

headache.
I  I  Gums  swollen,  ulcerated,  retracted,  bleeding,  teeth  loose;

caused  by  defective  nutrition  and  exposure.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. ' '  Nothing  tastes  natural,  except  salt

food. ^Epulis.

■  Putrid  taste  in  mouth. ^Diphtheria.

1  I  Tongue  generally  red  and  moist. ^Diphtheria.
I  Tongue  coated  whitish,  except  edges,  which  are  red.
I  Tongue  coated,  dirty  looking,  centre  to  root.

■  Tongue  furred  whitish  at  edges,  centre  and  root  darker.
I  1  Tongue:  heavily  coated,  and  dry  to  the  tip;  dirty  coated,

yellowish  white  and  slimy ;  dry ;  thickly  coated,  grey-
ish white. /^/Diphtheria.

■  Tongue  coated  whitish  grey,  having  an  underlying  blu-

ish look.
I  I  Slight  yellow  coating  on  tongue. ^Diphtheria.

■  Tongue  coated  brown.

I  I  Difficulty  in  articulating,  owing  to  a  semi-paretic  state
of  tongue,  causing  stuttering  if  she  talks  fast;  has  to
speak  very  slowly.
^  Inner  Mouth.  l  '  Peculiar  rattle  in  mouth,  right  along
tongue;  on  attempting  to  hawk  her  mouth  clear,  mucous
rattled  along  tongue  quickly  and  continually;  utterance
was  so  indistinct  as  to  be  unintelligible,  and  every  word
she  tried  to  speak  was  accompanied  by  this  quick  and
continuous  rattle  along  tongue. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Breath  offensive,  putrid. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Mouth  dry  and  parched  ;  drinks  little  and  often.

■  Mouth  very  dry  without  thirst.

■  Mucus  in  mouth,  <  after  eating,  and  in  open  air.

■  Mouth  full  of  frothy  mucus; inclination  to  swallow.

■  Increase  in  quantity  of  saliva  which  is  slightly  viscid.

■  Mouth  constantly  full  of  frothy  saliva,  lips  dry,  parched.
I  I  Constant  spitting  and  drooling,  very  profuse,  making

chin  and  breast  sore. ^Diphtheria.

■  During  sleep,  saliva  runs  from  mouth,  so  as  to  wet  pillow.
1  I  Stomatitis;  stomacace;  cancrum  oris;  nursing  sore  mouth.

^^  Throat. '  '  Throat  very  sensitive  to  touch  externally.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  throat  was  closing  and  she  would  choke,
sensation  is  between  throat  and  nose;  feels  as  if  some-
thing in  throat  was  either  enlarged  or  relaxed  ;  desires
to  keep  mouth  open  lest  she  should  choke;  sometimes


521  LAC  CANINUM.

cannot  swallow,  because  there  seems  to  be  a  kind  of
muscular  contraction  in  throat.

I  I  Paralytic  symptoms  strongly  marked;  as  soon  as  he
went  to  sleep,  would  stop  breathing,  and  was  only  kept
alive  by  keeping  him  awake ;  apparently  respiration
was  kept  up  by  voluntary  effort. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Talking  is  very  difficult,  and  there  is  a  disposition  to
talk  through  nose. ^Nervous  throat  affection.

llSwallowing  very  difficult,  painful,  almost  impossible.

I  I  Uvula  elongated  and  very  much  swollen,  diphtheritic
coating  on  it;  tonsils  swollen  and  coated ;  back  of  throat
patched,  extending  up  to  hard  palate;  odor  offensive
and  diphtheritic.

■  Constant  inclination  to  swallow,  causes  pain  extending

to  both  ears.

■  Pricking  sensation  in  throat,  as  if  full  of  sticks.

I  I  Pricking  and  cutting  pains  through  tonsils  on  swallow-
ing, shooting  up  to  ears. ^Diphtheria.

I  Pain  in  throat  pushes  toward  1.  ear.

I  I  On  swallowing,  acute  pain  at  one  time  on  r.  side  of
throat,  and  again  on  1.  side. ^Diphtlieria.

I  I  Throat  >  after  drinking  cold  or  warm;  <  by  empty
swallowing. ^Diphtheria.

1  I  Throat  feels  stiff  as  a  board. ^Diphtheria.

t  I  Throat  sensitive. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.

■Tickling  and  sense  of  constriction  in  upper  part  of  throat,
causing  constant  dry,  hacking  cough.

■  Feeling  of  lump  in  throat,  which  goes  down  when  swal-

lowing, but  returns ;  throat  <  on  r.  side.

I  I  Sensation  of  ball  or  round  body  in  1.  side  of  throat,  and
feeling  that  it  could  be  removed  with  a  knife.

I  I  Marked  sensation  of  lump  in  throat  on  1.  side,  when
swallowing ;  pain  extends  to  ear. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Sensation  of  lump  in  r.  side  of  throat,  with  a  feeling
that  she  could  take  hold  of  it  with  her  fingers  and  pull
it  out;  accompanied  by  a  very  annoying  pricking,  stitch-
ing feeling;  constant  inclination  to  swallow  saliva,  which
causes  soreness  of  throat.

I  I  Lump  on  1.  side  of  pharynx  below  tonsil,  causing  an

enlargement  that  filled  each  arch  of  palate,  nearly  to  r.
side.

I I  Most  pain  when  swallowing  solids,  no  aversion  to  cold
drink;  when  swallowing  solid  food,  it  seems  to  pass  over
a  lump,  with  sore  and  aching  pains  extending  to  and
into  1.  ear. ^Diphtheria.

■Soreness  of  throat  commences  wath  a  tickling.

■  Throat  feels  raw.

I  I  Sensation  of  rawness,  commencing  usuall}^  on  1.  side  of
throat. ^Diphtheria.


LAC  CANINUM.  522

I  Throat  feels  dry,  Imsky,  as  if  scalded  by  hot  fluid.

I  I  Throat  has  a  burnt  and  drawn  feeling  as  from,  caustic.

I  Pain  in  r.  side  of  throat  in  region  of  tonsil.  ^Acute
rheumatism.

I  I  Wakes  with  throat  and  mouth  painfully  dry.  ^Paren-
chymatous metritis.

I  I  Throat  very  dry  and  sore,  much  inflamed,  <  r.  side;
palate  red,  uvula  elongated  ;  very  painful  deglutition.

I  I  Throat  sore,  oedematous,  puffed,  tonsils  badly  swollen.

■  Especially  shining,  glazed  and  red  appearance  of  throat.

^Syphilis.

I  I  Sore  throat,  pains  in  whole  body  and  limbs,  severe  head-
ache. ^Diphtheria.

I  Throat  very  sore  on  1.  side;  painful  to  external  pressure
both  sides.

I  I  Sore  throat  on  r.  side,  low  down,  and  extending  up  to
ear;  pain  when  swallowing;  sensitive  to  external  press-
ure ;  slight  coryza.

I  1  Throat  sore,  swollen,  red  and  glistening. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Sore  spot  in  1.  side  of  throat,  only  at  night,  removed  by
1  A.M.;  next  night  same  on  r.  side  of  throat;  after  1  a.m.
returned  no  more.

iCrusts  on  skin,  with  greyish  yellow  matter  under  them;
mucous  follicles  of  throat  raised  and  swollen,  and  cov-
ered with  whitish,  cream  colored  mucus;  bloody  pus  dis-
charged from  nose  several  times  a  day;  nasal  bones  sore
to  pressure. <?Sore  throat.

■  Partial  suppression  of  urine;  throat  sore  and  of  an  oedema-

tous, puffy  appearance;  next  morning,  pulse  130;  tem-
perature 102;  tonsils  badly  swollen;  great  indisposition
to  take  food  or  drink. ^Sore  throat.

I  iSoreness  of  throat  commences  with  a  tickling  sensation,
which  causes  constant  cough ;  then  a  sensation  of  a  lump
on  one  side,  causing  constant  deglutition ;  this  condition
entirely  ceases,  only  to  commence  on  the  opposite  side,
and  often  alternates,  again  returning  to  its  first  condi-
tion ;  these  sore  throats  are  very  apt  to  begin  and  end
with  menses.

I  I  Sore  throat  just  before  menses  for  several  years  ever
since  diphtheria;  small  yellowish  white  patches  of  exu-
dation on  tonsil  of  affected  side,  with  great  difficulty  of
swallowing,  and  sharp  pains  moving  up  into  ear;  these
patches  are  also  present  on  back  of  throat  and  uvula;
some  are  quite  yellow  and  some  are  white;  scraping
them  off  makes  them  bleed.

I  Throat  very  sore,  pain  extending  to  chest;  dry  and  sore;
deep  red  color  on  either  side  of  throat  opposite  tonsils.

■  Shortly  before  going  to  bed,  throat  began  to  feel  raw  and


523  LAC  CANINUM.

sore;  did  not  sleep  well;  next  morning,  throat  felt  full
and  sore,  somewhat  <  on  r.  side;  this  condition  con-
tinued two  days,  when  it  seemed  to  continue  downward
to  chest.

lOn  waking  in  morning,  throat  felt  as  if  there  were  lumps
in  it  like  two  eggs,  and  sore  all  the  time,  especially  when
swallowing;  cold  water  seemed  to  >  momentarily;  in
evening,  examination  revealed  both  tonsils  much  swol-
len and  very  red,  1.  most,  and  distinct  patches  on  1.  tonsil.

I  Right  tonsil  red  and  swollen;  pain  in  tonsil  of  gnawing
character;  <  at  night;  dreams  of  snake  in  bed.

llTonsils  inflamed  and  very  sore,  red  and  shining,  almost
closing  throat;  dryness  of  fauces  and  throat;  swelling
of  submaxillary  glands. ^Tonsillitis.

I  Quinsy,  just  ready  to  discharge,  disappeared  without  dis-
charging, in  an  unusually  short  time;  the  trouble  had
been  changing  from  one  side  to  other  and  back  again ;
has  not  returned.

iSore  throat,  rapidly  growing  <;  fever;  difficult  swallow-
ing; r.  side  <;  r.  tonsil  intensely  inflamed,  bright  red
and  greatly  enlarged,  and  a  yellowish  grey  spot  on  inner
surface;  whole  pharynx,  uvula  and  velum  much  in-
flamed; spot  became  larger,  and  others  formed  in  phar-
ynx; 1.  tonsil  became  nearly  as  large  as  r.;  fetid  breath;
subsequently  a  bright  scarlet  eruption  on  face,  neck,
hands  and  chest,  like  scarlatina;  almost  total  inability
to  swallow,  especially  fluids;  aversion  to  liquids,  par-
ticularly water.

I  I  Quinsy;  suppuration  ran  from  1.  tonsil  to  r.,  then  from
r.  to  1.,  then  back  again  to  r.,  then  both  tonsils  equally;
and  again  one  tonsil  would  >  and  the  other  grow
<;  whole  posterior  portion  of  throat  was  an  oedema-
tous  swelling,  rising  up  like  an  insurmountable  barrier;
thick  tough  pieces  of  diphtheritic  membrane  were  com-
ing away,  and  new  membranes  constantly  reforming;
swelling  in  throat  so  large  and  tense  that  mouth  could
not  be  closed.

I  I  Mucous  follicles  raised  or  swollen,  and  covered  with  a
whitish,  cream  colored  mucus.

I  I  Whole  membrane  of  throat  swollen,  dark  red,  with  grey
patches  and  small,  irregular  shaped  ulcers;  membrane
peeled  off  occasionally;  articulation  and  deglutition
intensely  painful;  <  after  sleep.

M  White  ulcers  on  tonsils.

■Sore  throat,  beginning  at  1.  tonsil,  swollen  and  ulcerated;
throat  feels  swollen  and  raw,  pricking  and  cutting  pains
shoot  through  tonsils  when  swallowing;  submaxillary
glands  swollen,  sore  and  aching  pain  in  1.  ear;  most


LAC  CANINUM.  524

pain  when  swallowing  solids;  food  seems  to  pass  over
a  lump,  no  aversion  to  cold  drink;  while  drinking,  fluid
escaped  through  nose.

I  I  Sore  throat  commencing  on  1.  tonsil,  which  was  swollen

and  ulcerated,  and  presented  a  depression  covered  by  a
white  patch;  the  disease  later  extended  to  palate  and  r.
tonsil,  the  parts  red  and  shining.

II  Throat  highly  inflamed,  swollen,  almost  closed,  grey
diphtheric  spots  on  1.  side  of  throat.

I  I  Sore  throat,  ulcer  on  inner  side  of  each  tonsil,  tonsils
red  and  slightly  enlarged,  rest  of  throat  dry.  ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Ulcers  increase  in  size  and  number,  but  neighboring
membrane  looks  clearer. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Small,  round  or  irregular,  grey  white  ulcers  on  tonsils
and  fauces,  both  sides. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Tonsils  swollen  as  almost  to  close  throat. ^Quinsy.

I  I  Right  tonsil  covered  with  ash  grey  membrane  extend-
ing along  free  palatine  border  to  uvula,  which  it  had
already  involved;  room  loaded  with  diphtheritic  odor;
next  day  membrane  had  passed  centre,  involving  whole
arch  of  palate,  and  reaching  far  down  on  1.  tonsil.

I  I  Right  tonsil  raw,  swollen  ;  grey  white  membrane  there
and  on  fauces. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Whole  of  r.  tonsil  covered  with  diphtheritic  patch.

I  I  Both  tonsils  swollen  and  covered  with  spots  of  exuda-
tion, like  the  mould  on  preserves.

I  i  Tongue,  fauces,  tonsils,  all  swollen  and  covered  with  a
dirty  coating. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  On  each  tonsil  a  very  thick  exudation,  covering  nearly
entire  surface;  while  examining  a  large  piece  of  mem-
brane was  accidentally  detached  from  one  tonsil,  fol-
lowed by  considerable  hemorrhage.

I  I  Throat  very  sore,  tonsils  enlarged,  especially  1.,  very
large  white  patches;  tonsils  and  pharynx  deep  purple
red;  putrid  odor  from  throat;  after  patches  were  ex-
pectorated, they  left  throat  very  sore,  raw  and  bloody.

I  I  Throat  very  sore,  <  1.  side ;  large  greenish  ulcers  on
both  tonsils,  surrounded  by  grey  white  exudation,  parts
not  covered  are  a  deep  purple  red;  swelling  externally
on  both  sides ;  after  exudation  on  tonsils  disappeared,  a
raw,  bloody  surface  was  left. ^Diphtheria.

I  1  White  patches,  like  eggs  of  flies,  on  both  tonsils,  extend-
ing thence  to  back  of  throat ;  tonsils  enlarged  and  deep
red ;  felt  she  would  suffocate  at  night  from  full  feeling
in  throat,  which  prevented  sleep  ;  swallowing  toast  gave
some  pain,  but  seemed  to  clear  throat ;  drinking  caused
more  pain  in  throat,  and  she  had  to  gulp  it  down.

I  I  Gargling  with  warm  water  brought  up  a  stringy  mucus.


525  L^C  CANINUM.

I  I  Whole  membrane  of  throat  highly  inflamed,  swollen,
and  glands  enlarged  on  both  sides. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  False  membrane  in  throat,  thick,  grey,  or  slightly  yel-
low, or  dark  and  almost  black,  or  white  and  glistening,
almost  like  mother  of  pearl,  or  fish  scales.

I  I  Dark  red,  angry  streaks  of  capillaries  in  fauces,  giving

place  to  shining,  glistening  deposit,  or  tough  membrane ;
half  arches  filled  with  sticky,  fetid  saliva.

I ! Diphtheritic  membrane  white  like  china;  mucous  mem-
brane of  throat  glistening  as  if  varnished;  membranes
leave  one  side  and  go  to  other  repeatedly ;  desire  for
warm  drinks,  which  may  return  through  nose ;  post-
diphtheritic paralysis.

B Glossy,  shining  appearance ;  disposition  on  part  of  mem-
brane to  change  its  position  in  fauces.  ^Croupous  diph-
theria.

I I  Ulcers  on  throat  shine  like  silver  gloss,  symptoms  went
from  side  to  side ;  croupy  symptoms  not  well  marked ;
after  exudation  was  cleared  off,  a  deep  excavation  was
left. ^Diphtheria.

I  1  Diphtheritic  deposits  look  as  if  varnished;  exudations
migratory,  now  here,  now  there. ^Diphtheritic  croup.

1  I  Thick  membranous  mass  lying  on  soft  palate,  1.  side ;
diphtheritic  masses  covering  uvula  and  posterior  wall
of  throat;  next  day,  membrane  on  soft  palate  thicker,
dirty  brown  on  uvula  and  posterior  walls  and  pillars  of
throat,  much  more  extensive  and  off'ensive;  very  diffi-
cult deglutition;  a  large  membranous  mass,  which
threatened  suffocation,  having  been  removed  by  forceps;
on  following  morning  a  second  membrane  had  taken
place  of  first,  and  walls  of  throat  were  covered  with  a
dirty  grey  exudation ;  uvula  almost  black,  and  coarse
shreds  of  membrane  hanging  from  it.

I  In  morning throat  very sore; r.  tonsil  covered with

ulcers  and  patches,  which  extended  over  palate  and
covered  1.  tonsil ;  next  day  membrane  extended  across
posterior  wall  of  pharynx;  uvula  elongated,  accom-
panied by  chilliness,  high  fever,  pains  in  head,  back
and  limbs,  great  restlessness  and  extreme  prostration.

II  Throat  sore,  but  little  swelling,  tonsils  very  slightly
enlarged  ;  soreness  of  throat,  first  chiefly  r.,  then  1.;  well
marked  diphtheritic  membrane  on  both  sides  of  throat
situated  on  an  inflamed  red  base,  |  inch  long,  ^  inch
wide,  J  inch  thick,  and  the  same  length  and  width  as
at  the  base  ;  anterior  edge  a  dirty  yellow  ;  centre  more
organized,  pearly,  glistening,  white  Kke  cartilage;  mem-
brane on  r.  side  seems  more  firm  and  dense,  and  disap-
peared later.


LAC  CANINUM;  526

■  Severe  chills,  headache,  pain  in  back  and  limbs,  restless-

ness and  sore  throat ;  three  days  later  r.  tonsil  covered
with  ashy  grey  membrane,  extending  along  free  palatine
border  to  uvula,  which  it  had  already  involved;  peculiar
diphtheritic  odor  in  room  ;  pulse  small ;  skin  clammy  ;
rapid  vital  exhaustion ;  next  day  membrane  involved
whole  arch  of  palate  and  passed  down  to  1.  tonsil.  ^Diph-
theria (after  failure  of  PhytoL  and  Lycop.).

iRoof  of  mouth  and  back  wall  of  pharynx  coated  with
a  greyish  yellow  deposit,  greater  part  of  which  soon
disappeared,  lasting  only  about  an  hour;  throat  very
much  >  by  noon,  deposit  had  nearly  disappeared,  but  <
again  by  night.

I  I  Throat  covered  with  diphtheritic  membrane;  uvula
elongated,  swollen  and  covered  with  black  and  white  or
grey  diphtheritic  deposit ;  back  of  throat,  extending  to
hard  palate,  all  covered;  breath  very  ofiensive;  1.  side
of  neck  swollen  and  almost  even  with  jaw ;  great  diffi-
culty in  swallowing;  after  throat  began  to  improve,  dis-
ease seemed  to  work  through  whole  alimentary  canal,
for  uvula  and  parts  were  very  much  swollen,  and  every
little  while  there  would  be  involuntary  discharges  of
diphtheritic  matter  from  uvula  and  rectum.

■  Patch  of  diphtheritic  membrane  appeared  first  on  r.  ton-

sil, then  on  1.,  and  frequently  alternated  sides;  swelling
of  neck  (submaxillary  and  lymphatic  glands)  also  alter-
nated in  like  manner  ;  <  during  and  after  a  cold  storm
from  northeast;  tickling  in  throat  when  drinking;  one
side  of  nose  stuffed  up,  the  other  free  and  discharging
thin  mucus  at  times  and  thin  blood ;  this  condition  of
nose  also  alternated ;  non-oedematous  swelling  of  eye-
lids, pink  color  of  under  lid,  particularly  of  r.  eye;
breathing  hoarse  and  croupy,  at  times  entire  stoppage
of  breath ;  often  snoring,  and  only  possible  through
mouth ;  obstinate  constipation,  frequent  desire,  with
darting  pains  in  rectum,  no  power  to  expel ;  stool
large  in  size,  whitish,  rough,  scaly,  hard;  could  not  bear
to  be  left  alone  an  instant ;  saw  big  eyes  and  creeping
things;  must  have  light,  yet  is  intolerant  to  light  of
sun  ;  urine  scanty,  infrequent,  no  desire,  coffee  colored ;
80  per  cent,  of  albumen  and  much  mucus ;  quantity
less  than  a  gill  in  twenty-four  hours. ^Diphtheria.

■  Fever;  bathed  in  warm  perspiration,  especially  about  face,

neck  and  hands;  anxious  expression;  eyes  watery  and
discharging;  wants  to  sit  up  in  mother's  arms;  cries
and  desists  at  every  attempt  to  nurse  ;  reaches  for  w^ater,
3'et  refuses  to  take  it;  respiration  hoarse;  crying  whis-
pered and  broken,  often  no  sound  at  all ;  pulse  170 ;


527  LAC  CANINUM.

tongue,  fauces  and  tonsils  swollen  and  covered  with
dirty  coating ;  drooling  from  mouth ;  throat  tender  to
touch  externally ;  thick,  dirty  grey  diphtheritic  mem-
brane, covering  free  border  of  epiglottis,  and  extending
off  to  each  side ;  child  refuses  to  swallow  and  sputters
out  the  medicine,  some  returning  through  nose.  ^Diph-
theria.

■  Soreness  of  throat,  accompanied  by  intense  heat;  pulse

scarcely  to  be  counted;  prostration  so  complete  that
patient  refused  even  to  make  an  effort  to  take  medicine;
temperature  102.6°;  great  sensitiveness  of  throat  exter-
nally; symptoms  <  after  sleep;  very  thick  exudate,
covering  nearly  entire  surface  of  each  tonsil,  which,  if
forcibly  removed,  is  followed  by  considerable  hemor-
rhage. ^/Diphtheria  (after  failure  of  Laches.).

■  Throat  highly  inflamed,  swollen,  almost closed; grey,

diphtheritic  patches  on  1.  side  of  throat;  difficult  breath-
ing, at  times  suffocative  spells;  pulse  140;  face  flushed,
swollen  and  hot;  tongue  dry  and  thickly  coated,  grey-
ish white. ^Diphtheria.

■  On  third  day  r.  tonsil  swollen  and  on  it  a  small  diphthe-

ritic patch,  rest  of  throat  inflamed ;  on  fourth  day  both
tonsils  swollen  and  covered  with  diphtheritic  patches,
with  difficult  deglutition;  high  fever,  restlessness,  cried
out  and  talked  in  sleep;  complained  of  pains  in  head,
back  and  limbs;  bright  scarlet  redness  on  chest  and
around  neck,  which,  on  fifth  day,  extended  all  over
body  and  legs;  disease  now  at  highest  point;  skin,  in
large  patches,  assumed  a  dark  red  color  bordering  on
purple ;  whole  body  swollen ;  membrane,  swelling  and
soreness  <  on  r.  side;  deglutition  impossible;  refusing
to  drink  while  complaining  of  intense  thirst;  character-
istic fetor  in  room;  soreness  on  r.  side  decreased  and
commenced  on  1.;  1.  tonsil  and  posterior  wall  of  phar-
ynx covered  with  membrane;  posterior  nares  invaded;
marked  sensation  of  lump  in  throat  on  1.  side,  when
swallowing,  with  pain  extending  to  1.  ear;  tongue  coated
dirty,  yellow  white  and  slimy;  absence  of  prostration;
improvement  commenced  on  seventh  day  and  remedy
was  discontinued. ^Diphtheria.

■  Pains  in  limbs,  small  of  back  and  head  disappear,  and

throat  becomes  more  painful,  but  looks  better;  often
ulcers  increase  in  size  and  number,  but  neighboring
membrane  looks  clearer;  <  by  empty  deglutition;
throat  feels  stiff;  >  after  drinking,  warm  or  cold,  no
thirst,  but  dry  mouth;  pain  pushes  toward  1.  ear;  r.
tonsil  raw,  swollen,  grey  white  membrane  there  and  on
fauces;  epistaxis  when  speaking  or  swallowing,  in  one


LAC  CANINUM.  528

case;  sweat  all  over;  great  exhaustion  with  poisoned
feeling;  frequent  micturition,  urine  dark;  restless,  legs
and  whole  body;  face  burns  dry;  constant  spitting,
drooling;  ulcers  small,  round  or  irregular,  grey  white;
voice  hoarse,  interrupted  by  weakness  and  hoarseness.
^Diphtheria.

I  I  Throat  filled  with  substance  that  looked  like  "smear
kase;"  throat,  tongue,  roof  of  mouth,  gums  and  cheeks
completely  lined  with  this  substance ;  mouth  and  throat
filled  with  loose  particles;  horrible  odor.  ^Post-scarla-
tinal diphtheria.

■  Heaviness,  and  stomach  bloated  and  tender;  enlarge-
ment of  tonsils,  1.  tonsil  <  ;  feels  weak ;  cannot  eat  or
drink  anything  without  pain  in  pit  of  stomach;  short-
ness of  breath  and  general  languor. ^After  diphtheria.

I  I  Membrane  would  leave  throat,  and  a  very  severe  inter-
stitial hemorrhage  of  bright  red  blood  would  ensue;
hemorrhage  would  slowly  improve,  and  membrane  ap-
pear again  in  throat ;  these  had  continued  to  alternate
for  several  days. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  False  membrane,  thick  grey,  yellow  or  dark,  surround-
ing mucous  membrane  dark  or  bright,  may  be  <  on
either  side,  or  inflammation  shift  from  side  to  side,  gen-
erally <  on  1.

I  I  False  membrane,  thick,  yellowish  grey,  often  greenish.

I  I  Pharyngeal  inflammation,  with  wholesale  destruction
of  epithelium,  viscidity  of  saliva,  heat  of  palms;  absolute
necessity  for  constant  change  of  position.

I  I  Thick,  dirty  grey  diphtheritic  membrane  covering  free
border  of  epiglottis,  and  extending  off"  to  each  side.

I  I  Uvula  pretty  free  from  membrane,  but  intensely  sore
and  bleeds ^Diphtheria.

■Uvula  coated  (in  seven  cases).

I  1  After  membrane  exfoliates,  mucous  membrane  appears
raw  and  bloody,  with  increased  deglutition.

I  I  In  most  cases  of  diphtheria,  the  throat  symptoms  begin
on  r.  side.

I  I  Inflammation,  ulcers  and  swelling  shift  from  side  to  side,
generally  <  on  1. ^Diphtheria.

IS  Diphtheria  and  diphtheritic  croap;  membranous  croup.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  iNo  appetite.
^Dyspepsia. ^Acute  rheumatism. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Appetite  and  strength  failing ;  dislike  to  food,  especially
fat  or  greasy. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.

No  appetite  or  thirst. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Thirst  for  little  at  a  time,  but  often,  as  throat  is  so  dry
and  hot. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Thirst. ^Acute  rheumatism.


529  LAC  CANINUM.

I  I  Great  thirst  for  large  quantities,  often.

■  Desire  for  highly  seasoned  dishes,  which  is  very  unusual;

has  used  pepper,  mustard  and  salt  freely.
I  i  Desire  for  warmish  water  with  a  pinch  of  salt  in.
I  I  Craves  milk  and  drinks  much  of  it. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Aversion  to  liquids,  especially  water. ^Diphtheria.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, n  Great

faintness  of  stomacli  and  nausea. (^Metritis.
I  Nausea,  with  headache,  on  waking;  all  morning.
I  I  Nausea  at  beginning  of  diphtheria.
I  I  The  almost  constant  diphtheritic  discharges  from  mouth

and  nose  nearly  ceased,  and  she  almost  immediately  had

spells  of  sickness  of  stomach,  and would  occasionally

vomit  pieces  of  membrane. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Frequent  attacks  of  severe  vomiting,  and  when  not  so,

always  feeling  of  nausea,  and  fear  to  eat.  ^Sick  headache.
^^  Scrobicuium  and  Stomach. iWeak,  sinking  feeling  in

stomach  pit,  on  waking  in  morning.
I  I  Gnawing,  hungry  feeling,  not  >  by  eating;  everything

she  eats,  except  fish,  makes  her  worse ;  the  thought  of

milk  makes  her  sick. ^Sick  headache.

■  Dyspeptic  pain,  as  from  a  stone,  or  undigested  food,  in

stomach  pit  at  9.45  pm.;  followed  by  a  stabbing  pain
in  r.  lung,  just  below  nipple.

I  Burning  in  epigastric  region  ;  feeling  of  weight  and  press-
ure of  stone  in  stomach  ;  very  thirsty;  abdomen  swollen
and  burning,  with  bearing  down  pains  therein ;  mu-
cous, yellow,  liquid  stools;  pulse  lOU;  pains  and  throb-
bing in  temples;  flushes  on  1.  cheek;  red,  circular  spot
below  r.  malar  bone,  burning  to  touch;  no  appetite,
cannot  bear  food ;  jaw  cracks  while  eating,  t' Affection
of  stomach.

I  I  Stomach  tender  and  bloated ;  cannot  eat  or  drink  any-
thing without  pain  in  stomach  pit. ^After  diphtheria.

I  I  Beating  in  stomach  and  bowels.

I  I  Severe  throbbing  in  region  of  solar  plexus;  when  it  be-
comes very  severe,  which  it  did  daily  for  hours  at  a
time,  it  would  seem  to  extend  or  continue  upwards  to
head,  when  dizziness  and  lightness  of  head  would  super-
vene, requiring  her  to  lie  down  at  once,  otherwise  she
would  falL  violently  to  the  floor.

I  I  Gastralgia  or  cardialgia,  <  at  menses,  so  she  would  drop
to  the  floor,  comes  and  goes  suddenly.
'^  Hypochondria,  i  i  Severe  burning  pain  in  r.  hypochondriac
and  iliac  region  and  corresponding  part  of  back,  extend-
ing across  back  to  1.  side  of  abdomen ;  <  when  on  feet
or  when  fatigued,  >  when  lying  down.
"  Abdomen, i  Abdomen  very  hard  and  swollen,  in  evening.

VOL.  VI. — 34.


LAC  CANINUM.  530

1 1  Abdomen swollen  and burning,  with bearing  down

pains  therein.
I  1  Extreme  heat  in  abdomen.
I  Severe  shooting  pain  in  abdomen,  passing  in  all  directions.

■  Pressure  from  within  outwards,  as  if  contents  of  abdomen

would  be  forced  outwards,  just  above  pelvis,
I  I  Intense  sharp  pain in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  with  nausea

while  leaning  forward.
I  I  Pain  and  burning  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  and  pelvis,  with

weight  and  dragging  on  that  side;  clothes  feel  heavy.
iPain  in  pelvis,  principally  in  r.  ovarian  region.

■  Headache  over  1.  eye  on  first  waking,  and  great  pain  in

pelvis,  most  marked  at  r.  ovary.
I  Pains  in  abdomen  intermittent.

I  I  Pain  in  abdomen,  <  leaning  forward;  >  leaning  back,
I  I  Smarting  in  r.  groin ;  pains  seem  to  be  in  pelvic  bones,

uterus  and  limbs ^Parenchymatous  metritis.
iVery  acute  pain  in  1.  groin,  extending  up  1.  side  to  crest

of  ilium,  >  by  stool;  sometimes  pain  is  in  track  of  colon.
I  I  Feeling  of  tension  in  1.  groin,  do  not  want  to  walk  or

stand  as  it  increases  sensation,  >  by  flexing  leg  on  ab-
domen.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum, l  i  Mucous  yellow  liquid  stools.
I  Constipation. ^  A  cute  rheumatism.
I  [Obstinate constipation; frequent  desire  with darting

pains  in  rectum,  no  power  to  expel ;  stool  large,  whitish,

rough,  scaly,  hard. ^Diphtheria.
^'  Urinary  Organs. iConstant  desire  to  urinate,  urine  scanty,

■  Constant  desire  to  urinate,  passing  large  quantities  fre-

quently ;  at  night  she  dreams  of  urinating,  and  wakes
to  find  an  immediate  necessity.
I  I  Constant  desire  to  urinate,  with  intense  pain. ^Urethral
chancre.

■  Constant  inclination  to  urinate,  which  was  restrained  as

urination  caused  intense  pain  when  coming  in  contact
with  vulva,

■  Urine  unusually  frequent  and  dark,

'  1  Urine  frequent :  especially  at  night ;  scanty,  high  col-
ored ;  red  sediment.

I  I  Urine  very  scanty  and  dark. ^Acute  rheumatism.

■Urine  dark,  heavily  loaded  with  thick  reddish  sediment
that  adhered  in  different  colored  circles  to  bottom  and
sides  of  vessel.

I  1  Great  difficulty  in  urinating. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Urinating  only  once  in  twenty-four  hours,  and  then
copiously,  but  with  some  difficulty  and  slight  irritation.
^Diphtheria,

I  I  Urine  scanty, infrequent,  coffee  colored,  no  desire to


531  LAC  CANINUM.

urinate,  quantity  less  than  a  gill  in  twenty-four  hours-
eighty  per  cent,  albumen,  with  much  mucus.

I  I  No  urine  for  forty-seven  and  three-quarter  hours,  blad,
der  pretty  full,  parts  fearfully  swollen,  and  irritation  on
urination  very  great. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Urine  partially  suppressed.  ^Tonsillitis.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs,  l  l  Large  chancre  on  dorsum  of  penis,
with  a  fungoid  bacteric  mass  covering  whole  of  corona
glandis,  which  was  first  of  a  glossy,  shining,  white  ap-
pearance, and  later  covered  with  a  fungus,  looking  like
fully  developed  aphthse;  edges  of  swollen  prepuce  cov-
ered with  nodosities  and  itching.

■  Penis  enormously  swollen,  and  a  chancre  on  glans  like

a  cauliflower  excrescence,  over  half  an  inch  in  diameter;
it  was  red,  smooth  and  glistening;  no  pain;  in  a  week
there  appeared  two  more  small  chancres,  deep,  sharp
edges,  clean,  and  with  same  shining  appearance.
^Syphilis.

I  I  Small  sore  at  entrance  of  urethra;  kept  getting  <;  pre-
puce involved  for  about  half  inch,  and  parts  of  glans
around  urethra  an  open  ulcer,  exhaling  most  fetid  smell,
and  with  most  excruciating  pain ;  hemorrhage  at  10  p.m.
every  evening,  and  during  day  when  removing  dress-
ings; ^constant  desire  to  urinate,  with  intense  pain;  no
sleep  'for  a  fortnight,  red,  glistening  appearance.

■Prepuce  involved  for  about  an  eighth  of  an  inch,  and
parts  of  glans  penis  around  urethra  an  open  ulcer  exhal-
ing most  fetid  smell ;  pain  excruciating ;  hemorrhages
at  ten  every  evening  and  during  day  when  removing
dressing;  desire  to  urinate  constant,  and  accompanied
by  intense  pain;  had  not  slept  for  a  fortnight ;  red,  glis-
tening appearance  of  ulcer.  ^Syphilitic  ulceration  of
penis.

■  Chancre  on  prepuce  1.  side  of  frsenum,  granulating  rapidly

from  centre  to  circumference.

I  I  Buboes  and  chancres.

I  I  When  gonorrhoea  is  >,  catarrh  sets  in

I  iGonorrhoeal  pains,  intermittent,  in  front,  middle  or  pos-
terior part  of  urethra.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Heat  in  ovarian  and  uterine
region  (with  menses);  inflammatory  and  congestive  con-
dition of  ovaries  before  menses,  especially  of  r.  ovar}-,
with  extreme  soreness  and  sensitiveness,  which  makes
every  motion  and  position,  even  breath,  painful.

I  I  Pain  in  abdomen  principally  in  r.  ovarian  region.

I  I  Sharp  pain  in  r.  ovary.

■  In  afternoon,  sharp  pains  in  r.  ovarian  region,  not  con-

stant but  intermittent.


LAC  CANINUM.  532

■Severe  pain  in  r.  ovarian  region,  >  by  flow  of  bright  red
blood.

■  Pain  in  1.  ovarian  region;  across  lower  part  of  abdomen.

I  I  Constant  burning  pain  in  1.  ovarian  region,  extending
from  1.  leg  even  to  foot. ^Ovaralgia.

I  I  Sharp  pains  beginning  in  1.  ovary,  and  darting  like
lightning  either  towards  r.  ovarian  region,  or  else  up  1.
side  and  down  arm,  or  sometimes  down  both  thighs;
but  most  generally  down  1.  leg  to  foot,  which  is  numb ;
pains  act  something  like  labor  pains,  and  are  accom-
panied by  great  restlessness  of  legs  and  arms,  and  great
aching  in  lumbar  region ;  on  fifth  day  after  premature
labor.

Ilnflammatory  and  congested  condition  of  uterus,  with
extreme  soreness  and  tenderness,  that  made  every  mo-
tion, position,  and  even  breath,  painful.

I  I  Parenchymatous  metritis  (two  cases),  in  one,  uterus  three

times  as  large  as  natural,  round  as  a  ball,  and  body
very  hard,  cervix  obliterated  by  altered  form  of  body ;
uterus  sensitive.

I I  Much  pain  before  and  after  menses,  severe  headache  and
entire  prostration  for  first  day  or  so. ^Metritis.

I  I  Sharp,  lancinating  pains  like  knives  cutting  upwards
from  OS  uteri,  and  as  these  were  being  relieved,  sensa-
tion as  of  needles  darting  upwards  in  uterus.

1  I  Pain  in  uterine  region,  passing  down  inside  of  thighs,
half  way  to  knees,  and  r.  leg  feels  numb.

iPains  in  uterine  region,  all  day,  no  particular  direction
except  down  inner  side  of  thigh  half  way  to  knees.

I  I  Severe  pain  in  entire  uterine  region,  with  profuse  dis-
charge of  yellow,  brown  and  bloody  leucorrhoea,  two
weeks  after  menses;  intense  pain  and  enlargement  of
1.  ovary,  which  could  be  seen  protruding.

■Blood  bright  red  and  stringy,  hot  as  fire,  coming  in
gushes  and  clotting  easily ;  constant  bearing  down  pain,
as  if  everything  would  come  out  of  vulva.  ^Uterine
hemorrhage.

I  I  Uterine  hemorrhage  for  six  weeks;  ovarian  pains  alter-
nated sides,  as  did  the  chronic  headache.

I  I  Retroverted  uterus.

I  I  Menses:  fourteen  days  too  soon,  profuse;  seven  days  too
soon;  flow  came  in  gushes,  scanty,  intermittent,  bright
red  and  stringy,  preceded  by  much  flatulence  from  bow-
els; very  stringy  and  sticky,  cannot  get  rid  of  them.

I  I  Great  engorgment  of  breasts,  with  sensitiveness  to  touch,
precede  menses.

I  I  Menses  nearly  ceased;  at  menses  much  pain  in  r.  thigh
and  uterus,  constant  desire  for  stool,  very  low  spirited.
^Parenchymatous  metritis.


533  LAC  CANINUM.

iDysmenorrhcea,  abdomen  sensitive  even  to  weight  of
clothing;  flatus  from  vagina.

■  Membranous  dysmenorrhoea.

I  iSore  throats  are  very  apt  to  begin  and  end  with  men-
struation.

I Leucorrhoea,  very  profuse  during  day,  none  at  night;
discharge  whitish  and  watery;  pain  in  small  of  back;
very  irritable;  <  standing  or  walking.

I  I  Bearing  down  as  though  everything  would  fall  out
through  vagina,  with  very  frequent  desire  to  urinate,
and  smarting  in  urethra.

■  Escape  of  flatus  from  vagina.

I  I  Great  swelling  of  1.  labia  and  terrible  pain  while  urinat-
ing; from  gonorrhoea.

■  Itching  in  1.  side  of  labia,  with  rough  eruptive  condition

on  1.  side  of  vagina,  with  acrid  leucorrhoea;  excoriating.

■  Raw  and  bad  smelling  sores  between  labia  and  thighs,  in

folds  of  skin;  <  when  walking,  would  rather  keep  still
all  the  time;  sores  are  covered  with  disgusting  white
exudation.

I  I  Foul  smell  from  genitals. ^Herpes.

I  I  Pressure  on  labia  causes  a  slight  flow  of  blood;  menstru-
ation commenced  entirely  normal.

■  Intense  painful  soreness  of  vulva,  extending  to  anus,

coming  on  very  suddenly  about  noon,  and  lasting  for
about  two  hours;  came  again  during  evening;  could  not
walk,  stand  or  sit;  >  by  lying  on  back  and  separating
knees  as  far  as  possible.
I  I  Great  irritation  about  vulva  and  rectum. ^Diphtheria.

■  Urination  causes  intense  pain  in  vulva,  when  even  least

drop  of  urine  comes  in  contact  with  it.

■  Itching  of  vulva.

I  I  Breasts  very  sore  and  painful,  with  sharp,  darting  pain
in  r.  ovarian  region  extending  downwards  to  knee,  very
painful  and  must  keep  leg  flexed.  ^After  miscarriage
at  sixth  month.

■  Breasts  very  sore,  sensitive  to  least 'pressure;  dull,  con-

stant, aching  pain  in  them  all  evening.

■  Breasts  very  painful,  but  no  lumps;  pains  are  caused  by

least  jar;  has  to  hold  breasts  firmly  when  going  up  or
down  stairs;  breasts  <  towards  evening,  presssure  of
her  arm,  in  natural  position,  caused  considerable  pain.

■  Breasts  very  painful  and  sore;  feel as  if  full  of  hard

lumps,  very  painful  when  going  up  or  down  stairs.
I  I  Soreness  and  enlargement  of  breasts.

■  Breasts  seem  very  full.

■  Constant  pain  in  nipples.

^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i '  Afterpains  very
severe,  and  shooting  down  into  thighs.


LAC  CANINUM.  534

I  I  Knots  and  cakes  in  breast,  after  miscarriage.
I  I  Galactorrhoea.

I  I  Loss  of  milk  while  nursing,  without  known  cause.

I I  Serviceable  in  almost  all  cases  where  it  is  required  to  dry
up  milk.

I  I  Given  for  an  ulcerated  throat  to  a  nursing  woman,  it
cured  throat  and  nearly  dried  up  milk.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Loss  of
voice. ^Pharyngitis.

I  I  Throat  troubles  her  much  if  she  reads  aloud  or  talks
more  than  usual;  it  seems  almost  as  though  it  was
stopping  up,  and  she  feels  very  hoarse,  but  has  no  sore-
ness; there  is  a  feeling  of  fulness  and  choking.

I  I  Unable  to  speak  loud;  distressed  feeling  while  speaking.

I  I  Respiration  hoarse,  crying  was  whispered  and  broken,
often  no  sound  at  all. ^Diphtheria.

■  Slight  hoarseness,  with  now  and  then  a  change  of  voice,
after  walking,  but  soon  passing  away.

I  I  Excessive  hoarseness,  and  tickling,  choking  sensation,
>  moving  about.

I  1  Voice  hoarse  and  husky;  interrupted  by  weakness  and
hoarseness.

I  I  Larynx  sensitive  to  pressure. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Constriction  in  lower  part  of  larynx,  like  a  finger  across
throat;  feeling  as  of  a  bar  across  back  of  throat.
^''Respiration, il Difficult  breathing;  during evening  had
several  suffocating  spells. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Terrible  dyspncea  immediately  after  sleep,  first  on  1.  side
of  chest;  dyspnoea  compelled  her  to  be  lifted  upright
with  violent  exertion  to  get  breath  ;  sharp  pain  in  region
of  heart  with  each  attack. ^Acute  rheumatism.

I  I  Breathing  hoarse  and  croupy,  and  at  times  an  entire
stoppage  of  breath,  when  it  would  resume  with  a  vio-
lent effort. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Breathing  often  snoring  and  only  possible  through
mouth. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Short  breath. ^After  diphtheria.

I  I  Great  difficulty  in  breathing,  could  not  lie  down  flat.

I  I  Breathing  very  labored.

I  I  Loud  snoring  during  sleep.

I  I  Sensation as if  breath would  leave  her  when  lying
down  and  trying  to  sleep;  has  to  jump  up  and  stir
around  for  an  hour  or  so  every  night.
^  Cough. iTickling  sensation  in  throat  causing  cough ;  in
afternoon  quite  hoarse.

I  Cough  from  tickling  in  upper  anterior  part  of  larynx,  <
talking  and  lying  down.

1  I  Cough  caused  by  irritation  in  upper  part  of  throat,  <


32


^35  LAC  CANINUM.

lying  down  at  night,  also  after  eating  and  drinking  and
after  talking; with  soreness  of  1.  side  of  throat  and  con-
stant desire  to  urinate.
I  I  Cough  on  taking  a  long  breath,  not  when  swallowing.
I  I  Hard,  metallic  cough.
I  I  Croupy  cough,  a  dry,  hoarse  bark,  penetrating  through

closed  doors  all  over  house. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Cough  and  dyspnoea.

I  i  Constant  cough,  accompanying  soreness. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Expectoration  of  profuse,  sticky,  tough,  white  mucus  in
masses,  with  coryza.
'^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. 1 1  Sharp,  incisive  pain  between
scapulae, passing  through  to  sternum,  with  a  sense  of
pressure  or  constriction  of  chest  in  afternoon.
I  I  Trembling,  jerking  and  fluttering  through  lungs,  with
numb,  prickHng  sensation  all  over  body,  legs  and  arms.
I  I  Pulse  so  rapid  it  could  scarcely  be  counted.  ^Diphtheria
I  I  Pulse  130. ^Tonsillitis.

■  Pulse  quick,  full  and  strong,  with  pain  in  chest  and  throat.
I  I  Pulse  of  little  volume. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Pulse  130,  wiry,  weak.
I  I  Pulse:  quick  and  feeble;  100;  120;  140;  170;  130-140;

almost  gone.
I  I  Pulse  117. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Pulse  rapid,  quick. ^Acute  rheumatism.
I  i  Heart  beats  rapidly  from  slight  causes. <9Parenchyma-
tous  metritis.
'  Neck  and  Back, l  l  Neck  stiff. ^Pheumatism. <?Neural-
gic  headache. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Pain  in  back  of  neck. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Wandering  pains  in  nape  with  stiffness. ^Rheumatism.
I  I  Neck  aches,  making  her  want  to  bend  head  forwards;

entire  spine  sensitive. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.
I  I  Spine  aches  from  base  of  brain  to  coccyx. ^Pharyngitis.
•  I  Heat,  pain  and  beating  in  small  of  back. /^'Metritis.
I  I  Pain  in  back. /^Diphtheria.

Wakes  with  severe  pain  in  lower  part  of  back,  it  is  often
five  minutes  before  she  can  straighten ;  pain  leaves  her
when  she  has  been  about  work  a  short  time,  not  re-
turning till  morning. ^Nervous  throat  affection.
I  I  Intense,  unbearable  pain  across  supersacral  region,  ex-
tending to  r.  natis  and  down  r.  sciatic  nerve;  pain  so
severe  as  to  prevent  sleep  or  rest;  at  same  time  diphthe-
ritic sore  throat  on  r.  side,  with  sensation  of  a  lump,
could  not  swallow  solid  food.
Upper Limbs. l  Fetid perspiration in axillae, staining
linen  brown.
■After  exposure  to  draft  in  evening:  sudden  violent  pains


LAC  CANINUM.  536

in  r.  shoulder  so  severe  that  she  was  unable  to  raise  the

arm,  as  if  disabled  by  dislocation. ^ Acute  rheumatism.
1 1  Pain  in  1.  shoulder  extending  across  to  r. ;  could  scarcely

move  arm. ^Pharyngitis.
I  I  Neuralgic  pains  in  shoulders,  1.  then  r.;  then  vice  versa.
1  I  Pain  in  one  or  other  shoulder. ^Rheumatism.
I  I  Shoulders  and  arms  ache. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.
I  I  Partial  paralysis  of  1.  arm,  unable  to  raise  hand  to  head  ;

on  attempting  to  do  so  was  seized  with  sharp  pains  in

arm  below  shoulder.
I  iLeft  hand  bloats  and  is  numb,  with  trembling,  jerking

and  fluttering  through  lungs;  numb,  pricking  sensation

all  over  body,  arms  and  legs.

■  Sharp  pain  in  1.  hand,  1.  arm  as  if  asleep.

t  I  Trembling  of  1,  hand,  as  in  paralysis  agitans.

I  I  Fingers  extremely  cold  but  not  rest  of  hands.

I  I  Two  warts  on  little  finger.
^  Lower  Limbs, l  'Almost  constant  pain  in  r.  hip. /^Metritis.

I  I  Pain  in  r.  hip  and  leg  while  walking,  with  a  trembling
of  leg,  and  slight  feeling  of  uncertainty,  particularly  on
going  down  stairs. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.

I  I  Articular  rheumatism  in  r.  hip  and  knee  joints,  espe-
cially former;  she  was  seated  in  an  arm  chair,  unable
to  move,  complaining  of  bruised,  smarting,  lancinating
pains  in  both  joints  and  in  lumbar  region,  Avith  swell-
ing of  affected  joints;  pains  <  by  slightest  motion  at
night,  by  touch  and  by  pressure  of  bed  clothes;
next  day  pains  and  swelling  had  gone  to  1.  hip  and
knee  joints,  leaving  r.  almost  free;  the  ensuing  day  they
had  almost  entirely  disappeared  from  1.  hip  and  knee
joints  and  had  again  attacked  r.  hip  and  knee;  com-
plaining, moaning  and  sighing  on  account  of  her  suffer-
ings and  probable  termination  of  her  illness.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  hip  and  along  sciatic  nerve;  wan-

dering pains  in  nape  of  neck,  with  stiffness;  pains  in
one  or  other  shoulder;  pain  above  1.  eye  and  heaviness
of  eyelid;  burning  in  eye;  agglutination  of  eyelids;  sen-
sitiveness to  light. ^Sciatica  and  rheumatism.

■  Intense,  unbearable  pain  across  supersacral  region,  ex-

tending to  r.  natis  and  down  r.  sciatic  nerve ;  pain  so
severe  as  to  prevent  sleep  or  rest. ^Sciatica!

I  I  Partial  paralysis  of  r.  leg  from  miscarriage;  has  to  use
a  cane;  r.  ovary  sore  by  spells  and  pain  darts  down  leg,
sometimes  to  foot ;  leg  feels  numb  and  stiff,  but  cannot
keep  it  still  any  length  of  time;  feels  better  by  flexing
it  on  abdomen.

I  I  Can  only  walk  with  assistance  of  a  cane. ^Hip  disease.

1  I  Cannot  walk  any  distance;  trembling  through  r.  thigh,


537  LAC  CANINUM.

and  feeling  as  though  entire  lower  portion  of  body  was
giving  way;  felt  as  though  something  was  strained
across  lower  part  of  bowels. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.

I  I  Sciatica.

I  I  Limbs  cold  to  knees. ^Diphtheria.

■  Bruised  pain  in  soles  of  feet,  stiffness  of  ankle,  knee  and
hip  joints,  and  occasionally  intense  pains  which  move
upwards ;  pain  in  ankle  joints  as  of  a  dull  plug  pushing ;
joints  stiff  and  sore,  tender  to  touch,  <  from  heat  and
least  motion;  later  knees  and  then  hips  became  in-
volved ;  at  first  the  1.  ankle  was  attacked,  and  then,  after
some  hours  suffering,  the  r.,  with  relief  to  1.,  and  so  on
with  knees  and  hips;  chest  affected,  terrible  dyspnoea
coming  on  immediately  after  sleep,  first  on  1.  side ;  com-
pelled her  to  be  lifted  upright  with  violent  exertion  to
get  breath,  sharp  pain  in  cardiac  region;  urine  scanty
and  dark;  pain  in  r.  side  of  throat;  generally  <  at  5
P.M. ^ Acute  rheumatism.

I  I  After  exposure  to  cold  night  air  when  drunk,  sharp,
darting  pains,  <  by  any  motion,  with  swelling  inr.  knee
and  r.  ankle ;  next  day  joints.of  1.  knee,  1.  ankle,  1.  hand,
extremely  painful,  moderately  swollen,  slightly  red ;
ensuing  day,  1.  ankle  and  knee  better,  but  r.  shoulder
and  elbow  similarly  affected.

iNumb  pains  chiefly  in  ankles,  <  while  quiet,  with
swelling;  veins  of  ankles  distended;  >  while  extreme
heat  is  applied. ^Rheumatism.

I  I  Ecthyma:  a  sore  breaks  out  on  r.  leg,  excessive  itching,
inflammation,  then  swelling,  blisters  form  and  suppura-
tion sets  in;  afterwards  clear  lymph,  then  discharge  of
matter;  then  scabs  and  scales, turning  eventually  into  a
branlike  desquamation ;  scars  have  left  discolored  skin.

I  I  Restlessness  in  legs.

I  I  Cramps  in  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL '  l  Aching  pains  in  limbs  and  back.

I  Pains  in  limbs  as  if  beaten. ^Pharyngitis.

I  I  Bruised  pains  in  soles  making  it  difficult  to  walk;  in
twelve  days  pains  suddenly  left  soles,  and  appeared  in
r.  knee  joint,  being  smarting,  lancinating,  with  light
swelling  of  joint;  could  not  move  affected  limb,  as  least
motion  <  pains,  as  did  touch  and  pressure  of  bed-
clothes; on  following  day  1.  knee  joint  affected  in  same
w^ay,  r.  >  ;  on  ensuing  day  r.  again  affected,  with  relief
to  1.;  afterwards  hip  joints  attacked  alternately  with
same  symptoms,  alternating  like  these  in  pains  and
swelling,  1.  joints  one  day  with  >  of  r.,  and  vice  versa;
also  lancinating  pains  in  1.  side  of  chest;  after  four  days
wrist  joints  affected,  first  r.,  with  same  symptoms  as


LAC  CANINUM.  538

those  of  lower  extremities,  symptoms  of  one  side  of
body  alternating  with  those  of  other;  not  able  to  move
himself  in  bed,  lancinating  pains  made  him  cry  out ;
constipation,  sleeplessness,  no  fever;  pains  and  swelling

<  every  evening,  night,  by  movement,  touch  and  press-
ure of  bedclothes;  numb  pains  chiefly  in  ankles  <.

I  I  Burning  of  hands  and  feet  at  night. ^Ovaralgia.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  headache  >.

Lying  on  back :  with  hands  over  face,  falls  asleep ;  sepa-
rating knees  as  far  as  possible  >  soreness  of  vulva.

Lying  down:  thinks  how  horrible  it  would  be  if  a  very
sharp  pain,  like  a  knife,  should  go  through  her ;  causes
congestion;  cough  <  ;  does  not  seem  to  touch  bed.

Could  not  lie  flat:  great  difficulty  in  breathing.

Sitting:  as  if  she  was  going  deranged.

Bending  head  forward:  causes  congestion.

Leaning  forward :  nausea;  pain  in  abdomen  <.

Leaning  back:  pain  in  abdomen  >.

Standing:  leucorrhoea  <.

Cannot  find  comfortable  position  in  bed,  there  is  no  way
she  can  put  her  hands  that  they  do  not  bother  her.

Motion :  painful  on  account  of  soreness  of  ovarian  region  ;
>  hoarseness;  pains  in  hip  and  knee  joints  <  ;  sore-
ness of  joints  <  ;  sharp,  darting  pains  in  knee  and
ankle  <  ;  pain  in  knee  <.

Flexing  leg  on  abdomen  :  tension  in  groin  >.

Cannot  straighten  herself:  pain  in  back.

Could  not  raise  arm  :  pain  in  shoulder.

Exertion :  dull  pain  in  1.  superior  maxillary.

Must  jump  up  and  stir  about  to  >  feeling  as  if  breath
would  leave  her.

Walking :  leucorrhoea  <  ;  sores  between  labia  and  thighs

<  ;  pain  in  r.  leg ;  felt  as  if  walking  on  air.

Does  not  want  to  walk  or  stand  :  sensation  in  groin  <.
Going  up  or  down  stairs :  causes  pain  in  breasts.
Going  down  stairs:  trembling  of  leg.
-''^Nerves, l  Restlessness. ^Diphtheria.

BNo  inclination  for  least  exertion,  would  like  to  do  nothing
but  sleep;  much  lassitude.

I  Heaviness,  weakness,  general  languor.  ^  After  diphtheria.
I  Profound  depression  of  vitality. ^Diphtheria.
■  General  weakness  and  prostration  very  marked.
I  Great  exhaustion,  with  "  poisoned  "  feeling.  ^Diphtheria.
1  Profound  prostration,  to  extent  of  refusing  to  make  effort
to  take  a  dose  of  medicine. ^Diphtheria.
I  In  morning  so  much  prostrated  that  she  could  not  turn
in  bed ;  so  tired. ^Diphtheria.
I  Very  weak. ^Diphtheria.


539  LAC  CANINUM.

I  I  Sinking  spells  every  morning,  attended  with  great  ner-
vousness. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.

I  I  Often  feels  as  if  she  would  lose  use  of  limbs.  ^Nervous
throat  affection.

I  I  Child  partially  paralyzed  after  diphtheria;  could  not

walk;  pain  all  over,  cough,  aphonia,  loss  of  appetite,
emaciation.

I I  When  walking  seems  to  be  walking  en  air;  when  lying
does  not  seem  to  touch  bed.

I  Suffering  from  very  unpleasant  nervous  symptoms;  not
in  low  spirits,  but  weak,  and  nerves  so  thoroughly  out
of  order  that  she  cannot  bear  one  finger  to  touch  the
other,  and  often  feels  as  though  she  should  lose  use  of
her  limbs;  sensation  as  if  throat  was  closing,  sensation
is  between  throat  and  nose;  feels  as  if  something  in
throat  was  either  enlarged  or  relaxed,  and  has  a  desire
to  keep  mouth  open;  talking  difficult;  disposition  to
talk  through  nose;  sometimes  cannot  swallow,  because
there  seems  to  be  a  kind  of  muscular  contraction  in
throat;  sleep  restless,  frequently  w^akes  with  sick  head-
ache, which  seems  to  commence  at  nape ;  wakes  with
severe  pain  at  lower  part  of  back;  pain  leaves  when
about  work  a  short  time,  does  not  return  until  next
morning;  nerves  very  much  overwrought,  afraid  of
being  unable  to  perform  duties.  ^Nervous  affection.
^^  Sleep. '  I  Great  desire  to  sleep. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Cried  out  and  talked  in  sleep. ^Diphtherial.

I  I  Sleeplessness  from  emotional  strain,  with  entire  nervous
debility.

■  Cannot  find  any  comfortable  position  in  bed  ;  there  is  no

way  she  can  put  her  hands  that  they  do  not  bother  her;
falls  asleep  at  last  on  her  face.

■  Very  restless  at  night;  very  difficult  to  get  into  a  com-

fortable position ;  generally  goes  to  sleep  lying  on  back
with  hands  over  head.

■  Sleep  disturbed,  very  wakeful;  limbs  cold  all  night.

I  I  Sleep  prevented  by  being  very  cold  for  one  hour  after
retiring,  with  great  nervousness.

■  Very  restless  all  night;  could  not  keep  clothes  over  her.
I  I  Sleepless  and  crying  continually.

I  I  Restless  sleep  at  night,  bad  dreams. ^Metritis.

I  I  Dreamed  a  large  snake  was  in  bed. ^Tonsillitis.
_  iGot  to  sleep  late; profuse  sweat  during  sleep;  felt  fever-
ish all  night; in  morning  >  in  every  way.

I  I  At  night  lies  with  1.  leg  flexed  on  thigh,  and  thigh  on
pelvis;  restless; <  after  sleep. ^Ovaralgia.

I  Dreams  frequently  that  she  is  urinating,  and  wakes  to
find  herself  on  point  of  doing  so,  requiring  immediate
relief


LAC  CANINUM.  540

1  I  Dreams  of  going  on  a  journey,  and  was  separated  from

party,  and  had  to  walk  a  long  distance,  and  arrived  at

station  just  in  time  to  see  train  start  off.
I  I  Aggravation  *of  symptoms  after  sleep. ^Diphtheria.
^^  Time. Morning:  dull,  frontal  headache;  1.  superior  maxillary

feels  sore ;  nausea,  weak,  sinking  feeling  in  stomach  pit ;

much  prostration.
4  A.M. :  copious  epistaxis.
9  A.M :  sharp  pain  on  top  of  head.
Noon:  throat  >  ;  soreness  of  vulva  comes  suddenly.
Day:  pains  in  head.

Afternoon:  headache;  hoarseness;  constriction of  chest.
Evening:  abdomen  hard  and  swollen ;  intense  soreness  of

vulva;  aching  in  breasts.
9.45  P.M. :  dyspeptic  pain  in  stomach  pit.
Night:  constant  noise  in  head  <  ;  sensation  as  if  bed  was

in  motion; sore  spot  in  1.  side  of  throat  removed  by

1  A.M.; next night same  on  r.  side; pain  in  tonsil;

gnawing  <  ;  felt  she  would  suffocate;  throat  <  ;  dreams

of urinating; urine frequent; rheumatic pains  <;

burning  of  hands  and  feet;  very  restless;  limbs  cold.
After  midnight: very  severe  frontal  headache.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Heat:  soreness  of  joints  <;

pains  in  ankles  >  while  heat  is  applied.
Warm  room:  pain  in  forehead  >.
Warm  applications:  pains  in  superior  maxillary  >.
Open  air: headache  >; mucus  in  mouth  <.
Exposure  to  draft: severe  j'ain  in  r.  shoulder.
Cold  night  air:  sharp,  darting  pains  in  knee  and  ankle.
During  and  after  a  cold  northeast  storm:  throat  <.
Cold  winds:  terrible  j)ain  in  forehead.
Washing:  causes  pain  in  herpetic  eruption.
Cold applications : soreness of  superior maxillary > ;

pain  in  upper  canines  >.
Cold  water:  sore  throat  momentarily  >.
^^  Fever, l  l  Severe  chills. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Fever  and  chills  for  a  few  days,  and  up  and  down  every

few  hours.
I  Feels  feverish.

■  Intense  fever  on  waking  in  morning,  with  perspiration.
I  1  Fever,  and bathed in warm perspiration, especially

about  face,  neck  and  hands. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Intense  heat. ^Diphtheria.
I  1  Moderate  fever. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Fever. ^Diphtheria ^Acute  rheumatism.

II  High  fever. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Dry,  hot  skin. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  FeVer  returning  every  afternoon. ^Diphtheria.


541  LAC  CANINUM.

I  I  Temperature  102. ^Tonsillitis.
I  I  Temperature  102f . ^Diphtheria.
I  1  Temperature  103J. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Temperature  103. ^Acute  rheumatism.
I  I  Sweat  all  over. ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Skin  clammy. ^Diphtheria.
■  Exhausting  sweats;  after  sleep.

I  I  Wakes  in  night  in  cold  perspiration,  with  fearful  fore-
boding. ^Parenchymatous  metritis.
M  Perspired  considerably  through  night,  sweat  having  a
rank  smell. ^ Acute  rheumatism.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. '  l  Aggravation  morning  of  one  day,
evening  of  next. ^Diphtheria.
Paroxysmal  pain:  in  1.  upper  canine.
Intermittent  pains:  in  r.  ovarian  region.
At  times:  fear  of  falling  down  stairs;  stoppage  of  breath
At  intervals:  copious  epistaxis.
Several  times  daily:  bloody  pus  from  nose.
Lasting  two  hours :  soreness  of  vulva.
Two  or  three  times  a  day :  fits  of  weeping.
Once  in  twenty-four  hours:  urinating.
Daily  for  hours :  severe  tlirobbing  in  region  of  solar  plexus.
Every  morning:  sinking  spells.
Every  evening,  10  p.m.:  hemorrhage  from  urethra.
Every  night:  sensation  as  if  breath  would  leave  her  pains

in  wrists  and  knees  <.
Forty-seven  and  three-quarter  hours :  no  urine.
For  two  days :  sore  throat.
For  several  days:  alternately  membrane  appears  in  throat,

then  a  severe  interstitial  hemorrhage.
Third  day:  tonsil  swollen  and  on  it  a  small  patch.
Fourth  day:  both  tonsils  swollen.
Fifth  day:  rash  extended  all  over  arms  and  legs.
For  six  weeks:  uterine  hemorrhage.

For  several  years,  ever  since  diphtheria :  sore  throat  just
before  menses.
*'  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  in  head  beginning
on  side ;  pink  color  of  lower  lid  ;  sore  on  side  of  septum  ;
red  circular  spot  below  malar  bone;  acute  pain  on  side
of  throat;  throat  <  on  side;  sensation  of  lump  in  side
of  throat;  pain  in  region  of  tonsil ;  throat  much  in-
flamed on  side;  throat  sore;  sore  spot  on  side  of  throat;
tonsil  red  and  swollen;  side  of  throat  <  ;  tonsil  intensely
inflamed;  tonsil  covered  with  ash  grey  membrane;  ton-
sil raw,  swollen  ;  diphtheritic  symptoms  begin  on  side;
stabbing  pain  in  lung;  burning  pain  in  hypochondriac
and  iliac  region;  pain  in  ovarian  region;  smarting  in
groin;  sharp  pain  in  ovary;  numbness  of  leg;  much


LAC  CANINUM.  512

pain  in  thigh ;  pain  down  sciatic  nerve ;  pains  in
shoulder;  pain  in  hip;  pain  in  leg;  rheumatism  in  hip ;
partial  paralysis  of  leg ;  trembling  through  thigh ;
swelling  in  knee  and  ankle ;  sore  on  leg ;  swelling  of
knee  joint.

Left:  pain  over  eye;  sees  green  band  before  eye,  slanting
downward  to  r.  cheek ;  spots  before  eye ;  burning  in  eye;
heaviness  of  upper  lids ;  pain  over  eye;  agglutination
of  lids;  gathering  under  side  of  nose;  superior  max-
illary feels  sore;  flushes  on  cheek  ;  swelling  of  parotid  ;
pain  in  upper  canine ;  pain  on  side  of  throat;  sensation  of
ball  or  round  body  in  side  of  throat;  feeling  of  lump  in
side  of  throat;  lump  in  side  of  pharynx  ;  pain  from  throat
to  ear;  rawness  on  side  of  throat;  throat  very  sore;  sore
spot  in  side  of  throat;  patches  on  tonsil;  diphtheritic
spots  in  throat;  large  patches  on  tonsil;  thick,  mem-
branous mass  lying  on  side  of  soft  palate ;  neck  swollen  ;
pain  crossing  from  r.  iliac  region  to  1.  side  of  abdomen  ;
intense  pain  in  side  of  abdomen  ;  burning  in  side  of  ab-
domen; acute  pain  in  groin  extending  up  to  side  of
crest  of' ilium;  tension  in  groin;  chancre  on  prepuce
side  of  frsenum ;  pain  in  ovarian  region ;  sharp  pain
down  leg  from  ovary,  enlargement  of  ovary  ;  swelling  of
labia;  itching  in  side  of  labia;  eruptive  condition  on
side  of  vagina ;  terrible  dyspnoea ;  pain  in  shoulder ;
partial  paralysis  of  arm;  hand  bloats  and  is  numb;
sharp  pain  in  hand  ;  arm  as  if  asleep ;  trembling  of
hand;  pain  in  ankle,  knee  and  hand.

From  1.  to  r. :  neuralgic  pains  in  shoulders.

From  r.  to  1. :  swelling  of  parotid.

From  within  outwards:  pressure  in  abdomen.

Alternating  sides:  throat  symptoms;  articular  rheuma-
tism in  lower  limbs;  bruised  pain  in  ankles;  pains  in
ankles,  knees  and  elbows ;  swelling  and  ulcers.

llErratic  disposition  of  symptoms;  pains  constantly  flying
from  one  part  to  another.
^  Sensations.  As  if  she  was  going  deranged;  as  if  surrounded
by  myriads  of  snakes;  as  if  bed  was  in  motion;  as  if
forehead  would  split  open ;  as  if  ears  were  full ;  as  if
throat  was  closing;  as  if  something  in  throat  was
either  enlarged  or  relaxed ;  throat  as  if  full  of  sticks ;
as  if  a  lump  was  in  throat;  as  of  a  ball  or  round  body
in  1.  side  of  throat ;  as  of  a  lump  in  r.  side  of  throat,  with
a  feeling  that  she  could  take  hold  of  it  with  her  fingers
and  pull  it  out ;  throat  as  if  scalded  by  hot  fluid  ;  throat
as  if  burnt  by  caustic ;  throat  felt  as  if  there  were  lumps
in  it  like  two  eggs;  diphtheritic  deposit  looks  as  if  var-
nished ;  pain  as  from  a  stone  in  stomach  pit ;  as  if  con-


543  LAC  CANINUM.

tents  of  abdomen  would  be  forced  outwards;  as  of
needles  darting  upwards  in  uterus;  as  if  everything
would  come  out  at  vulva;  breasts  as  if  full  of  hard
lumps;  as  if  throat  was  stopped  up;  as  if  a  finger  was
across  throat;  as  of  a  bar  across  back  of  throat;  as  if
breath  would  leave  her  when  lying  down;  1.  arm  as  if
asleep;  as  of  a  dull  plug  pushing  in  ankle  joint;  pain
in  limbs  as  if  they  had  been  beaten  ;  feels  as  if  she  would
lose  use  of  limbs;  when  walking,  as  if  walking  on  air;
when  lying'  in  bed,  as  if  she  did  not  touch  it;  as  if
throat  was  closing;  as  if  an  insect  was  crawling  on
shoulders,  neck  and  hands.

Pain:  over  eyes;  in  temples;  above  1.  eye;  in  both  cars;
in  r.  side  of  throat ;  in  whole  body  and  limbs;  in  chest;
in  tonsils;  in  head,  back  and  limbs;  in  })it  of  stomach  ;
in  1.  side  of  abdomen  and  pelvis;  in  ovaries;  in  abdo-
men; in  track  of  colon;  in  uterine  region  and  down
thighs;  in  r.  thigh  and  uterus;  in  sujuU  of  back;  in
nipples;  in  chest  and  throat;  in  back  of  neck;  from  1.
shoulder  to  r. ;  in  r.  hip  and  leg ;  in  labia.

Excruciating  pain:  in  prepuce.

Unbearable  pain:  in  head  ;  across  supraorbital  region.

Violent  pain:  in  r.  shoulder.

Terrible  pain:  in  vertex;  in  1.  labia  while  urinating.

Very  severe  pain :  in  forehead  ;  in  head  ;  in  r.  ovarian  re-
gion; in  entire  uterine  region;  in  lower  part  of  back.

Intense  pain:  in  urethra;  in  1.  ovary;  in  vulva.

Intense  sharp  pain:  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.

Acute  pain :  on  r.  side  of  throat  then  in  1. ;  in  1.  groin,  ex-
tending to  1.  side  to  crest  of  ilium.

Sharp,  incisive  pain :  between  scapulae,  passing  through
to  sternum.

Sharp  pain  :  on  top  of  head  coming  from  nape  of  neck ;  in
arm  below  shoulder;  in  1.  hand;  in  cardiac  region;  in
r.  ovarian  region  ;  beginning  in  1.  ovary  and  darting  like
lightning  either  towards  r.  ovarian  region,  or  else  up  1.
side  and  down  arm,  or  sometimes  down  both  thighs,
generally  down  1.  leg  to  foot;  in  region  of  heart.

Sharp  pains  like  knives:  cutting  upwards  from  os  uteri.

Lancinating:  in  chest.

Cutting :  through  tonsils.

Stabbing :  in  r.  lung.

Darting  stabbing :  from  one  side  of  head  to  other.

Darting:  from  occiput  to  forehead;  in  rectum;  in  r.  ova-
rian region; in  knees  and  ankles.

Shooting:  to  ears;  in  abdomen  ;  down  into  thighs.

Piercing :  on  vertex.

Beating:  from  occiput  to  forehead;  in  stomach  and  bow-
els; in  small  of  back.


LAC  CANINUM.  .  644

Throbbing:  in  temples;  in  region  of  solar  plexus.
Bruised,  smarting,  lancinating  pains :  in  both  joints  and

in  lumbar  region  ;  in  1.  hip.
Bruised  pain:  in  soles  of  feet.
Pricking  stitching  :  in  throat.
Bearing  down  pains  :  in  abdomen.
Neuralgic  pains :  in  shoulders.
Burning:  in  r.  hypochondriac  region  and  corresponding

part  in  back  ;  in  1.  ovarian  region.
Aching:  in  throat;  in  1.  ear;  in  lumbar  region;  in  breasts;

in  neck;  in  whole  spine;  in  arms  and shoulders;  in

limbs  and  back.
Rheumatic  pain:  in  r.  hip; knee  joints ; 1.  hip; along

sciatic  nerve.
Wandering  pains:  in  nape  with  stiffness.
Gnawing  pain:  in  1.  upper  canine;  in  tonsil.
Heavy  dull  pain  :  in  forehead.
Heavy  pain  :  in  eyeballs.
Severe  pressure:  on  brain.
Sick  headache:  beginning  in  nape  gradually  settling  in  r.

or  1.  forehead.
Intense  painful  soreness:  of  vulva  extending  to  anus.
Smarting:  in  r.  groin  ;  in  urethra.
Intense  heat:  of  throat;  of  palms;  of  abdomen.
Burning:  in  1.  eye:  in  epigastric  region;  in  abdomen;  in

hands  and  feet.
Soreness:  of  head;  of  pimples  on  scalp  ;  on  r.  side  of  sep-
tum of  nose;  of  1. superior  maxillary; of  throat;  of

uvula;  of  r.  ovary  ;  of  uterus;  of  breasts.
Heat:  in  small  of  back.
Rawness:  in  throat.
Sensitiveness:  of  entire  spine.
Trembling,  jerking,  fluttering :  through  lungs,  with  numb,

prickling  sensation  all  over  body,  legs  and  arms.
Burnt  and  drawn  feeling:  in  throat.
Distressed  feeling  in  throat :  when  speaking.
Poisoned  feeling.

Pressure:  from  within  outwards  in  abdomen.
Stuffed  feeling:  in  head.
Feeling  of  fulness  and  choking:  in  throat.
Weight  and  dragging :  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.
Constriction  :  in  upper  part  of  throat;  of  chest.
Tension :  in  groin.
Stiff  feeling  :  in  throat.
Stiffness:  of  ankle,  knee  and  hip  joints.
Numbness :  of  leg.
Pricking:  in  throat;  through  tonsils ;  all  over  body,  arms

and  legs.


^^^'  LAC  CANINUM.

Tingling :  on  vertex.

Tickling:  in  throat;  in  upper  anterior  part  of  larynx.
Iremblmg:  otl.  hand;  of  leg;  through  r.  thigh
Weak,  sinknig  feeling :  at  stomach  pit
Itching:  of  head;  of  prepuce;  in  1.  side  of  labia;  of  sore
on  r.  leg.  '

*' Tissues. I  Enlarged  glands  after  scarlatina;  cold  indura-
tions, as  found  in  scrofulous  children.
BRed,  glistening  appearance  in  ulcerations.
I  I  Neuralgia  and  acute  pains ;  rheumatism ;  gout  •  syphi-
litic sciatica;  sexual  debility.
B Rickets; scrofula;  diphtheria.
jSequelse  of  diphtheria  and  syphilis.
''  Skin. Sensation  as  if  an  insect  was  crawling  on  shoulders
and  neck,  occasionally  on  hands.

■  Herpetic  eruption  in  both  axillaj,  with  light  brownish

scab,  extremely  painful  when  washing;  eruption  most
m  r.  axilla,  and  in  both  instances  appeared  day  previous
to  pain  in  labi«,  which  was  followed  by  a  discharge  of
blood  from  vagina.
I  I  On  face  hands,  neck  and  chest,  bright  scarlet  eruption
exactly  like  scarlatina. ^Diphtheria.  '

■  Throat  full  of  large  foul,  grey  yellow  patches;  deglutition

especially  painful  after  sleep  and  from  swallowing  fruits
(acid) ;  lumpy  sensation  felt  in  middle  of  throat  •  unrest
delirium  with  undefined  fears;  considerable  bright  red'
fine  eruption  on  face  and  chest;  itching  with  dry  skin'
t'bcarlatina.

I  I  Bright  scarlet  redness  on  chest  and  around  neck;  next
day  all  over  body  except  legs,  which  were,  however
covered  that  night ;  skin  in  large  patches  assumed  dark
red  color  bordering  on  purple,  as  seen  in  malignant
cases,  while  whole  body  seemed  swollen. ^Diphtheria

I  I  Diphtheria  with  or  following  scarlatina.

I  I  Ichthyosis,  with  branlike  desquamation  of  skin.

■  Shilling,  glazed  and  red  appearance  of  ulcers  on  shin  and

wrist. ^Syphilis.

■  Very  small  blotches  like  fieabites. <?Diphtheria.

■  Small  blotches  on  chest,  wrists  and  r.  knee.
. I  I  Several  boils  on  1.  side. I^Sick  headaches.

I  I  Crusts on skin,  under  which greyish  yellow  matter
formed  and  was  squeezed  out.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. From  eight  patients,  seven
were  spare  and  dark,  the  eighth  blonde.
Child,  set.  8  months,  drooping  and  ailing  since  day  be-
fore, grew  <  through  night;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  26  months;  rickets.
Child,  set.  4;  diphtheria.
VOL.  VI.— 35.


LAC  CANINUM.  546

Girl,  eet.  4 ;  diphtheria.

M.  Y.,  set.  5;  diphtheria.

Girl,  eet.  7,  slender,  tall,  bony,  with  enlarged  cervical  lym-
phatics and  tonsils ;  had  diphtheritic  croup  six  years  ago.

Boy,  set.  9,  three  days  before  had  spent  several  hours  on
ice  skating,  also  had  been  exposed  to  some  fatal  cases  of
diphtheria ;  diphtheria.

Boy,  set.  12 ;  convalescent  from  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  13;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  15;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  18; affection  of  stomach.

Man,  set.  20,  chancre  which  was  cauterized ;  syphilis.

Man,  set.  22; acute  neuralgia.

Young  man,  brother  died  of  diphtheria ;  sore  throat.

Young  woman ;  nervous  affection.

Woman,  set.  28,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  full  habit,  has  sore
throat  before  menses,  sometimes  begins  on  one  side,
again  on  the  other,  has  had  it  for  several  years,  ever
since  she  had  diphtheria;  diphtheritic  sore  throat.

Miss  Z.  G.,  set.  28,  tall,  slender ;  parenchymatous  metritis.

Woman,  after  exposure  to  draft;  acute  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  40,  strong,  healthy,  dark,  now  nursing  a  nine
months'  boy.

Woman,  set.  50,  suffers  after  each  attack  of  quinsy ;  acute
rheumatism.

Man,  set.  50,  had  syphilis  twenty-five  years  ago,  first  dis-
covered a  small  sore  at  entrance  to  urethra,  for  two
months  rapidly  growing  <  ;  syphilitic  ulceration  of
penis.

AVoman,  set.  90;  sensation  of  film  before  eyes.
^^ Relations.* "Acts  best  in  single  dose;  if  repeated,  should
be  given  at  exact  intervals." (Nichols.)

Memory  weak :  affects  only  what  she  has  read  {Laches.,
Natr.  mur.,  Staphis.);  forgetful,  in  writing  uses  too
many  words  or  not  right  ones  {Bovisia,  Graphit.,
Hepar,  Laches.,  Lycop.,  Natr.  carb.,  Natr.  mur.,  Nux  vom.,
Sepia);  absentminded  {Anac,  Caustic,  Conium,  Dulcam.,
Laches.,  Natr.  mur.,  Sepia);  cannot  speak  correctly  half
the  time  {Calc.  ostr.,  China,  Graphit.,  Hepar,  Laches.,
Lycop.,  Natr.  carb.,  Natr.  mur.,  Nux  vom.,  Sepia) ;  substi-
tutes name  of  object  seen  for  that  which  is  thought
{Amm.  carb.,  Calc.  carb.,  Sepia,  Sulphur);  very  restless,
cannot  concentrate  her  thoughts  or  mind  to  read;  wants
to  leave  everything  as  soon  as  it  is  commenced  {Nux
vom.,  Silicea,  Sulphur) ;  crying,  fearing  she  was  contract-
ing consumption  {Calc.  ostr.,  Paullin.,  Sepia);  exalted
feeling  of  sensorium  {Platinum).

*  The  names  of  corresponding  remedies  were,  with  a  few  exceptions,  added
by  Lippe  for  Swan's  Materia  Medica.


547  LAC  CANINUM.

Weak  feeling  in  head,  feeling  as  if  a  headache  was  com-
ing on  {Ambra,  lodam,  Phosphor.,  Stramon.,  Thuja).
On  going  into  cold  wind  felt  a  terrible  pain  in  forehead

as  if  it  would  split  open,  >  on  going  into  warm  room

{Aurum,  Nux  vom.,  Rhibs  tax.).
Headache  < by  noise  or  talking,  >  by  keeping  quiet ;

confused  feeling  in  head  ( Calc.  ostr.).
Must  have  light,  yet  is  intolerant  of  sunlight;  diphtheria

{Aeon.,  Amm.  mur.,  Bellad.,  Calc.  ac,  Calc.  ostr.,  Gelsem.,

Ruta,  Stramon.).
Difficulty  in  distinguishing  objects ;  in  reading,  letters  run

together;  after  severe  diphtheria  (iVa^r.  mwr.).
Acrid  coryza  {Aurum  triph.,  Nitr.  ac).
Soreness  and  scabbing  of  nostrils  {Kali  bich.,  Thuja).
Lips  dry  and  peeling  off  {Natr.  mur.).
Gums  ulcerated,  bleeding ;  teeth  loose  {lodum.  Kali  carb  ,

Lycop.,  Mercur.,  Natr.  mur.,  Phosphor.,  Staphis.,  Zincum).
Throat: Gensitive to touch externally  (Laches.);  < by

empty  swallowing  {Ignat).
Breasts  sensitive:  to  pressure  {Calc.  ostr.,  Murex);  to  deep

pressure  {Mercur.);  as  if  full  of  very  hard  lumps,  very

painful  when  going  up  or  down  stairs  {Bellad.,  Calc.  ostr.,

Carbo  an.,  Lycop.,  Nitr.  ac,  Phosphor);  soreness  and  en-
largement {Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Calc.  ostr.).
Sore  throat  commencing  on  1.  tonsil  {Laches.).
Small  round  or  irregular,  grey  white  ulcers  on  tonsils  and

fauces  {Merc  jod.).
Coarse  shreds  of  membrane  in  throat ;  diphtheria  [Kali

bich.); discharges of  diphtheritic matter from  vulva

and  rectum  {Apis).
Empty,  weak  feeling  in  stomach  pit  {Digit,  Ignat.,  Petrol.,

Sepia) ; pain as  from  a  stone  or undigested food in

stomach  pit  {Kali  bich.).
Pain  in  r.  ovarian  region  {Apis,  Lycop.,  Pallad).
Sensation  as  if  breath  would  leave  her  when  lying  down ;

has  to  jump  up  and  stir  around  {Grind,  robusta).
Cramps  in  feet  [Lycop.,  Petrol.,  Silicea,  Sulphur).
Sciatica  {Curare,  Graphit., Gnaphal.,  Kali  bich.,  Iris  vers..

Laches.,  Phytol.,  Tellur.).
Intense  fever  in  morning,  with  perspiration  {Ewpat.  perf.).
When  walking,  seems  to  be  walking  on  air;  when  lying,

does  not  seem  to  touch  bed  {Asar.,  China,  Coffea,  Natr.

mur. ,  Nux  vom.,  Opium,  Rhus  tox. ,  Spigel. ,  Stram  on. ,  Thuja).
Dreams  of  going  on  a  journey  {Lac  deflor.,  Laches.,  San-

guin..  Silica).
Icthyosis, with branlike desquamation of skin (after

Sulphur,  and  Psorin.  had  failed).


LAC  DEFLOEATUM.  548


LAC  VACCINUM  DEFLORATUM.

Cow's  milk  skimmed.

The  idea  of  potentizing  skimmed  milk  originated  with  Swan  upon  reading
Doukin's  Skim  Milk  Treatment  for  Diabetes  and  Bright's  Disease.  The  first
proving  was  made  by  a  lady  in  New  York,  in  whose  case  the  headache  with
nausea  and  constipation  were  strongly  marked.  A  subsequent,  more  extensive
proving  was  made  under  Swan  by  Dr.  Laura  Morgan.  See  Swan's  Mat.  Med.  of
Nosodes  and  Morbific  Products,  arranged  by  Berridge.

With  but  few  exceptions  the  symptoms  in  the  following  arrangement  have
received  clinical  verification.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Farrington,  Farrington's  Clinical  Mat.
Med.,  p.  28;  Laura  Morgan,  Boardman,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  257  ;  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  10,
p.  220;  Periodical  sick  headache,  Morgan,  T.  H.  M.  Soc.  Pa.,  1881,  p.  105;  Hemi-
crania,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  220;  Chronic  constipation  Schley,  Swan,  Hahn.  Mo.,
vol.  10,  p.  321  ;  Knerr,  MSS.;  Fainting  spells,  Laura  Morgan,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  256.

'  Mind. Loss  of  memory ;  listlessness  and  disinclination  for
either  bodily  or  mental  exertion.

■  Depression  of  spirits;  don't  care  to  live;  question  as  to

quietest  and  most  certain  way  of  hastening  one's  death.
During  conversation,  headache  and  depression  of  spirits  >.

■  Depression  with  crying  and  palpitation. ^Fainting  spells.
I  Imagines  that  all  her  friends  will  die  and  that  she  must

go  to  a  convent. ^Fainting  spells.
I  Does  not  want  to  see  or  talk  to  any  one.
Can  remember  what  has  been  read  only  by  a  strong  effort

of  will.
Vacillation  of  mind.
Great  despondency  on  account  of  the  disease,  is  sure  he  is

going  to  die  in  twenty-four  hours.
Has  no  fear  of  death  but  is  sure  he  is  going  to  die.
^  Sensorium. iHead  light,  with  throbbing  in  temples.

B  Vertigo :  on  moving  head  from  pillow  ;  <  lying  down  and

especially  turning  while  lying,  obliging  to  sit  up.
Head  feels  heavy  with  marked  tendency  to  fall  to  r.  side.
iFaintness and nausea when stepping upon floor in

morning.

■  At  first  a  sharp  pain  at  apex  of  heart,  as  though  a  knife

was  cutting  up  and  down  ;  this  lasts  a  few  seconds  and
is  followed  by  strange  feeling  in  head ;  forehead  feels
extremely  heavy,  with  dull  sensation  over  eyes,  and  con-


^^^  LAC  DEFLORATUM.

siderable  throbbing,  most  marked  on  each  side  of  head  •
rest  of  head  feels  very  light;  dimness  of  vision;  can
only  distmguish  light,  not  objects;  at  same  time  great
loss  of  strength;  cannot  stand,  but  falls  backwards  and
remains  entirely  unconscious  for  two  or  three  minutes  •
weakness  passes  off  gradually,  and  is  followed  by  cryina
palpitation  of  heart  and  great depression of"  spirit?'
imagines  that  all  her  friends  will  soon  die,  and  that  she
must  go  to  a  convent;  she  can  produce  an  attack  at  any
time  by  extending  arms  high  above  head,  or  by  press-
ure around  waist;  spells  come  on  at  7.30  p  m 6'Faint-
tmg  spells.
^  Inner  Head. iPain  first  in  forehead,  then  extending  to  oc-
ciput, very  intense,  distracting  and  unbearable?  great
photophobia  even  to  light  of  candle;  deathly  sickness
all  oyer,  with  nausea  and  vomiting, <  by  movement
or  sitting  up ;  very  chilly,  and  external  heat  does  not  >  •
trequent  and profuse urination  of very pale urine!
f/Sick  headache.
I  After  light  breakfast,  pain  in  forehead,  with  nausea ;  very
pale  face,  even  lips  looked  white;  vomiting  of  ino-esta
and  afterwards  of  mucus  and  bitter  water;  deathly'^sick
leelmg  in  pit  of  stomach,  <  rising  up  in  bed;  profuse
urination  every  half  hour; urine  colorless  as water-
great  thirst;  intense  throbbing  pain  in  vertex. ^Head-
ache.

■  After  injury  subject  to  distress  in  head;  severe  pain  in

torehead  just  above  eyes;  breath  offensive;  appetite
poor,  nausea;  at  times  sleeps  for  hours  during  attack-
great  distress  across  back ;  urine  dark  and  thick

■  Nausea,  and  sometimes  vomiting,  which  >  ;  pain  in  fore-

head as  if  head  would  burst,  with  blindness;  pain  is  >
by  bandaging  head  tightly;  <  by  light  and  noise;
constipation,  stools  large ;  hands  and  feet  cold. ^Hemi-


crania.


■  Periodical  pain  in  forehead,  as  if  head  would  burst,  ac-

companied by  violent  efforts  to  vomit,  and  more  rarely
vomiting;  hands  and  feet  cold;  diarrhoea  alternating
with  constipation,  the  latter  predominating;  loss  of  ap-
petite; smell  or  thought  of  food  causes  nausea;  tongue
moist,  coated  white ;  thirstlessness ;  always  <  at  men-
strual period;  menses  scanty  and  accompanied  with
colic. /^Headache.

■  Attacks  come  every  eight  days ;  during  attack  can  neither

eat  nor  drink,  nor  endure  light  or  noise;  does  not  even
like  to  speak;  great  prostration,  <  during  menstruation;
when  pams  subside,  inflammation  of  tonsils  appears-
tongue  white  and  no  relish  for  food, headache


LAC  DEFLORATUM.  550

llThrobbing  frontal  headache,  nausea,  vomiting  and  ob-
stinate constipation;  especially  in  ancemic  women.

■Severe frontal  headache;  nausea  and  sometimes  vomiting
upon  rising  in  morning,  or  from  recumbent  position  at
any  time,  or  upon  moving;  great  constipation ;  constant
chilliness  even  when  near  tire;  urine  profuse  and  watery,
or  scanty  and  high  colored ;  intense  pain  throughout
whole  spinal  column ;  excessive  thirst  for  large  quanti-
ties; great  depression  of  spirits;  sudden  prostration  of
strength  at  5  p.m.;  skin  color  of  red  rose,  with  swelling
of  face,  neck,  arms  and  body,  generally  in  morning  and
during  day  and  evening. fc/Headache.

■  Severe  pain  over  eyes,  with intense  throbbing  in  both

temples;  eyes  feel  as  if  full  of  little  stones;  eyeballs  in-
tensely painful,  and  on  shutting  eyes,  pressure  of  lids
increases  pain ;  edges  of  lids  feel  contracted,  and  convey
sensation  as  of  a  narrow  band  drawn  tightly  across  eye-
ball; pain  over  1.  hip;  constipation  and  profuse  urina-
tion during  paroxysm. ^Headache.

■  Dimness  of  vision,  as  of  cloud  before  eyes;  profuse  urina-

tion; full  feeling  in  head;  slight  nausea  at  pit  of
stomach;  face  pale;  feet  cold; coldness  in  back.

■  Pain  commencing  in  and  above  inner  end  of  r.  eyebrow;

before  rising  in  morning;  soon  after  rising  pain  passed
into  eyeball;  <  until  afternoon,  at  which  time  it  be-
came unbearable;  <  by  walking  and  particularly  by
sitting  down,  though  done  carefully,  also  by  heat  radi-
ated from  fire  or  stooping,  >  on  pressure;  pressure  on
temples  disclosed  strong  pulsation  of  artery ;  pain  ceased
entirely  at  sunset  and  did  not  return  till  next  day.

■  Intense  pain  at  point  of  exit  of  supraorbital  nerve,  dif-

fused thence  over  forehead;  attack  commences  with
chill,  quickened  pulse,  flushed  face  and  discharges  of
wind  from  stomach.

■  Pains  so  severe  that  she  would  bury  her  eyes  in  her

hands  and  press  them  into  pillo'w. ^Sick  headache.
■Severe  headache  for  years;  severe  pain  over  eyes ;  intense

throbbing  in  temples.
•  General  sore  pain  of  head,  produced  by  coughing.

■  Severe  headache  with  a  sensation  as  if  top  of  her  head

was  lifted  off  and  was  raised  about  five  inches,  and
brains  were  coming  out;  head  feels  very  hot  and  motion
increases  pain;  face  felt  as  if  flesh  w^as  off  bones  and
edges  were  separated  and  sticking  out.

■  Pain  first  in  forehead,  extending  through  occiput,  mak-

ing her  nearly  frantic.

■  Intense  headache  in  forehead  and  through  head,  <  in

vertex,  afterward  head  felt  bruised.


551  LAC  DEFLORATUM.

I  In  morning  nausea  and  sensation  of  .a  round  ball  full  of

pain  in  centre  of  forehead.
I  Throbbing  in  temples.

■  American  sick  headache,  with  gastric  symptoms.

*  Outer  Head. iHead  feels  large  as  if  growing  externally.

Head  heavy,  falling  to  r.  side.

i  I  General  sore  pain  of  head  produced  by  coughing.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i Dimness  of  vision;  can  only  see  lights,

not  objects; preceding  headache.
■Sensation  as  if  eyes  were  full  of  little  stones. ^Headache.
BiGreat  photophobia,  even  candlelight  unbearable.
Intense  vertigo  when  opening  eyes  while  lying,  <  when

raising  up;  objects  appeared  to  move  swiftly  from  1.  to

r.,  at  other  times  moving  as  if  tossed  up  from  below  in

every  direction.

■  Great  pain  in  eyes  on  first  going  into  light,  soon  passed

off;  on  closing  eyes  on  account  of  light,  pain  was  felt

in  eyeballs  as  if  from  pressure  of  lids.
I  Pain  in  and  above  eyes.
BOn  closing  eyelids  painful  pressure  as  if  lids  were  short

laterally,  causing  sensation  of  band  pressing  upon  balls.

■  Upper  eyelids  feel  very  heavy;  sleepy  all  day.

■  Pain  in  head,  most  marked  over  1.  eye  and  in  temple,

extending  into  eyes,  and  causing  profuse  lachrymation.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Painful  pressure  or  tightness  at  root  of
nose. ^Catarrh.

*  Upper  Face. Deathly  paleness  of  face.

■  Wasted,  thin  and  excessively  sallow,  with  dark  stains

beneath  eyes.

■  Sallow  complexion  with  eczematous  eruption.

■  Flushes  of  heat  in  1.  side  of  face.

■  Face,  neck,  arms and body  generally  flush  color  of  a

red  rose,  with  swelling,  but  no  itching  or  burning.

■  Sensation  as  if  all  flesh  was  off  bones  of  face  and  edges

were  separated  and  sticking  out.
I  I  Pimples  on  face  and  forehead. ^Irregular  menses.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Grinding  of  teeth  when  asleep,  with

pain  in  stomach  and  head  with  vomiting.
^^  Inner  Mouth. '  i  Mouth  very  dry.

■  Breath  very  offensive.  ^

■  Mouth  clammy  and  frothy,  especially  during  conversation.
^^  Throat. ■Globus  hystericus; sensation  of  a  large  ball  rising

from  a  point  about  lower  end  of  sternum  to  upper  end
of  cesophagus,  causing  distressing  sense  of  suffocation.

■  Sore  throat  <  when  swallowing;  slight,  hacking  cough.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■  Entire  loss  of

appetite.

■  Great  thirst  for  large  quantities  and  often;  intense  thirst.


LAC  DEFLORATUM.  552

^^  Eating  and  Drinking, i  Could  not  drink  milk  without  its

causing  sick  headache.
^^  Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea and  Vomiting. iSour
eructation.

I  I  Nausea  in  morning.

Nausea  from  a  recumbent  position  at  any  time  during  day
or  evening,  or  upon  moving  or  rising  in  morning.

! Deathly  nausea,  cannot  vomit,  with  groans  and  cries  and
great  distress,  great  restlessness  with  sensation  of  cold-
ness; although  skin  was  hot,  pulse  was  normal.

I  Nausea  and  vomiting  and  a  sensation  of  deathly  sickness,
<  from  movement  or  rising  up  in  bed.

■  Vomiting  first  of  undigested  food,  intensely  acid,  then  of

bitter  water  and  lastly  of  a  brownish  clot,  which  in
water  separated  and  looked  like  coffee  grounds;  no
smell ;  bitter  taste.

■  Incessant  vomiting,  which  had  no  relation  to  her  meals.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach, i Violent pain in pit of

stomach,  seldom  lower,  brought  on  by  fatigue.
I A  good  deal  of  wind  and  acid  stomach,  no  tenderness.
I B  Dyspepsia.

■  Bloating  in  epigastric  region,  with  attacks  of  asthma ;  he

could  scarcely  breathe;  hard  pressivepain  at  about  fourth

cervical  vertebra.
^^Hypochondria. iCramps  in  epigastric  region.
^'^  Abdomen, i  l  Abdomen  sore  and  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Severe  pain  across  umbilicus  with  headache.

■  Great  fatigue  from  walking,  on  account  of  heaviness  as

of  a  stone  in  abdomen.

■  Constant  pain  in  frontal region; nausea  in  morning,

deathly  paleness  of  face  on  rising  in  morning;  aching
pains  in  wrists  and  ankles ;  puffy  swelling  under  mal-
leoli ;  drawing  pains,  with  heat,  across  lower  abdomen
and  bearing  down  ;  frequent,  scanty,  pale  urine  ;  press-
ive  bearing  down  in  both  ovarian  regions;  cannot  bear
pressure  of  arm  or  hand  on  abdomen;  slight  yellowish
leucorrhoea;  great  lassitude  and  disinclination  to  exer-
tion; depression  of  spirits;  does  not  care  to  live;  ques-
tions as  to  quickest  and  most  certain  mode  of  hastening

/  one's  death ;  great  fatigue  from  walking,  on  account  of
heaviness,  as  of  a  stone  in  abdomen.

I  I  Drawing  pain  across  lower  part  of  abdomen,  with  heat
and  pressing, bearing  down  in  pelvic  region,  both  sides;
cannot  bear  pressure  of  hand  or  arm  on  abdomen.

■  Flatulence.

■  Chronic  gastro-enteritis,  symptoms  of  chronic  diarrhoea

and  vomiting.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Frontal  headache;  deathly  sickness,


553  LAC  DEFLORATUM.

with  or  without  vomiting ;  pale  face  in  morning,  also
lips  and  tips  of  fingers  white;  coldness  over  whole  body.
^Constipation.
lis  generally  constipated,  and  when  it  is  most  persistent
very  chilly;  cannot  get  warm.

■  Frequent  but  ineffectual  urging  to  stool.

1 1  Constipation:  with  chronic  headache;  most  powerful  pur-
gatives were  of  no  avail ;  fseces  dry  and  hard  ;  diarrhoea;
stool  large  and  hard,  passed  with  great  straining,  lacer-
ating anus,  extorting  cries  and  passing  considerable
blood ;  chronic.

I  I  Continual  persistent  constipation,  >  only  by  cathartics
and  enemas,  with  violent  attacks  of  sick  headache,  pain
first  ill  forehead  then  extending  to  occiput,  very  intense,
distracting  and  unbearable;  great  photophobia,  even  to
lightof  a  candle;  deathly  sickness  all  over,  with  nausea
and  vomiting  <  by  movement  or  sitting  up;  chilly,
and  external  heat  does  not  relieve  her;  frequent  and
profuse  urination  of  very  pale  urine.
^'  Urinary  Organs. ■  Frequent  but  scanty  urination.

8  Profuse,  pale  urine.

B  a  Albuminuria.

iConstant  pain  in  region  of  kidneys,  passing  around  each
side  above  hips  to  region  of  bladder,  also  downward
from  sacral  region  to  gluteal,  and  from  thence  down
back  of  thighs  ;  pain  burning,  not  >  in  any  position,  <
lying  down.

■  Urine  very  dark  and  thick.
Urine  very  pale; cannot  retain  it.

I  I  Urine  comes  away  drop  by  drop,  or  else  gushes  out  with
a  sensation  of  very  hot  water  passing  over  parts;  wet-
ting bed  at  night.
^*  Female  Sexual  Organs. iPressive  bearing  down  in  ova-
rian region.

■  Drawing  pain  across  uterine  region,  with  heat  and  press-

ive  bearing  down  in  both  ovarian  regions ;  cannot  bear
pressure  of  hand  or  arm  on  abdomen,  intense  distress  in
lower  part  of  abdomen  during  menstruation,  not  >  by
any  position;  violent  inflammation  in  ileo-ca^cal  region,
with  intense  pain,  swelling,  tenderness,  fecal  accumu-
lation and  violent  vomiting.
I  Menses  delayed  a  week  with  congestion  of  blood  to  head  ;
coldness  of  hands,  nausea  and  vertigo  ;  flow  commenced
next  morning  after  taking  Lac  defl.,  scanty  with  pain  in
back ;  sensation  of  weight  and  dragging  in  1.  ovarian
region.

■  After  putting  hands  in  cold  water  sudden  suppression

of  menses;  pains  all  over,  especially  in  head.


LAC  DEFLORATUM.  554

I  I  Irregular  menstruation,  sometimes  very  dark  and  scanty,

sometimes  colorless  water.
I  I  Slight  yellowish  leucorrhoea.
24  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Morning  sick-
ness during  pregnancy ;  deathly  sickness  at  stomach  on
waking;  vertigo  and  waterbrash  on  rising;  constipation.
I  I  Decrease  in  size  of  breasts.
Has  never  failed  to  bring  back  the  milk  in  from  twelve  to

twenty-four  hours,
i  Diminished  secretion  of  milk.
^"Respiration, l Asthma  so  that  he  could  scarcely  breathe,

accompanied  by  bloating  in  epigastric  region.
^^  Cough. I  1  Short,  dry  cough,  with  difficult  expectoration  of

a  small  lump  of  mucus,  which  >  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Soreness  of  chest  with  great
pressure.

■  Tuberculous  deposit  in  apices  of  both  lungs.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i Pressure  around  heart
(not  like  grasping  of  Cactus),  with  dyspnoea  and  a  feeling
of  certainty  that  he  is  going  to  die  in  24  hours.

■Sharp  pain  in  apex  of  heart,  as  if  a  knife  was  cutting  up
and  down;  this  preceded  a  heaviness  of  head,  dulness
over  eyes,  throbbing  in  temples  and  palpitation  of  heart.

1  Palpitation  of  heart  and  flushes  of  heat,  especially  in  1.
side  of  face  and  neck.
"^  Neck  and  Back. ■  A  symmetrical  patch  of  herpetic  eruption
on  each  side  of  neck,  itching  and  burning  after  scratching.

■Hard,  pressive  pain  at  fourth  cervical  vertebra;  chills
creeping  along  back  between  scapulae.

I  I  Intense  burning  pain  in  small  of  back  and  sacrum,  com-
mencing in  region  of  kidneys,  passing  around  on  both
sides  above  hips  into  groins,  also  downward  from  renal
region  through  gluteal  region,  down  back  part  of  thighs;
pain,  burning,  and  >  by  no  position;  lying  down.

■  Constant  pain  in  small  of  back.

^^  Upper  Limbs, i  i  Ends  of  fingers  icy  cold,  rest  of  hand  warm.
^^  Lower  Limbs. iNumbness  and  loss  of  sensation  over  outer
and  anterior  surfaces  of  thighs.

■  Pains  passing  down  under  side  of  thighs  to  heels,  and

pains  across  top  of  feet  as  if  bones  were  broken  across
instep;  pains  w^ould  come  on  as  soon  as  she  stepped
upon  floor  in  morning,  upon  which  she  would  be  faint
and  nauseated  and  would  have  to  lie  down.

■  Weakness  and  aching  in  ankles,  puffiness.

■  Skin  thickened  at  edges  of  feet.

^^  Limbs  in  General, i  '  Cold  hands  or  feet  during  headache.

1  I  Aching  pains  in  wrists  and  ankles.
^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion. No  position  >,  burning  pain  in
urinary  region.


555  LAC  DEFLORATUM.

Lying  down: vertigo  <;  severe  frontal  headache;  burn-
ing pain  in  urinary  region  <.
Sitting  up:  sick  headache  <;  deathly  sick  feeling  in  pit

of  stomach  < ;  nausea  and  vomiting.
Obliged  to  sit  up :  vertigo.
Sitting  down: pain  in  eyeball  <.
Cannot  stand: falls  backwards  unconscious.
Motion: sick  headache  <;  headache;  pain  in  head  <.
Disinclination  to  exertion.
Moving  head  from  pillow :  vertigo.
Turning  while  lying:  vertigo  <.
Rising:  in  morning,  deathly  paleness.
Extending  arms  high  above  head :  produces  fanitmg  spells.
Stepping  upon  floor :  faintness  and  nausea.
Walking:  pain  in  eyeball  < ;  great  fatigue.
^  Nerves, l  l  Great  lassitude  and  disinclination  to  exertion.
B  Great  restlessness  and  extreme  and  protracted  suffering

from  loss  of  sleep  at  night.
■  Feels  completely  tired  out  and  exhausted,  whether  she

does  anything  or  not;  great  fatigue  from  walking.
I  Great  loss  of  strength,  commencing  with  a  sharp,  cutting
pain  in  apex  of  heart; forehead  feels  heavy,  with  a  dull
sensation  over  eyes  and  throbbing,  principally  m  tem-
ples, rest  of  head  feels  light.
^' Sleep. I  I  Sleepy  all  day  long.  -, r^ • ^

Great  restlessness,  extreme  and  protracted  sutiering  from
loss  of  sleep  at  night.  i  ^  • +

^  Time.  Morning :  when  stepping  upon  floor,  nausea  and  tamt-
liess; nausea  and vomiting; headache;  before rising
- pain  in  eyebrow ;  as  of  a  round  ball  full  of  pain  m  centre
of  forehead; deathly  paleness.
During  day: headache.
Afternoon: pain  in  eyebrow  and  eyeball  <.
5  P.M. :  sudden  prostration  of  strength.
7.30  P.M.: fainting  spells.
9  P.M.:  hot  fever.
Evening: headache.

Night: sleepless.  .  .  ^ ,  , •

''  Temperature  and  Weather. iSensation  as  if  cold  air  was
blowing  on  her,  even  while  covered  up  warm.
External  heat:  does  not  >  chilliness;  pam  m  eyeball  <.
Cold  water:  putting  hands  in,  sudden  suppression  of  menses.
^0  Fever HHot  fever  9  p.m.,  continues  until  near  morning,
wakes  in  profuse  sweat,  which  stains  linen  yellow  dith-
cult  to  wash  out
I  Hectic  fever;  malignant  typhoid.
ISensation  as  if  the  sheets  were  damp.
''  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodical  pam:  m  forehead.


LAC  DEFLORATUM.  556

Every  half  hour:  profuse  urination.

Sunset:  pain  in  eyeball  ceases.

Every  eight  days:  attacks  of  sick  headache.

Menstrual  period :  colic.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  tendency  to  fall  to  side;
pain  in  and  above  inner  end  of  eyebrow;  head  heavy,
fails  to  side.

Left:  pain  over  hip;  over  eye;  flashes  of  heat  in  side  of
face;  sensation  of  v^eight  and  dragging  in  ovarian  region.

From  1.  to  r.:  objects  appear  to  move.
^^  Sensations.  As  though  a  knife  was  cutting  up  and  down
through  heart;  as  if  head  would  burst;  eyes  feel  as  if
full  of  little  stones ;  sensation  in  lids  as  of  a  narrow  band
drawn  tightly  across  eyeball;  as  of  a  cloud  before  eyes;
as  if  top  of  head  was  lifted  off;  as  if  flesh  was  off  bones
of  face,  and  edges  were  separated  and  sticking  out;  as
of  a  ball  of  pain  in  centre  of  forehead;  htad  as  if
growing  externally ;  objects  appear  as  il  tossed  up  from
below  in  every  direction ;  pain  in  eyes  as  if  from  press-
ure of  lids ;  as  if  eyelids  were  short  laterally,  causing  sen-
sation as  of  a  band  pressing  upon  balls ;  as  of  a  large  ball
rising  from  a  point  about  lower  end  of  sternum  to  upper
end  of  oesophagus ;  as  of  a  stone  in  abdomen  ;  as  if  bones
were  broken  across  instep ;  as  if  sheets  were  damp ;  as  if
cold  air  was  blowing  on  her.

Pain  :  first  in  forehead,  then  in  occiput ;  over  1.  hip  ;  above
inner  end  of  r.  eyebrow  ;  in  eyeball :  in  stomach  ;  in
region  of  kidney  passing  around  each  side  above  hips  to
region  of  bladder,  also  downward  from  sacral  region  to
guteal,  and  from  thence  down  back  of  thighs ;  in  back  ;
all  over;  in  small  of  back;  down  under  side  of  thighs
to  heels ;  across  top  of  feet.

Distracting,  unbearable  pain :  in  forehead  and  occiput.

Intense  pain:  throughout  spinal  column;  in  eyeballs;  at
point  of  exit  of  supraorbital  nerve;  in  forehead  and
through  head.

Violent  pain :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Severe  pain :  in  forehead  just  above  eyes ;  in  head ;  across
umbilicus.

Sharp  pain  :  at  apex  of  heart.

Great  pain  :  in  eyes.

Litense  distress  :  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

Throbbing:  in  temples;  in  vertex.

Intense  burning  pain :  in  small  of  back  and  sacrum.

Burning  pain :  in  urinary  organs.

Cramps:  in  epigastric  region.

Drawing  pains  with  heat:  across  low^r  abdomen.

Aching  pains:  in  wrists  and  ankles.


557  LAC  DEFLOR ATUM.

Sore  pain  :  of  head ;  in  throat.

Hard,  pressive  pain:  at  about  fourth  cervical  vertebra.
Painful  pressure:  at  root  of  nose.
Constant  pain: in  frontal  region.
Periodical  pain :  in  forehead.
Soreness:  of  abdomen;  of  chest.

Pressive  bearing  down:  in  ovarian  region  ;  in  pelvic  region.
Pressure: around  heart.
Heaviness: of  head.
Heavy  feeling :  in  forehead.
Dull  sensation :  over  eyes.
Itching:  of  eruption  on  neck.
^^  Tissues, i  Perverted  and  deficient  nutrition.
I  I  Loss  of  weight.

I  Obesity.

I I  Dropsy :  from  organic  heart  disease ;  from  chronic  liver
complaint;  far  advanced  Bright's  disease;  following
intermittent  fever.

I  I  Asthma;  emphysema;  pulmonary  catarrh.

I  I  Obstinate  neuralgia  caused  by  derangement  of  abdomi-
nal organs,  intestines  and  liver.

I  I  Fatty  degeneration.

Diseases  with  faulty  nutrition,  in  consequence  of  obscure
subacute  inflammation  of  stomach  or  intestines,  followed
by  affections  of  the  nervous  centres.
*^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Touch :  abdomen
sensitive.

Pressure:  around  waist,  produces  fainting  spells ;  pain  in
eyeball  >  ;  presses  eyes  into  pillow  with  severe  pain ;
cannot  bear  it  on  abdomen.

Bandaging  head  tightly: <  pain.

After  injury:  subject  to  distress  in  head.
^  Skin. ■  A  symmetrical  patch  of  herpetic  eruption  on  each

side  of  neck,  itching  and  burning  after  scratching.
*'' Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  13,  dark  hair,  sick
headache; sciatica.

Girl,  set.  17,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  one  to  three  attacks  every
week,  suffering  three  years;  fainting  spells.

Girl,  set.  18; irregular  menstruation.

"Woman,  had  been  in  habit  of  taking  ten  or  twelve  enemas
every  day,  and  often  passed  four  or  five  weeks  without
action  of  bowels,  suffering  fifteen  years;  chronic  consti-
pation.

Woman,  small,  slender,  nervo-bilious,  mother  of  four
children,  attacks  came  at  least  once  a  month,  and  for
last  two  years  every  Saturday,  suffering  sixteen  years ;
hemicrania.

Man  set.  22,  musician,  strong,  active;  chronic  constipation.


LAC  DEFLORATUM.  558

Woman,  set.  29,  tall,  thin,  mother  of  two  children,  light
hair  and  blue  eyes,  suffering  from  youth ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  30,  nervo-sanguineous  temperament,  suffering
two  years;  headache.

Woman,  set.  32,  small  sized,  mother  of  four  children,  suf-
fering seven  years ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  40,  attacks  two  or  three  times  a  week,  lasting
12  to  24  hours,  during  which  she  is  unable  to  do  any-
thing; headache.

Woman,  set.  40,  has  been  for  several  years  subject  to  con-
tinual, persistent  constipation,  >  only  by  cathartics  and
enemas;  violent  sick  headaches.

Man,  set.  49,  at  age  of  21,  fell  from  a  roof  and  was  carried
home  insensible,  since  then  subject  to  spells,  which,  as
he  advanced  in  years,  became  more  frequent,  sometimes
occurring  every  week ;  headache.

Woman, set. 71, very  stout, suffering for some  years;
headache.
*^  Relations. Compare  Lac  can.


550  LACI-IESIS.

LACHESIS.

The  Surukuku  Snake  of  South  America.  Ophidia.

The  first  trituration,  and  first  dilution  in  alcohol,  of  the  snake  poison,  Trio-o-
nocephalus  Lachesis,  was  made  by  Hering,  on  July  28th,  1828.

The  first  cases  were  published  in  the  Archives,  in  1835.  In  1837  this  remedy
was  introduced  into  our  Materia  Medica.  See  Effects  of  Snake  Poison,  by  C.  Hering,
Denkschriften  der  Nordamerikanischen  Akademie  der  homoopathischen  Heil-
kunst,  Allentown,  Pa.

Provings  by  Hering,  and  under  his  direction  by  Stapf,  Bute,  Bauer,  Behlert,
Detwiller,  Gross, •  Kummer,  Eeichhelm,  Roenig,  Wesselhoeft,  Kehr,  Koth,  Mat-
lack,  De  Young,  Helfrich,  Schmoele,  and  Lingen.  Later  proving-s  were  made  by
Eobinson,  Fellows  (Fincke,  not  contained  in  Encyclopedia),  Bartlett,  Metcalf  and
Berridge. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  5,  p.  432.

Clinical  Authorities.— i/fmtaca^  jealousy,  Woost,  Ruck.-  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5
p.  6  ;  Delirium  Iremem,  Hering,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  143;  Melancholy,  Guernsey,'
Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  49 ;  Melancholia  after  confinement,  MSS. ;  Mental  disorder,
Berridge,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  51;  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  73;  Wesselhoeft,  Raue's
Rec,  1871,  p.  47;  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  314;  Weber,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  5,
p.  34;  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  32;  Irritation  of  meninges  of  brain  and  spinal
cord.  Pope,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  479  ;  Brain  irritation,  Nankivell,  A.  H.  Rev.,  vol.
13,  p.  360 ;  Inflammation  of  brain,  Lunzer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  44 ;  Sunstroke,  C.  B.
Knerr,  MSS.;  Affection  of  brain.  Miller,  H(.m.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  97;  Encephaloma,  Jackson,
Gilchrist's  Surgery,  p.  161,  N.  A.  J.H.,  vol.  22,  p.  363;  Vertigo,  J.  C.  Cummings,MSS.;
Headache  (4  cases),  Neidhard,  MSS.;  C.  H.Vilas,  MSS.;  Wesselhoeft,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.
483;  Sawyer,  Am.  Horn.  Obs.,  vol.  2,  p.  138  ;  Pope,  B.J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  478  ;  Megrim,
Tietze,  Peters,  Pope,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  89  ;  Cephalalgia,  Raue's  Rec,  187(»|
p.  287;  Supraorbital  neuralgia,  Martin,  Med.  Inves.,  vol.  7,  p.  594;  Asthenopia,
Norton's  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  109;  Defective  sight  after  diphtheria,  MSS.;  Post-diph-
theritic eye  affection,  Martin,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  108 ;  Retinitis  apoplectica,  Norton's  Ophth.
Therap.,  p.  109;  Inflammation  of  eye,  Rittenhouse,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc  Pa.,  1873,
p.  106;  Orbital  cellulitis,  Allen,  Norton's  Ophthal.  Therap.,  p.  108;  Pterygium,
Rittenhouse,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1873,  p.  107;  Partial  deafness,  Martin,
Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  81 ;  Affection  of  ear,  Martin,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  149  ;  Lippe,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  159 ;  Epistaxis,  J.  S.  Linsley,  MSS. ;  Coryza,  MSS. ;
Chronic  nasal  catcm-h,  W.  Story,  MSS. ;  Affections  of  nose,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  173;  Neuralgia  of  fcx.e,  Bnjanus,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  179;  Tietze,

Note.— A  circular  letter  issued  by  Dr.  Hering,  in  1878,  soliciting  contribu-
tions of  clinical  matter,  provings,  etc,  for  a  full  collection  of  reports  wherewith  to
celebrate  the  Fiftieth  Anniversary  of  the  introduction  of  Lachesis,  was  freely  and
generously  responded  to  by  numerous  members  of  the  profession,  whose  names  ap-
pear in  the  list  of  Clinical  Authorities,  followed,  by  the  abbreviation  MSS.  The
author  did  not  live  to  finish  his  intended  Monograph,  but  all  that  is  essential  and
of  guiding  value  in  Lachesis  is  embodied  in  our  arrangement. — Eds.


LACHESIS.  560

Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  425 ;  Swelling  of  face,  Duncan,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  24o ;
Erysipelas  of  face,  Berridge,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p,  30 ;  Parotitis,  Smith,  Med.  Inv.,
vol.  5,  p.  106 ;  Bleeding  of  gums,  Leon,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  666 ;  GLossomania,
Gross  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  472 ;  Sore  mouth  of  nursing  women,  C.  Pearson,  MSS. ;
Nursing  sore  mouth,  Raymond,  Med.  Inv.,  vol,  5,  p.  72 ;  Affection  of  mouth  after
diphtheria,  MSS.;  Sore  mouth  and  throat after  scarlet  fever,  Preston,  Pane's  Pec,
1870,  p.  321;  Chronic  irritability  of  fauces,  Wessellioeft,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  488;
2%-oat affection, C.  Hering, B. J.  H.,  vol.  21, }».  370;  Affection  of  throat after
diphtheria,  MSS. ;  Inflamnudion  of  throat,  Paymond,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  5,  p.  72  ;  Angina,
Stow,  Paue's  Pec,  1870,  p.  142 ;  Berridge,  Pane's  Pec.,  1870,  p.  142  ;  Fielitz,  Jahr,
RUck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  531;  Sore  throat,  Blakely,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  126;
Boyce,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  5,  p.  6; (5  cases)  Neidhard,  MSS.;  Tonsillitis,  Hirschel,
Piick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  242 ;  Blakely,  Raue's  Pec,  1870,  p.  141 ;  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.
1,  p.  232;  Epidemic  pharyngitis  (50  cases).  Ward,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  6,  j).  226;
Chronic  pharyngitis. Miller, Raue's Pec, 1875,  p. 246; Diphtheria,  Guernsey,
Oehme's  Therap.,  p.  46;  Allen,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  99 ;  Hale,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.
1,  p.  184;  (3  cases)  Hale,  Oehme's  Therap.,  p.  48  ;  Goodno,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.
140 ;  (2  cases)  Goodno,  Oehme's  Therap.,  p.  49  ;  (2  cases)  Hirsch,  Oehme's  Therap.,
p.  46 ;  (5  cases)  Wesselhoeft,  Oehme's  Therap.,  pp.  47-48 ;  Dunham,  A.  H.  O.,
vol.  4,  p.  Ill ;  Tietze,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  124 ;  Oehme,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  68 ;
T.  S.  Hoyne,  MSS. ;  A.  M.  Piersons,  MSS. ;  (3  cases)  Piersons,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,
p. 212;  (8 cases) MSS.;  Von  Tunzelmann,  Am.  Hom. Rev.,  vol. 17,  p.  741;
C.  W.  Boyce,  MSS.;  Fellows,  Am.  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  5,  p.  412;  C.  Pearson,  MSS.;
Rittenhouse,  Paue's  Pec,  1872,  p.  103;  Schmitt,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  190;  Beau-
mont, Org.,  vol.,  3,  p.  93;  Syphilitic  phagedcena  of  fauces,  Hale,  Raue's  Pec,  1874,
p.  109 ;  Spasmodic  stricture  of  throat,  Bartlett,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  242 ;  Foreign
body  in  oesophagus,  Herzberger,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  376 ;  Dyspepsia,  Hering,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  586;  Affection  of  stomach,  Neidhard,  MSS.;  Affection  of  liver,
Luther,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  339 ;  C.  Neidhard,  MSS.;  Affection  of  spleen,  C.  Neid-
hard, MSS.  ;  Typhlitis,  Hering,  Black,  Piick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  725;  Peritonitis,
Wesselhoeft,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  485  ;  Burkner,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  669 ;
Tumor  in  I.  groin,  H.  C.  Bartlett,  MSS. ;  Buboes,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  560 ;
Diarrhoea,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  837;  C.  Neidhard,  MSS. ;  Constipation,
Hering,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  816 ;  Smith,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  176 ;  Croup-
ous enteritis,  Gerson,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  420 ;  Dysentery,  Boyce,  Paue's  Pec,
1874,  p.  174;  Affection  of  anus  and  rectum,  Morgan,  Am.  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  409 ;
Hemorrhoids,  C.  Neidhard,MSS.;  Anal  fistula,  Eggert,  Raue's  Pec,  1 870,  p.  219 ;  Med.
Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  143  ;  Strangury,  C.  Neidhard,  MSS. ;  Ovaritis,  Conant,  Times  Petros.,
vol.  1,  p.  93;  Sacculated  ovarian  disease,  Baer,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  103;  Ovarian  tumor.
Dudgeon,  Gilchrist's  Surgery,  p.  161,  B.  J.  H.,  1873,  p.  183; Uterine  and  ovarian
f  -(mors ;  Metritis,  J.  C. Morgan,  MSS. ; Chronic uterine catarrh, Lindsay, Org.,
vol. 1,  p. 471 ; Leucorrhosa  with sterility,  MSS. ;  Puerperal convulsions,  Minton,
Raue's Path.,  p.  902,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  76; Colby,  Raue's Pec,  1874,  p.
247  ;  G.  B.,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  405  ; Ovarian  pain  after  confinement,  J.  H.  Pat-
ton,  MSS.;  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens,  M.,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  108,  p.  156; Vitiated
milk,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  412 ;  Aphonia,  Knickbocker,  Raue's  Pec,  1873,  p.
88  ;  Affections  of  larynx,  Lobethal,  Piick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  168  ;  Spasms  of  larynx,
Knickbocker,  Pane's  Rec,  1873,  p.  89 ;  Spasm  of  glottis.  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.
8,  p.  310;  Croup,  Guernsey,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  80;  Membranous  croup.  Frost,
Am.  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  5,  p.  491 ;  Bronchitis  and  aphonia,  Stow,  Raue's  Pec,  1874,  p.


5G1  LACHESIS.

145  ;  Bronchial  catarrh  (5  cases),  Boyce,  Am,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  415  ;  Respiratory
affections,  Hering,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  18 ;  Dyspnea,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.

107,  p.  157 ;  Asthma,  Hart,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  118  ;  Med..  Inv.,  vol.  11,  p.  225  ;
Heriug,  Rlick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  190;  Asthmatic  cough,  Deck,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.
173;  Pdiiis  ill  chest,  C  Neidhard,  MSS. ;  Threatened  paralysis  of  lungs,  Trinks,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  762 ;  Chest  affection,  Hering,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  3(59 ;
Lwng  affection,  Hering,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  377;  Weber,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  5,
p.  33 ;  Wurmb,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  822 ;  Consumption,  Hering,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  380;  Tuberculosis,  Wells,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  121 ;  ttmith,  N.  E.
M.  G.,  vul.  8,  p.  309 ;  CAromc  pZewro-pTieitmoreia,  C  Neidhard,  MSS. ;  Affection  of  heart.
Deck,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  175  ;  Hale,  Org ,  vol.  2,  p.  220  ;  Stow,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,
p.  197;  Cyanosis,  Yon  Tagen,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  106;  Functional  disease  of
heart,  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  116;  Attacks  of  dyspnoea  and  palpitation,  Gerstel,
Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  99;  Affection  of  mammary  gland,  Oehme,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  648 ;  Mammary  tumor,  Oehme,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf ,  vol.  4,  p.  304 ;  Ab-
scess 0,1  /.  side  of  neck,  after  scarlatina,  W^ells,  Am.  H.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  362 ;  Affection  of
spine,  Seward,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  310;  Caries  of  dorsal  spine,  Wesselhoeft,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  22,  p.  481;  Phlegmonous  inflammation  of  hand,  M.,  Allg.  Horn Ztg.,  vol.

108,  p  156  ;  Gangrene  of  hand,  Allen,  Am.  Hom  Rev.,  vol.,  4,  p.  558  ;  Affection  of  r.
hand,  Flering,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  374;  Whitlow,  Bell,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.
327 ;  Panaritium,  Kreuss,  Stapf,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  558 ;  Onychia,  Wood,
Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  106;  Contraction  of  psoas  muscle  after  pelvic  abscess,  Hale,  Eaue's  Kec,
1874,  p.  109 ;  Paralysis  of  legs  and  chest  affection,  Wesselhoeft,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.
482;  Scicdica,  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  246;  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  357;  Affection  of
knee,  Fielitz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  587  ;  Varicose  veins  of  knee,  Schiissler,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  860;  Pain  below  knee,  J.  H,  Patton,  MSS.;  Ulcer  of  leg,  J.  C.
Morgan,  MSS.;  Ulcer,  with  paralysis  of  I.  leg,  Baer,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  103;  Syphilitic
ulcer  on  leg,  Hafen,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  105,  p.  108 ;  Gangrene  of  leg,  Allen,  Am.
Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  557 ;  Indolent  ulcers  on  foot,  W.  Story,  MSS. ;  Affection  of
second  toe  of  r.  foot,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  376;  Pain  in  joints, 'Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  900 ;  Hystefia,  B.  in  D.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  286 ;  Bahrenberg,  Allg.
Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  101,  p.  134 ;  Spasms  in  meningitis,  C.  Neidhard,  MSS. ;  Urannic  con-
vulsions. Barrows,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  2,  p.  14;  Convulsions  (3  cases).  Finch,  Hom.
Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  30,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  186;  Chorea,  Constantine  Lippe,  MSS.;
Epilepsy,  C.  Mohr,  MSS. ;  Tietze,  Hering,  Pulte,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  577 ;
(4  cases)  Preston,  Baker,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  1,  p.  123;  Friese,  Raue's  Eec,  1872,
p.  228 ;  Tetanus,  Sircar,  Raue's  P.,  p.  890 ;  Smith,  Eaue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  264 ;
Opisthotonos,  Oehme,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  207  ;  Catalepsy,  C.  Mohr,  MSS. ;
Nervousness,  Deck,  B.  J.  H.,vol.  31,  p.  174;  Nervous  affection,  Bahrenberg,  Org.,
vol.  3,  p  90 ;  General  breakdown  after  repeated  attacks  of  pneumonia,  Kenyon,  Am.
Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  5,  p.  269  ;  Neuralgia,  Bojanus,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  Ill ;  Howard,
Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  Ill;  Post-diphtheritic  affection,  Martin,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  1 08  ;  Incipient
paralysis;  Sleeplessness,  C.  Neidhard,  MSS  ;  Intermittent  fever,  Hering,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  941;  Lippe,  Bernreuter,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3,  p.  30;  Intermittent,
with  ovarian  cd)scess,  Linsley,  MSS. ;  Ague,  Walker,  Dever,  Jennings,  Allen's  Inter-
mittent Fever,  p.  160;  C.  Neidhard,  MSS.;  J.  C.  Morgan,  MSS.;  Typhoid,  jSIohr,
Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  208;  Bojanus,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  745  ;
Boyce,  Brewster,  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  284;  Boyce,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  5,  p.
5;  Hydrophobia,  Hering,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  624;  Toothaker,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  276;  Septicemia,  result  of  dissecting  wound,  Dunham,  Dunham's  Lec-

VOL.  VI. — 36.


LAOHESIS.  562

tares,  vol.  2,  p.  247  ;  Phlebitis,  Dunham,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  124;  (8  cases)  Dun-
ham A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  110;  Rheumatmn,  Linsley,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  44;
^mith,  Raue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  254;  Hemorrhage  in  typhoid  fever,  Guernsey,  Hah.
M.  vol.  6,  p.  175 ;  Erysipelas,  Gross,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  143;  Smith,
Kane's  Eee.,  1874,  p.  291;  Carbuncle,  Hering,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  183;
C.  B.  Knerr,  MSS. ;  Dunham,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  Ill ;  Eerridge,  Times  Ketros.,
vol.  3,  p.  30;  Traamatic  gangrene,  J.  H.  Patton,  MSS.;  (2  cases)  Franklin,
Hughes'  Pharm.,  p.  493;  B.  J.  H.,  vol  27,  p.  322;  Simon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol  4,
]).  1027  ;  Gangrene,  Hiatt,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  493 ;  J.  C.  Morgan,  MSS.,  Gil-
christ's Surg.,  p.  91;  Epidemic  malignant  pustule  (8  cases),  Dunham,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.
4,  p.  110 ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  123 ;  Dropsy,  Wolf,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,
p.  349  ;  Anasarca,  Frost,  Am.  Hum.  Rev.,  vol.  6,  p.  492 ;  Syphilis,  Hering,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  123 ;  Morgan,  Am.  H.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  410 ;  Bedscnxs,  Strong,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  285;  Measles,  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  222,  Raue's  P.,  p.  1006;
Repercussion  of  measles,  Dunham,  A.  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  32  ;  Malignant  scarlatina,
Bringham,  MSS.;  Scarlet  fever,  P.  P.Wells,  MSS.;  G.  B.  Saertelle,  MSS.;  Wells,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  411 ;  Gross,  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  58  ;  Hughes,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  125  ;  Allen,  Am.  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  556 ;  Skin  affection,  Ber-
rido-e  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  288 ;  Eruption  on  arm  and  abdomen,  \V.  Story,  MSS. ;
Itch,  Hering,  MSS.,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  375;  Eczema,  Scott,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol  I,  p.
460 ;  Pustular  eruption,  AVesselhoeft,  B.  J.  H  ,  vol.  22,  p  486 ;  Gross,  Hering,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  243;  Herpes  zoster,  Elb,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg,  vol.  110,  (>.  18  ;  Boils,
abscesses,  J.  H.  Patton,  MSS. ;  Ulcers,  Griesselich,  Gross,  Ruck.  Kl  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.
284;  Iiulolent  idcers,  Smith,  Gwynn,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  295;  Hall,  Raue's  Rec,
1873,  p.  247;  Antidote  to  bee  sting,  Boyce,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  90;  Baugh,  Med.
Tnves.,  vol.  6,  p.  54;  Antidote  to  Bufo,  Weber,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  91 ;  Dog  bite,
Linsley,  MSS. ;  Tarantula  6fe,  Hardenstein,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  106;  Antidote
to  bite  of  rattlesnake,  Weber,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  91.

^  Mind. 'Loss of consciousness.

1 1  Weakness  of  memory  ;  makes  mistakes  in  writing ;  con-
fusion as  to  time.

c  Great  dulness  of  mind  with  bodily  weakness. ^Typhus.

EMind  confused  and  wandering. ^Diphtheria.

I B Quick  comprehension ;  mental  activity,  with  almost  pro-
phetical perception  ;  ecstasy  ;  a  kind  of  trance.

I  No  sooner  does  one  idea  occur  to  him,  than  a  number  of
others  follow  in  quick  succession  while  he  is  writing.

■Visions  and  delirious  talk  as  soon  as  he  shuts  eyes;  <
noon  till  midnight.

BThinks:  she  is  somebody  else  and  in  the  hands  of  a
stronger  power;  she  is  dead,  and  preparations  are  made
for  funeral,  or  that  she  is  nearly  dead  and  wishes  some
one  would  help  her  off;  herself  pursued  by  enemies,  or
fears  medicine  is  poison  ;  there  are  robbers  in  house
and  wants  to  jump  out  of  window;  herself  under  super-
human control ;  visions  real ;  he  will  die.

I  Imagines  he  is  followed  by  enemies  who  are  trying  to
harm  him ;  attempts  to  leave  room  as  if  frightened  by
visions  behind  him. ^Fistula.


5G3  LACHESIS.

1 1  Delirium  at  night,  muttering,  drowsy,  red  face;  slow,
difficult  speech  and  dropped  jaw.

■  Violent  delirium  especially  after  sleeping. ^Typhoid.

■  Delirium  ;  fears  she  will  be  damned.

■  Constant  delirium  which  changes  rapidly  from  one  sub-

ject to  another. ^Diphtheria.

■  Delirium  from  overwatching,  overfatigue;  loss  of  fluids;

excessive  study.

■  iDeKrium  tremens,  attacks  come  most  in  afternoon,  or

after  sleep;  loquacious,  jumps  from  subject  to  subject,
cannot  bear  shirt  or  neckband  to  touch  throat.

■  Most  extraordinary  loquacity,  making  speeches  in  very

select  phrases,  but  jumping  off  to  most  heterogeneous
subjects  ;  at  same  time  proud,  full  of  mistrust. ^Mania.

■  Religious  monomania,  fear  of  being  damned.

■  lOne  word  often  leads  into  midst  of  another  story.

■  Insane  jealousy.

■  His  mind  is  disturbed  before  the  attack. ^Epilepsy.

■  After  operation  for  fistula  in  ano,  complained  of  his  head,

particularly  pain  in  1.  temple  and  occiput ;  aching  pain
in  lumbar  region;  came  home  from  work  dizzy,  faint
and  nauseated  ;  talked  incoherently,  talked  as  it  were
in  a  strange  language;  since  then  quite  without  mind  ;
will  frequently  cry  and  whine,  then  laugh  in  silliest
manner;  does  not  sleep  at  night;  sleeps  only  a  minute
or  two  at  a  time  during  day ;  is  often  violent,  only  with
difficulty  can  be  kept  in  bed ;  endeavors  to  climb  up
bedpost;  has  an  idiotic  expression;  articulation  imper-
fect ;  tongue  lolling  about  in  mouth  ;  eyes  rolling  va-
cantly ;  frequently  rises,  with  great  effort  and  awkward-
ness; body  when  standing  bends  toward  1.,  must  be
supported;  drags  his  feet  in  walking,  direction  of  steps
toward  1.;  entirely  unable  to  feed  himself;  seems  in-
different to  food  ;  imagines  he  is  followed  by  enemies
who  are  trying  to  harm  him ;  attempts  to  leave  room  as
if  frightened  by  visions  behind  him.  ^Mental  disorder.
I  I  She  is  tempted  to  commit  suicide. dUania.

■  ■Loquacity;  much  rapid  talking;  wants  to  talk  all  the

time. <?Fevers.

■Inclination  to  be  communicative ;  vivid  imagination;  ex-
tremely impatient  at  tedious  and  dry  things.

■Is  morbidly  talkative  and  gives  a  rambling  account  of
her  ailments.

■Jealousy,  with  frightful  images,  great  tendency  to  mock,
to  satire  and  ridiculous  ideas.

■  ■Exceptional  loquacity  with  rapid  change  of  subject;

jumps  abruptly  from  one  idea  to  another.

■  Talks,  sings  or  whistles  constantly ;  makes  odd  motions

with  arm. ^Diphtheria.


LACHESIS.  564

I  I  Violent  laughing  for  one  hour;  dyspnoea.

■  Undertakes  many  things,  perseveres  in  nothing.

I  I  Disinclined  to  his  own  proper  work ;  complains  of  trifles.

■  Aversion  of  women  to  marry.

;rPerfect  happiness  and  cheerfulness,  followed  by  gradual
fading  of  spirituality;  want  of  self  control ;  lascivious;
felt  as  if  she  was  clear  animal  right  through,  whilst  all
mental  power  was  dormant ;  sensation  as  if  in  hands  of
stronger  power,  as  if  charmed,  and  as  if  she  could  not
break  the  spell.

I  Quiet,  sorrowful,  lowness  of  spirits,  >  by  sighing ;  repug-

nance to  society  and  dislike  to  talk ;  solicitude  about
future,  with  disgust  for  life ;  inclination  to  doubt  every-
thing; mistrusts  and  misconstrues;  indolence;  aversion
to  every  kind  of  labor  and  motion. ^Melancholia.

I I  Feels  extremely  sad,  unhappy  and  distressed  in  mind  on
waking  in  morning.

iSad;  loatliing  of  life ;  suspicious  and  peevish  ;  moaning
and  complaining;  skin  shriveled  and  livid;  nose,  ears
and  forehead  cold;  as  soon  as  he  shuts  his  eyes  he  is
delirious. ^Traumatic  delirium.

■  Fainting  fits  with  great  and  almost  unconquerable  sadness

and  gloom  ;  dreads  society  ;  persistent  constijDation  with
sensation  as  though  anus  was  closed.

■  ■Great  sadness  and  anxiety,  <  in  morning  on  awaking.

■  Weak  and  unhappy,  particularly  in  morning,  when  she

feels,  on  awaking,  friendless  and  forsaken;  same  symp-
toms if  she  awakens  at  night;  appetite  poor;  consti-
pated; feeling  of  constriction  of  anus  ;  urine  scanty  and
dark  colored;  has  had  domestic  troubles. ^Melancholia.

■  Hopelessness.

■  Dread  of  death,  fears  to  go  to  bed  ;  fears  of  being  poisoned.

■  Discouraged,  loathing  life.  ^Melancholy  after  confinement.

■  Weary  of  life,  looks at  everything  from  dark  side;  <

morning,  >  through  day  ;  least  noise  disturbs  sleep.
■Satiety  of  life  with  longing  for  death.
■She  is  tormented  by  idea  that  her  better  principles  might

be  overcome  by  irresistible  desire  to  suicide. /^Mania.
■Voluptuous,  irritated  state,  fights  it. /^Epilepsy.

■  Amorousness;  amativeness.

I  I  Great  sensitiveness  and  anxiety. ^Liver  complaint.

■  Irritability;  ill  humor;  sensitive  disposition.

■  Peevish,  disposed  to  be  morose  or  quarrelsome.

■  Proud;  jealous,  suspicious  ;  developing  into  mania.
■Malice;  thinks  only  of  mischief

■  Sensitiveness,  or  general  aggravation  after  mental  exertion.

■  A  girl,  after  excessive  study,  uses  exalted  language;  ex-

ceedingly particular  about  language  she  uses,  often  cor-


5G5  LACHESIS.

recting  herself  after  using  a  word,  and  substituting
another  of  very  siniihir  meaning;  talks  about  being
under  influence  of  a  superior  power. ^Mania.

■  Nightly  attacks  of  anxiety ;  afraid  of  cholera,  gets  cramps

in  calves  from  fear;  nausea,  heavy  feeling  in  abdomen,
rolling  in  umbilical  region.

1 1  Chronic  complaints  after  long  lasting  grief  or  sorrow.

lAfter  domestic  calamity ;  sleepless,  or,  when  overcome  by
exhaustion,  short  naps  disturbed  by  frightful  dreams;
springing  up  in  bed  with  terror,  and  suflbcation  of  chest
and  palpitation;  irritability  alternating  with  loquacious
delirium  ;  nightly  hallucinations  causing  mental  suffer-
ing; conscious  of  her  state. /^Mental  disturbance.

I  Mental  derangement  after  vexation.

■  Ailments  from  fright,  disappointed  love  or  jealousy.

■  After  a  jealous  quarrel,  she  put  both  hands  to  her  chest

and  cried  out  "Oh!  my  heart!"  then  fell  down  and  was
in  an  asphyctic  state  for  nearly  twenty-four  hours;  no
pulse  could  be  felt,  breathing  hardly  perceptible;  lay
on  her  back.
^  Sensorium.  iLeft  sided  apoplexy,  especially  after  mental
emotions,  or  abuse  of  alcohol ;  blowing  expiration,  can-
not bear  neck  touched.

■  Stupefaction  or  loss  of  consciousness,  blue  face  and  con-

vulsive movements,  tremor  of  extremities. ^Apoplexy.

■  Stupid  state;  complaining  of  pain  and  weight  in  head

at  school,  on  being  brought  home  he  generally  lies
dozing  or  waking  for  three  or  four  hours;  frequent
waking  at  night;  vomiting  on  alternate  nights;  face
heavy,  pupils  slightly  dilated,  forehead  hot,  pulse  90;
tongue  clean;  head  pains  through  day.  ^Irritation  of
brain.

■  Vanishing  of  thought,  with  blackness  before  eyes,  in  par-

oxysms.
■So  giddy  he  could  not  stand;  could  not  see  letters,  fell
against  wall;  severe  pains  all  over  head.

■  I  Rush  of  blood  to  head :  with  heat  in  head;  after  alcohol ;

suppressed  or  irregular  menses;  climacteric  period.
I  Vertigo  with  heaviness  of  head,  dulness  like  lead  in  occi-
put. ^Typhoid.

■  sDulnessof  cerebral  function. ^Diphtheria. ^Scarlatina.

■  Vertigo:  early  in  morning;  on  waking;  in  evening;  on

looking  up;  on  looking  at  any  object  closely;  from
walking  in  open  air  (at  climaxis);  from  suppressed  ery-
sipelas; with  pale  face;  migraine;  momentary  on  clos-
ing eyes;  with  falling  to  1.  side;  before  menses;  on  stoop-
ing; after  lying  down;  on  reaching  up;  with  nausea,
vomiting,  headache;  stuj^efying;  as  before  apoplexy.


LACHESIS.  566

^  Inner  Head. ■  Frontal  headache;  faint  on  rising.

lln  forehead:  aching;  with  stitches;  dull  pain  (angina
faucium) ;  pressing  from  without  inward ;  violent  head-
ache when  nasal  discharge  suddenly  dries  up.

I  Violent  darting,  stabbing  pains,  from  upper  part  of  fore-
head down  to  centre  of  head,  as  if  knives  were  being
thrust  into  brow;  <  least  motion;  violent  pressure  from
above  downwards. ^Headache.

I  Heavy  pain  in  forehead  extending  to  back  and  sometimes
all  over  head,  coming  on  at  any  time  of  day;  pain  in
back  part  of  hip  and  1.  side,  region  of  spleen,  occasion-
ally on  r.  side;  abdomen  sore,  cannot  bear  least  touch;
costive;  dull  pain  in  legs.

I  Headache  over  eyes  and  in  occiput,  morning  on  rising.

I  Dull  pain  over  and  in  eyes;  nausea;  pain  top  of  head;
giddiness  on  rising.

I  Pain  over  eyes,  mostly  1.,  with  nausea. ^Sick  headache.

I I  Headache  extending  into  nose.

I  Heat  in  forehead  between  attacks. ^Epilepsy.

I  iThrobbing  pain  in  temple  with  heat  in  head,  ^Migraine.
■Violent  throbing  pain  in  1.  temple,  particularly  before

menses.
■  Temporal  nerves  on  one  side  painful,  with  throbbing  in

temples;  heat  in  head;  vertigo  with  paleness  of  face;

pain in 1.  ovarian region; bloatedness of stomach.
iHeadache  frightfully  severe,  brain  feels  as  if  it  w-ould

burst  skull,  especially  at  temples;  generally  begins  on

rising  in  morning,  seldom  in  afternoon ;  lying  down  >

pain,  but  as  soon  as  she  raises  head,  pain  is  equally

severe  whether  she  sits  or  walks.

I I  Pressing  or  bursting  pains  in  temples,  <  from  motion,
pressure,  stooping  or  lying  down.

I  Severe,  oppressive  pain  in  one  or  the  other  temple,  <  on
r.  side;  nausea;  mouth  clammy;  cannot  swallow  the
saliva;  pain  comes  on  at  night  and  lasts  till  end  of  next
day;  usually  >  after  vomiting;  after  eating,  food  rises
in  mouthfuls;  frequent  risings  of  frothy  phlegm.

iDrawing  pain  in  1.  temple  with  redness;  soreness  to  least
touch ;  fever;  pulse  full  and  quick.

IHeadache:  pain  from  superciliary  ridge  to  occipital
protuberance,  intolerable;  could  not  sleep;  slightly
delirious;  pupils  dilated;  pain  intense;  cold  water
externally  >  somewhat;  at  midnight,  partly  insen-
sible; tongue  stiff  and  protruding;  speech  incoherent,
or  saying  same  thing  over  and  over;  talks  like  a
lunatic;  idiotic  look;  does  not  comprehend  what  is  said
to  him ;  whenever  he  rises  staggers  backwards;  walks
backwards  until  he  comes  in  contact  with  wall, bed


507  LACHESIS.

or  table;  takes  hold  of  some  furniture,  and  with
greatest  difficulty  pulls  himself  forward;  afraid  of
everybody,  thinks  everybody  conspires  to  kill  him;
afraid  of  medicine,  won't  take  any;  partial  paralysis  on
r.  side.

■  Headache  in  1.  frontal  eminence,  deep  internally.

I  Left  sided  orbital  neuralgia;  lachrymation  ;  previous  to
paroxysm  rising  of  heat  to  head;  during  intervals  a
weak,  nauseous  feeling  in  abdomen.

iSemilateral  headache  on  r.  side,  creeping  gradually
towards  1.,  until  it  goes  around  head  ;  twitching  in  eyes
when  they  are  fixed  upon  an  object;  menses  irregular,
one  week  ahead  of  time;  tardy  digestion;  constipation;
frequent  nausea;  pain  deep  in  orbit  and  over  eyes,
which  are  red  and  injected. ^'Cephalalgia.

■  Every  three  or  four  days  intense  headache;  pain  throb-

bing and  oppressive,  chiefly  in  r.  half  of  head,  extending
down  same  side  of  neck, which  generally  feels  stiff  and
sore;  pain  <  at  catamenial  period,  which  is  attended
with  much  aching  across  loins;  menses  dark  and  pro-
fuse, lasting  eight  to  nine  days.

■  One  sided  tensive  headache,  drawing  from  neck  over  head

to  eyes;  vomiting;  stiffness  of  neck ;  tenderness  of  scalp.

■  Headache  on  r.  side,  extending  to  neck  and  shoulders,

with  tension  in  muscles.

■  Tearing  pain  in  whole  1.  side  of  head,  from  temple  to  collar

bone;  tears  flow  continually;  pain  without  intermission  ;
some  nightly  aggravations;  >  from  warm  applications;
paralytic  state  of  tongue;  it  inclined  to  affected  side;
could  hardly  speak;  painful  weariness  of  face,  head  and
neck;  tongue  feels  as  if  bound  or  tied  up. ^Neuralgia.

■  Cutting  headache  as  if  a  part  of  r.  side  of  head  was  cut

off,  <  after  rising  or  ascending;  >  from  heat  and  after
belching.

■  Hemicrania  with  giddiness,  paleness  of  face,  general  sen-

sation of  stiffness  and  pain  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.

■  Tearing  on  top  of  head  from  within  outward;  dizzy,  face

pale;  faint,  numb;  face  sunken,  or  bloated  and  red.

■  Pressure  on  top  of  head  with  hot  throbbing  of  temples;

constipation;  any  excitement  causes  headache;  no  cata-
menia  for  two  months. ^Climaxis.

■  Boring  pain  on  vertex,  nausea  and  vomiting. ^Itch.

■  ■Beating  headache  with  heat,  <  on  vertex  and  r.  side,

or  over  eyes;  preceding  a  cold  in  head,  with  stiff  neck.

■  Headache  which  had  lasted  six  weeks;  pain  at  first  began

in  vertex,  then  extended  over  r.  side  of  head  and  over
face,  with  pricking  as  from  needles  in  limbs  of  same
side;  <  in  afternoon.


LACHESIS.  568

I  Violent  pressing,  burning  pain in top of  head,  from

witiiin  outwards.
I  Burning  vertex  headache  during  menopause.
I  Boring  and  sticking  on  vertex.

I  I  Dull  aching  in  sinciput.

iBeating  throbbing  in  vertex;  with  every  movement.

I I  Weight  and  pressure  on  vertex.

■  Congestion  to  head  with  other  complaints.

I  Throbbing  in  head  from  least  movement;  red  face.

■  Headache,  with  rush  of  blood  to  head.
iPressive  headache,  with  nausea.

I  I  Dizzy,  pressive  headache;  <  on  stooping.

B  Violent  headache,  with  flickering  before  eyes.

I I  Headache  in  sun,  glimmering  sight.
I  Headache  preceding  coryza.

■  Headache:  catarrhal;  congestive;  from  sunstroke;  hys-

terical; rheumatic;  menstrual;  epileptic.

■  Terrible  headache;  nightly  pain  in  limbs. /^Syphilis.

■  Pain  as  if  swollen  in  angle  in  front  of  styloid  process,  <

from  pressure.

■  Heaviness  like  lead  in  occiput;  can  scarcely  raise  it  from

pillow,  in  morning  after  waking,  with  vertigo.

■  Boring  pain  behind  1.  ear,  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  Feeling  in  back  of  head  as  if  pressed  asunder.

■  Numbness  in  occiput,  with  pain  in  forehead;  on  touching

throat,  darting  from  throat  to  occiput;  chest  feels  dry.

■  Headache  from  occiput  to  eyes.

■  Headache  every  eight  or  ten  days;  toward  evening  pain

in  back  of  head,  at  first  dull  and  gradually  concentrat-
ing, acute  boring  behind  1.  ear,  apparently  at  juncture
of  temporal,  parietal  and  occipital  bones;  when  boring
pain  reaches  its  height,  generally  towards  morning,  vom-
iting of  food  and  slime;  stitches  in  chest.

■  Soreness  at  vertex,  gradually  spread  over  r.  side  of  head

and  face;  same  sensation,  with  pricking  pains  like  pins
and  needles,  in  upper  and  lower  extremities  of  same
side;  mouth  very  sore;  cannot  masticate  food  without
great  pain;  after  desire  to  micturate  cannot  retain  urine ;
coughing  produces  flow  of  urine;  <  in  afternoon,  when
soreness  frequently  changes  to  a  sudden,  darting  pain  in
arm;  drops  things;  slight  vertigo.

■  Inflammatory  conditions  of  brain;  great  vascular  and

nervous  erethism.
*  Outer  Head. iNumbness  and  crawling  on  1.  side  of  head,
as  in  whole  1.  side.
■Painful  sensitiveness  in  1.  temple  from  vertex  down,  and
in  1.  half  of  face,  when  touched,  or  on  moving  muscles;
sensation  as  if  skin  had  been  burnt  by  heat  of  sun.


569  LACHESIS.

I  Wants  head  closely  wrapped  up.

iTumors  which  perforate  skull.

I  I  Sudden  backward  throwing  of  head. ^Epilepsy.

I  I  Bettered  by  shaking  head.

I  Purplish swelling; delirious talk when closing eyes.

^Erysipelas  of  scalp.

I I  Hair  falls  off,  <  during  pregnancy;  averse  to  sun.
I  I  Does  not  like  hair  touched;  itching  of  scalp.

^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  Oversensitive  to  light.

•  Flickering  before  eyes,  as  from  threads,  or  rays  of  sun.
I  Flickering  and  jerking  in  r.  eye,  with  congestion  to  head.
Flickering  in  peculiar  angular  zigzag  figures,  with  head-
ache.
I  Bright  blue  ring  about  light,  filled  with  fiery  rays.

I  I  Fog  before  eyes ;  in  evening  a  bluish  grey  ring,  about

six  inches  in  diameter,  around  light.

I I  Dimness  of  vision:  much  black  flickering  before  eyes.
that  seems  very  near;  on  waking.

llDefective  sight,  after  diphtheria.
I  I  Shortsightedness.

■  Unsteady  look,  eyes  roll  vacantlj\

I  Eyes  weak  and  dull,  or  distorted. ^Typhus.

■  Variety  of  pains  and  sensations  in  and  around  eyes,  es-

pecially 1.;  very  nervous;  <  thinking  of  eyes,  using
them,  and  waking  in  morning. ^Asthenopia.

■  Amblyopia,  with  lung  or  heart  affections.

■  Hemorrhages  into  interior  chamber,  vitreous,  retina  and

choroid.
!  I  Pupils  at  first  contracted,  then  dilated. ^Fever.

■  Retinitis  apoplectica;  absorbs  hemorrhage,  controls  in-

flammatory symptoms  and  diminishes  tendency  to  reti-
nal extravasation.

I  I  Phlyctenular  keratitis,  especially  chronic  recurrent;
moderate  redness  of  eye;  photophobia.

■Scrofulous  keratitis  with  eruption  on  face,  considerable
photophobia  and  pains  in  eye  and  head,  <  in  morning
and  after  sleeping.

■  Ulcers  on  cornea;  haziness.

■  Sharp,  shooting  pains  from  eyes  to  temples,  top  of  head

and  occiput.

■  Stitches  as  from  knives  in  eyes,  coming  from  head.
■Sticking  drawing  pain  in  r.  eye,  extending  to  vertex.

■  As  if  a  thread  was  drawn  from  behind  eye  to  eye.

■  Eyes  feel  as  though  they  had  been  taken  out  and  squeezed,

and  then  put  back  again;  pains  <  after  sleep;  wakens
patient  from  sleep. ^Supraorbital  neuralgia.

■  Pressure  in  orbits,  with  sensation  of  drawing  from  eyes

to  occiput.


LACHESIS.  570

■  I  Feels  when  throat  is  pressed,  as  if  the  eyes  were  forced

out.
iStitching,  burning  and  pressing  pains  in  eyes.
I  I  Itching  and  burning  of  eyes.

■  Severe  pains  in  and  above  eyes.

I  Intense  and  constant  pain  in  1.  eye,  pain  sharp  and  stick-

ing, and  sometimes  extending  to  brow;  uncertain,  nunib
feeling  on  1.  side  of  head;  marked  dimness  of  vision ;
terrific  headache  over  eyes;  wide  awake  in  evening  and
very  talkative;  could  not  get  to  sleep  until  late,  and
when  she  did,  would  dream  all  the  time;  alternately
dreaming  and  awakening;  <  after  sleep,  anxiously  in-
quires why  it  is  so;  great  prostration;  seems  exhausted
mentally  and  physically;  constantly  laying  aside  bed-
clothes to  get  reUef,  they  seemed  to  oppress  her;  seems
as  if  she  would  die  of  exhaustion  in  morning;  >  in
evening;  intense  pain  in  thigh,  coming  on  after  sleeping,
and  wlien  gone,  leaving  a  paralyzed  feeling;  confused
feeling  in  head  with  vertigo.

I I  Whites  of  eyes  yellow. ^Jaundice.

lOrbital  cellulitis,  following  operation  for  strabismus;  eye
protruded;  conjunctiva  chemosed;  puiulent  discharge;
retina  hazy  and  congested;  point  of  tenotomy  slough-
ing and  a  black  spot  in  centre;  <  at  night.

!  Pterygium.

I  Redness  of  eyes. ^Mania. ^Angina  faucium. ^Fevers.

i Inflammation  of  eyes  and  lids,  Avith  pain  in  them.

I  Painful  inflammation  of  1.  eye,  frequently  recurring,
characterized  by  a  bundle  of  congested  vessels  extending
from  inner  canthus  toward  cornea.

I  I  Eyes  watery. ^Catarrhal  headache. ^Neuralgia. .

■  Fistula  lachrymalis,  accompanied  b}^  long  standing  erup-

tion on  face.
''Hearing and Ears. IB Sensitive  to  sounds;  rushing  and
thundering  in  ears.

■  Painful  beating,  cracking,  whizzing,  drumming,  with  re-

verberation.

■  Whizzing  as  from  insects  in  ears.

■  Ears  feel  as  if  closed  from  within. ^Angina  syphilitica.

■  Ears  as  if  stuffed  up.

■  Hardness  of  hearing,  with  dryness  in  ears,  want  of  wax  ;

numbness  about  ear  and  cheek.

■  After  otorrhoea  ear  remained  dry  and  obstructed,  with

almost  entire  deafness.

■  Diminished  hearing.

■  Partial  deafness,  with  dry  wax  in  1.  ear;  noise  in  ear  like

tea  kettle;  sensation  of  numbness  about  ear  and  down  L
cheek;  sense  of  hunger  every  day  at  eleven.


571  LACHESIS.

■  Stoppage  or  stricture  of  Eustachian  tube.

I  In  evening,  pain  deep  in  1.  ear;  <  from  motion  of  tem-

poral or  masseter  muscles; left  in  a  few  minutes  and
appeared  just  above  1.  external  malleolus,  <  on  stepping.
Iln  night  earache  in  r.  ear,  >  by  external  warmth  and
lying  on  r.  side.

■  Annoying  pulsations  in  ear. ^Carotid  aneurism.

I I  Tearing  extending  from  zygoma  into  ear.
1 1  Pains  in  ears  with  sore  throat.

llEarwax  too  hard,  pale  and  insufficient; whitish,  like
chewed  paper.

■  Polypus  of  ears.

I  I  Soreness  and  crusts  around  ears.

■  Threatened  abscess  of  parotid  gland. ^Typhoid.

■  Ears  excessively  sensitive  to  wind.

^  Smell  and  Nose.  ■■Nosebleed:  dark;  with  amenorrhoea;
before  menses;  typhus;  blowing  of  blood,  mostly  in
morning;  trickling  on  blowing;  from  both  nostrils;  on
svyallowing,  sensation  as  if  tonsils  were  sore,  like  a
wound,  with  stinging  through  ears.

■  Nasal,  indistinct  speech. ^Typhoid.

■  ■Coryza  preceded  by  headache;  discharge  watery,  with

red  nostrils,  herpes  on  lips.

■  Coryza  preceded  one  or  two  days  by  a  feeling  of  soreness,

rawness  and  scraping  in  throat.

■  Scabs  in  nose ;  redness  of  point  of  nose.

■  Catarrh  with  sticking  headache;  stiffness  of  neck.

I  I  Swollen  nasal  mucous  membrane;  discharge  of  blood
and  pus. ^Coryza.

■  Feeling  of  lump  in  throat;  on  swallowing,  lump  descends

but  immediately  returns. ^Coryza.

■  Mucous  membrane  of  nose  thickened, much  sneezing;

dry,  stuffed  feeling  through  front  of  head;  gradually
passes  to  fauces  and  chest;  constant  cough  short  and
dry,  with  wheezing,  face  red  and  puffed,  while  eyes
seemed  almost  pressed  out. ^Hay  asthma.

■  Many  symptoms  end  with  nasal  catarrh.

■  Obstruction  of  nose,  with  buzzing  in  ears;  headache;  ill

humor  and  inability  to  drink.

■  ■Complaints  after  suppressed  coryza.

■  Undeveloped  coryza  with  headache  and  mental  worry.

■  Thick,  yellow  discharge  in  morning,  sometimes  streaked

with  blood,  offensive;  hawking;  falling  of  mucus  from
posterior  nares;  1.  side  only;  discharge  of  hard  plug  of
mucus. ^Chronic  nasal  catarrh.

■  ■Pus  and  blood  from  nose.

■  Discharges  offensive,  sanious,  corroding  nostrils  and  lips.

■  Sudden  discharge  of  pus  and  blood  from  nose,  as  from  a


LACHESIS.  672

bursting  abscess,  seems  to  come  from  frontal  cavities.
fi'Ozsena  syphilitica.
llSoreness  of  nostrils  and  lips.

■  Internal soreness  of  nose,  and  nose  filled  with scabs.

^Mercurio-syphilitic  cases. ^Drunkards.

■  Inflammation  of  nose  with  pimples  and  blisters.

■  Nose  pointed,  reddish,  as  if  sore,  and  always  some  fluent

coryza. ^Angina  syphilitica.

■  Red  nose  of  drunkards.

■  Vesicular  eruption  about  nose.

^  Upper  Face. ■Expression:  of  pain,  with  sopor;  idiotic;  epi-
leptic; distorted;  haggard.

■  Features  distorted,  face  dark  and  much  swollen,  appeared

almost  in  an  apoplectic  fit;  had  removed  everything
from  his  neck,  saying  he  could  bear  nothing  to  touch  it;
could  hardly  breathe. OBee  sting.

■  Haggard,  face  of  unnatural  color,  cheeks  yellow,  with

red;  nose  pointed  and  red,  as  if  raw  from  a  sore;  nose
always  stuffed  up.

■  Face  pale: fainting;  headache;  before  epileptic  attack.

■  Blue  circles  around  eyes.

i Countenance  deeply  sallow. ^Scarlatina.
B I  Yellow complexion,  vermilion redness  of cheeks, or
small  red  bloodvessels  shining  through  skin. ^Syphilis.

■  Earthy,  livid,  cachectic  complexion.  ^Abdominal  troubles.

■  Bluish,  purplish  appearance  of  face,  inability  to bear

anything  around  neck ;  cerebral  symptoms. ^Scarlatina.

■  Face  not  red,  but  very  livid  and  bluish. ^Puerperal  fever.

■  Blue  face  and  lips. ^Emphysema.

■  Li via  face. ^Metritis.

■  Face  puffed. ■Mania.

■  Red  face,  as  in  apoplexy;  bloated,  red,  with  headache,

pains  in  limbs,  stomach,  etc.

■  ■Flushes  of  heat. ^Drunkards. ^Climacteric  period.

^Constipation. ^Suppresed  menstruation.

■  One  cheek  flushed,  the  other  pale.

■  Severe  pain  commencing  in  r.  inner  canthus,  and  extend-

ing upwards  and  outwards  in  a  semicircle,  just  above
superciliary  ridge;  dull,  heav}^  and  prevents  him  work-
ing; commences  9  A.M.  and  goes  off  in  afternoon;  skin
extremely  sensitive  to  touch. ^Neuralgia.

■  Neuralgia,  1.  side,  orbital;  rising  of  heat  to  face  before,

and  weak  feeling  in  abdomen  after  attack.

■  Neuralgia  of  trigeminus;  horrible;  heat  running  up  in

head  previous  to  attack;  weak,  nervous  feeling  in  ab-
domen during  intervals.

■  Tearing  pain  in  whole  1.  side  of  head,  from  temple  down


^73  LACHESIS.

as  far  as  collar  bone,  so.  severe  as  to  cause  tears  to  flow
continually;  <  at  night;  articulation  almost  impossible;
when  tongue  is  put  out  it  inclines  toaltected  side;  pain-
ful weariness  of  head,  neck  and  face;  tongue  feels  as  jf
bound  or  tied  up.  ^Neuralgia.
■Sensation  of  warmth  rising  into  head,  followed  by  tearing
pain  beginning  in  forehead,  but  particularly  affecting
1.  malar  bone  and  parts  under  1.  eye,  and  occasionally
extending  into  eye,  causing  lachrymation ;  attack  lasts
several  hours,  then  disappears  for  a  day  or  two,  and  then
returns  without  any  cause;  weak  sensation  in  abdomen
during  free  days.

■  Feeling  of  stiffness  in  malar  bone  from  cervical  glands.
1 1  Left  side  of  face  and  lower  jaw  swollen,  sensitive  to  touch.
I  Cheeks  swollen,  skin  tense,  hot  and  crisp,  as  if  it  would

crack. ^Peritonitis.

■  Enormously  swollen  upper  lip  and nose; surface not

changed  from  natural  color;  appearance  that  of  pufh-
ness,  but  hard  to  feel,  much  like  swelling  from  a  bee
sting,  or  from  a  blow;  vermilion  border  of  lip  a  trifle
more  blue  than  natural ;  no  pain  or  heat;  menstruating.

■  Erysipelatous  eruption  beneath  1.  eye,  which  first  itches

at  night;  she  was  awakened  with  fright  about  trifles;
in  morning  skin  began  to  redden  and  swell,  and  became
<  after  midday  nap;  next  morning  very  thick  and  red,
with  incessant  itching  scarcely  to  be  endured;  whole
lower  lid  swollen,  red  and  itching.

■  Erysipelatous  swelling  of  face;  r.  eye  almost  closed.

■  Erysipelas  began  close  to  1.  side  of  nose,  in  a  red,  sore

spot,  then  it  became  redder  and  extended  up  and  down
1.  side  of  face ;  extends  up  as  far  as  1.  eye  and  is  dusky ;
she  feels  languid.

■  Facial  erysipelas,  in  a  child  a  year  old;  inflammation

partly  involving  scalp ;  on  second  or  third  day  threat-
ened metastasis  to  meninges;  convulsive  stifl'ening  of
child's  penis.

■  Face swollen, bluish red or leaden  hue;  tongue  dry,

glossy,  tremulous;  <  from  noon  until  midnight.  ^Ery-
sipelas from  a  dissecting  wound.

■  ■Erysipelas  of  face,  with  burning  and  itching,  <  after

siesta;  hammering  headache.

■  Eruption  in  face  followed  by  bluish  spots.

■Burning,  swelling,  redness  and  violent  itching  in  face  at

night ;  later  tetterlike  cracks  with  oozing.
I  I  Facial  herpes.
I  I  Itching  in  face.
"  Lower  Face. "Drawing,  tearing,  throbbing,  boring  pain  in
jawbones.


LACHESIS.  ,  -  574

I  On  opening  mouth,  cracking  in  submaxillary  joints  and

sensitive  as  if  swollen.
I  Great  difficulty  in  opening  jaws. ^Angina  faucium.

■  Lower  jaw  hangs  down. ^Coma. ^Typhus.

■  Frothing  at  the  mouth. ^Epilepsy.

■  Lips  dry,  black,  cracked,  bleeding. ^Diphtheria.  ^Fevers.
i  Enormous  swelling  of  lips.

■  Furuncular  formation  on lips,  pain  and  erysipelatous

areola;  rapid  and  excessive  loss  of  strength,  patient
being  reduced  from  vigor  to  absolute  prostration  in
twenty-four  to  thirty-six  hours. ^Malignant  pustule.

■  Mumps,  particularly  on  1.  side  ;  enormously  swollen,  sen-

sitive to  least  touch;  least  possible  pressure  causing
severe  pain;  shrinks  away  when  approached ;  can  scarcely
swallow;  excessively  peevish ;  throat  sore  internally  ;  face
red  and  swollen;  eyes  glassy  and  wild.

■  Threatened  abscess  of  submaxillary  gland. ^Typhoid.

■  ■Submaxillary  and  cervical  glands  swollen.  ^Diphtheria.
I  I  Red  suppurating  blotches  under  jaw.

^'*  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Teeth  feel  too  long  when  biting  them.

■  ■Raging,  jerking,  tearing,  dull  sticking  in  roots  of  lower

teeth,  through  upper  jaw  to  ear,  periodic,  after  waking
from  sleep;  soon  after  eating;  from  warm  and  cold
drinks.

■  Boring, jerking, twitching, drawing,  tearing, cutting,

piercing,  beating,  pulsating  pains  in  teeth.

■  ■Toothache: from eating; biting; something w^arra;

drinking  warm  things  or  cold;  during  menstruation;
when  awaking;  from  getting  wet;  in  the  Spring;  in
Summer;  >  from  external  warmth;  from  cleaning
teeth;  with  chilliness,  heat,  thirst;  in  persons  who  have
taken  too  much  mercury  ;  with  headache;  with  swelling
of  cheek;  teeth  too  long,  blunt.

■  Hollow  teeth  feel  too  long.

■  Pain  in  all  decayed  teeth  during  rush  of  blood  to  head.

■  Crumbling  of  teeth.

■  ■Gums  swollen  and  spongy;  easily  bleeding.

■  Protruding  gums,  dark  purple. ^Dentition.

■  Gums  bluish,  swollen,  bleeding;  aching  <  from  warm

drinks. ^Yellow  fever.

■  ■Hemorrhage  from  gums.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. iSour  taste;  everything  turns  sour.

■  Slow,  difficult  speech,  tongue  heavy,  cannot  open  mouth

wide;  cannot  pronounce  some  words.
1  I  Worse  from  speaking.

■  Stammering;  letters  s,  b,  t  and  w.

■  Stammering  in  a  child,  set.  4; in talking  draws  face

awry;  clones  r.  or  both  eyes,  opens  mouth  wide  or  closes  it.


575  LACHESIS.

I  Stammering  comes  with  second  or  third  word  or  not  in  a
whole  period;  it  seems p,  v  and  a  had  the  most  influence.

IB  Puts  tongue  out  with  difficulty;  tongue  trembles.

I  Difficulty  of  moving  tongue,  with  impossibility  of  open-
ing mouth  wide.

iTongue:  lolling  about  in  mouth;  swollen,  coated  white;
papillae  enlarged;  dry,  red,  cracked  at  tip;  red  tip  and
brown  centre;  mapped;  sensation  as  if  it  was  going  to
peel;  dry,  black  and  stiff;  tip  cracked  and  bleeding;  a
deep  red  color;  a  dry  stripe  in  middle;  anterior  half  red,
smooth  and  shining  ;  black  and  bloody  ;  sore  on  1.  side,
wdth  sticking  here  and  there;  tickling  at  root,  exciting
cough  ;  blistered  about  tip.

B Blisters  on  inflamed  tongue,  change  into  ulcers,  threat-
ening suffocation ;  gangrene  of  tongue,  on both  edges.

iCanker  sores  on  tip  of  tongue; aphthae.

■  Glossitis  with  titillation  inducing  cough.

■  Cancer  of  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth. I  iBad  odor,  stench,  from  mouth.  ^Stomatitis.

^Sensation  on  roof  of  mouth  as  if  mucous  membrane  was
peeling  off.

lA  bagging  just  in  front  of  uvula,  very  soft,  as  if  contain-
ing pus. ^After  diphtheria.

■  Burning  pain  in  mouth  with  swelling  of  lips  and  gums.

■  Dryness  in  mouth  with  thirst.

■  Dryness  of  mouth  and  throat,  accompanied  by  continued

sensation  in  velum  palali  as  if  desquamation  was  about
to  take  place. ^Hysteria.

■  Much  slime  in  mouth,  with  flakes  of  blood  of  disgusting

taste  and  smell.

■  iSaliva  abundant  and  tenacious. ^Scarlatina.

■  Constant  salivation,  which  often  interferes  with  speak-

ing; cough;  expectoration;  if  the  latter  occurs  after
dinner  she  frequently  vomits  her  food.

■  Salivation  with  hawking  and  coughing. ^Syphilitic  ul-

cers in  throat.

■  Much  slimy  saliva,  especially  in  back  part  of  mouth.

■  Aphthous  and  denuded  spots  in  skin  and  flesh  of  mouth,

preceded  by  burning  pain  and  rawness.

■  Mouth  very  sore,  parched  and  dry,  and  tongue  somewhat

swollen  and  covered  with  blisters  on  each  side.

■  Cannot  swallow  food  after  masticating  it,  because  it  rests

on  back  part  of  tongue  and  produces  a  thrilling  pain
there. ^Cancrum  oris.

■  Nursing  sore  mouth;  swelling  of  tongue  and  lips,  partic-

ularly lower  lip;  redness  and  burning  sensation  of
tongue  and  lips;  redness  and  swelling  of  gums;  at  times,
dry,  shining  appearance  of  inflamed  surface,  at  others


LACHESIS.  576

the  parts  were  moist  with  increased  secretion  of  saliva
on  lower  lip,  small  white  spots  soon  coalescing,  and
forming  a  continuous  white  patch;  ulcers  on  sides  of
tongue;  finally  nausea  and  vomiting,  followed  by  loose
stools;  loss  of  appetite;  inability  to  take  food  from  ex-
treme sensitiveness  of  mouth  and  tongue,  and  distress  at
stomach  after  food  had  been  taken;  emaciation;  debility;
at  times  profuse  perspiration  ;•  pale,  sunken  face.

llSore  mouth  in  last  stage  of  phthisis.

IlSyphilitic  ulceration  of  mouth  and  throat.
'^Throat. iiThroat  and  neck  sensitive  to  slightest  touch  or
external  pressure; everything  about  throat  distresses,
even  the  weight  of  the  bedcovers.

illf  in  evening  on  lying  down  anything  touches  throat  or
larynx,  it  seems  as  though  he  would  sufibcate  and  pain
is  much  <.

llCan  endure  nothing  tight  on  throat;  nausea  is  at  times
caused  thereby.

iPain  in  throat  on  taking  hold  of  it,  extending  even  to
nape  of  neck,  with  sticking  always  on  swallowing,  r.nd
scraping  on  swallowing  bread,  as  if  everythiiig  was
raw;  dryness  of  throat,  without  actual  dryness  of  tongue.

ElUvula  elongated;  fauces  purplish,  swollen,  ulcerated.

I  Uvula  elongated,  constant  inclination  to  hawk  and  scrape ;
hacking  cough;  purplish  hue  of  fauces;  tonsils  but
slightly  enlarged;  emaciation;  face  pale  and  haggard;
sleep  interrupted ;  appetite  and  strength  impaired;  feel-
ing as  if  parts  were  swollen;  some  soreness  on  swallow-
ing and  a  frequent  sensation  as  if  a  small  crumb  was
lodged  in  throat. ^Chronic  irritability  of  fauces.

iSoft  palate,  roof  of  mouth  and  tonsils  much  swollen  and
bright  red. ^Angina  faucium.

I  Constant  feeling  as  of  something  in  throat  to  swallow.

BiFeeling  of  lump  in  throat;  suffocative  sensation;  on
swallowing,  lump  descends,  but  returns  at  once.

■Sensation  as  of  a  lump  in  throat;  awakes  from  sleep  dis-
tressed and  unhappy,  as  if  from  loss  of  breath.  ^Hysteria.

■Feeling  of  a  ball  in  throat,  or  as  if  a  button  was  stuck
fast  in  pit  of  throat;  not  perceptible  on  swallowing  food,
but  on  attempting  deglutition,  and  during  this  it  seems
to  rise  and  sink,  as  if  it  was  turned  around;  it  always
feels  as  if  she  could  bring  it  up,  but  it  will  not  come;
must  have  whole  neck  bare.

I  I  Pain  as  if  something  lodged  in  r.  side,  stinging;  lump
moves  towards  stomach.

■Spasmodic  contraction  of  oesophagus.

■  Constant  tickling  in  throat.

■  Something  sticks  in  throat,  causes  a  hemming,  but  will

not  loosen.


577  LACHESIS.

I A  great  deal  of  phlegm  in  fauces,  on  opening  mouth  it

forms  big  bubbles.
t  Much  hawking  up  of  mucus,  which  is  excessively  painful.

I  Fulness  and  soreness  in  throat. ^Tonsillitis.

■  Sensation  of  a  painful  contraction,  as  if  tied,  on  attempt-

ing to  eat. ^Angina  fauciura.

I I  Feeling  as  if  a  crumb  of  l)road  remained  sticking  in
throat,  obliging  her  to  swallow,  somewhat  >  by  hawking.

■  Sensation  in  throat  as  if  a  morsel  had  remained  sticking

on  swallowing.

■  Feeling  of  a  ridge  in  both  sides  of  throat;  constant  desire

to  swallow  saliva;  sides  of  throat  externally  tender.

■  Feeling  like  a  snake  in  throat,  soreness  in  1.  side  of  throat,

with  choking  like  a  ball;  dryness  <  after  eating;  tick-
ling and  regurgitation  of  food;  eructations  of  wind;
stitch  in  r.  side  when  walking;  throat  <  by  draught
of  air.
■Spasmodic  stricture  on  swallowing  solids,  causes  a  strug-
gling— "goes  the  wrong  way,"  gagging  follows.

■  Throat  feels  ulcerated  on  swallowing.

■  ■Constant  pain  swallowing  empty,  not  swallowing  food.

■  ■Difficulty  of  swallowing  saliva,  not  food.

■  ■Liquids  cause  more  difficulty  in  swallowing  than  solids,

they  escape  through  nose.

■  iCannot  swallow  sweet  or  acrid  things. ^Syphilis.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  in  throat,  with  inclination  toswallow.

■  Constant  desire  to  swallow. /^Tonsillitis.

■  Much  inclination  to  swallow,  although  it  is  very  painful,

with  spasmodic  contraction  of  throat;  <  on  1.  side  and
after  sleep;  cannot  bear  any  pressure  about  neck.

■  Pain  in  throat,  extending  to  ears;  desire  to  swallow;  <

on  deglutition;  pharynx  swollen,  dark  red.

■  Dryness  in  throat:  without  thirst,  at  night  on  waking;

sticking  as  with  a  thousand  needles  that  threatens  to
suffocate  her ;  impedes  swallowing.

■  Pain  in  small  spot  in  throat  at  one  side  of  larynx,  some-

what posteriorly.

■  iThroat  and  larynx  painful  on  bending  head  backward.
■On  lying  down,  pain  in  top  of  throat.

■  Pain  in  1.  side  of  throat,  extending  to  tongue,  jaw  and

into  ear.

■  ■Pains  in  throat,  in  connection  with  those  in  ears.

■  Sensitiveness  of  throat  as  if  sore,  as  after  taking  cold,

with  pain  in  1.  side,  <  in  evening.

■  Hawking  of  mucus,  with  rawness  in  throat,  after  a  nap

in  daytime.

■  ■Much  phlegm  in  fauces,  with  painful  hawking.

■  Everything  seems  raw  in  throat.
VOL.  VI. — 37.


LACHESIS.  578

■  Burning  sensation  of  swelling;  dryness  in  throat.

I  Constriction,  dryness,  stinging  and  great  rawness  of
throat,  especially  of  pharynx  and  larynx,  with  chills
and  rigors. ^Pliaryngitis.

iMouth  and  throat  get  so  dry  that  the  act  of  trying  to
moisten  them,  after  sleeping,  will  make  patient  scowl
and  cause  tears  to  start. ^Typhoid.

iSudden  feeling  as  if  a  lishbone  had  stuck  in  throat,  and
some  days  after  felt  with  increasing  discomfort  as  if  a
sponge  was  hanging  in  throat;  seemed  to  impede
breathing,  felt  as  if  he  could  hawk  it  up,  but  attempt
gave  pain  and  did  no  good ;  felt  as  if  there  was  a  small,
dry  spot  from  which  pain  extended  to  ear ;  continual
inclination  to  swallow,  no. pain  on  swallowing  food  but
during  empty  deglutition  and  on  applying  external
pressure ;  when  he  presses  throat  feels  as  if  eyes  would
spring  out  of  head,  and  externally  as  if  he  had  got  a
blow  on  neck;  between  sternum  and  glottis  a  throbbing,
choking  sensation  ;  throat  >  in  morning,  begins  two  or
three  hours  after  rising  and  conti]iues  till  evening.

■Feeling  of  obstruction  in  throat  on  swallowing,  every
other  day,  first  on  r.  side ;  heat  and  smarting  in  1.  throat,
with  hoarse  voice,  every  day  about  11  p.m.;  <  on  wak-
ing in  morning,  goes  off  about  11  a.m.

I  Sore  throat,  with  hoarseness,  sensation  like  a  lump  in
throat,  inflammation  very  deep  red;  slight  cough.

llRight  tonsil  first  afi'ected,  then  left.

iPain,  especially  in  r.  side  of  throat,  <  by  pressure,
as  if  a  thick  substance  was  there,  it  feels  very  dry,
no  difficulty  in  swallowing  solid  food,  but  cannot  easily
swallow  liquids,  which  get  forced  into  nose  on  swallow-
ing ;  pains  <  when  she  washes  in  morning  and  after
sleeping  in  daytime;  pain  >  in  afternoon,  at  this  time
throat  trouble  becomes  so  prominent,  without  being
painful,  as  to  prevent  speech.

■Rawness  and  difiiculty  in  swallowing,  with  sensation  of
spasmodic  stricture  about  throat.  ^Epidemic  pharyngi-
tis and  laryngitis.

■  Swallowing  increases  pain  in  ears  or  it  sends  pain  into

ears. ^Tonsillitis.

■  lOn  attempting  to  swallow  fluids  pass  through nose,

^Angina  faucium. ^Tonsillitis. ^Syphilis.

■  Chills  and  nausea,  followed  by  hot  flushes  and  terrible

choking,  as  though  some  one  was  pressing  his  wind-
pipe between  thumb  and  fingers. ^Pharyngitis.

■  Pain  in  head,  <  by  light,  noise  and  heat;  eyes  red  and

painful ;  great  pain  in  back  and  limbs,  did  not  permit
her  to  lie,  stand  or  sit  quiet,  must  change  position  fre-


579  LACHESIS.

quently;  fever,  with  dry  mouth;  sore  throat  on  r.  side,
with  redness  and  swelling  of  r.  tonsil,  finally  passing  to
1.  side;  pain  in  limbs.

1 1  Soreness  of  throat,  commencing  on  r.  side  and  passing  to
1.,  where  it  becomes  fixed.

Boy,  set.  8;  very  sore  throat,  horrid  pains  all  over  head,
back  and  front,  so  giddy  could  not  stand,  had  to  be  car-
ried from  school,  could  not  see  letters  in  his  book,  fell
against  wall.

I  Pain  in  throat  extends  to  ears,  which  feel  stuffed.

■  Inflamed  swelling  1.  side  of  throat,  extending  over  ear,

threatening  sphacelus.

■  Phlegmonous  inflammation  of  throat.

■  Angina  crouposa  or  nervosa  with  children  or  climacteric

women.

■  ■Chronic  angina  with  periodic  exacerbations.

■  Children  spit  much  saliva  with  sore  throat.

■  Empty  swallowing  is  agonizing. ^Angina.

■  Sore  throat  and  mouth  following  scarlet  fever;  almost

total  inability  to  swallow ;  fluids  swallowed  easier  than
solids.
■Feeling  of  large  lump  at  back  of  throat ;  sometimes  feels
as  if  some  one  grasped  him  by  throat,  causing  feeling  of
suffocation ;  nausea,  retches  as  if  to  vomit  up  lump ;
slight  soreness  of  back  of  throat  on  swallowing  saliva;
r.  side  of  neck  tender  to  touch;  swallows  saliva  fre-
quently, which  makes  lump  seem  to  increase  and  rise
higher;  feeling  of  pressure  in  middle  of  throat;  must
clear  throat  before  he  can  talk;  all  symptoms  <  on
waking  in  morning.  ^Angina.
Inability  to  swallow,  liquids  being  returned  through
nose;  fauces  bright  red,  tonsils  much  swollen;  face  pale;
small,  hard  and  very  frequent  pulse;  complete  aphonia,
incessant  effort  to  cry  being  heard  only  as  a  gasping
sound;  great  exhaustion,  head  hanging  loosely  back-
ward, could  hardly  move  a  limb;  mucous  memlDraneof
throat  extremely  pale  and  covered  with  white  shreds  of
exudation;  dysphagia,  apparently  paralytic.

■  After  catching  cold,  inflammation  and  swelling  of  ton-

sils; velum  palati  and  root  of  tongue  inflamed;  saliva-
tion and  fetor  oris;  swallowing  almost  impossible,  every-
thing escaping  through  nose ;  can  hardly  speak ;
sensation  as  if  throat  was  filled  with  a  lump  threatening
suffocation;  recumbent  posture  impossible;  no  sleep.

■  Angina,  sudden  in  onset,  appearing  every  year,  causing

great  pain  and  ending  with  suppuration  of  tonsils ;
velum  palati,  uvula  and  posterior  wall  of  pharynx  red,
swollen  and  inflamed,  [)rotruding  from  both  sides;  con-
stant desire  to  swallow,  which  is  difficult.


LACHESIS.  580

iSensation  of  fulness  and  rawness  in  throat ;  frequent  desire
to  swallow,  which  causes  pain,  extending  deep  into  ear;
fluids  ejected  through  nose,  with  great  fear  of  suffocalic  n  ;
gums,  tonsils  and  uvula  dark  red  and  swollen,  latter
looking  as  if  squeezed  and  crowded  back  ;  large  collec-
tion of  mucus  in  mouth,  which  forms  large  bubbles
when  mouth  is  opened. ^Tonsillitis.

I  Fauces  inflamed  ;  r.  tonsil  swollen  ;  1.  tonsil  first  attacked.
^Tonsillitis.

iTonsils  swollen,  1.  <  with  a  tendency  to  r. ;  inability  to
swallow,  threatening  suffocation;  or,  on  swallowing,  pain
shoots  into  1.  ear  ;  cannot  bear  anything  to  touch  neck.

■  Swollen,  congested  tonsils,  with  yellow,  small  patches  on

each;  great  difficulty  to  swallow,  with  pain  on  1.  side,
shifting  to  r.  and  upwards  to  ear;  heat  and  chills,  alter-
nating; commencing  to  get  <C  at  4  p.m. ^Tonsillitis.

iLeft  side;  choking  when  drinking,  fluids  are  driven  out
through  nose;  <  in  p.m.,  aiter  sleep,  from  slightest
touch;  cannot  bear  bedclothes  near  neck. ^Quinsy.*

llChronic  enlargement  of  tonsils.

■  Sloughing  ulcer  in  fauces,  from  an  abscess  in  1.  tonsil.
■Numerous  white  spots  on pale  red  surface  in  1.  throat;

ulcers  on  mucous  membranes;  both  parotids  much
swollen,  without  much  pain;  pulse  frequent  and  hard.
■Right  tonsil  swollen;  uvula  elongated  and  clinging  to  r.
tonsil ;  between  the  two  a  yellowish  white,  part  liquid
exudation,  with  no  especial  tendency  to  formation  of
membrane;  fauces  red;  headache;  fever;  thirst;  pain-
ful deglutition ;  enlarged  submaxillary  glands;  distress-
ing thirst. ^Diphtheritis.

■  Pale,  distressed face,  blue  rings  around  eyes;  extreme

prostration;  speech  and  deglutition  difficult;  fauces  pale
red;  white  shreds  of  exudation  on  fauces  and  roof  of
mouth ;  also  ulcers  with  white  edges  distinct  from  exuda-
tion patches. ^Diphtheritis.

■  Roof  of  mouth,  tonsils  and  buccal  cavity  pale  red ;  tough,

yellow  white  membrane  on  1.  tonsil.

■  ■  Pain  and  soreness  begin  on  1.  side  of  throat.  ^Tonsillitis.

^Diphtheria.

■  Excessive  tenderness  of  throat  to  external  pressure.  ^Ton-

sillitis. ^Diphtheria.

■  ■Aggravation  by  hot  drinks;  liquids pain  more  than

solids  while  swallowing. ^Tonsillitis. ^Diphtheria.

■  Face  sickly,  pale;  dark rings  around  eyes;  swallowing

exceedingly  painful;  speaking  difficult;  weakness  extra-
ordinary;  fauces  pale  red;  white  exudate  on  tonsils  and

*  In  quinsy  there  is  no  remedy  so  often  effective  in  breaking  up  the  attack  at
its  inception,  nor  in  promoting  resolution  in  its  later  stages.—  C.  Hering.


^^^  LACHESIS.

velum,  looks  like  ulcers  of  mucous  membrane  with
white  edges;  mmd  depressed. ^Diphtheria
Ibevere  pain  m  forehead,  changing  to  beating  pain  in
vertex  on  assuming  upright  position;  dizziness  on  fix-
ing eyes  on  any  spot  on  wall;  severe  pain  in  limbs <
about  knees  and  elbows;  flesh  sore,  <  moving  lim'bs-
lassitude;  nearly  famts  on  rising;  tenderness  and  pain'
in  epigastrium;  nausea,  anorexia,  tongue  coated  with
ye  low,  dirty fur; unpleasant  taste; tonsils swollen;
patches  of  diphtheritic  membrane  half  an  inch  wide
dn-ty  grey  color,  on  tonsils  and  extending  down  out  of
sight;  began  on  1.  side,  which  is  most  painful,  <  after
sleeping  or  talking;  skin  at  times  hot  and  dry,  at  other
times  moist;  pulse  90. ^Diphtheria
iConstant  delirium,  changes  rapidly  from  one  subject  te
another;  taks,  smgs,  or  whistles  constantly;  makes  odd
motions  with  r.  arm,  as  if  reaching  for  something;  throat
tilled  with  membrane  of  dark  color,  which  developed
Jrom  {.  to  r.;  no  sleep  for  seventy-two  hours,  but  durino-
last  twelve  hours  has  occasionally  falfen  into  a  li^hl  •
sleep,  which  was  followed  by  aggravation  of  all  symp-
toms; badly  smelling  stools;  urine  high  colored  and  of
strong  smel  ;  body  covered  with  bluish  red  eruption
round  and  elevated. <?Diphtheria.
■  Inflammation  and  membrane  beginning  on  1  side-  ex-
ternal swelling  of  throat; unbearable  fetor; besitted
expression;  temperature  104  to  105  degrees;  pulse  140-
epistaxis several  times  a  day,  of  venous  blood;  diar-
rhoea of  blackish  feces;  could  drink  nothing  hot-  con-
stant muttering  delirium;  discharge  of  yellowish  mucus
from  nose,  1.  nostril  first. ^Diphtheria
"Sore  throat,  hurts  to  swallow,  with  difficulty  in  swallow-
ing; fluid  runs  out  through  nose;  dislike  to  have  throat
touched  or  examined;  flushed  face;  quick  pulse;  breath-
ing oppressed;  membrane  commences  on  1.  tonsil  and
pharynx,  extending  to  uvula  and  r.  side. ^Diphtheria
I  Violent  pam  m  throat,  swollen  tonsils,  fever,  heat;  con-
siderable  exudate in choanse; in sneezing a tough
skinny  substance  is  blown  out  of  nose. ^Diphtheria '
"Diphtheritic  deposits  first  show  themselves  on  1.  tonsil
Irom  there  extending  to  r. side  and  then  spreading
further;  neck  is  stiff",  or  external  throat  sore  and  quite
tender  to  touch ;  patient  coughs  and  feels  <  when  awak-
ing trom  sleep;  expectoration  very  difficult  and  scantv

f n-^Vi?^"^"^'^^'  '^  ^'^^y  ^^Pt  "1  check by  hoarseness!
^Diphtheria.

■  Throat  greatly  swollen  internally  and  externallv  dis-
charge from nose  and  mouth  of  intensely  fetid  and


LACHESIS.  582

excoriating  fluid ;  fauces  covered  with  diphtheritic  mem-
brane; pulse  110,  small;  extremities  mottled  and  livid;
swallowing  almost  impossible.  ^Diphtheria.
I  Purplish  appearance  of  mucous  membrane  of  lips,  buccal
cavity  and  throat;  diphtheritic  spot  as  large  as  a  pin
head  on  1.  tonsil ;  tongue  pointed  and  purplish ;  pulso
weak,  132;  skin  hot;  urine  scanty,  dirty  colored  and
containing  albumen;  bowels  constipated;  four  days
later  submaxillary  glands  on  both  sides  much  swollen ;
running  of  acrid  secretion  from  nose  and  mouth;  diph-
theritic stench;  throat  and  even  lips  covered  with  thick,
grey  membranes. ^Diphtheria.

I  Diphtheria; membrane  covering  tonsils  and  posterior

portion  of  throat;  considerable  pain  on  swallowing;
pain  <  turning  head,  touching  neck  and  on  awaking
from  sleep;  sleep  disturbed  by  dryness  of  mouth  and  a
feeling  as  if  he  would  suffocate.
iTumefaction  of  throat  slight  and  redness  of  mucous  mem-
brane hardly  notice<able;  diphtheritic  deposits  of  two  or
three  little  patches  hardly  larger  than  a  pin's  head;
prostration  of  strength  quite  alarming;  pulse  slow,  feeble
and  compressed;  a  cold,  clammy  sweat  frequently  cov-
ered forehead  and  extremities:  breath  fetid;  appetite
gone;  patient  passed  with  alarming  rapidity  into  a  com-
pletely asthenic  condition — sometimes  prostration  quite
considerable  before  local  evidence  of  disease  could  be
detected. ^Epidemic  diphtheria.

I I  Diphtheritic  patches  in  throat,  spreading  from  1.  to  r.;
fetid  breath;  <  after  sleep;  great  debility,  feeble  pulse;
clammy  sweat;  headache  and  faintness.

I  Purple  livid  color  of  atfected  parts,  with  dull,  dry  appear-
ance and  little  swelling,  also  pain  out  of  all  proportion
to  amount  of  inflammation. ^Diphtheria.

I  Throat  rapidly  sloughed  and  presented  a  bluish  hue.

I  Girl,  £et.  8,  throat  greatly  swollen  internally  and  exter-
nally; discharge  from  nose  and  mouth  of  an  intensely
fetid  and  excoriating  fluid ;  fauces  covered  with  diph-
theritic membrane;  pulse  110,  very  quick  and  small;
extremities  mottled  and  livid;  swallowing  nearly  im-
possible; fetor  almost  overpowering. ^Diphtheria.

I  On  1.  side  of  throat  several  white  exudate  spots;  mucous
membrane  pale  red;  parotids  swollen;  pulse  frequent,
hard; great apathy; somnolency, drooping eyelids.

I Yery  difficult  swallowing;  complete  aphonia;  wheezing,
hissing  sound,  in  place  of  natural  crying;  excessive
weakness;  lets  head  hang;  scarcely  lifts  limbs;  fauces
pale,  covered  with,  white  exudate. ^Diphtheria.

I  Velum,  tonsils  and  posterior  wall  of  fauces  pale  red;  on
1.  tonsil  tough,  yellowish  white  exudate. ^Diphthetia.


5S3  LACHESIS.

llPeculiar  hard  ache  all  over,  in  head,  back  and  legs;
could  not  lie  still,  but  constantly  changed  position.
^Diphtheria.

■  Membranous  deposit  in  choanse;  discharge  of  a  skinny

substance  from  nose  when  sneezing. ^Diphtheria.
I A  greyish  ulcerative  crust  appeared  first  on  tonsils,  spread
over  arch  of  amygdeli  into  posterior  nares,  sometimes
downward  into  larynx,  causing  strangulation. ^Diph-
theria.

■  Tonsils  swollen  so  that  they  almost  meet,  and  covered

with  a  tough,  cheesy  looking  substance;  feverish  and
very  low. ^Diphtheria.

■  Left  tonsil  one  complete  black  slough,  disease  passing  to

r.  side. ^Diphtheria.

■  Pulse  130; skin  hot  and dry;  face  very  red;  drowsy;

muttering  delirium;  greyish  membrane  developed  from
1.  to  r. ^Diphtheria.

■  Sul)jective  symptoms  much  more  prominent  than  ob-

jective; complaints,  especially  swallowing,  much  more
violent  than  one  would  suppose  from  extent  of  disease;
sensation  as  of  foreign  body  in  throat,  with  stinging
extending  into  ear;  urging  to  swallow  and  desire  to
hawk  up  something,  with  attacks  of  choking;  voice
weak  and  hoarse;  cough,  causing  pain  in  throat,  was
restrained,  therefore  it  sounded  short  and  suppressed,
^Diphtheria.
■Constitutional  symptoms  out  of  all  proportion  to  local
manifestations,  prostration  considerable  even  before  any
local  evidences  of  disease  could  be  detected.  ^Diphtheria.

■  Diphtheritic  inflammation  of  throat;  ulcers  on  tongue;

suppuration  of  glands  of  neck;  pleuritic,  pericarditic
and  general  dropsy  in  delayed  desquamation,  with  great
oppression;  urine  almost  black;  stools  badly  smelling;
fever  <  in  afternoon. ^.Scarlatina.

■  Sensibility  of  affected  parts  increased  and  their  motility

essentially  diminished.  ^Diphtheria.
■After  diphtheria  speech  disturbed,  some  words  she  could
not  articulate,  because  after  a  few  minutes  conversation
a  curtain  seemed  to  fall  down  in  front  of  her  pharynx;
teeth  feel  as  if  wedged;  tongue  feels  scalded,  cannot
yawn  because  of  sharp  pain  about  root  of  tongue;  if
eating  fast  food  stays  in  her  throat;  pain  over  eyes  and
sore  feeling  in  eyeballs.

■  Ulcers  in  throat:  <  in  wet  weather;  after  mercury;  from

syphilis;  extend  into  posterior  nares;  throat  dry,  awak-
ens choking;  soft  palate  full  of  cicatrices,  with  greenish
yellow  ulcers  l)etween;  pains  shooting;  fetid  breath.

■  Mercurial  syphilis,  with  ulcerated  sore  throat,  causing


LACHESIS.  584

a  constant  provocation  to  cough,  with  retching;  painful
deglutition;  regurgitation  of  drink  through  nose;  earthy,
yellowish  appearance  of  face,  with  small  red  bloodvessels
shining  through  skin;  coryza,  nose  sore;  terrible  head-
ache; nightly  pains  in  limbs. ^Syphilis.

iSyphilitic  phagedsena  of  soft  palate  and  fauces.

1 1  Gangrenous  sore  throat.

■Secondary  ulceration  of  throat,  extending  into  posterior
nares;  obstruction  of  nose ;  offensive  smell  from  mouth ;
stinging  and  shooting  pains  in  ulcers;  excessive  dryness
of  throat,  in  spots;  throat  feels  entirely  *' parched  up"
on  waking;  touching  throat  produces  sensation  of  suf-
focation; sensitive  to  slightest  movement  of  neck;  symp-
toms somewhat  >  after  eating.  ^Syphilis.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i  Hunger,  cannot
wait  for  food.

I  At  one  time  good  appetite,  at  another  none  at  all.

I  Constant  thirst,  with  dry  tongue  and  skin.

I  I  Great  longing  for  drinks,  but  afraid  to  drink,  as  it  brings
on  a  discharge. ^Diarrhoea.

I  Thirst  insatiable,  with  disgust  for  drink.

I  At  10  o'clock  every  night,  with  urgent  and  unquenchable
thirst,  dryness  in  throat  and  mouth,  can  scarcely  breathe
for  thirst,  must  continually  moisten  mouth;  drinking
does  no  good  and  she  dreads  it;  fever  begins  with  rigor
on  going  to  bed,  and  the  heat  continues  till  about  4  a.m.,
with  intervals  of  shivering;  sweat  toward  morning;
tearing  pain  in  temples  during  hot  stage,  with  burning
heat  in  epigastrium;  very  sleepy  day  and  night,  but
cannot  sleep,  except  a  little  towards  morning.

I  Desire:  for  oysters;  for  wine  and  spirituous  liquors ;  for
coffee,  which  agrees  (dysmenorrhoea).
^*  Eating  and  Drinking. Generally  improved  when  eating.

I  After  eating:  gnawing  in  stomach  >,  but  returns  in  a
few  hours. ^Cancer  of  stomach.

•After  eating:  vertigo,  languor,  drowsiness;  gagging  and
suffocating;  dyspnoea;  pressing,  like  a  load  in  stomach;
stomach  puffed ;  eructations;  diarrhoea;  flashes  of  heat.

■  Craving  hunger;  >  after  eating;  <  after  acid  drinks;

constipation;  abdomen  sensitive  to  weight  of  clothes;
flushes  of  heat;  flushes  after  eating,  after  mental  or
physical  effort.

■  Better  from  eating  fruit.

■  Fluids  go  down,  but  solids,  even  well  chewed,  cause  a

sensation  of  choking.

■  Complaints  from  wine  or  tobacco.

■  Worse  from  alcoholic  drinks  (except  the  snake  bite).

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■Eructa-


585  LACHESIS.

tions:  aflfording  relief;  amounting  to  vomiting;  before
epilepsy;  at  every  menstrual  effort.

■  Everything  sours;  heartburn.

I  I  Always  thirsty,  but  nausea  after  drinking. ^Itch.

■  Nausea  after  drinking.

I  Nausea:  want  of  appetite  in  forenoon;  in  attacks,  weak-
ness, even  to  syncope;  dyspnoea,  palpitation,  cold  sweat
nosebleed  (typhus) ;  with  great  flow  of  saliva  (cholera)

TrSick  stomach,  with  terrible  retching,  but  no  vomiting,
great  fulness  in  head,  with  a  confused,  half  conscious
feeling;  flashing  before  eyes ;  numb  feeling  about  head;
thinks  she  is  going  to  die.

■  Vomiting:  of  bile  or  mucus;  of  food;  in  organic  affections,

with  hardening  of  abdominal  viscera;  of  greenish  mat-
ter; renewed by  slightest  motion  (cholera);  of  blood
and  pus.
*''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  ■  Pit  of  stomach sore  to
touch.

■  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  causes  dull,  stinging  pain.

■  Tickling  in  pit  of  stomach  causes  tormenting  cough.

■  Bloatedness  of  stomach,  with  belching  of  masses  of  wind.

■  Stomach  bloated;  no  appetite;  costiveness.

I  I  Violent  pressure  in  stomach  after  eating,  with  feeling

of  weakness  in  knees.
■Stitching  extending  from  stomach  to  chest.

■  Feeling  as  though  something  was  gnawing  in  stomach,

though  without  pain;  followed  by  gnawing  in  both
sides,  extending  across  under  ribs  deep  in  abdomen.

■  Gnawing  pressure  >  after  eating,  but  returning  as  soon

as  stomach  is  empty. ^Cancer  of  stomach.

■  Cardialgia;  body  stiffened  from  pain,  came  on  slowly  and

passed  off  slowly;  brought  on  by  overwork.

■  At  every  menstrual  effort  cardialgia.

■  Appetite  at  one  time  good,  at  another  poor,  sometimes

such  a  gnawing  that  he  can  hardly  wait  for  his  meal;
after  eating,  vertigo,  heaviness,  lassitude,  shortness  of
breath  and  heaviness  in  stomach;  smothered  feeling  in
chest,  stomach  full  of  wind,  must  belch  much,  with
relief;  regurgitation  of  food ;  when  he  cannot  belch  be-
comes deathly  sick;  severe  and  annoying  pressure  in  a
small  spot  between  epigastrium  and  navel,  which  takes
away  his  breath,  >  by  belching;  during  day  several
attacks  of  nausea  with  shortness  of  breath,  weakness
almost  to  loss  of  consciousness,  palpitation  of  heart  and
cold  sweat;  at  night  when  in  bed  if  least  thing  touches
mouth  or  nose  respiration  seems  interfered  with  and
suffocation  threatening;  sleep  disturbed  by  dreams,  fre-
quent waking; in  morning  heaviness  and  dejection;


LACHESIS.  586

constipation;  pale  and  emaciated;  face  grey,  pale  yel-
low; after  sitting,  pain  in  thighs  and  stiti'ness  of  knees.
^Dyspepsia.

II Dyspepsia,  <  as  soon  as  he  eats;  costive ;  after  mercury.

iCancer  of  stomach: gnawing  pressure  > after  eating,
returns  in  a  few  hours;  sensiveness  to  contact,  especially
of  clothes,  with  drunkards.
*^  Hypochondria. iAcute  pain  in  liver,  extending  towards
stomach.

I  Inflammation  and  chronic  obstruction  of  liver,  sensitive
to  pressure  or  touch.

■Catarrhal  affection  of  liver.

■  Abscesses  in  liver;  pain  when  coughing,  as  if  ulcerated;

excessively  offensive  stools,  whether  formed  or  not.
llLiver  complaints:  at clinjaxis;  alter  ague;  pain  as  if
something  had  lodged  in  r.  side,  with  stinging.

■  Gallstones. (After  Calcar.)

■  Nutmeg  liver;  cannot  bear  tight  clothing,  loosens  jacket,

arms  molest;  contractive  tightness  in  region  of  liver.

■  ■Cannot  bear  any  pressure  about  hypochondria.

■  Contractive  feeling  in  region  of  liver.

■  ■Ulcerative  pain  about  liver.

■  Pain  as  if  from  suppuration  under  ribs.

■  Fulness  and  heaviness  in  region  of  liver,  and  at  same

time  pain  in  1,  hypochondrium ;  coppery  taste  in  mouth  ;
hard  morning  cough.

■  Liver  swollen  and  painful  in  anterior  and  superior  aspect.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  over  whole  body;  fainting  spells:

pale,  dirty  yellow  color  of  face ;  appearance  of  sufier-
ing;  thick,  yellow  coating  on  tongue;  dryness  of  mouth ;
great  thirst;  bitter  taste;  nausea;  diarrhoea;  great  de-
bility; nervous  and  despondent;  great  aversion  to  talk-
ing; climaxis. ^Bilious  attacks.

■  Shooting  pain  in  region  of  spleen,  particularly  on  exer-

cise by  walking;  skin brown near  region  of  stomach ;
brown  spots  on  hand;  constipation.
^^  Abdomen. ■■Painful  distension,  flatulence; can  bear  no
pressure,  the  surface  nerves  are  sensitive.

■  Abdomen  distended  and  hard.

■  ■Is  obliged  to  w^ear  clothes,  especially about  stomach,

very  loose,  they  cause  uneasiness ;  even  in  bed  obliged
to  loosen  and  pull  up  nightdress  to  avoid  pressure;  dare
not  lay  arm  across  abdomen  on  account  of  pressure.

■  Great  sensitiveness  to  contact,  especially  to  that  of  clothes.

^Cancer  of  stomach. /^Typhlitis. ^Metritis.

■  Sensitive  over  lower  abdomen,  can  scarcely  allow her

clothes  to  touch  her. ^Melancholy  after  confinement.

■  Distension  of  abdomen,  with  gurgling  and  rumbling  in

bowels  before  diarrhoea. ^Typhoid  fever.


587  -  ^  LACHESIS.

1 1  Abdomen  distended,  much  annoyance  from flatulence.

iBloated  abdomen.  ^Mania.  ^Megrim.  ^Epilepsy.  ^Fevers.

I  Sensation  of  incarcerated  flatus.

I  I  Feeling  of  emptiness  in  abdomen.

■Pain  as  if  something  was  lodging  in  r.  side;  stinging
sensation;  sensation  as  if  a  ball  was  I'olling  from  that
side  towards  stomach.

iSqueamishness  in  abdomen,  alternating  with  facial
neuralgia.

lAt  a  small  spot  between  navel  and  epigastrium  a  sense
of  unpleasant  pressure,  taking  away  breath,  >  by  eruc-
tations, an  hour  after  a  meal.

I  Three  months  after  weaning  a  six  months  old  child
menses  had  not  returned ;  severe  aching  in  small  of
back;  every  two  or  three  days  acute  colicky  pains  low
in  abdomen,  resembling  labor  pains,  coming  at  various
times  of  day;  hard  aching  pain  in  uterus;  sinking,  flut-
tering feeling  in  epigastrium;  stools  loose;  great  sleepi-
ness, constant  desire  to  lie  down,  sleep  in  daytime  <
abdominal  pains;  milk  very  thin  before  weaning.

■  Tearing  pain  in  abdomen. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Cutting  pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  throwing  her  into

fainting  flts;  painful  distension  of  abdomen;  urging  to

urinate,  but  inability  to  do  so  except  at  long  intervals.

I  Cramplike  pains  in  abdomen,  which  feels  hot. ^Dysentery.

■  Spasmodic  colic,  >  by  bending  forward.

■  At  times  pains  as  if  knife  was  thrust  through  abdomen.

■  Colic:  stomach  distended;  incarceration  of  wind,  belch-

ing relieves;  pains  change  locality;  sensitive  to  light
pressure;  with  restlessness  and  fever.

■  Excessive  griping,  as  though  about  to  have  diarrhoea.

■  Burning  like  fire  in  hypogastric  and  lumbar  regions.

■  Coldness;  thirst;  abdomen  very  hot. ^Dysentery.

■  Abdomen  hot  and  sensitive  to  touch;  painful  stiffness

from  loins  down  into  thighs;  scanty,  turbid  urine  with
reddish  sediment;  strangury;  constipation;  must  lie  on
back  with  drawn  up  knees;  especially  in  complications
with  typhilitis.  ^Peritonitis.
■Acute  cutting,  stinging  pains,  radiating  from  navel  over
upper  portion  of  abdomen,  excruciating  from  slightest
touch  as  well  as  by  motion,  with  tympanitic  distension.
^Peritonitis.

■  Lies  on  back  with  knees  drawn  up;  tenderness,  pain  and

swelling  in  region  of  caecum;  pain  extending  from  r.
lumbar  region  through  sacrum,  through  inguinal  region
and  forepart  of  thigh,  more  especially  when  swelling  is
examined;  urine  scanty,  high  colored;  strangury;  bow-
els costive. ^Inflammation  of  csecum.


LACHESIS.  588

I  Strangulated  umbilical  hernia;  sloughing.

I I  Tenderness  in  1.  iliac  region,  intolerance  of  pressure.
IIleo-c£ecal region  very  sensitive to touch; after great

straining  discharges  a  mass  of  croupous  exudation,
//Chronic  intestinal  catarrh.

iThreatened  gangrene  in  strangulated  hernia;  skin  cov-
ering hernial  tumor  mottled  and  dark;  pain  across  ab-
domen; contractive  sensation  in  abdomen;  cutting,
lacerating,  burning  })ains;  hernia  exceedingly  sensitive,
will  not  admit  handling.

iFor  years  violent  pains  over  r.  groin,  drawing  from  ovary
to  uterus;  pus  passing  with  stool.

■  Violent  pain  of  long  standing  in  r.  groin,  extending  either

towards  genital  organs  or  upwards  towards  liver  or  chest.

■  Extreme  nervous  debility;  great  fear  of  death;  hopeless

of  recovery;  despair  of  salvation;  desire  to  pick  her
fingers  raw,  or  arms,  or  face,  or  pick  threads  from  shawl,
clothing,  etc. ;  menses  delayed,  with  general  aggravation
of  symptoms;  always  <  every  four  weeks  for  four  or
five  days;  fibrous  tumor,  size  of  orange,  in  1.  groin.

■  Contraction  of  psoas  muscle,  drawing  knee  towards  ab-

domen ;  hectic  fever. ^Bubo.

■  Large  hard  swelling,  with  fistulous  openings  in  inguinal

region,  extending  towards  abdomen ;  hectic  fever.  f/Bubo.

■  ■Long  lasting,  suppurating  buboes  ol  mercurio  syphilitic

origin.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Tormenting  urging,  but  not  to  stool.

■  Wants  to  pass  stool,  but  jjain  is  so  increased  thereby,  he

must  desist.

■  I  Fetid  flatus.

■  ■Very  offensive  stools  whether  formed  or  not.

■  Sensation  as  if  feces  ascended  to  chest. ^Puerperal  fever.

■  Stools:  fetid;  cadaverous  smelling;  frequent;  corrosive;

purulent;  thin;  pasty;  bloody,  watery;  watery,  light
yellow,  fecal;  dark,  chocolate  colored;  of  decomposed
blood,  looking  like  charred  straw;  mixed  blood  and
slime;  <  at  night,  after  acids;  during  warm  weather;
thin,  offensive;  thin,  slippery  lumps;  involuntary.

■  Sudden  diarrhoea,  with  great  urging,  about  midnight,

thin,  pasty,  excessivel}^  offensive,  ammoniacal.

■  Diarrhoea  every  evening  for  a  week,  preceded  by  transient

pain  in  rectum,  followed  by  throbbing  as  with  little
hammers,  in  anns.

■  Watery  stools,  with  burning  in  anus,  in  evening.

■  Painless,  brownish  yellow  diarrhoea,  smelling  like  car-

rion; fluid  mixed  with  small  fragments  of  feces,  like
millet  seeds;  diarrhoea  brought  on  by  least  quantity  of
food;  had  eighteen  to  twenty  stools  during  night;  tongue


589  LACIIESIS.

red  and  dry;  longs  for  drinks,  but  is  afraid  of  aggrava-
tion it  causes  of  the  diarrhoea;  sleep  restless  and  full  oi
dreams;  hands  shriveled  and  cold;  slight  twitching
of  hands;  despondent;  speech  affected  (sermo  abdomi-
nalis);  great  emaciation  and  prostration,  cannot  sit  up
in  bed  without  assistance.

■  Great  inclination  for  acids;  discharges  black  and  frothy;

sometimes  vomiting  of  bile  in  morning.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea,  with  gnawing  and  pressure  in  pit  of
stomach. ^Syphilis.

llDiarrhoea:  of  mixed  blood  and  slime  in  warm  weather,
<  by  acid  fruits;  <  at  night  and  after  sleep;  with
frothy  urine;  a  few  days  before  or  after  catamenia,  with
colic ;  during  climaxis  ;  of  drunkards,  with  languor  and
exhaustion,  very  excessive  in  hot  weather  and  with  large
hemorrhoidal  tumors,  which  protrude  after  each  pappy,
offensive  stool,  with  constriction  of  sphincter  and  con-
tinued desire  to  evacuate.

I  Stool  and  urine  involuntary. ^Fevers.

I I  Hemorrhage  from  bowels;  decomposed  blood.  ^Typhus.

I  Flakes  of  decomposed  blood,  having  form  and  appear-
ance of  perfectly  charred  wheat  straw,  in  longer  or
shorter  flat  pieces,  portions  more  or  less  ground  up.

■  Discharges  have  a  penetrating,  fetid  smell  and  assume

a  purulent  character;  great  heat  of  abdomen.  ^Sum-
mer complaint.

■  Discharges  chocolate  colored,  of  a  cadaverous  smell;  dur-

ing evacuation  burning  in  anus;  cramplike  pain  in
abdomen;  coldness;  thirst;  abdomen  very  hot;  tongue
red  and  cracked  at  its  point,  or  black  and  bloody.
^Dysentery.

■  Could  not  protrude  tongue,  which  caught  on  teeth;  dur-

ing a  nap,  restlessness,  dyspnoea,  distress  and  then  stink-
ing stool. ^Dysentery.

■  Dysentery;  shivering  without  coldness.

■  Vomiting  renewed  by  slightest  motion,  and  nausea  at-

tended by  great  flow  of  saliva. ^Cholera.

■  Painful  straining,  with  discharge  of  croupous  exudate.

■  Pressive  pains  in  umbilical  region;  violent  gripes,  with

contracted  abdomen,  or  abdomen  hard  and  tympanitic;
fetid  stools. ^Enteritis.

■  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh,

■  Soft  stools  of  bright  yellow  color.

■  Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation.

■  Costive, ineffectual urging; anus feels closed; stools

offensive.

■  Long  lasting  constipation  with  pressure  in  stomach  and

unsatisfactory  belching.


LACHESIS.  ■  590

iStools:  scanty,  greyish,  like  potter's  clay;  hard  like  sheep
•dung;  hard  and  difficult;  frequent  and  hard;  hard,
scanty  and  insufficient.

iConstipation  with  black  tongue  and  lips. ^Scarlatina.

I  Constipation  without  other  symptoms.

iFeeling  of  unhappiness  on  awaking;  sensation  of  con-
striction of  anus. ^Constipation.

•  Absence  of  stool  in  persons  suffering  from  hydrothorax.

■  Weight,  fulness  and  pressure  in  bowels,  with  much  flat-

ulence. ^Chronic  constipation.

IConstipation,  with  ineffectual  effort  to  evacuate.

iCostiveness,  with  very  hard  stools,  between  catamenia;
stool  omitted  twenty  days. 6'Angina  syphilitica.

iStools  in  pieces,  frequent,  yellow,  orange,  sometimes
tinged  with  blood. /^Gastric  nervous  fever.

iLong  lasting  costiveness,  with  pressure  in  stomach  and
unsuccessful  eructations.

iChronic  constipation  in  a  young  lady,  of  ten  years'  stand-
ing, was  obliged  daily  to  use  warm  injections;  weight,
fulness  and  pressure  in  bowels,  accompanied  with  a
good  deal  of  flatulency.

I  Fecal  obstructions  ;intusussception  threatening  sloughing.

I  No  stool  nor  urine. ^Metritis. ^Puerperal  fever.

I  Before  stool :  rumbling;  ineffectual  urging;  constant  and
very  painful  pressure  in  rectum,  without  stool;  con-
striction in  rectum  or  sensation  of  plug  in  anus.

■  During  stool:  cramplike  pain  in  abdomen;  burning  in

anus;  tenesmus;  pain  as  if  sphincter  was  torn  with
effort;  tearing  pains  in  rectum  from  below  upward  and
backward,  to  point  of  producing  eructations;  feces  re-
main at  anus;  aggravation  of  pains,  so  that  it  is  neces-
sary to  cease  all  efforts.

■  After  stool:  burning  at  anus;  tenesmus;  protrusion  of

large  hemorrhoidal  tumors,  with  constriction  of  anus
and  continued  desire  for  stool.

■  Child  always  awakens  in  distress. ^Diarrhcea.
■Stool  lies  in  rectum,  without  urging.

■  Full  feeling  in  rectum,  and  a  sensation  of  little  hammers

beating. ^Fistula  in  ano. ^Climaxis.

■  Rectum  prolapsed  and  tumefied.

■  Burning, cutting  pains  in  rectum, < while  standing

morning  till  afternoon.

■  Constant  and  painful  pressure  in  rectum,  without  stools.

■  Beating  sensation  in  rectum;  throbbing. ^Stricture  of

rectum.
■Stitch in rectum or hemorrhoids  w^hen coughing  or
sneezing.

■  Uneven  or  tuberculated  and  indurated  mass,  surround-


591  LACHESIS.

ing  and  protruding  from  anus,  tlirougli  centre  of  this
mass  was  an  irregular,  ragged  and  ulcerated  fissure- (the
outlet  from  rectum),  from  which  issued  a  sanious  mucous
discharge;  stool  almost  impossible  on  account  of  ob-
struction and  pain;  soft  and  yielding  tumors  (hemor-
rhoidal) nearly  filling  rectum,  as  far  as  touch  extended;
constant  throbbing  with  itching,  shooting  and  burning
in  affected  region;  all  symptoms  <  after  sleep;  had
been  diagnosticated  as  scirrhus  of  anus  and  rectum.
^Affection  of  anus  and  rectum.

■  Piles  for  four  years,  came  on  first  month  of  pregnancy;

discharge  of  mucus,  excoriating  passage;  sore,  burning
pain  after  every  evacuation;  very  irritable  nervous
system;  craving  for  pickles;  acrid  waterbrash.

1 1  Piles  protruding  or  strangulated,  or,  with  stitches  up-
ward at  each  cough  or  sneeze. 6'Climaxis. ^Drunkards.

I  riot,  bleeding  hemorrhoidal  tumors.

■  Hemorrhoids :  with  scanty  menses;  in  climacteric  years.

■  Drawing  pains  from  anus  to  umbilicus.

■  Spasmodic  pains  in  anus  internally,  short  time  before

and  after  stool.
■Visible  spasmodic  tenesmus  in  paroxysms,  from  two  to
five  minutes,  extorting  cries,  passes  blood  and  mucus.

■  Itching  at  anus,  <  after  sleep.

■  xlnus  feels  closed;  sensation  of  a  plug.

■  Painful  constriction  of  anus,  following  prolapsus  of  rectum.

■  Fistulous  abscess  opened  near  anus. 6'Scarlatina.

"  Urinary  Organs. "Stitches  in  kidneys,  extending  down-
ward and  apparently  through  ureters. ^Cystitis.
I  I  Pressure  upon  bladder ;  dull  pain.

I  a  Feeling  as  of  a  ball  rolling  about  in  bladder  or  abdomen,
when  turning  over. ^Uterine  displacement. ^Cystitis.

■  Discharge  of  offensive  mucus  during  micturition. ^Ca-

tarrh of  bladder.

■  Ineffectual  urging  to  urinate;  burning  when  it  does  pass.

■  Urgent  desire  to  urinate,  with  passage  of  much  urine.

■  Frequent  micturition,  urine  scanty,  dark  brown,  turbid.

■  Violent  burning  when  passing  urine.  ^Anginasyphilitica.

■  Painful  pressing  and  burning  when  making  water.

■  Dribbling  after  urinating.

I  I  Constant  sticking  and  cutting  in  forepart  of  urethra.

■  Urine of  strong  ammoniacal  odor,  involuntary;  lying

on  back. ^Gastric  nervous  fever.

■  Pligh  colored  urine  of  strong  smell. ^Diphtheria. ^Scar-

latina.

■  Urine  dark,  with  a  brown,  gravelly  sediment,  passing

with  a  sharp,  cutting  pain.

■  ■Urine:  almost  black;  frequent,  foamy,  dark.


LACHESIS.  502

I  Urine  like  coffee  grounds. ^Scarlatina,

I  Urine  dark  or  scanty,  as  in  typhus. ^Diphtheria.

I I  Black,  scanty  urine,  with  oedema,  after  scarlatina.

■  Urine  red  and  hot. ^Angina  faucium.

■  Scanty  urine  with  red  sediment. ^Typhlitis.
I  Urine  heavily  loaded  with  albumen.

■  Albuminuria  with  hydrothorax  and  dropsical  enlarge-

ment of  1.  side  and  leg.

■  Strangury. ^Typhlitis.

■  ■No  urine,  no  stool.

■  Urine  almost  suppressed. ^Scarlatina.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Great  excitement  of  sexual  desire.

■  Epilepsy  after  suffering  by  lewdness,  or  morbid  excite-

ment of  sexual  organs,  onanism,  frequent  emissions  of
semen,  or  jealousy.

■  Impotence.

■  Nocturnal  emissions,  with  thrill  of  delight.

■  Excessive sexual desire,  constant erections at night;

emissions,  with  profuse  night  sweats;  cheerful  disposition
and  feeling  of  ease  on  awaking,  succeeded  by  increased
mental  concentration;  semen  has  a  pungent  smell.
I  I  Sore  pain  in  urethra,  in  forepart  of  penis.

■  Indurated  foreskin,  after  chancres.

■  Mercurial  syphilitic  ulcers  on  penis.

■Scrotum  swollen  to  enormous  size. ^Scarlatinal  dropsy.

■  Sycotic  ulcers,  with  bluish  areolae.

■  Paraphimosis when constriction causes gangrene, or

threatened gangrene, eruption on glans and mons
veneris.

■  ■Gangrene  of  glans.

■  Phagedenic  chancres.

■  I Buboes:  with  sore  throat  and  headache;  indurated  or

with  fistulous  openings  and  hectic;  after  mercury  ;  sup-
purating a  long  time.
^-  Female  Sexual  Organs. iSexual  desire  excited  to  the  high-
est  pitch; perfectly insatiable; luxurious convulsive
thrills  run  all  through  her.

■  Tickling  and  jerking  extending  from  thighs  to  genital

organs. ^Nj^mphomania.

■  I  Ovarian  neuralgia,  particularly  1.  side;  tensive,  pressing,

burning  or  stitching  pains.

■  Frequent,  troublesome,  drawing  pain  in  r.  ovarian  region,

from  near  hip  bone  down  to  os  pubis,  sometimes  burn-
ing. ^Swelling  of  r.  ovaiy.

■  Pain  in  r.  ovarian  region  increasing  more  and  more  un-

til relieved  by  a  discharge  of  blood. ^Climaxis.

■  Terrible  pain  in  r.  ovarian  region,  with  swelling.

■  Induration  and  suppuration  of  ovaries.


503  LACHESIS.

iRiglit  ovary  size  of  a  fist;  1 J  inches  thick,  painful  when
pressed,  attached  to  uterus  by  a  string  as  thick  as  a  finger.

■  Sharp,  shooting  pain  in  L  ovary;  constipation;  feels  <

in  morning  and  after  sleep. //Ovaritis.
iTensive,  pressing  pains  and  stitches;  inability  to  lie  on
r.  side,  on  account  of  sensation  as  if  something  was  roll-
ing over  to  that  side ;  swelling  of  ovary ;  suppuration ;
1.  side. ^Ovaritis.

■  Painful,  oblong  swelling  and  induration  in  r.  ovarian  re-

gion,  < by  moral emotions,  rapid movements,  pro-
longed walks  and  overexertion. ^Uterine  displacement.

■  Ovarian  tumors;  1.  ovary  first  affected,  tending  to  right.

■  ■Swelling,  induration, tumors, neuralgia, suppuration,

etc.,  of  1.  ovary.

■  Menses  irregular,  dark,  dirty  looking  and  offensive;  looks

like  a  pregnant  woman  at  ninth  month ;  abdomen  hard,
some  parts  more  so  than  others;  in  1.  ovarian  region
and  directly  under  navel,  extending  up  to  stomach,  very
hard,  as  though  fibrous,  all  other  sections  tense  and  more
or  less  painful;  at  times  dyspnoea  and  wheezing  almost
approaching  suffocation ;  tongue  red  and  glazed ;  appetite
fickle;  great  thirst;  scantj^  high  colored  urine,  with  hse-
matin  aAd  ten  per  cent,  of  albumen;  constipation,  with
occasional  discharge  like  horse  dung  in  size,  causing  pain
and  weakness  from  which  she  would  not  recover  for  half
a  day  or  more ;  constant  malaise.  ^Sacculated  ovarian
disease.
■Uterine  and  ovarian  tumors,  with  profuse  and  protonged
menses;  great  sensitiveness  of  lower  abdomen;  severe,
aching  pain,  anteriorly,  in  thighs,  in  branches  of  ante-
rior crural  nerve.

■  Uterine  region  feels  swollen,  will  bear  no  contact,  not

even  of  clothing;  bearing  down  pains.

■  Pains  like  a  knife  thrust  into  abdomen.

■  Uterus  feels  as  if  os  was  open.

TrGenital  parts  much  distended,  swollen  and  red,  every-
thing seemed  to  be  rolled  out  and  mouth  of  womb  open ;
nymphomania.

■  Laborlike  pains  as  if  everything  would  issue  from  vulva,

followed  by  a  slight  discharge  of  blood.

■  Menstrual  colic  beginning  in  1.  ovary.

■  ■  Sensation  as  if  pains  from  uterus  and  abdomen  ascended

towards  chest.

■  Pain  in  uterine  region  as  if  swollen;  displacement.

■  Violent,  laborlike  pressing  from  loins  downwards  during

menses,  which  are  scanty. ^Displacement.

■  ■Pains  in uterine  region,  increase  at  times  more  and

more  till  relieved  by  a  flow  of  blood  from  vagina;  after
a  few  hours  or  days  the  same  again,  and  so  on.

VOL.  VI. — 38.


LACHESIS.  594

1 1  Uterus  does  not  bear  contact  and  has  to  be  relieved  of  all
pressure;  frequently  lifts  clothes,  they  cause  an  uneasi-
ness in  abdomen,  no  tenderness.

iWomb  enlarged,  retroverted,  hot  and  sensitive  to  touch;
OS  open  and  sensitive;  menses  irregular ;  fundus  found
to  be  larger  posteriorly.

B Chronic  metritis:  with  hypertrophy;  menses  too  scant}^
"~  and  difficult;  soreness  about  pelvic  region.  (Comple-
mented by  Nitr.  ac.)

1 1  Congestion  of  womb  with  prolapsus.

■  Displacement  in  connection  with  or  in  consequence  of

change  of  life.
llProlapsus  during  climaxis,  with  flashes of  heat,  hot
vertex;  metrorrhagia  and  fainting;  pain  in  1.  hypogas-
tric and  ovarian  region.

■  Chronic  uterine  catarrh,  staining  linen,  rendering  it  stiff,

accompanied  by  a  severe  pain  in  lumbar  region.
//Sterility.

■  Uterine cancer, developing at climaxis,  or as  a  con-

sequence of  change  of  life;  pains  increase  rapidly,  until
relieved  by  profuse  discharge  of  blood;  violent  pains,  as
if  a  knife  was  thrust  through  abdomen,  which  has  to
be  relieved  of  all  pressure.

■  ■Uterine  hemorrhages  of  the  menopause.

■  ■Menses:  suppressed  at  regular  time,  but  too  short  and

feeble;  scanty,  with  laborlike  pressure  from  loins  down-
wards; irregular;  scanty,  blood  black;  late,  scanty  and
difficult;  every  two  or  three  months,  then  profuse;  re-
appearing during  climaxis;  blood  lumpy,  black  or  acrid.

■  Tenacious and acrid menstrual flow, with laborlike

pains. /^Cancer  of  uterus.

■  Menorrhagia  with  chills  at  night,  flashes  of  heat  by  day.

■  Amenorrhoea:  the  smaller  the  discharge  the  greater  the

pain;  with  vertigo,  headache  and  bleeding  from  nose;
with  pain  in  stomach,  chest  and  eructations  at  every
menstrual  time;  swelling  in  region  of  1.  ovary.

■  ■Persistent  congestions  at  menopause.

■  Nosebleed  and  cardialgia  instead  of  menses.

■  Strangulation  of  prolapsed  vagina,  parts  deep  purple.

■  Erectile  tumors;  hemorrhage  vicarious;  pain  <  until  >

by  flow  of  blood ;  if  bleeding  returns,  pain  returns.

■  Fistula  vagina ;  gangrene.

■  Before  menses:  desire  for  open  air;  vertigo;  nosebleed;

laborlike  pains,  <  in  1.  ovarian  region;  bruised  feeling
in  hips;  >  when  flow  begins;  sudden  attacks  of  cardi-
algia; oppression  or  spasms  of  chest;  eructations;  diar-
rhoea, with  violent  straining;  colic,  with  sense  of  mal-
aise; nervous  distress;  mucous  sediment  in  urine;  leu-


505  LACHESIS.

corrhoea  three  days  before,  discharge  copious,  smarting
and  sHmy,  stiffening  linen  and  leaving  a  greenish
stain;  pain  in  back,  with  abdominal  cramps  and  throb-
bing headache.

■  The  day  before catamenia irresistible  desire  to  go in

open  air  and  run  about. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Menstrual  colic  on  first  day  of  catamenia.
I  Laborlike  pains  with  catamenia.

llDuring  menses  beating  in  head  and  burning  in  vertex;
laborlike  pains,  as  if  everything  was  being  pressed  out,
followed  by  a  slight  show ;  uterus  feels  as  if  os  was  open ;
violent  pains  first  day  in  small  of  back  and  abdomen ;
tearing  pain  in  abdomen;  bruised  feeling  in  hips;  >  as
flow  becomes  free;  violent  cramps  in  bowels  as  if  cut  with
knives;  pressing  pains  from  loins  to  privates;  uterine
pains  running  up;  colic  beginning  in  1.  ovary;  tooth-
ache <  in  proportion  to  diminution  of  flow;  fainting  in
nervous  women ;  cardialgia,  oppression  of  chest  and
eructations;  ovarian  pain;  discharge  of  blood  or  mucus
from  anus;  epilepsy  <.

■Jealous  disposition;  craves  coffee  and  feels  >  after  drink-
ing it;  ulcers  on  legs  with  a  purplish  circumference.
^Dysmenorrhoea.

■With  menses  a  throbbing  in  rectum  and  violent  pains ;
greatly  troubled  with  wind;  slime  passes,  sometimes
blood  as  from  an  ulcer;  pressure;  feels  as  if  a  stricture
was  there.

■  Catamenia  flow  but one  hour  every  day,  on  stopping,

violent  pains  follow  in  region  of  1.  ovary,  alternating
with  gagging  and  vomituritio. ^.Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Dysmenorrhoea  of  eighteen  years'  standing.

■  After  menses:  diarrhoea;  common,  acrid  leucorrho^a;  pal-

pitation, with  pain,  as  if  heart  was  hanging  by  a  thread,
and  every  beat  would  tear  it  off.
iLeucorrhoea: from  three  to  eight  days  before  menses;
green or thick yellow; copious, smarting, stiffening
linen,  staining  it  greenish,  milky.

■  Redness  and  swelling  of  parts,  with  mucous  discharge.

■  Fungus  hsematoides  on  right  mamma  as  large  as  a  peony;

blood  poured  out  all  over  it  as  from  a  sponge.

■  For  last  four  years  stitching  and  cutting  pains  in  1.  breast,

more  or  less  severe,  but  always  <  before,  during  and
after  menses ;  at  flrst  pain  limited  to  affected  part,  but
finally  extended  to  1.  axilla,  and  thence  down  arm  to
hand ;  peculiar  painful  sensation  of  weakness  and  lame-
ness in  1.  shoulder  and  arm,  <  using  arm;  occasionally
1.  mamma  and  arm  become  so  painful  that  use  of  latter
becomes  impossible,  and  she  is  compelled  to  lie  down;


LACHESIS.  596

on  examination  no  visible  swelling,  but  upon  pressure
with  finger  a  three-lobed  tumor,  each  lobe  about  as  large
as  a  pigeon's  egg,  can  be  detected  lying  about  two  inches
above  and  somewhat  to  1.  side  of  nipple;  tumor
movable  and  painful  to  pressure;  examination  causes
pain  which  extends  to  shoulder  and  down  arm,  lasting
5-6  hours;  shoulder  and  arm  sensitive  to  pressure,  the
pain  extending  back  into  mamma;  pale  and  emaciated ;
menses  regular,  lasting  3-4  days,  with  much  pain  on
first  day  and  day  previous  to  their  appearance;  chronic
fluor  albus.
I  Breast  has  a  bluish  or  purplish  appearace;  chills  at  night
and  flushes  of  heat  "by  day.

I  Cancer  having  bluish  or  dark  base,  interspersed  with

black  streaks  of  coagulated  or  decomposed  blood.

■  Cancer  of  breast,  with  lancinating  pains.

iScarlet,  shining,  herpetic  eruption,  under  mammae,  <
from  scratching;  odor  offensive.

I I  At  menopause:  flashes,  hot  vertex;  metrorrhagia;  faint-
ing; uterine  displacement;  cancer;  capillary  circulation
aftected.

llSuitable  at  beginning  and  close  of  menstruation.
^Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Persistent  vomit-
ing  in pregnancy,  occurring late in afternoon and
evening.

■  Convulsions  commenced  on  1.  side,  in  face,  and  continued

longer,  and  were  more  severe  about  neck  and  throat
than  elsewhere;  sixty-five  distinct  convulsions.  ^Puer-
peral convulsions.

■Violent  convulsions  in  lower  limbs,  with  coldness  of  feet,
stretching  backward  of  body,  and  screaming;  puerperal.

■From  sunstroke  two  years  previous  to  confinement  had
been  ever  since  in  bed;  two  hours  after  delivery  con-
vulsions; after  twelve  hours  comatose,  great  heat  in
occipital  and  cervical  regions;  mouth  dry;  pulseless.

■  Face  turgid;  mouth  filled  with  foam  and  blood;  jaws

convulsively  set,  tongue  shockingly  lacerated;  pulse
full  and  hard;  respiration  irregular;  complete  coma
interrupted  by  frightful  convulsions;  sudden  and  for-
cible protrusion  of  tongue. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

■Face  livid,  bluish;  abdomen  swollen;  urinary  and  fecal
evacuations  suppressed;  lochial  discharge  thin  and
fetid ;  unconsciousness  with  violent  chills  daily.  ^Puer-
peral peritonitis.

■Lochial  discharge  thin,  ichorous;  tympanitis. <?Metritis.

■  i  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

■  ■  Pains  in  ovaries  after  confinement.

■Sore  mouth  of  nursing  women,  edges  of  tongue  red  and
cracked,  with  smarting  and  aching  pains.


597

LACHESIS.

iLancinating  pains  in  mamma;  pains  down  arm-  breast

bluish with  blackish  streaks. Vlastitis  '

"Breast  has  a bluish  or  purplish  appearance;  chills  at

night  and  flushes  ot  heat  by  day
iThin,  blue  milk  discharging  involuntarily;  child  does
not  want  to  nui^e;  after  child  has  sucked  awhile  milk
becomes  natural  in  color.
jMilk  thin,  blue;  she  awakens  sad,  despairing
Mamm^  swollen ;  nipples  swollen,  erect ;  painful  to  touch
^ II  Extreme  sensitiveness  of  nipples
Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. nLossof
voice  caused  by  paralysis  or  oedema  of  vocal  cords
i  I  Paralysis  of  vocal  cords,  particularly  the  left
I  Unable  to  utter  a  loud  word  for  a  week;  a  spot  tender

■  Aphonia  in  phthisis;  sputum  tough  and  green
bomething  hinders  speech;  hoarse;  hawks  constantly

■  Hoarseness  and  cough;  heart  beat  accelerated  by  quick

motion  or  after  drinking  beer  ^ ^

"Hoarseness,  rough,  dry  cough  caused by  scratching  in
larynx  and  trachea, ^eart  disease.  ^

■  Increased hoarseness while speaking; voice will not

come  because  something  in  larynx  "prevents  ilwhch
cannot  be  hawked  loose,  though  mucus  is  brought  m
"Hoarseness,  rawness,  dryness ;  larynx  sensitive  to  touch
"bensation  as  from  a  skin  in  larynx

i  Feeling  as  of  talons  sticking  into  larynx,  <  by  couehino-

■•Larynx  sensitive  to  least  touch,  which caules  suflocf

tion ;  feeling  of  a  lump  in  throat  '^^"

■  Larynx  and  whole  throat  painful  to  touch

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  larynx;  hoarseness;  *a  thick  lumo

bronchrtis "'''  "  '''"  -—elated  mucus. ^ChroZ

"S'as^?itlTf//""'P  ^?  P^"^  ^^^^^*'  like  a  button;
reels  as  it  it  might  loosen,  but  does  not

Pdn'^-n  ^r^^^'hT'  Painful  on  bending  head  backward.

■  lain  in  pit  of  throat  extending  to  root  of  tongue  and  to

pi^^Ltr^r-  '■  ''''"'■  "^'"^  '^'"*  '*  ^'-«"-^

■  ■Feeling  as  if  something  was  swollen  in  pit  of  throat

■Constriction, dryness,  stinging and great  rawness  of

and  rloTTp^-  ?^  ^^'"T^  """?  '"y"^'  ^"^  «hil?s
ana  rigors. C'Epidemic  pharyngitis

"Larynx  swollen,  sore,  raw,  scraping,  somewhat  also  on

pressing  upon  it;  at  same  time  is  obliged  to  swallow.


LACHESIS.  598

I  Catarrh,  with  little  secretion  and  much  sensitiveness;
dry  cough,  coming  from  sense  of  tickling  in  larynx,
provoked  by  deep  inspiration,  speaking  and  pressure;
sense  of  fulness  in  trachea  and  painful  aching  in  os
hyoides. ^Laryngitis.

I  Chronic  affections  of  larynx,  where  parts,  without  being
actually  inflamed,  are  very  sensitive;  hoarseness;  sen-
sation as  if  a  large  mass  of  mucus  had  accumulated  in
throat.

I  Impending  croup  during  diphtheria;  awakens  suffocat-
ing, grasps  throat;  fears  he  is  dying.

II Croup  <  after  sleep;  seemingly  sleeps  into  croupy  spell.

iChild  seems  as  if  it  would  choke  while  sleeping;  breathes
>  after  waking. ^Croup.

■Awakened  from  sleep,  apparently  in  a  dying  condition.
^Membranous  croup.

I  Croup  in  children  subject  to  inflammator}'  rheumatism.

I  Child  arouses  with  a  paroxysm  of  choking,  almost  loses
its  breath,  and  sometimes  goes  into  convulsions.  ^Croup.

■  Membranous  croup,  last  stage;  membrane  coughed  uj)

in  pieces  like  a  glove  finger;  very  sore  throat.

■  Membranous croup with diphtheritic sore throat, or

malignant  scarlet  fever;  breath  very  offensive;  glands
of  neck  swollen;  soreness  of  neck  to  touch.

■  ■Suddenly  something  runs  from  neck  to  larynx,  stopping

breathing,  it  awakens  him  at  night.  6'Spasmus  glottidis.

■  Constriction  of  larynx,  attended  with dryness  of  whole

throat  and  mouth,  invariably  after  sleeping.

■  Nightly  attacks  of  spasm  of  glottis  after  first  sleep;  suf-

focation and  livid  face  ;  during  day  sensation  of  foreign
body  in  throat,  with  difficulty  in  swallowing.

■  Paroxysms  recur  as  often  as  child  gets  into  a  sound  sleep.

^Laryngismus  stridulus.
;rFrightful  gasping  or  grasping  at  larynx,  almost  suffocated
at  night  in  an  attack;  she  thought  she  was  dying  from
inability  to  breathe;  rolling  from  side  to  side  in  bed.

■  Sensation  as  if  something  was  in  trachea  which  might

be  raised,  comes  partly  up  and  then  goes  back  again.

■  After  attack  of  influenza  dry,  harassing,  concussive  cough ;

<  after  sleep. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Mucous  membrane  of  nose  thickened;  much  sneezing;

dry,  stuffed  feeling  through  whole  front  part  of  head;
gradually  passing  to  fauces  and  chest;  constant  dry,
short  cough,  night  and  day,  sitting,  lying  or  walking;
wheezing  breathing;  face  red  and  puffed;  eyes  seem
almost  pressed  out. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Cough  excited  by  even  light  pressure  on  larynx,  or  as

soon  as  he  falls  asleep,  often  with  choking,  as  if  suffoca-


599  LACHESIS.

tion  was  inevitable;  after  a  long,  dry  and  wheezing
paroxysm  of  cough  there  is  suddenly  a  profuse  expec-
toration of  frothy,  tenacious  mucus,  which  gives  great
relief. ^Chronic  bronchitis.

■  Continued  fever,  <  at  night;  pulse  150;  respirations  70

per  minute;  red  spot  on  one  cheek,  frequently  changing
sides;  1.  lung  impervious  to  air;  constant  cough,  <  at
night;  later  r.  lung  affected;  uneasy  and  restless;
throws  itself  in  all  positions  in  efforts  to  breathe ;  face
dark;  constant  spasmodic  cough  with  labored  breath-
ing; on  falling  asleep  for  a  few  moments  throat  became
so  dry  that  a  condition  like  croup  came  on,  and  all
suffering  increased. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Can  only  breathe  in  upright  position,  and  that  with  great

labor;  thickening  of  mucous  membrane  seems  to  fill
luug  completely;  constant  cough  from  titillatioiis  be-
hind sternum,  seemingl}^  at  bifurcation  of  trachea;  no
expectoration,  yet  chest  seems  full  of  fluid  when  cough-
ing. (^Bronchial  catarrh.

I  Dry  cough,  squeaking  rale  and  aphonia;  external  throat

sensitive  to  touch ;  soreness,  tenderness,  sensation  of
weight  in  1.  ovarian  region;  <  after  sleep;  pale,  scanty
menses,  with  loss  of  sexual  instinct. ^Bronchitis.

■  Bronchial  attacks in  subjects  of  cyanosis  and  cardiac

disease.  ^

^'  B.8Spiration. ■  l Constantly  obliged  to  take  a  deep  breath.

I I  Desperate  fits  of  suffocation,  must  sit  up  in  bed;  cutting
pain  in  abdomen.

■  (Obliged  to  sit  up  and lean  r.  side  against  a  pillowed

rocking  chair  that  pain  in  1.  chest  with  dyspncea,  might
be  >;  frequent  small  pulse;  diminished  strength  of
heart's  action;  could  not  bear  neck  and  waistbands
fastened.

■  Difficulty  of  breathing  >  when  sitting  bent  forward;  <

when  talking  and  after  eating.

■  Oppression  and  want  of  breath  :  <  when  walking  and

after  spiritous  liquors;  heart  disease;  at  every  menstrual
effort.
■Shortness  of  breath  and  suffocative  attacks  caused  by
touching  larynx  and  <  on  moving  arms.

■  I The  least  thing  coming  near  mouth  or  nose  interferes

with  breathing;  lying  in  bed  at  night  slightest  covering
over  mouth  or  nose  produces  suffocating  dyspnoea.

■  In morning  when  sitting up  quickly,  breathing  slow,

difficult,  whistling. ^Asthma.

■  ■Oppression  of  chest  during  sleep.

■  Lays  hand  upon  u])per  third  of  sternum  and  declares  she

cannot  <zet  her  breath  below  there.


LACHESIS.  600

I  Chest  stuffed  as  it  were;  cannot  lie  down  from  a  sense  of
suflbcation  and  must  open  doors  and  windows  to  obtain

■  air;  a  suffocating  short  cough,  with  scanty  and  difficult
expectoration;  head  must  always  be  high,  and  she  gen-
erally rests  it  on  her  hand.

I  Great  dyspnoea,  <  in  afternoon  and  after  sleep;  1.  side;
badly  smelling  stools  even  if  formed. ^Pneumonia.

I  iChest  feels  constricted.

llSuddenly  something  runs  from  neck  to  larj-nx  and
interrupts  breathing  completely;  it  wakens  at  night.
^Spasmus  glottidis.

iCannot  sleep,  as  soon  as  he  falls  asleep  breathing  is  im-
mediately interrupted. ^Acute  rheumatism.

iSutfbcating  fits,  waking  from  sleep  with  throwing  arms
about;  cyanotic  symptoms;  swelling  of  liver;  black
urine. ^Hydrothorax.

lAwakes  with  fear  of  suffocation  in  middle  of  night.

llDuring  heat  as  of  orgasm  of  blood  he  is  obliged  to  loosen
clothes  about  neck  ;  sensation  as  though  they  hindered
circulation  of  blood,  with  a  kind  of  suffocative  feeling.

I I  Asthma:  <  from  covering  mouth  or  nose,  touching
throat,  moving  arms,  on  awaking,  after  eating  or  talk-
ing; >  sitting  bent  forward.

iSharp  pain  through  lungs,  great  dyspnoea;  <  sitting
erect,  or  lying  down,  >  bending  forward  and  throwing
head  back;  feeling  of  intense  constriction  in  all  parts  of
chest,  as  if  lungs  were  being  pressed  up  into  throat,  caus-
ing extreme  agony,  so  that  she  despaired  of  life;  feeling
as  though  a  cord  was  tightly  tied  around  neck;  must
loosen  clothes  at  neck  and  epigastrium;  at  times  sensa-
tion as  though  heart  turned  over  and  ceased  beating  for
a  moment,  tlien  commenced  again  with  increased  force;
lung  seems  full  of  mucus,  yet  none  can  be  raised;  face
almost  purple  during  paroxysms.

I  lOildema  pulmonum  ;  emphysema.

llThreatening  paralysis  of  lungs,  greatest  difficulty  in
breathing,  with  long  lasting  attacks  of  suffocation.

I  Hay  asthma.

I  Itching  disappears,  she  is  very  short  of  breath  and  full

of  anxiety. ^Itch.
^  Cough. I  Constant  dry,  hacking  cough. ^Ovaritis.

I I  Dry,  hacking  cough,  caused  by  touching  throat  or  in
morning  after  sleep.

I  Every  contact  with  open  air  causes  a  violent  tickling
cough,  accompanied  by  expectoration  of  mucus.

I  Fluttering,  nervous,  slight  cough,  apparently  excited  by
a  tickling  in  larynx.

I  Cough  caused  by  pressure  on  larynx  or  by  any  covering


GOl  LACHESIS.

on  throat;  by  ca  tickling  in  pit  of  throat  and  sternum;

when  falling  asleep;  from  ulcers  in  throat.
I  Cough,  with  rawness  of  chest,  difficult  expectoration  and

pains  in  throat,  head  and  larynx.
iConstant  titillation  in  throat  inducing  cough;  constant

hawking  going  on  to  empty  retching,  without  nausea;

seldom  any  expectoration,  but  when  there  is  it  is  brought

up  with  extreme  difficulty  and  at  risk  of  suffocation.
i  Crawling  in  ulcers,  irritation  to  cough.  ^Angina  sy  ph  ilitica.
■Short,  gagging,  very  fatiguing  cough  from  tickling  in

pit  of  throat,  cannot  get  anything  loose.

■  Frequent  attacks  of  short  cough  from  tickling  in  pit  of

stomach,  dry  during  night;  difficult,  sometimes  watery,
salty  mucus,  which  has  to  be  swallowed  again.

■  Cough: <  during  day;  after  sleeping;  changes  in  tem-

perature;  alcoholic  drinks;  acids  and  sour  drinks.

■  Short,  superficial,  tickling  cough,  very  exhausting,  some-

times causing  vomiting;  difficult  expectoration  of  thin,
tough  mucus,  or  thick,  roundish  lump^;  often  coughs,
hawks,  spits,  without  bringing  up  anything;  coughs
only  during  day ;  cough  in  open  air  and  after  speaking,
which  seems  to  make  everything  dry;  in  damp  weather
and  after  eating  fish  ;  cough  seems  to  originate  in  epigas-
trium, where  it  produces  a  tickling  sensation  and  severe
pain.
^rSuperficial,  nervous  cough  from  tickling  in  larynx,  at  9
P.M.  until  going  to  bed.

■  Cough  after  rising  from  a  lying  position.

■  Cough  during  sleep,  without  being  conscious  of  it.

■  Bronchial  cough,  <  after  sleeping.

■  I  Cough  after  sleep;  breath  fetid;  complete  loss  of  appetite.

■  Dry  cough,  squeaking  rale  and  aphonia;  throat  sensitive

to  touch;  soreness,  tenderness,  sensation  of  weight  in  1.
ovarian  region ;  <  after  sleep;  pale,  scanty  menses,  with
loss  of  sexual  instinct. ^Bronchitis.

■  After influenza,  dry,  harassing,  concussive cough; <

after  sleeping,  lasting  all  Winter  and  following  Spring.

■  After  occasional  attacks  of  haemoptysis,  dry,  sore  cough,

<  at  night  and  in  early  morning,  and  also  by  reclining.
^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

■  i Cough  as  if  some  fluid  had  gone  into  wrong  passage.

■  With  every  cough  feeling  as  of  an  ulcer  in  stomach.

■  Gagging,  persistent  cough,  from  tickling  in  throat,  under

sternum,  or  in  stomach ;  <  on  falling  asleep)  or  during
day,  from  change  of  temperature  and  alcoholic  drinks.

■  Hard,  racking  cough  and  profuse  expectoration. ^Hepa-

titis.

■  Child  coughs  in  evening  on  lying  down,  afterwards  dur-

ing sleep,  sometimes  awakened  thereby  ;  faint  and  weak.


LACHESIS.  C02

1 1  Cough  most  during  day.

I  Cough  excited  by  increased  secretion  of  fluid  in  larynx.

I  Feels  pretty  well  when  she  gets  up;  thinks  she  will  be

able  to  do  a  good  day's  work,  until  11  a.m.,  when
she  becomes  weak  and  faint;  tongue  sore  across  middle
from  side  to  side,  and  beats;  throat  seems  to  swell  and
beat;  fits  of  coughing,  expectoration  of  tenacious  mucus;
>  after  two  o'clock ;  perspires  at  night,  starts  up  sud-
denly with  choking;  cannot  bear  bonnet  strings  tied
tight;  no  appetite;  flatulence;  to  be  costive;  >  out  of
doors  and  when  moving  about.

■  Coughing  or  sneezing  causes  stitching  pains  in  affected

parts. ^Cancer  of  uterus.
OlSympathetic  cough  of  cardiac  affections.

■  During  cough :  tension  in  head  ;  pains  in  epigastrium,  ab-

domen and  anus;  burning  in  chest;  ulcerative  pain
above  and  along  ribs;  stitches  in  chest;  running  of
water  from  the  mouth;  vomiting;  discharge  of  urine;
pain  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors.

■  Constant  provocation  to  cough,  with  retching  and  gagging.

II  With  every  single  cough  a  stitch  in  hemorrhoidal  tumor.
I  Pain  in  aims  when  coughing  or  sneezing.

I  Cough  with  hoarseness.

I  Paroxysms  of  suffocating,  spasmodic  cough,  with  tickling
in  larynx.

■  Dyspnoea  and  cough,  with  slimy,  blood  streaked,  very

copious  sputa. ^Gastric  nervous  fever.

liSharp  pain  through  lungs  with  great  dyspnoea;  <  sit-
ting erect  or  lying  down ;  >  bending  body  forward  and
throwing  head  back;  feeling  of  intense  constriction  in
all  parts  of  chest,  as  if  lungs  were  pressed  up  into  throat;
constriction  in  throat  as  if  cord  was  tied  around,  neces-
sitating loosening  of  covering;  sensation  as  if  heart
turned  over  and  ceased  beating  for  a  while,  after  which
pulsations  increased  in  force. ^Spasmodic  asthma.

llMustcough  hard  and  long  before  he  can  raise.

■  After  a  long,  wheezing  cough,  suddenly  spits  up  profuse,

frothy,  tenacious  mucus.
■Spitting  large  quantities  of  ropy  mucus. /^Diphtheria.

■  Expectoration:  scanty,  difficult,  watery,  saltish;  must  be

swallowed  again ;  straining  and  vomiting.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Oppressive  pain  in  chest,  as  if
full  of  wind,  >  by  eructation.

■  ■  Full  feeling  of  chest  and  a  pushing  pressing  from  within

outward. ^ Heart  disease.

■  Contraction  of  chest  waking  him after  midnight,  with

slow,  heavy,  wheezing  breathing,  compelling  him  to  sit
up  bent  forward.


603  LACHESIS.

I  Pain  in  chest  as  from  soreness;  burning  in  chest.

■  Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  with  difficult  breatiiing.

I  Stitching  pain  through  r.  side  of  chest.  ^Hepatitis.
•  I  Chest  feels  as  if  stutted;  cannot  lie  down,  from  sense  of
suffocation ;  must  open  doors  and  windows  to  obtain
air;  suffocating,  short  cough,  scanty  and  difficult  ex-
pectoration; fever  at  10  p.m.,  unquenchable  thirst,
dryness  in  throat  and  mouth,  can  scarcely  breathe  for
thirst,  must  continually  moisten  mouth,  drinking  does
no  good,  and  she  dreads  it;  fever  begins  with  rigor  on
going  to  bed,  heat  continues  till  4  a.m.,  with  intervals
of  shivering;  sweat  towards  morning;  tearing  pain  in
temples  during  hot  stage,  burning  heat  in  epigastrium;
sleepy,  day  and  night,  but  cannot  sleep,  except  a  little
towards  morning;  frequent  micturition,  urine  scanty,
dark  brown  and  turbid;  abdomen  distended,  flatulence;
cannot  bear  anything  upon  abdomen;  little  appetite;
frequent  coryza;  feeling  of  ball  in  throat,  as  if  a  button
was  fast  stuck  in  pit  of  throat;  not  perceptible  on
swallowing  food,  but  on  attempting  deglutition,  and
during  this  it  seems  to  rise  and  sink,  as  if  it  was  turned
around,  feels  as  if  she  could  bring  it  up  Vmt  it  will  not
come;  must  have  whole  neck  bare,  cannot  endure  bed-
clothes, nor  even  tie  cap  strings. ^Chest  affection.

iBurning,  stinging,  like  coals  of  fire  from  chest  through  to
shoulders.

I  Hepatization,  particularly  of  1.  lung;  great  dyspnoea  on
awaking. ^Pneumonia.

I  Pulse  very  quick,  wiry, excited and strong; frequent

chills  and  fever;  no  appetite;  constipation;  sputa  as  if
mixed  with  brickdust ;  discouraged,  homesick  and  de-
spairing; covers  his  head  with  bedclothes,  and  sighs  and
laughs  by  turns,  and  always  thinks  there  is  something
wrong. ^Pneumonia.

I I  Threatened  paralysis  of  lungs  with  great  dyspnoea  and
long  lasting  suffocative  paroxysms. /^Pneumonia.

I  Dropsy  of  chest;  awakt&ns  suffocating;  liver  swollen;
scanty,  dark  urine;  palpitation. Mfter  scarlatina.

I  I  Sibilant  rales.

iChronic  pleuropneumonia;  hepatization;  difficulty  of
breathing;  dyspnoea  particularly  on  r.  side.

I  Measles,  followed  by  whooping  cough,  inflammation  of
lungs,  bloody  expectoration,  high  fever  and  terrible
coughing  spells;  intense  capillary  bronchitis;  pulse
135 ;  dry  crepitation  over  both  lungs,  somewhat  veiled
by  co-existing  coarse  bronchial  rales ;  finally  suppuration
of  both  lungs  supervened,  with  following  symptoms;
great  emaciation,  cadaverous  appearance,  eyes  sunken


LACHESIS.  604

and  glassy,  rattling  in  bronchi,  expectoration  of  cream
colored  pus,  hectic  Hush,  pulse  rapid,  cannot  be  counted
correctly,  pijcking  and  boring  1.  nostril,  until  it  is  raw
.  and  bleeding;  lips  parched  and  dry,  tongue  dry,  dark
brown  coating  at  root,  tip  red;  trembling  of  tongue
when  attempting  to  protrude  it;  cannot  put  out  tongue,
it  sticks  to  front  teeth  ;  sordes  on  teeth  ;  great  prostra-
tion; can  bear  nothing  about  throat;  plaintive  moan-
ing; after  every  coughing  spell  such  exhaustion  it  seems
she  will  die.
■Useful  when  tubercles  follow  pneumonia.

■  Woman,  set.  26,  tall  and  slender,  tuberculous  tendency  of

family;  cough  for  more  than  two  months;  frequent,  dry,
short  and  sharp,  or  harsh  sound;  loss  of  appetite  and
strength;  emaciation;  prominent  clavicles;  no  respira-
tory murmur  in  posterior  superior  half  of  1.  lung.

■  Afternoon  fever,  chills  and  flushes  alternating;  pulse,  112;

copious  night  sweat  wakes  him  from  first  sleep;  violent
titillating  cough,  sensitiveness  of  larynx ;  difficult  expec-
toration, in  hard  lumps,  of  offensive  taste,  sometimes
salty;  burning  deep  in  chest,  pleuritic  pains,  <  from
coughing;  morning  cough,  vomiting;  dulness  in  1.  infra-
clavicular region,  sensitiveness  to  touch ;  shortness  of
breathing,  a  sense  of  constriction  of  chest.  6'Tuberculosis.

■  Difficult  expectoration  of  offensive,  purulent  sputa,  with

straining  even  to  vomiting. ^Tuberculosis.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■■Heart  feels  as  if  too
large  for  containing  cavity.

■  Feeling  of  constriction  about  heart.

■  ■Cramplike  pain  in  prsecordial  region,  causing  palpita-

tion, with  anxiety.

■  Great  pain  in  heart.

■  Palpitation:  with  numbness  of  arm ;  choking  from  slight-

est exertion;  >  by  sitting  down  or  lying  on  r.  side;
with  fainting  and  anxiety  ;  chronic  with  young  girls.

■  Irregularity  of  beats  of  heart.

■  She  feels  beating  of  hear*,  with  weakness,  to  sinking.

■  Palpitation  after  exertion  or  sudden  excitement  >  by

lying  down;  feels  sick  and  faint;  his  face  becomes  white,
but  on  lying  down  symptoms  pass  off  in  tv/o  minutes;
for  some  time  has  been  unable  to  lie  on  1.  side  because
it  caused  pain  at  heart  or  dull  oppression;  lying  on  r.
side  weight  of  1.  arm  is  painful;  fulness  at  heart,  as  if
pressing  against  side  or  had  not  free  play.  ^Heart  disease.

■  Wakes  from  a  troubled  sleep  of  a  few  moments  with  a

violent  shock  in  prsecordla  and  a  sensation  of  suffocative
constriction  of  chest;  extreme  distress  for  breath;  face
livid  and  covered  with  warm  sweat;  visible  palpitation  of


G05  •  LACHESIS.

heart*;  heart  seems  to  stand  still  and  then  start  with  a
tremendous  bound,  followed  by  rapid  tremor;  pulse  ir-
regular, intermissions  growing  more  protracted.  ^'Func-
tional  disturbance  of  heart.

■  Restless,  trembling;  anxiety  about  heart;  hasty  speech;

suffocation  on  lying  down;  weight  on  chest;  heart  feels
constricted. ^Rheumatism  of  heart.

■  Restless  and  trembling;  hasty  talking;  great  oppression ;

anguish  about  heart  in  rheumatism;  irregularity  in
beats  of  heart. ^Pericarditis.

■  Tremulous  irritability  of  heart  after  scarlatina  or  fevers.

■  Constant  dyspncea;  sense  of  suffocation  in  chest  and  car-

diac region,  uninfluenced  by  position,  exercise,  etc. ;
pulse  160,  feeble,  small  and  occasionally  intermittent;
heart's  action  ditto;  a  mouthful  of  food  or  drink  causes
distress,  burning  and  pain  till  vomited;  believes  she
will  not  recover,  but  withont  anxiety. ^Heart  affection.

■  Obliged  to  sit  up  and  lean  r.  side  against  pillowed  chair,

that  pain  in  1.  chest,  with  dyspnoea,  might  be  >■;  fre-
quent small  pulse;  could  not  bear  neck  and  waistbands
fastened. ^Heart  disease.

■  Hypertrophy  of  1.  ventricle,  with  sensation  as  if  heart

was  too  large  for  its  containing  space.

■  Suffocative  attacks  on  touching  larynx  or  moving  chest;

fainting  and  anxiety  from  slightest  motion  of  child;
purple  color  of  skin ;  coldness  of  extremities. ^Cyanosis.

■  Pericarditis,  or  endocarditis,  after  scarlatina  ordiphtheria.

■  Favors  resorption  of  exudate  in  pericarditis.

■  Weight  in  chest  with  anxiety;  spasmodic  pain  in  heart,

palpitation,  feels  constricted  ;  sensation  as  if  heart  inter-
mitted a  single  beat,  produces  slight  cough  which  seems
to  re-establish  circulation ;  shortness  of  breath  after
every  motion,  especially  of  hands;  great  weariness;  in-
ability to  lie  down  on  account  of  a  suffocating  sense  of
fulness  in  chest,  necessity  of  removing  all  pressure  from
neck  and  chest  and  gasping  for  breath,  when  >  of  this
lies  on  1.  side  with  head  high;  most  adapted  to  cases
where  fibrin  is  deposited  on  surfaces  of  heart,  valves  or
investing  membrane. ^Rheumatism  of  heart.

■  Dilatation  of  r.  ventricle.

i  I  Woman,  set.  50,  fleshy;  dilatation  of  1.  ventricle,  aorta
and  carotid;  when  quiet  she  could  lie  down  and  sleep  for
an  hour  or  two;  when  excited  must  sit  by  open  window:
bronchiae  are  readily  affected  by  cold;  lungs  fill  up;
could  only  breathe  in  upright  position  with  great  labor;
constant  cough  from  titillation  behind  sternum,  at  bi-
furcation ;  no  expectoration,  yet  chest  seems  full  of  fluid.

■  ■Ebullitions  in  chest.


LACHESIS.  •  606

1 1  Cyanosis  neonatorum.

iSurface  of  body  mottled;  every  effort  to  lift  or  move  babe
would  cause  it  to  cry  out  with  pain;  child's  breathing
after  a  crying  spell  so  labored  as  to  almost  amount  to
asphyxia;  extremities  and  feet  cold;  face  and  limbs
puffed. ^Cyanosis.

iPulse:  small,  weak  and  accelerated;  unequal;  intermit-
tent; alternately  full  and  small;  weak,  slow,  small.

I  I  Pulse  weak  and  empty. ^Intiltration  on  back.

B  Induration  of  veins  and  surrounding  cellular  substance.

I  Atheromatous  condition  of  arteries  in  old  people.

I  Capillaries fill quite slowly alter pressure on skin.
t/iScarlatina.
■"^  Outer  Chest. iBlueness  of  skin.  ^

fcjensation  of  heat  like  from  a  hot  stove  on  outer  chest.

I  I  Burning  pain  as  if  in  flesh  of  chest,  two  or  three  inches
below  1.  nipple.

I  Swelling  from  above  clavicle  down  to  below  pectoralis

major,  smooth  and  elastic,  not  painful,  not  red.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iBlueness  of  external  throat  from  disten-
sion of  veins.

I I  Intolerance  of  tight  neckbands.

I  Pain  in  nape  of  neck  to  distraction. ^WerlhofF's  disease.
I  iStiff  neck,  moves  jaw  with  difficulty ;  tearing  from  nape

of  neck  up  either  side,  to  top  of  head.
iNape  of  neck  painful  to  toucli,  and  stiff.
I  I  Stiffness  of  neck,  on  r.  side,  sore  to  touch,  giddiness  with

choking  in  throat.
I  Nape  of  neck  sensitive  to  external  pressure.

■  Stiffness  of  nape  of  neck,  with  catarrh.

■  Swelling  entirely  on  1.  side;  smooth,  livid  appearance;

suffocative  sensations  produced  by  touching  neck  or
swelling. ^Bronchocele.

■  Glands  of  throat  and  neck  badly  swollen. ^Scarlatina.

■  Swelling  on  1.  side  of neck  from  angle  of  jaw  down-

ward to  near  clavicle,  suppurated  and  abscess  was
discharged  with  lancet;  after  this  patient  declined  and
became  much  exhausted  in  strength;  face  pale,  of  diity,
dingy  hue,  with  puffy  aspect;  appetite  nil;  restlessntss
day  and  night;  constant  hot,  dry  skin;  extremely
peevish  and  whining;  abscess  formed  a  large  cavity
from  which  there  was  sloughing  of  cellular  tissue ;  no
sign  of  healthy  granulations;  discharge  foul  and  copi-
ous ;  pulse  140  and  small ;  could  not  eat  solid  food  on
account  of  soreness  of  neck ;  extremely  sensitive  to  all
motions  of  head ;  profuse  hemorrhage  from  abscess,  at
least  a  pint  of  blood;  great  prostration,  refused  food,
discharges  more  foul,  pulse  rapid  and  feeble;  constant


C07  LACHESIS.

leakage  of  dark  colored  blood  from  sore.  ^After  scar-
latina.

I  Abscess  near  1.  clavicle,  another  on  1.  side  of  neck.
^After  scarlatina.

Stitches  in  upper  part  of  back,  or  along  spine  from  below
upward,  or  in  whole  back  and  in  nape  of  neck,  with
stinging  in  r.  arm  and  sensation  as  if  it  had  gone  to
sleep,  with  itching  on  arms,  hips  and  lower  limbs.

iFrom  cervical  vertebrae  down  to  lumbar,  whole  r.  side
of  back,  width  of  three  or  four  inches,  much  swollen,
elastic,  painless  to  pressure;  dull  pains  intolerable  after
exertion,  has  to  lie  down  in  a  kind  of  tetanic  state.
^Infiltration  of  cellular  tissue.

■  Myelitis.

I  Pain  in  back,  with  great  restlessness,  with  yawning  and
stretching  of  arms  and  legs;  weariness,  aslromtoo  great
exertion,  with  awkward,  tottering  gait,  with  jerks,  tak-
ing away  breath  or  goiug  into  abdomen;  small,  painful
spot,  low  down  in  back.

tintolerable  drawing  in  small  of  back  and  down  into  legs,
especially  noticed  in  ischia,  frequently  in  evening;  draw-
ing extending  from  small  of  back  up  back;  drawing  ex-
tending from  back  to  hips,  with  urging  to  urinate.

iiPain  in  small  of  back:  as  if  lame  and  weak;  intermit-
tent fever;  palpitation;  dyspnoea;  constipation;  dys-
menorrhoea.

lAching  pain  in  lumbar  region. ^Fistula. ,

SStiffness  in  sacrum,  bending  or  beginning  motion,  extend-
ing to  hip  joint  and  thigh  as  if  sinews  were  too  short.

I  Continual  pain  in  sacrum  and  coccyx.

BPain  in  os  coccygis,  when  sitting  down,  feeling  as  if  sit-
ting on  something  sharp.

■  Continual  pain  in  os  sacrum  and  coccj'x;  drawing  pain,

as  if  sprained,  in  small  of  back,  preventing  motion;
agonizing  pain  when  rising  from  a  seat.  ^Coccygodjaiia.
B Tenderness  in  whole  spine,  most  in  neck,  below  occiput;
headache  in  occiput  and  forehead;  on  turning  or  mov-
ing head  pain  in  spine  of  neck  into  brain;  pressure  of
finger  on  spine  of  neck  sends  pain  to  brain;  pressure  on
dorsal  spine  sends  pain  to  stomach;  cannot  bear  to  be
raised  up,  and  cannot  raise  herself  in  bed  because  of
severe  pain;  little  sleep. Mffection  of  spine.

■  Girl,  set.  5  years,  since  two  years  of  age  affected  with

caries  of  dorsal  vertebrae  resulting  in  deformed  chest,
leaving  child  feeble;  lost  control  of  both  legs;  toes
moved  sometimes  involuntarily;  she  coughs  some  dur-
ing day,  but  particularly  at  night  on  going  to  bed ;
much  thirst;  pain  in  spine,  lies  only  on  back;  much


LACHESIS.  608

wheezing  and  rattling  of  mucus;  fever  and  tliirst  at
night;  respiration  feeble  and  difficult,  with  blueness  of
face;  each  coughing  fit  produced  sweating;  expectora-
tion impossible; sleep  much  interrupted.

I  Boils  half  an  inch  in  diameter  near  spine,  with  violent
burning,  throbbing  pain.

llCarbuncle  in  back  of  neck,  purple  or  gangrenous.
^^  Upper  Limbs. '  iPain  in  r.  shoulder  joint  with  headache.

I  Lameness  in  1.  shoulder.

•Soreness  of  r.  shoulder,  <  when  lying  on  it.  ^Hepatitis.
iLeft  shoulder  and  arm  weak  and  lame,  <  lying  on  arm.
iPainful  feeling  of  weakness  and  lameness  in  1.  shoulder

and  arm,  <  by  using  arm;  shoulder  and  arm  sensitive

to  touch. ^Tumor  in  1.  mamma.

I I  Axillary  glands  swollen,  painless,  purplish.
B  Garlic-like  smell  of  sweat  in  axillee.

I  Left  arm  nearly  double  its  size,  from  elastic  cellular  in-
filtration.
I  Arras  so  weak  that  she  is  unable  to  raise  them,
•Makes  odd  motions  with  r.  arm  as  if  reaching  for  some
object. ^Diphtheria.

•  Tetters  on  arms  and  hands.

•  Brown  spots  on  elbow  joint.

•  Wrists  very  painful  and  swollen;  could  not  study  by  day

or  sleep  at  night,  for  burning  pain.  ^After  bee  stings
on  both  wrists.

•  Left  hand  and  arm  numb  while  pain  and  redness  in  foot

disappeared;  pain  and  redness  returned  to  foot,  and
hand  and  arm  were  well.  ^Rheumatism  complicated
with  epilepsy.

•  Pain  in  wrist  joints  as  if  sprained.
B Twitching  of  hands. ^Diarrhoea.

•  Tingling  and  pricking  inl.  hand;  hands  go  to  sleep.

•  Trembling  of  hands. ^Drunkards.

•  The  hands  are  cold  as  if  dead.

•  Swelling  of  hands.

•  Phlegmonous  inflammation  of  hand  with  great  swelling

and  tendency  to  extend  up  arm.

•  Dark  blue,  blackish,  hard  swelling  of  back  of  hand  and

fingers,  icy  cold  with  a  burning  feeling,  sensitive  to
touch  in  attacks  every  day,  come  suddenly,  disappear
slowly;  rubbing  upwards  hastens  disappearance ;  after
touching  ice.

•  Livid  swelling  of  back  of  r.  hand  and  fingers;  began  with

severe  itching  and  "creeping;"  hand  becomes  blue  and
gradually  darker, mottled,  very  hard;  cold, but  seems  to
him  burning  hot;  sensitive  to  pressure;  burning  and
pricking  in  finger  ends;  heat  of  stove  >  pain,  but  <


609  LACHESIS.

creeping  sensation;  throbbing  pain  at  outside  of  wrist ;
sharp  pain  extending  to  elbow;  spasmodic  pain  in
elbow,  when  carrying  arm  in  a  sling;  pain  in  one  small
spot  under  shoulder,  pricking  and  burning  in  hand  as
it  slowl}''  goes  away.
iA  laborer  had  been  working  among  lumber  three  days
before  and  thought  he  must  have  been  poisoned;  hand
commenced  swelling  two  days  ago  until  it  was  three
times  its  size;  very  red,  pits  on  pressure,  between  first
and  second  knuckle,  opening  as  large  as  a  three  cent
piece,  looking  like  dirty  soft  soap;  around  this  and
along  first  three  knuckles  skin  bluish  black  and  inflated
by  gas;  skin  under  black  skin  looked  rotten,  separated
on  opening  first  and  second  fingers,  showing  same  soapy
appearance,  hand  burnt  (deep  in)  terribly;  pain  in  red
streaks  that  ran  up  from  wrist;  constant  thirst;  pulse
not  rapid,  but  soft.

■  Thumbs  bend  inwards. ^Epilepsy.

I  Rheumatic  swelling  of  index  finger  and  wrist.

I I  Panaritium,  bluish  swelling;  stinging,  pricking  pains
intense;  erysipelas;  necrosis,  with  fistulous  openings;
assumes  purplish  hue,  becomes  gangrenous.

■Finger  much  swollen,  looks  bluish,  has  fistulous  openings
from  which  bony  splinters  have  been  discharged,
three  months  in  this  state,  during  which  time  woman
twice  suffered  difficulty  in  swallowing.  ^Sore  finger
from  bite  of  a  drunken  man,  cauterized.

■  Pricking  in  extremities  of  fingers. ^Panaritium.

8  Whitlow  with  necrosis  of  tendon,  and  much  discoloration,

■  Right  index  finger  atrophied;  fetid  sanious  discharge

from  beneath  nail ;  integument  about  root  of  nail  tawny
brown,  bordering  upon  purple  in  parts. ^Onychia.

I  Warts  and  excrescences  on  hands  and  fingers.

II  Numbness  of  finger  tips  (morning).

■  Cold,  sweaty  hands.

1 1  Bluish,  mottled  appearance  of  hands.

■  i  Panaritium,  pricking,  tingling,  more  than  stinging ;  blue

far  around.

■  Felons,  with  proud  flesh.

^^  Lower  Limbs. '  Painful  stiffness  from  loins  down  to  sacrum
and  thighs.
i  Contraction  of  psoas  muscle,  after  abscess.

■  Coxalgia,  <  3  p.m.  and  after  sleep.

I  I  Bruised  feeling  in  hips. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Sciatica for  five  days,  with  intolerable  shooting  pains,

extending  from  1.  hip  down  to  foot,  followed  by  sensa-
tion of  intense  heat  as  from  a  hot  iron  in  parts  affected,

VOL.  VI. — 39.


LACHESIS.  610

and  afterwards  by  perspiration  and  general  prostration ;
pains  extorted  cries,  <  after  sleeping.

iFeet  and  legs  CBdematous,  r.  leg  <;  pale  face;  tongue
yellow;  sclerotic  yellow;  r.  sided  sciatica  at  night,
awaking  him;  pains  come  suddenly  and  disappear
gradually.

I  Pain  constantly  changing  locality,  now  in  head,  now  in
teeth,  now  in  sciatic  nerve,  attended  with  nervousness,
palpitation  of  heart;  burning  like  fire  in  hypogastrium,
lumbar  region  and  behind  sternum. ^Sciatica.

iPain  in  thighs,  as  if  swollen,  in  back  part.

llGressus  gallinaceus.

■  Weakness,  especially  of  legs.

■  Uneasiness  in  lower  limbs.

I  I  Feeling  of  weakness  in  knees  after  eating,  with  pressure

in  stomach.
1  I  Feeling  as  from  a  sprain  in  r.  knee.
BStinging  tearing  in  knees,  with  swelling.
I  I  Aching  in  knees  on  waking  in  morning.

■  Sensation  as  if  hot  air  was  going  through  knee  joints,

which  were  shaky.

■  Left  knee  feels  as  if  sprained.

iSwelling  of  knees,  tension  in  bend,  difficulty  in  stretching.
I  I  Pain  in  legs  and  stiffness  in  knees  after  sitting.

■  Near  1.  knee  joint  a  bunch  of  varicose  veins  size  of  a  fist;

veins  as  thick  as  a  thumb  and  hard  as  a  rope.

■  Contraction  of  hamstrings,  after  popliteal  abscess.

■  Synovial  fluid  dried  up;  pain  in  knee  day  and  night.

■  On  external  side  of  knee  bluish  redness.  ^Erysipelas  of  leg.

■  ■Much  pain  of  an  aching  kind,  in  shin  bones  only.

■  A  half  painful  sensation  of  a  sore  place  immediately  be-

low lower  edge  of  patella  of  1.  leg,  this  trifling  thing
almost  driving  him  wild;  great  distress  of  mind,  as  if
some  terrible  evil  was  impending,  the  evil  dreaded
being  in  some  way  connected  with  the  pain,  but  how,
he  could  not  tell.

■  Pains  as  if  burnt  in  different  places  on  tibia,  at  first  itch-

ing, but  after  rubbing  there  appeared  rather  sensitive
spots  as  large  as  a  quarter  dollar,  with  dark  blue  red
margins  and  dry  scurf.

■  Caries  of  tibia.

■  Erysipelas  with pustules; leg  swollen  bluish  red,  dis-

charged matter  from  several  holes,  presenting  appear-
ance of  a  large  carbuncle,  with  itching.

■  Erysipelas  of  leg;  restless,  could  not  sleep,  least  move-

ment or  touch  on  leg  almost  throwing  child  into  con-
vulsions; very  angry  appearance,  dark  blue  spots  on
upper  part  just  below  knee,  rest  of  limb  of  a  dark,  glossy
redness.


611  LACHESIS.

I  Ulcer  on  r.  leg,  with  varicose  swelling,  after  a  fall.

I  Leg below knee terribly swollen,  black and  spotted.

^Rattlesnake  bite  on  toe.

I I  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

■  Hard  red  patch,  with  scabs  on  calf  of  1.  leg;  tender;  thin,

yellow  fluid  discharge  from  under  scabs;  itching,  espe-
cially in  cold  weather.

■  Legs,  from  knees  to  end  of  big  toes,  covered  with  scales,

circular  or  elliptic,  raised  and  free  on  circumference,
attached  in  centre  and  of  horny  consistence,  resting  on
a  purple  bluish  colored  base;  <  every  Spring;  itching
and  burning,  especially  during  warm  weather,  and  when
heated,  or  when  warm  in  bed.  ^Eczema.
1 1  Flat  ulcers :  with  thin,  offensive  discharge  and  bluish
areolae ;  become  erysipelatous  from  motion.

■  Ulcers  of  legs;  bottom  of  ulcers  uneven  and  dirty;  dis-

charge thin,  odor  offensive.

■  After  scratching  legs  at  night  until  raw,  rapid  suppura-

tion, followed  by  a  large,  dirty  looking,  painful  ulcer.

■  After  running  nail  into  foot,  for  which  a  salve  was  given,

small  ulcer  where  nail  had  pierced,  soon  followed
by  others,  until  whole  plantar  surface  was  covered;
very  little  moisture  from  ulcers,  which  soon  began  to
dry  up,  forming  a  thick,  dry  scale  which  covered  sole
of  foot,  in  some  places  being  a  half  inch  thick.

■  Had  been  using  washes  of  sulphate  of  copper,  sulphate

of  zinc,  sugar  of  lead,  etc.,  for  a  year ;  ulcer  at  last
dried  up  and  patient  was  discharged  as  cured ;  on  tak-
ing cold,  a  few  weeks  after,  her  entire  foot  and  ankle
broke  out  into  small  ulcers,  resembling  original  sore;
great  pain  in  ulcers,  itching  of  feet  and  ankles,  almost
unbearable;  leg  <  after  sleep  and  >  from  warmth.

■  ■Chronic  indolent  ulcers  of  legs,  flat  with  purple  skin;

many  small  sores  around  main  ulcer,  which  has  an  un-
even bottom,  burning  and  bleeding,  even  when  lightly
touched ;  ichorous,  offensive  discharge.

■  Virulent  phagedenic  ulcers.

ii Black,  gangrenous  ulcers  and  wounds  on  legs.

■  Chronic  ulcers  of  lower  extremities  (probably  of  syphi-

litic origin)  in  which  discharge  ceased ;  extremity
oedematous  and  hard,  slightly  red,  swelling  extending
up  along  course  of  principal  veins ;  great  and  sudden
prostration  of. strength;  low,  muttering  delirium  and
general  typhoid  symptoms. /^Phlebitis.

■  Lacerating,  jerking,  rheumatic  pains  in  legs  as  soon  as

he  falls  asleep;  irregular  action  of  heart  and  valvular
murmur  from  rheumatic  metastasis;  deadly  pallor  of
face. ^Rheumatism.


LACHESIS.  612

I  Uneasiness  in  lower  limbs.

I I  Trembling  of  legs.

iConvulsions  particularly  violent  in  lower  limbs,  coldness
of  feet,  stretching  backward  of  body  and  crying  out.

I  I  Swelling  of  1.  leg  and  foot.

I  Rose  red  swelling  of  ankles. ^Erysipelas.

I  Injured  ankles;  severe  contusions  and  lacerations;
gangrene;  bluish  purple  vesicles  covering  a  dirty  look-
ing ash  grey  ground.

I  Woman,  set.  40,  who  had  not  menstruated  for  one  year,
sprained  her  foot;  after  exercise  ankle  greatly  swollen,
erysipelatous  to  knee;  sticking  pain  in  ankle  when  walk-
ing; upper  part  of  foot  covered  with  dark  lentil  shaped
pimples.

I  Pain  in  second  toe  of  r.  foot;  by  evening  livid  swelling
to  knee,  more  painful  when  he  walked ;  pain  in  both
knees;  cannot  stretch  out  foot;  toe  painful  on  pressure.

I  Foot  like  marble  from  varicose  swellings.

■  Swelling  of  feet,  <  after  walking. ^During  pregnancy.

I  Icy  coldness  of  feet;  cold  before  epileptic  attack.

■  Tingling  in  toes.

I I  Gangrenous  ulcers  on  legs  and  toes;  rhagades  of  toes.

I  Proud  flesh  about  ingrown  toenails  or  in  old  wounds-
stinging; purplish  appearance.

Ilnflammation  and  suppuration  of  old  chilblains.

I  Rheumatic  swelling  of  index  finger  and  wrist  joint ;  rheu-
matic pains  in  knees,  stinging,  tearing  and  sense  of
swelling ;  swelling  of  knees  with  tension  in  bends  of
knees,  difficulty  in  stretching  limb  and  pain  of  thigh
(posteriorly I  as  if  swollen;  bluish  red  swellings;  pains
<  after  sleeping ;  after  profuse  sweats  1.  side  most
affected ;  or  the  affection  commences  on  r.  and  goes  over
to  1. ;  arthritic  contractions  of  limbs  after  abuse  of  mer-
cury and  quinine.  ^Rheumatism.
^'  Limbs  in  General.  nErysipelas  of  legs  or  arms;  surface
bluish,  swelling  glossy,  impending  gangrene.

■  Rheumatism,  with  swelling  of  wrists  and  ankles.

■  Three  years  ago,  after  great  mental  emotion,  sudden  ces-

sation of  menstruation,  since  then,  headache,  toothache,
pain  in  joints,  sciatica;  for  last  year  erratic  pains  in
joints,  particularly  in  morning  on  awaking;  nervous
irritability,  palpitation,  burning  as  from  fire  in  hypo-
gastrium,  loins  and  behind  sternum ;  transient  flushes
of  heat  in  face,  without  sweat ;  loss  of  appetite ;  white
coated  tongue ;  pressure  in  stomach;  constipation;  sev-
eral dry,  painless  varices  in  anus.

■  Acute  or  chronic  rheumatism,  recurring  every  year.

■  ■Bluish  swelling  of  joints,  after  sprains.


^^^  LACHESIS.

lODark  bluish  swelling  of  cellular  tissue,  on  hands,  arms,
legs,  very  sensitive ;  impending  gangrene.

■  Boils  on  thighs  and  fingers.

I  fl Nightly  burning  in  palms  and  soles.

iLimbs  stiff,  straight  or  curved,  after  abuse  of  mercury

lArm  and  leg  paretic;  crawling  as  if  asleep.  ^Infiltra-
tion on  back.

''Rest. Position. Motion. Lying down: vertigo; pain
in  head  >;  pressing  or  bursting  pains  in  temples-  any-
thing touches  throat  seems  as  if  he  would  sufi-ocate,  pam
niuch <;  pam  in  top  of  throat;  constant coughing-
slightest  covering  over  nose  and  mouth  produce  sutio-
eating  dyspnoea;  pain  in  lungs  <  ;  stiffness  in  sacrum
Lying on  r  side:  > earache  in  r.  ear; palpitation >-
weight  of  1.  arm  on  1.  side  is  painful;  as  if  something
was  rolling  to  that  side  of  abdomen.
Cannot  lie  on  1.  side  :  causes  pain  at  heart.
When  lying  on  r.  shoulder:  pain  <.
Lying  on  1  side,  with  head  high:  >  suffocating.
Lymg  on  1.  arm :  shoulder  and  arm  weak  and  lame.
Lying  on  back:  involuntary  urine;  pain  in  spine;  mouth
open ;_  must  lie  on  back  with  knees  drawn  up,  peritonitis
typhlitis.  '

Constant  desire  to  lie  down:  acute  pain  in  abdomen
Must  he  down:  pain  in  back  intolerable
Cannot  stand,  has  to  lie  down:  child  loses  consciousness
Lying  with  body  and  limbs  doubled  up:  during  chill
Itecumbent  position  impossible :  from  sense  of  suffocation  •

inflammation  and  swelling  of  tonsils.
Cannot  lie,  stand  or  sit  quiet:  pain  in  back  and  limbs
Kising  from  lying  position:  cough.
Must  change  position  frequently  on  account  of  pain  in

back  and  limbs.
Head  always  must  be  high :  generally  resting  on  hand
feitting:  causes  pain  in  thighs  and  stiffness  at  knees;  con-
stant cough; difficult  breathing; pain  in lungs and
dyspnoea  <;  palpitation  >;  pain  in  coccygis;  pain  in
legs;  stiffness  m  knees.  ^a '  f

Assuming  upright position: pains in head change  to

beating  m  vertex.
Can  only  breathe  in  upright  position.
Could  not  sit  up  without  assistance.

When  sitting  bent forward:  difficulty  of  breathing  >•
contraction  of  chest  >.  '

Bendhig  forward:  spasmodic  colic  >  ;  stiffness  in  sacrum
pending  head  backward :  throat  and  larynx  painful.
Lending  and  throwing  head  back :  pain  in  lungs  >.
On  reaching  up :  vertigo.


LACHESIS.  614

Stooping:  vertigo;  pressing,  bursting  pains  in  temples;
dizzy;  pressive  headaclie  <.

Standing:  body  bends  towards  1.;  cutting  pains  in
rectum  <.

Could  not  stand:  vertigo.

Stretching  backwards  of  body :  during  convulsions.

Cannot  stretch  out  foot:  pain  in  knee.

Rising:  faint;  pain  in  top  of  head  and  giddiness ;  staggers
backwards;  pulls  himself  forward  with  greatest  diffi-
culty; cutting  headache  <.

Rising  from  seat:  agonizing  pain  in  small  of  back.

Cannot  raise  herself  up  in  bed:  because  of  severe  pain.

Could  scarcely  raise  head  from  pillow.

Unable  to  raise  arms:  on  account  of  weakness.

Cannot  use  arm:  on  account  of  pain  in  1.  mamma;  com-
pelled to  lie  down.

Using  arm:  pain  <;  shortness  of  breath  and  suffocative
attacks  < ;  weakness  and  lameness  in  1.  shoulder  and
arm.

Raising  head:  pain  in  head  <.

Turning  head:  pain  in  throat  <;  pain  in  spine  of  neck
into  groin.

Bettered  by  shaking  head.

Turning  over:  feeling  as  of  a  ball  rolling  about  in  blad-
der or  abdomen.

Rolling  from  side  to  side  in  bed :  sufiPocating  attacks ;  from
hour  to  hour.

Makes  odd  motions  with  r.  arm.

Throws  arms  about:  in  suffocating  fits.

Throws  herself  in  all  positions:  to  get  breath.

Sudden  backward  throwing  of  head.

Motion:  aversion  to  every  kind;  pain  in  head  <;  pressing
or  bursting  pains  in  temples;  beating  in  head;  of
temporal  and  masseter  muscles  <  pain  in  ear;  of
limbs;  flesh  sore;  slightest,  renews  vomiting;  causes
excruciating  pain  in  abdomen ;  rapid,  pain  in  r.  ovary  <  ;
causes  heart  beat;  symptoms  of  chest  >;  causes  suffoca-
tive attacks;  stiffness  in  sacrum.

Every  movement:  throbbing  in  head  ;  causes  fainting  and
anxiety ;  of  hands,  causes  shortness  of  breath ;  of  leg,
almost  throws  girl  into  convulsions;  flat  ulcers  become
erysipelatous.

Cannot  move:  nervous  aches  all  over.

Cannot  stand  or  move  legs :  except  an  involuntary  draw-
ing up  of  toes.

Difficulty  of  moving  tongue :  with  impossibility  of  opening
mouth  wide.

Stepping: <  pain  in  ear.


615  LACHESIS.

Walking:  drags  his  feet;  vertigo;  backwards;  stitch  in  r.
side;  shooting  in  region  of  spleen;  constant  cough;  op-
pression and  want  of  breath  <;  sticking  pain  in  ankle;
swelling  of  knee  painful;  feels  like  falling  forwards;  be-
fore chill  became  blind  and  giddy.

Overexertion:  pain  in  r.  ovary  <.
^''Nerves. iNervous  irritability;  restlessness;  jerking.

I  Restless  tossing,  moaning;  children  with  sore  throat.

II Nervous  exaltation;  hysteria.

siTrembling  in  whole  body,  thinks  she  will  faint  or  sink
down  from  weakness.

■  Trembling  of  limbs  and  internally,  with  fever  and  faint-

ness,  evenings. 6'Typhoid.

■  Nervous  aches  all  over;  hysterical  spells  of  trembling;

cannot  move,  work  or  sleep;  dark  forebodings  of  future;
any  news,  excitement,  or  a  harsh  word  makes  < ;  <
after  sleep. /^Nervous  affection.

■  Cramps  in  chest  and  abdomen;  with  crying  and  loud

complaining;  dryness  in  mouth  and  throat;  sensation
as  if  epithelium  was  peeling  off  gums. t^Hysteria.

■  Child  now  and  then  loses  consciousness  and  sight  for  a

second,  turns  and  twists  eyes  like  one  who  fights  with
sleep;  closing  lids,  sinking  of  head  all  in  a  moment;
cannot  stand,  has  to  lie  down.

■  Crawls  upon  floor,  laughs  and  is  very  cross  by  turns;

attacks  last  from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour;  child  acts
strangely,  will  not  play  with  other  children;  exhibits
no  love  for  mother;  seems  to  hate  her  mother  and
friends,  hides;  runs  away  from  strangers,  looks  at  them
through  her  fingers;  bites  and  spits  at  other  children;
six  years  ago  was  frightened  by  a  snake.

■  Spasms  of  legs.

■  Convulsions,  particularly  violent  in  lower  limbs;  coldness

of  feet;  stretciiing  backwards  of  body  and  crying  out.

■  Convulsions  and  other  spasms,  with  violent  shrieks.

■  Severe  pains  in  back  of  head ;  violent  convulsions,  requir-

ing several  strong  persons  to  prevent  her  from  injuring
herself;  attempts  to  pull  hair  out  of  back  part  of  head.

■  Unconscious; hands  clenched;  1.  hand,  1.  foot  and  r.  eye-

lids in  constant  motion;  painless  abscess  on  inside  of  r.
wrist,  one  inch  in  diameter.

■  Delirium  and convulsions from night  watching,  over-

fatigue and  solicitude.

■  Sudden  and  forcible  protrusion  and  retraction  of  tongue.

■  After  having  ears  pierced,  chorea; <  1.  side;  1.  side  of

body  in  continual  motion  ;  cross,  irritable;  throws  away
anything  she  has  in  her  hands  at  time;  ears  sore  and
ulcerated  where  they  had  been  pierced;  finally  motion


LACHESIS.  616

very  violent,  partial  paralysis  of  1.  side;  could  hold  noth-
ing in  hand;  when  walking  frequent  stumbling  and
dragging  of  1.  foot;  unnaturally  loquacious;  <  after  sleep.

■  Great  depression  of  spirits  and  apprehension  of  death;
neck  stiff  and  sensitive  to  touch ;  blue  spots  or  blisters
on  skin;  epistaxis;  hemorrhage  from  bowels,  of  decom-
posed blood;  great  prostration. ^Chorea.

lEpilepsy:  from  onanism  or  otherwise  connected  with
sexual  function  after  great  lewdness,  jealousy,  fluor
albus,  or  seminal  emissions;  during  catamenia;  during
climacteric  period;  during  sleep.

B Epileptic  convulsions;  eyeballs  turned  upward;  cries  fall-
ing down  unconsciously,  foam  at  mouth,  sudden  and
forcible  protrusion  of  tongue;  hands  clenched;  limbs
twitching;  deep  sleep.

I  Creeping  sensation  beginning  at  back  of  neck,  moving
slowly  down  spinal  column. ^Epilepsy.

iBefore  attack:  cold  feet;  palpitation  of  heart;  bloating
of  abdomen;  belching;  heaviness  of  head;  vertigo;
headache;  paleness  of  face. ^Epilepsy.

iHeadache  and  congestions  of  blood  to  head ;  before
attack  absentminded,  confused ;  throws  head  back,
froth  at  mouth,  clenches  hands,  throws  arras  and
legs  about;  between  attacks,  severe  vertigo;  constant
headache;  sensation  of  heat  in  forehead  ;  trembling  of
limbs,  <  1.  side;  curious  dreams  at  night. ^Epilepsy,

■  Striking  about  with  hands  and  feet. ^Epilepsy.

lOne  week  after  frostbitten  toe  which  had  ulcerated,
rigors;  shooting  pains  in  back;  opisthotonus, in  twenty-
four  hours  trismus;  remission  midnight  till  noon;
after  midnight  profuse  sweat  and  agitated  sleep;  throat
sensitive  to  contact,  swallowing  painful. ^Tetanus.

■  Peculiar  tetanic  look,  half  closed eyes  and  stiffness  of

neck;  partial  lockjaw;  rigidity  and  pain  in  muscles  of
back;  after  cutting  oflf  two  outer  phalanges  of  third  r.
toe,  by  being  run  over  by  a  carriage  wheel ;  soft  parts
of  toe  look  gangrenous  nine  days  after  accident.
■Stitches  in  cardiac  region,  in  paroxysms,  three  or  four
times  a  day;  hacking  cough  with  blood  spitting;
pains  take  away  his  breath  while  they  last,  but  cease
suddenly ;  cough  during  day  and  after  lying  down,  none
in  the  night ;  raises  blood  in  morning ;  opisthotonus  with
loss  of  consciousness  only  for  a  moment;  trismus  with
constriction  of  throat,  pulls  and  tears  at  throat;  several
paroxysms  in  quick  succession.

■  Hydrophobia.

■  Climaxis;  menses  irregular;  blood  scanty,  dark, fluid,

and  sometimes  lumpy  ;  for  a  year  past  frequent  catalep-


617  LACHESIS.

tic  attacks,  preceded  by  cold,  stiff  feeling  of  upper  lip,
as  if  she  had  a  moustache  of  ice. ^Catalepsy.

I  Feeling  of  weariness  ;  languor;  exhaustion  as  from  warm

weather ;  inclination  to  lie  down,  especially  after  eating.

■  Great  weakness  in  back,  extending  into  limbs.

I I  Great  physical  and  mental  exhaustion,  constantly  sinks
down  from  weakness; <  in  morning.

llWeakness  of  whole  body,  in  morning  on  rising,  espe-
cially in  arms  and  feet.

■  Weakness  in  morning  in  sleep;  on  waking  general  sick

feeling,  vertigo,  feeling  of  lead  in  occiput,  can  scarcely
raise  head  from  pillow ;  all  joints  seem  sprained.

■  Feeling  as  though  body  was  overwhelmed  by  a  disinte-

grating tendency,  with  sinking  of  all  forces.
BiTrembling  all  over;  exhausted,  faint.
8  a  Fainting,  with  pain  in  heart,  nausea,  pale  face,  vertigo.

■  ■Muscular  prostration. ^Diphtheria, ^^carlatina.

■  Heaviness  and  dulness  in  head,  particularly  in  occiput;

sensation  of  heat  in  head;  hands  numb;  heaviness  <
from  motion,  >  sitting  still;  if  head  is  placed  ever  so
high,  she  thinks  it  too  low;  drowsiness  in  afternoon
every  other  day;  starting  on  falling  asleep;  heat  in
head  and  arms  at  night,  with  weakness  in  epigastrium;
sleeps  little,  and  fulness  and  heaviness  in  head  are  <  in
morning;  restlessness,  driving  from  place  to  place;
symptoms  change  place;  now  more  in  1.  arm,  now  in
foot,  which  is  cold  as  ice;  every  cold  gives  her  a  sore
throat;  swelling  and  stiffness,  painful  when  sw^allowing
and  to  touch;  now  and  then  a  sudden  stitch  in  region
of  heart,  which  makes  her  weak  ;  hemorrhoidal  tumors,
very  painful  during  stool;  frequent  urging;  menses  too
late  and  profuse,  with  throbbing  headache.

■  No  sleep  until  after  midnight;  great  despondency  and

sadness,  weakness  of  memory;  headache  in  sun,  with
glimmering  of  eyes;  swollen  and  easily  bleeding  gums;
sore  throat,  with  sensation  of  fulness,  or  as  of  a  plug  in
throat;  tonsils  enlarged;  constant  dryness  of  throat;
frequent  entire  loss  of  voice;  burning  pain  in  regit)n
of  1.  ovary,  menstruation  irregular;  corrosive  leucor-
rhcea  for  ten  days  after  menstruation  ;  everything  sours
in  stomach,  heartburn  incessantly;  pressing,  burning
pain  in  top  of  head,  from  within  outward;  dry,  hack-
ing cough;  palpitation;  constipation;  cold  limbs  below
elbows  and  knees.  ^General  breakdown  after  rejDeated
attacks  of  pneumonia.
■Menstruation  irregular;  suppressed  for  eight  months;
swelled  abdomen  ;  restless,  nervous,  morbidly  talkative
complaining,  yet  giving  a  very  rambling  account;  no


LACHESIS.  618

sleep  for  three  nights,  partly  owing  to  nervous  restless-
ness, partly  to  what  she  calls  shivering  and  shaking  fits
which  come  over  her;  for  some  time  sleep  broken,  fol-
lowed by  headache  and  despondency  ;  least  worry  and
excitement  puts  her  into  heat  and  fever;  urine  scanty,
high  colored,  offensive,  passed  with  much  pain  ;  bowels
1  inchned  to  be  loose;  nervous  and  discouraged  after
eating;  nausea  and  load  at  stomach;  dress  unfast-
ened and  quite  loose  at  upper  part  of  chest,  says  she
cannot  bear  it  tight,  nor  can  she  bear  things  tight
around  her  waist;  faintness  and  hunger  about  11  a.m.
^General  prostration  after  childbearing.
iSuddenly  eyesight  nearly  gone;  speech  disturbed,  after
a  few  minutes  conversation  a  curtain  seemed  to  fall
down  in  front  of  pharynx;  teeth  feel  as  if  wedged;
tongue  feels  scalded ;  cannot  yawn  because  of  sharp
pain  about  root  of  tongue;  when  eating  fast,  food  stays
in  throat;  pain  over  eyes  and  sore  feeling  in  eyeballs;
has  to  read  and  sew  with  glasses  of  an  octogenarian  ;
bagging  just  in  front  of  uvula,  which  is  very  soft  and
feels  like  pus;  at  apex  of  bag  a  whitish  prominence,  as
if  an  abscess  was  about  to  discharge.  ^Post  diphthe-
ritic affection.

I  Lying  with  body  and  limbs  doubled  up;  nose,  ears  and

forehead  very  cold;  giddiness  and  blindness;  skin
shriveled,  cold,  livid;  pulse  thready,  dying  away;
i-apid  gaping,  incessant  sighing;  blue  rings  around  eyes;
increasing  stupor. ^Shock  from  injuries.

I I  Awkward  gait;  1.  side  weak.
llGressus  gallinaceus.

iLeft  side  of  body  numb,  cold;  abdomen  and  feet  also
cold;  sparks  before  eyes;  on  walking  feels  like  falling
forward,  pain  from  top  of  head  downwards.  ^Incipient
paralysis.

I  Progressive  locomotor  ataxy.

I  Palsies  depending  on  apopleptic  condition  of  brain,  ex-
haustion or  extremes  of  temperature.

I  I  Body  when  standing  bends  towards  1.,  must  be  supported  ;

drags  feet  in  walking,  direction  of  steps  towards  left.

I I  Paralysis:  left  sided;  after  apoplexy,  or  cerebral  ex-
haustion; painful.

EChild,  muttering  delirium;  yellowish  red,  dry,  tremu-
lous tongue;  moderate  thirst;  pulse  70;  rational  for  a
little  time  when  awake,  then  subsides  into  delirium  ;
paralysis  of  motory  nerves  of  1.  limbs.

I  After  exposure  entire  paralysis  of  both  legs,  cannot  stand,
or  move  legs  with  exception  of  an  occasional  involun-
tary drawing  up  of  toes;  cough  <  during  night  and  on


619  LACHESIS.

going  to  bed;  thirst  during  meals,  drinks  much  at  a
time;  pain  in  spine,  lies  only  on  back  at  night;  finally
cough  more  severe  and  accompanied  by  fever  and  thirst;
respiration  feeble,  difficult,  with  blueness  of  face;  each
coughing  turn  produced  perspiration;  expectoration  im-
possible; sleep  interrupted.
^^  Sleep. I  Great  drowsiness.

itSleepiness  without  being  able  to  sleep.

1 1  As  soon  as  he  falls  asleep  the  breathing  stops.

I  I  When  falling  asleep  is  awakened  by  tickling  cough.

iCould  not  sleep  on  account  of  strangulation.  ^Scarlatina.

I  I  Sleepy  and  weak  after  dinner.

■  Persistent  sleeplessness.

I I  In  evening  very  wide  awake  and  talkative;  lively  as
soon  as  the  gas  is  lit.

iSleepless:  from  anxiety ;  especially  before  midnight,  with
talkativeness;  on  account  of  internal  restlessness;  ab-
domen and  chest  seem  swollen;  restless  and  nervous,
burning  in  soles  of  feet,  stinging  all  over.

■  Afraid  to  go  to  sleep  for  fear  he  will  die  before  he  wakes.
iTossing  about,  moaning,  during  sleep;  children.
■Restless  sleep,  with  dreams  and  frequent  waking.

■  Awakens  at  night  and  cannot  sleep  again.

■  ■Troubles  come  on  during  sleep,  and  patient  wakes  in

distress  or  pain;  cough,  asthma  or  spasm.

■  Awoke  in  a  fright  about  something  trifling.

■  lOn  waking:  vertigo;  dry,  hacking  cough;  all  symptoms

worse.
1  I  Not  refreshed  after  a  good  sleep. ^Heart  disease.

■  Restless  sleep,  with  many  dreams  and  frequent  waking.

■  Constant  dreaming,  frequent  waking,  and  again  dozing

and  dreams,  in  morning  is  heavy  and  out  of  sorts.

1  I  Amorous  dreams.
^Time.  Morning:  unhappy  and  distressed  in  mind;  great
sadness;  heaviness  and  dejection;  vertigo;  on  rising,  ^
headache  over  e^^es ;  heaviness  in  occiput;  vomilmg  ot
food  and  slime;  epistaxis;  thick,  yellow  discharge  from
nose;  on  awakening  eyes  <;  pains  in  eye  and  head  <  ;
as  if  she  would  die  of  exhaustion ;  blowing  of  blood ;  skiii
began  to  redden  and  swell;  throat  >;  hard  cough;
vomiting  of  bile;  pain  in  rectum  <  till  afternoon;  ova-
ritis <;  difficult  breathing;  numbness  of  finger  tips;
aching  in  knees ;  feels  bruised.

9  A.M. :  neuralgia  in  face  begins.

Forenoon:  want  of  appetite.

Noon  till  midnight:  visions  and  delirious  talk<;  swollen
face; erysipelas  <.

Day:  sleeps  a  minute  or  two  at  a  time;  symptoms  >  ;  head


LACHESIS.  620

pains;  short,  dry  cough;  after  a  nap,  hawking  of  mucus
and  rawness  in  throat;  after  sleeping,  pains  in  tliroat
< ;  very  sleepy  but  cannot  sleep ;  several  attacks  of
nausea,  with  shortness  of  breath;  sleep  <<  pains  in  ab-
domen; flushes  of  heat;  sensation  of  foreign  body  in
throat;  constant  cough ;  cough  <;  restlessness;  pain  in
knee;  talks  too  much;  itching  in  paroxysms.
Afternoon:  attacks  of  delirium  tremens;  headache  <;
soreness  of  vertex  changes  to  darting;  facial  neuralgia
goes  off;  tonsillitis  <;  fever  <;  dyspnoea  <;  violent
chill;  intermittent  fever,  <  2  p.m.

8  P.M.  :  coxalgia  >.

Evening:  vertigo;  pain  in  back  of  head;  bluish  grey  ring
before  eyes;  wide  awake  and  talkative;  feels  nearly  well;
pain  deep  in  1.  ear;  if  anything  touches  throat,  seems  as
though  he  would  suffocate;  pain  much  <;  sensitiveness
of  throat  <  ;  watery  stools  with  burning ;  cough  on  lying
down;  drawing  in  back  and  legs;  trembling  of  limbs;
violent  chill;  heat  in  hands  and  feet;  burning  in  palms
and  soles.

9  P.M.  until  going  to  bed:  nervous  cough.

Night:  loquacity;  delirium;  does  not  sleej);  pain  comes
on  and  lasts  till  end  of  next  day;  short,  dry  cough;
tearing  pain  in  side  of  head  <  ;  orbital  cellulitis  < ;
earache  in  r.  ear;  eru[)tion  beneath  eye  itches;  itching
on  face;  dryness  in  throat;  comatose;  very  sleepy,  but
cannot  sleep  till  towards  morning;  least  touch  on  mouth
and  nose  causes  threatened  suffocation;  stools  bloody
and  slimy;  eighteen  or  twenty  stools;  constant  erections;
menorrhagia  with  chills;  something  runs  from  neck  to
larynx,  stops  breathing  and  awakes  him ;  almost  safib-
cated ;  constant  cough ;  fever  <  ;  awakens  with  fear  of
suffocation  ;  dry  cough  ;  perspires  very  much  ;  restless-
ness; fever  and  thirst;  pain  in  wrists;  sciatica  in  r.
leg;  pain  in  knee;  constant  dreaming;  chills;  burning
in  palms  and  soles ;  heat  as  from  orgasm  of  blood ;  itch-
ing intense ;  burning  in  ulcers.

Before  midnight:  sleepless.

Midnight :  became  insensible ;  sudden  diarrhoea ;  wakened
by  contraction  of  chest.

After  midnight :  no  sleep.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Worse  during  Spring and
Summer,  or  from  extremes  of  temperature ;  <  from  the
sun's  rays.

Open  air:  vertigo,  from  walking;  desire  for,  before
menses ;  causes  violent,  tickling  cough ;  symptoms  >  ;
after  scarlet  fever  swelling  of  whole  body ;  must  open
doors  and  windows  ;  during  suffocating  attacks.


621  LACHESIS.

Draft  of  air:  throat  <.

Must  sit  by  open  window :  heart  disease.

In  sun :  headache.

Heat:  headache;  ulcers  >.

AVarm  weather :  diarrhoea  <  ;  legs  burn  and  itch.

Warm  room :  chill  abates.

Warmth  of  bed : itching  of  legs  <  ;  cannot  keep  limbs
quiet.

External  warmth  :  desire  for ;  toothache  >  ;  pains  in  head
>  ;  earache  >  ;  wants  head  closely  wrapped  up.

Hot  drinks :  throat  symptoms  <  ;  cause  toothache ;  bleed-
ing of  gums  <•

Heat  of  stove:  pain  in  hands  >  ;  creeping  sensation  <.

Change  of  temperature :  cough  <.

Damp  weather:  cough  <.

Wet  weather:  ulcers  in  throat  <.

Getting  wet :  causes  toothache.

Exposed  all  day  to  cold,  wet  weather,  at  night  comatose.

Washing:  pains  in  throat  <.

Cold  water:  headache  >  ;  burning  in  ulcer  >.

Cold  or  warm  drinks :  cause  toothache.

Cold  weather :  itching  of  scabs  on  calves  of  legs.

Complaints  in  damp,  warm  Spring  weather.
*°  Fever. iShivering  without  coldness. ^Dysentery.

BCold  shudders  ascending.

I  I  Single  paroxysms  of  shivering.

I  I  Icy  coldness  of  feet.

DCold  feet,  with  oppression  of  chest.

I  Numbing  coldness.

■  Violent  chill  in  evening,  chattering  of  teeth  and  feeling

as  in  trismus.

I  I  Chill  in  afternoon,  pains  in  limbs,  pleuritic  stitches,
oppression  of  chest  and  convulsive  movements.

Chill  runs  from  hollow  of  back  upwards  over  shoulders,
nape  of  neck,  back  of  head  as  far  as  vertex,  with  a  sen-
sation as  if  drawn  at  base,  goose  flesh  on  parts  affected.

E Chill:  commencing  in  small  of  back;  runs  up  back  to
head ;  beginning  across  back  and  shoulders ;  >  in  warm
room;  desires  external  warmth.

■Shaking  chills  in  several  attacks  daily,  the  almost  un-
conscious woman  is  thrown  about  in  bed.  ^Puerperal
fever.

I  I  Shaking  chill  for  two  hours. ^Erysipelas  of  leg.

■  Unconscious; livid face; shaking  chills; skin  hot  or

cool. ^Metritis.

■  Rigors,  nausea,  subsequent  fever. ^Epidemic  laryngitis.

■  Wants  to  be  near  fire  and  lie  down;  heat  makes  him

feel  >,  but  chill  continues.


LACHESIS.  622

1 1  Child  must  be  held  firmly  to  >  pain  in  head  and  chest
and  prevent  shaking  ;  feels  >  if  held  or  pressed  down.

I  After  icy  cold  calves,  shaking  chill  with  warm  sweat;
then  strumming  through  limbs,  intermingled  with
flushes  of  heat.

I  Chill  and  heat  alternate  and  change  place.

I  Chills  at  night,  flushes  of  heat  by  day. ^Menorrhagia.

I  I  Shivering  during  heat.

3  Heat,  particularly  on  hands  and  feet,  in  evening.
81  Burning  in  palms  and  soles,  evening  and  night.

I I  Heat  at  night,  as  from  orgasm  of  blood ;  throat  sensitive.

■  Internal  sensation  of  heat,  with  cold  feet.
I  Dry,  burning  skin.

I  Heat:  with  violent  headache;  livid  complexion  ;  oppres-
sion of  chest ;  deep  breathing  and  sleep ;  great  loquacity.

B Great  inclination  to  sweat.

i Sweat:  profuse,  with  most  complaints;  cold,  stains  yel-
low; brownish  yellow;  bloody,  staining  red;  between
paroxysms  of  fever ;  at  night;  aff'ords  relief.

■  Sweat  about  neck  after  first  nap. ^Phthisis.

■  ■Strong  smelling  perspiration  in  axilla,  like  garlic.

■  Intermittent  fever ;  severe  pain  and  soreness  on  pressure

in  region  of  spleen,  shooting  to  breast  or  1.  side  of  neck.

■Intermittent  fever  recurs  every  Spring,  or  after  suppres-
sion in  previous  Fall  by  quinine;  <  in  afternoon,  2
P.M.;  face  red,  headache,  feet  cold  ;  talking  during  hot
stage;  excessive  burning  and  rending  pain  during
relapse  into  bilious  intermittent  after  quinine.

■Intermittent  fever  in  Spring  or  begining  of  Summer.

■Intermittent  fever  for  eight  years,  suppressed  by  large
doses  of  quinine  in  Summer,  to  return  every  Spring;
complexion  when  fever  was  present  a  grey,  ash  color.

■  Chills  for  six  months  in  Summer  and  Fall,  suppressed

with  blue  mass  and  quinine,  returned  following  May  ;
convulsions  during  chill.

■Sinking  chills  annually,  in  August,  for  nine  years,  has
always  been  dosed  heavily  with  morphine,  brandy  and
quinine  to  prevent  "  fatal  third  chill ;  "  drenched  in
sweat  for  many  days  after  each  attack,  takes  months  to
recuperate  ;  fever  always  tertian.

iRestlessness;  pain  in  lumbar  region;  constipation;
tongue  coated  thick,  brown,  furrowed  and  tending  to
dryness  ;  soreness  across  bowels;  chill  comes  on  at  2.30
P.M.;  body  drawn  up  in  a  heap;  tip  of  nose  and  ears
cold  and  icy;  forehead  cold  ;  skin  shriveled  and  livid  ;
pulse  filiform,  dying  away;  rapid  yawning,  incessant
sighing  ;  dark  areola  around  eyes,  fast  becoming  darker
as  she  sinks  into  stupor. ^Tertian  ague.


623  LACHESIS.

Ilntermittent  fifth  day  after  confinement;  chills  daily,
with  great  violence,  for  a  week  (sewer  gas  in  house);
inflammation  of  1.  ovary;  shuddering;  prostration;  at
end  of  fourth  week  discharge  of  pus  and  blood  through
abdominal  wall.

1 1  Typhus:  delirium  ;  tongue  red  or  black,  dry  or  in  fis-
sures, especially  on  tip;  trembles  when  put  out,  or  tip
remains  under  lower  teeth  or  lip.

■  Stools,  with  sediment  of  flakes  of  decomposed  blood,  hav-

ing appearance  and  form  of  perfectly  charred  wheat
straw,  in  longer  or  shorter  flat  pieces,  together  with
portions  more  or  less  ground  up ;  violent  epistaxis  in
morning. ^Typhoid.

■  Alter prolonged quiet; loquacious  mood; talks day

and  night,  if  not  to  those  in  room,  to  imaginary  per-
sons ;  jumping  from  subject  to  subject;  desire  to  lie  in
bed  with  clothing  away  from  neck. ^Typhoid.

■  Great prostration daily increasing,  until twenty-three

days  had  passed  without  any  crisis;  complete  delirium
with  muttering,  and  complete  prostration ;  the  only
position  was  upon  back ;  if  placed  on  side  rolled  at
once  upon  back ;  tongue  dry,  black  and  cracked ;
patient  evidently  sinking. ^Typhoid.

■  On  ninth  day,  profuse,  sour  sweat  without  relief;  delir-

ium ;  headache  ;  eyes  strongly  injected,  gaze  unsteady  ;
loss  of  consciousness  ;  constant  unintelligible  mumbling;
pulse  hard,  small,  120-140  ;  tongue  dry,  black,  cracked
and  bleeding,  can  be  protruded  only  with  great  diffi-
culty, then  trembles ;  lips  cracked,  black,  bloody ;
unquenchable  thirst;  hardness  of  hearing;  abdomen
soft,  but  in  all  places  painful ;  stools  (lumpy)  crum-
bling frequent,  yellow,  orange  colored,  or  tinged  with
blood;  urine  suppressed;  profuse  sweats;  finally,  in-
voluntary escape  of  stool  and  strongly  smelling  ammo-
niacal  urine;  will  lie  only  upon  back;  dyspnoea  and
cough  with  copious  expectoration  of  blood  streaked
mucus. ^Typhoid.

■  Case  had  run  into  fifth  week,  became  thoroughly  dyscra-

sic,  death  seemed  imminent  from  asthma. ^Typhoid.

■  Typhoid  fever,  third  week,  with  delirium;  tongue  dry,

black,  cracked  ;  throat  dry  and  cracked  ;  unable  to  put
tongue  out.

■  Muttering delirium  ; yellowish red, dry, tremulous

tongue;  moderate  thirst ;  pulse  70  ;  rational  for  a  little
time  when  awake,  then  subsides  into  delirium  ;  paraly-
sis of  motory  nerves  of  limbs. ^Typhoid.

■  Exposed  all  day  to cold,  wet  weather;  at  night  coma-

tose ;  high  fever;  tongue  dry,  red  at  tip,  soon  becoming


LACHESIS.  624

brown  in  centre ;  pupils  contracted,  then  dilated ;  vom-
iting of  greenish  water;  restless  from  colic,  requiring
three  attendants  to  keep  him  on  bed ;  continually
throws  off  bedcovers  ;  unconscious  of  external  impres-
sions;  pulse  about  120,  four  beats  to  one  respiration;
involuntary  stools  and micturition.

iFever  <  in  afternoon,  sweat  without  alleviation ;  symp-
toms <  after  sleep ;  loss  of  consciousness ;  muttering
stupor;  sunken  countenance; dropping  of  lower  jaw
dry,  red  or  black  tongue,  cracked  on  tip  and  bleeding
in  attempt  to  protrude  it,  it  trembles,  or  tip  remains
under  lower  teeth  and does  not  come out;  dry  lips,
cracked and  bleeding ; stools very  offensive,  whether
formed  or  loose ;  dyspnoea  and  cough,  with  slimy,  bloody
expectoration. ^Typhus.

1 1  Yellow  fever :  delirium  at  night;  loquacious,  disposed
to  quarrel ;  slow,  difficult  speech ;  drowsy ;  rush  of
blood  to  head ;  red  face ;  yellow  conjunctiva  ;  yellow  or
purplish  tint  of  skin ;  blood  dark,  non-coaguable;  small
wounds  bleed  much  ;  perspiration  stains  yellow ;  lips
dry,  cracked  and  bleeding ;  tongue  heavy,  trembling,
dry  and  red,  cracked  at  tip;  tip  red,  centre  brown;
difficult  speech;  sour  eructations;  heartburn;  nausea
after  drinking;  vomiting,  with  palpitation;  dyspnoea;
anxiety  about  heart;  cannot  lie  on  1.  side;  irregular
weak  pulse ;  urine  almost  black ;  persistent  sleepless-
ness; fainting;  trembling  all  over;  sudden  flushes  of
/  heat;  sensitiveness  about  neck  and  pit  of  stomach
against  any  pressure;  <  when  waking;  >  after  nour-
ishment.

I  Blood  dark  and  does  not  coagulate. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Cellulitis,  particularly  of  rectum  and  anus,  with  burning
and  blue  color  of  skin. ^Yellow  fever.
*'  Attacks, Periodicity. Periodic : raging  through upper
jaw  to  ear;  exacerbations  with  chronic  angina.

Attacks :  of  weakness,  even  to  syncope ;  of  sensitiveness  to
touch  in  hands ;  of  itching.

After  every  evacuation  :  sore,  burning  pain.

Alternate:  heat  and  chills;  squeamishness  and  facial  neu-
ralgia ;  diarrhoea  and  constipation.

After  few  minutes  conversation  : a  curtain  seems  to  fall
down  in  front  of  pharynx.

At  long  intervals :  urination.

For  one  hour :  violent  laughing.

For  one  hour  every  day :  catamenial  flow.

For  two  hours :  shaking  chill.

A  few  hours  after  eating :  gnawing  in  stomach.

Every  few  hours  or  days :  flow  of  blood  from  vagina.


C25  LACHESIS.

For  several  hours :  tearing  pain  in  head  then  disappears
for  a  day  or  two.

For  five  or  six  hours :  pain  in  arm  and  shoulder.

Several  times  a  day :  epistaxis  of  venous  blood ;  most  vio-
lent shaking  chill.

4  A.M. :  heat  continues  from  bedtime.

]  0  A.M. :  fever.

Until  11  A.M. :  feels  well,  then  faint  and  weak.

Afternoon :  delirium  tremens ;  vomiting ;  fever.

Evening :  persistent  vomiting.

2.30  P.M. :  chill.

Nightly  attacks :  of  anxiety ;  hallucinations ;  pain  in
limbs;  at  10  o'clock  dryness  of  throat  and  thirst ;  of  spasm
of  glottis;  burning  in  palms  and  soles;  burning  in
ulcers.

Towards  morning :  sweat.

First  day  of  menses  and  day  previous  to  appearance :  pain.

Every  day  at  11  a.m.  :  hunger ;  throat  >  ;  violent  chills.

Every  day  at  11  p.m.  :  heat  and  smarting  in  1.  throat.

Alternate  nights :  vomiting.

Every  other  day  :  feeling  of  obstruction  in  throat  on  swal-
lowing ;  chill  ascending  back.

On  second  or  third  day :  threatened  metastasis  to  meninges.

Every  two  or  three  days :  acute  colicky  pains.

For  three  nights :  no  sleep.

Three  days  before  menses:  leucorrhoea.

Every  three  or  four  days :  intense  headache.

From  three  to  eight  days  before  menses:  green,  thick  yel-
low leucorrhoea.

For  five  days :  sciatica.

On  ninth  day :  profuse  sour  sweat  without  relief.

Every  eight  or  ten  days :  headache.

For  ten  days  after  menstruation :  leucorrhoea.

For  twenty  days :  no  stool.

Twenty-three  days  passed  without  crisis :  typhoid.

For  many  days,  after  each  attack  of  chill :  sweat.

Third  week :  typhoid  fever  with  delirium.

The  day  before  catamenia :  great  desire  to  go  in  open  air.

Every  four  weeks,  for  four  or  five  days,  nervous  debility  <.

For  several  weeks :  partial  deafness.

Every  two  or  three  months :  menses  late.

For  three  months :  fistulous  opening  in  fingers,  during
this  time  she  suffered  twice  with  difficulty  in  swallowing.

At  every  menstrual  effort :  eructations  amounting  to  vom-
iting; cardialgia;  oppression  of  chest.

For  eight  months :  no  menstruation.

Lasting  all  Winter  and  Spring:  cough.

In  the  Spring:  toothache;  diarrhoea.

VOL.  VI. — 40.


LACHESIS.  626

In  the  Summer :  toothache.

Every  Spring :  lower  extremities  covered  with  scales  <  ;
intermittent  fever,  or  after  suppression  in  previous  Fall,
by  quinine ;  eruption.

Every  Fall:  eruption.

Every  year :  angina ;  acute  or  chronic  rheumatism ;  in
August,  for  nine  years,  sinking  chills.

For  one  year:  no  menstruation.

Sunstroke  two  years  previous  to  confinement,  in  bed  ever
since;  two  hours  after  delivery  convulsions.

After  twelve  hours  comatose.

Three  years  ago :  after  great  mental  emotion,  sudden  ces-
sation of  menstruation  ; erratic  pains  in  joints.

For  four  years :  piles  ;  stitching,  cutting  pains  in  1.  breast.

For  eight  years:  intermittent  fever.

For  ten  years:  constipation.

Eighteen  years'  standing  :  dysmenorrhoea.

For  last  twenty  years :  eruption  on  1.  forearm  and  on  1.
lower  abdomen.

For  years :  violent  pains  over  1.  groin ;  succession  of
carbuncles.
''^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  in  side;  oppressive
pain  <  on  side;  partial  paralysis;  semi-lateral  head-
ache; as  if  part  of  side  of  head  was  cut  off;  soreness  of
vertex  to  side  of  head ;  pricking  pain  in  limbs ;  se-
vere pain  commencing  in  inner  canthus,  extending  to
superciliary  ridge;  jerking  in  eye;  sticking,  drawing
pain  in  eye ;  pain  in  ear  >  lying  on  side;  pain  as  if
something  was  lodged  in  side  of  throat;  stitch  in  side;
feeling  of  obstruction  in  throat;  pain  in  side  of  throat ;
tonsil  swollen;  uvula  clinging  to  tonsil;  makes  odd
motions  with  arm ;  as  if  something  was  lodged  in  side ;
as  of  a  ball  rolling  from  side  to  stomach  ;  tearing  in  ab-
domen; cutting  in  side  of  abdomen  ;  pain  from  lumbar
region  through  sacrum  ;  violent  pain  over  groin  ;  swell-
ing of  ovary  ;  pain  in  ovarian  region ;  ovary  size  of  a
fist;  induration  in  ovarian  region;  fungus  haematoides
on  mamma ;  lung  affected  ;  must  lean  to  side  to  >  pain
in  chest;  stitching  pain  through  side  of  chest;  dyspnoea
<  ;  lying  on  r.  side  weight  of  1.  arm  is  painful ;  dilata-
tion of  ventricle;  stiffness  of  neck  on  side;  stinging  in
arm;  side  of  back  swollen  ;  pain  in  shoulder  joint;  sore-
ness of  shoulder;  makes  odd  motions  with  arm;  livid
swelling  of  back  of  hand  and  fingers ;  index  finger  atro-
phied ;  leg  oedematous ;  sciatica  in  leg ;  knee  as  if
sprained;  ulcer  on  leg;  pain  in  second  toe  of  foot;
stitching  pain  in  side  of  chest;  thick  patches  of  exan-
them  on  side  from  spine  to  sternum  ;  immense  carbuncle
side  of  spine;  rheumatism  commences.


C-7  LACHESIS.

Left:  pain  in  temple; body bends  toward direction  of
steps ;  apoplexy  on  side ;  falling  to  side  from  vertigo ;
pain  in  side;  pain  over  eye;  drawing  pain  in  temple'
headache  in  frontal  eminence;  neuralgia  on  side-  tear-
ing pain  in  whole  side  of  head ;  pain  behind  ear ;  numb-
ness and  crawling  on  side  of  head;  painful  sensitive-
ness in  temple  and  in  half  of  face;  discharge  from  nose;
pain  in  eye; orbital  neuralgia; tearing  pain in  head '
tongue  inclined  to  side;  tearing  pain in  malar  bone
and  parts  under  eye;  side  of  face  and lower  jaw  swol-
len; uncertain  numb  feeling  in  head;  painful  inflamma-
tion of  eye;  dry  wax  in ear;  sensation  of  numbness
down  cheek;  pain  deep  in  ear;  erysipelatous  eruption
beneath  eye;  erysipelas  began  close  to  side  of  nose  ex-
tending up  and  down  side  of  face  up  as  far  as  eye ;  tongue
sore  on  side;  soreness  in  side  of  throat;  heat  and  smart-
ing side  of  throat ;  inflamed  swelling  side  of  throat ;  tonsil
swollen;  pain  shoots  from  tonsil  to  ear;  abscess  i'n  ton-
sil; numerous  white  spots  on  pale  red  surface  in  throat;
yellow  white  membrane  on  tonsil ;  pain  and  soreness
begui  on  side  of  throat; inflammation  and  membrane
begnming  on  side;  diphtheritic  spot  as  large  as  a  pin-
head  on  tonsil;  side  of  throat  several  white  exudate
spots ;  tonsil  one  complete  black  slough ;  pain  in  hypo-
chondrium;  pain in  side  of  abdomen;  tenderness  in
ihac  region;  fibrous  tumor  in  groin;  dropsical  enlarge-
ment of  side  and  leg;  pain  in  ovarian  region;  ovarian
neuralgia;  swelling,  induration and other anomalies
of  ovary;  sharp,  shooting  pain  in  ovary;  suppuration
m  ovary;  enlargement  of  ovary ;  ovarian  region  hard;
menstrual  colic  beginning  in  ovary ;  pains  in  breast ;
pain  in  axilla;  painful  weakness  and  lameness  in  shoul-
der and arm; convulsions  on side  of  face; pain  in
tragus ;  lung  impervious  to  air;  soreness,  tenderness  and
sensation  of  weight  in  ovarian  region;  stitches  in  side  of
chest;  dyspnoea;  hepatization  of  lung;  constant  pick-
ing and  boring  of  nostrils;  no  respiratory  murmur  in
posterior  superior  half  of  lung;  dulness  in  infraclavic-
ular region;  lying  on  side  causes  pain  at  heart;  weight
of  arm  on  side  is  painful;  hypertrophy  of  ventricle;
lying  on  side  with  head  high  >  suffocating;  burning
pain  below  nipple;  swelling  on  neck;  abscess  near  clav-
icle; abscess  on  side  of  neck; lameness  in  shoulder;
weakness  of  arm  and  shoulder;  arm  nearly  double  its
size;  tingling  and  pricking  in  hand;  shooting  from  hip
to  foot ;  knee  as  if  sprained  ;  near  knee  joint  a  bunch
of  varicose  veins ;  sore  place  below  lower  edge  of  pa-
tella; hard red patch  with  scabs  on  calf  of  leg;  flat


LACHESIS.  C28

ulcers  on  leg ;  swelling  of  leg  and  foot ;  rheumatism  <
side ;  side  weak  ;  side  of  body  numb  and  cold  ;  paralysis
of  motory  nerves  of  limb;  severe  pain  shooting  up  side
of  neck;  veins  in  whole  side  of  thorax  up  to  throat
much  dilated;  eruption  on  forearm  and  side  of  abdomen ;
index  finger  quadrupled  in  size;  hand  and  forearm
much  swollen ;  side  partially  paralyzed  ;  granular  swell-
ing on  side  of  throat;  parotid  enormously  swollen;  flat
open  ulcers  on  leg;  paralysis  of  leg;  sensation  absent  in
arm;  side  of  pharynx  sore.

First  r.  then  1. :  semilateral  headache ;  tonsils  affected.

From  above  downwards :  violent  pressure  in  head ;  stitches
in  kidneys;  pressure  from  loins;  pain  from  top  of  head.

From  below  upward :  stitches  in  spine.

From  below  upward  and  backward :  tearing  pain  in  rectum.

From  without  inward  :  pressing  in  head.

From  within  outward :  tearing  on  top  of  head ;  violent
pressing,  burning  pain  in  top  of  head  ;  puffing  pressure
inchest;  cardiac  pressure.

From  1.  to  r. :  pain  in  throat;  diphtheria  developed  ;  dis-
charge from  nose;  legs  oedematous ;  erysipelas  spreads ;
ulceration  in  throat;  ovarian  tumors;  rheumatic  pain.

Changes  locality :  rheumatic  pains ;  sciatica.
*^  Sensations.  Sensation  as  if  she  was  somebody  else;  as  if
frightened  by  visions  behind  him ;  as  if  knives  were
being  thrust  into  brow;  as  if  brain  would  burst  skull ;
tongue  as  if  bound  or  tied  up;  as  if  a  part  of  r.  side  of
head  was  cut  off;  as  if  swollen  in  angle  in  front  of
styloid  process;  back  of  head  as  if  pressed  asunder;  as
if  skin  had  been  burnt  by  heat  of  sun ;  flickering  before
eyes  as  from  threads;  stitches  as  from  knives  in  eyes;
as  if  a  thread  was  drawn  from  behind  to  eye;  eyes  as  if
they  had  been  taken  out,  squeezed,  and  then  put  back
again ;  as  if  eyes  were  forced  out,  when  throat  is  pressed ;
whizzing  as  from  insects  in  ears;  ears  as  if  closed  from
within;  as  if  had  moustache  of  ice;  ears  as  if  stuffed
up;  as  if  tonsils  were  sore  like  a  wound;  as  if  sore;
skin  as  if  it  would  crack ;  submaxillar}^  joints  as  if
swollen;  teeth  as  if  too  long;  as  if  tongue  was  going
to  peel;  as  if  mucous  membrane  was  peeling  off;  as
if  desquamation  was  about  to  take  place  in  velum
palati;  as  though  he  would  suffocate;  as  if  every-
thing was  raw  in  throat;  as  if  parts  of  throat  were
swollen ;  as  if  a  small  crumb  was  lodged  in  throat ;  as
of  something  in  throat  to  swallow ;  as  if  lump,  ball  or
button  in  throat ;  distressed  as  if  from  loss  of  breath ;
as  if  something  was  lodged  in  r.  side  of  throat ;  throat
as  if  tied ;  feeling  like  a  snake  in  throat ;  choking  like


629  LACHESIS.

a  ball ;  throat  as  if  ulcerated  ;  sticking  as  of  a  thousand
needles  in  throat;  as  if  two  lumps  as  large  as  fists  came
together  in  throat;  throat  as  if  sore  ;  throat  as  if  raw  ;
as  if  fishbone  had  stuck  in  throat;  as  if  a  sponge  was
hanging  in  throat ;  as  if  he  could  hawk  it  up  ;  as  if  there
was  a  small  dry  spot  from  which  pain  extended  to  ear ;
as  if  he  had  had  a  blow  on  neck ;  as  if  a  thick  substance
was  in  throat;  feeling  of  large  lump  at  back  of  throat;
as  if  some  one  grasped  him  by  throat;  retches  as  if
to  vomit  up  lump;  uvula  looked  as  if  squeezed  and
crowded,  back ;  as  though  some  one  was  pressing  wind-
pipe between  thumb  and  fingers;  odd  motions  with  r.
arm  as  if  reaching  for  something ;  teeth  feel  as  if  wedged ;
tongue  feels  as  if  scalded ;  pain  in  liver  as  if  ulcerated ;
as  if  something  had  lodged  in  r.  side ;  as  if  a  ball  was
rolling  from  r.  side  to  stomach ;  as  if  a  knife  was
thrust  through  abdomen ;  griping  as  though  about  to
have  diarrhoea;  as  if  feces  ascended  to  chest;  throb-
bing as  with  little  hammers  in  anus ;  as  if  from  suppu-
,  ration  under  ribs ;  arms  feel  as  if  closed ;  as  of  plug  in
'[  anus;  as  if  sphincter  was  torn  with  effort;  as  of  a  ball
rolling  about  in  bladder  or  abdomen ;  uterine  region  as
if  swollen ;  as  if  a  knife  was  thrust  into  abdomen ;
uterus  feels  as  if  os  was  open ;  as  if  everything  would
issue  from  vulva;  as  if  pains  from  uterus  and  abdomen
ascended,  toward  chest;  as  if  everything  was  being
pressed  out ;  as  if  bowels  were  cut  with  kilives ;  as  if  a
stricture  was  in  rectum ;  as  if  heart  was  hanging  by  a
thread,  and  every  beat  would,  tear  it  off";  as  of  a  skin  in
larynx ;  as  of  talons  sticking  into  larynx  ;  as  of  a  small
lump  in  pit  of  throat,  like  a  button  ;  as  if  a  large  mass
of  mucus  had  accumulated  in  throat ;  choking  as  if  suf-
focation was  inevitable;  as  if  something  was  in  trachea
which  might  be  raised;  chest  as  if  stuffed;  as  though
clothes  hindered  circulation;  as  if  lungs  were  being
pressed  into  throat;  as  though  a  cord  was  tightly  tied
around  neck;  as  though  heart  turned  over  and  ceased
beating  for  a  moment;  as  if  some  fluid  had  gone  into
wrong  passage;  as  though  there  was  an  ulcer  in  stom-
ach ;  as  if  lungs  were  pressed  up  into  throat;  as  if  chest
was  full  of  wind  ;  chest  as  if  sore ;  like  coals  of  fire  from
chest  through  to  shoulders ;  as  if  heart  was  too  large  for
cavity ;  as  if  heart  was  pressing  against  side  or  had  not
free  play ;  as  if  heart  intermitted  a  single  beat ;  heat  as
from  a  hot  stove  on  outer  chest ;  burning  as  if  in  flesh  of
chest ;  as  if  r.  arm  had  gone  to  sleep  ;  back  as  if  lame  and
weak  ;  as  if  sinews  in  sacrum  were  too  short ;  as  if  sitting
on  something  sharp ;  small  of  back  as  if  sprained ;  wrists


LACHESIS.  630

as  if  sprained;  bands  cold  as  if  dead  ;  as  of  a  hot  iron  from
hip  to  foot ;  thighs  as  if  swollen ;  as  of  a  sprain  in  r.
knee;  as  if  hot  air  was  going  through  knee  joints;  1.
knee  as  if  sprained ;  as  if  burnt  in  different  places  on
tibia;  burning  as  from  fire  in  hypogastrium,  loins  and
sternum ;  crawling  as  if  asleep  in  arm  and  leg ;  as  if  epi-
thelium w^as  peeling  off  gums;  as  of  a  plug  in  throat;
teeth  feel  as  if  wedged ;  tongue  feels  as  if  scalded ;  head
as  if  drawn  at  base;  skin  around  carbuncle  as  if  too
short ;  as  if  flesh  was  being  torn  from  bones.

Pain :  in  1.  temple  and  occiput ;  in  forehead  ;  in  back  part
of  hip  and  1.  side;  region  of  spleen;  over  eyes;  lop  of
head;  in  1.  ovarian  region;  from  superciliary  ridge  to
occipital  protuberance;  deep  in  orbit  of  eyes;  in  1.  side
of  abdomen;  in  back  of  head;  in  eye;  deep  in  1.  ear;
in  ears;  in  limbs;  in  stomach;  in  throat  to  nape  of
neck;  on  swallowing;  in  small  spot  in  throat  at  one
side  of  larynx  ;  in  top  of  throat;  in  1.  side  of  throat  ex-
tending to  tongue,  jaw  and  ear;  in  epigastrium  ;  as
though  something  was  gnawing  in  stomach;  in  liver;
in  1.  hypochondrium ;  in  abdomen;  in  region  of  cae-
cum; from  r.  lumbar  region  through  sacrum  and  in-
guinal region  and  forepart  of  thigh ;  in  rectum  ;  in  r.
ovarian  region ;  in  uterine  region ;  in  hypogastric  re-
gion ;  in  stomach;  from  1.  breast  to  axilla  down  arm  to
hand ;  down  arms ;  in  pit  of  throat  to  root  of  tongue
and  to  hyoid  bone  and  to  1.  tragus,  behind  which  it
shoots  out;  in  1.  chest;  pain  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors;
inchest;  in  heart;  in  nape  of  neck  to  distraction;  in
small  of  back;  in  coccygis;  in  os  sacrum;  in  spine;  in
r.  shoulder  joint;  in  wrists;  in  wrist  joints;  in  one
small  spot  under  shoulder ;  in  red  streak  that  ran  up
from  wrist;  changing  locality,  now  in  head,  now  in
teeth,  now  in  sciatic  nerve;  in  thighs ;  in  legs;  in  knee  ;
in  a  sore  place  below  lower  edge  of  patella;  in  second
toe  of  r.  foot;  in  joints.

Sensitiveness  of  internal  and  external  parts.

Intolerable  colic.

Tension:  from  neck  to  eyelids;  and  thread,  along  arms
and  legs ;  in  external  parts.

Ulcerative  pain:  in  internal  parts.

Burning  as  from  fire:  in  hypogastric  region;  in  loins;  be-
hind sternum.

Agonizing  pain:  in  back  when  rising  from  seat.

Intense  pain  :  in  head ;  down  neck ;  in  1.  eye  ;  in  thigh ;
in  arm  and  hand.

Violent  pain:  in  head;  in  throat;  over  r.  groin,  extend-
ing either  to  genital  organs  or  to  liver  and  chest.


€31  LACHESIS.

Severe  pain: all  over  head;  in  and  above  eyes;  from  in-
ner cantlms  upward  and  outward  in  a  semicircle  just
above  superciliary  ridge  in  forehead;  in  limbs;  in  lum-
bar region ;  in  epigastrium.
Terrible  pain:  in  head;  over  eyes;  in  r.  ovarian  region.
Acute  pain:  in  liver  and  towards  stomach.
Great  pains:  in  back  and  limbs;  in  heart;  in  ulcers  on

foot.
Anguish : about  heart.
Horrid  pains :  all  over  head.
Sharp  pain:  at  root  of  tongue ;  through  lungs;  extending

from  wrist  to  elbow.
Raging: in  roots  of  lower  teeth.

Violent,  darting,  stabbing  pains:  from  upper  part  of  fore-
head down  to  centre  of  head.
Lancinating  pains:  in  breasts.
Lacerating  pain  :  in  legs.

Cutting,  lacerating,  burning  pains:  in  abdomen.
Acute  cutting,  stinging  pains :  radiating  from  navel  over

upper  portion  of  abdomen.
Cutting: in head;  in  teeth; in  r.  side  of  abdomen;  in

rectum ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  1.  breast.
Sharp,  cutting  pains ;  when  passing  water.
Tearing  pain: in  temples;  in  whole  1.  side  of  head  from
temple  to  collar  bone; in  top  of  head;  from  zygoma
into  ear;  in forehead  and  1.  malar  bone  and  under  1.
eye;  in  jawbones;  in  roots  of  lower  teeth;  in  temples;
in  abdomen; in  rectum;  from  nape  of  neck  up  either
side  to  top  of  head ;  in  knees.
Sharp,  shooting  pains:  from  eyes  to  temple;  in  1.  ovary.
Shooting  pain  : into  1.  ear ;  in  throat ;  in  region  of  spleen ;

in  rectum; from  1.  hip  down  to  foot.
Piercing  pains: in  teeth.
Sticking  cutting :  in  forepart  of  urethra.
Sticking:  on  vertex ; in  head  ;  in  ankle.
Stitching  pain: in  eyes;  from  stomach  to  chest;  through

r.  side  of  chest ;  in  back.
Stitches  :  in forehead ;  in  chest ;  in  eyes ;  in  r.  side ;  in
rectum;  in  kidneys,  downward  and  apparently  through
ureters;  in  ovary;  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors,  with  cough  ;
in  1.  side  of  chest ; in  upper  part  of  back ;  in  whole  back.
Painful  beating : in  ears ;  in  rectum.
Bursting  pain : in  temples.
Beating  pain: in  head;  in  vertex;  in  teeth.
Ulcerative  pain:  about  liver;  above  and  along  ribs.
Boring :  on  vertex  ;  behind  1.  ear ;  in  jawbones ;  in  teeth.
Pleuritic  pains  :  in  chest.

Throbbing  pain:  in  temple;  in  vertex:  in  head;  in  jaw-
bones ; at  outside  of  wrists.


LACHESIS.  632

Darting:  from  throat  to  occiput ;  inarm.

Hammering:  in  head.

Pulsating  pains:  in  teeth.  •«

Thrilling  pain  :  at  root  of  tongue.

Neuralgia:  1.  side  orbital ;  horrible  of  trigeminus;  in  face;

ovarian.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  head;  in  legs;  in  knees.
Aching  pain :  in  lumbar  region  ;  m  forehead  ;  in  1.  frontal

eminence;  r.  side  of  head  gradually  going  to  1.;  across

loins;  from  occiput  to  eyes;  in  r.  ear;  in  small  of  back;

in thighs  anteriorly; in branches  of  anterior  crural

nerve;  in  os  hyoides;  in  knees;  in  shin  bones.
Hard  aching:  all  over;  in  head;  back  and  legs;  in  uterus.
Dull  aching:  in  sinciput.

Violent  laborlike  pressing  from  groins  downward.
Acute  colicky  pains  : low  in  abdomen.
Excessive  griping  :  in  abdomen.
Laborlike  pains :  in  uterus.
Bearing  down  pains:  in  uterine  region.
Gnawing:  in  stomach;  in  sides  and  deep  into  abdomen.
Cramps :  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest.

Cramplike  pains:  in  abdomen  ;  in  preecordial  region.
Menstrual  colic:  beginning  in  1.  ovary.
Spasmodic  colic.
Sensation  of  incarcerated  flatus.

Sticking,  drawing  pain:  in  r.  eye;  in  1.  eye;  in  throat.
Dull  sticking:  in  roots  of  lower  teeth.
Stinging,  burning  pains:  in  panaritium.
Burning  stinging:  of  skin.
Burning,  throbbing  pain  :  in  boils  on  spine.
Burning  pain :  in  top  of  head ; in vertex ;  in  eyes ;  in

mouth ;  in  rectum  ;  in  1.  ovary  ;  in  wrists.
Burning  heat :  in  epigastrium  ;  in  hypogastric  and  lumbar

regions;  from  hip  to  foot;  behind  sternum.
Stinging:  through  ears  ;  in  throat;  in  r.  side;  in  r.  arm;

in  tips  of  fingers;  in  knees;  all  over.
Sore  pain :  in  urethra ;  in  forepart  of  penis.
Smarting:  in  1.  throat.
Burning: in  vertex; of  eyes; of  erysipelas  in face;  of

face;  of tongue and lips; of  swelling of  throat;  in

anus;  in  rectum;  when  urinating;  in  chest;  in  icy  cold

hands;  in  finger  ends ;  in  hands;  terrible  deep  in  hand;

of  eczema  on  legs ;  in  palms  and  soles.
Pricking  pain: in  upper  and  lower  extremities.
Dull,  stinging  pain  :  in  stomach.
Heat:  in  forehead;  in  1.  throat;  in  occipital  and  cervical

regions.
Heavy  pain :  in  forehead  to  back  and  all  over  head.


633  LACHESIS.

Dull  pain:  in  forehead;  in  legs;  over  and  in  eyes;  in
bladder.

Pressing  pains:  in  eyes;  in  umbilical  region;  in  1.  ovary;
from  loins  to  privates.

Tensive  pain:  from  neck  over  head  to  eyes;  in  1.  ovary.

Drawing  pain:  in  1.  temple;  from  eyes  to  occiput;  in
jawbones;  in  teeth;  from  anus  to  umbilicus;  in  ova-
rian region ;  intolerable  in  small  of  back  and  down  into
legs ;  up  back ;  from  back  to  hips.

Spasmodic  pains: in  anus  internally  ;  in  heart;  in  elbow.

Throbbing:  in  anus;  in  rectum.

Soreness:  of  neck;  at  vertex;  of  mouth;  in  throat;  of
nostrils  and  lips ;  of  internal  nose ;  of  internal  throat ;
in  1.  side  of  throat;  of  external  throat;  about  pelvic  re-
gion ;  of  larynx  ;  of  r.  shoulder.

Soreness :  in  region  of  spleen  ;  across  bowels.

Sore  feeling : in  eyeballs.

Scraping: in  throat.

Rawness :  of  throat.

Bruised  feeling:  in  hips.

Painful  pressure:  in  rectum;  when  making  water.

Gnawing  pressure :  in  stomach.

Laborlike  pressure :  irom  loins  downwards.

Violent  pressure  :  on  top  of  head  ;  in  stomach.

Pressure:  in  orbits;  in  stomach;  severe  in  a  small  spot
between  epigastrium  and  navel;  in  bowels;  upon  bladder.

Oppressive  pain  :  in  one  or  other  temple;  in  chest.

Painful  contraction  :  in  throat.

Painful  sensitiveness:  in  1.  temple,  from  vertex  down  and
in  1.  side  of  face.

Great  sensitiveness:  of  lower  abdomen.

Tenderness:  of  scalp;  in  1.  iliac  region;  in  epigastrium;
in  whole  spine ;  of  body.

Peculiar  painful  sensation  of  weakness  and  lameness:  in  1.
shoulder  and  arm.

Distress :  at  stomach.

Painful  weariness :  of  face,  neck  and  head.

Extraordinary  weakness :  diphtheria.

Weak  feeling:  in  abdomen;  in  knees;  in  1.  shoulder  and
arm ;  in  legs.

Sinking,  fluttering  feeling:  in  epigastrium.

Uneasiness: in  lower  limbs.

Contractive  tightness:  in  region  of  liver;  in  abdomen.

Throbbing,  choking  sensation  :  in  throat.

Choking  sensation:  in  throat.

Sutibcative  sensation:  in  throat.

Dry,  stuffed  feeling :  through  whole  front  of  head.

Stuffed  feelinjj: :  in  ears.


LACHESIS.  G34

Feeling  of  obstruction  :  in  throat.

Smothered  feeling:  in  chest.

Strumming: through  limbs.

Twitching:  in  eyes;  of  hands.

Jerking :  in  r.  eye  ;  in  lower  teeth  ;  in  teeth  ;  from  thighs
to  genitals;  in  legs.

Trembling:  in  whole  body;  of  limbs  and  internall}^;  of
tongue.

Pricking:  in  1.  hand;  in  finger  ends;  in  extremities  of
fingers.

Crawling:  on  1.  side.

Titillation :  behind  sternum.

Tickling  :  after  blowing  nose  ;  at  root  of  tongue ;  in  throat ;
in  pit  of  stomach;  from  thighs  to  genital  organs';  in
larynx;  in  pit  of  throat  and  sternum.

Tingling  ;  in  1.  hand ;  in  toes.

Dryness :  of  mouth  ;  of  throat.

Weight:  in  head;  on  vertex;  in  bowels;  in  1.  ovarian  re-
gion; on  chest.

Heaviness:  of  head;  in  occiput;  in  stomach;  in  region
of  liver.

Confused  feeling:  in  head.

Full  feeling:  of  chest.

Fulness:  in  throat;  in  head ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in  bow-
els ;  in  trachea ;  at  heart.

Dull  oppression  :  in  breathing.

Oppression  :  of  chest.

Constriction:  of  anus;  in  rectum;  of  throat;  of  chest;-
about  heart.

Dulness :  in  occiput ;  in  1.  infraclavicular  region.

Paralyzed  feeling:  in  thigh  after  pain  has  gone.

Lameness:  in  1.  shoulder.

Numbness:  in  occiput;  of  1.  side;  about  ear  and  cheek;
of  arm.

Numb  feeling:  on  1.  side  of  head;  about  head.

Stiffness:  of  neck;  in  malar  bone;  of  knees;  painful  from
loins  down  into  thighs;  in  sacrum;  in  knees.

Emptiness:  of  stomach.

Coldness:  over  whole  body;  of  limbs;  of  upper  lip.

Itching  pain :  in  1.  ovary.

Itching :  of  scalp ;  of  eyes ;  of  eruption  under  eyes ;  of
lower  lid;  of  facial  erysipelas;  of  face;  of  rectum;  of
anus;  on  arms,  hips  and  lower  limbs;  in  hands;  in
different  places  on  tibia ;  of  eczema  on  legs ;  of  feet  and
ankles  ;  of  pustules  in  palms  of  hands ;  in  internal  parts.
**  Tissues.  I  Emaciation,  with  muscular  relaxation  ;  skin  and
muscles  lax.

I  Great  tenderness  of  all  flesh  ;  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to


g35  LACHESIS.

handle  the  child  at  all ;  the  least  touch  seems  to  hurt  it,
and  to  leave  a  deeper  blueness,  like  a  bruise.

II Hemorrhages,  blood  dark,  incoagulable;  typhoid.

I  a  Affections  produced  by  blood  poisoning;  pyaemia.

I  Venous  stasis  with  a direct  paralytic-like  affection  of

medulla  spinalis  combined  with  general  anaemia.

I I  Bluish  color  of  affected  parts ;  cyanosis.
I  Small  wounds  bleed  much.

■  Purpura. (^Scorbutic  purpura.

I  Inflammation  of  internal  organs  with  suppuration.

I  Veins  on  whole  1.  thorax  up  to  throat  much  dilated.
iMenopausia  troubles,  especially  when  capillary  circula-
tion is  affected.

I I  Dropsy;  froni  liver,  spleen  and  heart  disease;  after
scarlatina;  urine  black,  legs  oedematous,  first  1.  then  r.

II  Cellulitis,  with  burning  and  blue  color  of  skin.

llUlcers  sensitive  to  touch;  ichorous,  offensive  discharge;
many  small  pimples  surround  them  ;  areolae  purple ;  >
from  warmth.

1 1  Gangrene,  or  carbuncles  from  blood  poisoning.

I  Malignant  local  inflammations,  with  secondary  blood  in-
fection and  nervous  prostration.


tongue ;  of  foot.

I I  Suppuration,  particularly  in  internal  parts.

■Traumatic  gangrene,  restores  vitality  to  parts  appar-
ently dead  and  induces  renewed  circulation  without
slougfting.

1 1  Malignant  pustule.

1 1  Sphacelus.

liGangrena  senilis.

I  Melanosis,  colloid  and  encephaloid  cancer;  violent  burn-
ing, gangrenous  spots.

lUlcers  and  wounds  bleed  readily  and  profusely.
'"  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch  :  cannot  bear
shirt  or  neckband  on  throat ;  can  scarcely  bear  clothes
to  touch  lower  abdominal  region  ;  temple  sore;  on  throat
causes  darting;  face  sensitive;  lower  jaw  sensitive;  throat
swollen  and  sensitive;  pit  of  stomach  sore;  liver  sensi-
tive; stomach  sensitive;  slightest,  causes  excruciating
pain  in  abdomen ;  ileo-csecal  region  sensitive ;  uterine
region  sensiti-ve;  womb  sensitive;  nipple  sore;  a  spot
on  anterior  portion  of  neck  tender;  larynx  sensitive;
pit  of  throat  painful;  neck  sore;  on  larynx  causes  suf-
focative attacks ;  on  throat  causes  cough;  infraclavicu-
lar region  sensitive;  nape  of  neck  painful;  shou  der
and  arm  sensitive;  hands  sensitive ;  ulcers  on  legs  bleed
and  burn ;  ulcers  sensitive ;  produces  black  and  bluish
spots.


LACHESIS.  636

Taking  hold  of  throat  causes  nausea.

Cannot  bear  bonnet  strings  tied  tight.

Does  not  like  hair  touched.

Hernia  will  not  admit  handling.

Pressure:  bursting  pains  in  temples;  pain  in  front  of
styloid  process  <;  on  throat  causes  sensation  as  if  eyes
were  forced  out;  on  throat  causes  severe  pain;  pain  in
r.  ovary;  tumor  in  breast  painful ;  larynx  sore;  cough
<;  on  larynx  causes  cough;  capillaries  fill  quite
slowly;  nape  of  neck  sensitive;  of  finger  on  spine  oi"
neck  sends  pain  to  brain ;  on  dorsal  spine  sends  pain  to
stomach;  swelling  on  hand  sensitive;  toe  painful.

Cannot  bear  pressure:  about  neck,  hypochondria,  abdomen,
stomach  and  1.  iliac  region.

Abdomen  sensitive  to  weight  of  clothes.

Uterus  does  not  bear  contact  and  has  to  be  relieved  of  all
pressure;  frequently  lifts  clothes,  they  cause  uneasiness.

Feels  >  if  held  firmly  or  pressed  down.

After  scratching  at  night  on  calf:  an  ulcer.

When  effort  is  made  to  lift  or  move  babe  it  cries  out.

Shock  from  injuries.

After  a  fall:  ulcer  on  r.  leg,  with  varicose  swelling.

After  running  nail  into  foot:  small  ulcer.

■  Gangrene  of  hand,  ten  days  after  a  bullet  wound  in  hand.

■  Wound  in  hand  from  explosion  ot  a  pistol;  fifth  day

gangrene.

■  Hydrophobia.

■  From  dissecting  wound  in  finger  that  member  very  much

swollen,  hand  and  forearm  much  swollen  and  oedema-
tous;  a  hard  red  line  extended  from  wrist  to  axilla;
axillary  glands  swollen;  arm  and  hand  intensely  pain-
ful; whole  1.  side  partially  paralyzed  ;  extreme  prostra-
tion; low  muttering  delirium  at  night;  marked  aggra-
vation on  waking;  abscesses  formed  under  deep  fibrous
tissues  of  finger  and  hand.

■  Dog  bite  (seven  cases) ;  in  two  adult  males  who  used  alco-

holic drinks  there  were  shudderings  and  flushes  of  heat
at  intervals  of  a  few  weeks  for  two  years.

■  After  compound  fracture  of  leg  six  or  eight  gangrenous

spots,  as  large  as  a  dime,  and  each  point  marked  by  a
black  blister  which  broke  and  revealed  circular  spots  of
gangrene  ;  livid  appearance  of  skin  ;  delirium  on  closing
eyes ;  <  after  sleep.  ^Gangrene.
Compound  comminuted  leg  fracture,  terminating  in  gan-
grene and  threatening  speedy  destruction  of  limb.

■  Gangrene  of  finger  which  had been  mashed;  on  fourth

day  after  injury  shooting  pains  from  finger  to  wrist
and  up  arm;  on  fifth  day  fetid  odor  and  some  grey


637  LACHESIS.

blisters  indicated  gangrene ;  next  day  line  of  demarca-
tion formed  entirely  around  finger ;  patient  restless,  cheer-
fal  beyond  reason  ;  by  twelfth  day  all  traces  of  gangrene
had  disappeared ;  no  tissue  lost  by  sloughing.
A  man  a  week  ago  was  struck  by  corner  of  a  heavy  box  on
inner  surface  of  leg  and  cutting  down  into  calf;  leg  much
inflamed;  leeches  were  applied;  severe  chill;  since  chill
nothing  has  remained  on  his  stomach  ;  severe  pains  set
in,  whole  of  wound  and  two  leech  bites  gangrenous ;
very  severe  headache  ;  breath  very  fetid  ;  sleepless,  his
shining  eyes  constantly  in  motion;  tongue  trembling;
pulse  110,  small  and  irregular.

■  Elderly  lady  was bitten  by  a  pet  cat  through  ball  of

thumb ;  whole  hand  and  arm  swollen  and  painful ;
thumb  suppurated  and  for  months  resisted  all  efforts
to  heal. ^Carbuncle.

■  Bedsores  in  typhoid  fever;  ulcers  red  and  inflamed,  with

black  edges.

■  Small  wounds  bleed  much.

■  Old  chronic  flat  ulcers  on  lower  limbs,  with  discolored

areolse.
^'^  Skin. ■Itching  over  whole  body,  burning;  yellow  or  pur-
plish blisters;  scabies.

■  Itching  intense,  almost  driving  to  distraction,  mostly  at

night,  but  also  by  paroxysms  in  daytime;  often  chang-
ing to  a  severe,  burning  stinging  sensation. ^Pustular
eruption.
QSkin  dry  and  burning. ^Diphtheritis. ^Scarlatina.

■  Jaundice. ^Hepatitis. (^Typhoid,
I  I  Red  lumps  and  tubercles.

I  iRash  all  over;  small  smooth  spots  size  of  a  needle  point.
I  I  Yellow,  red  and  copper  colored  spots.

■  Ecchymosis; purple  or  black  spots.

■  ■Purpura  hsemorrhagia.

■  Bluish  black  swellings;  dark  blue  blisters.

■  Body  covered with  bluish  red  eruption,  round  and  ele-

vated. ^Diphtheria.

■  Child,  get.  1,  had  gums  lanced,  bled  five  days,  finally  flow

arrested, but child became cachectic  and dropsical;
black  and  blue  spots  appeared  all  over  him  ;  least  touch
or  pressure  produced  them  ;  much  <  after  sleeping ;  ex-
treme deathly  paleness.
I  I  Small  reddish  spots  on  face,  neck  and  arms.

■  Miliary  eruption;  rash  appears  slowly  or  turns  livid  or

black; comatose.

■  High  fever ; stitching  pain  on  r.  side  of  chest  and  back ;

thick  patches  of  exanthema  on  r.  side,  from  spme
to  sternum,  and  from  fifth  to  ninth  ribs;  at  first  erup-


LACHESIS.  C38

tion  vesicular,  then  pustular;  whole  surface  of  skin
occupied  by  eruption,  very  red  and  swollen,  especially
intense  around  margin  of  each  patch;  high  fever,  ady-
namic in  character,  slight  morning  remission ;  on  fifth
day  pains  in  back  unbearable;  several  groups  of  pus-
tules near  spine  have  a  hemorrhagic  appearance,
gradually  spread  from  one  group  to  another  until  it
reached  axillary  line;  sufferings  of  patient  almost  un-
endurable; will  take  no  food  except  a  small  quantity  of
soup  and  wine;  great  prostration  from  loss  of  sleep,
from  pain.  ^Herpes  zoster  after  external  application
of  Rhus  tox.

iFor  last  twenty  years,  eruption  on  1.  forearm  and  on  1.
lower  abdomen;  eruption  begins  as  a  small  boil  which
disappears,  leaving  a  dry,  scaly,  itching  eruption;  then
other  boils  appear  successively,  all  going  through  same
process;  this  goes  on  until  most  space  between  elbow
and  wrist,  and  a  space  as  large  as  palm  of  hand  on  lower
abdomen  is  covered  with  itching  dry  eruption ;  >  for
a  few  weeks,  when  little  boil  reappears  and  same  process
is  gone  over.

I  I  Old  reddish  herpes,  with  thick  scurf  in  region  of  whis-
kers ;  reappearance  of  suppressed  herpes  in  face.

iPale,  chlorotic,  emaciated ;  blackish  or  bluish  blisters
with  sanious,  fetid  contents. ^Herpetic  ulcers.

■Vesicles  large,  usually  of  yellow  color  first,  and  then  turn-
ing dark  with  much  pain ;  vesicles  break  and  leave  an
excoriated  surface,  which  burns  when  touched;  erup-
tions every  Spring  and  Fall; <  from  acids. ^Herpes.

1  I  Vesicular  eruption,  with  a  red  crown.

I  I  Red  spots,  with  vesicles  on  fingers  and  thighs.

I I  Eruption  of  yellow  or  purplish  blisters.

1 1  Bullae  dark  from  bloody  serum  within. ^Pemphigus.
1 1  Gangrenous  blisters.

■  New  pustules  and  at  same  time  many  of  older  ulcers  and

scabs  surrounded  by  blue  halo;  veins  of  legs  enlarged
from  pregnancy,  unusually  blue  and  knotty,  almost  ap-
pearance of  incipient  gangrene ;  itching,  burning  and
stinging  pains.

■  Pustules  size  of  pea  to  five  cent  piece,  on  back,  legs  and

particularly  about  ankles;  isolated  pustules,  rapidly
filled  with  sero-purulent  matter  and  surrounded  by  an
inflamed  halo  came  in  small  crops ;  these  pustules  soon
dried  into  hard,  dry  scabs  easily  knocked  off,  leaving
red  moist  surfaces  sensitive  to  contact  with  atmosphere
or  bedclothes.

■  Confluent  smooth,  round,  white  pustules  of  size  of  a  mus-

tard seed  in  palms  of  hands;  they  contained  a  white
fluid  and  itched  intolerablv.


639  LACHESIS.

Ilndex  finger  of  1.  hand  quadrupled  in  size;  hand  and
forearm  mucli  swollen  and  oedematous,  a  hard  red  line
extending  from  wrist  to  axilla;  axillary  glands  swollen  ;
arm  and  hand  intensely  painlul;  whole  1.  side  partially
paralyzed;  extreme  prosliation,  causing  disease  to  be
at  first  mistaken  for  typhus,  low  muttering  delirium  at
night;  marked  aggravation  of  suffering  and  prostration
on  awaking  from  sleep;  abscesses  forming  under  deep
fibrous  tissues  of  finger  and  hand.  ^Septitsemia,  result
of  dissecting  wound.

■  Swelling  assumes  a  purplish  hue,  and  patient  commences

to  be  delirious  as  soon  as  he  closes  his  eyes;  bloated  red
face,  attended  by  heat;  coldness  of  extremities;  tend-
ency to  faint,  with  numbness;  swelling  of  part  is  not
great,  but  firm ;  suppuration  occurs  in  spots,  does  not
discharge,  but  dries  up  into  cheesy  mass,  which  is
revealed  by  skin  covering  it  drying  up  and  peeling  oft';
sometimes  bullae  containing  dark  colored  serum.  ^Ery-
sipelas.

■  Erysipelas  contracted  while  dissecting;  has  been  sick  a

week;  face  swollen,  bluish  red,  or  leaden  hue;  tongue
dry,  glossy,  tremulous;  <  from  weight  of  clothes,  from
noon  until  midnight.

■  sDark  red,  very  large  and  thick  swelling,  soft  as  dough

when  touched.

■  I  Varicose  veins  ulcerate.

■  Bedsores in typhoid  fever; ulcers red  and  inflamed,

with  black  edges.

■  Furuncular formation, generally upon lower lip, at-

tended with  severe  pain  and  frequently  surrounded  by
erysipelatous  areola;  rapid  and  excessive  loss  of  strength,
reduced  from  vigor  to  absolute  prostration  within
twenty- four  hours. ^Epidemic  malignant  pustule.

■  Bluish  color  of  pustule,  and  red  streaks  along  lymphatic

vessels. /^Malignant  pustule.

■  Immense  carbuncle,  six inches  in  diameter,  appeared  in

dorsal  region  to  r.  of  spine,  attended  with  rigors,  noc-
turnal sweat,  fever  and  prostration. ^'After  bite  of  a  cat.

■  Dark  redness  around  sore,  which  discharges  dark,  bloody

pus ;  tension  of  skin  around  carbuncle,  as  if  too  short ;
nightly  burning  in  ulcer,  obliging  one  to  rise  and  wash
it  with  cold  water. ^Anthrax.

■  Black  and  blue  spots ; ecchymoses  all  over  body;  least

touch  or  pressure  produces  them  ;  tenderness  of  body  ;
deathly  paleness  of  face; <  after  sleep. ^Anasarca.

■  After  scarlet  fever,  upon  going  out  into  air  before  des-

quamation had  occurred,  swelling  up  of  whole  body,
scrotum  as  large  as  child's  head,  urine  diminished,  res-


LACHESIS.  G40

piration  oppressed  ;  on  1,  side  of  throat  glandular  swell-
ing, extending  up  behind  ear.

llnflammation  slow;  skin  over  dead  cellular  tissue  little
disposed  to  ulcerate,  and  w^hen  finally  perforated  in
three  or  four  places,  discharge  scanty,  thin,  sometimes
bloody;  great  prostration. ^Carbuncle.

■Man,  had  suffered  for  several  years  from  a  succession  of
carbuncles  and  indolent  boils;  lately  four  successive
carbuncles,  none  of  which  ran  a  complete  course ;  after
each  of  these  carbuncles  patient's  health  deteriorated,
until,  after  last,  took  to  bed,  with  hectic  fever;  an  ab-
scess deep  in  adductor  muscles  of  thigh  being  opened,
discharged  about  a  quart  of  pus;  formation  and  discliarge
of  pus  continued  profuse;  patient  rapidly  growing
feeble,  with  severe  hectic;  loss  of  appetite;  great  local
suffering.  ^'Carbuncle  (seven  weeks  afterwards  remnants
of  four  carbuncles  inflamed,  abscesses  formed  and  sloughs
were  discharged ;  abscesses  occurring  in  inverse  order
of  original  appearance  of  carbuncle).

■  Purplish  color  of  affected  part;  erysipelas  spreads  from

1.  to  r. ^Erysipelas  neonatorum.

I  iMarked  swelliug  and  redness  of  throat,  with  difficulty  of
swallowing,  elevated  papillse  on  tongue,  severe  pain  in
head,  flushed  and  turgid  appearance  of  face,  great  rest-
lessness, eruption  of  miliary  character,  or  when  it  fails
to  come  to  the  surface. ^Scarlet  fever.

llSore  throat  and  great  difficulty  in  swallowing ;  fever;
pulse  120,  quick  and  small ;  throat  sore  to  touch  exter-
nally ;  as  yet  no  eruption. ^Scarlet  fever.

■  Pleuritic,  pericarditic  and  general  dropsy  in  delayed  des-

quamation, with  great  prostration. ^Scarlatina.

■  Scarlet  fever  and  scarlet  eruptions,  with  swelling  of  cervi-

cal glands,  black  lips  and  reddish  tongue.

■  I Throat  symptoms  assume  a  virulent  character;  signs  of

blood  poisoning  and  prostration. ^Scarlatina.

■  Lies  on  back  with open mouth;  1.  parotid  enormously

swollen;  tongue  dry  and  loaded  with  drying,  offensive
mucus,  extending  back  upon  pharynx,  obstructing
passage  of  throat;  nose  stopped  with  bloody  mucus,  hav-
ing dried  down,  thoroughly  impacting  both  nasal  pas-
sages, high  up;  eyes  turned  back;  could  not  be  aroused
in  least  from  most  profound  stupor;  pulse  compressible
and  small. ^Malignant  scarlatina.

■  Cankerous  ulcers  spread  from  mouth  to  near  chin,  with

sanious  discharges  from  nostrils  and  throat;  constantly
recurring  spasms  of  almost  entire  muscular  system  ;
vibratory  movements  in  spasms,  short  and  tremulous.
^Scarlatina.


641  LACHESIS.

llScarlatina  maligna,  advanced  stages,  typhoid  states,
threatening  gangrene;  destructive  decomposition  of
both  fluids  and  solids.

I  Boy,  set.  9,  had  scarlet  fever  under  allopathic  treatment,
survived  swelling  on  1.  side  of  neck  followed,  which  sup-
purated, abscess  opened  with  lancet,  afterwards  boy
declined  in  flesh,  strength  and  appetite;  much  ex-
hausted; face  pale,  dirty,  dingy;  puffy,  no  appetite;  rest-
less, hot,  dry  skin;  peevish  and  whining;  abscess  dis-
charging foul  and  copious  pus;  very  sensitive  to  all
motions  of  head ;  a  large  cavity,  no  appearance  of  healthy
granulations;  pulse  140  and  small;  motions  of  jaw  in
masticating  solid  food  could  not  be  borne.

BAlternate  deUrium  and  stupor;  irrational,  slow  mutter-
ing dehrium;  pulse  soft,  wavy,  quick;  calor  mordax;
respiration  attended  by  moaning;  rapid,  whistling;  oc-
casional single  cough ;  grasping  at  throat,  as  if  to  tear
away  clothing  from  it;  pupils  widely  dilated;  urine
scanty,  constipation;  countenance  cadaverous;  breath
putrescent. ^Repercussion  of  measles.

I  Girl,  set.  9,  had,  during  previous  winter,  scarlatina
very  severely;  it  left  her  delicate  and  deaf;  was  ex-
posed to  measles;  six  days  after,  rash  appeared  with  a
copious  discharge  from  ears;  two  days  later,  discharge
suddenly  ceased  and  rash  disappeared;  immediately  be-
came feeble  and  prostrate;  wild,  muttering  delirium;
great  thirst,  drinking  little  at  a  time;  singularly  biting
heat  of  skin  next  day;  pulse  soft,  wavy;  hardly  to  be
counted;  calor  mordax;  moaning  respiration,  rapid,
whistling;  occasionally  a  single  cough  with  a  moan  after
each  cough,  and  a  grasping  at  throat,  as  if  to  tear  away
clothing  from  it;  pupils  widely  dilated ;  no  stool  for  two
days;  urine  scanty  and  seldom  passed;  countenance  ca-
daverous; breath  putrescent.

I  Livid  eruption ;  countenance  almost  black ;  tongue  coated

dark brown,  sordes on teeth, inability to protrude
tongue. ^Measles.

I I  Black  measles.

I  Itching  on  whole  body,  hands  and  feet;  after  burning
pains  there  appeared  vesicles,  with  much  itching,  throb-
bing, heat,  there  formed  a  diffuse,  red  swelling,  some
vesicles  as  large  as  a  nut,  at  first  filled  with  water,  but
afterwards  containing  pus;  a  good  deal  of  inflammation
about  parts;  some  pustules  dark  blue,  with  burning,
throbbing  pain  in  swelling,  as  if  flesh  was  being  torn
from  bones;  pains  attack  head,  teeth,  breast,  back;
severe,  burning  pain  in  head,  causing  sense  of  sickness
and  nausea;  throbbing  in  head  at  every  movement;  stu-

VOL.  VI. — 41.


LACHESIS.  '  642

pefied  sleep  after  attacks ;  pains  <  at  night ;  constant
thirst  but  drinking  makes  her  sick;  sometimes  itching
goes  off,  tlien  she  is  short  of  breath  and  full  of
anxiety.  ^Itch.
lAfter  scratching  at  night  on  calf,  an  ulcer  size  of  a  dollar,
discolored,  very  painful.

■  Peculiar  bluish  red  or  livid  appearance  of  ulcers.

I  Malignant  ulcers;  bleed  readily;  discharge  bad  smelling
ichor;  deep,  filthy  suppuration;  gangrenous;  indolent,
with  blue  color.

■  Flat  open  ulcers  on  1.  leg,  with  erysipelas.

llUlcers,  surrounded  by  pimples,  vesicles  and  smaller
ulcers.

lAreola  of  ulcer  assumes  a  bluish  color. ^Sycosis.

1  Ulcer  dried  up  by  washes;  on  taking  cold  a  few  weeks
after  her  entire  foot  and  ankle  broke  out  into  small
ulcers,  resembling  original  sore ;  great  pain  in  ulcers;
itching  of  feet  and  ankles,  almost  unbearable ;  leg  <
after  sleep  and  >  from  warmth. ^Indolent  ulcer.

■Chronic  indolent  ulcers  of  legs,  flat,  with  purple  skin;
many  small  sores  around  main  ulcer,  which  has  an  un-
even bottom,  burning  and  bleeding,  even  when  lightly
touched; ichorous,  offensive  discharge.

■  Ulcers  small  and  scattered  about  upon  neck  and  face.

■  Skin  around  ulcers  and  wounds  is  yellow,  green,  lead

colored,  bluish  red  or  black.
■Superficial  ulcers,  foul  at  bottom,  with  red  crowns.

■  Brownish  red  areola  about  ulcer  became  blackish  blue.

■  Flat  ulcers  with  a  bluish  white  base.

■Spreading,  superficial, shallow  ulcer;  paralysis  of  1.  leg.

■  Burning  in  ulcers  at  night.

■  Chronic  indolent  ulcers,  with  an  uneven  bluish  bottom

and  offensive  odor.
■Painful  ulcers,  sometimes  with  proud  flesh.

■  Pain  in  old  cicatrices  of  ulcers;  old  red  scars  reopen.
■Spongeous  ulcerations  of  syphilitic  origin.
■Cancerous  ulceration,  putrefaction,  flesh  falls  off  piecemeal.
I  I  Boy,  set.  10,  large  sore  on  centre  of  forehead,  covered

with  a  hard  black,  scab,  tissue  around  hard  and  in-
flamed ;  puffy  sweUing  extended  down  on  both  sides  of
neck,  which  was  much  swollen,  as  were  his  lips;  on
taking  a  swallow  of  water  grasped  throat  and  evinced
greatest  pain;  face  very  red  but  mottled  white;  ears  burn-
ing hot  to  touch  yet  pulse  but  85,  irregular  and  softish  ;
picked  at  hair  continually;  every  few  minutes  twitch-
ing of  arms ;  throat  swollen  and  red ;  next  morning  ton-
sils covered  with  dirty  white  membrane;  in  evening
abundant  scarlet  rash ;  bleeding  of  dark  blood  from
nose  and  mouth.


643  LACHESIS.

I  I  Chronic  ulcers  of  legs  (probably  of  syphilitic  origin) ;
discharge  ceased,  extremity  cedematous;  a  hard,  slightly
red  swelling,  extending  up  course  of  principal  veins;
great  and  sudden  prostration ;  low  muttering  delirium,
general  typhoid  symptoms. ^Secondary  phlebitis.

liCarbuncles,  with  purple  surroundings  and  many  small
boils  around  them;  must  rise  at  night  and  bathe  to
allay  burning;  also  when  suppuration  is  tardy  and
systemic  weakness  obtains;  cannot  bear  bandages.

I  Malignant  furuncles,  very  painful,  turn  blue  and  spread.

llSore  spots  become  fungoid,  dark  red  to  brownish,  with
whitish  spots; burning  on  wiping.

B I  Fungus  hsematoides.

I  Spots  yellow,  green,  red,  lead  and  copper  colored,  pale,
livid.;  hard  and  pale  swelling;  ulcers  surrounded  by
nodes  and  vesicles ;  muscles  fall  off  in  shreds  from  bone;
loss  of  sensation;  toes  fall  off. ^Leprosy.

I  I  Sensation  absent  in  1.  arm  ;  toes  fall  off;  1.  side  of  phar-

ynx sore,  with  suppurating  ulcers ;  menstruation  alter-
nately profuse  and  absent. ^Leprosy.

I I  Bedsores,  with  black  edges.

I  Scars  redden,  hurt,  break  open  and  bleed.

I  Warts.
"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution,  i  Affections  of  meagre,  weak,
melancholy  persons,  or  of  those  who  are  chlorotic,  with
sickly  complexion;  women  at  climacteric  period,  with
frequent  metrorrhagia  and  hot  flushes,  burning  vertex,
headaches,  pain  in  back,  or  hot  flushes  by  day  and  cold
flashes  by  night,  insomnia,  <  in  afternoon,  evening  and
after  sleep;  throat  diseases  commence  on  1.  side —
rheumatism  on  right.

B I  Better  adapted  to  thin  and  emaciated  than  to  fat  per-
sons; or  adapted  to  those  who  have  been  changed  both
mentally  and  physically  by  their  illness.

OSuits  people  with  a  vivid  imagination.

D Melancholic  or  choleric  temperament,  with  phlegmatic
constitution;  with  dark  eyes  and  disposition  to  lowness
of  spirits  and  indolence.

I  Bilious  temperament.

I I  Women  of  choleric  temperament,  freckles  and  red  hair.
I  Dark  eyes,  disposed  to  sluggishness  and  indolence.

■  iClimacteric  ailments; hemorrhoids,  hemorrhages,  hot

flushes,  burning  vertex  headaches ;  especially  after  ces-
sation of  flow.
I  Women  who  have  not recovered  from  change  of  life,
"  have  never  felt  well  since  that  time."

■  Drunkards;  headaches, hemorrhoids;  prone  to  erysipela-

toid  inflammations.


LACHESIS.  644

(Erysipelas  of  old  people.
■  I  After  onanism. ^Epilepsy.
■People  injured  by  mercurial  treatment.
B I  In  all  syphilitic  mercurial  diseases. ^Tertiary  syphilis.
Infant,  set.  2  months; cyanosis.
Girl,  infant,  set.  6  months;  malignant  erysipelas.
Girl,  set.  9  months; diphtheria.
Child,  set.  9  months,  scrofulous;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set. 1,  scrofulous,  apparently  healthy,  had incisors

lanced,  obstinate  hemorrhage  ensued,  which  was  finally

stopped  by  perchloride  of  iron ;  anasarca.
Child,  fet.  21  months,  light  complexion,  blue  eyes;  bron-
chial catarrh.
Boy,  set.  2;  membranous  croup.
Girl,  set.  3,  blonde,  spare  built.
Child,  set.  3;  typhoid  fever.
Girl,  set.  4,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  slight  build  ;  suppuration

of  lungs.
Boy,  set.  4;  diphtheria. •
Boy,  set.  5,  attends  school,  previous  good  health,  suffering

six  weeks; brain  irritation.
Girl,  set.  5,  dark  straight  hair  and  blue  eyes,  when  two

years  old  had  caries of  dorsal  vertebrse ;  paralysis  of

legs  and  chest  affection.
Boy,  set.  5,  in  good  health  and  spirits,  has  abscess  on  wrist;

convulsions.
Girl,  set.  6;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set,  6,  epileptic,  with  thick  head,  pale,  bloated  look,

delicate  constitution,  suffering  fourteen  days;  diphtheria.
Child,  after  being  frostbitten ;  tetanus.
Boy;  post-diphtheritic  eye  affection.
Boy,  sick  five  days ;  diphtheria.
Girl,  after  excessive  study ;  mental  disorder.
Girl,  set.  6; ague.
Girl,  set.  6; diphtheria.
Roy,  set.  8,  suffering  five  days ;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set. 8, cold contracted in  wet  weather;  bronchial

catarrh.
Girl,  set.  8;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  8 ; diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  8  ;  affection  of  throat.
Boy,  set.  8,  scrofulous ;  scarlatina.
Girl,  set.  8,  light  red  hair,  nervous  and  sensitive,  bright

and cheerful when well,  after  having  ears pierced ;

chorea.
Girl,  set.  9,  a  few  months  ago  had  scarlatina,  which  left

her  delicate  and  deaf,  nine  days  ago  exposed  to  measles,

two  days  ego  rash  appeared  along  with  copious  dis-


645  LACHESIS.

charge  from  ears,  now  rash  and  discharge  both  disap-
pear; repercussion  of  measles.

Girl,  set.  9,  frightened  when  three  years  old  by  snake;
affection  of  mind.

Boy,  sdt  9,  fair  skin,  dark  eyes,  short  stature,  well  devel-
oped, healthy;  after  scarlatina  abscess  on  1.  side  of  neck.

Boy,  «t.  9,  pale,  weakly,  subject  to  epileptiform  spasms;
diphtheritis.

Girl,  set.  9 ;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  10; pharyngitis.

Boy,  £et.  10,  suffering  from  scarlatina,  upon  going  out  be-
fore desquamation;  dropsy.

Boy,  set.  10 ;  scarlatina.

Boy,  sdt  10,  highly  nervous  temperament,  psoric  taint ;
scarlet  fever.

Girl,  set.  10;  diphtheria.

Boy,  set.  12 ;  affection  of  knee.

Girl,  set.  12,  healthy  looking,  suffering  eight  days;  affec-
tion of  throat.

Girl,  set.  13 ;  typhoid  fever.

Boy,  set.  14;  tonsillitis.

Boy,  set.  16,  strong  and  active,  red  hair,  dark  eyes,  freckled
complexion;  peritonitis.

Girl,  set.  16,  light  complexion;  typhoid.

Girl,  set.  16; tonsillitis.

Boy,  set.  17,  subject  to  inflammation  of  throat;  angina.

Girl,  set.  18,  governess,  robust  constitution,  suffering  a
week  without  perceptible  cause ;  neuralgia.

Girl,  set.  18 ; diphtheria.

Girl,  get.  20,  blonde,  slim,  mild  disposition;  erysipelas.

Weakly  girl,  set.  20 ;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  20,  bilious  temperament,  full  habit,  from  sittmg
on  stool  and  practicing  at  piano,  suffering  four  years ;
affection  of  spine.

Woman,  eet.  20,  after  giving  birth  to  child  which  died  on
fourth  day  of  erysipelas ;  peritonitis.

Girl,  set.  20,  blonde,  thin,  mild  temperament ;  erysipelas  on
leg  and  foot.

Woman,  set.  20,  strong;  angina.

Young  man,  tall,  active,  dark  hair  and  eyes;  diphtheria.

Young  man,  scrofulous,  weak,  has  had_  for  several  years
eczema  on  arms  and  leg  ulcers;  tonsillitis.

Young  lady,  bilious  lymphatic  temperament,  suffermg
ten  years; constipation.

Young  woman,  delicate,  nervous temperameiit;  diphtheria.

Young  woman,  married,  refined  sensibilities;  mental
disturbance.

Young  man,  phthisical  habit,  had  been  coughing  two
months;  pulmonary  tuberculosis.


LACHESIS.  G46

Young  man,  weakened  by  disease  and  medicine  and  fur-
ther by  fracture  of  clavicle;  affection  of  r.  hand.

Strong  young  man;  affection  of  second  toe  of  r.  foot.

Young  man,  after  excessive  study;  glossomania.

Young  man,  phthisical  habit,  emaciated,  six  months  ago
had  pneumonia  ;  lung  affection.

Young,  robust  sea  captain,  previously  suffered  from  abscess
of  throat;  affection  of  throat.

Girl,  set.  20,  after  taking  purgative  medicine  for  some
digestive  troubles;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  21,  scrofulous;  angina.

Man,  set.  22;  pharyngitis.

Man,  set.  22,  physician,  result  of  wound  incurred  during
post  mortem  examination  of  a  case  of  puerperal  perito-
nitis ;  septicaemia.

Man,  get.  23;  pneumonia.

Girl,  set.  23;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  23,  slender  build,  premature  labor;  puerperal
convulsions.

AVoman,  set.  24,  multipara,  small,  fair,  nervous,  sanguine
temperament; puerperal  convulsions.

Man,  set.  24,  wears  glasses;  asthenopia.

Woman,  set.  24,  brunette;  facial  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  25,  medium  height,  fair  complexion,  muscular,
and  accustomed  to  outdoor  exercise;  chronic  irritability
of  fauces.

Girl,  set.  26;  diphtheria.

Man,  set.  28,  small,  brown  hair,  during  childhood  frequent
convulsions,  after  being  cured  of  caries;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  28,  sunstroke  two  years  previous  to  confine-
ment, from  which  she  had  ever  since  been  confined  to
bed;  puerperal  convulsions.

Woman,  set.  28,  suffering  several  weeks;  partial  deafness.

Man,  set.  29,  suffering  since  fourteenth  year;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  30,  medium  height,  dark  complexion,  black
hair,  subject  to  swelling  of  glands  and  morbid  discharges
from  mucous  membranes,  had  three  abortions,  now  in
eighth  month  of  pregnancy; pustular  eruption.

AVoman,  set.  30; chronic  affection  of  larynx.

Woman,  set.  30,  brunette,  nursing  5  months;  thin  milk.

Woman,  set.  30,  married,  weak  constitution,  tuberculous
tendency;  tumor  in  breast.

Man,  set.  30,  another  23;  fever.

Man,  set.  30,  laborer,  after  injury;  gangrene  of  leg.

Woman,  set.  30,  single;  pharyngitis.

Married  woman,  set.  30,  tuberculous,  weakly  constitution,
somewhat  emaciated  and  pale,  skin  dry ;  since  ten  years
no  child  ;  tumor  in  1.  mamma.


C17  LACHESIS.

Woman,  sst.  31,  unmarried,  suffering  for  many  years;
headache.

Woman,  set.  32,  married,  after  night  watching;  convul-
sions.

Woman,  set.  32,  brunette,  choleric  temperament ;  mania.

Man,  set.  32,  sanguine  nervous  temperament;  ague.

Countess  V.,  set.  33,  after  rubbing  a  mixture  of  Rhus  tox.
and  alcohol  upon  abdomen  for  a  strain  of  uterine  liga-
ment; herpes  zoster.

Man,  editor;  typhoid  fever.

Man,  plethoric,  tendency  to  hydrothorax;  periodic  asthma.

Man,  after  mercurial  treatment;  syphilis.

Lady,  worn  out  with  solicitude  and  care  of  a  sick  friend,
had  delirium  followed  by  convulsions.

Woman,  set.  40,  one  year  without  catamenia;  erysipelas  on
foot  joint.

Woman,  slender  form,  menstrual  irregularities;  aphonia.

Woman,  married;  effects  of  domestic  troubles;  melancholy.

Woman,  weakly,  sensitive  mind,  during  climacteric,  after
grief  at  death  of  husband  and  loss  of  fortune;  affection
of  throat.

Woman,  after  taking  charge  of  child  with  itch;  itch.

Woman,  married  many  years,  but  never  pregnant ;  chronic
uterine  catarrh. (Afterwards  bore  a  child.)

Woman,  post  diphtheritic  affection.

Woman,  subject  Spring  and  Fall  to  acute  pneumonia ;  had
been  treated  for  many  years  allopathically ;  ovaritis.

Woman,  wasted,  slim,  pale ;  ulcers  on  legs.

Woman,  set.  35,  sickly  and  weak,  slim,  strong  bones,  bilious
constitution,  mild  temper;  infiltration  on  the  back.

Man,  set.  35,  pharyngitis.

Man,  set.  35; diphtheria.

Man,  set.  39,  dark  complexioned,  emaciated,  eight  weeks
ago  operation  for  fistula  in  ano,  suffering  four  weeks;
mental  disorder.
'  Woman,  set.  40,  single,  large  and  fleshy,  subject  to  attacks
of  catarrh  for  fifteen  years;  bronchial  catarrh.

Woman,  set.  40,  suffering  20  years;  hysteria.

Man,  set.  40;  gangrene  of  hand.

Man,  set.  40,  after  receiving  wound  on  head  by  falling  off
horse;  gangrene  of  wound.

Woman,  set.  40,  has  not  menstruated  for  one  year;  ery-
sipelas.

Woman,  set.  40,  tall,  slender,  pale;  ulcers  on  legs.

Woman,  set.  40;  indolent  ulcer.

Man,  set.  40,  phthisical;  ulcers  on  legs.

Man,  set.  40;  bee  sting.

Woman,  set.  42,  mother  of  two  children,  sanguine  bilious
temperament;  asthma.


LACHESIS.  648

Woman,  set.  42,  sanguine  bilious  temperament ;  asthma.

■Woman,  get.  43,  married;  irritation  of  meninges  of  brain
and  spinal  cord.

Woman,  set.  43 ;  ulcers  on  leg.

Lady,  set.  43,  slim,  large,  cachectic,  scrofulous ;  intestinal
croup.

Woman,  widow,  set.  43;  catalepsy  during  climaxis.

AVoman,  set.  45,  full  habit,  nervous,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,
lively  disposition,  suffering  for  years; headache.

Married  woman,  set.  45;  chronic  nasal  catarrh.

Woman,  set.  48,  18  months  after  climaxis,  catamenia  had
been  copious,  very  dark,  had  been  subject  to  congestion
towards  head  and  chest;  swelling  of  r.  ovary.

Woman,  set.  48,  bilious,  nervous  temperament,  has  for
many  years,  every  Spring  and  Fall,  had  acute  pneu-
monia, for  which  she  was  salivated,  bled,  blistered  and
purged ;  general  breakdown.

Woman,  set.  49,  seamstress,  for  three  years;  cephalalgia.

Woman,  climacteric  period;  anal  fistula.

Man,  set.  45,  suffering  three  weeks;  spasm  of  glottis.

Man,  set.  45,  full  habit  and  bilious  temperament ;  func-
tional disturbance  of  heart.

Man,  set.  48,  subject  to  follicular  pharyngitis;  pharyngitis.

Man,  set.  49,  light  complexioned,  suffering  five  days ;
sciatica.

Woman,  set.  50,  just  passed  critical  period,  suffering  six
months;  affection  of  anus  and  rectum.

Woman,  set.  50;  itch.

Woman,  set.  50;  chronic  affection  of  larynx.  ■

Woman,  set.  50 ;  foreign  body  in  oesophagus.

AVoman,  set.  50,  phlegmatic,  sanguine  temperament,  small
stature,  father  and  brother  died  of  heart  disease;  attacks
of  dyspnoea  and  palpitation  of  heart.

Woman,  set.  50,  large  and  fleshy,  at  critical  period,  had
suffered  several  years  with  dilatation  of  1.  ventricle,
aorta  and  carotid  artery ;  bronchial  catarrh.

Woman,  set.  51,  after  sudden  suppression  of  menses  by  a
mental  emotion;  rheumatism  of  vagus.

Woman,  set.  52,  married,  leuco-phlegmatic,  very  fat,  suffer-
ing for  twenty  years ; eruption  on  arm  and  abdomen.

Woman,  set.  52;  sacculated  ovarian  disease.

Woman,  set.  53,  plethoric,  robust,  choleric ;  ulcer  on  leg.

Woman,  set.  56,  passing  through  climacteric  period;  affec-
tion of  liver.

Man,  set.  57,  nervous  bilious  temperament,  dark  hair  and
skin,  suffering  thirty-five  years;  eczema.

Man,  set.  60,  married,  subject  five  years  to  occasional  at-
tacks of  severe  pains  in  back  of  head ;  convulsions.


649  LACHESIS.

Man,  aet.  60,  strong,  well  built,  full  chest,  blue  eyes,  suffer-
ing since  he  was  six  years  old ;  headache.

Elderly  woman,  thin  and  cachectic ;  phthisis  pulmonalis.

Lady,  set.  60,  tall,  dark,  leathery  skin,  feeble,  thin,  nervo-
bilious,  fond  of  good  living;  tertian  ague.

Man,  set.  60,  strong,  well  built,  blue  eyes ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  65,  stout,  fleshy,  for  many  years  periodical
attacks  from  hepatic  apostema.

Woman,  set.  69 ;  ulcers  on  legs.

Woman,  set.  70,  suffering  six  months ;  bronchial  catarrh.

Woman,  set.  76,  suffering  a  long  time  from  suffocative
cough ;  chest  affection,

Man,  set.  80 ;  vertigo.

Man,  set.  86;  sciatica.
^  Relations.. Antidoted  by:  Radiate  heat  outwardly,  alcohol
inwardly;  salt. The  dilutions  are  antidoted  by :  Alum.,
Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Coccul.,  Coffea,  Hepar,  Mercur.,  Nitr.  ac,
Niix  vom.,  Phos.  ac,  according  to  effects.

It  antidotes:  effects  of  Bufo,  CrotaL,  Rhus  tox.

Compatible :  Aeon.,  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Bromum,  Carbo  veg.,
Cinchona,  Hepar,  Hyosc,  Kali  bich.,  Lac  canin.,  Lycop.,
Mercur.,  Nitr.  ac,  Nux  vom.,  Oleand.,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,
Silica,  Sulphur,  Tarent.

Incompatible:  Acet.  ac

Complementary:  Hepar,  Lycop.,  Nitr.  ac

Compare:  CrotaL,  Naja  trip..  Flaps,  cor.  and  Bothrops  can.,
in  their  general  effects  on  the  blood  and  nervous  system  ;
Sulphur  and  Lycop.  in  aphasia;  Theridion  and  Moschus,
vertigo  <  closing  eyes,  sun  headaches;  Arsen.,  Hy dr.  ac,
Lauroc,  Digit,  and  Veratr.,  fainting  from  cardiac  weak-
ness; Kali  carb,  heart  hangs  by  a  thread;  Glonoin,  Bel-
lad., Camphor,  Natr.  carb.,  and  Therid.,  effects  from  heat
of  the  sun ;  Stramon.,  Agaric,  Mephitis,  Act.  rac  and
Paris  quad.,  loquacity;  Opium,  Hyosc,  Arnica,  Alum.,
Lycop.,  Rhus  tox.,  typhoid  fever;  Mercur.,  Cinchona,  Pul-
sat., Bryon.,  Gelsem.,  catarrhal  and  rheumatic  head-
ache; Silica,  desire  to  have  head  wrapped  up;  CrotaL,
Phosphor,  and  Arnica  in  retinal  apoplexy;  CrotaL  and
Elaps,  otorrhoea;  Apis,  Arsen.,  and  Kali  carb.,  oedema  of
face;  CicuL,  dyspnoea  from  spasm;  Apis,  Rhus  tox.  and
Euphorb.,  erysipelas,  herpes,  etc.;  PhytoL,  sore  throat,
debility,  etc.;  Lac  can.,  CrotaL  and  Naja,  diphtheria;
Cinchona,  Carbo  veg.,  Hepar,  Kreos.,  Kali  bich.,  Nux  vom.
and  Lycop.,  d3''spepsias  and  abdominal  diseases;  Colchic
and  Elaps,  cold  feeling  in  stomach ;  Bellad.,  Caustic,
Natr.mur.,  Nitr.  ac,  Ignat.,  Kali  bich.,  Opium,  Plumbum,
Mezer.  and  Coccul.,  constriction  of  anus,  anal  tenesmus
and  dysentery ;  Anacard.,  sensation  of  plug  in  rectum;


LACHESIS.  650

Hepar,  Asaf.,  Lycop.,  Mur.  ac,  Silica,  SulpK  ac.  and
Arsen.,  ulcerations;  Apis,  Arg.  met,  Platin.,  Murex,  Pallad.,
Lycop.,  and  Graphit,  ovarian  and  uterine  diseases;
CrotaL,  Helleb.,  Digit.,  Tereb.,  Apis  and  Colchic,  vesical
and  renal  affections,  with  hsematuria;  Calc.  ostr.,  gall
stones;  Phosphor,  and  Thuja  fungus  heematoides;  Nair.
mur.  and  Ledum,  effects  of  bee  sting ;  Lact.  ac,  fulness
of  throat  and  constriction;  Tarent.  cuben.,  painful  car-
buncles.
