The Hermetic Museum, Restored and Enlarged, Vol. 2 (A. E. Waite, 1893) (A. E. Waite (ed./trans.), 1893)
=======================================================================================================
Waite's Hermetic Museum, Vol. 2. Completes the 2-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

\ Why / M7).
Mp, : 2. fp, Ves AS) en, i) "a\(e" 8 A %
sf = s)\¢

w Sag? 5) New Meyya os) ex Set as
Mn , sf 56M [8 A ite, “Me ot
S © >’ -4 Sis fe =, o Sis ©.
GY NN 4 “ 7 INN “yy &Y Suyr /.< fs
ee
FING. SS

sm Hd , We Mn (Fla
2 Sayp> Nes Say 0) Nes Gig oe Ke
INVAG eM, mr AA mr (8 S sn, 2”) io gM, > a
~ "55 Ge » GE Gy 2») © ,


“yy 0S gs oe) New

"om, D) e) om, 3) es Ww PNY AG on r si, :
Neat ONS ARTS D) ey “wu ys:
sn, eS) e i", 2") io $ 6, D) e sm, "> Wr
ue TX yh oe yyy Nes aug 0 PAS
a\(é- CEE NES SC aes a RY at a eS a

Digitized with financial assistance from

Hermeés India

a project facilitated by the Rotary Club of Bombay

on 10 August, 2018

THE HERMETIC MUSEUM

RESTORED AND ENLARGED.

THE

HERMETIC MUSEUM.

RESTORED AND ENLARGED:

MOST FAITHFULLY INSTRUCTING ALL DISCIPLES OF THE SOPHO-SPAGYRIC
ART HOW THAT GREATEST AND TRUEST MEDICINE OF

THE PHILOSOPHER’S STONE

MAY BE FOUND AND HELD.

Now FIRST DONE INTO ENGLISH FROM THE LATIN ORIGINAL PUBLISHED AT
FRANKFORT IN THE YEAR 1678.

Containing Twenty-two most celebrated Chemical Tracts.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOLUME II.

London :
JAMES ELLIOTT AND CO.,
TEMPLE CHAMBERS, FALCON Court, FLEST STREET, E.C,

1893.

HVMUNUAI A) UMUANY AL
00201294

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

VOLUME II.

PAGE

I.—TuHeE CuHEMICAL TREATISE of Thomas Norton, the
Englishman, called Believe-Me, or The Ordinal of
Alchemy ... tee es es a sy OR I

I],—Tue TesTaAMENT OF CREMER, Abbot of Westminster
and Brother of the Benedictine Order sits = 69

Ill.—Tue New Cuemicat Licut, Drawn from the Foun-
tain of Nature and of Manual Experience. By
Michael Sendivogius ... eo — 6 ey 1°)

IV.—Tue New Cuemicar Licut, Second Part, Concerning
Sulphur. By Michael Sendivogius ... his wee 127

V.—AN OpEN ENTRANCE TO THE CLOSED PALACE OF THE
Kinc. By an Anonymous Sage and Lover of
Truth (¢.e., Eirenzeus Philalethes) ... es ree «159

VI.—A SuptLe ALLEGORY CONCERNING THE SECRETS OF
ALCHEMY, very useful to possess and pleasant to _
read. . By Michael Maier ots cet at we =199

VII.—Tue Turee TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. I. The
Metamorphosis of Metals... oss _ vee 225

PAGE.

VIII.—Tue THRE TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. Ill. A
Short Vade Mecum or Guide to the Celestial
Ruby
IX.—TuHe THREE TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. III. The
Fount of Chemical Truth

X.—JoHN FREDERICK HeELvETIuS’ GOLDEN CALF, which
the World worships and adores: in which is
discussed the Most Rare Miracle of Nature in the
Transmutation of Metals, viz. : How at the Hague

a Mass of Lead was in a Moment of Time changed

into. Gold by the Infusion of a Small Particle of
our Stone .

XI.—Tue ALt-Wise DoorkeepEr, or a Fourfold "Figure,
exhibiting analytically to all who enter this Museum
the Mosaico-Hermetic Science of Things above
and Things below

246

261

271

301

THE GOLDEN TRIPOD,

SECOND TRACT.

THE

CHEMICAL TREATISE

OF
THOMAS NORTON,

THE ENGLISHMAN,

CALLED

BELIEVE - ME

]

OR

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY.

AN EPIGRAM

WRITTEN BY M, M., ON NORTON’S CHEMICAL
TREATISE.

As the Nile with its overflowing waters floods the surround.
ing country, and covers it with fertilizing slime, bearing in it the
promise of a rich and laughing harvest, so the genius of Norton
overflows its banks far and wide, while he makes known to us
the glorious works of Nature. He spreads himself abroad over
an immensity of space, that he may fertilize the fields of Alchemy,
and rejoice the hearts of its husbandmen. If you are fortunate
you will catch beneath this wide expanse of waters a fish which
will satisfy the longing of your heart. And if you fail of suc-
cess, yet your mind will be stored with the precious treasures of
knowledge, and you will in any case be richly rewarded for your
labour. The treasures of Hermes are not laid open in oe book:
perhaps one writer may render clear to you what another fails
to explain. ,

THE TREATISE, CREDE-MIHI, OR ORDINAL,
OF THomas NokTON.

PREFACE FIRST.-
(By the Author himself.)

: HIS Book shews to the initiated knowledge, but inten-
sifies the ignorance of the vulgar. It is the book of
honouring, increasing riches, and the book of the needy,
putting to flight poverty. It is the book of confidence

and truth, full of counsel for kings and of teaching for prelates,
a book useful for sainted men, who wish to live unspotted of
sin; a secret book, the Book of the Gift of God, to chosen men
a pathway of true hope, a strength to those constant in firm
faith, and who unwaveringly believe in my words.- Alchenty is
sought by the false and the true—by. false seekers without
number, but they are rejected. Many are aflame with the desire
of gain, but amongst a thousand thousand scarce three are
chosen. There are many called to knowledge, noble and poor,
Icarned and ignorant, but they will not submit to toil, or await
the time; they do not attain to the goal because they are
ungrateful. The Book of our Art is clear as light to the sons of
knowledge, to whom God has freely given to understand this
matter. Only let them believe this prophetical saying ; to the
thankful all flows forth from the fount of Divine love.

This noble science is bestowed only on those who jaye
justice with a devout mind, but to the deceitful, the treacherous,
and the violent it is denied, because their sins hinder the coming
of God's gifts.

This knowledge would often have been the glory of
England’s Kings, if their hope had been firmly aloes ype God.

4 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

One who shall have obtained his honours by means of this Art,
will mend old manners, and change them for the better. When
he comes, he will reform the kingdom, and by his:goodness and
virtue he will set an everlasting, example to rulers. In ‘his time
the common people will rejoice, and, render praise to God in
mutual neighbourly love. .O King, who art to accomplish all
this, pray to God the King,-and implore His aid in the matter!
So the glory of thy mind will be crowned with the glory of a
golden age, which shall not then be hoped for as future.

PREFACE SECOND.

To the honour of the One God, who is Three Persons in
One, this book has been written, in order that, after my death,
learned and unlearned men might see how every one who will
follow my good counsel, and ponder it well before he begins the
work, may obtain great treasure through the Art of Alchemy.
But the book is also a storehouse of mighty secrets for the
learned. Let me warn the unlearned that they must study this
Art with fear and trembling, lest they be led astray by the
false delusions of those who counsel many costly experiments,
and use high sounding words. For my part, I desire none of .
that fame which the world can give, but only your prayers to
God for me, though you need not utter my name. Let no one
trouble himself about the author, but rather let him diligently
consider the contents of the Book. If you enquire into the
motives of men, you will find many who are induced to give
their minds to the study. of Alchemy, only by the desire of gain
and riches ; and such men are found even among Cardinals of
highest rank, Archbishops, and Bishops of lofty order, Abbots
and religious Priors, also among hermits, monks, and: common
priests, and among Kings, princes, and lords of high degree.

For men of all classes desire to partake of our good things :
merchants, and those who exercise their craft in the forge, are
led captive by a longing to know this Art; nor are common
mechanics content to be excluded from a share in it: they love
the Art as dearly as great lords. The goldsmiths are consumed

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 5

with the desire of knowing—though them we may excuse since
they have daily. before their eyes that which they long to possess,
But we may wonder that weavers, freemasons, tailors, cobblers,
and needy priests join in the general search after the Philoso-
pher’s Stone, and that even painters’ and glaziers cannot restrain
themselves from it. Nay, tinkers pregsumptuously aspire to exalt
themselves by its médhs, though -they should be content with the
colour with which glass is stained. Many of these workmen,
however, have been deceived by giving credulous heed to
impostors, who helped them to convert their ‘gold into smoke,
and though they are grieved and disappointed at the loss, they —
yet buoy themselves up with sanguine thoughts, and hope that
they will after all reach the goal; alas, too many have I known,
who, after amusing themselves with delusive hopes through a
long life, have at last died in squalid poverty! For them it would
have been better if they had stayed their hands at once, seeing
that they met with nothing but disappointment and vexation of
spirit. For, surely, he who is not very learned will do well to
think twice before he meddles with this Art. Believe me, it is by
no means a light matter to know all the secrets connected with the
science. Nay, it is a profound philosophy, a subtle science, a sacred
alchemy. Concerning which I here intend to write in a style
manly, but not curious. For he who desires to instruct the com-
‘mon people should speak to them in a Janguage they understand.
But though I must express myself in a plain and unassuming
style, no candid reader should therefore contemn me. For
all that before me have written on this matter have rendered
their books obscure and unintelligible by an exaggerated use of
poetical imagery, abe and metaphors which grievously
obstruct the path of those who first enter on this field of know-
ledge. This is the reason that a beginner, who strives to put
their précepts into practice, only loses his trouble and his money,
as is daily seen. Hermes, Rhasis, Geber, Avicenna, Merlin,
Hortulanus, Democritus, Morienus, Bacon, Raymond, Aristotle,
and many others, have concealed their meaning under a veil of
obscurity. Hence their books, which they have handed down to
us, have been a source. of endless error and delusion to the vulgar
and the learned, and, in spite of the beautiful conceits which
abound in their writings, no one has been able to find a path

6 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

through the wilderness of their words ; yea, many have beén
reduced to despair. Anaxagoras indeed acquitted himself better,
*than the rest, in his book “Concerning Natural; Changes.” Of
all the ancient Sages whose writings I have read, he lays open
most plainly the foundation 6f our knowledge.- For this very
reason Aristotle is wroth against him, and attacksyhim most’
virulently in many passages, as I can shew, his purpose being to
keep men from following him. For he (Anaxagoras) was full of
wisdom and love: may God above reward: him for his goodness,
and pardon the evil deeds of those who sow the seeds of enmity
and hatred. To the latter class belonged..that. monk who set
forth a pretentious book of A Thousand Receipts, from malice
and the love of mischief—which was copied in ‘many places,
and deceived and deluded numerous enquirers, and reduced
them to beggary ; moreover, he represented true, and approved
men as forgers and impostors. For this reason I am im-
pelled by pity to set forth the truth in a few simple words,
in order to warn you against false and deceitful teaching, if,
indeed, you will pay attention to me and to my words. Throw
away your volumes of “ Recipes,” for they are full of falsehood
and fraud. Do not believe them, but give diligent heed to the
maxim, that nothing is wrought without its own proper cause. .
This is the mistake into which those self-styled “Practical Sages”
fall. They do not place knowledge on a firm foundation by
enquiring into the cause of things. You should therefore con-
stantly bear this momentous rule in mind; never to set about
an experiment until you fully comprehend the why and the how.
He who would make good progress in this Art should also dili-
gently eschew all falsehood. For Godis Truth, and it is He who
shews this Art to men: therefore keep yourself above all things
unspotted from the slightest taint of falsehood. Let it be fixed
in your mind as an abiding principle, under no circumstances to
procure for yourselves “ adulterated ” metals, like those who seek
to accomplish albifications and citrinations, which cannot abide
a searching test, and by which they produce false silver and
false coin for the purpose of duping the credulous. But God has
provided that no one should succeed in attaining to this Blessed
Art, who loves that which js false rather than that which is true.
If any man would obtain grace of God to discover the secrets of

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 7

this Art, he should ‘be. a lover of justice and truth ; nor let him
be too eager in his: ‘own ‘thind to follow this Art on account of its
outward advantages. He who would enjoy the fruit of his labour,
should be satisfied. with such wealth as is suffictent. Let him not
waste time and trouble dn divers methods of procedure, but let him
-follow the directions of this Book, which is called the “ Ordinal of
Alchemy,” the’ Crede-mihé, an everlasting standard. For as the
Ordinal instructs the presbyters concérning the ministry of the
days which they must observe, so all the true and useful teach-
ing of ill-digested books on Alchemy is here set forth in proper
order. Wherefore; this Book is of inestimable value for the
acquisition of the precious science, ner can its truth ever be
denied, though it be composed in an unassuming style. As I
_ have received this Art by Divine Grace, so I set it forth to yon
in seven chapters as fully as my fealty will permit. For I
remember what is said about the judgment of God at the last day.

The first chapter’ will shew what persons from among
the common people can attain-to this knowledge, and why the
science of Alchemy was by.the Ancients called blessed and.
sacred.

In the second chapter will be set forth the wise joy and the
long labours of those who follow this Art.

The third chapter will, for the sake of my fellow-men,
contain a faithful description of the substance of that Stone
which the Arabians call the Elixir. There you will learn whence
it is obtained.

The fourth chapter will treat of the gross part of the
work, which is foul and little suited to delicate persons.

The fifth chapter is concerned with the subtle part of the
process which God has ordained for the lezrned only, but which
few of the learned ever comprehend ; so that the secret is really
possessed by very few.

The sixth chapter deals with the question of proportion,
and with the agreement of this world below with the sphere of
heaven above, of which a right understanding greatly -helps
many learners, and proves of great assistance to them in our
wonderful Art.

The seventh chapter will truly set forth to you the principles
in accordance with which your fire should be regulated.

8 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Now,.O Lord, do Thou guide and assist me, for I desire to
gird myself to my task!. Everyone that shall happen to read
this Book, I implore to offer up prayers for my soul, and not to
alter that which J have written, for the better or for the worse,
on the pain of my most grevious anathema. For where the sense
is obscure this is for the purpose of secrecy ; but if a single syl-
lable’ be altered in a critical passage, it may destroy the value
of the whole’ book. Therefore, see that which I have written be
preserved intact, for though the language’ be humble, yet it
conveys truths of most momentous importance, and it should
be read not once or twice, but twenty times, Your best plan
will be to read many books on Alchemy, and this one last of all.

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 9

ed

HM:

cc

THOMAS NORTON’S:
CHEMICAL TREATISE,

CHAPTER I.

MOST wonderful Magistery and’ Archimagistery is”
the Tincture of sacred Alchemy, the marvellous
science of the secret Philosophy, the singular gift
bestowed upon men through the grace of Almighty. °

God—which men have never discovered by the labour of their
hands, but onty by revelation, and the teaching of others. It
was never bought or sold for a’ price to any of those who
sought after it; but it has always been granted through the
grace of God alone to worthy men, and perfected by long labour
and the lapse of time. It was given to relieve the estate of
man ; it puts an end to vainglory, hope, and fear, and removes
ambition, violence, and excess. It mitigates adversity, and
saves men from: being overwhelmed by it. Whoever has
perfect knowledge of it, eschews extremes, and is content with
the middle way. Some disdain to call this Art’ sacred, because
they say that Paynims sometimes acquire a knowledge of it,
though God cannot be desirous of conferring any good thing upon
them, seeing that their wilful and stubborn unbelief renders them
incapable of possessing that which is the cause of all good.
Moreover, it is affirmed that our Art produces nothing but gold
and silver, which are coined into money, or fashioned into cups
and rings,-but are approved and accounted by wise men the
least valuable and precious of all things which are upon the
earth ; and hence men of this school conclude that this science,
if judged by its effects, cannot claim to be regarded as sacred.

12 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

To this objection, we answer what we know to be true, that
the science of this Art has never been fully revealed to any-
one who has not approved himself worthy by a good and noble
life, and who has not shewn himself to be deserving of this
gracious gift by his love of truth, virtue, and knowledge. From
those who are otherwise minded this knowledge must ever
remain concealed.

Nor can anyone attain to this Art, unless there be some
person sent by God to instruct him in it. For the matter is so
glorious and wonderful that it cannot be fully delivered to any
“one but by word of mouth. Moreover, if any man would receive
it, he must take a great and sacred oath, that as we his teachers
refuse high rank and fame, so he will not be too eager for these
frivolous distinctions, and that he will not be so presumptuous
as to make the secret known to his own son; for propinquity
of blood, or affinity, should be held of no account in this our
Magistery. Nearness of blood, as such, does not entitle anyone
to be let into the secret, but only virtue, whether in those near
to us or in strangers. Therefore you should carefully test and
examine the life, character, and mental aptitude of any person
who would be initiated in this Art, and then you should bind
him, by a sacred oath, not to let our Magistery be commonly
or vulgarly known. Only when he begins to grow old and
feeble, he may reveal it to one person, but not to more—and
that one man must be virtuous, and generally approved by his
fellows. For this Magistery must always remain a secret
science, and the reason that compels us to be so careful is
obvious. If any wicked man should learn to practise this Art,
the event would be fraught with great danger to Christendom.
For such a man would overstep all bounds of moderation, and
would remove from their hereditary thrones those legitimate
princes who rule over the peoples of Christendom. And the
punishment of this wickedness would fall upon him who had
instructed that unworthy person in our Art. In order, then, to
avoid such an outbreak of overweening pride, he who possesses
the knowledge of this Art, should be scrupulously careful how
he delivers it to another, and should regard it as the peculiar
privilege of those who excel in virtue.

But even if this Art could, on account of its effects, be

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 13

justly denied a claim to sanctity, it would still be sacred on
account of jts nature and essence. For as, on the one hand,
no one can discover it except by the grace of God, $0 it is also
holy, because it is a divine labour and work to change vile
copper into the finest silver and gold. For no one could dis-
cover a method of producing such effects by his own thought,
seeing that the substances are divers, and man cannot separate
that which God has joined together. Nor could the course of
Nature be quickened, unless God Himself had granted the aid
of this mighty science to those whom He loves. Therefore, the
ancient Sages have well called Alchemy a sacred science ; and
no one should be so presumptuous as to cast away the blessed
gift of God. For let us only consider that God has hidden this
knowledge from great and learned doctors, and out of His
mercy has revealed it to men of low degree, who are faithful
lovers of truth, and lowly of heart ; and as there aré only seven
planets among the vast multitude of the stars of heaven, so
amongst millions of millions of men hardly seven attain to this
knowledge. As we watch men’s lives, we see and learn that
many scholars of profound erudition, with countless other
enquirers, have striven to acquire our science, and yet that all.
their labour has produced as a net result—nothing. Though
they have spent all their substance in the search, it has never-
theless turned out a failure. They have again and again missed
the mark at which they aimed ; and at last they have given up
the quest in despair, and have arrived at the bitter conclusion
that the Art is nothing but rank fiction and imposture. As the
outcome of their fruitless enquiries they have begun to denounce
our Magistery for a vain and empty thing. Let me tell such
men that they take too much upon themselves in thinking that
that must be nought which their wisdom is not sufficient to
compass. But we are not greatly troubled by their calumnies
and injurious words; for those who are wise in their own con-
ceits, while in reality they understand nothing, are not the guests
for whom our feast is prepared. Though these men cannot
understand our Magistery, yet, for all that, it must remain true ;
and though its truth be denied by some who are lifted up by
the vain pride of empty wisdom, all wise men will admit that those
who have confessedly riever looked upon a thing cannot be allowed

14 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

to give an authoritative opinion about it. It would be foolish
indeed to attach any value to a blind man’s opinion about a
painting ; and though these men are so proud of their profundity
and wisdom, I very much doubt whether they could build the
tower of St. Paul’s (London), or remove it from its foundations.
But it is more difficult still to believe that they are keen enough
to penetrate the most profound secret which this world contains.
Well, now, we will say no more about them, but deliver them
over to the wretchedness of their own ignorance.

Now, you who seek this wisdom, learn to distinguish the
. false from the true. All true enquirers into the Art.of Alchemy
should be well versed in the primary philosophy. Otherwise all
their labour will be vain. The true seeker undertakes the search
on his own account; for while he eagerly hopes to find our
Delectable Stone, he does not wish to see others involved in any
loss he may incur. He therefore conducts all the experiments
at his own cost, nor does he grudge the expense which their
labour requires. ‘He consumes his substance and empties his
coffers, and advances step by step with great patience, basing his
hope on God’s assistance alone. Impostors, on the other hand,
wander in ragged gown from city to city, and set traps for the
unwary whom they may dupe with their pretended knowledge,
and outwit by vain talk and perjury. They say that they can
augment silver, and affirm with a false oath that they can mul-
tiply both gold and silver, and thus they ingratiate themselves
with the covetous, producing the excellent conjunction of Fraud
and Avarice. But in no long time the multiplier of gold is found
to have deceived his credulous victim with his magnificent
promises and his perjured assertions—and the covetous man is
reduced,to beggary. This must be the result if one is not from
the very first on his guard against the deceitful language of the
multiplier. Of these persons I might speak at-great length, but
am afraid of encouraging men who are of themselves disposed to
evil. I fear that by saying any more I might possibly do as
much harm as good, and therefore I will only add one word to
the wise: If these persons really possessed the knowledge to
which they pretend, they would take good care not to make it
known to others, nor would they have any need to go about
boasting of their knowledge, and cheating the credulous out of

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 15

their money. If these impostors were punished, according to
their deserts in all places where they drive their fraudulent trade,
there would not be so many of them. Now these fellows put
forward lying assertions about Nature when they speak of the
multiplication of metals. For of this one thing you may rest
assured: Metals are never multiplied. Such a thing would be
contrary to Nature’s methods. Nature never multiplies anything,
except in either one or the other of these two ways: either by
decay, which we call putrefaction, or in the case of animate crea-
tures, by propagation. In the case of metals, there can be no
propagation, though our Stone exhibits something like it.
Putrefaction destroys and corrupts, but in order to be fruitful,
it must go forward in some convenient place. Metals are
generated in the earth; for above ground they are subject to rust:
hence above ground is the place of the corruption of metals and
of their gradual destruction. The cause which we assign for this
fact is that above ground they are not in their proper element,
and an unnatural position is destructive to natural objects,
as we see, for instance, that fishes die when they are taken
out of the water; and as it is natural for men, beasts, and
birds to live in thé air, so stones and metals are naturally
generated under the earth. Physicians and apothecaries do
not’ look for aquatic flowers on arid hills. God in His
wisdom has ordained that everything should grow in its
own proper place. I know that some deny this principle, and
assert that metals are multiplied. For, they say, the veins of
silver, lead, tin, and iron which we find in the earth, are some-
times rich and sometimes poor; and such diversity would be
totally inexplicable if the metals did not multiply or grow. This
fact theg is thought to prove that metals grow underground—
and if they grow underground, why, it is asked, should they not
grow above ground, in a vessel which protects them from the
influences of fire, water, and air? Our answer to this argument
is that it proves nothing, because the conditions are not the same
in the two cases. For the only efficient cause of metals is the
mineral virtue, which is not found in every kind of earth, but
only in certain places and chosen mines, into which the celestial
sphere pours its rays in a straight direction year by year, and
according to the arrangement of the metallic substance in these

16 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

places, this or that metal is gradually formed. Only few parts of
the earth are suitable for such generation—how, then, can they
be multiplied above the earth? Every person of average intelli-
gence knows that in the case of congealed water, or ice, the water,
before it becomes hardened, is more plentiful in some places than
in others. Before its congelation, it exists in small quantities in
brooks and ditches, while more considerable veins of it are found
in lakes and rivers. Afterwards, large quantities of ice are seen
where there was much water ; but it would manifestly be absurd
to say that the ice must have grown or multiplied in the lakes and
rivers, because they contain greater masses of it than ditches or
brooks. In the same way, the metals do not necessarily grow in
the mountains, because in some places they exist in larger
quantities than in others. A certain portion:of any metal can
never be increased in quantity by the action of an inherent prin-
ciple ;-and herein minerals differ from vegetables and animals.
A vegetable seed, such as an acorn, virtually contains within itself
the trunk and the leaves of a tree, though they cannot at a given
moment be discerned with the eye. But metals always remain
exactly the same in their composition, though they be dissolved
with strong waters. An ounce of silver can never become more
or less than an ounce of silver. For nothing can be multiplied
by inward action unless it belong to the vegetable kingdom, or
the family of sensitive creatures. But the metals are elementary
objects, and possess neither seed nor sensation. Hence we con-
clude that all multipliers of metals should be forbidden to exercise
their fraudulent trade. For when a metal has once been gene-
rated, it is never added to by growth. Nevertheless, we have
known one metal to be transmuted into another of a different
kind by means of the cognate nature of their substances ; so,
for instance, iron has been changed into bronze. But nothing
can produce real silver or gold except the Medicine of the Philo-
sophers. Hence the falsehoods affected by the multipliers are
eschewed and shunned by all true Sages. But all honour and
reverence is due to the genuine Art of sacred Alchemy, which is
concerned with the precious Medicine that has virtue to produce
pure gold and silver, Of this an example exists in a certain city
of Catalonia, which Raymond Lullius is supposed to have drawn
up. It consists of a series of seven images, and is designed to

THE ORDINAL OR ALCHEMY. 17

shadow out the way of truth. Three of these pictures represent
matronly figures of solid silver, and four of thern represent men
of gold in flowing garb. On the hems of their garments appear
certain letters, the meaning of which I will proceed to expound.

“| was once an old iron horse-shoe ”—such is the inscription
on the garment of one woman— but now I am the purest silver.”
“T,” says another woman, “was iron smelted from the ore, but
now I am become pure and solid gold.” “TI,” says a third, “ was
once a battered piece of copper: now I am all silver.” The fourth
figure says: “I was once copper, generated in a vile place, but at
the bidding of God I have now become perfect gold.” “I,” says
the fifth figure, “ who was once fine and pure silver, am now more
excellent gold.” The sixth figure proclaims that it was during
200 years a leaden pipe, but is now known by all for honest silver.
The seventh says: “A wondrous thing has happened to me—I

‘have become lead out of gold. But certainly my sisters are
nearer than I.”

This science derives its name from a certain King Alchymus
of illustrious memory, who, being a generous and noble-hearted
prince, first set himself to study this Art. He ceased not to
question Nature by day and by night, and at last extorted from
her a blessed answer. King Hermes also did a like thing, being
deeply versed in every kind of learning. His “ Quadripartite ”
deals with the four great branches of natural science: astrology,
medicine, alchemy, and natural magic ; and therein he expresses
himself as follows : “ Blessed is the man who knows things truly
as they are, and blessed is the man who duly proves that which
appertains to knowledge.” It was his opinion that many are
deceived in thinking that they understand that of which they do
not know the cause. It is an old proverb that in a bushel of
imagination there is often not even a grain of true knowledge.
It is also true that by the habit of proving everything, and by wise
discernment, learned mien are even now adding to their stock of
information. By knowledge men understand themselves and all
things ; without knowledge men are beasts, and worse than
beasts. Lack of knowledge renders men fierce and wild, but
instruction makes them: mild and gentle. It is now'the custom
for nobles to despise those who desire to understand the secrets
of Nature ; but in olden times even Kings ordained that no one

Vou, II, B

18 THE, HERMETIC: MUSEUM.

should be instructed i in the seven liberal sciences except “those
who were nobly born, and brilliantly endowed, and that he'who"
had once devoted hitnself to knowledge should be bound to spend
his life in its pursuit. Hence the Ancients called these sciences the
seven liberal sciences, because those who wished to become per-
fect adepts in them should delight in them in a spirit of liberty.
Freedom from all mundane cares is necessary for him who would
apply himself thoroughly to the study of human law, and he who
wishes to become a ripe scholar in many sciences, has much
more solid reasons for turning his back on the world’s toils and
pleasures. This fact sufficiently shews the ground on which
learned men are despised. Yet the glorious memory of the man
who increases day by day in the knowledge of truth, can never
perish. The man who loves wisdom, justice, and grace, may be
rejected in many places, but time will circle his brow with a crown
of gold. In the meantime, we must expect that those who love
knowledge for its own sake shall be scorned by the ignorant
multitude. Nevertheless, it should be borne in mind that though
many devote themselves to this study for the sake of mere gain,
yet avarice and science are incompatible yoke-fellows ; he whose
affections are set on mere lucre, will never discover the secrets of
this Art. But he who delights in knowledge for its own sake
approaches the study of our Art in the right spirit, and. such a
man is bound to succeed. There is no need to lengthen out this
chapter any further, since we have already set forth who they are
that may, with reasonable hope of success, apply themselves to
the study of sacred Alchemy. Let me repeat that any such per-
son should be a faithful Christian, and a man who is not easily
moved from his purpose. He should be free from ambition, free
from the necessity of borrowing from others, full of patience and
endurance, and of unwavering confidence in God. He should be
prepared to follow knowledge through good and evil report. His
life should be free from guilt, falsehood, and sin. Such men alone
possess mental aptitude for becoming proficients in this science.
The next chapter deals with joy and sorrow.

CHAPTER II.

In Normandy there once lived a monk, who deceived many
persons of different ranks in life. When his mind had become

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY, 19

‘filled with the vain conceit that he had a perfect knowledge of
‘this, Art, he gave himsclf up to such violent joy that he almost
“went out of his senses. Whose preposterous zeal | will attempt
to excuse by adding the foilowing brief narrative for the sake of
illustgation :— :

‘ This monk had led a vagrant life in France, in forgetfulness
of his vow, and in the indulgence of his low desires. At last he
came to this kingdom, and attempted to persuade all men that
he had a perfect understanding of the Art of Alchemy, which he
said he had obtained from a certain “ Book of Recipes.” He
was desirous of achieving a mighty deed, which should hand
down the glory of his name to posterity, and for ever establish
his reputation in this island, He was always thinking how he

‘should spend the vast wealth which (he thought) he would soon
be able to procure. At last he said to himself: “Behold, I
know where [ shall find a faithful man, who can aid me in this
matter, and help me to the fulfilment of my wish: which is, to |
erect in a glorious manner on Salisbury Plain, fifteen magnificent
Abbeys in a short space of time, and each within a mile of the

. other.” In pursuance of this design, the monk came to me, and
laid open his whole plan, at the same time requesting me to
assist him with my counsel. I have promised before the shrine
of Saint James not to divulge his name ; but yet I may without
prejudice to my vow speak about his foolish undertaking.
After telling me of his proficiency in this glorious Art, he
said that he wanted nothing but an opportunity of labouring for
the King’s good, and permission from the Council to buy land
for the aforesaid Abbeys. As to the expense, he said it would
be easy for him to make it good. But he was in great doubt,
where, from whom, and how he was to purchase the land. After
listening to the exposition of his lofty design, I desired to test
his learning and his knowledge of scholastic science; and I
found that in these branches of attainment he was sadly to seek.
Yet 1 contained myself, and kept my own counsel, in order that
I might learn more about his designs. So I told him that the
matter was not of sufficient importance to be laid before the
King, for everyone would look upon the same as an idle tale, if
no proof of his pretensions was forthcoming. The monk
answered that he had in the fire a substance which would supply

. B2

26 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

him with all that he needed, and that within forty days
he could triumphantly demonstrate to me the truth of his
words. I replied that I would not now press him any
further, but that I would wait the allotted time. But when
the date which he had fixed arrived, the monk’s science
evaporated, and all his Abbeys and lofty designs vanished into
thin air ; as the impostor had come, so he departed, not without
great shame and confusion. But shortly afterwards I heard that
he had deceived many kind-hearted people; and had then again
returned to France. It seemed a great pity that fifteen abbeys,
seats of religion,sanctity, and learning, should so unceremoniously
have vanished with him! It was also wonderful that such a man
could have deluded himself into the belief that he could erect
fifteen abbeys, while he himself could not live true to his vow of
obedience,and must needs wander about as an apostate vagabond,
for the purpose of obtaining a knowledge of this sacred Art.
But I have already repeatedly said that just because it is sacred,
no false or deceitful person can attain to it. In order to illustrate
my meaning, I will now add anotherexample. There wasa man
who thought that he was as deeply versed in this Art as
Raymond Lullius or Friar Bacon, for which reason he was so
presumptuous as to call himself peerless. He was the priest of
a small town, not far from the city of London, and was thought
by others to have little skill in preaching. This man felt sure
that he had discovered the secret of our Art, and so, in order to
advance his fame, he formed the design of throwing a bridge
over the Thames for the benefit of travellers, and for the con-
venience of the whole neighbourhood. But nothing would serve
him but he must set up a grand and lofty structure which should
compel the admiration of all beholders. It was to have towers
covered with flaming gold, and its pillars were to be such as had
never been seen before. He frequently spoke of the new thing
which he was going to accomplish, for his bridge was to be seen
far and wide by night, and was to endure for ever ; its glory was
never to grow dim. Then he revolved different plans in his
mind concerning the best manner of carrying out his design.

At first he thought that flaming torches would answer his pur-
pose, and elaborated a plan of setting them up in sufficient
numbers. But soon he was seized with a fear that after his

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 21

death the trustees of his benefaction’ might neglect the torches,
and apply the money allotted to that purpose in some other way,
Thus he at length arrived at the conclusion that it would be best
to light up his bridge by night with great flaming gems and
carbuncles, such as should be visible far and wide, and radiate
their splendour in all directions. But here again he was troubled
with new misgivings, where such carbuncles could be found, and
where he should meet with wise and reliable men, who would
travel through all the countries of the world, and procure for him
a sufficient number of these jewels. These thoughts caused him
so much anxiety, that he wasted away to a mere shadow. All
this time, of course, he was firmly persuaded that he had found
the true secret of our Art. But. when the year came to an end,
his Art and all his substance vanished with it; for he had opened
his glass vessel and found that it contained neither gold nor
silver. Then he flew into a great passjon, and cursed himself in
the bitterness of his heart. For he had spent all his wealth, and
passed the rest of his life in poverty. What more shall I say
about him? His case speaks for itself.

When learned scholars and those who frequent the schools
hear.of the melancholy fate of these foolish persons, they ought
to take warning, and remember that the same things may
happen to themselves, if they are not constantly on their guard.
For many of them afe but too ready lightly to receive all con-
clusions, however false, if they only find them boldly asserted in
books. This easy and unquestioning confidence may bring in
its train poverty and vexation of spirit. The hope afforded by
such teaching is an empty delight and a veritable fools’ paradise.
But the true sons of our Art stay their hope on God alone, since
they know that without Him everything is a delusion and a
failure, for they know that a man who has not the Beginning of
all Knowledge cannot conduct his enquiry to a successful end.
No man, O God, can comprehend without Thee, and though the
exposition of the Art be uttered in his ears, without Thee it is
but idle breath to him! Of Thee, O God, comes all blessed
and successful effort! Thou art of all good things both the
beginning and the end. Now I have told you something of
the joy which is caused by the vain hopes of foolish enquirers ;
hear now also about the sorrow, Of which this Art has been

22 THE HERMETIC: MUSEUM.

a soyrce to many whose hopes have been grievously disap-
pointed.

The first cause of sorrow is to see and realize that among
the many who seek this Art only few ever find it, and that no
one can attain this knowledge unless he be taught before he
begins; and he is truly learned, and finely endowed, who can
apprehend it by the teaching of another. The subtle shades of
natural differences must be well known to the man who desires
to be initiated in the most profound secret of the universe ; and
no form of words can be so accurate as to safeguard the learner
against error. For many who have now departed this life have
gone widely astray before they finally succeeded in their
search after our Stone. Either at the very outset, or at a
later stage of the work, all are liable to error, until they are
enlightened by the teaching of experience, and hit upon the
proper regulation of heat and cold. Nobody is more liable
to error in respect to this matter than your bold and over-
confident enquirer. Nobody sooner mars our work, than he
who is in too great a hurry to complete it. The man who
would bring this matter to perfection, should set about it
cautiously and heedfully. The most grievous circumstance
connected with our Art, is that it you make a mistake in any
part of it, you have to do it all over again from the very
beginning. Anyone who gives himself up to this search must
therefore expect to meet with much vexation of spirit. He will
frequently have to change his course in consequence of new
discoveries which he makes. His experiments will often turn
out failures, his mind will often be in a state of doubt and
perplexity ; and thus he will continue to be vexed by
conflicting results, until at length he reaches the goal of his
desire. Again, let me tell you a little more about the
sorrows and troubles of the Alchemist, which may considerably
moderate your desire to acquire the practice of this Art. At
first it is most difficult, as the Sages say, to find out among so
many impostors, the man who has a perfect understanding of
our science. And when you have found a truly learned master,
you have not yet by any means left all your trouble far behind you.
If your mind is devoted to virtue, the Devil will do his utmost to
frustrate your search by one or the other of three stumbling blocks,

THE ORDINAL OF: ALCHEMY. a3

namely, haste, despair, or deception. For he is afraid of the
good works which you may do if you succeed in mastering this
secret. The first danger lies in undue haste, which destroys and
mars the work of many. All authors who have written about
this Art, agree in saying, like the author of the little book of
“The Philosopher’s Feast,” that undue haste is of the Devil.
Hence he will the soonest make an end who tarries a little at
the beginning ; and those who act otherwise will discover to
their cost the truth of the proverb which says that: “The greater
haste we make, the less will be our speed.” For he who is in a
hurry will complete his work neither in a month, nor yet in a
year ; and in this Art it will always be true that the man who is
in a hurry will never be without matter of complaint. Rest
assured also that haste will precipitate you from the pinnacle of
truth. It is the Devil’s subtlest device to ensnare us ; for this’
haste is an zgnis-fatuus by which he causes -us to wander from
the right path. The man who has found grace stoutly sets his
face against hurry ; he does so as a matter of habit, for in a
moment of time haste may mar your whole work. Therefore be
on your guard against hurry, accounting it as a device of the
Devil. Time will not allow me to caution you with sufficient
vehemence of feeling against habits of hurried work. Many
- pierce themselves through with sharp sorrows, because they are
always in a hurry, and full of impatience to reach the goal,
which comes about through the temptation of Satan. I will
say no more about hurry, but blessed is he who possesses
patience, If the enemy does not prevail against you by hurry,
he will assault you with despondency, and will be constantly
putting into your minds discouraging thoughts, how those who
seek this Art are many, while they are few that find it, and how
those who fail are often wiser men than yourself. He will then
ask you what hope there can be of your attaining the grand
arcanum ; moreover, he will vex you with doubts, whether your
master is himself possessed of the secret which he professes to
impart to you; or whether he is not concealing from you the
best part of that which he knows. The Evil One will endeavour
to fill your mind with these doubts, in order to turn you from
your purpose by diffidence and despondency. Nor will anything
avail against his assaults, except the calm confidence inspired

2, THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

by virtue, and the sound conclusions of reason. Your fears will
be. scattered to the winds if you quietly consider the high -
character of your master and teacher; nor need you déspair if
you can call to mind that he was induced to instruct you by
love, and by no selfish motive. It is difficult indeed to trust a
man who offers you his services ; for such a person stands more
in need of you than you of him. But if your master be such a
man as I have directed you to seek, and if he has waited for
you to come to him, you ought to be strongly armed against
the shafts of distrust. If your master be at all such a man as
mine was, you can have no excuse for doubting him, for mine
was noble and true, a lover of justice, and an enemy to
deceit. Moreover, he was a good keeper of his secret, and
when others ostentatiously displayed their knowledge, he held
his peace as if he knew nothing. When others talked in his
presence about the colours of the rose, he would listen in grave
and impenetrable silence. Him I attended during many years ;
but he would not impart to me anything of moment, until he had
made me submit to many tests for the purpose of proving my
disposition ; and when he had found me faithful and true, and
had seen the great hope which I had conceived in my mind, I
obtained favour in his eyes through the will of God, and his
heart inclined tome. When at length he thought that I should
not be put off any longer—since my scholarly attainments and
the generous aspiration of my soul had moved his heart, and
made it go out to me—he took up his pen, and wrote to me as
follows: “ My faithful friend and beloved brother, I am con-
strained to accede to your request, asno other person like
you will ever come to me. The time has arrived for you
to receive this favour of me on account of your manly
character and firm faith, your approved virtue and wisdom,
your truthfulness, love, and perseverance, your constancy, and
‘the generous,aspiration of your soul. This your excellent
mental condition I will now reward, to your lasting solace
and comfort, by divulging to you the mighty secret. For this
purpose it is necessary to converse with you by word of mouth ;
if I laid open to you the secret in writing, | should be violating
my oath. Hence it is necessary that we should meet ; and when
you come, I will make you the heir of my Art, and depart from,

THE ORDINAL .OF ALCHEMY, ‘25
this land. You shall be my brother and my heir jin respect of
this grand secret, which is the despair of the learned. For this
reason give thanks to God for this message : it is better than to
become heir-apparent to a crown. For only those whom God
has chosen next to His own heavenly saints, ever receive this
Art by which He is so highly honoured. 1 will write no more
to you at the present time: mount on horseback, and come to me
without delay.” When I had perused these lines, I set out at
the very same hour, and at once hastened to my master, though
the distance exceeded a hundred miles, I continued with him
forty days, and learned all the secrets of Alchemy (although
before I had understood philosophy as well as any other person
in the kingdom). Yet it would be foolish to suppose that the
work itself can be completed within forty days: I say that 1 was
fully instructed within that time, but the work: itself requires a
longer period. Then all that had been dark became as clear as
the light, when I beheld the secret gates of. Nature unbarred ; I
saw so plainly the causes and the rationale of everything, that it
_was no longer possible for me to doubt ordespair. Ifyou are as
fortunate in your master as I, you will never be assailed by
despondency.
The third enemy against whom you must guard is deceit,
and this one is perhaps more dangerous than the other two, The
’ servants whom you must employ to feed your furnaces are fre-
quently most untrustworthy. Some are careless, and go to sleep
when they should be attending to the fire ; others are depraved,
and do you all the harm they can ; others, again, are either stupid
or conceited and over-confident, and disobey instructions ; some
have fingers retentive of. other people’s property, or they are .
drunken, negligent, and absent-minded. Be on your guard
against all these, if you wish to be spared some great loss. If
servants are faithful, they are generally stupid ; those who are
quick-witted, are generally also false ; and it is difficult to say
whether the deceitful or the stupid are the greater evil of the two.
For when I had all my experiments in proper train, some
thievish servants ran away with my materials and utensils, and
left me nothing but the empty laboratory ; and when I calculated
the cost, time, and labour of beginning the work all over again,
I had almost in the bitterness of my heart resolved to bid an

26 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

everlasting farewell to this Art of Alchemy. For it will hardly
be believed how completely I had been stripped of all that I
possessed, although ten trustworthy persons still survive to attest
the fact. Indeed the blow was so great that it could hardly have
been inflicted on me by human agency alone, without the insti-
gation and co-operation of the Devil. [I also made an Elixir of
Life, of which a merchant’s wife bereft me, and I procured a
quintessence, with many other precious preparations, but of all
these things I was robbed by wicked men, and thus found, to my
smart, that in the sweetest cup of this world’s joy, there is a
liberal infusion of bitterness. Let me tell you a little more of
what has fallen under my observation, concerning the perplexities
of this work. The calamity of which I am thinking happened
to a good and godly man; and I am the only person that can
give a true account of it.

Thomas Dalton, a devout and religious servant of God,
possessed a larger quantity of the Red Medicine than has ever
been obtained by any other Englishman. Nowa certain knight
of King Edward’s household, named Thomas Herbert, dragged
this Dalton forth by violence from an abbey in Gloucestershire,
and brought him before the King, where he was confronted with
Delvis. For Dalton had been scribe (secretary) to this William
Delvis, and Delvis had told the King about Dalton’s skill in this
Art. Delvis was a faithful servant, who always stood in the
presence of King Edward, and he deposed that within an hour
Dalton had made for himself one thousand pounds sterling of
gold, fully equal to that of the royal coin: and he confirmed his
testimony by a most sacred oath upon the Bible. Then Dalton
looked full upon Delvis, and said: “O Delvis, thou hast per-
jured thyself! Thou hast foully broken the pledge thou gavest
me, and hast betrayed me even as Judas betrayed his Master.”
“I did, indeed,” rejoined Delvis, “once swear to thee that I
would not betray thy secret; yet I do not consider myself as
guilty’ of perjury, since the service of my King and country
release me from my oath.” Then Dalton soberly answered him
thus: “This subterfuge does not excuse thy perjury ; for if it
did, how could the King himself trust thee, who hast confessed
thy perjury in-his presence ? And,” he continued, turning to His
Majesty, “I do admit that I possessed this Medicine for a long

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 27

time ; but at length it was only a source of grief and anxicty to
me—and therefore after retiring to that abbey from which I was
brought hither, I threw it into a tidal river which is daily
renewed by the ebb and flow of the sea. Thus as much wealth
has been lost as would have sufficed for the outfit and support
of twenty thousand knights, who might have been willing to go
forth and recover the Holy Sepulchre. For the love of God, I
kept this Medicine many years, in order that through its means
I might succour a King who should undertake this expedition.
But as this sacred duty was forgotten, the Medicine is now
irrecoverably lost.” The King replied that it was a foolish
act to destroy so wonderful a treasure, and demanded that
Dalton should prepare some more of the Medicine. “No,” said
Dalton, “ that can never be.” “Why nct ?” enquired the King.
“ How did you obtain it?” Dalton replied that he had received
it from a learned Canon of Lichfield, whose works he had
diligently attended to during many years, until at length the
Canon had bequeathed to him as much of the Medicine as he
had ever possessed. Then the King gave Dalton four marks,
with liberty to depart withersoever he- desired ; and, at parting,
he expressed his grief and concern that he had not known Dalton
before. But as it oftens happens that the worst tyrants are
found in the retinues of kings, so Herbert now caused Dalton to be
seized, robbed of the money which the King had given him, and
carried off to Stepney, where he detained him a long time.
Thence Dalton was conveyed by Herbert to a castle in
Gloucestershire, cast into the dungeon thereof, and kept close
prisoner for four years, during which period he was tormented
by Herbert in every conceivable manner. At length he was led
forth to execution, and when he saw the ministers of death, he
said : “O blessed Lord Jesus, I have been separated from Thee
too long: Thou didst give me this knowledge, and I have used
it without overweening pride. I have not been able to find a
fit person to whom I might have bequeathed my wisdom.
Therefore, dearest Lord, I now resign Thy gift into Thy own
hands.” Then he poured forth a devout prayer, and thereupon
turned to the executioner and said, with a smile, “ Now thou
mayest work thy will.”

When Herbert heard these words, his eyes filled with tears,

28 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

because neither deceit, imprisonment, nor death could induce
his victim to yield up the precious secret; and he bade his
servants let the old man go, as his obstinacy was not to be over-
come. Then Dalton arose, looked about him with sadness and
disappointment depicted in his countenance, and departed with
a heavy heart; for he had no desire to live even another year.
This injury happened to him through the greed and cruelty of
godless men. Herbert died not long after, and Delvis lost his
life at Tewkesbury. Such are the sufferings which they who
aspire to a knowledge of this Art, must lay their account with
having to bear. Yet we also see how the greed of wicked men
over-reaches itself. For if Herbert had treated Dalton with
kindness and gentleness, instead of with cruelty, insolence, and
violence, much advantage might have been reaped not only by
the King, but also by the entire commonwealth. Yet we need not
wonder that gracious means were not used, for sin reigns every-
where in this kingdom. Otherwise, the people might have
obtained great relief from rates and taxes, and much money
might have been bestowed in charity among knights, priests, and
the common people. Hence we may learn that profligate
viglence is incapable of acquiring wisdom; for virtue and vice
are contrary the one to the other, and men abandoned to the one
cannot receive the reward of the other. If vicious persons could
gein a full knowledge of this Art, their overbearing insolence
would grow unendurable, and their ambition would overleap all
bounds ; they would by its means become worse men than they
were before. Now this chapter respecting the delights and
sufferings of our Art is finished. The next will declare the
Matter of our Stone.

CHAPTER III.

Tonsilus had been engaged in the momentous search
during more than sixty years. Bryan, too, and Halton, in the
western parts, had been employed day and. night in practical
experiments ; yet they did not find this noble science, because
they did not know the Matter and root of the Art, but sought it
by a mistaken method, until they had wasted their lives and
goods, They were put to great éxpense, loss, and suffering, by
the recipes according to which they -worked. Then Tonsil

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 29

complained to me with tears that he was in great bitterness of
soul, because he had spent the better part of his life on false
receipts, vile substances, herbs, gums, roots, and grasses, of which
he enumerated many species, as, for-instance, crowfoot, celandine,
mezerion, lunaria, and mortagon-—also upon hair, eggs vervein,
excrements, and urine—upon antimony, arsenic, honey, wax, and
wine—on quicklime, vitriol, marchasita, and all kinds of minerals
—on amalgams, albifications, and ¢citrinations. All had been
reduced to nothing by his operations ; for he had not well con-
sidered his purpose, and the due proportions of natural truth.
After he had failed with all these substances he thought nothing
could be better than to operate on human blood, until I told him
that by a fierce fire blood was destroyed, and converted into
smoke.. Then he besought me by the love of Christ to declare
to him the true substance of the Stone. “Tonsil,” I replied,
“what good would it do an old man like you? Renounce this
pursuit and give yourself up to prayer; for that is what your
time of life requires. If you did know the substance of our
Stone, you would fall a victim to old age before you could
prepare it.” But he bade me not to trouble myself about what
might be the result to himself. “It would be a comfort to me
at least to know the substance of the Stone which I have sought
so long.” “Tonsil,” I said, “your request is more easily made
ethan granted. For all the authors who deal with this subject
write about it in obscure language, and not one of them declares
it plainly ; nay, they beseech God to remove them suddenly out
of this world, if they ever write books about the grand secret.
For many of them have been fearful of committing to. paper
more than was right about this science; and not one of them
has given more than one or two plain hints respecting it. They
, did not write with the object of divulging their secret to the
world, but in an obscurely allusive style, in order that they
might be able to recognize those who understood their meaning
“as brothers and fellow adepts. Hence you must not be content
with reading only one book, but you should study a variety of
authors; because, according to the learned Arnold, one book
opens up the understanding of another. Tht same thought is
expressed by the learned Anaxagoras, who testifies that
if a man will not take the trouble of reading many books,’

30 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

he can never attain to a practical knowledge of our Art.
But though I may not reveal to you for the sake of
charity what has never yet been plainly set forth by the
brethren of our Art, [ may at least give you some comfort by
answering as straightforwardly as I can, any questioris which
you may like to put to me.” “Good Master,” he replied, “tell
me truly whether the substance be Sun (gold) and Mercury, or
Sun and Moon (silver), or whether these three must -be taken
together ; or whether it be Gold by itself, or Mercury by itself,
or whether Sulphur with these two be the substance of the
Stone? Or, is salt of ammonia nearer the truth, or is some other
mineral the right thing to use in our Art?” “The questions
. you have put, Tonsil, are wisely and astutely conceived ;
neverthelesss, you. have not named the substance, except.
generically. For you must take a part of these, and of other
things at various times, according to the requirements of the
Art. Divers things are used in the preparation of our Stone,
but there are two materials, and only one Stone. Between the
two there is the same difference as that between a mother and
her offspring ; or, looking at the matter from another point of
view, the difference resembles that which exists between male
and female. These two substances will furnish you with all that
you need. As for the white Tincture, if you are wise, one of these
you shall find to be a Stone, which is rightly named, because, like*
a stone, it is indestructible by fire. Yet it is not like a stone to
the touch or the sight, but is a fine earthy powder, of a dull red.
In its separate form we call it our ground litharge ; at first it is
brown and ruddy, and then of a whitish colour. It is called our
chosen Marcasite, and one ounce of it is worth more than fifty
pounds. Yet is it not sold in the cities of Christendom, but he
who desires it, must either get it made by someone else, or
prepare it himself. There is this advantage concerning it, that
to make it once well dispenses with all need of repeating the
task. Ancient writers call it a thing of small price, because
it is lightly esteemed by the merchants, and no one that finds it
cares to pick it up, any more than if it were an ounce of dirt.
Few will believe that it is a pearl of great price, for it is known
to none but the wise. Thus have I laid bare to you a great
secret, more plainly than any of the dead masters. Then,

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 31

Tonsilus, you must also have another Stone, or else you want
your principal material. This Stone is most glorious, fair, and
bright. It is sold as a stone, and looks like a stone of singular
transparency and brilliance. One ounce of it may, in most
places, be obtained for about twenty shillings. Its name is
Magnesia, but its real nature is known to few. It is found
on the tops of the highest mountains, and in the lowest
depths of the earth Plato knew its properties and called
it by its name. Chaucer says, in the Canon’s Tale, that it
is called Dytanos, thus defining an obscure term in language
still more hopelessly obscure ; but it is impossible to understand
a thing if for one unintelligible term another still less intelligible
is substituted. Nevertheless, my Tonsilus, I will endeavour to
explain to you the meaning of Magnesia in our own tongue.
Magos is Greck, and is equivalent to the Latin mzrabile ; aes is
money, ycos, science ; A is God ; that is to say, it isa matter in
which much divine knowledge i is involved. Now you know what
Magnesia is—it is res aerzs, and in it lies hidden a wonderful and
divine secret. These two stones, my Tonsilus, you must take as
your materials for the préparation of the Elixir. Although at
first no further materials are needed, yet, as I have already
hinted, divers other things are of great use in our Art. The
great secret was never before so plainly expounded. But take
my explanation in all its fulness; and I will pray God, lest
my excess of frankness be reckoned to me for a crime—for |
fear that I have suffered my pen to run riot. Though few may
understand what [ have said, yet there are some students of this
Art so subtle, cunning, and keen-witted, that still fewer data
would suffice to them for the discovery of all that we know.
. Nevertheless, God shall provide that none shall find it except the
_ man ofa _pure and virtdous life. It was with this end in view
that the ancient writers concealed with so much solicitude the
matters of our Stone, which J] have here declared. You need no
other substances but these two for the preparation of the white
Stone, except salt of ammonia, and that kind of sulphur which
is exttactd from metals. ~PRSSE WO GUBSEANCES Suthice for the”
ment of your desire ; none but these two finally abide the
‘est of the fire. Sulphur is burned, and loses its colour. But
our Litharge is indestructible. Do not set about with any
pr pe a ee ne

32 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

metal or quicksilver. If you destroy its whole composition,
some of its component parts will be of use to you. But the
principal substances are the two which I have mentionéd, namely,
Magnesia and Litharge, its brother.”

CHAPTER IV.

I will not attempt to escape from the task which I have
undertaken to expound the great work: [ will instruct you as
fully as possible in this secret, and all my endeavour shall be to
make known to you the truth. As far as I may do so without
prejudice to my vow, I will be your guide, and shew you the way
to the goal of your desire. If you consider into what a state of
obscurity and confusion the different parts of this work have been
wilfully thrown by the old writers, you will understand the diffi-
culty ‘of my task. None of them has declared more than one
point of our experiment ; and for this reason their writings, even
if you understand them, will not enable you to practise the Art
yourself. Arnold testifies in his books that the central secret of
our Art is to know the substance on which it is based; and in
his work “Multifary,” where he shews how pure and simple
essences are to be recognised, he says that our fundamental
matter is of two kinds ; but he does not tell us how they are to
be found. Their names you have already learned in the last
chapter. Friar Bacon dwells more fully on this point, where he
says: “Divide all parts into their cognate elements. For the
unlearned do not proceed in this way ; but they continue perti-
naciously and senselessly to add more and more to a divisible
substance—and while they fancy that they are on the point of
bringing to perfection the flower of our Art, all that they really
effect is the multiplication of error.” In this passage Bacon, like
his predecessors, appears fearful of sayfmg too much. Perhaps
you also remember what Avicenna says, in his “Gate”: “You
must go forward to perfection by true teaching in accordance
with the facts of Nature : you.must eat to drink, and drink to eat,
and in the mean season be covered with perspiration.” Rhasis
expresses himself to the same effect, but warns us against suffering
the matter to consume its food too quickly :_“ Let it assimilate
its aliment little by little.” Of this rule the Prophet also makes
mention, if you rightly comprehend his meaning: “ Thou hast

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 33

visited the earth,” he says, “and watered it: Thou hast multiplied
its wealth: the fruitful land hast Thou turned into a dry place,
and the arid land into a river of water.” When it has plenty of
meat and drink, it is needful to watch at a time when the body
craves sleep. For our labour demands constant vigils and great
diligence, and it must be nourished and fed with precious sub-
stances. “Therefore let all poor-men eschew this experiment,”
says Arnold, “as this Art is for the rich of this world ”—and I
myself can attest to ail poor men the truth of these words.
“ Moreover,” he continues, “ let the enquirer be patient and of an
even temper, for those who are ina hurry will never reach the
goal.” The length of time required for the purification of the
substance, is a stone of stumbling to many who will not believe
in it. I advise you, therefore, ye poor, not to attempt the solution
of this mystery, but to stay your hands before it is too late. One
fourth of an ounce too much or too little may in a single hour
mar and destroy the labour of weeks. The substance you must
prepare with gentle heat, and so long as there is no violent
effervescence, you may keep it over the fire: you should gradu-
ally consume it by gentle coction, but it must not be suffered
to throw up great bubbles, as such a course would be indicative
of haste. Gentleness and patience will mark out to you the
safest method, and enable you to avoid the manifold dangers
which beset the enquirer’s path. One of the most difficult
experiments in the gross work, is the classification of our
intermediate minerals. The different media that are used must
. all be in a highly purified state, if the work is to be brought to a
successful conclusion. For the pureand impure, the mature and
immature, are by nature violently opposed to each other; that
which is fixed naturally adheres to fixed substances, and volatile
substances are sympathetically attracted by that which is volatile.
Everywhere Nature strives to produce harmony by drawing like
to like. Now you will find our gross work to be generically
impure; and it is a matter of great difficulty and danger,
requiring the utmost wisdom of the wise, and confounding the
folly of the ignorant, to purge our Substance from all foreign
matter. The learned as well as the simple are often led astray
at this point, and prove the truth of the saying of Anaxagoras,
that all men need to be taught discretion by bitter experience.

Vou, II, Cc

34. THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Once I heard a wise man say that, at the present time, magnesia
(in a pure state) is sold in Catalonia, together with the other
intermediate minerals, so that the hands of a fastidious man
need now no longer be defiled with this dirty work ; and if this’
were really true, both the commencement and the consummation
of your work would be a much easier matter than it is under
ordinary conditions. For if you are compelled to do all that I
have had to accomplish, you will be wearied out before you
reach the work proper. The work of the Sages does not begin
until all substances are pure, both without and within. Let us
remember that as we are seeking a tincture which imparts per-
fection to all things else, we must remove from it all that is foul
and vile. Of the different media, each has its own properties,
and its own function to perform, according to its essential
nature; of those media by which our experiment is advanced,
some are of their own nature helpful, and others are harmful.
Our Apothecaries do not understand the secret of their prepara-
tion, and we refuse to instruct them, because we know that they
would adulterate them (for the purpose of deceiving their
customers) rather than take diligent and conscientious pains to
let their drugs be genuine and pure. It is their practice (as I
know by bitter experience) to ask a high price, and to furnish
an untrustworthy article. Ifa man would have materials on
which he may rely, he must not be afraid of soiling his own
hands, nor must he shun expense, though it may swallow up
all his hoarded wealth. In the gross work that man is
furthest from the goal who is in too great a hurry to reach it.
If our great work, with all that belongs to it, could be accom-
plished in three years, artists might account themselves fortuntae ;
for when it has once been brought to a satisfactory conclusion,
there is no need to undertake it a second time, if indeed one is
skilled in the art of augmenting his medicine; and the attain-
ment of this skill is one of the great objects of our Magistery.
There is no need for me to name in this place the different
minerals which are required, seeing that Albertus has most fully
discussed this point. I might say much about the properties of
minerals ; but the discussion would prove barren of results in
the advancement of our Art. One of the most important
conditions of success is the mechanical skill in the manipulation

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 35

of experiments ; in regard to these it is possible to go astray in
a thousand ways, the path being beset with all but insurmount
able difficulties at every step, Therefore, believe that which the
ancient writers tell us—that nothing can be rightly done without
experierice. - Consider all circumstances, and take care to secure
uniformity in all that is required. Use one vessel which is
simple both in material and in shape; beware of one made of
mixed matcrial, lest some accident happen at a critical moment.
This general admonition will save me the trouble of laying
down, and you the trouble of remembering, a hundred special
cautions ; and this instruction may suffice for him who is wisely
intent on the practice of our Art. If your servants are faithful
and true, you will be able to carry out your experiments without
constant vexation. Therefore, if you would be free from all fear,
over the gross work, follow my counsel, and never engage
married men; for they soon give in and pretend that they are
tired out, as [ can assure you from my own experience.
Hire your workmen for certain stipulated wages, and not for
longer periods than twenty-four hours at a time. Give them
higher wages than they would receive elsewhere, and be prompt
and ready in your’ payments. For your kindness will stir up
in their hearts love and reverence, and a spirit of zeal in the
conduct of the work committed to them ; for they know withal
that they are liable to be discharged at onceif they are negligent
in your service. Married men will not agree to be engaged for
such short periods ; therefore, give them a wide berth. If I had
known and acted on this principle before, I might have been
spared much loss and vexation. [n the pursuit of our Art, you
must preserve at all times your liberty of action ; and you
should also take care, from time to time, to unbend your mind
from its sterner employments with some convenient recreation ;
otherwise your spirts might be weighed down with melancholy
and despair, and you might lose heart for the continuation of
-your work. There is no need to add much to this chapter, for
the ancient writers have already fully set forth all that I have
not yet touched upon. But that which they have omitted is
most plainly expounded in this Book. Hence it is called the
Ordinal of Alchemy, the supplement of all other works on
the subject.‘ The following chapter is for the initiated, and
: C2

°

36. THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

shews all the rules to be observed in the subtle part of the
work.

CHAPTER V.

When Briseus was a money-changer, he caused loss to
many persons, but to others his dealings were a source of delight
and joy; and as this fact seemed at the time a wonder and
marvel to all who heard of it, so in our own time—not so very
long ago—an almost miraculous event was observed to take
place: within the short space of ten days the same bed in a
house near Leadenhall was successively occupied by three
Masters of this Art, every one of whom possessed both the
white and the red Tincture ; though hardly one person amongst
a million of men ever becomes possessed of the glorious prize.
One of them, as I was told, was from the Duchy of Lorraine,
the second hailed from the Midland Counties of England, the
third was the youngest, and was born near a Cross, which stands
at the boundary of three shires. Wise men had foretold from
the conjunction of planets that prevailed at his birth, that he
would be an ornament to England. Anyone might travel
through the length and breadth of Europe without meeting with
three such Masters. Two of them are about to depart, but the
third will remain and do much good in this part of the world.
Nevertheless, the sins of our rulers will delay the good which
otherwise he might confer upon our country at once. The
oldest of the three Masters prophesied concerning this young
adept, that he would have to endure much suffering at the hands
of those who owed him the greatest debt of gratitude. He
also uttered many other prophecies, some of which were verified
by the event, while the rest. remain to be fulfilled. “One thing
is most certain,” he said, “ after great sorrow there will be great
joy in all parts of this country—joy which will be experienced
by all good men.” The youth enquired when this thing should
be, and the old man’s answer was that it should come to pass
when the Cross was honoured by night and by day in the land
of God, and the land of Light : which thing will happen in due
time, but is delayed by the grevious wickedness of men. But
when the blessed hour arrives, this Art will be revealed to a
King ; and more glorious things will then be brought to pass

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. wy

than it is possible for us to enumerate in this place, when he
shall have reformed our manners and abolished all abuses. He
will investigate this science in secret, and will be instructed in it
by hermits, or monks. So King Calid, in his time of need,
sought this knowledge of many, until it was imparted to him by
Morienus, who succoured the King with his counsel, being
removed thereto by his nobleness and virtue. But now we will
speak of this subject no longer, but proceed to give an account
of the subtle work. He that would understand it must be
deeply learned. He should know elementary philosophy if he
wishes to study Alchemy. ‘
Now, let me tell you who are intent upon this Art, that
when materials have by preparation been rendered fit for
generation, they must by division be separated into four
elements. If you cannot do this, go and learn of Hortulanus,
who has written a special treatise on the subject—in which
treatise he shews how to divide wine into its elements. More-
over, you should know the effects of the four qualities—heat, cold,
moisture, and dryness—of which all things are composed ; and
because in this Art you are specially desirous of obtaining a
colour which abides the fire, you ought also to know, before you
set about its production, how colours are generated. For every
colour that can be named is seen in our work, before the white
colour appears. Moreover, you must be able to melt your
substance easily, like wax or gum. Otherwise, according to the
Masters, it could not enter or penetrate metals. The substance
should be both fixed and fluxible, and have abundance of colour.
To conjoin these three contraries in one substance, is the great
secret of our Art. Nevertheless, an apt learner may find it
expounded in this chapter. And first—to speak as briefly and
concisely as possible concerning the aforesaid four primary
qualities: heat and cold are active qualities; moisture and
dryness, on the other hand, are qualities of a passive kind. For
the latter are always passively subject to the former, as, for
instance, stones when they become lime, and water when it is
changed to ice. Whence you may easily see that nothing is
fully wrought except by heat andcold. Yet the passive qualities
have some power, as we find every day in mechanical operations,
in the baking of bread, the brewing of beer, and other processes

38 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

brought about by the operation of moisture and dryness.
Aristotle, in his physical treatise, and many others, say that
from action proceeds knowledge; thus they call practice the
source and root of speculation and of all science. For the
properties of all things are perceived by watching their opera-
tions, as, from the colour of urine we hear physicians draw
conclusions in regard to the excess or lack of animal heat in the

body. By means of those four primary qualities, we study the-
colours in the due order of their succession. But we can have
no real assurance respecting the white colour, except in a very

pure substance. You will be materially assisted in your task by
a knowledge of the way in which colours are daily generated.

Colour is the extremity of every transparent body ; a clear sub-
stance is here beautifully consummated. If dryness dominates in
a dry substance, its colour will most certainly be white. Of this

fact you may convince yourself by ocular proof in the case of
burned bones, or of quicklime made of stones. Where cold

prevails in a moist and clear substance, a white colour will be the
result, as is seen in the case of ice, or water indurated by frost.

The cause has already before been declared in our philosophy ;

but here I do not speak of common philosophy, but only adduce

these facts in illustration of alchemistic principles. And indeed

one fact explains another, as the offspring may be known by

looking at its mother. If heat operates on a thick and moist

substance, a black colour will be the result.

If you desire an illustration of this principle, you need only
put some green wood on the fire. When cold is brought to bear
on a thick and dry substance, the colour which is produced will
be black. The reason 1s that the substance is compact and very
thick, and under the influence of cold which is destructive of life,
the thickness causes obscurity and absence of light; and
negation of colour is blackness. Thus you may accept it for an
universal fact that a clear substance is a white substance. The
efficient cause is not always the same; it is sometimes heat, and
sometimes it is cold. But blackness and whiteness (as every one
knows) are the two extremes of colour. Hence your work
must begin with blackness, if whiteness is its final perfection.
Red—as the Sages say—is an intermediate colour between black
and white. Nevertheless you may believe what I say: Red

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 39

is the final colour in Alchemy. The Sages also tell us that pink
and orange are colours intermediate between white and red ;
and that green and grey are intermediate colours between red
and black. Flesh cotour is seen in very pure substances.
Physicians have discovered nineteen colours intermediate be-
tween white and black in urine; of these colours one is whitish,
like that of the onyx stone. Magnesia appears to partake of
this colour—though Magnesia throws out a mild, pure splendour
in the subtle stage of our Art ; and here we behold all colours
that ever were seen by mortal eye—a hundred colours, and
certainly a good many more than have been observed in urine ;
and in all those colours-our Stone must be found in all its
successive stages. In the ordering of your practical experiments,
and in conceiving the different parts of the work in your own
mind, you must have as many phases, or stages, as there are
colours. If you do not know the different stages of this Art,
you will find them in Raymond’s “General Exposition of
Alchemy.” Gilbert Kymer has indeed left us a fanciful book, in
which he describes seventeen proportions. But they do not
suffice for this science, of which he was never able to discover the
true secret, though he was profoundly learned in Medicine.
Such, however, is the strength of the human constitution, that it
often overcomes disease in spite of the doctor’s physic: and the
physician’s art is praised in many cases where his remedies had
nothing to do with the cure, or even retarded it. But the case is
different with respect to our mineral medicine ; for our Art is
raised far above all generations, and exists only in the wisdom
of the Artist,as any wise man may discover by experience. Thus,
the true foundation of Alchemy consists in the proper graduation
of the work, and in- the correct adjustment of heat and cold,
moisture and dryness; also in the knowledge that through these
qualities others are generated, such as hardness and softness,
heaviness and lightness, roughness and smoothness~ according to
the addition of these primary qualities in certain proportions of
weight, number, and measure. Under these three categories we
may range everything that God has made. For God has created
and ordered all things in accordance with certain proportions of
number, weight, and measure ; and if you depart from these pro-
portions, you destroy the harmony of Nature. It is therefore a

40 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

wise caution which is given by Anaxagoras, that we should not
proceed to join together our elements, until we have discovered
the exact proportion of weight .in which all the elements are
found in the substances with which we have to deal. Bacon says
that the Ancients have concealed nothing except these propor-
tions, respecting which they give us no information. For when
they speak of proportions, they bewilder the student with the
most contradictory assertions. If you wish to know the truth
about these proportions, you may obtain it by studying the works
of Albertus, Raymond, Bacon, and Anaxagoras the Elder. You
must collect your knowledge from the pages of these four writers,
as one of them by himself will not afford it. Though you under-
stand the secret of joining the four qualities together into one
cohesive whole, yet the more difficult task of combining the
different elements still remains to be accomplished. A proper
union has to be effected between earth and water on the one
hand, and air and fire on the other. Though the third and the
second are the most noble of all, yet the first and the fourth
cannot be excluded. Earth is the most useful element, and that
of which we have the greatest need. Here lies latent the possi- .
bility of growth and the power of generation; it is the earthy
litharge of our Stone. Without it there can be no generation
and no fixation thereof. For there is nothing fixed save earth
alone; all the other elements are volatile. Daily experience
teaches you that this is true of fire, water, and air. Fire is the
cause of éxpansion, and renders the substance capable of per-
mixtion ; but the transparent splendour and beautiful colour are
producéd through the influence of air. Moreover, when air is
condensed, it produces substances which are easily melted, such
as wax, butter, and gum ; these are liquefied by a very slight
degree of heat. Water purifies by ablution, and causes morti-
fying things to reviye. There is nothing wonderful in the
multiplication of fire, and it is greatly inferior to the power of
multiplication inherent in earth. For earth daily produces fresh
herbs, while one spark of fire is miraculously enlarged only when
it is fed with plenty of combustible matter. Fire and earth are the
only elements that are capable of multiplication, and they cause
the power of multiplication inherent in our Stone. Of this earth
Albertus the Great says, that among ali mineral substances

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 41

lithargyrium (which he describes at some length) is the most
suitable for our white Elixir. We will now proceed. to discuss
the conjunction of the elements; and, on this point, we may lay .
down the following rules : (1) Combine your elements grammati-
cally, in accordance with their own proper rules. These rules
are the principal instruments for aiding the learned in this work :

for the two greatest -contrarics_upon_carth_are_fixedness_and_
volatility.” All the grammarians,of England and France cannot
skilfto-teach you this concord. But this Ordinal can shew you
where you may learn it, namely, in the book called De Ardore.
(2) Join them together also after the manner of the rhetorician,
with purified and ornate essences. Inasmuch as your tincture
must be pure and fair, take pute earth, water, fire, and air. (3)
In accordance with logical methods, combine such things as
admit of a true and natural union. Many learned men, by
neglecting this precept, have lost all their labour and pains.
(4) Combine them also arithmetically, in accordance with
those subtle natural proportions, of which little was known
when Boéthius wrote: “Bind together the elements by num-
bers.” (5) Combine your elements musically, for two reasons :
first, on account of melody, which is based on its own proper
harmonies. Join them according to the rules which obtain
in music in the proportions which produce musical conson- .
ance; for these musical proportions closely resemble the
true proportions of Alchemy, at least, as far as the more
general aspects of our Art are concerned. Its more subtle
proportions you must learn from the writings of Raymond
and Bacon. Bacon discusses them allusively in his three
Epistles. Raymond expounds them more fully in his General
Treatise. Many who read his words think that they understand
them, but they are deceived. (6) Combine your elements also
by means of Astrology, that all their operations may prosper,
and that the simple, rude, and unformed substance may, in due
course of time, and in the proper order of its development, be
brought to perfection through the blessed influences of the
Stars. (7) The science of perspective (optics) also affords much
help to those who labour in our noble Art ; and it is mater-
ially advanced by many other sciences, (8) as, for instance, that
science which deals with the plenum and the vacuum. But, as

42 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

far as this Art is concerned, we must regard as the mistress
of all sciences, (g) the science of Natural Magic. Now, when
the four elements have been wisely combined, and each thing
ordered in its own proper degree, then we shall behold in the
various stages “of coction, a constantly shifting succession of
colours, until perfection is attained. For the substance is
wrought upon from within by the natural warmth, which is
found to exist intellectually in our substance, though it can be
neither seen, nor felt, nor handled. Its operation is known
only to few. When this inward natural heat is stirred up by
the influence of outward artificial heat, Nature, having once
been roused into activity, will go.on to operate, and produce
the various changes which the substance has to undergo; and
this is one cause, as the Sages will tell you, why so many colours
are seen in our work. Many mistakes arise in the study of
this Art through ignorance of the difference between outward
and inward heat. In order that you may know how these two
kinds of heat ought to aid and stimulate each other, and which
of the two ought to predominate in our work, you should be
guided by the analogy of animate creation, and more especially
by the analogy of the coction which goes on in the human
body. It was well said by Morienus, that the generation
of our Stone exhibits a wonderful analogy to the creation of
man, in whom, says Raymond, the four degrees of the four
complexions are found together. On_account of_the close
analogy which exists between the generation of man_and_that— fF man_and_t
of our Stone, it has béen said that there are in this world only
two micrecosms—man and Our Stone

~ Now, wehave déscribéd thé conjunction or digestion of the
elements, and we proceed to give an account of the nutrition of
our substance. There is a solid humour rendered firm by
dryness, well mixed in all its degrees; and the passive qualities
are generated in due mixture by inward and outward heat.
Hence our digestion is nothing but perfection produced out of
a substantial humour. You must pardon my using these ex-
pressions, which to the unlearned must appear obscure and
meaningless ; but this Art of Alchemy, like all other arts and
sciences, has its own proper terminology, from which it is not
safe for me to depart. Digestion is sometimes quickened by

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 43

outward cold, as you may see from the fact that in winter men
take a larger quantity of food than in summer, when their heat
is more intense For cold drives heat inward and increases its
action, giving it greater virtue and power of digestion than it
had before. The digestive quality in our Art is the virtual heat
of a digestive organism. Nevertheless, the warmth of a diges-
tible substance is also instrumental in aiding digestion. “Fever
heat digests nothing. Baths may both aid and cause destruction.
Digested (fermented) wine has more natural heat than must.
Coagulation is not a substantial form, but cnly a passive state
of some material substance. Moreover, you should know when
the colours appear, that the principal agent in the substance is
either heat, or cold, or moisture, or dryness. To recognise the
principai agent at any given stage requires the practised eye of
of the Master, and a quick observation of the manner in which
the colours arise. The principal agent obtains royal power over
the four qualities, and during its temporary predominance
assimilates them to its own nature. This change is discussed by
Anaxagoras in his book entitled “ Natural Conversion,” and its
rationale is also given by Raymond. The discernment of your
principal agent is not by any meanssuch a simple matier as you
may suppose; I will attempt to teach it you by means of four
signs or symptoms, viz., colour, taste, smell,and fluxibility. The
colour of your substance may guide you in recognising its
principal agent, because that colour which a glance at your
vessel exhibits as predominant is caused by that quality which,
for the time being, is the principal agent: Of course, you will
be able to moderate any excessive action of this principal agent,
if you are aware of its nature; and its nature I will now enable
you to tell, by giving you an account of the causes whereby the
different colours which appear in our Art are produced. White-
ness is the effect of transparency in any object. Blackness arises
when the clearness of a dense body is obscured by the thickness
of its constituent parts: it is produced out of an earthy
substance by combustion, particularly when the heat causes a
greater hardness of the atoms. By the mixture of the dense
and obscure with the clear and pure, we obtain all the interme-
diate colours. Any clear and transparent body arises out of the
substance of air and water condensed in purified earth which

~

44 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

does not destroy their transparency. If in ‘such clear and
transparent bodies you do not perceive any special shades -of
colour, you may confidently conclude that they are the effect of
intense cold, as is the case with the crystal, beryl, and other for-
mations which you may thus distinguish from each other: Crystal
is aeriform water, and is clear, transparent, and fair; but where
the aqueous element predominates, it is more obscure, as in the
case of beryl, or ice. Where the substance is essentially dry,
it is dense, hard, and obscure, as may be seen in the diamond,
and other substances of a like nature. In a clear substance
light causes a brilliancy such as we behold in Magnesia ; and a
watery vapour produced by heat is instrumental in the formation
of such bodies. Such are the causes of transparency, and of the
extreme colours. As to the intermediate colours, that of the
ruby is caused by a thin smoke in a clear body, which happens
when much light and brilliancy prevail in such a bedy ; and it is
more or less brilliant in proportion to the quantity of light.
The amethyst comes next in glory after the ruby, its obscurity
being greater, and its transparency less; the shining substance
of the chalcedony stands next to beryl. Green, or the colour of.
the emerald, is formed of pure water, mixed with a burned earthy
substance, and the greater the transparency of the earth, the
more marked is also the brilliant green of the emerald. Yellow
is generated out of water and earth, and has the clearness of air
dimmed by the obscurity of black vapour. Grey, or lead colour,
is the result of and union of watery and earthy elements,and where
these atoms are cold and dense, the grey colour is more intense,
as is seen in very old lead ; or in persons at the point of death.
This colour is called livid, and is frequent in men of an envious
disposition. It concentrates the natural colour and the blood in
the heart, for the purpose of comforting it, and leaves the face
cold and dry, as it has been forsaken by, its warmth and blood.
In the same way, when fevers have reached an extreme point,
the finger nails are of a livid hue. The colour of the sapphire is
an orient blue, not unlike that of the celestial firmament, and
fairer to behold than the colour of lead, because it contains more
air, water, and light. Moreover, the colour of the sapphire is
esteemed more precious than other shades of light blue,
which are more obscure because they contain more earth and

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 45

less air. Silver may easily be converted into the colour of the
lazulite, because the transparency of the silver, produced by air,
has a tendency to become assimilated to the colour of the sky ;
and the abundance of quicksilver which it contains, causes the
brilliancy of the silver, while the splendour of the quicksilver, in
its turn, is produced by subtle earth, pure water, and clear air.
The orange colour, the shade of yellow which appears in gold,
is a pleasing colour,'and by many is even considered charming ;
it is generated by a strong and vigorous digestion, as its aqueous
elements are exposed to a high degree of heat, which is seen in
honey, urine, gall, and lye. The yellow colour of gold is the
product of a pure and subtle water perspicuously condensed.
For the more pure water is condensed, the more brilliant it
becomes. The cause of a mirror is fixed humidity ; and for this
reason it is also smooth, because air receives no impressions, and.
is incapable of confining itself. It is the water which produces
hts clearness. If pure white and_pure red be well mixed,'the.
results a beautiful orange calout~ Thus all the different ways
in Which the elements may be combined, produce different
colours in our substance, according to the different degrees of
digestion. Observe well the proper colours of elements, that you
may be the better able to judge of colours. Physicians say of
certain herbs that they are cold without, and warm within at the
root. If you wish for an illustration of this saying, observe the
nature of fragrant violets. Common philosophy teachesus that the
rose is cold within and red without. . Anaxagoras says in his
“Natural Changes,” that the outward and the inward in all things
are of a nature directly opposite to each other; and the rule
holds true, except in the case of such things as are very plain and
simple in their composition, as, for instance, the scammony and
laurel, that do not nourish like vegetables. Bear in mind that
in every mixture, one of the elements wil] Strive to obtain the
mastery. This insolent and greedy disposition is found in man,
as in all things beside. But all sorts and conditions of men are
placed on a footing of equality by death, which is God’s means
of laying low men of high degree, and of shewing the vanity of
all ambitious thoughts and desires. Kings and beggars find
their common level in the grave. It is thus that you must treat
your principal agent, if it overleaps the proper bounds of equality.

46 THE HERMETIC. MUSEUM:

In this sense Aristotle says: “Let there be perfect equality in
the composition of your Stone, in order that unprofitable strife
may be avoided.” Let there be all the colours which we have
enumerated, in their proper order, and then suffer Nature to bring
about the process of generation in her own way, till among this
great variety of colours one is found to prédominate, which
resembles the colour you are seeking to discover. In this way
you may make use of the colours for the purpose of guiding you
in this work. I might say much more about colours ; but what
has been said constitutes a satisfactory fulfilment of my promise,
and will teach you how far the various colours may be made to
serve your purpose in recognising your principal agent. Many
learned men indeed will justly wonder that so great a variety of
colours should appear in our Stone before the final stage of per-
manent and immutable whiteness is reached, seeing that the
ingredients seem to be so few and simple. But I will explain
the mystery in afew words: Those colours are due_to the pro-
perties of magnesia, the nature of which is capable of change into
any proportion and degree, just as crystal, for instance, exhibits
the colour of any substance which is placed under it. Hence it
is well and generously said by Hermes that “for performing the
miracles of one thing, God has so ordained it that out of one
thing all these marvels should spring forth.” For this teason
common philosophers cannot find this virtuous Stone, because it
transcends their comprehension.

The sense of smell will also furnish you with indications
whereby you may recognise the predominant element ; and, in
conjunction with the indications afforded by colour, it will teach
you where to look for the principal agent. Now as white and black
are the twoextremes of colour, so stench and fragrance are the ex-

‘tremes of odour. But as fishes are incapable of distinguishing
intermediate colours, because their eyes are without eye-lids and
cannot be closed, so we cannot become aware of intermediate
odours by the sense of smell, because our nostrils are incapable
of being shut, like the eyes of fishes. On this account inter-
mediate odours are not perceived by the nostrils as distinctly as
intermediate colours are perceived by the eye. An unpleasant
smell is not, in the opinion of the Sages, an intermediate smell,
but only one less fetid. Yet they have noted it down in

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 47

their books as the result of their experience—though I have no
experimental knowledge of the fact—that if you mix a sweet
and fragrant odour with one of a penetratingly fetid character,
the fragrant odour alone is smelt, while the fetid one is imper-
ceptible ; and the reason which they allege is that all fragrant
things are more pure and spiritual than those which are fetid,
and therefore penetrate the air more easily, and, being more
grateful to the living organisms and more agrecable to nature,
are more readily received than fetid smells. An odour is a
vaporous steam dissolved by heat, of a substance resembling an
exudation, which penetrates the air freely, and affects it and
your sense of smell, as your palate is affected by food, your
sense of hearing by sound, and your sense of sight by colour.
Four things are required for the perfect apprehension of odours.
First, it is necessary that a subtle substance should be affected
by the operation of heat, and give out a vaporous similitude of
itself, which evaporation must then be dispersed through thin,
clear air, and act on the sense of smell. But this odorous
vapour is not so readily given out by dense and hard substances
which, like our Stone, are not easily affected by heat. Heat
quickens odours, cold hinders them ; manure is more fetid in
summer than in winter. Grateful odours are generated out of a
pure and vaporous substance, as in the case of ambergris, nard,
and myrrh, which are specially pleasing to women. A pure sub-
stance under the influence of gentle heat, gives out moderate
odours, such as the fragrance of violets ; but when moderate heat
acts on an impure substance, the result is a disagreeable odour,
such as that of aloés and sulphur. When the natural heat of the
substance is diminished, the fact is signalized by a most fetid
smell, such as that of decomposed fish. Where a stench is pro-
duced by the putrefaction of natural heat, it is a vapour or steam
issuing from decaying matter. If the juices only are corrupted,
while the substance itself is not destroyed, the stench will be
extremely disagreeable, yet not so fetid as in the former case.
A putrid smell is caused only by the corruption of the substance
itself When an evil substance is decomposed, it gives out a
horrible smell ; and putrefying carcases of human beings may
often cause a pestilence. The smell of extinguished coals is
destructive of health, and may occasion even a mare to miscarry.

48 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

When the qualities of a substance harmonize with your nature,
the odour will be pleasant ; but if the substance be of a kind that
does not sympathise with your nature, you will be disagreeably
affected by the odour. Fishes love sweet smells, as is seen from
the fact that they are more easily attracted by a fresh than bya
stale bait. All fragrant matters have a corresponding degree of
natural heat; and though camphor, roses, and other cold sub-
stances emit a pleasant fragrance, yet ancient writers tell us that
the purity of their substance is equivalent to, and virtually
represents, natural heat. You may take for granted the truth of
the old saying, that one pleasant smell does not neutralize another.
It is different, however, with fetid odours ; for the smell of garlic
overpowers that of dung. But now we have said enough for our
present purpose about smells, and you will be easily able to tell
when putrefaction begins to set in. The sense of smell will also
enable you to distinguish between a subtle and a gross substance.
You will also have knowledge of an intermediate substance
which exhibits the corruption of natural. heat, and of the
difference between corrupted humour and corrupted substance.
But our substance has been highly purified, and is conserved by
the mean virtue ; wherefore, you must not expect a fetid smell
to arise from it, though it putrefies after its own proper kind.
The third sign and test by which you may know your
principal agent is called taste, which always causes the diminu-
tion of the substance tasted. The test of the palate would be
more certain than that of the eye or the nose, if it were not
dangerous to taste our Stone, seeing that it is destructive of
health and life, so penetrating is its quality ; hence it is inex-
pedient and even dangerous to taste of it too often. It
strengthens metals, as we know, but it is hurtful to human
beings until the perfect red colour appears, which abides the
test of fire. A common labouring man, who had devoted him-
self to the study of this Art, tasted a small piece of the white
Stone in the hope that thereby he would be delivered from all
pain and disease, instead of which he was suddenly struck
down with the palsy. Him my master speedily cured with
mineral Bezoar. Therefore, though the palate be the best judge
of the progress which has been made in our Art, yet it is of
little practical use, because the taste of our substance is both

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 49

horrible and hurtful. Nevertheless, certain parts may, without
any risk, be tasted before they are joined together, for the
purpose of discovering whether the operation has been rightly
performed or not. At the same time the skilled artist will be
able to discover all he wants to know by the colour and odour.
Thus many judge of the quality of good wine, but new wine is
best tested by the palate. For the sense of smell has only one
organ, and is capable of distinguishing nothing but vaporous
steam. The sense of taste, on the other hand, undoubtedly
possesses six organs for the perception of material qualities.
These organs Nature has ordained for the security and protection
of living creatures. The ape tests the wholesomeness of his
food by the sense of smell, men and parrots rely upon the
verdict of the palate. For many things, though fragrant, touch
the palate adversely, and repel by their acidity, bitterness, or
sickly and nauseating sweetness ; or they are poisonous, cor-
rosive, or too highly seasoned. In all these cases it is unad-
visable to appeal for a decision to the sense of taste. The
ancient writers have distinguished nine different varieties of taste,
viz., acrid, oily, and vinegary (indicative of a subtle substance),
biting, salt, watery (characteristic of intermediate substances),
bitter, acid,-and sweet (inherent in substances of great thickness
and density). These nine varieties of taste are of common
occurrence: five of them are the product of heat—the oily, the
acrid, the salt, the bitter, and the sweet; the remaining
four are produced by cold--the sour, the acid, the watery
or insipid, and the biting. Taste is determined by two
things, viz., by diversities of substance, and diversities of quality.
A thick substance is generally found to have a sweet taste; a
substance which is moist, thick, and warm, produces an oily
taste; while a substance of an intermediate quality, which is
both hot and dry, is characterised by a salt or pungent taste. A
thick substance, that is both hot and dry, is intensely bitter.
A subtle substance, on the other-hand, which is also hot and dry,
is marked by a harsh and acrid flavour. In this way heat is the
source of five different varieties of taste, but notef more. That
which is cold and dry in the second degree, and at the same time
exhibits a subtle substance, is sour—as you may see by the face
which a man makes who has tasted unripe apples. The same
D

Vou, I.

50 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

qualities in the same degree, united to an intermediate substance,
produce, as you may easily suppose, a biting effect upon the
palate, as, for instance, the rose. But the acid, less acid, and
slightly acid flavours are the results of cold and dryness in
different degrees. Cold and humidity in the first degree always
produce a watery flavour, as is seen in the whites of eggs and in
oysters ; for these substances are both cold and humid, and have
-much superfluous moisture—for which reason they are not
greatly relished by the human palate. Isaac says that there are
only seven varieties of taste, because the acid and the slightly
acid, though different in degree, are yet in reality one and the
same flavour, and because the watery or insipid variety simply
represents negation of taste. We may also speak of compound
flavours, such as bitter-sweet,and others of a like kind. Thus,
by means of the palate, men may distinguish substances, qualities,
and degrees. But if you do not care to subject our matter to
the test of the palate, you may be guided by another class of
symptoms, just as in medicine we do not rely upon the signs
exhibited by the urine alone, but take them in conjunction with
the state of the pulse, and the general condition of the body. He
would be an ignorant physician indeed who should compiete
his diagnosis without availing himself of everything which
may help him to a knowledge of the exact nature of the
disease: Thus, if you would pursue the study of our Art,
you should avail yourself of the indications afforded by the
four methods of observation for the purpose of forming a correct
judgment. Of three of these methods we have already spoken,
the fourth is the fluxibility of the liquid. The liquid is the
strength of our substance, and its condition affords the most
striking evidence of the progress of the work ; moreover, by its
means the elements are both combined and dissolved. The
liquid joins together the male and the female, and causes the
dead to be restored to life. The liquid purges’ by ablution, and
is the principal nutriment of our Stone. Without liquid there is
no good food; the liquid carries the aliment to all the different
parts of the human living body, and it performs the same
function in Alchemy. But you should well consider the purity
and the quantity of all your liquids, and also their consistency or
thinness: otherwise you will make little progress. Now, because

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY... .51

our Elixir needs a twofold preparation, it exhibits more natural
marvels than any other substance. Physicians say that the
denser and more consistent urine is, the more humidity does it
indicate ; but with us the thickness betokens dryness, and that
which is subtle humidity. Many liquids are needed for our
Stone in accordance with its requirements. In the book entitled
“The Crowd,” Aristeus says: that air is invisibly enclosed in
water, which lifts up the earth by its aérial potency. Pythagoras
remarks that if the matter were so, it would be a most fortunate
circumstance. Plato expresses himself most circumspectly when
he calls it (the liquid) “the gentle dropping of dew”; and the
words are thoroughly applicable to Alchemy. But in the
commonplaces of the primary philosophy it is said that condensed
air is changed back into rain, and rarefied water into air. Some
say that the month of May is the beginning of the year, when
air is condensed into water. Others say that such water
descends from the sky till the Sun enters the sign of Scorpio.
Others, again, tell us that no liquids should be used that are
affected by the cold, because, as the ancient writers state, their
activity is chained up by the cold. Some Sages affirm that the
liquid which you should employ in preparing the Elixir is milk ;
another expresses himself in the following mystical words:
“No_ligquid is_sufficient for the. greatwork_ but the_water_..
of Litharge-which together yith the water of “Az
produces virgin’s milk,” Democritus, on the other hand, states
that the best Tiquid for the preparation of our Stone ‘is
permanent water, which is naturally capable of resisting
the action of fire, and of enduring its heat. Rupescissa
says that aqua vite is the liquid required, because it is spiritual
and revivifying in its nature, and because it is the quintessence
which restores dead things to life (concerning this quintessence
Aristotle writes in his “ Book of Secrets” that all perfection isin
the fifth part). Rupescissa further calls this aqua vite the best
of all liquids, for that it renders thick and dense substances
spiritual. In the works of Pythagoras you will find our aqua
vitae spoken of in different language. He himself calls it the
vivifying principle, and bids us volatilize that which is fixed, and
fix that which is volatile, as by this strong method of compulsion
the fixed materials will become easy to melt. Others say that
b2

52 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

the best of all liquids is that which stirs up most desire and love.
These are best found near islands, and in places that are washed
by the ocean. Certain Sages tell us of yet another liquid which
is colder than spring water, and has an icy taste; its quantity,
however, is never:diminished, nor is its substance consumed,
though it is in a state of constant activity in the preparation of
our Stone. This water is called by Democritus the “shadowless
light,” or “the water of the rising Sun.” Hermes says that no
water is of such paramount importance as the water of crude
mercury ; “for,” he says, “this water holds the high place of being
the proper water of Alchemy.” Thus, ye who pursue the study
of this Art, may know by means of all these liquids our Stone
must be perfected. A liquid is a shifting substance, of a watery
and unstable nature ; and all such things are more subject to
lunar influences than those ofa firmer structure. Of this every
initiated Artist may behold a proof in the preparation of the
white Tincture. Liquids wash and purify both extreme and
intermediate substances. God created liquids for the use of man
and for the cleansing ofall impurities. Liquids doubtless possess
the power of bringing hidden impurities to the surface ofa body,
as those will tell you who use this simple means for the purpose
of cleansing soiled clothing. Liquids comfort and refresh the
parched roots of grass and trees ; for all natural liquids have the
power of restoring any vital juices which have been lost. Liquids
are also useful for the dividing and separating of qualities, and
for the resolving of substances into their smallest parts. Liquids
further cause the generation of our Stone by the conjunction of
many things into one. They assist the fluxibility and motion of
many things. Again, you should observe how liquids are to be
gained from the different substances which exist on earth. Some
are derived through incision, as, for instance, the juice of the
terebinth ; others, by crushing, as the juice of the grape and of
the olive; others again, by distillation, like water ; some, by com-
bustion, like colophony ; some by dissolution, according to the
manner in which women prepare lye ; others are produced in other
ways ; while some owe their origin to natural processes, as, for
instance, urine, blood, milk, and sweat. Coagulatory substances,
again, are of great use and profit in the making of cheese. In
these and many other ways we seek and discover liquids which may

oe THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 53

be useful to us in the preparation of our glorious Elixir, the most
precious Philosopher’s Stone, for which we daily bless God’s name.
All the liquids that we have enumerated are of a more or

less adhesive nature, with the solitary exception of quicksilver,

which, though fluxible, will not adhere to any other matters but

those in which it finds a sister or brother mixed of the same

subtle substance ; but with any other liquid it will not mingle,

though they, too, are composed of the four elements, as milk

contains whey, butter, and cheese. These four elements may be

separated and put together again, to the great advancement of

your experiment; but the manner in which cheese, butter, and

whey are obtained is a simpler subject of investigation than are

the liquids which exist in our Stone. Not one of them is simple

and uncompounded except water alone. Of the several liquids

of our Stone you should understand also the qualities and

degrees ; for thus you will be able to check the various super-

fluous activities of the principal agent,if this agent itself be

permanent and durable. If the predominant quality be dryness,

you may correct it by adding, according te your requirements, a

greater or Jess quantity of humid moisture ; and in the same way

you may proceed with regard to the other qualities, thus

compelling the principal agent to submit to the rule of your will.
By the knowledge of the diversity, contrariety, and agreement of

qualities, you may judge which quality ought to predominate.

You will need great wisdom in so adding and diminishing your

liquids that all the ingredients are placed on an equal footing.

But do not believe that there is anything which has the qualities

of heat and moisture in the same degree; for all that maintain
the existence of two qualities of this kind, are deceived in their

opinion, whoever they be. The commonplaces of philosophy,
which set forth this proposition, are not true. Have done with
this idea, and let a new one take its place in your mind. For all

the ancient writers who have asserted that these two qualities
could exist in the same degree, have been mistaken, or they have
done so simply for the purpose of preventing enquirers from
discovering the secret method of tempering the elements. Hence
he who does not know graduations cannot be perfect in our work,
seeing that God has allotted to each thing its own proper measure.
Without due measurement of time no one can sing correctly; he

54 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

who errs in the measurement of time, errs in the very essence of
the singer’s Art—and all that err inflict a wrong on Nature. Con-
sider also that the purer your medium is, the greater will be the
perfection which arises out of it. The media embrace the most
important part of the virtue and potent essences of our Art.
For the solid cannot become fluxible, nor the liquid firm, in the
gradual process of preparing our substance, without the help of
intermediate substances which partake of the nature of both the
extremes. It is thus that, by means ofa treble spirit, the soul is
joined to the human body ; of these three spirits one is called the
vital spirit, the other the natural spirit, and the third the animal
spirit. Let me also tell you where these spirits dwell. The vital
spirit has his habitation in the heart; the natural spirit, accord-
id to the ancient writérs>abides in thé Tiver, while the animal
spirit. sojourns in the brain. Now, S0Tong as theSe three spirits
maintain a sound staté~of-health in the human body, the soul
dwells in the body without any jarring disagreements, and life is
sustained. But when these spirits are unable to abide in man,
the soul is also compelled to forsake the body. For the subtle,
pure, and immortal soul can never dwell with the gross body,
except the spirits act as media between them. In our work we
ought also to distinguish between body, soul, and spirit; and
our intermediate substances are the spirit which joins the body
and soul together by partaking of the nature of both. Nature
has no other way of binding extremes together except by inter-
mediate substances, and these intermediate substances (media)
are of different kinds. After all these things you should also
know the seven circulations of each element, which agree with
the number of the seven planets, and they are known to none
except by grace Divine. Certain Sages of great learning tell
us that these circulations are nine in number ; and perhaps it is
safer for us to follow their teaching. Nevertheless, the newest
inventions made by modern philosophers, whose assertions are
exalted beyond the possibility of doubt, enable us to dispense
with two. Some learned men think that they may avoid every
risk of a mistake if they go on in due order from fire to air,
from air to water, and from water to earth, thus moving down-
ward from that which is most. exalted to that which is lowest ;
and they adduce in support of their assertion the alleged fact

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 55

that air is the food of fire. But, believe me, this kind of
circulation is nothing but one method of rectification, which
tends more to’separation and correction than to transmutation.
Moreover, the favourite food of fire, its own proper nutri-
ment and fuel, is not air but earth, as both fire and earth are
dry, and heat depends for its very existence on dryness, while the
nature of air, on the other hand, is more humid. Yet it is
also true that fire cannot operate without air, since the hand of
God. has linked together the elements in a bond of mutual
dependence, which will not suffer them to be disunited by any
human contrivance or device. Of this fact you may find an
illustration in trumpets, where, after the ascent of air, you may
often observe a deposit of water, the occurrence of which can
only be explained on the supposition of the mutually inclusive
nature of the elements. But our circulation begins with fire,
the most exalted of all elements, and ends with water, which
of all elements is the most unlike to fire. Another circulation
begins with air and ends with earth. From earth to fire, thence to
pure water, thence again to fire, and after this to a mean, passing
to earth, finally once-more recurring to fire—by such circula-
tions, the Red Tincture is perfected. Other circulations are more
suitable for the production of the White Tincture. Now every
circulation has its own proper time, according to the facility or
difficulty of its execution. For as one planet is heavier and
slower than another, so some circulations that are performed by
the Sages take up a space of thirty weeks, while other circula-
tions require a much shorter period of time ; just as some planets
are lighter and swifter than others. Thus, after all the gross and
crude operations have been performed, our work may often still
require twenty-six weeks. Ignorance of this fact has deceived
many, and caused them to give up, their labour at a point
where the Sages are wont to begin. Other inexperienced
students of this Art have imagined that it can be accomplished
in forty days. They do not know that in Art as well as in
Nature everything has its own time, and its own. proper.
method. The elephant, for instance, being a huge and unwieldy
animal, extends its period of gestation over two years, and is
fifty years old before it can bring forth young. Anaxagoras
says, in his “ Considerations,” that the generation of the metals

56 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

requires a thousand years, and that, in comparison to that period
of time, our work occupies only a single day. You must
therefore conduct your operation in a very subtle manner when
you see the earth rise above the water; for as the earth which
we tread with our feet supports the water, so, in our Art, you
should frequently cause a gentle spring of water to well forth, in
order that the same may flow softly, seeing that a violent out-
pour is positively hurtful. Moreover, the student of Alchemy
should be aware of the effects of the seven waters, concerning
which you must seek instruction in-the books of others ; for you
cannot expect me to expound our whole system in this brief
treatise.

Some think that by means of these waters they can correct
all metallic imperfections, and can find the effects of the four
elements ; for they are confident that all requisite properties are
discovered in these waters, not only for the purpose of softening
hard metals, but also for hardening those which are too soft,
purifying them, and rendering them malleable. For the attain-
ment of each one of these objects, the knowledge of these waters
is said to be indispensable. Otherwise our Stone would not
receive its proper nourishment. The ancient writers call our
Stone a microcosm ; and there can be no doubt that its compo-
sition greatly resembles that of the world in which we live,
consisting as it does of elements, hot, cold, moist, and dry, hard,
soft, light, and heavy, rough, smooth, fixed, volatile, and fluxible ;
and also because, in spite of the manifold variety of its com-
ponent parts, it is not many things, but one thing. The
transmutation of metals implies a change, not only of colour, but
also of substance. The elements of the substance which under-
goes a change must become the elements of the substance into
which it is to be changed, and impress upon it their own character.
All transmuted parts must be proportionately impressed in the
transmuting elements, so that the thin elemented matter may ~
permanently possess the substance of the one and the virtue of
the other. As soon as a child is born, it can feed and cry; and
so our Stone, when first prepared, has abundant power-.of imparting
its colour to other substances. Again, as after three years the
child walks and talks, so after a certain lapse of time, our Stone
receives a still more intense power of colouring, so that it can

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 57

pervade with its own glorious nature a substance of a thousand
times its own size. To this fact I myself can bear witness: for
many a time have I seen well-purged metals transmuted into the
finest silver and gold. Thus, our Stone may go on growing in
quantity, and becoming more excellent in quality, during an
infinite period of time ; and in this respect it bears a marvellous
analogy to the birth and growth of human beings. _I must, how-
ever, take this occasion to state a truth which may be displeasing
to some readers. The time when you first succeed in preparing
your Stone should be well and wisely used, or you may even then
lose all your pains, and miss your recompense for all the
heavy outlay you have undergone.

For the purpose, then, of augmenting your Stone, you should
at once divide it into two equal parts, carefully testing the correct-
ness of your division by means of the balance. One-half is for
the Red Tincture, and the other moiety for the White. Then, and
not till then, will you begin to reap the profits of your labours. But
it will be unadvisable to stop even here, seeing that you may go
on augmenting your Tincture indefinitely. Miriam, the sister of
Aaron, rightly says that life is short, and knowledge long; never-
theless, our Tincture, when it has once attained to the highest
perfection of its excellence, has the virtue of greatly retarding
old age. Some of our Sages have been so foolish as to give up
the further improvement of our Stone at a point when they
might have reached the final goal with little trouble and great
advantage to themselves. This supine carelessness can only be
explained by assuming that they were not aware of the full virtue
of that Stone; and I see that I must point out to all its
fortunate owrfers the full extent of their possession. For when I
shall have departed out of this world, this testimony will remain
behind as a witness, and on this account I am not slow to reveal
the secrets of the Art, so far as I may do it without prejudice to
my vow. I have instructed you with sufficient clearness how to
prepare the White Tincture. But when my master had declared
all these things to me, he said that many students have by patient
and unwearied diligence independently discovered this our White
Stone and Tincture, as if they had derived their knowledge from
the wisest cf masters; but that scarce one in fifteen kingdoms
possesses our Red Stone. With these words, he fixed upon me

58 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

a steady and unfaltering gaze, and he saw that his speech had
clouded my countenance with sorrow. Ianswered : “ Alas, what
shall I do? for I love knowledge far beyond all earthly wealth ;
moreover, the Red Tincture is said to be a most precious
substance, which has the virtue of prolonging life. I should
account the Red Stone a more glorious acquisition than all the
gold of the whole world.” He replied that I was still a young
man, and that youth was prone to insolence and excess. Could I
expect to be enrolled among the Sages at the immature age of
twenty-eight? I must be a much older man before I could
expect to have this secret unfolded tome. “Alas, good master,”
I said, “though my body is still young and my years are few, I be-
seech you to prove me, and you will see that my mind has already
attained the ripeness of mellow age.” My master said no more at
the time, but I soon found that he was trying and testing my
character by a course of probationary training, after the manner:
of the Sages—of which it would be both tedious and indiscreet
to publish a lengthy account. Finally, however, by the grace of
God, he accounted me worthy of this wonderful proof of his love
and esteem, and imparted to me the true secret of preparing the
Red Tincture. To inquire into the manner of its preparation
would be an aimless quest before the White Tincture has been
prepared. Both Medicines are composed from the same sub-
stance, in the same vessel, and by the same methods, until the
living matters have been mortified. Then the material and shape
of the vessel, and the degree of chemical treatment, must be
changed. ‘But my heart beats violently, and my hands tremble,
when I speak of this glorious thing. Hermes said a true word
when he exclaimed: “Fire and Azoth are sufficient.” The
expositor of Hermes and Aristotle, in the treatise appended to
their works, makes a most startling assertion, when he says that
Albertus Magnus, and Bacon, the Minorite friar,had no knowledge
of the manner in which the Red Stone is multiplied by augmenta-
tion. This writer was well aware what he was saying, as my
master proved to me by incontrovertible arguments. I myself
have never actually prepared the Red Tincture as yet, because I
was disheartened by being robbed of my whole wealth of chemical
materials and implements—as I set forth at length ina preceding
chapter. But I understand the method of its preparation per-

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 59

fectly, and am able to explain it to others. Those who have
ventured to unfold this grand arcanum to their disciples say that
the redness of this delectable Stone is contained in its whiteness,
and may be brought out, and made to appear to the Artist’s
ravished gaze by the gently compelling heat of fire. Pandophilus,
in “The Crowd” tells us that the white Tincture is the type and
shadow of the red ; and Miriam confirms his words by saying that
the redness is concealed in the whiteness. An admirable book
entitled Laudabile Sanctum, ascribed to Hermes,uses the following
expression of the Red Tincture: “There lies the snowy wife
wedded to her red spouse.” That is to say, in the white Tincture
you have a beautiful woman of snowy whiteness espoused to a
red husband. If your white Stone is exposed to the heat, and
through the action of the fire becomes red as blood, then the
marriage is valid and perfect—as in the act of copulation, if it be
fruitful, the male seed obtains the ascendancy, and assimilates the
female seed to its own nature. That this fact is so, those who
have observed the nature of the embryo have been taught by
experience. When this has been brought about, our Stone is
perfected. The Sages say that it should be nourished with its
own poison till it has had enough. When this has been done,
you may go wherever you like, for it will defray all your expenses.
Thus, then, I have expounded to you the subtle part of the work
with all its appurtenances, and more I need not, cannot, and will
not, reveal,

CHAPTER VI.

With respect to concords, let me say that there should be
no scrious difterence between those things which ought to agree.
For difference produces discord, and discord would make all your
labour of none effect. Whoever wishes to practise our Art,
should be guided by five rules or concords. The first rule to be
observed is, that the student’s mind should be in perfect harmony
with his work. The desire of knowing this Art should hold a
dominant place in his mind ; else all his labours will come to
nothing. The second concord is, that he should know the
difference between this Art and those who profess it. The third
kind of harmony is that which should exist between the work
and the instruments. The fourth concoid assigns to the work

60 _ THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

the place which is most suited to its execution. The fifth
concord is the sympathy which should exist between your work
and the celestial sphere. I will say something about each one of
these five rules, and begin with the first. Few students possess
the gift of perseverance. They are in a great hurry and the
work seems too long. They wish you to do violence to Nature,
and the zeal of some is so much like a straw fire that at the end of
six months it has quite burned down. Many change their minds
after a week, scme after twenty-four hours. Some believe in our
Art most fervently for a month ; but at the end of the month
they will have nothing more to do with it. For such persons it
would be better to stay their hands at once than to waste their
time with the study of our Art Let these butterflies flutter
whither they will. But let us, before we put our hands to this
work, learn with our hearts the truth of the saying ; “Let us do
everything from beginning to end strenuously, and yet softly and
on, All foofish and double-minded people must necessarily

e fickle and unstable ; and it is natural that simple folk, who
have been stripped of all their savings by heartless impostors,
should conceive a deep-seated aversion to our Art. But only
men of constant and persevering minds are fitted to be students
thereof. If any such man undertakes the study of this science,
whether he be a layman or a priest, a merchant, a knight, an
abbot, or a gentleman, he is not likely to fail of success : for his
mind is in harmony with his work. The second concord to
which attention must be paid in the pursuit of this Art, is the
securing of fit and suitable assistants. No assistant should be
chosen that is not sober, discreet, and diligent, faithful, vigilant,
a keeper of secrets, and a pure liver ; a man of clean hands and
of a delicate touch, obedient and humbly content to carry out
your orders. Such ministers alone will give close heed to your
work, and secure you against all avoidable accidents. Do not
imagine, however, that two or three of these will be sufficient
for the completion of ‘your experiment. If the quantity of
your substance be moderate, eight such servants will be
required, but if the quantity be small, the work may be done by
four. Of this number, one half should be on duty, while the
other half sleep, or are at church ; for this experiment cannot be
brought to a successful termination, unless it is continually

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 61

attended to, by night as well as by day ; and with the exception
of the Sabbath, your men should relieve cach other in the
morning and in the evening. While they are on duty, they
should carefully eschew every wicked word and deed ; otherwise
your work will most certainly be marred. For this reason your
assistants ought either to be all men or all women, and persons
of both sexes ought not to bé set to work together. If your
assistants are members of your own family, you should seek to
inspire them with love for the work, and interest in its success ;
for nothing is more important than that the hearts of your
workers should be in their wcrk. Our third rule was, that the
instruments should be of a kind suited to the labour to be
performed. This rule is not fully apprehended by many
students of our science. It means that the different parts of the
experiment require their own proper utensils, of a substance and
shape closely adapted to the particular purpose which they are
intended to serve. The divisions and separations of our
substance are best carried out in small vessels ; a broad vessel
is required for humectation, while the process of circulation
demands a vessel of still larger capacity. Those used for pre-
cipitation should be long; those which you employ for the
purpose of sublimation may be both short and long, while
narrow vessels, four inches high, are more appropriate in the
process of correction. Some vessels are made of lead, and some
of dead clay. Dead clay is that which has been carefully
hardened, and having. been mixed with sand and gravel. is
capable of sustaining a high degree of fierce heat. Other kinds
of clay burst when exposed to the fire, and you should reject
vessels made of them. Other vessels, again, are made of stone,
and endure the test of heat admirably ; but vessels of this kind,
which are both impervious to water and proof against fire, are
now very rarely to be obtained in England ; but where they can
be had, they are invaluable for our purpose. All other vessels
are made of glass, and are admirably adapted to prevent the
volatile substance from escaping. In our country they are made
of ashes and siliceous material, but elsewhere of little stones.
The best kind of glass for our purpose is that made of cinders
which have been left to glow in the hearth all night; a still
harder and more durable kind is prepared out of smelted glass

62 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

sherds. What has’ been: said will guide you in selecting the
most suitable kind of vessel; as to its form or shape you must
consult your own common sense: it is. however, clear that you
should, in this case, as in all others, strive to follow as closely as
possible in the footsteps of Nature, Moreover, the size and
shape of your vessel should be in proportion to the quantity of
your substance, and to all the other conditions of the experiment.
The general principles which should determine your choice are
well laid down by Albertus Magnus in his book on * Minerals.”
The whole secret was disclosed in a few words by my master,
when he said: “If God had not given us a vessel, His other
gifts would have been nothing worth—and that vessel is glass.”
Some other instruments are also needed, such, for instance, as
suitable furnaces. The ancients describe a special furnace for
use in every stage of our Art, devised differently according to
the bent of their minds. Many of these, however, are quite
unsuitable, some being too broad, others too high, and others
out of harmony with the requirements of Nature. Some of the
furnaces described in these books may be used, but by far the
greater number ought to be rejected, seeing that they are the
inventions of men who only appeared to be, but were not really,
Sages. Of the furnace which can be most highly recommended,
you will find a pictorial representation in this volume. One
which was unknown to the Ancients, I am proud to call my own
invention. I set it up, in the first instance, at a very con-
siderable outlay. But its advantages more than make good
its cost. It is so constructed that sixty different chemical
operations, for which divers kinds of heat are required, may
be carried on in it at the same fime, and a very small fire of
only a foot square supplies ‘a sufficient degree of heat for all
these processes. As all may not be sure of this instrument,
it has not been represented in a picture. Another furnace
will serve for sixty or more glasses, each of them standing
in the same degree of heat, as you may see by the picture.
I have also invented another furnace, which is of great
use in the work of separation, exaltation, and disjunction or
‘division, and is most admirably adapted for the processes of
ablution or purging, desiccation, and preparation. These six
operations may with great ease be performed in it at the

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 63

same time, and one fire suffices for them all. But it is a
new invention, and I cannot afford to describe it more minutely.
I might also set down a description of another furnace, which is
more dangerous than all the rest. It was constructed by the
Ancients for the preparation’ of our Magnesia ; and they said that
while it could not with impunity be touched for fear of the flame .
which rose from the wood, yet a linen rag might be placed on it
without being scorched. This ingeniously constructed furnace I
was fortunate enough to re-invent, and with its aid I was enabled
to perform many wonderful experiments. This furnace and its
structure must remain a secret for some years longer ; but let me
warn you, in conclusion, to be very careful in the selection and
structure of your furnace. It must be so arranged as to enable
you to regulate the supply of heat, and to abate the fierceness of
the flame at any moment. Ifa man does not understand and
know the use of his tools and instruments, all his work will be
done in a casual, haphazard manner, and it will be impossible for
him to anticipate success with any degree of certainty. There-
fore, let me once more repeat my warning: See to your
instruments, and test their quality before you set about your
work. The fourth rule is also mostimportant. The experiment
cannot succeed unless it be performed in a suitable place. Some
places must be always dry, free from air and excess of light such
as is caused by the bright rays of the sun. Others cannot be too
much illuminated. The places more fitted for other parts of the
work, are humid and cold. But violent draughts should be care-
fully avoided throughout. Hence a spot must be wisely chosen
to fulfil all the requirements of the different parts of the work.
The Sages tell us, in their enigmatic style, that our substance
should be prepared within nine bars. Astrologers say that it is
a singular mark of Divine grace if a man can find the right place
for our work. For many things produce wonderful effects in
some places, but are entirely barren of results in others; and
opposite consequences are often produced by the same thing in
different places. The explanation of these facts is to be found
in the knowledge that different places are differently influenced
by the celestial bodies, just as a magnet, for instance, affects a
needle differently in different latitudes. For this reason the
Sages have declared that some places are well, and others ill,

64 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

suited to our work. But the very worst of all possible places are
those which have been defiled by lechery.

The fifth rule is well known to the learned. There should
exist a certain harmony between the celestial spheres and our
work, Nothing on earth is so simple or so easily influenced as
the elements of our Stone; and when they are being prepared
they obey their own proper constellations, as the needle yields to
the influence of the magnet. Let this amicable concord prevail,
then,in a direct and fiery ascendent,and let your happy and favour-
able ascendent be in fortunate aspect with his Lord. * The work
should be sheltered from all adverse and evil influences; if these
cannot beset aside, let them have a trine aspect. When you prepare
the White Tincture, let the Moon be fortunate, as also the Lord of
the Fourth House, which is the Treasure of Hidden Things,
according to the old Sages. The Sixth House must be favourable
for the servants. Preserve your work from all great impediments,
and see that it be not affected by the adverse constellation of
your Nativity. The virtue of the mover of the orb is the formal
influence ; the virtue of the eighth sphere is instrumental to it ;
the virtue of the planet is proper and special; and that of the
elements is material, and embodies the working of the other
agents. The first resembles the genius of the operator; the
second is analogous to his hands ; the third corresponds to his
instruments ; and the fourth answers to the substance which is
prepared. Let the things on earth correspond to things in
heaven, and you will obtain the Elixir, and become a great
Master. Do not trust to Geomancy, which is a superstitious
Art; nor to all Astrologers, because this science is secret, like
that of Alchemy. Necromancy God forbids, and the Church
condemns ; therefore, if you wish for success, let your hands be
pure from all superstitious practices. Necromancy is of the
Devil, and a lying Art. God will bless you if you give yourself
wholly to the study of our own Blessed Art. In the next chapter
I will speak about the regulation of the fire.

CHAPTER VII.

Would you know the perfect Master? It is he who under-
stands the regulation of the fire, and its degrees. Nothing will

THE ORDINAL OF ALCITEMY. 65

prove to you so formidable an impediment as ignorance of the
regimen of heat and fire ; for our whole Art may be looked upon
as being concentrated in this one thing, seemg it is all important
for the proper development of our substance that the degree of
heat which is brought to bear on it should be neither too great
nor too small. In regard to this point many learned men have
gone grievously astray: (1) The degree of heat which is
employed for the scalding of pigs and geese, is that which we
require forpur decoction of intermediate minerals, and for the
purpose of covering the Litharge with sweat. (2) The degree
of heat which is sufficient for drying thin linen is good for our
air in thirty operations ; for the purpose of division you may
employ the degree of heat used by cooks in roasting meat.
(3} A similar degree of heat with a circular fire will be found
useful for the separation of the dividents. (4) But for the
circulation of the elements you will require white’ heat, which
must be maintained at an even temperature, without either
increase or diminution, until the whole operation is accom-
plished. Moreover, there ought not to be in this fire any
moisture that can be perceived by the touch, or seen with the
eye. (5) There also is such a thing as a moist fire, though
the expression sounds like a contradiction in terms. This fire
should be used at a certain stage of the work, in order to remove
the substances which adhere to the sides of the vessel. The
same degree of heat is also employed to dilute thick substances.
The Sages declare that, in its highest degree, it causes and
generates an even dryness, and that its effect here coincides
with that of dry heat in the first degree. (6) There is also
another fire which is employed for the purpose of drying sub-
stances steeped in moisture. (7) Another variety of fire is
that of conservation, because by its operation all things are’
parched up. (8) Inthe preparation of Magnesia we use the
effusion of fire; which is full of danger, not only to the work, but
also to the Master, who may even lose his life by its noxious
effects. For this reason you should carefully protect your
mouth, ears, eyes, and nose, as the smoke of this fire is ten
times more baneful than poison. By neglecting this caution
many students have sustained considerable injuries. (9) A cor-
rosive fire answers the purpose of judiciously separating kindred
Vou, E

66 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

elements. One moment of excess, one moment of premature
diminution, may mar the labour of months. He that regulates
the fire aright is worthy of being hailed as a great Master of the
Fire. It is exceedingly difficult to tell the exact degree of heat
which any given fire will produce ; and here the sense of sight is
the only reliable test. No sound or intelligible directions can be
given in writing: the only schoolmistress that can impart to you
a thorough knowledge of this branch of our Art is experience.
It is in regard to this variety of heat that Anaxagoras says:
“Nobody is all at once an accomplished Sage.” (10) The next
kind of heat is of a consuming fierceness. It is employed to
smelt very hard minerals. It cannot be too fierce or powerful, even
though it may occasionally be necessary to keep it up for some
length of time. (11) The next variety of heat is that of calcina-
tion, and is used for the purging of impure metals, the essential
qualities of which would be impaired by smelting. (12) The
kind of heat used for sublimation comes next, and by its means
volatile minerals may be sublimed. (13) The last variety of
heat is the most important of all. It should be employed at the
time of the projection of our Stone. But experience is a good
teacher, and I will say no more, except that he who makes a
mistake at this point, must begin the work over again.

I have now told you all things as plainly as if I had been
describing to you the way to this or that town. I have, as it
were, named every county, river, bridge, and village that has to
be passed, and, with this my guide-book in his hand, a judicious
traveller may easily find his way. A wise and intelligent man
may, by means of this Book, discover the secret of our science ;
for the foolish and dull-witted it was not intended, and it will not
teach them anything. Our Science is the height of earthly
knowledge, and is to be attained by neither Pope nor Emperor
through their rank, influence, or power, but only by virtue, and
by Divine grace. Our Stone cannot be discoveréd or perfected
unless it be sought with intense devotion. In the works of the
Ancients, understood in the light of this my Ordinal, the truth of
the matter is fully set forth ; the present Book, in particular, was
written for the purpose of resolving all-your doubts; here every-
thing is in its proper place, and nothing is wanting. Time was
when I would cheerfully have paid down a thousand pounds for

THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY. 67

the contents of this volume ; and this last chapter I would not
have missed for three hundred pounds.

Do not wonder, Masters and Friends, that our Science is
here so plainly expounded : I set pen to paper with the require-
ments of the common people in view. For just because the
vulgar are not instructed in this knowledge, infinite wealth is
annually wasted in this country, as all Sages know, and many
others of all ranks are daily reduced to beggary. Study our Art,
then, ye uninstructed, and scorn to abide in fatuous ignorance.
It is better for you to take to this study late than never.

Let all that are benefitted by the reading of this Ordinal
offer up prayers for my soul, and for the living and the dead.

In the year of our Lord 1477 this Book was begun.

Glory be to God!

THE TESTAMENT

CREM EO,

Appor oF WESTMINSTER, AND BROTHER OF THE

BENEDICTINE ORDER.

A TETRASTICH ON THIS WORK.
By M. M.

,

“ Either the meaning of the Author or the letter’
“of his writings is deceitful. Be on your guard,”
“therefore. Everywhere a serpent lurks among”
“the flowers. Yet scorn not a friend who spoke”
“as plainly as he might. Beneath the shadowy ”
“foliage of words is concealed the golden fruit”

“OF”
“TRUTH.”

THE TESTAMENT

OF
CREMER, THE ENGLISHMAN,

ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER, AND FRIAR OF THE
BENEDICTINE ORDER.

Alchemy without using any of those obscure technical

terms, which have proved so serious a stumbling-block in

the way of many students of this Art. I am here des-
cribing my own experience during the thirty years which I spent
and wasted in perusing the writings of authors whose whole
ingenuity seemed to have been concentrated upon the Art of
expressing thought in unintelligible language. The more I read
the more hopelessly I went astray, until Divine’ Providence at
length prompted me to undertake a journey to Italy,and caused
me to be accepted as a disciple by that noble and marvellously
learned Master Raymond, with whom I remained for a long time.
In his eyes I found such favour that he not only unfolded tomea
partial knowledge of this Great Mystery, but at my most earnest
entreaty, accompanied me to this island of England, and lived
with me here two years. During his stay he thoroughly
instructed me in the whole secret of the work. Subsequently, I
introduced my noble master to his most gracious Majesty King
Edward, who received him kindly and honourably, and obtained
from him a promise of inexhaustible wealth, on condition that
he (the King) should in person conduct a Crusade against the
Turks, the enemies of God, and that he should thenceforward
refrain from making war on other Christian nations. But, alas,
this promise was never fulfilled, because the King grossly violated
his part of the contract, and compelled my dear master to fly

| HAVE attempted to give a full and accurate account of

92 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

beyond the seas, with sorrow and grief in his soul. My heart
still burns within me when I think of the unjust treatment which
he received, and I have no more earnest longing than once more
to behold his bodily presence.. For the model of his daily life,
and the purity and integrity of his mind, would move the most
inveterate sinner to repentance.

In.the meantime, rest assured, most blessed Raymond, that
I and my brethren day by day pour out our prayers before God
on your behalf. All wisdom is derived from God, and ever ends
in Him. Any one who desires knowledge should ask it of Him,
for he gives liberally, and without upbraiding. The height and
the depth of all knowledge, and the whole treasure of wisdom
are given unto men of God, because in Him, and to Him, and
through Him are all things, and nothing can happen without His
will. In beginning my discourse I invoke the help of Him Who
is the source and origin of all good things. May the bright light
of His Spirit shine in my heart, and guide me into all truth;
also enabling me to point out to others the true path of
Knowledge! May this prayer be granted by Him who is
enthroned on High, and rules and governs all things, world
without end |. Amen.

'“In the Beginning was the Word. . .. . . . . full
of grace and truth.”

Prayer.

Holy Lord, Almighty Father, Eternal God, deign to bless
and sanctify the fire which we unworthy men, by invocation of
Thy only-begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, presume to bless.
Hallow it, most gracious God, with Thy benediction, and let’ it
tend to the good of the human race, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Good Lord, Creator of the Red Light,

Who dividest the times by certain seasons,

When the Sun vanishes, fearful Chaos comes again:
* Oh Christ, restore the light to Thy faithful people!

THE TESTAMENT OF CREMER. 73

Though Thou hast studded heaven’s floor with stars,
And inlaid it with the bright lamp of the Moon,
- Yet Thou dost teach us also to strike light out of flints,
' And to fan it into life out of the stone-born spark.

Thou art the true light of the eyes, and the light of the senses ;
A mirror Thou art of things without and of things within.
Accept this light which I bear, ministering,

Tinged with the unction issued from the peace-bearing virgin.

To Thee we come, great Father, thro’ Thine only Son,
In whom Thy glory visibly shines forth,

And through Him, the Blessed Comforter,

Whom Thou didst send forth from Thy great heart.

In whom Thy Brightness, Honour, Light, and Wisdom,
Majesty, Goodness, and Mercy

Dwell with us throughout the Ages,

And draw us up to the Fountain of Light. Amen.

CHAPTER I.

How to prepare the living water which constitutes the life of
our Art. ;

Take three oz. of tartar of good claret, strong and pure.
Add to it five oz. of Petroleum, two oz. of living sulphur, two oz.
of orange-coloured Arsenic, three 0z. of Rabusenum, two oz. of
willow charcoal. Mix and distil all these ingredients in the
“Bath of Neptune,” in a well-stoppered glass jar. Let this jar
be about one cubit high, and carefully closed. to prevent any of
the spirits or smoke from evaporating. When you see it turn of
a pale colour, take it out of the furnace, and let it cool. You
ought to be able to prepare it in about four days. Be careful
not to inhale its smell, for it isdeadly poison. This water should
be kept in a stout well-stoppered glass jar, and used according to
the directions given in the following chapters.

The other water should be twice distilled out of the urine of
an unpolluted youth of eighteen ; if he be polluted, the water will
have no vitality.

74 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

CHAPTER II.

Take the water of an unpolluted youth after his first sleep
for three or four nights, until you have three pints. Put it each
night into a well-stoppered stone jar; remove the sediment.
Strain out one pint of the thinnest and purest part of the liquid.
Add two glasses of very strong vinegar, two oz. of quick-
lime, half-an-ounce of the “ living water,” of which the preparation
has been described above. Put the mixture into an earthen pot,
and place over it an alembic or distilling vessel, rendered air-
tight with clay. Let it stand one day and one night before you
put it on the fire. Then expose it to gentle heat, and let it
distil continually for five or six days and nights. Thus let it
flow by drops; carefully lute your glass receptacle so that
neither spirit nor smoke may escape, and when the liquor dis-
tilling assumes a blue or pallid colour, then abstract nothing
further.

CHAPTER IIL.

Smelt eight oz. of clear, hard iron ore, having no blemishes,
in three or four parts, over a fierce charcoal fire; extinguish it
with so much of the Virgin water described in the second chapter
as may be necessary for the purpose. Then take three oz. of
tin, heat it for a short time in the fire, and steep it in the Virgin
water. Pound the iron ore and the tin very small on a marble
tablet, and when it begins to cool feed it with some of the water
aforesaid. Pour the whole into a narrow-necked glass bottle,
and seal it up with lead. Put it in a safe place, and in October
you should fill a water-tight box (about one yard in height) with
fresh horse dung, and thrust your glass vessel into it. Next to
the bottle let there be a layer of unslaked quick-lime. Shut the
lid of the box closely, and never look at the mixture but at the
time of the full moon. Its colours will continue to change until
it becomes fixed and hardened. Then it is precipitated towards
the bottom of the vessel. When it has been in the box twelve
weeks, it should be quite black. You may then take it out, and
keep it till the twentieth day of March, when it should be once
more pounded small, according to the directions given below.

THE TESTAMENT OF CREMER 75

CHAPTER IV.

About the fifteenth day of March ‘take three oz. of
quicksilver, and add to it half-an-oz. of “living water.” Pass
the quicksilver five times through a strainer purged with lye and
well dried. Melt two pounds of lead, and pour it into a pot.
When it becomes liquid, thrust into it a thin round skewer, and
when the lead is still warm, but already fixed, remove the
skewer, and pour in the quicksilver instead. When the whole
mass has cooled turn it out on a slab of marble, pour some oil
over it, pound it small, divide it into three parts, mix each with
small pilules of soot. Leave them in a closely sealed vessel for
eight days, stamp them to powder, and nourish this powder with
a liquid compounded in equal proportions of vinegar and “ Virgin
water.” Put the soft paste which must thus be formed into a
high glass distilling vessel. Close up the upper part of the vessel
with clay, and tie it up with a piece of leather or parchment.
Then plunge it into a wooden box, containing glowing coals of
juniper wood and oak, and a twentieth part of iron filings. To
test the degree of the fire before inserting the vessel put in it a
piece of dry paper. If it catches alight the fire is not too hot,
but if the thin shreds which remain of the paper after burning.
are also consumed, then the heat is excessive, and the door must be
opened till the temperature lowers ; when it has become properly
warm, carefully add to it a spoonful of “living water” (described
in the first chapter). But take care that the still is only three-
quarters covered with the coals, in order that you may, whenever
the moon is full, be able quickly to remove the cover, and see
how the work is progressing. Whenever you perform this, adda
spoonful of “living water.” At first the colour of the mixture
should be black ; afterwards it will become white, and will pass
through various changes of colour. When the mixture turns
solid or fixed, its colour should be red of a somewhat dark tinge,
and it should also be saline and heavy, no longer flowing or
bubbling up towards the top of the vessel. It ought to be treated
in the manner suggested for forty weeks, beginning on the
twenty-fifth of March. By the end of this period the mixture
will have become so hard as to burst the vessel. When this
happy event takes place, the whole house will be filled with a

76 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

most wonderfully sweet fragrance ; then will be the day of the
Nativity of this most blessed Preparation. Remember, that the
iron box with the coals ought to be enclosed in another wooden
box, of which the object is to preserve the compound from the
noxious influences of the air.

CHAPTER V.

Take two pounds of pure and soft lead, two pounds of pure
tin, and melt them in the above-mentioned well-covered clay
jar. Place the whole on a wood fire, and keep it in a moderate
blaze for three hours. Remove the “ foam” of the metallic ore,
till the whole mixture is pure and transparent, then add to ita
fourth part of an ounce of the Red Stone powdered. Stir it
gently with an iron spoon until'the whole mass turns red. Leave
the jar for seventy-two hours, and during the last three hours
expose it once more to the gentle heat of a blazing wood fire.
While it is still liquid you can mould it into any shape you
please ; when it hardens you have before your eyes the Consum-
mation of the whole work. Mind you lift up your hands in
grateful prayer to the Giver of all good gifts. So be it.

CHAPTER VI.

How to prepare a fire-proof clay jar in which
to melt the metal.

Take well-tempered potter’s clay, or the white earth which
is called Taxonium ; mix it with a tenth part of horse dung.
When the jar has been formed, and is half dried, cover it with
thin filings of red or caldarium copper and.fine powder of red
arsenic. When it is quite dry, smear all its lower part with
saltpetre dissolved for twelve hours in the “living water” of our
first chapter.

How to prepare the Clay.

Make the “clay” which you are to use for stopping up your
vessel and keeping it air-tight, of bitumen, or quicklime mastic,
and the white of eggs, well mixed with a little white Armenian
bolus. Let your petroleum be clear, pure, and yellow. Your
Rabusenum should be clear, and of a bright vermilion.

THE TESTAMENT OF CREMER. 77

It is my wish that Brother Alexander, and Richard, of this
our Monastery, should copy this Testament in the name of the
Most Blessed Trinity, and preserve it carefully.

In the first place, let them diligently keep the secret from
all greedy and nefarious persons, and reveal it to none but the
Abbot and Prior, for the time being, of our Monastery. Nor
should it be made known to them until they have sworn on the
four Gospels that they will not reveal it to any men in power,
or to any of the inferior brethren of our Monastery.

Moreover, it is my wish that the Art be not actually exer-
cised in this our Monastery, except to save it from penury and
ruin—a contingency which is not likely to happen, seeing that I
leave to it so great a treasure of precious metals. I also enjoin
upon you who are in-authority in this house, to wit, the Abbot
and Prior, to have this my last will and testament copied once in
every sixty years, inorder that it may not become illegible, either
through the ravages of time, or through a change in the form of
those written characters which render man’s thought permanent.

Furthermore, I command you not to betray the secret of the
preparation of the Red Dragon’s Blood, or the quantities of sub-
stances required, or the manner of their treatment, or the time
when the work should be taken in hand, to any human soul,
except to the persons named above ; and I adjure you to keep
and preserve intact, inviolate, and unbroken the trust committed
to you, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
as you will one day have to answer me before the judgment seat
of Christ. Whoever does not obserye this my mandate, let his
name be blotted out from the Book of Life.

Magnesia is the smelted ore of iron. When the mixture is
still black it is called the Black Raven. As it turns white, it is
named the Virgin’s Milk, or the Bone of the Whale. In its red
stage, it isthe Red Lion. When it is blue, it is called the Blue
Lion. When it is all colours, the Sages name it Rainbow. But
the number of such names is legion: and I can only mention
these few. Moreover, they were only invented for the purpose of
confounding the vulgar, and hiding this mystery from the simple.
Whenever you meet with a book full of these strange and out-
landish terms and names, throw it aside at once: it will not teach
you anything. .

78 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Rabusenum is a certain red substance and earth coming
forth with water, which flows out of minerals, and is brought to
perfection in the month of a in a glass j jar exposed to the heat

of the sun for 26 days.

THE NEW
CHEMICAL LIGHT

DRAWN FROM THE FOUNTAIN OF NATURE
AND OF MANUAL EXPERIENCE.

TO WHICH IS ADDED

A TREATISE

CONCERNING

SULPHUR.

[THE AUTHOR’S ANAGRAM]:

“Divi Lescht genus amo,”

In this sentence : ‘*I love the Divine Race of Leschi,”
all the letters of the Author’s name are found
transposed, —

To wir: MICHAEL SENDIVOGIUS.

PREFACE.

Upon all genuine Seekers of the great Chemical Art,
or Sons of Hermes, the Author implores
the Divine Blessing and Salvation.

HEN I considered in my mind the great number of
deceitful books and forged Alchemistic “ receipts,”
which have been put in circulation by heartless
impostors, though they do not contain even a

spark of truth—and how many persons have been and are still
daily led astray by them ?—it occurred to me that I could not
do better than communicate the Talent committed to me by the
Father of Lights to the Sons and Heirs of Knowledge. I also
wish to let posterity see that in our own age, as well as in
ancient times, this singularly gracious philosophical Blessing has
not been denied to a few favoured men, For certain reasons
I do not think it advisable to publish my name ; chiefly, because
I do not seek for praise for myself, but am only anxious to
assist the lovers of philosophy. The vainglorious desire for
fame I leave to those who are content to seem what they, in
reality, are not. The facts and deductions which I have here
briefly set down are transcribed from that manual—experience,
graciously bestowed upon me by the Most High; and my object
is to enable those who have laid a sound foundation in the
elementary part of this most noble Art, to advance to a more
satisfying fullness of knowledge, and to put them on their
guard against those depraved “vendors of smoke,” who delight
in fraud and imposition. Our science is not a dream, as the
vulgar crowd imagines, or the empty invention of idle men, as
the foolish suppose. It is the very truth of philosophy itself,
which the voice of conscience and of love bid me conceal no
Vou, IL F

82 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

longer. In these wicked days, indeed, when virtue and vice are
accounted alike, the ingratitude and unbelief of men keep our
Art from appearing openly before the public gaze. Yet this
glorious truth is even now capable of being apprehended by
learned and unlearned persons of virtuous lives, and there are
many persons of all nations now living who have beheld Diana
unveiled. But as many, either from ignorance or from a desire
to conceal their knowledge, are daily teaching and inducing
others to believe that the soul of gold can be extracted, and
then imparted to other substances; and thereby’ entice -
numbers to incur great waste of time, labour, and money: let =
the sons of Hermes know for certain that the extracting of
the essence of gold is a mere fond delusion, as those who
persist in it will be taught to their cost by experience, the only
arbitress from whose judgment seat there is no appeal. If, on
the other hand, a person is able to transmute the smallest piece
of metal (with or without gain) into genuine gold or silver
which abides all the usual tests, he may justly be said to have:
opened the gates of Nature, and cleared the way for profounder
and more advanced study. Itis with this object that I dedicate the
following pages, which embody the results of my experience, to the
sons of knowledge, that by a careful study of the working of
Nature they may be enabled to lift the veil, and enter her
inmost sanctuary. To this final goal of.our sacred philosophy
they must travel by the royal road which Nature herself has
marked out for them. Let me therefore admonish the gentle
reader that my meaning is to be apprehended not so much from
the outward husk of my words, as from the inward spirit of
Nature. If this warning is neglected, he may spend his time,
labour, and money in vain. Let him consider that this mystery
is for wise men, and not for fools. The inward meaning of our
philosophy will be unintelligible to vainglorious boasters, to
conceited mockers, and to men who smother the clamorous voice
of conscience with the insolence of a wicked life; as also to
those ignorant persons who have fondly staked their happiness
on albefactions and rubrefactions and other equally senseless
methods. The right understanding of our Art is by the gift of
God, or by the ocular demonstration of a teacher, and can be
attained only by diligent, humble search, and prayerful depen-

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 83

dence on the Giver of all good things ; now, God rejects those who
hate Him, and scorn knowledge. In conclusion, I would earnestly
ask the sons of knowledge to accept this Book in the spirit in
which it was written; and when the HIDDEN has become
MANIFEST to them, and the inner gates of secret knowledge’,
are flung open, not to reveal this mystery to any unworthy
person; also to remember their duty towards their suffering and’
distressed neighbours, to avoid any ostentatious display of their
power; and above all, to render to God, the Three in One,
sincere and grateful thanks with their lips, in the silence of their
hearts, and by refraining from any abuse of the Gift.

SIMPLICITY
1s

THE SEAL OF TRUTH.

As after the completion of the Preface, it was found that it
did not cover the whole of the space allotted to it, I have, at
the publisher’s request, there set down the “last will and testa-
ment of Arnold Villanovanus,” which I once turned into Latin
verse. I am conscious that the style of my versification is want-
ing in neatness and elegance ; but this defect was partly caused
by the necessity of adhering strictly and faithfully to the Author's
meaning.

Testament of Arnold de Villanova.

It is said that Arnold de Villanova, a man who was a
credit to his race, signified his last will in the following words:
“Tt has its birth in the earth, its strength it doth acquire in the

*“ fire, and there becomes the true Stone of the ancient Sages.

“ Let it be nourished for twice six hours with a clear liquid until

“its limbs begin to expand and grow apace. Then let it be
- F2

84 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

“ placed in a dry and moderately warm spot for another pei od
“ of twelve hours, until it has purged itself by giving out a thick
“ steam or vapour, and becomes solid and hard within. The ‘vir-
“¢gin’s milk’ that is expressed from the better part of the
“ Stone is then preserved in a carefully closed oval-shaped distil-
“ling vessel of glass, and is day by day wondrously changed by
“the quickening fire, until all the different colours resolve them-
“selves into a fixed gentle splendour of a white radiance, which
“goon, under the continued genial influence of the fire, changes
“to a glorious purple, the outward and visible sign of the final
“ perfection of your work.”

THE FIRST TREATISE.

Of Nature, what she is, and what manner of men her
Disciples ought to be.

ANY Sages, Scholars, and learned men have in all
ages, and (according to Hermes) even so early as
the days before the Flood, written much concerning
the preparation of the Philosopher’s Stone; and if

their books could be understood without a knowledge of the
living processes of Nature, one might almost say that they are
calculated to supersede the study of the real world around us.
But though they never departed from the simple ways of Nature,
they have something to teach us, which we, in these more
sophisticated times, still need to learn, because we have applied
ourselves to what are regarded as the more advanced branches
of knowledge, and despise the study of so “simple” a thing as
natural Generation. Hence we pay more heed to impossible
things than to those objects which are broadly exhibited before
our very eyes ; we excel more in subtle speculations than in a
sober study of Nature, and of the meaning of the Sages. It is
one of the most remarkable features of human nature that we
neglect those things which seem familiar, and are eager for new
and strange information. The workman who has attained the
highest degree of excellence in his Art, neglects it, and applies
himself to something else, or else abuses his knowledge. Our
longing for an increase of knowledge urges us ever onward
towards some final goal, in which we imagine that we shall find
full rest and satisfaction, like the ant which is not endowed with
wings till the last days of its life. In our time, the Philosophical
Art has become a very subtle matter; it is the craft of the
goldsmith compared with that of the humble workman who
exercises his calling at the forge. We have made such
mighty strides in advance that if the ancient Masters of our

86 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

_ science, Hermes and Geber and Raymond Lullius, were to rise
from the dead, they would be treated by our modern Alchemists,
not as Sages, but as only humble learners. They would seem
very poor scholars in our modern lore of futile distillations, circu-
lations, calcinations, and in all the other countless operations
wherewith modern research has so famously enriched our Art,
though without understanding the sense of the ancient writings.
In all these respects, our learning is vastly superior to theirs.
Only one thing is unfortunately wanting to us which they
possessed, namely, the knack they had of actually preparing the
Philosopher’s Stone. Perhaps, then, their simple methods were
after all the best ; and it is on this supposition that I desire, in
this volume, to teach you to understand Nature, so that our vain
imaginations may: not misdirect us in the true and simple way.
Nature, then, is one, true, simple, self-contained, created by God
and informed with a certain universal spirit. Its end and origin
are God. Its unity is also found in God, because God made ail
things. Nature is the one source of all things: nor is anything
in the world outside Nature, or contrary to Nature. Nature is
divided into four “ places” in which she brings forth all things
that appear and that are in the shade ; and according to the good
or bad quality of the “ place” she brings forth good or bad things.
There are only four qualities which are in all things and yet do
not agree among themselves, as one is always striving to obtain
the mastery over the rest. Nature is not visible, though she acts
-visibly ; she is a volatile spirit who manifests herself in material
shapes, and her existence is in the Will of God. It is most im-
portant for us to know her “places,” and those which are most
in harmony, and most closely allied,-in order that we may join
things together according to Nature, and not attempt to confound
- vegetables with animals, or animals with metals. Everything
should be made to act on that which is like to it—and then
Nature will perform her duty.

Students of Nature should be suchas is Nature herself— true,
simple, patient, constant, and so on ; above all, they should fear
God, and love their neighbours. They should always be ready
to learn from Nature, and to be guided by her methods, ascer-
taining by visible and sensible examples whether that which they
propose to perform is in accordance with her possibilities. If we

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 87

would reproduce something already accomplished by Nature, we
must follow her, but if we would improve on hér performance, we
must know in and by what it is ameliorated. For instance, it
we desire to impart to a metal greater excellence than Nature’
has given to it, we must take the me¢a/lic substance both in its .
male and its female varieties, else all our efforts will bé in vain. ,
Ifis as impossible to ‘produce a metal out of a plant, as to make’
a tree out of a dog or any other animal.

SECOND TREATISE.

Concerning the operation of Nature in our Substance,
and its Seed.

I have already-said that Nature is one, true, and consistent,
and that she is known by her products, such as trees, herbs, &c.
I have also described the qualifications of a student of Nature.
Now I will say a few words about the operation of Nature. As
Nature has her being in the Will of God, so her will, or seed, is
in the Elements. She is one, and produces different things, but
only through the mediate instrumentality of seed. For Nature
performs whatsoever the sperm requires of her, and is, as it were,
only the instrument of some artisan. The seed,if anything, is
more useful to the artist than Nature herself; for Nature
without seed, is what a goldsmith is without silver and gold, or a
husbandman without seed corn. Wherever there is seed, Nature
will work through it, whether it be good or bad. Nature works
on “seed” as God works on the free will of man. Truly.it is a
great marvel to behold Nature obeying the seed, not because she
is forced to do so, but of her own will. In like manner, God
permits man to do what he pleases, not because He is constrained,
but of His good and free bounty. The seed, then, is the elixir or
anything, or its quintessence, or its most perfect digestion and
decoction, or, again, the Balm of Sulphur, which is the same as the
radical, moisture in metals) We might say much more about
this seed, but can only mention “those facts which are Of
importance in our Art. The four elements produce seed, through
the will of God and the imagination of Nature ; and as the seed
of the male animal has its centre or storing place in the kidneys,

88 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

so the four elements by their continual action project a constant
supply of-seed to the centre of the earth, where it is digested, and
whence it proceeds again in generative motions. Now the centre
of the earth is a certain void place wherein nothing is at rest ;
and upon the margin or circumference of this centre the four
elements project their qualities. As the male seed is emitted
into the womb of the female, where only so much as is needed
is retained while the rest is driven out again, so the magnetic
force of our earth-centre attracts to itself as much as is needed of
the cognate seminal substance, while that which cannot be used
for vital generation is thrust forth in the shape of stones and other
rubbish. This is the fountain-head of all things terrestrial. Let
us illustrate the matter by supposing a glass of water to be set
in the middle of a table, round the margin of which are placed
little heaps of salt, and of powders of different colours. If the
water be poured out, it will run all over the table in divergent
rivulets, and will become salt where it touches the salt, red where
it dissolves the red powder, and soon. The water does not change
the “places,” but the several places differentiate the water. In
the same way, the seed which is the product of the four elements
is projected in all directions from the earth-centre, and produces
different things, according to the quality of the different places.
Thus, while the seed of all things is one, it is made to generate a
great variety of things, just as the seed of a man might produce
a man if projected into the womb of a female of his own species,
or a monstrous variety of abortions, if projected into the wombs
of. different female animals. So long as Nature’s seed remains
in the centre it can indifferently produce a tree or a metal, a herb
or a stone, and in like manner, according to the purity of the
place, it will produce what is less or more pure. But how do the
elements generate the sperm or seed? There are four elements,
two heavy and two light,two dry and two moist, but one driest
and one moistest of all; and these are male and female. By
God’s Will each of these is constantly striving to produce things
like to itself in its own sphere. Moreover, they are constantly
acting on one another, and the subtle essences of all are combined
in the centre, where they are well mixed and sent forth again by
Archeus, the servant of Nature, as is more fully set forth in the
Epilogue of these twelve Treatises.

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 89

THIRD TREATISE.
Concerning the true and first Matter of Metals.

The first matter of metals is twofold, and one without the:
other cannot createa metal. The first and principal substance is
the moisture of _air mingled with warmth. This substance the
SagesShave called _Mercury, and in the philosophical sea it is
governed’ by the rays of the Sun and the Moon. The second
substance i is the dry heat of the earth, which is called Sulphur.
But as this substance has always been kept a great. mystery, let
us declare it more fully, and especially its weight, ignorance of
which mars the whole work. The right substance, if the
quantity of it which is taken be wrong, can produce nothing
but an abortion. There are some who take the entire body for
their matter, that is, for their seed or sperm; others take only a
part of it: both are on the wrong track. If any one, for in-
stance, were to attempt the creation of a man out of a man’s
hand and a woman’s foot, he would fail. For there is in every
body a central atom, or vital point of the seed (its sm» part), even
in a grain of wheat. Neither the body nor the grain is a// seed,
but every body has a small seminal spark, which the other parts
protect from all excess of heat and cold. If you have ears and
eyes treasure up this fact, and be on your guard against those
who would use the whole grain as seed, and those who strive to
produce a highly rarefied metallic substance by the vain solution
and mixture of different metals. For even the purest metals
contain a certain element of impurity, while in the inferior the
proportion is greater. You will have all you want if you find
the point of Nature, which you must not, however, look for in
the vulgar metals; it is not to be found therein, for all these,

common gold more especially, are dead. But the metals
which we advise you to take are living and have vital spirits.
Fire is the life of metals while they are still in their ore, and the
fire of smelting is their death. But the first matter of metals
is a certain moisture mixed with warm air. Its appearance is

|: that of oily water adhering to all pure and impure things ; yet
in some places it is found more abundantly than in others,
because the earth is more open and porous in one place than in
another, and has a greater magnetic force. When it becomes

90 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

manifest, it is clothed in a certain vesture, especially in places
where it has nothing to cling to. It is known by the fact that
it is composed of three principles ; but, as a metallic substance,
it is only one without any visible sign of conjunction, except
that which may be called its vesture or shadow, namely,
sulphur, &c.

FOURTH TREATISE.
How metals are produced in the Bowels of the Earth.

The métals are produced in this way: after the four
elements have projected their power and virtues to the centre of
the earth, they are, in the hands of the Archeus of Nature, dis-
tilled and sublimed by the heat of perpetual motion towards the

. surface of the earth. For the earth is porous, and the air’ by
’ distillation through the pores of the earth is resolved into a
water, out of which all things are generated, You should know
that the seed of metals is the same, in the first instance, as the
sperm of all other things, viz., a vaporous moisture. Hence it is
foolish to seek the dissolution of metals in the first matter, which
is nothing but a vapour, and in so doing philosophers have not
comprehended the first matter, but only the second, as Bernard
Trevisan well argues, though in a somewhat obscure manner, for
he addressed himself to the Sons of the Doctrine. For my part,
before openly explaining this theory, I would warn all men not
to seek that which exists everywhere by itself in a soft volatile
form by so many circulations, calcinations,-and reiterations of
hard gold and silver, which can never be changed back into their
original substance. Let us follow the real meaning of the
writers of Alchemy whose works we read, and remember that if
Art would produce any solid and permanent effect, it must follow
in the footsteps of Nature, and be guided by her methods. It
must trust itself to the guidance of Nature as far as Nature will
lead, and go beyond her by still adhering to her rules. Now I
said that all things are produced of a: liquid air or a vapour,
which the elements distil into the centre of the earth by a con-
tinual motion, and that as soon as the Archeus has received it,
his wisdom sublimes it through the pores, and distributes it to
each place, producing different things according to the diverse

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT: gl,

places in which it is deposited. Some think that each metal has
its own seed. But this is a great mistake, for there is only one
seed. The sperm which appears in Saturn is the same as that
which is found in gold, silver, copper, &c.; their difference is
caused by the place, and by the time during which Nature was
at work upon them, the procreation of silver being achieved
sooner than that of gold, and so with the other metals. The
vapour which is sublimed by heat from the centre of the earth,
passes either through cold or warm places. If the place be
warm and pure, and contain adhering to it a certain fatness of
sulphur, the vapour (or Mercury of the Sages) joins itself to its
fatness, and sublimes it together with itself. Ifin the course of
its further sublimation this unctuous vapour reaches other places
where the earth has already been subtilized, purified, and
rendered moist by previous ascending vapours, it fills the pores
of this earth, and with it becomes gold. But if this unctuous
moisture be carried to impure and cold places, it becomes lead ;
if the earth be pure and mingled with sulphur, it becomes copper.
For the purer the place is, the more beautiful and perfect will
the metal be. We must also note that the vapour is constantly
ascending, and in its ascent from the earth’s centre to its super-
ficies, it purifies the places through which it passes. Hence
precious metals are found now where none existed a thousand
years ago, for this vapour, by its continual progress, ever
subtilizes the crude and impure, and as continually carries away
the pure with itself. This is the circulation and reiteration of
Nature. All places are being more and more purified: and the
purer they become, the nobler are their products. In the winter
this unctuous vapour is congealed by the frost. At the return
of spring it is set free, and is the J/agnesza which attracts to
itself the kindred Mercury of the air, and gives life to all things
through the rays of the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, thus bring-
ing forth grass, flowers, and the like, for Nature is never idle even
during a single moment. This, then, is the only true account, of
the generation of Metals. The earth is purged by a long
distillation, and when the unctuous or fatty vapour approaches,
the same are procreated, nor are they ever otherwise begotten,
notwithstanding the imaginations of those who misinterpret on
this point the writings of the philosophers.

92 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

FIFTH TRACT.
On the generation of all kinds of Stones.

The substance of stones is the same as that of all other
things; and their quality is determined by the purity of the
places in which they arise. When the four elements distil their
vapour to the centre of the earth, the Archeus of Nature expels
and sublimes it in such a manner that it carries with it in its
passage through the pores of the earth, all the impurities of these
places up to the surface, where they are congealed by, the air, all
that pure air engenders being congealed by crude air, their
ingression being mutual, so that they join one with another, since
Nature rejoices in Nature. Thus rocks and stones are gradually
built up and generated. Now the larger the pores of the earth,
the greater is the quantity of impurities carried upward ; and
thus the earth is most completely purified under those places
where there is a great accumulation of stones or rocks at the
surface, and in this manner the procreation of metals becomes
easier in these places. This explains the fact that metals are
scarcely ever found in plains, but nearly always in the bowels of
rocky hills. The plains are often moist with elemental water
which attracts to itself the rising vapour, and with it is digested
. by the rays of the Sun into the rich clay which potters use. In
places where the soil is gross, and the vapour contains neither
unctuousness nor sulphur, it produces herbs and grass in the
meadows. The precious stones, such as diamonds, rubies, and
emeralds, chrysopras, onyx, and carbuncle, are all generated in
the same manner as ordinary stones. When the natural vapour
is sublimed by itself without sulphur or the unctuosity of which
we have spoken, and reaches a place where there is pure salt
water (ze, in very cold places, where our sulphur cannot exist,
for could it exist, this effect would be hindered), diamonds are
formed. The unctuous sulphur which rises with the vapour
cannot move without warmth, and is instantly congealed, when
it reaches a slightly cold place, leaving the vapour to continue
its upward -movement without it. Colours are imparted to
precious stones in this way. When the unctuous sulphur is con-
gealed by the perpetual motion, the spirit of the water digests it
in passing and purifies it by the water of the salt, until it assumes

7
THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 93

a red or white colour. This colour is volatilized by so many"
repeated distillations, and at length is borne upward with the
purifying vapour, which by its aid is able to enter imperfect
bodies, and thus to pervade them with colour; the colour is
united to the partly congealed water, and fills all its pores so,
that the two are absolutely one. For water which has no spirit
is congealed by heat, and water which has a spirit is congealed
by cold ; but he who knows how to congeal water by means of
heat, and to join to it a spirit, is like to discover something a
thousand times more precious than gold, or anything which is in
the world. Let him separate the spirit from the water, in order
that it may putrefy, and that the grain may appear. Then let
him purge off the dross, and reduce the spirit to water. This
union will produce a branch which bears little resemblance to
the parent stem.

SIXTH TREATISE.
Concerning the Second Matter and Putrefaction.

We have spoken of the first matter of all things, and after
what manner they are born by Nature without seéd, that is, affer
what manner Nature receives the matter from the elements
whereof she engenders seed. We will now consider this seed and
the things evolved from it. Everything that has seed is multi-
plied thereby, but not without the aid of Nature: for seed is
nothing but congealed air, or a vaporous humour enclosed in a
body ; and unless it be dissolved by a warm vapour, it cannot
work. Now, the nature of this seed which is produced out of the
four elements, is threefold: it is either Mineral, or Vegetable, or
Animal. Mineral seed is known only to the Sages. Vegetable
seed is common and vulgar, as we see in fruits. Animal seed is
known by imagination. But vegetable seed exhibits most clearly
the process by which Nature evolves natural objects out of the
four elements. Winter is the cause of putrefaction: it congeals
the vital spirit in trees; and when the heat. of the Sun, which
magnetically attracts moisture, sets it free, the natural heat (of
the tree) which is thereby stirred up, drives a subtle vapour of
water towards the surface, and makes the sap to flow, always
separating the pure from the impure, though the impure may

94 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

sometimes precede the pure. That which is pure is congealed
into flowers, the impure becomes leaves, the gross and thick
hardens into bark. The bark of the tree remains fixed ; the
leaves fall when the pores are obstructed by heat or cold; the
flowers receive a colour according to the quality of the natural
heat, and bear fruit or seed. We may instance the apple, wherein
is the sperm, whence the tree does not spring ; but in this sperm
is the seed or grain interiorly, whence the tree is born even
without sperm, for multiplication is not of the sperm but of the
seed. “Thus we see how Nature, without our help, creates
vegetable seed out of the four elements. But how about Min-
erals? Nature brings forth Mineral or Metallic seed in the
bowels ofthe earth. This is the reason why so many will not
believe in its existence—because it is invisible. And on this
account the vulgar unbelief is not so greatly to be wondered at :
for if they hardly understand that which is openly before their
eyes, how should they know anything about that which they
cannot see, Yet, whether they believe it or not, the fact remains
the same, and it is most true that that which is above is as that
which is below, and that which is born above has origin from the
same source which is at work down below, even in the bowels of
the earth. What prerogative have vegetables above metals that
God should give seed to the one and withhold it from the other ?
Are not metals as much in His sight as trees? It is certain that
nothing can grow without seed ; for that which has no seed, is
dead. The four elements must cither bring forth metallic seed,
or produce metals without seed. In the latter case, they cannot
be perfect: for nothing is complete without seed. He who can
bring himself to believe that metals are destitute of seed, is un-
worthy to understand the mysteries ofour Art. The metals then
really contain their own proper seed ; and it is generated in the
following way. The vapour which (in the manner repeatedly
described) risés from the earth’s centre, and is called Mercury not
on account of its essence but on account of its fluidity, and the
facility with which it adheres to anything, is assimilated to the
sulphur on account of its internal heat ; and, after congelation, is
the radical humour. Thus metals are indeed generated out of
mercury ; but those ignorant persons who say that this first
substance of metals is ordinary mercury, confound the whole

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 95

body with the seed that is in it, seeing that common mercury,
too, contains metallic seed, as well as the other metals. Let
us illustrate the matter by the analogy of the human body.
Therein it is certain that there is a seed whereby the species
of mankind is propagated. That body (which may be likened
to common mercury) contains seed, which is not seen, and
of which the quantity is very small in proportion to the size of
the whole body: the process of generation is performed not by
the whole body, but by this seminal “congealed watery vapour.”
But as no vital generation could take place if the body were
dissected in order to get at the seed, as the murdering of the body
would kill the seed—so ignorant Alchemists ‘may be said to
murder the body and kill the seed of metals, when they dissolve
their bodies, whether of gold, silver, or lead, and corrode them
with aqua fortis, in order to obtain the metallic seed. All multi-

plication is performed by means of male and female seed ; and
the two (which by themselves are barren) must be conjoined in
order to bring forth fruit, ze, anew form. Whosoever, therefore,
would bring forth any good thing must take the sperm or the seed,
and not the entire body.

Take, then, the jing male and the living female, and join
them in order that they may project a sperm ‘for the procreation
ofa fruit according to their kind, for let no one presume to suppose
that he can make the first matter. The first matter of man is
earth, and there is no one so bold as to dream that he can create
aman. God alone can perform this artifice. But if the second
substance (or seed) which is already created, be put in the proper
place, Nature will produce a new form of the same species. The
Artist only separates what is subtle from its grosser elements, and
puts.it into the proper “vessel.” Nature doestherest. Asa thing
begins, so it ends. Out of one arise two, and out of two one—
as of God the Father there was begotten God the Son, and from
the two proceeded God: the Holy Ghost. Thus was the world
made, and so also shall it end. Consider carefully these few
points, and you will find, firstly, the Father, then the Father
and the Son, lastly, the Holy Spirit. You will find the four
elements, the four luminaries, the two celestials, the two centrics.
In a word, there is nothing, has been, and shall be nothing in the
world which is otherwise than it appears in this symbol, and a

96 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

volume might be filled with its mysteries. I say, therefore, it is
the attribute of God alone to make one out of one; you must
produce one thing out of two by natural generation. Know, then,
that the multiplying sperm is the second substance, and not the
first. For the first substance of things is not seen, but is hidden
in Nature or the elements: the second substance is occasionally
seen by the children of knowledge.

SEVENTH TREATISE.
Concerning the Virtue of the Second Matter.

But in order that you may the better know this second
matter, I will describe to you its virtues. Nature is divided
into three kingdoms, the mineral, the vegetable, and the animal.
It is manifest that the mineral kingdom could subsist of itself
were there no vegetables or animals in the world ; the vegetable,
in like manner, is independent of the animal and mineral.
These two kingdoms were created in independence. The animal
kingdom alone depends for its subsistence on the two others,
and is the most noble and excellent of all ; and seeing that it is
the last of the three, it governs the two others, because virtue
expends itself at the third, even as it is multiplied in the
second. In the vegetable kingdom the first substance is the
herb or the tree, which you cannot create, but which is. pro-
duced by Nature alone. The second substance is the seed
.which you see, by which herbs and trees are propagated. In
the animal kingdom the first substance is the beast or man,
whom you cannot create; but the seed, or second substance, by
which they are propagated, you know. In the mineral kingdom,
too, you are unable to create a metal, and if you boast that
you can do so, Nature will laugh at your pretensions; given
even the possession of that first matter which is vaunted by
the philosophers, namely, the centric salt, you cannot multiply
it without gold ; but the vegetable seed of metals is known only
to the Sons of Science. Tete case of plants, the seed is seen
outwardly, and is digested by warm air. In animals the seed
appears inwardly and outwardly, and is prepared in the kidneys
of the male Water is the seed of minerals, in the very
centre of their. heart and life ; and the “kidneys of its digestion”

THE NEW> CHEMICAL LIGHT. 97

are fire. The receptacle of vegetable seed is the earth; the
- receptacle of animal seed the womb of the female; and air is
the receptacle of water—the mineral seed. The receptacles of
seed are the same as congelations of bodies; digestion is the
same as solution, and putrefaction the same as destruction. The
specific property of seed is to enter into union with other sub-
stances belonging to the same kingdom, because it is subtle, and,
in fact, air congealed by fatness into water. It is recognisable
by the fact that it does not become naturally united to anything
outside the kingdom to which it belongs. It is not dissolved,
but only congealed, as it does not need solution but only con-
gelation. Hence it is necessary that the pores of bodies be
opened to admit the sperm, in the centre of which lies the seed
_ (which is air), When it enters its proper womb it is congealed,
and congeals the pure or mixed substance which it finds. So
long as there is any seed in the body the body lives ; when it is
all consumed the body dies ; and any emission of seed weakens
the body, as may be seen in the case of dissolute persons, and
of trees which have been too richly laden with fruit. The seed,
then, is invisible, but the sperm can be seen, and is even as
a living soul, which is not found in dead things. It is extracted
after two manners, of which the ‘first is gentle and the second
violent. Nothing is produced without seed, but everything
comes into being by means of seed. Let all sons of knowledge
remember that seed is vainly sought in dry trees, and that it is
found only in those which are green. ;
wr S eemmnneal

EIGHTH TREATISE.
How Nature operates through our Art in the Seed.

Seed in itself produces no fruit, if it be not placed by Nature
or Artin its own proper womb. Though seed in itself is the most
glorious of all created things, yet the womb is its life, which causes
the putrefaction of the enclosing grain or sperm, brings about the
congelation of the vital atom, nourishing and stimulating its
growth by the warmth of its own body. All this is constantly
and regularly being enacted (by months, years, and seasons) in
the above said three natural kingdoms. The process can be
hastened artificially in the vegetable and mineral, but not in the

Vor, IL G

_

98 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

animal world. In the auc ifaetiony Art can do something
which Nature is unable to perform, by removing the crude air
which stops up the outward pores of minerals, not in the bowels
of the earth but in the circumference. The elements vie in
projecting their seed into the centre of the earth in order that it
may there be digested. The centre, by a caloric movement,
‘emits it into the womb; of these wombs there are an untold
number—as many as there are places, and one place always purer
than another. Know that a pure womb will bring forth a pure
form of its own species. For instance, as among animals there
are wombs of women, cows, mares, bitches, so in the mineral °
world there are metals, stones, and salts. Now salts principally
demand consideration, with their localities, according as they are
less or more important.

NINTH TREATISE.

On the Commixtion of Metals, and the Elictting
of the Metallic Seed.

We have spoken hitherto of Nature, of Art, of bodies, sperm,
and seed. Let us now proceed to the practical enquiry, how
metals should be mixed, and how they are mutally related. For,
as a woman is generated in the same womb, and out of the same
seed: as a man, and the only difference is in the degree of
digestion, and the purity of the blood and salts, so silver is
produced from the same seed, and in the same womb as gold ;
but the womb of the silver had more water, and, as it were, less
digested blood than that of gold, according to the times of the
celestial moon. But if you would understand the sexual union
of the metals, and their manner of emitting and receiving seed,
took at the celestial bodies of the planets. You will see that
Saturn is higher than all the rest, to whom Jupiter succeeds, then
Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, while the last place is occu-
by the Moon. The virtues of the planets descend, but do
not ascend; and so as experiences teaches us, Mars is easily
converted into Venus, but not Venus inte Mars, which has an
inferior sphere. Also Jupiter may be quickly transmuted into
Mercury, because Jupiter has a higher place ; the one is second
after the firmament, the other second after the earth. Saturn is

: bad
THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 99°

the highest, the Moon lowest ; the Sun combines with all, but is
never ameliorated by its inferiors. There is a great correspon-
dence between Saturn and_the Moan, the Sun being medial
between them ; as also between Mercury and Jupiter, Mars and‘
Venus, which all have the Sun as their centre. Most operators
know how to transmute iron into copper, or Venus, without
using gold; they also know how to change Jupiter into Mercury ;
some can prepare the Moon (silver) out of Saturn; but if they
could prepare gold by these changes, their secret would be worth
knowing indeed. For this reason I repeat that it is important
to know the mutual correspondence of metals, and their
possibilities of union. There is exe metal which has power to’
consume all others, for it is, so to Speak, their water, and an
their mother, and is resisted only by the radical humour of gold
and silver, and ameliorated by it. This metal is called Chalybs
(steel). If gold is united to it eleven times, and emits its seed,
it is weakened even unto death; but the Chalbys (steel
conceives and brings forth a son much nobler than the father ;
and when the seed of the son is placed in her womb, it purifies it,
and renders it a thousand times better fitted to produce excellent
fruit. There is another Chalybs (steel) which is like this one, and
created as a thing by itself by Nature ; this steel is able, with its
wonderful virtue, to elicit from the rays of the “sun” that which
so many have sought, and which is the.chief principle of our Art.

TENTH TREATISE.

On the Supernatural Generation of the Son of the Sun.

We have treated of those things which are produced by
Nature and have been created by God, so that those who are
searchers of this science may comprehend more easily the
possibility of Nature, and the utmost limit of her powers.

I now go on to speak about the method of preparing the
Philosopher’s Stone. The Stone or Tincture is nothing other
than gold digested to the highest degree. Common gold resembles
a plant without seed; but when such a plant is matured, it
produces seed—and so, when gold is ripened, it produces its
seed, or the Tincture. If any one asks why gold and other
metals do not commonly produce seed, I answer: because the

G2

100 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

crudity of the ore, which has not sufficient heat, prevents it from
being matured. In some places pure gold is found which
Nature has been striving to mature, but which has not attained
to ripeness on account of the crudity of the air. An analogous
‘case is that of the orange tree, which bears no fruit in northern
latitudes, because it has not sufficient warmth, while in warmer
countries it ripens the most delicious fruit, and a like result it
is possible to produce in colder countries, by means of artificial
heat. The same thing happens with metallic natures, and so
gold may be made to produce seed, by a wise and judicious
Artist who knows how to assist Nature. Should he act inde-
pendently of Nature, he would err, for in this science, as in all
others, we can do nothing but supplement Nature, nor can we
otherwise aid her than through the agency of heat or fire. Now,
in order that Nature may be enabled to work upon a congealed
metallic substance, wherein the spirit does not appear, the body
must be dissolved and its pores opened. Now, there are two
kinds of solution, the violent and the natural ; and under the
former head come all those methods of solution which are in
vogue among the vulgar herd of modern Alchemists, and the
same are cold and useless. JVatural solution takes place when
the pores of the body are gently opened in our water, so that the
digested seed can be emitted and placed in its womb. Our
water is a water which does not wet the hands; it is a heavenly
water, and yet not rain water. The “Body” is gold, which gives
out the seed.” Our silver (not common silver) is that which con-
ceives the seed of the gold. There itis digested by our continual
fire, for seven or even ten months, until our water consumes
‘three, and leaves ove; and this is something twofold. Then it
is nourished with the milk of earth, or the fatness of that which
is formed in the breasts of the earth, and is regulated and
conserved by the putrefaction of the surrounding substance. In
this way that infant of the second generation is born. Now let
us advance from theory to practice.

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 101
ELEVENTH TREATISE.

Concerning the practical preparation of our Stone or Tincture
by means of our Art.

Our discourse in preceding chapters. has been enlarged by
appropriate examples which will facilitate the understanding of
the practice, which, in accordance with natural procedure, must be
performed as follows: take eleven grains of our earth, by as
many doses, one grain of our gold, and two grains of our silver.
Here you should carefully bear in mind that common gold and
silver are of no use for our purpose, as they are dead. Those
which I ask you to take are the living metals. Expose them to
the heat of our fire, and there will come out of them a dry liquid.
The earth will first be dissolved into a water, which is called Mer-
cury of the Sages, and this water will dissolve the bodies of the
gold and silver, and consume them, till only the tenth part with
one part remains, which is the radical metallic humour. Then
take the water of saltpetre from our earth, in which isa living river
and a flowing wave. Let this water be clear, and pour on it the
radical humour: expose the whole to the fire of putrefaction and
generation, which is not the same as that of the first: operation.
Regulate the heat judiciously, until there appear colours like
those of the Peacock’s Tail; and then continue to apply this
well-regulated heat until the colours resolve themselves into a
pronounced green. Be not weary, but continue till the rest of
the colours have manifested. When you observe at the bottom
ashes of a brown colour, while the water is almost red, you should
open the vessel and dip a feather into it. With this feather
smear a morsel of iron, and if it becomes tinged, pour into the
vessel as much of a certain water (which we will describe here-
after) as there is of crude air which has entered in, and then again
subject it to coction over the same fire, until it colours the feather
again. Further than this my experience does not go. The water
I have mentioned is the menstruum of the world, from the sphere
of the Moon, and socarefully rectified that it has power to calcine
the Sun. Herein have I desired to discourse everything to your
understanding, and if sometimes you will take my meaning rather
than my words, you will find that I have revealed all, more
especially as regards the first and second work. It remains for

102 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

me to say a few words about the fire. In the first operation the
fire should be of one degree and continuous, and should pervade
the whole substance with an even warmth. In the second
operation we need a natural fire, which digests and fixes the
substance. Behold, I say unto you the truth! I have unfolded
the regimen of the fire, if only you understand Nature. But it is
needful also to speak a few words concerning the vessel, which
ought to be such as is indicated by Nature; and two of these
vessels suffice. In the first operation, the vessel should be round ;
in the second it should ce somewhat smaller; it should also be
of glass, in the form of a vialoregg. But know, above all things,
that the fire employed by Nature is oe, and its differences are
determined by differences of distance. The vessel] of Nature is
also one, but we use two in order to accelerate the development
of our substance ; its material is one, but consists of two sub-
stances. If you would produce anything, look at the things that
are produced. If you cannot understand those which are con-
tinually before your eyes, it will go hardly with you when you
seek to produce those which are as yet unseen. Remember that
God alone can create; but He has permitted the Sage to make
manifest things that are hidden and concealed, according to the
ministry of Nature. Consider, I pray you, the simple water of
the clouds. Who would believe that it contains in itself all
mundane objects, hard stones, salts, air, earth, and fire? What
shall I say of the earth, which seems simple enough, and yet con-
tains water, fire, salts, air, and much besides? | O, admirable
Nature, who knowest by the means of water how to produce the
wonderful fruits of earth, who dost give life to them and nourish
them by means of air! Everything depends upon the faculty of
seeing which we bring to the study of Nature. Common
eyes, for instance, discern that the sun is hot; the eyes of the
Sage see that the sun itself is cold, and that it is only its
movements which produce heat; for its effect is felt at so
great a distance in space. The heat of the sun is the same as
our natural fire: for as the sun is the centre of the planets,
and thence scatters its heat downward in all directions, so in the
centre of the earth there is a sun of the earth, which by its
perpetual motion drives heat or rays upward towards the surface
of the earth. This inward heat is much more powerful than ele-

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 103

mental’ fire, but it is tempered and cooled by the water which
pervades and refreshes the pores of the earth; otherwise all
things would be consumed by its fierceness. In the same way,
the fierce rays of the sun are tempered and assuaged by the
air of the intermediate atmosphere, without which everything
would be consumed, and no generation would be possible.

But I must now proceed to explain after what manner the
elements act upon each other. In the centre of the earth, then,
there is a central sun, of which the heat pervades the whole
earth to its surface by reason of the movement thereof, or by the
motion of the firmament thereof. This heat changes the water
of the earth into air (or vapour), which being much more: subtle
than water, is violently driven upward through the pores of
the earth, But when it reaches the colder atmosphere it is
once more condensed into water; and in some places we do
indeed see this water, or condensed air, driven high up into the
air by the force of the central fire: just as a ‘kettle of water
when exposed to gentle heat sends upward a gentle stream of
vapour and air, while the steam thickens and the upward move-
ment becomes more intense when the fire is kindled into a
blaze. By this action of the “central sun” the elements are dis-
tributed over the earth, and each finds the place where it can
grow. This upward current of air is not always noticeable, -
because in many places there is not enough water to make it ©
perceptible: an empty kettle gives out no steam. I say, then, '
that fire or heat is the cause of the motion of the air, and the

‘life of all things ; and the earth is their nurse, or receptacle. If
our earth and air were not cooled by water, the earth would
be parched up, as it is even now in some places where the pores
of the earth are closed up, and by obstructing the movement
of the water would be placed at the mercy of the two kinds of
solar heat. In this way the destruction of the world will one
day be brought about. Now in our Art you should closely
imitate these natural processes. There should be the Central
Heat, the change of the water into air, the driving upward of the
air, its diffusion through the pores of the earth, its reappear- .
ance as condensed but volatilized water. Then you must give
our Ancient One gold and silver to swallow and consume, till
he himself is burnt to death, and his ashes are scattered into the

104 . ZFHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

water, which you must then subject to coction for a sufficient
space of time. The result will be the Medicine which is a cure
for leprosy. But be careful not to take heat for cold, or cold
for heat. Mix only things which are like each other, and
separate contrary elements by means of heat. If you do not
follow the guidance of Nature all your efforts will be in vain.
I swear by God that I have spoken to you as a father should to
his son. He that hath ears, let him hear, and he that hath sense,
let him understand.

TWELFTH TREATISE.
Concerning the Stone and its Virtue.

We have spoken sufficiently in preceding chapters concern-
ing the production of natural things, the elements, the first and
second matters, bodies and seeds, as also of their use and virtue.
I have written also of the Philosophical Stone, and shall now
speak of its virtue, in so far as experience has discovered it to me.
Before, however, I proceed to describe the virtues of the Stone,
I will, for the better understanding of our Art, once more
recapitulate what has already been said. If any one doubts the
vealzty of our Art, he.should read the books of those ancient
Sages whose good faith no one ever yet called in question, and
whose right to speak on this subject cannot be challenged. If
you will not believe z4em, I am not so foolish as to enter into a
controversy with one who denies first principles: the deaf-and
dumb cannot speak. Why minerals alone should be excluded
from God's primal benediction, when He bade all things increase
and multiply after their kind, 1 am unable to see; and if
minerals have seed they have it for the purpose of generic pro-
pagation. The Art of Alchemy is true in its nature. Nature is
true also, but a true Artist is rarely found. Nature is one,
our Art is ove, but the workmen are many. Nature, then,
generates things through the Will of God out of the first Matter
(the product of the elements) which is known to God alone.
Nature produces things, and multiplies them out of the second
substance, which is known to the Sages. All elements are
mutually dependent, though they do not agree when joined, but
the queen of all is water, because it is the mother of all things—

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 105

and over it broods the spirit of fire. When fire acts on water,

and strives with it, the first matter is evolved. Thus arise

vapours of sufficient denseness to combine with earth, by means_
of that crude air which from the very beginning was separated

from it. This process is going on ceaselessly, by means of

perpetual motion. For motion causes heat, as you may know

by continued friction of any substance. Motion causes heat,

heat moves the water; the motion of water produces air, which

is the life of all living things. Thus all things grow out of

water; out of its more subtle vapours are produced light and

subtle things ; out of its “oil,” things of greater weight ; out of
its salt things far more beautiful and precious than the rest. But

as Nature is often hindered by the impurity of this vapour, fat-

ness, and salt, from producing perfection, experience has taught

us to separate the pure from the impure. Therefore, if you

would ameliorate Nature, and produce a more perfect and elabo-

rated subject, purge the body by dissolution of all that is

heterogeneous, and unite the pure to the pure, the well-digested

to the well-digested, and the crude to the crude, according to the

natural and not the material weight. For you must know that

the central saltpetre never contains more earth than is required,

whether it be otherwise pure or impure. But it is different with

the fatness of the water, which is never found pure. Art purges

it by the action of twofold heat, and then again combines its”
elements.

EPILOGUE,

OR
CONCLUSION OF THESE TWELVE TREATISES.

I have composed, O friendly reader, the preceding twelve
Treatises for the benefit of the students of this Art ; in order that
they might understand the operations of Nature, and after what
manner she produces all things which are in the world, before
they put their hands to any experiment. Otherwise, they might
be trying to open the gate without a key, or to draw water with
a sieve. For in regard to our Holy and Blessed Art he for whom
the sun shines not, walks in thick darkness, and he who does not

106 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

see the light of the moon, is involved in the shades of night.
Nature has her own light, which is not visible to the outward eye.
The shadow of Nature upon our eyes is the body. But where the
’ light of Nature irradiates the mind, this mist is cleared away from
the eyes, all difficulties are overcome,and things are seen in their
very essence, namely, the inmost heart of our Magnesia, which
corresponds to the respective centres of the Sun.and Earth. The
bodily nature of things is a concealing outward vesture. If you
dressed a boy and a girl of twelve years of age in exactly the
same way, you would be puzzled to tell which was the boy and
which the girl, but when the clothes are removed they may
easily be distinguished. In the same way, our understanding
makes a shadow to the shadow of Nature, for our human nature
is concealed by the body in the same way as the body by the
clothes. I might in this place discourse fully and philosophic-
ally of the dignity of man, of his creation and generation, but I
will pass over these themes and touch briefly on his life alone.
Man is made of earth, and lives through air ; for aircgntains the
hidden food of life, of. which the invisible spirit, when congealed,
is better than the ‘whole world. Truly wonderful and admirable
are the ways of Nature, who shews to us day by day the light of
truth. I have set down in these twelve Treatises that which she
has revealed to me in order that the God-fearing reader may more
easily understand that which I have seen with my eyes, that
which my hands have performed, without any fraud or sophistica-
tion. For without the light and knowledge of Nature it is
impossible to attain to the perfection of this Art, unless it be
revealed to a man by the Spirit, or secretly by a loving friend.
| The substance is vile and yet most.pregiaus. Take ten parts of
our air; one part of living gold or living silver ; put all this into
your vessel; subject the air to coction, until it becomes first
water, and then something which is not water. If you do not
know how to do.this, and how to cook air, you will go wrong,
for herein is the true Matter of the Philosophers. You must take
that which is, but is not seen until the operator pleases. This is
the water of our dew, which is extracted from the saltpetre of the
Sages, by which all things grow, exist, and are nourished, whose
~womb is the centre of the celestial and terrestrial sun and moon.
“To speak more openly, it is our Magnet, which I have already

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 107

Aalled our Chalybs, or steel Air generates this magnet, ne
magnet engenders or manifests our air.

Thus Hermes says that its father is the Sun, its mother the
Moon, and that the winds have fostered it in their womb, that is
to say, the salt Alkali (called by the Sages salt of Ammonia, or
vegetable salt) is hidden in the womb of Magnesia. The opera-
tion thereof is as follows :—You dissolve condensed air, and in it
a tenth part of gold; seal it up, and expose it to our fire, until
the air is changed into powder, and there will be seen, given the
salt of the world, a great variety of colours. The rest of this
process and the method of multiplication you will find fully set
fotth in the writings of Lullius,and other of the ancient Sages,
so therefore I do not dwell on them, being content to treat only
of the first and second matters. This I have done frankly, and
with open heart. Think not that any man in this world has
spoken more fully and clearly than I have. I have not learnt
what I tell you from books, but by the experiment of my own
hands. If you do not understand it at first, or are unable to
accept the truth, accuse not my work, but blame rather yourself,
believing that God will not reveal this secret unto you. Take it,
then, in all earnestness, read and.again read it, especially the
Epilogue of these twelve Treatises, and diligently consider
the possibilities of Nature, the action of the elements, and
which is chief among them, especially in the rarefaction
of air or water, by which the heavens and the whole world!
were created. This I admonish you to do, as a father
admonishes a son. Do not wonder that I have written so many
Treatises. I am not in need of books for myself, but was
impelled to record my experience by pity towards those who are
wandering astray in the darkness of their own conceits; and
though I might have set forth this secret in few words, I have
written at great length in order to equip you with that knowledge
of Nature, without which you could not hope to succeed in this
Art. Do not be put out by the seeming contradictions with
which, in accordance with the custom of the Sages, I have had
to conceal my real meaning a little. There is no rose found
without thorns. Revolve diligently in your mind all that I have
said about the way in which the elements distil the Radical
Moisture to the centre of the earth, and how the terrestrial and

1088 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

centric sun again raises and sublimes them, by its continual
motion, to the surface of the earth. Note also the correspondence
which has been affirmed between the celéstial and the centric sun;
for the celestial Sun and Moon have a special power and a won-
derful virtue in distilling upon earth by their rays. For heat is
easily united to heat, and salt to salt. As the central sun has
its sea and crude perceptible water, so the celestial sun has its sea
of ‘subtle and imperceptible water (the atmosphere). On the
surface of the earth the two kinds of rays meet and produce
flowers and all things. Then rain receives its vital force out of
the air, and unites it to that of the saltpetre of the earth. For the
saltpetre of the earth is like calcined 7artar, and by its dryness,
attracts air to itself—which air it dissolves into water. For this
saltpetre itself was once air, and has become joined to the fatness
of the earth, The more abundantly the rays of the sun descend,
the greater is the quantity of saltpetre generated, and so also is
the harvest on earth increased. All this does experience daily
‘teach.

I have willed thus to set forth solely for the benefit of the
ignorant the correspondences which exist between all things, and
the efficacious virtue of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. The wise
have no need of such instruction. Our substance is openly’ dis-
played before the eyes of all, and yet is not known. Oh, how
marvellous is our heaven, and our water, and our mercury, and
our saltpetre which are in the world sea, and our vegetable, and
our fixed and volatile sulphur, and our dead head, or dregs of our
sea, and our water that does not wet the hands, and without
which no mortal can live—without which nothing is born or
generated in the whole world! It is lightly esteemed by. men,
yet no one can do without it: for it is more precious than all the
world beside, and, in short, it is nothing but our pontic-water
which is congealed in the sun and moon and extracted from the
sun and moon, by means of our chalybs (steel) through the skill
of the Sages by a philosophical artifice and in a surprising
manner. . . . . I did not really intend to publish this book,
for reasons that are named in the preface; but my love for
earnest students of this Art got the better of my caution. So
have I sought to make known my good-will to those who know
me, and manifest unto the initiated that I am their companion

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT, 109

and equal, and that I desire their acquaintance. I doubt not
that there are many persons of good conduct and clear conscience
who possess this great gift of God in secret. I pray and conjure

_them that they should preserve even the silence of Harpocrates.
Let them be made wise by my example, and take warning from
my dangers. Whenever I have revealed myself to the great, it
has always been to my peril and loss. But by this work I now
shew myself to the Sons of Hermes, while at.the same time I
instruct the ignorant, and direct lost seekers into the right path.
Let them know that the secret is here as plainly.expounded as
it ever will be. I have kept nothing back except the secret of
extracting our “salt of Ammonia,” or “Mercury of the Sages”
out of our. “sea water,” and the great use to which it is put. If I
have not expressed myself very plainly on these points, it is only
because I may not doso. The secret can only be revealed by
God, who knows men’s hearts and minds, and He will vouchsafe
this knowledge, in answer to earnest and importunate prayer,
after a repeated careful perusal of this Book. The vessel, as I
have said, is one, or two at most will suffice; and if you have
knowledge of Nature, a continuous fire, and the right substance,
you ought to succeed. Let me caution you, in conclusion, not
to be led astray by those who waste their time and money on
herbs, animals, stones, and all kinds of minerals but the right
ones. Farewell, good reader, and may you long enjoy the results
of my labours, to the glory of God, the salvation of your soul,
and the good of your neighbour.

A PREFACE °'
TO THE RIDDLE OF THE SAGES.

Addressed to the Sons of Truth.

Though I have already given unto you, O Children of
Science, a full and exhaustive account of our Art, and of the
source of the universal fountain, so that there seems no further
call to say anything, having, in the preceding Treatises, illus-
trated the mode of Nature by examples, and declared both the
theory and the practice, so far as it is permitted me to ‘do,

110 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

yet there may be some of my readers who think that I have
expressed myself here and there in too laconical a fashion. I
will therefore once more make: known, from beginning to end,
the entire process, but in the form of a philosophical enigma, so
that you may judge how far I have been permitted to attain
by God. There is an infinite number of books which treat
of this Art, but you will scarce find any which contain a more
clear explication of the truth than is here set down. I have, in
the course of my life, met with a good many who fancied that
they had a perfect understanding of the writings of the Sages ;
but their subtle style of interpretation was in glaring contrast
with the simplicity of Nature, and they laughed at what they
were pleased to call the rustic crudeness of my remarks. I have
also frequently attempted to explain our Art to others by word
of mouth ; but though they called themselves Sages, they would
not believe that there is such water in our sea, and attributed
my reinarks to temporary insanity. For this reasen I am not
afraid that my writings will reveal anything to unworthy persons,
as I am persuaded that it is only by the gift of God that this
Art can be understood. If, indeed, subtlety and mental acute-
ness were all that is necessary for its apprehension, I have met
with many strong minds, well fitted for the investigation of such
subjects. But I tell you: Be simple, and not overwise, until
you have found the secret. Then you will be obliged to be
prudent, and you will easily be able to compose any number of
books, which is doubtless more simple for him who is in the centre.
and. beholds the thing itself, than one who is on the circum-
ference only, and can only go by hearsay. You have a clear
description of the matter of all things, but I warn you that if
you would attain to this knowledge you should continue in
earnest prayer to God, and love your neighbour. In the second
place, you should not be ready to imagine all manner of subtleties
and refinements of which Nature knows nothing. Remain
rather in the way of her simplicity, for therein you are far more
likely to put your finger on the subject than if you abide in the
midst of subtleties.

In reading my book, do not stick too closely to the letter of
my words, but read them side by side with the natural facts
which they describe. You should also from the first fix your

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. II

eyes steadily on the object of your search, and the scope and aim
of our work. It is much wiser to learn with your mind and your
brain first than by bitter experience afterwards. The object of
your search should be to find a hidden thing from which, by a
marvellous artifice, there is obtained a liquid by whose means
gold is dissolved as gently and naturally as ice is melted in.
warm water. If you can find this substance, you have that out
of which Nature produced gold, and though all metals and all
things are derived from it, yet it takes most kindly to gold. For
all other things are clogged with impurity, except gold wherein
there is no uncleanness, whence in a special manner this matter
is, as it were, the mother of gold. If you will not follow my
instructions, and be warned by my cautions, you can derive no
benefit from my book. I have spoken as plainly as my
‘conscience would permit. If you ask who I am: I am a
Cosmopolitan. If you know me, and wish to be good and hon-
ourable men, keep my namea secret. If you do not know me,
forbear to enquire after my name, for I shall make public
nothing more than appears in this writing. Believe me, if my
rank and station were not what they are, I should enjoy nothing
so much as a solitary life, or to have joined Diogenes in his tub:
For I behold this world full of vanity, greed, cruelty, venality,
and iniquity ; and I rejoice in the prospect of the glorious life to
come. I no longer wonder, as once I did, that the true Sage,
though he owns the Stone, does not care to prolong his life ;
for he daily sees heaven before his eyes, as you see your face in
a glass. When God gives you what you desire, you will believe
me, and not make yourself known to the world. :

A PARABLE,

OR
ENIGMA OF THE SAGES.
Added by way of an Appendix.

Once upon a time, when I had been for many years of my
life sailing from the Arctic to the Antarctic Pole, I was cast ashore
by the Will of God, on the coast of a certain great ocean ; and

rt? THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

though I was well acquainted with the properties of that sea, I
did not know whether there was generated near those shores
that little fish Edieneis, which is so anxiously sought, even unto
this present, by men of high and low degree. But as I watched the
Naiads and Nymphs disporting themselves in the water, being
fatigued with my previous toils, and overwhelmed by the
multitude of my thoughts, I was lulled asleep by the soft murmur
of the waves; and as I slept sweetly and gently, I beheld a
marvellous vision. I saw ancient Neptune, with a trident in his
hand, rise, with venerable aspect, from our sea, who after a
friendly salutation, carried me to a most beautiful island. This
island was situated in the southern hemisphere, and contained all
that is required for man’s use and delight. It appeared a more
pleasant and delightful abode than Virgil’s Elysian fields. The
shores thereof were fringed with verdant myrtles and cypresses.
The meadows were studded with a large variety of beautiful and
fragrant flowers. The slopes of the hills were clad with vines,
olives, and cedars. The roads were overhung by the intertwining
branches of laurels and pomegranate trees, which afforded grateful
shade to the wayfarer. The plains were covered with groves of
orange and lemon trees. In short, the island was an epitome of
earthly beauty. Concealed under a rock, Neptune shewed me
two minerals of that island, gold and chalybs (steel). Then I was
conducted to an orchard in the middle of a meadow, which was
at no great distance, the same being planted with a great variety
of beautiful trees. Among these he shewed me seven enriched
by particular names; and two of them sea above the rest.
One bore fruit which shone like the sun, and its leaves resembled
gold; the fruit of the other was whiter than lilies, and its leaves
were like fine silver. Neptune called the first the Solar, and the
second the Lunar tree. The only thing which it was difficult to
obtain in the island, was water. The inhabitants had tried to get
it from a spring by means of aconduit, and to elicit it from many
things. But the result was a poisonous water, and the only
water that could be drunk was that condensed out of the rays of
the sun and moon. The worst of it was, that no one could
attract more than ten parts of this water. It was wonderful water,
I can tell you ; for I saw with my eyes, and touched with my hands
its dazzling whiteness, which surpassed all the splendour of the

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 113

snow. While I stood wrapt in admiration, Neptune vanished
from my sight, and there stood before me a tall man, on whose
forehead the name of Saturn was inscribed. He took a vessel,
and scooped up ten parts of the water, in which he placed fruit
from the Solar tree ; and the fruit was consumed like ice in warm
water. So I said unto him :—“ Lord, I behold here a marvellous
thing. This water is small in quantity; nevertheless, the fruit
of this tree is consumed therein by a gentle heat. To what pur-
pose is all this?” He graciously replied: “My son, it is true
that this thing is wonderful. But this water is the water of life,
and has such power to exalt the qualities of this fruit, that it shall
afterwards, without sowing or planting —only by its fragrance—
transmute the six trees which remain into its own nature.
Moreover, this water is as a woman to the fruit: the fruits of
this tree can putrefy nowhere but in this water; and though the
fruit by itself be wonderful and precious—yet when it putrefies
in this water, it brings forth out of this putrefaction a Salamander
that endures the fire ; its blood is more precious than all treasures,
and has power to render fertile six ‘trees such as you see here,
and to make their fruit sweeter than honey.” Then I said unto
him :—* Lord, how is this thing done?” He replied: “I have
already told thee that the fruits of the Solar tree are living, and
they are sweet ; but whereas the fruit while it is cooked in this
water can inform but one part, after its coction has been com-
pleted it can inform a thousand.” I then enquired whether the
fruit was boiled in this water over a fierce fire, and how long?
He answered this water has an inward fire, and when this is
assisted by continuous outward warmth, it burns up three parts
of its own body with this body of the fruit, until nothing but an
incredibly small part remains, which, however, possesses the most
marvellous virtue. This is cooked by the wise Master first for
seven months, and then for ten. But in the meantime, on each
fiftieth day, a variety of phenomena is witnessed.” Again I
besought him whether this fruit was cooked in several waters,
and whether anything was added to it. He made. answer:
“ There is no water, either in this island or in the whole country,
but only this kind alone that can properly penetrate the pores of
this fruit ; and you should know the Solar tree also grew out of
this water, which is collected by magnetic attraction out of the
Vou. IL A

114 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

rays of the Sun and Moon. Hence the fruit and the water
exhibit a wonderful sympathy and correspondence. If any
foreign substance were added to the water, its virtue would only
be impaired, Hence nothing should be put into the water but
this fruit. After its decoction the fruit has life and blood, and
its blood causes all barren trees to bring forth the same precious
fruit.” I asked whether the water was obtained by any secret
process, or whether it was to be obtained everywhere? He
said: “It is found everywhere, and no one can live without it,
but it is best when extracted by means of our Chalybs
(steel), which is found in the belly of the Ram. If you
ask what is its use, I answer that before the due amount
of coction has been performed, it is deadly poison, but after-
wards it is the Great Medicine, and yields 29 grains of blood,
each oné of which produces 864 of the fruits of the Solar
tree.” I asked whether it could be still further improved.
* The Sages say,” he returned, “that it can Be increased first to
ten, then to a hundred, then to a thousand, then to ten thousand
times its own quantity, and so on.” I asked whether that
water was known by any particular name. He cried aloud,
saying: “Few know it, but all have seen it, and see and love it ;
it has many names, but we call it the water of our sea: the
water that does not wet the hands.” “ Do they use it for any.
other purpose?” I enquired ; “and is anything born in it?”
“Every created thing,” he replied, “uses it, but invisibly. All
things owe their birth to it, and live in it. Nothing is, properly
speaking, in it, though itself mingles with all things. It can
be improved by nothing but the fruit of the Solar tree, without
which it is of no use in this work.” I was going to ask him
to speak more plainly, when he began to cry out in such a
loud voice that I awoke out of my sleep, and Saturn and the
hope of getting my questions answered vanished together. Be
contented, nevertheless, with what I have told you, and be sure
that it is impossible to speak more clearly. If you do not
understand what I have said, you will never grasp the writings
of other philosophers. After a while, I fell into another deep
sleep, in which I saw Neptune standing over me, congratu-
lating me on our happy meeting in the Garden of the Hesperides.
He held up to me a mirror, in which I saw the whole of

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 115

Nature unveiled. After we had exchanged a few remarks, I
thanked him for conducting me to this beautiful garden, and
introducing me to the company of Saturn; and I heartily be-
sought him to resolve for me the difficulties and doubts which
Saturn had left uncleared. “ For instance,” I said, “I have read
and believe that for every act of generation a male and a female
are required; and yet Saturn spoke of generation by placing
the Solar fruit in the water, or Mercury of the Sages. What
did he mean? As the lord of the sea, I know that you are
acquainted with these things, and I entreat of -you to answer
me.” * He said, “ What you say about the act of generation is
true ; and yet you know that worms are produced in a different
way from quadrupeds, namely by putrefaction, and the place
or earth in which this putrefaction occurs is feminine. In
our substance the Mother is the water of which so! much
has been said, and its offspring is produced by putrefaction,
after the manner of worms. Hence the Sages call it the Phoenix
and Salamander. Its generation is a resurrection rather than a
birth, and for this reason it is immortal or indestructible. Now,
whatsoever is conceived of two bodies is subject to the law of
death ; but the life of this fruit is a separation from all that is
corruptible about it. It is the same with the Phcenix, which
separates of itself from its corruptible body.” I enquired whether
the substance was compound in its nature. “ No,” he said, “there
is only the Solar fruit that is put into the water, which must
be to the fruit in the proportion of zez to one. Believe that
what was here revealed to you in a dream by Saturn, after the
manner of our island, is not a dream, but a bright reality which will
stand the test of broad daylight.” With these words he abruptly
left me, without listening to my further questions ; and I awoke
and found myself at home in Europe. May God shew to you,
gentle reader, the full interpretation of my dreams! Farewell!

To the Triune God be Praise and Glory!

H2

116 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

A’ DIALOGUE
BETWEEN
MERCURY, THE ALCHEMIST, AND NATURE.

Ona certain bright morning a number of Alchemists met
together in a meadow, and consulted as to the best way of pre-
paring the Philosopher’s Stone. It was arranged that they
should speak in order, and each after the manner that seemed
best to him. Most of them agreed that Mercury was the first
substance. Others said, no, it was sulphur, or something « else.
These Alchemists had read the books of the Sages, and hence
there was a decided majority in favour of Mercury, not only as
the true first matter, but in particular as the first matter of
metals, since all the philosophers seemed to cry with one voice:—
“O our Mercury, our Mercury,” &c., whatever that word might
mean. Just as the dispute began to run high, there arose a
violent wind, which dispersed the Alchemists into all the
different countries of the world—and as they had arrived at no
conclusion, each one went on seeking the Philosopher’s Stone in
his own old way, this one expecting to find it in one substance,
and that in another, so that the search has continued without
intermission even unto this day. One of them, however, had at
least got the idea into his head that Mercury was the substance
of the Stone, and determined to concentrate all his efforts on the
chemical preparation of Mercury, saying to himself, for this kind
of discourse is very common among Alchemists, that the
assembly had determined nothing ,and that the dispute would
end only with the confection of the ‘Stone. So he began reading
the works of the philosophers, and among others that of Alanus
on Mercury, whereby he became a philosopher indeed, but not
one who had reached any practical conclusion. Then he took
(common) Mercury, and began to work with it. He placed it in
a glass vessel over the fire, where it, of course, evaporated. . So
in his ignorance he struck his wife and said: “No one but you
has entered my laboratory ; you must have taken my Mercury
out of the vessel.” The woman, with tears, protested her innocence.
The Alchemist put some more Mercury into the vessel, and kept
close and jealous watch over it, expecting that his wife would

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. Lt

once more make away with it. The Mercury rose to the top of
the vessel in vaporous steam. Then the Alchemist was full of
joy, because he remembered that the first substance of the Stone
is described by the Sages as volatile; and he thought that now
at last he must be on the right track. He now began to subject
the Mercury to all sorts of chemical processes, to sublime it, and
to calcine it with all manner of things, with salts, sulphur,
metals, minerals, blood, hair, aqua fortis, herbs, urine, and vinegar.
ATI these substances were tried in suc¢ession ; everything that
he could think of was tried ; but without producing the desired
effect. Seeing that he had still accomplished nothing, the poor
man once more began to take thought with himself. At last he
remembered reading in some authors that the matter was so
contemptible that it is found on the dung hill; and then he
began to operate on his Mercury with various kinds of dung.
When all these experiments turned out failures, he fell into’ a
deep sleep, and there appeared to him an old man, who elicited
from him the cause of his sadness, and bade him use the pure
Mercury of the Sages. When the Alchemist awoke he pondered
over the words of the old man, and wondered what he could
mean by “the Mercury of the Sages.” But he could think of no
other Mercury but that known to the common herd, and went
on with his efforts to purge it; for which purpose he used, first,
the excrements of animals, then those of children, and at last his
own. He also went every day to the place where the old man
had appeared to him, in the hope that he might be able
to ask him for a more detailed explanation of his meaning. At
times, he would pretend to be asleep; and because he thought
that the old man might be afraid to come to him in his
waking hours, he would swear to him, and say: “Be not
afraid to come, old man: I am most certainly asleep. See, my
eyes are tightly shut.” At length, from always thinking about
that old man, he fell into a fever, and in his delirious visions he
at last saw a phantom in the guise of that ancient standing at his
bedside, and heard-him say : “ Do not despair, my friend.. Your
mercury is good, and your substance is good, but it will not obey
you. Why do you not charm the mercury, as serpents are
charmed?” With this, the old man vanished. But the Alchemist
arose, with these words still ringing in his ears: “Serpents are:

118 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

charmed ”’—and recollecting that apothecaries ornament their
mercury bottles with images of serpents, he took up the vessel
with the mercury, and repeated the formula of conjuration : “ux,
ux, ostas,” etc, substituting the word mercury for the name of the
serpent: “ And thou mercury, most nefarious beast.” At these
werds, the Mercury began to laugh, and said to the Alchemist :
“Why dost thou trouble me, my Lord Alchemist?” Alchenust:
Oho, do you call me your lord? Now I have touched you home.
I have found a bit to bridle you with ; wait a little, and you shall
soon sing the tune that I bid you. (Then as his courage increased,
he cried angrily) :—I conjure you by the living God—are you not
that Mercury of the Sages? Afercury (pretending to speak in
a whimpering and frightened tone of voice): Master, I am
Mercury. <Adchemist: Why would you not obey me then?
Why could I not fix you? Mercury: Oh, most high and mighty
Master, I implore you to spare your miserable slave! I did not
know that you were such a potent philosopher. Adchemist: Oh,
could you not guess as much from the philosophical way in which
I operated on you? Mercury: I did so, most high and mighty
Master, but I wished to hide myself, though now I see that I
cannot hide myself from my most potent Lord. <Adchemist:
Then you know a philosopher when you see him, as you now do,
my gallant? JZercury: My most high Lord, I see, and to my
own great cost, that your Worship is a high and mighty and most
potent philosopher. A/chemist (with a smile of satisfaction):
Now at last I have found what I sought. (To the Mercury, in
awful tones of thunder): Now mind that you obey me, else it
will be the worse for you. Mercury: Gladly, Master, if I can:
for lam very weak. Adchemist: Oho, do you begin to make
excuses already ? Mercury: No, but lam very languid. A/chemist:
What is the matter with you? Mercury: An Alchemist is the
matter with me. Alchemist: Are you laughing at me, you false
rogue? Mercury : Oh, no, no, Master, as God shall spare me, I
spoke of an Alchemist—you are a philosopher. <Adchemést: Of
course, of course, that is quite true. But what did the Alchemist
do? Mercury: Oh Master, he has done me a thousand wrongs ;
he belaboured and mixed me up with all manner of disagree-
able and contradictory things, which have stripped me of
all my powers, and so I am sick, even to death. Alchemist:

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 119

You deserved such treatment, because you would not obey.
Mercury: I never yet disobeyed a philosopher, but I cannot ~
help laughing at fools. Adchemist: And what is your opinion
of me? Mercury: Oh Master, your Worship is a great man,
and mighty philosopher, greater by far than Hermes, both
in doctrine and wisdom. Alchemist: Well, I won't praise
myself, but I certainly am a learned man. My wife says so too.
She always calls mea profoundly learned philosopher. Mercury:
I quite believe you. For philosophers are men whom too much
learning and thought have made mad. Alchemist: Tell me, what
am I to do with you?) How am I to make you into the
Philosopher’s Stone? Mercury: Oh, my master philosopher,
that I cannot tell, You area philosopher, I am the philosopher’s
humble slave. Whatever he wishes to make me, I become, as far
as my nature will allow. Adchemist : This is all very fine, but I
repeat that you must tell me how to treat you, and whether you
can become the Philosopher’s Stone. Mercury: Mr. Philosopher,
if you know, you can make it, and if youdon’t youcan’t, From
me you cannot learn anything with which you have been
unacquainted beforehand. A/chemist: You talk to me as to a
simple person. Perhaps you do not know that I have lived at
the courts of great princes, and have always been regarded as a
very profound philosopher. Mercury: I readily believe you,
my Master, for the filth of your brilliant experiments still cleaves
to me. Alchemist: Tell me, then, are you the Mercury of the
Sages? Afercury: I am Mercury, but you should know best,
whether I am the Mercury of you philosophers. A/chemist: Tell
me only whether you are the true Mercury, or whether there is
another? J/ercury: J am Mercury, but there is also another.
With these words, the Mercury vanished. The Alchemist
shouts and calls aloud, but there is no answer. At last he is
fain to derive some little comfort from the thought that he has
had speech of Mercury, and therefore must be very dear to it.
With this thought .he once more sets himself to sublime, distil,
calcine, precipitate, and dissolve the Mercury in the most awful
manner, and with different sorts of waters. But his efforts
turned out failures, and mere waste of time. .Then he began to
curse Mercury, and to blaspheme Nature for creating it. When
Nature heard this, she called Mercury to her, and asked him what

120 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

he had done to the Alchemist, and why he would not obey him.
Mercury humbly protested his innocence. Nature admonished
hin to obey the Sons of Knowledge who sought to know her.
Mercury promised that he would do so, but added :“Mother Nature,
who can satisfy fools?” Nature smiled, and departed. Mercury,
indignant with our Alchemist, returned also to his own place. The ©
philosopher presently appeared with some excrements of swine,
and was proceeding to ply Mercury therewith, when the latter
thus wrathfully accosted him: “What do you want of me, you
fool? Why did you accuse me?” Adchemzst: Are you he whom
I so much desiretosee? A/ercury : 1 am; but blind people can-
not behold me. Alchemist: I am not blind. Mercury: You
are as blind as a new-born puppy. You cannot see yourself:
how then should you be able to see me? Alchemist : Oh, now
you are proud and despise me because J speak humbly. Perhaps
you do not know that I have lived at the courts of princes, and
have always been called a philosopher? Afercury: The gates
of princes stand wide for fools; and it is they that fare sumptu-
ously in the palaces of the great. I quite believe that you have
been at court. A/chemist: You are, undoubtedly, the Devil, and
not a good Mercury, if you speak like that to philosophers.
Mercury: Now, in confidence, tell me whether you are acquainted
with any philosophers. . A/chemist: Do you ask this of me, when
you are aware that I am myself a philosopher? Mercury
(smiling): Behold the’ Philosopher! Well, my philosopher,
what do you seek, and what would you have? Alchemist: The
Philosopher’s Stone. Mercury: Of what substance would you
make it? "Alchemist: Of our Mercury. Mercury: Oh, my
philosopher, then J had better go: for lam not yours! Adchemzst:
You are none but the Devil, and wish to lead me astray.
Mercury : Well, my philosopher, I think I may return the com-
pliment: you have played the very devil with me. Alchemist:
Oh, what do I hear? This is most certainly the Devil., For I
have done everything most scientifically, according to the writ-
ings of the Sages. Mercury: Truly, you are a wonderful
operator ; your performances exceed your knowledge by as much
as they defy the authorities which you have in your books. For
they say that substances should be mixed only with substances
of a kindred“nature. “But you have mixed me, against Nature,

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 121

with dung and other foul things, and are indifferent about
defiling yourself so long as you cantortureme. Alchemist: 1
do nothing against Nature: I only sow the seed in its own
proper earth, according to the teaching of the Sages. Mercury :
You sow me in dung; at the time of the harvest I vanish,
and you reap’ dung. Verily, you are a good husbandman!
Alchemist: Yet the Sages say that their substance is found on
the dunghill. JZercury: What they say is true, but you under-
stand only the letter, and not the spirit of their injunctions.
Alchemist: Now I see that you are perhaps Mercury. But as
you will not obey me, I must once more repeat the words of con-
juration: Ux, ux, ostas Mercury (laughing): It is of no use,
my friend; your words are as profitable as your works.
Alchemist: They say true when they call you a wonderful and _
inconstant and volatile substance. Mercury: You call me
inconstant. But to the constant I am also constant, and to the
man of fixed resolve, I am fixed. But you, and the likes of you,
are continually abandoning one substance for another, and’ are -
ever vagabonds in experiment. A/chemist: Tell me truly, are
you the Mercury which, side by side with sulphur and salt, the
philosophers describe as the first principle of all things, or must
I look for some other substance? Mercury: The fruit, when it
falls, lies near the tree that bore it. I am the same that I was,
except in the matter of age. In the beginning I was young,
and I remained so as long as I was alone. Now, J am old, and
yet I am the same as ever. I am only older than I was.
Alchemest ; | am glad that you are old. For it isa constant and
fixed substance that I require, and this also have I invariably
sought. Mercury: It is in vain that you come to the old man
whom you did not know asa youth. <Ad/chemist: What is this
you say? Did I not know you when you were young? Have IJ
not subjected you to all manner of chemical processes, and shall
I not continue to do so till I have prepared the Philosopher’s
Stone? Jvercury: Woeis me! What shallI do? I already scent
the foul odour of dung. Woe is me! I beseech you, Master
Philosopher, not to ply me with excrements of swine—or the foul
smell will drive me hence. And what more do you want of me?
Am I not obedient? Do I not mingle with all things that you
ask me to amalgamate with? Do I not suffer myself to be sub-

122 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

limated, precipitated, amalgamated, calcined? What more can I
do? I have submitted to be scourged and spat upon till my
miserable plight might move a heart of stone. I have given
you milk, blood, flesh, butter, oil, and water. I have done all
that any metal or mineral can do. And yet you have no pity on
me! Woeis me! A/chemist : Oho, it does youno harm, you
rascal ; you deserve it all richly, for not changing your form, or for
resuming the old form aftera mere temporary change! Mercury:
I do whatsoever you make me do. If you make me a body, I
ama body. If you make me powder, Iam powder. Howcan I
be more obedient than Iam? Ad/chemist: Tell me, then, what
you are in your centre, and I will not torment you any more.
Mercury : 1 see there is no escape from speaking fundamentally
to you. Ifyou will, you may now understand me. With my
Jorm which you see you have nothing to do. My centre is the
fixed heart of all things, immortal and all-pervading. I am a
faithful servant to my master, and a faithful friend to my com-
panions, whom I do not desert, and with whom I perish. I am
an immortal body. I die when I am slain, but rise to stand
before the judgment seat of a discriminating judge. Adchemiést :
\ Are you then the Philosopher’s Stone? <AZercury: My mother
is such, and of her is born artificially some_one_thing—but my
| Brother who lives in the citadel has in his gift that which the
\Sage desires. Alchemist: Tell me, is yourage great? Mercury:
My mother bore me, yet I amolder than my mother. Alchemist:
How in all the world am I to understand you, if you answer my
questions in dark parables? Tell me in one word, are you that
fountain concerning which Bernard, Count of Trevisan, has
written? Mercury: J am no fountain, but I am water, and the
fountain surrounds me. A/chemzst: Since you are water, is gold
dissolved in you? JAercury: Whatever is with me, I love; and
to that which is born with me, I impart nourishment. That
which is naked I cover with my wings. Alchemist: I see plainly
that it is impossible to talk to you. Whatever I ask you, your
reply is foreign to the point. If you donot answer my questions
better, I will torment you again. Mercury: Have pity on me,
Master, I will gladly tell you all I know. Alchemist: Tell me,
are you afraid of the fire? Mercury: Imyselfam fire. Alchemist:
Why then do you seek to escape from the fire? Mercury:

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 123

Because my spirit loves the spirit of the fire, and accompanies it
wherever it goes. Adchemist : Where do you go when you ascend
with the fire? Mercury: Every pilgrim looks anxiously towards
his country and his home. When he has returned unto these he
reposes, and he always comes back wiser than he left. Adchemist :
Do you return, then? Mercury: Yes, but in another form.
Alchemist: Ido not understand what you mean, nor yet about
the fire. MZercury: If any one knows the fire of my heart, he has
seen that fire (proper heat) is my food ; and the longer the spirit
of my heart feeds on fire, the fatter will it be: its death is
afterwards the life of all things belonging to my kingdom.
Alchemist : Are you great? Mercury: My body, as you must
know, can become one drop out of a thousand drops, and,
though I am always one, you can divide my body as often as
you like. But my spirit, or heart, always produces many
thousands of parts out of one part. d/chemist ; How is this to
be brought about? After what manner should my operation be
performed on you? Mercury: I am fire within; fire is my
food and my life ; but the life of fire is air, for without air fire is
extinguished. Fire is stronger than air ; hence [ know not any
repose, and crude air can neither coagulate nor restrain me.
Add air to air, so that both become one in even. balance ; com-
bine them with fire, and leave the whole to time. Alchemist :
What will happen then? Mercury: Everything superfluous
will be removed. The residue you burn in fire, place in water,
“cook,” and when it is cooked you give as a medicine, and have
no fear. Adhemist: You do not answer my questions. Wife,
bring the excrements of swine, and we will see whether we can
get the better of his stubbornness.

In his utmost extremity, Mercury called in the help of
Nature, amidst much lamentation and mourning over these
threats of our admirable Alchemist. He impeaches the thank-
less operator ; Nature trusts her son, Mercury, whom she knows
to be true and faithful, and comes full of wrath to the Alchemist,
calling him imperiously before her. Alchemist: Who calls me?
Nature: What are you doing to my son, arch-fool that you
are? Why do you torment him? He is willing to give you
every blessing, if you can understand him. <A/chemist : Who
dares to rebuke so great a philosopher, and a man withal so

124 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

excellent as Iam? Mature: O fool, and of all men most insen-
sate, 1 know and love all philosophers, and am loved of them.
I take pleasure in aiding their efforts, and they help me to
do that which I am unable to accomplish. But you so-called
Alchemists are constantly offending me, and systematically
doing despite to me ; and this is the réason why all your efforts
are doomed to failure. Alchemist: It is not true. I, too, am
a philosopher, and understand scientific methods of procedure.
I have lived with several princes, and with more than one phil-
osopher, as my wife can testify. Moreover, I possess at this
very moment a manuscript which has lain hidden for some
centuries in a certain wall. I know very well that I am almost
at the end of my labours, and am on the point of coinposing the
Philesopher’s Stone ; for it was revealed to me a few days ago
in a dream. I have had a great many dreams, nor do I ever
dream anything untrue ; my wife knows it. A’ature: It is with
you as with a great many of your fellows: at first they know
everything, but in the end thcir -knowledge turns to ignorance.
Alchemist: \f you are truly Nature, it is you who serve for the
operation of the work. Mature That is true; but it is per-
formed only by those who know me, and such do not torment
my children, nor do they hinder my working. Rather
they clear away the impediments, that I may the sooner
reach the goal. Alchemist: That is exactly what I do.
Nature: No; you do nothing but cross me, and deal
with my children against my will. Where you should revive,
you kill; where you should fix, you sublime ; where you should
calcine, you distil; and thus my obedient son J4ercury you
torment in the most fearful manner. Alchemist: Then I will
in future deal with him gently, and subject him only to gradual
coction. ature: That is well, if you possess understanding ;
otherwise, you will ruin only yourself and your possessions. If
you act in opposition to my commands, you hurt yourself more
than him. Adchemzst: But how am I to make the Philosopher's
Stone? Aature: That question does not justify your ill-
treatment of my son. Know that I have many sons and
daughters, and that I am swift to succour those who seek me,
provided they are worthy. <Adchemist: But who is that
Mercury? A’ature: Know that I haye only one such son ; he

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 125

is one of seven, and the first among them; and though he is
now all things, he was at first only one. In him are the four
elements, yet he is not an.element. He isa spirit, yet he has
a body; a man, yet he performs a woman’s part ; a boy, yet he
bears a man’s weapons; a beast, and yet he has the wings of a
bird. He is poison, yet he cures leprosy ; life, yet he kills all
things ; a King, but another occupies his throne; he flees from
the fire, yet fire is taken from him ; he_is water, but does not
wet the hands; he is earth, and yet he is sown; he is air, and
lives by water. Alchemist: Now I see that I know nothing ;
only I must not say so. For I should lose the good opinion of
my neighbours, and they would no longer entrust me with money
for my experiments. I must therefore go on saying that |
know everything ; for there are many that expect me to do
great things forthem. Mature: But if you go on in that way,
your neighbours will at last find you out, and demand their
money back. Adchemist: I must amuse them with promises,
aslongas | can. Mature: And what then? Alchemist: 1
will try different experiments ; and if they fail, I will go to some
other country, and live the same life there. Mature: And then?
Alchemist: WHa,ha,ha! There are many countries, and many
greedy persons who will suffer themselves to be gulled by my
promises of mountains of gold. Thus day will follow day, and
in the meantime the King or the donkey will die, or ] myself.
Nature: Such philosophers are only fit for the gallows. Be
off, and take with you my most grievous curse. The best thing
that you can do, is to give yourself up to the King’s officers,
who will quickly put an end to you and your philosophy !

NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT,

SECOND PART.

CONCERNING. SULPHUR,

THE AUTHOR’S ANAGRAM:
Angelus Doce Mihi Jus.
(Angel, Teach me Right.)

PREFACE.

S I am not at liberty to write more plainly than the
Ancient Sages, gentle Reader, you may possibly be
dissatisfied with my Book, particularly as you have so
many other philosophical treatises ready to your hand.

But you may be sure that no necessity is laid upon me to write
at all, and that if I have come forward it is only out of love to
you, having no expectation of personal profit, and no desire for
empty glory, for which reason I here refrain, as I have before
done, from revealing my identity to the public. [ was under the
impression that in the first part of this work I had already given
a lucid account of our whole Art. But my friends tell me that
there is one point with which I have not yet fully dealt, and
vehemently urge me to write this second treatise about Sulphur.
The question is, whether even this Book will convey any
information to one before whom the writings of the Sages and
the Open Book of Nature are exhibited in vain. For if you
could incline your ear to the teaching of Nature, you would at
once be able to emancipate yourself from the tutelage of printed

128 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

volumes; in my opinion it is better to learn from the master
himself than from one of the disciples. In the preface to my
twelve Treatises, and again in the twelfth chapter, I have already
hinted at the reason why there is now so great a multitude of
books on this subject, that they confound and hinder the student
instead of helping him. The confusion is rendered worse
confounded by the ill-will of the Sages, who seem to have set pen
to paper for the express purpose of concealing their meaning ;
aad by the carelessness with which some of the more important
* volumes are copied and printed ; the sense of a whole passage is
often hopelessly obscured by the addition or omission of one
little word (e¢g., the addition of the word “not” in the wrong
place). Yet the student may get information even from these
books (as the bee obtains honey even from poisonous flowers),
if he reads them by the light of natural fact, and with constant
reference to the utterances of other Sages. One writer explains
another. Yet some of them are so closely beset with the
difficulties of an obscure phraseology, that it is almost impossible
to understand them, except by reading them side by side with
.the facts of Nature ; for their interpreters and commentators are
more hopelessly unintelligible even than the writers whom they
take upon themselves to explain ; the exposition is more difficult
than the text. If you would succeed in this study, keep your
eyes fixed on the possibilities of Nature, and on the properties
of the hatural substance. It is universally described as common
and easy of access and apprehension, and it zs so, but only to
those who know it. He who knows it can discover it in the
dunghill ; he who does not will fail to find it even in gold. I
»have no desire to praise myself, but this one thing I will say,
(ahat the reading of my Books, in combination with a careful
.study of Nature, and of the writings of other genuine possessors
\of this Stone, must in the end open up to you the understanding.
lof this secret. If I have planted another tree in the dense forest
of Alchemistic literature, [ have done so, not in order to obstruct
the path of students, but in order to aid and refresh them by the
way. Let not the diligent and God-fearing enquirer despair. If he
seek the inspiration of God he will most surely find it. This know-
ledgeis more easily obtained of God than of men. For His mercyis
\ infinite,and He never forsakes those who put their trust in Him;

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 129

with Him there is no respect of persons, nor does He despise
the humble and contrite heart. He-has showered the fulness of
His mercy even on me, the unworthiest of all His creatures, in
shewing to me His wonderful power and incffable goodness,
which I am utterly unable to declare. The only way in which
I can, in a small degree, at least prove my gratitude, is by
succouring my struggling brother students with friendly counsel
and assistance. Rest assured, then, gentle Reader, that He will!
grant this boon to you, if you wait upon Him day by day me
earnest prayer, and in the power ofa holy and loving life. He
will throw open to you the portals of Nature; and you will be
. amazed at the simplicity of her operations. Know for certain
that Nature is wonderfully simple ; and that the characteristic
mark of a childlike simplicity is stamped upon all that is true
and noble in Nature. If you would imitate Nature, you should
take her simplicity for your model in all the operations of ‘Art.
If my Book does not please you, throw it away, and take up
some other author ; it is short, so that you need not spend
much time in reading it through. Only persevere ; to the im-
portunate knocker the door will at length be opened. The times
are at hand when many secrets of Natuté will be revealed to
men. The Fourth or Northern Monarchy is about to be estab-
lished ; the Mother of Knowledge will soon come; and many
things will be brought to light that were hidden under the three
preceding monarchies. This fourth kingdom God will found
by the hand of a prince who will be enriched with all virtues,
and endowed with wisdom greater than that of Solomon.. In
his time (to adopt the words of the Psalmist) mercy and truth
will meet together; peace and justice will kiss each other; truth
will spring up from the ground, and righteousness will look
down from heaven. There will be one Shepherd and one fold ;
and knowledge will be the common property ofall. For those
days I, too, am waiting with longing. Pray to God that it may
come soon, gentle Reader. Fear Him, love Him, and read
carefully the books of His chosen Sages—and you will soon
see,and behold with your own eyes, that I have spoken truly.

Vou, IL. I

130 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

CONCERNING SULPHUR.

The Second Principle.
S ULPHUR is by no means the least important of the great
wn

principles, since it is a part of the metal, and evena

principal part of the Philosopher’s Stone. Many Sages

have left us weighty sayings about this substance: for
instance, Geber himself (“Sum of Perfection,” bk. 1, chap. 28), who
says: “It illumines all bodies, since it is the light of the light,
and their tincture.” But seeing that the ancients regarded it as
the noblest principle, before we proceed to speak about it, we
must first explain the origin of the three principles. The origin
of the principles is a subject which has hitherto been but scantily
discussed in the works of the Sages ; and the student who knows
nothing about it, is as much in the dark in regard to this matter,
as is a blind man in respect to colour. I therefore propose to
make this point which my predecessors have neglected, the sub-
ject of my treatise.

Now, according to the ancient Sages there are two principles
of things, and more particularly of metals, namely, Sulphur and
Mercury ; according to the Moderns there are three: Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, and the source of these principles aré the’
elements ; of which it therefore behoves us to speak first. Be it
known to the students of this Art that there are four elements,
and that each has at its centre another element which makes it
what it is. These are the four pillars of the world. They were
in the beginning evolved and moulded out of chaos by the hand
of the Creator; and it is their contrary action which keeps up
the harmony and equilibrium of the mundane machinery ; it is
they which, through the virtue of celestial influences, produce all

‘things above and beneath the earth. We will say a few words
about each of them in due order of succession ; and first of all
about the nearest element, Earth.

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 131

Concerning Elementary Earth.

Earth is an element of considerable quality and dignity. In
this element the other three, especially fire, are latent. It is
admirably adapted both to the concealment and to the manifesta-
tion of things committed to it. It is gross and porous, specifically
heavy, but naturally light. It is also the Centre of the World
and of the other elements ; through its centre passes the axis of
the earth to both poles. It is porous, as we have said, like a
sponge, and produces nothing of itself; but it réceives all that
the other three project into it, conscientiously conceals what
it should hide, and brings to light that which it should manifest.
Whatsoever is committed to it putrefies in it through the action
of motive heat, and is multiplied by the separation of the pure
from om the i impure. Heavy substances are hidden in it. Light
substances are driven by heat to its surface. It is the nurse and
womb of all seed and commixtion ; and these seeds and com-
pounds it faithfully preserves and fosters till the season of:
maturity. It is cold and dry, but its dryness is tempered with
water ; outwardly t it is visible and fixed ; inwardly it is invisible
and volatile. It is a virgin substance, and dead residue of the
creative distillation of the world, which God will one day calcine,
and after extracting the humour, create out of it a new crystalline
earth, Inits present state it consists of a pure and an impure
element. The first is used by water for producing natural forms ;
the latter remains where it is, It is also the storehouse of all
treasures, and in its centre is the Gehennal fire, conserving the
machine of the world, and this _by the expression of water, which
it converts into air. This fire is produced by perpetual motion,
and the influences of the Stars; it is aided_by the Sclar heat,
which is tempered by the atmosphere, and the two together
mature the growth of all things. For this reason the element of
earth has fire intrinsically, and the earth is purified by this inward
fire, as every element is purified by that which is in it. The
inmost part, or centre of the earth, is then the highest purity
mixed with fire, in which there is ceaseless motion, and we have
shewn at some length in the twelve Treatises that it is, as it were,
an empty space, into which the other elements project their
products. It is enough for us to remember that this elementary
earth is like a sponge, and the receptacle of all other elements.

T2

132 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Concerning Elementary Water.

Water is an element of great specific gravity, full of unctuous
moisture. Outwardly it is yolatile, inwardly it is fixed, cold, and
humid It is tempered by air, and is the sperm of the_ werld, in
which the seed of all things is conserved. There is a great
difference between sperm and seed. Earth is the receptacle of
sperm, water the receptacle of seed. Whatever the air, under
the influence of firc, distils into the water, is imparted by the
water to the earth. There is always an abundance of sperm
awaiting seed, in order that it may carry it into the matrix,
which is performed by the movement of the air, excited by the
imagination of fire. Sometimes sperm has not a sufficient
quantity of seed, for want of heat to digest it. Sometimes,
when there is no seed, the sperm enters the womb alone, ut is
ejected again without producing any fruit. At other times con-
ception does not take place, even when there is plenty of seed in
the sperm, because the womb is rendered barren by a superfluity
of bad sulphur and malignant phlegm. Water is capable of,
commixtion with all things, by means of its volatile surface; it
purifies and dissolves earth; air is congealed in it, and thus
intimately united to it. It is the Solvent of the World, because
by the action of heat, it penetrates the air, and carries with it a
warm vapour which causes the natural gencration of those
things with which the earth is like a wombimpregnated. When
_ the womb has once received a due portion of seed, Nature never
rests until the natural form (whatever it may be) has been pro-
duced. The humid residue, or sperm, is putrefied in the earth
by means of warmth, and out of it worms and other things are
generated. An intelligent Artist will readily understand how
great a variety of wonders is performed by Nature through this
element, as a sperm, but the said sperm must be operated upon,
having already within it an imagined astral seed of a certain
weight. For Nature produces pure things by means of the first
putrefaction, but things far purer by means of the second, as you
see in the case of wood, where vegetable fibre is produced as the
result of the first putrefaction, while the putrefaction of wood
engenders worms and insects—natural forms endowed with sen-
tient life ; and it is clear that animate creatures endowed with

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 133

sense and motion belong to a higher creative: level, and are
_moulded of a purer substance than plants.
Water is the menstruum (solvent) of the world, and exists
_..in -hree degrees Of €xcellence: the pure, the purer, and the
purest. Of its purest substance the heavens were created ; of
that which is less pure the atmospheric air was formed ; that
which is simply pure remains in its proper sphere, where, by the
Will of God, and the co-operation of Nature, it is guardian of all
subtle substances here below. It has its centre in the heart of
the sea ; its polar axis coincides with that of the earth, whence
flow forth all springs and fountains of water, which are presently
swoilen into great rivers. This constant movement of water
preserves the earth from combustion, and distributes the seeds
of things throughout its length and breadth. -Yet all water
courses return to the heart of the sea. As to the ultimate
fate of this water opinions are divided. Some say that all
water is generated in the stars, and the sea does not overflow
its shores because the water is consumed by fire as it reaches
the heart of the sea. But this hypothesis is contrary to
Nature’s methods of working: Nature produces like out of like
—-and how can the stars, which are air and fire, produce water?
Moreover, the safety of this earth depends on the equilibrium of
the four elements; if at any time the total quantity of one ele-
ment exceeded that of the others, the universe would relapse
into chaos. Hence, if the stars generated water, they must mani-
festly produce an equal quantity not only of aif and fire, but also
of earth—which is manifestly absurd. It is much more reason-
able to suppose that the waters are chained down, as it were,
to the foundation of the earth by the circumambient air,
and that they are constrained by it to continue in a ceaseless
movement towards the Arctic pole—because no vacuum is pos-
sible in Nature; which is also the reason why there is a
Gehennal fire in the centre of the earth, which is presided over
by the Archeus (the first principle) of Nature.

For in the creation of the world, God first of all separated
the quintessence of the elements from the weltering mass of
chaos ; and out of it He evolved fire, the purest of all substances,
giving to it the most exalted place in the universe, and making .
it, in a special manner, the dwelling-place of His Sacred

134 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Majesty. In the centre of chaos was kindled that fire which
afterwards distilled and carried upward the purest substance of
water. But because this most pure fire now occupies the firma-
ment, and surrounds the throne of God, the waters have been
condensed into a body beneath it; and thus the sky is formed,
while the water which now forms the atmospheric air and the
lower firmament is due to the action of a lower and grosser fire.
As the water of the firmament cannot pass the bounds of that
highest and celestial fire, so the lower fire cannot pass through
the atmospheric air to the earth; nor can the air pass the
bounds of this lower fire. The water and the earth were formed
together into one organic mass. Only one part of this water
was volatilized into air,in order to protect the earth from the
fierce and consuming heat of the sun. If there had been a
vacuum in the air, all the water would have evaporated ; but as
the space below the firmament is already filled up with air, the
great bulk of the water is kept below, near the centre of the
earth, by the pressure of the air. These natural conditions con-
tinue to operate day by day, and through their normal action
the world will be: preserved from destruction during the good
pleasure of the Creator. The central fire is kindled day by day
by the universal motion and influence of the celestial bodies.
This fire heats the water, and a certain quantity of the water is
dissolved into air; the air day by day keeps down by its
weight the residue of the water, and causes it to form one mass
with the earth. And as the equilibrium of the world is thus
naturally preserved by the Creator, so every natural generative
process in the world must repeat the same conditions on a small
scale. Thus the elements below act in perfect unison with
the elements above, which God created of a far greater purity
and excellence ; and the example of obedience to their influ-
ences, which is set by the whole universe, is imitated on a small
scale by the constituent parts of the world below.

But let us now proceed to explain the flux and reflux of
water. There are two Poles—the Arctic Pole in the north, and
the Antarctic Pole, or the southernmost point of the earth.
The Arctic Pole possesses the property of magnetic attraction ;
the Antarctic Pole that of magnetic repulsion. Thus the Arctic
Pole attracts the waters along its axis, and then they are

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 135

again repelled by the Antarctic Pole along its axis; and, as the
air does not permit inequality, they are once more forced back
to their centre, the Arctic Pole. In this their continua] course
from the Arctic to the Antarctic Pole, they pass through the
middle (z¢., along the axis) of the earth, are diffused through its
pores, and break out here and there as springs and fountains,
which are swollen into rivers, and return to the point whence
they first flowed forth. This universal motion is incessantly
proceeding. The waters, then, are not generated by the stars
and consumed in the heart of the sea; but they flow forth from
the centre of the sea into the whole earth, and are diffused
through all its pores. On this principle the Sages have con-
structed conduits and aqueducts, since it is well known that
water cannot rise higher than the level of its spring or fount. If
this were not an actual fact, art would vainly found its practical
conclusions upon it; and the natural principle involved is
illustrated in the process by means of which wine is drawn out
of a cask.

It may be objected to our view that if the water of our
springs were derived from the sea, it would be salt, and not
sweet, as we actually finditto be. The answer to this objection
lies in the fact that the sea water, in its passage through the
pores of the earth, gradually deposits all the salt which it
contains, and thus wells forth from the ground in a sweet and
fresh condition. It should, however, be remembered that some
of our springs—called mineral or saline springs—actual'y do
exhibit all the original saltness of the sea water which has not
passed through earth calculated to retain its mineral element.
In some places we also meet with hot springs, which are caused
by the passage of the water through certain spots where large
deposits of sulphur have been set afire.by the central heat of the
earth ; every one who has tasted this water must have observed
its sulphureous flavour. Something closely analogous happens
when the water passes through large deposits of iron, or alum, or
copper, and acquires their taste. Thus the earth is'a great
distilling vessel, formed by the hand of an all wise Creator, on
the model of which all Sages have constructed their small distill-
ing vessels ; and if it pleased God to extinguish the central fire,
or to destroy the cunning machinery, this universal frame would

136 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

relapse into chaos. At the end of time, He will kindle the
Central Fire into a brighter ‘flame, will cause all the water to
evaporate, will calcine the earth—and thus the earth and the
water will be rendered more subtle and pure, and will form a
new and more glorious earth.

The operations of the earth and the water are always per-
formed in combination, and are mutually dependent, since they
are the two tangible elements, in which the other two work
invisibly. Fire keeps the earth from being submerged, or
dissolved ; air keeps the fire from being extinguished ; water
preserves the earth from combustion. This is what the Sages
call the equilibrium of the elements, and it illustrates the aid
which they render to each other. Fire is closely associated with
earth, and air with water. It will.suffice if we remember that
clementary water is the sperm and menstruum of the world, and
the receptacle of seed.

Concerning Elementary Air.

The most noble element of air is inwardly heavy, visible,
and fixed, outwardly light, volatile, and invisible. It is hot and
moist, 1s tempered by fire, and is nobler than earth or water. Air
is volatile, but may be fixed, and when fixed, renders all bodies
penetrable. Its purest substance has been formed into the vital
spirits of animals, that which is less pure into the circumambient
atmosphere, and the grosser residue has remained in the water,
and associates with itas fire with its kindred earth. In the air
the seed of all things is formed, as it were,in the body of the
male, and is projected by its circulative motion into its sperm,
which is water. It contains the vital spirit of all creatures, is the
life of all, and penetrates and forces its seed upon all, as the man
does upon the woman. It nourishes, impregnates, conserves the
other elements ; and we are taught by daily experience that it
is the life not only of minerals, animals, and vegetables, but also
of the other elements. We see that water becomes foul and
unwholesome without a supply of fresh air; without it fire is
extinguished—as is well known to Alchemists who regulate the
temperature.of. their fire by the supply of air. “Air is also that
which conserves the pores of the earth. In short, the whole
universe is kept fresh and sweet by air, and it is the vital element

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 137

of man, beast, plant, and stone. It contains the seed of all things
whichis forced up, into vegetables for instance, through the pores
of the earth by the action of fire, and thus the tree is built up
atom by atom out of the vital element of congealed air. This
vital force has remained in it ever since the time when the Spirit
of Life brooded over the waters in the air. The magnetic power
of life which air undoubtedly possesses, was put into it by God
at the Creation. As the megnet attracts to itself hard steel, and

water). This power of attracting water is in a certain part (viz.,
the 28oth part) of all seed. If, then, any one would bea cunning
planter of trees, he should take care to turn the point of attrac-
tion towards the North; for as the Arctic Pole attracts water,

so the vertical point draws to itself the seminal substance. If °

you would know what the point of attraction in a tree is, submerge
it entirely in water ; that point which always appears first, will be
the point of attraction. In the air, then, is the seed and the vital
spirit, or abode of the soul of every creature.

Concerning Elementary Fire.

Fire is the purest and noblest of all elements, full of
adhesive unctuous corrosiveness, penetrant, digestive, inwardly
invisible, fixed, hot and dry, outwardly visible, and tempered by

the earth. Of its purest substance was created the Throne of the .

Almighty ; of that which is less pure, the Angels ; out of fire of
an inferior purity were created the stars and the heavenly
luminaries ; that which was less pure still was used to bear up the
heavens ; that which is impure and unctuous—that, namely,
which we have termed the fire of Gehenna—is in the centre of the
earth, and was there inclosed and shut up to set this lower world
in motion. Though these different fires are separate, yet they
are also joined together by natural sympathy.

This element is the most passive of all, and resembles a
chariot: when it is drawn it moves; when it is not drawn, it
stands still. It exists imperceptibly in all things; and of it is
fashioned the vital rational soul, which distinguishes man from
all other animals, and makes him like God. This: rational soul

se

138 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

was divinely infused into his vital spirit by God, and entitles him
to be regarded as a microcosm, or small world by himself. But
the fire which surrounds the Throne of God is of an infinitely
pure and simple essence, and this is the reason that no impure
soul can know God, and that no human eye can penetrate this
essential fire, for fire is the death and destruction of everything
composite—and all material substances are of this nature. What
I said about the restful passivity of fire, applies in a certain sense
to the eternal calm and unchangeableness of the Divine Nature.
For as the fire sleeps in the flint, until it is roused and stirred up
from without, so the power of God, which is a consuming fire, is
only roused to action by the kindling breath of His Almighty
Will. How calmly and solemnly does not even an earthly
monarch sit enthroned in the pomp and state of his royalty ! His
courtiers hardly venture to move, and all around is calm and
still. But when he rises what a stir of motion and activity does
he not cause! All that are about him arise with him, and
presently you see him sweeping along in grand and stately
majesty: Yet the pomp ofan earthly prince is but a faint reflex
of the glory of the King of Kings, When He utters the voice of
His Will, all heaven is roused, the world trembles, and thous-
ands of angels speed forth on His errand. But it may be asked
hew I come to have this knowledge about heavenly things which
are removed far beyond human ken. My answer is that the
Sages have been taught of God that this natural world is only
an image and material copy of a heavenly and spiritual pattern ;
that the very existence of this world is based upon the reality of
its celestial archetype; and that God has created it in imitation
of the spiritual and invisible universe, in order that men might
be the better enabled to comprehend His heavenly teaching, and
the wonders of His absolute, and ineffable power and wisdom.
Thus the Sage sees heaven reflected in Nature as in a mirror ;
and he pursues this Art, not for the sake of gold or silver, but
for the loveob ihe <nowledge which it revealsj-he jealously cori
ceals it from the sinner and the scorntul, lest the mysteries of
heaven should be laid bare to the vulgar gaze. If you will but
rightly consider it, you yourself are an image of God, and a little
picture of the great world. For a firmament you have the
quintessence of the four elements attracted to the formative

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 139

womb out of the chaos of seed, and bounded by your skin; your
blood is fire in which lives your soul, the king of your little
universe, acting through the medium of the vital spirit; your
heart is the earth, where the Central Fire is always at
work; your mouth is your Arctic, and your stomach your
Antarctic Pole, and all your members correspond to some part
of the greater world, as I have set forth at some length in my
work on the Harmony of the Universe, and in the Chapter on
Astronomy. In the microcosm of man’s nature the soul is the
deputy or Viceroy of the Creator. It governs the mind, and the
mind governs the body: the mind is conscious of all that is con-
ceived in the soul, and all the members understand the mind,
obey it, and wait eagerly to carry out its behests. The body
knows nothing of itself; all its motions and desires are caused by
the mind ; it is to the mind what the tool is to the craftsman.
But though the rational soul operates in the body, a more im-
portant part of its activity is exerted on things outside the body :
it rules absolutely outside the body, and therein differs from the
vital spirits of brute beasts. In the same way, the Creator of the
world partly acts in and through things belonging to this world,
and is thereby, in a sense, included in this world. But He abso-
lutely transcends this world by that infinite part of His activity
which lies beyond the bounds of the universe, and which is too
high and glorious for the body of the world. The great differ-
ence between the soul’s extracorporal, and God’s extramundane,
activity, is that man’s rational activity is purely imaginative and
mental, whereas God’s thoughts are immediately translated into
real cxistences. I might be mentally in the streets of Rome,
but my journey would be purely imaginative ; God’s conceptions
are at once objective essences. God, then, is included in the
world, only as the soul is enclosed in the body, while it has power
to do things which far transcend the capacity of the body. By
material relations such as these you may know God, and learn
to distinguish Him from the material manifestations of His power.
When once the gates of knowledge have been flung wide for you,
your understanding will be enlarged.

We said that fire was the quietest of all elements, and that
it is stirred by a kind of motion well known to the Sages. The
Sage should be perfectly acquainted with the generation and

140 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

destruction of all things; he is familiar with the creation of
the heavens, and the composition and commixtion of things
terrestrial; yet, though he knows everything, he cannot make
everything. He knows the anatomy and composition of the
human body—yet he cannot make a man. This is a mystery
which the Creator has. kept in His own hand. Nature cannot
work till it has been supplied with a material: the first matter is
_furnished b; God, the second matter_by the Sage“ Bat trrthie
‘philosophical wor ature must excite the fire which God has
“enclosed in the centre of cach thing. The excitation of this fire
is performed by the will of Nature, and sometimes also by the
will of a skilful Artist who can dispose Nature, for fire naturally
purifies every species of impurity. .

All composite substances are purified by fire, as all sub-
stances that are not fixed owe their purification to water.
It is the property of fire to separate and divide composite
substances ; and this separation means a purging away of the
‘impure fromthe pure. This element also acts secretly, by mar-
vellous means, not only in opposition to the rest of the elements,
but also to all other things For as the reasonable soul was
made of this most pure fire, so the vegetable soul was made of
the elementary fire which Nature governs. The fire which is
contained in the centre of any given thing acts in the following
way: Nature provides the motive power, which stirs up the air ;
the air stirs up and rouses the fire, which separates, purges,
digests, colours, and brings every seed to maturity, and expels
the matured seed through the sperm into places or wombs,
either pure or impure, more or less hot, dry, or humid ; and
according to the nature of the place or womb, different things
are produced (cp. the Twelve Treatises). So the Most High God
has ordained that, in the economy of the universe, one thing
should be at enmity with another, and that the death of one
thing should be the life of the other; that one thing should
consume what another produces, and evolve out of it some higher
and nobler form of life. The elementary separation of all living
things is death ; and hence it is necessary for man to die, as
| his body is compounded of the four elements, which cannot
hold together for ever. In spite of this fact, our science fur-

: nishes an incontestible proof of man’s original immortality. It

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 14l

is certainly true that all composite substances are liable to de-
composition ; that this decomposition, when it takes place in the
animal world, is called death ; and that the human body is a
substance compounded of the fourelements. But it is also true
that the elements of Paradise, where man was created, are not
subject to this law, seeing that they are most pure and incor-
ruptible heavenly essences; and if man had remained in this
pure and celestial region, his body would have been incapable
of natural decay. Adam, however, in an evil day for our race,
disobeyed his Creator, and straightway was driven forth to the
beasts, into the world of corruptible elements which God had
created for the beasts only. From that day forward his food
was derived from perishable. substances, and death began to
work in his members. The pure elements of his creation were ,
gradually mingled and infected with the corruptible elements of
the outer world, and thus his body became more and more
gross, and liable, through its grossness, to natural decay and
death. The process of degeneration was, of course, slow in the
case of Adam and his first descendants; but, as timé went on, the
seed out of which men were generated became more and more
infected with perishable elements. The continued use of corrupt-
ible food rendered their bodies more and more gross—and human
life was soon shortened to a very brief span indeed. In some
favoured climes, where men eat and drink moderately, they
still sometimes live to a green old age ; but in our latitudes men
abridge the term of their natural existence by grossly filling them-
selves with an excess of elementary corruptible food, and thus,
before their time, become like “the beasts that perish.’ When
the pure and essential elements are joined together in loving
equilibrium, as they are in our Stone, they aré inseparable and
immortal, like the human body in ” Paradise ; whence also our
philosophical treasure has been compared to the creation of man,
an analogy which modern wise men, who take all things literally,
have understood as referring to the corrupted generation of this
present order, which is produced from corruptible elements.

It was the recollection of man’s immortality in Paradise,
that first set Sages a-thinking whether those pure and essential
elements might not be obtained in this world, and united in one
body. At length a merciful Creator made known to them that °

142 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

the desired conjunction of such elements existed in gold. It
could not be found among the animals who are sustained by
corruptible food, nor in vegetables, because they exhibit the
elements in a state of inequality and contention. When cor-
ruptible elements are united in a certain subject, their strife must
sooner or later bring about its decomposition, which is, of course,
followed by putrefaction ; in putrefaction, the impure is separated
from the pure: and if the pure elements are then once more
joined together by the action of natural heat, a much nobler and
higher form of life is produced. In the strife of the elements,
which follows when a body has been broken up by the victory of
water, earth and air unite with fire, and together they overcome
the water, digest, cook, and ultimately congeal it—which is the
beginning of a new life. For if the hidden central fire, which
during life was in a state of passivity, obtain the mastery, it
attracts to itself all the pure elements, which are thus separated
from the impure, and form the nucleus of a far purer form of life.
It is thus that our Sages are able to produce immortal things,
particularly by decomposition of minerals; and you sce that the
whole process, from beginning to end, is the work of fire.

‘Thus, then, we have briefly set forth as much as will serve
our purpose concerning the four elements. Truly the description
of each might be extended into a large volume, but we postpone
all amplification for our Treatise on Harmony, which, God help-
ing, if our life be spared, will be opportune to a more large
discourse upon natural things. ;

Concerning the Three Principles of All Things.

The three Principles of things are produced out of the four
elements in the following manner: Nature, whose power is in
her obedience to the Will of God, ordained from the very begin-
ing, that the four elements should incessantly act on one another,
so, in obedience to her behest, fire began to act on_air, and_pro-
duced Sulphur ; air_acted on water and produced Mercury ;
Water, by its action on earth, produced. Salt. Earth, alone,

‘havingnothing to act upon, did not produce anything, but
became the nurse, or womb, of these three Principles. We
designedly speak of three Principles; for though the Ancients
mention only two, it is clear that they omitted the third (Salt),

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 143

not from ignorance, but from a desire to lead the uninitiated
astray.

Whoever would be a student of this sacred science must
know the marks whereby these three Principles are to be
recognised, and also the process by which they are developed.
For as the three Principles are produced out of four, so they, in
their turn, must produce two, a male and a female; and these
two must produce an incorruptible one, in which”are exhibited
the four (elements) in a highly purified and digested condition,
and with their mutual strife hushed in unending peace and good-
will. In every natural composition these three represent the
body, the spirit,andthehidden soul ; and if,after purging them well,
you join them together, they must, by a natural process, result in
a most pure substance. For though the soul is most noble, yet
it cannot reach the goal without the spirit which is its place and
abode ; and if it is your desire to bring it back to a given place,
both the soul and the place must be purged and washed from all
impurity, so that the soul may dwell in glory, and nevermore
depart. Without these three Principles, the Artist can do
nothing, since even Nature is powerless without them. They are
in all things, and without them there is nothing in the world,
neither, indeed, can be. Their origin being such as we have des-
cribed, it is from these, by an imitation of Nature, that you must
produce the Mercury of the Philosophers, and their first matter,
bearing in mind the laws which govern natural things, and es-
pecially metals. Do not think that Salt is unimportant because
itis omitted by the Ancients ; they could not do without it, even
if they did not name it, seeing that it is the Key which opens the
infernal prison house, where sulphur lies in bonds. The three
Principles are necessary because they are the immediate
substance of metals. The remoter substance of metals is the
four elements, but no one can produce anything out of them but
God ; and even God makes nothing of them but these three
Principles. Why, then, should the Sage lose time and labour
over the four elements, when he has the substance made ready to
his hand by Nature? It is surely less troublesome to go three
miles than four, and as these three Principles exist in all things,
and, according to their proportions, etc., produce either metals, or -
plants, or animals, it is best to use them as our first substance.

144 THE HERMETIC MUSEUA¢.

The body is carth, the spirit water, the soul fire or sulphur of
gold. The Spirit augments the quantity of the body, the soul
the virtue. But because in the matter of weight there is more of
spirit than of fire, the spirit is uplifted, oppresses the fire, and
attracts it to itself in such a’way that both augment in virtue,
and the earth, which is mediate between them, augments in
weight. The Artist should determine which of the three
Principles he is seeking, and should assist it so that it may over-
come its contrary. Afterwards he must seek by his skill to
supplement what has been wanting in Nature, and thus his
chosen Principle will obtain the necessary victory. The element
of earth is nothing but a receptacle, in which fire and air carry
on their strife through the mediation of air. If water predom-
inate, temporal and corruptible things are produced ; if fire
obtains the victory, it produces lasting and incorruptible things.
Se you know which of the elements ought to receive your aid.
Moreover, though fire and water are in all things, they can
produce nothing without air and earth. Theiractivity is aroused
by external heat (in Nature, the Central Fire of the earth), and in
their struggle they are assisted each by that which is like to it.
By this strife they are subtilized in the pores of the earth, and
when they ascend to the surface they, produce flowers and fruit,
in which they closely associate together as friends; and the more
they are subtilized and purified in their ascent, the more excellent
are the fruits which they produce.

When the purification has thus been performed, let water and
fire become friends, which they will readily do in their earth which
ascends with them ; and the process will be the more speedily and
perfectly accomplished, if you combine the two in their proper
proportions—thus improving upon Nature. In all natural com-
pounds fire is always the smallest part; but it is aided and
stirred up by the action of outward fire; and according as fire
is overcome or obtains the mastery, imperfect or perfect things
are the result. The outward fire does not enter into the com-
position as an essential part of it, but only by the effect which it
helps to produce. The inward fire is sufficient, if it only receive
nutriment from the outward fire, which feeds it as wood feeds
elemental fire; in proportion to the quantity of nutriment
the inward fire grows and multiplies. Care should be taken,

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 145

therefore, that the outward fire is not so fierce as to devour,
instead of feeding, the inward fire. Gentle coction will be the
best means of attaining perfection, and of adding excellence to
weight. But as it is difficult toadd to a compound substance, |
would advise rather to produce the same effect by removing that
which is present in an excessive quantity. Remove that which
is too much, and let the compound develop itself naturally.
But many artists sow straw instead of grain ; others sow both;
many throw away that which the Sages love ; others begin and
do not persevere to the end; they look for short and easy labour
ina difficult Art. But we say that this Art consists in an ever
mingling of the virtues of the elements—in the natural equi-
librium of the hot, the dry, the cold, and the moist—in the
conjunction of the male and female, the female having engendered
the male, ze, of fire and the radical humour of the metals. If
you understand that the Mercury of the Sages contains within
itself its own good Sulphur, digested and matured by Nature,
you can accomplish the whole process by means of Mercury
alone ; but if you know how to add the supplement which our
Art requires to the natural proportions of substances, to double
the Mercury, and to triple the Sulphur, you will all the more
quickly produce, first the good, then the better, and finally the
best—though only one sulphur appears, and two mercuries
(which, are, however, of the same stock); they should not be
crude nor too much digested, yet well purged and dissolved (if
you understand me)

{t is really unnecessary to describe the matter of the

Mercury and the Sulphur of the Sages, as it has already been as |

plainly delineated by the Ancients as is consistent with our vow.
We do not altogether say that the Mercury of the Philosophers
is a common thing, or that they have openly called it by its
name, and that the matter from which Mercury and Sulphur
are philosdphically extracted has been plainly pointed out.
For the Mercury itself is not found above ground, but is
extracted by an artifice from Sulphur and Mercury conjoined,
in short, Sulphur and Mercury are the ore of our quicksilver,
and this quicksilver has power to dissolve, mortify, and revive
metals, which power it has received from the sulphur (which has
some of the properties of an acid). In order to put you on the
Vou. I. K

146 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

right track, I will also tell you the difference between our quick-
silver and common mercury. Common mercury does not dissolve
gold and silver so as to amalgamate with them ; but when our
quicksilver dissolves gold and silver, it amalgamates with them
in inseparable union, as water is mixed with water, Common
mercury has bad combustible sulphur, which turns it black ; our
quicksilver contains incombustible, fixed, good, snow-white and
red sulphur. Common mercury is cold and humid ; our quick-
silver is hot and humid. Common mercury blackens other
bodies ; our quicksilver renders them white and pure as crystal.
Common mercury is changed by precipitation into a yellow
powder and bad sulphur ; our quicksilver is converted by heat
into snow-white, good, fixed, and fusible sulphur. Common
mercury becomes more fusible, our quicksilver more fixed, the
more it is subjected to coction. Our quicksilver possesses such
marvellous virtue that it would by itself be sufficient for our pur-
pose, if subjected to gentle coction ; but in order to accelerate its
congelation, the Sages add to it its well digested and matured
sulphur. :

We might well have cited philosophers in confirmation of
the points of our discourse, but as our writings are more clear
than are theirs, we have no need of their support. Whosoever
understands them will understand us better. If you would prac-
tise our Art, learn first to hold your tongue, and study the nature
of minerals, “metals, and vegetables. “Our Mercury may be
obtained from all things, as everything has it; only from some
substances it is more easily procured than from others. Our
Art is not a matter of luck or accident, but is founded on a real
knowledge, and there is only one matter in the world by which,
and of which, the Stone of the Philosophers is prepared. The
substance is indeed to be found everywhere, but the method of
its extraction out of some matters would take a lifetime, and if
you begin your search without a due knowledge of natural things,
more especially in minerals, you will be working in the dark and
in blindness. it is, indeed, possible to set about our Artin a
casual manner ; and some who actually operate on our quicksilver,
begin at the wrong end, and thus fail in bringing it to perfection,
because they are quite in the dark about its real nature. Yet,
after all, we must confess that a right knowledge of our Art is

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 147

the gift of God alone, and is granted to diligent students in
answer to earnest and importunate prayer. To the Master it
may appear easy enough; but to the beginner it must seem
at first very hard and uphill work, He should not, how-
ever, despair, for in due time he will receive the reward
of his diligence and aspiration; even in the dangers which}
the knowledge may bring upon him, he will be kept:
from.harm by the loving hand of Providence, as I can testify \
from personal experience. We have with us God’s Ark of the
Covenant, which contains the most precious of earthly things,
and is guarded by the holy Angel of the Lord. We heard that
our enemies had fallen into the snare which they had laid for us ;
that those who sought our lives had been enclosed in the meshes
of death ; that those who attempted to rob us of our goods had
lost all that they possessed; and that those who strove to
blacken our reputation, died in shame and dishonour. Such is
the care which God has of us, Who, from our childhood, has kept
us safe under the shadow of His wings. And the feeling upper-
most in our minds is the humbling consciousness of our utter
unworthiness : we do not deserve the very least of His great
mercies. But one thing we do and wil] do: our hope and trust
always have been, are, and will be, in Him alone. We will not
put our confidence in men or in princes : "we will place ourselves
in the hands of One who remains unchanged when all earthly
power and greatness have passed away. The fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom: never did Sage utter truer word
than this; and if we would attain to the knowledge of this
glorious science, if we would be able to use it well when we pos-
sess it, we must wait on God continually, and importune Him
with earnest prayer. But to proceed with our description of the
Matter. We said that it was quicksilver, and quicksilver only :
whatever is added, is gained from this same substance. We
have repeatedly affirmed that all things earthly are evolved out
of three principles. But for our purpose they must be purged of
- their impurities, and then recombined ; that which is wanting is
added—and thus imitating and assisting Nature, we arrive at a
degree. of perfection such as Nature is unable to attain, on
account of the impurities with which her operations are clogged.
Do not suffer yourself to be confounded by the apparent con-
K2

148 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

tradictions which the Sages have introduced into their writings for
the purpose of keeping their secret. Select only those sayings
which are agreeable to Nature; take the roses, leave the thorns.
If you wish to produce a metal, your fundamental substance
should be metallic ; only a dog can beget a dog; without wheat
you will vainly plough your field ; and all your endeavours in this
Art will be in vain, unless you take your radical humour from a
metal. There is one substance,one. Art, one operation It is as
erroneous to Su suppose that any of the particular benefits of our
Stone can be enjoyed before the Stone itself has been prepared,
as it would be absurd to imagine that you can have a branch
without a root or tree. If you have water you can cook in it
various kinds of meat, and thus obtain broth of different flav-
ours ; but there will be no broth unless you have both the water
and the meat..... In: metals, then, as in all other things,
there is only one first substance, but the universal substance is
modified in a vast variety of ways, according to the course of its
subsequent development. Thus one thing is the mother of all
things. This great fact ought always to be borne in mind in
studying the works of the Sages; for nothing but mistakes and
disappointment can result from a slavishly literal interpretation
of their books. It is a pity that, instead of humbly studying -
and following Nature, our Alchemists are so ready to adopt
any fancy or notion that happens to pass through their minds.
They seek to attain the end not only without a middle part, but
without so much as a beginning. But how can anyone who
sets about our Art in so casual and haphazard a manner
expect anything but disappointments? Let our Alchemists
have done, then, once for all, with their sophistical methods, to
which they ascribe so great an importance—with their dealba-
tions, rubrefactions, fixations of the Moon, extractions of the soul
of gold,—and let them place themselves under the unerring
guidance of Nature. For though the soul of the metal has to be
extracted, it must not be killed in the operation ; and the ex-
traction of the living soul, which-has to be reunited to the
glorified body, must be carried on in a way very different from the
violent method commonly prevailing among Alchemists. We
do not propose to multiply wheat without seed corn. But let us,
in concluding this part of the subject, earnestly inculcate on the -

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 149

student’s mind the necessity of having seed that will germinate
and grow, and to avoid the use of seed which has been killed by
an excess of fiery heat.

Concernz. ng Sulphur.

Among the three principles the Sages have justly assigned
the first place to Sulphur, as the whole Art is concerned with the
manner of its preparation. Sulphur is of three chief kinds: that
which tinges or colours; that which congeals mercury ; and
essential sulphur, which matures it. The properties and prepara-
tion of this Sulphur we propose to describe, not in a set treatise,
but in a dialogue like that which brought out the essential
properties of Mercury. We will only'say, by way of preface,
that Sulphur is more mature than the other principles, and that
Mercury cannot be coagulated without it. The aim and object of
our Art is to elicit from metals that Sulphur by means of which
the Mercury of the Sages is, in the veins of the earth, congealed
into silver and gold ; in this operation the Sulphur acts the part
of the male, and our Mercury that of the female. Of the com-
position and action of these two are engendered the Mercuries
of the Philosophers.

In our former dialogue we gave an account of the meeting
of Alchemists, which a sudden tempest brought to so abrupt a
close Among those who took a prominent part in the proceed-
ings, was a good friend of the first Alchemist ; he was not a bad
man, or an impostor, but, as they say, nobody’s enemy except his
own ; yet he was foolish withal, and though really very ignorant,
had no small opinion of his own wisdom and learning. He had
at the meeting been the foremost champion of the claims of
Sulphur to be regarded as the first substance of the Stone, and
was satisfied that he would have been able to make good that
claim, if the meeting had not been prematurely broken up. So
when he got home he resumed his operations on Sulphur in a
very confident spirit. He subjected it to distillation, sublimation,
calcination, fixation, and to countless other chemical processes,
in which he spent much time and money, without arriving at any
result whatsoever. His failures at length began to prey on his
health and spirits, and in order to recruit the former, and raise
the latter, he fell into the habit of taking long walks in the neigh-

150 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

bourhood of the town where he lived. But’wherever he went he
could think of nothing but Sulphur. One day, with his mind full
of this besetting idea, and being wrought almost to an ecstacy,
he entered a certain verdant grove, in which there was abundance
not only of trees, herbs, and fruits, but also of animals, birds,
minerals, and metals. Of water there was indeed a great
scarcity ; it was carried to the place by means of aqueducts, and
among these was a conduit flowing with water extracted from
the rays of the moon ;—but this water was reserved for the use
ot the Nymph of the grove. In the grove there were two young
men tending oxen and rams, and from them he _ learned
that the grove belonged to the Nymph Venus. The Alchemist’.
was gratified enough, but all his thoughts were absorbed by the
subject of Sulphur, and when he remembered the words of the
Sages, who say that the substance is vile and common, and its
treatment easy, when he recollected the vast amount of time, .
labour, and money which he had vainly spent upon it, he lifted
up his voice, and in the bitterness of his heart, cursed Sulphur.
Now Sulphur was in that grove, though the Alchemist did not
know it. But suddenly he heard a voice which said: “ My friend,
why do you curse Sulphur?” He looked up in bewilderment:
nobody was to be seen. ‘“ My friend, why are you So sad?”
continued the voice. A/chemist: Master, I seek the Philosopher's *
Stone as one that hungers after bread. Vozce: And why thus
do you curse Sulphur ? Adchemist: My Lord, the Sages call it the
substance of the Stone; yet I have spent all my time and labour
in vain upon it, and am well nigh reduced todespair. Vozce: It
is true that Sulphur is the true and chief substance of the Stone.
Yet you curse it unjustly. For it ies heavily chained in a dark
prison and cannot do as it would. Its hands and feet have been
bound, and the doors of the dungeon closed upon it,at the bidding
‘of its mother, Nature, who was angry with it for too readily
obeying the summons of every Alchemist. It is now confined in
such a perfect labyrinth of a prison, that it can be set free only
by those Sages to whom Nature herself has entrusted the secret.
Alchemist ; Ah! miserable that I am, this is why he was unable
to come to me! How very hard and unkind of the mother !.
When is he to be set at large again? Voice ; That can only be.
by means of hard and persevering labour. <A/chemist - Who are

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 151

his gaolers? Vodce ; They are of his own kindred, but grievous
tyrants. Alchemist: And who are you? Voice: I am the
judge and the chief gaoler,and my name is Saturn. Alchemist ;
Then Sulphur is detained in your prison? Voice ; Yes; but I
am not his keeper. Adchemist : What does he do in prison?
Voice ; Whatever his gaolerscommand. Alchemist - And what
can he do? Voce; Hecan perform a thousand things, and is
the heart of all. He can perfect metals and minerals, impart
understanding to animals, produce flowers in’ herbs and trees,
corrupt and perfect air ; in short, he produces all the odours and
paints all the colours in the world. Alchemist: Of what
substance does he make the flowers ? Voice; His guards furnish
him with vessels and matter ; Sulphur digests it ; and according
to.the diversity of the digestion, and the weight of the matter,
he produces choice flowers, having their specialodours. Alchemist:
Master, is he old? Vozce: Know, friend, that Sulphur is the
virtue of the world, and though Nature’s second-born—yet the
oldest of all things. To those who know him, however, he is as
obedient as a little child. He is most easily recognised by the
vital spirit in animals, the colour in metals, the odour in plants.
Without his help his mother can do nothing. Alchemist: Ishe
the sole heir, or has he any brothers? Voce: He has some
brothers who are quite unworthy of him; and a sister that
he loves, and who is to him as a mother. Alchemist :
Is he always the same? Vozce: As to his nature, it is always
the same. But in person his heart only is pure: his garments
are spotted. A/chemzst ; Master, was he ever quite free?
Voice: Yes; in the days of the great Masters and Sages, whom
Nature loved, and to whom she gave the keys of the prison.
Alchemist ; Who were these wise adepts? Vozce: There have
been very many, and among them Hermes, who was one and the
same with the mother of Sulphur. After him there were kings,
princes, a long line of Sages, including Aristotle and Avicenna.
All these delivered Sulphur from his-bonds. Alchemist ; What
does he give to them for delivering him? Voice ; When he is
set free, he binds his gaolers, and gives their three kingdoms to
his deliverer.. He also gives to him-a magic mirror, in which
the three parts of the wisdom of the whole world may be seen
_and known.at a glance: and this mirror clearly exhibits the

152 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

creation of the world, the influences of the celestial virtues on
earthly things, and the way in which Nature composes sub-
stances by the regulation of heat. With its aid, men may at
once understand the motion of the Sun and Moon, and that
universal movement by which Nature herself is governed—also
the various degrees of heat, cold, moisture, and dryness, and the
virtues of herbs and of all other things. By its means the
physician may at once, without consulting an herbarium, tell the
exact composition of any given plant or medicinal herb. But
now-a-days men are content to trust to the authority of great
writers, and no longer attempt to use their own eyes. They
quote Aristotle and Galen, as if there was not much more to be
learned from the great Book of Nature which is spread open
before them. Know that all things on the earth and under the
earth are engendered and produced by the three principles, but
sometimes by two, unto which the third, nevertheless, adheres.
He who knows these three principles, and their proportions as
conjoined by Nature, can tell easily by their greater or less
coction, the degrees of heat in each subject, and whether they
have been well, badly, or passably cooked. For those who know
the three principles know also all vegetables—by sight, taste,
‘and odour, for these senses determine the three principles, and
the degree of their decoction. A/chemzst : Master, they say that
Sulphur is a Medicine. Vozce - Nay, you might rather call him a
physician, and to him who delivers him out of prison, he gives
his blood as a Medicine. Alchemist : How long can a man ward
off death by,means of this universal Medicine? Vozce ; Until
the time originally appointed. But many Sages who did not
take it with proper caution, have died before that. time.
Alchemist : Do you call it a poison then? Voze.: Have you
not observed that a great flame swallows up a small one?
Men, who had received the Art by the teachings of others,
thought that the more powerful the dose they took of our
Medicine, the more beneficial would be the effect. They did
not consider that one grain of it has strength to penetrate many
thousand pounds of metals. Adchemist ; How then should they
have used it? Vozce : They ought to have taken only so much
as would have strengthened and nourished, without overwhelm-
ing, their natural heat. A/chemist: Master, | know how to make

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 153

that Medicine. Voice: Blessed are you if you do! For the
blood of Sulphur is that inward virtue and dryness which
congeals quicksilver into gold and imparts health and perfection
to all bodies. But the blood of Sulphur is obtained only by
those who can deliver him from prison ; and therefore he is so
closely imprisoned that he can hardly breathe, lest he should
come to the Palace of the King. Alchemist; 1s he so closely
imprisoned in all metals? Vozce - In some his imprisonment is
less strict than in others. Adchemist : Why, Lord, is he im-
prisoned in the metals so tyrrannously? Vozce; Because if he
once came unto his royal palace, he would no longer fear his
guards. He could look from the windows with freedom, and
appear before the whole world, for he would be in his own
kingdom, though not in that state of highest power whereto he
desires to arrive. Alchemist : What is his food? Voice: His
food is air, in a digested state, when he is free; but in prison
he is compelled to consume it in a crude state. Alchemist ;
Master, cannot those quarrels between him and his gaolers be
composed? Vozce;: Yes, by a wise and cunning craftsman.
Alchemist ; Why does he not offer them terms of peace?
Voice: He cannot do so by himself: his indignation gets the
better of his discretion. Adchemisr: Why does he not do so
through some commissary? Vozce: He who could put an end
to their strife would be a wise man, and worthy of undying
honour. For if they were friends, they would help, instead
of hindering each other, and bring forth immortal things.
Alchemist : 1 will gladly undertake the duty of reconciling them.
For I am a very learned man,and they could not resist my practical
skill. I am a great Sage, and my Alchemistic treatment
would quickly bring about the desired end. But tell me, is this
the true Sulphur of the Sages? Votce: He is Sulphur; you
ought to know whether he is the Sulphur of the Sages
Alchemist: If I find his prison, shall I be able to deliver him ?
Voice: Yes, if you are wise enough to do so. It is easier to
deliver him than to find his prison. Alchemist ; When I do find’
him, shall I be able to make him into the Philosopher’s Stone?
Votce : I am no prophet. But if you follow his mother’s advice,
and dissolve the Sulphur, you will have the Stone. Alchemist :
In what substance is this ‘Sulphur to be found? Voze- In

ae

154 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

all substances. All things in the world—metals, herbs, trees,
animals, stones, are its ore. Adchemist: But out of what sub-
stances do the Sages procure it? Vozce ; My friend, you press
me somewhat too closely. But I may say that though it is every-
where, yet it has certain palaces where the Sages can most con-
veniently find it ; and they worship it when it swims in its sea
and sports with Vulcan (god of fire), though there it is disguised
in a most poor garb. Now is if in a dark prison, hidden from
sight. But it is one only subject, and if you cannot. find it at
home you will scarcely do so in the forest. Yet, to give you
some heart in your research, I will solemnly assure you that it
is most perfect in gold and silver—most easily obtained in
quicksilver.

With these words Saturn departed, and the Alchemist,
being weary with walking, fell into a deep sleep, in which he
saw the following vision: He beheld in that grove a spring of
water, near which Salt and Sulphur were walking and quarrel-
ling, until at last they began to fight. Salt dealt Sulphur a
grevious wound, out of which there flowed, instead of blood,
pure, milk-white water, that swelled into a great river. In this
river the virgin goddess, Diana, came to bathe; and a certain
bold prince, who was passing by, was inflamed with great love

. towards her ; which she, perceiving and returning, pretended to

be sinking under water. The prince bade his attendants assist
her ; but they excused themselves, saying that the river, though
it looked small. and all but dried up, was most dangerous.
“ And,” said they, “ many of those who have passed here before
have perished in it.” Then that prince threw off his thick
cloak, plunged into the river, and stretched out his arm to save
the beautiful Diana; but she grasped it so convulsively that
they both sank under water together. Soon afterwards their souls
were seen rising upward above the water, and they said, “We
have done well, for in no other way could we be delivered from
our stained and spotted bodies.” Adchemist (speaking): Will
you ever return into those bodies? Sou/s; Not while they are
so polluted—but when they are cleansed, and the river is dried up
by the heat of the sun. Alchemist; What do you do in the
meantime? Souls: We soar above the water till thee storm
and the mists cease.... Then the Alchemist thought that he

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 155

saw a great number of his fellows come to the spot where the
body of the Sulphur lay slain by the Salt; and they divided it
among themselves, and gave a piece to him also. Then they
went home, and began to operate on their (dead) Sulphur, and
are at it to this day. Presently Saturn returned, and the
Alchemist said: Master, come quickly, I have found Sulphur—
help me to make the Stone. Saturn; Gladly, my friend.
Prepare the quicksilver, and the sulphur, and give me the vessel.
Alchemist ; Oh, I do not want Mercury. It is a delusion and a
snare, as my friend the other Alchemist discovered to his smart..
Saturn; 1 can do nothing without quicksilver. Alchemist ;
Oh no, we will make it of Sulphur only. So they set to work
on that piece of dead Sulphur, and sublimed, calcined, and sub-
jected it to all manner of chemical operations. But they
produced nothing save little bits of sulphurous tow, such as they
use for lighting fires. Then the Alchemist confessed the fruit-
lessness of his endeavours, and bade Saturn set about the
work in his own way. Then Saturn took two kinds of quick-
silver, of different substance but one root, washed them with his
urine, and called them the sulphurs of sulphurs ; then he mixed
the fixed with the volatile, after which he placed them in a proper
vessel, and set a watch to prevent the sulphur from escaping ;
afterwards he placed them in a bath of very gentle heat—and
thus they made the Philosopher’s Stone, which must always
follow as the outcome of the right substance. Then the
Alchemist took it in his hand, admired its beautiful_purple
colour, and danced about with it, shouting aloud with joy and
déligfit. Suddenly the glass slipped out of his hand and broke
into a thousand pieces ; the stone vanished ; and the Alchemist
awoke with nothing in his hand but some pieces of sulphurous
tow. : ;
There are a good many Alchemists who, having an
extremely favourable opinion of themselves, and fancying that
they can hear the grass grow, rail against this Art, because they
think that if the Stone were not a mere delusion, they could not
have failed to find it. We, for our part, are not over anxious
to rob these people of their comfortable conviction. But to men
who were worthy (men both of high and low degree) we have
repeatedly proved the reality of our Art by incontestable

156 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

ocular evidence, Let me warn those who wish to follow the true
method in studying our Art, atways to read with constant
reference to natural facts, and never, under any circumstances, to
do anything contrary to Nature. If the Sages say that fire does
‘not burn, they must not believe it; for Nature is greater than
the Sages ; but if they say that itis the property of fire to dry
and heat things, they will accept this statement, because it is in
accordance with the truth of Nature—and the facts of Nature are
always simple and plain. If any one came and taught you to
make this Stone, as though he were giving you a receipt for
making cheese out of milk, he might speak more plainly than |
have done; but I am compelled to veil and conceal my meaning,
because of the vow which my Master exacted of me.

My last words shall be addressed to you who have already
made some progress in this Art. Have you been where the
bridegroom has been married to the bride, and the nuptials were
celebrated in the house of Nature? Have you heard how the
vulgar have seen this Sulphur, as much as have you who have
taken such pains to seek it? If you wish that even old women
should practise your philosophy, shew the dealbation of these
sulphurs, and say openly to the common people: Behold, the
water is divided, and the Sulphur has gone forth; when it
returns it will be whiter than snow, and will congeal the water.
Burn the Sulphur with imcombustible sulphur, wash it, and make
it white and purple. until the Sulphur beccmes Mercury, and the-
Mercury Sulphur, and you can proceed to quicken it with the
soul of gold. Our Mercury must be corrected by means of
Sulphur —otherwise it is unprofitable. A prince without a people
is a wretched sight—and so is an Alchemist without Sulphur
and Mercury. If you understand me, I have spoken.

The Alchemist went home, bewailed the broken Stone, and
his folly in not asking Saturn about the Salt of the Sages, and
the way of distinguishing between it and ordinary salt. The
rest he related to his wife.

Conclusion.
Every student of this Art should first carefully read what is
said—in this and other Treatises—about the creation, operation,
properties, and effects of the four elements ; otherwise he cannot

THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT. 157

apprehend the nature of the three principles, or find the sub-
stance of the Stone, or understand its development. God has
created the elements out of chaos ; Nature has evolved the three
principles out of the elements ; and out of these principles she
makes all things, and gives power to her beloved disciples to
produce marvellous preparations. If Nature produces metals out
of the principles, Art must follow her example. It is one of the
rules of Nature to act through intermediate substances ; and this
book should enable the student to judge what substances are
intermediate between the elements and metals, and between
metals and the Stone. The difference between gold and water
is great, that between water and mercury not so great, and that
between gold and mercury very small, for mercury is the habita-
tion of gold, water the habitation of mercury, and sulphur is that '
which coagulates mercury. The whole arcanum lies hidden in
the Sulphur of the Sages, which is also contained in the inmost
part of their Mercury, which has to be prepared in a certain way
that shall be described on another occasion.

I have not written this Treatise with the object of refuting
the ancient Sages, but only for the purpose of correcting, explain-
ing, and supplementing their statements. After all, they were
only men, and they sometimes did make assertions which can
now no longer be maintained. For instance, when Albertus
Magnus says that gold was once found to have developed in the
teeth of a dead man, he is out of harmony with the possibilities
of Nature; for an animal substance can never develop into a
mineral. It is true that animals and vegetables contain sulphur
and mercury, as well as minerals; but these principles are
animal and vegetable, not mineral. If there were no animal
sulphur in man, the mercury of his blood could not be congealed
into flesh and bones; and if plants contained no vegetable sul-
phur, their mercury or water (sap) would not be congealed into
leaves and flowers. The three kinds of sulphur are essentially
the same, but, like the three mercuries, they are differentiated
according to the three kingdoms, and cannot act outside their
own kingdoms. Each kind of mercury can be coagulated by
none but its own sulphur, and if gold was found in the teeth of
a dead man, it must have been introduced in an artificial man-
ner—either as gold, or in the shape of some other metal which

158 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

by the gradual action of its own metallic sulphur on its metallic
mercury, was afterwards transmuted into gold. It is mistaken
impressions and superstitious notions, like this one of Albertus
Magnus, that we have set ourselves to correct in this Treatise, by
stating once for all the true facts of animal, vegetable, and
mineral development. ;

Let the painstaking student be satisfied to have received a
true account of the origin of the Threc Principles. There is no
greater help towards a successful end than a good beginning. I
have in this Treatise started the student on the right road, and
given him clear and practical directions. With God’s blessing,
and by dint of diligent and persevering study, he may now fairly
hope to reach the glorious goal. But I, having told out all that is
lawful for me to utter, now commit myself to the mercy of a
loving Creator, who will receive me to Himself ; and I commend
the gentle and pious Reader to the same great Father of All, to
whom be praise and glory, through the endless succession of
the ages.

THE END.

AN
OPEN ENTRANCE.
CLOSED PALACE

OF THE

KING.

BY

AN ANONYMOUS SAGE AND
LOVER OF TRUTH.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

THe AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

Chapter’ 1. Of the need of Sulphur for producing this Elixir.

ws
~~
iS)

Sages.
Of the Chalybs of the Sages. |
Of the Magnet of the Sages.
Of the Chaos of the Sages.
Of the Air of the Sages.

WALES

means of the Flying Eagles.

Of the Component Principles of the Mercury of the

Of the first Operation—Preparation of Mercury by

» 8 Of the Difficulty and Length of the First Operation.
33 g. Of the Superiority of our Mercury over all Metals.
ys to. Of the Sulphur which is in the Mercury of the Sages.
», 11. Concerning the Discovery of the Perfect Magistery.
5» 12. The Generic Method of Making the Perfect Magistery.
» 13. Of the Use of Mature Sulphur in the Work of the

Elixir.

»» 14. Of the Circumstantial and Accidental Requisites of

our Art.

»» 15. Of the Incidental Purgation of Mercury and Gold.
», 16. Of the Amalgam of Mercury and Gold, and of their

respective Proportions.

»» 17. Concerning the Size, Form, Material, and Mode of

Securing the Vessel.
», 18 Ofthe Furnace, or Athanor of the Sages.’

162

Chapter 19.

20.

2t.

THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Of the Progress of the Work during the First
40 Days.

Of the Appearance of Blackness in the Work of the
Sun and Moon.

Of the Caution required to avoid Burning the
Flowers.

Of the Regimen of Saturn.

Of the Different Regimens of this Work.

Of the First Regimen, which is that of Mercury.

Of the Regimen of the Second Part, which is that of
Saturn.

Of the Regimen of Jupiter.

Of the Regimen of the Moon.

Of the Regimen of Venus.

Of the Regimen of Mars.

Of the Regimen of fhe Sun.

Of the Fermentation of the Stone.

The Imbibition of the Stone.

The Multiplication of the Stone.

Of Projection.

Of the manifold Uses of this Art.

THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

philosopher, have decreed to write this little treatise of
medicinal, chemical, and physical arcana, in the year 1645
) after the Birth of Christ, and in the 23rd year of my age,
to assist in conducting my straying brethren out of the labyrinth
of error, and with the further object of making miyself known to
other Sages, holding aloft a torch which may be visible far and
wide to those who are groping in the darkness of ignorance. The
contents of this Book are not fables, but real experiments which
I have seen, touched, and handled, as an adept will easily
conclude from these lines. I have written more plainly about
this Art than any of my predecessors ; sometimes | have found
myself on the very verge of breaking my vow, and once or twice
had to lay down my pen for a season ; but I could not resist the
inward prompting of God, which impelled me to persevere in the
most loving course, who alone knows the heart, and to whom only
be glory for ever. Hence, | undoubtedly gather that in this last
age of the world, many will become blessed by this arcanum,
through what I have thus faithfully written, for I have not
willingly left anything doubtful to the young beginner. I know
many who with me do enjoy this secret, and am persuaded that
many more will also rejoice in its possession. Let the holy Will
of God perform what it pleases, though | confess myself an
unworthy instrument through whom such great things should
be effected.

| BEING an anonymous adept, a lover of learning, and a

CHAPTER I.
Of the need of Sulphur for producing the Elixir.

HOEVER wishes to possess this secret Golden

ri Fleece, which has virtue to transmute metals into
gold, should know that our Stone is nothing

but gold digested to the highest. degree of purity

and subtle fixation to which it can be brought by Nature
and the highest effort of Art; and this gold thus perfected is
called “our gold,” no longer vulgar, and is the ultimate goal
of Nature. These words, though they may be surprising to
some of my readers, are true, as I, an adept, bear witness; and
though overwise persons entertain chimerical dreams, Nature
herself is most wonderfully simple. Gold, then, is the one true
principle of purification. But our gold is twofold ; one kind is
mature and fixed, the yellow Latten, and its heart or centre is
pure fire, whereby it is kept from destruction, and only purged
in the fire. This gold is our male, and it is sexually joined to
a more crude white gold—the female seed: the two together
being indissolubly united, constitute our fruitful Hermaphrodite.
We are told by the Sages that corporal gold is dead, until it
be conjoined with its bride, with whom the coagulating sulphur,
which in gold is outwards, must be turned inwards. Hence it
follows that the substance which we require is Mercury. Con-
cerning this substance, Geber uses the following words: “ Blessed
be the Most High God who created Mercury, and made it an
all-prevailing substance.” And it is true that unless we had
Mercury, Alchemists might still boast themselves, but all their
boasting would be vain. Hence it is clear that our Mercury
is not common mercury ; forall common mercury is a male that
‘is corporal, specific, and dead, while our Mercury is spiritual,
female, living, and life-giving. Attend closely to what I say
about our Mercury, which is the salt of the wise men. The
Alchemist who works without it is like a man who.draws a bow

166 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

without a string. Yet it is found nowhere in a pure state above
ground, but has to be extracted by a cunning process out of the
substance in which it exists.

CHAPTER II.
Of the Component Principles of the Mercury of the Sages.

Let those who aim to purify Mercury by means of salts,
feeces, and other foreign bodies, and by strange chemical pro-
cesses, understand that though our water is variously composed,
it is yet only oe thing, formed by the concretion of divers
substances of the same essence. The components of our water
are fire, the vegetable “ Saturnian liquid,’ and the bond of
Mercury. The fire is that of mineral Sulphur, which yet can be
called neither mineral nor metallic, but partakes of both char-
acters: it is a chaos or spirit, because our fiery Dragon, that
overcomes all things, is yet penetrated by the odour of the
Saturnian liquid, its blood growing together with the Saturnian
sap into one body which is yet neither a body (since it is all
volatile) nor a spirit (since in fire it resembles melted metal).
It may thus be very properly described as chaos, or the
mother of all metals. From this chaos I can extract everything
—even the Sun and Moon—without the transmutatory Elixir.
It is called our Arsenic, our Air, our-Moon, our Magnet, and our
Chalybs: these names representing the different stages of its
development, even unto the manifestation of the kingly diadem,
which is cast out of the menstruum of our harlot. Learn,
then, who are the friends of Cadmus ; who is the serpent that
devoured them ; what the hollow oak to which Cadmus spitted
the serpent. Learn who are the doves of Diana, that overcome
the green lion by gentleness: even the Babylonian dragon,
which kills everything with its venom. Learn, also, what are
the winged shoes of Mercury, and who are those nymphs whom
he charms by means of his incantations.

CHAPTER III.
Concerning the Chalybs of the Sages.

Our Chalybs is the true key of our Art, without which the
Torch could in no wise be kindled, and as the true magi have

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 167

delivered many things concerning it,so among vulgar alchemists
there is great contention as to its nature. It is the ore of gold,
the purest of all spirits ; a secret, infernal, and yet most volatile
fire, the wonder of the world, the result of heavenly virtues in the
lower world—for which reason the Almighty has assigned to it
a most glorious and rare heavenly con junction, even that notable
sign whose nativity is declared in the East. This star was seen
by the wise men of old, and straightway they knew that a Great
King was born in the world. When you sec its constellation,
follow it to the cradle, and there you will behold a beautiful
Infant. Remove the impurities, look upon the face of the
King’s Son ; open your treasury, give to him gold, and after his
death he will bestow on you his flesh and blood, the highest
Medicine in the three monarchies of the earth.

CHAPTER IV.
Of the Magnet of the Sages.

As steel is attracted towards the magnet, and the magnet
turns towards the steel, so also our Magnet attracts our Chalybs.
Thus, as Chalybs is the ore of gold, so our Magnet is the true
ore of our Chalybs. The hidden centre of our Magnet abounds
in Salt, which Salt is the menstruum in the Sphere of the Moon,
and can calcine gold. This centre turns towards the Pole with
an archetic appetite, in which the virtue of the Chalybs is
exalted into degrees. In the Pole is the heart of Mercury, the
true fire (in which is the rest of its Master), sailing through this
great sea that it may arrive at both the Indies, and direct its
course by the aspect of the North Star, which our Magnet will
manifest.

CHAPTER V.
Of the Chaos of the Sages.

Let the student incline his ear to the united verdict of the
Sages, who describe this work as analogous to the Creation
of the World. In the Beginning God created Heaven and
Earth ; and the Earth was without form and void, and the Spirit
of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said,

168 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

“Let there be light,” and there was light. These words are

sufficient for the student of our Art. The Heaven must be

united to the Earth on the couch of friendship ; so shall he reign

in glory for ever. The Earth is the heavy body,.the womb of the

minerals, which it cherishes in itself, although it brings to light

trees and animals. The Heaven is the place where the great

Lights revolve, and through the air transmit their influences

to the lower world. But in the béginning all was one confused

chaos. Our Chaos is, as it were, a mineral earth. (by virtue

of its coagulation), and yet also volatile air—in the centre of

which is the Heaven of the Sages, the Astral Centre, which with

its light irradiates the earth to its surface. What man is wise

enough to evolve out of this world.a new King, who shall °
redeem his brothers from their natural weaknesses, by dying,

being lifted on high, and giving his flesh and blood for the life

of the world? I thank Thee, O God, that Thou hast concealed

these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them '
unto babes !

CHAPTER VI.
Of the Air of the Sages.

Our air, like the air of the firmament, divides the waters;
and as the waters under the firmament are visible to us mortals,
while we are unable to see the waters above the firmament, so
in “our work ” we see the extracentra] mineral] waters, but are
unable to see those which, though hidden within, nevertheless,
have a real existence. They exist but do not appear until it
please the Artist, as the author of the Wew Light has testified.
Our air keeps the extracentral waters from mingling with those
at the centre. If through the removal of this impediment, they
were enabled to mingle, their union would be indissoluble.
Therefore the external vapours and burning sulphur do stiffly
adhere to our chaos, and unable to resist its tyranny, the pure
flies away from the fire in the form of adry powder. This then
should be your great objéct: The-arid earth must be irrigated, .
and its pores softened with water of its own kind; then this
thief with all the workers of iniquity will be cast out, the water,
will be purged of its leprous stain by the addition of true

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 169

Sulphur, and you will have the Spring whose waters are sacred
to the maiden Queen Diana. This thief is armed with all the
malignity of arsenic, and is feared and eschewed by the: winged
youth. Though the Central Water be his Spouse, yet the youth
,cannot come to her, until Diana with the wings of. her doves
purges the poisonous air,and opens a passage to the bridal
chamber. Then the youth enters easily through the pores,
presently shaking the waters above, and stirring up a rude and
ruddy cloud. Do thou, O Diana, bring in the water over him,
even unto the brightness of the Moon! -‘So the darkness on the
face of the abyss will be dispersed by the spirit moving in the
waters, Thus, at the bidding of God, light will appear on the
Seventh Day, and then this sophic creating of Mercury shall be
completed, from which time, until the revolution of the year, you
may wait for the birth of the marvellous Child of the Sun, who
will come to deliver his brethren from every stain.

CHAPTER VII.

Of the First Operation—Preparation of Mercury by means
of the Flying Eagles.

Know, my brother, that the exact preparation of the Eagles

of the Sages, is the highest effort 6f our Art. In this first section

‘of our work, nothing is to be done without hard and persevering
tofl; though ‘it is quite true that afterwards the substance

develops under the influence of gentle heat without any
imposition of hands. The Sages tell us that their Eagles must

be taken to devour the Lion, and that they gain the victory all

the sooner if they are very numerous ; also that the number of

the work varies between 7 and 9. The Mercury of the Sages is

the Bird of Hermes (now called a goose, now a pheasant). But

the Eagles are always mentioned in the plural, and number from

3.t0 10. Yet this is not to be understood as if there should be

so many weights or parts of the water to one of the earth, but

the water must be taken so oftentimes acuated or sharpened as

there are Eagles numbered. This acuation is made by sublima-

tion. There is, then, one sublimation of the Mercury of the Sages,

when one Eagle is mentioned, and the seventh sublimation will

so strengthen your Mercury, that the-Bath of your King will be

170 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

ready. . . Let me tell you now how this part of the work
is performed. Take 4 parts of our fiery Dragon, in whose belly
is hidden the magic Chalybs, and g parts of our Magnet ; mingle
them by means of a fierce fire, in the form of a mineral water,
the foam of which must be taken away. Remove the shell, and
take the kernel. Purge what remains once more by means of
fire and the Sun, which may be done éasily if Saturn shall have
seen himself in the mirror of Mars. Then you will obtain our
Chameleon, or Chaos, in which all the virtues of our Art are
potentially present. This is the infant Hermaphrodite, who,
through the bite of a mad dog, has been rendered so fearful of
water, that though of a kindred nature, it always eschews and
avoids it. But in the grove of Diana are two doves that soothe
its rabid madness if applied by the art of the nymph Mercury.
Take it and plunge it under water till it perish therein ;

then the rabid and black dog will appear panting and half
suffocated—drive him down with vigorous blows, and the
darkness will be dispelled. Give it wings when the Moon is full,
and it will fly away as an Eagle, leavirg the doves of Diana
dead (though, when first taken they should be living). Repeat
this seven times, and your work is done; the gentle coction
which follows is child's play and a woman’s work.

CHAPTER VIII.
Of the. Difficulty and Length of the First Operation.

. Seme Alchemists fancy that the work from beginning to
end is a mere idle entertainment ; but those who make it so will
reap what they have sown—viz., nothing. We know that next
to the Divine Blessing, and the discovery of the proper founda-
tion, nothing is so important as unwearied industry and persever-
ance in this First Operation. It is no wonder, then, that so many
students of this Art are reduced to beggary ; they are afraid of
work, and look upon our Art as mere sport for their leisure
moments. For no labour is more tedious than that which the
preparatory part of our enterprise demands. Morienus earnestly
entreats the King to consider this fact, and says that many Sages
have complained of the tedium of our work. “To render a
chaotic mass ordcrly,” says the Poet, “is matter of much time

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 171

and labour” —and the noble author of the Hermetical Arcanum
describes it asan Herculean task. ~There are so many impurities
clinging to our first substance, and a most powerful intermediate
agent is required for the purpose of eliciting from our polluted
menstruum the Royal Diadem. But when you have once pre-
pared your Mercury, the most formidable part of your task is
accomplished, and you may indulge in that rest which is sweeter
than any work, as the Sage says.

CHAPTER IX.
On the Superiority of our Mercury over All Metals.

Our Mercury is that Serpent which devoured the companions
of Cadmus, after having first swallowed Cadmus himself, though
he was far stronger thanthey. Yet Cadmus will one day transfix
this Serpent, when he has coagulated it with his Sulphur. Know
that this, our Mercury, is a King among metals, and dissolves
them by changing their Sulphur into a kindred mercurial sub-
stance. The Mercury of one, two, or three eagles bears rule over
Saturn, Jupiter,and Venus. The Mercury of from three to seven
eagles sways the Moon ; that of ten eagles has power over the
Sun ; our Mercury is nearer than any other unto the first es of
metals ; it has power to enter metallic bodies, and to manifest
their hidden depths.

CHAPTER X.
On the Sulphur which ts in the VWercury of
the Sages.

It is a marvellous fact that our Mercury contains acteve
Sulphur, and yet preserves the form and all the properties of
Mercury. Hence it is necessary that a form be introduced
therein by our. preparation, which form is a metallic sulphur.
This Sulphur is the inward fire which causes the putrefaction of
the composite Sun This sulphureous fire is the spiritual seed
which our Virgin (still remaining immaculate) has conceived.
For an uncorrupted virginity admits of a spiritual love, as ex-
perience and authority affirm. The two (the passive and the
active principle} combined we call our Hermaphrodite. When

172 ‘| THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

' joined to the Sun, it softens, liquefies, and dissolves it with gentle

heat. By means of the same fire it coagulates itself ; and by its

coagulation produces the Sun. Our pure and homogeneous

’ Mercury, having conceived inward Sulphur (through our Art),
coagulates itself under the influence of gentle outward heat, like
the cream of milk—a subtle earth floating on the water. When
it is united to the Sun, it is not only not coagulated, but- the
composite substance becomes softer day by day ; the bodies are
almost dissolved ; and the spirits begin to be coagulated, with a
black colour and a most fetid smell. Hence it appears that this
spiritual metallic Sulphur is in truth the moveng principle in our
Art; it is really volatile or unmatured gold, and by proper
digestion is changed into that metal. If joined to perfect gold,
it is not coagulated, but dissolves the corporal gold, and remains
with it, being dissolved, under one form, although before the
perfect union death must precede, that so they may be united
after death, not simply in a perfect unity, but in a thousand
times more than perfect perfection.

CHAPTER XI.
Concerning the Discovery of the Perfect Magistery.

There. are those who think that this Art was first discovered
by Solomon, or rather imparted to him by Divine Revelation.
But though there is no reason for doubting that so wise and pro-
foundly learned a sovereign was acquainted with our Art, yet
we happen to know that he was ‘not the first to acquire the
knowledge. It was possessed by Hermes, the Egyptian, and
some other Sages before him; and we may suppose that they
first sought a simple exaltation of imperfect metals into regal
perfection, and that it was at first their endeavour to develop
Mercury, which is most like to gold in its weight and properties,
into perfect gold. This, however, no degree of ingenuity could
effect by any fire, and the truth gradually broke on their minds
that an internal heat was required as well as an external one.
So they rejected aqua fortis and all corrosive solvents, after long
experiments with the same—also all salts, except that kind which
is the first substance of all salts, which dissolves all metals and
coagulates Mercury, but not without violence, whence that kind

AN OPEN ENTRANCE, 173

of agent is again separated entire, both in weight and virtue,
from the things it is applied to. They saw that the digestion of
Mercury was prevented by certain aqueous crudities and earthy
dross ; and that the vadical nature of these impurities rendered
their elimination impossible, except by the complete inversion of
the whole compound. They knew that Mercury would become
fixed if it could be freed from their defiling presence—as it con-
tains fermenting sulphur, which is only hindered by these
impurities from coagulating the whole mercurial body. At
length they discovered that Mercury, in the bowels of the earth,
was intended to become a metal, and that the process of
development was only stopped by the impurities with which it
had become tainted. They found that that which should be
active in the Mercury was passive ; and_ that its infirmity could
not be remedied by any means, except the introduction of some
kindred principle from without. Such a principle they discovered
in metallic sulphur, which stirred up the passive sulphur in the
Mercury, and by allying itself with it, expelled the aforesaid im-
purities. But in seeking to accomplish this practically, they
were met by another great difficulty. In order that this sulphur
might be effectual in purifying the Mercury, it was indispensable
that it should itself be pure. All their efforts to purify it, how-
ever, were doomed to failure. At length they bethought them
that it might possibly be found somewhere in Nature in a purified
condition—and their search was crowned with success. They
sought active sulphur in a pure state, and found it cunningly
concealed in the House of the Ram. This sulphur mingled
most eagerly with the offspring of Saturn, and the desired effect
was speedily produced—after the malignant venom of the “air”
of Mercury had been tempered (as already set forth at some
length) by the Doves of Venus. Then life was joined to life by
means of the liquid ; the dry was moistened ; the passive was
stirred into action by the active; the dead was revived by the
living. The heavens were indeed temporarily clouded over, but
after a copious downpour of rain, serenity was restored. Mer-
cury emerged in a hermaphroditic state. Then they placed it
in the fire ; in no long time they succeeded in coagulating it, and
in its coagulation they found the Sun and the Moon in a most
pure state. Then they considered that, before its coagulation,

174 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

this Mercury was not a metal; since, on being volatilised, it left
no residue at the bottom of the distilling vessel ; hence they
called it unmatured gold and their living (or quick) silver. It
also occurred to them that if gold were sown, as it were, in the

‘ soil of its own first substance, its excellence would probably be
enhanced ; and when they placed gold therein, the fixed was
volatilised, the hard softened, the coagulated dissolved, to the
amazement of Nature herself. For this reason they wedded
these two to each other, put them in a still over the fire, and for
many days regulated the heat in accordance with the require-
ments of Nature. Thus the dead was revived, the body decayed,
and a glorified spirit rose from the grave; the soul was exalted
into the Quintessence,—the Universal Medicine for animals,
vegetables, and minerals.

CHAPTER XII.
The Generic Method of Making the Perfect Magistery.

The greatest secret of our operation is no other than a
cohobation of the nature of one thing above the other, until the
most digested virtue be extracted out of the digested body of the
crude one. But there are hereto requisite: Firstly, an exact
measurement and preparation of the ingredients required ;
secondly, an exact fulfilment of all external conditions ; thirdly
a proper regulation of the fire ; fourthly, a good knowledge of the
natural properties of the substances ; and fifthly, patience, in
order that the work may not be marred by overgreat haste.
Of all these points we will now speak in their proper order.

; CHAPTER XIII.
Of the Use of Mature Sulphur in the Work of the Elixir,

We have spoken of the need of Mercury, and have described
its properties more plainly and straightforwardly than has ever
been done before. God knows that we do not grudge the
knowledge of this Art to our brother men ; and weare not afraid
that it can ever become the property of any unworthy person. So
long as the secret is possessed by a comparatively small number
of philosophers, their lot is anything but a bright and happy

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 175

one ; surrounded as we are on every side by the cruel greed and
the prying suspicion of the multitude, we are doomed, like Cain,
to wander over the earth homeless and friendless. Not for us are
the soothing influences of domestic happiness ; not for us the
delightful confidences of friendship. ' Men who covet our golden
secret pursue us from place to place, and fear closes our lips,
when love tempts us to open ourselves freely toa brother. Thus
we feel prompted at times to burst forth into the desolate
exclamation of Cain: “Whoever finds me will slay me.” Yet
we are not the murderers of our brethren; we are anxious
only to do good to our fellow-men. But even our kindness and
charitable compassion are rewarded with black ingratitude—
ingratitude that cries to heaven for vengeance. It was only a
short time ago that, after visiting the plague-stricken haunts of a
certain city, and restoring the sick to perfect health by means of
my miraculous medicine, I found myself surrounded by a
yelling mob, who demanded that I should give to them my
Elixir of the Sages ; and it was only by changing my dress and
my name, by shaving off my beard and putting on a wig, that I
was enabled to save my life, and escape from the hands of those
wicked men. And even when our lives are not threatened, it is
not pleasant to find ourselves, wherever we go, the central objects
of human greed. . . . I know of several persons who were found
strangled in their beds, simply because they were suspected of
possessing this secret, though, in reality, they knew no more
about it than their murderers; it was enough for some desperate
ruffians, that a mere whisper of suspicion had been breathed
against their victims. Men are so eager to have this Medicine
that your very caution will arouse their suspicions, and
endanger your safety. Again, if you desire to sell any large
quantity of your gold and silver, you will be unable
to do so without imminent risk of discovery. The very
fact that anyone has a great mass of bullion for sale
would in most places excite suspicion. This feeling will be
strengthened when people test the quality of our gold ; for it is
much finer and purer than any of the gold which is brought
from Barbary, or from the Guinea Coast; and our silver is
better even than that which is conveyed home by the Spanish
silver fleet. If, in order to baffle discovery, you mix these

176 | JHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

precious metals with alloy, you render yourself liable, in Eng-
land and Holland at least, to capital punishment ; for in those
countries no one is permitted to tamper with the precious metals,
except the officers of the mint, and the licensed goldsmiths. I
remember once going, in the disguise of a foreign merchant,
to a goldsmith’s shop, and offering him 600 pounds worth of our
pure silver for sale. He subjected it to the usual tests, and then
said: “ This silver is artificially prepared.” When I asked him
why he thought so, his answer was: “I am not a novice in my
profession, and know very well the exact quality of the silver
which is brought from the different mines.” When I heard
these words J took myself away with great secrecy and dispatch,
leaving the silver in the hands of the goldsmith. On. this
account, and by reason of the many and great difficulties
which beset-us, the possessors of this Stone, on every side, we
do elect to remain hidden, and will communicate the Art to
those who are worthily covetous of our secrets, and then mark
what public good will befall. Without Sulphur, our Mercury
would never be properly coagulated for our supernatural work ;
it is the male substance, while Mercury may be called the
female ; and all Sages say that no tincture can be made
without its latten, which: latten is gold, without any double
speaking. Wise men, notwithstanding, can find this substance
even on the dunghill; but the ignorant are unable to dis-
cern it even in gold. The tincture of gold .is concealed
in the gold of the Sages, which is the most highly matured .
of bodies; but as a raw material it exists only in our
Mercury ; and it (gold) receives from Mercury the multiplication
of its seed, but in virtue rather than in weight. The Sages say
that common gold is dead, while their’s is living; and common
gold is dead in the same sense in which a grain of wheat is dead,
while it is surrounded by dry air; and comes to life, swells,
softens, and germinates only when it is put into moist earth. In
this sense gold, too, is dead, so long as it is surrounded by the
corporeal husk; always allowing, of course, for the great differ-
ence between a vegetable grain and metallic gold. Our grain is
quickened in water only ; and as wheat, while it remains in the
barn is called grain, and is not destined to be quickened, because
it is to be used for bread making—but changes its name, when

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 177

it is sown in the field, and is then called seedcorn ; so our gold,
while it is in the form cf rings, plate, and coins, is called common
gold, because in that state it is likely to remain unchanged to
the end of the world ; but fotentzally it is even then the gold of
the Sages, because if sown in its own proper element, it would in
a few days become the Chaos of the Sages. Hence the Sages
bid you revive the dead (z.e., the gold which already appeared
doomed to a living death) and mortify the living, ze, the
Mercury which, imparting life to the gold, is itself deprived of
the vital principle. Their gold is taken in a dead, their water in
a living, state, and by their composition and brief coction, the
dead gold revives and the living Mercury dies, zz. the spirit is
coagulated, the body is dissolved, and thus both putrefy together,
until all the members of the compound are torn into atoms.
The mystery of our Art, which we conceal with so great care, is
the preparation of the Mercury, which above ground is not to be
found made ready to our hand. But when it is prepared, it is
“our water” in which gold is dissolved, whereby the latent life
of the gold is set free, and receives the life of the dissolving
Mercury, which is to gold what good earth is to the grain of
wheat. When the gold has putrefied in the Mercury, there
arises out of the decomposition of death a new body, of the
same essence, but of a glorified substance. Here you have the
whole of our Philosophy in a nutshell. There is no secret about
it,except the preparation of Mercury, its mingling with the gold in
the right proportions, and the regulation of the fire in accordance
with its requirements. Gold by itself does not fear the fire ;
hence the great point is, to temper the heat to the capacity.of
the Mercury. Ifthe Mercury is not properly prepared, the gold
remains common gold, being joined with an improper agent ; it
continues unchanged, and no degree of heat will help it to put
off its corporeal nature. Without our Mercury the seed (2 ¢., gold)
cannot be sown ; and if gold is not sown in its proper element,
it cannot be quickened any more than the corn which the West
Indians keep underground, in air-tight stone jars, can germinate.
I know that some self-constituted Sages” will take exception
to this teaching, and say that common gold and running Mercury
are not the substance of our Stone. But one question will
suffice to silence their objections: Have they ever actually
VoL, IL M

178 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

prepared our Tincture? I have prepared it more than once, and
daily have it in my power ; hence I may perhaps be permitted
to speak as one having authority. Goon babbling about your
. rain water collected in May, your Salts, your sperm “ which is
more potent than the foul fiend himself,” ye self-styled philoso-
phers; rail at me, if you like; all you say is conclusively
refuted by this one fact—you cannot make the Stone. When I
say that gold and Mercury are the only substances of our Stone,
I know what I am writing about ; and the Searcher of all hearts
knows also that I say true. The time has arrived when we may
speak more. freely about this Art. For Elias the artist is at
hand, and glorious things are already spoken of the City of God.
I possess wealth sufficient to buy the whole world—but as yet I
may not use it on account of the craft and cruelty of wicked
men. It is not from jealousy that I conceal as much as I do:
God knows that I am weary of this lonely, wandering life, shut
out from the bonds of friendship, and almost from the face of
God. J} do not worship the golden calf, before which our
Israelites bow low to the ground ; let it be ground to powder
like the brazen serpent. I hope that in a few years gold (not as
given by God, but as abused by man) will be so common that
those who are now so mad after it, shall contemptuously spurn
aside this bulwark of Antichrist. Then will the day of our
deliverance be at hand when the streets of the new Jerusalem
are paved with gold, and its gates are made of great diamonds.
The day is at hand when, by means of this my Book, gold will
have become as common as dirt; when we Sages shall find rest
for the soles of our feet, and render fervent thanks to God. My
heart conceives unspeakable things, and is enlarged for the gond
of the Israel of God. These words I utter forth with a herald’s
clarion tones. My Book is the precursor of Elias, designed to
prepare the Royal way of the Master; and would to God that
by its means all men might become adepts in our Art—tor then
gold, the great idol of mankind, would lose its value, and we
should prize it only for its scientific teaching. Virtue would be
loved for its own sake. I am familiar with many possessors of
this Art who regard silence as the great point of honour. But I
have been enabled by God to take a different view of the
matter ; and I firmly believe that I can best serve the Israel of

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. . 183

CHAPTER XVIII.
Of the Furnace, or Athanor of the Sages.

I have spoken about Mercury, Sulphur, the vessel, their
treatment, etc., etc.; and, of course, all these things are to
be understood with a grain of salt. “You must understand that
in the preceding chapters I have spoken metaphorically ; if you
take my words in a literal sense, you will reap no harvest except
your outlay. For instance, when I name the principal substances
Mercury and gold—I do not mean common gold in the state in
which it is sold at the goldsmiths—but it must be prepared by
‘means of our Art. You may find our gold in common gold and
silver ; but it is easier to make the Stone than to get its first-
substance out of common gold. “Our gold” is the Chaos whose
soul has not been taken away by fire. The soul of common
gold has retired before the fiery tyranny of Vulcan into the
inmost citadel. If you seek our gold in a substance intermediate
between perfection and imperfection, you will find it ; but other-
wise, you must unbar the gates of common gold by the first
preparatory process (ch. xv.), by which the charm of its body is
broken, and the husband enabled to do his work. [f you choose
the former course, you shall use only gentle heat ; in the latter
case, you will require a fierce fire. But here you will be hope-
lessly lost in a labyrinth, if you do not know your way out of it.
But whether you choose our gold, or common gold, you will in
either case need an even and continual fire. If you take our
gold, you will finish the work a few months sooner, and the
Elixir will be ten times more precious than that prepared from
common gold. If you work with “ our gold,” you will be assisted
in its calcination, putrefaction, and dealbation by its gentle
inward (natural) heat. But in the casé of common gold, this
heat has to be applied externally: by foreign substances, so as to
render it fit for union with the Virgin’s Milk. In neither case,
however, can anything be effected without the aid of fire. It was
not, then, in vain that Hermes counts fire next to the Sun
and Moon as the governor of the work. But this is to be under-
stood of the truly secret furnace, which a vulgar eye never saw.
There is also another furnace, which is called our common
furnace, made of potter’s earth, or of iron and brass plates, well

£

184 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

compacted with clay. This furnace we cal] Athanor, and the
shape which I like best is that of a tower with a “nest” at the
top. The “tower” should be about three feet high, and nine
fingers wide within the plates. A little above the ground, let
there be a little opening of about three or four fingers wide, for
removing the cinders ; over that, there should be a fire-place
built with stones. Above this, we place the furnace itself, which
should be such as to exclude all draughts and currents of air.
The coals are put in from above, and the aperture should then be
carefully closed. But it is not necessary that your furnace
should exactly correspond to the description which I have given,
so long as it fulfils the following conditions: firstly, it must be
free from draughts ; secondly, it must enable you to vary the
temperature, without removing your vessel ; thirdly, you must
be able to keep up in it a fire for ten or twelve hours, without
looking to it. Then the door of our Art will be opened to you ;
and when you have prepared the Stone, you may procure a
small portable stove, for the purpose of multiplying it.

CHAPTER XIX.
Of the Progress of the Work during the first Forty Days.

When you have prepared our gold and Mercury in the
manner described, put it into our vessel, and subject it to the
action of our fire ; within 40 days you will see the whole substance
converted into atoms, without any visible motion, or perceptible
heat (except that it is just warm). If you do not yet rightly
know the meaning of “our gold,” take one part of common gold
(well purified), and three parts of our Mercury (thoroughly
purged), put them together as directed (cap. xvi), place them
over the fire, and there keep them at the boiling point, till they
sweat, and their sweat circulates. At the end of 90 days you
will find that the Mercury has separated and reunited all the
elements of the common gold. Boil the mixture 50 days
longer, and you will discover that our Mercury has changed the
common gold into “ our gold,” which is the Medicine of the first
order. It is already our Sulphur, but it has not yet the power
of tinging. This method has been followed by many Sages, but
it is exceedingly slow and tedious, and is only for the rich of the

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 185

earth. Moreover, when you have got this Sulphur do not think
that you possess the Stone, but only its true Matter, which you
may seek in an imperfect thing, and find it within a week, by our
easy yet rare way, reserved of God for His poor, contemned, and
abject saints. Hereof I have now determined to write much,
although in the beginning of this Book I decreed to bury it in
silence. This is the one great sophism of all adepts ; some
speak of this common gold and silver, and say the truth, and
others say that we cannot use it, and they toc, say the truth.
But in the presence of God. I will call all our adepts to account,
and charge them with jealous surliness. I, too, had determined
to tread the same path, but God’s hand confounded my scheme.
I say then, that both ways are true, and come to the same thing
in the end—but there is a vast difference at the beginning. Our
whole Art consists in the right preparation of our Mercury and
our gold Our Mercury is our way, and without it nothing is
effected. Our gold is not common gold, but it may be found in
it; and if you operate on our Mercury with common gold
(regulating the fire in the right way), you will after 150 days
have our gold, since our gold is obtained from our Mercury.
Hence if common gold have all its atoms thoroughly severed by
means of our Mercury, and then reunited by the same. agency,
the whole mixture will, under the influence of fire, become our
gold. But, if, without this preparatory purging, you were to use
common gold with our Mercury for the purpose of preparing the
Stone, you would be sadly mistaken; and this is the great
Labyrinth in which most beginners go astray, because the Sages
in writing of these ways as two ways, purposely obscure the
fact that they are only ove way (though of course the one is
more direct than the other). The gold of the Sages may then
be prepared out of our common. gold and our Mercury,
from which ‘there may afterwards be obtained by repeated
liquefactions, Sulphur and Quicksilver which is incombustible, and
tinges all things else. In this sense, our Stone is to be found in
all metals and minerals, since our gold may be got from them all
—but most easily, of course, from gold and silver. Some have
found it in tin, some in lead, but most of those who have pursued
the more tedious method, have found it in gold. Of course, if
our gold be prepared in the way I have described, out of common

186 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

gold (in the course of 150 days), instead of being found ready
made, it will not be so effectual, and the preparation of the Stone
will take 1% years instead of 7 months. I know both ways, and
prefer the shorter one ; but I have described the longer one as
well in order that I may not draw down upon myself the scathing
wrath of the “Sages.” The great difficulty which discourages
all beginners is not of Nature’s making: the Sages have created .
it by speaking of the longer operation when they mean the
shorter one, and vce versd. If you choose common gold, you
should espouse it to Venus (copper), lay them together on the
bridal bed, and, on bringing a fierce fire to bear on them, you
will see an emblem of the Great Work in the following succes-
sion of colours: black, the peacock’s tail, white, orange, and red.
Then repeat the same operation with Mercury (called Virgin’s
Milk), using the “fire of the Bath of Dew,” and (towards the
end) sand mixed with ashes. The substance will first turn a
much deeper black, and then acompleter white and red. Hence
if you know our Art, extract our gold from our Mercury this is
the shorter-way), and thus perform the whole operation with one
substance (viz., Mercury); if you can do this, you will have
attained to the perfection of philosophy. In this method, there
is no superfluous trouble : the whole work, from beginning to.end,
is based upon one broad foundation—whereas if you take common
gold, you must operate on ¢wo substances, and doth will have to
be purified by an elaborate process. If you diligently consider
what I have said, you have in your hand a means of unravelling
all the apparent contradictions of the Sages. They speak of
three operations: the first, by which the inward natural heat
expels all cold through the aid of external fire; the second,
wherein gold is purged with our Mercury, through the mediation
of Venus, and under the influence of a fierce fire; the third, in
which common gold is mixed with our Mercury, and the ferment
of Sulphur added. But if you will receive my advice, you will
not be put ont by any wilful obscurity on the part of the Sages.
Our sulphur you should indeed strive to discover; and if God
enlightens you, you will find it in our Mercury. Before the
living God I swear that my teaching is true. If you operate on
Mercury and pure common gold, you may find “our gold” in
7 to § months, and “our silver” in 5 months. But when

' AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 187

you have these, you have not yet prepared our Stone: shat
glorious sight will not gladden your eyes until you have been at
work for a year-and-a-half. By that time you may obtain the
elixir by subjecting the substance to very gentle continuous heat.

CHAPTER XxX.

Of the Appearance of Blackness in the Work of the
Sun and Moon.

_If you operate on gold and silver, for the purpose of finding
our Sulphur, let your substance first become like a thin paste, or
boiling water, or liquid pitch ; for the operation of our gold and
Mercury is prefigured by that which happens in the preparation
of common gold with our Mercury. Take your substance and
place it in the furnace, regulate the fire properly for the space of
twenty days, in which time you will observe various colours, and
about the end of the fourth week, if the fire be continuous, you
will see a most amiable greenness, which will last for about ten
days. Then rejoice, for in a short time it will be as a black coal,
and your whole compound shall be reduced to atoms. The
operation is a resolution of the fixed into the not fixed that both
afterwards, being conjoined, may make one matter, partly
spiritual and partly corporal. Once more, J assure you, the
regulation of the fire is the only thing that I have hidden from
you. Given the proper regimen, take the Stone, govern it as you
know how, and then these wonderful phenomena will follow :
The fire will at once dissolve the Mercury and the Sulphur like
wax; the Sulphur will be burnt, and change its colours from
day to day ; the Mercury will prove incombustible, and only be
gradually tinged (and purified, without being infected) with the
colours of the Sulphur. Let the heaven stoop to the earth, till
the latter has conceived heavenly seed. When you see the
substances mingle in your distilling vessel, and assume the
appearance of clotted and burnt blood, be sure that the female
has received the seed of the male. About seventeen days after-
wards your substance will begin to wear a yellow, thick, misty,
or foamy appearance. At this time, you must take care not to
let the embryo escape from your vessel ; for it will give out a*
greenish, yellow, black, and bluish vapour and strive to burst the

Fd

188 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

vessel. If you allow these vapours (which are continuous when
the Embryo is formed) to escape, your work will be hopelessly
marred. Nor should you allow any of the odour to make its
way through any little hole or outlet ; for the evaporation would
considerably weaken the strength of the Stone. Hence the true
Sage seals up the mouth of his vessel most carefully. Let me
advise you, moreover, not to neglect your fire, or move or open
the vessel, or slacken the process of decoction, until you find that
the quantity of the liquid begins to diminish ; ; if this happens
after thirty days, rejoice, and know that you are on the right
road. Then be doubly careful, and you will, at the end of
another fortnight, find that the earth has become quite dry and
of a deep black. This is the death of the compound ; the winds
have ceased, and there is a great calm. This is that great
simultaneous eclipse of the Sun and Moon, when the Sea also
has disappeared. Our Chaos is then ready, from which, at the
bidding of God, all the wonders of the world may successively
emerge.

CHAPTER XXI.
Of the Caution required to avoid Burning the Flowers.

The burning of the flowers is fatal, yet soon committed :
is chiefly to be guarded against after the lapse of the third gee
In the beginning there is so much moisture that if the fire be too
fierce it. will dry up the liquid too quickly, and you will pre-
maturely obtain a dry red powder, from which the principle of
life has flown ; if the fire be not strong enough the substance
will not be properly matured. Too powerful a fire prevents the
true union of the substances. True union only takes place in
water. Bodies collide, but do not unite ; only liquids (and
spirits) can truly mingle their substance. Hence our homogene-
ous metallic water must be allowed to do its work properly, and
should not be dried up, until this perfect mutual absorption has
taken place in a natural manner. Premature drying only
destroys the germ of life, strikes the active principle on the head
as with a hammer, and renders it passive. A red powder is
irideed produced, but long before the time: for redness should
be preceded by blackness, It is true that, in the beginning

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 189

of our work, when heaven is wedded to earth, and earth
conceives the fire of nature, a red colour does appear. But the
substance is then sufficiently moist ; and the redness soon gives
way to a green colour, which in its turn gradually yields -to
blackness. Do not be in a hurry ; let your fire be just powerful
enough, but not too powerful; steer a straight course between
Scylla and Charybdis: you will behold in your vessel a variety
of colours and grotesque transformations---until the substance
settles down into a powder of intense blackness. This should
happen within the first fifty days. If it does not, either your
Mercury, or the regulation of your fire, or the composition
of your substance is at fault—if, indeed, you have not moved or
shaken your glass vessel.

CHAPTER XXII.
Of the Regimen of Saturn.

All the Sages who have written on our Art, have spoken of
the work and regimen of Saturn; and their remarks have led
many to choose common lead as the substance of the Stone.
But you should know that our Saturn, or lead, is a much nobler.
substance than gold. It is the living earth in which the soul of
gold is joined to Mercury, that they may bring forth Adam and
his wife Eve. Wherefore, since the highest has so lowered itself
as to become the lowest, we may expect that its blood may be
the means of redeeming all its brethren. The Tomb in which
our King is buried, is that which we call Saturn, and it is the key
of the work of transmutation; happy is he who can salute this
planet, and call it by its right name. It is a boon which is
obtained by the blessing of God alone; it is not of him that
Aaa or of him that runneth; but God bestoweth it on whom
He wil

CHAPTER XXIII.
Of the different Regimens of this Work.

Let me assure you that in our whole work there is nothing
hidden but the regimen, of which it was truly said by -the
Sage that whoever knows it perfectly will be honoured by

190 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

princes and potentates. I tell you plainly that if this one point
were clearly set forth, our Art would become mere women’s
‘work and child’s play : there would be nothing in it but a simple
process of “cooking.” Hence it has always been most carefully
concealed by the Sages. But I have determined to write
in a more sympathetic and kindly spirit: know then that our
regimen throughout consists in coction and digestion, but that
it implies a good many other processes, which those jealous
Sages have made to appear different by describing them under
‘different names. But we intend to speak more openly in regard
to this subject.

CHAPTER XXIV.
Of the First Regimen, which is that of Mercury.

This first regimen has been studiously kept secret by all
the Sages. They have spoken of the second regimen, or that
of Saturn, as if it were the first, and have thus left the student °
without guidance in those operations which precede the appear-
ance of that intense blackness. Count Bernard, of Trevisa, says, '
in his Parable, that when the King has come to the Fountain,
he takes off the golden garment, gives it to Saturn, and
enters the bath alone, afterwards receiving from Saturn a
robe of black silk But he does not tell us how long it takes
to put off that golden robe; and thus, like all his brethren,
leaves the poor beginner to grope in the dark during 40 or 50
days. From the point where the stage of blackness is reached
to the end of the work their directions are more full and
intelligible. It is in regard to these first 40 days that the
student requires additional light. This period represents the
regimen of Mercury (of the Sages), which is alone. active during
the whole time, the ofker substance being temporarily dead.
You should not suffer yourself to be deluded into the belief that
when your matters are joined, namely, our Sun and Mercury,
the “setting of the Sun” can be brought about in a few days.
We ourselves waited a tedious time before a reconciliation was
made between the fire and the water. As a matter of fact,
the Sages have called the substance, throughout this first period,
Rebis, or Two-thing: to shew that the union is not effected

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. Ig!

“till the operation is complete. You should know, then, that
though our Mercury consumes the Sun, yet a year after you
‘shall separate them, unless they are connected together by a
suitable degree of fire. It is not able to do anything at all
'-without five. We must not suppose that when our gold is
placed in our Mercury it is swallowed up by it in the twinkling
of an eye. This conception rests on a misunderstanding of
Count Bernard’s teaching about the King’s plunge in the
fountain. But the solution of gold is a more difficult matter
than these gentry appear to have any idea of. It requires the
highest skill so to regulate the fire in the first stage of the
work as to solve the bodies without injuring the tincture.
Attend to my teaching therefore. Take the body which I have
shewed you, put it into the water of our sea, and bring to bear
on the compound the proper degree of heat, till dews and
mists begin to ascend, and the moisture is diminished night and
day without intermission. Know that at first the two do not
affect each other at all, and that only in course of time the body
absorbs some of the water, and thus causes each to partake of
the other’s nature. Only part of the water is sublimed ; the
‘rest gradually penetrates the pores of the body, which are
thereby more and more softened, till the soul of the gold
is enabled gently to pass out. Through the mediation of
the soul the body: is reconciled and united to the spirit, and
their union is signalized by the appearance of the black colour.
The whole operation lasts about 4o—-50 days, and is called the
Regimen of Mercury, because the body is* passive throughout,
and the spirit, or Mercury, brings about all the changes of
colour, which begin to appear about the 2oth day, and gradually
‘intensify till all be at last completed in black of the deepest dye,
which the 50th day will manifest.

CHAPTER XXV.

The Regimen of the Second Part, which is that of Saturn.

The Regimen of Mercury, the operation whereof despoils
the King of his golden garments, is followed by the Regimen of
Saturn. When the Lion dies the Crow is born. The substance
has now become of a uniform colour, namely, as black as pitch,

192 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

and neither vapours, or winds, or any other signs of life are seen ;
the whole is dry as dust, with the exception of some pitch-like
substance, which now and then bubbles up; all presents an
image of eternal death. Nevertheless, it isa sight which gladdens
the heart of the Sage. For the black colour which is seen is
bright and brilliant ; and if you behold something like a thin
paste bubbling up here and there, you may rejoice. For it is the
work of the quickening spirit, which will soon restore the dead
bodies to life. The regulation of the fire is a matter of great im-
portance at this juncture; if you make it too fierce, and thus
cause sublimation at this stage, everything will be irrecoverably
spoilt. Be content, therefore, to remain, as it were, in prison for
forty days and nights, even as was the good Trevisan, and employ
only .gentle heat. Let your delicate substance remain at the
bottom, which is the womb of conception, in the sure hope that
after the time appointed by the Creator for this Operation, the
spirit will arise in a glorified state, and glorify its body—that it
will ascend and be gently circulated from the centre to the
heavens, then descend to the centre from the heavens, and take
to itself the power of things above and things below.

CHAPTER XXVI.
Of the Regimen of Jupiter.

Black Saturn is succeeded by Jupiter, who exhibits divers
colours. For after the :putrefaction and conception, which has
taken place at the bottom of the vessel, there is once more a
change of colours and a circulating sublimation. -This Rezgz, or 4
Regimen, lasts only three weeks. During this period you see all’:
conceivable colours concerning which no definite account can be
given. The “showers” that fall will become more numerous as
the close of this reign approaches, and its termination is sig- -
nalized by the appearance of a snowy white streaky deposit on
the sides of the vessel. Rejoice, then, for you have successfully
accomplished the regimen of Jupiter. What you must be par-
ticularly careful about in this operation, is to prevent the young
ones of the Crow from going back to the nest when they have
once left it ; secondly, to let your earth get neither too dry by

‘AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 193

an immoderate sublimation of the moisture, nor yet to swamp
and smother it with the moisture. These ends will be attained
by the proper regulation of the outward heat.

CHAPTER XXVII. .
Of the ‘Regimen of the Moon.

When the Reign of Jupiter comes to an end (towards the
close of the fourth month) you will see the sign of the waxing
moon (Crescent), and know that the whole Reign of Jupiter was
devoted to the purification of the Laton. ._The mundifying spirit
is very pure and brilliant, but the body that has to be cleansed is
intensely black. While it passes from blackness to whiteness, a
great variety of colours are observed ; nor is it at once perfectly
white ; at first it is simply white—afterwards it is of a dazzling,
snowy splendour. Under this Reign the whole mass presents
the appearance of liquid quicksilver. This is called the sealing
of the mother in the belly of the infant whom she bears ; and
its intermediate colours are more white than black, just as in the
Reign of Jupiter they were more black than white. The Reign
of the Moon lasts just three weeks ; but before its close, the
substance exhibits a great varicty of forms ; it will become liquid,
and again coagulate a hundred times’ a day ; sometimes it will
present the appearance of fishes’ eyes, and then again of tiny

. silver trees, with twigs and leaves. Whenever you look at it you
will have cause for astonishment, particularly when you see it all:
divided into beautiful but very minute grains of silver, like the

. raysoftheSun. This is the White Tincture, glorious to behold,

- but nothing in respect of what it may become.

‘CHAPTER XXVIII.
Of the Regimen of Venus.

The substance, if left in the same vessel, will once more
become volatile and (though already perfect in its way) will
undergo another change. But if you take it out of the vessel,
and after allowing it to cool, put it into another, you will not be
able to make anything of it. In this Reign you should also give

Vou, II. N

104 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

careful attention to your fire. For the perfect Stone is fusible ;
and if the fire be too powerful the substance will become glazed,
and unsusceptible of any further change. This “ vitrification”
of the substance may happen at any time from the middle of the
Reign. of the Moon to the tenth day of the Reign of Venus, and
should be carefully guarded against. The heat should be gentle,
so as to melt the compound very slowly and gradually; it will then
raise bubbles, and receive a spirit that will rise upward, carrying
the Stone with it, and imparting to it new colours, especially: a
copper-green colour, which endures for some time, and does not
quite disappear till the twentieth day ; the next change is to blue
and livid, and at the close of this Reign the colour is a pale
purple. Do not irritate the spirit too much—it is more corporeal
than before, and if you sublime it to the ¢op of the vessel, it will
hardly return. The same caution should be observed in the
Reign of the Moon, when the substance begins to thicken. The
law is one of mildness, and not of violence, lest everything should
rise to the top of the vessel, and be consumed or vitrified to the
ruin of the whole work. When you see the green colour, know
that the substance now contains the germ of its highest life. Do
not turn the greenness into blackness by immoderate heat. This
Reign is maintained for forty days.

CHAPTER XXIX.
Of the Regimen of Mars.

When the Regimen of Venus is over,and therein has appeared
the philosophical tree, with all its branches and leaves, the Reign
of Mars begins with a light yellow, or dirty brown colour, but at
last exhibits the transitory hues of the Rainbow, and the
Peacock’s Tail. At this stage the compound is drier, and often

’ shews like a hyacinth witha tinge of gold. The mother being
now sealed in her infant’s belly, swells and is purified, but because
of the present great purity of the compound, no putridness can
have place in this regimen, but some obscure colours are chief
actors, while some middle colours come and go, and they are
pleasant to look on. Our Virgin Earth is now undergoing the
last degree of its cultivation, and is getting ready to receive and

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 195

mature the fruit of the Sun. Hence you should keep up a
moderate temperature; then there will be seen, about the
thirtieth day of this Reign, an orange colour, which, within two
weeks from its first appearance, will tinge the whole substance
with its own hue.

CHAPTER XXX.
Of the Regimen of the Sun.

As you are now approaching the end of the work, the
substance receives a golden tinge, and the Virgin’s Milk which
you give your substance to drink has assumed a deep orange
colour. Pray to God to keep you from haste and impatience at
this stage of the work; consider that you have now waited for
seven months, and that it would be foolish to let one hour rob
you of the fruits of all your labour. Therefore be more and
more careful the nearer you approach perfection. Then you will
first observe an orange-coloured sweat breaking out on the body ;
next there will be vapour of an orange hue. Soon the body
below becomes tinged with violet and a darkish purple. At the
end of fourteen or fifteen days, the substance will be, for the
most part, humid and ponderous, and yet the wind still bears it
in its womb. Towards the 26th day of the Reign it will begin
to get dry, and to become liquid and solid in turn (about a
hundred times a day) ; then it becomes granulated ; then again
it is welded together into one mass, and so it goes on changing
for about a fertnight. At length, however, an unexpectedly
glorious light will burst from your substance, and the end will
arrive three days afterwards. The substance will be granulated,
like atoms of gold (or motes in the Sun), and turn a deep red
—a red the intensity of which makes it seem black like very
pure blood in a clotted state. This is the Great Wonder of
Wonders, which has not its like on earth.

CHAPTER XXXL

Of the Fermentation of the Stone.

’ J forgot to warn you in the last chapter to be on your guard
against the danger of vitrification ; too fierce a fire would render
N2

196 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

your substance insoluble and prevent its granulation.

You now possess the incombustible red Sulphur which can no
longer be affected in any way by fire. In order to obtain
the Elixir from this Sulphur by reiterate solution and coagula-
tion, take three parts of purest gold, and one part of this fiery
Sulphur. Melt the gold in a clean crucible, and then cast your
Sulphur into it (protecting it well from the smoke of the coals)
Make them liquid together, when you will obtain a heautiful
mass of a deep red, though hardly transparent. This you should
permit to cool, and pound into a small powder. Of this powder
take one part, and two parts of our Mercury; mix them well,
and put them in a glass vessel, well sealed. They should be
exposed to gentle heat for two months. This is the true
fermentation, which may be repeated if needful.

CHAPTER XXXU.
The Imbibition of the Stone.

Many authors take fermentation in this work for the
invisible external agent, which they call ferment ; by its virtue
the fugitive and subtle spirits, without laying on jof hands, are
of their own accord thickened, and our before-mentioned fer-
mentation they call cibation with bread and milk. But I follow
my own judgment. There is another operation, called [mbibi-
tion of the Stone, by which its quantity rather than its quality
is increased. It is this: Add to three parts of your perfect
Sulphur (either white or red) one part of water, and after six or
seven days’ coction the water will become thick like the Sulphur
Add again as much water as you did before ; and when this is
dried up, with a convenient fire, add three distinct times so much
water as shall be equal to one-third of the original quantity of
Sulphur. Then add (for the 7th imbibition) five parts of water
(the parts being equal to the original parts of the Sulphur).
Seal up the vessel ; subject it to gentle coction, and let the com-
pound pass. through all the different Reigns of the original
Substance, which will be accomplished ina month. Then you
have the true Stone of the third order, one part of which
will perfectly tinge 1,000 parts of any other metal.

AN OPEN ENTRANCE. 197

CHAPTER XXXIIL
The Multiplication of the Stone.

Take the perfect Stone ; add one part of it to three or four
parts of purified Mercury of our first work, subject it to gentle
coction for seven days (the vessel being carefully sealed up), and

‘let it pass through all the Reigns, which it will do very quickly.
and smoothly. The tinging power of the substance will thus be
exalted a thousandfold ; and if you go through the whole process
a second time (which you can do with ease in three days) the ©
Medicine will be much more precious still: This you may repeat
as often as you like; the third time the substance will run —
through all the Reigns in a day, the fourth time in a single hour,
and so on—and the improvement in its quality will be most
marvellous. Then kneel down. and render thanks to God for
this precious treasure.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
Of Projection.

Take four parts of your perfect Stone, either red or white
(of doth, for the Medicine) ; melt them in aclean crucible. Take
one part of this pulverisable mixture to ten parts of purified
Mercury ; heat the Mercury till it begins to crackle, then throw
in your mixture, which will pierce it in the twinkling of an eye ;
increase your fire till it be melted, and you will have a Medicine
of an inferior order. Take one part of this, and add it to a large
quantity of well purged and melted metal, which will thereby be
transmuted into the purest silver or gold (according as you have
taken white or red Sulphur). Note that it is better to use a
gradual projection, for otherwise there may be a notable loss of
the Medicine. The better the metals are purged and refined,
the quicker and more complete will the transmutation be.

CHAPTER XXXV.
Of the Manifold uses of this Art.

He that has once found this Art, can have nothing else in
all the world to wish for, than that he may be allowed to serve

198 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

his God in peace and safety. He will not care for pomp or
dazzling outward.show. But if he lived a thousand years, and
daily entertained a million people, he could never come to want,
since he has at hand the means of indefinitely multiplying the
Stone both in weight and virtue, and thus of changing all
imperfect metals in the world into gold.

In the second place, he has it in his power to make stones
and diamonds far more precious than any that are naturally
procured. _

In the third place, he has an Universal Medicine, with
which he can cure every conceivable disease, and, indeed, as to
the quantity of his Medicine, he might heal ali sick people in the
world. :

Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, and sole Almighty, be
everlasting praise for these His unspeakable gifts and invaluable
treasures.

I exhort all that possess this Treasure, to use it to the
praise of God, and the good of their neighbours, in order that
they may not at the last day be eternally doomed for their
ingratitude to their Creator.

TO

“GOD ' ALONE
BE
THE GLORY.

A
SUBTLE ALLEGORY

CONCERNING THE

SECRETS OF ALCHEMY

VERY USEFUL TO POSSESS
AND
PLEASANT TO READ.

BY

MICHAEL MATER.

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY.

the liberal arts and sciences, and in the company of

wise men and judicious scholars, I was compelled, as

the result of my observation of mankind, to arrive at
the melancholy conclusion that the hearts of most’ persons are
set either on ambitious and vainglorious projects, on sensual
pleasures, or on the accumulation of wealth by all and any
means; and that few care either for God or for virtue At
first I did not quite know whether to become a disciple of the
‘laughing or of the weeping philosopher, or whether to join in the
exclamation of the wise Prince of Israel: “A)l things are vanity.”
But at length the Bible and experience taught me to take refuge
in the study of the hidden secrets of Nature, whether pursued at
home, by means of books, or abroad, in the Great Volume of the
World. ‘Now, the more I drank of the mighty fount of know-
ledge, the more painfully my thirst, like that of Tantalus, seemed
to increase. I had heard that there was a bird called Phoenix,
the only one of its kind in the whole world, whose feathers and
flesh constitute the great and glorious medicine for all passion,
pain, and sorrow ; which also Helena, after her return from Troy,
had presented in the form of a draught to Telemachus, who
thereupon had forgotten all his sorrows and troubles. This bird
I could not indeed hope to obtain entire ; but I was seized with
an irresistible longing to become possessed of at least one of its
smallest feathers ; and for this unspeakable privilege I was pre-
pared to spend all my substance, to travel far and wide, and to
endure every hardship. There was, of course, much to discourage
me. Some people denied the very existence of this bird ; others
laughed at my faith in its wonder-working properties. 1 was
thus brought for a time to regard all that Tacitus, Pliny, and all

A FTER spending the best part of my life in the study of

202 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

other writers have said as fabulous, and to doubt whether, after
all, the different narcotics and opiates were not a better remedy
for anger and sorrow than the supposed virtues of the Phcenix.
Moreover, I had heard of the simple method of curing these
mental ailments suggested by a certain wise man to Augustus,
whom he bade run through the twenty-four letters before
saying anything whenever he was angry; and this suggestion
appeared to supersede all other remedies, I had also read
the books of those moral philosophers who undertake to pre-
scribe an effective remedy for every disease of the mind. But
after giving all these boasted specifics a fair trial, I found, to my
dismay, that they were of little practical use. In many cases,
the causes of mental maladies appeared to be material, and to
consist in an excess or defect of the bile, or of some other bodily
substance ; in all these cases a medical treatment seemed to be
indicated ; whence Galen, that prince among physicians, was led
to believe that character depends on temperaments of the body.
As a soldier may lose all his bravery and strength by being
starved and confined in a close prison, so even a good person
may yield to anger, simply through some vicious habit of
body. This opinion is most reasonable in itself, and is borne
out, amongst other things, by the testimony which is given by
Arnold of Villanova, in that book of his where he sets forth the
virtues of all medicines by means of tables of the four qualities :
“ The medicines that conduce to intellectual excellence are those
which strengthen the digestion, and nourish the brain and the
principal vitals, purging out all superfluities, purifying the blood,
and preventing the ascent of vapours to the brain; hence you
will find that many medical writers speak of their medicines as
productive of a direct effect upon the mind, when it is only:
through the medium of the stomach, the brain, the blood, the
liver, etc., that they tend to brighten the intellectual faculties, by
improving the general health of the brain, and quickening all
processes of the body, that you may say they are productive of
joy, because they tend to strengthen the chief limbs, purify the
blood, and produce good animal spirits. Other medicines “lead
to Paradise,” as they dispose the heart to charity and to every
good work, by their action upon the blood. Some medicinal
herbs have the power of exciting love, by increasing and clarify-

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 203

ing the blood, and thus quickening thé sexual instinct ; while

others make men chaste and religious, by inducing poverty and

frigidity of blood, and taking away the edge of all sensual

appetite. In the same way, it is possible, by means of certain

drugs, to make men stupid and insane, as men are rendered

dull and stolid by drinking too much wine. You may also

notice, sometimes, that after eating a certain kind of food, men

become light-hearted, joyous, and inclined to dance and sing—-

though they are ordinarily staid and grave persons—while other

kinds of food have a contrary effect upon them. Thus, a
physician has power to make a miser liberal, a chaste person

lascivious, a timid person bold, simply by changing the com-

plexion of his vital juices. Such are the wonderful secrets of the

medical Art, though, of course, they are hidden from the foolish

and the ignorant. There are a great many infatuated persons
who will not believe that medicine can do anything but cure
a headache ; but such people know little of the resources of this
science. Hippocrates forbad the physicians whom he taught
to reveal these secrets ; and it was a wise prohibition.” A little

further on the same writer says: “What medicine can produce
greater heat than anger? or chill the body more than fear? or
invigorate the nerves more thoroughly than joy ? or nourish and’
comfort more gently than hope? And what more certain cause

of death is there than despair?” These are the words of the
philosopher, and they shew that medicine may, through the

body, cure the mind, and thus supply a remedy for anger as well

as other mental disturbances. It is true that if there isa remedy
for anger, it would, in the present state of the world, hardly be

very highly esteemed. Still it would calm the passions of indi-

viduals, although other persons might not recognise its value.

But that which men do not care to have just now, may one day

be in great demand. Such is the vicissitude of all things human.

Galen once said that the savages of England and Germany were

as hostile to the science of Medicine as they were ignorant of it.

But now the descendants of Galen’s countrymen are sunk in’
barbarism, while the English and Germans are the most skilful

physicians in the world. Thus it seems very likely that this

Remedy may be one day in great request, especially when

we consider its vast utility, and the innumerable evils which

anger brings upon men. -

204 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

What has been said about anger applies with equal force to
grief ; for while the symptoms of anger are more or less mental,
those of grief produce a more perceptible and lasting effect on
the body. This great Remedy for anger and grief, then, it
would be most desirable to have, if we could only find the
Phoenix which affords it. Where shall I look for it? Where
shall I enquire after it? Whom shall I ask? I determined to
go abroad, and to’search for it till | should have found it. For-
tune assists the brave: to the indolent and idle knowledge never
comes. I would leave my native country —dearly as I love it,
and sadly as'I should miss my friends - arid wander from Jand to
land until I should be able to return with the eagerly coveted
Medicine. All beginnings are difficult: he who has never been
sad, cannot rejoice ; he who has never erred, cannot be brought
back to the right way ; and. as the Chemists say: “There is in
Alchemy a certain noble body, which is moved from master ‘to
master, whose beginning is misery and ‘sourness, whose end is
sweetness and joy.” So I expected to endure hardships, and go
through bitter experiences, but I also expected them to be crowned
with the delights of success. Of the existence of the Phoenix I
had no doubt, or I could not have looked for it. It is enough
for me to see the Sun and its rays, even though I cannot touch it;
and perhaps it is as well for us that we cannot get so very close to
the Sun. But as to this Medicine which I seek ; howcan I have
a perfect knowledge of it before I see and touch it? How can].
become a Master before I have been a scholar? The products
of all countries are not the same; and perhaps I may learn in .
one part of the world what I cannot get to know in another.
Moreover, I asked myself the question: Can a pilgrim’s life hurt

-anyone? Are we not all pilgrims here below to that land whither
our Saviour Christ has gone before? And is not the example of
‘peregrination set us by the swallow, the herald of spring ; by the
crane, the stork, and other birds of passage? Does not the whole
world lie open before man as the air is everywhere accessible to
birds? Great Phoebus himself, the god of the Sun, journeys
day by day over the wide expanse of the sky. The heart of
man beats and pulsates in his bosom from the first to the
last hour of his life; and being surrounded by all these models
and examples, it is natural for man to lead the life of a pilgrim,

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 205

particularly if that pilgrimage be directed towards a certain
goal, The merchant travels over land and sea to buy the pro-
duce of distant climes; but a nobler merchandise by far are
science and knowledge, which are the wares of the mind. He
who stays at home will there bury his talents, and get to know
little about the secrets of. the universe Moreover, it is: both
pleasant to travel and honourable to be always several hours’
journey in advance of'the Sun. That which is most spiritual is
most swift in its movements, while the lifeless earth ‘alone is
immovable. The other three elements are in perpetual motion:
the air sweeps over the earth in the shape of winds, hurricanes,
and gales ; fire devours everything before it as it rushes onward in
the conflagration of a great city ; water runs along in rivers and
mighty streams, and hastes to reach the sea. Let us also look
up and behold the heavens as they move in their glory. The
stars, the sun, and the moon know the times and seasons of
their rising and setting. A cannon ball, if projected from one
of our most powerful guns, would be more than eight days in
.making the compass of the world (which is more than 25,000
miles) ; but the Sun, notwithstanding its vast size, accomplishes
the same distance in 24 hours. It would make our thoughts
reel if we strove to realise the velocity with which Saturn moves
round the Sun, and with which the heavens revolve round their
own axis. But greater still, and far more wonderful, is the
speed of human thought, which, in a moment of time, travels
from one end of the heavens to the other. We may believe that
the angels, as spiritual beings, move with the quickness of that
which is spiritual in man, viz., thought. God .alone does not
move ; for He is everywhere. For all these reasons, I conceived
that it would be both interesting, pleasant, honourable, and
eminently profitable for me to follow the example of the whole
world, and to undertake a pilgrimage for the purpose of dis-
covering this wonderful bird Phoenix. I therefore braced myself
for a long journey, determining to travel, first, through all the
countries of Europe, then, if necessary, to América, thence to
Asia, and at last to pass on to Africa. If, after carefully
searching for the Phoenix in all these parts of the world, I did °
not succeed in finding it or hearing of it, I might reasonably
give up all hopes of ever setting eyes thereon. The plan of my

¢

706 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

journey was determined by the relative quality of the elements
which the different parts of the world represent, z.2, Europe
stands for earth, America for water, Asia for air, and Africa for
fire; and earth cannot become air except through the medium
of water; nor can water become fire except through the
medium of air. I determined, then, to go first to Europe,
which represents the grossest, and last to’ Africa, which repres-
ents the most subtle element. But my reasons will be set forth
more clearly as I come to speak of the different parts of the
world. ;

EUROPE: EARTH. . *

I left my native town on the day of the vernal equinox,
when the Moon and‘Sun were both in the sign of Aries, with
the intention of first travelling through Europe, and to enquire
everywhere after the Phoenix. I took Europe to represent the
element Earth, because earth forms the foundation of all the’
other elements, and stands out above the water, so Europe is the
mother of the whole world, and though smaller than other con-
tinents, is vastly superior to them through the courage, energy,
and mental strength of its inhabitants. Some say that one hand-
ful of earth gives ten handfuls of water, a hundred handfuls of
air, and a thousand handfuls of fire ; and this is the relative -im-
portance of the different continents, if Europe answers to earth.
Europe has produced the bravest warriors, and the most distin-
guished conquerors; and though she has subdued other continents,
she has herself never been subjugated by them. Of the four
great world empires, only one was founded by an Asiatic prince;
the Macedonian, the Roman, and the Teutonic Empires, have all
had their centres in Europe. Alexander the Great and Julius
Caesar were among her sons. If we look at a map of Europe
we may easily perceive that in shape this part of the world
resembles a virgin; but her heart is that of a lion. For these:
reasons, I determined to travel first through this Virgin Lion,
because it clearly corresponds to the fundamental element :
earth,

Europe is a Virgin because of her beauty and spotless purity ;
a Lion because she has conqueréd others, but has never herself
* al

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 207

been conquered. ~ Among the heavenly bodies the Sun answers
to Europe, and among the metals, gold. For though she pro-
duces little gold, and the sun shines upon her with less fierceness
than on Africa, yet she is worthy of being compared’ to the Sun
and gold because of the excellence of her people, though a few
years ago even some real lions were born in Germany, yet we call
her a Lioness only on account of her stoutness of heart. Europe
is the Mother of the World, and Germany is her heart.

Nor. is Europe without her marvels. In Pannonia, it is
reported, men live in compact stone houses under water. The hot
springs of Carlsbad, it is said, are hardened into stones. . On the
coasts of Prussia, a transparent and pellucid stone (amber), formed
out of subterraneous vegetable juices, is cast ashore in large quanti-
ties. I do not mention the coral of the Sicilian sea, which, origin-
ally a plant, hardens outside water into a white or red tree of
stone ; or the sealed earth of Germany and Silesia. . . . Europe,
then, is the Zzon Earth. This expression is for those who hear
not with their ears only, but also with their brains ; it is earth
which resists the fire, like gold, and is not resolved into air.
Like the boundary pillar of the gods of old, it “ yields to none.”
Hence Europe (the gold of the universe) seemed the very place
in which I should be most likely to hear of the Phoenix and its
Medicine. But most of those whom I met laughed at my quest,
and said that, like Narcissus, I had fallen in tove with the shadow
of my own mind, the echo of my vain and ambitious thoughts,
which had no substantial existence apart from my own folly.
“The words of the Alchemists,” said they, “are like clouds: they
may mean and represent anything, according to the fancy of him
who hears them. And even if there were such a medicine,
human life is too brief for the search ; all that makes life worth
living will have to be neglected and thrust aside while you are
engaged in hunting after it. If we can pick up a knowledge of
this secret casually, and whilst devoting ourselves to other
pursuits, well; but if not, we can very ill spare the time for
a closer search.” These objections (at least the latter half of
them) I met as follows: “The quest of this Medicine demands
the whole powers of a man’s body and mind. He who engages
in it only casually, cannot hope to penetrate even the outward
tind of knowledge. The object of our search is a profound

208 'THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

secret, and a man who is not prepared to give himself wholly to
this enquiry had much better abstain from it altogether. I
readily acknowledge that the powers of my mind are not such as
to justify me in anticipating success. But the spirit within me
impels me to undertake this search; and I am confident that
God will at the last reward my patience, and my humble waiting
upon Him. As every King loves his Queen, as every bride-
groom is devoted to his bride, so I regard this science as more
beautiful and lovely than anything else in the world besides.
Now, beautiful things are hard to win, and hard toil is the way to
all that is great and glorious.” This was the gist of my answer.
Now I had already travelled through a great part of Europe, when
it occurred to me that Italy and Spain are constantly mentioned
by the Ancients as the great seats of secret knowledge, and I
therefore directed my steps thitherward. In Spain I heard
that some Arabs (Geber, Avicenna, and others) had lived there a
long time agb, and these had possessed the wonderful Medicine ;
Iwas also told a great deal about Hercules and his achievement
in securing the golden apples of the Hesperides, and also the.
golden cup, wherein he received the medicine for anger and
sorrow. Now all prudent men have decided that it contained a
small portion of the feathers of the Phcenix. I saw that Geryon
with the three bodies was the theme of the philosopher’s writings,
that Hercules was a laborious artist, seeker of the Medicine.
But nobody was able to give me any definite information. I did
not, however, wish to teave Europe without visiting the Canary
Islands, which are seven in number and are named: Lancerotta,
Bonaventura, Great Canaria, Teneriffe, Gomera, Ferro,and Palma.
Three of them, Lancerotta, Gomera, and Ferro, are governed each
by its own King. Ferro is naturally destitute of good drinking
water, but the inhabitants get a supply of it out of certain broad-
leaved trees, which distil sweet water in such quantities as to
suffice for the whole island. Strangers and pirates who land in
the island, being ignorant of this fact, are prevented by want of
water from staying in Ferro very long. Now, it happened about
this time that the King of Gomera had died without leaving a.
male heir, and his subjects refused to acknowledge the authority
of his beautiful daughter Blanche, unless she accepted the hand
of some royal wooer, because they said that it was unworthy of

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY 209

men to be ruled by a woman, and calculated to injure the
manliness of the national character—as was shewn by the experi-
ence of those peoples over whom women have borne sway for
any length of time. For there women had assumed the place of
men, while men were degraded to the position of women; and,
as a consequence, there followed the wildest excesses of profli-
gacy and lewdness. So the royal maiden was prevailed upon to
think of bestowing her hand in marriage. Now, there was in the
island a royal youth, named Brumazar (with beautiful dark locks
and a splendid golden robe),who was passionately enamoured of
the royal maiden Blanche, and was loved by her in return. He
wooed and won her, and the wedding was celebrated on condition
that she should bring to‘him as her dower a diamond of great
value and magnitude, while he should present to her a splendid
ruby of incalculable worth (7.2. worth a million ducats) ; he, as her
King and Lord, should protect her from all dangers and from
the robbers with whom that country swarms, while she, on the
other hand, promised humbly to obey him without either subter-
fuge or tergiversation. After these preliminaries, they were
linked together in close and indissoluble marriage, in which they
lived long and happily ; and it was predicted that a son should
be born to them, who would be a mighty conqueror, and would
carry his victorious arms as far as the Pillars of Dionysus in
India. . . . So you see that I was unable to get any
information whatsoever about the Phcenix in the course of my
wanderings through Europe ; I therefore determined to set sail
for America, in the hope that I might be more fortunate among
the savages of that Continent. For I remembered the words of
the poet :—

“ Accident is a mighty helper; let your hook always be
baited; in the least likely river you may catch your fish.”

AMERICA: WATER.

In these days, when commerce has opened up, as it were, a
highroad across the seas to America (or India in the West), there
is no very great difficulty in reaching that continent; but far
different were the circumstances under which it was first

Vou H, y

210 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

discovered. After leaving the “Islands of the Blessed,” I became
a passenger on board of a ship which had an eagle for its figure-
head ; and, after weathering many severe gales and hurricanes,
we at length landed in Brazil, a great province of America,
entirely covered with forests. The surface of the country is only
dotted here and there with the homestead of a settler ; there are
few towns, and the inhabitants are sunk in ignorance, and un-
skilled in the arts of civilisation. How, then, could I hope ta
hear anything about the Phoenix among people who could hardly
read or write? Yet there are in this country many rare and
beautiful birds which are not found elsewhere, though, of course,
the Phoenix, being a miraculous bird, must not be sought among
common fowls. The trees of the land are of a rich colour and
sweet fragrance; and one day when I was enjoying the wild
beauty of the forest, and listening to the natural music of the
birds, I happened to find an apple of unusual and exquisite
beauty, which on a closer view exhibited the following
inscription :—

“Within is that which, if you deliver it to its”

“grandmother, there will thence arise a son who”

“may cling to his mother in loving embrace.”

“From this union will arise in a short time a”

“noble tree which will render to the husbandman ”

“a golden harvest.”

After much thinking, it occurred to me that the seed which
was in the fruit must be placed in the earth (its grandmother, since
the parent tree was its mother). So I took it asa gift of God,
sowed the seed, and when there had sprung up a little tree, I
grafted it into the parent tree (first having sawn off that tree
close to the ground) and when the two had grown together, they
became a much more glorious tree than either of them had been
before; and the fruit was that of the scion which had been
inserted into the parent tree.... Itis said that before the
Spaniards reached Brazil, there were no horses in that country,
so that the natives regarded a horse soldier as a monster half
man and half beast; but when both horses and asses had been
introduced by the strangers, it was thought most desirable to
obtain also some mules which are the common offspring of these
two animals. Now, there was a certain chief who possessed a

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 211

large number both of asses and horses, and he took particular
interest in this matter. He knew very well how to breed horses
from horses, and asses from asses, but he was not acquainted
with the proper method of breeding mules from both; while he
was aware that all experiments which are made in the dark, ze.,
without the light of previous experience, are both dangerous and
uncertain. The consequence was that all his efforts to produce
a mule out of a stallion and a she ass were doomed to failure, no
doubt because their seeds were not mixed in the right proportion.
At last a Sage who was passing that way,and whose insight into
the secret working of Nature was infinitely keener and more
complete than that of those ignorant people, gave our chief the
following advice:—
“if you would obtain a mule resembling the”
“paternal ass in length of ear and slowness of”
“gait, you should feed each of the parents with”
‘ “just as large a quantity of food as their nature”
“requires. Would you know what this proportion ”
“is? Give to the male twice as much as to the”
ms female, then a mare will conceive a mule from ”
“an ass.”

This advice was taken by the chief, and, after several
failures, his perseverance was crowned with complete success.
Nor does it appear contrary to Nature’s general plan that two
different parents should produce offspring which differs from
them both. Look at the leopard, which is said to be the
offspring of the pard and the lioness ; in the same way the wolf
and bitch beget the lynx; a scion inserted into a good tree
produces fruit different from those of the parent stock; new
varieties of flowers are obtained by a judicious mingling of the
pollen ; and the red powder called “our Tincture,” being mixed
with quicksilver over the fire, produces gold which is utterly
unlike either the one or the other. Now, these Americans are
able to perform a most singular experiment with metals, and
particularly with gold. They have a kind of water in which
gold becomes soft like wax, and capable of being moulded with
the hand into any shape they please. This water is not a
corrosive, ‘since it does not burn the fingers of those who take up
the gold. But we need not doubt that it is some chemical

02

212 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

discovery, and that it is obtained by a distilling process... . .
As I could gain no further information in America, I began to
think of taking the first opportunity of crossing to Asia: I took
with me a very heavy and valuable piece of a certain kind of
wood, the most precious I saw here in Brazil, and which is
remarkable for.its brilliant ebony colour, for this black colour
seems proper to America by reason of the blackish poplars and
the soil dyed with various hues. The colour of this wood seems
to arise from the heat of the sun, and the wonderful peculiarity
of the American soil, of which Monandez, that learned physician
of Seville, writes as follows: “The variety of colour exhibited
by the soil of Peru is most remarkable. If you look at it from
a distance, it has the appearance of a patchwork quilt spread
out to air in the sun: one part of it is green; another blue,
others again are yellow, white, black, and red. Now all these are
different kinds of mineral earth: the black earth, if mixed with
water or wine, makes an excellent ink ; the red soil is said to be
the ore of quicksilver, and the Indians paint themselves with it.”—
Well, I took my wood, went aboard a ship, with a white unicorn .
for its figure head, and setting sail for Asia, soon arrived in the
Persian Gulf.

ASIA: AIR.

Asia is the third continent of the world, the continent which
answers to the element of Air, and its climate is more temperate
than that of the other continents, as it is equally remote from
the intense cold of Europe, and the intense heat of Africa.
Being both warm and moist, it most admirably corresponds to
the element of air; its heat is almost everywhere tempered by
the vapours which ascend from the sea. Moist, warm air has
fire for its father, and water for its mother, and retains the most
active qualities of both its parents. Thus air is a mediator
between the two hostile elements, and in its own composition
reconciles their strife. In the same way Asia binds Europe
(earth) and Africa (fire) together, the grossest and the most
subtle of the elements ; but without Asia (air) there would be no
union between them. By means of air, fire clings gladly to

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 213

earth, and fosters it; but without air, the fire soon goes out. It
is the prerogative and distinctive mark of Asia to be the centre
of the world, and to bring forth such fruits as require a warm,
soft air, as, for instance, dates, balsam, spices of all kinds, and
gold itself. Asia is the cradle of our race, the seat of the. first
Monarchy, the birthplace of our Redeemer. From the Persian
gulf I travelled straight through the continent, till I reached
those parts of Asia Minor where Jason is said to have obtained
the golden fleece. So, being greatly interested in these, old
world occurrences, I walked out one day to a place said to be the
field of Mars, and the site of the Palace of Aétes, the descendant
of the Sun; there I met an old man of venerable aspect and
authoritative port, who saluted me graciously, and to whom, after
returning his salutation, I addressed the following words :
“Master, if Iam not troubling you too much, kindly enlighten
my ignorance, as I can doubt neither your ability nor your
willingness to help a stranger.” He having signified his
willingness to do for me all that lay in his power, I asked
him whether those things which were related in history
and poetry concerning Jason and his golden fleece, were real
facts or mere poetical fictions. He smiled, and made the
following reply to my question: “TY myself am Jason,. and
better able than any one else to give you information
concerning those things which have happened to myself. You
. need not be afraid, for during my lifetime I was no man’s enemy,
but succoured all, like a good physician; and now that I no
longer belong to this world, I am still as kindly disposed towards
my morta] brethren. On this spot stood the royal seat of my
father-in-law, Aétes, whose father was the Sun—not, indeed, that
heavenly luminary (which would be incredible), but one likest to
him in name, and face, and dignity. The golden fleece of the
ram, which Mercury had transmuted, and which Aétes had hung
in the grove of Mars, I obtained in the following manner:
Medea was my chief adviser, and she enabled me by her wise
counsel to contend successfully against the fierce and venomous
monsters. The watchful Dragon I stupefied with a narcotic,
which I cast into his maw; and while he was in that helpless
state, I hastened to extract his teeth. These had to be buried
in earth first prepared and ploughed up by means of bulls vomit-

214 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

ing fire, which fire was extinguished by water poured into their
mouths. Then Medea gave me thé images of the Sun and
Moon, without which, she said, nothing could be done.” I asked
where I should find all these things. His answer was that he
obtained them Medea, but he could not tell me where she was to
be found. “When she left me in her madness,” he said, “she
was wedded to old Aegeus, to whom she bore Medus; Medus
afterwards went to Asia, and became the founder of the Median
race.” I wished to ask Jason many more questions, but he ex-
cused himself from answering them, and vanished before my
eyes. Then I saw that he had been speaking of the Medicine of
which I was in search, which also he had shadowed out under
the figure of the golden fleece. For the crest of the Phoenix and
its feathers are described by the learned as exhibiting a golden
splendour. I did not indeed meet with many learned men in
Asia; but I was well satisfied to have explored that blessed
“aérial earth,” especially as Syria and the Holy Land (with their
rivers of Adonis and Jordan, in which the leper Naaman was
cleansed) form part of it. In Syria, it is related that Adonis
was killed by a boar, hounded on by Mars, and that from his
wounds there flowed forth that balm by means of which human
bodies are preserved from decomposition. On this, continent
stood the Holy of Holies, into which our Most High Priest
entered when He had made atonement for the sins of the whole
race on the Cross of Calvary ; to Him let us now utter forth the |
most ardent desires of our hearts in the following prayer :

O great and merciful Saviour of the world, Jesus Christ,
who being God from all eternity, next madest man in time, in
order that, as our Mediator, Thou mightest unite God and man,
by satisfying the eternal and infinite pewer of God which human
sin had provoked to wrath, that is to say, Thyself, the Father,
and the Holy Spirit. For this purpose Thou wast born into this
world and didst go about doing good among men, and didst
sanctify this earth by Thy miracles, Passion, Resurrection, and
Ascension. To Thee I pray from the very bottom of my heart
that as Thou hast given this Medicine for the use of men by
ordinary means, and meanwhile hast Thyself cured incurable
diseases by Thy Divine power, Who art the Great Physician :
so Thou wouldst bestow the gift of this most precious Medicine

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 215

upon me, the very humblest of thy servants, who for the sake of
this most blessed knowledge have taken upon myself so weary
a pilgrimage, and so many toils and hardships, as Thou well
knowest—in order that I may use it to the glory of Thy Name,
and for the relief of my suffering brethren. Thou who art a
searcher of hearts, knowest that I despise all worldly pomp, and
desire to consecrate my life to Thee, if Thou wilt but work in me
both the will and the power of performance: Grant to me the
power of exercising boundless charity, of relieving all sufferings,
both bodily and mental : -Bless me with the gracious gift of Thy
Medicine, which comes next in value after the peace of mind and
eternal happiness which Thou hast gained for us, in order that
its virtue may be effectual in the cure of human sorrow, disease,
and pain; to the everlasting praise of the everblessed Trinity,
world without end, Amen.

When I had poured forth this prayer to the Giver of all
good things, [ remembered that besides the land which once
flowed with milk and honey, but now, under Turkish rule, has
become utterly barren and sterile, there was also in Asia,
Paradise, which was created for man while he was still perfect.
Knowing that this blessed garden was situated near Babylon,
I journeyed to the spot, but found nothing except a confluence
of certain rivers. Thence I travelled to the maritime parts of
India, and found a city, called Ormuz, of which there ran a
proverb, that if the world was a ring, Ormuz would be its gem.
In this city there was a great concourse of eager visitors from
the whole neighbourhood; and when I asked one of them
whither he was hastening, he said: “To the terrestrial paradise.”
“What,” said [, “was I unable to find the ancient garden of
Eden, and do these people speak of a new Paradise!” But the
man left me standing there, and pursued his journey as fast as
he could. While I was considering whether I should follow him,
it occurred to me that I should do well to adopt the plan of
Columbus, the discoverer of America. So I went to the different
gates of the city, and determined to leave it by that one where
the sweetest and most fragrant odours were borne towards me
on the air. This I did, and I soon found myself on a road where
the air was such as might well come from an earthly Paradise,
yet was frequented by very few travellers. Ormuz being

216 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

situated on an island, we soon had to cross a sea, where I saw
men fishing up pearls of the purest whiteness. Having obtained
some of these for love and money, I had no doubt that I had
come into possession of one of the most important substances
of the Medicine, for the whiteness of these pearls was such as to
defy exaggeration. After pursuing my journey on the mainland,
along a very narrow by-path, for some time, | reached a point
where two roads met, and there was a statue of Mercury, of
which the body was silver while the head was overlaid with
gold. The right hand of this statue pointed towards the Earthly
Paradise ; and when I had followed for some time the road
which it indicated, I came to a very broad and deep river, which
it was impossible to cross without a boat, though far and wide
there was no boat to be seen; but the beauty of the other shore
convinced me that it must be the Earthly Paradise. The trees
which grew there were covered with golden, orange, citron-
coloured, purple, and intensely red flowers. There were evergreen
laurels, junipers, box-trees, and great store of blossoms of all
colours and of the sweetest fragrance: sunflowers, amaranths,
‘lilies, roses, hyacinths, &c. The ear was charmed with the songs
and cries of nightingales, cuckoos, parrots, larks, thrushes, and
hundreds of other known and unknown birds; nor was there
wanting the sweet music of instruments and sweet-toned organs ;
the taste was gratified, as it. seemed, with all manner of delicious
fruits, and the fragrance which streamed out on the breeze was
such as charmed while it rendered insensible the olfactory nerves
of all the people who lived round about, just as the noise of the
Nile cataracts becomes inaudible to those who are used to it.
But what did the sight of all these glories profit me, who, for
want of one little boat, was unable to get at them? So I turned
away, with the firm resolution of coming back, as soon as I could
do so with a better chance of success ; in the meantime, I should
be most likely to find the Phoenix that I was in search of, if I
crossed over to Africa without further delay. So I directed my
course towards the Red Sea, and there landed in Africa.

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. . 217

AFRICA: FIRE.

When I reached Africa, more than a year had elapsed from
my first setting out ; the Sun had once more entered the sign of
the Lion, the Moon was at her height in the house of Cancer. .
All these were circumstances which inspired me with hope.
The intense heat of the African climate renders the whole
continent torrid, sterile, and dry. It has few rivers, but many
wild beasts, which meet together at the riverside, and. bring forth
among themselves many-new and strange shapes, for which
Africa is so well known. Satyrs, cynocephali, and semi-human
beings are said to live there. There are the Mountains of the
Moon, and Atlas that bears up the heavens on its shoulders: all
these abound in minerals and in serpents. There also is
collected the blood of the Dragon which the Dragon has sucked
from the Elephant ; but when the Elephant falls dead, the
Dragon is crushed, and the blood which it has drunk is pressed
out of it. Again, in the neighbourhood of the Red Sea, an
animal named Ortws has been observed, the colour cf whose
head is red, with gold lines up to the neck, while its eyes are deep
black and its feet white, to wit, the fore feet, but the hind feet
are black, the.face up to the eyes white -—a description which tallies
exactly with that which Avicenna gives of our Medicine.

Now I heard that not far from the Red Sea there lived a
prophetess, named the Erythrzean Sibyl, in a rocky cave ; and
| thought well first of all to enquire of her concerning this
Phoenix. It is she that prophesied and predicted the coming of
the Son of God in the flesh This assertion has indeed been
questioned by many writers, but it is borne out by Eusebius, the
great historian of the Early Church, and by Cicero, the great
orator, whe, as is well known, translated this prophecy into the
. Latin tongue. Abundant evidence to the same effect may ‘also
be collected from the works of Virgil, the prince of Roman poets.
The passage of Cicero which is referred to by Eusebius, will be
found in the second book of his treatise, De Divinatione (On
Divination). . . . When I came to her, I found her sitting
in her cave, which was beautifully overgrown with the spreading
boughs of a green tree, and covered with green sod. I saluted
her with the lowliest and most deferential humility. At first she

218 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

seemed somewhat startled at my sudden appearance, and hastily
retreated to the interior of the cave. But she was soon won
over by my earnest entreaties, and prevailed upon to shew her-
self at the entrance of her habitation. ‘“ Who art thou, stranger?”
. she enquired, “and what wouldest thou.of me? Dost thou
not know that a man may not approach a virgin that
dwells in solitude?” “It is not forward boldness, that has
brought me hither,” I replied ; “ but I have come after mature
deliberation, because I feel that it is you, and you alone, that can
resolve certain doubts which lie heavy on my mind. If'you will
shew me this great kindness, ],on my part..promise to do you
suit and service, and to fulfil all your commands, as far as lies in
my power” When she heard these words, her ‘countenance
cleared, and she asked me in a more kindly tone what my
business was. “ I cannot,” she continued, “deny anything to
men like you who are anxious to learn.” “There are two things,”
I returned, “concerning which | would crave plain and straightfor-
ward instruction from you. namely, whether there was and is in
these countries of Arabia and Egypt a wonderful bird named
Phoenix ; whether its flesh and feathers are really an effectual
medicine for anger and grief ; and, if so, where the bird is to be
found ?” “ The object of your search,” she rejoined, “ is a great and
glorious one ; doubt is the first stage of knowledge, and you have
also come to the right place and the right person. For the
country in which you now find yourself is Araby the Blest, and
nowhere else has the Phoenix ever been found ; moreover, I am
the only person who could possibly give you any definite informa-
tion about it. I will teach you, and this land will exhibit to you,
the glad sight of which I speak. Therefore, listen to my words.
Araby the Blest and Egypt have from of old rejoiced in the sole
possession of the Phoenix, whose neck ts of a golden hue, while
the rest of its body is purple, and its head is crowned’ with a
beautiful crest. It is sacred to the Sun, lives 660 years, and
when the last hour of its life approaches, it builds a nest of cassia
and frankincense, fills it with fragrant spices, kindles it by
flapping its wings towards the Sun, and is burnt to ashes with it.
From these ashes there is generated a worm, and out of the worm a
young bird which takes the nest, with the remains of its parent,
and carries it to Heliopolis (or Thebes), the sacred city of the

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 219

Sun, in Egypt. Now, this whole tale which you find in the
books of the Ancients is addressed to the mind rather than to
the ear ; it is a mystical narrative, and like the hieroglyphics of
the Egyptians, should be mystically ‘not historically) understood.
An ancient Egyptian writer tells us that the Phoenix rejoices in.
the Sun, and that this predilection is its chief reason for coming
to Egypt. He also relates that his countrymen were in the habit
of embalming the Phcenix if it died before its time. If you
therefore regard this tale as an allegory, you will not be far
wrong ; and you know that the flesh and feathers of this bird
were of old used in Heliopolis as a remedy for anger and grief.”
When I heard her say this, I was full of joy, and asked her
whether she could.tell me how to become possessed of this Blessed
Bird and Mcdicine. She promised not to forsake me, and to do
all in her power to help me out of my difficulty. “ Nevertheless,”
she continued, ‘“‘ the most important part of the enterprise must.
be performed by the toil of your own hands. I cannot describe
to you in exact and unmistakable terms the place where the
Pheenix lives, yet I will endeavour to make it as plain to you as
I may. Egypt, you know, owes all her fertility to the Nile,
whose sources are unknown and undiscoverable ; but the mouths
by which it is discharged into the sea, are sufficiently patent to
all. The fourth Son of the Nile is Mercury, and to him his father
has given authority to shew you this bird, and its Medicine.
This Mercury you may expect.to find somewhere near the seven
mouths of the Nile ; for he has no fixed habitation, but is to be
found now in one of these mouths, and now in another.” I
thanked the Virgin Prophetess most cordially for her gracious
information, and at once set my face towards the mouths of
the Nile, which are seven :—the Canopic, the Bolbitic, the
Sebennitic, the Pelusian, the Tenitic, the Phoenetic, and the
Mendesic. . The way to the Canopic mouth !ed me through an
ancient Christian burial ground, where a most miraculous occur-
rence is witnessed every year on a certain day in May. From
dawn to noon on that day the dead bodies gradually rise from
their graves until they are completely visible to the passers by;
and from noon to sunset they gradually sink back again into their
tombs. If this be true, as eye-witnesses testify, it is a most cer-
tain proof of the resurrection of the human body, and exhibits a

220 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

close analogy to the resuscitation of the dead Phoenix. . . .
When I reached the island of Canopus, I enquired where Mer-
cury was to be found. But the people were only hopelessly
puzzled. by my questions. Some said that, according to Hermes,
Egypt exhibits an image of the heavens, and the seven mouths
of the Nile (of which the Canopic is the most considerable) cor-
respond to the seven planets; the Canopic mouth they called
the habitation of Saturn, the grandfather of Mercury; Mercury
was to be found domiciled in some other mouth of theriver. At
the Bolbitic mouth none of those persons of whom I enquired
knew anything about Mercury. Near the third or Sebennitic
mouth stood the city of Sebennis, of which the inhabitants were
so savage and cruel towards strangers, and so utterly destitute
of all the arts and graces of civilisation, that I could not conceive
of Mercury, the god of culture and science, living in their midst.
Moreover, a certain peasant whom I asked whether Mercury’s
house was there, told me that he had a house in the town but
that he never lived there. SoI at once went on to the fourth or
Pelusian mouth of the Nile. The famous city of Pelusium is
said to have been founded by Peleus, the father of Achilles. It
separates Asia and Arabia from Egypt, and was at one time a
most wealthy town. When I heard of its greatness in commerce
and industry, and of the large quantities of Arabian gold which
are imported in this city, one of the wealthiest marts of Egypt, I
felt assured that I should find the dwelling of Mercury here ; but
I was told by the inhabitants that he did not come there very
often, though he was received as a most welcome guest whenever
he did visit it. This answer filled me with dismay, which was in
proportion to the hopes which I had conceived, but I determined
not to abandon my search till I should have visited the three
remaining mouths of the river.

At the Tenitic mouth of the Nile, I learned quite as much
as I had learned everywhere else, namely —nothing. When the
people who lived there told me that Mercury never came to them
at all, I began to bewail my hapless fate, and the many fruitless
journeys I had undertaken; and I now saw that perhaps it
would have been wiser to have begun at the other end. There,
however, I was; only two mouths of the river were left ; and in
one of these Mercury would be found, if indeed the Prophetess .
had spoken true.

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 221

At the Phoenetic mouth another disappointment awaited me.
Mercury had once lived’ there, but had long since migrated
somewhere else. At the seventh, or Mendesian mouth, nothing
whatever was known about him.

It may easily be imagined that, ‘fier this long series of
disappointments, I began to suspect the Sibyl very strongly of
having sent me on a fool’s errand; for I had now visited every
one of the mouths of the Nile, and yet had not found even a
trace of Mercury in any of them. Or if the words of the
prophetess had been true, it seemed as if the various people of
whom I had enquired must have deceived me with false infor-
mation. But after more mature consideration of the answers

_ which had been returned to my questions in the different places,
I arrived at the conclusion that I had merely misapprehended
their meaning. So I retraced my steps, and at length succeeded
in finding Mercury in one of the mouths, where the people had
at first appeared to know nothing about him. He shewed meat
great length, where I must look for the Phoenix and where I
could obtain possession of it. When I reached the place to
which he directed me, I found that the Phoenix had temporarily
deserted it, having chanced to be chosen umpire between the owl
and other birds which pursue it, of which battle we have treated
otherwise. It was expected back in a few weeks; but, as I
could not afford to wait so long just then, I thought I might be
content with the information I had gained, and determined to
consummate my search at some future time. So, having returned
to my native land, I composed the following epigrams in honour
of the Sibyl, Mercury, the Phoenix, and the Medicine.

EPIGRAM
In Honour of the Erythrean Sibyl, named Herophyle.

“T thank thee, great prophetess, whose inspiration is not of the”
“fiend, but of ‘the Spirit of God, that thou didst direct me on”
“my way to the Son of Nilus, who should shew unto me the”
“bird Phoenix. Full of sacred knowledge, thou didst utter”
“forth thy oracles when thou didst sing of God who”
“should come in the fashion of a man. Thou dost love”

222 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

“Him who, bearing the sentences of highest justice, will be the”
“omnipotent judge of the whole world, though thou wert called”
“a Gentile Maiden, and though men said that thou couldst”
“know nothing of Him. The cave near the Red Sea cannot”
“hold thy greatness, when Christ shall claim thee for His own”
“in Heaven. i ao bs Be Ss, Bes <a de a Te

EPIGRAM
‘Dedicated to Mercury of the Sages.

“The Latins call thee Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods ;”
“among the Greeks thy name is that of great Hermes. Thou”
“art called Tenthius on the soil of Egypt ; thy father is Nilus,”
“who enriches that soil, and has bequeathed unto thee untold”
“wealth. Thou hast duly conveyed to the peoples of Egypt”
“the laws which Vulcan, being in the secret with thee, has given.”
“ All nations of the world behold thee with delight, yet thou”
“desirest to be known to very few. Of how many secrets of”
“Nature have the keys been entrusted to. thy keeping! Thy”
“face is red, thy neck is yellow, thy bosom is whiter than”
“purest snow. Thy feet are shod with black sandals, a wand”
“with a double snake in no wise hurts thy hand. This i is thine”
« “apparel whereby thou art known to all, O Hermes! Thy com-”
“plexion is fittingly of four hues. Thou didst shew to me the”
“glorious bird Phoenix by the mouth of an interpreter, and I”
“thank thee for thy love with all my heart ; though the words”
“be light, they are weighty with gratitude. be. a gt

AN EPIGRAM
ln Pratse of the Phenix.

“OQ Marvel of the World, prodigy without a blot, unique”
“ Phoenix who givest thyself to the great Sages! Thy feathers”
“are red, and golden the hues of thy neck ; thy nest is buiit of”
“cassia and Sabcean frankincense. When ‘thy life is drawing”
“to a close, thou knowest the secret way of Nature by”
“which thou art restored to a new existence. Hence thou”
“gladly placest thyself on the altar of Thebes, in order that”
“Vulcan may give thee a new body. The golden glory of thy”

THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY. 223

“feathers is called the Medicine of health, and the cure of”
“human woe. Thou has power to cast out disease and to”
“make the old young again. Thee. Blessed Bird, I would”
“rather have than all the wealth of the world, and: the know-”
“ledge of thee was a delight which I sought for many years.”
“Thou art hidden in the retreat of thine own nest, and if Pliny”
“writes that he saw thee in Rome, he does greatly err. Thou”
“art safe in thy home, unless some foolish boy disturb thee: if”
“thou dost give se feathers to pais I Pray thee let him be”
“a Sage. : ; oh

On the Hermetic Medicine of the Phenix.

“Tf all the mountains were of silver and gold, what would they”
“ profit a man who lives in constant fear of death? Hence there”
“cannot be in the whole world anything better than our Medi-”
“cine, which has power to heal all the diseases of the flesh.”
u Wealth, and riches, and gold, all yield the prize to this glori-”
“‘ous possession : and whoever does not think so, is not a man,’
“but a beast.

“Tf anyone will not acknowledge the force of reason, he must
needs have recourse to authority.”

THE

THREE TREATISES

OF

PHILALETHES.

I.
THE METAMORPHOSIS OF METALS.

II.

A SHORT VADE MECUM TO
THE CELESTIAL RUBY.

III.
THE FOUNT OF CHEMICAL TRUTH.

Vou. II, P

CHAPTER -I.
Of the Claims of our Art, tts Students, and its Method.

LL men who devote their lives to the study of any art,
or to any kind of occupation, have before their eyes,

as the aim of their efforts, perfection in the thing
which they pursue. But only few attain to the goal
of their wishes: there are many architects, but few masters of
the art of architecture ; many students of medicine, but few men
like Hippocrates or Galen; many mathematicians, but. few
proficients like Archimedes ; many poets, but few worthy to rank
with Homer. Yet, even men who have nothing more than a
respectable knowledge of their calling, are capable of being
useful to society. >
Among those who devote themselves to the transmutation
of metals, however, there can be no such thing as mediocrity of
attainment. A man who studies this Art, must have either
everything or nothing. An Alchemist who knows only half his
craft, reaps nothing but disappointment and waste of time and
money ; moreover, he lays himself open to the mockery of those
who despise our Art. Those, indeed, who succeed in reaching
the goal of the Magistery, have not only infinite riches, but the’
means of continued life and health. Hence it is the most
popular ofall human pursuits. Anyone who has read a. few
“Receipts” claims the title of a Sage, and conceives the most
extravagant hopes; and, in order to give themselves the
appearance of very wise men indeed, such persons immediately
set themselves to construct furnaces, fill their laboratories with
stills and alembics, and approach the work with a wonderful
appearance of profundity. They adopt an obscure jargon, speak
of the first matter of the metals, and discuss with a learned air
the rotation of the elements, and the marriage of Gabritius with
P2

228 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Bega. In the meantime, however, they do not succeed in
bringing about any metamorphosis of the metals, except that of
their gold and silver into copper and bronze.

When captious despisers of our Art see this, they draw
from such constant failures the conclusion that our Art is
a combination of fiction and imposture ; whilst those who have
ruined themselves by their folly confirm this suspicion by
preying on the credulity of others, pretending to have gained
some skill by the loss of their money. In this way the path of
the beginner is beset with difficulties and pestilent delusions of
every kind ; and, through the fault of these swindlers, who give
themselves such wonderful airs of profundity and learning, our
Art itself has fallen into utter disrepute, though these persons, of
course, know nothing whatever about it. The beginner finds it
extremely difficult to distinguish between the false and the true
in this vast Labyrinth of Alchemy. Bernard of Trevisa warns
him to eschew like the plague these persons who hold out
so many vain and empty promises ; while I have written this
Treatise for the guidance of the blind, and the instruction of the
erring. I wish, in the first place, to clear our Art from the
slanders which have been cast upon it, then to describe the
qualifications of its students and its methods of procedure.
After these prefatory explanations, I will gird myself to a
description of the Art itself.

Before I say anything else, I would record my most earnest
protest against that method of reasoning by which the decep-
tions. of certain wretched sophists are laid to the charge of this
science. The wickedness of some of its lying professors can
prove nothing either for or against its genuineness. Such a
position could be made good only by arguments based on
natural relations ; but such arguments it is impossible to find.
The light of Nature is too bright to be darkened by these
obscurists. I hope my Book will shew that the Transmutation of
Metals, from an imperfect to a perfect state, is a real and true
achievement, and that by the co-operation of Nature and Art.
The only thing that distinguishes one metal from another, is its
degree of maturity, which is, of course, greatest in the most
precious metals; the difference between gold and lead is not
one of substance, but of digestion; in the baser metal the

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 229

coction has not been such as to purge out its metallic impurities.
If by any means this superfluous impure matter could be organ-
ically removed from the baser metals, they would become gold
and silver. So miners tell us that lead has in many. cases
developed into silver in the bowels of the earth ; and we contend
that the same effect is produced in a much shorter time by
means of our Art. It is a fact that the Mercury which is
generated in the bowels of the earth, is the common substance of
all metals—since this Mercury will enter into combination with
every kind of metal—which could not be the case if it were not
naturally akin to them all. Mercury is a water that will mix
with nothing that is not of the same nature. By Art, the hand-
maid of Nature, Mercury can be so successively concocted with
all metals, that one and the same under the same colour and flux,
may subalternately shew and express the true temperature and
properties of them all. Moreover, all metals are capable of being
resolved into running Mercury—and surely this could not be if
it were not their common substance. Again, the Mercury of
lead may become that of iron, the Mercury of iron that of
copper; while the Mercury of tin may even be transmuted into
that of silver and gold—a fact which triumphantly demonstrates
the substantial affinity ofall the metals. From antimony, too, a
good Mercury is obtained, which some of our Artists are able to
change into metallic mercury. It is also a well-established fact
that the Mercury gained from any metallic or mineral body
possesses the properties of assimilating common Mercury to its
own nature; thus common Mercury may become that of all
metals in turn. Do not these arguments clearly shew that there
is one Mercury, and that in the various metals it is only differen-
tiated according to their different degrees of digestion or purity ?
I do not see how these arguments can be answered. It is
possible indeed that some dull person may allege in refutation
of our reasoning his inability to accomplish those chemical
transformations on which it is based ; but such operators would
be vindicating too great an honour for their ignorance if they
claimed to advance it as an argument against the truth of our Art.
They must not make their own little understandings the standard
or measure of the possibilities of Nature. At any rate, my word
is as good as theirs (and better, since they can never prove

—

230 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

a negative), and I do most positively and solemnly assert that I
have with my own hands performed every one of the experiments
which I have described ; and I know many others whose experi-
ence has shewn these things to be true. How can our opponents
hopé to prevail against eye-witnesses by bare negation? My
testimony is borne out by the experience of such men as
Albertus, Raymund, Riplzus, Flamellus, Morienus, and a host
of others. ' I confess that the transformations of which I have
spoken are not easy to accomplish ; but whoever has the Key of

‘our Art can unlock all gates, and has power over all the secrets

of Nature. But this Key is possessed only by those who have
both a theoretical and a practical knowledge of natural processes.
I could here reckon up divers mutations of metals, as, for
instance, Mars into Venus, by the acid stalagma of vitriol,
Mercury into Saturn, Saturn into Jupiter, Jupiter into Lune,
which operations, indeed, many vulgar chemists (far enough from
the top of the art) know how to perform. I might also add,
what is known only to a few philosophers, that there is a secret .
substance intermediate between metals and minérals, thé mixed

heavenly virtues of which produce a certain ‘méfal without .a
name, which is, strictly speaking, not a metal at all, but a Chaos,
or Spirit, for it is all volatile: from this all metals can be educed
without transmutatory Elixir,even gold, silver, and mercury. It
jis called Chalybs by the author of the “New Light,” and it is
‘the true key and first principle of our Art. What though the

- Sages have hidden all these things, ‘and set them forth paraboli-

cally for she true sons of knowledge? Are they any the less
true for that reason? . . . All that is wanted for the perfect
development of an imperfect substance, is the gentle, digestive
action of a homogeneous agent. This agent is gold, as highly
matured as natural and artificial digestion can make it, and a
thousand times more perfect than the common metal of that
name. Gold, thus exalted, radically penetrates, tinges, and
fixes metals. This scientific fact we may illustrate in the follow-

.ing manner. If you take six pounds of silver, and gild it with a

single ounce of gold, you may afterwards draw out the silver into
threads of the greatest fineness, and still distinctly perceive in
each thread the brilliancy of gold. If then this dead, bodily, and
earthy metal (which, as a body, of course, has no power to enter

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 231

another body) can produce so wonderful an effect, does it seem
incredible that the spirit of this gold, which can enter and
animate the bodies of other metals, should transform them into
its own nature? If we had this spiritual tincture, is it not clear
that it would do inwardly what the body of the gold is seen to
do outwardly? Remember that our Tincture is the Quintessence
of gold, and infinitely more perfect than the mere body of gold
can ever be; and that it has, therefore, an infinitely greater
power of diffusing its essential quality. If gold thus spiritually
enters another metal, it will clearly assimilate it to its own
nature. The method of this spiritual ingestion we shall
describe further on. Let us only add in this place, where
we are discussing the rationale. of metallic transmutation, :
that seed is the perfection of any seed-bearing substance; that
which has no seed is altogether imperfect. It is, then, as the.
poet sings: “Gold contains the seeds of gold, though they be
deeply hidden.” Gold is not only perfect, but the most perfect
thing of its kind (ze, of metals). If gold has seed, it must be
contained in water, which is the habitation of all spirits, seed -
being a certain spiritual means of conserving any species. If
gold is to be dissolved for the purpose of educing its seed, the
‘dissolution will have to take place by means of this same
metallic water. When this dissolution takes place, the gold puts
off its earthly form, and assumes a watery form. Now, gold
being both the starting point and the goal in the whole of this
generative process, it is clear that all intermediate operations
must be of a homogeneous character, ze. they must consist in
gradual modifications of this seed of gold. The processes of our
Art must begin with the dissolution of gold ; they must termin-
ate in a restoration of the essential quality of gold. But as the
negative can never become the positive, the final form of our gold
must be essentially different from its initial one. The final form
is so much more noble than the initial one as fire is more subtle
and spiritual than earth. What I have written is enough for the
faithful student of our Art; and to its hostile and carping critics
this book is not addressed. Therefore, I will now go on to add.
a word or two about the qualifications of those who should study
this noble science. Our Art has fallen into disrepute, as I have
said, through the stupidity and dishonesty of many of its profes-

232 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

sors. They are ignorant mechanics who, not having skill and
brains enough for an honest trade, must needs meddle with our
Art, and, of course, soon lose all they possess. Others, again,
are only just less ignorant than these persons; they are in too
great a hurry to make gold before they have mastered even the
rudiments of natural science ; of course they fail, spend all they
have, borrow money from their friends, amuse themselves and
others with hopes of infinite wealth, learn to talk a barbarous semi-
philosophical jargon, and afford a capital handle to those who
have an interest in abusing our Art. Again, there are others
who really have a true knowledge of the secret, but who grudge
others the light which has irradiated their own path; and who
therefore write about it in hopelessly puzzling language, which
the perplexed beginner cannot possibly understand. To this
;class belong Geber, Arnold, and Lullius, who would have done

| much better service to the student, if they had never dipped pen

_in ink. The consequence is that every one who takes up this
study at once finds himself lost ina most perplexing labyrinth of
falsehood and uncertainty, in which he has no clue. I will
therefore try to give him some sound advice as to the best way
of accomplishing his object.

In the first place, let him carry on his operations with great
secrecy in order that no scornful or scurrilous person may know
of them ; for nothing discourages the beginner so much as the
mockery, taunts, and well-meant advice of foolish outsiders.
Moreover, if he does not succeed, secrecy will save him from
derision ; if he does succeed, it will safeguard him against the
persecution of greedy and cruel tyrants. In the second place, he
who would succeed in the study of this Art, should be persevering,
industrious, learned, gentle, good-tempered, a close student, and
neither easily discouraged nor slothful; he may work’in co-op-
eration with onefriend, not more, but should be able to keep his
own counsel; it is also necessary that he should have a little
capital to procure the necessary implements, etc., and to provide
himself with food and clothing while he follows this study, so
that his mind may be undistracted by care and anxiety. Above
all, let him be honest, God-fearing, prayerful, and_holy. Being
thus equipped, he should study Nature, read the books of genuine
Sages, who are neither impostors nor jealous churls, and study

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 233

them day and night ; let him not be too eager to carry out every
idea practically before he has thoroughly tested it, and- found it
to be in harmony not only with the teaching of all the Sages, but
also of Nature herself. Not until then let him gird himself for
the practical part of the work, and let him constantly modify his
operations until he sees the signs which are described by the
Sages. Nor let him despair though he take many false steps ;
for the greatest philosophers have learned most by their mistakes.
For his guidance in these operations he will find all the light he
requires in the following treatises.

CHAPTER II.

Of the Origin of this Art and its Writers; its Fundamental
Metallic Principles, and the Gradual Production of
Metals and Minerals.

Hermes, surnamed Trismegistus, is generally regarded as
the father of this Art; but there are different opinions with
regard to his identity. Some say he was Moses; all agree that
he was a very clear-sighted philosopher, the first extant author
on the subject, and was also of Egyptian extraction. Others say
that Enoch invented the Art, and, before the coming of the Flood,
described it on the so-called emerald tables, which were after-
wards found by Hermes in the valley of Hebron. Many assert
that it was known to Adam, who revealed it to Seth; that Noah
carried the secret with him into the Ark, and that God revealed
it to Solomon. But I do not agree with those who claim for our
Art a mystical origin, and thus only make it ridiculous in the
eyes of ascornful world. If it is founded on the eternal verities of
Nature, why need I trouble my head with the problem whether
this or that antediluvian personage had a knowledge of it?
Enough for me to know that it is now true and possible, that it
has been exercised by the initiated for many centuries, and under
the most distant latitudes ; it may also be observed that though
most of these write in an obscure, figurative, allegorical, and
altogether perplexing style, and though some of them have
actually mixed falsehood with truth, in order to confound the
ignorant, yet they, though existing in many series of ages,

234 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

differing’ in tongue and nation, have not diversely handled one
operation, but do all exhibit a most marvellous and striking
agreement in regard to the main features of their teaching—an
agreement which is absolutely inexplicable, except on the sup-
position that our Art is something more than a mere labyrinth
of perplexing words. Our Art is most plainly and straightfor-
wardly expounded by Bernard of Trevisa, Ripley the English-
man, Flamellus the Frenchman, Send ivogius, the author of the
“New Light,” the anonymous author of the “Arcanum of
Hermes,” who also wrote Euchiridion Physice Restitute, and
“The Ladder of Philosophers,” the great “ Rosary,” the “ Child’s
Play,” the Tract of Dionysius Zachary, the works of Morienus,
the works of Egidius de Vadis, Augurellus’ poem entitled
“ Goldmaking,” the works of Peter Bonus of Ferrara, and the
“ Abridged Rosary.” Let the student procure one or more of
these, and similar genuine works on Alchemy, and let him study
the secrets of Nature by the light which they throw upon it. He
will find a knowledge of natural science, and more particularly
of mineralogy, indispensable for.his purpose.

All philosophers tell us that there are four elements, which
compose all things, and, by means of their diverse combination,
produce various forms. But the truth is that there are only
three elements, 2.2, those which of their own nature are cold—
air, water, and earth. The defect of heat which we perceive
in them is in proportion to their distance from the sun. Fire
I do not acknowledge as an element. There is no fire, except
the common fire which burns on the hearth ; and _ its heat, is
essentjally destructive. The heat there is in things is the
product either of light, or motion, or life, or alterative processes.
Fire is not an element, but a robber that preys on the products
of the four elements ; it is a violent corruptive motion caused by
the clashing of two active principles. Thus, we see that it is an
operation of two other substances, not a substance in itself—a
result of the active co-operation of a comburent and a com-
bustible. The nature and characteristic quality of the three
elements is cold, and they possess heat only as an accident.

Nor is it true that objects are formed by a mixture of these three
elements; for dissimilar things can never really unite, seeing
that union is a complete mixture and concretion of the smallest

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 235

atoms or molecules of two substances. But such a mixture is
impossible in the case of two dissimilar matters, as, for instance,
between water and earth (or water and wine); they admit.of
being separated at any time on account of the disproportion of
their smallest particles. It may be said that for the sake of union
the grosser element becomes as subtle as the other ; but if this were
the case, if for the purpose of union water became as subtle as air,
that would simply mean that water became air, an assumption
which would thus fail to prove the possibility of an amalgam-
ation of water and air. Is it not a simpler and more credible
supposition that only water or air, as the case may be, enters into
the composition of any given object ? But if any one still persists in
maintaining this permutation of the elements (which, after all,
would only mean that all things consist of air)—let me ask the
humble question—by the activity of what agent they are so trans-
muted? Moreover, one would also be glad to enquire what is the
use of this permutation of earth into water, and of water into air?
What can earth converted into water, or water converted into air,
perform, that could not be just as well accomplished by simple
unchanged water or air? Surely, Nature does nothing in vain ;
but here would be a difficult and wasteful process of transmutation,
constantly going on, which is not calculated to serve any useful
purpose whatsoever. If it be said that earth rarefied into water
is like water, yet not exactly water, my answer is that this is a
mere quibble about words, and that if the rarefied earth is only
like water, and not really water, it cannot possibly combine with
it in its smallest particles ; so nothing is gained by this hypo-
thesis. Hence we may conclude that all things derive their
origin from one element, which can be neither earth nor air.
This J could prove at great length if I were not cramped for
space. It follows, then, that water must be the first principle -of
all things, ze, of all concrete bodies in this world; earth is the
fundamental element in which all bodies grow and are preserved ;
air is the medium into which they grow, and by means of which
the celestial virtues are communicated to them. The
seed of all things has been placed by God in water. This
seed some exhibit openly, like vegetables, some keep in their
kidneys, like animals; some conceal in the depths of their
essential being, like metals. The seed is stirred into action

236 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

by its form (ze, a certain appropriate celestial influence),
coagulates the material water, and passes through a series of |
fermentative processes (fermentation being the principle of all
transmutation), until it has produced that for the production of
which it was specially suited. If the seed is metallic, thefe is
generated from it first a dry liquid, which does not wet the hand,
viz, Mercury, the mother of all metals. Mercury may be
described as the true first matter of metals; for not unti] the
elemental water has become Mercury can it beaffirmed with any
degree of certainty that a metal or mineral must result from it.
Water is, in itself, potentially the seed of either an animal,
vegetable, or mineral; but Mercury is metallically differentiated
water, z.¢., it is water passed into that stage of development, in
which it can no longer produce anything but mineral substances.
Mercury, then, is the common seed of gold, silver, copper, tin,
iron, lead, ete. ; their difference is only to be sought in the degree
of their digestion. The digestive is not any fat sulphur which is
brought to bear on them from without ; but Mercury contains
within itself the active principle of its development, vzz., the
inward heat due to celestial influences, causing vitality, and
dependent on the fitness of the womb. These heavenly influences
are at work throughout the world ; but their exact mode of
action is determined by the potential nature of the seed; if the
inward life be metallic, the course of its development by means of
outward agents will also be metallic. Still Mercury develops
only where these outward influences (celestial and terrestrial) can
be brought to bear. In every other place it will appear a cold,
dead, and lifeless substance. But in the centre of its nativity it
is quickened by the action of celestial influences, conveyed to it
through the medium of air, whence results heat, wherewith life is
necessarily associated. Now, the womb in which this Mercury is
placed, is either more, less, or not at all suited to it ; and accord-
ing to the different degrees of this fitness, the substance either
remains altogether stationary, or is more or less perfectly
developed ; imperfection of development yields the imperfect
metals, while by means of perfect development are produced
silver and gold; but all metals, though .differentiated by the
degree of their digestion or maturity, have the same first
substance, vzz., Mercury. The dross and impurities which are

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. — 237

so largely found in the base metals, form no part of the original
Mercury, but are added afterwards through some flaw in the
process of coagulation, or through the impurity of the place or
womb in which their metallic generation (fermentation) takes
place But I will now go on to deal with the special subject of
ae Treatise, vzg., the renovation or multiplication of gold and
silver.

CHAPTER HUI.

Of the Generation of Gold and Silver from the Mercurial
Substance, and the Posstbility of bringing Imperfect
Metals to the same State of Perfection.

To the aforesaid source (Mercury) we trace the birth of
gold, and of its sister, silver; they represent this substance
brought to perfection by means of digestion. Perfection is
of two kinds, inchaotive or complete, partial or entire. Complete
perfection (the complete digestion of all crudities and elimina-.
tion of all impurities) is the ultimate aim of Nature; and she
has reached it in our gold, which with its brilliancy lights up the
whole earth. Inchaotive perfection may be so named, not abso-
lutely, but relatively, when compared with essentially imperfect
bodies. Those bodies are formally or essentially imperfect in
the composition of which the impure predominates over the
pure, so that they could never of themselves (by natural develop- .
ment) attain perfection ; this is the case with all metals except
gold and silver. But whenever the pure is freed from the cor-
ruptive tyrrany of the impure, and obtains the mastery over it,
we have inchaotive perfection, though the development of the
body may be still incomplete. These crudities and impurities
do not originally belong to the metallic substance, and are very
well capable of being separated from it ; if they are so purged off
before coagulation, we get a perfect metal. But even if they are
coagulated together with the Mercury, it is still possible to
separate them from it, and thus to perfect the Mercury. It is on
this possibility that our Art is based; and its business is to
perform this separation. The base metals contain the same
Mercury as gold; if we can free this Mercury from the
impurities which hinder its development, it must also go on to

238 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

perfection, ze, become gold. If we could find some separating
agent which would perform this office for the impure minerals, it
would also be a digestive, 2... it would quicken the inward metallic
digestion of the long-entombed Mercury. Such a separant is
our divine Arcanum, which is the heavenly spirit of water with
fiery penetrative power. Compared with common gold, it is
what the soul is in comparison of the body ; and having attained
the highest degree of corporeal fixity, it takes up the Mercury of
the base metals into its own nature, and protects it from the fire
while the impurities are being burnt up. The Mercury of the
base metals (unlike the Mercury of gold), if exposed to the fire
without such protection, would not be able to encounter the
searching ordeal, but (having no cohesion with its impure body,
and possessing no fixity in itself) would simply evaporate, and
leave the impurities to be burned. But our Arcanum, being both
a spiritual and a homogeneous substance, is capable of entering
into a perfect atomic union with the imperfect metals, of taking
up into its own nature that which is like to it, and of imparting
to this Mercury its own fixity, and protecting it from the fire; so
when the fire has burnt up all the impurities, that which is left
is, of course, pure gold or silver, according to the quality of the
Medicine—which from that time forward is (like all other gold
and silver) capable of resisting the most searching ordeal. So
you see we do not, as is sometimes said, profess to create gold
and silver, but only to find an agent which—on account of its
homogeneity and spirituality—is capable of entering into an inti-
mate (atomic) and maturing union with the Mercury of the base
metals. And we contend that our Elixir is calculated, by the
intense degree of its fixity and colour, to impart these qualities
_to any homogeneous substance which does not possess them.

CHAPTER - IV.
Of the Seed of Gold ; and whether other Metals have Seed.

Seed is the means of generic propagation given to all perfect
things here below; it is the perfection of each body; and
anybody that has no seed must be regarded as imperfect. Hence
there can be no doubt that there is such a thing as metallic seed.

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. . 239

If metals have seed, they certainly do not lose it in coagulation,
which is the effect of, perfection (or rather of perfect conditions).
Now, in all seed-bearing things maturity means the perfect
development of the seeds, and it stands to reason that metallic
seed is therefore most certainly not destroyed by coagulation
(the maturing process), If it be asked whether all metals have
seed, my answer is, that the seed of all metals is the same; but
that in some it is found nearer to, and in some further from the
surface. All metallic seed is the seed of gold; for gold is the

intention of Nature in regard to all metals. Ifthe base metals |

are not gold, it is only through some accidental hindrance ; they
are all potentially gold. But, of course, this seed of gold is most
easily obtainable from well-matured gold itself. Hence it would
be lost labour to endeavour to obtain it from tin or lead by some
laborious process, when it may be more readily obtained from
gold itself. Remember that I am now speaking of metallic seed,
and not of Mercury. Lead is to be multiplied, not in lead, but
only in gold; for only when it attains its maturity as gold can
its seed become fruitful. It may be admitted that silver has
its own seed, as there is a white (as well as a red) multiplicative
Tincture. Still, the White Tincture is really contained in the
Red ; and the seed of silver is nothing but a modification of that
of gold. The whiteness of silver is the first degree of perfection,
the yellowness of gold is the second, or highest degree. For the
mother of our Stone (the silver of the Sages) is white, and
imparts its whiteness to our gold, whence the offspring of these
two parents first becomes white, like its mother, and then red
with the royal blood of its father.

CHAPTER V.

Of the Virtue of Golden Seed, and where it is most
readily found.

In order that we may obtain this means of perfecting im-
perfect metals, we must remember that our Arcanum is gold
exalted to the highest degree of perfection to which the com-
bined action of Nature and Art can develop it. In gold, Nature
has reached the term of her efforts; but the seed of gold is
something more perfect -still, and in cultivating it’ we~ must,

ee

240 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

therefore, call in the aid of Art. The seed of metals is hidden
out of sight still more completely than that of animals; never-
theless, it is within the compass of our Art to extract it. The
seed of animals and vegetables.is something separate, and may
be cut out, or otherwise separately: exhibited ; but metallic seed
is diffused throughout the metal, and contained in all its smallest
parts ; neither can it be discerned from its body: its extraction
is therefore a task which may well tax the ingenuity of the most
experienced philosopher ; the virtues of the whole metal have to
be intensified, so as to convert it into the sperm of our seed,
which, by circulation, receives the virtues of superiors and in-
' feriors, then next becomes wholly form, or heavenly virtue, which
can communicate this to others related to it by homogeneity of
matter. In respect of the Stone, the whole of gold is its sub-
stance. The place in which the seed resides is—approximately
speaking--water ; for, to speak properly and exactly, the seed is
the smallest part of the metal, and is invisible ; but as this in-
visible presence is diffused throughout the water of its kind, and
exerts its virtue therein, nothing being visible to the eye but
water, we are left to conclude from rational induction that this
inward agent (which is, properly speaking, the seed) is really
there. Hence we call the whole of the water seed, just as we call
the whole of the grain seed, though the germ of life is only a
smallest particle of the grain. But the seminal life is not dis-
tinct from the remaining substance of metals; rather, it is
inseparably mingled with the smallest parts of the body.

Roughly speaking, however, we describe the whole of our golden:

water as the seed of gold, because this seminal virtue pervades it
in amost subtle manner. This seminal virtue the ancient Sages
called the hidden ferment, the poison, or the invisible fire;
again, they said that it was fire, or that fire resided in the water ;
they distinguished between soul and spirit, of which the former
is the medium, the latter the active virtue. Jf anyone wonders
that we describe water as the seat of the seed, or the seminal spirit,
let him remember that in the beginning the Spirit of God moved
on the face of the waters, z.¢., penetrated them with His heavenly
quickening power. Thus, from the very first day of Creation,
water has been the source and element of all things. For water
alone contains the seeds of all things ; yet in vegetables they are

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 241

put forth in crude air; in animals they are preserved in the kid-
neys; while in minerals they are diffuséd éhroushout the whole
substance; nevertheless, seed can never leave its origina] seat
(ze, water). Things are preserved by that from which they derive
their origin; for the cause of their origin being removed, the
things which are the effect must also cease to exist; hence the
multiplication and nutrition of all things is in water and through
water. Vegetables are generated and nourished by the aqueous
Teffas of the earth ; animals by the liquid chyle; metals by the
mercurial liquid. Animals preserve their seed in their kidneys,
and in due time project it into the proper womb, where it is first
moulded into a tender and very watery feetus; this foetus is
nourished by the liquid female menstruum, and thus grows until
the time comes for it to be born. Then it is nourished with
milk until it can bear stronger food ; but this solid food does not
become real nutriment until the stomach has converted it into a
liquid chyle (as, for instance, bones in the stomach of the dog).
In the same way the metals keep their perfect seed where it can-
not be seen ; but even there it is preserved in water. Thence the
Artist extracts it, puts it into its own ‘proper womb, where it is
cherished and grows, until (by means of corruption) it attains to
its glorification. This is a most difficult operation, because the
metals, in which the seed is hidden, are so firmly and tightly com-
pacted, and will not yield to violence, but only to a gentle and
exquisitely subtle chemical process. Then I say to you, that
there is a womb into which the gold (if placed therein) will, of
its own accord, emit its seed, until it is debilitated and dies, and
by its death is renewed into a most glorious King, who thence-
forward receives power to deliver all his brethren from the fear
of death.

CHAPTER VI.
Of the Mode and Means of Extracting this Seed.

That the most beautiful things are the most difficult to
produce, is the experience of all mankind; and it is not to be
wondered at, therefore, that the most glorious of sublunary
operations is attended with a very great amount of difficulty. If
any student of this Art is afraid of hard work, let him stop with
his foot upon the threshold. When, indeed, the Father of Lights

Vou, I, Q ;

242 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

has entrusted the Key of the Art to any man, that which remains
to be done is mere child’s play ; his eyes are ravished with the
sight of the most glorious signs, until the time of harvest arrives.
Without this, error and vexation will be the result. Therefore
the wise man, before commencing the work, will be chiefly
solicitous of knowing it by its marks. Let the sons of knowledge
learn that the great object of our Art is the manifestation of the
hidden seed of gold, which can be effected only by full and
perfect volatilisation of that which is fixed, and the subsequent
corruption of its particular form. To break up gold in this way
is the most profound secret in the world. It is not brought
about by corrosive depravation -of the metal, nor by the usual
method of dissolution, but by our philosophical solution of the
_ metal into mercurial water, by means of a previous mercurial
calcination (made-by means of the agént 9), which is produced
through the subtle rotation and conversion of the elements ; this
calcination, again, is a mortification of our homogeneous liquid
with the dry element belonging to it; afterwards the dry is so
far revived by means of this same liquid, that the perfectly
matured virtue, extracted from the substance by the solvent, is
the cause of this calcination and solution. Here, then, there is no
room for the action of a corrosive. Gold, which is the most solid,
strong, fire-proof, and fixed of all substances, is to be volatilised,
and‘no mere corrosive will accomplish such a perfect change of
nature. The mighty agent required for this purpose must be
homogeneous, amicable, and spiritual, ze. it must be akin to the
body (of gold), and yet strong enough to overcome it, and
penetrate to its very core, still leaving each smallest part of the
gold true gold. Gold does not easily give up its nature, and will
fight for its life, but our agent is strong enough to overcome and
kill it, and then it also has power to restore it to life, and to
change the lifeless remains into a new pure body.

CHAPTER VII.
Of the First Agent or Womb, into which our Seed should -
be emitted, and where tt is matured.

There remains to be found an Agent, by means of which
the aforesaid operation may be performed. For this purpose we

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 243

require a homogeneous water. For we have seen that the seed
of gold is concealed, and can remain effectual only in water, and
this water must be homogeneous with the body, or else it could
not penetrate all the thick integuments by means of which this
seed is secured. For like generates like, that is to say, every
agent that exercises a generative action upon anything, trans-
mutes it (as far as possible) into its own nature. The Agent
then must be akin to the body which is to be dissolved, and,
moreover, perfectly pure from all dross or alloy. Again, whereas
gold is fixed and solid, the Agent must be highly volatile and
spiritual ; gold is thick and gross, our Agent is subtle , gold is
dead, our Agent is living and life-giving: in short, our Agent
should have all those qualities which gold has not, and which it
is to impart to the gold. Hence we conclude that Mercury
alone is the true Key of our Art ; for it is in truth the dry water
described by the Sages, which, though liquid, does not wet the
hands, nor anything else that does not belong to the unity of its
substance. Mercury is our doorkeeper, our balm, our honey,
oil, urine, may-dew, mother, egg, secret furnace, oven, true fire,
venomous Dragon, Theriac, ardent wine, Green Lion, Bird of
Hermes, Goose of Hermogenes, two-edged sword in the hand of
the Cherub that guards the Tree of Life, &c., &c. ; it is our true,
secret vessel, and the Garden of the Sages, in which our Sun
rises and sets. It is our Royal Mineral, our triumphant vegetable
Saturnia, and the magic rod of Hermes, by means of which he
assumes any shape he likes. It is of this water that the Sage
uses the words: “Let Alchemists boast as much as they like,
but without this water the transmutation of metals is impossible.
In Nature it is not such as we use it in our Art; it is a most
common thing, and yet the most precious treasure ofall the
world)”. . . . . Therefore, Son of Knowledge, pay diligent
heed to my words: Take that which in itself is most impure, the
strumpet woman, purge it radically of all its uncleanness, and
extract from it that which is most pure, namely, our menstruum
(solvent), the Royal Diadem.” Behold, I have told you in a few
words that which ennobles the Sage, delivers him from error, and
leads him to the most beautiful meadow of delights. . . . The
Arcanum which we seek is nothing but gold exalted to its
highest degree of perfection, through the operation of Nature

Q2

244 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

assisted by our Art. When the sperm hidden in the body of
lgold is brought out by means of our Art, it appears under the
form of Mercury, whence it is exalted into the quintessence
which is first white, and then, by means of continuous coction,
becomes red. All this is the work of our homogeneous Agent,
our Mercurial Ponticum, which is pure crystalline without
transparency, liquid without humectation, and, in short, the
ruéDivirie water, which is not found above-ground, but is
prepared by the hand of the Sage, with the co-operation of
Nature, which we know, have seen, have made, and still possess ;
which also we desire to make known to the true students of our
Art, while it is our wish to hide it only from the unworthy.

CHAPTER VIIL

Concerning the Genealogy of the Mercury of the Sages,
its Origin, Birth, and the Signs which precede
; and accompany it.

Some boastful and arrogant sophists, who have read in
books that our Mercury is not common Mercury, and who know
that it is called by different names, do not blush to come forward
as pretenders to a knowledge of this Art, and take upon them-
selves to describe this solvent as diaphanous and limpid, or as a
metallic gum which is permiscible with metals, though they do.
not in reality know anything whatsoever about. it. The same
may be said of those who would extract our Mercury from herbs
or other still more fantastic substances. These gentry ‘Kriow not
why the Sages do not use Mercury such as is sold by apothecaries
as their substance. They are aware of the fact, but are unac-
quainted with its causes ; and the consequence is the idea which
they have that anything which changes the nature of common
Mercury, will convert it into that of the Sages. But in regard to

_these foolish persons, I have already expressed our opinion. .. .
All metals, as I demonstrated in the second chapter, have the
same substantial principle, vz., Mercury. From this proposi-
tion it follows that the substance of common Mercury is
homogeneous with that of all the other metals; and if the
Mercury of the Sages be the homogeneous metallic water, it can

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 245

differ from common Mercury only in respect of its purity and
heat. The first substance of common Mercury is that of all other
metals, vzz.,our Mercury. So longas it remains in the veins of the
earth,in a place perfectly adapted to its generation,and is sheltered
from crude air, it retains its inward movement and heat, which
are the cause of all metallic development. But if it be marred by
any accident, or if the place become unfit for it, the inward
movement is stopped, ad the germinal life chilled like that of
an egg which a hen has left after sitting on it for some time.
This is the reason why those who have attempted to digest
common Mercury by means of artificial heat have failed as
ludicrously as any one who should endeavour to incubate
artificially an addled egg. The difference between the egg and .
the metal is that our Art is capable of making good the damage,
but not by artificial means. We havea crude, undigested, frigid,
unmatured metallié mass, which wants the form of our Mercury,
for which it must exchange its own, if itis to become that which
we seek. With this end in view, its deficiences are twofold ; its
nature is clogged with superfluous foreign matter, and it does
not possess the requisite spiritual virtue. Its superfluities
consist of earthy leprosy, and aqueous dropsy. Its deficiency
is one of true sulphureous heat, by means of which it would be
enabled to purge off these superfluities. Water, indeed, is the
womb, but no womb can receive a vital germ without warmth.
* Supplement your (common) Mercury, therefore, with the inward
fire which it needs, and it will soon get rid of all superfluous
dross. If you can do this, you have accomplished the great feat
of the Sages. Jupiter has recovered his empire ; the black clouds
of Saturn are dispersed, and the sparkling fountain. wells forth
clearand pure. This substance will dissolve gold by means of a
true philosophical solution, which is as different as can be from
that foolish use of corrosives which only destroy the metallic
nature. This Mercury (with) gold and silver naturally produces
the Arcanum, or potable gold, as all adepts know and can testify.

“Here I conclude this Tract, as all that remains to be said is
set forth in a special (the next) Treatise.

246 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM / i“
\! of

; sy f
YO

4

BRIEF GUIDE TO

THE '

CELESTIAL RUBY.

Concerning the Philosopher's Stone and tts Grand Arcanum.

HE Philosopher’s Stone is a certain heavenly, spiritual,
penetrative, and fixed substance, which brings all:

metals to the perfection of gold or silver (according
to the quality of the Medicine), and that by natural

methods, which yet in their effects transcend Nature.
q It is prepared from one substance, with which the art of
chemistry is conversant, to which nothing is added, from which
‘nothing is taken away, except that its superfluities are removed.
No one will question the utility of our Art, if he believes
that it enables us to transmute base metals into gold. That
base metals are capable of such transmutation is clear; Nature
has destined them all to become gold, but they have not been
perfectly matured. If, then, that which hinders their perfect
digestion be removed, they will all become gold; for crude, cold,
and moist Mercury is the common first substance of gold as well
as of the other metals. Hence all other metals may be perfected
into gold, by the aid of our Divine Magistery, which, being pro-
jected upon imperfect metals, has power to quicken the maturing
process by as much as itself exceeds the standard maturity
of gold. How patent, then, must the spiritual nature of our
Stone be, which can effect more in one hour by a bare projection
than Nature in the course of ages. - If that substance which
Nature supplies be taken in hand by Art, dissolved, coagulated,
and digested, its perfection is increased from a monadic to a

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 247

denary virtue; by repeating the same process, it is increased
a hundred-fold, and then a thousand-fold, ete. This wonderful
Medicine penetrates each smallest part of the base metals (in
‘the proportion of I ::1,000) and tinges them through and
through with its-own “noble nature: your arithmetic will fail
sooner than its all-prevailing power. Each smallest part that is
pervaded with the vitalizing power of the Elixir in its turn tinges
that part which is nearest to it until the whole mass is leavened
with its marvellous influence, and brought to the perfection of
gold. This is done in a very short time, on account of the
spiritual nature of the agent ; it is the true metallic fire, and as
a common fire warms even those parts of any object which are
not in immediate contact with the fire, so this Elixir penetrates
dissolved and melted metals in a moment of time—just in the
_ same way as the virtue of leaven or yeast is brought to bear even
upon those parts of the meal which it never reaches. A reproach
is sometimes levelled at our Art, as though it claimed the power
of creating gold ; every attentive reader of our former tract will
know that it only arrogates to itself the power of developing,
through the removal of all.defects and superfluities, the golden
nature, which the baser metals possess in common with that
highly-digested metallic substance.

Listen, then, while I make known to you the Grand Arcanum
of this wonder-working Stone, which at the same time is not a
stone, which exists in every, man, and may be found in its own
place at all_times. ThE knowledge which] declare is not
intended for the unworthy, and will not be understood by them.
But to you who are earnest students of Nature, God will, at His
own time, reveal this glorious secret.

I have shewn that the transmutation of metals is not a
chimerical dream, but a sober possibility of Nature, who is
perfectly capable of accomplishing it without the aid of magic ;
and that this possibility of metallic transmutation is founded
upon the fact that all metals derive their origin from the same
source as gold, and have only been hindered from attaining the
same degree of maturity by certain impurities, which our
Magistery is able to remove.

Let me tell you, then, what is the nature of this grand
arcanum, which the Sages have called the Philosopher’s Stone,

248 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

a]
j but which is in every man, in every thing, at every season of the
‘year, if it be sought in the. right.place.

It must consist of the elements, for they are the universal
substance of all things, and as it is of a nature homogeneous with
that of gold, it must be that which contains the qualities of all
elements in such a combination as to render it incapable. of
being destroyed by fire. :

It follows, then, that you must look for the substance of our
Stone in the precious metals, since the required combination of
elements is not found anywhere else. Those foolish sophists
who seek it outside the domain of metals will never arrive at any
satisfactory conclusion. For there is only one true principle,
and nothing heterogeneous must be introduced into our Magistery.

For as a lion is always born of a lion, and a man of a man,
so all things owe their birth to that which they are like; that
which is combustible is derived from that which is combustible,
that which is indestructible from that which is indestructible.
‘Nor must we expect to find the principle which imparts the
qualities of gold anywhere but in gold itself. If, indeed, we were:
able to create the sperm of things, we might hope to evolve this
metallic principle from plants or animals which do not contajn'
it; but that is the privilege of God alone. We must be content
to dispose and develop the sperm which is made ready to our
hands—new things’ we are unable to produce, and even if we
could, our artificial seed would be no better than that which
Nature has provided. If any one calling himself a Sage cannot
use the things which are already created, it does not seem likely
that he will be able to create new things out of heterogeneous
substances—the seeds of metals out of herbs or animals. °

Thus, you see that the Stone which is to be the transformer
of metals into gold must be sought in the precious metals, in
which it is enclosed and contained.

But why is it called a Stone, though it is not a stone; and
how is it.to be found? The Sages describe it as being a stone
and not a stone; and the vulgar, who cannot imagine how so
wonderful a thing should be produced except by art-magic,
decry our science as impious, wicked, and diabolical. Some
silly persons clamour for an Act making the profession or
practice of this Art punishable by statute law. Now, one can

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES 249

hardly be angry with the illiterate and ignorant persons who
raise this cry ; but when it is taken up by men of exalted station
and profound learning, one hardly knows what to say. These
men I also reckon among the rude multitude, because they are
deplorably ignorant of everything pertaining to our Art, and
yet, forgetful of their dignity, they join in the hue and cry
against it, like so many cowardly village curs. It is neither
religious nor wise to judge that of which you know nothing ; and
yet that is exactly what these people do, who claim to be both
Christians and scholars.

But let us return to the point from which we strayed. Some
Alchemists who are’in search of our Arcanum seek to prepare
something of a solid nature, because they have heard the object
of their search described as a Stone.

Know, then, that it is called a stone, not because it is like a
stone, but only because, by virtue of its fixed nature, it resists
the action of fire as successfully as any stone. In species it is
gold, more pure than the purest; it is fixed and incombustible
like a stone, but its appearance is that of very fine powder,
impalpable to the touch, sweet to the taste, fragrant to the smell,

in potency a most penetrative spirit, apparently dry and yet

unctuous, and easily capable of tinging a plate of metal. It is
justly called the Father of all miracles, containing as it does all
the elements in such a way that none predominates, but all form
a. certain fifth essence ; it is thus well called our gentle metallic
fire. It has no name of its own; yet there is nothing in the
whole world whose name it might not with perfect propriety
bear. If we say that its nature is spiritual, it would be no more
than the truth ; if we described it is as corporeal, the expression
would be equally correct ; for it is subtle, penetrative, glorified,
spiritual gold. It is the noblest of all created things after the
rational soul, and has virtue to repair ‘all defects both in
animal and metallic bodies, by restoring them to the most
exact and perfect temper ; wherefore is it a spirit or quintessence.

But I must proceed to answer the second and more impor-

tant part of my question. How is this Stone to be obtained? ,

It does not exist in Nature, but has to be prepared by Art, in
obedience to Nature’s law. - Its substance is in metals; but in
form it differs widely from them, and in this sense the metals are

—_— or

250 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

not our Stone. For if we would elicit our Medicine from: the
precious metals, we must destroy the particular metallic form,
without impairing its specific properties. The specific properties
of the metal have their abode in its spiritual part, which resides in
homogeneous water. Thus we must destroy the particular form of
gold, and change it into its generic homogeneous water, in which
the spirit of gold is preserved ; this spirit afterwards restores the
consistency of its water, and brings forth a new form (after the
necessary putrefaction), a thousand times more perfect than the
form of gold which it lost by being reincrudated.

It is necessary, then, to reduce metallic bodies to their
homogeneous water which does not wet the hands, that from this
water there may be generated a new metallic species which is
nobler by far than any existing metal, viz.,our Celestial Ruby.

The whole process which we employ closely resembles that
followed by Nature in the bowels of the earth, except that it is
much shorter. Nature produces the metals out of cold and
humid Mercury by assiduous digestion ; our Art takes the same
crude, cold, and humid Mercury, and conjoins with it mature
gold, by a secret artifice ; the mixture represents a new and far
more potent Mercury, which, by digestion, becomes not common
gold, but one far more noble, which can transmute imperfect
metals into true gold.

Thus, you see that though our Stone is made of gold alone,
yet it is not common gold. In order to elicit our gold from
common gold, the latter must be dissolved in our mineral water
which does not wet the hands ; this water is Mercury extracted
from the red servant, and it is capable of accomplishing our work
without any further trouble to the Artist. It is that one true,
natural, first-substance, to which nothing is added, from which
nothing is subtracted, except certain superfluities, which, how-
ever, it will cast off without any aid by its own inherent vital
action. The chief object of your perseverant efforts should be
the discovery of this Mercury, or the albefaction of our red
eaten ; all the rest is mere child’s play, as the Artist has only to
look on while Nature gradually matures his substance.

But remember that our albification is by no means an easy
task. Gold which has been thus whitened can never resume
its old form, for, instead of being corporeal and fixed, it is now

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 251

spiritual and volatile. Concentrate your whole mind, therefore,
on the whitening of the Laton. It is easier to make gold than
thus to jeseay ie form; he who so dissolves it may be said
rather to coagulate it—for dissolution of the body and coagulation
of the spirit are coincident in it.

-Consider these signs, ye sons of knowledge. . That which
dissolves is spirit; that which coagulates is body. A body
cannot enter a body so as to cause dissolution ; but a spirit. can
enter it, attenuate and rarefy it; and as you seek water, you
need water to bring it to light ; for every Agent has a tendency
to assimilate to itself that which it acts upon, and every natural
effect is conformed to the nature of the efficient; hence water is
necessary if you would extract water from earth. ,

When I speak of water, I do not mean aquafortis, royal
water, or any other corrosive whatsoever, for these waters, instead
of dissolving metals, only corrode, mar, and corrupt them,
without destroying their old form, to which task they are
insufficient, as they are not of a metallic nature. No, our water
is the water Mercury, which dissolves homogeneous metallic
bodies, and mingles with them in indissoluble union, abides
with them, is digested with them, and together with them
becomes that spiritual whole which we seek. For everything
that dissolves a substance naturally (still preserving the specific
properties of the thing dissolved) becomes one with it both
materially and formally, coalesces with it, and is thickened by
it, thus nourishing it; as we see in the case of a grain of wheat,
which, when dissolved by the humid earthy vapour, thereby

‘takes up that vapour as its radical moisture, and grows together
with it into a plant. We may also observe that, every natural
dissolution being a quickening of that which was déad, this
quickening can take place only through some vital agent which
is of the same essence with the dead thing; if we wish to
quicken the (dead) grain of wheat, we can do this only by means
of an earthy vapour, which, like the grain itself, is a product of
the earth. For this reason common Mercury can have no
quickening effect on gold, because it is not of the same essence
with it. A grain of wheat sown in marshy soil, so far from being
quickened into life, is, on the contrary, destroyed, because the
aqueous humour of the soil is not of the same nature. In like

252 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

manner, gold, if mixed with common Mercury, or with anything
except its own essential humour; is not dissolved, because such
waters are too cold, crude, and impure ; for which reason, being
utterly unlike gold, they cannot amalgamate with it, or attain
with it to a far nobler degree of development. Our Mercury,
indeed, is cold and unmatured in comparison with gold ; but it
is pure, hot, and well-digested in respect of common, Mercury,
which resembles_it only in whiteness and fluxibility. Our
Mercury is, in fact, a pure water, clean, clear, bright, and
resplendent, worthy of all admiration. °

If you wish for a more particular description of our water, I
ain impelled by motives of charity to tell you that it is living,
fluxible, clear, nitid, as white as snow, hot, humid, airy, vaporous,
and digestive, and that gold melts in it like ice in warm water ;
moreover, that in it is contained the whole regimen of fire, and
the sulphur which exists but does not predominate in it. This
water is the true Keeper of our. Gates, the Bath of the King and
of his Queen, which warms them incessantly, but is not taken of
their substance, and is distinct from the whitening substance of
the water, though the two are united and appear under the same
flowing form and colour. It is our vessel, our fire, the abode of
our furnace, by whose continuous and gentle warmth the whole
substance is digested. Hf you know this water, it will be seen to
contain all our fires, all our proportions of weight, all our regi-
mens, It is Bernard of Trevisa’s clear pellucid Fountain, in
which our King is cleansed and strengthened to overcome all his
foes. All you have to do is to find this water and to put into it
‘the purified body ; out of the two Nature will then produce our
Stone.

This mineral water can be extracted only from those
things which contain it; and that thing from which if is most
easily obtained is difficult to discover, as is also the mode of, its
extraction. It dissolves gold without violétice, is friendly to it
washes away its impurities, and is white, warm, and cle
Without our Mercury, Alchemy could not be a Science, but only
a vain and empty pretence. If you can obtain it, you have the
key of the whole work, with which you can open the most secret
chambers of knowledge. Its nature is the same as that of gold,
bit its substance is different, and the preparation of it causes

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 253

a great stench. Weigh well the possibilities of Natuye; refrain
from introducing any heterogeneous element into our Magistery,
and do not blame me if you fail to understand my words.

Our Stone is produced from one thing, and four mercurial sub-
stances, of which one is mature ; the others pure, but crude, two
of them being extracted in a wonderful manner from their ore by
means of the third’ The four are amalgamated by the interven-
tion of a gentle fire, and there subjected to coction day by day,
until they all become one by natural (not manual) conjunction.

Afterwards, the fire being changed, these volatile substances
should be fixed and digested by means of heat which becomes
a little more powerful every day (ze, by means of fixed
and incombustible Sulphur of the same genus) until the whole
compound attains the same essence, fixity, and colour.

There are twelve degrees or phases of this our process,
which J may briefly enumerate and describe as follows. The
first is Calcination.

Calcination is the first purgation of the Stone, the drying up
of its Humours, through its natural heat, which is stirred into
vital action by the external heat of water—whereby the com-
pound is converted into a black powder, which is yet ‘unctuous,
and retaifis its radical humour.”

“This calcination is performed for the purpose of rendering
the substance viscous, spongy, and more easily penetrable ; for
gold in itself is highly fixed, and difficult of solution even in our
water ;. but through this calcination it becomes soft and, white,
and we observe in it two natures, the fixed and the volatile,
which we liken to two serpents. In order that a full dissolution.
may be made, there is need of contrition, that calcination
may afterwards produce a viscous state, when it will be fit for
dissolution.

When the substances are first mixed, they are at enmity
with each other, by reason of their contrary qualities, for there is
the heat and dryness of the Sulphur fiercely contending with the
cold and moisture of the Mercury. They can only be reconeiled
in a medium which partakes of both natures, and the medium in
which heat and cold are reconciled is dryness which can co-exist
with both. Thus cold and heat are brought to dwell peaceably
~— together in the dryness of the earth, and dryness and moisture in

254 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

the coldness of the water. This reconciliation of contrary
qualities is the second great object of our calcination.

Its sufficient cause is the action of the inward heat upon the
moisture, whereby everything that resists it is converted into a
very fine powder; the meving and instrumental cause is the
fire contrary to Nature, which, being hidden in our solvent water,
battles with its moisture and digests it into a viscous or unctuous
powder.

This operation takes place before our dissolution, because
whenever bodies are dissolved, the spirits in their turn are con-
gealed. Again, the woman must reign, before she is overcome
by the man. The dominion of the woman is in the water, and if
the man overcome her in the element in which both her qualities
_ of coldness and moisture inhere, he will easily conquer her where
she has only one quality.

Calcination, then, is the beginning of the work, and without
it there can be neither peaceable commixtion nor proper union,
The first dealbation reduces the substance to its two principles,
sulphur and quicksilver, the first of which is fixed, while the
other is volatile. They are compared to two serpents, the fixed
substance to a serpent without, and the volatile substance to a
serpent with, wings. One serpent holds in his mouth the tail of
the other, to shew that they are indissolubly conjoined by com-
munity of birth and destiny, and that our Art is accomplished
through the joint working of this Mercurial Sulphur, and
sulphureous Mercury. Hence the whole compound is at this
stage called Rebis, because there are two substances but only one
essence. TheéV re not really two, but one and the same thing ;
the Sulphur is matured and well digested Mercury, the Mercury
is crude and undigested Sulphur. It has already been said that
in our Art we imitate Nature’s methed of producing metals in
the bowels of the earth, except that our method is shorter and
more subtle. In metallic veins only crude and frigid Mercury is
found, in which the inward heat or dryness (z.e., Sulphur) can
scarce make its influence felt. No digestive heat is found there,
but in the course of ages an imperceptible motion changes this
metallic principle. In the course of centuries, however, this
imperceptible digestive heat changes the Mercury into what is
then called fixed Sulphur, though before it was denominated
Mercury.

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 255

But in our Art, we have something besides crude and frigid
Mercury, véz, mature gold, with its manifold active qualities.
These are united to the passive qualities of our Mercury ; and so
one aids and perfects the other, and as we have two fires, instead
of the one slow inward fire of Mercury, the operation is more
expeditious, and something far nobler than common gold is
produced. . :
Thus you see that in our Art we have two Sulphurs and
two Mercuries (ze, Sulphur, and Mercury of Mercury, and
Sulphur and Mercury of gold), but their only difference consists
in degrees of perfection and maturity. Now, the perfect body
of gold is reduced to its (two) first principles by means of our
Divine water which does not wet the hands (wz., Mercury and
Sulphur). This operation for a time gives the ascendancy to the
female agent; but this being unnatural, the male agent soon
reasserts itself, and by means of its heat dries up the moisture of
the female agent, and—through calcination—converts it all into
a most subtle and viscous powder, which powder is then
changed by dissolution into a water, in which the spirits of the
solvent and the thing dissolved, the male and the female
principles, are mingled. But the inward heat, which has once
been roused into action, still continues to work, separating the
subtle (which ftoats on the surface) from the gross (which sinks
to the bottom), until the man has gained the upper hand, the
inseparable union takes place, and the male impregnates the
female; the female brings forth a nebulous vapour, in which
they are putrefied and decay, and from which both arise with a
glorious body, no longer two, but only one by inseparable
conjunction. This new birth is then coagulated, sublimed,
nourished, and exalted to the highest degree of perfection, and
may afterwards be indefinitely multiplied by fermentation, and
used both for projection and as an Universal Medicine.

We see, then, that these black and fetid ashes are not to be
despised, since they contain the Diadem of our King ; your
substance will never be white, if it has not first been black. It
is by means of putrefaction and decay that it attains the
glorified body of its resurrection. Therefore, you should honour
the tomb of our King, for unless you do so, you will never
behold him coming in his glory.

256 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

A great many students make a mistake at the very outset,
by performing this calcination on a wrong substance—borax, or
alum, or ink, or vitriol, or arsenic, or seeds, or plants, or wine,
vinegar, urine, hair, blood, gum, resin, etc.; or they choose a false
method, and corrode instead of calcining the metallic bodies on
which they operate. Calcination can take place only by means
of the inward heat of the body, assisted by friendly outward
warmth ; but calcination by means of a heterogeneous agent can
only destroy the metallic nature, in so far as it has any effect at
all. Every calcination of gold, which is not succeeded by a
spontaneous dissolution, without laying on of hands, is also
fallacious.

The true calcination is by means of Mereury, which (henge
added to gold in due proportions) softens and dissolves the gold,
and, by its inward heat,united to outward heat, stirs into action the
native heat of the gold, and thus causes it to dry up its humidity
into that fine, viscous, black powder. And this is the true key
of the work—to incrudate the mature by the conjunction of an
immature—being incrudated to calcine it—being calcined to dis-
solve it—and all this philosophically, not vulgarly.

The outward signs of the calcination are as follows :—When
the gold has become saturated with water, and the fire of the
Mercury has called into play the heat of the bath, the water
which was so brilliant begins to grow dim, then visibly swells and
bubbles, until the whole becames a fatty and viscous powder, .
which, however, still retains its radical humour. For when the:
heat first begins to operate, the cold and the moist ‘seek refuge
by rising to the top; thence they descend in liquid form and
assimilate as much of the substance as they can to themselves ;
_thus the powder is converted into a glutinous water. For

between the different processes of our Art, there exists such a
concatenation that not one can be produced or understood with-
out the rest. In order to hide our meaning from the unworthy,
we speak of several operations ; but all these—the whole progress
of the substance from black to white and red—should be
philosophically understood as one operation, one thing, one
successive disposition to black, white, and red.

The following rules should be observed if you wish to bring
‘about true calcination :—

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES 257

In the first place, you must procure our Mercury ; common
Mercury will produce no effect if you operate on it till doomsday.

Secondly, the external fire of the furnace should be neither
too violent (in order that the equilibrium of chemical forces in
the substance may not be disturbed), nor -yet too gentle, so that
. the action of the inward fire may not languish for want of out-
ward heat. It should be just such as to Meee up an equable
vital warmth..

In the third place, the Laton should receive neither too much
nor too little todrink. If it receive too much, it will not be able
to give it out, and a nebulous tempest will arise; if too little, it
will be burnt to cinders. The activity of the Sulphur must dry
up the superfluous humour of the Mercury ; therefore, the active
(sulphur) must not be swamped with too much sperm ; nor must
the moisture be choked with too much earth. The proportions
should be between’two or three parts of water to one of gold;
but the larger the quantities of both substances, the more perfect
will the calcination and dissolution be. The ‘chief mistake

‘against which you must guard is the swamping of your earth
with water. For the earth contains the fire, which is the principal
digestive in our Art.

In the fourth place, you should take care to seal up your
vessel properly, to prevent the spirit from evaporating. Consider
how carefully Nature has closed’ up the female womb to prevent
anything from escaping or entering that might prove hurtful to
the young life ; and quite as much (if not more) care is required ~
in our Magistery. For when the embryo is being formed, great
winds arise, which must not be allowed to escape—or else our
labour will have been all in vain.

The fifth requisite in our work is patience. You must not
yield to despondency, or attempt to hasten the chemical process
of dissolution. For if you do so by means of violent heat, the
substance will be prematurely parched up into a red powder,
and the active vital principle in it will become passive, being
knocked on the head, as it were, with a-hammer. But our true
calcination preserves the radical humour in the body dissolved,
and converts it into an unctuous black powder. Patience is,
therefore, the great cardinal virtue in Alchemy. It must not be
supposed that the signs and colours which I describe appear on

Vou. I, ‘ k

258 THE HERMETIC MUSEU.

the first day, or even within the first week: Bernard of Trevisa
tells us that he waited in an anguish of expectation for forty days,
and then returned and saw clouds and mists. You, need the
patience of the husbandman, who, after committing the seed to
the earth, does not disturb the soil every day to see whether it is
growing. . . . Assoonas you have prepared your substance,
ze, mixed mature yellow sulphur with its crude white sulphur,
put them in a vessel and let them stand undisturbed ; at the end
of twenty-four hours, the Mercury, which is attempting to rouse
the latent fire of the sulphur, will begin to effervesce and send up -
bubbles. But little variation of colour shall appear until the
object of the Mercury has been accomplished, and the Royal Bath
prepared ; at first it is the Mercury alone that is at work. When,
however, the Bath has been made hot (z.2., the inward warmth of
the gold roused) the greater part of our work is over, and we shall
be easily able to distinguish the various operations. The first
colour which appears after the silver colour of the amalgamated
body, is not perfect blackness, but only a darkish white; the
blackness becomes more pronounced day by day, until the sub-
stance assumes a brilliant black colour. This black is a sign that
the dissolution is accomplished, which does not come about in
one hour, but gradually, by a continuous process; for the Tincture
which comes out of the Sun and Moon appears black to the eyes,
but is insensibly and imperceptibly extracted. When the whole
of the Tincture has been extracted from the body that is to be
dissolved, the blackness is complete. The more you digest the
substance at first, the more you subtilize the gross, and blacken
the compound. There are four principal colours, the first of
which is blackness ; and it is of all colours the most tardy in
making its appearance. But as soon as the highest degree. of
intense blackness has been reached (there being no idle intervals
in our work), that colour begins little by little to yield to another.
The time during which this blackness is developed is very long,
and so is the time during which it disappears ; but it is only for
one moment that the blackness neither increases nor decreases :
for things find rest only in that which is the end of their being,
but blackness is not the end of our substance.

The advent of the blackness is like the coming of ‘the
night, which is preceded by a long twilight—when the last ray of

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES 259

light has faded away, the blackness of night has come; only our
work is more tedious, and the change is, therefore, still less
perceptible.

It may be objected that the. black tincture begins to be
extracted as soon as the inward heat ‘is roused, and that, there-
fore, the colour which appears must be, from the very first, an
intense black. My answer is that the Tincture which is extracted
is,as a matter of fact, not black, but of a dazzling white ; and
that the blackness is produced gradually, through the action of
the water on the body, out of which it draws the soul (the
tincture), thus giving the body up to decomposition. It is
this putrefaction (the result of the mutual action of the Sulphur
and Mercury) which imparts to the Tincture its black colour ;
in itself the Tincture is brilliantly white. How long, then, will
you have to wait till perfect blackness appears? Flamellus tells
us that this intense blackness comes at the end of about forty
days. Ripley advises us to let the mingled substances remain
together for six weeks, until the conception -has taken place,
during which time the fire must be very gentle. And Bernard
(of Trevisa) suggests the same thing, when he says in his parable:
“ The King doffs his glorious robes, and gives them to Saturn,
who clothes him .in a garment of black silk, which he retains for
forty days.” Of course, the blackness which is here spoken
of is not equally intense all the time, as you will understand
from what has been said above.

In the course of this change from white to black, the sub-
stance naturally passes through a variety of intermediate colours ;
but these colours (being more or less accidental) are not invari-
ably the same, and depend very much on the original proportion
in which the two substances are combined. In the second stage,
during which the substance changes from black to white, it is
already far purer, the colours are more lucid, and more to be
depended upon. In the two phases there are intermediate
colours ; but in the first they are more dingy and obscure than
in the second, and very much less numerous. In the progress of
the substance from blackness to whiteness (z.e., the second phase
of our Magistery), the most beautiful colours are seen in a
_ variety such as eclipses the glory of the rainbow ; before the
perfection of blackness is reached, there are also some transition

R2

260 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

colours, such as black, azure, and yellow--and the meaning of
these colours is that your substance is not yet completely
decayed; while the body is dying, the colours are seen, until
_black night shrouds the whole horizon in pitchy gloom. But
when the process of resurrection begins (in the second phase),
the hues are more numerous and splendid, because the body is
now beginning to be glorified, and has become pure and spiritual.

But in what order do the colours of which we speak appear ?
To this question no definite answer can be given, because in this
first phase there are so much uncertainty and variation. But
the colours will be the clearer and more distinct, the purer your
water of life is. The four principal colours (white, black, white,
red), always follow in the same order; but the order of the
intermediate colours cannot be so certainly determined, and you
ought to be content if within the first 40 days you get the black
colour. There is orily one caution you should bear in mind,
in regard to this point: if a reddish colour appears before the
black (especially if the substance begins to look dry and powdery
at the same time), you may be almost sure that you have marred
your substance by too violent a fire. You should be very care-
ful, then, about the regulation of your fire ; if the fire be just hot
enough, but not too hot, the inward chemical action of our water
will do the rest.

Our Solution, then, isthe reducing of our Stone to its first
matter, the manifestation of its essential liquid, and the extrac-
tion of natures from their profundity, which is finished by bring-
ing them into a mineral water ; nor is this operation easy : those
who have tried can bear out the truth of my words.

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 261

THE FOUNT

OF

CHEMICAL TRUTH.

UR Magistery consists of three parts: the first deals
with the essential and substantial composition of our
Stone ; the second describes their manner of combina-
tion ; the third the mode of chemical procedure. Our
substances are “red ore,” or.matured Sulphur, and water, un-
digested Mercury, or “white ore.” To these a vessel is added, a
furnace, and a triple fire. In discussing their manner of com-.
bination, we have to consider their weight and the regimen.
The weight is twofold, and so is the regimen: between them
they produce the following processes—Calcination, Dissolution,
Separation, Conjunction, Putrefaction, Distillation, Coagulation,
Sublimation, Fixation, and Exaltation. The first two produce
the black, viscous powder, by means of the “unnatural fire,” a
temperate, incomburent, and alteririg ignition. There is then a
further change into a mineral water. The three operations
which follow are the result of the first and third fires, namely,
natural and contra-natural, and “circulate” the substance, until
the gross is separated from the subtle, and the whole is evenly
tempered, the separated elements being then recombined,
impregnated, and putrefied.

The five last operations are the result of natural fire which
increases and gets stionger from day to day, purifying the putre-
fied substance of its dross, by continual ascensions and descents.
This process is therefore called ‘distillation, volatilization,
ablution, imbibition, humectation of the earth, and is continued
until the dryness gradually thickens the. substances, and, finally,
under the influence of coction or continued sublimation, induces

362 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

fixation, the terminal point of which is exaltation, an exaltation
which is not local, from the bottom to the surface, but qualitative,
from vileness to the highest excellence.

These operations are sometimes called regimens ; but there
are only two kinds of fire, the natural and the non-natural, the
latter being employed to call out the activity of the former. Putre-
faction precedes regeneration, and is caused by the strife of the
two fires. That part of the work which is subsequent to putre-
faction and conjunction, when the Sulphur and the water have
become one, and also receive congelation, is effected by the
natural fire alone.

The substances are our body (commonly styled Lemnian
earth) and our water (our true rain water). Our water is the life
of all things, and if you can by much toil obtain it, you will have
both silver and gold. It is the water of Saltpétre, and outwardly
resembles Mercury, while inwardly at its heart there burns purest
infernal fire. Do not be deceived with common quicksilver, but
gather that Mercury which the returning Sun, in the month of
March, diffuses everywhere, till the month of October, when it is
ripe.

Know that our Mercury is before the eyes of all men,
though it is known to few. When it is prepared, its splendour
is most admirable ; but the sight is vouchsafed to none, save the
sons of knowledge. Do not despise it, therefore, when you see
it in sordid guise ; for if you do, you will never accomplish our
Magistery—and if you can change its countenance, the trans-
formation will be glorious. For our water is a most pure virgin,
and ts loved of many, but meets all her wooers in foul garments,
in order that she may be able to distinguish the worthy from the
unworthy. Our beautiful maiden abounds in inward hidden
graces; unlike the immodest woman who meets her lovers in
splendid garments. To those who do not despise her foul
exterior, she then appears in all her beauty, and brings them an
infinite dower of riches and health. Our Queen is pure above
measure, and her splendour like that of a celestial being—and so
indeed she is called by the Sages, who also style her their
quintessence. Her brilliancy is such as baffles imagination, and,
if you would have any idea of it, you must see it with your own
eyes, Our water is serene, crystalline, pure, and beautiful—

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES 203

though it can assume its true form only through the aid of our
Art. In that form it is our sea, our hidden fountain, from which
gold derives its birth by natural descent ; yet it is also stronger
than gold, and overcomes it, wherefore gold is united to it, and
is washed in it,and the two together grow up into a strong hero,
whom neither Pope nor Emperor can buy for a price. Hence
you should, above all things, seek this water, by means of which
(with the solitary addition of a clean and perfect body) the
Stone may be prepared.

But it requires profound study to become acquainted with
all the secrets of our sea, and with its ebb and flow. [It took me
18 months, after I had discovered the spring of our water, to
find the method of making it well forth, because I did not know
the meaning of the fiery furnace of the Sages. When I dis-
covered it, indeed, the sight which I beheld richly rewarded me
for all my pains. I was then suddenly, as by a flash of

.inspiration, enabled to understand all the secret words and
énigmas of the Sages. Our water is the fire which causes both
death, and, through death, a more glorious life. Whoever
discovers it has reached the autumn of his Magistery, as Nature
will then (when the pure body has been put into it) perform all
the other processes, and carry the substance onward to
perfection through all the different regimens. This water,
though one, is not simple, but compounded of two things: the
vessel and the’ fire of the Sages, and the bond which holds the
two together. So when we speak of our vessel, and our fire, we
mean by both expressions, our water; nor is our furnace
anything diverse or distinct from our water. There is then one
vessel, one furnace, one fire, and all these make up one water.
The fire digests, the vessel whitens and penetrates, the furnace is
the bond which comprises and encloses all, and all these three
are our Mercury. There are many kinds of fire (and of water)
in our Magistery, but all these only represent different aspects of
our Mercury.

There is only one thing in the whole world from which our
Mercury can be obtained. It is like gold in essence, but different
in substance, and if you change its elements you will have what
you seek. Join heaven to earth in the fire of love, and you will
see in the middle of the firmament the bird of Hermes.. Do not

264 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

confound the natures, but separate and re-combine them, and
you will reign in honour all your life.

In the South-west there is a high mountain (very near the
Sun), one of seven, and the second in height. This mountain is
of a very hot temperature (because it is not far from the Sun),
and in this mountain is enclosed a vapour or spirit, whose services
are indispensable for our work. But it does not ascend, unless
it is quickened, nor is it quickened unless you dig kneedeep on
the summit of the mountain. If you do this, a subtle exhalation
(or spirit) ascends, and is congealed by the air into drops of
beautifully limpid water—which is our water, our fire, our vessel,
and our furnace; not common Mercury, but the hot and moist
liquid of most pure Salt, which we call Mercury, because in
comparison with the Sun, it is immature and cold. If the
Almighty had not created this Mercury, the transmutation of
metals would be impossible, because gold does not tinge unless
it be first tinged itself. Our Mercury is the beloved spouse of
gold, and changes its body into a purely spiritual substance ;
gold loves it so, that for very love he dies, and is revived by his
spouse, and she is impregnated by him, and conceives, and
bears a most beautiful royal son. The whole knowledge
of our Art consists in the discovery of this our sea; any
Alchemist who is ignorant of it, is simply wasting his
money. Our sea is derived from the mountain of which I told
you above. The exhalation or white smoke which ascends
there, will accomplish our whole Magistery. There is another
secret which you should know if you wish to see your hope
fulfilled, vz, how you are to dig a hole in the mountain, as its
surface is impenetrable to ordinary tools, its dryness being such
that it has become harder.than a flint. But in the places of
Saturn a small herb is found, called Saturnia, whose twigs
appear dry, but in whose roots there is abundance of juice. This
herb you should carefully take up with.the roots, and carry with
you to the foot of the mountain, and, with'the help of fire, bury
it beneath the mountain; its virtue will at once penetrate the
whole mountain, and soften its earth. ‘Then you may ascend to
the summit, easily dig a hole knee deep, and pour in so much
dry and viscous water, that it penetrates to where the herb lies
buried, and makes it ascend as a fume, which carries upward

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 265

with it the spirit of the mountain. This spirit is the strength of
fire mingling with water, and dwelling in it. The spirit of
Saturnia is the whitening fume, the vapour of the mountain is
fire, and all these things are fire. Thus you obtain Saturnia, the
royal plant and mineral herb, which together with fat flesh makes
such a soup as to eclipse the richest banquets in the world.

Here is an enigmatic description of our water, which should in
course of time and study, become plain to the diligent enquirer.
There is the King (gold), and the water which is the King’s
Bath ; our water is the vessel, inasmuch as our King is enclosed
in it, and the furnace, inasmuch as our fire is enclosed in it, and
our fire, inasmuch as the virtue or spirit of the mountain dwells
in it, and the woman, inasmuch as it receives the vapour of the
plant Saturnia ; and as the dear friend of the Sun penetrates,
whitens, and softens it, and causes it to emit its sperm. Then
the frery virtue which is in the water, begins to act on our body,
wasting and mortifying it, until at length the innate heat of the
Sun is roused into activity. Our Stone is called a little world,
because it contains within itself the active and the passive, the
motor and the thing moved, the fixed and the volatile, the mature
and the crude —which, being homogeneous, help and perfect each
other. We have already shewn that our object in adding
matured Sulphur to crude Mercury (the same thing in different
stages of development), is to shorten and accelerate the natural
process. Gold is a hot and dry body, silver a frigid and humid
one, Mercury the means of conveying tinctures. The body of
the Sun is-most highly digested, that of the Moon imperfect and
immature, while Mercury is the bond by which these two-con-
traries are united. Join the Moon to Mercury by means of
proper heat, so that the two become one Mercury which retains
its inward fire; then the Mercury will be freed from all dross
and superfluities, and it will become transparent like the tears
we shed, though not exactly perspicuous. If you then unite this
purified Mercury to gold, in which is the Moon and fire, the hot
and dry will love the cold and humid, and they will unite on the
bed of the fire of friendship; the man will. dissolve over the
woman, and the woman be coagulated over the man, till the
spirit and the body become one by commixtion. “Continue the
same operation (let the heaven descend to the earth) till the

266 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

spirit puts on the body, and both are fixed together. Then our
Stone will have obtained its royal virtue. For Mercury is the
water of all metals, and they are digested in it. When vegetables
are boiled in ordinary water, which is naturally frigid and humid,
it partakes of their qualities, and is yet separable from them ; so
the pure Mercury, which. is in .all metals and minerals, is
perfectly separable from the dross and foreign matter which
has become mixed up with them; yet the different minerals
and metals qualify the Mercury in the same way as the
water is qualified by the vegetables cooked in it. There are
these two differences between the Mercury and the water, that
the water is not coagulated and fixed with the vegetables as our
water is with the metals; and that, while the colour of common
water is changed by anything boiled in it, Mercury retains its
own colour and fluxibility, though its essence is qualified.
Therefore the Mercury is effectual in the dissolution of the
metal, and the metal in the coagulation of the Mercury ; and as,
in the dissolution, the form and colour of the metal is latent in
the form and colour of the Mercury, so, in coagulation, the form
and colour of the Mercury is hidden in the form and colour of
the metal ; neither do the qualities of the metal in dissolution
prevent the fluxibility of the Mercury, nor the qualities of
Mercury in coagulation the fixity of the metal. Do you not
here observe a wonderful harmony between Mercury and the
metals? For their love is like that of mother and son, sister and
brother, male and female. Hence they are calculated mutually
to perfect each other, the water imparting to the body a spiritual
and volatile nature, while the body gives to the water a corporeal
substance. The reason that the colour of Mercury is not
changed in coction by the dissolved body, is this: the earth
and water in the Mercury are homogeneous, and so well tempered
that neither can be separated from the other, and they are so
well mixed that the whole substance exhibits (together with
great fluxibility) so great a consistency as entirely to conceal the
colours—and only if a part of the Mercury is destroyed or
marred by some deleterious chemical corrosive, are the colours
seen. The relations of Mercury in respect of earth and water
are these: in respect of water it is fluxible and liquid, in respect
of earth it moistens nothing but what is of the same essence
e

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 267

with it. These hints will enable you to detect any errors in your
treatment of Mercury. Some obstruct or divide its homogeneity
by unduly drying up its water; others corrupt the earth and
render it diaphanous by disproportionate mixing. Mercury is
the sperm of the metals; it contains in itself the Sulphur by
which alone it is digested (through which Nature would in course
of time have matured it into gold); nor would it be possible to
convert Mercury into gold without it. This mature Sulphur,
then, is radically mixed with the Mercury, and rapidly digests it,
while itself is putrefied by the Mercury, and is revived again, not
as common, but as spiritual, penetrative, and tinging gold, which
has power to purify imperfect metals of all their dross, and to
change them into its own nature. Thus you see that none of
the Mercury should be destroyed, or violently dealt with ; all
you have to do is to add to it a mature body sprung from the
same root, and mix the two in their smallest parts, by means of
our cunning conjunction (which is performed, not by a manual, |
but by a purely natural process, of which the Artist does not
even understand the cause). We must distinguish, however,
between our transmutative conjunction, and a sort of conjunction
practised by sophists which is merely a fusing together of the
two substances, and leaves each exactly what it was before. In
our operation the spirit of gold infuses itself into the spirit .of
Mercury, and their union becomes as inseparable as that of
water mixed with water. The.:conjunction can take place only
by means of the Moon or an imperfect body and fire; and this
Moon is the sap of the water of life, which is hidden in Mercury,
and is stirred up by fire; it is a spirit which enters the body, and
compels it to retain its soul. We speak not of common Mercury
(which lacks the spirit and fire), but of our Mercurial water—though
common Mercury may be made like it by the addition of that
which it lacks. Our conjunction is the grand secret of our Art;
for earth is not inseparably united to water, but the union of
water. with water is indissoluble; hence our conjunction can
take place only after dissolution, which dissolution takes place
through the Moon and fire that are in the Mercury. For the
Moon penetrates and whitens, and the fire mortifies and frets,
while water combines both these properties, according to the
philosophical dictum: “The fire which I shew you, is water,”
= :

268 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

and, “Unless the bodies are subtilized by fire and water,
nothing can be done in our Magistery.”. Thus everything, from
beginning to end, is accomplished, not by sophistical operations,
but by our Mercury, which, unless it be violently impeded, is kept
to the right road by the necessity of arriving at a certain goal.
Some Alchemists. fail because they put (common) gold with
Mercury in a phial over the fire, and thus sow good seed in
barren earth. But gold is not the substance of our Stone in its
whole essence, nor yet Mercury. What we want for our
work of generation is the seed of. gold which is profoundly
hidden in our metal. This seed must be received into its own
proper womb, and there mingle with the female seed, in order
that, being kindly fostered with heat, and fed with its proper
aliment, it may become that part of gold which is of abundant
use in our work. It is not the whole of a man that generates the
‘infant, but only his seed, which is rightly disposed in the proper
womb ; and so only the seed of gold (and not the whole metal)
is useful for our metallic generation. Gold is the Father of our
Stone, the substance of our Stone is in gold, but gold is not the
substance of our Stone; yet there is that in gold (the sperm)
which, by right manipulation, may become our Stone. We
extract from gold, by a cunning process, that which is its most
highly matured virtue, and this is called, not common, dead, but
our living gold. The difference between common gold and our
gold, is that which exists between a Father and his seed ;
common gold is dead and useless, as far as our-work is
concerned, until it emits its living seed. Take the body of gold,
then, and gently extract from it its seed, and you will have the
living male seed of our Stone, which we now no longer call gold,
but ore, magnesia, lead, etc.—because it is no longer a body, like
gold, but a chaos, or spirit, which cannot revert to its corporeal
form. Aristotle says: “The first thing you should do is to
sublime the Mercury, then you should put a pure body into the
pure Mercury.” The sublimation of the Mercury which is here
referred to, is not an artificial, but a true and natural one. It is
the “first preparation of- the thin substance,” by which the
eclipse caused by the interposition of Earth is removed from the
Moon, enabling her to receive the light of the Sun—which
happens when the murky sphere of Saturn (that overshadowed |

TREATISES OF PHILALETHES. 269

the whole horizon) is removed, and Jupiter ascends the throne ;
then there rises upward a mist of dazzling whiteness, whence
there is distilled upon the earth a pure, sweet, and fragrant dew,
that softens it and stirs up great winds at its centre ; these winds
bear our Stone upward, where it is endowed with heavenly
virtue, and thence descending once more to its nurse, the earth,
is clothed upon with a corporeal nature, and thus receives the
strength both of things above and of things below. This living
gold is “that which zs, but does not appear till it pleases the
Artist, and in the knewledge of which is the secret of all
perfection.” Mercury is our field, in which the Sun rises and
sets ; let the two be inseparably united on the bed of love, till
from this (regenerate) Mercury there comes: forth a quickening
virtue, which is able to raise the dead. Then there will appear
the royal child, whose father is the Sun, whose mother is the
Moon. . . Besides these things, we need, of course, a furnace
of clay, a vessel of glass, and a triple fire; but we do not call
these three our vessel, our fire, or our furnace, because ordinary
sophists employ . these things as well as the Sages ; when we
speak of our’ vessel, our furnace, and our fire, the terms are to be
interpreted in accordance with the explanation which we gave
above. Of this fire a Sage might well say: “Behold, the fire,
which I will shew you, is water”; and again, “ The vessel of the
Sages is their water,” Another Sage says, that all our operations
take place in our humid fire, in our secret furnace, and our
hidden vessel, and thereby clearly shews that there must be a
fire, vessel, and furnace, other than those which ignorant
Alchemists possess in greater perfection and abundance than we.
Our appliances are part of. our substance, and are described by
Sendivogius, for instance, as the “vessel of Nature,” and the
“fire of Nature.” This practice is followed by Flamellus,
Artephius, Lullius, and all other Sages ; and I tell you that these
three appliances are, after all, only one; for the nature of our
‘ substance is one. Our fire is that which dissolves and heats
bodies more effectually than ordinary fire ; hence it is called
ardent wine and a most strong fire, and the Sages bid us burn
our ore with our most strong fire—words which are falsely
_interpreted of an ordinary coal fire. Of this fire John Mehungus
writes: “ No artificial fire can infuse so high a degree of heat as
that which comes from heaven,”

JOHN FREDERICK
HELVETIUS’

GOLDEN CALF,

WHICH THE WORLD WORSHIPS AND ADORES:

IN WHICH IS DISCUSSED
THE MOST RARE MIRACLE OF - NATURE
IN THE TRANSMUTATION OF METALS,
VIZ:
HOW AT THE HAGUE A MASS OF LEAD WAS IN

A MOMENT OF TIME CHANGED INTO GOLD

BY THE INFUSION OF A SMALL ,
PARTICLE OF OUR STONE.

Jor, xxvii., 5 :—‘ Great things doeth God which we cannot comprehend.”

Sengca, Epist. 77:—‘‘ We moust learn, in our pursuit of wisdom, to listen with
equanimity to the reproaches of the foolish, and to despise contempt itself.”

TO THE
MOST HONOURABLE AND EXCELLENT

DR. THEODORE KETIJES,

A great physician, and traveller in Turkey and other
foreign lands, now in practice at Amsterdam,
and my intimate friend ;

AND TO.THE
MOST HONOURABLE AND PROFOUNDLY LEARNED
DR. JOHN CASPAR FAUSIUS,

Councillor and Court Physician to the Count
Palatine of Heidelberg ;

AND

DR. CHRISTIAN MENTZELIUS,
Councillor and Court Physician to the Elector of Brandenburg,

MY HONOURED PATRONS, AND

BELOVED FRIENDS.

Vou. II, 5.

DEDICATORY EPISTLE

TO THE ABOVE-NAMED NOBLE AND HONOURABLE
: FRIENDS AND MASTERS.

ete

I neither can nor will withhold from my honoured and
beloved friends the knowledge of this Spagyric Art, and of the
most precious and miraculous Arcanum, which I have not only
seen with my own eyes, but also executed with my own hands,
by changing a mass of lead into solid gold, persistently resisting
any test of fire, through the addition of a small particle of our
transmutatory powder. It can no longer be pretended that our
Art does not possess the power which it claims, or that the
Mercury of the Sages is not the great and glorious fountain of
all natural marvels. This wonderful secret has, through the
grace of God, been revealed to me, and as it is unworthy of man,
created in the image of God, to maintain silence in regard to
God’s miraculous works, like the brute beasts, I have determined
to unveil this grand Arcanum to you, my beloved friends ; and I
will now gird myself to tell you all that I know and have heard
of the sayings and doings of the Great Artist Elias. It was not,
indeed, he who revealed to me the grand secret ; yet his conver-
sation was so instructive that I cannot refrain from reporting it
to you word for word. It is my earnest wish, honoured friends
and masters, that this Book may meet witha kindly reception at
your hands, and that you may derive from it both enjoyment
and profit. With this hope, I remain,

_ Your humble Servant,
JOHN FREDERICK HELVETIUS

CHAPTER I.

EFORE I begin to write about the philosophical Pygmy
vanquishing the Giants, my honoured friends and
masters, you must permit me to transcribe a passage
from the works of Helmontius (Arbor Vite, folio 630):

“TI cannot but believe that there is such a thing as a gold and
silver making Stone. At the same time, I cannot shut my eyes
to the fact that hundreds of painstaking Alchemists are daily
being led astray by impostors or ignorant professors of the
Spagyric Art.” For this reason I shall not be astonished if—
immediately upon perusing my book—multitudes of these
deluded victims start up, and contradict the assertion which
I have made in regard to the truth of this Art. One of these
gentry denounces Alchemy as a work of the Devil; another
describes it as sheer nonsense and humbug; a third admits the
possibility of transmuting metals into gold, but maintains that
the whole process costs more money than it is worth. But I do
not wonder at these opinions. It is a hackneyed saying of
human nature that we gape at those things whose purpose we do
not understand, but we investigate things pleasurable to know.
. The Sages should therefore remember the words of Seneca (De
Moribus): “You are not yet blessed, if the multitude does not
laugh at you.” But I do not care whether they believe or con-
tradict my teaching about the transmutation of metals ; I rest
calmly satisfied in the knowledge that I have seen it with my
own eyes, and performed it with my own hands, Even in our
degenerate age these wonders’ are still possible ; even now the
Medicine is prepared which is worth twenty tons of gold, nay,
more, for it has virtue to bestow that which all the gold of the
world cannot buy, véz., health. Blessed is that physician who
knows our soothing medicinal Potion of Mercury, the great
panacea of death and disease. But God does not reveal this
S2

276 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

glorious knowledge to all men indiscriminately ; and some men
are so obtuse (with a judicial blindness) that they wonder at the
activity of the simplest forces of Nature, as, for instance, the
attractive power which the magnet exercises upon the steel.
But (whether they believe it or not) there is a corresponding
magnetic force in gold which attracts Mercury, in silver which
attracts copper, and so with all other metals, minerals, stones,
herbs, plants, etc. . . . We must not be surprised at this
persistent opposition to truth: the light of the sun pains the
eyes of owls. j

As a matter of fact, we human beings take too much upon
ourselves in hastily and dogmatically judging of things which
we do not understand. We deny the influence of the stars upon
earthly things, and by that denial only exhibit our ignorance.
And what do we know of the secret forces which slumber in
plants. You may know nothing of the glory of the Angels, the
brightness of the heavens, the transparency of the air, the
limpidity of the water, the variety of colours in flowers, the
hardness of stones and metals, the proportionate beauty of men
and animals, the image of God in regenerate souls, the faith of
believers, the rationality of the mind, &c.—for we may be blind
and without feeling or understanding—and yet the beauty of all
these things is not in the least affected by our ignorance.

If we bear these considerations in mind, they ought to stop
our mouths when we feel tempted to deny the possibility of such
wonderful transmutatory virtue being inherent in our Stone.
Still, it must not be supposed that I wish to force this knowledge
upon any oné. God has reserved it for the worthy, and I know
that it can never become known to the wicked, the irreligious,
or the scornful. All I propose to do is to lay before the reader,
for his diligent consideration, those conversations which have
passed between the Artist. Elias and myself, in regard to the
nature of this Stone, the splendour of whitch (being more glorious
than the dawn, more brilliant than a carbuncle, more bright
than the sun or gold) has not yet faded from my mind. The
contempt of the scornful, and the ignorance of the foolish I
despise. Their ephemeral babble will soon be swept away by
the river of forgetfulness; but our triumphant Art, which is
established upon a foundation of adamant, upon the foundation

~

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 277

of God’s own truth, will abide unshaken throughout all ages.
For adepts according to ancient experience have given their
word that this natural mystery is only to be found with JEHOVA
Saturninely placed in_the ,centre of the world. But'those we
call blessed, who can purge the Queen of the Sages of her
impurity, who can circulate the Catholic Virgin Earth by means
of our crystalline Physico-magical Art, and who have beheld
the King, with his crown on his head, and his strength of inward
fire, come forth from the chamber of his crystal grave, his
bodily semblance glorified with all the most beautiful hues
that the world affords, like a shining carbuncle, or like a
transparent, compact, and diaphanous crystal—like a salamander
that has spued forth all water, and washes away the leprosy of
base metals with fire. Moreover, they shall behold the abyss of
the Spagyric Art, where in the mineral kingdom, the same so royal
art has, to a certain extent, for many years (in, as it were, the
safest retreat of all) lain concealed. The Sages have seen the
river in which AEneas was cleansed of his mortality—the river of
Pactolus in Lydia which was changed into gold by King Midas
bathing in it—the bath of Diana—the spring of Narcissus—the
blood of Adonis trickling upon the snowy breast of Venus,
whence was produced the anemone—the blood of Ajax, from
which sprang the beautiful hyacinth flower—the blood of the
Giants killed by Jupiter’s thunderbolt—the tears which Althea
shed when she doffed her golden robes—the magic water of
Medea, out of which grass and flowers sprang forth—the Potion
which Medea prepared from various herbs for the rejuvenescence
of old Jason—the Medicine of Aesculapius—the magic juice, by
the aid of which Jason obtained the Golden Fleece—the garden
of the Hesperides, where the trees bear golden apples in rich
abundance—Atalanta turned aside from the race by the three
golden apples—Romulus transformed by Jupiter into a god—
the transfiguration of the soul of Julius Cesar into a Comet—
Juno’s serpent, Pytho, born of decomposed earth after Deucalion’s
flood—the fire at which Medea lit her seven torches—the Moon
kindled by Phaéthon’s conflagration—Arcadia, in which Jupiter
was wont to walk abroad—the habitation of Pluto in whose
vestibule lay the three-headed Cerberus—the Pile, on which
Hercules burnt those limbs which he had received from his

278 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

mother, with fire, till only the fixed and incombustible
elements derived from his father were left,and he became a god—
and the rustic cottage whose roof was made of pure gold.
Blessed, yea, thrice blessed, is the man to whom Jehovah has
revealed the method of preparing that Divine Salt by which the.
metallic or mineral body is corrupted, destroyed, and mortified,
while its soul in the meantime is revived for the glorious ressur-
rection of the philosophical body—blessed, I say, is he to whom
the knowledge of our Art is vouchsafed in answer to prayer
throughout all his work for the Holy Spirit! For it should be
remembered that this is the only way in which our Art of Arts
is vouchsafed to man, and if you would attain it, the service of
God ought to be your chief business. By committing themselves
to this sacred and practical path of piety, and to theosophical
colloquies alone with Jehovah, all true students of this Art will,
in due course of time, behold the sight which will gladden their
hearts. Blessed, also, is he to whom some adept graciously flings
wide the gates of knowledge, and to whom the golden road of the
King is thus manifested! . . I am afraid that the Preface
will not please all my readers ; nevertheless, ] have a good hope
that it will cheer and hearten the better part of them. Drink, my
friends, from the fountain of truth, which wells forth in the |
Dialogue that I shall hereafter set down, and slake therewith the
thirst of your souls, for my words shall be sweeter to you than
nectar or ambrosia. For I bear in mind the saying of Julius:
Cesar Scaliger that “the end of wisdom is its communication,”
and the teaching of Gregory of Nyssenus, who affirms “that the
good delight to impart their knowledge to others, because it is
the greatest joy to them to be useful.”

CHAPTER II.

The truth of this Art is maintained by many illustrious
writers, of whom the following are the most distinguished
representatives of their class:

Paracelsus (Rev, Natur. ix., fol. 358) has the following
words: “The true sign by which the Tincture of the Physicists
is known, is its power of transmuting all imperfect metals into
silver (if it be white) or gold (if it be red), if but a.small particle

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 279

of it be ‘injected into.a mass of such metals liquefied in a

crucible.” ee

“Again: “The invincible Star of the Metals vanquishes all

things, and changes them into a nature similar to its own. This
.\gold and silver are better than those found in mines for the pre-
ear of arcane medicines from it.”

Again: “I say that any Alchemist, who has the Star of
Gold, can change all metals into that precious substance.”

Again: «Our Tincture of Gold contains stars, is a substance

' of the greatest fixity, is unchangeable in multiplication, is a red
powder (with almost a_saffron tinge), liquid like resin, trans-
parent like crystal, fragile like glass, is of a rubinate colour, and
of great specific gravity.”

“Again, in Paracelsus’ book called “ The Heaven .of the
Sages,” and in his seventh book on the “Transmutation of
Natural Things,”’ he bears witness to the same fact: “ Trans-
mutation is a great natural mystery, which is by no, means—as
fools suppose—contrary to the course of Nature, or the law of
God. Without this Philosopher’s Stone, the imperfect metals
can be transmuted neither into gold nor silver.”

Paracelsus, in his Manual concerning the Medicinal Philo-
sopher’s Stone, says: “Our Stone is the heavenly and super-
perfect Medicine, because it washes away all the impurities of

* metals.”

Henry Khunrath, in his “Amphitheatre of Eternal Wisdom ”
(fol. 147), has the following words: “1 have visited many lands,
and had speech of many learned men. I have seen the Green
Catholic Lion, and the Blood_of the Lion, ze, the Gold of the
Sages, with my own eyes, have touched it with my hands, tasted °
it with my tongue, smelt it with my nose. By its means I have
cured many whose. life was despaired of.”

, Again (fol. 202): “That which I describe is not a myth:,
you shall handle it with your hands, see it with your eyes,—that
Azoth, or Catholic_Mercury of the Sages, which, together with
inward ‘and outward fire, in sympathic harmony, through an
unavoidable necessity, physico- magically united, is alone sufficient
for the preparation of our Stone.”

Again: “ You shall see the Philosopher’s Stone, our King and
Lord of Lords, go forth from the chamber of its crystal tomb into

280 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

this world, with its glorified body, regenerate and transcendently
perfect, a brilliant carbuncle, whose most subtle and fully purified
parts, being harmoniously mixed, are bound inseparably into
one, altogether smooth, translucid as crystal, compact and
exceedingly weighty. It is easily fused in fire,as résifi, and after
the flight of artificial quicksilver, just as wax. Without smoke
it enters and penetrates solid bodies as oil enters paper. It is
soluble in any liquid, melting and commingling with the same,
fragile as glass, ina powder saffron-coloured, but_in a solid mass,
red like, the ruby. Its purple colotr"is the mark of perfect
fixation and fixed perfection, for it remains fixed and incom-
bustible, even when exposed to fire, corrosive waters, or burning
sulphur, since it is, like the salamander, incapable of being
consumed by fire.”

Again: “When the White Tincture is added to metals as a

ferment, it transmutes them into purest silver; when the Red
Tincture is mixed with pure gold, it is, within three days, multi-
plied by the quantity of the gold.”
“ _Helmontius (“ On Life Eternal,” page 590) has the following
words :—“I have seen the Stone, and touched it with my own
hands. . . . . One-fourth ofa grain of this powder, wrapped
up in.paper, I have cast upon eight ounces of boiling quicksilver
in a crucible, and immediately the whole mixture was congealed
into a mass like yellow wax ; when the fusion was completed,
the crucible contained eight ounces of purest gold (less eleven
grains). So one‘grain of our powder had transmuted into purest
gold 19,186 times its own weight of quicksilver,—-and this
process can be repeated indefinitely. The powder cleanses the
metal from all impurity, and protects it from rust, decay, and
fire, etc. ‘

‘Again, the same Helmontius says, in his “Tree of Life”
(page 630) :+—“! am compelled to believe that there is a Stone
which produces gold and silver; for I have several times, with
my own hands, projected one grain of powder upon one thousand
grains of boiling quicksilver, which was thereby, in the presence
of a great multitude of spectators, immediately transformed into |
precious gold. He who first gave me some of this transmutatory
powder, had of it .at least as much as would have sufficed for the
production of 200,000 pounds of gold. He gave me about

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 281

¥% grain of the powder, with which I transmuted 934 ounces of
quicksilver.

Moréover, the most honourable and profoundly learned
Dr, Theodore Ketjes, an eminent physician resident at Amster-
dam, gave me a medal on which were the following inscriptions:

Numm«mu craffities

On the obverse of the medal there appeared the following
words :

AS THIS ART IS RARE AMONG MEN,
SO IT IS RARELY EXHIBITED :
PRAISED BE GOD FOR EVER WHO
HAS COMMUNICATED PART OF
HIS INFINITE POWER TO US HIS MOST |
ABJECT CREATURES.

282 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

It is also sajd that, in 1660, Alexander (a Scotch adept)
effected a change of imperfect metals into gold, at Cologne, and
at Hanover, etc.

There are also other instances on record of such transmuta-
tions having taken place.

The following is a genuine extract from a letter written by
Dr. Kuffler :-—

“First I found in my own laboratory, aquafortis, next in
that of Charles de Roy, 1 poured it over calx of gold prepared
in the ordinary way, and after the third cohobation, it sublimated
with itself the tincture of gold in the neck of the retort, which
I mingled with silver precipitated jn the ordinary way, and I
beheld that it had transmuted one ounce of sublimated tincture
of gold in the crucible with the usual flux, and two ounces of
precipitated silver, into an ounce-and-a-half of the best gold,
while the third portion remained silver. The gold was white and
- fixed, but the remaining two parts were the best silver, fixed
under the test of any fire. This is my experience, and I need
not say that it has made me a most enthusiastic believer in
Alchemy.” |

I, Helvetius, have seen this gold, without the tincture, white.

Another proof of the genuineness of this Art was given at
the Hague, in the year 1664, when a silversmith, of the name of
Gril, in the presence of many witnessess, transformed one pound
of lead, partly into gold, and partly into. silver. Gril had
obtained the Tincture from a certain weaver of the name of
John Caspar Knéttner, with the injunction to use it for metals
only, . Gril placed it with some lead in a glass cake dish, and
after about a fortnight the above change was found to have
taken place. I can testify to the genuineness of this case, as Gril
was personally known to me, and I saw the transmuted lead,
which exhibited on its surface a most beautiful silver crystal, in
the form of a star, as though prepared by most ingenious artifice
with a circle. The pity was that Gril, being obstinate and crafty,
would not let Knéttner know whether it was his “ Spirit of Salt”
that had effected the change ; and some time afterwards, when
Gril’s obstinacy had at length been overcome, Knottner had
a Seas which of his many chemical preparations he had given
to him, and, before he was able to find ‘out, he and his family

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 283

were swept away by the plague, while Gril fell into the water

and was drowned. Afterwards, not one of the many goldseekers*
was able to discover the secret which died with them. Never-

theless, it is a matter of never ceasing admiration that the
Philosopher’s Stone should have the power of transmuting, in so
short a time, the dull and heavy nature of lead into the bright and
brilliant nature of silver and gold ; of this natural law, however,
we have an illustration in the fact that steel, by contact with the
magnet, acquires its magnetic power.

CHAPTER III.

Since promises are all the more acceptable, the more quickly
they are fulfilled, I will now, without any further delay, address
myself to the task which I have set myself to accomplish.

On the 27 December, 1666, in the forenoon, there came to
my house a certain man, who was a complete stranger to me, but
of an honest, grave countenance, and an authoritative mien,
clothed in a simple garb like that of a Memnonite. He was of
middle height, his face was long and slightly pock-marked, his
hair was black and straight, his chin close shaven, his age about
43 or 44, and his native province, as far as I could make out,
North Holland.

After we had exchanged salutations, he asked me whether
he might have some conversation with me. He ‘wished
to say something to me about the Pyrotechnic Art, as he had
read one of my Tracts (directed against the Sympathetic
Powder of Dr. Digby), in which [ hinted a suspicion whether
the Grand Arcanum of the Sages was-not after all a gigantic
hoax. He, therefore, took that opportunity of asking me
whether I could not believe that such a grand mystery might
exist in the nature of things, by means of which a physician
could restore any patient whose vitals were not irreparably
destroyed. I answered: “Such a Medicine would be a most
desirable acquisition for any physician; nor can any man tell
how many secrets there may be hidden in Nature; yet, though
I have read much about the truth of this Art, it has never been
my good fortune to meet with a real Master of the Alchemical
Science.” I also enquired whether he was a medical man, since

284 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

he spoke so learnedly about the Universal Medicine. In reply,
he modestly disclaimed my insinuation, and described himself as
a brassfounder, who had always taken a great interest in the
extraction of medicinal potions from metals by means of fire.
After some further conversation, the Artist Elias (for it was he)
thus addressed me: “Since you have read so much in the works
of the Alchemists about this Stone, its substance, its colour, and
its wonderful effects, may I be allowed the question, whether you
have not yourself prepared it?” On my answering his question
in the negative, he took out of his bag a ‘cunningly-worked i ivory
box, in which there were three large pieces of a substance
resembling glass, or pale_sulphtr, and informed me that here
was enough of the Tincture for the production of 20. tons of
gold. When I had held the precious treasure in my hand for a
quarter of an hour (during which time I listened to a recital of
its wonderful curative properties), I was compelled to restore it
to its owner, which I could not help doing with a certain degree
of reluctance. After thanking him for his kindness in shewing
it to me, I then asked how it was that his Stone did not display
that ruby colour which I had been taught to regard as character-
istic of the Philosopher’s Stone. He replied that the colour
made no difference, and that the substance was sufficiently
mature for all practical purposes. My request that he would
give me a piece of his Stone (though it were no larger than a
coriander seed), he somewhat brusquely refused, adding, in a
milder tone, that he could not give it me for all the wealth I
possessed, and that not on account of its great preciousness, but
for some other reason which it was not lawful for him to divulge ;
nay, if fire could be destroyed in that way, he would immediately
throw it all into the fire. Then, after a moment’s consideration,
he enquired whether I could not shew him into a room at the back
of the house, where we should be less liable to the observation of
- passers-by. On my conducting him into.the state parlour
(which he entered without wiping his dirty boots), he demanded
of me a gold coin, and while | was looking for it, he produced
from his breast pocket a green silk handkerchief, in which were
folded up five medals, the gold of which was infinitely superior
‘to that of my gold piece, On the medals appeared the following
inscriptions :—

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 285

Jehovah’s
wonderful and miraculous
Wisdom
in the Catholic Book of

Nature.

Holy, Holy, Holy
is the Lord our God;

Nn

the universe is full of
His Glory.

I was made the
26 August, 1666.

Lion. Ralance.

© 8 )

‘God, Nature, and

the Spagyric Art

make nothing

in vain.

To the Eternal,

Invisible, Triune, Thrice

Holy, Sacred Spirit !
Halleluia, Halleluia.
Avaunt, Satan.
Speak not of God

without Light.
- Amen

Holy, and only wise God,
the Governor and

Preserver,

be praise now and

ever.

I was filled with admiration, and asked my visitor whence
he had obtained that wonderful knowledge of the whole world ?
He replied that it was a gift freely bestowed on him by a friend
who had stayed a few days at his house, who had also taught
him to change common flints and crystals into stones more

: precious than rubies, chrysoliths, and sapphires ; he also revealed
to me the preparation of crocus of iron (an infallible cure for
dysentery), of metallic liquid (an efficacious remedy for dropsy),
and of many other infallible Medicines, to which, however, I paid
no great heed, as I was impatiently anxious to have the chief

+

286 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

secret of all revealed to me. The Artist told me that his Master
had bidden him bring him a glass full of warm water, to which
he had added a little white powder, and in which one ounce of
silver had melted like ice in warm water. Of this draught he
emptied one-half, and gave the rest to me. Its taste resembled
that of fresh milk, and its effect was most exhilarating.”

I asked my visitor whether the potion was a preparation of
the Philosopher’s Stone? But he answered: “You should not
be so inquisitive.”

Then he told me that, at the bidding of the Artist, he had
taken down a piece of leaden water-pipe, and melted the lead in
a pot, whereupon the Artist had taken some sulphureous powder
out of a little box on the point of a knife, and cast it into the
melted lead, and that after exposing the compound for a short
time to a fierce fire, he had poured forth a great mass of molten
gold upon the brick floor of the kitchen.

“The Master bade mé take one-sixteenth of the gold for
myself as a keepsake, and to distribute the rest amongst the
poor; which I did by making over a large sum in trust to the
Church of Sparrendam. At length, before bidding me farewell,
my friend taught me this Divine Art.”

When my strange visitor had concluded his narrative, I
besought him to give me a proof of his assertion, by
performing the transmutatory operation on some metals in my
presence. He answered evasively, that he could not do so then, but
that he would return in three weeks, and that, if he was then at
liberty to do so, he would shew me something that would make
me open my eyes. He appeared punctually to the promised day,
and invited me to take a walk with him, in the course of which
we discourséd profoundly on the secrets of Nature in fire, though
I noticed that my companion was very chary in imparting
information about the Grand Arcanum ; he spoke very learnedly
and gravely concerning the holiness of the Art (just as if he
were a clergyman), and said that God had commanded the
initiated to make the secret known only to the deserving. At
last Lasked him pointblank to shew me the transmutation of
metals. I besought him to come and dine with me, and to spend
the night at my house; I entreated ; I expostulated ; but in
vain. He remained firm. I reminded him of his promise. He

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 287

retorted that his promise had been conditional upon his being
permitted to reveal the secret to me. At last, however, I
prevailed upon him to give me a piece of his precious Stone—
a piece no larger than .a.grain of rape seed. He delivered it to
me as if it weré the most princely donation in the world. Upon
my uttering a doubt whether it would be sufficient to tinge more
than four grains of lead, he eagerly demanded it back. I
complied, in the hope that he would exchange it for a larger
piece; instead of which he divided it in two with his thumb, threw
away one-half and gave me back theother, saying : “Even now it
is sufficient for you.” Then I was still more heavily disappointed,
as I could not believe that anything could be done with so small
a particle of the Medicine. He, however, bade me take two
drachms, or half an-ounce of lead, or even a little more, and to
mélt it-in the crucible ; for the Medicine would certainly not
‘tinge more of the base metal than it was sufficient for.
I answered that I could not believe that so small a quantity
of Tincture could transform so large a mass of lead.
But I had to be satisfied with what he had given me, and my chief
difficulty was about the application of the Tincture. I confessed
that when I held his ivory box in my hand, I had managed to
extract a few small crumbs of his Stone, but that they had changed
my lead, not into gold, but only into glass. He laughed, and
, said that I was more expert at theft than at the application of
the Tincture. “You should have protected your spoil with
‘ yellow, wax,’ then it would have been able to penetrate the lead
and to transmute it into gold. As it was, your. Medicine
evaporated, by a sympathetic process, in the metallic smoke.
For all metals, gold, silver, tin, and mercury, are corrupted by the
fumes of lead; and degenerated into glass.” I shewed him the
crucible, and there he discovered the yellow piece of Medicine still
adhering to it. He promised to return at nine o’clock the next
morning, and then he would shew me that my Medicine could well
be used for transmuting lead into gold. With this promise I had -
to declare myself satisfied. Still I asked him to favour me with
some information about the preparation of the Arcanum. He
would not tell me anything about the cost and the time ; “as to
its substance,” he continued, “it is prepared from two metals or
minerals ; the minerals are better because they contain a larger

288 ' THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

quantity of mature Sulphur. The solvent is a certain celestial
Salt, by means of which the Sages dissolve the earthy
metallic body, and this process elicits the precious Elixir of the
Sages. The work is performed from beginning to end in a
crucible over an open fire ; it is consummated in four days, and its
cost is only about three florins. Neither the Mineral from the
Egg nor the Solvent Salt are very expensive.” I replied that
his statement was contradicted by the sayings of the Sages, who
assign seven or nine months as the duration of the Work. His
only answer was that the sayings of the Sages were to be under-
stood in a philosophical sense, and no ignorant person could
apprehend their true meaning. I besought him that, as a
stranger had made known to him this precious mystery, so he
would extend to me the same kindness, and: give me at least
some information which would remove all the most formidable
obstacles, out of my path; for if one knew one thing, other
facts connected with it were more easily discovered. But the
, Artist replied: “It is not so in our Magistery ; if you do not
know the whole operation from beginning to end, you know noth-
ing at all. I have told you all; yet you do not know how the
crystal seal of Hermes is broken, and how the Sun colours it
with the marvellous splendour of its metallic rays, or in what
mirror the metals see with the eyes of Narcissus the possibility
of their transmutation, or from what rays adepts collect the fire
of perfect metallic fixation.” With these words, and a promise
to return at nine o’clock the next morning, he left me. But at
the stated hour on the following day he did not make his
appearance ; in his stead, however, there came, a few hours later,
a stranger, who told me that his friend the Artist was unavoidably
detained, but that he would cat! at three o’clock in the afternoon.
The afternoon came; I waited for him till half-past seven o’clock.
He did not appear. Thereupon my wife came and tempted me
to try the transmutation myself. I determined, however, to wait
till the morrow, and in the meantime, ordered my son to light
the fire, as I was now almost sure that he was an impostor. On
the morrow, however, I thought that I might at least make a
experiment with the piece of “ Tincture” which I had recewed ;
if it turned out a failure, in spite.of my following his directitiis-~
closely, I might then ‘be quite certain that my visitor had been’a

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 289

mere pretender to a knowledge of this Art. So I asked my
wife to put the Tincture in wax, and I myself, in the meantime,
prepared six drachms of lead; I then cast the Tincture,
enveloped as it was in wax, on the lead; as soon as it was
melted, there was a hissing sound and a slight effervescence, and
after a quarter of an hour I found that the whole mass of lead
had been turned into the finest gold. Before this transformation
took place, the compound became intensely green, but as soon
as [ had poured it into the melting pot it assumed a hue like
blood. When it cooled, it glittered and shone like gold. We
immediately took it to the goldsmith, who at once declared it to
be the finest gold he had ever seen, and offered to pay fifty florins
an ounce for it.

The rumour, of course, spread at once like wildfire through
the whole city; and in the afternoon, I had visits from many
illustrious students of this Art; I also received a call from the
Master of the Mint and some other gentlemen, who requested
me to place at their disposal a small piece of the gold, in order that
, they might subject it to-the usual tests. I consented, and we
betook ourselves to the house of a certain silversmith, named
Brechtil, who submitted a small piece of my gold to the test
called “the fourth”: three-or four parts of silver are melted in
the crucible with one part of gold, and then beaten out into
thin plates, upon which some strong aquafortis is poured. The
usual result of this experiment is that, the silver is dissolved,
while the gold sinks to the bottom in the shape of a black
powder, and after the aquafortis has been poured off, and
melted once more in the crucible, resumes its former shape. . . .
When we now performed this experiment, we thought at first
that one-half of the gold had evaporated; but afterwards we
found that this was not the case, but that, on the contrary, two
scruples of the silver had undergone.a change into gold. ;

Then we tried another test, vzz., that which is performed by
means of a septuple of Antimony ; at first it seemed as if eight
grains of the gold had been lost, but afterwards, not only had
two scruples of the silver been converted into gold, but the silver
itself was greatly improved both in quality and malleability.
Thrice I performed this infallible test, discovering that every
drachm of gold produced an increase of a scruple of gold, but the

You, I, ' T

290 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

silver is excellent and extremely flexible. Thus I have unfolded
to you the whole story from beginning to end. The gold I still
retain in my possession, but J cannot tell you what has become
of the Artist Elias. Before he left me, on that last day of our
friendly intercourse, he told me that he was on the point of
undertaking a journey to the Holy Land. May the Holy
Angels of God watch over him wherever he is, and long preserve
him as a source of blessing to Christendom! This is my earnest
prayer on his and our behalf.

CHAPTER IV.

I will now proceed to give.an account of the conversations
which passed between the Artist Elias and myself (the
Physician), on the occasion of his kindly visits to my house.
The reader is to imagine the Artist entering my room, and
introducing himself with the following words :

I salute you, Dr, Helvetius. I am one of the readers of the
Tract you wrote against Dr. Digby, and his Sympathetic Pills,
and I should like to have some conversation with you on this
and kindred subjects. I am a close student of Nature’s secrets,
and delight in the company of those who have a kindred aim.
And, certainly, I have found as the result even of my paltry
investigations, that no natural marvels are to be rashly
pronounced impossible.

PHYSICIAN.

Let me bid you a hearty welcome. Discourses on the
secrets of Nature are the great delight of my heart, as they are
of yours. Come with me, I pray you, into my study.

ARTIST ELIAS.

You do, indeed, possess a wonderfully well-equipped
laboratory, and-I make no doubt that, by its means, you have
sounded all the secret depths of Alchemy. But why do you
keep so many medicines? Do you not believe that there exists
in the nature of things one or more remedies, fully capable of
counteracting disease in all cases, where neither the heart, the

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 291

liver, nor the fungs, are entirely destroyed, or the vital juices
altogether consumed? .

PHYSICIAN.

From what you say I conclude that you are either one of
the profession, or else a Master ‘of the Chemical Art. I do
believe, as you say; that there exist in-Nature other more excel-
lent medicines than any that I possess. This view is both
natural and reasonable, and it is supported by the authority of
many celebrated writers. They tell us of a certain Universal
- Medicine, which, as they say, is known only to the elect, but it
enables its possessors to heal all diseases (even those otherwise
incurable), and to prolong their lives almost indefinitely. Yet is
anyone able to conduct us to this miraculous fountain, whence
this vitalizing water is drawn? I am afraid it is a hopeless
aspiration.

ARTIST ELIAS.

I am not, as you suppose, a physician, but only a brass-
founder. I have, however, from a very early age, taken an_all-
absorbing interest in the Art of Alchemy, and the secret qualities
of metals. And asa result of my investigations (humble as they
have been), I most decidedly incline to the belief that the dis-
covery of the Medicine you mention will, even in our degenerate
age, be vouchsafed to some earnest student, as a reward of
prayer and work.

PHYSICIAN.

It is true that God grants His gifts to those who love Him
ungrudgingly and without upbraiding. But I also find that in
former ages, as in our own, there have lived hosts of chemists
who have spent their lives, as the saying is, in scooping up water
with a sieve. Moreover, it seems quite impossible to gain from
the writings of the genuine Sages any intelligible information,
either as to the substance or the mode of preparation of this
Universal Philosopher’s Stone. . . . In the meantime, it is
the duty of a good physician to make the most of those appliances
for the cure of disease, which are actually within his reach, If
he refused to give any medicines until he had discovered the

292 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Universal Remedy, his patients would suffer through his folly and.
carelessness. Moreover, taking into consideration the great
variety of human constitutions, I really do not see how one Medi-
cine can possibly cure all diseases ; the effect of morbid matter
upon the glands. and vital juices of cifferent persons being
well known to be utterly different. If you give a certain
quantity of wine to Peter, it will make him quarrelsome, and
even furious ; its effect on Paul is to produce in him the mild-
ness and timidity of alamb; in Matthew it causes gaiety and
laughter ; while it makes Luke melancholy and tearful. In the
same way, the morbid matter known as scorbutic poison becomes,
in Peter’s case, an acid, consuming the whole of the vital juices
and organs, and breaking out on his‘hands and feet in the
shape of bluish, discoloured boils. The same poison in the body
of Paul is changed into a bitter aperient, which shews itself on
the arms and feet in the form of subcutaneous red spots, with
punctures like flea-bites, and, in times of plague, turns to anthrax.
In the body of Matthew the poisonous fluid is of a sweetish
taste, and produces on arms and legs watery tumours, like those
seen in dropsical subjects; in times of plague, they turn to
plague sores. In Luke’s case, the humour is saltish and acrid ;
the swellings on his arms and legs are dry and inflammatory ;
and when there is infectious matter in the air, the sores become
so red and malignant as to produce.madness and death. It
stands to reason, then, that these different symptoms require
different treatment, and that no one herb or medicine could pos-
sibly suffice for such different cases. The volatile bitter salt of
Cochlearia, which relieves Peter, makes Paul worse ; a fixed acid
salt only aggravates the symptoms of Luke, but it very often
_ suffices to produce a complete cure in the caseof Paul. In‘every
instance we require a remedy which is different from the morbid
matter already in the system, and therefore capable of counteract-
ing it. In the face of this need of specific remedies for every
particular form of disease, you must pardon a medical man if he
does not quite see the possibility of an Universal Medicine.

ARTIST ELIAS.

I admit the truth of all that you say, as far as the Vegetable
Kingdom is concerned, though very few physicians employ this

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 293

method of cure.- At the same time, I see no reason why there
should not be in the Mineral Kingdom an Universal Medicine
which combines all the virtues of the different. vegetable reme-
dies you have named. I acknowledge that this Gift of Grace
is bestowed only on a few persons; but the truth of the
Alchemistic Art is too strongly supported to admit of any
doubt

PHYSICIAN.

_I have by no means exhausted the list of objections which .
may with reason be urged against the existence of this Universal
Medicine. But how can the same remedy be equally suited to
the case of a man or & woman, a delicate and a robust person,
the initiatory or the final stage of a disease, a chronic or an acute
affection ?

‘ARTIST ELIas.

Your arguments against the Universal Medicine are very
learned and orthodox, and I am not disinclined to allow to
them some importance. At the same time, you will admit that
“many men many minds” is a saying of some weight, and those
who know anything by experjence, are the best qualified to speak
about it. The sweetest music does not delight all hearers ; the
_best story appears dull to some readers ; some like one kind of
food or wine and some another: and so there’ are as many
different verdicts about this Universal Medicine as there are
(self-constituted) judges. But only he who is acquainted with
its properties has a right to’deliver an authoritative opinion.
Now, it is quite true that in your common, tinkering Medicinal
Art, which seeks to counteract only the separate symptoms or
manifestations of disease, there is no room for an Universal
Mediciné. But the true physician knows that all disease (what-
ever shape it may assume) is simply a depression of the vital
spirits, and that whatever strengthens vitality, will cut off the
possibility of disease at the very source, expelling the humours
which each produce their own peculiar malady, and I maintain
that our Universal Mcdicine is a remedy of this radical kind. It
gently promotes and quickens the movement of the vital spirits,
and thus, by renewing the source of life, renovates and quickens

2904 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

the whole frame, infusing new vitality and strength into every
part. For this reason adepts call it the Great Mystery of
Nature, and the preyentive of old age and disease. By its aid
any man may live the full term of days naturally allotted to
him, and need have no fear of contagion, even when the plague,
\ or some other malignant epidemic, is striking down hundreds of
his neighbours.

PHYSICIAN.

If I take your meaning, this Remedy does not set itself
merely to correct depraved humours, but directly restores the
vital spirits themselves ; and it cannot prolong existence beyond
the span of life originally allotted to each man by the Creator,

| though it does prevent his being cut off prematurely by weak-
ness or disease. All this sounds very reasonable. But there is
another question I should like to ask. Does this Medicine
change a man’s temperament, so as to convert a phlegmatic
person into one of a sanguine character, or a melancholy person
into a gay and jovial boon companion ?

ARTIST ELIAS.

Certainly not. It is impossible for any medicine of any
kind to alter the nature of a man: just as wine does not produce
a change in a man, but only brings out his true character. The
effect of the Universal Medicine is of a corresponding kind. It
is like the warmth of the Sun, which does not change or even
modify the shapes, colours, and scents of the different flowers,
but only fully develops all that is in them by means of its
genial influence. . . . If our Universal Medicine possessed
the property of prolonging the life of man beyond the term
assigned to each individual by Divine foreknowledge, no doubt
Sages like Hermes Trismegistus, Paracelsus, Raymond Lullius,
Count Bernhard, and many other genuine possessors of this
Great Mystery, would be still with us in the land of the living.
It would be folly and madness to suppose that any medicine in
the whole world can do more than protect a man against being
cut off prematurely, z.¢., before his appointed time.

—

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. ° 295

PHYSICIAN.

All that you have said about the operation of this Blessed
Universal Medicine seems both reasonable and in harmony with
Nature’s general plan of working. The worst of it is that,
though I now fully believe in the existence of the Medicine, all
my efforts to find it have hitherto resembled the futile endeavours
of a mariner who, attempting to put out to sea in a frail boat, is
again and again driven back to the shore by the united force of
wind and wave. Though many illustrious persons have written
concerning the preparation, they have so cautiously veiled it, that
the smallest possible number might become acquainted with the
steps to be taken to arrive at their desire. The best thing’ one
can do, I think, is to stay in one’s laboratory, work and pray,
and wait for God’s blessing.

ARTIST ELIAS.

You reason well, my friend; yet you must not despair of
learning the secret of the Alchemists’ Art, especially if you can
induce some adept to become your teacher, But we will now
proceed to discuss the transmutatory virtues of our most precious
Stone, which are still more wonderful than its medicinal
properties.

PHYSICIAN.

Oh, I see! You wish to discuss the transmutation of metals.
In the possibility of such transmutation, I certainly do feel con-
strained to believe, considering that I have heard and read of
cases which admit of no manner of doubt, and in which such
transmutation is attested by the most authentic and trustworthy
witnesses (such as Dr. Kiffler, Helmont, Scotus, &c.), as having
really taken place. I am especially thinking of that wonderful
experiment of metallic transformation which was achieved at
Prague, in the presence of the German Emperor Ferdinand III,
when, by means of one grain of the Tincture, three pounds of
commemorated by a medal struck at the Imperial Mint. But
though I firmly believe in the possibility of such a transmutatory
Tincture, I have never in the whole course of my life come across
any one who possessed it.

296 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

ARTIST ELIAS.

You are quite right in what you say, albeit your belief or
unbelief could not make any difference to the truth of our Art,
just as a magnet would go on attracting steel, and rendering it
magnetic by such contact, even if you did not credit it. It is
also true that hitherto our secret has béen rather hidden than
revealed by those who have written about it in the obscurest of
language. But you can no longer feel disposed to doubt that
which you see with your own eyes; and here in this box you
behold a large quantity of the true substance of the Sages.
There! Examine it.

PHYSICIAN.

Is this yellow, sulphureous, glassy substance really and truly
the Philosopher’s Stone? Did you prepare it yourself? Surely
you are hoaxing me!

ARTIST ELIAS.

No, indeed; you now hold the most precious of mundane
treasures in your hand; and I myself prepared it from beginning
to end. If you can take me to a room where we shall be more.
secret, I will shew you some gold obtained through its means
(and having been ushered into the state parlour, he produced the
five medals described above). These {said he) I keep in
memory of my Master.

PHYSICIAN.

So you had a Master from whom you learned the glorious
secret ! How wonderful that I should at this moment be holding
the true substance in my hands! Can you not give me a small
piece of it, just enough to transmute four grains of lead into gold,
so that I may be able to test the truth of your statement? Do
give mea picce, at least as large as a grain of mustard seed, and
let me make the trial! It would be a great kindness.

ARTIST ELIAS.

I admit that a certain stranger once instructed me both as
to the possibility of this Art, and in its methods of procedure.

HELVETIUS’ GOLDEN CALF. 297

But I cannot give you even a small fragment of my Tincture,
though you offered me this room full of ducats ; not because the
substance is so precious in my eyes, but for another momentous
reason which | may not reveal. Indeed, if fire could consume
fire, I should at once throw the whole of this Tincture on the
hearth. I will, however, return to you after the lapse of three
weeks, and shew you some beautiful experiments which will both
surprise and delight ycu. If by that time I shall have obtained
leave to do so, I will also satisfy your curiosity by performing in
your presence a_ change of _lead into. gold. In the meantime, I
bid you good-bye, and warn you not to invest too much of your
substance in the pursuit of this Art, as it will all turn to ashes.

PHYSICIAN.

I am deeply obliged to you for your kindness in coming to
me, and shewing me this Stone ; but you can hardly expect me
to be satisfied with the mere sight of it. I am one of those
whose souls are always athirst for knowledge ; and I believe that
if our first parent Adam, who lost Paradise by touching the
forbidden fruit, were alive at the present day, he would once
more risk the happiness of his life in order to become possessed
of the “golden apples from the garden of Atlas.” I thank you
most heartily, however, for comforting me with the prospect of

“your return in three weeks. I will endeavour to spend the
interval in strict obedience to your wise and kindly counsel ; but
you may easily suppose that the feeling uppermost in my mind
will be one of eager hope and longing for the fulfilment of your
promise. I also thank you for the proof of your confidence
involved in making yourself known to me as an adept of this
Art. If the secret which you have entrusted to my safe keeping,
were, by any accident, to come to the ears of a tyrannical prince
or noble, would you be terrified by his threats into betraying it?

ARTIST ELIAS.

I have never made this secret known to anyone except to
yourself and one good old man. Nor must any human being
hear or see the like in future. But if any prince or king were to
cast me into prison, or put me to the rack, he would not be able

Vou Il, U

298 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

to extract a single syllable of direct or indirect information from
me by the most cruel tortures which he could ‘devise ; not even
death itself would make me shrink from the path of duty, or
become disloyal to my trust.

PHYSICIAN.

Are there any Alchemistic writers that. are more easily
understood than the rest, or who can at least be warranted to
possess a real knowledge of those things wherein they undertake
to instruct others ?

ARTIST.

I do not read many of these books ; but of all the writers on
Alchemy whose works I have studied, I have found Sendivogius,
the Cosmopolitan, to be. the most_trustworthy ; also Basilius, in
his twelve Keys. Truth has chosen the obscure style of Sendi-
_ vogius for her hiding-place, if. you could only discover her—just

as our Substance is really and truly hidden and concealed in the
outward bodies of all metals and minerals.

-: PHYSICIAN.

Accept once more my warmest thanks for all your kindness
and friendly counsel. I do indeed believe that, as you say, the
essences of metals are hidden in their outward bodies, as the
kernel is hidden in the nut. Every earthly body, whether
animal, vegetable, or mineral, is the habitation and terrestrial
abode of that celestial spirit, or influence, which is its principle of
life and growth. The secret of Alchemy is the destruction of
the body, which enables the Artist to get at, and utilize for his
own purposes, the living soul. But what man is sufficient to
search out this wonderful secret ?

ARTIST ELIAS.

You have spoken truly, and judged rightly concerning the
natural destruction of things ; and if you find grace in the sight
of God, He will commission either me or some other adept of
our Art to unfold to you the right way of destroying the out-
ward bodies of metals and seizing the inward, vital, life-giving

HELVETIUS GOLDEN CALF. 299

soul. This gracious gift, I say, God may bestow on you sooner
than you think, in answer to devout and earnest prayer.. Once
more, farewell, and rest assured’ that I will always remain your
friend. I cherish a fond hope that I shall soon see you again, in
a flourishing state of health.

With these words he departed ; and I have already told
you how after three weeks he came back and gave me a small
piece of the transmutatory Tincture. But since oyr second
parting I have neither set eyes on him, nor heard either of him
or from him.

He has, however, left ween seated in my heart the
conviction that through metals and out, of metals purified by
highly refined and spiritualized metals there may be prepared
the living gold and quicksilver of the Sages, which bring both
metals and human bodies to perfection. If my friend had
condescended to give me one or two practical hints as to the
best method of proceeding in this Magistery, I might have
discovered the grand secret of collecting the rays of the Sun and
Moon in their own proper womb, whereby their power of
metallic transmutation by magnetic sympathy might have been
brought out. Thus I might have obtained the red seed which
transmutes into gold, and the white seed which transmutes into
silver. For the Artist Elias told me that the Chalybs of
Sendivogius was that true_Mercurial metallic humour which—
without the aid of any corrosive—would sufficé to separate the
fixed rays of the Sun and Moon from their body, and to render .
them volatile and Mercurial for the dry philosophical Tincture
which he shewed me, and the efficacy of which I subsequently

. experienced. This is the same method by which metals are still
,; being produced day by day in the bowels of the earth, and
stones developed, in their different saline wombs, out of the
spiritual tingent sulphureous seed. . . . . Metallic sulphur
mixed with saltpetre, may be converted, by gentle heat,
first into solid. earth, then into air, then into limpid water, and
then into glass_of a most beautiful colour, and ofa penctra-
tiveness superiot to that of fire—just as the chicken is developed
out of the apparently lifeless egg by gentle heat. Between the
different metals there exists a sympathy such as that between
the magnet and steel, gold and quicksilver, silver and copper ;
U2

300 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

and this sympathy is the rationale of the transmutation of metals.
On the other hand, there are also metallic antipathies, such as
that of lead to tin, of iron to gold, of lead to mercury—anti-
pathies which have theii’ counterpart in thé animal and vegetable
worlds. An accurate and comprehensive knowledge of these
sympathies and antipathies is the one great qualification of every
man who aspires to be a Master of this Art.

In making known to you all that I have seen and experi-
enced, [ am only following the maxim of Seneca, who said that
he desired knowledge chiefly that he might impart it to others.
If anyone doubts the truth of my statements, let him but live a
pious and Christ-like life here below, and he will learn the truth
of all things in the new Jerusalem above. That a share of this
glory may be vouchsafed to you and him, is the prayer of

Your faithful and loving servant,
JOHN FREDERICK HELVETIUS, M.D.

THE

ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER,

OR
A FOURFOLD FIGURE,
EXHIBITING ANALYTICALLY TO ALL THAT ENTER THIS

MUSEUM THE MOSAICO-HERMETIC SCIENCE OF

THINGS ABOVE AND THINGS BELOW.

T Fano

. TE TT

SAA
a

7”

Tl aNQo

.

‘AL HANSA

THE ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER.
A KEY TO THE FOURFOLD FIGURE,

FIGURE I.

BONUM INFINITUM VEL LUMEN GRATIZ =
The Infinite Good or the Light of Grace. TRIUNITAS = Trinity
in Unity. man7 = Jehovah. PATER, FILIUS, ET SPIRITUS
SANCTUS = Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. MUNDUS ARCHE-
TYPUS = The Archetypal World. SERAPHIM, CHERUBIM,
THRONI = Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones, ze. AHierarchia,
Classis Prima = First Class of the Hierarchy. DOMINATIONES,
PRINCIPATUS, POTESTATES = Rulers, Principalities, and Powers,
ze. Hierarchie Classis Secunda = Second Class of the Hierarchy.
VIRTUTES, ARCHANGELI, ANGELI = Virtues, Archangels,
Angels, 2.2, Hierarchie Classis Tertia = Third Class of the
Hierarchy. MUNbDus INTELLIGENTIARUM = The World of
Rational Beings.

HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, LORD GOD OF HOSTS;
ALL THE EARTH IS FULL OF HIS GLORY.

MARCELLIUS PALINGENIUS (in Zod. Vit., Book ix.):
Great Father of Gods, Highest Power of the World, than
whom Thought knows nothing greater; far from the bodily
world, yet forming all Bodies, those which cannot change,

312 THE ‘HERMETIC MUSEUM.

and thase which‘are destroyed by the lapse of time; Beginning
without a beginning ; Fountain from which all manner of good
things flow forth; Ruler and Multiplier of Nature; Who com-
prehendest All Things, yet art comprehended of none ; “Infinite
Majesty, Goodness, Wisdom, Life, Order, Beauty, Perfection,
Mind, Truth-Light, Way, Strength ; dwelling nowhere, and
yet dwelling everywhere ; immovable, yet constantly moving
all things: Of whom, To whom, ang Through whom.are all
things ; always remaining the same, unchangeable through all
_time; Greatest of Causes, who, revolving according to a fixed
jaw the starry heavens, dost govern the circle of human Destiny ;
King of: Kings, waited on and worshipped by thousands of
Angelic Hosts singing joyous Hymns in the Infinite Domain
of Light, beyond the uttermost borders of the [flower] World,
where is the fit abode of true Archetypal Things ; Thee I worship,
to Thee I pray, Thee I reverently adore. Deign to look on me
‘ with gracious eye, and hear my voice when I cry to Thee.
Send to me the rays of Thy Light, dispel the darkness of my
.soul, weighed down by the grossness of a mortal body. Grant
me to find the Right Way, lest hurtful error, vain credulity,
and blind opinion drag me headlong to the ruinous domain of
falsehood. For if without Thee a mortal mind or human
strength strive to rise upward, their waxen wings are melted,
and they fall headlong, like Icarus of old. Without Thee, I
cannot see the hidden depths of Divine Truth, or the art and
skill by which salvation is attained. Grant unto me, therefore,
most gracious King of Kings, that I may know Thee and
please Thee ; then that I may know myself, what I am, the
reason of my life on earth, whence I came, and whither I am
going, what is my duty in this life, and what I must eschew—so
that when Lachesis has finished the thread of my life, and the
last hour has cast my weary body into the Tomb, Death may be
unto me a grateful rest, and the haven of peace,

.

THE ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER. 313

FIGURE. II
MUNDUS ELEMENTARIS = Elementary World.

. The First Circle contains the Zodiacal Symbols:

SECOND CIRCLE.

Capricornus tenet Genua = Capricorn holds the knees.,
Aquarius habet Tibias = "Aquarius rules the thighs>
Pisces gubernant Pedes = The Fishes govern the feet.
Aries tenet in Microcosmo Caput = Aries. holds the head of the
microcosm, '
’ Taurus tenet Collum et Guttur = Taurus holds the neck and the
throat.
Gemini tenent Scapulas et Manus = Gemini hold the shoulders
and the hands.
Cancer regit Pectus et Pulimonum = Cancer rules the’ prease and
the lungs.
Leo imperat Stomacho = The Lion governs the stomach.
Virgo tenet Hepar, Lntestina, et circa Ventrem = The Virgin holds
the liver, the intestines, and the parts about the stomach.
Libra continet Renes et Vesicam = The Balance contains the
reins and the bladder.

Scorpio gubernat Nature Secreta = The Scorpion governs the
secret parts of Nature.

Sagittarius regit Coxas = Sagittarius governs the thighs,

THIRD CIRCLE.

JANUARIUS, FEBRUARIUS, Melancholia = January, February,
Melancholy.
Martius, Ver = March—Spring.
APRILIS, Pituita = April—Phlegm.
Mayus =May. Junius, 4stas = June—Summer.
Jutius, Bilis = July—Bile.
AUGUSTUS = August. SEPTEMBER, Autumnus = September—
Autumn. .
Nove | Sanguis = = Sanguine a a
DECEMBER, fliems = Winter.
Von. IL, Vv

THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

FOURTH CIRCLE.

Minere = Minerals. IGNIS = Fire. AERIS = Air. AQUA =

Waters. Metalla = Metals. TERR& = Earth. +

FIFTH TO ELEVENTH CIRCLES.

The Seven The Seven The 7 Members of The Seven
Planets. Angels. Microcosmus. Metals.
SATURN. Oriphiel. SPLEEN. Lead,
' JUPITER. 1 Zachariel, LIVER. Tin.
MARS. Samuel. DIAPHRAGM. Jyon.
SUN. Michael. HEartT. Gold.
VENUS. Anael. REINS. Copper.
MERCURY. Raphael. LUNGs. Quicksilver.
Moon. Gabriel. BRAIN. Silver.

TWELFTH CIRCLE.

TRIA SUNT PRINCIPIA, TRES SUNT MUNDI,
TRES SUNT AETATES, TRIA SUNT REGNA =
There are Three Principles, Three Worlds, Three Ages, and
Three Kingdoms.

THEOLOGIA (Theology). ALCHYMIA (Alchemy). GRAM-
,MATICA (Grammar). DIALECTICA (Dialectics). RHETORICA
(Rhetoric). Musica (Music). PHysica (Physics). AsSTRO-
NOMIA (Astronomy). ARITHMETICA (Arithmetic), | GEO-
METRIA (Geometry). MEDICINA (Medicine). JURISPRUDENTIA
(Jurisprudence).

NATURA = NATURE.

INMOST CIRCLE.

Magna dignitas fidelium animarum ut unaqueque habeat,
etc. =*It is the great honour of faithful souls, that from their
very birth an angel is appointed to preserve and keep each of
them. :

THE ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER. 315

The Author of the “Handbook of Physical Science
Restored ” writes as follows :

§ 1. God is an Eternal Being, an Infinite Unity, the Radical
Principle of all things. His Essence is Infinite Light. His
Power—Omnipotence ; His Will—Perfect Goodness ; His
Wish—Absolute Reality. As we strive to think of Him, we
‘plunge into the Abyss of Silence, of infinite Glory. § 2. Many
Sages have held that an Archetypal World existed long before
the world of sense, when the Archetypal Light began to
unfold Himself, and set forth in an Ideal World a counterpart
of the Divine Mind: This belief is borne out by the words of
Hermes Trismegistus, who says that when God changed His
form, the universe was suddenly revealed and put forth in the
Light of Actuality--this world being nothing but a visible
Image of a Hidden God. This is what the Ancients meant
when they said that Pallas leapt forth in divine perfection from
the forehead of Jupiter, with the aid of Vulcan (or Divine
Light) § 3. The Eternal Father of All Things, being not less
wise in the ordering, than powerful in the creation, of the world,
has made the whole Universe to cohere by means of secret
influences and mutual! subjection and obedience, things below
being analagous to things above, and wice versdé; so that both
ends of the world ‘are nevertheless’ united by a real bond of
natural cohesion. Thus Hermes tells us that things below are
the same as things above, and that things above are analagous
to things below. § 4. He who Jooks upon Nature as anything
but the constant expression of God’s Will, is an Atheist ; every
smallest part of the great universe is constantly vitalized and
conserved by the Spirit cf the Divine Master, and there is no
life or existence apart from His consciously exerted Will. It
was He that in the beginning moved upon the face of the
waters, and brought forth the Actual out of the Chaos of
Potentiality.

216 THE HERMETIC MUSE UM.
FIGURE LIE.

FIRST CIRCLE,
nan? = Jehovah, ze, A Q= Alpha and Omega.

SECOND CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 2—The earth was empty and void, and darkness
was upon the face of the deep.

THIRD CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 2—And the Spirit of God moved the face of the

waters.
FouRre CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 3, 4—And God said; Let there be light: and
there was light. . . . And God saw the light that it was

good.
FIFTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 4, 5—And He divided the light from the dark-
ness. And He called the light day, and the darkness He called
night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.

SIXTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 6-8.—And God said, Let there be a firmament in
the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the
waters.

And God- made the firmament, and divided the waters
which were under the firmament from the waters which were
above the firmament: and it was so.

And God called: the firmament Heaven, and the evening
and the morning were the second day.

Psalm xxxiii. 6—By the word of the Lord were .the
heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of His
mouth.

Psalm exlviii. 4, 5,—-Praise the Lord, ye heavens of heavens,
and ye waters that be above the heavens. Let them praise the
name of the Lord: for He commanded, and they were created.

THE ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER. 317

Daniel, iii. §9,60.—Praise the Lord, ye heavens ; bless Him
and magnify Him,for ever. O ye waters that be above the ,
firmament, praise ye the Lord: bless Him and magnify Him
for ever. :
SEVENTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 9-13.—-And God said: Let the waters under the
heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry
land appear: and it was so.

3 And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering
together of the waters called He seas: and God saw that it was
‘ood,

And God said: Let the earth bring forth grass, "the herb
yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind,
whose seed is ‘in itself upon the earth: and it was so.

And the earth brought forth grass and herb yielding seed
after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit whose seed was in
itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

And the morning and the evening were the third day.

Psalm, civ. 5, 14.-—Who laid the foundations of the earth

_that it should not be removed for ever. He causeth the grass to

' grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man; that -he
‘may bring forth food out of the earth: and wine that maketh -
glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and
bread which strengtheneth man’s heart.

EIGHTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 14-19.—And God said: Let there be lights in
the firmament of, heaven to divide the day from the night ; and
let them be for signs, and for seasons, and days and years.

And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven,
to give light upon the earth: and it was so.

‘And God made two lights: the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night ; He made the stars also.

And God set them in the firmament of the heaven. to give
light upon the earth,

And to.rule over the day and over the night, and to divide
the light from ‘the darkness.

And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

318 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

Sirach, xliii. r—He made the lofty firmament in its glory,
and the stars, a vision of beauty. The eastern Sun announces
the day. It is a wonder of the Most High. Great is God who
created it, and bade it run its course Moreover, the Moon
- shines throughout the world, in due season, dividing months
and years. It waxes and wanes in wonderful guise. The host
of the stars shines gloriously in the firmament of heaven. God,
the Most High, has commanded them to light up the world.
By the word of the Lord they are fixed, and do not neglect their
vigils. .

NINTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 20-23.—And God said: Let the waters bring
forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and. fowl *
that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

And God created great whales, and every living creature
that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after
their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw
that it was good.

And God blessed them, saying: Be fruitful and multiply,
‘and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

’ And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

Psalm civ., 24.—O Lord, how manifold are Thy works: In
wisdom hast Thou made them all: the earth is full of Thy riches.
So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts. There go the ships ;
there is that leviathan whom thou hast made to take his pastime
therein. These all wait on Thee, that Thou mayest give them
their meat in due season.

TENTH CIRCLE.

Genesis, i. 24-31 -—-And God said: Let the earth bring
forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and creeping thing
and beast of the earth, after his kind: and it was so.

And God made the beast of the earth, after ‘his kind, and
cattle after their kind, and’ everything that creepeth upon the
earth, after his kind ; and God saw that it was good.

And God said: Let us make man in our image, after
our likeness ; and let them have dominion over the fish of the

- THE ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER. 319

sea, and over the fow] of the air, and over the cattle, and over
all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon
the earth.

So God created man in His own image, in the image of God
created He him: male and female created He them.

And God blessed them, and said unto them: Be fruitful
and multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

And God said : Behold I have given you every herb bear-
ing seed which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree ,
in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed ; to you it shall
be for meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to, every foul of the
air, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth, wherein
there is life, I have given every green herb for meat : and it was
SO.

And God saw everything that He had made, and behold it
was very good. And the evening and the morning were the
sixth day.

GEORGE RIPLEY, in the Prologue to his “ Twelve Gates,”
says: O incomprehensible Light, glorious in Majesty, the bright-
ness of whose rays obscures our lights: O Unity in the sub-
stance, and Trinity in the Godhead. Merciful purifier of souls,
who dost exalt us from this troublesome vale of vanity to heaven.
Infinite power and wisdom, unspeakable goodness, sustain and
govern me day by day so that I may displease Thee in nothing.
O Thou with whom are all treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
out of whose infinite mind this universal frame sprang forth ina,
moment of time—when heaven and earth were made by Thy
word, and all that is in them by the breath of Thy mouth—-grant
unto me grace to know Thy blessedness and Thy goodness. In
no other way shall I come to the knowledge of the Blessed Stone.
As Thou didst make all things out of oe chaos, so let me be
‘skilled to evolve our microcosm (little world) out of oze substance
in its three aspects of Magnesia, Sulphur, and Mercury !

aoe THE HERMETIC’ MUSEUM.

: FIGURE IV.
1971* = Jehovah.
- ANNUS' SOLARIS = The Solar Year. ANNUS STELLATUS
= The Year of the Stars, ANNUS VENTORUM = The Year of
the Winds.
Mercurius Philosophorum = = Mercury of the Sages.
Mercurius Corporeus = Corporeal Mercury.
Mercurius Vulgaris = Common Mercury.
Sulphur Combustibile = Combustible Sulpauty
Sulphur Fixum = Fixed Sulphur.
Sulphur dithereum = Volatile Sulphur.
Sal Terrenum = Earthy Salt.
Sal Elementorum = Elementary Salt.
' Sal Centrale = Central Salt.
Tenes quatior ad opus requiruntur = Four kinds of fire are
requisite for the work,
Phenix = Phoenix. Aguila = Eagle.

BY THE WORD OF THE LORD WERE THE HEAVENS
ESTABLISHED, AND THEIR HOSTS BY THE BREATH OF HIS
MOUTH. THE SPIRIT OF THE, LORD HAS FILLED THE WORLD.
ALL THINGS ARE SATISFIED, WITH THY GOODNESS, O. LORD.
THOU TURNEST AWAY THY FACE, THEY ARE TROUBLED.
THOU TAKEST AWAY THY SPIRIT, THEY DIE AND. RETURN
AGAIN TO THEIR DUST. THOU SENDEST FORTH THY SPIRIT
AND THEY ARE CREATED, AND RENEWEST THE FACE OF

re THE EARTH; THY GLORY IS FOR EVERLASTING.,

THE EMERALD TABLE OF HERMES. —

It is most true, it is without error, it is the sum of verity:
That which. is benéath is like that which is above, and .that
which is above is like that which is below, for the performance

THE ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER 328

of the wonders of one thing. As. all things were created from
the Mind of One, so all things arose by modification of this
One Thing. It is so with our Substance. Its father is the Sun,
its mother the Moon The Wind bore it‘in its belly. The
earth is its nurse. The father of all, the Thelema of the whole
world, is here. Its strength is undiminished if*it is changed
into earth. Separate the carth from the fire, the subtle from the
gross, gently, but with great skill. It rises from earth to
heaven, and again descends to the earth, and receives tie
strength of things above and of things below. Thus you have
the GEORY OF THE WHOLE WORLD, and all darkness
will flee away from you. This is the strength of every strong
thing ; it overcomes every subtle thing, and penetrates all solids.
IN THIS WAY WAS THE WORLD CREATED. These
are the wonderful mcdifications, the manner of which I have
described. Hence I am called Hermes Trismegistus, having
the three parts of the wisdom of the whole world. I have now
said all I have to say concerning the operation of the Sun.

ADDENDUM

The verses which accompany the frontispiece to the first
volume may be translated thus: The things that are in the
realms above are also in the realms beneath; What heaven
shews is oft found on earth. Fire and flowing water are con-
trary one to another; Happy thou, if thou canst unite them :
let it suffice thee to know this!

The Cross on the title-page of “ The Golden Tract” bears
the following inscription: All Glory is a Birth in | the Sand.
The Stone unites in itself all blessings.

The Symbol at the end of the Preface contains, within the
second, circle, the names of the four elementary natures, Air,
Fire, Earth, and Water, and in the central circle the words—
Marvel of Nature. .

The inscription on the Emblem which accompanies the
title page of “The Golden Age Restored ” should be read thus:
There are three marvels—God and Man—Mother and Virgin—
. Three and One. The Centre in the Triangle of the Centre.

Von. Il, WwW

00201294

CH)

Digitized with financial assistance from
| 4 *
Hermeés India
a project facilitated by the Rotary Club of Bombay

on 10 August, 2018

GON OO NSW TD NE QGP“ Nk
1G - ™" mr (ors gM, 2¢ é ot Mr, DV AGS so, 2" fe RD 2"
‘vy yy? « Ju G “aw? ust) Kon G Gye St Su % Gor y Se % H

we
IS 2) 3 oe" "9 ro, 2») of gm, 2", fs wi 2, "2.
she 3 é€ ©

4 7 Guyer S Sagi 2a % we Ss Sa % ww? =) C

i o™ 2," KS) 0M, Mm, A om, on
(0° S % ‘ ‘e 2) “we K\ n, "2 Gg 6% ~ >
NE€ Lys 23 <~ Z Guy? -, Sos in Fs “WF 2. ;
“iy 3? ws, oy %, mr wv

Wy 2" (os on”, *s ss em: ay sf aM ms) , ee" om” My 9 ef @

7, Ak Ui? Nea Gg AG “uss Fea Says » EG
fa on," Ma aS a “ aan a) ” f mn ue Ne

2% . . s Mn, SS & My 0 2. on SM > *
ANG “uss i) New Gaygs> oa, ayer oo) Neu “us Z
sy, es an Sn, 2) Gy ome 2") os sn, "3 os o, 2," “ot Ce

2 Wo) Nee Gay 05) Nee Gay gh New Gg) Ne yur © a

fF gt (0 hp, an “74. fe “~~ = ian ~ "cc.

fa