The Principles of Mechanics Presented in a New Form (Heinrich Hertz (D. E. Jones and J. T. Walley, trans.), 1899)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/principlesmecha00hertgoog). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often diflicult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parlies, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the plus We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a b<x>k is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means il can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's hooks while helping authors ami publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull text of this book on I lie web 
at |http : //books . qooqle . com/| 




I _ 



* 



* I 



f 



>, 



i 



J 

) 



I 



) 






THE 

PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 

ELEOTRIO WAVES: 

Researches on the Propagation of Electric Action 
with Finite Velocity through space. 

Translated by D. E. JONES 

With a Preface by LORD KELVIN. 

8vo. 108. net. 

ELECTRICIAN :—" There 1b not in the entire annals of scientific research a more 
completely logical and philosophical method recorded than that which has been 
rigidly adhered to by Hertz from start to finish. We can conceive of no more delight- 
ful intellectual treat than following up the charming orderliness of the records in the 
pages before us. . . . The researches are a splendid consummation of the effort* which 
have been made since the time of Maxwell to establish the doctrine of one ether for 
all energy and force propagation— light, heat, electricity, and magnetism. The original 
papers, with their introduction, form a lasting monument of the work thus achieved. 
The able translation before us, in which we have a skilful blend of the original mean- 
ing with the English idiom, and which is copiously illustrated, places the record of 
these researches within the reach of the English reading public, ana enables it to study 
this important and epoch-making landmark in the progress of Physical Science." 



MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS. 

With an Introduction by P. Lenard. Translated by 

D. E. Jones and Q. A. Schott. 

8vo. 10s. net 

NATURE:— "Trot. Lenard has earned much gratitude for his Introduction. It 
gives a charming picture of Hertz, of his simplicity, his devotion to science, his loving 
regard for his parents. There is just enough added to the very well-selected letters to 

Slve the reader a continuous view of Hertz's work, and enable him to follow its 
evelopment, and hence feel an interest in it and sympathy with the worker, thus 
fulfilling the best ideal of the biographer." 

KNOWLEDGE :— " The volume commands a place in the library of every institu- 
tion and individual interested in physical research. It is a monument to a scientific 
genius, and as an example of good translation it will be difficult to excel." 

ELECTRICAL REVIEW:—" If a work is to be judged by its fruit, it would be 
difficult to name a series of more valuable contributions to physical science than those 
made by the lamented Hertz. . . . The book has been well done into English by the 
translators. It contains very little trace of the heaviness that is generally felt about 
translations from the German, a circumstance for which we have no doubt to thank the 
skill of the translators as much as the style of the author." 



1 



V 



THE 



PEINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 



PRESENTED IN A NEW FORM 



BY 



HEINRICH liERTZ 

LATE PROFESSOR OF PHTBIC8 IN THE UNIVEBfllTY OF BONN 



WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY 

H. von HELMHOLTZ 



AUTHORISED ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 

D. E. JONES, B.Sc. 

DISTRICT INSPECTOR UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND ART 

LATELY PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS IN THE UNIVERSITY 

COLLEGE OF WALES, ABERYSTWYTH 

AND 

J. T. WALLEY, M.A. 

FELLOW OF JESUS COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, LECTURER IN MATHEMATICS 
IN THE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF WALES, ABERYSTWYTH 



ioribon 
MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd. 

NEW YOBK: MACMILLAN k CO. 

1899 

All rights reserved 



I 



• • 

• • m 
»-. . • 

::• * 



• • 



EDITOR'S PREFACE 

The volume now published is Heinrich Hertz's last work. To 
it he devoted the last three years of his life. The general 
features were settled and the greater part of the book written 
within about a year ; the remaining two years were spent in 
working up the details. At the end of this time the author 
regarded the first part of the book as quite finished, and the second 
half as practically finished. He had arranged to work once more 
through the second half. But soon his plans became only 
hopes, and his hopes were doomed to disappointment. Death 
was soon to claim him in the prime of his power. Shortly 
before he died he forwarded to the publishers the greater 
part of the manuscript. At the same time he sent for me and 
asked me to edit the book, in case he should not be able to see 
it through the press. 

From first to last I have done this with the greatest care, 
seeking especially to give a faithful rendering of the sense of 
the original. I have also endeavoured, as far as possible, to 
retain the form; but to do this in all cases, without due 
reference to the contents and connection, would have been 
contrary to the author's wish. Hence I have slightly changed 
the form in places where, after careful study of the book, I 
felt convinced that the author would himself have made such 
changes. I have not thought it necessary to specify where 
these changes occur, inasmuch as none of them affect the sense. 
In order to guard against this I have carefully studied all the 
rough notes and earlier manuscripts of the work. Several of 
the first drafts had been carefully written out, and some of 



303192 



Vi PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

them are fuller than the manuscript as finally prepared for the 
press. With regard to two paragraphs of the work I have 
found it impossible to satisfy myself, the author's intention as 
to the final form having remained doubtful to me. I have 
marked these two paragraphs and have thought it best to leave 
them entirely unaltered. 

After sending off the manuscript the author had noted 
certain corrections in a second copy; all these have been 
included before printing off. I have completed the references 
to earlier paragraphs of the book (of which few were given in 
the second part, and scarcely any in the last chapter), and 
have drawn up an index to the definitions and notation. 

P. Lenard. 



TMNSLATOKS' NOTE 

Hertz's Principles of Mechanics forms the third (and last) 
volume of his collected works, as edited by Dr. Philipp Lenard. 
English translations of the first and second volumes (Miscel- 
laneous Papers and Electric Waves) have already been published. 

The translation of the first two volumes was comparatively 
easy ; the third has proved to be a more difficult undertaking. 
If it has been brought to a satisfactory conclusion this will be 
largely due to Professor Lenard, through whose hands the 
proof-sheets have passed. He has again, notwithstanding the 
pressure of other work, been good enough to advise and assist 
us from time to time, and we tender to him our warmest 
thanks. 

We also desire to thank the publishers and printers for 
the extreme consideration shown by them while the book was 
being prepared for the press. 

D. E. J. 
J. T. W. 

September 1899. 



PKEFACE BY H. VON HELMHOLTZ 

On the 1st of January 1894 Heinrich Hertz died All who 
regard human progress as consisting in the broadest possible 
development of the intellectual faculties, and in the victory of 
the intellect over natural passions as well as over the forces of 
nature, must have heard with the deepest sorrow of the death 
of this highly favoured genius. Endowed with the rarest gifts 
of intellect and of character, he reaped during his lifetime (alas, 
so short !) a bounteous harvest which many of the most gifted 
investigators of the present century have tried in vain to 
gather. In old classical times it would have been said that 
he had fallen a victim to the envy of the gods. Here nature 
and fate appeared to have favoured in an exceptional manner 
the development of a human intellect embracing all that was 
requisite for the solution of the most difficult problems of 
science, — an intellect capable of the greatest acuteness and 
clearness in logical thought, as well as of the closest attention in 
observing apparently insignificant phenomena. The uninitiated 
readily pass these by without heeding them ; but to the practised 
eye they point the way by which we can penetrate into the 
secrets of nature. 

Heinrich Hertz seemed to be predestined to open up to 
mankind many of the secrets which nature has hitherto con- 
cealed from us ; but all these hopes were frustrated by the 
malignant disease which, creeping slowly but surely on, robbed 
us of this precious life and of the achievements which it 
promised. 

To me this has been a deep sorrow ; for amongst all my 



Vlll PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

pupils I have ever regarded Hertz as the one who had pene- 
trated furthest into my own circle of scientific thought, and it 
was to him that I looked with the greatest confidence for the 
further development and extension of my work. 

Heinrich Eudolf Hertz was born on 22nd February 1857, 
in Hamburg, and was the eldest son of Dr. Hertz, who was 
then a barrister and subsequently became senator. Up to the 
time of his confirmation he was a pupil in one of the munici- 
pal primary schools (Biirgersehulen). After a year's prepara- 
tion at home he entered the High School of his native 
town, the Johanneum ; here he remained until 1875, when he 
received his certificate of matriculation. As a boy he won 
the appreciation of his parents and teachers by his high 
moral character. Already his pursuits showed his natural 
inclinations. While still attending school he worked of his 
own accord at the bench and lathe, on Sundays he attended 
the Trade School to practise geometrical drawing, and with 
the simplest appliances he constructed serviceable optical and 
mechanical instruments. 

At the end of his school course he had to decide on his career, 
and chose that of an engineer. The modesty which in later years 
was such a characteristic feature of his nature, seems to have 
made him doubtful of his talent for theoretical science. He 
liked mechanical work, and felt surer of success in connec- 
tion with it, because he already knew well enough what it 
meant and what it required. Perhaps, too, he was influenced 
by the tone prevailing in his native town and tending towards 
a practical life. It is in young men of unusual capacity that 
one most frequently observes this sort of timid modesty. They 
have a clear conception of the difficulties which have to be 
overcome before attaining the high ideal set before their minds ; 
their strength must be tried by some practical test before they 
can secure the self-reliance requisite for their difficult task. 
And even in later years men of great ability are the less con- 
tent with their own achievements the higher their capacity 
and ideals. The most gifted attain the highest and truest 



PREFACE BY H. VON HELMHOLTZ IX 

success because they are most keenly alive to the presence of 
imperfection and most unwearied in removing it. 

For fully two years Heinrich Hertz remained in this state 
of doubt Then, in the autumn of 1877, he decided upon an 
academic career; for as he grew in knowledge he grew in 
the conviction that only in scientific work could he find en- 
during satisfaction. In the autumn of 1878 he came to Berlin, 
and it was as an university student there, in the physical 
laboratory under my control, that I first made his acquaintance. 
Even while he was going through the elementary course of 
practical work, I saw that I had here to deal with a pupil 
of quite unusual talent ; and when, towards the end of the 
summer semester, it fell to me to propound to the students 
a subject of physical research for a prize, I chose one in 
electromagnetics, in the belief that Hertz would feel an interest 
in it, and would attack it, as he did, with success. 

In Germany at that time the laws of electromagnetics were 
deduced by most physicists from the hypothesis of W. Weber, 
who sought to trace back electric and magnetic phenomena 
to a modification of Newton's assumption of direct forces 
acting at a distance and in a straight line. With increasing 
distance these forces diminish in accordance with the same 
laws as those assigned by Newton to the force of gravitation, 
and held by Coulomb to apply to the action between pairs 
of electrified particles. The force was directly proportional to 
the product of the two quantities of electricity, and inversely 
proportional to the square of their distance apart ; like quanti- 
ties produced repulsion, unlike quantities attraction. Further- 
more, in Weber's hypothesis it was assumed that this force 
was propagated through infinite space instantaneously, and with 
infinite velocity. The only difference between the views of 
W. Weber and of Coulomb consisted in this — that Weber 
assumed that the magnitude of the force between the two 
quantities of electricity might be affected by the velocity with 
which the two quantities approached towards or receded from 
one another, and also by the acceleration of such velocity. 



X PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

Side by side with Weber's theory there existed a number of 
others, all of which had this in common — that they regarded 
the magnitude of the force expressed by Coulomb's law as 
being modified by the influence of some component of the 
velocity of the electrical quantities in motion. Such theories 
were advanced by F. E. Neumann, by his son C. Neumann, by 
Eiemann, Grassmann, and subsequently by Clausius. Magnet- 
ised molecules were regarded as the axes of circular electric 
currents, in accordance with an analogy between their external 
effects previously discovered by Ampfere. 

This plentiful crop of hypotheses had become very un- 
manageable, and in dealing with them it was necessary to go 
through complicated calculations, resolutions of forces into their 
components in various directions, and so on. So at that time 
the domain of electromagnetics had become a pathless wilder- 
ness. Observed facts and deductions from exceedingly doubt- 
ful theories were inextricably mixed up together. With the 
object of clearing up this confusion I had set myself the task 
of surveying the region of electromagnetics, and of working 
out the distinctive consequences of the various theories, in 
order, wherever that was possible, to decide between them by 
suitable experiments. 

I arrived at the following general result. The phenomena 
which completely closed currents produce by their circulation 
through continuous and closed metallic circuits, and which 
have this common property, that while they flow there is no 
considerable variation in the electric charges accumulated 
upon the various parts of the conductor, — all these phenomena 
can be equally well deduced from any of the above-mentioned 
hypotheses. The deductions which follow from them agree 
with Amp&re's laws of electromagnetic action, with the laws 
discovered by Faraday and Lenz, and also with the laws of 
induced electric currents as generalised by F. E. Neumann. 
On the other hand, the deductions which follow from them in 
the case of conducting circuits which are not completely closed 
are essentially different. The accordance between the various 



PREFACE BY H. VON HELMHOLTZ xi 

theories and the facts which have been observed in the case of 
completely closed circuits is easily intelligible when we con- 
sider that closed currents of any desired strength can be main- 
tained as long as we please — at any rate long enough to allow 
the forces exerted by them to exhibit plainly their effects ; 
and that on this account the actual effects of such currents and 
their laws are well known and have been carefully investigated. 
Thus any divergence between any newly-advanced theory and 
any one of the known facts in this well-trodden region would 
soon attract attention and be used to disprove the theory. 

But at the open ends of unclosed conductors between which 
insulating masses are interposed, every motion of electricity 
along the length of the conductor immediately causes an 
accumulation of electric charges ; these are due to the surging 
of the electricity, which cannot force its way through the 
insulator, against the ends of the conductor. Between the 
electricity accumulated at the end and the electricity of the 
same kind which surges against it there is a force of repulsion ; 
and an exceedingly short time suffices for this force to attain 
such magnitude that it completely checks the flow of the 
electricity. The surging then ceases; and after an instant 
of rest there follows a resurging of the accumulated electricity 
in the opposite direction. 

To every one who was initiated into these matters it was 
then apparent that a complete understanding of the theory of 
electromagnetic phenomena could only be attained by a thorough 
investigation of the processes which occur during these very 
rapid surgings of unclosed currents. W. Weber had endeavoured 
to remove or lessen certain difficulties in his electromagnetic 
hypothesis by suggesting that electricity might possess a certain 
degree of inertia, such as ponderable matter exhibits. In the 
opening and closing of every electric current effects are pro- 
duced which simulate the appearance of such electric inertia. 
These, however, arise from what is called electromagnetic in- 
duction, i.e. from a mutual action of neighbouring conductors 
upon each other, according to laws which have been well known 



XU PBINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

since Faraday's time. True inertia should be proportional 
only to the mass of the electricity in motion, and independent 
of the position of the conductor. If anything of the kind 
existed we ought to be able to detect it by a retardation in 
electric oscillations, such as are produced by the sudden break 
of an electric current in metallic wires. In this manner it 
should be possible to find an upper limit to the magnitude of 
this electric inertia ; and so I was led to propound the problem 
of carrying out experiments on the magnitude of extra-currents. 
Extra-currents in double- wound spirals, the currents traversing 
the branches in opposite directions, were suggested in the 
statement of the problem as being apparently best adapted for 
these experiments. Heinrich Hertz's first research of im- 
portance consisted in solving this problem. In it he gives a 
definite answer to the question propounded, and shows that of 
the extra-current in a double-wound spiral ^ to -fo at most 
could be ascribed to the effect of an inertia of electricity. The 
prize was awarded to him for this investigation. 

But Hertz did not confine himself to the experiments which 
had been suggested. For he recognised that although the 
effects of induction are very much weaker in wires which are 
stretched out straight, they can be much more accurately calcu- 
lated than in spirals of many turns ; for in the latter he could 
not measure with accuracy the geometrical relations. Hence he 
used for further experiments a conductor consisting of two 
rectangles of straight wire ; he now found that the extra-current 
due to inertia could at most not exceed ^^ of the magnitude 
of the induction current. 

Investigations on the effect of centrifugal force in a rapidly 
rotating plate upon the motion of electricity passing through 
it, led him to find a still lower value to the upper limit of the 
inertia of electricity. 

These experiments clearly impressed upon his mind the 
exceeding mobility of electricity, and pointed out to him the 
way towards his most important discoveries. 

Meanwhile in England the ideas introduced by Faraday as 



PREFACE BY H. VON HELMHOLTZ Xlll 

to the nature of electricity were extending. These ideas, ex- 
pressed as they were in abstract language difficult of compre- 
hension, made but slow progress until they found in Clerk 
Maxwell a fitting interpreter. In explaining electrical pheno- 
mena Faraday was bent upon excluding all preconceived notions 
involving assumptions as to the existence of phenomena or 
substances which could not be directly perceived. Especially 
did he reject, as did Newton at the beginning of his career, the 
hypothesis of the existence of action-at-a-distance. What the 
older theories assumed seemed to him inconceivable — that 
direct actions could go on between bodies separated in space 
without any change taking place in the intervening medium. 
So he first sought for indications of changes in media lying 
between electrified bodies or between magnetic bodies. He 
succeeded in detecting magnetism or diamagnetism in nearly 
all the bodies which up to that time had been regarded as non- 
magnetic He also showed that good insulators undergo a 
change when exposed to the action of electric force ; this he 
denoted as the " dielectric polarisation of insulators." 

It could not be denied that the attraction between two 
electrically charged bodies or between two magnet poles in the 
direction of their lines of force was considerably increased by 
introducing between them dielectrically or magnetically 
polarised media. On . the other hand there was a repulsion 
across the lines of force. After these discoveries men were 
bound to recognise that a part of the magnetic and electric 
action was produced by the polarisation of the intervening 
medium ; another part might still remain, and this might be 
due to action-at-a-distance. 

Faraday and Maxwell inclined towards the simpler view 
that there was no action-at-a-distance ; this hypothesis, which 
involved a complete upsetting of the conceptions hitherto 
current, was thrown into mathematical form and developed by 
Maxwell. According to it the seat of the changes which pro- 
duce electrical phenomena must be sought only in the insu- 
lators; the polarisation and depolarisation of these are the 



XIV PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

real causes of the electrical disturbances which apparently take 
place in conductors. There were no longer any closed currents ; 
for the accumulation of electric charges at the ends of a con- 
ductor, and the simultaneous dielectric polarisation of the 
medium between them, represented an equivalent electric 
motion in the intervening dielectric, thus completing the gap 
in the circuit. 

Faraday had a very sure and profound insight into geo- 
metrical and mechanical questions ; and he had already recog- 
nised that the distribution of electric action in space according 
to these new views must exactly agree with that found accord- 
ing to the older theory. 

By the aid of mathematical analysis Maxwell confirmed 
this, and extended it into a complete theory of electro- 
magnetics. For my own part, I fully recognised the force of 
the facts discovered by Faraday, and began to investigate the 
question whether actions -at -a- distance did really exist, and 
whether they must be taken into account. For I felt that 
scientific prudence required one to keep an open mind at first 
in such a complicated matter, and that the doubt might point 
the way to decisive experiments. 

This was the state of the question at the time when 
Heinrich Hertz attacked it after completing the investigation 
which we have described. 

It was an essential postulate of Maxwell's theory that the 
polarisation and depolarisation of an insulator should produce 
in its neighbourhood the same electromagnetic effects as a 
galvanic current in a conductor. It seemed to me that this 
should be capable of demonstration, and that it would consti- 
tute a problem of sufficient importance for one of the great 
prizes of the Berlin Academy. 

In the Introduction to his interesting book, Uhtersuchungen 
uber die Austreitung der elektrischen Kraft, 1 Hertz has de- 
scribed how his own discoveries grew out of the seeds thus 

1 [Electric Waves. London, Macmillan, 1893.] 



PREFACE BY H. VON HELMHOLTZ XV 

sown by his contemporaries, and has done this in such an 
admirably clear manner that it is impossible for any one else 
to improve upon it or add anything of importance. His 
Introduction is of exceeding value as a perfectly frank and full 
account of one of the most important and suggestive dis- 
coveries. It is a pity that we do not possess more documents 
of this kind on the inner psychological history of science. We 
owe the author a debt of gratitude for allowing us to penetrate 
into the inmost working of his thoughts, and for recording 
even his temporary mistakes. 

Something may, however, be added as to the consequences 
which follow from his discoveries. 

The views which Hertz subsequently proved to be correct 
had been propounded, as we have already said, by Faraday 
and Maxwell before him as being possible, and even highly 
probable; but as yet they had not been actually verified. 
Hertz supplied the demonstration. The phenomena which 
guided him into the path of success were exceedingly insignifi- 
cant, and could only have attracted the attention of an observer 
who was unusually acute, and able to see immediately the full 
importance of an unexpected phenomenon which others had 
passed by. It would have been a hopeless task to render visible 
by means of a galvanometer, or by any other experimental 
method in use at that time, the rapid oscillations of currents 
having a period as short as one ten-thousandth or even only a 
millionth of a second. For all finite forces require a certain 
time to produce finite velocities and to displace bodies of any 
weight, even when they are as light as the magnetic needles of 
our galvanometers usually are. But electric sparks can become 
visible between the ends of a conductor even when the poten- 
tial at its ends only rises for a millionth of a second' high 
enough to cause sparking across a minute air-gap. Through 
his earlier investigations Hertz was thoroughly familiar with 
the regularity and enormous velocity of these rapid electric 
oscillations ; and when he essayed in this way to discover and 
render visible the most transient electric disturbances, success 



XVI PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

was not long in coming. He very soon discovered what were 
the conditions under which he could produce in unclosed con- 
ductors oscillations of sufficient regularity. He proceeded to 
examine their behaviour under the most varied circumstances, 
and thus determined the laws of their development. He next 
succeeded in measuring their wave-length in air and their 
velocity. In the whole investigation one scarcely knows 
which to admire most, his experimental skill or the acuteness 
of his reasoning, so happily are the two combined. 

By these investigations Hertz has enriched physics with 
new and most interesting views respecting natural phenomena. 
There can no longer be any doubt that light-waves consist of 
electric vibrations in the all -pervading ether, and that the 
latter possesses the properties of an insulator and a magnetic 
medium. Electric oscillations in the ether occupy an inter- 
mediate position between the exceedingly rapid oscillations of 
light and the comparatively slow disturbances which are pro- 
duced by a tuning-fork when thrown into vibration ; but as 
regards their rate of propagation, the transverse nature of 
their vibrations, the consequent possibility of polarising them, 
their refraction and reflection, it can be shown that in all these 
respects they correspond completely to light and to heat-rays. 
The electric waves only lack the power of affecting the eye, 
as do also the dark heat-rays, whose frequency of oscillation is 
not high enough for this. 

Here we have two great natural agencies — on the one 
hand light, which is so full of mystery and affects us in so 
many ways, and on the other hand electricity, which is equally 
mysterious, and perhaps even more varied in its manifesta- 
tions : to have furnished a complete demonstration that these 
two are most closely connected together is to have achieved a 
great feat From the standpoint of theoretical science it is 
perhaps even more important to be able to understand how 
apparent actions-at-a-distance really consist in a propagation 
of an action from one layer of an intervening medium 
to the next. Gravitation still remains an unsolved puzzle ; as 



PREFACE BY H. VON HELMHOLTZ XVU 

yet a satisfactory explanation of it has not been forthcoming, 
and we are still compelled to treat it as a pure action-at-a- 
distance. 

Amongst scientific men Heinrich Hertz has secured en- 
during fame by his researches. But not through his work 
alone will his memory live ; none of those who knew him can 
ever forget his uniform modesty, his warm recognition of the 
labours of others, or his genuine gratitude towards his teachers. 
To him it was enough to seek after truth ; and this he did 
with all zeal and devotion, and without the slightest trace of 
self-seeking. Even when he had some right to claim dis- 
coveries as his own he preferred to remain quietly in the 
background. But although naturally quiet, he could be merry 
enough amongst his friends, and could enliven social intercourse 
by many an apt remark. He never made an enemy, although 
he knew how to judge slovenly work, and to appraise at its 
true value any pretentious claim to scientific recognition. 

His career may be briefly sketched as follows. In the 
year 1880 he was appointed Demonstrator in the Physical 
Laboratory of the Berlin University. In 1883 he was in- 
duced by the Prussian Education Department (KuUusminis- 
terium) to go to Kiel with a view to his promotion to the 
office of Privat-docent there. In Easter of 1885 he was 
called to Karlsruhe as ordinary Professor of Physics at the 
Technical School. Here he made his most important dis- 
coveries, and it was during his stay at Karlsruhe that he 
married Miss Elizabeth Doll, the daughter of one of his 
colleagues. Two years later he received a call to the Uni- 
versity of Bonn as ordinary Professor of Physics, and removed 
thither in Easter 1889. 

Few as the remaining years of his life unfortunately were, 

they brought him ample proof that his work was recognised 

and honoured by his contemporaries. In the year 1888 he 

was awarded the Matteucci Medal of the Italian Scientific 

Society, in 1889 the La Caze Prize of the Paris Academy of 

Sciences and the Baumgartner Prize of the Imperial Academy 

b 



XVin PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

of Vienna, in 1890 the Eumford Medal of the Eoyal Society, 
and in 1891 the Bressa Prize of the Turin Eoyal Academy. 
He was elected a corresponding member of the Academies of 
Berlin, Munich, Vienna, Gottingen, Borne, Turin, and Bologna, 
and of many other learned societies ; and the Prussian Govern- 
ment awarded him the Order of the Crown. 

He was not long spared to enjoy these honours. A pain- 
ful abscess began to develop, and in November 1892 the 
disease became threatening. An operation performed at that 
time appeared to relieve the pain for a while. Hertz was able 
to carry on his lectures, but only with great effort* up to the 
7th of December 1893. On New Year's day of 1894 death 
released him from his sufferings. 

In the present treatise on the Principles of Mechanics, the 
last memorial of his labours here below, we again see how 
strong was his inclination to view scientific principles from the 
most general standpoint. In it he has endeavoured to give a 
consistent representation of a complete and connected system 
of mechanics, and to deduce all the separate special laws of this 
science from a single fundamental law which, logically con- 
sidered, can, of course, only be regarded as a plausible hypo- 
thesis. In doing this he has reverted to the oldest theoretical 
conceptions, which may also be regarded as the simplest and 
most natural; and he propounds the question whether these 
do not suffice to enable us to deduce, by consistent and rigid 
methods of proof, all the recently discovered general principles 
of mechanics, even such as have only made their appearance 
as inductive* generalisations. 

The first scientific development of mechanics arose out of 
investigations on the equilibrium and motion of solid bodies 
which were directly connected with one another; we have 
examples of these in the simple mechanics, the lever, pulleys,, 
inclined planes, etc. The law of virtual velocities is the 
earliest general solution of all the problems which thus arise. 
Later on Galileo developed the conception of inertia and of the 
accelerating action of force, although he represented this as 



PREFACE BY H. VON HELMHOLTZ XIX 

consisting of a series of impulses. Newton first conceived the 
idea of action-at-a-distance, and showed how to determine it 
by the principle of equal action and reaction. It is well 
known that Newton, as well as his contemporaries, at first only 
accepted the idea of direct action-at-a-distance with the greatest 
reluctance. 

From that time onwards Newton's idea and definition of 
force served as a basis for the further development of mechanics. 
Gradually men learned how to handle problems in which con- 
servative forces were combined with fixed connections; of 
these the most general solution is given by d'Alembert's Prin- 
ciple. The chief general propositions in mechanics (such as the 
law of the motion of the centre of gravity, the law of areas for 
rotating systems, the principle of the conservation of vis viva, 
the principle of least action) have all been developed from the 
assumption of Newton's attributes of constant, and therefore 
conservative, forces of attraction between material points, and of 
the existence of fixed connections between them. They were 
originally discovered and proved only under these assumptions. 
Subsequently it was discovered by observation that the proposi- 
tions thus deduced could claim a much more general validity 
in nature than that which followed from the mode in which 
they were demonstrated. Hence it was concluded that certain 
general characteristics of Newton's conservative forces of attrac- 
tion were common to all the forces of nature ; but no proof was 
forthcoming that this generalisation could be deduced from 
any common basis. Hertz has now endeavoured to furnish 
mechanics with such a fundamental conception from which all 
the laws of mechanics which have been recognised as of general 
validity can be deduced in a perfectly logical manner. He 
has done this with great acuteness, making use in an admir- 
able manner of new and peculiar generalised kinematical ideas. 
He has chosen as his starting-point that of the oldest mechani- 
cal theories, namely, the conception that all mechanical pro- 
cesses go on as if the connections between the various parts 
which act upon each other were fixed. Of course he is obliged 



PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

to make the further hypothesis that there are a large number 
of imperceptible masses with invisible motions, in order to 
explain the existence of forces between bodies which are not in 
direct contact with each other. Unfortunately he has not 
given examples illustrating the manner in which he supposed 
such hypothetical mechanism to act; to explain even the 
simplest cases of physical forces on these lines will clearly 
require much scientific insight and imaginative power. In 
this direction Hertz seems to have relied chiefly on the 
introduction of cyclical systems with invisible motions. 

English physicists — e.g. Lord Kelvin, in his theory of vortex- 
atoms, and Maxwell, in his hypothesis of systems of cells with 
rotating contents, on which he bases his attempt at a mechani- 
cal explanation of electromagnetic processes — have evidently 
derived a fuller satisfaction from such explanations than from 
the simple representation of physical facts and laws in the 
most general form, as given in systems of differential equations. 
For my own part, I must admit that I have adhered to the 
latter mode of representation and have felt safer in so doing ; 
yet I have no essential objections to raise against a method 
which has been adopted by three physicists of such eminence. 

It is true that great difficulties have yet to be overcome 
before we can succeed in explaining the varied phenomena of 
physics in accordance with the system developed by Hertz. But 
in every respect his presentation of the Principles of Mechanics 
is a book which must be of the greatest interest to every reader 
who can appreciate a logical system of dynamics developed 
with the greatest ingenuity and in the most perfect mathe- 
matical form. In the future this book may prove of great 
heuristic value as a guide to the discovery of new and general 
characteristics of natural forces. 



t 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE 

All physicists agree that the problem of physics consists 
in tracing the phenomena of nature back to the simple laws 
of mechanics. But there is not the same agreement as to 
what these simple laws are. To most physicists they are 
simply Newton's laws of motion. But in reality these latter 
laws only obtain their inner significance and their physical 
meaning through the tacit assumption that the forces of which 
they speak are of a simple nature and possess simple pro- 
perties. But we have here no certainty as to what is simple 
and permissible, and what is not: it is just here that we 
no longer find any general agreement. Hence there arise 
actual differences of opinion as to whether this or that 
assumption is in accordance with the usual system of 
mechanics, or not. It is in the treatment of new problems 
that we recognise • the existence of such open questions as 
a real bar to progress. So, for example, it is premature to 
attempt to base the equations of motion of the ether upon the 
laws of mechanics until we have obtained a perfect agreement 
as to what is understood by this name. 

The problem which I have endeavoured to solve in the 
present investigation is the following : — To fill up the existing 
gaps and to give a complete and definite presentation of the 
laws of mechanics which shall be consistent with the state of 
our present knowledge, being neither too restricted nor too 
extensive in relation to the scope of this knowledge. The 
presentation must not be too restricted: there must be no 
natural motion which it does not embrace. On the other 



XX11 PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

hand it must not be too extensive: it must admit of no 
motion whose occurrence in nature is excluded by the state 
of our present knowledge. Whether the presentation here 
given as the solution of this problem is the only possible * 
one, or whether there are other and perhaps better possible 
ones, remains open. But that the presentation given is in 
every respect a possible one, I prove by developing its con- 
sequences, and showing that when fully unfolded it is eapable 
of embracing the whole content of ordinary mechanics, so 
far as the latter relates only to the actual forces and connec- 
tions of nature, and is not regarded as a field for mathematical 
exercises. 

In the process of this development a theoretical discussion 
has grown into a treatise which contains a complete survey of 
all the more important general propositions in dynamics, and 
which may serve as a systematic text-book of this science. 
For several reasons it is not well suited for use as a first 
introduction; but for these very reasons it is the better 
suited to guide those who have already a fair mastery of 
mechanics as usually taught. It may lead them to a vantage- 
ground from which they can more clearly perceive the physical 
meaning of mechanical principles, how they are related to each 
other, and how far they hold good ; from which the ideas of 
force and the other fundamental ideas of mechanics appear 
stripped of the last remnant of obscurity. 

In his papers on the principle of least action and on 
cyclical systems, 1 von Helmholtz has already treated in an 
indirect manner the problem which is investigated in this 
book, and has given one possible solution of it. In the first 
set of papers he propounds and maintains the thesis that a 
system of mechanics which regards as of universal validity, 
not only Newton's laws, but also the special assumptions 
involved (in addition to these laws) in Hamilton's Principle, 

1 H. yon Helmholtz, " Uber die physikalische Bedeutung dea Prinzips der 
kleinsten Wirkung," Journal f fir die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 100, pp. 
137-166, 213-222, 1887 ; "Prinzipien der Statik monocyklischer Systeme," ibid, 
07, pp. 111-140, 817-336, 1884. 



author's preface xxiii 

would yet be able to embrace all the processes of nature. In 
the second set of papers the meaning and importance of 
concealed motions is for the first time treated in a general 
way. Both in its broad features and in its details my own 
investigation owes much to the above-mentioned papers : the 
chapter on cyclical systems is taken almost directly from 
them. Apart from matters of form, my own solution differs 
from that of von Helmholtz chiefly in two respects. Firstly, 
I endeavour from the start to keep the elements of mechanics 
free from that which von Helmholtz only removes by subse- 
quent restriction from the mechanics previously developed. 
Secondly, in a certain sense I eliminate less from mechanics, 
inasmuch as I do not rely upon Hamilton's Principle or 
any other integral principle. The reasons for this and the 
consequences which arise from it are made clear in the book 
itself. 

In his important paper on the physical applications of 
dynamics, J. J. Thomson 1 pursues a train of thought similar 
to that contained in von Helmholtz's papers. Here again the 
author develops the consequences of a system of dynamics 
based upon Newton's laws of motion and also upon other 
special assumptions which are not explicitly stated. I might 
have derived assistance from this paper as well; but as a 
matter of fact my own investigation had made considerable 
progress by the time I became familiar with it I may say 
the same of the mathematical papers of Beltrami 8 and 
Iipschitz, 8 although these are of much older date. Still I 
found these very suggestive, as also the more recent presenta- 
tion of their investigations which Darboux 4 has given with 

1 J. J. Thomson, "On some Applications of Dynamical Principles to Physical 
Phenomena," Philosophical Transactions, 176, II., pp. 807-342, 1885. 

* Beltrami, "Sulla teoria generale dei parametri differenziali, " MemorU 
delta ReaU Accademia di Bologna, 25 Febbrajo 1869. 

* R. Lipschitz, " Untersuchungen eines Problems der Variationsrechnnng, in 
welchem das Problem der Meohanik en thai ten ist," Journal fur die reine und 
angewandU Matiwnatxk, 74, pp. 116-149, 1872. " Bemerkungen zu dem Princip 
des kleinsten Zwanges," ibid. 82, pp. 316-842, 1877. 

4 6. Darboux, Lecons sur la theoris generals des surfaces, livre v., chapitres 
vL vii. viii., Paris, 1889. 



XXIV PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 

additions of his own. I may have missed many mathematical 
papers which I could and should have consulted. In a general 
way I owe very much to Mach's splendid book on the 
Development of Mechanics} I have naturally consulted . the 
better-known text-books of general mechanics, and especially 
Thomson and Tait's comprehensive treatise. 2 The notes of 
a course of lectures on analytical dynamics by Borcbardt, 
which I took down in the winter of 1878-79, have proved 
useful. These are the sources upon which I have drawn ; in 
the text I shall only give such references as are requisite. 
As to the details I have nothing to bring forward which is 
new or which could not have been gleaned from many books. 
What I hope is new, and to this alone I attach value, is the 
arrangement and collocation of the whole — the logical or 
philosophical aspect of the matter. According as it marks 
an advance in this direction or not, my work will attain or 
fail of its object. 

1 E. Mach, Die Mtchanik in ihrer Entvrickelung historisch-krUiseh dargestellt, 
Leipzig, 1888 (of this there is an English translation by T. J. M'Cormack, The 
Science of Mechanics, Chicago, 1893). 

2 Thomson and Tait, Natural Philosophy. 



CONTENTS 



Introduction 



BOOK I 



GEOMETRY AND KINEMATICS OF MATERIAL SYSTEMS 



PAGE 



Prefatory Note 



45 



CHAPTER I 



Time, Space, and Mass 



. 45 



CHAPTER H 

Positions and Displacements of Points and Systems 

Position ; Configuration and Absolute Position ; Finite Displacements 
(a) of Points, (b) of Systems ; Composition of Displacements. 



48 



CHAPTER in 



Infinitely small Displacements and Paths of a System of Material 
Points ......... 61 

Infinitely small Displacements ; Displacements in the Direction of the 
Coordinates ; Use of Partial Differential Coefficients ; Paths of 
Systems. 



XXVI PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 



CHAPTER IV 

PAGE 

Possible and Impossible Displacements. Material Systems . 78 * 

Connections ; Analytical Representation of Connections ; Freedom of ^ 

Motion ; Displacements Perpendicular to Possible Displacements. 



CHAPTER V 

On the Paths of Material Systems .90 

1. Straightest Paths ; 2. Shortest and Geodesic Paths ; 3. Relations 
between Straightest and Geodesic Paths. 



CHAPTER VI 

On the Straightest Distance in Holonomous Systems 106 

1. Surfaces of Positions ; 2. Straightest Distance. 

CHAPTER VII 

Kinematics . .121 

1. Vector Quantities with regard to a System ; 2. Motion of Systems, 
Velocity, Momentum, Acceleration, Energy, Use of Partial Differ- 
ential Coefficients. 

Concluding Note on Book I . . . .135 



BOOK II 



Prefatory Note ........ 139 



CHAPTER I 



Time, Space, and Mass .139 









) 



> 



> 

\ 

> 



MECHANICS OF MATERIAL SYSTEMS f 

> 



A 



f 

* 



CONTENTS xxvii 



CHAPTER II 

PAOX 

The Fundamental Law ....... 144 

The Law ; its Justification, Limitation, and Analysis, Method of Applying 
it, Approximate Application. 



CHAPTER IE 



Motion of Free Systems ....... 152 

General Properties of the Motion : 1. Determinateness of the Motion ; 
2. Conservation of Energy ; 3. Least Acceleration ; 4. Shortest Path ; 
5. Shortest Time ; 6. Least Time- Integral of the Energy. Analytical 
Representation: Differential Equations of the Motion. Internal 
Constraint of Systems. Holonomous Systems. Dynamical Models. 



CHAPTER IV 



Motion of Unfree Systems . 17ft 

I. Guided Unfree System. II. Systems influenced by Forces : Intro- 
duction of Force, Action and Reaction, Composition of Forces, Motion 
under the Influence of Forces, Internal Constraint, Energy and Work, 
Equilibrium and Statics, Machines and Internal Forces, Measurement 
of Force. 



CHAPTER V 



Systems with Concealed Masses ..... 209> 

► I. Cyclical Motion : Cyclical Systems, Forces and Force-Functions, Re- 

ciprocal Properties, Energy and Work, Time-Integral of the Energy. 
II. Concealed Cyclical Motion : Conservative Systems, Differential 
Equations of Motion, Integral Propositions for Holonomous Systems, 
Finite Equations of Motion for Holonomous Systems ; Non-Oon- 

► servative Systems. 



XXV111 



PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 



CHAPTER VI 



Discontinuities op Motion 



PAGE 

253 



Impulsive Force or Impulse ; Composition of Impulses ; Motion under 
the Influence of Impulses ; Internal Constraint in Impact ; Energy 
and Work ; Impact of Two Systems. 




Concluding Note on Book II 



. 270 



Index to Definitions and Notations . 



. 273 



* 



/ 



INTBODUCTION 



The most direct, and in a sense the most important, problem 
which our conscious knowledge of nature should enable us to 
solve is the anticipation of future events, so that we may 
arrange our present affairs in accordance with such anticipa- 
, tion. As a basis for the solution of this problem we always 
, make use of our knowledge of events which have already 
occurred, obtained by chance observation or by prearranged 
experiment. In endeavouring thus to draw inferences as to 
the future from the past, we always adopt the following process. 
We form for ourselves images or symbols of external objects ; 
and the form which we give them is such that the necessary 
consequents of the images in thought are always the images of 
the necessary consequents in nature of the things pictured. In 
/ order that this requirement may be satisfied, there must be a 
certain conformity between nature and our thought. Experience 
teaches us that the requirement can be satisfied, and hence that 
such a conformity does in fact exist When from our accumu- 
lated previous experience we have once succeeded in deducing 
fc images of the desired nature, we can then in a short time 

\f develop by means of them, as by means of models, the 
consequences which in the external world only arise in a com- 
paratively long time, or as the result of our own interposition, 
f We are thus enabled to be in advance of the facts, and to 

decide as to present affairs in accordance with the insight so 
obtained. The images which we here speak of are our concep- 
tions of things. With the things themselves they are in 
conformity in one important respect, namely, in satisfying the 
above - mentioned requirement. For our purpose it is not 

B 



) 



\ 

I 

\ 



2 INTRODUCTION 

necessary that they should be in conformity with the things in 
any other respect whatever. As a matter of fact, we do not 
know, nor have we any means of knowing, whether our con- 
ceptions of things are in conformity with them in any other 
than this one fundamental respect. 



1 The images which we may form of things are not deter- 

mined without ambiguity by the requirement that the conse- 
quents of the images must be the images of the consequents. 
Various images of the same objects are possible, and these 
images may differ in various respects. We should at once 
denote as inadmissible all images which implicitly contradict 
the laws of our thought. Hence we postulate in the first place 
that all our images shall be logically permissible — or, briefly, 
that they shall be permissible. We shall denote as incorrect 
any permissible images, if their essential relations contradict 
the relations of external things, i.e. if they do not satisfy our 
first fundamental requirement. Hence we postulate in the 
second place that our images shall be correct. But two per- 
missible and correct images of the same external objects may 
yet differ in respect of appropriateness. Of two images of the 
same object that is the more appropriate which pictures more 
of the essential relations of the object, — the one which we may 
call the more distinct. Of two images of equal distinctness 
the more appropriate is the one which contains, in addition to 
the essential characteristics, the smaller number of superfluous 
or empty relations, — the simpler of the two. Empty relations 
cannot be altogether avoided : they enter into the images 
because they are simply images, — images produced by our 
mind and necessarily affected by the characteristics of its 
mode of portrayal. 

The postulates already mentioned are those which we 
assign to the images themselves : to a scientific representation 
of the images we assign different postulates. We require of 
this that it should lead us to a clear conception of what 
properties are to be ascribed to the images for the sake 
of permissibility, what for correctness, and what for appropri- 
atenesss. Only thus can we attain the possibility of modi- 
fying and improving our images. What is ascribed to the 



t 



INTRODUCTION 3 

images for the sake of appropriateness is contained in the nota- 
tions, definitions, abbreviations, and, in short, all that we can 
arbitrarily add or take away. What enters into the images for 
the sake of correctness is contained in the results of experience, 
from which the images are built up. What enters into the 

i images, in order that they may be permissible, is given by the 

nature of our mind. To the question whether an image is per- 
* v missible or not, we can without ambiguity answer yes or no ; and 

our decision will hold good for all time. And equally without 
ambiguity we can decide whether an image is correct or not ; 
but only according to the state of our present experience, and 
. permitting an appeal to later and riper experience. But we 

cannot decide without ambiguity whether an image is appro- 

" priate or not ; as to this differences of opinion may arise. One 

image may be more suitable for one purpose, another for another ; 

v only by gradually testing many images can we finally succeed 

in obtaining the most appropriate. 



f 



Those are, in my opinion, the standpoints from which we 
must estimate the value of physical theories and the value of 
the representations of physical theories. They are the stand- 
points from which we shall here consider the representations 
which have been given of the Principles of Mechanics. We 
must first explain clearly what we denote by this name. 

Strictly speaking, what was originally termed in mechanics 
<^ a principle was such a statement as could not be traced back 
x to other propositions in mechanics, but was regarded as a direct 
result obtained from other sources of knowledge. In the course 
of historical development it inevitably came to pass that pro- 
positions, which at one time and under special circumstances 
were rightly denoted as principles, wrongly retained these 
\ names. Since Lagrange's time it has frequently been remarked 
K that the principles of the centre of gravity and of areas are 
in reality only propositions of a general nature. But we can 
with equal justice say that other so-called principles cannot 
bear this name, but must descend to the rank of propositions 
or corollaries, when the representation of mechanics becomes 
^ based upon one or more of the others. Thus the idea of a 
mechanical principle has not been kept sharply defined. We 



\ 



4 INTRODUCTION 

shall therefore retain for such propositions, when mentioning 
them separately, their customary names. But these separate 
concrete propositions are not what we shall have in mind when 
we speak simply and generally of the principles of mechanics : 
by this will be meant any selection from amongst such and 
similar propositions, which satisfies the requirement that the 
whole of mechanics can be developed from it by purely deduc- 
tive reasoning without any further appeal to experience. In 
this sense the fundamental ideas of mechanics, together with the 
principles connecting them, represent the simplest image which 
physics can produce of things in the sensible world and the 
processes which occur in it By varying the choice of the 
propositions which we take as fundamental, we can give 
various representations of the principles of mechanics. Hence 
we can thus obtain various images of things ; and these images 
we can test and compare with each other in respect of per- 
missibility, correctness, and appropriateness. 



The customary representation of mechanics gives us a first 
image. By this we mean the representation, varying in detail 
but identical in essence, contained in almost all text-books 
which deal with the whole of mechanics, and in almost all 
courses of lectures which cover the whole of this science. This 
is the path by which the great army of students travel and are 
inducted into the mysteries of mechanics. It closely follows 
the course of historical development and the sequence of 
discoveries. Its principal stages are distinguished by the 
names of Archimedes, Galileo, Newton, Lagrange. The con- 
ceptions upon which this representation is based are the ideas 
of space, time, force, and mass. In it force is introduced as 
the cause of motion, existing before motion and independently 
of it. Space and force first appear by themselves, and their 
relations are treated of in statics. Kinematics, or the science 
of pure motion, confines itself to connecting the two ideas of 
space and time. Galileo's conception of inertia furnishes a 
connection between space, time, and mass alone. Not until 
Newton's Laws of Motion do the four fundamental ideas 



I 



I 



INTRODUCTION 5 

\ become connected with each other. These laws contain the 
seed of future developments; but they do not furnish any 
general expression for the influence of rigid spacial connections. 

j Here d'Alembert's principle extends the general results of 

' statics to the case of motion, and closes the series of inde- 
^ pendent fundamental statements which cannot be deduced from 
each other. From here on everything is deductive inference. 
In fact the above-mentioned ideas and laws are not only 

1 necessary but sufficient for the development of the whole of 
mechanics from them as a necessary consequence of thought ; 

f and all other so-called principles can be regarded as proposi- 
^ tions and corollaries deduced by special assumptions. Hence 
the above ideas and laws give us, in the sense in which we 
have used the words, a first system of principles of mechanics, 
and at the same time the first general image of the natural 

' motions of material bodies. 

' Now, at first sight, any doubt as to the logical permis- 

\ sibility of this image may seem very far-fetched. It seems 
almost inconceivable that we should find logical imperfections 
in a system which has been thoroughly and repeatedly con- 
sidered by many of the ablest intellects. But before we 
abandon the investigation on this account, we should do well 
to inquire whether the system has always given satisfaction to 
these able intellects. It is really wonderful how easy it is to 
attach to the fundamental laws considerations which are quite 
in accordance with the usual modes of expression in mechanics, 
and which yet are an undoubted hindrance to clear thinking. 
Let us endeavour to give an example of this. We swing in a 
circle a stone tied to a string, and in so doing we are conscious 
of exerting a force upon the stone. This force constantly 
deflects the stone from its straight path. If we vary the force, 
the mass of the stone, and the length of the string, we find 
that the actual motion of the stone is always in accordance 
with Newton's second law. But now the third law requires 
an opposing force to the force exerted by the hand upon the 
stone. With regard to this opposing force the usual explanation 
is that the stone reacts upon the hand in consequence of centri- 
fugal force, and that this centrifugal force is in fact exactly 
equal and opposite to that which we exert Now is this mode 



6 INTRODUCTION 

of expression permissible ? Is what we call centrifugal force 
anything else than the inertia of the stone ? Can we, without 
destroying the clearness of our conceptions, take the effect of 
inertia twice into account, — firstly as mass, secondly as force ? 
In our laws of motion, force was a cause of motion, and was 
present before the motion. Can we, without confusing our 
ideas, suddenly begin to speak of forces which arise through 
motion, which are a consequence of motion ? Can we behave 
as if we had already asserted anything about forces of this new 
kind in our laws, as if by calling them forces we could invest 
them with the properties of forces ? These questions must 
clearly be answered in the negative. The only possible 
explanation is that, properly speaking, centrifugal force is not 
a force at all. Its name, like the name vis viva, is accepted as a 
historic tradition ; it is convenient to retain it, although we should 
rather apologise for its retention than endeavour to justify it 
But, what now becomes of the demands of the third law, which 
requires a force exerted by the inert stone upon the hand, and 
which can only be satisfied by an actual force, not a mere name ? 

I do not regard these as artificial difficulties wantonly 
raised : they are objections which press for an answer. Is not 
their origin to be traced back to the fundamental laws ? The 
force spoken of in the definition and in the first two laws acts 
upon a body in one definite direction. The sense of the third 
law is that forces always connect two bodies, and are directed 
from the first to the second as well as from the second to the 
first. It seems to me that the conception of force assumed and 
created in us by the third law on the one hand, and the first 
two laws on the other hand, are slightly different. This slight 
difference may be enough to produce the logical obscurity of 
which the consequences are manifest in the above example. 
It is not necessary to discuss further examples. We can 
appeal to general observations as evidence in support of the 
above-mentioned doubt 

As such, in the first place, I would mention the experience 
that it is exceedingly difficult to expound to thoughtful hearers 
the very introduction to mechanics without being occasionally 
embarrassed, without feeling tempted now and again to 
apologise, without wishing to get as quickly as possible over 



INTRODUCTION 7 

the rudiments, and on to examples which speak for themselves. 
I fancy that Newton himself must have felt this embarrassment 
when he gave the rather forced definition of mass as being the 
product of volume and density. I fancy that Thomson and 
Tait must also have felt it when they remarked that this is 
really more a definition of density than of mass, and neverthe- 
less contented themselves with it as the only definition of mass. 
Lagrange, too, must have felt this embarrassment and the wish 
to get on at all costs ; for he briefly introduces his Mechanics 
with the explanation that a force is a cause which imparts " or 
tends to impart " motion to a body ; and he must certainly 
have felt the logical difficulty of such a definition. I find 
further evidence in the demonstrations of the elementary pro- 
positions of statics, such as the law of the parallelogram of 
forces, of virtual velocities, etc. Of such propositions we have 
numerous proofs given by eminent mathematicians. These 
claim to be rigid proofs ; but, according to the opinion of other 
distinguished mathematicians, they in no way satisfy this claim. 
In a logically complete science, such as pure mathematics, such 
a difference of opinion is utterly inconceivable. 

Weighty evidence seems to be furnished by the state- 
ments which one hears with wearisome frequency, that the 
nature of force is still a mystery, that one of the chief problems 
of physics is the investigation of the nature of force, and so on. 
In the same way electricians are continually attacked as to the 
nature of electricity. Now, why is it that people never in 
this way ask what is the nature of gold, or what is the nature 
of velocity ? Is the nature of gold better known to us than 
that of electricity, or the nature of velocity better than that of 
force ? Can we by our conceptions, by our words, completely 
represent the nature of any thing ? Certainly not. I fancy 
the difference must lie in this. With the terms " velocity " 
and "gold" we connect a large number of relations to other 
terms ; and between all these relations we find no contradic- 
tions which offend us. We are therefore satisfied and ask no 
further questions. But we have accumulated around the 
terms "force" and "electricity" more relations than can be 
completely reconciled amongst themselves. We have an 
obscure feeling of this and want to have things cleared up. 
Our confused wish finds expression in the confused question 



8 INTRODUCTION 

as to the nature of force and electricity. But the answer 
which we want is not really an answer to this question. It is 
not by finding out more and fresh relations and connections 
that it can be answered ; but by removing the contradictions 
existing between those already known, and thus perhaps by 
reducing their number. When these painful contradictions 
are removed, the question as to the nature of force will not 
have been answered; but our minds, no longer vexed, will 
cease to ask illegitimate questions. 

I have thrown such strong doubts upon the permissibility 
of this image that it might appear to be my intention to 
contest, and finally to deny, its permissibility. But my inten- 
tion and conviction do not go so far as this. Even if the 
logical uncertainties, which have made us solicitous as to our 
fundamental ideas, do actually exist, they certainly have not 
prevented a single one of the numerous triumphs which 
mechanics has won in its applications. Hence, they cannot 
consist of contradictions between the essential characteristics of 
our image, nor, therefore, of contradictions between those rela- 
tions of mechanics which correspond to the relations of things. 
They must rather lie in the unessential characteristics which we 
have ourselves arbitrarily worked into the essential content 
given by nature. If so, these dilemmas can be avoided. 
Perhaps our objections do not relate to the content of the image 
devised, but only to the form in which the content is represented. 
It is not going too far to say that this representation has never 
attained scientific completeness; it still fails to distinguish 
thoroughly and sharply between the elements in the image which 
arise from the necessities of thought, from experience, and from 
arbitrary choice. This is also the opinion of distinguished physi- 
cists who have thought over and discussed * these questions, 
although it cannot be said that all of them are in agreement. 3 
This opinion also finds confirmation in the increasing care 
with which the logical analysis of the elements is carried out 
in the more recent text-books of mechanics. 8 We are con- 

1 See E. Mach, The Science of Mechanics, p. 244. See also in Nature (48, pp. 
62, 101, 117, 126 and 166, 1893 ; and Proc Phys. Soc 12, p. 289, 1893) a discus- 
sion on the foundations of dynamics introduced by Prof. Oliver Lodge and carried 
on in the Physical Society of London. 

3 See Thomson and Tait, Natural Philosophy, § 205 et seq. 

* See £. Budde, AUgcmeine Mechanik der PunJcU und starren Systeme, p. 11 1-138 



INTRODUCTION 9 

vinced, as are the authors of these text-books and the physicists 
referred to, that the existing defects are only defects in form ; 
and that all indistinctness and uncertainty can be avoided by 
suitable arrangement of definitions and notations, and by due 
care in the mode of expression. In this sense we admit, as every- 
one does, the permissibility of the content of mechanics. But 
the dignity and importance of the subject demand, not simply that 
we should readily take for granted its logical clearness, but that 
we should endeavour to show it by a representation so perfect 
that there should no longer be any possibility of doubting it 

Upon the correctness of the image under consideration we 
can pronounce judgment more easily and with greater certainty 
of general assent. No one will deny that within the whole 
range of our experience up to the present the correctness is 
perfect ; that all those characteristics of our image, which claim 
to represent observable relations of things, do really and correctly 
correspond to them. Our assurance, of course, is restricted to 
the range of previous experience : as far as future experience is 
concerned, there will yet be occasion to return to the question of 
correctness. To many this will seem to be excessive and absurd 
caution: to many physicists it appears simply inconceivable 
that any further experience whatever should find anything to 
alter in the firm foundations of mechanics. Nevertheless, that 
which is derived from experience can again be annulled by 
experience. This over-favourable opinion of the fundamental 
laws must obviously arise from the fact that the elements of 
experience are to a certain extent hidden in them and blended 
with the unalterable elements which are necessary consequences 
of our thought Thus the logical indefiniteness of the repre- 
sentation, which we have just censured, has one advantage. 
It gives the foundations an appearance of immutability ; and 
perhaps it was wise to introduce it in the beginnings of the 
science and to allow it to remain for a while. The correctness 
of the image in all cases was carefully provided for by making 
the reservation that, if need be, facts derived from experience 
should determine definitions or vice versa. In a perfect science 
such groping, such an appearance of certainty, is inadmissible. 

(Berlin : 1890). The representation there given shows at the same time how great 
are the difficulties encountered in avoiding discrepancies in the use of the elements. 



10 INTRODUCTION 

Mature knowledge regards logical clearness as of prime im- 
portance : only logically clear images does it test as to correct- 
ness ; only correct images does it compare as to appropriateness. 
By pressure of circumstances the process is often reversed. 
Images are found to be suitable for a certain purpose ; are next 
tested as to their correctness ; and only in the last place purged 
of implied contradictions. 

If there is any truth in what we have just stated, it 
seems only natural that the system of mechanics under con- 
sideration should prove most appropriate in its applications to 
those simple phenomena for which it was first devised, ie. 
especially to the action of gravity and the problems of 
practical mechanics. But we should not be content with this. 
We should remember that we are not here representing 
the needs of daily life or the standpoint of past times; we 
are considering the whole range of present physical know- 
ledge, and are, moreover, speaking of appropriateness in the 
special sense defined in the beginning of this introduction. 
Hence we are at once bound to ask, — Is this image perfectly 
distinct ? Does it contain all the characteristics which our 
present knowledge enables us to distinguish in natural 
motions ? Our answer is a decided — No. All the motions 
of which the fundamental laws admit, and which are treated 
of in mechanics as mathematical exercises, do not occur in 
nature. Of natural motions, forces, and fixed connections, we 
can predicate more than the accepted fundamental laws do. 
Since the middle of this century we have been firmly con- 
vinced that no forces actually exist in nature which would 
involve a violation of the principle of the conservation of 
energy. The conviction is much older that only such forces 
exist as can be represented as a sum of mutual actions between 
infinitely small elements of matter. Again, these elementary 
forces are not free. We can assert as a property which they 
are generally admitted to possess, that they are independent of 
absolute time and place. Other properties are disputed. 
Whether the elementary forces can only consist of attractions 
and repulsions along the line connecting the acting masses ; 
whether their magnitude is determined only by the distance or 
whether it is also affected by the absolute or relative velocity ; 



INTRODUCTION 1 1 

whether the latter alone comes into consideration, or the accel- 
eration or still higher differential coefficients as well — all these 
properties have been sometimes presumed, at other times ques- 
tioned. Although there is such difference of opinion as to the 
precise properties which are to be attributed to the elementary 
forces, there is a general agreement that more of such general 
properties can be assigned, and can from existing observations 
be deduced, than are contained in the fundamental laws. We 
are convinced that the elementary forces must, so to speak, be 
of a simple nature. And what here holds for the forces, can 
be equally asserted of the fixed connections of bodies which are 
represented mathematically by equations of condition between 
the coordinates and whose effect is determined by d'Alembert's 
principle. It is mathematically possible to write down any 
finite or differential equation between coordinates and to 
require that it shall be satisfied ; but it is not always possible 
to specify a natural, physical connection corresponding to such 
an equation : we often feel, indeed sometimes are convinced, 
that such a connection is by the nature of things excluded. 
And yet, how are we to restrict the permissible equations of 
condition ? Where is the limiting line between them and 
the conceivable ones ? To consider only finite equations of 
condition, as has often been done, is to go too far; for 
differential equations which are not integrable can actually 
occur as equations of condition in natural problems. 

In short, then, so far as the forces, as well as the fixed 
relations, are concerned, our system of principles embraces all 
the natural motions ; but it also includes very many motions 
which are not natural. A system which excludes the latter, 
or even a part of them, would picture more of the actual 
relations of things to each other, and would therefore in this 
sense be more appropriate. We are next bound to inquire as 
to the appropriateness of our image in a second direction. Is 
our image simple ? Is it sparing in unessential characteristics 
— ones added by ourselves, permissibly and yet arbitrarily, to 
the essential and natural ones ? In answering this question 
our thoughts again turn to the idea of force. It cannot be 
denied that in very many cases the forces which are used in 
mechanics for treating physical problems are simply sleeping 



12 INTRODUCTION 

partners, which keep out of the business altogether when actual 
facts have to be represented. In the simple relations with 
which mechanics originally dealt, this is not the case. The 
weight of a stone and the force exerted by the arm seem to be 
as real and as readily and directly perceptible as the motions 
which they produce. But it is otherwise when we turn to the 
motions of the stars. Here the forces have never been the 
objects of direct perception ; all our previous experiences relate 
only to the apparent position of the stars. Nor do we expect 
in future to perceive the forces. The future experiences which 
we anticipate again relate only to the position of these luminous 
points in the heavens. It is only in the deduction of future 
experiences from the past that the forces of gravitation enter as 
transitory aids in the calculation, and then disappear from 
consideration. Precisely the same is true of the discussion of 
molecular forces, of chemical actions, and of many electric and 
magnetic actions. And if after more mature experience we 
return to the simple forces, whose existence we never doubted, 
we learn that these forces which we had perceived with con- 
vincing certainty, were after all not real. More mature 
mechanics tells us that what we believed to be simply the 
tendency of a body towards the earth, is not really such : it is 
the result, imagined only as a single force, of an inconceivable 
number of actual forces which attract the atoms of the body 
towards all the atoms of the universe. Here again the actual 
forces have never been the objects of previous experience ; nor 
do we expect to come across them in future experiences. 
Only during the process of deducing future experiences from 
the past do they glide quietly in and out. But even if the 
forces have only been introduced by ourselves into nature, we 
should not on that account regard their introduction as 
inappropriate. We have felt sure from the beginning that 
unessential relations could not be altogether avoided in our 
images. All that we can ask is that these relations should, 
as far as possible, be restricted, and that a wise discretion 
should be observed in their use. But has physics always 
been sparing in the use of such relations ? Has it not rather 
been compelled to fill the world to overflowing with forces of 
the most various kinds — with forces which never appeared in 
the phenomena, even with forces which only came into action 



INTRODUCTION 13 

in exceptional cases ? We see a piece of iron resting upon a 
table, and we accordingly imagine that no causes of motion 
— no forces — are there present. Physics, which is based upon 
the mechanics considered here and necessarily determined by 
this basis, teaches us otherwise. Through the force of gravita- 
tion every atom of the iron is attracted by every other atom in 
the universe. But every atom of the iron is magnetic, and is 
thus connected by fresh forces with every other magnetic atom 
in the universe. Again, bodies in the universe contain 
electricity in motion, and this latter exerts further complicated 
forces which attract every atom of the iron. In so far as the 
parts of the iron themselves contain electricity, we have fresh 
forces to take into consideration; and in addition to these 
again various kinds of molecular forces. Some of these forces 
are not small : if only a part of these forces were effective, this 
part would suffice to tear the iron to pieces. But, in fact, all 
the forces are so adjusted amongst each other that the effect of 
the whole lot is zero; that in spite of a thousand existing 
causes of motion, no motion takes place ; that the iron remains 
at rest. Now if we place these conceptions before unpreju- 
diced persons, who will believe us ? Whom shall we convince 
that we are speaking of actual things, not images of a riotous 
imagination ? And it is for us to reflect whether we have 
really depicted the state of rest of the iron and its particles in 
a simple manner. Whether complications can be entirely 
avoided is questionable ; but there can be no question that a 
system of mechanics which does avoid or exclude them is 
simpler, and in this sense more appropriate, than the one here 
considered ; for this latter not only permits such conceptions, 
but directly obtrudes them upon us. 

Let us now collect together as briefly as possible the 
doubts which have occurred to us in considering the 
customary mode of representing . the principles of mechanics. 
As far as the form is concerned, we consider that the logical 
value, of the separate statements is not defined with 
sufficient clearness. As far as the facts are concerned, it 
appears to us that the motions considered in mechanics do not 
exactly coincide with the natural motions under consideration. 
Many properties of the natural motions are not attended to in 



14 INTRODUCTION 

mechanics ; many relations which are considered in mechanics 
are probably absent in nature. Even if these objections are 
acknowledged to be well founded, they should not lead us to 
imagine that the customary representation of mechanics is on 
that account either bound to or likely to lose its value and its 
privileged position ; but they sufficiently justify us in looking 
out for other representations less liable to censure in these 
respects, and more closely conformable to the things which 
have to be represented. 

II 

There is a second image of mechanical processes which is 
of much more recent origin than the first. Its development 
from, and side by side with, the latter is closely connected with 
advances which physical science has made during the past few 
decades. Up to the middle of this century its ultimate aim 
was apparently to explain natural phenomena by tracing them 
back to innumerable actions-at-a-distance between the atoms of 
matter. This mode of conception corresponded completely to 
what we have spoken of as the first system of mechanical 
principles : each of the two was conditioned by the other. 
Now, towards the end of the century, physics has shown a 
preference for a different mode of thought Influenced by the 
overpowering impression made by the discovery of the prin- 
ciple of the conservation of energy, it likes to treat the 
phenomena which occur in its domain as transformations of 
energy into new forms, and to regard as its ultimate aim the 
tracing back of the phenomena to the laws of the transforma- 
tion of energy. This mode of treatment can also be applied 
from the beginning to the elementary phenomena of motion. 
There thus arises a new and different representation of 
mechanics, in which from the start the idea of force retires in 
favour of the idea of energy. It is this new image of the 
elementary processes of motion which we shall denote as the 
second; and to it we shall now devote our attention. In 
discussing the first image we had the advantage of being able 
to assume that it stood out plainly before the eyes of all 
physicists. With the second image this is not the case. It has 
never yet been portrayed in all its details. So far as I know, 



INTRODUCTION 15 

there is no text-book of mechanics which from the start 
teaches the subject from the standpoint of energy, and intro- 
duces the idea of energy before the idea of force. Perhaps 
there has never yet been a lecture on mechanics prepared 
according to this plan. But to the founders of the theory of 
energy it was evident that such a plan was possible ; the remark 
has often been made that in this way the idea of force with its 
attendant difficulties could be avoided ; and in special scientific 
applications chains of reasoning frequently occur which belong 
entirely to this mode of thought. Hence we can very well 
sketch the rough outlines of the image ; we can give the general 
plan according to which such a representation of mechanics 
must be arranged. We here start, as in the case of the first 
image, from four independent fundamental ideas; and the 
relations of these to each other will form the contents of 
mechanics. Two of them — space and time — have a mathe- 
matical character ; the other two — mass and energy — are intro- 
duced as physical entities which are present in given quantity, 
and cannot be destroyed or increased. In addition to explain- 
ing these matters, it will, of course, also be necessary to indicate 
clearly by what concrete experiences we ultimately establish the 
presence of mass and energy. We here assume this to be pos- 
sible and to be done. It is obvious that the amount of energy 
connected with given masses depends upon the state of these 
masses. But it is as a general experience that we must first lay 
down that the energy present can always be split up into two 
parts, of which the one is determined solely by the relative posi- 
tions of the masses, while the other depends upon their absolute 
velocities. The first part is defined as potential energy, the 
second as kinetic energy. The form of the dependence of 
kinetic energy upon the velocity of the moving bodies is in all 
cases the same, and is known. The form of the dependence of 
potential energy upon the position of the bodies cannot be 
generally stated ; it rather constitutes the special nature and 
characteristic peculiarity of the masses under consideration. It 
is the problem of physics to ascertain from previous experience 
this form for the bodies which surround us in nature. Up to 
this point there come essentially into consideration only three 
elements — space, mass, energy, considered in relation to each 
other. In order to settle the relations of all the four funda- 



16 INTRODUCTION 

mental ideas, and thereby the course in time of the phenomena, 
we make use of one of the integral principles of ordinary 
mechanics which involve in their statement the idea of energy. 
It is not of much importance which of these we select ; we can 
and shall choose Hamilton's principle. We thus lay down as 
the sole fundamental law of mechanics, in accordance with 
experience, the proposition that every system of natural bodies 
moves just as if it were assigned the problem of attaining given 
! ; positions in given times, and in such a manner that the average 
jiover the whole time of the difference between kinetic and 
\ (potential energy shall be as small as possible. Although this law 
may not be simple in form, it nevertheless represents without 
ambiguity the transformations of energy, and enables us to pre- 
determine completely the course of actual phenomena for the 
future. In stating this new law we lay down the last of the 
indispensable foundations of mechanics. All that we can 
further add are only mathematical deductions and certain 
simplifications of notation which, although expedient, are not 
necessary. Among these latter is the idea of force, which does 
not enter into the foundations. Its introduction is expedient 
when we are considering not only masses which are connected 
with constant quantities of energy, but also masses which give 
up energy to other masses or receive it from them. Still, it is 
not by any new experience that it is introduced, but by a 
definition which can be formed in more than one way. And 
accordingly the properties of the force so defined are not to be 
ascertained by experience, but are to be deduced from the 
definition and the fundamental laws. Even the confirmation 
of these properties by experience is superfluous, unless we doubt 
the correctness of the whole system. Hence the idea of force 
as such cannot in this system involve any logical difficulties : 
nor can it come in question in estimating the correctness of 
the system ; it can only increase or diminish its appropriateness. 
Somewhat after the manner indicated would the principles 
of mechanics have to be arranged in order to adapt them to 
the conception of energy. The question now is, whether this 
second image is preferable to the first Let us therefore 
consider its advantages and disadvantages. 

It will be best for us here to consider first the question of 



INTBODUCTION 17 

appropriateness, since it is in this respect that the improve- 
ment is most obvious. For, to begin with, our second image of 
natural motions is decidedly more distinct : it shows more of 
their peculiarities than the first does. When we wish to 
deduce Hamilton's principle from the general foundations of 
mechanics we have to add to the latter certain assumptions as 
to the acting forces and the character of contingent fixed connec- 
tions. These assumptions are of the most general nature, but 
they indicate a corresponding number of important limitations 
of the motions represented by the principle. And, conversely, 
we can deduce from the principle a whole series of relations, 
especially of mutual relations between every kind of possible 
force, which are wanting in the principles of the first image ; 
in the second image they are present, and likewise occur, 
which is the important point, in nature. To prove this is 
the object of the papers published by von Helmholtz under 
the title, Ueber die phydkodische Bedeutung des Prinzips der 
kleinsten, Wirhing. It would be more correct to say that 
the fact which has to be proved forms the discovery which is 
demonstrated and communicated in that paper. For it is 
truly a discovery to find that from such general assump- 
tions, conclusions so distinct, so weighty, and so just can be 
drawn. We may then appeal to that paper for confirmation 
of our statement ; and, inasmuch as it represents the furthest 
advance of physics at the present time, we may spare ourselves 
the question whether it be possible to conform yet more closely 
to nature, say by limiting the permissible forms of potential 
energy. We shall simply emphasise this, that in respect of 
simplicity as well, our present image avoids the stumbling- 
blocks which endangered the appropriateness of the first. For 
if we ask ourselves the real reasons why physics at the present 
time prefers to express itself in terms of energy, our answer will 
be, Because in this way it best avoids talking about things of 
which it knows very little, and which do not at all affect the 
essential statements under consideration. We have already 
had occasion to remark that in tracing back phenomena to 
force we are compelled to turn our attention continually to 
atoms and molecules. It is true that we are now convinced 
that ponderable matter consists of atoms ; and we have definite 
notions of the magnitude of these atoms and of their motions 



18 INTRODUCTION 

in certain cases. But the form of the atoms, their connection, 
their motion in most cases — all these are entirely hidden from 
\ls ; their number is in all cases immeasurably great. So that 
although our conception of atoms is in itself an important and 
interesting object for further investigation, it is in no wise 
specially fit to serve as a known and secure foundation for 
mathematical theories. To an investigator like Gustav Kirchhoff, 
who was accustomed to rigid reasoning, it almost gave pain to 
see atoms and their vibrations wilfully stuck in the middle of a 
theoretical deduction. The arbitrarily assumed properties of 
the atoms may not affect the final result. The result may be 
correct Nevertheless the details of the deduction are in great 
part presumably false ; the deduction is only in appearance 
a proof. Tfh e earlier mode of thought in physics scarcely 
allowed any choice or any way of escape. Herein lies the 
advantage of the conception of energy and of our second 
image of mechanics : that in the hypotheses of the problems 
there only enter characteristics which are directly accessible to 
experience, parameters, or arbitrary coordinates of the bodies 
under consideration ; that the examination proceeds with the 
aid of these characteristics in a finite and complete form ; and 
that the final result can again be directly translated into tan- 
gible experience. Beyond energy itself in its few forms, no 
auxiliary constructions enter into consideration. Our state- 
ments can be limited to the known peculiarities of the system 
of bodies under consideration, and we need not conceal our 
ignorance of the details by arbitrary and ineffectual hypotheses. 
All the steps in the deduction, as well as the final result, can 
be defended as correct and significant. These are the merits 
which have endeared this method to present-day physics. They 
are peculiar to our second image of mechanics : in the sense in 
which we have used the words they are to be regarded as ad- 
vantages in respect of simplicity, and hence of appropriateness. 

Unfortunately we begin to be uncertain as to the value of 
our system when we test its correctness and its logical permis- 
sibility. The question of correctness at once gives rise to 
legitimate doubts. Hamilton's principle can be deduced from 
the accepted foundations of Newtonian mechanics ; but this does 
not by any means guarantee an accordance with nature. We 



INTRODUCTION 19 

have to remember that this deduction only follows if certain 
assumptions hold good ; and also that our system claims not 
only to describe certain natural motions correctly, but to 
embrace all natural motionfe. We must therefore investigate 
whether these special assumptions which are made in addition 
to Newton's laws are universally true ; and a single example 
from nature to the contrary would invalidate the correctness 
of our system as such, although it would not disturb in the 
least the validity of Hamilton's principle as a general proposi- 
tion. The doubt is not so much whether our system includes 
the whole manifold 1 of forces, as whether it embraces the 
whole manifold of rigid connections which may arise between 
the bodies of nature. The application of Hamilton's principle 
to a material system does not exclude the existence of fixed 
connections between the chosen coordinates. But at any rate it 
requires that these connections be mathematically expressible 
by finite equations between the coordinates : it does not permit 
the occurrence of connections which can only be represented 
by differential equations. But nature itself does not appear 
to entirely exclude connections of this kind. They arise, for 
example, when bodies of three dimensions roll on one another 
without slipping. By such a connection, examples of which 
frequently occur, the position of the two bodies with respect 
to each other is only limited by the condition that they must 
always have one point of their surfaces common; but the 
freedom of motion of the bodies is further diminished by a 
degree. From the connection, then, there can be deduced 
more equations between the changes of the coordinates than 
between the coordinates themselves ; hence there must amongst 
these equations be at least one non-integrable differential equa- 
tion. Now Hamilton's principle cannot be applied to such 
a case ; or, to speak more correctly, the application, which 
is mathematically possible, leads to results which are physi- 
cally false. Let us restrict our consideration to the case 
of a sphere rolling without slipping upon a horizontal plane 
under the influence of its inertia alone. It is not difficult 
to see, without calculation, what motions the sphere can 
actually execute. We can also see what motions would corre- 
spond to Hamilton's principle ; these would have to take place 

1 [Mannigfaltigkcit is thus rendered throughout. — TV.] 



20 INTRODUCTION 

in such a way that with constant vis viva the sphere would 
attain given positions in the shortest possible time. We 
can thus convince ourselves, without calculation, that the 
two kinds of motions exhibit very 'different characteristics. If 
we choose any initial and final positions of the sphere, it is 
clear that there is always one definite motion from the one to 
the other for which the time of motion, i.e. the Hamilton's 
integral, is a minimum. But, as a matter of fact, a natural 
motion from every position to every other is not possible with- 
out the co-operation of forces, even if the choice of the initial 
velocity is perfectly free. And even if we choose the initial 
and final positions so that a natural free motion between the 
two is possible, this will nevertheless not be the one which 
corresponds to a minimum of time. For certain initial and 
final positions the difference can be very striking. In this 
case a sphere moving in accordance with the principle would 
decidedly have the appearance of a living thing, steering its 
course consciously towards a given goal, while a sphere follow- 
ing the law of nature would give the impression of an inani- 
mate mass spinning steadily towards it. It would be of no 
use to replace Hamilton's principle by the principle of least 
action or by any other integral principle, for there is but a 
slight difference of meaning between all these principles, and in 
the respect here considered they are quite equivalent. Only 
in one way can we defend the system and preserve it from the 
charge of incorrectness. We must decline to admit that rigid 
connections of the kind referred to do actually and strictly occur 
in nature. We must show that all so-called rolling without 
slipping is really rolling with a little slipping, and is therefore 
a case of friction. We have to rest our case upon this — that 
generally friction between surfaces is one of the processes which 
we have not yet been able to trace back to clearly understood 
causes ; that the forces which come into play have only been 
ascertained quite empirically; and hence that the whole problem 
is one of those which we cannot at present handle without 
making use of force and the roundabout methods of ordinary 
mechanics. This defence is not quite convincing. For rolling 
without slipping does not contradict either the principle of 
energy or any other generally accepted law of physics. The 
process is one which is so nearly realised in the visible world 



INTRODUCTION 21 

that even integration machines are constructed on the assump- 
tion that it strictly takes place. We have scarcely any right, 
then, to exclude its occurrence as impossible, at any rate from the 
mechanics of unknown systems, such as the atoms or the parts 
of the ether. But even if we admit that the connections in 
question are only approximately realised in nature, the failure 
of Hamilton's principle still creates difficulties in these cases. 
We are bound to require of every fundamental law of our 
mechanical system, that when applied to approximately correct 
relations it should always lead to approximately correct results, 
not to results which are entirely false. For otherwise, since all the 
rigid connections which we draw from nature and introduce into 
the calculations correspond only approximately to the actual 
relations, we should get into a state of hopeless uncertainty 
as to which admitted of the application of the law and which 
not And yet we do not wish to abandon entirely the defence 
which we have proposed. We should prefer to admit that the 
doubt is one which affects the appropriateness of the system, 
not its correctness, so that the disadvantages which arise from 
it may be outweighed by other advantages. 

The real difficulties first meet us when we try to arrange 
the elements of the system in strict accordance with the 
requirements of logical permissibility. In introducing the idea 
of energy we cannot proceed in the usual way, starting with 
force, and proceeding from this to force-functions, to potential 
energy, and to energy in general. Such an arrangement 
would belong to the first representation of mechanics. With- 
out assuming any previous consideration of mechanics, we have 
to specify by what simple, direct experiences we propose 
to define the presence of a store of energy, and the deter- 
mination of its amount. In what precedes we have only 
assumed, not shown, that such a determination is possible. 
At the present time many distinguished physicists tend so 
much to attribute to energy the properties of a substance as 
to assume that every smallest portion of it is associated at 
every instant with a given place in space, and that through 
all the changes of place and all the transformations of the energy 
into new forms it retains its identity. These physicists must 
have the conviction that definitions of the required kind can be 



22 INTRODUCTION 

found ; and it is therefore permissible to assume that such defini- 
tions can be given. But when we toy to throw them into a con- 
crete form, satisfactory to ourselves and likely to command general 
acceptance, we become perplexed. This mode of conception as 
a whole does not yet seem to have arrived at a satisfactory and 
conclusive result. At the very beginning there arises a special 
difficulty, from the circumstance that energy, which is alleged 
to resemble a substance, occurs in two such totally dissimilar 
forms as kinetic and potential energy. Kinetic energy itself 
does not really require any new fundamental determination, 
for it can be deduced from the ideas of velocity and mass ; on 
the other hand potential energy, which does require to be 
settled independently, does not lend itself at all well to any 
definition which ascribes to it the properties of a substance. 
The amount of a substance is necessarily a positive quantity ; 
but we never hesitate in assuming the potential energy con- 
tained in a system to be negative. When the amount of 
a substance is represented by an analytical expression, an 
additive constant in the expression has the same importance 
as the rest ; but in the expression for the potential energy of a 
system an additive constant never has any meaning. Lastly, 
the amount of any substance contained in a physical system 
can only depend upon the state of the system itself; but the 
amount of potential energy contained in given matter depends 
upon the presence of distant masses which perhaps have never 
had any influence upon the system. If the universe, and 
therefore the number of such distant masses, is infinite, then 
the amount of many forms of potential energy contained in 
even finite quantities of matter is infinitely great. All these 
are difficulties which must be removed or avoided by the 
desired definition of energy. We do not assert that such a 
definition is impossible, but as yet we cannot say that it has 
been framed. The most prudent thing to do will be to regard 
it for the present as an open question, whether the system can 
be developed in logically unexceptionable form. 

It may be worth while discussing here whether there is 
any justification for another objection which might be raised 
as to the permissibility of this second system. In order that 
an image of certain external things may in our sense be per- 



INTRODUCTION 23 

missible, not only must its characteristics be consistent amongst 
themselves, but they must not contradict the .characteristics 
of other images already established in our knowledge. On 
the strength of this it may be said to be inconceivable that 
Hamilton's principle, or any similar proposition, should really 
play the part of a fundamental law of mechanics, and be a 
fundamental law of nature. For the first thing that is to be 
expected of a fundamental law is simplicity and plainness, 
whereas Hamilton's principle, when we come to look into it, 
proves to be an exceedingly complicated statement. Not only 
does it make the present motion dependent upon consequences 
which can only exhibit themselves in the future, thereby 
attributing intentions to inanimate nature ; but, what is much 
worse, it attributes to nature intentions which are void of 
meaning. For the integral, whose minimum is required by 
Hamilton's principle, has no simple physical meaning ; and for 
nature it is an unintelligible aim to make a mathematical 
expression a minimum, or to bring its variation to zero. The 
usual answer, which physics nowadays keeps ready for such 
attacks, is that these considerations are based upon meta- 
physical assumptions ; that physics has renounced these, and 
no longer recognises it as its duty to meet the demands of 
metaphysics. It no longer attaches weight to the reasons 
which used to be urged from the metaphysical side in favour 
of principles which indicate design in nature, and thus it 
cannot lend ear to objections of a metaphysical character 
against these same principles. If we had to decide upon such 
a matter we should not think it unfair to place ourselves rather 
on the side of the attack than of the defence. A doubt which 
makes an impression on our mind cannot be removed by calling 
it metaphysical; every thoughtful mind as such has needs 
which scientific men are accustomed to denote as metaphysical. 
Moreover, in the case in question, as indeed in all others, it is 
possible to show what are the sound and just sources of our needs. 
It is true we cannot a priori demand from nature simplicity, 
nor can we judge what in her opinion is simple. But with 
regard to images of our own creation we can lay down require- 
ments. We are justified in deciding that if our images are 
well adapted to the things, the actual relations of the things 
must be represented by simple relations between the images. 



24 IHTKODUOTION 

And if the actual relations between the things can only be 
represented by complicated relations, which are not even 
intelligible to an unprepared mind, we decide that these 
images are not sufficiently well adapted to the things. Hence 
our requirement of simplicity does not apply to nature, but to 
the images thereof which we fashion ; and our repugnance to 
a complicated statement as a fundamental law only expresses 
the conviction that, if the contents of the statement are correct 
and comprehensive, it can be stated in a simpler form by a 
more suitable choice of the fundamental conceptions. The 
same conviction finds expression in the desire we feel to 
penetrate from the external acquaintance with such a law to 
the deeper and real meaning which we are convinced it pos- 
sesses. If this conception is correct, the objection brought 
forward does really justify a doubt as to the system ; but it 
does not apply so much to its permissibility as to its appro* 
priateness, and comes under consideration in deciding as to the 
latter. However, we need not return to the consideration of this. 

If we once more glance over the merits which we were 
able to claim for this second image, we come to the conclusion 
that as a whole it is not quite satisfactory. Although the 
whole tendency of recent physics moves us to place the idea 
of energy in the foreground, and to use it as the corner-stone 
of our structure, it yet remains doubtful whether in so doing 
we can avoid the harshness and ruggedness which were so 
disagreeable in the first image. In fact I have discussed this 
second mode of representation at some length, not in order to 
urge its adoption, but rather to show why, after due trial, I 
have felt obliged to abandon it. 



Ill 

A third arrangement of the principles of mechanics is that 
which will be explained at length in this book. Its principal 
characteristics will be at once stated, so that it may be criti* 
cised in the same way as the other two. It differs from 
them in this important respect, that it only starts with three 
independent fundamental conceptions, namely, those of time, 
space, and mass. The problem which it has to solve is to 



INTRODUCTION 25 

represent the natural relations between these three, and 
between these three alone. The difficulties have hitherto 
been met with in connection with a fourth idea, such as the 
idea of force or of energy ; this, as an independent fundamental 
conception, is here avoided. G-. Kirchhoff has already made 
the remark in his Text-book of Mechanics that three independent 
conceptions are necessary and sufficient for the development of 
mechanics. Of course the deficiency in the manifold which 
thus results in the fundamental conceptions necessarily requires 
some complement. In our representation we endeavour to fill 
up the gap which occurs by the use of an hypothesis, which 
is not stated here for the first time ; but it is not usual to 
introduce it in the very elements of mechanics. The nature 
of the hypothesis may be explained as follows. 

If we try to understand the motions of bodies around us, 
and to refer them to simple and clear rules, paying attention 
only to what can be directly observed, our attempt will in 
general fail. We soon become aware that the totality of 
things visible and tangible do not form an universe conform- 
able to law, in which the same results always follow from the 
same conditions. We become convinced that the manifold of 
the actual universe must be greater than the manifold of the 
universe which is directly revealed to us by our senses. If 
we wish to obtain an image of the universe which shall be 
well-rounded, complete, and conformable to law, we have to 
presuppose, behind the things which we see, other, invisible 
things — to imagine confederates concealed beyond the limits 
of our senses. These deep-lying influences we recognised in 
the first two representations ; we imagined them to be entities 
of a special and peculiar kind, and so, in order to represent 
them in our image, we created the ideas of force and energy. 
But another way lies open to us. We may admit that there 
is a hidden something at work, and yet deny that this some- 
thing belongs to a special category. We are free to assume 
that this hidden something is nought else than motion and 
mass again, — motion and mass which differ from the visible ones 
not in themselves but in relation to us and to our usual means >jL 
of perception. Now this mode of conception is just our hypo- 
— ttesffiT" We assume that it is possible to conjoin with the visible 



26 INTRODUCTION 

masses of the universe other masses obeying the same laws, 
and of such a kind that the whole thereby becomes intelli- 
gible and conformable to law. We assume this to be possible 

!\ everywhere and in all cases, and that there are no causes 
/^ whatever of the phenomena other than those hereby admitted, 

^ What we are accustomed to denote as force and as energy 
C now become nothing more than an action of mass and motion, 
\ ^ but not necessarily of mass and motion recognisable by our 
V coarsepsenses. Such explanations of force from processes of 
motion are usually called dynamical; and we have every 
reason for saying that physics at the present day regards such 
explanations with great favour. The forces connected with- . 
heat have been traced back with certainty to the concealed - 
) motions of tangible masses. Through Maxwell's labours ffie 
, , ) k supposition that electro-magnetic forces are due to the motion 
of/concealed masses^ has become almost a conviction. Lord 
Kel^hr-gives a prominent place to dynamical explanations of 
force ; in his theory of vortex atoms he has endeavoured to 
present an image of the universe in accordance with this 
conception. In his investigation of cyclical systems von 
Helmholtz has treated the most important form of concealed 
motion fully, and in a manner that admits of general applica- 
tion ; through him " concealed mass " and " concealed motion n 
have become current as technical expressions in German. 1 
But if this hypothesis is capable of gradually eliminating the 
mysterious forces from mechanics, it can also entirely prevent 
their entering into mechanics. And if its use for the former 
purpose is in accordance with present tendencies of physics, 
the same must hold good of its use for the latter purpose. 
This is the leading thought from which we start. By following 
it out we arrive at the third image, the general outlines of 
which will now be sketched. 

We first introduce the three independent fundamental ideas 
of time, space, and mass as objects of experience; and we 
specify the concrete sensible experiences by which time, 
mass, and space are to be determined. With regard to the 
masses we stipulate that, in addition to the masses recog- 
nisable by the senses, concealed masses can by hypothesis be 

1 [Verborgene Masse ; verborgene Betcegung.] 



INTRODUCTION 27 

introduced. We next bring together the relations which always 
obtain between these concrete experiences, and which we have 
to retain as the essential relations between the fundamental 
ideas. To begin with, we naturally connect the fundamental 
ideas in pairs. Relations between space and time alone form 
the subject of kinematics. There exists no connection between 
mass and time alone. Experience teaches us that between 
mass and space there exists a series of important relations. 
For we find certain purely spacial connections between the 
masses of nature : from the very beginning onwards through 
all time, and therefore independently of time, certain positions 
and certain changes of position are prescribed and associated 
as possible for these masses, and all others as impossible. 
Respecting these connections we can also assert generally that 
they only apply to the relative position of the masses amongst 
themselves ; and further that they satisfy certain conditions of 
continuity, which find their mathematical expression in the 
fact that the connections themselves can always be represented 
by homogeneous linear equations between the first differentials 
of the magnitudes by which the positions of the masses are 
denoted. To investigate in detail the connections of definite 
material systems is not the business of mechanics, but of 
experimental physics : the distinguishing characteristics which 
differentiate the various material systems of nature from each 
other are, according to our conception, simply and solely the 
connections of their masses. Up to this point we have only 
considered the connections of the fundamental ideas in pairs : 
we now address ourselves to mechanics in the stricter sense, in 
which all three have to be considered together. We find that 
their general connection, in accordance with experience, can be 
epitomised in a single fundamental law, which exhibits a close 
analogy with the usual law of inertia. In accordance with 
the mode of expression which we shall use, it can be repre- 
sented by the statement : — Every natural motion of an inde- 
pendent material system consists herein, that the system follows 
with uniform velocity one of its straightest paths. Of course this 
statement only becomes intelligible when we have given the 
necessary explanation of the mathematical mode of expression 
used ; but the sense of the law can also be expressed in the 
usual language of mechanics. The law condenses into one 



28 INTRODUCTION 

single statement the usual law of inertia and Gauss's Principle 
of Least Constraint It therefore asserts that if the connections 
of the system could be momentarily destroyed, its masses would 
become dispersed, moving in straight lines with uniform velocity; 
but that as this is impossible, they tend as nearly as possible 
to such a motion. In our image this fundamental law is the 
first proposition derived from experience in mechanics proper : 
it is also the last. From it,, together with the admitted 
hypothesis of concealed masses and the normal connections, 
we can derive all the rest of mechanics by purely deductive 
reasoning. Around it we group the remaining general prin- 
ciples, according to their relations to it and to each other, as 
corollaries or as partial statements. We endeavour to show 
that the contents of mechanics, when arranged in this way, do 
not become less rich or manifold than its contents when it 
starts with four fundamental conceptions ; at any rate not less 
rich or manifold than, is required for the representation of 
nature. We soon find it convenient to introduce into our 
system the idea of force. However, it is not as something 
independent of us and apart from us that force now makes its 
appearance, but as a mathematical aid whose properties are 
entirely in our power. It cannot, therefore, in itself have any- 
thing mysterious to us. Thus according to our fundamental law, 
whenever two bodies belong to the same system, the motion of 
the one is determined by that of the other. The idea of force 
now comes in as follows. For assignable reasons we find it 
convenient to divide the determination of the one motion by 
the other into two steps. We thus say that the motion of the 
first body determines a force, and that this force then deter- 
mines the motion of the second body. In this way force 
can with equal justice be regarded as being always a cause 
of motion, and at the same time a consequence of motion. 
Strictly speaking, it is a middle term conceived only between 
two motions. According to this conception the general pro- 
perties of force must clearly follow as a necessary consequence 
of thought from the fundamental law; and if in possible 
experiences we see these properties confirmed, we can in no 
sense feel surprised, unless we are sceptical as to our funda- 
mental law. Precisely the same is true of the idea of energy 
and of any other aids that may be introduced. 



INTBQDUCTION 29 

What has hitherto been stated relates to the physical con- 
tent of the image, and nothing further need be said with 
.regard to this ; but it will be convenient to give here a brief 
explanation of the special mathematical form in which it will 
be represented. The physical content is quite independent 
of the mathematical form, and as the content differs from what 
is customary, it is perhaps not quite judicious to present it in 
a form which is itself unusual. But the form as well as the 
content only differ slightly from such as are familiar ; and 
moreover they are so suited that they mutually assist one 
another. The essential characteristic of the terminology used 
consists in this, that instead of always starting from single 
points, it from the beginning conceives and considers whole 
systems of points. Every one is familiar with the expressions 
" position of a system of points," and " motion of a system of 
points." There is nothing unnatural in continuing this mode of 
expression, and denoting the aggregate of the positions traversed 
by a system in motion as its path. Every smallest part of this 
path is then a path-element. Of two path-elements one can 
be a part of the other : they then differ in magnitude and only 
in magnitude. But two path-elements which start from the 
same position may belong to different paths. In this case 
neither of the two forms part of the other : they differ in 
other respects than that of magnitude, and thus we say that 
they have different directions. It is true that these statements 
do not suffice to determine without ambiguity the character- 
istics of " magnitude " and " direction " for the motion of a 
system. But we can complete our definitions geometrically or 
analytically so that their consequences shall neither contradict 
themselves nor the statements we have made ; and so that the 
magnitudes thus defined in the geometry of the system shall 
exactly correspond to the magnitudes which are denoted by the 
same names in the geometry of the point, — with which, in- 
deed, they always coincide when the system is reduced to a 
point Having determined the characteristics of magnitude 
and direction, we next call the path of a system straight if 
all its elements have the same direction, and curved if the 
direction of the elements changes from position to position. 
As in the geometry of the point, we measure curvature by the 
rate of variation of the direction with position. From these 



30 INTRODUCTION 

definitions we at once get a whole series of relations ; and the 
number of these increases as soon as the freedom of motion of 
the system under consideration is limited by its connections. 
Certain classes of paths which are distinguished among the 
possible ones by peculiar simple properties then claim special 
attention. Of these the most important are those paths which 
at each of their positions have the least possible curvature : 
these we shall denote as the straightest paths of the system. 
These are the paths which are referred to in the fundamental 
law, and which have already been mentioned in stating 
it. Another important type consists of those paths which f 

form the shortest connection between any two of their posi- 
tions: these we shall denote as the shortest paths of the 
system. Under certain conditions the ideas of straightest and 
shortest paths coincide. The relation is perfectly familiar in 
connection with the theory of curved surfaces ; nevertheless it 
does not hold good in general and under all circumstances. * 

The compilation and arrangement of all the relations which 
arise here belong to the geometry of systems of points. The 
development of this geometry has a peculiar mathematical 
attraction ; but we only pursue it as far as is required for the 
immediate purpose of applying it to physics. A system of n 
points presents a 3?i-manifold of motion, — although this may 
be reduced to any arbitrary number by the connections of the ^ 

system. Hence there arise many analogies with the geometry 
of space of many dimensions ; and these in part extend so far 
that the same propositions and notations can apply to both. 
But we must note that these analogies are only formal, and 
that, although they occasionally have an unusual appearance, | 

our considerations refer without exception to concrete images ^ 

of space as perceived by our senses. Hence all our statements 
represent possible experiences ; if necessary, they could be con- 
finned by direct experiments, viz. by measurements made with 
models. Thus we need not fear the objection that in building 
up a science dependent upon experience, we have gone outside 
the world of experience. On the other hand, we are bound to j 

answer the question how a new, unusual, and comprehensive 
mode of expression justifies itself; and what advantages we 
expect from using it. In answering this question we specify as 
the first advantage that it enables us to render the most general 



INTRODUCTION 31 

and comprehensive statements with great simplicity and brevity. 
In fact, propositions relating to whole systems do not require 
more words or more ideas than are usually employed in referring 
to a single point. Here the mechanics of a material system no 
longer appears as the expansion and complication of the mechanics 
of a single point ; the latter, indeed, does not need independent 
investigation, or it only appears occasionally as a simplification 
and a special case. If it is urged that this simplicity is only 
artificial, we reply that in no other way can simple relations 
be secured than by artificial and well-considered adaptation of 
our ideas to the relations which have to be represented. But 
in this objection there may be involved the imputation that 
the mode of expression is not only artificial, but far-fetched and 
unnatural. To this we reply that there may be some justifica- 
tion for regarding the consideration of whole systems as being 
more natural and obvious than the consideration of single points. 
For, in reality, the material particle is simply an abstraction, 
whereas the material system is presented directly to us. All 
actual experience is obtained directly from systems ; and it is 
only by processes of reasoning that we deduce conclusions as 
to possible experiences with single points. As a second merit, 
although not a very important one, we specify the advantage 
of the form in which our mathematical mode of expression 
enables us to state the fundamental law. Without this we 
should have to split it up into Newton's first law and Gauss's 
principle of least constraint. Both of these together would 
represent accurately the same facts ; but in addition to these 
facts they would by implication contain something more, and 
this something more would be too much. In the first place 
they suggest the conception, which is foreign to our system of 
mechanics, that the connections of the material system might be 
destroyed ; whereas we have denoted them as being permanent 
and indestructible throughout. In the second place we cannot, 
in using Gauss's principle, avoid suggesting the idea that we 
are not only stating a fact, but also the cause of this fact. 
We cannot assert that nature always keeps a certain quantity, 
which we call constraint, as small as possible, without suggest- 
ing that this quantity signifies something which is for nature 
itself a constraint, — an uncomfortable feeling. We cannot 
assert that nature acts like a judicious calculator reducing 



32 INTRODUCTION 

his observations, without suggesting that deliberate intention 
underlies the action. There is undoubtedly a special charm 
in such suggestions ; and Gauss felt a natural delight in giving 
prominence to it in his beautiful discovery, which is of funda- 
mental importance in our mechanics. Still, it must be con- 
fessed that the charm is that of mystery ; we do not really 
believe that we can solve the enigma of the world by such 
half-suppressed allusions. Our own fundamental law entirely 
avoids any such suggestions. It exactly follows the form of 
the customary law of inertia, and like this it simply states a 
bare fact without any pretence of establishing it. And as it J 

thereby becomes plain and unvarnished, in the same degree 
does it become more honest and truthful Perhaps I am pre- 
judiced in favour of the slight modification which I have made 
in Gauss's principle, and see in it advantages which will not 
be manifest to others. But I feel sure of general assent when 
I state as the third advantage of our method, that it throws a < 

bright light upon Hamilton's method of treating mechanical 
problems by the aid of characteristic functions. During the 
sixty years since its discovery this mode of treatment has been 
well appreciated and much praised ; but it has been regarded 
and treated more as a new branch of mechanics, and as if its 
growth and development had to proceed in its own way and in- 
dependently of the usual mechanics. In our form of the mathe- 
matical representation, Hamilton's method, instead of having the 
character of a side branch, appears as the direct, natural, and, 
if one may so say, self-evident continuation of the elementary 
statements in all cases to which it is applicable. Further, our 
mode of representation gives prominence to this : that Hamil- 
ton's mode of treatment is not based, as is usually assumed, on 
the special physical foundations of mechanics ; but that it is 
fundamentally a purely geometrical method, which can be 
established and developed quite independently of mechanics, 
and which has no closer connection with mechanics than any 
other of the geometrical methods employed in it It has long 
since been remarked by mathematicians that Hamilton's method j 

contains purely geometrical truths, and that a peculiar mode of 
expression, suitable to it, is required in order to express these 
clearly. But this fact has only come to light in a somewhat 
perplexing form, namely, in the analogies between ordinary 



INTRODUCTION 33 

mechanics and the geometry of space of many dimensions, which 
have been discovered by following out Hamilton's thoughts. 
Our mode of expression gives a simple and intelligible 
explanation of these analogies. It allows us to take advantage 
of them, and at the same time it avoids the unnatural ad- 
mixture of supra-sensible abstractions with a branch of physics. 

We have now sketched the content and form of our third 
image as far as can be done without trenching upon the con- 
tents of the book; far enough to enable us to submit it to 
criticism in respect of its permissibility, its correctness, and 
its appropriateness. I think that as far as logical permis- 
sibility is concerned it will be found to satisfy the most rigid 
requirements, and I trust that others will be of the same 
opinion. This merit of the representation I consider to be 
of the greatest importance, indeed of unique importance. 
Whether the image is more appropriate than another ; whether 
it is capable of including all future experience ; even whether 
it only embraces all present experience, all this I regard 
almost as nothing compared with the question whether it is 
in itself conclusive, pure and free from contradiction. For I 
have not attempted this task because mechanics has shown 
signs of inappropriateness in its applications, nor because it 
in any way conflicts with experience, but solely in order to 
rid myself of the oppressive feeling that to me its elements 
were not free from things obscure and unintelligible. What 
I have sought is not the only image of mechanics, nor yet the 
best image ; I have only sought to find an intelligible image 
and to show by an example that this is possible and what it 
must look like. We cannot attain to perfection in any direc- 
tion ; and I must confess that, in spite of the pains I have 
taken with it, the image is not so convincingly clear but that 
in some points it may be exposed to doubt or may require 
defence. And yet it seems to me that of objections of a 
general nature there is only a single one which is so per- 
tinent that it is worth while to anticipate and remove it. 
It relates to the nature of the rigid connections which we 
assume to exist between the masses, and which are abso- 
lutely indispensable in our system. Many physicists will 
at first be of opinion that by means of these connections 

D 



34 INTRODUCTION 

forces are introduced into the elements of mechanics, and 
are introduced in a way which is secret, and therefore not 
permissible. For, they will assert, rigid connections are 
not conceivable without forces; they cannot come into 
existence except by the action of forces. To this we reply — 
Your assertion is correct for the mode of thought of ordinary 
mechanics, but it is not correct independently of this mode of 
thought ; it does not carry conviction to a mind which con- 
siders the facts without prejudice and as if for the first time. 
Suppose we find in any way that the distance between two 
material particles remains constant at all times and under all 
circumstances. We can express this fact without making use 
of any other conceptions than those of space ; and the value 
of the fact stated, as a fact, for the purpose of foreseeing 
future experience and for all other purposes, will be inde- 
pendent of any explanation of it which we may or may not 
possess. In no case will the value of the* fact be increased, 
or our understanding of it improved, by putting it in the 
form — " Between these masses there acts a force which keeps 
them at a constant distance from one another," or " Between 
them there acts a force which makes it impossible for their 
distance to alter from its fixed value." But it will be urged 
that this latter explanation, although apparently only a 
ludicrous circumlocution, is nevertheless correct. For all the 
connections of the actual world are only approximately rigid ; 
and the appearance of rigidity is only produced by the action 
of the elastic forces which continually annul the small 
deviations from the position of rest. To this we reply as 
follows : — With regard to rigid connections which are only 
approximately realised, our mechanics will naturally only state 
as a fact that they are approximately satisfied ; and for the 
purpose of this statement the idea of force is not required. 
If we wish to proceed to a second approximation and to take 
into consideration the deviations, and with them the elastic 
forces, we shall make use of a dynamical explanation for 
these as for all forces. In seeking the actual rigid connections we 
shall perhaps have to descend to the world of atoms. But such 
considerations are out of place here ; they do not affect the 
question whether it is logically permissible to treat of fixed con- 
nections as independent of forces and precedent to them. All 



INTRODUCTION 35 

that I wished to show was that this question must be answered 
in the affirmative, and this I believe I have done. This being so, 
we can deduce the properties and behaviour of the forces from the 
nature of the fixed connections without being guilty of a petitio 
princijpii. Other objections of a similar kind are possible, but 
I believe they can be removed in much the same way. 

By way of giving expression to my desire to prove the 
logical purity of the system in all its details, I have thrown 
the representation into the older synthetic form. For this 
purpose the form used has the merit of compelling us to 
specify beforehand, definitely even if monotonously, the logical 
value which every important statement is intended to have. 
This makes it impossible to use the convenient reservations 
and ambiguities into which we are enticed by the wealth of 
combinations in ordinary speech. But the most important 
advantage of the form chosen is that it is always based upon 
what has already been proved, never upon what is to be 
proved later on : thus we are always sure of the whole chain 
if we sufficiently test each link as we proceed. In this 
respect I have endeavoured to carry out fully the obligations 
imposed by this mode of representation. At the same time 
it is obvious that the form by itself is no guarantee against 
error or oversight; and I hope that any chance defects will not 
be the more harshly criticised on account of the somewhat 
presumptuous mode of presentation. I trust that any such 
defects will be capable of improvement and will not affect any 
important point. Now and again, in order to avoid excessive 
prolixity, I have consciously abandoned to some extent the 
rigid strictness which this mode of representation properly 
requires. Before proceeding to mechanics proper, as depend- 
ent upon physical experience, I have naturally discussed 
those relations which follow simply and necessarily from the 
definitions adopted and from mathematics ; the connection 
of these latter with experience, if any, is of a different nature 
from that of the former. Moreover, there is no reason why 
the reader should not begin with the second book. The 
matter with which he is already familiar and the clear analogy 
with the dynamics of a particle will enable him easily to guess 
the purport of the propositions in the first book. If he admits 



36 INTRODUCTION 

the appropriateness of the mode of expression used, he can at 
any time return to the first book to convince himself of its 
permissibility. 

We next turn to the second essential requirement which 
our image must satisfy. In the first place there is no doubt 
that the system correctly represents a very large number of 
natural motions. But this does not go far enough ; the system 
must include all natural motions without exception. I think 
that this, too, can be asserted of it ; at any rate in the sense 
that no definite phenomena can at present be mentioned which 
would be inconsistent with the svstera. We must of course 
admit that we cannot extend a rigid examination to all 
phenomena. Hence the system goes a little beyond the 
results of assured experience; it therefore has the character 
of a hypothesis which is accepted tentatively and awaits 
sudden refutation by a single example or gradual confirmation 
by a large number of examples. There are in especial two 
places in which we go beyond assured experience : firstly, 
in our limitation of the possible connections; secondly, in 
the dynamical explanation of force. What right have we to 
assert that all natural connections can be expressed by linear 
differential equations of the first order? With us this 
assumption is not a matter of secondary importance which we 
might do without. Our system stands or falls with it ; for it 
raises the question whether our fundamental law is applicable 
to connections of the most general kind. And yet connections 
of a more general kind are not only conceivable, but they are 
permitted in ordinary mechanics without hesitation. There 
nothing prevents us from investigating the motion of a point 
where its path is only limited by the supposition that it makes 
a given angle with a given plane, or that its radius of curva- 
ture is always proportional to another given length. These 
are conditions which are not permissible in our system. But 
why are we certain that they are debarred by the nature of 
things ? We might reply that these and similar connections 
cannot be realised by any practical mechanism; and in this 
respect we might appeal to the great authority of Helmholtz's 
name. But in every example possibilities might be over- 
looked; and ever so many examples would not suffice to 



INTRODUCTION 37 

substantiate the general assertion. It seems to me that the 
reason for our conviction should more properly be stated as 
follows. All connections of a system which are not embraced 
within the limits of our mechanics, indicate in one sense or 
another a discontinuous succession of its possible motions. 
But as a matter of fact it is an experience of the most general 
kind that nature exhibits continuity in infinitesimals every- 
where and in every sense : an experience which has crystallised 
into firm conviction in the old proposition — Natura nonfacit 
saltus. In the text I have therefore laid stress upon this: 
that the permissible connections are defined solely by their 
continuity ; and that their property of being represented by 
equations of a definite form is only deduced from this. We 
cannot attain to actual certainty in this way. For this old 
proposition is indefinite, and we cannot be sure how far it 
applies — how far it is the result of actual experience, and how 
far the result of arbitrary assumption. Thus the most con- 
scientious plan is to admit that our assumption as to the 
permissible connections is of the nature of a tentatively 
accepted hypothesis. The same may be said with respect to 
the dynamical explanation of force. We may indeed prove 
that certain classes of concealed motions produce forces which, 
like actions-at-a-distance in nature, can be represented to any 
desired degree of approximation as differential coefficients of 
force-functions. It can be shown that the form of these force- 
functions may be of a very general nature ; and in fact we do 
not deduce any restrictions for them. But on the other hand 
it remains for us to prove that any and every form of the force- 
functions can be realised; and hence it remains an open question 
whether such a mode of explanation may not fail to account for 
some one of the forms occurring in nature. Here again we can 
only bide our time so as to see whether our assumption is refuted, 
or whether it acquires greater and greater probability by the 
absence of any such refutation. We may regard it as a good 
omen that many distinguished physicists tend more and more 
to favour the hypothesis. I may mention Lord Kelvin's 
theory of vortex-atoms : this presents to us an image of the 
material universe which is in complete accord with the 
principles of our mechanics. And yet our mechanics in no 
wise demands such great simplicity and limitation of assump- 



38 INTRODUCTION 

tions as Lord Kelvin has imposed upon himself. We need not 
abandon our fundamental propositions if we were to assume that 
the vortices revolved about rigid or flexible, but inextensible, 
nuclei ; and instead of assuming simply incompressibility 
we might subject the all-pervading medium to much more 
complicated conditions, the most general form of which would 
be a matter for further investigation. Thus there appears to 
be no reason why the hypothesis admitted in our mechanics 
should not suffice to explain the phenomena. 

We must, however,' make one reservation. In the text we 
take the natural precaution of expressly limiting the range of 
our mechanics to inanimate nature ; how far its laws extend 
beyond this we leave as quite an open question. As a matter 
of fact we cannot assert that the internal processes of life 
follow the same laws as the motions of inanimate bodies; 
nor can we assert that they follow different laws. According 
to appearance and general opinion there seems to be a 
fundamental difference. And the same feeling which impels 
us to exclude from the mechanics of the inanimate world as 
foreign every indication of an intention, of a sensation, of 
pleasure and pain, — this same feeling makes us unwilling to 
deprive our image of the animate world of these richer and 
more varied conceptions. Our fundamental law, although it 
may suffice for representing the motion of inanimate matter, 
appears (at any rate that is one's first and natural impression) 
too simple and narrow to account for even the lowest processes 
of life. It seems to me that this is not a disadvantage, but 
rather an advantage of our law. For while it allows us to 
survey the whole domain of mechanics, it shows us what are 
the limits of this domain. By giving us only bare facts, 
without attributing to them any appearance of necessity, it 
enables us to recognise that everything might be quite different. 
Perhaps such considerations will be regarded as out of 
place here. It is not usual to treat of them in the elements of 
the customary representation of mechanics. But there the 
complete vagueness of the forces introduced leaves room for 
free play. There is a tacit stipulation that, if need be, later 
on a contrast between the forces of animate and inanimate 
nature may be established. In our representation the outlines 



INTRODUCTION 39 

of the image are from the first so sharply delineated, that any 
subsequent perception of such an important division becomes 
almost impossible. We are therefore bound to refer to this 
matter at once, or to ignore it altogether. 

As to the appropriateness of our third image we need not 
say much. In respect of distinctness and simplicity, as the 
contents of the book will show, we may assign to it about the 
same position as to the second image ; and the merits to which 
we drew attention in the latter are also present here. But the 
permissible possibilities are somewhat more extensive than in 
the second image. For we pointed out that in the latter certain 
rigid connections were wanting ; by our fundamental assump- 
tions these are not excluded. And this extension is in accord- 
ance with nature, and is therefore a merit ; nor does it prevent 
us from deducing the general properties of natural forces, in 
which lay the significance of the second image. The simplicity 
of this image, as of the second, is very apparent when we 
consider their physical applications. Here, too, we can confine 
our consideration to any characteristics of the material system 
which are accessible to observation. From their past changes 
we can deduce future ones by applying our fundamental law, 
without any necessity for knowing the positions of all the 
separate masses of the system, or for concealing our ignorance 
by arbitrary, ineffectual, and probably false hypotheses. But 
as compared with the second image, our third one exhibits 
simplicity also in adapting its conceptions so closely to 
nature that the essential relations of nature are represented by 
simple relations between the ideas. This is seen not only in 
the fundamental law, but also in its numerous general corol- 
laries which correspond to the so-called principles of mechanics. 
Of course it must be admitted that this simplicity only obtains 
when we are dealing with systems which are completely known, 
and that it disappears as soon as concealed masses come in. But 
even in these cases the reason of the complication is perfectly 
obvious. The loss of simplicity is not due to nature, but to 
our imperfect knowledge of nature. The complications which 
arise are not simply a possible, but a necessary result of our 
special assumptions. It must also be admitted that the 
co-operation of concealed masses, which is the remote and special 



40 INTRODUCTION 

case from the standpoint of our mechanics, is the commonest 
case in the problems which occur in daily life and in the aits. 
Hence it will be well to point out again that we have only 
spoken of appropriateness in a special sense — in the sense of a 
mind which endeavours to embrace objectively the whole of 
our physical knowledge without considering the accidental 
position of man in nature, and to set forth this knowledge in 
a simple manner. The appropriateness of which we have 
spoken has no reference to practical applications or the needs 
of. mankind. In respect of these latter it is scarcely possible 
that the usual representation of mechanics, which has been 
devised expressly for them, can ever be replaced by a more 
appropriate system. Our representation of mechanics bears 
towards the customary one somewhat the same relation that the 
systematic grammar of a language bears to a grammar devised 
for the purpose of enabling learners to become acquainted as 
quickly as possible with what they will require in daily life. 
The requirements of the two are very different, and they must 
differ widely in their arrangement if each is to be properly 
adapted to its purpose. 

In conclusion, let us glance once more at the three images 
of mechanics which we have brought forward, and let us try 
to make a final and conclusive comparison between them. 
After what we have already said, we may leave the second 
image out of consideration. We shall put the first and third 
images on an equality with respect to permissibility, by 
assuming that the first image has been thrown into a form 
completely satisfactory from the logical point of view. This 
we have already assumed to be possible. We shall also put 
both images on an equality with respect to appropriateness, by 
assuming that the first image has been rendered complete by 
suitable additions, and that the advantages of both in different 
directions are of equal value. We shall then have as our sole 
criterion the correctness of the images: this is determined by the 
things themselves and does not depend on our arbitrary choice. 
And here it is important to observe that only one or the other 
of the two images can be correct: they cannot both at the 
same time be correct. For if we try to express as briefly as 
possible the essential relations of the two representations, we 



INTRODUCTION 41 

come to this. The first image assumes as the final constant 
elements in nature the relative accelerations of the masses with 
reference to each other: from these it incidentally deduces 
approximate, but only approximate, fixed relations between 
their positions. The third image assumes as the strictly in- 
variable elements of nature fixed relations between the posi- 
tions : from these it deduces when the phenomena require it 
approximately, but only approximately, invariable relative 
accelerations between the masses. Now, if we could perceive 
natural motions with sufficient accuracy, we should at once know 
whether in them the relative acceleration, or the relative rela- 
tions of position, or both, are only approximately invariable. 
We should then know which of our two assumptions is false ; 
or whether both are false ; for they cannot both be simul- 
taneously correct The greater simplicity is on the side of 
the third image. What at first induces us to decide in favour 
of the first is the fact that in actions-at-a-distance we can 
actually exhibit relative accelerations which, up to the limits 
of our observation, appear to be invariable ; whereas all fixed 
connections between the positions of tangible bodies are soon 
and easily perceived by our senses to be only approximately 
constant. But the situation changes in favour of the third 
image as soon as a more refined knowledge shows us that the 
assumption of invariable distance -forces only yields a first 
approximation to the truth ; a case which has already arisen 
in the sphere of electric and magnetic forces. And the balance 
of evidence will be entirely in favour of the third image 
when a second approximation to the truth can be attained by 
tracing back the supposed actions-at-a-distance to motions in 
an all-pervading medium whose smallest parts are subjected to 
rigid connections; a case which also seems to be nearly 
realised in the same sphere. This is the field in which the 
decisive battle between these different fundamental assumptions 
of mechanics must be fought out. But in order to arrive at 
such a decision it is first necessary to consider thoroughly the 
existing possibilities in all directions. To develop them in 
one special direction is the object of this treatise, — an object 
which must necessarily be attained even if we are still far 
from a possible decision, and even if the decision should finally 
prove unfavourable to the image here developed. 



BOOK I 

GEOMETRY AND KINEMATICS OF 
MATERIAL SYSTEMS 



J 
1 



t 



> 



BOOK I 

GEOMETRY AND KINEMATICS OF 
MATERIAL SYSTEMS 



1 



I 



1. Prefatory Note. The subject-matter of the first 
book is completely independent of experience. All the asser- 
tions made are a priori judgments in Kant's sense. They are 
based upon the laws of the internal intuition of, and upon the 
logical forms followed by, the person who makes the asser- 
tions ; with his external experience they have no other con- 
nection than these intuitions and forms may have. 



CHAPTEK I 

TIME, SPACE, AND MASS 

2. Explanation. The time of the first book is the time 
of our internal intuition. It is therefore a quantity such that 
the variations of the other quantities under consideration may 
be regarded as dependent upon its variation; whereas in itself 
it is always an independent variable. 

The space of the first book is space as we conceive it. 
It is therefore the space of Euclid's geometry, with all the 
properties which this geometry ascribes to it. It is immaterial 
to us whether these properties are regarded as being given by 
the laws of our internal intuition, or as consequences of thought 
which necessarily follow from arbitrary definitions. 

The mass of the first book will be introduced by a defini- 
tion. 

3. Definition 1. A material particle is a characteristic 
by which we associate without ambiguity a given point in 



46 FIRST BOOK 



CHAP. 



space at a given time with a given point in space at any other 
time. 

Every material particle is invariable and indestructible. 
The points in space which are denoted at two different times 
by the same material particle, coincide when the times coincide. 
Rightly understood, the definition implies this. 

4. Definition 2. The number of material particles in any 
space, compared with the number of material particles in some 
chosen space at a fixed time, is called the mass contained in the 
first space. 

We may and shall consider the number of material particles 
in the space chosen for comparison to be infinitely great. The 
mass of the separate material particles will therefore, by the 
definition, be infinitely small. The mass in any given space 
may therefore have any rational or irrational value. 

5. Definition 3. A finite or infinitely small mass, con- 
ceived as being contained in an infinitely small space, is called 
a material point. 

A material point therefore consists of any number of 
material particles connected with each other. This number is 
always to be infinitely great : this we attain by supposing the 
material particles to be of a higher order of infinitesimals than 
those material points which are regarded as being of infinitely 
small mass. The masses of material points, and in especial 
the masses of infinitely small material points, may therefore 
bear to one another any rational or irrational ratio. 

6. Definition 4. A number of material points considered 
simultaneously is called a system of material points, or briefly 
a system, The sum of the masses of the separate points is, by 
§ 4, the mass of the system. 

Hence a finite system consists of a finite number of finite 
material points, or of an infinite number of infinitely small 
material points, or of both. It is always permissible to regard 
a system of material points as being composed of an infinite 
number of material particles. 

7. Observation 1. In what follows we shall always treat 
a finite system as consisting of a finite number of finite material 
points. But as we assign no upper limit to their number, and 



f 



I TIME, SPACE, AND MASS 47 

no lower limit to their mass, our general statements will also 
include as a special case that in which the system contains an 
infinite number of infinitely small material points. We need 
not enter into the details required for the analytical treatment 
of this case. 

8. Observation 2. A material point can be regarded as a 
special case and as the simplest example of a system of material 
points. 



CHAPTER II 



POSITIONS AND DISPLACEMENTS OF POINTS AND SYSTEMS 



Position 



9. Definition 1. The point of space which is indicated by 
a given particle at a given time is called the position of the 
particle at that time. The position of a material point is the 
common position of its particles. 

10. Definition 2. The aggregate of the positions which all 
the points of a system simultaneously occupy is called the 
position of the system. 

11. Definition 3. Any given position of a material point ; 
in infinite space is called a geometrically conceivable, or for 
shortness a conceivable, position of the point. The aggregate 
of any conceivable positions whatsoever of the points of a 
system is called a conceivable position of the system. 

At any time two particles may differ as to their position, 
two material points as to their mass and their position, and 
two systems of material points as to the number, the mass, 
and the positions of their points. But, in accordance with the 
definitions which we have already given of them, particles, 
material points, and systems of material points cannot differ in 
Tany other respect. 

12. Analytical Representation of the Position (a) of a 
Point. — The position of a material point can be represented 
analytically by means of its three rectangular coordinates 
referred to a set of fixed axes. These coordinates will always 
be denoted by x v x r # 3 . Every conceivable position of the point 



V- 

1 

I 



I 



I 



chap. II POSITIONS OF POINTS AND SYSTEMS 49 

implies a singly-determined value-system of these coordinates, 
and conversely every arbitrarily chosen value-system of the 
-coordinates implies a singly-determined conceivable position of 
the point 

The position of a point can also be represented by any r 
quantities p l . . p p . . . p r whatsoever, provided we agree to 
associate continuously a given value -system of these quantities 
with a given position of the point, and conversely. The rect- 
angular coordinates are then functions of these quantities, and 
conversely. The quantities p p are called the general coordinates 
of the point If r>3, then for geometrical reasons r — 3 
equations must exist between the quantities p p which enable 
us to determine these quantities as functions of three inde- 
pendent quantities, for instance, & v x 2> x z . However, we shall 
exclude dependence of the coordinates on one another on 
account of purely geometrical relations, and consequently it 
must always be understood that r < 3. If r<3, then all con- 
ceivable positions of the point cannot be represented by means 
of p p , but only a portion of these positions. The positions 
not expressed in terms of p p will be considered as being eo ipso 
excluded from discussion whilst we are using the coordinates p p . 

13. Analytical Representation (b) of a System. — The 

position of a system of n material points can be analytic- 
ally represented by means of the 'in rectangular coordinates of 
the points of the system. These coordinates will be denoted 
by x v x 2 ..x y ... x sn , so that x v x 2> x 3 are the coordinates of the 
first point, ^_ 2 , a^-r^ the coordinates of the /4 th point 
We shall call these 3n coordinates x v , the rectangular coor- 
dinates of the system. Every conceivable position of the system 
implies a singly -determined value-system of its rectangular 
coordinates, and conversely every arbitrarily chosen value-system 
of x ¥ a singly-determined conceivable position of the system. 

We may also consider the system as determined by means 
of any r quantities p x . .p p . .p r whatever, as long as we agree 
to associate continuously a given value-system of these coordi- 
nates with a given position of the system, and conversely. 
The rectangular coordinates are therefore functions of these 
quantities, and conversely. The quantities p p are called the 
general coordinates of the system. If r > Sn, then for 

E 



50 FIRST BOOK . CHAP. 

geometrical reasons r—3n equations must exist between p p . , 
However, we shall assume that no geometrical relations exist ] 
between p pi and consequently r < 3n. If r < 3?i, then all con- 
ceivable positions of the system cannot be expressed in terms 
of p pt but only a portion of them. Those positions not ex- 
pressed in terms of p p will be considered as being eo ipso 
excluded from consideration when we are using the general 
coordinates p ? . ] 

Configuration and Absolute Position 

14. Definition 1. The aggregate of the relative positions of 
the points of a system is called the configuration of the system. 

The configuration of the system and the absolute position ' 
of the configuration in space determine together the position 
of the system. 

15. Definition 2. By a coordinate of configuration we 
mean any coordinate of the system whose value cannot change 
without the configuration of the system changing. r 

Whether a given coordinate is a coordinate of configura- 
tion or not does not depend on the choice of the remaining 
coordinates of the system. 

16. Definition 3. By a coordinate of absolute position 
we mean any coordinate of the system through whose change 
the configuration of the system cannot be altered so long as 
the remaining coordinates of the system do not alter. 

Whether a given coordinate is a coordinate of absolute 
position or not depends therefore on the choice of the remain- 
ing coordinates. 

Corollaries 

i 

17. 1. A coordinate cannot be at one and the same time * 
both a coordinate of configuration and a coordinate of absolute 
position. On the other hand, a given coordinate can and in 
general will be neither a coordinate of configuration nor a 
coordinate of absolute position. 

18. 2. So long as n > 3, in every position 3n independent 
coordinates can be chosen in various ways, so that there are as 



II CONFIGURATION AND ABSOLUTE POSITION 51 

many as 3n — 6 coordinates of configuration amongst them, but 
in no way so as to include more than 3n — 6 such coordinates. 
For, let us choose from the coordinates the three distances 
of any three points of the system from each other, and the 
3(n — 3) distances of the remaining points from them; then 
we have (3n — 6) coordinates of configuration ; and any 
(3n — 6) different functions of these distances give {3n — 6) 
coordinates of configuration of the system. Fewer coordinates 
of configuration can exist; for example, if we take the 3n, 
rectangular coordinates, none exist. But there cannot be more 
than (3n — 6) coordinates of configuration amongst inde- 
pendent coordinates ; for if, amongst the given coordinates 
of a system, there were more than (3?&— 6) coordinates of 
configuration, then the latter could be expressed in terms of 
these (3n — 6) distances, and consequently would not be inde- 
pendent of one another. 

19. 3. So long as n > 3, 3n independent coordinates for all 
conceivable positions of a system can be chosen in various ways 
so that there are amongst them as many as 6, but not more 
than 6 coordinates of absolute position. 

For, let us choose the coordinates in such a manner that 
there are amongst them (3n — 6) coordinates of configuration, 
and take with them any 6 coordinates, say 6 of the rect- 
angular coordinates of the system ; then the last are eo ipso 
coordinates of absolute position, for no change in them changes 
the configuration so long as the rest are fixed. Fewer than 6 
may exist; none exist, for instance, when we use the rect- 
angular coordinates of the system. More than 6 cannot exist. 
For did more than 6 exist, then, for a particular choice of the 
coordinates, all conceivable configurations of the system would 
be determined by the remaining fewer than 3n — 6 coordinates ; 
and consequently there would not be left (3ti— 6) coordinates 
of configuration independent of one another for the system, 
which would be contrary to § 1 8. 

20. 4. If 3n independent coordinates of a system of n 
points are so chosen that there are amongst them (3n — 6) 
coordinates of configuration, then the remaining 6 are neces- 
sarily coordinates of absolute position. And if these 3?i co- 
ordinates are so chosen that 6 of them are coordinates of absolute 



52 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

position, then the remaining (3n — 6) are necessarily coordinates 
of configuration. 

For, if there were amongst the latter even one which could 
be changed without altering the configuration of the system, then 
the absolute position of the configuration would be determined 
by more than 6 independent coordinates, which is impossible. 

21. 5. Any quantity can be used as a coordinate of absolute 
position, provided its change alters the position of the system, 
and provided it is not itself a coordinate of configuration. Any 
6 quantities which satisfy these conditions and are inde- 
pendent of one another, can be taken as coordinates of absolute 
position, and become coordinates of absolute position by the 
fact that no other quantities are associated with them as 
coordinates unless they have the properties of coordinates of 
configuration. 

Finite Displacements 

(a) Of Points 

22. Definition 1. The passage of a material point from an 
initial to a final position, without regard to the time or manner 
of the passage, is called a displacement of the point from the 
initial position to the final one. 

The displacement of a point is completely determined by 
its initial and final position. It is also completely known 
when we are given its initial position, its direction, and its 
magnitude. 

23. Observation 1. The magnitude of the displacement 
of a point is equal to the distance of its final position from its 
initial one. Let the quantities x v be the rectangular coordi- 
nates of its initial position, and xj the rectangular coordinates 
of its final position, then the magnitude sf of the displace- 
ment is the positive root of the equation 

i 

24. Observation 2. The direction of a displacement is 
the direction of a straight line which is drawn from the initial 



II 



FINITE DISPLACEMENTS 53 



position of the point to the final one. Let «', x v , xj have the 

same meaning as before, and let x ¥ °, xj f t s" be the coordinates 

of the initial and final positions, and the length of a second 

A 
displacement, then the angle sV between the two displacements 

is given by the equation 

sV' cos A" = 2<*/ - *,)(*," - O ®. 

1 

For, if we consider a triangle whose sides are equal in length 

A 
to sf and s", and the included angle equal to ss rf , we obtain 

the equation 

A 8 

^ + s "2 _ 2 sV' cos s's" = 2 V K^' " O - (**" " O? (">' 

i 

from which, together with § 23, equation (i) follows. 

25. Definition 2. Two displacements of a point are said 
to be identical when they have the same initial and final posi- 
tions ; two displacements of a point are said to be equal when 
they have the same magnitude and direction ; they are said to 
be parallel when they have the same direction. 

26. Note. Let a? , x 2 . . . x k denote the k rectangular coor- 
dinates of a point in space of k dimensions, x x ', x 2 ' . . . x k ' the 
coordinates of a second point ; then the additional statement 
that the distance between the two points is the positive root 
of the equation 

1 

extends the whole of the following investigation, as well as 
the whole of mechanics, to space of k dimensions, without 
necessitating anything but a change in the wording. No use 
will be made of this remark, but the investigation will refer, 
as stated at the beginning, simply to the space of Euclidian 
geometry. 

(b) Of Systems 

27. Definition. The passage of a system of material points 
from an initial position to a final one without regard to the time 






54 FIRST BOOK chap. 

or manner of the passage is called a displacement of the system 
from the initial to the final position. 

The displacement of a system is completely known when 
we know its initial and final positions. It is also completely 
known when its initial position, and what are termed its direc- 
.^tion and magnitude, are given. 

ft ^ 28. Notation. It will be convenient to call the positive 
root of the arithmetic mean of the squares of a series of 
quantities their quadratic mean value. 

^ 29. Definition a. The magnitude of the displacement of 

Vv a system is the quadratic mean value of the magnitudes of the 
■/^/^v displacements of all its particles. 

The magnitude of the displacement which a system under- 
goes in moving from one position to another is called the 
distance between the two positions. The magnitude of a 
displacement is also called its length. 

30. Note. The distance between two positions of a 
system is defined independently of the form of its analytical 
representation, and in particular is independent of the choice 
of the coordinates of the system. 

31. Problem. To express the distance between two posi- 
tions of a system in terms of its rectangular coordinates. 

Let there be n material points in the system. Let x v be 
the value of one of the rectangular coordinates of the system 
before the displacement, and xj the value of the same after the 
displacement. The coordinate x v is at the same time a co- 
ordinate of one of the points of the system : let the mass of 
this point be m yy v ranges from 1 to 3ft, but all the mjs are 
not unequal, since for every p from 1 to Sn 



m 



If now rj be the number of particles in the unit of mass, the 
mass ra„ contains m y r} particles, and the whole mass m of the 
system m.r}. Consequently, with this notation, the quadratic 
mean value / of the displacements of all particles is the 
positive root of the equation 



II FINITE DISPLACEMENTS 55 

and this root is therefore the required distance. Finally 

8n 
1 

32. Proposition. The distance between two positions of 
a system is always smaller than the sum of the distances of 
the two positions from a third. 

Let the quantities xj, xj\ x" r be the rectangular coor- 
dinates of the positions 1, 2, 3 ; let s 12 , s 13> s is be their distances 
from each other. For shortness write 

J ^(V _ X J) = a v v^*/" - x r ") = b r , 

v m v m 

8» 8» 8n 

then « 18 * = 2' V fe'-S'V ^-S^-^- Ifthen 

ill 

it were possible that « 12 > s u + s^ we should get on squaring 
*u* ~ 8 i8 2 ~ s 2s 2 > 2 A**» and on squaring again. 

48 isV-W- a B 2 - s a . 2 ) 2 <°- 

This is, however, impossible, for, on substituting the values 
of 8 given as above, the left-hand side becomes 

8» 8» 

i i 

which, being a sum of squares, is necessarily positive. There- 
fore our assumption was unwarranted, and consequently 

33. Corollary. It is therefore always possible to con- 
struct a plane triangle whose three sides are equal to the three 
distances of any three positions of a system from each other. 

34. Definition b. The difference in direction between two 
displacements of a system from the same initial position is the 
included angle of a plane triangle which has the lengths of the 



56 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

two displacements as sides, and whose base is the distance 
between their final positions. 

The difference in direction between two displacements is 
also called the angle between them, or their inclination towards 
one another. 

35. Note 1. The inclination towards one another of two 
displacements with the same initial position is in all cases a 
singly-determined real angle, smaller than tt. 

For the triangle which determines that angle can always 
(§ 32) be drawn. 

36. Note 2. The difference in direction between WO 
displacements is defined independently of the form of the 
analytical representation, and in particular is independent of 
the choice of the coordinates used. 

37. Problem. To express the angle between two displace- 
ments from the same initial position in terms of the rectangular 
coordinates of the initial and final positions. 

Let the quantities x v be the coordinates of the common 

initial positions, xj and xj the coordinates of the two final 

A 
positions, sf and s" the lengths of the two displacements, sis" the 

included angle. By consideration of the plane triangle whose 

three sides are the three distances between the three positions, 

we obtain 



2?7wV cos sV = ^vm v (xj — x y ) 2 + ^*m v (x" — x v )* 



1 1 

871 



1 
and therefore 

A 8n 

ms's" cos s's" = 2* ™<J<Pv — «,) (»/ — x v ) (i), 

i 

in which equation we consider s! and s" expressed as in § 31 
(i) in terms of the rectangular coordinates. 

38. Proposition. Two displacements of a system from 

the same initial position have the angle between them equal to 

% zero when the displacements of the individual points otboth 



I 



II 



FINITE DISPLACEMENTS 57 



the system^ are parallel andVorrespondingly proportional, and 
conversely. 

For, if the displacements of all points are parallel and pro- 
portional, then for all values of v 

X y — X y = €\X y — Xy)> 

where e is the same constant factor for all values of v. The 

right-hand side of equation § 37 (i) becomes therefore mesf 2 . 

A 
Moreover s n = erf ; thus by this equation cos $s" = 1, and since 
A 

ss" is an interior angle of a triangle «V' = (§ 35). 

A A 

Conversely when sV = 0, cos sV = 1, and then the equation 

37 (i) squared gives when the values of si and s" are sub- 
stituted 

fa fa fa 

1 11 

fa fa 

= 2*2* m v m Xi x " - ^x v - *g - «' - *M - *,)?> 

i i 
and this is only possible when for every value of fi and v 

Xy —" X y Xy "" ^j, 

wherefore the converse is proved. 

39. Corollary 1. If two displacements from the same 
initial position have their inclinations to a third displacement 
from the same initial position zero, then their inclination to 
one another is zero. 

All displacements whose inclinations to any given dis- 
placement are zero, have consequently their inclinations to 
each other zero. The common property of all such displace- 
ments is called their direction. 

40. Corollary 2. When two displacements of a system 
have the same direction, they are equally inclined to a third 
displacement. 

Thus all displacements from the same initial position, and 
having the same direction, make the same angle with all 
displacements which have another common direction. This 



58 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

angle is called the angle between the two directions or the 
inclination of the two directions. 

41. Definition. Two displacements of a system are said 
to be identical when the displacements of the points of the two 
systems are identical Two displacements are equal when the 
displacements of the individual points are equal and two 
displacements are parallel when the displacements of the indi- 
vidual points in both are parallel and correspondingly pro- 
portional. 

42. Corollary. Two displacements of a system from 
different initial positions are parallel when each of them has 
the same direction as a displacement which passes through its 
initial position and is equal to the other displacement, and 
conversely. 

43. Additional Note. By the difference in direction 
between two displacements of a system from different initial 
positions we mean the angle between either of them, and a 
parallel displacement to the other from its own initial position. 

44. Problem. To express the angle between any two 
displacements of a system in terms of the rectangular coor- 
dinates of their four end positions. 

Let / and s" be the magnitudes of the two displacements, 

and ss" the angle between them. Let x v and xj be the coor- 
dinates of the initial and final positions of the first, x p ° and x" 9 
the coordinates of the initial and final positions of the second 
displacement. A displacement whose initial coordinates are x„ 
and whose final coordinates have the value x v + x" — a?„°, has the 
same initial position as the first, and is equal to the second. 
Hence it makes with the first the required angle, for which 
we obtain the equation 

ms's" cos *V' = 2*m v (xJ — X vX X v — #„°)- 

1 

The same value is obtained if we choose a displacement 
through the initial position of the second, and equal to the first, 
and then find the angle between this and the second. 

Our definition in § 43 was thus unique, and therefore 
permissible. 



^ 



II 



FINITE DISPLACEMENTS 59 



.? 



45. Definition. Two displacements of a system are said 
to be perpendicular to one another when the angle between 
them is a right angle. 

46. Corollary 1. The necessary and sufficient analytical 
condition that two displacements should be perpendicular to 
one another is the equation 

i 

in which use is made of the notation of § 44. 

47. Corollary 2. In a system of n points there is from 
a given position a (3w— 1) manifold of displacements, and 
therefore a (3?i— 2) manifold of directions conceivable which 
are perpendicular to a given direction. 

48. Definition. The component of a displacement in a 
given direction is a displacement whose direction is the given 
direction, and whose magnitude is equal to the orthogonal pro- 
jection of the magnitude of the given displacement upon the 
given direction. 

Thus, if the magnitude of the given displacement is s, and 
it makes with the given direction the angle o>, then its com- 
ponent in this direction is equal to s cos o>. 

The magnitude of the component in a given direction will 
be simply termed the component in that direction. 



Composition of Displacements 

49. Note. Let there be given to a system several dis- 
placements, which are equal to given displacements, and which 
are so related to one another that the final position of the pre- 
ceding displacement is the initial position of the succeeding 
one, then the final position attained is independent of the 
succession of displacements. 

Since this is true for the displacements which the indi- 
vidual points suffer, it must also be true for the system. 

50. Definition 1. A displacement which carries the 



60 FIRST BOOK OHAP. II 

system into the same final position as a succession of dis- 
placements, which are equal to given displacements, is called 
the sum of these given displacements. 

51. Definition 2. The difference between a chosen dis- 
placement and another is a displacement whose sum, together 
with the latter one, gives the former. 

52. Corollary (to § 49). The addition and subtraction of 
displacements is subject to the rules of algebraic addition and 
subtraction. lp. _ 



CHAPTER III 

INFINITELY SMALL DISPLACEMENTS AND PATHS OF A SYSTEM 

OF MATERIAL POINTS 

53. Prefatory Note. From here on we shall no longer 
deal with single material points by themselves, but shall 
regard their investigation as being included in that of systems. 
Hence what follows must be understood as referring always to 
displacements of systems, even when this is not expressly stated. 

Infinitely Small Displacements 

54. Explanation. A displacement is said to be infinitely 
small when its length is infinitely small. 

The position of the infinitely small displacement is a 
position to which the bounding points of the displacement lie 
indefinitely near. 

An infinitely small displacement is determined in mag- 
nitude and direction when we know its position, and the 
infinitely small changes which the coordinates of the system 
undergo owing to the displacement. 

55. Problem la. To express the length ds of an infinitely 
small displacement in terms of the changes dx v of the Sn 
rectangular coordinates of the system. 

If in equation § 3 1 (i) we substitute dx v for xj — x v , we 
obtain 

3n 

Twrfs 2 = yvm v dx v 2 . 



62 FIRST BOOK 



CHAP. 



A 

56. Problem lb. To express the angle ss! between two in- 
finitely small displacements ds and <M in terms of the changes 
dx v and dxj in the 3n rectangular coordinates of the system. 

If in the equation § 44 we substitute dx v for xj — x v and dxj 
for x" —x v ° we obtain 

A 8 * 
mdsds r cos ss r = yvm y dx v dxj. 

i 

This expression holds whether both displacements have the 
same position or not. 

57. Problem 2a. To express the length ds of an in- 
finitely small displacement in terms of the changes dp p of the 
r general coordinates p p of the system. 

The rectangular coordinates x v are functions of the p p % 
and moreover of the p p s alone, since they are completely 
determined by these, and since displacements of the system 
which are not expressible in terms of the changes of p p are 
excluded from consideration (§ 13). 

Putting now for shortness 

dx v 
we get 3 n equations of the form 

r 

<te v = ^2fa vp d>p p (ii), 

i 

where a vp are functions of the position, and can therefore be 
expressed as functions of p p . Substituting these values in 
equation § 55, and putting for shortness 

1 

we get as the solution of the problem 

r r 

Cfe 2 = 2*2* a P<r d Pp d P* ( iv > 

1 1 

A 

58. Problem 2b. To express the angle $$' between two 
infinitely small displacements of lengths ds and ds f and having 
the same position in terms of the changes dp p and dp p in the r 
general coordinates p p of the system. 



HI INFINITELY SMALL DISPLACEMENTS 63 

We form the values of dxj by means of § 57 (ii), and 
substitute these and the values of dx v in equation § 56. 
Bemembering that for both displacements the values of the 
coordinates, and therefore of the quantities a p<r , are equal, we 
obtain 

dsdsf cos & = ^/^/a^dp^pj. 

1 1 

Properties of a pa and a^ Introduction of b^. 

59. 1. For all values of p, <r, r (c£ § 57 (i)), 

9 £W = fay 

60. 2. For all values of p and <r (cf. § 57 (iii)), 

61. 3. The number of the quantities a^ is equal to Snr ; 
the number of the quantities a^ different from one another is 
£r(r+l). 

62. 4. For all values of p 



For all values of p and a- 

pp <r<r p<r r 

For the right-hand side of the equation § 57 (iv.), on 
account of its derivation from the equation § 55, is a neces- 
sarily positive quantity, whatever may be the values of dp p . 
For this the foregoing inequalities are necessary conditions. 

63. 5. For all values of p, <r, t, the following equation 
holds, 

In order to prove this equation we must substitute on the 
right-hand side the values of a^ given in § 57 (iii), and make 
use of the properties of a p<r given in § 59. 

64. 6. Let the determinant formed by the r 2 quantities 



64 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

a^ be A. The factor of a^ in A, divided by A will always 
be denoted by h^ Thus we have as a definition 

_3 L 3A 

" " a a< 

For all values of p and cr then 

V = K- 

The number of quantities b^ different from one another is 
equal to \r{r+ 1). 

65. 7. The value of the expression 

r 

i 

is equal to unity so long as i = ^ ; its value is zero if i and ^ 
are different. 

r 

For if i = x> ^ e expression 2 pa pA>x^ represents the 

i 
determinant A itself. If, however, i and % are different, it 

represents the determinant which results from A when the row 

a px is replaced by the row a^. In this determinant two 

rows are equal, and consequently its value is zero. 

66. 8. For all values of i and % we have the two 
equations 



2 p 2 <r V a P^= a c X > 



i i 

r r 



1 1 
For if we form by means of § 65 the value of the expression 

r r 

2 P *W or 2 pa p^ *° r a ^ va * ues of °" ^ rom 1 to r, and then 
i i 

multiply the resulting equations one by one with a^ or 6^ 
respectively, and add, the equations follow. 

67. 9. Definite changes of the quantities a p<r involve 
definite changes of the quantities i p<r Let us denote by Ba^ 



Ill INFINITELY SMALL DISPLACEMENTS 65 

and Sb^ any variation of a^ and the resulting variation in b^ 
then the following equations hold, 

r r 

2 p 2 <r v i <Ar= -Sa 'x 
i i 

• * • 

r r 

i i 

If we vary the equations § 66 and make use of the results of 
§ 65 the equations follow. 

68. 10. If we vary in a^ and b^ only one definite coor- 
dinate, p ry on which they depend, then for every value of t 



IY 






Displacements in the Direction of the Coordinates 

69. Definition 1. A displacement in the direction of a 
definite coordinate is an infinitely small displacement in which 
only this one coordinate is changed without the remaining 
ones changing. 

The direction of all the displacements in the direction of 
the same coordinate from the same position is the same ; it 
is called the direction of the coordinate in that position. 

70. Note. The direction of a coordinate depends on the 
choice of the remaining coordinates in use. 

71. Definition 2. The reduced component of an infinitely 
small displacement in the direction of a given coordinate is 
the component of the displacement in the direction of the 
coordinate (§§ 48, 69) divided by the ratio of the change of 
the coordinate to a displacement in its own direction. 

The reduced component in the direction of a coordinate 
is called for shortness the component along the coordinate. 
Thus we speak of the component of a given displacement 

F 



66 FIKST BOOK chap. 

in a given direction ; we cannot speak of the reduced com- 
ponent in a given direction, but only of the reduced com- 
ponent of an infinitely small displacement in the direction 

of a coordinate. 

A 
72. Problem la. To express the inclination sx v of the 

displacement ds to the rectangular coordinate x v in terms of 

the 3ti increments dx r 

In equation § 56, put the dx v 's equal to zero for all values 

of v, except the given one to which the problem refers. 

Then the direction of ds f is, by § 69, that of #„, and the angle 

A 

ss becomes the required angle. Moreover, since by § 55 mds' 2 

— m v dx v n 9 we get as solution 



dscossx v = J^dx, 
v m 



where for ds its value in terms of dx v is to be substituted. 

73. Problem lb. To express the components dx v of the 
displacement ds along the rectangular coordinates x v in terms of 
the changes dx v of the coordinates. 

A 

Put sx v = in the foregoing proposition ; then we get 
the displacement ds in the direction of the coordinate x v , and 
we observe that the ratio of the change of the coordinate to 
a displacement in its own direction is equal to dxjds, or to 

\/m/m v . The left-hand side of equation § 72 represents 
immediately the component of ds in the direction of x v ; then if 
we divide the equation by s/m/m v we obtain (§ 71) as the solu- 
tion of the problem 

dx v = —dx y . 
m 

74. Problem la To express the changes dx v of the rect- 
angular coordinates in a displacement in terms of the reduced 
components of the displacement along these coordinates. 

The solution of the foregoing problem gives immediately 

m — 
dx v = — dx v . 



Ill INFINITELY SMALL DISPLACEMENTS 67 

A 

75. Problem 2a. To express the inclination sp p of the 
displacement ds to the general coordinate p p in terms of the r 
increments dp p . 

Put in equation § 58 dp p zero for all values of p except 

the chosen one to which the problem refers. The direction 

A 
of ds is then by § 69 that of p p , and the angle ss! is the 

required angle. Since at the same time by § 57 ds' 2 = a pp dp f2 9 
we obtain as solution of the problem 

A r 

h/a^ds cos sp p = 2 <ra p^P'» 

i 

where for ds its value in terms of dp 9 must be substituted. 

76. Observation 1. If in the foregoing expression we 
put all the dpjs equal to zero with the exception of a given 
one, say dp a , the direction of ds becomes the direction of this 

A A 

coordinate p 9 and the angle sp p becomes the angle p a p p which 
the coordinate p 9 makes with the coordinate p p . Since at the 
same time efo 2 = a^dp^ 2 , we obtain for this angle 

A V 

cosiVp p = -y— - 

v« pp a t 
and this angle is always, by § 62, a real angle. 

77. Observation 2. The coordinates p p are called ortho- 
gonal when each of them is in every position perpendicular to 
the remaining ones. The necessary and sufficient condition is 
(§76) that a^ should vanish whenever p and a are different. 
For example, rectangular coordinates are orthogonal coordinates. 

78. Problem 2b. To express the components dp p of the 
displacement ds along the coordinates p p in terms of the in- 
crements dp p of these coordinates in the displacement. 

. A 

In equation § 75 put sp p equal to zero, and we get the dis- 
placement ds given by this equation in the direction of p p ; 
every dp 9 is zero except dp p , and the equation thus becomes 
s/a^ds = ^pprfpp- The ratio of the change of p p to a displace- 
ment in its own direction is thus 1/ Va~. If we remember 

. A 

that according to § 48 ds cos sp p is the component of (is in the 



v pfT u 99 



68 FIEST BOOK CHAP. 

direction^ and pay attention to definition § 71, we see that 
the left-hand side of the equation § 75 represents the Teduced 
component along p p and we obtain the expression, 

d P 9 = Va^ds cos sp p (i), 

and thus 

__ r 

1 

79. Problem 2c. To express the increments dp p of the 
coordinates, owing to a displacement d$, in terms of the com- 
ponents dp p of the displacement along the coordinates p p . 

Using the equation § 78 (ii), along with the notation of 
§ 64, we get immediately 

r 
1 

80. Problem Sa. To express the components dp p of a 
displacement along the general coordinates p p in terms of the 
components dx v of the displacement along the rectangular 
coordinates of the system. 

We obtain successively by use of §§ 78, 57 (iii), 57 (ii), 
and 74, 

r r 8n 

dp p = ^2*a pa dp a = 2-2* 5?^^*' 
i i i m 

Zn m 8tt - 

= > v — -a dx = > v a dx . 
/i jrC~ v? X\z1vp mj v % 

81. Problem 3b. To express the components dx v of a 
displacement along the rectangular coordinates x v in terms of 

the components dp p of the displacement along the general 
coordinates p p of the system. 

We obtain successively by means of §§ 73, 57 (ii), and 79, 



^~S^"£2r&-*« 



thus, writing for shortness 



Ill INFINITELY SMALL DISPLACEMENTS 69 



HI. r 



1 

we obtain 

r 

82. Problem 4. To express the length of an infinitely 
small displacement in terms of its reduced components along 
the coordinates of the system. 

If we employ the general coordinates p p1 we obtain by 
successive use of §§ 78 (ii) and 79 with the equation § 57 (iv) 



r r 



rf * 2 = 2*2* vMp- 



i i 

r r r 



= **2/d Pp dp p = 2*2* mmp« 



83. If we employ rectangular coordinates these equations 
take the form 

= 2' dx ,<&v = 2" m^*' 



i 



84. Problem 5a. To express the angle between two in- 
finitely small displacements from any position in terms of 
the reduced components of both displacements along the 
rectangular coordinates. 

By successive use of § 73 and § 74 in the equation § 56 
we obtain the forms 

dsds cos 88 = >* — dx v dx v 

= ^»dx v dx v ' = ^^vdx v dxj = ^* — dx v dxj. 
i i i >m,f 

In these we must substitute for ds and dd their values in 
terms of dx v given in § 83. 

85. Problem 5b. To express the angle between two 



70 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

infinitely small displacements from the same position in terms 
of the components of the two displacements along the general 
coordinates p p . 

By successive use of §§ 78 and 79 in the equation § 58 
we obtain the forms 

A r r 

dsdrf cos s* = ^/^a^dp^pj 

i i 

r __ r r r 

= ^pd P( >dp p ' = ^Pdp p dp/ = 2'2* MiVW- 
i i 11 

Here again we must substitute for ds and d£ their values 
in terms of dp p given in § 82. 

86. Problem 6. To express the angle between two in- 
finitely small displacements in terms of the angles which both 
make with the coordinates of the system. 

Divide the last of equations § 85 by dsdsf and remember 
that by § 78 (i) 

J%> cos *P P = -^ P > J%> cos Jp P = ( ^, 
we then obtain 

cos ss 7 = 2 p 2 a V*/ a PP a ™ cos *Pp cos s 'iV 
i i 

87. When we employ rectangular coordinates the fore- 
going equation takes the form 

A, *» A A 

COS 88 = > r COS SX ¥ COS SX r 

1 

It is to be noticed that the equation § 86 assumes the 
same position for the two displacements, whereas the equation 
of § 87 is free from this assumption. 

88. Proposition. The r angles which any direction in 
a definite position makes with the r general coordinates are 
connected by the equation 

r r . A A 

*>***< a H> a <r* °° s sp p cos sp a = 1 ; 




P s.^^pr^ "pp—ov 



Ill INFINITELY SMALL DISPLACEMENTS 71 

for this equation follows when in § 86 the directions of ds 
and dsf are made to coincide. 

89. Corollary. In particular the Sn angles which any 
displacement of the system makes with the rectangular 
coordinates of the system satisfy the equation 

8tt A. 
r eos 2 «r r = 1. 




Use of Partial Differential Coefficients 

90. Notation. The length ds of an infinitely small dis- 
placement is determined by the values of the coordinates p p of 
its position and their changes dp p . If we change one of these 
constituent elements, whilst the rest remain constant, the 
resulting partial differential of ds will be denoted by d p ds. 

If we consider, as we may, the • coordinates p p and the 

components dp p along them as the independent constituent 
elements of ds, then the resulting partial differential of ds will 
be denoted by dj£s. 

Other partial differentials of ds are of course possible, but 
it is not necessary for our purpose to specify them. The 
symbol dds, which is usually used for them, will be retained, 
and will be more particularly defined on each occasion in 
word 8. 

91. Note 1. The components of a displacement along 
the coordinates can be expressed as partial differential coeffi- 
cients of the length of the displacement. Thus, by differ- 
entiating the equation § 57 (iv), and making use of § 78, 
we get 

,- , d dJ 3 *I$ 

p * Odp p Odp p 

92. Note 2. The inclination of an infinitely small dis- 
placement to the coordinate p p can be expressed by means of 
the partial differential coefficients of its length. Thus, using 
§§ 91 and 78, 

/ — A 3 ds 



72 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

. 9 3. Observation. In particular, if in §§ 91 and 9 2 we 
use rectangular coordinates we obtain 

■»""" •» 0(18 4 * - #N 

fm w A dds .... 

\f - ?008«f «— (n), 

v m case,, 

where the meaning of the partial differentials is clear from 
what precedes. 

94. Note 3. The changes which the coordinates p p 
suffer in an infinitely small displacement can be expressed 
as partial differential coefficients of the length of the displace- 
ment. Thus, using the equations in §§ 82 and 79, 

d = l 3 /* 8 * = d z d(id$ 
p ddp p ddp p 

95. Note 4. For all values of the index r the following 
relation exists between the partial differential coefficients of ds — 

a ^=-^ (i). 

dp r dp T 

For 

and 

3ii 1 ' ' 36 - 

. If we put in the first form for dp p and dp 9 their values in 

terms of dp and dp 9 given in § 79, and make use of the 
relations in § 68 and the second form, the proof follows. In 
a similar manner we may proceed with the second form. 

96. Proposition. If the position of an infinitely small 
displacement suffers two such changes, whereby the first time 
the components along the coordinates, and the second time 
the changes of the coordinates retain their original value, then 
the changes in the length of the displacement in both cases 
are equal, but of opposite signs. 



XII 



PATHS OF SYSTEMS 73 



For in the second case Sdp p = 0, whilst the coordinates p p 
*\ suffer the changes Sp p , and thus the change in the length of 

> the displacement is given by 

In the first case Sdp p =0, whilst the coordinates suffer 
the same changes Sp p so that 

v-2^* * ' (ii) - 

From the' equations (i) and (ii) and the equation § 95 (i) 
we get 



Paths of Systems 

Explanations 

97- The aggregate of positions which a system occupies in 
its passage from one position to another is called a path of the 
system. 

A path may also be considered as the aggregate of displace- 
ments which a system undergoes in its passage from one 
position to another. 

98. A portion of the path which is limited by two in- 
finitely near positions is called an element of the path. Such 
an element is an infinitely small displacement; it has both 
length and direction. 

99. The direction of the path of a system in a given 
position is the direction of one of the elements of the path 
infinitely near that position. 

The length of the path of a system between two of its 
positions is the sum of the lengths of the elements of the path 
between these positions. 

100. Analytical Representation. — The path of a system 
is represented analytically when the coordinates of its positions 



74 FIKST BOOK CHAP. 

are given as functions of any one chosen variable. With every 
position of the path is a value of the variable associated. 
One of the coordinates themselves may serve as independent 
variable. It is frequently convenient to choose as independent 
variable the length of the path, measured from a given position 
of the path. The differential coefficients with regard to this 
chosen variable, and therefore with regard to the length of 
path, will be denoted in the manner of Lagrange by accents. 



101. Definition 1. The path of a system is said to be 
straight when it has the same direction in all its positions. 

102. Corollary. If a system describes a straight path, 
then its individual points describe straight lines, whose lengths 
measured from their starting-point are always proportional 
to one another (§ 38). 

103. Definition 2. The path of a system is said to be 
curved when the direction of the path changes as we pass 
from one position to another. The rate of change of the 
direction with regard to the length of the path is called the 
curvature of the path. 

The curvature of the path is therefore the limiting value of 
the ratio of the angle between two neighbouring elements to 
their distance. 

104. Observation. The value of the curvature is therefore 
defined independently of the form of the analytical representa- 
tion ; hence, in particular, it is independent of the choice of the 
coordinates of the system. 

105. Problem 1. To express the curvature c of the path 
in terms of the changes of the angles which the path makes 
with the rectangular coordinates of the system. 

Let de be the angle between the direction of the path at 
the beginning and end of the path-element ds. Then by de- 
finition (§103) 

de 

"IS 

A 

Let, further, cos sx v be the cosine of the angle which 
the path makes with x v at the beginning of ds; and let 



r 



III PATHS OF SYSTEMS 75 

A A 

cos 8x v + d cos sx y be the value of the same quantity at the 
end of ds. Then, by equation § 87, 

2* n A A A 

v COS SX y ( COS 8X y + A COS sx v ). 

1 
Further, by equation 89, 

2 s» A 
'COS *«£,= ]., 

7 1 

and 

2 8n A A 

* (cos &c„ + d cos SB,) 2 = 1, 
i 

If, then, we subtract twice the first equation from the 
^ sum of the last two we obtain 

2 — 2 cos (de) = de 2 = 2" (^ cos *0 2 > 

i 
and on dividing by d£ 

106. Problem 2. To express the curvature of the path 
in terms of the changes of the rectangular coordinates of the 
system with respect to the length of the path. 

From § 72 we have (§ 100) _ 

cos sx v = a/ — *x' 9 
and 

(cos £fr - J 7 ^:. 

Hence by § 105 the solution of the problem is 

3» 

i 

107. Problem 3. To express the curvature of the path 
in terms of the changes in the rectangular coordinates, them- 
selves considered as functions of any variable r. 

> According to the rules of the differential calculus 



76 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

*' ~ds\d^"ds)~ \ds) \fa'~fa*~lfr'~tih* ) ' ' 

If we substitute this expression in c 8 and remember (§55) 
that 

W = ■% 



-».s;-2-a*v - (i) ' 



and 






•^•--S^sr** <»>• 



we obtain 






where for ds/tfr and cFs/dr* their values determined by the 
foregoing equations are to be substituted. 

108. Problem 4. To express the curvature of the path 
in terms of the changes in the general coordinates p ? of the 
system with regard to the length of the path. 

Substitute in the expression § 106 instead of the rect- 
angular coordinates, p pi supposing x" expressed in terms of pj 
and p p ". 

Thus, by § 57 (ii), 



and hfence 



X J = ^f2*pPi>'> 
i 

r 



therefore 



1 1 A 

If we form these equations for all values of p and multiply 

each of them by — - and then add, the left-hand side becomes c 2 . 

m 

The summation on the right with regard to v can be obtained 

by aid of the quantities a^ for the first two terms. For the 

first term we get immediately by § 57 (iii) a^ For the 

coefficient of pj r in the second term we have 



•* 
i 



Ill PATHS OF SYSTEMS 77 

r • 8n r r S n S <y 






In the transition from the second to the third form, and 
from the fourth to the fifth, use is made of the fact that, when 
F(/),<r) is any expression involving p and a, then 

ii ii 

The coefficient of the third term cannot be expressed in 
terms of a^ In order to make the connection with the rect- 
angular coordinates disappear from the final result, let us put 






Then we obtain 






'■^(wV^-^ 



+ 



r r x 

i i ) 



In these results the values of a^ are given by means of 
§ 57 as functions of p p ; the quantities a p<rA ^ are to be regarded 
as newly introduced functions of the same quantities. The 
number of these newly introduced functions is equal to 



\r\r+l)\ 



CHAPTEE IV 

POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE DISPLACEMENTS. 
» MATERIAL SYSTEMS 

Explanations 

109. There exists a connection between a series of material 
points when from a knowledge of some of the components 
of the displacements of those points we are able to state some- 
thing as to the remaining components. 

110. When connections exist between the points of a 
system, some of the conceivable displacements of the system 
are excluded from consideration, namely, those displacements of 
the system whose occurrence would contradict the statements 
above referred to. Conversely, every statement that some of 
the conceivable displacements of the system are excluded from 
consideration, implies a connection between the points of the 
system. The connections between the points of a system are 
completely given when for every conceivable displacement of 
the system it is known whether it is, or is not, excluded 
from our consideration. 

111. Those displacements which are not excluded from 
our consideration are called possible ones, the others impossible 
ones. Possible displacements are also called virtual. They 
are always called possible displacements when as a narrower 
idea they are contrasted with conceivable displacements ; they 
are only called virtual when as a broader idea they are con- 
trasted with a narrower one, e.g. the case of actual displace- 
ments. 



GHAP. iv MATERIAL SYSTEMS 79 

112. Possible paths are those paths which are composed of 
possible displacements. Possible positions are all those positions 
which can be reached via possible paths. 

113. Thus all positions of possible paths are possible posi- 
tions. But it is not to be understood that any conceivable 
path whatever through possible positions is also a possible path. 
On the contrary, a displacement between infinitely neighbour- 
ing possible positions may be an impossible displacement. 

114. Between two possible positions there is always one 
possible path. For if from any one actual position even a 
single possible path can be drawn to each of the two positions, 
then these two paths must together form one possible path 
between the two positions ; if no possible path could be drawn 
to one of the two, then would this position not be a possible 
position. 

115. Definition 1. A connection of a system is said to 
be a continuous one when it is not inconsistent with the three 
following assumptions : — 

1. That the knowledge of all possible finite displacements 
should be included in the knowledge of all possible infinitely 
small displacements. 

2. That every possible infinitely small displacement can 
be traversed in a straight, continuous path. 

3. That every infinitely small displacement, which is 
possible from a given position, is also possible from any in- 
finitely neighbouring position, except for variations of the 
order of the distance between the positions or of a higher 
order. 

116. Corollary. When only continuous connections exist 
in a system, the sum of any possible infinitely small displace- 
ments whatever from the same position is itself a possible dis- 
placement from the same position. (Superposition of infinitely 
small displacements.) 

For, according to § 115 (3), the individual displacements 
may be performed successively, and consequently, by § 115 
(2), the direct displacement from the initial position to the 
final one is itself a possible displacement. 

117. Definition 2. A connection of a system is said to 



80 FIRST BOOK chap. 

be an internal one when it only affects the mutual position 
of the points of the system. 

118. Corollary. When in a system only internal con- 
nections exist, every displacement of the system which does 
not alter the configuration is a possible displacement, and 
conversely. 

119. Definition 3. A connection of a system is said to 
be normal (gesetzmassiger) when it exists independently of the 
time. 

A normal connection is therefore implied in the statement 
that of the conceivable displacements of a system some are 
possible, others not, and this at all times or independently of 
the time. 

120. Observation. So long as we treat solely of the 
geometry of systems, the difference between normal and 
abnormal connections does not appear, for in this case our in- 
vestigations are not affected by the time. If the connections 
of a system are different at two different times, then for the 
present we must consider that we are dealing with two 
different systems. It will practically amount to the same 
thing if we assume that in this first book all the connections 
are normal. 

121. Definition 1. A system of material points which 
is subject to no other than continuous connections is called a 
material system. 

122. Definition 2. A material system which is subject 
to no other than internal and normal connections is called a 
free system. 

123. Definition 3. A material system between whose 
possible positions all conceivable continuous motions are also 
possible motions is called a holonomous system. 

The term means that such a system obeys integral (0X09) 
laws (vo/ios), whereas material systems in general obey only 
differential conditions. (Of. § 132 infra.) 

Analytical Representation 

124. Note. A system of material points satisfies the 
conditions of a material system when the differentials of its 



ir MATERIAL SYSTEMS 81 

rectangular coordinates are subject to no other conditions than 
a series of homogeneous linear equations whose coefficients are 
continuous functions of possible values of the coordinates. 

For the first kind of continuity which Definition 115 
requires must be presupposed, when mention is made of the 
differentials of the coordinates of the system ; the other two 
kinds of continuity are satisfied by the restriction of the differ- 
entials employed. 

125. Converse. If a system of material points satisfies 
the conditions of a material system, then the differentials of its 
rectangular coordinates are subject to no other limitations than 
to a series of homogeneous linear equations, whose coefficients 
are continuous functions of possible values of the coordinates. 

To prove this let us take a possible position of the system, 
and the possible displacements from it. For a given displace- 
ment the Sn increments dx v may be supposed to have to one 
another the ratios 

If now we consider du x as any infinitely small quantity 
whatever, then by means of the set of equations 

dx v = e^di^ 

a set of possible displacements is given. Now either all pos- 
sible displacements are contained in these, or this is not the 
case. If not, then we must take a second displacement, which 
cannot be represented in this form, and for this the 3n incre- 
ments dx y may bear to one another the ratios 

€ 21 * € 22 • * " ' € 2S' 1 ' 

f Ihen taking any second infinitely small quantity du 2 , by means 
of the set of equations 

dx v = e lv du l + e 2y du 2> 

by § 1 1 6 a more general set of possible displacements is 
given. 

Now either all possible displacements are contained in this 
set, or not If not, we must choose another such quantity 
du v and continue the process until, on account of the exhaus- 
tion of all possible displacements, it is not possible to continue 

G 



82 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

it further. Its continuance becomes impossible when we have 
taken 3n such quantities du k ; and then the expression 

Sn 



dx ¥ = 2 A € x* du K (*) 



represents all possible displacements of the system, when all 
conceivable displacements are possible ones, and thus when 
no connections exist between the points of a system. In 
general the process must come to an end earlier, and all possible 
displacements may therefore be expressed by equations of con- 
dition of the form 

i 

toy = 2 A e ***» ft t ) 

1 

where under all circumstances 

I < 3tl 

In order that this form may be satisfied by arbitrarily 
chosen values of dx v > it is sufficient that the dxjs should satisfy 
the 3n — l linear homogeneous equations which result from 
the elimination of du k from the equations (ty. The quantities 
e kv must, according to § 115 (3), be continuous functions of the 
position. However (by § 124), the increments dx v are not 
to be subject to further limitations than these. 

126. Observation. The number and the content of the 
equations which we obtain between dx v by the foregoing process, 
are independent of the particular choice of the displacements. 

For if we take other displacements and express dx 9 
in terms of other quantities dv k) then we c&n substitute the 
values of dx v in the equations which we have already obtained 
by elimination. If these are not identically satisfied then 
the quantities dv k would not be independent, which would be 
contrary to the assumption under which they are chosen. Thus 
these equations are identically satisfied, and cannot therefore 
be different from the equations or linear combinations of the 
equations which were obtained by elimination of the quantities 
dv k in terms of which the increments dx v are expressed. The 
number of equations obtained by means of du k can not be 
greater than the number obtained by means of dv k \ neither 



I 



IV MATERIAL SYSTEMS 83- » 

can it be less ; for then the converse process would show that 
the quantities du k would not be independent of one another. 

127. Corollary 1. The connection of a material system 
can be completely expressed analytically by stating a single 
possible position of the system and a set of homogeneous linear 
equations between the differentials of its rectangular coordinates. 

For relations between these differentials cannot by § 125 \ 

be given in any other manner than by such a set of equations. 
This does not exclude the existence of finite equations between 
the coordinates. However, all such finite equations can be 
completely replaced by means of a single possible position, 
and just as many homogeneous linear equations between the 
differentials. These last, however, must not be inconsistent 
with the given differential equations ; they must either reduce 
to them, or must be associated with them in a complete repre- 
sentation. 

i 

128. Notation. The equations which represent the con- 
nection of a material system, in terms of its rectangular coor- 
dinates, will in future always be expressed in the following form 



.2 



Sn 
vX.J&X„= 0. 



1 



It is to be understood that i such equations exist, and that 
the is have values from 1 to i. The quantities x w are to be 
considered continuous functions of x v . 

129. Corollary 2. The connection of a material system 
whose positions are expressed in terms of general coordinates 
can also be completely expressed analytically by stating a 
single possible position and a set of homogeneous linear 
equations between the differentials of the coordinates. 

Using the general coordinates p p whose number r is less 
than Sn, a connection between the points of the system is 
ipso facto in existence. First suppose the connection to be 
completely expressed by the rectangular coordinates according 
to § 128. In the corresponding differential equations let the 
values of dx v be substituted in terms of dp 9 by means of 
equation § 57 (ii). The resulting linear homogeneous equations 
can be so arranged that 3n — r of them are identically satisfied 



84 FIRST BOOK chap. 

in consequence bf the 3n — r equations which express the fact 
that the Zn quantities x v are functions of the r quantities p p . 
The remaining k = i — 3n + r equations between dp p give com- 
pletely all the equations between dx v> and therefore (§ 127), 
with a knowledge of one possible position, are sufficient to 
describe completely the connection of the system. 

130. Notation. The equations which express the connec- 
tion of a material system in the general coordinates p pt will in 
future always be written in the form 

r 

i 

They will be taken as k in number, and all values from 1 to 
k are to be given to ^. The quantities p^ are to be considered 
continuous functions of p p . 

131. Observation. The equations § 128 or § 130 are 
called the differential equations, or the equations of condition 
of the system. 

132. Proposition. When from the differential equations 
of a material system an equal number of finite equations 
between the coordinates of the system can be deduced, the 
system is a holonomous system (§ 123). 

For the coordinates of every possible position must satisfy 
the finite equations. The differences between the coordinates 
of two neighbouring positions satisfy consequently an equal 
number of homogeneous linear differential equations, and since 
these must not be inconsistent with the equal number of the 
differential equations of the system, they must satisfy these 
also. The displacement between any two possible positions is 
consequently a possible displacement, whence the assertion 
follows. 

133. Converse. If a material system is holonomous, then 
its differential equations admit an equal number of finite or 
integral equations between the coordinates. 

For let us take from the r coordinates of the system, be- 
tween whose differentials the k equations exist, any, say 
the first r-i as independent variables, and pass from any 
initial position of the system along different possible paths 



IV FREEDOM OF MOTION 85 

to a position for which the independent coordinates have given 
values. Now if with a continually changing path one arrived 
at continuously changing values of the remaining coordinates, 
consequently at different positions, these positions would be 
possible positions, and therefore the displacements between 
them would by hypothesis be possible displacements. There 
would then be a value-system of the differentials, different 
from zero, which would satisfy the differential equations, even 
when the first r — k are put zero. This is not possible, for the 
equations are homogeneous and linear. Thus we must always 
arrive at the same values not only of the first r — k, but also 
of the remaining coordinates. The latter are consequently 
definite functions of the former. The k finite equations which 
express this are, since they cannot be inconsistent with the 
differential equations, integral equations of these latter. 



Freedom of Motion 

134. Definition. The number of infinitely small changes 
of the coordinates of a system that can be taken arbitrarily is 
called the number of free motions of the system, or the degree 
of freedom of its motion. 

135. Note 1. The number of free motions of a system is f - ^'H- I 
equal to the number of its coordinates, diminished by the 

number of the differential equations of the system. 

136. Note 2. The number of free motions of a material 
system is independent of the choice of the coordinates. 

In the notation of §§ 128-130 the number of degrees of 
freedom is equal to r — k, or, by § 129, to 3n — i, and is 
therefore always the same number, whatever numbers r and 
k may represent. 

137. Note 3. The number of degrees of freedom of a 
system does not change with the position of the system. 

For the connection being a continuous one, the number of 
degrees of freedom cannot differ by a finite quantity in neigh- 
bouring positions; thus, since a continuous change in this 
number is excluded, it does not change in finitely distant 
positions. 



86 FIRST BOOK chap. 

138. Note 4. The proof of the set of equations in § 125 
furnishes a solution of the problem — To find, but not without 
trial, the number of degrees of freedom of a completely known 
material system. The number I of the auxiliary quantities du K 
found according to the method of that proof is the required 
number. 

It is known that the possible positions of the system can be 
represented by means of r general coordinates p py and so in 
that proof these coordinates can be used instead of x v . 

139. Definition. A coordinate of a material system whose 
changes can take place independently of the changes of the 
remainder of the coordinates is called a free coordinate of the 
system. 

140. Corollary. A free coordinate does not appear in the 
differential equations of its system, and conversely every coor- 
dinate which does not appear in the differential equations of 
the system is a free coordinate. 

141. Observation 1. Whether a given coordinate is a 
free coordinate or not depends on the choice of the remaining 
ooordinates simultaneously employed. 

For if a certain coordinate does not appear in the differen- 
tial equations of the system, and we choose instead of one of 
those coordinates which do appear in the differential equations, 
a function of this and the first one as coordinate, then the first 
one loses its property of being a free coordinate, a property 
which it possessed until then. 

142. Observation 2. In a free system every coordinate 
of absolute position is a free coordinate. See §§118 and 122. 

143. Proposition. When the possible positions of a 
material system can be represented by means of coordinates 
which are all free, then the system is holonomous (§ 123). 

For every displacement of the system between possible 
positions is expressed in terms of a value -system of the 
differentials of the free coordinates ; every such value-system 
is possible since it is subject to no conditions, and therefore 
every displacement between possible positions is a possible 
displacement. 



IV FREEDOM OF MOTION 87 

144 Oonverse. In a holonomous system all possible 
positions can be expressed in terms of free coordinates. 

If a holonomous system has r coordinates, between which 
k differential equations exist, then k of the coordinates can be 
expressed as functions of the remaining (r — k). (See § 133.) 
Hence these r — k arbitrarily chosen coordinates determine 
completely the position of the system, and can by omission 
of the remaining coordinates be taken as free coordinates 
of the system. Also any (r — k) functions of the original r 
coordinates may serve a similar purpose. 

145. Observation 1. The number of free coordinates of a 
holonomous system is equal to the number of its degrees of 
freedom. 

146. Observation 2. If the number of coordinates of a 
material system is equal to the number of its degrees of 
freedom, then all the coordinates are free coordinates, and the 
system is holonomous. 

For should even a single differential equation between 
the coordinates exist, then the number of coordinates of the 
system would be greater than the number of degrees of free- 
dom. The number of coordinates can not be less than the 
number of degrees of freedom. 

147. Observation 3. The possible positions of a system, 
which is not holonomous, can not be fully represented by means 
of free coordinates alone. 

For the opposite of this statement would be contrary to 
§143. 



Displacements Perpendicular to Possible Displacements 

148. Proposition. If the r components dp p of a dis- 
placement ds of a system along the coordinates p ? can be 
expressed by means of k quantities y x in the form 

_ k 

i 
where the p^s are taken from the equations of condition of the 



88 FIRST BOOK chap. 

system (§ 130), then the displacement is perpendicular to every 
possible displacement of the system from the same position. 

Let dd be the length of any possible displacement from 
the same position, and let dpj denote the changes of the coor- 
dinates owing to this displacement. If now we multiply the 
equations of the series, each with dp p and add them, then 
using equations § 85 and § 130 



r 



2 p d Pp d v? = chih ' cos !*' = 2 x %<2 p Pxp d Pp = ° ; 
i i i 

A A 

thus cos ssf = ; and ss' = 90° as was to be proved. 

149. Additional Note. The r components dp p of a dis- 
placement ds along the coordinates p p are singly determined 
when we know k of them, and know also that the displace- 
ment is perpendicular to every possible displacement of the 
system. 

Let dp p be again the changes of p p for any possible dis- 
placement By means of the k equations of condition we 
can represent k of them as homogeneous linear functions of 
the remaining (r — k), and then substitute these values in the 
equation 

r 

2 p d Pp d Pp = °- 

The dpj's appearing in this equation are now completely 
arbitrary, and thus the coefficient of each one of them must 
vanish. This gives (r — k) homogeneous linear equations be- 
tween dp p which permit us to express (r — k) of them as 
single-valued linear functions of the remaining k. 

150. Converse. If a conceivable displacement is per- 
pendicular to every possible displacement of a system, then its 

r components dp p along p p can always, by suitable choice of the 
k quantities y x , be expressed in the form 

k 

. d Pp = ^2*p x( >y X ' 
i 

For if we determine the 7 's by means of k of these equa- 



I 



IV FREEDOM OF MOTION 89 

tions and calculate by means of these values all the com- 
ponents, we must obtain the given values of dp ? . For the 
displacement so obtained is by § 148 perpendicular to all 
possible displacements, and has with the given displacement 
k components common. It has thus by § 149 all the r com- 
ponents along p p common with the same. 



CHAPTER V 

SPECIAL PATHS OF MATERIAL SYSTEMS 

1. Straightest Paths 

151. Definition 1. An element of a path of a material 
system is said to be straighter than any other when it has a 
smaller curvature. 

152. Definition 2. The straightest element is defined as 
a possible element, which is straighter than all other possible 
ones which have the same position and direction. 

153. Definition 3. A path, all of whose elements are 
straightest elements, is called a straightest path. 

154. Analytical Representation. All elements of a 
path of which one straightest element is the straightest, have 
the same position and direction ; hence the values of their 
coordinates, and the first differentials of these coordinates with 
regard to the independent variables, are equal. The curvature, 
however, is determined not by means of these values alone, 
but also by means of the second differential coefficients of the 
coordinates. By the values of these the elements are dis- 
tinguished, and for the straightest element the second differen- 
tial coefficients must be such functions of the coordinates and 
of their first differential coefficients as make the curvature a 
minimum. 

The equations which express this condition must be satis- 
fied for all positions of a straightest path, and they are thus 
the differential equations of such a path. 






q*AP. v STRAIGHTEST PATHS OF SYSTEMS 91 

155. Problem 1. To express the differential equations of 
the straightest paths of a material system in terms of the rect- 
angular coordinates of the system. 

Let us choose as independent variable the length of the 
path. Since only possible paths are to be considered, the Sn 
quantities xj according to §§128 and 100 are subject to i 
equations of the form 

i 

Thus the 3n quantities x" are subject to i equations of 
the form ^ 

i ii* 

which follow from (i) by differentiation. 

With the condition that these equations are not to be 
violated, the quantities x" will be determined so as to make 
the curvature c (§ 106), or what is the same thing, the value 
of ^ c 2 , viz., 



*2 r -v* (*)- 

a minimum. 

According to the rules of the differential calculus, we 
proceed as follows : — 

Multiply each of the equations (ii) by a factor to be 
determined later, which for the I th equation we may denote 
by H t ; add the partial differential coefficients on the left- 
hand side of the resulting equations arranged according to 
each of the quantities x" to the partial differential coefficients 
of (iii) (the quantity which is to be made a minimum) arranged 
according to the same quantities ; then finally put the result 
equal to zero, and we get 3n equations of the form 



-v' + 2- *<&> " ° ( iv ) i 



which, together with the i equations (ii), give 3n + i linear 
but not homogeneous equations to determine the Zn + i 
quantities x p " and E ( ; and from these the values of these 
quantities can be found, and consequently the value of the 



92 FIRST BOOK chap. 

least curvature. The satisfying of the equations (iv) at all 
positions of a possible path is thus a necessary condition that 
the path should be a straightest one, and the equations (iv) are 
therefore the required differential equations. 

156. Observation 1. The equations (iv) are moreover the 

sufficient conditions for the occurrence of a minimum. For 

d 2 c 2 
the second differential coefficients -—„^ — Tl vanish whenever v 

and fi, are different, and are necessarily positive when v and 
fi are equal. The value of the curvature thus admits no other 
special value. 

The satisfying of equations (iv) for all positions of a pos- 
sible path is thus the sufficient condition for a straightest 
path. 

157. Observation 2. By use of § 72 the equations (iv) 
can be written in the form 

N ' i 

The equations (iv) therefore determine how the direction of a 
path must change from position to position in order that it may 
remain a straightest path ; and moreover every single equation 
determines how the inclination of the path to a given 
rectangular coordinate changes. 

158. Problem 2. To express the differential equations of 
the straightest paths of a material system in terms of the general 
coordinates of the system. 

Choose again as independent variable the length of the 
path. The coordinates p p and their differential coefficients p ? r 
satisfy (§ 130) the k equations 

r 

2" jw/ = ° (i) - 

i 
« • 

thus the quantities p p " satisfy the equations 

i li-™ 

From all values of p" which satisfy these equations those 



V STKAIGHTEST PATHS OF SYSTEMS 93 

are to be determined which make the value of c or ^c 2 9 that 
is, the right-hand side of the equation §108 (iii), a minimum. 
We proceed according to the rules of the differential calculus, 
as in S 155, and take II for the factor, with which we 
multiply the ^ of equations (ii), and we obtain the necessary 
conditions for the minimum as r equations of the form 

2- w/ + ifi[(^ - ^)pJp: + 2*^ n * = ° ^ 

where to p in each equation a definite value from 1 to r 
has to be given. These make together with the equations 
(ii) (r + k) linear but not homogeneous equations for the 
(r + k) quantities p ? " and II X , by which these quantities, and 
thus the least curvature, can be found by § 108. The satisfy- 
ing of equations (iii) for all positions of a possible path is the 
necessary condition that the path should be a straightest path. 

159. Observation 1. The satisfying of equations (iii) is 
also the sufficient condition for a minimum, and thus for a 
straightest path. For the result of § 108 is only a trans- 
formation of § 106 for the curvature, and like § 156 this 
value in § 158 only admits one special value, which is a 
minimum. 

r 

160. Observation 2. By § 75 we have 

s/a ?p cos sp p = 2«r a^pj 

i ' 

and therefore 

js( ^ cos sty = 2; w/ + 2*2 T ^^/- 

Thus the equations 158 (iii) can be written in the form 

Js{ J a » cos «v) - *2;2^V - 2x^n r 

The equations (158) (iii) determine thus how the direction of 
the path must change from position to position in order that 
it may remain a straightest path ; and moreover every single 
equation determines how the inclination to a given coordinate 
p p changes. 



94 FIRST BOOK chap. 

161. Proposition. From a given position in a given 
direction there is always one and only one straightest path 
possible. 

For when a position and a direction in it are given, the 
equations 155 (iv) and 158 (iv) always give definite, and 
moreover unique, values for the change of direction ; thus by 
means of the given quantities the initial position, the direction 
at the next element of the path, and therefore at the successive 
positions right to the final position, are singly determined. 

162. Corollary. It is in general not possible to draw a 
straightest path from any position of a given system to any 
other position. 

For since the manifold of possible displacements from a 
position is equal to the number of free motions of the system, 
the manifold of possible directions in any position and there- 
fore the manifold of straightest paths from it is smaller by 
unity. The manifold of positions which are to be reached by 
straightest paths from a given position is thus again equal to 
the number of free motions. But the manifold of possible 
positions may be equal to the number of coordinates used, and 
is therefore in general greater than the former. 

163. Note 1. In order to be able to express all straightest 
paths of a material system whose positions are denoted in 
terms of p p , by equations between p p it is not necessary to know 
any 3n functions whatever which fully determine the position 
of the separate points of the system as functions of p p . It is 
sufficient that, together with the equations of condition of the 
system in terms of p pt the -| r (r+1) functions a^ of p p 
should be known. 

For the differential equations of the straightest paths can 
be explicitly written down when together with the p w 's the 
a^s are given as functions of p p . 

164. Note 2. In order to be able to express the straightest 
paths of a material system whose positions are denoted in terms 
of p p by equations between p p , it is sufficient to know, together 
with the equations of condition between p pi the length of 
every possible infinitely small displacement as a function of 
these coordinates p p and their changes. 



T SHORTEST PATHS OF SYSTEMS 95 

For if ds is the expression for this length in the desired 
form, then 

aw 

a = . 

" ddpddpr 

165. Note 3. In order to know the value of the curvature 
itself in any position of a straightest path, it is not sufficient to 
know the fyr(r+ 1) functions a^ We require in addition the 
±r*(r + l) 2 functions a^ (§ 108). 

The knowledge of the position of all the separate points as 
functions of p p is not necessary for the determination of the 
curvature itself. 

2. Shortest and Geodesic Paths 

166. Definition 1. The shortest path of a material system 
between two of its positions is a possible path between these 
positions, whose length is less than the length of any of the 
other infinitely neighbouring paths between the same positions. 

167. Note 1. The definition does not exclude the possi- 
bility, which may actually arise, of there being more than one 
shortest path between the two positions. The shortest of 
these shortest paths is the absolutely shortest path. It is at 
the same time the shortest path which is at all possible 
between the two positions. 

168. Note 2. Between any two possible positions of a 
material system there is always at least one shortest path 
possible. 

For possible paths always exist between the two positions 
(§ 114), and consequently there is amongst them an absolutely 
shortest path which is shorter than the neighbouring ones, — 
such as, according to §§ 121, 115, it must possess, — and is 
consequently a shortest path. 

169. Note 3. A shortest path between two positions is 
at the same time a shortest path between any two of its inter- 
mediate positions. Every portion of a shortest path is itself 
a shortest path. 

170. Note 4. The length of a shortest path differs only 
by an infinitely small quantity of a higher order from the 
lengths of all neighbouring paths between the same end posi- 



96 FIRST BOOK chap. 



i 



tions. By infinitely small quantities of the first order are 
meant the lengths of the displacements necessary to pass from 
a neighbouring path to the shortest path. 

171. Definition 2. A geodesic path of a material system 
is any path whose length between any two of its positions differs 
only by an infinitely small quantity of a higher order from „ 
the lengths of any of the infinitely neighbouring paths what- 
ever between the same positions. 

172. Note 1. Every shortest path between any two 
positions is a geodesic path. 

Thus the definition § 171 does not involve anything in the 
nature of an inconsistency, for there are paths which satisfy this * 
definition. 

173. Note 2. There is always at least one geodesic path 
possible between any two possible positions of a material system 
(§§ 168, 172). 

174. Note 3. A geodesic path is not necessarily at the { 
same time a shortest path between any two of its positions. 

It cannot be concluded from the definition that everv 
geodesic path is also a shortest path, and simple examples show 
that there are in fact geodesic paths which are not also shortest 
paths between their end positions. Such examples may be 
taken from the geometry of the single material point, that is, 
from ordinary geometry, and thus be assumed known. 

175. Note 4. When between two positions there is only 
one geodesic path, then this is also a shortest path, and more- 
over the absolutely shortest path between the two positions. 

For the opposite would by §§168 and 172 "be contrary to 
the hypothesis. 

176. Note 5. A geodesic path is always a shortest path 4 
between any two sufficiently neighbouring but still finitely 
distant positions on it. 

There may be between any two positions of the geodesic 
path under consideration a number of other geodesic paths. 
The absolutely shortest path between the two positions 
must coincide with one of these paths (§ 172). If we 
now make the positions approach one another along the 
geodesic path considered, then the length of this path as well 



T SHORTEST PATHS OF SYSTEMS 97 

as the length of the absolutely shortest path tends to zero, 
whilst the remaining geodesic paths remain finite. At least, 
from a certain finite distance of the positions onwards the 
geodesic path, along which the two positions approach each 
other, must coincide with the absolutely shortest path. 

177. Analytical Representation.— In order that a path 
may be a geodesic path, it is necessary and sufficient that the 
integral of the path -elements, (§ 99) viz., 

fds, 

taken between any two positions of the path should not vary 
when any continuous variations are given to the coordinates of 
the positions of the path, it being only supposed (1) that these 
variations should vanish at the limits of the integral, and (2) 
that after the variation the coordinates and their differentials 
should satisfy the equations of condition of the system. 
The necessary and sufficient conditions for this are a set 
of differential equations, which the coordinates of the path,- 
considered as functions of any single variable, must satisfy, 
aud which are consequently the differential equations of the 
geodesic paths. 

178. That these differential equations should be satisfied 
for all points of a possible path is also by § 172 the neces- 
sary condition that the path should be a shortest path, and 
hence these equations are also the differential equations of the 
shortest paths. The vanishing of the variation of the integral 
is, however, not also a sufficient condition that the path should 
be a shortest path between its bounding positions. It is further 
necessary that for every admissible variation of the coordinates 
the second variation of the integral should have an essentially 
positive value. For sufficiently near positions of a path, which 
satisfies the differential equations, this condition is always 
satisfied by § 176 of itself. 

179. Problem 1. To express the differential equations of 
the geodesic paths of a material system in terms of its rect- 
angular coordinates. 

The 3)i rectangular coordinates x v which are regarded as 
functions of any variable, must both before and after the 
variation satisfy (§ 128) the i equations 

H 



98 FIRST BOOK chap. 

Sn 

1 

The 37i variations Sx v are therefore associated with the i equa- 
tions which result from these after variation, viz., 



8n 3n 8i 



2'» w ^ + S'S'a-^H^ = (")• 



As the length ds of an element of the path does not depend 
on as„ but only on dx y , then its variation is 

This being understood, 

S/#s =fBds 

must be made zero. According to the rules of the Calculus of 4 
Variations, we multiply each of the equations (ii) by a function 
of x v to be determined later, which for the tth equation will 
be denoted by £, and add the sum of the left-hand sides of 
the resulting equations, which sum is equal to zero, to the 
varied element of the integral By partial integration we 
get rid of the differentials of the variations ; finally we put 
the coefficients of each one of the arbitrary functions Sx v 
equal to zero. We thus obtain 3n differential equations of 
the form 

<£) + ^«-^(£ -£>*- (iv». . 

which, together with the i equations (i), give (3n + i) equations t 
for the (3n + i) functions x v and £. These differential equa- 
tions are necessary conditions for the vanishing of the variation 
of the integral ; every geodesic path thus satisfies them, and 
consequently they represent the required solution. 



180. Observation 1. The differential equations 179 (iv) 
are moreover the sufficient conditions that the path which 
satisfies them should be a geodesic path. For if these equations 
are satisfied, then the variation of the integral Jds becomes 



\ 



V SHORTEST PATHS OF SYSTEMS 99 

equal to the series which results from partial integration under 
the integral sign ; it thus becomes with the usual notation, the 
upper limit being denoted by 1 and the lower by 0, 



•J"-^ 



If we make the variations &j„ for any two positions of the 
path vanish, then the variation of the integral between these 
positions as limiting positions vanishes, and therefore the re- 
quired sufficient analytical condition for a geodesic path is by 
§177 satisfied. 

181. Observation 2. Let us take the current length of 
the path as independent variable, then by use of §§ 55, 100, 
the equations 179 (iv), after division by ds, take the form 



< i Sn 



^. + ^:-2;2^-^)f.v=o (i)i 



which, together with the i equations resulting from differenti- 
ating 179 (i), viz., 

2'*.^+2'2vvv=o (n), 



furnish (Sn + i) unhomogeneous, linear equations for the (3n + i) 
quantities x" and £/, and thus permit these quantities to be 
expressed as single-valued functions of the quantities x ¥f 

182. Observation 3. By use of § 72 the equations 181 
(i) can be put in the form 

fe i <« A) - - i?x + j$fe - %>,/. 

The equations 181 (i) thus express how the direction of 
the path must continually change from a given initial value 
in order that it may remain a geodesic path ; and moreover 
every single equation expresses how the inclination to a given 
rectangular coordinate changes. 

183. Problem 2. To express the differential equations of 



100 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

the geodesic paths of a material system in terms of the general 
coordinates p p . 

The r coordinates p p of the system are connected by the k 
equations 

and thus the r variations by the equations 

1 1 1 U P<r 

Now the length ds of an infinitely small displacement 
depends not only on the differentials dp p> but also on the 1 
values of p p themselves, and thus 

Bds = 2 P 5T- dS Pp + 2 P ;T^V 
i d < l P P i d P P 

This understood, 

B/cls =ySds must be made zero (iii). 1 

Then we proceed according to the rules of the Calculus of 
Variations as in § 179, and denoting the factor of the ^th • 
equation by ir x we obtain the r differential equations 

which, together with the equations (i), give (7' + k) differential 
equations for the (r + k) quantities p p and ir x as functions of 
the independent variables. These equations are the necessary 
conditions for the vanishing of the variation, and thus are satis- 
fied in all positions of a geodesic path ; they accordingly 
contain the solution of the problem. 

184. Observation 1. The differential equations 183 ' 
(iv) are moreover the sufficient conditions that the path which 
satisfies them should be a geodesic path. For if these equations 
are satisfied, then the variation of the length of the path becomes 
(«/• § 180) 

If we make the variations hp of any two positions of the 



V SHORTEST PATHS OF SYSTEMS 101 

path vanish, then the variation of the integral between these 
positions as limits also vanishes, and therefore the required 
analytical condition for a geodesic path is satisfied (§ 177). 

185. Observation 2. If we choose the length of the 
path as independent variable and divide the equations 183 
(iv) by ds, and for ds substitute its value given by § 57 (iv) in 
terms of p p and dp p , we obtain the equations of the geodesic 
paths in the form of the r equations 






CO; 



which, together with the k equations obtained from § 183 (i), 

2>m>" + 2>2|^>/ = o (»)> 

1 11 V P<T 

give (r + k) unhomogeneous, linear equations for the (r + k) 
quantities p p and 7r x ', and enable us to express these quantities 
as single-valued functions of p p , p pi and ir x . 

186. Observation 3. When by use of the length of the 
path as independent variable we consider the equation § 92, 
we obtain the equations 185 (i) in the form 

^( J%> COS SP„) = l\2/2(^P° I'* ~ ^1*PXP-*X 

Thus these equations again express how the direction of the 
path must change in order that the path may constantly 
remain geodesic ; and moreover every single equation expresses 
how the inclination to a chosen coordinate p p changes. 

187. Note 1. A geodesic path is not completely known if 
we know the length and direction of one of its elements, but 
from a given position in a given direction there is in general an 
infinite series of geodesic paths possible. 

When the quantities p pt p p and the k quantities ir x are 



102 FIHST BOOK chap. 

given us for one position of the path, then they are (§ 185) also 
singly determined for the next element, and the continuation 
of the path is only possible in a single given manner. The 
knowledge of the direction of the path at that given position, 
however, only furnishes us with the quantities p p and p pJ and 
this is not sufficient for the determination of the path, but 
admits, when particular conditions do not prevent, an infinity 
of the kth order of geodesic paths. 

188. Note 2. When the differential equations erf the system 
permit of no integral, consequently in the general case, 2r — k of 
the 2r quantities p p and p p which determine a position and the 
direction at it, can be arbitrarily chosen, viz., the r quantities p p 
and r — k of the quantities p p . These 2r — k arbitrary values, 
together with the k arbitrary values of ir x in that position, may 
be regarded as the 2r arbitrary constants which, together with the 
differential equations § 185 (i), determine a geodesic path, and 
must therefore exist in the integrals of these equations, for by 
§ 173 it must be possible to connect every possible position of 
the system with every other by means of a geodesic path. For 
if the differential equations of the system furnish no finite rela- 
tion between p^ then every conceivable value-system of these 
quantities is a possible value-system ; an arbitrary initial and 
final position are thus determined by means of these 2r arbitrary 
values of the coordinates. 

189. Note 3. For every integral, which the differential 
equations of the material system admit, the number of the con- 
stants which determine uniquely a geodesic path diminishes 
by two. 

For if from the equations of condition of the system I finite 
equations between p p can be derived, then only r — I of the 
r coordinates p p can be arbitrarily chosen, and consequently of 
the 2r quantities p p and p p which determine a position and a 
direction at it only 2r — / — k. Further in this case the differ- 
ential equations by multiplication by proper factors and by 
addition can be brought into such a form that I of them 
immediately give integrable equations, viz., those equations 
which are got by differentiation of the I finite relations. In 
each of these equations, one of which we may typify by the 
index \, we get 



7 STRAIGHTEST AND SHORTEST PATHS 103 

d P P d Pa 

Thus the corresponding quantities ir k vanish from the 
equations 185 (i), and all the quantities p p " and tt x ' are singly 
determined in terms of the k — / values of the remaining ir^ 
On the whole, therefore, we have still 2r — 2J arbitrary quanti- 
ties; two have disappeared for every finite equation. 

Finally, these 2r—2l arbitrary constants are always suffi- 
cient to connect every possible position of the system with 
every other by means of a geodesic path. If then I finite 
equations exist between p pi it is sufficient to traverse the path 
in such a manner that two of its positions should each have 
r — l coordinates common with the given positions ; the coin- 
cidence of the remaining will then ensue of itself. 



3. Relations between Straightest and Geodesic Paths 

190. Proposition. In a holonomous system every geo- 
desic path is a straightest path, and conversely. 

To prove this let us use rectangular coordinates. Then if 
the system is holonomous, such a form may be given to the i 
equations of condition by multiplication by proper factors and 
addition in a proper order as to make every one of them 
directly integrable, namely, that form in which the left-hand side 
of each of them coincides with the exact differential of one 
of the i integrals of the equations. For every value-system 
of t, /*, i/, then, 

^ _ 3i = (i), 

and the differential equations of the geodesic paths by 181 (i) 
now become 



— x. 
m 



These equations differ only in notation from the equations of 
the straightest paths (§155 (iv)), viz., 



-v+2'^^ < Ui >> 



104 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

as neither £ nor H t appear in the remaining equations to be 
satisfied. Every possible path, which after a proper deter- 
mination of £ t satisfies the first of these equations, also satisfies 
the second when S t is made equal to £/, and every solution of 
the second is also a solution of the first. The satisfying of the 
equations (ii) and (iii) is moreover a sufficient condition that 
the path should be a geodesic one or a straightest one. 

191. Corollary 1. In a holonomous system only one 
geodesic path is possible from a possible position in a possible 
direction (§ 161). 

192. Corollary 2. In a holonomous system there is 
always at the least one straightest path between any two 
possible positions (§ 173). 

193. Proposition. If in a material system every geodesic 
path is also a straightest path, then the system is holonomous. 

For from every possible position there is only one 
straightest path in a given direction by § 161, and conse- 
quently by hypothesis only one geodesic path. Moreover, it 
is. possible by § 173 to reach every possible position by one of 
these paths. Thus the number of degrees of freedom of the 
system is equal to the number of its independent coordinates, 
and consequently by § 146 the system is holonomous. 

194. Corollary. In a system which is not holonomous 
a geodesic path is not in general a straightest path. 

This follows from the fact that in any direction there is 
only one straightest path, whereas many geodesic paths are 
possible (§ 161, 187). 

195. Note. In a system which is not holonomous a straight- 
est path is not in general a geodesic path. 

The assertion is proved if examples of systems are given 
in which the straightest paths are not amongst the geodesic 
ones. Let us choose for simplicity a system in which there 
exists only a single unintegrable equation of condition between 
the r coordinates p ? of the system, and let this be 

2*uP/-0 (i> 



V STRAIGHTEST AND SHORTEST PATHS 105 

Let us now assume that every straightest path is also geo- 
desic. Then for all possible systems of values of p ? and p ? f at 
least one system of values of p p " can be obtained so as to 
satisfy simultaneously the equations 158 (iv) and 185 (i). 
Then the equations obtained by subtraction of these equations 
in pairs, viz., 



are to be satisfied for all possible values of p and p ? \ But 
these are r equations for the single quantity (Jl 1 — ir^)JTr v 
and they are only consistent with one another when for all 
pairs of values of p and t 






Let us now substitute in (r— 1) of these equations inde- 
pendent of one another, by aid of equation (i), one of the 
quantities p f in terms of the remaining, then the ratios between 
the last are now entirely arbitrary quantities. The coefficient 
of each of these quantities must consequently vanish. We 
thus obtain as a necessary consequence of our assumption 
(r — l) 2 equations between the r functions p lp and their r 2 first 
partial differential coefficients. In particular cases these 
equations can be satisfied, for they are satisfied when the 
equation (i) is integrable. But in general we have no right 
to make the functions p lp subject to even a single condition, 
and thus in general our assumption is unwarranted. Hence 
the statement is proved. 

196. Summary (190-195). In holonomous systems the 
ideas of straightest and geodesic paths are completely identical 
as regards their content : in systems which are not holonomous 
neither of these ideas includes the other, but both have in general 
a completely different content. 



CHAPTER VI 

ON THE STRAIGHTEST DISTANCE IN HOLONOMOUS SYSTEMS 

Prefatory Notes 

197. This chapter is confined to holonomous systems alone, 
and by a system simply, is meant a holonomous one. It will 
therefore be assumed that the coordinates p p of the system are 
all free coordinates. The number of these coordinates is equal 
to the number of degrees of freedom of the system, and is 
thus quite unarbitrary ; we shall always denote them by r. i 

198. Straightest and geodesic paths in this chapter are 
the same (§ 196), and the common differential equations of 
these paths can be written in the form of the r equation's 

/ , — A \ dds 

d [ V *„ COS Sp p j = g£ 

which are obtained from § 186 or§ 160, when we remember 
that for the chosen coordinates all the quantities p are zero. 

199. As a consequence of this, we obtain from § 184 for 
the variation of the length of a path which satisfies the fore- 
going differential equations, that is for the length of a geodesic 
path, 

or using § 92, 



i/ds = 2>| Ja^ cos spfa 



chap, vi SURFACES OF POSITIONS 107 

where the quantities 8p denote the variations of the coordi- 

A 

nates of the final position, and cos sp p the direction cosines of 
the final elements of the geodesic path under consideration. 

1. Surfaces of Positions 

200. Definition. By a surface of positions is meant, in 
general, a continuously connected aggregate of positions. In par- 
ticular, however, here by surface will be understood an aggregate 
of possible positions of a holonomous system which is character- 
ised by the fact that the coordinates of the positions which 
belong to it satisfy a single finite equation between them. 

The aggregate of the positions which simultaneously belong 
to two or more surfaces we define as the intersection of these 
surfaces. 

201. Observation 1. Through every position of a surface 
an infinite manifold of paths can be drawn, all of whose positions 
belong to the surface. We say of these paths that they belong 
to or lie on the surface ; we employ the same expressions for 
the elements of the paths and for infinitely small displace- 
ments. 

202. Observation 2. A path which does not lie on a 
surface has in general a finite number of positions common 
with it. 

For the path is analytically expressed by means of (r— 1) 
equations between the coordinates of its positions, the surface 
by means of a single equation. By supposition the former 
equations are independent of the latter. Therefore in all 
they give r equations for the r coordinates of the common 
positions, which equations in general permit of none or a finite 
number of real solutions. 

203. Observation 3. From any position of a surface a 
manifold of the (r — l)th order of infinitely small displace- 
ments is possible on the surface. 

For of the r independent changes of the coordinates which 
characterise the displacement, (r — 1) can be arbitrarily chosen ; 
the rth is then determined from the fact that the displacement 
lies along the given surface. 



108 FIBST BOOK 



CHAP. 



204. Proposition 1. It is always possible to determine 
one, and in general only one, direction which is perpendicular 
to the (r — 1) different infinitely small displacements of a 
system from the same position (§ 197). 

Let d T p p be the change of the coordinate p p for the rth 
of the (r — 1) displacements; let Bp p be the change of the co- 
ordinate p p for a second displacement. The necessary and 
sufficient condition that the latter should be perpendicular 
to the former is that (r— 1) equations of the form (§58) 

r t 

1 1 

should be satisfied. These, however, give (r— 1) unhomo- 
geneous, linear equations for the (r— 1) ratios of 8p p 'to 
one another ; they can thus always be satisfied, and in 
general only satisfied, by a single value -system of these 
ratios. In exceptional cases indeterminateness may arise ; 
this may happen, for instance, when any three of the 
(r — 1) displacements are so chosen that every displacement 
which is perpendicular to two of them is also perpendicular to 
the third. 

205. Proposition 2. If a direction is perpendicular to 
(r— 1) different displacements which lie on a surface in a 
given position, then it is perpendicular to every displacement 
which lies on the surface in that position. 

The displacements, which lie on a surface in a given position, 
are characterised by the fact that the corresponding dp p s satisfy 
a single homogeneous, linear relation between them, namely, the 
equation which is obtained by differentiation of the equation 
of the surface. If now the (r — 1) value-systems of d T p p satisfy 
that equation, then so do also the quantities given by 

r-l 
1 

where \ T denote arbitrary factors. Thus the dp p s belong to 
any displacement on the surface, and moreover every displace- 
ment on the surface can be expressed in this form since it 
contains an arbitrary manifold of the (r— l)th order. By 
hypothesis now (§204) 



VI 



SURFACES OF POINTS 109 



1 1 
by multiplying these equations by \ T and adding we get 

r r 

i i 

which is the required proof (§ 58). 

206. Definition. A displacement from a position of a 
surface is said to be perpendicular to the surface when it is 
perpendicular to every displacement which lies on the surface 
in the same position. 

207. Corollary 1. In every position of a surface there is 
always one, and in general only one, direction which is per- 
pendicular to the surface. 

208. Corollary 2. In every position of a surface it is 
always possible to draw one, and in general only one, straight- 
est path perpendicular to the surfaca 

209. Definition 1. By a series of surfaces we mean an 
aggregate of surfaces whose equations (§ 200) differ only in 
the value of the contained constant. 

210. Notation. Every series of surfaces can be analytic- 
ally expressed by an equation of the form 

E = constant, 

which is obtained by the solution of the equation of one of 
the surfaces in terms of the variable constant ; and in which 
the right-hand side denotes the possible values of this constant, 
whilst the left is a function of the coordinates p p . To every 
surface of this series there corresponds a definite value of 
the constant, that is a definite value of the function E. Those 
surfaces, for which the value of the function E only differs by 
an infinitely small quantity, are called neighbouring surfaces. 

211. Definition 2. An orthogonal trajectory of a series of 
surfaces is a path which cuts the series orthogonally, i.e. which 
is perpendicular to every surface of the series in the common 
positions (§ 202). 



110 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

212. Proposition. In order that a path may be an 
orthogonal trajectory of the series 

It = constant (i) 

it is necessary and sufficient that it should satisfy in each of 
its positions r equations of the form 

A 3R 

v^ cos sp ? =/j^- W, 

A 

where the quantities sp p denote the inclinations of the path to 
the coordinates p p , and / is a quantity identical for all the r 
equations, but which changes with a change of p p . 

Draw from the position under consideration an infinitely 
small displacement whose length is S<r, and denote the resulting 

changes of p p and R by Sp p and 8R, and let this displacement 

A 
make an angle so- with the path considered; then multiply 

the equations (ii) each with the corresponding 8/? p and add ; 

we thus obtain (§§ 78 (i) and 85) 

A * dR 

Sa cos scr = 2Zfffo*P? = fi R ( m )- 

If now the displacement 8<r lies on a surface of the series (i), 

namely, that surface which has the position under consideration 

A 
common with the path, then &R= 0, and thus $<r = 90°. The 

direction of the path is therefore perpendicular to the surface 
which it intersects (§ 206), and the equations (ii) are conse- 
quently the sufficient conditions that this should happen at 
every position. They are, moreover, the necessary conditions, 
since, apart from exceptional cases, at every position there is 
only one direction which satisfies the given requirement. 

213. The orthogonal distance between two neighbouring 
surfaces of the series in any position is equal to 

fdll. 

For, let the displacement Ba of the foregoing article coincide 
in direction and length with the portion of the orthogonal 
trajectory which lies between the two surfaces; then So- 
coincides with the distance under consideration, and the angle 



vi STRAIGHTEST DISTANCE 111 

A 

so- is equal to zero, and thus the proof follows from § 122 

cm). 

214. The function / which enters into the equations of 
the orthogonal trajectory is a root of the equation 

1 -^ni «^[ 3R 3R 

For this equation follows when we substitute the value of 
the r direction cosines from § 212 (ii) in the equation § 88, 
which they must satisfy. The root to be chosen depends 
on whether we consider the direction of the trajectory positive 
along increasing or decreasing values of K. 



2. Straightest Distance 

215. Definition. By the straightest distance between two 
positions of a holonomous system is meant the length of one 
of the straightest paths connecting them. 

216. Observation. Two positions may have more than 
one straightest distance. Amongst them are the lengths of the 
shortest paths between both positions, consequently, too, the 
length of the absolutely shortest path. When mention is made 
of the shortest distance between two positions as of a quantity 
determined without ambiguity, then the last is meant. 

217. Analytical Representation. The straightest distance 
between two positions can be expressed as a function of the 
coordinates of these positions. That position which is regarded 
as the initial position will be denoted by 0, and its coordinates 
by Pff ; whilst that position which is regarded as the final 
position will be denoted by 1, and its coordinates by p pV so 
that the direction of the straightest path is positive from to 
1. The straightest distance for all value-systems of p^ and p n 
is then a definite function of these 2r quantities. The 
analytical expression for the straightest distance, in terms of 
these variables, will be denoted by S, and for shortness this 
will be termed the straightest distance of the system. 



112 FIRST BOOK 



CHAP. 



218. Observation 1. The function S is in general a 
many^valued function of its independent variables. Of the 
branches of this function one and only one vanishes with the 
vanishing of the difference between p^ and p pV It is to this 
branch (§ 216) that we shall refer whenever we say that S is 
a given single- valued function. 

219. Observation 2. The function S is symmetrical with 
regard to p pl and p^ in the sense that it does not change its 
value when for all values of p these quantities are interchanged. 

For this interchange only implies an interchange of the 
final and initial position. 

220. Note. When the straightest distance of a system is 
given in terms of any free coordinates, then all the straightest 
paths of the system are given in terms of these same coor- 
dinates, without its being necessary to know in what manner 
the position of the separate material points of the system depends 
on these coordinates. 

For the straightest distance between any two infinitely 
near positions of the system is at the same time the length of 
the infinitely small displacement between them; but if this 
latter can be expressed in terms of the chosen coordinates, 
then the statement follows by § 163. 

221. Problem. To obtain from the straightest distance 
of a system the expression for the length of its infinitely small 
displacements. 

In S substitute for p^ p p , and for p pV p p + 8/> p , and suppose 
8p to become very small. We already know (§57 (iv)) 
that the distance between the two positions is expressed as 
the quadratic root of a homogeneous quadratic function of 8p p . 
S itself cannot thus be expressed in a series of ascending 
powers of dp p , but S 2 can, and in this expansion the quadratic 
terms must be the first which do not vanish. If, then, we 
denote by a bar that in the function under consideration 
p =p =2> p , we obtain for the distance between the two 
points, and therefore for the magnitude of the displacement, the 
expression 



^24(4S ™- 



vi STRAIGHTEST DISTANCE 113 

and the function a pv becomes 



a 2 s 2 



?P n %> 



"V 



We might equally correctly have 



2C!iJ 



d-s 



These values of a^ can be employed to obtain indirectly, from 
the function S, the straightest paths, but the following proposi- 
tions enable us to determine them in a more direct way. 

222. Proposition. A surface, all of whose positions have 
equal straightest distances from a fixed position, is cut ortho- 
gonally by all straightest paths through this fixed position. 

Let p be the coordinates of the fixed position and p n the 
coordinates of a position of the surface. Let us pass from the 
latter to another position of the surface for which p pl has 
changed by dp . In this the straightest distance from the 
fixed position has, by hypothesis, not changed; but by § 199 

^ / — A A 

it has changed by /cv^ cos sp pl dp pv where sp pl denotes the 

i 

angle which the straightest path at 1 makes with the direction 

of p p . Thus then 

2i p « a PPi cos *P* d Pn = °> 

i 

and this equation expresses that the shortest path is perpen- 
dicular to the displacement of dp pl (§§ 85 and 78 (i)). Since 
this holds for any displacement which lies on the surface 
at 1, the proposition follows (§ 206). 

223. Corollary 1. The straightest paths which pass 
through a fixed position are the orthogonal trajectories of a series 
of surfaces which satisfy the condition that all the positions of 
each one of them have the same distance from this fixed position. 

224. Corollary 2. All the straightest paths which pass 
through the fixed position satisfy the r equations 

I— A SS r\ 

V a m cos sp pl = ^- (i), 



114 FIRST BOOK chap. 

where p pl are to be considered the coordinates of the variable 

A 

position of the path, and cos sp pl the direction cosine of the 
path in this position. 

For the equations (i) are the equations of the orthogonal 
trajectories of a series of surfaces which are represented by 
the equation 

S = constant (ii). 

For if S were any function of the variable coordinates p pV 
then by § 212 the equations of the orthogonal trajectories 
would be 

/ — A 3S / ...v 

^i cos 9 n =/^' (m) ' 

and the perpendicular distance between two neighbouring 
surfaces would be equal to fdS. On account of the special 
nature (§§ 217, 222) of our function S, however, this distance 

is equal to dS itself, and consequently 

* 

and the general equations (iii) take the particular form (i). 

225. Observation 1. The equations 224 (i), which are 

differential equations of the first order, can also be regarded as 

the equations of straightest paths in a finite form, if we regard 

A 
p^ as variable and the 2r quantities p pl and sp pl as constants. 

For let us determine from these equations a series of positions 

in such a manner that with fixed values of p pV the values of 

A 

sp pl do not change, then we obtain positions such that the 
straightest paths drawn from them towards the position 1 have 
in this position 1 a fixed direction. Since now only one 
straightest path having this property is possible, all the posi- 
tions so obtained must be on this one path ; their aggregate 
forms this path and this last is expressed by the equations 
§ 224 (i). 

226. Observation 2. In the proof of § 222 we might 
equally well have made 1 the fixed and the variable position. 
In place of the equations § 224 (i) we should then have 
obtained the equations 



n STRAIGHTBST DISTANCE 115 

The difference in the sign of the right-hand side results 

from the fact that the direction from the fixed position is now 

negative (§ 217). Like the equations § 224 (i), the equations 

§ 226 (i) also represent straightest paths. They are the 

differential equations of the first order of all straightest paths 

which pass through the fixed position p n , and at the same time 

the finite equations of a definite path which passes through the 

A 
position p^ and there makes with the coordinates the angles sp^ 

227. Corollary 3. The straightest distance S of a system 
satisfies, as a function of j p po , the partial differential equation of 
the first order 

as as 

= 1 <i), 



2 P 2*W» d v 

1 1 fpQ f<TQ 

and as a function of p n the partial differential equation of the 
first order 

v r v r as as 

For both equations follow from § 214 and § 224 (iv); 
they are also immediately found when we substitute in § 88 
the direction cosines of a straightest path expressed by means 
of S from § 224 (i) or 226 (i), which the angles of any 
inclination to the coordinates satisfy. 

228. Proposition. If we erect at all positions of any 

surface straightest paths perpendicular to the surface, and cut 

off from each equal lengths, then the surface so obtained is 

cut orthogonally by each of these straightest paths. 

Let the positions of the original surface be denoted by 0, and 

A A 

of the new surface by 1. Let sp^ and sp n denote the angles 

which a chosen straightest path makes with the coordinates at 

the first and second surface respectively. If we proceed from 

this straightest path to any neighbouring one, then the length 

of the path changes (§ 199) by 



116 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

1 1 

where dp pl and dp^ denote the changes of p p in the positions 1 
and 0. But by construction this change is zero, and also by 
construction 




a „o cos sp p0 dp p = 0, 



for every path is perpendicular to the original surface. 
Thus then also 

^T / — A 

2f V a pn cos sp n dp pl = ; 

i 

and since dp pl denotes any displacement on the surface in the 
position 1, the conclusion follows. 

229. Corollary 1. The orthogonal trajectories of any 
series of surfaces, each of which in all its positions has the 
same perpendicular straightest distance from its neighbouring 
ones, are straightest paths. 

230. Corollary 2. If E is a function of the r coordinates 
p p of such a nature that the equation 

E = constant (i) 

represents a series of surfaces each of which has in all its 
positions the same perpendicular straightest distance dR from 
its neighbours, then the equations 

sj a pp cos sp p = ,— (ii) 

are the equations of the orthogonal trajectories, and consequently 
the equations of the straightest paths. And, moreover, these 
equations are differential equations of the first order for these 
paths. 

For if E were any function whatever of p pf then the 
equations 212 (ii) would represent the orthogonal trajectories 
of the series (i), and the perpendicular distance between two 
neighbouring surfaces would, by § 213, be equal to f<HL 
According to our particular hypothesis, however, this distance 



VI STRAIGHTEST DISTANCE 117 

is constant and equal to dR, consequently /= 1, and thus 
the equations 212 (ii) reduce to the above-mentioned ones. 

231. Corollary 3. If the equation 

E = constant 

represents a series of surfaces of such a nature that each of 
them in all its positions has the same straightest orthogonal 
distance dR from its neighbours, then the function R satisfies 
the partial differential equation 

^ ' 3R3R 

for this equation follows from § 214 and § 230. It is also 
immediately found when we substitute the direction co^nes of 
a straightest path, given by § 230 (ii), in the equation § 88, 
which the angles of every inclination to the coordinates 
satisfy. 

232. Proposition 1. (Converse of § 231.) If the func- 
tion R satisfies the partial differential equation 

'^ 3R dR 

1 1 L p * * 

then the equation 

R = constant 

represents a series of surfaces of such a nature that each of 
them in all its positions has the same orthogonal straightest 
distance from its neighbours, and, moreover, this distance 
is measured by the change of R 

For if R were any function, then the orthogonal tra- 
jectories of the series would be given by equations of the 
form § 212 (ii), and the orthogonal distance between two neigh- 
bouring surfaces would in every position be /dR But by our 
special hypothesis as to the nature of R, /= 1 (§ 214), and 
thus the proposition is true. 

m 

233. Proposition 2. If the function R of p p is any solution 
of the partial differential equation 

S2-H" % = * (i) ' 

li r? r<r 



118 FIRST BOOK cm*. 

then the equations 

/— A 3R r-\ 

s/a„ cos sp p = g- (11) 

are the equations of straightest paths. And, moreover, they 
are differential equations of the first order of the straightest 
paths represented by them. 

This follows immediately from § 230 and § 232. 

234. Observation. Although every path which is repre- 
sented by the equations 233 (ii) is a straightest path, yet in 
general every straightest path cannot conversely be represented 
in this form. The manifold of straightest paths, which are 
contained in the given form, depends rather on the manifold 
which the function Rasa solution of the differential equation 
possesses, that is on the number of its arbitrary constants. 

In particular, however, if R is a complete solution, i.e. if R 
contains r arbitrary constants a , a x . . . a r _ v the first of 
which is the additive constant necessarily present, then all 
straightest paths of the system may be expressed in the form 
§ 233 (ii). For the right-hand sides of these r equations (of which 
only r — 1 are independent of one another) contain then (r — 1) 
constants which are sufficient to furnish an arbitrarily chosen 
direction of the path represented at an arbitrary position in 
terms of (r — 1) independent direction cosines. But if we can 
arbitrarily choose one position of the path represented, and its 
direction at this position, then we can represent all straightest 
paths. 

235. Propositions. (Jacobi's Proposition.) Let R denote 
a complete solution of the differential equation 

ZIZi "dp, dp, 

and let its arbitrary constants, with the exception of the additive 
one, be Oj, a 2 . . . a r _ v Then the (r — 1) equations 

as; -a (u) - 

where the yS^s are (r— 1) new arbitrary constants, give tLe 
equations of the straightest paths of the system in a finite form. 



VI STRAJGHTEST DISTANCE 119 

As proof we show that the paths which are represented 
by the equations (ii) are orthogonal trajectories of the series 

R = constant (iii) ; 

whence the proof follows by §§ 232 and 229. 

In order now firstly to fiud the direction of the path re- 
presented, we differentiate the equations (ii) each in its own 
direction, i.e. we form these equations for two positions of the 
path at distance ds, in which p p differs from its next value by 
dp p , then we subtract and divide by ds. We thus obtain 
(r — 1) equations of the form 

d 2 R dp t 



2 



i d pJ° a r ds 



= 0; 



or, when we substitute in these by §§ 79 and 78 the direction 
cosines of the element of the path under consideration, 

r /\ r g2p 

2' Ap cob 4P p 2» h *tyfa = ° (i V) ; 

which equations give (r — 1) unhomogeneous, linear equations 
for the (r — 1) ratios of the direction cosines to one another. 

Secondly, we notice that the equation (i) holds for all 
values of the constants a T ; we can thus differentiate them with 
regard to these quantities, and we then obtain (r — 1) equations, 
which may be written in the form 

' 3R^ r 9 2 R A , , 

and which express relations which the partial differential 

coefficients of R must satisfy as a consequence of our particular 

hypotheses with regard to this function. 

If now the equations (ii) represent a definite path for the 

values of a r and /3 T under consideration, then from the equations 

(iv) must be obtained singly-determined values for the ratios of 

the direction cosines to one of them. But these same single 

3R 
values for the ratios of the quantities ^— to one of them must 

% 

be given by the equations (v). Thus if / is a factor which 

still remains to be determined, then 



120 FIRST BOOK CHAP. VI 



_ A 3K 

V a„ cos sp p =/^-. 



Thus by § 2 1 2 the path under consideration is the orthogonal 
trajectory of the series (iii), as was to be proved. The factor 
/ is found equal to unity. 

The hypothesis that the (r— 1) equations (ii) represent, 
for definite values of a r and £ T , a definite path, would not 
be correct if these equations were not independent of one 
another. In that case the arbitrary constants would not be 
independent of one another, and the solution would not be, as 
was supposed, a complete one. 

236. Problem. From any complete solution E of the 
differential equations 235 (i) to obtain the straightest distance 
S of the system. 

By S is again to be understood the straightest distance 
between two positions and 1 with the coordinates p^ and p pV 
In the (r — 1) equations, § 235 (ii), we substitute for p p in the 
first place p^ t and in the second p pr From the resulting 
(2r — 2) equations we eliminate @ T and express a r as functions 
of pp and p pv These functions are symmetrical with regard 
to p and p pv and give those values which a T must have in 
order that the paths defined by them may pass through the 
definite positions and 1. 

We have then, in the first place, for any position 1, by §§ 
224 (i) and 233 (ii), 

as /3B 




d ppl 

and secondly, for any position 0, by §§ 226 (i) and 233 (i), 

3S _ _ /3R\ 

We substitute in the right-hand side of these equations the 
values of a [ T in terms of p^ and p n , and put p p in the first 
equal to p pV and in the second equal to p p0 ; we then obtain 
the first differential coefficients of S with regard to all the in- 
dependent variables expressed as functions of these variables. 
S can then be found by a single integration. 



CHAPTER VII 



KINEMATICS 



1. Vector Quantities with regard to a | System 

237. Definition. A vector quantity with regard to a 
system is any quantity which bears a relation to the system, 
and which has the same kind of mathematical manifold as a 
conceivable displacement of the system. 

238. Note 1. A displacement of a system is itself a 
vector quantity with regard to the system. Every product 
of a displacement of the system with any scalar quantity what- 
ever is a vector quantity with regard to the system. 

239. Note 2. Every vector quantity with regard to a 
system can be represented geometrically by a conceivable dis- 
placement of the system. The direction of the displacement 
representing it is called the direction of the vector quantity. 
The measure of the representation can and will always be so 
chosen that the displacement representing it is indefinitely 
small Every vector with regard to a system which changes 
with the position of the system can then be represented as an 
infinitely small displacement of the system from the position 
to which its instantaneous value belongs. 

240. Note 3. A vector quantity with regard to a single 
material point is a vector in the ordinary sense of the word. 
Every vector with regard to a point can be represented by a 
geometrical displacement of the point; in particular, by an 
infinitely small displacement from its actual position. 

241. Note 4. By components and reduced components 



122 FIRST BOOK 



CHAP. 



of a vector are meant those vectors of the same kind which 
are represented by the components and reduced components of 
that infinitely small displacement which represents the original 
vector (§§ 48, 71). 

The reduced component of a definite vector in the direction 
of a coordinate p p is called for short the component of the 
vector along p pt or the vector along the coordinate p p . 

When no misunderstanding can arise, the magnitude of 
such a component is simply called a component or reduced 
component. 

242. Problem la. To deduce the components k p of a 
vector along the general coordinates p p from the components h v 
along the 3n rectangular coordinates. 

Let dx v be the components along x v of that displacement 
which represents the vector quantity, and let dp p be the com- 
ponents of the same displacement along p p , then dp p is given in 
terms of dx v in § 80. But k p and h v are respectively propor- 
tional to dp p and dx p ; consequently 



i i dp. 



243. Problem lb. To deduce the components h v of a 
vector along rectangular coordinates, from the components k p 
of the vector along p p . 

The equations § 242 give only r equations for the 3n 
quantities h v> from which the latter consequently cannot be 
found. In fact the problem is in general indeterminate. For 
all conceivable positions and displacements of a system cannot 
be expressed in terms of p p but only a part of them, amongst 
which are the possible displacements. 

The proposition can thus only be solved in the case when 
the given vector is parallel to a displacement which can be 
expressed in terms of p p and its changes. In this case, by § 81, 

r 

a,=2 p #a 
i 

* 244. Problem 2a. To determine the magnitude A of a 
vector, from its components A; along rectangular coordinates. 



VII 



VECTOR QUANTITIES OF A SYSTEM 123 

Using § 83 we obtain 

^* m.. ' 



Bn m_ 2 



245. Problem 2b. To determine the magnitude A; of a 
vector in terms of its components lc p along the general co- 
ordinates p p . 

The problem is again, as in § 243, in general indeterminate. 

A solution is only possible when the vector in question is 
parallel to a displacement which can be represented in terms of 
p pt and then, by § 82, 

i i 

246. Problem 3a. To find the components of a vector in 
the direction of any displacement ds from its components 
A„ along x v . 

If ds' denote the length and dxj the reduced components 

of the displacement by which we represent the vector, then the 

component of this displacement in the direction of ds is, by §§ 48 

and 84, 

A 1 3n — 
ds' cos ss f = t^ v dxjdxj. 

If we multiply this equation by the ratio of the magnitude 
of the vector to the length of the displacement by which it is 
represented, we obtain on the left-hand side the required com- 
ponent and on the right-hand side h v instead of dxj\ we 
thus get as a solution of the problem the required quantity 
equal to 

2»&. 



or, by § 72, equal to 



ds 



%& 



v cos sx v , 



247. Problem 3b. To find the components of a vector in 
the direction of any displacement ds, expressed in terms of 
p pi from the components k p along p p . 



124 FIEST BOOK CHAP. 

If we employ the same method as in the previous problem 
we obtain by §§ 48 and 85 the required quantity equal to 

Z' k »ds> 
i 

or, by §§ 78 and 89, equal to 



r r . 

2 P 2' b I^P ^ a <r<r C0S <9V 



248. Observation. Thus although in general all com- 
ponents of a vector are not determined by means of the 
quantities k pi yet the components of the vector are de- 
termined by means of these quantities in all such directions 
as can be expressed in terms of p p , and consequently in every 
possible direction. 

249. Proposition 1. In order that the vector, whose 
components along p p are the quantities k pi may be perpendicular 
to a displacement for which p p suffer the changes dp pt it is 
necessary and sufficient that the equation 

i 
should be satisfied. 

This follows from § 85 when we consider k p proportional to 
dp/- 

250. Proposition 2. In order that the vector, whose 
components along p p are k pt should be perpendicular to every 
possible displacement of the system, it is necessary and 
sufficient that the r quantities k p can be expressed in the form 

fc 

i 

where p xp occur in the equations of condition of the system 
(§ 130) and y x are quantities to be determined as we please. 
This follows from §§148 and 150 when we consider k p 

expressed by means of dp . 

r~251.TNote 1. Vectors with regard to one and the same 



VII VECTOR QUANTITIES OF A SYSTEM 125 

system can be compounded and resolved like the conceivable 
displacements of the system. 

Consequently, the compounding of the vectors of the same 
system follows the rules of algebraic addition. 

252. Note 2. Vectors with regard to different systems 
are to be considered quantities of a different nature; they 
can neither be compounded nor added. 

253. Note 3. A vector quantity with regard to a given 
system may be considered as a vector quantity of any more 
extended system of which the original forms a part. 

254. Problem 1. The same vector quantities may, at 
one time, be considered as vector quantities with regard to a 
partial system, and, at another time, as vector quantities with 
regard to the complete system. From the components h v 
along the rectangular coordinates x v in the first case, the 
components hj along the corresponding coordinates xj in the 
second can be determined. 

Let m be the mass of the partial system, w! the mass 
of the complete system. The coordinates x v of the partial 
system are at the same time coordinates of the complete 
system, only for clearness they are denoted as such by xj. If 
now the partial system suffers any displacement, which is, of 
course, at the same time a displacement of the complete system, 
then dxj = dx v for the common coordinates, whereas dxj = 

for the remaining ones. Now, by § 73 m'dxj = m v dxj and 

mdx y = 7n v dx v> consequently m'dxj = mdx v . In the case of a 
vector which is represented by means of this displacement, 
the component along x y is proportional to dx vi and that along 
wj to dxj. Thus we obtain 

m'hj = mh v 

for every v which the systems have in common, whereas for 
the remainder 

A/=0. 

255. Problem 2. The same vector quantities may, at 
one time, be considered as vector quantities with regard to a 
partial system, and, at another time, as vector quantities with 
regard to the complete system. To determine, in the former 



126 FIRST BOOK 



CHAP. 



case, the components k p r along the coordinates p ? ' in terms of 
the components Jc p along the coordinates p p . 

Let m be again the mass of the partial system, m! that 
of the complete. We assume that the coordinates p ? of the 
partial system are also coordinates of the complete system, 
only for clearness in the latter case they will be denoted by p '. 
Of the coordinates p ? f which are not common to the two 
systems we assume that they are not coordinates of the partial 
system. With these assumptions, an analogous consideration 
to the foregoing (§ 254) gives 

m'kj = mk p 

for the common coordinates, whereas for the remainder 

V = 0. 

But without the assumptions named the problem is indeter- 
minate. 

2. Motion of Systems 

Eocplanations 

256. (1) The passage of a system of material points from 
an initial position to a final one, considered with reference to the 
time and manner of the passage, is called a motion of the system 
from the initial to the final position (cf. § 27). 

Consequently, in any definite motion the system describes 
a definite path, and moreover it describes definite lengths in 
definite times. 

257. (2) Every motion of a system along a conceivable 
path is called a conceivable motion of the system (§ 11). 

258. (3) Every motion of a system along a possible path 
is called a possible motion of the system (§ 112). 

259. (4) Kinematics, or the theory of pure motion, treats 
of the conceivable and possible motions of systems. 

So long as we deal only with normal systems (§§ 119, 
120), kinematical investigations almost coincide with those of 
geometry. But when an abnormal system is investigated 
and the time appears in the equations of condition of the 



* 



vii KINEMATICS 127 

system, then kinematics possesses greater generality than 
geometry. However, it is not necessary to enter into purely 
kinematical investigations here ; we may then be satisfied with 
the discussion of a series of fundamental ideas. 

260. Analytical Representation. The motion of a system 
is analytically represented when in the representation of the 
path described, the time t is taken as independent variable, or, 
what is the same thing, when the coordinates of the position 
of the system are given as functions of the time. 

Following Newton, the differential coefficients of all quanti- 
ties with regard to the time will be denoted by dots. 

Velocity 

261. Definition 1. The instantaneous rate of motion of a 
system is called its velocity. 

The velocity is determined by the change which the posi- 
tion of the system suffers in an infinitely small time, and 
by the time itself. It is measured by the ratio of these 
quantities which is independent of their absolute value. 

By the condition of a system we shall mean its position 
and velocity. 

262. Corollary. The velocity of a system may be re- 
garded as a vector quantity with regard to the system. The 
direction of the velocity is then the direction of the instan- 
taneous path-element ; the magnitude of the velocity is equal 
to the differential coefficient of the length of path traversed 
with regard to the time. 

The magnitude of the velocity is also called the velocity of 
the system along its path, or, when misunderstanding cannot 
arise, the velocity simply. 

263. Definition 2. A motion of a system in which the 
velocity does not change its magnitude is called a uniform 
motion. 

264 Observation. A straight motion of a system is 
motion in a straight path. In this motion the velocity does 
not change its direction. 

265. Problem 1. To express the magnitude of the 



128 FIRST BOOK chap. 

velocity, its components and reduced components in the 
direction of the rectangular coordinates, in terms of the rates 
of change of these coordinates. 

The magnitude v of the velocity is given by the positive 
root of the equation, 

m ^ = m \di) "S'^ 



A*/ *\ 



2 

 

'¥ 



Thus, then (§ 241), the components of the velocity in the direc- 
tion of x v are equal to 



'V m 



and the reduced components in the same direction, or the 
components along x v , to 



m vi. 



m 



266. Observation. The magnitude of the velocity of a 
system is the quadratic mean value of the magnitudes of the 
velocities of all its particles. 

267. Problem 2. To express the magnitude of the velocity, 
its components and reduced components along the general 
coordinates p pi in terms of the rates of change p p of these 
coordinates. 

By transformation of § 265 by means of § 57 we obtain 
the magnitude of the velocity as the positive root of the 
equation 

r r 

1 1 
Thence, by § 241, the components in direction of p p are equal to 






and the reduced components in the same direction, or the 
components along p p9 to 

r 



vii KINEMATICS 129 



Momentum 

268. Definition. The product of the mass of a system 
into its velocity is called the quantity of motion, or momentum, 
of the system. 

The momentum of the system is thus a vector quantity 
with regard to the system. The component of the momentum 
along any coordinate will usually be simply called the 
momentum of the system along this coordinate (§ 241). 

269. Notation. The momenta of a system along the 
general coordinates p p will always be denoted by q p . 

270. Problem 1. To express the momenta q p of a system 
along p p in terms of the rates of change of these coordinates. 

From §§ 268 and 267 we obtain 

r 
l 

271. Problem 2. To express the rates of change of the 
general coordinates p p in terms of the momenta of the system 
along these coordinates. 

From the foregoing equation we obtain 

1 r 

i 

• 

272. Observation. The velocity and the quantity of 
motion of a system are vectors with regard to the system of 
such a nature that they are always parallel to possible dis- 
placements of the system (§§ 243, 245). 

Acceleration 

273. Definition. The instantaneous rate of change of the 
velocity of a system is called its acceleration. 

The acceleration is determined by the change which the 
velocity suffers in an infinitely small time and by the time 
itself; it is measured by the ratio of these two quantities 
which is independent of their absolute value. 

274. Corollary. The acceleration of a system may be 

K 



130 FIRST BOOK CHAP* 

regarded as a vector quantity with regard to the system. We 
take from the actual position of the system two displacements, 
of which the one represents the actual velocity, the other the 
velocity at the next instant ; then the difference of these gives 
a new displacement, whose direction is the direction of the 
acceleration, whilst the magnitude of the acceleration is equal 
to the ratio of the length of this new displacement to the 
differential of the time. 

275. Problem 1. To express the magnitude / of the ac- 
celeration and its components along the rectangular coordinates 
in terms of the differential coefficients of these coordinates with 
regard to the time. 

The components of the velocity along x y , now, and after 
the time dt, are (§ 265) 

m ¥ . m v m v , 

— x v and — x v + — x v dt t 
m mm 

m 
the components of their difference are thus -^x v dt\ the ratio 

of these to the time dt gives the components of the acceleration 
along x v equal to 

x i 

m ¥ 

whence by § 244 the magnitude of the acceleration is the 
positive root of the equation 

Sn 

1 

276. Observation. The magnitude of the acceleration 
of a material system is the quadratic mean value of the magni- 
tudes of the accelerations of its particles. 

• 

277. Problem 2. To express the components f p of the 
acceleration of a system along the general coordinates p^ in 
terms of the differential coefficients of these with regard to 
the time. 

By § 242, 

8n m. 



*/* = 2'™ A*. 



a-2-^ 



i m 



and in this is to be substituted, as in 8 108, 



VH KINEMATICS 131 

t 



X 
v 



1 1 1 U Pr 



Thus proceeding as in § 108 we obtain 

278. Observation 1. The components of the acceleration 
are thus in general linear functions of the second differential 
coefficients of the coordinates, quadratic functions of the first 
differential coefficients, and implicit functions of the coordi- 
nates themselves. 

279. Observation 2. The acceleration of a system is not 
necessarily parallel to a possible displacement of a system, nor 
even to a displacement which can be expressed by the coordi- 
nates p p . 

The components / p do not therefore in general suffice to 
determine the magnitude of the acceleration nor even its com- 
ponents along all the rectangular coordinates (§§ 243, 245). On 
the other hand the quantities / p are sufficient to determine the 
components of the acceleration in the direction of every one 
of the possible motions of the system (§ 248). 

280. Problem 3. To find the component of the accelera- 
tion in the direction of the path. 

The direction cosines of the path are by § 72 equal to 

f^v^v and thus by 8 265 to^ /— * % Thence follows by 

§ 246, with the help of § 275 for the tangential com- 
ponent f p 

where 8 is the current length of the path. 

281. Note. If we resolve the acceleration of a system 
into two components, of which one is in the direction of the path 
and the other is perpendicular to the path, then the magnitude 
of the latter is equal to the product of the curvature of the path 
into the square of the velocity of the system in the path. 



132 FIRST BOOK CHAP. 

If, in equation § 107 (iii), we take the time t as independent 
variable, we obtain 

i 
thus by use of §§ 275 and 280 

If now we call the second, the radial or centrifugal com- 
ponent of the acceleration / r , then f* =f t 2 +/ r 2 , for f r and f t are 
perpendicular to one another ; consequently 

fr = <*> 2 , 
as was to be proved. 

Energy 

282. Definition. The energy of a system is half the 
product of its mass into the square of the magnitude of its 
velocity. 

283. Problem 1. To express the energy E of a system 
in terms of the rates of change of its rectangular coordinates. 

By § 265 

i 

284. Corollary 1. The energy of a system is the sum 
of the energies of its particles. 

285. Corollary 2. If several systems together form a 
greater system, then the energy of the latter is the sum of the 
energies of the former. 

286. Problem 2. To express the energy of a system in 
terms of the rates of change of the general coordinates of 
the system and the momenta along these coordinates. 

Using §§ 267, 270, 271, we obtain successively 

r r 

1 1 

r 



8n 




Til KINEMATICS 133 

r r 

i i 

287. Observation (on §§ 261-286). The velocity, momen- 
tum, acceleration, and energy of a system are defined inde- 
pendently of their analytical representation, and, in particular, 
independently of the choice of the coordinates of the system. 



Use of Partial Differential Coefficients 

288. Notation (cf. § 90). The partial differential of the 
energy E will be denoted by 9pE only when we consider the 
coordinates p p and their rates of change p p as the independent 
variable elements of the energy (§286 (i)). 

The partial differential of the energy E will be denoted by 
3^ only when we consider the coordinates p p and the momenta 
i p along these coordinates as the independent variable elements 
of the energy (§286 (iii)). 

Either of these assumptions excludes the other. When 
misunderstanding cannot arise, any partial differential of E 
will be denoted as usual by 3E, e.g. the first or the second of 
those mentioned above, or any third kind. 

289. Note 1. The momenta q p of a system along the 
coordinates^ maybe expressed as partial differential coefficients 
of the energy of the system with regard to the rates of change 
of the coordinates. 

For, by equation § 286 (i) and § 270 (cf. § 91), 

p d P P 

290. Note 2. The rates of change p p of the coordinates 
p p of a system may be expressed as partial differential coeffi- 
cients of the energy of the system with regard to the momenta. 

For, by equation § 286 (iii), and § 271 (cf. § 94), 

291. Note 3. The components f p of the acceleration of 
a system along the coordinates p p can be expressed as partial 
differential coefficients of the energy. 



134 ITB8T BOOK OHXt. 

For, by equation 286 (i), firstly, 



thus 



and, secondly, by the same equation, 

By subtracting' the second equation from the first and 
comparing with § 227, 

for which may be written (cf. § 289) 

3E 

292. Note 4. If we change one coordinate p T of a system 
twice by the sanie infinitely small amount, whereby the first time 
we let the rates of change of the coordinates, the second time 
the momenta along these coordinates, retain their original 
values, then the energy of the system in the two cases suffers 
an equal and opposite change. 

For, if the equation § 95 (i) is multiplied by mds and 
divided by dt 2 , we get 

dp T dp r ' 

which proves the statement. 

293. Proposition. If the position of a system suffers 
twice the same infinitely small displacements whereby the first 
time the rates of change of .the coordinates, and the second time 
the momenta along the coordinates, retain their original values, 
then the energy of the system in the two cases suffers an equal 
and opposite change. 

For the change of the energy is in the first case 



Til KINEMATICS 135 



and in the second 



*-3g*.  



*>-2 



&5*  



thus then, by § 292, 

S,E=-S g E. 

294. Corollary. The components of the acceleration of a 
system along its coordinates p p can also (by §§ 291 (ii) and 
292) be expressed in the form 






Concluding Note on the First Book 

295. As has already been stated in the prefatory note 
(§ 1), no appeal is made to experience in the investigations 
of this book. Consequently, if in the sequel we again meet 
with the results here obtained, we shall know that they are 
not obtained from experience but from the given laws of our 
intuition and thought, combined with a series of arbitrary 
statements. 

It is true that the formation of the ideas and the develop- 
ment of their relations has only been performed with a view to 
possible experiences ; it is thus none the less true that ex- 
perience alone must decide on the value or worthlessness of our 
investigations. But the correctness or incorrectness of these 
investigations can be neither confirmed nor contradicted by 
any possible future experiences. 



< 



BOOK II 



MECHANICS OF MATERIAL SYSTEMS 



< 



\ 



296. Prefatory Note. In this second book we shall 
understand times, spaces, and masses to be symbols for objects 
of external experience; symbols whose properties, however, 
are consistent with the properties that we have previously 
assigned to these quantities either by definition or as being 
forms of our internal intuition. Our statements concerning 
the relations between times, spaces, and masses must therefore 
satisfy henceforth not only the demands of thought, but must 
also be in accordance with possible, and, in particular, future 
experiences. These statements are based, therefore, not only 
on the laws of our intuition and thought, but in addition 
on experience. The part depending on the latter, in so far as 
it is not already contained in the fundamental ideas, will 
be comprised in a single general statement which we shall take 
for our # Fundamental Law. No further appeal is made to 
experience. The question of the correctness of our statements 
is thus coincident with the question of the correctness or 
general validity of that single statement 



CHAPTEE I 



TIME, SPACE, AND MASS 



297. Time, space, and mass in themselves are in no sense 
capable of being made the subjects of our experience, but 
f only definite times, space -quantities, and masses. Any 

definite time, space-quantity, or mass may form the result of 
a definite experience. We make, that is to say, these concep- 
tions symbols for objects of external experience in that we settle 
by what sensible perceptions we intend to determine definite 



140 SECOND BOOK CHAP. 

times, space-quantities, or masses. The relations which we 
state as existing between times, spaces, and masses, must then 
in future be looked upon as relations between these sensible 
perceptions. 

298. Rule 1. We determine the duration of time by 
means of a chronometer, from the number of beats of its 
pendulum. The unit of duration is settled by arbitrary con- 
vention. To specify any given instant, we use the time that 
has elapsed between it and a certain instant determined by a 
further arbitrary convention. 

This rule contains nothing empirical which can prevent us 
from considering time as an always independent and never 
dependent quantity which varies continuously from one value 
to another. The rule is also determinate and unique, except 
for the uncertainties which we always fail to eliminate from 
our experience, both past and future. 

299. Rule 2. We determine space-relations according to 
the methods of practical geometry by means of a scale. The 
unit of length is settled by arbitrary convention. A given 
point in space is specified by its relative position with regard 
to a system of coordinates fixed with reference to the fixed 
stars and determined by convention. 

We know by experience that we are never led into contra- 
dictions when we apply all the results of Euclidean geometry 
to space-relations determined in this manner. The rule is 
also determinate and unique, except for the uncertainties 
which we always fail to eliminate from our actual experience, 
both past and future. 

300. Rule 3. The mass of bodies that we can handle is 
determined by weighing. The unit of mass is the mass of 
some body settled by arbitrary convention. 

The mass of a tangible body as determined by this rule 
possesses the properties attributed to the ideally defined mass 
(§ 4). That is to say, it can be conceived as split up into any 
number of equal parts, each of which is indestructible and un- 
changeable and capable of being employed as a mark to refer, 
without ambiguity, a point of space at one time to a point of 
space at any other time (8 3). The rule is also determinate 



l TIME, SPACE, AND MASS 141 

and unique as regards bodies which we can handle, apart from 
the uncertainties which we cannot eliminate from our actual 
experience, either past or future. 

301. Addition to Rule 3. We admit the presumption 
that in addition to the bodies which we can handle there are 
other bodies which we can neither handle, move, nor place in 
the balance, and to which Eule 3 has no application. The 
mass of such bodies can only be determined by hypothesis. 

In such hypothesis we are at liberty to endow these masses 
only with those properties which are # consistent with the pro- 
perties of the ideally defined mass. 

302. Observation 1. The three foregoing rules are not 
new definitions of the quantities time, space, and mass, which 
have been completely defined previously. They present rather 
the laws of transformation by means of which we translate ex- 
ternal experience, i.e. concrete sensations and perceptions, into 
the symbolic language of the images of them which we form 
(vide Introduction), and by which conversely the necessary 
consequents of this image are again referred to the domain of 
possible sensible perceptions. Thus, only through these three 
rides can the symbols time, space, and mass become parts of 
our images of external objects. Again, only by these three 
rules are they subjected to further demands than are neces- 
sitated by our thought. 

303. Observation 2. The indeterminateness which our 
rules involve and which we have acknowledged, does not arise 
from the indeterminateness of our images, nor of our laws 
of transformation, but from the indeterminateness of the ex- 
ternal experience which has to be transformed. By this we 
mean that there is no actual method which, with the aid 
of our senses, determines time more accurately than can be 
done by the help of the best chronometer; nor position than 
when it is referred to a system of coordinates fixed with 
regard to the fixed stars ; nor mass than when determined by 
the best balance. 

304. Observation 3. There is, nevertheless, some appa- 
rent warrant for the question whether our three rules furnish 
true or absolute measures of time, space, and mass, and this 



142 SECOND BOOK CRAP. 

question must in all probability be answered in the negative, 
inasmuch as our rules are obviously in part fortuitous and arbi- 
trary. In truth, however, this question needs no discussion 
here, not affecting the correctness of our statements, even if 
we attached to the question a definite meaning and answered 
it in the negative. It is sufficient that our rules determine 
such measures as enable us to express without ambiguity 
the results of past and future experiences. Should we agree 
to use other measures, then the form of our statements would 
suffer corresponding changes, but in such a manner that the 
experiences, both past and future, expressed thereby, would 
remain the same. 



Material Systems 

305. Explanation. By a material system is henceforth 
understood a system of concrete masses, whose properties are 
not inconsistent with the properties of the ideally defined 
material system (§ 121). Thus in a natural material system 
some positions and displacements are possible, others im- 
possible ; and the aggregate of possible positions and dis- 
placements satisfies the conditions of continuity (§121). In 
a natural free system the connections are independent of the 
position of the system relative to all masses not included in 
it, as well as of the time (§ 122). 



< 



306. Note thereupon. We know from experience that 
there is an actual content corresponding to the conceptions 
so defined. 

For, firstly, experience teaches us that there are connections, 
and moreover continuous connections, between the masses of 
nature. There are thus material systems in the sense of § 305. 
We may even assert that other than continuous connections 
are not found in nature, and that, consequently, every natural 
system of material points is a material system. 

Secondly, experience teaches us that the connections of a 4 

material system may be independent of its position relative to 
other systems, and of its absolute position. We may even 
assert that this independence always appears, so long as a r 

material system is sufficiently distant in space from all other 



I TIME, SPACE, AND MASS 143 

systems. Thus, there are systems which have only internal 
connections, and we possess also a general method for recog- 
nising and constructing such systems. 

Thirdly and finally, experience teaches us that absolute 
time has no effect on the behaviour of natural systems which 
are only subject to internal connections. Every such natural 
system is thus subject only to normal (§ 119) connections 
and is therefore a free system. There are thus free systems 
in the sense of § 305, and we can construct free systems and 
recognise them as such independently of the statements which 
we shall have to make again concerning free systems. 

307. Observation. The normal connections of free 
systems form those very properties which exist independently 
of the time. It is the problem of experimental physics to 
* separate those finite groups of masses which can exist inde- 
pendently as free systems, from the infinite world of pheno- 
mena, and to deduce from those phenomena which occur in 
time and in connection with other systems those properties 
which are unaffected by time. 



CHAPTER II 



THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW 



308. We consider the problem of mechanics to be to 
deduce from the properties of a material system which are 
independent of the time those phenomena which take place in 
time and the properties which depend on the time. For the 
solution of this problem we lay down the following, and only 
the following, fundamental law, inferred from experience. 

309. Fundamental Law. Every free system persists in 
its state of rest or of uniform motion in a straightest path. 

Systema ovine liberum iierseverare in statu suo quiescendi vel 
movendi uniformiter in directissimam. 

310. Note 1. The fundamental law is so worded that 
its statement has reference only to free systems. But since 
a portion of a free system can be an unfree (unfreies) system, 
results may be deduced from the fundamental law which have 
reference to unfree systems. 

311. Note 2. The aggregate of inferences with regard to 
a free system and its unfree portions which may be drawn 
from the fundamental law forms the content of mechanics. 
Our mechanics does not recognise other causes of motion than 
those which arise from the law. The knowledge of the funda- 
mental law is, according to our view of it, not only necessary 
for the solution of the problem of mechanics, but also sufficient 
for this purpose, and this is an essential part of our assertion. 

312. Note 3. (Definition.) Every motion of a free 
material system, or of its parts, which is consistent with the 



\ 



II FUNDAMENTAL LAW 145 

fundamental law, we call a natural motion of the system 
in contradistinction to its conceivable and possible motions 
(§§ 257, 258). 

Thus mechanics treats of the natural motions of free 
material systems and their parts. 

313. Note 4. We consider a phenomenon of the material 
world to be mechanically and thereby physically explained when 
we have proved it a necessary consequence of the fundamental 
law and of those properties of material systems which are 
independent of the time. 

314. Note 5. The complete explanation of the phenomena 
of the material world would therefore comprise: (1) their 
mechanical or physical explanation; (2) an explanation of the 
fundamental law ; (3) the explanation of those properties 
of the material world which are independent of time. The 
second and third of these explanations we, however, regard as 
beyond the domain of physics.. 



Validity of the Fundamental Law 

315. We consider the law to be the probable outcome of 
most general experience. More strictly, the law is stated as 
a hypothesis or assumption, which comprises many experiences, 
which is not contradicted by any experience, but which asserts 
more than can be proved by definite experience at the present 
time. For, as regards their relation to the fundamental law, 
the material systems of nature can be divided into three classes. 

316. 1. The first class comprises those systems of bodies 
or parts of such systems which satisfy the conditions of a 
free system, as can be immediately seen from experience, and 
to which the fundamental law applies directly. Such are, for 
example, rigid bodies moving in free space or perfect fluids 
moving in closed vessels. 

The fundamental law is deduced from experiences on such 
material systems. With regard to this first class it merely 
represents an experiential fact. 

317. 2. The second class comprises those systems of 
bodies which do not immediately conform to the assumptions of 

L 



146 SECOND BOOK CHAP. • 

the fundamental law, or which do not at first sight obey the 
law, but which can be adapted to the assumptions or can be < 
made to obey the law when, and in fact only when, to direct 
sensible experience certain definite hypotheses as to the nature 
of this experience are adjoined. 

(a) Amongst these are included, firstly, those systems which 
do not seem to satisfy the condition of continuity in particular 
positions ; i.e. those systems in which impulses, in the widest 
meaning of the term, occur. In this case it is sufficient to 
use the exceedingly probable hypothesis that all discontinuities 
are only apparent and vanish when we succeed in taking into 
consideration sufficiently small space- and time-quantities. 

(b) Secondly, there are included amongst them those 
systems in which actions-at-a-distance, the forces due to heat < 
and other causes of motion, not always fully understood, are in 
operation. When we bring to rest the tangible bodies of 
such systems, they do not remain in this state, but on being 

set free enter into a state of motion again. Thus, apparently, 
they do not obey the law. In this case it is highly probable 
that the tangible bodies are not the only masses, nor their 
visible motions the only motions of these systems, but that 
when we have reduced the visible motions of the tangible 
bodies to rest, other concealed motions still exist in the 
systems which are communicated to the tangible bodies 
again when we set them frea It appears that assumptions can 
always be made with regard to these concealed motions such 
that the complete systems obey the fundamental law. „ 

As regards the second class of natural systems the law 
bears the character of a hypothesis which is in part highly 
probable, in part fairly probable, but which, as far as we can 
see, is always permissible. 

318. 3. The third class of systems of bodies comprises ^ 
those systems whose motions cannot be represented directly 
as necessary consequences of the law, and for which no definite 
hypotheses can be adduced to make them conformable to it. 
Amongst these are included, for instance, all systems which 
contain organic or living beings. We know, however, so little 
of all the systems included under this head, that it cannot m 
be regarded as proved that such hypotheses are impossible, 



IX FUNDAMENTAL LAW 147 

and that the phenomena in these systems contradict the 
fundamental law. 

Thus, then, with regard to the third class of systems 
of bodies the fundamental law has the character of a per- 
missible hypothesis. 

319. Observation. If we may assume that there is no 
free system in nature which is not conformable to the law, 
then we may consider any system whatever as such a free system, 
or as part of such a free system ; so that, on this assumption, 
there is in nature no system whose motions cannot be deter- 
mined by means of its connections and the fundamental law. 



Limitation of the Fundamental Law 

320. In a system of bodies which conforms to the funda- 
mental law there is neither any new motion nor any cause of 
new motion, but only the continuance of the previous motion in 
a given simple manner. One can scarcely help denoting such 
a material system as an inanimate or lifeless one. If we were 
to extend the law to the whole of nature, as the most general 
free system, and to say — " The whole of nature pursues with 
uniform velocity a straightest path," — we should offend against 
a feeling which is sound and natural. It is therefore prudent 
to limit the probable validity of the law to inanimate systems. 
This amounts to the statement that the law, applied to a 
system of the third class (§ 318), forms an improbable 
hypothesis. 

321. No attention is, however, paid to this consideration, 
nor is it necessary, seeing that the law gives a permissible 
hypothesis if not a probable ona If it could be proved 
that living systems contradicted the hypothesis, then they would 
separate themselves from mechanics. In that case, but only 
in that case, our mechanics would require supplementing with 
reference to those unfree systems which, although themselves 
lifeless, are nevertheless parts of such free systems as contain 
living beings. 

As far as we know, such a supplement could be formed, 



148 SECOND BOOK CHAP. 

namely, from the experience that animate systems never 
produce any different results on inanimate ones than those 
which can also be produced by an inanimate system. Thus 
it is possible to substitute for any animate system an inanimate 
one ; this may replace the former in any particular problem 
under consideration, and its specification is requisite in order 
that we may reduce the given problem to a purely mechanical 
one. 

322. Observation. In the usual presentation of mechanics 
such a reservation is omitted as superfluous and it is assumed 
that the fundamental laws include animate as well as inanimate 
nature. And, indeed, in that presentation it is permissible, 
because we give the freest play to the forms of the forces which 
there enter into the fundamental laws, and reserve to ourselves 
an opportunity of explaining, later and outside of mechanics, 
whether the forces of animate and inanimate nature are 
different, and what properties may distinguish the one from 
the other. In our presentation of the subject greater prudence 
is necessary, since a considerable number of experiences 
which primarily relate to inanimate nature only are already 
included in the principle itself, and the possibility of a later 
narrowing of the limits is much lessened. 



Analysis of the Fundamental Law 

323. The form in which we have stated the law pur- 
posely assimilates itself to the statement of Newton's Fir3t 
Law. However, this statement comprises three others inde- 
pendent of one another, namely, the following : — 

1. Of the possible paths of a free system its straightest 
paths are the only one which it pursues. 

2. Different free systems describe in identical times lengths 
of their paths proportional to each other. 

3. Time, as measured by a chronometer (§ 298), increases 
proportionally to the length of the path of any one of the 
free moving systems. 

The first two statements alone contain facts of a general 
nature derived from experience. The third only justifies our 



II FUNDAMENTAL LAW 149 

arbitrary rule for the measure of time, and only includes the 
particular experience that in certain respects a chronometer 
behaves as a free system, although, strictly speaking, it is not 
such. 



Method of applying the Fundamental Law 

324. When a given question with regard to the motion of 
a material system is asked, then one of the three following 
cases must necessarily arise : — 

1. The question may be stated in such a manner that 
the fundamental law itself provides a definite answer. In this 
case, the problem is a definite mechanical one, and the 
application of the fundamental law gives its solution. 

325. 2. The question may be stated in such a manner 
that the fundamental law itself does not directly furnish a 
definite reply, but one or more assumptions may be joined with 
the question by means of which the definite application of the 
law is rendered possible. 

If only one such assumption is possible and we assume 
that the problem is a mechanical one, this assumption must also 
be an appropriate one ; the problem can thus be considered as 
a definite mechanical one, and the application of the assump- 
tion and the fundamental law gives the solution. 

If several assumptions are possible and we assume that the 
problem is a mechanical one, one of these assumptions must 
be appropriate; the problem may then be considered as an 
indeterminate mechanical one, and the application of the 
fundamental law to the different possible assumptions gives the 
possible solutions. 

326. 3. The question may be stated in such wise that 
the fundamental law is insufficient for the solution and that 
no assumption may be joined to it such as to render the appli- 
cation of the law possible. In this case the question must 
contain assumptions contradicting the fundamental law or the 
properties of the system to which it relates ; the proposition 
stated cannot then be considered a mechanical problem. 



150 SECOND BOOK chap. 



Approximate Application of the Fundamental Law 

327. Note. When equations result from the given equa- 
tions of condition of a system and the fundamental law, which 
have strictly the form of equations of condition, then for the 
determination of the motion of the system it is indifferent 
whether we consider the original equations alone, or instead 
of them the derived equations, as a representation of the con- 
nections of the system. 

For if we omit from the series of original equations of 
condition all those which may be obtained analytically from 
the remainder and from the derived equations of condition, 
then only possible displacements, although in general not all 
the displacements which were possible according to the original 
equations, satisfy those of the original equations which are left 
and the derived equations. A path which was a straightest 
path under the original more general manifold will be one 
also a fortiori under the present more limited manifold. And 
since the natural paths must be included under this more 
limited manifold, the natural paths are the straightest amongst 
those which are possible by the present equations of condition. 
Thus the proof follows. 

328. Corollary 1. If we know from experience that a 
system actually satisfies given equations of condition, then in 
applying the fundamental law it is quite indifferent whether 
these connections are original ones, ie. whether they do not 
admit of a further physical explanation (§ 313), or whether 
they are connections which may be represented as necessary 
consequences of other connections and of the fundamental law, 
and which consequently admit of a mechanical explanation. 

329. Corollary 2. If we know from experience that 
given equations of condition of a material system are only 
approximately but not completely satisfied, then it is still 
permissible to leave those equations of condition as an approxi- 
mate representation of a true connection, and by applying the 
fundamental law to them to obtain approximate statements 
concerning the motion of the system, although it is quite 
certain that these approximate equations of condition do not 



II FUNDAMENTAL LAW 151 

represent an original, continuous and normal connection, but 
can only be regarded as the approximate result of unknown 
connections and the fundamental law. 

330. Observation. Every practical application of our 
mechanics is founded upon the foregoing corollary. For in 
all connections between sensible masses which physics discovers 
and mechanics uses, a sufficiently close investigation shows 
that they have only approximate validity, and therefore can only 
be derived connections. We are compelled to seek the ultimate 
connections in the world of atoms, and they are unknown to 
us. But even if they were known to us we could not apply 
them to practical purposes, but should have to proceed as we now 
do. For the complete control over any problem always requires 
that the number of variables should be extremely small, 
whereas a return to the connections amongst the atoms would 
require the introduction of an immense number of variables. 

However, the fact that we may employ the fundamental 
law in the manner we do, is not to be regarded as a new 
experience in addition to the law, but is, as we have seen, a 
necessary consequence of the law itself. 



CHAPTER III 

MOTION OF FREE 8TSTEMS 

General Properties of the Motion 

1, Determinateness of the Motion 

331. Proposition. A natural motion of a free system is 
singly determined when the position and velocity of the system 
at any given time are known. 

For the path of the system is singly determined (§ 161) 
by its position and the direction of its velocity ; the constant 
velocity of the system in its path is given by the magnitude 
of the velocity at the initial time. 

332. Corollary 1. The future and past conditions of a 
free system for all times are singly determined by its present 
condition (§261). 

333. Corollary 2. If it were possible to reverse the 
velocity of a system in any position (a thing which would in no 
wise contravene the equations of condition of the system), 
then the system would pass through the positions of its former 
motion in reverse order. 

334. Note 1. In a free holonomous system (§ 123) there 
is always a natural motion which carries the system in a given 
time from an arbitrarily given initial position to an arbitrarily 
given final one. 

For a natural path is always possible between the two 
positions (§ 192). Any velocity is permissible in this path, 
and therefore such an one as makes the system traverse the 
given distance in the given time. 



CHAP. Ill GENERAL PROPERTIES Of MOTION 153 

335. Observation. The foregoing note still holds when 
instead of the time of the transference the velocity of the 
system in its path or its energy is given. 

336. Note 2. A free system which is not holonomous 
cannot be carried from every possible initial position to every 
possible final one by a natural motion (§ 162). 

337. Proposition. A natural motion of a free holo- 
nomous system is determined by specifying two positions of 
the system at two given times. 

For by these data the path of the system and its velocity 
in the path are determined. 

338. Observation 1. The determination of a natural 
motion by means of two positions between which it takes place 
is in general not unique ; it is unique so long as the distance 
between the two positions does not exceed a certain finite 
quantity and the length of the path described is of the order 
of this distance (cf. §§ 167, 172, 190, 176). 

339. Observation 2. A natural motion of a free holo- 
nomous system, apart from the absolute value of the time, is 
also determined by two positions of the system and either the 
duration of the transference, or the velocity of the system in 
its path, or the energy of the system. 



2. Conservation of Energy 

340. Proposition. The energy of a free system in any 
motion does not change with the time. 

For the energy (§ 282) is determined by the mass of the 
system, which is invariable, and the velocity in its path, 
' which is also invariable. 

341. Observation 1. Of the three partial statements 
into which the fundamental law can be subdivided (§ 323), 
only the second and third are needed for the proof of the 
proposition* We might also make the third unnecessary and 
render the proposition independent of any given method of 
measuring time by stating it in the form : — 



154 SECOND BOOK CHAP. 

The ratio of the energies of any two free systems in any 
motion does not change with the time. 

342. Observation 2. The law of the conservation of 
energy is a necessary consequence of the fundamental law. 
Conversely, from the law of the conservation of energy the 
second partial statement (§ 323) of that law follows, but not 
the first, and consequently not the entire law. There might 
be free systems conceivable, for which the law of the conser- 
vation of energy held, and which nevertheless did not move in 
straightest paths. It is conceivable, for instance, that the law 
of the conservation of energy might also hold good for ani- 
mated systems although these might not be embraced in our 
mechanics. Conversely, natural systems might be conceived 
which only moved in straightest paths, and for which never- 
theless the law of the conservation of energy might not 
hold good. 

343. Observation 3. Lately the opinion has been re- 
peatedly expressed that the energy of a moving system is 
associated with a definite place and is propagated from place to 
place. On this account energy, in this respect as well as in 
respect to its indestructibility, has been compared with matter. 
This conception of energy is obviously very different from 
that implied in our method of treatment We have no stronger 
reason for saying that the seat of the energy of a moving 
system is where the system is, than for saying that the seat 
of the velocity of a moving body is where the body is. But 
naturally this last mode of expression is never used. 



3. Least Acceleration 

344. Proposition. A free system moves in such a -, 
manner that the magnitude of its acceleration at any instant 
is the smallest which is consistent with the instantaneous 
position, the instantaneous velocity and the connections of the 
system. 

For the square of the magnitude of the acceleration is by 
§§ 280, 281, equal to 

^c 2 + it*. 



in GENERAL PROPERTIES OF MOTION 155 

Now for the natural motion v = o\ v has a value given by 
the instantaneous velocity, and c has the least value which is 
consistent with the given direction of motion and the connec- 
tions of the system. Hence the expression itself must take 
the smallest value consistent with the given circumstances. 

345. Observation 1. The property of the natural motion 
stated in the above proposition determines this motion uniquely, 
and therefore the proposition can completely replace the funda- 
mental law. 

For if the expression itcP + v 2 is to become a minimum, 
firstly v must be zero, and consequently the system must traverse 
its path with constant velocity; secondly either v must be 
zero, in which case the system is at rest, or c must have 
the smallest value possible for the direction of the path, in 
which case the path is a straightest path. 

346. Observation 2. Proposition 344 might be regarded 
as a preferable form of statement of the fundamental law, inas- 
much as it condenses the law into a single indivisible statement, 
not only externally into one sentence. The chosen form, how- 
ever, has the advantage of making its meaning clearer and 
more unmistakable. 



4. Shortest Path 

347. Proposition. The natural path of a free holo- 
nomous system between any two sufficiently near positions 
is shorter than any other possible path between the two 
positions. 

For in a holonomous system a straightest path between 
any two sufficiently near positions is also a shortest one 
(§§ 190, 176). 

348. Observation 1. If the restriction to sufficiently 
near positions is removed, then it can no longer be asserted that 
the natural path is shorter than all other paths, nor even that 
it is shorter than all neighbouring paths. However, the asser- 
tion contained in the foregoing proposition, that the variation of 
the length of the path vanishes in a transference to any neigh- 
bouring possible path, always holds (§§ 190, 171). 



156 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



349. Observation 2. The foregoing proposition corresponds 
to the Principle of Least Action in the form given to it by Jacobi. 
If for the moment we take m v to be the mass, ds v the path- 
length described by the V th of the n points of the system in a 
given element of time, then the proposition asserts that the 
variation of the integral 



h'^jJi, 



m..ds. 



vanishes in the natural motion of the system, and this is 
Jacobi's form of that principle. 

350. Observation 3. In order to establish more strictly 
the relation between the proposition of § 347 and Jacobi's 
Law, it is necessary to make the following statement : — Accord- 
ing to the usual conception of mechanics the proposition con- 
tains a particular case of Jacobi's Law, viz., the case where no 
forces act. 

Conversely, according to our conception, the assumptions 
of the complete Law of Jacobi are to be considered as less 
general According to this conception Jacobi's Law is an 
adaptation of the proposition to particular relations and a 
modification of it to the assumptions in them. 

351. Observation 4. The law of the conservation of 
energy is not postulated by the proposition of § 347, nor is 
the latter deduced from the law ; they are quite independent 
of one another. In conjunction with the law of energy 
the proposition may completely replace the fundamental law, 
but only for holonomous systems. If the proposition were 
applied to other systems, it would certainly determine 
definite motions ; but these motions would contradict the 
fundamental law (§ 194) and would consequently furnish false 
solutions of the stated mechanical problem. 



5. Shortest Time 

352. Proposition. The natural motion of a free holono- 
mous system carries the system in a shorter time from a given 
initial position to a sufficiently near final one, than could be 



Ill GENERAL PROPERTIES OF MOTION 157 

done with any other possible motion, with the same constant 
value of the energy. 

For if the energy, and consequently the velocity in the 
path, are the same for all the motions compared, then the 
duration of the motion is proportional to the leugth of the 
path. Consequently it is the smallest for the shortest path, 
that is for the natural path. 

353. Observation. If the restriction to sufficiently near 
positions is removed, then the time of the motion is no longer 
necessarily a minimum, but it still retains the property of always 
being equal for the natural path and for all its infinitely near 
possible paths (see § 348). 

354. Corollary 1. For the natural motion of a free 
holonomous system between given sufficiently near final 
positions, the time-integral of the energy is always smaller than 
for any other possible motion performed with the same constant 
value of the energy. 

For the time-integral is equal to the product of the given 
constant value of the energy and the duration of the transference. 

355. Observation 1. The proposition of § 352, particu- 
larly in the form of § 354, contains Maupertuis' Principle of 
Least Action. If it is desired to establish more strictly its 
relation to this principle, we must express ourselves in the 
manner done in § 350. 

356. Observation 2. The corollary § 354, and also the 
proposition § 352, assume for the motions compared with one 
another the constancy of the energy with the time. With the 
assumption that the natural motion is included in those com- 
pared, they are sufficient for its determination, and could replace 
the fundamental law, but only in the case of holonomous 
systems. Their assumptions applied to other systems would 
lead to false mechanical solutions. 

357. Corollary 2. A free holonomous system is carried 
from its initial position in a given time through a greater 
straightest distance by its natural motion than by any other 
possible motion which takes place with the same constant 
value of the energy as the natural motion. 



1 



158 SECOND BOOK chap. 



6. Least Time-Integral of the Energy 

358. Proposition. The time-integral of the energy in the 
transference of a free holonomous system from a given initial 
position to a sufficiently near final one is smaller for the natural 
motion than for any other possible motion by which the system 
may pass from the given initial position to the final one in an 
equal time. 

For firstly, if we compare only motions in one and the same 
path, of length S, then the time-integral attains its minimum 
value for that one in which the velocity v is constant. For 
since the sum of the quantities vdt has the given value S, then 
the sum of the quantities v 2 dt will attain its smallest value 
only when all the vs are equal. But if the velocity is constant, 
then the time-integral of the energy is equal to ^raS 2 /T, where T 
is the duration of the transference. Since T is given, the time- 
integral of the energy for different paths of the system varies 
as the square of the length of the path ; hence the first quantity, 
like the last, has its minimum value for the natural path. 

359. Observation 1. If the limitation to sufficiently near 
positions is removed, then the time-integral of the energy will 
no longer necessarily be a minimum, but its variation, never- 
theless, always vanishes in the transference to any other of the 
motions considered (c/. § 348). 

360. Observation 2. The foregoing proposition corre- 
sponds to Hamilton's Principle. If it is desired to establish 
more closely its connection with this principle, we must use the 
mode of expression of § 300. 

361. Observation 3. The proposition § 358 and the 
corollary § 354 ngree in this, that amongst certain classes of 
possible motions they distinguish the natural motion by one 
and the same characteristic, viz., the minimum value of the 
time-integral of the energy. They differ essentially from one 
another in this, that they consider entirely different kinds of 
possible motions. 

362. Observation 4. The law of the conservation of 
energy is a necessary consequence of the proposition in § 358 ; 



Ill GENERAL PROPERTIES OF MOTION 159 

and this proposition, employed as a principle, can therefore 
completely replace the fundamental law, but still only in its 
application to holonomous systems. If the restriction to 
holonomous systems is removed, then the proposition deter- 
mines definite motions of the material systems ; but these in 
general contradict the fundamental law, and are, therefore, 
mechanically considered, false solutions of the stated problem. 

363. Retrospect to §§ 347-362. If we employ the pro- 
perties of the natural motion stated in the propositions 347, 
352, 354, and 358 as principles for the complete or partial 
determination of this motion, then we make the changes now 
entering into the condition of the system dependent on such 
peculiarities of the motion as can only appear in the future, 
and which often seem in human affairs as objects worth striv- 
ing for. This circumstance has occasionally led physicists 
and philosophers to perceive in the laws of mechanics the 
expression of a conscious intention as to future aims, combined 
with a certain foresight as to the most suitable means for attain- 
ing them. Such a conception is, however, neither necessary 
nor permissible. 

364. That such a conception of these principles is not 
necessary is shown by the fact that the properties of the 
natural motion which seem to indicate an intention can be 
recognised as the necessary consequences of a law in which 
one finds no expression of any intention as to the future. 

365. That this conception of the principles is inadmis- 
sible is seen from the fact that the properties of the natural 
motion which appear to denote an outlook to future issues 
are not found in all natural motions. Had nature the design 
of aiming at a shortest path, a least expenditure of energy and 
a shortest time, it would be impossible to understand why 
there could be systems in which this design, although attain- 
able, should still be regularly missed by nature. 

366. If one wishes to recognise in the fact that a system 
always chooses a straightest path-element amongst all possible 
ones the expression of a definite intention, then this is 
allowable ; the expression of a definite intention is then already 
seen in the fact that a natural system always chooses out 



160 SECOND BOOK chap. 

of all possible motions no arbitrary one, but always one which 
is determinable beforehand and is marked by particular charac- 
teristics. 



Analytical Representations. Differential Equations of 

Motion 

367. Explanation. By the differential equations of 
motion of a system we understand a set of differential 
equations in which the time is the independent variable, the 
coordinates of the system the dependent variables ; and which, 
together with an initial position and initial velocity, uniquely 
determine the motion of the system (§ 331). 

368. Problem 1. To express the differential equations 
of the motion of a free system in terms of its rectangular 
coordinates. 

In § 155 (iv) we have found the differential equations of 
the straightest paths of the system in terms of the rectangular 
coordinates. In these equations we introduce the time t as 
independent variable instead of the length of the path. By the 
fundamental law, dsjdt = v is independent of t, and conse- 
quently also of s. Thus we have 

X v — X v . Vy X y — X v . V . 

We then multiply the equations 155 (iv) by mv 2 and put for 
shortness X t instead of mv 2 S, c We thus obtain as solution of 
the problem the 3n equations 



m v 



^+2 t ^ X l =0 (i), 



which with the i equations (cf. § 155 ii.) 

|Stt 3 n 8 n ~ 



1 1 fy 



f- 



determine the 3n quantities x v and X t as single- valued functions 



of x v and x r 



369. Observation 1. The equations of motion of the free 
system in the form of § 368 are usually known as Lagrange's 
equations of the first form. 



s 



t 

^ 



III DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OF MOTION 161 

370. Observation 2. Every single equation of § 368 (i) 
gives us, after having first determined the quantities X t , the 
component of the acceleration of the system along one of the 
rectangular coordinates of the system. 

371. Problem 2. To express the differential equations of 
motion of a free system in terms of its general coordinates p p . 

The differential equations of the straightest paths in terms 
of p ? are given in § 158 (iv). In these we introduce the 
time as independent variable instead of the length of the 
path ; and we again note that according to the fundamental law 

P f > = p' p v> P ? = P\ V *- 

We consequently multiply the equations § 158 (iv) by mvP, 
and putting P x for am^II we obtain as solution of the problem 
the r equations 

which with the k equations (ef. § 158 (ii)) 

>p w pp+2'2%w - o (u) 

1 1 1 v P<r 

determine the r + k quantities p p and P x as single- valued 
functions of p p and p p . 

372. Observation. If we make use of the notation of 
§ 277 we can write the equations of motion of § 371 (i) 
in the form 

k 
1 

If we assume that the quantities P x have been determined, 
each of these equations gives us the component of the accelera- 
tion along a given coordinate p p expressed as a function of the 
instantaneous position and velocity of the system. 

373. Corollary 1. If we express by using the notation 
of § 291 (i) the components of the acceleration in terms of the 
energy, then the equations of motion of a free system take the 
form 

M 



162 SECOND BOOK CHAP. 

d/d'E\ aE x:* ^ ^ 

374. Observation 1. The differential equations of motion 
in this form are called also the generalised Lagrangian equa- 
tions of motion or Lagrange's equations of the second form 
(c/. § 369). 

375. Observation 2. If the coordinate p ? is a free co- 
ordinate, then it does not appear in the equations of condition 
of the system, and the quantities p xp are consequently all equal 
to zero. The equation of motion corresponding to p p then 
becomes 

rf/a p E\_ 9p E 

In a holonomous system all the equations of motion can 
be expressed in this simple form (§ 144). 

376. Corollary 2. The equations of motion of a free 
holonomous system expressed in any r free coordinates p p 
of the system can be written in the form of the 2r equations 

Of these the former contain only definitions; but the latter 
contain experiential facts. One can thus regard the equations 
of motion in this form as 2r differential equations of the first 
order for the 2r quantities p p and q p . These equations, together 
with the 2r initial values of the quantities, determine them for 
all times. 

377. Observation 1. The equations 376 (i) and (ii) one 
might correctly term Poisson's form of the equations of motion. * 

378. Observation 2. From the equations § 376 there 
follow two reciprocal relations, analytically expressed by the 
equations 

[from(ii)] |^ = |^ 0) . 



in DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OF MOTION 163 

[from (i) and (ii)] *& = |jfr (ii), 

and which possess a simple physical meaning. Both relations 
contain elements of experience and would not hold for every 
possible motion of the system. Hence they may, under 
certain conditions, be utilised for testing the fundamental law. 
A third analogous relation, deduced solely from S 376 (i), 
would only be a consequence of our definitions. 

379. Corollary 3. The equations of motion of a free 
holonomous system in terms of any r free coordinates p of 
the system can be written in the form of the 1r equations 
(§§ 290, 289, 292, 375) 



^ 

k, 



a- ¥ » 



*--s 



Of these the former contain only definitions ; but the latter 
contain experiential facts. In this form also the equations 
of motion appear as 2r differential equations of the first order 
for the 2r quantities p p and q p . These equations, together 
with the 2r initial values of the quantities, determine them 
for all times. 

380. Observation 1. The foregoing equations are usually 
known as the Hamiltonian form of the equations of motion 
for a free system. 

381. Observation 2. Two reciprocal relations follow from 
the equations § 379, which are analytically expressed by the 
equations 

Mb _ M* ftt 

d -P - - # (ii), 

and which possess a simple physical meaning. Both relations 
contain elements of experience and distinguish the natural motion 
from other possible motions. Hence they may conversely, 



164 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



under certain conditions, be utilised for testing the fundamental 
law. A third analogous relation, deduced solely from § 379 (i), 
would only be the consequence of our definitions, and would 
therefore have no mechanical significance. 

It is necessary to insist on the fact that the equations 
378 (i) and 381 (i) represent different statements, and not 
the same statements in a different form. 



Internal Constraint of Systems 

382. Proposition. A system of material points between 
which no connections exist, persists in its condition of rest or 
uniform motion in a straight path. 

For in such a system the straight path is also the 
straightest 

383. Corollary 1. A free material point persists in its 
condition of rest or uniform motion in a straight path (Galileo's 
Law of Inertia or Newton's First Law). 

384. Corollary 2. The acceleration of a system of * 
material points between which no connections exist is zero. 

The connections between the points of a material system can 
thus be regarded as the cause owing to which the acceleration 
differs in general from zero. 

385. Definition. The change in the acceleration caused 
by all the connections of a material system is called the 
constraint which the connections impose on the system ; this I 
change is also called for shortness the internal constraint, or, 

still shorter, the constraint of the system. 

The constraint is measured by the difference between the 
actual acceleration of the system and the acceleration of that 
natural motion which would result on removal of all the equa- , 

tions of condition of the system; it is equal to the former 
diminished by the latter. 

386. Corollary 1. The internal constraint of a system is, 

like the acceleration, a vector quantity with regard to the system. 

i 

387. Corollary 2. In a free system the internal con- 4 



Ill INTERNAL CONSTRAINT 165 

straint is equal to the acceleration of the system : it is here in 
fact only another mode of regarding the acceleration (§ 382). 

388. Proposition 1. The magnitude of the constraint 
is at every instant smaller for the natural motion of a free 
system than for any other possible motion which coincides 
with it in position and velocity at the particular, instant con- 
sidered. 

For this statement is by § 387 only different in form 
from proposition § 344. 

389. Corollary. Any connection which is added to the 
connections of the system already in existence increases the 
constraint of the system. The removal of any connection 
changes the natural motion in such a manner that the con- 
straint is diminished. 

390. Observation 1. The foregoing theorem corresponds 
to Gauss's Principle of Least Constraint. In order to present 
clearly its connection with this principle we should have to 
use the same mode of expression as in § 350. 

391. Observation 2. Gauss's Principle and the Law of 
Inertia (§ 383) may together replace completely the funda- 
mental principle, and that for all systems. 

For they together are equivalent to the proposition § 344. 

392. Proposition 2. The direction of the constraint in 
the natural motion of a free system is constantly perpendicular 
to every possible or virtual (§111) displacement of the system 
from its instantaneous position. 

For the components of the constraint in a free system 
along the coordinates p ? are by § 387 equal to / p , and may thus 
be written in the form 

1 * 

i 

Thus by § 250 they are perpendicular to every possible dis- 
placement of the system. 

393. Symbolical Expression. If we denote by Bp p the 
changes of the coordinates p p for any possible or virtual dis- 
placement of the system, then the equation 



166 SECOND BOOK CHAF« 



ItfM 



= (i) 



furnishes a symbolical expression of the foregoing proposition. 
For the equation replaces the proposition by § 249, and it is 
symbolical, since it stands as a symbol for an infinite number 
of equations. 

If we use rectangular coordinates and denote by &e„ the 
change of x v for any possible or virtual displacement, then the 
equation takes the form 

394. Observation 1. The foregoing proposition, § 392, 
corresponds to d'Alembert's Principle; the equations 393 (i) 
and (ii) correspond to the usual expression of that principle. 
In order to establish clearly the relation between that principle 
and the proposition we should have to use the same mode 
of expression as in § 350. 

395. Observation 2. From the condition that the con- 
straint is perpendicular to every virtual displacement of the 
system we get by § 250 the equations of motion of the free 
system in the form § 372. Consequently d'Alembert's Prin- 
ciple can by itself replace the fundamental law, and that for 
all systems. Our fundamental law has over d'Alembert's 
Principle the advantage of a simpler and clearer meaning. 

396. Corollary 1. In a free system the acceleration is 
always perpendicular to any possible displacement of the 
system from its instantaneous position. 

397. Corollary 2. In the motion of a free system the 
acceleration is always perpendicular to the direction of the 
actual instantaneous motion. 

398. Corollary 3. In the motion of a free system the 
component of the acceleration in any direction of a possible 
motion is always zero. 

399. Corollary 4. The component of the acceleration of 
a free system in the direction of any free coordinate is always 
equal to zero. 



Ill INTERNAL CONSTRAINT 167 

400. Proposition. A free system moves in such a 
manner that the components of the acceleration in the direction 
of any coordinate of absolute position always remain zero, 
whatever is the internal connection between the points of the 
system. 

For whatever is the connection of the system, every co- 
ordinate of its absolute position is a free coordinate (§ 142). 

401. Corollary. If we choose the coordinates of a free 
system in all other respects arbitrarily, but so that there are 
amongst them six coordinates of absolute position (§ 19), we 
can without knowledge of the connection of the system, or 
without complete knowledge of it, write down immediately six 
differential equations of the motion of the system. 

402. Particular Selection of Coordinates. The follow- 
ing choice of coordinates of absolute position is permissible 
for every system. 

We denote by 

<hi « 2 » tt 8 i 

the arithmetic mean value of those rectangular coordinates of 
all particles which are respectively parallel to x&p z * The 
quantities a Y a^a z we consider as rectangular coordinates of 
a point of mean position, which" we call the centre of gravity 
of the system. Through the centre of gravity we draw three 
straight lines parallel to the three coordinate axes. Through 
these three straight lines and all the particles we draw planes 
and denote by 

a>i> a> 9 , a> 8 , 

the arithmetic mean value of the inclinations of all the planes 
drawn through these straight lines to any one of them. The 
six quantities a and a> are variable quantities independent of 
each other, whose change necessarily causes a change in the 
position of the system, and which are not determined by the 
configuration alone. We can consequently make these six 
quantities coordinates of absolute position (§21), and we make 
them coordinates of absolute position so long as we introduce 
only coordinates of configuration for the remaining coordinates. 
If we give a and <o any changes whilst we fix the 
remaining coordinates, the system moves as a rigid body. 



168 SECOND BOOK chap. 

We obtain then from purely geometrical considerations for 
the changes of the rectangular coordinates, when we allow the 
index v to pass from 1 to n (§ 13), 

*V-i - *■* + (*«r-» "" «s>k>i - for - «i) d ®8 (*)• 

^-2 = *»S + tor - <h)A»2 - tor-1 - <^dW\ 

From this we can obtain, when we consider the x r 's as functions 
of all the coordinates, the values of the partial differential co- 
efficients of the x r 's with respect to a and a> ; thus, for instance, 



-1. 5T-0. ^"'=0 (ii), 



^ = 1 ^-'=0 — 
3*! ' 3oj ' dag 

403. Corollary 1. As a consequence of the remark that 
the accelerations of the system along the coordinates a v a 2 , a, 
must vanish (§ 400), we get the three equations 



n 



ii i 

j 

For by § 242 and § 275 the acceleration along the co- 
ordinate a 1 of the centre of gravity is equal to 



ftb 



i9a t m 



therefore by § 402 (ii) equal to 



n 

X 3v> 



2m v 



and similar expressions hold for the accelerations along a s 



and a g . 



404. Observation. The three equations § 403 can be 
immediately integrated twice and then express that the centre 
of gravity of a free system moves uniformly and in a straight 
line. This is known as the Principle of the Centre of Gravity. 

405. Corollary 2. From the fact that the accelerations 



Ill 



INTERNAL CONSTRAINT 169 



of the system along the coordinates a> v q> 2 , g> 3 must vanish 
(§ 400), we get the three equations 

1 

n 



1 
n 



2" m ^-l S 8»' ~ X V *8"-l) =0 - 
1 

For by § 242 and § 275 the acceleration along c^ is 
equal to 

sr* — • ~ x w» 

thus by § 402 (iii) equal to 
then by using § 403 equal to 



n 



S*\ X w-lFiw-l "~ X Z¥-l X sw-2) * 



and corresponding values hold for the accelerations along a> 2 
and o> 8 . 

406. Observation. These three equations contain the so- 
called Principle of Areas. These equations can be immediately 
integrated once, and then give the differential equations of the 
fiist order 

n 

2" m ^-2 i 8»'-l -V-Ar-i) = COnSt » 

* 1 

n 

h 2" m "Kr *V-i" a W-i*«r ) = COnst, 

1 
n 

2" m ^sv-i^ -*V ^ 3 v-i) = const. 
1 

k These admit of the following geometrical interpretation which 

> suggests the name : — 



170 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



Draw to each particle of the system from the origin a 
radius vector; then the sum of the projections of the areas 
described by these radii on each of the three coordinate planes 
increases uniformly with the time. 

407. Observation 1 (on §§ 402-406). We have introduced 
the Principles of the Centre of Gravity and of Areas as 
particular cases of the general proposition § 400. We should 
not have been right in this, if we regarded, as is sometimes 
done, the essential features of these principles as lying in the 
fact that they furnish integrals of the equations of motion. 
One reason why this view seems to us inadmissible, is that the 
result derived from the Principle of Areas can only be called 
an integral in a figurative sense. We rather consider the 
essential features of the principles as lying in the fact that 
they furnish properties which are of general validity and can 
be stated quite independently of the particular connection of 
the system. 

408. Observation 2 (on §§402-406). In deducing the 
Principles of the Centre of Gravity and of Areas as special 
cases of § 400 we have not made use of all the properties 
which the definitions assigned to a and co. In fact, we might 
have been able to deduce these principles by using other 
coordinates, for instance, all coordinates which are in the 
same direction as a and oo without being identical with 
them. Of course, with any choice of coordinates, we should 
not obtain in every case six equations which would furnish a 
new physical meaning, or which would be quite independent of 
the equations § 403 and § 405 ; but they would always be 
those equations which result from the equations § 403 and 
§ 405 by transformation to the chosen coordinates. But the 
proposition § 400 gives for all these different forms a common 
expression and physical meaning. 

Holonomous Systems 

409. Note. If the straightest distance (§ 217) is known 
for a holonomous system, then the equations of the straightest 
paths can be expressed in a finite form (§ 225). These paths, 
moreover, are the natural paths of the system, so long as it is 



Ill HOLONOMOUS SYSTEMS 171 

free ; and all motions by which they could be traversed with a 
constant velocity, are natural motions of the system. The 
equations of motion of a free holonomous system can thus be 
expressed in a finite form. 

410. Problem. To express the equations of motion of a 
free holonomous system by means of its straightest distance. 

As before, let S be the straightest distance of the system, 
considered as a function of the free coordinates p^ and p pl of 
its initial and final positions. Let t be the time at which the 
system passes through the initial position, and t x the time at 
which it passes through the final position. Then t x — 1 is the 
duration of the motion, and thus 

* = — (0 

gives the constant velocity of the system in its path ; its 

energy is given by 

S 2 
E = Ara (ii), 

and its momenta q n and q pl at the times t and t x by 



2po = m : — j V^o co8 8 P*> 



cm). 



S , A 

?oi = m : — j V a i cos sp pl 

For the equations of the straightest paths we find two 
% forms in the equations § 224 (i) and §226 (i). If we mul- 
tiply these by m/S(^ — Q, or, what is the same thing (ii), by 

V 2m£, we obtain the four following sets of r equations — 

, to 3S 2 ,. . 

in " £, — T 5Z- ( lv ) 

I h ~ S °Pfl 

 U=-h — :;- <?) 

h - h oPpo 



..^88 



U - - ^2toE— W 



172 SECOND BOOK chap. 

Thus our problem is solved in a variety of ways. 

For if we consider ^ as the variable time, and consequently 
p pl as the coordinates of the position changing with this time, the 
r equations (v) determine these r coordinates as finite functions 
of ti, and the equations (vii) give us the same result if we 
associate with them the relation between £ and t lt i.e. the 
equation (ii). The 2r quantities p^ and q^ behave here as 2r 
arbitrary constants. From similar considerations the equations 
(iv), or (vi) and (ii), give us the equations of motion of the 
system ; these are now in the form of differential equations of 
the first order, in which the r quantities p^ behave as r 
arbitrary constants. 

Or, if we consider, as is equally permissible, the time t Q as 
the variable time, and thus the position as the variable position, 
the equations (iv), or (vi) and (ii), give us the equations of 
motion in a finite form, with the time t as independent, the 
quantities p n as dependent variables, and the quantities p pl and 
q pl as 2r arbitrary constants. Thus, again, the equations (v), 
or (vii) and (ii), give the equations of motion in the form of 
differential equations of the first order, in which p pl behave as 
r arbitrary constants. 

411. Corollary 1. If we put 

V2E^.S = V (i), 

and consider V as a function of p^ p pl and E, then the natural 
motions of the system can be expressed in the form 

dV ..... 

?po= -jj— ( m ) 

d Ppo 

1 ° 9E 

For the equations (ii) and (iii) coincide with the equations 
§ 410 (vi) and (vii), and the equation (iv) follows from the 
equation (i) and § 410 (ii). 

412. Observation. The function V here introduced is 
Hamilton's Characteristic Function of the System ; Hamilton 



Hi HOJLONOMOUS SYSTEMS 173 

denotes it by the same symbol. Such a function, therefore, 
only exists for holonomous systems. Its mechanical meaning 
is this. Suppose that the system moves with given energy 
from a given initial to a given final position : then the char- 
acteristic function gives twice the value of that time-integral 
of the energy which results, considered as a function of that 
energy and of the coordinates of the initial and final positions. 
For by equations 411 (i) and 410 (ii) 

V = 2Eft - 1 ) 

in value, but in form only when, on the right-hand side, we 
regard the duration of the motion t x — 1 expressed as a function 
of E, p pl and p^ 

413. Proposition* The characteristic function V of a 
free holonomous system satisfies the following two partial 
differential equations of the first order — 



2»^^l ^dp pl dp ffl 



1 T T 

2 Wl 2>2; 



av 2v =K 



For they are obtained by multiplying the equations § 227 
for the straightest distance by 2raE, and using equation 
§ 411 (i). 

414. Corollary 2. If we put 



and regard P as a function of p^, p pl , t and t u the equations 

dP 

represent the natural motions of the system. The energy £ 
of the system can be immediately obtained from P by means 
of the equations 



174 SECOND BOOK 



CHAJP. 



* 

For the equations (ii) and (iii) coincide with the equations 
410 (iv) and (v), and the equations (iv) follow from (i) and 
410 (ii). 

415. Observation. The function P, here introduced, is 
Hamilton's Principal Function of the System ; it is called by 
Hamilton S. Such a function exists only for holonomous 
systems. Its mechanical meaning is this. Suppose that the 
system moves in a given time from a given initial to a given 
final position : then the Principal Function gives that value of 
the time-integral of the energy which results, considered as a 
function of that time and of the initial and final values of the 
coordinates. 

For by equations § 414 (i) and 410 (ii) 

P = Eft - 1 ) 

as regards its value, but as regards it form only when we 
regard E, on the right-hand side, as a function of p pli p^ t x 
and t . 

416. Proposition. The principal function of a holonomous 
system satisfies the two following partial differential equations 
of the first order — 

^2^2f b ^d P y^r 9 'i 



=22 



r r T ap dp ap 

*0. 



2m^i^i ""dpfidp^ dt ' 

For these are obtained when the equations § 227 are multi- 
plied by (§410 (ii)) 

2(* 1 -y» 

and the relations § 414 (i) and (iv) made use of. 

417. Observation on §§ 411-416. Starting from the 
differential equations § 227, we were able to consider in 
SS 232-236 functions which were related to the straightest 
distance and capable of replacing it in all respects analytically, 
but without having the same simple geometrical meaning. In 



) 



in DYNAMICAL MODELS 175 

jttst the same way, starting from the differential equations 
§§413, 416, we can arrive at functions which are related to 
the characteristic and principal functions and analytically 
serve the same purpose, or even offer advantages over these ; 
but their physical significance, on account of the mathematical 
complications, becomes more and more obscure. Such functions 
would be suitably denoted as Jacobi's Principal Functions 
and Characteristic Functions. 

It appears, moreover, that even in the characteristic and 
principal functions it is only the simple idea of the straightest 
distance which appears, and this, too, somewhat indistinctly; 
so that the introduction of these two functions together and 
in addition to the straightest distance would have but little 
significance if all the systems to be considered were always, 
as here, completely known and free. 



Dynamical Models 

418. Definition. A material system is said to be a 
dynamical model of a second system when the connections of 
the first can be expressed by such coordinates as to satisfy 
the following conditions : — 

(1) That the number of coordinates of the first system is 
equal to the number of the second. 

(2) That with a suitable arrangement of the coordinates 
for both systems the same equations of condition exist. 

(3) That by this arrangement of the coordinates the 
expression for the magnitude of a displacement agrees in both 
systems. 

Any two of the coordinates so related to one another in 
the two systems are called corresponding coordinates. Corre- 
sponding positions, displacements, etc., are those positions, 
displacements, etc., in the two systems which involve similar 
values of the corresponding coordinates and their changes. 

419. Corollary 1. If one system is a model of a second, 
then, conversely, the second is also a model, of the first. If 
two systems are models of a third system, then each of these 
systems is also a model of the other. The model of the . 
model of a system is plso a model of the original system. 



176 SECOND BOOK chap. 

All systems which are models of one another are said to 
be dynamically similar. 

420. Corollary 2. The property which one system pos- 
sesses of being a model of another, is independent of the 
choice of the coordinates of one or the other system, although 
it is only clearly exhibited by a particular choice of coordinates. 

421. Corollary 3. A* system is not completely deter- 
mined by the fact that it is a model of a given system. 
An infinite number of systems, quite different physically, can 
be models of one and the same system. Any given system is 
a model of an infinite number of totally different systems. 

For the coordinates of the masses of the two systems 
which are models of one another can be quite different in 
number and can be totally different functions of the corre- 
sponding coordinates. 

422. Corollary 4. The models of holonomous systems 
are themselves holonomous. The models of non-holonomous 
systems are themselves non-holonomous. 

423. Observation. In order that a holonomous system 
may be a model of another, it is sufficient that both should 
have such free coordinates that the expression for the magni- 
tude of the displacements of both systems should be the same. 

424. Proposition. If two systems, each of which is a 
model of the other, have corresponding conditions at a 
definite time, then they have corresponding conditions at 
all times. 

For by the equations of condition of a system, the ex- 
pression for the magnitude of the displacement (§ 164) and 
the initial values of the coordinates and their change (§ 332), 
the course of these coordinates is determined for all times, — 
this being true whatever function of these coordinates the 
position of the masses of the system is. 

425. Corollary 1. In order to determine beforehand the 
course of the natural motion of a material system, it is 
sufficient to have a model of that system. The model 
may be much simpler than the system whose motion it 
represents. 



in DYNAMICAL MODELS 177 

426. Corollary 2. If the same quantities are corre- 
sponding coordinates of a number of material systems which are 
models of one another, and if these corresponding coordinates 
alone are accessible to observation, then, so far as this limited 
observation is concerned, all these systems are not different 
from one another; they appear as like systems, however 
different in reality they may be in the number and the con- 
nection of their material points. 

Thus it is impossible, from observation alone of the 
natural motions of a free system, i.e. without direct determina- 
tion of its masses (§ 300), to obtain any wider knowledge of 
the connection of the system than that one could specify a 
model of the system. 

427. Observation 1. If we admit generally and without 
limitation that hypothetical masses (§301) can exist in nature 
in addition to those which can be directly determined by the 
balance, then it is impossible to carry our knowledge of the 
connections of natural systems further than is involved in 
specifying models of the actual systems. We can then, in 
fact, have no knowledge as to whether the systems which we 
consider in mechanics agree in any other respect with the 
actual systems of nature which we intend to consider, than in 
this alone, — that the one set of systems are models of the 
other. 

428. Observation 2. The relation of a dynamical model 
to the system of which it is regarded as the model, is precisely 
the same as the relation of the images which our mind forms 
of things to the things themselves. For if we regard the con- 
dition of the model as the representation of the condition of 
the system, then the consequents of this representation, which 
according to the laws of this representation must appear, are 
also the representation of the consequents which must proceed 
from the original object according to the laws of this original 
object The agreement between mind and nature may there- 
fore be likened to the agreement between two systems which 
are models of one another, and we can even account for this 
agreement by assuming that the mind is capable of making 
actual dynamical models of things, and of working with them. 

N 



CHAPTER IV 



MOTION OF UNFliEE SYSTEMS 



429. Prefatory Note 1. Every unfree system we con- 
ceive to be a portion of a more extended free system ; from 
our point of view there are no unfree systems for which this 
assumption does not obtain. If, however, we wish to emphasise 
this relation, we shall denote the unfree system as a partial 
system, and the free system of which it forms a part, as the 
complete system. 

430. Prefatory Note 2. When a part of a free system is 
considered an unfree system it is assumed that the rest of the 
system is more or less unknown, so that an immediate appli- 
cation of the fundamental law is impossible. This deficiency of 
knowledge must in some way be met by special data. Such 
data can be given in various ways. As it is not our purpose 
to take every possible form for these data, we shall only con- 
sider two forms which, in previous developments of mechanics, 
have obtained special significance. 

In the first form the motion of the unfree system is 
denoted as guided ; whilst in the second we say that the 
motion is affected by forces. 



I. Guided Unfree System 

431. Definition. A guided motion of an unfree system 
is any motion which the system performs while the other 
masses of the complete system perform a determinate and 



CHAP. IV MOTION OF UNFREE SYSTEMS 179 

prescribed motion. A system whose motion is guided is 
called a guided system. 

432. Additional Note 1. A possible motion of a guided 
system is such a motion as is not inconsistent with the con- 
nection of the complete system and the prescribed motion of the 
other masses. 

433. Additional Note 2. A natural motion of a guided 
system is such a motion as forms, with the prescribed motion 
of the remaining masses, a natural motion of the complete 
system. 

434. Problem. To represent analytically the possible 
motions of a guided system. 

Let the r quantities p p be the general coordinates of the 
partial system considered, and the r quantities }J p be any 
coordinates whatever of the remaining masses of the complete 
system. The r + x quantities p p and jj p are then general co- 
ordinates of the complete system, and its connections are ex- 
pressible by a series of equations, say h in number, of the form 

r x 

i i 

where p w and also JJ W may be functions both of p ? and p p . 
If now the motion of the masses whose coordinates are jj p are 
determined, then the Jj p 's are given functions of the time. The 
equations (i) are in part identically satisfied by these functions ; 
in part they take, on substitution of these, the form of the r 
equations 

r 
1 

or 

r 

^PxpdPp +P X ^ 1 = ° ( Ui )> 

l 

which are called the equations of condition of the guided 
system, and in which p w and p xt are now functions of p p and 
the time t alone. All possible motions of the guided system 
satisfy these equations, and all motions which satisfy them are 
possible motions. 



180 SECOND BOOK chap. 

435. Observation 1. If the guided system is holonomous, 
then the differential equations (ii) and (iii) for it can be re- 
placed by the same number of finite equations between the r 
coordinates of the system and the time t The possible 
positions of a guided holonomous system can be expressed by 
coordinates which are subject to no other conditions than this, 
that a number of them are given functions of the time 

436. Observation 2. Thus the equations of condition of a 
guided system contain in general the time, and therefore the 
guided system, considered in itself, would be inconsistent 
with the requirements of normality (§ 119). Conversely, we 
now consider every system whose equations of condition in 
the ordinary language of mechanics contain the time explicitly, 
and which in our mode of expression is apparently abnormal, 
as a guided system, i.e. as a system which with other unknown 
masses satisfies the conditions of normality. If this assumption 
is permissible, then by it the problem is reduced to a determinate 
mechanical problem (§ 325). But if, owing to any particular 
form of the equations of condition, this assumption is not per- 
missible, then these equations of condition already involve a 
contradiction to the fundamental law or its assumptions, and 
no questions asked concerning the system would be mechanical 
problems (§326). 

437. Observation 3. The fundamental law is not directly 
applicable to a guided system. For the idea of straightest 
paths is only defined for normal connections (§ 120); and 
the internal connections of the guided system are abnormal. 
Some other characteristics must therefore be sought by which 
the natural motions of a guided system may be distinguished 
from the greater manifold of possible motions. 

438. Proposition 1. A guided system, just like a free 
system, moves in such a manner that the magnitude of its 
acceleration is always smaller for the actual motion than 
for any other motion which satisfies the equations of condition 
and which, at the moment under consideration, coincides in 
position and velocity with the actual motion. 

For the square of the magnitude of the acceleration of the 
complete system is equal to the sum of the corresponding 



jv GUIDED SYSTEM 181 

quantities for the partial system and the remaining system, 
these quantities being multiplied by the masses of their 
systems and divided by the mass of the complete system. 
This sum, by § 344, is to be a minimum ; the second member 
of the summation is supposed to be already determined and 
such a function of the time as allows the sum to be a 
minimum (§ 436) ; this minimum is then only obtained when 
the first member is made a minimum. 

439. Proposition 2. A guided holonomous system, just 
like a free one, moves in such a manner that the time- 
integral of the energy in a motion between sufficiently near 
positions is smaller for the actual motion than for any other 
motion which satisfies the equations of condition, and which 
carries the system in the same time from the given initial to 
the final position. 

For the time -integral of the energy for the complete 
system is equal to the sum of the corresponding quantities for 
the partial system and the remaining system. This sum is, 
by § 358, to be a minimum; the second member of the 
summation is supposed to be already determined and to be 
such as admits of a minimum sum ; this minimum is then 
only obtained when the first member is made a minimum. 

440. Observation 1. The two preceding propositions 
contain the adaptation of articles 344 and 358 to the special 
assumptions of this chapter. In the ordinary language of 
mechanics their contents could be put into the following 
form : — The Law of Least Acceleration and Hamilton's 
Principle still hold even where the equations of condition of 
a system contain the time explicitly. 

,441. Observation 2. The laws of energy, of the shortest 
path, and of the least time (§§ 340, 347, 352) can not be 
directly adapted in a similar manner to the assumptions of a 
guided system. In the ordinary language of mechanics this 
statement can be put in the following form : — The Principles of 
Energy and Least Action lose their validity when the equa- 
tions of condition contain the time explicitly. 

442. Problem. To obtain the differential equations of 
motion of a guided system. 



182 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



Let, as before, m be the mass, p* the coordinates, and / 
the accelerations along p p for the guided system. Further, 
let tit be the mass and Jj p any coordinates of the remaining 
material points of the complete system. Thus p p and p p may 
be taken as coordinates of the complete system. The com- 
ponents of the acceleration along these coordinates may be 
denoted for the complete system by f and f f p . "Then the 
motion of the complete system is singly determined by its h 
equations of condition of the form § 434 (i), and by r + r 
equation of motion of the form (§372) 

1 

(m+m)f ( ,+2 x P w p x = ° (»)• 

1 

Now by hypothesis we have to regard the quantities p p as 
such determined functions of the time as identically satisfy 
the equations (ii), and through whose substitution the h 
equations of condition of the complete system are transformed 
into the k equations of condition (§434 (ii)) of the constrained 
system. Further, by § 255 we have 

(» + VOf, = »/, (»i>. 

Thus we obtain as equations to be considered the r equa- 
tions of motion 

k 

™/p + 2*l»*Px = (iv), 

1 

and the k equations of condition 

r 

2 p ^xA + ^ = ° ( v >- 

1 

These (r + k) equations do not now contain any reference to 
the unknown masses of the complete system ; and as they are 
sufficient for the unique determination of the r + k quantities 
p p and P x , they contain the solution of the stated problem. 

443. Corollary 1. The differential equations of motion of 

a guided system have the same form as those of a free system. 

Tn the ordinary language of mechanics we may say that 



iv GUIDED SYSTEM 183 

the validity of this fonn does not depend on whether the 
equations of condition contain the time or not The equa- 
tions of motion of a guided system will therefore admit of 
exactly the same transformations as those of a free system 
(368 et seq.) ; but of course those forms which assume that all 
the coordinates are free will lose their applicability. 

444. Corollary 2. A natural motion of a guided system 
is singly determined by a knowledge of the position and velocity 
of the system at any given time (cf. § 331). 

445. Note. In a guided, as in a free system, the con- 
straint is equal to the acceleration of the system. 

For if all the equations of condition of a guided system 
are removed, then the material points of the system will be 
free points and the acceleration of the natural motion of the 
system will be zero (§ 385). 

446. Proposition 1. The magnitude of the constraint at 
any instant in a guided system, as in a free one, is smaller 
for the natural motion than for any other possible motion 
which, at the moment considered, coincides with it in position 
and velocity. 

The proof follows from §§ 445 and 448. 

447. Proposition 2. In the natural motion of a guided 
system, as in that of a free system, the direction of the 
constraint is always perpendicular to every possible or virtual 
displacement of the system from its instantaneous position. 

This follows from §§ 445 and 442 as in § 392. 

448. Observation. The two foregoing propositions contain 
the adaptation of propositions 388 and 392 to the particular case 
of guided systems. In the usual language of mechanics they 
might be expressed in the following form : — Gauss's Principle 
of Least Constraint and d'Alembert's Principle retain their 
validity even when the equations of condition contain the 
time explicitly. 

449. Note. When the coordinates jj p of the complete 
system which appear together with p p in the equations § 434 
(i) are not functions of the time, but are constant, then the 
equations of condition of the guided system take the form 



184 SECOND BOOK chap. 



2 



1 



where the p^'s do not contain the time. The guided system 
appears in this case as a normal one, but it does not necessarily 
cease to be an unfree system. For p may be functions of 
the absolute position, whilst in the equations of condition of a 
free system they are independent of the absolute position. 

In such guided, but nevertheless normal systems, the idea 
of the straightest path retains its applicability. It also 
follows that the fundamental law is immediately applicable to 
such systems ; and all the propositions which have been proved 
for the motion of a free system also hold good for such 
systems, excepting, only those which refer to absolute position, 
ie. excepting only proposition 400 and its corollaries. 



II. Systems acted on by Forces 

450. Definition. Two material systems are said to be 
directly coupled (gekoppelt) when one or more coordinates of 
the one are always equal to one or more coordinates of the 
other. Two systems will be simply said to be coupled when 
their coordinates can be so chosen that the systems become 
directly coupled. Coupled systems which are not directly 
coupled are said to be indirectly coupled. 

451. Corollary 1. The coupling of two systems is a 
relation between them which is independent of our choice, and 
in particular independent of the choice of coordinates. But 
whether an existing coupling is direct or indirect does depend 
on the choice of coordinates, and is thus a question for our 
arbitrary determination. 

452. Corollary 2. Every coupling which exists between 
two systems can be made direct by a proper choice of co- 
ordinates. When the contrary is not definitely expressed, we 
shall hereafter assume that this has been done. The coor- 
dinates of the coupled systems which are always equal we 
shall denote as their common coordinates. 

453. Corollary 3. Each of two coupled systems is 



IV SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 185 

necessarily an unfree system ; but both together, or with other 
systems with which they are coupled, form a free system. 
When the contrary is not expressly stated it will be assumed 
in what follows that there is no coupling with more systems, 
so that the two coupled systems together form a free 
system. 

454. Analytical Representation. Let p ? be the co- 
ordinates of the one, Jj p of the other system ; then a coupling 
between the two systems is expressed by the fact that for one 
or more pairs of values of p and cr, p ? and JJ^ are always equal. 
We can, however, without restricting the generality, so arrange 
the indices that congruent coordinates in both systems have 
the same index. The systems are then coupled when for one 
or more values of p 

ft-lV-0 (i) 

continually. From this equation the equations 

ft. -P, = (ii) 

or 

d V> ~ d l\ = ° ("0 

immediately follow. 

455. Definition. By a force we understand the inde- 
pendently conceived effect which one of two coupled systems, 
as a consequence of the fundamental law, exerts upon the 
motion of the other. 

456. Corollary. To every force there is necessarily always 
a counterforce (Gegenkmft). 

For the conception of the effect which the system, referred 
to in the definition as the second, produces upon the first, is 
by the definition itself also a force. Force and counterforce 
are reciprocal in the sense that we are free to consider either 
of them as the force or the counterforce. 

457. Problem. To obtain an expression for the effect 
which one of two coupled systems produces upon the motion of 
the other. 

Let m be the mass, and the r quantities p ? the coordinates 
of the first system ; and let the h equations 



186 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 




>p w P„ = (i) 

1 



be its equations of condition. Let ni be the mass and the r 
quantities p p the coordinates of the second system ; and let the 
ft equations 

SftA- (ii) 

i 

be its equations of condition. Between the two there may- 
further be for one or more, say h, values of p, equations of 
coupling of the form 

Vp -Pp = ° ("0. 

Let us now consider the motion of the first system under the 
action of the second, and regard it as a guided system. So 
long as the p p f $ do not appear in the equations (iii) the 
accelerations along them are given by the equations (442) 

™/p+2*Vx= (iv); 

i 

but for those p p 's which appear in (iii) we must take into 
consideration these equations as well, and consequently multiply 
the coefficient of p p in them, namely — 1, by an undetermined 
factor which may be called P p , and add the product to the 
left-hand side ; thus, then, for these — 

'»/,+2 x p«. p x- p p= (v) - 

i 

The appearance of the h quantities P p in the equations of 
motion increases the number of unknowns in them by h, and 
for the determination of these h quantities the number of 
equations of condition is also increased by the h equations (iii), 
in which we must regard the p p s as given explicit functions 
of the time. But if we assume that the quantities P p are not 
unknown, but are given immediately as functions of the time, 
then the h equations (iii) and any knowledge of p p and of the 
second system are unnecessary; the k + r equations (i), (iv) 
and (v) are again sufficient for the unique determination of 
the k + r unknowns P x and j) p . The h factors P p consequently 



iv SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 187 

represent completely the effect of the second system on the first, 
and their aggregate can be regarded as an analytical expression 
for this effect, as is required by the problem. 

458. Theorem 1. If we wish to represent in a symmetrical 
manner the effect of the first system on the second, we must 
write the equations of coupling in the form 

*,-fc-0 (0. 

and for the Jj p 's which do not appear in (i) we have the follow- 
ing equations of motion 

H+2 x i l *.^x= (ii) > 

i 
while for the remaining p p 's they take the form 

wf,+2*ft»**-*P= ' (iii); 

i 
where by the $ p '$ are understood the undetermined multipliers 
of equations (i). The aggregate of the J&^s gives us an expres- 
sion for the effect which the first at any instant has on the 
motion of the second. 

459. Theorem 2. Thus we can write all equations of 
motion of the first system in the form 

k 

1 

and of the second in the form 

k 

h+2*Pxp^-£p=° (ii) > 

1 

when we decide (which is permissible, although arbitrary) that 
for all coordinates which are not coupled the quantities P p and 
$ p are to be zero. It is true that P p and J& p thereby lose their 
significance as a system of multipliers of the equations 457 
(iii) and 458 (i); but they retain their significance as an ex- 
pression for the effect which the one system has on the other. 

460. Analytical Representation of Force. In accord- 
ance with the definition § 455 we may and shall decide that the 
aggregate of the quantities P p , singly determined for all values 
of ^ p by § 459, forms the analytical expression for the force 



188 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



which the system p p exerts on the system p p . In a similar 
manner the aggregate of the quantities J& p forms the analytical 
expression for the force which the system p p exerts on the 
system Jj p . The individual quantities P p or $ p are called the 
components of the force along the corresponding coordinates 
p p or jjp, or, for short, the forces along these coordinates. 

By this determination we place ourselves in agreement 
with the existing notation of mechanics ; and the necessity for 
securing such an agreement sufficiently justifies us in choosing 
this particular determination out of several permissible ones. 

461. Corollary 1. The force which a system exerts on a 
second may be considered a vector quantity with regard to the 
second system : i.e. as a vector quantity whose components 
along the common coordinates are in general different from 
zero ; whose components along the coordinates which are 
not common vanish ; but whose components in such directions 
as cannot be expressed by changes of the coordinates used 
remain undetermined. 

462. Corollary 2. The force which one system exerts on 
another may also be considered as a vector quantity with regard 
to the first system : ie. as a vector quantity whose components 
along the common coordinates are in general different from 
zero ; whose components along the coordinates which are not 
common vanish ; but whose components in such directions as 
cannot be expressed by means of changes in the coordinates 
used remain undetermined. 

463. Observation. Considered as vector quantities with 
regard to a system, every force contains components which 
depend on the choice of coordinates, i.e. on arbitrary convention. 
This arises from the fact that on the choice of coordinates 
depends the manifold of those motions of a system which we 
take into consideration; and in the direction of which we 
may therefore admit a possible effect. 

464. Note 1. If a system is coupled successively with 
several other systems, and the same force is thereby exerted 
upon it by these systems, then its motion is the same, however 
much these other systems may differ amongst themselves. 

We therefore speak (in accordance with definition § 455) 



iv SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 189 

of the motion of a system under the influence or action of a 
force simply, without mentioning the other system to Which it 
is due, and without which it could not be conceived. 

465. Note 2. If a system is coupled successively with 
several other systems, and the same motion results, then it may 
exert upon each of these other systems the same force, even 
though these systems may be entirely different from each other. 

We therefore speak (in accordance with definition § 455) 
of the force which a moving system exerts simply, without 
mentioning the other system upon which this force is exerted, 
and without which it could not be conceived. 

466. Note 3. Since all forces which are simply spoken 
of as such can be no other than those which are exerted by 
material systems on material systems in accordance with the 
fundamental law, all forces must as a matter of course have 
certain properties common. The sources of all such common 
properties are the properties of material systems and the funda- 
mental law. 

Action and Reaction 

467. Notation. ( 1 ) The components of the force which the 
Jj p system exerts on the p p one, considered as vector quantities 
with regard to the p p system, have already been denoted in 
§ 460 by P p . If we regard this same force as a vector quantity 
with regard to the system JJ^ then its components along p p will 
be denoted by $ p . Thus for all common coordinates 

identically. 

(2) The components of the force which the p p system 
exerts on the Jj p system, considered as vector quantities with 
regard to the p p system, have already been denoted in § 460 
by J& p . If we regard this same force as a vector quantity with 
regard to the p p system, then its components Sdong p p will be 
denoted by P p '. Thus for all coordinates 

identically. 



190 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



The forces exerted on a system are thus denoted by un- 
accented letters, whilst the forces exerted by a system are 
denoted by accented letters, as long as we regard them as 
vector quantities with regard to the system itself. 

468. Proposition. Force and counter force are always 
equal and opposite. By this is meant that their components, 
along each of the coordinates used, are equal and opposite ; 
and this is equally true whether we regard force and counter- 
force as vector quantities with regard to the one or the other 
system. 

For we may regard the two coupled systems (§ 457) as 
a single free system. Its mass is m + ttt, and its coordinates 
are 2> p and p p . Its equations of condition are the equations 
457 (i) and (ii) and the equations of coupling as in 457 (iii). 
If in addition we denote the multipliers of the equations (i) 
by P G , those of equation (ii) by p x °, and those of the equation 
(iii) by P p °, then the equations of motion of the total system 
take the form 

i 

1 

where, for the coordinates that do not appear in the equations of 
coupling, the P p 0, s are to be put zero. 

But the motion represented by these equations is that 
which before was considered as the motion of -the separate 
systems. We consequently obtain a possible solution for the 
above equations when we substitute for f p and f p their former 
values, and make 

and in (i) 

IV = r, (iv), 

and in (ii) 

V = - #, (v). 

Moreover, since the undetermined multipliers are singly 
determined by the equations (i) and (ii), this possible solution 



I 

* 

* 

I 

1 

IV • SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 191 

is at the same time the only possible solution. Therefore the 
equations (iv) and (v) necessarily hold ; thus from them 

or, using the notation of § 467, 

p,= -p; 

ft = - ft'- 

which proves the proposition. 

469. Observation 1. The foregoing proposition corre- 
sponds to Newton's Third Law, and is also known as the 
Principle of Eeaction. Nevertheless its content is not quite 
identical with that of Newton's Third Law. Their true relation 
is as follows : — 

Newton's Law, as he intended it to be understood, contains 
our proposition completely; this is shown by the examples 
appended to his statement of the law. 

But Newton's Law contains more. At least it is usually 
applied to actions-at-a-distance, i.e. to forces between bodies 
which have no common coordinates. But our mechanics does 
not recognise such actions. Thus in order to be able to adduce 
as a consequence of our proposition the fact that a planet 
attracts the sun with the same force that the sun attracts the 
planet, it is necessary that further data should be given as to 
the nature of the connection between the two bodies. 

470. Observation 2. It is open to doubt, whether the ex- 
tension of the application of the principle of reaction beyond what 
is contained in proposition 468 as to its form and content, can 
rightly be used as a fundamental principle of mechanics ; or 
whether rather the actual and universally valid content of that 
principle has not been completely included in proposition 468. 

As far as the form is concerned, it is manifest that the 
statement of the law is not quite clearly determined when 
applied to actions-at-a-distance. For when force and counter- 
force affect different bodies, it is not quite clear what is meant 
by opposite. For example, this is seen in the case of the 
mutual action between current-elements. 

As far as the content is concerned, the application of the 
principle of reaction to actions-at-a-distance commonly found 



192 SECOND BOOK chap. 

in mechanics manifestly represents an experiential fact, con- 
cerning the correctness of which in all cases people* are begin- 
ning to be doubtful. For instance, in Electromagnetics we are 
almost convinced that the mutual action between moving 
magnets is not in all cases strictly subject to the principle. 



Composition of Forces 

471. Proposition. If a system is simultaneously coupled 
with several other systems, then the force which the aggregate 
of these systems exerts on the first is equal to the sum of the 
forces which the individual systems exert on it. 

For let there be a system 1 of mass m and coordinates p p , 
whose equations of condition are the k equations, 

r 

.i 

and let this be simultaneously coupled with the systems 2, 3, 
etc., whose coordinates are p p ", jj p w , etc. 

First consider the systems 2, 3, etc., as separate systems. 
Then the equations of coupling for every common coordinate 
p 9 are to be written in the form 

V>"-P> = (ii) 

*/"-*, = 0,etc. (iii). 

If now we treat the system made up of 1, 2, 3, etc., as a free 
system, and denote the multipliers of the equations (i) by P , 
those of (ii) by P p " and of (iii) by P p w , etc., then we obtain the 
equations of motion of the system 1 in the form 

Wf, + 2* JfeP x - *V - r /" - etc. = (iv), 

where all the quantities P p ", P p w , etc., as well as P x are singly- 
determined quantities. P p ", P p 7// , etc., represent the components 
of the forces which the systems 2, 3, etc., respectively exert on 
the system 1. 

Secondly, if we regard the systems 2, 3, etc., as forming 
one system, then for the quantities jj p ", p p w , etc., which by equa- 



iv SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 193 

tions (ii), (iii), etc., are equal, one single coordinate p p can be 
used, and in place of those equations of coupling we have now 
for each common coordinate p p the one equation 

fc - P f = (v). 

If P p is its multiplier, and we denote by P x ° the multipliers of 
the equations (i) which correspond to the present system of 
equations of motion, then these take the form 

i 

The P p 's represent the components of the total force exerted on 
the system 1. 

Now this different mode of conception cannot alter the 
motion which ensues according to the fundamental law. 
Therefore a possible solution of the equations (vi) is obtained 
by using the former solution and putting 

P x ° = P x (vii) 

P p = P/' + P/" + . . . (viii). 

Moreover, since there is only one possible solution, the foregoing 
is the one, and the equation (viii) which contains our proposition 
must necessarily hold. 

472. Corollary 1. Any number of forces exerted on a 
system, or by a system, can be regarded as a single force, namely, 
that force which, considered as a vector quantity with regard to 
the system, is equal to the sum of these forces. 

When we represent a number of forces in this way, we 
say that we compound them. The result of the composition 
is called the resultant of the individual forces. 

473. Corollary 2. Any force exerted on a system, or by 
a system, can be conceived as a sum of any number of forces, 
namely, of any number of forces the sum of which, regarded as 
vector quantities with regard to the system, is equal to that 
original force. 

When we represent a force in this way, we say that we 
resolve it ; the forces which result from such a resolution we 
call the components of the original force. 

474. Observation. The geometrical components of a force 

o 



194 SECOND BOOK chap. 

along the coordinates can at the same time be considered com- 
ponents in the sense of § 473. 

475. Definition. A force which is exerted by a single 
material point, or on a single material point, is called an 
elementary force. 

476. Observation. As a rule, elementary mechanics 
means by forces only elementary forces. By way of distinc- 
tion, the more general forms of forces hitherto considered by 
us are denoted as Lagrangian forces. Similarly we might 
denote the elementary forces as Galilean or Newtonian forces. 

477. Corollary 1. Every elementary force can be repre- 
sented by the geometrical displacement of a point, and there- 
fore by a straight line given in magnitude and direction. 

For each elementary force is a vector quantity with regard 
to a single point. 

478. Corollary 2. The composition of the elementary 
forces, which act at the same point, is performed according 
to the method of geometrical composition and resolution of 
straight lines. 

In particular, two forces acting at the same point can be 
combined into a single force, which is represented in magni- 
tude and direction by the diagonal of a parallelogram whose 
sides represent these forces in magnitude and direction (Paral- 
lelogram of Forces). 

479. Corollary 3. Every Lagrangian force can be repre- 
sented as a sum of elementary forces, and is therefore capable 
of being resolved into elementary forces. 

For every displacement of a system can be conceived as a 
sum of displacements of its individual points. 

480. Corollary 4. The components of a force along the 
rectangular coordinates of the system on which the force acts, 
or which exerts the force, can be directly conceived as 
elementary forces, which act on the individual material points 
of the system. 

Motion under the Action of Forces 

481. Problem 1. To determine the motion of a material 
system under the action of a given force. 






IV SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY fcORCES 195 

The solution follows directly from § 457. Let the P p 's be 
the given components of the force acting along p^ then one uses 
the r equations 

1 

together with the k equations of condition of the system for 
the determination of the r + k quantities p p and P x , and these 
equations are sufficient to determine them without ambiguity. 

482. Observation 1. The equations of motion of a system 

acted on by forces have in rectangular coordinates the form 

of the 3n equations 

* 

1 

where the XJa are the components of the force along x v > and 
for the rest the notation of § 368 is used. 

483. Observation 2. If the coordinate p ? is a free coor- 
dinate, then the equation of motion corresponding to it takes 
the simple form 

If in a holonomous system all the coordinates p ? are free, 
then all the equations of motion of the system take this form, 
and these r equations are sufficient to determine the r 
quantities p p . 

484. Corollary. The natural motion of a material 
system from a given instant onwards is singly determined by 
position and velocity of the system at that instant and the 
knowledge of the forces acting on the system for all times from 
that instant onwards (cf. §§ 331, 444). 

485. Proposition, The acceleration which a number of 
forces simultaneously acting produce in a system is equal to 
the sum of the accelerations which each force acting alone 
would produce. 

For the equations of motion § 481 are linear in/ p and 
P x . Thus if the value-systems f pl P xl , f n P^, etc., are the solu- 
tions for these equations for the forces P pl , P p2 , etc., then the 



196 * SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 






value -system / p i+/ p2 + . . ., P xl + P x2 ... is the solution 
for the force P pl + P p2 + ... 

486. Observation. The content of the above proposition 
can also be rendered by the statement that any number of 
simultaneously 'acting forces are independent of one another 
with regard to the acceleration which they produce. This 
principle has been known and used since Galileo's time. 

487. Corollary. The acceleration which the resultant of 
any number of forces produces in a system is equal to the 
sum of the accelerations which the components acting alone 
would produce on the system (§§ 472, 473). 

488. Proposition, If a force, as a vector quantity, is 
perpendicular to every possible displacement of a material 
system, then it has no effect on the motion of the system — 
and conversely. 

For if tt is such a force, then its components 7r p along %y ? 
have the form (§ 250) 

*> = 2 x *vy x . 

i 

If now this force be made to act on the system in addition 
to the force P, then the equations of motion can be written 
in the form 



w/p + 2 x ^p( P x-7x)= 1> p- 



In the solution of these equations with regard to p p and 
P x the P x 's alone are increased by 7 X ; the j5 p 's, which alone 
determine the motion, remain unaltered. 

Conversely — if the addition of the components tt p to the 
right-hand side of the equations § 481 does not alter /, but 
only P x , then ir p can be written in the form 

k 

w ? = 2 x *vy x . 

Thus the force tt is perpendicular to every possible displace- 
ment of the system (§ 250). 



IV SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 197 

489. Observation. The proposition states to what condi- 
tion that part of a force, considered as a vector quantity, is 
subjected, which depends upon the choice of coordinates and 
therefore upon our will (§ 463). For this part must neces- 
sarily be such as to have no effect on the actual motion. 

490. Corollary, Although the motion of a system 
can be obtained without ambiguity from a knowledge of the 
forces which act on the system, still the force which acts on 
a system can not be determined without ambiguity from the 
motion of the system. 

491. Problem 2. To determine the force which a material 
system exerts in a given motion. 

In accordance with § 467 we denote by P ' the component 
of the force required along p p ; then by §§ 468 and 481 we get 

k 

p / = m f> - 2 x w 

1 

In these equations the/^s are to be considered as given, and must, 
moreover, satisfy the equations of condition. The quantities 
P x are likewise determined, when that system is given with 
which the one considered is coupled. But when only the 
motion of the p p system is given, the P x 's remain unknown. 
The force which a moving system exerts is thus not completely 
determined by the knowledge of the motion of the system 
alone, but contains an undetermined summation whose com- 
ponents have the form 

k 



-2 



*". - ZfiP. 



l 



i and which is therefore perpendicular to every possible dis- 

placement of the system. 

 

492. Observation. Although all the components of the 
force exerted by a moving system are not singly determined 
by the motion of the system, yet the components in the direc- 

• tion of every possible displacement of the system are singly 

determined by its motion. 

493. Corollary. The components of the force which a 



198 8EC0ND BOOK chap. 

moving system exerts in the direction of every free coordinate 
of the system are singly determined by the motion. 

For if p p is a free coordinate, then the p^'s vanish, and 
with them the undetermined series ; thus the component of the 
force of the system along p p can be written in the forms 

iy=-™/p (§491) a) 

- IrKg) (§291) <0 <U) 

= Y-i* ( § 291) (ii) (iii > 

= -^?_a (§294) (iv). 



a 



% 



Internal Constraint 

494. Proposition. The acceleration of a system of 
material points between which no connections exist, takes place 
in the direction of the force which acts on the system, and its 
magnitude is equal to the magnitude of the force, divided by 
the mass of the system. 

For when no connections exist between the n points of a 
material system, then for every one of the 3/i rectangular 
coordinates of the system (§ 482) 

*V > 

111 771 

but the left-hand side of the equation represents the components 
of the acceleration of the system along x v (§ 275). 

495. Corollary. The acceleration of a single material 
point takes place in the direction of the force acting on it, and 
its magnitude is equal to the magnitude of the force, divided 
by the mass of the point (Newton's Second Law). 

496. Observation. If connections exist between the points 
of a material system on which a force acts, then the acceleration 
of the system differs in general from that given by proposition 



iv SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 199 

§494. We may thus regard the connections of the system 
as the cause of this difference, and by § 385 we have to denote 
this difference as the internal constraint of the system. 

497. Problem. To determine the internal constraint of 
a system which moves under the action of forces. 

The actual component of the acceleration of the system 
along the general coordinate p p is f p ; the component which 
would arise if the equations of condition did not exist is 
(§ 494) Pp/ra ; the difference of the two quantities, or 

w.-5 » ' 

is thus the component of the constraint along p ? . 

The knowledge of the components themselves along p p is in 
general insufficient for the determination of the magnitude of 
the constraint. If, however, we use rectangular coordinates, 
we obtain for the component along x v 

z v = -K& - X„) (ii), 

m 

and consequently for the magnitude z of the constraint the 
positive root of the equation (§ 244) 



-2 



rTOJ *„ - -J 
1 \ ™>v. 



498. Proposition 1, The magnitude of the constraint of 
a material system under the action of forces is at every instant, 
as in a free system, smaller for the natural motion than for any 
other possible motion which coincides with it, at the moment 
considered, in position and velocity. 

For the necessary and sufficient condition that, with given 
values of X v> the quantity \m& should be a minimum, is that 
the 3ft equations, obtained as in § 155, viz., 

* 

» 



200 SECOND BOOK chap. 

should be satisfied; where X ( denote the i undetermined 
multipliers which with the 3m, quantities x v are to be singly 
determined from these 2>n equations and the i equations of 
condition of the system. But the foregoing equations give the 
same values for x v and X„ as the corresponding equations for 
the natural motion (§ 482). 

499. Observation. The foregoing proposition contains a 
complete statement of Gauss's Principle of Least Constraint. 
We might regard proposition 388 as a particular case of it. 
But according to our general conception we prefer to regard 
that proposition as the general one, and to consider the foregoing 
as the application of it to particular and more complex relations. 

500. Proposition 2. In the natural motion of a system 
under the action of a force the direction of the constraint, 
as in the natural motion of a free system, is always perpen- 
dicular to every possible or virtual displacement of the system 
from its instantaneous position. 

For by §§ 497 (i) and 481 the components of the con- 
straint along p p may be written in the form 

1 * 

The constraint as a vector quantity is thus (§ 250) perpen- 
dicular to every possible displacement of the system. 

501. Symbolical Expression. If we denote by Sp p the 
changes of the coordinates p p for any possible displacement of 
the system, then we can express the foregoing proposition by 
the following symbolical equation (cf. § 393) — 




2>(/, - ^ W = ° <*>. 



which in rectangular coordinates takes the form 

3n 

2<m ;i v - X v )Bx v = (ii). 

i 

502. Observation. Proposition § 500 contains the complete 
Principle of d'Alembert, and the equations § 501 (i) and (ii) the 
usual expression for it. With regard to the relation between 



IV SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 201 

proposition § 500 and proposition § 392 the same remark is 
to be made as in § 499. 

503. Corollary 1. The component of the acceleration of 
a material system in the direction of any possible motion is 
equal to the component of the force acting in this direction, 
divided by the mass of the system. 

For the component of the constraint vanishes in the direc- 
tion of every possible motion. 

504. Corollary 2. The component of the acceleration of 
a material system in the direction of its actual motion is equal 
to the component of the force acting in that direction, divided 
by the mass of the system. 

505. Corollary 3. The component of the acceleration of 
a material system along any free coordinate of the system is 
equal to the component of the force acting in that direction, 
divided by the mass of the system. 

506. Proposition. In the natural motion of a material 
system under the action of forces the component of the accel- 
eration along every coordinate of absolute position is always 
equal to the component of the force acting in that direction, 
divided by the mass of the system ; and this holds good what- 
ever the internal connection of the system is. 

507. Corollary 1. If we choose the coordinates of a 
system in any manner so that there are six coordinates of 
absolute position amongst them, then we can with a knowledge 
of the forces acting on the system, — yet without a knowledge 
of the internal connection of the system, — always obtain six 
of the equations of motion of the system. 

508. Corollary 2. In particular, if we arrange the coor- 
dinates of absolute position as in § 402, and apply the proposi- 
tion to the direction of the three coordinates a lf a.,, a 3 , then 
we get the three equations 



n 



1 1 
n n 



202 SECOND BOOK chap. 



* n 



1 1 

These three equations, which admit of the interpretation 
that the centre of gravity moves as if the whole mass were 
condensed at the centre of gravity and all the elementary forces 
applied there, form the so-called extended Principle of the 
Centre of Gravity (cf. § 404). 

509. Corollary 3. Applied to the direction of the three 
coordinates of absolute position <o l9 g> 2 , g> 3 , the proposition gives 
the three equations 



n 



Si V m v\ X sy - &&v - 1 "" X 3* - \\v - 2 ) "~ ^| V V*> - 2^W - 1 ~" X 3v - 1 3* - 2' 



1 1 

n n 



/\ v m v\ x zv a > - 2 "" x w - &v> ) — ^f \ x av X 3V _ 2 — x $y _ 2 X 3 „ ) 
1 1 

nS j n 

S * Vl y\ X 3v - 1 X W "" X %v ^V - 1) = ^1 ( X X V ~ l * v """ X * v 3 V " V' 

1 1 

These three equations form the so-called extended Principle 
of Areas (cf. § 406). 

Energy, Work 

510. Definition. The increase in the energy of a system, 
conceived as a consequence of force exerted on the system, is 
called the work of that force. 

The work which a force performs in a given time is 
measured by the increase of the energy of the system on 
which it acts, in that time. 

Any decrease in the energy owing to the action of force 
we consider a negative increase. The work of a force may 
thus be positive or negative. 

511. Corollary. When a force acting on a system does 
a certain amount of work, the counterforce exerted by the 
system always does an equal and opposite amount of work. 

For the latter work is equal to the increase of the energy 
of that system, with which the one under consideration is 
coupled ; the sum of the energies of the two systems is, how- 
ever, constant. 



JV SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 203 

512. Proposition. The work which a force does on a 
system whilst it traverses an element of its path is equal to 
the product of the length of the element and the component of 
the force in its direction. 

For the increase dE of the energy in the time-element dt y 
in which the element ds is traversed, is (§ 283) 

dE = mvidt — m v ds. 

By § 280 v is the component of the acceleration of the system 
in the direction of its path; thus by § 504 mb is the com- 
ponent of the force in that direction. 

513. Observation 1. The work is also equal to the pro- 
duct of the magnitude of the force and the component of the 
element of the path in its direction. 

514. Observation 2. If during the motion along the 
path-element ds the coordinates p p suffer the changes dp pi then 
the work done by the force is represented by the equation 

dE = 2<- p ,&v 

1 

For the component of the force in the direction of the path- 
element is by § 247 equal to 

►VI> I .B. 



2-1 



f>ds 



515. Corollary 1. The force acting on a system does 
positive or negative work, according as the angle which it 
makes with the velocity of the system is smaller or greater 
than a right angle. If the force is perpendicular to the direc- 
tion of motion, it does no work. 

516. Corollary 2. A force which acts on a system at 
rest, does no work. 

Equilibrium, Statics 

517. Definition. We say that two or more forces which 
act on the same system are in equilibrium when any one of them 
counteracts the effect of the others, i.e. when the system moves 



204 SECOND BOOK chap. 

under the action of both, or of all of them, as though none of 
them existed. 

518. Proposition. Two or more forces are in equilibrium 
when their sum is perpendicular to every possible (virtual) 
displacement of the system from its instantaneous position, 
and conversely. 

The proposition follows immediately from §§ 471 and 
488. 

519. Symbolical Expression. If we denote by P/, P p ", 
etc., the components of the respective forces along p pi and by 
Sp p the changes of p p for any possible displacement of the 
system, then the foregoing proposition can be expressed in the 
form of the symbolical equations 

2'(iv+ p ,"+---)H=°- 

i 
Cf. §§ 393, 501. 

520. Observation. The foregoing proposition contains 
the Principle of Virtual Velocities (displacements, momenta), 
and the equation § 5 1 9 the usual analytical form of it. 

521. Corollary 1. If several forces acting on a system 
are in equilibrium, then the sum of the work done by the 
forces in any possible (virtual) displacement of the system 
from its instantaneous position is zero, and conversely (Principle 
of Virtual Work). 

For if we write the equation § 519 in the form 

i i 

then the proof follows by § 514. 

522. Corollary 2. If two or more forces preserve equi- 
librium in a system, then the sum of their components in the 
direction of any possible motion of the system is zero. 

523. Corollary 3. If two or more forces preserve equi- 
librium in a system, then the sum of their components along 
every free coordinate of the system vanishes. 

524. Proposition. If two or more forces preserve equi- 
librium in a system, then the sum of their components along 



iv SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 205 

any coordinate of absolute position is zero, no matter what 
may be the internal connection of the system. 

• 525. Observation. Thus without a knowledge of the in- 
ternal connection of a system, we can nevertheless always write 
down six necessary equations of condition for equilibrium. If 
we choose as coordinates of absolute position the six quantities 
ai«2 a s» ft>ift>2 w 8> which were introduced in § 402, then the fore- 
going proposition furnishes those six equations which corre- 
spond to the principles of the centre of gravity and of areas, 
and which Lagrange investigates in chapter iii. §§ 1 and 2 of 
the first part of the Micanique Analytique. 

526. Note 1. If two or more forces are in equilibrium 
when the system is in a given position and has a given velocity, 
then these forces are also in equilibrium in the same position, 
no matter what the velocity be. 

For the condition of equilibrium does not contain the 
actual velocity of the system. 

527. Note 2. If two or more forces are in equilibrium 
when the system is at rest, then the system continues in its 
state of rest. And conversely — if, notwithstanding the action 
of two or more forces, a system is at rest, then the forces on 
the system are in equilibrium. 

528. Corollary 1. Two forces which, acting simultane- 
ously on a system at rest, do not disturb the equilibrium of 
the system, have equal and opposite components in the direc- 
tion of every possible motion of the system. 

529. Corollary 2. Two forces which act successively on 
the same system at rest at the same time as other forces, and 
leave the system at rest, have the same components in the 
direction of every possible motion of the system. 

530. Observation. From the last two corollaries the 
statical comparison of forces is deduced. 

Machines and Internal Forces 

531. Definition. A system whose masses are considered 
vanishingly small in comparison with the masses of the 
systems with which it is coupled, is called a machine. 

A machine is thus completely represented, as to its effect on 



206 SECOND BOOK chap. 

the motion of the other systems, by its equations of condition ; 
the knowledge of the expression for the energy of the machine 
in terms of its coordinates is not necessary. 

A machine is called simple when it has only one degree of 
freedom. 

532. Proposition. So long as a machine moves with 
finite velocity the forces acting on the machine are continually 
in equilibrium. 

For if these forces gave a component in the direction of 
any possible motion of the machine, then the component of 
the acceleration in this direction would be infinitely great on 
account of the vanishing mass (§ 504). 

533. Corollary. There exists a series of homogeneous 
linear equations between the components of the forces acting 
on a machine along its coordinates, and their number is equal 
to the number of degrees of freedom of the machine. A simple 
machine is represented by a single homogeneous linear equation 
between the forces acting on its coordinates. 

534. Note 1. If a machine is coupled as to all its 
coordinates with two or more material systems, then the 
mechanical connection produced between the latter can be analy- 
tically represented by a series of homogeneous linear differential 
equations between the coordinates of the connected systems. 
For in the equations of condition of the machine we can replace 
its coordinates by the equal coordinates of the connected systems. 

Conversely, therefore, we can physically interpret any given 
analytical series of homogeneous linear differential equations 
between the coordinates of two or more systems as a mechanical 
connection of the kind which we denote as a coupling of these 
systems by means of the machine. 

535. Corollary. If two or more systems are coupled by 
a machine, then the work done by each of the systems is equal 
and opposite to the work done by the other systems. Conse- 
quently no work is gained by coupling systems by a machine. 

For the forces due to the systems preserve equilibrium in the 
machine, and thus the sum of the work done by them is zero. 

536. Note 2. Any material system can in various 
ways be regarded as made up of two or more systems which 



IV SYSTEMS ACTED ON BY FORCES 207 

are coupled by machines. For if we divide up the masses of 
the system into several parts, and if p ? f are the coordinates of 
the first part, p p " of the second, etc., then we may consider 
those equations of condition of the complete system which only 
contain pj, as equations of condition of the first partial 
system, those equations which only contain p p " as equations of 
condition of the second partial system, and so on ; whilst those 
equations of condition of the complete system which contain 
Pp> P? • • '» mav be regarded as the equations of the machine 
coupling the partial systems. 

The forces which in this permissible though arbitrary concep- 
tion are exerted on the partial systems by the machine coup- 
ling them will be denoted as internal forces of the system. 

537. Corollary 1. Every such series of internal forces 
may replace a portion of the connection of the system. For if 
we set aside those equations of condition of the whole system 
which represent the machines between the partial systems, but 
retain the forces exerted by the machines, then the system 
moves as before. 

538. Corollary 2. The whole connection of a system 
can be set aside and replaced by a series of elementary forces 
which act on the individual material parts of the system. 

For we may regard the individual points as partial 
systems, and the whole system as the aggregate of the partial 
systems coupled by machines. 

539. Corollary 3. The internal forces which entirely or 
partially replace the connection of a system are always in 
equilibrium when acting on the original system. 

For by § 532 they preserve equilibrium in the machines 
which form parts of the original system. 

540. Observation. This last consideration is the one by 
which, in the usual development of mechanics, the transition is 
made from the laws of equilibrium (the Principle of Virtual 
Velocities) to the laws of motion (d'Alembert's Principle). 

Measurement of Forces 

541. Our considerations give three independent methods 
of measuring directly those components of the forces which 



208 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. IV 



affect phenomena. By the application of any one of these 
three methods the forces can be made objects of direct 
experience, i.e. symbols for determinate connections of sensible 
perceptions. 

542. The first method determines the force from the masses 
and motions of the system by which it is exerted. Physically 
this method is known as the measurement of force according to 
its origin. It is, for instance, applied on the assumption that 
equally stretched springs, equal quantities of explosive powder, 
etc., ceteris paribus, exert equal forces. 

543. The second method determines the force by means 
of the masses and motions of the system on which it acts. In 
physics this method is known as the dynamical measurement 
of force. It was, for instance, applied by Newton when he 
deduced the force acting on the planets from their motion. 

544. The third method determines the force by reducing 
it to equilibrium with known forces. This method is known 
as the statical method. For example, all measures of forces by 
the balance depend upon this. 

545. When these three methods are used for the deter- 
mination of one and the same force, paying attention to the 
relations deduced by us, they must lead in all cases to the 
same result, provided the fundamental law, on which our con- 
siderations are based, actually comprises correctly all possible 
mechanical experience. 



CHAPTER V 

SYSTEMS WITH CONCEALED MASSES 

L Cyclical Motion 

546. Definition 1. A free coordinate of a system is said 
to be cyclical when the length of an infinitesimal displacement 
of the system does not depend on the value of the coordinate, 
but only on its change. 

547. Observation 1. Cyclical coordinates exist; for 
instance, a rectangular coordinate of the system, when free, 
satisfies the definition. Cyclical coordinates can always be 
introduced, when infinitesimal displacements of the system 
are possible which do not involve a change in the mass-dis- 
tribution in space, but only a cyclical interchange of the masses ; 
hence the name. Cyclical coordinates may, however, appear 
under other circumstances, as the example of rectangular 
coordinates shows. 

548. Observation 2. The energy of a system does not 
depend on the value of its cyclical coordinates, but only on 
their time-rates of change. 



549. Definition 2. A cyclical system is a material system 
whose energy approximates sufficiently near to a homogene- 
ous quadratic function of the rates of change of its cyclical 
coordinates. 

A cyclical system is monocyclic, dicyclic, eta, according as 
it possesses one, two, etc., cyclical coordinates. 

In a cyclical system the non-cyclical coordinates are 
also known as the parameters of the system; the rates of 

P 



210 SECOND BOOK chap. 

change of the cyclical coordinates are also called the cyclical 
intensities. 

550. Observation 1. The condition that must be 
approximately satisfied for cyclical systems cannot be rigor- 
ously satisfied except in the case when the system possesses 
only cyclical coordinates. 

For if a quantity is a coordinate of a system, then its 
change must involve a displacement of at least one material 
point of the system ; the energy of this point is consequently 
a quadratic function of the rate of change of that coordinate, 
and the same holds for the energy of the system. Strictly 
speaking, then, the energy of any system contains necessarily 
the rates of change of all quantities which are coordinates of 
the system, and consequently the energy of a cyclical system 
contains the rates of change of its parameters. 

551. Observation 2. But this condition for the appear- 
ance of a cyclical system can be satisfied to any degree of approxi- 
mation so long as the system possesses cyclical coordinates. 

It is, for instance, satisfied in the case when the parts of 
the energy which contain the rates of change of the parameters 
vanish in comparison with the parts which depend on the 
cyclical intensities. This is always possible by taking the 
rates of change of the parameters sufficiently small, or the cyclical 
intensities sufficiently great. As to how small the former 
must be taken or how great the latter, in order that a given 
degree of approximation may be attained, depends on the 
particular values of the coefficients in the expression for the 
energy. 

In what follows it will always be assumed that the 
condition for a cyclical system is satisfied to such a degree of 
approximation that we may regard it as absolutely satisfied. 

552. Notation. We shall denote the cyclical coordinates 
of the system by jj p , their number by r, and the momenta along 
Vp ky flp« The r non-cyclical coordinates may be denoted by 
2> p , and their momenta along p p by q p . Let the mass of the 
cyclical system be m. 

Let the external forces which act on the system have P, 
as their components along p p) and JJ p as their components along 



V CYCLICAL MOTION 211 

jj p . The forces which the system itself exerts then have com- 
ponents along p p> likewise along jy p , which by § 467 are to be 
denoted by P' p and JJ' p respectively. 

553. Corollary 1. The energy (85 of a cyclical system 
can be written in the form 

r t 

1 1 
I r r 

*** 1 1 

where a p<r and 6^ are functions of p p alone, but not (§ 548) 
of p p , while in other respects they have the same properties 
and connection as a^ and b^ (§ 59 et seq.). 

If we consider (&, a function of p p and JJ^ as the first form 
represents it, then its partial differential may be denoted by 
9„(85 ; but if we regard it as a function of p p and q p , as the 
second form represents it, its partial differential may be denoted 
by \<& {of. § 288). 

554. Corollary 2. For all values of p the following 
equations hold — 

^ = ? P = (§289)(i) 

3 af=^=0 (§290)(ii) 



h 



? 



d eg 

-^=0 (iii) 

|f = (iv). 

These equations contain the peculiar characteristics of cycli- 
cal systems, and from them are deduced their special properties. 

The equation (ii) repeats the observation (§ 550) that a 
contradiction exists between the assumption that the form of 
the energy is strictly the one assumed, and that nevertheless 
the p p '& are quantities which change with the time. We have 
then, conformably with § 551, to take the equation to mean 
that when (85 has very approximately the chosen form, the p p s 
must be considered as quantities which change very slowly. 



212 SECOND BOOK chap. 

Forces and Force-Functions 

555. Problem 1. To determine the force P/ which the 
cyclical system exerts along its parameter p . 

By equations § 493 (iii) and (iv) and §554 (i) we obtain 

F=M?=-<y? (i), 

or, in a more extended form, 

\\VPp 

556. Corollary. The forces of a cyclical system along its 
parameters are independent of the rates of change of these 
parameters. 

It is always assumed that these rates of change do not 
exceed the values which permit us to treat the system as a 
cyclical one. Thus in Electromagnetics the attractions between 
magnets are independent of the velocity of their motion, but 
only so long as this velocity is considerably less than the 
velocity of light 

557. Problem 2. To determine the force JJ/ which the 
cyclical system exerts along its cyclical coordinate p p . 

By equations § 493 (iii) and § 554 (iii) we obtain 

W= -4. a> 

When developed by § 270 we have 

r 

qp = m2<ra^ (ii) 



i 

X T 



? a* 



W - - »2» a^ - «2»2 f S ! * A < m > 

1 11 °Pr 

558. Corollary. If an external force acts on a cyclical 
system, and if its components along p p are ^fjp, then the changes 
of the cyclical momenta are given by the equation. 

4-* 



T CYCLICAL MOTION 213 

559. Proposition. When no forces act on the cyclical 
coordinates of a cyclical system, then all the cyclical momenta 
of the system are constant with regard to time. 

For if the 3| p 's are zero, then the foregoing equations give 
on integration 

qt, = constant. 

560. Definition. A motion of a cyclical system in which 
its cyclical momenta remain constant is called an adiabatic 
motion ; and when its cyclical intensities remain constant it is 
called an isocyclic motion. 

The cyclical system itself is called adiabatic or isocyclic 
when it is constrained to perform only adiabatic or isocyclic 
motions. 

561. Observation 1. The analytical condition for adia- 
batic motion is that for all values of p 

(J, = 0, (J, = constant. 

The analytical condition for isocyclic motion is that for all 
values of p 

562. Observation 2. The motion of a cyclical system is 
adiabatic so long as no forces act along the cyclical coordinates ; 
it is isocyclic when it is coupled as to its cyclical coordinates 
with other systems which possess constant rates of change for 
the coupled coordinates. Thus, in order that a motion may be 
isocyclic, appropriate forces must act on the cyclical coordinates. 

563. Definition. If the forces of a cyclical system along 
its parameters can be expressed as the partial differential 
coefficients with regard to the parameters of a function of these 
parameters and some constant quantities, then this function is 
called the force-function of the cyclical system. 

564. Proposition. There exists a force-function both for 
adiabatic and for isocyclic motion. 

From § 555 (iii) for adiabatic motion we get 



*/- -5;2'2-»^ «>• 



214 SECOND BOOK chap. 

where the quantities HJ^/m are constants and the quantities 
6^ functions of the parameters solely. 

Similarly we get for isocyclic motion from § 555 (ii) 

p /-5^'«-?&* (ii) ' 

where the quantities Tdp a p T are constants and the quantities 
H^,. functions of the parameters solely. 

565. Observation. We also distinguish the force-func- 
tions for adiabatic or isocyclic motions as adiabatic or isocyclic 
force-functions. There are other forms of motion of the system 
for which force-functions exist, but such a function does not 
exist for every given motion. 

566. Additional Note 1. The force - function of an 
adiabatic system is equal to the decrease of the energy of the 
system, measured from some arbitrarily chosen initial condition. 
It is therefore equal to an arbitrary — i.e. not determined by 
definition — constant, diminished by the energy of the system. 

567. Additional Note 2. The force - function of an 
isocyclic system is equal to the increase of the energy of the 
system measured from some arbitrarily chosen initial condition. 
It is therefore equal to the energy of the system diminished 
by an arbitrary constant. 

Reciprocal Characteristics 

568. Proposition la. If in an adiabatic system an 
increase of the parameter p^ increases the component of the 
force along another parameter p kf then conversely an increase 
of p K increases the force along p^. Moreover, in an in- 
finitesimally small increase, the quantitative relation between 
cause and effect is the same in both cases. 

For in an adiabatic system we may regard the quantities 
p p as sufficiently independent elements for determining P ' ; 
hence the equation § 564 (i), which holds for adiabatic systems, 
gives us 

ap/ = t^/ 

d PfjL dp K ' 
which proves the proposition. 



v CYCLICAL MOTION 215 

569. Proposition lb. If in an isocyclic system an 
increase of the parameter p^ increases the component of the 
force along another parameter p Kt then conversely an increase 
of p k increases the force along p^ Moreover, in an infinitesimal 
increase, the quantitative relation between cause and effect is 
the same in both cases. 

For in an isocyclic system we may regard the quantities 
p p as sufficiently independent elements for determining P ' : 
hence the equation § 564 (ii), which holds for isocyclic systems, 
gives us 

which proves the proposition. 

It is to be noted that this equation differs from the previous 
one in meaning although it is identical in form. 

570. Observation. In order that the two foregoing pro- 
positions may admit of a physical application, it is sufficient 
that two parameters of the cyclical system and the forces 
along them should be accessible to direct observation. 

571. Proposition 2a. If in a cyclical system an increase 
of the cyclical momentum q^, with fixed values of the parameters, 
involves an increase of the force along the parameter p Kf then 
the adiabatic increase of the parameter p k causes a decrease of 
the cyclical intensity p M , and conversely. Moreover, in an 
infinitesimal change the quantitative relation between cause 
and effect is the same in both cases. 

For we have 

P/= "If (555 (i». iV = f^<§290); 
thus 

and the proposition furnishes the correct interpretation of this 
equation. 

572. Corollary. If in a monocyclic system an increase 
of the cyclical intensity p, with fixed values of the parameters, 
involves an increase of the force along the parameter p k , then 



216 SECOND BOOK CHAP. 

the adiabatic increase of the parameter p K causes a decrease of 
the cyclical intensity p, and conversely. 

For in a monocyclic system increase of the cyclical in- 
tensity always goes hand in hand with increase of the cyclical 
momentum, the parameters remaining fixed. In fact, for a 
monocyclic system 

q=majr, 

where a is a necessarily positive (§62) function of the para- 
meters of the system. 

573. Proposition 2b. If in a cyclical system an increase 
of the cyclical intensity p tt , the parameters remaining fixed, 
involves an increase of the force along the parameter p K9 then 
the isocyclic increase of the parameter p k involves an increase 
of the cyclical momentum q^, and conversely. Moreover, in an 
infinitesimal change the quantitative relation between cause and 
effect is the same in both cases. 

For we have 



thus 



P A ' = |f (555(i)), q, = |^(289); 



8P*' _ % a) 

and the proposition expresses this equation in words. 

574. Corollary. If in a monocyclic system an increase 
of the cyclical momentum q involves an increase of the force 
along the parameter p Xt the parameters remaining fixed, then 
the isocyclic increase of the parameter p k involves an increase 
of the cyclical momentum q, and conversely. 

The reason is the same as in § 572. 

575. Observation. The foregoing propositions 2a and 
2b admit of a physical application when it is possible to 
determine a cyclical intensity and also the corresponding 
cyclical momentum directly, i.e. to determine it without a know- 
ledge of the coefficients a^ This may happen. For instance, 
in Electrostatics the differences of potential of conductors 
correspond to cyclical intensities, the charges of the conductors 
to the cyclical momenta, and both quantities can be directly 
determined independently of one another. 



v CYCLICAL MOTION 217 

The corollaries require only the direct determination either 
of the cyclical intensity or cyclical momentum. 

576. Proposition 3a. If in a cyclical system a force 
exerted on the cyclical coordinate p M involves an increase 
with the time of the force along the parameter p K , then an 
adiabatic increase of the parameter p k causes a decrease of 
the cyclical intensity p^ and conversely. Moreover, in an 
infinitesimal change the quantitative relation between cause 
and effect is the same in both casea 

For if we regard on the left-hand side of equation § 571 
(i) the changes 3P/ and 3q^ as happening in the time dt, and 
divide the differential coefficients in the numerator and denomi- 
nator by this time dt and make use of equation § 558, where 
the change 3q^ is considered as the effect of the force ^, then 

and the proposition expresses fully this equation in words. 

577. Proposition 3b. 1 If in a cyclical system an increase 
of the cyclical intensity p^, the parameters remaining fixed, 
involves an increase of the force along the parameter p» then 
an isocyclic increase of the parameter p k involves a decrease 
of the force of the system along the cyclical coordinate p M , and 
conversely. Moreover, in an infinitesimal change, the quantita- 
tive relation between cause and effect is the same in both cases. 

For if we regard in the right-hand side of the equation 
§ 573 (i) the changes 9q^ and dp k as occurring in the time dt, 
we can put 

fy^^.fl-84.*-- *i/* (557 (i)) 

thus that equation becomes 

and the proposition expresses this in words. 

1 Printed as in the original MSS.— Ed. 



218 SECOND BOOK chap. 

578. Note. The propositions 3a and 3b admit of a 
physical application when a cyclical intensity and also the 
corresponding cyclical force-component are accessible to direct 
observation. This happens, for instance, in Electromagnetics, 
and one can best illustrate the meanings of these theorems 
by translating them into the technical language of this branch 
of physics. 

Energy and Work 

579. Proposition 1. In the isocyclic motion of a cyclical 
system the work done on it through the coupling of its 
cyclical coordinates is always twice the work it does through 
the coupling of its parameters. 

In the isocyclic motion Jj p is equal to zero for all values 
of p, and thus by § 514 and § 557 (iii) the work which the 
external forces acting on the cyclical coordinates perform in 
the unit of time is equal to 

i iii ^ r 

But the work which the system performs through the forces 
along the parameters, calculated for unit time, is found equal to 

1 l l 1 *P 

by the use of § 555 (ii). 

The summations in both equations are identical except for 
the notation, and the value of the series in the first equation is 
therefore double that of the second. 

580. Corollary. When an isocyclic system does work 
through the forces along its parameters, then the energy of 
the system increases at the same time, and by the same 
amount as the work done. When an isocyclic system has 
work done on it through the forces along its parameters, then 
the energy of the system decreases at the same time, and by 
the amount of the work done on it 

For the increase of the energy of the system is equal to 
the difference between the work done on it through its cyclic 
coordinates and the work it does through its parameters. 



i 



v CYCLICAL MOTION 219 

581. Observation. When an adiabatic system does work 
through the forces along its parameters, then the energy of 
the system decreases at the same time, and by the same amount 
as the work done. When an adiabatic system has work done 
on it by the forces along its parameters, then the energy of 
the system increases at the same time, and by the amount of 
work done. 

For the work done on an adiabatic system through the 
cyclical coordinates is zero (§ 562). 

582. Proposition 2. In an adiabatic displacement of a 
cyclical system the cyclical intensities always suffer changes 
in such a sense that the forces along the . parameters caused 
by these changes do negative work. 

Let the quantities p p suffer the changes 8p p and the in- 
tensities p p the changes 8j| p from the displacement. If only 
the latter took place, then the forces P p ' would change by the 
amount (§555 (ii)) 

1 1 rp 
and these SP/'s are what the proposition denotes as the forces 
caused by Bp r The work done by them is given by 

1 111 "p 



P 



i i 

and the proof requires that this work should be necessarily 
negative. But for the adiabatic motion 

r 

% = VX^fUpJl, = const, 
i 
thus 

i i 

If we form these equations for all values of t, multiply them 
in succession by the corresponding VXSp T and add them, we 
obtain on the left-hand side the foregoing expression for the 
work done, and on the right-hand side a necessarily positive 
quantity (§ 62), which completes the proof. 



220 SECOND BOOK chap. 

583. Corollary. In an adiabatic displacement of a 
cyclical system the cyclical intensities always suffer changes 
in such a sense that the forces caused by these changes tend to 
stop the motion which produces them. 

This is in fact only another form of the foregoing proposi- 
tion. It corresponds to Lenz's Law in Electromagnetics. 

584. Note. In any infinitesimally small motion of a 
monocyclic system, the work received through the cyclical co- 
ordinates of the system bears the same ratio to the energy of 
the system as twice the increase of the cyclical momentum of 
the system does to this momentum. 

For the work d(@. done through the cyclical coordinate jl 
in the time dt is given by 

d© = $ip = qdb = i$dt = jrrfq, 

while the energy (& may be written 

e = iqjr, 

thus 

d®, dq 

which proves the proposition. 

585. Corollary 1. In any motion of a monocyclic system 
the expression 

is the complete differential of a function of the parameters and 
cyclical intensity of the system. This function is 

2 log!, 

where q denotes the cyclical momentum for an arbitrarily 
chosen initial position. This function is also called the entropy 
of the monocyclic system. 



.586. Corollary 2. The value of the integral 



I'- 



V CYCLICAL MOTION 221 

for any finite motion of a monocyclic system depends only on 
the condition of the system in its initial and final positions, 
and not on the condition at any intermediate position. The 
value of this integral is zero for every motion which carries 
the system back to its initial position. 

For the value of this integral is equal to the difference 
between the entropy in the initial and final positions. 

587. Corollary 3. In the adiabatic motion of a mono- 
cyclic system the entropy is constant. . For in the adiabatic 
motion ^jj, and consequently d®, is equal to zero. Hence the 
adiabatic motion of a monocyclic system is called isentropic 



Time-Integral of the Energy 

588. Note 1. If in the adiabatic motion of a cyclical 
system the cyclical coordinates p p change in a given finite 
time by p p , then the time-integral of the energy of the system 
for that time is equal to 

i 

for the energy of the system can be written in the form 
(286 (ii)) 

t 

i 

and for the adiabatic motion the q^s are constant. 

589. Note 2. The variation of the time-integral of the 
energy of an adiabatic system when the motion of the system 
is varied depends — firstly, on the variation of the parameters 
during the whole time for which the integral is taken, and 
secondly, on the variations which the constant cyclical momenta 
of the system suffer. 

590. Notation. We shall in what follows use the follow- 
ing notation : — 8 will denote a variation by which the cyclical 
momenta suffer arbitrary variations, 

S q a variation by which the cyclical momenta suffer no 
variations, 



222 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



and, finally, S v a variation by which the cyclical momenta 
suffer such variations that the initial and final values of the 
cyclical coordinates remain unaltered. 

591. Corollary. From the notation we immediately get 
for all values of p 

and consequently by § 588 for any variations of the para- 
meters 






592. Observation. In an adiabatic system it is always 
possible, and in general possible in only one way, to giye the 
cyclical momenta such variations with any variation of the 
parameters that the initial and final values of the cyclical 
coordinates remain unaltered. 

For from the general relation 






m x 



it follows that in an adiabatic system, when the jj p 's change 
from the values jl^ to the values |j pl , 



^pi-Ppo = ^2;^J 6 ^ ; 



o 
thus in any variation of the parameters and cyclical momenta 

i i 

1 

These equations form r unhomogeneous linear equations for the 
X quantities Sq^, and thus admit of one, and in general only one, 
solution — in particular in the case when the variations on the 
left-hand side vanish. 

Variations of the kind denoted by S 9 are thus always 
possible with any variation of the parameters. 



v CONCEALED MOTION 223 

593. Proposition. In equal, and arbitrary variations of 
the parameters in a given time the variations of the time- 
integral of the energy in an adiabatic system are equal and 
opposite when in the first instance the cyclical momenta 
of the system are not varied, and in the second are varied in 
such a manner that the initial and final values of the cyclical 
coordinates remain unaltered. 

For in any variation 



= *J«W + ^p^; 



thus, in particular for a variation in which the initial and final 
values of JJ P remain unaltered, 

If twice the equation § 591 (ii) is subtracted from this, then 



sjgw*= -8J©<ft, 



which proves the proposition. 

With these we may compare the allied propositions § 96 
and § 293. 

IL Concealed Cyclical Motion 

Explanations and Definitions 

594. 1. We say that a system contains concealed masses 
when the position of all the masses of the system is not deter- 
mined by means of those coordinates of the system which are 
accessible to observation, but only the position of a portion of 
them. 

595. 2. Those masses whose position still remains un- 
known when the coordinates accessible to observation have 
been completely specified are called concealed masses, their 



224 SECOND BOOK chap. 

motions concealed motions, and their coordinates concealed 
coordinates. In contradistinction to these the remaining 
masses are called visible masses, their motions visible motions, 
and their coordinates visible coordinates. 

596. 3. The problem which a system with concealed 
masses offers for the consideration of mechanics is the follow- 
ing : — To predetermine the motions of the visible masses of the 
system, or the changes of its visible coordinates, notwith- 
standing our ignorance of the position of the concealed masses. 

597. 4. A system which contains concealed masses 
differs from a system without concealed masses only as regards 
onr knowledge of the system. All the propositions hitherto 
made are therefore applicable to systems with concealed motions, 
if we understand by masses, coordinates, etc., all its masses, 
coordinates, etc. Thus alterations are only necessary when 
we restrict our propositions to the visible quantities. The 
problem can therefore be reduced to specifying what altera- 
tions our previous propositions must undergo, when by masses, 
coordinates, etc., we mean visible masses, coordinates, eta, 
only. 

598. 5. It is evident that whether the problem is stated 
in the one form or the other, a solution cannot be obtained 
without some data as to the effect which the concealed masses 
produce on the motion of the visible masses. Such data are 
possible. A guided system, or a system under the action of 
forces, may be conceived as a system with concealed masses, 
if we consider either the unknown masses of the guiding 
system, or of the system producing the forces, as concealed. 
In general, however, in these cases it is possible also to ascer- 
tain physically the masses of the guiding system or of the 
■system which exerts the forces, and it then rests with 
us to decide whether we regard them as concealed or not. 
But at present we are mainly interested in cases where a know- 
ledge of the concealed masses cannot be obtained by physical 
observation. 

599. 6. Continually recurrent motions, and therefore 
cyclical motions, are frequently concealed motions ; for these, 
when existing alone, cause no change in the mass-distribution, 
nor therefore in the appearance of things. Thus to all appear- 



v CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 225 

ance the motion of a homogeneous fluid in a closed vessel 
is concealed ; it is only rendered visible when its strictly 
cyclical character is destroyed by the introduction of dust or 
other such substances. 

Conversely, concealed motions are almost always cyclical. 
For motions which do not recur continually must sooner or 
later produce a change in the mass-distribution, and therefore 
in the aspect of things, and thus become visible. 

600. 7. Even cyclical motions cannot long retain their 
property of being concealed if we obtain means to affect the 
individual cyclical coordinates, and produce changes in the 
cyclical intensities. The manifold of our influence on the 
system is in this case. as great as the actual manifold of the 
system, and we can argue from one to the other. The case is 
different, however, if any direct and arbitrary influence on the 
cyclical coordinates is permanently excluded. This may happen 
in adiabatic cyclical systems (§ 560), and in these we shall 
rather have to seek the motions which are concealed from our 
observation. 

We therefore restrict our consideration of concealed 
motion in the first place to such cases. Our treatment, how- 
ever, has the effect that even in these cases we treat the 
concealed motions as though they were visible, and only 
investigate subsequently which of our propositions are still 
applicable notwithstanding that they are now supposed to be 
concealed. 

Conservative Systems 

601. Definition 1. A material system which contains no 
other concealed masses than those which form adiabatic cyclical 
systems is called a conservative system. 

The name is derived from a property of these systems 
which will appear later ; at present it is sufficiently justified by 
its connection with the already established usage of mechanics. 

602. Observation. Every conservative system may be 
regarded as consisting of two partial systems, of which one 
contains all the visible masses, the other all the concealed 
masses of the complete system. The coordinates of the 

Q 



226 SECOND BOOK chap. 

visible partial system, i.e. the visible coordinates of the com- 
plete system, are at the same time parameters of the concealed 
partial system. 

We shall denote the mass of the visible partial system by 
m, its coordinates by p ?t and its momenta along p p by q p . The 
mass of the concealed partial system will be denoted by m, 
its coordinates by JJ p , and its momenta along these coordinates 

byq, 

603. Definition 2. By the force-function of a conserva- 
tive system is meant the force-function of its concealed partial 
system (§ 563). 

The force-function of a conservative system is thus in 
general given as a function of the visible coordinates and 
constant quantities, without any explicit statement of the con- 
nection between these constants and the momenta of the 
cyclical partial system. The form of this function is* subject 
to no restriction by our considerations. 

We shall denote the force-function of a conservative system 
byU. 

604. Note. In order to fully determine the motion of 
the visible masses of a conservative system it is sufficient to 
know its force-function as a function of its visible coordinates, 
and this knowledge renders any further knowledge of the con- 
cealed masses of the system unnecessary. 

For the forces which the concealed partial system exerts 
on the visible one can be completely obtained from the force- 
function in the given form, and these forces replace completely 
effect of the former on the latter (§ 457 et seq.). 

605. Definition 3. That part of the energy of a conser- 
vative system which arises from the motion of its visible 
masses is called the kinetic energy of the whole system. In 
opposition thereto the energy of the concealed masses of the 
system is called the potential energy of the whole system. 

Kinetic energy is also called vis viva (lebendiffe Kraft). 
According to another and older mode of expression this term 
denotes twice the kinetic energy. 

606. Notation. We shall denote the kinetic energy by 
T. T is thus a homogeneous quadratic function of p p or of q p ; 
the coefficients of this function are functions of p p . We shall 



V CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 227 

denote the partial differential of T by d p T when we regard p p 
and p ? as variables independent of one another, but by d q T when 
we regard p p and q p as variables independent of one another. 

The energy of the concealed cyclical partial system, i.e. the 
potential energy of the whole system, may be denoted as 
previously (§ 553) by (ffif. 

607. Observation. The kinetic and the potential energy 
of a conservative system do not differ in their nature, but 
only in the voluntary standpoint of our conception, or the 
involuntary limitation of our knowledge of the masses of 
the system. That energy, which from one particular stand- 
point of our conception or knowledge is to be denoted as 
potential, is from a different standpoint of our conception or 
knowledge denoted as kinetic. 

608. Corollary 1. The energy of a conservative system 
is equal to the sum of its kinetic and potential energies. 

We shall denote the total energy of the conservative 
system by E, and we thus have 

E = T + <£. 

609. Corollary 2. In a free conservative system the sum 
of the potential and kinetic energies is constant in time. As 
the kinetic energy increases the potential energy decreases, and 
conversely (§ 340). 

610. Corollary 3. In a free conservative system the 
difference between the kinetic energy and the force-function 
is constant in time ; the kinetic energy and the force-function 
increase and decrease simultaneously and by the same amount 
(§ 566). 

611. Definition 4. We shall call the difference between 
the kinetic energy and the force-function of a conservative 
system the mathematical or analytical energy of the system. 

We shall denote the mathematical energy by h. It differs 
from the energy of the system only by a constant which is inde- 
pendent of the time and the position of the system, but is in 
general unknown. In mathematical applications it may com- 
pletely take the place of the energy, but it lacks the physical 
meaning which the latter possesses. 



228 SECOND BOOK chap. 

612. Observation. The definition is represented by the 
equation 

T-U = A (i), 

or 

U + A = T (ii). 

If the conservative system is free, then the quantity h in 
this equation is a constant independent of the time, and the 
equation is then called the equation of energy for the conserva- 
tive system. 

From (ii) and § 608 we obtain the relation 

U + A = E-& (iii). 

613, Definition 5. The time-integral of the kinetic energy 
of a system, taken between two definite times as limits, is called 
the action or " expenditure of power " (Kraftaufwand) between 
the two times. 

The action in the motion of a conservative system during 
a given time is thus represented by the integral 



J™ 



taken between the initial and final values of that time. 

614. Observation 1. If ds denotes a path-element of the 
visible partial system, and v its velocity in its path, then the 
action can be represented in the form of the integral 



1 f 

— m I vds 

2 J 



taken between the positions in which the system is found at 
the beginning and end of the time considered. 

615. Observation 2. The name "action" (Wirkung) 
for the integral in the text has often been condemned as un- 
suitable. It is not easy to see, however, why the term " ex- 
penditure of power," invented by Jacobi, is better ; nor why the 
term (action) originally chosen by Maupertuis should be pre- 
ferred. All these names suggest conceptions which have nothing 
to do with the objects they denote. It is difficult to see how 
the summation of the energies existing at different times could 
yield anything else than a quantity for calculation, and it is 
not only difficult, but impossible, to find a suitable name, of 
simple meaning, for the integral in the text 



v CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 229 

The other terms and notations introduced in this chapter 
are also justified less by their essential suitability than by 
the necessity of employing as much as possible the existing 
terms of mechanics. 

Differential Equations of Motion 

616. Problem. To form the differential equations of 
motion of a conservative system. 

The solution of the problem consists only in specifying the 
equations of motion for the visible partial system. The mass 
of this portion is m, its coordinates p p \ let the h equations 

T 
1 

be its equations of condition. Since the p p 9 s are at the same 
time the parameters of the concealed partial system, the com- 
ponents of the force which it exerts on the visible partial 
system are equal to 3U/9p p (§ 563). Let an additional force 
act on the visible partial system on account of a coupling with 
other visible systems and let P p be its components. Then the 
equations of motion of the system are by § 481 

and these r equations, together with the k equations (i), are 
sufficient for the unique determination of the r + h quantities p 
and P x . 

617. Observation 1. If the conservative system is free, 
then no external forces act on it, and the P p 's are zero ; the 
equations of motion thus take the form 

618. Observation 2. In particular, if the coordinate^ is 
a free coordinate of the visible partial system, then the equa- 
tion of motion for the index p takes the form 

au 

since then all the p^'s vanish. 






230 SECOND BOOK chap. 

619. Observation 3. If we substitute in the equations 
§ 616-618 for the accelerations along p p their different ex- 
pressions from § 291, we obtain for these equations a series of 
different forms corresponding to the forms which we obtained 
for a completely known system in § 368 et seq. 

620. Corollary 1. If in a holonomous conservative system 
all the pjs are free coordinates, and we put for short 

T + U = L, 

then the equations of motion of the system may be expressed in 
the form of the 2r equations 



?p = ir (0 



which may be regarded as so many differential equations of the 
first order for the 2r quantities p ? and q p , and which, with 
given initial values,singly determine the course of these quantities. 
For if we substitute the value of L, develop the partial 
differential coefficients and remember that U does not contain 
p p) and thus that 

an A dJJ d\J 

then we recognise that the equations (i) coincide with the relation 
between q ? and p p which follows from the definitions, but that 
the equations (ii) coincide with the equations of motion in the 
form § 618 (§§ 289, 291). 

621. Observation. The function L, by whose use the differ- 
ential equations of motion take the simple form of the equa- 
tions § 620 (i) and (ii), has been called Lagrange's function. This 
function consequently exists only for a holonomous system, and 
it is here equal to the difference between the kinetic and 
potential energies, except for an arbitrary constant 

622. Corollary 2. If in a holonomous conservative 
system all the ^'s are free coordinates, and we put for short 

T-U = H, 



v CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 231 

then the equations of motion can be expressed in the form of 
the 2r equations 

p >-w, () 

*> = -|r (ii) ' 

which may be regarded as so many partial differential equa- 
tions of the first order for which the 2r quantities p p and q^ 
and which with given initial values, singly determine the course 
of these quantities. 

For if we substitute the value of H, and remember that 
U does not contain q p , and consequently that 

we see that the equations (i) represent the relation between q p 
and p p resulting from the definitions ; while thp equations (ii) 
coincide with the equations of motion (§ 618) deduced from 
experience (§§ 290, 294). 

623. Observation. The function H, through whose use 
the equations of motion take the simple form given in § 622 
(i) and (ii), is known as Hamilton's function. This function 
therefore exists only for a holonomous system, and for such a 
system is equal to the sum of the potential and kinetic * 
energies, except for an arbitrary constant ; it is also equal to 
the total energy of the system, except for an arbitrary constant. 

In general it is permissible to define Hamilton's function 
for a system with any, not necessarily cyclic, concealed motions, 
by the equations § 622 (i) and (ii), i,e. as a function of the 
visible p p 's and q p B through whose use (assuming there is such 
a function) the equations of motion take that simple form. 
With this more general definition, Hamilton's function is not 
always equal to the sum of the kinetic and potential energies. 

624. Note. From the equations § 620 and § 622 the 
same reciprocal properties can be obtained for a system with 
concealed cycles as were deduced in § 378 and § 381 for a 
completely known system. This is unnecessary, but it is implied 
in these relations that each of them is valid quite independ- 
ently of whether the coordinates, momenta, etc., appearing in 
them are visible or concealed coordinates, momenta, etc. 



232 SECOND BOOK chap. 

Integral Propositions for Holonomons Systems 

625. Note 1. The integral 






(T-V)dt 

to 

for the motion of a free holonomous system with concealed 
adiabatic cycles between sufficiently near positions and 1 
is smaller for the natural motion of the system than for any 
other possible motion by which both the visible and concealed 
coordinates pass in the same time from their initial to their 
final values. 

For since T — U is equal to the energy of the system, 
increased by a constant which is the same for all possible 
motions, the note is the same as proposition § 358 expressed 
by means of the notation just adopted. 

626. Observation 1. If the restriction that the final posi- 
tions should be sufficiently near is removed, then it can only 
be asserted that the variation of the integral vanishes in a trans- 
ition to any one of the other motions considered. Using the 
notation of § 590 the statement takes the form that 

h 
to 

in a transition from the natural motion to any other possible 
motion, when the variations of the initial and final times as 
well as the initial and final values of the visible coordinates 
vanish (cf. § 359). 

627. Observation 2. Note 1 distinguishes the natural 
motions from every other possible motion, and may therefore 
be used to determine the natural motion if it is actually 
possible to form the variation of Observation 1. But if, 
as is assumed, the cyclical coordinates are concealed, then the 
formation of variations of the form d p is not possible, and the 
note, although still correct, becomes inapplicable. 

628. Proposition 1. The integral 



h 

,f(T-U)<fc = 0, 



CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 233 






(T + V)dt 



in the motion of a free holonomous system with concealed 
adiabatic cycles between sufficiently near positions of its 
visible masses is smaller for the natural motion than for any 
other possible motion which, in the same time and with the 
same momenta of the concealed cyclical motions, carries the 
visible coordinates from the given initial to the given final 
values. 

The proof can be obtained by reference to Note 1, § 625. 
For this purpose we associate (as is possible by § 592) each one 
of the varied motions required by this proposition, with a second 
in which the visible coordinates undergo the same variation, 
but in which the cyclical momenta vary in such a manner 
that the initial and final values of the cyclical coordinates 
remain unaltered. "We must denote, according to § 590, a 
variation by a transition to a motion of the first kind by S qt and a 
variation to the corresponding motion of the second kind by S p . 

Now, firstly, since T depends on the visible coordinates 
alone, 

l(m = S.(Tdt (i). 



s q J™=s p | 



Secondly, since the duration of the motion is not varied, 
and — U differs only by a constant from the energy of the 
cyclical motion (§ 566), we get by § 593 



,/u^-sJi 



S q I Vdt = - S n I Vdt (ii). 

Adding (i) and (ii) we get 

$J(T + U)^ = 8j(T-U)<tt (iii). 



JCT + U>» = S p [ (T - 



Now by §§ 626, 625, the variation on the right-hand side 
has for the natural motion always a vanishing value, and for 
sufficiently near final positions a necessarily negative value, 
and therefore so has the variation on the left-hand side. Con- 
sequently the integral on the left has a minimum value for 



234 SECOND BOOK chap. 

the natural motion between sufficiently near final positions ; 
which proves the proposition. 

629. Observation 1. If the restriction to sufficiently 
near positions is omitted, then it can only be asserted that the 
variation of the integral vanishes. The analytical expression 
for this statement is in our notation (in contradistinction to the 
statement of § 626) 

Sj(T + U)* = 0. 



■/ 



630. Observation 2. The property of the natural motion 
stated in the proposition distinguishes it without ambiguity 
from every other possible motion. The variation S, can be formed 
even though the cyclical motions are considered concealed ; for 
its formation only requires that the constants appearing in the 
force-function should be left unvaried. The proposition can 
thus be used for the determination of the natural motion of 
conservative systems. Its validity is rigorously limited to 
holonomous systems. 

631. Observation 3. The above proposition (§ 628) em- 
ployed as in § 630 bears the name of Hamilton's Principle. 
Its physical meaning can in our opinion be no other than 
that of proposition § 358, from which we have deduced the 
principle. The principle represents the form which must 
be given to proposition § 358 in order that, notwithstanding 
our ignorance of the peculiarities of cyclical motion, it should 
remain applicable to the determination of the motion of the 
visible system. 

632. Note 2. If we denote by ds a path-element of the 
visible masses of a free holonomous system which contains 
concealed adiabatic cycles, then the integral 



i 

/ 



ds 



s/\J + h 
o 

in a motion between sufficiently near positions and 1 is 
smaller for the natural paths of the system than for any 
other possible paths by which the values both of the visible 



T = U + A = ^ (i), 






V CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 235 

• 

and cyclical coordinates pass from the given initial to the 
given final values. The quantity h is here to be considered a 
constant varying from one natural path to another, while for all 
the paths compared at any instant it is to be regarded as the 
same constant. 

For if we introduce the time and make the arbitrary but 
permissible assumption that the system traverses the paths 
under consideration with a constant velocity, this being such 
that the constant h denotes the value of the analytical energy, 
then 

1 d# 

2 dt 4 
and thus the integral considered is equal to 

h 

-Idt. 

m 

k 

The integral, except for the coefficient, is therefore equal 
to the duration of the motion. But this, by § 352 regarded 
as a consequence of § 347, is a minimum for a given value of 
the energy, i.e. of the constant h. Hence the content of this 
note is identical with that of proposition § 352, but is ex- 
pressed by means of the notation since introduced. 

633. Observation 1. If the restriction that the positions 
should be sufficiently near is omitted, then the vanishing of 
a variation only can be asserted : in our notation this state- 
ment is represented in the form 

f da 



634. Observation 2. By means of the property stated in 
Note 2, the natural paths, which correspond to different values 
of the constant A, are uniquely distinguished from all other 
possible paths ; and the proposition may be used for the deter- 
mination of the natural paths of the system, if it is possible 
to form the variation B r If, however, as is assumed, the 
peculiarities of the cyclical motion are concealed, then it is 
not possible to form this variation, and the note, although still 
correct, ceases to be applicable to the purpose in question. 



236 SECOND BOOK chap. 

635. Proposition 2. 1 In the motion of a free holonomous 
system which contains concealed adiabatic cycles, between two 
sufficiently near positions and 1 of the visible masses, the 
integral 



/ 



*/TJ + kds 



Jll 





is smaller for the natural paths than for any other possible 
paths by which, with the same values of the concealed cyclical 
momenta and the constant A, the visible coordinates pass from 
the given initial values to the given final ones. 

We again give the proof by a reference to the foregoing 
note (§ 632). For this purpose we introduce the time, and 
make the arbitrary but permissible assumption that the system 
traverses the paths considered with constant velocity, this 
being such that the constant h is equal to the mathematical 
energy. The integral can then be written in the form 

— \(V + h)dt. 
m 

h 
Further, we again associate, as is permissible by § 592, 

each one of the varied motions mentioned in the proposition with 
a second in which the visible coordinates undergo the same 
variation, and in which the constant h, and consequently the 
energy E, remains unaltered; the cyclical momenta must, 
however, vary in such a manner that the initial and final 
values of the cyclical coordinates retain their original values. 
A variation corresponding to the requirements of the proposi- 
tion we shall again denote by S q , and a variation corresponding 
to the second motion by S p . 

Now, firstly, for any variations Sq, of the cyclical 
momenta (j, (§ 566) 

s|(u + h) at = \\ (u + h) dt + ^ fy^ y 



= *,/' 



(U + A)tf*-£2'fr%' 



thus in particular for a variation S p -j 

1 Printed as in the original MSS. — Ed. , 



v CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 237 

$„ j (U + hyu = S,J (U + A>ft - J 2" #M (i). 

Secondly, we obtain from the equation § 612 (iii), remem- 
bering the relation § 588 and the constancy of E, 

|(U + h)dt = E& - 1 ) - ±2' ?>9" 
thus by a variation of the kind S v 

S p j(U + h)dt = E8# x - - i2" ? M ( ji )- 
Subtraction of (i) and (ii) gives 

8, j (U + A>tt = 1% - g (iii) ; 

or when, by aid of § 632 (i), we again eliminate the time, 

i i 

B^WTMs^-^ (iv). 



The variation on the right has always, by § 632, for the 
natural motion a vanishing, and for sufficiently near posi- 
tions a negative value; and hence, since £ is necessarily 
positive, the same holds for the variation on the left. The 
integral on the left has thus, for the natural motion and 
for sufficiently near final positions, a minimum value, which 
proves the proposition. 

636. Observation 1. If the restriction that the positions 
should be sufficiently near is removed, then it can only be 
asserted that the variation of the integral vanishes. The 
analytical expression of this statement is in our notation (in 
contradistinction to § 633) 

i 



S J V(U + A)is = 0. 



o 

637. Observation 2. For every value of the constant h 

the proposition distinguishes without ambiguity a natural path 

from all other possible paths. The property of natural 

paths which the proposition states, may therefore be used for 



238 SECOND BOOK chap. 

the determination of these paths ; it can even be used if the 
cyclical motions are assumed to be concealed. 

For the formation of the variation S q only requires that the 
constants appearing in the force-function should remain un- 
altered ; the variation can thus be formed notwithstanding our 
ignorance of the peculiarities of cyclical motion. 

638. Observation 3. Proposition 2, employed in the con- 
ception of the last observation, is Jacobi's form of the Principle 
of Least Action. For if, for the moment, we take m v to be the 
mass of the i/th of the visible points of the system, ds v an 
element of the path of this point, then 



7* 



2 

V > 

i 



and thus the integral for which we establish a minimum value 
is, except for coefficient, 



fjv + hj^. 



vn ¥ ds y 2 , 



which (again excepting a constant coefficient) is Jacobi's integral. 
The physical meaning of Jacobi's Principle we conceive to 
be no other than that contained in propositions §352 or §34 7, 
from which it is deduced. It represents the form which we 
must give to that proposition in order that, notwithstanding 
our ignorance of the peculiarities of cyclical motions, it may 
be applicable to the determination of the motion of the visible 
system. The validity of Jacobi's Law is also confined to 
holonomous systems. 

639. Proposition 3. In the motion of a free holonomous 
conservative system between sufficiently near positions, the time- 
integral of the kinetic energy is smaller for the natural motion 
than for any other possible motion which carries the system 
from the given initial to the given final values of the visible 
coordinates, and which is performed with the same given 
value of the mathematical energy which is constant with regard 

to the time. 

For if we take A to be the given value of the mathematical 
energy, then for all the paths considered (§ 611) 

T-U = A, 
and thus the integral of which the proposition treats, viz. 



v CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 239 



[Tdt, 



is (except for a constant coefficient) the integral of which Pro- 
position 2 treats ; the present proposition is thus only another 
mode of expressing the content of that proposition. 

Observations similar to Nos. 1 and 2 after Proposition 2 
are also applicable here. 

640. Observation. Proposition § 639 expresses the Prin- 
ciple of Least Action as originally stated by Maupertuis. This 
form is preferable to Jacobi's in that it can be expressed more 
simply, and therefore appears to contain a simple physical 
meaning. But it has the disadvantage that it contains the 
time unnecessarily, inasmuch as the actual statement only 
determines the path of the system and not the motion 
in it; this motion being rather determined only by the 
note which is added, viz. that only motions with constant 
energy will be considered 

Retrospect to §§ 625-640 

641. 1. From our investigations we see that, for the 
natural motion of a free conservative system, each one of the 
integrals 

f (T - U>ft, f (T + V)dt, 

takes a special value under determined conditions. While the 
two upper integrals relate to the motion of the system, the 
others refer only to the path. The two integrals on the 
left relate to the case when all the coordinates of the system, 
even the cyclical ones, are considered, and when only those 
positions of the system are considered the same in which the 



240 SECOND BOOK chap. 

latter coordinates as well as the former have the same values. 
The remaining integrals relate to the case when the cyclical 
coordinates are concealed, and when those positions of the 
system are considered the same in which the visible coordinates 
have the same values. The consideration of the last integral 
assumes the validity of the Principle of the Conservation of 
Energy ; the consideration of the two upper ones allows the 
deduction of this principle ; the two middlg ones can be 
considered independently of this principle. 

642. 2. The physical meaning of the two integrals on the 
left is extremely simple ; the statements expressing them are 
immediate consequences of the fundamental law. The integrals 
on the right have lost their simple physical meaning; but the 
statement that they take special values for the natural motion 
always represents a form of the fundamental law, even though 
it be complicated and obscure. This has happened because the 
law has been adapted to complicated and obscure hypotheses. 
The statement which relates to the last integral has an 
illusory appearance of an independent and simple physical 
meaning. 

Our method of proof was not chosen with a view to being 
as simple as possible, but to making the above relations stand 
out as clearly as possible. 

643. 3. That Nature is not constituted so as to make 
any one of these integrals a minimum, is seen firstly from the 
fact that even in holonomous systems with a more extended 
motion a minimum does not always appear; and, secondly, 
from the fact that there are natural systems for which the 
minimum never appears, and for which the variation of these 
integrals never vanishes. An expression comprehending all 
the laws of natural motion cannot therefore be assigned to 
any of these integrals ; and this justifies us in regarding the 
apparently simple meaning of the last integral as illusory. 



Finite Equations of Motion for Holonomous Systems 

644. Note 1. Let us denote by V the value of the 
integral 



CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 241 



M 



ds 
JjJ + h 



taken for the'natural path between two value-systems of all 
the coordinates of a free holonomous system with adiabatic 
cycles, regarded as a function of the initial and final values 
of these coordinates, ie. of p^, p pv and jj^, jf pi , and the 
quantity h ; then the expression 



" / 2E 



represents the straightest distance of the system. The dotation 
is the same as we have used previously in this chapter. 

By § 632 V' is equal to the duration of the natural motion 
between the given positions, for the mathematical energy h. 
If then S is the straightest distance between the two positions, 
we get 

S 2 

from which the proof follows. 

645. Corollary. By means of the function V' the natural 
paths of the system considered may be represented in a concise 
form. 

For if ds denotes an element of the path of the visible 
partial system, and d% a similar quantity for the cyclical 
partial system, and da for the complete system, then 

(m + m)rf<r* = md£ + n\dS* (i), 

and therefore (§57) with the previous notation 

A A 

If <rp p and <rp p are the angles which the path of the com- 
plete system makes with the coordinates p p and Jj p of that 
system, then the equations of the natural paths, after division 
of both sides by a constant factor, are obtained by §§ 224, 
226 in the form 

R 



242 SECOND BOOK chap. 

r 2E av 



/ — /2E dV 

/— /2E SV 

V Epp! COS <T,|J ! = / - 



"2E 3V' 



(iii) 



(iv) 



(v) 



(vi), 



and these equations admit of a dual interpretation, namely, 
either that they give the equations of the natural paths as 
differential equations of the first order or as equations of a 
finite form* 

646. Observation. The foregoing equations (iii) to (vi) are 
correct in all cases, whether we regard the cyclical coordinates 
as visible or concealed. They cease, however, to be applicable 
if the latter be the case; for then the complete expression 
for V is unknown and the equations cannot be developed. 

647. Problem 1. To transform the foregoing equations of 

motion of a free holonomous system so that they remain 

applicable even when the cyclical motions of the system are 

concealed. 

We denote by V the value of the integral 

1 



s/2m\ «/U 



+ hds, 



taken for the natural path between two value-systems of the 
visible coordinates. In the determination of this natural path 
we shall regard the cyclical momenta in the force-function as 
invariable constants ; V will therefore be considered a function 
of the initial and final values alone of the visible coordinates 
and the constant h. By § 635 (iv), for the transition from one 
natural path to another with visible coordinates varied in any 
manner, 

1 1 

8 q V2^| JvTkds = 2EsJ^j~^ (i), 



v CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 243 

so that, in particular, in a transition from one natural path to 
any neighbouring natural path ' 

*,V = 2ES„V' (ii), 

therefore 

3V = 2E av' 

av »v l h 

By the help of these equations we can eliminate the 

cyclical coordinates from the right-hand sides of the equations 

§645 (iii) and (iv). Then for the left-hand sides we have 

A A 

to replace the angle <rp ? by the angle sp? We then have, by 

§ 645 (ii) (§ 75), 



I 



tn> /— i *%u m 



s/a^dc cos <r$ p = ]>V m a pa dp e 



m + ltt rr r ^m + m 

m 
m 



— ^/a^ds cos s,p. 



(iv), 



U+*=T=£m^ 



E = i(m + m)^ 2 



and further, from the equations 

l : 

& 

and (v), 

do* 

dt 
by division 

Vm+mVU + A 
thus from (iv) and (vi) 

cos<T,p p = J^^coss,p p (vii). 

If now we substitute the result (iii) on the right, and the 
result (vii) on the left of the equations to be transformed, we 
obtain the equations 

,— 1 dV 



244 SECOND BOOK chap. 

^"•"'-- JW+kl fi. (Vm) ' 

which are the required transformations. For they no longer 
contain any quantities which refer to the concealed partial 
system, and they admit the dual interpretation that they present 
the natural paths of the visible partial system as differential 
equations of the first order, or in a finite form. 

648. Observation 1. The function Y does not contain 
the time and gives only the natural paths of the system, but 
not its motion in these paths. But since the natural paths are 
traversed with constant velocities, and we have already assigned 
the interpretation of analytical energy to the constant h appear- 
ing in V, it is easy to introduce the time as an independent 
variable in the equations. In the first place, the connection 
of the time with the length of the path, previously regarded as 
the independent variable, is given by the equation 



-£■&*->-'' • o) - 



ay 
dh 



Thus we obtain after multiplication of the equations § 647 
(viii) by 

and using § 75 and § 270, 

av _ 

U = 5— ( u ) 

av 

Finally, we obtain for the value of the function itself, 



V = 2 \Tdt (iv). 



-i 



In form these equations are much simpler than the 
equations of the foregoing problem, but the former have the 
advantage of containing one less independent variable. 



V CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 245 

649. Observation 2. The function V is the same function 
as Hamilton denoted by a similar symbol, and is known as 
the characteristic function of the conservative system. This 
statement agrees with that of § 412, for by the assumption 
made there that all coordinates were visible, the function 
here denoted by V is transformed into the function there 
denoted by the same symboL 

Finally, it appears that the characteristic function of a 
system, according to the now extended definition, is a quantity 
for calculation without any physical meaning. For, according 
as we treat greater or lesser parts of cyclical motions as 
concealed, we may write down different characteristic functions 
for the same system; and these serve the same purpose 
analytically although they possess different values for identical 
motions of the system. 

650. Proposition. The characteristic function V of a 
conservative system satisfies the two partial differential equa- 
tions of the first order 



i ^ r ^ r , av av 



= (U + A) , 



which correspond to the differential equations § 227 for the 
straightest distance. 

For these equations are obtained by the substitution of the 
direction cosines from the equations § 647 (viii) in the equation 
§88, which these direction cosines satisfy. 

651. Note 2. If we denote by P* the value of the in- 
tegral u 



J(T- 



JJ)dt 9 



taken for the natural motion between two value-systems of 
all the coordinates of a free holonomous system with adiabatic 
cycles, and considered as a function of these values and the 
duration of the motion, then P' differs from the principal 
function of the system (§ 415) only by the product of the 
duration of the motion and an (unknown) constant. 



246 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



For T — U differs from the energy of the system only by 
an (unknown) constant 

652. Corollary. With the aid of the function P' the 
natural motions of the system can be expressed in a concise 
form. 

In fact the difference between P' and the principal function 
defined in § 415 does not prevent the immediate application 
of the equations § 414 (ii) and (iii), so that we obtain as 
equations of motion 

9P' 

«.- w n (i > 



?« = 



3P' 



q " = "sir. ° v) - 

On the other hand the equation § 414 (iv) requires a slight 
modification ; we obtain instead of it 

3P'_3F 

1 

653. Observation. The foregoing equations (i) to (iv) 
are correct in every case, whether all the coordinates are access- 
ible to observation or not ; but they cease to be applicable when 
the cyclical motions of the system are considered concealed. 

654. Problem 2. To transform the foregoing equations of 
motion of a free holonomous system, so that they remain appli- 
cable even when the cyclical motions of the system are concealed. 

We denote by P the value of the integral 

h 



/ 



(T+vyu, 



<0 

taken for the natural motion between the two value-systems 
of the visible coordinates existing at the times t and t v In 
the determination of this natural motion the cyclical momenta 



v CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS * 247 

contained in the constants of the force-function will be con- 
sidered invariable, and P will thus be considered a function of 
the initial and final values alone of these coordinates and of 
the times t and t v 

Now, by § 628 (iii), for a transition from a natural motion 
to any neighbouring motion of equal duration, the equation 

S q [(T + U^ = S p ((T-U)^ 

holds. If we apply this equation to the transition from a 
natural motion to a neighbouring natural motion of equal 
duration, we get 

8 q P = S p P , 
thus 

ap_ap^ j^_^_ 

By means of these equations we eliminate the concealed 
coordinates from the right of equations § 652. For the 
left, it is sufficient to remark that the momentum q p of the whole 
system along p p is also the momentum of the visible partial 
system along p p> regarded as a coordinate of this partial system. 
We then obtain as equations of motion of the visible partial 
system 

3P ,.. 

3p 

&» = -5— <")' 

which are the required transformations. 

655. Observation 1. The function P here introduced is 
the function which Hamilton denoted by S, and is known as the 
principal function of the conservative system. This statement 
agrees with § 415, for by the assumption there made, that all 
the coordinates are visible, the present function P transforms 
into the function there denoted by the same symbol. 

656. Observation 2. The value of the principal function 
for a definite transference is related to the characteristic function 
in a simple manner. For by a simple transformation we obtain 



248 SECOND BOOK chap. 

h 

(T + V)dt = J (2U + h)dt 



/■ 



i i 



Thus (§§ 647, 644) 

P = V - h(h - * ) (i), 

where we have to regard the quantity h introduced on the 
right-hand side, in V and in the second summation, as a func- 
tion of (t x - t ), Pn and p pi . 
Conversely, 

V-P+Aft-tf (ii), 

where, on the right-hand side in P and in the second summa- 
tion, the quantity (t t — t ) is regarded as a function of h, p 
and p n . 

657. Observation 3. The analytical energy h does not 
appear in the principal function. Still it can be indirectly 
deduced from it by means of the equations § 654 (i), (ii), 
§ 286 (iii) and § 612 (i). It can also be directly expressed 
by means of P. For if we change on the right-hand side of 
§656 (i) t x and t , but not p n and p w and denote by dh the 
change of h which necessarily results therefrom, we get 

av 

dP = ^rdh - hd(t x - 1 ) - (t x - t )dh, 

and thus, by § 648 (i), 

dP = - hd(t x - 1 ), 



from which follows 



3P_aP 



658. Proposition. The principal function P of a con- 
servative system satisfies the two differential equations of the 
first order 






+ ^ = U, 



CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 249 






which correspond to the differential equations § 227 for the 
straightest distance. 

For these equations are obtained when the analytical 
energy h is expressed in terms of the differential coefficients 
of P, the first time directly by means of § 657, and the second 
time indirectly by means of § 612 (i) and § 654 (i), (ii). 



Retrospect to §§ 644-658 

659. 1. In §§ 644-658 there are given four finite repre- 
sentations of the motion of a holonomous system with adiabatic 
cycles. In the first and third all the coordinates of the system 
were considered capable of being observed, and in the second 
and fourth the cyclical coordinates were treated as concealed. 
The first and third representation, which led to the character- 
istic function, essentially gave only the path of the system 
and corresponded to the Principle of Least Action. The second 
and fourth, which led to the principal function, gave the motion 
completely, and corresponded to Hamilton's Principle. 

660. 2. All the four representations have the same 
simple physical sense, and in all of them the cause of the 
mathematical complexity is the same. The simple physical 
sense consists in the fact that the natural paths are always 
straightest paths, and in the purely geometrical connections of 
these paths with the straightest distance in holonomous systems. 
The cause of the mathematical complexity consists in this, 
that we did not always treat in the same manner all the 
essential elements for determining the motion, but eliminated 
some of them as concealed. We may also say that difference 
in the treatment consists in the fact that for some coordinates 
the initial and final values were the elements introduced, and 
for others the initial velocities. Our course of investigation 
was not adopted as being the simplest possible, but rather as 
putting this relation as clearly as possible. 

661. 3. Further representations of the motion of a 



250 SECOND BOOK CHAf. 

holonomous system could be given by eliminating other 
coordinates, or by introducing for the visible coordinates 
as well, not their initial and final values, but other quantities 
as elements; or by proceeding from the partial differential 
equations, § 650 or § 658, in the same manner as is 
done for the straightest distance in §§ 232 et seq. Such 
representations may in particular cases have certain mathe- 
matical advantages, as Jacobi has shown in a comprehensive 
manner. But the further one proceeds in this direction the 
more is the physical meaning obscured under its mathematical 
form, and the more the functions used take the character of 
auxiliary constructions with which it is no longer possible to 
associate a physical meaning. 



Non-Conservative Systems 

Explanations and Notes 

662. 1. If a material system contains only such con- 
cealed masses as are in adiabatic cyclical motion, then if the 
visible coordinates are under our free control it is possible 
at every instant to transform back the energy which has 
become the energy of the concealed masses, into the energy 
of the visible masses. The visible energy once residing in 
the system may therefore be permanently retained as visible 
energy. 

It is on account of this property that we have called these 
systems conservative. For the same reason we denote the 
forces exerted by the concealed masses of such systems as con- 
servative forces. 

663. 2. On the other hand, those systems in which we 
cannot sufficiently control the visible coordinates so as to retrans- 
form the concealed energy at every instant into visible energy 
are called non-conservative, and the forces of their concealed 
masses non-conservative forces. Non-conservative systems in 
which the energy tends to change from the energy of the 
visible masses into that of the concealed masses, but not 
conversely, are called dissipative systems, and the forces due 
to their concealed masses dissipative forces. 



v NON-CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS 251 

664. 3. In general the systems and forces of nature are 
non-conservative if concealed masses come into consideration. 
This circumstance is a necessary consequence of the fact 
that conservative systems are exceptions, and even exceptions 
attained only more or less approximately (§ 550); so that for 
any natural system taken at random the probability of its 
being conservative is infinitely small. Again we know by 
experience that the systems and forces of nature are dissipative 
if concealed masses come into consideration. This circumstance 
is sufficiently explained by the hypothesis that in nature the 
number of concealed masses and of their degrees of freedom is 
infinitely great compared with the number of visible masses 
and their visible coordinates; so that for any motion taken 
at random the probability of the energy concentrating itself 
in a special direction from that large number of masses into 
this definite and small number is infinitely small. 

665. 4. The difference between conservative and dissipa- 
tive systems of forces does not lie in nature, but results simply 
from the voluntary restriction of our conception, or the in- 
voluntary limitation of our knowledge of natural systems. If 
all the masses of nature were considered visible, then the 
difference would cease to exist, and all the forces of nature 
could be regarded as conservative forces. 

666. 5. Conservative forces appear in general as differ- 
ential coefficients of force-functions, i.e. as such functions of 
the visible coordinates of the system as are independent of 
the time. The non-conservative forces depend in general on 
the first and higher differential coefficients of the visible co- 
ordinates with regard to the time. With any given analytical 
form of a force of either kind, the question may be raised 
whether this form is consistent with the assumptions of our 
mechanics, or the reverse. 

667. To this question an answer cannot in general be 
given ; in particular cases it is to be judged from the following 
considerations : — 

(1) If it can be shown that there exists a normal con- 
tinuous system which exerts forces of the given form, then it 
is proved that the given form satisfies the postulates of our 
mechanics. 



252 SECOND BOOK chap, t 

(2) If it can be proved that the existence of such a system 
is impossible, then it is shown that the given form contradicts 
our mechanics. 

(3) If it can be shown that there exists in nature any 
system which we know by experience to exert forces of the 
given form, then we consider it thereby proved that the 
given form is consistent with our mechanics. 

If no one of the three cases happens, then the question 
must remain an open one. Should such a form of force 
be found as would be rejected by the second consideration, but 
permitted by the third, then the insufficiency of the hypothesis 
on which our mechanics reposes, and in consequence the 
insufficiency of our mechanics itself, would be proved. 



CHAPTER VI 

DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 

Explanations and Notes 

668. 1. All systems of material points to which the 
fundamental law in accordance with its assumptions is ap- 
plicable must possess continuous connections. Hence the 
coefficients of all the equations of condition of such systems 
are throughout continuous functions of the position (§ 124). 
This, however, does not prevent these functions from changing 
very quickly near given positions, so that the equations have, 
in positions very near to one another, coefficients which differ 
by finite quantities. 

669. 2. When the system considered passes through such 
a position of very rapid change, then a complete knowledge of 
its motion requires a complete knowledge of the equations 
of condition during the rapid change itself, Certain statements 
may, however, be made concerning the motion even when the 
form of the equations of condition of the system is given 
only before and after the place of its sudden change. If we 
limit ourselves to this class of statements, then it is analytic- 
ally simpler to pay no attention to the special manner of the 
change, and to use the equations of condition as though their 
coefficients were discontinuous. In this case the system is 
regarded as discontinuous, owing to the voluntary limitation 
imposed by our mode of treatment. 

670. 3. But it may happen that while our physical means 
permit us to completely investigate the connection of a system 



254 * SECOXD BOOK chap. 

in other respects, they are jet insufficient to investigate it at 
the places of very sudden change, although we are convinced, 
and indeed may physically prove, that even here this connection 
is continuous. If this happens we are compelled to represent 
the connection analytically as discontinuous, unless we 
renounce the possibility of a single representation of it In 
this case the system must be regarded as discontinuous on 
account of the involuntary limitation of our knowledge of the 
system. 

671. 4. Conversely, if the coefficients of the equations 
of condition of a system are directly given as discontinuous 
functions of the position, without a knowledge of how these 
functions are obtained, then we assume that one of the two 
cases previously mentioned happens. We regard the given 
equations only as an incomplete and approximate presentation 
of the true and continuous form. We therefore assume, from 
this very fact, that a complete determination of the motion of 
such a system is not required of us, but only the specification 
of those statements which can be made notwithstanding the 
incomplete knowledge of the system, with the supposition that 
even in the positions of discontinuity the unknown connection 
is in reality continuous. 

672. 5. If a system passes through a point of very rapid 
change with a finite velocity, then its equations of condition 
undergo finite changes in a vanishing time. If during the 
whole change the system is in reality normal, as the funda- 
mental law assumes, then, to all appearances, it ceases to be 
normal at the instant of its passing through that position, 
although this has not actually oocurred. Hence if a system 
is given us analytically, and if its equations of condition are 
independent of the time but at a certain moment instantane- 
ously take a new form, then we consider the equations of 
condition at this moment as only an approximate representa- 
tion of another connection, unknown and perhaps more intricate, 
but at the same time not only continuous but also normal. 
Hence we assume again that a complete determination of the 
motion of the system is not required of us, but only a specifica- 
tion of those statements which, notwithstanding our ignorance, 
can be made by means of the fundamental law, with the supposi- 



; 



r 



vi DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 255 

tion that even at the time of the discontinuity the true con- 
nection of the system is continuous and normal. 

673. 6. When we regard all positions and times of dis- 
continuity in the foregoing manner we have renounced the 
investigation of actually discontinuous systems. The funda- 
mental law, too, would not be applicable to these. This 
restriction, however, does not imply a refusal to investigate 
any natural system whatever, for everything points to the 
conclusion, that there are in nature only apparent, and not 
actual, discontinuities. That the motion of systems through 
apparent positions of discontinuity is not completely deter- 
mined by the fundamental law alone, corresponds entirely with 
the physical experience that the knowledge of a system before 
and after a position of discontinuity is not sufficient to 
determine completely the change of the motion during the 
passage through that position. 

Impulsive Forces or Impulses 

674. Note. If a system passes through a position of dis- 
continuity, then its velocity undergoes a change of finite mag- 
nitude. The differential coefficients of the coordinates with 
regard to the time suddenly jump to new values. 

For immediately before and after such a position these 
differential coefficients, and consequently the components of 
that velocity, must satisfy linear equations with finitely different 
coefficients. 

675. Corollary 1. In a motion through a position of 
discontinuity the acceleration becomes infinitely great, but in 
such a manner that the time-integral of the acceleration taken 
for the time of the motion retains in general a finite value. 

For this time-integral is the change of the velocity which 
in general is finite. 

676. Corollary 2. If the equations of condition of one 
of two or more coupled systems are subject to discontinuity, 
then in the motion through this discontinuity the force acting 
between the systems becomes in general infinitely great, but 
in such a manner that the time-integral of the force, taken 
for the time of the motion, remains finite. 



256 SECOND BOOK CHAP. 

For in general the components of the acceleration of the 
discontinuous system along the common coordinates become 
infinite in the sense of Corollary 1. But since the coefficients 
of the equations of condition remain finite during the discon- 
tinuity, the force is of the order of the acceleration. 

677. Definition. An impulsive force or impulse is the 
time-integral of the force exerted by one system on another 
during the motion through a position of discontinuity, taken 
for the duration of the motion through this position. 

678. Observation. When all the systems considered have 
finite velocities, finite and infinitesimal, but not infinite impulses, 
may appear. In what follows we shall assume the impulses to 
be finite. 

679. Corollary 1. To every impulse there is always a 
counter-impulse. It is the time-integral of the force which 
the system regarded as the second exerts on the first. 

680. Corollary 2. An impulse is always exerted by, as 
well as exerted on, a system which suffers a discontinuity 
of motion ; it is not conceivable without two such systems 
mutually acting on one another. 

We may speak of impulses simply without expressly men* 
tioning the systems which cause or suffer them, for exactly the 
same reasons as we thus speak of forces. 

681. Corollary 3. An impulse may always be considered 
as a vector quantity with regard to that system which causes it, 
as well as with regard to that system on which it acts. Its 
components along the common coordinates are in general 
different from zero ; its components along the coordinates which 
are not common are zero ; its components in directions which 
cannot be expressed in terms of the coordinates used remain 
undetermined. 

For this statement holds for the force of which the impulse 
is the time-integral. 

682. Notation. If a system with the coordinates p p suffers 
a discontinuity of motion, then we shall denote the components 
along p p of the impulse which acts on the system, by J p . But 
the components of the impulse which the system causes along 
p ? will be denoted by J p '. For the second system whose co- 



VI DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 257 

ordinates are denoted by p p , the corresponding quantities will 
be denoted by 5 p and $ p ' respectively (c/1 § 467). Thus, then, 

j, -v. 

identically. 

683. Proposition. An impulse and its counter-impulse 
are always equal and opposite, i.e. their components along every 
coordinate are equal and opposite whether we consider these 
quantities as vector quantities with regard to the one system, 
or with regard to the other system. 

For an impulse and its counter-impulse can also be re- 
garded as is the time-integrals of force and counter-force (cf 
§ 468). 

With the notation employed the proposition is given by 
the equation 

j,= - j; 

3 P = — 3 P '. 

Composition of Impulses 

684. Proposition. If a system is simultaneously coupled 
with other systems, then any impulse which the aggregate of 
these systems exerts is equal to the sum of the impulses 
exerted by the several systems. 

For the proposition holds at every instant during the 
impulses for the acting forces (§ 471), and therefore also for 
their integrals, ie. for the impulses. 

685. Corollary. If impulses simultaneously act on the 
same system or are exerted by the same system, they can be 
compounded and resolved by the rules for the composition and 
resolution of vector quantities. We speak of the components of 
an impulse and of resultant impulses in the same sense as we 
speak of the components of forces and resultant forces (cf §§ 
472-474). 

686. Definition. An impulse which is exerted by or on 
- a single material point is called an elementary impulse. 

687. Corollary 1. Every impulse which is exerted by 
or on a material system can be resolved into a series of 
elementary impulses (cf. § 479). 

s 



258 SECOND BOOK chap. 

688. Corollary 2. The composition and resolution of 
elementary impulses are performed by means of the rules for 
the composition and resolution of geometrical quantities. 
(Parallelogram of impulses.) (Cf. § 478.) 



Motion under the Action of Impulses 

689. Problem 1. To determine the motion of a material 
system under the action of a given impulse. 

The solution of the problem consists simply in stating the 
change which the velocity of the system suffers through the 
impulse. Let the system considered be the same as in § 481; 
let us denote by P p the components of the infinite force which 
acts on the system during the impulse, then, by § 481, during 
this time, 

i 

Multiply this equation by dt and integrate for the duration 
of the impulse. Since the values of the coordinates during 
this time are constant, 



nlfpdt^Qn-SfQ (P)> 



where we denote quantities before the impulse by the index 
and after by the index 1. We have further, by § 682, 



and putting for short 



J' 



V ? di - J, (iii), 



T> x dt - J (iv), 



we obtain r equations of the form 

k 

1 

Since the velocity of the system before and after the im- 
pulse must satisfy the connections of the system, we obtain from 



vi DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 259 

the k equations of condition of the system, k equations of the 
form 

r 

^fPxp(Ppi-Ppo) = ° ( vi )i 

1 

which, with the equations (v), may be regarded as k + r unhomo- 
geneous linear equations for the k + r quantities p^—p^ and 
J x , or for the k + r quantities q n — q^ and J x ; and they singly 
determine these quantities, and therefore the change in the 
velocity of the system. 

690. Observation 1. If the velocity of the system before 
the impulse is given, and thus the quantities q^ and p^ known, 
then we may regard the r equations § 689 (v), together with 
the k equations § 689 (vi), or, what is the same thing, the k 
equations 

r 

2 p Mpi = °> 

1 

as r + k unhomogeneous linear equations for the r + k quanti- 
ties p n and J x , which singly determine these quantities, and 
therefore the velocity of the system after the impulse. 

691. Observation 2. If we use rectangular coordinates 
and denote the component of the impulse along x v by I„, then 
the equations of the impulse take the form of the 2>n equations 

t 



m v 



(x n - x^) + 2' Mi = J , ®' 



which, with the i equations deduced from the equations of 
condition, namely, 



8* 



^fBj&n-xJ^O (ii), 

i 

singly determine the Sn components x — x^ of the change of 
the velocity and the i quantities I t . 

692. Observation 3. If the coordinate p p is a free coor- 
dinate, then the corresponding quantities p w are zero, and the 
equation of impulse relative to p p takes the simple form 

? p1 -?po = J p- 



260 SECOND BOOK chap. 

If in a holonomous system all the coordinates are free, 
then all the equations take this form, and the resulting r equa- 
tions are sufficient to determine the r quantities^ —p^ which 
are known linear functions of the quantities q n — q^, imme- 
diately given by these equations. 

693. Corollary 1 (to § 689). In order to impress 
suddenly on a system at rest a given possible velocity, it 
is sufficient to apply to the system an impulse in the given 
direction and equal in magnitude to the product of the given 
velocity and the mass of the system. 

For if q n = 0, and the given values of p pl satisfy the equa- 
tions of condition, then the assumption 

J x = 

J p = in 
satisfies the equations § 689 (v) and (vi). 

694. Corollary 2. In order to bring a moving system 
suddenly to rest in its instantaneous position, it is sufficient to 
apply to the system an impulse opposite in direction and equal 
in magnitude to the product of the velocity of the system and 
its mass. 

For if q = 0, and if the quantities p^ satisfy the equations 
of condition of the system, then the assumption 

J x =0 

J p=-?po 
satisfies the equations § 689 (v) and (vi). 

695. Proposition. The change of velocity which several 
impulses, acting simultaneously, produce in a system is the 
sum of the changes of velocity which the impulses, acting 
singly, would produce. 

All impulses are considered as acting simultaneously 
which take place within a vanishing time, without regard to 
their succession in this time. 

The theorem follows (cf. § 485) from the linear form of 
the equations § 689 (v) and (vi), and it can also be regarded 
as an immediate consequence of § 485. 

696. Observation. The content of the foregoing pro- 



vi DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 261 

position may also be expressed by the usual statement that 
several simultaneous impulses are quite independent as regards 
the velocity which they produce. 

697. Proposition. If the direction of an impulse is per- 
pendicular to every possible displacement of the system on 
which it acts, then the impulse produces no effect on the 
motion of the system. And conversely : If an impulse pro- 
duces no effect on the motion of the system on which it acts, 
then it is perpendicular to every possible displacement of the 
system. 

The proposition may be regarded as an immediate con- 
sequence of § 488, or it can be deduced from the equations 
§ 689 (v) and (vi). 

698. Note. Although the change of motion which an 
impulse produces can be singly determined when we know the 
impulse, yet the impulse cannot conversely be singly deter- 
mined when we know the sudden change of motion which it 
has produced. 

699. Problem 2. To determine, the impulse which a 
material system exerts in a given sudden change of motion. 

As in § 682 we denote the components of the impulse by 
J' p , and by §§ 683 and 689 (v) these are 

k 

i 

In this equation $ pl and q^ are determined by the data of 
the problem, but the J x 's are not so given unless the motion of 
the second system on which the impulse acts is also given. The 
solution of the problem is thus not determinate, but contains 
an undetermined summation which represents an impulse 
perpendicular to every possible displacement of the system. 

700. Observation 1. Although all the components of the 
impulse which a system exerts in a sudden change of motion 
are not determined by the change of motion of the system, 
still all the components in the direction of a possible motion 
are determined by this change. 

701. Observation 2. Although all the components of the 



262 SECOND BOOK chap. 

impulse which a system exerts in a sudden change of motion 
are not determined by the change of motion of the system, 
yet every component in the direction of a free coordinate is 
singly determined by this change. 

702. Observation 3. If ^> p is a free coordinate, then the 
impulse exerted in the direction of this coordinate can be 
written in the form 



--(©.♦ 




Internal Constraint in an Impulse 

703. Note 1. If an impulse acts on a system of material 
points between which no connections exist, it produces a change 
of velocity whose direction is that of the impulse, and whose 
magnitude is equal to the magnitude of the impulse divided 
by the mass of the system. 

704. Note 2. If connections exist between the points of 
the system, then the change of velocity differs in general from 
that given in the foregoing remark. The connections of the 
system may thus be considered the causes of this difference. 

705. Definition. By internal constraint, or constraint 
simply, in an impulse, we mean the alteration which all the 
connections of a system produce in the change of velocity of 
the system due to the impulse. 

The constraint in an impulse is measured by the difference 
between the actual change of velocity and that change of velocity 
which would take place if all the equations of condition of the 
system were removed ; it is equal to the former diminished by 
the latter. 

706. Corollary. The constraint in an impulse is the 
time-integral of the internal constraint of the system taken 
for its whole duration. 

707. Problem, To determine the constraint of a system 
in an impulse. 

We shall denote the components of the constraint along p p 



VI DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 263 

by Z p . If then we multiply the equation § 497 (i) by mdt 
and integrate for the duration of the impulse, we obtain 

«»Z, - 2^i - ?* - J, (i). 

The components along any coordinates are not in general 
sufficient for the determination of the magnitude of the con- 
straint. If, therefore, we use rectangular coordinates and 
denote the component of the constraint along x y by Z„, we 
obtain 

mZ v = m v (x n - x^) - 1„ (ii) ; 

then the magnitude Z of the constraint is the positive root of 
the equation 



ymj x^ — x^ — — - 



y^rr^ 



708. Proposition 1. The magnitude of the constraint in 
an impulse is smaller for the natural change of motion than it 
would be for any other possible change of motion. 

For the necessary and sufficient condition {of. §§ 155, 498) 
that with given values of I„ the quantity £mZ* should be a 
minimum, is given by the 3n equations 

i 

***(** - **) - ^ + 2 ta k T * = °> 

i 

where the quantities I t denote any undetermined multipliers, 
and these with the i equations 

1 

singly determine the 3n + i quantities ± vl — x^ and I t . But 
since the equations coincide with the equations of motion 
(§ 691) of the system, they are satisfied by the natural changes 
of velocity, and only by these. 

709. Observation. The foregoing theorem contains the 
adaptation of Gauss's Principle of Least Constraint to the 
particular case of impulses. 

710. Corollary. If, owing to the connections of the 
system, the angle between an impulse and the change of 
velocity caused by it is not zero (§ 703), then this angle is as 



264 SECOND BOOK ohap. 

small as possible, consistently with the connections of the 
system. 

For, if we draw a plane triangle whose sides represent the 
magnitude of the impulse divided by the mass of the system, 
the magnitude of any possible change of velocity and the 
magnitude of the difference of these two quantities, that is to 
say, the constraint which corresponds to this change of velocity, 
then the angle e included between the first two sides represents 
the angle between the impulse and the change of velocity (§ 34). 
Now a possible change of velocity in a. given direction may 
take all values ; but amongst all the changes of velocity in 
given directions, the natural one can only be that in which 
the constraint is perpendicular to the change of velocity 
(§ 708). If, then, we restrict ourselves to those changes of 
velocity which are subject to^this consideration, all the triangles 
to be drawn are right-angled, and the hypothenuse is equal in 
all and is given. But the side opposite to the angle e is 
smaller for the natural change of velocity than for any other 
(§ 708) ; therefore, for this change of velocity the angle e itself 
is a minimum, which proves the proposition. 

711. Proposition 2. The direction of the constraint in 
an impulse is perpendicular to every possible (virtual) dis- 
placement of the system from its instantaneous position. 

For by §§ 707, 689, the components of the constraint can 
be represented in the form 

1 k 

Thus (§ 250) the constraint as a vector quantity is perpen- 
dicular to every possible displacement of the system. The 
proposition may also be immediately deduced from § 500. 

712. Symbolical Expression. If we denote by Sp p the 
changes of the coordinates p ? for every possible dis- 
placement of the system, then the foregoing proposition can be 
expressed in the form of the symbolical equation 

r 

2>(? rt -?,o-J,,)8p, = (i). 

1 

which, for rectangular coordinates, takes the form 



vi DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 265 

3 ft 

(cf. §§ 393, 501). 

713. Observation. The foregoing proposition (§ 711) 
contains the adaptation of d'Alembert's Principle to the par- 
ticular case of impulses, and the symbolical form § 712 is the 
usual expression for this adaptation. 

714. Corollary 1. The component of the change of 
motion in the direction of every possible motion produced by an 
impulse is equal to the component of the impulse in that 
direction divided by the mass of the system. 

715. Corollary 2. The component of the change of 
motion produced by an impulse in the direction of every free 
coordinate is equal to the component of the impulse along 
this coordinate divided by the mass of the system. 

716. Corollary 3. The component of the velocity along 
every coordinate of absolute position changes by an amount 
which is equal to the component of the impulse acting in that 
direction divided by the mass of the system — whatever be the 
connections of the system. 

717. Observation. Without any knowledge, or without 
a complete knowledge of the connection between the masses of 
a system, we can always find six equations for the motion of a 
system under the action of an impulse. If we choose as co- 
ordinates of absolute position the six quantities a lf <z 2 , a 3 , co ly 
c» 2 , g> 3 , introduced in § 402, then the six equations which 
we obtain represent the adaptation of the Principle of the 
Centre of Gravity and of Areas to the particular case of 
impulses. 

Energy, Work 

718. Definition. The increase of the energy of a system 
produced by an impulse acting on the system is called the 
work of the impulse. 

Any decrease of the energy owing to an impulse is regarded 
as a negative increase. Thus the work of an impulse may be 
positive or negative. 



266 SECOND BOOK chap. 

719. Corollary. The work of an impulse is the time- 
integral of the work performed by that force whose time- 
integral is the impulsa 

720. Proposition. The work of an impulse is equal to 
the product of the magnitude of the impulse and the com- 
ponent in its direction of the mean value of the initial and 
final velocities of the system. 

For whatever may be the actual values of the force acting 
during the time of the impulse and the motion of the system 
during this time, the final motion, and consequently the work 
of the impulse, will be the same as though the force acted with 
a constant mean value in the direction of the impulse. Now, 
if we make this simple assumption, then, firstly, the magnitude 
of the force acting is equal to the magnitude of the impulse 
divided by its duration. Secondly, the velocity changes uni- 
formly from its initial to its final value, and its mean value is 
the arithmetic mean of the initial and final values. The com- 
ponent of the portion of the path described during the impulse 
is, however, equal to the component of that mean value, multi- 
plied by the time. Then, if we calculate by § 513 the work 
performed by the force during its time of application, i.e. the 
work of the impulse, the time drops out and the proposition 
follows. 

721. Observation. With the notation hitherto used, the 
analytical expression for the proposition is the statement that 
the work of the impulse is equal to 

r 

£2'W P i+£po)- 
i 

722. Corollary 1. The work of an impulse is equal to 
the product of the impulse and the component of the original 
velocity taken in its direction, increased by half the product of 
the magnitude of the impulse and the component in its direc- 
tion of the change of velocity produced by it 

The analytical expression for this is that the work of the 
impulse is equal to 

r r 

i i 

which coincides with § 721. 



vi DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 267 

723. Corollary 2. The work of an impulse which sets 
in motion a system at rest is equal to half the product of the 
impulse, and the component in its direction of the velocity 
produced by it 

For if the quantities p^ are zero, then the work of the im- 
pulse is 

r » 

1 

724. Proposition. If a system at rest is set in motion 
by an impulse, then it moves in that direction in which the 
impulse performs the most work, i.e. in which it performs 
more work than it would if it were compelled to move in any 
other direction by additional connections. (The so-called 
Bertr&nd's Law.) 

For if J is the magnitude of the impulse, v that of the 
velocity produced, and € the angle between them, then for 
every original or additional connection we have by § 714 

J 

V = — COS €. 

m 
Thus the work of the impulse is by § 723 equal to 

J2 

AJv cos € = — cos 2 €. 
2 2m 

But the angle e for the natural action of the impulse takes 
(§ 710) the smallest value consistent with the original connec- 
tion, and consequently c can only be increased by any addi- 
tional connection, i.e. cos 2 e decreased, which proves the 
proposition. 

725. Corollary. The energy which an impulse on a 
system at rest produces in that system is greater the fewer the 
connections of the system. The greatest possible value of that 
energy, which, however, can only be attained by dropping all 
the connections, is equal to the square of the magnitude of the 
impulse divided by twice the mass of the system. 

Impact of Two Systems 

Explanations 

726. 1. We say that two systems impinge when they 
behave as though they had been coupled for a very short time. 



268 SECOND BOOK chap. 

We assume this coupling to be direct by assuming (§452) a 
special choice of the coordinates of the two systems. 

727. 2. We have to conceive such a temporary coupling 
as a permanent coupling of the two systems with a third 
unknown system which possesses the property that it in 
general has no effect on their motion, but that in the im- 
mediate neighbourhood of those positions in which certain 
coordinates of the one system are equal to certain coordinates 
of the other it constrains these coordinates to remain tem- 
porarily equal. We call such coordinates the common coor- 
dinates of the two systems. 

728. 3. Before and after the impact the rates of change 
of the coordinates of each of the two systems are subject simply 
to the equations of condition of its own system. But during 
the impulse the rates of change of the common coordinates are 
also related by the equations of coupling. These rates of change, 
then, just like the coordinates themselves, must during the 
impulse have become respectively equal and must have re- 
mained so for a time. But the time in which this takes place 
we regard as vanishingly small, and what takes place during 
this time as quite unknown. We consider the systems only 
before and after the impulse, and expect that only such informa- 
tion with regard to the impact will be required as can be given 
without a knowledge of what takes place during the impact 

729. Problem. To determine the subsequent motion of 
two impinging systems from their motion before the impact, as 
far as is possible without a knowledge of what takes place 
during the impulse. 

Let the quantities p ? be the r coordinates of the one 
system and p p the r coordinates of the other. Let the number 
of common coordinates be 8. In the impact each of the 
systems suffers an impulse ; let the components of the im- 
pulse on the first system be J p and on the second 3 p . 
Quantities before and after the impulse will be distinguished 
by the indices and 1. 

Now, in the first place, for all coordinates of the first 
system equations of the form § 689 (v) hold good, and for all 
coordinates of the second system corresponding equations. In 
the second place, the impulses which the two systems suffer 



VI DISCONTINUITIES OF MOTION 269 

stand in the relation of impulse and counter-impulse, and 
consequently for all common coordinates we have by §§ 682, 
683, 

aud for all the coordinates of the two systems which are not 
common, 

J P = 0, 3 p =0. 

If now we combine the two relations we obtain for the $ 
common coordinates, s equations of the form 

k t 

?pi-?po+2 x -Pxp j x= -qpi+q*)-2 x Pxp3x w- 

i i 

while for the (r — s) + (t — s) coordinates which are not common, 
r - s equations of the form 

k 

1 

and (t — s) of the form 

t 

qpi-qpo+2 x Pxp3x=° ( iJi ) 

i 

are obtained. The equations (i), (ii), (iii), together with the 
k + k equations of condition of the two systems, we may 
regard as equations for the quantities p pl and p pl , which deter- 
mine the motion of the system after the impulse, and for the 
quantities J x and 3 X . We have thus altogether r + r — s + k + k 
unhomogeneous linear equations which the r + x + k + ft un- 
knowns must satisfy and which contain the requirements of 
the problem. 

730. Observation. If the coordinates p and p p are free 
coordinates of their systems, then the equations of impact can 
be written in a simpler form. By paying attention to the 
common coordinates of the system, s equations of the form 

will be obtained ; for the coordinates of the first system 
which are not common, r — $ equations of the form 

Q P i - U ( u ) ; 



270 SECOND BOOK 



CHAP. 



and for the coordinates of the second system which are not 
common, r — s equations of the form 

these give r + X — s equations to determine the r + x unknowns 
P P i and p pl . 

731. Corollary 1. The motion of two systems after im- 
pact is not completely determined by their motion before im- 
pact and the general laws of mechanics, but its determination 
requires also a knowledge of further relations obtained from 
other sources. The number of these additional necessary rela- 
tions is equal to the number of common coordinates during the 
impact. 

732. Corollary 2. If in an impact it is possible to 
obtain, in addition to the relations deduced from the general 
laws of mechanics, as many linear equations for the components 
of the velocity after the impact as there are common coor- 
dinates, then the motion after the impact is singly determined 
by means of the previous motion. 

733. Observation. The special relations which are neces- 
sary for the determination of the motion in an impact, and 
which do not spring from the general laws of mechanics, 
depend on the special nature of that system which causes the 
coupling and whose peculiarities are not known to us in 
detail. It is this concealed system which takes up the 
energy lost by the impinging systems, or which supplies the 
energy gained by the impinging systems. The first case 
occurs, for instance, in an inelastic impact where the im- 
mediate neighbourhood of the point of impact is to be regarded 
as the coupling system. The second case occurs in explosions. 
The detailed consideration of these special relations is, how- 
ever, not a part of general mechanics. 

Concluding Note on the Second Book 

734. In this second book our object has not been to deter- 
mine the necessary relations between the creations of our own 
mind, but rather to consider the experiential connections between 



VI CONCLUDING NOTE 271 

the objects of our external observation. It was therefore in- 
evitable that our investigations should be founded not only on 
the laws of thought, but also on the results of previous experi- 
ence. As the necessary contribution of experience, we thus 
took from our observation of nature the fundamental law. 

735. At first it might have appeared that the fundamental 
law was far from sufficient to embrace the whole extent of facts 
which nature offers us and the representation of which is'already 
contained in the ordinary system of mechanics. For while the 
fundamental law assumes continuous and normal connections, 
the common applications of mechanics bring us face to face with 
discontinuous and abnormal connections as well. And while the 
fundamental law expressly refers to free systems only, we are also 
compelled to investigate unfree systems. Even all the normal, 
continuous, and free systems of nature do not conform imme- 
diately to the law, but seem to be partly in contradiction to it. 
We saw, however, that we could also investigate abnormal and 
discontinuous systems if we regarded their abnormalities and 
discontinuities as only apparent ; that we could also follow the 
motion of unfree systems if we conceived them as portions of free 
systems ; that, finally, even systems apparently contradicting the 
fundamental law could be rendered conformable to it by admit- 
ting the possibility of concealed masses in them. Although 
we have associated with the fundamental law neither additional 
experiential facts nor arbitrary assumptions, yet we have been 
able to range over the whole domain covered by mechanics in 
general Nor does our special hypothesis prevent us from 
understanding that mechanics could and must have been 
developed in the manner in which it actually has developed. 

In conclusion, then, we may assert that the fundamental 
law is not only necessary but also sufficient to represent com- 
pletely the part which experience plays in the general laws of 
mechanics. 



I 

i 



INDEX TO DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS 



(Numbers refer to paragraphs.) 



Acceleration, 273 

Action, 613 

Adiabatic motion, 560 

Analytical energy, 611 

Angle between two displacements, 34/43 

Common coordinates, 452 
Component of a displacement, 48 
Components along the coordinates, 71, 

241 ; of a force, 478 ; of an impulse, 

685 ; of a vector, 241 
Concealed masses, motions, coordinates, 

595 
Conceivable motion, 257 ; position, 11 
Condition of a system, 261 
Configuration, 14 
Connection, 109 

Conservative systems, forces, 601, 662 
Constraint, 385 ; in impact, 705 
Continuous connection, 115 
Coordinates of absolute position, 16 ; of 

configuration, 15 
Counter-force, 456 
Counter-impulse, 679 
Coupled systems, 450 
Coupling, 450 
Curvature of a path, 103 
Cyclical coordinates, 546 ; intensity, 

549 ; 8ystem } 549 

Degrees of freedom, 134 

Difference between two displacements, 
51 ; in direction between two dis- 
placements, 84, 48 

Differential equations of motion, 367 ; of 
a system, 131 

Direction of a coordinate, 69 ; displace- 
ment, 24, 39 ; path, 99 ; vector 
quantity, 239 

Displacement, 22, 27 ; in direction of a 
coordinate, 69 ; perpendicular to a 
surface, 206 

Displacements perpendicular to one 
another, 45 



Dissipative forces, systems, 663 
Distance between two positions, 29 

Elementary force, 475 ; impulse, 686 

Equations of condition, 181 ; motion, 367 

Energy, 282 

Entropy, 585 

Equal displacements, 25, 41 

Equilibrium, 517 

Force, 455 ; along the coordinates, 460 
Force-function, 563 ; of a conservative 

system, 603 
Free coordinate, 189 ; system, 122 
Freedom of motion, 134 

Geodesic path, 171 
Guided motion, system, 481 

Holonomous system, 123 

Identical displacements, 25, 41 
Impossible displacements, 111 
Impulse, impulsive force, 677 
Inclination of two displacements, 34, 43 
Internal connection, 117 ; constraint, 

385 ; do. in impact, 705 
Infinitely small displacement, 54 
Isocyclic motion, 560 

Kinetic energy, 605 

Length of a path, 99 ; of a displacement, 
23, 29 

Magnitude of a displacement, 23, 29 

Machines, 531 

Mass, 4, 300 

Material particle, 8 ; point, 5 ; system, 121 

Mathematical energy, 611 

Model of a system, 418 

Momentum, 268 ; along a coordinate, 268 

Monocyclic system, 549 

Motion, 256 



274 



PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS 



Natukal motion, 312 
Non-conservative systems, forces, 663 
Normal connection, 119 

Orthogonal trajectory, 211 

Parallel displacements, 25, 41 

Parameter, 549 

Path-element, 98 

Path of a system, 97 

Perpendicular displacements to one 

another, 45 ; to a surface, 206 
Position, 9, 10, 54 
Possible displacements, 111 ; motion, 

258 ; paths, positions, 112 
Potential energy, 605 

Quadratic mean value, 28 
Quantity of motion, 268 

Reaction, 679 

Reduced components, 71, 241 
Resultant of forces, 472 
Resulting impulse, 685 



Series of surfaces, 209 

Shortest path, 166 

Space, 2, 299 

Straight path, 101 

Straighter element of path, 157 

Straightest element of path, 152 ; 
distance, 215 ; path, 153 

Sum of two displacements, 50 

Surfaces of positions, 200 

System of material points, 6 ; with con- 
cealed masses, 594 

Time, 2,298 

Trajectory (orthogonal), 211 

Uniform motion, 263 

Vector quantity, 237 

Velocity, 261 

Virtual displacements, 111 

Visible masses, motions, coordinates, 595 

Vis viva, 605 

Work of a force, of an impulse, 510, 718
