Electric Waves (Heinrich Hertz (D. E. Jones, trans.), 1900)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.110688). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

WA TAI AT 


00052163 


=. 


SRKEKREREAME SS U0 5S OS GAAS KEGSSGCTEL ES OEE 
2 NOT TO BEFSSUED OUT 

% WITHOUT PERMISSION. _ 
~ 


mn ie 


ORYLLY WLWSE LKR VTS WHS Ay ee KUNE PT NE LER wOREY I we 


o 
Re 


POROPRREROSOROOCO OOOO 
BOMBAY BRANCH 3 
g OF THE 3 | 
« ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY » ! 
; Town Hatt, Bomsay. 3 
CBRE RAIAIII PRGA) 


Digitized with financial assistance from 


Hemendra Kothari 


on 06 November, 2019 


ELECTRIC WAVES 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS. 


With an Introduction by P. Lenarp. 
Translated by D. E. Jones and G. A. Scnort. 


8vo. 10s, net. 


NATURE :—“ Prof. Lenard has earned much gratitude for his Introduction. It 
gives a charming picture of Hertz, of his simplicity, his devotion to science, his loving 
regard for his parents. There is just enough added to the very well-selected letters to 
give the reader a continuous view of Hertz’s work, and enable him to follow its 
developnient, and hence feel an interest in it and sympathy with the worker, thug 
fulfilling the best ideal of the biographer.” 

KNOWLEDGE :—“ The volume commands a place in the library of every institu- 
tion and individual interested in physical research. It is a monument to a scientific 
genius, and as an example of good translation it will be difficult to excel.” 

ELECTRICAL REVIEW :—‘If @ work is to be judged by its fruit, it would be 
difficult to name a series of more valuable contributions to physical science than those 
made by the lamented Hertz. . . . The book has been well done into English by the 
translators. It contains very little trace of the heaviness that is generally felt, about 
translations from the German, a circumstance for which we have no doubt to thank the 
skill of the translators as much as the style of the author.” 

{ 


THE PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS. 


Presented in a New Form. 


With an Introduction by H. von HELMHOLTZ. 
Translated by D. E. Jones and J. T. Wat.ey. 


8vo. 10s. net. 


ENGINEER :—“ A very remarkable book. . . . A book which it is impossible to 
pass over in silence, fraught as it is with infinite possibilities of the future, It re- 
presents the latest work of one of the finest intellects of the century.” 

SCOTSMAN :-— The English version is a work of excellent scholarship, and merits 
the attentive study of every one more than superficially interested in physical research.” 

NATURE :—“ A rendering which admirably conveys the spirit of the original. .. . 
Should serve to make more widely known @ book which certainly ought to be read by 
onthes wish to have clear ideas concerning the most fundamental of the physical 
subjects.” 


ELECTRIC WAVES 


BEING 


RESEARCHES ON THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC 
ACTION WITH FINITE VELOCITY 


THROUGH SPACE 2g g g 
22163 | p 


AC ‘ 
HEINRICH HERTZ 


LATE PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF BONN 


BY 


AUTHORISED ENGLISH TRANSLATION 


By D. E. JONES, B.Sc. 


DISTRICT INSPECTOR UNDER THE BOARD OF EDUCATION 
LATELY PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS IN THE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF WALES, ABERYSTWYTH 


WITH A PREFACE 
By LORD KELVIN, G..V.0, M.A, LLD., DOL. ERS, FRSE, DL. 


FELLOW OF 8T, PETER'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 
PRESIDENT ROYAL SOCIETY, EDINBURGH 


London 
MACMILLAN AND CO., Limitep 


NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


1900 


All rights reserved 


Caecd 
Sod sl 
Were e. 


“2.6 5 


irst Edition, 1894; Second Edition, 1900, 


00052163 


Dedicated 
BY THE AUTHOR 
TO 
HIS EXCELLENCY 


HERMANN VON HELMHOLTZ 


WITH THE DEEPEST RESPECT AND GRATITUDE 


TRANSLATORS NOTE 


THE publishers of Wiedemann’s Annalen, being unable to 
comply with the numerous applications made for copies of 
Professor Hertz’s researches, invited him to prepare his papers 
for publication in a collected form. To recast or thoroughly 
revise them would have been a serious undertaking; and 
researches are most easily understood when described from the 
standpoint from which they are undertaken. It was therefore 
felt best to reprint the separate papers in the form in which 
they were originally published; but Professor Hertz for- 
tunately decided to supplement the papers by explanatory 
notes, and to write an Introduction, in which he describes the 
manner in which the investigations were undertaken, and also 
discusses their bearing upon electrical theory and the criticisms 
to which they have been subjected. The collected researches 
were published early last year under the title, Untersuchungen 
tiber die Ausbreitung der Elektrischen Kraft. 

The book now presented to the English reader is a transla- 
tion of the German original, with only one or two slight alter- 
ations in the notes, and a change, suggested by Lord Kelvin, in 
the title. JI would scarcely have undertaken the translation 
if I had not been able to rely upon the supervision and kind 
assistance which Professor Hertz has most freely given, and 


for which my heartiest thanks are due. I have had the 
b 


viii TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 


advantage of revising the proofs with him in Bonn, and now 
trust that no serious error will have escaped notice. 

For advice and help in seeing the book through the press, 
I am indebted to several friends; but most especially to Dr. 
Philipp Lenard, Privat-docené in the University of Bonn. Dr. 
Lenard has not only read and revised the translation from 
start to finish, but has shown as keen an interest in it as if it , 
were his own work. I am very glad to have this opportunity 
of acknowledging his valuable assistance, and of thanking him 
most warmly for-his kindness. 


D. E. JONES. 


StarrorD, December 1893. 


PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 


To fully appreciate the work now offered to the English 
reading public, we must carry our minds back two hundred 
years to the time when Newton made known to the world the 
law of universal gravitation. The idea that the sun pulls 
Jupiter, and Jupiter pulls back against the sun with equal 
‘force, and that the sun, earth, moon, and planets all act on 
one another with mutual attractions seemed to violate the 
supposed philosophic principle that matter cannot act where it 
is not. The explanation of the motions of the planets by a 
mechanism of crystal cycles and epicycles seemed natural and 
intelligible, and the improvement on this mechanism invented 

by Descartes in his vortices was no doubt quite satisfactory to 
‘some of the greatest of Newton’s scientific contemporaries, 
Descartes’s doctrine died hard among the mathematicians and 
philosophers of continental Europe; and for the first quarter 
of last century belief in universal gravitation was an insularity 
of our countrymen. 

Voltaire, referring to a visit which he made to England in 
1727, wrote: “A Frenchman who arrives in London finds a 
* great alteration in philosophy, as in other things. He left the 
world full; he finds it empty. At Paris you see the univers 
composed of vortices of subtile matter; at London we +r 
nothing of the kind. With you it is the pressure of 
moon which causes the tides of the sea; in England it ij 
sea which gravitates towards the moon. . . . You will cy 
also that the sun, which in France has nothing to do v 
business, here comes in for a quarter of it. Among 
tesians all is done by impulsion; with the Newto 
done by an attraction of which we know the cause 


1 Whewell’s History of the Inductive Sciences, vol. ii. p 


x PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION: 


Indeed, the Newtonian opinions had scarcely any disciples in 
France till Voltaire asserted their claims on his return from 
England in 1728. ‘Till then, as he himself says, there were 
not twenty Newtonians out of England? 

In the second quarter of the century sentiment and 
opinion in France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy ex- 
perienced a great change. “The mathematical prize questions 
proposed by the French Academy naturally brought the two 
sets of opinions into conflict.” A Cartesian memoir of John 
Bernoulli was the one which gained the prize in 1730. It 
not infrequently happened that the Academy, as if desirous to 
show its impartiality, divided the prize between Cartesians and 
Newtonians. Thus, in 1734, the question being the cause of 
the inclination of the orbits of the planets, the prize was shared 
between John Bernoulli, whose memoir was founded on the 
system of vortices, and his son Daniel, who was a Newtonian. 
The last act of homage of this kind to the Cartesian system 
was performed in 1740, when the prize on the question of the 
tides was distributed between Daniel Bernoulli, Euler, Mac- 
laurin, and Cavallieri; the last of whom had tried to amend 
and patch up the Cartesian hypothesis on this subject.” 

On the 4th February 1744 Daniel Bernoulli ‘wrote as 
follows to Euler: “ Uebrigens glaube ich, dass der Aether sowohl 
gravis versus solem, als die Luft versus terram sey, und kann 

‘Ihnen nicht bergen, dass ich iiber diese Puncte ein vélliger 
Newtonianer bin, und verwundere ich mich, dass sie den Prin- 
cipiis Cartesianis so lang adhdriren; es méchte wohl einige 
Passion vielleicht mit unterlaufen. Hat Gott kénnen eine 
animam, deren Natur uns unbegreiflich ist, erschaffen, so hat er 
. auch kénnen eine attractionem universalem materiaeimprimiren, 
venn gleich solche attractio supra captum ist, da hingegen die 
incipia Cartesiana allzeit contra captum etwas involviren.” 
| Here the writer, expressing wonder that Euler had so long 
ed to the Cartesian principles, declares himself a thorough- 
Newtonian, not merely in respect to gravitation versus 
but in believing that matter may have been created 
ith the law of universal attraction without the aid of 
e medium or mechanism. But in this he was more 
han Newton himself. 


y of the Inductive Sciences, vol. ii. p.201. 7 Llid. pp. 198, 199. 


PREFACE TO THE nexisi EDITION xi 


_ 4 Indeed Newton was not a Newtonian, according to Daniel 
Bernoulli’s idea of Newtonianism, for in his letter to Bentley of 
date 25th February 1692,' he wrote: “ That gravity should be 
innate, inherent, and essential to matter, so that one body may 
act upon another at a distance through a vacuum without the 
mediation of anything else, by and through which their action 
and force may be conveyed from one to another, is to me so 
great an absurdity that I believe no man who has in philo- 
sophical matters a competent faculty of thinking, can ever fall 
into it.” Thus Newton, in giving out his great law, did not 
abandon the idea that matter cannot act where it is not. In 
respect, however, merely of philosophic thought, we must feel 
that Daniel Bernoulli was right; we can conceive the sun 
attracting Jupiter, and Jupiter attracting the sun, without any 
intermediate medium, if they are ordered to do so. But the 
question remains—Are they so ordered? Nevertheless, I be- 
lieve all, or nearly all, his scientific contemporaries agreed with 
Daniel Bernoulli in answering this question affirmatively. 
Very soon after the middle of the eighteenth century Father 
Boscovich * gave his brilliant doctrine (if infinitely improbable 
theory) that elastic rigidity of solids, the elasticity of com- 
pressible liquids and gases, the attractions of chemical affinity 
and cohesion, the forces of electricity and magnetism ; in short, 
all the properties of matter except heat, which he attributed 
to a sulphureous essence, are to be explained by’ mutual 
attractions and repulsions, varying solely with distances, 
between mathematical points endowed also, each of them, with 
inertia. Before the end of the eighteenth century the idea of 
action-at-a-distance through absolute vacuum had become so 
firmly established, and Boscovich’s theory so unqualifiedly 
accepted as a reality, that the idea of gravitational force or 
electric force or magnetic force being propagated through and 
by a medium, seemed as wild to the naturalists and mathe- 
maticians of one hundred years ago as action-at-a-distance 
had seemed to Newton and his contemporaries one hundrec 
years earlier. But a retrogression from the eighteenth centv 
school of science set in early in the nineteenth century. 


1 The Correspondence of Richard Bentley, D.D., vol. i. p. 70. 
2 Theoria Philosophie Naturalis redacta ad unicam legem virium 
existentium auctore P. Rogerio Josepho Boscovich, Societatis Jesu, fir 
Vienna, 1758. Second edition, amended and extended by the Author, * 


xii PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 


Faraday, with his curved lines of electric force, and his 
dielectric efficiency of air and of liquid and solid insulators, 
resuscitated the idea of a medium through which, and not only 
through which but by which, forces of attraction or repulsion, 
seemingly acting at a distance, are transmitted. The long 
struggle of the first half of the eighteenth century was not 
merely on the question of a medium to serve for gravific 
mechanism, but on the correctness of the Newtonian law of 
gravitation as a matter of fact however explained. The 
corresponding controversy in the nineteenth century was very 
short, and it soon became obvious that Faraday’s idea of the 
transmission of electric force by a medium not only did not 
violate Coulomb’s law of relation between force and distance, 
but that, if real, it must give a thorough explanation of that 
law.’ Nevertheless, after Faraday’s discovery * of the different 
specific inductive capacities of different insulators, twenty years 
passed before it was generally accepted in continental Europe. 
But before his death, in 1867, he had succeeded in inspiring 
the rising generation of the scientific world with something 
approaching to faith that electric force is transmitted by a 
medium called ether, of which, as had been believed by the 
whole scientific world for forty years, light and radiant heat 
are transverse vibrations. Faraday himself did not rest with 
this theory for electricity alone. The very last time I saw him 
at work in the Royal Institution was in an underground cellar, 
which he had chosen for freedom from disturbance; and he 
was arranging experiments to test the time of propagation of 
magnetic force from an electromagnet through a distance of 
many yards of air to a fine steel needle polished to reflect light ; 
but no result came from those experiments. About the same 
time or soon after, certainly not long before the end of his 
working time, he was engaged (I believe at the shot tower near 
Waterloo Bridge on the Surrey side) in efforts to discover 
relations between gravity and magnetism, which also led to no 
result. “ 
Absolutely nothing has hitherto been’ done for gravity 
r by experiment or observation towards deciding between 


trostatics and Magnetism, Sir W. Thomson, Arts. I. (1842) and II. 
rticularly § 25 of Art. II. 
Experimental Researches, 1161-1306. 


PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION xiii 


Newton and Bernoulli, as to the question of its propagation 
through a medium, and up to the present time we have 
no light, even so much as to point a way for investigation in 
that direction. But for electricity and magnetism Faraday’s 
anticipations and Clerk-Maxwell’s splendidly developed theory 
have been established on the sure basis of experiment by Hertz’s 
work, of which his own most interesting account is now pre- 
sented to the English reader by his translator, Professor D. 
E. Jones. It is interesting to know, as Hertz explains in his 
introduction, and it is very important in respect to the experi- 
mental demonstration of magnetic waves to which he was led, 
that he began his electric researches in a problem happily put 
before him thirteen years ago by Professor von Helmholtz, 
of which the object was to find by experiment some relation 
between electromagnetic forces'and dielectric polarisation of 
insulators, without, in the first place, any idea of discovering a 
progressive propagation of those forces through space. 

It was by sheer perseverance in philosophical experimenting 
that Hertz was led to discover (VII, p. 107 below) a finite 
velocity of propagation of electromagnetic action, and then to - 
pass on to electromagnetic waves in air and their reflection . 
(VITI.), and to be able to say, as he says in a short reviewing 
sentence at the end of VIII.: “Certainly it is a fascinating 
idea that the processes in air which we have been investigating, 
represent to us on a million-fold larger scale the same pro- 
cesses which go on in the neighbourhood of a Fresnel 
mirror or between the glass plates used for exhibiting 
Newton’s rings.” 

Professor Oliver Lodge has done well, in connection with 
Hertz’s work, to call attention’ to old experiments, and ideas 
taken from them, by Jos Henry, which came more nearly 
to an experimental demonstration of electromagnetic waves 
than anything that had, been done previously. Indeed Henry, 
after describing experiments showing powerful enough induction 
due to a single spark from the prime conductor of an electric 
machine to magnetise steel needles at a distance of 30 feet i 
a cellar beneath with two floors and ceilings intervening, F 
that he is “disposed to adopt the hypothesis of an elec 
plenum,” and concludes with a short reviewing sentenc 


1 Modern Views of Electricity, pp. 369-372. 


xiv PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 


may be further inferred that the diffusion of motion in this 
case is almost comparable with that of a spark from a flint and 
steel in the case of light.” 

Professor Oliver Lodge himself did admirable work in fis 
investigations regarding lightning rods,’ coming very near to 
experimental demonstration of electromagnetic waves; and he 
drew important lessons regarding “electrical surgings” in an 
insulated bar of metal “induced by Maxwell’s and Heaviside’s 
electromagnetic waves,” and many other corresponding pheno- 
mena manifested both in ingenious and excellent experiments 
devised by himself and in natural effects of lightning. 

Of electrical surgings or waves in a short insulated wire, 
and of interference between ordinary and reflected waves, and 
positive electricity appearing where negative might have been 
expected, we hear first it seems in Herr von Bezold’s 
“Researches on the Electric Discharge” (1870), which Hertz 
gives as the Third Paper in the present series, with interesting 
and ample recognition of its importance in relation to his own 
great work. 

Readers of the present volume will, I am sure, be pleased 
if I call their attention to two papers by Prof. G. F. Fitzgerald 
which I heard myself at the meeting of the British Association 
at Southport in 1883. One of them is entitled, “On a 
Method of producing ‘Electromagnetic Disturbances of com- 
paratively Short Wave-lengths.” The paper itself is not long, 
and I quote it here in full, as it appeared in the Report 
of the British Association, 1883: “This is by utilising the 
alternating currents produced when an accumulator is dis- 
charged through a small resistance. It is possible to produce 
waves of as little as two metres wave-length, or even less.” 
This was a brilliant and useful suggestion. Hertz, not knowing 
of it, used the method ; and, making as little as possible of the 
“accumulator,” got waves of as little as twenty-four centimetres 
wave-length in many of his fundamental experiments. The 
title alone of the other paper, “On the Energy lost by Radia- 
ion from Alternatitig Currents,” is in itself a valuable lesson 
the electromagnetic theory of light, or the undulatory theory 
agnetic disturbance. The reader of the present volume 


peng Conductors and Lightning Guards, Oliver J. Lodge, D.Sc., F.R.S. 
r and Co, 


PREFACE TO THE mois EDITION xv 


will be interested in comparing it with the title of Hertz’s 
Eleventh Paper; but I cannot refer to this paper without 
expressing the admiration and delight with which I see the 
words “rectilinear propagation,” “polarisation,” “reflection,” 
“refraction,” appearing in it as sub-titles. 

During the fifty-six years which have passed since Faraday 
first offended physical mathematicians with his curved lines of 
force, many workers and many thinkers have helped to build 
up the nineteenth-century school of plenum, one ether for 
light, heat, electricity, magnetism; and the German and 
English volumes containing Hertz’s electrical papers, given to 
the world in the last decade of the century, will be a per- 
manent monument of the splendid consummation now realised. 


KELVIN, 


XI. 


x XIL. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION— 
A. EXPERIMENTAL . . ‘ . . P 
B. THEORETICAL ‘ 5 ‘ ‘ . 


On Very Rarip ELEcTRic OscILLATIONS. . < ‘ 


From Herr W. von Brzoun’s Paper: ‘‘ RESEARCHES ON THE 
Evzotric DischaRGE—PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION” 


On aN Errect oF Utrra-Vioter Lieut uPoN THE ELEcTRIC 
DiscHARGE wz : - ‘ 3 5 ‘i 


Ow THE AcTION or A RectTiuingaR Exectric OscILLATION 
UPON A NEIGHBOURING CIRCUIT i : . - 


On ELeorroMaGNETIC EFFECTS PRODUCED BY ELECTRICAL 
DIsTURBANCES IN INSULATORS 5 . ‘ . 


On THE Finire VELOCITY oF PropaGATION oF ELEcTRO- 
MAGNETIC ACTIONS ‘ . " . 5 7 


On ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION. 


THE Forces or Exectric OscILLATIONS, TREATED ACCORDING 
To MaxwELu’s THEORY . . A é Fi 


ON THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY MEANS OF 
WIREs . . ; < ‘ 3 ‘ : 


On Exzotric RapiaTION . ‘ . ‘ . 3 
On THE MecHANICAL AcTION OF ELECTRIC WAVES IN WIREs . 


On THE FUNDAMENTAL EquaTions oF ELECTROMAGNETICS FOR 
Bopirs at Rest : t 2 5 Pi . 


XIV. On tHe FunpamEnraL Equations oF ELECTROMAGNETICS FOR 

Bopres In Motion. mar ° ‘ _ - 
SUPPLEMENTARY Notes . . : ie OO é 
INDEX TO NamEs . 7 . ; ; z : ‘ 


54 


63 


80 


95 


107 
124 


137 


160 
172 
186 


195 


241 
269 
279 


I 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Experimental 


I HAVE often been asked how I was first led to carry out the 
experiments which are described in the following pages. The 
general inducement was this. In the year 1879 the Berlin 
Academy of Science had offered a prize for a research on the 
following problem :—To establish experimentally any relation 
between electromagnetic forces and the dielectric polarisation 
of insulators—that is to say, either an electromagnetic force 
exerted by polarisations in non-conductors, or the polarisation 
of a non-conductor as an effect of electromagnetic induc- 
tion. As I was at that time engaged upon electromagnetic 
researches at the Physical Institute in Berlin, Herr von 
Helmholtz drew my attention to this problem, and promised 
that I should have the assistance of the Institute in case I 
decided to take up the work. I reflected on the problem, and 
considered what results might be expected under favourable 
conditions by using the oscillations of Leyden jars or of open 
induction-coils. The conclusion at which I arrived was 
certainly not what I had wished for; it appeared that any 
decided effect could scarcely be hoped for, but only an action 
lying just within the limits of observation. I therefore gave 
up the idea of working at the problem; nor am I aware that 
it has been attacked by anybody else. But in spite of having | 
abandoned the solution at that time, I still. felt ambitious to 

discover it by some other method; and my interest in every- 
thing connected with electric oscillations had become keener. 
It was scarcely possible that I should overlook any new form 

B 


2 INTRODUCTION 


of such oscillations, in case a happy chance should bring such 
within my notice. 

Such a chance occurred to me in the spring of 1886, and 
brought with it the special inducement to take up the follow- 
ing researches. In the collection of physical instruments at 
the Technical High School at Karlsruhe (where these researches 
were carried out), I had found and used for lecture purposes a 
pair of so-called Riess or Knochenhauer spirals. I had been 
surprised to find that it was not necessary to discharge large 
batteries through one of these spirals in order to obtain 
sparks in the other; that small Leyden jars amply sufficed for 
this purpose, and that even the discharge of a small induction- 
coil would do, provided it had to spring across a spark-gap. 
In altering the conditions I came upon the phenomenon of # 
side-sparks which formed the starting-point of the following 
research. At first I thought the electrical disturbances 
would be too turbulent and irregular to be of any further 
use; but when I had discovered the existence of a neutral 
point in the middle of a side-conductor, and therefore of 
a clear and orderly phenomenon, I felt convinced that the 
problem of the Berlin Academy was now capable of solution. 
My ambition at the time did not go further than this. My 
conviction was naturally strengthened by finding that the 
oscillations with which I had to deal were regular. The first 
of the papers here republished (“On very Rapid Electric 
Oscillations ”) gives, generally in the actual order of time, the 
course of the investigation as far as it was carried out up to 
the end of the year 1886 and the beginning of 1887. 

While this paper was in the press I learned that its contents 
were not as new as I had believed them to be. The Geographical 
Congress of April 1887 brought Herr W. von Bezold to Karls- 
ruhe and into my laboratory. I spoke to him about my experi- 
ments; he replied that years ago he had observed similar 
phenomena, and he drew my attention to his “ Researches on 
the Electric Discharge,” in vol. cxl. of Poggendorff’s Annalen. 
This paper had entirely escaped me, inasmuch as its external 
appearance seemed to indicate that it related to matters quite 
other than electric oscillations, namely, Lichtenberg figures ; 
indeed, it does not appear to have attracted such attention as 
the importance of its contents merited. In an appendix to 


I INTRODUCTIO! 3 


my paper I acknowledged Herr von Bezold’s prier claim to a 
whole series of observations. In place of this appendix, I here, 
with Herr von Bezold’s kind consent, include as the second of 
these papers that part of his communication which is of the 
most immediate interest in the present connection. It may 
now well be asked with surprise how it was possible that 
results so important and so definitely stated should have 
exercised no greater influence upon the progress of science ? 
Perhaps the fact that Herr von Bezold described his come 
munication as a preliminary one may have something.to do 
with this. 

I may here be permitted to record the good work done by 
wo English colleagues who at the same time as myself were 
wriving towards the same end. In the same year in which I 
uried out the above research, Professor Oliver Lodge, in 

iverpool, investigated the theory of the lightning-conductor, 
and in connection with this carried out a series of experiments 
on the discharge of small condensers which led him on to the 
observation of oscillations and waves in wires. Inasmuch as 
he entirely accepted Maxwell’s views, and eagerly strove to 


verify them, there can scarcely be any doubt that if I had- 


not anticipated him he would also have succeeded in 
observing waves in air, and thus also in proving the pro- 
pagation with time of electric force. Professor Fitzgerald, 
in Dublin, had some years before endeavoured to predict, 
with the aid of theory, the possibility of such waves, and 
to discover the conditions for producing them. My own 
experiments were not influenced by the researches of these 
physicists, for I only knew of them subsequently. Nor, 
indeed, do I believe that it would have been possible to 
arrive at a knowledge of these phenomena by the aid of 
theory alone. For their appearance upon the scene of our 
experiments depends not only upon their theoretical possi- 
bility, but alse upon a special and surprising property 
_of the electric spark which could not be foreseen by any 
theory. : 

By means of the experiments already mentioned I had 
succeeded in obtaining a method of exciting more rapid 
electric disturbances than were hitherfo at the disposal of 
physicists. But before I could proceed to apply this method 


4° INTRODUCTION 


to the examination of the behaviour of insulators, I had to 
finish with another investigation. Soon after starting the 
experiments I had been struck by a noteworthy reciprocal action 
between simultaneous electrical sparks. I had no intention 
of allowing this phenomenon to distract my attention from 
the main object which I had in view; but it occurred in such 
a definite and perplexing way that I could not altogether 
neglect it. For some time, indeed, I was in doubt whether 
I had not before me an altogether new form of electrical 
action-at-a-distance. The supposition that the action was due 
to light seemed to be excluded by the fact that glass plates cut 
it off; and naturally it was some time before I came to experi- 
ment with plates of rock-crystal. As soon as I knew for 
certain that I was only dealing with an effect of ultra-violet ' 
light, I put aside this investigation so as to direct my 
attention once more to the main question. Inasmuch as a 
certain acquaintance with the phenomenon is required in 
investigating the oscillations, I have reprinted the communi- 
cation relating to it (“On an Effect of Ultra-Violet Light 
upon the Electric Discharge”) as the fourth of these papers. 
A number ‘of investigators, more especially Herren Righi, 
Hallwachs, and Elster and Geitel, have helped to make our 
Knowledge of the phenomenon more accurate; nevertheless, 
the mechanics of it have not yet been completely disclosed 
to our understanding. 

The summer of 1887 was spent in fruitless endeavours 
to establish the electromagnetic influence of insulators by the 
aid of the new class of oscillations. The simplest method con- 
sisted in determining the effect of dielectrics upon the position 
of the neutral point of a side-circuit. But in that case 
I should have had to include the electrostatic forces in the 
bargain, whereas the problem consisted precisely in investi- 
gating the electromagnetic induction alone. The plan which 
I adopted was the following:—-The primary conductor’ had 
the form shown in Fig. 1; between the plates 4 and J’ at 
its ends was introduced a block BB of sulphur or paraffin, 
and this was then quickly removed. I placed the secondary 
conductor C in the same position, with respect to the 
primary, as before (the only position which I had taken 


1 The reader is assumed to be already acquainted with the papers referred to. 


I INTRODUCTION 5 


into consideration), and expected that when the block was 
in place very strong sparks would appear in the secondary, 
and that when the block was re- 
moved there would only be feeble 
sparks. This latter expectation 
was based upon the supposition 
that the electrostatic forces could 
in no case induce a spark in the 
almost closed circuit C, for since 
these forces have a potential, it 
follows that their integral over a 
nearly closed circuit is vanishingly 
small. Thus in the absence of the 
insulator we should only have to 
consider the inductive effect of the 
more distant wire ad. The experiment was frustrated by the 
invariable occurrence of strong sparking in the secondary 
conductor, so that the moderate strengthening or weakening 
effect which the insulator must exert did not make itself 
felt. It only gradually became clear to me that the 
law which I had assumed as the basis of my experiment 
did not apply here; that on account of the rapidity of the 
motion even forces which possess a potential are able to in- 
duce sparks in the nearly closed conductor; and, in general, 
that the greatest care has to be observed in applying here 
the general ideas and laws which form the basis of the 
usual electrical theories. These laws all relate to statical or 
stationary states; whereas here I had truly before me a vari- 
able state. I perceived that I had in a sense attacked the 
problem too directly. There was yet an infinite number of 
other positions of the secondary with respect to the primary 
conductor, and among these there might well be some more 
favourable for my purpose. These various positions had first 
to be examined. Thus I came to discover the phenomena 
which are described in the fifth paper (“On the Action of a 
Rectilinear Electric Oscillation upon a Neighbouring Circuit ”), 
and which surprised me by their variety and regularity. The 
finding out and unravelling of these extremely orderly pheno- 
mena gave me peculiar pleasure. The paper certainly does 
not include all the discoverable details; whoever may extend 


Fig. 1. 


6 INTRODUCTION I 


the experiments to various other forms of conductor will find 
that the task is not an ungrateful one. The observations at 
greater distances are also probably very inaccurate, for they 
are affected by the disturbing influence of reflections which 
were not at that time suspected. What especially surprised 
me was the continual increase of the distance up to which I 
could perceive the action; up to that time the common view 
was that electric forces decreased according to the Newtonian 
law, and therefore rapidly tended to zero as the distance 
increased. 

Now during the course of this investigation I had made 
sure of other positions of the secondary conductor in which 
it was possible, by bringing an insulator near, to cause the 
appearance or disappearance of sparks, instead of simply 
altering their size. The problem which I was investigating 
was now solved directly in the manner described in the sixth 
paper (“On Electromagnetic Effects produced by Electrical 
Disturbances in Insulators”). On 10th November 1887 I 
was able to report the successful’ issue of the work to the 
Berlin Academy. 

The particular problem of the Academy which had been 
my guide thus far was evidently propounded at the time by 
Herr von Helmholtz in the following connection:—If we 
start from the electromagnetic laws which in 1879 enjoyed 
universal recognition, and make certain further assumptions, 
we arrive at the equations of Maxwell’s theory which at that 
time (in Germany) were by no means universally recognised. 
These assumptions are: first, that changes of dielectric polar-. 
isation in non-conductors produce the same electromagnetic 
forces as do the currents which are equivalent to them; 
secondly, that electromagnetic forces as well as electrostatic 
are able to produce dielectric polarisations ; thirdly, that in all 
these respects air and empty space behave like all other 
dielectrics. In the latter part of his paper (“ On the Equations 
of Motion of Electricity for conducting Bodies at Rest”), von 
Helmholtz has deduced Maxwell’s equations from the older 
views and from hypotheses which are equivalent to those 
just stated. The problem of proving all three hypotheses, 
and thereby establishing the correctness of the whole of 


1 y. Helmholtz, Ges, Abhandl. 1, p. 545. 


I INTRODUCTION 7 


Maxwell’s theory, appeared to be an unreasonable demand ; 
the Academy, therefore, contented itself with requiring a 
confirmation of one of the first two. 

The first asstimption was now shown to be correct. I 
thought for some time of attacking the second. To test it 
appeared by no means impossible; and for this purpose I cast 
closed rings of paraffin. But while I was at work it struck me 
that the centre of interest in the new theory did not lie in the 
consequences of the first two hypotheses. If it were shown that 
these were correct for any given insulator, it would follow that 
waves of the kind expected by Maxwell could be propagated 
in this insulator, with a finite velocity which might perhaps 
differ widely from that of light. I felt that the third hypo- 
thesis contained the gist and special significance of Faraday’s, 
and therefore of Maxwell’s, view, and that it would thus be a 
more worthy goal for me to aim at. I saw no way of testing 
separately the first and the second hypotheses for air;' but 
both hypotheses would be proved simultaneously if one could 
succeed in demonstrating in air a finite rate of propagation 
and waves. Certainly some of the first experiments in this 
direction failed ; these are described in the paper referred to, 
and they were carried out at short distances. But in the 
meantime I had succeeded in detecting the inductive action 
at distances up to 12 metres. Within this distance the 
phase of the motion must have been reversed. more than 
once; and now it only remained to detect and prove 
this reversal. Thus the scheme was conceived which was 
carried out as described in the research “On the Finite 
Velocity of Propagation of Electromagnetic Actions.” The first 
step that had to be taken was easy. In straight stretched 
wires surprisingly distinct stationary waves were produced 
with nodes and antinodes, and by means of these it was 
possible to determine the wave-length and the change of phase 
along the wire. Nor was there any greater difficulty in pro- 
ducing interference between the action which had travelled 
along the wire ‘and that which had travelled through the air, 
and thus in comparing their phases. Now if both actions 


1 The expressions air (Luftrawm) and empty space (Jeerer Rawm) are here 
used as synonymous, inasmuch as the influence of the air itself in these experi- 
ments is negligible. 


8 INTRODUCTION I 


were propagated, as I expected, with one and the same finite 
velocity, they must at all distances interfere with the same 
phase. <A simple qualitative experiment which, with the 
experience I had now gained, could be finished within gn 
hour, must decide this question and lead at once to the goal. 
But when I had carefully set up the apparatus and carried 
out the experiment, I found that the phase of the interference 
was obviously different at different distances, and that the 
alternation was such as would correspond to an infinite rate 
of propagation in air. Disheartened, I gave up experimenting. 
Some weeks passed before I began again. I reflected that it 
would be quite as important to find out that electric force was 
propagated with an infinite velocity, and that Maxwell’s theory 
was false, as it would be, on the other hand, to prove that 
this theory was correct, provided only that the result arrived 
at should be definite and certain. I therefore confirmed with 
the greatest care, and without heeding what the outcome might 
be, the phenomena observed: the conclusions arrived at are 
given in the paper. When I then proceeded to consider more 
closely these results, I saw that the sequence of the inter- 
ferences could not be harmonised with the assumption of an 
infinite rate of propagation; that it was necessary to assume 
that the velocity was finite, but greater than that in the wire. 
As shown in the paper, I endeavoured to bring into harmony 
the various possibilities; and although the difference in the 
velocities appeared to me to be somewhat improbable, I could. 
see no reason for mistrusting the experiments. And it was 
not by any means impossible that the motion in the wire 
might be retarded by some unknown causes, as, for example, by 
an essential inertia of the free electricity. 

I have entered into these details here in order that 
the reader may be convinced that my desire has not been 
simply to establish a preconceived idea in the most convenient 
way by a suitable interpretation of the experiments, On the 
contrary, I have carried out with the greatest possible care 
these experiments (by no means easy ones), although they 
were in opposition to my preconceived views. And yet, 
although I may have been lucky elsewhere, in this research I 
have been decidedly unlucky. For instead of reaching the 
right goal with little effort, as a properly devised plan might 


I INTRODUCTION 9 


have enabled me to do, I seem to have taken great pains, and 
to have fallen ‘into error after all. 

In the first place, the research is disfigured by an error of' 
calculation. The time of oscillation is overestimated in the 
ratio of ./2:1. M. Poincaré first drew attention to this 
error. As a matter of fact, this error affects the form of the 
research more than the substance of it. My reliance on the 
correctness of the calculation was mainly due to its supposed 
accordance with the experiments of Siemens and Fizeau and 
with my own.” If I had used the correct value for the 
sapacity, and so found out the discrepancy between calculation 
md experiment, I would have placed less reliance on the 
alculation; the investigation would have been somewhat 
tered in form, but the subject-matter would have remained 
analtered. 

In the second place (and this is the more important point), 
one of the principal conclusions of the investigation can 
scarcely be regarded as correct—namely, that the velocities in 
air and in the wire are different. Such further knowledge as 
has been gained respecting waves in wires, instead of confirm- 
ing this ‘result, tends to make it more and more improbable. 

eIt now seems fairly certain that if the experiment had been 
carried out quite correctly, and without any disturbing causes, 
it would have given almost exactly the result which I expected 
at the start. There is ho doubt that the phase of the inter- 
ference must have changed sign once (and this I had not 
expected beforehand); but the interference should have ex- 
hibited no second change of sign; and yet the experiments 
without exception pointed to this. It is not easy to point to 
any disturbing cause which could imitate in such a deceptive 
way the effect of a difference in velocity; but there is no 
reason why we should not admit the possibility of such a 
deception. While performing the experiments, I never in the 
least suspected that they might be affected by the neighbour- 
ing walls. I remember that the wire along which the waves 
travelled was carried past an iron stove, and only 1°5 metres 
from it. A disturbance caused in this way, and always acting 
at the same point, might have given rise to the second change 


1 H. Poincaré, Comptes Rendus, 111, p. 3 
2 See the remark at the end of the second part of the 1 aie (p. 114). 


10 INTRODUCTION I 


of phase of the interference. However this may be, I should 
like to express a hope that these experiments may be repeated 
by some other observer under the most favourable conditions 
possible, 7c. in a room as large as possible. If the plan of 
the experiment is correct, as I think it is, then it must, when- 
ever properly carried out, give the result which it should at 
first have given; it would then prove without measurement 
the finite velocity of propagation of the waves in air, and at 
the same time the equality between this and the velocity of 
the waves in the wire. 

I might also mention here some further considerations which 
at that time strengthened my conviction that the waves in the 
wire suffered a retardation. If the waves in the wire run along 
at the same speed as waves in air, then the lines of electric 
forces must be perpendicular to the wire. Thus a straight 
wire traversed by waves cannot exert any inductive action 
upon a neighbouring parallel wire. But I found that there 
was such an action, even though it was only a weak one. I 
concluded that the lines of force were not parallel to the wire, 
and that the velocity of the waves was not the same as that 
of light. Further, if the lines of force are perpendicular to 
the wire, it can be shown by a simple calculation that the 
energy propagated by a wave in a single wire becomes log- 
arithmically infinite. I therefore concluded that such a wave 
was @ priori impossible. Lastly, it seemed to me that it could 
have no effect upon the rate of propagation in a straight con- 
ductor, whether that conductor was a smooth wire or a wire 
with side projections, or a crooked wire, or a spiral wire with 
small convolutions, provided always that these deviations from: 
the straight line were small compared with the wave-length, 
and that their resistance did not come into consideration. 
But now I found that all these alterations produced a very 
noticeable ‘effect upon the velocity. Hence I concluded that 
here again there was some obscure cause at work which caused 
a retardation, and which would also make itself felt in simple 
smooth wires. At the present moment these and other 
reasons do not appear to me to be of decisive weight; but at 
that time they so far satisfied me that I asserted without any 
reserve that there was a difference between the velocities, and 
regarded this decision as one of the most interesting of my 


1 INTRODUCTION 11 


experimental results. Soon I was to discover what appeared 
to be a confirmation of my opinion; and at that time it was 
very welcome. 

While investigating the action of my primary oscillation 
at great distances, I came across something like a formation of 
shadows behind conducting masses, and this did not strike me 
as being very surprising. Somewhat later on I thought that 
I noticed a peculiar reinforcement of the action im front of 
such shadow-forming masses, and of the walls of the room. 
At first it occurred to me that this reinforcement might 
arise from a kind of reflection of the electric force from 
the conducting masses; but although I was familiar with 
the conceptions of Maxwell’s theory, this idea appeared 
to me to be almost inadmissible—so utterly was it at 
variance with the conceptions then current as to the nature 
of an electric force. But when I had established with 
certainty the existence of actual waves, I returned to the 
mode of explanation which I had at first abandoned, and so 
arrived at the phenomena which are described in the paper 
“On Electromagnetic Waves in Air, and their Reflection.” No 
objection can be urged against the qualitative part of this 
research—the experiments have been frequently repeated and 
confirmed. But the part of the research which relates to 
the measurements is doubtful, inasmuch as it also leads to 
the very unlikely result that the velocity in air is considerably 
greater than that of waves in wires. Assuming that this 
result is incorrect, how are we to explain the error which has 
crept in? Certainly it is not due to simple inaccuracy of 
observation. The error of observation may perhaps be about 
a decimetre, but certainly not a metre. I can only here 
attribute the mistake in a general sense to the special con- 
ditions of resonance of the room used. The vibrations natural 
to it may possibly have been aroused, and I may have ob- 
served the nodes of such a vibration when I thought that I 
was observing the nodes of the waves of the primary con- 
ductor. There was certainly a substantial difference between 
the distances of the nodes in air which I measured and the 
wave-lengths in the wire. I specially directed my attention 

_ to the question whether or not such a difference existed. As 
far as any exact accordance with the first series of experi- 


12 : INTRODUCTION I 


ments is concerned, I freely allow that in the interpretation of 
the experimental results I may have allowed myself to be 
influenced by a desire to establish an accordance between the 
two sets of measurements. I put back the first node a cer- 
tain distance behind the wall, and an exact control of the 
amount of this cannot be deduced from the experiments. If 
I had wished to combine the experiments otherwise, I might 
indeed have been able to calculate a ratio of the velocities 
which would come out nearer to unity; but I certainly could 
not infer from them that the velocities were equal. 

Now, if the experiments which I made at that time all 
agree in pointing to a difference between the velocities, it will 
naturally be asked what reasons now induce me to allow 
that there may have been unknown sources of error in the 
experiments, rather than to abide by the statement made as to 
the difference of velocities. Is it the objection which has been - 
raised in several quarters as to the want of accord between 
the results and the theory? Certainly not. The theory was - 
known to me at the time; and furthermore, it must be sub- 
ordinated to the experiments. Is it the experiment in this 
connection made by Herr Lecher?! This, too, I must deny, 
although I fully recognise the value of the work which Herr 
Lecher has done in this direction. In working out his results 
Herr Lecher assumes that the calculation is correct, and there- 
fore in a certain sense that the theory itself is correct.” Is it 
then the results of MM. Sarasin and de la Rive, who carefully 
repeated the experiments and arrived at conclusions which 
were conipletely in accord with the theory? In a certain 
sense, yes; in another sense, no. The Genevan physicists 
worked in a much smaller room than my own; the greatest 
distance of which they could avail themselves was only 10 
metres, and the waves could not develop quite freely even up to 
this distance. Their mirror was only 2°8 metres high. Care in 
carrying out the observations cannot compensate for the un- 
favourable nature of the room. In my experiments, on the 
other hand, the waves had perfectly free play up to 15 

1 E. Lecher, ‘‘ Eine Studie iiber elektrische Resonanzerscheinungen,” Wied. 
Ann. 41, p. 850. 
2 The same remark holds good for the work recently published by M. 


Blondlot, C. 2. 113, P. 628 (cp. Note 15 at end of book), 
3. Sarasin and L. de la Rive, Comptes Rendus, 112, p. 658. 


I INTRODUCTION 13 


metres. My mirror was 4 metres high. If the decision 
rested simply and solely with the experiments, I could not 
attribute greater weight to those of MM. Sarasin and de la 
Rive than to my own.’ So far, then, I again say no. But 
certainly the Genevan experiments show that my experi- 
ments are subject to local variations; they show that the 
phenomena are different if the reflecting walls and the rooms 
are different, and also that under certain conditions the 
wave-lengths have the values required by theory. But if the 
experiments furnish information which is ambiguous and con- 
tradictory, they obviously contain sources of error which are 
not understood ; and hence they cannot be brought forward as 
arguments against a theory which is supported by so many 
reasons based on probability. Thus the Genevan experiments 
deprive my own of their force, and so far they restore the 
balance of probability to the theoretical side. 

Still, I must acknowledge that the reasons which decided 
me were of a more indirect kind. When I first thought that 
I had found a retardation of waves in the wires, I hoped soon 
to discover the cause of this retardation, and to find some 
gradual change in its value. This hope has not been 
realised. I found no such change, and, as my experience 
increased, instead of coming across an explanation, I met with 
increasing discrepancies, until these at last appeared to me to 
be insoluble, and I had to give up all hope of proving the 
correctness of my first observation. My own discovery, that 
for short waves the difference between the velocities very 
nearly disappears, tended in the same direction. Before one 
of my scientific colleagues had attacked this question, I had 
stated my opinion in the following words :*—“ Thus I found 
that for long waves the wave-length is greater in air than in 
wires, whereas for short waves both appear to be practically 
equal. This resulf is so surprising that we cannot regard it 
as certain. The decision must be reserved until further ex- 
periments are made.” The only experiments of the kind 
referred to that.have hitherto been made are those of MM. 
Sarasin and de la Rive; and inasmuch as these were carried 


1 Mr. Trouton, in a room of which the dimensions are not exactly given, 
found, like myself, that the wave-length of my primary conductor in air was 
about 10 metres.— Nature, 39, p. 391. 

2 Archives de Geneve (3), 21, p. 802. 


14 INTRODUCTION I 


gut in small rooms, they may more properly be regarded as a 
confirmation of the second part of my statement than as a refut- 
ation of the first part. Decisive experiments for long waves 
seem to me to be still wanting.’ I have little doubt that 
they will decide in favour of equal velocities in all cases. 

The reader may, perhaps, ask why I have not endeavoured 
to settle the doubtful point myself by repeating the experi- 
ments. I have indeed repeated the experiments, but have only 
found, as might be expected, that a simple repetition under 
the same conditions cannot remove the doubt, but rather 
increases it. A definite decision can only be arrived at by 
experiments carried out under more favourable conditions. 
More favourable conditions here mean larger rooms, and such 
were not at my disposal. I again emphasise the statement 
that care in making the observations cannot make up for want 
of space. If the long waves cannot develop, they clearly 
cannot be observed. 


The experiments hitherto described onthe reflection of waves 
were finished in March 1888. Inthe same month I attempted, 
by means of reflection at a curved surface, to prevent the 
dispersion of the action. For my large oscillator I built a 
concave parabolic mirror of 2 metres aperture and 4 metres 
high. Contrary to my expectation I found that the action 
was considerably weakened. The large mirror acted like a 
protecting screen surrounding the oscillator. I concluded that 
the wave-length of the oscillation was too large in comparison 
with the focal length of the mirror. A moderate reduction in 
the size of the primary conductor did not improve the result. 
I therefore tried to work with a conductor which was geo- 
metrically similar to the larger one, but smaller in the pro- 
portion of 10:1. Perhaps I did not persevere sufficiently in 
this attempt ; at any rate I entirely failed at that time to pro- 


1 Since the above was written, the wish expressed has been amply satisfied 
by the experiments which MM. Sarasin and de la Rive have carried out in the 
great hall of the Rhone waterworks at Geneva (see Archives de Geneve, 29, pp. 
358 and 441). These experiments have proved the equality of the velocity in 
air and in wires, and have thus established the full agreement between experi- 
ment and theory. I consider these experiments to be conclusive, and submit to 
them now with as much readiness as I then felt hesitation in submitting to 
experiments which were not superior tomy own. I gladly avail myself of the 
opportunity of thanking MM. Sarasin and de la Rive for the great kindness and 
goodwill which they invariably exhibited in the whole controversy—a controversy 
which has now been decided entirely in their own favour. 

e 


l aed 15 


duce and observe such short oscillations, and I abandoned these 
experiments in order to turn my attention to other questions. 

In the first place, it was important to devise a clearer theo- 
retical treatment of the experiments. In the researches to which 
I have hitherto referred, the experiments were interpreted from 
the standpoint which I took up through studying von Helm- 
holtz’s papers.’ In these papers Herr v. Helmholtz distinguishes 
between two forms of electric force—the electromagnetic and 
the electrostatic—to which, until the contrary is proved by 
experience, two different velocities are attributed. An inter- 
pretation of the experiments from this point of view could 
certainly not be incorrect, but it might perhaps be unneces- 
sarily complicated. In a special limiting case Helmholtz’s 
theory becomes considerably simplified, and its equations in 
‘this case become the same as those of Maxwell’s theory; only 
one form of the force remains, and this is propagated with 
the velocity of light. I had to try whether the experiments 
would not agree with these much simpler assumptions of 
Maxwell’s theory. The attempt was successful. The results 
of the calculation are given in the paper on “The Forces of 
Electric Oscillations, treated according to Maxwell’s Theory.” 
That part of the research which relates to interference between 
" waves in air and in wires could clearly be adapted without 
difficulty to any other form of such interferente which might 
result from more complete experiments. 

Side by side with the theoretical discussions I continued 
the experimental work, directing the latter again more to waves 
in wires. In doing so, my primary object was to find out 
the cause of the supposed retardation of these waves. 
Secondly, I wished to test the correctness of the view accord- 
ing to which the seat and field of action of the waves is not 
in the interior of the conductor, but rather in the surrounding 
space. I now made the waves travel in the interspace be- 
tween two wires, between two plates, and in tubular spaces, 
instead of along a single wire; in various interposed insulators 
instead of in different metals. The research on “ The Propa- 
gation of Electric Waves by Means of Wires” was, for the 
most part, carried out in the summer of 1888, although it 
was only completed and published later on. 


1 y, Helmholtz, Ges, Abhandi. 1, p. 545. 


16 INTRODUCTION I 


For in the autumn a singular phenomenon attracted my 
attention away from the experiments with wires, For the 
investigation of waves in the narrow interspace between two 
wires I was using resonators of small external dimensions, and 
was engaged in tuning these. I found that I obtained distinct 
nodes at the end of the wires even when I used resonators 
which were much too small. Even when I diminished the 
size of the circles to a few centimetres diameter, I still obtained 
nodes; these were situated at a small distance from the end of 
the wires, and I could observe half wave-lengths as small as 
12 cm. Thus chance brought me on to the track, hitherto 
undiscovered, of the short waves. I at once followed up this 
track, and soon succeeded in finding a form of the primary 
conductor which could be used with the small resonators. 

I paid no special attention to the phenomenon which led 
me back to the observation of short waves; and, as no suitable 
occasion arose for doing so, I have not mentioned it in my 
papers. Clearly it was a special case of the same phenomenon 
which was later on discovered by MM. Sarasin and de la 
Rive,’ called by the name of “Multiple Resonance,” and ex- 
plained by saying that the primary conductor did not possess 
any definite period of oscillation, but that it performed simul- 
taneously all possible oscillations lying within wide limits. If 
I paid little attention myself to this phenomenon, it was 
partly because I was soon led on to other researches. It 
arose’ no less from the fact that I had from the start 
conceived an interpretation of the phenomenon which lent 
much less interest to it than the interpretation given by 
MM. Sarasin and de la Rive. I regarded the phenomenon 
as a consequence of the rapid damping of the primary 
oscillation—a necessary consequence, and one which could 
be foreseen. M. Sarasin was good enough to communicate 
at once to me the results of his research, and I told him my 
doubts as to his explanation of the phenomenon, and gave 
him my own explanation of it; but although he received my 
explanation with the readiest goodwill, we did not succeed in 
coming to a common understanding as to the interpretation of 
the experiment. With M.H. Poincaré such an understanding 
was secured at once; he had formed a conception of the 


1 E, Sarasin and L, de la Rive, Arch. de Genéve (3), 23, p. 118, 1890. 


I INTRODUCTION | 17 


phenomenon which was practically idehtical with my own, 
and had communicated it to me in a letter. This conception 
he has worked out mathematically, and published in his book 
Electricité et Optique.' Herr V. Bjerknes has worked out the 
mathematical developments simultaneously and independently.” 
That the explanation given by MM. Poincaré and Bjerkues is 
not only a possible one, but is the only possible one, appears to 
me tv be proved by an investigation by Herr Bjerknes3 which 
has appeared recently, and which makes it certain that the 
vibration of the primary conductor is, at any rate to a first 
approximation, a uniformly damped sine-wave of determinate 
period. Hence the careful investigations of MM. Sarasin and 
de la Rive are of great value in completing our knowledge of 
this part of the work, but they in no way contradict any 
statement made by me. The authors themselves regard théir 
experiments in this light. Nevertheless, these experiments 
gave occasion to an adverse criticism of my work from a 
distinguished French physicist who had not, however, repeated 
the experiments himself. I hope it will now be allowed that 
there was no cause for such a criticism.‘ 

I may be permitted to take this opportunity of referring 
to the doubts which have recently been raised by Herrn 
Hagenbach and Zehnder as to what my experiments really 
prove.” Perhaps I ought not yet to consider their work as 
being completed. The authors reserve to themselves the right 
of returning to the explanation of resonance and the formation 
of nodes and antinodes in my experiments. But it is just 
precisely upon these phenomena that my experiments, and 
the whole interpretation of them, rest. 

After I had succeeded (as already described) in observing 
very short waves, I chose waves about 30 cm. long, and 
repeated first of all the earlier experiments with these. I 
now found, contrary to my expectation, that these short waves 
travelled along wires with very nearly the same velocity as in 
air. As ib was easy to procure free play for such short waves, . 
no doubt could arise in this case as to the correctness of the 

1H. Poincaré, Electricité et Optique, 2, . aie 
2¥. Bjerknes, Wied. Ann, 44, p. 92, 
3 Ibid, 45, p. 513, 1891. 


4 Cornu, Comptes Randiias 110, p. 72, 1890 
5 HE. Hagenbachand L. Zehnder, Wied. Ann. 43, p. 610, 1891. 


Cc 


18 INTRODUCTION I 


results. After I had become quite used to managing these 
short waves, I returned to the experiment with the concave 
reflector. The large old reflector was no longer at my dis- 
posal, so I had a smaller one made, about 2 metres high and a 
little more than 1 metre in aperture. It worked so remark- 
ably well that, directly after the first trial, I ordered not only 
a second concave reflector, but also a plane reflecting surface 
and a large prism. The experiments which are described 
in the paper “On Electric Radiation” now followed each 
other in rapid succession, and without difficulty; they had 
been considered and prepared long beforehand, with the excep- 
tion of the polarisation-experiments, which only occurred to 
me during the progress of the work. These experiments 
with concave mirrors soon attracted attention; they have fre- 
quently been repeated and confirmed. The approval with 
which they have been received has far exceeded my expecta- 
tion! A considerable part of this approval was due to reasons 
of a philosophic nature. The old question as to the possibility 
and nature of forces acting at a distance was again raised. The 
preponderance of such forces in theory has long been sanctioned 
by science, but has always been accepted with reluctance by 
ordinary common sense; in the domain of electricity these 
forces now appeared to be dethroned from their position by 
simple and striking experiments. 

« Though in the last-mentioned experiments my research had, 
in a certain sense, come to its natural end, I still felt that there 
was one thing wanting. The experiments related only to the 
propagation of the electric force. It was desirable to show that 
the magnetic force was also propagated with a finite velocity. 
According to theory it was not necessary for this purpose to 
produce special magnetic waves; the electric waves should at 
the same time be waves of magnetic force; the only important 
thing was to really detect in these waves the magnetic force 
in the presence of the electric force. I hoped that it would be 
possible to do this by observing the mechanical forces which 
the waves exerted upon ring-shaped conductors. So experi- 
ments were planned which (for other reasons) were only 


1 These experiments gave occasion to the lecture “On the Relations between 
Light and Electricity,” which I delivered to the Naturforscherversammlung at 
Heidelberg in 1889, and in which I gave a general account of my experiments 
in a popular form (published by E. Strauss, Bonn). 


* 


I INTRODUCTION i" 19 


carried out later on, and then incompletely ; these are described 
in the last experimental research “On the Mechanical Action 
of Electric Waves in Wires.” 

Casting now a glance backwards we see that by the 
experiments above ‘sketched the propagation in time of a 
supposed action-at-a-distance is for the first time proved. 
This fact forms the philosophic result of the experiments; and, 
indeed, in a certain sense the most important result. The 
proof includes a recognition of the fact that the electric forces 
can disentangle themselves from material bodies, and can con- 
tinue to. subsist as conditions or changes in the state of space. 
The details of the experiments further prove that the particular 
manner in which the electric force is propagated exhibits the 
closest analogy ' with the propagation of light; indeed, that it 
corresponds ahnost completely to it. The hypothesis that 
light is an electrical phenomenon is thus made highly probable. 
To give a strict proof of this hypothesis would logically require 
experiments upon light itself. 

What we here indicate as having been accomplished by 
the experiments is accomplished independently of the correct- 
ness of particular theories. Nevértheless, there is an obvious 
connection between the experiments and the theory in con- 
nection with which they were really undertaken. Since the 
year 1861 science has been in possession of a theory which 
Maxwell constructed upon Faraday’s views, and which we 
therefore call the Faraday-Maxwell theory. This theory affirms 
the possibility of the class of phenomena here discovered just as 
positively as the remaining electrical theories are compelled to 
deny it. From the outset Maxwell’s theory excelled all others 
in elegance and in the abundance of the relations between 
the various phenomena which it included. The probability of 
this theory, and therefore the number of its adherents, increased 
from year to year. Put as long as Maxwell’s theory depended 
solely upon the probability of its results, and not on the 
certainty of its hypotheses, it could not completely displace 
the theories which were opposed to it. The fundamental 
hypotheses of Maxwell’s theory contradicted the usual views, 


1 The analogy does not consist only in the agreement between the more or less 
accurately measured velocities. The approximately equal velocity is only one 
element among many others. 


20 INTRODUCTION I 


and did not rest upon the evidence of decisive experiments. 
In this connection we can best characterise the object and 
the result of our experiments by saying: The object of these 
experiments was to test the fundamental hypotheses of the 
Faraday-Maxwell theory, and the result of the experiments 
is to confirm the fundamental hypotheses of the theory. 


B. Theoretical 


And now, to be more precise, what is it that we call the_ 
Faraday-Maxwell theory? Maxwell has left us as the result 
of his mature thought a great treatise on Electricity and 
Magnetism ; it might therefore be said that Maxwell’s theory 
is the one which is propounded in that work. But such an 
answer will scarcely be regarded as satisfactory by all scientific 
men who have considered the question closely. Many a man 
has thrown himself with zeal into the study of Maxwell’s 
work, and, even when he has not stumbled upon unwonted 
mathematical difficulties, has nevertheless been coinpelled to 
abandon the hope of forming for himself an altogether con- 
sistent conception of Maxwell’s ideas. I have fared no better 
myself. Notwithstanding the greatest admiration for Maxwell's 
mathematical conceptions, I have not always felt quite certain 
of having grasped the physical significance of his statements. 
Hence it was not possible for me to be guided in my experi- 
ments directly by Maxwell’s book. I have rather been guided 
by Helmholtz’s work, as indeed may plainly be seen from the 
manner in which the experiments are set forth. But un- 
fortunately, in the special limiting case of Helmholtz’s theory 
which leads to Maxwell’s equations, and to which the experi- 
ments pointed, the physical basis of Helmholtz’s theory dis- 
appears, as indeed it always does, as soon as action-at-a-distance 
is disregarded. I therefore endeavoured to form for myself in 
a consistent manner the necessary physical conceptions, starting 
from Maxwell’s equations, but otherwise simplifying Maxwell’s 
theory as far as possible by eliminating or simply leaving out 
of consideration those portions which could be dispensed with, 


I INTRODUCTION 21 


inasmuch as they could not affect any possible phenomena. 
This explains how the two theoretical papers (forming the 
conclusion of this collection) came to be written. Thus 
the representation of the theory in Maxwell’s own work, 
its representation as a limiting case of Helmholtz’s theory, 
and its representation in the present dissertations—however 
different in form—have substantially the same inner significance. 
This common significance of the different modes of represent- 
ation (and others can certainly be found) appears to me to be 
the undying part of Maxwell’s work. This, and not Maxwell’s 
peculiar conceptions or methods, would I designate as “ Max- 
well’s Theory.” To the question, “ What is Maxwell’s theory ?” 
- I know of no shorter or more definite answer than the follow- 
ing :—-Maxwell’s theory is Maxwell’s system of equations. 
Every theory which leads to the same system of equations, and 
therefore comprises the same possible phenomena, I would 
consider as being a form or special case of Maxwell’s theory ; 
every theory which leads to different equations, and therefore 
to different possible phenomena, is a different theory. Hence 
in this sense, and in this sense only, may the two theoretical 
dissertations in the present volume be regarded as representations 
of Maxwell’s theory. In no sense can they claim to be a precise 
rendering of Maxwell’s ideas. On the contrary, it is doubtful 
whether Maxwell, were he alive, would acknowledge them as 
representing his own views in all respects. 


The very fact that different modes of representation con- 
tain what is substantially the same thing, renders the proper 
understanding of any one of them all the more difficult. Ideas 
and conceptions which are akin and yet different may be 
symbolised in the same way in the different modes of repre- 
sentation. Hence for a proper comprehension of any one of 
these, the first essential is that we should endeavour to under- 
stand each representation by itself without introducing into it 
the ideas which belong to another. Perhaps it may be of 
service to many of my colleagues if I here briefly explain the 
fundamental conceptions of the three representations of Max- 
well’s theory to which I have already referred.. I shall thus 
have an opportunity of stating wherein lies, in my opinion, 
the especial difficulty of Maxwell’s own representation. I can- 


22 INTRODUCTION I 


not agree with the oft-stated opinion that this difficulty is of 
a mathematical nature. 


When we see bodies acting upon one another at a distance, 
we can form for ourselves various conceptions of the nature of 
this action. We may regard the effect as being that of a 
direct actidn-at-a-distance, springing across space, or we may 
regard it as the consequence of an action which is propagated 
from point to point in a hypothetical medium. Meanwhile, 
in applying these conceptions to electricity, we can make a ° 
series of finer distinctions. As we pass from the pure conception 
of direct attraction to the pure conception of indirect (ver- 
mittelten) attraction, we can distinguish between four stand- 
points. 

From the first standpoint we regard the attraction of two 
bodies as a kind of spiritual affinity between them. The force 
which each of the two exerts is bound up with the presence of 
the other body. In order that force should be present at all, 
there must be at least two bodies present. In some way a 
magnet only obtains its force when another magnet is brought 
into its neighbourhood. This conception is the pure con- 
ception of action-at-a-distance, the conception of Coulomb’s 
law. In the theory of electricity it has almost been aban- 
doned, but it is.still used in the theory of gravitation. Mathe- 
matical astronomy speaks of the attraction between the sun 
and a planet, but with attraction in empty space it has no 
concern. , 

From the second standpoint we still regard the attraction 
of the bodies as a kind of spiritual influence of each upon the 
other. But although we admit that we can only notice this 
action when we have at least two bodies, we further assume 
that each of the acting bodies continually strives to excite at 
all surrounding points attractions of definite magnitude and 
direction, even if no other similar bodies happen to be in the 
neighbourhood. With these strivings, varying always from 
point to point, we fill (according to this conception) the surround- 
ing space. At the same time we do not assume that there is 
any change at the place where the action is exerted; the acting 
body is still both the seat and the source of the force. This 
is about the standpoint of the potential theory. It obviously 


I INTRODUCTION 23 


is also the standpoint of certain chapters in Maxwell’s work, 
although it is not the standpoint of Maxwell’s theory. In 
order to compare these con- 
ceptions more easily with one 
another, we represent from this eo Sy 
standpoint (as in Fig. 2) two 

oppositely electrified condenser- = 


owe eee 


plates. The diagrammatic 

representation will be easily 

understood; upon the plates ; 

are seen the positive and 

negative electricities (as if GE positive Electricizat 


Z2 negative flectricitat, 


they were material); the force 
Fig. 2. (II.] 


between the plates is indicated 
by arrows. From this standpoint it is immaterial whether the 
space between the plates is full or empty. If we admit the 
existence of the light-ether, but suppose that it is removed from 
a part B of the space, the force will still remain unaltered in 
this space. 

The third standpoint retains the conceptions of the second, 
but adds to them a further complication. It assumes that the 
action of the two separate bodies is not determined solely by 
forces acting directly at a distance. It rather assumes that the 
forces induce changes in the space (supposed to be nowhere 
empty), and that these again give rise to new distance-forces 
(Fernkriften). The attractions between the separate bodies de- 

' pend, then, partly upon their direct action, and partly upon the 
influence of the changes in the medium. The_change in the 
mediunr itself is regarded as an electric or magnetic polarisa- 
tion of its smallest parts under the influence of the acting 
force. This view has been developed by Poisson with respect 
to’statical phenomena in magnetism, and has been transferred 
by Mosotti to electrical phenomena. In its most general 
development, and in its extension over the whole domain of 
electromagnetism, it is represented by Helmholtz’s theory.’ 

Fig. 3 illustrates this standpoint for the case in which 
the medium plays only a small part in the resultant action. 
Upon the plates are seen the free electricities, and in the parts 


1 At the end of the paper ‘‘On the Equations of Motion of Electricity for 
Conducting Bodies at Rest.”—Ges. Abh. 1, p. 545. 


24 INTRODUCTION I 


of the dielectric the electrical fluids which are separated, but 
which cannot be divorced from each other. Let us suppose that 
the space between the plates 
contains only the light-ether, 
and let a space, such as B, be 
hollowed out of this; the forces 
will then remain in this space, 
but the polarisation will dis- 
appear. . 

One limiting case of this 
mode of conception is of 
especial importance. As closer 
examination shows, we can split up the resultant action (which 
alone can be observed) of material bodies upon one another into 
an influence due to direct action-at-a-distance, and an influence 
due to the intervening medium. We can increase that part of 
the total energy which has its seat in the electrified bodies at 
the expense of that part which we seek in the medium, and 
conversely. Now in the limiting case we seek the whole of the 
energy in the medium. Since no energy corresponds to the 
electricities which exist upon the conductors, the distance-forces 
must become infinitely small. But for this it is a necessary 
condition that no free electricity should be present. The 
electricity must therefore behave itself like an incompressible 
fluid. Hence we have only closed currents; and hence arises 
the possibility of extending the theory to all kinds of electrical 
disturbances in spite of our ignorance of the laws of unclosed 
currents. 


Fig. 8 [Illa.] 


The mathematical treatment of this limiting case leads, us 
to Maxwell’s equations. We therefore call this treatment a 
form of Maxwell’s theory. The limiting case is so called also 
‘by v. Helmholtz. But in no sense must this be taken as 
meaning that the physical ideas on which it is based are 
Maxwell’s ideas. 


Fig. 4 indicates the state of the space between two 
electrified plates in accordance with the conceptions of this 
theory. The distance-forces have become merely nominal. 
The electricity on the conductors is still present, and is a 
necessary part of the conception, but its action-at-a-distance is 


I INTRODUCTION 25 


completely neutralised by the opposite electricity of the 
medium which is displaced towards it. The pressure which 
this medium exerts, on account 
of the attraction of its internal 
electrifications, tends to draw the 
plates together. In the empty 
space B there are present only +}. 
vanishingly small distance-forces. 

The fourth standpoint be- 
longs to the pure conception of 
action through a medium. From 
this standpoint we acknowledge 
that the changes ‘in, space assumed from the third stand- 
point are actually present, and that it is by means of them 
that material bodies act upon one another. But we do not 
admit that these polarisations are the result of distance-forces ; 
indeed, we altogether deny the existence of these distance- 
forces; and we discard the electricities from which these 
forces are supposed to proceed. We now rather regard the 
polarisations as the only things which are really present ; 
they are the cause of the movements of ponderable bodies, and 
of all the phenomena which allow of our perceiving changes 
in these bodies. The explanation of the nature of the 
polarisations, of their relations and effects, we defer, or else 
seek to find out by mechanical hypotheses; but we decline to 
recognise in the electricities and distance-forces which have 
hitherto passed current a satisfactory explanation of these 
relations and effects. The expressions electricity, magnetism, 
etc., have no further value for us beyond that of abbreviations. 

Considered from the mathematical point of view, this 
fourth mode of treatment may be regarded as coinciding 
completely with the limiting case of the third. But from 
the physical point of view the two differ fundamentally. It 
is impossible to deny the existence of distance-forces, and at 
the same time to regard them as the cause of the polarisations. 
Whatever we may designate as “electricity ” from this stand- 
point does not behave like an incompressible fluid. If we 
consider Fig. 5, which brings symbolically before us the view 
presented from this standpoint, we are struck by another dis- 
tinction. The polarisation of the space is represented by the 


EXE SS 


Fig. 4. (IIIb ] 


26 INTRODUCTION I 


same symbolic method as was employed in discussing the 
third standpoint. But whereas in Figs. 3 and 4 this mode 
of representation explained the nature of the polarisation 
; through the nature of electri- 
city (assumed to be known), we 
have here to regard the mode of 
representation as defining the 
~~ nature of an electric charge 
through the state of polarisa- 
tion of the space (regarded as 
known). Each particle of the 
dielectric here appears charged 
in opposite senses with elec- 
tricity, just as it did from our third standpoint. \ If we again 
remove the ether from the space B, there remains nothing 
whatsoever in this space which could remind us of the elec- 
trical disturbance in the neighbourhood.’ 

Now this fourth standpoint, in my opinion, is Maxwell’s 
standpoint. The general explanations in his work leave 
no room for doubting that he wished to discard distance- 
forces entirely. He expressly says that if the force or 
“displacement” in a dielectric is directed towards’ the right 
hand, we must conceive each particle of the dielectric as 
being charged with negative electricity on the right-hand 
side, and with positive electricity on the left-hand side. But 
it cannot be denied that other statements made by Maxwell 
appear at first sight to contradict the conceptions of this 
standpoint. Maxwell assumes that electricity also exists in 
conductors; and that this electricity always moves in such a 
way as to form closed currents with the displacements in the 
dielectric. The statement that electricity moves like an incom- 
pressible fluid is a favourite statement of Maxwell’s. But these 
statements do not fit in with the conceptions of the fourth 
standpoint; they lead one to suspect that Maxwell rather 
viewed things from the third point of view. My own opinion is 
that this was never really the case; that the contradictions are 
only apparent and arise from a misunderstanding as to words. 
The following, if I am not mistaken, is the state of affairs -— 
Maxwell originally developed his theory with the aid of very 
definite and special conceptions as to the nature of electrical 


Fig. 5. (IV. 


I INTRODUCTION 27 


phenomena. He assumed that the ones of the ether and of 
all bodies were filled with an attenuated fluid, which, how- 
ever, could not exert forces at a distance. In conductors this 
fluid moved freely, and its motion formed what we call an 
electric current. In insulators this fluid was confined to its 
place by elastic forces, and its “displacement” was regarded as 
being identical with electric polarisation. The fluid itself, as 
being the cause of all electric phenomena, Maxwell called 
“electricity.” Now, when Maxwell composed his great treatise, 
the accumulated hypotheses of this earlier mode of conception 
no longer. suited him, or else he discovered contradictions in 
them, and so abandoned them. But he did not eliminate 
them completely; quite a number of expressions remained 
which were derived from his earlier ideas. And so, unfor- 
tunately, the word “ electricity,” in Maxwell’s work, obviously 
has a double meaning. In the first place, he uses it (as we 
also do) to denote a quantity which can be either positive or 
negative, and which forms the starting-point of distance-forces 
(or what appear to be such). In the second place, it denotes 
that hypothetical fluid from which no distance-forces (not even 
apparent ones) can proceed, and the amount of which in any 
given space must, under all circumstances, be a_ positive 
quantity. If we read Muaxwell’s explanations and always 
interpret the meaning of the word “electricity” in a suitable 
way, nearly all the contradictions which at first are so sur- 
prising can be made to disappear. _ Nevertheless, I must 
admit that I have not succeeded in doing this completely, or 
to my entire satisfaction ; otherwise, instead of hesitating, I 
would speak more definitely.’ 

Whether this is so or not, an attempt has been made, in 
the two theoretical papers here printed, to exhibit Maxwell’s 
theory, i.e. Maxwell’s system of equations, from this fourth 
standpoint. I have endeavoured to avoid from the beginning 
the introduction of any conceptions which are foreign to this 
standpoint and which might afterwards have to be removed.” 

1M. Poincaré, in his treatise ‘‘Electricité et Optique” (vol. i., Les Theories de 
Maxwell), expresses a similar opinion. Herr L. Boltzmann, in his Vorlesungen 
tber Maxwell's Theorie, appears like myself to aim at a consistent development 
of Maxwell’s system rather than an exact rendering of Maxwell’s thoughts. 
But no definite épinion can be given, inasmuch as the work is not yet completed. 


2 The expression ‘‘ electric force” in these papers is only another name for a 
state of polarisation of space. It would perhaps have been better, in order to 


28 INTRODUCTION I 


I have further endeavoured in the exposition to limit as far 
as possible the number of those conceptions which are arbi- 
trarily introduced by us, and only to admit such elements as 
cannot be removed or altered without at the same time altering 
possible experimental results. It is true, that in consequence 
of these endeavours, the theory acquires a very abstract and 
colourless appearance. It is not particularly pleasing to hear 
general statements made about “directed changes of state,” 
where we used to have placed before our eyes pictures of 
electrified atoms. It is not particularly satisfactory to see equa- 
tions set forth as direct results of observation and experiment, 
where we used to get long mathematical deductions as apparent 
proofs of them. Nevertheless, I believe that we cannot, without 
deceiving ourselves, extract much more from known facts than 
is asserted in the papers referred to. If we wish to lend more 
colour to the theory, there is nothing to prevent us from sup- 
plementing all this and aiding our powers of imagination by 
concrete representations of the various conceptions as to the 
nature of electric polarisation, the electric current, etc. But 
scientific accuracy requires of us that we should in no wise con- 
fuse the simple and homely figure, as it is presented to us by 
nature, with the gay garment which we use to clothe it. 
Of our own free will we can make no change whatever in the 
form of the one, but the cut and colour of the other we car 
choose as we please. 


Such further remarks as I may wish to make on points of 
detail will be found at the end of the book as supplementary 
notes. 


prevent misconceptions, if I had replaced it by another expression, such, for 
example, as “‘ electric field-intensity,” or ‘‘elekirische Intensitat,” which Herr E. 
Cohn proposes in his paper, which refers to the same subject ( Zur pe ead 
der Elektricitatslehre,” Wied. Ann. 40, p. 625, 1890). 


Ir 


ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS 


(Wiedemann’s Annalen, 31, p. 421, 1887.) 


THE electric oscillations of open induction-coils have a period 
of vibration which is measured by ten-thousandths of a second. 
The vibrations in the oscillatory discharges of Leyden jars, 
such as were observed by Feddersen,’ follow each other about 
a hundred times as rapidly. Theory admits the possibility of 
oscillations even more rapid than these in open wire circuits 
of good conductivity, provided that the ends are not loaded 
with large capacities; but at the same time theory does 
not enable us to decide whether such oscillations can be 
actually excited on such a scale as to admit of their being 
observed. Certain phenomena led me to expect that oscilla- 
tions of the latter kind do really occur under certain conditions, 
and that they are of such strength as to allow of their effects 
being observed. Further experiments confirmed my expecta- 
tion, and I propose to give here an account of the experiments 
made and the phenomena observed, 

The oscillations which are here dealt with are about a 
hundred times as rapid as those observed by Feddersen. Their 
period of oscillation—estimated, it is true, only by the aid of 
theory—is of the order of a hundred-millionth of a second. 
Hence, according to their period, these oscillations range them- 
selves in a position intermediate between the acoustic oscilla- 
tions of ponderable bodies and the light-oscillations of the 
ether. In this, and in the possibility that a closer observa- 


1 For the literature see Colley, Wied. Ann. 26, p. 482, 1885. (See also Note 1, 
at the end of this book.) 


30 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS H 


tion of them may be of service in the theory of electro- 
dynamics, lies the interest which they present. 


Preliminary Experiments 


Tf, in addition to the ordinary spark-gap of an induction- 
coil, there be introduced in its discharging circuit a Riess’s 
spark-micrometer, the poles of which are joined by a long 
metallic shunt, the discharge follows the path across the 
air-gap of the micrometer in preference to the path along the 
metallic conductor, so long as the length of the air-gap does 
not exceed a certain limit. This is already known, and the 
construction of lightning-protectors for telegraph-lines is based 
on this experimental fact. It might be expected that, if the 
metallic shunt were only made short and of low resistance, the 
sparks in the micrometer would then disappear. As a matter 
of fact, the length of the sparks obtained does diminish with 
the length of the shunt, but the sparks can scarcely be made 
to disappear entirely under any circumstances. Even when 
the two knobs of the micrometer are connected by a few 
centimetres of thick copper wire, sparks can still be observed, 
although they are exceedingly short. This experiment shows 
directly that at the instant when the discharge occurs 
the potential along the circuit must vary in value by 
hundreds of volts even in a few centimetres; indirectly it 
proves with what extraordinary rapidity the discharge takes 
place. For the difference of potential between the knobs of 
the micrometer can only be regarded as an effect of self- 
induction in the metallic shunt. The time in which the 
potential of one of the knobs is appreciably changed is of the 
same order as the time in which such a change is transmitted 
to the other knob through a short length of a good conductor. 
The potential difference between the micrometer-knobs might 
indeed be supposed to be determined by the resistance of the 
shunt, the current-density during the discharge being possibly 
large. But a closer examination of the quantitative relations 
shows that this supposition is inadmissible; and the following 
experiment shows independently that this conjecture cannot be 
put forward. We again connect the knobs of the micrometer 
by a good metallic conductor, say by a copper wire 2 mm. in 


rt ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC i a 31 


diameter and 0°5 metre long, bent intd rectangular form; we 
do not, however, introduce this into the discharging-cireuit of the 
induction-coil, but we simply place one pole of it in communi- 
cation with any point of the discharging circuit by means of 
a connecting wire. (Fig. 6 shows the arrangement of the 
apparatus; A represents diagrammatically the induction-coil, B 
the discharger, and Af the micrometer.) Thereupon we again 
observe, while the induction-coil is working, a stream of sparks 
in the micrometer which may, under suitable conditions, attain 
a length of several millimetres. Now this experiment shows, 
in the first place, that at the instant when the discharge takes 
place violent electrical disturbances occur, not only in the 
actual discharging-cireuit, but also in all 
conductors connected with it. But, in the 
second place, it shows more clearly than 
the preceding experiment that these dis- 
turbances run on so rapidly that even the 
time taken by electrical waves in rushing 
through short metallic conductors becomes 
of appreciable importance. For the experi- 
ment can only be interpreted in the sense 
that the change of potential proceeding from’ 
the induction-coil reaches the knob 1 in an 
appreciably shorter time than the knob 2. 
The phenomenon may well causesurprise when 
we consider that, as far as we know, electric 
waves in copper wires are propagated with a velocity which is 
approximately the same as that of light. So it appeared to 
me to be worth while to endeavour to determine what con- 
ditions were most favourable for the production of brilliant 
sparks in the micrometer. For the sake of brevity we shall 
speak of these sparks as the side-sparks (in order to distin- 
guish them from the discharge proper), and of the micrometer 
discharging-circuit as the side-circuit (Nebenkreis). 

First of all it became evident that powerful discharges are 
necessary if side-sparks of several millimetres in length are 
desired. I therefore used in all the following experiments a 
large Ruhmkorff coil, 52 cm. long and 20 cm. in diameter, 
which was provided with a mercury interrupter and was 
excited by six large Bunsen cells. Smaller induction-coils 


Fig. 6. 


32 “ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS uN 


gave the same qualitative results, but the side-sparks were 
shorter, and it was therefore more difficult to observe differences 
between them. The same held good when discharges from, 
Leyden jars or from batteries were used instead of the induc- 
tion-coil. It further appeared that even when the same 
apparatus was used a good deal depended upon the nature of 
the exciting spark in the discharger (B). If this takes place 
between two points, or between a point and a plate, it only 
gives rise to very weak side-sparks; discharyes in rarefied 
gases or through Geissler tubes were found to. be equally 
ineffective. The only kind of spark that proved satisfactory 
was that between two knobs (spheres), and this must neither 
be too long nor too short. If it is shorter than half a centi- 
metre the side-sparks are weak, and if it is longer than 1} 
em. they disappear entirely. 

In the following experiments I used, as being the most 
suitable, sparks three-quarters of a centimetre long between 
two brass knobs of 3 cm. diameter. Even these sparks were 
not always equally efficient; the most insignificant details, 
often without any apparent connection, resulted in useless 
sparks appearing instead of active ones. After some practice 
one can judge from the appearance and noise of the sparks 
whether they are such as are able to excite side-sparks. The 
active sparks are brilliant white, slightly jagged, and are 
accompanied by a sharp crackling. That the spark in the 
discharger is an essential condition of the production of shunt- 
sparks is easily shown by drawing the discharger-knobs so far 
apart that the distance between them exceeds the sparking 
distance of the induction-coil; every trace of the side-sparks 
then disappears, although the differences of potential now 
present are greater than before. 

The length of the micrometer-circuit naturally has great 
influence upon the length of the sparks in it. For the greater 
this distance, the greater is the retardation which the electric 
wave suffers between the time of its arrival at the one knob 
and at the other. If the side-circuit is made very small, the 
side-sparks become extremely short; but it is scarcely 
possible to prepare a circuit in which sparks will not show 
themselves under favourable circumstances. Thus, if you file 
the ends of a stout copper wire, 4-6 cm. long, to sharp points, 


Il ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS 33 


bend it into an almost closed circuit, insulate it and now touch 
the discharger with this small wire circuit, a stream of very 
small sparks between the pointed ends generally accompanies 
the discharges of the induction-coil. The thickness and 
material (and therefore the resistance) of the side-circuit have 
very little effect on the length of the side-sparks. We were 
therefore justified in declining to attribute to the resistance the 
differences of potential which arise. And according to our 
conception of the phenomenon, the fact that the resistance is 
of scarcely any importance can cause us no surprise; for, to a 
first approximation, the rate of propagation of an electric wave 
along a wire depends solely upon its capacity and self-induction, 
and not upon its resistance. The length of the wire which 
connects the side-circuit to the principal circuit has also little 
effect, provided it does not exceed a few metres. We must 
assume that the electric disturbance which proceeds from the 
principal circuit travels along it without suffering any real 
change of intensity. 

On the other hand, the position of the point at which 
contact with the side-circuit is made has a very noteworthy 
effect upon the length of the sparks in it. We should expect 
this to be so if our interpretation of the phenomenon is correct. 
For if the point of contact is so placed that the paths from it 
to the two knobs of the micrometer are of equal length, then 
every variation which passes through the connecting wire will 
arrive at the two knobs in the same phase, so that no differ- 
ence of potential between them can arise. Experiment confirms 
this supposition. Thus, if we shift the point of contact on the 
side-circuit, which we have hitherto supposed near one of the 
micrometer-knobs, farther and farther away from this, the 
spark-length diminishes, and in a certain position the sparks 
disappear completely or very nearly so; they become stronger 
again in proportion as the contact approaches the second 
micrometer-knob, and in this position attain the same length 
as in the first. The point at which the spark-length is a 
minimum may be called the null-point. It can generally be 
determined to within a few centimetres. It always divides 
the length of the wire between the two micrometer-knobs into 
very nearly equal parts. If the conductor is symmetrical on 
the right and left of the line joining the micrometer and the 

D 


34 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS Ir 


null-point, the sparks always disappear completely, the 

phenomenon can be observed even with quite short side- 

circuits. Fig. 7 shows a convenient arrangement of the ex- 
@periment; abc dis a rectangle of bare copper wire 2 mm. in 
diameter, insulated upon sealing-wax sup- 
ports ;* in my experiments it was 80 em. 
broad and 125 long. When the connecting 
wire is attached to either of the knobs 1 
and 2, or either of the points a and 3, 
sparks 3-4 mm. long pass between 1 and 
2; no sparks can be obtained when the 
connection is at the point e, as in the 
figure; shifting the contact a few centi- 
metres to right or left causes the sparks 
to reappear. It should be remarked that 
we consider sparks as being perceptible 
when they are only a few hundredths of a 
millimetre in length. 

The following experiment shows that 
the above is not a complete representation of the way in 
which things go on. For if, after the contact has been 
adjusted so as to make the sparks disappear, we attach to one 
of the micrometer-knobs another conductor projecting beyond 
it, active sparking again occurs. This conductor, being 
beyond the knob, cannot affect the simultaneous arrival of 
the waves travelling from ¢ to 1 and 2. But it is easy to see 
what the explanation of this experiment is. The waves do 
not come to an end after rushing once towards a and b; they 
are reflected and traverse the side-circuit several, perhaps 
many, times and so give rise to stationary oscillations in it. 
If the paths ec a 1 ande db 2 are equal, the reflected waves 
will again arrive at 1 and 2 simultaneously. If, however, the 
wave reflected from one of the knobs is missing, as in the last 
experiment, then, although the first disturbance proceeding 
from e will not give rise to sparks, the reflected waves will. 
‘We must therefore imagine the abrupt variation which arrives 
at e as creating in the side-circuit the oscillations which are 
natural to it, much as the blow of a hammer produces in an 
elastic rod its natural vibrations. If this idea is correct, then 


1 [See Note 2 at end of book.] 


It ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC aes 35 


the condition for disappearance of sparks in Jf must substan- 
tially be equality of the vibration-periods of the two portions 
elande2. These vibration-periods are determined by the 
product of the coefficient of self-induction of those parts of the 
conductor into the capacity of their ends; they are practically 
independent of the resistance of the branches. The following 
experiments may be applied to test these considerations and 
are found to agree with them :-— 

If the connection is placed at the null-point and one of 
the micrometer-knobs is touched with an insulated conductor, 
sparking begins again because the capacity of the branch is 
increased. An insulated sphere of 2-4 cm. diameter is quite 
sufficient. The larger the capacity which is thus added, the 
more energetic becomes the sparking. Touching at the null- 
point has no influence since it affects both branches equally. 
The effect of adding a capacity to one branch is annulled by 
adding an equal capacity to the other. It can also be com- 
pensated by shifting the connecting wire in the direction of the 
loaded branch, ie. by diminishing the self-induction of the 
latter. The addition of a capacity produces the same effect as 
increasing the coefficient of self-induction. If one of the 
branches be cut and a few centimetres or decimetres of coiled 
copper wire introduced into it, sparking begins again. Thechange 
thus produced can be compensated by inserting an equal length 
of copper wire in the other branch, or by shifting the copper 
wire towards the branch which was altered, or by adding a 
suitable capacity to the other branch. Nevertheless, it must 
be remarked that when the two branches are not of like kind, 
a complete disappearance of the sparks cannot generally be 
secured, but only a minimum of the sparking distance. 

The results are but little affected by the resistance of the 
branch. If the thick copper wire in one of the branches was 
replaced by a much thinner copper wire or by a wire of Ger- 
man silver, the equilibrium was not disturbed, although the 
resistance of the one branch was a hundred times that of the 
other. Very large fluid resistances certainly made it im- 
possible to secure a disappearance of the sparks, and short air- 
spaces introduced into one of the branches had a like effect. 

The self-induction of iron wires for slowly alternating 
currents is about eight to ten times as great as that of copper 


36 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS II 


wires of equal length and thickness. I therefore expected 
that short iron wires would produce equilibrium with longer 
"opper wires. This expectation was not confirmed; the 
pranches remained in equilibrium when a copper wire was 
replaced by an iron wire of equal length. If the theory of 
the observations here given is correct, this can only mean that 
the magnetism of iron is quite unable to follow oscillations so 
rapid as those with which we are here concerned, and that it, 
therefore, is without effect. A further experiment which will 
be described below appears to point in the same direction. 


Induction-Effects of unclosed Currents 


The sparks which occur in the preceding experiments owe 
their origin, according to our supposition, to self-induction, 
but if we consider that the induction-effects in question are 
derived from exceedingly weak currents in short, straight con- 
ductors, there appears to be good reason to doubt whether 
these do really account satisfactorily for the sparks. In order 
to settle this doubt I tried whether the observed electrical 
disturbances did not manifest effects of corresponding magni- 
tude in neighbouring conductors. I therefore bent some 
copper wire into the form of rectangular circuits, about 
10-20 cm. in the side, and containing only very short 
spark-gaps. These were insulated and brought near to the 
conductors in which the disturbances took place, and in such 
a position that a side of the rectangle was parallel to the con- 
ductor. When the rectangle was brought sufficiently near, a 
stream of sparks in it always accompanied the discharges of 
the induction-coil. These sparks were most brilliant in the 
neighbourhood of the discharger, but they could also be 
observed along the wire leading to the side-circuit as well 
as in the branches of the latter The absence of any direct 
discharge between the inducing and induced circuits was care- 
fully verified, and was also prevented by the introduction of a 
solid insulator. Thus it is scarcely possible that our concep- 
tion of the phenomenon is erroneous. That the induction 
between two simple straight lengths of wire, traversed by only 
small quantities of electricity, can yet become strong enough 
to produce sparks, shows again the extraordinary shortness of 


I ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS 37 


the time in which these small quantities of electricity must 
pass backwards and forwards along the conductors. 

In order to study the phenomena more closely, the 
rectangle which at first was employed as the side-circuit was 
again brought into use, but this time as the induced circuit. 
Along the short side of this (as indicated in Fig. 8) and at 
a distance of 3 cm. from 
it was stretched a second 
copper wire gh, which was 
placed in connection with 
any part of the discharger. 
As long as the end A of 
the wire gh was free, only 
weak sparks appeared in the 
micrometer J/, and these 
were due to the discharge- 
current of the wire g h. But 
if an insulated conductor 
C—one taken from an elec- 
trical machine—was then 
attached to h, so that larger 
quantities of electricity had a—*3 & 
to pass through the wire, Fig. 8. 
sparks up to two milli- 
metres long appeared in the micrometer. This was not caused 
by an electrostatic effect of the conductor, for if it was attached 
to g instead of to h, it was without effect; and thé action 
was not due to the charging-current of the conductor, but to 
the sudden discharge brought about by the sparks. For when 
the knobs of the discharger were drawn so far apart that 
sparks could no longer spring across it, then the sparks dis- 
appeared completely from the induced circuit as well. Not 
every kind of spark produced a sufficiently energetic discharge ; 
here, again, only such sparks as were before found to occasion 
powerful side-sparks were found to be effective in exciting 
the inductive action. The sparks excited in the secondary 
circuit passed not only between the knobs of the micrometer 
but also from these to other insulated conductors held near. 
The length of the sparks was notably diminished by attaching 
to the knobs conductors of somewhat large capacity or touch- 


38 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS It 


ing one of them with the hand; clearly the quantities of 
electricity set in motion were too small to charge conductors 
of rather large capacity to the full potential. On the other 
hand, the sparking was not much affected by-connecting the 
two micrometer-knobs by a short wet thread. No physiological 
effects of the induced current could be detected ; the secondary 
circuit could be touched or completed through the body without 
experiencing any shock. 

Certain accessory phenomena induced me to suspect that 
the reason why the electric disturbance in the wire gh pro- 
duced such a powerful inductive action lay in the fact that it 
did not consist of a simple charging-current, but was rather of 
an oscillatory nature. I therefore endeavoured to strengthen 
the induction by modifying the conditions so as to make them 
more favourable for the production of powerful oscillations. 
The following arrangement of the experiment suited my pur- 
pose particularly well. I attached the conductor C’ as before 
to the wire g A and then separated the micrometer-knobs so far 
from each other that sparks only passed singly. I then 
attached to the free pole of the discharger / (Fig. 8) a second 
conductor 0” of about the same size as the first. The sparking 
then again became very active, and on drawing the micrometer- 
knobs still farther apart decidedly longer sparks than at first 
could be obtained. This cannot be due to any direct action 
of the portion of the circuit 7k, for this would diminish the 
effect of the portion gh; it must, therefore, be due to the 
action of the conductor C’ upon the discharge-current of C. 
Such an action would be incomprehensible if we assumed that 
the discharge of the conductor C was aperiodic. It becomes, 
however, intelligible if we assume that the inducing current in 
gf consists of an electric oscillation which, in the one case, 
takes place in the circuit C—wire g hR—discharger, and in the 
other in the system C—wire gh, wire ik—C’. It is clear in 
the first place that the natural oscillations of the latter system 
would be the more powerful, and in the second place that 
the position of the spark in it is more suitable for exciting 
the vibration. 

Further confirmation of these views may be deferred for 
the present. But here we may bring forward in support of them 
the fact that they enable us to give a more correct explanation 


iI ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC is eae 39 


of the part which the discharge of the Rauhmkorff coil plays in 
the experiment. For if oscillatory disturbances in the circuit 
C—C’ are necessary for the production of powerful induction- 
effects, it is not sufficient that the spark in this circuit should 
be established in an exceedingly short time, but it must also 
reduce the resistance of the circuit below a certain value, and 
in order that this may be the case the current-density from 
the very start must not fall below a certain limit. Hence it is 
that the inductive effect is exceedingly feeble when the con- 
ductors C and C’ are charged by means of an electrical 
machine! (instead of a Ruhmkorff coil) and then allowed to 
discharge themselves; and that it is also very feeble when a 
small coil is used, or when too large a spark-gap is introduced ; 
in all these cases the motion is aperiodic. On the other hand, a 
powerful discharge from a Ruhmkorff coil gives rise to oscilla- 
tions, and therefore to powerful disturbances all round, by per- 
forming the following functions :—In the first place, it charges 
the ends C and C” of the system to a high potential ; secondly, 
it gives rise to a disruptive discharge ; and thirdly, after starting 
the discharge, it keeps the resistance of the air-gap so low that 
oscillations can take place. It is known that if the capacity 
of the ends of the system is large—if, for example, they consist 
of the armatures of a battery of Leyden jars—the discharge- 
current from these capacities: is able of itself to reduce the 
resistance of the spark-gap considerably ; but when the capaci- 
ties are small this function must be performed by some ex- 
traneous discharge, and for this reason the discharge of the 
induction - coil is, under the conditions of our experiment, 
absolutely necessary for exciting oscillations. 

As the induced sparks in the last experiment were several 
millimetres long, I had no doubt that it would be possible to 
obtain sparks even when the wires used were much farther 
apart; I therefore tried to arrange a modification of the ex- 
periment which appeared interesting. I gave the inducing 
circuit the form of a straight line (Fig. 9). Its ends were 
formed by the conductors C and C’. These were 3 metres 
apart, and were connected by a copper wire 2 mm. thick, at 
the centre of which was the discharger of the induction-coil. 
The induced circuit was the same as in the ‘preceding experi- 


1 [See Note 3 at end of book.] 


40 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS i 


ment, 120 cm. long and 80 cm. broad. If the shortest 
distance between the two systems was now made equal to 
50 cm., induced sparks 2 mm. in length could still be . 
obtained; at greater distances the spark-length decreased 


Fig. 9. 


rapidly, but even when the shortest distance was 1°5 metres, a 
continuous stream of sparks was perceptible. The experiment 
was in no way interfered with if the observer moved between 
the inducing and induced systems. A few control-experiments 
again established the fact that the phenomena observed were 
really caused by the current in the rectilinear portion. If one 
or both halves of this were removed, the sparks in the micro- 
meter ceased, even when the coil was still in action. They also 
ceased when the knobs of the discharger were drawn so far apart 
as to prevent any sparking in it. Inasmuch as the difference 
of electrostatic potential at the ends of the conductors C and C’ 
are now greater than before, this shows that these differences 
of potential are not the cause of the sparks in the micrometer. 

Hitherto the induced circuit was closed; it was, however, 
to be supposed that the induction would take plage equally in 
an open circuit. A second insulated copper wire was therefore 
stretched parallel to the straight wire in the preceding arrange- 
ment, and at a distance of 60 cm. from it. This second wire 
was shorter than the first; two insulated spheres 10 cm. in 
diameter were attached to its ends and the spark-micrometer 
was introduced in the middle of it. When the coil was now 


II ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC ce 41 


started, the stream of sparks from it was accompanied by a 
similar stream in the secondary conductor. But this experi- 
ment should be interpreted with caution, for the sparks observed 
are not solely due to electromagnetic induction. The alter-. 
nating motion in the system C C’ is indeed superposed upon 
the Ruhmkorff discharge itself. But during its whole course 
the latter determines an electrification of the conductor C, and 
an opposite electrification of the conductor C’. These electri- 
fications had no effect upon the closed circuit in the preceding 
experiment, but in the present discontinuous conductor they 
induce by purely electrostatic action opposite electrifica- 
tions in the two parts of the conductor, and thus produce 
sparks in the micrometer. In fact, if we draw the knobs of 
the discharger so far apart that the sparks in it disappear, the 
sparks in the micrometer, although weakened, still remain. 
These sparks represent the effect of electrostatic induction, 
and conceal the effect which alone we desired to exhibit. 

There is, however, an easy way of getting rid of these 
disturbing sparks. They die away when we interpose a bad 
conductor between the knobs of the micrometer, which is most 
simply done by means of a wet thread. The conductivity of 
this is obviously good enough to allow the current to follow 
the relatively slow alternations of the discharge from the coil ; 
but in the case of the exceedingly rapid oscillations of the 
rectilinear circuit it is, as we have already seen, not good 
enough to bring about an equalisation of the eleetrifications. 
If after placing the thread in position we again start the 
sparking in.the primary circuit, vigorous sparking begins again 
in the secondary circuit, and is now solely due to the rapid 
oscillations in the primary circuit. I have tested to what 
distance this action extended. Up to a distance of 1:2 metres 
between the parallel wires the sparks were easily perceptible ; 
the greatest perpendicular distance at which regular sparking 
could be obseryed was 3 metres. Since the electrostatic effect 
diminishes more rapidly with increasing distance than the 
electromagnetic induction, it was not necessary to complicate 
the experiment by using the wet thread at greater distances, 
for, even without this, only those discharges which excited 
oscillations in the primary wire were attended by sparks in the 
secondary circuit. 


4) ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS II 


I believe that the mutual action of rectilinear open circuits 
which plays such an important part in theory is, as a matter 
of fact, illustrated here for the first time. 


Resonance Phenomena 


We may now regard it as having been experimentally 
proved that currents of rapidly varying intensity, capable of 
producing powerful induction-effects, are present in conductors 
which are connected with the discharge circuit. The existence 
of regular oscillations, however, was only assumed for the pur- 
pose of explaining a comparatively small number of phenomena, 
which might perhaps be accounted for otherwise. But it 
seemed to me that the existence of such oscillations might be 
proved by showing, if possible, symphonic relations between 
the mutually reacting circuits. According to the principle of 
resonance, a regularly alternating current must (other things 
being similar) act with much stronger inductive effect upon a 
circuit having the same period of oscillation than upon one of 
only slightly different period.’ If, therefore, we allow two 
circuits, which may be assumed to have approximately the 
same period of vibration, to react on one another, and if we 
vary continuously the capacity or coefficient of self-induction 
of one of them, the resonance should show that for certain 
values of these quantities the induction is perceptibly stronger 
than for neighbouring values on either side. 

The following experiments were devised in accordance with 
this principle, and, after a few trials, they quite answered my 
intention. The experimental arrangement was very nearly the 
same as that of Fig. 9, excepting that the circuits were made 
somewhat different in size. The primary conductor was a 
perfectly straight copper wire 2°6 metres long and 5 mm. 
thick. This was divided in the middle so as to include the 
spark-gap. The two small knobs between which the discharge 
took place were mounted directly on the wire and connected 
with the poles of the induction-coil. To the ends of the wire 
were attached two spheres, 30 em. in diameter, made of strong 
zinc-plate. These could be shifted along the wire. As they 
formed (electrically) the ends of the conductor, the circuit 


1 Cf. Oberbeck, Wied. Ann. 26, p. 245, 1885. 


II ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCITLATIONS 43 


could easily be shortened or isitheaba: The secondary 
circuit was proportioned so that it was expected to have a 
somewhat smaller period of oscillation than the primary; it 
was in the form of a square 75 cm. in the side, and was made 
of copper wire 2 mm. in diameter. The shortest distance 
between the two systems was made equal to 30 cm, and at 
first the primary current was allowed to remain of full length. 
Under these circumstances the length of the biggest spark in 
the induced circuit was 0°9 mm. When two insulated metal 
spheres of 8 cm. diameter were placed in contact with the 
two poles of the circuit, the spark-length increased, and could 
be made as large as 2°5 mm. by suitably diminishing the dis- 
tance between the two spheres. On the other hand, if two 
conductors of very large surface were placed in contact with 
the two poles, the spark-length was reduced to a small fraction 
of a millimetre. Exactly similar results followed when the 
poles of the secondary circuit were connected with the plates 
of a Kohlrausch condenser. When the plates were far apart 
the spark-length was increased by increasing the capacity, but 
when they were brought closer together the spark-lenyth again 
fell to a very small value. The easiest way of adjusting the 
capacity of the secondary circuit was by hanging over its two 
ends two parallel bits of wire and altering the length of these 
and their distance apart. By careful adjustment the sparking 
distance was increased to 3 mm., after which it diminished, 
not only when the wires were lengthened, but also when they 
were shortened. That an, increase of the capacity should 
diminish the spark-length appeared only natural; but that it 
should have the effect of increasing it can scarcely be explained 
excepting by the principle of resonance. 

If our interpretation of the above experiment is correct, 
the secondary circuit, before its capacity was increased, had a 
somewhat shorter period than the primary. Resonance should 
therefore have occurred when the rapidity of the primary 
oscillations was increased. And, in fact, when I reduced the 
length of the primary circuit in the manner above indicated, 
the sparking distance increased, again reached a maximum of. 
3 mm. when the centres of the terminal spheres were 1°5 
metres apart, and again diminished when the spheres were 
brought still closer together. It might be supposed that the 


44 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS Ir 


spark-length would now increase still further if the capacity of 
the secondary circuit were again, as before, increased. But 
this is not the case; on attaching the same wires, which before 
had the effect of increasing the spark-length, this latter falls 
to about 1 mm. This is in accordance with our conception of 
the phenomenon ; that which at first brought about an equality 
between the periods of oscillation now upsets an equality which 
has been attained in another way. The experiment was most 
convincing when carried out as follows :—The spark-micrometer 
was adjusted for a fixed sparking distance of 2mm. If the 
secondary circuit was in its original condition, and the primary 
circuit 1:5 metres long, sparks passed regularly. If a small 
capacity is added to the secondary circuit in the way already 
described, the ' sparks are completely extinguished; if the 
primary circuit is now lengthened to 2°6 metres they reappear ; 
they are extinguished a second time if the capacity added to 
the secondary circuit is doubled; and by continuously i increas- 
ing the capacity of the already lengthened primary circuit 
they can be made to appear and disappear again and again. 
The experiment shows us quite plainly that effective action is 
determined, not by the condition of either of the circuits, but 
by a proper relation (or harmony) between the two. 

The length of the induced sparks increased considerably 
beyond the values given above when the two circuits were 
brought closer together. When the two circuits were at a 
distance of 7 cm. from one another and were adjusted to exact 
resonance, it was possible to obtain induced sparks 7 mm. 
long; in this case the electromotive forces induced in the 
secondary circuit were almost as great as those in the primary. 

In the above experiments resonance was secured by alter- 
ing the coefficient of self-induction and the capacity of the 
primary circuit, as well as the capacity of the secondary 
circuit. The following experiments show that an alteration 
of the coefficient of self-induction of the secondary circuit can 
also be used for this purpose. A series of rectanglesa bed . 
(Fig. 9) were prepared in which the sides a b and c d were kept 
of the same length, but the sides a ¢ and 6 d were made of wires 
varying in length from 10 em. to 250 cm. A marked maxi- 
mum of the sparking distance was apparent when the length 
of the rectangle was 1°8 metres. In order to get an idea of 


Ir ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC Ses, 45 


the quantitative relations I measured the longest sparks which 
appeared with various lengths of the secondary circuit. Fig. 
10a shows the results.’ Abscissee represent the total length 
of the induced circuit and ordinates the maximum spark- 
length. The points indicate the observed values. Measure- 
ments of sparking distances are always very uncertain, but this 
uncertainty cannot be such as to vitiate the general nature of 
the result. In another 
set of experiments not 
only the lengths of the 
‘sides a 6 and ¢ d, but 
also their distance apart 
(30 em.), and their posi- 
tion were kept constant; 
but the sides ac and 6d 
were formed of wires 
of gradually increasing 
length coiled into loose 
spirals. Fig. 100 shows 
the results, obtained. 
The maximum here cor- 
responds with a some- 
what greater length of 
wire than before. Prob- 
ably this is because the 
lengthening of the wire 
in this case increases 
only the coefficient of 
self-induction, whereas 
in the former case it 
increased the capacity Fig. 10, a and D. 

as well. 

Some further experiments were made in order to determine 
whether any different result would be obtained by altering the 
resistance of the secondary circuit. With this intention the 
wire ¢ d of the rectangle was replaced by various thin copper 
and German silver wires, so that the resistance of the secondary 
circuit was made about a hundred times as large. This change 
had very little effect on the sparking distance, and none at 


1 [See Note 4 at end of book.] 


46 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS II 


all on the resonance; or, in other words, on the period of 
oscillation. 

The effect of the presence of iron was also examined. The 
wire ¢ d was in some experiments surrounded by an iron tube, 
in others replaced by an iron wire. Neither of these changes 
produced a perceptible effect in any sense. This again confirms 
the supposition that the magnetism of iron cannot follow such 
exceedingly rapid oscillations, and that its behaviour towards 
them is neutral. Unfortunately we possess no experimental 
knowledge as to how the oscillatory discharge of Leyden jars 
is affected by the presence of iron. 


Nodes 


The oscillations which we excited in the secondary circuit, 
and which were measured by the sparks in the micrometer, 
are not the only ones, but are the simplest possible in that 
circuit. While the potential at the ends oscillates backwards 
and forwards continually between two limits, it always retains 
the same mean value in the middle of the circuit. This 
middle point is therefore a node of the electric oscillation, 
and the oscillation has only this one node. Its existence 
can also be shown experimentally, and that in two ways. In 
the first place, it can be done by bringing a small insulated 
sphere near the wire. The mean value of the potential of 
the small sphere cannot differ appreciably from that of the 
neighbouring bit of wire. Sparking between the knob and 
the wire can therefore only arise through the potential of 
the neighbouring point of the system experiencing sufficiently 
large oscillations about the mean value. Hence there should 
be vigorous sparking at the ends of the system and none 
at all near the node. And this in fact is so, excepting, 
indeed, that when the nodal point is touched the sparks do 
not entirely disappear, but are only reduced to a minimum. 
A second way of showing the nodal point is clearer, Adjust 
the secondary circuit for resonance and draw the knobs of 
the micrometer so far apart that sparks can only pass by 
the assistance of the action of resonance. If any point of 
the system is now touched with a conductor of some capacity, 
we should in general expect that the resonance would be 


ee ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC le 47 


disturbed, and that the sparks would difappear; only at the 
node would there be no interference with the period of oscil- 
lation. Experiment confirms this. The middle of the wire 
can be touched with an insulated sphere, or with the hand, 
or can even be placed in metallic connection with the gas- 
pipes without affecting the sparks; similar interference at the 
side-branches or the poles causes the sparks to disappear. 
After the possibility of fixing a nudal point was thus 
proved, it appeared to me to be worth while experimenting 
on the production of a vibration with two nodes. I pro- 
ceeded as follows:—The straight primary conductor CC’ and 
therectilinear second- 
ary a bed were set up 
asin the earlier experi- 
ments and brought to 
resonance. Anexactly 
similar rectangleefgh 
was then placed oppo- 
site to abed as 
shown in Fig. 11, 


and the neighbouring p y, F 
poles of both were 7 or 
joined.(1 with 3and 2 
with 4). The whole 
system forms a closed , 


metallic circuit, and 
the lowest or funda- Fig. 11. 

mental vibration pos- 

sible in it has two nodes. Since. the period of this vibra- 
tion must very nearly agree with the period of either half, and 
therefore with the period of the primary conductor, it was 
supposed that vibrations would develop having two anti- 
nodes at the junctions 1-3 and 2-4, and two nodes at the 
middle points of cd andgh. These vibrations were always 
measured by the sparking distance between the knobs of the 
"micrometer which formed the poles 1 and 2. The results 
of the experiment were as follows :—-Contrary to what was 
expected, it was found that the sparking distance between 1 
and 2 was considerably diminished by the. addition of the 
rectangle ef gh. From about 3 mm. it fellto 1mm. Never- 


48 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS II 


theless there was still resonance between the primary circuit 
and the secondary. For every alteration of efgh reduced the 
sparking distance still further, and this whether the alteration 
was in the direction of lengthening or shortening the rectangle. 
Further, it was found that the two nodes which were expected 
were actually present. By holding a sphere near ed and gh 
only very weak sparks could be obtained as compared with 
those from ae and bf. And it could also be shown that these 
nodes belonged to the same vibration which, when strengthened 
by resonance, produced the sparks 1-2. For the sparking 
distance between 1 and 2 was not diminished by touching along 
ed or gh, but it was by touching at every other place. 

The experiment may be modified by breaking one of the 
connections 1-3 or 2-4, say the latter, As the current- 
strength of the induced oscillation is always zero at these 
points, this cannot interfere much with the oscillation. And, 
in fact, after the connection has been broken, it can be shown 
as before that resonance takes place, and that the vibrations 
corresponding to this resonance have two nodes at the same 
places. Of course there was this difference, that the vibration 
with two nodes was no longer the deepest possible vibration ; 
the vibration of longest period would be one with a single 
node between a and e, and having the highest potentials at 
the poles 2 and-4. And if we bring the knobs at these 
poles nearer together we find that there is feeble sparking 
between them. We may attribute these sparks to an excita- 
tion, even if only feeble, of the fundamental vibration; and 
this supposition is made almost a certainty by the following ex- 
tension of the experiment :—We stop the sparks between 1 and 
2 and direct our attention to the length of the sparks between 
2 and 4, which measures the intensity of the fundamental vibra- 
tion. We now increase the period of oscillation of the primary 
circuit by extending it to the full length and adding to its 
capacity. We observe that the sparks thus incréase to a 
maximum length of several millimetres and then again become 
shorter. Clearly they are longest when the oscillation of the 
primary current agrees with the fundamental oscillation, And 
while the sparks between 2 and 4 are longest it can be easily 
shown that at this time only a single nodal point corresponds 
to these sparks. For only between a and e can the conductor 


i ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC ae 49 


be touched without interfering with the sparks, whereas touch- 
ing the previous nodal points interrupts the stream of sparks. 
Hence it is in this way possible, in any given conductor, to 
make either the fundamental vibration or the first overtone 
preponderate. 

Meanwhile, there are several further problems which I 
have not solved; amongst others, whether it is possible to 
establish the existence of oscillations with several nodes. The 
results already described were only obtained by careful atten- 
tion to insignificant details; and so it appeared probable that 
the answers to further questions would turn out to be more 
or less ambiguous. The difliculties which present themselves 
arise partly from the nature of the methods of observation, 
and partly from the nature of the electric disturbances observed. 
Although these latter manifest themselves as undoubted oscil- 
lations, they do not exhibit the characteristics of perfectly 
regular oscillations. Their intensity varies considerably from 
one discharge to another, and from the comparative unimport- 
ance of the resonance-effects we conclude that the damping 
must be rapid; many secondary phenomena point to the 
superposition of irregular disturbances upon the regular oscilla- 
tions, as, indeed, was to be expected from the complex nature 
of the system of conductors. If we wish to compare, in 
respect of their mathematical relations, our oscillations with 
any particular kind of acoustic oscillations, we must not choose 
the long-continued harmonic oscillations of uniform strength 
which are characteristic of tuning-forks and strings, but rather 
such as are produced by striking a wooden rod with a hammer, 
—oscillations which rapidly die away, and with which are 
mingled irregular disturbances. And when we are dealing 
with oscillations of the latter class we are obliged, even in 
acoustics, to content ourselves with mere indications of re- 
sonance, formation of nodes, and similar phenomena. 

For the sake of those who may wish to repeat the experi- 
ments and obtain the same results I must add one remark, the 
exact significance of which may not be clear at first. In all 
the experiments described the apparatus was set up in such a 
way that the spark of the induction-coil was visible from the 
place where the spark in, the micrometer took place. When 


1 [See Note 5 at end of book.] 
E 


50 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS at 


this is not the case the phenomena are qualitatively the same, 
but the spark-lengths appear to be diminished. I have under- 
taken a special investigation of this phenomenon, and intend to 
publish the results in a separate paper.! 


Theoretical 


It is highly desirable that quantitative data respecting the 
oscillations should be obtained by experiment. But as there 
is at present no obvious way of doing this, we are obliged to 
have recourse to theory, in order to obtain at any rate some 
indication of the data. The theory of electric oscillations 
which has been developed by Sir W. Thomson, v. Helmholtz, 
and Kirchhoff has been verified as far as the oscillations of 
open induction-coils and oscillatory Leyden jar discharges 
are concerned ;? we may therefore feel certain that the appli- 
cation of this theory to the present phenomena will give 
results which are correct, at least as far as the order of 
magnitude is concerned. 

To begin with, the period of oscillation is the most im- 
portant element. As an example to which calculation can 
be applied, let us determine the (simple or half) period of 
oscillation T of the primary conductor which we used in the 
resonance-experiments. Let P denote the coefficient of self- 
induction of this conductor in magnetic measure, expressed 
in centimetres ; C the capacity of either of its ends in electro- 
static measure (and therefore expressed also in centimetres) ; 
and finally A the velocity of light in centimetre/seconds. 
Then, assuming that the resistance is small, T=7,/ PC/A. 
' In our experiments the capacity of the ends of the conductor 
consisted mainly of the spheres attached to them. We shall 
therefore not be far wrong if we take C as being the radius of 
either of these spheres, or put C=15 cm? As regards the 
coefficient of self-induction P, it was that of a straight wire, of 
diameter d= 0°5 cm., and of which the length L was 150 cm. 
when resonance occurred. Calculated by Neumann’s formula 
P=// cos e/r ds ds’, the value of P for such a wire is 


1 [See IV., p. 63.] 2 Lorenz, Wied. Ann. 7, p. 161, 1879. 
: [See Note 6 at end of book.] 


Il ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC es 51 


2L{log nat (4L/d)— 0°75} and therefor 
P=1902 em. 

At the same time we know that it is not certain whether 
Neumann’s formula is applicable to open circuits. The most 
general formula, as given by v. Helmholtz, contains an un- 
determined constant 4, and this formula is in accordance with 
the known experimental data. Calculated according to the 
general formula, we get for a straight cylindrical wire of 
length L and diameter d the value P = 2L{log nat (4L/d)— 
0-75+4(1—4)}. Ifin this we put k= 1, we arrive at Neu- 
mann’s value. If we put k=0, or k= —1, we obtain values 
which correspond to Maxwell’s theory or Weber’s theory. If we 

- assume that one at any rate of these values is the correct one, 
and therefore exclude the assumption that it may have a very 
large negative or positive value, then the true value of & is not 
of much moment. For the coefficients calculated with these 
various values of & differ from each other by less than one- 
sixth of their value; and so if the coefficient 1902 does not 
exactly correspond to a length of wire of 150 cm., it does 
correspond to a length of our primary conductor not differing 
greatly therefrom. From the values of P and C it follows 
that the length 7,/CP is 531 em. This is the distance 
through which light travels in the time of an oscillation, and 
is at the same time the wave-length of the electromagnetic 
waves which, according to Maxwell’s view, are supposed to be 
the external effect of the oscillations. From this length it 
follows that the period of oscillation itself (T) is 1°77 hundred- 
millionths of a second; thus the statement which we made in 
the beginning as to the order of magnitude of the period is 
justified. 

Let us now turn our attention to what the theory can tell 
us as to the ratio of damping of the oscillations. In order 
that oscillations may be possible in the open circuit, its resist- 
ance must be less than 2A,/ P/C. For our primary con- 
ductor ,/P/C = 11:25: now since the velocity A is equal to 
30 earth-quadrant/seconds, or to 30 ohms, it follows that the 
limit for r admissible in our experiment is 676 ohms. It is 
very probable that the true resistance of a powerful discharge 
lies below this limit, and thus from the theoretical point of 
view there is no contradiction of our assumption of oscillatory 


jn our experiments 


52 ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS It 


motion. If the actual value of the resistance lies somewhat 
below this limit, the amplitude of any one oscillation would 
bear to the amplitude of that immediately following the ratio 
of 1 to eT? The number of oscillations required to reduce 
the amplitude in the ratio of 2°71 to 1 is therefore equal tv 
2P/rT or 24,/P/C/mr. It therefore bears to 1 the same 
ratio that 1/m of the calculated limiting value bears to the 
actual value of the resistance, or the same ratio as 215 ohms 
tor. Unfortunately we have no means of even approximately 
estimating the resistance of a spark-gap. Perhaps we may 
regard it as certain that this resistance amounts to at least a 
few ohms, for even the resistance of strong electric arcs does 
not fall below this. It would follow from this that the 
number of oscillations we have to consider should be counted 
by tens and not by hundreds or thousands.’ This is in complete 
accordance with the character of the phenomena, as has already 
been pointed out at the end of the preceding section. It is 
also in accordance with the behaviour of the very.similar 
oscillatory discharges of Leyden jars, in which case the 
oscillations of perceptible strength are similarly limited to a 
very small number. 

In the case of purely metallic secondary circuits the condi- 
tions are quite different from those of the primary currents 
to which we have confined our attention. In the former a 
disturbance would, according to theory, only come to rest 
after thousands of oscillations. There is no good reason for 
doubting the correctness of this result; but a more complete 
theory would certainly have to take into consideration the 
reaction upon the primary conductor, and would thus probably 
arrive at higher values for the damping of the secondary con- 
ductor as well. 

Finally, we may raise the question whether the induction- 
effects of the oscillations which we have observed were of the 
same order as those which theory would lead us to expect, or 
whether there is here any appearance of contradiction between 
‘the phenomena themselves and our interpretation of them. 
We may answer the question by the following considerations :— 
We observe, in the first place, that the maximum value of the 
electromotive force which the oscillation induces in its own 

1 [See Note 7 at end of book.] 


II ON VERY RAPID ELECTRIC pee ei 53 


circuit must be very nearly equal to the maximum difference 
of potential at the ends, for if the oscillations were not damped, 
there would exist complete equality between the two magni- 
tudes; inasmuch as the potential difference of the ends and 
the electromotive force of induction would in that case be in 
equilibrium at every instant. Now in our experiments the 
potential difference between the ends was of a magnitude 
corresponding to a sparking distance of 7-8 mm., and any such 
sparking distance fixes the value of the greatest inductive 
effect of the oscillation in its own path. We observe, in 
the second place, that at every instant the induced electro- 
motive force in the secondary cireuit bears to that induced 
in the primary circuit the same ratio as the coefficient of 
mutual induction yp between the primary and _ secondary 
circuit bears to the coefficient of self-induction P of the 
primary circuit. There is no difficulty in calculating accord- 
ing to known formule the approximate value of p for our 
resonance-experiments. It was found to vary in the different 
experiments between one-ninth and one-twelfth of P. From 
this we may conclude that the maximum electromotive force 
which our oscillation excites in the secondary circuit should be 
of such strength as to give rise to sparks of 1/, to */, mm. 
in length. And accordingly the theory allows us, on the one 
hand, to expect visible sparks in the secondary circuit under 
all circumstances, and, on the other hand, we see that we can 
only explain sparks of several millimetres in length by assum- 
ing that several successive inductive effects strengthen each 
other. Thus from the theoretical side as well we are com- 
pelled to regard the phenomena which we have observed as 
being the results of resonance. 

Further application of theory to these phenomena can only 
be of service when we shall have succeeded by some means in 
determining the period of oscillation directly. Such measure- 
ment would not only confirm the theory but would lead to an 
extension of it. The purpose of the present research is simply 
to show that even in short metallic conductors oscillations can 
be induced, and to indicate in what manner the oscillations 
which are natural to them can be excited. 


Til 


FROM HERR W. VON BEZOLD’S PAPER: “RESEARCHES 
ON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE — PRELIMINARY 
COMMUNICATION ” 


(Poggendorf's Annalen, 140, p. 541. Berichte der Bayrischen Akad. d. 
: Wissensch., 1870.) : 


AS we must extract that part of v. Bezold’s work which 
alone concerns us here, and remove it from its context, it may 
be advisable to preface it by some explanation. 

Von Bezold’s researches start with observations on Lichten- 
berg dust-figures. Herr von Bezold had noticed that under 
certain conditions the characters of the positive and negative 
figures appeared to undergo some modification and to resemble 
each other more nearly; so much so that the negative figure, 
for example, might be taken for positive. The first deviation 
from the normal character always presents itself in the form of 
a small positive figure appearing in the centre ‘of the negative 
figure, or a small negative figure in the centre of the positive 
figure. It appeared that the more complicated figures always 
owed their origin to a spark associated with an alternating 
discharge, while the simple figures were produced by simple 
discharges. In every complicated figure an alternating dis- 
charge to a certain extent registered itself; and from the 
appearance of the figure the alternating character of the 
discharge and the direction of its first outburst could be 
directly recognised. We can, therefore, make use of the 
Lichtenberg figures in investigating the discharge. 

Von Bezold produced the Lichtenberg figurés in the 
following way :—A horizontal plate of well-insulating glass was 


it V. BEZOLD’S RESEARCHES ON THE Hite DISCHARGE 55 


covered underneath with tinfoil, and this was connected to 
earth. On the. upper side of the plate was placed the point 
of a vertical knitting-needle, to which the discharge was led. 
The needle was then removed, the plate dusted, and the 
figure produced was examined. If this arrangement (which 
will be called the test-plate) is inserted directly in the 
discharge-cireuit of a Leyden jar or of the conductor of 
an electrical machine, it naturally makes it impossible for 
an alternating discharge, and in general for any complete 
discharge, to occur. Hence the test-plate can only be 
inserted in a shunt to the actual discharge which is being 
investigated. 

While Herr von Bezold was carrying out this method— 
using the discharge to earth of the conductor of his electrical 
machine as the principal discharge—he at once came upon 
certain very remarkable phenomena. Positive figures made 
their appearance where negative ones were to be expected ; 
large figures appeared where one might have supposed there 
would be small ones, and vice versa, Ohm’s law did not explain 
the facts; it appeared as if the electricity in motion had the 
power of carrying with it neighbouring electrifications, as if 
“ phenomena occurred in electrical disturbances similar to those 
which are observed in the motion of fluids under the name of 
aspiration-phenomena.” Of course many of the details were 
bound to remain unexplained at first. We now quote Herr 
von Bezold’s own words: 


“These peculiar observations led to further researches on 
the division of electrical discharge-currents. 

“Here, again, alternating discharges gave more constant 
results than simple ones; care was therefore taken to provide 
always a suitable return-conductor. The above experiments 
show that a simple wire cannot be employed for this purpose ; 
hence the induction-coil of the Ruhmkorff & was used as a 
return-conductor. F 

“Tf now the electrical machine Q was slowly turned until a 
spark passed at /, complex positive figures appeared with great 
regularity on the plate at A. . 


“Ifa portion of the current was diverted along a short wire 
D, and this branch-current led on to the plate in the same way 


56  V. BEZOLD’S RESEARCHES ON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE I 


by a conductor B, there appeared, as might be expected, two 
precisely similar figures. If, on the other hand, the branch-wire 
was of considerable 
D length (somewhat 
more than 1 metre), 
there was a decided 
difference in size be- 
tween the figures. 
As soon as the 
length of the wire 
exceeded this limit, 
the figure at B was 
always larger than 
at A,even when the 
branch had its origin quite near the end of the conductor 
(1 cm. above the plate). The difference in size between the 
two figures became more striking as the length of the branch- 
wire D was increased, until finally, when D was equal to 6°4 
metres, and F (the length of the spark-gap) was equal to 
4:0 mm., the figure at 4 was reduced to a small star, and 
often was altogether absent. 


Fig. 12. 


“ This experiment obviously shows that Ohm’s law only holds 
good for stationary currents, and not for electrical discharges, 
as indeed all theoretical investigations have shown. For 
whereas no electricity reaches the plate through the short 
branch .A, it rushes, at any rate apparently, along the path 
through the wire D which is several hundred times longer. 


“If the wire D is still further lengthened there is (within 
fairly wide limits) no change at first to be observed; only 
when the length has been about doubled does the figure at 4 
again become larger, until with still greater lengths the 
difference in size between the two figures again completely 
disappears. Jt made no difference whether the wire used was 
thick or thin, whether it was a good or bad conductor, nor yet 
whether it was tightly stretched or curved. I have not yet 
experimented with wire spirals. 


“On account of the complete novelty of the phenomena it 
appeared to me of interest to investigate the behaviour of the 


ut V. BEZOLD’S RESEARCHES ON THE a DISCHARGE 57 


wire D at different places. For this purpose a modification 
shown in Fig. 13 was made. On the plate were placed the 
conductors A, B, C, which were connected together by two 
wires D and D’. If the length of these wires is chosen so as 
to produce as large as pos- ; 
sible a figure at C, and, on 
the other hand, as small as 
possible a figure at .4, then 
the figure at B is larger than Pd 
that at A and smaller than > 

that at C. If the wires are 

longer the sizes of the 
figures 4 and C are more 
nearly equal, whereas, when 
the ratio ,D:D’ is suit- 
ably chosen, B becomes 
quite small and even dis- Fig. 13. 

appears altogether. When 

the sparking distance was 4°3 mm. and the length AF 
was equal to 50 cm., D=6'2 m. and D’=8-1m,, the figures 
at A and CO were large, whereas only a small star appeared 
at B. 


“If any one of the conductors is lifted away from the plate, 
the figures at the remaining conductors are not in the least 
altered thereby. 


“ This experiment teaches us a new fact, viz. that by simply 
connecting a conductor with a wire which has a blind end, we 
can produce important modifications in the figure which is 
formed by that conductor, and may even cause it to disappear. 
The most instructive way of performing the experiment is to 
bring near the conductor A a second spark-micrometer f (Fig. 
14), one knob of which is connected with 4 while the other 
leads to the wire D. If now the distance between the knobs 
of the micrometer / is at first made large and then gradually 
diminished, it is seen that at the instant when the spark passes 
at f the figure at A becomes altered or disappears. But if we 
consider that in the case of an alternating discharge the wire 
forthwith becomes completely discharged, it ‘follows that in 
such a case electricity is first driven to the outer end of the 


58 V. BEZOLD’S RESEARCHES ON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 


wire D, and then immediately back again ; that, in fact, we have 
here disturbances which are entirely comparable with reflection. 


Fig. 14. 


‘ 


“This consideration leads to an hypothesis respecting the 
peculiar changes of size which the dust-figures undergo when 
the discharge branches as above described. 

“Tf electric waves are impelled along a wire and forced to 
return along the same path after reflection at the end, the 
advancing and reflected waves would interfere and so give rise 
to phenomena analogous to those observed in organ-pipes. 
The observations already described point distinctly to such an 
analogy, and we may venture to compare the positions of the 
wire in which maximum and minimum figures appear with the 
antinodes and nodes. 

“The hypothesis that the phenomena under discussion are 
due to interference gains additional support from the fact that 
it is only with alternating currents that the experiment is a 
decided success; differences in size between the various figures 
are indeed observed with simple discharges too, but not nearly 
to the same extent. 

“In connection with the above experiments, a small 
modification was tried, which in turn became the starting-point 
for fresh researches :— 

“Tf the end of the wire D (Fig. 12) is brought back to and 
connected with the first conductor 4, as shown in the accom- 
panying diagram, the figure can again be made to disappear by 
suitably choosing the length of the wire. Strictly speaking, 
this experiment was the starting-point of all the others already 
described ; but I have deferred the description of it until now 


11 -V. BEZOLD’S RESEARCHES ON THE aie DISCHARGE 59 


because it does not help us much to ynderstand the above 
experiments. For my own part, I at first believed that I had 


Fig. 15. 


found in it an analogue to Savart’s interference-experiment for 
sound-waves, and pictured the currents to myself as moving in 
the direction of the dotted arrows. This view was upset by 
the experiments in which the wire with a blind end was used, 
as well as by the fact that the distance between the two points 
of divergence on A exercised no decided effect on the result. 
In order to remove all doubt on this score I introduced a spark- 
gap into the branch D at various places in turn. The knobs 
of this second micrometer were only 0°01 to 0:03 mm. apart. 
T reasoned thus: If the current enters the wire from both ends 
there must be some point on the wire at which the two trains 
of waves meet. When the spark-gap is exactly at this point, 
the potential on the two balls must reach the same value 
simultaneously, and there can be no cause for the production 
of sparks at this point; whereas, at all other points, sparking 
was to be expected. 

“ And, a3 a matter of fact, the sparking ceased when the 
micrometer was introduced in the middle of a branch, and 
began again as soon as it was removed from this point a few 
decimetres on either side. It is thus proved that the direction 
of the current is as indicated by the continuous arrows; and, 
on the other hand, the small retardation which the electric 
discharge-current: suffers while traversing a few decimetres of 
wire is here made evident. 

“T now endeavoured chiefly to find out under what experi- 
mental conditions this retardation was most efféctively shown. I 
found it best to use the direct- discharge of a Ruhmkorff cil, 


60 VV. BEZOLD’S RESEARCHES ON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 1 


as shown in the diagram (Fig. 16). The inducing current was 
provided by a Grove cell, and the sparking distance F ih the 


Fig, 16. 


spark-micrometer was made about 2 mm., inasmuch as neither 
larger nor smaller spark-gaps gave such good results. 

“ Under these circumstances it sufficed for the production of 
the spark if one of the wires D was only one decimetre longer 
than the other. On the contrary, no spark ever appeared if they 
were of the same length. It can, however, be made to appear 
at once if the symmetry of the two branches is upset by placing 
the knob of a Leyden jar in contact with one of the wires. 

“In this experiment, again, the material and thickness of 
the wires had not the slightest effect. Whether I used a 
silvered copper wire of 0°06 mm. diameter, or an iron wire of 
0°23 mm., or a copper wire of 0°80 mm. diameter, there was 
never any spark as long as the two wires were of equal length. 

“ Thus the velocity of electricity for all (stretched)’ wires 
is the same. 

“ The experiment is still not easily visible in the form above 
described, for one can only work with a small spark-gap in the 
auxiliary micrometer f. I therefore endeavoured to modify it 
in such a way as would admit of its being exhibited in a lecture- 
room. 

“Trials with small Geissler tubes gave no definite result. 
On the other hand, the retardation can be very well shown in 
the following way, provided the difference of path amounts to 
a few metres (Fig. 17) :-— 

“Let a (negative) discharge, preferably from a Ruhmkorff 
coil, be divided as above directly beyond the spark-micrometer 
into two branches. Let one of them be connected with the 
coating of a completely insulated test-plate, while the other is 


ae Wires wound spirally would probably have given a different result, 


111 -V. BEZOLD’S RESEARCHES ON THE ELEGTEIC DISCHARGE 61 


led by the conductor A on to the upper uncovered surface. 
Under these conditions a positive figure, or a negative one, or 
no figure at all, may appear on the upper’ surface according as 
the upper branch is larger, smaller, or of the same length as 
the lower. Indeed, we can predict what results the experiments 
must give if the supposition is correct that they are caused by 
time-differences. For if we recollect that the effect of leading 


Fig. 17. 


positive electricity on to the phate is the same as the effect of 
removing negative electricity, we can understand how a positive 
discharge gives rise to a positive figure if the electricity reaches 
the point of the conductor before it reaches the coating, we. if 
D, is shorter than D, If, on the other hand, the discharge 
arrives first at the coating, the induced electricity traverses 
the conductor in the opposite sense, and hence a negative 
figure must make its appearance upon the pane as soon as 
D, is shorter than D,. In the course of the disturbance the 
induced charge in the wire D, must meet the electricity 
arriving directly from F, and hence a complex character will 
be impressed upon the figure. 

“Between these two dispositions, which give opposite 
results, there obviously must be another in which no figure 
can be produced, because there is no reason why the one kind 
or the other should appear. This must be the case when the 
electricity arrives simultaneously from both sides, ze. when 
D, and D, are of the same length.’ 

“The experiments entirely coincided with these theoretical 
predictions. With either kind of electricity figures of both 
kinds can be obtained if the lengths of the wires are rightly 
chosen: 

1 A small difference of length in favour of the upper wire may occur here, 


inasmuch as the electricity arriving from below has to spread itself out over the 
whole coating. 


62 V. BEZOLD’S RESEARCHES ON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 111 


“Jt is true that this assertion may appear incorrect to 
many who may try the experiment under conditions which are 
_ not quite favourable; excepting the one case in which, on 
account of the exact equality of the two paths, no figure 
appears. For it may happen that at first sight all the figures 
appear to be positive under whatever conditions one works 
and with either kind of electricity. 

“ The reason is simply that the complex negative figures in 
this case belong to the class which already bear a strong positive 
character, and can scarcely be recognised as negative even 
after thorough experience of them. 

“ But the considerable difference in size which results from 
a change of pole amply suffices to remove at once any doubt 
respecting the real nature of the figures, and to show the 
accordance between the experiments and the theoretical pre- 
dictions. 


“To sum up, the following results were obtained :— 

“1. If, after springing across a spark-gap, an electric dis- 
charge has before it two paths to earth, one short and the 
other long, and ‘separated by a test-plate, the discharge- 
current splits up, so long as the sparking distance is small. 
But when it is larger the electricity rushes solely along the 
shorter path, carrying with it out of the other branch elec- 
tricity of the same sign. 

“2. If a series of electric waves is sent along a wire which 
is insulated at the end, the waves are reflected at the end, and 
the phenomena which accompany this process in the case of 
alternating discharges appear to be caused by interference 
between the advancing and reflected waves. 

“3. An electric discharge traverses wires of equal lengths 
in equal times, whatever may be the material of which these 
wires consist.” 


IV 


ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT UPON 
THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 


(Sttzungsberichte d. Berl. Akad. d. Wiss., June 9, 1887. Wiedemann’s 
Ann. 31, p. 983.) 


IN a series of experiments on the effects of resonance between 
very rapid electric oscillations which I have carried out and 
recently published, two electric sparks were produced by the 
same discharge of an induction-coil, and therefore simul- 
taneously. One of these, the spark A, was the discharge- 
spark of the induction-coil, and served to excite the primary 
oscillation. The second, the spark B, belonged to the induced 
or secondary oscillation. The latter was not very luminous ; 
in the experiments its maximum length had to be accurately 
measured. I occasionally enclosed the spark B in a dark 
case so as more easily to make the observations; and in so 
doing I observed that the maximum spark-length became 
decidedly smaller inside the case than it was before. On 
removing in succession the various parts of the case, it was 
seen that the only portion of it which exercised this pre- 
judicial effect was that which screened the spark B from the 
spark A. The partition on that side exhibited this effect, not 
only when it was in the immediate neighbourhood of the spark 
B&, but also when it was interposed at greater distances from 
B between A and, £& <A phenomenon so remarkable called 
for closer investigation. The following communication con- 
tains the results which I have been able to establish in the 
course of the investigation :— 


1 See IL, p- 29. 


64 ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT I¥ 


1. The phenomenon could not be traced to any screening 
effect of an electrostatic or electromagnetic nature. For the 
effect was not only exhibited by good conductors interposed 
between A and B, but also by perfect non-conductors, in 
particular by glass, paraffin, ebonite, which cannot possibly exert 
any screening effect. Further, metal gratings of coarse texture 
showed no effect, although they act as eflicient screens. 


2. The fact that both sparks A and B corresponded with 
synchronous and very rapid oscillations was immaterial. 
For the same effect could be exhibited by exciting two 
simultaneous sparks in any other way. It also appeared 
when, instead of the induced spark, I used a side-spark (this 
term having the same significance as in my earlier paper). 
It also appeared when I used as the spark B a side-discharge 
(according to Riess’s terminology), such as is obtained by con- 
necting one pole of an induction-coil with an insulated 
conductor and introducing a spark-gap. But it can best and 
most conveniently be exhibited by inserting in the same 
circuit two induction-coils with a common interruptor, the 
one coil giving the spark .4 and the other. the spark B. This 
arrangement was almost exclusively used in the subsequent 
experiments. As I found the experiment succeed with a 
number of different induction-coils, it could be carried out 
with any pair of sets of apparatus at pleasure. At the same 
time it will be convenient to describe the particular experi- 
mental arrangement which gave the best results and was 
most frequently used. The spark 4 was produced by a large 
Ruhmkorff coil (a, Fig. 18), 52 cm. long and 20 cm. in 
diameter, fed by six large Bunsen cells (b) and provided with 
a separate mercury-break (c). With the current used it 
could give sparks up to 10 cm. long between point and plate, 
and up to about 3 cm. between two spheres. The spark 
generally used was one of 1 cm. length: between the points of 
a common discharger (d). The spark B was produced by a 
smaller coil (originally intended for medical use) of relatively 
greater current-strength, but having a maximum spark-length 
of only 7/,-1 em. As it was here introduced into the 
circuit of the larger coil, its condenser did not come into 
play, and thus it only gave sparks of 1-2 mm. length. The 


Ww UPON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 65 


sparks used were ones about 1 mm. long between the nickel- 
plated knobs of a Riess spark-micrometer (f), or between 
brass knobs of 5 to 10 cm. 
diameter. When the appar- 
atus thus arranged was set up 
with both spark-gaps parallel 
and not too far apart, the 
interruptor set going, and the 
spark-micrometer drawn out 
just so far as to still permit 
sparks to pass regularly, then 
on placing a plate (p) of 
metal, glass, etc., between the 
two spark-gaps d and /, the 
sparks are extinguished im- 
mediately and completely. 
On removing the plate they immediately reappear. 

3. The effect becomes more marked as the spark A is 
brought nearer to the spark B. The distance between the two 
sparks when I first observed the phenomenon was 14 metres, 
and the effect is, therefore, easily observed at this distance. 
I have been able to detect indications of it up to a distance of 
3 metres between the sparks. But at such distances the 
phenomenon manifests itself only in the greater or less 
regularity of the stream of sparks at B; at distances less than 
a metre its strength can be measured by the differerice 
between the maximum spark-length before and after the 
interposition of the plate. In order to indicate the magnitude 
of the effect I give the following, naturally rough, observations 
which were obtained with the experimental arrangement shown 
in Fig. 18 :-— 


e 


Distance between Length of Spark B in mm.. 
the Sparks in before and after insert- Difference. 
cm. ing the Plate. 

@ 08 0°8 ce) 

50 09 08 01 

40 : 10. 0-8 0-2 

30 il 0:8 03 

20 13 0-8 05 

10 15 08 : 0-7 
5 16 0:8 0-8 
2 1:8 0-8 1-0 


66 ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT 1v 


It will be seen that, under certain conditions, the sparking 
distance is doubled by removing the plate. 


4. The observations given in the table may also be 
adduced as proofs of the following statement which the reader 
will probably have assumed from the first. The phenomenon 
does not depend upon any prejudicial effect of the plate on the 
spark B, but upon its annulling a certain action of the spark 
A, which tends to increase the sparking distance. When 
the distance between the sparks 4 and B is great, if we so 
adjust the spark-micrometer that sparks no longer pass at B, 
and then bring the spark-micrometer nearer to .A, the stream 
of sparks in B, reappears; this is the action. If we now 
introduce the plate, the sparks are extinguished ; this is the 
cessation of the action. Thus the plate only forms a means 
of exhibiting conveniently and plainly the action of the spark 
A. I shall in future call A the active spark and B the 
passive spark. 


5. The efficiency of the active spark is not confined to 
any special form of it. Sparks between knobs, as well as 
sparks between points, proved to be efficient. Short straight 
sparks, as well as long jagged ones, exhibited the effect. There 
was no difference of any importance between faintly luminous 
bluish sparks and brilliant white ones. Even sparks 2 mm. 
long made their influence felt to considerable distances. Nor 
does the action proceed from any special part of the spark ; 
every part is effective. This statement can be verified by 
drawing a glass tube over the spark-gap. The glass does not 
allow the effect to pass through, and so the spark under these 
conditions is inactive. But the effect reappears as soon as a 
short bit of the spark is exposed at one pole or the other, or 
in the middle. I have not observed any influence due to the 
‘ metal of the pole. And in arranging the experiment it is not 
of importance that the active spark should be parallel to the 
passive one. 


6. On the other hand, the susceptibility of the passive 
spark to the action is to a certain extent dependent upon its 
form. I could detect no susceptibility with long jagged 
sparks between points, and but little with short sparks 


> 


Iv UPON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 67 


between points. The effect was best aeaayed by sparks 
between knobs, and of these most strikingly by short 
sparks. It is advisable to use for the experiments sparks 
1 mm. long between knobs of 5-10 mm. diameter. Still 
I have distinctly recognised the effect with sparks 2 cm. long. 
Perhaps the absolute lengthening which such sparks experi- 
ence is really as great as in the case of shorter sparks, but at 
all events the relative increase in length is much smaller; and 
hence the effect disappears in the differences. which occur 
between the single discharges of the coil. I have not dis- 
covered any perceptible influence due to the material of the 
pole. I examined sparks between poles of copper, brass, iron, 
aluminium, tin, zinc, and lead. If there was any difference 
between the metals with respect to the susceptibility of the 
spark, it appeared to be slightly in favour of the iron. The 
poles must be clean and smooth; if they are dirty, or corroded 
by long use, the effect is not produced. 


7. The relation between the two sparks is reciprocal. 
That is to say, not only does the larger and stronger 
spark increase the spark-length of the smaller one, but con- 
versely the smaller spark has the same effect upon the spark- 
length of the larger one. For example, using the same 
apparatus as before, let us adjust the spark-micrometer so 
that the discharge in it passes over regularly; but let the 
discharger be so adjusted that the discharges of the large coil 
just miss fire. On bringing the spark-micrometer nearer we 
find that these discharges are again produced; but that on 
introducing a plate the action ceases. For this purpose the 
spark of the large coil must naturally be fairly sensitive; and, — 
inasmuch as long sparks are less sensitive, the effect is not so 
striking. If both coils are just at the limit of their sparking 
distance complications arise which have probably no connection 
with the matter at present under discussion.’ One frequently 
has occasion to notice a long spark being started by other 
ones which are much smaller, and in part this may certainly 
be ascribed to the action which we are investigating. When 
the discharge of a coil is made to take place between knobs, 
and the knobs are drawn apart until the sparks cease, then it 


1 [See Note 8 at end of book.] 


68 ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT Iv 


is found that the sparking begins again when an insulated 
conductor is brought near one of the knobs so as to draw 
small side-sparks from it. I have proved to my entire 
satisfaction that the side-discharges here perform the function 
of an active spark in the sense of the present investigation. 
It is even sufficient to touch one of the knobs with a non- 
conductor, or to bring a point somewhat near it, in order to 
give rise to the same action. It appears at least possible that 
the function of an active spark is here performed by the 
scarcely visible side-discharges over the surface of the non- 
conductor and of the point. 


8. The effect of the active spark spreads out on all sides 
in straight lines and forms rays exactly in accordance with 
the laws of the propagation of light. Suppose the axes of 
both of the sparks used to be placed vertically, and let a plate 
with a vertical edge be pushed gradually from the side in 
between the sparks. It is then found that the effect of the 
active spark is stopped, not gradually, but suddenly, and in a 
definite position of the plate. If we now look along the edge of 
the plate from the position of the passive spark, we find that 
the active spark is just hid by the plate. If we adjust the 
plate with its edge vertical between the two sparks and slowly 
remove it sideways, the action begins again in a definite 
position, and we now find that, from the position of the 
passive spark, the active spark has just become visible beyond 
the edge of the plate. If we place between the sparks 
a plate with a small vertical slit and move it backwards 
and forwards, we find that the action is only transmitted 
in one perfectly definite position, namely, when the active 
spark is visible through the slit from the position of the 
passive spark. If several plates with such slits are interposed 
behind each other, we find that in one particular position the 
action passes through the whole lot. If we seek these posi- 
tions by trial, we end by finding (most easily, of course, by 
looking through) that all the slits lie in the vertical plane 
which passes through the two sparks. If at any distance 
from the active spark we place a plate with an aperture of 
any shape, and by moving the active spark about fix the 
limits of the space within which the action is exerted, we 


1v UPON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 69 


obtain as this limit a conical surface determined by the active 
spark as apex and by the limits of the aperture. If we place 
a small plate in any position in front of the active spark we 
find, by moving the passive spark about, that the plate stops 
the action of the active spark within exactly the space which 
it shelters from its light. It scarcely requires to be explained 
that the action is not only annulled in the shadows cast by 
external bodies, but also in the shadows of the knobs of the 
passive spark. In fact, if we turn the latter so that its axis 
remains in the plane of the active spark, but is perpendicular 
to it instead of being parallel, the action immediately ceases. 


9. Most solid bodies hinder the action of the active spark, 
but not all; a few solid bodies are transparent to it. All the 
metals which I tried proved to be opaque, even in thin sheets, 
as did also paraffin, shellac, resin, ebonite, and india-rubber ; 
all kinds of coloured and uncoloured, polished and unpolished, 
thick and thin glass, porcelain, and earthenware ; wood, paste- 
board, and paper; ivory, horn, animal hides, and feathers ; 
lastly, agate, and, in a very remarkable manner, mica, even in 
the thinnest possible flakes. Further investigation of crystals 
showed variations from this behaviour. Some indeed were 
equally opaque, eg. copper sulphate, topaz, and amethyst; but 
others, such as crystallised sugar, alum, calc-spar, and rock-salt, 
transmitted the action, although with diminished intensity ; 
finally, some proved to be completely transparent, such as 
gypsum (selenite), and above all rock-¢rystal, which scarcely 
interfered with the action even when in layers several centi- 
metres thick. The following is a convenient method of test- 
ing :—The passive spark is placed a few centimetres away from 
the active spark, and is brought to its maximum length. The 
body to be examined is now interposed. If this does not stop 
the sparking the body is very transparent. But if the spark- 
ing is stopped, the spark-gap must be shortened until it comes 
again into action. An opaque substance is now interposed in 
addition to the body under investigation. If this stops the 
sparking once more, or weakens it, then the body must have 
been at any rate partially transparent; but if. the plate pro- 
duces no further effect it must have been quite opaque. The 
influence of the interposed bodies increases with their thickness, 


70 ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT Iv 


and it may properly be described as an absorption of the 
action of the active spark; in general, however, even those 
bodies which only act as partial absorbers, exert this influence 
even in very thin layers. ‘ 


10. Liquids also proved to be partly transparent and 
partly opaque to the action. In order to experiment upon 
them the active spark was brought about 10 cm. vertically 
above the passive one, and between both was placed a glass 
vessel, of which the bottom consisted of a circular plate of 
rock-erystal 4 mm. thick. Into this vessel 4 layer, more or 
less deep, of the liquid was poured, and its influence was then 
estimated in the manner above described for solid bodies. 
Water proved to be remarkably transparent; even a depth of 
5 cm, scarcely hindered the action. In thinner layers pure 
concentrated sulphuric acid, alcohol, and ether were also trans- 
parent. Pure hydrochloric acid, pure nitric acid, and solu- 
tion of ammonia proved to be partially transparent. Molten 
paraffin, benzole, petroleum, carbon bisulphide, solution of 
ammonium sulphide, and strongly coloured liquids, e.g. solutions 
of fuchsine, potassium permanganate, were nearly or completely 
opaque. The experiments with salt solutions proved to be 
interesting. A layer of water 1 cm. deep was introduced into 
‘the rock-crystal vessel; the concentrated salt solution was 
added to this drop by drop, stirred, and the effect observed. 
With many salts the addition of a few drops, or even a single 
drop, was sufficient to extinguish the passive spark; this was 
the case with nitrate of mercury, sodium hyposulphite, potassium 
bromide, and potassium iodide. When iron and copper salts 
were added, the extinction of the passive spark occurred before 
any distinct colouring of the water could be perceived. Solutions 
of sal-ammoniac, zine sulphate, and common salt exercised an 
absorption when added in larger quantities. On the other 
hand, the sulphates of potassium, sodium, and magnesium were 
very transparent even in concentrated solution. 


11. It is clear from the experiments made in air that 
some gases permit the transmission of the action even to con- 
1 According to my experiments a concentrated solution of common salt is 


a more powerful absorbent than crystallised rock- salt. This result is so remark- 
able as to require confirmation. 


Iv UPON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 71 


siderable distances. Some gases, however, are very opaque to 
it. In experimenting on gases a tube 20 cm. long and 2°5 cm. 
in diameter was interposed between the active and passive 
sparks; the ends of this tube were closed by thin quartz 
plates, and by means of two side-tubes any gas could at will 
be led through it. A diaphragm prevented the transmission 
of any action excepting through the glass tube. Between 
hydrogen and air there was no noticeable difference. Nor 
could any falling off in the action be perceived when the tube 
was filled with carbonic acid. But when coal-gas was intro- 
duced, the sparking at the passive spark-gap immediately ceased. 
When the coal-gas was driven out by air the sparking began 
again; and this experiment could be repeated with perfect 
regularity. Even the introduction of air with which some coal- 
gas had been mixed hindered the transmission of the action. 
Hence a much shorter stratum of coal-gas was sufficient to stop 
the action. If a current of coal-gas 1 cm. in diameter is 
allowed to flow freely into the air between the two sparks, a 
shadow of it can be plainly perceived on the side remote from 
the active spark, 7.e. the action of this is more or less com- 
pletely annulled. A powerful absorption like that of coal-gas is 
exhibited by the brown vapours of nitrous oxide. With these, 
again, it is not necessary to use the tube with quartz-plates 
in order to show the action. On the other hand, although 
chlorine and the vapours of bromine and iodine do exercise 
absorption, it is not at all in proportion to their opacity. No 
absorptive action could be recognised when bromine vapour 
had been introduced into the tube in sufficient quantity to 
produce a distinct coloration; and there was a partial trans- 
mission of the action even when the bromine vapour was so 
dense that the active spark (coloured a deep red) was only 
_just visible through the tube. 


12. The intensity of the action increases when the air 
around the passive spark is rarefied, at any rate up to a certain 
point. The increase is here supposed to be measured by the 
difference between the lengths of the protected and the unpro- 
tected sparks. In these experiments the passive spark was 
produced under the bell-jar of an air-pump between adjustable 
poles which passed through the sides of the bell-jar. A window 


72 ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT Iv 


of rock-erystal was inserted in the bell-jar, and through this the 
action of the other spark had to pass. The maximum spark- 
length was now observed, first with the window open, and 
then with the window closed; varying air-pressures being 
used, but a constant current. The following table may be 
regarded as typical of the results :-— 


Air-pressure in Length in mm. of Spark 
mm. of with Window Difference, ~ 
Mercury. Closed. Open. 
760 0°8 15 0-7 
500 09 2°3 14 
300 1-0 3°7 27 
100 20 62 42 . 
80 very great very great undetermined. 


It will be seen that as the pressure diminishes, the length 
of the spark which is not influenced only increases slowly ; 
the Jength of the spark which is influenced increases more 
rapidly, and so the difference between the two becomes greater. 
But at a certain pressure the blue glow-light (Glimmlicht) 
spread over a considerable portion of the cathode, the sparking 
distance became very great, the discharge altered its character, 
and it was no longer possible to perceive any influence due to 
the active spark. 


13. The phenomenon is also exhibited when the sparking 
takes place in other gases than air; and also when the two 
sparks are produced in two different gases. In these experi- 
ments the two sparks were produced in two small tubulated 
glass vessels which were closed by plates of rock-crystal and 
could be filled with different gases. The experiments were 
tried mainly because certain circumstances led to the sup- 
position that a spark in any given gas would only act upon 
another spark in the same gas, and on this account the four 
gases—hydrogen, air, carbonic acid, and coal-gas—were tried in 
the sixteen possible combinations. The main conclusion arrived 
at was that the above supposition was erroneous. It should, how- 
ever, be added that although there is no great difference in the 
efficiency of sparks when employed as active sparks in different 
gases, there is, on the other hand, a notable difference in their 
susceptibility when employed as passive sparks. Other things 
being equal, sparks in hydrogen experienced a perceptibly greater 


Iv UPON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 73 


increase in length than sparks in air, ahd these again about 
double the increase of sparks in carbonic acid and coal-gas. It 
.is true that no allowance was made for absorption in these 
experiments, for its effect was not known when they were carried 
out; but it could only have been perceptible in the case of 
coal-gas. 


14. All parts of the passive spark do not share equally in 
the action; it takes place near the poles, more especially near 
the negative pole.’ In order to show this, the passive spark is 
made from 1 to 2 cm. long, so that the various parts of it can 
be shaded separately. Shading the anode has but a slight 
effect ; shading the cathode stops the greater part of the action. 
But the verification of this fact is somewhat difficult, because 
with long sparks there is a want of distinctness about the 
phenomenon. In the case of short sparks (the parts of which 
cannot be separately shaded) the statement can be illustrated 
as follows :—The passive spark is placed parallel to the active 
one, and is turned to right and left fromthe parallel into the 
perpendicular position until the action stops. It is found that 
there is more play in one direction than in the other; the 
advantage being in favour of that direction in which the 
cathode is turned towards the active spark. Whether the 
effect is produced entirely at the cathode, or only chiefly at 
the cathode, I have not been able to decide with certainty. 


15. The action of the active spark is reflected from most 
surfaces. From polished surfaces the reflection takes place 
according to the laws of regular reflection of light. In the 
preliminary experiments on reflection a glass tube, 50 cm. 
long and 1 cm. in diameter, was used; this tube was open at 
both ends, and was pushed through a large sheet of cardboard. 
The active spark was placed at one end so that its action 
could only pass the sheet by way of the tube. If the passive 
spark was now moved about beyond the other end of the tube 
it was affected when in the continuation of the tubular space 
and then only; but in this case a far more powerful action 
was exhibited than when the tube was removed and only the 
diaphragm retained. It was this latter phenomenon that sug- 
gested the use of the tube; of itself it indicates a reflection from 


1 [See Note 9 at end of book.] 


74 ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT Iv 


the walls of the tube. The spark-micrometer was now placed 
to one side of the beam proceeding out of the tube, and was so 
disposed that the axis of the spark was parallel to the direction 
of the beam. The micrometer was now adjusted so that the 
sparking just ceased; it was found to begin again if a plane 
surface inclined at an angle of 45° to the beam was held in it 
so as to direct the beam, according to the usual law of reflec- 
tion, upon the passive spark. Reflection took place more or 
less from glass, crystals, and metals, even when these were not 
particularly smooth; also from such substances as porcelain, 
polished wood, and white paper. I obtained no reflection from 
a well-smoked glass plate. 

In the more accurate experiments the active spark was 
placed in a vertical straight line; at a little distance from it 
was a largeish plate with a vertical slit, behind which could be 
placed polished plane mirrors of glass, rock-crystal, and various 
metals. The limits of the space within which the action was 
exerted behind the slit were then determined by moving the 
passive spark about. These limits were quite sharp and always 
coincided with the limits of the space within which the image 
of the active spark in the mirror was visible. On account of 
the feebleness of the action these experiments could not be 
carried out with unpolished bodies; such bodies may be sup- 
posed to give rise to diffused reflection. 


16. In passing from air into a solid transparent medium 
the action of the active spark exhibits a refraction like that of 
light ; but it is more strongly refracted than visible light. The 
glass tube used in the reflection experiments served here again 
for the rougher experiments. The passive spark was placed in 
the beam proceeding out of the tube and at a distance of 
about 30 cm. from the end farthest from the active spark; 
immediately behind the opening a quartz-prism was pushed 
sideways into the beam with its refracting edge foremost. In 
spite of the transparency of quartz, the effect upon the passive 
spark ceased as soon as the prism covered the end of the tube. 
If the spark was then moved in a circle about the prism in the 
direction in which light would be refracted by the prism, it 
was soon found that there were places at which the effect was 
again produced. Now let the passive spark be fixed in the 


Iv UPON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 75 


position in which the effect is most powerfully exhibited ; on 
looking from this point towards the tube through the prism 
the inside of the tube and the active spark at the end of it 
cannot be perceived ; in order to see the active spark through 
the tube the eye must be shifted backwards through a consider- 
able distance towards the original position of the spark. The 
same result is obtained when a rock-salt prism is used. In 
the more accurate experiments the active spark was again fixed 
vertically ; at some distance from it was placed a vertical slit, 
and behind this a prism. By inserting a Leyden jar the active 
spark could be made luminous, and the space thus illuminated 


Fig. 19. 


behind the prism could easily be determined. With the aid 
of the passive spark it was possible to mark out the limits of 
the space within which was exerted the action here under 
investigation. Fig. 19 gives (to a scale of 4) the result thus 
obtained by direct experiment. The space a bc d is filled - 
with light; the space a’ b/c’ d’ is permeated by the action 
which we are considering. Since the limits of this latter space 
were not sharp, the rays a’ 0’ and ¢’ d’ were fixed in the follow- 
ing way :——The passive spark was placed in a somewhat distant, 
position, about c’, at the edge of the tract within which the 
action was exerted. A screen m n (Fig. 19) with vertical edge 
was then pushed in sideways until it stopped the action. The 


76 ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT Iv 


position m of its edge then gave one point of the raye’d’. In 
another experiment a prism of small refracting angle was used, 
and the width of the slit was made as small, and the spark 
placed as far from it as would still allow of the action being 
perceived. The visible light was then spread out into a short 
spectrum, and the influence of the active spark was found to 
be exerted within a comparatively limited region which corre- 
sponded to a deviation decidedly greater than that of the 
visible violet. Fig. 20 shows the positions of the rays as they 
were directly drawn where the prism was placed, r being the 
direction of the red, v of the violet, and w the direction in 
which the influence of the active spark was most powerfully 
exerted. 


I have not been able to decide whether any double refrac- 
tion of the action takes place. My quartz-prisms would not 
permit of a sufficient separation of the beams, and the pieces of 
calc-spar which I possessed proved to be too opaque.’ 


17. After what has now been stated, it will be agreed (at 
any rate until the contrary is proved) that the light of the 
active spark must be regarded as the prime cause of the action 
which proceeds from it. Every other conjecture which is based 
on known facts is contradicted by one or other of the experi- 
ments. And if the observed phenomenon is an effect of light 
at all it must, according to the results of the refraction-experi- 
ments, be solely an effect of the ultra-violet light. That it is 
not an effect of the visible parts of the light is shown by the 
fact that glass and mica are opaque to it, while they are trans- 
parent to these. On the other hand, the absorption-experi- 
ments of themselves make it probable that the effect is due to 
ultra-violet light. Water, rock-crystal, and the sulphates of 
the alkalies are remarkably transparent to ultra-violet light and. 
to the action here investigated; benzole and allied substances 


1 [See Note 10 at end of book.] 


vo. UPON THE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE 17 


are strikingly opaque to both. Again, the active rays in 
our experiments appear to lie at the outermost limits of 
the known spectrum. The spectrum of the spark when 
received on a sensitive dry-plate scarcely extended to the 
place at which the most powerful effect upon the passive spark 
was produced. And, photographically, there was scarcely any 
difference between light which had, and light which had not, 
passed through coal-gas, whereas the difference in the effect 
upon the spark was very marked. Fig. 21 shows the extent 
of some of the spectra taken. In a the 
position of the visible red is indicated by 7, 
that of the visible violet by v, and that of 
the strongest effect upon the passive spark 
by w. The rest of the series give the photo- 
graphic impressions produced—t after simply 
passing through air and quartz, ¢ after pass- 
ing through coal-gas, d after passing through 
a thin plate of mica, and e¢ after passing through glass. 


mm | 
lh 


18. Our supposition that this effect is to be attributed to 
light is confirmed by the fact that the same effect can be pro- 
duced by a number of common sources of light. It is true 
that the power of the light, in the ordinary sense of the word, 
forms no measure of its activity as here considered; and for the 
purpose of our experime fijmene faintly visible light of the spark 
of the induction-coil ren the most powerful source of light. 
Let sparks from any indWWjfon-coil pass between knobs, and let 
the knobs be drawn so faWapart that the sparks fail to pass; 
if now the flame of a candJe be brought near (about 8 cm. off) 
the sparking begins again. The effect might at first be attri- 
buted to the hot air from the flame; but when it is observed 
that the insertion of a thin small plate of mica stops the action, 
whereas 2 much larger plate of quartz does not stop it, we are 
compelled to recognise here again the same effect. The flames 
of gas, wood, benzene, etc., all act in the same way. The non- 
luminous flames of alcohol and of the Bunsen burner exhibit 
the same effect, and in the case of the candle-flame the action 
seems to proceed more from the lower, non-luminous part than 
from the upper and luminous part. From a small hydrogen 
flame scarcely any effect could be obtained. The light from 


78 ON AN EFFECT OF ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT vw 


platinum glowing at a white-heat in a flame, or through the 
action of an electric current, a powerful phosphorus flame burn- 
ing quite near the spark, and burning sodium and potassium, all 
proved to be inactive. So also was burning sulphur; but this 
can only have been on account of the feebleness of the flame, 
for the flame of burning carbon bisulphide produced some 
effect. Magnesium light produced a far more powerful effect 
than any of the above sources; its action extended to a distance 
of about a metre. The limelight, produced by means of coal- 
gas and oxygen, was somewhat weaker, and acted up to a dis- 
tance of half a metre; the action was mainly due to the jet 
itself: it made no great difference whether the lime-cylinder 
was brought into the flame or not. On no occasion did 1 
obtain a decisive effect from sunlight at any time of the day 
or year at which I was able to test it. When the sunlight was 
concentrated by means of a quartz lens upon the spark there 
was a slight action; but this was obtained equally when a 
glass lens was used, and must therefore be attributed to the 
heating. But of all sources of light the electric arc is by far 
the most effective; it is the only one that can compete with 
the spark. If the knobs of an induction-coil are drawn so far 
apart that sparks no longer pass; and if an arc light is started 
at a distance of 1, 2, 3, or even 4 metres, the sparking begins 
again simultaneously, and stops again when the arc light goes 
out. By means of a narrow openggfheld in front of the arc 
light we can separate the violet of the feebly luminous 
are proper from that of the glowing@#rbons ; and we then find 
that the action proceeds chiefly frin the former. With the 
light of the electric arc I have repeated most of the experi- 
ments already described, ¢.g. the experiments on the recti- 
linear propagation, reflection, and refraction of the action, 
as well as its absorption by glass, mica, coal-gas, and other 
substances, \ 

According to the results of our experiments, ultra-violet 
light has the property of increasing the sparking distance of 
the discharge of an induction-coil, and of other discharges. 
The conditions under which it exerts its, effect upon such dis- 
charges are certainly very complicated, onl it is desirable that 
the action should be studied under “ai conditions, and 

] 


especially without using an induction-coil, In endeavouring 


\ 


IV UPON THE ELECTRIC ee 79 


to make progress in this direction I have met with diffi- 
culties.’ Hence I confine myself at present to communicating 
the results obtained, without attempting any theory respecting 


the manner in which the observed phenomena are brought 
about. 


1 [See Note 11 at end of book.] 


Vv 


ON THE ACTION OF A RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC OSCIL- 
LATION UPON A NEIGHBOURING CIRCUIT 


(Wiedemann’s Annalen, 34, p. 155, 1888.) 


In an earlier paper’ I have shown how we may excite in 
a rectilinear unclosed conductor the fundamental electric oscil- 
lation which is proper to this conductor. I have also shown . 
that such an oscillation exerts a very powerful inductive effect 
upon a nearly closed circuit in its neighbourhood, provided that 
the period of oscillation of the latter is the same as that of the 
primary oscillation. As I intended to make use of these effects 
in further researches, I examined the phenomenon in all the 
various positions which the secondary circuit could occupy with 
reference to the inducing current. The total inductive action 
of a current-element upon a closed circuit can be completely 
calculated by the ordinary methods of electromagnetics. Now 
since our secondary circuit is closed, with the exception of an 
exceedingly short spark-gap, I supposed that this total action 
would suffice to explain the new phenomena; but I found that 
in this I was mistaken. In order to arrive at a proper under- 
standing of the experimental results (which are not quite 
simple), it is necessary to regard the secondary circuit also as 
being in every respect unclosed. Hence it is not sufficient to pay 
attention to the integral force of induction; we must take into 
consideration the distribution of the electromagnetic force along 
the various parts of the circuit: nor must the electrostatic 
force which proceeds from the charged ends of the oscillator 
be neglected. The reason of this is the rapidity with which 


1 See II., p. 29. 


Vv RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC OSCILLATION 81 


the forces in these experiments alter their sign. A slowly 
alternating electrostatic force would excite no sparks in our 
secondary conductor, even if its intensity were very great, 
since the free electricity of the conductor could distribute 
itself, and would distribute itself, in such a way as to neutralise 
the effect of the external force; but in our experiments the 
direction of the force alters so rapidly that the electricity has 
no time to distribute itself in this way. 

For the sake of convenience I will first sketch the theory 
and then describe the phenomena in connection with it. It 
would indeed be more logical to adopt the opposite course ; 
for the facts here communicated are true independently of the 
theory, and the theory here developed depends for its support 
more upon the facts than upon the explanations which aceom- 
pany it. 


The Apparatus 


Before we proceed to develop the theory, we may briefly 
describe the apparatus with which the experiments were carried 
out, and to which the theory more especially relates. The 
primary conductor consisted of a straight copper wire 5 mm. 
in diameter, to the ends of which were attached spheres 30 
em. in diameter made of sheet-zinc. The centres of these 
latter were 1 metre apart. The wire was interrupted in the 
middle by a spark-gap */, cm. long; in this oscillations were 
excited by means of the most powerful discharges which 
could be obtained from a large induction-coil. The direction 
of the wire was horizontal, and the experiments were carried 
out only in the neighbourhood of the horizontal plane passing 
through the wire. This, however, in no way restricts the 
general nature of the experiments, for the results must be the 
same in any meridional plane through the wire. The secondary 
circuit, made of wire 2 mm. thick, had the form of a circle of 
35 em. radius which was closed with the exception of a short 
spark-gap (adjustable by means of a micrometer-screw). The 
change from the form used in the earlier experiments to the 
circular form was made for the following reason. Even the 
first experiments had shown that the spark-length was 
different at different points of the secondary conductor, 
even when the position of the conductor as a whole was not 

G 


82 ON THE ACTION OF A RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC Vv 


altered. Now the choice of the circular form made it easily 
possible to bring the spark-gap to any desired position. This 
was most conveniently done by mounting the circle so that it 
could be rotated about an axis passing through its centre, and 
perpendicular to its plane. This axis was mounted upon 
various wooden stands in whatever way proved from time to 
time most convenient for the experiments. 

With the dimensions thus chosen, the secondary circuit was 
very nearly in resonance with the primary. It was tuned 
more exactly by soldering on small pieces of sheet-metal to 
the poles so as to increase the capacity, and increasing or 
diminishing the size of these until a maximum spark-length 
was attained. 


Analysis of the Forces acting on the Secondary Circuit 


We shall assume that the electric force at every point varies 
as a simple periodic function of the time, changing its sense 
without changing its direction ; we shall further assume that this 
variation has the same phase at all points. This is true at any 
rate in the neighbourhood of the primary conductor ; and for the 
present we shall restrict our attention to points which lie near 
it. Any point on the secondary circuit is determined by its 
distance s measured from the spark-gap along the circle. We 
denote by = the component of the electric force which acts at 
any moment at the point s in the direction of the element d s 
of the circle. Then & is a function of s which, after passing 
round the whole circumference §, returns to its original value. 
> can therefore be developed in circular functions, beginning 
thus— 


Z=A+B cos Qrs/S+ ... +B’ sin 2rs/S+ . 


We shall neglect the higher terms. The effect of this will 
be that our results will only be approximately correct; in 
especial, weak sparks will be found to occur at places where 
our calculations indicate that the sparking should disappear. 
But for the present our experiments are not sufficiently accu-- 
rate to justify us in paying any attention to these higher 
terms. Let us therefore consider more closely the. terms 
which have been referred to. 


v OSCILLATION UPON A NEIGHBOURING SIRCUIT. 83 


In the first place, the force A acts in the same sense, and 
is of the same magnitude at all parts of the circle. A is inde- 
pendent of the electrostatic force ; for the integral of the latter, 
taken all round the cireuit, is zero. A corresponds to the total 
induced electromotive force. We know that this is measured 
by the change, per unit of time, in the number of magnetic 
lines of force which pass through the circle. If we regard the 
magnetic field in which the circle lies as being homogeneous, 
A will be proportional to the component of the magnetic force 
perpendicular to the plane of the secondary circuit. A will 
therefore vanish when the direction of the magnetic force lies 
in the plane of the secondary circuit. The force A gives rise 
to an oscillation the intensity of which is independent of the 
position of the spark-gap in the circle; we shall denote by a 
the spark-length which corresponds to this oscillation. 

Turning now to the two other terms, we note, in the first 
place, that the force B’ sin 2as/S is not in a position to 
excite the fundamental oscillation of our circle. For it is 
completely symmetrical on both sides of the spark-gap; it 
acts in the same sense upon both poles, and therefore cannot 
produce any difference between them. The force B cos 27s8/S 
behaves otherwise. If we start from the spark-gap and 
divide the circle into four equal parts, we find that this force 
acts in the same direction in the two parts which lie opposite 
the spark-gap, and that here it powerfully excites the funda- 
mental oscillation. It is true that B acts in an opposite 
direction in those parts which lie nearest the spark-gap; 
but the latter parts cannot here exert as powerful an 
effect. For since the current at the open ends of the circle 
must always be zero, the electricity cannot move with the 
same freedom near these ends as in the middle of ‘the circle. 
To elucidate the meaning of this somewhat brief statement we 
may take as an illustration a string stretched between two 
fixed points. Ifthe middle and outer parts of the string are 
acted upon by forces in opposite directions, the string as a 
whole will move as if acted upon by the former set of forces, 
and the fundamental note of the string will be produced if the 
alternations of these forces synchronise with this note. Thus 
the term B cos 2as/S will excite the fundamental oscilla- 
tion of our circle, and the direction of the oscillation will be 


84 ON THE ACTION OF A RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC v 


the same as if the force in the parts opposite the spark-gap 
were alone effective. Further, the intensity of the oscillation 
will be proportional to the quantity B. To find out what 
this quantity means, let us assume that the electric field in 
which the circle lies is approximately homogeneous. Let E 
denote the total electric force acting in this field, w the angle 
which its direction makes with the plane of the secondary 
circle, and 6 the angle which the projection of the force upon 
this plane makes with the straight line drawn from the 
centre to the spark-gap. Then 2=E cos @ sin (273/S—@) 
approximately,’ and therefore B= —E.cos » sin 6. Hence 
the value of B depends directly upon the total force; electro- 
static as well as electromagnetic causes contribute towards it. 
B becomes zero when w= 90°, ae when the total force is 
perpendicular to the plane of the circle; and in this case it 
will be zero for all positions of the spark-gap in the circle. 
But B also becomes zero when 6=0, te. when the projec- 
tion of the total force upon the plane of the circle coincides 
with the line drawn from the centre to the spark-gap. Ifin any 
given position of the circle we suppose the spark-gap to move 
round it, the angle 6 alters, and corresponding alterations are . 
produced in the value of B, in the intensity of the oscillation, 
and in the spark-length. Thus the spark-length, which corre- 
sponds to the second term of our series, can be approximately 
represented by the expression 8 sin @. 

The two terms which produce respectively the spark- 
lengths a and @ sin @ have always the same phase. Hence 
the induced oscillations have also the same phase, and their 
amplitudes have to be added together. Now inasmuch as the 
spark-lengths are approximately proportional to the total 
amplitudes, it follows that the spark-lengths have also to be 
added together. If in any given position of the circle we 
suppose the spark-gap to move round it, the spark-length 
must accordingly be represented by an expression of the form 
a+ 8 sin @. Equal absolute values of this expression indi- 
cate equal spark-lengths, whatever the sign may be; for there 
is nothing in the spark-length which corresponds to direction of 


1 Tf the field is really homogeneous, then A=0; and A will therefore be small 
when the field is approximately homogeneous. Nevertheless the force A may 
give rise to an oscillation of the same order of magnitude as that produced by the 
force B cos 27s/S. 


v OSCILLATION UPON A eae CIRCUIT 85 


oscillation. The absolute values of a and 8 could only be 
determined by a much more detailed development of the theory ; 
but we have indicated the conditions upon which they depend, 
and this will be enough to enable us to understand the 
phenomena. 


The Plane of the Secondary Circuit is Vertical 


Let us now place our circle anywhere in the neighbourhood 
of the primary conductor, with its plane vertical and its centre 
in the horizontal plane which passes through the primary con- 
ductor. As long as the spark-gap lies in the horizontal plane, 
either on the one side or the other, we observe no sparks; 
but in other positions of the spark-gap we perceive sparks of 
greater or less length. The disappearance of the sparks occurs 
at two diametrically opposite points; it follows that the a of 
our formula is here always zero, and that 6 becomes zero 
when the spark-gap lies in the horizontal plane. From this 
we draw the following conclusions:—In the first place, that 
the lines of magnetic force in the horizontal plane are every, 
where vertical, and therefore form circles around the primary 
oscillation, as indeed is required by theory. Secondly, that 
at all points of the horizontal plane the lines of electric force 
lie in this plane itself, and therefore, that everywhere in space 
they lie in planes passing through the primary oscillation— 
which is also required by theory. If while the circle is in any 
one of the positions here considered, we turn it about its axis 
so as to remove the spark-gap out of the horizontal plane, the 
spark-length increases until the sparks arrive at the top or 
the bottom of the circle, in which positions they attain a 
length of 2-3 mm. It can be proved in various ways that 
the sparks thus produced correspond, as our theory requires, 
to the fundamental oscillation of our circle, and not, as might 
be suspected, to the first overtone. By making small altera- 
tions in the circle, for example, we can show that the oscilla- 
tion which produces these sparks is in resonance with the 
primary oscillation ; and this would not hold for the overtones. 
Again, the: sparks disappear when the circle is cut at the 
points where it intersects the horizontal plane, although these 
points are nodes with respect to the first overtone. 


86 ON THE ACTION OF A RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC v 


« If we now maintain the spark-gap at the highest point and 
turn the circle round about a vertical axis passing through its 
centre and the spark-gap, we find that during a complete 
revolution the sparks twice reach a maximum length and twice 
become zero or else very nearly disappear. Clearly the maxi- 
mum positions are those in which the direction of the electric 
force lies in the plane of the-circle (@=0); whereas the 
minimum positions are those in which the direction of the 
electric force is perpendicular to this plane (o = 90°). Hence 
we now have a means of finding out the direction of the 
electric force at any point. I have investigated at a number 
of points the positions in which the sparks either become very 
short or completely disappear. In the lower part of Fig. 22 


Fig. 22. 


‘ these are shown as taken directly from the experimental re- 
sults. .4 A’ is the primary conductor. The straight lines m n 
are the projections of the secondary conductor on the horizon- 
tal plane; but all the observed positions are not shown in the 
illustration. The short lines, normal to the lines m n, indicate 
the direction of the force. Since this force nowhere becomes 
zero, as we pass from the sphere A to the sphere 4’, it does 
not change its sign. Hence we may. furnish these normals 
with arrow-heads, as has been done in the figure. With 
regard to this figure we remark :— 

1. The distribution of the total force in the neighbourhood 
of the rectilinear oscillation is very similar to the distribution 
of the electrostatic force which proceeds from the ends of the 


® 


Vv OSCILLATION UPON A SEONG CIRCUIT 87 


oscillation. Near the centre of the oscillation in especial the 
direction of the total force coincides with that of the electro- 
static force ; the opposing electromagnetic force must therefore 
be overpowered. Theory also indicates that in this neighbour- 
hood the force of electromagnetic induction should be weaker 
than the electrostatic force. 

2. Still we can quite easily recognise the effect of the 
electromagnetic induction. For the lines of force appear to a 
certain extent to be pushed away from the axis of the oscilla- 
tion; in going from A to A’ they make a wider circuit than 
they would if the electrostatic force alone were in operation.! 
The explanation of this is that the force of induction weakens 
the components of the electrostatic force which are parallel to 
the primary conductor, whereas they are without influence 
upon the components which are perpendicular to the primary 
conductor 


The Plane of the Secondary Circle ts Horizontal 


We shall explain by reference to the upper half of Fig. 
22 the phenomena which are observed when the plane of the 
secondary circle is horizontal. First suppose the circle to be 
brought into position J, in which its centre lies on the pro- 
longation of the primary oscillation. After what has been 
already stated, we may at once conclude from purely geometri- 
cal considerations that the sparks will disappear when the 
spark-gap is at the points 6, and 0’; and also that maximum and 
equal spark-lengths should be observed at the points a, and a’,.* 
In my experiments the lengths of these sparks were 2°5 mm. 

Now let us shift the circle sideways into the position 
IT. Here lines of magnetic force pass through the circle. The 
integral of the force of induction taken round the circle does 
not vanish; @ is not zero. We may therefore expect to find 
that our expression a+ sin 8,in which the value of a at 
first is small, will have (since we pay no regard to sign) two 
maxima of unequal value, viz. 8+a and B—a. These will 
occur when @=90°, and the line joining them will be per- 
pendicular to the direction of the electric force. These two 
maxima must be separated by two points at which no sparking 


1 The original drawing showed this more plainly than the reduced copy does. 


88 ON THE ACTION OF A RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC Vv 


oceurs, and these points should lie near the smaller maxi- 
ium. This agrees with the experimental results. For in the 
points 6, and 0’, we again find our null-points which have 
been drawn closer together; between these at a, and a’, are 
maximum spark-lengths, and that at a, is found to be 3°5 
mm., while that at a’,is 2mm. The line a, a’, is very nearly 
perpendicular to the direction of the electric force. In order to 
complete our explanation we have yet to show that a, must 
correspond to the sum, and a’, to the difference of the actions. 
Let us consider the case in which the spark-gap lies at a, 
While the sphere A is positively charged, the total electric 
force in those parts of the circle which lie opposite to a, urges 
positive electricity in a direction away from A; it tends to 
move positive electricity in a circular direction, which in the 
case of our illustration would be the direction of the hands of 
a clock. Between the spheres A and J’ the electrostatic force 
at the same time is directed from A towards A’; the force of 
induction which is always opposed to it is therefore, in the 
neighbourhood of the conductor, directed towards A, and every- 
where in space is parallel to this direction. Now since this 
force in our circle acts more strongly in the neighbourhood of 
the primary oscillation than it does at a distance from the latter, 
it follows that this force also tends to set positive electricity in 
motion in a circular direction corresponding to that of the 
hands of a clock. Hence at a, both causes act in the same 
sense and so strengthen each other. Similarly it can be shown 
that at a’, they act in opposite senses and weaken each other. 
Thus the phenomenon is completely explained. 

Now suppose our circle to be moved nearer the centre 
of the primary oscillation to JZ. Here the two points at 
which the spark is extinguished coincide into one. One maxi- 
mum disappears; and opposite to a very extended tract of 
extinction a’, lies the second maximum with a spark-length of 
4mm. Here evidently a=, and the spark-length is repre- 
sented by the formula a(1+sin @). The line a, a’, is again 
perpendicular to the direction of the electric force. If we move 
the circle still nearer to the centre of the primary oscilla- 
tion, a becomes greater than 8. The expression a+ 8 sin 0 
can no longer be zero for any value of 6, but it oscillates 
between a maximum value a+ and a minimum value a—£. 


v OSCILLATION UPON A re cans CIRCUIT 89 


Experiment also shows that in the positions under considera- 
tion there are no longer any points at which the sparks 
are extinguished; there are only maxima and minima. In 
position IV we have at a, a spark-length of 5°5 mm., and at 
a’, a length of 15 mm. In position V we have at a, a spark- 
length of 6 mm., at a’, the spark-length is 2°5 mhm., and at 
intermediate points we have intermediate values. In passing 
over from position IJJ to position V, the join a a’ turns sharply 
from a direction parallel to the primary current into a 
direction perpendicular to it; it therefore always remains 
approximately perpendicular to the direction of the electric 
force. 

In the last-mentioned positions the sparks are mainly due 
to electromagnetic induction. Hence, in my first paper, I made 
no error in speaking of the phenomena in these positions as 
being electromagnetic effects. Nevertheless, the production of 
sparks even in these positions is completely independent of 
electrostatic causes only when we bring the spark-gap into the 
inean position between maximum and minimum, in which par- 
ticular position 6 sin @ becomes zero. 


The Remaining Positions of the Secondary Circle 


The positions which as yet have not been discussed, and in 
which the secondary circle is inclined to the horizontal plane, 
can be regarded as intermediate states between those which 
have already been described. In all such cases I have found 
the theory confirmed and have noticed no phenomenon which 
did not fit in with it. Let us consider one case only. Suppose 
the circle in the first place to lie in the horizontal plane and 
in position V, with the spark-gap turned towards the primary 
oscillation at a, Now let the circle be turned about a hori- 
zontal axis passing through its centre parallel to the primary 
oscillation, in such a way that the spark-gap rises. While 
the circle turns, the electric force is always at right angles to 
the straight line drawn from its centre to the spark-gap; thus 
@ is always equal to 90°. The value of 8 is approximately 
constant ‘in all positions. But a varies approximately as the 


1 In these positions the secondary spark must, in order to avoid disturbing 
causes, be protected from the light of the primary spark. 


90 ON THE ACTION OF A RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC v 


cosine of the angle @ between the plane of the circle and the 
horizontal plane, since a is proportional to the number of lines 
of magnetic force cut by the circle. Thus if a, denote the 
value of a in the initial position, the value of a in any other 
position is a, cos ¢, and it may therefore be expected that the 
relation between the spark-length and the angle ¢ may be 
given by the expression a, cos 6+, where a,>8. Experi- 
ment confirms this. For as we raise the spark-gap the spark- 
ing distance steadily decreases from its initial value of 6 mm. 
and acquires at the highest point in its circuit a length of 2 
mm. It then sinks farther in the second quadrant almost to 
zero, increases again to the smaller maximum of 2°5 mm., 
which occurs in the horizontal plane, again decreases, and after 
passing through the same stages in the reverse order it returns 
to its original value. 

Let us suppose that in the course of the movements above 
described we hold the circle in the position in which the 
spark-gap is at its highest point. If now we raise the circle 
vertically as a whole, the sparks become weaker and ultimately 
they almost disappear; if we lower the circle vertically the 
sparking becomes more vigorous. But if under similar circum- 
stances the spark-gap is at its lowest point, the effects are 
reversed. These results may be deduced by purely geometrical 
reasoning from what has been already stated. 


The Forces at Greater Distances 


We have already mentioned a method of ascertaining 
experimentally the direction of the total electric force at any 
point. There was no difficulty in extending the application 
of this method to greater distances, and there was all the 
more reason for making the experiment because the existing 
theories of electromagnetics differ widely in their views as to 
the distribution of the force in the neighbourhood of an un- 
closed current. We therefore place the plane of our circle 
in a vertical position, bring the spark-gap to the highest point, 
and by turning the circle about a vertical axis we try to ascer- 
tain in what position the sparks are longest and in what 
position they disappear or nearly disappear. But when we 
get to a distance of 1-1°5 metre from the primary oscillation, 


v OSCILLATION UPON A Guenaounis CIRCUIT 91 


we are met by an unexpected difficulty. For the maxima and 
minima lose their distinctness, except in particular positions, so 
that it becomes difficult to adjust the position of the circle for 
either ; indeed, at certain places the differences between the 
spark-lengths during a revolution of the circle are so small that 
it becomes impossible to specify any definite direction of the force. 
Now observe that this difficulty again disappears when we pass 
beyond a distance of about 2 metres. Certainly the sparks 
are now very small and need to be observed in the dark and 
with the aid of a lens; but they disappear sharply in a 
definite position of the circle, and are strongest in a position at 
right angles to this. When the distance is further increased 
the spark-length only diminishes slowly. I have not been 
able to decide the farthest distance at which they could be 
observed. When I placed the primary conductor in one 
corner of a large lecture-room 14 metres long and 12 metres 
broad, the sparks could be perceived in the farthest parts of 
the room; the whole room seemed filled with the oscillations 
of the electric force. It is true that in the neighbouring 
rooms the action could not be perceived even at small dis- 
tances ; solid walls exercise a powerful damping effect upon it. 
In the lecture-room referred to I ascertained the distribution 
of the force as follows:—Wherever the direction of the force 
could be definitely determined I marked it by a chalk line on 
the floor; but wherever it could not well be determined I 
drew a star upon the floor. Fig. 23 
shows on a reduced scale a portion 
of the diagram thus made; with 
reference to it we note :— 

1. At distances beyond 3 metres ~ — => CL 
the force is everywhere parallel to SEEN. Set 
the primary oscillation. This is 7aX=a\~ 
clearly the region in which the ~7*=*s~ 
electrostatic force has become negli- wae 
gible, and the electromagnetic force Fig. 23. 
alone is effective. All theories agree 
in this—that the electromagnetic force of a current-element is 
inversely proportional to the distance, whereas the electrostatic 
force (as the difference between the effects of the two poles) 
is inversely proportional to the third power of the distance. 


me eee eee eee 


92 ON THE ACTION OF A RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC v 


It is worthy of notice that, in the direction of the oscillation, 
the action becomes weaker much more rapidly than in the 
perpendicular direction, so that in the former direction the 
effect can scarcely be perceived at a distance of 4 metres, 
whereas in the latter direction it extends at any rate farther 
than 12 metres. Many of the elementary laws of induction 
which are accepted as possible will have to be abandoned 
if tested by their accordance with the results of these ex- 
periments. 

2. As already stated, at distances less than a metre the 
character of the distribution is determined by the electrostatic 
force. 

3. Along one pair of straight lines the direction of the 
force can be determined at every point. The first of these 
straight lines is the direction of the primary oscillation itself; 
the second is perpendicular to the primary oscillation through 
its centre. Along the latter the magnitude of the force is at 
no point zero; the size of the sparks induced by it diminishes 
steadily from greater to smaller values. In this respect also 
the phenomena contradict certain of the possible elementary 
laws which require that the force should vanish at a certain 
distance. 

4. One remarkable fact that results from the experiment 
is, that there exist regions in which the direction of the force 
cannot be determined; in our diagram each of these is indi- 
cated by a star. These regions form in space two rings 
around the rectilinear oscillation. The force here is of 
approximately the same strength in all directions, and yet it 
cannot act simultaneously in these different directions; hence 
it must assume in succession these different directions. Hence 
the phenomenon can scarcely be explained otherwise than as 
follows:—The force does not retain the same direction and 
alter its magnitude; its magnitude remains approximately con- 
stant, while its direction changes, passing during each oscillation 
round all the points of the compass. I have not succeeded 
in finding an explanation of this behaviour, either in the 
terms which have been neglected in our simplified theory, or in 
the harmonics which are very possibly mingled with our fun- 
damental vibration. And it seems to me that none of the 
theories which are based upon the supposition of direct action- 


Vv OSCILLATION UPON A NEIGHBOURING CIRCUIT 93 


at-a-distance would lead us to expect anything of this kind. 
But the phenomenon is easily explained if we admit that the 
electrostatic force and the electromagnetic force are propagated 
with different velocities. For in the regions referred to these 
two forces are perpendicular to one another, and are of the 
same order of magnitude; hence if an appreciable difference 
of phase has arisen between them during the course of their 
journey, their resultant—the total force—will, during each 
ascillation, move round all points of the compass without 
approaching zero in any position. 

A difference between the rates of propagation of the 
electrostatic and electromagnetic forces implies a finite rate 
of propagation for at least one of them. Thus it seems to 
me that we probably have before us here the first indication 
of a finite rate of propagation of electrical actions. 


In an earlier paper * I mentioned that trivial details, with- 
out any apparent reason, often interfered with the production 
of oscillations by the primary spark. One of these, at any 
rate, I have succeeded in tracing to its source. For I find 
that when the primary spark is illuminated, it loses its power 
of exciting rapid electric disturbances. Thus, if we watch 
the sparks induced in a secondary conductor, or in any 
auxiliary conductor attached to the discharging circuit, we see 
that these sparks vanish as soon as a piece of magnesium wire 
is lit, or an arc light started, in the neighbourhood of the 
primary spark. At the same time the primary spark loses its 
crackling sound. The spark is particularly sensitive to the 
light from a second discharge. Thus the oscillations always 
cease if we draw sparks from the opposing faces of the knobs 
by means of a small insulated conductor; and this even 
though these sparks may not be visible. In fact, if we only 
bring a fine point near the spark, or touch any part of the 
inner surfaces of the knobs with a rod of sealing-wax or glass, 
‘or a slip of mica, the nature of the spark is changed, and the. 
oscillations cease. Some experiments made on this matter 
seem to me to prove (and further experiments. will doubtless 
confirm this) that in these latter cases as well the effective 


1 See No. IL, p. 29. 


94 RECTILINEAR ELECTRIC OSCILLATION v 


cause of the change is the light of a side-flash, which is 
scarcely visible to the eye. 

These phenomena are clearly a special form of that action 
of light upon the electric discharge, of which one form was 
first described’ by myself some time ago, and which has since 
been studied in other forms by Herren E. Wiedemann, H. 
Ebert, and W. Hallwachs. 


VI 


ON ELECTROMAGNETIC EFFECTS PRODUCED BY 
ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES IN INSULATORS 


(Siteungsber. d. Berl, Akadem. Nov. 10, 1887. Wiedemann's Ann. 34, 
p. 273.) 


It is obviously a fundamental assumption in the most promising 
electrical theories that electrical disturbances in insulators are 
accompanied, not only by the electrostatic actions (which are 
known with certainty to exist), but also by the corresponding 
electromagnetic actions. All that we know about electrical 
phenomena has long tended to raise this assumption to a high 
degree of probability ; but as yet it can scarcely be said to follow 
with certainty from any direct observations. In the following 
pages are described a series of researches which will, I hope, 
assist in filling this gap. They exhibit an electromagnetic effect 
which proceeds from insulators; they can be repeated with un- 
failing success and without extensive appliances. A magnetic 
effect arising out of processes in an insulator has already been 
exhibited in an experiment by Herr Réntgen,’ if we assume 
that the final communication relating to this experiment con- 
firms the interpretation first assigned to it. 

In order to detect the electromagnetic action, I made use of 
the extremely rapid electric oscillations which can be excited in 
unclosed metallic conductors by the appropriate use of sparks.? 
The method is the following -—-A primary conductor in which 
oscillations of the kind referred to are excited, acts inductively 


1 W. C. Rontgen, Sitzungsber. d. Berl. Acad., 1885, p. 195. Cp. also the 
more recent paper, Sitzwngsber. der Berl, Acad., 1888, p. 23. 
2 See II. and V. 


96 ELECTROMAGNETIC EFFECTS PRODUCED BY VI 


upon a secondary conductor. The induced disturbance is 
observed by inserting a spark-gap. In order to make the 
observation delicate both conductors are adjusted to the same 
period of oscillation. The secondary conductor is now brought 
as near to the primary as possible, but in such a position that 
the forces acting upon its various parts neutralise each other, 
so that it remains free from sparks. If the equilibrium is 
now upset by bringing other conductors near, sparking com- 
mences again; the system acts as a kind of induction-balance. 
But it is an induction-balance which has this peculiarity, that 
it also indicates a change when large insulating masses are 
brought near it. For the oscillations are so rapid that the 
quantities of electricity displaced in insulators by dielectric 
polarisation are of the same order of magnitude as those which 
are set in motion by conduction in metals. 


The Apparatus 


Fig. 24 shows the apparatus by means of which. this 
principle was put into practice. Only the essential parts are 
shown; we have to imagine them as connected by a light wooden 
frame. A A’ is the primary conductor, consisting of two square 
brass plates 40 cm. in the side, which are connected by a 
copper wire */, cm. thick and 70 cm. long. In the middle of 
the latter a spark-gap °/, cm. is inserted; the poles consist, of 
well-polished brass knobs. If we now conduct to the latter the 
most powerful discharges of a large induction-coil, the plates 
A and A’ are first electrified in opposite senses and then, at 
the instant when the spark passes, discharge into one another, 
thereby giving rise to the oscillations which are peculiar to 
the conductor A A’, having a period which may be estimated 
as the hundred-millionth part of a second. The discharge of 
the induction-coil which immediately follows has no more 
effect upon the phenomena which we are here considering than 
has the presence of the induction-apparatus and the wires 
leading to it. The secondary conductor B forms an exact circle 
of 35 cm. radius, and is made of copper wire 2 mm. thick ; 
it contains at f a spark-gap the length of which can be varied 
ly a fine screw from a few millimetres down to a few hun- 
dredths of a millimetre. A circle having the above dimensions 


VI ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES IN eee 97 


is in resonance with the primary conductor, and when it is 
placed in a suitable position secondary sparks 6-7 mm. long 
can be obtained. For the purpose of our experiment the 
circle is mounted so 
that it can rotate 
about an axis passing 
through its centre and 
perpendicular to its 
plane; when the circle 
is rotated thus its. 
position is not altered, 
but the spark - gap 
rotates with it. The 
position of the axis is 
such that its direction 
lies in the plane of the 
plates 4 and 4’, and 
in fact coincides with 
the line m n which is 
symmetrical with re- 
spect tothem. If we 
add that the smallest 
distance between A A’ and B is 12 cm., the description of our 
apparatus is complete. The phenomena which we now observe 
by means of it are the following —— 

When the spark-gap f lies in the horizontal plane of 4 4’, 
i.e. at @ or at a’, it is entirely free from sparks. When the-circle 
is rotated a few degrees in either direction from this position, 
minute sparks arise. These small sparks increase in length 
and strength as the spark-gap is removed farther from the 
position of equilibrium and reach a maximum length of about 
3 mm. when f is at the highest and lowest points, 6 and U’ 
respectively, of the circle. The oscillations of the secondary 
conductor which are thus made manifest are always due to 
the forces acting upon those parts of the circle B which are 
opposite to the spark-gap. Although in form it is nearly closed, 
£ must be regarded as an unclosed circuit; those parts of it 
which lie on either side of the spark-gap-act only as capacities 
of the ends of the current. The effective force is the resultant 
of the electrostatic force and the electromagnetic force which 

H 


Fig. 24. 


98 ELECTROMAGNETIC EFFECTS PRODUCED BY VI 


is opposed to it; the former, being the greater of the two, 
determines the direction of the total force. If we regard the 
direction of this force and the amplitude of the oscillation 
excited by it as being positive when /f is at the highest point 
of the circle, then we must regard the force and the amplitude 
as being negative, with reference to a fixed direction in the 
circle B, when f is at the lowest point. The amplitude changes 
sign as it passes through zero in the position of equilibrium. 

It will assist us in what follows if we also consider here 
the phenomena which occur when we shift the circle B a little 
downwards, parallel to itself and without moving it out of its 
plane. When this is done the sparking distance increases at 
the highest point and diminishes at the lowest point ; the points 
which are free from sparks—the null-points as we may call 
them—no longer lie on the horizontal line through the axis, 
but appear to be rotated downwards through a certain angle 
on either side. The slight displacement has changed the 
effect of the force of induction, although it has scarcely changed 
the effect of the electrostatic force, for the former, when inte- 
grated around the closed circle B, now gives an integral which 
is not zero; hence it gives rise to an oscillation the sign of 
whose amplitude is independent of the position of the spark- 
gap; and according to our convention this sign is positive. 
For the direction of the integrated force of induction is oppo- 
site to that of the electrostatic force in the upper half, but is 
the same as that of the electrostatic force in the lower half of 
the circle B,in which latter we regard the sign of the electro- 
static force as being positive. Since the oscillation which is 
now superposed does not differ in phase from the former one, 
their amplitudes are simply added together. This explains 
the results observed. 

The explanations of the phenomena which we have here 
given will be found more completely established in the preced- 


ing paper.’ 
Effects produced by Approach of Conductors 


Hitherto it has been assumed that the conductors .4 A’ 
and B are set up in a large room as far away as possible from 
all objects which might disturb the action. Such an arrange- 

1 See V. 


VI ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES IN eee 99 


ment is necessary if we wish to secure an actual disappearance 
of the sparks at @ anda’. For we soon observe that sparks 
are produced when conductors are brought near, eg. when 
long metal rods are placed on the floor underneath the 
apparatus. A little attention shows that even the body of the 
observer exerts a perceptible influence. If he places himself 
1-2 metres away on. the prolongation of the axis mn the 
apparatus is free from sparks; but if he approaches nearer in 
order to examine the sparks, he always finds them present. 
These very minute sparks have to be observed from a distance, 
and it follows as a necessary consequence that the observer 
must work in a dark room, and that his eyes must be rendered 
more sensitive by not exposing them to light beforehand. 

* We have now to choose a conductor which will produce 
a moderately large effect, and of which we may assume the 
oscillation period to be smaller than that of our primary 
oscillation. These conditions are fulfilled by the conductor 
made of sheet-metal, which is shown at C in our illustration. 
When it is lowered towards the primary conductor A 4’, we 
observe the following effects :—-The spark-length has decreased 
at the highest point b, and has increased at the lowest point 0’; 
the null-points have moved upwards, z.e. towards the conductor 
C, whereas there now is noticeable sparking where the null-points 
originally were. From the last experiment in the preceding 
' section we know what effect would be produced by shifting the 
conductor.A A’upwards. The same effect—qualitatively—would 
be produced by introducing above 4 4’ a second current having 
the same direction as that in 4 A’. Now our conductor C 
exerts exactly the opposite effect; and, if we assume that 
there exists in C a current which is always in the opposite 
direction to that in 4 4’, this effect is naturally explained 
as being due to an inductive action proceeding from C. This 
assumption is indeed necessary, for the preponderating 
electrostatic force tends to produce such a current; and, 
since the natural period of oscillation of the conductor is less 
than that of the force, the current must have the same phase 
as the exciting force. In order to.test the correctness of this 
explanation I proceeded to experiment further in the following 
way :——I left the horizontal plates of the conductor C in 
position, but removed the vertical sheet, and in place of it 


100 °- ELECTROMAGNETIC EFFECTS PRODUCED BY vi 


introduced in succession longer and thinner wires, with a view 
to increasing gradually the period of oscillation of the con- 
ductor C. The results of this progressive change were as 
follows:—At first the null-points retreated farther and 
farther upwards, but at the same time became more and 
more indistinct ; they were no longer points of extinction, but 
simply points of minimum spark-length. Hitherto the spark- 
length at the highest point was much smaller than at the 
lowest point; but after the disappearance of the zero-points 
it began to increase again. At a certain stage the sparks in 
the highest and lowest positions again became equal, but no 
null-points could be found anywhere in the circle; in all 
positions there was vigorous sparking. From here on the 
spark-length at the lowest point grew less, and in its neigh- 
bourhood there presently appeared two null-points, which at 
first were only feebly marked; these soon became more 
distinct, and approached towards the points a and a’, but 
always lay on the half of the circle remote from the conductor 
C. Finally they coincided with the points a and a’; the 
electrical condition was now identical with that which 
obtained before the conductor C had been brought near. 
The successive changes are just what might be expected 
according to our conception of the mode of action, For 
if the period of oscillation of the conductor C approaches 
that of the conductor A A’, the current in C becomes 
stronger, but at the same time there arises a difference 
of phase between the current and the inducing force. 
At the stage where resonance occurs the current in C is 
strongest, and the difference of phase amounts (as in every 
case of resonance of a moderately damped oscillation) to a 
quarter-period; hence there can no longer be any interfer- 
ence between the oscillations induced in B by A JA’ and 
by C respectively. This condition evidently corresponds to 
the stage specially referred to above. If the period of 
oscillation of C becomes much greater than that of A A’ 
the amplitude of the oscillations in C again decreases, and 
the difference of phase between them and the exciting 
force now approaches a half-period. The current in C is 
now at every instant in the same direction as that in 
A A’; interference between the oscillations excited in B by 


VI ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES IN INSULATORS 101 


these currents is again possible; but the effect produced 
by the conductor C must be opposite to that which it exerted 
in.its original position. 

If the conductor C is brought very close to 4 4’ only small 
sparks appear in the circle B. By bringing the conductors closer 
together the period of oscillation of A A’ is increased, and thus 
A A’ and B are no longer in resonance. 


Effects produced by Approach of Non-conductors 


A very rough estimate shows that if large masses of in- 
sulating substances are brought near to the apparatus, the 
quantities of electricity displaced by dielectric polarisation 
must be at least as great as those which are set in motion 
by conduction in thin metallic rods. The approach of the 
latter has been found to produce a very noticeable effect in 
our apparatus; if, therefore, the approach of large insulating 
masses produced no similar effect, we should naturally con- 
clude that the electricity displaced by dielectric polarisation 
did not exert a corresponding electromagnetic action. But if 
the views of Faraday and Maxwell are correct, we should 
expect that a noticeable effect would be produced, and, further, 
that the approach of a non-conductor would actin the same 
way as that of a conductor having a very short period of oscilla- 
tion. Experiment fully confirms this expectation; and the 
only difficulty in carrying out the experiments is that of pro- 
curing sufficiently large masses of the insulating material. 

I made the first experiments with a material which lay 
ready to hard, namely, paper. Underneath the conductor 
A A’ TI piled up books in the form of a parallelopiped 
15 metre long, 0°5 m. broad, and 1 m. high, until they reached 
the plates A and 4’. It was shown without doubt that 
sparks now appeared in those positions of the circle which 
before were free from sparks, and that in order to make the 
sparks disappear the spark-gap f had to be turned about 10° 
towards the pile of books. Encouraged by this, I had 
800 kgm. of unmixed asphalt cast in the form of a 
block 1:4 metre long, 0°6 m. high, and.0-4 m. broad 
(D in Fig. 24). The apparatus was removed on to this, 
the plates being laid upon the block. The effect could 


52168 


102 ELECTROMAGNETIC EFFECTS PRODUCED BY vI 


be immediately recognised; the results obtained were as 
follows :— 

J. The spark at the highest point of the circle was now 
considerably stronger than at the lowest point (that nearest 
the asphalt). . 

2. The null-points were displaced downwards, 7.e. towards 
the insulator, and when the plates were laid right upon it 
the angle of displacement (which could be measured with 
fair accuracy) was 23°. But the sparking no longer ceased 
completely at these points. At the original zero-points there 
was now vigorous sparking. 

3. When the plates A and A’ rested upon the asphalt 
block the period of oscillation of 4 A’ was altered; the period 
of oscillation of B had to be increased at the same time in 
order to obtain sparks of maximum length. 

4, If the apparatus was gradually removed in any direc- 
tion away from the asphalt block the effect continuously 
diminished, without experiencing any qualitative change. 


We have here all the effects of a conductor of small 
period of oscillation, The accordance between the mode of 
action of the insulator and of a conductor is further shown 
by the fact that the one can be compensated by the opposing 
action of the other. Thus, if the apparatus lay upon the 
asphalt, and the conductor C was ‘brought near it from above, 
the null-points shifted backwards towards their original 
positions, and they again coincided with the points a and 
a’ when the conductor C’ was brought within about 11 cm. 
of the conductor 4A A’., If the upper surface of the asphalt 
lay 5 cm. beneath the plates A and .4’, compensation was 
attained as soon as C was brought within 17 cm. of A A’. 
The compensating action always took place when the con- 
ductor was somewhat farther off than the insulator. In a 
rough way these experiments show that the action of the 
insulator is, quantitatively as well as qualitatively, about what 
we should expect. 

The asphalt used was an excellent insulator ; it contained (as 
might be suspected from its high specific gravity) a large amount 
of mineral matter. One hundred parts (by weight) were found 
to give no less than 62 parts of ash, consisting of 17 parts of 
quartz-sand, 40 of calcium compounds, and 5 of aluminium and 


VI ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES IN INSULATORS 103 


iron compounds.’ It might be suspected that the action should 
be attributed entirely to these constituents, some of which 
might perhaps act as conductors. In order to remove this doubt 
I had a second, and exactly similar, block made of the so-called 
artificial pitch: this also is an excellent insulator, and gives 
scarcely any ash. The phenomena observed with this were the 
same as those above described, excepting that they were not quite 
so strongly marked; for example, the maximum displacement 
of the null-points here was only 19°. Unfortunately, however, 
this artificial pitch contains not only hydrocarbons but also 
free carbon in a very fine state of division, and it would be 
difficult to determine the amount of this latter. It cannot be 
denied that this carbon would have some conductivity, and 
hence the doubt in question is not entirely removed by this 
experiment. The expense of undertaking further investiga- 
tions on the same large scale with pure substances was pro- 
hibitory. I therefore had the system of conductors 4 .4’ and 
B made again of exactly one-half the linear dimensions, and 
tried whether the phenomena could be followed with sufficient 
accuracy in this smaller model. The result was satisfactory, 
although, of course, with such exceedingly delicate sparks the 
strain upon the observer’s attention was necessarily increased. 
For the purpose of demonstrating the phenomenon, or for 
quantitative experiments, 1t would be advisable to adhere to 
the larger dimensions. With the small apparatus I investi- 
gated altogether eight substances, which I will now mention 
in order :— 

1. Asphalt.—The large block already described was used. 
When the plates A and A’ lay upon the block, so that their 
front edges lay along the front edge of the block, the rotation 
of the null-point amounted to 31°. When the apparatus was 
drawn forward, so that the central line r s coincided with the 
front edge of the block, the rotation amounted to 20°. 

2. Artifirial Pitch obtained from Coal.—Here, again, the 
large block was used. The rotations in the two positions 
referred to in (1) amounted to 21° and 13° respectively. 

3. Paper—When the apparatus was placed upon a block 
of paper 70 ecm. long, 35 cm. high, and 20 cm. broad, the 
null-points were displaced about 8° towards the paper. 


1 For the analysis I have to thank my colleague, Herr Hofrath Engler. 


104 ELECTROMAGNETIC EFFECTS PRODUCED BY vI 


4, With a block of dense and perfectly dry wood the rota- 
tion of the null-points amounted to about 10°. 

5. Sandstone-—When the apparatus was brought near to 
a sandstone pillar in the building (almost touching it), the 
null-points were rotated about 20° towards the sandstone. I 
had already observed with the large apparatus that the stone 
floor exercised a perceptible effect as soon as ane apparatus 
was brought within half a metre of it. 

6. Sulphur.—A massive block 70 cm. dene 20 cm. 
broad, and 35 em. high, was cast from roll sulphur in a 
wooden mould, and the mould was then removed. The action 
of the block was very distinct; the various effects described 
above could be perceived, and the rotation amounted to 
13-14°. 

7. Parafin.—The paraftin was white; it melted between 
60° and 70°, giving a liquid as clear as water and free from 
impurities. It was melted and poured into a cardboard mould 
of the same dimensions, which was afterwards removed. The 
action was very distinct, and the rotation amounted to 7°, 

8. Petroleum.—In order to investigate the effect of a 
liquid insulator, I filled an oak trough with 45 litres of pure 
petroleum. The internal dimensions of the trough were :— 
Length 70 cm., breadth 20 cm., depth 35 cm. When full it 
produced a rotation of about 7°, when empty about 2°. The 
very perceptible difference indicates the effect which would be 
produced by the petroleum alone. 


The concordance between the observations made upon so 
many substances, some of which were pure, scarcely leaves 
any doubt that the action is a real one, and that it must be 
attributed to the substances themselves, and not to impurities 
in them. Indeed, I see only two objections which can be 
urged against this intérpretation of the phenomena, and it will 
be advisable to rebut these at once. In the first place, it 
might be’ asserted that the effect is not an electromagnetic one, 
but that the insulator changes the distribution of the electro- 
static force in its neighbourhood, and that this change in the 
distribution results in a change in the phenomenon. I have 
tried in vain to interpret,-in accordance with this assumption, 
the various phenomena observed. But the assertion can be 
directly disproved. For, if the insulator fills a space which is 


VI ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES IN INSULATORS 105 


only bounded by lines of force, and by parts of the surfaces 
of A and J’, it cannot give rise to any change in the 
electrostatic force outside its own mass. Now the vertical 
plane through the centre line rs is certainly made up of 
lines of force, and so also is the horizontal plane of the 
plates A and A’ themselves. If, therefore, the insulator is 
bounded by these two planes, and if it extends behind the 
former and under the latter, as far as it can exert any influ- 
ence, then every electrostatic effect outside the insulator is 
avoided. Now if we place our smaller apparatus with the line 
7 s upon the upper front edge of one of the large blocks, the 
conditions referred to are sufficiently fulfilled. But when this 
was done the action, as already stated, did not cease, but was 
of similar strength to that observed under the most favourable 
conditions. It follows that the action did not arise from 
electrostatic forces. 

In the second place, it may be objected that the effects 
should be attributed to currents arising through a residual 
conductivity. This objection can scarcely be urged with 
respect to.such excellent insulators as sulphur and paraffin ; 
nor do I believe that it is valid in the case of inferior insulators 
such as wood. Even assuming that such a substance insulates 
so badly that it allows the charged plate A to discharge in the 
ten-thousandth part of a second, but not much more rapidly, 
then during an oscillation of our apparatus the plate would 
never lose more than the ten-thousandth part of its charge. 
The conduction-current proper in the substance under con- 
sideration would therefore never exceed the ten-thousandth 
part of the primary current in 4 4’, and hence it would be 
quite ineffective. Hence in the case of the better insulators, 
at any rate, any assistance through conduction is excluded. 

At present it does not appear to be possible to give any 
discussion of the quantitative relations of the experiments that 
would be of interest. : 


We have now seen what effect is produced upon the 
secondary circuit B by bringing a metallic conductor C near 
to the primary conductor 4 4’. If C was in resonance with 


106 ELECTROMAGNETIC EFFECTS IN INSULATORS VI 


A A’, its action upon B could. not interfere with the direct 
action of A A’, But at the same time, when the conditions 
for resonance were fulfilled, its action was fairly powerful, and 
could even be perceived when C was removed 1-1'5 metre 
away from A A’. Upon this I based experiments which 
should establish a finite rate of propagation of the electric 
forces. For if these forces require time to proceed in the first 
place from A A’ to C, and then again from C back to B, the 
difference of phase between the effects of 4A’ upon B and of 
C upon B will increase when the distance between A A’ and 
C increases; and the two effects must again become capable 
of producing interference if the distance between 4 4’ and C 
becomes so great that the time taken by the electric force in 
traversing it is one-quarter of the half-period of oscillation. 
Hitherto these experiments have been unsuccessful, for I have 
not been able to detect any of the phenomena which I had 
expected. But since it was at best a question of observing 
exceedingly delicate changes, I do not consider that this nega- 
tive result should weigh against the positive results which I 
have obtained otherwise. 


Vil 


ON THE FINITE VELOCITY OF PROPAGATION OF 
ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS 


(Sttzungsbr. d. Berl. Akad. d. Wiss. Feb. 2, 1888. Wiedemann’s Ann. 
84, p. 551.) 


WHEN variable electric forces act within insulators whose 
dielectric constants differ appreciably from unity, the polarisa- 
tions which correspond to these forces exert electromagnetic 
effects. But it is quite another question whether variable 
electric forces in air are also accompanied by polarisations 
capable of exerting electromagnetic effects. We may conclude 
that, if this question is to be answered in the affirmative, 
electromagnetic actions must be propagated with a finite 
velocity. 

While I was vainly casting about for experiments which 
would give a direct answer to the question raised, it occurred 
to me that it might be possible to test the conclusion, 
even if the velocity under consideration was considerably 
greater than that of light. The investigation was arranged 
according to the following plan :—In the first place, regular 
progressive waves were to be produced in a straight, stretched 
wire by means of corresponding rapid oscillations of a primary 
conductor. Next, a secondary conductor was to be exposed 
simultaneously to the influence of the waves propagated 
through the wire and to the direct action of the primary 
conductor propagated through the air; and thus both actions 
were to be made to interfere. Finally, such interferences 
were to be produced at different distances from the primary 
circuit, so as to find out, whether the oscillations of the electric 


108 FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS VII 


force at great distances would or would not exhibit a retarda- 
tion of phase, as *ompared with the oscillations in the neigh- 
bourhood of the primary circuit. This plan has proved to be 
in all respects practicable. The experiments carried out in 
accordance with it have shown that the inductive action is 
undoubtedly propagated with a finite velocity. This velocity 
is greater than the velocity of propagation of electric waves in 
wires, According to the experiments made up to the present 
time, the ratio of these velocities is about 45:28. From this 
it follows that the absolute value of the first of these is of the 
same order as the velocity of light. Nothing can as yet be 
decided as to the propagation of electrostatic actions. 


The Primary and Secondary Conductors 


The primary conductor A A’ (Fig. 25) consisted of two 
square brass plates, 40 cm. in the side, which were connected 


by a copper wire 60 cm. long, In the middle of the wire was 
a spark-gap in which oscillations were produced by very 
powerful discharges of an induction-coil J. The conductor 
was set up 1°5 metre above the floor, with the wire horizontal 
and the plane of the plates vertical, We shall denote as the 
base-line of our experiments a horizontal straight line rs 
passing through the spark-gap and perpendicular to the direc- 
tion of the primary oscillation. We shall denote as the zero- 
point a point on this base-line 45 cm. from the spark-gap. 

» The experiments were carried out in a large lectiure-room, 
in which there were no fixtures for a distance of 12 metres in, 


VII FINITE VELOCITY OF eae ACTIONS 109 


the neighbourhood of the base-line! Duri 
this room was darkened. 

The secondary circuit used was sometimes a wire C in the 
form of a circle of 35 cm. radius, sometimes a wire B bent 
into a square of 60 em. in the side. The spark-gap of both 
these conductors was adjustable by means of a micrometer- 
screw ; and in the case of the square conductor the spark-gap 
was provided with a lens. Both conductors were in resonance 
with the primary conductor. As calculated from the capacity 
and coefficierit of self-induction of the primary, the (half) 
period of oscillation of all three conductors amounted to 1:4 
hundred-millionths of a second.” Still it is doubtful whether 
the ordinary theory of electric oscillations gives correct results 
here. But inasmuch as it gives correct values in the case of 
Leyden jar discharges, we are justified in assuming that its 
results in the present case will, at any rate, be correct as far as 
the order of magnitude is concerned. 

Let us now consider the influence of the primary oscilla- 
tion upon the secondary circuit in some of the positions which 
are of importance in our present investigation. First let us 
place the secondary conductor with its centre on the base-line 
and its plane in the vertical plane through the base-line. We 
shall call this the first position. In this position no sparks 
are perceived in the secondary circuit. The reason is obvious: 
the electric force is at all points perpendicular to the direction 
of the secondary wire. 

Now, leaving the centre of the secondary conductor still 
on the base-line, let it be turned so that its plane is perpen- 
dicular to the base-line; we shall call this the second position. 
Sparks now appear in the secondary circuit whenever the 
spark-gap lies above or below the horizontal plane through the 
base-line; but no sparks appear when the spark-gap lies in 
this plane. As the distance from the primary oscillator 
increases, the length of the sparks diminishes, at first rapidly 
but afterwards very slowly. I was able to observe the sparks 
along the whole distance (12 metres) at my disposal, and 
have no doubt that in larger rooms this distance could be still 
farther extended. In this position the sparks owe their origin 


g the experiments 


1 [See Note 12 at end of book.] 
2 See II., p. 50. [See also Note 13 at end of book.] 


110 FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS VII 


mainly to the electric force which always acts in the part of 
the secondary circuit opposite to the spark-gap. The total 
force may be split up into the electrostatic part and the 
electromagnetic part; there is no doubt that at short distances 
the former, at greater distances the latter, preponderates and 
settles the direction of the total force. 

Finally, let the plane of the secondary conductor be 
brought into the horizontal position, its centre being still on 
the base-line. We shall call this the third position. If we 
use the circular conductor, place it with its centre at the zero- 
point of the base-line, and turn it so that the spark-gap 
slowly moves around it, we observe the following effects :— 
In all positions of the spark-gap there is vigorous sparking. 
The sparks are most powerful and about 6 mm. long when 
the spark-gap faces the primary conductor; they steadily 
diminish when the spark-gap is moved away from this posi- 
tion, and attain a minimum value of about 3 mm. on the 
side farthest from the primary conductor. If the conductor 
was exposed only to the electrostatic force, we should expect 
sparking when the spark-gap was on the one side or the other 
in the neighbourhood of the base-line, but no sparking in the 
two intermediate positions. Indeed, the direction of the 
oscillation would be determined by the direction of the force 
in the portion of the secondary conductor lying opposite 
to the spark-gap. But upon the oscillation excited by the 
electrostatic force is superposed the oscillation excited by the 
electromagnetic force; and here the latter is very powerful, 
because the electromagnetic force when integrated around the 
secondary circuit (considered as being closed) gives a finite 
integral value. The direction of this integrated force of induc- 
tion is independent of the position of the spark-gap; it 
opposes the electrostatic force in the part of the secondary 
conductor which faces A .4’, but reinforces the electrostatic 
force in the part which faces away from 4 A’. Hence the 
electrostatic and electromagnetic forces assist each other when 
the spark-gap is turned towards, but they oppose each other 
when it is turned away from the primary conductor. That it 
is the electromagnetic force which preponderates in the latter 
position and determines the direction of the oscillation, may 
be recognised from the fact that the change from the one state 


Vu FINITE VELOCITY OF sane ACTIONS Hil 


to the other takes place in any position without any extinction 
of the sparks. For our purpose it is important to make the 
following observations :—If the spark-gap is rotated to the 
.Tight or left through 90° from the base-line, it lies at a 
nodal point with respect to the electrostatic force, and the 
sparks which appear in it owe their origin entirely to the 
electromagnetic force, and especially to the fact that the latter, 
around the closed circuit, is not zero. Hence, in this particu- 
lar position, we can investigate the electromagnetic effect, even 
in the neighbourhood of the primary conductor, independently 
of the electrostatic effect. 

A complete demonstration of the above explanations will 
be found in an earlier paper.’ Some further evidence in 
support of these explanations, and of the results arrived at in 
my earlier paper, will be found in what follows. , 


The Waves in the Straight Wire 


In order to excite in a wire with the aid of our primary 
oscillations waves suitable for our purpose, we proceed as 
follows:—Behind the plate 4 we place a plate P of the same 
size. From the latter we carry a copper wire 1 mm. thick to 
the point m on’ the base-line; from there, in a curve 1 
metre long, to the point », which lies 30 cm. above the spark- 
gap, and thence in a straight line parallel to the base-line for 
a distance sufficiently great to prevent any fear of disturbanve 
through reflected waves. In my experiments the wire passed 
through the window, then went about 60 metres freely through 
the air, and ended in an earth-connection. Special experi- 
ments showed that this distance was sufficiently great. If now 
we bring near to this wire a metallic conductor in the form 
of a nearly closed circle, we find that the discharges of the 
induction-coil are accompanied by play of small sparks in the - 
circle. .The intensity of the sparks can be altered by altering 
the distance between the plates P and 4A. That the waves in 
ithe wire have the same periodic time as the primary oscilla- 
tions, can be shown by bringing near to the wire one of our 
tuned secondary conductors; for in these the sparks become 
more powerful than in any other metallic circuits, whether 


1 See V., p. 80. 


112 FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS VIL 


larger or smaller. That the waves are regular, in respect to. 


space as well as time, can be shown by the formation of sta- 
tionary waves. In order to produce these, we allow the wire 
to end freely at some distance from its origin, and bring near 
to it our secondary conductor in such a position that its plane 
includes the wire, and that the spark-gap is turned towards 
the wire. We then observe that at the free end of the wire 
the sparks in the secondary conductor are very small; they 
increase in length as we move towards the origin of the wire ; 
at a certain distance, however, they again decrease and sink 
nearly to zero, after which they again become longer. We 
have thus found a nodal point. If we now measure the wave- 
length so found, make the whole length of the wire (reckoned 
from the point 7) equal to a complete multiple of this length, 
and repeat the experiment, we find that the whole length is 
now divided up by nodal points into separate’ waves.’ If we 
fix each nodal point separately with all possible care, and 
indicate its position by means of a paper rider, we see that 
the distances of these are approximately equal, and that the 
experiments admit of a fair degree of accuracy. 

The nodes can also be distinguished from the antinodes in 
other ways. If we bring the secondary conductor near to the 
wire, in such a position that the plane of the former is per- 
pendicular to the latter, and that the spark-gap is neither 
turned quite towards the wire nor quite away from it, but is 
in an intermediate position, then our secondary circle-is in a 
suitable position for indicating the existence of forces which 
are perpendicular to the direction of the wire. Now, when 
the circle is in such a position, we see that sparks appear at 
the nodal points, but disappear at the antinodes. If we draw 
sparks from the wire by means of an insulated conductor, we 
find that these are somewhat stronger at the nodes than at the 
antinodes ; but the difference is slight, and for the most part 
can only be perceived when we already know where the nodes 
and antinodes respectively are situated. The reason why this 
latter method and other similar ones give no definite result 
is that the particular waves under consideration have other 
irregular disturbances superposed upon them. With the aid of 
our tuned circle, however, we can pick out the disturbances in 


1 [See Note 14 at end of book.] 


va 


vu FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS 113 


which we are interested, just as particular notes can be picked 
out of confused noises by means of resonators. 

If we cut through the wire at a node, the phenomena 
along the part between it and the origin are not affected: the 
waves are even propagated along the part which has been cut 
off if it is left in its original position, although their strength 
is diminished. 

The fact that the waves can be measured admits of 
numerous applications. If we replace the copper wire hitherto 
used by a thicker or thinner copper wire, or by a wire of 
another metal, the nodal points are found to remain in the 
same positions. Thus the rate of propagation in all such 
wires is the same, and we are justified in speaking of it as a 
definite velocity. Even iron wires are no exception to this 
general rule; hence the magnetic properties of iron are not 
called into play by such rapid disturbances. It will be of 
interest to test the behaviour of electrolytes. The fact that 
the electrical disturbance in these is bound up with the dis- 
turbance of inert matter might lead us to expect a smaller 
velocity of propagation.’ Through a tube of 10 mm. diameter, 
filled with a solution of copper sulphate, the waves would not 
travel at all; but this may have been due to the resistance 
being too great. Again, by measuring the wave-lengths, we 
can determine the relative periods of oscillation of different 
primary conductors; it should be possible to compare in this 
way the periods of oscillation of plates, spheres, ellipsoids, . 
ete. 

In our particular case the nodal points proved to be very 
distinct when the wire was cut off at a distance of either 
8 metres or 5°5 metres from the zero-point of the base-line. 
In the former case the positions of the paper riders used for 
fixing the nodal points were—0°2 m., 2°3 m., 5:1 m.,and 8 m.; 
in the latter case—0-1 m., 2°8 m., and 5°5 m.,, the distances 
being measured from the zero-point. From this it appears 
that the (half) wave-length in the free wire cannot differ much 
from 2°8 metres. We can scarcely be surprised at finding 
that the first wave-length, reckoned from P, appears smaller 
than the rest, when we take into consideration the presence of 
the plate and the bending of the wire. A period of oscilla- 


1 [See Note 15 at end of book.] 
I 


114 FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS VII 


tion of 1:4 hundred-millionths of a second, and a wave-length 
of 2°8 metres, gives 200,000 km/sec. as the velocity of 
electric waves in wires.’ In the year 1850 Fizeau and 
Gounelle? making use of a very good method, found for this 
velocity the value 100,000 km/sec. in iron wires, and 
180,000 km./sec. in copper wires. In 1875 W. Siemens?’ 
using discharges from Leyden jars, found velocities from 
200,000 to 260,000 km. /sec. in iron wires. Other determin- 
ations can scarcely be taken into consideration. Our result 
comes in well between the above experimental values. Since 
it was obtained with the aid of a doubtful theory, we are not 
justified in publishing it as a new measurement of this same 
velocity ; but, on the other hand, we may conclude, from the 
accordance between the experimental results, that our calcu- 
lated value of the period of oscillation is of the right order of 
magnitude. 


Interference between the direct Action and that propagated 
through the Wire 


Let us place the square circuit B at the zero-point in 
our second position, and so that the spark-gap is at the 
highest point. The waves in the wire now exert no influence ; 
the direct action gives rise to.sparks 2 mm. long. If we now 
bring B into the first position by turning it about a vertical 
axis, it is found conversely that the primary oscillation exercises 
no direct effect ; but the waves in the wire now induce sparks 
which can be made as long as 2 mm. by bringing P near to 
A. In intermediate positions both causes give rise to sparks, 
and it is thus possible for them, according to their difference in 
phase, either to reinforce or to weaken each other. Such a 
phenomenon, in fact, we observe. For, if we adjust the plane 
of B so that its normal towards 4 A’ points away from that 
side of the primary conductor on which the plate P is placed, 
the sparking is even stronger than it is in the principal 
positions; but if we adjust the plane of B so that its normal 
points towards P, the sparks disappear, and only reappear 

1 [See Note 16 at end of book.] 


2 Fizeau and Gounelle, Pogg. Ann. 80, p. 158, 1850. 
3 'W. Siemens, Pogg. Ann. 157, p. 309, 1876. 


VII FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS 115 


when the spark-gap has been considerdbly shortened. If, 
under the ‘same conditions, we place the spark-gap at the 
lowest point of B, the disappearance of the sparks takes place 
when the normal points away from P. Further modifications 
of the experiment—eg. by carrying the wire beneath the 
secondary conductor—produce just such effects as might be 
expected from what has above been stated. The phenomenon 
itself is just what we expected; let us endeavour to make it 
clear that the action takes place in the sense indicated in our 
explanation. In order to fix our ideas, let us suppose that 
the spark-gap is at the highest point, and the normal turned 
towards P (as in the figure). At the particular instant under 
consideration let the plate P have its largest positive charge. 
The electrostatic force, and therefore the total force, is directed 
from A towards A’. The oscillation induced in B is deter- 
mined by the direction of the force in the lower part of B. 
Positive electricity will therefore be urged towards A’ in the 
lower part, and away from J’ in the upper part. Let us now 
consider the action of the waves. As long as 4 is positively 
charged, positive electricity flows away from the plate P. 
At the instant under consideration this flow reaches its 
maximum development in the middle of the first half wave- 
length of the wire. At a quarter wave-length farther from 
the origin—that is, in the neighbourhood of our zero-point— 


it is just beginning to take up this direction (away from the. 


zero-point). Hence at this point the electromagnetic induction 
urges positive electricity in its neighbourhood towards the origin. 
In particular, positive electricity in our conductor B is thrown 
into a state of motion in a circle, so that in the upper part it 
tends to flow towards .4’, and in the lower part away from 
A’. Thus, in fact, the electrostatic and electromagnetic forces 
act against one another, and are in approximately the same 


‘ phase; hence they must more or less annul one another. If’ 


we rotate the secondary circle through 90° (through the first 
position) the direct action changes its sign, but the action of 
the waves does not; both causes reinforce one another. The 
same holds good if the conductor B is rotated in its own 
plane until the spark-gap lies at its lowest point. 

We now replace the wire m n by longer lengths of wire. 
We observe that this renders the interference more indistinct ; 


116 FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS Vii 


it disappears completely when a piece of wire 250 cm. long 
is introduced ; the sparks are of the same length whether the 
normal points away from P or towards it. If we lengthen 
the wire still more the difference of behaviour in the various 
quadrants again exhibits itself, and the extinction of the 
sparks becomes fairly sharp when 400 cm. of wire is intro- 
duced. But there is now this difference—that extinction 
occurs when the spark-gap is at the top, and the normal 
points away from P. Further lengthening of the wire causes 
the interference to disappear once more; but it reappears in 
the original sense when about 6 metres of wire are introduced. 
These phenomena are obviously explained by the retardation 
of the waves in the wire, and they also make it certain that 
the state of affairs in the progressive waves changes sign 
about every 2°8 metres. 

If we wish to produce interference while the secondary 
circle C' lies in the third position, we must remove the recti- 
linear wire from the position in which it has hitherto remained, 
and carry it along in the horizontal plane through C, either on 
the side towards the plate A, or on the side towards the plate 
A’. In practice it is sufficient to stretch the wire loosely, 
grasp it with insulating tongs, and bring it alternately near 
one side or the other of C. What we observe is as follows :— 
If the waves are carried along the side on which the plate P 
lies, they annul the sparks which were previously present; if 
they are carried along the opposite side they strengthen the 
sparks which were already present. Both results always 
occur, whatever may be the position of the spark-gap in the 
circle. We have seen that at the instant when the plate A 
has its strongest positive charge, and when, therefore, the 

. primary current begins to flow away from A, the surging at 
the first nodal point of the rectilinear wire begins to flow 
away from the origin of the wire. Hence both currents flow 
round C in the same sense when the rectilinear wire’ lies on 
the side of C which is remote from A; in the other case 
they flow round C in opposite senses, and their actions annul 
one another. The fact that the position of the spark-gap is 
of no importance confirms our supposition that the direction 
of the oscillation is here determined by the electromagnetic 
force. The interferences which have just been described also 


Vil FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS 117 


change their sign when 400 em. of wire, instead of 100 cm., 
is introduced between the points m and n. 

I have also produced interferences in positions in which . 
the centre of the secondary circle lay outside the base-line ; 
but for our present purpose these are only of importance 
inasmuch as they throughout confirmed our fundamental 
views, 


Interference at Various Distances 


Interferences can be produced at greater distances in the 
same way as at the zero-point. In order that they may be 
distinct, care must be taken that the action of the waves 
in the wire is in all cases of about the same magnitude as the 
direct action. This can be secured by increasing the distance 
between P and A. Now very little consideration will show 
that, if the action is propagated through the air with infinite 
velocity, it must interfere with the waves in the wire in 
opposite senses at distances of half a wave-length (7.e. 2°8 metres) 
along the wire. Again, if the action is propagated through 
the air with the same velocity as that of the waves in the 
wire, the two will interfere in the same way at all distances. 
Lastly, if the action is propagated through the air with a 
velocity which is finite, but different from that of the 
waves in the wire, the nature of the interference will alter- 
nate, but at distances which are farther than 2°8 metres 
apart. | 

In order to find out what actually took place, I first made 
use of interferences of the kind which were observed in 
passing from the first into the second position. The spark- 
gap was at the top. At first I limited myself to distances up 
to 8 metres from the zero-point. At the end of each half-metre 
along this position the secondary conductor was set up and 
examined in order to see whether any difference could be 
observed at the spark-gap according as the normal pointed 
towards P or away from it. If there was no such difference, 
the result of the experiment was indicated by the symbol O. 
If the sparks were smaller when the normal pointed towards 
P, then this showed an interference which was represented by 
the symbol +. The symbol — was used to indicate an inter- 


118 FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS Vit 


ference when the normal pointed towards the other side. In 
order to multiply the experiments I frequently repeated them, 
making the wire mn 50 cm. longer each time, and thus 
lengthening it gradually from 100 cm. to 600 cm. The 
results of my experiments are contained in the following 
summary which will easily be understood :— 


100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400 
450 
500 
550 
600 


Ooo00++00 
1Oooo+r+ 


rtm] — | ~f ee] 


FOLrlLlitt1ootet 
++ 00i1 FI 
111OQO0tF4++00 


1oor+++ 0001 
If) 1OoOFrt++4+01 


t++++ 0011 
teetet i 
Ot+++4+01 
OOtttt+O 
! 
I 
o°o° 
+00 
+00 


According to this it might almost appear as if the inter- 
ferences changed sign at every half wave-length of the waves 
in the wire But, in the first place, we notice that this does 
not exactly happen. If it did, then the symbol O should 
recur at the distances 1 m., 3°8 m., 6°6 m., whereas it obviously 
recurs less frequently. In the second place, we notice that 
the retardation of phase proceeds more rapidly in the neigh- 
bourhood of the origin than at a distance from it. All the 
rows agree in showing this. An alteration in the rate of 
propagation is not probable. We can with much better reason 
attribute this phenomenon to the fact that we are making 
use of the total force (Gesammtkraft), which can be split up 
into the electrostatic force and the electromagnetic. Now, 
according to theory, it is probable that the former, which 
preponderates in the neighbourhood of the primary oscillation, 
is propagated more rapidly than the latter, which is almost 
the only factor of importance at a distance. . In order first to 
settle what actually happens at a greater distance, I have 
extended the experiments to a distance of 12 metres, for at any 


1 [See Note 17 at end of book.] 


vil FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS 119 


rate three values of the length mn. I must admit that this 
required rather an effort. Here are the results :— 


Jol+l2]3l4/sje]7]s 9 |10 |11 |12 


100 +/O}/-—-!-/]0;0/O]};+]}4+14+]+4]1+]0 
250 Oj;-1|-[O!|+].4/0/0);0/0;/-];-]- 
400 -{|O]/+})+/O;O0;,-j;-|]-j-|]O|[O|0 


If we assume that at considerable distances the electromag- 
netic action alone is effective, then we should conclude from 
these observations that the interference of this action with 
the waves in the wires only changes its sign every 7 metres. 

In order now to investigate the electromagnetic force in the 
neighbourhood of the primary oscillation (where the phenomena 
are more distinct) as well, I made use of the interferences 
which occur in the third position when the spark-gap is 
rotated 90° away from the base-line. The sense of the 
interference at the zero-point has already been stated, and this 
sense will be indicated by the symbol —, whereas the symbol 
+ will be used to denote an interference by conducting the 
waves past the side of C which is remote from P. This choice 
of the symbols will be in accord with the way in which we 
have hitherto used them. For since the electromagnetic force is 
opposed to the total force at the zero-point, our first table 
would also begin with the symbol —, provided that the in- 
fluence of the electrostatic force could have been eliminated. 
Now experiment shows, in the first place, that interference still 
takes place up to a distance of 3 metres, and that it is of the 
same sign as at the zero-point. This experiment, repeated 
often and never with an ambiguous result, is sufficient to prove 
the finite rate of propagation of the electromagnetic action. | 
Unfortunately the experiments could not be extended to a 
greater distance than 4 metres, on account of the feeble nature 
of the ‘sparks. Here, again, I repeated the experiments with 
variable lengths of the wire m n, so as to be able to verify the 
retardation of phase along this portion of the wire. The 
results are given in the following summary :—_ 


120 FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS 


Sa EC ee ICES GuUuG 
100 -|-|]-j}-|]90 400 +)/+{/+/4+]0 
150 -!-|]0O/0;}0 450 +]+4+1+{/0]0 
200 O;O/;O!]+)]+4 500 +/+/0/10/0 
250 Ol+} +] 4+] + 550 +)/O010/0)]- 
300 tl ep ei eit 600 Oj-j-;-{- 
350 +)/+]+]+ [0 


A discussion of these results shows that here, again, the 
phase of the interference alters as the distance increases, so 
that a reversal of sign might be expected at a distance of 
7-8 metres. 

But this result is much more plainly shown by combining 
the results of the second and third summary—using the data 
of the latter up to a distance of 4 metres, and of the former for 
greater distances. In the first of these intervals we thus 

-avoid the action of the electrostatic force by reason of the 
peculiar position of our secondary conductor; in the second 
this action drops out of account, owing to the rapid weakening 
of that force. We should expect the observations of both 
intervals to fit into one another without any break, and our 
expectation is confirmed. We thus obtain by collating the 
symbols the following table for the interference of the electro- 
magnetic force with the action of the waves in the wire :— 


100 - alle -|O/O/O]+)+]4+{4+]4 | 0- 
250 O;+, +) 4+] ]4+]}/4+}/0)/0;/0;/0};~-]-1 - 
400 + +|4 +/O0/O]/-j|]-};-}-|]0]90],0 


From this table I draw the following conclusions :-— 

1. The interference does not change sign every 2°8 metres. 
Therefore the electromagnetic actions are not propagated with 
infinite velocity. 

2. The interference, however, is not in the same phase at 
all points. Therefore the electromagnetic actions do not spread 
out in air with the same velocity as the electric waves in 
wires. 

3. A gradual retardation of the waves in the wire has the 


vit FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS 121 


effect of shifting any particular phase of the interference 
towards the origin of the waves. From the direction of this 
shifting it follows that of the two’ different rates of propaga- 
tion that through air is the more rapid. For if by retardation 
of one of the two actions we bring about an earlier coincidence 
of both, then we must have retarded the slower one. 

4. At distances of every 7°5 metres the sign of the interfer- 
ence changes from + to —. Hence, after proceeding every 7°5 
metres, the electromagnetic action outruns each time a wave in 
the wire. While the former travelled.7°5 metres, the latter 
travelled 7°5 —2°8 =4°7 metres. The ratio of the two velocities 
is therefore as 75:47, and the half wave-length of the electro- 
magnetic action in air is 2°8 x 75/47 =4°5 metres. Since this 
distance is traversed in 1:4 hundred-millionths of a second, it 
follows that the absolute velocity of propagation in air is 
320,000 km. per second. This result only holds good as far 
as the order of magnitude is concerned ; still the actual value 
can scarcely be greater than half as much again, and can 
scarcely be less than two-thirds of the value stated. The 
actual value can only be determined by experiment when we 
are able to determine the velocity of electricity in wires more 
accurately than has hitherto been the case. 

Since the interferences undoubtedly change sign after 
2°8 metres in the neighbourhood of the primary oscillation, we 
might conclude that the electrostatic force which here pre- 
dominates is propagated with infinite velocity. But this con- 
clusion would in the main depend upon a single change of 
‘phase, and this one change can be explained (apart from any 
retardation of phase) by the fact that, at some distance from 
the primary oscillation, the amplitude of the total force under- 
goes a change of sign. If the absolute velocity of the electro- 
static force remains for the present unknown, there may yet 
be adduced definite reasons for believing that the electrostatic 
and electromagnetic forces possess different velocities. The 
first reason is that the total force does not vanish at any point 
along the base-line. Since the electrostatic force preponderates 
at small distances, and the electromagnetic force at greater 
distances, they must in some intermediate position be equal 
and opposite, and, inasmuch as they do not annul one another, 
they must reach this position at different times. 


122 FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS Vil 


The second reason is derived from the propagation of the 
force throughout the whole surrounding space, In a previous 
paper’ it has already been shown how the direction of the 
force at any point whatever can be determined. The dis- 
tribution of the force was there described, and it was remarked 
that there were four points in the horizontal plane, about 
1:2 metre before and behind the outer edges of our plates 4 and 
A’, at which no definite direction could be assigned to the 
force, but that the force here acts with about the same strength 
in all directions, The only apparent interpretation of this 
is that the electrostatic and electromagnetic components 
here meet one another at right angles, and are about equal 
in strength but differ notably in phase; thus they do not 
combine to produce a resultant rectilinear oscillation, but a 
resultant which during each oscillation passes through all 
points of the compass. 

The fact that different components of the total force 
possess different velocities is also of importance, inasmuch as 
it provides a proof (independent of those previously mentioned) 
that at least one of these components must be propagated with 
finite velocity. 


Conclusions 


Moré or less important improvements in the quantitative 
results of this first experiment may result from further experi- 
ments in the same direction; but the path which they must 
follow may be said to be already made, and we may now 
regard it as having been proved that the inductive action 
is propagated with finite velocity. Sundry conclusions follow 
from the results thus obtained, and to some of these I wish to 
draw attention. 

1. The most direct conclusion is the confirmation of 
Faraday’s view, according to which the electric forces are 
polarisations existing independently in space. For in the 
phenomena which we have investigated such forces persist in 
space even after the causes which have given rise to them 
have disappeared. Hence these forces are not simply parts or 
attributes of their causes, but they correspond to changed con- 


1 See V., p. 80. 


VIE FINITE VELOCITY OF ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIONS 123 


ditions of space. The mathematical character of these con- 
ditions justifies us then in denoting them as polarisations, 
whatever the nature of these polarisations may be. 

2. It is certainly remarkable that the proof of a finite 
rate of propagation should have been first brought forward in 
the case of a force which diminishes in inverse proportion to 
the distance, and not to the square of the distance. But it is 
worth while pointing out that this proof must also affect 
such forces as are inversely proportional to the square of the 
distance. For we know that the ponderomotive attraction 
between currents and their magnetic actions are connected 
by the principle of the conservation of energy with their 
inductive actions in the strictest way, the relation being 
apparently that of action and reaction. If this relation is not 
merely a deceptive semblance, it is not easy to understand 
how the one action can be propagated with a finite and the 
other with an infinite velocity. 

3. There are already many reasons for believing that the 
transversal waves of light are electromagnetic waves; a firm 
foundation for this hypothesis is furnished by showing the 
actual existence in free space of electromagnetic transversal 
waves which are propagated with a velocity akin to that of 
light. And a method presents itself by which this important 
view may finally be confirmed or disproved. For it now 
appears to be possible to study experimentally the properties 
of electromagnetic transversal waves, and to compare these 
with the properties of light waves. 

4. The hitherto undecided questions of electromagnetics 
which relate to unclosed currents should now be more easily 
attacked and solved. Some of these questions, indeed, are 
directly settled by the results which have already been 
obtained. In so far as electromagnetics only lacks certain 
constants, these results might even suffice to decide between 
the vatious conflicting theories, assuming that at least one of 
them is correct. 

Nevertheless, I'do not at present propose to go into these 
applications, for I wish first to await the outcome of further 
experiments which are evidently suggested in great number by 
our method. 


Vit 


ON ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR 
REFLECTION 


(Wiedemann’s Ann. 84, p. 610, 1888.) 


I HAVE recently endeavoured to prove by experiment that 
electromagnetic actions are propagated through air with finite 
velocity. The inferences upon which that proof rested appear 
to me to be perfectly valid; but they are deduced ina com- 
plicated manner from complicated facts, and perhaps for this 
reason will not quite carry conviction to any one who is not 
already prepossessed in favour of the views therein adopted. 
In this respect the demonstration there given may be fitly 
supplemented by a consideration of the phenomena now to 
be described, for these exhibit the propagation of induction 
through the air by wave-motion in a visible and almost 
tangible form. These new phenomena also admit of a direct 
measurement of the wave-length in air. The fact that the 
wave-lengths thus obtained by direct measurement only differ 
slightly from the previous indirect determinations (using the 
same apparatus), may be regarded as an indication that the 
earlier demonstration was in the main correct. 

In experimenting upon the action between a rectilinear 
oscillation and a secondary conductor I had often observed 
phenomena which seemed to point to a reflection of the 
induction action from the walls of the building. For example, 
feeble sparks frequently appeared when the secondary con- 
ductor was so situated that any direct action was quite 
impossible, as was evident from simple geometrical considera- 


1 See VII., p. 107. 


vit. ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION 125 


tions of symmetry; and this most: frequently occurred in the 
neighbourhood of solid walls. In especial, I continually 
encountered the following phenomenon :—In examining the 
sparks in the secondary conductor at great distances from the 
primary conductor, when the sparks were already exceedingly 
feeble, I observed that in most positions of the secondary 
conductor the sparks became appreciably stronger when I 
approached a solid wall, but again disappeared almost suddenly 
close to the wall. It seemed to me ‘that the simplest way of 
explaining this was to assume that the electromagnetic action, 
spreading outwards in the form of waves, was reflected from 
the walls, and that the reflected waves reinforced the advancing 
waves at certain distances, and weakened them at other 
distances, stationary waves in air being produced by the 
interference of the two systems. As I made the conditions 
more and more favourable for refiection the phenomenon 
appeared more and more distinct, and the explanation of it 
given above more probable. But without dwelling upon these 
preliminary trials I proceed at once to describe the principal 
experiments. 

The physics lecture-room in which these experiments were 
carried out is about 15 metres long, 14 metres broad, and 6 
metres high. Parallel to the two longer walls there are two 
rows of iron pillars, each of which rows behaves much like a 
solid wall towards the electromagnetic action, so that the parts 
of the room which lie outside these cannot be taken into con- 
sideration. Thus only the central space, 15 metres long, 8°5 
metres broad, and 6 metres high, remained for the purpose of 
experiment. From this space I had the hanging parts of the 
gas-pipes and the chandeliers removed, so that it contained 
nothing except wooden tables and benches which could not 
well be removed. No objectionable effects were to be feared 
from these, and none were observed. The front wall of the 
room, from which the reflection was to take place, was a mas- 
sive sandstone wall in which were two doorways, and a good 
many gas-pipes extended into it. In order to give the wall 
more of the nature of a conducting surface a sheet of zine 4 
metres high and 2 metres broad was fastened. on to it; this 
was connected by wires with the gas-pipes and with a neigh- 
boyring water-pipe, and especial care was taken that any 


126 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION vitr 


electricity that might accumulate at the upper and lower ends 
of the sheet should be able to flow away as freely as possible. 

The primary conductor was set up opposite the middle of 
this wall at a distance of 13 metres from it, and was there- 
fore 2 metres away from the opposite wall. It was the same 
conductor that had already been used in the experiments on 
the rate of propagation. The direction of the conducting wire 
was now vertical; hence the forces which have here to be 
considered oscillate up and down in a vertical direction. The 
middle point of the primary conductor was 2°5 metres above 
the level floor; the observations were also carried out at the 
same distance above the floor, a gangway for the observer 
being built up with tables and boards at a suitable height. 
We shall denote as the normal a straight line drawn from the 
centre of the primary conductor perpendicularly to the reflect- 
ing surface. Our experiments are restricted to the neighbour- 
hood of this normal; experiments at greater angles of incidence 
would be complicated by having to take into consideration the 
varying polarisation of the waves. Any vertical plane parallel 
to the normal will be called a plane of oscillation, and any 
plane perpendicular to the normal will be called a wave- 
plane. 

The secondary conductor was the circle of 35 em. 
radius, which had also been used before. It was mounted so 
as to revolve about,an axis passing through its centre and 
perpendicular to its plane. In the experiments the axis was 
horizontal ; it was mounted in a wooden frame, so that both 
circle and axis could be rotated about a vertical axis. For 
the most part it does well enough for the observer to hold the 
circle, mounted in an insulating wooden frame, in his hand, 
and then to bring it as may be most convenient into the 
various positions, But, inasmuch as the body of the observer 
always exercises a slight influence, the observations thus 
obtained must be controlled by others obtained from ‘greater 
distances. The sparks too are strong enough to be seen in 
the dark several metres off; but in a well-lit room practically 
nothing can be seen, even at close quarters, of the phenomena 
which are about to be described. 

After we have made these preparations the most striking 
phenomenon that we encounter is the following:—-We place 


vill ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND es REFLECTION 127 


the secondary circle with its centre on the normal and its 
plane in the plane of oscillation, and turn the spark-gap first 
towards the wall and then away from it. Generally the 
sparks differ greatly in the two positions. If the experiment 
is arranged at a distance of about 0°8 metre from the wall the 
sparks are much stronger when the spark-gap is turned 
towards the wall. The length of the sparks can be so regu- 
lated that a continuous stream of sparks passes over when the 
spark-gap is turned towards the wall, whereas no sparks what- 
ever pass over in the opposite position. If we repeat the 
experiment at a distance of 3 metres from the wall we find, 
on the contrary, a continuous stream of sparks when the 
spark-gap is turned away from the wall, whereas the sparks 
disappear when the spark-gap is turned towards the wall. If 
we proceed further to a distance of 5°5 metres, a fresh reversal 
has taken place; the sparks on the side towards the wall are 
stronger than the sparks on the opposite side. Finally, at a 
distance of 8 metres from the wall, we find that another 
reversal has been executed; the sparking is stronger on the 
side remote from the wall, but the difference is no longer 
so noticeable. Nor does any further reversal occur; for it is 
prevented by the preponderating strength of the direct action 
and by the complicated forces which exist in the neighbour- 
hood of the primary oscillation. Our figure (the scale in 
which indicates the distances from the wall) shows at L, ZZ, 
ITL,, IV., the secondary circle in those positions in which the 
sparks were most strongly developed. The alternating char- 
acter of the conditions of the space is clearly exhibited. 

At distances lying between those mentioned both sets of 
sparks under consideration were of equal strength, and in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the wall too the distinction 
between them diminishes. We may therefore denote these 
points—namely, the points 4, B, C, D in the figure—as being 
nodal points in a certain sense. Still we must not consider the 
distance between any one of these points and the next as being 
the half wave-length. For if all the electrical disturbances 
change their direction in passing through one of these points, 
then the phenomena in the secondary circle should repeat 
themselves without reversal; for in the spark-length there is 
nothing which corresponds to a change of direction in the 


128 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION vutt 


oscillation. We should rather conclude from these experi- 
ments that in passing through any one of these points one 
part of the action undergoes reversal, while another part does 
not. On the other hand, it is allowable to assume that double 
the distance between any two of the points corresponds to the 
half wave-length, so that these points each indicate the end of 
a quarter wave-length. And, indeed, on the basis of this 
assumption and of the fundamental view just expressed, we 
shall arrive at a complete explanation of the phenomenon. 

For let us suppose that a vertical wave of electric force 
proceeds towards the wall, is reflected with slightly diminished 
intensity, and so gives rise to stationary waves. If the wall 


ewe neo  eenen 


gm 


Fig. 26. 


were a perfect conductor a node would form at its very sur- 
face. For inside a conductor or at its boundary the electric 
force must always be vanishingly small. Now our wall 
cannot be regarded as a perfect conductor. For, in the first 
place, it is only metallic in part, and the part which is metallic 
is not very extensive. Hence at its surface the force will 
still have a certain value, and this in the sense .of the 
advancing wave. The node, which would be formed at the 
wall itself if it were perfectly conducting, must therefore lie 
really somewhat behind the surface of the wall, say at the 
point A in the figure. If double the distance A B, that is the 
distance 4 C, corresponds to the half wave-length, then the 
geometrical relations of the stationary wave are of the kind 


vir ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND |THEIR REFLECTION 129 


which are represented in the usual symbolic fashion by the 
continuous wave-line in the figure. The forces acting on both 
sides of the circle in the positions J, JZ, I/J, and JV are 
correctly represented for any given instant in magnitude and 
direction by the arrows at the sides. If, then, in the neigh- 
bourhood of a node the spark-gap is turned towards the node, 
we have in the circle a stronger force acting under favourable 
conditions against a weaker force, which acts under unfavour- 
able conditions. But if the spark-gap is turned away from 
the node, the stronger force now acts under unfavourable con- 
ditions against a weaker force, which in this case is acting 
under favourable conditions. And whether in this latter 
case the one preponderates or the other, the sparks must 
necessarily be weaker than in the former case. Thus the 
change of sign of our phenomenon every quarter wave-length 
is explained. 

Our explanation carries with it a means of further testing 
its correctness. If it is correct, then the change of sign at. 
the points Band D should occur in a manner quite different 
from the change of sign at C. At V, VI, and VII in the 
figure the circle and the acting forces in these positions are 
represented, and it is easily seen that if at B or D we transfer 
the spark-gap from the one position to the other by rotating 
the circle within itself, the oscillation changes its direction 
relatively to a fixed direction within the circle; during this 
rotation the sparks must therefore become zero either once or 
an uneven number of times. On the other hand, if the same 
operation is performed at C, the direction of the oscillation 
does not change; and therefore the sparks must either not 
disappear at all, or else they must disappear an even number 
of times. Now when we actually make the experiment, what 
we observe is this:—-At B the intensity of the sparks 
diminishes as soon as we remove the spark-gap from a, 
becomes zero at the highest point, and again increases to its 
original value when we come to @. Similarly at D. At C, 
on the other hand, the sparks persist without change during 
the rotation, or, if anything, are somewhat stronger at the 
highest and lowest points than at those which we have been 
considering. Furthermore, it strikes the observer that the 
change of sign ensues after a much smaller displacement at C 

K 


130 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION vit 


than at B and D, so that in this respect also there is a 
contrast between the change at C and that at Band D. 

The representation of the electric wave which we have 
thus sketched can be verified in yet another way, and a very 
direct one. Instead of placing the plane of our circle in the 
plane of oscillation, let us place it in the wave-plane; the 
electric force is now equally strong at all parts of the circle, 
and for similar positions of the sparks their intensity is simply 
proportional to this electric force. As might be expected, the 
sparks are now zero at the highest and lowest points of the 
circle at all distances, and are strongest at the points along 
the normal in a horizontal plane. Let us then bring the 
spark-gap into one of these latter positions, and move slowly 
away from the wall., This is what we observe :—Just at the 
conducting metallic surface there are no sparks, but they make 
their appearance at a very small distance from it; they 
increase rapidly, are comparatively strong at B, and then again 
diminish. At C again they are exceedingly feeble, but become 
stronger as we proceed further. They do not, however, again 
diminish, but continue to increase in strength, because we are 
now approaching the primary oscillation. If we were to 
illustrate the strength of the sparks along the interval 4 D by 
a curve carrying positive and negative signs, we should obtain 
almost exactly the curve which has ‘been sketched. And 
perhaps it would have been better to start from this experi- 
ment. But it is not really so striking as the first one de- 
scribed ; and furthermore, a periodic change of sign seems to be 
a clearer proof of wave-motion than a periodic waxing and 
waning. 

We are now quite certain that we have recognised nodes 
of the electric wave at A and C, and antinodes at B and JD. 
We might, however, in another sense call B and D nodes, for 
these points are nodes of a stationary wave of magnetic force, 
which, according to theory, accompanies the electric wave and 
is displaced a quarter wave-length relatively to it. This 
statement can be illustrated experimentally as follows :-—-We 
again place our circle in the plane of oscillation, but now 
bring the spark-gap to the highest point. In this position 
the electric force, if it were homogeneous over the whole 
extent of the secondary circle, could induce no sparks. It 


vir ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION 131 


only produces an effect in so far as its magnitude varies in 
various parts of the circle, and its integral taken around the 
circle is not zero. This integral is proportional to the number 
of lines of magnetic force which flow backwards and forwards 
through the circle. In this sense, we may say that in this 
position, the sparks measure the magnetic force, which is 
perpendicular to the plane of the circle? But now we find 
that in this position near the wall there is vigorous sparking 
which rapidly diminishes, disappears at B, increases again up to 
C, then again decreases to a marked minimum at D, after which 
it continuously increases as we approach the primary oscilla- 
tion. Representing the strength of these sparks as ordinates 
with positive and negative signs, we obtain approximately the 
dotted line of our figure, which thus represents correctly the 
magnetic wave. The phenomenon which we first described 
can also be explained as resulting from the co-operation of the 
electric and the magnetic force. The former changes sign at 
the points 4 and C, the latter at the points B and D; thus 
one part of the action changes sign at each of these points 
while the other retains its sign; hence the resulting action 
(as the product) changes sign at each of the points. Clearly 
this explanation only differs in mode of expression, and not 
in meaning, from the one first given. 

Hitherto we have only considered the phenomena in some 
of the more important positions of the circle. The number of 
transitions between these is in a threefold sense infinite. We 
shall therefore content ourselves with describing the transitions 
for the case in which the plane of the circle lies in the plane 
of oscillation. Near the wall the sparking is greatest on the 
side towards the wall, and least on the opposite side; on 
rotating the circle within itself the sparking changes from the 
one value to the other, attaining only intermediate values ; 
there are no zero-points in the circle. As we move away from 
the wadl the sparking on the side remote from it gradually 
diminishes and becomes zero when the centre of the circle is 
1:08 metre distant from the wall; this distance can be 
ascertained within a few centimetres. As we proceed further, 
the sparks on the side remote from the wall reappear and at 
first are still weaker than on the side towards the wall; but 


1 [See Note 18 at end of book.] 


132 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION vit 


the strength of the sparks does not change from the one value to 
the other simply by passing through intermediate values; on 
rotating the circle within itself the sparking becomes zero once 
in the upper and once in the lower half of the circle. The 
two zero-points develop out of the one which was first formed 
and separate gradually more from each other, until at B they 
lie at the highest and lowest points of the circle. By this 
indication the point B can be determined with fair accuracy, 
but more exactly still by a further observation of the zero- 
points. On proceeding further, these zero-points slide over 
towards the side of the circle facing the wall, approach each 
other, and again coincide in a single zero-point at a certain 
distance from the wall which can be sharply determined. In 
this case the distance of the centre from the wall is 2°35 
metres. The point B must lie exactly between this and the 
analogous point first observed, ze. at a distance of 1:72 metres 
from the wall; this agrees within a few centimetres'with the 
direct observation, If we proceed further towards C’ the 
sparks at all points of the circle tend to become of equal 
strength, and do become so at C. Beyond C the same per- 
formance begins over again. In this region there are no zero- 
points in the circle. In spite of this the position of the point 
C can be determined with fair accuracy, inasmuch as in 
its neighbourhood the phenomena first described alter very 
rapidly. In my experiments C was 4:10 to 4:15 metres, or 
say 4:12 metres from the wall. The point D could not be 
accurately determined for the phenomena had here become 
very feeble; only this much could be asserted, that its distance 
from the wall was between 6 and 7°5 metres. For an 
explanation of the details I may refer to a previous paper.’ 
The mathematical developments therein indicated admit of 
being carried much further; but the experiments seem to be 
sufficiently intelligible without calculation. 

According to our measurement, the distance between B 
and C is 2-4 metres. If we assume this to be the correct 
value, the nodal point 4 lies 0°68 metres behind the wall, the 
point D 6°52 metres in front of it, which agrees sufficiently 
well with the experiments. According to this, the half wave- 
length is 4°8 metres. By an indirect method I had obtained 


1 See V., p. 80. 


vir ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND [HEIR REFLECTION 133 


4°5 metres as the wave-length for the same’ apparatus. The 
difference is not so great as to prevent us from regarding the 
new measurement as confirming the earlier one If in our 
earlier measurements we substitute 2°9 for 2°8 metres as the 
wave-length in the wire, and 7:1 for 7°5 as the length of the 
coincidence (which will be found to agree with the observa- 
tions), we can deduce the new value from the earlier observa- 
tions. Perhaps, indeed, a mean value would be nearest to the 
truth; and I scarcely think it likely that the nodal point A 
should lie nearly 0°7 metre behind the metallic wall. 
Assuming a mean value for the wave-length, and a velocity of 
propagation equal to that of light, we get for the period of 
oscillation of our apparatus about 1°55 hundred-millionths of a 
second, instead of the 1°4 hundred-millionths obtained by 
calculation. 

I have repeated the experiments with some alterations. 
Altering’ the distance of the primary oscillation from the 
reflecting wall did not result in much fresh information. If 
this distance could have been considerably extended, we might 
certainly have expected a distinct formation of a second and 
third wave-length ; but there was not sufficient space for such. 
extension. When the distance was diminished the phenomena 
simply became less interesting, for towards the primary 
oscillation they were more and more indistinct, and in the 
opposite direction the reversal of sign became lost. The 
experiments with an oscillation of different period are better 
worth describing, for they show that the points which have 
attracted our attention are determined, not by the form of the 
wall or of the room, but only by the dimensions of the primary 
and of the secondary oscillation. I, therefore, used for some 
experiments a secondary circle of 17°5 cm. radius, and a 
primary oscillation of the same periodic time as this circle. 
The primary oscillator was placed at a distance of 8-9 metres 
from the wall. It is, however, difficult to work with apparatus 
of such small dimensions. Not only are the sparks exceedingly 
minute but the phenomena of resonance, etc., are very feebly 
developed. I suspect that oscillations of such rapidity are 
very rapidly damped. Thus it was not possible here to make 
out as much detail as in the case of the larger circle; but the 


1 [See Note 19 at end of book.] 


134 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION vu 


main features, such as those first described above, could be 
plainly recognised. Near the wall, at distances of 2°5 
and 4°5 metres from it, the stronger sparks were on the side 
next the wall; at the intermediate positions (15 and 3°5 
metres from the wall) the stronger sparks were on the side 
next the primary oscillation. A change of sign occurred about 
every metre; accordingly the half wave-length was here only 
2 metres, and the oscillation was more than twice as rapid as 
that first used. 

Finally, I may remark that as far as the above experiments 
are concerned, no great preparations are essential if one is 
content with more or less complete indications of the 
phenomena. After some practice one can find indications of 
reflection at any wall. Indeed, the action of the reflected 
waves can be quite well recognised between any one of the 
iron pillars above referred to and the primary oscillation ; and 
similarly on the opposite side the electromagnetic shadow can 
be perceived. 

Let us now extend our experiments in a new direction. 
Hitherto the secondary conductor has been placed between the 
reflecting wall and the' primary oscillation—that is to say, in a 
space in which the direct and reflected waves travel in opposite 
directions and by interference produce stationary waves. If, on 
the contrary, we place the primary oscillation between the wall 
and the secondary conductor, the latter is situated in a space 
in which the direct and reflected waves travel in the same 
direction. Hence these must combine to produce a progressive 
wave, the intensity of which will, however, depend upon the 
difference of phase between the two interfering waves. If the 
phenomena are to be at all striking, the two waves must be of 
similar intensity ; hence the distance of the primary oscillation 
from the wall must not be large compared with the dimensions 
of the latter, and must be small compared with the distance from 
the secondary oscillation. In order to test whether the cor- 
responding phenomena could be observed under the working 
conditions, I arranged an experiment as follows:—The secondary 
circle was now set up ata distance of 14 metres from the reflect- 
ing wall, and therefore 1 metre away from the opposite wall. Its 
plane was parallel to what we have called the plane of oscilla- 
tion, and its spark-gap was turned towards the nearer wall so 


vir ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR oe REFLECTION 135 


that the conditions were specially favourable for the appear- 
ance of sparks in it. The primary conductor was set up 
parallel to its original position in front of the conducting wall, 
and at first at a very short distance—about 30 cm.—from it. 
The sparks in the secondary circle were extremely feeble. The 
spark-gap was now adjusted so that no sparks whatever passed 
over. The primary conductor was next shifted step by step 
away from the wall. Single sparks soon appeared in the 
secondary conductor, and these ran into an unbroken stream of 
sparks when the primary conductor arrived at a distance of 
15-2 metres from the wall—that is to say, at the point B. 
This might be referred to the decrease in the distance between 
the two conductors. But when I now removed the primary 
conductor further away from the wall, and therefore nearer to 
the secondary, the sparks again diminished and disappeared when 
the primary arrived at C. On proceeding still further the 
sparks began to increase and did so now continuously. No 
exact measurement of the wave-length can be deduced from 
these experiments, but from what has been stated above it will 
be seen that the wave-lengths already obtained are in accord- 
ance with the phenomena. The experiments could be very, 
well carried out with the smaller apparatus. The primary 
conductor was set up at a distance of 1 metre from the wall, and 
the corresponding secondary conductor 9 metres from the wall. 
The sparks in the latter were certainly small, but could be 
quite well observed. They disappeared when the primary 
conductor was moved out of its position, whether it was moved 
towards the wall or towards the secondary conductor. The 
sparks only reappeared when the distance from the wall was 
increased to 3 metres, and from there on they did not again dis- 
appear on approaching nearer to the secondary conductor. It is 
worthy of notice that at the same distance of 2 metres the pres- 
ence of the wall proved to be of assistance in propagating the 
induction in the case of the slower oscillation, whereas it was a 
hindrance in the case of the more rapid one. This shows 
plainly that the position of the points to which we have drawn 
attention is determined by the dimensions of the oscillator, and 
not by those of the wall or room. 

In acoustics there is an experiment analogous to those 
last described, in which it is shown that when a tuning-fork is 


a 


136 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN AIR AND THEIR REFLECTION viit 


brought near a wall the sound is strengthened at certain dis- 
tances and weakened at others. The analogous experiment in 
optics is Lloyd’s form of Fresnel’s mirror-experiment.1 In 
optics and acoustics these experiments count as arguments in 
favour of the wave-nature of light and sound; and so the 
phenomena here described may be regarded as arguments in 
favour of the propagation of the inductive action of an electric 
oscillation by wave-motion. 

I have described the present set of experiments, as also 
the first set on the propagation of induction, without paying 
special regard to any particular theory ; and, indeed, the demon- 
strative power of the experiments is independent of any 
particular theory. Nevertheless, it is clear that the experi- 
ments amount to so many reasons in favour of that theory of 
electromagnetic phenomena which was first developed by 
Maxwell from Faraday’s views. It also appears to me that 
the hypothesis as to the nature of light which is connected 
with that theory now forces itself upon the mind with still 
stronger reason than heretofore. Certainly it is a fascinating 
idea that the processes in air which we have been investigating 


_ represent to us on a million-fold larger scale the same pro- 


cesses which go on in the neighbourhood of a Fresnel mirror 
or between the glass plates used for exhibiting Newton’s rings. 

That Maxwell’s theory, in spite of all internal evidence of 
probability, cannot dispense with such confirmation as it has 
already received, and may yet receive, is proved—if indeed 
proof be needed—by .the fact that electric action is not pro- 
pagated along wires of good conductivity with approximately 
the same velocity as through air. Hitherto it has been inferred 
from all theories, Maxwell’s included, that the velocity along 
wires should be the same as that of light. I hope in time to 
be able to investigate and report upon the causes of this 
conflict between theory and experiment.’ 


1 [See Note 20 at end of book. ] 2 [See Note 21 at end of book. 


IX 


THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS, TREATED 
ACCORDING TO MAXWELL’S THEORY 


(Wiedemann’s Ann. 36, p. 1, 1889.) 


THE results of the experiments on rapid electric oscillations 
which I have carried out appear to me to confer upon Max- 
well’s theory a position of superiority to all others. Never-. 
theless, I based my first interpretation of these experiments 
upon the older views, seeking partly to explain the phenomena 
as resulting from the co-operation of electrostatic and electro- 
magnetic forces. To Maxwell’s theory in its pure development 
such a distinction is foreign. Hence I now wish to show that 
the phenomena can be explained in terms of Maxwell’s theory 
without introducing this distinction. Should this attempt 
succeed, it will at the same time settle any question as to a 
separate propagation of electrostatic force, which indeed. is 
meaningless in Maxwell’s theory. : 

Apart from this special aim, a closer insight into the play 
of the forces which accompany a rectilinear oscillation is not 
without interest. 


The Formule 


In*what follows we are almost solely concerned with the 
forces in free ether. In this let X, Y, Z be the components of 
the electric force along the co-ordinates of x, y,z;' L, M, N, 


1 Suppose that you‘are standing at the origin of the system of co-ordinates 
on the zy-plane. Further assume that the direction of positive x is straight in 
front, of positive z upwards, and of positive y to the right hand. Unless these 
conventions were made,-the signs of the electric and magnetic forces in the sub- 
sequent equations would not have their usual meanings. 


138 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS 1x 


the corresponding components of the magnetic force, both being 
measured in Gauss units;! and let ¢ denote the time and A 
the reciprocal of the velocity of light. Then, according to 
Maxwell, the time-rate of change of the forces is dependent ‘ 
upon their distribution in space as indicated by the following 
equations :— 


a. _ ae _ av a@X_@M_ aN’ 
dt dy dz’ dt dz dy’ 
aM dX dZ dy aN dh 
ae as ae “SO ae ae oe 
dN d¥ aX dZ du dM 
dt. de dy dt dy dx 


Originally, and therefore always, the following conditions 
must be satisfied :— 


dL dM dN dX dY  aZ 
et ag ae and =-+ Lae 


ata 0. 


The electric energy contained in a volume-element 7 of 


1 
the ether is equal to aa | (X? + Y?+ Z)dr; the magnetic energy 


1 
is equal to 8a. | (L?+ M?+N*)dr, the integration extending 


through the volume 7. The total energy is the sum of both 
these portions. 

These statements form, as far as the ether is concerned, 
the essential parts of Maxwell’s theory. Maxwell arrived at 
them by starting with the idea of action-at-a-distance and 
attributing to the ether the properties of a highly polarisable 
dielectric medium. We can also arrive at them in other 
ways. But in no way cana direct proof of these equations be 
deduced from experience. It appears most logical, therefore, 
to regard them independently of the way in which they have 
been arrived at, to consider them as hypothetical assumptions, 
and to let their probability depend upon the very large 
number of natural laws which they embrace. If we take up 


1H. v. Helmholtz, Wied. Ann. 17, p. 48, 1882. 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO aus THEORY 139 


this point of view we can dispense with 4 number of auxiliary 
ideas which render the understanding of Maxwell’s theory 
more difficult, partly for no other reason than that they really 
’ possess no meaning,’ if we finally exclude the notion of direct 
action-at-a-distance. ‘ 

Multiply equations (1) by L, M, N, and equations (2) by 
X, Y, Z; add the equations together and integrate over a volume 
of which dr is the volume-element and dw the surface-element. 
We thus get— 


ad( 1 1 
pe can 2 2 2 ae 2 2 2 
“| Pale +Y +2 )irt fC +M?+N yar 
1 
- ial { (NY — MZ) cos n,2+(LZ—NX) cos ny 
+ (MX — LY) cos nz | do, 


where nz ny nz denote the angles which the normals from 
dw make with the axis. 

This equation shows that the amount by which the energy 
of the space has increased can be regarded as having entered 
through the elements of the surface. The amount which enters 
through each element of the surface is equal to the product of 
the components of the electric and magnetic forces resolved 
along the surface, multiplied by the sine of the angle which 
they form with each other, and divided by 47A. It is well 
known that upon this result Dr. Poynting has based a, highly 
remarkable theory on the transfer of energy in the electro- 
magnetic field.” 

With regard to the solution of the equations we restrict 
ourselves to the special but important case in which the dis- 
tribution of the electric force is symmetrical about the z-axis, 
in such a way that this force at every point lies in the 
meridian plane passing through the axis of z and only 
depends upon the z-co-ordinate of the point and its distance 
p= ./z'+y* from.the z-axis. Let R denote the component 
of the electric force in the direction of p, namely Xx/p + Yy/p; 
and further let P denote the component of the magnetic force 


2 As an example I would mention the idea of a dielectric-constant of the ether. 
2 J. H. Poynting, Phil. Trans., 1884, II. p. 343. 


rn 


140 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS ' IX 


perpendicular to the meridian plane, namely Ly/p—Mz/p. 
We then assert that if IT is any function whatever of p, z, ¢, 
which satisfies the equation— 


A’ /dé? = ATI, 
and if we put Q =pdII/dp, then the system 


pZ=dQ/dp, pP = AdQ/dt, 
pR= —dQ/dz, N=0 


is a possible solution of our equations. 
In order to prove this assertion, we observe that we have— 


X= dp | @il is pe 2 air 
dx dx dz dy dy dt 
dp ait d il 
™ dy dy dz dx Ag at’ 
ld;sdihy @i ait WN 
= — J = —— — os = 0. 
p dp (p dp ) dx? - dy’ 


We have only to substitute these expressions in the 
equations (1), (2) and (3) to find equations (2) and (3) identi- 
cally satisfied, and also equations (1) if we have regard to the 
differential equation for IT. 

It may also be mentioned that conversely, neglecting 
certain limitations of no practical importance, every possible 
distribution of electric force which is symmetrical about the z- 
axis can be represented in the above form; but for the purpose 
of what follows it is not necessary to accept this statement. 

The function Q is of importance to us. For the lines in 
which the surface of revolution Q=const. cuts its meridian 
planes are the lines of electric force; if we construct these 
for every meridian plane at any instant we get a clear 
representation of the distribution°of the force. If we cut 
the cup-shaped space lying between the surfaces Q and Q + dQ 
in various places by surfaces of rotation around the z-axis, then 
for all such cross-sections the product of electric force and cross- 
section, which Maxwell calls the induction across the section, 
is the same. If we arrange the system of surfaces Q = const. 
so that in passing from one to another Q increases by the 
same amount dQ, then the same statement holds good if we 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO MAXWEIL’S THEORY 141 


compare amongst themselves the cross-séctions of the various 
spaces thus formed. In the plane diagram formed by the 
intersection of the meridian planes with the equidistant surfaces 
Q =const., the electric force is only inversely proportional to 
the perpendicular distance between two of the lines Q = const. 
when the points compared lie at the same distance from the 
z-axis; in general, the rule is that the force is inversely pro- 
portional to the product of this distance, and of the co-ordinate 
p of the point under consideration. 

In what follows we shall introduce along with p and z the 
polar co-ordinates r and 9, which are connected with the 
former by the relations p=, sin 0, z=rcos 0; r then denotes 
the distance from the origin of our system of co-ordinates. 


The Forces around a Rectilinear Oscillation 


Let E denote a quantity of electricity, / a length, m= /r 
the reciprocal of a length, and n = 7/T the reciprocal of a time. 
Let us put 

=F sin (mr — mt) 
r 


This value satisfies the equation Ad*II/dé= AII, if we 
stipulate that m/n=T/X=A, and hence that »/T shall be 
equal to the velocity of light. And it must be noticed that 
the equation referred to is satisfied everywhere, except at the 
origin of our system of co-ordinates. : 

In order to find out what electrical processes at this point 
correspond to the distribution of force specified by IT, let us 
investigate ‘its immediate neighbourhood. Thus let r be 
vanishingly small compared with A, and mr negligible compared 
with nt. Then II becomes’ equal to —E/sin nt/r. Now 


since 
a i & (=) oe 2/1 
da® * dy? r d2\ x)? 
we have 


X= —-@M/dedz, Y= —@U€/dyde, Z= —@M/dedz. 


1 [See Note 22 at end of book.] 


e 


142 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS Ix 


Thus the electric forces appear here as the derivatives of a 


potential— 
g= UT Et sin nt 5(2), 
dz dz\r 


and this corresponds to an electrical double-point, whose axis 
coincides with the z-axis,and whose moment oscillates between 
the extreme values + E/ and —E/ with the pertod T. Hence 
our distribution of force represents the action of a rectilinear 
oscillation which has the very small length 7, and on whose 
poles at the maximum the quantities of electricity + E and—E 
become free. The magnetic force perpendicular to the direction 
of the oscillation and in its immediate neighbourhood comes 
out as— : 
P= AEIn cos nt sin 6/r*. 


According to the Biot-Savart law this.is the force of a 
current-element of length J lying in the direction of the axis 
of z, and, whose intensity, in magnetic measure, oscillates 
between the extreme values +7AE/T and —AE/T. In 
fact, the motion of the quantity of electricity E determines a 
current of that magnitude. 

From II we get— 


Q = Elm {cos (mr — nt) — —— \ sin26, 
Tr 


and from this the forces Z, R, P follow by differentiation. 
Now it is true that the formule in general turn out to be too 
complicated to allow of a direct survey of the distribution of 
the forces. But:in some special cases, which we will now 
indicate, the results are comparatively simple— 

(1) We have already considered the immediate neighbour- 
hood of the oscillation. 

(2) In the z-axis, 2.c. in the direction of the oscillation, we 
have dp =rd@, dz=dr, 0=0; so that here 


R=0, P=0, 
_ 2Elm | cos (ark nd) = 2 (mr — nt) \ . 
r mr é 


The electric force acts always in the direction of the 
oscillation ; at small distances it diminishes as the inverse 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO cats THEORY 143 


cube, at greater distances as the inverse square, of the 
distance. 

(3) In the wy-plane, i.e. when z= 0, we have dz= —rdé, 
dp =dr, 9=90°; and therefore— 


cos (mr— ay 
mr ‘ 


er {sin (nr — nt) + 


cos (mr — nt) 4 sin (mr — nt) 
mr my? 


Z= . | -sin (mr — nt) — 


In the equatorial plane through the oscillation the electric 
force is parallel to the oscillation, and its amplitude is 
EL./1 — mr? + mrt |r, The force diminishes continuously 
with increasing distance, at first rapidly as the inverse cube, 
but afterwards only very slowly and inversely as the distance 
itself. At greater distances the action of the oscillation can 
only be observed in the equatorial plane, and not along the 
axis. 

(4) At very great distances we may neglect higher powers 
of 1/r as compared with lower ones. Thus we have at such 
distances— 

Q= Elm cos (mr — nt) sin?6, 


from which we deduce— 


P=A. Elma sin (mr — nt) sinO/r, 
Z= — Elm? sin (mr — nt) sin’6/r, 
R= = Elm? sin (mr — nt) sin@ cos6/r. 


Whence it follows that Z cos 0+R sin 0=0. Hence at 
great distances the force is everywhere perpendicular to the 
radius vector from the origin of the force; the propagation 
takes place in the form of a pure transversal wave. The 
magnitude of the force is Elm? sin (mr—nt)sinO/r. At a 
constanj distance from the zero-point it decreases towards the 
axis, being proportional to the distance from the latter. 

In order now .to find the distribution of force in the 
remaining parts of space we make use of graphie representa- 
tion, drawing for definite times the lines of electric force, ie. 
the curves Q=const., for equidistant values of Q. Since Q 
appears as the product of two factors, of which the one 


144 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS Ix 


depends only upon r, and the other only upon @, the con- 
struction of these curves presents no great difficulty. We 


split up each value of Q, for which we wish to draw the 
curve, in various ways into two factors; we determine the 
angle @ for which sin? is equal to the one factor and, by 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO ia THEORY 145 


means of an auxiliary curve, the value of r for which the 
function of 7 contained in Q is equal to the other factor; in 


Fig. 29. 


this way we find as many points on the curve as we please. 

On setting about the construction of these curves one perceives 

many small artifices which it would be tedious to exhibit here. 
: L 


146 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS 1x 


We shall coritent ourselves with considering the results of the 
construction as shown in Figs. 27-30. These figures exhibit 
the distribution of force at the times ¢=0, 1T, 4T, 3T, 
or by a suitable reversal of the arrows for all subsequent 
times which are whole multiples of 1T. At the origin is 
shown, in its correct position and approximately to cor- 
rect scale, the arrangement which was used in our earlier 
experiments for exciting the oscillations. The lines of 
force are not continued right up to this picture, for our 
formule assume that the oscillator is infinitely short, and 
therefore become inadequate in the neighbourhood of the finite 
oscillator. 

Let us begin our explanation of the diagrams with Fig. 27. 
Here ¢=0; the current is at its maximum strength, but the 


' poles of the rectilinear oscillator are not charged with elec- 


tricity—no lines of force converge towards them. But from 
the time ¢= 0 onwards, such lines of force begin to shoot out 
from the poles; they are comprised within a sphere repre- 
sented by the value Q=0. In Fig. 27, indeed, this sphere is 
still vanishingly small, but it rapidly enlarges, and by the 
time ¢=4T (Fig. 28) it already fills the space R,. The 
distribution of the lines of force within the sphere is nearly of 
the same kind as that corresponding to a static electric charge 
upon the poles. The velocity with which the spherical surface 
Q = 0 spreads out from the origin is at first much greater than 
1/A; in fact, for the time {T this latter velocity would only 
correspond to the value of 4A given in the figure. At an 
infinitesimal distance from the origin the velocity of propagation 
is even infinite. This is the phenomenon which, according to 
the old mode of expression, is represented by the statement that 
upon the electromagnetic action which travels with the velocity 
1/A, there is superposed an electrostatic force travelling with 
infinite velocity. In the sense of our theory we more correctly 
represent the phenomenon by saying that fundamentally the 
waves which are being developed do not owe their formation 
solely to processes at the origin, but arise out of the conditions 
of the whole surrounding space, which latter, according to our 
theory, is the true seat of the energy. However this may be, 
the surface Q=0 spreads out further with a velocity which 
gradually sinks to 1/A, and by the time ¢=4T (Fig. 29) fills 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO MAXWELL’S THEORY 147 


the space #,. At this time the electrostatic charge of the 
poles is at its greatest development; the number of lines of 
force which converge towards. the poles is a maximum. As 
time progresses further no fresh lines of force proceed from the 
poles, but the existing ones rather begin to retreat towards the 
oscillating conductor, to disappear there as lines of electric 
force, but converting their energy into magnetic energy. Here 
there arises a peculiar action which can plainly be recognised, 
at any rate in its beginnings, in Fig. 30 (¢=3T). The lines 
of force which have withdrawn furthest from the origin become 
laterally inflected by reason of their tendency to contract 
together ; as this inflection contracts nearer and nearer towards 
the z-axis, a portion of each of the outer lines of force detaches 
itself as a self-closed line of force which advances indepen- 
dently into space, while the remainder of the lines of force sink 
back into the oscillating conductor. 

The number of receding lines of force is just as great as 
the number which proceeded outwards, but their energy is 
necessarily diminished by the energy of the parts detached. 
This loss of energy corresponds to the radiation into space. 
In consequence of this the oscillation would of necessity soon, 
come to rest unless impressed forces restored the lost energy 
at the origin. In treating the oscillation as undamped, we 
have tacitly assumed the presence of such forces. In Fig. 27 
—to which we now return for the time ¢=T, conceiving the 
arrows to be reversed—the detached portions of the lines of 
force fill the spherical space &,, while the lines of force pro- 
ceeding from the poles have completely disappeared. But new 
lines of force burst out from the poles and crowd together the 
lines whose development we have followed into the space #, 
(Fig. 28). It is not necessary to explain further how these 
lines of force make their way to the spaces FR, (Fig. 29), R, 
(Fig. 30), R, (Fig. 27). They run more and more into a pure 
transveyse wave-motion, and as such lose themselves in the 
distance. The best way of picturing the play of the forces 
would be by making drawings for still shorter intervals of 
time and attaching these to a stroboscopic disk. 

A closer examination of the diagrams shows that at points 
which do not lie either on the z-axis or.in the xy-plane the 
direction of the force changes from instant to instant. Thus, 


148 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS 1X 


if we represent the force at such a point in the usual manner 
by a line drawn from the point, the end of this line will not 
simply move backwards and forwards along a straight line 
during an oscillation, but will describe an ellipse. In order to 
find out whether there are any points at which this ellipse 
approximates to a circle, and in which, therefore, the force turns 
successively through all points of the compass without any 
appreciable change of magnitude, we superpose two of the 
diagrams which correspond to times differing by 4T from one 
another, eg. Figs. 27 and 29, or 28 and 30. At such points 
as we are trying to find, the lines of the one system must 
clearly cut those of the second system at right angles, and the 
distances between the lines of the one system must be equal 
to those of the second. The small quadrilaterals formed by 
the intersection of both systems must therefore be squares at 
the points sought. Now, in fact, regions of this kind can be 
observed ; in Figs. 27 and 28 they are indicated by circular 
arrows, the directions of which at the same time give the 
direction of rotation of the force. For further explanation 
dotted lines are introduced which belong to the system of 
dines in Figs. 29 and 30. Furthermore, we find that the 
behaviour here sketched is exhibited by the force not only at 
the points referred to, but also in the whole strip-shaped 
tract which, spreading out from these points, forms the neigh- 
bourhood of the z-axis. Yet the force diminishes in magnitude 
so rapidly in this direction that its peculiar behaviour only 
attracts attention at the points mentioned. 

In an imperfect series of observations which are not 
guided by theory, the force-system here described, and 
required by theory, may well exhibit itself in the manner 
described in an earlier paper. The observations referred 
to do not by any means enable us to recognise all the com- 
plicated details, but they show correctly the main features 
of the distribution. According to both observation and 
theory the distribution of the force in the neighbourhood 
of the oscillator is similar to the electrostatic distribution. 
According to both observation and theory the force spreads 
out chiefly in the equatorial plane and diminishes in that 
plane at first rapidly, then slowly, without becoming zero 


1 See V., p. 90. 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO aes THEORY 149 


at any intermediate distance. According to both observa- 
tion and theory the force in the equatorial plane, along 
the axis, and at great distances, is constant in direction and 
variable in magnitude; whereas, at intermediate points, its 
direction varies greatly and its magnitude but little. The 
only want of accord between theory and the observations 
referred to is in this—that, according to the former, the force 
at great distances should always be perpendicular to the radius 
vector from the origin, whereas, according to the latter, it 
appeared to be parallel to the oscillation. These two come 
to the same thing for the neighbourhood of the equatorial 
plane, where the forces are strongest, but not for directions 
lying between the equatorial plane and the axis. I believe 
that the error is on the side of the observations. In 
the experiments referred to the oscillator was parallel to 
the two main walls of the room used; and the components 
of the force parallel to the oscillator might thereby be 
strengthened as compared with the components normal to . 
the oscillator. 

I have therefore repeated the experiments, making various 
alterations in the position of the primary oscillator, and found® 
that in certain positions the results were in accordance with 
theory. Nevertheless, the results were not free from ambiguity, 
for at great distances and in places where the force was feeble, 
the disturbances due to the environment of the space at my 
disposal were so considerable that I could not arrive at a 
trustworthy decision. 

While the oscillator is at work the energy oscillates in and 
out through the spherical surfaces surrounding the origin. But 
the energy which goes out during each period of oscillation 
through every surface is greater than that which returns, and 
is greater by the same amount for all the surfaces. This 
excess represents the loss of energy due to radiation during 
each period of oscillation. We can easily calculate it fora 
spherical surface, whose radius r is so great that we may use 
the simplified formule. Thus the energy which goes out in 
the element of time dé through a spherical zone lying between 
6 and 6+ d@ is 


" dt. 2arr sin 0. rd@.(Z sin 0—R cos 6) P.1/40rA. 


o 


150 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS 1x 


If we here substitute for Z, P, R, the values corresponding 
to large values of r and integrate with respect to @ from 0 to 7, 
and with respect to ¢ from 0 to T, we get for the energy which 
goes out through the whole sphere during a half-oscillation 

LEP? ment = *El?/3n2. 

Let us now try to deduce from this an approximate 
estimate of the quantities actually involved in our experi- 
ments. In these we charged two spheres of 15 cm. radius in 
opposite senses up to a sparking distance of about 1 em. If 
we estimate the difference of potential between the two spheres 
as 120 O.GS. electrostatic units (gm.4 cm? sec.—'), then each 
sphere was charged to a potential of + 60 C.G.S. units, and 
therefore its charge was E= 15x 60=900 COGS. units 
(gm.4 cm.! sec.), Hence the whole stock of energy which the 
oscillator possessed at the start amounted to 2 x 4x 900 x 60 
= 54,000 ergs, or about the energy which a gramme-weight 
would acquire in falling through 55 cm. The length / of the 
oscillator was about 100 cm., and the wave-length about 
480 cm. Hence it follows that the loss of energy in the half- 
period of oscillation was about 2400 ergs.’ It is therefore 
evident that after eleven half-oscillations one-half of the energy 
will have been expended in radiation. The rapid damping of 
the oscillations, indicated by our experiments, was therefore neces- 
sarily determined by the radiation, and would stil] occur even if 
the resistance of the conductor and of the spark becamenegligible. 

To furnish energy amounting to 2400 ergs in 1°5 hundred- 
millionths of a second is equivalent to working at the rate of 
22 horse-power. The primary oscillator must be supplied with 
energy at fully this rate if its oscillations are to be kept up 
continuously and with constant intensity in spite of the radia- 
tion. During the first few oscillations the intensity of the 
radiation at a distance of about 12 metres from the primary 
conductor corresponds to the intensity of the sun’s radiation at 
the surface of the earth. 


The Interference- Experiments 


In order to ascertain the velocity of propagation of the 
electric force in the equatorial plane, we caused it to interfere 


1 [See Note 28 at end of book.] 


Ix TREATED ACCORDING TO MAXWELL'S THEORY 151 


with the action of an electric wave proceeding ‘with constant 
velocity along a wire.’ It appeared that the resulting inter- 
ferences did not succeed each other at equal distances, but 
that the changes were more rapid in the neighbourhood of the 
oscillation than at greater distances. This behaviour was 
explained by the supposition that the total force might be 
split up into two parts, of which the one, the electromagnetic, 
was propagated with the velocity of light, while the other, 
the electrostatic, was propagated with a greater, and perhaps 
infinite velocity. But now, according to our theory, the force 
under consideration in the equatorial plane is— 


Z=Eim { sin (mr—nt) cos (mr—nt) , sin (mr— = 


mr mr? mr 


and this expression can in no way be split up into two simple 
waves travelling with differenti velocities. Hence if our present 
theory is correct, the earlier explanation can only serve as an 
approximation to the truth. Let us now investigate whether 
the present theory leads to any explanation of the phenomena. 

To begin with, we can write Z=B sin (n¢ — 6,), where the 
amplitude of the force B=El,/1—mr?+ mért/r?, and the 
phase 6, of the force is determined by the equation— 


sin mr/mr + cos mr/m*r?—sin mr/mér? 


tan’ $6.22 
1 cos ner |mr — sin mr | mr? — cos omer [m3r®” 


which, after transformation, gives 


mr 
5, = mr — tan Toque 

In Fig. 31 the quantity 6, is represented as a function of 
mr by the curve §. The length a 6 in the figure corresponds 
to the value of a, both for abscisse and ordinates. If we 
regard 7, instead of mr, as the variable abscissa, the length a 6 
in the abscisse corresponds to the half wave-length. For the 
purpose of referring directly to the experiments which we wish 
to discuss, there is placed beneath the diagram a further 
division of the axis of abscisse into metres. According to the 
results obtained by direct experiment ? » is put = 4°8 metres, and 


1 See VIL, p. 107. 2 See VIIL., p. 124. 


152 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS Ix 


from this the length of the metre (or scale of divisions) is 
determined; but the first mark of the divided scale is not at 
the oscillator, but is placed at a distance of 0°45 metre beyond 
the latter. In this way the divisions represent the divisions 


e 


, 
7 
oy 
H 
’ 
! 
‘ 
‘ 
' 
' 
t 
’ 
’ 
‘ 
' 
’ 
' 
4 
ft 
» 
’ 
' 
t 
: 
1 
t 
, 
’ 
7 
' 
t 


Fig, 31. 


of the base-line which we used in determining the interferences. 
‘We see from the figure that the phase does not increase from 
the source; its course is rather as if the waves originated at 
a distance of: about ZA in space and spread out thence, partly 
towards the conductor, and partly into space. At great 
distances the phase is smaller by the value 7 than it would 
have been if the waves had proceeded with constant velocity 
from the origin; the waves, therefore, behave at great distances 
as if they had travelled through the first half wave-length with 
infinite velocity. 

The action w of the waves in the wire for a given position 
of the secondary conductor can now be represented in the form 
w=C-sin (nt —6,), wherein 5, is used as an abbreviation for 
mr +8=nr/ry+6. >, denotes the half wave-length of the 
waves in the wire, which in our experiments was 2°8 metres. 
6 indicates the phase of its action at the point r= 0, which 
we altered arbitrarily by interposing wires of various lengths. 
Similarly we were able to alter the amplitude C, and we made 
it of such magnitude that the action of the waves in the wire 
was approximately equal to the direct action. The phase of 


Ix TREATED ACCORDING TO Maxynias THEORY 153 


the interference then depends only upon the difference between 
the phases 6, and 6,, With that particular adjustment of the 
secondary circle to which our expression for w relates, both 
actions reinforce one another (i.e. the interference has the 
sign +) if 6,—68, is equal to zero or an odd multiple of 
2a; the actions annual one another (i.e. the interference has 
the sign —) if 6,— 6, is equal to w or an odd multiple of it ; 
no interference takes place (the interference has the sign 0) if 
8, — 5, is equal to an odd multiple of 32. 

Let us now suppose that 6 is so determined that, at the 
beginning of the metre-scale, the phase of the interference has 
a definite value e, so that 6,=5, +6 The straight line 1 in 
our figure will then represent the value of 5+ e as a function 
of the distance. For the inclination of the line is so chosen that 
for an increase of abscissa by A, =2°8 metres, the ordinate 
increases by the value 7; and it is so placed that it cuts the 
curve §, at a point whose abscissa is at the beginning of the 
metre-scale. The lines 2, 3, 4, etc, further represent the 
course of the values of 6,+¢e—47, 8,+e—7, 5,+¢— $1, 
etc. For these lines are parallel to the line 1, and are so drawn 
that they cut any given ordinate at distances of 47, and any, 
given abscissa at distances of 14 metre. If we now project the 
points of intersection of these straight lines with the curve 6, 
upon the axis of abscisse below, we clearly obtain those 
distances for which 6, is equal to §,+e+47, 6,+e+7, 
8, +¢+ 37, etc.,'ie. for which the phase of the interference 
has increased by 37, 7, $2, etc., as compared with the zero- 
point. We thus deduce directly from the figure the following 
statements :—If at the zero-point of the base-line the inter-’ 
ference has the sign + (—), it first attains the sign 0 at about 
1 metre, the sign — (+) at about 2°3 metres, and it again 
acquires the sign 0 at about 4°8 metres: the interference 
reverts to the sign + (—) at about 7:6 metres, is again 0 at 
about 44 metres, and from there on the signs succeed each 
other in order at about equal distances. If at the zero-point 
of the base-line the interference has the sign 0, it will also 
have this sign at about 2°3 metres, 7°6 metres, and 14 metres ; 
it will have a marked positive or negative character at about 
1 metre, 4°8 metres, and 11 metres from the zero-point. 
Intermediate values correspond to intermediate phases. If this 


154 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS 1x 


theoretical result is compared with the experimental result, and 
especially with those interferences which occurred on introducing 
100, 250, 400, and 550 em. of wire} the accordance will be 
found as complete as could possibly be expected. 

I have not been able to account so well for the inter- 
ferences of the second kind.” For producing these interferences 
we used the secondary circle in a position in which the most 
important factor was the integral force of induction around 
the closed circle. If we regard the dimensions of the latter as 
vanishingly small, the integral force is proportional to the rate 
of change of magnetic force perpendicular to the plane of the 
circle, and is therefore proportional to the expression— 


dP | AELm2n? | cos (mr —mt) sin (mr—nt) 
tt an aca ae, 


Hence we deduce the phase 6, of this action— 


_ cos mr]/mr — sin mr /m?r* 


tl pe 
sin mr/mr + cos mr/m?r? 


or, after transforination— 
5, = mr — tan mr. 


The line 6, of Fig. 31 represents the course of this function. 
We see that the phase of this action increases continuously 
from the origin itself. Hence the phenomena which point to 
a finite rate of propagation must, in the case of these inter- 
ferences, make themselves felt even close to the oscillator. 
This was indeed apparent in the experiments, and therein lay 
the advantage presented by this kind of interference. But, 
contrary to the experiment, the apparent velocity near to the 
oscillator comes out greater than at a distance from it; and 
it cannot be denied that, according to theory, the change of 
phase of the interference should be slightly, but noticeably, 
more rapid than it was in the experiments. It seems to me 
probable that a more complete theory—in which the two con- 
ductors used would not be regarded as vanishingly small,— 
and perhaps a different estimate of the value of 2, would 
establish a more satisfactory agreement. 


1 See p. 118. 2 See p. 119. 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO eee THEORY 155 


It is, however, important to notice that even on the basis of 
Maxwell’s theory, the numerical results obtained cannot be ex- 
plained without assuming a considerable difference between the 
rates of propagation of the waves in wires and in free space. 


Waves in Wire-shuped Conductors 
The function K(pp) = [ered 


® 
which, for large values of p, approximates asymptotically to the 
function ,/7/2pp. e~?, and for infinitesimal values of p to the 
function — log(pp/2) — 0°5'77, satisfies the differential equation— 


@K 1 aK 
(ep) L AK (pp) — p’K(pp) =0. 
dp? pap 


If we therefore put— 


l= ~ . sin (mz — nt). K(pp), 


then II -satisfies the equation A’d*II/dt?=AII, if we ‘make 
p?=m?—A’n®, Here J must be understood to represent 
a current expressed in magnetic measure, p and m= CARN 
reciprocals of lengths, and n=7/T the reciprocal of a time. 
The function II satisfies its equation through all space, except 
along the z-axis, where it is discontinuous. The values 
R, Z, P, N, which can be deduced from the above II, represent 
therefore an electrical disturbance taking place in a very thin 
wire stretched along the z-axis. In the immediate neighbour- 
hood of this wire, neglecting quantities which contain even 
powers of p, we have— 


Q, = ve . Sin (mz — nt), 
and therefore— 


R= imp - cos (mz — nt), 
P,= a . Cos (mz — nt), 
p 


in which the suffix 0 indicates that p is assumed to be 


156 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS Ix 


vanishingly small. From the expression for R, it follows that 
the quantity of free electricity e in unit length of the wire is— 


e= = Zap. Re cos (mz — nt). 


Similarly from the expression for P, it follows that the 
current + is— 


i= a 2mp.P,=J cos (mz — nt). 


The values of i and e satisfy of themselves the necessary 
equation Ade/dt= —di/dz. They show us that the disturb- 
ance under consideration is an electric sine-wave which is 
propagated in the positive direction along the axis of z, whose 
half wave-length is X, and half-period of oscillation T, whose 
velocity is therefore 1/T = n/m, and whose intensity is such 
that the maximum current which arises is + J. 

If we stipulate that external forces may be made to act 
arbitrarily in the wire, we may regard ®X and T as being inde- 
pendent of each other. For every given relation between these 
quantities, i.e. for every given velocity of the waves, the lines 
of electric force have a definite form which, independently of 
time, glides along the wire. As before, we represent this form, 
drawing the lines Q = const. 


@ c. 


AVA All : 
ZN 


Such a representation is carried out in Fig. 32. In the 
first place, Fig. 32, represents the case in which the velocity is 
very small and therefore p=m. The drawing then represents 
a distribution of electrostatic force, viz. that which is obtained 
when we distribute electricity upon the wire so that its density 


== 
—— 
we wee wwe wen. cee eee oe 


Fig. 32. 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO MAXWELL’S THEORY 157 


is a sine-function of the length of the wire. Fig. 32, gives 
the lines of force for a velocity amounting to nearly 28/48 of 
that of light. We see that in proceeding from and returning to 
the wire the lines of force make a wider circuit than before. 
According to the older mode of conception, this would be 
explained by saying that the electromagnetic force, which is 
parallel to the wire, weakens the component of the electrostatic 
force in the same direction, whereas it does not affect the — 
component perpendicular to the wire. The weakening of the 
component parallel to the wire may even amount to annulling 
it altogether. For if we take the velocity of propagation of the 
wire-waves as being equal to that of light, » becomes zero, 
K (pp) reduces to —log p+ const. for every value of p, and 
for every value of p— 
2J 
Q= -z,° 82 (mz ~ nt), 

and therefore— 


25m : 
ar ors cos (mz—nt), Z=0, 


25 
Pear . cos (mz—nt), N=0. 


The distribution of force then is the simplest that can be 
conceived ; the electric force is everywhere normal to the wire 
and decreases in inverse proportion to the distance from it. 
The lines Q=const., drawn for equidistant values of Q, are 
represented in Fig. 32,, For waves travelling with a velocity 
greater than 1/A, p becomes imaginary. For this case our 
formule would require transformation, but as it has no practical 
significance, we need not discuss it. 

At the surface of a conductor, that component of the elec- 
tric force which is tangential to the surface continues without 
discontinuity in the interior of the conductor. According to 
Maxwell, a perfect conductor is understood to mean one in 
whose interior there can only exist vanishingly small forces. 
From this it necessarily follows that at the surface of a perfect 
conductor the components of the force tangential to the surface 
must vanish. Unless this statement is incorrect, it follows 
that electric waves in wires of good conductivity must be 
propagated with the velocity of light and in the form which is 


158 THE FORCES OF ELECTRIC OSCILLATIONS IX 


represented in Fig. 32, For only in this particular force- 
distribution is the force everywhere normal to the surface of 
the wire. In fact, then, it follows from Maxwell’s theory, 
as well as from the older theories, that electric waves travel 
along perfectly conducting wires with the velocity of light. 

If, on the other hand, we are to place any reliance upon 
our experiments, this conclusion is incorrect—the propagation 
takes place with a much smaller velocity and in some such 
form as is indicated in Fig. 32,. The result is all the more 
remarkable, because the velocity in wires appears likewise to 
be a velocity which is quite independent of the nature of the 
wire. I have found it to be the same in wires of the most 
diverse metals, varying widely in thickness and in the shape 
of their cross-section, and also in columns of conducting 
fluids. The causes which determine this velocity still remain 
obseure. The resistance, at all events, has nothing to do with 
it. For some time I thought that it might be affected by the 
constant k&, through the introduction of- which Hr. H. v. 
Helmholtz has extended Maxwell’s theory ;1 but further con- 
sideration led to the rejection of this idea. If only the 
Jimiting condition were correct, a wave of the form of Fig. 
32, would yet be possible. This would always be a pure 
transversal wave, and as such must travel with the same 
velocity as plane transversal waves in space, whether simul- 
taneous longitudinal waves are possible or not. Although a 
finite value of the constant k would not explain the difference 
between the two velocities, it would postulate the possibility 
of two kinds of waves in the wire with different velocities : 
experiment has hitherto given no intimation of such a pheno- 
menon. It seems rather to be doubtful whether the limiting 
condition is correct for rapidly alternating forces. 

Although it does not appear to be possible, on the one hand, 
to confer a velocity of any desired magnitude upon the waves 
travelling along the z-axis, there is no difficulty, on the other 
hand, in reducing the velocity as much as may be desired below 
its maximum value, or in producing distributions of force 
intermediate between the forms 32, and 32, With this 
object the waves are made to proceed along crooked wires or 
wires rolled into spirals. For example, I rolled a wire 40 metres 


1H. v, Helmholtz, Ges. Abh. 1, p. 545. 


1x TREATED ACCORDING TO MAXWELL’S THEORY 159 


long into a spiral 1 cm. in diametet, and so tightly that the 
length of the spiral was 1°6 metre; in this I was able to observe 
nodes at distances of about 0°31 metre, whereas, in the straight 
wire, the nodes were 2°8 metres apart. As the spiral was stretched 
out, the one value changed gradually into the other. Hence, 
when the velocity is measured along the z-axis (the axis of 
the spiral), the wave moves much more slowly in the coiled 
wire. When the velocity is measured along the wire itself, 
on the other hand, the wave certainly moves more rapidly. 
Along crooked wires the behaviour is similar. Unless I 
am mistaken, Maxwell’s theory, assuming the limiting con- 
dition for good conductors, is unable to account for this. 
It seems to me that according to this theory the propagation, 
measured along the z-axis, must for every form of conductor 
take place with the velocity of light ; provided, in the first place, 
that the resistance of the conductor does not come into con- 
sideration, and, in the second place, that the dimensions of the 
conductor perpendicular to the axis are negligible in comparison 
with the wave-length. Both conditions are satisfied by coiled 
metallic wires; but what should happen does not happen. 

In our endeavour to explain the observations by means of, 
Maxwell’s theory, we have not succeeded in removing all 
difficulties. Nevertheless, the theory has been found to account 
most satisfactorily for the majority of the phenomena; and it 
will be acknowledged that this is no mean performance. But 
if we try to adapt any of the older theories to the phenomena, 
we meet with inconsistencies from the very start, unless we 
reconcile these theories with Maxwell’s by introducing the 
ether as dielectric in the manner indicated by v. Helmholtz. 


XxX 


ON THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES 
BY MEANS OF WIRES 


(Wiedemann’s Ann. 37, p. 395, 1889.) 


WHEN a constant electric current flows along a cylindrical 
wire, its strength is the same at every part of the section of 
the wire, But if the current is variable, self-induction pro- 
duces a deviation from this most simple distribution. For the 
central parts of the wire are, on the whole, less distant from 
ell the rest than are the outer parts; hence induction opposes 
variations of the.current in the centre of the wire more strongly 
than at the circumference, and consequently the current by 
preference flows along the outer portion of the wire. When 
the current changes its direction a few hundred times per 
second, the deviation from the normal distribution can no 
longer be imperceptible. This deviation increases rapidly 
with the rate of alternation; and when the current alternates 
many million times per second, almost the whole of the interior 
of the wire must, according to theory, appear free from 
current, and the flow must confine itself to the very skin of 
the wire. Now in such extreme cases the above conception of 
what takes place is obviously not free from physical difficulties ; 
and preference must be given to another conception of the 
matter which was first presented by Messrs. O. Heaviside’ and 
J. H. Poynting,’ as the correct interpretation of Maxwell’s 
equations as applied to this case. According to this view, the 
electric force which determines the current is not propagated 


10, Heaviside, Electrician, January 1885, Phil. Mag. 25, p. 153, 1888. 
2 J. H. Poynting, Phil. Trans. 2, p. 277, 1885. 


x PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY WIRES 161 


in the wire itself, but under all circumstances penetrates from 
without into the wire, and spreads into the metal with com- 
parative slowness and according to laws similar to those which 
govern changes of temperature in a conducting body. Thus 
when the forces around the wire continually alter their 
direction, the action of these forces only extends to a very 
slight depth within the metal; the slower the fluctuations, the 
more deeply will the action penetrate; and lastly, when the 
changes succeed each other with infinite slowness, the force 
has time to penetrate into the interior of the wire and to act 
with uniform strength throughout it.! 

Whatever conception we may form from the theoretical 
results, it is important to find out whether these latter agree 
with the actual facts. Inasmuch as I made use of electric 
waves in wires of exceedingly short period in my experiments 
on the propagation of electric force, it was natural to test by 
means of these the correctness of the conclusions deduced. As 
a matter of fact the theory was found to be confirmed by the 
experiments which are now to be described; and it will be 
seen that these few experiments are amply sufficient to support 
the conception introduced by Messrs. Heaviside and Poynting., 
Similar experiments, with similar results, have been carried out 
by Dr. O. J. Lodge? who has, however, used quite different 
experimental methods, and mainly with the object of elucidating 
the theory of lightning-conductors. To what extent the con- 
clusions are true which were deduced by Dr. Lodge in the 
latter respect from his experiments must, in the first place, 
depend upon the actual rapidity of succession of the changes 
of electrical conditions which accompany lightning. 

The apparatus and methods which are here mentioned are 
those which have been fully described in. my previous papers. 
The waves used were such as had in wires nodes about 3 
metres apart. 

1. When a primary conductor acts through air upon 
a secondary conductor, there can be no doubt that the 
action penetrates from without into the latter. For it may 
be regarded as an established fact that in air the action is 
propagated from point to point, and it must therefore first. meet 


1 [See Note 24 at end of book.] 
20. J. Lodge, Journ. of Soc. of Arts, May 1888; Phil. Mag. 26, p. 217, 1888. 
M 


162 PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY WIRES x 


the outer boundary of the conductor before it can act upon the 
inside. Now it can be shown that a closed metallic envelope 
does not allow the action to pass through it at all. If we 
place the secondary conductor in a favourable position with 
reference to the primary so that sparks 5-6 mm. long are 
obtained, and then surround it with a closed box of sheet 
zine, not the slightest amount of sparking can be detected. 
Similarly the sparks disappear when the primary conductor is 
completely surrounded by a metal box. It is known that a 
metal screen does not interfere with the integral force of 
induction when the fluctuations of current are relatively slow. 
At first sight this appears to contradict the above experimental 
results. But the contradiction is only apparent and disappears 
when the time-relations are considered. In a similar way a 
badly-conducting envelope protects its interior completely 
against rapid fluctuations of external temperature, less com- 
pletely against slow fluctuations, and not at al] against a 
permanent rise or fall in temperature. The thinner the 
envelope the more rapid are the fluctuations which can act 
through it upon the interior. And so in our case also, the 
electric action should clearly penetrate into the interior if we 
only reduced sufficiently the thickness of the metal. Yet I 
did not find it easy to secure the requisite thinness. A box 
covered with tinfoil acted as a perfect screen; and so too did 
a box of gilt paper when care was taken to make good contact 
between the edges of the separate pieces of paper. In this 
case the thickness of the conducting metal could scarcely be 
estimated as high as 34, mm. I next fitted the protecting 
envelope as closely as possible around the secondary conductor. 
For this purpose its spark-gap was drawn out to about 20 mm.; 
and, in order to be still able to detect electric disturbances in 
it, an auxiliary spark-gap was introduced just opposite the 
usual one. The sparks in this were not so long as in the 
proper spark-gap because the resonance-effect was now, absent, 
but they still were quite vigorous. After being thus prepared 
the conductor was completely surrounded with a tube-shaped 
conducting envelope made as thin as possible; this did not 
touch the conductor, but was brought as close as possible to it, 
and in the neighbourhood of the auxiliary spark-gap—in order 
to be able to make use of the latter—was made of wire-gauze. 


x PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC ae BY WIRES 163 


Between the poles of this envelope the sparking was as vigorous 
as it had previously been in the secondary conductor itself; 
but in the enclosed conductor not the slightest electrical 
disturbance could be perceived. It does not interfere with the 
result if the envelope touches the conductor at a few points; 
it is not necessary to insulate the two from one another in 
order to make the experiment succeed, but only in order to 
give it its demonstrative force. In imagination we can clearly 
draw the envelope around the conductor more closely than is 
possible in practice ; indeed, we can imagine it to coincide with 
the outer skin of the conductor. Thus although the electrical 
disturbances at the surface of our conductor are so powerful as 
to produce sparks of 5-6 mm. length, yet at a depth of only 
gy mm. below its surface there is such complete calm that not 
the slightest sparking is produced. We are thus led to suspect 
that what we call an induced current in the secondary con- 
ductor is a process which takes place for the most part in the 
surrounding space and in which the inside of the conductor 
scarcely plays any part. 

2. We might admit that this is so when an electrical 
disturbance passes through a dielectric, but yet maintain that 
it is otherwise when the disturbance, as we usually say, has 
been propagated in a conductor. Near one of the end plates 
of our primary conductor let us place a conducting plate and 
fasten to it a long straight wire; in our earlier experiments we 
have already shown how the action of the primary oscillation 
can be conveyed to great distances with the aid of such a wire. 
The usual view of this is that the wave proceeds through the wire. 
We will, however, try to show that all the changes are confined 
to the surface and the space outside, and that the interior of 
the wire knows nothing of the passing waves. I first arranged 
experiments in the following manner. From the conducting wire 
a piece 4 metres long was removed and replaced by two strips of 
zinc sheet 4 metres long and 10 cm. broad, which were laid flat 
one upon the other with their ends touching and firmly con- 
nected. Along the whole length of the middle line between 
the strips, and hence almost completely surrounded by metal, 
was placed a copper wire 4 metres long and covered with gutta- 
percha. It made no difference in the experiments whether 
the outer ends of this wire were in metallic connection with 


164 PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY WIRES x 


the strips, or insulated from them; but generally the ends 
were soldered to the zinc strips. The copper wire was cut in 
the middle, and its ends were twisted round each other and 
led out between the strips to a small spark-gap by which any 
electrical disturbance in the wire could be perceived. Not 
the slightest action could be detected at the spark-gap, even 
when the strongest possible waves were led through the whole 
arrangement. But if any part of the copper wire, a few deci- 
metres long, was pulled out of its place so as to project but a 
little beyond the strips, sparking immediately began. The 
longer the projecting part and the further it extended beyond 
the edge of the strips, the more vigorous became the sparking. 
The absence of sparks in the first instance cannot be attributed 
to any unfavourable conditions of resistance; no change has 
taken place in these conditions; only the wire at first was 
inside a conducting mass and beyond the reach of outside 
influences. Indeed, it is only necessary to enclose the pro- 
jecting part of the wire with a little tinfoil in metallic 
connection with the zinc strips, in order to stop the sparking 
at once. By so doing we virtually bring the copper wire 
‘pack inside the conductor. In like manner the sparks become 
weaker if we carry another wire, in a somewhat larger arc, 
around the part of the gutta-percha wire which projects beyond 
the strips; the second wire cuts off from the first part of 
the external effect. Indeed, we may say that the edge of the 
zine strip itself in a similar way cuts off from the- middle 
of the strip some of the induction. For if we now remove 
one of the two zinc strips and simply let the gutta-percha wire ~ 
rest upon the other, we always perceive sparks in the wire ; 
but these are extremely feeble in the middle of the strip, and 
much more powerful towards the edge. Just as electricity 
when distributed by electrostatic induction would tend to 
accumulate on the sharp edge of the strip, so here the current. 
seems by preference to move along the edge. In both cases 
we may say that the outer parts protect the inner from an 
influence exerted from the outside. 

Equally convincing, and somewhat neater, are the follow- 
ing experiments :—I inserted in the conductor, along which 
the waves were transmitted, a very thick copper wire 1°5 metre 
long, whose ends carried two circular metallic disks 15 cm. 


x PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC ie BY WIRES 165 


in diameter. The wire passed through the-centres of the disks 
whose planes were perpendicular to it. Around the edge of 
each disk were twenty-four equidistant holes. A spark-gap 
was inserted in the wire. When the waves traversed the wire 
they produced sparks up to 6 mm. in length. A thin copper 
wire was now stretched across between two corresponding 
holes in the disks. The sparking distance thereupon sank to ° 
3°2 mm. No other change was produced when the thin wire 
was replaced by a thick one, or when twenty-four wires were 
used instead of the single one, provided they were drawn all 
together through the same pair of holes. But it was other- 
wise when the wires were distributed around the edge of the 
disks. When a second wire was added opposite the first one 
the spark-length sank to 1:2 mm. When two more wires 
were put in midway between the others, the spark-length 
went as low as 0°5 mm. The insertion of four more wires 
in intermediate positions left sparks barely 0°-1 mm. long; and 
after all twenty-four ‘wires were inserted at equal distances no 
sparking whatever could be perceived inside. Yet the resistance 
of the inner wire was much smaller than the joint resistance of 
all the outer wires; and furthermore, we have given a speciab 
proof that the resistance is of no consequence. At the side of 
the tube of wires which has been built up let us place as a 
shunt a conductor precisely similar to the one inside the tube; 
we see vigorous sparking in the former, but none whatever in 
the latter. The former is not screened, the latter is screened 
by the tube of wires.) We have here an electromagnetic 
analogue to, the electrostatic experiment known under the 
name of the electric bird-cage. 

Again I altered the experiment in the way indicated in 
Fig. 33. The two disks were moved nearer together so that, 


Fig. 33. 


with the wires stretched between them, they formed a wire- 
cage A just big enough to contain the spark-micrometer. One 
of the disks (a) remained in metallic connection with the 
central wire; the other (8) was insulated from it by cutting 


166 PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY WIRES x 


out a round hole, and was instead connected with a conducting 
tube y which, without touching the central wire, completely 
surrounded it for a distance of 1°5 metre. The free end 6 of 
the tube was then placed in metallic connection with the 
central wire. The wire with its spark-gap still lies in a 
space surrounded by a metallic screen ; and it seems to follow 
naturally after what has already been stated that, whether 
the waves be led through the arrangement in the one direction 
or the other, not the slightest electrical disturbance would be 
detected in the wire. So far, then, this arrangement offers 
nothing new; but it has this advantage over the preceding 
one, that we can replace the protecting metal tube y by others 
with thinner and thinner walls, and so find out what thickness 
of wall is just sufficient to stop off the outside action. Very 
thin brass tubes—tubes of tinfoil and tubes of Dutch metal— 
acted as perfect screens. I next took glass tubes which had 
been chemically silvered, and now found it quite easy to pre- 
pare tubes so thin that, in spite of their protection, there was 
vigorous sparking in the central wire. But the sparks only 
appeared when the film of silver was so thin that it was no 
fonger quite opaque to light, and was certainly thinner than 
roo5 mm. In imagination, though not in practice, we may 
draw the protecting envelope more and more closely around 
the wire, until at last it coincides with its surface; and we 
may feel certain that nothing would practically be altered 
thereby. So, however vigorously the waves may really play 
about the wire, inside it is perfectly calm; the action of the 
waves scarcely penetrates further into the wire than does 
the light which is reflected from its surface. Hence we 
should expect to find the real seat of these waves in the 
neighbourhood of the wire, and not in the wire itself; and 
instead of saying that our waves are propagated in the 
wire, we should rather say that they glide towards and along 
the wire. : 
Instead of inserting the arrangement last described in the 
conducting wire in which waves were indirectly produced, we 
can insert it in one of the branches of the primary conductor 
itself. In such experiments I obtained much the same results 
as in the previous ones. Hence it must be equally true of 
our primary oscillation, that its seat is not to be found in the 


x PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY WIRES 167 


interior of the conductor; only thd cuter skin of the con- 
ductor, about which it plays, takes part in it.’ 

One further item of information may be added to what 
we have already learned about waves in wires, and this relates 
to the method of carrying out the experiments. If our waves 
have their seat in the space surrounding the wire, then a wave 
gliding along a single wire will not be propagated through the 
air alone; ,but, inasmuch as its action extends to a considerable 
distance, it will be propagated in the neighbouring walls, the 
floor, etc., and so will develop into a complicated phenomenon. 
But if we set up in exactly the same way two auxiliary plates 
opposite the two poles of our primary conductor, connect a 
wire to each of them, and lead both wires straight and parallel 
to one another to the same distance, then the action of the 
waves makes itself felt only in the neighbourhood of the 
space between the two wires. Hence it is only in the space 
between the wires that the wave progresses. We can thus 
take measures to secure that the propagation occurs only 
through air or another insulator, and by so arranging matters 
can experiment more conveniently and with less fear of com- 
plications. The wave-lengths thus obtained are, however, 
approximately the same as those obtained with single wires ; 
so that even with the latter the disturbing effects do not 
seem to be of much importance. 

3. From what has already been stated, we may conclude 
that rapid electric oscillations are quite incapable of penetrating 
metallic layers of any thickness, and that it is therefore quite 
impossible to excite sparks by the aid of such oscillations 
inside closed metallic envelopes. Hence, if we see sparks 
induced by such oscillations inside metallic envelopes which 
are nearly, but not quite, closed, we must conclude that the 
electric disturbance has penetrated through the existing open- 
ings. And this mode of conception is the correct one; but 
in sofhe cases it contradicts the usual view so completely that 
special experiments are required to induce us to forsake the 
usual view for the newer one. We shall select a striking case 
of this kind; and by making certain of the correctness of our 


1 The calculation of the self-induction of such conductors on the assumption 
of uniform current-density in the interior must therefore lead to totally un- 
reliable results. It is surprising that the results obtained under such erroneous 
assumptions should yet appear to agree approximately with the truth, 


168 PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY WIRES x 


view in this case, we shall show its probability in all other 
cases, - We return to the arrangement described in the pre- 
vious section, and represented in Fig. 33, only we no longer 
connect the protecting tube at 5 with the central wire. We 
now send the train of waves through the arrangement in the 
direction from 4 towards 6. We obtain brilliant sparks at 4, 
and these are about as strong as if we had inserted the spark- 
gap in the conducting wire without any protection. Nor do the 
sparks become much smaller if, without altering anything else, 
we lengthen the tube y considerably—up to about 4 metres. 
According to the usual view, it would be said that the wave on 
reaching A easily passes through the thin metal disk a, which 
is a good conductor, then springs across the spark-gap at A and 
proceeds along the central wire. According to our conception, 
on the other hand, we ought to describe what happens as 
_ follows :—The wave on reaching A is absolutely unable to pass 
through the metal disk, so it glides along the disk over the 
outside of the apparatus, travelling along thus until it reaches 
the point 5, 4 metres off. Here it divides—one part, which 
at present does not concern us, immediately proceeds straight 
along the wire; another part bends round into the inside of 
the tube and runs back the whole 4 metres in the air-space 
between the tube and the central wire, until it reaches the 
spark-gap .A, where it now produces sparks. We shall show 
by the following experiments that our conception, although 
somewhat complicated, is yet the correct one. In the first 
place, every trace of sparking at 4 disappears as soon as we 
close the opening at 6, even if it be only with a tinfoil cap. 
Our waves have a wave-length of only 3 metres; before their 
action has reached the point 6, it has gone back to zero at A; 
and has changed sign. What influence then could the closing 
of the distant opening at 6 exert upon the spark at A, if the 
latter really appears as soon as the wave passes through the 
metallic partition? In the second place, the sparks disdppear 
when we make the central wire end inside the tube y, or at 
the open end 6 of this tube; they reappear when the end of 
the wire is allowed to project beyond the opening, even if only 
for 20-30 cm. What influence could this insignificant length- 
ening of the wire have upon the spark at -A, unless the pro- 
jecting end of the wire were just the means by which a part 


x PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY WIRES 169 


of the wave is intercepted and brought through the opening & 
into the interior? Let us, in the third place, introduce a 
second spark-gap B in the central wire between A and 6, and 
surround it with a wire-cage just like 4. When we place the 
poles in B so far apart that sparks can no longer pass, we find 
that it is no longer possible to obtain any perceptible sparks 
in A. But if, in like manner, we hinder the passage of the 
sparks in A, we find that this has scarcely any influence upon 
the spar.s in & Hence, for the passage of the sparks in A, 
it is requisite that they should first pass in B; but for the 
passage of sparks in B, it is not necessary that they should 
first pass in A. Hence the direction of propagation in the 
interior is from B towards .A, not from A towards B. 
Moreover, we can adduce other and more convincing 
proofs. By making the spark-gap either vanishingly small or 
very great, we may prevent the wave returning from § towards 
A from expending its energy in the formation of sparks. In 
this case the wave will be reflected at A, and will again pro- 
ceed from 4 towards 6. But in doing so it must combine 
with the direct waves to form stationary oscillations with 
nodes and antinodes. If we succeed in showing the presence 
of these, we can no longer have any doubt as to the correct- 
ness of our conception. For this purpose we must necessarily 
give our apparatus somewhat different dimensions, so as to be 
able to introduce electric resonators inside it. I therefore 
carried the central wire through the axis of a cylindrical tube 
5 metres long and 30 cm. in diameter. This tube was not 


‘made of solid metal, but was built up of twenty-four copper 
wires ? these were stretched parallel to one another along the 
generating surface over seven equidistant circular rings of 
stout wire, as indicated in Fig. 34. The resonator to be used 
I made as follows:—Copper wire 1 mm. thick was coiled 
tightly into a spiral of 1 em. diameter. About 125 turns of 
this were taken, pulled out a little, and bent into a circle of 
12 em. diameter; between the free ends was inserted an 


170 PROPAGATION OF ELECTRIC WAVES BY WIRES x 


adjustable spark-gap.. Special experiments’ had shown that 
this circle was in resonance with the waves of 3 metres length 
in the wire, and yet it was sufficiently small to be introduced 
between the central wire and the tube. Both ends of the 
tube were at first left open, and the resonator was held inside 
in such a way that its plane included the central wire, and 
the spark-gap was not turned exactly inwards or outwards, 
but faced towards one or other end of the tube; vigorous 
sparks, 3-1 mm. long, appeared at the spark-gap. If now 
both ends of the tube were closed by four wires arranged 
crosswise and connected with the central conductor, not the 
slightest sparking could be discovered inside, which proves 
that the metwork of the tube is sufficiently close for our ex- 
periments. In the next place, the eross-wires on the # side 
of the tube (ze. the side remote from the origin of the waves) 
were removed. Nosparks could be detected when the resonator 
was in the immediate neighbourhood of the remaining cross- 
wires, 7.¢. in the position a, which corresponds to the spark-gap A 
_of our earlier experiments. But when it was moved from this 
position towards 8 the sparks reappeared, became very vigorous 
at a distance of 1-5 metre from a, decreased again and alimost 
completely disappeared at a distance of 3 metres, and again 
became stronger towards the end of the tube. Our supposition 
is therefore confirmed. It is right that there should be a node 
at the closed end, for at the metallic connection between the 
central wire and the tube the electric force between both must 
necessarily be zero. It is otherwise if we cut the central 
conductor at this point, quite near the cross-wires, leaving a 
gap a few centimetres long. In this case the wave is reflected 
with the opposite phase, and we should expect an antinode at 
a. And, in fact, we do now find vigorous sparks in the reson- 
ator; these, however, rapidly become smaller as we move from 
a towards f, disappear almost entirely at a distance of 1°5 
metre, become vigorous again at a distance of 3 metres, and 
finally give plain indications of a second node at a distance of 
4°5 metres, t.e. 0°5 metre from the open end of the tube. 
The nodes and antinodes which we have described lie at fixed 
distances from the closed end, and alter their position as this 
does; but otherwise they are quite independent of processes 
going on outside the tube, e.g. of the nodes and antinodes which 


x PROPAGATION OF eee BY WIRES 171 


we may produce there. The phenontera occur in precisely the 
same way when we allow the waves to traverse the tube in the 
opposite direction, z.¢. from the open to the closed end; but this 
case is less interesting, because the mode of propagation of the 
waves here differs less from the usual conception than in the 
case which we have just discussed. If we leave the central 
wire uncut, and both ends of the tube open, and produce in 
the whole system stationary waves, with nodes and antinodes, 
we always find a node inside the tube corresponding to each 
node outside, which proves that the rate of propagation is 
approximately the same inside and outside. 

On studying the experiments above described, the mode 
in which we have interpreted them, and the explanations of 
the investigators referred to in the introduction, one differ- 
ence will be found especially striking between the con- 
ception here advocated and the usually accepted view. In 
the latter conductors appear as the only bodies which take 
part in the propagation of electrical disturbances—non-con- 
ductors as bodies which oppose this propagation. According 
to our conception, on the other hand, all propagation of 
electrical disturbances takes place through non-conductors ; 
and conductors oppose this propagation with a resistance 
which, in the case of rapid alternations, is insuperable. We 
might almost feel inclined to agree to the statement that 
conductors and non-conductors should, according to this con- 
ception, have their names interchanged. Such a paradox, 
however, only arises because we omit to specify what conduc- 
tion or non-conduction is under discussion. Undoubtedly 
metals are non-conductors for electric force, and for this very 
reason they, under certain conditions, restrain it from becoming 
dissipated, and compel it to remain concentrated; they thus 
become conductors of the apparent source of these forces— 
the electricity—-to which the usual terminology has reference. 


XI 


ON ELECTRIC RADIATION 


13, 1888. Wiedemann's Ann. 


i 


(Sttzungsbe?. d. Berl. Akad. d. Wiss. Dec. 
36, p. 769.) 


As soon as I had succeeded in proving that the action of an 
electric oscillation spreads out as a wave into space, I planned 
experiments with the object of concentrating this action and 
making it perceptible at_ greater distances by putting the 
primary conductor in the focal line of a large concave 
parabolic mirror. These experiments did not lead to the 
desired result, and I felt certain that the want of success was 
a necessary consequence of the disproportion between the 
length (4-5 metres) of the waves used and the dimensions 
which I was able, under the most favourable circumstances, to 
give to the mirror. Recently I have observed that the 
experiments which I have described can be carried out quite 
well with oscillations of more than ten times the frequency, 
and with waves less than one-tenth the length of those which 
were first discovered. I have, therefore, returned to the use of 
concave mirrors, and have obtained better results than I had 
ventured to hope for. I have succeeded in producing distinct 
rays of electric force, and in carrying out with them the 
elementary experiments which are commonly performed. with 
light and radiant heat. The following is an account of these 
experiments :— 


The Apparatus 


The short waves were excited by the same method which 
we used for producing the longer waves. The primary 


XI ELECTRIC RADIATION 173 


conductor used may be most simply described as follows :— 
Imagine a cylindrical brass body, 3 cm. in diameter and 
26 cm. long, interrupted midway along its length by a spark- 
gap whose poles on either side are formed by spheres of 2 cm. 
radius. The length of the conductor is approximately equal 
to the half wave-length of the corresponding oscillation in 
straight wires; from this we are at once able to estimate 
approximately the period of oscillation. It is essential that 
the pole-surfaces of the spark-gap should be frequently 
repolished, and also that during the experiments they should 
be carefully protected from illumination by simultaneous side- 
discharges ; otherwise the oscillations are not excited. Whether 
the spark-gap is in a satisfactory state can always be recognised 
by the appearance and sound of the sparks. The discharge is 
led to the two halves of the conductor by means of two gutta- 
percha-covered wires which are connected near’ the spark-gap 
on either side. I no longer made use of the large Ruhmkorff, 
but found it better to use a small induction-coil by Keiser and 
Schmidt; the longest sparks, between points, given by this 
were 4°5 cm. long. It was supplied with current from three 
accumulators, and gave sparks 1-2 cm. long between the 
spherical knobs of the primary conductor. For the purpose 
of the experiments the spark-gap was reduced to 3 mm. 

Here, again, the small sparks induced in a secondary 
conductor were the means used for detecting the electric forces 
in space. As before, I used partly a circle which could be 
rotated within itself and which had about the same period of 
oscillation as the primary conductor. It was made of copper 
wire 1 mm. thick, and had in the present instance a diameter 
of only 7°5 cm. One end of the wire carried a polished brass 
sphere a few millimetres in diameter; the other end was 
pointed and could be brought up, by means of a fine screw 
insulated from the wire, to within an exceedingly short 
distamce from the brass sphere. As will be readily under- 
stood, we have here to deal only with minute sparks of a few 
hundredths of a millimetre in length ; and after a little practice 
one judges more according to the brilliancy than the length of 
the sparks. 

The circular conductor gives only a differential effect, and 


1 See Figs. 35 and 36 and the description of them at the end of this paper. 


174 ELECTRIC RADIATION XI 


is not adapted for use in the focal line of a concave mirror. 
Most of the work was therefore done with another conductor 
arranged as follows :—Two straight pieces of wire, each 50 cm. 
long and 5 mm. in diameter, were adjusted in a straight line 
so that their near ends were 5 cm. apart. From these ends 
two wires, 15 cm. long and 1 mm. in diameter, were carried 
parallel to one another and perpendicular to the wires first 
mentioned to a spark-gap arranged just as in the circular 
conductor. In this conductor the resonance-action was given 
up, and indeed it only comes slightly into play in this case. It 
would have been simpler to put the spark-gap directly in the 
middle of the straight wire; but the observer could not then 
have handled and observed the spark-gap in the focus of the 
mirror without obstructing the aperture. For this reason the 
arrangement above described was chosen in preference to the 
other which would in itself have been more advantageous. 


The Production of the Ray 


If the primary oscillator is now set up in a fairly large 
fire space, one can, with the aid of the circular conductor, 
detect in its neighbourhood on a smaller scale all those 
phenomena which I have already observed and described as 
occurring in the neighbourhood of a larger oscillation.’ The 
greatest distance at which sparks could be perceived in the 
secondary conductor was 1°5 metre, or, when the primary spark- 
gap was in very good order, as much as 2 metres. When a plane 
reflecting plate is set up at a suitable distance on one side of the 
primary oscillator, and parallel to it, the action on the opposite 
side is strengthened. To be more precise :—lIf the distance 
chosen is either very small, or somewhat greater than 30 cm., 
the plate weakens the effect ; it strengthens the effect greatly 
at distances of 8-15 em., slightly at a distance of 45 cm., and 
exerts no influence at greater distances. We have drawn 
attention to this phenomenon in an earlier paper, and we 
conclude from it that the wave in air corresponding to the 
primary oscillation has a half wave-length of about 30 cm. We 
may expect to find a still further reinforcement if we replace 
the plane surface by a concave mirror having the form of a 


1 See V., VII., VIII. 


XI ELECTRIC RADIATION 175 


parabolic cylinder, in the focal line ofjwhich the axis of the 
primary oscillation lies. The focal length of the mirror 
should be chosen as small as possible, if it is properly to 
concentrate the action. But if the direct wave is not 
to annul immediately the action of the reflected wave, the 
focal length must not be much smaller than a quarter wave- 
length. I therefore fixed on 124 cm. as the focal length, and 
constructed the mirror by bending a zinc sheet 2 metres long, 
2 metres broad, and 4 mm. thick into the desired shape over @ 
wooden frame of the exact curvature. The height of the 
‘mirror was thus 2 metres, the breadth of its aperture 1°2 
metre, and its depth 0°7 metre. The primary oscillator was 
fixed in the middle of the focal line. The wires which 
conducted the discharge were led through the mirror; the 
induction-coil and the cells were accordingly placed behind 
the mirror so ag to be out of the way. If we now investigate 
the neighbourhood of the oscillator with our conductors, we 
find that there is no action behind the mirror or at either side 
of it; but in the direction of the optical axis of the mirror the 
sparks can be perceived up to a distance of 5-6 metres. When 
a plane conducting surface was set up so as to oppose the 
advancing waves at right angles, the sparks could be detected 
in its neighbourhood at even greater distances—up to about 
9-10 metres. The waves reflected from the conducting surface 
reinforce the advancing waves at certain points. At other 
points again the two sets of waves weaken one another. In 
front of the plane wall one can recognise with the rectilinear con- 
ductor very distinct maxima and minima, and with the circular 
conductor thecharacteristicinterference-phenomena of stationary 
waves which I have described in an earlier paper. I was able 
to distinguish four nodal points, which were situated at the 
wall and at 33, 65, and 98 cm. distance from it. We thus get 
33 cm. asa closer approximation to the half wave-length of the 
waves, used, and 1:1 thousand-millionth of a second as their 
period of oscillation, assuming that they travel with the 
velocity of light. In wires the oscillation gave a wave-length 
of 29 cm. Hence it appears that these short waves also have 
a somewhat lower velocity in wires than in air; but the ratio 
of the two velocities comes very near to the theoretical value 
—unity—and does not differ from it so much as appeared to 


176 ELECTRIC RADIATION xI 


be probable from our experiments on longer waves. This 
remarkable phenomenon still needs elucidation. Inasmuch as 
the phenomena are only exhibited in the neighbourhood of the 
optic axis of the mirror, we may speak of the result produced 
as an‘ electric ray proceeding from the concave mirror. 

I now constructed a second mirror, exactly similar to the 
first, and attached the rectilinear secondary conductor to it in 
such a way that the two wires of 50 cm. length lay in the 
focal line, and the two wires connected to the spark-gap passed 
directly through the walls of the mirror without touching it. 
The spark-gap was thus situated directly behind the mirror, 
and the observer could adjust and examine it without obstruct- 
ing the course of the waves. I expected to find that, on inter- 
cepting the ray with this apparatus, I should be able to observe 
it at even greater distances; and the event proved that I was 
not mistaken. In the rooms at my disposal I could now 
perceive the sparks from one end to the other. The greatest 
distance to which I was able, by availing myself of a doorway, 
to follow the ray was 16 metres; but according to the results 
of the reflection-experiments (to be presently described), there 
can be no doubt that sparks could be obtained at any rate up 
to 20 metres in open spaces. For the remaining experiments 
such great distances are not necessary, and it is convenient 
that the sparking in the secondary conductor should not be too 
feeble ; for most of the experiments a distance of 6-10 metres 
is most suitable. We shall now describe the simple pheno- 
mena which can be exhibited with the ray without difficulty. 
When the contrary is not expressly stated, it is to be assumed 
that the focal lines of both mirrors are vertical. 


Rectilinear Propagation 


If a screen of sheet zinc 2 metres high and 1 metre broad 
is placed on the straight line joining both mirrors, and at right 
angles to the direction of the ray, the secondary sparks dis- 
appear completely. An equally complete shadow is thrown by 
a screen of tinfoil or gold-paper. If an assistant walks across 
the path of the ray, the secondary spark-gap becomes dark as 
soon as he intercepts the ray, and again lights up when he 
leaves the path clear. Insulators do not stop the ray—it 


XI ELECTRIC RADIATION 177 


passes right through a wooden partition or door; and it is not 
without astonishment that one sees the sparks appear inside a 
closed room. If two conducting screens, 2 metres high and 1 
metre broad, are set up symmetrically on the right and left of the 
ray, and perpendicular to it, they do not interfere at all with 
the secondary spark so long as the width of the opening between 
them is not less than the aperture of the mirrors, viz. 1:2 metre. 
If the opening is mnade narrower the sparks become weaker, 
‘and disappear when the width of the opening is reduced below 
0-5 metre. The sparks also disappear if the opening is left 
with a breadth of 1:2 metre, but is shifted to one side of the 
straight line joining the mirrors. If the optical axis of the 
mirror containing the oscillator is rotated to the right or left 
about 10° out of the proper position, the secondary sparks 
become weak, and a rotation through 15° causes them to 
disappear. 

There is no sharp geometrical limit to either the ray or 
the shadows; it is easy to produce phenomena corresponding 
to diffraction. As yet, however, I have not succeeded in 
observing maxima and minima at the edge of the shadows. 


Polarisation 


From the mode in which our ray was produced we can 
have no doubt whatever that it consists-of transverse vibrations 
and is plane-polarised in the optical sense. We can also prove 
by experiment that this is the case. If the receiving mirror 
be rotated about the ray as axis until its focal line, and there- 
fore the secondary conductor also, lies in a horizontal plane, 
the secondary sparks become more and more feeble, and when 
the two focal lines are at right angles, no sparks whatever are 
obtained even if the mirrors are moved close up to one another. 
‘ The two mirrors behave like the polariser and analyser of a 
polarisation apparatus. 

I next had made an octagonal frame, 2 metres high and 
2 metres broad; across this were stretched copper wires 1 mm. 
’ thick, the wires being parallel to each other and 3 cm. apart. 
If the two mirrors were now set up with their focal lines 
parallel, and the wire screen was interposed perpendicularly to 


1 [See Note 25 at end of book.] 
N 


178 ELECTRIC RADIATION XI 


the ray and so that the direction of the wires was perpendicular 
to the direction of the focal lines, the screen practically did not 
interfere at all with the secondary sparks. But if the screen 
was set up in sueh a way that its wires were parallel to the 
focal lines, it stopped the ray completely. With regard, then, 
to transmitted energy the screen behaves towards our ray just 
as a tourmaline plate behaves towards a plane-polarised ray of 
light. The receiving mirror was now placed once more so that 
its focal line was horizontal; under these circumstances, as 
already mentioned, no sparks appeared. Nor were any sparks 
produced when the screen was interposed in the path of the 
ray, so long as the wires in the screen were either horizontal 
or vertical.” But if the frame was set up in such a position 
that the wires were inclined at 45° to the horizontal on either 
side, then the interposition of the screen immediately produced 
sparks in the secondary spark-gap. Clearly the screen resolves 
the advancing oscillation into two components and transmits 
ouly that component which is perpendicular to the direction 
of its wires. This component is inclined at 45° to the focal 
line of the second mirror, and may thus, after being again 
resolved by the mirror, act upon the secondary conductor. The 
phenomenon is exactly analogous to the brightening of the dark 
field of two crossed Nicols by the interposition of a crystalline 
plate in a suitable position. 

With regard to the polarisation it may be further observed 
that, with the means employed in the present investigation, 
we are only able to recognise the electric force. When the 
primary oscillator is in a vertical position the oscillations of 
this force undoubtedly take place in the vertical plane through 
the ray, and are absent in the horizontal plane. But the results 
of experiments with slowly alternating currents leave no room 
for doubt that the electric oscillations are accompanied by 
oscillations of magnetic force which take place in the horizontal 
plane through the ray and are zero in the vertical plane. “Hence 
the polarisation of the ray does not so much consist in the 
occurrence of oscillations in the vertical plane, but rather in the 
fact that the oscillations in the vertical plane are of an electrical 
nature, while those in the horizontal plane are of a magnetic 
nature. Obviously, then, the question, in which of the two 
planes the oscillation in our ray occurs, cannot be answered 


xr ELECTRIC waa 179 


unless one specifies whether the questior relates to the electric 
or the magnetic oscillation. It was Herr Kolaéek’ who first 
pointed out clearly that this consideration is the reason why 
an old optical dispute has never been decided? 


Reflection 


We have already proved the reflection of the waves from 
conducting surfaces by the interference between the reflected 
and the advancing waves, and have also made use of the 
reflection in the construction of our concave mirrors. But now 
we are able to go further and to separate the two systems of 
waves from one another. I first placed both mirrors in a large 
room side by side, with their apertures facing in the same 
direction, and their axes converging to a point about .3 metres 
off. The spark-gap of the receiving mirror naturally remained 
dark. I next set up a plane vertical wall made of thin sheet 
zinc, 2 metres high and 2 metres broad, at the point of inter- 
section of the axes, and adjusted it so that it was equally 
inclined to both. I obtained a vigorous stream of sparks 
arising from the reflection of the ray by the wall. The 
sparking ceased as soon as the wall was rotated around a 
vertical axis through about 15° on either side of the correct 
position ; from this it follows that the reflection is regular, not 


diffuse. When the wall was moved away from the mirrors, the . 


axes of the latter being still kept converging towards the wall, 
the sparking diminished very slowly. I could still recognise 
sparks when the wall was 10 metres away from the mirrors, 
z.¢. when the waves had to traverse a distance of 20 metres. 
This arrangement might be adopted with advantage for the 
purpose of comparing the rate of propagation through air with 
other and slower rates of propagation, e.g. through cables. 

In order to produce reflection of the ray at angles of 
incidence greater than zero, I allowed the ray to pass parallel 
to the wall of the room in which there was a doorway. In 
the neighbouring room to which this door led I set up the 
receiving mirror so that its optic axis passed centrally through 
the door and intersected the direction of the ray at right angles. 
If the plane conducting surface was now set up vertically at 


2 [F, Kolatek, Wied. Ann. 34, p. 676, 1888.] 


180 ELECTRIC RADIATION XI 


the point of intersection, and adjusted so as to make angles of 
45° with the ray and also with the axis of the receiving mirror, 
there appeared in the secondary conductor a stream of sparks 
which was not interrupted by closing the door. When I turned 
the reflecting surface about 10° out of the-correct position the 
sparks disappeared. Thus the reflection is regular, and the 

‘angles of incidence and reflection are equal That the action 
proceeded from the source of disturbance to the plane mirror, 
and hence to the secondary conductor, could also be shown by 
placing shadow-giving screens at different points of this path. 
The secondary sparks then always ceased immediately ; whereas 
no effect was produced when the screen was placed anywhere 
else in the room. With the aid of the circular secondary con- 
ductor it is possible to determine the position of the wave-front 
in the ray; this was found to be at right angles to the ray. 
before and after reflection, so that in the reflection it was turned 
through 90°. 

Hitherto the focal lines of the concave mirrors were vertical, 
and the plane of oscillation was therefore perpendicular to the 
plane of incidence. In order to produce reflection with the 
oscillations in the plane of incidence, I placed both mirrors with 
their focal lines horizontal. I observed the same phenomena 
ag in the previous position; and, moreover, I was not able to 
recognise any difference in the intensity of the reflected ray in 
the two cases. On the other hand, if the focal line of the one 
mirror is vertical, and of the other horizontal, no secondary 
sparks can be observed. The inclination of the plane of oscilla- 
tion to the plane of incidence is therefore not altered by re- 
flection, provided this inclination has one of the two special 
values referred to; but in general this statement cannot 
hold good. It is even questionable whether the ray after 
reflection continues to be plane-polarised. The interferences 
which are produced in front of the mirror by the intersecting 
wave-system, and which, as I have remarked, give rise to 
characteristic phenomena in the circular conductor, are most 
likely to throw light upon all problems relating to the a 
of phase and amplitude produced by reflection. 

One further experiment on reflection from an sldctrindlly 
eolotropic surface may be mentioned. The two concave mirrors 
were again placed side by side, as in the reflection-experiment 


XI acne i 181 


first described; but now there was placed opposite to them, as 
a reflecting surface, the screen of parallel copper wires which 
has already been referred to. It was found that the secondary 
spark-gap remained dark when the wires intersected the direction 
of the oscillations at right angles, but that sparking began as 
soon as the wires coincided with the direction of the oscillations, 
Hence the analogy between the tourmaline plate and our surface 
which conducts in one direction is confined to the transmitted 
part of the ray.' The tourmaline plate absorbs the part which 
is not transmitted ; our surface reflects it. Ifin the experiment 
last described the two mirrors are placed with their focal lines at 
right angles, no sparks can be excited in the secondary conductor 
by reflection from an isotropic screen; but I pyoved to my 

. Satisfaction that sparks are produced when the reflection takes 
place from the eolotropic wire grating, provided this is adjusted 
so that the wires are inclined at 45° to the focal lines. The 
explanation of this follows naturally from what has been already 
stated. 


Refraction 


In order to find out whether any refraction of the ray takes 
place in passing from air into another insulating medium, I had 
a large prism made of so-called hard pitch, a material like 
asphalt. The base was an isosceles triangle 1:2 metres in the 
side, and with a refracting angle of nearly 30°. The refracting 
edge was placed vertical, and the height of the whole prism was 
15 metres. But since the prism weighed about 12 cwt., and 
would have been too heavy to move as a whole, it was built up 
of three pieces, each 0°5 metre high, placed one above the other. 
The material was cast in wooden boxes which were left around 
it, as they did not appear to interfere with its use. The prism 
was mounted on a support of such height that the middle of 
its refracting edge was at the same height as the primary and 
secomdary spark-gaps. When I was satisfied that refraction 
did take place, and had obtained some idea of its-amount, I 
arranged the experiment in the following manner :—The produc- 
ing mirror was set up at a distance of 2°6 metres from the 
prism and facing one of the refracting surfaces, so that the axis 
of the beam was directed as nearly as possible towards the centre 


1 [See Note 26 at end of book.] 


182 - ELECTRIC RADIATION xI 


of mass of the prism, and met the refracting surface at an 
angle of incidence of 25° (on the side of the normal 
towards the base). Near the refracting edge and also at the 
opposite side of the prism were placed two conducting screens 
which prevented the ray from passing by any other path than 
that through the prism. On the side of the emerging ray there 
was marked upon the floor a circle of 2°5 metres radius, having 
as its centre the centre of mass of the lower end of the prism. 
Along this the receiving mirror was now moved about, its aper- 
ture being always directed towards the centre of the circle. 
No sparks were obtained when the mirror was placed in the 
direction of the incident ray produced; in this direction the 
prism threw a complete shadow. But sparks appeared when 
the mirror was moved towards the base of the prism, beginning 
when the angular deviation from the first position was about 
11°. The sparking increased in intensity until the deviation 
amounted to about 22°, and then again decreased. The last 
sparks were observed with a deviation of about 34°. When 
the mirror was placed in a position of maximum effect, and then 
moved away from the prism along the radius of the circle, the 
sperks could be traced up to a distance of 5-6 metres. 
When an assistant stood either in front of the prism or behind 
it the sparking invariably ceased, which shows that the action 
reaches the secondary conductor through the prism and not in 
any other way. The experiments were repeated after placing 
both mirrors with their focal lines horizontal, but without alter- 
ing the position of the prism. This made no difference in the 
phenomena observed. A refracting angle of 30° and a devia- 
tion of 22° in the neighbourhood of the minimum deviation 
corresponds to a refractive index of 1°69. The refractive index 
of pitch-like materials for light is given as being between 1°5 
and 1°6. We must not attribute any importance to the 
magnitude or even the sense of this difference,’ seeing that our 
method was not an accurate one, and that the material® used 
was impure. 

We have applied the term rays of electric force to the 
phenomena which we have investigated. We may perhaps 
further designate them as rays of light of very great wave-length. 
The experiments described appear to me, at any rate, eminently 


1 [See Note 27 at end of book.] 


xI ELECTRIC RADIATION 183 


adapted to remove any doubt as to the identity of light, radiant 
heat, and electromagnetic wave-motion. I believe that from 
now on we shall have greater confidence in making use of the 
advantages which this identity enables us to derive both in the 
study of optics and of electricity. ‘ 


Explanation of the Figures—tIn order to facilitate the 
repetition and extension of these experiments, I append in 
the accompanying Figs. 35, 
36,, and 36,, illustrations of 
the apparatus which I used, 
although these were constructed 
simply for the purpose of experi- 
menting at the time and with- 
out any regard to durability. 
Fig. 35 shows in plan and ele- 
vation (section) the producing 
mirror. It will be seen that 
the framework of it consists of 
two horizontal frames (a, a) of 
parabolic form, and four vertical 
supports (0,5) which are screwed 
to each of the frames so as to 
support and connect them. The 
sheet metal reflector is clamped 
between the frames and the sup- 
ports, and fastened to both by 
numerous ‘screws. The sup- 
ports project above and below 
beyond the sheet metal so 
that they can be used as 
handlts in handling the mirror. Fig. 36, represents the 
primary conductor on a somewhat larger scale. The two metal 
parts slide with friction in two sleeves of strong paper which 
are held together by indiarubber bands. The sleeves them- 
selves are fastened by four rods of sealing-wax to a board which 
again is tied by indiarubber bands to a strip of wood forming 
part of the frame which can be seen in Fig. 35. The two leading 


184 ELECTRIC RADIATION XI 


wires (covered with gutta-percha) terminate in two holes bored 
in the knobs of the primary conductor. This arrangement 
allows of all necessary motion and adjustment of the various 
parts of the conductor; it can be taken to pieces and put 
together aguin in a few minutes, and this is essential in order 
that the knobs may be frequently repolished. Just at the 
points where the leading wires pass through the mirror, they . 


Fig. 86. 


are surrounded during the discharge by a bluish light. The 
smooth wooden screen s is introduced for the purpose of shield- 
ing the spark-gap from this light, which otherwise would 
interfere seriously with the production of the oscillations. 
Lastly, Fig. 36, represents the secondary spark-gap. Both parts 
of the secondary conductor are again attached by sealing-wax 
rods and indiarubber bands to a slip forming part of the wooden 
framework. From the inner ends of these parts the leading 
wires, surrounded by glass tubes, can be seen proceeding through 
the mirror and bending towards one another. The upper wire 
carries at its pole a small brass knob. To the lower wire is 
soldered a piece of watch-spring which carries the second pole, 
consisting of a fine copper point. The point is intentionally 
chosen of softer metal than the knob; unless this precaution is 
taken the point easily penetrates into the knob, and the minute 
sparks disappear from sight in the small hole thus produced. 
The figure shows how the point is adjusted by a screw which 
presses against the spring that is insulated from it by a glass 
plate. The spring is bent in a particular way in order to secure 


XI ELECTRIC RADIATION 185 


finer motion of the point than esi be possible if the screw 
alone were used. 

No doubt the apparatus here described can be considerably 
modified without interfering with the success of the experi- 
ments. Acting upon friendly advice, I have tried to replace 
the spark-gap in the secondary conductor by a frog’s leg pre- 
pared for detecting currents; but this arrangement which is so 
delicate under other conditions does uot seem to be adapted for 
these purposes.! 


1 [See Note 28 at end of book.] 


Oo BOMBay > 


S$ BRANCH uw 
& 


XII 


ON THE MECHANICAL ACTION OF ELECTRIC WAVES 
IN WIRES 


(Wiedmann’s Ann. 42, p. 407, 1891.); 


. THE investigation of the mechanical forces to which a con- 
ductor is subjected under the action of a series of electric 
waves appeared to me to be desirable for several reasons. In 
the first place, these forces might supply a means of investi- 
gating such waves quantitatively, provided that the effects 
okserved were of sufficient magnitude and regularity. Hitherto 
almost the only quantitative determinations have been based 
on the heating effect of the waves. In the hands of Herren 
Rubens and Ritter this method has given excellent results ;* 
but the observation of the mechanical forces offers in many 
cases the advantage of simplicity. In the second place, by 
examining the nature and distribution of the mechanical forces, 
I hoped to find a means of demonstrating the existence of the 
magnetic force in addition to the electric force. Only the 
latter has manifested itself in the observations hitherto made ;? 
and as the ordinary methods of detecting magnetic force are of 
no avail here, it appeared to be worth while trying whether a 
new method would prove more serviceable. In the third and 
last place—and this was more especially the object of the in- 
vestigation—TI hoped to be able to devise some way of making 
observations on waves in free air,—that is to say, in such a 
manner that any disturbances which might be observed could 

1 H. Rubens and R. Ritter, Wied. Ann. 40, p. 55, 1890. 
2 If I have myself on former occasions happened to speak of the observation 


of nodes of the magnetic waves, this mode of expression was only justified hy 
theory and not required by experiment. 


xl MECHANICAL ACTION OF Sey, WAVES IN WIRES 187 


in no wise be referred to any action+at-a-distance. This last 
hope was frustrated by the feebleness of the effects produced 
under the circumstances. I had to content myself with 
examining the effects produced by waves travelling along 
wires, although in so doing the most important object of the 
experiments was missed. The mechanical actions produced by 
waves in wires may be and will be regarded as being due to 
attractions caused by the electrification of the wires and by 
the currents flowing in them. For this reason researches on 
waves in wires cannot be made use of to decide between the 
older and the newer views. If, however, we start from the 
point of view from which waves in wires are regarded simply 
as a special form of waves travelling in air, it is a matter of 
indifference whether we make the one form’ or the other the 
object of our experiments. 


1. The System of Waves Employed 


After trying several ways of disposing the waves, and 
after obtaining results which in the main were concordant>I 
decided to adhere to Herr Lecher’s arrangement as being the 
neatest and the most suitable for the investigation.’ Fig. 37 
shows the form thereof. 


Fig. 37. 


A A’ is the same conductor which was always used before 
as the primary conductor, and consists of two square plates, 
each 40 cm. in the side, connected by a wire 60 cm. long 
which contains a 2 mm. spark-gap. A small induction-coil 
was used as an exciter; this was supplied with current from 
two accumulators, and its maximum spark-length was only 4 
em. Single discharges of thissmaller apparatus were certainly 
less efficient than those of a larger induction-coil, but this 


1 BE. Lecher, Wied. Ann. 41, p. 850, 1890. 


188 MECHANICAL ACTION OF ELECTRIC WAVES IN WIRES XII 


drawback was more than eompensated for by the more rapid 
succession of discharges. Opposite the plates 4 and 4’, and 
at a distance of 10 cm. from them, stood the plates B and B’, 
from which two parallel wires, about 30 cm. apart, are led to 
a distance of 6°8 metres, and there’ are connected together 
between 6 and 3’. At a variable distance aa’ from their 
origin these wires are placed in communication with each 
other by means of a second connection or bridge. When this 
bridge is in a certain position, at a distance of about 1:2 metre 
from B B’, there takes place in the interval between aa’ and 5 0’ 
a very energetic oscillation. This indicates the half wave- 
length of a stationary wave, and, as Herr Lecher has shown, it 
is produced by resonance between this oscillation itself and 
the primary oscillation, which here takes place in the interval 
between .4 4’ on the one hand, and Ba a’B’ on the other hand. 
Any shifting of the bridge increases one of the two periods of 
oscillation, and at the same time diminishes the other; hence 
the peculiar definiteness of adjustment with this arrangement. 
Besides its general excellence it offers for our present purpose 
several special advantages. Since the forces to be observed 
ace very small, we have to protect carefully the conductors 
which are subjected to them from external electrostatic effects. 
With the arrangement here used this is possible, because the 
wires, which we must necessarily place near the test-body, 
form a connected conducting system. If in our experiments 
we surround the working parts (of the apparatus) with a wire 
network, and connect this with the nodal points at aa’ and bd’, 
the protection is made complete without interfering with 
the vibration. Hence the experiments are carried out in this 
way. Again, since the conductors which are to be subjected 
to the forces do not, like the resonators previously used, pick 
out a definite vibration from the whole disturbance, we could 
only expect confused results if we did not otherwise take care 
to produce a simple oscillation of definite wave-length arid with 
nodes in known positions. This condition is fulfilled in the 
above arrangement; for there can be no doubt that the points 
aa’ and 6d! are nodal points of all oscillations excited between 
them, and that among these only the longest oscillation, 
strengthened by resonance, rises to a considerable magnitude. 
Clearly, we do not narrow the scope of the experiments by 


XII MECHANICAL ACTION OF ELECTRI¢ WAVES IN WIRES 189 


contenting ourselves with the investigation of half a wave- 
length. Finally, the conditions of our oscillation are practically 
the same whether the two wires are stretched straight, or 
whether they are bent side by side in any desired way; just 
as, in the case of acoustic vibrations of air in tubes, it is not 
of much importance whether the tubes are straight or crooked. 
We can thus easily bring our oscillation into all possible 
positions with respect to the test-body which is held in a fixed 
position. As a matter of fact, the various relative positions were 
always obtained by shifting the wire, even in cases in which it 
may appear from the text that the test-body had been shifted. 


2. The Electric Force 


For the purpose of measuring the mechanical action of the 
electric force, I made use of a small cylindrical tube of gold 
paper 5°5 cm. long, and 0°7 cm. in diameter. This was sus- 
pended by a silk fibre with its 
axis horizontal; a very small 
magnet gave the tube a definite 
position of rest, and a deviation 
from this position was measured 
by means of a small mirror. The 
whole system hung in a glass 
case, a8 shown in Fig. 38. 
When the apparatus was sub- 
jected to the action of the oscil- 
lation, the needle tended to set 
along the mean direction of the 
electric force, and was thus de- 
flected from the position of rest. 
In order to increase these de- 
flections I brought the two wires 
in the*’neighbourhood of the ap- 
paratus nearerto oneanotherand 
to the test-body—in fact, within 
a few centimetres; andinorder @ Fig. 38. 
to strengthen the action I at- 
tached small plates to the wires opposite to the ends of the 
test-body, as shown for one special case in the figure. Under 


190 MECHANICAL ACTION OF ELECTRIC WAVES IN WIRES xII 
‘ 


these circumstances first deflections of 100 scale divisions 
and above could be obtained. These first throws exhibited a 
satisfactory regularity ; when the same experiment was repeated 
several times, the separate results only differed from one 
another by a few per cent. The differences between single 
discharges ought to be much greater, but the throw of the 
needle gives the mean effect of very many discharges. In 
order to show how these throws can be used in quantitative 
experiments I here quote two series of observations. The 
first of these is intended to illustrate the effect of resonance. 
The apparatus was set up at c at the antinode of an oscillation, 
and the wires a6 and a’ 0! were brought near to it, as shown in 
Fig. 38. The bridge aa’ was now placed at various distances 
e from the origin B B’ of the wires, the induction-apparatus was 
put into action, and the magnitude 7 of the throw measured. 
The respective values of e and z in the neighbourhood of the 
maximum were :— 


e=80 p60 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 cm. 
t= 53 100 218 512 441 193 108 5:7 4°2 div. 


° When the throws are represented graphically it is seen 
that their course is regular and exhibits a pronounced maximum 
between 110 and 120 cm. In fact, the throws reach their 
largest value «= 60°6 scale divisions at e= 114 em. 

The second series of observations was intended to exhibit 
the decrease in the intensity of the oscillation from the antinode 
ce to the node 6. For this purpose the distance was divided 
into 12 equal divisions, and the apparatus was introduced at the 
13 end-points. The following first throws 7 were obtained :— 


1 2 3. 64 5 6 vi 8 9 10 11 12 13 — 
80'5 80°5 79:0 77-0 65:6 57:8 50:0 385 275 175 70 1:0 0 


These values again give a sufficiently smooth curve and 
enable us to form an idea of the nature of the oscillation, and 
to convince ourselves that it differs appreciably from the 
simple sine-oscillation. 

Other experiments which I planned had reference to the 
direction of the electric force in the neighbourhood of the 
wires. These experiments gave no fresh information beyond 


xl MECHANICAL ACTION OF ELECTRIC WAVES IN WIRES 191 
* 


what might be regarded as already settled. In the interval 
between the wires the needle tended to set along the shortest 
line between the two wires; outside this space it tended to 
take up the direction towards the nearest wire. Thus there was 
always an apparent attraction to be observed between the ends 
of the tube and the nearest parts of the wires. 


3. The Magnetic Force 


In order to investigate the magnetic force I made use of a 
circular hoop of aluminium wire. The diameter of this hoop 
was 65 mm., and that of the wire was 2 mm. The hoop was 
suspended so that it could. turn about a vertical diameter, and, 
like the cylinder in the last section, was provided with a 
magnet, mirror, and glass case. 
Fig. 39 gives a sketch of the 
apparatus used. 

If we disregard for a moment 
our knowledge of the magnetic 
force we should expect that, 
under the influence of the oscilla- 
tion, the hoop would behave just 
like the cylinder, and therefore 
that the direction of the parts 
which are farthest from the axis 
of rotation, 7.e. that the horizontal 
diameter of the hoop would play 
the same part as the axis of 
length of the cylinder. We 
should therefore expect the end- 
points of the horizontal diameter 
would everywhere be attracted by 
the nearest parts of the wires 
through which the waves are pass- 
ing, and that this action would be Fig. 89. 
strongest at the antinode of the 
oscillation, and would cease in the neighbourhood of the nodes 
where the electric force itself disappears. But if we actually 
hang up the hoop at the node 6 8’, in the manner shown in Fig. 
39, we observe other and unexpected phenomena. In the 


192 MECHANICAL ACTION OF ELECTRIC WAVES IN WIRES xIl 


first place, the ring does not remain at rest under the influence 
of the oscillation, but exhibits deflections of the same order of 
magnitude as those shown by the cylinder at the antinode of 
the oscillation. In the second place, the deflection does not 
indicate an attraction but a repulsion between the neighbouring 
points of the hoop and the wires. That the repulsion is a 
consequence of the oscillation itself is shown by the fact that 
its magnitude is found to be determined by resonance, accord- 
ing to the same’ law as that of the electrical action. If we 
leave the hoop inside the bent wire 00’, but alter the relative 
positions of the two, w find that the horizontal diameter 
always, and from all sides, endeavours to.take up a position 
perpendicular to the plane of the bent. wire. 

After these experiments alone, and apart from any knowledge 
obtained otherwise, we may therefore assert that, in addition to 
the electric oscillation, there is present an oscillation of another 
kind whose nodal points do not coincide with those of the 
electric oscillation, and that this oscillation, like the electrical 
one, exhibits itself as a directive change of space-conditions, 
but that the characteristic direction of the new oscillation is 
perpendicular to the electrical one. 

We may indeed, going beyond mere observation, at once 
identify the new oscillation with the magnetic oscillation 
required by theory. The rapidly alternating magnetic force 
must induce in the closed hoop a current alternating rhyth- 
mically with it, and the reaction between these causes the 
deflection of the loop. The magnetic force has its maximum 
value at the nodes of the electric oscillation, and just there its 
direction is perpendicular to the plane of the bent wire. We 
can most easily understand the repulsion between the fixed 
wires and the neighbouring parts of the hoop by regarding it 
as the effect of currents flowing along these paths. The 
current deduced in the hoop must continually annul the effect 
of the inducing current in the interior of the hoop; f% must 
therefore at every instant be in the opposite direction to the 
latter, and must accordingly be repelled by it. + 

All the remaining phenomena of disturbance which are 
observed with the suspended hoop, can without difficulty be 
connected with the above explanation. Under certain cireum- 
stances complications arise. For example, if we leave the 


xii MECHANICAL ACTION OF ELECTRIC/ WAVES IN WIRES 193 


arrangement in the state shown in Fig. 39, but move the hoop 
from the node 0 b’ towards the antinode of the oscillation, the 
repulsion rapidly diminishes; at a certain distance it becomes 
zero, and then changes into an attraction which increases until 
we arrive at the antinode. In one special case, for example, 
the repulsion at 5 5’ amounted to 20 scale divisions, disappeared 
at a distance of 95 cm. from the end, and then changed into 
an attraction of which the maximum value was measured by 
44 scale divisions. Clearly these changes are not to be ex- 
plained by the behaviour of the magnetic force alone, but by 
the joint action of the magnetic vith the electric force; of 
these the latter preponderates considerably at c, the former at 
bd’. By eliminating the electric force we can confirm this view 
and follow the course of the magnetic oscillation. For this 
purpose we set up two other wires parallel to the wires a b and 
a’ b’, but only 20 cm. long, and in such'a position that they are 
symmetrical towards the wires a b and a’ b’ with reference to the 
position of rest of the hoop, as shown by the dotted lines a, 6, 
and a,’ },’ in Fig. 40. We connect ad with a, b, and a’ 0! with 
a,'b,’. Clearly this almost annuls the electric action, but 
scarcely affects the magnetic. In fact, we now observe that 
at all distances the movable ring is repelled from the fixed 
wires, This repulsion diminishes continuously from the ends 
towards the middle of the oscillation ; it there reaches a minimum 
which, in the particular instance referred to, amounted to 4 
scale divisions. If the electric oscillation were a real sine- 
oscillation, the magnetic force would necessarily vanish at. its 
antinode; but we saw at once, from the distribution of the 
electric force, that this simple assumption did not hold good, 
_and so we can easily understand the existence of a residual 
magnetic force at the antinode of the oscillation. 

As required by theory, the mechanical effects of the electric 
and of the magnetic force prove to be, in general, of the same 
order of magnitude; the preponderance of the one over the 
other in each particular case is mainly determined by the 
proportions of the neighbouring parts of the ring and of the 
fixed conductors. The more these approximate to the state of 

infinitely thin wires, the more the magnetic force comes into 

prominence; the broader the surfaces which are attached to 

them, the more is the magnetic force overpowered by the 
ce) 


194 MECHANICAL ACTION OF ELECTRIC WAVES IN WIRES XIE 


electric force. It is evident, even from the simple examples of 
forms of conductor which we have chosen for the detailed 
investigation, that a conductor of any form whatever inside a 
train of electromagnetic waves must be subjected to the action 
of forces which are complicated and not always easy to under- 
stand. 


XIII 


ON THE FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTRO- 
MAGNETICS FOR BODIES AT REST 


e 
(@attinger Nachr. March 19, 1890; IFiedemann’s Ann, 40, p. 577.) 


THE system of ideas and formule by which Maxwell repre- 
sented electromagnetic phenomena is in its possible develop- 
ments richer and more comprehensive than any other of the 
systeras which have been devised for the same purpose. It is 
certainly desirable that a system which is so perfect, as far as 
its contents are concerned, should also be perfected as far as 
possible in regard to its form. The system should be so constructed 
as to allow its logical foundations to be easily recognised ; all 
unessential ideas should be removed from it, and the relations 
of the essential ideas should be reduced to their simplest form. 
In this respect Maxwell’s own representation does not indicate 
the highest attainable goal; it frequently wavers between the 
conceptions which Maxwell found in existence, and those at 
which he arrived. Maxwell. starts with the assumption of 
direct actions-at-a-distance ; he investigates the laws according 
to which hypothetical polarisations of the dielectric ether 
vary under the influence of such distance-forces; and he ends 
by asserting that these polarisations do really vary thus, but 
without being actually caused to do so by distance-forces.? 
This procedure leaves behind it the unsatisfactory feeling that 
there must be something wrong about either the final result or 
the way which led to it. Another effect of this procedure is 
that in the formule there are retained a number of superfluous, 


1 The same remark applies to v. Helmholtz’s paper in vol. 72 of Crelle’s 
Journal,—not, indeed, throughout, but as far as relates to the special values of 
the constants, which allow the distance-forces to vanish from the final results, 
and which, therefore, lead to the theory here supported. 


196 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XH 


and in a sense rudimentary, ideas which only possessed their 
proper significance in the older theory of direct action-at-a- 
distance. Among such rudimentary ideas of a physical nature 
J may mention that of dielectric displacement in free ether, as 
distinguished from the electric force which produces it and the 
relation between the two—the specific inductive capacity of 
the ether. These distinctions have a meaning so long as we can 
remove the ether from a space and yet allow the force to persist 
in it. This was conceivable, according to the conception from 
which Maxwell started ; it is not conceivable, according to the 
conception to which we have been led by his researches. Asa 
rudimentary idea of a mathematical nature I may mention the 
predominate of the vector-potential in the fundamental equa- 
tions. In the construction of the new theory the potential served 
as a scaffolding; by its introduction the distance-forces which 
appeared discontinuously at particular points were replaced by 
magnitudes which at every point in space were determined only 
by the conditions at the neighbouring points. But after we 
have learnt to regard the forces themselves as magnitudes of 
the latter kind, there is no object in replacing them by poten- 
tials unless a mathematical advantage is thereby gained. And 
it does not appear to me that any such advantage is attained 
by the introduction of the vector-potential in the fundamental 
equations; furthermore, one would expect to find in these 
equations relations between the physical magnitudes which are 
actually observed, and not between magnitudes which serve 
for calculation only. 

Again, the incompleteness of form referred to renders it 
more difficult to apply Maxwell’s theory to special cases. In 
connection with such applications I have been led to endeavour 
for some time past to sift Maxwell’s formule and to separate 
their essential significance from the particular form in which 
they first happened to appear. The results at which I have 
arrived are set forth in the present paper. Mr. ’Oliver 
Heaviside has been working in the same direction ever since 
1885. From Maxwell’s equations he removes the same sym- 
bols as myself; and the simplest form which these equations + 


1 These equations will be found in the Phil. Mag. for February’ 1888. 
Reference is there made to earlier papers in the Electrician for 1885, but this 
source was not accessible to me. 


XIII FOR BODIES AT ate 197 


thereby attain is essentially the same 'as that at which I arrive. 
In this respect, then, Mr. Heaviside has the priority. Never- 
theless, I hope that the following representation will not be 
deemed superfluous. It does not claim to set forth matters in 
a final form ; but only in such a manner as to admit of further 
improvements more easily than has hitherto been possible. 

I divide the subject into two parts. In the first part (A) 
I give the fundamental ideas and the formule by which they 
are connected. Explanations will be added to the formule ; 
but these explanations are not to be regarded as proofs of the 
formule. The statements will rather be given as facts derived 
from experience; and experience must be regarded as their 
proof. It is true, meanwhile, that each separate formula 
cannot be specially tested by experience, but only the system 
asa whole. But practically the same holds good for the system 
of equations of ordinary dynamics. 

In the second part (B) I state in what manner the facts 
which are directly observed can be systematically deduced 
from the formule ; and, hence, by what experiences the correct- 
ness of the system can be proved. A complete treatment of 
this part would naturally assume very large dimensions, ¢nd 
therefore mere indications must here suffice. 


A. THE FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS AND THEIR CONNECTION 


1. Electric and Magnetic Force 


Starting from rest, the interior of all bodies, including the 
free ether, can experience disturbances which we denote as 
electrical, and others which we denote as magnetic. The 
nature of these changes of state we do not know, but only the 
phenomena which their presence causes. Regarding these 
latter as known we can, with their aid, determine the 
geometrical relations of the changes of state themselves. The 
disturbances of the electric and the magnetic kind are so 
connected with one another that disturbances of the one kind 
can continuously exist independently of those of the other kind; 
but that, on the other hand, it is not possible for disturbances . 
of either of the two kinds to experience temporary fluctuations 
without exciting simultaneously disturbances of the other kind. 


198 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xu 


The production of the change of state necessitates an expen- 
diture of energy; this energy is again released when the 
disturbance disappears; hence the presence of the disturbance 
represents a stock of energy. At any given point the changes 
of state of either kind can be distinguished as to direction, 
sense, and magnitude. For the determination, therefore, of the 
electrical as well as of the magnetic state, it is necessary to 
specify a directed magnitude or the three components thereof. 
But it is an essential and important hypothesis of our present 
theory that the specification of a single directed magnitude 
is sufficient to determine completely the change of state 
under consideration. Certain phenomena, eg. those of per- 
manent magnetism, dispersion, etc., are not intelligible from 
this standpoint; they require that the electric or magnetic 
conditions of any point should be represented by more than 
one variable! For this very reason such phenomena are 
excluded from our considerations in their present state. 

That directed magnitude by means of which we first deter- 
mine the electrical state, we call the electric force. The pheno- 
menon by which we define the electric force is the mechanical 
force which a certain electrified body experiences in empty 
space under electrical stress. That is to say, for empty space 
we make the component of the electric force in any given 
direction proportional to the component of this mechanical 
force in the same direction. By electric force at a -point in a 
ponderable body we understand the electric force at this point 
inside an infinitely small cylindrical space, infinitely narrow as 
compared with its length, bored out of the body in such a way 
that its direction coincides with that of the force—a require- 
ment which, as experience shows, can always be satisfied. And 
whatever may be the relation between the force so measured 
and the actual change of state of the body, it certainly must, 
in accordance with our hypothesis, determine the change of 
state without ambiguity. If we everywhere replace the word 
“electric” by the word “magnetic,” and the electrified test- 
body by the pole of a magnetic needle, we obtain the definition 
of magnetic force. In order to settle the sense of both forces 
in the conventional manner, let us further stipulate that the 
electrified test-body is charged with vitreous electricity, and 


1 [See Note 29 at end of book.] 


XML FOR BODIES AT er : 199 


that the pole of the magnetic needle used is the one which 
points towards the north. The units of the forces are still 
reserved. The components of the electric force in the directions 
x, y, 2, we shall denote as X, Y, Z, and the corresponding 
components of the magnetic force as L, M, N. 


2. The Energy of the Field 


The stock of electrical energy in a portion of a body, 
within which the electric force has a constant value, is a 
homogeneous quadratic function of the three components of 
the electric force. The corresponding statement holds good for 
the supply of magnetic energy. The total supply of energy 
we shall denote as the electromagnetic; it is the sum of the 
electrical and the magnetic. 

According to this, the amount of energy of either kind per 
‘unit volume is for an isotropic body equal to the product of the 
square of the total force under consideration and a constant. 
The magnitude of the latter may be different for the electric 
and the magnetic energy ; it depends upon the material of the 
body and the choice of the units for energy and for the forges. 
We shall measure the energy in absolute Gauss’s measure; and 
shall now fix the units of the forces by stipulating that in free 
ether the value of the constants shall be equal to 1/87, so 
that the energy of unit volume of the stressed ether will be 


Jet y4z)+t (7+ M4N%. 
Sor 8r 


When the forces are measured in this manner, we say that 
they are measured in absolute Gauss’s units. The dimensions 
of the electric force become the same as those of the magnetic 
force. Both are such that their square has the dimensions of 
energy per unit volume; or, expressed in the usual notation, 
the dimensions of both are M'?L~'2T—. 

For every isotropic ponderable body we can now, in accord- 
ance with what has been stated, put the energy per unit 
volume as equal to 


(x? + Y?+ Tye (L? + M?+ N?). 
87 87 . 


1 See H. Helmholtz, Wied. Ann. 17, p. 42, 1882. 


200 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIII 


The new constants (e and ») here introduced are necessarily 
positive, and are simply numbers. We shall call ¢ the specific 
inductive capacity (Dielektricttdtsconstante) and yx the mag- 
netic permeability (Magnetisirungsconstante) of the substance. 
Clearly « and ~ are numerical ratios, by means of which we 
compare the energy of one material with the energy of another 
material. A definite value of either does not follow simply 
from the nature of a single substance itself. This is what we 
mean when we say that the specific inductive capacity and the 
magnetic permeability are not intrinsic constants of a substance. 
There is nothing wrong in saying that these constants are 
equal to unity for the ether; but this does not state any fact 
derived from experience ; it is only an arbitrary stipulation on 
our part. 

’ For crystalline bodies the energy per unit of volume will 
be equal to 


1 ss y 
as (€,,X? + €,,.¥° + €,,2? + 2¢,,.XV + 2¢,,VZ + 2¢,,XZ) 
1 9 2 
+ 5g (al* + fygM? + piggN? + 2pygLM + 2y,,.MN + 2y,,LN). 


By a suitable choice of axes either the one part or the other 
of this expression can be transformed into a sum of three 
squares. It is even probable that the same choice of axes 
would thus transform both parts. The e and » must be such 
that in the transformation into a sum of squares all the co- 
efficients would become positive. 


3. Connection of the Forces in the Ether 


We assume that the system of co-ordinates is such that 
the direction of positive is straight out in front of us, the 
direction of positive z upwards, and that y increases frota left 
to right. Assuming this, the electric and magnetic forces in 
the ether are connected with each other according to the 
following equations :— 

1 Unfortunately for the English reader this is not the system employed by 
Maxwell, but the symmetric one. Hence follow some differences from Maxwell's 


formule as to the signs + and —-. The system is that which is employed in 
y. Helmholtz’s papers. 


XII FOR BODIES AT ies 201 
aL - dZ adY dX _ aM dN 
‘dt dy dz ; dt dz dy 
| aM dX aZ dY aN aL 
(3,) A sale ae (3) AX Dogan ae 
oN _aY dX. dZ du dM 
dt de dy’ AGE = dy de’ 


in addition to which we have the equations (which are not 
inconsistent with the above)— 


4) aM aN _ dX d¥ dh 
(30) de dy aa : lo eae 


as a supplement distinguishing the ether froni ponderable 
matter. ‘ 

After these equations are once found, it no longer appears 
expedient to deduce them (in accordance with the historical 
course) from conjectures as to the electric and magnetic con- 
stitution of the ether and the nature of the acting forces,—all 
these things being entirely unknown. Rather is it expedient 
to start from these equations in search of such further conjec- 
tures respecting the constitution of the ether. 

Since the dimensions of X, Y, Z, and of L, M, N are the 
same, the constant A must be the reciprocal of a velocity. It 
is in reality an intrinsic constant of the ether; in saying this 
we assert that its magnitude is independent of the presence of 
any other body, or of any arbitrary stipulations on our part. 

We multiply all our equations by (1/47A).d7; further 
multiply the members of the series separately by L, M, N, X, Y,Z 
respectively, and add all together. We integrate both sides of 
the resulting equation over any definite space, of which the 
element of surface dw makes, with the co-ordinate axes, the 
angle nz, ny, nz. The integration can be caryied out on the 
rightshand side of the equation, and we get-— 


d fi xy 2 2 2 i 2 2 2 
altos + Y°42) +4 IP +N%)/ dr 


i 
i Ealtor — MZ) cos ne +(LZ—NX) cos ny 
7 | 
+(MX — LY) cos nz}do. 


202 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XU 


The integral on the left-hand side is the electromagnetic 
energy of the space: the equation, therefore, gives us the 
variation of this energy, expressed in magnitudes which relate 
only to the bounding surface of the space. 


4. Isotropic Nun-Conductors 


In homogeneous isotropic non-conductors the phenomena 
are qualitatively identical with those in free ether. Quantita- 
tively they differ in two respects: in the first place, the 
intrinsic constant has a value different from what it has in the 
ether; and in the second place, the expression for the energy 
per unit volame contains, as already explained, the constants 
eand yw. The following equations represent these statements, 
and are in accord with experience :— 


Apth _d%_ a a@X _@M_ aN 
dt dy dz’ dt dz dy’ 

dM dX dZ dv dN ab 

‘Ke a 7 ap ss oc Eo 

A Pa ae ae (4) di de da’ 
| ap ON at _ ax. Ae Z _ ah _aM 
dt dz dy’ dt dy da 


For if, for a moment, we determine the measure of the 
forces in the non-conductor as we have previously done in the 
ether, and accordingly replace X, Y, Z by X/,/e, Y/a/e, 
Z//e, and L, M, N by L/a/p, M//p, N//m; then the 
equations assume exactly the form of the equations for the 
ether—with this single difference, that the magnitude A is 
replaced by the magnitude A/,/ eu. If we retain, on the other 
side, our measure of the forces, we can consistently assign to 
the energy the requisite value. For by carrying out the same 
operations which we employed in the preceding section, we 
get— 


@ of { goers ay+t fates | ar 


= at (NY — MZ) cos nx + (LZ — NX) cos ny 
+(MX —LY) cos nz!do. 


XIII FOR BODIES AT re : 203 


The general statements by which we have been guided to 
equations (4) no longer hold good when the non-conductor is 
not homogeneous. The question therefore arises-—Do our 
equations hold good in this case? Experience answers this 
question in the affirmative; we may therefore regard the 
magnitudes e and p in equations (4,) and (4,) as variable from 
point to, point. 


5. Crystalline Non-Conductors 


We can obtain a representation of the processes that take 
place in such bodies—-whose structure differs in different 
directions, but whose electromagnetic properties merge into 
those of isotropic non-conductors as the eolotropy disappears 
—by regarding the time-variations of the forces on the left 
hand of our equations as perfectly general linear functions of 
the space-variations of the forces of the opposite kind on the 
right hand. ‘The generality of form of these linear functions 
and the choice of their constants is, however, restricted by 
assuming that the same operation which has already furnjghed 
us with an equation for the variation of energy will always 
do so, and by stipulating that the energy shall thereby be ex- 
pressed in the form already established. By these considerations 
we are led to the following equations, which, in fact, suffice for 
the representation of the most important phenomena :— 


aL aM aN aZ aY 
A(uua + Pia + Hea) = ay - ze’ 


aL dM dN\ dX dZ 
(54) alea + Pe ae + —) = 


Pos dt) ~ dz dx’ 
aM aN ua dX 

’ aX dy 
(A en dt + €.—— ak ter) = dM aN 
ay dt “dz dy’ 
(5p) alcca + eg a Se _@N_ al 
dX dt dz dz’ 


So oe 


204 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIII 


The equation for the variation of the energy of a space 
gives the same result as in sections (3) and (4). Experience 
also shows that it is not necessary to regard the e and yu in the 
equations of the present section as being constant throughout 
the space; they may be magnitudes varying in any way from 
point to point. 


6. Distribution of the Forces in Conductors 


In the bodies hitherto considered, every variation of the 
electric force appears as the consequence of the presence of mag- 
netic forces. If within a finite region the magnetic forces are 
equal to zero, every cause for such a variation is wanting; and 
any existing distribution of electri¢ force remains permanently, 
so long as it is left to itself and,no disturbance reaches the 
interior from beyond the limits of the region. The electric 
forces do not behave thus in all bodies. In many bodies an 
electric force when left to itself vanishes more or less rapidly 
away; in such bodies magnetic forces or other causes are 
necessary in order to restrain an existing distribution from 
change. For reasons which will appear later, we call such 
bodies conductors. The simplest assumptions which we can 
make with respect to them are these: In the first place, 
that the loss per unit time experienced by an electric 
force when left to itself is proportional to the force itself; 
and, in the second place, that independently of this loss the 
magnetic forces here tend to produce the same variations as in 
the bodies hitherto considered. If we introduce a new constant 
A, the first assumption allows us to assert that the force-com- 
ponent X when left to itself will vary in accordance with the 
equation— 


aX 
Acy = — 47 AX. 


This first assumption is supplemented by the secorfd as 
follows :—When magnetic forces are present, the variation will 
take place in accordance with the equation— 

dX dM dN 


Ae = a ay — 47 AX. 


The constant A is called the specific conductivity of the body, 


XUI FOR BODIES AT ie 205 


measured electrostatically. Its dimension is the reciprocal of a 
time. Hence the magnitude ¢/4qd is a time; it is the time 
in which the force when left to itself sinks to 1 /e of its initial 
value—the so-called time ‘of relaxation. Hr. E. Cohn first 
observed and drew attention to the fact! that it is this latter 
time, and not 2 itself, that is a second intrinsic constant of the 
body under consideration; one that can be settled without 
ambiguity and independently of any second medium. 

These considerations lead us now, conjecturally, to the 
following equations which are in accordance with experience :— 


dL daZ adY aX. dM dN 
Bae de des Aezy = ey TAPAS 
aM aX adZ adY dN adh 
(6,) {Ap ae ot ae (6) Aez, = Tg 7 ATAAY, 
aN daY dX dZ dL dM 
Bear de ay? Ae oP ay das ee 


Clearly these equations refer only to isotropic media; it is, 
however, unnecessary, as far as the hypotheses hitherto made are 
concerned, that the bodies should be homogeneous as wetk™ But 
in order to represent accurately the actual distribution of 
the forces in a non-homogeneous body, our equations still need 
to be supplemented to a certain extent. For if the constitution 
of a body varies from point to point, the electric force when 
left to itself does not in general sink completely to zero, but it 
assumes a certain final value which is not zero. This value, 
whose components may be X’ Y’ Z’, we call the electromotive 
force acting at the point in question. We regard this as 
being independent of time; in general it is greater, the greater 
the variation of the chemical nature of the body per unit of 
length. We take into account the action of the electromotive 
force as follows :—Instead of making the diminution of the 
electtic force when left to itself proportional to its absolute 
value, we make it proportional to the difference which remains 
between this absolute value and the-final value. In the case, 
then, of conductors whose structure admits of the production of 
electromotive forces, our equations become— 


1 With respect to this, and the manner in which the magnitude ) is here 
introduced, cf. E. Cohn, Berl. Ber. 26, p. 405, 1889. 


206 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS 


_dZ ay dX_dM_dN_ se 
Ate ag ae Ne ig =ae ~ dy AMA -X), 
agit _ 2% _ 42 i), WN yy 
| Mat ae ae (8a Ata = en He 7 EMAC ), 

dN _dY_ aX, dZ dL dM 
geo dat ay ea ae ae ee 


7. Holotropic Conductors 


XIII 


If the conductor behaves differently in different directions, 
we can no longer assume that the diminution in each com- 
ponent of the force when left to itself depends only upon this 
same component; we must rather suppose that it is a linear 
function of the three components. If we further assume that 
when the conductivity vanishes, the equations reduce to those 
of an eolotropic non-conductor, we arrive at the following 


system :— 
dM dN z adZ aY 
A (wag a Foe gp t Mas Gy i) dy dz’ 
' dM dN, dX dX 
(7,)) A hee a sae dt + Has-a7 ) ae eee 


aM dN\_@¥_ aX. 
Mae + besa tha) = ae ay’ 


dX dZ, dM aN 
AGT a5 dt it 7 dz dy 


- as X/) + A(¥ — ¥)+%3(Z — Z’)}, 


“2 OE tena : + Age) ae ae 


=r ral K KX) + deg ¥ — ¥") + dog('Z— 2}, 


dy de. 


A (wi 
( 
| a( dX =) dN dL 
( 


aX dZ. du dM 
A (4s qq t 9G at &s8 7 


= 4orA{o(X — X’) + Age(Y — ¥’) + rgs(Z — Z’)}. 


It is highly probable that for all actual bodies X,, 


21? 


Nay = Ayge Nog = Ago We may regard the constants e, p, ne in athe 


13? 


equations of this section again as varying in value from place 


to place. 


XIIL FOR BODIES AT zi 207 


8. Limiting Conditions 


It is easily seen that the equations (7,) and (7,) include all 
the earlier ones as particular cases; and that even the equations 
for the free ether can be deduced from them by a suitable dis- 
position of the constants. Now since these constants may be 
functions of the space, we are led to regard the surface of 
separation of two heterogeneous bodies as a transition-layer, in 
which the constants certainly pass with extraordinary rapidity 
from one value to another, but in which this still happens in 
such a way that even in the layer itself the above equations 
always hold good, and express finite relations between the finite 
values of the constants and the forces which also ‘remain finite. 
In order to deduce the limiting conditions from this hypothesis, 
which is in accordance with experience, let us for the sake of 
simplicity suppose that the element of the surface of separation 
under consideration coincides with the zy-plane. 

Disregarding for the moment the appearance of electro- 
motive forces between the bodies in contact, we find, on 
examining the first two of the equations (7,) and (7p) tha the 
magnitudes 

dX dY dM dL 
dz’ dz’ dz’ de 


must, in consequence of our hypothesis, remain finite in the 
transition-layer as well. Thus, if the index 1 refers to the one 
side of the limiting layer, and the index 2 to the other side, 
we must have 


(8,) o CLO. Oe ee eer 


The components of the force which are tangential to the 
limiting surface therefore continue through it without discon- 
tinuify. Applying this to the third of the equations (7,) and 
(7,), we further find that the expressions 


dL: dM aN ‘ 
Mase + besa ners an 


aX 7 
St €23 TE p+ Pei di ae Arr(Ag X + AgeY + gsZ) 


208 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIII 


must have the same value on both sides of the limiting layer. 
This statement, which expresses the reciprocal dependence of 
the normal components of the forces on both sides of the limiting 
surface, assumes in the case of isotropic bodies the simple form 


aN, aN, = 
(8,) bh ah Be Fra =u, 
aZ aZ. 
(84) at — € = == 4mr(r,Z, —A_Z,). 


In the next place, if we do not exclude the appearance of 
electromotive forces in the limiting layer, we have to observe 
that, in accerdance with experience, the component of these 
forces which is normal to the limiting surface, 7.e. Z’, becomes 
infinite in the transition-layer itself; and yet in such a way 
that the integra] /Z’dz taken through the limiting surface retains 
a finite value; this value we can obtain from experiments, 
although these leave us in the dark as to the course of Z’ itself. 
We now satisfy the hypothesis of the present sectioh by 
assuming that, with L, M, N, X, Y, the magnitude Z— Z’ 
renfiime™inite in the transition-layer. Z becomes infinite 
there; nevertheless, we can allow aZ/at to remain finite. 
Furthermore, we put 


(8,) /Zdz = /Z'dz = $9, 


Let us now integrate the first two of the equations (7,) and _ 
(7,) after multiplying by dz through the transition-layer. Since, 
on account of the shortness of the path, the integral of every 
finite magnitude vanishes, we obtain the conditions— 


d 
¥,-¥, = Eu, M,-—M,= , 
(8,) dé, (8,) 
X,— X,= ae N,—N,=0 


Applying these to the third of the equations (7,) and 
(7p), We obtain as the conditions for the normal-forces? that 
on both sides of the limiting surface, the values of the 
expressions 


XIII FOR BODIES AT REST, 209 


dL 4 OM ss dN 
Masgg * Mogg © Mos ae’ 


dX aX. dz fay 
Gey tea t esag tot (h(X—X) 


+2,(¥ —¥ +2,.(Z — Z’)} 


must be equal. If the bodies on both sides of the limiting 
surface are homogenevus, then the presence of the electro- 
motive forces has no effect upon the conditions by which the 
forces existing on the two sides are connected. 

. Our limiting conditions are nothing else than the general 
equations (7,) and (7,), transformed to suit special circum- 
stances. We may, therefore, imagine every statemeht and every 
operation relating to these general equations within a definite 
region to be at once extended to the limitsof heterogeneous bodies 
within the region; provided always that this procedure does 
not land us in mathematical impossibilities, and therefore that 
our statements and operations, either directly or after suitable 
transformation, do not cease to be finite and definite. We 
shall often avail ourselves of the convenience which_arises 
from this. And if, in general, we dispense with “proving 
that all the expressions which arise are finite and definite, 
it must not be supposed that this is because we regard such 
proof as superfluous, but only because the proof has long 
since been furnished, or can be supplied according to known 
examples, in all the cases which have to be considered. 


Each one of the previous sections means an increase in 
the number of facts embraced by the theory. The following 
sectioifs, on the other hand, deal only with names and notations. 
As their introduction does not increase the number of facts 
embraced, they are merely accessory to the theory; their 
value consists partly in making possible a more concise mode 
of expression, and partly also in simply bringing our theory 
into its proper relation towards the older views as to electrical 
‘ theory. 

P 


210 . FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIII 


9. Electric and Magnetic Polarisation 


So far as our equations relate to isotropic media, each 
separate one gives the value which a single one of the physical 
magnitudes under consideration will have at the next moment, 
expressed as a definite function of the conditions existing at 
the present moment. This form of the equations is very 
perfect from a mathematical point of view, for it enables us 
to ascertain from the outset that the equations determine with- 
out ambiguity the course of any process whatever that may 
be arbitrarily excited. It also appears very perfect from a 
much more philosophic standpoint ; for it enables us to recog- 
nise on the deft-hand side of the equation the future state— 
the consequence—while, at the same time, on the right-hand 
side of the equation, it exhibits the present state—the cause 
thereof. But those of our equations which relate to eolotropic 
bodies have not this perfect form; for, on the left-hand side, 
they do not contain the variations of a single physical magni- 
tude, but functions of such variations. Since these functions 
are linear, the equations can certainly be thrown into the 
desfftiform by solving them for the separate variations. 
Another means to the same end—which, at the same time, 
simplifies the equations—is by introducing the magnitudes 
which we call polarisations. We put 


£=pA,L+4,.M+ HN, X= eX + e_¥ + 6,2, 
(9.)4 M= pw L + #..M + PoN, (9a)} N= eX +e,¥ +¢,,Z, 
RW = Aygl + MoM + fy,N 5 5 = €gX + €yg¥ + gh 5 


and call the resultant of £€, 2%, 2% the magnetic, and the 
resultant of X, N, 3 the electric polarisation. For isotropic 
bodies the polarisations and the forces have the same direc- 
tion, and the ratio of the former to the latter is the specific 
inductive capacity or the magnetic permeability. In the case 
of the ether polarisations and forces coincide. If we intfoduce 
the polarisations on the left-hand side of our equations, then 
each equation gives us the variation of a single polarisation- 
component as the result of the forces instantaneously Die ae 
Since the forces are linear functions of the polarisation? there 
is no difficulty in introducing the polarisations on the right- 
hand side of the equations as well. We should thus have 


xi FOR BODIES AT a 211 


replaced the particular directed magnitude—the foree—which 
we first. used to determine the electromagnetic state, by 
another directed magnitude—the polarisation—which would 
serve our purpose as well, but not any better. The introduc- 
tion of the polarisations and the forces side by side considerably 
simplifies the equations; and this is our first indication that, in 
order to represent completely the conditions in ponderable 
bodies, it is necessary to specify at least two directed magni- 
tudes for the electrical condition and two for the magnetic 
condition. 
In order to simplify our equations further, let us put 


{ u=r(X—X)+A,(0Y -Y)+2,(2-2/), + 
(9.)4 V=A(X— X)+4A,(Y —YV)+A,,(Z% 2’), 
(wea (X— X49) 40.(¥ —V) 42,(Z— 24 
For reasons which will appear in the next section, we call u, 
v, w the components (measured electrostatically) of the electric 
current-density. 

Our most general equations now take the form 


dg _dZ av 


dt dy da’ noah a 

dm dX* aZ dy dN du * 

= =, 9 Se se D 
CO 8a ae de Aa ae ge 

dy dY dX d3 dL dM 

ae de ae Goa de 


and, on introducing the polarisations, the electromagnetic 
energy per unit volume of any body whatever takes the form 


1 1 
(XX + NY + 35Z) + —(£L 4+ MM +4 WW). 
89 87 


In these expressions there no longer appear any quantities 
which refer to any particular body. The statement that these 
equatiéns must be satisfied at all points of infinite space, 
embraces all problems of electromagnetism; and the infinite 
multiplicity of these problems only arises through the fact 
that the constants e, p, », X’, Y’, Z’ of the linear relations 
(9.), ($4), (9) may be functions of the space in a multiplicity 
of ways, varying partly continuously, and partly discontinu- 
ously, from point to point. 


212 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIIZ 


10. Electricity and Magnetism 


Let there be a system of ponderable bodies in which 
electromagnetic processes take place, and which are separated 
by empty space from other systems. Let us differentiate the 
three equations (9,) with respect to «, y, 2 respectively, and 
add; we thus obtain for all points of the system the equation 


dsd® aQ dd du dv dw 
elas? a a lied (= stat a 

Let us multiply this equation by the volume-element dr, and 
integrate ower the volume up to any surface, completely 
enclosing the ponderable system. Let dw be the element of 
this surface, and let the normal to dw make with the axes the 
angles nz, ny, n% Since u, v, w are zero at the surface, we 
get 


dX +o =) d 
dt = — a 
a Get eae J (Xcos nz + Neosny + 5 cos nz)do 
—_—ew ase. dv ie dl 
ogee alee (a age dz a a 


= —47/(ucos nz + v cos n,y + w cos n,z)dw = 0. 


Hence, if ¢ denotes a quantity which is independent of time— 


[Gar9 dQ +2) ar 


dx dz 


=/(X cos nx +2 cos et +5 cos nz)dw = 4re. 


(10,) 


The quantity e is obviously a function of the electrical state 
of the system—a function of such a kind that it cannot be 
increased or diminished by any internal or external processes 
of a purely electromagnetic nature. This indestructibflity of 
the quantity e—which also holds good for other than purely 
electromagnetic processes, so long as these are restricted to the 
interior of the system——has prompted the idea that e represents 
‘the amount of some substance contained in the system. In 
accordance with this idea we call e the amount of electricity 
contained in the ponderable system. But we must allow ¢ to 


XIN FOR BODIES AT RES’ 213 


be positive or negative, whereas the amdunt of a substance is 
necessarily positive. For this reason the hypothesis has been 
supplemented by assuming the existence of two electricities of 
opposite properties, and making e mean the difference between 
the two; or else a way out of the difficulty has been sought 
in assuming that ¢ represents only the deviation of the amount 
of electricity actually contained from the normal amount. 
. But if ¢ represents the quantity of a substance in one of these 
forms or some other form, then each volume-element dr must 
furnish -its definite share towards the total ‘amount of ¢ Only 
hypothetically can we distribute the volume-integral, which 
supplies ¢, among the separate volume-elements. A possible 
distribution—the first which suggests itself for the moment— 
is that which assigns to the volume-element dz the quantity 


of electricity — 
1/dX aQ d3\ 
(Fs ata) 


We shall call the quantity of electricity thus determined the true 
electricity of the volume-element; in the interior of a body, 
in accordance with this, we shall call the expression" 


“ 
1/dX 15 
7(F +84) 
da\dx dy dz 


the true volume-density, and at the surface of separation of 
dissimilar bodies the expression 


1 
reaics — X,) cos nz + (Q, —Y,) cos ny + (5, — 5,) cos nz} 


the true surface-density of the electricity. 

Another possible distribution of e among the volume- 
elements which suggests itself is that which we get through 
observing that in empty space polarisations and forces are 
identical, and that we can therefore write instead of (10,)-— 


of" =/(X cos n+ YV cos ny +Zcos nz)do 
(10,) are d¥ 2% ‘ 
T; 


SF 


214 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS - xur 


and furthermore, that we can regard the expression 


1/dX av 2, 
Ag da * dy * de - 


as representing the share which the volume-element dz con- 
tributes to e. Accordingly, we call the quantity of electricity 
so determined the free electricity of the volume-element, and 


ia ie 2) 
dar\ de * dy * dz 


the free volume-density, and at surfaces of separation— 
l / 
Tg -©X,) cos 2+ (Y, — Y,) cos ny +(Z, —Z,) cos nz} 


\ 

the free surface-density of the electricity. The difference 
between the true and the free electricity we call the bound 
electricity. Our nomenclature follows the familiar nomen- 
clature which takes its origin from the view hitherto held as 
to the existence of electrical action at-a-distance.1 According 
to this view, a part of the extraneous or “true” amount of 
electfitftP introdyced into a non-conductor remains “bound ” 
by electrical displacement? in the molecules of the surround- 
ing medium; whereas the rest remains “free” to exert its 
distance-action outwards. And yet in many respects our 
nomenclature differs’ from the usual one. But since the latter 
is sometimes ambiguous and not always consistent, it was not 
possible for me to find a system of notation which would in 
all cases harmonise with the common use of terms. The 
common phraseology is also ambiguous in that it uses the 
word electricity without further discrimination to denote some- 
times the true, sometimes the free electricity ; and this even 
when important statements are being made. 

In accordance with what has been stated above, we denote 
the integral 


SJ(¥ cos nx+ cos ny+5 cos nz)do, 


extended over any closed surface and divided by 47, as the 


1 [See Note 30 at end of book.} 
2 This is not identical with our polarisations. [See the theoretical part of 
the Introduction. ] 


XIII FOR BODIES AT RES 215 


true electricity contained within this surface. The same in- 
tegral extended over an unclosed surface we shall call the number 
of electric lines of force traversing this surface in the direction 
of the positive normal. By this notation we follow Faraday’s 
conception, according to which the lines of force are lines which 
in isotropic homogeneous bodies run everywhere in the 
direction of the prevailing force, and the number of which is 
proportional to the magnitude of the force. It is true that by 
our notation we have rendered this conception more complete 
or precise in this respect,—that in all bodies we make the lines 
of force run everywhere in the direction of the polarisation, not 
of the force, and that their density is in: all cases proportional 
to the magnitude of the polarisation, not of the force. It follows 
from our definitions that the quantity of true electricity con- 
tained in any space, multiplied by 47r, is equal to the excess of 
the number of lines of force which enter the surface over the 
number which leave it. Every line ot force which has an 
end must accordingly end in true electricity; and we may 
define the true electricity as the free ends of the lines of force. 
If a given space in the neighbourhood of the surface over which 
our integral extends is free from true electricity, then the value 
of the integral is independent of the particular position of the 
surface within this space; it only depends upon the position of 
the boundary of the surface. In this case, then, we denote 
the value of the integral as being the number of lines of 
force crossing the boundary line—any ambiguity remain- 
ing in this expression being supposed removed by special 
restrictions. 

We shall next calculate the variation of the true electricity 
é, in a part of our system bounded in any way. . Let dw again 
be an element of the bounding surface of this part. We get 


dey du dv dw 
(10,) re (Ge + dyt 7: r= -f(wcosne+ cos 1,y + w cos n,2)de. 
e 


Now if our bounding surface runs entirely in bodies for 
which 2% is equal to zero, then wu, v, w still vanish at the 
surface, and hence the amount of true electricity contained in 
the space bounded by it remains constant. Accordingly, true 
electricity cannot by any purely electromagnetic process escape 
from a space which is wholly bounded by bodies for which © is 


216 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XUI 


equal to zero. For this reason we call, and have called, such 
bodies non-conductors. But if the bounding surface passes 
wholly or partially through bodies for which > is not zero, it 
becomes possible for the amount of electricity within the space 
so bounded to vary through purely electrical disturbances ; for 
this reason we call bodies of this latter kind conductors. This 
division of bodies into conductors and non-conductors has 
reference therefore to the true electricity ; with reference to the 
free electricity all bodies may be regarded as conductors (cf. 
displacement-currents). The amount of a substance within a 
given space can only vary by its passing inwards or out- 
wards through the surface; and it is clear that a definite 
amount of the substance must pass through each element 
of the surface. Consistently with the fact that the amount 
of electricity given by our integral passes per unit time 
through every closed surface, we may assume that the amount 


U COS 2,Z+V COS NY + W COS 1,2 


passes through unit surface of every surface-element. In 
accordance with this assumption we call, and have called, w, », 
w the comf®nents of the electric current-density, and the integral 


J(u cos n+ cos ny +w cos 2,z)da, 


taken over an unclosed surface, the electric current flowing 
through this surface. We must, however, lay stress upon this— 
that even if we admit the materiality of electricity, the above 
special determination of its flow in conductors embraces a further 
hypothesis. Upon the system of disturbance found there can 
be superposed an arbitrary current-system, closed at every 
moment, without thereby altering the increase or decrease of 
electricity at any point. 

If a portion of our system has attained its present condition, 
starting from the unelectrified condition, by purely eleetro- 
magnetic processes, or if by purely electromagnetic changes it 
can return to the unelectrified state, then in all non-conductors 
of this portion the true electricity is equal to zero. For such 
portions we have, then, in addition to the general equations, the 
following as limitations of the permissible initial conditions 
which are not inconsistent with the general equations, viz. :--— 


XIII FOR BODIES AT | 217 


se dQ 4 _4 
Pas dz 


for the interior of non-conductors ; and 
(X, - X,) COs 7,0 + (Q, —1),) cos ny + (5, _ 3,) cos nz = 0 


for the boundary between two heterogeneous non-conductors. 
The magnetic phenomena can be considered in a manner 
exactly analogous to the electric phenomena. Let us proceed 
to examine these, with the assistance of the equations (9,). 
We shall call 
1/d£ am =) 
ae tyra 


the true volume-density for the interior of a body; the 
expression— 


Lté —£,) cos nx + (2, —M,) cos ny + (MX, — %,) cos nz} 


the true surface-density of magnetism at the surface of separa- 
tion of two bodies; and the integral of these magnitudes 
extended over a definite portion of space, the true magnetism 
contained in this portion. The integral 


SE cos 2,2 + M cos ny +2 cos nz)do, 


taken over an unclosed surface, we shall call the number of 
magnetic lines of force penetrating this surface, or the 
boundary of this surface. Further, we shall call 


1 A/a, dL | dM *) 
— +} 
4ir\ det dy dz 


the free volume-density for the interior of a body; and 
~td, —L,) cos n#+(M,~M,) cos ny+(N, —N)) cos n,z} 


‘the free surface-density of the’ magnetism at the surface of 
separation of two bodies. The distinction between conductors 
and non-conductors here disappears; for the equations (9,). 
contain no terms corresponding to the u, v, w of equations (9,). 
With respect to true magnetism all bodies are non-conductors ; 


218 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIII 


" with respect to free magnetism all bodies may be regarded as 


conductors. 

Let us suppose that a system or a portion of it emerges 
from the non-magnetic state through purely electromagnetic 
processes, or can by such processes return to this state. For 
such a system, or that portion of it, the following equations 
obtain, viz.— , 

d& am «dX ; 
Goleta 
for the interior of the bodies; and 
(£,—£,) cos nw + (2M, — Nt) cos ny + (X%, —%,) cos nz=0 


e 
for the surface of separation of heterogeneous bodies. These are 
supplementary to the general equations as consistent stipula- 
tions respecting the possible initial conditions. 


11. Conservation of Energy 


Let S genote the electromagnetic energy of a volume 7, 
which is bounded by the surface . We can calculate the 
variation of S by multiplying all the equations (9,) and (9,) by 
(1/4:rA)dr, then multiplying them separately in order by 
L, M, N; X, Y, Z, adding all together, and integrating over the 
volume tr. We obtain 


dt 4A 
+ (MX —LY) cos nz}dw —/(uX + v¥ + wZ)dr. 


If we extend the space r over a complete electromagnetic 
system, 7.e. as far as a surface at which the forces vanish, then 
our equation becomes 


dS 


at — [(uX + 0¥ + wZ)dr. 


d 
aa | S J [{arv-Mz) cos n,2 + (LZ—NX) cos ny 


The conservation of energy accordingly requires that in 
every system which is not subjected to external actions, an 
amount of energy corresponding to the integral on the right- 
hand side should make its appearance per unit time in other 


XIII FOR BODIES AT ae 219 


than electromagnetic form. This requirement is satisfied by 
experience, which further teaches us that each separate volume- 
element dr furnishes towards the total amount of the trans- 
formed energy the quantity 


(uX + vYet wZ)dz, 


and shows us in what form this energy makes its appearance. 
Or rather, to speak accurately, experience does not show that 
this is true in all cases, but provisionally in the following 
special cases only. According to both theory and experience, 
the amount of energy which appears per unit time and per unit 
volume in the interior of a homogeneous isotropic conductor 
takes the form 


1 
CX? + ¥? 4 Z*) = xu +0? +’). 


It is always positive and represents a development of heat 
—the Joule effect. At the boundary between two homogeneous 
isotropic bodies, the amount of energy per unit volume that 
appears in the transition-layer takes the form 


UX! +vY' + w7Z’ ; 
hence, by integration over the whole thickness of the transition- 


layer, it follows that the quantity of energy which appears 
per unit of surface at the boundary amounts to 


(w cos n,v+ cos ny + w COs NZ). dio, 


which expression is also confirmed by experience. This 
expression may be either positive or negative; it may corre- 
spond either to an appearance or a disappearance of foreign 
forms of energy. Either the transformed foreign energy is heat 
in this case as well—the Peltier effect; in which case we 
denote the effective electromotive forces as thermoelectric. 
Or else chemical energy as well as heat is transformed; in 
which case we denate the forces as electrochemical. Let us now 
consider any limited portion of our system and calculate for it 
the increase of its total energy, ze. of the quantity 


ad 
= +f(uX + oY + wZ)dr. 


In accordance with what has been stated, we find that this 


220 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIII 


increase is equal to an integral taken over the surface of the 
space. The variation of the stock of energy in this (and there- 
fore in any) space will therefore be correctly calculated if we 
assume that the energy enters after the manner of a substance 
through the surface, and in such quantity that through every 
such surface the amount 


(NY — MZ) cos nz + (LZ— NX) cos ny 
+(MX — LY) cos nz} 


enters per unit of surface. A geometrical discussion of this 
expression shows that our assumption is identical with the 
statement that,the energy moves everywhere in a direction 
perpendicular to the directions of the magnetic and electric 
forces, and in such amount that in this direction a quantity 
equal to the product of the two forces, the sine of the enclosed 
angle, and the factor 1/47A, passes through unit surface per 
unit time. This is Dr. Poynting’s highly remarkable theory 
on the transfer of energy in the electromagnetic field’ In 
examining its physical meaning we must not: forget that our 
analysis of #he surface-integral into its elements was hypo- 
thetical, and that the result thereof is not always probable. 
If a magnet remains permanently at rest in presence of 
an electrified body, then in accordance with this result the 
energy of the neighbourhood must find itself in a state of 
continuous motion, going on, of course, in closed paths. In the 
present state of our knowledge respecting energy there appears 
to me to be much doubt as to what significance can be attached 
to its localisation and the following of it from point to 
point. Considerations of this kind have not yet been success- 
fully applied to the simplest cases of transference of energy in 
ordinary mechanics; and hence it is still an open question 
whether, and to what extent, me conception of aurey admits 
of being treated in this manner.” 


iat 


12. Ponderomotive Forees 


The mechanical forces, which we perceive between ponder- 
able bodies in the electromagnetically stressed field, we regard 


1J. H. Poynting, Phil. Trans. 2, p. 348, 1884. 
2 [See Note 31 at end of book.] 


XIII FOR BODIES AT ss 221 


as the resultants of mechanical pressures which are excited by 
the existence of electromagnetic stresses in the ether and in 
other bodies. According to this view the mechanical forces 
which act upon a ponderable body are completely determined by 
the electromagnetic state of its immediate neighbourhood; and 
it need not be considered what causes at a distance may have 
led up to this state. We further assume that the presupposed 
pressures are of such a kind that they cannot give rise to any 
resultants which would tend to set the interior of the ether 
itself in motion. Without this hypothesis our system would 
necessarily be incorrect, or at least incomplete ; for without it 
we could not in general speak at all of electromagnetic forces in 
the ether at rest. It necessarily follows from thig hypothesis that 
the forces under observation, acting upon ponderable bodies, 
must satisfy the principle of the equality of action and reaction. 

The question now is—Whether pressures can be specified 
answering these requirements, and capable of producing the 
resultants which are actually observed? Maxwell and, in a 
-more general form, von Helmholtz have described forms of 
pressures which satisfy all the requirements of statical and 
stationary states. But these pressures, if assumed to obtain 
for the general variable state, would set the ether itself in 
motion. We therefore assume that the complete forms have 
not been discovered, and, avoiding any definite statements as 
to the magnitude of the pressures, we shall rather deduce the 
ponderomotive forces with the aid of the hypotheses already 
stated, of the principle of the conservation of energy, and of 
the following fact derived from experience :—If the ponderable 
bodies of an electrically or magnetically excited system, which 
always remains indefinitely near to the statical condition, are 
displaced with reference to one another, and if at the same 
time the amount of true electricity and of true magnetism in 
each element of the bodies remains invariable and behaves as 
if attached to the element, then the mechanical work consumed 
in the displacement of the bodies finds its only compensation 
in the increase of the electromagnetic energy of the system, 
and is therefore equal to this latter. 

It still remains an open question whether forms of pressure 
can be specified which satisfy, generally and precisely, the 


1 [See Note 32 at end of book.} 


222 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XLII 


requirements which we have laid down. If this is not the 
case, our body of hypotheses contains an intrinsic contradiction 
which must be removed by correcting one or more of these 
hypotheses. But at all events the necessary amendments are 
of such a kind that their effect would not make itself felt in 
any of the phenomena hitherto observed. And it must be 
pointed out that if there is here something lacking in our 
theory, it is not a defect in the foundations of the theory, but 
in parts of the superstructure. For, from our point of view, 
the mechanical forces excited are secondary consequences of 
the electromagnetic forces. We could discuss the theory of 
the latter without even mentioning the former; as indeed we 
have excluded ,from the discussion all other phenomena of 
minor importance which result from the electromagnetic state. 


B. DEDUCTION OF THE PHENOMENA FROM THE FUNDAMENTAL 
EQUATIONS 


We divide the phenomena represented by our equations 
into statical,etationary, and dynamical. In order that a pheno- 
menon may rank as statical or stationary, it is necessary that 
it should not determine any variations of the electric and 
magnetic forces with time, ¢.e. that the left-hand sides of the 
equations (9,) and (9,) should vanish. Furthermore, in order 
that a phenomenon may rank as statical, it is also necessary 
that it should not be accompanied by changes in time at all, 
and hence, more especially, that it should not determine any 
permanent change of energy into other forms. The sufficient 
and necessary condition for this is that the quantities u, v, w 
in equations (9,) and (9,) should also vanish. 


Statical Phenomena 


If in the equations (9,) and (9,) the left-hand sides and 
also the quantities u, v, w vanish, the system splits up into 
two mutually independent systems, of which one contains only 
the electric forces and the other only the magnetic forces. We 
thus get two groups of problems, of which one is called electro- 
statics, and the other might be called magnetostatics. 


amr FOR BODIES AT REST 223 


| 


13. Electrostatics 


, In this section we shall disregard the occurrence of electro- 

motive forces; for if these admit of the existence of the 
statical state at all, their action is too weak to come into 
consideration in the problems which are of interest. In con- 
ductors, accordingly, in which the quantities 7 do not vanish, 
the forces X, Y, Z must vanish. In non-conductors the 
equations (9,) take the form 


aZ ad dX dZ dY dX 
(1s) SE SS no. 


Hence the forces possess a potential ¢, and cah be put equal 
to the negative differential coefficient of this potential. Since 
the forces are everywhere finite, @ is everywhere continuous ; 
it can therefore continue right through the conductors, and is 
then to be regarded as constant within these. At a surface 
of separation the differential coefficients of ¢ tangential to the 
separating surface continue through it without discontinuity. 
Again, if e, denote the volume-density of the freg electricity, 
according to section (10) the potential ¢ satisfies everywhere 
in space the equation Ag= —4ze,. In free ether this 
assumes the form A¢=0; and after suitable transformation 
for the surface of separation between heterogeneous bodies it 
gives the condition 


(8) (b= 


where e’, denotes the surface-density of the free electricity. 
From all these conditions it follows that the value of ¢, 
within an arbitrary constant, is definite and equal to /(e,/7)dr, 
the integral being extended over the whole space with due 
regatd to the surfaces of separation. Thus when the potential 
and the forces are distributed in the same way in different 
non-conductors, the free electricities are the same. But the 
corresponding quantities of true electricity are different, and 
for the interior of two homogeneous non-conductors they are 
in the ratio of the specific inductive capacities. Restricting 
ourselves for the moment to isotropic bodies, the condition 


224 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIII 


that the density of the true electricity in the interior of the 
non-conductors should have given values ¢,, is expressed by 
the equation 


sas) + aap) aS) = 


which at the boundary of two isotropic bodies assumes the 


form 
dg dg 
«(@) - (2). ames 


where e’,; denotes the surface-density of the true electricity. 

Let us now direct our attention to the stock of energy in 
an electrostati@ system. We obtain this successively in the 
forms 


ip _d 
+ [ax+ny+szyir= - (xe Sauget age)ar 


= 5 o(St vat ©) d= if gear =4f [= Vdedr. 


The injegrations are here supposed to extend over all 
space in which electrical stresses exist, and therefore up to the 
boundaries where the stresses vanish, and the suitable trans- 
formation of the integrals at the bounding surfaces is im- 
plicitly assumed. When any motion of the ponderable bodies 
takes place, and the amounts of true electricity attached 
to the elements of these bodies remain constant, then, 
according to section (12), the increase in the value of any one 
of these expressions is equal to the work done by the 
mechanical forces in this motion. Hence, if our system 
consists of two quantities of electricity E, and E,, separated 
by the ether and at a distance R apart which is very great 
compared with their own dimensions, and if their distance 
apart increases by an amount of dR, the electric energy of the 
space decreases by an amount 


aR 
3(E,E, + ELE) ; 


Thus the expression E,E,/R? represents the mechanical 
force with which the two electricities tend to move apart. 


XIII FOR BODIES AT vo 225 


Coulomb’s law, which in the older theorjes forms the starting- 
point of every discussion, here makes its appearance as a 
remote final result. 

With regard to the general determination of the pondero- 
motive forces, we must here content ourselves with the follow- 
ing remarks :—The last two expressions obtained for the energy 
are just those whose variations represent the work done by 
the motion of bodies in ordinary electrostatics. Hence it 
follows that from the variations of these expressions we can 
calculate the values of those same forces which are the starting- 
point of ordinary electrostatics and are tested by experiment. 
In particular, it may be shown that an element of a body 
which contains a quantity ¢ of true electricity js acted upon 
by the mechanical force-components eX, eY, eZ. We thus 
return to the same statements by means of which we first 
introduced the electric forces. 


14, Magnetostatics 


The equations which connect the components of statical 
magnetic forces are the same as those which obtain between 
the components of statical electric forces. Hence all the 
statements in the preceding section may, with the necessary 
changes of notation, be repeated here. And if, nevertheless, 
the magnetic problems of interest are still distinct mathe- 
matically from the electrostatic problems, this arises from the 
following causes :— 

(1) The class of bodies known as conductors is here 
wanting. * 

(2) In no bodies, excepting those which exhibit permanent 
or remanent magnetism, does true magnetism appear. Hence 
in the interior of such bodies, provided they are isotropic, the 
magnetic potential y must necessarily and always satisfy the 


equatgon 
ita) * ayy) tad Mae) ~ 


which at the poundary between two such bodies becomes 


nll) -n( dt) =0 
Q 


226 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS Xl 


The equations which apply to the interior and the boundaries 
of crystalline bodies are somewhat more complicated, but can 
easily be given; these equations have to be considered in dis- 
cussing the phenomena of the so-called magne-crystallic force. 

(3) The specific inductive capacity of all known bodies is 
greater than unity; on the other hand, the magnetic permea- 
bility of many bodies is less than unity. We call such bodies 
diamagnetic, and all others paramagnetic. The free magnetic 
density at the surface of an isotropic body bounded by empty 
space is equal to (1 — yw) times the force in the interior of the 
body normal to the surface. The sign of the surface-magnetism 
(Belegung) of a diamagnetic body is therefore opposite to that ” 
of a paramagretic body when the sense of the force is the same. 

The study of statical magnetism further acquires a peculiar 
aspect, owing to the fact that iron and steel, which are the most 
important substances in connection with magnetic phenomena, 
do not fit in at all well with the theoretical treatment. These 
substances exhibit permanent and remanent magnetism ; hence 
the polarisation of the ponderable material is here partly inde- 
pendent of the prevailing force, and therefore the magnetic state 
cannot be®ompletely defined by a single directed magnitude. 
Again, the relations between the force and the disturbances 
produced by it are not linear; so that, for a double reason, our 
theory does not include these bodies entirely within its scope. 
In order to avoid excluding them entirely from consideration, 
we replace them by the two ideal substances which approximate 
most nearly to them—perfectly soft iron and perfectly hard 
steel. We define the first as a substance which obeys our 
equations, and for which the value of w is very large. We 
attain a nearer approximation by giving yw different values 
according to the problem under consideration. We define 
perfectly hard steel as a substance which obeys our equations, 
whose magnetic permeability is unity, in whose interior true 
magnetism can exist distributed in any way, provided &lways 
that the total quantity of true magnetism existing in any such 
piece of steel does not differ from zero. 


Stationary States 


The same conditions hold good for the state of stationary 
disturbances in non-conductors as for the statical condition ; in 


XIII FOR BODIES AT i 227 


conductors, which for the sake of simpjicity we shall assume 
in this section to be isotropic, the equations (9,), (91), (9.); 
which here come under consideration, take the form 


dz dY_ MN yy 
dy dz’ a dy 
aX aZ dN di 

(15,)) 2. Ge = (15a) a ae —Eree 
aY aX dL aM ; 


(15,) w=MX—X), v=MY-Y, w=r(Z—Z’). 


Differentiating equations (15,) with respect ae x, y, 2 respec- 
tively, and adding, we ‘a 


which equation, at surfaces where the currents vary abruptly, 
takes the form 


(15,) (u, — %,) cos n,z + (v, — v,) cos ny + (wu, — W,) COB 2,2 = 0. 


Combining equations (15) and (15,) with equations (15,) and 
(15,), we obtain a system which contains only the electric 
forces. This can be treated without regard to the magnetic 
forces, and gives us the theory of current-distribution. If the 
components «, v, w of the current are found, the treatment of 
the equations (15,) further gives us the magnetic torres 
exerted by these currents. 


15. Distribution of Steady Currents 


It appears from equations (15,) that, in the interior of the 
conductor through which a current is flowing, the forces can 
also be represented as the negative differential coefficients of a 
function ¢, the potential, which is determined by the following 
condition, which must obtain everywhere :— 


of te) *HO%) +ab%)- -Z0 
= £aY’) = f(z!) 
y : z 


228 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XUL 


At the surface separating two heterogeneous conductors this 
equation takes the form 


( d d 
as, m2), 7 n(3), = A,X’, —2,X’)) cos nw 
—@:F.= mY) cos ny — (AyZ’, — r,21) COS 22,2, 


and hence at the boundary between a conductor and a non- 
conductor the form 


(15,) pes = — X’ cos nx — Y’ cos ny — Z’ cos nz. 


In addition te these limiting conditions we have, according to 
section (8), at limiting surfaces where the electromotive forces 
become infinite, the further condition 


= /(X’ cos ne + Y’ cos ny + Z’ cos n,z)dn, 
= P, > : 


These conditions together determine ¢ definitely within a con- 
stant which remains dependent upon the conditions outside the 
conductor. For homogeneous conductors the equations (15,) 
to (15,) assume the simpler forms— 


$, — 6, =/(X cos nz+V cos ny+Z cos nz)dn, 
(1 | 


Ad =0 for the interior of the conductor, 


a (3) = 4) for the boundary between two con- 
dn /y dn/2 ductors, 


d 
(154) = = 0 for the boundary adjoining a non-conductor, 
$,— $,=$ 2 at a bounding surface where electro- 
motive effects occur. 


The equations thus obtained admit of immediate afplica- 
tion to problems on current-distribution in bodies of three 
dimensions. Their application to lamellar conductors or to 
linear conductors is easy, and gives the definition of resistance, 
Ohm’s law for closed circuits, Kirchhoff’s laws for branched 
circuits, as well as the other laws relating to the distribution 
of steady currents. 


XU FOR BODIES AT lk . 229 


16. Magnetic Forces of Steady Currents 


In order to determine the forces L, M, N produced by the 
current-components wu, v, w, which are now known, we introduce 
as subsidiary magnitudes the so-called components of the vector- 
potential, putting 


U= | <dr, V= | “dr, W= | dr. 


The integrals are to be extended over the whole space; thus it 
follows from the conditions of the steady state that 


dU dV dW _ 
da’ dy" de 
We now put 
dV aW dw dU 

= Sa pe M=A(—_— — ’ 
- ACE iy) dx z) 

(16,) ‘(dU av 

| N=a(— —"), 
dy dx 


These quantities L, M, N are solutions of equations (15,), 
and satisfy the equation 


dL dM dN =0 
dx dy dz 


If, therefore, the forces actually present differ from these, the 
differences between the two still satisfy the conditions for the 
forces of statical magnetism, and may be regarded as arising from 
these latter; this, however, does not exclude the supposition 
that the magnetism itself is due to currents. But if no statical 
magnetism is present at all, the formule above given represent 
completely the magnetic forces present. 

If we have only to deal with linear conductors, in which 
the cfirrent 7 flows, then the expressions udt, vdr, wdr in the 
quantities U, V, W are replaced by the expressions idz, idy, 
idz, where dx, dy, dz are the projections of the element ds of 
the circuit on the three axes; and the integrations must then 
be taken round all the circuits. Suppose we wish to 
regard the magnetic forces of the whole current as the sum 
of the actions of the separate current-elements. In order 


230 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIIL 


to simplify the formule, let us suppose the element to be at 
the origin and the point a’ y’ 2’ to be in the zy-plane; then an 
analysis of our integrals, which, as far as its results are con- 
cerned, is admissible, gives for the action of the current-element 
idz upon the point 2’ y’ 2’— 
1 
o Mide yf 
L=0, M=0, N=Ade7 2-7 7 

dy r r 
which formule contain the expression of Ampére’s rule and 
the Biot-Savart law. 

Wherever u, v, w vanish, 7.e. everywhere outside the con- 
ductor in whéch the current flows, the values of the forces 
must in accordance with equations (15,) possess a potential V, 
to whose negative differential coefficients we can equate them. 
If the forces arise from only a single closed linear circuit, this 
potential can be expressed in the form 


+1 


(16,) = ae 

where dw denotes the element of any surface through the 
circuit, n the normal to this surface, and where the integration 
is extended over the whole of the surface bounded by the 
circuit. We here regard as positive that side of the surface 
from which the current appears to flow in the direction in 
which the hands of a clock move. For the negative differential 
coefficients of the above expression can in all cases be brought, 
by known methods of transforming integrals, into the forms 
found for L,M,N. Except in the circuit itself these differential 
coefficients are therefore everywhere finite and continuous; and, 
even if the integral contained in VY becomes discontinuous at 
the surface w, the necessary continuity can always be conferred 
upon W itself if we regard the constant contained in’ it as 
having an infinite number of values, and employ a value 
varying by 4A: whenever we pass through the surface a. 
The potential itself thus attains an infinite number of values, 
and changes in value by 47Az each time we return to the 
same point after passing round the circuit. 

Various interpretations can be assigned to the integral 


. 


XIII FOR BODIES AT ms 231 


which occurs in V. In the first place, jt can be regarded as 
the potential due to a magnetic shell. By following out this 
conception we arrive at Ampére’s theory of magnetism. Again 
we may, with Gauss, regard the value of this integral at a given 
point as the spherical angle which the circuit subtends at this 
point. From this, by an easy transition, we arrive at the 
following statement :—For any given point this integral repre- 
sents the number of lines of force which proceed from an unit 
pole placed at the point and are embraced by the circuit. We 
may supplement this by applying the following statement to 
the potential itself (including its manifoldness):—The differ- 
ence between its values at two points is equal to the product of 
Az into the number of lines of force which cut the circuit in a 
definite direction when an unit pole is moved in any manner 
from the one point to the other. 

From our standpoint the last interpretatién is the most 
suitable; it also allows us, with the aid of sections (12) and 
(14), to deduce the following conclusions:—Firstly, the mechani- 
cal work which must be done in moving a magnet-pole, or a 
system of unchangeable magnetism, in the neighbourhood of a 
current whose strength is kept constant, is equal te the number 
of lines of force of the magnet-pole or magnetic system which 
cut the circuit in a definite direction, multiplied by the current 
and the constant A. Secondly, the mechanical work which 
must be done in moving a constant current in a magnetic field 
is equal to the number of lines of force which are cut by the 
circuit during the motion, multiplied by the current and the 
constant A. Lastly, and in particular, the mechanical work 
which must be done in moving a constant current 1 in the 
neighbourhood of a constant current 2, is equal to the number 
of lines of force proceeding from the circuit 2 which are cut 
by the circuit 1 during the motion, multiplied by the current 
in 1 and by the constant A. It is also equal to the number 
of lihes of force proceeding from the circuit 1 which cut the 
circuit 2 during the motion, multiplied by the current in 2 
and by the constant A. Both expressions lead to the same 
result ; we can prove this by representing the product of the 
current in the one circuit and the number of lines of force 
from the other circuit which pass through it, by an expression 
which is symmetrical with reference to both. For let the 


232 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xr * 


symbols 7, ds refer to the circuit 1; and the symbols 7’, ds’, 
U’, V’, W’, LU’, M’, N’ refer to the circuit 2. Then the product 
of Az into the number of lines of force from 2 which pass 
through 1 is equal to 


Ai/(L’ cos nz + M’ cos ny + N’ cos n,z)do 


: dv’ daw’ dw’ dv’ 
= A’ eg See ise 
if{( de dy ) eos CR da aa )eos my 
? 7 
Fe a — cos na | do 


= —A%/(U’ cos 3,2 + V! cos 8,y + W’ cos s,z)ds 
U , / 
= A%y! ii ii Cps 8,2 cos 8/2 + cos 8.y 008 8',y + C08 2 COS Sz 7. 7.4 
T 


= — A%i! i] f =s dsds’ 


where e denotes the angle between the two current-elements. 
The expression obtained is symmetrical with respect to both 
circuits. We know that in fact the variations of this expres- 
sion—Neurmann’s potential of the one circuit upon the other 
multiplied by A%id’—gives the work required for the relative 
displacement of closed currents, and hence the ponderomotive 
forces which exist between the currents when at rest. We 
also know that this statement contains everything that can 
with certainty be asserted respecting the ponderomotive forces 
which arise between currents. 

We shall next calculate the magnetic energy of a space in 
which the stationary current-components wu, », w and the un- 
changeable magnetic densities m are distributed, assuming the 
restriction that no magnetisable bodies are present in the space. 
If ¥ now represents the potential of the magnetisms m, we 
obtain the energy successively in the forms— 


= [O2+MP+ Nar 
T 
A dV dW 1d¥ dw dU lay 
"| ala a an) Ge ae aa) 
dU dV 1av 
oo Ge ag” 


x1ly FOR BODIES AT Beet 233 


| 
A dM aN aN! dh 
a aa) a aw 
dL dM 
+W- Ee 
1 dL. dM 
(16,) tofu (Gte +e 
= 4A2/(Uu+ Vot+ Ww)dr+4/¥mdr, 


-or, in the case of linear currents— 


op 
[= 447 [ uns dsds! +4. f'Vmdr, 


where, in the first part of the last form, the integration is to be 
carried out with respect to both ds and ds’, arf is to include 
all currents present. It is clear from this last form that the 
displacement of unchangeable magnets with respect to un- 
changeable currents does not alter the magnetic energy of the 
space. Hence the mechanical work which is done in such a 
displacement does not find its compensation in the variation of 
the magnetic energy of the space, as it does in the case of the 
displacement of unchangeable magnets among themselves; we 
must account in some other way for the work which has 
been done. It further appears from the same formula that 
the relative displacement of currents which are maintained 
constant does determine a change in the energy of the space, 
which is equal to the absolute value of the work done. But 
when we pay due regard to the signs, we see that this change 
does not take place in such a sense that it can be regarded as 
the compensation for the lost mechanical energy, but in the 
opposite sense. Here again, then, we have to account for double 
the amount of work which the mechanical forces do in the 
relative displacement of the circuits. We shall return to this 
at the end of the following section. 


Dynamical Phenomena 


From among the infinite number of possible forms of the 
variable state, comparatively few groups of phenomena have 


- hitherto fallen under observation. We shall refer to these 


groups without attempting any exhaustive and_ systematic 
classification of the subject. 


234 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xi 


17. Induction in Closed Circuits 


In accordance with equations (9,) electric forces must 
necessarily be present in a varying magnetic field. In general 
these forces must be very weak, for they contain the very small 
factor A; on this account they can only be detected through the 
currents which they excite in closed circuits, or through their 
cumulative action in very long linear circuits which are closed 
to within a small fraction of their lengths. Hence the effects 
which can be experimentally measured invariably give us only 
the integral effect of the electric force in a closed circuit, te. 
the integral /(Xdx + Ydy+ Zdz) taken along a looped line. 
According to a*known method of transforming integrals, which 
we: have already used, this line-integral is equal to the surface- 
integral 


Ga eG 2G a 


taken over any surface » bounded by the line in question. 
Applying eqyations (9,) this expression becomes equal to 


d 
AZ i (£ cos n,x + M1 cos ny + cos n,z)do. 


We may express this in words as follows :—The electro- 
motive force which manifests itself in a closed circuit is equal 
to the variation per unit time of the number of magnetic lines 
of force which traverse the circuit multiplied by A. In 
particular, if the induction arises from a closed variable current, 
and if it is assumed that no magnetisable bodies are present, then 
according to the results of the previous section the induced 
electromotive force is equal to the product of the Neumann’s 
potential of the two circuits on one another and the variation 
per unit time of the inducing current, multiplied by A% These 
laws—of which the first is the more general—with their con- 
sequences embrace all the phenomena of induction which have 
been actually observed in the case of conductors at rest. 

Induction in moving conductors lies beyond the range to 
which the present dissertation is restricted. But as far as 
linear conductors are concerned, the transition from the case of 


Xr FOR BODIES AT REST 235 


induction in conductors at rest can be a by the following 
statement :—-Whether the magnetic field in the immediate 
neighbourhood of a closed circuit changes in consequence of 
the motion of ponderable bodies, or in consequence of purely 
electromagnetic changes of state, the electromotive force pro- 
duced in the closed circuit is the same, provided the change in 
the magnetic field in its immediate neighbourhood is the same. 
Tn accordance with this and the previous statements, the induced 
electric force in a conductor in motion is equal to the number 
of lines of force which are cut by the conductor in a definite 
direction per unit of time, multiplied by A. The product of 
this electric force and of the current in the moving conductor 
gives, according to section (11), the thermal og chemical work 
done by induction in the conductor. It follows from the 
results of the preceding section, if we pay due regard to sign, 
that this is equal to the mechanical work which must be done 
by the external forces acting upon the circuit. Hence, if a 
current of constant strength is maintained in a circuit, and 
this circuit is moved towards a fixed magnet, the thermal and 
chemical energy developed in the circuit accounts for. the 
mechanical work done; while the magnetic emergy of the 
system remains constant. But, on the other hand, if this 
circuit is moved towards another in which a constant current is 
maintained, the larger amount of thermal and chemical energy 
developed in the one through the motion accounts for the 
mechanical work done; and the same extra amount of energy 
which appears in the other circuit accounts for the diminu- 
tion in the magnetic energy of the field. Or, to speak more 
accurately, the sum of the former amounts of energy balances 
the sum of the latter. This settles the point referred to at the 
end of section (16). 


18. Electromagnetics of Unclosed Currents 


With regard to the phenomena which are. possible, this is 
the richest region of all; for it includes all those problems 
which we cannot apportion elsewhere as special cases. But 
as far as actual experience is concerned, it is a region which 
hitherto has been but slightly explored. The oscillations of 
unclosed induction-circuits, or of discharging Leyden jars, can be 


236 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XHI 


treated with sufficient approximation according to the laws of 
the preceding section; and so far only the electric waves and 
oscillations of short wave-length, which have been discussed 
in the earlier papers, strictly belong here. With regard to the 
theoretical treatment of this section we must therefore refer to 
these earlier papers—pointing out, however, that the splitting 
up of the electric force into an electrostatic and an electro- 
magnetic part does not in these general problems convey any 
physical meaning which can be clearly conceived, nor is it 
of any great mathematical use; so that, instead of following 
earlier methods of treatment, it will be expedient to avoid it. 


19. Optical Phenomena in Isotropic Bodies 


We include in optics those electromagnetic disturbances 
which are purely periodic in time, and whose period does not 
exceed a very small fraction, say the billionth (107) part, of a 
second. By none of the means which are at our disposal for 
detecting such disturbances can we recognise the magnetic and 
electric forcegas such ; what we are able to detect are simply 
the geometrical relations according to which the existing dis- 
turbance is propagated in different directions with different 
intensities. Hence the mathematical representation of the 
phenomena may also be confined to following the propagation 
of one of the two kinds of force, after eliminating the opposite 
kind; and it is immaterial which of the two is chosen for 
consideration. If we restrict ourselves to homogeneous isotropic 
non-conductors and eliminate in the one case the electric, in 
the other the magnetic, force-components, we obtain from 
equations (4,) and (4,) the following equations :— 


Mey = AL, Ae = AX, 
a 
Ave joe = AM, Ave joey 
(19,) ce (19) - 
a). N 
Aep—a = AN, Aveu pos = AZ, 
aL aM | aN _y aX d¥ dz _y 


2 3 Se 
da aay dy de dz dy dz 


XII FOR BODIES AT RES] 237 


The solutions of these, assuming that) the disturbances are 
purely periodic, are always solutions of the equations (4,) and 
(4,) as well. From each of the two systems of equations (19,) 
and (19,) it can be seen that transverse waves are possible, 
and that longitudinal waves are impossible; each of the two 
systems gives for the velocity of the possible waves the value 


1/An/eu; 

from each .of the two systems the phenomena of rectilinear 
propagation, of diffraction, of the interference of natural and of 
polarised light can be deduced, and the different kinds of 
polarisation can be understood. By returning to equations 
(4,) and (4,) it can be shown that the simultameous directions 
of the electric and the magnetic force at any point of a plane 
wave are invariably perpendicular to one another. 

Suppose that the surface of separation of two homogeneous 
isotropic bodies coincides with the 2y-plane. In accordance 
with section (8),and bearing in mind that we are dealing only 
with periodic disturbances, the following conditions obtain at 
this surface of separation :— 


L= L, X,= X, 
(19,.)} M,= M,, (193), Y= Y, 
HN, = nN, ; eZ, = €,Z,, 


Each of these systems of limiting equations, together with 
the corresponding equations for the interior of both bodies; 
gives the laws of reflection, of refraction, of total reflection — 
in fact, the fundamental laws of geometrical optics. From 
each of them it follows that the intensity of reflected and 
refracted waves is dependent upon the nature of their polarisa- 
tion, and that this dependence, as well as the retardation of 
phase of the totally reflected waves, is in accordance with 
Fresnel’s formule. If we deduce these formule from the 
equations of the electric forces (19,) and (194), it will be 
found that the method of development corresponds with the 
method of deducing these formule as given by Fresnel him- 
self. If we start from the equations of the magnetic force 
(19,) and (19,), we approach the path by which F. Neumann 
arrived at Fresnel’s equations. From our more general 


238 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XHI 


standpoint we cannot only see from the start that both 
paths must lead to the same goal, but we can also recog- 
nise that the two are equally satisfactory. In the actually 
observed phenomena of reflection the electric and magnetic 
forces are not completely interchangeable, and the two paths 
appear to be different. This is because the magnetic per- 
meabilities are almost the same and equal to unity for all 
bodies which come under consideration, whereas the specific 
inductive capacities differ considerably ; and hence the optical 
behaviour of bodies is chiefly determined by their electrical 
properties, 

If the zy-plane forms the boundary between our non- 
conductor and .a perfect conductor, the following equations 
obtain in this plane :-— 


(19,) N=0, 
(19) X=0, Y=0. 


From these, together with the corresponding equations for 
the interior of the non-conductor, it follows that for every 
angle of incidence and every azimuth of polarisation the reflec- 
tion is total, Since all actual conductors occupy an inter- 
mediate position between perfect conductors and non-conductors, 
the reflection from them may be expected to be of a kind 
intermediate between total reflection and the reflection from 
transparent bodies. Inasmuch as metallic reflection occupies 
such a position, our equations appear adapted for giving a 
general picture of metallic reflection as well. Up to the present, 
however, investigation does not enable us to state how far 
such a representation, by suitable choice of the constants, can 
be extended into details, 

It has already been pointed out in the first section that 
the phenomena of dispersion require the introduction of at least 
two electric or two magnetic quantities, and that they therefore 
lie outside the limits of our present theory. 


20. Optics of Crystalline Bodies 


We shall confine our attention to optical phenomena in 
the interior of a homogeneous, completely transparent crystal,— 
in which we further assume that the axes of symmetry of the 


XIII FOR BODIES AT oi 239 


electric and the magnetic energy coincide. Let the co-ordinate 
axes be parallel to these common axes of symmetry, and, for 
the sake of simplicity, let us write 


Ey» Eqy yy Myr May My UMStead OF yy, Ey Eggs Mayr Mass Mage 


Equations (5,) and (5,), which here come under consideration, 
_ how take the form 


(a _aZ ay a aX dM dN. 

| bar - dy da’ di dz dy’ 
io aX aZ dY aN adh 

20 2— =—_— -—-— 20,)J Ae, —— = —— — 
(204) arr dz dx hie 77, dx dz’ 
dN dY aX dz _dh_ aM 

Sat dx dy’ Ste dy da’ 


These equations are integrated by assuming that the light 
consists of plane waves of plane-polarised light, corresponding 
to the following statements:—The magnetic force is perpen- 
dicular to the electric polarisation, and the electric force is 
perpendicular to the magnetic polarisation. In general the 
direction of both forces does not coincide with the wave-plane ; 
the direction of both polarisations lies in the wave-plane. Hence 
the direction which is perpendicular to both polarisations is the 
wave-normal; the direction which is perpendicular to both forces 
is the direction in which, according to section (11), the energy 
is propagated ; in optics it is called the ray. To every given 
position of the wave-normal there correspond in general two 
possible waves of different polarisations, different velocities, and 
different positions of the corresponding rays. If we suppose that 
at any given instant plane waves starting from the origin of co- 
ordinates proceed outwards in all possible directions of the wave- 
normals, these wave-planes after unit time envelop a surface,— 
the so-called wave-surface. Each single wave-plane touches 
the wave-surface at a point on the corresponding ray from the 
origin. The equation to the surface enveloped by the wave- 
planes is found to be 


2 92 ae 2 2 2 1 1 
ane ( nate ae Or aT, 
ar ae 


(20,) ' ‘ 
be 
Coty Exh €Ms ey Efi’ EEE gM Mob 


240 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xl 


The surface of the fourth degree represented by this equation 
cuts each of the co-ordinate planes in two ellipses. In one of 
the co-ordinate planes the two ellipses intersect each other in 
four points—the four conical points (Nabelpunkte) of the sur- 
face; in the two other co-ordinate planes one of the ellipses 
surrounds the other; and these statements hold good whatever 
the values of « and w are. To a very near approximation 
4 = #, =, = 1 for all actual crystals; in this case the general 
form of the equation reduces to that of Fresnel’s wave-surface, 
and of the two ellipses in which the surface cuts the co-ordi- 
nate planes, one reduces to a circle. 


It is well known that the explanation of double refraction, of 
reflection at crystalline surfaces, and many of the interference- 
phenomena observed in crystals are intimately connected with 
the consideration of the wave-surface and the simpler forms which 
it assumes in special cases. But other facts, again, in crystallo- 
graphic optics cannot be mastered by following out the idea of 
a single electric and a single magnetic directed magnitude ; 
hence these facts lie outside the present limits of our theory. 


In sectiéns (17) to (20) we have completed the enumera- 
tion of those cases of the variable state whose importance has 
up to the present time given rise to the development of special 
theories. 


XIV 


ON THE FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTRO- 
MAGNETICS FOR BODIES IN MOTION 


(Wiedemann’s Ann, 41, p. 369, 1890.) 


AN account which I recently published! of electromagnetic 
processes in bodies at rest agreed, as far as the matter was 
concerned, with Maxwell’s theory, but as far as thé manner 
was concerned it aimed at a more systematic arrangement. 
From the outset the conception was insisted upon, that the 
electric and magnetic forces at any point owe their action to 
the particular condition of the medium which ls the space 
at that point; and that the causes which determine the exist- 
ence and variations of these conditions are to be wholly sought 
‘in the conditions of the immediate neighbourhood, excluding 
all actions-at-a-distance. It was further assumed that the 
electric and magnetic state of the medium which fills space 
could be completely determined for every point by a single 
directed magnitude for each state; and it was shown that the 
restriction which lies in this assumption only excluded from con- 
sideration comparatively unimportant phenomena. The intro- 
duction of potentials into the fundamental equations was avoided. 

The question now arises whether, while adhering strictly 
to the same views and the same limitations, the theory can be 
extended so as to embrace the course of electromagnetic pheno- 
mena in bodies which are in motion. We remark, in the first 
place, that whenever in ordinary speech we speak of bodies in 
motion, we have in mind the motion of ponderable matter 
alone. According to our view, however, the disturbances of 
the ether, which simultaneously arise, cannot be without effect ; 


1 See XIII, p. 195. 
R 


242 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIV 
e 


and of these we have no knowledge. This is equivalent to 
saying that the question here raised cannot at present be 
treated at all without introducing arbitrary assumptions as to 
the motion of the ether. Furthermore, the few existing 
indications as to the nature of the motion of the ether 
lead us to suppose that the question above raised is 
strictly to be answered in the negative, for it appears to 
follow from such indications as we have, that even in the 
interior of tangible matter the ether moves independently of 
it; indeed, this view can scarcely be avoided in view of the 
fact that we cannot remove the ether from any closed space. 
If now we wish to adapt our theory to this view, we have to 
regard the electromagnetic conditions of the ether and of 
the tangible matter at every point in space as being in a 
certain sense independent of each other. Electromagnetic 
phenomena in bodies in motion would then belong to that 
class of phenomena which cannot be satisfactorily treated 
without the introduction of at least two directed magnitudes 
for the electric and two for the magnetic state. 

But the state of the case is different if we explicitly con- 
tent ourselves with representing electromagnetic phenomena 
in a narrower sense—up to the extent to which they have 
hitherto been satisfactorily investigated. We may assert that 
among the phenomena so embraced there is not one which 
requires the admission of a motion of the ether independently 
of ponderable matter within this latter; this follows at once 
from the fact that from this class of phenomena no hint has 
been obtained as to the magnitude of the relative displace- 
ment. At least this class of electric and magnetic pheno- 
mena must be compatible with the view that no such dis- 
placement occurs, but that the ether which is hypothetically 
assumed to exist in the interior of ponderable matter only 
moves with it. This view includes the possibility of, takifig 
into consideration at every point in space the conditien of 
only one medium filling the space; and it thus admits of the 
question being answered in the affirmative. For the purpose 
of the present paper we adopt this view. It is true that a 
theory built on such a foundation will not possess the advan- 
tage of giving to every question that may be raised the correct 
answer, or even of giving only one definite answer; but it at 


XIV FOR BODIES IN MOTION 243 


least gives possible answers to every Jraiséton that may be 
propounded, z.e. answers which are not inconsistent with the 
observed phenomena nor yet with the views which we have 
obtained as to bodies at rest. 

We therefore assume that at every point a single definite 
velocity can be assigned to the medium which fills space; 
and we denote the components of this in the directions of 
x, y, 2, by a, 8, y. We regard these magnitudes as being 
everywhere finite, and treat them as varying continuously 
from point to point. Of course we also admit discontinuous 
variations, but we regard them as being only the limiting cases 
of very rapid continuous variations. We further limit each 
permissible discontinuity by the restriction thaf it shall in no 
case lead to the formation of empty spaces. The necessary and 
sufficient condition for this is that the three differential coeffi- 
cients da/dx, d@/dy, dy/dz should everywhere be finite. 
Wherever we find tangible matter in space we definitely de- 
duce the values of a, 8, y from the motion of this. Wherever ” 
we do not find in the space any tangible matter, we may 
assign to a, 8, y any arbitrary value which is consistent with 
the given motions at the boundary of the emptyespace, and is 
of the same order of magnitude. We might, for example, give 
a, B, y those values which would exist in the ether if it moved 
like any gas. We further use all the symbols which occur in 
the preceding paper in the same sense here. We here regard 
electric and magnetic force as signs of the condition of the 
moving matter in the same sense in which we have hitherto 
regarded them as signs of the conditions of matter at rest. 
Electric and magnetic polarisation we simply regard as a 
second and equivalent means of indicating the same conditions. 
We also assign to the lines of force, by which we represent 
these polarisations, precisely the same meaning. 


1. Statement of the Fundamental Equations for Bodies in 
Motion 


At any point of a body at rest the time-variation of the 
magnetic state is determined simply by the distribution of the 
electric force in the neighbourhood of the point. In the 
case of a body in motion there is, in addition to this, a second 


244 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF RISC TEOMSENELIES xIV 


variation which at every instant is superposed upon the first, 
and which arises from the distortion which the neighbourhood 
of the point under consideration experiences through the 
motion. We now assert that. the influence of the motion is 
of such a kind that, if it alone were at work, it would carry 
the magnetic lines of force with the matter. Or more pre- 
cisely :—-Supposing that at any given instant the magnetic 
state of the substance was represented in magnitude and 
direction by a system of lines of force; then a system of lines 
of force passing through the same material points would also 
represent in magnitude and direction the magnetic state at 
any other time, if the effect of the motion alone had to be 
considered. The corresponding statement holds good for the 
variation which the electric polarisation experiences through 
the motion. These statements suffice for extending to moving 
bodies the theory already developed for bodies at rest; they 
clearly satisfy the conditions which our system of itself 
requires, and it will be shown that they embrace all the 
observed facts.’ 

In order to represent our ideas symbolically, let us first, 
during the ttme-element dt, fix our attention upon a small 
surface-element in the interior of the moving matter, which at 
the beginning of this time-element lies parallel to the yz-plane, 
and during the motion is displaced and distorted with the 
matter. We distribute and draw the magnetic lines of force 
so that the number of them which penetrates the surface- 
element at the beginning of the time dt is£. Everywhere and 
always £, 211, 2% will then denote the number of lines of force 
which traverse a surface-element of equal area parallel to the 
yz, «2, xy-planes respectively. The number of lines of force 
which traverses our particular surface-element now varies 
owing to several causes; we shall consider separately the 
amount which each separate cause contributes. In the first 
place, the number would vary even if the surface-elefnent 
remained in its original position; this variation amounts to 
(d€/dt)dt, if d€/dt denotes the rate of variation of £ at a 
point which, with reference to our system of co-ordinates, 
is at rest. In the second place, since the surface-element is 
displaced with the velocity a, 8, y to places where other values 


1 [See Note 33 at end of book. 


XIV FOR BODIES IN MOTION 245 


of £ obtain, the rate of variation due td this cause amounts to 
(ad& /dx + Bd& /dy + yd£/dz)dt. In the third place, the plane 
of the element rotates with velocity da/dy about the 2-axis, 
and with velocity da/dz about the y-axis, and lines of force 
will be embraced by the element which originally were parallel 
to it; the amount due to this cause is—(MWda/dy + Xda/dz)dt. 
Finally the surface of the element increases with velocity 
dB/dy + dy/dz; and for this cause the number increases by an 
amount £(d8/dy+dy/dz)dt. If the sum of these quantities is 
equal to zero, there can be no change in the number; we have 
therefore reckoned up completely all causes of variation, and 
since all the amounts are very small, their sum represents the 
total variation. We may also analyse the tofal variation in 
another manner which has a more distinct physical significance, 
viz. into the amount which the presence of the electric forces in 
the neighbourhood, and the amount which the motion would 
contribute, each by itself and in the supposed absence of the 
other cause. According to the laws which hold good for 
conductors at rest, the first amounts to (dZ/dy — dY/dz)dt.1/A; 
according to the statement which we have just made, the latter 
is zero; the first of itself represents the total v@riation. We 
equate the two expressions found for the total variation, 
divide by dt, multiply by A, add and subtract the terms 
adM/dy + adXi/dz, rearrange the terms and thus obtain, after 
treating similarly the other components of the magnetic force 
and the components of the electric force, the following system 
of fundamental oe. for bodies in motion :— 


ds dé am ax 
af +5 (BE — atl) — Flatt 98) +a (F+3+S)} 
i a 
ne 
amd am aK 
afm + Let — prt) — 4 (ge — att) + 6(E + +2.) 
(te) _a4X_ dz 
e; dx’ 
ad, amd 
als + (aX 1£)— 50M — Bt) +4(F + ate 2) } 
aa dX 


ae ag 


246 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xIV 


dX a dX dQ dd 
{ex ap Tia al) £(@5- yx) +a(=+ a42)| 

mM dN 

= —-—_—— AU, 

dz dy nce 

dX  adQ dd 
Af 4 Zan 65) — 2px an) + 8(2 + a *)| 
(1,) dt tae 

LIN yea, 

a dz 
1d dX a 1d 
Ale —(ad ~ ~ 9) - S- £3) +4(= +742) 

Ltt! Oty, 

dy dx 


which are completed by the linear relations which connect the 
polarisations and the current-components with the forces. 
The constants of these relations are to be regarded as functions 
of the varying conditions of the moving matter, and to this 
extent as functions of the time as well.’ 

Our method of deducing the equations (1,) and (1,) does 
not require that the system of co-ordinates used should 
remain absofutely fixed in space. We can, therefore, 
without change of form, transform our equations from the 
system of co-ordinates first chosen to a system of co-ordinates 
moving in any manner through space, by taking a, 8, y to 
represent the velocity-components with reference to the 
new system of co-ordinates, and referring the constants 
€, #, », X’, Y’, Z’, which depend upon direction, at every 
instant to these. From this it follows that the absolute 
motion of a rigid system of bodies has no effect upon any 
internal electromagnetic processes whatever in it, provided that 
all the bodies under consideration, including the ether as well, 
actually share the motion. It further follows from this 
consideration that even if only a single part of a moving 
system moves as a rigid body, the processes which occur int this 
part follow exactly the same course as in bodies at rest. If, 
nevertheless, the existing motion does exert any influence 
upon this part, this influence can only arise in those portions 
of the system in which distortion of the elements occurs, and 
must be propagated thence into those portions’which move 

1 [See Note 34 at end of book.] 


xIVv FOR BODIES IN MOTIOX 247 


after the manner of rigid bodies. If, for example, a solid mass 
of metal is suddenly displaced in the magnetic field, then, 
according to our equations, the only direct or simultaneous 
effect of this disturbance is upon the surface and the neigh- 
bourhood of the metallic mass; it here gives rise to electric 
forces which afterwards produce secondary effects—penetrating 
into the interior of the mass and giving rise to currents in it. 

‘The equations here stated are in form and intention closely 
related to those by which von Helmholtz in vol. lxxviii. of 
Borchardt’s Journal represented the behaviour of the electric 
and magnetic forces in moving bodies’ From this source the 
notation is partly borrowed. And yet our equations differ 
from those given by v. Helmholtz not only in form, but 
also in meaning, at least with regard to such members as 
have not hitherto been tested by experiment. Maxwell 
himself does not seem to me to have aimed in his treatise at 
any systematic treatment of the phenomena in moving bodies.” 
The numerous references which he makes to such phenomena 
are either confined to approximations, or relate only to cases 
which do not involve any necessary distinction between the 
theories of direct and of indirect action. 


2. The Physical Meaning of the Separate Terms 


Equations (1,) and (1,) tell us the future value of the 
polarisations at every fixed point in space or, if we prefer 
it, in each element of the moving matter, as a definite 
and determinate consequence of the present electromagnetic 
state and the present motion in the neighbourhood of 
the point under consideration. This is the physical meaning 
of them in accordance with the conception which our system 
represents. The common conception of the relations expressed 
by these equations is quite different. It regards the rates of 
variation of the polarisations on the left-hand side as the 
cause, and the induced forces on the right-hand side as the 

ly, Helmholtz, Ges. Abhandl. 1, p. 745; Borchardt’s Journ. f. Mathem. 78, 
a. rhs iateanent is not quite correct. It does indeed hold good for Maxwell’s 
treatise, to which it refers; but in his beer “On Physical Lines of Force” 
(Phil. Mag., April 1861) Maxwell has himself given a complete and systematic 


treatment of the phenomena in moving bodies. Unfortunately I had not noticed 
this when writing my paper. ] 


248 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xIV 


consequence thereof. This conception has arisen through the 
fact that the polarisations and their variations are usually sooner 
and more clearly known to us than the forces which simultane- 
ously arise; so that, as far as our knowledge goes, the left-hand 
sides of the equations are prior to the right-hand sides. In the © 
cases which chiefly interest us this conception has indeed very 
great advantages; but from the general standpoint it has the 
disadvantage that the forces are not definitely determined 
by the rates of variation of the polarisations of the opposite 
kind, but contain terms which are independent of these varia- 
tions. The common theory gets out of this difficulty by setting 
these terms as electrostatic or magnetic forces in opposition to 
the electromagnetic forces which are alone, according to that 
theory, determined by our equations. Although we do not 
approve of such a separation, and hence do not accept the 
common conception as to the causal relationship, it is still 
interesting to show how the partial forces which are intro- 
duced in the usual theory are contained in the separate terms 
of our equations. For this purpose we split up the forces in 
the form X= X,+X,, ete, L=L,+L,, ete, and put— 


X,=AM— B®,  —- L, = A(B3 — 70), 
(2)1¥,= At —y£), M,=A(7X — a3), 
Z,=A(BE —aM),  N,=A(an—AX). 


We thus obtain for X,, Y,, Z,, L,, M,, N, equations which 
result from the equations (1,) and (1,) for X, Y, Z, L, M, N 
by omitting the second and third terms on the left-hand side. 
Now the resultant of X, Y, Z, is an electric force which arises 
as soon as a body moves in the magnetic field. It is 
perpendicular to the direction of the motion and to the 
direction of the magnetic lines of force ; it is that force which 
in a narrower sense we are accustomed to denote as the 
electromotive force induced through motion. But it shduld 
be observed that, according to our views, the separation of this 
from the total force can have no physical meaning; for it 
would be in opposition to our conception to suppose that the 
magnetic field within a body could have a motion relative to it. 
The counterpart to the force X, Y, Z, is the force L, M, N,, 
which must make itself felt in a non-conductor when the 


XIV FOR BODIES IN MOTION 249 


latter is displaced through the lines of force of an electric 
field; but this is not yet confirmed by experience and is 
absent from the older electromagnetics. 

Let us now turn our attention to the resultant of L, M, N,, 
and suppose the general solutions of the equations containing 
these quantities to be represented as functions of the quantities 


u, AX/dt, a(dX/dx + dd/dy + d3/dz), ete. 


Let us put these latter quantities in the functions all equal to 
zero; there still remains a first part of the force which does 
not owe its origin to electromagnetic causes. Its components 
necessarily possess a potential; it represents that distance- 
force which, according to the older view, proces from magnetic 
masses. A second part of the force is given by that part of 
the functions which vanishes when, and only when, wu, v, w 
vanish, It contains the magnetic distance-force which appears 
to proceed from the actual electric currents. We obtain the 
whole of the electromagnetic part of the force L, M,N, by 
replacing in the expression of the second part the quantity 
4rAu by the quantity 
dX dX aQ dd 
drAu+ AT +Aa(— tag t fe 
and treating v and w similarly. This corresponds to the state- 
ment that as far as the production of a magnetic distance- 
force is concerned, an actual current is to be regarded as 
equivalent in the first place to the variation of an electric 
polarisation, and in the second place to the convective motion 
of true electricity. The latter part of this statement finds its 
requisite confirmation in Rowland’s experiment. 

Finally, let us consider the foree X, Y, Z, We can 
separate from this force as well a part which is independent of 
time-variations of the system, which possesses a potential, and 
which is treated as an electrostatic distance-force. From the 
residue of the electromagnetic force which remains we can 
detach a second part, which vanishes when, and only when, 
the quantities d€/dt, dM /dt, dXi/dt vanish. It clearly repre- 
sents the force of induction which arises from varying mag- 
netic moments, but it also contains in a hidden form that 
electric force which owes its origin to varying currents. 


250 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xIV 


Finally, there remains a third and last part which can be 
interpreted as an electric force produced by a convective motion 
of magnetism, and in which must be found the explanation 
of certain known phenomena of unipolar induction. 

These considerations show that we might also have arrived 
at the system of equations (1,) and (1,) by summing up the 
effects of the separate forces required by the older theories, 
and adding a series of hypothetical terms which can neither 
be confirmed nor disproved by existing experience. The way 
which we have followed requires a smaller number of inde- 
pendent hypotheses. We now proceed to deduce from our 
equations the most important general results. 


3. Motion of Magnets and of Electrostatically Charged Bodies 


As independent causes of variation of the electric or mag- 
netic polarisation there appear in our scheme first the magnetic 
or electric forces respectively, and secondly the motion of 
material bodies. According to our conclusions in the case 
of bodies at rest, the first cause produces no displacement of 
true electricit? in hon-conductors and no displacement of 
true magnetism at all. The latter cause of itself produces a 
displacement of electricity and of magnetism towards the space 
at rest, but it can cause no displacement towards the matter 
in motion; for by its motion this matter carries with it the 
lines of force, and electricity and magnetism may be regarded 
as the free ends of these lines. Hence when both causes act 
together there can be no relative motion of true magnetism 
with reference to the surrounding matter; nor can there be 
ahy such relative motion of true electricity, at any rate in 
non-conductors. Under these circumstances electricity and 
magnetism move with the matter in which they are present, 
as if they were indestructible and adhered firmly to the parts 
thereof. In order to represent this same idea symbolically, let us 
differentiate first the equations (1,) and then the equations (1,) 
with respect to wy z, multiply by the volume-element dr which 
we suppose to remain at rest, and to which the quantities 
£, 27, etc, refer. Let dr’ denote a volume-element which at 
every instant encloses the matter contained at the present 
instant in dr; let de’ and dm’ denote the amounts of true elec- 


XIV FOR BODIES IN woripy 251 


tricity and true magnetism respectively contained in dr’, and 
£’, XW, etc., the values of £, 2M, etc., with reference to dr’. We 


thus obtain—— 


ees 
dt\dz " dy ' dz 
en (ett a) eae tata) 
(3a) " 13 (e += =) 
G od tea 
{ge 
tenet a) teeta ta): 
dX dQ d3 
(3) da , UB , dy, jd& ac = a i) 
as dy dy" ds (ae aya) | 
=al Get ay tae) oa 
= m(et 4" oy 
dy dz 


These equations embrace the statements already made, 
and complete them as far as conductors are concerned. 
If the velocities a By are so small that the electric 
and magnetic conditions may at each instant remain in- 
finitely near to the stationary state, and if we restrict 
outSelves to the consideration of such quasi-stationary states, 
then the results which we have obtained are sufficient 
and necessary to determine the interdependence of the 
various states which may arise from each other. The intrd- 
duction of these results into such problems enables us to 
replace the complete, but very complicated, equations (1,) and 
(1,) by the equivalent and very simple equations which hold 


a 


252 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIV 


good for statical problems in bodies at rest, and which can 
be deduced from equations (1,) and (1,) by equating to zero 
the velocities and the time-variations at all points of the space. 
Such a simplification of the statements is not possible without 
introducing the idea of electricity and of magnetism; and it 
seems to me that this is the principal reason why these ideas 
are indispensable in the study of electrostatics and in the 
representation of magnetic phenomena. 


4. Induction in Closed Circuits 


The greatest velocities which we can assign to the sur- 
rounding bodies are so small compared with the velocity of 
light—the reciprocal of which appears as the multiplier of 
a, B, y in equations (1,) and (1,)—that electromagnetic effects 
due purely to motion can only be investigated with precision 
in the particular case in which these effects consist in the 
induction of an electric current in a closed metallic con- 
ductor. In order to determine the magnitude of such effects 
in closed conductors, let us consider any unclosed portion # 
of a surface inethe interior of the matter under consideration, 
and which is displaced with the material particles during 
the motion. Let s represent the instantaneous limiting curve 
of this surface-element. Let ¢’ denote the number of mag- 
netic lines of force which at any time traverse the surface . 
We shall again consider the causes which produce (independ- 
ently of each other) a variation in ¢’ as being two—in the 
first place, the electric forces; and in the second place, the 
motion of matter. If the first cause alone were at work, the 
system would be at rest, and so the rate of variation of ¢/ 
multiplied by A would be equal to the integral of the electric 
force taken around the whole extent of s; the integral, 
viewed from the side of the positive normal, being .taken 
clock-wise. If the motion alone were at work, it would ‘not 
produce any variation of ¢’, for it would carry forward the 
lines of force traversing the surface # together with this sur- 
face itself. Hence in the actual case in which the two 
causes act together, the integral of the electric force taken | 
in the given sense around any closed curve s is equal to A 
multiplied by the rate of variation of the number of mag- 


XIV FOR BODIES IN Mong 253 


netic lines of force which traverse any surface which was 
originally bounded by the curve s, but which follows the 
motion. This Jaw also holds good for the special case—the 
only one which is important from an experimental point of 
view—in which the curve s follows the path of a linear con- 
ductor; nor does it become invalid when the motion is suffi- 
ciently slow to allow all the states which arise to appear as 
being steady, and the current as uniform in all parts of the 
conductor. 

To represent this symbolically, let n’x, n’/y, n’z denote the 
angle which the normal to the element do of the moving sur- 
face # makes at any instant with the axes. Let £’ 1 wW be 
the values of £ Wt Win this element. Hurgher, let dw, n,x, 
ny, 2,2 denote the values of da, n’x, n'y, n’ L in the original 
position. We observe that, from purely geometrical considera- 
— we have 
Z (dé cos n’v) = aol Ge + aN COS 1,0 — = cos NY — o cos nal, 


a dey 
—(de, lav — if Pampa 
7 fae cos n',y) = dw | dy 008 Ne + (= + 7) ny — dy = Cos nal, 


ds, ; f da dB da dp 
ae Cos ',2) = ae _- CS sai — Gy COSY + x + ay) nal, 
and we thus ed 
as ’ ; 
=5 (£' cos n’ 2 + UV cos n’y + W cos n’z)do 
dt ee dt d 
={(5 eae Tle ay +75, Joos na @ 


IG + oe Stee + 1 r)eos ny dw 


gee aA AX 
f+ +B dy +1 de Jeos made 
d 
+ fe(@s B «oanste- fe cos ny do — fe cos 2,2 dw 
_ fos! cos nse do — fans ate “cos my do — fH cos ne de 


! dp 
~ [xt cos ne do — [ar cos my deo + {2( (G+ Gy eos ne de 


254 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xIv 
from which, with the aid of equations (1,) and (1,), we get 


dg’ daZ dY aX dZ adY aX 
A= -{{ ay ~~ eos + (—- “cosy + ae Gy) eo8 ‘de 
= [(Xdz+Ydy+ Zdz), 


the last integral being taken around the whole extent s of the 
surface dw. ; 

In special cases these results admit of simplification. If it 
is possible to shut off a singly connected space which entirely 
contains the moving curve s, and in which there is no true 
magnetism, it is clearly immaterial whether the auxiliary sur- 
face w follows the motion of the material parts or suffers a dis- 
placement independently of these, provided it remains within 
the space referred to, and is bounded by the curve s. In this 
case we may more simply and yet definitely assert that the in- 
tegral of the electric force taken around the closed curve is equal 
to the time-rate of variation of the number of magnetic lines of 
force embraced by the curve s, multiplied by A. If we retain 
this same supposition, and if in addition the magnetic polarisa- 
tion at every fixed point of. the space is constant in spite of 
the motion of the curve s, we may assert that the induced 
force along the curve is equal to A multiplied by the number 
of magnetic lines of force, considered as at rest, which the 
curve s cuts in a given direction during its motion. If the 
magnetic forces, under the influence of which the curve s 
moves, are simply and solely due to the influence of an 
uniform current along a path ¢, then the number of lines of 
force traversing s is, as we have seen,’ equal to the product of 
the Neumann’s potential of the curves s and ¢, and of the 
current in ¢ In this case, therefore, the variation in the 
above-mentioned product per unit time multiplied by A gives 
the electromotive force acting along the curve s. 

In one form or another these theorems embrace all knpwn 
cases of induction which have been carefully investigated. 
The laws of unipolar induction, too, can be easily deduced 
from the general propositions. Quantitative investigations of 
induction-phenomena in bodies of three dimensions have only 
been carried out to a limited extent. The equations by which 


1 See p. 232. 


XIV FOR BODIES IN MOTION 255 


Jochmann’ and others have siiseeadea in representing the 
known facts, follow directly from our general equations by 
omitting a number of terms which naturally disappear in con- 
sequence of the special nature of the problem. 

We must not omit to mention that we may represent the 
general theorem of induction in another and a very elegant 
form if we allow ourselves to speak of an independent motion 
of the lines of force, and to regard in general every variation of 
the magnetic polarisation as the result of such a motion of the 
lines of force. If we do this, we may state generally and 
completely that the induced electromotive force in any closed 
curve s is equal to the product of A into the number of lines 
of magnetic force which are cut by the curve s in a definite 
sense per unit time. But although no objection can be raised 
to the occasional use of the conception therein involved, 
nevertheless it will be better for us to avoid it in the present 
paper. For the conception employed by Faraday, and developed 
by Poynting? of a motion of the lines of force relatively to 
the surrounding medium, is indeed a highly remarkable one, 
and may be capable of being worked out; but it is entirely 
different from the view here followed, according to which the 
lines of force simply represent a symbol for special conditions 
of matter. There is no meaning in speaking of an independent 
motion of such conditions. It should also be observed that 
the controllable decrease and increase of the lines of force in 
all parts. of the space does not definitely determine the pre- 
supposed motion of the lines of force. Hence the above- 
mentioned proposition would not of itself decide definitely the 
magnitude of the induction in all cases; it should rather be 
regarded as a definition by means of which one among the 
possible motions of the lines of force is pointed out as the 
effective motion. 


5. Treatment of Surfaces of Slip 


At the boundary of two heterogeneous bodies the electro- 
magnetic constants may pass from one value to another dis- 
continuously; but the velocity-components aSy do not 


1 Jochmann, Crelle’s Journ. 63, p. 1, 1863. 3 
: = H. Poynting, Phil. Trans. 2, p. 277, 1885. [See also Note 35 at end of 
ook. J 


256 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIV 


necessarily undergo discontinuous changes at the same time at 
this bounding surface. The surfaces of separation between 
solid bodies and fluids, or between fluids themselves, are to be 
regarded as surfaces of discontinuity of this kind; and we are 
free to suppose that the transition at the boundary between a 
body and the ether is of the same nature. The appearance of 
continuous motion at such surfaces of discontinuity does not 
give rise to any new considerations; the conditions of the 
material parts on both sides of the surface are connected by 
the same relations as those which obtain for bodies at rest. 
But the case is different when the velocity-components also 
undergo discontinuous variations at the surface. As observed 
in our Introduction, the discontinuity can only refer to the 
components of t#e velocity which are parallel to the surface of 
separation ; we therefore rightly denote surfaces of this kind 
as surfaces of slip (Gleitfldchen). They may exist between 
solid bodies which are in contact with one another; it is also 
occasionally convenient and—seeing how ignorant we are as 
to the actual circumstances—permissible, to regard the surface 
of separation between a body and the ether as a surface of 
slip. As we Pave already remarked in the Introduction, we 
treat a surface of slip as the limiting case of a transition-layer 
in which the motions, and possibly the electromagnetic con- 
stants as well, change very rapidly, but still continuously from 
one value to another. This conception is justified by the fact 
that it does not lead to any results in contradiction with 
experience ; and it enables us to assert that the general pro- 
positions which we have already deduced do not become 
invalid in a system in which there are surfaces of slip. In 
order that our conception may suffice to determine the conditions 
in the surface of separation, the nature of the transition must be 
subjected to certain general restrictions. We give these restric- 
tions in the form of hypotheses respecting the finiteness of certain 
magnitudes in the transition-layer itself. We assume that there 
are no electromotive forces at the surface of slip. We place 
' the origin of the system of co-ordinates to which we refer at 
any point of the element of the transition-layer under con- 
sideration, and let it also follow this point during the motion. 
We further give the z-axis such a direction that it stands 
perpengicular to the element of the surface of slip, and also 


xIt FOR BODIES IN uonio 257 


remains perpendicular during the motion. Thus the transition- 
layer always forms the immediate neighbourhood of the zy- 
plane. We assume that even in the transition-layer itself 
the quantities 

xX Y ZLM WN 

XN 5S £€ M NR 

uvwa py 


remain finite; and in the same way that the differential co- 
efficients of these quantities parallel to the surface of slip, 1.¢ 
with respect to x and y, and also the differential coefficients of 


the quantities 
. XHSEM ZN 


with reference to the time ¢, remain finite. “On the other 
hand, we should allow the differential coefficients with respect 
to z to become infinite, with the exception of dy/dz, which, in 
accordance of the remark in the Introduction already referred 
to, must remain finite. Everywhere in the transition-layer, 
accordingly, y itself is vanishingly small. These assumptions 
being made, we multiply the first two equations of the system 
(1,) and (1,) by dz, integrate with respect to # through the 
transition-layer between two points lying exceedingly near to 
it, and observe that, on account of the shortness of the 
integration-path, the integral of every quantity which remains 
finite in the layer vanishes. We thus obtain the following 
four equations, in which the index 1 refers to the one side, 
the index 2 to the other side, of the surface of separation— 


2 2 
da ap Bo)4 
(5,) A [a ieae =e ee A[aee =X,-%; 
1 


1 
2 2 
da dg 
(a)-AfSzd=M,-M,  AfS5-u=1,-1, 
1 1 


These equations give the mutual relations between the force- 

components tangential to the surface of separation on both sides 

of it. Here, as in the case of bodies at rest, the components 

normal to the surface are connected by the condition that the 

surface-density of the true magnetism at the surface of sepgration 
8 


258 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIV 


cannot alter excepting by convection, and that the surface- 
density of the true electricity can only alter either by convec- 
tion or by an actual current. 

If the’ element of the surface of separation under con- 
sideration is not charged with any true electricity or true 
magnetism, 6 and Y% are constant in the interior of the transi- 
tion-layer. In this case ,the equations (5,) and (5,) take the 
simpler forms 

(5,.) X,—X,=AWB,—B,), Y, — Y, = Aa, —,), 
(53) L,-L, =A3S(B,—8,), M, — M, = Ad(a, — ,). 

As an example of the application of these equations, let us 
consider the case of a solid of revolution rotating about its 
axis within a ‘hollow in another solid body which closely 
surrounds it. If this system is submitted to the action of 
a magnetic field which is symmetrical with reference to the 
axis of rotation, there will not be, according to our conception, 
either in the interior of the rotating body, or in the interior of 
the surrounding mass, any cause for the appearance of electric 
forces. Such forces are, in fact, absent when the magnetic 
excitement is emtirely restricted to the interior of the one body or 
of the other. But if the lines of force penetrate through the 
surface along which the two bodies slide past one another, the 
electromotive forces expressed by equation (5,) are excited at 
this surface ; these forces spread into the interior of the bodies 
and there produce the electric stresses and currents whose 
existence is shown by experiment. If the bodies under con- 
sideration are non-conductors and are subjected to the influence 
of electric forces which are distributed symmetrically with refer- 
ence to the axis of rotation, and which do not vanish at the 
surface of slip, the introduction of the motion excites magnetic 
forces in the neighbourhood in accordance with equation (5,4). 
It is true that effects of this kind cannot be observed wjth the 
same certainty as those first referred to; but there is at 4east 
an indication of them in Professor Réntgen’s experiments.’ 

In the general case in which there are charges of true 
electricity and true magnetism at the surface of separation, a 
knowledge of the surface-density of these is not by itself 
sufficient for ascertaining the integrals of the equations (5,) - 

1 W. ©. Rontgen, Wied. Ann. 35, p. 264, 1888. 


XIV FOR BODIES IN MOTION 259 


and (5,4); beyond this it is necessary to know to what extent 
the electricity and magnetism in the transition-layer share in 
the motion of each of the two contiguous bodies. This 
indeterminateness lies in the very nature of the matter. 
Consider, for example, Rowland’s experiment on the effect of 
the convective motion of electricity ; and suppose the electrified 
disc to rotate within a solid insulatpr surrounding it closely, 
instead of rotating in air. Clearly the magnetic effect would 
diminish, even to the point of vanishing entirely, as the 
electricity gradually escaped from the surface of the rotating 
disc on to the contiguous surface of the body at rest. 


6. Conservation of Energy—Ponderomottre Forces 


We shall consider the transition of the system from the 
initial to the final state during any element of time as being 
split up into two stages. In the first stage we shall suppose 
all the material parts to be transferred from their initial to their 
final position, the lines of force simply following the motion of 
the material parts. In the second stage we shall suppose that 
the electric and magnetic forces, which by®this time are 
present, come into action, and in turn transfer the electro- 
magnetic conditions into their final state. The variation which 
the electromagnetic energy of the system experiences during 
the whole period of transition is the sum of the variations 
which it experiences during the two stages. The processes 
which take place during the second stage are processes in 
bodies at rest ; we already know how the variations of the 
electromagnetic energy during such processes are compen- 
sated by other forms of energy. But during the first stage, 
too, the electromagnetic energy of each material part of the 
system alters; we have therefore to account for what becomes 
of the eelectromagnetic energy thus diminished, or to find the 
source of any increase. As far as all existing experience 
extends, it can be proved beyond doubt that in every self- 
contained electromagnetic system the amount of energy in 
question is balanced by the mechanical work which is done by 
the electric and magnetic ponderomotive forces of the system 
during the element of time under consideration. But, never- 
theless, taken as a statement of general applicability, this is 


260 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xIV - 


not sufficient to enable us to deduce generally and rigidly the 
ponderomotive forces from the calculable variations of the 
electromagnetic energy. For this reason we introduce two 
further assumptions which are not inconsistent with it; these 
are not required by experience but by our own particular 
views. The first assumption declares that the statement 
already made—which experience proves to be correct for 
every self-contained electromagnetic system—also holds good 
for any material part of such a system. The second assumption 
asserts that no part of the system can exert upon the rest of 
the system any ponderomotive forces excepting pressures which 
are exerted by the elements of the first part upon the contiguous 
elements of the remaining part, and which at every point 
of the surface of contact depend simply upon the electro- 
magnetic conditions of the immediate neighbourhood. The 
pressures required by the second assumption are determined 
without ambiguity by the first assumption; we shall deduce 
the magnitude of these pressures, and shall show that they are 
sufficient. to explain the facts which have been directly observed. 
It then follows from the mode in which the pressures are 
deduced that the principle of the conservation of energy is 
satisfied in the case of moving bodies as well. 

Consider during an element of time dt the magnetic energy 
of a material particle, whose varying volume may be denoted 
by dr’, while dr denotes the value of dr’ at the beginning of 
the time-element dé. For the sake of simplicity let the origin 
of our system of co-ordinates be placed permanently in a 
material point of the space dr’. If dr’ moved as a rigid body, 
carrying its lines of force with it, the amount of energy con- 
tained in it would not alter. In general, therefore, the variation 
of this energy must be simply a function of the distortion 
which dr’ experiences in consequence of the motion; our 
immediate problem is to represent the variation in thw form. 
Now it is not the polarisations alone which alter in conseq fence 
of the distortions, but also the properties of the material 
vehicles thereof, i.e, the magnetic constants. For the pur- 
pose of calculating this variation we need a further extension 
of our notation. In the first place, and in addition to the 
constants p, we define a series of constants yw’ by the condition 
that 


’ 


XIV FOR BODIES IN MoTIgN 261 


£L+%MM + UN 
= py, L, + 2y,,LM + etc. 
= py £, + 2y,,/£M + ete. 


These constants pv’ are therefore the coefficients of £, UN, 2% 
in the linear functions of these quantities by which the forces 
are represented. We further denote by &n & the displace- 
ments which the point, whose velocities are a By, suffers from 
its original position at the beginning of the time dt. The 
quantities 


d dé d 
3 = zy at = =a, ete, 

are then the components of the distortions of the element dr’ 
in which the displacements &»f occur. The constants yw’ are 
functions of these quantities; moreover, they depend upon the 
rotations p, ¢, 7 which the element experiences during the dis- 
tortion. During the element of time dt both z,, z,, etc, and 
p, o, t remain vanishingly small; hence the dependence is 
linear and is known to us, provided we are given the differential 
coefficients of y’ with respect to p, o, 7, 7g x, etc. The 
differential coefficients with respect to p, 0, r can be calculated 
from the instantaneous values of »’ itself. But this is not 
possible for the differential coefficients with respect to 2,, x,, 
etc., and we must therefore assume that we are otherwise given 
the quantities 


, , 
Up, raven, apy, -,/ ati 
dat, Pyew . dx, Pay» yp CU., 
dp. , dp , 
12 , 12 __ , 
dx, = Py Ww diy eee Py. > 19? etc. ete. 


The 36 constants so defined clearly correspond to the 
magnetic properties of the particular substance which fills the 
space dr’ in its instantaneous state of deformation. For our 
purpose we cannot dispense with a single one of these constants ; 
nor can we a priori deduce a single one of them from the 
magnetic properties of the substance which we have hitherto 
considered. By a suitable orientation of our system of co- 


1 Cf. G. Kirchhoff, Mechanik, p. 123, 1877. 


262 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS X1V 


ordinates we can reduce the number of necessary constants ; 
similarly a reduction takes place when there happen to be 
symmetrical relations with respect to the system of co-ordinates 
used. In the simplest case, in which the substance is not only 
isotropic in its initial state, but also remains isotropic in 
spite of every deformation that arises—viz. in a fluid——the 
number of the new constants reduces to a single one, which 
then, together with the one magnetic permeability, sufficiently 
defines the magnetic properties. Besides, it does not seem 
improbable that even in the general case necessary relations 
may be proved to exist between the constants which would 

then reduce to a smaller number of independent constants. 
This notation being now assumed, we obtain successively 
the following expressions for the variation per unit time of 
the amount of magnetic energy contained in the space dr’ :— 
d 


1 
— 4 —(£L + MM + WN)d: , 
att + + UN) dr 


= ae dr liye 2 Qpyg ST + etc.) 
8ar\ dé 


d 
+(£L+ UM + ayia’ 


(6) 
4 dE AM , AB 
= har{o(o -MOh+ =) 


Up! 2 dps, 
Lt g-F 12 €M + ete. 
+ (“ets afer emt ete) 


da dB , dy 
+ (€L + 2M +2) (<* ae +2)|. 

From the last of these we proceed to remove the dif- 
ferential coefficients with respect to % We obtain the 
following expressions for d£/dt, dM/dt, d/dt from equations 
(1,) by considering only the influence of the motion in them, 
and putting the velocities a, 8, y, with due regard to the special 
choice of our co-ordinate system, equal to zero— 


dg dp. dy da da 
placed — +—)+M—4+ N= 
at G = dz - dy a3 ay 
AM dy . da dp dB 
= — MM 4+ oe 

dt Gta eh tae 
aN da dp d d 
— = —-N(— += g_Y Y 
dt a = dy 1 dy 7 le, 


(6,) 


XIV FOR BODIES IN words 263 


For the magnitude dy,,'/dt we further have 
dp dw du, dul day 


— ig 


dt ~ da, at diy “dt 


+ ete. 


da , (la dp 
= Pu nga t Pu lz, tas) + ete. 

dp’ dy dp 

oe ao. dp \dy |G) te 

We deduce similar expressions for dy,,//dt, ete. We in- 

troduce all these expressions in the right-hand side of 
equation (6), and this side now becomes, a homogeneous 
linear function of the nine differential coefficients of a By: 
with respect to zyz. But we can and will arrange this 
function so that it shall appear to us as a homogeneous 
linear function of the six rates of deformation da/dz, 
da/dy+da8/dx, ete, and of the three rates of rotation 
4(da/dy —dB/daz), etc. We here note that the coefficients of 
the three rates of rotation must necessarily vanish identically ; 
for a motion of a particle as a rigid body does*not bring about 
any alteration in the amount of energy contained in it. 
Accordingly, we simply reject the terms in which these rates 
of rotation occur, and thus obtain as our final result, after 
reducing to the unit of volume by dividing by dr— 


1@ (1 gt pw 4 BN)! } 

es dt | 8 

~ Sar = £L — WM — UN + pay if? + Ape’ E21 + ete.) 
T ¢ 


+ ae £L4MM—UN +p,’ 


you 


i Tt £L— mM UU t par’ sf? + 2pre’ so + etc.) 
rs +2 TM + WN+en ” os + Dp! ose 2it + etc.) 
87 Pe 


+ =-(3 Y +2 EN WU a go h2 4 Dye’ gM + etc.) 
87 dx * 


+ 7 (G+ ey ML + EM + May’ pk? + py’ oA + etc.) 
yd. 


a2? + ois ooh UIT + ete. ) 


264 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIV 


Now it is clear that in the linear function of the rates of 
distortion on the right hand the coefficient, taken negatively, 
of each of these rates, gives that pressure-component with 
which the magnetically strained matter tends to increase the 
corresponding distortion. For let us, in accordance with the 
usual’ notation, denote by X,X,X, the components of the 
pressure which the matter of the element dr exerts upon a 
plane section perpendicular to the z-axis; and let us further 
extend this notation to the directions of the other axes. 
Then the expression : 


, da dB dy 

Xa t vay t oa, 
dR dy dy , da da ap 
+¥.Ce tay) +X (Get aE) +X Gy + as) 


represents the mechanical work, per unit volume and per unit 
time, done by the material contents of the element dr in the 
distortion which takes place. According to our assumption 
this mechanical work is equal to the magnetic energy which 
is lost as a result of the distortion. Inasmuch as this holds 
for every possifle deformation our assertion is shown to be 
correct. Each of the pressure-components obtained is a 
homogeneous quadratic function of the three components of 
the prevailing magnetic force or, similarly, of the three com- 
ponents of the prevailing magnetic polarisation. By exactly 
analogous considerations we can deduce exactly analogous 
expressions for the pressures which arise through electric 
stresses. The total pressure is equal to the sum of the © 
magnetic and electric pressures. 

Having now found the values of the ponderomotive pressures, 
‘ we add three remarks. The first remark has-reference to the 
difference between our system of pressures and the system 
which Maxwell has given for the general case in whith the 
forces and the polarisations have different directions? In the 
first place, Maxwell’s formule are simpler, because in deducing 
them he paid no heed to the possible deformation of the 
medium. A much more important difference consists in the 
fact that the force-components which, according to the notation 


1G. Kirchhoff (Mechanik, Eleventh Lecture). 
2 Maxwell, Treatise on Elect. and Mag. 2, p. 254, 1873. 


{ 
xIVv FOR BODIES IN MOTION 265 


used, are denoted by X, and Y,, have different values in 
Maxwell, whereas with us they are identical. According to 
our system each material particle, when left to itself, simply 
changes its form ; according to Maxvwell’s system it would at 
the same time begin to rotate as a whole. Hence Maxwell’s 
pressures cannot owe their origin to processes in the interior 
of the element ; and they therefore find no place in the theory 
here worked out. At the same time they are permissible, if 
one starts with the assumption that in the interior of the 
moving body the ether remains permanently at rest and 
provides the necessary point of support for the rotation which 
takes place. 

The second remark has reference to the manner in which 
our formule become simplified when we apply them to bodies 
which are isotropic, and which, in spite of every deformation, 
remain isotropic — viz. to fluids. The system of constants 
» here reduces to the one constant y’=1/p. If we further 
denote by o the density of the fluid, we have 


1 
a) a Asm 
dloga yp’ dloga 


par’, 11 = pee, 22 = = pss, 33 


Mis’ 11 =etc. = 0. 


Thus the pressure-components are— 

Fe Eats HE 

2 M2? 2 2 2 N? ; 

(6,)4 Yy= a L'—M*+N*)- cai Sad loo oe + +M’+N’) 
Z,=f(, Y+M?—Nn*%)-_? _ (1? 4. M+? 
ae = gepteg lt He +N, 
.x%,=-H1M, x,=-ANL, Y,=-— MN. 

47 40 40 

For the samé case quite identical formule have already 

been obtained by von Helmholtz? by following a similar train 

of thought. Our formule merge into his if we alter the nota- 

tion so as to replace L, M, N and w by 2/3, w/F, »/9, and 


1 y, Helmholtz, Wied. Ann. 13, p. 400, 1881. 


266 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS XIV 


1+49, and further, notice that the @ of von Helmholtz’s 
formule is equal to d9/d log o =dy/4ad log o. 

The third remark has reference to the question, in how 
far the resultants of the pressures deduced from our hypo- 
theses are in accordance with the mechanical forces and couples, 
which we actually observe in bodies subjected to electromag- 
netic actions. We first observe that our observations are con- 
fined to systems which are indefinitely near to the statical or 
steady state. For such systems, however, the principle of 
the conservation of energy is of itself sufficient to enable 
us to calculate without ambiguity, from the loss of electro- 
magnetic energy during any displacement, the magnitude of 
the opposing mechanical force-components; and it may be 
regarded as alrealy proved that the force-components so 
calculated agree with those which are observed. One system 
of force-components which satisfies the principle of the 
conservation of energy is certainly given by the resultants 
of the pressures which have been deduced. This system 
must, therefore, be the one which is directly deducible 
from that principle, and which is in accordance with experi- 
ence. In order %o arrive a posteriori at the same result, we 
observe that under actual circumstances the electromagnetic 
“ pressures are much too feeble to cause noticeable deformations 
of the volume-elements of solid bodies. The very slight dis- 
tortions which they are able to bring about we are accustomed, 
in the study of electricity, to treat separately as phenomena of 
electrostriction, apart from the phenomena of electromagnetics 
proper. If, therefore, we put on one side this special class of 
phenomena, it will not affect the result whether we admit the 
pressures as calculated by us in the case of solid bodies, or no 
pressures at all, or any others of the same order of magnitude. 
We may, therefore, in general content ourselves with the 
simpler formuls (6,), in which we are now to take » to mean in 
the case of crystalline bodies any constant of the order °of 
magnitude of f, M2, etc. But we may further simplify the 
formule (6,) by neglecting the terms which contain the quan- 
tity du/d log c. For these terms, which represent an uniform 
pressure, cannot produce any finite displacements in liquids on 


1 The signs remain contrary, because v. Helmholtz reckons a tension as being 
positive, whereas we reckon a pressure as positive, 


xIV FOR BODIES IN MOTION 267 


account of their small compressibility; they can only give 
rise to phenomena of electrostriction or magnétostriction re- 
spectively. In the case of gaseous bodies these terms dis- 
appear, for the constant » and the specific inductive capacity 
do not change appreciably with the density o. Those pondero- 
motive forces which produce finite relative displacements of 
the bodies must accordingly be represented by the resultants 
of the following pressure-system, which is to be regarded as 
acting everywhere :— 


X,=F(-L?+M?+N%, 
8r 
yY,=-( L?—M?+N%, 
(6.) 4 Yy Bat +N") 
,=( V+M?—N?). 
87 
x,=-4tM, x,=-#NL Y,=—-/MN. 
T 4 


Now this simplified system of magnetig pressures is just 
Maxwell's! Maxwell has shown that this, together with the 
corresponding electric system, embraces the observed pondero- 
motive forces between magnets, steady currents, and electrified 
bodies, and to his simple demonstration we may here refer. 

It does not appear to have been observed that this system 
of pressures in general only leaves the interior of a homo- 
geneous body, especially of the ether, at rest, if the acting 
forces possess a potential, i.e. if the prevailing conditions are 
statical or steady. In the case of any admissible electro- 
magnetic disturbance, the pressures found must set the interior 
of the ether—which we have expressly supposed to be mov- 
able—into motion, with velocities which we could calculate if 
we had an idea of its mass.* This result seems to possess 
little intrinsic probability. And yet there is no reason, from 
the standpoint of the present dissertation, why we should 
abandon the theory on this account; for the result is not 


1 Maxwell, Treatise on Elect. and Mag., 1873, 2, p. 256. The signs there 
are opposite to ours, because Maxwell reckons a tension as being positive, 
whereas we reckon a pressure as positive. 

2 [See Note 36 at end of book.] 


268 FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS OF ELECTROMAGNETICS xIv 


inconsistent with our hypotheses, nor yet with what experience 
teaches us. The small quantity of air which remains even in 
the highest vacua is amply sufficient to keep below perceptible 
magnitude all currents that could be excited in such spaces 
under the existing circumstances. 

Finally, I wish to point out once more that I only attach 
value to the theory of electromagnetic forces in moving bodies 
here proposed from the point of view of systematic arrangement. 
The theory shows how we can treat completely the electro- 
magnetic phenomena in moving bodies, under certain restric- 
tions which we arbitrarily impose. It is scarcely probable 
that these restrictions correspond to the actual facts of the 
case. The correc? theory should rather distinguish between 
the conditions of the ether at every point, and those of the 
embedded matter. But it seems to me that, in order to pro- 
pound a theory in accordance with this view at present, we 
should require to make more numerous and arbitrary hypo- 
theses than those of the theory here set forth. 


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


(1891) 


1. [IL p. 29.] 

It was v. Helmholtz, in his paper Ueber die Erhaltung der Kraft, 
who first stated (in 1847) that the discharge of § Leyden jar is oscil- 
latory. He arrived at this conclusion from its varying and opposite 
magnetic effects, and from the fact that when one endeavours to 
decompose water by electric discharges, both gases are developed at 
both electrodes. Sir William Thomson arrived independently at 
the same result from theoretical considerations. The mathematical 
treatment of the problem given by him in the yéar 1853 (Phil. 
Mag. (4) 5, p. 393) still holds good to-day. We may further 
mention the following among the more import#mt early papers on 
the subject :— : ° 

On the discharge of Leyden jars— 

Feddersen, Pogg. Ann. 108, p. 69, 1858; 108, p. 497, 1859; 
112, p. 452, 1861; 118, p. 437, 1861; 115, p. 336, 1862 ; 
116, p. 132, 1862. 

Paalzow, Pogg. Ann. 112, p. 567, 1861; 118, pp. 178, 


357, 1863. 
v. Oettingen, Pogg. Ann. 115, p. 513, 1862; Jubelbd. p. 269, 
1874. 
G. Kirchhoff, Pogg. Ann. 121, p. 551, 1864; Ges. Abhandl. 
168 


L. Lorenz, Wied. Ann. 7, p. 161, 1879. 

On the oscillations of open induction-circuits— 

‘Helmholtz, Pogg. Ann. 88, p. 505, 1851; Ges. Abhandl. 1, 
429. The theory is implicitly contained in this, but is 
not explicitly applied to the special case of oscillations. 

v. Helmholtz, Ges. Abhandl. 1, p. 531, 1869. 

Bernstein, Pogg. Ann. 142, p. 54, 1871. 

Schiller, Pogg. Ann. 152, p. 535, 1872. 

2. (IL p. 34.] 
At first I insulated carefully with sealing-wax, ete. But I 
always found that, for all such experiments as are here considered, 


270 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


the insulation afforded by dry wood is apply sufficient. In the 
subsequent experiments no other means of insulation was used. 

3. (II. p. 39.] 

I expect that the action of the induction-coil partly depends 
upon the fact that directly before the discharge it allows the potential 
to rise very rapidly. Several accessory phenomena lead me to 
believe that when this rapid rise takes place, the difference of 
potential is forced beyond the point at which sparking occurs when 
the difference of potential increases slowly; and that for this 
reason the discharge takes place more suddenly and energetically 
than when a statical charge is discharged. 

4, [IL p. 45.] 

These curves should be compared with the corresponding 
resonance-curves which Herr V. Bjerknes has obtained by more 
accurate experimental measurements (Wied. Ann. 44, p. 74, 1891). 

5. [II. p. 49.] 

This remark in my first paper shows clearly that I never con- 
ceived the oscillations of my primary conductor as perfectly regular 
and long-continued sine-oscillations. The value of the damping 
has recently been carefully determined by Herr V. Bjerknes (Wied. 


Fig. 40. 


Ann. 44, p. 74, 1891). Fig. 40 shows, in accordance with the 
results of his experiments, the kind of oscillation given by a 
conductor similar to our primary conductor. 

6. [II p. 50.) 

Just at this point there has crept into the calculation a fatal 
mistake, the unfortunate effects of which extend even to some of 
the subsequent papers. 

The capacity C in the formula T=x /PC/A aabted the 
amount of etectricity which exists at one end of an oscillating con- 
ductor when the difference of potential between the two ends is 
equal to unity. Now if these two ends consist of two spheres which 
are far apart from each other, and if their difference of potential is 
equal to unity, then the difference of potential between each of 
them and the surrounding space is equal to+1/,. Therefore the 
charge upon each of the spheres, measured in absolute units, is 


SUPPLEMENTARY NoTis 271 


found by dividing its capacity, ic. its radius measured in centi- 
metres, by 2. Hence we should here put C= cm., and not 
C=15 cm. The period of oscillation, T, now becomes smaller in 
the proportion of 1:,/2, so that T is now equal to 1-26 hundred- 
millionths of a second. 

M. H. Poincaré, as already stated in the Introduction, first drew 
attention to this error (Comptes Rendus, 111, p. 322, 1891). 

7. (II. p. 52.] 

The result is about right, but the way in which it is deduced is 
not sound. We have just referred [6] to an error in the calcula- 
tion which would have to be corrected ; and beside this no account 
is taken of damping through radiation. Indeed, I had not thought 
of this when writing the paper. 

8. {IV. p. 67.] 

The complications here mentioned, and the starting of long 
sparks by other much shorter ones, refer to the following pheno- 
mena:——Let the primary coils of two induction-coils be placed 
in the same circuit, and let their spark-gaps be so adjusted as 
to be just on the point of sparking. Any cause which starts 
sparking in one of them will now make the other begin to spark 
as well; and this quite independently of the mutual action of 
the light emitted by the two sparks—which, indeed, can easily 
be excluded. Sparking begins either in both, or else in neither of 
them. Again, let a Tépler-Holtz induction-maghine, with a disc 
40 cm. in diameter, be turned rapidly so as to give sparks having a 
maximum length of about 15 cm. Now draw the poles 20-25 
cm. apart, so that the sparking entirely stops; it will now be 
found that a long crackling spark can again be regularly obtained 
every time a small spark is drawn from the negative conductor, 
either with the knuckle of the hand or with the knob of a Leyden 
jar ; or the negative pole may be connected to a long conductor, 
and sparks may be drawn from this with the same result. The 
“releasing” spark may be quite short and weak; if it is drawn 
with the knob of a Leyden jar, the jar only appears slightly 
charged. The same effect cannot be obtained by drawing sparks 
from the positive pole. The phenomenon must have been often 
observed before; but I have not found any mention of it in the 
literagure on the subject. 

eI can give no explanation of these phenomena. They clearly 
have the same origin as the phenomena which Herr G. Jaumann 
has described in his. paper entitled “ Einfluss rascher Potentialver- 
anderungen auf den Entladungsvorgang ” (Sitzungsberichie d. Akad. d. 
Wissensch. zu Wien. Bd. 97, Abth. Ila, July 1888). Herr Jaumann 
arrives at the conclusion that “not only the form, condition, and 
potential difference of the discharge-field,” but also “the manner in 
which the potential difference alters, and probably its rate of 


272 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


alteration, materially influence the discharge.” It is to be hoped 
that these phenomena, will be further explained. 

9. [IV. p. 73.] 

Soon afterwards Herren E. Wiedemann and H. Ebert showed 
that the action of the light only affecés the negative pole, and only 
the surface of it (Wied. Ann. 38, p. 241, 1888). 

10. [IV. p. 76.] 

Somewhat later I succeeded in this, I had hoped to observe an 
influence of the state of polarisation of the light upon the action, 
but was not able to detect anything of the kind, 

11. [IV. p. 79.] 

By this I did not mean to say that I had not succeeded in 
observing the action of light upon discharges other than thosé. of 
induction-coils; but only that I had not succeeded in replacing 
spark-discharges—the nature of which is so little understood—by 
simpler means. Ths was first done by Herr Hallwachs (/Vied. Ann: 
83, p. 301, 1888). The simplest effect that I obtained was with 
the glow-discharge from 1000 small Planté accumulators between 
brass knobs in free air; by the action of light I was able to 
make the glow-discharge pass when the knobs were so far apart 
that it could not spring across without the aid of the light. 

12. [VIL p. 109.] 

The 12 metres are supposed to be measured in the direction of 
the base-line. Thg space on each side of the base-line was clear up 
to a distance of 3-4 metres, with the exception of an iron stove 
which came within 1‘5 metres of it. I did not think at the time 
that at this distance it could interfere at all. 

13. [VIL p. 109.] 

In this calculation as well the capacity is assumed to be that of 
an end-plate, supposed to be hanging free in air; this capacity was 
experimentally determined by comparison with the sphere previously 
used. For the reasons stated in Note 6, only the half of this 
capacity should have been taken. Hence the period of oscillation, 
as correctly calculated, is smaller than the value given in the 
proportion of 1:./2. Thus the correct value of the period of 
oscillation is almost exactly one hundred-millionth of a second. 

14, [VIL p. 112] 

Here, as well as in all that follows, it is to be understood, that, 
in order to produce stationary waves in wires, not only must the 
primary and secondary conductors be brought into resonance, but the 
straight stretched wires must also be tuned to unison with both 
of these. Only in this case does the whole length of the wire 
divide itself clearly into half wavelengths, and only in this.case is 
this beautiful phenomenon exhibited in its full development. This 
condition seems to have escaped the attention of some observers 
who have repeated the experiments on waves in wires. 


SUPPLEMENTARY orp 273 


15. [VIL p. 113.] 

This has not turned out to be true. In tubes of about 2 cm. 
diameter, filled with dilute sulphuric acid, the waves travel quite 
well and with the same velocity as in wires. Herr E. Cohn has, 
moreover, shown that the inertia of the electrolytes cannot come 
into play when the period of oscillation is of the order here 
employed (Wied. Ann. 38, p. 217). The fact that these oscillations 
4re transmitted through electrolytes has been used by J. J. Thomson 
“for the purpose of determining their resistance (Proc. Roy. Soc. 45, 
p. 269). 

16. [VIL p. 114.] 

The correctly calculated period of oscillation is one hundred- 
nillionthof a second. This, with a wave-length of 2°8 metres, gives 
. a velocity of 280,000 km. per second, or approximately the velocity 
of light. 

This is the final form,—although, of couree, with much more 
careful data,—which Messrs. E. Lecher (Vied. Ann. 41, p. 850) 
and Blondlot (C. R. 118, p. 628) have adopted for showing that the 
velocity of waves in wires is the same as the velocity of light. As 
a matter of fact, however, this final form only shows the accordance 
of theory and observation in the following respect: that in a simple 
straight wire 2°8 metres long, and in a conductor of the form of 
our primary conductor, the periods of oscillation are equal. But 
the absolute value of the period of oscillatign, and hence the 
velocity, might on that account differ by the same amount in both 
cases from the theoretical value; and it must differ by the same 
amount if the same causes produce equal retardations in both 
conductors. 

Hence this final form cannot be employed for the purpose of 
removing doubts as to the existence of such a retardation. 

The velocity assumed in the text depends much more upon the 
experiments of Fizeau and Gounelle and Siemens, than upon the 
calculation. 

17. (VII. p. 118.] : 

It is not without interest to inquire how the interferences 
should have taken place if the experimerits had led to the conclusion 
that the velocity in wires is equal to the velocity in air. This can 
easily be deduced from the correct theory given in No. IX., together 
‘with the aid of Fig. 31, and comes out as follows :— 


OP Che Gea Selects 
100 }+}+/O0/O;—-;-/f-;-/L-}-j;- [-7-f-]J-{-[- 
250 |O|-|-|-J/O/O/OJOlOlOlOOJO}O}O{O;O 
400 |-|-|90 a el ea a ae es) cd Pad fc ead calla 


274 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


If the velocities were equal, there should still have been one 
change of sign; but the further changes which the experiments 
gave can only be explained by a difference in the velocities, or by 
illusions due to reflections or distavpnces in the neighbourhood. 

18. [VIL p. 131.] 

It should be observed that we are here only able to determine 
the position of the magnetic force by the aid of theory. From the 
experiments we cannot conclude that a second kind of force is 
present together with the electric force. If we confine ourselves to 
the experiments, we can only regard the expression “magnetic 
force” as a short name for a certain mode of distribution of the 
electric force. That this magnetic force produces effects which 
cannot be explained by the electric force, is first verified by experi- 
ments in No. XII. ; and, of course, only for waves in wires. 

19. [VIII p. 133.] 

The wave-length measured depends, therefore, very much upon 
the distance of B and C; and hence upon the assumption that C is 
quite accurately measured. If we assume that the position of C is 
altered by general conditions of the surrounding space, the first node 
should be placed nearer to the wall and we might obtain much 
smaller values for the wave-length. But the experiments give no 
reason for believing that the position of C is uncertain. 

20. (VIII. p. 136.] 

Lloyd’s experynent is the optical analogue of the experiments 
in which the primary conductor is gradually moved away from the 
wall. The experiments of the first kind, in which we removed the 
secondary conductor from a reflecting wall, have also found an 
optical analogue in the beautiful experiments which Herr O. Wiener 
has published in his paper on “Stationary Light-Waves and the 
Direction of Vibration of Polarised Light” (ied. Ann. 40, p. 303). 

As to the acoustic analogues, I find that the phenomenon which 
forms the analogue to the experiments of the first kind was discovered 
by N. Savart many years ago (see Poqg. Ann. 46, p. 458, 1839 ; also a 
number of Seebeck’s paper in the subsequent volumes). If a steady 
source of sound is placed at a distance of 15-20 metres in front of a 
plane wall, and if we listen near the wall (best with the aid of a reso- 
nator), we find that the sound swells out at certain points—the 
antinodes,—and becomes weak at other points—the nodesi | A correct 
analogue to the experiments of the second kind—in whfth athe 
primary conductor is moved—has been already given in’ the text. 
Another analogue—in itself interesting—is the following. Take a 
glass tube about 60 cm. long and 2 cm. in diameter and lower it 
gradually over a Bunsen burner, of which the flame is not too large. 
At a given depth the Bunsen flame will begin, but not without some 
difficulty, to make the tube sing loudly. Now bring the system 
near to a wall. Quite near the wall the sound disappears ; it 


SUPPLEMENTARY sok 275 


reappears at a distance of a quarter wave-length, and again vanishes 
at a distance of half a wave-length. By very careful adjustment, 
which up to the present I have not been able to secure at will, I 
have been able to observe two further positions of sound and silence 
at distances of half a wave-length. I do not know of any com- 
plete explanation of this phenomenon. Probably it has some 
connection with the fact that such a tube becomes silent if a 
resonator, tuned to the same note, is brought near its end. This 
last experiment is due—as far as I am aware—to Professor A. 
Christiani (Verhandl. d. phys. Gesellsch. zu Berlin, Dec. 15, 1882, at 
end of the Fortschritte der Physik, 36). 

21. [VIII. p. 136.] 

This remark refers to the experiments with wires, which I was 
arranging at the time when this paper was written. It has already 
been stated in the Introduction that the hope here expressed has 
not been fulfilled. 

29, [IX. p. 141.] 

An error in sign in the original paper, to which M. L. de la 
Rive drew my attention, has here been corrected. 

23. [IX. p. 150.] 

This calculation is based upon the observed wave-length of 480 
em. If this is not correct, the calculation must be altered 
accordingly. With regard to the real value of the damping see 
Note 5. 

24. [X. p. 161.] 

By the experiments in the following paper it is pretty plainly 
proved that in the case of rapid variations of current the changes 
penetrate from without into the wire. It is thereby made probable 
that in the case of a steady current as well, the disturbance in the 
wire itself is not, as has hitherto been assumed, the cause of the 
phenomena in its neighbourhood ; but that, on the contrary, the 
disturbances in the neighbourhood of the wire are the cause of the 
phenomena inside it. 

That the disturbances in the wire are connected with a regular 
circulation of material particles, or of a fluid assumed ad hoc, is a 
hypothesis which is neither proved nor disproved by our experi- 
ments ; they simply have nothing to do with it. We have neither 
any right to oppose this hypothesis, nor have we ahy intention of 
doing so, on the ground of the experiments here described. 

25. [XI. p. 177.] , 

In connection with these phenomena we may refer to the 
observation which Herren Hagenbach and Zehnder have brought 
forward as an objection to my interpretation of the experiment 
(Wied. Ann. 43, p. 611). My meaning is that light behaves 
just as the electric waves here behave; but we must imagine 
the dimensions of everything concerned in the experiment to 


276 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


be reduced in the same proportion, not only the length of the 
waves. 

26. [XI. p. 181.] 

Herr W. Konig first pointed out that the analogy between the. 
reflection of electric waves from our grating and the reflection of 
monochromatic light from the surface of dichroic crystals is much 
more complete than the analogy which is drawn in the text. He 
has also drawn attention to the relation between the action of our 
grating and certain polarising effects of optical gratings (Vied. Ann. 
87, p. 651, at the end). , 

27. [XI p. 182.] 

Messrs. Oliver Lodge and Howard have sbeially succeeded in 
showing the refraction and concentration of electric rays by means 
of large lenses (Phil. Mag. 27, p. 48, 1889). 

28. [XL p. 185.] 

Since then thé experiments have been exhibited objectively in 
many ways. Herr R. Ritter has employed successfully a frog’s 
leg (Wied, Ann. 40, p. 53). Mr. Dragoumis has used Geissler tubes 
(Nature, 39, p. 548). Herr Boltzmann has given a very convenient 
method in which a gold-leaf electroscope is used (JVied. Ann. 40, p. 
399). Herr Klemenéié has used a thermo-element (Jed. Ann. 42, 
p. 416). The method which is most elegant and best adapted for 
demonstration, although it is far from being an easy one, is the 
bolometer metho@ which Herren H. Rubens and R. Ritter have 
employed for exhibiting the experiments and for further useful 
researches (Wied. Ann. 40, p. 55, and subsequent volumes). 

29. [XIII p. 198.] 

And by more than one independent variable. The “force” and 
“polarisation ” in this paper are not to be regarded as two variables 
in this sense ; for they are connected by a fixed linear relation. If 
this relation is allowed to drop, by regarding it as a special case of 
a general relation, then “force” and “ polarisation” may serve as 
two variables. But it would be more convenient to introduce the 
polarisation of the ether as the one variable, and the polarisation 
of the ponderable matter as the other. 

30. [XII p. 214.] 

According to this usual system of nomenclature it is undoubtedly 
true that the amount of “electricity ” on an insulated - Sphere 
remains unchanged when the sphere is immersed ih an insulgting 
fluid, or, speaking generally, when it is moved in any way through 
insulating media. Hence we have denoted as “true” electricity 
the magnitude which remains unchanged during such motion. The 
distance-action of the sphere, and therefore the “free” electricity 
does change during the motion. 

31. [XIII p. 220.] 

Consider a steam-engine which drives a dynamo by means of a 


SUPPLEMENTARY xorfes 277 


strap running to the dynamo and back, and which in turn works an 
are lamp by means of a wire reaching to the lamp and back again. 
In ordinary language we say—and no exception need be taken to 
such a mode of expression—that the energy is transferred from 
the steam-engine by means of the strap to the dynamo, and from 
this again to the lamp by the wire. But is there any clear physical 
meaning in asserting that the energy travels from point to point 
along the stretched strap in a direction opposite to that in which 
the strap itself moves? And if not, can there be any more clear 
meaning in saying that the energy travels from point to point along 
the wires, or—as Poynting says—in the space between the wires ? 
There are difficulties here which badly need clearing up. 

32. [XIII p. 221.] 

In order to deduce the mechanical forces from the changes of 
energy, we must impart Virtual displacements to the bodies. Hence 
we should have to use the equations for bodiés in motion and not 
for bodies at rest, and at present the former are not at our disposal. 
By the aid of the experimental fact here assumed we are able to fill 
up this gap for the statical and steady states satisfactorily. 

33, [XIV. p. 244.] 

This proof that the statements here made embrace the observed 
facts, is also a proof of the statements themselves. They are there- 
fore logically stated as facts derived from experience ; not as results 
of any particular experiment, but as resultseof all the general 
experience which we possess respecting such matters. 

34, [XIV. p. 246.] 

The meaning of the equations is exceedingly simple; but their 
externa] appearance is somewhat complicated. This led me to expect, 
that skilful mathematicians might be able to’replace them by more 
elegant forms. And in fact Signor Vito Volterra has succeeded in 
representing by a single system of equations the phenomena for 
bodies both at rest and in motion (II nuovo Cimento (3), 29, p. 53; 
see also p. 147 did.). 

35. [XIV. p. 255.] 

A similar theory has also been developed recently by J. J. 
Thomson (Phil. Mag. (5), 31, p. 149). In so far as this theory 
and Poynting’s lead to Maxwell’s equations, I would regard them 
as special forms of “ Maxwell’s theory,” although their conceptions 
arg undoubtedly not Maxwell’s. 

36. (XIV. p. 267.] 

This does not necessarily imply an error in the theory, though 
it does necessarily imply a lack of completeness in it. Moreover it 
seems to be at the very root of our view, for it can be understood 
without using the equations. Let us suppose a magnetised steel 
sphere to rotate in free space about an axis which does not coin- 
cide with the direction of magnetisation. It continually sends out 


278 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


electromagnetic waves; it therefore gives out energy and must 
gradually come to rest. Now let us take an iron sphere at rest and 
excite in it a rotary magnetisation by varying electric forces ; it will 
easily be seen that the iron sphere must, conversely, begin to 
rotate. Such conclusions scarcely seem probable. But in con- 
nection with these matters we have scarcely any right:to speak of 
probability,—so complete is our ignorance as to possible motions of 
the ether. , 


INDEX TO NAMES 


Ampére, 230, 231 
Bernstein, 269 
Bezold, v. 2, 3, 54, 55 
Biot, 230 

Bjerknes, 17, 270 
Blondlot, 12, 273 
Boltzmann, 27, 276 
Christiani, 275 

Cohn, 28, 205, 273 
Colley, 29 

Cornu, 17 

Coulomb, 225 
Dragoumis, 276 
Ebert, 94 

Elster, 4 

Engler, 103, 

Faraday, 7, 19, 101, 122, 136 
Feddersen, 29, 269 
Fitzgerald, 3 

Fizeau, 9, 114, 273 
Fresnel, 136, 237, 240 
Gauss, 138, 199, 231 
Geissler, 32, 60 
Geitel, 4 

Gounelle, 114 
Hagenbach, 17 
Hallwachs, 4, 94, 272 
Heaviside, 160, 196 
Helmholtz, v., passim 
Howard, 276 
Jaumann, 271 
Jochmann, 255 

Joule, 219 

Kirchhoff, 50, 261, 264, 269 
Klementié, 276 
Kolatek, 179 

Konig, 276 


Lecher, 12, 187, 188, 273 

Lloyd, 136, 274 

Lodge, 8, 161, 276 

Lorenz, 50, 269 

Maxwell, passim 

Mosotti, 23 

Neumann, 50, 232, 234, 237, 254 
Newton, 136 @ 


. Oberbeck, 42 


Oettingen, v. 269 

Paalzow, 269 

Peltier, 219 

Poiucaré, 9, 17, 27, 271 
Poisson, 23 

Poynting, 139, 160, 220, 255, 277 
Riess, 64 

Righi, 4 

Ritter, 186, 276 

Rive, de la, 12, 18, 14, 16, 275 
Rontgen, 95, 258 
Rowland, 249, 259 
Rubens, 186, 276 
Riihmkorff, 31, 60, 64, 173 
Sarasin, 12, 13, 14, 16 
Savart, 59, 230, 274 
Schiller, 269 

Seebeck, 274 

Siemens, 9, 114 

Thomson, J. J., 273, 277 
Thomson, Sir W., 50, 269 
Trouton, 13 

Volterra, 277 

Weber, 51 

Wiedemann, 94 

Wiener, 274 

Zehnder, 17, 275 


Printed by R. & R. Crark, Limiren, Edinburgh. 


00052163 


ss 
oor ge + hogs 
we we, ee 


27 FERY337 


Digitized with financial assistance from 
Hemendra Kothari 


on 06 November, 2019 


son TA Rh HN NOR age by oe daha HL 
Miva ti %
