================================================================================
The Works of Hesiod, Callimachus, and Theognis
Hesiod, Callimachus, Theognis | Literally translated into English prose by Rev. J. Banks (Bohn's Classical Library, 1856)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Bohn's Classical Library (1856)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.91321
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

Fragments of other works of Hesiod, or the Hesiodic


-school, epic, astronomic, and didactic, are to be found at the


end of the edition of Goettling ; and do not need any enumer-
ation here. a ;

It remains to mention the editions consulted in the pre-
sent, translation. ‘They are principally those of Goettling,
Van Lennep, Robinson, -Gaisford, (in the Poet Minores,) and
Vollbehr. The English poetical version of Elton is appended
as the best existing, being infinitely more poetical than the
miserable attempt of Cook, whilst it is more faithful and
literal than that of Chapman.

The works of Hesiod have long deserved an English prose
version, to facilitate the general appreciation of one whom
the ancients deemed not unworthy to rank with Homer.
May the present translation pave the way, and lead many
future students to-the charms of the orjginal. :


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF CALLIMACHUS,


‘
4


Or avery different date and style is the poet, whose re-
maining works, chiefly of the Hymnic cast, stand next to.
those of Hesiod in the following translation. Callimachus
was chief librarian of the celebrated ‘library at Alexandria
from B. c. 260 to: 8B. G. 240, the date of his death, so that he
was a contemporary of Theocritus as well as of Aratus, (cf,
-Epigr. xxix.,) and like them enjoyed the esteem’and. patron-
age of Ptolemy Philadelphus. His extant poetry can hardly
be mentioned with the poems of Hesiod, except to point out
the contrast between the earliest framer of a Greek Theogony,
and the diligent compiler at a much later date of what had
beén added in the interval. The hymins are marked by little
else than learning and labour, and do not contain much real
poetry, or much of interest to sustain a faith, which was.

_ daily becoming weakened by the constant extension of its
objects of worship. i

Callimachus was, as Strabo tells us,(X VIL. iii. p.497,)a mem-
ber of the powerful house at Cyrene, named, from its founder
Battus, the Battiade ; and hence he is by Ovid (Ib. 53) call-
ed Battiades simply. Born probably at Cyrene, he became
in due course a pupil of the grammarian Hermocrates, under |
whom he worked with so much assiduity that he seems him~
self to have enjoyed very great celebrity as a grammarian
among the Alexandrine school, though of his works in that
branch of learning no remains have unfortunately come down
tous. He flourished in the reign of Ptolemy. Philadelphus, —
and ended his days in that of Euergetes, his son and successor.
We learn from Aulus Gellius (xvii. 21) that he lived shortly
before the first Punic war, aud that bis wife was a daughter


xvi BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF CALLIMACHUS.


of Euphrates of Syracuse. He appears to have had a nephew
bearing his own name, (the author, according to Suidas, of
an epic poem zepl yfowr,) of whom Lucian (de conscrib. Hist.)
quoted by. Spanheim, p. 154, vol. ii. of Ernesti’s edition, seenis,
' to make mention. (Cf. also Epigram xxii.)

If Callimachus was not great in the length or the substance
of his works,—the first of which positions we may infer from
his own Hymn to Apollo, ver. 106—-112, where we find him
thrusting off a charge seemingly made against him by his for-
mer pupil Apollonius Rhodius (see Spanheim ad loc.); while
the second is evident from a perusal of his hymns, and from
the phrase: of Propertius, II. i. 40, “Angusto pectore Calli-
machus,”—he is by all accounts free from the charge of want
of variety in his subjects. The names or fragments of forty
of his works are known to us, and Suidas records that -he
was the author of 800 works on grammar, history, mytho-
logy, and general literature, as well as hymns, elegies, epi-
grams, and at least one epic. His prose works are completely’
lost. Six of his hymns remain, or, if we adopt Blomfield’s
view that the Bath of Pallas is, as ‘its metre indicates, an

‘elegy, five; these are in the Ionic dialect, in hexameters,
and are replete with mythical knowledge. The Bath of Pal-
‘Jas is in elegiac verse, and in the Doric dialect.- This, and
. @ translation, or imitation, by Catultus of another elegy of
Callimachus, “de Coma Berenices,” 3 poem in honour of the
Queen of Euergetes, whose hair had been made a constella-
tion by the astronomers, are the only remaining evidence for '
testing the judgment of Quinctilian, that Callimachus was'
the most eminent elegiac poet of Greece (i. 58), He was:
certainly held in high esteem by the Roman poets Catullus,
Propertius,.and Ovid. | See Catull: Ixvi., de Coma Berenices ;
Propert. IV. i. 1; V. i. 64, where the poet declares his am-
bition to be called the Roman Callimachus, &c.; Ov. Ex.
Pont. IV. xvi. 32; Trist. ii. 367, 368 ; and Amor. I. xv.
18, 14, where the poet mentions Callimachus in the same
breath as Hesiod,’ ‘
Vivet et Ascreeus, dum mustis uva tumebit.
Dum cadet incurva falce resecta ceres.


Battiades semper tot cantabitur urbe, =. F
Quamvis ingenio non valet, arte valet. a


The epigrams of Cgllimachus which have come down tp


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF CALLIMACHUS.. + ‘xvii


us are seventy-thrée in stumber! and of various merit, some
of them being among the gems of the Greek Anthology, whilst
others are poor and meagre. Of the former we may direct
attention to the 2nd, the 5th, the 17th, and the 21st Epigrams,


_ 28 especially beautiful. Very elegant ‘and faithful translations ;


‘of these appear’ in the Greek Anthology, published by Mr.
Bohn.


Among the lost poems of Callimachus, which are often-re- -


ferred to by later writers, the most famous seem to have been
his Aira, an epic poem, (which Propertius calls “nonni, flati
somnia Callimachi,” ILI. 26, 32, where the word “somnia”


is explained by Barth, ss Quia Calljimachus finxerat, somniasse -


aliquando ge intervenisse Musis, quas postea litetis mandavit,”)
and another epic entitled ‘Exady, the hostess of Theseus


when he went forth to slay the Bull of Marathon, The


fragments which remain of this poem have been collected


and arranged with much learning by A. F. Naeke, Bonn.


' 1845; who shows that this poem, which was spoken of ‘as
the s only long poem of Callimachus, and supposed to have been
written in consequence of his being charged with Bpaxvhoyia,
was not after all an extraordinarily lengthy production, An-
other poem of a satirical character remams te be mentioned,—
the. Ibis, or Stork, an invective -against Apollonius Rhodius,
who seems to have provoked it by a bitter epigram. This
poem was imitated by Ovid in his poem of . the same name,
which still remains.

The editions consulted and used for this translation have
been the very complete variorum, edited by Ernesti, Leiden,
1761, based on that of Spanheim, and including his erudite
and very valuable commentary, and the edition of Bp. Blom-


field, 1815, which, excising much that is superfluous in Er-


nesti, adds the valuable matter of Ruhnken.


Of the two poetic versions of Callimachus, that of Tytler.


has been preferred for i incorporation with this volume, Dodd’s


has ‘considerable merit; but, all points considered, Tytler.


seemed most deserving of reproduction.


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF THEOGNIS.


Tre celebrated gnomic poet, whose remains are the con+
cluding subject of translation in this volume, was born in the
Grecian, not Sicilian, Megara, (cf. Theogn. 781, &c.,) about
570 years’ before the Christian era. He speaks in the passage
just referred to of a visit across the sea to Sicily, and it would
seem, frotn the Scholiast on Plato, (Leg. i. 630, A. vol. vi. p. 21,
Ast,) that the true interpretation of the philosopher’s words in
that passage is that Hyblean Megara had conferred: honorai
citizenship upon the poet, on the occasion of his visit. It

‘ would seem that his life was, extended till at least B. c. 490, -
so that he must have witnessed the commencement of the
war with Persia; and there are allusions to the fear of the
Median Invasion ia ver. 762 and 773. Taking his life as
having fallen between B. 6. 570 and 490, he must have
drawn his first breath amidst the tumults of the contending
factions, which from an earlier period than 630 3. c., the
date of the beginning of the tyranny of Theagenes at Megara,
had been rending that state. The despot Theagenes had
ascended to power on the shoulders of the people, after the
overthrow of the oligarchy which had held thesreins from the
period of Megara’s emancipation from the yoke of Corinth. The
deposition of Theagenes, B. c, 600, by the exiled nobles, aided
by the oligarchical Lacedemonians, served but to pave the
way after a brief tranquillity for a wilder ‘and more violent
insurrection of the commonalty, who carried their hatred to
the rich so far that they banished some and confiscated their

‘ property ; whilst they intruded into the houses and banquets

of others, and even passed a decree “repudiating ” their debts’
to their aristocratic creditors, and ‘requiring the whole in+


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF THEOGNIS., xix


terest, which bad been already received, to be repaid to them.
In considering this radiyroxéa, (Plut. Quest. Grec. 18, p.
295,) ag it was termed, we are to remember, however, as Mr.
Grote suggests, (iii. 60,) the reprobation with which usury
was viewed generally by early Greek and Roman society.
The result. of this disorderly democracy was, as might be
expected, a return of the nobles, and a re-establishment of
their supremacy; though for a long space revolutions and _
counter-revolutions distressed the Megarian. state, in thé
midst of which Theognis was born and lived. Naturally,
therefore, we find amidst the “disjecta membra poeta ” many


allusions to this unsettled state of things, now a strong aris-


tocratic appeal (for Theognis was himself one of the nobles) to
the leading men of his party ; at another time an outpouring
of despair at the failure of an onslaught of the nobles upon
the commons ;‘and at another the querulous laments of an


. exile from his father-land; as well as here and there 4°


concession to expediency for a season, indigated by # sup-
pression of his party feelings. Again, in other places we find
him complaining of the loss of his property by the betrayal of.
his own friénds and companions (262; 349, 512, 600, 828,
&e.). Greatly annoyed by the intermixture of ranks conse-
quent on these revolutions, and the re-distributions of pro=


- perty, Theognis is found also complaining generally of the in-


termarriage of good (i. e. noble) men with the daughters of the
bad, (i. e. base,) 189—192, &c.; and specially of a slight


- to himself on the part of aristocrati¢. parents, who, for in-


terest or lucre, have wedded their daughter to a churl, “ #oA-
Adv ipod caxtwy” (262). From his picture it would seem
that the base-born had been gainers by the revolutions, chang- .
ing their goat-skins and country-huts for citizenship and
wealth (cf. 349). Mr. Grote is of opinion that there is no
ground for Welcker’s statement that the land of the state had -
been formally re-divided, though the revolution had strength-
ened the “bad rich,” and depressed the “good and virtuous,”
with ruinous effects to the fortunes of Theognis.

The political and most of the moral verses are addressed to
Cyrnus, son.of Polypas, the word IeAvratdne being now ge-


-nerally allowed to be a patronymic (cf. Miiller, Hist. Gr. Lit.


ce. x, § 14, note). This person seems to have gained con-
siderable influénce in public affairs,, and to have been, in


a 3 t *


XX - BIOGRAPHIGAL NOTICE ,OF THEOGNIS.


Theognis’s eyes the “coming man” who was to re-estab-.
lish order. This same individual’ gppears, from ver. 805,
’ &e., (Gaisford,) to have been of age and rank enough te
be a@ Ompoc, or sacred envoy to Delphi; and the poet ad-
dresses him always as one on whom the hopes of his party are
sét, though not without gloomy forebodings as to the issue,
arising out of the feebleness and irresolution of the other
chiefs of that party. We have bitter lines addressed to him
(cf. 845) in a speech of the poet at a meeting of the aristo-
cratic party: and 4 description of the march on Megara of
the troops of some neighbouring ‘state, in aid of the demo-
cratic party (cf. 549—554). After this the poet seems to
have retired to Eubca, and thence to Thebes. Many frag-
ments of great beauty touch upon the miseries of exile, not:
unsoothed, however, as he testifies (1223) to himself and to
his friend Cyrnus, by the charms of conjugal affection. Per-
haps some of the fragments (e. g. 881, &c.) refer to a resi-
dence shortly after in’ Sicily; while Sparta, a congenial’
’ quarter as far as aristocratic feelings were concerned, is
_ shown in ver. 1067, &c., and at ver..875, to have given him
an asylum, and that too without the restrictions which en-
forced on natives of the soil the laws of Lycurgus, His
return to his country, and his. party’s triumph, are the sub-
jects of two fragments, placed by the accomplished trans-
lator, whose poetical version is appended to this edition, at the
close of his volume: and are indicative of this event being
about the time of the Persian invasion.

Besides Simonides, who was probably not the-poet, but’
president of an aristocratic Megarian club, and Onomacritus,
(not the famous Athenian, but a boon companion of the poet,)
other friends, probably connegted with the same club, are
mentioned or addressed by him in various fragments, por-
tions, it is supposed, of special elegies to each.

Welcker has very elaborately re-arranged and restored to
their supposed original order the extant fragments, rejecting,
first, all verses positively assigned by the ancients to other
poets: secondly, all parodies of existing gnome of Theognis.
He, thirdly, collects all passages referring to special persons,
places, seasons, and events: and, fourtlily, classes the cuprd-
rexa or convivial poetry. In the fifth class he ranges the ad-
dresses to Polypaides 3 erring in this point, because he does


.


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF THEOGNIS. xxi


not recognise the identity of this patronymic with Cyrnus.
Lastly, he places the ra:diud, many of which are blemishes, as
‘Suidas has observed, on the poet’s general poetical character;
and are besides of very questionable genuineness.

Of course the arrangement of the fragments by Welcker is
to a certain extent arbitrary, as is also the attempt of Mr.
Frere in his “ Theognis Restitutus” to re-arrange and reduce .
to system the scattered fragments of our author. To both
we owe a debt of gratitude: to the former for the deep learn-

' ing of his Prolegomena, and the labour bestowed upon the
systematizing of: the remains of Theognis; to the latter for
a most ingenious attempt to frame an autobiography of The-
ognis, at once lively and scholar-like, out of a mass of pass-
ages disconnected. ;

The chief charm of the poet lies in the light he throws
upon the circumstances and crises of the period during which .

he lived and wrote; and both Welcker and Mr. Frere have
done much to elucidate, much to present in a clever and pro-,
bable grouping, the persons, places, and events connected with
the state of Megara, between 8. c. 570 and 490, as depicted.
by Theognis.

The editions of Welcker and of Gaisford have been used
for this translation, and the order of the verses is that of
Gaisford. The translator is indebted for some useful re-
marks to an able article on Frere’s Theognis Restitutus, in
the Quarterly Review, No. 144, pp. 452-478, and to an-
other in the 1st volume of the Classical Museum, (263—266,).
by Sir G. C. neve ; :


»


_ THE,


THEOGONY OF HESIOD.


Becin we to sing with the Heliconian Muses,! who keep?
safe the spacious and divine mount of Helicon, and also with


delicate feet darice about the violet-hued fount? and altars of .


the mighty son of Cronos :4 and likewise having bathed their
soft skins in the Permessus,® or Hippocrene,® orsacred Olmius,


an)

1 Pausanias, ‘ix. c. 29 and 380, mentions the worship of the
Muses on Mount Helicon, which Otus and Ephialtes, the founders |
of Hesiod's birth-place, Ascra, had consecrated to them. He re-
counts the gifts offered to them at the same place, where Hesiod


©


dedicates a tripod which he had gained in a musical contest. , Cf.


Works and Days, 658. ; a4

2 fyovorv: the notion of protection is implied, as in woAtodxog, So
in Latin, Catullus, Epith; Pel. et Thet. 8, Retinent in summis ur-
bibus arces.—ZaSeor, sacred to the Muses and to Jove.

3 The violet-hued fount.] This was Aganippe, who, according to
Pausanias, ix. 29, was daughter of .Permessus. — ioedéc. Hesych.
piday® ty ris dpdaOat zroopupodr. . : ?

4 Son of Cronos.) No other author mentions that Jupiter had an
altar here, but if. his daughters. had, it is likely that he was not
without honour at Helicon. ~

* Permessus.] This river and the Olmius flow from Helicon, and
empty themselves together into Lake tepaue in Beeotia, near Hali-
artus. Strabo, ix. c.-ii. p. 259, Tauchn. The genitive here is used to
express the instrument of an action. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 375, obs. 2s.
Hom. I1. v.6, Aehoupivog wxeavoto: vi. 508, &c. The MSS. vary between
Tleppnecoio and Tsppycooio, to which last reading Goettling inclines,
deriving the word. from Tipyzwy, the bound of freticon. But Virg.
Ecl. vi. 64, Permessi ad flumina; and Statius, Theb. vii. 283, 284,

: Tuque, O Permesse, canoris, : ;

Et felix Holmie, vadis,
lead us to read the former, for uniformity. : ,
* Hippocrene.] This fountain was named from the steed Pegasus, '


‘which, when thirsty, stamped the ground’ with his hdof, and it sent
F _ '


,


i HESIOD. 7-19,


are wont! to institute on the top of Helicon choral dances,
beautiful and lovely, and move nimbly with their feet. Then
starting thence, shrouded in thick darkness,? by night? they
are wont to wend their way, uttering sounds exceeding
. sweet, while they celebrate wgisebearing Jove, and majestic
Juno, the Argive goddess, treading-proudly in golden sandals;
and gleaming-eyed Athene, daughter of egis-bearing Jove ;
Phebus Apollo ; Artemis, arrow-queen ; and earth-encompass-
ing, earth-shaking Poseidon; august Themis; Aphrodite
- shooting-lively-glances; and Hebe ‘ of-the-golden-crown ; and
fair Dione ; Aurora, and the'great Sun, and the resplendent
Moon ; Latona, and Iapetus,® and wily Cronos; Earth, mighty


forth a spring. But neither here, nor in ver. 281, 284, 325, is the
story given, though Hesychius refers us to the Theogony for it. |

’ Here, as in 8 and 10, we have an illustration of Matth. Gr. Gr.
§ 502, obs: 3, that the imperfect, perfect, and aorist have the sense
often of an action frequently repeated, “tobe wont.’? Cf. Hes. Works
and Days, 240—244 imeppwoavro, from fiw, poopat TI. i. 529.

. 2 sige woddg. Cf. Butm. Lexil. p. 39, who traces the significations
of énp, from “‘ thick ‘haze ” to “ fog,’” which the ancients took for
thickened air, and from fog to ‘ darkness,” as being a very thick
fog, deceiving the eye-sight. Cf. Il. v. 864; Od. viit. 562.

iyviyun, nocturne, noctu, adj. for adv. Cf. [l'i. 682; xxi. 37 ;
Od. ifi. 178; Hesiod, Scut. 32. In Latin. Nec vespertinus cir-
cumgemit utsus ovile, Hor. Epod. xvi. 51. ‘Fhese visits were by
night, because the ancients deemed that the gods, who had visited
earlier and purer mortals night and day, denied their presence, in
‘the daylight, to the more depraved ages of the world. Cf. Catull.
Pel. et Thet. 384; , ;
Presentes namque ante domos invisere castas
Sepius et sese mortali osténdere cetu
Celicole, nondum spretaé pietate, solebant.
decay, 1, A voice noised abroad, one knows not how. 2. A voice;
not from. dccopat, but akin to 5b. Butm. Lexil. p. 445. Heyne,
arguing that dooa in the second sense is of later writers, assigns this
proem to a later-date than Hesiod—wrongly; for see Odyss. xxiv.
412; H. in Mere. 442. ; v
* Hesiod ranks Hebe among Dex Majores, because she was the
wife of Hercules. Pindar mentions her with honour, Nem. i, 110;
vii. 6; x. 32. Pausan. speaks ‘of her temple and worship, ii. 13;
among the Phliasians, and heraltar, with that of Hercules, at Athens,
i. 19. Dione, in Homer, is the mother of Venus (by Jove). Il v.
370, 428. Hesiod not sone this, (ef. 188,) places her among the
Oceanides, (853,) and yet here among the Majores Dez. - Latin
writers constantly confuse Dione and Venus. Perhaps they were
different names of the same goddess in different parts of Greece. -
5 Japetus, ‘the Titan, trough not. worshipped in Greece, as the


-20—35. _ THE THEOGONY. ; . 8


Ocean, and ‘dark Night, and the holy race of other ever-living
immortals, who erst taught Hesiod a lovely song,! as he fed
his lambs beneath divine Helicon. But first of all the god-
desses, the Olympian Muses, daughters of zgis-bearing Jove,
addressed me in a speech such as this: _

“Ye shepherds, dwelling a-field, base subjects for reproach,
nought but gluttons,? we know to sing® many fictions like to
traths, and we know, when we will, to speak what is true.”

Thus said the daughters, ready-in-speech, ef mighty Jove,

-and gave me* as a staff a branch of very luxuriant olive to

pluck, (a branch) wondrous to behold; and breathed into‘me

a voice divine, that I might sing of both the future and the
ast. : ‘

And they bade me hymn the race of ever-living blessed

gods, but first and last® ever to sing of themselves. Yet why

should these tales ée told: by me touching the sacred oak,’ or ‘


other gods here mentioned, was yet highly distinguished among the
ancient Hellenés, on account of his deavendants Prometheus and
Deucalion.

1 Aristides calls Hesiod, for these two verses, oxérdcoc rai iBproriic.
Robinson compares the fables of Horace, Carm. ii. 19; iil. 4, and
Numa’s nocturnal meetings with Egeria. The ancients called men
ey sold eeee tales yono:ddovg, in satire of Hesiod; and Ovid says,

vA. i. ;

‘Nee mihi sunt vise, Clio, Clitsque sorores nt
Pascenti pecudes vallibus, Ascra, tuis.
Compare Fasti, book vi. 13. But Hesiod’s simple nature may haye —
dreamed these visions, or have been wrought on by fancy, the Muse-
haunted spot, and the plenteous laurel, their gift. V. L aoe

2 yacripeg otov. Hesych. rpogiig povoy exquehodpevor. Cf. Epi-
menides (S. Paul to Tit. i. 12); Hom. Il, v. 787. : ;

® Milton’s Lycidas, 10, 11, “ He knew 5

Himself to sing and build the lefty rhyme.”

Hor. A. P. 338, Ficta voluptatis causa sint proxima veris. Callimach.
Hymn to Jupiter, 65. deokolany, diovroc & xev weriOoey dxouny. :
*.We read here of three gifts to Hesiod from the Muses, the
laure]-leaves, the staff, and inspiration. ' Cf. Juvenal, vii. 19, Lau-

rumque momordit. _ ‘

* Lucian (in Disp. on Hesiod) says he never exercises the gift of
a pavric, implied here. But see Works and Days, 180.

-* Cf. Horat. Epist. i. 1, Prim& dicte mihi, -summa dicende Ca-
men’, Mecenas. : ,

7 Sed quo mihi hec circa quercum, aut circa petram. (F.S. Lehrs.) .
Goettling refers the words to the prophetic oaks of Dodona (ai xpo- -
onyopoe Sotec. AEsch. Prom. V. 882. Ef Sophec. Trach. 1158); and
the Dephian rock (AeAgic. zérpa, Soph. . T. 464 Cf. Odyss. xix.

LEX B .


4. i HESIOD. i.e ° g6--5ay


rock? Come thou!'! Begin we with the Muses, who, as they’ '

_ sing, delight the great spirit of Jove, their sire, within
‘Olympus, telling of the present, and the future, and the past,
according in their voice ; and from their lips sweet speech
flows ceaselessly, whilst the halls of loud-thundering Jove,
their sire, are glad? at the delicate utterance? of the goddesses,
as ¢t is diffused around: and the top of snowy Olympus rings,
and the mansions of the immortals. They then uttering di-

. vine -sounds first celebrate in song the august race of the
gods, whom from the beginning Earth and broad Heaven pro- -
duced; the gods who sprang from these, givers of good
gifts ;* and then next, Jove, sire of gods and men likewise, the
goddesses chaunt as they begin, and chaunting him cease
from their song, how most excellent he is of the gods, and
mightiest in strength. .And next the Olympian , Muses,®
daughters of egis-bearing Jove, gladden Jove’s spirit within
Olympus, by singing of the ‘race of heroes,® and mighty
giants ; che Muses I say, whom Mnemosyne, guardian over
the corh-lands of’ Eleuther,’ bare, after union with their sire,


' 168). The sense then will be, Why do I babble touching great
mysteries? Van Lennep (from comparing Il. x. 126; Theoc. ili. 8;
Ov. Heroid. v. 13) prefers to.render it somehow thus, “ Why prate I
thus around oak and rock?” “ Quid ita garrio, ut rure amantes so-
lent juxta umbresam quercum vel rupem.” We have adopted the
former view. > ; :

1 rivn. Age tl, Hesiode. Hom. Odyss. xx. 18, réthae 31) xpadin.
Theogn. 997, réApa Ovpi xaxoter, Terent. Andy. 1. iii, Enimvero,
Dave, nil loci est segnitiz. Adelph. V. iv. 23, Age, age, experia-
mur. Such expressions of encouragement to self are common in
all languages. to

2 yerg de re. Cf. Hom. H. in Cer. 13, 14, and Theognis, éyéddove
8& yaia redwon, THOnoervre Babde, wsvrog Grog wodrjg. Lucret. i. 8, .
Tibi rident zquora ponti. oS ;

+. Necptoéooy, lily-coloured, (Asigior,) delicate. The word properly
‘applied to objects which may be seen, is transferred to matters of
sound and hearing. So in I]. iii. 152, df Agptoseon. In Pliny,
xxxviii..6; Cic. N. D. ii, 58, candida vox is opposed to fusca vox.
Ausonius, Ep. 17, Eloridissimus tui sermonis afflatus. ;

4 Swrijpec tdwy. .An Homeric phrase. Hom. I]. xxiv. 528; Od.
vili. 325, 335. Zawy, gen. plur. neut., as if from rd@ 2a, good things,
th, 20c. Butm. Lexil. p. 253, note. éx ray, i. e. earth and heaven.

§ Olympian: either because born near Olympus, (ver. 62,) or be-
cattse wont to mix in the abode of the gods, Olympus, ver. 75. II.
i, 604, Movedwy @ ai aitoy apebsuevardaixalj., * ;

§ dvOpd7wy, herves. * . -


7 Eleuthera, a city built by Eleuther, son of Apollo and Aethusa,


55473, THE. THEOGONY. — ' 5


the son of Cronus, in Pieria,! to be a means of oblivion of ills,
and a rest from cares, For during nine nights did the coun-
sellor Jove associate with her, apart from’ the qther immortals,
ascending her. holy-bed : but when at length, I ween, it was
the year,? and the seasons had revolved towards the end of the
months, and many days had been completed, then -she bare

, nine accordant daughters, whose care is song,’ possessing, as
they do, in their bosoms a mind at ease, but a little distance
from the highest peak of snowy Olympus, -where dre ‘their
bright spots-for-dancing 4 and fair abodes. And beside them
‘the Graces and Cupid too have dwellings at festivals,> and
pouring through their lips a lovely voice, they chaunt the attri-
butes,® and celebrate the wise ways of all the immortals, utter-
ing sn exceeding-lovely voice. a


And they then? went to Olympus, exulting in their beau-


tiful voice, in their immortal song, and around them, as they

sang, dark earth was re-echoing, and-a winsome sound arose

from their feet, as they wended to their sire: But he reigns

\in Olympus,’ having in his own disposal the thunder and the

glowing bolt, since he hath conquered by might his father,
¢ .


daughter of Neptune, near Cithzron, on the Beeotian border: itis
the first town as you journey from Beeotia, by Citheron and
Platea, towards Attica. Pausan. i. 38, § 8. ‘

1 Pieria, a mountain tract between Macedon and Thessaly, whence
the Pierians introduced the worship of the Muses to Helicon and
its vicinity. Strabo, ix. c. v. p. 315 (Tauchn.). Pausan. ix. 29, § 2.

2 tmauroc, the year, i. e. of ten months, according to ancient
reckoning. Macrob. Saturn. i. 11, ;


3 wéuBAerat, perf. pass. for peusdprac. Van Lennep, Liddell and


Scott, &c. pédw, pepéidw, péprw, pepPrw, hence wrappépBrwe,

‘4 yopol, spots for dancing. ‘Od. viii. 260, 264; xii. 4. é

oki’, Zyouer : not always, but at festivals of the gods. The Muses

dwelt at Helicon, and the Graces and Cupid (according to Scho-
‘liast) had_ temples with them there. The Muses were ‘ever at the
feasts of the gods, and the poet seems to mean that those who dwelt
with them-at Helicon, had dwellings near them in. heaven during
the 0dr. Vi Lennep. _ ee

"6 ydpoug: que propria singulis Dis attributa sunt.


? roré: i. e, at their biyth. The gods were supposed to be adult


at-birth. Mercury, Hom. Hymn ad ill. 17,
aS , “H&og-yeyovise plow fart tyeBagizep 4
Eoxipwec Boiy EMaby senBéhow AzOd\wvoe.
So Minerva sprang all armed from hi ios Z
* A grand subject for his daughters’ first essay in singing-


6 ‘HESIOD. 73-97,


Cronus. And duly to the immortals ‘hath he arranged each
office at once, and declared their prerogatives.

Thus, I wot, the Muses tenanting Olympian homes are
wont to sing, nine daughters born of mighty Jove, Clio,
Euterpe, Thalia, and Melpoméne, Terpsichore and Erato;
Polymnia, Urania, and Calliope :' and she is eldest'of them
all. For she also attends in the company of august kings.
Whomsoever of Jove-reared sovereigns the daughters of great
Jove shall have honoured and looked upon at his birth,? on


. the tongue of such an one they shed a honeyed dew, and from


his lips drop gentle words ; so then'the peoples ajl look to
him, as he Jecideth questions of law’ with righteous judg-
ments ; and he speaketh-counsels unerringly,* and quickly
stays with wisdom a strife however great.° For therefore
are kings wise,® in that for their peoples, when misled in the
forum, they easily accomplish the reversal of their acts, ex-
horting them with soft words. And as he goes through the
city they propitiate him as 2 god with gentle awe, and he is
conspicuous among them when assembled, as is the sacred
gift of the Muses among men. Since from the Muses and
ciao Apollo are men of song, and hatpers over the
earth, but from Jove spring kings: yet happy he whomso-


ever the Muses shall have loved ; sweet is the sound that


1 These were the Muses respectively of rhetoric, flute-playing,
comedy, tragedy, lute-playing and the dance, erotic poetry and


. mimic imitation, geometry, astronomy, ahd epic poetry. Cf. Scho-


liast on this passage; and more in Smith’s Dict. Gr. and Rom. Biog.
vol. ii. 1126, a. b, ‘apogepeordrn, eldest. Cf. 361, 777.
2 Shall have honoured, &c.] Compare Theocr. ix. 38,
j : og x2e opedyrat ,
yabeboat, ric 8 ottre org Saknoaro Kipxa,
Hor. Od. IV. iii. Quem tu, Melpomene semel
Nascentem placido lumine videris.

- 8 Decideth questions of law ;] i. e. where old usage is disputed, and
the king or judge must decide. I}. xvi. 887. So Liddell and Scott.
Of this function of kings, cf, Op. et D. 89, 248, 261.

4 dyopebwy—carinavet, Anacolouthon. rs couples. rarézavee to
ayopstwr for d&yopedet. f

5 Cf. Virg. Ain. i. 148-158, Ac veluti populo in magno, &c.

* Van Lennep gives the best interpretation of this and the follow-
ing line, “‘ Ideo sunt reges ‘prudentes quod in concione populis
errore vel pravitate consilii in noxam incurrentibus, (cf. Il. ix. 512;
Il. xv. 484, BragGévra,) facta infecta reddunt; efficiunt ut illi sua
facta mutent,”’ ue € j


97-119, THE THEOGONY. 7
flows from his mouth. For suppose one, even having grief
in his fresh sorrowing -spirit, pines away troubled at heart,
yet if a minstrel, servant of the Muses, shall have chaunted the
glories of men of yore, and the blessed gods, who hold Olym-
pus, quickly does he forget his melancholy, nor does he at all
remember his cares ;' and quickly have the gifts of the gods
diverted them. saa :

Hail! daughters of Jove; and give the lovely song. And _
sing? the sacred race of immortals ever-existing, who sprang
from Earth and starry Heaven, and murky Niglit, whom the
briny Deep nourished. Say, too, how at the first the gods and
earth were born, and rivers and boundless deep, rushing with
swollen stream,? and shining stars, and: the broad Heaven
above; and the gods who were sprung from these, givers of
good gifts; and say how they divided their wealth,’ and how
they apportioned their honours, and how at the first they oc-
cupied Olympus with-its-miany-ravines. Tell me these things,
ye Muses, abiding in Olympian homes from the beginning,
and say ye what was the first of them that rose. | ,

In truth then foremost sprang Chaos,5 and next broad-
bosomed® Earth, ever secure seat of all the immortals, who
‘inhabit the peaks of snow-capt Olympus, and -dark dim Tar-
_ tarus? in a recess of Earth having-broad-ways, and Love,


1 Svodpovéwy émAnSerae, Matt. Gr. Gr. § 549. 6. p. 950.

2 Goettling deems the next ten lines spurious. V.Lennep main-
tains them, on the ground that Hesiod means to speak first of the
eldest gods, offspring of Ccelus and Terra, and also those born of
Nox and Pontus (105—107) ; then how Cronus and the Titans, Terra,
Pontus, Rivers, and Ceelus first existed (108—-110); then the pro-
geny of the elder gods, which conquered the Titans, took Olympus,
and divided the spoil (111-113). Hesiod bids the Muses first tell
this, and what of these was first; or before all these (114, 115). _—

8 dweipitog. Od. x. 195.1. q. dmreipécrog: oldpare Obwy, rushing
with swollen stream. I], xxi. 234. ; :

._ # dgevog, wealth of the gods. dgevoy, accusative. Op. et D. 24,
Butm. Lexil. p. 177, derives it from an old adj. dgvdc, i. q. €g00v0g. |
Passow, from a7é and évac, annual income. Cf. Annona. Doederlein,
from d¢iw, apdocw.~ :

1 8 Xdoc, from xéw: hisco; capax sum. (Varro, de L. L. iv. p. 8.
ed, Bip. Cavum. V. Lennep.)

* Broad-bosomed.] Earth was worshipped under this epithet at

giz. So Scholiast and Pausanias say. : ;

7 Tartarus and Eros. Pausan. (Boept#27, § 2, p. 204, ‘Tauch.)
quotes this passage of Hesiod. “Epos, act. pov, Homer, seems to be -


8 y HESIOD. "  *  420—188,


_ who-4s most beautiful among immortal gods, Love that te-
laxes the limbs,' and in the breasts of all gods and, all men,
subdues their reason and prudent counsel. But ' from Chaos
were born Erebus and black. Night ; and from Night again

. Sprang forth ASther and Day, whom she bare after having

‘conceived, by unien with Erebus? in love. And Earth, in
sooth, bare first indeed like to herself (in size) starry Heaven,
that he might shelter her around on all sides, that so she
might be ever a secure seat for the blessed gods: and she
brought forth vast mountains, lovely haints of deities, the.
Nymphs who dwell along the woodland hills. She too bare -
also the barren Sea,? rushing with swollen stream, the Deep,
I mean, without delightsome love: but afterward, havin,
bedded with Heaven, she bare deep-eddying Ocean, Czeus an
Arius, Hyperion and Iapetus,t Thea and Rhea, Themis, Mne-


the ancient form of “Epwe, preserved by the Aolic dialect. Cf.
Bepeho, ap. Hepheest. c. vii. p. 42. . ;
, _} dXugpedne, limb-relaxing. Cf. Hom, Od. xx. 57; xxiii. 343.
Ovid. Heroid. Ep. xiii. 15, ve ; .
Quando erit ut reducem sop amplexa lacertis
Languida letitid solvar ab ipse mea. %
Lucret., lib. i. 8—5, thus speaks of Eros under the name of Venus:
Quz mare navigerum, que terras frugiferentes .
Concelebrat, per quam quoniam genus omne animantum -
Concipitur visitque exortum lumina solis. 538

2 "BpsBoc was b7d xPovdc. Theog. 669. Above Hades. A mythical
being, son of Chaos, and father of Aither and Day by his sister .
Night. Chaos, Erebus, and Nox are joined, Ovid. Met. xiv. 414.
Et Noctem, Noctisque deos Ereboque Chaoque Convoeat. Virg.
En, iv, 509, 510, Crines effusa sacerdos Ter centum tonat ore deos,
Erebumque-Chaosque. . ;

3 HeSiod’s Oceanus was father of Rivers (Th. 337); rednee wéra-
poe, (242,) whose springs, m7yat, are mentioned, (282,) and who is
called by the river-epithet, Ba@udivyc. Theog. 265. Op. et D. 171.

. Therefore he was son of Coelus and Terra; but Pontus, MéAayog
. (mare salsum), only of Terra.

* Caus, sire of Latona. Theog, 404. His worship seems pecu-
liar to the Hgean. The word is derived from «oéw, intelligo, or
_xéw, turgeo. Pausan. (iv. 33) mentions a river of Messenia so called. .
—Crius; Deus eximié potens ; a cpt. Pausan. (vii. c. last) mentions
a river in Achaia called-after this Titan.—Hyperion, the same as*
“Sol. Il. viii. 480. Od. i. 8, 24 He is however called the father of
Sol, Odyss. xii. 176, and son of Ceelus and Tenra. H. in Solem, 4.
Iapetus. This name came into Greece from the East through his
descendants. Hellen was one,of these, Homer (Il. viii. 479) men-

tions Iapetus as shut up ix‘Tartarus with Cronos,


135144, THE. THEOGONY. 9


-‘mosyne, and Pheebe with golden coronet, and lovely Tethys.!
And after these was born, youngest, wily Cronus,? most savage
of their children ; and he hated his vigour-giving® sire. Then
brought she forth nexe the Cyclops,‘ having an over-bearing
spirit, Brontes, and Steropes, and stout-hearted Arges,> who
-both gave to Jove his thundér, and forged his lightnings.
Now these, in sooth, were in other respects, it is true, like to
gods, but a single éye was fixed in’ their mid-foreheads.
And they from immortals grew up speaking mortals, and
Cyclops was their appropriate name,® because, I wot, in their


1 Thia, dea lucis. Mérep‘AXiov. Pindar, (in Isthm. v. 1,) writing
in praise of an AEginetan, mentions her thus.. Perhaps she was a
sea-goddess, worshipped by the A’ginetans, asa Dea Celestis was by
the Phoenicians.—Rhea, mentioned often by Homer, had a mle
at Athens with Cronos. Cf. Pausan. i. 18, § 7.-—Themis. Il. xv. 87, Od.
ii, 68. She was worshipped and had an oracle at Delphi. Pausan, x.
5, § 3. Comp. Ov. Met. i. 34, Pyrrha et Deucal., Fatidicamque
Themin, qu tunc oracla tenebat. She had also a temple and
image at Thebes, Pausan. ix. 25; and an altar at Olympia) v. 14.—
Mnemosyne ; ef. supra, 54.—®oi6n, Luna, (o%Bog, Sol,) mother of
Asterie and Hecate, Theog. 408, 409, once had an oracle at Delphi.
See Aschyl. Eumen, 4, 5.—Tethys, the nursing-mother of all things,
the force of nature nurturing all creation with fruitful moisture.

_ IL. xiv. 201, Qeeavdvrié Ceciv yéveowv, cai whrepa TyOdv. Si
.* Kpdvoc, (from codw, perficio) ; ‘‘ Temporis et anni Deus, ut apud
Lat. Janus.”” V. Lennep. -Homer agrees with Hesiod in his ban-:
ishment to Tartarus, effected by his son, Jove. His worship was at
Mount Cronius, in Elis (Pausan: vi. 20); and he had a temple at
Athens (i, 18, § 7). ; .

* @adepdy is here used actively, in the sense of bloom-giving,

‘ Cyclops. ‘The earliest Greeks honoured the Titans as gods; the
Cyclops as Oevi¢ évadiyevor: perinde ac gigantes. Cf. Hom. Odyss.
vii. 205. They had an altar at Corinth, (Pausan. ii. 2, § 2,) gave
name to the Cyclopian buildings at Tiryns, Mycenz, and Argos,
(ef. Pausan. ii. 16, : 4,) and, according to Homer and Thucyd., (vi.
2,) dwélt in Trinacria. Fitly were they called sons of Earth and'
Heaven, seeing that they built man’s strengholds, and forged the
bolts of Jove. ate : :

5 Arges; so called “a candente fulmine.”* dGprudOvjiov, the
right reading, not dS8piyé@vpor; from pdprpoc, pease: Metath.
bppisoc, SuBoyog; hence poppe, péppopoc. Cf. Butm. Lexil. p. 189,
in voc. BXirrey, + a :

* évow’ yoav. With dvop’ tori, and dative of the thing.or person,
and évop’ éye, the name is put in the nominative, as with dvopdtec-
Ga, with which both phrases accord in signification. Not genitive
or dative, as in Latin, “ Est ei nomen Tuliii,” or. Tullio. Odyss.
vii. 54. - Herod. ii. 17. But Kiedwzeg 5ycj’ Hoav here combines the |


pe


0 ‘HESIOD. 95 45168,
foreheads one circular eye was fixed. . Strength, -force, and
contrivances were in their works. But again, from Earth
and Heaven sprung other three sons, great and mighty, scarce
to be mentioned,' Cottus and Briareus and Gyas, children ex-
ceeding proud. From the shoulders of these moved actively
- an hundred hands, not brooking approach, and to each above
sturdy limbs there grew fifty heads from their shoulders.
Now monstrous strength is powerful, joined with vast size,
For of as many sons as were born of Earth and Heaven, they'
were the fiercest,? and were hated by their sire from the very
‘first: as soon as any of these was born, he would hide
them all,? and not send them up to the light, in a cave of
‘the earth, and Heaven exulted over the work of mischief,
whilst huge Earth inly groaned, straitened as she was; and
she devised a sybtle and evil scheme. For quickly having
produced a stock of white iron,‘ she forged a large sickle, and
gave the word to her children, and said encouragingly, though
troubled in her heart: “ Children of me and of a sire madly
, violent, if ye would obey me, we shall avenge the baneful in-
- jury of your father; for he was the first that devised acts of
indignity.” So spake she, but fear seized on them all, I wot,
nor did any of them speak ; till, having gathered courage,
great and wily Cronus bespake his dear> mother ¢hus in reply:
above construction. (Matt. Gr. § 308) with Matt. Gr. § 305. joav
attracted to Ki«dwreg is instead of i. .

1 ode évopacrot : quos vix nominare audeas,—dgaroe, These were
the Centimani.—K<¢rrog (xow, tumeo).—Bordoeve (Gapiw, Bpiw, gravo).
—Tébyne, or Fine (yim, laté explico). Tvng,'cf. 714, and Butm. Lexil.
p 2, not. 2, (Fishlake,) who says, ““On the Srthoarephy of Ting,

eft uncertuin by Bentley, Hor. Od. If. xvii. 14, I am loth to speak

decisively. Probably it is contracted from yviov.”” Téne, the more

proper and original form, is more agreeable to analogy. Tvyns, a

_ natural corruption from the Lydian name Gyges. Gyges, Hor. Od.

II. v.20; IE. iv. 69, Ov.ii. Am. 1. 12; Fast, iv. 593; Trist. vii. 18.

Briareus, Virg. Aen, vi. 287, called by others, after Homer, Ageon.

® They were the fiercest,] viz. the Centimani and Cyclopes. yap
refers to the description of them just before,

3 wrdvrag anoxpirraoe, Kk. 7. X., is for ravrag dmoxptrracee yaing
dy xevOpnwrr, kai i¢ Gdog ode dvieoxe: ita in recondite Terra sinu abdi-
dit, ut in lucem adire nullo modo possent. For examples of the like
construction, see Theog. 551, notes. ae

+ White iran.) Cf. Scut. 231. Hor. Od. I. vi, Quis Martem


tunicA tectum adamantina, Digné scripserit. :
5 xedvijy, dear. Il, ix. §86. Od. x. 225. Butm. Lexil. p. 119, note
: :


6, voce. dyvnvobe.


170190, THE THEOGONY. il


“Mother, this deed at any rate I will undertaké and accom-

plish, since for our sire, in sooth, of-detested-name,' I care not;
‘for he was the first that devised acts of indignity.”

Thus spake he, and huge Earth rejoiced much at heart, and’
hid and planted him in ambush: .in his hand she placed a
sickle with jagged teeth,? and suggested to him all the stra-
tagem. f ;

Then came vast Heaven bringing Night with him, and,

eager for love, brooded around Earth, and lay stretched, I
wot, on all sideg: but his son from out his ambush grasped. at
him? with his: left hand, whilst in his right he took the huge
sickle, long and. jagged-toothed, and hastily mowed off the
genitals of his sire, and threw them back to be carried away
behind‘ him. In nowise vainly slipped they from his hand ;
for as many gory drops as ran thence, Earth received them
all; and when the years rolled round,® she gave birth to stern
Furies,‘ and mighty giants, gleaming in arms, with long spears
in hand, and Nymphs whom men call Ashnymphs,’ (Meliz,)
over the boundless earth. ._ But the genitals, as after first
severing them with the steel he had cast them into the heaving
sea from the continent, so kept drifting long time up and


! Of detested name.) dSvowvdpov, hateful to hear named. Il. vi.
255; xii. 116, potpa duowvuyos. Odyss, xix. 571, Hoc. The 3 in
évopa is lengthened in duswvvpog, just as € is in vqxepdye, “ ratione «
rythmica.”” See Goettling. : .

2 rapxapddovra, with jagged teeth, like a saw; akin to yapdaow,
Cf. Il. x. 360. .

3 gpitaro (understand rév-Odpavod pndéiwy) xecpi cxarg—dpeyéobar
rwi rg, is, “to reach with something, or some part of the body
towards something.”’ Compare Hom. fi. iv. 307, éyxe dpekaoOw, se.
abrod. Jl. xxiii. 99, dpétaro yepot gidrgory, - .

4 Behind.] So Pyrrha sad Deucalion were bidden to do.

Ossaque post tergum magne jactate parentis.
et. i. 383, Cf. ibid. 398.

5 weperdopéivwy, “ volventibus annis;” meprreAAdpevog évcavrag is
annus vertens,”” wspirddpevoc iv: annus inversus. Goettling, F
6 towie, from épevvdey, furere. Sri ry Ovpw xpijcOat adrovory ipiv-
view oi Apeddec. Pausan. viii. 25,§ & The same writer, i. 28, § 6, quotes
this passage to identify the oepvai Séat-of Athens with the rynnyes.

7 Mediac, ashnymphs, as Apiadec were caknyniphs from pedjia,
an ash. Cf, Callim. H. in Jov. 47, Auraias Mediat. H. in Del. 80,
abréyQuv Medin. ‘Phey were nine in number, Helice, Cynosura,
Arethusa, Ida, Cromne, Britho, Caleno, Adrastea, Glauce. ‘Tzetz.’
ad Op. et D. 144. weclees : .

: here seems no authority for supposit?g Epirus is here meant,


12 : ‘ | HESIOD. Dg 190—209,
down the deep, and all around kept rising a white foam from
the immortal flesh ; and in it a maiden was -nourished ;" first
she drew nigh divine Cythera, and thence came next.to wave-
washed Cyprus. Then forth stepped an awful, beauteous god-
dess ;.and beneath her delicate feet the verdure throve around?
her gods and men name Aphrodite, the foam-sprung goddess,
and fair-wreathed Cytherea—the first because she was nursed
in foam, but Cytherea, because she touched, at Cythera; and
‘ Cyprus-born, beeause she was born in wave-dashed Cyprus?
And her Erag accompanied and fair Desire followed, when
first she was born, and came into the host of the gods. And
- froth the beginning this honour hath she, and ¢his part hath
she obtained by lot among men and immortal gods, the amor-
ous converse of maidens, their smiles and wiles, their sweet
delights, . their love, and blandishment. Now those‘ sons,
their father, mighty Heaven, called’ by surname Titans, up-
braiding those whom he had himself begotten; and he was
wont to say that, out-stretching their hands® in infatuation,


though Dione, mother of Aphrodite, was worshipped there. dz’ nrti--
pote is aaa ee ex continente,” as Goettling, Lennep, &c. agree.

t Tibull. I. ii. 39, : = ‘ ne

Nam fuerit quieumque loquax, is sanguine natam,
Is Venerem e rapido sentiet esse mari. .
The worship of Venus (Astarte) came from the Phcenicians from
Ascalon, and was first celebrated in the isles of Cyprus and Cy-
-thera. See Herod. i. 105, at which place Blakesley quotes this pas-
sage of Hesiod: and Pausan. iii. 23, p
For parallels to this beautiful fancy of all things blooming which

-the goddess of beauty touched, see Lucret. i. 6, |


Adventumque tuum, tibi suaves dedala flores
Summittit tellus: .tibi rident equora ponti
Placatumque nitet diffuso lumine ccelum. ©


Compare Scott, Lady of the Lake, canto I. 18; Homer, Il. xiv.
847—349; and Milton, Paradise Lest, book ix. 200-~-205. é
. 3 46% grdoppndéa. This line being probably spurious, has been
passed over untranslated.

* Now those.] The thread is resumed from verse 155.

5 For this derivation of the word “Titan,” see: Van Lennep, ad
loc., who says, all the brothers were called Titans, because one,~
Cyonus, (ver. 178,) éreraiver, “ manum extendit,” and thus effecte!
what all the brothers, except Oceanus, (cf. Apollodorus,) wished.
réiw, reivw, tendo, rdw, Tirdw, Tivaivw, are all kindred verbs. The
last occurs in Homer, passim, and in Hes, Scut. 229. But see
Liddell and Scott, in voc. “ Titan.” ; ;


209-227, THE THEOGONY. ; 18:


‘they had wrought a grave act, but that fot it there should be
vengeance hereafter.! .

Night bare*also hateful Destiny, and black Fate, and Death ::
she bare Sleep likewise;3 she bare the tribe of dreams; these
did the goddess, gloomy Night, bear after union with none.
Next again Momus,‘ and Care full-of-woes, and the Hespe-
rides,> whose care are the fair golden apples beyond the-

‘famous ocean, ‘and trees yielding fruit; and she produced the .
Destinies,® and ruthlessly punishing Fates, Clotho, Lachesis,
_ and Atropos, who assign to men ‘at their births to have good
and evil; who also pursue transgressions both of men and’
gods, nor do the goddesses ever cease from dread wrath, be-
fore that, I wot, they have repaid sore vengeance to him,
whosoever shall have sinned. Then bare pernicious Night
Nemesis’ also, a woe to mortal men : and after her she brought
forth Fraud, and Wanton-love,’ and mischievous Old Age, and
stubborn-hearted Strife. But odious Strife gave birth to
grievous Trouble, and Oblivion, and Famine, and tearful Woes,


‘


1 This will be seen to have come to pass, in verses 728, &c-

* A similar list of the brood of Night is given by Cicero, De Nat.
Deorum, ILL. xvii. .

3 Death and Sleep are near akin in Homer too, II. xiv. 231. Virg.
En. vi. 278, Consanguineus Lethi sopor, ,

-4 Mépov, Cicero éalls him Invidentiam.- Callimachus, H. in’
Apoll. 118, 5 de Mépoc, tv’ 6 GOdp0¢, EvOa véoero. ; ;

_ 5 From the use of the present tense pédovor we seem to gather
that Hercules did not carry off all the fruit; or that other fruit
ripened on.the same trees after his theft. Muetzellius had suggested
areading xpbcea cada pépnre, ra O Hparding érpdynoer, But the first
syllable in rovydw is long. See Goettling and Van Lennep. “

6 In ver. 211 we had mention of pépoy and xijoa, and ver. 218, 219
recur in nearly the same words at 905, 906, to which place they
seem better suited ; for Apollodorus likewise makes the poipar chil-
dren of Jove and Themis. Perhaps therefore these lines are of a
later writer. The words aire Bporote:—xaxdyre refer to Moipat: air’,
avdpiv—audpry to Kijpac. The names seem here to belong-to Kijoec,
whereas all antiquity refers them to Moipac. For the office of the
Kijpec, see Eurip. Electr. 1252 (Dind.), AEsch.'S. c. Theb. 1086, -
where they are called éowdec. More on this subject may be athered
from V. Lennep and Goettling, though the only clear result seems
to be the rejection of the lines 218, 219, from this place. - Eustathius,
ad Il. p. 302, 19, 20, quotes the word zapatBaciag as used by Hesiod.

7 Nemesis was worshipped at Rhamnus in Attica, as daughter of -
‘Oceanus, Pausan. i. 33, § 7, and had a temnle at Patre, vii. 20.
5 gdrne is referred by the Scholiast to 74 Ugpodiosa.


14 HESIOD. ~ / 928248,


‘Contests and Slaughters,' Fights and Homicides, Contentions,
Falsehoods, Words, Disputes, Lawlessness and Ruin,? intimates
one of the other, and the Oath, which most hurts men on the
earth, whensoever one has sworn voluntarily a perjured oath.
, And Pontus begat trusty and truthful Nereus,? eldest indeed
of his children, but men call him old,‘ because he is unerring
as well as mild, neither doth he forget the laws, but knoweth
just and gentle purposes. And next again, by union with
,Harth, great Thaumas,® and strong Phorcys, and Ceto® with
fair-cheek, and. Eurybia, having in her breast a soul of ada-
mant.
From Nereus and fair-haired Doris, daughter of Ocean,
perfect stream, sprung lovely daughters of goddesses? in the
barren sea, Proto, Eucrante, Sao, and Amphitrite ;. Eudora,


1 This line differs scarcely at all from Hom. Odyss.' xi. 611.

2 For the deities here mentioned compare Virg. An. vi. 274—277,
Vestibulum ante ipsum, &c. :
' 4 Nereus, as being trusty and truthful, is mentioned here in strong
contrast to the list of personified evil passions that have gone be-
fore. Nereus among Greek and Latin poets stands for the sea. Cf.
Iph. in Aul. 948. Trbull. IV. i. 58, Vexit et Aolies placidum per

erea ventos. Ovid. Met. i. 187, Qua totum Nereus circumtonat-
orbem. Amores II. xi. 39. The word Nageve is the same as Ne
fluus, i. e. fundus, from 2) and péw, Hermann. :

‘4 abrdp xadéover yipovra. But they call him old, not because he is
eldest, &c., but because he is vnpeprg cai Hartog.—Eustathius ad Il,
ay that Nereus is called “old” from the foam which whitens his
surface,

5 Thaumas (mentioned in Cicero, De N. D. iii. 20) is said at
265 to have been the mother of Iris, the rainbow, and Harpyiz, the
storms. This deity therefore must be taken to represent the ‘‘ won-
ders of nature,’’ which have reference to the sea.—Phorcys (Odyss.

_1.72; xiii. 96, 345) is also taken by most commentators to have

been so called from his age* ¢éproc is AevKde, w5Acog. Hesych. Her-
mann connects the word with ‘* furcus,’’ and so with promontories
and jutting sea-rocks. :
- © Kyra, the wife of Phorcys, (270,) is supposed to refer ‘to the
“ monstra natantia’”’ of the great deep, from caw, yaw, hisco: or to
hidden rocks, from «eieBae. Virg. Ain. v. 249,. speaks of “ Phorei
chorus ;’’ 824, “* Phorcique exercitus omnis: ’’ among which he num-
bers ‘“‘cete.” :

7 rixva Ocdwy is the same as @eai. Similar periphrases are viec
Axady, raises copay. Blomf. Esch. Pers. 402, raiéeg “EAAHywv. The
Nereids whose names follow, (240—264,) were roriepped on the
Magnesian coast. Herodot.’ vii. 191.- Their mother “ Doris” is by
Latin poets put for the sea’ Virg. Ecl. x. 5. Ov. Fast. iv. 678, Hae
Hyades Dorida nocte t¢aent. ?


Yo
ts


244-267, THE THEOGONY. sey 15


Thetis, Galene, Glauce, Cymothoe, Spio, Thoe, and charming


Halia; graceful Melita, and Eulimene, and Agave, Pasithea,


Erato and rosy-armed Eunice, Doto and Proto, Pherusa, and
Dynamene, Nesea, and Acta, and Protomedia, Doris and
Panope, and beauteous Galatea, lovely Hippothoe, and rosy-
armed Hipponoe, and Cymothoe, who along with Cymatolege,
and neat-ankled Amphitrite, calms with ease the waves.on
the misty sea, and the blasts of violent, winds ; Cymo and,
Hione, and Halimede with beauteous wreath, and blithe Glau-
conome, and Pontoporia, Liagore, Evagore, Laomedia, Poly-


‘nome, Autonoe, and Lysianassa, and Evarne, both lovely in


shape and in beauty faultless, and Psamathe, graceful in per-
son, and divine Menippe, Neso, Eupompe, Themisto, Pronoe,
and Nemertes, who hath the mind of her .immortal, sire.’
These were born of blameless Nereus, fifty maidens, versed. in
blameless labours. :
And Thaumas? wedded Electra, daughter of deep-flowin
Ocean: she bare rapid Iris, and the fair-tressed Harpies,


1 Many of the names in this list are found in Hom. II. xviii.
They are derived from the sea, its wonders, its treasures,
‘and its good signs for sailors. Proto is the eldest, as the name im-
ports. amphi is so called from the caverns of rocky shores.
f. Soph. Philoct. 19, dugirpijc. Eudora, Doto, (Virg. in. ix.'102,
Nereia Doto,) Liagore, Evagore, Polynome,(multos pascens,) clearly
have reference to maritime commerce and its profits, Thetis is
from riénu, because she is wont “ponere freta.’’ Galene and
Galatea, from yédaw, to be glad. The latter is celebrated in Theoer.
Idyll xi.; Virg. Ecl. vii. 37; Ovid. Met. xiii. 738. Glauce and Glan-
conome, so called from the colour of the sea. Cymothoe, (Virg.
En, i. 144,) Cymo and Cymodoce, (Virg. Ain. v. 826,) and i? bce
tolege, from xvpza. The derivations of several others are self-evi+
dent: e. 3 Nesza, Actea, and Eione, from vqooc, dxrn, ov. Ha
limede, Pontoporia, Eupompe, Laomedia, Lysianassa, have their
names from the care the Nereids have for sailors and voyagers.
Panope, from her look-out over the wide sea. (Cf. Virg. Georg. i.
487; En. v. 240.) Those compounded with txzo¢ seem to point to
the fact that horses first came by sea to Greece, as Neptune is often.
called txmtog. Van Lennep, ; f
* Thaumas,.(wonder,) son of Pontus, marries Electra, (lustre, Aq


‘ wndov, Schol.,) daughter of Oceanus, and hence springs Iris, the:


rainbow. For Iris ‘see Hom. IL. xvii. 547. Cis. de Nat. Deor. iif.


_ 20, Arcus, quia speciem habet admirabilem, Thavmante dicitur


esse natus. So called from épé éigw, because the meet of the.
gods. Fa iv. 695. For Thaumas see Dict. Gr. and R. Biogr. vol,
iii. p. 1021. . ;

* The Harpies, in Virg. En. iii. 24), ate three, Celeno being


16 HESIOD. ‘ 267-284,


Aelle and Ocypete, who, I ween, accompany the wind-blasts
and birds, with swift wings, for they are wont to fly high
above the earth! But to Phorcys ,next Ceto of-fair-cheek
bare the Graw,? gray from their birth, whom in truth im-
mortal gods as well as men walking on the ground call Gree}
‘namely, Pephredo handsomely-clad, and Enyo of saffron-vest-
ment, and the Gorgons, who dwell beyond famous Ocean,? in
the most remote quarter night-ward, where ave the clear-
voiced Hesperides, Stheno;> Euryale, and Medusa having-
suffered sadly.. The latter was mortal, but they, the other
two, were immortal and: ageless, and i¢ was with the one
(Medusa) that the azure-haired god lay in the soft meadow,
and amid the flowers of spring. From her too when, as the
tale is, Perseus® had cut off the head, up sprang huge Chry-
saor and the steed Pegasus. To the latter came his name,
because I wot he was born near the springs of Ocean,’ whilst
the other had a golden falchion in his hands. And he indeed,
winging his flight away, left Earth, the mother of flocks, and


added. Homer mentions“Aprua Toddpyn, Il. xvi. 150. "AsdAXO is
named from déw, spiro. Ocypete, from her rapid flight. Goettling
“suggests that they personify the breath .of pestilence, and so are
driven away, according to the legend, by the sons of Boreas; and
therefore these deities are to be referred to Thrace.

' peraxpomat, “celeres ad instar temporis,” like pernvépiot. Goett-
ling. But the Scholiast says the ancients called odpavic, xedvoc, and
the old poets, from Hesiod downwards, recognise peraxpdrog in the
sénse of ptréwpog. See Liddell and Scott in voc. ~* .

2 Gree. Gorgones. Hermann (Opusc. ii. p. 179) says,“‘ Tpatae sunt
unde que littori allise spnmas agunt nunc veniendo, nunc rece-
dendo.” ‘ Tépyovec magne et terribiles aque.” In Aischylus Prom.
V.819, they are called @éonwdec, from their sire, and cuxvdpoppos, from


’ their hair. %sch. mentions three, and Apollodorus mentions one


named Aavw. Goettling supposes here a verse to have been lost.

+ wépny, i. e. in some isle of Ocean, to arrive at which one must
cross Ocean. ;

* “Eorepideg Acyiguvor. Cf. ver. 518. Euripides, Herc. Fur. 894
(Dind.), calls them iprwdode xopag. soxurti mpdg vucrdg. Cf. Herod.
vii. 115, mpdg ‘HAiov ducpiwy. :

§ Stheno, th. o@évoc.—Euryale, from the open sea, in which was.
the island of the Gorgons.—Medusa, from pédw», a ruler.” For the
fable of Medusa, and her ill treatment by Neptune, vid. Ovid. Met..
iv. 771—798. ’

* See more about Perseus and the head of Medusa in Scut. Here.
216—230, seqq. *

7 Near the springs, xnydc, fontes; that is, at the extremities.
Cf. 738, $09, wyyai xaiweipara e ; :


~—


,


285306, THE THEOGONY. — 17


came to the immortals ; in Jove’s house he dwells, bearing to
counsellor Jove thunder’ and lightning.! But Chrysaor,. by
union with Callirhoe, daughter of famous Ocean, begat three-
headed Geryon. ‘Him indeed then mighty Hercules spoiled,
amidst-his trailing-footed oxen in sea-girt Erythia,? even on
that day when he drove the. broad-browed oxen to ‘sacred
Tiryns, having crossed the path of Ocean, and having slain
beyond famous Ocean Orthus, and the herdsman Eurytion
in a dusky stall. : : ;
And she? brought forth another monster, irresistible, nowise
like to mortal men, or immortal gods, in a hollow cavern; the
divine stubborn-hearted Echidna, [half nymph, with dark
eyes and fair cheeks; and half, on the other hand, a serpent
huge, and terrible, and vast, ]* speckled, and flesh-devouring,


’neath caves of sacred Earth. For there is her cavern, deep '


-under a hollow rock, afar from immortal gods as well as.


mortal men :: there I ween ‘have the gods assigned to her

famous mansions to inhabit. But she, the destructive Echidna,

was confined in Arinia® beneath the earth, a nymph immortal,

and all her days insensible to age. With her they say that
is ‘


‘ i ~ : = -, . : . . i
1 this office of Pegasus is unmentioned by ancient writers, except


* ‘in a fragment of Euripides, Belleroph., ‘vg’ Gopar’ dwy Znvig do-


toarnpopet, which Aristophanes introduces in his Pax, 722.. It
seems to be implied in this passage of Hesiod that the minast horse
yoked to Jove’s chariot bears his thunders and lightnings. Cf. Horat.
Od. I. xxiv. 7, Per coelum’Tonantis Egit equos volucremque cur-


-vum. Van Lennep. : .


* Geryon is fabled to have been prince of Gades, i. q. Erythia


unless indeed Erythia was an island near, and now joined with,
themainland. Compare Herodot.iv. 8. One of the labours imposed
on Hercules by Eurystheua was to carry off his oxen: Orthus was
Slain to effect this. : er ay

-? Van Lennep, with Wolf and Heyne, refer 10° irex’ to Callirhoe,.
the mention of Ceto, 290, being too remote to allow reference to her.
Hermann however dissents from this. a
- 4 wotxidov, feminine. See Matth. Gr, Gr. § 118, obs. 1. (1832-)
a&fnorav; used here as a substantive. For other instances see- Lo-
beck’s Ajax, ver. 208, rij¢ dpepiac. ; ;


5’ gour’, imperfect, remarkable for the %, as in the Op. et D. 818,


" siodpevat, See here Butmann, Lexil. p. 387, (Fishlake, 1836) and p.


310. Arima. Cf, 11. ii. 783, ely “Aptpore, 80: Paci Tugwiog Zeperac edydc,


. Where the Scholiast explains Arima as 4 mountain of Cilicia, or


Lydia. Strabo, book xiti. p.152, 153, seems to point to the Arimi
being what was afterwards the Aramzans, of Cilicia, or Syria,
in ;
c ote


,


18: 2 HESIOD. 306-325,
Typhaon! associated in love, a terrible and lawless? ravisher
for the dark-eyed maid. And she, having conceived, bare
’ fierce-hearted children. The dog Orthus* first she bare for
- Geryon, and next, in the second place, she brought forth the
irresistible and ineffable flesh-devourer Cerberus, dog of hell,
with brazen voice‘ and with fifty heads, a bold and strong
beast. Thirdly, again she gave birth to the-Lernean Hydra®
subtle in destruction, whom Juno, white-armed goddess;
reared, implacably . hating® the mighty Hercules. And it
Jove’s son, Hercules, named of Amphitryon, along with warlike
Tolaus,” and by the counsels of Pallas the despoiler, slaughter-
ed with ruthless sword. But she (Echidna) bare Chimera,’
breathing resistless fire, fierce and huge, fleet-footed as well
as.strong: this monster had three heads: one indeed of a
grim-visaged lion, one of a goat, and another of a serpent, a
fierce dragon; in front a lion, a dragon behind, and in the
midst a goat; breathing forth the dread strength of burning
fire. Her Pegasus® slew and brave Bellerophon.
- 1 Typhaon. -Cf, 821. :

2 dvopor, vulgo dvenov. The Scholiast recognises both readings.
‘Sophocles, in Trachin. 1096, has orparéy Onpwr, wBprorgny, dvopor,
of the army of Centaurs.

3 Orthus, (high, tall,) and Eurytion, (broad,) are the keepers of
Geryon’s oxen, (293,) a figurative representation of high mountains °
and broad plains. Echidna was sister or aunt of Geryon, for whose
service she bore this dog.

4 xaXxedgwvor, trumpet-voiced, an epithet of Stentor, Hom. Nl. v.
785. KépGepoe, according to Goettling, is akin to BépBapoc in its ety-
mology, and has reference to the voice of the monster. Pindar,
followed by Horat. II. xjii, 34, assigns to Cerberus a hundred heads,
(bellua centiceps,) whilst Sophocl. Trachin. 1098, calls him rpixpavoy
oxbdaka, : ay hy ‘

5 Hydra. Horat. Od. IV. iv. ‘61, Non Hydra secto corpore fitmior
Vinci dolerttem crevit in Hereulem. From Lerna sprang the Hydra,
and from Nemea, the lion, which Juno alike retred against Hercules.
_ © &tdnrov (xeddw, not wipwAnpe) “tanta ira,ut vix ad eum acce-
dere liceat.”’ Big Hpaxdneiy. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. 430, p. 702.

* Tolaus appears in Scut. Herc. 118, as comrade and charioteer of
Hercules: Minerva as his counsellor, Scut.'125, 325. Hom. II. viii.
362; Od. xi. 626. The Hydra of Lerna is not Homeric. ie

8 Chimera (Horat. Od. I. xxvii. 23, 24; II. xvii. 18; IV. ii. 16)
is described by Horace as “ triformis,” and “ ignea,”’ just as here.
dpaipaxeroy, (Jl. vi. 179; Sophocl. Cid. T. 177; Cid. Col. 127,) de-
‘rived from dudyxog, redupl. paipaxog, as from wady we have watraan.

 _* ¥Wtyacog—xai Bedrepopdyrnec, that is, Bellerophon by the aid of
Pegasus. Goettling. a - : f
ao


326—343, , THE THEOGONY. “  , 19


_ _ But she,! compelled: by Orthas; brought forth in sooth the
destructive Spinx, a destruction to the Cadmeans ;.and the
Nemzan lion, whom I wot Juno, Jove’s glorious consort,
reared, and settled in the corn-lands of Nemza, a woe to man-
kind. There abiding truly used he to devour the tribes of
men, whilst he held sway over Tretus? of Nemea, and over


‘Apesas: but him the might of strong Hercules subdued. And .


Ceto mingling in love with Phorcys, brought forth, as young-
est-born, a terrible serpent,’ which in hiding-places of dark
earth, guards all-golden apples, in'wide bounds. Such then
is the brood of Ceto and Phorcys.. Buf Tethys to Oceanus
bare eddying rivers, Nile and Alpheus, and deep-eddying
Eridanus, Strymon, and Meander and Ister of-fair-stream,
Phasis, Rhesus, and Achelous with silvery-tide, Nessus, and
Rhodius, Haliacmon and Heptaporus, Granicus, A.sepus, and
divine Simois, Peneus, Hermus, and pleasant-flowing Caicus ;


1 48 doa, that is, Echidna, as it would seem; though the Schol.
calls Spinx, the daughter of Chimera and Typhaon. The later
' word, Lgiyé, tvyoc, was originally gié, gixoc, whence Pixoy dpo¢ near

Thebes. Cf. Scut. Here. 83, The word is probably derived froni
giyyo, optyyw, to strangle. Cf. -Ovid, Met. iii. 48. Van Lennep.
- # Tretus was a mountain between Mycene and Nemea, near
Cleonz.. Nemea was about fifteen stadia from Tretus, and Mount
Apesas above Nemea. Cf. Pausanias ii. c. xv. § 2—4. . EAegaigero,


(2Arw, tdrxdpn, Liddell and Scott,) is derived by V. Lennep from


fw, ehéw, MEF w, AEG, EXeGdw, Ehepaiow.
3 This Dragon is called Ladon by Apollon. Rhod. ‘iv. 1397.


4 Hesiod seems to have singled out of the three thousand rivers a’


. few of the more famous, whether in Greece or elsewhere. Thus we
* find Alpheus, chief river of Elis, Achelous and Evenus of £tolia,
Peneus of Thessaly, Ladon of Arcadia, Haliacmon of Macedonia,
Strymon and Nessus of Thrace. Of Asia Minor, whence Hesiod’s
father had come, there are' enumerated, Meander, Hermus, and


Caicus ; and from the Troad and its Mountain Ida, famous already, -


the Rhesus, Rhodius, Heptaporus, Granicus, Simois, Scamander,
Asepus. Othey rivers flowing into the Euxine, and famotis through
the Argonautic Expedition, are mentioned here: the Sangarius of
Phrygia, the Parthenius of Paphlagonia, Phasis of Colehis, Aldescus
and Ister of Scythia. Two more distant rivers are enumerated, the
Nile, (mentioned in Hom. Odyss, iv. 477; xiv. 257, under the name
of Egy ptus, ) and the Eridanus, i. q. Padus, of Italy; which Hesiod
knew, cf. 1011. There is no order in the list, which is made as
best suits the versification. Cf. Van Lennep, from whom the above
is abridged. 7 ‘ ;
x ' Z c


3


20 - HESIOD. : 344-368, -
and vast Sangarius, Ladon, Parthenius, Everius, and Ardescus
and, divine Scamander. And she bare a sacred race of
daughters, who with King Apollo and the rivers all earth
over bring up men to manhood,! and have this prerogative


. from Jupiter, namely, Pitho, Admete, Ianthe, Electra, Doris


and Prymno, and goddess-like Urania, Hippo, and Clymene,
Rhodia, and Callirhoe, Zeuxo and Clytia, Idya and Pasithoe,


. Plexaure, Galaxaure, lovely Dione, Melobosis, and Thoe, and


fair -Polydora, and Circeis in nature amiable, and bright-
eyed Pluto, Perseis, Ianira, Acaste, and Xanthe, and winsome
Petrsea, Menesto, and Europa, Metis, Eurynome, and saffron-
robed Telesto, Crenzis, Asia as well as desire-kindling Ca-
lypso, Eudora, Tyche, Amphiro, and Ocyroé, and Styx, who


' truly is eldest of them all.? :


_ Now these were born eldest daughters of Oceanus and
Tethys; there are, however, many others also: for thrice a
thousand are the tapering-ankled Ocean-nymphs, who truly
spreading far and near, bright children of the gods, haunt
everywhere alike. earth and. the depths of the lake. And
again, as many other rivers® flowing with a ringing noise, sons
of Ocean, whom august Tethys bare: of all-of whom ’twere


' KoupiZover, juvenescere vel vigere faciunt. V. Lennep.

* The Oceanides, though in some respects similar in nature to
Melie and Dryads, differed herein, that they haunted not merely
the woods and glades, but roamed everywhere, now over earth, now
‘over water. Hence they are associated with the Naiads and Dry-
ads. Gallim. H. in Dian. 12; Virgil, Georg. iv. 344, 382. As to their
names,.Goettling would refer Europa, Asia, Doris, Rhodia, Perseis,
Ianira, (from ‘lay, as roéeBuc, rpicBetpa,) to the continents, isles,
and countries which the names suggest to us: Van Lennep rather
to certain qualities peculiar to the several Oceanids: Rhodia from
the rose, Ianthe from ioyv, a violet, &c. Calypso, Goettling ex-
plains “‘ fertilizing,” hecause covering the land with mud. Hermann,
‘ occultans or latens,”’ For the rest, see Goettling, loc.

* For instance, Ephyre, Clio, Beroe, mentioned in Virg. Georg.


iv. 341; ADthra in Ovid’s Fast. v. 171; Hune stirps Oceani maturis


nixibus /thra Edidit.._-

4 BivOea -riprne, i. e. ‘Qxeavot. So Hom. Od. iii. 1, "Hedcog & dvd-
‘povge Aimwy wepecadria Aipyny. Ih. xiii, 21, BévOeor Aiwyng. Nitsch
explains it generally as the waters of Oceanus standing near the
shore: Od. p. 181. + wéyry. dude, i. e. so that there are Oceanids
everywhere. . :

* Apollodorus mentions Inachus and Asopus amongst these.


o


369—385, THE THEOGONY. 21


difficult for mortal man to tell the names, but each individual
-knows them, of as many as dwell around them. And Thia,!

. overcome in the embrace of Hyperion, brought forth the great
‘Sun, and bright Moon, and Morn, that shines for all that- _
dwell-on-the-earth, and for immortal gods, who occupy broad
heaven. Eurybia? too, a goddess among goddesses, bare to

Crius, after union in love, huge. Astreus, and. Pallas, and‘

Perses, who was transcendent in alt sciences. And-to Astreus
Morn brought forth the strong-spirited winds, Argestes,® Ze- -
phyr, swift-speeding Boreas, and Notus, when she, a goddess,
had mingled in love with a god. And after them the goddess |
of morning produced the star Lucifer, and the brilliant stars
wherewith the heaven is crowned.4 ‘ et
And Styx, daughter of Ocean, after union with Pallas, bar
within the house Zelus and beauteous-ankled®> Victory; and


' Here begins the enumeration of the progeny of the’remaining
~ Titans: in the first place, Hyperion and Thia. s+ will be periarked
. that here Hesiod makes ’HéAtog a son of Hyperion; whereas in Ho»
mer (II. viii. 408; Odyss. i. 8, xii. 183, &c.) Hyperion is the epithet
_of ’Hédwg: and elsewhere the names are aid of the same god.
The Sun was doubtless worshipped by the Greeks as Hyperion.:
and Hesiod seems to have first distinguished the two as father and .
son, when constructing his Theogony. Pindar calls Thia the origin.
of light and brightness, Isthm. v. 1. Catullus, lxiv. 44, mentions
Sol as the son of Thia: tte : '
THe quoque evergus mons est, quem maximum in oris
Progenies Thig clara supervehitur. :

2 Eurybia is fitly in the Theogony connected with Crius, a god
of supreme power in the earliest times of Greece. (Cf. 134.) As-
trzus, as the name imports, and as we: find by ver. 381-2, is the
father of Hesperus and the stars (Astra), as well as of the winds
which rise in the morning. Pallas seems to be derived from waAdu,
vibro, (according to V. toe and to be connected with Nep-.
tune (éyvocvyaiog). Perses, the father of Hecate, cf. 409, seems des *
rived from xépw, or weipw, and to indicate the far-darting god
(“Exarog). 7 f =, ;

3 — Argestes.]| V. Lennep considers this an epithet of Zephyr, ©
the sky-clearer : *‘ qudd discussis nubibus ccelum reddit candidum.”
Eurus is not mentioned here, as those enumerated belong to the
steady winds called ed@eec, in contradistinction to those called pay~ -
adpat, cf. 872. , :

4 rd 7’ Oupavic torepdverat, is equivalent to ca6’ & obpavdg iore~

‘¢avwra. Compare I]. xviii. 485. . .

§ Elton renders this, ‘‘ whose feet are beautiful in palaces,”’ po- ,

. etically but incorrectly.. The construction is irex’ ev peydpouor.
Compare above, 240. ¥V. Lennep. in ;


22 , HESIOD. ° 385—407,


she gave birth to Strength and Force, illustrious children,

whose mansion is not apart. from Jove, nor is there any seat,

or any way, where the god does not go before them; but ever

_ sit they beside deep-thundering Jupiter. For thus counselled
Styx, imperishable Ocean-nymph, what time the Olympian
‘Lightener summoned all the immortal gods to broad Olympus,

. and said that whoso of the gods would fight with him against
the Titans, none of them would he rob of his rew’rds,! but
each should have the hqnour, to wit, that which he had afore-
time among the immortal gods, And he said.that him, who
~was unhonoured or ungifted by Cronus, he would stablish in
honour, and rewards, according to justice. Then first I. wot

_¢ame imperishable Styx to Olympus along with her children
through the counsels of her sire. And Jove honoured her,
and gave her exceeding gifts. es ‘

For her he ordained to be the great Oath-witness? of the
gods, and her children to be dwellers-with-her? all their days.
And even in such wise as he promised, he performed to them
all-for ever: for hehath power and reigns mightily. 5

And next Phebe came to the much-beloved couch of Coeus:4
then in truth having conceived, a goddess by love of a god,
she bare dark-robed Latona,> ever mild, gentle to mortals and


' droppaiew is used in Od. i. 404, xvi. 428, with an accusative of
person, and of the thing in the sense of “‘ privare aliquem aliqua
re.” The simple verb fai signifies “to break,’’ whence pacorip,
: hammer ; hence’ éroppaiw,'revello- aliquem ab aliquéa re. Van

ennep. 5 ,

2 ¥oxor signifies here the thing which restrains, bears witness, and
in cases of perjury punishes, Cf. Hom. Il. ii. 755; Hesiod, Theog.
784. It is personified as the Oath-witness, avenger of perjury.
See Butmann, Lexil. p. 434 (Fishleke). , Compare here Pindar, Ol.
vii. 119, 120 (Huntitigford).

. peravadrne, “ cohabitator,” not “ wanderer,” as the sense
shows.
_ _4 The progeny of Coeus by Phoebe, Latona and Asteria, follows.

Pheebe and’ Asteria are unmentioned in Homer. Latona and He-
cate appear only in the Hymns.to Apollo, 63; Cer. 24. According
to Hesiod, Pheebe is the grandmother, not sister, of Phoebus. Coous,
Latona, and Asteria seem to have been long worshipped in: the
isles of the Augean. Callim, H, in Ap. 62, in Del. 150; Ov. Met.
‘vi. 366 (where Latona is called filia Cosi); Pausan: iv. 33, § 6. The
Latin poets always use Phoebe as the same with Lina.

5 Leto, or Latona, seems to have been the same as Night; under
which supposition the epithets cvavdmemr)oy, Hmtoy, peidtyov, are per-
tinent. Compare the natue of Night, edgpévn. V. Lennep.


407-—429, THE THEOGONY.’ 23
t


immortal geds, mild from the beginning, most kindly within
Olympus. And she bare renowned Asteria, whom erst Perses
led to an ample palace to be called his bride.! And she, be-
coming pregnant, brought forth Hecate,” whom Jove, the son
of Cronus, honoured beyond all: and provided.-for her.splendid
gifts; to wit, to hold a share of earth and of barren sea. But
she has obtained honour also from starry Heaven, and has been
honoured chiefly by immortal gods. For even now when any-
where some one of men upon-the-earth duly propitiates them
by doing worthy sacrifice, he calls on Hecate: and’abundant
honour very speedily attends him, whose vows the goddess


shall. receive, that is to say, graciously, yea, and to him she


presents wealth, for she has the power. For as many as ‘were
born of Earth and Heaven, and received a share of honour, of
all these she has the lot, neither did the son of Cronus force
any portion from her, nor did he take away as many honours
as she had obtained by lot, among the elder gods, the Titans,
but she hath them, ag at the first the distribution was from the
beginning. Nor, because she is sole-begotten,® has the god-
dess obtained less of honour, and her prerogative on earth, and
in heaven, and sea, but even still much more, seeing that Jove
honours her. And to whom she wills,* she is greatly present,


1 wicAnoOac (Sore) ut vocaretur conjux : i.e. ut ejus conjux esset.
For xécAnoQat so used, see Hom. I]. iii, 138; iv. 61; Od. vii. 318.

2 Heyne and other commentators consider the Hymn to Hecate
(411—452) to be the work ofa later writer, perhaps Onomacritus,
first, because she is twice called pouvoyerig, (426, 448,) a word-from’
Orphie poems and mysteries; secondly, because Hesiod is not wont


to be so prolix in paying honour to any particular deity ; thirdly, be-».


cause such words and phrases as tapayiyvec9at and ot yAauniy ioyde
Zovrat are not Hesiodean. Goettling sees the hand"of two different
oets in the passage. Van Lennep dissents from these, and argues
or the antiquity of the passage, from the contrast between the at-
tributes of ‘Hecate here; and those ascribed.to her by later writers.
3 Sole-begotten.] She does not receive less but more. honour.
because she has no brothers to protect her. Compare Works and
Days, 376—380. Pallas, Proserpine, and Mercury are all in Hesiod
called “ sole-begotten.” : . se
‘* Van Lennep suggests that because Hecate, or Luna, was deemed
favourable to many pursuits and arts of men, and the niglit the best
time for following these, she is here made the goddess of those who
labour and follow various pursuits and the.arts generally, though in


the day-time. .There js no mention hereof “ magic arts,” of which


in later poets she is special patroness. 9 .


:


24 : - | HESIOD. 429451,


and benefits Aim, and he is distinguished, whom she may will,
in the forum among the people; and when men arm for mor-
tal-destroying war, then the goddess draws nigh to whom she
will, kindly to proffer victory and to extend renown fo them:
and in judgment she sits beside august kings: and propitiously!
again, when men contend in the games, there the goddess
stands near these also, and helps them. -

_And when he has conquered by strength and might, a man
carries with ease a noble prize,? and rejoicingly presents glory
to his parents. Propitious is she also to be present with

shorsemen, whom she will; and’ to them who ply the rough
silvery main ;3 and they pray to Hecate and the Joud-sound-
ing Earth-shaker. Easily too the glorious goddess presents
an ample spoil, and easily is she wont to withdraw it when
it is shown, that is, if she isso disposed in her mind. And
(propitious along with Mercury to increase the flock‘ in the
folds) the ‘herds of cattle, and the droves, and broad herds of
goats, and flocks of fleecy sheep, if she choose in her heart,
she makes great from small, and is wont to make less -from
being many. Thus, in truth, though being sole-begotten from
her mother, she has been honoured with rewards amidst all °
the immortals. And the son of Cronus made her the nursing-
mother-of-children,5 who after her have beheld with their eyes

1 2609}, Goettling says, is not Hesiodean. But comp. Op. et Dies, '
812, So Virg. Eclog. v. 1, Cur non, Mopse boni quoniam consedi-
mus ambo. hides :

2 beia pipe. - pipe must either be taken for géperat, as elsewhere,
“ carries off,’’ or mean “facile fert,’’ ‘‘ easily carries, heavy though
it be, the tripod,” (de9dov,) which he has gained as victor, joy mak-
ing his‘ burden light. i” .

yAauxny., This word (here used simply) is only once in Hom.
used, (Il, xvi. 34,) and then as an epithet. dvenipdedor, Il. xvi.
748, of the sea into which a diver leaps. Hesiod, Op. et.D. 618— -
(derived from ziprw, or perhaps zwéugié, “a bubble,’ L. and 8.)
yraurny toyatecOa, as yiv ipydfecOae (Op. et D. 623). So Virg.
En. ii. 780, Maris aquor arandum. | a

4 Luna, or Hecate, gave increase to the flocks: the same office is
ascribed to Mercury in Hom. H. in Mere. 567. Anida, elsewhere a
spoil of cattle, I). i. 134, is here the “‘ increase of the flock”? simply..
So AniZeoBaz, in Op. et D., is simply ‘‘ to gain or get.” Cf. O. et D.
702. Bouxodiac, so used Hom. H. in Merc. 489; Apollon. Rhod. i. 627.

*% Construe xovporpdgoy txeivwy, of per’ dxeivny WovrTo pdog Howe.
Confirming the former privileges of Hecate, Jove added to her this
office of xouporpégos for the future. 4 .


‘


451—474, THE THEOGONY. 25


the light of far-seeing Morn. Thusis she from the beginning
nursing-mother, and such are her honours. :
1Rhea teo, embraced .by Cronus, bare renowned children, '
Vesta, Demeter, and Heré of-the-golden-sandals, and mighty
Hades, who inhabits halls beneath the earth, having a ruthless
heart; and loud-resounding Neptune, and counselling Jupiter,
father of gods as well as men, by: whose thunder also the”
broad earth quakes.2 And them indeed did huge Cronus de-


- vour,? namely, every one who'came to the mother’s knees from


her holy womb, with this intent, that none other of the illustrious


- heaven-born might hold royal honour among the immortals.


For he had heard from Earth and starry Heaven that it was
fated for him, strong though he was, to be subdued by his own -
child,* through the counsels of mighty Jove: wherefore, he
did not keep a careldss watch, but lying in wait for them,
kept devouring his own sons; whilst a grief not-to-be-for-
gotten possessed Rhea. But when at length she was about to
bear Jove, the sire of gods as well as men,.then i was that
she essayed .to supplicate her parents dear, Earth and starry
Heaven, to contrive a.plan how she might without observation
bring forth her son, and take vengeance on the furies of their
sire, against his children,? whom great and wily Cronus de-
voured. | St

But they duly heard and complied with their dear daughter,


1 In what follows, Vesta, Demeter, and Juno, in addition to Nep-
tune, Pluto, and Jupiter, are called the children of Cronus and Rhea.
Vesta is mentioned in the Hymn to Venus, (Hom.) 22, as eldest.


‘ born of Cronus. She is nowhere spoken of in the Iliad or Odyssey,


where we frequently find the name, but not parentage, of Demeter.
See more about Vesta in Donaldson’s Varronianus, pp. 48,49. Here,
or Juno, is in Homer @vyarip peyddoro Kodvovo—the eldest-born, Il.
iv. 60. This honour is given to Tove in Il. xv. 182,204, but in’ He-
siod he is made youngest. '

2 wedepiZerac, (Il. xvi. 612,) from madrw. L. and S, :

3. carérwve, properly used of drinking, is-here applied to swallow-
ing generally. Seri¢ exactoc—ixotro, “ut quisque nasceretur.”

-4 A'schylus, in his Prometheus, 793, introduces Prometheus fore-
telling a like fate to Jove. i ;

5 rarpic tpivvic waidwy, furias patris contra filios. tprvviie seems
to imply the blood-guiltiness of Cronus. Goettling and others un-~
derstand évsxa before waidwy. It appears to be a case of two geni-
tives, one of which depends more closely than the other on the °
noun lowvie, “ the father’s-furies against his sons.” aidwy is the
objective genitive. >) -


v
'


26 _— . HESIOD. 415 —492,


and explained to her as much as it had been fated should come
to pass concerning king Cronus, and his strong-hearted son.
And they sent her to Lyctus,! to the fertile tract of Crete,
when I. wot she was about to bear the youngest of her sons, .
‘mighty Jove: whom indeed vast Earth received from her to
rear and nurture in broad Crete. ‘Thereupon indeed came
she, bearing him through the swift dark night, to Lyctus first,
and took him in her hands? and hid him in a deep? cave, |
‘neath the recesses of the divine earth, in the dense. and
wooded Atgean mount.” But to the great prince,‘ the son of
Heaven, former sovereign of the gods, she gave a huge stone,
having wrapped it in swathes: which he then took in his
hands, and stowed away into his belly, wretch as he was, nor
did he consider in his mind that against him for the future
his own invincible and untroubled® son was left instead of a
stone, who was shortly about to subdue him by strength of
hand, and to drive him from his honours, and himself to reign
among the immortals, ‘

Quickly then, I ween, throve the spirit® and beauteous


‘ ,


1 Lyctus, or Lyttus, was the most ancient city in Crete, and was
about 100 stadia from Gortyna, (Polyb. iv. 54; Strabo, x. 4, p. 372,
Tauch.,) cf. Hom. II. ii, 647, xvii. 611. It was built on an eminence,
‘and we may pérhaps infer, from Mount Ageus being only men-
‘ tioned in this place, that it was near Lyctus. It may have been

the same as the mountain called Dicte, and mentioned in Callimach.
_H, in Jov. 4; Virg. Georg. iv. 152, Dictzeo cceli regem pavere sub
‘ antro. According to the Scholiast, Aiyeioy dp0¢ is connected with
the fable of the goat, (ai, alyd¢,)=said to have suckled Jove.
Goettling pronounces it Mount Ida, called Aiyéioy from the goat
Amalthea. . .

2 gipovea. Goettling considers this to be equivalent to tv yaorpi
gépovea, but gives no.example of the word used in such sense.

5 pruBdry. Cf. 675, and Butmann’s Lexilogus, p. 329, who de-
rives it from ddcréety and Baivw for dd:réBaroc, expressive of the .
facility of making a false step in ascending a precipitous height, or
descending a steep declivity. Compare Eurip. Hippolyt. 732, where
the Scholiast explains jA.Bdratg, Baburdrosc.

* wey’ dvacre, adv. for adject..with substantive. So way abpat, 872,
and 6 wévu Zwxparne. See Goettling in note on the passage.


5 dendijc, ‘“securus.”’ Free from cares as the Sage were sup-
batt to be. Il. xxiv. 526. So Virg. En. iv. 379, Ea cura quietos
ollicitat. : ;


® For. the quick growth of the gods see Hymn. Hom. in Merc. 173;
Callim. in Jov. 55. Apollodorus details Jove’s onslanght on Cro-
nus with the aid of Metis, a daughter of Ocean, who administered


493—516, THE THEOGONY. 27


limbs of the king, .and, as years came round, having been
beguiled by the wise counsels of Earth, huge Cronus, wily
counsellor, let loose again his offspring, having been conquered
by the arts and strength of his son. And first he disgorged


the stone, since he swallowed it last! This stone Jove fixed


down upon the earth with-its-broad-ways, in divine Pytho,
beneath the clefts of Parnassus, to be a monument thereafter,
a@ marvel to mortal men: Then he loosed from destructive


bonds his father’s brethren, the sons of Heaven, whom his:


sire had bound in his folly.2, Who’ showed gratitude to him
for his kindnesses,, and gave him the thunder, and’ the
smoking bolt, and lightning; but aforetime ‘huge Earth had
hidden them: ttusting on these, he rules over mortals and
immortals, : vs me
Iapetus, moreover, wedded the damsel Clymene,? ¢ fair-
ankled Oceanid, and ascended into a common bed. And she
bare him Atles, a stout-hearted son, and brought forth ex-
ceeding-famous Menztius, and artful Prometheus,‘ full of.
various wiles, and Epimetheus of-erring-mind, who was from
the first an evil-to gain-seeking men: for he first, I wot, re-
ceived from Jove the clay-formed woman, a virgin. But the
insolent Menextius wide-seeing Jove thrast down to Erebus,


having stricken him with flaming lightning, on. account of


his arrogance, and overweening strength. _


‘an emetic to Cronus, and so brought back to light first the stone,
and then the brethren of Jove. ‘

1 Geettling ‘interprets the myth of Cronus vomiting the sons he
had devoured, to imply that the realms of the sea, and of the
shades, &c., had been under the old regime content with the same
sovereign who held the heaven; but that when these were assigned
by Jove to separate gods, Cronus gave forth those whom he had
confined in his own bowels. Hence arose new divine laws, to be

romulgated ‘by the Delphic oracle, which Pausan., x, 24, shows to
have been connected with the stone, said to have been thrown up
by Cronus, and honoured at festivals by the Delphians. :

2 Cf. 157. deotsooodyyow, Odyss, xv- 470, from decigowy, properly
éacigowy from déoat. See Butmann’s Lexil. p. 7. .

. § The same story of Prometheus and Pandora is found in the
Op. et D. 42—105. According to Apollodorus and Lycophron,
Asia was the wife of Iapetus; according to, Aschylus, Themis.
Ovid, in his Metamorphoses, makes Clymene the wife of the Sun.

‘ According to Goettling, in this myth Atlas is endurance, Pro-~
metheus providence, Epimetheus blindness, and Menzetius (pévee

‘olroc) mortality arismg from excess of boldness, personified. -Of


oo 3
‘s


t


’ =


28 ; ; HESIOD. 517-535,


But Atlas! upholds broad Heaven by strong necessity, be-
fore the clear-voiced Hesperides, standing on earth’s verge,
with head and unwearied hands. For this lot counselling
Jove apportioned to him. And wily-minded Prometheus he
bound in indissoluble bonds, with painful-chains, having thrust
them through the middle of a column.? And jhe urged against
him an eagle with-wings-outspread: but it kept feeding on
-his immortal liver, whilst it would increase to a like size all-
round by night, to what the eagle with-wings-outspread had
eaten during the whole day efore. This bird indeed, I wot,
Hercules, valiant son of fair-ankled Alemene, slew, and re-
pelled from the son of Iapetus? the baneful pest, and released
him from his anxieties, not against the wishes of high-reigning
‘Olympian Jove, that so the renown of Thebes-sprung Her-
cules might be yet more than aforetime over the many-feeding
earth. \Thus,I ween, he honours his very famous son,’ through
veneration ‘for him: and though incensed, ceased from the
wrath which he was before cherishing, hecause he strove in
‘plans against the almighty son of Cronus. For when gods


Menzetius no author but Apollodorus gives any account, and pet-
haps he gathered his Lnowledbe only from this passage.

! AcCording to Hesiod, Atlas is a doomed Titan bearing up the
vault of heaven, as a punishment. Homer too (Odyss. i. 52) seems
to have the idea of a giant; not a mountain, in view. Later writers
confounded him with the mountain so called, cf. Virg. Ain iv.
246—251. Vau Lennep suggests that the mountain got its name
either from a naval expedition of early date from Greece, the leader
of which was called Atlas; or from Atlas the Titan, whom tradition
connects with the growth of nautical science.—iorepidwy Aryugdvwy,
ef. supra, 275. ?

2 pecov did _xiov’ Hermann explains to mean “ita ut mediz co-
Jumnz vincula infixa essent.”” A®schylus,, Prom. V. 65, describes
Prometheus as fastened to a rock, dcardporg wédate. The, scene of
his suffering was, according to. Aschylus, Scythia; according ,to
Cicero, Tusc. Q. II. 10, Caucasus. é:a—edaeoac is of course an ex-
ample of Tmesis.

3 "lareriovidne, a double patronymic. “Idzerog, iwy, tovidnc. Com-
pare Ovid. Met. i. 81, $2,

Quam satus lapeto mistam fluvialibus undis
Finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta Deorum.
And seé Virg. Ecl. vi. 42, and Blackie’s Essay on the Prom. Vine-
‘tus, Classical Museum, vol. v. p. 1—40. ;
“4 ratra is to be taken with riyz&. a&dpevog is translated by Van
Lennep, “ Pietate in illum ductus”? Cf. Hom. Il. i. 21; Odyss. ix.
200, where the word is giiaillarly used. . \


535—-556,- THE THEOGONY. 29


and mortal men were contending at Mecone,! then did he set.
before him a huge ox, having divided it with ready mind,
studying to deceive? the wisdom of Jove. - For here, .on the
one hand,? he deposited the flésh and entrails with rich fat on
the hide, having covered it with the belly of the ox;* and
‘there, on the other hand, he laid down, having well disposed
them with subtle art, the white bones of the ox, covering
them with white fat. Then it was that the sire of gods and
. men addressed him, “Son of. Iapetus, far-famed among all
kings, how unfairly, good friend, you have divided the ipor-
tions.” Thus spake rebukingly Jupiter, skilled in imperish-
able counsels.’ And him in his turn wily Prometheus address-
ed, laughing low,. but he was not forgetful of subtle art:
* Most glorious Jove, -greatest of ever-living gods, choose |
which of these your inclination within your breast bids you.”
He spake, I ween, in subtlety: but Jove knowing’ imperishr
able counsels was aware, in sooth,5 and not ignorant of his
. guile; and was boding in his heart evils to mortal men, which
also were about to find accomplishment.. Then with both
hands lifted he up the white fat. But he was incensed in
mnind, and wrath came around him in spirit, when he saw the
white bones of. the ox arranged with guileful art.@ And


' ¥ Mecone.] Such, according to Strabo, viii. c. vi. p. 217, Tauch.,
was the ancient name of Sicyon, a city which, according to Pau-
sanias, (ii. 5 and 7,) was of. old famous for its worship of the gods. ,
Fitly, therefore, is this matter, touching sacrifices and observances
to be paid to the gods; referred to Mecone or Sicyon.” Prometheus
seems to have been chosen arbitrator of the portions of sacrifices
each god should receive, and that Jove should have allowed this
agrees with Aschylus, Prom. V. 199, who makes Prometheus favour
in the first instance the younger ruler of Olymp s and not the
Titans. V.Lennep. Compare Xschylus, Prom. V. 207, seq., and
the boast he there.makes of his teaching mortals in religious matters,
., 2 &awagionwy, fallere studens, V. Lennep. , Guyetus preferred |
to read éEazagjowyv. ;

3 rg piyv—r@i, oe, hie—illic. \ . :
4 ed a Bosty, the refuse, according to Hom. Odyss. xviii, 44, com-
monly given to beggars. In that passage the suitors are represented
setting the beggars to fight for it. f Sao

5 yve p’ 08d’ Hyvoinos, compare ver. 157; Op. et D. 637; Hom. It
X. 113; Od. xxil. 473 ; GEdipus Tyrannus, Sophoc. 514; Cid. C. 397;
Ajax, 289. Perhaps here more than a mere tautology is expressed.
He knew, and did not, as Prometheus had hoped, overlook the

a *


fraud. : 5


30 Le HESIOD. 556—579,


thenceforth the iribes of men on the earth burn to the im-
mortals white bones! on fragrant altars. Then cloud-com-
pelling Jove addressed him, greatly displeased: “Son of
Iapetus, skilled in wise plans beyond all, you do not, good sir,
I wot, yet forget subtle art.” ‘Thus spake in his wrath Jove
knowing imperishable counsels: from that time forward in
truth, ever’ mindful of the fraud, he did not give the strength
of untiring fire to wretched mortal men, who dwell upon the
earth. : ot ‘ o &

But the good son of Iapetus cheated him,? and stole the far-
seen splendour of untiring fire in ahollow fennel-stalk ; but it
stung high-thundering Jove to his heart’s core, and incensed
his spirit, when he saw the’ radiance of fire. conspicuous
among men. Forthwith then wrought he evil for men in
.requital for the fire bestowed. Yor from the earth the farhous
Vulcan, halting in both feet, fashioned? the image of a modest
maiden, through the counsels of the son of Cronus, And the
goddess glancing-eyed Minerva girded and arrayed her in
.silver-white raiment; and from her: head she held -with her
hands‘ a curiously @mbroidered veil, 2 marvel to-look upon:
and Pallas Athene placed around her about her head lovely
garlangs fresh-budding with meadow-fiowers, and around her
head she set a golden coronet,5 which renowned Vulean lame


} Heyne suspects these lines because he finds no instanee of
bones of victims burnt in sacrifice on altars. But Menander and
other poets quoted by Clemens Alexandr. mention this custom, and
the grommariene explain pypia, rd pyoaia dora. * -

2 Compare Op. et D. 50—52, whence it appears that Prometheus
stole the fire from Jove. See also Horat. I. Od. iii. 29, Post
ignem zthered domo Subductum. Esch. Prometheus V. 109, seq,,
vapOnxorrnpwroy be Gnpispat mvpd¢ UWiynv wdoraiav, 4 Siddoradug
réxvng Tdaone Bodrorg rignye wai piyag wopog.

® yaing yap ciprdacce: supply é« before yaing in sense, comparing

p- et D. ver. 70, where the preposition is expressed.

* Rightly, explains Goettling, is xelosoot wargoxeOe used. For
Pandora would hold in her own hands the Ia ‘a or fringes of the
veil given her by Minerva, as we find in the tN ustrations of ancient
art which have come down tous. Minerva, according to Hesiod,
Op. et D. (64, 72, 76,) gave Pandora other gifts, as did Venus, Mer-
cury, the Graces, the Hours, and Persuasion. See-the passage.

5 orepdvoue, orepdvny, garlands of flowers, and a golden diadem- -

.V. Lennep points out this distinction between orepdvoc and oregavn,
by a comparison of Hom. II. vii. 12; x. 30; xi..96, where orepavy is


an ornament of brass or,gold.- \
7


579599, THE THEOGONY. Bl


with both feet had made himself, having wrought it carefully
by hand, out of compliment to Jove his sire. On it had been
. wrought many curious monsters, a marvel to- view, ad many.
as in great abundance the.continent and the sea maintain.
Many of these he introduced, (and much elegance beamed
from it,) of wondrous beauty, like to living animals gifted
with sounds. ; ; ie
But when he had wrought a beauteous eyil! instead of
good, he led her forth. even where were the rest of gods and
men, exulting as she was in the adornment of the gleaming-
eyed daughter-of-a-strong-father : and wonder seized immortal
gods as well as mortal men, when they beheld a deep snare,
against which man’s arts are vain. Now from her is the race
of tender women.? For from her is a pernicious race, and
tribes of women, a great source of hurt, dwell along with mor- '
tal men,? helpmates not of consuming poverty, but of surfeit.
And as when in close-roofed hives bees feed drones, sharers in
bad works,‘ the former through the whole day till sunset are
busy day by day, and make white combs, whilst the latter,
remaining within in the close-roofed hives, reap the labours
of others for their own maws. ;


1 The evil was Pandora; the good, fire. Hermann undefstands
_ tebgey of Vulcan. But it refers to Jupiter, as it did in line 570.:
The scene of this was Mecone, at the congress of gods and ‘men.

2 Ondurepdwy. There had been Osai @mrAvrepar before, (Odyss. viii.
324,).as well as Nymphs, but Pandora was the first woman, accord-, °
-ing to Hesiod. : : ar

® Theognis, 526, 7 mevin dt xaxg odbppopog ‘avdgi pipe, and 153, .
rieree rot képoc UBpiy. Goettling. Compare Op. et D. 302, 782. This
character of women given by an ancient poet of generally fair senti-
-ments and judgment, sup orted as it is by repeated concurrent tes-
timony of fate poets -of Greece, argues very ill of the training of
Greek maidens in early times, and the effects which resulted there-
from. Milton has imitated this description of the infelicities pro- —
duced by womankind in a prophetic complaint, which comes with
beautiful propriety from the lips of Adam. ;

“Thus it shall befall
Him who, to worth in woman over-trusting,
Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook:
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue, ~ 7
She first.his weak indulgence will accuse.”
e ‘ (Paradise Lost, b..ix. ad fin-) ¢
‘See Elton’s Translation of Hesiod, p. 284. ; a
4 Evvjovac, from tive, Evvéwy, lon Euvhwv, Dor. gvvaiay, Pin-
dar, Pyth. iii. 84, Axéwy Evvaoveg, vulnerum pleni.
‘ Seat


32 . : : HESIOD. 600—619.
t = Fi


’ .


Just so to mortal men high-thundering Jove gave women as
4p evil, helpmates of painful toils: another evil too did he
provide instead of good;- fo. wit, whosoever shunning mar-

. Mage and-the ills that women work, declines to marry, and

. has come to old age pernicious,! through want of one to tend’
his latter days; he lives not, it is true, in lack of subsistence,

_ but, when he is dead, distant kindred divide his possessions:
whilst to whomsoever,-on the other. hand, the lot of marriage
shall. have fallen, and he has had a good wife congenial to his
heart, to him then for ever ill contends with good? to be with
him: but whoso finds a baneful breed, lives with an incessant?
care to spirit and heart within ‘his breast, and is an irremedi-

‘ able woe.

- . Thus it is not possible to deceive or overreach‘ the
xtind of Jove, for neither did Prometheus, guileless son of
Tapetus, escape from beneath his severe wrath; but a great
chain, by necessity, constrains him, very knowing though

‘he is. ‘ : ;

But when first their sire> became wroth in spirit against:
Briareus, Cottus, and Gyes, he bound them with a strong
bond, admiring their overweening courage, and also their form

i xaree ynooxéporo. Greev., Caret que senectutem foveat. But
xnree is the dat. of xfroc, and is explained évécig. ynpoxdpovo refers
not to a wife, but a son born of haw x7re seems to depend on

‘ddody as the dative of the cause. Cf. Il. vi, 463; xix. 824; Od,
avi 35. . .

2 duripepizer (ore) Eypevac, ‘ Malum perpetuo certat cum bono,
ut sit una.” Tl strives with good, for existerice. ; :

8 ddiaoroy, incessant, from a and AedZw, (Butm: Lexil. p. 406, 407,)
which Butmann shows to be akin to xAivw, as xvépag is to vépoc, and
xArapde to Avapdg. .

‘4 pdipar, wapedOctv, Cf. Il. i. 1382; xiv. 217; Od. xiii, 291. The

“use of the epithet dxdeyra, (Ep. for éeaxnTn¢,) in connexion with
Prometheus, on account of his philanthropy, (as also in Hom. IL

. xvi. 185; Od. xxiv. 10, with Mercury for the same cause,) leads Van
Lennep to observe that Mercury succeeded to Prometheus in the
Greek religion. There was a mountain in Arcadia called Axaxjeozoc,
from the epithet, and worship of Mercury there. Pausan. viii. 3, and
86, § 6. ‘See also the Schohast at Odyss. xxiv. 10, who shows that
epithet to have been considered as peculiar to Hermes.

- 5 Their sire.] i.e. Heaven, or Oipavéc, cf. 155. We shall see
in 626, that they were freed by Jupiter from these bonds, to aid
him against the Titans, by the advice of Earth. The forms ’OSpra-
pevg and Bordpewe are of earlier date than Bptapijoc, which is used
in Callim. Del 143. :


e


620-646, | ‘THE THEOGONY.— . 83


and bulk; and-he’made them dwell beneath the roomy
earth: then they in sooth in grief dwelling ‘neath the earth,!
sate at the yerge, on the extremities of vast Earth, very
‘long, afflicted, having a great woe at heart; but them the.
son of Cronus, and other immortal gods, whom fair-hairéd
Rhea bare in the embrace of Cronus, by the counsels of Earth
brought up again to light: for she recounted to them at large
everything, how that they should along with those (Titans)
gain victory and splendid glory. Long time then they fought,
incurring soul-vexing toil, the Titan gods and as many. as
were born from Cronus, in opposition. to each other in stout
conflicts ; the one side,? the glorious Titans from lofty Othrys,
and the other, I wot, the gods, givers of good things, whom
Rhea the fair-haired had borne to Cronus, in union with
-him, from Olympus, They then, I ween, in soul-distressing .
‘pattle, one’ party with the other, were fighting continuously
more than ten years.3 Nor was there any riddance or end
of severe contention to either party,-and the completion‘ of
_the war was extended equally éo either. But when at length
Jove set before them! all things agreeable, to wit, nectar and
ambrosia, on which the gods themselves feed, a noble spirit
grew in the breasts of. all. And when they had tasted the
nectar and delightful ambrosia, then at length the sire of gods
and men addressed them: ‘“ Hear me, illustrious children of
Earth and Heaven, that I may speak what my spirit within
my breast prompts me ¢o speak. For now a very long space®
are we fighting, each in opposition to other, concerning victory


1 ‘Neath the-earth.] i. e.in Erebus. See below, 669.

? Here we have the battle-field, The sons of Cronus occupy
Olympus, the Titans, Othrys: between which on the south, and
Olympus on the north, Jay Thessaly and its wide plains, not un-

_ marked to after ages by tokens of a gigantic contest, in the rocks
rent and the traces of earthquakes that are visible throughout it.
V. Lennep. . ‘

§ déxa msloug Emavrotc. i.e. Trhelouc } déxa txavrovg. See Matt.
Gr. Gr. § 455, 4.> So “amplius” is used without “quam” in Latin,
Amplius sunt sex menses.

+ Compare here, as Wolf suggests, I]. xv. 413; xii. 486, éai tea
paxn réraro wroXsude TE. y :

° Goettling suggests, for wapicyeOer, raptoxebov, referring it to
the gods mentioned in 640 and 626.

* A very long pees ie. dixa mXeiove tnanrodc, 636. As also
para mavra stands here for cuveyéwe in thab passage.

. D


34 ‘HESIOD. 646-674,


and power, all our days, the Titan gods and as many of
us as are sprung -from Cronus. ‘Now do ye show against
the Titans in deadly fight both mighty force and hands in-
vincible, in gratitude for our mild loving-kindness, namely,
after how many sufferings ye came back again to the light,
from afflictive bondage, through our counsels,! from the murky
gloom.” Thus he spake; and him again the blameless Cottus
addressed in answer: ‘ Excellent Lord, thou dost not tell
things unlearnt by us; but we too are aware that thy wisdom
is excellent, and excellent thine intellect, and chat thou bust
been to the immortals an averter of terrible destruction? And
back again, from harsh, bonds, have we come from the murky
darkness, through thy thoughtful care, O royal son of Cronus,
having experienced treatment unhoped-for.2— Wherefore also
how with stedfast purpose and prudent counsel we will pro-
tect thy might in dread conflict, fighting with the Titans in
stout battles.” Thus spake he: and the gods, givers of good,
applauded, when they had heard his speech: and their spirit
was eager for battle still more than before, and they stirred
up unhappy? strife all of them, female as well as male, on that

ay, both Titan gods, and as many as had sprung from Cro-
nus, and they whom Jove sent up to light from Erebus,‘ be-
neath the earth, terrible and strong, having overweening force.
From the shoulders of these a hundred hands outsprung to
all alike, and to each fifty heads grew from their shoulders
over their sturdy limbs. They then were pitted> against the


» Through our counsels.] Wolf considered this line spurious.
But juerépag dia BovdAde was necessary to show by whose loving-kind-
ness the Centimani were released from their bondage beneath the
earth. V. Lennep. 2 : ;

2 dpijc.—kpvepoio. Some would read ’Apstc or “Apeog here, but
dpii¢ is used similarly, Hom. Il. xviii. 10, apie adcrijpa yevioBat.
As to the objection to a masc. adjective with dpj¢, we have below,
in ver. 696, Oepudc diiryn. So also OfAue tpon. 3

4 Unhappy.] _duéyaprov, unenvied, not an object of envy; from
& and peyaipw, always joined with unfortunate or mournful objects.
Il. ii. 420; Odyss. xi. 400; Hecub. Eurip. 191. See Butmann,
Lexilog. pp. 410-11, peyaipw. duéyaproc. Heyne conjectures that
line Ai and those following, are a fragment from an old Titano-
macnia, , . c 1

4 ’EpéBeogiv. Some read here the Ion. genitive ’EpéBevod:r. But
- Butmann prefers ’EpéBeog. ;

5 rartoraev. Stetere Titanibus oppositi. Eurip. Herc. Fur.
1168, é¢ woAspoy ipiy eet paxyny Kabiorarat


674—691, THE THEOGONY. 35


Titans in deadly combat, holding huge' rocks in their sturdy
hands., But the Titans on the other side made strong their
squadrons with alacrity,-and both parties were showing work
of -hand and force at the same time, and the boundless sea re-
echoed terribly, and earth resounded loudly, and broad heaven
groaned, being shaken, and vast Olympus was convulsed from
- its base under the violence of the immortals? and a severe
quaking came to murky Tartarus,? namely, a hollow sound of _
countless chase of feet,-and of strong battle-strokes: to such
an extent, I ween, did they hurl groan-causing weapons. And
‘the voice of both parties reached to starry heaven, as they
cheered: for they came together with a great war-cry.

Nor longer, in truth, did Jove restrain his fury, but then
forthwith his heart was filled with fierceness, and he began
also to exhibit* all his force :, then, I wot, from heaven and
from Olympus together he went forth lightening continually :
and the bolts close together with thunder and lightning flew®


1 4uBarove: Huge. Cf, Hesiod, Theog. 786; Sc. 422; Hom.
Od. ix. 243; x. 88. See Butmann, Lexil. pp. 831-338.

2 gurg in’ abavdrwrv. Ab impetu deorum. So avipwy pirai,
violence of the winds. évoowg os Papsia— ody 7’ aimtia, e.T.d.
re is here apparently epexegetic of évocrc, a severe quaking, to wit, -
a hollow sound. : ‘

5 This fine description of the nether world, being shaken by the
conflict above it, is imitated by Virg. Ain. viii. '243—246, .

-Haud secus ac si qua penitus vi terra dehiscens .
Infernas reseret sedes, et regna recludat .
Pallida, Dis invisa, superque immane ‘barathrum
Cernatur, trepidentque immisso lumine Manes.
Ovid, Met. v. 8356—358,' i :
Inde tremit tellus, et rex pavet ipse silentém
Ne pateat, latogue solum, retegatur hiatu,
Immissusque dies trepidantes terreat umbras.
Compare also Lucan, vi. 743, Immittam ruptis Titana cavernis, Et
subito feriére die. Cf. Milt. Par. Lost, vi. 867, &c.
4 And he began also.] Compare Milton, Par. Lost, vi. 853-855,
* Yet half his strength he put not forth, but check’d
His thunder in mid volley, fer he meant
: Not to destroy, but root them out of heaven.” _
' [tis to be observed how low the heathen conception of Divinity is,
compared with the Christian. The Messiah has a superabundance,
Jupiter scarce a sufficiency, of might. See Robinson. ;

® ixrap is from txw. e@ woréovro, flew in*such wise as not to miss
their mark. ciAugéwyree is the same as cikvgaZw. Scut. 275.

D2


'


'


36° ; HESIOD. ; 691—712,
duly from his sturdy hand, whirling a sacred flash, in fre-
quent! succession, while all-around life-giving Earth was
crashing in conflagration, and the immense forests on all
sides crackled loudly with fire. All land was boiling, and
Ocean’s streams, and the barren sea: warm vapour was cir-
cling the earth-born Titans, and the incessant blaze reached
the divine dense-atmosphere,? whilst flashing radiance of
thunderbolt and lightning was bereaving their eyes of sight,
strong heroes though they were. Fearful heat likewise pos-
sessed Chaos:? and it seemed, to look at, face to face, with
the eye, and to hear the sound with the ear, just as if earth
‘and broad heaven from above were threatening to meet: (for
such an exceeding crash would have arisen from earth falling
in ruins, and heaven dashing it down from above.) Such a
din there rose when the gods clashed in strife. The winds
too at the same time were stirring up quaking and dust to-
gether, thunder and lightning and smoking bolt, shafts of the
mighty Jove; and they were bearing shout and battle-cry
into the midst, one of another, then a terrible noise of dread-
ful strife was roused, strength of prowess was put forth, and
the battle was inclined: but hefore that time assailing one an-
other, they were fighting‘ incessantly in stern conflict. Now.


2 aepiees (rappic, rpipw, to thicken,) frequentes. Il. xi. 387; Od.
xxii, 246.

* The divine atmosphere.] ' i. e. the clouds and darkness of the
storm. Cf. Il. v. 864; xvii. 644, where dp is used in a like sense,
Cf. Theog. 9, supra.

3 Xdo¢ stands here for the wide void beneath the earth, betwixt
it and the bottom of Tartarus. Cf. 724, 740, 814. Greevius, i in his
Lect. Hesiodex, says that Chaos is often used for the abode of the
infernal gods, ‘quoting Plutarch, and Ovid, Met. x., where Orpheus
addresses Pluto and Proserpine : :

™ Per ego hee plena timoris,

Per Chaos hoc i ingens, vastique silentia regni. .
So also Statius uses Chaos, and also Aristoph. Av. 192-3:
Oud Tig mwodewc Tis adXorpiag, wai rov ydoug
TaY PNpiwy Tiy Kviccay Srapophaere.
And an old interpreter on St. Luke, xvi-..26, explains xdopa peya,
(which | divided Dives from Lazarus,) ‘Chaos magnum. ticaro 3’
dvra—ie dre. Compare Od. v. 281, for a like construction ; ont
for ‘the imperf. gwidvaro, after we bre, see Odyss. xxi. 406, oe 8
dvip—iravvcce. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 508, b.

¢ iud xovro—ot Geol, “ that is to say :”’ as contradistinguished from
ot 8 dp’ svi mpi 7


‘


T13—735, THE THEOGONY. 87


the others, I wot, among the first ranks roused the keen fight,
Cottus, Briareus, and Gyes insatiable in war, who truly were ~
hurling from sturdy hands three hundred rocks close upon
each other, and they had overshadowed the Titans with mis-
siles, sent them "neath the broad-wayed earth, and bound them
in irksome bonds, (having conquered them with their hands,
over-haughty though they were,) as far beneath under earth!
as heaven is from the earth, for equal is the space from earth |
to murky Tartarus. For nine nights and’ days also would a
brazeri anvil be descending from the heaven, and come on the
tenth to the earth: and nine days as well as nights again
would a brazen anvil be descending from the earth, to reach
on the tenth to Tartarus.? Around it moreover a brazen fence?
has been forged: and about it Night is poured in three rows
around the neck; but above spring the roots of Earth and
barren Sea. There, under murky darkness, the Titan gods’
lie hidden* by the counsels of cloud-compelling Jupiter in a
dark, drear place, where aré® the extremities of vast Earth.
These may not go forth, for Neptune has placed above them
brazen gates, and a wall goes round them en both sides.6 ‘There
dwell Gyes, and Cottus, and high-spirited Briareus, faithful


1 Hom. (II. viii. 16) says that Tartarus is réocoy évep0’ didew, Soov
obpavdg tor’ dad yaing, a variation from Hesiod’s account, as making
a deeper space beneath the earth, unless Homer looked on Hades
as a part of the earth. Homer, too, Il. i. 590—594, makes the distance
from heaven to earth less: than Hesiod does here (722). But.the
poets followed their fancy on these matters. See Virg. Ain. vi. 577,

Tum Tartarus ipse
’ Bis patet in preeceps tantum, tenditque sub umbras,
- Quantus ad ztherium ceeli suspectus Olympum.

* Hesiod endeavours to give an exact account of the distances
from heaven to earth, and from earth to Tartarus. Throw an anvil
from heaven, and it will reach earth on the tenth day after. Just
so, if thrown from earth through the void beneath, the same anvil
will take as many more days te reach Tartarus. At

-§ Compare Virgil, Aun. vi. 549—-554; Milton, Par. Lost, ii. 648;
both of whom also speak of this wall as threefold. ; ;

* So Virg. En. vi. 581,

Hie genus antiquum Terre, Titania proles,
Fulmine dejecti fundo volvuntur in imo. —~ .

5 Kither we must read here Wédwo’ cig Zoyara yaine, or take foyar
as referred to Terijvec, and in apposition to'it, as in Perse Esch. i.
(Blomf.) This option is pointed out by Goettling. ae

® For the irregular elision of ¢ in repoixettu, cf. 678, weplaxs.


38 ; HESIOD. 735—761,


guards of egis-bearing Jove. And there are the sources and
boundaries of dusky Earth, of murky Tartarus, of barren
Sea, and starry Heaven, all in their order: bowndaries op-
pressive and gloomy, which. also even gods abhor, a vast
chasm,' not even for a whole round of a year would one reach
the pavement, after having first been within the gates: but
hurricane to hurricane would bear him onward? hither and
thither, distressing him, and dreadful even to immortal gods
‘is this prodigy, and ¢here the dread abodes of gloomy Night
stand shrouded in dark clouds. In front of these the son of
Tapetus stands and holds* broad Heaven, with his head and
unwearied ‘hands, unmovedly, where Night and Day also
drawing nigh are wont to salute each other,‘ as they cross the
vast brazen threshold. The one is about to go down within,
whilst the other comes forth abroad, nor ever doth the abode
constrain both within; but constantly one at any rate being
outside the dwelling, wanders over the earth, while the other
again being within the abode, awaits® the season of her journey,
until it come; the one having a far-seeing light for men-on-
‘the-earth, and the other, destructive Night; having Sleep, the
brother of Death, in its hands, being shrouded in hazy mist.®
And there the sons of obscure Night hold their habitation,
Sleep and Death, dread gods: nor ever doth the bright sun.
look upon them with his rays,’ as he ascends the heaven, or


1 yaopa péiya.| Robinson quotes Milton, Par. Lost, ii. 932--938,'
A vast vacuity: all unawares, &c, . 5; :

* 2 gtooe pd for zeogépor, used in like sense, Hom. I]. vi. 846; Od.
xix. 63. V. Lennep.

3 Zyér’ is the reading of almost all MSS. V.Lennep defends it
by II, xx. 531, yeooi wbAag exer’, where the Schol. explains the middle
voice, xaréye xai pipet, He observes that there is but one instance
(Il. xi, 272) of at cut off before a vowel in a similar case. Some
suggest that we should read éxero, imperfect, “ tenendum accepit,”
supporting it by the use of rpovteirov, (749,) “ compellare solent.”

* For this passing salutation, ¢f, Hom. Od. x. 82, 56: wouéva mor-
pay dria ciceddwy, 658 1 sedkdwy braxobe,

S ulpver tiv abrijg Gony d60%, or’ dy txnrat is equivalent to pipve
ior’ ap 4 wpa iknrat, «7.2. ‘

6 So Hom. Hl. xiv. 231; Virg. Ain. vi. 278, Et consanguineus lethi
sopor. Hesiod (Theog. 202) has made Sleep and Death the children
of Night, and so we have their abodes nighest his in ver. 758, 759.

7 Clericus refers this passage to Hom. Od. xi. 15—18 as its source.
But, as Van Lennep observes, both probably followed a common
and earlier original. ¢ :


761—786. °° THE THEOGONY. 39


descends from the heaven. Of whom indeed the one tarries
on the earth and the broad surface of the sea, silently and
soothingly to men; but of the other, iron is the heart, and
brazen #s his ruthless soul within his breast ; and whotnsoever
of men he may have first caught, he holdeth: and he is hos-
tile even to immortal gods. There in the front stand the re-
sounding! mansions of the infernal god, of mighty Hades,
and awful? Persephone besides ; and a fierce dog keeps guard
in front, a ruthless dog; and he has an evil trick: those who
enter he fawns upon with his tail and both ears? alike, yet he
suffers them not to go forth back again, but lies in wait and
. devours whomsoever he may have caught going forth without
the gates of strong Hades and dread Persephone. There too
dwells a goddess odious to immortals, dread Styx, eldest
daughter of back-flowing? Ocean: and apart from the gods
she inhabits renowned dwellings vaulted by huge rocks; and
round about on all sides they are strengthened to Heaven by
silver columns. And seldom goes the fleet-footed daughter of
Thaumas, Iris, on a message® over the broad back of the sea,®
namely, when haply strife and quarrel shall have arisen among
the immortals : and whosoever, I wot, of them that hold Olym- °
pian dwellings, utters falsehood, then also Jove’ is wont to
send Iris to bring from far in a golden ewer the great oath of
the gods, the renowned water, cold as it is, which also runs’


' According to Hesiod, beneath the boundaries of Earth, and
over Tartarus, were the halls of Hades, called 4yHevrec, because
high ceiled or vaulted. V. Lennep. ~ : :

2 trawijc. Cf. Butmann, Lexil. sub voc. atvoc, (pp. 62, 63,)
who would read én’ aiv}—iai being taken as an adverb, moreover,

. .* Both earé.] This dog appears to be the Cerberus of ver. 31],
though there called revrnxovraxégadoc. V. Lennep suggests that
the ‘‘ both ears’’ may be understood of each pedetal: ere

+ aboppdou, (Tl. xviii. 399; Od. xx. 65,) an epithet of the ocean,

which, to the Homeric and Hesiodean mind, encircled earth and .

flowed back into itself.

- 5 dyyeding is a genitive governed by rwasira:, of the same class
of constructions as mpyosew bdov. Goettling, Compare II. iii. 206,
and Butmann, Lex. p. 14, on that passage.

® Styx is represented dwelling afar from the rest of the gods, so

_far that rarely does Iris penetrate thither; and then only when an
oath is to be udministered to gods, to ptit an end to strife. _

7 Lede de re is the apodosis to lines 782, 783. Zarewpe, “ is wont to
send,” the aorist for the present.—Of the ey ts as the oath of the
gods, see Hom. Od. v. 185; IL. ii. 755; Virg) Aon. vi. 823, 324.


. 40 ‘HESIOD. : 786—815,


down from a steep and lofty rock ; but in abundance beneath
the roomy Earth flows a branch of Ocean from the sacred
river through black Night; and a tenth portion has been
assigned! to it. In nine portions indeed, rolling around Earth
* and also the broad back of the Sea with silver whirlpools, he
(Ocean) falls into the brine ; but the other one part flows forth
from a rock, a great bane to the gods. Whosoever of im-
mortals that occupy the top of snowy Olympus, shall have
offered of this? as a libation, and sworn over it a false oath,
lies breathless until the completion of a year,? nor ever comes
near the repast of nectar and ambrosia, but also lies breath-
less and speechless on a strown couch, and a baneful stupor
over-shrouds him. But when he has fulfilled his malady until
the full year, then another after another severer trouble suc-
céeds for him. And for nine years he is parted from the ever-
‘living gods; nor ever does he mix with them in council nor
in feasts for nine whole years; but in the tenth he mingles
again in the assemblies* of the gods immortal, who oceupy
Olympian dwellings. Such a grave oath, I wot, have the
gods made the imperishable water of Styx, that ancient wa-
ter, which also runs. through a very rugged tract. There
too are the sources and boundaries of dusky Earth, and murky
Tartarus, and barren Sea, and starry Heaven, all in order;
boundaries oppressive and gloomy, which also even gods ab-
hor. And there are gleaming® gates and a brazén threshold,
unshaken and fixed upon far-extending foundations, self-
growing ; and before i¢, outside of all the gods, beyond gloomy
Chaos, the Titans dwell. But the famed allies® of loud-


1 The poet states that a tenth portion of Ocean’s waters has been
assigned to this branch, the Styx, and in ver. 790—792, explains the
distribution more fully. 2vvia (poipac, sc.} must probably (as V-
Lennep suggests) be construed adverbially, for sidtypévog can
scarcely be taken in an active sense.

2 shy, i.e. radrny riy Srvyd. Gutetus. fe -

5 Goettling thinks, after comparing ver. 799, that rerehecpivor ig
éwavrév means the year of eight ordinary years. , :

4 sipéag. Goetiling. sipacc. Lehrs. If the former reading is pre-
ferred, the accusative will be governed by émi in imqmicyerar. stpia,
not eipa, is the Beeotian form. Goettling. ; i
- § pappdpeat, gleaming.-] ‘The adjective is so explained in IL. iii.
126; xiv. 273; xvii. 594; xviii. 485 xxii. 441, V. Lennep.

* Famed allies. ] ae pie who is mentioned as‘one of these, is’
probably the same as Egeon (see II, i. 403). See also Smith’s Dict.-


$i5—-839, THE. THEOGONY. 41


crashing Jove inhabit dwellings under the foundations of the.
Ocean, namely, Cottus and Gyes. Briareus indeed, for his
part, strong as he was, deep-sounding Earth-shaker made his
son-in-law, and gave him to wife his daughter Cymopolia.
But when Jove had driven the Titans out from Heaven,
huge Earth bare her -youngest-born son, Typhoeus,! by the
embrace of Tartarus, through golden Aphrodite.. Whose
hands, indeed, are apt for deeds on the score of strength, and -
untiring the feet of the strong god; and from his shoulders
there were a hundred heads of a serpent, a fierce dragon, play-
ing with dusky? tongues, and from the eyes in his wondrous
heads fire sparkled beneath the brows: whilst from all his
heads fire was gleaming, as he looked keenly. In ail his ter-
rible heads, too, were voices sending forth every kind of sound
ineffable. For one while indeed they would utter sounds, so _
as for the gods to understand,’ and at another time again the
voice of a loud-bellowing bull, untameable in force, and proud -
- in utterance ; at another time, again, that of a lion possessing
a daring spirit; at another yet again they would sound like to
whelps, wondrous to hear ; and at another he would hiss, and
the lofty mountains resound. And, in sooth, then would there
have ,been done a deed past remedy, and he, even he, would
have reigned over mortals and immortals, unless, I wot, the
sire of gods and. men had quickly observed him. Harshly


Gr. and R. Ant. p. 24, B.’ V. Lennep enumerates various passages
from Latin poets, where Briareus is the enemy, not the ally, of Jove.
Virg. Hn. x. 665; Hor. Od. III. iv. 69; Ov. Fast. iii. 805, &.

1 Typhoeus.] Cf 307. We find Aisch. Prom. V. 353, &., cor-.
responding in his account of Typhoeus with Hesiod, ver. 824-826,
ixatoyxdpnvoy wrpdg Biay yepotpevoy Tudmva Oovpoy, and in 871, roioy
be Tuga tkavatice yodov Oeopoic dxddrov Béideot rupmrvoov Carne. .
It appears, from these descriptions, that Typhaon, or Typheeus,
was a wind of a fiery nature, to describe which he is imaged with
“fiery eyes.” WV. Lennep.

2 Aekerypudrec. Either the masc. participle is here used with xe-
gadal, (as in Hom. Il. viii. 455, where we have mAnyévre. Kepavig,

- said of Minerva and Juno, and in Hesiod, Op. et D. 199, mpodimbve
avOpwroug Aidwe nai Népeoc,) or we must take it as a case of the
oxipa mpoe 7d onpatvopevor, of which see Matt. Gr. Gr. § 434, obs.
p. 715. For the word Ashexporec, see Butm. se 546, note.

3 Sore Osotor curtzuev. Understand éétvat, with Heyne, “ Ut diis
intelligere liceret.”? Thus it appears Typhoeus spoke the language |
of the gods, specimens of which, as varying from man’s language,
Goettling collects. Hom. Il, i. 403; xiv. 201; xx. 74; Od. x. 304, &e,


42 ‘ HESIOD. 839—863,


then ‘he thundered, and heavily,'‘and terribly the earth re-
echoed around ; and the! broad heaven above, and the sea, and
streams of ocean, and the abysses of earth. But beneath his
immortal feet! vast Olympus trembled, as the king uprose,

‘and earth groaned beneath. And the heat from both? caught
the dark-coloured sea, both of the thunder and lightning, and
fire from the monster, he heat arising from the thunder-storms,
winds, and burning lightning. And all earth and heaven and
sea were boiling; and huge billows roared around the shores
about and around, beneath the violence of gods; and unal-
layed quaking arose. Pluto trembled, monarch over the dead
beneath ; and the Titans under Tartarus, standing about Cro-
nus,? trembled also, on account of the unceasing tumult and
dreadful contention. But Jove, when in truth he had raised
high‘ his wrath, and had taken his arms, his thunder and
lightning, and smoking bolt, leapt up, 4nd smote him from
Olympus, and scorched ® all-around all the wondrous heads of
the terrible monster. ;

But when at length he had quelled it, after having smitten
it with blows, the monster fell down lamed, and huge Earth
groaned. But the flame from the lightning-blasted monster ®
flashed forth in the mountain-hollows, hidden and rugged,
when he was stricken, and much was the vast earth burnt and
melted by the boundless vapour, like as pewter,” heated by the


1 gzooci 5 tw. Robinson here compares Milton, Par. Lost, vi.
832—834,
“ Under his Bvning wheels
The stedfast empyrean shook throughout, -
All but the throne itself of God.”


2 The heat from both.] Jupiter and Typhoeus. So thinks V.
Lennep, who considgrs ver. 846 as an explanation of 845, the (cadpa)
TOnorHowy r’ dvipwy 7’ explaining more clearly radpa wupd¢ aro rvi0
TéerAwpov, and kepavvod odreyiPovrog the foregoing Boovrijc re .crepomijc
te. Goettling refers dugorigwy to Olympus and Terra, 842, 843.

« * Compare Hom. Il. xiv. 274, wdprupor wo’ of EvepPe coi, Kodvoy
Gydig tévrec. 279, rode ‘Yxoraprapiouc, of Tirivec eadzovrat.

.* V. Lennep traces a kindred between xdpa, xépon, xépuc, Kopudi),
xépQuc, xopObu, (Il. ix. 7,) and copOive.

5 &apece for expose. Cf. Butm, Lexil. p. 484, and Grammar.

* roto dvaxrog. dvat, signifying primarily a king or prince, is
here taken for what is special of its kind. Clerieus. .

7 «agaireooc, plumbum ecandidum. Van Lennep explains that
two operations are here ‘indicated, viz. the one, the pewter melted


1


863—889, THE THEOGONY. . . 43


art of youths, and by the well-bored 'melting-pit ; or iron,
which is the hardest of metals, subdued in the dells of the °
mountain by blazing fire, melts in the sacred earth beneath
the hands of Vulcan. So, I wot, was earth melted in the


-glaré of burning fire. Then, troubled in spirit, he hurled


him into wide Tartarus.

Now from Typhoeus! is.the strength of winds moist-blow-
ing, except the south-west, the north, and Argestes, and Ze-
phyr, who also indeed are a race from the gods, a great bless-
ing to mortals. But the others, being random gusts, breathe
over the sea, And these in truth falling upon the darksome
deep, rage with baneful hurricane, a great hurt to mortals;


. and now here, now there they blow, and scatter barks, and


destroy sailors: nor is there any succour from ill to men, who
encounter them on the ocean. But these again even o’er the
boundless flowery earth spoil the pleasant works of earth-
born men, filling them with dust and wearisome uproar.
But when, I wot, the blessed gods had fulfilled their labour,
and contended with the Titans perforce on the score of hon-
ours,? then it was,'I say, that they urged far-seeing Jove, by
the advice of Earth, to rule and reign over. immortals: and
he duly distributed honours amongst them. j

And Jupiter, king of the gods, made Metis? first. his wife ;
Metis, most wise of deities as well as mortal men. But when
now at length she was about to give birth to Minerva, gleam- ,


or fused in a vessel having an aperture suitable for the purpose,
and operated upon by youths; the other, the melting out of veins
ef iron, described by Pliny, N. H. xxxiv. c. 14, s. 41, which was


‘carried on in woody valleys, where there was plenty of fuel.


éy yQovi diy means simply a furrow of the earth, into which the _
melted iron might run. Compare 2’Chron. iv. 17. :

1 Typhoeus is represented as the father of winds, which are dis-
tinct from those mentioned in ver. 378, &c., as the children of Astreus
and Aurora. The progeny of Typhoeus, unlike that of Astreeus,
are uncertain gusts, hurtful alike to mariners gnd husbandmen, to
land and sea. ’

2 On the score of honours.] rysdwy, (Zvexa, sc.,) the contest being
whether the Cronide or the Titans should have these honours. —

5 Metis, (“ prudentia,”) daughter of Ocean, (cf. Theog. 358,)
was a fitting choice for Jupiter, as a new sovereign. Apollodorus
and the .Scholia tell us that Metis had the property of assuming
various shapes; and that Jove persuaded her to transform herself
into such a shape that he could without difficulty swallow her; and


‘ that so Minerva might spring, not from Metis, but from his head.


44 HESIOD. - - 889.910,


ing-eyed goddess, then ¢¢ was that having by deceit beguiled
her mind with flattering words,'he placed her within his own
belly by the advice of Earth, and of starry Heaven. 'For
thus they persuaded him, lest other of everliving gods should
possess? sovereign honour in the room of Jove. For of her
it was fated that wise children should be born: first the
glancing-eyed Tritonian maiden, ‘having equal might and
prudent counsel with her sire; and then, I ween, she was
going to give-birth-to a son, as king of gods and men, with
an overbearing spirit, but chat in sooth Jove deposited her
first in his own belly, that the goddess might indicate to him
both good and bad? . Next he wedded bright Themis,‘ who
bare the Hours, Eunomia, Dicé, and blooming Peace, who
care for their works for mortal men ; and the Parce,® to whom
counselling Jove gave most honour, Clotho, Lachesis, and
Atropos, who also give to men good and evil to possess. And
Eurynome,® daughter of Ocean, having a very lovely form,
bare him the fair-cheeked Graces,’ Aglaia, and Euphrosyne,
and winsome Thalia; from whose eyelids alsb as they gazed


1 This line gives another reason for the act of Jupiter, viz. that
Metis might never again bear a child; it having been fated that
the next-born should reign in place of Jove.

* 2 yy. The conjunctive is used, because the fact remains in the
poet’s day. Goettling.

3 Both good and bad.] Clericus compares Genesis iii. 5, to
prove that this phrase is meant as an exhaustive division of all


things.

‘ Themis.) See ver. 135. Pausanias also describes her as the
mother of the Hours, and notes the statues of Themis and the Hours
in the temple of Juno at Elis, v. 17, 1. ‘Good ‘laws,”’ justice,
“and peace,” insure the fruits of the earth, and the gpya of which
another poem of Hesiod treats, in their seasons. Respecting the
Hore end their funetions, see Theoc. Idyll. i. 150; xv. 103; Mosch.
ii, 160; Ovid, Met. ii. 25.

5 Since Hesiod has given the Parcs other parentage at ver. 215,
Robinson thinks that poipag must be governed by wpedover, in the
sense of the Hours making man’s lot happy. This seems preferable
to disowning the lines, though unapproved by V. Lennep.

6 Eurynome (cf. 358, and Hom. Il. xviii, 399) had a temple at
Phigalea in Arcadia., Pausan. vili- 41, § 4. The most ancient wor-
ship of the Graces was at Orchomenus. Pausan. ix. 35 and 38, § 1.
Hom. I]. xviii. 382, mentions one Grace as the wife of Vulcan, and
we find by the Theog. 945, that this was Aglaia. .

7 Of the beauty of the Graces we read in Horace, Od. LI. iv. 6,
Juncteeque nymphis gratia decentes; and Theoc. xvi. ad fin. ¢


310—931, THE THEOGONY. eve 45


dropped Lové, unnerving limbs, and sweetly too look théy

- under their brows. But he came to the couch of much-
nourishing Demeter, who bare him white-armed Proserpine ;
her whom Pluto ravished from her mother: and sage Jupiter
gave her.! And next he was enamoured of beautiful-haired
Mnemosyne, of ‘whom were-born to him the Muses nine,?
with-golden-fillets, to whom festivals, and the delight of song,
are wont to be a pleasure. .

But Apollo and Artemis, rejoicing-in-arrows, a lovely off-
spring beyond all the heavenly-beings, Latona’. in sooth
brought forth, after union in love with xgis-bearing Jove. |
And last made he blooming Juno his spouse. She bare Hebe,
and Mars, and Lucina, having been united in love with the
king of gods and men. But *by himself, from his head, he
produced glancing-eyed Tritonis,‘ fierce, strife-stirring, army- |
leading, unsubdued, and awful, to whom dins, and wars, and
battles are a delight. And Juno,® without having been united

‘in love, brought forth famous Vulcan, and put out all her.
strength, and strove with her husband; Vulcan, distinguished
in arts from amongst all the heaven-born.

But from Amphitrite and the loud-roaring Earth-shaker
Sprang great and widely-powerful Triton,’ who occupies the


' Zwee. Concessit ut raperet. Clertcus,

2 Mnemosyne, mother of the Muses Cf. 54. The first mention
of the fillets, which were the earliest head-dress of Greek women,
is Hom. Il. xvii. 52. Goettling. Cf. Pindar, Pyth. iii. 158; Isthm.:
ii, 2. :

* Compare Hom. Il. i. 9; xxi. 499, 506; Od. vi. 106; Callim. H.
in Del. 291. The mention of Latona as wife of Jove before Juno,
whom Jove took last to wife, (921,) shows that Hesiod was un-
aware of Juno’s wrath against her rival, and Latona’s consequent
wanderings.

4 Totroyévera, either from Tprrw, “ caput,’ (compare “ Capita,”
Ov, Fast. iii. 837,) or from a river in Beotia.

5 Juno, as sole parent of Vulcan; is recognised by Servius on
#¥n. viii. 454, and such was the received opinion of the Greeks, from
whom Homer differs,“(Il. i. 572; Qd. viii. 312,) in making him the
son of Jupiter and Juno. . V. : ;

_ ° Triton is unmentioned by Homer, but we learn from Herod.
iv. 179, that he appeared to Jason before the Argonantic expedition.
€f. Pindar, Pyth. iv. 22, seq.; spall Ube. iv. 269, 284, 1552, where,
as here, he is called edspuBing. ere seems to be some connexion
between his name and the “ buccina,” or concha, which the Latin ‘
poets give him. Ov. Met. i. 333; Ain. x. 20%


46 : HESIOD. ‘ 931—954,


depth of the sea, and inhabits golden houses! beside his dear
mother and his royal sire, being a terrible god. To shield-
piercing Mars, however, Cytherea .bare Fear and Terror,
formidable deities, even they who route dense phalanxes of
meh in. horrid war, with the help of city-spoiler Mars;? and
Harmonia, whom high-spirited Cadmus made his spouse.
Then to Jove, I wot, Maia,? daughter of Atlas, bare glori-
ous Hermes, herald of immortals, having ascended his holy
couch. And to him, in sooth, Semele,* daughter of Cadmus,
bare an illustrious son, even jocund Bacchus, after union ir
love, mortal though she was, an immortal. But now both are
deities. And Alcmena, after union in love with cloud-com-
pelling Jove, bare Hercules-the strong.
But Vulcan, far-famed, ¢rippled god, took to wife blooming
* Aglaia, youngest of the Graces. And Bacchus, of golden
hair, took for his blooming bride auburn-tressed Ariadne,
daughter of Minos. And her the son of Cronus made im-
mortal,> and unsusceptible of old age for him. And. fair-
ankled Alemena’s valiant son, mighty Hercules, having ac-
complished grievous: toils, made Hebe, daughter of mighty
Jove and Juno-with-golden-sandals, his bashful wife in snowy
_ Olympus :* happy hero, who having achieved a great work,


1 36 for dépara, by Apocope. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 89, ad fin.
These dwellings are mentioned by Hom. I]. xiii. 20, as being at


SE. ‘

* So Terror and Fear are occupied with Mars and Minerva in
Il. iv, 440, and m Hesiod, Scut. Here we find them near the
chariot, and ye the horses of Mars, 195, 463. By 6@o¢ too
with Mars and Enyo, the seven chiefs swear. Aisch.’S.'c. Theb. 45.

3 Next in order come the offspring of Maia, Semele, and Ale-
mena, mistresses of Jove, the first a nymph, the second and third
mortals, ‘.

* Homer, fil. xiv. $23, and Hymn in Dionys. i. 57, gives the same
_ account of the parentage of Bacchus. Hesiod seems to have been
ignorant of the fate of Semele and the fable of Bacchus having been
enclosed in the thigh of Jupiter. -V. Lennep.

5 The Latin poets (Propert, IV. xvii. 8; Ov. Fast. iii. 510) follow
Hesiod’s account of Ariadne’s deification. Homer, Odyss. xi. 320,

ives another account, viz. that Theseus carried her to. Athens, but
that Diana, on the accusation of Bacchus, hindered her marriage
by causing her death.

® See Hom. Od. xi. 603, 604, the last of which lines (bracketed
ine in many editions) 1s word for word the same as ver. 952

ere. :


954-915, THE THEOGONY. _ 4a


dwells among the immortals uninjured and ageless evermore, .
To the unwearied Sun the famous Oceanid, Perseis,! bare.Circe .
and king CEetes. And CEetes, son of.man-enlightening Sun, .
wedded beauteous-cheeked Idyia, daughter of Ocean, perfect
river, by the will of the gods. But she then, subdued in love
through golden Aphrodite, brought forth to him fair-ankled.
Medea. . ‘

Now fare ye well, gods dwelling in Olympian mansions ;?
[Islands and Continents, and briny Sea within;] and now
Olympian Muses, sweet of speech, daughters of egis-bearing
Jove, sing ye the tribe of goddesses, as many as in truth
having been united, though immortal, with mortal men, gave
birth to children resembling gods.

Ceres, divine among goddesses, after union in delightsome
love, bare Plutus to the hero Iasius,? in a thrice-ploughed fale’
low, in the fertile country of Crete, a kind god who goes
over all4 the earth, and the broad surface of the sea; and to
him that has-chanced upon him, and into whose hands he may
have come, him, I say, he is wont to make rich, and presents
to him much wealth. And to Cadmus, Harmonia,® daughter


1 Perseis.] The same as Perse in Hom. Od. x. 136, who calls her
own sister to (Eetes. Cf. Apollon. Rhod. iv. 59, V.Lennep traces
the myth-of the Sun marrying an Oceanid from his appearing to
sailors to rise at morn from the sea, and return to it at eve.

_? We must here either suppose, with Van Lennep, a considerable
omission of lines, which have slipped out before ver. 964, or, wit
Goettling, read, olow ba’ Arapot re Kat Gdpupdg Evdobs wévrog. Most —
commentators deem this passage the beginning of a separate work
of Hesiod. '

2 The same account of Iasius is given in Hom. Od. v. 125, with
the additional statement, that he was stricken with lightning by
Jove, for his boldness. Theocr. Idyll iii. 51, 52, and Ovid, Amor,
Ill. x. 25, allude to this fable. The former agrees with Hesiod


’ that Crete was the country of lasius.


4 wasav. Hermann would read méow, but xacav may be re-
tained, and referred to carelessness of expression. An‘ anacolu-
thon follows in rg de ruyévri—rov 0 agvedy EOrjxe, referable to the
same. Goettling and V. Lennep agree here. Wolf compares
Theog. 157, &c., 240, 283. ; ;

5 Harmonia here, and Medea (992), are ranked among goddesses
wedding mortals, probably because each was of ‘divine parentage.
Harmonia, the daughter of Mars and Venus, deities of the higher
order, and Medea, of CEetes, son of Sol and an Oceanid. Har-
monia’s children, Ino, Agave, and Autonoe, are famous for their
jealous care for ‘the orgies of Bacchus, tRe,son of Semele, their ~


1 \
48 “HESIOD. 975—993,


of golden Aphrodite, bare Ino, Semele, aid fair-cheeked
Agave, and Autonoe, whom Aristeus of-clustering-locks
wedded, and Polydorus in tower-circled Thebes.
But Callirhoe, daughter of Ocean, united to brave-hearted
‘Chrysaor in union of all-golden Aphrodite,! bare a son the
strongest of all mortals, Geryon, whom mighty Hercules slew,
for the sake of the trailing-footed oxen? in island Erythea.
And to Tithonus Aurora? bare Memnon with-brazen-helm, |
king of the Aithiopians, and the sovereign Hemathion. But
to Cephalus in truth she produced an illustrious son, the brave
Phaethon,! a man like to the gods, whom, I wot, when youyg,
in the tender flower of glorious youth, a lad, conscious but of
‘young fancies, laughter-loving Aphrodite snatched up, and
rushed away, and she made him, in her sacred fanes, her
nightly temple-keeper, a divine Genius. And the daughter
of Céetes, Jove-descended king, Jason,® son of AZson; by the


sister. Agave was the mother of Pentheus. ' See Theocr. xxvi.;
Eurip. Bacche ; Ov. Met. iii. 701—733. The husband of Autonoe,
Aristzus, is known to us through Virg. Georg. iv. 317, &c¢. Van
Pennet notes the frequent commemoration of the flowing locks of
the gods. i

1 Wolf doubts the correctness of the phrase év puddrgre ’Agpodirys.
But Muetzellius quotes the same verse from a fragment of Hesiod
in me a ad Pindar, Pyth. iv.'35, For Chrysaor, see above at
ver: 287. ; ’

2 Bowv. A case of Synizesis, or species of crasis affecting two
syllables of the same word. Compare Op. et D. 442, 607; Theog.
28, 288. In the Tragics we have duoty and wé\éGe contracted into
dvoty and worse, Gedg—OE0C, - : ;

8 Aurora and Tithonus.) Cf. Hom, Il. xi.1; Od. v.1; Virg.
Georg. i. 447; Ain. iv. 585; ix. 460. -

‘ This Phaethon is other than he, of whom we read as the son of
Sol and Clymene, Ov. Met. ii., whose end was so disastrous. But
Ovid, Met. vii. 701—704, makes Cephalus say,

- s Cum me cornigeris’tendentem retia cervis
Vertice de summo semper florentis Hymetti
Lutea mane videt pulsis Aurora tenebris,
Invitumque rapit.”’
Cf. Or. Her. Ep. iv. 93, and Pausan. I. iii. 1, quoted by Goett-
ling, where ‘Hyépa is said to have carried off Cephalus, not Au-
rora. Ndéyxoy (991) is the reading of some editions, others have
poxwov. Aaipova diov, that is, a god of the lower order, one of the
Dii Minores. .
5 Cf. 965, and notes there. Medeus is mentioned as Medea’s
* son by Justin, lib. xlii2. That Chiron was an approved master


!


+


. daughters of Nereus, ancient sea-god, Psamathe in truth, di-


t


994-1016, _ THE -THEOGONY. - 49


counsels of ever-living gods, carried off from Céetes, after he
had fulfilled the grievous toils, which, being many in number,
the great and overbearing king, insolent and infatuated Pelias,
doer of deeds of violence, imposed upon him. _ Which having
achieved, after having toiled much, the son of ison arrived


at Tolchos, bearing in his. fleet ship a dark-eyed maiden, and |


her he made his blooming bride. Yes, and she, having been
yoked with Jason, shepherd of his people, bore a son Medeus,
whom Chiron, son of Philyra, reared on the mountains ; whilst
the purpose of mighty Jove was being fulfilled. But of the


vine among goddesses, bare Phocus! in the embrace of Aacus,
through golden Aphrodite : and the goddess Thetis, of the sil-
ver feet, yielding to Peleus, gave birth to Achilles the lion-
hearted, who-broke-the-ranks-of-men. . -

Fair-wreathed Cytherea? too, I wot, blending in delight-
some love with the hero Anchises, bare Aineas on the peaks
of many-valleyed, woody Ida. But Circe, daughter of the
Sun,. born-of-Hyperion, by the love of Ulysses? of-enduring-


heart, gave birth to Agrius and blameless and strong Lafinus ;


Telegonus also she bare through golden Aphrodite. Now


these in truth very far in a recess of sacred isles,‘ reigned over


in his day we find from Il. iv. 219; Od. xi. 831; Xenophon de
Venatione. His cave in the mountains is mentioned by Theocr.
Idylk. vii. 149. Pa ;
 Phocus is called, in Ov. Met. vii. 685, Juvenis Nereius. :
2 Compare Hom. Il. ii. 819; v. 313; Hymn to Venus, 53 and
75 ; and, among later poets, Theoer. Idyll. i. 106, where Venus is
taunted by Daphnis with her intrigue with Anchises. =>
* Thus Hesiod gives the progeny of-Ulysses and Circe, which
Homer does not. Latinus js called by Virgil, A‘n. xii. 164, the
fprceon of Sol, “ Solis avi specimen,” though elsewhere, vii. 45—47,
é calls him the son of Faunus and a Laurentian nymph, and
. grandson of Picus. The- former account (as Servius observes)
agrees with Hesiod. The mention of Latinus and the Tyrrhenians
shows, observés V. Lennep, that even in Hesiod’s age the Greeks
‘had some knowledge of tie western peoples of Italy. Telegonus
and his connexion with Italy is commemorated in Horat. Od. III.
xxix. 8, Telegoni juga parricidz, and Epod. i, 19, Tusculi Circzea
tangat menia. ;


‘ There may have been scarce enough geographical knowledge |


of Italy in Greece at Hesiod’s date, to say whether it was or was


not an island. The peninsula might be called pai vicot on ac- ,


count of the dwellings and pastures of the, gods there, (especially
Ez »e ase


a


i >
50 . HESIOD. | 1016-1022,


all the very far-renowned Tyrrhenians. But Calypso, divine
among goddesses, bore to Ulysses Nausithoiis and Nausinous
after union in delightful love. These, though immortal, hav-
ing been united with mortal men, gave birth to children like
unto the gods. And now sing ye the tribe of women, ye
vila saree Olympian Muses, daughters of sgis-bearing
Jove. :


of Sol in Sicily,) or simply because they were large islands. Cf.
Il, ii. 626. Goettling considers that Italy, Sicily, and the olian
Islands are the isles indicated. Cf. Od. xii. 127, where Trinacria is
said to have been the nurse of the sacred bulls of the Sun.


’


THE


SHIELD OF HERCULES.


‘ A FRAGMENT.


4


Or as Alcmena,! daughter of Electryon,? exciter of peo-
ples, left her home and father-land, and came to Thebes in
the train of martial Amphitryon. She, I wot, excelled the
race of gentler women® in beauty and height; yea, and in


mind indeed none did compete with her of those, whom mor- —


tal women bare by union with mortal men. Both from her
head‘ and from her dark eyelids breathed even such a fra-
grance as from those of golden Aphrodite. Yet she e’en


so was. wont to revere at heart her spouse, as never any of


' The poet may be supposed to have continued to some length
the catalogue of women, with a preface to which the Theogony:


ends. Having spoken, perhaps, of Niobe and Semele, as of this ,


list, otn &qy Zepekn—x ofn NwBn, he goes on to Alemena, in the now
apparently abrupt opening of the “ Shield.” Commentators assign
these verses to some catalogue of women, which has been prefixed
by some Rhapsodist. An anonymous Greek grammarian in Goett-
ling’s edition of Hesiod, p. 108, leads us to infer that the lines from
1 to 56 belong to a lost poem of Hesiod, the "Hoiat, book iv.
— otn. Instances of like comparison are, Odyss, vi. 102;
Fn. i. 502, Qualis in Eurote jugis, &c.
2 HAexrpiwyoc. The syllables xrev and w coalesce in one syllable.
3 Robinson compares Xenophon, Cyrop. ii. 5, and Theocr. Idyll.
xvili. 26. See also note 11 in Banks’s translation of Theocr. ad locum.


‘ Both from her head, &c.] This passage, says Robinson, may -


have suggested Virgil’s description of Venus, En. i. 402—40+.:
Dixit et avertens rosea cervice refulsit, |
Ambrosizque come divinum vgrtice odorem
Spiravere. : ° :
E2 ‘


i


52 HESIOD. 10—33.


gentler women! revered : though in very truth he had by force
subdued and slain her noble father, in wrath about oxen: he
then having left his father-land, came to Thebes, and suppli-
- cated? the shield-bearing Cadmeans. . There dwelt he with
his chaste spouse, apart, and without delightseme union, nor
might he-ascend the couch of fair-ankled Alemena, before®
that he had avenged the slaughter of the high-souled brothers
of his wife, and consumed, with wasting fire the villages. of
warlike heroes, the ,Taphians‘ and Teleboans. For so was it
ordered him, and the gods were witnesses ¢o it; whose wrath
he dreaded, and hastened’ with all speed to accomplish a
great work, which was Jove’s law to him. With him then,
eager for war and battle-din, the horse-spurring Beotians,
breathing over their shields,> the close-fighting Locrians, and
the high-hearted Phocians, followed, and ‘the gallant son of
Aleszus headed them, glorying in his hosts. But the sire of
men and gods was weaving in his mind another counsel, that
to gods and inventive’ men he might beget an averter of de-
struction. So he arose from Olympus, building deceit in the
deep of his heart, during-the-night, in eagerness for the em-
brace of the fair-zoned dame; and soon he arrived at the
Typhaonian height:’ and thencé counsellor Jove drew nigh
i

' Onhurepdwy. A comparative used here (as in II. viii. 520; Od.
vill. 324) positively, only of Qfae and yuvaixec, and therefore of the
fruitful or tenderer sex, as Passow observes. Cf. Arnold's Homeric
Lex. of Crusius. \

2 ixérevoe, Supply 20d» from Atwrey before in ver. 12.

* oivy here takes the opt. without dy, because the past action: is
represented as one which the agent, has in his thoughts. Cf. II.
xxi. 580; Matt.'Gr. od 522, b, ;

‘ Taphius, a son of Neptune and Hippothoe, led. a colony to

. Taphos, and called the people Feleboans. Baehr, at Herodot. v.
59, concludes that the Teleboans and Taphians occupied the main-
land of Western Acarnania and the adjacent isles. Some migrated
to Italy. Cf. En. vii. 735. An account ef Amphitryon’s expedi-
tion, in Plautus, Amphit. 50—105, will amuse.

5 Breathing over theis shields.] aveiowrec, (dAxip or péivea,) or
spesiens used absolutely. Liddell and Scott. Compare Statius, Ani-
mus ultra thoracas anhelus. y :

6 gdonarpor, inventive; so called since the days of Prometheus
or Deucalion. Cf. Op. 82,146.) - ;

7 Typhaonian height] Goettling quotes Hom. H. to Apollo,
(306,) to show that this height was a part of Mount Parnassus.
Phicium, or thé Phiciap ‘mountain, was the Rock of the Sphynx,


*


+


’ +. .
33-57, THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. 53


to topmost Phicium. There sitting he revolved divine works
in his mind; for the self-same night he was united in couch
and love with the tapering-ankled daughter of Electryon, and
he satisfied, I ween, his longing. On the same night too,
Ampbhitryon, rouser of peoples, a splendid hero, returned to
his home, after having achieved a ‘great deed. Nor-did he
hasten to go to his servants, and shepherd hinds, that is, be--
fore he had ascended the couch of his spouse: for such eager-
ness possessed the shepherd of his peoples at heart. And as
when a man is glad? to have escaped ill arising out of a severe
disease, or even out of hard bonds, go then, I wot, Amphitryon,
having brought to an end his difficult task, delightedly and
gladly came to his own home. All-night-long? then he slept
beside his, modest spouse, delighting himself in the gifts of
golden Aphrodite. So then she, embraced by a god and by
a man far the best of men, in seven-gated Thebes bare twin
sons, agreeing in nought beyond, brothers though indeed‘
they were: the one inferior, the other again a far better man,
both valiant and strong, the mighty Hercules, whom she bare
after having been embraced by the cloud-darkener, son of
Cronus: but Iphiclus -by. Amphitryon, shaker of spears ;
an offspring. distinct: the one after union with mortal
man, the other with Jupiter, son of Cronus, sovereign of
all the gods. Who also slew Cycnus,® great-hearted son of


not far from Thebes. The Beeotians call Zgiyt, biz. See Scholiast
here, and Theog. 326. ; .

' Amphitryon would naturally repair to his herdsmen, because in
the heroic age the wealth of kings consisted in cattle. See Op. et
D. 120. And: besides, he would have a further reason for an early
visit to them, that eare might be taken of the spoil which he had
taken. Goéttling. ee

? doracrov, adverbially used. Cf. Odyss. v. 398. .

3 mavvbyeoc, used adverbially, as in IL. ii. 2, 24; Odyss, ii. 434;
Horace, Epod. xvi. 51, Nec vespertinus circumgemit ursus ovile.

4 ye piv seems to be equivalent to yé uy}y, and to have the force of
* nevertheless,’’ and is peculiar to Epic poetry.

5 wexptpévny, i. q. dtanexpieevyy. "

* Cycnus, a son of Mars and Pelopia, challenged Hercules to
single combat at Itone, and was killed in the conflict. Cf. Scut.
345, 480. _1t was his wont to waylay and rob sacred processions
going to Delphi. *Aonriadnv, a patronymic curiously formed, as if
from “Agyc, “Agyrog. In the next-line but one we find “Aony, for
the commoner *Apy, of which there is gn example in Hom. II.
v. 909, ; * oY


54 ‘ } HESIOD. 3 57—83,


Mars: for in the grove of the far-darting Apollo, he found
him and’ his sire Mars, insatiate of war, gleaming in arms, as
- the brightness of burning fire, upstanding in their chariot:
the swift steeds struck the earth, dinting it,with their hoofs,
and the dust burnt -around them, shaken violently beneath
wicker! cars and hoofs of horses. But well-made chariots
and seat-rims kept rattling, as the steeds sped on: blameless
Cyenus rejoiced, in hope that he should slay with the sword
Jove’s warlike son, and the charioteer, and strip him of his
glorious mail. Yet Phebus Apollo did not hear his prayers,
for he had himself urged the mighty Hercules against him.
Then all the grove and altar of Pagaszean? Apollo was flash-
ing with the arms of the fearful god, and with himself: and
from his eyes fire as it were blazed. Who, being mortal,
would have had the courage to rush against him, save Her-
cules and famous Iolaus? for both great strength was theirs, .
and their unvanquished hands grew? from their shoulders
on stout limbs. Who then, I ween, bespake his.charioteer,
brave Iolaus: :

“O hero Jolaus,4 far dearest of all mortals, surely some
grave sin did Amphitryon sin® against the blessed immortals,
who occupy Olympus, when he left Tiryns,® well-built city,
and came to strongly-fortified Thebes, after having slain Elec-
tryon on the score of the broad-browed herds; and came to
Creon, and long-robed Henioche,? who, I wot, welcomed him,


1 adexrotow is understood by Goettling in the sense of “ built,”
not of ‘‘ wicker.” He compares Callimach. H. in Ap. 61, 4 5° Zahexe
Bwpdr 'ArddAwv. ‘ : ;

? Goettling explains that Cyenus had built at Pagase an altar of
horns of eapeeel beasts to Apollo, to propitiate him, and to depre-
cate his wrath at the attacks upon his pilgrims and offerings. But
Apollo loved Delphi more than Pagase. a

® Compare Theog. 152; Op. 148. éaiguxoy is for taepuxécav.

* See art. ITolaus, Heracles, and Amphitryon, in Dict. G. and
R. Biog. (Smith). Thiersch supposed verses 79—95 to be the work
of auother hand, but Hermann and Goettling agree that they are
coherent with the rest. : ‘

5 #dtrev. j. e. in killing Electryon, his father-in-law, in conse-
quence of which he was forced by Eurystheus to flee to. Thebes.

% TipvyBor is from TipyvOoe, (another form of Tipuv¢, or Tipus,) as
KéaivGo¢, “OArAvrO0¢e, TpoBaderOoe. Pe

. 7 According to Sophocl. Antig. 1194, Eurydice, and not Henioche,
was the wife of Creow, who was uncle-to Amphitryon,


e '


84—105, THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. 55


and provided him all things needful,’ as ’toas right they should
to suppliants ; and they honoured: him the more from the heart.
So he lived exulting with the beauteous-ankled daughter of
Electryon, his spouse; and full soon when the year came
round, we were born, thy sire and I, alike neither in stature
nor in thoughts. His senses Jove took from him, who left
his own home,? and his own parents, and went forth, for the
purpose of honouring the erring? Eurystheus, wretched man
that he was; no doubt ofttimes afterward he bewailed over
his infatuation, in grief; but it is not to be recalled. On me,
however, fate enjoined severe labours. But, my friend, quickly
grasp thou now the purple reins of the fleet-footed steeds, and
rousing great courage within thy heart, drive‘ straight for-
ward the swift chariot, and thy strong fleet-footed steeds ;
fearing not a whit the din of mortal-slaying Mars, who now
is crying out.and raging around the sacred grove of Phcebus
Apollo, far-darting .king: in very ‘truth, mighty though he
be, he shall have® his fill of war.” ‘ '
And him in turn blameless Iolaus addressed. ‘“ Honoured ®
lord, in very truth then the sire of gods and men honours thy
head, and so does bull-voiced’? Neptune, who keeps the bat-


' The process of purification in such cases may be learnt from
Peronat. 1-1 ; Eurip. Iph. in Taur. 949, seq. ; and Apollon. Rhod.
iv. 685—717. 7

* Iphicles, or Iphiclus, (he is called by both names indiseri-
minately,) the. father of Iolaus, seems to have been induced by
the hope of great reward to attach himself to the side of Eurys-
theus. Clericus has a long note on ver. 89, instancing frequent
statements in Greek tragic poetry of evil purpose, &c., on the part
of the sods: and irreverent ascription of bad attributes to them.
But Robinson shows that in Holy Scripture God is said to harden
Pharaoh's heart, to blind men’s eyes, and make their ears dull of
hearing. Cf. Op. et D. 15. % “
"$8 dderqpevov. An Epic perf. participle for #Arrnpévoy, from ddirew,
with the accent of a present participle. Cf. Od. iv. 807; Il. xxiv. 157.

* dé€wv—étyew. The infin. for imperatite. Cf. Soph. El. 9; Hsch.
Prom. V..711; and see Matt. Gr, Gr. § 546,

5 Garat is for drat, from dw, a resolution of a before r, for the
double a@ is not original, as Butmann shows in Lexil. p. 2, and p.
142, note, in-voe. qyriéy. . ;

% 40ctoc, a term used in Homer and elsewhere, generally by the
younger to the elder. II. vi. 518; x. 87, &c. Derived from 7)90¢,
“intercourse,” or 74ag. According to others, from 6sio¢, “ uncle,”’
or Oeiog, “ divine.” . ; ¢

” Tatpeoc, according to Goettling, has reference to the roaring of


& HESIOD. a 105—123,


tlement of Thebes, and protects the-city; just as now they
bring this man also strong and mighty into.thy hands, that
thou mayest carry off excellent glory. But come! put on thy
warlike arms, that, with all speed, having brought our chariots
near, that of Mars, and our own, we may engage, since he
will not in truth terrify the undaunted son of Jove, nor the
child of Iphiclus, but methinks he will flee from the two de-
scendants! of the faultless son of Alezus, who now are nigh
to him,? desiring to engage in the tumult of battle, matters
which to them are far more dear than a feast.” :

-Thus spake he: then smiled the mighty Hercules, exulting4
in his heart, for he had spoken words very congenial to him,
and in answer to him’ he addressed winged words:

“© hero Iolaus, Jove-sprpng, no more afar is the rough
conflict: as then of yore thou. wast warlike, so now too guide4
every way the huge steed, dark-maned Arion,® and aid me as
thou mayest be able.”. So. having spoken, he placed about
’ his legs greaves of bright mountain-brass,® splendid presents


Lake Onchestus in Boeotia, where Neptune was worshipped.
Tzetzes says that the name was given because bulls were there
offered to him. . ’

' Sto waidag Adkeidac. aig is here taken in a wider sense. Her-
vie was the son, Iolaus the grandson, of Amphitryon, the son of

ceus. -

? ogt is found elsewhere as a dative singular. Cf. Hom. H. in
Pan. xix. 19; Asch. Pers. 759, &c.; Matt. Gr. Gr. § 147, 6; and
Lobeck’s Ajax, 801, p. 350.

% ynOneag is made to agree with ‘HpaxAjjc, implied in Bin ‘Hpa-
ednein, by the constructio per synesim, or wed¢ Td onpatyopevor.
Compare Horace, Od. I. xxxvii. 21, Fatale monstrum, que gene-
rosius, &c.

4 avaorpupayv. The inf. for imperat. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 546,
and above at ver. 96. :

5 The horse Arion is mentioned in Pausan. viii. 25; Hom. I.
Xxill. 346; and Statius, Thebaid. vi. 301, Ducitur ante omnes ru-
tile manifestus Arion Igne come.

* dpeyddcoro. This metal is mentioned neither ‘by Homer nor
Pindar, but occurs in the Homeric H. to Venus, ver. 9. It is the
aurichalcum and orichalcum of the Latins, who, according to
Goettling, who quotes Macrob. Saturn. iii. 15, ealled auratum, ora-
tum. Pompeius Festus derives the word from épeg, and the note on
the word in the Delphin edition of Festus shows that it'was a later
pronunciation, which gave rise to the notion of “aurum” being
mixed with brass.“ Compare Horat, A. P. 202, Tibia ndn ut nunc
orichalco vincta; and Plaut. Curcul. 206; Mil. Glor. 658:


ae !
123151, THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. «oF


of Vulcan: next donned he a corselet about his breast, beau-
tiful, and of gold, curiously wrought, which Jove’s daughter
Pallas Minerva had given him, when for the first time he was
about to rush furiously upon groanful conflicts. Then fastened
the mighty man around his shoulders a sword, the averter of
destruction: and the hollow quiver athwart his breast he cast
over his back: within it were many chilly arrows, givers of
’ death that-striketh-dumb: .At the points indeed they, were-
fraught with death and were wet with tears,! in the middle
polished, and very long: but at the back end covered with
the feathers of a dusky eagle.2 Then took he his stout spear,
pointed with gleaming brass, and on his strong brows placed
his well-wrought, curious helmet of adamant,’ fitted on his
temples, which fenced the head of divine Hercules.. Boos
Yea, and in his hand he took an all-variegated shield, nei-_
ther could any one have broken it by flinging a juvelin, nor -
have shattered it, a marvel to behold. For the whole of #4
was bright all-around with chalk, and white ivory, and elec-
tron, and gleaming with shining gold; and plates of blue-
cast-steel had been drawn across it. On its centre was the
unspeakable terror of a dragon glancing backwards with eyes
gleaming with fire: his mouth too was filled with teeth run-
ning in a white line,®> dread and unapproachable, and above
his terrible forehead, dread Strife was hovering, as she raises
the battle-rout: hard-hearted Strife, who, I wot, was taking
mind and heart from mortals, whosoever chanced to wage war
against the son of Jove. Of these® also their souls go be-
1 Sdxoves pipor, lacrimis, madebant. Robinson and Lehrs. ‘They
melted ’”’ (kindred?) to tears. Liddell and Scott.
2 gdeybac, a vulture or eagle, so named, é& rod ¢déyev, from its
flame colour. : ;
3 ddapac is not 1. q. ferrum. See Blomf. Esch. Prom. 6. Goettling.
4 The shield seems to have been divided into four portions,
namely, one of gypsum, another of ivory, another of electron, and,
the last of gdld, marked out one from the other by the plates of
xvavog, and all surrounded by Ocean. Electrum was either amber,
‘ or a metallic compound of gold and a fifth part of silver. Cf. Cru-
sius’s Lexicon Homericum, (Armold,) ad voc. .

5 Neved Oedvrwy. Cf. 224, and Theog. 738, répoiyerat ; and Odyss.
xxiv, 208, for this sense of Oéev. So iAadvey also is constantly used
by a metaphor. ae : }

‘ rév—abréyv. The former is here a demonstrative pronoun, not
the article. See Goettling, who compares W. vii. 170. abréy isin

’


apposition with dcréotg. :


. §8 HESIOD. > 181—173,


neath the earth, within the shades, but their bones, when the
skin has rotted'around them, under the parching Dog-star,!
moulder in the dark earth. On it had been wrought Driving-
forward, and Beating-back, and on it raged Tumult, Fear, and
Carnage. Strife teo, and Panic, were darting-to-and-fro on
it, and? on it deathly Fate, holding one mortal lately-wounded,
another unwounded, and another dead, was dragging them by
the feet through the battle-fray. And about her shoulders
had she a vestment gory with blood of men, while she looked
terribly, and bellowed with the gnashing of teeth.- On it like-
wise were heads of terrible serpents, unspeakable, twelve in
_number, which were wont to scare the races of men upon
earth, whosoever chanced to wage war against the son of Jove.
From the teeth of which serpents too there was a gnashing,
whensoever the descendant of Amphitryon might be fighting.
These wondrous works? then blazed on the shield. And there
appeared‘ to the sight as it were spots on the terrible dragons:
azure were they on their backs, and they had been blackened.
as to their jaws. And on it were herds of snouted® boars
and of lions, eyeing one another, and chafing, and ready to
spring. Of which also the ranks were advancing in troops,
nor in truth did they, either of them, tremble, nay both par-
ties verily were bristling in back. For already before them
was lying a huge lion, and around him two boars deprived ® of


1 Zepiov dZadéoo. This is properly a genitive of time. Cf. Matt.
Gr. Gr. § 377,2, and there is no need to understand #7d or dvtog,
Cf. Op, et D. 575.

= This and the two following verses occur in Hom. Il. xviii.
535—587, with the exception of the word duideov for eObvenr. R

3 ra b¢ Saisro, x.7r.d. Saiero, “-ardebant fulgore metalli.’’ Heinr.
Oavpard for Qavpacrd, as dyarée for dydoréc. addparog for d0dpac-
toc. Goettling. i

. ‘éxipavro idsiv. Compare -with this construction Theog. 700, *
and Matt. Gr. Gr. § 535, a. ‘

5 yrotvwy, from xAobvyc, or xAobvoe, an Epic word found also in
Hom. Il. ix. 509. Eustath. Apoll. and Hesych. derived it from
xAéq and edvy, “lying in the grass,* “ well-fed.” Aristarch. con-
sidered it equivalent to povede, { solitary.”’’ But we have adopted
Goettling’s conjecture, that it is as if it were yeAodyye, a yedwy, an ,
apt epithet for a boar. ; —

6 dmrovpdpuevor. For the use of this word thus in a passive,sense, —
see Butmann, Lexil. p. 145. Goettling, following Hermann, looks
upon amovpdyevot as pertaining as much to Aig as to Kxdmpot, and
equivalent to “ cum se invicem interfecissent,”” 2


[ é.
173195, ° THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. - - 89


their life, and their dark blood was dropping down .to the

ground ; while they, letting their neeks fall on the ground, lay ~
dead beneath the terrible lions. But they were still the more

roused, in rage for fighting, both snouted boars and grim lions. ~
And on it was wrought the battle of the warrior Lapithe
around Ceneus the king and Dryas, and Pirithous, Hopleus,
Exadius, Phalerus, and Prolochus, Mopsus,? son of Ampyx of
Titaressa, a branch of Mars, and Theseus, son of Augeus, like-
unto the immortals: these were of silver, having golden arms
about their bodies. And the Centaurs® on the opposite side
were gathered together against them, around huge Petraeus
and Asbolus, diviner-by-birds, Arctus, Urius, dark-haired
Mimas, and the-two sons of Peucus, Perimedes and Dryalus,
in silver likewise, and having in their hands golden pine-trees.
Aye and pressing @olently* together, even as if they were
alive, they were fight#g hand to hand with outstretched spears
and pines. On it too stood in gold the fleet-footed steeds of
terrible Mars: and on it likewise destructive Mars himself,
the wearer of spoils,° with lance in hand, cheering his foot-
men,® empyrpled in blood, as if spoiling the living, and stand-


P

1 The Lapithe, and their struggle with the; Centaurs, are men-
tioned by Pausanias, book v. 10, § 8; Ov. Met. xii, 208; Horat. I.
Od. xviii. 5, &c.; as well as by Hom, Tl. i. 266; xii. 128. They
dwelt near Olympus and Pelion in Thessaly. Goettling warns
against understanding Kasia r’ dugi dvaxra as if the article ray
were preceding, and explains the contest as one of regular military
forces (impersonated by the Lapithz) against rude violence, i.e: _
the Centaurs, and gathers additional arguments in favour of this '
view from the names of the Lapithe, 179—182, the precious metals
composing their armour and arms, and the character of their wea-

ons, as contrasted with the names and weapons of the more bar-

arous Centaurs. .

? Robinson shows from Pzetz. in Schol. ad Lycoph., that Tirapjowoy
indicates*the place whence Mopsus sprang, and which had its name
from the grandsire of Mopsus. : ‘

* The offspring of Ixion and Nephele, a Thessalian tribe ex-

_pelled from the neighbourhood of Ossa and Pelion by the Lapithe.
Cf. Hom. Il. i. 268; xi, 342; Od. xxi. 295. Their half-equine form
belongs to a later agé than Pindar. Cf. Smith’s Dict. G. and R..
B. vol. i. 666.

‘4 suvaiyény. Butmann, Lex, 161, reads ovvaixrgy, which he con-
siders an adverb of the same class as dxijy, paxpdy, avriBinv. See
art. ’Amgidryy, |. c. ; :

5 tvaopdpoc. Syncope for évapngopoc.

‘ apuriec. Cf. Il. v. 744, &c., opposed 20 cavalry. Hermann,


60. : HESIOD. - 195—215,


ing in his-chariot: and beside him stood Terror and Fear,!
eager to enter the war of men. On it too was wrought Jove’s
daughter,’ the Trito-born, driver of spoil, like to her, and as
it were wishing to array the battle, having a -spear in hand,
and a golden helmet,? arid an egis about her shoulders, and
she was approaching: the dreadful battle.

And on it was a holy choir of immortals; and in the midst,
I ween, the son of Jove and Latona was playing a delightsome
strain on golden lyre: and holy Olympus,? seat of the gods:
and on it an assembly, but boundless wealth 4 had been wrought
encircling it, in a contest of the gods: whilst the goddesses,
the Pierian Muses, were beginning the song, like unto clear
songstresses, Upon it a harbour too, with safe port, of the
monstrous sea, had been fashioned circular-wise of refined tin,
like to a surging sea: howbeit many do¥phins in the midst of
it were dashing here and there in-chase-of-fish, just as though
they were swimming: and two dolphins® of silver, breathing
hardly, were feasting-on the-dumb fishes.6

Beneath these were quivering fishes wrought-in-brass: but
‘on the banks sat a fishermati? on-the-look-out: and he had

in his hands a net for fish, resembling as he did one in act

to throw. ee!


Opuse. iv. p. 288, describes them as “ presules sive presultores,
qui ante’ ceteros progressi saltationem cum armis preeunt.” (Ar-
nold’s Lex. Homeric.)

‘ Tullus Hostilius vowed Salii to Pallor and Pavor, (Liv. i. 27,)
and the latter is called, in Aisch. Sept. c. Theb. 45, geAaiparoy
géBov. See also Hom. II. iv. 440, &c.

2 rovpddaa is derived, by Butm. (Lexil. p. 534,) from rpdw and

adoc, because a hole was bored in the ¢adoc to receive the plume,
in the common helmet. Goettling dissents from this, quoting Virg.
ZEn. vii. 785 in support of the derivation from rpi¢ and gdAoc.

3 Heinsius conjectured éyyvr’, “ was rent,” which Heinrich and
Dindorf have received. :
be For the 6ASo¢ of Olympus, cf. Hom. Il, iv. 1, and H. in Mere.

, seq. . 5

5 Goettling illustrates dvaguoiwrreg by Ov, Met. iii. 686, Jactant
Corpora, et acceptum patulis mare naribus efflant. ;

® &dorwac. Cf. Soph. Ajax, 1297, for the kindred word “EAA C—
either “ mute,” (cf. Hor. Od. IV. iii. 19,) Mutis piscibus, or from
é\w éhadve, in the sense of gliding, quick.

7 dvjpe ddd, two substantives for a subst. and adject. See Matt.
Gr. Gr 429, § 4; Hom. I. xxiv. 58. yuvaira palév for yuvaueiov
patéy. See also Wordsw. Gr, Gr. § 121, L. Gr. 136. Compare for
the passage, Theocritns; Idyll. i. 39—~46. .


its


216-234, THE SHIELD OF HERCULES, ~~ ~ 61


On it too was fair-haired Danae’s son, equestrian Perseus:
neither, I wot, touching the shield with his feet,! nor yet, far
from it, a great marvel to tell of: for he rested nowhere,”
‘For so had the famous crippled-god wrought him with his
hands in gold, but about his feet he had winged sandals.
And around his shoulders a hanger of brass with-iron-scab-
bard lay hanging from a thong: but he was flitting about
quick as thought.2, The whole of his back the head of the
Gorgon, terrible monster,? was covering, and round about ‘it,
‘wrought-in-silver, a knapsack? was stretching, a ‘marvel to
behold, and bright tassels were hanging down wrought-in-
gold,'and the dreadful helmet of Hades® was set around the
temples of the king, having a fearful gloom of night. But
like unto one hurrying and shuddering with fear, Perseus,
son of Danae, himself was outstretched: whilst after him the
Gorgons, unapproachable and unspeakable, were darting, ea-
ger to seize him: but as they moved upon the pale adamant,®
the shield seemed clanking with a vast din sharply and shrilly,
and on their girdles’ two dragons were hanging, curving
their heads.


f .
' The simplest‘mode of explaining this seems that of Robinsoh,
that the carving was so skilful that the figure of Perseds seemed to .
rest on nothing. Goettling, in a learned note, dissents from the
notion of Heinrich, (who considers the passage to mean, that the
figure of Perseus did not, as the Gorgons, touch the border or rim
of the shield; and from that of Hermann, which is pretty much
that of Robinson,) and inclines to the opinion that the poet, a later


‘ writer than Hesiod, was ignorant of art, and really meant to repre-


sent the figure as unattached, for the most part, to the shield.

2 Quick as thought.] So Apollo is described in the Homeric
Hymn to him :

EvOev dt modg"Odvpror ad xPovig Hore venpa.
stot Avdg ade Spa.

3 Servoio xéhvipoy. Heinrich pont out that this is the older no-
tion of the Medusa’s head, as in Hom. Od. xi. 683, 634. Pindar (Pyth.
xii. 28) and later eae sang of her face as one-of wondrous beauty,
so much so that she contended with Minerva on the score of it. _

4 giBiore, i. gq. wnpa. Hesych. ‘ Cf. Callimach. Fragm. 177, & ydp
imOnoe wavra inn KiBtotc. . nnn
_ > Helmet of Hades.) Cf. Hom. I]. v. 845. This helmet rendered
its wearer invisible, like the Nebel or Tarn-kappa of the Niebel-

’ungenlied. It was made by the Cyclopes. Apollod. i. 2, 1.

'* yAwpod dddpavrog. Compare ‘theo: . 161. .

.” That-is, where their girdles suanld: of right be; for they were
girt with serpents. ~ _° ;


62 . HESIOD. . 235258,


These two, I wot, were forking their tongues, and, looking

savagely, were gnashing their teeth in wrath. But! over the
dread Gorgon heads great terror was shaking: and the men
above them were fighting in warlike arms, one party warding
off a pest on behalf of their city and their parents, and the
other eager to devastate. Many were lying low; yet more
still were fighting engaged in the conflict: and the women
. on the well-built towers were shrieking with a brazen shrill-
_ ness,? and were tearing their cheeks, like to living women,
works of famous Vulcan. But men,-who were elders, and
whom. age had overtaken,? were in crowds without the gates,
and were uplifting their hands to the blessed gods, in fear
concerning their children :—these again were engaging in
combat, and in their wake the dark Fates,‘ gnashing white
teeth, of aspect-fierce and terrible, bloody and unapproach-
able, were holding strife for those who fell.

But.all, I wot, were eager to quaff dark blood: and whom-
soever they had happened to find first lying-low or falling
fresh-wounded, about him indeed one of them® was casting
huge talons, and a soul was descending to Hades, into chill
Tartarus. So when they had satisfied their fancy with hu-
man blood, behind them they would cast the corpse, and, go-
ing back again, hurry to the tumult and fray. Clotho and
Lachesis stood beside them: the somewhat lesser goddess


1 This seems the beginning of another distinct image on the
shield, unconnected with the Gorgons. ,
' 2 yddxeov £3 Bowy, Heinrich explains as if 46&) Bowy were one
word, and xéAxeov were a neut. adj. taken adverbially. Goettling
suggests that it is tantamount to év yang 6&3 Bowy. But see 445,
Sava & wmddoa ote’ — <

* Comp. Hom, Od. xxiv. 390, tari xara yijoac EuapWev. Goettling.

* Kijpec. These differ from the Parce (ver. 258, seq.). The
Parce bring life and death; Kijpec only death, and that a violent
one. These last are innumerable; cf. Hom. Il. xii. 236; xxiii. 78;

_ as many as are the kinds of violent death. Simonid. Fragm. xviii.

20. So Goettling at this passage. . Bs “4

5 Badd’. Guietus here suggests that “unaqueque” should be
supplied in sense. See Matt. Gr. Gr. 293, p. 502, vol. i. Lehra
translates, injiciebat una ungues magnos, It may be an instance
of the Schema Pindaricum, respecting which, see Wordsw. Gr. Gr.
§ 150, obs. 2, xaretev, according to Matt. Gr. Gr. § 219, should he
xargev, imp. ind. 3 pers. sing. from cdreys. See Goettling, how-
ever, who retains, with all the MSS., carciex. : ?

Ps :


259-—~279. THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. : 63
Atropos! was by no means a tall goddess; but, I ween, she
yet was excellent above them all and eldest of them. All of
them? then had engaged in a sharp conflict, about one man,
and fiercely looked they one at the other, wrathful in their
glances, and on the body they made their nails and hands
alike. Beside them too stood Gloom,’ sad and dread, pale,
squalid, cowering through famine, swollen-of-knee:4 but long
nails were upon the tips of her hands. From her nostrils
indeed were flowing mucous discharges, and frem her cheeks
blood was dripping on the ground: but she stood grinning
intolerably,> and much dust lay upon her shoulders ;® and
moistened was she with tears. But hard-by was a city of
men with-noble-towers : and seven golden gates fitted in their
lintels enclosed it: whilst its men were taking delight in fes-
tivities and dances: for some upon a well-wheeled car were
leading home a bride to her husband,’ and the marriage-song —
was bursting forth unbounded ; whilst afar a brilliant gleam
from blazing torches was whirling about in the hands of at-.
tendant maidens. Now these, blooming in beauty, were going
in advance, and sportive bands-of-dancers followed them.
These from their soft voices* were breathing a song te the
sound of shrill pipes, and echo around them spread in broken


1 Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos, the Parc distinct from the Kijoeg. -
‘See above at 249. 1 pv vgncowy. According to Hermann, Atro-
os is represented less in stature, because eldest, and so nearest to,
eath. Goettling considers t¢jcowy to mean “ debilior,” and obrs
peydday, “ forma minor.” : ek

 g&cat. Kijpee, i.e. for the verses 258—260 are parenthetical.

# ‘AyAdg is not, a3 Guietus explains, 9 twi Oavarp oxdrworg, but, as
Liddell and Scott observe, a personification of Trouble. This is
confirmed by the oor following.

4 youvoraxns. Goettling here compares Op. et D. 497, wayty
wéda. from which it would seem clear that the notion of swelling is
contained in wax%¢ here.

5 Gwdnrov sscapvia. Grinning so that none might approach her.
Goettling. Hermann reads &rAnetor, “incessantly,” -

5 careviqvober, said of something “lying upon ” and covering, as
drevyvode, Il. ii. 219; x. 184. étvyvobe, from évé0w. %yvOw, akin to
26w. Butm. Lexil, p. 110, 133. ; ,

7 The nuptial procession in the following order: maidens with
torches (276); the-car with the bride (273) ; two choruses, the for-
mer with pipes, the latter with lyres (277). Goettling.

8 8 amadev oropdrwy. Goettling takes this to mean, “ from
Mouths finely wrought on the shield,” “ subgili arte factorum.”’ |

.


64 | HESIOD. 279——299,


utterance: whilst those to the lyre! were leading the delight-
some dance.

‘Then again on another side young men were making merry
to the sound of ‘the flute: these indeed disporting with
dance and song, those on the other hand laughing. But to
the flute-player they were proceeding, each of them: and
festivals, choirs, and rejoicings were occupying all the city. -
Others again in front of the city had mounted on horseback
and were darting along. And ploughers were cleaving the
rich earth, and had their tunics girt neatly.2, But there was
a thick standing-crop. Some on their part indeed were reap-
ing with sharp sickles the staff-like stalks laden with ears,
ag it were the present of Ceres.3 Others, I wot, were binding
them in straw-ropes, and were laying the ,threshing-floor ;+
whilst others with vine-sickles in their hands were gathering-
the-fruit of the vines; others again were carrying to baskets
from the vintagers clusters white and dark from tall rows,
laden with foliage and silvery tendrils; and others again were
carrying them in baskets: near them was a row-of-vines
wrought-in-gold, famous works of very-skilful Wulcan,> wav-
ing with leaves and trellises® in-silver, [these again indeed,

4


1 brd goppiyywy. For the same sense of i276, see Hom. II. xviii.
492; Eurip. Phoen. 838 ; Herodot. i. 17, gorparevero be bd ovupiyywr
cai wncridwy, and more examples, as Matt.'Gr. Gr. § 592, 6.

? tmorodadny. isradaro. The Scholiast explains the former
word dvecrakpivwe, succincté tunica. The form éorddaro for yoav
toradpévor, suggests the proper reading in Herodot. vii. 89, where
MSS. have éoraddéaro, doubtless a corruption of éorddaro or éoroXi-
éaro. See Baehr’s Herodot. vol. iii. ad loc.

5 Anphrepoc dxrnv. There appears no need to supply dwpedy, cf.
Op. et D. 464; Il. xi. 680; Od. ii. 355. The word is generally de-
rived from dyvupt, of bruised corn. But Goettling shows that in the

assage in the Works and Days it is used of corn unground, and
derives it from dyw, making jt imply “id quod allatum est.’”’

4 tmtrvoy addny, a peculiar use of ziryw in the imperfect transi-
tively. Others read émrvoy ¢dwy. Others, as Gaisford, éremdor.
For the operation in question, see Virg. Georg. i. 178, 179,

Area cum primis ingenti sequanda cylindro,
Et vertenda manu, et creta solidanda tenaci.

5 For this apposition of the plural to the singular, see Matt. Gr.
Gr. § 293 and § 431; Eurip. Hippolyt. 11, ‘Immédurog dyvot Ter Oiwg
rawebpara. : : a :

" _® xéuaé, From the reference to Achill. Tat. i. 15, given by
Goettling, it would seem that these were as it were trellis-work, by
: e ‘


\


299-318. |. THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. 65


sporting each to the minstrel’s flute,] weighed down: with
grapes: yes, and these indeed had been represented dark.
Some were treading! the grapes and others were drawing the
juice ; whilst others were contending with the fist, and in
wrestling :? others were chasing fleet-footed hares, sportsmen,
and a brace of sharp-toothed hounds in front, eager to catch
the hares, and they eager to escape them: and beside them
horsemen? were busy, and for prizes they were engaging in
strife and toil: charioteers standing on well-compacted chari-
ots were letting-loose swift steeds, giving’ them the reins;
and the close-joined chariots were flying rattling over the
ground, and the naves of the wheels added to the din, They
then, I wot, were busied in endless toil, nor had victory ever
been achieved for them, but they were engaged in.a yet-doubt-
ful contest. Now to them also was proposed a huge tripod,
within the course,* wrought-of-gold, the famous work of skil-


ful Vulcan. Around the rim® was flowing Ocean, like as it ,


were swelling ; and-it was encircling all the curiously-wrought .
shield. About it the high-hovering swans were clamouring
loud, many of which, I wot, were swimming on the water’s
surface, while near them fishes were tumbling. - A marvel to
look-upon,® even to loud-thundering Jove, through whose


which one vine was knit to another, and this would explain cedpe-


voc. The next verse is omitted in several MSS., and appears gut
of place. ae

‘éroameov. Cf. i ba vii. 125, and Butmann, Lexil. p. 266.
‘©T have not the least'doubt that the Greek language preserved in’
this verb that family of words, which pervades modern European
languages; in the German ‘treten,’ to tread— trappen,’ to stamp.”
L. and S. Lex. derives from reavéw, trapetes and trapetum, an oil- '
press. .


- ® &henddv, in wrestling. Hom. Il. xxiii. 715, has, in the same |


sense, éAxdpeva orzpsdc. :
3 Goettling understands traijec of charioteers, with Heinrich.
. * This seems to'mean a Hippodrome—cotttest used for place-of-
contest.. In next line, with ravra ipya, compare 297. : ‘
5 Aroynd the rim.] The ocean formed the work about the mar- ,
gin or periphery of the shield. .
® Goettling here observes, that the whole shield was a marvel to
Jove, and not the tumbling fishes only; and therefore he puts a
full stop at éeAovéovro. Hence too he would infer, that from vér.
140 to 318 is the work of a later writer, taking up the thread which ,
the older poet had laid down at 140, and here resumes. -
: - ‘
a »


4


66° oe HESIOD. 318—341,


counsels Vulcan made the vast and sturdy shield, and framed!
it with his hands. This was the valiant son of Jove
shaking with violence, and vaulting upon his horse-chariot,
like unto the. lightning-flash? of his sire, egis-bearing Jove,
as he lightly took his stand; but for him his brave chariot-
eer, Iolaus, mounting the chariot-board, was guiding tie
crooked car. And nigh them came Minerva, glancing-eyed
goddess, and in encouragement addressed them in winged
.words. ;

“Save you, offspring of Lynceus? far-renowned: now of
_ @ truth Jove, ruling among the blest, giveth you might to
slay Cycnus, and spoil him of his famous arms. But I will
tell you* one other word, O far chiefest among the hosts.
Whensoever, I say, you shall have ’reft Cycnus of dear life,
there leave him® then, and his arms: but do you by yourself
watch Mars, the slayer of mortals, as he approaches, where
you shall have seen him with your eyes, unprotected by the
curiously-wrought shield, and there wound him with sharp
blade, and then retire: for look you now, it is not fated for
you to capture either his steed or his famous arms.” .

So spake she, divine among goddesses, and mounted. the
car® in haste, bearing in her immortal hands victory and
glory. ’Twas then, I wot, Iolaus, Jove-descended, terribly


.. | &podpevog. 1 aor. mid. from ypcduny. In Op. et D. 429, we
have zpocaphperar, the pass. perf. of the same verb. ' |

2 Cf. Hom. I]. xiv. 386, said‘of dop. xiii. 242, of a coat of mail;
and x. 154; sudden flashing of light being the idea in all these pa& .
sages. Goettling. 2

% Yolaus derived his descent from Lynceus through Iphicles,
Amphitryon,, Alezus, Perseus, Danae, Acrisius, and Abas, son of -
Lynceus. The use of the plural verb, addressed to one individual,
is illustrated by Matt. Gr. Gr. § 511, 2; Lobeck, Ajax, 191, who
adduces many instances of this usage, and_its opposite, the verb
‘singular addressed to many. Cf. Philoctet. Soph. 646, and for the
cpp. CEd. Col. 1104 Heinrich compares Virg. Atn. ix. 525, Vos, O
Calliope, precor.

4 This is addressed to Hercules.

5 Auréey, and obrdper, (335,) are instances of infin. for imperat.
Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 546. -

* The car of Hercules. Goettling shows, by reference to II. v.
837, that Heinrich wrongly supposes Minerva to have come ina
chariot of her own. She sate in the car of Hercules, rendered in
visible by the helmet of Orcus, which she had put on.


341—364, THE SHIELD OF, HERCULES. 67
urged on his steeds: and they by reason of his shouting were
bearing hurriedly along the swift chariot, raising-a-dust!
through the plain; for thé gleaming-eyed goddess Minerva
had inspired them with spirit, by having brandished the gis;
and the earth was groaning around.

They then were advancing together, like unto fire? or a
storm, Cycnus, tamer-of-steeds, and Mars, insatiate in the
battle-cry. Whose steeds indeed then on facing one an-
other; neighed shrilly:? and Echo rang brokenly around.
The mighty Hercules addressed him (Cycnus) first.

“© soft-hearted Cycnus, why now direct ye your Swift
steeds against us two, men who are experienced in toil and -
trouble: nay, drive your well-polished chariot outside, and yield
to go outside of the path. Now-look you I pass to Trachis,
to the court of King Ceyx;® for in power and reverence he
hath pre-eminence at Trachis—and you yourself also know
it right well, for you are spouse of his dark-eyed daughter
Themistonoe. O craven, not assuredly will Mars ward off
from you the end of death, that is, if we two shall meet in”
fight. Already, methinks, even elsewhere, he has made some
trial of my lance, when in behalf of sandy Pylos he stood
opposed to me, madly desirous for the fight. Thrice indeed
stricken by my spear, he supported himself on the earth, his
shield having been, pierced,® the fourth time, pressing with
all my might, I smote his thigh, and broke-through his huge


"1 goviovreg wediovw. This phrase is used, in Od. viii. 122, of men
manning, but in IL. xiii. 820, xxiii. 372, of horses, as always in .the
lad. >
- _ * Somewhat similar is Virgil’s Emicat et ventis et Sulminis ocior
igne. ‘ fin. v. 319. >
® d&¢ia yoépicary. Guietus reads da r’ typéutoay, to avoid the
difficulty of a neuter adj. in the acé. plural ending in ¢ia from ve.
, Goettling quotes Arat. Dios..336, O7rAaa pijda, and suggests that
6&ei’, in 1. xi, 272, is not feminine but neuter for. déeia, and used
adverbially. . Pat ce he
4 eine wapeétivas. Goettling compares Hom. Od. ii. 5, 69 2 ier.
See more examples in Matt. Gr. Gr. § 532,c. -‘
; Pia king of Trachys. Vid. Smith’s Dict. Gr. and R. Biog.
"4, 676. 7 ,
_ ‘ obrapévov. The aor. mid. used for the aor. pass. So xrdpsvog
in ver. 402. See more in Matt. Gr. Gr. § 496, 8 In the next line
the reading, capxdc, which some MSS. have, is defended by Her-
mann. : . “> ae


@2 e ‘i


68 HESIOD. ; 365385,


shield. Then truly had he become dishonoured among im-
mortals, if he had left! under my hands his gory trophies.”
Thus spake he. Nor, I ween, was Cycnus, skilled in the
spear, minded to restrain his chariot-drawing steeds, in obedi-
ence to the other. Then truly quickly leapt from their well-
compacted chariots to the earth both the son of mighty Jove
and the son of King Mars. But the charioteers drove -near?
their steeds with-flowing-manes: and beneath them, as they
rushed on, the broad earth was resounding with feet. Even
as when rocks from the lofty top of a high mountain leap-
with-a-bound, and fall one upon another: and many oaks of
lofty foliage, many pines, and poplars with wide-stretching-
roots, are crashed? by them, as they roll down quickly, till
they have reached the plain.; thus fell they one upon another,
loudly shouting. Then all the city of the Myrmidons,‘ and


_renowned Iolchus, and Arne, and Helice, and grassy. Anthea,


echoed loudly with the voice of both. They met together
with a wondrous battle-cry ; and loudly thundered Jove the
counsellor, and down from, heaven, I ween, he hurled drops .
of blood,® making: chat a.signal of war to his greatly-daring
son. ‘


! There is no need_to suppose any apodosis to have slipt out
here, since Aura, as Goettling shows from Matt. Gr. Gr. § 508, c.,
is equivalent to & Z\ure. :

2 éumdny, from éurehaZw, used in Hom. I]. ii. 526, with a genitive.

Are crashed.] pihyvuryrat seems to be for enyviwvra:, as the
other verbs are in the subjunctive.

* Goettling quotes Miiller, A.gin., to show that Hellas Phthiotis
is meant by “ the city of the Myrmidons.”’ Hellas and Phthiotis
seem to have been equally names for that part of Thessaly where
the Myrmidons dwelt. The Schol. says Pharsalus was meant. It
can hardly be that Arne in Bootia, and Helice and Anthia in the
Peloponnese, are meant by the names which follow, especially if,
as Goettling suggests, we compare ver. 473, which indicates that
the towns named were near the city of Ceyx, Trachys. Perhaps they


rf


mark cities round the scene of the combat, as Strabo may be in-


- ferred to suppose, from his quoting this passage in ‘regard to an


Helice in Thessaly, mentioned by Strabo, lib. viii. c. 7, p. 221,
(Tauchn.) Otherwise it is a marvel which Hesiod must have
wished his hearers to believe, if they could. -_ .

5 Compare I]. xvi. 458. Such portents were not uncommon in
the annals of Rome. Cic. De Divin. ii. 27, Sanguinem pluisse
Sa nunciatum est. Livy, iv. 19, In area Vulcani sanguinem
pluit. . ,


t
e


.
x ‘


3s6e—409, THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. ' 69


Like as in the glades of a mountain a boar with-jatting-
tusks and fierce to look upon, in his spirit ponders upon fight-
‘ing with hunting men, ay and twisting himself side-ways whets
his white tusk, but foam drops abut his jaws as he gnashes!
his teeth, and his eyes are like shining fire ;? and he bristles
‘with mane erect on his crest and about, his neck; like such a
beast the son of Jove leapt from his horse-chariot. But when
the dusky-winged songster cicala,? perching on a verdant bough,
begins to sing of summer for man, the cicala whose meat and -
drink is the life-giving dew,‘ and both all-day-long, and in-the-
morning pours he forth his voice in the fiercest heat,> when Si-
rius parches the skin, [then truly the beards spring around the.
millet, which men sow in summer, when unripe grapes begin
to colour, gifts which Bacchus has given to men as matter of
joy and grief, at that season they began to fight, and a great
tumult uprose. [And as two lions, for a slain buck, in wrath '
have rushed one on the other, and fierce roaring and gnashing |
of teeth at the same time arises between them:] but they,
like vultures with curved-talons and hooked-beaks, screaming
loudly, fight on a lofty rock for a mountain-roving goat, or a
wild stag, a fat one, which a youth bas stricken and slain with
a shaft from his bow-string, but himself has wandered else-


z,


1 paoriyéwyrt, from pacrdé, or pacrixn, (which is from pacrad,


the mouth). Ovid describes the boar, Fast. ii. 231, 232.


Sicut aper longe silvis. Laurentibus actus
Fulmineo celeres dissipat ore canes. :
* Compare Hom. Od. xix. 446, 4 3° dyriog dx Evddxouo ppitag 8 do
guy, wip 3 bp0adpoior Sedopxwe. Cf. also Virg, Ain. vi. 800, Stant

Tumina flamma; xii. 102, Oculis micat acribus ignis.
® réreé. Cf. Op. et D.'580; Virg. Ecl. v.77, Dum thymo pas-
centur apes, dum yore cicade. I]. ili, 151, where good orators are
called rerriyecow todrec, &. For the Kolic #xéra, see Matt. Gr.
Gr. § 68, 8, and the translation of Theocritus, (Bohn’s series,) p.
_47, note 9. In the next line, Goettling compares Anacreon’s Ode
to the Cicala, 9ipeo¢ yAuxic apognrne.—devdpiwy ex’ dxpwy driyny

Spdcov reruxag Bactrede Orwg aeidsrg—

4 @HAve dépon, for Ofraa. See Hom, Od. v. 467; Theocr. xx. 4,
(notes to translation,) adéa yairay; and Matt. Gr. Gr. § 119, b. 4...
5 iSog is, akin to the Sanscrit “ svid,” according to L. and S.
Lexicon. .Zeiptog fee. Compare Op. et D. 587. rijpog 64: Her-
mann regards 398—400 as a further description of the season the
poet would indicate in 393—397, inserted by a later poet. So he
considers 402—404 to be the work of a later hand, trying to add to

the simile 405—41) another of like import. > :


70 . HESIOD. 410—431,
where, being ignorant of the spot; whilst they quickly spy
it, and hastily engage in a sharp fight about it; so.these heroes
‘rushed, shouting, one on another. ;

Hereupon of a truth Cycnus, eager to slay the son of al--
mighty Jove, drove his brazen lance against his buckler, but
broke not through the metal; for the gifts of a god pro-
tected! him. But Amphitryon’s son, strong Hercules, struck
violently with his long spear the neck exposed quickly under-
neath the chin betwéen the helm and shield: and the murder-
ous ashen-beam cleft away the two nerves;? for the vast
strength of the hero had fallen on him. Then fell he, as when
some oak has fallen, or some impassable’rock, stricken with
the smoking lightning of Jove. So he fell, and around him his
curiously-wrought brazen armour rattled. Him then Jove’s
enduring-hearted son let alone, and he himself watching the
approach of Mars, a pest-to-mortals, and looking fiercely
with his eyes, like a lion, having chanced on a beast,* which
very eagerly tears the skin with strong claws, and with all
speed deprives it of sweet life, while with fury, I wot, his dark
heart is filled: and glaring® fearfully with his eyes, and lash-
ing sides and shoulders with his tail, be tears the earth with

‘ ®
"1 tpuro, the syncop. form of aorist from dopa. The penult is
long in Il. xxjji. 19, though short in Theog. 301. Cf. Butm. Lex.
p. 806, 307, and Liddell and Scott’s Lex. in voc.

2 Gugw—rivovre. Compare Hom. Il. iv. 521; v. 307, OAdove 52 of
Kordarny, mode 0 dpow pnte révorre. :

. § Horace, in his Odes, II. x. 9, Sepius ventis agitatur ingens Pinus
—feriuntque summos culmina montes; III. iii. 6, Nee fulminantis
. magna Jovis manus; xvi. 11, Et perrumpere amat.saxa potentius
Ictu fulmineo. .
owpart, Hither the living body, or carcase.of a beast. Cf.
Hom. I. iii. 28, and xviii. 161, 162. The Scholiast, on the first of
these passages, explains odpag= piya aor, ‘ for ’tis said lions will
not touch a dead body.” Robinson. ‘Two lines below, @upov is, as
Grzevius observes, i. q. boxy. ; -

5 yAavetdwy. Hl, xx. 172, From these two passages the signifi-
cation of yAavxéic, in reference to Pallas, is clearly made out to
be “ glancing-eyed.” Goettling. Hotmer’s words are, op de rAcupag
re Kai ioxia aheor ety Hacrisrar—yhaveiwy 0 Ode péperar péver.
Heyne quotes, on that passage, Plin. N. H. viii. 18, Leonum animi
index cauda, sicut et equorum aures :—in priticipio terra verbera-
tur, incremento terga seu quodam incitamento verberantur. Com-

‘pare also Virg. Zin. xii. 4-9; Lucan, i, 205-210, Mox ubi se seve
stimulavit verbere cauda.


.


431—462, . THE SHIELD OF HEROULES. : 71


his feet, nor does any one dare, having .seen him face to face,
approach or-contend with him: such, I ween, stood the son of
Amphitryon, insatiate in the battle-cry, in array against Mars,
gathering courage in his soul, promptly: but he drew near
him grieving in heart, then rushed both, one on the other,
with shouting. Yea, as when from a tall jutting-rock a crag
has tumbled, and- rolls with far boundings, it comes then on
impetuously, but a tall hill has stood-in-its-way ;! where, in
truth, it dashes against it, there the hill detains it: with just
as great a shouting the one, namely, chariot-pressing? destruc-
tive Mars, rushed on with an outcry, but the other quick re-
ceived him. But Minerva, child of egis-bearing Jove, stood
in the way of Mars with the dark egis, and scowling at him
terribly, addressed to him winged words.
“ Hold, Mars, thy strong spirit, and unconquered hands.
For it is not lawful for thee to slay and strip Jove’s bold- -
hearted son, Hercules, of his famous armour. Nay come,
, cease from the battle, and oppose not me.”
So spake she: yet did she not prevail upon the high-hearted
Spirit of Mars: but with a great shout, branaiiug weapons.
like unto flame, he quickly rushed on mighty Hercules, in
eagerness to slay him:? and, in truth, from wrath on account
of his dead son, hurled his brazen spear violently against the
broad shield. Then glancing-eyed Minerva, stretching her- -
self from the chariot, turned off the foree of his spear. Keen
grief seized Mars: and having drawn his. sharp hanger, he
. Sprang upon stout-hearted Hercules, but the son of Amphi-
tryon, ingatiate in terrible war, violently wounded him in his
onslaught, when he had exposed his thigh under the curiously
wrought shield, and smote strongly through his flesh, having -
made a thrust with his spear: so he prostrated him to the


1 I have translated according to Goettling’s explanation of this

passage, who considers rg to be equivalent to 9, yxt, and translates
‘ubi (rq) cum monte illo colliditur rupes, ibi eam mons sistit.””

2 Borcdpparog. Goettling observes that Heinrich properly ex-
plains this of the weight of divine bodies, quoting Hom. Hl. v. 838,
839; péya O° [Boaye piryivog wy BoPocivy, where Heyne observes,
‘“ Gravat currum, ex opinione vulgari, de deorum specie.” Compare,
with this act of Pallas, Il. v. 883—863; Virg. Ain. xii. 468—480, of .
luturna. ;

* waxrdpevat. i,q: caraxrdpevar, Guyetus. - —

‘ - :
’


) : HESIOD. 462480,
ground in the midst. Then Terror and Fear! drave quickly
nigh to him his well-wheeled chariot and steeds, and from
the spacious earth placed him in his variously-wrought car:
and quickly then they lashed the steeds, and came to vast
Olympus.

_, But Alemena’s son and glorious Iolaus, after spoiling Cye-
. nus of the beautiful arms from his shoulders, returned home :
and speedily then came they with fleet-footed steeds to the
. city of Trachis.“ Glancing-eyed Minerva, however, arrived
at vast Olympus, and the halls of her sire. But Cyenus, on
the other hand, Ceyx ‘buried, and a countless people,? who,
near the city of the illustrious king, were dwelling in Anthe,
and the city of the Myrmidons, anu famed Iaolchos, and Arne,
and Helice.3. And a vast host collected, in honour of Ceyx,
. dear to the blessed gods.. His. tomb, however, and monument,
the Anaurus? swept from sight, swelling with wintry rains.
For so Apollo, son of Eatona, bade it, because, I ween, he
was wont to lie in wait, and spoil whoever happened to lead
heeatombs to Delphi. —_


'


' Terror and Fear, charioteers of Mars, See above at 195.

2 Nade dareipwy. : Populus magnus, i. e. 2 vast multitude. Virg.
En. i. 148, Ac veluti populo in magno cum szpe coorta est Seditio.
Cf. Ov. Met. vi. 197, Fingite demi Huic aliquid populo natorum
posse meorum So Greevius in his Lectiones Hesiodese.

3 Compare ver. 380, 381.

* Anaurus, a river of Magnesia in Thessaly, mentioned by Apol-
lon. Rhod. i. 8, as a river in which Jason lost a sandal, “Ijowy ye-
Bepiow picOpa xy did wécaw ’Avadigov. Lucan, vi. 370, Nec tenues
wentee eos pirat Anaurus. Cf. Smith’s Dict, Gr. and R. Geography,
vol. 1. p. 181. :


. THE . :


‘WORKS. AND DAYS


This poem of Hesiod is a Didactic poem, having for its main ob-
ject the inculcation of agricultural precepts and the management
of domestic matters connected with the farmer’s vocation, ~The
latter portion of the work, pias, is a sort of Calendar, while the’
former, ipya, (by which name alone the whole is sometimes
called,) details the whole pcs: of husbandry and country
labours. There are two or three episodes, e. g. the story of Pan-
dora, the ages of the world, and the description of winter, (504-——
558,) all of which some have thought the work of later poets.
Virgil has borrowed much of the ground-work of his Georgics
from this poem, which, after his manner, he has admirably worked
up, and polished with rare skill. -


“Ye Muses! from Pieria, celebrating in songs, come speak
of Jove, and chaunt your? sire, through whom mortal men
are alike famed and fameless, named. and nameless, by the
will of mighty Jove. For with ease indeed he maketh strong,>


1 Pausan. ix. 31, § 4, states that the Boeotians showed him a leaden
plate of very great antiquity, whereon was inscribed Hesiod’s ‘poem
the Works and Days, without the lines 1—9, which other writers
have disowned for Hesiod. Goettling conceives them to have been

rt of an ancient hymn to Jove, attached to this poem, which
lacked a beginning, on the principle of “ A Jove principlum.”-—-
Movcat ItepinOey, i.e. Pierian Muses. So Homer, Zed rarep, "1dn0ev
pediwy. Virg. Fel. vi. 13, Pergite Pierides. Cf. Theog. 53, &e.

2 egérepor, i.e, dpérepov. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 149, obs. 2, note,

. 245. In Theocritus, xxv. 168, it seems to be used for iude. In‘

om. Il. x. 398, opiow is used for dziv. The repetitions in lines 3
and 4 are arguments for the antiquity of this proem. nr: is used
in the Odyssey. is. ;

3 Borde—piriOe. Both are here used trapsitively, whereas Bord
ovra here, and. puviPover in 244, are intransitive. Compare with


74 2? HESIOD. L122,
and with ease bringeth low the strong: and easily he minish-
eth the illustrious, and increaseth the obscure: easily too doth
high-thundering Jove, who dwelleth in mansions’ highest,
straighten the crooked, and blast the prowd of heart. Hear
and behold and heed, and direct the judgments righteously,
QO thou!! Now would I narrate what is true, O Perses.
Not, I ween, was there one kind only of Contention,? but
there are two upon the earth: the one a sensible man would
commend, but the other is blameworthy: and they have spirits
minded different ways.? For the one fosters evil war and
discord, cruel as she is: her at any rate no mortal loves, but
of necessity, by the counsels of the immortals, they honour
_harsh Strife. The other, however, gloomy Night bare first,‘
and her, by far the best, the high-throned son of Cronos, dwell-
ing in the heavens, placed at earth’s roots and among men:
*tis she also who still rouses’a man to work, even though he
be, inactive. For any one when idle having looked upon an-
other being rich, he,> I say, makes haste to plough and to


these and the two following lines Herodot. vii. 10 (the speech of
Artabanus) ; Horat. Od. I. xxxiv. 12, Valet ima summis Mutare et
‘insignem attenuat Deus, obscura promens; and in Holy Writ
annah’s song, 1 Sam, ii. 7; Psal. exiii. 7, 8; Luke i, 51—53.
Van Lennep and Goettling.


1 There seems no simpler way of understanding this passage than


by placing a stop after révm, and none before it; and referring it,
with Proclus; Tzetzes, and most who have followed them, to Jove.
The contrast between rivn and éy# de is in favour of this view.
Hesiod invokes the god to guide the right. For himself he would
try to advise his brother what is true. ivy is used hortatorily
by Hesiod, Theog. 36, and in Hom. Il. v. 485; xii. 237, &c.—Of
Perses see more at ver. 27. ad

2 “Non, sicut ante existimabam, unum est genus contentionis.”
Spohn. Hesiod, at Theog. 225, had spoken of but one “Eprc, a daugh-


ter of Night. He recants this error here. That such is the force ©


of &pa is shown by Van Lennep, from II. xvi. 60, 000’ dpa mw yy.
Od. ix. 475; CEdip. Tyran. 1697. Goettling, however, treats dpa
here as an initiatory particle, “‘ ergo, ut incipiamus.””
3 hia 8 dvdtya Oupdy Exovor, i, e. Otéyover Je dvdtya roy Oupsy. Cf.

Hom. I]. xx. 32, diya Ovpoy éxovrec. 3

_ * The Scholiast explains that what is good is eldest, evil comes
after; and Goettling instances the particularity of Hesiod in placing
Jove as eldest among Saturn’s sons, and Calliope among Muses.
Both “ Strifes ’’ are called daughters of Night.
‘ § &¢, i. gq. obroc. See Matt. Gr. Gr. § 289, obs. 7, and Wordsw.
Gr. Gr. § 147. Goettling quotes Hom, Odyss. xvii. 172; i. 286.


a; oe THE WORKS AND DAYS. : 78


plant, and well to order his house; for neighbour rivals neigh-
bour, when hastening toward riches; but this contention is
good for mortals. ' Both potter is jealous of potter, and
craftsman of craftsman; and poor man has.a grudge against.
poor man, and poet against poet.

But do thou, Perses,? lay up these things in thy mind, nor
let Contention rejoicing-in-ills hinder thy. mind from work,
whilst it gapes at strifes, and is a listener in the forum.’ For
rare indeed is the time for contentions and suits-in-the-forum
to him, whose substance is not yearly stored up within, in
season, substance which Earth bears, the gift of Ceres.*

When thou hast satisfied thyself with these,® then, and not
till then, further contentions and strife concerning the pos-
sessions of others: but it will never again be allowed you 1o
do thus: let us however forthwith® put an end to the dispute '

‘by righteous judgments which are the best from Jove. For
already in sooth have we divided the inheritance, and thou


1 This line is quoted in full by Plato, Lysis. p. 215, C., and partly
by Aristot. Rhet. If. iv. § 21; Polit. v. 10. Van Lennep. We have
more than one homely proverb in English to the same effect. Van
Lennep observes on the next line, that, strange though it may sound
to our ears, “‘ beggar” and “ poet” were not so far removed in Epic
times, and each was entirely dependent on the rich.

2 Hesiod and his brother Perses had divided their patrimony :
Perses spent his share in riot and luxury, and then sought to re-
’ eruit his fortunes, by bringing his brother to trial for having re-

ceived more than his share, Betors cofrupt judges, whom Perses
had bribed (cf. 39). The passage from 27—41 seems to urge him
to leave off litigation, and rely on toil and labour for a competence. -

3 Greevius illustrates dyopitg éraxovdy éévra by Aristoph. Nub. 447,
Suey repirpippara.. Cf. Demosth. de Coron, 269, 19, ayopie mept-
toippara. Liv., Qui concionibus adfixi herent, et in foro vivunt.

Cic. De Orat. I. chapter Jast, Qui in subselliis habitant. Such per-
sons are said by Plautus, foro operam dare; and by Terence, “ lites
sequi.”’ : .

4 Anunrepoc deriv. Cf. Scut. Here. 290. - ;

5 Hesiod bids Perses give up the frequenting of the forum, and
connexion with lawsuits, till he was rich. The Srother appears not
merely to have had a taste for attending the courts, but also to have
hoped to improve his fortunes by litigation. He was, as Goettling .
observes, what is called by Festus, lib. xiii. in voc., “ Ordinarius,”
i-e.improbus qui ipse in litibus moraretur. goi @ odxére dedrepov
Zora, you will never have the alternative. The phrase was used
when of two conditions the first did not please, and the option of
the second was or was not allowed.


® a6, extemplo, illico, for abro®. sane


7%: : HESIOD. $8—52,


‘ didst carry off much more, by plunder: flattering much the
bribe-swallowing judges,' whose will it is to give. judgment
thus. Fools! and they know neither how much half exceeds
the whole,? nor how great advantage is in mallow and as-
phodel.

Now? the gods keep hidden for men their means of sub-
sistence: for else easily mightest thou even in one day have
wrought, so that thou shouldest have enough for the year,
even though being idle: else straightway wouldst thou lay-by
the rudder above the smoke,‘ and the labours® of oxen and of
toil-enduring mules would be undone. But Jove in wrath at
his heart concealed it, because ‘wily Prometheus® had beguiled
him. Therefore, I ween, he devised baneful cares? for men.
And fire he hid,-which indeed the good son of Iapetus stole
back for mankind from counsellor. Jove in a hollow fennel-


1 Baosdjjag, (cf. Odyss. vili. 40, 41,) the judges. In the kingdoms
of the Heroie age the functions of judge appertained to the Ringly
office. When aristocracies took the place of monarchies, these
functions were divided, and so, as touching administration of jus-
tice, there became many Baordéic in lieu of one. Cf. V. Lennep.

2 “géov figuay mavrég. This proverb is quoted by Plato, Polit. y.
466, C., and De Legg. iii. p. 690; D., as Hesiod’s. In each case it
is directed ‘against violent and rapacious judges: and the scope of
- the phrase seems to be“ the superiority of the mean between ex-
cess and defect.” , Cf. Ovid, Fast. v. 718.—In the next line, the
mallow and asphodel are used to express the dinner of herbs, which
was the lot of the poorest classes. Cf. Aristoph. Plut. 543, ovreic@at
Garexre xrép9ov. Cf. also Horat. Od. I. xxxi. 15, Me pascunt olive

e chicorea, levesque malvze. Homer, Od. iv. 565, places the dead
heroes in a mead of asphodel, (rgzep pniorn Bor?) wéAK avOpwHroisr,)
because the dead and the gods are supposed by him to live most,
sparingly and lightly. Clericus. Compare Plin. H. N. xxi. 17, § 68.

3 Hesiod here resumes the thread dropped at ver. 31, 32, and yap
in ver. 43 implies et un) expupay. Goettling compares here Virg.
Georg. i. 121, Pater ipse colendi Haud facilem esse viam vojuit.

’ 4 Cf. Aristoph. Aves, 711, wai andddcoy tore vavxdrypy opdter xoeud-
cavre cadevday ; and Virg. Georg. i. 175, Et suspensa focis explorat
robora fumus. :

5 ioya Posy. Cf. Virg. Georg. i. 118, Boumque labores, and Odyss.
x. 48. . :

® Compare THeogony, 507—516, 562, 563. The difference is ex-
plained by keeping in mind, that the poet is here dwelling rather
on the consequences of the sin of Prometheus than his story, which
he gives in the gas at .Cf. Vollbehr. Prolegom. p. 28.

7 Ephoaro xndea, So Virg. Georg. 1. 121, Curis acuens mortalia
corda. Ee ;


5973, THE WORKS AND DAYS. 77


stalk, after he had escaped the notice of Jove delighting in
the thunderbolt. Pe |

Him then cloud-compelling Jove addressed in wrath: “O
son of Japetus, knowing beyond all in counsels, thou exultest
in having stolen fire, and deceived my wisdom, a severe woe!
to thyself and to men that shall come after. To them now
will I give evil instead of fire, wherewith all may delight
themselves gt heart, hugging their own evil.” So spake he:
and out-laughed? the sire of men and gods: but he bade Vul-
can the illustrious with all speed mix earth with water,’ and

’ endue it with man’s voice and strength, and to liken in coun-
tenance to immortal goddesses the fair, lovely beauty of a
maiden: then he bade Minerva teach her work, to weave the,
highly wrought.web; and golden Aphrodite. to shed around
her head grace, and painful desire,> and cares that-waste-the
limbs: but to endue her with a shameless mind® and tricksy
manners he charged the conductor, Argicide Mercury.

So he bade: but they obeyed Jove, the sovereign son,of
Cronus: and forthwith out of the’earth the famous crippled-
god fashioned, one like unto’ a modest maiden, through the

~ gounsels of Jove, thé son of Cronus: and the goddess, gleam-

ing-eyed Minerva, girdled and arrayed her: and around her


1 Homer uses nearl} the same words about. Paris, Il. iii. 50;
vi. 283. a ‘ 7 .

2 ter’ iyékaoce. Clericus quotes Virg. En. x. 742, Ad quem sub-
ridens tacit Mezentius ira, Robinson compares Milton, P. L., °

“ Mighty Father, thou thy face
Justly hast in derision, and secure, :
Laugh’st at their vain designs and tumults vain.” |
So in Psal. ii. 4, “‘ He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the
Lord shall have them in derision.”

2 Use, an Epic dative of bdep, used also by Theognis, 955, tdup
& dvapiocyerat Ube, from which (see Liddell and Scott) Callimachus,
Fragm. 466, forined a nom. Bdo¢.

-* xdpuv apoexéat. Compare Virg. Ain. i. 190, 191, Lumenque ju-
vente Purpureum et lztos oculis afflarat honores.

5 ré0ov apyadéoy. Cf. Catull. lxvi. 18, Non est Dea nescia nostri,
Que dulcem curis miscet amaritiem.—yvirdpove (from xeigay, in
the sense of wasting): Compare Virg. Georg. iii. 458, Atque artus
depascitur arida febris. ' * :

* xivedv re vdov. Cf. Homer's epithet, cuviane.—irixdroroy 100c.
Cf. Apollon. Rhod. iii. 781, pijrec éarixkowog.— Van Lennep notes the
propriety’ of these gifts from Mercury, himself called «epigowy in

EJ


the Hymn to Mere. 413. :


78 , . - HESIOD. 13—94.


skin the goddess Graces and august Persuasion hung golden
_ehains, whilst fair-tressed: Hours! crowned her about with .
flowers of spring: and Pallas Minerva adapted every orna-
ment to her person. But in her breast, I wot, conductor
Mercury wrought falsehoods, and wily speeches, and tricksy
manners, by the counsels of deep-thundering Jove: and the
herald of the gods placed within her, I ween, a winning
voice:* and this woman he called Pandora, because all, in-.
habiting Olympian mansions, bestowed on her a gift, a mis-
chief to inventive men. -

But when he had perfected the dire inextricable snare,
father Jove proceeded to send to Epimetheus the famous
slayer-of-Argus, swift messenger of the gods, carrying her
as a gift: nor did .Epimetheus consider how Prometheus?
had told him never to accept a gift from Olympian Jove, but

.to send it’ back, lest’ haply any ill should arise to mortals.
But he, after receiving it, felt the evil, when now he pos-
sessed it. ;

Now‘ aforetime indeed the races of men were wont to live
on the earth apart and free from ills, and without harsh la-
bour, and painful diseases, which have brought death on mor-
tals. [For in wretchedness men presently grow old.] But


1 Fair-tressed Hours.] Compare notes. at Theog. 901, &c. In
the Hymn to Venus, Homer introduces the Hours as her tiring-
women. Vid. Hymh the Second to Aphrodite, 5—16.

2 gwy)y. In ver. 61, Vulean is said to have endowed her with
aidy, that is to say, with “mortal speech.” gw) seems here to
mean persuasive utterance. Vid: Goettling, and Van Lennep, who
observes that Sophocles, Antig. 354, uses ¢@¢yua in the same sense
of “ eloquium.” a

* Prometheus had given him this warning in_ consequence of
Jove’s words recorded at ver. 57, &c. Hesiod, in Theog. 513, gives
the satne account of Epimetheus receiving Pandora. Cf. Theog.
586, as to the time and place. ae

* In the fifteen next-verses it is shown how the ills with which
sea (101) and land abound, and especially how diseases (92) render
harder man’s lot, particularly as regards seeking that subsistence,
which the gods had made difficult at the best (cf. 42). And the
culpourine of these evils on men. formerly free from them (90, &c.)
was caused by Pandora lifting the lid from the vessel wherein they
were contained (94, &c.). : 7 ’

5 Comparing this passage with Hom. H. xxiv. 527, &c., Van
Lennep infers, that though the two differ, the fable of Pandora’s
box was known comnfonly before the age of Homer and Hesiod.


94108. THE WORKS AND DAYS. 79


the woman having with her hands removed the great lid from
the vessel, dispersed them: then contrived she baneful cares
for men. And Hope! alone there in unbroken abode kept
remaining within, beneath the verge. of the vessel, nor did it
flit forth abroad: for before that, she had placed-on the lid of
the vessel, by. the ‘counsels. of sgis-bearing, cloud-compeller ,
Jove. But myriad other ills have roamed forth among men.
For full indeed is earth of woes,? and full the sea: and in the
day as well as at night diseases unbidden haunt mankind,
silently bearing ills? to men, for counsellor Jove hath taken
from them theix voice. Thus not in any way is it possible to
escape the will of Jove.. oe
4But if you will, another tale will I briefly-tell you well
and skilfully, and do you ponder it in your mind, that from
the same origin® are sprung gods and mortal men. * First-of-


“Proclus relates a‘ tradition that Prometheus had deposited with

Epimetheus a vessel full of ills closely covered, which he had re-
ceived from the Satyrs. This was opened, contrary to Prometheus’s.
warning, by Pandora, therein evidencing her nature. :

1 Hope, as the only solace man has for the ills of life; remains
behind. It is often fallacious, (hence /Esch, P. V. 298, rupAdc
édidag,) but still a boon to men. . Cf. Theognis, 1131, 1132,

'EAzig by dvOpmrores povn Oedg koOdH Eveort,
: "Addat & ObdAuprov & txrpodterdvrec EBav.
? Horace imitates this, Od. I. iii. 29, ~
: Post ignem eethered’ domo
Subductum macies et nova febrium
Terris incubuit cohorss .


Servius quotes Hesiod, 100, 101, in his note on the words of Virgil,
Ecl. vi. 42, Cancaseasque refert volucres furtumque Promethei. .
> gotrGot. Proclus refutes the objection of ales critics against
this personification of diseases, showing that Homer has introduced
aes and Acipog as in bodily forms. So one of our own poets has,
“Lo! there sits Danger, with his feet upon the-hearth.”—At 105,
ef. Theog. 614.. : *

‘ Goettling thinks that from this verse to 201 is the complete
work of some other, added to this poem by the rhapsodists, But,
as Van Lennep urges, they not inapely come in to point the admo-
nition of Hesiod to his brother to labour for an honest livelihood,
and to avoid injustice. Volbehr, in his Prolegomena, holds them
to belong to Hesiod, p. 40, 41. .

* Goettling, contrary to other editors, joins this line with the
foregoing, not with the following. —éyd6ev. Cf. Soph: El. 153, ol¢
éné0en el. Eurip. Iph. Aul. 503. See also Pindar, Nem. vi. 1, é
dvipiiy, ty Oeay yévog, te pudig Je wvéopoy parpog dpgoripor, viz. the

>


80 HESIOD. ’ 109—124,


all the immortals holding the mansions of Olympus made a
golden race of speaking men. [They indeed were under
Cronus,' what time he ruled in heaven.] And as gods they
were wont to live, with a life void-of-care, apart from, and
without labours and trouble: nor was wretched old age at all
impending, but, ever the same in hands and feet, did they de-
light themselves in festivals out of the reach of all ills: and
they died, as if o’ercome by sleep ;? all blessings were theirs;
of-its-own-will the fruitful field would bear them fruit,? much
and ample: and they gladly used to‘reap the labours. of their
hands in quietness along with many good things, being rich
in flocks,‘ and dear to the blessed gods. But after that Earth
"had covered this generation by.the hests of mighty Jove, they
indeed are demons,® -kindly, haunting-earth, guardians of.
mortal men, who, I ween, watch both the decisions of justice,


nN , . ’ :

. earth, Hence the conceit of giving to ages of men the names of
the various metals which are contained in her womb. Goettling.
For allusion to these ages by other poets, see Aratus, (Phanom.
100—134,) whe mentions three—golden, silver, and brazen ; ‘Ovid,
Met. i. 89-150, who adds the iron; and Juvenal, xiii. 27-30, who
calls his own age, as Hesiod does his, worst of all. ; :

Nunc etas agitur Pejorague secula ferri
- Temporibus, quorum sceleri non invenit ipsa
omen, et a nullo posuit natura metallo,
None of these mentions Hesiod’s fourth age, the heroes or demigods,
1 For Saturn’s blissful reign, see Virg. Georg. i. 125, Ante Jovem
nulli subigebant arva coloni.  Tibull. I. iit. 35—48, Quam bene
Saturno vivebant rege, &c. Virg. Ecl. iv. 6, Redeunt Saturnia
regna. :
A beautiful picture of Euthanasia. Some of our own poets
have the image of one in death, ie 3 :


: ** who sinks to rest,
Like a tired child upon his nurse’s breast,’’
® Compare Ovid, Met. i. 101—105, &c.
* whdoto, Greevius and others interpret “ fruits,’’ from Ovid, Met.
‘i. 104, q. v.; but Goettling and Van Lennep agree in rendering it
“* flocks,’’ comparing Tibull. I. iii. 45, Ultroque ferebant Obvia se-
curis ubera lactis oves. : :
$ This notion of Genii, of Eastern origin, was unkiiown ‘to Homer.
Socrates is made to quote these lines in Plato’s Cratylus, and to ex-
plain “ golden” to signify good, and “iron” bad, § 398, E. (Ast.).
Cf. Macrobius, Comm. in Somn. Scip. i. 9, who translates these lines,
Indigetes divi fato summi Jovis hi sunt ‘
Quondain homines, modo cum superis humana tuentes,
Largi ac munifici, rerum jus nune quoque nacti.


124-145, THE WORKS AND DAYS, 8l
and harsh deeds, going-to-and-fro everywhere over the earth,
having wrapt themselves in mist,' givers of riches as they
are: and this is a kingly function which they have.
Afterwards again the dwellers in Olympian mansions?
formed a second race of silver, far inferior; like unto the
golden neither in shape nor mind: but for a hundred years
indeed a boy was reared and grew up beside his wise mother,*
in her house, being quite childish : but when one happened
to come to age and reached the stature of manhood, for but
a brief space used they to live, suffering griefs through their
imprudences: for they could not keep off rash insult one from
the other, nor were they willing to worship the gods, nor to
sacrifice® at the holy‘altars of the blessed, as it is right men
should in their abodes. Them indeed afterwards, Jove; son
‘ of Cronus, buried? in his wrath, because they gave not due
honours to the blessed gods, who occupy Olympus. Now
- when earth had ingulfed this race also, they, beneath the »
“ground, are called blessed mortals, second iz rank ; but still
honour® attends these also. ;
And yet a third race of speech-gifted men farmed fathe
Jove of brass, not at all like unto the silver, formidable and


» Cf. "Hepogotrog "Eovvic, Hom. H. ix. 571.—adovrodérar. Goett-
ling compares the Lares and Penates of the Etruscans, The rest -
of the verse seems to signify, that to do justice and dispense wealth,
which was an attribute of these Genii, was a kingly function.

2 The dwellers in Olympian mansions.} i. e. the gods mentioned
in ver. 110, not Jove, who is named in ver. 137, where he is said to
have buried the silver race for not according due honours to the
Maxapeg Oéor, himself and the Cronide. Cf. Theog. 881. V. L .

* This seems to mean that in mind and body men were infantile
and under mothet’s care till their hundredth year.

4 irpiger’ dréd\wv. The latter word séems to be here used in a
‘neuter sense, as in Il. -xili. 27 ; Soph. Aj. 559. The kindred ari-

_ TadXduwy is used actively at Theog. 480. ;

$ 7Bnoee. The optative used of a matter frequently repeated, as
often... Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr, § 521.

* ipdey, “facere.” So Virg. Ecl. iii. 77, Cum faciam vitula. So
also Georg. i. 339, Letis operatus in herbis. In the next line, ef.
we Gea, Il. vi. 511, pera 7 Oca vai vipov txmwy; and Op. et D.
167. é :
_' Exoupe, “buried,” i.e. in the earth; because the Genii were
re ; is haat : ‘

eir ty or rank is that of pdeagec. They are among the paxpec
of mortal birth, as distinguishe fon the a6dvaroe of Wee 136, who


are also called parapeg. )
a
, @


.


82 HESIOD. : 145—169,


mighty by reason of their ashen-spears:! whose care was the

mournful deeds 6f Mars, and insalts: neither did they at all
_eat wheaten food only,? but had stout-spirited hearts of ada-
* mant; unapproachable. Now vast force and hands unvan-
quished grew from their shoulders upon sturdy limbs. These
had brazen? arms, and likewise brazen houses, and with brass
they wrought: for there was not yet dark iron. They indeed
subdued* beneath their own hands, entered the squalid abode
of chilling Hades, inglorious: for terrible though they were,
black Death seized them, and they quitted the bright sun-
light.

But when earth had covered this race also, again Jove,
son of Cronus, wrought yet another, a fourth, on the many-
nourishing ground, more just and more worthy, a godlike
race of hero-men,®> who are called by the former® age demi-
gods over the boundless earth. And these baneful -war, as
well as the dire battle-din, destroyed, a part fighting before


1 This is according to Goettling’s punctuation, who illustrates it
by Soph. Trach. 671, ¢% Srov goPei, and shows that é« pédray decvor is
to be taken assively. For the other punctuation at pedcay, Van
Lennep adduces Virg, Ain. viij. 315, Gensque virum truncis et duro
robore nata; Statius, Theb. iv. 276, 279; Virg. Georg. i. 63; Hom.
Od. xix. 163; and Aristoph. Acharn. 180; pointing to the wide-
spread ascription by the ancients of man’s origin to stocks and
stones. x

? Not bread only, but flesh also. Ovid, Met. i. 125, 126, says of
this race, \ ‘

Tertia post illas successit aenea proles
Seevior ingeniis, et ad horrida promptior arma.


3 Robinson observes here, that this age derives its name from the
metal of which arms were made, and quotes Herodot. ii. 152, re-
specting a raid of lonians and Carians, who placed Psammitichus on
the throne of Egypt, and who are called by an oracle yaAxeor dvdpec.

4 This corresponds with the mythic end of the early children of
the Greek soil, with whom, under the name of Earth-born, or child- .
ren of the Dragon’s seed, the stranger Cadmus fought. V. Lennep.
“8 Then comes the age of heroes, born of Jove, or of some other
god, and a mortal woman, as we find, in the end of the Theoeont:
‘These succeeded the aborigines, who had fallen by mutual slaugh-
ter, and were renowned in Epic poetry. ,

6 xoorepy, i.e. by the age preceding the fifth, that of Hesiod.
The poet would seem to say, that in his own age the men of this
fourth race were called jpwse¢ rather than #i8eo. There is only
one place in Hom, (Il. xii. 23) where the Greeks at Troy are called
ayeOecr, See Van Lennep, Hermann, &c.

ia €


162—177, THE WORKS AND DAYS. . 83


seven-gated Thebes, in the Cadmean land, for the flocks! of
CEdipus, and part also in ships beyond the'vast depths of the
sea, when it had led? them to Troy for fair-haired Helen’s sake.
There indeed the end of death enshrouded them; but to them
Jove, the son of Cronus, their sire, having given life and set-
tlements apart from men, made them to dwell at the confines
of earth, afar from the immortals. Among these Cronus
rules, And they indeed dwell with careless spirit in the
Isles of the Blest,? beside deep-eddying Ocean; blest heroes,
for whom thrice in a year doth the fertile soil bear blooming |
fruits as-sweet-as-honey.* ae

Would that then I had not mingled with the fifth race of
men, but had either died before, or been born afterward For
now in truth is the iron® race, neither will they ever cease?


' Because, in the Heroic age, wealth consisted in exceeding many
flocks and herds, whence kings got the title of oimeveg Aadv.
Q£dipus amassed such wealth; and what is here meant is, that Etro-
cles and Polynices contended for it, and so sprang war between
Thebes and Argos.

2 dyayuy, se. wodepoc.

5 Homer, Od. iv. 563, speaks of the Elysian plain, which he fixed
at the extremities of Earth, and at the Ocean. Pindar, Ol. ii. 128,
has 0a pardowy Naoor dxeavitee Adpat meprmviove:, and there, as
here, Saturn is called King of the Isles of the Blest. Vat Lennep,
Goettling, and Heyne at 1. c. Pindari, quote Monument. Regille, 9,


. 2 paxdpwy vijcoory iva Kodvog euBacireder, Callistratus, in his cele~


brated Scolium, (515, AntHol. Polyglott,) places Harmodius there
with Diomed and Achilles, ;

4 Van Lennep quotes Pomponius Mela, III. x. 12, Fortunate
insule abundant sud sponte genitis; et subinde aliis super aliis ad-
nascentibus nihil sdllicitos alunt. °

5 Goettling compares Hom. J], iii. 40, ai@’ Spedeg Gyovig 7’ ipevar
ayausg 7 arodechar—and with the former part of the wish Robin-
son compares Hor. Sat. II. ii. 92, 93,

Hos utinam Inter
Heroas hatum tellus me prima tulisset.

* adnocov, of iron, as the fifth race had need to be, to sustain the
toils and hardships incident to it. Cf. Hom. II. xxiv. 205; Hesiod,
Theog. 764; Aristoph. Acharn. 491; Eurip. Medea, 1279; Virg.
Georg. i. 63, Unde homines nati, durum genus; Ov. Met. i. 414,

Inde genus durum sumus eXperiensque laborum,

Et documenta damus, qua simus origine nati.
Clericus observes with. truth, that every age looks upon itself as
having come to the extreme point of wickedness, forgetting the
past ages. - | ;

7 All these futures, ratoovrat, découn, pepiterar, xefer to the re-

@2


84 HESIOD. 177—197,


by day, nor at all by night, from toil and wretchedness, cor-
rupt as they are: but the gods will give them severe cares:
yet nevertheless even for these shall good be mingled with
ills. But Jove will destroy this race also of men endowed
with speech, as soon as, immediately after having been born,
they become silvery-templed.! Nor will sire be like-minded
to sons, nor sons at all ¢o parent, nor guest to host, nor com-
rade to comrade, nor will brother be dear, even as it was
aforetime, to brother. But quickly will they dishonour pa-
rents growing old, and will blame them, I ween, addressing
.them with harsh words, deimg impious, and unaware of the
vengeance of the gods ;? -nor to aged parents would these pay .
back the price of their nurture, using the right of might ‘4
‘and one will sack the city of another: nor will there be any
favour to the trusty, nor the just, nor the good, but rather
they will honour a man that doeth evil and zs overbearing ;¢
and justice and shame will not be in their hands, and the bad
will injure the better man, speaking in perverse speeches, and
will swear a false oath. But on ali wretched mortals envy
with-its-tongues-of-malice, exulting-in-ills, will attend with
hateful look. Then also in truth to Olympus from earth


maining years of the lives of Hesiod and his brother Perses, whom
he warns that labour is man’s lot, and that he will have, as all
men, ills mixt with good things.

1 Vollbehr, in his Prolegomena, p. 44, (note 108,) explains this
passage of the narrowing gradually, and from age to age, of the dis-
tance or interval between infancy and old age, birth and death.—
In the degenerate age of iron, men’s bodies and minds should be
quick to decay, and give evidences thereof from their very birth.
‘Opotog, in the next line, is agreed by the best commentators to be
equivalent to dzovonrixdc, and not to refer to countenance.

_ 8 obd8 Ceti Om Kdéreg. Cf. Tibull. I. viii. 72, Nescius ultorem post

caput esse Deum; and compare Hom. Il. xvi. 388, Ociv Saw ode
adéyovreg. Od. xxi. 28; Theog. 222.—ynpdvrecn, Ep. dat. plur.
of ynoac, aor. 1, particip. from yjonuet.

3 yecpodixat. Goettling refers us (inter alia) to Herodot. viii. 89,
for the phrase év yepiy vépp. To this may be added Esch. Choeph.
.418 (Blomf.) ; Herodot. ix. 48.

4 UBpw avépa, Hither bBprveis here a subst. used as in Lucian,
Conviv. § 12, dvdoa Bony drexviig Svra, as Labeck suggests, or it is
an adj. used for bGprorne. See Liddell and Scott. Goettling sup-

orts the former view with references to Soph. Antig. 320, AdAnpa
HAov éxcrepuxdc ei: Aristoph. Nub. 445; Hom. Il. xvi. 498. Ro-
binson adds Lucret. iv..1156; Martial, xi. 92, Non vitiosus homo
es, Zoile, sed vitium.,


197—217. THE WORKS AND DAYS. — 88


with-its-broad-ways shall Shame and Retribution, having
abandoned men, depart,’ when they have clad their fair skin

_ in white raiment, to the tribe of the immortals: but the bane-
ful griefs shall remain behind, and against evil there shall be -
no resource. :

Now then will & speak a fable to kings, wise even though
they are. Thus the hdwk addressed the nightingale of varie-
gated-throat, as he carried her in his talons, when he had
caught her, very high in the clouds.

She then,? pierced on all sides by his crooked talons, was
wailing piteously, whilst he victoriously addressed his speech to
her. ‘ Wretch,? wherefore criest thou? ’tis a much stronger
that holds thee. Thou wilt go that way by which I may lead
thee, songstress though.thou art: and my supper, if I choose, I
shall make, or shall let go. But‘ senseless 7s he who chooses
to contend against them that are stronger, and he is robbed of
victory, and suffers griefs in addition to indignities,” .

So spake the fleet-flying hawk, broad-pinioned bird. But
do thou, Perses, hear the right, nor help-on wrong: for wrong
is both ill® to a poor mortal, nor in truth can a well-to-do man
easily bear it, for he is also weighed down by it, having
fallen upon the penalties of crime ;° the better way és to arrive


4 Shall Shame and Retribution depart.] troy is clearly used in &
future sense. According to Hesiod’s view, (273,) they had not yet
gone. mpodurdvre for xpodrwovea:. Cf. 'Theog. 826; Hom. I]. viii.
456.—mAnyévre for mAnysioa, said of Juno and Minerva. Compare,
for the whole statement, Juvenal, vi. 19; Ovid, Met. i..150.

2 Volibehr, in Comment. p. 49, refers this fable of the hawk and
nightingale to the wish of the poet to hold up to censure that worse
contention, (¢f. 14, 15,) which is the pier of his brother and
the corrupt judges. Vollbehr adds, that Hesiod must have meant
himself by the nightingale, or he would have adhered to common
usage, and substituted the dove or pigeon, as in Horat. I. xxxvii.
17; Soph. Aj. 140, 168; Esch. Prom. 857. ‘

'* dauovin, Guietus translates “infelix.”” Van Lennep prefers to
consider it ironical, “O bona,” Good mistress! In the next
line, é%¢ is used in a future sense, and is equivalent to a mild impe-
rative. ; :
_ * Ver. 210, 211, which Aristarchus deemed spurious, Goettling'
considers only in their wrong place.—dvregepiZew, i.e. by crying
and wailing, which were useless. Van Lennep. 4

5 der@, éoOdbc. The former of these is equivalent to aodevicrepes,
genere et opibus inferior; the latter to 6 rg réixy nai ri Svpapet
mpoixve. : os :

8 i.e. when he comes in for the punishment of it, then he finds


86 HESIOD. ’ 217-236.


at what is right in the contrary path; and justice surmounts
injury, when it has reached to the etd. When he has suf-
{éred,' the senseless man learns this. For along with crooked
judgments straight runs the avenger of perjury ;? and a re-
‘Sistless course is that of Justice, though she be dragged whi-
therscever bribe-swallowing men may lead: her, and with
perverse judgments decide upon the existing rights. And she
follows lamenting city and settlements of peoples, clad in mist,®
bringing ill on men, who shall have driven her out, and dis-
pense not a fair decision.4 But® whoso give fair judgments to
strangers and to citizens, and do not overstep aught of justice,
for these a city blooms, and her peoples flourish within her:
peace rears her young men through the land, nor ever to them
doth wide-seeing Jove ordain® troublous war: nor ever doth
famine, nor ruin, company with men who judge the right, but
in festivals they enjoy the fruit of carefully-tended works.
For them bears Earth much substance: on the mountains the
oak? at its top indeed yields acorns, and midway bees: the
woolly sheep-are weighed down with fleeces; women bear
children like unto their sires: in blessings they flourish still :


that the wrong he has done has power to weigh him down.—irépnge
(689, sc.) contrario modo. Dat. sing. See Matt. Gr. Gr. § 87.

1 qabwy d& re, x.7-r. Cf. Hom. Il. xvii. 32. This passage is
quoted by the Scholiast on A'sch. Agam. 177, rov waGee padog Bivra
Kupiwg tye, -

2 “Ooxog. The avenger of perjury. Cf. Theog. 231; Sophocl.
Cid. C. 1767, xe wavr’ diwy Ate bpxoc; and Herodot. vi. 86, the
oracle to Glaucus. In the next line I have translated as Liddell
and Scott, who understand Zort, though there is probability in the
view of Van Lennep, who makes rpéxee the verb to 9d00¢ as well as
bexos, and understands 9d@o¢ of the noise of Justice, dragged per-
force, whither she would not. \

3 jeoa tocapévn. She is hidden by a vapour, because she would
watch and punish wrong-doers, unseen; and that, once embarked
in wrong, they may not seem to have her countenance.

4 i@ciay Evepav—se. dicny,

5 Ver, 225-247. Van Lennep compares Callimach. H.in Dian.
120—135. - :

* rexpaioerat, destinat immittendum. Cf. Hom. It, vi. 349; vii.
70. Van Lennep. > : ;

7 Plat. de Rep. ii. p. 363, B.; Plin. N. H. xvi. 8, Robora ferunt
et viscum et mella, ut auctor Hesiodus. Cf. Virg. Ecl. iv. 30, Et
dure quercus sudabunt roscida mella. Ov. Met. i. 112, Flavaque
de viridi sudabunt ilice mella. Cf. Georg. ii. 452.

* Compare Horat. Od. IV. v. 28, Laudantur simili prole puerperz.


1


236—254, THE WORKS AND DAYS. ae 87


nor ever travel they on board ship ;! but the fertile field yields
its increase. But they, to whom evil, wrong, and hard deeds
are % care, to them wide-seeing Jove, the son of Cronus, des-
tines punishment. Oft? hath even a whole city reaped the -
evil fruit of a bad man, who sins and puts in practice deeds
of infatuation.

On them then? from heaven the son of Cronus is wont
to bring great calamity, famine and pestilence at the same
time: so the peoples waste away. Neither do the women
bear children: and houses come to nought, by the counsels
of Olympian Jove; and at other times again the son of Cronus
either destroys their wide army, or he lays low their walls,*
or in the deep he punishes their ships.

Now do ye too,® ye judges, ponder likewise yourselves this:
vengeance: for being among men and nigh unto them, the
immortals observe as many as with perverse judgments wear-
and-waste each other, disregarding the punishment of the
gods. For on the many-nurturing earth are thrice ten thou-
sand® immortals, Jove’s watchers over mortal men; who, I
ween, watch both just judgments and daring acts, clad in


* Goettling explains this as meaning, that they are so little co-
vetous of wealth, that none of them are merchants, but are content
with their own land. Van Lennep would read, & & éxi vniv—be-
cause only those with whom Jove was wroth for their injustice met
with shipwrecks. He shows that the poet had often crossed to
Eubeea. But Goettling’s view renders this nugatory. :

2 Cf. Eschines contra Ctesiph. p. 427; Bekk. Herodot. vii. 147;
Sophoel. Ged. T. 25, &c. : . :

3 Compare with this and the six next lines, Hosea ix. 11—~14, a
denunciation of God’s vengeance on Ephraim’s idolatry.

4 For this emphatic use of 8ye in the second clause, cf. Op, et D.
821; Virg. Georg. iv. 255, ; 5
Tum corpora luce carentum

Exportant tectis, et tristia funera ducunt:

Aut ile pedibus connexe ad limina pendent.
#n, v. 457, Nunc dextra ingeminans ictus, nunc ille sinistra. To
which add, Horace; Od. I, ix. 15, 16; Epod. ix. 29. :

5 The connexion is, “ Heed the vengeance with which the gods
pursue a state for the sinof an individual, ye judges; for evil deeds
cannot escape Jove’s eye, seeing that thrice ten thousand immortals,
ie from afar, but near and amongst men, are keeping watch on .
them.” : ‘

5 rocopdpto., i.e. very many. Definite for indefinite. Cf. Horat.
Od. ILI. v. 79, Amatorem trecente Pirithoum cohibent caten ;
Sat. 1. v. 12, Trecentos ingeris! ohe! ond Plaut. Meneech. 795,
where Sexcenties is so used.. See Hildyard’s edition of that play
for other parallels, : ,


88 HESIOD. 255—277,


misty-darkness, and haunting everywhere over the earth.
And Jove’s virgin daughter, Justice, besides, is a watcher,
illustrious and venerable, with the gods who occupy Olympus.
Yes, and whenever any one wrongs her by perversely railing
at her, forthwith taking her seat! beside Jove, son of Cronus,
her sire, she speaks of the unjust mind of mortals, that so the
people may atone for the infatuations of kings,? who, with
pernicious intents, turn ker the wrong way by speaking judg~-
ments perversely. Heeding these things, ye judges, swallow-
ers-of-the-bribe, make straight your sentiments, and entirely
forget crooked judgments. For himself doth a man work evil,
in working evils for another, and the evil counsel is worst to
him that hath devised it.3 Jove’s eye, having seen all things,
and sbserved all things, also regards these things, if he so
please, nor does it escape him, of what nature, in truth, is


-this justice,4 which the city encloses within. ._Now might in


truth neither I myself; nor my son, be just among men, since
to be a just man is an evil, if so be that the more unjust man .
is to have the stronger justice. But this I hope that Jove,
delighting in thunders, will not yet. bring about.®

“Yet, O Perses, do thou ponder these things in thine heart,
and heed justice in sooth, and forget violence entirely. For
this law hath the son of Cronus ordained for men,® for fishes


1 Svordlay.: Cf. Hom. H.'in Mere. 30, and Asch. Suppl. 11,
yapov Aiybrrov raidwy docBi tr’ dvoraléuevat. With the next line
Van Lennep compares Soph. Cid. C. 1382,'Ainy Zbvedpog Znvdc

pxaiwy vopwr. :

2 Compare Horat. Ep. I. ii. 14, Quidquid delirant reges, plectun-
tur Achivi. But Van Lennep observes that the ground-work of
that line is Hom. Il. i. 410, iva wdyrec érabpwvrat Baoirfjoc,. where
Heyne quotes rod\dex cai obpraca médtc kaxod avdpdc drnipa.

? This line is quoted by Aristotle, Rhet. iii. 9, § 6. Pausanias, IT.
ix. 5, (quoted by Van Lennep,) speaks of this verse as ody Oey me-
wotnpévov. A, ‘Gelling; iv. 5, gives the next line translated thus,
“ Malum consiliym consultori pessimum.” .

4 rhvée dixny, i. e. this atl administration of justice.

5 ob, not yet; i.e. not till the iron age, which he seems to im-
ply, at ver. 271, would be ngither in his nor his son’s day. reAciv is
1 q: redéoev, the future.

Here Vollbehr, in his Prolegomena, .p. 56, note 144, quotes
Archilochus, Fragm. 73, p. 190, Schneider:


"O Zeb, warep Zed, ody piv odpavod eparog
ot 0 ipy’ ig’ dvOpdrwyr bode

Aewpya Kaj. Oguord, coi Sé Onpiwy
UPore ve wai dien pera.


e


277 —298, THE WORKS AND DAYS. 89


indeed and beasts, and winged fowls to eat each other, since
justice is not among them: but to men hath he given justice,
which is far best. For if & man choose to know and speak
out what is just, to him also wide-seéing Jove’ gives felicity ;
but whoso in his testimony, wilfully having sworn a false oath,
‘shall have lied, and by it having marred justice, shall have
gone astray incurably,.of him then the race is left more ob-
scure for the future. Of a man, however, of-true-oath, the
generation is more excellent thereafter.” ,
. Now will I speak to thee with good intent, thou exceeding
foolish Perses. .Badness,? look you, you may choose easily
in a heap: level is the path, and ‘right near it dwells. But
before virtue the immortal gods have set exertion: and long
and steep and rugged at the first is the way to it,4 but when
one shall have reached the summit, then truly it is easy, dif-
ficult though it be before. - ;
This mah, indeed, is far-best,5 who shall have understood
evérything for himself, after having devised what may ‘be best
_afterward and unto the end: ‘and good again is he likewise


1 This verse shows that what was said before, at ver. 279, 280,
had reference to evidence given in law-courts. Cf. 280.. In 283,
edcerat is the Epic form for Pebonrat.

.* This yerse is found word for word in the oracle given to Glau-
cus, a Spartan, recorded by Herodot. vi. 86, where “Oro zai¢ is
said to be the avenger of perjury. , This story of Glaucus is given
by Juvenal, Sat. xiii. 199—210. :

3 caxérqg appears here, as Van Lennep observes, to signify “ ig-
navia,” as in Hom. Ih. fi. 868; xiii-108, and elsewhere. For the
sentiment in line 289, cf. Theognis, 463, 464, Edpapiwe roe yorjpa
Get Sdoay obre re Caddy obr’ ayabdy’ yaderep O Eoypare Kidog emt.

4 According to Dionys, Halic. the ancient poets purposely shaped
the structure of their verse to the matter which was being described: ,
—e. g. Hom. I1. iii. 363, rorya re kai rerpaxOd Suaroipiv txmece xerpdc,
where you might almost fancy, as Eustathius observes, you heard
the iron shivered. Cf. Hom. Od. ix. 71, and Virg. En. viii. 596,
Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit-‘ungula campum. Robinson
sees in this line and the two next, first the ruggedness of the begin-
ning of the way of virtue, and then its after-ease and smoothness.
Eee the sentiment, cf. Simonid. Fr. 20; Tyrt. ix. 43; Pind. Nem.

« 24. :

> Cf. Livy, xxii. 29, Sepe ego audivi, milites, eum primum esse
virum qui ipse consulat, quid in rem sit: secundum eum, qui bene
monenti obediat: qui nec ipse consulere, nec alteri parere sciat,
esse extremi ingenii ;—the last two words answering to dxpiios, i. e.
ineptus, in 297. And see Cic. pro Cluent>c. 31. This passage of
Hesiod is quoted by Aristot. Eth.N.14


90 HESIOD, - 295-318,


who shall have complied with one advising him well: but
whoso neither himself hath understanding, nor when he hears
another, lays it to ‘heart; he on the other hand is a worth-
less man. Do thou then, ever mindful of my, precept, work-
on, Perses, of stock divine,! that so famine may hate, and

- fair-chapleted Demeter love thee, august as she is, and fill
thy garner with substance. For famine, look you, és ever the
sluggard’s companion.

And with him gods and men are indignant, Who lives a
sluggard’s life, like in temper to stingless drones,? which lazily
consume the labour of bees, by devouring tt: but to thee let
“it be a pleasure? to set in order seemly works, that so thy
garners may be full of seasonable substance. From works
men become both rich-in-flocks and wealthy: by working too,
thou wilt be dearer far to immortals and to mortals. For
greatly do they hate sluggards. Now work is no ‘disgrace,
but sloth is a disgrace. And if thou shouldst work, quickly
will the sluggard envy thee growing rich; for esteem and
glory accompany wealth.4 So to a sensible man,® such as thou
wert, to labour is best, if having turned a witless mind from
the possessions of others towards work, thou wouldst study
thy subsistence, as I recommend thee. ;

But a false shame possesses a needy man, shame® which
greatly hurts or helps men. Shame, look you, is beside


1 Goettling thinks that diov yévog only signifies here “‘ a probo
patre genitus,” as diog Ebpatog in the Odyssey. But Proclus shows
that Hesiod’s genealogy: was traced up to Orpheus.and Calliope.

2 endfvecor xoBobpere. Compare Virg. Geor. iv. 167, Ignavum fu-
cos, pecus a presepibus arcet; 244, Immunisque sedens aliena ad
pabula fucus. Van Lennep adds Pheer. III. xiji. 2, In Theog.
594, Hesiod: compares women to drones.

5 gid’ éorw, the neut, plur. for neut. sing. For a similar construc-
tion, Van Lennep refers to Hom. Odyss. xvii. 15, 4) yap époi gid’
adrnOba pvdgcacOat.

* ghobrw 8° doers, «.r.. Robinson here would render dger),
pulehritudo, and quotes Horat. Epist. I. vi. 836—38, Et genus et

‘ormam regina pecunia donat. Plutarch considered it equivalent
here to dd&a, Sévapuc, or ebruxia- ;

5 Saipovte & ologc. Here Van Lennep follows the Scholiast, in in-
_terpreting daipou as equivalent to réxy—“ sorte, vel fato,”’ to such
as you are by Fates’ decree. But Goettling follows Plato, Cratyl.
aay and Archiloch. iv. 4, in considering datuwy the same as

ano. © 8
® aidwe jr’. Compare with this verse, Il. xxiv. 44, 45; Odyss.


319-337, THE WORKS AND DAYS. 91
wretchedness, but confidence beside wealth; and possessions
not gotten-by-plunder, but given-by-the-gods, are far best.
For if any one even with his hands shall have taken great

‘wealth by violence, or if he for his part shall have plundered ©
it! by his tongue, even as often happens, as soon ag in truth
gain hath deceived the minds of men, and shamelessness comes
suddenly on shame, then,? J say, easily do the gods darken his
name: the family of such a man is minished, and but for a
brief space doth his wealth accompany him.

And alike he who shall have done-evil to suppliant and to
guest, and he who mounts the couch of his kinsman, for
stealthy union with his wife, doing acts unseemly ; and whose
through the senselessness of any one wrongs orphan children,
and whoso reproaches:an aged parent on the threshold of
wretched age, assailing him with severe words; against such
an one, I say in truth, Jove himself is wroth,4 and ‘at the
last, in requital for wrong deeds, lays on him a bitter penalty.
Then keep thou wholly a witless mind from these deeds. But
after thy power do sacrifice to the immortal gods,> holily and
‘purely, and burn moreover sleek thighs of victims, and at


‘xvii. 847. Robinson adds Ecclestasticus iv. 21, ‘‘ For there is a
shame that bringeth sin; and there is a shame which is glory and
grace. ;

! Aniooerat. This is of course the Epic form of the first aorist
conjunctive. The whole phrase is equivalent to, “ shall have borne '
false witness for a bribe.” :

2 Note here the de in apodosis, an Epic usage especially. Voll-
behr quotes on this passage Solon, El. i. 7, et seq.

Xenpara D ipsion piv tyev, ddiewe de rexacbar
ob Edw’ wravrwe YorEepoy HAGE Sixn.
tdodror 0 dy pity deer Ozoi, rapayiverar avipt

tpredog Ex vedrou mvOpivos cig KopugHy.

3 xpurrading sbvitc. Supply evera or dia. It is at atty rate such
a genitive as in Hes. Scut. Herc. 406, payécOyy Aide dpecorvépov.

4 dyaisrat. Cf. Odyss. xx. 16; Herodot. vi. 61. Its first sense ig
to admire; hence (2) to envy, (3) to be annoyed at, to be wroth
with. In Hom. |. c. it takes an accusative. Van Lennep.

5 This verse was often quoted by Socrates. Xenoph. Memorab.
L. iii. 3. The inf. for imperat. here is very common to Hesiod ; but
in use with other poets. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 546. Robinson quotes
here Horace, Od. II. xvii. 30—32; and III. xxiii. 1, Coelo supinas
si tuleris manus.—dyvae nai ea0apwe, i. e. pura mente puroqve cor-
pore. Govttling ;-who notes here three modes of propitiating the _

%


92 ; HESIOD. , 338—357,


other times propitiate chem with libations, and incense, both
when you go to rest, and when the holy light shall have-risen:
that so to thee they may entertain a propitious heart and spirit,
that ‘thou mayest buy the land of others, not others thine.
Invite the man that loves thee to a feast,'! but let alone thine
enemy: and especially invite him that dwelleth near thee:
for if, mark yqu, anything strange shall have happened at
home,? neighbours are’ wont to come ungirt, but kinsfolk gird
themselves first. A bad neighbour is as great a misfortune
as a good one is a great blessing.? ‘Who gains a worthy neigh-
bour, hath truly gained a meed of honour: neither would an
ox perish; if there were not a bad neighbour.“ Duly measure
when thou borrowest from a neighbour, and duly repay, in
the very measure, and better still, if thou canst,> that so when
in want thou mayest find that which may be relied on in
future.

’ Gain not base gains: base gains are equal to losses. Love
him that loves thee; and be nigh him that attaches himself to
thee: and give to him who may have given: give not to him
that hath not given. To a giver on the one hand some have
given: but to the withholder none give. A gift is good: but
plunder® evil,—a dealer of death. For whatsoever man shall


gods, 1. burnt offerings; 2. libations; 3. incense-offerings. This
last was the morning sacrifice; the libations, the evening sacri-
fice. :

1 Having dwelt upon Kbations to the gods, which commonly were
attended with solemn feasts, the poet naturally goes on to consider
who should be the guests. Vollbehr, pointing out this, quotes
Plautus, Rudens. II. iii. 11—13, Non est meum, Ampelisca, Sed
,quam_mox coctum est prandium? Am. Quod prandium, obsecro
te? Tr. Nempe rem divinam facitis hic. ;

2 ypu’ dAdo, Res inexpectata. fyroptoy, i.e. in Hesiod’s copy,
namely, Ascra. Goettling. .

’ ¥ Compare with this line, Alemann. Fr. 33, péya yeirov 'ysirwy, sc.
aya0év, and Xenoph. Memorab. II. ii. 12.

‘ It appears from Heraclides Ponticus, quoted by Van Lennep
and Goettling, that the Cumeans, whence Hesiod’s family sprung,
had a sort of “ association for the prosecution of felons.” Hence it
was the interest of all to guard each other’s property. Bote stands
for “riches” generally. Cf. 120. -

5 This verse is quoted by Cic. ad Att. xiii. 12, and alluded to,
Cie. de Off. i. 12. For d&pxeov, in ver. 351, see Butmann, Lexil. p.
163, 164. :

6 "pwat is here for 4p¢ay?, as in ver. 191, U8 for iBprorhy.


&


857—372, THE WORKS AND DAYS. 93


have given willingly,! he too would give much. He exults
in his gift, and is pleased in his spirit. But whoso shall have
‘seized, in compliance with his shamelessness, even though it
be byt a little, yet that little curdles his heart’s blood.2 Fer’
if thou shouldst lay up even a little upon a little, and shouldst
do this often, soon would even this become great.. He who
brings, in addition to what is in store, this man shall escape
dark hunger: nor does that at least which is laid up in the
house distress a man. Better zs ¢¢ that it should be at home,
since that which is without is attended with loss. "Tis good
to take from what is at hand, but a woe to the spirit to want
of that which is far from you: which truths I bid thee pon-
der. At the beginning too of the cask, and at the end, take
thy fill, but spare it in the middle:4 for sparingness is évo late
at the bottom. Let the recompence fixed for a friend be suf-
ficient, and, as in sport, with a brother even callin witnesses :&
for trust, I wot, look you, .as well as mistrusts, has ruined


1 20{\wy. Understand dvig, and take «dv, with Goettling, as used
for cai dv, not for cai Zev. Hermann would read, ire cai peyd dwy,
in which case av}p is the nominative to yaipet.

2 It seems the simplest plan here to refer réy’ to opuxpdy édy, and
to understand ¢géAoy, as constantly in Hom. in the sense of “ suwusm.’* -
The unlawful seizure of ever so small a sum freezes a man’s heart,
and hardens him thenceforward.

3 Goettling considers lines 363, 364, 365, as separate proverbs ;
the last of which he refers to woman kind, as a general recommend~
ation to them to remain at home, according to the general view of
the Greeks, cf. Asch. S. e.: Theb. 182; Eurip. Med. 216, &e.
Hermann refers it to the master of the family, whose presence is
wanted at home. But Van Lennep seems right in connecting the
three lines, and referring to 7d caraxtisevoy as the subject of BéAre-
poy eivat.— BraPepov will be taken in the sense of ‘ noxium.”

‘ Vollbehr explains this as advice to the wealthy man, and to
him whose estate is well nigh squandered away, to enjoy freely
what they have, but to the man of moderate meahs to be sparing. .
He compares Senec. Ep. }, fin., ‘“ Nam ut visum est majoribus nos-
tris, sera parsimonia in fundo est. Non enim tantum minimum in
imo, sed pessimum remanet.”

5 This verse is in Plutarch, Thes. 2, ascribed to Pittheus, the fa-
ther of Theseus, dpxiog is used here in the sense of “ to be relied
upon.” If you engage a friend to do aught, though there be no
witness to the compact, carry out your wi i Nay, even
with a brother call in witnesses, as if jokingly. The next’ verse is
imitated by Phadrus, III. x. 18, “‘ Periculosum est credere et non


eredere.”’ ’
2 : 5


94 ; . HESIOD. : 372—390,


men. Nor let a woman with sweeping train! beguile thy
mind, winningly coaxing, ard seeking after thy dwelling: for
who trusts a woman, that man, I wot, trusts knaves.2, And
let there be one only-son to tend his father’s house :® for so
shall wealth increase in the dwelling. But if old, you may
die and leave another son. For easily to more might Jove
provide vast wealth. For of many greater is the care, and
greater the gain. Now if thy spirit desires woalth in thy
mind, thus do, and moreover do work upon work.

When the Pleiads,. born-of-Atlas, rise, begin thy harvest ;
but thy ploughing, when they set. Now these, look you, are
hidden for forty nights and days;5 and again in revolving
years they appear when first the sickle is sharpened. This
truly is the law of fields, as well for them who dwell near the
sea, as for those who inhabit wooded valleys, a fertile soil afar


1 guyogrédog. Anglicé, “ with a bustle’? Passow thinks that


’ the word is a parody of-Homer’s éAxecizemdoc.—F or xwridovea, see
. Theoer. xv. 97. ,


2 gAnrgo:. Goettling considers this an euphemism. ‘‘ Lovers of
other men’s goods.” Scaligersmakes it i. q. 7Anri)e, pilator, a “‘ pi-
lare.’’ Others consider if i. q. ¢9AATn¢, which Tzetzes woul reall
- * Hesiod’s drift in this and the three next lines appears to be, An‘
only son.is best, for then there are no lawsuits, oad the property
increases; but suppose there be two sons to inherit, ’tis best the
father should die old, that so he may himself settle the disposition
of his inheritance, and avoid litigation. But even should there be
many sons, if they do not strive with each other, Jove may grant
each a sufficiency, since the joint care of their substance will bring
gain worth dividing. This seems Volibehr’s explanation.

+ Here begins the second part of*the poem, which treats of agri-
culture, and gives the poem its name in part, viz. feya. It follows
naturally after the injunction to work, for agriculture was the Bo-
otian’s proper work and means of subsistence.—The Pleiads were
the daughters (seven in number) of Atlas and Pleione. They were
transformed into a cluster of stars at the back’ of Taurus, whose
rising,was from April 22 to May 10, and commonly brought in fine
weather; and their setting in November. Compare Theocr. Idyll.
xiii. 25; Virgil, Georg. iv. 231, 232, Taygete simul os terris ostendit
honestum Pleias; and especially here Georg. i. 221—223,

Ante tibi Zéow Atlantides abscondantur,

Gnosiaque ardentis decedat stella coronz,

Debita quam sulcis ¢ommittas semina.
See also art. Pleias, Dict. G. and R. Biog. iii. 412.

% Forty days.) Strictly forty-four, between the 4th of April and
18th of May. the Heliacal setting and the rising of the Pleiads.—-
arepuTopevou imcavrod, ano se ¢onvertente. Van Lennep. ar


390-409, THE WORKS AND DAYS._ . 95


from the swelling sea:! sow stript, plough stript, and reap
stript, if thou shouldst wish to gather the works of Ceres, ‘all
in their seasons, that so each may grow for thee in due time,
lest in anywise, being in need meanwhile, thou shouldst go
begging to other people’s houses, and accomplish® nothing.?
As e’en now thou hast come to me; but I will not add mere '
to thee, nor measure out‘ aught in addition: work, senseless
Perses, the works which the gods have destined for mortals,
lest ever, with children and wife grieving thine heart, thou
shouldst seek thy subsistence among neighbours, and they
should neglect thee. For twice indeed or thrice perhaps
thou wilt obtain, but if thou trouble them further, thou shalt -
avail nought, but wilt speak many words in vain: and use-


-less will be thy range of words.5 I recommend thee then to


study both payment of debts, and avoidance of hunger, First
of all get a house, and a woman, and a ploughing ox; @ wo-
man purchased, not wedded,® who may also tend your cattle,
and all fitting implements in your house, lest you should ask
of another, and he ‘refise, and you bein want of #, 80 the
season should pass by, and your labour’s fruit be- lessened.


1 Both these descriptions of locality apply to portions of Beeotia,

the poet’s country. rea :
yupviy oreipny. Cf. Virg. Georg. i. 299, Nudus ara: sere nu-.
dus; and Aristoph. Lysistr.. 1173.

* The consequence of slackness in the husbandman, in' sowing,
ploughing, and reaping, may be a bad crop, or no crop;: in which
case he must be a beggar till next harvest. Tyrteus is quoted here
by Vollbehr, Fragm. 7, 7

arwxevay navrwy tor’ dvinodraroy,
mhacouevor ody pnt ee nai rarpi yépovre
Tatar te ody pixpoic Kougudiy 7’ addxy.

4 duperghow. Van Lennep points out that pergety is properly
said of meting out corn or grain; perpeio@at, of receiving what is
so meted out. Cf. 349. dearexpaipec@ar is used in the next line in
the same sense as rexpaipscOae in lines 229, 239.

5 §réwy vopoc. Cf, Hom. Il. xx. 249, sxsw 88 rodde vépioc EvOa Kai
évOa, where Heyne translates éa. vou. “ verborum campus,” and
quotes as paral el, Horace’s “ Carmina divides ;” védpog being from
VEG. a
me xrnrhnv ob yaperiy. These adjectives seem to define. yuvaica *
more exactly. Aristotle, in Gicon. i. 2, referring to this passage,
evidently considers yuvaika as wife, and hence some think that the
second line is spurious. But it seems in place here, and to indicate
Hesiod’s anxiety that his brother should upderstand his meaning.

%


96 ' ‘HESIOD. 410426,


Nor put off till to-morrow or the-day-after ; for not, if he


works-sluggishly or puts off, doth a man fill his garner: but
diligence increaseth the fruit of toil! A dilatory man ever
wrestles with losses.”

-When now the violence of the keen sun abates his sweat-
causing heat, as all-powerful Jove rains in-the-autumnal-sea-
son, and the body of man moves itself far more lightly,? for at.
this season in truth the star Sirius* comes in the day-time for a
short space above the heads of men born-to-death, but has


-more share of the night; then is ‘the timber least worm-


’


eaten,® if felled with the axe, and sheds 'its leaves on the
ground, and ceases from budding; then truly, bearing it in
mind, fell a timely work.6 Hew a mortar’ three feet in
diameter, and a pestle three cubits, and an axle-tree seven feet
long, for, look you, it is very serviceable thus; but if you
should cleave it eight feet, you might also cut from it a mal-
let. And hew.a wheel three spans long for the plough-car-


Cf, Pindar, Isthm. vi. 97—99, Adumwy d2, pedérav "Epyotg dakar,
‘Howddov Mada tripe ror’ exog. |

2 Clericus compares here Persius, Sat. v. 66—69.

> Moves itself far more Mente “ Movetur levius.” Grev.
Goettling. Lanzius. This seems the best interpretation. Vollbehr


‘takes. it to mean the change of complexion.


+ Seiptog dorhp. The Scholiasts take this to refer to the Sun, not
the Dog-star. So Grevius: and to this view Van Lennep against
Goettling inclines, arguing that if Pindar and Alczus apply the
om dorpov to the Sun, Hesiod may have done the same with

ornp.

5 eijpog 4dnerorary. This seems to be what Virgil means, where,
in Georg. i. 256, he says, Aut dempestivam silvis evertere pinum,
which is explained by Servius as having reference to its being most
free from worms, pe i

® dpa %oya are the timbers which are hewn, just as elsewhere
gpya are the fruits of husbandry. -peurjpevog is used as it were
adverbially. :

7 Odpor, (from Aw, ddéw, see Butm. Lex. 451; or 3Aw, volvo, ac-
cording to V, Lennep.) dApoc,'the mortar, was to be three feet;
Ssrepoy, pistillum, the pestle, three cubits long. Both were of straight
trunks or branches of a trée, the thicker and shorter to be hollowed.
See Dict. Gr. and R. Antigq. Smith, 622, a. Cf. Virg. Georg. i. 179,
and Servius’ note.

* If a foot more is added to the wood cut for an axle-tree, it may
be made into a mallet.’ V. Lennep thinks that the handle of the
mallet is not taken into acceunt; and that the waggons must have
been very broad. ‘ :


426—-440, . THE WORKS AND DAYS. ‘ OF


riage of-ten-palms’-length.! Many curved blocks of seasoned
wood are at hand; but bring your plougl-tail home, when
you shall have found it, after search on mountain or in field,? ©
‘of ilex-oak: for this is stoutest for steers to plough; when-
‘ soever a servant of Minerva,’ having fastened it to the share-
beam, has attached it with nails, and fitted it to the pole.
But make two ploughs,‘ toiling at them at home, one with
plough-tail of one-piece with the share-beam, the other com-
pacted, for ’tis much .better thus, if, look you, you should
have broken one, you might place the other upon the oxen:
and poles are soundest of bay or elm: but provide yourself
a share-beam of oak, a plough-tail of ilex-oak, and a pair of
males, steers nine-years-old, (for the .vigour of. such és not
weak,) having the just mean of age,® which are best for
working. Such at least would’ not strive in the furrow and
‘preak the plough, and leave there their labour unfinished.


1 &iny is, in Beeotic dialect, used for 4~ida. For an account of
the duaga, (plaustrum,) see Smith, Dict. Gr. and R. Ant. p. 764, 765.
In the next line, «dda (from xaiw) is dry, combustible, seasoned
wood. ét is i. q- éxéore. one is the “ Baris ” of Virgil (Georg.
1. 169, 170). Hesiod: says nothing of the pains taken, according to.
Virgil, to force a tree to the shape required for this plough-tail.:

2 car’ dpovpay seems to indicate the plain or valley, in contradis- |
tinction from the mountain. 5 ; 7 .

2 A servant of Minerva, i.e. a smith or carpenter. Clericus com- |

_ pares Virg. Ain. ii. 15, Divina Palladis arte. Hom. Il. xv. 411, 412,


tixrovog ly maXdpnordSanpovoc, S¢ pa TE TAONS
e& eidg coping, droOnpootvyow ‘AGHYNS. |


Minerva, according to Pausanias, I. xxiv. 8, and IX. xxvi. 5, was
worshipped by the Athenians and Beeotians alone as "AOhva ’Epydyn.
See Goetiling. . .
_ * Hesiod bids the farmer have two ploughs, that if one broke, he
nigh use the other. One was called adréyvoy, because its plough-
tail, (yéne,) and share-beam, (Zvpa, dentale,) and pole, (pipoc,
toroBosdc, temo,) were of one piece of timber. The other was xnx-
réy, “ compacted,” the three parts in it being of different kinds of
timber, and fastened by nails. See art. “‘ Aratrum,” Dict. Gr. and
R. Ant, 69.—zposapiperat, is the perf. pass. conjunctive with a mid-
dle sense. ‘See Matt. Gr. Gr. § 493. Compare with all this passage,
' Virg. Georg. i, 169—175. : : ae
5 dewraro: (from sig, vermis) may be compared with ddyxrorarn
ne 420th line. ; pers
ne wérpoy Eyevré. Becatise, as appears in ver. 439, they were
too old for wanton mischief, and yet, as we see, (in 437,) they were
in full vigour. aa : >
= H of


98 HESIOD. ~ 441456,


And along with these let a lusty ploughman of forty years
follow, having made a meal on a loaf four-squared, divided
into eight morsels,! who, minding his. business, will cut the.
furrow: straight,” no longer peering round among his fellows,
but having. his heart in his work; than such an one none
other, being younger, is. better to disperse the seed,? and to
avoid after-sowing. For a younger mah gapes like one dis-


. traught after his fellows. :


Mark, too, when from on high out of the clouds you shall
have heard the voice of the crane* uttering its yearly cry,
which both brings the signal for ploughing, and points the
season of rainy winter, but gnaws the heart of the man that
hath no oxen: then truly feed the crumpled-horned ‘oxen re-
maining, within their stalls: for it is easy to say the word,
“Lend me a yoke of oxen, and a wain;” but easy is it to re-
fuse, saying, There ig work for my oxen.> Then thinks the
man, rich in his own conceit,® to build a wain, fool as he is,
. ) rerpdrpugor, dxr@Bdwpor. The loaves, according to commenta-
tors on Hesiod, were made with four marks or incisions, (rpv¢i,)
four square in fact, {LEO Drawing a line right along the whole
the baker divided it into eight portions, called Bdwyol, from BrSu,
protubero. ELE Robinson aptly remarks, that hence may be


explained the line of Horace, Epist. I. xvii. 49, Et mihi dividuo
findetur munere quadra. Pan
2 (siay addar’ thatvar. Van Lennep quotes here the word ép0o- |


. Toueiy, used by St. Paul to Timothy, II. ii. 15. See atso Proverbs


iji. 6, wdoag ddotg gov yrupide abriy, iva opPoropy Tag ddob¢g cov. ”

% S$dccac0at, so that no place may be unsown, so as to need a se-
cond sowing. With txroinras, in the next line, Robinson compares
Callim. H. in Dian, 190, 4g ort Mivwe TroimQsic ix’ Zowrt xaridpa-
ev otipsa Konryg. Plato in the Phadon uses the phrase éwrojaOa
aepi Tag émOupiac.

4 The voice of the erane.] Cf. Aristoph. Aves, 710, omeipsy piv,
Bray yipavog Kowloue’ é¢ Ty AtBinv peraxwog.—Theoc: Idyll. x. 31;
Virg. Georg. i. 120; Hom. JI. iii. 4. From this last. we learn that
the cranes Hy the approach of winter; migrating to Africa, as Aris-
tophanes and others point out. In 450, Goettling here notes three
times of ploughing, Before winter, in spring, and in early summer,
after which last he thinks the sowing took place. V.Lennep takes
Gporog in this passage to mean ploughing and sowing together, and


‘ this a little before the winter, which the migration of the cranes


heralds.
5 xapa 5 Zoya, i. &. wapsort, They would be wanted to haul ma-
nure, &c., into the fields. . ; a
6 Rich in his owp conceit.] “ Riche par imagination.” Guyetus.


456—469, "SHE WORKS AND DAYS. 99


nor knows he this, “but there are also a hundred planks to a
waggon,”! for which it is meet first to take thought, to get
them within the house. ge
But when first the season of ploughing has appeared to
mortals, even then rouse thyself, thy servants alike and thy-
self, ploughing during the season of ploughing, whether dry
or wet, hasting very early, that so thy corn-lands may be full.
In spring turn up the soil ;? and the ground tilled afresh in
, 8ummer will not mock thy hopes: and sow thy fallow-land .
while yet light. Fallow-land ts a guardian-from-death-and-
‘yuin, and a soother of children? Make vows, too, to Jove in-
fernal, and chaste Demeter;‘ that they may load the ripe holy
seed-corn of Demeter; when first beginning thy ploughing,
when thou hast taken in hand the goad at the extremity of
the plough-tail, and touched the back® of the oxen dragging
the oaken peg of the pole with the leathern strap :° and let


Sibi sapiens. Spohn. V. Lennep thinks it means, Rich only in his
own fancy, and not really so.—aftacGar, the aorist for future. See
rad 628; Aristoph. Nub. 1144, xai dixdoacBai gaci po.

1 This P pads of a verse appears to be quoted as a proverb, known
in Hesiod’s day. It was common after it, and is quoted by Plato
Theetet. § 207, A: p. 188, vol. ii. Ast.—oixnia Oic0a: is i. q. oixijia
éaur@ moiv, Guyetus. .

? Bdpt wodziv. Hesiod here states that the soil must be turned up
. (invertere solum. Virg. Georg. i. 64) in spring, and tilled afresh in

Summer (novare, novales, ef. Virg. Georg. i. 71). comparing this

and the next line with Hom. Il. xviij..642; Od. v. 127, we find that -
there were three seasons of tillage indicated by the words zod¢i», -.
yeody, and oreipav, Cf. Smith’s Dict. of Gr. and Rom. Ant. p. 70, b.

rovgiZovcay is here used in a neuter sense: cf, Eurip. Helen. (pind),
1555, wat radra piv by, pading stow vewg 2OipeOa KovgiZoyta: and -

Soph. Phil. 735. ‘ ;

sdxndjreipa—tit, “she that lulls.” Yan Lennep understands it
as “soothing children,” who, when bread fails, (owing to bad crops, )
are wont to lament and cry about it; whence Quinctilian, L.O,
i, 46, Date Boers panem, ne ploret.

* Pluto, the Zede y8ér10¢, and Ceres were connected deities, s‘nce
he was the husband of Proserpine, or as some say of Ceres,—Horace,
in Sat. IL. ii. 124, speaks of this worship of Ceres,

Ac venerata Ceres, ita culmo surgeret uno, &c.

8 qi vésroy ixnat, i, qs veroy égixgat, by the figure Tmesis.—ip raz, -
is properly a young tree or shoot: hence anything made thereof,
e. g,a lance, Eurip. Hippol. 221, and here a goad: cf. Tibull. I. i-

‘30, Stimulo tardos increpuisse boves.—éxérAy, the plough-tail, stiva :
ef. Virg. Georg. i. 174, Stivaque que currug a tergo torqueat imos.


»,


+ © Evdpvoy adxdvrwy peadBy —ivopuor, the -ork-peg fastening the
F 2


H


400 : : : HESIOD. , 469-487,


the servant boy behind, carrying a mattock, cause trouble to
birds,! whilst he covers over the seed. For good-management is
best to mortal men, and bad-management worst. Thus, if the
Olympian god himself afterwards give a prosperous end, will
the ears bend to the earth with fulness, and thou wilt drive
the cobwebs from the bins,? and I hope that thou wilt rejoice,
taking-for-thyself from substance existing within.? And ‘in
plenty thou wilt come to the white spring, nor wilt thou gaze
on others, but another man will be in want from you. But
if at the point of mid-winter‘ you shall have ploughed the
divine earth, you will have to sit and reap but little, grasping
what meets your hand, being covered with dust as you tie it
up, not much. to your pleasure; and you will carry it in a
basket, while few will eye you with admiration.» Now di-
verse at divers seasons is,the purpose of Jove, and hard for
mortal men to understand. But if you shall have ploughed
late, this would be your remedy : When the cuckoo sings first
on the oak-foliage, and delights mortals over, the boundless


yore to the pole, toroBosbc, by a leathern strap, pécaBor, subjugium.
hese straps went round the necks of the oxen, and then through
the wooden Peg, (which was fastened through the bore in the mid-
dle of the yoke into the pole,) and thus uniting the yoke and pole
made the whole plough easy to be drawn. :

1 Van Heaney compares Ov. III. Am. x. 31, Cum bene jactati
pulserant arva ligones: and Virg. Georg. ii..355, Et duros jactare,

identes. ; Rik:

2 Cobwebs from the bins.] That is, because in unfruitful years
there has been no need to brush them off the bins, which were not
wanted for use. The words of the text depict an evidence of plenty
shown by the necessity for getting rid of the cobwebs. Cf. Catullus
xiii. 8, (quoted by Clericus,) Plenus sacculus est aranearum.

ompare 366, éicPar wapedvrog.. In the next line Goettling
points out that zrodtdy is the same as Aevedy, Callimach. Cer. 123;
Lheocr. Id. xviii. 27, The epithet occurs again in line 492.
' 4 sedriove rpomge, i. e. at the winter solstice.’ In the next line the
punctuation of Goettling suggested in his note ad loc. has been
followed: . ;

. ipsvoc dphoug driyov, wepi xepdg tipywr
‘ dyria, Secpevwr xecovipivoc. —


- évria will then be joined with xpos, and epi with tig: wy. Clericus


companys Psalm cxxix. 7, “‘ Wherewith the mower filleth not his

hand; neither he that bindeth up the sheaves his bosom.” :

‘ 8 We are here reminded of the next verse of the Psalm above

uoted. ‘Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the .

ord be upon you: we‘bless you in the name of the Lord.”
are :


488-503, ,THE WORKS AND DAYS. " : 101


earth, then let’ Jove rain three days,! and not cease, neither ,
over-topping your ox’s hoof-print nor falling short of it :?
thus would a late-plougher be-equal-with an early one.’ But
duly observe all things in your mind, nor let either the spring .
becoming white with blossoms, or the showers returning-at-
set-seasons, escape your notice. But: pass-by the seat at thé
brazier’s forge,? and the warm lodging-house in the winter
season, when cold keeps men from toils; at which time an
- active man* would greatly improve his household matters ;
lest the hardship of baneful winter along with poverty catch .
thee, and with lean hand thou press a swollen foot.5 But
many ill designs hath the idler, waiting for a vain hope, and
in need of subsistence, spoken in his spirit. And ’tis no good
hope that sustains a needy man, sitting at a lodging-housey
and who hath not means-of-life sufficient. Point out, then, to
thy servants,® when it is still mid-summer, “It will not be
summer alway: make you cabins.”


* Even a late sower may reap plenteously, if at the first sound of
the cuckoo, i. e. in mid-spring, there be three days’ steady rain.
Aristoph. Av. 505, speaks of the cuckoo’s note warning the Phas-
nicians to begin harvest. Vine-dressers, too, used to prune their
vines before the spring equinox. When they did it later, they were
saluted by wayfarers with the cry, Cuckoo. See Hor. Sat. 1. vii. 31.

2 éedav, properly of horses,.xm\7 being more strictly applied to
beasts having a cleft hoof, as oxen, &c. Cf. Schol. ad Aristoph.
Acharn. 740, :

3 yadxecoy Odor, the seat at the brazier’s forge, a warm: lounge,
whither idlers went in cold weather, and whete beggars and needy
persons passed the night; cf. Hom. Od. xviii. 328; cf. Hor. Epist:
vii. 50, 51. Agoxar were common lodging-houses for the ‘poor and
starving, founded in many cities of Greece at the public cost.
Pausan. x. 25. Goettling reads ix’ ddéa, taking éai for moreover,
as in Soph. Cid. T. 179, & & &doxot wortai 3 Emi penrigec, &c.. ddéa,
in that case,'will be from 4Ajjc, confertas. The ordinary reading
is gwadéa, warm, from é\éa, warmth. ie

4 Virg. Georg. i. 260-1, gives the same advice for rainy weather.


Frigidus agricolam si quando continet imber,
Multa, forent que mox ceelo properanda sereno,
Maturare datur. : : ;


5 Scaliger, on this- passage, gives a translation of a sentence of
Aristotle’s Problems, Famelicis superiora arescunt, inferiora tu-
ment. With the 499th line Guyetus compares Psalm xiv. 1, “The
fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.” ca

* dsixyve. Van Lennep rightly translates this “dic, precipe.”
Grevius quotes Cicero, Sallust, and C. Népos, for a like use of


102 ; HESIOD. : 504—518,


But the month Lenzon,! (evil days, all galling the oxen, )
this month avoid, and the hoar frosts, which, when the North-
wind blows, are hard upon the earth: the North-wind, which
sweeping through steed-rearing Thrace,? upon the broad
deep, is wont to heave i, and land and forest re-echoes :*
and falling on them, brings to many-feeding earth many lofty-
foliaged oaks, and branchirig pines in the mountain-dells, 30
then all the immense forest resounds.4 The wild-beasts cower,
and place their tails beneath their legs, though their skin is
covered over with hair: yet even through these, chilly as it
is, the North-wind pierces, even though they are shaggy-
breasted. It goes also through the hide of an ox, nor does
that keep it out, ay, and blows throygh the skin of the long-
haired goat; but flocks of sheep, because their fleeces last a
whole year, the violence of the North-wind does not at all
penetrate; but it makes the old man bent.”6 And through


“ostendo”’ among the Latins.—zoveiobe wadtac. The slaves of old
lived in the open air all the summer, and only in winter sought the
shelter of huts. ; : ‘

' The month Lenzon.] Plutarch, quoted by. Proclus, says that
the Beotians had no month called Lenzon, but that the month cor-
responding to that month in the ordinary Greek calendar was called
Bucatius (Bovedrioc). It corresponded to part of December and
part of January. Some have hence questioned the genuineness of
this line of Hesiod. But it may be answered with Van Lennep,
that Hesiod, though a Boeotian, used that name of the month
by which it would be known in most parts of Greece.—Sovdépa,
from Bove and dépw, to flay, may be compared with the phrase of
Latin poets. Hor, Od. If]. i. 29, Non verberate grandire vinez.
Virg. Ain. ix. 669, Verberatimber humum. Cf. Lucretius, v. 955, &c.
V. Lennep.

2 bc re ded Oonenc. Cf. Hom. Il. ix. 5, Bopene wai Zépupoc, re re
OpjnnSey &nrov, and Callimach. H. in Del. 62—65. Virg. Aén. xii-
365, ;
Ac velut Edoni Bore cum spiritus alto “
Insonat Hgeo. .


3 péuuxs seems to be from pixw, an old form of pucdo, purd, as is
shown by a reference to Hom. IL. xviii. 580, Bote paxpd pepucwc. It
is translated, remugit, reboat, by Spohn and others.

: * vigtrog, This word, which is found in Apollon. Rhod. iii. 1288 ;
iv. 58, is derived from dpiw, dpi@w, the root of dpiOpdc—vr) apirog,
vipiroc. Guyetus. ;

® inneravai—totum in annum durantes, V. Lennep; who com-
pares Op. et D. 607; Hom. Od. viii. 233.

® rpoxaddy is used of cone who bends and contracts his body be-


wet en


519—535, THE WORKS AND DAYS. 103
_the soft-skinned maiden it does not pierce,' who bides within
the house beside her dear mother, as yet inexperienced in the.
deeds of -golden Aphrodité; when, having bathed her tender
form, and anointed herself with rich oil, she shall rest during
the night? within the house in the wintry-season, when the
boneless one? (the polypus) gnaws at his own foot, in an abode
without fire, and in dismal haunts. For. the-‘Sun doth not
show him a feeding-range‘ to assail: but turns toward the
nation and city of tawny men, and more slowly shines on the
Panhellenes.© Then at length the horned and‘ unhorned
tenants of the wood, sorely grinding their teeth, fly up and
‘down the woodland thickets, (and this is the care of all, of
them in. their thoughts,) where seeking a shelter they have
thick-covered Jairs and rocky caves: then truly are they like
to a man that-goes-on-a-stick,® whose back is well-nigh broken,
and head looks toward the ground: like such an one they
roam, shunning the white snow. :


cause of the cold, the metaphor being taken from the wheel, rpoxée,
according to Proclus.

1 Goettling considers these verses unworthy of the grave Hesied,
and ascribes.them to some later sophistical poet. But V..Lennep
and Hermann agree that the simphcity of thought and expression

‘indicate a very early poet. V. Lennep quotes Catullus, as having

‘these verses in mind in lxii. 86—88, :
5 Virgo

Regia (quam suaves expirans castus odores

Lectulus in molli complexu matris alebat).


? yuyin. Some have here read pvyin, “in the recesses of the
house.” But, as Goettling observes, this would be superfluous, as
we have &vdo6: oixov in the same line. : c ;

* Note the contrast between the last beautiful image and this un-
pleasant, one. The ancients believed that the polypus (avdoreog
without its substantive expressed just as at ver. 529, vAnxolrag: 571,
HEptoucog: 605, Huepdxorrog: 742, wévrolov) through ae eo
its own claws. This notion is controverted by Aristotle H. A.-viii.
2, and Plin. H. N, ix. 29. R yoo

* vopor, i, e. réroy rijg vopijc, a place of pasture; Schol. ruaviwy
avipéy, the Ethiopians. 74 dvw rijc AiBinc, Herod. ii..24. The city’
was probably Meroe, Herod. ii. 29. . '

5 According to Thucyd. i. 8, the Greeks collectively were not
called Hellenes or Panhellenes till after Homer’s time. Cf. Hom.
Il. ii. 580, where the term is applied to the Thessalians. Strabo,
in his 8th Book, says that Hesiod and Archilochus first applied the
word to the whole Greek nation. / ‘

6 soixzode Bpory. This phrase arose from the riddle of the Sphinx,
and was current among the Beeotians and other Greeks for “an old


>


- ‘


.
104, HESIOD. 536—B54.


Even then, as I bid you, clothe yourself in a defence for
your body,! a soft cloak, and a frock reaching to the ground;
- and into a scant warp weave an abundant woof: this ¢ast
around: you, that your hairs may not shiver, nor bristle raised
erect about your body.? And about your feet bind suitable
sandals of the hide of an ox slaughtered with your might,’
having covered them thick within with felt. Then, when
the season of cold has come, stitch together with the sinew of
an ox the skins of first-born kids, that so upon your back you
may throw a shelter from the rain; and on the head above
keep a well-wrought felt hat, that you may not get your ears
drenched. : For bleak both is the morn, when the North-wind
falls upon one,‘ and in-the-morning over the earth from the
starry heaven a wheat-bringing mist is spread above the till-
‘age of the rich,>.@ mist which also having drawn water for
itself from ever-flowing streams, and borné high above the
earth by 4 storm of wind, one while indeed rains toward
evening, and at another descends-in-blasts, the Thracian
North-wind driving the dense clouds.6 Anticipating this,


. : ‘
man,” going on a stick. Cf. Esch. Agam. 80, rpizodag per ddode
oreixet,—and Arg. to Sophocl. Cid. T., where the riddle is given.
With the next line Clericus contpares Horat. Sat. I. i. 5, Multo
fractus em membra labore. émi edys, is of course a case of Tmesis.

' So Hom; IL. ¥:'137, pirene 6’ Hv éddpe, Zovxpa xpodc. With rep-
pedevra ytrava here cf. Hom. Od. xix. 242, Itis equivalent to. xerwy
modtonc, and shows the meaning of the epithet applied to the loni-
ans, éAKexerdvec. a

2 The effects of cold; or of horror, as in Hamlet, act i. sc. 5,

-.And each particular hair to stand on end,
» Like quills upon the fretful porcupine.

5 See Hom. Od. xxiv. 228, 229, and xiv. 23, 24.—Uz erapévoro, that
is slain for sacrifice or feast: not having died a natural death ; be-
cause the skin of this last would be less sound. Below, at ver. 543,
the skins of first-born kids are to be taken in preference to those of
kids born after, because the latter would be less thick and stout.

* Bopéao weodyrog, according to Spohn, means cessante Borea (cf.
Virg. Ecl. ix. 58, and Georg. i. 354, Quo signo caderent Austri).
But Goettling and others agree in considering weodvroc equivalent

: to surecdvrog. os
5 paxdpwy, locupletum: Beatorum. Hom. Il. xi. 68,’Avdpdc pd»
rapog rar’ Gpovpav. :
° Van Lennep quotes at this passage Lucret. vi. 476—480,
Preeterea fluviis ex omnibus et simul ipsd
Surgere de terra’ nebulas estumque videmus,
\ Que velut halitug hinc ita sursum expressa feruntur,


‘ !


"554-569, THE WORKS AND DAYS. 105


return home, when you have finished work, lest ever a-dark
cloud from the sky should surround you, and drench your


skin, and soak your garments; rather avoid it: for this win~ °


try month! is most severe, severe to flocks,? and severe to
men. Then to oxen give but half, but let man have a larger
share, of the allotted food,? for long nights are great helpers.
Observing these things to the completion of the year, equalize
the allowance nights and days, until again Earth, the mother
‘of all, has put forth her various fruits4 = ae
But when after the winter solstice Jove hath fulfilled sixty
days of-winter,> even then it is that the star Arcturus, having
left the sacred stream of Ocean, first rises brightly beaming
in-the-twilight. After him is wont to rise Pandion’s daugh-
ter, the swallow with-its-plaint-at-dawn,® for a light to men,


Suffunduntque sué celum caligine et altas
Sufficiunt nubes paulatin conveniundo. :

1 usic, an old form of py. See Il. xix.117; Herod. ii. 82; Pind.
Nem. v.82; Plat. Crat.409,-C. Goettling finds its root in yey, from
pévw.’ Hence, perhaps, the Latin “ mensis.”’

® wpoBdroug, cattle of every kind, not in the later sense “ sheep.”’
See the Schol. at Hom. Il. xiv. 124, who explains the word by de-
riving it from apd and Baivw, front feet or steps (Baceig) before hind
ones. : . 4

* dppadtijc: Gf. Theocr. Id. xvi. 35, “Appadidy Eupnvoy suerpjoavro


_ mevicrat. The reason ‘for the injunction in 559 is, that in winter


oxen are free from work, but men are not so, and _in addition en-
counter then greater hardship, to be compensated by more food.
Long nights help the oxen, because they have less work, and men,
because they are better fed and enjoy the comforts of winter keep.
Cf. Virg. Georg. i. 302. etgpdvar is here first used in this sense.

“4 igovoOa virxrac. That is, food is to be meted out scorns iny to
the amount of day-labour and night-rest, so that the length of days
and their shortness regulate the allowance. :

5 Sixty days, | in round numbers, strictly fifty4seven,viz. from Dec.
29th to Feb. 24th, when Arcturus rose. At ver. 566, cf. Hom. II.


vy, 5, (of Sirius,) ¢ re paddicra Aaprpdy mappaivyor dedoupivoe


‘Qxsavoio,—axpoxvegatog in ver. 567 is the same as vuxrdg dpody¢ in
Homer. ; : :

6 d9poyén Tlavdiovic, i. e. Procne, the daughter of Pandion, kin
of Attica, and wife of Tereus.. According to the tradition hick
Hesiod follows, she was changed into a swallow, Philomela into a
nightingale, and Tereus into a hawk. See Dict. Gr. and R. Hie:
iii. p. 1002; Virg. Ecl. vi. 78; Ovid. Fast. ii. 853856; Horat. Od.


IV. xii. 5, Nidum ponit, Ityn flebiliter gemens; and Horat. Epist.


I. vii. 12, 13,
Te, dulcis amice, reyiset .
Cum Zephyris, si concedes, et hirurgine prima.


106 ‘ - HESIOD. 569-850,


when spring is fresh-beginning. ‘Anticipating this, prune
your vines:! for tis better thus.


When, moreover, the snail climbs up the plants from-off


‘the ground, shunning the Pleiads, then ’#s no longer the


season for hoeing the vines: but you should sharpen sickles,


‘and rouse your servants. Fly shady seats and sleep at-morn-


‘


ing-time,? at harvest-season when the Sun parches the skin.
Then make you haste, gather-and-bring home your corn,
rising: at the dawn, that you may have substance sufficient.
For the morning obtains by lot a third share of the day’s
work: The morn, look you, furthers a man on his road, and
furthers him too in his work; the morn, I say, which, at its
appearing, sets many men on their road, and places the yoke
on many oxen. , a

When the artichoke flowers,? and the tuneful cicala, perched


on a tree, pours forth a shrill song oft-times from under his


" 15, and Theocr. Id. ix. 31; Aristoph. Pax


wings, in the season of toilsome summer, then goats are fat-
test, wine is best, women most wanton, and men weakest,*
since Sirius parches head and knees, and body also is dried-
up by reason of heat. But then at last be thine the rocky
shade, and Biblian wine,® a light-well-baked cake, the milk of


e ;

? Plat. Leg. viii. p. 844, fixes the time of vintage at the rising of
Arcturus. In the next line gpéorog corresponds with the phrase
“‘domiporta cochlea ”’ of an old poet quoted by Cicero. De Divin. ii.
64, Terrigenam, herbigradam, domiportam, sanguine cassam. For
the Pleiads, see ver. 883—385.

2 The great temptation in hot weather is idleness and self-indulg-
ence, Cf. Virg. Georg. i. 341—343,


‘ Tune pingues agni, et tunc mollissima vina,
Tum somni dulces, denszeque in montibus umbre.


® Vollbehr quotes here Alczeus, (p. 275, Schh.) who describes the
same season when dxét te weraduy adia rirrité—dvet 62 oxddupoc.
This oxédAvpoc mentioned by Pliny, H. N. xxii., who alludes to the
passages of Hesiod and Alceeus, is supposed to be the cinara car-
duneulus of Linneus. V. Lennep. For the rérm¥ see Hom. II, iii.
1159—1163. __,

 paydéraras de yuvaixeg: this is alluded to by Pliny H. N. x. 62,
and by Alczus in the passage quoted above. With the next line
compare The Shield of H., 397. 7
- § Cf. Virg. Georg. ¢. 343, quoted at 574.—Rocky shade. Clericus

wotes Isaiah xxxil. 2, “As rivers of water in a dry place, as the
shadow of a great rock in a weary land.” See also Virg. Georg, ii.
486—489, ' .


Rura mihi et rigui placeant in vallibus amnes,
Cc .


590—~604, “THE WORKS AND DAYS. ‘ “rt 107


goats which-are-now-off-their milk,! and the flesh of a heifer
browsing-the-forest, which has not yet calved,? and of first-
“born kids—then sit in the shade, and drink moreover dark-
hued wine, (having your soul satisfied with viands, and
‘turning your face to catch the brisk-blowing Zephyr, )3 and the
ever-running and forth-gushing spring, which is untroubled-
by-mud.: Pour in three cups of water first, and add the fourth ©
of wine.4 Tee ;
Urge ‘your servants, too, to thrash the holy gift of Demeter,
when first Orion’s strength® shall have appeared, in a breezy
place, and on a well-rounded thrashing-fioor: and by measure
store it well in bins. But when at length you have laid up
all your substance, duly prepared within your house, I re-
commend you to get a houseless hireling,® and to seek a female-
servant without children: for a female-servant. with children
is troublesome. And maintain a sharp-toothed dog ;’ stint
‘' s Flumina amem silvasque inglorius: O ubi campi —~
Sperchiusque, et virginibus bacchata Lacenis
‘aygeta! O qui me gelidis in vallibus Hemi.
Sistat, et.ingenti ramorum protegat umbra.
Biblian wine. Cf. Theocr. Idyll. xiv. 15. Bibline is the name of a
Thracian district, the wine of which was approved for its sweetness .
and lightness. - See Atheneus, i. p. 31, A. ; aoe

1 paZa dyohyain, Proclus explains this word dxuaia—rd yap dpod-
by éwi rod dxpaiou riPerat. Some consider it i. q.“ pain au lait.”
But see Butm. Lexil. p. 90, 91, and note there. :

- # Theoer. Id. i. 6, says yupdpw 62 addy kpiac Eo re x’ dpédtge. |

3 dxpaiog, V. Lennep shows from Proclus that the right inter-
pretation of this word 1s “clear, searching,” the derivation being
from _xepavyups, :

+ This must have been generous wine to bear this infusion,
Cratinus in Atheneus i. p. 29, D., asks Gp’ oice: rpia; will it bear.
three parts water? Cf. Equit. Aristoph. 1195; Alczus, 33, 34.

Van Lennep. i ;

5 aBévog *Qoiwvog, a paraphrasis like t¢ TyAgudxovo—Bin Hoaxdnein.
The rising o Orion would ba about the 9th of June, or a little earlier. '
For Orion, see Virg. in. i. 585; iii, 517; iv. 52; Hor. Od. I. xxviii.
21; Theoc. vii. 53. In the next line compare with dirpoydhy ty,
édwg, Vir. Georg. i. 178, Area cum primis ingenti equanda cylindro.

® On¢ doucog, “ villicus, she non habet familiam.” Goettling. Zo:@oc,

villica. Both were hired servants, of the nature of bailiff and fe-
male overseer. See Theocr. xv. 80 on p60c. They were to be‘un-.
_ married, so as to have no concern but for their master’s interests.
7 Virg. Georg. iii. 401, Nec tibi cura canum fuerit postrema. In
the next line at 7juepdxotrog, cf. Horat. Epist. 1. viii. 32, Ut jugulent
homines surgunt de nocte latrones. Playtus, in Trinumm. LV. ii.
26, calls such an one a“ dormitator.”” > ;


.


108 HESIOD. 604—621,


not his food: lest ever. a day-slumbering man shall have
plundered thy property. Gather in hay and litter,! that your
oxen and mules may have fodder for the year. Afterwards
refresh the limbs of your servants, and unyoke your pair of
oxen.

But when Orion and Sirius shall have reached mid-heaven,
and rosy-fingered Aurora looked on Arcturus,? then, Perses,
cull and carry home all thy grape-clusters. Then expose
them to the Sun? ten days and ten nights, shade them five


.days, and on the sixth draw into vats the gifts of joyous Bac-
- chus. But when now the Pleiads, Hyads,* and strong Orion
‘set, then be thou mindful of ploughing in due season. And


may the year® be prosperous éo thee in thy rustic matters.
But if a longing for dangerous® voyaging seizes you, when

fleeing thé impetuous might of Orion, the Pleiads sink into

the misty deep,’ then rage the blasts of winds of every de-


1 oupgerdy (from obpw, ouperdc, oupperoc); Latin, “ Quisquiliz ;”
“Du fourage,” French. In the next line observe that éageravdv
is pronounced as if quadrasyllabic, (née as if “ yet,””) by Synezesis.

When Arcturus rises with the dawn, then is the vintage-time.
This was about the 18th of September. Plato De Leg. viii. p. 844,


| -D., rhv Spay rv rod rpvyay Apcrodpy Sdvipopor,


3 Acigar O° Hedi. Cf. Virg. Georg. ii. 261, Aquiloni ostendere
glebas. For this drying process compare Hom. Od. vii. 123, 124,
Tig eee piv, Oecréaedow AEupyp én xwpw Tépcerar Heriy. Cf. Plin.

. xiv. 8. . F

* For the Pleiads and their setting, see ver. 314. The Hyades or
Suculz (from ig, sus) set a little later, as did also Orion. Virg. Ain.
iii, 516, Arcturum, pluviasque Hyadas, geminosque Triones Ar-
matumque auro circumspicit Oriona. Cf. Georg. i. 138; Horat. I. iii.
14, Nec tristes Hyadas. Cf. also Smith, Gr. and R. Biog. ii. 533.

5 Goettling thinks this verse an addition of some rhapsodist, as
bearing the marks of a later date, in the use of wAewy for the year;


- but Van Lennep answers that Callimachus (H. in Joy. 89) was ad-


dicted to the use of ancient words: and that no argument as to the
spuriousness of the line can be drawn from its use by Callimachus
and Lycophron. p ;

4 duomenpidov. Cf. Theog. 440, Here a new portion of the poem
begins, having reference‘ to navigation, a rasher way of money-
getting than agriculture, as Hesiod would think.

* Goettling observes that the Greeks generally represented the
stars which have been here and elsewhere mentioned by Hesiod as
the chase of Orion, the Nimrod of Greece: He with his dog Sirius


chases the Bear ("Apxrov), the Pigeons (IIMyiddac), the Hyades


(Yddas), Hence the image here. That the sea was hazardous at
the setting of the Pleiads as testified Theocr. Epigr. ix. 5, 6, dow
& twd Wriddog abryy Movromropiy abrg WAadée ovyxariduc. Cf.


622-640, THE WORKS AND DAYS. 109


scription: then also keep, no more your ships on the dark sea,
but remember to till your land, as I recommend you. Haul
ashore your ship, and cover-it-thick with stones on all sides,!
that they may‘keep off the violence of moist-blowing winds,
when you have drawn out the keel-plug, that Jove’s rain may
not rot it, Store away in your house all the ship’s tackle?
duly arranged, and furl in good order the sails of your deep-
skimming bark, and’ hang ‘up above the smoke your well- °
wrought rudder. And wait you for a passage in due season,
until it shall have come: then drag down to the sea your
swift ship, and store in it also a prepared freight, tha so you
may bring home gain, even as my sire and yours,’ very sense-
less Perses, used to sail in ships, in. search for honest sub-
stance: who of old came hither too, when‘ he had traversed
much sea, after having left Cuma in Xolia, in dark ship;
forsaking nor plenty, nor riches and wealth, but evil poverty,
which Jove gives to men. Near Helicon‘ he dwelt in Ascra,
a wretched hamlet, bad in winter, oppressive in summer, and:
never genial.5 1


,


gos


Callimach. xe xix. (Ernesti,) and Propert, I. viii. 10, Et sit iners

tardis navita Vergiliis. : 1
1 These stones are the ebval of Homer; and the fppara ynée, Il. i.

486; ii. 154, Some commentators argue from quxdeat, i. e. cover,
that the ships were to be buried beneath stones for the winter, to
protect them from the rain and other evil influences of weather.

_ 2 8qda, all the ship’s tackle. See Hom. Od. xiv. 846; xxi. 390,
where the cables are chiefly meant; here, the oars, &c. likewise.
Saha, like the Latin “arma,” signifies “implements.” In the next
line wrepd corresponds with the Latin “alas:” cf. Virg. Ain. iii, 520,
Velorum pandimus alas. Some, however, consider xrepé to be the
oars, Cf. Virg. En, vi. 19, Remigio alarum; and Propert. IV. vi.
47, Centenis Ni alis. In the next line at dip xarvoi, cf. Virg.
Georg. i. 175, Et suspensa focis explorat robora fumus. See also
above at line 45.. | ' :

_ 4 This, with the next eight lines, is a digression, to show how
toilsome and fruitless had been the sea to the sire of Hesiod and
Perses. Ephorus and Suidas say that Hesiod, as well as his father,
was born.at Cuma in Molia. But see 649, 650, which militates
against this. - : a ee

* See for confirmation of this, Pausan. ix. 29, § 1, where the poet

Hegisinoiis is quoted, saying, “Aoxpyy, 0 “Edtndvac tyes moda.

adaxdevra. ; x as
5 Velleius Patere. (i. 7) says of Hesiod, “Sed patriam, quia mul-
tatus ab ef erat, contumeliosissime contestatus est.’ And Ovid. E.


ex Pont. IV. xiv. 81, 82: - <


110 . HESIOD. 641657.


‘But thou, Perses, be thou mindful of all works in-their-


. Seasons, and most of all about navigation. Commend a small


vessel :! in.a large one stow thy freight. Greater will be
thy cargo, and greater thy gain upon. gain, that is to say, if
the winds keep off evil blasts: When thou shalt have turned
thy silly mind towards: merchandise, and desired to escape
debts and unpleasant hunger,? then will I show thee the
courses’ of the loud-roaring sea, though neither at all clever


.in navigation, nor in ships. For never yet have I sailed in


ship, at least across the broad deep, save to: Eubea from
Aulis,¢ where formerly the Greeks, having waited through the
winter, collected together q vast host from sacred Greece > for
Troy with-its-beauteous women. And there I crossed over
to the games in honour of warlike Amphidamas® and to
Chaleis: the numerous prizes duly proclaimed his noble-


; spirited sons had set up: there boast I that; as victor in the


lay, I carried off an eared tripod.


Esset perpetuo sua quam vitabilis Ascra,
Ausa est agricolze Musa docere senis.


Observe the synizesis in the words dpyahéy od. __ ;
' Virg. Georg. ii. 412, Laudato ingentia rura Exiguum colito.
2 Vollbehr reads here, Ei 8 dv éa’ guwopiny reipas—and in the


next BovdrAnat xpéa. If the reading of Goettling is retained, BodAnat


‘must be read as a dissyllable.


3 Goettling here quotes the oracle te Croesus in Herodotus i. 47,
oda 0 tyo'spappou r” ane y Kat pérpa Paddconc. * ‘

* Cf note at 633. If Hesiod was born at Cuma, this statement is
incorrect. In the next line V. Lennep translates peivavrec yepora,
cum hiemem (ibi) mansissent,:’ as Cesar in B. G. y. 51.

5 ieojc. Van Lennep and Guyetus translate this “ great,”
“famous.” Goettling considers it to mean. “ sacred,’? because
Olympus, the seat of the gods; was in it. P

® Amphidamas was king of .Chalcis in Euboea, who fell in a sea-


_ fight with. the Eretrians, the cause of war being the land aroun


the river Lelantus, which Callimach. H. in Del. 289, calls dya@éy


_wediov-Anirarriov. Cf. Thucyd. i. 15; Herod. v. 99; and Strabo, X.


i. 823: Thucydides alludes specially to this war-—The games al-
luded to were funeral games, at which contests of song were wont
to take place. These contests were of very early origin; cf. Hom.
Il. ii. 594, 595, where Thamyris contends with the Muses. Pro-
elus says that Hesiod conquered Homer at this Euboean contest of -
song. But this, beside the diserepeoty of dates, is confuted by
Pausanias, who saw Hesiod’s tripod, and mentioned Homer’s name
in reference to it. Pausan, [X. xxxi. 3, ‘oTwevra is 1, 4. auritum:
ansatum: cf. Hom. I. Rviii. 378. | .


658-677, HY WORKS AND ‘DATS. 114


This J offered to the Muses-of Helicon, where! first they
initiated me in the tuneful song.- Thus much experience
only have J had in ships with-many-nails: but even so I will -
speak the mind of egis-bearing Joye: for the Muses have
taught me to sing the divine song.? For’ fifty days after the
summer solstice, when summer, a season of toil, has come to
an end, sailing is seasonable.for mortals: neither then would
‘you founder your ship, nor would the sea destroy the crew,
unless, that is, of-sét-purpose, earth-shaking Neptune, or Jove,
king of immortals, should choose to destroy them: for with
them is the end of good and bad alike, But at that season
‘the breezes are clear,* and the deep free-from-danger; then in -
security, relying on the winds, drag down to sea your swift
ship, and duly stow im 7¢ all the cargo: but hasten with all ©
speed to come back honie; wait not the new wine, and au-.
tumn rain,® the coming winter, and the terrible blasts of the
South-wind, which is wont to disturb the sea, when it fol-
lows Jove’s abundant rain, in. autumn, and renders the deep
dangerous. : a


2


{ Where first, &c.} i.e. on the spot where they appeared to him,
nheog: 9, 10. , ;

2 Hesiod says that all his practical knowledge of navigation arises
from one short voyage: but still he can speak the mind of Jove:
because the Muses, when they taught him song, would teach him ©
also the kindred subjects, which they superintended, and which
were part of a poet's training, e. g. astronomy. V. Lennep. ,

3 The Etesian winds blew in the A.gean for forty days after the
rising of the dog-star. “When they began to blow mildly and more -
steadily, the summer, which commenced with the rising of: the
Pleiads, was nearly at an end, as was also the harvest, so that a
man might ship his corn, and transport it across the Agean to the
isles, or to Asia Minor, and be back for the vintage, without losing
time (cf. 674). The forty days which Apollon. Rhod. ii. 525 speaks
of, would become nearly fifty, if we count the efght days which
Pliny (ii. 47) calls prodomi before the rising of the dapetar:

+ séxowiec. Eustathius compares with this, Il, xiv. 19, xpiy rive
rexoypévov xaraBnuevat tx Ards odpov, where Arnold explains xexp.-
pévoy, decided, blowing steadily towards one point of the com- -


pass. \ : ~
5 Cf. note at 663, The voyager ought fo be back by the time of
vintage, and so he might be, considering how short his voyage was.,
In the next verse with Nérous re devdg dijrac, cf. Odyss. xii. 3253,
Soph. Antig. 384, yeyepip Nérp. Virg. Ain. vi. 355,
“Tres Notus iS hanged ventosa per zquora noctes


Vexit me violentus aqua. os
~


112 HESIOD. “  678—697,


Another season of sailing, amongst men, is in the spring.

_ When in truth at the first, as large as the crow, advancing,
has left her foot-print, just so large leaves will appear to a
man.on the top of the fig tree’s branch, then, I say, the sea
may be traversed} but this is a spring voyage.? I praise it
‘not, for it is not pleasant to my thinking, because snatched
in haste: with difficulty could one avoid evil; yet even this
too men do, through foolishness of mind: for riches are life to
‘wretched mortals. But dréadful.it is to die in the waves:
now thee I recommend to consider all these things in thy
mind, as I speak them. Nor do thou stow all thy substance
in hollow ships, but leave most behind, and make the lesser
share thy cargo. For shocking it is to meet with loss in the
‘waves of the sea; and sad, if when thou hast lifted an ex-
cessive weight on thy waggon, thou crush the axle, and the
loads be wasted. Observe moderation.> ‘In all the fitting-
season is best—And at mature age bring home a wife to
thine house, when thou art neither very far short of thirty
years,® nor hast added very much thereto, for such a marriage,


! The time indicated is the middle of the spring, ‘‘ when the
leaves have shown themselves on the top of each twig of a fig tree,
just as large as the print of a crow’s foot on the ground.” V. Len-
nep observes that the time meant is later than that alluded to by
Theophrastus, H. Pl. iii. 6, saying that the fig tree buds a little ber
fore the vernal equinox, and prior to that spoken of in St. Matt.-
xxiv. 32, as a sign of summer nigh at hand, where the full-grown
leaves & the fig tree are txeant. ‘

* Van Lennep seems Tia in explaining these words as a sort of
blame, or reservation. ‘This is a spring voyage, you run your own
risk init. Itis like ‘ Punica fides,’ a questionablemovement, ‘ verna
navigatio.’” \ : ; f

~ §% dowarréc. We have followed the common reading and the in-
terpretation of Moschopulus, dpwaxrdg. Biatoc, ob rov xaipod diddv-,
To¢, 4a rv dvOparwr dpwalévrwy abriv. In this sense,:V. Len-
nep observes, Silius Ital. i. 569 uses rapio, Tempore Martia Uten-
dum est rapto. # . rare.

* Compare Pindar, Isthm. ii. 17, xenpara, xojpar’ dvip. Horat.
Sat. i. 163, a

O cives, cives, querendapecunia primum,
Virtus post nutnmos. ’


With the next line compare Hom. O4. v. $12. : :

5 pérpa is explained here rightly by Grevius “ justum modum.”

Gnyetus and others render it “tempus opportunum,” but that is
Aitie


xap“¢. a tah e ‘ . ss
6 Plat. de Rep. Vv, 460; Leg. vi. 772; Aristot. Pol. vii. 14, are


697-714, THE WORKS AND DAYS. . 113


look you, is seasonable. And let the woman be in her bloom
four years, and be married in the fifth.! Marry a maiden, too,
that you may teach her chaste morals. Most‘of all, marry
her who lives near you, when you have duly looked round on |
_ everything, lest, you should marry a cause-of-mocking? for
your neighbours. For nothing better does a man gain than
the good wife, vhilst' than the worse, the banquet-seeker,
nought else is more dreadful: though a man be strong, she
consumes him without a torch,® and consigns him to unripe
old age. ;
‘And be duly regardful of the vengeance of the blest Im-
. mortals: neither make thy friend equal to a brother: but, if
‘thou shalt have made him so, be not the first to do him wrong ;
and lie not, for talking’s sake ;4 though, if he should begin
either to speak aught distasteful,® or even to do it against
” you, requite him just twice as much, in thy resentment; but
if again he lead the way to friendship, and. be willing to give
satisfaction, accept it; ¢¢ s a wretched man, be sure, that gets
now one, now another for his friend,® but thy mind let not.


uoted by Goettling, as agreeing generally with Hesiod here, though
the last of them iG the fit age for a man at thirty-six or a little
ess. aoe pie
1 Mulier autem pubescat quatuor annos, quinte a pubertate anno
nubat. V. Lennep. That is, counting from the 14th year, let her
wait four more years, and be married in her 19th year. ;
' 2 So Hom. IL iii. 51, uses xéppa. Svopeviow piv xdppa, xarngelny
8 eoi abr. In the next line cf, with AyiZerar, Theogon. 444, An 3
dé%ev, where see note 4 on the word. The commentators quote


Simonides, . / :
. yuvatede obdiy xpiip dvio Aniferas
.  baOdijg dpeevor, 0808 piytoy KaKijg. Lets
* Cf. Eurip. Orest. 621, log dgive sip? avydaior xvph, at which
_ passage Musgrave quotes Hesiod.—dpg yfoai: ct. Hom. Od, xv.
357. Robinson notes that “ cruda senectus ”’ had the very opposite
ineaning among the Latins. Cf. Virg. /En. vi. 304, Sed cruda deo
viridisque senectus. Inthe next line the word dmv, retribution, .
is derived, according to Guyetus, from ézi, or ixw. He quotes’
Tibullus I. viii. 72, Nescius nltoronh post caput esse deum.

- # ydoone xdpuv, “for the sake of vain babbling.” So V. Len-
nep, “linguz temeré garrientis gratia. - .
5 droOimeorv. Cf. Hom. Il. xiy. 261. With the next line com-

pare Soph, Ajax, 79, odxouy yihwe Hereroe sig ¢xOpoic yehav. »- :

* This passage seems to urge “that it is better to make up dif-”
ferences with former friends than cement new alliances.” ¢ 52 py)
tt,.«.7.4. Melancthon explains these words, “Ita cum amico in

; : -


114 HESIOD. 714743,


‘thy countenance at all convict. Neither be called the host of


vhany, nor the host of none, nor comrade of the evil, nor re-
viler of the good. Nor ever have-the-cruelty to reproach a
man with wretched, heart-consuming poverty,! the behest of
the ever-living-gods. The best treasure, look you, among
men is that of a.sparing tongue,? and the most grace is that
of one which moves measuredly. If you have spoken ill,
haply you will yourself hear worse. Neither be uncourteous
in a feast of many. guests, arising from a general payment :?
‘for the pleasure is then greatest, the expense least. .Nor ever
in the morning make libations of dark wine to Jove with
hands unwashen,! nor to the other gods. For they on their
part heed not, and more, they spurn your prayers.

Neither do thou ever cross the limpid wave of ever-flowing
rivers> with thy feet, chat is, before thou shalt have prayed,
gazing on the fair streams, and having thine hands washen
with the pleasant clear water. Whoso shall have crossed a
river having his hands unwashen through perverseness, with
him the gods are wroth, and are wont to give him griefs after-
ward. And do not at a festive banquet of the gods pare from
the finger® with bright steel the dry from the fresh.


gratiam redi, ut neque in animo, neque in vultu supersint ulla simul-
tatis indicia. : : ’
' Commentators compare Theognis, 155, pyworé ror meviny Oupog-


' Odpov avdpi arabaie, Myo’ dxpnopocbyyy obAepivny mpdgpepe.—pand-


‘pwr Sow. Cf. Eurip. Alcest. 1071, xaprepeiy O00 dda, V. Lennep,
a Cf Proverbs xv. 23, ‘A word spoken in due season, how good
is it!” : ;

* IT have translated herg according to Van Lennep’s interpreta-
tion, “Ne sis parum facilis collator convivii quod multi amici ex
communi jnstruunt.” x xoqwod is i. q. 8 épdvov. For dvomippedog
see above in Theogon. 444,

* Cf. Tibull. II. 1. 13, 14, :

Casta placent superis: pura cum veste venite:
; Et manibus.puris sumite fontis aquam : ;
and Virg. Zin. ii. 719, 720, Attrectare nefas donec me flumine vivo
sa Le Clerc compares Genesis xxxv. 2. See also below, at
ver. 739, Sart og . . :

5 The rivers, being accounted :gods, are to be propitiated by
prayer, before fording. ‘V. Lennep compares Apollon. Rhod. i. 9, °
m viaseagen of the common practice in Greece of crossing rivers
on foot. ;

* ard mevrétow: cf. 875, gAATnS, 571, seetouecs 526, dvdoreoc,
for like euphemisms, %révroZog==five-pointed, i.e. the hand. Goett-

7


\


744—760, THE WORKS AND DAYS.. — - 115
Nor ever place a cat above the bowl, when men drink :!
for a deadly fate is wrought in -it. Nor,*when building a _
house, leave it not-finished-off, lest, mark you, one on
a, the cawing crow should eroak.? Nor, having taken from
cauldrons aot-yet-used-for-sacrifice, eat, or wash thyself:
since in these, too, there is a penalty. Nor let a lad of twelve.
years sit inactively ;3 for tis better not, since it makes a man
unmanly: nor yet a child of twelve months; for this is all the
same. Nor, being a man, cleanse thy skin in the woman’s bath ;
for on this, too, there is a-dismal penalty for a time. Nor, if
thou hast chanced upon lighted sacrifices, mock at rites of hid-
den import ;+ the god, look thou, is wroth at this also. Nor
ever defile the current of rivers flowing seaward, nor -foun-
tains, but specially avoid it. For this is nowise best.
Thus do, and avoid the evil.rumour of mortals. For evil


ling and V. Lennep quote from Diog. Laert. viii. 17, a saying of
Pythagoras, rapa Ouciay py dvuyiZov. 2

' Goettling explains this of preferring unmixed wine to wine and
water; and considers 6Ao7 potpa drunkenness. Proculus seems.to
give a pointless explanation ; and perhaps V. Lennep’s is the most”
reasonable conjecture, “that as oivoyéy was the smaller vessel, in'
which the wine from the xeyrp was conveyed into the cups of the

ests, to place the can‘over the bowl was to stint the liquor and

ishonour the feast.”’—mvdyrwy, i. e. inter bibendim.

? Ipsa ales est inauspicate garrulitatis, a quibusdam tamen lauda-
ta. Plin. N.H.x.12. Cf. re: Ecl. i. 15. -In the next line avemip-
péxrwy is i, q. dOiTwy; pilav, being the same as Ode. So “facere’”’
and “ operari”’ are used by Horace and Virgil. ;

* Tzetzes and others interpret decrocot of tombs, to sit on which
‘was a bad omen. .A variety of suggestions not more to the point
have been offered, but the most reasonable explanation is that of
Goettling based on Proculus and thé passage from Plutarch to
which he alludes; namely, that the words are an injunction against
létting a child of twelve years, or even an infant of twelve months
be suffered to be without exercise fitted for the strengthening of
his body. We may compare with én’ dxevfroioe used thus adverbi-
ally, Theocritus, Idyll. i. §1, tai 2nooies.—od yao Gpevoy, a form of
dissuading; ef. Herodot. i. 157, and Matt.*Gr. Gr. § 457, p. 757.

4 pupedery didna, Butmann in his Lexilogus (p. 49) shows that
the only approach to the common-sense meaning hére is Le Clere’s,
and that those who take dtdnAa adverbially are wide of the mark.
He observes, that in all ancient religion there were rites, whose
origin the people, nay, sometimes even the priest, might not know.
A thought ess person chancing on the celebration of these might’
ridicule what he did not understand. For the injunction given in
the next line, compare a similar observance of the Persians, He-
rodot. i. 188, eae cn aes :

12 ‘


116 ; HESIOD. 761—T74,


report is light to'lift with all ease,! but painful to bear, and
difficult to set ¢side. And no rumour wholly dies away,
‘which many peoples shall have spread abroad ; in sooth she,
too, is a kind of goddess.


Mind well, too, and teach thy servants fittingly the days?
appointed of Jove; to wit, the 30th day of eack month, the
best both for inspecting work done, and distributing allotted
sustenance, when the peoples observe it, iz deciding the
right. For these following days are from counselling Jove.‘
In the first place, the first, the fourth, and the seventh, is
a holy day:\ for on this last, Latona, gave-birth-to Apollo
of-the-golden-sword:> the eighth and ninth; these are two
days, F ween, of the month far advancing, for getting ready
the works of mortals: and the eleventh and twelfth, both in


2 Van Lennep observes that Rumour is here compared to a bur-
den easy to be lifted, but hard to bear, most hard to be deposited.
She is. here added to the list of the goddesses of the Theogdny. «
For an elaborate description of her, see Virg. Ain. iv. 174—188.

_? Here follows Hesiod’s Calendar,'curious on account of its an-
tiquity. A catalogue of lucky and unlucky days was acceptable to
his agricultural friends. Virgil imitates it in Georg. i. 276, &c.,
where see Servius’s nete. Hesiod’s month, according to Goettling,
was one of 80 days, divided into three decads, (ily lordpevoc, peowy,
¢0ivwv,) so that in ver. 782 ern wéon is the 16th, in the 785th zewry
éxrn the 6th, and in the like manner throughout.—Hermann, how-
ever, thinks that Hesiod divided only into icrapivog and g0ivwy. rpin-
xdda pyvoc. Hesiod begins with this, to show that all his months were
30 days long. On this day the Greeks seem to have distributed the
appadu) (Lat. Demensum) to their retainers. The 1st of the month,
the Calends, was the Roman pay-day. Cf. Plaut. Stichus, I. fi. 3.

% er’ dv, x... Eo die, quo populi lites dijudicantes festa
agunt. Goettling, © ; ‘
4 This verse is connected by yap with ver. 765, and the list that
follows is that of-days settled and defined by Jove in contradis-
tinction to the @xfpior, unfixed, unmarked days, mentioned below

at ver. 823. ° :

5 Van Lennep seems right in following Scaliger and the Scho-
liasts, interpreting vm the first of the month, i. q, bo nvia; for
we have the authority of Herodot. (vi. 57) to show that the Ist and
7th of every month was sacred to Apollo; who was called éS8dopa-
yirac, (Agsch. S. c. Theb. aot) and be etn to have been born on
the 7th of the month Thargelion. Cf. Blakesley’s note at Herod.
-l.c. and Spanheim on Callimach. H. in Del. 251. The 4th day was
sacred to Mercury; the 8th was sacred to Neptune; the 9th (cf.
Virg. Georg. 286) Nona fugz melior, contraria furtis, ;


"44790, +« THE WORKS AND Days. Uy


truth are good, ‘the one for shearing sheep, the other for reap-
ing laughing corn: but the twelfth is far better than the


eleventh, for on it, look you, the high-hovering spider! spins '


his threads in the long semmer day, when also the wise ant
harvests his heap. On this day, too, a woman should set up
cher loom, and put forth her work. - -But on the thirteenth of
the beginning of the month? avoid commencing your sowing :
though to‘set plants it is best. eg

The sixteenth, however,? is very unprofitable to plants, but
auspicious for the birth of men, though for a girl it is not
propitious, either to be first born, or to be joined in wedlock.
_ Nor, in truth, is the first sixth.day+ suitable for the birth of
girls, but a favourable day for cutting kids and flocks of
sheep, and for enclosing a fold for sheep. Fortunate is the day
on which a man is born: but it is fond® both of uttering rail-


‘leries, and of falsehoods, and wily words, and stealthy fond ~


discourses. On the eighth. ef the month emasculate the boar
and loud bellowing bull, and on the twelfth the toil-enduring
mules., But on the longest twentieth day;® in broad day,
generate a wise man, for he will be very cautious of mind.
.And lucky for raising sons is the tenth day, and the foir-


teenth for girls, On this; too, tame sheep, and trailing-footed, .


! depovmérnrog dpayyne. Cf. Scut. 316, kbevot a pC form °


doaxyne is found in Pindar. fr. 257 (according to L. and 8. Lexicon).
fuarog tx wieiov is to be construed, with V. Lennep, “ from the time
when the day lengthens,” i. e. the 12th day of the summer month.
To explain it “ medio die ” is soneasy to fact and experience; for
the spider weaves from dawn to midnight, and does not wait till
noon to begin.—idpe, i. e. the ant, just as we have seen wevrdZouo
at ver. 742. . ; \

2 Here Hesiod would seem to divide his month into two parts,
not, as in avery other place, into three decads. The division here
followed would seem to be regulated by. the full moon.

8 Sern 0 4 péoon, i. e..9 fern Kai Sexdrn. Pollux.

* 4 mpwrn Serq=the.6th of the month. Diana, according to the De-
lians, was born on the 6th of the month Thargelion. Apollodor. in
Diogen. Laert. ii. 44. :

5 gAée. Goettling, following Proclus,-eonsiders the subject of


grAéee to be “ the boy born on that day.” But Van Lennep considers ,


guAéee to refer to the “day itself.” In 789 we have the word dagrc-
pove, recalling the 27th Idyll of Theacritus, called éaptoric.

8 gixdde & iv peyddy. According to Goettling eixdg mip jpare
means the 20th day of the month in which the year’s longest day
falls, and sixdg peya@An the same day in the cycle of three years, or
Trieteris. : \


“418 4 HESIOD. *790-—813,


crumple-horned oxen, and sharp-toothed dog, and patient
agules, applying your hand ¢o them.! But be cautious in your
mind to avoid gnawing the heart with grief on the twenty-
fourth and fourth of the month: it is in truth a very per-
fect day.! ; :

Then or the fourth? of the month lead home a bride, after
having examined the, omens, which are best in this matter.
But avoid the fifth days, since chey are both mischievous and
destructive; for on the -fifth ’tis said that the furies attend
upon Oreus born on that day,? whom strife brought: forth, .
as a woe to the perjured. On the seventeenth * watch well,
and cast upon the well-rounded thrashing-floor Demeter's
holy gift ;.and let the wood-cutter cut timbers for chamber-
furnituré, and many blocks for naval purposes, which are fit
for ships. Andon the fourth begin to put together slight
vessels. But the nineteenth is a better day towards evening.
And the first ninth day in.@ month is wholly harmless5 to
mortals’, since lucky indeed is this day for planting and for
birth, to man a3 well 43s woman; and never is it a day alto-


1 imi xsipa TiOeic, a case of Tyfotc. “ palpans et attrectans eorum
terga.”’ mepidago de Oupg, &c. Goettiing tries to resolve the awk-
wardness of construction by mapping adyea OvpoBopsiv, to be i. q.
BH by abry adyed ge OvpoBopot. But Van Lennep’s suggestion that
in rerpad’ not “a! but “+” is elided, seems a simpler and more pro=
bable solution, and‘is adopted in the text of this translation.

? This day was sacred to Aphrodite and Hermes. Proclus. The
Greeks and Romans attached great weight to omens in this matter.
Hence Catullus, lix. 20, Bona cum bona Nubit alité virgo; and+
Horat. Od. I. xv, 5, 6, . :


. : Mala duces avi domum
‘ Quam multo repetet Grecia milite.


® The reading revvupévac is shown by Butmann, Lexil. p. 435, to
be fitly superseded by “Opxoy yewvépevov. The Furies omthe fifth of
the month, his birth-day, protect “Opxog, and avenge any wrong
offered to him, i. e. perjury of all kinds, Virgil, imitating this
passage, speaks of another Orcus, j..e. Hades or Pluto, “Opxog, the

ersonification of a righteous oath, was unknown as a deity to the

omans. See Virg. Georg. i. 277, Quintam fuge; Pallidus Orcus, .
&c., and ef. Cid. Col. (Sephocl.) 1767, Arde dprog.

4 Virgil, Georg. i. 248, ascribes to the 17th day the luck which
Hesiod gives to the 12th, the 13th, and the 14th of the' month, as


‘connected with the commencing various works,


* The first ninth in the month is wholly harmless, whereas the
line before tells us that the 19th, or second ninth, is only good in a
qualified sense, ive. towards evening. évi deieka is used adverbially.


©


813—828, THE WORKS AND DAYS, HO


gether bad. Now few, again, know that the twenty-ninth! of
the month is best both for broaching a cask, and placing a’
yoke on the neck of oxen and mules and fleet-footed steeds:
then draw down your swift, many-benched ship to the dark |
sea; yet few call it a truthful day. On the fourth day open
your cask: the fourteenth is a day sacred beyond all others’:
and few know that the fourth after the twentieth of the month
is best,? at the break of day: but toward evening it is worse.
These days indeed are to men-on-the-earth a great benefit.
But the others falling-between 3 are harmless, bringing nothing
of moment. One man praises one day, another another. But few
know them. Sometimes a day is'a step-mother,* sometimes a
mother. Blest and fortunate is he who knowingly does -all
these things with réference to these days, unblamed by the’
immortals, discerning omens, and avoiding transgressions. —


1 Some commentators explain rprcevdda as i, a trae sivada, the
29th ; others as the 27th. V. Lennep inclines to the former because
the ninth and nineteenth have been mentioned’ before: and he’
au tpig for rpirny by Pliny’s expression Ter (i, e. tertium)
consul. : :

2 Tlatipos & adre. Goettling understands cicAjoxousr, But it would
follow more epprobtiat ly on toaet, in ver. 814, which would not be
so far removed, but that toac: might be taken up, if with Goettling
‘ and Vollbehr we take verses 815 and 816 as spurious.

. _% perddouros = ai peragd tiv pnOacdiy awiwrovods. V. Lennep
shows from Hom. I]. iv. 455, that dodzoc is the noise of anything
falling or dashed to earth. Ace ‘

* V. Lennep adduces a similar metaphor from Claudian de Raptu
Proserp. iii. 39, 40, where Nature complains,
Se jam, que genitrix mortalibus ante fuisget,
_In dure subito mores transisse noverce. -


.


THE HYMNS OF CALLIMACHUS.


THE HYMN TO JUPITER.


Art the libations to Jove,! what else can be better to cele-
brate, than the god himself, ever mighty, ever king, driver ot
the earthborn,? justice-dealer to the Celestials ? How, then,’
shall we celebrate him, as Dictean, or Lycean: much in
doubt is my mind; since his birth-place is disputed. Thou,
Jove, men say, wast born on the mountains of Ida:* and


1 The first Hymn is with propriety in honour of Jove. Virg. Ecl.
iii. 60, Ab Jove principium. Spanheim shows from various authori-
ties that hymns were wont to be chaunted during, as well as after,
libations. In ver. 2 he compares with aitv dvaxra, Soph. Cid, T.
905-6, and Aisch. Suppl. 574, Zede aidvog xpiwy dxaverou.

2 TindSyovor, i. e. ynyeveic. (The other reading is HyAayévwy, from
IyAayov, Pelagonum.) They are the same as the ynyevsig men-
tioned in the Bath of Pallas, ver. 8. Blomfield for éXarfipa reads
éderijpa, from a comparison of copyists of Callimachus, Nonnus,
and Antipater .Sidonius, instituted by Ruhnken. For dicacwérov
ef. Hom. Jl. i. 238. In the 5th verse Callimachus imitates Hom.
Il. ix. 230, év dog 58 cawokper F asrodscBat. ' tee

* Dictean, Lycean, Ida, Arcadia.—The rivals for the honour of
Jove’s Bi place are Crete, of which Dicte and Ida were moun- ~
tains; and readia, one of the mountains of which is Lyceeus. For
the Cretan Ida see Virg, AEn. iii. 105, Creta Jévis magni medio
jacet insula ponto, Mons Ideus ubi, and Servius’s note on that
passage. In Georg. iv. 152, Virgil follows the tradition that he
was born on Dicte. For the claim of Arcadia, we have .the allu-
sion of Pindar, Ol. xiii. 154, Aveaiov Bwpég dvat, and Pausan. viii.
88, § 3, who states that the Arcadian tradition is that Jove was reared
on Lyczeus by certain nymphs. Callimachus determines Jove’s”
birthplace to have been Arcadia, and his early nursing-place Crete.
For Hesiod’s account see Theog. 477—484. ;

ue : oy


co =


) THE HYMN TO JUPITER. “121


thou, Jove, others affirm in Arcadia: which of the twain, O
father, have uttered-falsehood. The Cretans are ever liars: !
for a tomb to thee, O king, the Cretans have constructed.
But thou art not dead. For thou existest ever. Thee Rhea
‘bare on the Parrhasian? height where the mountain is most
screened with bushes. ' Thence is the spot sacred,’ neither
doth: any-thing-that-moveth-on-the-earth, when in need of
llithyia, nor any woman, draw nigh to it; but the Apidanes?
call it the olden child-bed of Rhea. There when thy mother
had laid thee down from her divine lap, straightway she be-
gan to seek a stream of water, wherein she might bathe the
filth from her offspring, and lave in it ‘thy skin. ~

.But not yet was vast Ladon flowing, nor Erymanthus,
clearest_of rivers: as, yet all Aréadia was unwatered, (though
it was destined afterwards to be exceeding-well-watered,)
since at that time, when Rhea loosed her zone in child-birth,®


' For this character of Crete compare St. Paul’s uotation from -
Epimenides, in the Ep. to Titus#i. 12. See also Ovid. A. A: i.
297-8 . F '
ot Non hoe centum que sustinet urbes,

Quamvis sit mendax Creta negare potest.


“The same poet identifies Crete with Jove’s birth-place in his He-
roides, Phedr. to Hippol. 163, Ariadne to Theseus, 68, Puero cog-
nita terra Jovi. That the Cretan lie,'relative to Jove’s tomb, was the
cause of the’island’s bad name, is implied by Lucan, Pharsal. viii.
872, Tam mendax Magni tumulo, quam Creta Tonantis.

? Parrhasian.] Arcadia was called Parrhasia from Parrhasus, a
son of Lycaon. Ovid (Fast. i. 478) has Deserit Arcadiam, Parrha-
siumque.Larem. With the account of the reverence paid to Rhea’s
cave compe Pausanias, viii. 36, § 2, and the description of Eve’s
bower, Milton’s Paradise Lost, iv. 703, quoted by Dodd in his
translation.

3 ’Qybycor, olden, from Ogyges, a very early king of Attica. Cf.
Callim. H..in Del. 160; Aisch. S. c. Theb. (Blomf.) 310. The
Apidanes are the aboriginal inhabitants of the Apian land, Apia
(from Apis,son of Phoroneus) being the first name of the Pelopon-
nese.. For the fabulous antiqhity of the Arcadians, see Ovid. Fast.
i. 469—470, Orta prior, Luna, &c. ;

4 Adpara yurdAdeatro. Cf. Pausan. viii. c. 41, § 2, who quotes
‘Hom. II. i. 314. For Ladon in the next line, see Pausan. viii.

-¢. 25, § 7, who considers it equal to any river, Greek or Barbarian;
and for Erimanthus, ibid. 27, § 6. In the next line cadéeoOae is
used like kexAjo8ac in Hesiod, Theog. 410. : 7

+ There were two periods to which this phrase applied,—mar-
riage and child-birth. With reference to this ae time Lucina

. :


122 : CALLIMACHUS. ; 22—-36,
of a truth moist Iaon reared many hollow! oaks above it, and
‘Melas bare many waggons, and above Carnion,? moist though
it mow is, many serpents had made their lurking-holes, and a
man would go a-foot over Crathis, and over pebbly Metope?
thirsting, though the plenteous water was lying ‘neath his
feet. Then, I wot, constrained by perplexity, august Rhea
said : “ Dear Earth, do thou, too, bear ; for easy are thy throes.”
The goddess spake, and having uplifted on high‘ her great arm
smote the mountain with a staff. So it was rent widely asunder
at her bidding, and poured forth a vast flood. Therein having
cleansed thy skin,® O king, she swathed thee, and gave thee
to Neda to carry into a secret-place in Crete, that so thou

~ mightest be reared stealthily: to Neda most honoured ® of
the Nymphs, who then were her mid-wives, and eldest-born.
after Styx and Philyra.? '


is called in Theocritus, Idyll. xvii. 60, AvoiZwvog EidciOura.—See
Translation. . .

! gapwvidac (a galpw).—In the next line dxynoev is retained by
Blomfield as the Doric form from éyéw. - Iaon and Melas, rivers of
Arcadia: the former mentioned by Dionysius in his Periegesis,

ver. 416. :

? Carnion.] The common reading is Kapiwyoc, which has been
altered to Kapydvog by Arnaldus from Pausan. viii. 34, § 3; and
Plin, N. H. iv. 6.-dvyp for rec, which would be more classic.

3 Crathis, Metope.] Both rivers of Arcadia: a commentator (fol-
lowing Strabo) derives the former from xepdvyuyt, because two
tivers combine and join their floods in the Crathis. In the next
line dupadéog is i. q. siccus. Cf. Hymn. in Cer, ver. 6, abadéog..

. * dvravicaca, i608. Blomfield reads ipéce, comparing Hom. U1.
xxii. 34, ido’ betaeW ag and shows that ipéce is “in altum: ”
ide, de alto: imped, “in alto: ” as with rnAdOe, TAAGO, TNASCE.

5 gadpbvaca, i. e. Kobcaca: Steph. who shows that this is so by
comparison of Hymn in Del. 6, Aoteé rs cal oreipwoe. In the next
line Ernesti’s emendation, KevOpav’ t¢ Kpyraioy, is preferable to
the other readings. Blomf. compares Eur. Helen.’ 24, "Idaitoy sic
xevOuova, 7

8 zpsoBurary, maximé veneranda. Ernesti, Compare Asch. S. c.
Theb. 390, and Blomf. Gloss. ad loc.— Neda is mentioned with
Ithome, by Pausan., iv. 82, § 2, as the nurse of Jove, and, in book
viii. c: 38, § 3, with Thisoa and Agno. These gave names toa
city and a fountain, whilst Neda gave her name to a river.

7 For Styx, who is named by Hesiod zpogegesrary aragiwy, (Theog.
361,) was eldest of the Oceanids. Philyra was also a daughter of
Oceanus, and the mother of Chiron by Cronos. Cf. Apollon. Rhod.
ii. 1241; Pind. Nem. iii. 82. Hesiod calls Chiron :Aupidys,
Theog. 1002. «


a A


3T—50, THE HYMN TO JUPITER... 123


Nor did the goddess pay back vain thanks: for she. named
that flood Neda, which in full force somewhere over-against
the very city of the Caucones,! which iscalled Leprium, mingles .
with the sea ;? and the sons of Lycaon’s daughter,’ the she-
bear, drink it as the most ancient water. When the nymph
was leaving Thene, carrying thee, father Jove, towards
Cnossus, (Then was nigh to Cnossus,) then fell thy
navel, O god: whence‘ afterward the Cydonians call that
plain Omphalian. But thee, O Jove, the associates of the Cory-
bantes, the Dictean Melie,> took-to-their-arms: Adrastea
lulled thee in a golden cradle :® thou suckedst the full teat of
the goat-Amalthea,? and moreover atest sweet honey. For


1 Caucones, ] i. e. the most ancient dwellers in what was afterwards
Elis. Strabo calls them a migratory people of Arcadia, part in
‘Triph lia, part in Hollow Elis. Strabo, viii. p. 821. Lepreon was the
capital of Triphylia. Cf. Smith, Dict. Gr. and R. Geography, vol. i.
572; Niebuhr’s Lect. on Ethnography, i. 77.. The Neda forms in
part of its course the southern boundary of Elis. © ,

2 Naoqi. This use of the name of the god for the element of
which he is the god, is easy of illustration. os Androm. 161, Adépa
Nupydde. So Virg. Eclog. vii. 60, Jupiter et leto descendet plurimus
imbre; ver. 69, Et multo imprimis hilarans convivia Baccho. ~

* The fable of Lycaon’s daughter Callisto, changed into a she-
bear by Juno, and mother of Arcas, the ancestor of the Arcadian,
by Jove, is told hy Ovid in his Metamorph. ii. 400—495.

4 éyOev ixsivo. Blomfield illustrates ey in this sense by rot -
tvey e& de causi, H. in Del. 314.-Thene; Cnossus, Omphalus,
Cydones. The three former were towns, the latter a people of
Crete. ; : :

5 The Meli (see Hesiod, Theog. 187) lived in woods and groves ;
and so are called the associates of the Corybantes, who were fond
of the same haunts, and were priests of Cybele, i. q. Rhea. Cf. art.
Cabiri and Rhea, in Smith’s Dict. of Gr. and R. B. Adrastea is
mentioned as Jove’s nurse in Apollon. Rhod. iii. 133, &., as having
given him a ball, xetvo rd of roinoe gin rpopde Adphorera. . '

$ Xixvwp tv Yovoty, properly a golden “ winnowing fan.” It-was a

ood omen to place a child in one of. these, instead of a cradle.
Bacchus who is called Auevirne, (Hesych.) is represented as carried
in a “ vannus ” or “ Aixvee ” Made dancing Bacehants. So. Jove
here, and Mercury, see Hom. H. in Merc. 254. Warriors’ children
were places in a shield. Cf. Theocr. Idyll. xxiv., yadxeiay cariOnxey
‘bg dorida. :
re aiyic’ ’ApgdGeinc, Cf. Ovid, Fast. ver. 115—128, Naig Amalthea,
&c. For 6@jea0 see Hom. I. xxiv. 58.—yAued enpioy. So Bacchus was
fed. See Apollon. Rhod. iv. 1136, and Comatas in Theoer. vii. 84
Cf. Isaiah xiii. 15, “ Butter and honey shall he eat.” Song of Solo-
mon iv.11; v.1, &c., quoted by Dodd frem Isaac Vossius ad Bar-


‘ _


124 | CALLIMACHUS, 50—69,


on a sudden sprung up the labours of the Panacrian bee on
the mountains of-Ida, which men call Panacra. But around
thee vigorously danced: the, Curetes! the war-dance, rattling
their arms, that so Cronus might hear with his ears the sound
* of the shield, and not thee crying. Nobly didst thou thrive,
and nobly wast’ thou reared, heavenly Jove. And quickly
didst thou grow up, quick came for thee the first growth of
beard. Yet whilst still boyish thou musedst on all things pro-
per-to-mature-age :?. wherefore even thy brothers, though
being elder-born, grudged not heaven éo thee to hold as thine
allotted home. Now, ancient poets were not altogether true.
They said the lot divided homes to the sons of Cronus in-
three-divisions ; but who, that was not foolish, would draw
- lots in the case of Olympus? ‘and Hades? For on equal terms
*tis meet to.draw lots: but these differ in the highest degree.
_ If I must fable, fain would ‘I fable what might convince the
ears of my audience.* ‘Not lots, but deeds of prowess, and
thy Force and Might, which thou placedst near thy seat,5 made
thee sovereign of the gods. And thou madest a bird distin-
guished-far-beyond others, messenger of thy portents,® whichI .
- would thou wouldst manifest propitious fo my friends. Thou


nabe Epist. p. 318. Virgil alludes to the work of the, bees in.
Jove’s nurture, Georg. iv. 149—152, . - .

' odAa, neut. adj. used adverbially. Cf. H. Dian. 246, OdAa carexpo~
tar.fov. Hom. ll. xvii. 756. Lucret. ii, 63, quoted by Blomf., ren-
-ders otAa “ pernice chorea.’’—Curetes, i. q. Cabiri: Corybantes: cf.
46, and see Horat. Od. I. xvi. 8.—ptdAuw. H. in Dian. 240.

2 Meursius compares Ammianus Marcellinus speaking of Julian
as “ Virtute senior, quam ingenio.” Plautus, Trinumm. 337; Bothe,
says, “ Ingenio, non etate apiscitur sapientia.”’—yrwroi, brothers.
of Apollon. Rhod. i, 53. In what follows,Callimachus agrees with
Hesiod respecting Jove being youngest-born. Cf. Theog. 468.

® Callimachus does not here follow Homer, Il. xv. 193, where
Earth and Olympus are said to be common to all three. Cf. Il. xv.
185—195.—In ver. 64 did xdetorov Exover is by Tmesis for deéxovoe
aheioroy. ~ - is

* Cf. Hom. Od. xix. 203, toxev Pevdia ToAAR Ab yee Erdporory Spota,

_ and Hesiod, Theog. 27.—ivony, a priest of Artemis at Ephesus.
Pausan. viii. 13, § 1. Jt seems to have meant the “‘ king-bee.””

5 Kodrog and Biz are so placed as persons in Hesiod, Theog, 385,
and by Asch. Prom. V., see opening scene, and at Theocr. iv. 8,
they are mentioned together.

*"So Theocr. Id. xvii. 72, Atdg, aiovog aierdc Spc. Horat,-Od. LV.
iv. 1, . ; ‘< . ;


10—84, ' THE HYMN TO JUPITER, 5 “425


chosest, too, the foremost of young men; not thou the know-:
ing in naval-matters, nor the shield-brandishing warrior, no,
nor the poet; but thou didst givé up these at the instant to
the lesser blessed-gods,! different cares for different gods to
-care for; whilst for thyself thou chosest-out. rulers-of-cities
themselves ; beneath whose hand is the tiller-of-the soil, and
‘the skilful-in-arms, the rower, and all things. For what is -
not beneath the power of a ruler? ae
_ For example,? we tell of the smiths of Vulcan, the armed-
men ‘of Mars, and the hunters of tunic-clad® Diana, and of
Phoebus them that duly know the courses'of song. But from
‘Jove are kings ;4 since nothing is more godlike than Jove-
sent kings. Therefore thou determinedst them ¢o be thine
allotment, and gavest them cities to guard,® but, thou thyself
sittest in high citadels, overlooking such as govern the people
under unjust judgments, and such as rule in the opposite
Qualem miniatrum fulminis alitem,


Cui rex deorum regnum in aves vagas
d Permisit.
Hom. I]. viii. 247, redecérarow merenviiy, 7 ‘

1 driZoow. drwy is Ionic and Doric for édéyoe, according to
Eustath. at Il, xviii. 519, where the compound imodiZow is used.
But see Liddell and Scott. ;

2 abrixa. “ Exempli gratia.” Ernesti. Heyne, in note at Georg. i. |
60, illustrates “ continud ” by this use of abrixa, not as “‘ principio,”
but as a formula of beginning a sentence. ddsiopey js used, says
Spanheim, by Nicander, Ther., and Apollon. Rhod. ii. 530, as well as
by Aratus, Phan, 253. It is plainly an Alexandrine word,

3 isaxrijpag, hunters. Hom. Od. xix. 445; Il. xvii. 135, uses éord-
yourss in the same sense. In Apollon. Rh. i. 625, it is used of

‘ fishermen.’’—Xirwvng: see H. in Dian. 225.—Avone & sidérag .
oipoug: of. Theocr. Id. xvi: 69; Pind. Ol. ix. 72, taéwy oipoy Aryoy.
4 Theoer. xvii. 74, Aci Kpovtwre pédovre Aidot of Bacrdijeg. Hor. Od.


*


TIL. i. 4,°5,

Regum timendorum in proprios greges,

Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis. e .
Cf. also Proverbs vii. 15; Rom. xiii. 11; 1 Pet. ii.13; quoted by
Dodd. Add to these Esch. Agam. 43, d:0pdvov ArdOer cai Stoxnarpov, |
and Pers. 532, &c. These lines convey a compliment to Ptolemy
Philadelphus, the patron of Callimachus.

5 gvAacoépey.—ln the same sense Jove and other gods are called
by the Latins ‘‘Custodes.” Cf. Hor. Od. I. xxviii. 29, Ab Jove Nep-
tunoque sacri custode Tarenti; and xxxvi. 3, Custodes Numidz
degs. With éaéyno¢ ef. Philoct. Sophoe. 1040, Seok +’ irda: Apoll.
Rhod. ii. 1123, ’AvrépeOa srpde Znvog’Bxopiou: and with the active
use of the word contrast Hom. Il. iii. 42, éxéyuov Gddwy, * aliis
spectaculo.” At ver. 83, compare a 86.


126 0°. /  GALLIMACHTS.  g4—~o6,


. manner. And amongst them thou hast placed affluence, and
abundance of fortune, among all indeed, but not certainly in
equal share. Now one may guess this in our ruler,! for ex-
ceeding widely hath he distanced the rest. At even I wot he.
achieves what he may have devised at dawn ;? at even the
matters of-chief-moment, and lesser matters at the time when
he has conceived them. But others accomplish some projects
in.a year, others not in one year: whilst from others thou
hast thyself entirely cut short accomplishment, and frustrated
their eager-desire.? pe boo

All hail, supreme son of Cronus, giver of good things, giver
of security! ‘Thy works who can celebrate? There hath not
been, there will not be, exe. Who could celebrate the works
of Jove ?4 Hail, Sire, hail again. But grant excellence and
wealth. Neither without worth can® ‘wealth prosper men,
nor worth without wealth. Give, then, both worth and wealth.®


THE HYMN TO APOLLO. :


How hath the laurel-shoot of Apollo heaved !6 How the
whole of the shrine! Afar, afar be ye, sinners.’ Now verily


1 hperipw pedéovre. See H.in Ap. 35, WeOive xe reeujoao. Pto-
lemy is alluded to.—zepi apd yap ebpd PsByxev. Metath. for arpopé-
Bye yap wepi ebpd. Hom. Ll. xi. 180, wepiwrpd yap eyxei ier.

* # Compare with this the character of Ptolemy by Theocritus, Idyll.
xvii. 18—15; and see Hom. Od. ii. 272. For ‘Eoméptog, the adj. for
adv., cf. Soph. Ajax, 217, vixrepog for vueri, and Horat. Epod. xvi.
51, Vespertinus. Ernesti compares with this passage Thuc. i. 70,
“Mévot Exover Te Kai spotwe érariover, & Ay émevonowor.—In the next
line but one we find Aad, a word used by Hesiod, Op. et D. 617, .
and derived from w)éoc, because in a year “ tempora omnia com-
plentur.” Hor. Carm. III. xviii. 5, Sitener pleno cadit hedus anno.

* ivicdacag. So Jupiter’s projects are thwarted by Juno, Il. viii.
408, alei yap por EwOer svuxay, Etre voRow.
- 4 The reading here adopted is asia, which Blomfield suggests:
* 5 obx éxiorarat is i, q. ob dvvarat, as in Latin, Horace, Ars Poet.
390, Nescit vox missa reverti. Dodd compares with the sentiment

. here, Proverbs xxx. 8, “Agur’s prayer;” and Eccles, vii. 11,

“ Wisdom is good with an inheritance,” &c. |

® Cf. Juvenal, iii. 164, 2 ‘ :
’ Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat

Res angusta domi. es

Hor. Sat. IE. v. 8, Et genus et virtus, nisi cum ré, vilior alg4 est,

7 Virgil imitates closély in Ein. iii. 90—92,


.


3—13, THE HYMN TO APOLLO. 127


doth Phebus knock-at the. doors with beauteous foot. See
you not?! The Delian palm has nodded in a pleasant fashion
on a sudden, and the swan sings sweetly on the air. Now of
your own accord? fall-back, ye bolts of the doors, and of-your-
selves, ye bars. For no longer és the god afar-off. Make
ready, ye young men, for the song and the choir.2 Not to
every one doth Apollo manifest-himself, but to only the good.4
-Whoso shall have seen him, great is he: small that man who
hath not seen him. oe

We shall behold thee, O Far-darter, and shall be no more
of small account. Nor silent lyre nor noiseless tread® should
the servants of Phoebus have, when he sojourns among them,


@ . . .
Tremere omnia visa repenti :
Liminaque laurusque Dei: totusque moveri
Mons circum, et mugire adytis cortyna reclusis;


and in ©n. vi. 238, the next line is found in a Latin dress, Procul,
0 procul este, profani, Conclamat vates. See also Lucan, v. 154, Nul-
Joque horrore comarum Excusse laurus,


toe °


1 See you not ?] ody dpdge; is referred, as Ernesti shows, to xéxvoc


ying equally to both. So H.in
Del. 17; Dian. 246; Horat. Od. IIL. xxv. 2, Que nemora aut quos
agor in specus. Soph. Cd. T. 861. eee
4 A faint shadow of the Divine word, ‘* Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God.” ae
5 Cf. H. in Del. 302. Blomfield quotes Soph. Trach. 969, dopow
gépee Bao, Ov. Fast. I. vii. 109,
.,. Vestigia furtim
Suspenso digitis fert taciturna gradu. | -
Tibull. I. x. 84, Tacito.clam venit illa pede. With éyeey in line 13,
understand xo7.—éxedqpnoavreg. Apollo passed his six winter
months in Lycia, and his six summer at Delos. See Virg. En. iv.
143, 144,
, Qualis ubi hibernam Lyciam Xanthique fluenta
Deserit, ac Delon -maternam invisit Apollo,


*


428 | |. GALLIMACHUB. . 1432,


if they have @ mind to accomplish marriages, and to cut off
gray hair,! and that their walls should stand firm on ancient
foundations. I honour the boys, since the lyre‘is no more idle.

, Listen, and keep-holy-silence? at the song iz honour of
Apollo. Even the deep keeps-holy-silence,? when minstrels
celebrate on lyre or bow the implements of Lycorean Pho-
bus. Nor does Thetis, his mother, plaintively* bewail
Achilles, whenever she has heard the Io Pean, Io Pan.
And even the tearful rock defers its sorrow, the rock, which
remains fixt,.a dripping stone, in Phrygia, the marble in the
place of a woman, with a mournful utterance.®> Sing Io! Io!
at ts ill to contend with the gods. Whoso contends with im-
mortals, would contend with my king, and whoso with my
king, would sttive even with Apollo. Apollo will honour
‘the choir, because it sings to his taste; for he is able, seeing
that he sits at Jove’s right hand.6 Nor will the choir sing
Apollo for one day only ;' for he is celebrated-in-many-hymns.
Who would not easily sing of Apollo? Golden are both the


_ .} wokehy, sc. rpiya. Just as the Latins use the adj. “cani” sim-
ply for “‘cani capilli.” Cic. de Sen. xviii. 62, Non cani, non ruge
repente auctoritatem arripere possunt.
ebgnusir’ dtovrec. Cf, Horat. Od. IIT. i. 2, Favete linguis.

Hom. II. ix. 171, ebgnpijoat re xédeo8e. The ancients were. obliged
to be scrupulous to avoid using ill-omened words at sacrifices, and
’ they did this most effectually by silence. Hence the use of the
phrase eboypa géve. Aj. Soph, 862; Aristoph. Nub. 263; and the
use of ordpa sionnov spercsee, in Soph. Cid, Col. 132.

* Compare Theocr. Id, ii. 88; Virg. Ecl. ix. 57; and Propert. iv.
5, 6, Ponat et in sicco molliter unda minas.—Lycorean, an epi-
thet of Phoebus from Lycorea, a town at the foot of Parnassus,

4 aitwa. Cf. Soph. Aj. 627, 628; Ovid, Amor. IIT.ix. 23, 24,


linon in silvis idem pater, Elinon, altis
. , Dicitur invit& concinuisse lyra.
Fisch. Ag. 123, atAwoy aldwwor ele.


* With this whole passage compare Propert. IV. x. 5—10, ed. .
Paley. And with xavotene, Propert. II. xxxi. 5, 6,


” Hic equidem Ptitebe xisus mihi pylchrior ipsa
armoreus tacité carmen Aiare lyra.


6 Aci de%tdg Horac. Spanheim compares this with the language of
the Creed, and of Psalm cx, 1. Ernesti_rather points to St. Matt.
xx. 27, and the rebuke therein conveyed to the sons of Zebedee.
In the Old Test., 1 Kings ii. 19, shows that the king’s right hand
was the post of honour,which Solomon reserved for Bathsheba.


—_


si—42, _. THE HYMN TO APOLLO. "7. 129


garment, and the clasp of Apollo, his lyre, his Lyctian bow,!
and his quiver: golden, too, his sandals; for Apollo is rich in
gold, and has also many possessions. One might guess this
at Pytho.? And, indeed, he is ever-beauteous, ever young ;
never hath so much: as a little down? come upon the soft
cheeks of Phebus. But his locks disti] odorous oils upon
the ground. Not mere ojl do the tresses of Apollo drop
down, but healing itself: and in whatsoever city those dews
shall have fallen on the ground, all things are wont to become
safe. Great, too, in art is 20 one so much as Apollo. He has ~
obtained for his lot the archer,® he the minstrel; for, to Phoe-
~bus bow as well as song is intrusted. To him, likewise, be-
long divinations and diviners: and from Pheebus’ physicians
have learned the art-of-delaying death.6 Phebus also wé
_ eall Nomian, even from that time, even from the time when
by Amphrysus’ he. tended the yoked mares, fired with love


1 Ernesti quotes Ov. Amor. i. 8, 59,
Apse Deus vatum, palla spectabilis aurea
4 ractat inaurate consona fila lyre.
See also Propert. III. xxiii. 16, Pythius in lomga carmina veste.
sonat.—imeropric, Cf. Theocr. Idyll. xy. 79; Virg. An. iv. 138, 139,
Cui pharetra ex auro, crines nodantur in aurum,
Aurea purpuream subnectit fibula vestem. :


His Lyctian bow. Statius, Thebais, vi. 927, Lyctia tela. +

2 IluOdre xe rexpypaco. For the wealth of the temple at Delphi,
see Herodot. i. 14; iv. 162; Pausan. x, 13, § 5; Eurip, Ion, 11440—
1145; Dict, Gr,.and R. Geogr. vol. i. p. 765, B. ;

$ For ob’ d000y yvdoc trHAOe mapeaic. Blomfield compares with

. this construction Dreceritas, ii. 108, 109; and with the “down”.
spoken of, Theocr. xv. 85, mpGrov tovrov amd xpordgwy naraBddr wy,
See also Hom. Odyss. xi. 319; Virg. Ain. x, 324; viii.,160.

4 wavdxsay, universal remedy, properly ascribed to him, one’ of
‘whose epithets was Zwryo. it is curious to compare Malachi iv.
2, “ The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings.”’
In ver. 41 apdxec is derived by Vulcanius 47d rot apwi ripmecOac.
Cf. Theoer, iv.- 6.


5 oterevrijy—cf. H. in Jov. 70; Virg. Hn, xii. 392, 3
Acri quondam cui captus amore, .


Ipse suas artes, sua munera letus Apollo ; :
Augurium citharamque dabat, celeresque sagittas. :
__© Opiar: at partial Pijgot. Suidas, With what follows compare
ar: Alcest. 970—972, and Ovid, Mét. i. 520—524.
7 Virgil speaks of the Nomian Apollo as “ Pastor ab Amphryso,”’
Georg. iii. 2. He was fabled to have been hanished to the fields of ,
K .


~


130 ~ CALLIMNACHUS. : 48—64,


for the young Admetus. Easily would the cattle-pasture be-
come abundant, nor would, the bleating she-goats! lack
younglings, on which, as they pasture, Apollo hath cast his
eyes. Nor would sheep be without milk, or unfruitful, but
all would suckle lambs, and the ewe that-bare-one would
quickly become a dam-of-twins.2 And following Phoebus
men are wont to measure out cities. For-Phoebus ever de-
lights in founding cities, and Phoebus himself lays their
foundations.3 -‘At four years of age Phebus laid the first
foundations in fair Ortygia, near the circular lake. The
huntress Artemis was wont to bring constantly the heads of
Cynthian she-goats,4 but from them Apollo was weaving an
altar. The foundations he laid with horns; from horns he
built the altar itself, and placed under it walls of horn around.
Thus first learned Phoebus to raise foundations. Phoebus,
too, pointed-out to Battus my fertile native-country,® and to


clops. Cf, Alcest. Eurip. 570—596. :
“1 Here Ruhnken reads debowro Bpsdiwy ti pnxddec, joining in


by H. in Jov. 44; Virg. En. x. 399, &c. Blomfield alters to irc
pnnddes : pneds, bleating, is an Homeric epithet for ai With


® didvygrénog, Cf. H. in Dian. 180, and Aschyl. Eumenid. 879,
880, Linwood, where Blomfield compares Herodot. iii. 65. In the
next line Spanheim observes that colonists first consulted the
Delphic Oracle; hence the force of SoiBy o’ tomdpevor. He in-
stances the disasters attending a colony not so founded, from He-
rodot. v.42. dceperphoavro.’ Cf. Virg. Ain. v. 755, Urbem designat
aratro Sortiturque domos. : ‘ .

* dpaive, texit,—weaves. Ernesti quotes Cic. ad Att. iv. 15, Paul-
Jus basilicam texuit; Ad Quint. fratrem, iii. 5, Sane texebatur opus
luculenter. : :
. * Delos was called Ortygia from ortyx, a quail, the form which
Latona assumed to evade Juno’s wrath.—kaphara ouvexig alyor,
Martial]. Lib. Spectac. Epist. i. 8, 4, -

Nec Trivie templo molles laudentur honores,
Dissimuletque Deum cornibus ara frequens,
Cynthus was a mountain of Delos; see Schol.

5 The name of Battus was given to Aristoteles, the leader of a
colony from Thera to Cyrene, according to Herodot. iv.-155, be-
cause it was the Libyan term for “king,” and the Delphic oracle
in so styling him foretold his destiny. Pausanias, x. 15, § 4, men-
tions a tradition that, being tongue-tied before, Aristoteles or Bat- .
tus recovered his voice by the fright of seeing a lion suddenly, on


“oe


65—78, THE HYMN TO APOLLO. - 131


his people entering Libya a crow, propitious to the leader-of-
a colony,! was guide; and sware that he would give walls to
our sovereigns. Apollo ever keeps-his-oath-inviolate. Many,
O Apollo, call thee Boedromian,? many Clarian’ (for every-
where thy name is manifold). But I style thee Carnean :*
it is my country’s wont to do so. To thee, O Carnean god,
Sparta, this was the first’ settlement; a second, again, was
Thera; a third, I wot, the city of Cyrene. From Sparta the
sixth descendant of CEdipus® led thee to the colonizing of
Thera, and from Thera-vigorous Battus. consigned thee to the
country of Asbystis.6 He built thee a very noble temple;
. and in the city instituted a yearly festival, at which many
-bulls,’ great king, fall on their haunches for the last time.


coming to Cyrene. The Cyrenzans set up at Delphi a statue of
Battus in a car, driven by Cyrene, -with.Libya crowning him. Cf.
Pind. Pyth. LV. xvii. 311, 481; Justin. xiii. 7.

1 Bentley reads here dé&tog otecorfpt, which Blomfield adopts. It
is more simple to app the epithet otxiorjp to Battus than the crow.
Baorrzvor, i. e. the Ptolemies, in the ‘reign of two of whom, Lagus
and Philadelphus, Callfmachus flourished.

2 Boedromian.] The Scholiast says that the Athenians thus styled
Pheebus, because he bade them fall upon their enemies perd Boje,

-whence they were victorious. The grammarians refer this to the
times of Erectheus, whom Ion aided against Eumolpus, and say that .
the month was called thence Boedromian. = :

3 Clarian ;] from Clarus, 2 city near Colophon in Tonia, where was
a Temple and Oracle of Apollo; see Pausan. vii. 3, §1. Virgil
calls Apollo by this epithet, Ain. iii. 360, Clarii laurus.

- * Carnean.} This was the Dorian title of Apollo, whose festival,
“ Carneia,”’ was.celebrated at various places of the Peloponnese very
early. The name arose, according to the Schol., from the prophet
Carnus, slain by Aletus, one of the Heracleids; owing to which
Apollo smote the Peloponnese with a pestilence.’ See more on this
festival in Smith’s Dict. Gr. and R. Antiq. p. 199—209. Cf. Eurip.,
ae a 449—451, Lxdprg xuxhac avixa Kapveiou mepwiccerar dpa,
KT. A,

5 ¥erov yévog. So Virg.. An. iv. 12, Credo equidem, nec vana
fides, genus esse Deorum. This was Theras, son of Autesion, who.

. traced his lineage up to Gidipys through Tisamenus, Thersander,

Polynices; see Herodot. iv. 147. Thera was before called Calliste.

6 "AaBvorids. - Herodot. iv. 170, places the Asbyste inland of Cy-
rene. The Scholiast explains d4oSverce “ white,” which, says Anna
Fabri, is partly confirmed by Pind. Pyth. iv. 14, ty apywéevrt pacra.

7 In Virg. 4n, iii. 119, we find “Taurum Neptuno, taurum tibi
pulcher Apollo.” With the next line compare En. iv. 200—203,


Centum aras posuit, vigilemque sacyaverat ignem,
x2 ‘


“


132 ms . CALLIMACHUS. 19-—94,


To! To! Carnean god, much. supplicated: thine - altars
carry flowers indeed in spring as many and various as the
seasons bring, when the Zephyr breathes dew ; and in winter
‘the sweet crocas. And ever’ hast thou eternal fire,! nor ever
do ashes consume yesterday’s coal. ;

Greatly, I wot, joyed Phebus, when Enyo’s belted heroes
danced with brown Libyan women,? when the settled seasons
of the Carnean festival arrived for them. But the Dorians
were not yet able to approach the fountain of Cyre,? but were
inhabiting Aziris thick-girt with woods.. These the god
himself beheld, and showed them to his bride,‘ as he stood on
the point of Myrtusa, when the daughter of Hypszus slew
the lion, ravager of the oxen of Eurypylus.>

No other choir saw Apollo more worthy of a god than
that, nor to other city gave he so many advantages as to
Cyrene,° being mindfal of the ancient’ rape: no, nor do the


Excubias divum eternes pecudumque cruore -
ingue solum, et variis florentia limina sertis. ,

Spanheim adds Terent. Andr. iv. 14, Ex ara hinc sume verbenas.

Pindar, Isthm. iv. 106, 107, crepavopara Bupdy. .  *

_ ' We find from this verse, as Spanheim shows, that at Cyrene, as

at Delphi, there was eternal fire at the altar of Apollo. See Choeph.

1087, mupdg re piyyoc agOtroy KEKAnpivoy, -

2 Lworhpéc Evvodg, a periphrasis for “ belted men,” warriors. In
the festivals of Apollo and Diana, there is constant mention of the
dances of young men and maidens. Cf. Horace, Carm. Szecul. 35, 36,
75,76.—réOurcr, Cf, Hymn. in Dian. 174; Cer. 19.

3 Cyre.] (Others read Kvpvije.) There is mention of this fountain,
the name being omitted, in Pind. Pyth. iv. 524. The Dorians meant

are the first colonists from Thera. In the next line Ape» is the

reading of Vulcanius.—See Wesseling at Herod. iv. 169.

4 vopgy, i. e. Cyrene, whom Apollo carried off from Pelion to:
Libya. o. Pindar, Pyth. ix. 96—98. Myrtusa, a promontory of
Libya Cyrenaica, Cf’ Apollon. Rh. ii. 500—508, where the tale of
Cyrene is given.

5 Cyrene was daughter of Hypseus and Chlidanope, and ‘was
qother of Aristeeus, Pind. Pyth. ix. 26; Virg. Georg. iv. 317. Eury-
_pylus was a son of Néptune and Celzno, afterwards connected with

’ the Argonauts. See Dict. Gr..and R. B. ii. 113, a. For the origin
of the-word sinis, see Ovid, Met. vii..440. :

6 Yéca—résoa, The second of these ig for 8cea. Cf. Pind. Nem.
iv. 6—8, obd? Osppdy Uéwp récov—réacoy ebdroyia goppeyyt SvYdopog.—
A, Fabri. Spankein has a long note recounting the proofs that this
is no vain boast. The colony of Cyrene could boast not only highly

+cultivated lands rising out of a waste, and clear sky and genial atmos-
phere, famous steeds end skill in chariot-races, but also eminent


-_


- in Rafinun, i.


r


o4—111, | THE, HYMN TO APOLLO. “483


Battiadse ‘themselves honour ‘other*god more than Phabus.


We hear To, Io Pean! for the Delphic people invented this
refrain first of all in honour of thee, when thou didst dis-


_play the far-range of thy golden bow and arrows. As thou


wentest down to Pytho there encountered thee a monstrous
beast,! a terrible serpent, This monster thou killedst, hurl-
ing one swift arrow after another: while the people shouted


in acclamation, “Io! Io Pan! let fly thy shaft; thy’


mother bare thee a helper? from-the-first.”. And thus thou
art celebrated even from that time. The envious-tale spake
stealthily to Apollo’s ears, I love not the minstrel? who does
not sing as much as doth the sea. The envious speech
Apollo both spurned with his foot, and answered thus:

Vast is the tide of the Assyrian river, but it draws with it
the many defilements of earth, and much refuse with its flood.4


°


‘Yet not: from every river do the Melissee® carry water for


Ceres, but a small fount from a sacred spring, which rills
pure and unpolluted, the choicest of its kind, from this they


men in philosophy and literature, as Carneades, Aristippus, and, our
poet himself.—At the next line Blomfield gives examples of Calli-


machus’s fancy for Ionic forms in vg, H. in Del. 824; in Dian. 194,”


&e. &e. q. v. :
t This monster Python is mentioned by Apollon. Rhod. ii. 705-—
708, te Sre werpaiy dd Sepdde Mapvycacio Aehgivyy rékoir Tehw~


_ ptow evdptey Kotoog twy ire yupvdc. Claudian in preef. libr. prim.


2, Phoebeo domitus Python cum decidit arcu, Mem-
braque Cirrhzo fudit anhela jugo, &e. Dodd. refers this pasgage


to a corrupt tradition of what the Redeemer was to do: ‘‘ The seed *


of the woman to bruise the serpent’s head.’* a

2 doconrijea, from d and dod, vox, because Apdllo “ vocatus et
non vocatus audit.”’ Vule. -

5 ‘It is supposed that Callimachus here alludes to those who strove
to detract from his praise with Ptolemy, who is meant by Apollo,
and who was urged by these detractors to prefer Apollonius Rho-
dius, and his vast poem, the Argonautics, a sea in itself, and in its
subject. Callimachus wrote his epic entitled “ Hecale” under this
pressure. , Bo . ‘

4 Blomf. observes that Horace not improbably had this passage
of Callimachus in his mind when he described Lucilius “Cum
flueret lutulentus,” Sat. I. iv, 11.—29’—éAxet. Tmesis for i@édces. The


. Assyrian river, i. e. the Euphrates. Lucan. iii. 253, Cum Tigride


magnus Euphrates. :

5 The Melisse.] Priestesses of Ceres, so named from Melissa,
daughter of Melisseus, king of Crete. Their office was ‘f petere e
vivis libandas fontibus undas,’’ Ovid, Met. iii. 27.

* dxpoy dwroyv. Cf. Theocr. ii, 2; xiii. 27; Hom. Il, xiii. 599; and


. %


134 . »  CALLIMACHUS. 111,


draw, Hail, King! and may Momus go thither, where ruin
dwells.


’


HYMN TO ARTEMIS.


We celebrate Artemis, for she is not light! to minstrels to
forget, Artemis, to whom the bow and hare-shooting, and the
wide choir? and disporting on the mountains are a care: com-
mencing, how that when sitting, yet a blooming child, on the
knees of her sire, she thus addressed her parent; “‘ Grant
me, kind father, to preserve eternal maidenhood,? and many-
names, that so Phoebus may not vie with me. And give me
arrows and bow. Grant it, sire! I ask not a quiver of
thee, nor a large bow: the Cyclopes will forthwith forge me
arrows, and fashion me a flexible bow: but J ask both bring-
ing-of-light,° and to be girt as far.as the knee® with a tunic


Butmann’s Lexil. ad v. dwrov, which is always used for something
best of its kind. Callimachus compares himself to the édAiyn ABac.
See also Propert. II. i. 39.—Momus, the god of blame and ridi-
cule. Hesiod, Theog. 214. :

1 2happd¢. Blomf. prefers this to Aagpdr, cf. Cid. C. 1652; Eur.
Andvom. 311. :'The phrase éy éAagpg in the same sense occurs in
Theoe. xxii.; Herod.i. 118; Eurip. lph. in Aul. 969; Helen, 1227;
Electr. 530. .

2 dugragie (used of persons, H. in Ap. 42) is here, according to
Spanheim, used of a circular chorus, “in orbem chorea.” —2v obpeow

’ dudacOa, (Hom. Od. xvii. 530; Callim. H. in Cer. 39:) Compare
Horat. Od. III. xxii., Montium custos nemorumque virgo; Ca-
tull. Carm. Secul. xxxiv. 9, Montium domina ut fores, Silvarum-

ue virentium. In the next line dpypevoe should be read with

lomfield by Syncope for dpxyépevor. This recalls Hom. Il. v. 408,
obdé tt piv watdsc wort yobvact rarmdZovo.

+ This reqtest is borrowed by Ovid, (Met. i. 486,) and put into
Daphne's mouth, Da mihi perpetha, genitor carissime, dixit, Virgini-
tate frui: dedit hoc pater ante Diane. For daa see Theocr. xv.
18, and the note there in the Translation published in this Series.

‘4 rorvovopinv. This petition is prompted by jealousy of her .
brother Apollo, who had many names, cf..H. in Ap. 70. So had
Bacchus, Jove, Themis, &c. See Spanheim’s note. Catull. Sec.
Carm. xxxiv. 21, 22, Sis quocunque tibi placet Sancta nomine.

- 5 gasogopiny. (Cf. gaecgdpog, 204.) She was called by the Romans
Lucifera, and by the Greeks dddodyo¢ and gwodépoc. ;

¢ Huntresses were wont to be girt high, as far as the knee. Cf,
Virg. En. i. 320. Theoer. xiv. 35, dvepioaoa de xixdoug "Eka and=
yero Saooov. Ov. Met. x. 586, Nuda genu, vestem ritu succincta


r


-


*


12-26, HYMN TO ARTEMIS, 135


of-coloured-border, that I may slay wild beasts. And :give
me. sixty ocean-nymphs! to-form-my-chorus, all of-the-
same-age, all yet unmarriageable maidens. Give me likewise
as attendants twenty Amnisian nymphs,? who may. duly take
care of my buskins, and, when I no longer am shooting lynxes
and stags, may tend my fleet dogs. Give me all mountains,
and assign to. me any city,? whichsoever thou choosest. For
*twill be rarey when Artemis shall go down intoa city. On
mountains will I dwell; then only will I mingle in the cities
of men, when women harassed by sharp throes call on a
helper,* women whom when I was first born the fates destined
me to aid, because my mother,-both when bringing me forth,
and when bearing me in her womb, suffered no pains,’ but
without labours deposited me from.her lap.”. Thus having


Diane. Esch. Suppl. 457, Zyw orpégac, Zévag re ovddadg rétrw,

i, e. the zones wherewith robes are gathered up. See more in

By teen heat note from which the foregoing is taken.—Aeyywrdy, with |

$ ordenes hem, “from dzyvdw, to furnish with a hem or border.
and 8, :

? Ocean-nymphs,] a selection from the 3000, mentioned as the
children of Ocean and Tethys by Hesiod, Theog. 364. In the next
line Ruhnken’s reading, oieréac, zequales, has been followed by Blom-~
field, and translated here.—dyirpouc, maidens who have not yet pus
on their woman’s girdle. Spanheim. Cf. H. in Jov. 21. 2 ge

? Amnisian nymphs,] i. es of Amnisus, a town of Crete, at ie
mouth of a river of the same name. Its nymphs were consecrate
to Diana or Eileithya, (Hom. Od. xix. 188; Ap. Rhod. iii. 877,)
who had a cave there. Pausanias (I. xviii. § 5) says that the
Cretans about Cnossus held that Diana was born at Amitisus.—
-‘tvdpopidag. Virg. Ain. i. 336,


Virginibus Tyriis mos est gestare pharetram
-Purpureoque alt® suras vincire cothurno,


3"Hvriva veipov. Ernesti here shows that fyriwa is equivalent to’
Hvrwaoiy, “ any.’ With reference to her mountain-life Catull. in
Epithal. Pel. et Thet. ver. 300, says,.Unigenarnque simul cultri-
cem montibus Ide. In A’sch. S. C. Theb. 149, &c., she is among the
tutelar' gods of Thebes; at a later date she was the chief goddess
of Ephesus.

4 Spanheim here quotes Horace, Carm. Sec. 18—15, Rita ma~
turos aperire partus Lenis Ilithyia, tuere matres, Sive tu Lucina
probas vocari, Seu genitalis. Horace a few lines after mentions the
Payee, (cf. 25,) whence it is inferred that he too connected th
Pare with Lucina on such occasions. Re od x
. 4 @&povea, sc. tv yaorgi, in utero gestans. In the 27th line,
tveddoc i0eke—dacGat, is an instance of a custom old as Homer.

ee Il. i. 500; vill. 371; x. 454. .


136 _ CALLIMACHUS. 26—48,


spoken, the maiden wished to touch the beard of her sire, and
oft! out-stretched her hands to-no-purpose ; until at last she
might touch it. Then her father assented with a smile, and
said, as he fondled her,? “ When goddesses bear me such
‘offspring, little care should I have for the wrath of jealous
Juno: Have, child, whatever you ask of-your-own-choice ;
but other yet greater gifts will your sire bestow. ‘Thrice ten.
cities will I present to you, not one fenced-town only ; thrice
ten cities for you, which shall not learn to honour any other
god,? but thee alone, and shall learn to be named the cities
of Attemis. And I will give thee many cities to measure out
in common with other gods, on the continent, and islands:
in all shall be altars and sacred groves of Artemis,‘ and thou
shalt be guardian over ways and harbours.” Thus spake he,
and with his head ratified his speech. Then went the maiden
toward Leucus, a mountain of Crete, tressed with woods ;°
and thence toward ocean: and many Nymphs chose she for.
herself, all nine-years-old, all yet unmarriageable damsels.
‘ ’ .


1 mode for woddaetc, adj. for adv., which Markland illustrates by
quoting, among other passages, Virg. Ecl. vi. 80,


' "| Et quidus ante
Infelix sua tecta supervolitaverit.alis :
and Georg. i. 381, Corvorum increpuit densis exercitns alis; where
. quibus and densis are for quomodo and densé.—péxpic iva, i, e.
“ usque eo dum.” :

2 xarappetwy. Blomf. compares ‘Hom. Il. i. 361, yetpi 88 perv eark-
pskev, Herodot. vi. 61, and Theocr. xxiv. 6.—ywopévng ddéyouse—for
this construction see Matt. Gr. Gr. § 348,

3 Frischlinus enumerates some of these, Perga, Pitane, Miletus,

Ephesus, Pella, and Petra.—defew, to honour, or worship. Compare
Virg. Ain, ix. 407; Plaut. Mercator, 668, Cedo, qui tane vicini
, nostri aram augeam. «
. 4 Bwpot rexai Gdoca. Ovid, in Fast. ii. 263, 264, vi. 755, 756, speaks
of the Lake Nemorensis, called from the grove hard by, and near
to Rome, dedicated to Diana. See also Virg. Ain. vi. 13, Jam
subeunt Trivie lucos. This. last quotation will serve also to illus-
trate the words dyviaig—tooy imioxoroc, from the Latin epithet of
Trivia, given her on the same account.

5 Aevedv, a mountain in the west of Crete.—xecopnpévoy bry. Anna
Fabri compares Horace, I. xxi. 5, Nemorum coma; and Spanheim,
Catull. iv. 11, Comata silva 3—from which simile arose the applica-
tion of the verb “‘ Tondeo ” to pruning and trimming branches, &c.
Virg. Georg. iv. 137, Comam mollis jam tum tondebat acanthi. -
In ver. 43, Blomfield roads as at ver. 14, oleriag,


x


\
1 .


44—56, HYMN TO ARTEMIS. 187


sRight glad was the river Ceratus,! glad was Tethys, because
she was sending her daughters as attendants on the daughter
of Latona. And straightway she proceeded to visit the Cy-
clopes: whom she found in the island Lipara,? (Lipara of-
later-times, but then its name was Meligunis,) at the anvils of
Vulcan standing around the red-hot-mass.3 Now a great.
work was being urged forward.
They were forging. a horse-trough‘ for Neptune. But the
Nymphs feared, when they saw the terrible monsters, like
unto the jutting-crags® of Ossa; for all of them had beneath
their brows an éye with-one-pupil, resembling a shield made-
of-four-ox-hides, fearfully glancing® from under them; and”
when they heard the noise of the anvils sounding loudly,?:
and the great blast of the bellows, and the heavy groaning of


' Ceratus.] This river washed the walls of Cnossus,; which was it-
self sometimes called by the name of the river. Diana was specially
worshipped there, as Spanhéim shows, quoting Ovid. Fasti, iii. 81,
Pallada Cecropide, Minoia (i. e. the Cnossian, of which Minos was
King) turba Dianam. Cf. Hom. Od. xix. 178, 179. -

‘2 Lipara, one of the Holides Insule, of, which and its tenants, the-
Cyclopes, see a noble description in Virg. Aineid. viii. 416—453.
om. I]. xviii. 369—381, fixes Vulcan’s forges, &c. in Olympus. See
also Apollon. Rhod. iv. 761, and Lucan, v. 609, about the Holian
islands. Vulcan is called Lipargean in: Theocr. Idyll. ii. 184,
Juvenal, Sat. xiii. 45, ; .

3 Cf. Virg.' En. viii. 453, Versantque tenaci forcipe massam.
Esch. Prom.. V. 366, copygaic 3 iw dxpare tyevog pudpoxrumed
“Hoatorog. . tome

‘ worierpny, a trough—for the same purpose the word dxoAnvidag
is used at ver. 167. af

® Compare with this Homer, Od. ix. 191, 192, GAAd pig drgevre
“‘Yimrasy dpiwy, dre gaiverca oloy ax’ &dwy, from which probably Cal-- :
limachus borrowed his idea; and Virg. Ain. ix. 674, Abietibus ju-
venes patriis et montibus equos. With ver. 58, compare Virg.. Bn.
iii. 638, Argolici clipei aut Phoebeze lampadis instar.

® sroydavcovra. This word occurs in Mosch. Idyll. ii. 86, doce
& swoyAaboceoxe. Cf. Apoll. Rhod. i. 1281, dtayhadocovet,

7 Compare Virg. An.. iii. 439, Alii ventosis follibus auras Ac-
cipiunt redduntque; and with the next line, ate ydp Alryn, compare
Virg. Ain. viii. 451, Gemit impositis incudibus Aina, and 419,


Antra Etnea tonant, validique incudibus ictus
Auditi referunt gemitum, striduntque cavernis.|


Cf. Stat. iii. 130 quoted by Bpashetee In ver. 55, dri péya (the
reading of Ste hens and Bent ey) is equivalent to peydAwe, and the.
stop is to be placed after péya. >


138 ; CALLIMACHDS. 56—71,


the Cyclopes themselves. For Aitna was echoing, and Trin-
acria,! settlement of the Sicani, was echoing, and Italy, her
neighbour, whilst Cyrnus was uttering a loud sound in an-
swer, when they lifted above their shoulders? their hammers,
apd toiled with great effort, striking with-alternate-bursts
either brass or iron gleaming from the forge. Wherefore the
Ocean-nymphs had not the courage either to look them in the
face,‘ or to hear their din, without anxiety. And no marvel!
for those monsters, even those daughters of the blessed gods,
who are no longer very-little, never behold without shudder-
ing. But when -any one of the maidens acts disobediently
towards her mother, that mother calls for the Cyclopes, Arges
‘or Steropes, to her child. Then from the interior of the
house comes Mercury,® besmeared with black ashes. Straight-
way he scares® the child, and she sinks into her mother’s


1 Cf. Ov. Fast. iv. 287, 288,


Aine mare Trinacrium, candens ubi tinguere ferrum
Brontes et Steropes, /Emonidesque solent. ‘


: pant me moderh Corsica, is mentioned as Poixcca Kuprvog in H.
‘in Del, 19. ; :
- * Virg. An. viii, 458, and Georg. iv. 171,


Illi inter sese magna vi brachia tollunt
In numerum, versantque tenaci forcipe ferrum.


But the whole, passage may be compared with its Virgilian parallels.
® Horace, Od. I. iv. 7, 8, speaks of ‘ Graves Cyclopum officinas.”’
aera thinks that the origin of this and the former line is Hom.
Il. xviii. 872, rov 0 edp’ pdovra, sn ieooue oy mEpi pboac.

advrny idiev. Cf. Hom. IIL. xvii. 167; Hesiod, Scut. 482. ‘In the
receding line -axndéec is used as “ securus” and “ quietus” in the
atin poets. Virg. Ain. iv. 379. With od vipeore, cf. Hom. Ih: iii.
156. ,
’ 5 Steropes and Arges are coupled with Brontes in Hesiod, Theog.
140, and Steropes, Brontes, and Pyrachmon are the three mentioned -
, in An. viii. 425. “In the next line, for ‘Eoueing Ruhnken suggests
‘Epteing, “‘ castigator.’" Spanheim suggests that the Hermes here
spoken of is not the heavenly Mercury, but a son of Cyllenius,
mentioned in Servius’s note at Virg. Atn. iv. 577, as having fled .o
Egypt after killing Argus; and there introducing learning and
numbers. For xexoenéinoc, we must, without doubt, follow Blom-
field_in accepting Stephens’s emendation, rexpipévog, from xpiw.

Cf. Herod. iv. 189 and 195. : z ‘

§ poppbocerat, Cf. H. in Del. 297, and Theoc. Idyll. xv. 40; Aris-
toph. Eq. 693; Ach. 582, &c. popyw was a word used to frighten
children. With the pasene’ in general Ruhnken compares IL. vi.

a


4


466-470, and Juvenal, idi. 175.


189, HYMN TO ARTEMIS: 189
bosom, placing her hands over her eyes. Thou, damsel, too,
though at an earlier period, when as yet three-years-old,
(when Latona came with thee in her arms, at the invitation
of Vulcan, that he might present thee natal-gifts,)! as Brontes:
placed thee on his brawny knees, graspedst the shaggy hair
from his huge chest, and didst tear.it out perforce: so even
to this time the middle of bis chest is hairless, just as when
mange having settled‘on the hairy scalp? of a man is wont to
consume his hair. a >
_ Therefore very boldly didst thou then address them thus:
“Ye Cyclopes, come now, forge me likewise a Cydonian bow,
and arrows, and a hollow quiver for my darts, for I too, like
as Apollo, am a child of Latona. And if I with my bow shall
have captured a wild beast,’ or some huge wild-animal, that
‘shall the Cyclopes eat.”

Thou saidst. They fulfilled thy mandate, and quickly, O
goddess, didst thou arm thyself;4 and straight go again after.
the whelps, and come to Pan’s Arcadian abode.> Now he. was
cutting-up the flesh of a Menalian lynx, that his bitches with


1 éarhpia, presents-upon-seeing-any-one, Eurip. Ion. 1127: Span-
heim compares isch. Eumenid. 7, yevé0Asov déowv, which the in-
terpreters say is equivalent to éarfpov, Cf. Donatus on Terent. |
Phorm. I. i. 12, quoted by Stanley on the passage of Zschylus just
referred to. 7

2 xépon, the hairy scalp, Asch. Choeph. (280). ddd is what -
Pliny, N. H. xxviii. 11, calls “eapillorum defluvium:” the same as
ddwirexia, used in Soph. Fragm. 379; and from this disease (Anglicé ©
mange) being most common to foxes, a name here applied to men
also. In ver. 81, with Kudwmov compare Virg. Ecl. x. 59, Ire, libet
Partho torquere Cydonia cornu Spicula. : :

_ 5 Hesychius interprets povioy, r6 y1) ody roig GAdorg ouvdyehazoue-
voy. Saxéc, a noxious animal, of dangerous bite or sting (from da~
xeiv). Eurip. Hippol. 646. Valken. : :

4 This line is, as Spanheim observes, an example of “ dictum
factum,”’ “no sooner said than done.” Cf. Hymn. in Jov. 87,
‘Eorepiog xeivog ye rede Tad Kev Hot vonoy.

5 "Aoxadustjy iwi Tavéc. This seems to have been a cave. Span-
heim illustrates the passage by Eurip. Ion, 301, 302, ’@ Id», rota
ooig év dyrpog, and Theocr. i. 16. For Arcadia, as the specially
favoured haunt of Pan, see Hor. Od. IV. xii. 11, 12, Cui pecus, et .
nigri Colles Arcadie placent; Virg. Ecl.iv. 49; Zn. viii. 344;
Propert. I. xviii. 20, Arcadio chorus amata deo; and Theocr. Id. i.
123, — roxddeq ive are determined by Spanheim to be “canes
foetze,” in the sense of fceta.in Georg. 1ii. 176; such as had very
lately borne young ones. ; > > a


140 © CALLIMACHUS. 89—105,


_ sucking whelps might eat food. Then the bearded god gave
thee two hounds, pieballed,! and three with-hanging-ears, and
one spotted ; which, I ween, dragging backwards very lions, '
when they have clutched their necks, are wont to draw them
while still alive to their kennel: seven Spartan-hounds tog he
gave swifter than the winds,” which are most fleet in pursuing
fawns as well as the hare not-shutting-its eyes, and in mark-
ing the Jair of the stag, and where are the haunts of the por-
cupine, and in tracking the footstep of the gazelle.

Departing thence, (and' with thee sped thy hounds,) thou
didst find at the jutting base? of the Parrhasian mount bound-

_ing does, a rich prize, which ever were wont to pasture on
the banks of dark-pebbled Anaurus,‘ larger in size than bulls,
and gold. was gleaming from their antlers.. On a sudden thou
wast amazed, and saidst to thine heart, “ This would be a first-
fruit-of-the-chase worthy of Artemis.” The whole number
was five. .And four thou didst capture, by swiftly-running,


1 Hucv wnyodc, canes semialbos seminigros. At Hom. I. ix.
124, &c., some explain it black, others white. Blomfield suggests the
_English given in the text. In line 92, ad épdéovrec will be familiar
to the reader of Homer from I]. i. 459; xii. 261. :

2 Ododovag aipdwy. Cf, Virg. Ain. v. 319, Emicat, et ventis et.
fulminis ocyor alis. Spanh. aoe Clandian, R. P. iii. 265, Mobi-
lior Zephyro. The Cynosutides mentjoned are Spartan hounds so
called from Cynosura, one of the Spartan tribes (see Pausan. III.
xvi. § 6). For the fame of Spartan hounds, cf. Soph. Aj. 8; Virg.
Georg. iif.-405, &e. ae ;

5 rpopodge is here the reading of most editions; but one or two
MSS. read ‘spoBorge, into which Blomf. thinks zpozoAge should be
changed: in the many passages of Apollon. Rhod. where it occurs.
Parrhadien mount. ch H. in Jov. 10, where a city is called by this -
name. In the next-line compare with piya re xpéoc, Matth. Gr.
ra § 430, p. 705; Aristoph, Acharn. 150; Eur. Phoen, (Valkn. p.

0 ee : . ‘


4 Spanheim here. compares Psalm xlii. 1, “‘Like as the hart de-
sireth the water brooks.’’ That this Anaurus was a river of Thessaly
appears from H. in Del. 103; Lucan. vi. 379, Nec tenues ventos
suspirat Anaurds. See also Héesiod’s Shield, 477, and Eur. Herc..
Fur. 389, 390, rdv re WqArad’ aerav 'Avatpov rapa Unyde. With the
next line Spanh. compares Ov. Met. viii. 282, Quanto majores
herbida tauros Non habae Epirus. Spanheim in a long note shows,
with regard te these beasts having horas, and their having just
above been marked by the feminine adjective, that it is the com-
mon practice of the Greek poets to use the feminine gender of

roups, droves, herds of animals, and to speak of rac izzoug, rag
dvoug, Tag Bots. Ov. Met. x. 112, Cornua fulgebant auro.


2
4


106—120. | HYMN TO ARTEMIS., 141


without the chase of dogs, to bear thy swift car. The other
one, having fled, by Juno’s counsels, across the river Celadon,!
that so it might become in after-time a labour to Hercules, the
Cerynean hill received.

O virgin Artemis, slayer of Tityus,? golden are thine arms
and zone, and thou yokedst a chariot of-gold, and on the stags
didst throw golden bits. But whither first began thy car
drawn-by-horned-cattle § to lift thee? O’er Thracian Hemus,
whence comes the hurricane of Boreas, bringing to the cloak-
less adverse frost. And where didst thou cut thy pine-
torch ? From what flame didst thou kindle it? On Mysian
Olympus ;4 but thou sheddest into it the breath of unex-
tinguished flame, which, I wot, thy sire’s lightnings let fall.
And how oft madest thou trial of thy silver bow, O goddess ?
First against an elm,® next at an oak didst thou discharge it;


1 Celadon was ariver of Arcadia, mentioned by Hom. II. vii.
133; Strabo viii. c, viii. Pausan. viii. c. xxxviii. § 7, calls it Celadus,
and says that it was one of five tributaries of the Alpheus.—vvesigow.
Cf. Hes. Theog. 494. Pausan. viis c. xxv. § 8, mentions Cerynea, a
mountain of Arcadia. Servius on Virg. 4En. vi. 803,


Nee vero Alcides tantum telluris obivit, .
Fixerit eripedem cervam licet,,


says that Hercules conquered the stag called from its abode

* Cerynitis,”’ i, e. of Cerynea. This does not appear to have been

one of the twelve labours, unless it was the MawaXiny tragoy of the
. Greek epigram, which stood fourth in the list of his labours:

2 Tervoeréve. Artemis and Apere are fabled to have shot Tityus,
son of Earth, for an assault on Latona. See Horat. Od. IV. vi. 2, 3;
Pausan. iii. 18,§ 9; Pind. Pyth. iv. 160. For his after fate see Virg.
an vi. 595; Hor. Od. LI] iv. 77. For cepadeoor, from xepde, see

» X- 361. - : :

3 wepdteg Syog. Horat. Carm. Set. 35, calls Diana, “ Bicornis re-
gina siderum,”"—~Thracian Hemus. The cold atmosphere of Thrace
was proverbial. ‘Cf. Virg. Ecl. x. 36, Sithoniasque nives. Hor. I. x.
6, Gelidove in Hemo. Ovid, Heroid. Phyllis to Demoph. 118. And
Boreas was almost always désignated as Thracian or Strymonian ;
cf. H. in Del. 26.—dyAaivow. Hesych. and Meris, p.' 408, point
out that this was a'zinter gaement ‘ .
_ 4 Four aie of Mount Ida were catled Olympus. A fifth was the
Mysian Olympus, not forming a part of it. Strabo, x. ¢. iii. It is men-
tioned in Herod. i. 36. Diana teedifera, or dadodyec, was much wor-
shipped in Mysia and Caria, and specially around Ida. See Span-
heim at this passage. . ‘ oo f :

5 Compare Virg. Georg. ii. 630, Velocis jaculi certamina ponit


in ulmo. ;


142 — “3 CALLIMACHUS. # 121-134,


then thirdly at a wild-beast. The fourth time thou didst aim
it no more at an oak, but ata city of unrighteous men, who

- both against themselves, and as touching strangers, were per-
forming many sinful acts. .

Wretched are they, on whom thou shalt inflict! heavy
wrath! Their beasts murrain consumes, and hail their till-
age: and old men mourn? over sons, whilst the wives either
die stricken in child-bed, or bear children in exile; nothing
of them: stands erect on a sound footing. But for those,
whom thou shalt have beheld smilingly and propitiously, for
them their field brings forth the ear-of-corn,‘ well thrives
the birth of cattle, well their wealth, neither come they to the
tomb, save when they bear some weight-of-many years. Nor
doth division, which is wont to mar families even though
well-established, wound their race; but around one hospite .


1 iupdteat, fut. from éxpdooopat, Ernesti thinks that this word
should be restored in Theocr. xvii. 36, for padiwde iveuadtaro xéipag.
-For another compound of pdcoopat see Theocr, Id. xv. 95. With
the next verse compare Psalm Ixxviii.47—49. Virg. Georg. i. 447,


Heu male tum mites defendet pampinus uvas:
Tam multa in tectis crepitans salit Aorrida grando.


With épya ef. Virg. Eneid. ii. 306, Sternit agros, sternit sata leta
boumque : labores.—KaraBédocsrac. So Geor. iil. 458, Artus depas-
gitur atida febris. + :

2 Literally, “shave their hair for.”” Evidences of this custom are
found in Esch. Choeph. 180; Ovid. Heroid. Canace to Macareus,
116, In tua non tonsas ferre sepulchra comas. Stat. Thebaid. vi.
193, 194. With the next line ef. Hesiod, Op. et D. 242; Hosea ix.
14; Job xxiv. 21. \ : 3

_ . * Anna Fabri compares with this phrase Hor. Epist. II. i. 176,
Recto stet fabula talo; Pindar. Isthm. vii. 18; and with the next
line Hor. Od. 1V. iii. 1, ; .

: Quem tu Melpomene semel
d Nascentem placido numine videris,
* So Horace, Od. IIL. xxiii. 5,
Nec pestilentem sentiet Afticum
Fecunda vitis, nec sterilem seges
Rubiginem, aut dulces alumni '
Pomitero grave tempus anno, '


These attributes, commonly given to Ceres, as Spanheim observes,
are ascribed to Diana by Catullus also, in his Carmen Sxculare,
Exxii. 16—20. * ~ oe o ; :

5 Blomf., following Hemsterhusius, translates this “Non ad exe-
quias eunt, nisi cum ajiquem valde senem ferunt. Cf, Psalm xxi. &


135-—158, - HYMN TO ARTEMIS. | *143


able-board brothers’ wives and husbands’ sisters! place their
seats. “ ; an a 3

O Lady, amongst these may he be, whosoever is a true
friend to me, and may I myself be likewise, O Queen : may-
the song ever be my care, wherein, shall be the nuptials of
Latona, wherein mention of thee shall be frequent, and
Apollo, and the whole of thy labours, thy dogs, thy bows, thy
chariots, which lightly bear thee conspicuous as ‘thou art,
when thou drivest to the mansion of Jove. There they re-
ceive, meeting thee in the vestibules, thine arms, Acace-
sian Mercury,? Apollo the -wild beast which thou mayest
‘be bringing: before that, I mean, strong Hercules came,
for now no longer hath Phebus this duty.. For such @
hero the Tirynthian stands unwearied before the doors ex-


pecting, if haply thou -shouldest come: bringing ‘some rich:


dainty, And at him all the gods laugh incessantly, and espe-
cially his mother-in-law herself, when from thy chariot he
brings a very large bull, or a yet gasping wild boar by his
, hinder. foot,4 ard instructs thee much with this shrewd
speech: “Cast at noxious beasts, that mortals may address
thee, like me, as helper. Leave goats and hares to feed on


the mountains; for what harm can goats and hares do?.


‘Wild boars spoil the tillage,® wild boars the young trees; and
*


' sivdrepeg yadéw re. These words are used by Hom. {L. xxii.
478, and vi. 378; and the corresponding Latin terms are glores
(from glos) and fratriz. j ;

2 draxhotog, either an'epithet of Mercury from Acacesion, a town.
of Arcadia, or from dxaxyrng, axaxnra (i. xvi. 185; Od. xxiv. 10,)
which epithet is applied to him as the bearer of happiness. Cf;
Hesiod, Theog. 614, above. , -

5 sevOeo?}, a wife’s mother, as “wevOepdec is a wife’s father. écvode
and éxvoy are the same relations of the husband. In the next line
we may note the elegant use of the pronoun éys in the second clause,
not the first, as in i PEN Il. iii. 409; Horat. Od. I. ix. 15, 16; Virg.
42n. v. 457; Ovid. Fasti, ii. 271.* For the word ‘ydodvny see He-
siod, Sc. 168. ae win at

4 gépe woddg is a like construction with pdopag modéc my, Trach.
Soph. 779, and the common AKey moddc.—Spanheim compares
with the use of zwéc«xe, in the next line, Hisch. Pers, 830, tuvvoxer’
eidé youre voulernpact.


’


5 Blomfield at this passage quotes Ov. Fast. i. 349, 850, 361, 862, *


Prima Ceres avide gavisa est sanguine porce,
Ulta suas merité ceede nocentis opes.
'


144° - _ GALLIMACHBs. "1ST ATL,


wild-bulls are a great evil to men, Cast thine arrows at
these also.” So is he wont to speak,-and quickly toils he


-over the huge beast. For, though changed into a god as to


his limbs ’neath the Phrygian oak,! he has not ceased from


-his voracity; still with him is present that paunch,? with


which of old he encountered Theodamas ploughing.
And for thee the Amiisian nymphs? rub down the stags
loosed from under the yoke, and bring before them much fod-


-der, having mown from the‘mead of Juno the quick-growing


trefoil,4 which also Jove’s steeds eat; and they are wont to fill


- golden troughs® with water, that so the stags may have a


pleasing draught. But thou comest thyself to thy sire’s
abode, and the gods all alike invite thee to a seat, but thou
Sittest beside Apollo.—Now when the nymphs shall encircle
thee with a choir, nigh to the sources of A%gyptian Inopus,®


Culpa sui nocuit: nocuit quoque culpa capella 4
Quid bos, quid placidz commeruistis oves? .


But this passage of Ovid differs from Hercules’s view in Callima-


’ chus, in condemning the goat. Compare Virg. Georg. ii. 874. See


t


also Psalm Ixxx. 13. .

1 Ruhnken would read: here Spvying wep ix’ d¢otor—Stephanus
Byz. (quoted by him) shows that Phrygia was a peak of Mount

ta, where was the funeral pile of Hercules. By his casting
himself thereon the hero’s body was burnt, but his soul was sup-
posed to have mounted to heaven with a deified body. Hence
speaking of him and Ptolemy, as in the possession of heaven,

heocr. xvii..24, has Ort ogéwy Kpovidac pedéwy bEeirero yijpag. Cf.
Ovid. Met. iv. 538, Abstulit illis quod mortale fuit; vii. 262—270,
eight noble lines respecting the apotheosis of Hercules.

% The eating powers of Hercules are common matter for the
Greek poets. Compare (out of many) Eurip. Alcest. 788; Aris-
toph, Ran. 63, 559-562, which last is indicated by Ernesti.—
‘Theodasias was a king of the Dryopes in Thrace, whom Hercules ~
met ploughing. _ On-his refusal to give the hero some victuals, he
was slain by Hercules, who devoured one of the oxen, bones and
all. Hence he was called Bovgayog. See Apollon. Rhod. i. 1213—
1219, 1855. He was father of Hylas. °

3 *"Aumoiddec, Cf. 18. : woh

4 rpurirndor, trefoil, lucerne. It seems to be i. q. Medica-in
Virg. Georg. i. 215, which Servius describes as coming up five or
six times in a year. : a °

‘Ss Jrodnvidac, Cf. note at ver. 50 of this hymn. :

6 The i was a river of Delos,’overflowing and decreasing
annually with the Nile—hence called the Egyptian river. The De-
lians believed the Nile and Inopus to have an underground com-
munication. Cf. Call.cH. in Del. 206, E


172—185, HYMN TO ARTEMIS. : "445


-or Pitane,! (for thine, too, is Pitane,) or at Limnz, or where,
.O goddess, thou hast come from Scythia to dwell in Ale
Araphenides, for thou hatest the solemn rites of Tauri, then
may my heifers not be cleaving for hire, under other plough-
man, a-day’s-work of fallow-land.? For surely lame, and
weary in their necks, they would come to their stall, e’en
though they should be Tymphzan,? nine years old and strong-
with-their-horns, such as are far best in cleaving a deep fur-
row; since never hath the Sun god passed-by that beauteous
choir, but stays his chariot to gaze on i, and so the days are
lengthened.* <p
But which of isles, I pray, and what mountain pleaseth
thee most? What harbour, what kind of city? And whom
of Nymphs lovest thou specially ? what heroines hast thou


' Spanheim shows that Pitane and Limnz were both Lacede-

monian demes, where Artemis was worshipped. In fact Pitane and
Limnate were the names of two of the four Spartah tribes. See
Thirlw. H.G. vol. i. Append. I.; Pausan. III. xvi. § 6. Pausanias
a little before, in the chapter just cited, speaks of the temple of
Diana Orthia at Limne, with a statue of the goddess brought from
Taurica by Orestés and Iphigenia. In the 173rd line, Ale Ara-
‘phenide is mentioned, called Araphenide to distinguish it from
Ale Aeronides, another deme of Attica. It was on the east coast,
the harbour of Brauron, whence eene would cross to Marmarium
in Eubcea, where were the marble quarries of Carysteus. Cf. Eu-
rip. Iph: in T. 1451; Smith’s Dict, Gr. and -R. Geogr. vol. i. art.
Attica ; Pavsan. loc. cit,—TiOpua, ef. H. in Apoll.87.Tatpwy. From
this Tauri came the surname of Tavporéd\a. Cf. Soph. Ajax, 172.
The sacrifices at Tauri were of a bloody nature. ;

2 Blomfield compares Virg. Georg. i. 455,


Non illa quisquam me nocteé per altum
Tre, neque e terra jubeat convellere funem.


rerpayvov, Cf. Hom, Od. xviii. 874; vii. 113. Spanh., at the 177th

line, remarks that this passage shows the care of beasts of bur-

den, which the ancient writers on agriculture teach. See Virg.

‘Georg.i. 3, Que cura boum; and the 3rd Georgic generally.—xdzpov,
om. Il, xviii. 575, an ox-stall,—the part put for the whole.

3 Tymphezan.] Here Spanheim fonda Sropgaidec, from Trépgas a -
Tegion of Epirus. But Grevius shows that Tymphas was a moun-
tain, Tymphza a city of the Theoprotians, from Stephan. de_Urbi-
bus, and Lycophron’s Cassandra. ,
_ * pdea pnxbvorrat.. Callimachus uses ¢dea for ‘‘ days” again, H.

im Cer. 83; and Asch. in Choeph. 62, év ¢aee, ipso die. So the La-
' tins frequently use ‘“ Soles,’’ and Catull. in Com..Berenices, lxiv
90, Festis fuminibus for diebus. . ,

L


“146 CALLIMACHUS. 185—198,


taken for.companions’? Say, goddess, thou to us, and I will
Sing to others.) .

Of isles Doliche,? of cities Perga pleaseth thee, Taygete of
mountains, ay, and the harbours of Euripus. . And far be-
yond others lovedst thou a Gortynian nymph, a slayer-of-
stags, Britomartis,? of-certain-aim: fired with the love of
* whom Minos of yore traversed the mountains of Crete. But
‘the Nymph one while was hiding herself under the thick-

foliaged oaks, at another time in the water-meadows ;4 whilst
he’ for nine months was resorting to steeps and crags, and
ceased not the pursuit, until when, now well-nigh caught,
~, she leapt into the sea from topmost jutting-crag, and sprang
into the nets of fishermen, which saved her; whence in-after-
time Cydonians call the Nymph, Dictynna,® and the moun-


1 Callimachus imitates Theocr. xxii. 116, Eimé Oca, od-ydp oloba
kyo 8 iripwy brognrncg SbéySopar, and Apollon. Rhod. iv. 1381,
Moucdwy d0e piOog: iyw 8 dwaxovdg dsidw Mupidwy, Ruhknken. Com-
pare also Virg. En. vii. 645, Et meministis enim, divee, et memorare

testis. , . .

2 Doliche.] This seems to have been Dulichium, or Icarus, one
of the Echinades, according to Strabo, x. p. 458. it is now called
“ Macri,”’ (dodixy,) from its lone narrow form. Smith’s Dict. Gr. and
R. Geog. i. 804, a. According to Strabo, xiv., it was a colony of the
Milesians, and we are told in the 226th verse of this hymn that
Diana was the tutelar goddess of the colony from Athens which
founded Miletus.—Perga, the metropolis of Pamphilia. Cic. in’
Verr. Act II. i. c. 20, Petee fanum antiquissimum et sanctissimum
Dianz scimus esse.—Taygete, or Taygetus, a mountain of Laconia,
famous for hounds, Virg. Georg. iii. 44. That Diana frequented this
mountain specially, we find from Hom. Od. vi. 103,,0ln 5° *Aprepuc
élot war’ obptog ioxéatpa”"H xara Tniysroy repipnxerov. As to Diana’s
preference for the Euripus, we find from Eurip. sph in Aul. 1492,
1498, “Aprepey Xadxidog dvrixopoy, and Pausan. IX. xix. § 5, that
there was a temple and two statues of Diana at Aulis.

3 Britomartis,] (from Bprric, sweet, and zdpric, maiden,) is cele-
brated in Eurip. [ph. Taur. 126; Virg. Ciris. 305; Pausan, II. xxx.
§ 3. She is called a daughter of Jupiter and Carne. , See her story
in Smith's Dict. Gr. and R. Biogr. i. 506.

4 siapevijos, Tl. iv. 483; ‘Avollon: Rhod. iv. 316. Low pasture
lands, sometimes flooded, sometimes green meadows. Butmann,
Lex. p. 326, connects the word with #iwy; Suid. and Hesych. with
tlarat, Ionic for #yvtac. In 195 HAaro wévrov is an instance of a
verb, not of itself governing an accusative, yet joined with that case .
on account of the active sense implied in it: cf. Matthiz, Gr. Gr.
§ 423, obs. p. 684; and also § 426, 2.

5 In Herodot. iii. 59, Samians are represented as having intro-
duced to Crete the worship of Dictyne, or Dictynna, much before


198—211, HYMN TO ARTEMIS. «wT


tain from which the Nymph leaped, Dictean: and set-up
altars to her, and still perform sacrifices. Now the chaplet
on that day! is either pine or mastich-tree, but myrtle their
hands touch not. For twas then that a myrtle-branch en~-
tarigled itself in the maiden’s robes, when she was flying:
whence she was very wroth with the myrtle. O sovereign
Upis,? of fair countenance, bearer-of-light, thes, too, the Cre~
tans call by a surname from that Nymph. But, in truth,
thou tookest-for-a-companion Cyrene,? to whom of old thou
gavest of thine own accord two hunting-dogs, with which the
damsel, daughter of Hypseus, gained the prize beside the
tomb of Pelias.4 And thou madest the auburn-haired wife of
Cephalus, son-of-Deion, thy comrade-in-the chase :> yea, and
they say thou lovedst fair Anticlea,® even as thine own eyes,


the date of Herodotus. But Blakesley considers the words in He-
rodotus to be a note, which has crept into the text. .

_. | That the heathen deities each had favourite trees, whence gar-
lands were worn at their festivals, we see from Pheedr. iii. 17; Plin.
N. H. xii. 2. Both these assign the myrtle, as do Virgil and the
pos generally, to Venus, who was the very opposite to Diana ;°

ence the banishment of the myrtle from her festival.—d@:cror is
used as here actively with a genitive, sch. Eumen. 704, cepddv
G@uxrov: The pine and mastich were the types of purity, (Oy. Fast.
ii, 27,) and of the growth of earth’s fruits respectively. Diana, as
Luna, had an interest in this last, as we find from Catull. xxxii. 20;
Virg. Georg. i. 276. hy . :

2Upis.] This epithet of Diana is Ionicé far dmc, the Dor. form.
L. and 8. See note at Herod. iv. 35, Baehr at the word, who con-
nects it with Ilithya. In Herod: a cit. it is an attendant of
Diana who is mentioned, as also in Wirg. Ain. xi. 532.

* Cyrene.] Cf. H. in Apoll. 92—94, where- she is mentiqned
as daughter of Hypseus.—roi¢ é, with which;-as Eurip. Troad,
pits dv xepoiy : 532, mevxg év odpeig~-ev in these cases stands for did
with gen. :

* Telchos was a town of Thessaly near the base of Mount Pelion,
where was the tomb of Pelias, its king. Pindar, in Pyth. ix. 45—85,
gives an account of Cyrene’s victory over the lion-here.,

5 Procris was the wife of Cephalus son of Deion, king of Phocis.
Cephalus was beloved by Aurora or Eos, whence arose all his mis-
fortunes. See Smith’s Dict. of Gr. and R. Biogr. vol. i. p. 667.
See also Ov. Met. vii. 800—859. In Ov. vii. 746, we read “ Monti-

‘bus errabat studiis operata Diane ’’ of Procne.

§ One Anticlea was mother of Ulysses, and wife of Laertes: an-

‘ other, of Machaon, the father of Asclepius. See Pausan. [V. xxx. § 2,
and Smith’s Dict. Gr. and R. Biogr. at the name Anticlea. Span-
heim compares with icoy gateco gihyoat, Mosch. Id. iv. 9, ray pév

L2


’ 148 CALLIMACHUS. 212—226,


Nymphs, who first bare thy swift bow, and quivers holding-
arrows upon their shoulders; but their right shoulders were
free from burden, and their bosom was ever exposed to view.
And furthermore, thou approvedst altogether Atalanta,! the
strong-of-foot, the boar-slaying daughter of Iasius, the Ar-
cadian, and taughtest her both hunting-with-dogs and skill
in shooting. With her not the invited hunters of the Caly-
donian boar find fault, For the tokens of victory entered
Arcadia, and still it preserves the teeth of the beast.?

Nor do I suspect that Hyleus, and senseless Rhzecus,’ even
though they hate her, will in Hades find fault with the
archer: for their loins, with the blood of which the Meenalian
ridge flowed,. will not join-them-in-their-lie, __

August goddess, of-many-fanes, of-many-cities, all hail !
Chitone !* colonist of Miletus. For Neleus took thee for his
dye riecxoy Ieov gaéecow ipoiery. Catull. iii. 5, Quam plus illa snis


oculis amabat; and ibid. xiv. 1, Ni te plus oculis meis amarem.
1 Atalante] (the Arcadian as distinguished from the Beotian: cf.


Spaheim at this postage) was daughter of Iasius and Clymene.
y


e was exposed her father, suckled by a she-bear, slew the .
Centaurs, joined in the hunting of the Calydonian boar, and in the
games in honour of Pelias. Milanion conquered her in the foot-
race, by dropping golden apples, and so won her hand. See more
at Theocr. ii. 440; Ov. Met. x. 65, &c., and elsewhere. Smith’s
Dict. Gr..and R. Biogt. i. 391. For Aooaotias in next line some
MSS. have Apradidao, according to analogy. But, as Stephens says,
at the word Aprdg, dtd 7d xaxédgwrorv, we. have Apkacidne, ao., the
feminine being Apcasie. ;

2 The names of Atalante’s fellow-hunters occur in Pausan. VIII.
xlv. 3; and in xlvi. 1, the same writer says that the teeth of the
boar were kept at Tegea, till carried thence by Augustus. '

3 Tyleeus and Rhecus were Centaurs, who, endeavouring to force
Atalanta, perished by her arrows. Milanion was wounded in his
defence. Cf. Propert. I. i. 13, 14,”


lle etiam Hylei percussus vulnere rami

‘ Saucius Arcadiis rupibus ingemuit.

See Apollodorus III. ix., quoted by Paley at this passage of Pro-
pertius, and Allien, Var. Hist. xiii. 1. Ruhnken compares with this
Passage Hom. [1]. xvii. 398, whence it appears to have been boy-
rowed. ;

* Chitone.] Cf. H. in Jov. 77, Xirwvye ’Apripidoc. She derived this
name either from the ‘‘chiton” or short tunie she wore, or from
her having dedicated to her the clothes of new-born infants. See
Schol. ad H. in Jov. l..c. In the next line, MaAgry éxidnue. The
English rendering here is in accordance with Ernesti’s view, who


. observes that Rhea might in like manner be called Popg éwidnpe.


.¢


227239, ‘ HYMN TO- ARTEMIS. . 149


1


leader, when with his ships he put-out-to-sea from Athens.
Goddess of Chesium and Imbrasus,' filling the first-seats: for
thee too Agamemnon dedicated the rudder of his ship in thy
temple, a charm against stress-of-weather,? when thou didst
imprison the winds for him, when the Achzan ships were
sailing to trouble the cities of the Trojans, in wrath for
Rhamnusian Helen’s sake. In truth it was to thee that Pratus
founded two temples ;3 one indeed of thee as girl-protectress,
because thou broughtest together for him his daughters roam-
ing over the Azenian mountains ; the other to thee as mild
goddess at Lussi, because thou hadst removed their wild
nature from his daughters. To thee also the Amazons eager-
after war, of-old on: the sea-shore of Ephesus‘ set up an
image beneath a beeth-tree’s trunk; and Hippo performed a


Neleus, son of Codrus, led a colony from Athens to Miletus. Herod.
ix. 97; Pausan. VU. ii. § 1; Theocr. Id. xxiii.5; Hlian. V. H.
viii. 5. In the chapter of Pausan. referred to, we find the worship
of Diana to have been prevalent in Ionia: probably through hav-
ing been introduced by Neleus.
; Chesium, 2 promontory, Imbrasus,:a river, of Samos. Schol.
Spanheim gives two Samian inscriptions, one of ‘which has Juno,
the other Diana, represented on it ; showing that Callimachus does
not err in placing Diana as tutelary goddess of these localities.

2 peitvoy. We find the plur. used in I]. ix. 147, and the sing. in
‘Apoll. R. iii. 135, where the critics explain the word of those play-
things, quibus infantes demulcentur.—xarédnoac anrac. Ernesti com-
pares Hom. Od. x. 20, dvipwy xartdnos xéhevOa, and Hor. Od. I. iii.
4, Obstrictis aliis preter lapygia. Spanheim quotes for dmdoiag
isch. Agam. 150. Two lines below, at the epithet ‘Papvovoidr, the
Schol. says that Helen was the offspring of the union of Zeus with
Nemesis at Rhamnus, a deme of Attica. From Attica she was cer-
tainly carried off by Theseus and Pirithous.

be Prete: son of Abas, king of Argos, and brother of Acrisius,
was first driven from his kingdom by his brother, and then by aid

of Jobates, whose daughter Sthenobea he married, restored to a
share of it. His three daughters were driven mad by Dionysus, or
Juno. (See Serv. at Virg. Ecl. vi. 48, Pretidesimplerant falsis mugi-
. tibus agros.)—Azenian mountains. These were near Cleitor, a well -
of Arcadia, where Ov., Met. xv. 325, says Melampus purified and
cured the daughters of Pretus. Pausanias (VIII. xviii. § 3) agrees
with Callimachus here in stating that this took place at Lusi, or
Lussi, in Arcadia.

* This image of Diana set up by the Amazons is mentioned by
Pausan. IV. xxxi. § 6, who mentions a temple also. One of the
theories respecting the Amazons is, that they were proselytes of
Artemis, the Moon, whose worship was widely spread in Asia. See

~ Amazones, Dict. Gr. and R. B. i. 138. ‘Hippo, or ‘Otrera, men


150 CALLIMACHUS. 239256,
sacred rite to thee; and they, O sovereign Upis, danced an-
armed-dance around, first an armed dance with shields, and
next in aring, when they had made a broad chorus, and
shrill pipes sounded a sweet accompaniment, that they might
all together beat the ground ; (for not as yet did they bore
the-bones of fawns,! a work of Minerva, hurtful to the stag,)
yet the sound ran to Sardis, and to the Berecynthian range.
They with their feet kept making a loud tramping sound,
whilst their quivers rattled with the movement. Now around
that image truly in-after-time a broad temple lias been built :
than which the dawn shall behold nought more divine, or
moré splendid :? easily would it surpass Pytho. Wherefore, I
wot, also in his madness insolent Lygdamis threatened to de-.
spoil it, and brought against it an army of mare-milking Cim-
merians,? like-to-the sea-sands in number; who, "tis said,
dwell near to the strait itself of the heifer, daughter of Ina-
chus. Ah !*wretched amongst kings,‘ how vastly he erred :
for he was not destined to return back again to Scythia,


tioned in ver. 239, was their priestess.—apiki. H.in Jov. ver. 52.
In ver. 248, ef. Horat. I. xxvii., Nunc pede libero Pulsanda tellus.

' Ovid also, in Fast. vi. .697, 698, ascribes the invention of the
pipe to Minerva: :

Prima terebrato per rara foramina buxo
Ut daret effeci tibia longa sonos.

So also Bion, iii. 7; Pind. Pyth. xii. 12—14, With the construction
in ver, 245, compare H. in Ap. 8, of d& véot podmriy re xai‘ég xopdy
dvriveode, *

2 This is no exaggeration. The wealth of Croesus, and the Ionian
colonies joined together, reared a splendid structure, which took
well nigh 100 years to build, in honour of Ephesian Diana. It was
burned by a fanatic, Herostratus, the fight Alexander was born, but
rebuilt with great magnificence, the ladies of Ephesus contributing
their jewels. It had 127 marble columns each 60 feet high, and
the temple was 425 feet in length. This building was 220 years
Ls it was completed. See Smith, Dict. Gr. and R. Geog._i.
835, &e.

* Lygdamis, with the Cimmerians, in the reign of Ardis, king of Ly-
dia, after being expelled by the Nomad Scythians from their land. in-
vaded Asia, and took Sardis, but when pressing on tp spoil Diana’s
temple at Ephesus, was defeated by the interposition of Diana. See
Herod. i. 15, and Smith’s Gr. and R. Biog. ii. 860. The Cimmerians
originally occupied the region between the Don and Borysthenes,
and were, like the Scythians, a Nomad race.—ypapa0y icov—a con-
stant similitude in Holy Scripture. See Josh. xi. 4, &c.

4 daddg Bactewv, Blomfield compares Eurip. Heracl. 567, ré-
Rawa xapSevwy : ABsch? Suppl. 966, Ate Wekacydv: Herod. vii. 48;


256—268, HYMN TO ARTEMIS. ' 351


either himself, or-any other of the many, whose waggons
stood in the plain of Cayster,! for in defence of Ephesus ever
thy bows and arrows are prepared.

O Lady Munychia, watching-over-barbours,? hail, Phersean
goddess. Let none contemn Artemis: for neither to Aineus,®
having lightly esteemed her altar, did noble contentions come

-home. Nor let any one dare to contend with her in. stag-
hunting or shooting ; for not even did the son of Atreus ex-
ult in a slight requital. Nor let any dare to woo the virgin ;
for neither Otus, nor Oarion* gained by the wooing a goodly
union. Nor let any shun her yearly choir. Not even did
Hippo without sorrow refuse to dance around the altar. Hail,
mighty queen, and kindly receive my strain.


THE HYMN TO DELOS


At what time or when; O my soul, wilt thou'sing of the
Holy Delos,® Apollo’s nurse ? Verily all the Cyclades, which’


H. Cer, 118; Virg. iv. 576, Sequimur te, sancte Deorum. Lygdamis,
according to Strabo, i. c. iit. p. 97, perished in Cilicia, :  -. *

' Plain of Cayster.] Virg. rey or. i. 384, Prata Caystri; Propert. 1V.
xxii. 15. Pioe The waggons mentioned are those wherein the
Nomad tribes lived. Cf. Herod. i, 129;, Hor.,Od. III. xxiv. 10, Quo-
rum s plauetre vagas rite trahuntdomos. _.

* Munychia.] Pausan. I.i. 4, mentions the harbour Munychia, that
it has a temple of Diana Munychia close’ to it. The Schol. calls
Munychia a part of the Pireus, because probably it was adjoining
it Phevean, That Phere, a town of Thessaly, was a worshipper
of Diana appears from Pausan. II. xxiii. 5, whereit is stated that the
Argives, who, as well as the Athenians and Sicyonians, worship Di-
oa of Phere, declared that her statue was brought to them from .

erze. ;

3 AMneus, king of Calydon and father of Tydeus, neglected to sa-
crifice to Diana; who therefore sent the boar to ravage his lands.
Cf. Hom. Il. ix. 582. Agamemnon’s offence was the shooting a stag
at Aulis, in Diana’s grove, and afterwards blaspheming against the
goddess. It was as a penalty for this that the sacrifice of Iphigenia
was required. Cf. Iph. Aul. 90; Ov. Met. xii. 31. ‘

-* Qtus, the brother of Ephialtes, one of the Aloide, (Od. xi. 306,)
was killed, according to Hom. and Virg., for conspiring against
Jove; see Ain. vi. 582. Some, however, say that he suffered for the
sin of Orion, who is mentioned by Horace, Od. HI. iv. 71, 72, as

—Integree
Tentator Orion Dianz, -
Virgine’ domitus sagittd.
5 A subject of song, specially at the Theoria, or Delian festival,


.


152 we ‘ CALLIMACHUS, . 8-16,


lie in the sea the holiest of isles, are well-worthy-to-be-sung :
but Delos must bear-off from the Muses the first honours, be-
cause she washed and swathed Phebus,! king of minstrelsy,
and first celebrated him as a god. .

As the Muses hate the bard, who shall not have sung of
Pimplea, so Phoebus, whosoever shall have been neglectful of
Delos. Now,unto Delos will I give-a-share? in song, that so
Cynthian Apollo may love me, as caring for his dear nurse.

Now she, breezy and barren, as lashed-by-the sea,? and

overrun by divers‘ rather than by horses, is set in the deep:
which rolling vastly around her, throws-off-upon her® the
white spray of the Icarian wave; wherefore also sea-sailing
fishermen have made her their abode. Yet none grudge her®


every five years; which was a gathering of all the Ionic cities on
the main-land and in the isles in honour of Apollo. See all parti-~’
culars in Smith’s Dict. G. and R. Geog. i. 758—760. Virg. Georg.
iii; 6, Cui non dictus Hylas puer, et Latonia Delos? Compare too
Eurip. Hec. 460—465. The compliment paid to the Cyclades would
be well-timed, as these islands would send many deputies to the
festival, though Gyarus, a Roman penal colony, Seriphos, and My-
conos were nowise distinguished jlo

4 Nodcé re kai oreipwos. Compare H. in Jov. 32, and Hom. H.in Ap.
112.—Pimplea, in the next line, is alluded to by Hor. Od. I. xxvi. 9,
Pimplea dulcis, and is said by him to “ delight in sunny fountains.”
It was, according to the Schol., a mountain in Thrace, sacred to
the Muses.

? droddcoopa. Ernesti quotes Theocr. xvii. 15, droddooao rypijc.
Cynthus was a mountain of Delog overhanging the temple. .

3 For the old reading drpoemoc, which the Schol. explains of the
fixedness of Delos, (cf. Thuc. ii. and Virg. An, ili. 47, Immotam-

ue coli dedit et contemnere ventos,) Ruhnken suggested dowopoc.
_Blomf. reads drpogog, “not feeding,” i. e. barren. The 2nd Scholi-
ast explains drpomog as dyewpyntog, which comes to the same thing.
' 4 aidvigg, divers. Cf. Virg. Acn. v. 128, Apricis statio gratissima
mergis, Lucret. They were boders of a storm. See Virg. Georg.
i. 361—363. Horses, as animals used for war, were, says Strabo, not
allowed at Delos. :

5 dzrouaooera, a dative is to be understood. Cf. Theocr. xv. 95, Ke-
vedy axopdtnc. Rubhnken’s reading rodujy for wodAjy has been
adopted.—The Icarian sea. Cf. Ovid, ‘Trist. i. 89, 90.

© ob vepsonrov. Il. ix. 523. Soph. Phil. 1198, (Dind.) Virg. Ain.
iv. 349, 350, :

Que tandem, Ausonia Teucros considere terra,

Invidia est.
In the following lines the isles are personified, and represented as
attending a levee of Oceanus and Tethys, Delos taking the lead.
Tethys is called Titanian by Ov. Fast. v. 81, Duxerat Oceanus
quondam Titanida Tethyn.


Ji—31. | THE HYMN TO DELOS. 158


being named among the first, when the isles are gathered to
Ocean and Titanian Tethys, and ever she is first and leads
the way. But close-in-her-track follows Phoenician Cyrnus,!
not-to-be despised, and Eubcean Macris of the Ellopians, and
lovely Sardo, and the isle to which Venus swam first from the ©
waves: and she preserves it in requital for her landing.”
With well-fenced towers they are strong-and-safe, but Delos
with Apollo. What is a more firm rampart ?3 Walls indeed
and stones might fall under the violent-blast of Strymonian
Boreas, but the god is ever undisturbed. O dear Delos, such,
is the helper who protects thee !* Yet since exceeding-many
hymns revolve around thee, in what song shall I inweave
theé ? What will be grateful to thee to hear? Shall it be,
how at-the-first the mighty. god striking mountains with
three-barbed trident, which the Telchines® wrought for bim,


1 Cyrnus was the ancient name of Corsica, which was called Corsis
and Corsica by the later Greeks. It was generally esteemed thir
in magnitude of the great islands in the Mediterranean, and was, like
Sardinia, originally’inhabited by a Carthaginian colony, Carthage
itself being a colony of Tyre. Cf. Smith’s Dict. Gr. and R. Geog.
art. “ Corsica.”—Maxpte 'ABayria¢ "EXNomijwy. Eubcea was called
Macris from its great length. Strabo, x. ¢. i. p. 319, Tauchn. “ Aban-
tis,” or “ Abantias,” from the Abantes, its earliest inhabitants, an
Hellopia from a son of Ion, Hellops. Hom. Il. ii. 536, .quoted by ;
Strabo, mentions the Abantes.—Zapéé, Sardinia, a Roman pens.

, edlony; the fertility, climate, and natural advantages of which are
described by Pausan. X. xvii. 6,7. The isle to which Venus swam
was Cythera, (Hesiod, Theog. 195 ; Herod.i. 105; Virg. Ain: i. 680,)
whence she is so oft called Cytherea. Ovid in Ep. vii. (Dido to Ain.
60,) has Mater Amorum Nuda Cytheriacis edita fertur aquis. Span-
heim inclines to the opinion that Cyprus is meant, an isle equally -
favoured by Venus. He quotes Lucan, viii. ver. 458, 459, &c.

2 avr’ imBdbpwv; Compare Hom. Od. xv. 448, Kai de xev Gd’
2riBabpor Eydyv 2tdoved ye doinye Where the Schol. explains éa-
BaOpor, pintie 6 dor: vaidov, rij smiBdcewe Tie vewe. ;

3 ri de ortBapmrepov Epxoc. Spanh. quotes Assch. S. c. Theb. 426 —
430, to show the divine Nemesis on such as threatened god-pro-
tected cities, and_ illustrates the passage by Canticles viii.’ 10;
Zechariah ii. 5, “I, saith the Lord, will ie unto her 2 wall.of fire
round about.” ae ;

4 dugeBéBnxev. Cf. Hom. U. i. 37; Asch. S. c. Theb. 175,

5 The Telchines.] Strabo, xiv, c. ii. p. 197, says that Rhodes was
first called Ophiussa and Stadia, and afterwards “Telchis,” from the
Telchines, whom he calls wizards, and of whom he says that they
came through Cyprus from Crete and forged the sickle for Cronus.
The derivation .is #Ayw. (L. and S. Lexic.) Ov. Met. vii. 365, has
Phoebeamque Rhodon et Jalysias Telchinas. >


154 CALLIMACHUS. - $2—nd9,,


made the isles in-the-seas ? and from below from the lowest
depths removed them all as with a lever, and rolled them
‘into the sea? and firmly fixed from their foundations some
indeed in the deep, that so they might forget the main-land :
whilst constraint did not press thee, but thou floatedst free!
in the seas, and thine olden name was Asterie,? because that,
fleeing from an-union with Jove, from heaven like a star thou
leapedst into a deep trench.- So long as indeed golden La-
tona had not yet frequented thee, so long thou wast still
Asterie, and wert not as yet called Delos. Oft-times sailors
coming from Troezen,? the city of Kanthus, to Ephyra within
the Saronic gulf, beheld thee; and on going back from Ephyra,
_ they indeed saw thee again no more: for thou hadst sped to
the rapid strait of narrow Euripus,‘ flowing with a-booming
sound. And on the same day spurning the flood of the sea
of Chalcis thou hadst swum even to Sunium, a headland of
the Athenians, or Chios, or the bosom of the isle Parthenia
moistened by the wave, (for it was not yet Samos,) where the


"1 Spanheim adduces Eurip. Ion, 822, év Ocot Sépororw agerot, &e.,
to show that dgerog may here mean “‘dedicated’’ as well as free,
like sacred beasts freed from work.—zeAdyeooty érémheec. Cf. Virg.
n. iii. 75, 76. Asteria is mentioned ag another name with Ortygia
for Delos by Plin. iv. 22, (Nat. Hist.) Homer in the Odyssey calls it
Asteris. Od. iv. $46. :
.* darts ton. So Theoer. xiii. 51, dg Sxa xuppéc dx’ obpavds ypurev
dornp, ’AOpsc tv wéyvrp. Spanh. compares Aratus, Diosem. 196;
Virg. Georg. i. 194, .

Szpé etiam stellas vento impendente videbis

Preecipites ccelo labi. ; F
In the next line ézreuioyero is i. q. ‘ commorata erat,” or some such
notion. Spanh. compares Hom. Od. vi, 205, and_241.

3 In the full mention of the kings of Troezen, Pausan. II. xxx. 6—
8, there is no mention of Xanthus: whence Ruhnken has proposed
an emendation for dé ZavOo0 dditavrowo, which Blomf. and others
have adopted; from %aivw, to wear: worn by the sea. The word
occurs in one of the epigrams of the Gr. Anthology. Ephyra is
well known as the elder name of Corinth. Cf. Hom: I]. vi. 152.—
Saronic gulf. According to Pausan. II. xxx. 7, this name was derived
from Saron, a king of Trceezen. It ismentioned Eurip, Hippol. 1200,
who speaks of this very Troezen as rpi¢ wévrov Hon xepivn Tapwricdy.

+ wopog, says Spanh., is here used for the Lat. fiuxus, fluenta.
freta. Cf. Aisch. Prom. V. 681. Pers. 453, sivadiwy wépwy, an
sch. in Agam. 800, has Edpizov poai in same sense. Chalcis, a
city of Eubcea opposite to Aulis. : F

5 paordv. This word is similarly used in Pind. Pyth. iv. 14; Xen.
Anab. LV. ii. 6, and elsewhere in the Anabuasis. Thus od8ap is used


49—64, THE HYMN TO DELOS. 155


y


nymphs of - Mycale, neighbours of Anceus,' entertained-thee+
hospitably. .

But when to Apollo thou affordedst a natal soil, the seay
roaming mariners gave thee this name in requital, because that.
no longer didst thou float obscure upon the deep, but hadst
set the roots of thy feet in the waves of the Zgean Sea.?

Nor didst thou dread Juno-in her wrath, who indeed was
wont to be terribly angry at all women-in-childbed, who
brought forth sons to Jove:3 and with Latona specially, be-
cause she alone was about to bear a son to Zeus. more dear |
than Mars. Wherefore also, L wot, she both kept watch
within the heaven, being greatly wroth and beyond-the-power
of-words ; and was hindering Latona distressed by her throes,‘
for two watchers had been set in watch over her, keeping-
jealous-eyes upon the earth. Orie, namely impetuous Mars,
sitting on a lofty peak of Thracian Hemus,® was watching in


by. Hom. I]. ix. 142, o}8ap; and Ubere glebe, a similar phrase, by

irg. Aun, i. 535.' Strafo and Pliny state that Parthenia was the

ancient name of Samos. Cf. pueddv, Theoer. xviii. 18, and Milton’s
‘Comus, ‘‘ the navel of the wood.” ;

' Ayxaiov Mucadyocites. Anceeus was an old king of Samos. Samos,
as Spanh. observes, is described by Thucyd. lib. viii. as at a very
little distance from the mainland, facing Mycale. Pausan. VII. iv.
1, speaks of it as 4 bxép MuxddAng. : .

2 Cf. above at ver. 35, and cf. Virg. En. iii. 77, Inmotamque coli
dedit et contemnere ventos. We are told in ver. 53 that the isle
was no more adndoc, but Afjxog. Somewhat similar is the change
of the Pontus, “Afewvog to Bizewvoc.

® éreBousaro, the reading of Tan. Faber, seems generally adopted
by later editors. Blomf. suggests tveSpeuaro, Cf. St. John xi: 33,

’ éveBorpnoaro rq mvedpart.—tin reference to Juno’s jealousy here,
see H. in Dian. 30, Enhhpovoc"Honc. ; : ;

* Anrw repopivny. Cf. below at vér. 202. This was Juno’s usual
course with reference to her rivals. See Pausan. IX. xi. 2, and
Ovid, Met. ix. 290—312, in both of which Alemena’s sufferings are
ascribed to Juno. ; : :

5 Spanheim explains that’ not only Asia Minor, but the parts of
Greece mentioned in the next ten lines, are indicated by the words
ridov #reipoto, which Mars, the son of Juno, surveys in his watch on
Latona. Hemus was the modern Balkan, and is described by He-
rod. iv. 49. See Smith’s Dict. G. and R. Geogr. i. p. 1024.—fopiao
napa oxeoc. In the H. to Dian. 114, we have seen the north wind
traced to its rising in Thracian Hamus. Cf. Hesiod, 0. et D. 506—
508, &e. The cave of the winds is a favourite topic with poets. Cf.
Virg. Ain. i. 52—-63. 5


»


156 % of CALLIMACHUS, .64—176,


arms the surface of the main-land, whilst his horses meanwhile
were being stalled in the seven-recessed cave of Boreas: but the
other, the daughter of Thaumas, sat as spy of the broad isles,!
. having hastily sped to Mimas.’ Then they sate threatening
the cities,as many as Latona strove-to-reach, and kept prevent-
ing them from receiving her. Arcady wasshrinking, Parthenius,
holy mountain of Auge, was shrinking,? and shrinking back
‘was the olden Phenzus. Shrank too all Peloponnese, as much
as is bordering on the Isthmus, save Agialus and Argos,? for
she had not trodden those paths, since Juno had had Inachus
. allotted to her. And in one and the same course Aonia was
shrinking : whilst Dirce and Strophie*+ were following, holding


1 The daughter of Thaumas, ] i. e. Iris. Cf. Hesiod, Theog. 266;
' Hom. Il. xvii, 547. The former makes Iris daughter of Thaumas |
_ and Electra, and sister of the Harpies.—Mimas, a mountain of Ionia,
’ opposite Chios. See Pausan. VII. iv. § 1. Strabo, Geogr. xiv. ¢.i.,
aye that it lies between Erythre and the cliffs of the sea. Hom.
Od. iii. 172, calls it qvepcevra Mizavra. From her watch-tower
hereupon Iris keeps guard, lest the isles*should harbour Latona.
Ovid, Met. ii. 222, mentions Mimas two lines after Hemus.

* Parthenius, a mountain of Arcadia (Virg. Ecl. x. 57). Auge was
cong of Aleus and Nezra, and was a priestess of Minerva. Her
son by Hercules, Telephus, was suckled by astag. See Pausan. VIII.

iv. § 6, &., and Spanheim’s note here,—Pheneeus was an ancient
’ gity of Arcadia near to Stymphalus and Carye, Pausan. VIII. xiv.
1—8; and the old city was destroyed by a flood. Homer calls it
Pheneus, II. ii. 605, and so does Catullus, lxvi: 109, Quale ferunt
‘Graii Pheneum. prope Cylleneum. -

3 Aiyadod, The district meant is that between Elis and Sicyon,
afterwards called Achaia. Pausan. VII. i. § 1.—Inachus, a river of
Argolis. According to Pausan, VIII. vi. § 2, it is a boundary .be-
tween Argolis and Mantinea, whence Zschylus and others call it
*Apytiog rorapéc. As to Juno’s connexion with Argos, see Horat.
Qa. I. vii. 9, 10, ;

. Plurimus in-Junonis honorem
Aptum dicat equis Argos.


Virg. En. i. 24, caris-Argis.—Aonia, according to Pausan. IX. v. 1,
was the district of the Aones and Hyantes, who occupied what was
afterwards Boeotian Thebes, but at first Ogygian. Cadmus allowed .
them to remain, after he and his Phoenicians had conquered Beeotia.
Pheeniss. Eurip. 644, media rupopdg’ ’Advwr.

. * Dirce, Strophie, and Ismenns. Two fountains and a river nigh
to Thebes. For Dirce see Pheeniss. Eurip. 730, where it seems to
mean a river, and Soph. Antig. 104, Aipxaia pis6pa.—Thebes is call-
ed in Eurip. Suppl, 1214, lopyvod zodig. Cf 2 Zésch. S, c. Theb. 378,


«


’


16—92, THE HYMN TO DELOS. 157


the, hand of dark-pebbled father Ismenus. Far behind fol-
lowed Asopus tardy-of-limb, for he had been stricken by light-
ning. (But the nymph, Native Melia, dizzy-with-fear ceased
from the choir, and paled her cheek, in anxiety-for the coeval
oak, when she saw the foliage of Helicon shaken-violently.
, Tell me, my goddesses, Muses, is it very truth that oaks were

born at the same time as Nymphs. Glad are the Nymphs,
when rain nourishes the oaks; and when the oaks no more
-have leaves, then in turn the Nymphs bewail.) But with
them indeed, though yet in-the-womb, Apollo was fiercely
wroth, and spake in his threats against Thebes a word not un-+
fulfilled: “ Phebe, wherefore, wretched as thou art, dost thou
inquire thy present fate?? Do not yet, do not force me to
prophesy against-my-will. Not yet is the tripod’s seat at
Pytho care to me, nor yet hath died the huge serpent,? but
still that monster with dreadful jaws creeping down from


& lopyvoy odx ig mepay 6 Mayric.—In 78, Asopus, a river of Boeotia
flowing eastward through the southern side of the country into the
Aa eee See Pausan. V. xiv. § 3. Ovid, inhis Amores, III. vi. 33, says,
Quid referam Asopon? Quem cepit Martia Thebe. .He was the
father of Zgina, and stricken with lightning while he pursued Jove,
the ravisher of gina. Cf. Stat. Theb. vii. 316327.

5 Melia.J Pausan. 1X. x. § 5, speaks of a fountain of this name
above the Ismenus, and says that the nymph Melia had two sons
by Apollo: ef. ibid. c. xxvi. 1. The word at7éy8wy is used to distin-
guish her from those Melie mentioned by Hesiod, Theog. 187, and
Callim. H. in Jov. 47. Callimachus goes into digression as to the
popular superstition that the Hamadryads were coeval with the
oaks: cf. Apollon. Rhod. ii, 481.

2 roy abrixa wétpov. This power of vaticination in the womb is
exercised by Apollo again at ver. 162. For the construction of the
adv. for adj. see Matth. Gr. Gr. § 272, a.; Soph. Gad. T. 1.; Herod.
viii. 8, 7 dvw wédeg.—Thebe, Cf. Apoll. Rh. i. 736; Hes. Scut. 105,
&c., where 087 is used instead of OnBar: so Muxhyyn and Moxivat,
*Adnvn, ’AGivat.—Tvedv, in the 90th line, is the dat. loci. Cf. Matth.
Gr. Gr. § 406, b.

3 Apollo is here made to say that the tripod and oracle are not
yet his, (for Themis held them first, after Gaia, cf. Aisch. Eumen.
2—5, then Pheebe, and then Phoebus. Cf. also Lucan. v. 81; Ov.
Met. i. 321,) and that he has not yet killed the serpent Python.
For allusions to this serpent see Ov. Met. i. 439, 460, Stravimus
innumeris domitum Pythona sagittis. Lucan. vi. 407,


: . Hinc.maxima serpens —
Descendit Python, Cyrrheaque fluxit in antra.


\ . >


ra


158 CALLIMACHUS. ‘ 92-105,


Plistus enwreaths snowy Parnassus with nine coils.! Yet
nevertheless I will say something more clear, than if it were
from the laurel: fly far: yet will I overtake thee quickly, to
bathe my bow and arrows in blood; for thou hast had allottéd
to thee the children of a blasphemous woman.? Not thou at
least, nor Citheron, shall be own nurse to me. Being pure,
may I also be dear to the pure-and-holy.? So spake he, and
Latona, turning back again, retired.

But when the Achaian cities rejected her on her coming,
Helice,* friend of Neptune, and Bura, the ox-stall of Dexame-
nus, son of Afneus, then began she to turn her steps back to
Thessaly. But Anaurus fled, and great Larissa, and the
heights of Chiron. Peneus too shunned- her, as he rolled


The Pleistus was a river flowing through the valley of Delphi.
Homer says that the temple was called Pytho, and the god Pythian,
from the huge serpent rotting, wi@av. Hom. H. in Apoll. 372.

_ | évvia wierowg, wixdor are “ orkes,” Virg. Georg. iii. 424, Tardos-
que trahit sinus ultimus orbes.—ropwrepor 4 dd Sdgvnc. The laurel
of Phoebus is speken of in connexion with the temple and oracle,
in Callim, H. to Apoll. 1; Vite. En. iii. 90—92.

2 A blasphemous woman.] Niobe, daughter of Tantalus, respect-
ing whom, see Ov. Met. vi. 146—312. Her language is alluded to
by Ovid, Met. vi. 213, Exhibuit linguam scelerata paternam. See
also Smith’s Dict. Gr. and R. Geogr. ii, 1204.

8% So Theocr. xxvi, 30, Airic 8 sbayéoyu, cai edayéieoow Gorge.
Ovid, Met. viii. 724, Cura pii Dis sunt, et qui coluere, coluntur.

4 Helice, a city of ‘Achaia, mentioned by Hom. Il. viii. 203;
Pausan, VII. i. § 2, &c. It was one of the twelve Achzan cities of
Achaia, and had a temple of Poseidon, or Neptune, thence called
Heliconius. Along with Bura, another of the Achzan cities, to
the S. E. of it, it was destroyed by an earthquake, 8. c. 873. Cf.

: (respecting Bura) Pausan. VII. xxv.§5—7; Ov. Met. xv. 293,
Si queras Helicen et Burin Achaiadas urbes,
Invenies sub aquis. .
Plin. H. N.ii. 92. Dexamenus is named by Pausan. VII. xix. as
king of Olenus, another of the cities of Achaia. He was one of the

Centaurs. .

§ Anaurus, a river of Magnesia in Thessaly, Apoll. Rhod. i. 8.—
Larissa. Stephanus of Byzantium, under this word in his work De
Urbibus, &c. p. 418, (ed. 1725;) mentions eight cities of this name,
one distinguished as being on'the river Peneus, It was said to have
been founded by Acrisius. Cf. Pausan. H. xxiii. ad fin.—The
heights of Chiron, i. e. Pelion, the mountain of Thessaly (celebrated
as the scene of the giants’ rebellion, and assault on heaven, cf. Hom.
Od. xi. 315; Virg. Georg. i. 281). Here Chiron dwelt, according
to the Scholiast. Peneus flowing through Tempe is celebrated by


106—125, ) THE HYMN TO DELOS. 159


through Tempe. O Juno, in thee then a ruthless heart lay
even at that time. Neither wast thou moved or hadst pity,
when stretching out both arms in-vain she spake thus: “ Ye
Nymphs of Thessaly, children of the River,' bid your sire
soothe his vast flood; cling to his beard, and supplicate, that
I may bear children of Jove in the waters. Pthiotian Peneus,
wherefore now viest thou with the winds ? © father, thou
bestridest not surely a horse running-for-a-prize.? Are thy
feet ever, I pray, thus swift? Or in my case-are they alone
fleet ? and hast thou caused thyself to fly to day only, oha
sudden ? But he hears not! O burden mine, whither do I
bear you? for my wretched tendons flag. O Pelion, bride-
chamber of Philyra,? nay, do thou stay! stay, for even wild
lionesses often in thy mountains have cast-forth-with-labour
the savage fruit of their throes.” But even Peneus, I-wot,
answered her, as he poured, forth tears. ‘“O Latona, Neces-
sity is a mighty goddess,‘ for I do not, O Lady, reject thy .
pangs: I know that other women also in child-bed have been
cleansed by me. But Juno has threatened me immoderately.®


, Greek and Latin poets without end. See Theocr. Id. i. 67, # xara
Tired nada Tipwea. Ov. Met. i. 569,


Vocant Tempe, per quee Peneus ab imo
Effusus Pindo spumosis volvitur undis.


\ worapod yevic. So Virg. Ain. viii. 71, Genus amnibus unde
est. fOvid speaks of Peneus having sway over the rivers and
Nymphs. Ov. Met. i. 576, Undis jura dabat, Nymphisque_ colen-
ibaa undas.—reprmrdtaabe yeveiv. See H. in. Dian. 26, and Hom. Il.
x. 454. Spanheim adduces Sophocl. Trach. 14, ix d2 dacxiou yeverddog
Kpovuvoi dteopaivovro konvaiov worod, said of Achelous in illustration
of the ancient representation of rivers having beards.

2 GsOdtov. Cf. i. in Cer, 110, nai rév deOdopdpov, nai roy rodephiov

.inxov. The next line, as Spanh. thinks, refers to the course of.
Peneus, ordinarily tranquil and slow, through Tempe, being in this
case swift and yidlent.  -

> Nuppiior, i. gq. vupgetov, which is the same as Nuygéy in the New
Testament. Spanh.—Ov. Met. vii. 382, Pelion umbresum, Philyreia
ee Philyra was a daughter of Ocean, and mother of Chiron by

aturn. . PY ie :

* *Avayrain—@eée. See on the power of “Necessity,” Eurip.
Alcest. 962—980. She is there connected with Zet¢; and still more
so in Eurip. Troad 886, (which Spanh. quotes,) Zeb, eir’ dvdyen
pdatog, ire vote Bpordvi.—avuivopar is equivalent to “ refuse to be
the scene of.” .
_ 5 saree neiAnoey is the reading of the MSS.; defended by Er-
nesti. Ruhnken’s conjecture, AacwAje yreiknver, (cf. Virg, Ain. i.


160 . CALLIMACHUS. 125-144,"


Behold from far what a watcher keeps a look-out from the
topmost part-of the mountain, who would with-ease tear me
out from the lowest depths. What plan shall I adopt? Is it
any pleasure to you that Peneus should perish ? Let it come !
For thy sake I will endure the day of fate,) even though I.
should be destined to be ruined for ever, having the ebbing
channel of my stream dried-up, and be called alone most con-
temptible among rivers. Lo, here I am! what more need I
- say ! do but-invoke Ilythyia.”? He spake, and forced-back
hig vast flood. But Mars having lifted the uprooted peaks of
Pangeutn® was about to hurl them into his tide, and to bury
his floods beneath them. Then from on high he rattled, and
struck his shield with the point of his spear. So it clanged’
. with a warlike sound.. Trembled the mountains of Ossa, the
Cranonian plain,‘ and’ the stormy edges of Pindus: the
whole of Thessaly danced with fear, for such a sound wrung
from his shield. And as when all the recesses of Mount
Bins smoking with fire are convulsed as the giant beneath-
the-earth, Briareus, moves himself to the other shoulder,} and.


662, atrox Juno} Hom. Od. xv. 284, dacrdfjrig "Epwwvic: Theocr.

ld. ii. 14, &c,) is approved by Blomfield. .

2 We have here ahopted the punctuation of Hemsterhusius, trw*
merpupivoy pap TAjoopac eiveca oeio. Sortem fato destinatam mihi
subibo tua gratia et perpetiar. In 180, duaw7w is the channel of a
river left dry by the ebbing tide, (Blomf.) Spanh. compares the use
of the word in Pausanias, VI. xix. § 8, duwwriy xaptxopevoy: said
of the river Tartessus.

2 EAROuay. A. Fabri observes that this passage makes Ilithyia dif-
ferent from Juno and Diana. Hesiod, in Theogon. 922, calls her
the daughter (as does Hom. Il. xi. 270, 271) of "Hoa, or Juno.

‘> Pangeeum, @ mountain on the confines of Thrace and Mace-
donia: it is mentioned for its gold and silver mines by Herodot. vii.
112.-—poOirupva (from GéAvpva, i. q. OeuéOra, foundations). Cf.
Hom. Il. x. 15, &e. ;

4 Cranon, or Crannon, (see Steph. Byzant. in voc.,) a town S. W.
of Larissa in Thessaly. It was the residence of the Scopada, (cf.
Theocr. xvi. 36,) a branch of the Aleuade. Cf. Hom. II. xiii. 301.

‘where the Ephyri are supposed to be the Crannonii. Catull. lxiv. 35,
quoted by Spanh. &c.—Ossa was a mountain of Thessaly, sough of
Tempe. Pindus, a mountain and river in W. of Thessaly.

* Compare Virg. 4n. iii. 581, 582, °


Et quoties fessum mutet latus, intremere omnem °*
Murmure Trinacriam.


Briareus is the same as A2geon, concerning whom see Hesiod, Theog.


144—160, _ .THE HYMN TO DELOS. 161


the furnaces bellow under Vulcan’s fire-tongs, and the works
at the same time; and terribly resound the fire-wrought:
ewers, and tripods, falling one upon the other: even such
, then was the rattling of the circular shield.
Yet Peneus did not give way again, but was abiding firm
even as at the first, and stayed his swift currents, until the
aughter of Ceus! cried, “ Save thyself, and farewell! save
‘thyself f do not thou for my sake suffer ill, in requital for this
compassion: nay, thou shalt have a return of thy kindness.”
She spake, and after she had laboured much before, approach+
ed the isles of-the-sea; but they did not receive her, when
she came towards them, no, not the Echimades having a port
convenient? for ships, nor Coreyra which ‘is most hospitable?
of all the rest; for Iris from lofty Mimas being wroth with
them all, kept driving them far, far away: while they,.whom-
soever Latona chanced to reach, by reason of her clamour were
fleeing-in-alarm, all together, up and down the waves.*

Then came she to ancient Cos,> the island of Merops, the


149, 617, &c.; Hom. Il. i. 403. With the next line, cf. Virg. Ain. viii.

420, 421, ae
~  Striduntque cavernis,

. Stricturee Chalybum, et fornacibus ignis anhelat.


' Kownice Daughter of Ceus, Latona, according to Hesiod, Theog.
184, 404, was daughter of Ceeus and Phoebe. His worship was pecu-
liar to the 4gean. Latona is called by Apollon. Rhod. ii. 712,
Kouyivera. ae : :

2 ob Acxapdv. Ruhnken adduces reasons for doubting the usual
translation, “convenient for ships,” as being contrary to fact, this
view being first started by Arnaldus. "Blomfield observes, that by
removing the stop, and joining of Avrapéy, i. e. inconvenient, the
difficulty is removed. But some, at least, of the Echinades, lie off

_ the coast of Acarnania, as Petala, which Leake identifies with ‘Duli-
chium: cf. Smith’s Dict. Gr. and R. Geogr. i. 804.

& Corcyra: the ancient Pheacians are dalled gAdéewor in Hom.
Od. ti. 121 ; and this is the character which the Phzacians have from
Homer throughout that book. Herodot., (iii. 49—53,). however,
narrates a violation of hospitality in the murder by the Corcyreans.
of Lycophron, son of Periander of Corinth. See more about Cor-
cyra, Smith's Dict. Gr. and R. Geogr. i. 670. '

* Bentley translates “ liiz vero, ad quamcunque accederet La~
tong, simul omnes fugiebant per fluctum, ob comminationem
Tridis.”  aegoSnpévace cig puyiy rerpappévor. - Hesych.

‘ 8 Cos, which is opposite Cnidus and Triopium, in the Myrtoan
sea, was called Meropis, (Thucyd. viii. 41,) probably from one
of its kings, Merops, son of Eumelus. He is mentioned by Eurip.

‘ ' M
4


162 : ‘ CALLIMACHUS. 16% —175,
sacred retreat of the heroine Chalciope. But this word of her
son checked her: “ Nay, mother, do not thon bring me forth
here; neither, in truth, do I blame, nor bear ill-will to, the
island; for it is both fruitful, and abounding in pasture, if any
other isle is.! But to it from the Fates some other god is due,
of the high race of Saviours :* beneath whose diadem shall come
both continents not unwilling to-be ruled by a Macedonian,
and the isles which are set in the sea, even as far as the East,
and the quarter whence his swift steeds bear the Sun. And
he shall be wise in the manners-and habits of his sire? At’
some future-time, too, at last shall come to us a common
struggle, whensoever, having raised up the barbarian sword
and Celtic warfare against the Greeks, the giants of-a-later;
brood‘ shall rush-on from the farthest West, like unto snows,
Helen. 382. See Stephanus Byzant. p. 408. Chalciope-was a daugh-


ir of Eurypylus, king of Cos, and mother of Thessalus, Hom,
. i. 679. :


these Germans were in stature, form, and cruelty then, the Gauls
were deubtless two centuries before."


175-—194, THE HYMN TO DELOS. 163


or equal-in-number to stars, when they pasture thickest in-the °
air! Zhen fortresses and villages of Loerians, the Delphie
heights, and plains of Crissa and valleys of the continent, would
mourn all-around: and behold the rich fruits of the ncighbour-
ing soil, as it burns; and no longer only by hearsay, but at .
length with clear gaze would they behold around the temple
the phalanxes of foes: and at length, close to my tripods,
swords and impious belts,? and hostile shields, which shall
eause to the Gauls, a senseless crowd, an evil retreat: part of
which shall be my prize, but part on the Nile, having seen
their wearers expiring amidst fire, shall-be-laid-up*® to be the
rewards of a king who-hath-toiled-much; which oracles; O°
Ptolemy, I make clear‘to thee! Greatly beyond doubt ‘wilt
thou approve the seer, that is yet in the womb, hereafter all
thy days: but do thou, mother, understand thus. Conspicuous
in the water is one slight island roaming amidst the open-
seas, and its feet are never in one place, but it floats on the
cwater’s ebb and flow, like an asphodel-stalk,> whither south


1 Boveodiovra, Ernesti illustrates this word by the use of pascor
in Latin. Virg. Ecl. i. 60, Ante leves ergo pascentur in axthere
eyeni. But A, Fabri, from Aen. i. 608, Polus dum sidera pascet,
and Lucretius, i. 231, shows that the word is to be taken in its ordi-
nary signification. Aedpideg depat: cf. Soph. Cid. Tyr. 463, Asdgic
aérea. Crissa was a. little S. W. of Delphi, on a point of Mount
Parnassus, and the Locri (Ozole) were on the west of it. The
Gauls, properly so_ called, the Galate of the-Greeks, the Galli of
the Romans, the Gaels of modern history, formed the van of the |
great Celtic migration westward. Merivale’s History of Rome.

2 Swerijpag. This word, in Catlimach. H.in Apoll.. 85, signifies
“belted men,” but ordinarily “ belts,” &c. So domig for domdj-
popoc—arma for armati, &c. In 185, the allusion is to.the slaughter
and capture of numberless Gauls, when the elements fought for
Delphi and Apollo, and to the shields hung up as trophies in con-

- sequence. :

' ® «sicovran _“ Reposite jacebunt.” Ernesti. It would appear
from Justin. XXIV. viii., and Pausan. X. xxiv, ad fin. states, that of
so vast @ host not one remained to tell the tale. But Callimachus
is entitled to a hearing, as being a contemporary of Philadelphus, .

* This seeming prediction is very apposite, as Spanheim shows,
when applied to Philadelphus, the patron of poets and literature +

» ef. Theoer. Idyll. xvii. 115. ; : :

5 dy@éiptxoc is the same as dvOiaé, (Hom. II. xx. 227; Theoer. Id. |

1.52, abrao dy dvOcpixeoor kadaw whéxer dxodoPppay,) the stalk of the
asphodel. At the next line Anna Fabri quotes a Latin Epigram '
about Delos; which see: and compare also Virg. En. iii, 73—~77.
7 _M 2 BY


164 -CALLIMACHUS. . 193-214, |


wind, or east, or the sea may bear it. Thither bear me. For
to that isle you will.come, willing ¢o receive you.”

The other isles of the sea, as he spake thus much, began
to flee away, but thou, song-loving Asteria, descendedst from
Eubeea, to visit the round Cyclades, not by any means long
before : for still behind ‘thee clung the sea-weed of Gereestus,!
and thou stayedst in the midst of them; and, pitying Latona,
didst burn all the sea-weed, since thou wert exceeding-vexed
at heart? to see the wretched mother weighed down by her
pangs: “ Juno, du with me what thou wilt: for I regard not


thy threats; cross, cross over to me, O Latona!” Thou.


' spakest : and she ineffably ceased from her vexatious wan-
dering,’ and sat beside the stream of Inopus, which the earth
then sends forth at its greatest depth, when Nile descends
from Aithiopian steep with swollen flood ;4 then loosed she
her girdle, and. leaned back with her shoulders against the
trunk of a palm-tree,> worn as she was by grievous distress,
and damp sweats were flowing over her skin. Then spake
she, in her weakness, “Why, child, do you bear down your
mother ? this, dear one, is thine island floating on the sea.
Be born, my child, be born,® and gently come forth from the
womb.” ‘ ‘

- 1 Gereestus was the southern promontory of Eubcea :—for ’Acrepin


in 197, cf. ver. 37. She is called g:Adpodxe because of the festivals
held there, to which reference was: made at the beginning of this


hymn. For wepyéag in 198, cf. H. in Ap. 59,—mepinyiog éyyiOe-


Aypyne. : :
2 Kijot. Bentley and others adopted this reading instead of zrupi.


Pausanias says that Lucina came from the Hyperborean regions to,


Delos to deliver Latona, and that hence she was solemnly wor-
shipped by. the Delians first, and after by other nations. See
Pausan. I> ¢. xxxi. § 1, 2. In 203, with the construction of a double
accusative with péfov, see Matth. Gr. Gr. § 415, obs. B.

3 Blomf. reads (instead of 0 dppyrov) 7 8’ ad Ayre.

+ Inopus has been mentioned in H. to Dian. 171, where it is
ealled Bgyptian, probably because it swelled and ebbed at the
same timé as the Nile, whence the underground communication
supposed to exist between them. In 209 Aticaro Zéryy is taken in
its 2nd sense, ‘‘de primo Per, | in which, as Spanh. observes, it is
‘ used in Ilythyia’s epithet, AvoiZwvoc: ef. Theocr. xvii: 60.

* For the palm-tree of Delos, as connected with Latona’s partu-
rition, see H. in Ap. 4; Eurip. Heeub. 458, &c.; Ion, 920, quoted
by Spanheim; Hom. Od. vi. 162} Theognis, ver. 5, 6. In ver. 212
ay ysaivovea, which is also read ddvoOaivovea, is derived from
ddiw, by Hesychius.


°


® Compare Berenice’s invocation to her new-born son Philadel-


-


215—234, | THE HYMN TO DELOS. 165


; But thou, hard-hearted wife of Jove, wast not likely, I
ween, long to be without hearing of this: such a messenger


was she that ran to thee, and said, while yet she panted, and .


her speech was mingled with fear: “O honoured Juno, far ©


foremost of goddesses, thine am J, all things are thine: ahd
‘thou sittest own queen of Olympus,! and we fear none other


female rule ;—thou, sovereign, shalt know the causer of thy‘


wrath. Latona, know you, looseth her girdle in an island, all


” the rest utterly rejected and would not receive her, but Asterie |


hath by. name invited her as she approached; -Asterie, base
refuse of the deep.? Thou, even thou, knowest her. But, dear
mistress, for thou hast power, help,® awful goddess, thy serv-
arits, who tread the earth’s surface at thy bidding.” So
spake she, and then sate beneath the golden throne, like a
hound of Artemis, which, what time it shall cease from the,
, swift chase, sits, hunting dog as she ts, beside her steps, and
her ears‘ are all-erect, ever ready to cateh the cheer of the
goddess. Such-like did Zris, daughter of Thaumas, sit beneath
the throne. Now she never forgets. her station there, not
even when sleep shall rest his wing-in-forgetfulness,> but


phus, Theocr: Idyll. xvii. 66, “OABie kiipe yivoro.—daverog in 215 is
similarly used in an active sense in Odyss. v. 127. :

} KaOnoat.—Ruhnken observes that this word has a notion of
dignity inherent, quoting a similar use in Aristoph. Plutus, 533,—
and a like use of “ sedeo.”? Ov. Met. xiv. 261,

Ad dominam ducunt, pulchro sedet illa recessu,
Sublimis solio. i
So also “ incedo”’ is used, Virg. 2n. i. 46. :

2 gdpoc, from saipw, Ist, the broom, that which sweeps :: then,

Qndly, that which, is eid 2g the sweepings, or refuse. Lat. Quis-


quiliz. Compare Matt..Gr. Gr. § 429, 1.


3 duévey. The infinitive uséd for the imperative: cf. Matt. Gr. ,


Gr. § 546; Soph. Electr. 6; Cid. T. 462; Atsch. Prom. Vinc. 711;
Hom. II. v. 124, &e. i
* So we have watchers compared toa hound, Asch: Agam. 3;
Soph. Ajax, 5—8.—otara & atrije—ép0a. So Virg. An. i. 152,
Arrectisqie auribus adstant, (and Geor. iii. 84,) where the meta-
phor is from a hound in the first instance.
§ Anna Fabri compares Virg. Zin. v. 854—356, '
Ecce Deus ramum Lethzo rore madentem
Vique soporatum Stygia super utraque quassat
Tempora: cunctantique natantia lumina solvit:


and Ernesti adds, Propert. I. iii. 45, Dum, me jucundis lapsam |
Deus impulit alis. Tibull. IT. i. 89, 90, :


166 : CALLIMACHUS, 235—250,


having bent her head a little toward the projection of the
great throne, sleeps chere slant-wise. Never does she unloose
her cincture, nor-her fleet hunting-shoes,! for fear that her
mistress should speak some sudden mandate. Then Juno,
being grievously wrathful, thus addressed her: “Thus then,
ye disgraces to Jove, ye would be wooed by stealth,? and bear
children secretly, and ¢haé not where wretched female-serv-
ants-at-the-mill? labour in hard child-birth, but where sea-
calves breed amid the barren rocks. But with Asterie for
-this error I am no-wise wroth ; nor is there reason wherefore
I should ‘treat her harshly, as it were right, (for very wrongly
hath she accorded the favour to Latona,)* but I honour her in
a wonderful degree, for that she ‘has not pressed my bed, and
shas preferred Ocean to Jove.” So spake she, and swans,5
tuneful minstrels of the god, having left Mzonian Pactolus®


_ Postque venit tacitus furvis circumdatus alis
Somnus, et incerto somnia nigra pede.


1 ’ydpopidac, hunting-boots, peculiar to Diana, (cf. H. in Dian.
16). In Juvenal, iii. 192; vi. 246, the word means a thick woollen
rug thrown over the body after hard exercise.

yapiow0e X40pa. Spanheim_ observes that the word yapéw is
here used of “ amours,” as in Theocr. Idyl. xxvii. 57, "AAAHAatg
- Aadgovre reby ydpor ai kuwdprogo.. He compares Plaut. Cistell. 45, 46.
(Something similar is the use of vir, uxor, maritus, &c. in Virg. Eel.
vii. 18, 29, 30, &c.), .
.. 3 dderpidec. The Scholiast at Aristoph. Pax, 258, explains @Aerpic
2 pudwOpdc xapd Kaddcpdyy. See Hom. Odyss. xx. 105.

* Juno hints that Asteria has deserved ill at her hands, by yield-
ing to Latonaa resting-place; but that she forgives her, in grati-
tude for her former kindness, in rejecting the advances of Jove,
and preferring Neptune to him. is appears the right explana-
tion, and is that of Spanheim. .

§ Of swans, sacred to Apollo, mention is made in Apoll. 5. Span-
heim notes as remarkable, that swans, which by the concurrent
statement of the Greek and Latin poets, (Esch. Agam. 1444, 1445;
Oppian, Cyneg. ii. 508; Ovid, Heroides, vii. 1, 2, &c.,) only sing just
before their death, are in the text, and by Eurip. Iph. in Taur..
1104, 1105, and Ion, 161, connected in song with the. worship of
Apollo and Diana. 2 ;

* Pactolus.] Virg. En. x. 14], 142, conneets the epithet Mzoni-
an with the Pactolus, Meonia generose domo: ubi pinguia culta Ex-
ercentque viri, Pactolusque irrigat auro. Meonia es to have
been the upper part of Lydia, near to Tmolus. Gf. Hom. II. ii. 866.
With reference to the seven times repeated circling of Delos by the,
swans, see Hesiod, Op. et D. ver. 771, where it appears that the


,


‘pare alse Hom.


250—270, THE HYMN TO DELOS. 167


circled seven times around Delos, and chaunted over Latona
in ebildbirth, birds of the Muses as they are, most tuneful of
winged fowl. Hence afterward the boy fitted to the lyre just
so many strings! as the times the swans had chaunted over ”
her throes. Not yet an eighth time did they sing, for he
leapt forth; and then to far distance the Nymphs of Delos,
stock of an ancient river, sang the holy song of Mlithyia, and
forthwith xther’s brazen vault gave back the thrilling chaunt.?
Nor was Juno wroth, for Jove had removed her wrath. Gold-
en then became all thy foundations, Delos, and of-gold flowed
thy circular lake all-its-days ;3 with golden foliage bloomed
likewise the olive shoot, and the deep-rolling Inopus was over-
flowing with gold. :

Then thou tookest the boy, thyself, from the golden soil,


. placedst him in thy bosom,‘ and spakest thus: “O mighty


earth, with-many-an-altar, many-a-city,> thou that bearest
much, ye fertile lands, and ye isles, that dwell around, J am-
myself barren as ye see me, yet from me shall Apollo be called
Delian;nor shall any other land be,so much beloved by other


seventh day was holy to Apollo, because on that day of the month
Latona bare him.

1 Cf. Horat. III. xi. 3, Tuque testudo resonare septem Callida
nervis.—é 6° éOopev. Cf. Homer, H. in Ap. 124, tx & ope roogdwe
be, In 256, rorapod yévog, Inopus is the river indicated. Cf. 206.

2 Sdodvyny. ddrodrvypoc is used of @ cry of joy by Asch, Agam. 28
and 595; as well as dvwiédvia at Agam. 587. Spanheim adduces
these and other passages from the Tragic poets, and the usage of
the word “ululo ” of joy from Statius, Theb. v. 729.—dtampuciny is
derived from wepjy, repau. - ‘

8 This circular lake is mentioned by Hferodot. ii. 170, and by
Theognis, 7. Cf. Herodot. Baehr ad loc.—Davipepoc, i. e. per om-
nes dies, semper. Cf. Apollon. Rhod. 1194, 7piv kai werpdwy oytdoy
HrvOov air’ dvi wévrov Lrevwowg cvviacr Tavipepor ddAjAooey, With
the next line compare Eurip. Ion, 1104.—éxdpyee. Cf. Virg. fin. .
vi. 141; Auricomos foetus; 208, aurum frondens. ~

4 Ernesti soropercs with this passage Theocr. xvii. 65—70. Com-

- to Ap. 61,114, &. Virg. Eel. v. 62, [psi letitia
voces ad sidera jactant Intonsi montes. ;

5 Though, according to Strabo, (book x.,) there was but one city
in Delos worthy of mention, it having been, laid waste by Mithri-
dates, yet in after-time it had several very flourishing colonies,
owing to its convenient position for merchants between Athens and
Phoenicia, and on account of the sanctity of the island.” See Span-
heim ad loc. :


168 CALLIMACHUS. 270-283,


.god; not Cerchnis!. by Poseidon, lord of Lecheum, nor the
_ mountain of Cyllene by Hermes, nor Crete by Jove, as I by
Apollo ;? neither shall I be any more roaming.”

So spakest thou. He drew the sweet teat. Thence, nurse
of Apollo, art thou called from that day forth even holiest of
isles, nor doth Enyo, nor Hades, nor the steeds of Mars tread
thee ;3 but’ ever every year to thee are sent tithes and first-
fruits,4 and all cities, which have placed their settlements
eastward,® and westward, and toward the south, lead up
choirs fo thee ; and they who have their dwellings beyond the
northern shore, a very ancient stock.6 Who however first of


1 Kepyvic, according to Spanh., is by metathesis for Kéyxorc, i. e.
Cenchres, the port and dock of Corinth, which was so called from
Cenchrius, son of Neptune, who is himself sometimes called Cen-
chrian: cf. Steph. Byzant. p. 373. Lechzum was the port of Cor-
inth on the Corinthian, Cenchres that on the Saronic Gulf. Ernesti
compares with the passage generally Ovid. Trist. I. vi. 1—3,

: Nec tantum Clario Lyde dilecta poetae
, __ Nec tantum Coo Bittis anzata suo est,
Pectoribus quantum tu nostris, uxor, inhzres.


2 ‘Qo yw ’ArédAXwM. Delus is called ’AwodAdwviag in Pindar,
eg i. 6. Cf. Virg. Zin. iii. 72, Veneramur Apollinis urbem, i. e..

elon.

% ’Aténc. Pluto, Bellona, and Mars, death, slaughter, battlé, are
absent from the isle. It is not clear that the allusion is here to the
regulation noticed in a hg iii. 104, that no corpse should be in-
terred within the sacred isle. Hades is introduced, as Spanheim
and Ernesti agree, in companionship with Enyo and Mars.

4 a@xapyai. Spanheim shows that first-fruits and tithes were sent
yearly to Delos, net by neighbouring isles only, but by remote na-
tions on every side. See also Smith’s Dict. of Gr. and R. Antigq.
art. “ Delia.’’—aéumovra, the vox solennis for annual offerings
being despatched to a god in a Theoris, by ‘Theori. Cf. isch. Eu-
men.-12, wipmouge 8’ abréyv cal ocBiZovow péya. Thucyd. iii. 104,
has yopote de avijyoy at wéderg:. Herodot. says that the Ionic cities
and isles sent many and stated presents thither, iv. 35; and Pausan.
gives the same account with reference to the Messenians, iv. 4, § 1.

5 aire xpdc "Hwy. Darius, Xerxes, and Datis, the general of
Darius, are shown by history to have honoured and left intact, and
even augmented, the sanctity and wealth, of Delos.

® Herodot. vi. 33, shows that the Hyperboreans, or Arimaspi, a
nation to the far north, sent deputies to Delos; but that the last
deputies sent thither having died in the isle, the nation thenceforth
contented themselves with alivenn their, presents on the borders

. of a country near the Scythians. ‘Thence they were forwarded to
the Pelasgi of Epirus, and so through Eubcea and Tenos to the


¢


283—301, . THE HYMN TO DELOS. ~ 169


all offer to thee wheat straw, and holy sheaves of ears of torn,

‘which the Pelasgi from Dodona receive far-earliest, as they |
come out from a far land, the Pelasgi sleeping-on-the-earth,!
servants of the vase that is never silent. Next come they to
the holy city, and mountains of the Melian land ;? and thence
they sail across to the fruitful Lelantian soil of the Abantes :
nor is the passage any longer far from Eubcea: since thine
harbours are neighbouring.

These to thee from the yellow Arimaspians, Upis, and
Loxo, and Ecaerge? of-happy-days, daughters of Boreas, were
the first to bring, with the males, who at that time were best
among the youths : neither did these dast come back home :
but they were made blessed, and never eve they without the
meed of glory. For in truth the Delian women, when the
tuneful nuptial-song scares the wonted-haunts‘ of maidens,
to the ‘virgins offer as first-fruits their coeval locks, whilst
the youths bring as‘ their first-fruit the first harvest of their
downy chin.

Thee, fragrant Asterie, the islands circle around and about,
and as it were encompass thee with a choir, while thou art


priests of Delos. Cf. Pausan. I. xxxi. § 2, &c. These offerings, as
it would seem, were bound up in wisps of straw, (Spdypara dorayb-
wy, “mergites,’’) and so passed from one nation to the other.

" ypdexéec. Hom. Il. xvi. 235, dpi be Zerdoi Voi vaiovs’ brogHrae
dmmrorodes, xapaivat. Anna Fabricompares Virg. Ain. vii. 87, 88, .


Et czesarum oyjum, sub nocte silenti . =
- Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit. =~


—édoryhroto Byrog. So Virg. An. iii. 466 has Dodonosque lebe-
tas, where Servius explains that these lebetes were brazen vases,
all of which would ring at one touch.

2 Mndidog atag—the shores of the Sinus Maliacus. Cf. Herodot.
iv. 83; and vii. 98. The Lelantian plain is in Eubeea, so called
from Lelas, one of the kings of the island; and is called dya0dy
from its warm springs‘and rich soil. Cf. Spanheim ad loe. i

* Upis, Loxo, and Hecaerge.] Herddot. iv. 34, mentions only .
two, called Hyperoche and Laodice. The Scythian goddess whose
servants these were, and who wasthe same as Artemis, was name
Bendis. See Smith’s Dict. of Gr. and Rom. Myth. vol. j. at art.
Bendis. ; : .

4 40ea, sedes consuetas. Hesiod, Op. et D. 523, dv 1’ dripy otew
kai dv AOec. Asvyadzoory.—Moppoooerar, Cf. H.in Dian. 70. Anna .
Fabri considers. 70a rovpdwy equivalent to xépac by a similar peri- -
phrasis to Mitis sapientia ‘Leds, ee. ; i


170 CALLIMACHUS, ; 302—315,


‘


neither silent nor without-vocal-sounds ;! bu¢ Hesper with-
his-crisp-locks ever looks down on thee celebrated-by-song.
Some sing-to-the-dancing the hymn of the Lycian old man,
which Olen, the seer, brought thee from-Xanthus s? whilst
others, maidens, in-the-choral-dance, beat with their foot the
firm earth. ‘Then truly also is the sacred image far-high re-.
nowned of ancient Cypris weighed down with garlands, whom
Theseus of old set up,? when he was sailing from Crete, along
with the youths, who, when they had escaped the savage bel-


’ lowing of Pasiphae’s brute son, and the intricate seat of the


‘winding labyrinth,* danced a cyclic measure around thine


altar, O revered goddess, whilst the harping roused the dance ;
and Theseus led the choir. Thence the sons of Cecrops send
to Phebus the ever-living rites of the sacred-ship,> the tackle


. of that vessel.


t obre otorndiy od’ dydpov. This is the reading of Blomfield,
adopted here as more in accordance with the sense. of the passage.
*Ovudog iOzipale“Komepoc. Vulcanius observes that Hesperus is called
by the Latins “‘jubar ; ’’ because the brilliancy of his light is shed
like a lion’s mane, juba leonis. He quotes Hom. II. xxii. 318,
“Eomepog 8¢ Kdddorog év odpavg torarar dorjp: and Catull. lx. 26,
Hepes qui ceelo lucet jucundior ignis. ; \

2 Olen, the earliest Hymnist in Greece, was probably connected
with a colony of worshippers of Apollo froni Patara in Lycia. See
Herod. iv. 85; Pausan. I. xviii. 5; I]. xiii. § 3, &c. Pausanias
states that his hymns included some to Here, Achaiea, and Eilei-
thyig, as well as a last one to Apollo and Artemis. Cf. Smith, Dict.
G. and R. B. iii. p. 20. With the next verse compare Horat. Od. I.
ii, 7, Alterno terram quatiunt pede. ' é

% This allusion to the image of Venus brought from Crete to De-
los, by Theseus, and the solemn dance around her altar, is illustrat-
ed by Pausanias, IX. xl.§ 2. Spanheim adds Horace, Od. ILL,


xxviii. 15, :
Que Cnidon
Fulgentesque tenet Cycladas et Paphon
Junctis visit oloribus. et
. * See Virg. En. vi. 20—22,
_ Tum pendere peenas,
Cecropide jussi (miserum) septena quotannis
Corpora natorum: stat ductis sortibus urna:


and Zn. v, 588—591, Ut quondam Cret& fertur, &c. ; :
5"Gewpidog, the sacred ship chiefly used for conveying embassies
to Delos to the solemn annual festival. It was in existence, so the


Athenians believed, till the time of Demetrius Phalerius, the very


©


316-326, ‘ ° THE HYMN TO DELOS. 171


O Asterie of many altars,‘ many suppliants, what sailor,
trading in the Agean, passeth thee by in his fleet ship ? No
gales so strong breathe on his bark,! no urgency speeds his
sailing with atmost haste, to prevent him: but quick-they
furl -the ‘sails, and do not go back again before that they have
whirled round thine altar lacerated with stripes,? and have
bitten the holy trunk of the olive, with their hands tied behind
them ; which the Delian nymph inventd as sports and food-
for-laughter to the young Apollo. O hearth of isles,® of-happy-
home, hail to thyself: and. hait Apollo too, and she whom
Latona bare. F


ship.in which Theseus sailed from Crete. For the Theoris, Theoria,
and Theori, see Smith, G. and R, A. Dict. p. 960, 961.—romijia, i. e.
dmAa, cxowvia, Kddor, Scholiast.

1 Anna Fabri aptly quotes Virg. Zin. iii. 453, .


Hic tibi nequa more fuerint dispendia tanti,

Quamvis increpitent socii, et vi cursus in altum

Vela vocet, possisque sinus implere secundos, u
Quin adeas vatem, precibusque oracula poscag,


And Stephens compares with rd Aqign éoreitavro, Virg. Ain. v. 15,
Colligere arma jubet. .

2 These rites are said to have been invented by the Delian nymph,
and not Theseus, and with them every voyager who touched at
Delos was obliged to propitiate Apollo. Spanheim refers to Theocr.
Id. vii. 106, where somewhat similar rites are said to have taken
place at a festival of Pan in Arcadia. For snoodpevor, the ordinary
reading, it seems needful to introduce with Ernesti pnogopivovcer-
apivoy ddaxrdoat,” This seems to‘mean that the merchants and
others, who joined in these rites, submitted to be bound by the
hands to the trunk of the olive, under which Latona was delivered.
—yeddoric, like dageric, cf. Theocr. Id. xxviii., seems to have
been of a class ‘of words in orég very common among the Alexan-
drian school of poets. :

3 Delos is éailed iorin vhowv, according to the Scholiast, as lying
in the centre of a number of isles, even as a hearth, or Vesta’s altar,
in the middle of the house. |


‘


172 | ; CALLIMACHUS. 1-13,


‘


HYMN TO THE BASKET OF CERES, OR DEMETER.


As the basket! descends, ye women, join in acclamation :
all hail, Demeter, that-feedest-many, of many-measures.? The
basket as it descends (close the door of your lips, ye profane)
gaze upon, neither from the house-roof, nor from an eminence,
neither boy, nor woman, nor she who has suffered her hair to
flow unbound,® neither when fasting we spit from parched
mouths. Hesperus is wont to behold it when he comes forth
from the clouds, Hesperus, who alone persuaded Demeter to
drink, when she was ‘following after the undiscovered track
of her ravished child. Lady goddess, how did thy feet sus-
tain to bear thee both to the west, and even to the black
(Africans), and to where are the golden apples. Thou didst
not drink, no, nor eat nor wash thyself during that time.
Thrice didst thou cross in truth silver-eddying Achelous,>’


rT We have followed Blomf. in placing this hymn before the Bath
of Pallas, a poem clearly of the elegiac class. Ptolemy Philadel-
phus had introduced to Alexandria from Athens the Eleusinian fes-
tival of Demeter. In this a main ceremony was the carrying of the
calathus or sacred basket in -honour of Ceres, on the fourth day of
the festival. Demeter seems to have personified the fertilizing

ower of nature. See Virg. Georg. i. 5, Liber et alma Ceres. This

asket-carrying may have had its origin in Proserpine’s maiden
life in Sicily. Cf. Ovid. Fast. iv. 420—450. :

* Theocritus, Id. x. 42, has Adyarep wodbnapre wodtorayv—and

eonpaye Virg. Georg. i. 347, Et Cererem clamore vocent in tecta.
In the third line, for yapai Qacasicbe we read from the Schol. on
Plato’s Symposium, p. 218, B., quoted by Blomf., Gdpag 0 éaiobe
BEBnrxX1 8c. roig Holy.
+ There seems no doubt that by @ carexedaro xairay is to be un-
‘derstood the class of courtesans, as Bentley was of opinion. In
illustration see Ov. De Art. Amat: i. 31, Este procul vitt tenues,
insigne pudoris, and Tibull. I. vi. 68. The meaning of the next line
. seems simply that the fasting are not to gaze on the ceremony of the
Canephoria, and so unsgeasonably renew the memory of the fast of
Ceres, in search of her daughter. ;

* duOuac, Doric for Svopac.—pédavac, i. e. Ethiopas. Cf. Hesiod,

Op. et D. 527, GdX’ ii cvavéwy dvipdr didy sre woduwrée. Ruhnken.—
_ bra rd yptoea pada—the Atlantic and the gardens of the Hespe-
rides, Spanh. quotes Apollon. Rhod. iv. 1396.

4 Aclslouay the chief fresh-water river in Greece, rising in Mount
Pindus, and flowing through Acarnania and /tolia into the Ionian
Sea near Ciniadz, mentioned by Hom, II. xxi..194; Ov. Met. ix.
68; Virg. Georg. i. 9.° . :


\


M425, ~ ‘HYMN TO DEMETER. . , 178


and as many times pass-over each of the ever-flowing rivers,
and thrice didst thou run to Henna, the navel of a most beau-
teous isle,! and thrice didst thou seat, thyself on the ground
beside the spring Callichorus, athirst and without drinking ; -
and thou didst not eat nor wash thyself. Nay, let us not
speak of these things, which brought tears to Ceres : better,
how she gave to cities pleasing Jaws ;? better, how she was
the first to cut off wheat straw and handfuls of ears,? and in-
troduced oxen to tread out the corn, when Triptolemus was
being taught a good art. Better, to see how (that so every.
one may escape transgressions) she made the son of Triopas
‘pitiabte by hunger.5 Not yet were the Pelasgians inhabiting
the Cnidian land, but as yet sacred Dotium ; but fo thyself


} Henna, or Enna, was as nearly as possible in the centre of Sicily.,
Hence Cic. in Verr. iv. 48, calls it “ Umbilicus Sicilie,”” and Calli-
Imachus here, dugaddy “Evvay. (Cf. Milton’s Comus, “‘ Within the
havel of this hideous wood.”’] For a description of Henna see Cic.
in Verr. iv. 48; Ov. Met. v. 385; Fast, iv. 419. Pausanias, I.
xxxviii. 6, mentions Callichorus as aspring of Attica, where first
fe Elcestaies women instituted a choir and celebrated the goddess
with song.

, Vite. En. iv. 58, calls Ceres “ Legifera,”’ the Latin form of
Ocopogdpoc, Cf. Oecpoddpra, legum latio. It is most fitting, as Servius


_ says, that she should be styled “ legifera,” because the giving of


corn to men was the first dawn of civilization and law—rights and
laws arising out of division of lands. ;
* xpdra—darixove. Cf. Ovid,-Fast. iv. 401, 402,


Prima Ceres homine ad meliora alimenta vocato
Mutavit glandes utiliore cibo.


kaddpny re xai tepd dpdypara,- Cf. ‘Theoer. vii, 157; Call. H. to De-'
Jos, 284; Tibull. I. x. ad fin., At nobis pax alma_veni, spicamque
teneto. Demeter’s symbols were spikes and poppies. In the next
line we have evidence of the general use of besati for treading
corn by the ancients. See Deut. xxv. 4, “ Thou shalt not muzzle
the ox,”’ &c. : ‘

* Triptolemus (cf. Virg. Georg. i. 19, Uncique puer monstrator
aratri) was a son of King Eleusis, a favourite of Demeter, and the

eat hero in the Eleusinian mysteries. See his story in Ov. Fast.
iv. 507, &c.; Ov. Met. v. 646, &c.-2d:déoxero—disceret, doceretur.

§ The son of Triopas, i. e. Erysichthon, i. e. tearer up of earth.
See Ovid, Met. viii. 738, &c., and Miiller, Dor. [I. x..§ 3. Cnidus,
mentioned in the next line, was a city of Caria colonized by Lace-
demonians under Triopas. Pausan. X. xi, § 1. Dotium was the
name of a plain S. of Ossa in Pelasgiotis of Thessaly, on the west
of the lake Beebeis, See Steph. Byzant. p. 250; Plin. H. N. iv.
e. 9. 3 e *


oa


!


174  GALEIMACHUS. 2648,


had raised a beautiful enclosure, thickly-grown with trees ;
scarce would an arrow have penetrated it. In it was the pine,
in it tall elms, and pear-trees also, and beautiful sweet-apples,
whilst the water, like as amber, was bursting forth from


‘springs,! and the goddess was as fond of the spot as Eleusis,


and as Triopus,? and Enna. But when their propitious deity
was wroth with the Triopide, then worse counsel took hold
of Erysichthon. He hastened forth with twenty. servants, all
in their prime, all giant-men, (they would be sufficient to lift


‘a whole city,)? having armed them in both respects with hat-


chets and axes. So they rushed without-shame into the
grove of Ceres. F

Now there was a poplar, a large tree, reaching to heaven,‘
and under it the Nymphs were-wont-to-disport-themselves in
the noontide ; which stricken first, sounded an evil melody for


‘the rest. Demeter became-aware that her sacred grove is in


trouble, and said in her anger, “ Who is hewing down my.
beautiful trees?” |
Forthwith she likened herself to Nicippe,> whom the state


128 duapity, Cf. Hom. Tl. xxi. 259, dudpne && txpara Bdd\r\wv,
Apollon. Rhod. ij: 1391. Compare generally, Theocr. Id. vii. 140—-
147,.—irepaiverat ydpy. Cf. 1). vi. 160, ro dg yuv2) Tpbirou émepnvaro,
Spanh. illustrates this verb by Propert. HI. xxxiv. 25, Lynceus ipse
meus sanos insanit amores. For goddesses preferring special cities,
ef. Virg. Ain, i. 15, &. ; ‘

2 Triopus.] This seems another name for Triopium, which, ac-
cording to Stephanus of Byzantium, was also called Triopia and
Triops. Cf, Steph. p. 666. In the next line Tprowidae refers to the
family of Triopas. : : :

3 Spanheim compares Eurip. Pheeniss. 1131, 1182,


yiyac én’ Gpwy ynyeric Sdyv tori
gipwy poxdotow tavacmdcag BaOpwy, :

* atysooc péya déocov. Cf. Hom. Od. v. 239, where it is called
obpavounkne. Cf. also Virg, Georg. ii. 66; En. viii. 276; Horat: Od.
IL. iii. 9, 10; in ali which passages it is described as large and over-
shadowing.—«ipor, i. e. xpoomedatov. Schol ;

5 Nuciaag (ray oi,x.7..) Compare Hom. I. vi. 309. Observe
also the noun of multitude with a verb plural; Matt. Gr. Gr. § 302,
p. 616. Asch. Agam. 588, &c. So in Virg. Aen. vii. 416, Alecto
likens herself to Juno’s priestess: In vultus sese transformat aniles:
.+. Fit Calybe Junonis anus, templique sacerdos.—yévro, i. q. ZAaBev,
according to some AXol. for éA70, ATO, Evro, yivro. Cf, Liddell and
Scott, Lex. in voc. oriupara cai pacwva. Cf. Theocr. vii. 157, re-
ferred to at line 20,, Spanheim illustrates this notice of the priestess


‘


oy re


N


44-59, = HYMN TO" DEMETER. : 175


had appointed as her public priestess, and she ‘grasped in her
hand the fillets, and poppies,'and kept ber key on her
shoulders. Then said she, soothing the bad and shameless
man, “ My son, who fellest the trees which are consecrated !
to gods, stay, my son, child much-loved by thy parents, forbear =’
etd turn away thy servants, lest. anywise our Lady Demeter
be wroth with thee, Demeter, whose holy precinct thou art :


pillaging.” ¢

At her then looking-askance more fiercely than a lioness
with-savage-brood (whose eye men say is of all most terrible)
eyes & man on the Tmarian? mountains, he said, “ Give way,
lest I fasten this great. axe in thy flesh. These trees thou
shalt behold my well-roofed house,? wherein I shall ever and.
anon hold pleasant banquets to my heart’s content” with my .
companions. So spake the youth, and Nemesis recorded the
wicked speech.4

Demeter was wrath in an. unspeakable degree; and she
‘became the goddess. Her steps indeed trod the ground, but %


P ot
of Ceres bearing the key of her temple, by Esch. Suppl. 291, where
Io is called cAndodyor “Hoag—editua Junonis:,and Iph. in Taur.
Eurip. 1463, and Troad. 256.

 dvepéva, i. e, dgera: properly animals dedicated to a deity,
and so allowed to run free in the sacred enclosures.’ Cf. Valkn. .
Herod. ii. 65.—odvbeore, th. Oiccac@at, to seekeby-prayer. Cf. daé-,
Gecroc, Hom. Od. xvii. 296. : ’

2? Tmarian mountains.] Cf. Virg. Ecl. viii, 44, Aut T'maros, aut
Rhodope, aut extremi Garamantes. Tmaros was a ridge of the
Molossian district, whence Aristot., H. A. vi., says the fiercest lions
sprung, Blomfield quotes here Eurip. Medea, 190, Kaira: roxad0g
Seopa Aeaivag "Arroraupotrat Spwoty, é ‘

3 Gace, according to Spanheim, is i. q. respicies. Cf, OaccioOe,
one reading in vers 3. Stephens and Anna Fabri understand @aceé
oreyavoy to mean oréte, shall roof. We have adopted the former
view, Has arbores videbis mee domistecta. __, .

4 dypdWaro gwvdv. Ernesti shows that the poets attribute books,
wherein good and bad deeds are noted to Jove, the Parcs, andother —
deities. So Pluto is represented in Esch. Eumen. 275, dedroy apy
gosvt. Cf. Prom. V. 789, &c. So too in Holy Scripture we have
frequent allusion to the ‘‘recording angel,” and, “ Are-not these
things written in thy book?’*—She became the goddess; that is,
she reassumed her proper character. The converse process is shown
in Virg. Atn. vii. 419, where out of a Fury Alecto becomes (¥#)
Calybe.—6ciic, Dor. for Oe6c, as Geipopos for Gedpopoc. Pind. Ol. iit.
18. Cf. Liddell and Scott, . :


176 _ CALLIMACHUS. . BOT


her head touched Olympus.!| Then were they half-dead I
wot, when they had seen the awful goddess, and on a sudden
rushed away, having left the axe among the oaks. The rest
she let alone, (for by constraint they followed beneath their
lord’s hand,) but she replied to the king that-vexed-her, “So,
so build thy hall, thou dog, thou dog,? wherein’ thou mayest
hold banquets : for frequént festivals shalt thou -have here-
after.” Thus much she spake, and proceeded to work evil for
Erysichthon. Forthwith upon him she sent a grievous fierce
hunger, burning? and violent; and he began to be famished by


‘a severé disease. Wretched man that he was, as much ‘as he


happened to eat, for so much more again did a craving seize
him. -Twenty were wont to make ready his banquet, twelve
to pour out wine: for so many acts incense Dionysus as in-


1 {Opara: cf. Hom. ll. v. 778. With the whole line compare Hom.
Il. iv. 442, 443. Virg. 2in. iv. 176,177,


Parva-metu primo, mox sese attollit in auras.
Ingrediturque solo, et caput inter nubila condit.
Dodd compares also Milton, P. L. iv. 985,
* On the other side Satan, alarmed,

Collecting all his aught dilated stood,

Like Teneriffe or Atlas unremoved :

His stature reached the sky; and on his crest
* Sat horror plumed.”


But above all, the prophet Isaiah, Ix. 1, ‘ Heaven is my throne, and
the earth is my footstool.”

% Koy, cbov. Spanh. observes the use of this term applied by he-
yoes and even goddesses ong to another in Homer, (cf. [1. viii. 428 ;
xxi. 481,) and’ we may add the frequent Homeric use of the epithet


: xuvama. Spanheim also remarks upon the correctness even of hea-


then views of reward and punishment, as shown,in this instance of
the Ligeti a man’s besetting sin the engine of his punishment.
So the rich man in St. Luke’s Gospel, xvi. 27.. Cf. Shakspeare’s
King Lear, ; .
“ The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices .
Make instruments to plague and punish us.’’

Blomfield illustrates the repetition of xéoy by Epigr. xxx. 5, od de
vatxi eadé¢ kaddc, and the use among the ancient 5 ne of L. L.
and B. ns libenter libenter, i. e. libentissimé, and Bene bene,
i. e. optime. . ANS .

3 aidwy. Cf. Ov. Met. viii. 827, Furit ardor edendi, i.e. Arde
aiOwy: and an: Epigy.' in: Aisch. against Ctesiphon, Aqwév aifwva.—
gorpedyero, Cf. Hom. Il. xv. 512, orpebyeoOar év aivy Syiorare.


71—88, HYMN TO DEMETER. | 177


\
.


--eense Demeter likewise.! For along with Demeter Dionysus
had been enraged. Neither to clubs nor to social’ banquets
could his parents send him for shame, but every pretext was
devised to excuse him, The Ormenidz had come to invite him
to the games in-honour-of Itonian Minerva :? his mother.then
said that he could not come. “ He is not within, for yesterday
he has: gone to Cranon, to demand back a debt? of a hundred
oxen.” Polyxo, Actorion’s mother, came, for she was making
ready her son’s nuptials, inviting both Triopas and his son.
But with grieving heart the woman answered, as-she-shed-
tears, “ Triopas will come at your bidding, but a bear hath
smitten Erysichthon in the sweet glades of Pindus,* and he
is lying ill now for nine days.” Wretched mother, fond of
thy son; what falsehood then didst thou not utter! Was
any ohe préparing feasts?> Erysichthon was abroad. Was
one marrying a wife ? .“ A quoit has struck Erysichthon, or
he has fallen from his chariot, or he is numbering the flocks
on Othrys.” But within-the-inngr-chambers, then, for-whole-


1 Bacchus and Ceres .are often associated, as in Virg. Georg. i.
5—7. Soph. Antig. 1119, 1120, pidag 6: wayxolvos "PXevorwiag Anodg .
dy «dAdo. And Pausan. VII, xx. § 1, 2, speaks of the Ach&ans as
paying Bacchus Aisupyirne, just the same honours as Demeter. In
the next line at eg iodvwe obre cuvdcinma, cf. om. Od. i. 226.

2 Itonian Minerva.] Pausan. IX. xxxiv. 1, speaks of the temple
of Itonian Minerva before Coronea in Boeotia, and says that the sur-
name arose from Itonus, a son of Amphictyon, who, according to
the Schol. to Apollon. Rhod. i. 721, was a to the goddess. Or-
menium was a city of Thessaly, between Phere and Larissa, named’
from Ormenus, a grandson of Holus. Cf. Pausan. I. xiii. § 2, who
marks the temple of Itonian Minerva as between these ‘cities. Crano

_ was a city of Thessaly, cf. H. in Del. 138.

» redOog, (cf. Bath of Pallas, 106,) for ré\o¢, as dy@o¢ from axoc,
padr@axdc from padraxdc. Span. Actorion, son of Polyxo, mentioned —
two lines below, was probably one of the Argonauts,—dppdrepor.
See here Blomfield’s learned note, showing that dygérepoy is here
‘used adverbially, the “ plena locutio” being dpgérepoy zovodea,
xixdnoxovoa, Cf. 36; Hom. Il, iv. 60, &c. 3

4 Tlivdov. dy’ ebdyxercay, Ernesti compares Pindar, Pyth. ix. 27, 28,
Tlivdou edcervds wrvyai.—reirat,the counterpart of the Latin “ Cubat.”
Horat. Sat. I. ix. 18, Trans Tiberim long cubat is prope Cexsaris
hortos. II. iii. 289, Mater ait eel menses jam quinque, cubantis.
Eurip. Orest. 36; Med. 24; Theocr. iii. 58. Blomfeid. ;

5 Saivuey citarivac (Saivu Satra yipovot, Il. ix. 70.) davtw and dat-
vupe are both from daim, to distribute. In the 87th line, 2% irxwy
would seem to mean, as in Hom. II. vii. 15, “de curru.’’ RuAnken.
The picture ofa king’s son nwmbering flocks on Othrys is not incon-

: N : ;


178 ; CALLIMACROS. " 8103,


days-long the feaster was devouring ten-thousand viands of
every kind,’ but his insatiate stomach was-in-commotion
while he kept eating more continually: and all the meats
kept flowing down idly thankless, as it were into the deep of
_the sea. Even as snow on Mimas, as a wax-doll in the sun,?
and yet more than these he was wasting, until on the nerves
. of the wretched man fibres and bones alone were left.3 Weep-
ing was his mother, deeply wailing were his two sisters, and
the nurse by whom he was suckled,‘ and the ten handmaids
oftentimes, Yea, and often would Triopas himself lay hands
on his hoary hair, thus calling on Neptune, who did not heed
him ; “O falsely named father, behold this the third from
thee, that is, if I indeed am son of thee and Aolian Canace ;5
and from me is born this wretched offspring. ;
“For would that mine hands had duly buried him stricken
by Apollo: but now baneful famine is seated in his eyes.


sistent with simple antiquity. So Proteus, king of Egypt, in Hom.
Od. iv. 461, Aécro J dpOpdy. Virg. Georg. iv. 436, Considit scopulo
medius numerumque recenset. :

1 pupia tdvra. Tidvra here seems used in the Homeric sense, “ of
all kinds.” Cf. Hom. [].i. 5, &c. é&4AXero yaorjp. Spanheim quotes
Ov. Met. viii. 834, Plusque cupit, quo plura suam dimettit in alvum.
843, Semperque locus fit inanis edendo. Juvenal, Sat. xv. 100,
Cogebat vacui ventris furor. ‘ With the next line, cf. Ov. Met. viii.
835, Usque fretam recipit de tofa flumina terra, Nec satiatur aquis.
Gdepdrwe for jrepiirwe, i, gQ.paraing. Apollon. Rhod. iv. 1206, 7 xat
Sr’ preparwe Kéryot padoy avridwrrec. f

2 Mimas, a mount of Ionia, opposite Chios. Cf. Pausan. VII. iv. 1.
mrayyov, a wax-doll, called by Theoer. ii. 110, Jayde, and by the
Attics, cépa. It is derived from wAdcow—planguncula is the term
used by Cicero ad Att. vi. 1, Inventa sunt quinque planguncula
matronarum. — ‘ 1

3 ivee rs wai dared. Cf. Theocr. Idyll. ii: 89; iv. 16; Virg. Ecl. iii.
102, Vix ossibus herent. Horace, Epod. xvii. 21, 22,


Verecundus color
Reliquit ossa pelle amicta lurida ;
and Rorat..Od. I. xxviii. 12. : 7 : ;

4 yo paordc, the thing for the person. The converse to this is
found in Catuil. xii. 18, Nutricum tenus exstantes e gurgite cano,
where nutricum is for “ mammarum.” Spanh. quotes Martial,
Epigr. lib. i. ci. .

5 Kolian Canace, daughter of Holus and Enarete, had several
children by Poseidon. She is the subject of the Eleventh of Ovid’s
Epistles, Canace Macareo.

® Apollo and Diana were supposed to remove those who perished
by sudden death. Cf. Hom. Il. xix. 59; xxiv. 757, dvr’ dpyupdrotog


103—120, HYMN TO DEMETER. | - ‘179
. Either remove thou from him his sore disorder, or thyself
take and maintain him: for my tables have fallen-short. Reft
are wy folds, and my stalls now void of beasts: and at length
my cooks have declined the task. Nay more, they have un-
yoked the mules from the great wains, and he ate the heifer
which his mother was feeding for’ Vesta, and the prize-
gaining steed and war-horse, and the cat, which lesser animals
dread.? ;

As Jong as matters rested in the house of Triopas, so long
the household apartments, I wot, alone were aware of the mis-
fortune. But when his teeth were beginning to consume- -
and-exhaust the plenteously-supplied house, then it was that
the king’s son sate in the cross-roads, begging for morsels,
and cast-away refuse of feasts. O Demeter, may he be. no
friend to me who is hated by you, neither may he be under: |
a-common-roof :4 evil-neighbours are hateful tome. Sing,
ye virgins, and, ye mothers, join the acclaim: all-hail, Deme-
ter, many-nurturing, of-many-measures. And as the four


‘


‘atédAwy ole dyavoig Bedéccow trouyduevog xarkrepvev. Odyss. ‘xi.
171. BobBoweric, (i. g. Bovdpia,) from ByBpdonw. Il. xxiv. 532.
Spanh. quotes an Epigr. of Agathias, Anthol. ii. 31,5, si yap dé
BovBoworw Exe Epvoiybovoc abrov.

? Spanh. in a learned note on this passage says that this may be
either to Vesta, ry xowwy Tij¢ wédews, OY TZ raroug, either. public or

rivate, the tutelar deity of the city or household, (Soph. Electr. 881 ;
Bur. Hee. 22,) and also that Bare Ay here stand for Ceres, who is
called ‘Eortodxoc in Eurip.’Suppl. 1.—In the next line deOAogépor is
i. q. rile arto in Theocr. Id. xvi. 46.
- * And the cat, &e.} Cf. Horat, Sat. II. vi, 118, 114, where the.
mice are said ; .
Currere per totum pavidi conclave, magisque
Exanimes trepidare.— ;

5 BaOdv, abundantem. Spanh. Blomf. Cf. 4ésch. Suppl. 555, S. c.
Theb. 306, Baiy@or, alay. For a vivid description of this stage of
Erysichthon’s disorder, see Ovid, Met. viii, 828—846, Ut vera est .
expulsa quies, furit ardor edendi, &c.—dxédwe. Cf. Hom. Od. xvii. -
222, eieilav akédoug (th. xoddc) : they are xia in St.' Luke xvi. 21.

+ une’ dpordeyog. Cf. Horat. Od. IIL. ii, 26—30, :

: Vetabo, qui Cereris sacrum ;
Vulgarit arcanz, sub isdem .
Sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum
Solvat phaselum: seepe Diespiter ee
. Neglectus incesto addidit integrum. soe


Dodd refers us to the prophet Jonah, c.i.
n2


180 - CALLIMACHUS. - 1202-131,


white-maned steeds carry the basket,! so shall the great god-
dess, wide-ruling, come bringing to us fair spring,” fair sum-
mer, winter, and autumn, and shall keep them for us to
another year. And as without sandals,’ and without fillets,
we tread the city, so shall we have our feet; and our heads,
all-unharmed. As the basket-bearers* carry baskets full of
gold, so we shall possess gold in abundance.

>is meet that the uninitiated women should attend these
mysteries as far as the Prytaneum of the city:5 whosoever
are under sixty years, as far as the goddess’s éemple; but
those who are weighed down by age, and she who stretches
out hands to lithyia,® and whoso is in pain, ’tis enough that


* Spanh. shows from this passage that Meursius is wrong in say-
ing that the basket was carried in this procession by a wain drawn
by oxen, though he may adduce Georg. i. 163, Tardaque Eleusine
matris volventia plaustra, where the procession does not seem to be
alluded to. Meydda Ged¢: as such Ceres was worshipped among the
Arcadians and Messenians. Pausan. iv. and viii. quoted by Spanh.
© Neuxdy gag, Cf. Catull. viii. 3, Fulsere quondam candidi tibi soles.

’ Soph. Aj. 708, A\eveov gdoc. xeipa also shares the epithet in the same

sense, because there are special, works for winter, see Georg. i. 805,

Sed tamen et quernas glandes tum stringere tempus. Zrog 0” é¢ dX
wraket. Ceres, as a good nursing-mother, belpe men to store up their
ruits for another year. Cf. Hesiod, Op. et D, 31. .

5 Spanh. quotes Ov. Fast. vi. 397, Huc pede matronam vidi de-
scendere nudo; and Vulcanius derives the custom of baring the feet
in the presence of the Deity from the Hebrews, and from the Books
of Moses; as when Moses is bidden by God to take off his shoes
from off his feet. Exodus.

4 Auvogdpot, they that carry the Aicvoy, a fan-shaped basket, Mys-
tica vannus Iacchi: Virg. Georg. i-.166.. Cf. Demosth. in Orat. de
* Cor. 313, 28. :

§ The Prytanea or common halls were in the middle of Greek
cities, and contained in them the statues of Vesta. Cf. Pindar,
Nem. xi. 1, Hai Péag, dre Wovraveia \édoyxac, ‘Eoria. Cf. Blomf. and
Speak With ray Ocvy in, ver. 130, cf. above, 58, rori ray Geb», i. q.
ad Dive templum.

§ xdrig EvtecOvia. so Hor. Carm. Secul. 13, 14,

Rite maturos aperire partus

; : Lenis llithya, tuere matres ;
and Terent. Andr. iii. 1, Juno Lucina, fer opem, serva me; obsecros
-—In the next line with d¢ abrir ixavéoy yévu, cf. Hom. I. iv. 314—


316. Virg. Zn. v.43],
Sed tarda trementi
* Genua labant. ; : :
Theoecr. xiv. 70, dc yévv xdwpdv. Aristoph. Acharn. 218. Horat.
Epod. xiii. 6, Dumque virent genua. - .


182138," ‘HYMN TO DEMETER, : 181


they follow as far as their knees are able: and to them Ceres
will give everything in full-abundance, and that they may.
come to her temple. Hail goddess, and preserve this city in
harmony, and in prosperity ;! and bring all things home ripe
from the fields. Feed our cattle: support our fruit-trees :
bring forth the ear, produce the harvest: nurse also peace,
that he who has sowed, that same may reap.?_ Be propitious
at my bidding, O thou thrice-prayed for, widely-ruling among
goddesses. : Be : :


AN ELEGY ON THE BATH OF PALLAS.s


As many of you as pour-water-for-the-baih of Pallas, :
come forth, maidens all, come forth, ' Already have I heard


1 ednmwedia. Blomf. restores the old reading, ednpepia. Bentley.
maintains e’y7sXia, the opp. to which is éAcynredia, and raxnmeXia.
—péada in the next line is explained by Ernesti, fructus arboreos..

2 Cf. Galat. vi. 7; 2 Cor. ix.6. — -

* Blomfield adduces reasons for deeming this poem an elegy, not
a hymn, and shows that Callimachus’s elegies were more popular
than his other works. Cf. Quinctilian X. i. 4 o: Propert. III. ix. 43,
44, Inter Callimachi sat erit placuisse libellos. Propertius, in II. i.
40, pronounces Callimachus less fit for the epic and the hymn, as
does also Ovid, De Remed. Am. 881, Callimachi numeris non est

’ dicendus Achilles. :

_ * The Schol. states that on a set day the Atgive women took the
images of Pallas and Diomed to the river Toashus, and there bathed
them before day-break. (Cf. Theocr. Id. xv. 182, of a similar rite to +
Adonis.) Spanheim sees in.this traces of Mosaic rites, and points
to Numb. viii. 7, Isaiah lii. 11. Ovid, Fast. iv. 135, also illus- .
trates this custom of washing statues, _- . .

Aurea marmoreo redimicula solvite collo ;
Demite divitias: tota lavanda Dea est,
With the next line Anna Fabri compares Virg. En. i. 16, 17,
Hic illius arma :
Hic currus fuit.
Horat Od. I. xv. 11, .
Jam galeam Pallas et egida
Currusque et rabiem parat.
—¢ovaccopivar.. Cf. Virg. Georg. i. 12,
Tuque o, cui prima frementem
Fudit equum tellus, — v


182 ; CALLIMACHUS, : . 2—18,


the sacred steeds neighing ; and the goddess moves-on ready-
equipped: haste then, hasten, ye auburn-haired Pelasgian
maids, Never has Minerva bathed her divine arms before
’ that she has dispersed the dust from the flanks of her coursers:
not even, I say, when she came carrying all her armour be-
-spattered with gore from the impious giants.? But, far before
all else, she loosed from the chariot her horses’ necks, and
bathed in the springs of Ocean? the drops of sweat :-and from
their bit-champing* mouths cleansed all the foam that had
clotted there. ; $
O come forth, Achzan nymphs, and bring-not unguents,
nor caskets ; (I hear the sound of the wheels under the axles :°)
bring not unguents, ye bath-preparers, nor caskets for Pallas,
for Minerva loves not mixed ointments,® no, nor mirror. Her
eye is ever beautiful: not even when the Phrygian was de-


i
¥ struxoc. Cf. Theocr. xxiv. .86, xiip eirucoy Zorw.—oovob:, cf.
Zsch. 8. e. Theb. 31, and Blomf. note on that passage.—ITsAacyiddec,
i. e. Argive; for Pelasgus, the mythical ancestor of the Pelasgians,
‘was suppesed to have founded Argos in the Peloponnese. Pausan. I.
xiv. § 2; IL. xxii. § 2. Adsch. Suppl. 251-253. | :
‘2 Of the aid then given by Pallas to her sire against the giants,
see Horat. Od. III. iv. 55—58,


Quid Rhzecus, evulsisque truncis
Enceladus jaculator audax,
Contra sonantem Palladis egida
Possent ruentes?
Xxé0ow weradaypeva. So Hom. Il. vi. 268; xi. 169.

‘i * Propertius ILI. ix. 9, 10, (Paley,) has copied the idea of these
‘ines ; : \
i Illum seepe suis decedens fovit in undis,

- Quam prius adjunctos sedula lavit equos:


With abyivac ixrwy, cf. Virg. G. ii. 542, Et jam tempus equim
spumantia solvere colla. . :
‘ xadwopdywr. Virg. Ain. iv. 185, Stat sonipes et freena ferox
spumantia mandit. With the next line A’ Fabri compares Theocr.
Xv. 114, Zupiw 6 pipw xptos’ 4déB8aorpa.—Ov. Heroid. Sappho Pha-
oni, xv. 75, Non Arabo noster rore capillus olet. Pallas preferred
xptecbat dvdgrori.—Cf. Theocr. Id, xviii. 23. :
5 Cf. Zisch. Suppl. 181, cdpeyyec 0d oryGow dZovprAaro: and S. c.
Theb. 205, ciptyyec txhayav. | ' i
4 xpiuara puxrd. Sophocles, in a lost tragedy, called Kpioe or
Kpiree, introduces Aphrodite asthe goddess of “ pleasure,” bathing
herself in unguents and gazing on a mirror, but Pallas as the god-
dess of sense, and prudence, and virtue, anointing herself in plain.
oil, and taking athletic exercises. Cf. Atheneus, XV. p. 687; ¢. Dind.


-


18—35. AN ELEGY ON THE BATH OF PALLAS. 183


: ! +

ciding the strife at Ida! did- the Great Goddess gaze either
into the prepared-brass, or the transparent eddies of Simois:? .
neither did Juno: but Venus, having taken up a radiant
brass-mirror, ofttimes twice altered-the-position of the same.
lock : while Pallas having driven-over one hundred and twenty

‘double courses, like the Lacedaemonian stars beside the Euro- ,
' tas,3 skilfully took and bruised smooth ointments, products of
her own tree. Ye maidens, but the blushes rushed-up, with
hue such as the morning rose or pomegranate’s kernel has.‘
Wherefore now also bring ye. only the strong oil, in which
Castor, in which also Hercules, anoints himself. Bring out too”
her comb. all-of-gold, that she may comb her hair when she
has anointed her sleek curl. .

Come forth, Minerva: a welcome troop is present to thee,
the maidens, daughters of the great Acestoride.> O Athena,


1 rdy "Ida, Bentley. The “ dativus loci,” cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. 406, b.
Soph. Trach. 172, Awan, &c.—dpetyadkor, yellow copper ore, or the
brass made from it. The’ Latin “aurichalcum,” the. Frech ,
“‘archal.” Pliny refers mitrors of silver, the first improvement on .
those of polished.brass, to the age of Pompey the Great.

4 The clear stream is nature’s mirror. Cf. Virg. Ecl. ii. 25,


Nuper me in littore vidi,.
j Cum placidum ventis staret mare.
Ovid,’Met. xiii. 840, 841, a’
Certe ego me novi, li iideogiie in imagine vidi

: Nuper aque, placuitQue mihi mea forma videnti.

Tibullus has borrowed from Callimachus the 22nd verse, I. viii. 10,
Szpeque mutates disposuisse comas, ‘ ,

3 The Lacedeemonian stars, i.e. Castor and Pollux. So Hor. Od.
1. iii. 2, Sic fratreg Helene, lucida sidera: for dtavAove in the 23rd
line see Agam. ‘Zsch. 344, appar daddov Oarepoy kidov wédAY.—

The Olympic stadium was 606 feet 9 inches, the exact length of the
 foot-race-course. This doubled was the diavdog, Cf. Smith, Dict. G.
and R. Antiq. 8983-895. Atrd, simple, plain. Cf. Horat.Od. I, xxxviii.*
5, Simplici myrto nihil allabores. ; :

4 apwivov, Evnesti, cf. Eurip. Hippol. 77, gpwde Atpwv—oiPdag
«éxxog, “mali punici granum.” The scarlet dye was formerly made
from the fruit of the pomegranate.-—In ver. 29, dpcev ZAatoy may be
compared with Soph. Trach. 1196, 1197; Philoct. 1455; xriwog
Gocny wévrov mpoBorjyc. Persius, Sat. vi. 4, Marem strepitum fidis -
intendisse Latine. Horat. A. P. 402, Tyrteusque mares animos in
Martia bella Versibus exacuit. , i:

5 The Acestoride were a-distinguished tribe at Argos, holding
the seme prerogative there as the Eumolpide, or Eteobutades, at
Athens, viz. that from it was chosen the priestess of Pallas. Spanh.
quotes Aischines de Fals. Leg. p. 166,


oy


184 CALLIMACHUS, © 85—52,


there is carried also Diomed’s shield,' since this is the elder
custom of the Argives; which Eumedes, a priest acceptable to
thee, instituted: who of yore, when he had learned that the
people. was making ready death decreed against him, fled
away with thy sacred image, and went and dwelt in the
‘Mount Creon: the Mount Creon,?and placed thee, 0 goddess,
on the broken rocks, of which the name is now Pajlatides.
Come, forth, Athena, city-sacking; golden-helmed,® delighting
in the noise of steeds and shields. To-day, ye, water-carriers,
dip not your vessels, to-day Argos drinks from springs, and
not from the rivers. To-day, ye handmaids, bring your urns
either to Physadea,‘ or to Amymone, daughter of Danaus ;
for truly, having mingled his waters with gold and flowers,
Inachus will come from the mountains rich-in pasture,® bring-
ing for Athena her beauteous bath. But thou, O Pelasgian,
beware lest even against thy will thou behold the queen.
‘ Diomed (according to Pausan. II. xxiv. 2) built a temple to
Athena d&vdépxnc, on account of her having removed the film from
his eyes. Heroes were wont to suspend their shields in the temples
of their tutelar gods, as that of Danaus in Juno’s temple, and that
of Pyrrhus in the temple of Ceres at Argos, and that of Aristomenes
at Lebadea, all recorded “by Pausanias, testify.—Eumedes fell into
suspicion of bavme wished to betray the Palladium to the Hera-
clids; ‘so says the Scholiast. . : :
2 Kpsiov dpoc--Kostov épog. For this repetition, compare H. in
Dian. 33, above; Hom. Il. xxii. 127; Ov. Met. xii. 172.


* Minerva is styled wepoérrodic by Aristophanes, Nub. 967, and.


Mars in Aésch. S, c. Theb. 106, & xpucomnAné Saipov. In the Phe-
_ nisse of Eurip. 1369, we find Maddddoc xpuoderdoc. Taddaridec,

in the line before, seems to be the name given from Pallas,’ or her

sanctuary having been carried thither. For an account of the

4E gis of Minerva, see Virg. Ain, viii. 435, &c. ry

* Physadea and Amymone, two fountains of the neighbourhood

‘of Argos, deriving their names, secorcing to the Scholiast, from two

daughters of Danaus. Of Physadea little can be learned, but

Amymone was celebrated in common with Lerna by the poets. Cf.

Eurip. Pheen. 188, Movedaoviow Apupwriore Vdact. Propert. III. xviii.
47, (Paley,) .

Testis Amymone, latices dum ferret in Argis
' Compressa, et Lerne pulsa tridente palus.

See also Ov. Met. ii. 240, Argos Amymonen, Ephyre Pirenidas un-

das. Cf. Apollodor. II. i.4; Pausan. Uf. xxxvil. § 1, and Smith’s Dict.

G. and R, Geogr. ii. 163, 164. :

5 xpuog re xai adv@eciv. So Mosch. Idyll. vii. 1—3, represents
Alpheus gliding past Pisa to Arethusa iva gépwv add gudra eqi
dvOea ai xéviv ipay. pépBawg is i. q. “ pascuis abundans.”


88-12, AN ELEGY ON THE BATH OF PALLAS, 185:


Whoso shall have seen Pallas, the city’s-guardian, naked, this
Argos shall behold him now for the last time.

O Lady Minerva, come thou forth: and meanwhile I will,
utter something to these maidens.' Yet the speech is not
mine, but that of ,others.2 Ye daughters, in Thebes of old,,
Athena loved one Nymph exceeding-well, yea.and beyond .
the rest, the mother of Tiresias,? and never was she without
her, but both when she was driving her steeds toward the
ancient Thespieans, or toward Coronea, where was her in-
cense-perfumed grove, and where her altars lay on the river
Curalius,‘ or toward Coronea, or to Haliartus, crossing over
the cultivated lands of the Beeotians ; ofttimes the goddess
made her to mount her own chariot. Neither were the sweet
converse of the Nymphs, nor the choral dances pleasant to
her,5 where Chariclo did not lead them. Yet still even her
many tears were awaiting, though she was the favourite com-
panion to Athena. For once-on-a-time, having unloosed the
clasps of their robes, they twain were bathing in fair-flowing
Heliconian Hippocrene:® and noon-tide galm was holding the


1 esoeirat rovro mavysrdriov. So Cadipus of himself, just before _
his self-inflicted blindness, Soph. Cid. Tyr. 1183, & @iic, redevraiov
06 mpooPréPare viv. im. * & : .

? Blomfield quotes Eurip. Helen. 513, Adyog yap Zorw ove épdg,
sopiby, & frog. ;

The mother of Tiresias.] This was Chariclo, the wife of Everus,
” ‘from whom Tiresias is called in ver. 81, and in Theocr. Id. xxiv. 70,
Eénoeidnc. 'The towns which follow, Thespize, Coronea, and Haliar-
tus, were all in Beeotia. It seems needful to the sense of the pass-
age to transpose the couplets in Ernesti’s edition so that’ # “i Ko-
pwreiag iva of reQuwpivoy Gdcoc should come immediately after cdr’
by @coriswy: and the lines 61, 62, in that edition, should beeome

3, 64.

‘ ti Koupadiv. Coronea stood on a hill, to the east of which
flowed the stream Coralius or Cuarius, and to the west the river
Phalarus. Both flowed into the Lake Copais. See Smith’s Dict..
Gr. and R. Geog. p. 412, B. and 688, B. In a temple at Coronea
was held the’ festival of Athena Itonica, common to all Bootians.
Pausan. IX. xxxiv. 1. ;

5 dapor: cf. Theoc. Id. xxvii. and Hesiod, Th. 205.—yxopocraciat,
a later Greek word formed from orjcacOat yopote. Theoc. Id. xviii.
2, 3 ; ; :

: Tap@evixai 04ddovra xépate ddxvOov Exorsae ,
mpoo0e veoypanrw Garayw yopiy ierdcavro.

*“Inww iti eodvg, Hippocrene. Cf. Hesiod, Theog. 6, and the
notes there.—xadd peoisg, So in Latin, Transversa tuentibus hir-1
cis. Torva tuens, &c.—pecapBpvd—dovyia, > A. Fabri illustrates

i , e 7 . é


186 CALLIMACHUS. 72-89,


mountain, They both were bathing, and ’twas the hour of
noon; and much stillness was pervading that spot. But
Tiresias still alone with his dogs, with his chin just now
darkening,! was roaming up and down the holy spot: and
thirsting unspeakably? he came to a stream of the fountain,
~wretched youth that he was, and without wishing it beheld
what was not lawful for him to see. Then wroth though. she
was nevertheless’ Athena addressed him, “ What deity, O
son of Everus, hath: led thee, that shalt never more bear
hence thine eye-sight on an evil journey?” She spake, and
night fell-upon the eyes of the youth. Speechless he stood,
for sorrows glued: his knees, and helplessness withheld his
voice. But.the Nymph shrieked out, “What, awful goddess,
hast thou done to my son? Are ye goddesses‘ friends such
as this? Thou hast taken away the eyesight ofmy son. O
accursed child, thou sawest the bosom and limbs of Athena;
but never again wilt thou behold the sun; ah, wretched me!


this passage by Theocr. Id. i. 15, 16, ob Ofutc & moundy, 7rd pecap-
Bowar ot Gime Eup Tupicdev, Horat- Od. III. xxix. 21—24, Jam
eh umbras cum grege languido, &c. Virg. Georg. iv. 401.

revins adds 1 Kings xviii. 27, Elijah mocking the priests of Baal
at noon-day, by the stiggestion that their idol-god is sleeping. The
verses 78, 74, dupdrepar—dpog, are by most commentators judged
spurious. ; ‘

1 repxdlwy. Strictly of fruit, as grapes and olives, beginning to
ripen, from mepxéc, dark-coloured. '

2 So Hercules intruded on the rites of the Bona Dea (whose
‘worship was doubtless connected with that of Demeter). Propert.
V. ix. 25, 26, (Paley,) ;

Foeminee loca clausa dew, fontesque piandos,
Impune et nullis sacra retecta viris.
In 57, 58 of the same elegy the priestess addressés him thus,
Magno Tiresias aspexit Pallada vates,
Fortia dum posita Gorgone membra lavat.

* Night fell upon the eyes.}] So Asch. S. c. Theb. 403, Nvz ex’
ogPadrpode rico, Soph. Cid. Tyr. 1818, oxdrov vigoc éudy. Milton,
Sonnet: Day brought back my night. In the next line Dodd illus-
trates éordOn 0° &pPoyyoc by Milton, P. L. xi. 263,

. “Adam at the news
Heart-struck with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound. :


Hom. Il. xxii. 452, o740coc waXderat rop dva ordpd, vipGe Se yotva


Wjyvuras. | ; . : ; .
4 Spanheim instances like complaints against severe deities in


90—105. AN ELEGY ON THE BATH OF PALLAS. 187


O mountain, O Helicon no more to-be-approached by me.
Surely thou hast gained a great triumph instead of a small :!
Thou hast lost a few antelopes and roes, thou hast gotten the
eyes of my boy.” She spake: and having clasped her dear
son round with both arms the mother, deeply weeping, set-up
the fate of plaintive nightingales.2. Then the goddess pitied
her companion, and Athena addressed these words to her.
*O' noble woman, reverse again all things as many as you —
have spoken through anger: for not I indeed made thy son
blind :? for ’tis not pleasant to Athena to steal the eyes of
boys ; but thus the laws of Cronus decree,—That whoso shall.
have beheld any of the immortals, when the divjnity himself
shall not choose, this same should behold with a heavy penalty.*
O noble lady, this act cannot be again recalled, since thus the
threads of the fates approved,® when first you had given birth


2sch. Prom. V. passim; Soph. Philoct. 446—452, &c. In ver. 87,
réxvoy Gdacrée, observe the construction ad synesim (the sense), like
Centauro invehitur magna sc. navi, in Latin. Homer constantly
has @ire rixvoy, Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. 434, 1, A.

1 Said in bitter irony. Spanheim rightly conceives the spirit of
the passage when he illustrates it by Virg. Ain. iv. 93, 94,


Egregiam vero laudem et spolia ampla refertis
Tuque puerque tuus: magnum et memorabile nomen.


Sépeac bdécoac. One editor suggests that ddéooag is the particip. masc.
agreeing with EXtcoy. 2

2 ywepiv olroy andovidwy. The common lament of the tragic
poets. Cf. Esch. Agam. 1143—1145; Suppl. 60—62; Soph. Ajax,
626—630; Trac. 963. So Horat. Od. IV. xii. 5, 6,


Nidum ponit, Ityn flebiliter gemens,
Infelix avis.


3 Ovid (as one of the commentators observes) alludes elegantly °
to these laws, Trist. ii. 103—108, ;
Cur aliquid vidi? cur noxia lumina feci?
Cur imprudenti cognita culpa mihi.
Inscius Actzon vidit sine veste Dianam: -
Preeda fuit canibus non minus ille suis. .
Scilicet in superis etiam fortuna luenda est;
Nee veniam leso numine casus habet.


* So Propert. V. ix. 25, 26, quoted at 77; above. Hom. II. xx.
181, yaderoi 32 soi paivecBar évapyeic, and Eurip. Ion, (quoted by
Spanheim), 1551, 1552, ¢sd-ywpey w. rexodvoa py rd Saapévur opGpev.

5 Mowpav—Aiva. So Theoer. Id. i. 139; Hom. Il. xx. 128; Virg.
An. x. 814, Extremaque Lauso Parce fila legunt; Horace, Carm..
Sacul. 25, 26. ey


’


>


" 288 ‘ CALLIMACHUS. 106—128,


to him; now then endure, O son of Everus, the debt! which
is owed to thee. How many burnt-offerings will the daughter
_of Cadmus burn hereafter, and how many Aristzus, praying
to behold their only son, the youthful Actzon, blind, and no-
thing more !* He, too, shall be companion-in-the-chase of
mighty Artemis: yet not his running nor his far-dartings in
common with her among the mountains shall save him then.
When, though not wishing it, he shall have beheld the grace-
ful bath of the goddess: but then the very hounds shall ban-
quet on their former lord. And his mother shall gather the
bones of her son,‘ going through all the glades. She will
say that thou hast been most fortunate and of-happy-days,
since thou, O my companion, hast received thy son blind only
_ from the mountains: wherefore do not wail at all: for this
man many other privileges await at my hands for thy sake.®
For I will make him a prophet to-be-sung-of by posterity, in
a degree of-a-truth, far exceeding the rest. And he shall un-
derstand birds,® which is favourable and which fly in vain,
.and of what sort the flight is unfavourable. Many oracles shall


1 riOo¢: cf. H. in Cer..78.—The daughter of Cadmus, viz. Auto-
noe, the mother of Actzon by Aristzeus. Her son was torn in pieces
by his fifty hounds on Mount Citheron. See Ovid. Met. iii. 155, &c.;
. Pausan. IX. ii. § 8. a8 ‘

2 The meaning is, how gladly would the parents of Actzon re-
deem their son’s life by the loss of his sight! How light is Tiresias’s
punishment compared with that of Acteon! _ :

3 Of the three accounts of the cause of Actzon’s fate. Callimachus
adopts the first, viz. that he saw Artemis bathing in the vale of
Gargaphia, and that she changed him into a stag, which his dogs
tore in pieces. So Ovid. 1. c. and Statius, Theb. ii. 203, Heu domi-
num insani non agnovere Molossi. .

4 Xekeiraz. Blomfield, (after most of the MSS. and editors,)
quoting in illustration Tibull. I. iii. 5, 6,

Abstineas, mors atra, precor, non hic mihi mater,
Que legat in meestos ossa perusta sinus. : :

5 r@de yao dh\ia—pevedvre yépa, [rév de in Ald. marg.] Ernesti
defends rg de by reference to Theocr. Id. xvii. 118, rodro cai Arpet-
daroi péver—Ovid. Met. iii. 337, ;

: Pro lumine adempte ;
Scire futura dedit poeenamque levavit honote.
We have a picture of Tiresias exercising his vocation as a prophet
in the case of the infant Hercules, in Theocr. Id. xxiv. 71—94.

6 ywwosirac 5’ BouiOac. Cf, Asch. Prom. V. 488, yappwviywr de
mrijow oiwviy oneOoade Auipica. 8S. c. Theb. 25, dv wot vena Kai dos
civ wupic dixa, xonornpiove dpvibac. Agam. 276. Propert. 1V.x. 11,
(Paley,)Tuque, O care mihi felicibus edita pennis (quoted by Ernesti).


195—142, AN ELEGY ON THE BATH OF PALLAS, . 189


he utter to‘the Beeotians, many to Cadmus, and in after time
tathe mighty descendants-of-Labdacus.! I will give him, too,
a great staff? which shall guide his feet serviceably, and I
will give him a far-distant end of his life. He alone, after
death, shall go to and fro among the shades, being wise-and-:
prudent, held in honour by the great Pluto.” j

Thus having said, she bowed to confirm her words; and
that is ratified, to which Pallas has bowed assent:. since to
Athena alone of his daughters has Jove granted this, to en-
joy all her sire’s attributes. Ye attendants of the bath, no
mother bare the goddess, but Jove’s head; and that is con-
firmed to.which Jove’s head shall have assented :> in like man-
ner that to which his daughter shall have done so. Now as-
suredly comes Athena. But.do ye, O maidens, as many as .
care for Argos, welcome the goddess, both with good omens,
and with prayers, and with acclamations. Hail, goddess, and
care for Inachian Argos. -Hail also when thou art about to
drive forth, and again drive thy steeds to the city, and guard-
safely all the inheritance? of Danaus.


Instances of this occur in Soph. Cd, Tyr. 316—462; Antig.
988—1090, where the descendants of Labdacus indeed ‘tremble at
his soothsaying. '

2 Baxrpoy. Hom. Od, xi. 90, 91, ‘

. "HAGE 3? éxi Wyn OnBaiov Tepeciao

. xovorov oxnrrooy ixwy, tpi 0 Eyvw cai rpoctermer. -

* Cf. Odyss. x. 494, rp Kai reOverdre voy wéps Pepoeddvaa Oty
awexvboGat' Toi de oxtai aiccovot.—in the same rank and place Virgil

uts Quique pii vates et Phoebo digna locuti. En. vi. 602.—Ayedi-
¢, from “Ayesidag, an epithet of Pluto (from dyw, \doc) because he -
drives all men to his realms. “Spanheim.

* So Horat. Od. I. xii. 19, 20, Proximos illi tamen occupavit Pal-
las honores. Soph. (id. T. 159) gives her pre-eminence also.—
parnp 9 oitic, in next line. So Atsch, Eumen. 663—666, wédac
Tldpeort paprug raig Odupriou Ardg, 068 tv axdrosor vydvog reOpappivn,
"AAN’ oloy Epvoc obtic dy Téxot Osdg.

5 tuaedov. Spanheim quotes here Esch. Suppl. 90, 91:

ninre d doparic 000 iri vdrp
xopupa Arde ei xpavOg mpaypa Tédevor :
whence, he observes, comes the epithet réAsog, applied to Jove, as
-in Asch. Agam. 973. Blomfield fills up the lacuna Pesdea——a
Gvycrnp. euredov Gaadrwe g Kev of & Ovydrnp. ; 5
P * toxer’ APavaia viv drpexéc. Cf, Theocr. Id. ii. 37, & @£og tv rprd~
joLot, .
7 wdapor, cf. H. in Del. 281, cAqpoug torgoavro. In the same
sense Asch. Pers. 897, xara kAjjpov ladviov xedvavdpoue.,


cats : i 118,
; CALLIMACHUS. . .
190 |


EPIGRAMS.


I.


A sTRANGER "from Atarneus inquired thus of Pittacus the
Mitylenzan, the son of Hyrrhadius. “Aged sire,? a double
union invites me: the one bride in truth is my match both in
wealth and birth; but the other is my superior : which. is
best ? Come now, counsel me,? which am I to lead to Hymen ?”
So said he: but the other, having lifted his staff, an old
man’s instrument, spake thus: “Lo, these will tell thee the
whole word (for the boys I wot, engaged with topg swift under
the influence of strokes, were spinning them in the broad
cross-road).4 Go,” said he, “in the track of these.” He
then presented himself near: the boys were saying, “Spin
the one that is suited to you.” Hearing these words, the
stranger forbore to win the greater family, and took' heed to
the omen® of the boys. As he then led home to his house?


1 The Scholiast compares with the moral of this epigram Asch.
Prom, V. 888—894, to which we may add the syllogism of Bias in
Aul. Gell, V. 11. Groe wadiy ddec H aioxpay, x. t. d., and Erasmus,
Quere equalem uxorem.—Arapveirng, a citizen of Atarneus, a
city of Mysia, opposite to Lesbos; now Dikeli Koi Smith, Dict.
Geogr. i. p. 252.—Tltrraxév. Pittacus of Mitylene, son of Hyrrhadius
or Caicus, a Thracian, and of a Lesbian mother, flourished, accord-
ing to Diogenes Laert., abouts. c. 612, and was one of the seven
wise men. ; .

2 drra, like dwra, axgvc., Abba, papa, a term applied to elders.
Cf. Hom. Od. xvi. 81, 57, &e.

8 aby por Bobdevooy, i. g. cvpBodrevoov, by Tmesis. :

* For the. allusion to the top compare Virg. Ain. vii. 378—382,
Seu quondam torto volitans sub verbere turbo, &c.

_5 rv ward cavrév Eka. These words apply here to the tops; and,
as ver. 16, in an after sense, or second intention, to matriage: 4
from @A\aw, a poetic form of dabvw. :

6 chydéut, cAnddy from «Aéopat, like ¢fuy, an omen deduced from
words or sounds. Hom. Od. xviii. 117, &c. :

1 ray & bdiyqv. Martial, viii. 12, varies this view a little:


Uxorem quare locupletem ducere nolim
Queeritis? uxori nubere nolo mez.

Inferior matrona suo sit, Prisce, marito,
Non aliter fuerint foemina, virque pares.


Juvenal, Sat. vi. 459, Intolerabilius nihil est quam fcemina dives. .


EPIGRAMS. : 191


the lowly bride, so do thou, O. Dion, marry the one that is
suited to you.) oe


4


\ II.


One told of your fate, Heraclitus? and brought me to
tears ; for I ¢alled to mind how often we twain. made the sun.
go down on our conversation ;3 yet thou art; I suppose, O
Halicarnassian friend, long, long ago, dust. But there séill
live thy strains,4 on which Hades, spoiler of all,® shall not lay
his hand. ee


i. -


Here dweli I Timon the man-hater: but pass on ; bid
me woes as many as you will, only pass on.


IV. :


O Ton, since you are no more, which is hateful to you,
light or shade ? Shade, for there are most® of ye in the shades.


1 gd y lov, Here read with Bentley, from Diogenes Laertius, od
Aiwy ;—Ovid Heroid. ix. 32, has, Siqua voles apte nubere, nube
pari.—kard oatréy: cf. xard, acc. signif. ix., Liddell and Scott:

? Heraclitus, a contemporary elegiac poet of Callimachus, men-
tioned by Strabo, lib. xiv. me

3 grwoy tv decxn Karedicaper. So Virg. Ecl. ix. 52, Sepe ego
longos Cantando memini puerum me condere soles. Horat. Od. IV.
v. 29, Condit quisque diem collibus in suis. Aéoym can hardly
used here as in Hesiod, Op. et D. 491, but, as Bentley says, it
means “ confabulatio,” not ‘ locus confabulandi.” . :

+ dnddvec, strains. Jacobs quotes an epigram, (Incert. 119,)
movdupersic Adkpavog anddveg, ~

> doaagrnp, cf. Hom. Il. xxiv. 262, not dpwarryje, as is read in the
Anthology: cf. Virg. Ain, ii. 492, Strepitumque Acherontis avari.
For a beautiful version of this epigram, by f N. Coleridge, see
the Anthologia Polyglotta, edited by Dr. Wellesley, p. 98, 99.

§ sdeiovec. The dead are called hence of wAsiovéc: cf. Aristo h.
Eccl. 1073, 4 ypatc dveornxvia wapd rv mdelovwy: and so “ Plu.
res” in Latin. Plaut. Trinumm. 263, Quin prius me ad plures pe-
ante qpeepecune this Timon, see Smith, Dict. Gr. and R. B. ii.
p. , B. .


_ notices t


1920 . ’ CALLIMACHUS.


Vv.


A MUSSEL-SHELL was I of yore, O Zephyritis,? but thou,
Venus, possessest me now, a first present of Selenza, the .
‘nautilus ;3 who was wont to sail on the seas, spreading @ sail,
if there were winds; from mine own forecables ;4 but if there
were a calm, bright goddess,® ably rowing with my feet : my
name corresponds with the act.6 But I was cast up on the
shores of Julis,” that so I might become thy precious toy,
Arsinoe ;° and that not any longer for me in her nests as
aforetime, (for I am lifeless,) should the egg of the rain-loving


' Seleneea the daughter of Clinias, a ndbleman of Smyrna, dedi-
cates a nautilus to the Egyptian princess, Arsinoe, .who was wor-
shipped as a goddess under the names of Zephyritis, Venus, and
Chloris, as we find in the Coma Berenices translated by Catul-»
lus. This nautilus was found on the shores of the island of Cos.
This svigran is found in Atheneus, vii. p, 318, B., where Casaubon

e custom of brides dedicating to Venus the toys of their
childhood. ae :

2 xadairepov, Bentley [al. radairepoc}. Zepupire. Arsinoe was so
called from:Zephyrium, a headland of Egypt. Cf. Steph. Byzant.
B 288, art. Zephyrium, in a note at which passage an epigram of
-Posidippus speaks of Eepupiidog dxrijc. Catull. Com. Beren. Ixvi. 57,

Ipsa suum Zepbyritis eo famulum legarat
Grata Canopeeis in loca litoribus.

®'Plin, ix. 29 gives a beautiful notice of the nautilus, called also

by the Greeks 2rouridog, too long, however, for quoting. Cf, also


Oppian. Halieut. j., 340, &c.


‘ The nautilus was furnished with a membrane used by it as a


ail.

5 Aewap) Osdc. This faust either be understood as in opposition
with yadnvain, the calm being thus deified; or be taken as the
vocative addressed to Arsinoe. The former is best. odAo0¢ iptoowy—
oddog is i. q, “xapidus”’ or strenuus, the adj. used adverbially.

$ mrocciv ty’ Somep nai. This reading is clearly uatenable; Blonif..
‘suggests roociy fpoig’ rHpyy, Tobvopa aupgiperat, which has been re-
ceived as the ground of the translation in the present instance. In
the next line read with Jacobs && & trecoy, ; '

7 "Tovdidog. Lulis, according to Casaubon, was a city of Ceos, so
called from the fountain Lulis. It was celebrated as the birth-place
of the lyric poets Bacchylides and Simonides, Prodicus the sophist,


. Ariston the philosopher, and others: ef. Steph. Byzant. p. 332, in


voc.; Smith, Dict. G. R.. G. vol. i. p.-586, B.

® Arsinoe, the sister and wife of Ptolemy Philadelphus, received
divine honours and a temple in her honour. See Theocr. xvii.
128, and notes there, in the translation of this series. ,


*


+" wrtgRais . 193
Halcyon be hatched.! Give'thanks however to the daughter
of Clinias, for she knows how to -perform good deeds, and is
from Smyrna in Aolia. i : ;

I am the work of the Samian,? who of old received Homer
in his home. And I lament the sufferings of Eurytus and
auburn Idle? But Iam styled the writing of Homer. Kind
Jove, this is a great honour for Creophylus.4 . :

. VIL os

A LAD was crowning his step-dame’s monument, a great:

stone,® deeming that even as her life, so her nature had been


changed. But it, inclining over her tomb, fell and slew the
boy. Ye step-sons,’ flee even the tomb of a step-mother.


VI.
- Tuezretus® wenton aclear path. What though’tisnot this


«
¢


1 riera 7° aivoriong weov ddxvdvnc. Bentley suggests in place of
this reading, which is unintelligible, rikrnrat vorepiig weov dAKud-
voc.—vorepite, i. e. tv voriowg rérotg deayovonc. This reading has been
translated, The Nautilus no longer needs Halcyon’s eggs to feed


‘ on. The next two lines simply indicate the giver of the offering,


and her native place. ‘

2 This epigram_is found in Strabo, -lib. xiv. c. i. p. 172, Tauchn.
Creophylus was one of the earliest Epic poets of Greece, and &
friend, or, some say, son-in-law, of Homer. His poem Oiyaniag dAw- .
otc is said to.have been his wife’s dower,.written by her father.
This epigram is supposed to be written on ‘the back of the poem,
“ Gichalia.” See more in Smith’s Dict. G. and R. B. i. 889, a. :

* Eurytus and Iole.J The subject of the poem of Creepy ss was
the contest of Hercules with Eurytus, king of CEchalia, for Iole,
whom he had won as-the prize of his bow.

* Kpiwgay rotro péya, i, e. to be considered equal to wyiting a
bose that could be-ascribed to. Homer, is a great honour to Creo-

ylus, : ;

& puxpdv dior ig the ordinary reading. Bentley suggests prapdy.


. Ernesti upholds puxpay, * mough a little stone it crushed the boy.”


For Bentley’s emendation, cf. Horat, Od. II. xiii, 11, Te triste
lignum. But Blomfield suggests the simplest and likeliest remedy .
in paxpdy, ag in ix. 2, he reads also paxpérarov. , i :

® For «\wOsioa Toup reads xrkuwOévra. .

7 apdyovo: is here i. q. privigni, which, according to some gram-
marians, was formed from privigeni or primo-geniti. — :

§ This Thextetus may have been the poet who wrote the epitaph
on Crantor the Academic philosopher, and whose date was about
312 sp. c. See Smith, Dict. G. and R. B. ili. p, 1021. Bentley ex-

oO ’


194 : CALLIMACHUS.


way that leads to thine ivy, O Bacchus, yet heralds will de-
clare for a brief space the name of others, but Greece for ever
the wisdom of that man. —


IX.:

Or-a-sHorT nature, O Dionysus, is the speech for the poet
when successful; !*the longest word? he says is “ I’m victor.”
But should any one ask him, on whom thou shalt not have
breathed propitiously, “ What luck ?”3 he says, “ the result
was hard.” Be such words his, who meditates injustice ;4
but be mine, O king, that lucky brevity.

. - \


Xx.


Herne sleeps Saon, of Acanthus,® son of Dicon, a holy sleep:
say not that the good die.


N


’


Tr you should seek for Timarchus® in the shades, that’ you


plains the epigram thys: Theatetus contested the dramatic prize
at the Dionysia, and failed through the corruption of the umpires.
_ The poet says others may win, but Greece will declare Theztetus to

have deserved the prize.—xtoody, the ivy wreath. Cf. Hor. Od. I. i.
29, Me doctarum hedere premia frontium. Virg. Ecl. vii, 25, Pas-
tores, hedeta crescentem ornate poetam. .

' The point of this epigram is, that all thé successful candidate
cares to say is me: it is only when a man is beaten that he makes
a long explanation. ", ‘

2 76 paxpdraroy. Cf, vii. 1, note. The contests here alluded to
‘are the Dionysia, whether at Athens, or transplanted thence to
Alexandria. :

* Tid Badec, a metaphor from the dice. Cf. Asch. Agam. 33,
rpic %E Badobong riode por poverwpiac. With wvebone ivdéktoc in the
8rd line compare Tibull. II. i. 80, Felix cui placidus leniter affiat
amor.@ | rm '


i Te peopnoitayre ra pijvoucar qui injusta cogitat—invidiosus.
ms ;


5 Acanthus was a city of Thrace, mentioned by Plin. iv. 10, or of
Egypt near to Memphis, mentioned by Diodorus Siculus. Both are
mentioned by Stephanus Byzant. p. 49, (not by Stephens, as Tytler
in his translation mistranslates the Latin note.)—iepdy bavoy, the
sleep of death: as sopor is used by Lucret. iii. 466, In altum Bter-
numque soporem. Hor. Od! 1. xxiv. 5, Ergo Quinctilium perpetuus

_sopor Urget.” But Blomf. quotes Heyne at Tibull. I. vi. 31, where
Somnus is called Sanctus, he says, quid piorum manes sancti
sunt. ; : whoa age

6 Timarchus, says Auna Fabri, was a Pythagorean; and Callima-
chus here touches on his peculiar tenets, respecting the soul’s im-,


EPIGRAMS. . 7 195


. : a : :
may inquire either somewhat of the soul, or how it'shall be
-hereafter, seek for'the son of his sire Pausanias, of the tribe
Ptolemais: and you will find him in the haunts of the pious.


XI!

Suort was the stranger, as also-his tomb. I will not speak
at length.. Beneath me is Theris, son of Aristeus, a Cretan :
*tis a long epitaph. ; ; , me

£ - XII. e


‘Ir you shall have come to Cyzicus,? small trouble is ¢¢ to find .
Hippacus and Didynie, for their race is nowise obscure. And
you shall tell them a sad tale, yet still tell this, that T hold
their son Critias. coat ‘


XIV.


A. Dorm Charidas rest beneath thee? B. If you mean
the son of Arimnas the Cyrenzan, he rests beneath me. A.’
O Charidas, what are the things below? B. Vast darkness.

. 4, And what the réturns to earth?4 B.Alie. 4, And
_ Pluto?> B, A fable, we have perished utterly.6 This is


’ a
. mortality. Perhaps there.may be some traces of Christian doc-
trines taught at ‘Mexendsis in this epigram — though the tribe
Ptolemais mentioned in line 3, may have been that one at Athens
which was so called instead of Antigonias, from Ptolemy Philadel-
pho the inhabitants of which were called Berenicide. Cf. Steph.
yz. p. 161; Pausan. I. v. § 5. . ;
1 With: this epigram Heinsius aptly compares Ovid, Am. II. vi.
- 59, ;
Ossa tegit tumulus, tumulus pro corpore magnus,
Cui lapis exiguus par sibt carmen habet.

2 Cyzicus, a city of the Propontis. . The tomb of Critias is repre- .
sented speaking to the parents Hippacus and Didyme living there.
§ This epigram, like E - Xi., seems to refer to “ resurrection ” an
another life after death. ie ver. 1, Blomf. and others read Xapidag, a

. Doric form i. q. XapiXaog, the name of a Spartan colonist of Cyrene.
Xapirag for Xapidaog is like Ayevidag for’ Ayeoidaog in Lavacr. Pall.

130. . * ‘
4 ai F dvodo: ri. Cf. in Ep. xi. 4 wade wide cera.
5 wsOog. Cf. Juvenal, ii. 149—"
Esse aliquid Manes et subterranea regna
Et contum, et Stygio ranas in gurgite nigras,
Nec pueri credunt.


* amw)dyut0a, i. e. body and soul are perished.
oe agg


196 CALLIMACHUS.
my true speech to you: but if you want the pleasant style of
speech, the Pellwan’s great-ox is in the shades.'


XV.


Bur who well knows’ the morrow’s fate,2 when thee.
too, Charmis, that wast yesterday in our sight, on the riext
day we wept and buried? Nought sadder than that hath
Diophon his father beheld. - :


a “XVI


Bur who art thou, Timonoe ?3 By the gods, I had not
- known thee, but that on the grave-stone was the name of thy
sire, Timotheus, and Methymna,‘ thy ative city. With
great grief truly I think thy widowed husband Euthymenes
sorrows. —


Tux daughters of the Samians oft regret Crethis the witty,5
who was apt at sporting gracefully, a most pleasant fellow-
‘worker,’ ever talkative; but she soundly-sleeps here the .
sleep that is due to all.7 7 ss :


' The key to the sense of this line is lost. Commentators’ sugges-
tions have failed to do anything but make the sense more hopeless-
ly obscure. Perhaps the meaning is, that not only man, but irra- ,,
tional creatures are welcome to another life, if you want to hear
smooth things and not true. The epigram is the work of, or put
into the mouth of, one who does not believe in a future state.

* Theocr, xiii. 4, of Qvaroi wedépecPa, Td 8 atprov ode soopdpec.
Eurip. Alcest. 783, kobe Zorw obdec'doric *eriorarat Ty aipiov
‘piAXovear si Prdoerat, Hor. Od. I ix. 13; XI. i. 2; and Anacreon,
XV. 9, 7d OnpEpOY pérer por. TO8’ adprovy rig older ; ; :

* This epigram turns on the names of parents and native place
being inscribed, as in modern times, on tombs. ;

4 Mé9upva. Methymna,.a city of Lesbos, celebrated for its wine.
a Bis Georg. II. 90, Quam Methymneo carpit de palmite

esbos. ole

5 wohtpudoyv, A. Fabri prefers to give this word ‘a passive sense,
“well known, famous.”

* ovvipGoy is used in fem. in Odyss. vi. 32.—dmoSpize. Od. ix.
151; xii. 6. Vulcanius, quoting Athenzus Deipnosoph. viii., says
‘that Boigu is the name of a goddess of divination by dreams.

7 Cf. Hor. Ars Poet. 63, Debemur morti nos nostraque.


EPIGRAMS, 197
. | XVOL |, |
_ Wovtp there had never ‘been swif€ ships?! for then wo
should not lament for Sopolis, son of Dioclides. But now he
drifts a corse somewhere in the sea, and in his stead we pass--
by a name and a cenotaph.* :


% XIX.


Naxran Lycus died not on land, but in the deep beheld his
ship and life perishing at-the-same-time, when he was sail-
ing, a merchant, from Aégina. And he indeed ‘%s a corse in
the sea.4 But I, a tomb bearing only his name,5 proclaim this
word of-perfect-truth. “Shun intercourse with the sea, O
sailor, at the setting of the Kids.® —


xXx. .. yw


Hare Philip set-up-a-memorial of his son, twelve years old,’
Nicoteles, his great hope. prea


1 Horace, Od. I. iii. 911; .

. li robur et zs triplex

Circa pectus erat, qui if eed truci
Commisit pelago ratem Primus.


Goere pnd’ syévovro. Latin writers used dgedrs, digedov, as conjunc-
tions. Arrian, Diss. ii. 18, dgedov reg pera rabrne scousyOn. Matt. Gr,
Gr. 513, obs. 3.: . et
? Blomfield aptly compares Propert. IT. i. 72, Et breve in exiguo
‘marmore nomen ero. Cf. below at xix. 4.
. » The tomb of Lycus of Naxos, drowned on e voyage from /Egina,
is here supposed to lament his fate, and warn others against going
to sea when the Kids set at sunrise, :
* Syo% used absolutely without a substantive, as in Hom. II. xxiv.
841, 4 pév 8g’ dyony "HO bx’ deipova yatay. Odyss. v. 45, &c.
5’fyw 8 dddwe, x.7. X. A cenotaph is indicated, as in the last epi-


gram.
* Cf. Horace, Od. III. i. 28,
Nec seevus Arcturi cadentis 4
Impetus, aut orientis Hedi.
Virg. Georg. i. 205, Heedorumque dies servandi. En. ix. 668,
Quantus ab occasu veniens pluvialibus hedis, ‘
Verberat imber humum. aay


Hesiod, Op. et D. 608, &e. :


’


7 Tytler has strangely rendered dwéexiry ray waida, his twelfth —


and only boy: which is absurd. We may perhaps mend his line
thus, “‘ And mourns, at twelve years lost, his boy.” .


.


17


198 . , CALLIMACHUS.


XXL.


At dawn! we were burying Menalippus, and at sun-set
the maiden Basilo died, by her own hand.? For she had not
the heart to liye,-when she had placed her brother in the
flame.. So the house of their sire Aristippus saw a double
woe: and all Cyrene was downcast, when it saw the house of
persons happy-in-their-children bereaved.


XXII.


' Whov’ER you are that bear your step past my tomb,? know ©
that I am the son aad sire of Callimachus the Cyrenzan.
Now you may know them both. The one of yore commanded
the armies of his country: the other sang strains too sur-.
passing for envy.5 And small blame! for as.many as the
Muses look upon in youth with eyes not askance,‘ they do not
abandon as friends when grey-headed. :


XX.


A nywpu carried off from the mountain the Cretan son-of-_
Astacus,’ the goatherd. And~now the son-of-Astacus is sa-


1 "Hot, adj. for adverb. Cf. Call. H. in Jov. 87, and note ? at that
passage. :
2 abroxepi for abroxepi, an adv. from adréxep. See Porson, Orest. ,
1037, adréyeipt-rpd7y.
* It would seem that in this epigram we must suppose Callima-
chus himself to speak, though we know not enough of his history to
' understand the allusions. This is probably intended for his awn
epitaph, though his father’s name is uncertain, (he was one of the
attiade, or royal race at Cyrene,) and his sister’s son was named
Callimachus, and wrote @ poem. :
FN brrwy, i, g. drAitwr, as domig for doxdHgopot, arma for armati,
Ce .
5 koslocova Baocarinc. Spanh. at H. in Apoll. 105, 106, considers
the allinsions there and here to be to Apollonius Rhodius, a contem-
porary and bitter rival of our poet. : Bees :

* The reading of the Scholiast on Hesiod at the beginning of the
Theogony, px) A0EG instead of dyer Biov, is universally adopted here.
Cf. Hor. Od. IV, iii. 1, Quem tu Melpomene, semel, &c.

7 This epigram touches on a shepherd’s being carried off by a
nymph, to become a priest beneath the oaks of the Dryads, or
some sylvan worship. Daphnis is no more to be the shepherd’s
song, but Astacides imhis stead. ” ~* :


’ EPIGRAMS. , Wo


- ered. No more beneath the Dictzan oaks, no more shall we
shepherds sing of Daphnis ; but the son-of-Astacus for ever-
more. , ,

XXIV.


Crzomprotus, the Ambraciot,! said, “ Sun, farewell,” then
leaped from a high wall into Orcus not that he had dis-
covered any ill? ‘worthy of. death, but because he had read
one writing of Plato, that on the soul. ;


XXV.


A HERO, I am set before the door of Eetion, of Amphipo«
lis,‘ a little hero at a small vestibule, bearing a snake looking-
dskance> and asword only. But being enraged at a horse-
man, he has placed me also near himself on-foot. ‘


XXVI.


To Ionis 6 Callignotus sware, that never would he hold friend
_ or mistress dearer than her. He sware. But ’tis truly said that
oaths made in love? enter not the ears of the immortals. For’


1 Cicero, Tusc. Disp. (I. xxxiv.'84,) translates this ‘epigram,
“Callimachi quidem epigramma in Ambraciotam Cleombrotum
est: quem ait quum ei nihil accidisset adversi, e mure se in mare
abjecisse, lecto Platonis libro.”’ Cf. Ovid in [bin. 491,,492,

Vel de precipiti venias in Tartara saxo .
Ut qui Socraticum de nece legit opus.

? Oavdrov caxdv. Some have proposed to read rédog instead of
xoxdy, but Cicere renders the words “ nihil adversi,’” showing that
in his day the reading was xaxdy. o

3 The Phedo of Plato. The story is noticed by St. Augustine
de Civ. Dei, i, 22. Cleombrotus was an Academic philosopher, and
may have been the disciple of Socrates mentioned by Plato in
Phedo, ji. p. 59, c. See Smith, Dict. G. R. B. i. 791, a.

4 Eetion is mentioned as a sculptor by Theocritus, Ep. vii.; as
having made a statue of Aisculapius for Nicias of Miletus. Here
it appears that the sculptor erects a pedestrian statue of a hero of
short stature who had been killed by a fall from bis horse.

5 dg. According to Vulcanius and A. Fabri, heroes had ser-
pents carved on’ their sepulchres and monuments. A. Fabri half
quotes Virgil as an authority, but does not give any reference, and |

am unable to find one. :

* Tonjs. Anglicé “ Violet.” a

7 rod év Epwre“Opeovg. Cf. Tibull. I. iv. 21,22, Veneris perjuria

- Venti Irrita per terras et freta summa ferunt. III. vii. 17, Perjuria
ridet amantum Jupiter et ventos irrita ferre jubet. Catull. lxx. 8, 4,


200 © | CALLIMACHUS,


siehire .
now he burns with the flame truly of another, whilst of the
lorn ‘maiden, as of the Megarians,! there is neither.care nor
_ account, :


a


e - XXVIL
‘ArorEetime I was Calliste,?-but my after-name was Thera,
mother of our equestrian country. :
. XXXVI


From small means I had a slight subsistence, neither doing
aught ill, nor wronging any one. O dear earth, if I, Micilus,
have commended aught that -is bad, neither do thou lie light
on me,‘ nor ye other gods, who hold me.


XXIX.


Bors song and style’ are Hesiod’s: the poet of Soli has
‘copied. not the last of minstrels, but I suspect that he has


Sed mulier cupido quod dicit amanti .
In vento et rapida scribere oportet aqua. ie


Propert. IT. xxviii. 8, Quicquid jurarunt, pontus et unda rapit.
' @¢ Meyaptwy. This is in allusion to the Pythian response to the
Megarensians seeking to know their rank ameng Greek states.
bpsic D & Meyapijes obre rpirot, obre rérapror,
obre Sdwhékaror, obr’ tv Adyy, ot! éy dprOug.


Cf. also Theocr. Idyll. xiv. 48. The low estate of the Megarensians
seems to have passed into a proverb. : ;

? This epigram is on Thera, one of the Sporades, whence a colony
was led to Cyrene, the native city of Callimachus. Strabo, lib. xvii.
¢. lii. p. 497, quotes this epigram to show that the older name of

' Thera was Calliste. Pliny, H. N. [V.c. xii., makes the same state-
ment. See Steph. Byzant. under the article Ojoa, p. 308, and ‘note.

* The epitaph of Micilus, a poet of whom nothing is known.

4 pare od Koton yiyveo. A frequent prayer of Greek and Latin

oets. Tibull. II. iv. 50, Teyraque secure sit sup ossa levis.
Pope's Elegy on the Death of an unfortunate Lady : ‘


“ Yet shall thy grave with rising flowers be drest,
And the green turf lie lightly on thy breast.’’


5 According to Bentley, the drift of this epigram is, that Aratus,
the astronomical poet of Soli in Cilicia, imitated Hesiod, not a late
poet; but a very sweet one. -Aratus was a contemporary of Callima-
chus and Theocritus. . > ‘

€


‘ _ EPIGRAMS car 261
e ie
opied' the sweetest of verses. Hail, fine sayings, born with
he watchings of Aratus,? ‘


.. XxXx.


I wats the cyclic poem,’ nor do I rejoice* in the road that
leads many this way, or that.- I hate too a roaming lover,
‘neither drink I from the spring.® I loathe all things that are
common.’ Lysanias, thou at least art verily beautiful, beau-
tiful ; yet before I have said this, an echo says, another
hath him.


,o


“a ‘


XXXI.


Poor in, and say again, “to Diocles:”7 nor is water con-
scious of his sacred cups. Fair is the boy, O Achelous, pass-


1 6 xatowpnro. For this unintelligible reading we have adopted
that of Bentley and others, dcvéw yy, I fear that,l suspect that. . Er-
nesti suggests GX’ dy’ dxpov cai rd pedtxpéraroy, which is probable
and intelligible. i ' :

2 *Aphrov obyyovot dypumuinc. Bentley urges that the poems of
Aratus cannot be odyyova of his watchings, and suggests odvrovog -
aypurvin, the fruit of the intense watching. If the objection be
ghmiteed, which is not clear, I venture to think Ruhnken’s sug-
gestion, ctpBodrov aypurving, seems most akely: ‘

3 7d mwoinua’ To Kuehixdv. The cyclic poets plagiarized, especially
from Homer.

4 yaipw, ric. Bentley supposes tig to be for #, comparing Cid.
Col. (Soph.) 3. But Blomfield reads 7) for #, observing that no

ood Greek author, nor any careful imitator, would use rig for
dc, though in Hellenistic Greek it might be admissible.

§ obr’ ard xpnync. Cf. Propert. ITI. xiv. 1, 2, (Paley,)}

Cui fuit indocti fugienda hee semita vulgi
‘ psa petita lacu nunc mihi dulcis aqua est.

* ouryaivw wavta ra Snpéora. Hor. Od. Ill. i. 1, Odi profanum .
vulgas et arceo. : :
7 his ‘is in allusion to the custom of lovers.to drain goblets to
the health of those they love; as in an epigram of Meleager,

. Eyxet, wai waduy eiwé wédw wédw ‘Hrroddipacg
Bime- oby depary 7d yrurd picy’ dvopa.
Cf. Theocr. xiv. 18; Catull. xxv. 1, 2, 5,
Minister vetuli puer Falerni,
Inger mi -calices amariores—
At vos, quo lubet, hinc abite lymphe,


4


Vini pernicies. ,


Tibull. I. ii. 1, Adde merum. (Blomf.)—’AyeAdoc, a special river
put for water generally; as in Virg. Georg, i. 9, Poculaque in-
4


202° CALLIMACHUS, .
: e
ing fair ! - And if any one says nay, may I alone be aware of:
his beauties.! “


XXXIL


WrercHen, wretched Thessalian Cleonichus, I know not,
"+ I- know not thee, no, by the piercing sun. Unhappy one,
where hast thou been ?? Bones and hair alone? remain to thee
any longer. Doth then my fate‘ possess thee, and hast thon
chanced, upon a harsh destiny. I know, Euxitheus hath
stolen thee ; and thou, as thou passedst by,> sawest that hand-

_ some one with both thine eyes. = -—- :


Tue hunter, O Epicydes, hunts for every hare on the


, mountains,’ and the tracks of every antelope, being acquaint-
ed with hoar-frost and snow.® But should any one say, Lo,°


. ventis Acheloia miscuit uvis. In the 3rd line Achelous is addressed
as the god of the river of that name.
1 Cf, Tibull. IV. xiii. 5,‘


Atque utinam posses uni. mihi bella videri;
‘ ‘  Displiceas aliis: sic ego tutus ero. ,
. * T have translated here according to’ the punctuation of Blom-
field, ode Eypwy’ oxirdee, od yéyovag ;
3 dorta cor. So Hymn to Cer. 92, péog” dvi wrevpaic Asthaip tvig
Te cal doria pdvoy agpOer. wer : ;
4 obpoc daipwy, meum fatum. Beni,
5 xai ob mapedOav. This is the reading of Pierson.
® dudoréporg, sc. Gppact, | ‘ ;
7 Horace has transfused this epigram into Latin numbers, cf.
Sat. I. ii. 105, fertt ;
aS rae Leporem venator ut alt&
_ In nive’sectetur, positum sic tangere nolit :
; Cantat et apponit-: meus est amor huic similis: nam =;
Transvolat in medio posita, et fugientia captat. . ;
8 xexonpivoc. If we retain this reading we must translate it as
in the text, almost as “‘ used to.” But A. Fabri would here, as in.
. H-in Dian. 69, read ceypévog, and Blomf. ceyapnpevos, letus: cf.
Hor. Od. 1. i. 28, | nce.
Multos castra juvané et lituo tube
-, Permistus sonitus, bellayue matribus
Detestata. Manet sub, Jove frigido
. ; Venator, tener conjugis immemor. :

9 rj, the old imperative, (from a root, rdw, akin to rdyw, rirayor,) |
equivalent to the French “ tiens, tenez."” Cf. Hom. Il. xxiv. 287;
Od, ix. 347. ©. ‘

»


EPIGRAMS, 208
here is a wild beast stricken ; he does not take it. Even .
such is my love. It is versed in pursuing what flies from it, -
but flits past what lies in its mid path, ant


XXXIV.


I know that my hands are void of wealth : but, O Menip-.
-pus; tell not, I pray thee by the Graces, my daily dream! to
me. My head is pained continually,? as’ I ‘hear this most.
bitter saying: yes! and from thee, my friend, this is most
unkind.


’ XXXV. , ,
O ArreEmis, to thee Phileratis set-up this statue here : then
do thou, Our Lady, accept it, and preserve her.5


" ¥XXVL


To thee, O thou clad-in-the-lion’s-skin,! slayer-of-the-boar,
he offered a shoot of the beech-tree. Who? Archinus. Of-
what-country ? The Cretan. I accept it.


XXXVIL‘ |


Past the tomb of Callimachus thou bendest thy steps, a
poet well skjlled in the song, and in joining-in-mirth season-
ably over wine.


wt


1 rodpdv bvepov, my dreams, i. e. an old story, rem mihi notissi-
mam, Jacobs illustrates the proverb by Plat. Republ. viii. p. 563,
7d indy ye spot eye Svap. sigs ‘: ,

2 ri bd wardc, sc. KEGadiy, as pa Ti}y, ob pa THY, i.e. THY Oedv,
Bentl., Brunck suggests 67. The force of the epigram is, “I may
be poor, but Iam not the less sick of being told the unpleasant
truth.‘ :

3 odov, Anna Fabri reads odw, Dor. for odwooy, as we constantiy
‘find in the Bath of Pallas. eee

‘4 Neovrdyxwve. Bastius suggested the ck emendation, Agov-
réyAave. The epigram is Set nee to be spoken by a beechen club *
to Hercules, who had strangled the Nemean lion, and taken its
skin for a cloak.—ovorréve, Hercules is so called as slayer of the
Erimanthian boar. - : " '

5 This is possibly an epitaph for himself written by Callimachus
in his lifetime. Callimachus, as above mentioned, was of the royal |
house of the Battiade at Cyrene. :


204 = CALLIMACHUS : a


XXXVI


Tue deep drinker of wine, Erasixenus, the cup of neat
liquor drunk-off twice in succession carried off. .


XXXIX? oa


» Tue Lyctian Menetas offered these bows, and said thus
much besides,? * Take,4 I give thee, Sarapis,5 the bow and
quiver: but the arrows the Hesperite® have.”


7 . xh
Roamine Simone? gave as her offerings to Aphrodite


an image of herself, and the zone which used. to protect her |
bosom. ‘ :


. | Valkenaer thus paraphrases this epigram: ‘ In the contest in
which drinkers weré wont to challenge one another to drain larger
goblets, the second cup of unmixt wine carried off Erasixenus, a very
strong wrestler in other contests.’’ The bottle .threw him, not the
hug of his antagonist. - : 5

? This epigram, as Bentley shows, is, as Epigram xli. composed
- of lines made up of two dimeters catalectic. Cf Epig. xl. also.

3 lxaxwy, There is no need to read aerwy, as Eremuoy expresses
-the words spoken with the dedication of the offerings.

4 Tq. Cf. Epig. xxxiii. 4, E ; ; .

5 Sapam. Sarapis, or Serapis, an Egyptian divinity, in the time
i oe Ptolemies introduced into Greece. He was said to be Apis

eified, - . ;
“6 oni Mar Stepbanus Byzant. (p. 275) says that Hesperis was

a city of Libya, afterwards called Berenica, and quotes the Epigrams

of Callimachus. See more under the art. Hesperis in Smith, Dict.

G. and R. G. vol. i. p. 1068, a.

7 Simone.] Bentley reads Serjvy. Cod. Vatic. Seudvn, whence
Ruhnken conjectures Zepdvn. The metre here is as in the previous
epigram. For srepigoerog, see Epig. xxx. 3. In the 4th line read, with
A. Fabri, 7) pacréug éptdacoe, A. Fabri quotes Anacreon. xx.,


‘


Mipor, yivat; yevoipav, '
“Orwe éyw 0 ddeipw,

kai rawwin 0 paoray,

and Terent. Eunuch. II. iii. 22,


“ + Haud similis virgo est virginum nostrarum quas matres student
Demissis humeris esse, vincto pectore ut graciles sient.


€


EPIGRAMS. 205


XLIL


To Demeter before the gates,! to whom Acrisius of the
Pelasgians caused this shrine to be built, and to her daughter
beneath the earth, Timodemus of Naucratis? set up these
gifts, the tithes of his gains ; for thus had he vowed.


. a: XLIL ; a
TO AN OLD PRIESTESS OF DEMETER HAVING DIED HAPPILY.


IN TETRAMETER HENDECASYLLABICS. .


Or old I was a priestess of Demeter, and again of the Ca,
biri,? O man, and afterwards of Dindymene‘ I became ‘the old
priestess, (who now am dust,) in-authority over many young
women.® And to me two male children'were born, and in
their arms I closed-mine-eyes® in-happy-old-age.? Go on chy
way rejoicing. ,


1 rg wvdaiy. A. Fabri anes H. in Cerer. 45, carwpadiar 3’ xe
rAsida, Some have thought that this epithet belonged to her as
the keeper of the Eleusinian mysteries. - ;

2 Naveparirne, a citizen of Naucratis, a town of Egypt, whence
Nayxparirne, just asin Epig. xxxix. 6, ‘Eorepirnc, from ‘Eowepic.

8 KaGsiowy, Inferior deities originally of Lemnos, according to
Eschyl., and, according to Herodot. iii. 37, worshipped at Memphis
as sons‘of Vulcan or Heahaiatan whose grandsons, as sons of Pr
teus, they were according to other accounts. According to the
writers of the Alexandrian period, the mysteries df the Cabiri were
sprung from Dardanus, and solemnized in honour of Demeter.

* Awvdupnrng, i.e. Cybele, so called from Dindymus, a mountain
of Phrygia, sacred to her. Cf. Horat. Od. I. xvi, 5, 6,


Non Dindymene, non adytis quatit
Mentem sacerdotum incola Pythius;


: and Catull. xxxiii- 14, Dindymi dominam ; 1xi- 18,


. Cybeles nemora simul,
Simul ite, Dindymenz domine vaga pectora.


5 In thie line the simplest construction seems to understand zpoc-
tasin to be i. q. rpoordrec, patrona, the office put for the person
holding it, as “arma” for “armati,” and the like. :

® mpripue’, i, e. raldniuvoa. Bentley. ‘ =

* Blomf. compares Propert, IV. xii, 64, Condita sunt vestro lu-
mina nostra sinu.


206 ‘ CALLDMACHUS.


XLII! . |


THat which still breathes, is but half my life ;* but the
other half I know not whether Eros or Orcus hath snat¢hed-
away ; but gone-it-is. I wonder if it hath gone again to one
of the youths ? And yet I often bade them not, saying, Re-
ceive? not the fugitive, young ones. Is it not even gone to
Cephisus,* for I know that that death-deserving and passion-
ately-lovirig maiden attaches-herself somewhere there.


XLIV.


Ir indeed, O Archinus, I have wilfully gone a-rioting, blame
me: ten-thousand times: but if I am come against-my-will,
consider my hastiness.> Strong-drink and love compelled
me,® of which, one of them kept dragging me, the other would


! Scaliger has pointed out sin Aul. Gell. xix. 9, a translation of
this epigram by an old Latin poet, Q. Catulus:
Aufugit mi animus; credo, ut solet, ad Theotimum
_ Devenit; sic est. Perfugium illud habet.
‘Quod si non interdixem, ne illum fugitivum ,
Mitteret ad se intro, sed magis ejiceret?
Ibimu’ quesitum. Verumi ne ipsi teneamur "
Formido. Quid ago? Da Venu’ consilium.
2 With this line Jacobs compares Theocr. xxix. 5,
. to yap dpisv rag Zotac txw
: Zg trav oar ifeav, ro dt Norby axendero,

: bddex9e, the reading of Bentley, seems to be preferable to all
others. ;

. '* Ob« icov %n cov.’ This unintelligible reading’ of the MSS. is
emended by Scaliger, od« eig Kygiody ; a slight and probable altera-
tion. Bentley prefers ob« sic tg ror EnBov ; which appears to have
been a proverb. . ,

5 riy xporéraay doa. Vide temeritas quid facit. Bentley.

* A. Fabri compares with this line Terent. Adelphi, Act III. sc.
iv. 24, Persuasit nox, amor, vinum, adolescentia ; and Blomf. Pro-
pert. I. iii. 13,

Et quamvis duplici correptum ardore juberent
Hac Amor, hac Liber, durus uterque Deus, &c.
—dv 6 piv abray, Some have suggested airév. But there is no
need, as in another’ epigram quoted by Bentley we find &y 6 pev
tpov—and in later Greek, as we see in the N. T., this redundancy
of poneeenchon was not uncommon. The Septuagint abounds
with it. ‘ :


EPIGRAMS. a a 207


ot let me keep a sober mind. But when J had come, I marked
ot who or whose, but I kissed the neck :! if this is a wrong
deed, I am a wrong-doer. sO . yy
' XLV.


Tue stranger was wounded without our knowledge: thou
sawest how sad a breath he drew through his breast. Lo, he
was drinking the third time,?. and the roses shedding their
leaves were poured all on the ground from the man’s chaplet.?
Doubtless he has been seriously inflamed; no, by the gods, I
do- not guess without -reason,* but being a thief, I have Jearnt
the traces of a thief®


THERE is, yes by Pan, something hidden, there is, by Bac-
‘chus, some fire beneath these ashes.6 I have no confidence :'
prythee embrace me not. Ofttimes a river, though it be silent,
eats imperceptibly through the wall.7 Wherefore now too I
fear, Menexenus, lest this stealthy-glider,® insinuating himself,
should throw me into love. .


' Saphy for iapyy is the emendation of Bentley, who quotes The- °
ognis, 259. Blomf. adds Horace, Od, II. xii. 25, 26, Dum flagrantia
detorquet ad oscula Cervicem.

2 £6 rpiroy yvid’ ime, So reads Dorville instead of the MSS. read-
ing +) y7 éreve, which seems to allude to the custom of libations pour- .
ed on the earth; another reading is ré tpiroy Hyyme wive, the third
challenge to drink approached. Blomfield adopts however Dor-_
ville’s reading, the simplest. ; ‘

3 Ruhnken quotes here Propert. IIT. vi. 51, (Paley,) Ac veluti folia
-arentes liquere corollas. - :

4 axd puopot—i, e. pvOget—not without reason. The opposite is
pdOpng rim. Eur. Cycl. 398. (Lidd. and Scott.)

5 gwpde Diya. “* Set a thief to catch a thief.”

® Jacobs compares Hor. Od. II. i. 7, Incedis per ignes Suppo-
sitos cineri dologo. Ov. Remed. Am. 243, $

Lentus abesto
a Dum perdat vires sitque sine igne cinis.
Ibid. 731, 732,
Ut pene extinctum cinerem si sulpure tangas,
Vivet, et e minimo maximus ignis erit.
In this epigram the speaker warns his friend not to embrace him,
as'the flame of former love has not quite died out.
1 dmorpéywv. Blomf. quotes Hor. Od. I. xxxi. 7, 8,
Non rura, que Liris quieta _ 2
. Mordet aqua taciturnus amnis, .
; 8 odrog 6 o' ei y’ dpvge¢. Bentl., 6 oryipwys—which is adopted in the
ext. .


1


208° : ~ = CALLIMACHUS.
* : 3 ‘

' XLVI
- Wuen beheld the beautiful Archestratus, I said that he was
not beautiful, no, by Hermes, for he did not seem exceedingly
so. I spake, Nemesis? seized me, and straightway I lay in the
flames: Jove was wholly directing his lightnings against me.? .
Shall I propitiate the boy, or the goddess? Nay, the boy is
more precious to me than the goddess. Good bye to Nemesis.


.


XLVUI.


- THou wilt be caught, roving Menecrates,‘ said I on the
twentieth of July, and of August—on the-what ?—the tenth
- day the ox. came of-his-own-will under the plough.’ Bravo,
bravo, my Mercury! I do not find-fault along-of the twenty

’ days.6 ;
a XLIX.


‘Wanst Polyphemus found his incantation good, so long?
the Cyclops neglectéd his sheep, and counted them not. The
Muses, Philippus, waste love away. Surely wisdom is a


1 This epigram is inscribed ”Adgov, and is by Pierson ascribed
to Philippus. . . .

% & Neweore. Cf. Catull. Coma Berenices, 71, Pace tui fari hee
liceat, Rhamnusia virgo. Nemesis was daughter of Jupiter and
*Avayen, avenger of perjury and insolence.. :

% gag 0 dv tuoi Zedc. Pierson enggesies; traic 8 kc tw’ we Zeve. But’
as Blomfield shows, there needs only the slight alteration of é» into

_ x” and the whole will stand as it was. ; eis)
4 wepigevye. Bentley yeads ‘wepiporre, which Blomf. and others.
‘ adopt, and which is Englished here: see at Epig. xxx. 3.—Mavnpou,
Panemus and Loiis were, two Macedonian months, answering to
July and August.' The Macedonian months were adopted after
Alexander’s date by all the Syro-Macedonian cities, and by the
Greek cities of Asia. For the names of them see Smith, Dict. G. and
R. Ant. p. 614, B. .
5 HdOev & Bovc i’ Gporpoy Exovowwg. A proverb of things turning
_ out prosperously, not by our own industry, but in the common
course of nature. Bentl.—Eppijc. The poet thanks Mercury, the
god of unexpected good Tuck. .
* mapa rd¢ eixoot. For wapé in this sense see Matt. Gr. Gr. § 588,
6.; Thue. i. 141, &e.
7 With Hermann we have adopted “Ewe d&ya0ay —régo’ dpedav .
aiyav obx dpidpac’ 6 kuedwp. There seems to be an allusion to the
early part of the 11th Idyll of Theocritus in this epigram.


n EPIGRAMS. ; 209

, medicine healing all.!_ This good, methinks, éven famine has,
and only this, in addition to its ills. It cuts off the. disorder
of love.. Yes, and I have even both in abundance against
love. This, boy, little boy, clips thy wings. Not even. the.
least crumb? do I fear thee ; for both the charms against the
severe wound are at my home.

L330 * . ;
OFTEN truly in the choruses of the tribe Acamantis the

Dionysiac hours shouted Joud on account‘of the ivy-bearin
dithyrambs, and with chaplets and choicest roses overshadow-
ed the sleek locks of skilful poets, who dedicated this tripod
as their witness of Bacchic prizes; those men Antigenes in--
structed. But well did Ariston, the Argive, nurse a sweet
voice, pouring into simple Doric pipes a tuneful breath: of

. whose honey-voiced choir Struthon’s son, Hipponicus, was '
leader, borne in the chariots of the Graces. Who gave him
famous name and splendid victory among men, by-the-powet-
of the Muses, goddesses with violet wreaths. ‘


LI - ae .
Tuts salt-cellar, from which eating plain salt,> he had


1 qwavaxic, 1d mavaxic, the “all-heal.” Cf. Callim. Apoll. 40,
abriy riyv wavaxsiay, : i

2 ob8' b00y arrdpayby—drrapayoc or arraépaxes, a crumb of bread.
Athenevs. Hence a bit—* not even a bit.”

3 The scope of this epigram is this: At the Dionysia, when Tragic
and Comic poets exhibited their dramas at Athens, @ particular
tribe finding chorus, garments, and other ornaments, the tribe Aca-
mantis was successful; the dramatist being Antigenes, Ariston the
flute-player, and Hipponicus the leader of the chorus. Cf. Bentley,
who quotes here an epigram of Simonides: ‘ ‘

*Hpxe piv ’Adsivavrog ’AOnvaiore, Br’ évina
’Avrioxic pod} Sadédeoy rpimoda,
Hevogirou 6& tre vide "Aproreione txopnyee .
~Tlevricovr’ dvépiy card pabdyre xopg
"Apgi Odacradig 58 Sipwridy tower Kidog

+> *Oydwrovrasre wait Atwrperiog, ‘

* Bentley has elucidated the sense of this epigram, which turns
upon the ambiguity of the words dAiny, dda, ddhoc—not having here

‘reference to the sea so much as to the salt. Eudemus, plunged in
debt, extricated himself by living very frugally (as one Cui pater-

. num Splendet in mensa tenui salient ; Hor.): in memory ofthe
advantage of which’ prudent course he dedicates rijv éXiqy, the salt-
cellar, to the Samothracian gods... ; or

5 tp tig dda duroy ixicOwr. ixécbuy,.i. q. txeadiwy, is used as differ-

P a
aie ‘A
¥


‘210 CALLIMACHUS.


‘escaped great storms of debt, Eudemus dedicated to the Sa-
“mothracian gods, saying that he had this set up here accord-
‘ing to his vow, ye peoples, because he had been saved from
the ‘brine. : : ,
> OD
‘For quickness-in-learning, Simus, son of Miccus, prayed,
Presenting me to the Muses. And they; like Glaucus,! gave
a great gift instead of a small. But I am set over against
. this double letter of the Samian,? gaping, Z the tragic Bac-
-chus, as hearer of boys? While they say, Holy is the lock,
. telling me my. daily dream.


Ny


LUI,


“Ts, stranger, that I, Pamphilus,* am set up> as a wit-
ness, truly comic, of the victory of Agoranax ‘the Rhodian,


ing very little in sound from éréOwy, just as davies is from dvipwr.
Throughout thé epigram it is to be taken as bearing a twofold allu-
sion to maritime and table matters. .

1 Pratixog bxwe. An allusion to the exchange between Glaucus
ga Diomed,. Hom. II. vi. 236, xpicea Yadkeiwy, ixardpBor ivyea

oiwy, F

2 «eiuat Tov Zapiov dttdéov. The letter meant is Y, called the
letter of the Samian, because invented by Pythagoras, [see Martial,

_ Littera Pythagore discrimine secta bicorni; and Persius, iii. 56, 57,
Et tibi que Samios diduxit litera ramos, ;
Surgentem dextro-monstravit limite callem.—] *

-Bentley explains that the letter Y, opposite which the image of
Bacchus was set, was placed in schools to indicate to boys the two-
‘fold path of virtues and vices. f
. The boys made offerings of their locks to Bacchus, according
to a common custom in deference to all the gods, but especially to
Bacchus. Cf. Euripid. Bacch. 493, 494,
Lpdror pix fpr Boorpoxyor rep ose -
ispac 4 wAdnapos: rg Oep F abrdy rpigw,
And as Bacchus had beautiful hair of his own, these offerings were
-an old story, a matter of no importance, an every-day affair, rodpér
Svepap; as Blomf. would read for éveag.

* Agoranax, a comic poet, having been victorious at the Diony-
siac festival, consecrates to Bacchus the statue cf the actor Pam- -
philus, ill wrought, full of wrinkles, and black as soot, or the lamp
.of Isis, The statue in the epigram is made to explain that it is not
burnt by love, so as to cause its appearance.

5 dyneioPat, i. q. givaxciebas.


oe


_-RRgRAms, OM


and not burnt by love.! But half of me is seen like to a dried
fig and the lanterns of Isis.? : ‘


'


Liv .
‘Miccus used to take care of Phrygian Atsclira,’a good .
nurse‘ even in her lifetime with all comforts, and, when she
was dead, set up her statue, for posterity to see, how the old.
woman receives-in-full® the thanks for her breasts. a


LY. :
TO BERENICE, WIFE OF PLOLEMY.®


Tur Graces are four. For in addition to those famous
three one more has been fashioned at some recent period, and
is still moist with unguents. Blessed in all things is very-
enviable Berenice, without whom not even the Graces them-
selves are Graces. : ‘


LVI.


THE beautifully? swarthy Theocritus, if indeed he hates
me, you would hate four times as much: if he loves me, you
would love him. ‘Yea! by fair-tressed Ganymede, O hea-
venly Jove, thou too wast once in love’ I will not speak
more at length. hs


1 deavpéivoy, from daw, i. q. weptareddeypivov. Hesych.

2 Jacobs shows from Pollux and Quinctil. Inst. Or. xi. 8, 74, that
on the ancient stage two-sided maaks were in use; hence pov d’
WIRTH, _ ‘

* Miccus shows his gratitude to the Phrygian nurse Aischra by
setting up her statue. :

4 aya8dy yada, lac bonum, i. e. bonam nutricem, the abstract for
the conereté, See Matthie, -Gr. Gr. § 429, 1. :

5 dréyer for tye is Alexandrine: see Epigr. lviii. -So we have
it in the New Testament.

6 An elegant compliment to Berenice, daughter of Philadelphus.
Bentley quotes from the Anthology, i.41, ¢ .

' Al ydprreg rocic etal, 06.34 pia raic-rptai xeivarg
Tevyf One, iv” Exwo’ at xdprreg xapera, ,

7 73 waddy for Kaddv or cadeg. So Theocr. ‘Idyll. iii. 3, Térup’
duly rd xaddy meperapéve : and again; 18, & 1d eaddy robopeioa.

8 kai od nor’ yodon¢. Cf. Theocr. Idyll. viii. 59, 60,

& warep, & Zeb
ob pdvog jode@ny— : >
P2


212 - CALLIMACHUS-


“LVI


Comes eyen again, Tiithyia, at the invocation of Lycenis,!
helping Aer thus in childbirth with easy-deliverance from
throes. So shall it be to thee now, O queen, for a girl: but
for a boy, hereafter thy fragrant temple will hold somewhat
else.


LVIII.


Tuov knowest? that thou hast, O #sculapius, the debt'which
Aceson vowed? and owed for his wife Demodice. But should
it escape thee, and thou demand payment, the tablet declares
that she will preserve her chastity.


LIX.


Catuistrom, daughter of Critias, dedicated me, a lamp rich
with twenty lamp-nozzles, to. the. god of Canopus,! having
vowed me for his gon Apellis, But looking upon my lights
you will say, “Hesperus, how hast thou fallen.”.


LX,


Evenrrvs, who set me-up, says (for I know nought of é)
that I am suspended ® in requital for his private victory, a
brazen cock to the Tyndarjde. I trust the son of distinguish-
ed® Philoxenides.


- LXE


In the temple of Inachian Isis,’ aes daughter of
Thales, placed me up, by the promise of her mother Irene.


oe This epi gram accompanies an offering from Lycenis, for her
safety in the birth of a dau fies and promises & larger offering,
. should she have a son herea
* Aceson had set up an image of his with Demodice in the tem-
. ple of Aisculapius. The poet compliments the statue, or perhaps
a original of it, on beauty that could charm a god, and on her
chastity.
Em eb8dusvog Tuvwoxste for dpbdpevos ~ytyvwoxe. Tyrwhitt and
Testi.
r§ Kavwrirg, the od of Canopus in Egypt: viz. Sarapis or
pase is. Cf. Epis. eae 5. f a
5 For éyxeieOat, in ver. 3, read dyxeidOat,. i, q. dvaxeioGat, as in
Epigr. liii. and elsewhere.
6 @aidpov. Blomf. reads gaidpov with a small ¢.
* Inachian Isis.] Isis, an oa deity, was fabled to be the


‘ EPIGRAMS, - 318


LXII.


Waat stranger art thou, shipwrecked mariner? Leonti-
chus found me here a corse on the shores, and buried me in
this tomb, whilst he wept for his own fateful life: for not
even doth he spend a quiet! life, but traverses the seas, like
divers. ,


: , LXITI.


Best was Argive*® Orestes, because, though mad in other
respects, he was not afilicted with the madness of men mad-
with-love.? Nor did he make the trial of the Phocian,* which.
tests his friend, but exhibited even one drama alone. Sure: °
quickly would he have lost even his friend, had he done this: : -
and I no longer have many Pylade. . ,


LXIV.


ALt ye, who journey past the sepulchre of Cimon of Elis,5
know that ye pass the son of Hippzus. ~


wife of Osiris and mother of Horus. Her worship seems to have
been extended to Greece, Rome, and other parts of Europe. Ina-»
chus was considered by the ancients to have been an eyption
immigrant into Greece, who united an Egyptian colony with the
Pelasgians. Smith, Dict. G. and R. B. vol. ii. 572, a.

' Houxov, al. prexes = oll ie &. Cf. Hom. Od. v. 337, aibvin 0”
eievia, worg avedicaro Xipyne. Dr. Wellesley, in his Anthologia Poty-
glotta, p. 374, thus translates this epigram : :


“Stranger, whoe’er thou art, found stranded here,
O’er thee Leontichus heap’d up this grave,:
Whilst at his own hard lot he dropp’d a tear:
He too, a restless sea-bird, roams the wave.”


* 2 For wpxaioc, Jacobs read wpyetoc, which has been translated
ere. ;

3 Neveapiray paviy. The right emendation of this passage mist ,
be only conjecture. Asvxapéray is untenable, and so is pavéy.


-Ernesti suggests with much probability zopwropavdy, before which,


if some such word as aérée is placed, we should have metre and
sense. : ;

4 ro} wxioc, i..e. Pylades. The meaning of this epigram is
obscure, ; .

5 "Adiow. "Adeiovo is adopted by Blomfield from a MS.—In frag- | -


ment xcix. we read ’AXstog 6 Zevg. Nothing is known of this
‘imon.
»
.


o14 " GALLANACHUS.


LXV.


Atas, alas!? for thou too art thus, Menecrates! Thou
wast not for long. What hath made an end of thee, O best
of hosts. Why surely what? killed the Centaur: which came
to me as my fated slumber, but the wretched wine forms the
pretext. oo ‘ :


; _¢ LXVL

Tue race of Neptune and of Jove trained -their youth in
contests of sturdy wrestling.® And their contest is proposed
not for & brazen ewer, but who shall carry away life or death.
The fall was that of Anteus: but’tis fitting that Jove’s son,-


Hercules, should conquer. Wrestling is peculiar to Argives,
not Libyans, :


LXVII.


Tuov there, that seekest to burn even fire itself,4 that de-
sirest td light up by night. thy beautiful lamp,-come hither
and kindle a flame from my soul. For within me burning,®
it sends forth a vast blaze,


“1 Blomfield réads, :


Al ai rai od yap Hee, Mevixpareg ; ode byri rovdd
"HoOa. ti oe, Ecivwy pore, xaretpyacaro.


“2 3 pa 7d, Jacobs, for the unintelligible #paro.—An allusion is
here made to the Centaur’s fight with the Lapithe at the marriage
feast of Pirithous. Cf. Horat. Od: I. xviii. 8, .


At ne quis modici transiliat munera Liberi
Centaurea monet cum Lapithis rixa super mero
Debellata ; ;

and see Hom. Od. xxi. 295—298.

} An epigram on the wrestling match between Hercules, son of
Jove, and Antzus, son of Poseidon and Ge, a mighty Libyan giant.
Hercules discovered the source of his strength, lifted him up from
the earth, and crushed him in the air. The poet says that Argos,
the fatherland of Hercules, was more famous fur wrestlers than


ibya. 2 :

‘Blomfield negatives the opinion of Obsopeus, who attributes
this epigram to Callimachus; and ascribes it on the contrary toa
Neoteric Sophist.


§ For xatpevor, Blomfield reads xarépevn, agreeing with vx}.


© : a


- EPIGRAMS, 218


LXVIIL.

_ Bravest of beasts am I,! of mortals he, whom I now guard,
as I stand on this stone tomb. But unless Leon had had the
heart, I wot, as he had the name of lion, I would not have set
my feet on this tomb.

LXIX.?,


Tur three-years-old Astyanax while sporting round about
a well, a mute image of a form drew in to itself? And from
the water the mother snatched her drenched boy, examining
whether he had any ade ti of life. But the infant did not
defile the Nymphs, for, hushed ‘on the lap of his mother, he
sleeps his deep sleep. ; -


LxXx4


Wokrn out with age and poverty, and no man outstretching
a contribution for misfortune, I have come into my tomb by
degrees with my trembling limbs. ‘With difficulty have I
found the goal of a troublous life. And in my case the custom
of the dead hath been-changed. For I did not die first, and
then was buried ; but was buried, and then died.5


“LXX1¢


TxHE old woman Nico crowned the sepulchre of the maiden.
Melité. O Orcus, hast thou decided this aright ?


2 This epigram is ascribed by Brunck to Simonides, but retained
by Blomfield on the judgment of Salmasius. Simonides was a con-

fomporet of Leonidas, and on that hero’s tomb there was, as we~
read in Herodst. ‘vii. 225, a lion carved. But so, according to
Pausanias, had other warriors. Pausan. III. iii. 5, speaks of one Leo,
a king of Sparta, grandsire of Leonidas, , ;

2 An epigram on a child three-years-old falling into a well, and
being drawn out by its mother to die in her lap. The poet says
that the death of the babe did not render the well and the Nymphs
thereof unclean, béing drawn out before death occurred..

3 Eidwhow poppag xugov. The babe seems to have leapt towards its
shadow in,the water.

* This epigram is by ‘some ascribed to Simonides.

5 It would seem that this last line must be understood of the old
man in the depth of poverty, having sought shelter in the tombs.
These tombs were probably hewn in rocks, as we read in St. Matt.
viii. 28; Luke vill. 27, and the commentaries on those passages.

* This epigram also is often ascribed to Simonides. It turns upon
the reversal of the laws of nature, in the aged woman burying the
young maiden. >


216 | CALLIMACHUS.
LXXIL

- WuErerore, O Venus, unable-to-endure battle-dins, hast
thou had Mars assigned to thee? Who was the coiner-of-the
falsehood ? Foolishly did he fasten-on-thee hateful arms ? For
to thee loves are delightful, and the joys of the couch,' and
the women-maddening sounds of’ castatets. But to divine
‘Tritonis? leave these bloody speats : and go thou to beautiful-
tressed Hymen.
s LXXUL


Wild beasts of Cynthus,? be of good-courage. For the bow
and arrows of Cretan Echemmas are laid up in Ortygia with
Artemis, the arrows wherewith he desolates the vast moun-
tain : but now he has ceased, ye she-goats, since the goddess
has effected a truce with him. :


LXXIVv.


So mayest thou sleep, Conopium, as thou makest me to
serenade at this’ cold vestibule, ‘So mayest thou sleep, most
wicked one, as thou puttest thy lover to sleep : and thou hast
chanced upon pity not even in a dream. Neighbours pity :
but thou not even in a dream: but thy gray hair will soon
remind thee of all these things. 2 :


LXXv. a


’ Bw me not hail, bad heart, but pass on. Thy-not-laughing
is equal joy to me.


1 ai re war’ sbvdy rippac. Cf. Soph. Ajax, 1203, 1204, Séopopoc
ob?’ tvyuyiay Tip latev.—xporédov, This is used for castanets or
cymbals, as in Herodot. ii. 60, &., in the worship of certain

gyptian deities. : eee

Torrwvidt. Tritonis was an epithet of Minerva. Cf. Virg. An. ii.
171, Nec dubiis ea signa dedit Tritonia monstris. } =

8 Kuv6idec. The wild beasts of Cynthus, a. mountain of Delos,
overlooking the town of Delos. Cf. Virg. Atn. i. 498, 499, Per juga -
Cynthi Exercet Diana choros.—’Exéppa. Genitive Kol, for ’Exéuzpou,
as Ilaveaviac, ia, and tov: ’Apxurac, ’Apxéra, and ’Apxtrov. Graev.

* Kopaobae would seem here to mean i. q. cwpalev. Cf. Theocr.
iti, 1.

5 odd’ Svap, used as if adverbially, as in Aisch. Eumen. 116, 131,
cu in Plat. Theet, 178, D. (Liddell and Scott), “not even ina

ream. j


,


THE MAXIMS


OF


THEOGNIS THE MEGAREAN.


O xine, son-of Latona, child of Jove, nevet shall I forget’
thee, beginning nor ending.' But ever first and last and -
in the middle will I sing thee. Hear thou me, and grant me
blessings, ; .

King Phebus, when the goddess, august Latona, having
grasped with her hands the taper palm, bare thee most beau-
teous of immortals at the circular lake,4 boundless Delos was
all filled with ambrosial odour, and*the vast earth smiled, _
whilst the deep wide-waters of the gray brine rejoiced.

Beast-slaying Artemis, daughter of Jove, whose statue
Agamemnon set up,’ when in swift-ships he was sailing to


‘1 Beginning nor ending.] Cf. Hesiod, Theogon. 84, oda¢ 8’ abrag
mpuréy re kai Yorepoy aity aeidar, and 48, "Apydpevai @ vpredar Oca,
Ajyousiv’ dodo. Hor. Ep. i, 1, Prima dicta mihi, summa dicende
Cameen& Mecenas. Virg. Ecl. viii. 11, A te principium; tibi
desinet. Hom. Il. ix. 97. :

? Cf. Theoer. xvii. 8, 4, i

"Avipdy, F ad Trodepatog ivi mowrovor AtyicOw 2

Kai riparog, nai piccoc’ 6 yap moogepioraroc avdpdy. Neander.
‘Milton’s Parad. Lost, v. 165, “‘ Him first, him last, him midst, and
without end.” ; ta

3 Callimachus describes this, H. in Del. 209—211,

Adcaro Se Zévny, dred 0? txhiOn ipradw wpoig '

goivixog mori mpspvoy dpnyaryc id huyorg

repopévn, ;
Hom. Od. vi. 163. Cf. Call. H. in Ap. 4; Eurip. Hecub. 458—460.

4 rpdxondéi Aipyy. Cf. Callim. H. in Del. 261, yout de rpoxseoca
maviepog Eppes Aipyn. *

%8 syédacee O¢ yaia medion, &c. Cf. Hesiod, Theogony, 41, and
the notes there (supra. p. 4, note 2); ef. also Zsch. Prom. V. 89, 90.
movriwy Te xuparwy ’AvnorOpov yidacpa. :

’ eiaa’, set up. In one MS. above étoaro iss written “ cognovit.””


.


218 | MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 13—26,


Troy, hear me at-my-prayer, and avert from me evil fates.
Little to thee, O goddess, this, but much to me.? |

Muses and Graces, daughters of Jove,? who of old went
to the nuptials of Cadmus, and sang a noble strain: “ what
is beautiful, is dear, and that which is not beautiful, is not
dear.”8 Through immortal mouths this word hath come.

Cyrnus,‘ let a seal be set on these words of mine, as I pur-
sue wisdom, but it will never escape notice, if it be stolen.’
Nor will any one take-in-exchange worse, when the good is
. present : but thus shall every one say, these are the poems of
Theognis,® the Megarean, and one celebrated among all men:
“yet not yet am I able to please all the citizens. No wonder,
son of Polypas, for not even doth Jove please all, either when
he rains, or when he holds up.?7' But to thee with kind inten-


If the aor. could be used in this sense, it would suit the passage

’ better than “ set up,’’ but etcaro, from eidw, seems generally to mean,
“was like,” .It is not anywhere stated, as far as I can discover, that
Agamemnon set up a statue or temple of Artemis, though we find
that he dedicated his rudder to her. Callimachus, H. in Dian. 228.
See Livy, xlv. 27. For his sin against her, and .its expiation, see
arte —— 110, &c.; Eur..Iph,im Aul. 90; Taur..15; Ov. Met.
xil. 31, &e.,

' Aristot. Eth. Eudem. (vii. 10, p. 205,) quotes this passage, as .
Gaisford points cut.

- * The Muses are spoken of as daughters of Jove. Hesiod, Theog.
25, 53, 54. In Hes. Theogon. 64, the Graces have dwellings near
the Muses in Olympus at festivals, and at 906, they, are called
daughters of Jupiter and Eurynome.—Kaduou é¢ yapov. The mar-
‘riage of Cadmus with Harmonia, whom Zeus gave fie, to wife. The
matriage ceremony was honoured by the presence of all the Olym-
pian gods in the Cadmea. Cf. Eurip. Pheniss. 822—827.

‘ alkenaer from this line has suggested an emendation of Enrip.

Pheniss. 828, (Pors.) 6v yap 5 4) Kaddy, dumor’ ig gidov, where the .
old reading is caddy, which he shows from Theognis was the burden
of their song at these nuptials.

4 (Ver. 20—28=Fragm. ix. Frere.) Cyrnus was the son of Polypas,
(cf. 25,) a young man bound to him by firm and pure friendship,
of age and standing to be sent to Delphi as “ Theorus.”’ Cf. 805 ;

: sue da Theognis in Smith’s Dictionary of Gr. and R. B., vol. iil.

p. 1076. ; , . .

® xXerropuéva is the reading of three MSS., and is preferable, as its

subject will be é#. :

6 Gsbyndoc, for Osdyudog, as in Callim. Epigr. xxxii. 4, Osv-
popin; Apollen. Rhod. iii. 676; Call. H. in Cer. 58, Oedg for Osd¢.
Theog. xxviii. 13. ei oe .

7 Son of Folypas.] (Cf. 19.) Some have considered that this name
designated another person, but it is generally agreed that oAuwatdyg


21-48, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. “219


tion I will give advice, Cyrnus, even such as I myself learned,
when yet a boy, from the good.!

Be wise, and do not on condition of shameful or unjust acts
dyaw to thyself honours, nor distinctions, nor wealth. These
things’ know thus: and consort not with bad men, but ever
cleave to the good: with them eat and drink, sit with them,
and please them, of whom there is a large force. For from
the good thou shalt learn good,? but with the bad if-thou
shouldst mix, thou wilt lese even the-mind thou hast. Learn
this, associate. with the good, and sometime thou wilt say,
that I give good advice to my friends. A

Cyrnus,? this city is pregnant: but I fear that it will bring-
forth aman to be a chastiser of our evil violence. For the citi-
zens here on their part are as yet sober-minded: but the leaders,
have turned themselves so as to fall into mueh worthiessness.
No city yet, Cyrnus, have good men ruined ;* but when it
pleases the bad to be insolent, and they corrupt the commons,
and give judgments in favour of the unjust,® for the sake
of private gains and power, expect that that eity will not
‘long be kept tranquil, even though now it is settled in much


is a patronymic, designating Cyrnus.—zxdvreco’ dvddva,.an emend-
ation of Porson at en Orest, 1623, where he says that he knows no
instance of dvdévw with the accusative. The editions generally have
mwavrac here.—dviywy is here used in a neuter sense. Probably we
must explain it by the ellipse of éavréy; see Matth. § 496,-1, p. 828.

| dro rév dya8wr, “It should be recollected that the terins ot ¢ya-
Goi, bodes, BeArioroi, &c., are frequently used by the Greek writers
to signify the nobles—oi kaxoi, deAoi, &e., to denote the commons,”
(W, Smith’s H. of Greece, p. 85.) So it is with Theognis. So also
Sallust ‘uses the terms boni, optimates, optimus quisque, mali, &c.
In ver. 80, dperdc is used in a kindred sense to this of dya@oc. See
more at Welcker’s Theogn, pref. p. xxi. seq.; Donaldson’s New
Cratylus, Sect. 322, p. 506. .

* This passage is put in the mouth of Socrates in Plato’s Meno,
95, D. (vol. ix. 294, Ast), and in Xenophon, Sympasium, ii. 8,

3 (Ver. 89-~-52—Fragm. Frere, xxiii.) Mr. Frere explains the scope
of this passage to be, that an aristocracy directed by generous and
bold Se is never overthrown ; its danger is, when such are guc-
ceeded by a self-seeking corrupt generation of statesmen.

« On the contrary they constitute the city. Cf. Thue. vii. 77, dv-
dpeg-yap mode, cai od rex, and Soph. Céd, a 56, 57.

"5 Cf, here Hesiod, W. and D. 214, 215, iBpug yap re can decdg
Bpor@, «7. 2., and 220, 221, rijg de Oexiig pobog sAxopévyc ge dvdpeg
dywot rns . . : ae

* So Hestod again, Op. et D. 240, wodrdei yép cbpmaca wordt
Kakod avdpde atnioa, on


220 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 49-—69.


calm, when these. gains shall have become dear to the igno-
blé men, coming along with public hurt. . For from these is
sedition, and civil bloodshed of men, and to a state such as
this a monarch would never be pleasing.

Cyrnus, this state is still a state indeed :' but its people
truly are other, who aforetime knew nor rights nor laws, but
were wont to wear-out goat-skins about their sides, and to
inhabit this city, like stags, without the walls. And now,
son of Polypas, they are noble: but they who were bettermost
of yore, now are of-low-degree: who can endure to look on
these things?’ They deceive also one another, laughing one
at the other, conscious of the sentiments neither of bad nor
good. Son of Polypas, get none of these citizens as a friend,
‘with thine whole heart,‘ for the sake of any advantage: but
seem indeed to be friend to all in tongue, yet associate with
none of them in any serious matter at all. For you will learn
the minds of wretched men, that in their deeds there is no
reliance.5 But they have loved tricks, and deceits, and crafts
in suchwise, a8 men no longer in-a-sound-condition.®

‘Never, Cyrnus, trustingly consult with a mean man, when


1 Ver. 58—68==Frere’s Fragm. xii.

? In this and the three preceding lines the effects of a revolution
at Megara are portrayed. The ancient aristocracy has been driven
out by skin-clad tillers of the ground who dwelt aforetime in the
country. There seems no reason to read siow, ‘with Brunck, as tw
may be ore of the former dwelling of this subject class out-
side the walls. In this view the Quarterly Reviewer, No. cxliv., on
Mr. Frere’s Theognis, and Sir G. Lewis’s observations on the same,
(Class. Museum, vol. i. p. 265,} seem to-eonfirm me. The latter
says, ‘Instead of avoiding the frequented places, like timid deer,
they now rule in the city.”—These dopai aiyGy were the same as the
owsvpai, or Bairat, of the Greek shepherds and soldiers, Mr. Frere

as not here translated his original. Welcker reads rijode—zrodéoc.

3 dvéxoir’ éoopév. For this construction of dvex0as with a parti-
ciple, see Matth. Gr. Gr. § 550, b. ;

* te Oupod, This preposition, much as d7é in the next line, is often
put with words importing an internal or external impulse of mind.
Cf. Hom. Il. ix. 486, ie Oupod giiiwy; Soph. Cid. C. 887; Matth.
Gr. Gr. § 574, p. 998.—d2d ywoonc, however, is shown by Matth.
Gr. Gr, § 396, 2, obs. 2, to be i. g. yAwooy. Cf. Cid. C. 936. t

5 tx’ obdepia. Emi is here i. q. Exeort, the accent being retracted,
by anastrophe, as in Hom. I]. i. 515; Od. xi. 367. Later editors
have read ér’ here. ;

* ae dvdpec pyxére owkdpevor, Cf. Plat. Theetet. 176, D., ddr’ dv-
Spec oiovg det év dda Tove owOgooptvouc. In the edition of Callim-


. -


10—86, ‘MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. "991


you may wish to accomplish a serious matter: but go to a
man-of-worth, and take advice, after you pave made great.
efforts, and accomplished, Cyrnus, a long journey afoot.

Not even to all friends communicate wholly! a matter:
few, look you, 6f many have a trusty mind. Rely on dué
few men when you take in hand great deeds, lest ever, Cyrnus,
you find incurable sorrow. : : :

A faithful man is worthy to-be-prized-equally with gold
and silver,? O Cyrnus, in vexatious doubt. Few men, son of
Polypas, will you find, as comrades, proving. themselves faith-
ful in difficult cireumstances, who would have the courage,

- possessing a like-minded spirit, to share alike good fortunes
and bad.? And of these you will not find, by seeking even

‘ among all men, such a number in all as one ship would not
carry :* upon whose tongue as well as eyes a-sense-of-shame
is set, nor does gain lead them to a base dealing.


machus, Theognis, &c., (Thos. Rentley, Cambridge,) this line is
rendered, Ita tanquam viri non servati, prorsus perditi.

1 Sdwe. Brunck reads duwe, pereeque, pariter, i.e. “to all friends
alike.” Shaksp. in Henry VIII. act ii. sc. 1, makes Buckingham
Bay,

‘ Where you are liberal of your loves and: counsels
Be sure you be not loose: for those you make friends
' And give your hearts to, when they once perceive
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from ye.” :
This fragment is No. lxx. in Frere’s Theognis. a

*2 This and the’next line are quoted by Plat. Leg. i. 680, A. (vi.
20, Ast:) Something to the same purpose is Hor. Od. I. xxxv. 21
—24; and with ver. 78, ef. Od. III. iii. 1, 2,


Justum et tenacem propositi virum
Non etvium ardor prava jubertium, &c.


Lines 77 to 86-form Frere’s 66th Fragment. :
‘8 The scarcity of comrades faithful in adversity is justified by
Photinus in Lucan, viii. 485—487,


Dat pcenas laudata fides, cum sustinet, inquit,
Quos fortuna premit. Fatis accede, Deisque :
Et cole felices, miseros fuge ; :


‘


and again at 535, Nulla fides unquam miseros elegit amicos. ,
‘*.ot¢ vaic ppia. Welcker compares Cic. ad Div. xii. 25, Una

navis est jam bonorum omnium, quam quidem nos damus operam,

utrectam teneamys. Two lines below cf. Virg. Asn. iii. 56, 57,


te


- 222 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 81—105,


‘Do not caress me in words, and keep your mind and heart
‘elsewhere,' if ygu love me and if there dwells in yeu a faith-
- ful mind. Either love me, cherishing a sincere mind, or dis-
‘ ewn and hate me, having raised a quarrel openly.’ But he
who, with one tongue, has yet his mind at variance, this man,
Cyrnus, is a formidable comrade, better as a foe.than when
“a friend. : . :
if aman shall praise you for so long as he sees you,? but,
when removed elsewhere, launches forth an evil tongue,‘ such
comrade, look you, is not by any means a very good friend,
“who would say what is most acceptable with his tongue, but
_ thinks differently. But be such an one my ‘friend, who,
knowing his comrade, éven if he be troublesome in disposi-
tion,® bears him as a brother. Do -you, I pray, my friend,
ponder these things in your mind, and at some time hereafter
you will remember me. - Ss
Let’ no man persuade thee, Cyrnus, to love a bad man.§
For what benefit is that man, if he be a friend? Neither
would he rescue you from severe trouble and loss, nor when
the has what is good, would he be willing to share this.
*Tis the vainest thanks to one that does good to them-


Quid non mortalia pectoracogis,
Auri saera fames. _
1 Compare Hom. Hl. ix. 311,
sx Opde yap pot Keivoc dude ’Atdao wbdyorw
Se Erepor prev KebOy ivi ppeciv, Zddo dé sirry.
Psal. xxviii. 3, ‘ Which speak peace to their neighbour, but mis-
chief is in their hearts.” Psal. 1xii. 4, “They bless with their mouth,
but they curse inwardly.”

2 dugddiny (dvagaivw); the accusative of the adj. used adverbially
(se. 6ddv). Cf. Hom. II. vii. 196; xiii. 356. In the next line diy’
éxee véoy is literally “ has his mind‘at-two,” diya being antithetical
to yy. For déxa, cf. Hom. Jl. xviii. 510.—At ver. 92, Bekker reads
derde for decvdc.

3 (Ver. 93—100==Frere’s Fragm. xxxiii.) This Fragment is also
well nade by Elton in his Specimens of the Clasgjc Poets, vol.
jit, p. 127, -

4 Donpintale & dry, «7.4. Compare Hor. Sat. -I. iv, 81—85,
Absentem qui rodit amicum, &e. With ver. 96, compare Hom. Od.
xviii. 168; Eurip. Orest. 908, 76d¢ roi¢ Adyotg, ppovey naxdig,

5 épyqv Kai Be iy évra. For dpynv in this sense, cf. Theogn.
958, 214, 1070. It is the accusative of limitation. Compare the
nse of the word in Aésch. Prom. V. 378; Soph. Ajax, 639.

6 (Ver. 101—118e<Frere’s Fragm. xxxii.) In ver. 102, Bekker
adopts the reading deidog.


165—119, _ MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. - 223


of-low-degree,! all one with sowing the wide-waters of the
gray brine.? Since neither if you sow the waters-wide, would
-you reap a thick crop, nor benefiting the mean, would you be
‘Yequited in turn with benefit. For the mean bave an in-
satiate mind : if you shall have erred in one thing, spilt is the
love arising from all the ancient Rindnesses.2 But the noble
in the highest degree receive and enjoy benefits, and retain
memory of good deeds, and gratitude in aftertime.*
» Never make the mean man friend and comrade,® but ever
- fly from him as a.bad harbour. . Many, lock you, are com-
panions in drinking and eating,® but fewer in a serious mat-
ter. And nought is harder to discern than a friend of-base- ~
alloy,? O Cyrnus, or of more value than caution. The loss


* For the construction of Zedw with the accusative ofthe remoter
object and ¢ or caxdéc, see Matth. ‘Gr. Gr. § 415, 1, A..,
Elton paraphrases thus, es
“Go rather sow the hoary-foaming sea:
Seant were thy ‘harvest from he barre main,
Nor kindness.from the bad returns again.”
Hom. II. xxi. 59, has the phrase mévrog ddbg wodtije; and Virg. Ain.
x. 877, Ecce maris,magna claudit nos objice pontus. f
3 dmdnorov yao txova, xr. In the same vein is Flaminius’s
exclamation in Shakspeare’s:Timon of Athens, iii. 1,
“ Thou disease of a friend, and not himself.
Has friendship such a faint and milky ‘heart,
It turns in less than two nights? This slave
‘Unto his honour, has my lord’s meat in him,’’.&c. '
With éxeéyvrat, in 110, cf. Georg. iv. 492, Ibi-omnis effusus labor. ,
P ‘ Virg. Zn. iv. 539, Et bene apud memores veteris stat gratia
acti. :
® (Ver. 118—128=Frere’s Fragm. xxxiv.) For the inf. rotioOa
instead of the imperative, cf. Soph. El. 9, Gid, T.462; Ausch.. Prom.
. V..711; Hom, Tl. v. 124; Matth. Gr. Gr. 546.
® Timon (act III. vi.) says to such,
: : “ Live loath’d and long
Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites;
You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time’s flies.”
Horace, Od. I. xxxv. 26,


Diffugiunt eadis cum fece siccatis amici '
Ferre jugum pariter dolosi. '


7.Clement of Alexandria, says Gaysford, eompares Eurip. Med.
515, .


x


& Zs, ri 0 Xpvcod. wey be KiBsy roe Z
sopite drOpwroow dracac capi,
dvioay & Srp xpi rév:caxdy dudéxas,
vas oddeig xaparrip tuaigune cdpert;


1 ~ "


224 ‘MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. : 119-—136,


of alloyed gold’ or. silver is to-be-borne,' and it is easy for a
shrewd man to detect: but if the mind of a friend within bis
breast is untrue without-your-knowledge, and he has a treach-
erous heart within him, this is the falsest thing chat God hath
made for man, this the most distressing of all to discern. For
you cannot know man’s mind nor woman’s,? before you have
proved it, like as of a beast-of-burden. Nor could you guess
tt, as if at any time you had gone to @ ware exposed for sale,?
for oftentimes appearances‘ deceive the judgment.

Pray, son-of-Polypas, to be foremost neither in dignity nor
wealth :5 but only let there be luck to a man.

-Nought among men is better than a father and mother, to
whom holy justice is a care.

No one,” Cyrnus, és himself the cause of loss 4nd gain: but
of both these the gods are givers. :

Nor doth any man toil, knowing within his heart as touch-


«| dvoxerog, i, q. dvdoyerog. Sylburg. Others read doyeroc.—pudpi¢
ewv—AéhyOe: for this construction see Matth. Gr. Gr. § 552, B.
Ruhnken reads pudpic. The reading yvdvdc is held by Brunck to
be equally admissible—by comparison of xvdpi¢ kvdvic, dxmdpic
dnidoie, pohuxpdg poduyvéc, x. 7. \.. which Hematerhusius has brought -
forward as words of like signification and equally sound form. .

« 2 ob yap dv sideing. With this and the two lines above compare
Plaut. Trinumm. 70—73, . ‘


Sunt quos scis esse amicos: sunt quos suspicor:
Sunt quorum ingenium atque animus fon pote noscier,
« , Ad amici partem an ad inimici pervenat.

* The rendering of Sylburg here, “ad rem emptitiam seu pro-
4mercalem,” seems more correct than Liddell and Scott’s Neate
come to market.’ Cf. Acharn. (Aristoph,) 758; Equit, 480, quote

by L. and S. Welcker reads dpror.
_ 4 iéat, outward appearances, unsubstantial, like Hylas’s shadow,
of which Propertius speaks, I. xx. 42,
Et modo formosis inckmbens nescius undis
_Errorem blandig tardat imaginibus.
5 dperny, dpevog, accusatives of limitation.
’ 6.Cf, Horace, Od. IV. iv. 25—35,


Sensere gad mens rite, quid indoles
Nutrita faustis sub penetralibus
Possent, quid Augusti paterhus
In pueros animus’ Nerones, &c. &c.
Cf. also Eurip. Heracl. 297, 298.
7 Ver. 138—142==Frere’s 58th Fragment, which he prefaces by
observing how superior was the rule of conduct, of ome enlight-
‘ened heathen to that which their religion authorized,


136—150, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. “ = « 925


‘ing the issue, whether ’tis well or ill. For oftentimes think-
ing that he Will bring about evil, he is wont to bring about
good, ay, and thinking to cause good, he causes ill. Neither
to any man do.as many ‘things as he may wish arrive: for
the bounds of stern impossibility hinder them. But we men
entertain vain thoughts, knowing nothing.? The gods accom-
plish all things after their own mind. :

None ever, son of Polypas, having deceived +a guest or
@ suppliant among mortals, has escaped the eye of the im-.
mortals,? ‘ Ss

Choose also rather to live religiously with small means, *
than to be rich, having gotten riches unjustly. In justice is
all virtue collectively, yea, and every man, Cyrnus, if just, is
good. Wealth indeed fortune gives even to a-man wholly
bad,® but excellence attends few men, O Cyrnus.-


4


» Cf. Soph. G&d, Tyr. 1186—1192; Hor. Od. I. xi. 1, 2; Juvenal,
Sat. x. 2, 3, .


Pauci dignoscere possunt 4
Vera bona atque illis multum diversa. '


2 dvOowror, be pdrara vouifapev. Cf. Psalm xciv. 11, “The Lord
knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity ;’’ and again,
(xxxix. 6,) “ Man walketh in a vain shadow ;’’ and Ixii, 9. ith
‘the next line ef. Hom. Od. viii. 571,

ra O& xev Aedg H Tedicerev
x dredeor’ ein, Ge ot pidroy Erdero Oupg. woos ,
' 8 Such persons would fall under. the wrath of Zede Zéveog and éke-
rhovog. Cf. Hom. Od. xiv. 57, mpde yap Atdc eiciv Gravrec Zeivoe re -
arwxoi rex ix. 270; and Virg. Ain. i. 131, Jupiter, hospitibus nam
-te-dare jure loquuntur. To violate the laws of hospitality was a sin
against gods and men. The stranger might be a god entertained
unawares. Cf. Pausan. VII. xxv. §1; and more in Smith’s Dict.
G. and R. Ant. p. 490. .
4 Bodbdeo, sc. paAAOY, Brunck; who alludes to the like omission
of “ magis’”’ in Ammianus Marcellinus, where we find, lib. X1X. xi.
7, gratanter is used for gratantius. Cf-ibid. XVII. xii. 19, “ op-
tabile quam ” for optabilius quam ; and xxviii. 1, § 18, Suspicatus
parum quam oportuerat missum. With the sentiment, cf. Proverbs
xv. 16: Psalm xxxvii.16; Agam. Aischyl. 774, dina de Adure pev iv
dvoxdrvore Sépacw. The 147th verse is quoted by Aristatle in his
Nicom. Ethics, v. 1. : 7;
6 Horace, Od. III: xxiv. 42—44; '
Magnum pauperies opprobrium jubet ;
Quid, vis et facere et pati, ,
Virtutisque viam deserit ardue,
' .@ i
4 ‘ .


+


226 + * MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 151-167,


Insolence, O Cyrnus, the god is wont to ‘present as the first


evil to the man, whom he is about to hold in no esteem: Ful-
ness, look you, breeds insolence,? whensoever wealth attends a
mean man, and one whose mind is not sound.

Do not ever, having become enraged at a man, O Cyrnus,
throw-in-his-teeth® heart-breaking poverty, or base want-of-
means.* For Jove, look you, inclines the scale now to one,


and now toanother, so that one while. they should be rich, :


and at another time have nothing.‘
Never ,speak in public, Cyrnus, big words; for no man
knows what.a night and day bring about for a man.5


Many, I wot, enjoy a mean mind, but a noble fortune :.


to whom that which seems ill turns out good. There are, too,

* who toil with both. good counsel and ill luck, but accom-
plishment does not follow their works.® .

No man is either wealthy or poor, mean or noble, without

the help of the gods.? One man has.one ill, another another ;


1 (Ver. 151—158==Frere’s Fragment xl.) Mr. Frere observes
that Coriolanus is an example of the insolence here deprecated.—
xe nv Oépevar. See below at ver. 820, rovrwy roe ywon Kipy’ ddiyn Te

EEL. . :

+ The Schol. at Pindar, Ol. xiii. 12, ascribes this verse to Homer.
Clement of Alexandria says that Solon wrote ricra: yap képog UBpw
br’ dv wodug GABog Sryra:—which Theognis alters by substitutin
raxp for woAbg. He compares Thucyd. III. xxxix. 5; where Arnol

* quotes Shaksp. Henry VI., “‘ Beggars mounted run their horse to

"death." For close parallels, cf. isch. Agam. 382, 383 ; Pind. Ol. xiii.

12, $Bpw, Képou partpa, Herod. viii. 77; the oracle of Bacis, ver. 4.

5 Cf. Hesiod, Op. et D. 717, pndé or’ obd\opévny weviny OvpopOépoy
avdpi Térhad” dvedigev. :

+ We may illustrate this by Hom. Od. xix. 78—80, jjeay yap
Spideg pada pupioe ddAda, Te WOAAG oloiv, T’e} Zhovor Kai dpveior Kadzor-
ra, AAG Zebe dddrake Kooviwy. Cf. Hor. Od. 1V. ix. 45; [. xxxiv.
14, 15, Hine apicem rapasx, Fortuna, &c., and III; xxix. 49—~53.


5 Compare Hor. Od. 1V. vii. 17, 18, . ‘
a Quis scit an adjicjant hodierne crastina summz
Tempora Di superi. _ -


Add to this Prov. xxvii. 1, “ Boast not thyself of to-morrow,’’ &c.

6 En. xii. 913, Sic Turno, quacunque viam virtuée petivit Suc-
cessum Dea dira,negat.

1 ybogu daipovoc, The gods are constantly called by Homer and
Hesiod dwripee tdwy, and the myth of Pandora’s box shows the
ascription of all mortals’ ills to the same sources. Hesiod, Op. et D.
we calls poverty. pardpwy déow aitv idyrwy, and see Eur, Alcest.


: '


167—183, MAXIMS oF THEOGNIS. ne i 227


but in strict trath, no one of mén whom the sun’ Jocks: tipon is
blest.! But whom thé gods honour, even he who finds fault, |
eommends, though there is no regard fora man.2

Pray to the gods, whose is great might ; nought pacbeey
to man without the gods, either good things or ‘bad.3

_ Poverty most of all things breaks down a noble man,‘ more
even, O Cyrnus, than hoary age. and hot-ague. And it in
truth he ought to flee, and to. cast it even into the deep, deep
sea,® and down steep rocks. For every man subdued by poverty
can neither say nor do anything, but his tongue is bound, One
ought then, Cyrnus, to seek alike over earth und the broad
back of the sea for a riddance from hard poverty.$ : To die,
dear Cyrnus, is better for a spose man than to live worn down
by hard poverty.’

_ We seek for well-bred rams, asses, and horses,® Cyrnas, and


® {Bog obdeig avOpirwy. Hor. Od. II, xvi. 27, Nihil est-ab omni
Parte beatum. Ov. Met. iii. 136, 187; Soph. Trach. 1—3,

? This and the line before signify that even the envious’ praise
the eyoerites of the gods, though for a man generally: they care


nue
o Horace, Od. IIT. vi. 8 :


Dis te minorem quod geris, imperas : $26 :
‘Hinc omne principium, huc refer exitum ‘
Di multa neglecti dederunt
\ Hesperiz mala luctuose. at
4 (Ver. 173—182=Frere’s Fragm. lxxxvi.)’ Mr. Frere refers this
fragment to the period of Theoghis’ long and needy exile in Sicily.
Horat. Ep. I. xviii. 24, speaks of ¢ Paupertatis pudor et fuga’ in the
same line.
5 This passage is referred to by Ammianus Marcellinus, xxix. 1,
§ 21, p. 503, Angustiis paupertatis attriti: cujus metu vel in mare
nos ire precipites suadet Theognis, poeta vetus et prudens.—peyarh-
tea. According to Hemsterhusius in Timeeus of Lucian, peyaxnrag
means only. huge, from xjjro¢. Butm. Lexil. 381, derives it from yde,
xaexw; and observes that from the old form of these with the «


came ktatw, to cleave, and xeddag. For #\Bd7wv'in next line see


Butmann, Lex. p. 330.

6 dileoOa, «x. t A. Thus did Hesiod’s father. See Works and
Days, 637—-0bK agevoc gedywr obde trovroy TE KaldABoy, ’AMAA caxjy
mweviny, THY Lede bidwat, *“

7 Ov. Trist. I. xi. 23, 24, °

Quocunque aspexi, nihil est nisi mortis imago,
Quam dubia timeo mente, timensque precor ;
said GY. Ovid of himself in his need and exile.
er. 1883—-196=Frere’s Fragm. x.) Compare Horace, Od. IV.
iv. py a4 3 ;
a2 : : :


,


-


, + ‘ ¢


228 * staxims .OF THEOGNIS. 184—205.
every one wishes that those from a noble breed should cover."
But a well-born man cares not to marry a mean woman,'a
mean man’s daughter, if he give her much wealth. No woman
refuses to be wife of a mean man tf he be rich, but prefers that
he be wealthy? instead of noble. *Tis ‘wealth they’ value;
noble man weds’ mean men’s daughter, and mean man the
daughter of the noble. Wealth is’ wont to mix the breed.
Then marvel not, son of Polypas, that the race of citizens is
obscured,? for noble is mixed with base.. ar

The man-of-rank weds the womarti-without-fame, he him+
self, look you, leads her homie, though he ‘knows that she is
base-born, because he is induced by her riches ; for stern
necessity urges him oy,‘ which also makes @ man’s mind
wretched. : 7 * .

But to whatsoever man riches shall have come from Jove,®
. and by just means, and with clean hands, they remain ever

stedfastly. Though.if a, man unjustly shall acquire beyond
what-is-proper with covetous spirit, or by an oath, having
* taken beyond what is just, at the moment he seems to bear off
some gain, but in the end again there is ill, for the mind of the
gods is wont to be superior.$
But these things deceive the mind of men; for-not at the
very time of the acts do the immortals take vengeance on


errors.’? But one ‘magn in his own person is wont to pay a.


Fortes creantur fortibus et. bonis :
Est in juvencis, est inequis patrum
’ Virtus. aaa
‘ The reading here, commonly read BicecOat, must be altered at
any rate to BjoacPa: after Botd\erat. It is rare in this tense: in a middle
sense, See a note of Brunck, who prefers to read erjoacQa, to get
for himself a wife. Hermann, zr7@eo@at. ;
? apvedy, a dissy]lable by synizesis. In the next line Zyque is the
aor. in a present sense, cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 506.
» * paypotoba. Cf. Hesiod, Op. et D. 325, psia d& pry pavpotior Ocoi.
4 kparspn —~ dvayen—the Seva necessitas of Horace.—ivrvn. Cf.
Pind. O]: i..51, tvrv’ dvdyea warpdeer. ¢
5° (Ver. 197--208=Frere’s Fragm. lvi.) xai xaQapdc. Hor. Sat. I.
iv. 68, At bene siquis Et puris. manibus vivat. Hesiod, Op. et D.
- 887, dyving cai Kabapiic. ©
¢ ue here, as in g former passage, the 37th Psalm, verses 7,
‘10, 35, 36. ne .
7 Non in ipso actu ulcisci solent Dei peccata. Brunck. In the
same spirit we have ir Hor. Od. III. ii. 31, 32. <


°


205223, MAXIMS- OF THEOGNIS. * ~ 229


bitter debt, another attaches ruin hereafter to his own chil-
dren.! . And another justice does not catch 3 for unscrupulous
death was beforehand sitting on his eyelids,? bringing fate.


To an exile, believe-me, none is a friend and faithful com- -


rade,? and this is more vexatious than banishment itse/f. ' .
Verily, to drink-much wine is bad,‘ but if a man drink it
prudently, ‘tis not bad but geod. * *


Cyrnus, direct a various. habit towards all your friends,

“mingling with your own the temper which each has, - Get
thee the temper ef the :polypus,® with-tangled-twisting-arms,
which on any ‘rock to which-he has attached himself appears
such as it is to look upon. Now follow this way, now be-
geome different im ‘complexion ; the wisdom of versatility is
something of a rapid kind.? Be not too indignant when-
citizens are in a state of disturbance, O Cyrnus ; but go on
the middle path, as I do. : 8

Whoso, look you, thinks that his neighbour knows nothing,


_ but that he himself alone possesses intricate counsels, he, I -


: Raro an tecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.


Punishment comes certainly though but slowly. -

! Hor. Od. III. vi. 1, Delicta majorum immeritus lues. Cf.
Hesiod, Op: et D. 284. .

? See instances of this image of death in Catull. lxii. 188, Non
tamen ante mihi languescent lumina morte. Propert. II,.iv. 17
(Paley); Hor. Od. L. xxiv. 5. : :

3 Ver. 209, 210=Frere’s Fragment ]xxxi.

* oivéy rot mivay. Cf. Hom. Od, xxi. 293,


olvdg os rower pedendrje, Sere kai ddXdove -

: Prdarret, So dv poy xavbev dy, pnd’ aiowa wig.

‘morte yup olvog wéAX’ dpaprdvey rout; Alexis, quoted by Clarke
_ad Hom. Od. 1c. And Panyasis, e¢ “Abpuslas, Fragma: A elvog
Hey Ovnroict Oey mapa Sépov apicroy, ivdpevog kata pitpov' inp
BErpoy O€ xépeoy. ,

5 Ver. 213—220—Frere’s Fragm. xiii. -

‘8 xovddrov. This is the sea-poly pus, Sepia Octopodia of Linnaus,
and Class. Museum, vol. iv. 887 (Art. the Zoology of Homer
and Hesiod). Homer mentions it in Od. v. 432, and Hesiod, Op. et
D. 524, mentions it under the term dvéereog, See also Plin. H. N.
ix. 29, : .

* 7 soamvév reis the reading of the Vaticanus Codex. ebrporing.
This was the talent of Ulysses. Cf. Hom, Od. i.1. With 220, ef.
881, and Ov. Met. ii. 137, Medio tutissimus ibis. Hor. Od. Il.


.


°


2 Oe
e , >


~


230 ; MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. ~ 223-237,


wot, is senseless, reft of sound mind:! for we all are ac-
quainted equally with crafty counsels. But-one chooses not:
to follow filthy lucre, whilst to another faithless wile-weav-
ings are more agreeable.? :

Now no limit of wealth has been made-clear to men,} for
they who of us now have most substance, strive after twice
as much. Who could satisfy all? ‘Riches verily to mortals
bécome folly.4 And from it up-starts ruin, which when Jove
shall send upon them worn-and-weary, one at one time and
another at another possesses. _

Though he be citadel and tower to an empty-minded


‘populace,® Cyrnus, the noble man gets little share of praise.


Nor longer, I wot, becomes it .us, as men in a state of
safety, to destroy, as it were, the walls of a city about to be
taken.®

To thee indeed I have given wings, wherewith thou wilt


' BeBdrappévoc, used here with a genitive, seems to me to be a

arallel canstruction to that in Agamemn. /Esch. 119, BdraBivra
Rictlue dpsuwy ; and Hom. Od. i. 195, "AAAd vy row ye Oeoi BAcr-
rovot keXevOov. In Latin it is equivalent to “ mente sana captus.”’
‘ 2 The imperfect &ov is used for the present. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr.
§ 505, 8, and Hesiod, Theog. 10.

3 Aristot. Pol. I. viii. p. 12, (Bekker, 13, § 1,) quotes this line as
one of Solon. With 128, '129, cf. “ Man hever is, but ever to be


’ blest.” Horace, Od. II. ii. 13, speaks of avarice as resembling dropsy,


“ Crescit indulgens sibi hydrops,” &c. Cf. also Ecclesiastes v. 10,


’. “ He that loveth silver shail not be satisfied with silver,” and iv. 8,


“ Yet. there is no end of all histabour; neither is his eye satisfied

with riches.” ‘
* xpnpard ro. Cf. Horace, Sat. IT. iii. 158, Quid avarus? Stul-

tus et insanus. And with the next two lines, see ibid. v. 122, 123,


Filius, aut etiam hee libertus ut ebibat heres,

Dis inimice senex, custodis, ne tibi desit ? 7
and Psalm xxxix. 6, ‘Surely they are disquieted in vain: he
heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them.”

3 dxodrodic wai wépyoc. Parallels to this figurative image of a
man of worth are to be found in dip. Tyr. 55—57; Thucyd. vii.
77: and in Latin, Hor. Qd.-II. xvii. 4, Grande decus columenque
rerum; Ter. Phowm. II. i. 57, Columen familie, &c.

® The emendation of Brunck is dAveiv, wéXewe WworEp, dAwooperne,
to be troubled, as if the state, &c. Perhaps the reading of the text
may stand, if we remove the comma at Advev. The passage seems
to mean, “it ill beseems us to aid in pulling down the walls,” (i, e.
the bettermost men, called dxpdrode cai répyoe in 233,) seeing that
the +é\e, the empty-minded populace, will be led captive sooner
or later, and we must keep it up as long as we can. :


237250. MAXIMS .OF THEOGNIS. _231


fly! over boundless deep, and all earth, easily borne-aloft ; and
thou wilt be present at-all banquets and feasts, resting in the
mouths of many ;? thee too with sweet-voiced pipes young
men gracefully lovely shall sing well and tunefully ; and
whensoe’er thou comest to the much-lamenting homes of
Hades, beneath earth’s murky vaults, never more, even though
dead, shalt thou lose thy renown, nor,? I ween, escape notice,
having ever imperishable fame among men, 0 Cyrnus, whilst
thou tarriest in the land of Greece,‘ or. up and down the isles,
crossing over the fishy barren deep, and not seated on the
backs of horses ; but, the tasteful gifts of violet-wreathed®


1 (Ver. ’237—254=Frere’s Fragm. li.) wrépa used of song. See
Hor. Od. II. xx. 1, 2,
. Non usitata nec tenui ferar
‘ Penna, biformis per liquidum gthera.
Cf. Od. I. vi. 2; Tibull. I. iv. 63,

~ Quem referent Muse, vivet; dum robora tellus,

Dum ceelum stellas, dum’ vehat amnis aquas. :
ores reipevog év oropact. Cf. Ennius quoted by Cicero, Tusc.
.D. i. 15, o
Nemo me lacrimis decoret nec funera fletu
Faxit, cur? volito vivu’ per ora virum. ;

Two lines below, xaAd re rai Acyéa, adj. neut. plur, used adverbially,
‘as in Latin, Torva tuens, transversa tuentes, sera comans Narcissus,
Virg. Cf, Matt. Gr. Gr. § 446, 447.
® So Hor. Od. III. xxx: 6, 7,
Non omnis moriar, multaque pars mei
Vitabit Libitinam ; usque ego postera
- Crescam laude recens.
So Harmodius and Aristogiton live in the Scolium of Callistratus, and
Lord Denman’s translation of it. iAra@’ ‘Appdde, obri aw riOyneag,
* Loved Harmodius, thou never shalt die ;
The poets exultingly tell,
. That ‘thine is the fulness of joy,
; Where Achilles and Dioined. dwell.””
* ‘BAAdde yijv. For this use of a gentile substantive for an adj.
see Matt. Gr. Gr. § 429, 4;. Herod.'iv. 78, ‘E\\dda' yAdeoay :


Wordsw. Gr. Gr. § 121.—-dvd. vacovg. These were a great field of |


song. Byron refreshes their immortality in “ The isles of Greece,
the isles of Greece,” &e. :

5 iosrepavwy, violet-crowned. This epithet was a favourite with
the Athenians.’ Cf. Aristoph. Acharn. 687; Eq. 1323: in both used of
Athens and Athenians. According to commentators on these pass-
ages itis a Pindaric word, With the next line cf. Hor. Od. IV. viii. 27,

: Dignum laude virum Musa vetat mori,
Coelo Musa beat.. :


+


232. MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 250—264,


Muses will convey thee, for with all, to whom, even among
posterity, minstrelsy is a care, thou wilt be likewise, as long
as there shall be earth and sun. I, however, meet with small
reverence from thee, but with words thou deceivest ‘me,
as a little child! That which is most just is most noble;
health most preferable ; but the gaining the object of one’s
love ts the most pleasant thing.?.

Iam as.it were a well-bred racing mare,3 but I carry a
very mean man: and this to me is most vexatious. Often
ere now have I been ready to burst the bridle and flee, hav-
ing thrust from me my mean-charioteer.

’ Wine is not drunk by me,‘ since.with a tender maiden, an-
other man, far meaner than I, has the.upper hand. Cold
‘water to my sorrow her dear parents drink with her, so that
she at the same time fetches water and bears me groaningly.


Mr. Frere gees in the lines 249-252 an allusion to the two means
of fame in Greece, Olympic victories in the chariot race, and bardic
celebration ; whence the connexion of Muses and horses!

1 The poet urges that Cyrnus requites his celebration by want of
respect, and by deceiving him. Mi . ‘Frere includes, the next six
lines in the same fragment, in which case we must suppose the od
tig tog of Theognis to be what he did not think he met with from


Cyrnus, aidwe,


* These lines are quoted by Aristot. Eth. Nicom. I. 8, where *


however the 2nd line is #dtorov de wigu’, od rie pg Td TuxEty.

3 aeOXin. Vinetus, according to Sylburg, derives this allegory of
the racing mare from Hom. Il. xxiii. 295. Callimachus, H. in Cer.
* 110, and Oppian, Cyneg. iv. 107, call the race-horse de@dopdpor.

-kai roy de0Xoddpoy kai roy modephioy immav. With the 260th line we
may compare Theocr. xv. 84, dp0d¢ aviora 6 rbppoc—édiaxonocirar

» toy dyovra,
* Theoghis in this and the five next lines complains of his rejection

by the parents of the maiden he loves, who had been betrothed to a’

peveon of far lower rank,(262,) but whose affections he deems still

xed on him. “ On Theognis going to see his love, he finds her sit-"
ting with her parents; but vefunes to drink wine, proposing water
as his proper drink: She goes to fetch it, when Theognis takes the


opportunity of embracing her.”” J. Donaldson, (Edinburgh,) from ,


whose Lyra Greca, p. 184, this account is derived, considers the
verses 257—~260, imnog tyw—ij)vtdxov properly to conie after ver. 266,
and to express the subject of her tender speech. wWvxpdy sc. idwp
in ver. 263. Cf. Herod. ii. 37. J. Donaldson places a full stop after
pot, taking Wuyxpdy poe as the speech of Theognis: he reads too’ in
ver.261, éeimoy for éasi wapad. Gaysford states that Cl. Wassenburg
makes one elegy by combining ver. 257—260, 859—862, 579--584,
457—460, with this passage.


‘


Q


265—284,. MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 233


Then having clasped the damsel round, I kissed her neck,
and she spake tenderly with her lips. + |

Known, look you, is poverty, even though it be strange,
for it neither comes to the market nor the law-suits, For
everywhere it has the lesser share, and everywhere.’tis mock-.
ed:' everywhere also, wheresoever it may be, it is ‘equally
hostile. °

Equally, in truth, to mortal men the gods have given the
other things,? to wit, wretched old age and youth. But’tis the
worst of all. the evils among men, and more unlucky than
death and all diseases, after that you have reared children,
and afforded them all things’ suitable, and laid up money for
them, having experienced much trouble, if they hate their

’ father,® and pray that he may perish, and abhor him as if he
were a beggar coming to them. :

It is'‘likely that a mean man would ill respect the rules of
justice, since he stands-in-awe-of no divine-vengeance here-
after.4 For a worthless mortal may take up many impracti-
cable things at the moment, and deem that he arranges al
well. - : :

Relying on none of the citizens, advance one step, trusting


' bviucrog. Bekker reads émipueroe, scoffed at, from pizw, be-
cause, says Camerarius, the poor puxrnpiZovrat bx’ ddAwy. e

2 (Ver. 274—278==Frere’s Fragm. cvii.) The lines, he says, show
that Theognis had his return embittered by the undutiful be-
haviour of his family, which had grown up, in his exile from Me-
gara to Sicily. ° .

8 roy wari’ ty@aipovec—the construction seems to requite é or
bri. An illustration of the whole of this fragment is our Shakgpeare’s
King Lear, e. g. among many other passages, Act I. sc. iv.,

“ Ingratitude ! thou marble-hearted fiend,
~More hideous, whén thou show’st ‘thee in a child,
Than the sea-monster!*? " ; : :
and again, _ .
“ How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is
To have a thankless child!’ .
rarapévrat 6? drodtoba, The inf. here seems to stand instead of the
sscusntiy? after carapdopat, which is the usual construction, Hom.

ix. 454. :

* &&épevov, .An Homeric word ‘only. found in the pres. and im-
perf. Il. i. 21; Od. xvii. 401, &c. In 281, awédapva is i. gq. aphyava:
ef. 481, formed from dadXapoc, like vovuuveg from yovupog, Liddell
and Scott’s Lexicon. :

5 (Ver. 28]3—292—Frere’s Fragm. lxv.) moro¢ is used here actively,


234 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 284304,


neither oath nor’ covenant, not even if 2 man, wishing to
give pledges, chooses! to give Jove, the supreme king of im-
‘mortals, a3 his surety. For verily in a city so malignantly-
blaming as éhis, nothing pleases, and according as any one does,
so they are called ‘far the more ‘senseless.2 But now the ills
of the well-born are good things to the mean of men, and be-
- come a law to the devious. or a sense-of-shame hath
perished : impudence and insolence, having mastered justice,
possess the whole earth. : :

Neither does a lion always feast on fiesh: but him, strong
though he be, yet nevertheless perplexity seizes.?
. Toa babbling man silence is the hardest burden, but an

unlearned man, if he speak, is so to all in whose presence he
may be. All hate him: yet the mixing up of such a man in
a banquet is necessary. Nor does he wish to be a friend,
when ill has chanced to a man,* even though he may have been
born of one and the same womb. ' Be bitter and sweet, harsh
and kind,} to hired servants and slaves and neighbours near-
your-doors. . , :

It is not meet often-to-change® a good life, but to keep peace:
and to alter the ill life, until you have brought it right.


_as in Eisch. Pers. 55. Cf. Jelf, Gr. Gr. § 256, obs.—mdda révde
seems to be used in the same construction as digitum transversum
in Plautus, Aulul. 1. i. 18, Si hercle tu ex isto loco digitum trans-
versum aut latum unguem excesseris. In the next verse cuvnpociyg
is from guvinxe; and is used by Hom. II. xxii. 261.

1 @0:\e. Hermann prefers i@éAg. ;

.? de 88 7d coat,” In place of this evidently corrupt -reading we
adopt Hermann’s emendation, we de ree, we diet wodddy dvodrBdrEpog,
i. e. ut quisque placet, ita stolidior multo audit ceteris civibus. die
is here used in the sense of “audit, is spoken of,’ ‘‘male audit,”
&c. For ierpamédoros T. Faber, Brunck, and others read etrpamé-
Aow, * easily-turning.’ om ; :

3 Not even the lion can insure his meal; chance, or, as we Chris-
tians know, God, gives or withholds it. Cf. Psalm civ. 21. For the
word ewridw in the next line, ef. Theog. 363, eb card rov by Opdy :
Theocrit. 1d. xv. 88; Hesiod, Op. 372. ;

4 ob0° 802d. Cf. Hor. Od. I. xxxv. 26, Diffugiunt cadis Cum feece
siccatis amici. In the next line é« pra¢’ yaorepéc is i. q. Suoydorptog.
Hom. Il. xxiv. 47. :

5 In this line Camerarius for daqvij¢ proposes éxnrije, i. e. rpoon-
wig, benignus; in order that there may be a similar antithesis be-
tween érnvic and dpyadéog as between mixpd¢ and yrucde.

¢ xtyehigerv. Metaphorically, “ to change-often,”” properly, to wag
the tail, as the bird kiyedog, the wagtail, does. Liddell and Scott,


305—323, | MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. : 235 .


The mean are not wholly mean from the womb, but through
having cemented a friendship with mean men.! And they
have learned worthless works, and slanderous words, and in-
solence, supposing that all was true which those men said.

Among companions-at-a-meal, 2 be a prudent man; and
deem that all escapes his notice, as if absent. Know how to
endure jokes, and be brave out-of-doors, understanding what
temper each has.

Among the mad indeed I .am exceeding mad ;8 but among
the just I am of all men most just.

Many mean men: are rich, look you; and noble. men
are poor, yet with these we will not exchange their wealth
for our excellence :* for the latter is ever secure, but riches
now one and now another of men possesses.

Cyrnus, a noble man hath a judgment always firm,® and


is bold when set amidst blessings and amidst ills. But if the-


god shall present toa mean man substance uand wealth, in-his-
folly he is unable to contain his meanness.®
Oo not ever on a slight pretext ruin'a man? that is a


€ Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 33. where St. Paul quotes from Menander or Eu
ripides, gOipovew 409 xpio0" éuidiat eaxai, and Anthol. Lat, i, 13,
Qui mali sunt, non fuere matris ab.alvo mali,
Sed malos faciunt malorum falsa contubernia.
ce, also Hermione’s spéech, beginning at ver. 930, in the Aridioius
of Eurip.

7 Wee 309—312— =Frere’s Frag, xxxviii.) In the 31st line pw
must be referred to wervupéivoc arip, as if it were not in apposition
to od, in which case the construction and sense are clear. elcker
quotes a saying of Chilo, yAorrne Kpartiv, rai padora ty woe
In 811, Welcker reads etc dé gépor, and “let him contribute,”
allusion to the Zpavor of the Athenians and others. He seems to un.
derstand the line above, ‘and it is seemly that every one should
forget himself, as if absent.’?

3"Welcker compares Scol. 19, ody por Hawvopipy paiveo, ody cdppore
owgpsve,

* dtaperope0a in this construction is like the Latin “muto,” Hor.
II. xvi. 18, Quid terras alie ealentes Sole mutamus ?


5 (Ver. 319--322—Frere’s Fragm. liv.?) Cf. at 319, 320, Hor. Od.


IT. iti. 1—4,
/Equam memento rebus in arduis
Servare mentem: non secusin bonis
Ab insolenti temperatam,
Letitia.
® ddpaivewy, x. 7d. The sentiment may be paralelled by Shaksp.,
se Beggars mounted ride their horse to death.”


er. 823—328-=Frere’s Fragm. xliii.) The poet deprecates ©


,


236 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 393—338,


friend, trusting, Cyrnus, to a harsh slander. If a man in
every instance should be ‘wrath at the faults of his friends,
never would. men be in-concord or in-friendship one with the
other. For faults follow-after mortal men,! Cyrnus: but the
gods choose not to endure them.

. Even the slow man with-good-counsel hath caught the
swift man in the pursuit, Cyrnus, with the aid of the straight-
forward justice of the immortal gods.?

Quietly, as I do, pursue the middle way with thy feet,
nor give to one party the property of the other, O Cyrnus.

Never, Cyrnus, kindly-treat an exile on the ground of
hope,‘ for not even, if he has returned home, does he become
any more the same.

Make-too-much haste in nothing, the mean is best of all:®

. and thus, Cyrnus, thou shalt have excellence, which too it is

bard to get. oe

May Jove grant me both requital of my friends, who love
me,® and that I may be more powerful than my foes. And so


resentment for a slight offence: In 324 we have the ain d:aGodig
long “in arsi,”’ as in Pind. Pyth. 11. 140, dtaBorcdy drodaruc.  -

dy dvOpdmovsw Exovrat. The construction would be clearer if
_ weread dp’ or éa’ for 4v here. Ruhnken suggests réiAovra:r—when
no such alteration would be needed. The same commentator points
to the next line as the source of a sentiment expressed in'‘an epi-
gram quoted by Demosth. de Cor, p. 822, R., undév duagrety dori Dewy,
kai wavra KaropQotry, F

? With the couplet compare Hom. Od. viii. 329, Kuyaver rou Bpa-
ode oxbv. Eccles. ix. 11, “ I returned and saw under the sun that’
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.”

“8 Frere’s Fragm. xxxvii—Welcker quotes Phocyl. ap. Aristotle,
TOAAG pécoroty dpsora: pékoog Oérw ty wédee elvar, xahdoy novyia, bmto-
garég xpowiraa; Periander. : .

‘ The exile spoken of is marked by the words ia’ Amid: to be
one of the faction which at the ‘time was worsted—in the civil dis-
sensions of Greek cities. These lived ever, as we see from the his-
torians, in the hope that their party would again get the upper
hand, and recall them. Welcker compares Agam. Aésch. 1668,
old’ éyd pedyovrag dvdpag thridac orroupévove, and Eurip. Phen. 396,
ai 0” shiridee Béoxovar gvyadac, we Adyos..

5 So Hesiod, Op. et D. 694, wérpa gurdoceoOan, ratpsc & imi waow
Gp.orog. Cleobulus Said, pérpor dpeoror. ‘

6 (Ver. 337~-350=Frere’s Fragm. Ixxviii.) Donaldson, in Lyra
Greca, thinks that Theognis here expresses 4 very determined wish
and prayer. In 838, peiloy duvyeduevor is paralleled by Aristoph.
peilor divacGat ; and Démosth. peiloy i¢xtew-—Scheef. reads durqao-

€


*


339357, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 237


should I have the character of being a god among men, if the
fate of death should overtake me, when I had recompensed
them. But, O Jove, accomplish nie, thou Olympian god, a
seasonable prayer, grant me to experience in return for ills
some good also. But oh might I die,! unless I find some
cessation from evil cares, and if thou givest bué sorrows in
return for sorrows. For thus is my lot; and there does not
appear to me a means of vengeance on the men who perforce
_ have plundered and possess my property; but like a dog? I
have crossed a mountain-torrent, having shaken off every- .
thing in the rain-swollen stream. Whose black blood may it
be mine to drink :3 and oh might the good Genius aid me,
who would accomplish these things to my mind.
O worthless poverty, why tarriest thou, failing to go* to an-
other man ? and why, prithee, dost love me, not desiring it ?
" Nay, go, and visit another house, nor along with us be ever
sharing this wretched life.
Be of good courage, Cyrnus, in ills, for amid blessings too
thou wast wont to rejoice,® when the lot fell to thee to have
a share of these too, And even as thou hast received ill out


pévy after dSoiy rioty. Jacobs reads Oéiy, instead of defy, in which
case SOvvnodper will-stand. In ver. 340 we have. the heathen elevat-
ne vengeance, not mercy, to the rank of the Deity’s highest attri-
utes, 3

' “May I die, if I don’t find for myself,” &c. J. Donaldson,
Lyra Gree. He reads in the next line doiyy 7’, (instead of Soine with
Turneb. and others,) ‘ and if I don’t give woes for woes.” *

2 The poet likens himself to a dog which has swum through a
torrent, in that he had been stript of everything, and is as bereft ot
all his goods, as the dog, whose meat, &c., the flood has swept


aie i
_ % With this wish compare Hom. I], xxii. 346.
: al yio ruc abriy pe pivoe cai Oupdg dvein
Gp’ drorapvopevoy xpia Mpsvat ola p’ sopyac.
Cf. II. iv. 85 ;' xix. 210, 7 wo
4 With zpodtrotca thus used cf. Soph. El. 134, ovd’ ew apohe-
meiy Té0e, [6n ob oTevaysiv, x.r. dX. Liddell and Scott. .
§ Frere’s Fragm. Ixxi. (2). Cf. Hor. Od. ILiii. 1; Sat. 11. ii, 136, ”
. Inthe next line éréBaddev with ace: and- infinitive mood is paral-
leled by Herod. ii. 180, Tote Ashpote de téBadde reraprnpdéptav—
wapaoxsiv (Lidd. and Scott), Cf, Herod. iv. 115, rd emBdddov:_sc,
pipog, with ver. 358, éxdtva wed. Cf. Hor. Epist. [. ii. 22,
: 5 -Aspera multa
Pertulit, adversis rerum amersabilis undis.


“1


’


'


(238 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 358-373.


‘of blessings, even so also, praying to the gods,’ try to emerge
again.. Neither display it too much :! for when exhibit-
ing any ill, O Cyrnus, you have but few carers for your ca-
. lamity.

The heart'of a man, look you, O Cyrnus, having suffered
great loss,.is weakened ;? but when he takes vengeance, after-
wards it is increased. es

Beguile your enemy with good words:* but when he shall
have come into your power, take vengeance on him, having
admitted of no excuse. :

Restrain thy mind,‘ and let mildness evér attend thy
tongue: the heart, look you, of mean men is more sharp than,
is meet. .

I cannot understand the mind of the citizens;>-which they
entertain : for neither if I do them good, nor ill, do ¥ please

- them: and many blame me, alike the base-born and the well-
born : but nore of the unwise can imitate me.

Do not, goading me perforce, and against my will, drive
me under the waggon’s yoke, drawing me, Cyrnus, too much


into friendship. '

' Welcker quotes a Fragm. of Pindar, (171,) ed reg avOpwrrocoe
Osdadoroe drAdra Kakérag mpooréiyy tabrav gKérer KpvaTey EotKxer,
and a saying of Periander, duorvymy xpiare, iva pn roig ixPpod¢
eddpavae. ie

% Welcker here compares Hesiod, Op. et D. 93, and Odyss. xix.
360, aia yap éy raxérnre Bporat karaynoaoxKovor, (the line in Hesiod
is probably spurious,) and Odyss. xx. 18, rérAaOe 5%, xpadin, wai
Kovrepov GAXo Ter’ EtANS. bes :

3 gwriadds. Cf. 295 and 488, and Soph. Antig. 756. With this sen-
timent compare Hesiod, Op. et D. 711, dic réga rivvucat, peyynpé-
voc, x. TX. This was the creed too of Archilochus, Solon, and most
of the sages of'Greece. Aristot. Pol. vii. 6, however speaks nobler
language, and more akin to Christian forgiveness of injuries.

+ Hamlet, I. iii. (Speech of Polonius to Laertes,) “ Give thy
thoughts no tongue, nor ay unproportioned thought his act.”” In
Proverbs xx. 23, we find, “ Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue
keepeth his soul from troubles;’’ and in xxxi. 26, ‘‘ And in her
tongue is the Jaw of kindness.” , -

5 (Ver. 367—370=Frere’s Fragm. xviii. latter part.) Theognis
complains of the arbitrium popularis aure, (Hor. Od. III. ii. 20,) but
consoles himself that “ Fools cannot imitate the man they blame.”
With 369, 370, cf. an adage quoted as of Diogenes, pwphoerai ric
Badtoy T pysnoerat.

6 xevrwy. Cf. Hom. Il. xxiii. 337, drap rév Sefdv txmoy xivoa
époxdnoag. The metaphor is from the use of the goad to drive ani-
mals: the moral, that it is better to lead than to drive.


373—393, + MAXIMS QF THEOGNIS. 239


Kind Jove, I marvel at thee, for thou rulest over all,!
having honour thyself and vast power. Well knowest thou
the mind of men, and the spirit of each ; and thy -might, O
king, is highest of all. How is i¢ then, O son of Saturn, that
thy purpose has-the-heart to hold men éhat are sinners, and
the just man, in the same portion,? both if thy mind shall have
been turned towards moderation, and if towards the inso-
lence of men yielding to unjust deeds? Neither is anything
defined by the-deity for mortals, nor the way in which walk-
ing @ man may please the immortals. But nevertheless they
hold wealth harmless ; while they who keep their mind aloof
from worthless deeds, still are-wont-to-find the mother of
poverty, want-of-means,* though they love what is just;
want-of-means, which leads on the spirit of men to error,
-hurting their minds within their bosoms by streng necessity.
So a man has-the-courage, though he wishes it not, to bear
many disgraces,> yielding to want, which truly teaches many
lessons, to wit, falsehoods, deceits, and mischievous strifes, to
a man even against his will :6 and they seem to him no evil,
for it also breeds vexatious lack-of-means. But in poverty
both the mean man, and he who is far better-born are


' Ver. 823—-328—Frere’s Fragm. lvii. ' ,

2 Compare with this complaint against the seeming lack of differ-
ence made by thé Divine Being between the righteous and untight-
eous, Psalm Ixxiii. 3—5, 11, 12, &e. - ¢ 7m

3 ixi owppocdyny roegO7 véog. For~the construction here Welc-
ker refers to'Schefer on Soph. Antig. 1107,- 90’ ia’ GAXorow rhére.
In ver. 382 the MSS. have 6ddv jvrw’ idv, in which case the con-

‘struction will be that of the antecedent attracted to the case of the
relative. Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 474, a., and Virg. An. i. 578, Urbem,
quem statuo, vestra est. Terence, Eunuch. IV, iii. 11, Eunuchum,
quem dedisti nobis, quas turbas dedit. . Spe Gwent

* pnrep’ dpnyéviny. This appears to have been a phrase of Al
czeus also. “See Asch. S.c. Theb. 224, weOapyia rij¢ ebzpatiag |
pntne, where see Blomfield’s note.”” Welcker. mpodys in the next
line is the ““ prolectat’’ of Ovid, Fast. iv. 433, Preeda puellares
animos prolectat inanis. . .

“5 rode 0’ ob« 2édwy, se, Tte, or a subject implied in ypyposivy .
eixwy. Welcker compares for this case of a suppressed subject
Hom. Od. xxiv. 107, &c. &., od rev ddAwe Kptvdpevoc héEauro xara *
ten dvdpag dpicrove, where however others read dAdog, Eurip.

on, 1388. : .

® dvdpa cai ede tOiAovra, x. r.X. For the double accusative after .
verbs of teaching, &c. see Matt. Gr. Gr. § 415, 8. The same con-
struction is very common in Latin. ;


,


240 ° MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 394—412,


seen,! whensoever, I mean, want.takes-hold-on-them. For the
spirit of the former indulges in unjust thoughts, no, nor even
is a right sentiment ever inherent in his breast: but the
-mind of the latter on-the-contrary follows neither bad nor
good fortunes: it is right however that the bettermost man
should have the courage to meet both the one and the other.?

Respect your friends,’ and flee oaths that-ruin-men; but
avoid, and give-heed-to,. the wrath of immortals.

Make too much haste in nothing: in all the works of man
the-fitting-season‘ is best: often a man, seeking gain, is
hastening towards rank-dnd-honours, whom fortune readily
draws astray into a great sin, and is wont to make him deem

- without difficulty that what is really evil, that is good: but
that what is good-and-useful, that is bad.5 .

Most dear though thou art, thou hast erred ; and J, look
you, am nowise to blame, but thou thyself hast chanced on
sentiments not good.

No treasure wilt thou lay up for thy children better than a
sense-of-shame, which also, Cyrnus, attends good men.

Of no man, whom judgment and whom power attends,é O
Cyrnus, seem thou to be a worse companion.


' Something sintilar is the sentiment. of Iolaus in Eurip. Heracl.

302, 303,
° ro dvoruyic yap nvyéve’ apuverar
tic Svoyeveiag paddov.

2 ra re nai ra, ‘tam mala quam bona,’’ Welcker, who illustrates
the phrase from Pinddr. I have not been able to find the passages
to which he refers—though Matthie, instances Nem. vii. 31, which
will be a similar phrase. ‘

* Welcker quotes here a saying of Solon, xpw rote Oeoic. gidovg
eboéBe. yoveic aidod, and Sosiad. Sept. Sap. Dict. “Opry py xpo. In
ver. 400 Welcker with others read éyrpéze’ for évrpéizeo, .

4 (Ver. 401—406=Frere’s Fragm. lxiv.) Cf Hesiod, Op. et D.
696, Mérpa pudAdocecOat' Kaspdc 5° éxi waow aporoc. And Diog. L. i.
41, quoted by Welcker: «

"Hy Aaxedatpdrviog Kéthwv odgog, be rad Edsée.
Mnoiy dyav’ Kawy ravta wpdceort xadd,


In the next line deriv is i. q. opes, divitias. Jacobs reads drarny.
, § This is of the nature of judicial blindness, such as is denounced
in Isaiah v. 20, Woe unto them ‘that call evil good and good evil;
that put darkness for light and light for darkness; that put bitter
for sweet and sweet for bitter.” Ver. 407, 408=Frere’s Fragm. xlix.

* Gaysford reads déxee—in which case, as Brunck observes, the
couplet may be thus rendered in Latin, “‘ Homine rullo, qui ve-


413425, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. - 241


But when I drink, I am not, about to become so drunk,! nor
does wine lead me on, so far as to speak a harsh word respect-
ing you. _ :

‘None like me can I find, when I seek a trusty associate,?
in whom there is no guile. But when I have come to the
touch-stone I am rubbed beside daser metal, as gold beside
lead, and a mind of superiority is in me.”

Marly things pass me by, even though I am conscious of
them: but of necessity I am silent,4 knowing our power.

To many men well-fitting doors are not set on their tongue,®
and many things are a care to them, which should be uncared
for. For oft that which is bad is better, if stored-up within,
and good, having come abroad, is better than what is bad.6

Of all things indeed to men on-the earth, not to be born,”


lit possitque bene facere, pejor amicus videaris. Welcker reads
Soxei, when we shall have to look to the antecedent of ¢ in the next
line for the subject of the verb doxei. Welcker quotes Hom. Od.
viii. 585, 586, . ; é
éxai ob piv ri Kadryvqrow xepstw
ylyveran, bc Kev éraipog wy remvopiva eidy,


1 Owoqtopar: for this sense of @wefcow compare Theogn. 470,
508, 840, 880; Aristoph. Acharn. 1135. Liddell and Scott consider
the sense metaphorical, “‘ to,arm oneself against the cares of life,”
and compare Horace, Epist. I. v. 17, In prelia trudit inermem.
See also Arist.. Vesp. 1193. In the'next line téye is in a future
sense, “ exagitabit,”’ ayeo@as r9 doyg—ird abripi. Welcker. .

2 (Ver. 415—420—Frere’s Fragm. xxx.) In ver. 417 we have allu-
sions to the processes of the ‘‘ assay ” office, as Mr. Frere observes,
‘comparing Fragment xxxiv. (117—-120).—odiBdog, black lead, was
used as a test of gold. Cf. 1101. Welcker says’it is here used for
aurum adulterinum, asin Aristoph. Nub. $13, ,

3 bmepreping védog, a cireumlocution for vdog bwéprepog, as in St. —
Luke xvi. 8, rod pipiiva ‘rig aduciac, where see Dr. Burton’s note
thereupon. Ao

4 GN’ bn” dvayeng Lys. Welcker quotes Solon, voiy Hyepcva
mow, & 0 dv oye ph déye. eidwe ciya.

5 Cf. Psalm cxli. 38, “ Set a watch over my mouth, O Lord. Keep
the door of my lips.” Shaksp. Hamlet, “Give every man thine
ear, but few thy tongue.” Welcker compares Soph. Philoct. 188,:
aOupécropog dyw. Eurip.Orest. 903, dvio ric dOupdyhwooog. Aris~
toph. Ran. 838, éxyorr’ayddtvov axparic dBipwroyv ordua. In the
next line Stobzus has dAaAnra wéde for duédyra péder. i:

* Welcker illustrates the construction of this verse by Pindar,
Ol. ix, 156, dvev Je Oe0d ceoryapévor ob oxardrepoy xorp’ Exacroy.

7 (Ver. 425—428= Frere’s Fragm. ixxxv.) For this sentiment see
Soph. Cid. C. 1225-1228; Hom. Il. xvii. 448; Bacchyl. Fr. 8, 6va-

‘ R-


242 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 426—441,


and not to-see the rays of the piercing sun, is best: but that

when born he should, as soon as possible, cross the gates of

Baa and lie low, having heaped together for himselt mach
~ earth.

To beget and nurture a child is easier than to implant right
feelings :? this at all events no one has yet contrived, in mak-
ing the senseless sensible; and the mean noble; but if a god
had granted this, I wot, to the sons of Aésculapius,’ to cure
meanness, and the infatuated minds of men, many and great
wages would they earn. And if mind were capable-of-being
ereated and implanted in man,‘ pever would worthless son
have been born of worthy father, but he would have been
heedfal of prudent discourses,’ But by teaching you will
never make the mean man noble.

He is a fool, who has my mind indeed in safe-keeping, but
pays no attention® to his own proper mind.

No one, look you, is in all things blest, but the nobler man


Toise ph} Pivar Pipioroy, Mnd dediov -mrpoodetv giyyog SAPr0¢g 3! ovdeig

poray mavra ypdvov. Eurip. Fragm. Belleroph. xx. 2, xpdriroy
elvan onpepe % divat Bporp. Cicero ap. Lactant, ili. p. 304, Non nasci
longé optimum, nec in hos scopulos incidere vite : proximum autem,
si natus sis, quamprimum ex incendioeffugere.

, brapnodpevor, having heaped together for a tomb or barrow.
Cf. Herod. viii. ‘24, where’ Valken. quotes this emendation, instead
of which Sextus'.reads yatay igecoapevov, which is approved by
Hemsterhusius and Brunck.

* (Ver. 429—488—Frere’s Fragm. xi.) Mr. Frere points out that
Theognis here concludes on the affirmative side as to the question
“ whether virtue and vice were innate,’’ with Pindar and Euripides.

3-’Agxdnmeddacg, the sons of Hsculapius. If these, says the poet,
could heal moral maladies as well as bodily, how great would be
their reward! For the powers of AMsgulapius see Eurip. Alcest.
122—129. Plato in his Meno, p. 95, E. (vol. ix. p. 264, Ast), quotes
the 434th and four following lines.

* roumrdy, EvOeroy. These words, as Welcker observes, are to be
construed in a potential sense, as in instances which he quotes from
Hom, Il. ii. 861, dwéBXnrog, 376, dxpncroc: Esch. Prom. V. 154, adv
1 Toe dedpotc: Asch. Pers. 168, péptzv’ appacroc, infanda cura: Tacit.

German. 20, Inexhausta pubertas. So we should construe here,

“ capable of being made and implanted.” :

5 reOdpevog, sed patri obsecuturus fuisset.—Plato in his Protago-
ras, 324, D. (vol. i. p. 38, Ast), uses the same argument, viz. that

. if virtue could be taught, good fathers would have good sons.
* This sense and construction of émorpigerat is illustrated by

Welcker from Eurip. Ion, 352, cairae réAX’ ixeorpagn xédoy,

¢


‘


442—458, ~' MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. . 248


has the heart! to endure what is evil, and still is not. known-
to-all. But the baser man neither in woe nor weal knows
how to remain in possession of spirit: the gifts of the gods
come variously to mortals; yet it is right to have the courage.
to hold the gifts of the immortals,? such as they give.

If you choose to drench me, undefiled water shall flow ever |
clear from the top of my head: and you shall find me in all
deeds like-as refined gold,? ruddy to look-on, when rubbed by
touch-stone; the colour of which from above the dark rust doth

- hot touch, nor mould, but it has its brilliancy4 always pure.

O man, hadst thou obtained a share of judgment, even as
thou hast of folly, and hadst thou been sensible as thou art
senseless, to many of these citizens thou wouldst appear an-
object-of-envy, just as now thou art nothing-worth.>

A young woman, look you, is not an expedient thing. for
an old man:® for she, like a light boat, does not heed the


' (Ver, 441—446=Frere’s Frag. liv.) rodw¢'in ver. 442 signifies sus-
tinet, perfert, obdurat: seeMonk, Alcestis 285, for the various senses
of rAdw and roApaw—Kodx éidydog dpe, “ keeps his inward sorrows
unrevealed.” Frere,. The character indicated by the next two lines
does not, (as Horace has it, Od. II. x. 13,) Sperat infestis, metuit se-
eundis, Oud» in the 444th line reminds us of Horace’s Animosus
atque Fortis appare, in the close of the same ode.

GN? tacrodpay, «. 7.4. Welck, compares Hom. I]. xxiv. 49, rAn-
roy yap Moipat Oupdy Oicay avOpwrooy, where rAnrév is for rAHpovea ;
‘and Archiloch., Fr. 48.“ 2 as

* (Ver. 447—452=Frere’s Fragm. xlvii.) As was observed at ver..
417, Theognis was peculiarly familiar with the assaying of gold..
Hence it is a constant image with him: as here in ver. 449, 440.
In ver. 447, dpiayroy, undefiled, i. e. by dross.

4 &v@oc, brilliancy of colour; cf. Liddell and Scott, and the pa-
rallels there given, and the use of the phrase dvOiva popeiv. | Cf.
wearer preface, p. Ixxxyiii., and Florens Iacchus, Catull. Epi-
thal. 252. -

% (Ver. 453—456—Frere’s Fragm. Ixviii.) Mr. Frere observes
that it seems to have been addfessed to some’ person formerly in-
fluential, but’ reduced by the revolution and his own misconduct
te insignificance. ; : :

. © Camerarius says that this and the three next lines have been
copied by one Theophilus, a comic writer in Athenzus, xiii. p. 560,
od cipgdpoy via’or. xpecBory yury. *
"Qomep yap dearoc obbt juxpdv meiOerae
‘Evi wndaXi, 76 wetop’ amoppitaca be
"Ex vurog Srepov Ams’ Exovo’ LEevpiby. ,
In the 460th line, for the use of ée in the phrase ée vucray, cf. Matt.
Gr. Gr. § 596, and Viger. Idiot. ix. 8, 4 :
R2


244 .MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS, 459—476.


rudder, nor do anchors hold her: but, having burst her fasten-
ings, oft in the nights she hath another harbour.

Never set thy mind at least on things impracticable! nor
long for wealth, of which there is no accomplishment.

Easily, look you, the gods have given wealth, neither any-
thing mean,? nor noble: but thére is glory attendant on a dif-
ficult work, .

Practise yourself about virtue: and let what is just be dear
to you, nor let gain, when it is base, get the upper hand of you.

Force no one of -these against his will to remain with-us,4
nor bid any, if he wishes it not, go out.of doors. Nor rouse
in-his-sleep, Simonides, whomsoever of us, drunken with
wine, soft sleep shall have seized.5 Neither bid him that is.
watchful, sleep against his will, for every-thing-done-by-
compulsion is vexatious.6° And to him that chooses to drink
let ove stand near and pour-out-wine: not every night does
it happen to us to live delicately. Now I, for I have due
measure? of sweet wine, will go home, and be mindful of

1 Welcker quotes here a saying of. Bias of Priéne preserved by
Diogenes Laertius, ydcog Yuyfe 16 rev aduvdrwr toav, ddrorpiwy dé
nacov dpynudvevroy siva. Chilo, py émOupety advvdrwr,

2 Cf. Hesiod, O. et D. 287—289. And Archilochus, wavra wévog
revxer Ovyroic, perry re Boorein. -

5 ndi os vuxarw Képdoc. Welcker compares Hesiod, Op. et D. 352,

_ ph wand Kepdaiver’ cand xipdea to’ drnow. He illustrates vuearw by
Soph, Ajax 1334, 0’ 1) Bia ce pnlapic vuenodrw Toodyde pueiv.
(Ver. 467—496=Frere’s Fragm. villi.) Welcker compares with
467 Hom. Od. xv. 68—71, and 74. See also Theoc. Idyll. xvi. 27,
Myéé ecvoddxoy Kady ippevar’ adAdrAG rparile
MaAritavr’ droripba, iway tidwyre vieoOar.
5 Here Welcker quotes Apollonid. Anthol. Pal. p. 510,
. ‘Yavdec. & ’raitps, rd Se oxvgoe abrd Bog os
"Eyogo" pu} reprrov porpidig pedérg.—
For 6upyy8éivra, cf. above, at ver. 413., ;

® Aristotle quotes this line in his Rhetoric, Book I. ch. xi. § 4,

and shows that all constraint is contrary to nature, and therefore un-
pleasant. In 473, before oivoyosiro understand tic, or 6 otvoxdoc.—
Boa wabsiv. Liddell and Scott point to the same Faiths in Solon,
xii. 4, (Gaysford’s Poet. Minor. p. 139, vol. iii.,) and Herodot. i. 71;
iv. 104. .
_ 7 Having imbibed his full share of liquor, the poet says he will
go home, as the wisest course for a man neither very sober nor
quite drunk: lest he should quarrel with his fellow-guests. With
ver. 477 Welcker compares the same_passage as it stands in Athe-
neus, where, instead of psifw we read ijxcw.


476—497, "MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 245


care-relaxing sleep ; and I will show that wine is most pleas-
ant for a man to drink, for neither am I a whit sober, nor
yet am I very drunk. Now whoso exceeds the due measure
of drinking, that man! is no longer master of his tongue or
mind: but he speaks scandalous words,’ which, to the sober,
seem disgraceful, and nothing is he ashamed to do, whenso-
ever he may be drurik. Though he were sensible before,
then he is a fool: do you, then, knowing these things, not
drink wine in excess; but either, before you are intoxicated,
rise and go,? lest your stomach constrain you, like a worthless
hireling for-the-day ; or be present, and do not drink: but
you, though knowing these things, are ever babbling this fool-
ish word, “pour-in :” therefore, look you, you are drunk. For
one cup is taken “to friendship ;” another is pledged :* this
you offer as a libation to the gods: the fourth you hold in
your hand. And you know not how to say nay ;° now, look.
you, that man will be invincible, who, though he drink many
cups, shall say nothing silly. But do ye discourse well, tarry-
ing beside the bowl, long keeping-off contentions one from
the other; speaking fairly and evenly alike to one and with:
all, and thus a banquet becomes not unpleasant.

Wine belongs to the senseless man as well as the sensible.


1 Cf. here Hom. Od. xiv. 466, wal re Zxog wpoéneer Sqep 7 Gponroy
dpavoy.

? dxddapva is here used in a different sense from that in ver. 281.
It is the same as in Solon, Fragm. xiv. 12, 0bd’ ipdey 20" dude spy’
amddapva Oder, and Pind. Ol. il. 105, dmddapvor ppivec Moivag Ere-
cay. In 483, cugowr recat Hmiog is read by Athenzeus. Welcker
reads Tére vipriocg, which we have translated.

* Welcker doubts the genuineness of this and the three next
lines, as contrary to the advice given in ver. 627, 628, and to the
law of cups which Cicero (Tusc. Disp. v. 40) quotes as prevail-
ing in Greek banquets, ‘‘ Aut bibat aut abeat,” wif ) dmiOt. At
ver. 487 we have translated the reading of the Cod.. Mutin.
08 0 éyxee TobTO pdratov, which Welcker pronounces the true read-
ing, and which is illustrated by the Epigram of Meleager, 98, Zyys«
wai wad sink? wade, wad ‘Hdoddpac. Theoer. ii. 152; xiv. 18;
Callimach. Ep. xxxi.; at which passages see the notes of the Trans-
lations in Bohn’s Classical Series.

4 pev yap (sc. wb). -Welcker compares Athenseus, vi. p- 254,
a, wai, THY peydAny db, émixéag giriag udBovg, x. r. dX, and Plaut.
Pers. V. i. 19. . F
- 5 doveicOar 3 obe oidac, sc. the pledgings of those, who challenged:
him to drink. On which see Welcker here and at ver. 487.

,


246 °«~ MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 497-518,


When, however, it is drunk above measure, it is wont to
render the mind light.! . :
| In fire, indeed, skilful men try gold and silver,? but wine
is wont to show the mind of a man, even though he be ex~
. ceeding sensible ; zine which when drinking he is wont to
praise beyond measure, so as to disgrace one being even wise
aforetime. :
My head, Onomacritus, is heavy-with-wine,? and wine does
violence to me, but I am no longer master of my senses; nay,
. the chamber whirls-round. Come, let me rise and try whe-
ther perchance the wine hath my feet too,4 and my mind with-
in my breast. I fear lest, in. my drunkenness, I should do
anything foolish, and incur a great disgrace. ;
Much wine drunk is bad: but if a man drink it with-
judgment, ’tis not bad but good.
* §o thou hast come, Clearistus, after having actomplished @
passage across the deep sea,® hither, wretched man, a beggar
. to a beggar, Under the ship’s sides, truly, we will place


F. :

! cotpoy tOnxe vdov. Conmpare 629, 93 rai vedrng ixccoupize vdov
avipdc. ASschyl. Prom. V. 383, xoupovody ednPiav, 7

2 (Ver. 499 — 502'= Frere’s Fragm. vi.) Welcker illustrates the
passage by Aschyl. Fr. xiii., xarorrpov eidoug yadkdg tar’, olvog ds
vou; Fr. xvi. of Alcwus; Theocr. xxix. 1, ofvog—Aéyerat kai adijOea ;
Hor. Od. I. xviii.; Erasmus, In vino veritas.

* (Ver. 503—508=—Frere’s Fragm. vii.) Mr. Frere observes that
Onomacritus was a favourite of Hipparchus, the brother of Hippias,
and joint ruler with him. Taking, he adds, the middle of the four-
teen years of Hipparchus’s reign as the date of these lines, Theog-
nis would be 23 or 24, a likely age at which to have written them.
The Quarterly Reviewer, No. 144, thinks otherwise. At ver. 505
Brunck quotes Juvenal, vi. 303, Totum vertigine tectum Ambulat.

* qeepnOd pr) wwe kai xédac, «. 7.) Cf. Shaksp. Othello, act ii.
8c. jii., Cassio drunk, protesting that he can stand well enough and
talk well enough. At 508, for GupnxSeic tompare 413, 470, &.

5 Cf. Hom. Il. vi. 261, dvdpi be kexpndre péivog plya olvog déter:
Hor. Od. I. vii. 17-—19, for the due use: Hom. Od. xxi. 293, 294;
and Alexis ap. Grotium, wod%¢ yap olvog wOAN’ Gpaprdvey woul, for
the undue use of wine. ; .

» © (Ver. 511—522=—Frere’s Fragm. lix.) Clearistus, ruined or dis-
-tressed at home, comes by sea to Megara; probably on a trading
voyage, but looking for hospitality from the poet, his hereditary
ally.—aviccac, sc..odév. Passow refers to Trachin. Soph. 657, piv
ravée mpdc wow dvbcue. Add to these Cd. Col. 1562, where one
reading is xaravicar: Ajax, 606; Antig. 805; Electr. 1451. Cfa
similar use of xaradvecy, Thucyd. i. 136. <


518—337, “MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. . 247.


benches, Clearistus,! such as we have, and as the gods give
us: and we will supply the best of what we have: but should
any one come, being a friend of thine, say to him, “ Sit-at- .
meat, an’ thou lovest me.” J will neither set apart aught of
my substance, nor, for the sake of entertaining thee, will we
bring aught more from other quarters. Then should any inquire
“my means of subsistence,” thus tell him, that I live with diffi-
culty as regards living well, but very well for one living with
difficulty: so as not to fail even one ‘guest. of my father’s,
though I am not able to afford feasts to more men.

Not to no purpose, Plutus, do mortals honour thee most,
for of-a-truth thou bearest distress with ease. For verily it
is fitting for the bettermost to have wealth indeed, but pover-
-ty is proper for a mean man to bear. ‘

Alas me for youth and wretched old age, the latter coming
on, and the former departing.

I have betrayed neither any friend nor trusty comrade, nor
is there aught servile in my spirit, . ‘

Ever is my heart cheered,4 whensoever I shall have heard
the delightsome sound of vocal flutes. And I rejoice in drink-
ing well, and in listing to a flute-player; I delight, too, in
carrying the gay lyre in my. hands.

Never is a slave’s head erect, but always crooked, and ‘has
the neck askance.5 For neither from the squill do roses or

1 Welcker thinks dror:Oévas rd Zvyd is used figuratively here, of


furnishing a banquet. At ver. 516, before cardxeoo, understand

“ dic ei,”” or some such words. 2 Cf. Hor. Epist. I. viii. 3,
Si queeret quid agam, dic multa et pulchra minantem -
Vivere nec recte nec suaviter.

In the next line wg eb piv and we yaXerac belong to the class of

cases in which we is aed: in limiting propositions, cf. Matt. Gr. Gr.

§ 628, 3, e, Before avrodsiwery understand sé, or rov iudy Bio. Hesiod,

Op. et D. 717, urges a man pyre wodbtevor, pyr’ akevor warécobar.

“3 i yap pnidiwg, x. 7.d. Welcker quotes Eurip. Heracl. 303,

7 dvoroxic yap Hiyeves’ dpiverar ‘
tiie Svoyeveiag paddov.

* (Ver. 531 — 538 = Frere’s Fragm. Ixxiv. Ist part.) Welcker
quotes Hom. Od. ix. 5—11, q. v., and for the word iaivera: com-
pares Pind. Pyth. i. 20, Aga lace capdiav ripart, At 533, ix’
abdnrijpog may be comp with the use of id in Herodot. i. 17,
bm upiyywy xai wyxribwy, Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 592, B., and Hesiod,
Se. Herc. 280, : ; :

5 Clarke quotes this and the preceding verse at Odyss, xvii: 323,


248 _ MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. . 537—-552,


hyacinths spring, no, nor ever from a bond-woman a free-
spirited child. ; ;
. No man, dear Cyrnus, forges fetters for himself,’ unless
the gods heguile my judgment.
I fear, O son of Polypas, lest insolence, even the insolence
which destroyed the savage Centaurs, should ruin this state.?
Tis right that I, O Cyrnus, should adjudicate this cause by
rule and square,’ and deal fair play to both sides, namely, to
oracular birds, and to burnt sacrifices, that so I may not in-
cur the foul disgrace of error.
Never do violence to any one through wickedness : for to
the just man nought is better than good-conduct.!. ,
A voiceless messenger stirs up, O Cyrnus, war-of-many
tears,® seen clearly as zt is from a conspicuous mountain-peak.
Nay, then, place bridles on your swift-footed steeds, for methinks


hpeecry yao r’ doerijc aoaivurat evovorra Zeve
vioog, er’ dv py kata dovdrov juap Edyow.

With 537 we may compare St. Matthew vii. 18, “ Do men gather
rapes of thorns, or figs of thistles;’’ and with the next line, Hor.
d. IV. iv. 31, ..

Nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquike columbam.

? Welcker compares Solon xv. 32, :

ebvopla 8 sixoopa cai dpria nave’ dropaive

: nai Papa roig dino dpperiOqor médag.

For the patronymic THoAvraidn, see above, at ver. 25.

* 2 (Ver. 541, 542—Frere’s Fragm. xiv.) See'the story of the con-
test between the Centaurs and Lapithe in Ovid, Met. xii. 210, &c.;
Virg. Georg. ii. 455-457; Hor. Od. I. xviii. 7—9; and Smith’s
Dict. Gr, and R. Biog. i, 666, &c. '

3 apd ordOuny Kal yropova. Cf. 939. Lat. ad amussim.” In
ver, 545, pavrecty owvoic re is, according to Camerarius, a case of
Hendiadys, “ oracular birds,” (as in Latin, Pateris libamus et auro,
Virg. Georg. ti, 192, and 4in.i. 111, In brevia et Syrtes urget,) as
opposed to aiPopévote iepoto, ignispiciis.

* Welcker quotes Hesiod, Op. et D. 267, of adrg@ cand reiyer dvijp
'@Xw racd _tevywr. Hom. Od. xxii. 373, where Clarke quotes this
line from Theognis. ef bees

5 (Ver. 549—560<Frere’s Fragm. Ixxii). The march of a force

rom some neighbouring state, opposed to the politics of Cyrnus and
heognis, is Indicated by a fire-signal, and determines them to
abandon their country without delay. With dyys\o¢ dg@oyyoc com-
pare Aisch. S. ¢. Theb. 81, aiOepia xévig ps weider pavsio’ "“Avaviog, |
oagiie, Erupog dyyedoc. Suppl. 180, dps xéviv, dvavdov &yys\ov orpa-
tov. For the beacon signal generally see Agam-,281—316. In

553 for Stawpntours Vinetus reads dtarpjocover. Td peonyd, sc.

xara, or it, must be taken as the accusative of limitation.


©


552—571, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. . 249 ©


that they will encounter hostile men.: nor long the way which
they will traverse between us and the foe, unless the gods de-
ceive my judgment. é

It behoves a man lying in severe griefs to take heart;! and
to ask deliverance from them at the hands of the immortal
gods. :

Consider : the danger, look you, stands on a razor’s edge :?
at one moment you shall have much: at another far fewer
possessions: so that you neither become exceeding rich'in
possessions, no, nor thrust yourself into much want-of-means.

Be it mine to have somewhat myself,3 but to bestow the
‘most of the riches of foes on my friends to enjoy.

_ Now ’tis meet that one should be invited to a banquet, and
sit beside a worthy man, versed in all wisdom, so as to un-
derstand him+ whensoever he shall utter aught-of-wisdom,
that so you may be instructed, and go home to your house
with this gain.

Delighting myself in youth I sport-and-sing:* for, when I
have lost my life, I shall lie long beneath the earth, like a
voiceless stone ; and shal] quit the delightful light of the sun,
and, though I be a man-of-worth, yet shall see nothing any
more. aa

Opinion, indeed, is a great evil to men,® but experience a


' Hom. Od. xx. 18, rérAade 34, kpadins wai rbvrepov dAdo zor’
érAne. Hor. Od. I. vii. 30, 31. “ '

2 gai Evpod torara: axpiic, stands on a razor’s edge, is so finely
balanced that a hair would turn the scale. Cf. Hom. Il. x. 173;
Herodot. vi. 11; Theocr. xxii. 6; Soph. Antig. 996; Livy, in xxxix.
17, In discrimine nunc est humanum genus, Welcker points out
that ver. 559, 560 have no reference to danger, but to moderate
mene so that they ought not to be connected with the two preced-
ing lines. . : ;

§ (Ver. 561—566 = Frere’s Fragm. Ixxv.) At ver. 564, Welcker.
quotes Plutarch Sympos., Qu. I. i. 2, to show that even philoso-
phers used to discuss ‘‘ what was the excellence of a banqueter,’’
“the proper use of wine,” and such-like questions.

4 rou ouviety. Camerar. considers this the infin. for the imperat.,

. as Soph. El. 9, &c. But it seems more consonant with the sense
to understand it “intelligendi causa,” sc. dere. .

5 gzai~w, “ad myrtum cano,” opp. to Boe ddBoyyoc. Pind. Ol. i.
24, ofa waiZoper giray "Avdoec apgt Odpa TpdreZay. This passage is
an evidence of lower views of a future state than pervade the writ-
ings of most of the poets of Greece and Rome. :

© Cf. 665. Aleman, Fr. 59, Ileipd rot pa@hoost dpxa.


a


250 ; MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS, 572-589,


very excellent tliing: many of the bettermost men have an

opinion unproved-by-experience. er

- Do good, and good shall be done by you:! but wherefore

send you another messenger ? the tidings of a benefit is easy.
My friends abandon me, yes, because I avoid my enemy, as


pilot avoids the low-rocks? in-the-sea.


*Tis easier to make a mean man out of a bettermost man,3
than a noble man of: a base: teach me not: I am not of an
age to learn. : ‘ :

I hate a mean man: and IJ veil myself when I approach
him,‘ having the volatile spirit of a little bird. I hate also a
roaming woman, and a wanton man, who desires to plough
the furrow of another. But the things which have gone by,
it is impossible should become undone :® the future, however,
be that a care to our caution.

Danger, I wot, is attendant on all works, neither knoweth
any one,’ when a matter begins, where he is likely to land.
But the man who endeavours to be popular, without fore-
thought,’ is wont to fall into great and severe ruin. Him how-


1 & ipduy, sb mpaooe. Bene fac et bene tibi fiet. Welcker. The
next line js the opposite of Shakspeare’s saw, ‘‘ And the first bearer
of unwelcome news Hath but a losing office.” ‘

2 yorpddag (th. xoioog) hogs-backs; ridges of low rock just rising


* above the sea, Cf. Eumen. Esch. 9, AnXiay re xoupdda, (and Eurip.


Troad. 89, AnAoi re youpddec,) where Blomf. thinks the whole of De-
los is meant, as rising like a xoipac from the sea. See also Virg. 4in.
i. 110, Dorsum immane mari sammo.

® (Ver. 577, 578=Frere’s. Fragm. xlviii.) _The poet, says Mr.
Frere, is out of humour at being admonished. In the next line,
with rndinog—palsiv, cf. Hom. Od. xvii. 20, 08 yap ei cradpoice
péverv Ere tydixog eipi. ‘ :

* raduibapévn. ‘These are probably the supposed words of some
goddess, é, g. Justice. —perpiic SprrBog, x... Cf. 1097 4dn Kai wrepi-
Asoowy éwaipopat Wore weravdy, and Psalm. xi. 1; -cxxiv. 7.

5 wepidpopov, an epithet dendting a character exactly opposite to
the Latin ‘ Domiseda.” With the next line Welcker compares
Zesch. S. ¢. Theb. 753, Save pa) zpic dyvdy oreipag dpoupav. Soph.
Cid: Tyr. 1485, 1497; . Antig. 569. ,

® geya, used in passive sense, as in Soph. Cid. Col: 1605, xode Hy
Er’ dpyov obdéy, dy épizro, | .!

7 Ver. 585-590, are with little variation toe be found in the.
fragments of Solon. In the next line with eyjoceu» we must _un-
derstand ry wopeiav, tiv épphv. Cf. Hom, Od. iii. 182; Ar. Ran.
188; Thue. ii. 25. we ;

8 (Ver. 587—590.2 Welcker understands this to mean, “ He who


.


589607, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. . _ 251


ever who doeth well é¢ is the deity that invests with every-
thing, with lucky chances, and riddance from folly.

It is right to endure what the gods" give to men, and to
bear easily the lot of both classes. Neither when distressed
with ills be vexed at heart,-nor be delighted on a sudden -
with good fortune, before you have seen the extreme end.!

Good Sir, let us be companions one to another at a dis-
tance.” There is satiety of everything save wealth. Long

. ‘then Jet us be even friends; but do thou associate with other
men also, who better know thy mind.

You ‘have not escaped-my-notice as you walked along the

- road, on which even aforetime you used to drive,’ stealing my
friendship. Away with you, hateful to geds, and faithless to
men, you who had in your bosom a chilly spotted snake,

' Such-like deeds, such ingolence, ruined the Magnesians
also,‘ as now possesses this sacred eity. ;

Fulness hath ere now destroyed far more men,® look you,
than famine, to wit, as many as were desirous of having more.
than their share. - ‘

At the beginning a lie gets small thanks,® but at last base


aims at success (ed todev: which Stobeus reads for evdoxiusiv) by
his own efforts, unexpectedly fails, and is stricken by ruin; while he
who is successful, ead. prospers in his efforts, owes that to the Deity,
freeing him from the consequences of unaided human nature, folly,
and ill-luck.” | -

1 apiy redog, Cf. Soph. Trach. 1, 2. With the two lines generally
compare Horace Od. II. iii, 1—4. .

2 This and the three next lines are a gentle hint from Theognis toa
friend that he wishes to drop his intimacy, which hint he softens by
suggesting that variety is pleasing in the matter of friends, as in
other things. In ver. 596, some read m)o}y wdobrov. Cf. Hom. Il.
xiii: 636, thvrov piv edpog dori, xai Varvov rai PAdrHTOG.

3 graoroac, imperf. from daerpiw, Lon. for Aadvw. Cf. Hom. I.
Xviii, 543; Herodot. ii. 188. In ver. 602, one reading is Puvypy, and
another, that of Brunck, zouxid ;: but Welcker prefers with reason
the. general reading, comparing Theocr. xv. 58 (see Virg. Ecl. iii.

,93) with the epithet puxpdy applied to a snake.

4 (Ver. 608, 604—Frere’s Fragm. xv-in some portions.) The Mag-
nesians were overthrown at the river Meander by the Ephesians.
Archil., Fr. 86, has r4 Mayvjowy card,

5 répoc is generally associated with Bo. Cf. Theogn. 153; Pind.
Ol. xii. 12; Esch. Agam: 767, &e., as emended by Donaldson, New
Cratylus, § 335, p. 518, véa dé guit Képov, Such being the case, this
fragment fitly follows the last two verses.

- © apyg im. Welck. compares 29’ 1ypépg, iwi prvi, toto die, mense.


252 ' MAXIMS OF ‘THEOGNIS. 608—628,


lucre, in truth, and ill arise, both of them: nor is there any-
thing noble to any man, whom a lie attends, even though it
be the first that has gone forth from his mouth.

It is not hard to blame one’s neighbour, no, nor to praise
him: these things are a care to mean men. And mean men.
do not choose to be silent, prating mischief! rather, but the
noble know how to preserve moderation.in all things.

No one of the present race of men doth the sun look down
upon, being entirely good and moderate.

Not to any great extent are all things accomplished to men’s
liking, for immortals? are far-superior to mortals.

I am much tost-about in difficulties, being vexed at heart :
for we have not outrun extreme poverty.

Every one honours a rich man, but dishonours a poor :4
and in all men there is the same mind.

All-kinds-of-baseness exist among men, and all-kinds-of
excellence, and devices for livelihood. .

Tis hard for a sensible man to speak much among the
senseless, and. so é¢ is always to be silent: for this is impos-
sible. ;

In truth, ’tis disgraceful for a drunken man to be amongst
‘sober men: and disgraceful if a sober man remains among
the drunken.


In 610, Gaysford reads cay 2&2\@y, Brunck rai from Stobzus. kav
appears to afford the best sense, although Welcker seems to disap-
prove Neander’s translation, “ etiamsi id primum sit ejus men-
dacium,”. which we have followed.

1 cand NeoyaZorrec. Aecydtery seems to answer our English word
“to gossip,” from Aeoxy, a low inn, or lounge; ef. Hesiod, Op. et D.
493 and 502, above. With the next line ef. Hesiod, Op. 694.

2 Welcker quotes Heraclitus, (in Stobzeus, Serm. ili. p. 48,) dvOpe-
tote yiyvesOat drdca Gédovory, otk dpevor. .
ad ae with this couplet Hom. Od. xi. 359, and Ov. Art. Am.
il. 277, :

’ Dummodo sit dives, barbarus ipse placet,
. Aurea sunt vere nunc seecula. Plurimus auro
Venit honos. Auro conciliatur amor.
And Hesiod, Op. 688, yo)para yap ux) wéderat Sethotot Bporoiaw.
* Welcker illustrates this passage by Lucian, Ep. xvi.,
iy. wiiciv peObovew 'Anivduvog HOere vfgery
‘ robvexa nai peOdew atrog 206k povog.
The 628th ver. reminds us of the last line of one of the Epigr. in
the Greek Anthology, picdi—pi0wr prypdvag ddpordrag.
‘ .


ae


629—644, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 253


Man’s-estate and youth lighten a man’s mind,’ and stir up
the spirits of many to error. ;

Whoso hath not a mind chat is master of his inclinations,
he, I wot, Cyrnus, lies ever in follies, and in great errors.

Consult twice and thrice on whatever shall have come
into your mind,” for a hasty man, look you, is hurried-to-
ruin.

Judgment and gense-of-shame attend men that are good,
who now are really few among the many.

Hope and hazard are alike among men :% for both these

“are severe deities.

Often beyond both expectation and hope‘ it is given men
to discover the works of men, but success is not wont to fol-
low their counsels. tu ees

A single individual, look you, troubles. neither one-well-
affected, nor his foe,> unless he meet with a serious matter.
Many are friends and comrades over the bowl,® but fewer in .
a serious mattér. ' :


“Cf Hom. I. iii. 108, Aéet & dardoripwy dvdpiiy poévec HeptOovrat,
and Jl. xxiii. 589. Horace, Od. I. xxxv. 86, speaks specifically as to
the fruits of youthful light-mindedness, F


Unde manus juventus _
Metu deorum continuit? Quibus
Pepercit aris.


At ver. 631 Welcker quotes a saying of Chilo, Oupod cpdrec.

2 Hom. Il. xxiv. 354, gpdfeo, Aapdavidy, ppadiog vdou toya réruxrat,

3 kivduvog here is i. q. “ metus.’ Camerarius.—For this personi-.
fication and deification of: feelings or passions, see Ov. Met. ii. 760,
&c., of Envy; Spenser, Fairy Queen, t iv. 18; and Paradise Lost,
b. iv. 988, “His stature reached the sky, and on his crest Sate
Horror plumed ;” xi. 490, “‘ Despair tended the sick, busier from
couch to couch :” and Virg. in. iv. 174, Fama volat, &¢, :

+ wap’ ddfav,«, 7. So Pind. Ol. xiii. 116, wap’ Spxoy cai map’
riba. :

5 Welcker here reads 0% rot x’ edeing ovr’ ebvovy, obre rov typo,
and in the next line dyriréyog for avrirbyor. The force of the
couplet is somewhat of the nature of the Latin adage, Amicus cer-
tus in re incerta cernitur. 2

6 Compare Hor. Od. I. xxxv. 26—28, '


Diffugiunt cadis \ :
Cum face siccatis amici,
: : Ferre jugum pariter dolosi.
Periander said gitar ebrvyota cai drvyotoww & abrig toOt,


1


254 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 645667,


Few companions would you find faithfyl protectors, when
you are placed in great perplexity of spirit.

Now at length a sense-of-shame hath perished among man-
kind, but shamelessness roams over the earth.

Thou luckless poverty, why, seated on my shoulders,? dost
thou disgrace niy body and mind? Nay, thou teachest me
against. my will perforce many disgraceful arts, though I -
know from men good and noble lessons. ,

May ‘I be fortunate, and dear to the immortal gods,? O
Cyrnus ; then am I eager for no other excellence.

Along with thee, Cyrnus, when thou hast suffered misfor-
tune, we are all distrest : but of-a-truth grief for another lasts
but-for-a-day.

‘In hard ‘fortunes be not at all excessively disgusted at
heart, neither rejoice in prosperity: for ’tis a noble man’s
course to bear all things. ‘

Nor is it right to swear this, “that this thing shall never
be,”* for the gods also, in whose hands is the issue, are wroth.

Yet still one ought to do somewhat :5 both good hath

‘arisen from ill, and ill from good; ay, and the poor man very
quickly becomes rich, while he who has possessed very much’
‘on a sudden is wont to lose everything, in fact, in a single
night. ,And sensible man errs, and glory oft attends a sense-
less man: honour too even a mean man is wont to obtain.

If I had wealth, Simonides, even such as I was acquainted

' Welcker compares with this line Hesiod, Op. et D. 197—199.
To which add Ov. Met. i. 150, Juv. vi. 19, of the-flight of Astrea
from thé. lawless earth. For the same use of ércorpégerat, he refers
to Anacteon; Fr. 29, érsorpigerar O° inde ropuddc dpiwy. |

2*a. Welcker illustrates the interjection here by Simonides, Fr.
101, At, ai, vodce Bapsia, ri J) uyaicr peyaipec. This and the
next line remind us of the image introduced by Horace in Od. III.
i. 40, Post equitem sedet atra cura. Or we may imagine poverty


“seated as it were on his shoulders, in the mean and sordid garb he
- wore perforce. ‘
_ * Oevig girog dBavdroin. So Horace, Od. I. xxxi. 13, Dis carus
ipsis. At ver. 655, Welcker aptly quotes Esch. ip Se 790—792,
7G dvoxpayoivre & imuarravaxey. Tag ree trompog &° ijypa 68 Avane .
Oddty tg’ Hrap wrpooryveirat, and Pind. Nem. i. 82—85.
* Welcker quotes Linus, :
tAreaOat xpi) wave’, trsi obK tor’ ogdtv dedarop":
pita yap Org redéoas, rai avaveror oddiy, -
and Pind. Ol. xiii, 116, 117.
5 Brunck reads xgy wpijSae pévroe ze’ instead of wai wpi¥at, x. 7. de


. , 4 s
688—681, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS, 255


with, I should not be vexed at associating with the noble.
-But now they (riches) pass-me-by, though I knew them,? and
I am mute through poverty, though still knowing better than
many. Wherefore we are borne-on now, having pulled down
our white sails,3 from the Melian Sea, through murky gloom :
but they do not choose to bale the ship, and the sea sur-
mounts both the vessel’s sides, whereby with great difficulty
any oue saves himself :, yet the sailors are slumbering,* and
have made the pilot, good though he was, cease from his
work, the pilot who used to watch over it understandingly.
By force they plunder property, order is upset, and no longer
is there an equal distribution in common: but the porters
bear-rule, and the mean are above the noble. I fear lest. haply
the waves should ingulf the ship,? Let thus much have been


1 Ver. 667—682=—Frere’s Fragm. Ixiii., and,is supposed by Mr.
Frere to be an invitation from Simonides, who was rich, and siding
with the dominant party, on his arrival at Megara, to Theognis,
who was ruined, and whose friends were out of office, Theognis
bitterly pleads that his present circumstances and political fortunes
render him little fitted for the company of the literati (some of them
caso, i, e..of the opposite party) he should meet. a. :

2 J. Donaldson thinks yyvecxovra is the nom. neut. plur., “ those
(creatures) that knew me,” sarcastically, and he refers to Jelf’s Gr,
382, 1. But the translation adopted in the text is, I think, safer,
and more like Greek. :

> Welcker here quotes Archilochus and Alczus, and refers to
Horat. Od. I. xiv. 5—8,

’ Et malus celeri saucius Africo
Antenneeque gemant? ac sine funibus
Vix durare carinz
Possint imperiosius i

ZEquor. A " :
Plato, in Repub. lib. vi. compares the state to a ship, MmAiou te wov-
rov, i.e. the sea around the island of Melos, I suppose, viz. the Myr-
toan. Cf. Horace, Od. I. i. 14, &c.—For dvrXciv in ver. 673, cf. Heracl.
169, ig dvrov EpPnoe méda.-  -

4 of 6” etdouct, and what follows, is, as Weleker points out, only a
further picturing of the neglect of those in the state, who are said
in ver. 673 dvrAsiv ode iBbAuyv. Bekker reads ol’ odover, with a comma
after owfera. J. Donaldson (Lyra Greca, p. 184) places a full
stop at awZerac, and takes ola as expressive of astonishment. With ver.
676, cf. Esch. S. ¢. Theb. 2, 8, dar1¢ puddooe mpaiyoc tv mpipry wédewe,
Clara vupisy, Brédapd pp copay bavep gOdov y' So, Gaisf. éoOAdy Grieg,
Bekk. Cf. Hom. II. iii. 279.

5 ‘Compare Virg. Zin. i. 116,


4 e ~
256 ‘ MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 681—696,


wrapt in riddles darkly,’ for the men-of-worth ; but a man, .
if he be wise, would be cognizant also of the evil.

_Many dunces have riches, but others seek what is noble,”
though harassed by severe poverty: but impossibility-of-
working lies-beside both: the one class want-of-riches im-
pedes, of-intellect the other.3.

_’Tis impossible for mortals to strive against immortals,* or
to deal out justice. To none is this permitted.

It is not right to cherish5 what should not be cherished,
nor to do what it were better to leave unaccomplished.

With satisfaction mayest thou duly perform thy voyage
through the great sea,® and may Neptune bring thee home, a
joy to thy friends.,

Many men, look you, being senseless, has fulness ruined,
for ’tis hard to understand moderation, when good things are
present. : ;

In trath, O my spirit, I cannot afford thee all things fit-
ting.’, Bear up: for not by any means thou alone art fond
of what is beautiful.


Ast illam ter fluctus ibidem, 2
Torquét agens circum, et rapido vorat equore vortex ;


and Hor. Od. I. xiy., quoted above.._- 3

! ratra pot yviy8w. Here for the due understanding of the pass-
age we must erase the stop at gvix0w, so that the sense may be
rather that the riddles, though dark to others, ave made for the
dyd@or, the i Seca friends of Theognis, to understand, «expuypiva
may be used as the neut. plur, adj. used adverbially. Cyrnus is the
helmsman spoken of in the foregoing verses.

2 (Ver. 6883—666=—Frere’s Fragm. xciv. ‘‘ The rarity of. wealth
and taste, united is detrimental to the progress of the fine arts.’’)
Welcker compares with ver. 683, Callimach. H. in Jov. 95, otr’ dperijc
arep ddBog biorara: dvdpac aekev* Otbr’ dperh agpéivoro.

> yonpara, i. gq. xpnpoobyn. vdog, i. gq. dvoia. Cf. Heyne ad II. x. 98,
Kaparw Gdonnérer 52 kai barvy, who observes that a thing itself is by
the Tragic and Lyric poets often put for the defect of that thing.
Welekér, :

4 Welcker compares Hom. Il. v. 407; vi. 129, 141; Hesiod, i
210. To which we may add A’sch. Prom. V. 49, dwavr’ éxpdyOn
ariy Ocoicr xorpaveiy: Hom. Od. xii. 117; Eurip. Iph. Taur. 1479.

5 In ver. 689 Camerarius reads wnpaivey and rypavrior, i. e. to
work mischief which should not be worked. ‘

® Cf. Theoer. vii. 52, goograc’Aysdvarre xaddg whdog ig MirvdAjvay,
and with the next line Horace, Od. I. iii. 5—8. With the next

couplet compare ver. 605, 606, above. :

7 @vpé. For this address to his spirit, see the poet at ver. 1029,
TOABG, Gbpe, xaxotow, and at ver. 887, HSwore, pide Gupi,


697—714, : MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. | . ° 257
oy
When I am flourishing,! friends are many ; but should any
calamity have chanced upon me, few retain a faithful, spirit
For to the multitude of men there is this vittue only, namely,
to be rich: but of the rest, I wot, there is no use.? |
Not even though you should have the sensé of Rhadaman-
thus himself,? and be more knowing than Sisyphus, son of
Bolus ; (even he who by his cunning came-up-again from
Hades, after having persuaded Proserpine by wily words,
Proserpine, who gives oblivion to mortals, ind‘ misleads their
mind ;* and never hath any other devised this, I ween, whom-
soever in truth the black mist of death has enshrouded, and
‘he has come to the chilly place of the dead, and crossed the
dark portals® which confine the souls of the dead, even though
they refuse: yet, verily, even thence came back the hero Sisy-
phus to the light of the sun through his own exceeding-
shrewdness ;) nor if you could make falsehoods like to truths;® .
' having the skilful tongue of the god-like Nestor, and were


¢


’
.


. 1 Ver. 697~718=Frere’s Fragm, ci.
2 Cf. Horace, Ep. I. i. 53, 54, - Soa ote


O cives, cives! queerende pecunia primum,
Virtus post nummos. ‘

With the use of #v along with dpa for iori, Welcker compares
Plat. Phed. 54, Heindorf. -. . 4

5 This and the few next lines remind us of a similar digression in
Tyrteus, El. iii, 3—10.—Rhadamanthus was a son of Zeus.and Eu-
ropa, and a brother of Minos, king of Crete, and became a judge in
Hell after death: ef. Hom. Od. iv. 464, &c. , Sisyphus was a son of
Bolus (cf. Hor. Od. Il. xiv..20) and Enarete. Before death he bade’
his wife not to bury him; and then in the lower world made this a
plea to Proserpine for being allowed.to return to the upper world.
Thence he was brought back only by the force of Hermes. For-
his punishment below, see Hor. Epod. xvii. 68; Virg. Georg. iii. -
89; Ovid. Met. iv. 459. ee oa as

4 Brérrovea vénpa. Cf. Hesiod, Theog. 89, Aavie  BAcwropivore,
and 222, véou BeBrappévog toPod. Hom. Od. xxi. 294; Pind. Pyth,
ix. 167, -Adyov BXarrwr. : ;

5 Cf. Virg. Georg. iv. 467, Rah 3

: Alta ostia Ditis,

Et caligantem nigr& formidine lucum ‘
Ingressus, Manesque adiit, regemque tremendum,
Nesciaque humanis precibus mansuescere corda.


$'So Hesiod, Theog. 27; Hom. Od, xix. 203, toxe peddsa odd

Aywr, sroporow suota; Callimach. H. in Jov. 65; Hor. A. P. 238.

—~For Nestor, see Hom. Od. iii. 244, 126; Il. i. 273; ii. 3386, &c.—For
s >


a* '


258 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 715731,
é ‘ ; :
swifter of foot than the fleet Harpies, and the sons of Boreas,
whosé feet go swiftly. Nay, then, tis right that all should
lay up this maxim, that, wealth. has the most power among
all. : i ;
Equally rich, look you, are he to whom there is much silver
and gold, and plains of wheat-producing earth, horses and
mules; and he to whom that which ‘is needful is ready, so
that he may enjoy himself in pleasures of stomach, sides, and
feet ;!"and boys and women: for when the fitting season of
these shall have. arrived, and at-the-same-time their youthful
prime is suitable, these aré wealth to mortals: for no one goes
to Hades with all his immense wealth? Neither by paying
ransom ean jhe escape death, or heavy diseases, or wretched
old age coming upon ‘him. ,
O Father Jove, would that it might please the gods, that
their insolence should delight sinners ;3 and that this might
be agreeable to their mind, namely, that whoso ruthlessly


the Harpies, mentioned in ver. 715, cf. Hesiod, Theog. 266; Virg.
Ap. iti. 225, &c. :
1 Welcker compares Horat. Epist. 1. xii. 5,

Si ventri bene, si lateri est, pedibusque tuis, nil

Divitize poterunt regales addere majus. __ :
Boissonade seems right in understanding wAgvpaic rai wéawy of sleep
and slippers, indolent living. waidec 7’ 738 yuratxec is, perhaps, in
apposition to the subjects of wAovrovety in ver. 719, and then means
“whether youths or maidens, lads or lasses.’? But more probably it
‘is coupled to ra dedvra, as the subject of rapect; which view is eon-


.


- . firmed by the two lines following. °


2 See Psalm xlix. 17, “For when he dieth he shall carry nothing
away: his glory shall not descend after him.’’ With the two next
lines compare Hom. Od. xiii. 59, eiodxe yijpag “ENO, cai Odvareg,
ta 7’ bn’ avOpwbrown widkovra. Virg. Georg. iii. 66, 67,"


., Subeunt morbi tristisque senectus, ©
Et labor, et dure rapit inclementia morttis.


«8 (Ver. 729—750=Frere’s Fragm. lv.) Theognis complains of
posthumous hereditary retribution. Compare with 729, 730, Hom. II.
xiii, 681-635; Od. xxiv. 350, 351; Hesiod, Qp. et D. 270—273;
“Esch. Agam. 1585, quoted by Welcker. The sense of the passage
is clear, if we take its two leading features to be the poet’s prayer,
that sinners may rejoice in their folly and then afterward pay the
penalty ; and his wish that the guiltless child may not suffer for
the guilty parent. He sums up all this in 739, dad sin paxdpecoe
Ocoig a In ver. 735 we read waida¢ with Turn., Neand., and
Weicker.


‘


731—761. MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. *< 259
works daring deeds in his heart, nowise standing-in-awe-of -
the gods, that .he, J say, thereafter should atone for his evil
deeds ; ‘and that the father’s infatuation should not in after-
time be a woe to the children. But that children, who, being
born of an unjust sire, know and do justice, reverencing thy -
wrath, O son of Cronus, and from the very first’ loving the:
right amongst the citizens, should not pay the penalty for any
transgression of their sires. May these things be agreeable
to the blessed gods: but now he that commits wicked deeds
_ escapes, and another presently suffers the punishment. Then
how, O king of immortals, is it just, that whoso is aloof from
unrighteous deeds, holding no transgression, nor sinful oath,
but being righteous, should suffer what is not just? What
other mortal, too, I pray, when he looks at this man, would
afterwards stand-in-awe-ef the gods, and entertaining what '
feeling ? When an unrighteous, infatuated man,' having avoid-
ed the wrath neither of any man nor of the immortals in any-
_ wise, doeth wrongs, and is glatted with wealth; whereas the
righteous are wasted, being worn out by severe poverty.
Having learned this, dear comrade, get riches justly, keep-
ing a prudent spirit, afar from btind-folly, and ever remem-
bering these my words ;? then at the last you will commend
me, giving heed to a wise speech... ‘ ree
May Jove, dwelling in heaven, hold on high® his right
hand ever over this city for its health and safety, as well as
the other immortal blessed gods; but may Apollo nerve my
tongue and mind: and on the other hand'‘let the holy melody
sound-with lyre,‘ and also flute ; but let us, having made full
drink-offerings to the gods, drink and speak pleasantly .one


1 Cf. Psalm Ixxiii. 8, 11, 12, &c., “ Behold, these are, the ungodly
_ that prosper in the world, they increase in riches.” - - .

2 Cf. Hesiod, Op. et D. 300 (298), dra ob 7° ayuerépne penynpévog
aity igerpic. ' ”

3 (Ver. 755—766=Frere’s Fragm.cv. _Theognis, says Mr. Frere,
here iY sem as a returned emigrant studiously patriotic and popu-
lar at Megara.) With ver. 755, émepéxor, cf. Hom. IL. ix. 419, wadda”
yap ev evptora Lebc xXeipa iy imepioxé, which occurs again at 686

‘In the same book. ; ;

4 géppeyy’. For the elision of ¢ in the dat. sing. see Linwood’s
Lexicon to Aschylus, p. 120, a.; Elmsley on Heraclid. 698; Lobeck
on Soph. Ajax, 801—dpeccdpevor: for this use of apeoxw in its”
primary sense, “to make good,” cf. Hom. Il. iv. 362; Od. xxii. 55.
[See Liddell and Scott.) : > : ;

8 :


260 ; MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 162—779.


_with the other, in no wise fearing the war of the Medes. So
be it! and, better sill, be it ours,! enjoying a cheerful spirit,
‘aloof from cares to pass our days cheerily, and delight our-
selves, and te drive far away? ill fates, wretched age, and the
end of death. .
Tis meet that the Muses’ servant and messenger, if he
know aught special of wisdom, should not begrudge it: but
should seek after some things, point out some, and invent
others ; alone knowing for what purpose he should use them.
O sovereign Phoebus, thou thyself fencedst the citadel4 in
favour to Alcathous, son of Pelops; do thou then ward off
from this city the insolent army of Medes,® that so thy peo-
ple, in cheerfulness, as spring.comes on, may send thee splen-
did hecatombs, delighting themselves with lyre, and lovely
festival, with choirs of peans, and shoutings: around thine
altar. For of a truth I fear, when I look on the folly and
people-destroying seiitions® of the’ Greeks. Yet do thou,


' 6S dlvat wai guevoy. Mr. Frere. compares with this sentiment
the Scotch “‘ May there never be worse among us,” or the sailors’
‘ Here’s better luck still.’”’ ,

- Sg ri Before this verb and dpivae understand ebydueOa. L.
Bos. Ellips. p. 620, Schef. \

4 Ocpawoyra wai. dyyedov. Cf. Theocr. Idyll. xvi. 29; xvii. 115.
Movogwy tropira. Hor. Od. III. i. 3, Musarum sacerdos.—Two
lines below pawoOat is like the Latin use of ““ queerere ”’ in Propert. I.
vii. 6, Atque aliquid duram querimus in dominam.; Plaut. Pseudol.
396, Querit anod nusquem est gentium, reperit tamen. (Welcker.)

«The worship of Apollo was very ancient in Megara (Schol. ad
Pind. Nem. v. 34; Ol. xiii. 155). ‘He had a temple in Megartis.
Pausan. I. xliv. § 9, 10. The coins have the head of Apollo, the
lyre, the ships, and dolphins. (Dodwell’s Tour, ii. 180, quoted by
Welcker.)—For Alcathous, son of Pelops, building the citadel of
Megara to the tune of Apollo’s lyre, cf. Pausan. I. xli. § 5; Pind.
Isthm. viii. 148-150. He is mentioned too in Eurip. Heracl. 279;
ef. Ov. Met. viii. 14, Regia turris erat vocalibus addita muris, &c.
See aoe at this passage, and Smith, Dict. Gr. and R. Geogr. ii.

313, B. .

5 Herodot. lib, vi. 112, has réwg 7y roiot"EAXnot kai. rotvona rev

Midwy 6Bo¢ agotcat, where Baehr quotes this’ passage of Theognis.
Brunck observes that. the foregoing lines prove Theognis to be a
Festa apa and not a Sicilian. Smith’s Dict. of Gr. and R. B. iii.
1074, B. ;
. § Theognis appears to have lived till after the Persian Invasion
in 490, 8. c- See Smith’s Dict. ibid. His fears for the divided states
of Greece are shown by history to have been just; though Athens
and Sparta for the time laid aside their rivalry. = . .


t


TI9—795, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS.' - 261


Pheebus, propitiously guard this our city. For I have gone
aforetime both to the Sicilian land, andI have gone to Eu-

_ boea’s vine-clad plain,! and to Sparta, splendid city of reed- -
nursing Eurotas, and all did with alacrity entreat-me-kindly
when I came. But no pleasure in them came over my spirit ;
so much, I wot, is nought else dearer than our father-land.?

Never may other fresher care present itself to me,' in. place
of charming wisdom ;? but may I ever, possessing this, de-
light myself with lyre, with dance, and song; and with these
blessings may I have a noble mind. oh

Harming by baneful deeds neither any stranger nor. any
of your townsmen, but, being just, delight your own ‘mind:
and of the unfeeling citizens some will speak ill of you, others
better. |

The noble one man blames much: another praises:4 but of ,


1 EiPoing dymedéev wediov. Smith, Dict..Gr. and R. G.4. 872, A., ¢
says that at the present day alight red wine is made of the vines
grown in the northern plains of the island, For dovaxorpégov ap-

lied to the Eurotas compare Eurip. Iph. in‘Aul. 179, dx’ Eipora
ovaxorodgou. Helen. 208, yuivdowd re dovaxdevrog Eipwra. Cf. ibid.
349 and 493, and Iph. in Taur. 400, dovaxéx)oa.
2 Welcker compares Hom. Od. ix. 34,
dg obdéy yrdbxov qe warpisoc, obbt rornwy
ylyveras, sirep kai rig dado Tiova oixoy ,
yaip dy adrodang vaia dravevOe rorquy.


. At which passage Clark adduces Cic. de Off. i. §17; Eurip. Phen.
409; Ovid. ex Pont. I. iii. 35,
Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine captos
Ducit, et immemores non sinit esse sui. .
‘Quid melius Roma ?
Virg. Ecl. i. 3. :

3 For the use of the comparative here followed by the superfluous
ayri, cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. 450, obs. 1; Soph. Antig. 182; Trach. .577,
avri cod wrov. é 7 . '

4 (Ver. 795—798—=Frere’s Fragm. xx.) At.797, Welcker quotes
Simonides, rdpray & dpwpog odric, od" denpto,. With reference to
the noble being exposed to blame and detraction, cf. Shaksp, As
you like it, Act ii. sc. 3,

‘* Know you not, master, to some kind of men

Their graces serve them but as enemies’

No more do yours; your virtues, gentle master,

Are sanctified and holy traitors.to you.” SEL. Sie
_In ver. 798 Gaysford gives as the “plena locutio” dAX’ we wiov
Earey ixsive, od ddiyoug pide. Welcker reads @ Adiov, where @ is ap-
parently the relative used for the demonstrative.’ (799—802=—Frere’s
Fr, xix. - 9


N


.262 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. _ 796-818,


‘the mean there is no record: but of men unblamed is none
upon the earth; and ’tis best for him, of whom there is no
care to the greater number. i

No one of men will either be, or hath been, born, who will
go down to Hades pleasing to all. For not even he who
reigns over mortals and immortals, Jove, son of Cronus, can
please all mortals.

It behoves, indeed, a man that goeth-to-consult-the oracle,
Cyrnus,! to keep more straightly than compasses, line, or rule ;
such a man, I mean, as he to whom the god at Pytho, having
given answer to the priestess, shall have indicated a prophecy

' from'his rich sanctuary; for neither though you add aught
would you discover any remedy, nor if you have diminished
aught, would you escape the punishment of offence, on the
part of the gods,

I have experienced a thing nowise inferior to an unseemly
death,? but of all other things most vexatious, O Cyrnus. My
friends have cast me off: so J, having drawn near to mine
enemies, 2m about to see also what mind they have.

. An ox, sthmping on my tongue with sturdy foot,? restrains
me from chattering, though J am versed in it, O Cyrnus. But
still it is impossible to escape from what is fated to suffer ;
and what I am fated to suffer I nowise fear to endure. Into
a vast unspeakable evil‘ are we come, wherein above all, O
Cyrnus, the fate of death may seize us both together.

' From this passage it is inferred that Cyrnus was old enough,
and of sufficient standing in- the city, to be sent to Delphi as a sa-
cred envoy (ewpdc) to bring back an oracle, which the poet exhorts
him to preserve faithfully. Smith, Dict. Gr. and R. B. iii. 1076, a.
In ver. 805 Ilv8i2 is the dativus loci: cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. 406, b.; Tra-
chin. 571, Awddvt.—otre re yao wpocOcic. Compare for this phrase
Deuteron. iv. 2; xii. 32, ‘‘ Thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish
from it.” : ‘ . ;

4 (Ver. 809—812Frere’s Fragm. lxxxii.) Jn ver. 811 Mr. Frere
explains wpotdwray, ‘cast me off,” ‘refused me pecuniary aid,”
end compares the like use of the word in vet. 529, Otre riva
tpovewKa,

% Compare Aischy]. Agami. 36, rd ? ddda oryd. Boitg ini yAdoog
peyac Bepnee’. ‘Donaldson, N. Cratyl. § 468, observes that the sense
of “ weight ” or strength is implied in Bove in these two passages,
as is shown by’. xparepy modi here. Hence he infers that Sov is an

antensive prefix in-many compound words, as also irzo in the
words iwréxpnyvec, &c. ae eid,

* Here we have adopted Brunck’s reading appyrov. Welcker's
reading is woAvdpnrov. Turneb. and others, appnxrov,


Ps


819-834, .MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 263,


t


But they who dishonour their parents, when growing; old,
for these, Cyrnus, there is no place of esteem.!

Neither aid any tyrant in ‘the hopes that ’tis matter of
gain,’ nor slay him, when you have entered into covenants
sworn before the gods, ° é :

‘How hath our spirit’ had the heart to sing to the flute-
* player ?3 but from the forum is seen the limit of the land,
which maintains with her fruits men wearing at feasts and on
auburn locks purple garlands. Nay, come now, Scythian, shave
thy hair, and cease from revelling, and lament the fragrant
country lost. _ a rane

By faith have I lost wealth, and by unbelief preserved it :4
but the counsel of both is. difficult. Adl this my property is_
with the crows and in ruin; nor is any of the immortal bless-_
ed gods to blame in my judgment: but man’s violence, and
much gain, and wrong have thrust me out of many ‘good
things into poverty,


1 Welcker illustrates this passage by Hesiod, Op. ét D. 187, 188,
and 331—334, q. v. Hom. ih iv: 478, 00d: roxedow Ooimrpa Pidorg
aridwxe, pevuvOacroy dé ot aiwy”Emder’. The words xwpr redéde are
a to be taken literally, there is no land or space for such,

elcker, compares the 4th commandment, ‘‘That thy days may
be long in the land.” Virgil in An. vi. 608 finds a place for the
violator of this law of nature and affection in the place of torment:
Pulsatusque parens, &c.

2 (Ver. 82}, 822—Frere’s Fragm. xxiii.) Mr. Frere considers these
lines to refer to the assassination of Hipparchus, and Welcker com-
pares Pind. Pyth. xi. 79. But he reals Képdeoww elxwy, instead of
xiodeog eivat. . :

* (Ver. 828—828—=Frere’s Fragm. lxi.) The poet’s piping in the
market-place of Megara finds a sudden ending, as he sees from it
the fruits of harvest being brought home from fields once his own,
to other barns. So thinks Mr. Frere. Welcker corinects the lines
with the sudden sight of harvest-fields sadly narrowed by the in-
cursions and encroachments ofthe enemy. In ver. 627 SxéOa is
addressed to the Scythian slave. Such were among the police at
Athens; cf. Aristoph. Thesmoph. 1025 (Kuster). Welckér discovers
some allusion to the shaving the headin token of having been con-
quered. But-cf. cxvOiZw, dwooxv0izw, Liddell and Scott. *_ .

4 (Ver. 829-834=Frere’s Fragm. lii.) 2v copaxecots ef: the com-
mon imprecation é¢ xépaxag. Aristoph. Vesp, 982, Pac. 1221, 500,
Liddell and Scott, where it is remarked that the allusion in all
these cases is to dying and being unburied, cf. Hom. I. i. 4, not
to the Latin idea of the gaHows, Abi in malam crueem et pasce cor-
vos. Cf. Hor. Ep. I. xvi. 48. : .


va >


oo


264 | MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 835—858,


There are two fatés truly of drinking to wretched mortals,!
limb-relaxing thirst, and baneful drunkenness. Now between


, these I shall abide, nor will you persuade me either not to


1


’ drink at all, or to be excessively drunken. Wine, indeed, in


other respects is agreeable to me, but in one ’tis disagreeable,
to wit, when, having made me drunk, it leads me against a foe.
But when one, being properly above,? shall have been lowered,
then ’tis meet he should go home, having ceased from drinking.

To upset a man well established is easy ; but to set right
that which is ill settled, is difficult. .

Spurn the empty-spirited rabble,’ strike them with shar
goad, and place around thém a galling yoke. For no more
will you find a populace so fond of. despots, among all men,
as many as the sun looks down upon.

May Olympian Jove destroy the man who chooses to de-
ceive his comrade, prating smoothly‘ to him. I knew indeed
even before, but much better now, that the mean have no gra-
titude. B ’ .

Oft hath this city through the baseness of its rulers, like a.
ship wandering out-of its course, driven past the land.

But if any of my friends sees me in any trouble, turning his
head away, he.does not even choose to look on me: yet if
any good comes to me from any quarter, such as .often® hap-


"pen toa man, I find many greetings and friendships.


1 Sicoat roi xijpe¢ Welcker compares Mimmerm. ii. 5, Knpec ce
rapecrixace pédhawvat, kT. r.; and at ver. 839, 840, Anacreon,—


Od girog, d¢ Koariipt rapa wréw oivoTroTagwy
veinea xai wddEhov daxpvoivra déyet.
Sée also Hor. Od, I. xxvii. 1—4. Welcker takes yapiZera: in an ex-
traordinary sense for “ gratum facit, placet.”’

2 Understand 71g, as at ver. 388, above. The allusion is, it would
seem, to the debasing nature of drunkenness. At ver. 843, §44, cf.
(with Welgker) Pind. Pyth-iv. 484—487.

3 (Ver, 845—848=Frere, Ixvii.) These lines are an ironical ex- -
hortation to the ruler of the opposite faction to make, the best use of
his opportunity, Welcker compares with 845 Meleager Epigr. 49,
Aag triBave. car’ abyévoc, Gypie Jaysdy. Propert. I. 1. 4, Et caput:
impositis pressit Amor pedibus: : ‘ ;

4 wadOand cwriddwv. Cf. 295, 488; Soph. Antig. 756, ye ebrcddé.
Weleker. In ver. 852, Welcker reads obvexa for rotvexa; for the
goea, i. q. poe, see Matt. Gr. Gr. § 198, 4. ,

8 For woAAaxe in this line Welcker with much probability reads
mavpdet, from mavpog, like dAcyaeec. .


859-878, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS 265


My friends forsake me, and will not give me aught, when
men appear: but I of-my-own-accord go,out' at-eve, and
come-in again at dawn, when the voice of wakening cocks is
heard.” me

To many useless. men the god gives good wealth,? which
being nothing, is better neither to itself nor its friends. But
the great glory of martial excellence‘ will never perish, for a
warrior saves both country and city.

. Then may the broad brazen vault-of-heaven fall on me®
from above, that terror of men of olden-time, if I shall not
help them indeed who love me: but be to my foes a vexation
and great source-of-loss.

Wine, I in part commend thee, partly blame: neither can I
wholly either ever hate or love’ theé. Good art thou, and
bad. Nay, who would blame chee? or who praise thee, if he
has due measure of wisdom.? .

Drink wine, which to me from the top of Taygetns® vines
have borne, which the old man, beloved by the gods, Theoti-
mus, planted in the mountain glades, introdhcing cold water


# This is by Camerarius called éra:pucéy triypappa, we ard yuvar-
xéc. But its explanation is not clear, and guesses are wide of the
mark. Line 859 occurs in part in ver. 575.—With éomepin 8 Zeque
ef. supra ver. 460, wodAduee Exe vueray addov Exet ipéva,

2 juog dAexrouévwr. See the Hymn of St. Ambrose, ii.'5,, Praeco
diei jam _sonat; and Prudentius ad Gallicinium, 1, 2. Ales diei
nuncius Lucem propinquam precinit, &.


“


3 Cf. Tyrteus, El. xiii. 13 (infra ver. 997).. Welcker quotes Bac- -


chylides, fr. 4, whotrog 58 nai dedoiow avOpdrwy dpidsi. (863—866
=Frere’s Fr. c.)

* Cf. here Hom. Od. xxiv. 195, 196. Eurip. Andromach. 773—776,
obroe Athbava riiv dyaQiv ’Avdody dpipttrar xodvog & Oo’ aperd gal
Gavotot A\duae. Hor. Od. IV, viii. 28, Dignum laude virum Musa
vetat mori. Seneca, Herc. Eteus,.1982, Nunquam Stygias fertur ad
undas Inclyta virtus. ° ;

5 éy—méoot. Tmesis for suzrécot. In the next line for radacyeviny,
one MS, reads yapatyeviwy. wadaryeviwy (cf. Lidd, and Scott) is
used for forefathers in Hom. H. to Cer. 113. . .
' 6 (Ver. 875—880=Frere’s Fragm. cii., where it is suggested that
Theognis must have had ties of hospitality with some Spartan family,
i, e. that of Theotimus, or Clearistus, mentioned elsewhere (ef. 511).
Welcker places the two. fragments, mentioning these names, toge~
ther.) For Taygetus see Virg. Georg. ii, 487, and a full account
under rg “ Laconia,” Smith, Dict. Gr. and R, Geogr. vol. ii. p.
108, a. b.


266° : MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 878——892,


from the grove-of-plane-trees.! Drinking of which, thou
wilt dispel? harsh cares, and when thou hast well drunk, wilt
be far the lighter. ‘

May peace and wealth possess the state, that I may revel®
with others, for I love not baneful war. Neither do thou too
much lend an ear, when the herald shouts loud and far ;4 for
we are not fighting for our father-land, Yet "tis disgraceful,
' when present and mounted on fleet-footed steeds, not to look
upon tearful war. _

Alas me, for our cowardice! Cerinthus is undone,® and
the goodly vineyard of Lelantum is stript. The noble flee ;
the mean administer the state: would Jove might destroy the
-Cypselizing race 16

Nought better than judgment hath a man in himself, I
wot, or more vexatious, Cyrnus, than lack-of-judgment.


1 ee Wraravorotyrog. Pausanias, (see Welcker,) III. xxiii. 1, men-
tions the promontory of Platanistus, and in IV. xxxiv. 2, a foun-
tain of the same name, in Laconia and Messenia. For. such invit-
ations as this, cf. Hor.’ Od. I. xx. 1.

2 BwpnyGeic ig here used punningly, cf. Frere, p. 106, armed, for-
tified with wine. Cf. for this passage Horace, Od. vii. ad fin., and
Lucret. ii. 132, &e. : ;

3 (Ver. 881—-886=Frere’s Fragm. xcix., who considers it to refer to
the battle of Elorus, previous to the siege of Syracuse by Gelon,
B. c. 492, or to some petty warfare while Theognis was an exile at
Thebes.) With cwpaZotut, in ver. 882, cf. 1061 and 934, Cf. also
with the passage generally, Hom.:Od. xxiv. 485, wAodrog de ai
sipnyn dug ~orw, one ; :

* The. tone of indifference and carelessness bespeaks an exile,

only fighting for the land of his brief sojourn, and taking a part in
the battles only upon a point of honour. Cf. Frere.
. . § (Ver. 886—890=Frere’s Fragm. Ixxiii. where see Mr. Frere’s pre-
- fatory remarks.): -Cerinthus was a city of Euboea. Cf. Valkenaer’s
note at Herodot. book v. 99, (p- 427, 27,) where he mentions that Le-
lantum was 4 very fertile plain, abounding in waters, an old source
of contention between the Eretrians and Chalcidians. Cf. Callim.
H. in Del. 289, and Spanheim’s note there.—Valkenaer quotes this
passage: Cf.-Herodot. book v. 99, Thuc. ‘i. 15, at the ehd, for the
war between Chalcidians and Eretrians. ; : ;

© KupedriZov, This word formed from Kuy¥édog, the founder of the .
Tyranny, in which his.son Periander-succeeded him at Corinth; to
which he rose by aid of the “demos; ’’ cf: Aristot. Polit. v. 8, 9. The
participle is here used to speak of the race of tyrants generally, as
we find the words @:lcxmiZoy, Mndifov, elsewhere. Megara sided
with the Cypselid dynasty. _™ ‘


893—917. MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 267
Cyrnus, be not ‘in all respects wroth with mortal men,
knowing that you have a mind, like as each man has, in your
breast, and deeds also. To mortals, whether the just man, or the
unjust, great loss may ensue. Of:each man one act is worse,}
another better: but no man is himself wise in ull respects.

- Whoso watches expenditure,? hunting after riches, has the ,
most distinguished excellence in the sight of men-of-under-
standing. :

For if it were possible to ascertain the end of life, to wit,
how much time having accomplished, a man were fated to go to
Hades, it would be reasonable that he, who awaited his destiny
the longer time, should most spare the substance which he
had. But now’tis not so: a circumstance which really rouses
great vexation in me, and I am heart-worn, and have my mind
in doubt. So I stand in a cross-road,‘ and there are two
roads in front for me: I consider on which of these I am to.
proceed first: either being at ho expénse I waste my life in
wretchedness ; or, accomplishing but ,few works, I live pleas-

-antly. For I, too, have seen a man who was careful, and -
never would allow his stomach food fit for a free man,® rich
though he was: yet ere he had finished he descended within
Pluto’s mansion, and the chance-comer from among men re- ~
ceived his wealth; so that he toiled in vain®-and did not
give as a man could wish. Another have I seen, who in-
dulging his appetites squandered his wealth, and said, “I de-


: > seaeker illustrates this by Hom. Il. iv. 320, xiii. 729; Od. viii.
67, &e. . ‘ :

2 (Ver. 899--926—Frere’s Fragm. xeviii.) The question of larger
indulgence is decided in favour of continued economy.

3 Jacobs reads ei yap Eny rarideiv Broroy rédog, H drrdcoy te.

* dv rosy & éornxa, an expression of hesitation, with which we
may compare Pindar, Pyth. xi. 59, 60, car’ duevoiropor rpiodoy ibt-
vaOny, “ tanquam in trivio cireumactus sum.”

§ Cf. Hor. Ep. FE. xvi. 63, Qui melior servo, qui liberior sit avarus,
Sat. 1. i. 95—97, Umidius quidam—ne se penuria victis

; Opprimeret, metuebat. :

6 dor’ ic deatpa rovetv. Hor. Sat. I. i. 90, Infelix operam perdas.
dg x’ eOedor rte. al. p al. S00’. But dc yields the best sense. So that
he bestowed not his wealth, according asa man would wish, to leave
his wealth after his death. Cf. here Hor. Epod. I. 31—33,

R ' Haud paravero
Quod aut avarus ut Chremes terré premam : ;
Discinctus aut perdam nepos.


1


‘268 * - MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 917—938,


light my soul, and then retire:”! but he begs of all his
friends, wheresoever he may have seen one. Thus, Damocles,
*tis best of all to regulate your expenditure according to your
means, and to pay attention fo ¢his; for neither will you then
toil first, and give another a share in the fruit of your toil;
‘nor will you finish your servitude a beggar; no, nor, should
old age come, will all your wealth flee-away: for in such a
class as this *tis best to have riches: since if you are rich,
you will have many friends ;? but should you be poor, then
few: and then no longer is the same man equally good.

"Tis best to spare: since not even does any one wail for
the dead, unless he sees wealth left behind. ,
. Few among men doth worth and beauty attend: happy he
who hath obtained both of these: all honour him: the young
aliké, and his equals-in-age, and his elders give place to him.

Tcannot sing tunefully with my voice,‘ like a nightingale, for
the last night I went toa revel. Nor do I set up the piper
as an excuse; but. a comrade, no wise lacking sense, fails me.
Close to the piper will I sing, standing here on the right, and
praying to the immortal gods.


l iwdyw. According to Brunck this word is equivalent to rpodyw,
(I go on my way through life). With ver, 919 cf. the phrase of Ho-
race, Od. 1V. ix. 48, Rectius occupat Nomen beati, qui deorum Mu-
neribus sapienter uti, &c. ; though Horace does not arrive at the same
conclusion as Theognis, whose view is that a man should be care-
ful, that he may have more at the last: In, ver. 821, xdyaroy pera-
doing, cf. Soph. Cid. Col, ver. 1484, xdpuw perdoyorne. ;

* The poet’s principle here is, Nil satis est, inquit, quia tanti,
quantum habeas sis, Hor. Sat. 1. 1.62. With the maxim in ver. 927
Welcker compares Periander’s saying, geddpevoy ypeirroy dmo0a-
vetv, A Cevra évdsioPat. , :

* These four lines are a sort of parody of Tyrtzus, El, iii. ad fin.,
probably put together by some rhapsodist; as we find in other
parts of the verses ascribed-to Theognis portions of Solon and
Evenus mixed up in a sort of hotch-potch. See note in Klotz’s Tyr-
teus, El. iii. 39, note. . ‘

* (Ver. 933--938=Frere’s Fragm. lxxxix.) According to Welcker,
wé have Theognis here pleading inability to sing, not owing to any
fault of the piper who was to accompany him, but owing to regret

‘at the absence of the friend of last night’s revel, who is ironically
said to be coping ode emdevdpevoc. He compares ver. .261, 262. Ca-
merarius -distinguishes ver. 937, 938 as another convivial ditty.
Welcker quotes from the Anthology & xOapwdé, tupacrdg Se xBapi-
Zee. bi wit saya Mari :


1


937-959, ‘MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 269


I will walk by rule on the straight path, swerving to neither
side: for tis meet I should entertain all right views.’ . I will
distinguish my bright native-city, neither having brought
myself under the power of the commonalty,! nor complying
with unjust men. . ’

Though having overtaken with my feet, as.a lion trusting
in his strength,? a fawn from a-stag, yet have I not drunk its
blood : and though I have mounted lofty walls, I have not
sacked the city; though I have yoked my steeds, I have not
set foot in my chariot. I have accomplished and yet not
accomplished, succeeded and yet not succeeded, done yet not
done, achieved yet not achieved.

There are two evils to him that doth good to the mean
man: he will both be stript? of his own many possessions,
and get no thanks. ;

If, after having experienced some great good from me, you
are not thankful, may you come again a beggar to my house.

While I was drinking alone of the dark-water spring,*
methought the water was of a sweet and limpid nature ; but
now hath it been polluted; water is mixt with water: I will
drink then of other fountain or river. ‘

Never praise before that you shall have clearly known as
toa man, the temper, disposition, bent, which he is of. Many,

‘ bri_rpinpac, a case of Tmesis—we must understand épavréy,
with Camerarius and the Schol,, or with Miiller (Dor. ii. 72, quoted
by Welcker) wédey, :

? Welcker classes this and the five following lines among the
Epigrams of Theognis, and sees in them an enigma, of the same
class as others which he quotes, e. g. yiic¢ (alac) fave ward Seopdy
br’ dyysiwy dpdapaprey, where yij¢ equals Ajax, ty gaveog yevopay
[sc. in Delo gavepd]. We are to understand this epigram of unsuc-
cessful love, and a lover who has hunted down his game yet fails
to secure it. For wpnta¢ in reference to success in amours,,he com-
pares Theocr. Idyll. ii, 148, érpaxOn ra piyiora. . ’

* xnpdos, will be bereaved of. Brunck and Welcker read
XNPEVTEL. -

4 (Ver. 953—956=Frere’s Fragm. v.} atrée, i.e. solus.: Cf. Hom.
‘Od. 1. 53, Exe dére xiovag adrég. Aristoph. Acharn. 504, abroi yap toner.
Frere interprets this of the determination of Theognis to abandon a
mistress whose love for every one has made her too indiscriminate
for his taste. He, too, will henceforth be a more general admirer.
For te, in ver. 955, see Hesiod, Op. 61, yaiay Boa gipuy, and a
fragment of Callimach. 466. It is formed from tog, an old nomi-'
native derived from tw. :

5 pudpov. Welcker quotes Archil..Frag.xiv. 7, yiyywone 0 olog


270 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 959—978,


look you, having a base and wily nature, hide i#, having’ put
on themselves a spirit to-last-the-day, but of each of all these
time discloses the character: for I too, I wot, have gone far
wide of my judgment, and have been before-hand in praising
you, ere I bad thoroughly learned your character: but pow at
length, as a ship, I stand far apart. .
But what excellence is it to drink and carry off the prize-
of-wine?? oft verily even the worthless man surpasses the
worthy. ; :
There is no one of mortals; who, when once earth shall
-cover him,? and he shall have descended to Erebus and the
abode of Proserpine, delights therein, because he neither
hears lyre nor piper, nor lifts to his lips the gifts of Bacchus.
Seeing these things, I shail feel well at heart, so long as un«
tremblingly I carry light limbs and head.4 :
Be no man friend to me in tongue, but in deed too:5 and
let him be active both with hands and means. Neither let
him delight my spirit with words over cups, but show by acts
if he can do aught good... :
Let us then stake our dear spirits on festivals, while ye
they can bear the delightsome works of enjoyment. Yor


' puOpic d&vOpdroue Exe. With the next line we may compare Hom.
Odyss. xxili, 217, woAXol yap xaxd xipdea Bovdedovot,

‘ Cf. Soph. Ajax, 646, drav6’ 6 paxpig x’avapiOunrog xpdvoc Die 7’
adnha, cai pavivra xpbarerat. In ver. 964 Camerarius thinks that
the simile of a ship, Sa a clear of another ship for fear of a col-
lision, is indicated. Welcker thinks the idea presented is of a ship
outsailing another; ef. Pind. OL. ix. 35, @aecov vade daromripov.

* Camerarius observes that the Greeks of Theognis’s date de-
lighted in contests of wine not less than the Teutones of his own
day. For the account of the prize given on the day of the yéeg at
the Dionysia to the man whe first drank. off his xove, see Smith,
Dict. G. and R. A. 227, a., 342, b. ; Aristoph. Acharn. 1086, 960, and
Scho]. ibid. Athen. x. p. 486—438, :

-?.Schefer at this Pea the following refers to his note and that of
*Porson at Eurip. Med. p. 453; and shows that the construction is,
obdeig dvOpwrwy (Lore) b¢ ist wore yaia cadiwyn (abroy)—riprerat
In ver. 970, Scheef. reads éoaeipépevog, i. e. rpoopepopevog, a very rare
sense of the word, as he observes.

+ Compare here Theocr. Id. xiv. 70, woseiy re Osi, de yoru xAGpdY,
‘Hor, Ep. xiii. 6; Aristoph. Acharn. 219. ‘

5 (Ver. 978—976=Frere’s a am xxxi.) In the next line the use
of dugérepa is illustrated by Welcker from Hom. I. iv. 60, dugére-
‘por, y-vEeg Te, Kalo Ureca of mapaxoirig Kéxhypat: Od. xiv. 505 ; Theocr,
fayil. xxv. 69, dupdrepoy, ddug re xp0d¢ Sour re wodotiv, .


~


979096, ' MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 271


quickly as thought passes brilliant youth, neither is the speed


of coursers fleeter, even those which impetuously bear a spear-
brandishing warrior to the struggle of men, whilst they exult
in the wheat-bearing plain. é :

Drink when men drink :? but when thou shalt have been


at-all disgusted in spirit, let no. man know that thou art’


troubled. One while, look you, you will grieve at suffering,
and at another, doing, you are able to rejoice, and at different
times you are a different man.


Would it was allowed, Academus, that thou shouldst chant -


a lovely hymn,? and that’a slave in the fair flower of youth
might be the prize proposed to thee and me contending on
the score of skill—then shouldst thou know how much better
are mules than asses. ey
But when the sun* indeed just now cheers on his solid-
hoofed steeds in ether, holding the middle of the day, then


cease we from: dinner, zo go whither inclination leads every,


one, gratifying the appetite with all manner of good things;
and let a comely Lacedeemonian® maiden with slender hands
quickly bring out water, and carry in the garlands.


1 aiba yap, x.r.d. Compare Hom: Od. vii. 36, ray veg: wreiar,


dose wrepdv, 72 vénpa, where Clarke quotes Claudian. Rapt. Proserp. -


ii. 200, Quantum non geculum Parthi, non impetus Anstri; ‘Non
leve sollicite mentis i
Nihil est animo velocius, nulla est celeritas, que possit cum animi
celeritate contendere. At ver. 981, compare Virg. Georg. ii. 145;
Hinc bellator equus campo sese arduus infert, ;

2 Chilo (quoted by Weicker) said, wivwy pi woddd AGAL, &paori

eae yao.” Comper Plato, Leg. i. p. 637 (Ast, vol. vi. p. 38, D). In

ver. 986, Epkema and Welcker read yatpjcetc’ éveat 3° dAdore dANog
a


eo

3 (Ver. 987—990=Frere’s Fragm. xcj.) <i6" ety. Welcker, ei Being.
See Frere’s remarks on this passage; in ver. 989, the Aldine edit.
reads dyptdwot, which Gaisford prefers to dnpusdvrow. With the
next line compare Virg. Ecl. viil. 55, Certent et cyenis ulule. ”

4 (Ver. 991—996—Frere’s Fragm, civ.) Inver. 993 for dzou Welcker
reads Jcov, from Atheneus; Brunck, dcov. Various conjectures
have been hazarded to supply the place of Avyower, which, how-
ever, as Welcker shows, may and if we compare Xenophon’s
Symposium, where, on the removal of the banquet, a Syracusan en-
ters with flute-player and dancer; and Virg. Ain. i. 738, 734,


iscurrit acumen. Cic. Tusc. Disp. i. § 19, .


*


 Postquam prima quies, &c, But Welcker thinks that the lines are —


‘a parody of Bion’s.


% Adwawa xépy. Welcker, shows from Maller’s Dorians, that ©


the Dorians of Sicily employed a girl instead of a boy fo be


-


>


‘272 ' | MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. _ 996—1012,


_ But excellence, this is the noblest prize among’ men, and
the most fair for a wise man to bear oft sand this is a common
blessing to every city and people, he who with-broad-stride
stands fast amid the first ranks. : . ;

Now I will counsel men for their-common-good,? that every
one enjoying the bright bloom of youth may also entertain
sound thoughts in his heart, to enjoy the good, each of his
own possessions : for twice to grow-young is not given by
the gods, neither zs there to mortal men an escape from death :4
but baneful and destructive old age overpowers them, and
touches the tops of their heads. .

How blest and fortunate and :lucky he,! who hath descended
to Hades’ dark mansion, without having experienced troubles,

“before that he has made his enemies cower, and overcome
them even perforce,.and ascertained what spirit his friends
have. s .

Straightway perspiration without measure flows down my
skin,> and I am fluttered when I look at the prime of my


cup-bearer. So did the gods, Hom. Il. iv. 12. For the beauty of
the women of Sparta Welcker compares Hom. Od. xiii. 412, and an
creck rele be to the insignificance of Megara, in the first lines of
which we find, ~~ :
yaing pty dong rb edacyindy “Apyoc'dpevor,
trmat OtooaNixat, Aaxsdatpériat Te yuvaixec,
‘These lines are to be found in the Schol. to Theocr. Idyll. xiv. 48
(vol. ii. p. 121, Kiessling). - er
' This and the three following lines are from Tyrteus, El. iii.
15, q. v. * , £ 3 ,
? Compare with this passage Simoides, Fragm. c. (Gaisford, v.~
» 8), Obdiy ty ArOowarose péver yoy’ Exmedov aisi, x. r. A.—HBno dvOoc.
‘ Welcker illustrates this by Hom. II. xiii. 484, and Tyrt. i. 28, dgp’
Giga ric x” NBne dvOo¢ xn. In ver. 1003 dvnBar is “ pubescere,” as in
+ Callimach. -H. in Jov. 56, 68% 8 dynBnoag, where see Ernesti’s note.
rév adrob creaviy eb racxiuer, is to be well-off-as-to, or to enjoy
one’s own*~as we find yevdpat and adroddvw used (Liddell and Sc.).
3 Compare Alcest. Eurip. 75, 76, iepd¢ yap virde rév card xOovdg -
Osdv "Orou 70d” Zyxoc kpurog ayviog tpiva, which words are spoken,
‘by “ Death,” and 419, wraow nyiv caraQaveiy dpeiderar. Hor. A. P,
63, Debemur morti nos nostraque. With the burden of this whol
argument cf. Horat. Od. I. ix. 12—17; II. xi. passim. 2
‘ (Ver. 1007—1010=Frere’s Fragm. lxxxiii.; In ver. 1009 note
the transitive use of rrq#Zaz, and compare Hom. Il. xiv. 40, wry dé.
Oupdy ive oriPecow "Axa. imepBivat, according to Welcker, is -
used absolutely. ian ‘
* This, with the five next verses, are the work of Mimmermus, ”
cose ries :


1012—1037, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. O73


equals-in-age, delightsome alike and beautifal ; for it ought
to be of longer duration, but, like a dream, precious youth is
# short-lived thing: and presently over-head hangs unhappy
and unsightly old age. . .

Never will I place my neck under the galling yoke of my
enemies, not even though Tmolus! is above my head.

To the meaner sort their minds are more empty through
baseness: but the doings of the noble are always more direct.

The practice of mischief, look you, among men is easy: -but
the method? of good, Cyrnus, is difficult. ,

Take courage, mine heart, in troubles, e’en though you
have suffered things unendurable:* the heart of the baser’
sort, look you, is ever too hasty. Neither do you, at any
rate, aggravating your chagrin at works that-have-been-un-
accomplished,‘ bear hate, nor be indignant: neither vex your
friends. Nor delight your enemies: for the destined awards of
the gods not easily could mortal man escape, either if he de-
sanded to the bottom of the dark lake, or when murky Tar-

. tarus holds him.

To beguile a noble man, look you, is most difficult, as it.
hath long been decided, Cyrnus, in my judgment. J knew it
indeed even before, but much better now; that the mean -
have no gratitude. 4

Senseless and fools are the men who drink not wine when
the dog-star rises.> Come hither; with the aid of the piper


(Fragm. v. in Gaisford’s Poet. Min. vol. iit. p. 220,) though the first
three verses are not found in Stobzeus. At ver. 1014, cf. Psalin xe. 5.

! (Ver. 1017—1020=Frere’s Fragm. lxxi. p. 4.) Tmolus was a
mountain of Lydia, ef. Virg. Georg. i. 56, ii. 98. Tuwhog, says Steph.
‘Byzant.,(and others, as Strabo and Pliny, concur,) is from Tipodog.
by contraction; and so Ovid. Met. vi. 15, xi. 86. ,

2 waddpn. Cf. Theogn. 624, Biorov warduar. Herodot: viii. 19;
zyecy rivd maddy, where Schweighheuser m Lex. Herodot: inter-
prets the word ansa, occasio, via, ratio efficiendi aliquid.

3 (Ver. 1023—1030=Frere’s Fragm. lili.) With ver. 1023, cf. Hom.
Od. xx. 18, rérAabe on, xpadin® xai xbyrepov &ddo wor’ erdyor—The
sense of the next line is, mean men may have bitter or hasty spirits ;
but with the noble it should not be so. : / ;

4 axpixrowt, According to Ruhnken on Apollon, Rh. i. 246, the
sense of dzpheroc here is “ difficult.” In that passage the French
edition of Dubner, 1841, has wévoc 8’ dxpyxroc iodery, labor vero —
difficilis euntibus. ' With @siv o° epappdéva ddpa, x. Tr. X., compare
£Esch. Pers. 93—102. 7 st .

5 dorpov wai evvdc¢ seems an hendiadys, The dog-star was called -


7 >


274 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 1037-1052,
let us laugh and drink beside one that weeps, whilst we de-
light in his griefs. “ Let us sleep: and the watching over the
city shall. be the warder’s care, the watch over our lovely
rockless fatherland. Yes, by Jove, if any of these sleeps even
wrapped-up, he will listen to our revelling eagerly. Now let
us drink and enjoy ourselves, speaking fairly: and what shall
‘be hereafter, that is the gods’ concern.! :

To you now, as to a dear child, I myself will give sound
. advicé; and do you ponder these things in your heart and
mind.? Never do any evil hastily, but deliberate in the deep
of your heart, and with your better mind. For of them that
contend, ’tis the heart and the mind that contend; but coun-
sel leads to a good and sound mind. '

But this account we will let-pass.3 Do thou however pipe
to me: and both of us will be’ mindful of the Muses. For


Kvwr or Seipeog, cf. Hesiod, Op. et D. 607.. Hesiod, Op. et D.
587—592, recommends men aiSora mvépev olvov—inei xepadiy ral
pee Seiptog &Zet, Homer: mentions this star as xtv’ ‘Opiwvog in

1, xxii.29.  Alczeus, quoted by Welcker, has zivwyer’ rd yao dorpov
weprréidrsrat. Cf. Horace, Od. I. xvii. 17—22, :


Hic in reducta valle, Canicule
Vitabis estus——-

Hic innocentis pocula Lesbii

Duces sub umbra.


apd eaioyre’ this, taken in connexion with the next six lines, seems
to refer to, the opposite party to that of Theognis, which has appar-
ently met with reverses, exciting the joy and revelry of his friends.
These, having well garrisoned the city, are feasting and revelling.
1 Compare here Hom. Od. xix, 502, GX’ tye ovyg piOorv™ inireavow
d¢ Oeototy, Hor. Od. I. ix. 9, Permitte Divis cetera, and Od. II. xi.
11, 12, ; ;
* Quid eternis minorem
Consiliis animum fatigas?


2 Welcker here quotes Hesiod, Op. et D. 27 and 277, and Hom.
Odyss. xviii. 128, rotvera rot ipiw’ od 58 obyOe0 cai fev Gxoveor, and
with ver. 1047, Il. ix. 496, :


“AN? "Aysred, Sdpacor Oupdy pyar’ obd8 re oF XO
vireeg too Zxeyv’ orperroi Se re vai Osoi abrot.


3 (Ver. 1051—1054==Frere’s Frag. xci. p.,2.) In ver. 1054 apgi-
mepixriovac, a word equivalent to dpguréovac, and used by Ca]linus,
2, 080? aideiaG’ dugurepicriovag, is figuratively used of minstrels near
each other at a banquet. See Welcker gd loc. Compare with ver.
1053, Hor. Od. L i. 22, Me doctatum hedere, &c. ;


1083—1072. MAXIMS OF THEOQGNIS, 275


they have given these delightful gifts to-hold, to thee, and me,
and in truth to the dwellers-all-around. ;

Timagoras, ’tis hard for one-seeing-from-far, to understand .
the temper of mady,! even though he be wise. For some
have meanness disguised by riches; and others rank by ruin-
ous poverty. :

But in youth ’tis best to sleep beside an equal-in-age, satis-
fying the desire of works of-love: ’tis better too to sing with
a piper? accompanying you, when you go a revelling! than
this nought, look you, else is more delightsome to men and
women. What to me are riches and dignity? Delight
along with good cheer surpasses everything. Ts

Senseless and childish are the men, who mourn for the .
dead,? and not the flower of manhood, when it perishes,

Prithee, delight thyself, déar heart:4 soon will there be
some other men, and I in death shall be black earth.

Cyrnus, direct a various temper-of-mind towards all your
friends, mingling such a character as each‘is of. One while
follow this character ; at another be diverse in your nature :
a better thing, look you, is wisdom than great excellence.


1 (Ver. 1055—1058=Frere’s Fragm. xciij.) Welcker has observed
that dpy7 in this passage indicates the mind and spirit, while xaxorje
and doer? refer to the rank and condition. The meaning seems to
be that the rich mean man belies his natural. disposition, and so
does the poor noble ‘man, the former by seeming liberality, the
latter by forced closeness. F

2 (Ver. 1061—1064—Frere’s Fragm. iii.) gat in 1062 isi. gq. éreort. |
Cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. vol. i. p. 67, § 30 (1832).

3 Welcker illustrates this passage by Plato, Republ. i. p. 329, a.,
(Ast, vol. iv. p. 8,) where Cephalus is represented appealing to So- -
crates whether most equals-in-age of their own did not lament the
port pleasures of youth, love, drinking, and feasting. Theognis

ere thinks with Cephalus. - +

* This and the next line form the beginning of Frere’s Fragm.
cii. Cf. ver. 1229, 1230, where nearly the same verses occur again.
With the sentiment cf. Hor. Od. IIL. viii. 27,


Dona preesentis rape letus hore, ac
Linque severa; :


and-IV. vii. 14—17,
Nos ubi decidimus, .
Pulvis et umbra sumus. ‘


See also Anacreon, Ode vi. ad fin. With ver. 1069—1072, cf..
218—218 supra,‘where the same precept is inculcated. Before
épyjv in ver.1070 understand Toupy. ome :


'


q 2 ‘


276 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. ~ 1078—1095,


Of a thing unaccomplished ’tis mest hard to know the end,!
how the god will accomplish this, For gloom. is spread over
_ #, and previous to.that which is about to be, the bounds of
human helplessness are not to-be-understood.
No one.of mine enemies will I blame, if he be noble ;? no,
nor will I commend a friend, if he be a mean man. |
' Thus it behoves the well-born man, I wot, directing his
thoughts to zz, to keep them ever stedfast. until the end to a
friend. You needs must bear worthily many unpleasant
things,’ since you. know not how to do that which is not pleas-
ant to yourself.

Castor and Pollux, ye who dwell:in divine Lacedxmon ‘ on.
the Eurotas, beautifully-flowing stream, if ever I should de-
vise evil fora friend, may I myself find it: but should he de-
vise aught against. me, may he find twice as much.

My mind is distressed respecting your friendship: for I
can neither love nor hate you: knowing as J do that ’tis hard
to hate, after one has been a friend to.a man; and hard to
love a man: without his concurrence. Look therefore now to —
another; to me at. least there was no constraint to do this:
namely, the kindnesses, fot which aforetime you were grateful
to me. Doe

Now even on wings am F uplifted, like a bird from a vast
marsh, having escaped from a base man, and having dragged


' Compare with this ver. 585, 586, supra, which are assigned by
Welcker and Gaisford to Solon. Thales said, degadec 76 yevopevor,
doagic rd péddov.

2 (Ver. 1077, 1073=Frere’s Fragm. lxxxiv.) Jacobs explains the
next couplet as laying dowa that if a noble man does change his
mind and purpose, it must not be so, as to affect his friends, to whom
he must.always be the same}

* Sijpor 8 d&ia woAdkd. Welcker suggests that we should here

read Anpdrak, coi woAda gine Bagi, quoting many happy emenda-
‘tions ; e.g. Ov. Amor. iii. 9, 23, where Grevius raed Patareidis
‘for “ pater edidit.”” Brunck reads dei pév o'@fia rodXd gipey Bape’,
Te quidem gravia multa condigne ferre necesse e#t, which we have
adopted as the text from which to translate.

‘ (Ver. 1083—1086=Frere’s Fragm. ciii-) This address is made
to the Dioscuri, because they are the patrons of friendship, owing
to their own brotherly love. Welcker. : ’

5 (Ver. 1087--1092—Frere’s Fragm. 1.) Cf. Anthol. Pal. p. 595, ef
podiv mévog isri, gurety mévog, ix 68’ deBouy aipotpat xonoTig EAxoc
tye odsvne. Welck, In ver. 1092, réiv poe redo0e yapry ribeso, i. e.
is’ gig wpdrepov ydpey oféag. Winterton translates. “ superiorum
mihi gratiam repone.’” . : ~~


1095—1115, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 277


away my neck.? But you, when you have-lost my friendship,
will afterwards be sensible. of my prudence,.ino matter who.it
was that counselled you concerning me, and bade you go
away and abandon my friendship.

Insolence hath ruined both the Magnesians, and Colophon, -
and Smyrna :? Cyrnus, it will certainly ruin us likewise. But
having been put to‘ the test, and being rubbed beside lead,
as being refined gold, you will be fair to all. °

Ah wretched me! for now have I become alaughing-stock
to foes, and to my friends‘ trouble, having suffered sadly.

O Cyrnus, they who were noble aforetime, are now on the
other hand mean ; and those who were base before, are now

_ noble: who can endure to look ypon? these things, éo 2wit,
the noble more dishonoured, and the baser sort obtaining
honour ? whilst the weli-born man espouses a wite from a
mean man’s house. So deceiving each ‘other they exult one
over the other, cherishing remembrance neither of good nor
bad. . “7

Possessing riches, you have reproached me with poverty :4
but something I have, and something more I shall make, afte
having paid my vows to the gods. va

-O wealth, of all gods fairest and most delightsome, with thy
aid, e’en though mean, I become a noble man,

May I have youth’s prime, and may Latona’s son,’ Phebus
3 dmoppabac Bosyxor, i.e. rév rpiyydov tedcicar. Camerarius,
In the line before for Mpwje peyadic, Graevins suggested ée Arwéng -
wegedye, out of a fine linen bird-net., With ver. 1097, 1098, ef. infra
1239, 1240, e , ‘ 6

* dppac ddet. Welcker suggests dup’ donde. For the line before
hhe quotes Cic. de Leg. Agrar. i. 7, Si superbia, nata inibi esse ex
Campanorum fastidio videtur. In ver. 1102 some read puede for
wardc. For this allusion to assaying, see above at ver. 417.

3 dvixor' ecopiv. Cf. Mate. Gr, Gr. § 550; Hom. Hl. v. 895.
With ver. 1108, cf, Theogn. 183-196. Nearly the same-words
occur above at ver. 59, 60, except that there yrwuag is read instead

of pyqpny, in ver. 1110.

* (Ver, 1111, 1112=Frere’s Fragm. xcii.) Palladas, 81, (quoted
by Welcker,) ove iué rip reviny 53 raOuBpicat’ dO Kai 6 Lede “Hy ini
ze arexéc, wairoc Emacyey tau. (Ver, 1118, 1114=Frere’s

ragm. xcvi.) .

% (Ver. 1115—1118=Frere’s Fragm. i.) With #Sn¢_pérpor Zxorps,
ef, Hom. Il. xi. 225; Bug tpexvdtos iwero péirpoy. Od. xi. 317, &
Buc pérpor icovro. Hes. Op. et D. 182, 488, Cf. Liddell and Scott
and Welcker. 5


278 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 1116-1134,


Apollo, love me, and Jove, sovereign of immortals ; that so
I may live my. life aloof from all ills, delighting my spirit
with youth and riches.

Remind me not of ills: I have suffered, look you, such
treatment as. Ulysses ;! who went to the vast mansion of
Hades, and came up again from it; Ulysses, who, prudent as
in truth he was, also slew with pitiless steel the suitors of
Penelope, his wedded spouse : she who had long awaited him,
while she remained abiding beside his dear son, until he set
foot in the land, and érod the terror-causing inmost corners.?
* If I but drink, I care not for spirit-wasting poverty,’ nor
hostile men, who speak ill of me. But I lament for delight-
some youth, which is failing me: and I kewail troublesome
old-age coming-upon-me. j

Cyrnus, for present friends we will stay the beginning of
ill:4 and Jet us seek remedies for the growing wound.

Hope alone remains a kind goddess among mortals,® the


rest have abandoned us, and gone to Olympus.


Gone is Faith, a mighty goddess: gone from men Temper-
ance: the Graces too, my friend, have quitted earth, and


' (Ver, 1119—1124—Frere’s Fragm. Ixxvi.) For the visit of Ulys-
ses to the shades, see Hom. Od. xi. passim. For xoupiding adédyou,
see Butmann’s Lexil. p. 392—394; Hor. Od. III. x: 11, Penelopen
difficilem procis. :

2 Wassengbergh quoted by Welcker reads d¢0’ "10dxn¢ EwiBn,
Sadadéou re puxov, puxod to avoid the awkwardness of two different
cases after iwéS8n. There seems no reason for altering detpadéouc
for dadadgov, as the puyol, says Welcker, are the recesses, or cor-


_hets, defended by many suitors, strong and brave. But perhaps


Serpurréiwy re poywy might be read. s

* (Ver. 1025-~1028=Frere’s Fragm. Ixii.) _For ei riopat, Bekker
and others read from Stobeus otre ye py. With the verses 1127
and 1128, cf. Hor. Od. IV. i., throughout.

* (Ver. 1129, 1180=Frere’s Fragm. Ixxi. p. 1.) Welcker quotes
a verse from Suidas, dpxiy i&ofat wordt Awior He TeXeuTHY.

5 (Ver. 1131—1146==Frere’s Fragm. lxxix.} Welcker accounts for
the transition from praise of the goddess Hopesin ver. 1143, by
explaining that hope, which, as says Tibull. Tr vie 21, Alit agri-
colas, also supports exiles, and depressed parties in states (cf. 333,
83+). Theognis is led by mention of hope, to think of the day when
he may regain from his foes his lost possessions. Soph. Ant. 897, év
adiriow Tpsgw; 1246, aio G& Béccopat. For the departure of the
deities from earth ef. Hesiod, Op. et D. 197—200. In 1133 wierte
is the Cana Fides of Virgil, Ain. i. 292; cf. Hor. Od. I. xxiv. 6,
Cui Pudor, et Justitie soror Jncorrupta Fides, nudaque veritas. Pu-
dor is perhaps the ¢w¢pooirn, .


. .


“M38—~1157, = - MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 279


just oaths are no more to be relied on among men, neither
does any-one reverence the immortal-gods.!_ But the race of
holy men hath waned, nor are they any longer sensible of
ordinances, no, nor holy lives. Yet so long as a man lives,
and beholds the light of the sun, acting-piously as regards the
gods, let him wait on Hope. And let him pray to the gods,
burning also splendid thighs of victims,? and to Hope let him
sacrifice first and last. And let him ever muse on the per-
‘verted language of unjust men, who, nowise reverencing the
immortal gods, are ever setting their thoughts on the pos-
sessions of others, having: attached shameful masks to evil
deeds.

- Never let go your ‘jesse friend, and seek out another,
complying with the words of meaner men.

Be it mine to be. rich, aloof from evil cares, and to live
harmlessly, meeting-with no ill.

I neither long nor pray to be rich:4 but be it mine to live
on my little store, and find no hurt.

Wealth and wisdom are a matter most irresistible ever ;
for neither could you over-fill the desire with wealth :> and
in like manner the wisest man doth not shan wisdom, but -
longs after it : yet cannot satisfy his desire therewith. — -

No treasure is it better to lay-up-for your children ;° yet


7 CE. Hor. Od. 1. xxxv. 35—37,
Unde manus juventus
Metu deorum continuit ? Quibus ;
Pepercit aris? ;
And at ver. 1137 cf. Psalm xii. 1, “ Help, Lord: for the godly
man ceaseth : for the faithful fail from among the children of men,

* rai dyhad pyoia xaiwy. Schiefer reads car’ for cai, from Iliad
Xv. 3873, kara wiova pypia caiwy. With adrmdi apdry kai wypdry, cf.
Hesiod, uae. 34 and 48, and ‘Theognis, 2, 3

: Solon sai Pld pI) TAXY KTH, otc F dy erhjoy, wr) Tayy aro-
ot weleker a ker.

4 Paes: quoges Archilochus, 08 pot ra Téyew Tov moduxpicov


6 “CE. Solon, Fragm. v.71; Gaisford, Poet. Min. vol. iii., xdodrov 3’

ovdiy réppa Tepacpevoy dvdpdee esirat. Welcker points out in these
lines an instance of the thing compared being placed after that
with which it is to be compared. Cf. Pind. Ol. ix.-74.

§ (Ver..1157—1164==Frere’s Fragm. liv.) The natural explana-
tion of the verses 1157, 1158, would be to refer them to “ liberality,”
though Welcker dissents from the notion of the noble (4ya@vic) being
in a state described by airotew. But the reverses of political par-


280 - _ MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 1158—1180.


give it, Cyrnus, to noble men when they’ erave it. For no
man is in all respects all-blessed :! but the noble man has re-
solution to keep his misfortune, albeit not manifest io all,
whilst the meaner person knows not how to keep his spirit
even alike, in prosperity or in adversity. But on mortals fall
various behests of the immortals ; to endure then the gifts of
the immortals, such-as they give men to have, it is meet.

In prudent men, eyes, tongue, and ears, and man’s intelli-
gence are-by-nature in the midst of their breasts.?

Company with the noble: but never follow the base, when-
‘soever you are finishing a journey or your traffics Of the
noble, noble-is the answer, noble the works: but of the baser

_ sort the winds carry away the worthless words. From evil-
company come ills :.and well wilt thou too understand this,
since thou hast erred against the mighty immortals.

The gods, O Cyrnus, give. judgment as the best boon to
niortals :4 judgment hath the issues of every man: O happy
he that truly hath it in his mind. ‘Verily it is far superior
to dangerous insolence and wretched satiety. But satiety is
an evil to mortals: than which twe nought is more evil.; for
all mischief, Cyrnus, is from these. :

Would that, O-Cyrnus, thou mightest be clear from
suffering and doing disgraceful deeds ; then wouldst thou have
greatest experience in virtue.


ties would reduce, as they did often, nobles to beggary. Welcker
applies the whole te an unlawful love.

" obdgig roe wavr’ eons, k. 7.4. This and the five following verses -
‘oceur before in 441—446; with no variation except Ze instead of
éxwy in the second verse. Perhaps in thé present instance the
construction roAp¢ éxwy may be pscolved into a case similar to these
. quoted by Matthie, Gr. Gr. § 552-554,

2 Grotius and Gaisford quote a reading ornGiwy epfoverog for iv
ouveroig puerat. ‘ .

3'reppard 7’ ivroping. Welcker reads ix’ dumopiny.—rippar’
éuroping is by Liddell and Scott explained as ‘a periphrasis, like
’#isch.. Eum. 746, réppar’ ayxorijc. ith ver. 1176 ef, Proper. If,
xxviii. 8; Quicquid jurarunt, ventus et unda rapit. Ver. 1171,
1172==Frere’s Fragm. xxxvii. Compare Hor. Od. III. ii. 21—32..

4 Welcker illustrates this line by a fragment of Solon, viii-,
yruposivyg ST dgavig yakexwraroy sort voijoat Mitpor, 8 0b) ravray
meipara povvoy ixe. For képog in ver. 1177, cf Theogn. 158, and
the notes theres iPpic and xépog are represented as near of kin by
Pindar, Herodotus, and other Greek writers,


«


‘4181—1200. MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. y 281


us, reverence und fear the gods ;! for this prevents
man either from doing or saying unholy things. :

To lay-low a tyrant that grindeth-down-his-people, even as
you will? is no call for wrath on the part of the gods.

Good sense and good speech, these things are-by-nature in
but few men,* who are ‘masters of both these. : '

No one by paying ransom can escape death‘ or severe .
misfortune, unless fate impose an issue. Neither can mortal
man, though he wish it, by gifts escape anxieties, to wit, when
the god sends griefs. . ;

I desire not to lie in regal couch when dead ;° but be mine
some good thing whilst I am yet alive. Prickles, I ween, to
a dead man are a like couch to embroidered carpets ; the wood
is either hard or soft: <¢ matters not.- ey

Neither swear by the gods a perjured oath, for it is not en-
durable to hide from the immortals a debt that is due.

I hear, son of Polypas, the voice of the shrill-crying crane,®
even her, who to mortals comes as harbinger of the season for
‘ploughing ; and it smote my dark heart? that others possess


1 So Hesiod, Op. et D. 706, 20 2 dai d0avdrwy paxdpwy mepuday-
péveg elvat, See alse Pythagor, Aurea Carmina, i. (Winterton's
Poet. Min. Grec.). « ” .

2 With dnpopayor cf. Hom. IL. i. 231, dnpoBdpog Bacidcig.—rara-
rXivac, Camerarius doubts the use of this word im the sense of to
“lay-low,” and suggests sataxjvat.—od vipeng. Cf. Hom. Od. i.
350. : ;

3 Ver, 1185--1186=Frere’s Fragm. xxvi.

« (Ver. 1187-——1190=Frere’s Fragm. xxvii.) Cf. for the sentiment
expressed: here Enrip. Alcest. 112—135; Hor. Od. IL. xiv..5—12.
With ver. 1189, 1190, cf. St. Paul to the Romans, viii. 22, * The -
whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.”

> Ver. 1191—1194—=Frere’s Fragm. xxiv., whe connects these re-
flections with the pageant at the burial of Hipparchus.—reOvedg, a -
dissyllable by synizesis, cf. Matt. Gr. Gr. § 198, 3, f£.—domddabog, a
shrub with such sharp prickles that it was used as an instrument of
torture. See Plat, de Rep. 616, a. (L. and S.). The two last lines
are different ways of expreasing that the grave levels all distinctions.

* (Ver. 1197--1202==Frere’s Fragm. |x.) Cf. Hesiod, Op. et D..
447—450, ppaZeoGar O° ebr’ ay yepdvov gwvqy émaxovonc, x.T.d., and
the notes on that passage. : ; ;

1 gpadinv—pédavvay. Welcker quotes for this phrase Hom. II. i.
103, pines 62 piya goiveg dygtpéihawar Tlipmdavre. Odyss. iv. 661;
isch. Agam. 546, wg wd\X’ dpaupitg ix gpevig p’ avacrivay, In
ver. 1202 I have translated Welcker’s reading ddapyyorig instead


.


282 MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 1200—-1216,


my flourishing fields, neither do my mules drag the bent-yoke
of the plough, on account of that ever-to-be-remembered
voyage.

I will not go, neither shall a.tyrant be lamented by me,!
nor-go beneath the earth with wailing over his tomb. No,
nor would he, if I were dead, either be grieved, or let fall
warm tears adown his eyes.

I neither forbid you, nor invite you, to revel: you will be
troublesome, when present, and friendly, whensoeVer you are
absent.? a ;

I am Atthon by family: but, forced from my fatherland,3 I
dwell in Thebes, a well-fortified city. Mock me not rudely,
Argyris, nor abuse my dear parents: for upon you presses
the day of servitude; but for me, woman, there are many
other ills indeed, for I am an exile from my country ; yet dis-
tressing slavery hangs not over me, nor do men export us for
sale,* and even for us indeed there is a fair city, situate in
oblivion’s plain.
of the common reading, dAXjj¢ penoriic. The poet had been despoiled
of bis posse enous whilse absent on a voyage. -"

' (Ver. 1203—1206=Frere’s Fragm. xxv.) This passage, like ver.
1191—1194, may have reference to the pomp of the tyrant’s obse-
quies. Ver. 1205, 1206 remind us of Childe Harold’s

“Why should I for others groan,- —-
When none will sigh for me?”

2 dpyadtog yap tov. According to the suggestion of Camerarius,

adopted by Welcker, we read here dpyadéog wapewv, and understand


é07.
q (Ver. 1209—1216—Frere’s Fragm. Ixxiv. part 3.) According to
Frere this is part of the indignant reply of our poet to Argyris, a
- female slave, who was engaged in singing at a banquet, and ques-
tioned the noble birth of Theognis. It is connected with ver, 531—
538. ‘This seems the most simple way of understanding the pass-
age that has been suggested, and is perhaps one of Mr. Frere’s
happiest hits, Camerarius professes ignorance of what we are to
understand by the word At@wy, Welcker says it has the force of
‘an appellative. It may have been a name of the family of Theog-
nis, which would prove his noble race at once to his contemporaries.
In ver. 1211, for the word dévvate compare Soph. Ant. 759; Ajax,
243, é ‘
* wepvador, an Homeric word, Il, xxii. 45; xxiv. 752;. xviii. 292.
According to Crusius’s Homeric Lexicon, it is a form of wepdw,
whence 769» is formed, which may point the bitterness of the word
used in re nes Argyris. AnOaioy zédtor, a figurative expression for
‘the forgetfulness in which the exile says he will bury his sorrows.


€


~ 42171234, MAXIMS OF THEOGNIS. 283


‘Never let us sit down and laugh beside them that mourn,!
O Cyrnus, delighting ourselves in our own advantages.

To deceive an enemy, indeed, and ill-affected man, is hard,
Cyrnus: but for a friend to deceive a friend is easy. :


VERSES


ASCRIBED BY VARIOUS WRITERS TO ‘THEOGNIS.


_Noveut, Cyrnus, is more unjust than anger, which hurts
its possessor, by meanly indulging passion.

NotHing, Cyrnus, is more sweet than a good wife:? Tama
witness, and be thou so to me of my truthfulness.

Speech is wont to bring many false-steps to mortal men, -
when the judgment, Cyrnus, is disturbed. ,

The cares of men have had allotted to them,? and possess,
various wings, being divided for the sake of spirit and sub+
sistence.

Be young, dear heart-: ‘soon will there be some other men ;
and J, having died, shall be dark earth.

But growing old, he is distinguished among the citizens,‘
nor does any wish to hurt him, in point of respect or justice.

On no one, Cyrnus, do the rays of the sun that-giveth«
light-to-men look down, over whom blame doth not hang,


t Cf. St. Paul to Rom. xii. 15, “ Rejoice with them that do rejoice,
and weep with them that nl Chilo in Stobeeus iii. ’Arvyobyre
BR oH blag xov} yao 4 TOXN. er. 1219, 1220, Frere’s Fragm. xliv.

2 (Ver. 1223, 1224—Frere’s Frag. Ixxvii.) Welcker illustrates the
passage by Hom. Odyss. vi. 182—185; Hesiod, Op. et D. 703—705.
Simonides, Fragm. cexxiv., | ;

yuvarndc obdiy xem ap Aniverat
ZoOhijg Gpevor, ob08 piyor raxiic.

3 (Ver. 1227, 1228=Frere’s Fragm. xcv.) For pepopevarin ver.
1228, Welcker reads pupépevat. The verses, 1230, 1231, seem to he-'
long to the same fragment as 875-880... ;

_ * Ver. 1281, 1232 are a fragment of Tyrteus, which would more
properly have gone with verses 929—982 above. In the next frag-
ment for gazoipBpdrou jediow, cf. Hom. Odyas, x. 138, 191.


,


284 MAXIMS OF THEOGNiS. .1284—1238,
But I am not able to ascertain what mind the citizens enter-
tain, for neither when I do good nor ill do I satisfy them.
Fer heretofore hath & marine corpse invited me home,!
though dead, yet speaking with living voice.
' 4 @addrrioc--vexpdg. The allusion here is to the spiral shell called
«éyXog, cochlea, which the Tritons were supposed to have used as
trumpets. -Cf. Virg. An. vi. 171—173; Cic. de Divinat. ii. c. 64,
where a quotation from the Amphion of Pacuvius, which ends with
‘ “eviscerata, inanima, cum animali sono,” sc. testudo, alludes to
the same shell.


REMAINS OF HESIOD,


TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK INTO ENGLISH VERSE,


’
.


BY


CHARLES ABRAHAM ELTON.


*"Tousv Weddea word Aéyerv Eropotowy Spoia,
"Toney rN br’ 2idwuey &Xnlia pvOijoac0at.—OEOr.


a THE THEOGONY,


OR GENERATION OF THE GODS.


a '


e


ARGUMENT. ,


The Proem is a rhapsody in honour of the Muses. It opens with a descrip-
tion of their solemn dances on Helicon, and of the hymns which they sing
during their nightly visitation of Earth. The poet then relates their ap-
pearance to himself, and his consequent inspiration; describes their em-
ployments in Heaven, their birth and dignity; their influence on kings,
minstrels, and ‘bards; and finishes with invoking their assistance, and
proposing his subject. The Cosmocony, or Origin of Nature, then com-
mences, and blends into the THEOGONY, or Generation of the Gods, which
is continued through the whole poem, and concludes with the race of
demigods, or those born from the loves of goddesses and mortals. The
following legendary fables are interwoven episodically with the main sub-
ject: I. The Conspiracy of Earth and Cronus, or Saturn, against Uranus
or Heaven. II. The Concealment of the Infant Jupiter. III. The Im-
piety and Punishment of Prometheus. IV. The Creation of Pandora, or

oman. V. The War of the Gods and Titans.. VI. The Combat of


Jupiter and Typheus.


Berein we from the Muses, O my song! .

Whose mansion is the mountain vast and holy

Of Helicon ; where aye with delicate feet

Fast by Jove’s altar and purpureal fount ;

They tread the measur’d round: their tender limbs 5

Lav’d in Permessian waters, or the stream

Of blest Olmius, or pure Hippocrene,

On the high top of Helicon they wont co
~ To lead the mazy measure, breathing grace,

Enkjndling love, and glance their quivering feet. , 10

Thence break they forth tumultuous, and enwrapt .

Wide with dim air, through silence of the night

Shape‘ their ethereal way, and send abroad

A voice, in stilly darkness beautiful. .

Jove egis-arm’d they praise, in choral hymns 15.

Of adoration; and of Argos nam’d ° .


~ 288 - ; HESIOD.


Majestic Juno, gliding on her way
With golden-sandal’d feet ; and her whose eyes
Glitter with azure light, Minerva born
From Jove ; Apollo, sire of prophecy,
And Dian, joyous in the sounding shaft ;
Earth-shaker Neptune, earth-enclasping god ;
And Themis, name adorable.in heaven ;
And Venus, lovely with her tremulous lids ;
And Hebe, who with golden fillet binds
Her brow ; and fair Dione, and the Morn,
And the great Sun, and the resplendent Moon 3 3
Latona; and Iapetus, and him
Of mazy counsel, Saturn; and the Earth,
And the vast Ocean, and the sable N: ight ; :
And all the boly race of deities
Existing ever.

They to Hesiod erst
Have taught their stately song ; the whilst his flocks
He fed beneath all-sacred Helicon.
Thus first those goddesses their heavenly speech
Address’d, th’ Olympian Muses born from Jove :

as Night-watching shepherds'! beings of reproach !

Ye grosser natures, hear! we know to speak
Full many a fiction false, yet seeming-true,
Or utter at our will the things of truth.”

So said they-—daughters of the mighty Jove
All-eloquent—and gave unto my hand '
Wondrous! a verdant rod; a laurel-branch
Of bloom unwithering ; and a voice imbreath’d
Divine; that I might 1 utter forth in song
The future and the past: and bade me sing
The blessed race existing evermore,

And first and last resound the Muses’ praise.

' But why this wandering tale, as it were told-
‘In oaken shade, or shelter of the rock?


Come, from the Muses let the Song proceed, =


Who the great spirit of their father Jove
Delight in heaven; and with symphonious voice
- Of soft agreement, in their hymns proclaim

The present, and the future, and: the past.
Flows inexhaustible from every tongue


30


40


50


55


THE THEOGONY.


That sweetest voice: the Thunderer’s palaces
Laugh in their melody, while from the lips
‘Of those fair goddesses the honey’d sounds
Are scatter’d far and wide. Olympus rings
From every snow-topt summit, and resound
The mansions of celestials. They: a voice
Immortal uttering, first in song proclaim
* The race of venerable Gods, who rose
From.the beginning, whom the spacious Heaven
- And Earth produc’d ; and all the deities
From them successive sprung, dispensing good.
Next also Jove, the sire of gods and men,
They praisé ; or when they lift the solemn song,
Or when surcease: how excellent heis
Above all gods, and in his might supreme.
Now to the race of Men, and hardy brood :
Of Giants, flows the strain; and thus in heaven
Th’ Olympian Muses charm the mind of Jove.
Them erst Mnemosyne, whose empire sways
Eleuther's fertile soil, conceiv’d in shades
Pierian, with their sire Saturnius there
Blending embrace of love: they to all ills
. Oblivion yield, to every troubled thought
Rest: thrice three nights did all-consulting Jove
Melt in her arms, apart from eyes profane
Of all immortals, to the sacred couch
Ascending : but when now roll’d round the year,
And moons had wan’d and seasons due revolv’d
And days were number’d, she the virgins nine |
‘Gave at a birth ; in unison of soul
Attemper’d soft, whose care is only song ;


In whose freé bosom dwells th’ unsorrowing mind.


They saw the light of heaven no distant space
From where Olympus his extremest top
Rears in eternal snow. There on the mount
They dwell in mansions beautified, and shine
In the smooth pomp of dance: and them beside
The sister Graces hold abode; and Love -
Himselfis nigh, participant in feast, . —.
So through their parted lips a lovely voice


The Muses breathe ; they sing the laws that bind =~
v


289
60
65
0
75


80


99


95


290 ‘ HESIOD.


The universal heaven ; the manners pure
Of deathless gods, and lovely is their voice. 7
Anon they toward th’ Olympian summits bend ~ 100°
Their steps, exuiting in the charm of voice, -
And songs of jmmortality : remote
The dusky earth remurmurs musical
The echo of their hymnings’; and beneath
Their many-rustling feet a pleasant sound 105
Ariseth, as tumultuous pass they on :
To greet their awful sire. Po be
. He ‘reigns in heaven,
The glowing bolt and lightning in his grasp,
Since by ascendant strength cast down from high .
Saturn his father fell: hence Jove to all ; 110
_ Disposes all things ; to th’ eternal gods
Ordering their honours.
. ; Thus the- Olympian maids
Are wont to sing, the daughters nine of Jove :
Clio; Thalia, and Melpomene, :
Urania, Erito, Terpsichore, 115°
Polymnia and Euterpe, and the last
Calliope :—she, proudly eminent
O’er every Muse, with kings majestical |
’ Associate walks.’ Whom of the monarch race,
The foster-sons of Jove, the Muses will. 120
. To honour; on whose infant head, when first
Usher’d to light, they-placid look from high
With smiling aspect; on his tongue they shed
A gentle dew, and words as honey sweet
Drop from his lips. On him the people’s eyes 125
Wait awful, who in righteousness disceris
The ways of judgment ; who in wisdom speaks
‘Infallible, and straight the contest calms
When mightiest. Lo! in this are monarchs wise;
That from the seat of justice to the wrong’d 180
They turn the tide of things, retrieving ils
With mild accost of soothing eloquence.
Him, when he walks the city-ways, all hail
With gentlest-awe, and as he were a god
Propitiate: hira th’ assembled council view , 185
Conspicuous in the midst. Lo! such to man


THE THEOGONY. 7 291


The Muse’s gift all-sacred. From the Muse
And Pheebus, archer-god, arise on earth
Minstrels and men of song ; "but kings arise :
From Jove himself. Unutterably blest 140
_ He whom the Muses. love. A melting voiee
Flows ever from his lip: and is there one
Whose aching heart some sudden anguish wrings ?
But lo! the bard, the Muse’s minister,
Awakes the strain: he sings the mighty deeds 145
Of men of yore: the praise of blessed gods
In heaven: and straight, though stricken to the soul, -
He shall forget, nor aught of all his griefs
‘Remember : so the, blessing of the Muse
Hath instantaneous turn’d his woes away. - Bs 150
Daughters of Jove, all-hail! but O inspire
The lovely song! the sacred race proclaim
Of ever-living gods ; who sprang from Earth,
From the starr’d Heaven, and from the gloomy Night,
And whom the salt Deep nourish’d into life. , 155
Declare how first the gods and earth became ;
The rivers, and th’ immeasurable sea
High-raging in its foam: the glittering | stars,
The wide-impending heaven ; and who from these
Of deities arose, dispensing good :. 160
Say how their treasures, how their honours each
Allotted shar’d : how first they held abode
On many-cav’d Olympus :—-this declare,
Ye Muses ! dwellers of the heavenly mount . ;
From the beginning ; say, who first arose ? _ . 165
First Chaos was : next ample-bosom’d Earth,
The seat eternal and immoveable
Of deathless gods, who still th’ Olympian heights
Snow-topt inhabit. Third, in hollow depth
Of the vast ground, expanded wide above . 110 —
The gloomy Tartarus. Love-then arose,
Most beauteous of immortals: he at once
Of every god and every mortal man
Unnerves the limbs ; dissolves the wiser breast ;
By reason steel’d, and quells the very soul. © 175
“From Chaos, Erebus and sable Night . ne


From = arose the Sunshine and the Day 5 ;
‘v2


292 *  < gEstop:


Whom she with dark embrace of Erebus
Commingling bore.
Her first-born Earth produc’d
Of like immensity, the starry Heaven : ; 180
That he might sheltering compass her around
On every side, and be for evermore
To the blest gods-:a mansion unremov’d.
Next the high hills arose, the pleasant haunts
Of goddess-nymphs, who dwell among the glens 185
Of mountains. With no aid of tender love
Gave she to birth the sterile Sea, high swoll’n
In raging foam ; and, Heaven-embraced, anon
She teem’d with Ocean; rolling in deep whirls
‘ His vast abyss of waters.
‘ Croeus then, 190
Ceeus, Hyperion, and Ispetus,
Themis, and Thea rose ; Mnemosyne, ,
And Rhea ; Phoebe diadem’d with gold,
And love-inspiring Tethys: and of these, x
Youngest in birth,-the wily Saturn came, 195
The sternest of her sons; and he abhorr’d
Thé sire that gave him life.
Then brought she forth
The Cyclops haughty of spirit : Steropes,
Brontes, and Arges of impetuous soul ; :
Who gave to Jove his thunder, and who forg’d 200
- The lightning flame. Resembling gods they were,
Save that a single ball of sight was fix’d
In their mid-forehead : hence thé Cyclops’ name :
For that one circular eye was broad infix’d
‘In the mid;forehead :—strength was ‘theirs, and force, 205
And craft of curious toil. é
Then other sons
Were born of Earth and Heaven: three mighty sons
And valiant ; dreadful but to name ; a race
Aspiring ; Cottus, Gyges, Briareus.
A hundred arms from forth their shoulders burst, 210
Mocking- approach ; and fifty heads upsprang
O'er limbs of sinewy mould : their giant forms
_ Tower’d,huge, in bold immeasurable strength.
Of all the children sprung from Earth and Heaven,


THE THEOGONY. ee 24


The fiercest these ; but all their sire abhorr’d ~ 2h
From the beginning : all his race he seig’d :
‘As each was born, and hid in cave profound, - is
. Nor e’er releas’d to day ; and in his work
Malign exulted Heaven, Then inly groan’d
The vast Earth, grief-opprest, and straight devis'd 220
Ill stratagem of fraud : and thus intent,
‘When now she had produced a whiter kind’
Of temper’d iron, cunning-wrought she forg’d
Sate huge, and to her children spake :
Dering she spake, yet at her heart aggriev’d :— 225
ly sons! alas, ye children of a sire
Most impious, now obey a mother’s voice ;
So shall we well avenge the fell despite
Of him, your father, who the first devis’d
Deeds of injustice.” -
: - While she said, on all 230
Fear seiz’d ; nor utterance found they, till with soul -
Embolden "4, wily Saturn huge address’d
His awfal mother.
, * Mother, be the deed
' My own: this pledg’d, I will most @ure achieve
This feat ; nor heed I him, our sire, of name 235
Detested ; for that he the first devis'd
Deeds of injustice.”
Thus he said; and Earth
Was gladden’d at her heart. She planted him
In ambush dark and secret: to his grasp
The rough-tooth’d sickle gave, and tutor’d him 240
In every wile.
; Vast Heaven came down fom high,
And with him brought the gloominess of night
On all beneath : with ardour of embrace °
Hovering o’er Earth, in his immensity
He lay diffus’d ‘around. The wily son _ 245
From secret ambush then his weaker hand -
Put forth : his right the sickle grasp’d, with teeth
‘Horrent, and huge, and long : and from his sire
He swift the source of generative life
Cut sheer : then cast behind him far away 250
The bloody ruin. But not so in vain


294 . ‘4 . HESIOD. ‘


Escap’d it from his hold : the gory drops
Earth, as'they gush’d, receiv’d. When years roll’d round

~ Thence teem’d she with the fierce Eumenides,
And ‘giants huge in stature, all in mail . 255
Radiant, and wielding long-protended spears :
And Nymphs, wide worshipp’ a o’er the founded earth
By Dryad name. .

So severing with keen steel
The sacred spoils, he from the continent:

Amidst the many surges of the sea 260
». Hu’dthem. Full long they drifted o’er the deeps;

‘Till now swift-circling a white foam arose

From that immortal substance, and a nymph

Was nourish’d in the midst. The wafting waves

First bore her to Cythera the divine: . 265°

To wave-encircled Cyprus came she then,

_ And forth emerg’d, a goddess, in the charms
Of awful beauty. Where her delicate feet
Had prest the sands, green herbage flowering sprang. |
Her Aphrodite gods and mortals name, 270
The foam-born goddess : and her name is known
As Cytherea with th€ blooming wreath,

For that she touch’d Cythera’s flowery coast ;
And Cypris, for that on the Cyprian shore
She rose, amid the multitude of waves. 275
Love track’d her steps, and: beautiful Desire
’ Pursued; while soon as born she bent her way
Toward heaven’s assembled gods; her honours these
From the beginning ; whether gods or men
Her presence bless, to her the portion fell 280.
Of virgin whisperings, and alluring smiles, :
And smooth deceits, and gentle ecstasy,
And dalliance, and the blandishments of love. .
Now the great Heaven, rebuking in his wrath
The sons. whom he had form’d, the Titan name 285
Stamp’d on his offspring, who vindictive wrought ;
A heinous act audacious: after-time
Should bring the vengeance ; they should rue the deed.
Abhorred Fate, and dark Necessity,
And Death, were born from Night; by none embrac’d 290
These gloomy Night brought self-conceiving forth :


THE THEOGONY.


And Sleep; and all the hovering host of Dreams.

Again she teem’d with Momus ; Care full-fraught

With many griefs : ‘and next th’ Hesperian maids,

Whose charge o’ersees the fruits of bloomy gold

Beyond the sounding ocean, the fair trees

Of golden fruitage. Then the Destinies

Arose; and Fates in vengeance pitiless ; 3

_ Clotho, and Lachesis, and Atropos,

Who at the birth of men dispense the lot
Of good and evil. They of men and gods
The crimes pursue ; nor ever pause from wrath
Tremendous, till destructive on the head
Of him that sins the retribution fall.
Then teem’d pernicious Night with Nemesis,

_ The scourge of mortal men ; again she bore
Fraud, and lascivious Love; slow-wasting Age,
And still-persisting Strife.

From hateful Strife

Came sore affliction, and oblivion drear ;

Famine, and weeping sorrows; combats, wars,

And slaughters, and all homicides ; and brawls,

And bickerings, and deluding lies : with them

Came lawlessness and galling injury,

Inseparable mates; and the dread oath—

A mighty bane to him of earth-born men

Who wilful swears, and perjur’d is forsworn.

The Sea with Earth embracing, Nereus rose,

Eldest of all: his race ; pure from deceit

And true ; with filial veneration nam’d
Ancient of years : for mild and: blameless he ;
Remembering still the right ; still merciful
As just in counsels. Then rose Thaumas huge,

Phorcys the strong, and Ceto fair of cheek,

And last Eurybia, of an iron soul.

From Nereus and the fair-hair’d Doris, nymph

Of ocean’s perfect stream, the lovely race

Of goddess Nereids, rose to light, whose haunt’

Is midst the waters of the sterile main.

Eucrate, Proto, Thetis, Amphitrite,

Love-breathing Thalia, Sao, and Eudora,

And Spio, skimming with light feet the wave 5


295
295


300


“310
315
820

825


330


296 "HESIOD."


Galene, Glauce, and Cymothée ;

Agave, and the gracéful Melita ;

Rose-arm’d Eunice, and Eulimene3 3 :
Pasithea, Doto, Erato, Pherusa, 335
Nesza, Cranto, and ‘Dynamene ; 3

Protomedia, Doris, and Actaa; -

And Panope, and Galatea fair ;

Hippothée winning soft ; Hipponde

The roseate-arm’d ; Cymedoce who calms. 340
The stormy billows of the darken’d main,

And blasts of mighty winds ; her aids the Nymph
Cymatolégé, while along the. deep

With beauteous ankles Amphitrite glides : :
Cymo, Eione, Liagore, 345
And, grac’d with blooming sea-wreath, ‘Halimed:
Pontoporia, and Polynome ;

Evagore, ‘and blythe Glauconome ;

Laomedia, and Evarne sweet

Of nature, as unblemish’d in her charms ;' : 850
Lysianassa and Autonome,

And Psamathe of all-engaging form ; 3:

Menippe the divine ; and Pronée,

And Neso, and Eupompe, and Themistho ;

And last Nemertes, with prophetic soul 355
Blest of her sire immortal. These are they
From blameless Nereus born, the fifty nymphs

In labours vers’d of blameless ministry.

Electra, nymph of the deep-flowing main, .
Embrac’d with Thaumas : ‘rapid Iris thence _° 860
Rose, and Aello, and Ocypetes,

The sister harpies, fair with streaming locks :
On fleetest wings upborne, they chase aloft
The hovering birds and wandering winds, and soar
. Into the heaven. :
From Ceto fair of ohisels 865
- And Phorcys, came the Graiz: (gray they were
E’en from the natal hour, and hence their name
Is known among the deities on high
And man’s earth-wandering race.) Pephredo clad __
’ In flowing vesture, and lier sister nymph, . 870
The saffron-rob’d Eny’o. Then,were born


: ‘THE THEOGONY, - 997°


The Gorgons ; who beyond the sounding main

Inhabit, on th’ extremest verge of earth,

Where night enwraps the pole, and where the maids
Hesperian warble forth their thrilling strains. *, 875
Stheno, Euryale, Medusa last, tee
Deep-suffering ; for that mortal is her date :. ’
The two immortal, dnd in bloom unchang’d.

Yet her alone the blue-hair’d god of waves °* |


. Enfolded, on the tender meadow-grass 380


And bedded flowers of spring: and when from her

Perseus the head dissever’d, then upsprahg

Chrysaor huge, and Pegasus the steed,

So nam’d, near ocean’s fountains born ; but he,

Chrysaor, in his hands a falchion held | ‘ 385 |

Of beamy gold : rapt on the winged horse

He left beneath him Earth, mother of flocks,

And soar’d to heaven’s immortals : and there dwells

In palaces of Jove, and to the god, es

Deep-counsell’d, bears the bolt and arrowy flame. 390
Chrysaor with Callirde blending love,

Nymph of sonorous ocean, sprang to birth

Three-headed Geryon : him did Hercules

Slay spoiling, ’midst his oxen pliant-hoof’d,

On Erythia girdled by the wave: 395

What time those oxen ample-brow’d he drove

To sacred Tyrinth, the broad ocean-way

Once past ; and Orthus, the grim herd-dog, stretch’d

Lifeless ; and in their murky den beyond

The billows of the long-resounding deep, : 400

The keeper of those herds, Eurytion, slain. ;
Another monster Ceto bore anon

In the deep-hollow’d cavern of a rock,

Stupendous, nor in shape resembling aught

Of human nor of heavenly; the divine 405


. Echidna, the untameable of soul :
_ Above, a nymph with beauty-blooming cheeks
. And eyes of jetty lustre ; but below,


*’ A speckled serpent horrible and huge,


Bloody-devouring, monstrous, hid in eaves 410.
Of sacred earth. There in the utterinost depth
Her cavern is, within a vaulted rock ;,. os


298 , HESIOD.
-Alike from mortals and immortals deep :
Remote: the gods have there her place assign’d
In mansions known to fame. :
So pent beneath 415
The rocks of Arima, Echidna dwelt.
Hideous ; a nymph immortal, and in youth |
' Unchang’d for evermore. But legends tell
That with*the jet-eyed nymph the whirlwind fierce,
His terrible embrace, Typhaon, join’d : 420
She, fill’'d with love, a progeny conceived
. Of strain undaunted. Geryon’s dog of. herds,
-Orthus, the first arose: the second birth,
Unutterable, was the dog of hell,
. Voracious, brazen-voiced, and bold and strong, 425,
The fifty-headed Cerberus: and third
Upsprang the Hydra, pest of Lerna’s lake ;
hom Juno, white-arm’d goddess, fostering train’d
With deep resentment fill’d, insatiable,
?Gainst Hercules ; but he, the son of Jove, - 430
Named of Amphytrion, in the dragon’s gore
Bath’d his’unpitying steel, by warlike aid
‘Of Tolaus, and the counsels high .
Of Pallas the Despoiler. Last came forth
Chimera, breathing deluges of flame 425
Unconquerable ; a monster grim and huge,
And swift and strong, and crested with three heads—
A lion’s tawny. semblance one; and one
As of a goat ;, a, mighty snake’s the third.
In front the lion threaten’d ; and behind 440
The serpent ;-and the goat was in the midst,
Exhaling fierce the strength of burning flame:
On the wing’d horse her brave Bellerophon
Slew,
She, compell’d by Orthus, gave to birth
' Depopulating Sphynx, of Cadmus’ race . 445 ©
The féll destruction ; and the lion bore
Nam’d of Nemza: him to fierceness rear’d
Jove’s glorious consort ; and his lair assign’d
Among Nemea’s hills, the pest-ofmen. °
There lurking in his haunts he long insnar’d 450
The roving tribes of man, and held stern sway


‘THE THEOGONY,


O’er cavern’d Tretum, o’er the mountain heights
Of Apesantus, and Nemza’s wilds;

Till strong Alcides quell’'d his gasping strength.
Again, embrac’d by Phorcys, brought she forth -
Her youngest-born, the dreadful snake, that couch’d —

In the dark earth’s abyss, a wide domain,
Holds o’er the golden apples wakeful guard.
To Ocean Tethys brought the rivers forth
In whirlpool waters roll’d : Eridanus
Deep-eddied, and Alphéus, and the Nile ;
Fair-flowing Ister, Strymon, and Meander,
Phasis and Rhesus; Acfelous bright
‘ With silver-circledl ‘tides ; Fleptaporus,
And Nessus ; Hialisémion. and Rhodius ;
Granicus, Ladon,‘Sitnois the divine, °
Penéds, Hermus, and Sangarius vast ;
/Esepus, and the smooth Caician stream ;
-Ardescus, and Parthenius, and Evenus ;
And last divine Scamander.
Bore she then
A sored race of Nymphs. O’er spacious earth
They with the rivers and the king of day §-
Claim the shorn locks of youth. This portion hold
From Jove, Admete, Pitho, and Ianthe,
Electra, Doris, Prymno, Cly’mene ;
Urania, heavenly fair; Callirde ;
Rhodia, Hippo, and Pasithée;
Plexaure, Clytie, and Melobosis ; C
Idya, Thée, Xeuxo, Galaxaure ; ; ‘
And amiable. Dione, and Circeis
Of nature soft, and Polydora fair ;
Ploto the nymph of bright-dilated eye ;
Perseis, Ianira, and Acaste ;
Xanthe, the sweet Petreea, saffron-rob’d
Telestho; Metis and Euryhome ;
And Crisie, and Menestho, and Europa;
Asia, Calypso, love-enkindling nymph ;
And A’mphiro, and Tyche, and Eudora:
Ocyrée, and Styx: but she the rest.
Transcends in excellence. To Ocean these
- Were born,, and Tethys, Nymphs - elder birth ;


.


455


480


485


490


300 " prEsiop-


But more untold remain. Three thousand nymphs
Of oceanic line, in beauty tread yi
With ample step, and far and wide dispers’d
Haunt the green earth and azure depth of lakes, | 495
A blooming race of glorious goddesses.
As many rivers also, yet untold, .
Rushing with hollow-dashing sound, were born
To awful Tethys: but their every name .
Is not for mortal man to memorate;. 500
Arduous ;. yet known to all the dwellers round.

Now Thia, yielding to Hyperion’s love,
Bore the great Sun, and the resplendent Moon;
And Morn, that wide effusessrosy light
To all earth-wandering men, and deathless gods 505
‘Whose mansion is yon ample firmament.

- Eurybia, noble midst the goddess race, *
With Crius blending love, produc’d the god
Pallas, Astreus huge, and Perses, him
Transcewding all in many-scienc’d lore. 510

The Morn to huge Astrzus bore the Winds
Of spirit untam’d; East, West, and South, and North
Swift-rushing on his way, the goddess bore
Embracing with a god. Last, Lucifer,
The dawn-appearing star; and all the host 515 |
That crown with glittering light the vault of heaven.
Styx, ocean-nymph, with Pallas blending love
Bore Victory, whose feet are beautiful
In palaces ; aspiring Zeal, and Strength,
And Forte ; illustrious children: nor apart * §20
From Jove their mansion is: for never throne
’ Ts set in heaven, for never passes forth .
The Godhead on his way, but they are seen,

.Behind his glory. ‘Where the Thunderer sits,

There stablish they their seat: so wisely wrought 525

, Lhe ocean-nymph, incérruptible Styx: - _ .

What time the Lightning-sender call’d from heav’n,
And summon’d to th’ Olympian mountain vast-
All Deities immortal; thus he spake: .
“ Hear, all ye gods! Whoe’er in aid of Jove 530
Shall give the Titans battle, he shall need
No heavenly gift ; and all of honour held’


THE THEOGONY.
Erst midst immortals, be his portion still:
.And he that murmur’d under Saturn’s reign,
Ungifted and unhonour’d, shall arise, ;
_ As justice claims, to honours and‘rewards.”
Lo! then, incérruptible Styx the first,
Sway’d by the careful counsels of her sire,
Stood on Olympus; and her sons beside ;,
There grac’d with honour, and with goodly gifts.
Her Jove ordain’d the great tremendous oath
Of deities ; her sons for evermore
_ Indwellers in the heavens, Alike to ail,
Even as he pledg’d that sacred word, the god |


3801


535


Perform’d: so reigns he, strong in power and might. 546


Now Pheebe sought the love-delighting couch
Of Czus ; and embracing ‘with a god
Conceiv’d the goddéss ; and to her is born
Latena, rob’d with azure ; ever mild;
To mortals placid and immortal gods;
Mild from her birth, and gladsome o’er the rest
In heaven. . ,
Anon she fam’d Asteria bore,
Whom Perses, to his ample palace erst
Leading, proclaim’d his bride. She fruitful teem’d
. With Hecaté, whom the Saturnian king |
O’er all®hath honour’d, and with glorious gifts
Endow’d: allotting her divided sway ;
O’er earth, and o’er the main untillable.
Nor less her honour in the starry skies
Chief rev’rene’d by immortals; and whoe’er ,
Of earth-born men with custom’d sacrifice
Propitiates Heaven, he then the name invokes
Of Hecaté; abundant honour straight
Shall follow on his path, if to that prayer
Gracious the goddess leans, and opulence
Attend his footsteps; for the power is hers.
O’er all the gods who born from earth and heaven
Receiv’d their-share of glory, she supreme
Allotted empire holds: nor aught from her
. Ofvall those honours midst the elder gods
Titanit held, hath Jove in violence
Revok’d, nor snatch’d away: but as it stood


555


302 * -sr¥s1OD.


In the beginning, so her portion’d power
Endures. She, sole-begotten, higher meed
Of glory hath obtain’d ; far ampler sway 575
O’er heaven, and earth, and main: for her doth Jove
Delight to honour. 4
: Lo!. to whom she wills
Her presence is vouchsaf’d, and instant aid
Magnific: whom she views with gracious eyes,
He mid the forum o’er the people shines 580
Conspicuous. _ When the mailed men arise ,
To deadly battle, comes the goddess prompt |
To whom she wills; bids rapid victory
Await them, and extends the wreath of fame.
. She sits apon the sacred judgment-seat 585
Of venerable monarchs. She is found
Propitious,; when in solemn games the youth
Contending strive: there is the goddess nigh ° .
With succour: he whose hardiment and strength
Victorious prové, with ease the graceful palm 590
' Achieving, joyous o’er his parents’ age
Sheds a bright-gleam of glory. Sheis known .
‘To them propitious, who, the fiery steed
Rein in the Course; and them who labouring cleave’
Through the blue watery vast th’ untractable way. 595°
They call upon the name of Hecaté e
With vows; and his, loud-sounding god of waves,
Earth-shaker Neptune: easily at will
The glorious goddess yields the woodland prey
Abundant; easily, while scarce they start : ~ 600!
On the mock’d vision, snatches them in flight.
She too with Hermes is propitious found
To herd and fold; and bids increase the droves
Innumerable of goats and fleecy flocks, .
And swells their numbers, or their humbers thins. 605 .
The sole-begotten of her mother’s love,
She thus is honour’d with all goodly gifts
Amongst immortals. Her did Jove appoint
The nursing-mother bland of infant youth;
Of all who thenceforth to the morn’s broad light 610
Should raise the tender lid—this from the firat -
Her soothing office, and her honours these.


THE THEOGONY. - 808


Embrac’d by Saturn, Rhea gave to light -

A glorious race. .She Vesta, Ceres, bore,

And Juno golden-sandal’d ;. and of heart 615
Ruthless, the mighty Pluto, him who dwells ‘

In subterraneous palaces profound ;

Earth-shaker Neptune; and consulting Jove,

The sire of gods and men, whose thunder-peal

Rocks the wide earth in elemental war. 620
But them, as issuing from the sacred womb . :
They touch’d the mother’s knees, did Saturn huge

Devour, revolving in his troubled thought

Lest other of celestials midst the gods

Usurp the kingly sway: for to his ear 625.
The tidings came, from Earth and Heaven star-crown’d,  —
That it was doom’d by Fate, strong though he were, :

To his own son he should bow down his strength :—
Jove’s wisdom this fulfill’d. No blind design

He therefore cherish’d, and in crooked craft ; 630 -
Devour’d his children. . es sl

; But when now was nigh

The birth of Jove, the sire of gods and men, |
Rhea both Heaven and Earth, her parents lov’d,
Besought, that they might counsel and advise .
How secretly the babe may spring to light ; - 685
And how the father’s furies ’gainst his race, ~
* In subtlety devour’d, may meet revenge,

-They to their daughter listen’d, and-complied ; |
Proclaiming what the Destinies had doom’d

‘Of kingly Saturn and his dauntless son:. 640.
And her they sent to Lyctus, to the clime

Of fruitful Crete.. And when her hour was come,

The birth of Jove her youngest-born,.then Earth
‘Took to herself the mighty babe, to rear


With nurturing softness in the spacious isle 645
_ Of Crete. So came she then, transporting him
Swift through the darksome night, to Lyctus first ;


And thence, upbearing in her arms, conceal’d

Beneath the sacred ground, in sunless cave, :
Where shage’d with densest woods th’ Egean mount 650
Impends, But to th’ imperial son of Heaven,


304. "HESIOD. ,


Whilom the king of gods, a stone she gave
Inwrapt in infant swathes; and this with grasp
Eager he snatch’d, and in his ravening breast
Convey’d away: unhappy! nor once thought’. 655
That for the stone his child behind remain’d ;
Invincible, secure; who soon, with hands. ;:

| Of strength o’ercoming him, should cast him forth
From glory, and himself th’ immortals rule.
Swift throve the monarch-infant, and his limbs 660
Teem’d with heroic vigour: and with lapse
Of years, by Earth’s all-subtle prudence foil’d,
Huge Saturn, vers’d in mazy wiles, releas’d
His offspring, by the might and arts of Jove
Vanquish’d. -He first the stone, the last devour’d, 665
Disgorg’d :—this Jove in Pythos all-divine

* On earth’s broad surface fix’d, in the deep cleft
Of high Parnassus, to succeeding times
A monument, and miracle to man: fe
The brethren of his father too he loos’d 670
From their oppressive bonds; the sons of Heaven,
Whom Heaven, their sire, had in his phrensy bound.
They the good deed in grateful memory bore ;
And gave the thunder, and the burning bolt,
And lightning, which vast Earth had heretofore 675
Hid in her central caves: in these confides
The God, and reigns o’er deities and men.
$ - With Cly’mene, the beauteous-ankled nymph
Of ocean, shar’d I§petus the bed
Of bridal love. She bore to him.a son 680
Dauntless of heart, strong Atlas; the renown’d .
Menecetius; and Prometheus vers’d in arts
Of various cunning: Epimetheus last, '
Of erring soul, who from the first drew down

’ Sore evil on th’ inventive race of man ; 685
For he the first from Jove unwary took
The clay-form’d maid. Flagitious in offence,
Menecetius, by the smouldering lightning struck
Of wide-beholding Jove, to Erebus

’ Fell headlong, through immeasurable pride 690

Of impious guilt. But Atlas the broad heaven
By strong necessity upholds: his hands .


¢


THE THEOGONY.


And head he rears erect, against the clime
Where aye th’ Hesperian Maids clear-warbling sing,
On earth’s far verge—the heavenly Counsellor
This lot assign’d him :' and. Prometheus vers’d
In various wiles he bound with fettering chains
Indigsoluble, chains of galling weight, ;
Midway a column. Down he sent from high
The broad-wing’d Eagle: she his liver gorg’d
Immortal; for it sprang with life, and grew
In the night-season, and the waste repair’d
Of what by day the bird of spreading wing
Devour’d. But fair Alemena’s valiant son
The torturer slew, and from Prometheus drove
The cruel plague, and freed him from his pangs.
Nor yet high-reigning Jove withstood ; that thence
To Hercules of Thebes might glory arise
Far ampler, o’er the many-nurturing earth.
Him honouring, from his former wrath did Jove
Now rest; the wrath which heretofore he felt,
For that Prometheus *gainst the wisdom strove
Of Jupiter th’ omnipotent. When erst
The gods with mortals at Mecona held
Contention, a huge ox with ready thought
Dividing then, he set before the god
His wisdom to beguile: for here the flesh
And entrails in‘the hide depositing
With unctuous fat, the belly of the ox
He covering close o’erlaid; and there the bones
With cunning skill adjusting he dispos’d,

in white fat envelop’d. ‘Then the sire

Sf gods and men:
“Son of Tipetus ! !

O’er alll of kingly race in arts renown’d,
O friend ! how partial are thy portion 4 shares! yr

Thus of imperishable counsel spake ;
The god, and in his accent was reproach.
Him answer’d then Prometheus, deeply vers’d
In crooked subtlety, with laugh supprest,
Nor of his arts forgetful ;

’ *“ Glorious Jove !
Mightiest of ever-living gods! of these »
x


695


700


710°


715


725


730


306 . HESIOD.


Choose to thyself, e’en as thy thought persuades.”
’ Musing deceit he spake ; nor did not Jove,
Of counsel incorruptible, the fraud
Know and perceive; and in his inmost thought 735
Much evil he foredoom’d to mortal man
Which time should bring to pass. With both his hands
He the white fat uprais’d from earth, and wrath
Possess’d him: yea, his very soul was wroth,
When laid with cunning artifice he saw 740
The whitening bones. Thenceforth the tribes of earth
The whitening bones consume, when climbs the smoke
* Wreath’d from their fragrant altars, ‘Then again-
Cloud-gatherer Jove with indignation spake:
“Son of Iapetus! o’er all deep vers’d 745
In counsels, dost thou then remember yet
Thy arts delusive?” .
! So to wrath incens’d =
Boeke he of wisdom incorruptible :
And still the fraud remembering, from that hour
The strength of unexhausted fire denied 750
To all the dwellers upon earth. But him
Benevolent Prometheus did beguile:
The far-seen splendour in a hollow reed
He stole, of inexhaustible flame. But then
Resentment stung the Thunderer’s inmost soul ; 755
And his heart chaf’d in anger, when he saw >
The fire far-gleaming in the midst of men.
Straight for the flame bestow’d devis’d he ill
To man. And now the crippled artist-god, ez
Illustrious, moulded from the yielding clay 760
A bashful virgin’s image, as advis’d - :
Saturnian Jove. Then Pallas azure-eyed
Bound with the zone her bosom, and with robe
-Of silvery whiteness deck’d her folded limbs ; ‘
With her own hands a variegated veil ; 765
- Plac’d on her head, all-marvellous to sight ;
Twin’d with her tresses a delicious wreath
Of mingled verdure and fresh-blooming fldwers ;
And clasp’d her brows with diadem of gold :—
This Vulcan with his glorious hands had fram’d 770
Elaborate, pleasing to the sire of gods. ;


THE THEOGONY, 307


Full many works of curious craft, to sight
Wondrous, he grav’d thereon; full many beasts
Of earth, and fishes of the rolling main;

‘ Of these innumerable he there had wrought— 775
And elegance of art there shone profuse, ,
And admirable—e’en as though they mov’d
In very life, and utter’d animal sounds.

But now when.this fair mischief, seeming-good, —~
His hand had perfected, he’led her forth 780
Exulting in her grac’d attire, the gift
Of Pallas, in the midst of gods and men.


On men and gods in that same moment seiz’d 7
The ravishment of wonder, when they saw .

The deep deceit, th’ inextricable snare. 785
For lo! from her descend the tender sex .

Of Woman—a pernicious kind: on earth .


They dwell, destructive to the race of men:
With Luxury they, not life-consuming Want,
Fitly consorted. And as drones within ° 790
The close-roof’d hive, codperative in works
Slothful and base, are nurtur’d by the bees,—
These all the day till sinks the ruddy : gun
Haste on the wing, ‘their murm’ring labours ply,’
And still cement the white and waxen comb ; 795
Those lurk within the sheltering hive close-roof’d,
And gather in their greedy maw the spoils so
Of others’ labour,—such are womankind ;
They’ ‘whom the Thunderer sent, a bane to man,
Til helpmates of intolerable toils, 800
.More evil yet he gave, in semblance veil’d
Of good: for whoso, from the-nuptial tie
Averse, and vexing cares of woman-state,
Wills not to wed, but destitute of her .
The cherisher of age, consum’d by years 805
Declines alone ; he though perchance he live
With plenty blest, yet in the death-hour leaves
His wealth dispersed to strangers from his blood.
” Or he whose lot is marriage, and whose bride

i Of modest fame, congenial to his heart, ‘810 -
Shall find that evil clashing with the good —
Contends perpetual. But the man who gains

: x2


308 is _ HESIOD.


Her of jnjurious kind, lives bearing deep
’ A wound within; in heart and soul a grief
Endless, and irremediable despair. 815
Therefore it is not given thee to deceive
The god, nor yet elude th’ omniscient mind.
For not Prometheus, void of blame to man,
Could ’scape the burden of oppressive wrath ; :
And vain his various wisdom ; vain to free 820
From pangs, or burst th’ inextricable chain.
When first their sire ’gainst Cottus, Briareus,
And Gyges, felt his moody anger chafe
Within him,—sore amaz’d with that their strength
Immeasurable, their aspect fierce, and bulk 825
Gigantie,—with | a chain of iron force . :
He bound them d down, and fix’d their dwelling-place
- Beneath the ‘spacious 'ground : beneath the ground
They dwelt, in pain and durance : in th’ abyss
There sitting, where earth’s utmost bound’ries end. | 830
Full long opprest with mighty grief of heart
* They brooded o’er their woes : but them did Jove
. Saturnign, and those other deathless gods
Whom fair-hair’d Rhea bore to Saturn’s love, j
By counsel wise of Earth, lead forth again 835
To light. For she successive all things told :
How with the giant brethren they should win
The glory bright of conquest.,
Long they fought
With toil soul-harrowing ; they the deities i
“Titanic and: Saturnian ; each to each 840
Oppos’d, in valour of promiscuous war. ,
From Othrys’ lofty summit warr’d the host
Of glorious Titans ; from Olympus they
The band of gift-dispensing deities
“Whom fair-hair’d Rhea bore to Saturn’s love. 845
“So wag’d.they war soul-hatrowing : each with each .
Ten years and more the furious battle join’d
‘Unintermitted : nor to either host
Was issue of stern strife, nor end: alike
Did either stretch the limit of the war. 850
But now when Jove had set before his powers.
All things befitting; the repast of gods, ~


. THE THEOGONY.


The nectar and ambrosia, in each breast

- Kindled th’ heroic spirit: and now all
‘The nectar and ambrosia sweet had shar’d,
When spake the father of the gods and men :

“ Hear; ye illustrious race of Earth and Heaven,
What now the soul within me prompts. Full long
Day after day in battle have we stood
Oppos’d, Titanic and Saturnian gods,

For conquest and for empire: still do ye, .

In deadly combat with the Titans join’d,
Strength mighty and unconquerable hands
Display: remembering our benignant love
And tender mercies which ye prov’d, again °
From restless agony of bondage ris’n,

So will’d our counsel, and from gloom to day.”


He spake; when answer’d Cottus the renown’d:


“O Jove august ! not darkly hast thou said :
Nor know we not how excellent thou art

In wisdom ; from a curse most horrible
Rescuing immortals : O imperial som

Of Saturn ! by thy counsels have we ris’n
Again, from bitter bondage and the depth
Of darkness, all unhoping of relief:
‘Then with persisting spirit and device

Of prudent warfare, shall we still assert
Thy empire midst the rage of arms, and still
Tn hardy conflict brave the Titan foe.”

He ceas’d. The, gift-dispensing gods around
Heard, and in praise assented : nor till then
So burn’d each breast with ardour te destroy.
All on that day rous’d infinite the war,
Female and male: the Titan deities,


809:


855


870.
- 875


880


_ The gods from Saturn sprung, and those whom Jove, 885


" From sabterraneous gloom releas’d to light :
Terrible, strong, of force enormous ; burst
A hundred.arms from all their shoulders huge ;
Fror all théir shoulders fifty heads upsprang

. O’er limbs of sinewy mould. They then array’d
Against the Titans in fell combat stood,
And in their nervous grasp wielded aloft
Precipitous rocks. On th’ other side alert.


* 890


310 HESIOD.
The Titan phalanx clos’d: then hands of strength
Join’d prowess, and display’d the works of war. ~ 895
Tremendous then th’ immeasurable sea
Roar’d; earth resounded: the.wide heaven throughout
Groan’d shattering : from its base Olympus vast
Reel’d to the violence of gods: the shock 3
Of deep concussion rock’d the-dark abyss- 900
Remote of Tartarus : the shrilling din :
Of hollow tramplings, and strong battle-strokes,
And measureless uproar of wild pursuit.
So they reciprocal their weapons hurl’d
Groan-scattering ; 3 and the shout of either host * 905
Burst in exhorting ardour to the stars _
Of heaven; with mighty war-cries either host
Encountering clos’d.
Nor longer then did Jove
Curb his fall power ; but instant in his soul
There grew dilated strength, and it was fill’d , 910
With his omnipotence. At once he loos’d
His whole of might, and put forth all the god.
The vaulted sky, the mount Olympian, flash’d.
With his continual presence ; for be pass’d
Incessant forth, and scatter’d fires on’fires. 915
Hurl’d from his hardy grasp the lightnings flew
Reiterated swift; the whirling flash
Cast sacred splendour, and the thunderbolt
Fell: roar’d around the nurture-yielding earth
In conflagration, far on every side ; 920
Th’ immensity of forests crackling blaz’d :
Yea, the braad earth burn’d red, the streams that mix
With ocean, and the deserts of the sea.
Round and around the Titan brood of Earth ;
Roll’d the hot vapour on its fiery surge ; 925
The liquid heat air’s pure expanse divine
Suffus’d : the radiance keen of quivering flame
That shot from writhen lightnings, each dim orb,
Strong though they were, intolerable smote,
And scorch’d their blasted vision. Through the void 9380
Of Erebus, the preternatural glare
Spread, mingling fire with darkness. But to see
With human eye, and hear with ear of man,.


THE THEOGONY. * 7 311


Had been, as if midway the spacious heaven, :
Huritling with earth, shock’d—e’en as nether earth 9335
Crash’d from the centre, and the wreck of heaven

Fell ruining from high. So vast the din,

When, gods encountering gods, the clang of arms
Commingled, and the tumult roar’d from heaven.

Shrill rush’d the hollow winds, and rous’d throughout 940.
A shaking, and a gathering dark of dust,

The crush of thunders and the glare of flames, °

The fiery darts of Jove: full in the midst

Of either host they swept the roaring sound

Of tempest, and the shouting: mingled rose 945
The din of dreadful battle. There stern strength ‘
Pat forth the proof of prowess, till the fight

Declin’d : but first in opposite array '

Full long they stood, and bore the brunt of war,

Amid the foremost towering in the van . 950
The war-unsated Gyges, Briareus, ;

And Cottus, bitterest conflict wag’d: for they

Successive thrice a hundred rocks in air '

Hurl’d from their sinewy grasp: with missile storm
The Titan host o’ershadowing, them they drove 955
All-haughty as they were, with hands of strength
Overcoming them, beneath th’ expanse of earth,

And bound with galling chains ; so fat beneath

This earth, as earth is distant from the sky :

So deep the space to darksome Tartarus. 960
A brazen anvil rushing from the sky

Through thrice three days would toss in airy whirl,

Nor touch this earth till the tenth sun arose:

Or down earth’s chasm precipitate revolve, ,
Nor till the tenth sun rose attain the verge : 965
Of Tartarus. A fence of massive brass :

Is forg’d around: around the pass is roll’d

A night of triple darkness; and above

Impend the roots of earth and barren sea. -

There the Titanic gods in murkiest gloom » 970
Lie hidden, such the cloud-assembler’s will ;

There in a place of darkness, where vast earth

Has end: from thence no egress open lies:
Neptune’s huge hand with brazen gates the mouth _


312 pte HESIOD.


Has clos’d ; a wall environs every side. 975
There Gyges, Cottus, high-soul’d Briareus
Dwell vigilant, the faithful sentinels
Of zxgis-bearer Jove. Successive there
The dusky earth, and. darksome Tartarus, .
The sterile ocean, and the star-bright heaven, . 980
Arise and.end, their source and boundary.
A drear and ghastly wilderness, abhorr’d
E’en by the gods ; @ vast vacuity:
Might none the space of one slow-circling year
Touch the firm soil, that portal enter’d once, 985
. Bat him the whirl of vexing hurricanes
Toss to ‘and fro. - E’en by immortals loath’d
This prodigy of horror. There of Night
Obscure the dismal dwellings rise, with mists
_ Of darkness overspread. Full in the front 990°
Atlas upholding heaven his forehead rears
And indefatigable hands. There Night
And Day near passing, mutual greeting still
Exchange, alternate as they glide athwart
The brazen threshold vast. This entérs, that 995
Forth issues ; nor the two can one‘abode
At once constrain. This passes forth, and roams
The round of earth; that in the mansion waits,
Till the due season of her travel qome,
Lo! from the one the far-discerning light. ~ 1000
Beams upon earthly dwellers; but a cloud
Of pitchy blackness veils the other round,
Pernicious Night, aye-leading in her hand
Sleep, Death’s half-brother; sons of gloomy Night,
There hold they habitation, Death and Sleep, 1005 |
Dread deities ; nor them the shining Sun
Fer with his beam contemplates, when he climbs
The cope of heaven, nor when from heaven descends.
Of these the one glides o’er the gentle space
Of earth and broad expanse of ocean waves, 1010
Placid to man: the other has a heart ©
Of iron; in bis breast a brazen soul
Is bosom’d, ruthless: whom of men he grasps:
-Stern he retains, e’en to immortal gods
A foe. . :


\


THE THEOGONY.


The hollow-sounding palaces
Of subterraneous gods there in the front
Ascend, of mighty Pluto and his queen
Awful Persephone. <A grisly dog,
Implacable, holds watch before the gates ;
Of guile malicious. Them who enter there,
With tail and bended ears he fawning soothes ;
But suffers not that they with backward step
Repass: whoe’er would issue from the gates
Of Pluto strong and stern Persephone,
For them with marking eye he lurks; om them
Springs from his couch, and pitiless devours.
There, odious to immortals, dreadful Styx
Inhabits, refluent Ocean’s eldest-born :
She from the gods apart for ever dwells
In mansions known to fame, with arching roofs
O’erhung, of loftiest rock, and all around
The silver columns lean upon the skies.
Swift-footed Iris, nymph of Thaumas born,
Takes with no frequent embassy her way —
O’er the broad main’s expanse, when haply strife
Be risen, and midst the gods dissension sown.
And if there be among th’ Olympian race
Who falsehood utters, Jove sends Iris down,
To bear from far, in ewer of gold, the wave
Renown’d; that from the summit of a rock
Steep, lofty, cold distils. Beneath wide Earth
Abundant from the sacred parent-flood,


313
1015


1040


Through shades of blackest night, the Stygian branch


Of Ocean fiows: a tenth of all the streams
To the dread oath allotted. In nine streams ©
Round and around earth and the ocean broad -
With silver whirlpools mazy-roll’'d, at length
It falls into the main: one stream alone
Glides from the rock, a mighty bane to gods.
Who of immortals that inhabit still

Olympus topt with snow, libation pours

And is forsworn, he one whole year entire
Lies reft of breath, nor yet approaches once
The neotar’d and ambrosial sweet repast :

But still reclines on the spread festive’couch


- 1045


. 1050


1055


314 HESIOD.


Mute, breathless ; and a mortal lethargy

O’erwhelms‘him: but, his malady absolv’d

With the great round of the revolving year,

More ills on ills afflictive seize: nine years 4g,

From ever-living deities remote - 1060
His lot is cast: in council nor in feast

Once joins he, till nine years entire are full: -
_The tenth again he mingles. with the. blest

In synod, who th’ Olympian mansions hold. »
So great an oath the deities of heaven 1065
Decreed the waters incorruptible,

Ancient, of Styx: who sweeps with wandering waves

A rugged region ; where of dusky Earth,

And darksome Tartarus, and Ocean waste,

And the starr’d Heaven, the source and-boundary 1070
Successive rise and end: a dreary wild.

And ghastly, e’en by deities abhorr’d.

There gates resplendent rise ; the threshold brass ;

Immoveable, on deep foundations fix’d,

Self-fram’d: before it the Titanic gods 1075
Abide, without th’ assembly of the blest,

Beyond the gulf of darkness: there beneath

The ocean-roots, th’ auxiliaries renown’d

Of Jove loud-thundering, Gyges, Cottus, dwell :

But the deep-sounding shaker of the shores, 1080
Hailing him son, to Briareus consign’d,

‘Brave as he was, his daughter for a bride, .

Cymopolia, ; :
Now when Jove from heaven

Had cast the Titans forth, huge Earth embrac’d ‘
By Tartarus, through love’s ail-golden queen, , 1085
Her youngest-born Typhceus bore; whose hands

Of strength are fitted to stupendous deeds,

And indefatigable are the feet. an

Of the strong god; and from his shoulders rise

A hundred snaky heads of dragon growth, ; 1090
Horrible, quivering with their blackening tongues.
In each amazing head from eyes that roll’d,

Within their sockets fire shone sparkling ; fire
Blaz’d from each head, the whilst he roll’d his glance
Glaring around him. In those fearful heads 1095


°


THE THEOGONY. 315


Were voices of all sound, miraculous?
‘ Now utter’d they distinguishable tones
‘Meet for the ear of gods; now of a bull
‘The cry, loud-bellowing and untameable
In strength ; and now the mighty roaring sound - 1100
As of a dauntless lion; now the yell -
Of whelps most strange to hear; and breath’d he now
Shrill hissings, that the lofty mountains rang.
Then had a dread event that fatal day
Inevitable fallen, and he had rul’d 1105,
O’er mortals and immortals; but the sire
Of gods and men the peril instant knew,
Intuitive, and vehement and strong
He thunder’d: instantaneous all around :
Earth reel’d with horrible crash; the firmament 1110
Roar’d of high heaven; the ocean-streams and seas
And uttermost caverns. While the king in wrath
Uprose, beneath his everlasting feet _— .
Trembled Olympus; groan’d the stedfast earth.
From either side a burning radiance caught. © 1115
The darkly rolling ocean, from the flash
_Of lightnings, and the monster’s darted flame,
Hot thunderbolts, and blasts of fiery winds.
Glow’d earth, air, sea; the billows heav’d on high,
Foam’d round the shores, and dash’d on every side 1120
Beneath the rush of gods. Concussion wild
And unappeasable uprose: aghast.
The gloomy monarch of th’ infernal dead
Trembled ; the sub-tartarean Titans heard
Fen where they stood, and Saturn in the midst;> 1125
They heard appall’d the uhextinguish’d rage :
Of tumult, and the din of dreadful war.
Now when the god, the fulness of his might
Gatfering at once, had grasp’d his radiant arms,
The glowing thunderbolt and bickering flame, 1130
He from the summit of th’ Olympian mount
Leap’d at a bound, and smote him : hiss’d at once -
The horrible ngonster’s heads enormous, scorch’d
Tn one conflagrant blaze. When thus the god ;
Had quell’d him, thunder-smitten, mangled, prone, 1135
He fell ; beneath his weight earth grosning shook..


316 : HESIOD.


Fiame from the lightning-stricken prodigy

Flash’d, midst the mountain-hollows, rugged, dark,

Where ‘he fell smitten. Broad earth glow’d intense

From that unbounded vapour, and dissolv’d :-— 1140

As fusile tin by art of youths above

The wide-brimm’d vase up-bubbling foams with ‘heat ;

Or iron, fardest of the mine, subdued

By burning flame, amid the mountain dells ,

Melts in the sdcred caves beneath the hands 1145
_ Of Vulcan,—so earth melted in the glare

Of blazing fire. He down wide Hell’s abyss

His victim huri’d in bitterness of soul.

Lo! from Typhceus is the strength of the winds 1150
Moist-blowing ; save the south, north, east, and west ;
These born from gods, a blessing great to man:

Those, unavailing gusts, o’er the waste sea
Breathe barren ; with sore peril fraught to man,
In whirlfool rage fall black upon the-deep :
Now kere, now there, they rush with stormy gale, 1155
-Scatter the rolling barks, and whelm in death -
The mariner ; an evil suceourless
‘To men who midst the ocean-ways their blast
Encounter. They again o’er all th’ expanse
Of flowery éarth the pleasant works of man 1160
Despoil, and fill the blacken’d air with cloud
Of eddying dust and hollow rustlings drear.

But when the blest of heaven had now. fulfill’d
Their toils, for meed of glory ’gainst the gods ©
Titanic, striving in their strength, they now, 1165
Counsell’d by Earth, exhort Olympian Jove, .
of wide-beholding eyes, to regal sway
And empire o’er immortals :—he to them
Due honours portion’d with an equal hand.

First as a, bride the monarch of the gods - #1170
Led Metis: her o’er deities and men
Vers’d in all knowledge. But when now at length
‘She would have given to birth the blue-eyed maid
Minerva, he with treacheries of smooth speech +)
Her thought beguiling, her within himself . 1175
Deposited : so Earth and Heaven star-crown’d
Had counsell’d ; him they both advising warn’d,


THE THEOGONT. 317


Lest, in the place of Jove, another seize

The kingly honour o’er immortal! gods.

For so the Fates had destin’d, that from her -°" - 1180
An offspring should be born, of wisest strain.

First the Tritonian virgin azure-eyed ;

Of equal might and prudence with her sire: |

And then a son, king over gods and men,

Had she brought forth, invineible of soul, 1185
But Jove before that hour within himself :
Deposited the goddess ; evermore

So warning him of evil and of good. ; .

Next led he Themis beauteous-bright, who bore
Order, and Justice, and the blooming Peace, 1190
The Hours by name, who shed a grace o’er all
The works of man.
-  _Eurynome, the nymph ~
“Of ocean, grac’d with all-engaging form, -
- Three daughters bore to Jove: the Graces fair
Of cheek, Aglaia, Thdlia winning-soft, _, _ 195 -
Euphrosyne ; their eyélids as they gaze
Drop love, unnerving ; and-beneath the shade
Of their arch’d brows they steal the sidelong glance
Of sweetness.
To the couch anon he came

Of many-nurturing Ceres : Proserpine _ 1200
She bore, the snowy-arm’d ; her gloomy Dis

Snatch’d from her mother, and all-prudent Jove


Consign’d the prize.
‘ + Next lov’d he fair of locks
Mnemosyne; from her the Muses nine
Are born; their brows with golden fillets wreath’d; 1205
Whom feasts delight, and rapture sweet of song.
_ In mingled transport with Egean Jove
Latong: shaft-rejoicing Dian bore,
And Phebus, loveliest of the race of heaven.
He last the blooming Juno clasp’d.as bride: 1210
She Hebe, Mars, Lucina bore; in love
Consenting, with the king of gods and men -
He from his head disclos’d himself to birth
The blue-eyed maid Tritonian Pallas ; fierce, :
Rousing the war-field’s tumult ; unsubdyed ; 1215


, 318 , ‘HESIOD.


Leader of armies ; awful: whom delight
The shout of battle and the shock of war.
Without th’ embrace of love did Juno bear
Illustrious Vulcan, o’er celestials grac’d . 1219
With arts; and Eye: and struggled with her spouse
-Emulous.
. From tlie loud-resounding god,
Shaker of earth, and Amphitrite, sprang
Sea-potent Triton huge: beneath the main
Fast by his mother and his monarch sire
He dwells in golden edifice, a god 1225
Of awful might. ;
Now Venus gave to Mars,
Breaker of shields, a dreadful offspring: Fear,
And Consternation; they in rout confound
Of horrid war the phalanx dense of men,
. With city-spoiler Mars. Harmonia last - 1230
She bore, whom generous Cadmus clasp’d as bride.
Daughter of Atlas Maia bore to Jove
The glorious Hermes, herald of the gods,
The sacred couch ascending.
Semele,
Daughter of Cadmus, melting in embrace 1235
With Jove, gave jocund Bacchus to the light ;
A mortal, an immortal ; now alike ;
Immortal deities.
: Alcmena bore °
Strong Hercules, dissolving in, embrace
With the cloud-gatherer Jove.
The crippled god 1240
Tn arts illustrious, Vulcan, as his bride
The gay Aglaia led, the youngest Grace.
Bacchus of golden hair, his blooming spouse,
Daughter of Minos, Ariadne, clasp’d, e
With yellow tresses; her Saturnian Jove 1245
Immortal made, and fearless of decay.
Fair-limb’d Alemena’s valiant son, achiev’d .
His agonizing labours, Hebe led
A bashful bride, the daughter of great Jove,
And Juno golden-sandal’d, on the top . 1250
Snow-crested of Olympus. Blest who thus, :


THE THEOGONY. 819


A mighty task accomplish’d, midst the gods
- Uninjur’d dwells, and free from withering age
For evermore.
Perseis, ocean nymph
Illustrious, to th’ unwearied Sun produc id 1255,
.Circe and king Metes.
By the will
Of heaven, Aetes vaunting for his sire,
The world-enlightening Sun, Idya led
Cheek-blooming, nymph of ecean’s perfect stream +”
And through all-golden Venus she to love 1260
Subdued, Medea beauteous-ankled bore.
And now farewell, ye heavenly habitants !
Ye islands, and ye continents of earth !
And thou, O main! of briny wave profound !
O sweet of speech, Olympian Muses! bern - 1265
From zxgis-bearer Jove, sing now the tribe ‘
Of goddesses, whoe’er, by mortals clasp’d
In love, have borne a race resembling gods. .
Ceres, divinest goddess, in soft joy ° ;
Blends with Jasius brave, in the rich tract. 1270
Of Crete, whose fallow’d glebe thrice-till’d abounds ;
And Plutus bore, all-bountiful, who roams
Earth, and th’ expanded surface of the sea;
And him that meets him on his way, whose hands
He grasps, him gifts he with abundant gold, 1275.
And large felicity.
Harmonia, born
Of golden Venus, gave to Cadmus’ love
Ino and Semele, and fair of cheek
Agave, and Autonoé, the bride
Of Aristeus with the clustering locks, _ 1280
- And Polydorus, born in towery Thebes.
. Aurora to Tythonus Memnon bore,
The brazen-helin’d, the Aithiopian king,
And king Hemathion ; and to Cephalus.
Bore she a son illastrions, Phaéton, 1285
Gallantly brave, a mortal like to gods.
Whom while a youth, e’en in the tender flower
Of glorious prime, a boy, and vers’d alone
In what a boy-may know, love’s amorous queen
Snatch’d with swift rape away, and in her fane 1290


320, 0°—O HESIOD. - ‘


Sacred, appointed as her nightly priest,
And genius of her sanctuary, divine.
Jason Aisonides, by heaven’s high will,
Bore from Aetes, foster-son of Jove,
His daughter ; those afflictive toils achiev’d, 1295
. Which Pelias mighty monarch, bold i - wrong,
Unrighteous, violent of deed, impos’d
And much-enduring reach’d th’ Jolehian coast,
‘Wafting in winged bark the jet-eyed maid
His blooming spouse. She yielding thus-in love 1300
To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore
Medeus, whom the son of Philyra,
’, Sage Chiron, midst the mountain-solitudes
Train’d up to man: thus were high Jove’s designs
Fulfill’d. : 5
_* ‘Now Psamatlie, the goddess fam’d 1305
Who sprang from ancient Nereus of the sea,
Bore Phocus; through the golden queen of love
es Zacus embrac’d.
» ‘To Peleus’ arms
’d, the silver-footed Thetis bore
aes lion-hearted, cleaving fierce .1310


The ranks of men.
__ , Wreath’d Cytherea bore
AGneas,; blending in ecstatic love
With brave Anchises, on the verdant top
Of Ida, wood-embosom’d, many-val’d. | +.
Now Circe, from the Sun Hyperion-born 1318.
Descended, with the much-enduring man | :
Ulysses blending love, Latinus brave,
Blameless, and Agrius bore: who left remote
Their native seats in Circe’s hallow’d isles,
, And o’er the Tyrrhene tribes illustrious reign’d. 1320
Calypso noble midst the goddess race ;
Clasp’d wise Ulysses: and from rapturous love
Nausithous and Nausinous gave to day.
Lo, these were they, whe yielding to embrace
Of mortal men, themselves immortal, gave 1825
. A race resembling gods.
O now the tribe
Of gentle women sing! Olympian maids! 7
Ye Muses, born from egis-bearer Jove! -


ra 1


,


SHIELD OF HERCULES.


A FRAGMENT..


ARGUMENT.


I. The arrival of Alemena at Thebes as the companion of her husband’s
exile, The expedition of Amphitryon against the Teloboans. "The
artifice of Jupiter, who anticipates his return, and steals the embraees
of Alemena. The birth of Hercules, | .

II. The meeting of Hercules with Cygnus, ‘The description of his armour,
and particularly of THE SHIELD, diversified with sculptured imagery.
. 4


III, The Combat. ;


,


Or as Alcmena, from Electryon born, * ,
The guardian of his people, her lov’d home ‘
‘And natal soil abandoning, to Thebes

Came with Amphitryon, with the brave in war.


She all the gentle race of womankind we RE


In height surpass’d and beauty: nor with her, ;
Might one in prudence vie, of all who sprang
‘From mortal fair-ones, blending in embrace
With mortal ment both from her tressed head,


And from the darkening lashes of her eyes, 10


She breath’d enamouring fragrance, like the breath —

Of love’s all-charming goddess: fair shé was, 4
_ But not the less her consort with heart-love

Rever’d she; so had never woman Jov’d.

‘Yet he her noble sire by violent strength . . 1d
Had slain, amid those herds the cause of strife,

Madden’d to sudden rage: his native soil

He left, and thence to the Cadmean state,

Shield-bearing tribe, came supplicant: and there

Dwelt with his modest spouse, yet-from the joys ; 20
Of love estranged : for might he not the couch

‘ . ¥ '


es
3 . -


322 es HESIOD.


- Ascend of her the beautiful of feet,
-Till for the slaughter of her brethren brave


His arm had wreak’d revenge, and burn’d with fire |


_ The guilty cities of those warlike men,
Taphians and. Teloboans. This the task
Assign’d ; the gods on high that solemn vow
Had witness’d :—of their anger visitant
In fear he stood, and speeded in all haste
. T’ achieve the mighty feat impos’d by Heaven.
Him the Besotians, gorers of the steed,
Who, coveting the war-shout and the shock
Of battle, o’er the buckler breathe aloft
Their open valour; him the Locrian race,
Close-combating ; and of undaunted soul
e Phocians follow’d :: towering in the-van
Amphitryon gallant shone, and in his host
Gloried. But ether counsel secret wove
Within his breast the sire of gods and men—
That both to gods and to th’ inventive race
Of man, a great deliverer might arise
Sprung from his loins, of plague-repelling fame. .
Deep-framing in his inmost soul deceit,
He through the nightly darkness took his way
From high Olympus, glowing with the love
Of her, the fair-one of the graceful zone.
Swift to the Typhaonian mount he pass’d:
To lofty Phycium thence approach’d ;—sublime
‘There sitting, the wise counsellor of heaven
Revolv’d a work divine. That self-same night,’
Of her who stately treads with ample pace
He sought the couch; and melting in her arms °
Took there his fill of love. That self-same night
The host-arousing chief, the mighty deed
Perform’d, in glory to his home return’d ;
Nor to the vassals and the shepherd hinds
His footstep bent, before he climb’d the couch
Of his Alemena: such inflaming love
Seiz’d in the deep recesses of his heart
The chief,of thousands. And as he that scarce
Escapes, and yet escapes, from grievous plague -
, Or the hard-fetzering chain, flees free away . —


25


35


40.


45


50


55


60


THE SHIELD OF HERCULES.


Joyful,—so struggling through that arduous toil
With pain accomplish’d, wishful, eager, traced
’ The prince his homeward way. The livelong night

He with the modest partner of his bed
Embracing lay, and revell’d in delight
The bounteous bliss_of love’s all-charming queen,
- Thus by a god and by the first of men
Alike subdued to love, Alcmena gave
Twin-brethren birth, within the seven-fold gates
Of Thebes: yet brethren though they were, unlike -
Their natures; this of weaker strain, but that

_.Far more of man, valorous, and stern, and strong.
Him, Hercules, conceiv’d she from th’ embrace

- Of the cloud-darkener: to th’ Alcean chief,
Shaker of spears, gave Iphiclus :_a race
Distinct ; nor wonder: this of mortal man,: -
That of imperial Jove; the same that slew
The lofty-minded Cygnus, born from Mars.
. For in the grove of the far-darting god
He found him ; and insatiable of war,
His father Mars beside. Both.bright in arms,
Bright as the sheen of burning flame, they stood
On their high chariot ; and the horses fleet
Trampled the ground with rending hoofs: around
n parted circle smok’d the cloudy dust,
Up-dash’d beneath the trampling hoofs, and cars
Of complicated frame. The well-fram’d cars
Rattled aloud ; loud clash’d the wheels; while rapt
In their full speed the horses flew. ~ Rejoic’a
The noble Cygnus; for the hope was his,

~ Jove’s warlike offspring and his charioteer
To slay, and strip them of their gorgeous mail.
But to his vows the Prophet-god ‘of day
Turn’d a deaf ear; for he himself set pn
Th’ assault of Hercules. Now all the grove, _
And Phoebus’ altar, flash’d with glimmering arms
Of that tremendous god; himself biaz’é light,
And darted radiance from his eyeballs glar’d
As it‘were flame. But who of mertal mould
Had e’er endur’d in daring opposite
To rush before him, save but Hercules,

. £2


70


85


‘ 95


100


324 HESIOD.


And Tolaus, an illustrious name ?
For mighty force was theirs, and hands of strength 105
- Outstretch’d in valour unapproachable ;—
He therefore thus bespake his charioteer :
“O hero Iolaus! dearest far .
To me, of.all the race of mortal men ;
I deem it sure that ’gainst the blest of heaven 110
Amphitryon sinn’d, when to the fair-wall’d Thebes
He came, forsaking Tirynth’s well-built wails,
Electryon midst the strife of wide-brow’d herds *
Slain by his hand: to Creon suppliant came,
And her of flowing robe, Henioche ; Ls
Who straight embrac’d, and all of needful aid
Lent hospitable, as to suppliant due: :
And more for this, e’en from the heart they gave
All honour and observance. So he liv’d ‘
_* Exulting in his beauteous-ankled spouse : 120
“ Alemena: when roll’d’round the rapid year,
We, far unlike in stature and in soul,
Were born, thy sire and I: him Jove. bereav’d
Of wisdom ; who from his parental home ;
Went forth, and to the fell Eurystheus bore 125
His homage. Wretch ! for he most sure bewail’d
In after-time that grievous fault, the which
Irrevocable is, ‘ On me has Fate
Laid heavy Jabours. But, O friend! O now
Quick snatch the crimson reins of these my steeds 130
Rapid of hoof; the manly courage rouse
Within thee: now with strong unerring grasp
Guide the swift chariot’s whirl, and wind the steeds
Rapid of hoof: fear nought the dismal yell . ae
Of mortal-slayer Mars, whilst to and fro 185
He ranges fierce Apollo’s hallow’d grove
With phrensying shout: for, be he as he may
War-mighty, he of war shall take his fill.”
Then answer’d Iolaus: “O rever’d!
Doubtless the father of the gods and men z 140
Thy head delights to honour; and the god
‘Who keeps the wall of Thebes, and guards’ her wwers
Bull-visag’d Neptune: so be sure they give -
Unto thy hand this mortal strong and huge,


THE SHIELD OF HERCULES: 825


That from the conflict thou mayst bear away 145
High glory. But now haste-in warlike mail
Dress now thy limbs, that, rapidly as thought _.
Mingling the shock of cars, we may be join’d
In battle. He th’ undaunted son of Jove
’ §$hall strike not with his terrors, nor yet me 150
Iphiclides: but swiftly, as I deem, -.
Shall he to flight betake him, from the race
Of brave Alcewus; who now pressing nigh
Gain on their foes, and Jangujsh for the shout
Of closing combat; to their eager ear : 155
More grateful than the banquet’s revelry.”
He said; and Hercules smil’d stern his joy:
Elate of thought: for he had spoken words
Most welcome. Then with winged accents thus:
* Jove-foster’d herd! it is e’en at hand, 160
The battle’s rough encounter ; thou, as erst, ee
In martial prudence firm, aright, aleft,
With ’vantage of the fray, unerring guide
Arion huge, the sable-maned, and me - |
Aid in the doubiful contest as thou mayst.” 165
TLus having said, his legs he sheath’d in greaves
Of mountain-brass, resplendent-white ; the gift
Glorious of Vulcan: o’er his breast he drew’
The corselet, variegated, beautiful,
Of shining gold; this Jove-born Pallas gave. 170 -
When first he rush’d to meet the mingling groans
Of battle, then the-mighty man athwart
His shoulder slung the sword whose edge repels
Th’ approach of mortal harms: and clasp’d around
His bosom, and reclining o’er his back, : 175.
He cast the hollow quiver; lurk’d therein
Full many arrows; shuddering horror they
Inflicted, and the agony of death
Sudden, that chokes the suffocative voiee: :
The points were barb’d with death, and bitter steep’d 180
In human tears: burnish’d the lengthening shafis ;
And they were feather’d from the tawny plume
Of eagles. “Now le grasp’d the solid spear
‘ Sharpen’d with brass; and on his brows of strength
Plac’d the forg’d helm, high-wrought iA adamant, 183


826 F ' HESIOD.


That cas’d the le See round, and fenc’d the head
Divine. é
His hands fen rais'd Tue Suretp, of disk

Diversified ; might none with missile aim
Pierce, or th’ impenetrable substance rive :
Shattering. A wondrous frame ; since all throughout iW
Bright with enamel, -and with ivory, . - :
And mingled metal; and with ruddy gold
Refulgent, and with azure plates inlaid.
The scaly terror of a dragon coil’d :
Full in the eentral field ; unspeakable ;. 195
With eyes oblique retorted, that aslant
Shot gleaming flame; his hollow jaw was fill’d
Dispersedly with jagged fangs of white,
Grim, unapproachable.

And next above


The dragon’ 's forehead fell, stern Strife in air 200
Hung hovering, and array’d the war of men:

Haggard ; whose aspect from all mortals reft

All mind and soul, whoe’er in brunt of arms

Should match their strength, and face the son of Joss
Below this earth their spirits to th’ abyss 205
Descend ; and through the flesh that wastes away

Beneath the parching sun, their whitening bones


. Start forth, and moulder in the sable dust.


Pursuit was there, and fiercely rallying Flight,
Tumult and Terror: burning Carnage glow’d ; 210
Wild Discord madden’d there, and frantic Roat
Rang’d to and fro. A deathful Destiny


’ There grasp’d a living man, that bled afresh


From recent wound; another yet unharm’d


Dragé’d furious ; and a third already dead 215
Trail’d by the feet amid the throng of war :—
And o’er her shoulders was a garment thrown,
Dabbled with human blood; and in her Took.
Was horror; and a deep funereal ary

Broke from her lips. ‘ :
There, indescribable, 220
Twelve serpent heads rose dreadful ; and with fear

Froze all who drew on earth the breath of life,

Whoe’er should thatch their strength in brunt of arms,


THE SHIELD OF HERCULES.


And face the son of Jove: and oft as he -
Mov’d to the battle, from their: clashing fangs
A sound was heard. Such miracles display’d
The buckler’s field, with living blazonry
Resplendent: and those fearful snakes were streak’d
O’er their ceerulean backs with streaks of jet;
And their jaws blacken’d with a jetty dye. :
Wild from the forest, herds of boars were there,

And lions, mutual glaring; and in wrath |
Leap’d on each other; and by troops they drove *
_ Their onset: nor yet these nor those recoil’d,

Nor quak’d in fear: of both the backs uprose
Bristling with anger: for a lion huge -
Lay stretch’d amidst them, and two boars beside.
Lifeless ; the sable blood down-dropping ooz’d
Into the ground. So these with bowed backs
Lay dead beneath the terrible lions: they,
For this the more incens’d, both savage boars -
And tawny lions, chafing sprang to war.

There, too, the battle of the Lapithe


827


225
230
235


240 |


Was wrought; the spear-arm’d warriors: Ceneus king,


Hopleus, Phalérus, and Pirithous, :
And Dryas and Exadius ; Prolochus,

Mopsus of Titaressa, Ampyx’ son,

A branch of Mars, and Theseus like a god:
Son of Aigéus:—silver were their limbs,

Their armour golden: and to them oppos’de
The Centaur band stood thronging: Asbolus,
Prophet of birds, Petraeus huge of height,
Arctus, and Urius, and of raven locks.

Mimas: the two Peucide, Dryalus,

And Perimedes ; all of silver frame,

And grasping golden pine-trees in their hands. '
At once they onset made ; in very life ”

They rush’d, and hand to hand tumultuous clos’d


With pines and clashing spears.
; There feet of hoof


The steeds were standing of stern-visag’d Mars
In gold: and he himeelf, tearer.of spoils,
Life-waster, purpled all with dropping blood,
As one who slew the living and despoil’d,


?


245


250


255


260


328 “7 waEsiop,


Loud-shouting to the warrior-infantry
There vaulted on his chariot: him beside 265
Stood Fear and Consternation ; high their hearts
Panted, all eager for the war.of men.
There too Minerva rose, leader of hosts,
Resembling Pallas when she would array
The marshall’d battle. In her grasp her spear, 270
And on her brows a golden helm; athwart - :
Her shoulders thrown her egis; went she forth :
In this array to meet the dismal shout *
Of war.
And there a tuneful choir appear’d
Of heaven’s immortals: in the midst, the son 275
Of Jove and of Latona sweetly rang
Upon his golden harp; th’ Olympian mount,
Dwelling of gods, thrill’d back the broken sound.
And there were seen th’ assembly of the gods
; Listening : encircled with beatitude: . . 280
And in sweet contest with Apollo there .
The virgins of Pieria rais’d the strain
~1Preluding ; and they seem’d a8 though they sang
With clear sonorous voice.
And there appear’d
A sheltering haven from the rage untam’d 285
Of ocean. It was wrought of tin, refin’d,
And rounded by the chisel ;' and it seem’ rd
Like to the dashing wave : ‘and in the midst
Full many dolphins chas’d the fry, and show’d
As though they swam the waters, to and fro 290
Darting tumultuous. Two of silver scale,
Panting above the wave, the fishes mute
Gorg’d, that beneath them shook their qulverine fins
Tn brass: but on the crag a fisher sat
Observant ; in his grasp he held a net, 295
Like one that poising rises to the throw.
There was the knight of fair-hair’d Danaé born,
Perseus: nor yet the buckler with his feet
Touch’d, nor yet distant hover’d: strange to think ;
For nowhere on the surface of the shield 300
He rested: so the crippled artist-god :
Illustrious, fram’d him with his hands in gold,


THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. $29


Bound to his fect were sandals wing’d: a sword

Of brass, with hilt of sable ebony,

Hung round him by the shoulders from a thong. 305
Swift e’en as thought he flew. The visage grim

Of monstrous Gorgon all his back o’erspread ;

And wrought in silver, wondrous to the sight,


- A veil was drawn around it, whence in gold


Cs


Hung glittering fringes : and the dreadful helm 810
Of Pluto clasp’d the temples ofthe prince, =~, ;
Shedding a night of darkness. Thus outstréetcht
In air, he seem’d like one to trembling flight
Betaken. Close-behind, the Gorgons twain,
Of nameless terror, unapproachable, 315
Came rushing : eagerly they stretch’d their arms g
‘To seize-him: from the pallid adamant
Audibly as they rush’d, the clattering shield .
Clank’d with a sharp shrill sound: two grisly snakes ‘:
Hung from their girdles, and with forking tongues 320
Lick’d their inflected jaws: and violent gnash’d
Their fangs, fell-glaring ; cach grim Gorgon head
Shook horror.

Next above them warrior men
Wag’d battle, grasping weapons in their hands.
Some from their city and their sires repell’d - 825
Destruction ; others hasten’d to destroy : “
And many press’d the plain, but more still held
The combat. On the strong-constructed towers
Stood women, shrieking shrill, and rent their cheeks
In very life, by Valean’ 3 glorious craft. . 830
The elders hoar with age assembled stood
Without the gates, and to the blessed gods ,
Their hands uplifted, for their fighting sons
Fear-stricken. These again the combat held.
Behind them stood the Fates, of aspect black, 835
Grim, slaughter-breathing, fell, insatiable,
With teeth white-gnashing ; and fierce conflict held
For those who fell.. Each eager-thirsting sought
To quaff the sable blood. om first they snatch’d
Prostrate, or Staggering with the fresh-made wound, 340
On him they struck their talons huge : the soul
Fled down th’ abyss, the horror-freezing gulf


e


330 _ HESIOD. .


Of Tartarus. Théy, glutted to the heart
With human gore, behind them ¢ast the corse ;
And back with hurrying rage they turn’d to seek 345
’ The throng of battle. And hard by there stood
Clotho and Lachesis ; and Atropos,
_ Somewhat in years inferior ; nor was she
A mighty goddess, yet those other Fates
Exceeding, and of birth the elder far. 350
And all around one man in cruel strife
Were join’d ; and on each other turn’d in wrath
Their glowing eyes ; and mingling desperate hands
And talons, mutual strove.
- And near to them
Stood Misery, wan, ghastly, worn with woe; 355
Arid and swoln of knees, with hunger’s pains’
Faint-falling : from her lean hands long the nails
Outgrew ; ‘an ichor from her nostrils flow’d ;
» ‘Blood from her cheeks distiiI’d to earth ; with teeth
All wide disclos’d in grinning agony 360
She stood : a cloud of dust her shoulders spread,
And her eyes ran with tears. °
: - But next arose
A well-tower’d city, by seven golden gates
Enclos’d, that fitted to their lintels hung.
‘There men in dances and in festive joys .
Held revelry. Some on the smooth-wheel’d car
‘A virgin bride conducted: then burst forth
Aloud the marriage-song ; and far and wide
Long splendours flash’d from many a quivering torch
Borne in the hands of slaves. Gay-blooming girls 370
Preceded, and the dancers follow’d blithe :
These, with shrill pipe indenting the soft lip, é
Breath’d melody, while broken echoes thril’d
Around them ; to the lyre with flying touch
Those led the love-enkindling dance, at
’ ¢ = A group ; ‘ 875
Of youths was elsewhere imag’d, to the flute . Ts
Disporting :, some in dances and in song,
In laughter others. To the minstrel’s flute®
So pass’d they on ;\and the whole city seem’d sss -
As fill’d with pomps, with dances, and with feasts. 380


365


‘THE SHIELD OF HERCULES.


°


Others again, without the city-walls, --
‘Vaulted on steeds, and madden’d for the goal. .
Others as husbandmen appear’d, and broke
_ With coulter the rich glebe, and gather’d up
Their tunics neatly girded. .

Next arose
A field thick-set with depth of corn ; where some
With sickle reap’d the stalks, their speary heads
Bent, as with pods weigh’d down of swelling grain,
The fruits of Ceres.
i ; Others into bands
Gather’d, and threw upon the thrashing-floor
The sheaves. ;
And some again hard by were seen
Holding the vine-sickle, who clusters cut
From the ripe vines, which from the vintagers
Others in frails receiv’d, or bore away .
In baskets thus up-pil’d the cluster’d grapes,
Or black, or pearly white, cut from deep ranks
Of spreading vines, whose tendrils curling twin’d
In silver, heavy-foliag’d: neat them rose
The ranks of vines, by Vulcan’s curious craft
Figur’d in gold.” The vines leaf-shaking curl'd
Round silver props. They: therefore on their way
Pass’d jocund, to one minstrel’s flageolet,
Burden’d with grapes that blacken’d in the sun.
Some also trod the wine-press, and some quaff’d
The foaming must.
But in another part
‘Were men who wrestled, or in gymnic fight
Wielded the cestus. ? Se eh
‘ Elsewhere men of chase
Were taking the fleet hares ; two keen-tooth’d dogs
Bounded beside: these ardent in pursuit,
Those with like atdour doubling on their flight.
Next them were knights, who painful effort made
. To win the prize of contest and hard toil.
High o’er the well-compacted chariots hung ,
The charioteers ; the rapid horses loos’d
At their full stretch, and shook the floating reins.
Rebounding from the ground with many a shock


33}


390


395*


405


415


332 HESIOD.


Flew clattering the firm cars, and creak’d aloud
The naves of the round wheels. They therefore toil’d
Endless ; nor conquest yet at any time
Achiev’d they, but a doubtful strife maintain’d. 420
In the mid-course the prize, a tripod huge, -
Was plac’d in open sight, insculpt of gold :—
These glorious works had Vulcan artful wrought.
Rounding the uttermost verge the ocean flow’d
As in full swell of waters: and the shield 425
All-variegated-with whole circle bound.
Swans of high-hovering wing there clamour’d shrill,
Who also skimm’d the breasted surge with plume
Innumerous: near them fishes midst the waves
Frolie’d in wanton leaps.
Marvellous the sight . ° 4380
E’en to the Thunderer’s eyes, by whose dread will ~
Had Vulcan fram’d the vast and solid shield. .
This fitting to his grasp, the valiant son ~
Of Jove with ease now shook, and vaulting rose
Into the steed-rapt chariot; with light bound, 435
Swift ag the flash of his Egean sire :
Up-springing: and his hardy charioteer Fr
Stood o’er the steeds from high, and guided strong
The crooked car. : is
Now near to them approach’d
Pallas, the blue-eyed goddess, and address’d 1 440
These winged words in animating voice :
“ Offspring of Lyngeus wide renown’d, all-hail !
Now verily the ruler of the blest,
E’en Jove, doth give you strength to spoil of life
Cygnus your foe, and strip his gorgeous arms. - 445
But I will breathe a word within thy ear :
Of counsel, O most mighty midst the strong !
Now soon as e’er from Cygnus thou hast reft
The sweets of life, there leave him ; ‘on that spot,
Him end his armour: but th’ approach of Mars, 450
Slayer of mortals, watch with wary eye ;
And where thy glance discerns a part expos’d,
Defenceless of the well-wrought buckler, strike !
With thy sharp point there wound him, and recede: .
For know, thou art not fated todespoil 455
The steeds and glorious armour of a god.”


“HE SHIELD OF HERCULES. 383


Thus having said, the gqddess all divine,
Aye-holding in her everlasting hands
Conquest and glory, rose into the car
Impetuous: to the war-steeds shouted fierce 460
The noble Iolaus: from the shout
They starting rapt the flying car, and hid
With dusty cloud the plain: for she herself,
The goddess azure-eyed, sent into them
Wild courage, clanging on her brandish’d shield: — 468
Earth groan’d around. 5

; That moment with like pace
Hen as a flame or tempest came they on,
Cygnus the tamer of the steed, and Mars
Unsated with the roar of war. And now
The coursers midway met, and face to face . 470
Neigh’d shrill: the broken echoes rang around.
Then him the first strong Hercules bespake : .
_ “0 soft of nature! why dost thou obstruct
' The rapid steeds of men, who toils have prov’d
And hardships ? Outward turn thy burnish’d car; = 475
Pass outward from the track, and yield the way :
For I to Trachys ride, of obstacle
Impatient ; to the royal Ceyx: he
O’er Trachys rules in venerable power, .
As needs not thee be told, who hast to wife. 480
His blue-eyed daughter, Themisthonde :—
Soft-one ! for not from thee shall Mars himself
Inhibit death, if truly hand to hand
We wage the battle: and e’en this I say,
That elsewhere heretofore himself has prov’d 485
My mighty spear; when, on the sandy beach
Of Pylos, ardour irrepressible .
Of combat seiz’d him, and to me oppos’d .
He stood: but thrice when stricken by my lance
Earth propp’d his fall, and thrice his targe was cleft: 490
The fourth time urging on my utmost force — .
His ample shield I shattering riv’d, his thigh
Transpiere’d, and headlong in the dust he fell ,
Beneath my rushing spear :—so there the weight
Fell on him of reproach midst those of heaven, 495 ©
His gory trophies leaving to these hands.”


334 - HESIOD:


So said he. But in no wige to obey
Enter’d the thought of Cygnus the spear-skill’d ;
Nor rein’d he back the chariot-whirling steeds. -

Then truly from their close-compacted cars 500
Instant as thought they leap’d to earth—the son
Of kingly Mars, the son of mighty Jove.

Aside, though not remote, the charioteers ’

“The coursers dreve of flowing manes. But then
Beneath the trampling sound of rushing feet 505
The broad earth sounded hollow: and as rocks
From some high mountain-top precipitate
Leap with a bound, and o’er each other whirl’d,

‘Shock in the dizzying fall; and many an oak
Of lofty branch, pine-tree, and poplar deep . 610
Of root, are crash’d beneath them, as their course
Rapidly rolls, until they reach the plain—


So met these foes encountering, and so burst 7 ’
Their mighty clamour. Echoing loud throughout :
The city of the Myrmidons gave back 515


Their lifted voices ; and Ioelchos fam’d,
And Arne, and Anthea herbage-crown’d,
And Helice: thus with amazing shout __
They join’d in battle. All-consulting Jove '
Then greatly thunder’d: from the clouds of heaven 520
He cast forth dews of blood, and signal thus .
Of onset gave to his high-daring son.
As in the mountain thickets the wild boar,
Grim to behold and arm’d with jutting fangs,
Now with his hunters meditates in wrath 525
The conflict, whetting his white tusk oblique; __
, Foam drops around his champing jaws; his eyes
Show like to glimmering fires, and o’er his neck
And horrent back he raises up erect ‘
The starting bristles ;—from the chariot, whirl'd 530
By steeds of war, such leap’d the son of Jove.
"T'was in that season when, on some green bough
High-perch’d, the dusky-wing’d cicada first
Shrill chants.to man a summer note; his drink,
His balmy food the vegetative dew : 535
The livelong day from early dawn he pours
His voice, what time the sun’s exhaustive heat


“4


THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. - 835


Fierce dries the frame :—’T was in the season when

The bristly ears of millet spring with grain

Which they in summer sow; when the crude grape 540

Faint reddens’on the vine, which Bacchus gave,

The joy or anguish of the race of men ;— ‘

F’en in that season join’d the war, and vast

The battle’s tumult rose into the heaven.
As two grim lions for a roebuck slain 545

Wroth in contention rush, and them betwixt

The sound of roaring and of clashing teeth |

Ariseth; or as vultures, curv’d of beak, ;


' Crooked of talon, on a steepy rock


Contest, loud-screaming, if perchance below - §50-
Some mountain-pastur’d goat or forest-stag
Sleek press the plain, whom far the hunter-youth

Piere’d with fleet arrow from thé bowstring shrill

Dismiss’d, but elsewhere wander’d-of the spot

Unknowing ; they with keenest heed the prize . 555
Mark, and in swooping rage each other tear :
With bitterest conflict ;—so vociferous rush’d

The warriors on each other.

- Truly then .


’ Cygnus, the son of Jove untnatch’d in strength


Aiming to slay, against the buckler struck » $60


’ His brazen lance—but through the metal plate


Broke not: the present of a god preserv’d.

On th’ other side he of Amphitryon nam’d

Strong Hercules, between the helm and shield __ .
Drove his long spear, and underneath the chin 565
Through the bare neck smote violent and swift: .
The murderous ashen beam at once the nerves
Twain of the neck cleft sheer; for all the man
he he and his force went from him: down he fell ‘ -
Headiong. As falls a thunder-blasted oak, 570
Or perpendicular rock, riven by the flash ;

Of Jove, in smouldering smoke is hurl’d from high,

So fell he; and his brass-emblazon’d mail

Clatter’d around him. f
aa Him the son of Jove, ©
Stout-hearted, there abandon’d where he lay: — - 575
- But wary -watch’d'the mortal-slayer god


336 - : . . . "HESIOD.


Approach, and view’d him o’er with terrible eyes
Stern-lowering. As a lion who has fall’n
Perchance on some stray. beast, with griping claws
Intent strips down the lacerated hide ; 580
Drains instantaneous the sweet-life, and gluts
F’en to the fill his gloomy heart with blood ;
Green-eyed he glares in fierceness ; with his tail
Lashes his shoulders and his swelling sides,
And with his feet tears up the ground; not ‘one 585
Might dare to look upon him, nor advance ,
Nigh, with design of conflict ;—such in truth
The war-insatiate Hercules to Mars
Stood in array, and gather’d in his soul
Prompt courage, But the other near approach’ a, 590
Anguish’d at heart; and both encountering rush’d
With cries of battle. —
' As when from high ridge
Of some hill-top abrupt, tumbles a crag
Precipitous, and sheer a giddy space
Bounds in a whirl and rolls impetuous down; 595
Shrill rings the vehement crash, till some steep cliff
Obstructs; to this the mass is borne along,
This wedges it immoveable ;-—-e’en so
. Destroyer Mars, bender of chariots, rush’d
Yelling vociferous with a shout: e’en so 600
As utterance prompt met Hercules the shock,
And firm sustain’d.
‘But Jove-born Pallas came
With darkening shield uplifted, and to Mars
» Stood interpos’d; and, scowling with her eyes
Tremendous, thus address’d her winged words: 605
“ Mars! hold thy furious valour ; stay those hands
In prowess inaccessible; for know,
It is not awful for thee to divest
_ Slain Hercules of these his glorious arms,
Bold-hearted son of Jove: but come ; rest thou 610
From battle, nor oppose thyself to me.”
She said; nor yet persuaded aught the soul
Of Mars, the mighty of heart. With a great shout,
- He, brandishing his weapon like a flame, -
Sprang rapid upon Hercules, in haste 615


THE SHIELD OF HERCULES. __ ‘337


To slay: and, for his slaughter’d son incens’d,
With violent effort hurl’d his brazen spear
*Gainst the capacious targe. The blue-eyed maid
Stoop’d from the chariot, and the javelin’s force | -
Turn’d wide. Sore torment seiz’d the breast of Mars; 620
He bar’d his keen-edg’d falchion, and at once .
Rush’d on the dauntless Hercules’: but he, ;
The war-insdtiate, as the god approach’d,
Beneath, the well-wrought shield the thigh expos’d> __
Wounded with all his strength, and thrusting riv’d - 625
The shield’s large disk, and cleft it with his lance, .
And inthe middle-way threw him to earth
Prostrate. ;
- But Fear and Consternation swift
Urg’d near‘his well-wheel’d chariot: from the face
Of broad-track’d earth they rais’d him on the ear ,- 630
Variously-fram’d ; thence lash’d with scourge the steeds
And bounding up the vast Olympus flew.
Alcmena’s mighty son and his compeer,
Fam’d Iolaus, now that they had stripp’d
From Cygnus’ shoulders in triumphant spoil . 635
’ The armour elegant, forthwith return’d
Upon their way direct,’ and instant reach’d :
The towers of Trachys with their fleet-hoof’d steeds :”
And azure-eyed Minerva sought the vast
Olympus, and the mansions of‘her sire, 640
But Ceyx o’er the corse of Cygnus rais’d
. Atomb.. Innumerable people grac’d _-
His obsequies: both they who dwelt hard by
The city of th’ illustrious king ; ahd they |
Of Anthe, of Iolchos wide-renown’d, _ , 6485
Of Arne, of the Myrmidonian towers,
And Helice. So gather’d there around
A numerous people; honouring duteous thus
.. Ceyx, beloved of the blessed gods. :
But the huge mount and monumental stone
Anaurus, foaming high with wintry rains, ©
Swept from the sight away. Latous this
Commanded, for that Cygnus ambush’d spoil’d
* Tn violence the Delphic hecatombs.
‘ ° Zz a


+


660


’


THE WORKS AND DAYS.


ARGUMENT.


“The Exordium is‘a rhapsody in praise of Jupiter. The poem comprehends
the general économy of Industry and Morals. In the first division of the
subject the state of the world A ee and present is described, for the pur-
pose of exemplifying the condition of human nature; which entails on
man the necessity of exertion to procure the goods of life ; and leaves him
no alternative but honest industry or unjust violence; of which the good
and evil consequences are respectively illustrated. Two Strives are
said to have been sent into the world, the one promoting Dissension, the
other Emulation. -Perses is exhorted to abjure the former and embrace
the latter; and an apposite allusion is made to the circumstance of his
litigiously sisguting the patrimonial estate, of which through the corrup-
tion of the judges he obtained the larger proportion. The judges are re-

uked, and cheap contentment is apostrophized as the true secret of hap-
Piness. Such is stated to have been the original sense of mankind before
the necessity of labour existed. The origin of labour is deduced from the
resentment of Jupiter against Prometheus; which resentment led to the
creation of PANDORA, or WoMAN ; who is described with her attributes,
and is represented as bringing into the world a casket of evils. The de-
generacy of man is shen traced through successive ages. -The three first
ages are respectively distinguished as golden, silver,-and brazen. The
fourth has no metallic distinction, but is described as the heroic age, and
as embracing the era of the Trojan war. The fifth is styled the iron age,
and, according to the poet, is that in which he lives. The general corrup-
tion of mankind in this age is detailed, and Modesty and Justice are
represented as taking their flight to heaven. A pointed allusion to the
corrupt administration. of the laws in his own particular’ instance is intro~
- duced in a fable typical of oppression. Justice is described as invisibly
following those who violate decrees with avenging power, and 28
lamenting in their streets the wickedness of a corrupted people. The
temporal blessings of an upright nation are contrasted with the temporal
-evils which a wicked nation draws down from an an; Providence.
Holy Demons are répresented as walking the earth, ead cece watch
over the actions of men. Justice is again introduced as carrying her com-
. Plaints to the feet of Jupiter, and as obtaining that the crimes of rulers be
visited on their people. A pathetic appeal is then made to these rulers, in
their judicial capacity, to forsake injustice.’ Aftér some further exhorta:
tions to virtue and industry, and a number of unconnectéd precepts, the
poet enters on the GEORGICAL ‘part of his subject ; which contains the
prognosties of the seasons of agricultural labour, and rules appertaining to
wood-felling, carpentry, ploughing, sowing, reaping, thrashing, vine-
dressing, and the vintage. This division of the subject includes a descrip-
tion of Winter and of a repast in Summer. The poet then treats of
navigation; and concludes with some desultory precepts of religion,


WORKS AND DAYS, : 339


morality, and superstition: and lastly, with a specification of Day 3
which are divided into holy, suapicioaus wad” inaus sivas, wisod: ‘and ae
_ termediary, or such as ate entitled to no remarkable observance.


WORKS.
. oe

' Come from Pieria, Muses! that inspire

The song of praise; the theme your heavenly Sire; '

By his dread hest alike are mortals found .

Obscure, illus rious, fameless, and-renown’d :

With equal ease the Ruler of the sky . .8

The humble lifts, and casts the-proud from high:

‘With ease eclipses glory’s dazzling ray,

With ease on abject darkness pours the day:
_ And bows the strong in might of their renown

“Wither’d to dust, and rears the bowed down: “10

E’en he, the god whose mansions are above,

High-thundering from the clouds, imperial Jove:

Now bend thine eyes:from heaven, incline thy ear

The ways of judgment. guide ; behold and hear!

While fain to Perses would my voice essay 15

The lore of truth, and breathe th’ instructive lay. ‘

Two Strifes on earth of soul divided rove ;

This will ihe wise condemn, and-that approve:

Deadly the one diffuses’ evil far, ot
_ Enkindling discord and arousing war: .- 20
Men love not this ; yet heaven-enfore’d maintain
The Strife abhorr’d,. but still abhorr’d-in vain.
.The other sprang of elder birth to light
From the dark:bosom of parental Night:
The god who dwells in ether, thron’d on high, = | 25 |
Sent down this elder.offspring from the sky; © =~
And plac’d on nether earth.amid mankind
This better Strife, which fires the slothful mind.
The needy idler sees the wealth of toil, As
‘Hastes to the plough, and plants himself the soil : ’,30
Orders his household ; and with zealous eyes
Views him who speeds. to. wealth, and toils to.rise.:

‘ z2 *


340 HESIOD.


Beneficent this better envy burns; _
Thus emulous his wheel the potter turns ;
The smith his anvil beats; the beggar-throng
Industrious ply ; the bards contest in song.

O Perses! thou within thy secret breast
Repose the maxims by my care imprest ;
Nor ever let that evil-joying strife
Have power to wean thee from the toils of life:
The whilst thy prying eyes the forum draws,
Thine ears the process, and the din of laws :
Small care be his of wrangling and debate
For whose ungather’d food the garners wait: ‘
Who wants within the summer’s plenty stor’d,
Earth’s kindly fruits, and Ceres’ yearly hoard:
With these replenish’d, at the brawling bar
For others’ wealth go instigate the war:


. But this thou mayst no more: let Justice guide, -


Best boon of heaven, and future strife decide.
Not so we shar’d the patrimonial land, _

When greedy pillage fill’d thy graspiny hand :
The bribe-devouring judges sooth’d by thee.

The sentence will’d, and stamp’d the false decree ;
O fools and blind! to whose misguided soul
Unknown how far the half exceeds the whole ; .


Unknown the good that healthful mallows yield,


And asphodel, the dainties of the field.

The food of man in deep concealment lies,
The angry gods have veil’d it from our eyes:
Else had one day bestow’d sufficient cheer, |
And though inactive fed thee through the year.
Then might thy hand have laid the rudder by,
In blackening smoke for ever hung on high ;
Theti,had the labours of the ox been o’er,

And the toil-patient mule had toil’d no more.
But Jove our food conceal’d: Prometheus’ art
With fraud illusive had incens’d his heart :
Sore ills to man devis’d the heavenly Sire,
And hid the shining element of fire. °


. .- Prometheus then, benevolent of soul,


In hollow reed the spark recovering stole :


35


40


45


50


60


65


70


WORKS AND DAYS. |


And thus the god beguil’d, whose awful gaze
Serene rejoices in the lightning’s blaze.

'«O son of Japhet !”.with indignant heart -
Spake the cloud-gatherer, “O unmatch’d in art !
Exultest thou in this the flame retriev’d,

And dost thou triumph in the god deceiv’d ?
’ But thou, with the posterity of man

Shalt rue the fraud whence mightier ills began:

This fire shall draw perdition on the race,

_ And all enamour’d shall their bane embrace,” « -


341,


80


The Sire who rules the earth and sways the pole . °


Had said, and laughter fill’d his secret soul:
He bade the crippled god his hest obey, .
And mould with tempering water plastic clay ;
With human nerve and human voice invest
The limbs elastic and the breathing breast ;_,
Fair as the blooming goddesses above,:
A virgin’s likeness with the looks of love.
He bade Minerva.teach the skill that’ sheds
A thousand colours in the gliding threads:
He call’d the magic of love’s golden queen
To breathe around a witchery of mien ;
And eager passion’s never-sated flame,
And cares of dress that prey upon the frame}
Bade Hermes last endue with craft refin’d
Of treacherous manners, and a shameless mind,
He gives command, th’ inferior powers obey:

The crippled artist moulds.the temper’d clay :
By Jove’s design arose the bashful maid ; _
The cestus Pallas clasp’d, the robe array’d:
‘Ador’d Persuasion and the Graces young
Her taper’d limbs with golden jewels hung:
Round her fair brow the lovely-tressed Hours
A garland twin’d of spring’s purpureal flowers:
The whole attire Minerva’s graceful art
Dispos’d, adjusted, form’d.to every part:
And last the winged herald of the skies,

, Slayer of Argus, gave delusive lies ; ;
‘Insidious manners, honey’d speech instill'd,
And warbling accents, as the Thund’rer will’d ;


90


95


105


110


342: / HESIOD.

Then by the feathet’d messenger of heaven

The name Pandora to the maid was given;  “< ‘

- For all the gods conferr’d a gifted grace 115

+ To crown this mischief of the mortal race.

The Sire commands the winged herald bear

The finish’d nymph, th’ inextricable snare :

To Epimetheus was the present brought,

Prometheus’ warning vanish’d from his thought— 120

That he disclaim each offermg from the skies,

And straight restore, lest ill to man arise.

But he receiv’d ; and conscious knew too late

Th’ insidious gift, and felt the curse of fate.

_ Whilom on earth the sons of men abode 125

From evil free and labour’s galling toad ;
Free from diseases that with racking rage ‘
Precipitate the pale decline of age. ‘
Now swift the days of manhood haste away,
And misery’s pressure turns the temples gray. 130
The woman’s hands an ample casket bear ;—
She lifts the lid,—she scatters ills in air.
Hope sole remain’d within, nor ‘took her flight,
Beneath the casket’s verge conceal’d from sight. ©
Th’ unbroken cell with closing lid the maid. 135
Seal’d, and the cloud-assembler’s voice obey’d.
Issued the rest in quick dispersion hurl’d,
And woes innumerous roam’d the breathing world:
With ills the land is rife, with ills the sea;

- Diseases haunt our frail humanity : 140
Self-wandering through the noon, the night they glide,
Voiceless—a voice the power all-wise denied,

Know then this awful truth ; It is not given
T’ elude the wisdom of omniscient Heaven,
Now listen other lore of skilful art . 4145s
And pleasing power, and grave it on thy heart. .

When gods alike and mortals rose to birth, . .
A golden race th’ immortals form’d on earth
Of many-languag’d men: they liv’d of old,
When Saturn reign’d in heaven—an age of gold, 150
Like gods they liv’d, with calm untroubled mind,
Free from the tojl and anguish of our kind.


WORKS AND. DAYS,


Nor sad decrepit age approaching high +

Their limbs mishap'd with swoln deformity.

- Strangers to ill, they Nature’s banquets prov’d,
Rich in earth’s fruits, and of the blest belov’d:
They sank to death, as opiate slumber stole

Soft o’er the sense, and whelm’d the willing soul.
Theirs was each good: the grain-exuberant soi} *
Pour’d the full harvest, uncompell’d by toil:
The virtuous many dwelt in common blest,


And all unenvying shar’d what all in peace possess’d.


When on this race the verdant earth had lain,
By Jove’s high will they rose a Genii train:


.. Earth-wandering demons they their charge began,


The ministers of good and guards of man: |
Veil’d with a mantle of aérial night,


348


"355


160


165'


.O’er earth’s wide space they wing their hovering flight ;


Dispense the fertile treasures of the ground, ,
And bend their all-observant glance around ;
To mark the deed unjust, the just approve,
Their kingly office, delegate from Jove.

Then form’d the gods a second race of man,
Degenerate far, and silver years began :
Unlike the mortals of a golden kind, ;
Unlike in frame of limbs and mould of mind.
Yet still a hundred 3 beheld the boy
Beneath the mother’s roof, her infant joy ;
All tender and unform’d: but when the flower
Of manhood came it wither’d in an hour.
Their frantic follies wrought them pain and wor $
Nor mutual outrage could their hands forego.
Nor fear’d they Heaven; nor e’er in eustom’d rite
Bade the dread altars flame with hallow’d light:
. Them angry Jove ingulf’d, who dar’d refuse
The gods their glory and their sacred dues:
Yet nam’d the second-blest in earth they lie,,
And second honours grace their memory.

The Sire of earth and heaven ¢reated then
A race, the third of many-languag’d men:
Unlike the silver they.; of brazen mould,
Strong with the ashen spear, and fiercely bold:


»


170
175,
180


185


344 ; HESIOD.


Their thoughts were bent on violence alone,
The deeds of battle, and the dying groan:
Bloody their feasts, by wheaten food unblest; —. 195
Of adamant was each unyielding. breast.
Huge, nerv’d with strength, each hardy giant stands,
And mocks approach with unresisted. hands :
Their mansions, implements, and armour shine
In brass,—dark iron slept within the mine. 200
They by each others’ hands inglorious fell,
In horrid darkness plung’d, the house of hell:
Fierce though they were, their mortal course was run,
Death gloomy seiz’d, and snatch’d them from the sun.
Them when th’ abyss had cover’d from the skies, 205
Lo! the fourth age on nurturing earth arise; ;
Jove form’d the race a, better, juster line,
A race of heroes and of, stamp divine :
Lights of the age that rose before our own,
As demi-gods o’er earth’s wide regions known. 210
Yet these dread battle hurried to their end :
- Some where the sev’nfold gates of Thebes ascend; - “
The Cadmian realm ; ‘where they with fatal might .
. Strove for the flocks of Gidipus in fight:
Some -war in navies led to Troy’s far shore, 215
_ O'er the great space of sea their course they bore, ;
For sake of Helen with the beauteous hair,
And death for Helen’s sake o’erwhelm’d them there.
Them on-earth’s utmost verge the god assign’d
A life, a seat, distinct from human-kind ; 220
Beside the deepening whirlpools of the main,
_ In those blest isles where Saturn holds his reign,
. Apart from heaven’s immortals ; calm they ‘share
A rest unsullied by the clouds of care.
And yearly thrice with sweet luxuriance crown’d “225
Springs the ripe harvest from the teeming ground.
Oh would that Nature had denied me birth -
Midst this fifth race, this iron age of earth;
That long before within the grave I lay, me
Or long hereafter could behold the day! rs 230
Corrupt the race, with tdils and griefs opprest,
- Nor day nor night can yield a pause of rest:


WORKS. AND. DAYS. . 845


Still do.the gods a weight of tare bestow,
‘Though still some good is mingled with the wee. ‘
Jove on this race of many-languag’d man “ 936 '
Speeds the swift ruin which but slow began ;
For scarcely spring they to the light of day,
Ere age untimely strews their temples gray.
Nor sire with son, with brethren brethren blend, :
Nor host with guest, nor friend, as erst, with friend; 240
Reckless of heaven’s revenge the sons behold :
The hoary parents wax too swiftly old ;
And impious point the keen dishonouring tongue,
With hard reproofs and bitter mockeries hung: ;
Nor grateful in declining age repay 245
The nurturing fondness of their better day.
Now man’s right hand is law: for spoil they wait, ”
And lay their “tautual cities desolate :
Unhonour’d he by whom his oath is fear’d ;
Nor are the good belov’d, the just rever’'d: ~ 250
With favour grac’d the evil-doer stands,.
Nor curbs with shame nor equity his hands ;
With crooked slanders wounds the virtuous man,
', And stamps with perjury what hate began.
Lo! ill-rejoicing Envy, wing’d with lies, 255
Scattering calumnious rumours as she flies, ;
The steps of miserable men pursue, :
With haggard aspect, blasting to the view.
Till those fair forms in snowy raiment bright
From the broad earth have wing’d their heavenward flight,
* Call’d to th’ eternal synod of the skies, ‘ » 261
The virgins Modesty and Justice rise:
And leave forsaken man to mourn below
The weight of evil, and the cureless woe. ”
Now unto kings I frame the fabling song,’ 265°
‘However wisdom unto kings belong. | ; '
A-stooping hawk with crooked talon smote
The nightingale of variegated note,
And snatch’d among the clouds. Beneath the stroke
This piteous shriek’d and that imperious spoke:. 270
_ “Wretch! vain are cries; a stronger holds thee now ;
Where’er I slispe my course a captive =


>


346 HESIOD.


Maugre thy song, must company my way ;
I rend my banquet or I loose my prey :.
Senseless is he that dares with power contend, 275
Defeat, rebuke, despair shall be his end.” :

So spake the bird whose wide-spread pinions bear
His course impetuous through the yielding air.
But thou, O Perses! heed the moral strain;
To justice cleave, from injury refrain. 280
For heayy on the poor does injury press, ~
And e’en the wealthy bend to the distress,
And feel the weight of wrong; be this thy trust;
The better path conducts thee to be just :
Still in the end shall justice wrong subdue ; 285
This fools confess from sore experience true.
With crooked judgments, lo! the oath’s dread god.
Avenging runs, and tracks them where they trod:
‘Rough are the ways of justice as the sea,
When. man' perverted wills the false decree ; 290
When to and fro the bribe-devourer draws,
As vile corruption sways, the wrested laws..
For them who trembling justice force to fly, -
For them whose breath decrees iniquity ;
Invisible their steps the virgin treads, 295
And mustering evils gather o’ér their heads:
She with a veiling cloud her form arrays,
And walks in awful grief the city-ways:
Her cry ascends ; her tear upbraiding falls ;
O’er their stain’d manners, their devoted walls. 800
But they who never fromthe right have stray’d,
- Who as the citizen the stranger aid,
They and their cities flourish ; genial Peace
Dwells in their borders, and their youth increase: , j
Nor Jove, whose radiant eyes behold afar, - 805
Hangs forth in heaven the signs of grievous war.
Nor scathe nor famine on the righteous prey ;
Earth. foodful teems, and banquets crown the day :.
Rich wave their mountain oaks ; the topmost tree
The rustling acorn ‘fills, its trunk the murmuring bee. 310
Burden’d with fleece their panting flocks: the race :
Of woman soft, reflects the father’s face:


. WORKS AND DAYS. 347


Still flourish they, nor tempt with ships the main:
The fruits of earth are pour’d from ay plain.
"" : But. oer the wicked race, to whom belong 315
The thought of evil and the deed of wrong,
Saturnian Jove, of wide-beholding eyes,
Bids the dark signs of retribution rise:
And oft the crimes of one destructive fall, ;
The crimes of one are visited on all; 320
The god sends down his angry plagues from high,
Famine and pestilence; in heaps they die.
He smites with barrenness the marriage bed,
And generations moulder with the dead. ’
Again in vengeance of his wrath he falls en: 2)
On their great hosts, and breaks their tottering walls ;
. Arrests their navies on the watery plain,
And whelms their strength with mountains of the ‘main.
Revolve, O kings! within your inmost thought
The rétribution by his vengeance wrought : 330 |
Invisible the gods are ever nigh,
Pass through the midst, and bend th’ all-seeing eye :
Who on each other prey, who wrest the right,
Aweless of heaven’s revenge, are open to their sight.
For thrice ten thousand holy demons rove 835
The nurturing earth, the delegates of Jove :
Hovering they glide to earth’s extremest bound,
A cloud aérial veils their forms around ;
Guardians of man, their glance alike surveys
The upright judgments and th’ unrighteous ways. 340 .
A virgin pure is Justice: from the king
Of heaven her birth ; a venerable thing
And glorious to the deities on high, |
Whose mansion is yon everlasting sky.
- Driven by despiteful-wrong, she takes her seat ’ 845
‘ In lowly grief at Jove’s eternal feet : iS
_ There of the soul unjust her plaints ascend,
So rue the nations when their kings offend ;
When, uttering wiles and brooding thoughts of ill,
' They bend the laws and wrest them to their will, 350.
Beware, O monarchs! ye that gifts devour, |
Make straight your judgments now in timely hour;


' $48 . : - ‘HESIOD,


-That crooked equity no more be seen,
Eras’d, forgotten, as it ne’er had been !
He wounds himself that aims another’s wound, 355
His evil counsels on. himself redound.
Jove at his-awful pleasure looks from high
With all-discerning and all-knowing eye,
Nor hidden from its ken what injur’d right :
Within the ¢ity-walls eludes the light. 360
Or oh ! if evil wait the righteous, deed, .
. If thus the wicked gain the righteous meed,
Then may not I nor yet my son remain
In thia our generation just in vain !-
But sure my hope, not this doth Heaven approve, 365
Not this the work of thunder-darting Jove.
Grave deep,-O Perses ! what my words declare;
To justice cleave, from violence forbear.
This law the wisdom of the god assign’d
To human race and to the bestial kind : 370
To birds of air, and fishes of the wave, + : :
’ And beasts of earth, devouring instinct gave; , -
In them no justice lives: he bade be known
This better sense to reasoning man alone.. .
Who from the. seat of judgment shall impart 875
» The truths of knowledge utter’d from his heart,
On him the god of all-discerning eye
Pours down the treasures of felicity. -
' Who sins against the right, his wilful tongue
With perjuries of lying witness hung, : 380
Lo ! he is hurt beyond the hope of cure; x
Dark is his race, nor shall his name endure.
Who fears his oath shall leave a name to shine
” With brightening lustre through his latest line.
Insensate Perses ! let the truths I tell, — * 385.
That spring from knowledge, in'thy bosom dwell
. Lo! wickednesses rife in troops appear;
Smooth is the track of vice, the mansion near:
But virtue dwells on high ; the gods before
Have plac’d the dew that drops from every pore; 390
And at the first to that sublime abode, .
Long, steep th’ ascent, and rough the rugged road :


WORKS AND DAYS.


But when thy slow steps the rude summit gain,
Easy the path and level is the plain. ‘
Far best is he whom conscious wisdom guides,
Who first and last the right and fit decides :
He too is good that to the wiser friend
His docile reason can submissive bend :
But worthless he that reason’s voice defies,
Nor wise himself, nor duteous to, the wise.
But thou, O Perses! what my words impart
Let memory bind for ever on thy heart :
O son of Dios !—labour evermore,
That hunger turn abhorrent from thy door;
That Ceres blest, with spiky garland crown’d,
Greet thee with love, and bid thy barns abound.
Still on the sluggard hungry want attends, .
The scorn of man, the hate of heaven impends ;
While he averse from labour drags his days,
Yet greedy on the gains of other's preys;
E’en as the sting]ess drones devouring seize
With glutted sloth the harvest of the bees.
Love every seemly toil, that so the store
Of foodful seasons heap thy garner’s floor.
From labour men returns of wealth behold,
Flocks in their fields, and in their coffers gold:
From labour shalt thou with the love be blest
Of men and gods; the slothful they detest.
Not toil but sloth shall ignominious be ¢
Toil, and the slothful man shall envy thee;
Shall view thy growing wealth with alter’d sense,
For glory, virtue, walk with opulence.
Thou like a god, since labour still is found
The better part, shalt live belov’d, renown’d:
Tf, as I counsel, thou thy witless mind,
» Though weak and empty as the veering wind,
From others’ coveted possessions turn’d,
To thrift compel, and food by labour earn’d.
Shame, which our aid or injury we find,
Shame to the needy clings of every kind;
Shame to low indigence declining tends,
Bold zeal to wealth’s proud pinnacle ascends.


349


595.


405


410


420


425


430


350. HESION.


_ But shun extorted riches :—oh far ‘best .,
The heaven-sent wealth without reproach possest: eS
‘Whoe’er shall mines of hoarded gold command 435 -
By fraudful tongue or by rapacious hand— Ls
As oft betides, when lucre lights the flame,
And shamelessness expels the better shame—~
Him shall the god cast down in darkness hurl!’d,
His name, his offspring, wasted from the world; 440
From his fond grasp shall fleet the guilty ore,
Awhile shall dazzle, and be seen no more.
Alike the man of crime’is he confest
Who spurns the suppliant, and who wrongs the guest; ~
Who impious climbs a brother’s marriage bed, 445
By ardour wild of stol’n embraces led ; A>
Who dares by crafty wickedness abuse
' His trust, and robs the orphans of their dues;
Who on the threshold of afflictive age
His hoary parent stings with taunting rage s-— 450
On him shall Jove in anger look from high, aes
And deep requite the dark iniquity. 4
But wholly thou from these refrain thy mind,
Weak as it is, and wavering as the wind. \
With thy best means perform the ritual part, 455
Outwardly pure, and spotless at the heart ;
And on thy altar let unblemish’d thighs ,
In fragrant savour to th’ immortals rise.
Or thou in other sort mayst well dispense
Wine-offerings and the smoke of frankincense; — 460
Ere on the nightly couch thy limbs be laid,
Or when the stars from sacred sunrise fade.
So shall thy piety aecepted move
Their heavenly natures to propitious love's. ;
Ne’er shall thy heritage divided be, 465
But others part their heritage to thee.
_' Let friends oft bidden to thy feast repair ;
- Let not a foe'the social moment-share:
Chief to thy open ‘board the neighbour call ;
’ When, unforeseen, domestic troubles fall, 470
The neighbour runs ungirded ; kinsmen wait,
And, lingering for their raiment, basten late.


‘WORKS. =e DAYS.


As the good neighbour i is our prop and stay,
So is the bad a pitfall in our way:
“Thus blest or curst, we this or that obtain,
. The first a blessing, and the last a bane.
How should thine ox by chance untimely die?
The evil neighbour looks and passes by. *

If aught thou borrowest, well the measure weigh ; 3
‘The’ same good measure to thy friend repay :
Or more, if more thou canst, unask’d concede ;
So shall he prompt supply thy future need.
Dishonest gains avoid : dishonest gain - ‘
Equivalent to loss will prove thy bane.


‘Who joves thee, love ; him woo that friendly woos: -
486


Give to the giver ; but to him refuse

That giveth not : their gifts the generous earn,

But none bestows where never is return.

. Munificence is blest ; by heaven accurst
Extortion,-of death- dealing plagues the worst.
Who bounteous gives, though large his bounty-flow,
Shall feel his heart with inward rapture glow:
Th’ extortioner of bold unblushing sin,

Though small the plunder, feels a thorn within.
If with a little thou a little blend

Continual, mighty shall the heap ascend.

Who bids his gather’d substance gradual grow,

Shall see not livid hunger’s face of woe.

No bosom-pang attends the home-laid store,

. But rife with loss the food without thy door:
*Tis good to take from hoards and pain to need
What is far from thee:—Give the precept heed.

‘When broach’d or at the lees, no care be thine
To: save the cask ; but’ spare the middle-wine.
To him, the friend that serves thee,.glad dispense
With bounteous hand the hire of recompense.
In. every compact be a witness near,
Though with thy brother ; for it-shall appear
As done in mirth: mistrust alike we find
And fond credulity destroy: mankind.
Let no fair woman rob’d in loose array,
That speaks.the wanton, tempt thy feet astray :


351


480


: 2
495
500
505


610


352. : HESIOD. : +


Whe soft demands if thy abodé be near,
. And blandly lisps, and murmurs in thine ear:
Thy slippery trust the charmer shall beguile, 515°
For, lot the thief is ambush’d in-her smile.
One only son his father’s house may tend, |
And e’en with one domestic wealth ascend :
But when thou diest in hoary years declin’d, ‘
Then mayst thou leave a second son behind ; 520
For many sons from heaven shall wealth obtain,
The care.is greater, greater is the gain.
Do thus: If riches be thy soul’s desire,
By toils on toils to this thy hope aspire. ~


Ss


‘IL.
When Atlas-born the Pleiad stars arise 625.
Before the sun above the dawning skies,’
Tis time to reap; and when they sink below 4,


The morn-iHumin’d west, ’tis time to sow. :
Know too, they set immerg’d into the sun.
~ While forty days entire their circle run ; 530
. And with the lapse of the revolving year,
When sharpén’d is the sickle, re-appear.
Law of the fields, and known to every swain
_Who turns the Jabour’d soil beside the main ; ;
Or who, remote from billowy ocean’s gales, ; 535
Tills the rich glebe of inland-winding vales.
Plough naked, swain ! and naked sow the soil,
And naked reap; if kindly to thy toil
Thou hope to gather all that Ceres yields,
And view thy crops in season crown thy fields : _ 540
Lest thou to strangers’ gates penurious rove,
_ And every needy effort fruitless prove; - |
E’en ag to me thou cam’st : but hope no more
The willing bounty, nor the borrow’d store. ;
Insensate Perses! be the labours thine — 545
Which the good gods to earthly man assign ; « 7
Lest with thy spouse, thy babes, thou vagrant ply,
And anguish’d crave those alms which all deny.
Twice may thy plaints benignant. favour gain, ee
And haply thrice.may not-be pour’d in vain : 550


WORKS AND DAYS. 8


If still persisting plead thy wearying prayer,
Thy words are nought, thy eloquence is air.
Did exhortation move, thy thought should be
From debt releasement,, days from hunger free,


A dwelling first ; a ploughing steer.be thine ; 55


A purchas’d girl, unwedded, tend thy kine:
Within let ali fit implements abound, :
Lest, with refus’d entreaty wandering round
Still press thy wants, the season glide away, '


And thou with scanted labour monrn the day. ' 56¢


‘Thy task defer not till the morn arise, -

Or the third sun th’ unfinish’d‘work surprise ;

The idler never shall his garners fill,

. Not he that still defers and lingers still : son


Lo! diligence can prosper évery toil ; 565


With loss the loiterer strives, and execrates the soil.
When the strong sun abates his keener flame

That bath’d in sultry dew the languid frame ;

‘When rushes in fresh rains autumnal Jove,

And man’s unburden’d limbs now lightlier move ;, 570

For now thestar of day with transient light -

Rolls o’er our heads, and rests in longer night :

When from the worm the forest boles are sound,

Trees bud no more, but earthward cast around

Their withering foliage,—then remember'well |. 575

The timely labour, and thy timber fell. - :


A mortar hew, and its dimensions be :

Three feet exact, the pestle cubits three, .

And cleave of seven just feet thy waggon’s axle-tree ;
Commodious length: if eight thy axe divide, 580


. Th’ exceeding foot a mallet yields beside.
Shape many blocks of curved form to round
Thy wheel, and let three spans its orbit bound ;
Whereon slow-rolling thy suspended wain
Ten spans in breadth may traverse firm the plain. 885

If hill or field supply an ilex-bough,
Of bending figure like the downward plough,
Bear it away ; this durable remains
While thy strong steers in ridges cleave the plains ;
If with firm nails thy artist join the whole, ;


590.
Affix the share-beam and adapt the pola - _
2a


354 _ HESIOD.


Two ploughs provide on household works intent,
This art-compacted, that of native bent :
A prudent forethought ; one may crashing fail,,
The other instant yok’d shall prompt avail : 595
Of elm or bay the draught-pole firm endures,
The plough-tail holm, the share-beam oak secures.
Two males procure; two strong unbroken steers:
Be nine the just proportion of their years :
Nor shail they headstrong-struggling spurn the soil, 600
And snap the plough and mar th’ unfinish’d toil.
In forty’s prime thy ploughman; one with bread
Of four-squar’d loaf in double portions fed :
He steadily shall cut the furrow true,


. Nor towards his fellows glance a rambling view, 605,


*


Still on his task intent : a stripling throws
Heedless the seed, and in one furrow strows
The lavish handful twice ; while wistful stray
His longing thoughts to comrades far away..,
Mark yearly when among the clouds on high 610
Thou hear’st the shrill crane’s migratory cry,
Of ploughing-time the sign and wintry rains’:
Care gnaws his heart who destitute remains
Of the fit yoke ; for then the season falls
To feed thy horned steers within their stalls. 615
Though easy were the prayer, .““ Indulgent friend !
Assist my need; a wain and oxen lend :”
Yet easy might the prompt excuse deny, .
“My wain and oxen must myself supply.”
Rich in bis own conceit, he then too late 620
May think to rear the waggon’s timber’d weight ;—
Fool! nor yet knows the complicated frame
A hundred season’d blocks may fitly claim: -


‘These let thy timely care provide before,


And pile beneath thy roof the ready store. 625
Improve the season: to the plough apply,
Both thou and thine; and toil in wet and dry:
Haste to the field with break of glimmering morn,
That so thy grounds may wave with thickening corn.
In spring upturn-the glebe ; and break again 630
With summer tilth the iterated plain, hk


<


‘ WORES AND DAYS,


Tt shall not mock thy hopes: be last thy toil,
When rais’d in ridges light, to sow the fallow’d soil
The fallow’d soil bids execration fly,
And brightens with content the intant’s eye.

Jove subterrene, chaste Ceres claim thy vow,
When, grasping first the handle of the plough,
Over thy broad oxen’s backs thy quickening hand
With gentle stroke lets fall the goading wand;
Whilst yok’d and harness’d by the fastening thong,
They slowly drag the draught-pole’s length along
So shall the sacred gifts of earth appear,
And ripe luxurjance clothe the plenteous ear.

_ A boy should tread thy steps; with rake o’erlay
The buried secd, and scare the birds away: ,
coca is the apt economy of things, =

hile evil management its mischief brings, )
Thus, if ethereal Jove thy cares befriend,

And ¢rown thy tillage with a prosperous end,
Shall the rich ear in fulness of its grain

Nod on the stalk and bend it to the plain.

So shalt thou sweep the spider's films away

That round thy hollow bins lie hid from day;

I ween, rejoicing in the foodful stores as
At length obtain’d, and laid within thy doors,
For plenteousness shall glad thee through the year,
Till the. white blossoms of the spring appear :

Nor thou on others’ wealth a gazer be,

But others owe their borrow’d wealth to thee,

Tf, ill-advis’d, thou turn the genial plains
His wintry tropic when the sin attains,

Thou then mayst reap, and.idle sit between $
Mocking thy gripe the meagre stalks are seen:
Whilst little joyful gather’st thou in bands

The corn whose chaffy dust bestrews thy hands:
In one scant basket shall thy harvest lie, roe
. And few shall pass thee then with honouring eye.
Now thus, now otherwise is Jove’s design,

To man inscrutable the ways divine:

' But if thou late upturn the furrow’d field,

One happy chance a remedy aney yield.

2a é


.
:


855


685


640


645


650


655


660


665


670


356 HESIOD.


O’er the wide earth when men the cuckoo hear
From spreading oak-leaves first delight their ear
Three days and nights let heaven in ceaseless rains
Deep as thy ox’s hoof o’erflow the plains ; 675
So shall an equal crop thy time repair
With his who éarlier launch’d the shining share.
Lay to thy heart the counsels thus reveal’d,
| That net a-sign be e’er from thee conceal’d:
What showery seasons ask be thine to know, 680
And what the infant spring that blossoms into snow.
Pass by the brazier’s forge where saunterers meet,
Nor loiter in the throng’d piazza’s heat: , ..
When in the wintry season rigid cold
Invades the limbs, and binds them in its hold; 685
Lo.! then th’ jndustrious man with thriving store
‘ Improves his household management the more ;
And this do thou: lest intricate distress ry
Of winter seize and needy cares oppress;
Lest, famine-smitten, thou at length be seen 690
To gripe thy tumid foot with hand from hunger lean.
- Pampering his empty hopes, yet needing food,
On ill designs behold the idler brood:
. Still in the saunterer’s place he sits reclin’d,
‘ An evil hope is lurking in his mind, * 695
While scant his means of life: thou wiser haste,
Ere the mid-summer’s favouring moment waste ¢
Thy household timely -warn,-“‘ The summer day
Endures not ever; toil while yet ye may.”
Beware the January month; beware - 700
Those hurtful days, that keenly piercing air
Which flays the steers; while frosts their horrors cast,
Congeal the ground and sharpen every blast.
From Thracia’s courser-teeming region sweeps
The northern wind, and breathing on the deeps 705
Heaves wide the troubled surge; earth echoing roars
From the deep forests and the sea-beat shores.
He from the mountain-top with shattering stroke
Rerids the broad pine, and many a branching oak .
Hurls ’thwart the glen: while sudden from on high, 710
With headlong fary rushing down the sky,


WORKS AND DAYS, =,


The whirlwind stoops to earth, then deepening round


857


Swells the loud storm,.and all the boundless woods resound.


The beasts their cowering tails with trembling fold,
And shrink and shudder at the gusty cold.
Thick is the hairy coat, the shaggy skin,

~ But that all-chilling breath shall pierce within.
Not his rough hide can then the ox avail,
The long-hair’d goat defenceless feels the gale;


715


Yet vain the north-wind’s rushing strength to wound 720


The flock, with sheltering fleeces fene’d around.

The aged man inclines his bowed form,

But safe the tender virgin from the storm.

She'strange to lovely Venus’ mystic joys . ;

Beneath the mother’s roof her hours employs.

Around her nightly flows the tepid wave,

And shining oils in liquid fragrance lave

Her yielding limbs; thus pillow’d to repose

In her soft chamber, while the tempest blows.

Now gnaws the boneless polypus his feet,

Starv’d midst bleak rocks, his desolate retreat :

For now no more the sun’s reflected ray

Through waves transparent guides him to his prey.

Over tawny Afric rolls his bright career, .

And slowly gilds the Grecian hemisphere.

And now the horned and unhorned kind,

Whose lair is in the wood, sore-famish’d grind

. Their sounding jaws, and frozen and quaking fly

Where oaks the mountain dells imbranch on high ;

They seek to couch in thickets of the glen,

Or lurk deep-shelter’d in the rocky den.

Like aged men who propp’d on crutches tread

Tottering, with broken strength and stooping head,

So move the beasts of earth; and creeping low

Shun the white flakes, and dread the drifting snow.
I warn thee, now around thy body cast _.

A thick defence and covering from the blast:

Let the soft cloak its woolly warmth bestow,

The undey-tunic to.thy ankle flow:

On a scant warp a woof abundant weave ;

Thus warmly woven the mantling cloak receive :


,


725


730


735


740


745,


750


358. HESIOD. a


Nor shall thy limbs beneath its ample fold
With bristling hairs start shivering to the cold.
Shoes of a slaughter’d ox’s lasting hide,
Soft-lin’d with socks of wool, thy feet provide: |= 755
And kid-skins ’gainst the rigid season sew
With sinew of the bull, and sheltering throw
Athwart thy shoulders when the rains impend ;
And let a well-wrought cap thy head defend, ®
And screen thine ears, when drenching showers descend.
Bleak is the morn, when blows the north from high ; 761
Oft when the dawnlight paints the starry sky,
A misty cloud suspended hovers o’er
The spacious earth with fertilizing store,
Drain’d from the living streams: aloft in air - 765
The whirling winds the buoyant vapour bear,
Resolv’d at eve in rain or gusty cold
As by the north the troubled raek is roll’d.,
Preventing this, the labour of the day
Accomplish’d, homeward bend thy hastening way; 770
Lest the dark cloud with whelming rush deprest
Drench thy cold limbs, and soak thy dripping vest.
This winter-month with prudent caution fear ;
Severe-to flocks, nor less to men severe : .
Feed thy keen husbandman with larger bread, 775
With half their provender thy steers be fed ;
Them rest assists: the night’s protracted length
Recruits their vigour and supplies their strength.
‘This rule observe, while still the various earth °
Gives every fruit and kindly seedling birth: 780
Still to the toil proportionate the cheer, ~ :
The day to night, and equalize the year.
When from the wintry tropic of the sun
Full sixty days their finish’d round have run,
Lo! then the sacred deep Arcturus leave : 785
First whole-apparent on the verge of eve:
Through the gray dawn the swallow lifts her wing,
Morn-plaining bird, the harbinger of spring.
Anticipate the time; the care be thine
An earlier day to prune the shoofing vine. * 790
' When the house-bearing snail is slowly found
To shun the Pleiad heats that scorch the ground,


e k


WORKS AND DAYS. ; 359


And climb the plant’s tall stem, insist no more

To dress the vine, bat give the. vineyard o'er, -

Whet the keen sickle, hasten every swain, 795
From shady bowers, from morning sleep refrain :

Now in the fervour of the harvest-day,

When the strong sun dissolves the frame away,

Now haste afield; now bind the sheafy corn,

And earn thy food by rising with the morn. 800
Lo! the third portion of thy labour’s cares
The early morn anticipating shares :

In early morn the labour swiftly wastes ;
In early morn the speeded journey hastes:
The time when many a traveller tracks the plain, 805
And the yok’d oxen bend them to the wain. |

When the green artichoke ascending flowers;

When in the sultry season’s toilsome hours,

Perch’d on a branch beneath his veiling wings,

With shrill sweet note Cicada frequent sings ; 810
Then the plump goat.a savoury food bestows,

The poignant wine in mellowest flavour flows ;
Wanton the blood then bounds in woman’s veins,
But weak of man the heat-enfeebled reins ; |
Full on his brain descends the solar flame, : 815
Unnerves the languid knees, and all the frame
Exhaustive dries away ;—O then be thine
’ The grofto’s arching gloom, the Byblian wine.

Let kneaded milk-cakes, and the milk that flows :
Defrauded from the kid, thy feast compose: 820
Let heifers young their tender flesh afford
_¥ed on the forest-browse, and kidlings crown the board,
With dainty food so saturate thy soul, ;

And drink the wine dark-mantling in the bowl:

While in the coolness of the shade reclin’d, 825
Thy face is turn’d to catch the breathing wind,

And feel the freshening brook that sparkling glides.

With living waters and transparent tides. ‘

To fill the goblet from the wave be thine
Three parts; the fourth may flow with brimming wine.

When first Orion’s beamy strength is born, 831

Let then thy labourers thrash the sacred corn.


360 HESIOD.


Smooth be the level‘ floor, on breezy ground,
Where winnowing gales may sweep in eddies round ;
Hoard in thy ample bins the meted grain ;
And now, as I advise, thy hireling swain -”
From forth thy house dismiss, when all the store
Of kindly food is laid within thy door ;
And to thy service let.a female come,
But childless, for a child were burdensome.
A sharp-tooth’d dog maintain, nor thrifty spare
To feed his fierceness high with pampering care ;
Lest the day-slumbering thief thy nightly door
Wakeful besiege, and spoil thy plunder’d store.
For ox and mule the yearly fodder lay,
And pile th’ abundant straw, the plenteous hay:
This care despatch’d, refresh the wearied swain
With rest, and loose thy oxen-from the wain.
When Sirius and Orion the mid-sky -
Ascend, and on Arcturus looks from high
The rosy-finger’d morn, the vintage calls ;
Then bear the gather’d grapes within thy walls.
Ten days and nights expos’d the clusters lay,
Bask’d in the radiance-of each mellowing day:
Let five their circling round successive run,
Whilst lie thy grapes o’ershaded from the sun ;
The sixth express the harvest of the vine,
And teach thy vats to foam with joy-inspiring wine.
But when beneath the skies on morning’s brink
The Pleiads, Hyads, and Orion sink ;
Know then the ploughing and the seed- time near :—
Thus well-dispos’d shall glide thy rustic year.
But if thy breast with nautical desire
The perilous deep’s uncertain gains inspire;
When chas’d by strong Orion down the heaven
Sink the seven stars in gloomy ocean driven ;
Then varying winds in gustful eddies rave ;
Let not a vessel tempt the blackening wave:
But, as I counsel, with contented toil
The land essay and exercise the soil.
Hale from the wave thy bark on solid ground,
And stedfast prop with steadying stones around,


835


845


850


855


860


865


870


: WORKS. AND DAYS. . $61


Firm ’gainst the strength of winds that rushing bear
The showery tempest through the sounding air:
Draw from its keel the peg, lest rotting rain 875
Suck’d in the hollow of the hold remain. . ;
Beneath thy roof secure the tackling lay, -
And furl thy vessel’s wings that skimm’d the watery way.
The well-fram’d rudder in the smoke suspend,
And calm and navigable seas attend, - “| 880
Then launch the rapid bark ; fit cargo load ;
And freighted rich repass the liquid road.
O witless Perses! thus for honest gain,
Thus did our mutual father plough the mein.
Erst from Atolian Cuma’s distan$.shore, . "$85
Hither in sable ship his course he bore: |
Through the wide seas his venturous way he took,
No rich revenues, prosperous ease forsook :
His wandering course from. poverty began,
The visitation sent-from heaven to man, 890
‘In Asera’s wretched hamlet, at the feet
Of Helicon, he fix’d his humble seat :-—
Ungenial clime; in wintry cold severe, He
And summer heat, and joyless through the year. ;
‘Each labour, Perses! let the seasons guide ; 895
But o’er thy navigation chief preside:
Decline a slender bark ; intrust thy freight
To the strong vessel of a larger rate:
The larger cargo doubles every gain; :
* Let but the winds their adverse blasts restrain. 900
If thy rash thought on merchandise be plac’d,
Lest debts insnare or woeful hunger waste,
Learn now the courses of thé roaring sea,
Though ships and voyages are strange to me.
Ne’er o’er the sea’s broad way my course I bore, 905
Save once from Aulis to th’ Eubcean shore: ;
From Aulis, where thé mighty Argive host,
The winds awaiting, linger’d on the coast;
From sacred Greece assembled to destroy
The guilty walls of beauty-blooming Troy.,  - 910
I pass’d to Calchis, where around the grave
Of king Amphidamas, in battle brave, ;


862 HESIOD.


His valiant sons had solemn games decreed,

And heralds loud announc’d full many a meed ;—

There let me boast, that victor in the lay 915

I bore a tripod ear’d, my prize, away:

This to the maids of Helicon I vow’d,

Where first their tuneful inspiration flow’d.

Thus far in ships does my experience rise, :

Yet bold I speak the wisdom of the skies ; 920

Th’ inspiring Muses to my lips have given

The lore of song, and strains that breathe of heaven.
When from the summer tropic fifty days

Have roll’d, when summer’s time of toil decays ;

Then is the season fair to spread the sail; 925

Nor then thy ship shall founder in the gale,

And seas o’erwhelm the crew; unless the power

Who shakes the shores have will'd their mortal hour 7

Or heaven’s eternal king require their breath,

Whose hands the issues hold of life and death, _ 980

Of evil and of good. But now the seas

Are dangerless, and clear the calmy breeze.

Then trust the winds, and let thy vessel sweep

With all her freight the level of the deep.

But rapidly retrace thy homeward way, 935

‘Nor wait the vintage-time with rash delay ;

Nor autumn rains, that speak the winter nigh ;

Nor the south blast, that fearful tosses high

The troubled surge; while ether pours amain 939

Th’ autumnal deluge down, and heaves the billowy plain. , -

’ There are who launch in spring: when first the crow ,

Imprinting with light steps the sands below;

As many thinly scatter’d leaves are seen

To clothe the fig-tree’s top with tender green ; ,

The vernal voyage practicable seems, 945

And pervious are the boundless ocean-streanis :-—

I praise it not; ‘for thou with anxious mind

Must hasty snatch th’ occasion of the wind:

The drear event may baffle all thy care: —

Yet thus, e’en thus, will human folly dare. 950

Of wretched mortals, lo! the soul is gain;

But death is dreadful midst the whelming main.


. WORKS AND DAYS. | 363


These counsels lay to heart: and, warn’d by me,
Trust not thy whole precarious wealth to sea,
Tost in the hollow keel: a portion send ; 955
Thy larger substance let the shore defend.
Fearful the losses of the ocean fall, Ay
When on a fragile plank embark’d thy all:
So bends beneath its weight th’ o’erburden’d wain,
And the crush’d axle spoijs the scatter’d grain. 960
The golden mean of conduct should confine .
Our every aim—be moderation thine.
When full matureness crowns thy manhood’s pride,
Lead to thy mansion the consenting bride:
‘Thrice ten thy sum of years, the nuptial prime ; 965
Nor fall far short, nor far exceed the time.
Four years the ripening virgin should consume,
And wed the fifth of her expanded bloom.
A virgin choose, that morals chaste imprest
By thy wise love may stamp her yielding breast: 970
Some known and neighbouring damsel be thy prize,
And wary bend around tliy cautious eyes ;
Lest by a choice imprudent thou be found :
_ The merry mock of all the dwellers round.
No better lot has providence Sssign’d _ 975
Than a fair woman with a virtuous mind:
Nor can a worse befall, than when thy fate
Allots a worthless, feast-contriving mate ;
She with no torch of mere material flame ;
- Shall burn to tinder thy care-wasted frame ; 980
Shall send 4 fire thy vigorous bones within,
And age unripe in bloom of years begin.
Be still observant, lest thine actions move '
Th’ avenging notice of the blest above.
Let none in friendship with a brother vie: 985
Or should mischance divide the tender tie,
Be not the first to point the vengeful sting,
Nor speak for falsehood’s sake the treacherous thing.
If he the first by word or deed offend,
Doubly thy just resentment may descend. | . 990
If with conciliating love possest
He come atoning, clasp him to thy breast.


,


864 HESIOD.


Wretched the man whom faith deceiv’d shall send’
Jn sad incertitude from friend to friend. __
Ne’er let thy features with thy thoughts imprest 995
Convict the secrets of thy silent breast.
Each name of opposite opprobrium shun ;
The host of many, and the host of none.
Ne’er to the wicked a companion be;
Nor let the good be e’er revilg by thee. 1000
Ne’er suffer that thy tongue’s reproof deny
The prayer of soul-devouring poverty :
It is a thing by sacred wisdom given,
The givers are th’ immortal gods of heaven. :
Lo! the best treasure is a frugal tongue; | 1005
The lips of moderate speech with grace are hung:
‘ ‘*The evil-speaker shall perpetual fear
. Return of evil ringing in his ear.
When many guests combine in common fare, :
. Be not morose, nor grudge a liberal share : 1010
When all contributing the feast unite, ‘
Great is the pleasure and the cost is light.
When the libation of the morn demands
The sable wine, forbear with unwash’d hands
To lift the cup: with ear Sverted Jove 1015
Shall spurn thy prayer, and every god above. :
When from the funeral feast thy steps return,
Let not thy breast with amorous transport burn:
From the glad feast of gods the soft embrace
Court unreprov’d, and stamp the infant race. 1020
Whene’er thy feet the river-ford essay,
Whose flowing current winds its limpid way,
. Thy hands amid the pleasant waters lave ;
And lowly gazing on the beauteous wave :
Appease the riveregod: if thou perverse 1025
Pass with unsprinkled hands, a heavy curse
Shall rest upon thee from th’ observant skies,
And after-woes retributive arise. f y
Ne’er when the feast of gods respect demands °
Apply the shining iron to thy hands ; 1030
Nor at the splendid board in sordid guise
Pare from the fresh the dry excrescencies._


© ry


WORKS AND DAYS. ” 365


Ne’er let thy hand above the chalice rest -
. The ewer of wine: the unsuspecting guest
May from, thy fault his own disaster drink, 1035 |
For evil omens lurk around the brink. ;
‘Ne’er in the midst th’ unfinish’d house forego,
Lest there perch’d lonely croak the clamorous crow.
Ne’er in unconsecrated vessels feed j
. Nor lave; a mischief shall the slight succeed. 1040
Set not an infant, o’er whose head have roll’d
Twelve days, or twelve revolving moons grown old,
On seats immoveable: this ill prevent,*
Or, lot ‘his manhood shall be impotent. :
Ne’er in the female baths thy limbs immerse: 1045
In its own time the guilt shall bring the curse.
Ne’er let the mystic rites of altars move
Deriding scorn; but dread indignant Jove.
Do thus :—and still with diligence of mind x
The evil rumour shun of humankind. . 1050 *
Easy the burden at the first to bear, -
And light when lifted as impassive air ;
- But scarce can human strength the load convey,
Or shake th’ intolerable weight away.
Swift Rumour hastes, nor ever wholly dies, 1055
Through peopled realms on tongues unnumber’d flies ;
Not earth’s far shores her kindling flight confine,
A goddess, and immortal as divine.


Wm ove


DAYS.


A vecent heed thy slaves enjoin to pay,

And well observe each Jove-appointed day. 1060 -
The thirtieth of the moon inspect with care

Each monthly task, and every ration share

To every slave: and choose the hour that draws

Th’ assembled people to the pleaded ane


¢


366 HESIOD.


(Lo! these the days appointed from ‘above, 1065
By the deep counsels of all-sapient Jove.)
Of each new moon the rolling year around,
The first, the fourth, the seventh are prosperous found:
Phebus, the seventh, from mild Latona born,
, The golden-sworded god, beheld the. morn. ' 1070
The eighth, nor less the ninth, with favouring skies
Speeds of th’ increasing month each rustic enterprise:
And on th’ eleventh let thy flocks be shorn,
And on the twelfth be reap’d thy laughing corn:


Both days aré good; yet is the twelfth confest 1075
More fortunate, with fairer omen blest. :

On this the air-suspended spider treads, ; :
In the full noon his fine ae self-spun threads ;

And thé wise emmet, tracking dark the plain, -


Heaps provident the store of gather’d grain. - 1080
_ On this let careful woman’s nimble hand
Throw first the shuttle, and the web expand.
On the thirteenth forbear to sow the grain,
But then the plant shall not be'set in vain. ;
. The sixteenth profitless to plants is deem’d, 1085
Auspicioys to the birth of men esteem’d ;
But to the virgin, shall unprosperous prove,
Then born to light, or join’d in wedded love.
So to the birth of girls with adverse ray
The sixth appears, an unpropitious day: 1090
But then the swain his wattled fold may weave;
Emasculation then the ram receive,
’ And wanton kid; and fortunate the morn
To every bitth, whene’er a man is born.
This day keen railleries loves, deluding lies, - 1095
And love-tales bland, and whisper’d secrecies.
The eighth the goat and bellowing steer by rule
Emasculate ; the twelfth the patient mule:
The twenty-ninth indulge in noon-day love, —
Profound in wisdom shall thy-offspring prove. 1100
The tenth propitious lends-its natal ray
To men; to gentle maids, the fourteenth day.
Tame the mild sheep on this auspicious morn,
‘And ox of flexile hoof and wreathed horn,


WORKS AND DAYS. . 367


And labour-patient mule; and now command , 1105. ~*
Thy sharp-tooth’d dog, with smoothly flattering hand.

The fourth and twenty-fourth no grief should prey
Within thy breast, for holy either day. ,

Fourth of the moon lead home thy blooming bride,

And be thé fittest auguries descried. 1110

Beware the fifth, with horror fraught and woe:

*Tis said the Furies walk their round below,
Avenging the dread oath ; whose awful birth
From Discord rose, to scourge the perjur’d éarth,

On the smooth thrashing-floor the seventeenth morn
Observant throw the sheaves of sacred corn: 1116
For chamber-furniture the timber hew,

And blocks for ships with shaping axe subdue. _ ‘

The fourth upon the stocks thy vessel lay,

‘Soon with light keel to skim the watery way. 1120.

The nineteenth mark among the better days,

When past the fervour of the noontide blaze. .. ~ ,

Harmless the ninth: ’tis good to plant the earth,

And fortunate each male and female birth.

The twenty-ninth to broach the cask is best ; 1125.

The prudent secret is to few confest.

Then yoke thy steers ; thy mules in harness bind,

And coursers, hoof’d with fleetness of the wind :

Let the swift ship with numerous banks of oars

Be launch’d this day along the sandy ‘shores. 1180
‘Yet few this day entirely faithful deem ;
Draw on the fourth thy wine’s well-flavour’d stream ;
Holy the fourteenth day beyond the rest ;

The twenty-fourth o’er all at morning best ; é
_Few know the secret truth : and worst the day 1138
When past the fervour of the noontide ray.

These are the days of which the careful heed

Each human enterprise will favouring speed :

Others there are, which intermediate fall,

Mark’d with no auspice, and unomen’d all: 1146
And these will some and those will others praise,

But few are vers’d in mysteries of days.

Now as a stepmother the day we find

Severe, and now as is a mother kind,


2 «


368 , : HESIOD.


Oh fortunate the man ! oh blest is he,
Who, skill’d in these, fulfils his ministry :-—
He to whose note the auguries are given,


No rite transgress’d, and void of blame to heayen.


1145


WORKS OF CALLIMACHUS,


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE.’


THE HYMNS AND EPIGRAMS
FROM THE GREEK;


THE COMA BERENICES


FROM THE LATIN OF CATULLUS.


_ BY H. W. TYTLER, M.D.


-


Inter Callimachi sat erit placuisse Hbellos,
Et cecinisse modis, pure poeta, tuis.—ProreRt.


., 2B


HYMNS.


HYMN TO JUPITER.


Waist we to Jove, immortal and divine,
Perform the rites, and pour the ruddy wine,
Whom shall the Muse with sacred rapture sing
But Jove th’ almighty and eternal king,
Who from high ‘heaven with bursting thunder harla
The sons of earth, and awes th’ ethereal world ?
But say, thou first and greatest power above |
Shall I Dictean or Lycwan Jove


Attempt to sing ?... Who knows thy mighty line ? |


And who can tell, except by power divine,
If Ida’s hills thy sacred birth may cai
Or far Arcadia boast an eqyal fame ?.
The Cretans, prone to falsehood, vaunts in vain,
And impious built thy tomb on Dict’ § plain ;
For Jove, th’ immortal king, shall never die,

_ But reign o’er men and gods above the sky.

In high Parrhasia Rhea bore the god, -
Where gloomy forests on the mountans nod ;
And hence such awful horror guards the grove,
Made holy by the glorious birth of Jove,

That now no teeming female dares presume
To bear her young amid the hallow’d gloom :
Nor beast nor insect shall approach the shade,
Nor matron chaste invoke Lucina’s aid
Within the dark recess, still known to fame,
‘And Rhea’s ancient bed th’ Arcadians name.

Soon as her womb discharg’d the mighty load,
She sought a spring to pees the new-born god,


5


25


372 = CALLIMACHUS. ~~


But in Parrhasia yet no stream appears,

Though fam’d for numerous rills in after-years ;

And when the Power ungirt her spacious breast,
The dusty fields display’d a barren waste.

Nor yet broad Ladon flow’d, the plains to lave,
Nor Erymanthus pour’d his limpid wave ;
Wide-branching oaks Iasus’ channel shade,

- And chariots roll on Mela’s sandy bed :
Unnumber’d savage beasts securely throng,
Where now deep Carion swiftly glides along ;

A thirsty swain amid the wilds might go,
Where crystal Cratis and Metopé flow,
Nor find a spring ; but still, with wonder, hear

. Th’ imprison’d water murmuring on his ear.

The venerable goddess, thus. distress’d,
With awful.voice the pregnant earth address’d ;
Slight are thy pangs, O friendly Power, she said,
Bring forth like me to give thy suppliant aid.
She rais’d' her mighty arm as thus she spoke,
And with her sceptre struck the solid rock ;
Wide at the blow the yawning mountain rent,

. The floods impetuous issued from the vent,

And pour’d along the ground in swelling streams, .

Where soon she bath’d Jove’s beauteous infant-limbs.

Thy body cleans’d, and wrapt in purple bands,

She gave the precious pledge to Neda’s hands,

-And much enjoin’d her, with a mother’s care,

To seek the Cretan cave and hide thee there.

For she was first-born of the beauteous maids ~

That nurs’d the Thunderer.in the gloomy shades,

Save Styx and Philyré; from whence she gain’d

More high rewards than virgin e’er obtain’d:

For Neda’s name the grateful] goddess gave

To this most ancient stream, whose rolling wave

With force impetuous pours along the plain,

And near the walls of Leprium meets the main ;

The sons of Arcas hear the waters roar,

And drink the sacred flood, and crowd the’ shore. |
Thee, mighty Jove, the nymph to Thenz bore,

And thence:to Gnossus on the Cretan shore,


‘


30


35


"40


50


55 .


60


65


Be ata HXYMN TO JUPITER.
But first at Thene eur’d thy recent sind
Cydonians hence Omphalé nam’d the ground.
The nymphs of Dicté with encircling arms
Embrac’d thee blooming in immortal charms ;
The fair Adraste next thy care began,
And laid thy godhead i in a golden van. *
* On Ida’s hills the géat Amalthea bred,
There gave thee suck ; and mountain-honey fed,
From bees that o’er the cliffs appear in swarms,
Prepare their waxen domes with -hoarse alarms,
Collect the sweets of every fragrant flower,
And on thy lips distil th’ ambrosial shower.
The fierée Curetes circle o’er the ground
In warlike dance, and beat their shields around,
That Saturn, for thy cries, might hear alone
The clang of armour on his distant throne.
Away thy infant years thus quickly flew,
Thy power appearing as thy stature grew. ,
And soon thou glow’st with every youthful grace,
And soon soft down o’erspreads thy beauteous face ;
Jove, yet @ child, the prize of wisdom bears’
From both his brothers in maturer years:
And both agreed that th’ empire of high heaven,


Though theirs by birthright, should to J! ove be given.


- Yet ancient poets idle fictions tell

That lots were cast for heaven, for death and hell, -
Our ears thus flattering with amusive: ‘tales ; 3

Wit pleases oftener than fair truth prevails.

None trust blind chance their fortune to decide,
Unless for equal prizes lots are tried ;

And who prefers the dark infernal bawers

To heaven’s gay courts and bright ethereal towers ? ?
Chance plac’d not Jove in these divine abodes; :
Thy. power, thy wisdom, made thee king of gods!
Then first thy bird excell’d th’ aérial kind,

Thy mandates waited and reveal’d thy mind ;

Now through the skies, at thy command he springs,
And bears celestial augury on his wings.
All-gracious Power! protect the friends I love,
And send them favouring omens from above.


” 878


70
75
80
“90
95
100 »


105


874 CALLIMACHUS.


Lo!. rob’d in purple, yonder shining bands *
Of chosen, youths whom Jove himself commands ;.
Not those who tempt the seas in search of gain,
Or join fierce: combat on the dusty plain,
Invent the dance or raise the tuneful song ;
These meaner cares t’ inferior gods belong ;
But those to whom imperial power ‘is given,
Jove’s ’favour’d sons, the delegates of heaven,
Whom seamen, soldiers, merchants, bards obey,
And wide-extended empires own their sway.
The rough artificer owns Vulcan’s power,
And hardy soldiers warlike Mars adore;
The man who swift pursues the savage brood,
Invokes Diana, huntress of the wood ;
And he, who strikes the lyre’s resounding strings _
With skilful hand, from bright Apollo springs,
But kings from Jove; except the royal line
No rank on earth approaches to divine:
Their sacred power descends from mighty Jove,
And he protects them from high heaven above.
Besides from him the power of judges springs,
And governors, the substitutes of kings ;
‘He guards the city, o’er.the state presides,
Rewards the governor whom virtue guides ;
But dire disgrace and ruin keeps in store
For partial judges that abuse their power.
Though, mighty Jove! thy scepter’d sons obtain
_ Abundant wealth, and means of glory gain,
Yet all receive not, by thy great decree,
An equal share of splendid pomp from thee;
‘ For warlike Philadelphus reigns alone,
And.power supreme supports his sacred throne ;
Glad evening still bebolds the vast designs
Complete, to which his tsorning thought inclines,
Beholds complete in one revolving sun,
What others, in long ages, but begun.
For Jove, in wrath, makes other kings to mourn
Their counsels blasted, and their hopes forlorn. :
Hail! mighty king; hail! great Saturnian Jove, °
Who sends life, health, and safety from above ;


110


115


120


126


180


135


140


HYMN TO APOLLO. -  * 875


Thy glorious acts transcending human tongue,
Nor were, nor shall by mortal bard be sung!
O, from thy bright abodes let blessings flow ;
Grant wealth, grant virtue to mankind below:
For we with wealth are not completely blest, :
And virtue ‘fails when wealth is unpossess’d ;
Then grant us both; for these united prove
The choicést blessing man receives from Jove.


| .HIYMN T0 APOLLO.


Wuart force, what sudden impulse, thus can make
The laurel-branch, and all the temple shake!
Depart, ye souls profane; hence, hence! O fly

Far from this holy place! Apollo’s nigh;

He knocks with gentle foot; the Delian palm
Submissive bends, and breathes a sweeter balm ::
Soft swans, high hovering, catch th’ auspicious sign,

Wave their white wings, and pour their notes divine.
Ye bolts, fly back; ye brazén doors, expand,

Leap from your hinges, Pheebus is at hand.

Bégin, ‘young men, begin the sacred song,

.Wake all your lyrés, and to the dances throng, . .
Remembering still, the Power is seen by none. -
Except the just and innocent alone; '
Prepare your minds, and wash the spots away,
That hinder men to view th’ all-piercing ray,

Lest ye provoke his favouring beams to bend
~ On happier climes, and happier skies ascend :

And lo! the Power, just opening on the sight,
Diffuses bliss, and shines with heavenly light.

Nor should the youthful choir with silent feet,

Or harps unstrung, approaching Phoebus meet,

If soon they wish to mount the nuptial bed,

To deck with sweet perfumes the hoary head,

On old foundations lofty walls to build,

Or raise new cities in some distant field.


,


10


15,


20


25


876 . - GALLIMACHUS. -


(ae . 3
Ye listening crowds, in awful silence hear
Apollo’s praises, and the song revere ;

” Even raging.seas subside, when poets sing
The bow, the harp of the Lycorean king:

_ Nor Thetis, wretched mother, dares deplore
Her lov’d, her lost Achilles, now no more!

But thrill’d ‘with, awe, she checks her grief and pain,
“When To Pxan sounds along the main.

The weeping rock, once Niobe, suspends

Its tears a while, and mute attention lends;

No more she seems a monument of woe, :

Nor female sighs through Phrygian marble flow.
. Sound Jo! Io! such the dreadful end

Of impious mortals, that with gods contend ;

Who dares high heaven’s immortal powers engage,

Against our king a rebel war would wage,

Aad who rebels against our sovereign’s sway

Would brave the bright far-shooting god of day. ,

But rich rewards await the grateful choir -

That still to Pheebus tune. the living lyre ;

From him all honour springs, and high above

He sits in power, at the right hand of Jove.

Beyond the day, beyond the night prolong _

The sacred theme, to charm the god of song.

Let all resound his praise; behold how bright

Apollo shines in robes of golden light

Gold are his quiver, harp, and Lyctian bow,

And his fair feet with golden sandals glow..-

‘_ All-bright in gold appears the Power divine,
And boundless wealth adorns his Delphic shrine. « .
Immortal youth and heavenly beauty crown
His cheeks, unshaded by the softest down,

But his fair tresses drop ambrosial dews,

- Distil soft oils, and healing balm diffuse:

_ And on what favour’d city these shall fall,
Life, health, and safety guard the sacred wall.

To great Apollo various arts belong, .
The skill of archers and the powers of song;
By him the sure events of lots are given,
* By him the prophet speaks the will of heaven,


* 30


35


40


AB


65


HYMN TO APOLLO.. 377


And wise physicians, taught by him, delay
The stroke of fate, and turn disease away.
But we to Nomius, heavenly shepherd, ery,
Since he, for young Admetus, left the sky; 70
When burning with desire, he deign’d to feed .
A mortal’s coursers on. Amphrysus’ mead. +;
His herds increas’d, and overspread the ground,
Kids leapt, and sportive lambkins frisk’d around,
Where’er Apollo bent his favouring eyes, 75
The flocks with milk abounded, grew in size,
And pregnant ewes, that brought one lamb before,
Now dropt a double offspring on the shore.
Ere towns are built, or new foundations laid,
We atill invoke the great Apollo’s aid, 80
And oracles explore; for with delight
He views new cities rising on the sight ;
And Phoebus’ self the deep foundations lays.
The god, but four years old, in former’ days,
First rais’d a structure on th’ Ortygian ground * 85
Close by the lake that ever circles round ;
“When young Diana, skill’d in hunting, laid
Unnumber’d goats, on Cynthus’ mountain, dead :
The careful goddess brought their heads away, ,
And gave them to the glorious god of day ; 90
He broke the hortis, and rais’d with artful toil
A wondrous altar from the.sylvan spoil,
Plae’d rows on rows, in order still dispos’d, _
Which he with circling walls of horn enclos’d ;
And from this model, just in every part, * 95
Apollo taught mankind the builder’s art.
Besides Apollo show’d my native place,
To Battus, and the fam’d Therxan race,
A crow propitious sent, that flew before,
* And led the wanderers to the Libyan shore. 100
Apollo, marking from unclouded skies,
Beheld Cyrené’s lofty towers arise,
And faithful swore, that Egypt’s king should gain -
The new-built city and the fertile plain.
To tuneful Phoebus, sacred god of song, . 105
In various nations, various names belong ; mt


878 a | CALLIMACHUS.


Some Boédromius, ‘Clarius some implore,
But nam’d Carneiis on my native shore.
. Thee, great Carneiis! Sparta first possess’d,
Next Thera’s isle was with thy presence bless’d ; J10,
' You cross’d the swelling main from Thera’s bowers,
And then resided in Cyrené’s towers,
The sixth from Cidipus convey’d the god
From Lacedemon o’er the watery road
To Thera’s isle; but brought from Thera’s strand 115
By blameless Battus to Asbystis’ land.
He rais’d a temple-to record thy praise,
Appointed annual feasts, on solemn days,
In fair Cyrené ; sacred hymns resound,
-And slaughter’d bulls lie bleeding on the ground. 120
Io! Carnean Phoebus! all must. pay : ;
Their vows to thee,-and on thine altars lay
Green herbs and painted flowers, when genial spring
Diffuses sweetness from Favonius’ wing ;
But when stern winter his dark power displays 125
With yellow crocus feed the rising blaze: _
So flames unceasing deck thy hallow’d shrine,
And breathe sweet odours to thy power divine.
With transport Phoebus views the warlike dance,
When fierce Bellona’s sons in arms advance, *- 1380
And, with brown Libyan virgins, tread the ground,
. When annual the Carneiin feast comes round,
Nor yet Alcides’ sons had Cyrne seen,
Her crystal fountain and extended green,
But through Azilis’ woods the wanderers stray’d, 135
And hid their heads within the dusky shade,
When Phoebus standing on the horned hill
Bebeld the forest and the murmuring rill,
And show’d the warriors to his lovely bride,
Cyrené fair attending at his side, 140
Who kill’d the lion on Myrtusa’s rocks,
. That tore the good Eurypylus’s flocks.
Apollo saw not from the realms above
A city more deserving of his love; -
No rising town, no mighty state obtain’d ' 145
Such gifts from Phoebus as Cyrené gain’d,


«
4


HYMN TO APOLLO.


In dear remembrance of the ravish’d dame,
That crown’d his love, and gave the city’s name.
Nor were her sons ungrateful, but bestow’d
Superior honours on their guardian god.’
Now Io! Io Pean! rings around
As first from Delphi rose the sacred sound,
When Phebus swift descending deign’d to show
His heavenly skill to draw the golden bow.
For when no mortal weapons could repel
Enormous Python horrible and fell,
From his bright bow incessant arrows flew,
And, as he rose, the hissing serpent slew.
Whilst Io! Io Paan! numbersery, —
Haste launch thy darts, for surely from the sky
Thou cam’st the great preserver of mankind,
As thy fair mother at thy birth design’d.
An equal foe, pale Envy, late drew near,
And thus suggested in Apollo’s ear;
J hate the bard who pours not forth his song
In swelling numbers, loud, sublime, and strong ;
No lofty lay should in low murmurs glide,
But wild as waves, and sounding as the tide.
_ Fierce with his foot indignant Phoebus spurn’d
Th’ invidious monster, and in wrath return’d.
Wide rolls Euphrates’ wave, but soil’d with mud,
And dust and slime pollute the swelling flood :
For Ceres still the fair Melisse bring .
The purest water from the smallest spring,
That-softly murmuring creeps along the plain,
And falls with gentle cadence to the main.
Propitious Phoebus! thus thy power extend,
And soon shall Envy to the shades descend.


‘


HYMN TO DIANA.


TxouacH great Apollo claim the poet’s lyre,
Yet cold neglect may tempt Diana’s ire.
Come, virgin-goddess, and inspire my song,
To you the chace, the sylvan dance belong,


150


160


165


170


175


. $80 | CALLIMACHUS,


And mountain-sports ; since first with accents mild, -


Whilst on his knee the Thunderer held his child,

O grant me, father, thus the goddess said,

To reign a virgin, an unspotted maid.

To me let temples rise and altars smoke,

And men by many names my aid invoke ;

Proud Phebus else might with thy. daughter vie,

And look on Dian with disdainful eye.

To bend the bow and aim the dart be. mine,

I ask no thunder nor thy bolts divine ; 7

At your desire the Cyclops will bestow

My pointed shafts and string my little bow.

Let silver light my. virgin steps attend,

When to the chace with flying feet I bend,

Above the knee be my white garments roll’d

In plaited folds, and fring’d around with gold.

Let Ocean give me-sixty little maids

To join the dance amid surrounding shades ;

Let twenty more from fair Amnisius come,

All nine years old, and yet in infant-bloom,

To bear my buskins, and my dogs to feed,

When fawns in safety frisk along the mead,

Nor yet the spotted lynx is doom’d to bleed. )

Be mine the mountains and each rural bower,

And give one city for thy daughter’s dower ;

On mountain-tops shall my bright arrows shine,

And with the mortal race Ill only join,

When matrons torn by agonizing throes |

- Invoke Lucina to relieve their woes ; '

‘For at my birth the attendant Fates assign’d -

This task to me, in mercy to mankind,

Since fair Latona gave me to thy love, : -

And felt no pangs when blest by favouring Jove.
She spoke, and stretch’d her hands with infant-art,

To stroke his beard, and gain her father’s heart ;

But oft she rais’d her little arms in vain,

At length with smiles he thus reliev’d her pain.
Fair daughter, lov’d beyond th’ immortal race, -

Jf such as you spring from a stol’n embrace,

Let furious Juno burn with jealous ire,

Be mine the care éo grant your full desire,


10


15


. 25


35


40


45


HYMN To DANA, 381


And greater gifts beside: from this blest hour
Shall thirty towns invoke. Diana’s power, —
Full thirty towns, .(for'such high Jove’s deeree,)
Ungirt by walls, shall pay their vows to thee:
‘O’er public ways Diana shall preside, . "80
And every port whére ships in safety ride.
Nor shall these towns alone your power obey,
But you with other gods divide.the sway, :
Of distant isles amid the watery main,
- And cities on the continental plain, = 55
Where mighty nations shall adore your name,
And groves and altars your protection claim.
The Thunderer spoke, and gave th’ almighty nod,
That seals his will, and binds th’ immortal god. .
Meantime the joyful goddess wings her flight 60
To Creta’s isle with snowy mountains bright ;
Thence from Dictynna’s hills and bending wood
She seeks the caverns of the rolling flood,.
_ And at her call th’ attendant virgins come,
All nine years old, and yet in infant bloom. 65
With joy Ceratus views the smiling choir, '
And hoary Tethys feels reviving fire,
When her bright. offspring o’er th’ enamel’d green
Trip with light footsteps.and surround their queen. '
But thence to Melegunis’ isle in haste 70
(Now Lipara) the sylvan goddess pass’d,
Her nymphs attending, and with wondering eyes:
Saw the brown Cyclops of enormous size,
Deep in their darksome dwelling under ground,
On Vulcan’s mighty anvil turning round, . 78
A mass of metal hissing from the flame:
The sea-god urges, and. for him they frame
A wondrous yase, the liquor to contain .. ‘
That fills his coursers on the stormy main.
With horror chiil’d, the timorous virgins eye 80
Stupendous giants rear their heads on high,
Like cloud-capt Ossa rising o’er the field ; .
One eye, that blaz’d like some-refulgent shield, ,
From each stern forehead glar’d pernicious fire. .
Aghast they gaze, when now the monsters dire - 85


.
’ » 7


382 CALLIMACHUS.


With stubborn strokes shake the resounding shore,
And the huge bellows through the caverns roar.
But when from fiercer flames the metal glows,
. And the fix’d anvil rings with heavier blows,
‘When ponderous hammers break the tortur’d mass, 90
Alternate thundering on the burning brass, .
The nymphs no more endure the dreadful sight,
Their ears grow deaf, their dim eyes lose the light;
A deeper groan through labouring AXtna runs,
Appals the hearts of old Sicania’s sons, 95 -
Redoubles from Hesperia’s coast around,
And distant Cyrnus thunders back the sound.
’ No wonder that Diana’s tender maids
Should sink with terror in these gloomy shades ;
For when the daughters of th’ immortal gods , 100
With infant-clamours fill the blest abodes,
Arges or Steropes the mother calls
(Two Cyclops grim) from their infernal halls
To seize the froward child; no Cyclops come,
But, loudly threatening, from some inner room 105
Obsequious Hermes swift before her stands,
With blacken’d face, and with extended hands;
The frighted infant, thus compos’d to rest,
Forgets its cries, and sinks upon her breast.
But fair Diana, scarce three summers old, 110
Could with her mother these dread realms behold,
When Vulcan, won by her enchanting mien,
With welcome gifts receiv’d the sylvan queen :
Stern Bronte’s knee the little goddess prest,
And pluck’d the bristles from his brawny breast, M5
As if dire Alopecia’s power had torn
The hairs that shall no more his chest adorn.
Now undismay’d, as then, the goddess cried,
Ye mighty Cyclops, set your tasks aside, —' ; :
- And for Jove’s daughter forge immortal arms, ~ 120
To fright the savage race with wild alarms;
Sharp arrows to pursue the flying foe,
A sounding quiver, and a dreadful bow,
Such as'Cydonians use; for know thatE
Descend, like Phoebus, from the realms on high, 125


HYMN TO DIANA. 883
And, when some tusky boar resigns his life,
Beneath.my darts amid the sylvan strife,
Th’ unwieldy victim shall reward your toil;
And hungry Cyclops gorge the grateful spoil.
' She spoke; the tawny workmen swift obey’d, | 180
And in one instant arm’d th’ immortal maid. x!
+ But now the goddess sought, nor sought in vain,
 -Pan, the protector of th’ Arcadian plain;
-‘She found the god dividing ’mongst his hounds
. The flesh of lynxes from Menalea’s grounds, 135
Six beauteous dogs, when first she came in view,
’ Swift from the pack the bearded shepherd drew.
One silver spangles round his body bears, oA
Two streak’d with white, and three with spotted ears, -
All fierce in blood; the weaker prey they slew, ‘ 140
And living lions to their kennel drew. :
Seven more he gave of Sparta’s hardy race,
Fleet as the winds, and active in the chace
Of fauns, that climb the mountain’s lofty steep, :
And hares, that never shut their eyes in sleep; 145
Skill’d through the porcupine’s dark haunts to go,
And trace the footsteps of the bounding roe. ;
‘The nymph accepting leads her hounds with speed
-To verdant hills above the Arcadian mead, .
And on the mountain’s airy summit finds 150
(Sight wondrous to behold) five beauteous hinds, .
That on Anaurus’ flowery margin fed. |
{Where mossy pebbles fill’d his ample bed)
Tn size like bulls, and on their heads divine
High horns of beaming gold resplendent shine. 155
‘Soon as the vision open’d on hey eyes, .
These, these, she said, shall be Diana’s prize, _
Then, o’er the rocks, pursued the mountain-winds,
Outstripp’d the dogs, and seiz’d the flying hinds ;,
+ One unobserv’d escap’d, but four remain . 160
. To draw her chariot through th’ ethereal plain.
The fifth, by Juno’s wiles, took swift her way
Through Celadon’s dark flood ; the glorious prey
- To Cerynus’ distant mountains run; , -
A future prize for great Alceména’s son.


se »


"465.


384 , | CALLIMACHUS.


Hail, fair Parthenia, béauteous queen of night,
‘Who hurld fierce Tityus from the-realms of light ;
I see the nymph in golden arms appear,
Mount the swift car, and join.th’ immortal deer:
A golden zone around her waist she binds, 170
_And reins of gold confine the bounding hinds. :
|. But whether first, O. sacred virgin, say,
Did your bright chariot whirl its airy way ?
To Hemus’ hills, whence Boreas fiercely blows
On wretched mortals frost and winter snows. 175
But whence the ‘pine, and whence the kindling flame ?
The pine from Mysia’s lofty mountain came;
Jove’s thunder roar’d; red lightning stream’d on high
To light the torch that blazes through the sky. ‘
- Say next, how oft the silver bow you drew, _ +180
And where, bright queen, your vengeful arrows flew.
An elm receiv’d the first, an oak the next ;
The third a mountain savage deep transfix’d ;*
More swift the fourth, like rattling thunder springs,
And hurls destruction from its dreadful wings 185
On realms accurst, where justice ne’er was shown
To gons of foreign states, or of their own,
Deep sunk in crimes !—-How miserable they
*Gainst whom thy vengeance wings its distant way !
Disease devours the flocks, dire hail and rain ‘190
Destroy the harvest, and lay waste the plain.
The hoary sire, for guilty deeds undone,
Shaves his grey locks, and mourns his dying son.
In agonizing pangs, her babe unborn, ‘
The matron dies, or from her country torn 195
*To some inhospitable clime must fly,
And see th’ abortive birth untimely die.
: Thrice happy nations, where with look benign
- Your aspect bends ; beneath your smiles divine ie
The fields are with increasing harvests crown’d, 200
The flocks grow fast, and plenty reigns around,
Nor sire, nor infant-son, black death shall crave,
Till ripe with age they drop into the grave; -
Nor fell suspicion, nor relentless care,
Nor peace-destroying discord enter there, 205


oe


'


HYMN TO DIANA.


But friends and brothers, wives and sisters, join
The feast in concord arid in love divine.
O! grant your bard, and the distinguish’d few,
- His chosen friends, these happy climes to yiew :
So shall Apollo’s love, Diana’s praise, 0
And fair Latona’s nuptials grace my lays +
And when my soul inspiring transport feels,
Your arms, your labours, and the fervid wheels
Of your swift car, that flames along the sky
To yonder courts of thundering Jove on high.
Your coming Acacesian Hermes waits,
And great Apollo stands before the gates,
f To lift from off the car the sylvan prey,
While Hermes joyful bears your arms away.
Nor Phebus e’er his helping hand denies ;
But when Alcides scal’d the lofty skies, -
This task to him was by the gods decreed,
So from his ancient labours scarcely freed,
Before th’ éternal doors the hero stands,


Expects the prey, and waits your dread commands.


In laughing crowds the joyous gods appear,
Bat chief th’ imperious step-dame’s voice you hear
Loud o’er the rest, to see Tirynthius pull
Th’ unwieldy weight of some enormous bull.
That with his hinder foot impatient spurns
. The labouring god, as from the car he turns.

The brawny hero, though with toil opprest,
Approach’d the nymph, and quaintly thus addrest :
Strike-sure the savage beast, and man to thee
Will give the name before bestow’d on me, .

The great Deliverer ; let the timid hare «
And bearded goat to native hills repair,
And there securely range. What ills proceed
From hares or goats that on the mountains feed?
’ Wild boars and trampling bulls oft render vain-
The peasant’s toil, and waste the ripening grain ;
Aim there your darts, and let the monsters feel
The mortal wound, and the sharp-pointed steel.
He spoke, renew’d:his toil, and heav’d away
With secret gladness the reluctant prey.
2e ;


385


210


215


240


245


386 CALLIMACHUS.
Beneath the Phrygian oak his bones were burn’d,
‘And his immortal part to heaven return’d,
Yet still tormented with fierce hunger’s rage,
- As when Theiodamas he durst engage.
Amnisian virgins from the car unbind 250
The sacred deer, and dregs each panting hind ;
Amhrosial herbage by their hands is given
From meadows sacred to the queen of heaven,
Where Jove’s immortal couysers feed. They bring
Refreshing water from a heavenly spring 255
In golden cisterns of ethereal mould, .
‘The draught more grateful from a vase of gold.
But you, fair nymph, call’d by the powers above,
Ascend the mansions of imperial Jove ;
The gods rose graceful, when the virgin queen, 260
With beauteous aspect and with look serene,
By Phoebus’ side assum’d her silver throne,
Next him in power, and next in glory shone.
But when, with sportive limbs, the nymphs are seen -
To dance in mazy circles round their queen, 265
‘Near the cool fountains whence Inopus rose,
Broad as the Nile, and like the Nile o’erflows ;
Or when to Pitane or Limrz’s meads,
Or Alz’s flowery field, the goddess leads
The choir, from Taurus black with human blood, 270
And turns disgustful from the Scythian brood. |
That day my heifers to the stall retire,
Nor turn the preen sward for another’s hire ;
Though nine years old, and in Tymphza born,
Their limbs though sturdy, fand though strong of horn 275
To drag the’ plough, and cleave the mellow soil,—
Yet would their necks, o’erlabour’d, bend with ‘toil,
When Sol himself leans downward from the sky,
Beholds the virgins with enraptur’d eye,
Detains his chariot, whence new glories pour, 280
Prolongs the day, and stops the flying hour.
What city, mountain, or what sacred isle,
What harbour, boasts your most auspicious smile?
And of th’ attendant nymphs, that sportful rove
- Along the hills, who most enjoys your love, "285


HYMN TO DIANA. "887


O goddess tell: If you inspire their praise,
Admiring nations will atténd my. lays.
Your favour Perga, green Doliche boasts,
Taygettus’ mountains, and Euripus’ coasts ; ;
And Britomartis, from Gertynas’ grove, 290
Of all the nymphs enjoys distinguish’d love: «'
Fair Britomartis (skill’d to wing the dart, ot
And pierce with certain wound the distant hart)
Imperial Minos chas’d with wild desire -
O’er Cretan hills, and made the nymph retire 295
To some far distant oak’s extended shade,
Or sheltering grove, or marsh’s watery bed.
Nine months the king pursued, with furious haste,
Over rocks abrupt, and precipices vast, .
Nor once gave back, but when the blooming maid 800
Was just within his power, and none gave aid,
His grasp eluding, from the impending steep
Headlong she plung’d amid the swelling deep.
But friendly fishers,on the main display’d
Their nets wide-stretching to receive the maid, 305°
And thus preserv’d her from a watery death,
Worn out with toil, and panting still for breath.
And in succeeding times Cydonians hence‘
Dictynna eall’d the nymph; the mountain, whence
“She leapt into the sea, bear Dicté’s name, _ 810
Where annual rites record the virgin’s fame.
On that blest day, fair nymph, is wove for thee’
A garland from the pine or mastich tree ;
The myrtle-branch untouch’d, that durst assail
The flying maid, and rent her snowy veil, - 315
And hence the man must bear the virgin’s frown,
Who shall her altars with fresh myrtles crown.
The name Dictynna, too, the Cretans gave
(From-her who fearless plung’d beneath the wave)
_ To you, fair Upis, from whose sacred brows 820
Resplendent glory with mild lustre flows ; ”
But in your breast the nymph Cyrené shares
An equal place, and equal favour bears,
To whom in days of old your hands convey’d
“ Two beauteous hounds, with which the warlike maid 325
. 22 :


388 CALLIMACHUS, |


Acquired renown before th’ Tolcian tomb.

All-bright with locks of gold see Procris come,

Majestic matron, Cephalus’s spouse, .

Whom, though no virgin, you, great goddess, choose
Companion of the chace, but o’er the rest 330
Mild Anticlea your regard possest : é

Fair as the light, and dearer than your eyes,

She claims protection by superior ties.

These first bore quivers, these you taught to wing


The sounding arrow from the trembling string, . 335
With their right shoulders and white bosoms bare,
They lead the chace, and join the sylvan war. ee


Your praises, too, swift Atalanta charm,
Tasius’ daughter, whose resistless arm
O’erthrew the boar; you show’d the nymph withart 340
T’ incite the hounds, and aim th’ unerring dart.
But Calydonian hunters now no more
. Dispute the prize, since the fair virgin bore
The glorious trophy to th’ Arcadian plain,
Where his white teeth record the monster slain. 345
Nor now shall Rheecus, nor Hyleus young,
With lust inflam’d, or with fell envy stung, -
Lay hands unhallow’d on the beauteous maid,
Or once approach her in th’ Elysian shade ;
Since their torn entrails on Meenatlia tell 350
How by her arm th’ incestuous monsters fell.
Hail! bright Chitone, hail! auspicious queen,
With robes of gold, and with majestic mien !
In many temples, many climes adore
Your name, fair guardian of Miletus’ shore. 355
The name Imbrasia, Chesias too is given
To you high thron’d-among the powers of heaven,
Since happy Nelus and th’ Athenian host
By your protection reach’d the fertile coast.
Great Agamemnon’s hand a rudder bore, 360
To grace your temple on Boeotia’s shore, =
And gain your love, while adverse winds detain
The impatient Grecians from the roaring main ;
Wild with delay on rugged rocks they mourn
Rhamnusian Helen, from her country torn. 865


Sy


HYMN TO DIANA. 389 ,


When sudden frenzy seiz’d the madd’ning brains
Of Prestus’ daughters on.th’ Achaian plains,;
While o’er th’ inhospitable hills they roam,
You sought the maids, and safe conducted home:
Of this two sacred fanes preserve the fame, 370
“One to Coresia from the virgin’ '3 name ;
To Hemeresia one in Loussa’s shades,
Mild Hemeresia cur’d the furious maids. .
Fierce Amazonian dames to battle bred,
Along th’ Ephesian plains by Hippo led, 375
With pious hands a golden statue bore
Of you, bright Upis, to the sacred shore,
Plac’d where a beech-tree’s ample shade invites
The warlike band to join the holy rites.
Around the tree they clash their maiden shields, 880
With sounding strokes that echo through the fields ;
Swift o’er the shores in wider circles spring,
Join hand in hand to form a mazy ring,.
And beat, with measur’d steps, the trembling gr ound
Responsive to the shrill pipe’s piercing sound ; 886
The bones of deer yet uninspir’d and mute,
From which Minerva form’d a softer flute.
Discordant notes to lofty Sardis fy, °
And Berecynthus’ distant hills reply ; a
Hoarse-rattling quivers o’er their shoulders rung, 390
While from the ground with bounding feet they sprung.
And after-ages saw, with glad surprise,
A wondrous fabric round the statue rise,
More rich, more beautiful, than Phoebus boasts,
With all his glory, on the Delphic coasts: — 895
Nor yet Aurora’s morning beams have shone
On such a temple, or so fair a throne.
But soon fierce Lygdamis descending down,
With impious threats to burn th’ Ephesian town,
In numbers like the sand an host prepares 400
Of strong Cimmerians, fed with milk of mares :
The bands unblest their sudden march began
From frozen plains, where lowing Io ran.
Ah! wretched monarch, fated now no more
To lead your legions to the northern shore; - 405


890 CALLIMACHUS.


Who drove their chariots o’er Cayéster’s mead
Shall ne’er in Scythian climes their coursers feed : .
For bright Diana guards the sacred towers, 4
And on th’ approaching foe destruction pours.
‘Bail! great Munychia; for th’ Athenian bay 410
And Phere’s fertile shores confess your sway ;
Hail! bright Phersza; and let none presume
T’ offend Diana, lest ih’ ayenging doom
Fall heavy on their heads, which Oeneus mourn’d,
When, unsuccessful, from the field he turn’d 415
For vows unpaid. ‘Like her let none pretend
To dart the javelin or the-bow to bend ;
For when Atrides durst her grove profane,
No vuigar death remov’d the fatal stain.
Let none, with eyes of love, the nymph behold, 420
Lest, like fond Otus and Orion bold,
They sink beneath her darts; let none decline
The solemn dance, or slight the power divine:
E’en favour’d Hippo feels her vengeful ire.
If from th’ unfinish’d rites she dares retire. 425
Hail ! virgin queen, accept. my humble praise ;
And smile propitious on your poet’s lays.


es


,


HYMN TO DELOS.

On when, my soul, wilt thou resound the praise

Of Delos, nurse to Phoebus’ infant-days,

Or of the Cyclades? Most sacred these

Of isles that rise amid surrounding seas ;

And fame and hymns divine to them belong: 5

But Delos chief demands the Muse’s song.

For there the god who leads the vocal train

Was swath’d around ; and on the Delian plain .

His infant-limbs were wash’d: the sacred lay

Triumphant rose to hail the god of day. i
" As who forgets, Pimplea the divine,

Is soon forsaken by the tuneful Nine ;


ra


HYMN TO DELOS. 391


Thus on the bard, neglecting Cynthus’ shores,
Avenging Phebus all his fury pours :
To Delos then let votive lays belong, ; 15
And Cynthiati Phebus will approve my song.
Though beat by, billows, and though vex’d with storms,
' The sacred isle its deep foundations forms
Unshook by winds, uninjur’d by the deep.
High o’er the waves appears the Cynthian steep ; 20
And from the flood the sea-mew bends his course
O’er cliffs impervious to the swiftest horse:
Around the rocks th’ Icarian surges roar,
Collect new foam, and whiten all the shore
Beneath the lonely caves, and breezy plain, 25
Where fishers dwelt of old above the main.
No wonder. Delos, first in rank, is plac’d
Amid the sister isles on ocean’s breast ;
For when the sea-gods o’er the liquid plains
Seek these dark cells, where hoary Tethys reigns, 30
Majestic Delos leads beneath the deeps :
The watery train; close following Cyrnus keeps”
Her steady course ; Eubcea floats along,
And fair Sardinia glides amid the throng.
Last, o’er the main, see flowery Cyprus move, 35
That from the waves receiv’d the queen of love;
And in return the nymph, with favouring smile, .
Biest the bright shores, and guards the sacred isle.
Though towers in these and lofty bulwarks stand,
Apollo still defends the Delian land, 40
A stronger fortress, and a surer trust : . :
Strymonian Boreas levels with the dust
The work of human hands; but Delos’ god
Stands unremov’d, and guards his lov’d abode. ;
Hail! favour’d isle, where walls nor towers arise, 45
A stronger power defends you from the skies.
O sacred Cynthus, much in song renown’d,
What theme delights? what shall the Muse resound ;
To thee most pleasing ? Wilt thou bend thine ear
The mighty sea-god’s glorious acts to hear ? 50
With those dread weapons, which the Telchins form,
He shook the mountains, like a bursting storm,


“892 __ CALLIMACHUS.


Tn times of old ; from their foundations hurl’d
Rocks, hills, and vales amid the watery world :
In rush the seas, and from the land divide '
The numerous isles now rising from the tide,
And fix’d for ever in the boundless main.

But Delos’ isle along the liquid plain

Still floated uncontrell’d ; her sacred name
Asteria then ; to her immortal fame,


. She shot from heaven like a descending star,


'


Amid the roaring deeps and watery war,

To shun th’ embrace of Jove. Asteria fair

She still was call’d; till; bright with golden hair,
Distress’d Latona sought the shady shore,

Hence Delos nam’d, Asteria now no more.

Oft sailors, wandering o’er the briny main
From Lycian Xanthus or Treezene’s plain,
Stood for the Ephyrian coast, and there descried
Asteria floating on Saronja’s tide: :

But when returning to their native shore,

Wide o’er the main the rolling isle no more
Appear’d in view ; but held its rapid course,
Driven by th’ impetuous flood’s resistless force,
Where black Euripus’ gulfs tempestuous roar,
And dash the whitening waves on Chalcis’ shore,


‘ Then, mounting o’er the surging billows, bounds


From Sunium’s, rocks to Chios’ flowery grounds,
Or softly seeks Parthenia’s fruitful soil, |
Not Samos yet ; and from the virgin isle
The Mycalesian nymphs rejoicing pour,
And hail thee to the hospitable shore
Of kind Ancseus. But thy sacred earth
Supplied a place for great Apollo’s birth,
Hence thy new name the grateful sailors gave,
And Delos call’d along the trackless wave ;
An undistinguish’d course no more you keep,
But fix’d and rooted in the A&Zgean deep.

Nor didst thou dread imperial Juno’s ire,
That burst impetuous, like the force of fire,
On every goddess, from whose secret love
A rising offspring crown’d th’ embrace of Jove,


55


60


65


70


80


85


90


HYMN TO DELOS.


But chief pursued Latona ; well she knew
That from Latona’s bed would rise to view
The brightest power in heaven, and dearer far
To thundering Jove than the stern god of war.
Amid the skies th’ observing goddess sat,
And brooded dire revenge, and- furious hate

' Unutterable ; watch’d the painful hour
Of labour, and detain’d the struggling power:
Then sent two faithful messengers on earth
To guard the shores and wait th’ approaching birth.
“Bright i in immortal arms stern Mars appears


- On Hemus’ hills; o’er their proud summits rears -


His. towering head, and from the mountain’s height

. Wide o’er the continent directs his sight:

‘Th’ immortal steéds meanwhile stood far hebind =
In seven recesses of the northern wind. -
Next Iris fierce descends on Mima’s brows,

And o’er the scaiter’d isles observing throws ©

‘Her careful eyes ; with inauspicious threats
Denounces vengeance on the pitying states, -
Where bright Latona turns distress’d with griefis
She bars access, and still denies relief.

Before the dreadful voice Arcadia fled,

And high Parthenius bow’d his rocky head
(Fair Auge’s sacred hill); Pheneeus bends
His aged steps, and close behind attends ;

And all the climes of Pelops’ isle that lie
Along the northern isthmus swiftly fly,

Save Argos and Agiale: but there
All entrance is denied by Juno’s care,

_ To whom the realms of Inachus belong. «
Aonia frighted holds her course along

_ The self-same path ; and Dirce swift succeeds,
And Strophie, watering green Bocotia’s meads,
Upon whese hands their sire Ismenus hung,.

As black with mossy stones he roll’d along.
And sore disabled by the lightning’ 3 blast, .
Slow moves Asopus, with inactive haste 3
But native Dryads, pele with sacred awe,


898


95


106


105


110.


115


Swift from the dance their trembling feet withdraw,


894 : CALLIMACHUS,


And shriek and sigh, when oaks coéval bend ~

Their green heads, and from Helicon descend.
Ye favouring Powers, immortal Muses, say, 135
Do nymphs with oaks exist,-with oaks decay ?

‘The nymphs rejoice, when oaks, refresh’d with dew,

‘Pat forth their leaves, and spread their arms anew ;

The nymphs lament, when winter, black with storms, '

Sweeps off the leaves, and the green boughs deforms.
Apollo heard, and from his mother’s womb

Furious denoune’d th’ unalterable doom

On, Thebe’s guilty realms, unhappy state ! .

Why thus provoke thy swift-approaching fate? :

Why tempt the god unwilling, to declare 145

The woes ungrateful Thebes is doom’d to bear? © 6

For though.no priestess on the tripod feels

Inspiring power, nor thence our will reveals ;

Nor yet, by darts divine, has Python bled,

Slow moving on from Plistus’ oozy bed, 150

Hideous and huge he rears his shaggy chest,

Black with infernal hairs, (tremendous pest !) .

Aseends Parnassus’ hill, and dreadful throws

Nine sable volumes round his hoary brows. ;

Yet hear thy doom; more awful the decree 155

Than e’er the laurel shall pronounce by me:

Fly hence; but fate pursues ; my burning darts

Shall soon be quench’d in blood of Theban hearts.

Since thou retain’st the guilty race that sprung

- From that vile woman with blasphemous tongue ; 160

Apollo’s hallow’d birth shall never crown -

Cithzron’s hill, nor Thebz’s impious town.

The god is good, and only will bestow

Distinguish’d blessings on good men below.

~ So spake the power unseen: Latona mourn’d, 165
And to th’ Achaian states ‘again return’d.

But these against her tender suit combine,

Nor grant admission to the Power divine ;

‘Not ev’n‘high Helice, whose blooming charms
‘Won mighty Neptune to her tender arms ; 170
Nor humble Bura, rising near the flood,
Where great Dexamenus his oxen stood


HYMN TO DELOS. © 395


In lofty stalls. Latona turns with sighs
To bleak Thessalia’s realms and colder skies.
But there Larissa flies th’ approaching god, 176
Anaurus’ waves,,and all the rocks that nod
On Pelion’s brows; nor Peneus dares abide,
‘ But rolls through Tempe’s vale a swifter tide.
And thou, fierce Juno, still with rage possest, .
Remain’st unmov’d ; no pity touch’d thy breast, 180
When thus the goddess mourn’d with plaintive sighs,
With outstretch’d arms, and with heart-rending cries.
Ye daughters of Thessalian floods, entreat ,
Your aged sire, low bending at his feet, -
To stop the mighty wave; O grasp with care 185
His hoary beard, and urge him to prepare
His water to receive th’ immortal son
Of.thundering Jove. Ah! why should Peneus run
More swift than wintry winds? Thy flight is vain;
Nor canst thou here a glorious prize obtain, 190
As in th’ equestrian strife. father, say,
Have thy swift streams thus ever roll’d away ?
Or does Latona’s pangs increase thy speed _
To fly from her distress? In time of need,
Alas! he hears me not. Where shall I turn? 195
And where, unhappy! shall thy son be born? ~*~
-My strength decays ;-to Pelion I'll repair,
The bridal bed of Philyre the fair.
. Stay, Pelion,'stay. A goddess asks.no more
Than.to the lioness you gave before ; ~ 900
Oft on thy cliffs she bears her savage young :
With dreadful yells, and with fierce anguish stung.
Sad Peneus wept, and answer’d thus with sighs:
A mightier god, Necessity, denies
Thy prayer, O Power distress’d, else soon should I 205
Rélieve thy woes, with thy request ‘comply,
And grant the boon to other births I gave,
That oft were wash’d in my refreshing wave.
The queen of heaven on Peneus bends her eyes,
And utters furious threats amid the skies ; 210
Lo! from yon hill a champion fierte and dread >
Frowns stern destruction on my wretched head ;


396 - CALLIMACHUS.


‘


'


And could with ease my sable deeps o’erturn,
Subvert my streams, and dry my fruitful urn. -


. All strife is vain; say, will it please thy soul,


That Peneus perish, and no longer roll —


215


His swelling streams? Th’ avenging hour may come;


But in thy cause {’ll brave the dreadful doom ;
Though my shrunk waves for ever cease to flow,
- And I be nam’d the meanest flood below ;

Behold, approach, Iythia’s aid invoke..

e stopt his rapid current as he spoke. |

But Mars perceiv’d; from their foundations tore
Pangeus’ hills, and in his arms upbore

The rocky mountain, an enormoys load !

To choke the fountajns, and o’erwhelm the flood.
‘His voice like thunder sounds; the spear and shield
Together struck, more dreadfal:murmurs yield:
When trembling Ossa heard, strange horrors fill
Cranonia’s field, high Pindus’ distant hill,

And shook Thessalia to her farthest bound.

As /itna’s inmost caverns under-ground

Roar horrible with floods of rolling fire,

And to the centre shake; when, fierce with ire,
Briareus turns beneath the mountain’s height,

And from his shoulders heaves, th’. incumbent weight ;
_ Forge, tripods, tongs, the caldron’s mighty round,
And all the works of Vulcan, strike the ground
With mingled clash:. such and more hoarse alarms
Sprung from th’ immortal powers’ discordant arms.

But Peneus, unappall’d, retires no more,


’ Collects his rolling waters as before,


‘And stands unmov’d; till thus Latona spoke:
Retire in peace, nor yon fierce gods provoke: -
Thou shalt not suffer, though my lot be hard ;
Nor thy compassion want its due reward.
Then o’er the main to.distant isles she goes,
Struck with new pangs, inextricable woes,
But still without success ; nor aid is found
Among the Echinades, for ports renown’d; .
Nor dares Corcyra’s hospitable coast
Receive the power, along the billows tost.


220


225


230


235


240


245


250


HYMN TO- DELOS,


‘For Iris dreadful stands in open sight,
And pours her threats from Mima’s lofty height:
Before her wrath the crowding islands fied,

And sought the nearest river’s friendly bed.
Latona turns to Merops’ ancient seat,

The Coan isle, Chaiciope’s retreat ;
But Phcebus stops her course, and thus relates,
With awful voice, th’ irrevocable fates.

O goddess, I nor envy nor disdain :
These flowery shores, and yonder fertile plain,
But here thou bear’st me not; Apollo sees
A future god appear by Fate's decrees,

The mightiest prince of Soter’s royal race,

To rule this favour’d isle, his native place,

. To him the willing world shall tribute bring ;

. Green isles and inland states obey the king,
And bow before him in succeeding times ;

His power extending from yon eastern climes,
To distant shores, where Sol descending leads
Beneath the western waves his wearied steeds.
From Macedonia comes the man divine,

And in the son the father’s virtues shine.

The glorious prince shall be my future care,
And I the great companion of his war,

When o’er the Celtic shores, with wild alarms,
Gigantic nations clash barbarian arms. -

The last of Titan’s sons, a furious throng !
From th’ utmost West shall swiftly pour along, .
-And, rushing dreadful, Grecian plains o’erfiow,
Thick as the driving rain or falling snow; .
Or numerous as yon silver lamps of night,

That fill their urns with Jove’s ethereal light,
From Locrian forts and undefended towns,
From Delphic mountains, and Crisse#an downs,
From all the midland cities far around, .

Deep groans shall issue; when along the ground
Wide-wasting flames devour the ripening grain,
And all the labours of th’ adjoining swain.

Nor these shall hear alone the fierce alarms

Of hostile armies,, sheath’d in shining arms


260


270


m5


. 280


398 - CALLIMACHUS,


' Around my temple; but with terror view
' ‘Th’ impetuous Gauls their impious course pursue,
With bloody falchions, belts, and bucklers stain 295
My holy tripods, and my cave profane, 7
For which fierce war shall rage, at my command,
And wreak my vengeance on th’ unhallow’d band.
Of conquer’d armour, half shall deck my shrine,
And half, the prize of valour, shall be thine, 300
Illustrious prince! when midst attacks and fire,
On Nilus’ banks the vanquish’d hosts expire.
Thus fate foretells the glory thou shalt gain,
O Philadelphus! in thy wondrous reign,
For which, immortal King, thou still shalt pay _ 805
Unceasing honours to the god of day; :
And future ages to the stars shall raise
Apollo’s name, and Philadelphus’ praise,
Both yet uhborn; thy power, O mother, join,
Fulfil the Fates, and aid my great design. 310
An isle ‘there is yet unconfin’d and free, -
With feet -unfix’d amid the rolling sea,
To mariners well known; it wanders wide,
Now here, now there, before the driving tide,
And yields, and shakes, like pliant Asphodel, 815°
As east or, western winds the floods impel: °
There shall thy labours end. The sacred earth
Will grant relief, arid aid my glorious birth.
As Phebus spoke, th’ obedient isles gave way,
Forsook the shores, and floated o’er the sea, 320
Returning to their seats. Not long before
Th’ Asterian isle had left Eubcea’s shore,
And, at the voice divine, came slowly down,
To view the Cyclades of great renown,
Encumber’d oft by dank sea-weeds, that sprung 325
From rough Gerestus, and around her hung.
Full in the midst she stood; beheld with grief
Latona’s dreadful pangs, and no relief.
At her command a fiery torrent roar’d
Around the shores, the crackling. weeds devour’d, 330
Prepar’d the sacred isle, and clear’d the skies;
While thus imperial Juno she defies.


HYMN TO DELOS.


Discharge thy, vengeance on Asteria’s head ;
Thy frowns I reck not, nor thy threatenings dread ;
Come, goddess, come ; my favouring shores ascend :
She heard, obey’d, and there her wanderings end.
By deep Inopus (whose dark fountains boil -
Still most impetuous, when th’ o’erflowing Nile

-From Aithiopia’s rocks descends amain,
And spreads a sudden deluge o’er the plain)
Soft she reclin’d, the crowded zone unbound, -
And dropt her fainting limbs along the ground.
Against a shading palm her shoulders rest ;. :
But racking pangs distend her labouring breast ;
Her body bath’d in sweat, with deepening groans,
And painful sobbings, thus she pour’d her moans.

Why, why, my son, dost.thou with anguish fill
My tortur’d heart with pangs increasing still ?
For thee, for thee I sought the watery plain ;

For thee this isle receiv’d me from the main:
Hast thou no pity for heart-rending throes?
O spring to light, and ease thy mother’s woes!”

But Iris mounts, all trembling to reveal
The fatal news she could no more conceal ;

, To wrathful Juno told the tale with tears,
With broken accents and uneasy fears.
Majestic Juno, spouse of thundering Jove,
Great Queen of heaven, and mightiest power above ;
Thy faithful Tris, all the gods are thine,
Nor dread the wrath of other hands divine ; -
But one presumptuous isle resists thy power,
And aids Latona in the dangerous hour.
From her approach the rest abhorrent turn’d,
Nor durst receive her when thy fury burn’d.
But vile Asteria, whom the surges sweep
Around the shores, invited from the deep
Thy hated foe. Her ‘crimes I thus make known; |
But still, blest goddess, be thy favour shown
T’ obedient powers, that fronr these fields of air
Walk o’er the world, and thy dread mandates bear.

She said, and hasty sunk beneath the throne,

That bright with radiant gold resplendent shone :


4 ‘ ,


399


335


- 340


350


855


360


865


370


400 CALLIMACHUS.


‘As at Diana’s feet a favourite hound
In silence listens to the distant sound
Of passing game ; and though soft slumbers creep - 375
O’er his keen senses, only seems to sleep,

Impatient waits the whispers of her voice,

-Erecis his ears, and starts at every noise,

. So sat THaumantia, fill’d with deep regret,

Nor left her place beneath the sacred seat ; : 380
And ev’n when sleep, on downy pinions, came
-- To shed soft dews o’er all her wearied frame,

On Juno’s throne her beauteous head reclin’d,
And scarcely slumbering wak’d with every wind ;
Nor Ioos’d the winged sandals, nor unbrac’d 385.
The circling zorie that bound her tender waist ;
Lest some unthought of message, given in haste, 5
Might claim her speed. But other cares engage
Th’ imperial Queen, and thus she vents her rage.

. Ye secret paramours, that bring disgrace 390
On faithless Jove! bear your detested race
For ever thus, on barren rocks reclin’d,

. More wretched than the worst of humankind ;

Or like th’ unwieldy whale in watery caves ;
Or spawn your brood amid the whelming waves. 395
But this contents; nor let Asteria dread
My sudden wrath on her offending head ;
For these unfertile shores can only show
Poor entertainment to my hated foe, .
Her pangs to soften, and her grief t’ assuage. 400
Asteria’s virtue has disarm’d my rage ;
She sought the seas to shun th’ embrace of Jove,
Refus’d my bed, and hence enjoys my love.
Scarce had she spoke when Phebus’ tuneful swans,
From rich Pactolus, and Meonia’s plains, 405
Seven times, on snowy pinions, circle round :
The Delian shores, and skim along the ground:
The vocal birds, the favourites of the Nine,
In strains melodious hail the birth divine.’
Oft as they carol on resounding wings, 410

“To soothe Latona’s pangs, as many strings
Apollo fitted to the warbling lyre,

In after-times; but cre the sacred choir


BYMN TO DELOS. 401


Of circling swans another concert sung :
In melting notes, the power immortal sprung ATS
_ To glorious birth, The Delian nymphs around
Rise from the flood, in strains divine resound
Tiythia’s praise ; triumphant songs aspire,
And the rejoicing ether seems on fire. ,
Jove sooth’d his angry queen; she dropt her scor®, 420:
And felt the gen’ral joy when Sol was born. aa
Then, happy Delos! thy foundations chang’d
To golden columns, in bright order rang’d ;
On that blest day thy circling lake became :
Of liquid gold, and seem’d a moving flame: 425 —
On golden branches golden olives roll’d,
And deep Inopus flow’d in waves of gold,
Then lifting from the shining soil you prest,
With arms encircling, to your snowy breast
The new-born god, and thus with pleasure spoke: . 430
On thee, proud earth, unnumber’d altars smoke ;
On thee fair cities, mighty states are seen:;
Thy shores are fertile, and thy fields are green:
Thy thronging islands countless numbers yield, ee
Whilst I lie waste with all my plains untill’d. 435°
But since Apollo deigns to take my name,
The power will bless, and grant me greater fame
Than all the world receives from gods beside :
More than from Neptune the Cenchrean tide;
More than Cyllene’s hill, or Creta’s plains, 440
From Hermes one, and one from Jove obtains.
” By Pheebus lov’d, my station here Ill keep,
And float no more amid the stormy deep.
_So saying, she display’d her sacred breast,
Which, with his lips, the smiliag infant prest, _ 445
And suck’d ambrosial juice; from whence thé name
Of isle mosf holy consecrates thy fame, :
O glorious nurse ! and hence thou ne’er shalt feel
The force of stern Belona’s vengeful steel;
Nor here shall Pluto spread his dark domain, 450
Nor Mars impetuous thunder o’er thy plain.
But tithes and first-fruits each revolving year,
From distant climes shall on thy shores appear,
le 2D *


402 CALLIMACHUS.


And every state beneath the morning ray,
The star of evening, or meridian day, ~ 455
Shall join the mystic dance; ev’n those renown’d
For length of days shall tread the hallow’d ground
- From Hyperborean shores; by whom are borne
' - The first ripe ears and sheaves of yellow corn.
* And the Pelasgi, from Dodona’s shores, 460
Shall first receive the consecrated stores ;
The race, that nightly rest along the ground,
Attentive to the caldron’s mystic sound ;
Consign’d by them the grateful off’rings fill
The Melian' city‘and the sacred hill: 465
From whence they pass to fair Lilantia’s land,
-And from Euboa reach thy neighbouring strand.
But Upis bright, and Hecaérge kind,
And Loxo, daughters of the northern wind, -
With pious hands-the first ripe off rings bore ) 470
To Delos’ isle, from th’ Arimaspian shore
Fair youths attending, that return’d no more,
But here were bless’d ; and hence each hallow’d name
Shall ever flourish in immortal fame. —
For when the Delian nymphs, a beauteous throng! 475
' With amorous throbbings hear the nuptial song ;
The joyful bridegroom hails the blissful morn,
Whilst from his face the virgin down is shorn ;
The blushing bride, with equal speed, prepares, :
And from her head divides the votive hairs ; 4380
The first is sacred to the youths divine,
The beauteous locks adorn the virgin’s shrine.
From thee, fair Delos, sweet perfumes ascend ;
Still, at thy feet, encircling islands bend ;
To solemn songs their verdant heads advance, 485
And seem to move, asin the mazy dance ;
When evening Hesper darts his rays around
Thy flowery shores, and brightens at the sound.
By chosen youths the lofty lays are sung
That flow’d from Lycian Olen’s tuneful tongue, 490
An ancient seor ; fair virgins dance, around,
And shake, with choral feet, the solid ground.
Bright Venus, listening to the hymns divine,
_ The nymphs with garlands deck her ancient shrine,


* _ HYMN TO DELOS.


By Theseus rais’d ; when with the sons of Greece
From Cretan plains he gain’d the shores in peace 5
Return’d in triumph o’er the briny main,

From fell. Pasiphaés monstrous offspring slain;
For Venus guided through the ihaze beneath,
The winding labyrinth, and the den of death.
Hence, beauteous queen, he led the choir around -
Thy sacred altars, to the solemn sound

Of melting lyres; and here the Athenians sent,
In grateful memory of this fam’d event,

The shrouds and tackling to the god of day,

That still remain, nor shall with time decay.

And since, Asteria, thy bright shores are crown’d
With smoking altars, and with hymns resound,
What mariners, when swift-wing’d vessels keep
Their course by thee, along th’ Augean deep,

But here shall stop, and furl their swelling sails,
Though bent on speed, and borne by driving gales ?
Nor shall return, till, circling o’er the ground,

They shape the maze, and the struck altar sound
With mystic blows, nor till, at thy command,

With arms averted, as the rites demand,

They bite the sacred-olive, Thus the god,

‘O nymph of Delos, in thy bright abode,

Was entertain’d ; and thus Apollo spent

His infant years in mirth and sweet content,

Hail, fair Asteria! girt with isles around,:
Like Vesta station’d, and for peace renown’d ;
Hail, Phebus! guardian of thy sacred shore ;
And hail the goddess whom Latona bore !


THE FIFTH HYMN. _
‘ ON THE BATHING OF PALLAS.


Come forth, come forth, ye virgins, and prepare’
The bath for Pallas with assiduous care: —-
The goddess comes ; from yon ethereal meads ,
I hear the snorting of ne ey steeds.

D2 :


403
495


"500


$15


404° CALLIMACHUS. : .


Come forth, come forth, ye brown Pelasgian maids; - 5
For bright Minerva never seeks the shades,
Nor bathes her limbs in the refreshing flood,
Till from her steeds she wash the dust and blood:
Not though th’ immortal arms, as once before,
Were stain’d with slaughter’d giants’ reeking gore. 10
Nor till, unloosing from the car, she lave «
The coursers’ panting side in ocean’s wave,
And cleanse their mouths that gather’d foam distains,
When, bounding swift, they shake thé flowing reins.
Come forth, ye nymphs ; no precious ointments bring, 15
(I hear the wheels around her axles ring,)
Nor oils, in alabaster smooth, prepare ;
Nor oils nor unguents are Minerva’s care ;
She needs no glass; her éyes are ever bright,
Nor when the Phrygian youth on Ida’s height, 20
Misjudg’d the strife, did mighty Pallas gaze
On polish’d brass, or Simois’ watery maze ;
Nor Jove’s imperial queen: but Venus fair
Fond seiz’d the charny, and oft replac’d her hair.
Whilst Pallas drove around, and ure "d her steeds, 25
Like Leda’s offspring on Eurotas’ meads ;
Then o’er her limbs she pour’d ambrosial oil,
_ The produce.of her garden’s fertile soil.

Behold, ye nymphs, the blushing morn arise
More bright than roses’ or pomegranates’ dyes ; H 30
Bring forth the sacred oil that Castor us’d,
And o’er, Alcides manly strength diffus’d :
Bring forth the comb, that shines with yellow gold,
To smooth her hairs, and curl each beauteous fold.

Come forth, Minerva; lo! thy virgins wait ; 35
Acestor’s offspring stand before the gate,
And bear Tydicles’ shield with holy hands, * ~
_As once the good Eumedes gave commands, -
Thy favour’d priest; for when bad men combin’d :
Against his life, he fled, nor left behind 40
Thy sacred image, which, with pious toil,
He plac’d on lofty Creon’s rocky soil; .
On Creon’s pointed cliffs, renown’d in fame,
And call’d Palladian from thy sacred name.


“fHE BATHING OF PALLAS.


Come forth, Minerva; from whose golden helm ~

Red lightning glances on the unhallow’d realm :
Come forth, Minerva; pleas’d with war’s alarms,’ -
The bounding courser, and the clang of arms.

This day, ye maids, the cleansing water bring,
Not from the river, but the crystal spring.

This day, ye maids, at Physadea fill

The brazen urn, or Amymone’s rill:

For Inachus from yon green mountain pours

His waters, bright with gold, and gay with flowers, ,
To fill the bath. Pelasgian ! fly from harms,
Nor, unpermitted, view Minerva’s charms ;

Lest, from your blind-struck eyes, she snatch away.
The towers of Argos, and the golden day.

Come forth, Minerva; while to nymphs I sing

A tale renown’d, and strike the vocal string.

Attend, ye maids.—A nymph of Thebe’s town,

Tiresias’ mother, from Minerva won

Distinguished love. The sacred pair were join’d
In friendship sweet, the union of the mind.

And, when the power to Thespis urg’d her seca
To Haliartus, o’er Beeotia’s meads,

Or Coronea, by Curalius’ flood, —

Where, near a breathing grove, her altar stood ;
Still in the car the nymph attending rode.

Nor dance, nor social converse pleas’d the god,
Unless her dear Chariclo led the way:

But she, with many tears, must shortly pay ”

For Pallas’ love, and woes attend behind.

For when the pair their shining veils unbind

To bathe their limbs in Hippocrene’s rills

(That softly flow from Heliconian hills)

At mid-day, when no breath was heard around,
Nor from the mountain came the stillest sound ;
At mid-day bathing, when the sun was bright, .
And silence reign’d, as at the noon of night ;

The first soft down just rising on his face,
Tiresiag then with hounds approach’d the place,
To quench his thirst in the refreshing streams,
And undesign’d beheld their naked limbs:


405:
45


50


55


70
75


80


* 406 CALLIMACHUS.


“Ah! luckless youth; for thus Minerva spoke,

Though ‘soft’ning pity smooth’d her angry look.
Euerus’ son! what unpropitious god

Has led fhy steps to this retir’d abode ?

Somé demon urg’d thee, this unhappy day ;

, Doom’d hence no more to bear thy sight away.

She said: thick darkness instant veil’d his eyes ;

Amaz’d he stood, and speechless with surprise:

Black horror chill’d his limbs: his mother mourn’d

"With rage and grief, and furious thus return’d:
What. hast thou done ? Is this Minerva’s love?

And this the kindness of the gods above ?

My son’s bright eyes thou hast for ever clos’d,

Because he saw thy beauteous limbs expos’d.

Since he no more beholds ethereal day,

No more my feet on yonder mountain stray ;

Since he no more this happy scene shall view,

Ye pendant rocks, ye falling rills, adieu !

Ah! wretched mother; more unhappy son !

Revengeful goddess! What could he have done?

Thy worthless goats and hinds were once his prize;

For which, unpitying power, you seiz’d his eyes!
She said: with oon arms embrae’d her son,

And pour’d her sorrows, helpless and undone,

As for her young sad Philomel complains,

In mournful notes, and melancholy strains.”

At her distress Minerva’s eyes o’erflow,

And thus she sooth’d her lov’d companion’s woe.
Recall these hasty words, O nymph divine;

Thy son is blind, but not by my design..

The powers of heaven delight not to destroy,

Nor snatch, the light from, every beauteous boy:

Charge not, my friend, this dire mischance on me ;

For every man, by Saturn’s stern decree, ’

That, unpermitted, views the powers divine,

Still makes atonement with an’ ample fine.

‘Before his birth, bright nymph, the Parc spun

This fatal thread for thy much-favour’d son.

Mourn not, Tiresias, though thy iot be hard,

But for the deed receive a great reward.


85


90


100


110


115


*


_ THE BATHING OF PALLAS. 407


What hecatombs would fair Cadmeis burn? | 125
Nor more would wretched Aristeus mourn

In after-times, when young Acton dies;

Could he return with only loss of eyes. )

For though Diana’s favourite in the chace, :

And skill’d, with her, to hunt 2 savage race, 180
Yet when the youth, unwilling, tempts her wr: ath,

And undesign’d behold’ her in her bath,

Nor chace nor sports avail: she gives the word,

And his fierce dogs devour their former lord.

Through lonesome woods the mother then shall rove, 135
Collecting his white bones from every grove,

And call thee blest, and not like her undone,

That from the hills receives thy sightless son.

Then weep no more, O most belov’d of friends ;

A gift more glorious on that son attends, 140
For great Minerva, from this happy hour, .
His breast irradiates with prophetic power,

Iilumes his mind, and grants him greater praise,

Than e’er shall crown the seers of future days.

For he shall mark the wandering birds that fly 145
To right, to left, along th’ ethereal sky,

Shall read their motions, as they swiftly spring,

Observe the flight of each unprosperous wing,

And utter sacred truths, in after-times,

To Cadmus, Thebes, and fam’d Bootia’s climes. 150
A wystic staff shall guide his steps, and he

Long life and honour’d age obtains from me.

And when he dies, from him alone shall flow

Prophetic truths in dismal realms below ; 7
. While, still-inspir’d, he walks among the dead, 155
And Pluto’s self reveres the mighty shade.

She spoke, and bow’d her beauteous head, that still

Confirms her vows; for by Jove’s awful will,

Of all his daughters, goddesses in heaven,

This honour only was to Pallas given ; 2 160
That she, with him, might equal glory gain.

No mother bore her with a mother’s pain,

But her great father’s head; and hence the god

Still gives, like aaa th’ irrevocable nod.


408’ _  CALLIMACHUS.


But now Minerva comes, nor comes unseen ; 165

Prepare, ye virgins, to receive your queen
. With acclamations, in this blissful hour,

With vowe and songs receive th’ approaching power.
Hail! guardian goddess, still let Argos claim

Thy kind protection, and adore thy name. _ 170
Whether, bright queen, thou lead’st thy fiery steeds

From Argos towers along the verdant meads,

Or back to yonder walls thy chariot runs,

Still, still defend old Danaus’ mighty sons.


HYMN TO CERES.


Tux basket swift-descending from the skies,
Thus, thus, ye matrons, let your voices rise:
“ Hail! Ceres, hail! by thee, from fertile ground
Swift springs the corn, and plenty flows around.”
Ye crowds, yet uninstructed, stand aloof, 5
Nor view the pageant from the l8fty roof,
But on the ground below; nor matrons fair,
Nor youth, nor virgins, with dishevell’d hair,
Dares here approach: nor let the moisture flow
From fasting mouths to stain the mystic show. ~ 10
But radiant Hesper from the starry skies ;
Beholds the sacred basket as it flies :
Bright Hesper only could persuade the power
To quench her thirst, in that unhappy hour,
When full of grief she roam’d from place to place, 15
Her ravish’d daughter’s latent steps to trace.
How could thy tender feet, O goddess, bear ~
The painful journey to the western sphere ?
How couldst thou tread black /Zthiop’s burning climes,
Or that fair soil, in these distressful times, 20
Where, on the tree, the golden apple beams,

or eat, nor drink, nor bathe in cooling streams?

Thrice Achelous’ flood her steps divide,
And every stream that rolls a ceaseless tide.


.


HYMN TO CERES,


Three times she press’d the centre of that isle,
Where Enna’s flowery fields with beauty smile.
Three times, by dark Challichorus, she sat,

‘And cal¥d the yawning gulf to mourn her “fatel:
There, faint with hunger, laid her wearied limbs,
Nor eat, nor drank, nor bath’d in cooling streams.

But cease, my Muse, in these unhallow’d strains,
To sing of Ceres’ woes, and. Ceres’ pains ;
Far nobler to resound her sacred laws,
That bless’d mankind, and gain’d their loud applanse.
Far nobler to declare how first she bound
The sacred sheaves, and cyt the corn around,
How first the grain beneath the steer she laid,
And taught Triptolemus the rural trade.
Far nobler theme (that all his crime may shun)
To paint the woes of Triopas’ ‘proud son ;
How meagre famine o’er his visage spread,
When her fierce vengeance on his vitals fed.

Not yet to Cnidia the Pelasgi came,

‘ But rais’d at Dotium to bright Ceres’ name ©
A sacred wood, whose branches interwove
So thick, an arrow scarce could pierce the grove.
Here pines and elms luxuriant summits rear ;
Here shone bright apples, there the verdant pear :
A erystal fountain pour’d his stréams around,

And fed the trees, and water’d all the ground.
With wonder Ceres saw the rising wood,

The spreading branches, and the silver flood,

. Which, more than green Triopium, gain’d her love,

Than fair Eleusis, or bright Enna’s grove.

But when, incens’d, his better genius fled

From Erysichton, rash designs invade

His impious breast: he rush’d along the plain
With twenty strong attendants in his train,

Of more than mortal size, and such their power,
As could with ease o’erturn the strongest tower.
With saws and axes arm’d they madly stood,
And fore’d a passage through the sacred flood.
A mighty poplar rais’d his head on high

Far o’er the rest, and seem’d to touch the sky


409
25


30


45:


55 -


410 : CALLIMACHUS.


(The nymphs at mid-day sported in the shade). 65
Here first they struck: on earth the tree was laid,
And told the rest her fate in doleful moans ;
Indignant Ceres heard the poplar’s groans,
And thus with anger spoke: What impious hand
Has cut my trees, and my bright grove profan’d? 70
She said, and instant, like Nicippa, rose,
Her well-known priestess, ‘whom the city. chose ;
Her holy hands the crowns and poppy bore ;
And from her shoulder hung the key before.
She came Where Erysichton’ s rage began, 75
And mildly thus address’d the wretched man.
My son, whoe’er thou art that wounds the trees,
My son, desist, nor break high heaven’s decrees?
By thy dear parent’s love, recall thy train,
Retire, my son, nor let me plead in vain: 80
Lest Ceres’ wrath come bursting from above,
In:vengeance for her violated grove. .
‘She said: but scornful Erysichton burn’d
* With fiercer rage, and fiercer frowns return’d,
Than the gaunt lioness (whose eyes they say 85
Flash keener flames than all the beasts of prey)
Casts on some hunter, when, with anguish torn,
On Tmarus’ hills her savage young are born.
_ Hence, hence, he cried, lest thy weak body feel
The fatal force of my resistless steel: | 90
Above my dome the lofty trees shall shine,
Where my companions the full banquet join,
And sport and revel o’er the sparkling wine.
He said. Fell Nemesis the speech records,
And vengeful Ceres heard th’ insulting words ; ~ 95
Her anger burn’d: her power she straight assum’d, _
And all the goddess in full beauty bloom’d :
’ While to the skies her sacred head arose,
She trod the ground, and rush’d amidst her foes. ©
The giant-woodmen, struck with deadly fear, 100
That instant saw, that instant disappear, ‘
And left their axes in the groaning trees :
But unconcern’d their headlong flight she sees ;
For these t’ obey their lord the fences broke,
To whom with dreadful voice the goddess spoke. “© 105


HYMN TO CERES.


Hence, henee, thon dog, and hasten to' thy home;
There shape the trees, and roof the lofty dome :
There shalt thou soon unceasing banquets join,
And glut thy soul with feasts and sparkling wine.

Her fatal words inflam’d his impious breast ;

He rag’d with hunger like a mountain-beast :
Voracious famine his shrunk entrails tore, :
Devouring still, and still desiring more.

Unhappy wretch ! full-twenty slaves of thine
Must serve the feast, and twelve prepare the wine;
Bright Ceres’ vengeance and stern Bacchus’ rage
Consum’d the man who durst their power engage :
For these combine against insulting foes, ;
And fill their hearts with anguish and with woes. ,
His pious parents still excuses found

To keep their son from banquets given around.
And when th’ Ormenides his presence call

To Pallas’ games, by sacred Iton’s wall,

Th’ impatient mother still their suit denied.

The last revolving day she swift replied,

To Cranon’s town he went, and there receives

An annual tribute of a hundred beaves.

Polyxo comes, the son and sire invites,

To grace her young Actorion’s nuptial rites :

But soon the mournful mother thus ‘replies,

With tears of sorrow streaming from. her eyes :

The royal Triopas will join thy feast ;
But Erysichton lies with wounds opprest ; .

Nine days are past, since, with relentless tooth,
A boar on Pindus gor’d the unhappy youth.

» What fond excuses mark’d her tender care !
Did one the banquet or the feast prepare ?

My, son is gone from home, the mother cries :
Was he invited to the nuptial ties ?

A discus.struck him, from his steed he fell,
Or numbers his white flocks in Othrys’ dale.

- Meanwhile the wretch, confin’d within the rooms,
In never-ending feasts his time consumes, ’
Which his insatiate maw devour’d as fast,

As down his throat the nourishment he cast;


, -


411


120


130


135


412 CALLIMACHUS.


But unrecruited still with strength or blood,
As if in ocean’s gulfs had sunk the food.
As snows from Mima’s hills dissolving run,
Or waxen puppets melt before the sun, 5
So fast his flesh consum’d, his vigour gone, 150
And nervous fibres only cloth’d the bone. '
His mother mourn’d; his sisters groans resum’d ;
His nurse and twenty handmaids wept around:. .
The frantic father rent his hoary hairs,
And vainly thus to Neptune pour’d his prayers: 155
O power divine, believ’d my sire in vain ;
Since thou reliev’st not thy descendant’s pain:
If I from beauteous Canace may claim
My sacréd birth, or Neptune’s greater name ;
Behold a dire disease my son destroy: . 160
Oh! look with pity on the wretched boy.
Far happier fate, had’ Phoebus’ vengeful dart
Struck, with resistless force, his youthful heart ;
For then my hands had funeral honours paid, - ‘
And sacred rights to his departed shade. “165
But haggard famine with pale a PAE now
Stares in his eyes, and sits upon his brow.
Avert, O gracious power, the dire disease,
Or feed my wretched son in yonder seas.
No more my hospitable feasts prevail, 170
My folds are empty, and my cattle fail.
My menial train will scarce the food provide ;
The mules no more my rushing chariot guide.
A steer his mother fed within the stall,
At Vesta’s sacred altar doom’d to fall, 173
This he devour’d, and next my. warlike horse,
So oft victorious in the dusty course.
Ev’n puss.escap'd not, when his fury rose,
Herself so dreadful to domestic foes. ;
Long as his father’s house supplied the feast 180
Th’ attendants only knew the dreadful waste.
But when pale famine fill’d th’ imperial dome,
Th’ insatiate glutton was expell’d from home,
And, though from kings descended, rueful sat
« In public streets, and begg’d at every gate: 185


‘ A neighbour's kindness, or a neighbour's love..


HYMN TO CERES.


Still at the feast his suppliant hands-were spread,

And still the wretch on sordid refuse fed.
Immortal Ceres! for thine impious foe

Ne’er let my breast’ with sacred friendship glow.

Beneath my roof the wretch shall never prove


Ye maids and matrons, thus with sacred song,
Salute the pageant as it comes along. ,


“Hail! Ceres, hail! by thee from fertile ground


Swift springs the corn, and plenty flows around.”
As four white coursers to thy hallow’d shrine
The sacred basket bear ; so, power divine,
Let Spring and Summer, rob’d in white, appear; .
Let fruits-in Autumn crown the golden year,
That we may still the sprightly juice consume,
To soothe our cares in Winter's cheerless gloom.
As we, with feet unshod, with hair unbound,
In long procession tread the hallow’d ground ;
May thus our lives in safety still be led,
O shower thy blessings on each favour’d head !
As matrons bear the baskets fill’d with gold,
Let boundless wealth in every house be told. | __
Far as the Prytaneum the power invites '
The women uninstructed in the rites;
Then dames of sixty years (a sacred throng) ~ |
Shall to the temple lead the pomp along.
Let those who for Lucina’s aid extend
Imploring arms, and those in pain attend
Far as their strength permits ; to them shall come
Abundant bliss, as if they reach’d the dome.

Hail, sacred power! preserve this happy town
In peace and safety, concord and. renown:


4


: Let rich increase o’erspread the yellow plain ;


Feed flocks ‘and herds, and fill the ripening grain :.
Let wreaths: of olive still our brows adorn,


And those who plough’d the field shall reap the corn.


Propitious, hear my prayer, O Queen supreme, —
And bless thy poet with immortal fame.


413 -


190


195


200


205


210


THE


LOCKS OF BERENICE.


TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN OF GATULLUS.


TuE sage who view’d the shining heavens on high,
Explor’d the glories of th’ expanded sky ;

Whence rise the radiant orbs, where still they bend

Their wandering cout'se, and where at length descend,
Why dim eclipse obscures the blazing sun, 5
‘Why stars at certain times to darkness run,

How Trivia nightly stole from realms above

To taste on Latmos’ rocks the sweets of love,

Immortal Conon, blest with skill divine,

Amid the sacred skies behold me shine, 10
Ev’n me, the beauteous hair, that lately shed
‘Refulgent beams from Berenice’s head ; :
The lock.she fondly vow’d with lifted arms,

Imploring all the powers to savé from harms

Her dearer lord, when from his bride he flew, ~ _ 15
To wreak stern vengeance on th’ Assyrian crew ; .
While yet the monarch’ bore the pleasing scars

Of softer triumphs and nocturnal wars.

O sacred queen, do virgins still despise

The joys of Venus, and the nuptial ties, 20
When oft in bridal-rooms their sighs and tears

Disturb the parent's heart with anxious fears ?

The tears descend from friendly powers above;

The sighs, ye gods! are only sighs of love.

With tears like these fair Berenice mourn’d, + 25
When, for her virgin-spoils, the monarch burn’d ;

With sighs like these she gave him all her charms,

And bless’d the raptur’d bridegroom in her arms.


1 This poem is but the translation of a translation; the original
Greek of Callimachus being long lost, and the Latin version, of
which Vossius says, vix, slogentine carmen Romano sermone scrip-
tum, being the work of the Roman poet Catullus.


“THE LOCKS OF BERENICE. 4is


But’on the widow’d bed you wept alone,

And mourn’d the brother in the husband ‘gone. 30°
What sorrow then my pensive queen opprest,
What pangs of absence tore her tender breast !
When, lost in woe, no trace remain’d behind
Of all her yirgin-mirth, and strength of mind.
Hadst thou forgot the deed thy worth achiev’d, 35
For which thy brows th’ imperial crown receiv’d; -

The wondrous deed, that plac’d thee far beyond

Thy fair iy ala and made a monarch fond ?

But when for wars he left your tender arms,

What words you spoke, with what endearing charms, 40
“Still breath’d your soft complaints in mournful sighs,

And wip’d, with lifted hands, your streaming eyes.

Didst thou, fair nymph, lament by power divine, -

Or for an absent lover only pine ?
Then to the gods you vow'd with pious care . 45
A sacred offering, your immortal hair, “a &
With blood of slaughter’d bulls, would heaven restore

Your lord in triumph to his, native shore ;

Should he, returning soon with high renown, i
Add vanquish’d Asia to th’ Egyptian crown : 150
And I, fair lock, from orbs of radiance, now:
Diffuse new’ light to pay thy former vow.

But. hear, O Queen, the sacred oath I swear,

By thy bright head, and yet remaining hair,

T join’d unwilling this ethereal sphere ; 55
And well I know what woes the perjur’d feel :

But none can conquer unresisted steel.

_ Steel hew’d the mightiest mountain to the ground

That Sol beholds in his diurnal round,

Through Athos’ rocky sides a passage tore, ; 60
When first the Medes arriv’d at’Phthia’s shore :

Then winds and waves drove their swift ships along,

And through the new-made gulf impell’d the throng,

If these withstood not stéel’s all-conquering blow, y
What. could thy hairs against so dire a, foe? : - 65
O mighty Jove! may still thy wrath divine _

Pour fierce destruction on their impious line,

Who dug with hands aceurst the hollow mine;


416 . CALLIMACHUS.


Who first from earth could shining ore produce,
First temper’d steel, and taught its various use. 70
As thy bright locks bewail’d their sister ‘gone,
Arsinoé’s horseman, Memnon’s only son,
On flattering wings descended from on- high,
* To bear the beauteous hairs above the sky;
‘Then upward bent his flight, and softly plac’d 75
Thy radiant lock in chaste Arsinoé’s breast,
Whota we Zephyritis and Venus name ;
And on Canopus’ shores her altars. flame:
Where late the winged messenger came down
At her desire, lest Ariadne’s crown 80
Should still unrivall’d glitter in the skies ;
And that thy precious hairs, a richer prize,
- The spoils devoted to the powers divine, odd
. Might from the fields of light as brightly shine.
Yet bath’d in tears I wing’d my rapid flight, ° 85
Swift from her shrine, to this ethereal height,
And, plac’d amidst the fair celestial signs} »
Thy lock for ever with new, glory shines,
‘ Just by the Virgin in the starry sphere,
The savage Lion, and the Northern Bear ; 90
Full to the west, with sparkling beams, I lead,
And bright Bodtes in my course precede,
Who scarcely moves along the ethereal plain,
And late and slowly sinks beneath the main.
Though feet of gods surround my throne by night, 95
And in the seas I sleep with morning light, .
Yet, O Rhamnusian maid, propitious hear
The words of sacred truth unaw’d by fear,
" . The words of truth I wish not to conceal,
' + But still the dictates of my breast reveal, 100
Though these resplendent orbs in wrath should rise,
And hurl me headlong from the flaming skies.
Though placed on high, sad absence I deplore,
,Condemn’d to join my lovely queen no more,
On whose fair head, while yet in virgin-bloom, — 105
I drank unmeasur’d sweets and rich perfume.
But now, ye maids, and every beauteous dame,
For whom on nuptial nights the torches flame,


- THE LOCKS’ OF BERENICE. 417


Though fondly wedded to some lovely boy, -
Your virgin-choice, and: partner of your joy, 110
Forbear to taste the pleasures of a bride,
Nor from the bosoms draw the veil aside, ~
Till oils in alabaster ye prepare,
And chastely pour on Berénice’s ‘hair:

But I th’ impure adulteress still confound, 1is-
And dash th’ ungrateful offering to the ground.

From her no rich libation Idemand, +

And scorn the gift of each unhallow’d hand.

But if the virtuous fair invoke my power, | a
Unbounded bliss shall crown the nuptial hour ; 120

* To her shall concord from high heaven descend,
And constant love her ‘soft retreats attend.

And when, bright Queen, on solemn feasts your eyes
Shall hail Arsinoé radiant in the skies ; :
When she demands, bright opening on your view, 125
The sacred rights to heavenly Venus dues’ ©
If thy lov’d lock appear resplendent there, ’
Let me with her an equal offering share. ~ :

But why, should these surrounding stars detain

Thy golden hairs in this ethereal plain ?. 130
Qh could I’ join thy beauteous head once more,
The sacred head on which I grew before,
Though I should ever lose my light divine,
And moist Arcturus next the Virgin shine.


EPIGRAMS..


EPIGRAM I.


A Yours in haste to Mitylene came,
And anxious, thus reveal’d his amorous flame
To Pittacus the wise: O sacred Sire,
For two fair nymphs I burn with equal fire,
One lovely maid in rank and wealth like me,
‘But one superior, and.of high degree.
‘ Since both return my love, and each invites
To celebrate with her the nuptial rites,
Perplex’d with doubts, for sage advice I come:
Whom shall I wed? ’Tis you must fix my doom.
_ So spake th’ impatient youth; th’ attentive sage
Rais’d the support of his declining age,
An ancient staff; and pointing to the ground
Where sportive striplings lash’d their tops around
With eager strokes; Let yonder boys, he cried,
Solve the dispute, and your long doubts decide.
The youth drew nigh, and listen’d with surprise,


Whilst from the laughing crowd these words arise,


Let equal tops with equal tops contend.

The boys prevail’d, and soon the contest end.

The youth departing shunn’d the wealthy dame,

And chose th’ inferior maid to quench his flame.
Go thou, my friend, obey the sage, and lead

An equal beauty to thy nuptial bed.


II.


I near, O friend, the fatal news

- Of Heraclitus’ death.:
A sudden tear my cheek bedews,
And sighs suppress my breath.


*


10


On


20


EPIGRAMS. - 419


For I must often call to mind,
How from the crowd we rum ;

And how, to jesting still inclin’d,
We sported in the sun.


Alas! he’s gone, and part we must,
And repartee’s no more;
But, though my friend be sunk in dust,
His muse shall ever soar.
The dart of death shall never fly
To stop her waving wings ;
Like Philomel she mounts on high,
“And still, like her, she sings..


; 1.


I, Timon, hated human race ;
Ye passengers, begone,

Curse as ye will, but leave the place,
And let me rest alone.


IV.


Say, Timon, sunk in tight, abhorr’st thou now
The light above, or gloomy shades below ?

“T hate the shades, since fill’d with human-kind
In greater pumbers than I left behind.”


Vv.


A SACRED shell, Zephyritis divine,
Fair Selena offers at thy shrine,
And thus thy Nautilus is doubly hless’d,
Since given by her, and still by thee possess’d.
Of late small tackling from my body grew; 5:
Thin sails I spread, when winds propitious blew,
But when the seas were calm, to gain the shores
I stretch’d my little feet, like labouring oars,
And, from my busy limbs and painted pride,
Was call’da Polyp as I stemm’d the tide; 10

. Till driven by winds, on Coan rocks I shone,
And now recline before Arsinoé’s throne. _

222 : ,


420  CALLIMACHTUS.


Depriv’d of life, no more in seas I rest,

' Or draw young Halcyons from the watery nest ;
But be this boon to Clinias’ daughter given,
A virtuous maid and favourite of high heaven ;
The precious boon let Selenza gain,


When she from Smyrna ploughs the foaming main.


VI.


A Sanian gave me birth, the sacred bard
Whose hospitable feast great Homer shar’d ;
‘For beauteous Iole my sorrows flow,
And royal Eurytus oppress’d with woe:
But mightier names my lasting fame shall crown,
And Homer give Creophilus renown.
Vil.
A Prous youth approaching where
His stepdame’s body lay,
Officious crown’d her statue there
With flow’rets ‘fresh and gay ;
Nor thought his father’s wife, when dead,
Her malice could retain :.
The statue thunder’d on his head’.
And fix’d him ‘to the plain.
Ye foster-sons, avoid his doom,
Nor hang a flow’ry wreath
Around an envious stepdame’s tomb,
Lest ye too sink in death.


Vii.


‘No wreaths of ivy ‘Theetetus crown,

Who chose the certain path to high renown ;
Unskilful judges his great worth “despise,

And undeserving bards obtain the prize:

Yet envy not, my friend, their short-liv’d fame ;
Admiring Greece shall still resound thy name.


: Ix.


Tue fewest words are still exprest
By hint who gain’d at Bacchus’ feast,


15


EPIGRAMS. , 421


He says in simple phrase, “I’ve won.”
But Phebus’ more unlucky son, ;
Whose prize is gone, whose hopes are crost,
Should any ask how he had lost, ;
On fickle fortune throws the blame, _
And tells in long harangues his claim:
No judges hence the prize assigh;° :
Oh may the shortest phrase be mine,
X. ;
BENEATH this tomb, in sacred sleep, :
The virtuous Saon lies; al ‘


Ye passengers, forbear to weep,
A good man never dies. .


XL


Say, dost thou seek Timarchus now, .
To talk with him in shades below’
Of truths before unknown to thee,
As, Where th’ immortal mind must be?
Go, search the fam’d Elysian plain
For ancient Ptolemeus’ train,
You ’ll find him there (his body ’s dust)
Amid th’ assemblies of the just.

: XIL , '
Here Theris lies in endless rest ;
A little spot contains the guest,
‘Once victor in th’ equestrian strife,
And now has reach’d the goal of life.
His body short, his tomb not long,
And short, like them, shall be my song.


XT.
WHEN you, my friend, to Cyzicus repair,
Godd Hippacus and Didyme the fair
Are found with ease, amid th’ extended town, -
Since both descend from sires of great renown :
Then sadly tell their son’s untimely doom,
For youthful Critias lies beneath this tomb.


422 : CALLIMACHUS.


Le XIV.


Stranger. Wuenre’s Charidas buried? I speak without fear.
Monument. The son of Arimnas lies mouldering here.
Stranger. O tell me, good Charidas, what’s in thy tomb?
Charidas, Inquisitive mortal, there’s nothing but gloom.
Str. Say, wilt thou return ?—Char. Wicked trifler, begone.
Str. What’s Pluto ?—Char. A fable, and we are undone.

If there’s pleasure in death, and sure I speak true,

Pelleus’ fat ox willbe happy as you.


XV.-
‘ Wao knows if any power will give
Another day for him to live ?
Lo! Charmus, late our dearest friend,
To-day shall to the grave descend ;
And tears,-alas! bring no relief
To soothe his mournful father’s grief.


, : XVI.
By all the gods, I ne’er had knowp
Who this Timonoé was,
Had not her father’s name been shown
In monumental brass.


’


Methymne too, the city’s name,
. Engraven on her tomb
With old Timotheus, gives to fame
Her much-lamented doom.


Though time will some relief impart
To soothe a father’s woe,

Deep. sorrow rends her husband’s heart,
His tears for ever flow.


XVI.
‘ Tue Samian virgins: us’d often to play
With Crethis the witty, the pleasant, and gay,
But now, when they seek her, she cannot be found ;
Their spurtive companion sleeps here under ground,
Discharging the debt which to nature we owe;
For all must descend to the regions below.


EPIGRAMS. 423


Hap never vessel cross’d the-main, . thy
* Our present grief had been in vain; ~

But we for Sopolis must weep,

Now plung’d beneath thé whelming deep :

The surges toss his breathless frame ; ,

An empty tomb preserves his name.


' _ IX.

Nor on the land could Lycus die, ‘
Nor in his native Naxos lie,
But'on the main by tempests tost,

His life and ship together lost,
When first he left Aigina’s shore, ;
“And o’er him now the surges roar:

‘An empty marble only keeps

His name from the devouring deeps.

Obey my words and shun the seas,

Ye mariners, in times like these,

When to the main the Goat declines,

Nor in the sky with Phebus shines.


KX.


NicoTe ss lies buried here,
Philippus o’er him drops a tear,

And mourns his twelfth and only boy,
The father’s hope, his pride and joy.


XXiI,


Tuis morning we beheld with streaming eyes °
The flames from Melanippus’ body rise ;

At eve fair Basile resign’d her breath,
Disdaining to survive a brother’s death ; . ;
With frantic hands she gave the deadly blow _ -
That sent her soul to gloomy shades below.
Two'mighty ills the wretched sire must mourn,
And weep around 4 son and daughter’s urn;
Old Aristippus sunk in grief appears,

And old Cyrene melts in briny tears.


424


CALLIMACHUS.


XXIL
Wuor’er with hallow’d feet approaches near,
Behold, Callimachus lies buried here.
I drew my breath from fam’d Cyrene’s shore,
And the same name my son and father bore.


- My warlike sire in arms much glory won,


But brighter trophies grac’d his favour’d gon ;
Lov’d by the tuneful nine he sweetly sung,


“And stopt the venom of th’ invidious tongue:


For whom the muse beholds with favouring eyes
In early youth, she'll ne’er again despise.


XXII


O’er Cretan hills a virgin chanc’d to stray,

And bore the swain Astacides away,

To Dicte’s wood his instant flight compels,
Where under rustling oaks a priest he dwells :
Ye shepherds, cease to sing in Daphne’s praise ;,
To fam’d Astacides your voices raise.


XXIV.


.  Cxxostsrotvs, high on a rock,
_ Above Ambracia stood,

Bade Sol adieu, and, as he spoke,
Plung’d headlong in the flood.

From no mischance the leap he took,

' ‘But sought the realms beneath,

Because he read in Plato’s book,

‘That souls live after death.


XXV.


Sma. is my size, and J must grace

' Eétion’s porch, a little place ;
A. hero’s likeness I appear,
And round my sword a serpent bear.
But since Eétion views with hate
The prancing steed that caus’d my fate,
Resolv’d that we no more should meet, ,
He plac’d me here upon my feet.


* EPIGRAMS.


XXVI.


Fonp Callignotus sigh’d and swore,

*Tis Violante I adore, ©

The brightest beauty on the plain,

And she alone my heart. shall gain.

He swore; but lovers’ vows, they say,

‘To heaven could never make. their way,

Nor penetrate the bless’d abode,

Nor reach the ears of any god.

While for another maid he burns,

Forsaken Violante mourns

Her blasted hopes, her honour gone ;

As Megra’s race were once undone.
XXVIL

Snort was my life, and Micylus my name;

I gain’d with little wealth a poet’s fame,

And wisely. pass’d without offence my time,

Friend to the good, unconscious of a crime.

If e’er I prais’d the bad, revenge it now,

Thou mother earth, and all ye powers below ;

Lie not, O goddess, lightly on my breast, -

Nor let th’ infernal furies grant me rest.


XXVIII.


Tats book is sure exactly wrote
In Hesiod’s manner, style, and- thought,
Of Grecian poets not the least,
And here his powers are all exprest.
T fear, my friend, you say too much ;
His verse is soft, his genius such
That Soli’s son will find it hard_
To emulate so sweet a bard.
Farewell Aratus’ empty themes,
~ His idle thoughts, and heavy dreams.


' XXIX.


I nate the bard who strolls along,
_ And sells in streets his borrow'd songs F


| 495


426


CALLIMACHUS.


I seldom walk the public way,
Where here and there the vulgar stray ;
Inconstant friends I never court,

Nor to the common spring resort ;

I still despise the rabble’s rage,

Nor with the noisy crowd engage.

Tis fine, ’tis fine, a reader cries:
Indignant Echo thus replies,

Though ne’er so good, perhaps divine,
Another bard wrote every line.


XXX.
Pour the wine, and drink it up,
But mix no water in the cup;
The sacred eup we fill with joy
To thee, Diocles, beauteous boy :
O more than beauteous, youth divine,
Should all refuse to drink the wine,
Should all refuse thy charms to ‘see,
Then would the boy be left with me.


XXXE


CLEonrIcus, unhappy man,

Say whence thy sorrows first began ?
For, by yon, preaas ae of light,

I ne’er beheld so sad a sight,

Where hast thou been ? thy flesh is gone,
And nothing left but skin and bone.
My dxmon sure, and hapless fate,
Redue’d thee to this wretched state ;
Eusithea stole thy heart, like mine ;
When first you saw the, nymph divine,
You gaz’d on her with wishful eyes,


And hence, I fear, your woes arise.


XXXII.


Tue huntsman o’er the hills pursues
The timid hare, and keenly views

The tracks of hinds amid the snow,
Nor heeds the wint’ry winds that blow.


* EPIGRAMS. 42%


But should a stranger mildly say,
Accept.the game-I kill’d to-day —
The proffer’d gift he quickly seorns, -
And to th’ uncertain chace returns:
Such is my love; I never prize

* An easy fair, but her who flies. :


XXXII.
Tuar I am poor is known to’me,
My good Menippus, as to thee ;
Then, by our love, insist no moré
~On what I knew too well before:
Such truths offend a stratiger’s ear,
But to a friend are most severe.


XXXIV.


Prac’p here by Phileratis’ hands,
This image of Diana stands ;
Accept the gift, attend her prayer,
And still, O goddess, guard the fair.
XXXV. ,
Club. A STRANGER cut mie froin a tree .
A beechen club, s gift to thee,
Who stopt the roaring lion’s breath;
And laid the foaming boar in death.
Herc. Declare his country, and his name.
Club. Archinus he; from Crete he came.
Herc. And, for the pious giver’s sake,
_ The proffer’d gift I freely take.


XXXVI.


ApprRoacu this tomb with silent feet,
The dead Battiades to greet ;

Alive, renown’d for sacred song, +
And mirth to charm the festive throng.


XXXVIL


Twice Erasixen fill’d his cup,
And twice he drank the liquor up; -


428


CALLIMACHUS. —~


He drank his wine, but much too deep,
And clos’d his eyes in endless sleep.


, XXXVII.


Mene@ras, tir’d with war’s alarms,
Gave to the gods“his shining arms,
And said, this quiver and this bow
On thee, Serapis; I bestow ;

This empty quiver; for my darts
Are all infix’d in hostile hearts.


XXXIX.


Siena, changeful as the sea, .

Bright Venus, dedicates to thee

Her image, and the zone that bound

Her swelling breast with beauty crown’d.


XL.


Acnisius of Pelasgian race .

To Ceres rais’d this holy place,
Where Timodemus pays his vow
To her, and Proserpine below :
Triumphant from his naval toil,
He gives the tenth of every spoil.


SL
Wuor’sr shall to this tomb draw nigh,
Behold, in death, a priestess lie:


I sacred Ceres first implor’d,
The great Cabiri next ador’d,


Grew old on Dindymene’s plains,


‘And now my dust alone remains.
Alive, I seldom fail’d to lead

The sprightly dance along the mead ;
T bore two sons, I ran my race,

And died with joy, in their embrace.
Go, friend ; prepare for life’s decline ;
And may thy death be blest.as mine.


BPIGRAMS. 429


XLII. ©
I preatHy in sighs; for half my soul.
By love or death was lately stale:
Perhaps the fool, too surely gone,

Is now possess a by love alone,

.And to some beauteous boy draws nigh, ;

From ‘whom I warn’d him oft to fly.

Retire, my soul, lest thou shouldst prove

The pangs of unsuccessful love;

For well I know thou It soon return

In anguish, and dismise’d with scorn.
XLII. -

Ir sober, and inelin’d to sport,

To you, my fair one, I resort;

The still-forbidden bliss to prove,

- Accuse me then, and blame my love.

, But if to rashness I incline, ~
Accuse me not, but. blame the wine:
When love and wine at once inspire,
What mortal can control his fire ?

Of late I came, I know not how,
Embrac’d my fair, and kiss’d her too ;
It might be wrong; I feel no shame, _
And, for the bliss, will bear the blame.


XLIYV. .


Brxorp our host by love depriv’d of rest,

A secret wound deep-rankling in his breast ;

He breathes in sighs, oppress’d by power divine,
And thrice the thirsty earth has drank the wine.

Lo! from his néck the rosy garlands fade,

And on the greund the withering leavés are spread;
He burns, he burns; as I too surely know,, ;
That oft have felt a lover’s pains and woe.


XLV.
By mighty Pan and Bacchus’ greater name,
‘Beneath these embers lurks a spreading flame.


490 2°. | CALLIMACHUS.


Embrace me not ; though streams in silence fall,
They sap the basis of the best built wall:
Embrace me not; lest this invading fire

Should be but love, and fiercer flames inspire.


XLVI.


Wuen Archestrata’s charms I first survey’d,
By heaven, said he, this is no beauteous maid ;
Nor seem’d she fair, when. view’d with careless eye:
But vengeful Nemesis stood listening by,

, Cut short my speech, and swift within my heart
Infix’d, like fire from Jove, her fatal dart.
I burn, I burn; shall I the power appease,
Or strive with blandishments the fair to please ?
Could I, my fair, thy blooming charms enjoy,
The dart of Nemesis would prove a joy. -


XLVIL ~~


JuLy the twentieth lately past,

This flying fair must yield at last, .,
I fondly said; but erethe.sun *
Had half his course in August.run,
She came all bright in blooming charms,
And rush’d spontaneous to my arms, .
By Hermes'led: O guardian power,
Thy sacred name [I still adore,

And since that long-expected day.

No more lament the short delay. *


XLVITIL.


Tuus Giant Polyphemus sweetly sung,

While o’er the cliffs his goats untended hung:

The.muse to hopeless-love is ever kind ;

The power of wisdom heals a wounded mind,

And meagre famine brings this only good,

It calms the pulse, and cools the glowing blood.
‘Mischievous boy, my thoughts no more shall rove ;

I'll clip with these the fluttering wings of love,

Despise thy power, swift hasten home, and there +

With wisdom and the nruse dispel my care.


.


»


: EPIGRAMS. 431


: XLEX.
Loup shouts from th’ Acamantian choir proclaim, .
At Bacchus’ feast, the joyful victor’s name ;
For him they weave the Dithyrambic crown,
A wreath of rosés adds to his renown, :
And, more to recompense his toil, they shed
The sqcred unguents o’er the poet’s head,
Who now victorious gives this lasting sign, ,
This golden tripod to the power divine.
Antigenes instructs the crowds beneath ;
But wise Aristo’s ever tuneful breath
Could sweeter sounds in Doric reeds inspire :
Hipponichus was leader of the choir, ~~
Above the rest he shone superior far, ‘
The Graces bore him in their airy car,
Obey’d the Muses, and the bard renown’d ;
‘The Muses with unfading violets crown’d.


L.
Escap’p the horrors of’ a watery grave,
To Samothracian gods Eudemus gave
His little skiff ; and said, -Ye mighty powers,
Accept my gift; the votive gift is yours.


. LI.


As youthful Sinus gave me to the Nine,

He said, Ye Muses, grant me light divine;
And these accepting, like brave Glaucus, soon
‘For the small gift return’d a greater boon.
But, with dishevell’d locks, I stand and stare -
Against the doubtful Samian letter there.

To me the boys address their ardent prayers, |
And cry, O Bacchus, sacred be thy hairs ;

But I no more attend. these idle themes,

Than if they told me last night’s empty dreams.


Lit.


Srrancer, wouldst thou my story know?
Behold, I stand a comic show ;
e : ‘


*


432 7 CALLIMACHUS.


And Pamphilus within this place

Must Ag’ranax’s victory grace:

Although I seem not very fine,

Nor is the workmanship divine ;
For half like shriyell’d figs appears,

And half to soot resemblance bears. -


LIT.


Tuus Micus chose to reimburse |

Old Phrygian Aéschra, once his nurse:
Alive the dame on dainties fed ;

He plac’d an image o’er her dead ;

vos That late posterity may know - :
What kindness we to nurses owe.


LIV.
Four are the Graces now ; ‘and all may see
Another added to the former three, ;
Yet wet with unguents, and but lately born ;
Fair Berenice, blooming as the morn,
- So bright with charms, and such her beauteous face,
That, rapb’d of her, the Graces lose their grace.


LV.
Taxocritus looks black, ’tis true ; -
But then his face is comely too: ~
If he hate me, your love is such,
You hate’him jyst four times'’as much ;
. But if he love, you love him then -
Beyond the love of mortal men.
And guch, I swear; O mighty Jove,
By sacred Ganymede above,
The friendship once to him you bore,
And such the love; I speak no more.


LVI:
Lvuema, grant thy aid again,
Nor let Lycenis call in vain ;
To thee, propitious power, I bow,.
And for a daughter thank thee now:
e


EPIGRAMS. " 433


_ But if, bright Queen, a boy were ming,
A greater gift. should grace thy shrine.


LVIL
Wuar for Demodice was ow’d, -
On sculapius is bestow’d; |
Aceson ow’d it for her charms,
Since ‘first he revell’d in her arms,
And, says the picture, should he choose
No more t’ approach his lovely spouse,
The fair would still his praise deserve,
Nor from the rules of virtue swerve.


LVI.

- Aw ever-living lamp I shine

To Canopista, power divine ;

With twenty matches I appear,

And Crita’s daughter plac’d me here,
To pay what for her son she ow’d,
What, for Appelles, late she vow’d :
And when my light you first espy,
You’d swear the stars had left the sky.


LIX.


Ev2netvs declar’d that he,
For battles won, devoted me, | ;
A brazen cock, within this place ,
To Tyndaris’ immortal race.‘ f4aty
But Phzdrus’ son I love and fear, .« y= P ox
. And, as my guardian god, revere: - + oye
LX. te r
Fair schylis, from Thale sprung, = -
In Isis’ fane an offering hung ;—
* And thus the vow her mother made,
Trene’s vow, is fully paid.


LX *


Wuor’er thou art in tempests lost,
And driv’n ashore by surges tost,
2 F*


434 . CALLIMACHUS,


Leoptichus laments thy doom,

And lays thy body in this tomb;
But mourns his own unhappy state, _
Exxpos’d, like thee, to certain fate; .

' Expos’d to plough the watery plain,
“Or, like a sea-mew, skim the main.


t THE


' FRAGMENTS OF THEOGNIS,


AND


CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED,


bs


WITH A VIEW TO ILLUSTRATE ‘


THE PERSONAL HISTORY OF THE POET.


BY J. H. FRERE.


ae
+


NOTICE.


THE following pages are taken from a work by the Right Hon.
John Hookham Frere, entitled Tarecnis ReEstrrutvs, printed at
Malta, 1842. ;


NUMERICAL REFERENCES |


TO ENABLE THE READER OF THE GREEK TEXT OF THEOGNIS, OR OF THE
PROSE TRANSLATION, TO FIND THE PARALLEL LINES IN ,
bd - MR. FRERE’S POETIC VERSION. -


GREEK TEXT. |FRERE'’S VERSN.| PROSE TRANS.
(Gaisford.) |(No. of Fragm.j| (Pages.) °
ect Leptin ere


407-8 240
241
241
241
242
243
243°
100-12 461-2 {?) 244
113-28 467-96 245
131-2 499-502 vi. 246
133-42 503-8 vu. 246
151-8 514-22 LIX. 246
173-82 523-6 cl. 247
183-96 531-4 u. 247
197-208 531-4 LXXIV. 247
209-10 535-8 LXXIY. 247
213-18 539-40 XLV.’ . 248
219-20 ‘941-2 XIV. 248
221-6 549-56 LXXII. 248
\ 232-6 557-60 LXXII. 249
233-8 561-6 LXXv. 249
234-54 577-8 XLVINL 250
255-8 6038-4 xvi. 251
257-60 619-20 | LXXXVII. 252
271-8 . 623-4 | LXxxXviit. | 252
283-92 635-40 LEXI. | 283
309-12 EKXVUL 639-40 XXVIII. 253
331-2 XXXVI. 619-52 xe. 254 '
337-50 LXX VIII. 667-82 LX 254 |
355-8 LXXI. 683-6 XCIv. 256
367-70 ~ XVIII. 695-6 XCVIL. 256
373-98 LVIL 697-718 ct. 257
401-6 “LEIV. 729-50» _Lv. [| 208


436* NUMERICAL REFERENCES. ,


GREEK TEXT.| PRERE’S VERSN.| PROSE TRANS.| GREEK TEXT.


PRERE'S VERSN.| PROSE TRANS.
~ (Gaisford,) | (Neo. of Fragm.) (Pages.) -


(Gaisford.) |(No. of Fragma.) (Pages.)


755-66 cv. 259 -10a]-4 xc =| | 274
767-70 CVIIl. 260 1055-8 xour |' 275
771-86 cvL. 260 ‘| 1060-4 12. 275
787-90 CVI. 261 1067-8 clr. 275
F9L-4 CVs. 261 1077-8 LXXXIV. 276
795-8 xX. 261 1073-82 XXX. 277
799-802 xIx. 262 | 1083-6 CME 276
809-12 LXXXU 262 1087-98 Le ' 276
813-18 | uxix. 262 1099-1102) xv. 277
821-2 XXII 263 IL11-12 xcH. 277
823-8 LX 263 1138-14 CVI. 277
829-34 - LI. 263 1115-18 L 27>
845-48 LXVIL 264 1119-24 LXXVI. 278
863-6 c 265 $125.8 LX. 282
867-70 LEXI. 265 1129-30 | uxxr. 278
875-80 cir 265 1131-46 LXXIX. 278
881-6 ° XCIx , 266 1153-6 Iv. 279
887-90 LXXUI, 266 1157-64 Liv. 279
893-8 XL. XXXVIL. 280
899-926 Xevuii. XXL 281
933-8 LXXXIX XXVI. 281
939-42 XV. XXVIL. 281
953-6 v. XX¥e 281
973-6 XXXI. Lx. 281
987-90 xcl, XXIy. 282
* 991-6 Civ. LXXI¥. 282
1007-10 | xxxxm1. XLIV, 283
1017-20 LXX1. XXXIX. 233.
1023-30- LI. LXXVII. 283
1035-6" | civ. xcV. 273


THEOGNIS.


THE verses of Theognis which in a regular arrangement of his
Fragments appear entitled to stand as the first of the series, are
those which represent him as a prosperous young heir just enter-
ing into life, and looking forward to the enjoyment of pleasure and
happiness. His vows are addressed to Jupiter as the sovereign ,

“deity, and to his own immediate patron, Apollo, the founder and
protector of Megara.— We shall see, that at a later period (in an-
ticipation of the Persian invasion) ‘his vows are addressed sepa-
rately to the same two deities.


I. r, Gaisford.
Guided and aided by their holy will, 1115-18 |
Jove and Apollo, may they guard mé still,
My course of youth in safety to fulfil :


Free from all evil, happy with my wealth,
In joyous easy years of peace and health.


His amusements ,and accomplishments at this time, his fond-
ness for the pipe, which he delighted to accompany, and the lyre,
are expressed in another fragment. ;

My heart exults the lively call obeying, 531-4
When the shrill merry pipes are sweetly playing :
With these to chaunt aloud, or to recite,
" To carol and carouse is my delight.:’ .
‘Or in a stedfast tone, bolder and higher,
To temper with a touch the manly lyre.


Other verses, evidently composed in his early years, terminate in
professing his fondness for this kind of music. -


Til.


To revel with the pipe, to chaunt and sing, 1060-4
This likewise is a most delightful thing— ;


.


,


438 : . THEOGNIS. ©


Give me but ease and pleasure ! What care I
For reputation or for property ?


The -eagerness of Theognis in the pursuit of knowledge is
songs marked in a ‘passage which (in whatever period it may
have been produced) serves to indicate a feeling, which is always
strongest in early youth. ‘ :

- Iv.


Learning and wealth the wise and wealthy find ) 1153-6
Inadequate to satisfy the mind ;

A craving eagerness remains behind ;

Something is left for which we cannot rest; }

And the Jast something always seems the best,
Something unknown, or something unpossest.


Theognis, after a successful intrigue, determines to extend the
range of his gallantries.


Vv.


My thirst was sated at a secret source, 953-6
I found it clear and limpid; but its course
, Is alter’d now; polluted and impure !
I leave it; and where other springs allure
Shall wander forth; or freely quaff my fill
From the loose current of the flowing rill.


We may now proceed to the congenial and equally edifying


subject of wine. ae : . . .
Even here Theognis exhibits traces of a peculiar mind, in a
tendency to general remark and fixed method. :


VI.


To prove our gold or silver coarse or fine, 499-502
Fire is the test ; for man the proof is wine: ‘
Wine can unravel secrets, and detect
And bring to shame the proudest intellect,

Hurried and overborne with its effect.
The following lines are curious, as affording a chronological ap-
proximation. Onomacritus, to whom they are addressed, (but
whose name could not easily be brought into an’ English verse,)


THEOGNIS, , "439


was a favourite of Hipparchus, but afterwards banished by him for
a sacrilegious forgery. Being at the time the Curator of a collec- ‘
tion of oracles in the possession of the sons of Pisistratus, he had
been detected in & wilful interpolation—If we take the middle of
the fourteen years of Hipparchus’ reign as the probable date of

- these lines, they wauld have been composed by Theognis at the
age of twenty-three or twenty-four, which, considering the nature of
the subject, seems probable enough. ;


VIL


My brain grows dizzy, whirl’d and overthrown 503-8
With wine; my senses are no more my own;
The ceiling and the walls are wheeling round.
But, let me try!—perhaps my limbs are sound:
Let me retire, with my remaining sense,
For fear of idle language and offence.


The next fragment is addressed to Simonides ; invited to Athens
by Hipparchus, and attached to his service by liberal presents.
Onomacritus and he were probably joint visitors at Megara, or
Theognis might have joined their society at Athens. The lines
seem to have been written about the-same time, and during the
same paroxysmi of experimental conviviality, as the preceding.
Theognis, who in his own opinion is not more drunk than a man
ought to be, remonstrates with Simonides, who, being president of
the meeting and further advanced in‘liquor, had become overbear-
ing and absurd. Theognis, as in the former fragment, takes his
leave, being apprehensive of exceeding the precise bounds of in-
ebriéty which st had prescribed to himself. -


Never oblige your company to stay ! 467-96 .
Never detain a man; nor send away,

Nor rouse from his repose, the weary guest,
That, sinks upon the couch with wine opprest! -
These formal rules enfore’d, against the will,

Are found offensive—let the bearer fill
Just as we please—freely to drink away ;
Such merry meetings come not every day.
For me ;-—since for to-night my stint is finish’d,
Before my common sense is more diminish’d ;
I shall retire (the rule, I think, is right)
Not absolutely drunk, nor sober quite.


. 440 _ ¢) PHEOGNIS. :


__ For hé that drinks beyond the proper point
Puts his own sense‘and judgment: out of joint,
Talking outrageous, idle, empty stuff
"(The mere effect of wine more than enough);
Telling a thousand things, that on the morrow

He recollects with sober shame and sorrow:

At other timés, and in his proper nature,

An easy, quiet, amiable creature.

Now you, Simonides, mind what I say !

You chatter in your cups and prate away,

Like & poor slave, drunk on a holiday. §

You ‘never can resolve to leave your liquor,

The faster it comes round, you drink the quicker—
There’s somé excuse—“ The slave has fill’d the cup,
A challenge—or a pledge”—you drink it up! ~
*’Tis a libation”—and you're so devout,

You can’t refuse it !+-Manly. brains and stout
Might stand the trial, drinking hard and fast,
And keep their sense and judgment to the last.

_ Farewell! be merry ! may your hours be spent

Without a quarrel or an argument,

In inoffensive, easy merriment ;

Like a good concert, keeping time and measure,
Such entertainments give the truest pleasure.


We now proceed to his moral and political verses, which (as
mankind are usually more ashamed of wisdom than of folly, of
from prudential reasons more cautious in concealing it) seem to
have been suppressed for a, titie, and to have been communicated
to his most intimate friend under an injunction of secrecy.


IX.

Kurnus, these lines of mine, let them remain 19-28

Conceal’d and secret—verse of such a strain :
‘ Betrays its author—all the world would know it!

“ This is Theognis, the Megarian poet,
- So celebrated and renown’d in Greece!”

Yet some there are, forsooth, I cannot please ;

Nor ever could contrive, with all my skill,

To gain the common liking and goodwill’

Of these my fellow-citizens.—No wonder! _

Not even he, the god that wields the thunder,


Pe. ape a in


(The sovereign all-wise, almighty-Jove,)
€an please them with his government above:

* Some call for rainy weather, some for dry, }
A discontented and discordant ery, - * 2
Fills all the earth, and reaches to the sky.


Ina 4 served to us“ by Stobeus, Xenophon, after
quoting Roa ts vectine fraemey the fourth line of the trans-
lation, proceeds to connect it with the fragment which follows;
explaining it in his own manner. “ These are the verses of Theog-
nis of Megara.”’—“The subject which the poet seems to me to
‘have had in view appears to have been simply a treatise on the
good and bad qualities of mankind. He treats of man in the same
manner as ‘a writer would do of any other animal (of horses, for
instance) ; his exordium seems to mea perfectly proper-one; for he -
begins with the subject of breed ;. considering that neither men
nor any other animals are likely to prove good for anything, un-
less they are produced from a geod stock. He illustrates his
penenl by a reference to those anjmals in which breed is strictly
attended to; these lines, therefore, are not merely an invective
against the mercenary spirit of his countrymen, (as the- generality
of readers imagine,) they seem to me to be directed against the
negligence and ignorance of mankind in the management and
economy of theit own species.” Such was the judgment of Xeno- -
phon upon’ this passage; different, as it should seem, from that of
is countrymen and contemporaries.

But we must recollect that the maintenance of a physical and
personal superiority was considered as-a point of paramount im-
portance by all the aristocracies of Doric race. The Spartans, the
maost perfect type of such an aristocracy, reared no infants who
appeared likely to prove defective in form; and condemned their
king Archidamus to a fine, for having married a diminutive wife.
eal als himself, speaks of it elsewheré as a well-known fact,
that the Spartans were eminently superior in strength and comeli-
ness of person.-—As a result of this principle, we can account for
what would otherwise appear a very singular circumstance,—that
the most eminent of the Olympic champions upon record, Diago-
‘ras and Milo, were both of the most distinguished families in their
native Doric states, Rhodes and. Crotona.—Xenophon, therefore,
who considered Theognis as belonging to a Doric aristocracy, and _
who was himself a. Dorian in his habits and partialities, interprets
him more in a physical than in a moral sense, and considers mis- .
alliances as a cause rather than a consequence of the debasement

_ of the higher orders.


’


442 ; THEOGNIS. '
x.


With kine and horses, Kurnus!-we proceed 183-96
By reasonable rules, and choose a breed
For profit and increase, at any price;
-Of a sound stock, without defect or vice.
But, in the daily matches that we make,
The price is everything ; for money’s sake “
Men marry ; women are in marriage given :
Thé churl or ruffian that in wealth has thriven
May match his offspring with the proudest race:
Thus everything is-mix’d, noble and base !
If then in outward manner, form, and mind,
You find us a degraded, motley kind,
‘Wonder no more, my friend! the cause is plain,
“ And to lament the consequence is vain.


From birth we proceed to education. " Here we find Theognis
taking the same side with Pindar and Euripides in a question
which seems to have been long agitated in the heathen world,—
Whether Virtue and Vice were innate ? concluding, like them, for
the affirmative. This fragment is separated from the preceding.
Yet, according‘ to the opinions of those times, there was a con-.
niexion between them, and the ‘process of thought is continuous.
The existence of the evil had been stated, and the poet proceeds
to argue that it is not capable of being remedied by human con-
trivance.—After which, in two succeeding fragments, we shall see
him following the cause into its consequences, as exemplified in
the degradation of the higher orders, and the comparative eleva- ,
tion of their former inferiors.


XL


To rear a child is easy, but to teach 429-38
Morals and manners is beyond our reach;
To make the foolish wise, the wicked good,
That science never yet was understood.
The sons of Esculapius, if their art
Could remedy:a perverse and wicked heart,
Might earn enormous wages! But, in fact,
The mind is not compounded and compact
Of precept and example; human art
In human nature has no share or part.


e


THEOGNIS. - 448


Hatred of vice, the fear of shame and sin,
Are things of native growth, not grafted in:
Else wise and worthy parents might correct
In children’s hearts each error and defect :
Whereas we see them disappointed still,

No scheme nor artifice of human skiil -

Can rectify the passions or the will.


We now come to those fragments which must have occasioned
the injunctions of secrecy in fragm. IX., and which mark the pe-
culiarity of the author's mind.

_ He distinctly prognosticates an approaching revolution, origin-
ating in the misrule.of the party to which he himself naturall
belonged ; and of which his friend Kurnus was, if not the actual,
the anticipated chief; for we shall see him driven from his coun-
try at an early age, after having been for some time at the head of
the state-—He warns him of the rising intelligence and spirit of the
lower orders; the feebleness, selfishness, and falsehood of the higli-
er; and the discontent which their mode of government was ex-


citing. :
XII.


Our commonwealth preserves its former frame, 53-68
Our common people are no more the same:
They that in skins and hides were rudely dress’d,
Nor dreamt of law, nor sought to be redress’d
By rules of right, but in the days of old
Flock’d to the town, like ¢attle to the fold,
Are now the brave and wise; and we, the rest, 1
(Their betters nominally, once the best, )
Degenerate, debas’d, timid, and mean !
Who can endure to witness such a scene?
Their easy courtesies, the ready smile,
Prompt to deride, to flatter, and beguile!
Their utter disregard of right or wrong,
Of truth or honour !—Out of such a throng
(For any difficulties, any need,
For any bold design or manly deed)
Never imagine you can choose a just
- Or steady friend, or faithful in his trust.
- But change your habits! let them go their way!
Be condescending, affable, and gay!


444 THEOGNIS.


Adopt with every man the style and tone
Most courteous and congenial with his own ;
But in your secret counsels keep aloof
* From feeble paltry souls ; that, at the proof
Of danger or distress, are sure to fail ;
For whose salvation nothing can avail.
XI. ; :
Our state is pregnant; shortly to produce 39-52
A. rude avenger of prolong’d abuse.
The commons hitherte seem sober-minded,
But their superiors are corrupt and blinded.
The rule of noble spirits, brave and high, :
Never endanger’d peace and harmony.
The supercilious, arrogant pretence
Of feeble minds ; weakness and insolence ;
Justice and truth and law wrested aside
By crafty shifts of avarice and pride ;
These are our ruin, Kurnus!—never dream
(Tranquil and undisturb’d as it may seem)
Of future peace or safety to the state ;
Bloodshed, and strife will follow soon or late.
Never imagine that a ruin’d land,
Will trust her destiny to your command,
To be remodell’d by a single hand.


If expanded into its full dimensions, this passage would stand
thus: “ The governments by an aristocracy of caste, such as ours,
have never been overthrown while they have been directed by
men of generous character, and resolute, magnanimous spirits; the
danger does not arise till they are succeeded by a poor-spirited, self-
ish generation, exercising the same arbitrary. muthority with mean
and mercenary views.”

The following examples and warnings are adduced from tradi-
tional fable and later history. . ?


. XIV. -
My friend, I fear it! pride, which overthrew 541-2


to


The mighty Centaurs and their hardy crew,
Our pride will ruin us, your friends, and you.


THEOGNIS, 445


XV.


Pride and oppressive rule destroy’d the state ) 1099-1102
Of the Magnesians—Such was Smyrna’s fate ; ;
Smyrna the rich, and Colophon the great!

‘And ours, my friend, will follow, soon or late.


Of the history of those’ governments we know nothing; they
were known to Theognis, probably ‘by the poems of authors like
himself; one of whom (in a fragment accidentally preserved) speaks
of his “ fellow-citizens of Colophon as overbearing and ed aa
from the time of their first settlement.” But the example of the
Magnesians (whatever it may have been) seems to have presented
to Theognis the most apposite parallel to the state of Megara; ac-
cordingly, as an anxious and earnest adviser, regardless of repeti-
tion, he recurs to the conduct and fate of the Magnesian government,
with a preface, too, almost in the same words as in fragm. XIII.


XVI.
Kurnus, our state is pregnant to produce 603-4
The avenger of oppression and abuse;
The birth (believe me) will not tarry long:
For the same course of outrage and of wrong
Which ruin’d the Magnesian state of old,
That very same we witness and behold.


In this state of things, the line of conduct which the poet pre-
scribed to himself is explained in the following lines.
XVIL
I walk by rule and measure, and incline 939-42


’


To neither side, but jake an even line;
Fix’d in a single purpose and design.
With learning’s happy gifts to celebrate,
To civilize and dignify the state:
Not leaguing with the discontented crew,
Nor with the proud and arbitrary few.


By an unavoidable consequence of his neutrality, he was (as it
appears) blamed and abused on all sides, consoling himself, in the
mean time, with the consciousness of his intellectual superiority.


XVII.


That: happy man, my friend, was never seen 367-70
Nor born into the world, whom saucy, spleen


446 ; THEOGNIS.


Forbore to scandalize ! I know not, J,

What they would have ; but whether I comply

To join with others in pursuit of ill,

Or keep myself aloof;—they blame me still. .
Such is my fortune; never understood,

But censur’d by the wicked or the good.
My consolation still remains the same ;

Fools cannot imitate the man they blame.


The following fragment is almost entirely a repetition from frag-
ments 1X, and XVII. - :


e


XIX.


That happy man, my friend ! that has through life 799-802
Pass’d unobnoxious to reproach or strife... .
. .. + Never existed yet; nor ever will!
A task there is, which Jove could not fulfil,
Infinite power and wisdom both combin’d
Would not avail to satisfy mankind.


“The sensibility to public opinion appears again strongly marked
in the following fragment.’


XX.


‘The generous and the brave, in common fame, 795-8
From time to time encounter praise or blame ;

The vulgar pass unheeded; none escape

Scandal or insult in some form or shape.

‘Most fortunate are those, alive or dead,

Of whom. the least is thought, the leust is said.


The apparent contradiction which is to be found in this passage
exists also in the original. .That his understanding was under-
valued by the practical, busy persons of the time, may be inferred
from the following lines.


‘


XXL.


The worldly minded and the worldly wise, 221-6
In ignorance and arrogance despise

All talents and attainments but their own:

Wisdom is theirs, they think, and theirs alone.

But no! the lessons of deceit and wrong,

In point of fact, are neither hard nor long ;


THEOGNIS. AAT


And many know them ;—but a better will
Prohibits some from practising their skill:
Some have a taste for good, and some for ‘ill.
Of himself, in the mean time, as a practical politician, he speaks
in substance rather disqualifyingly.. . co


XXII.


Many true counsels in this breast of mine 419-20
Lie buried ; many a just and fair design:
But inefficient, indolent, and weak,
I know my nature, and forbear to speak. .

The period of comparative happiness and tranquillity was now
drawing to a close, and the poet, whose mind had hitherto been
only occasionally saddened by the prospect of approaching evils,


was doomed to witness a revolution, to be stript of his property, .


and some time after forced to abandon his native city, in company
with his friend, and to commence a long course of exile and

erty. .

The elements of a revolution, already in existence, were called
into activity by the le of Athens, where the murder of Hip-
parchus had been followed, at the end of three years, by the ex-
pulsion of Hippias, upon which, after the ancient form of Athenian
government had been again established for a short time, the
weaker faction of the nobility, joining with the people, effected an
abolition of the aristocracy of caste: the very same which was in


existence in Megara; but whose existence was threatened (as has .


been seen in the preceding fragments) by its own misrule, and by
the growing discontent of a more intelligent commonalty. A re-
volution, therefore, at Megara was unavoidable; and we shall see
that it took place accordingly.

As a preface to the fragments which belong to this turbulent
period, the following lines, referring to the assassination of Hip-
ow and the splendour of his funeral, may properly find their

lace. .
e The question of obedience or resistance to a sovereign de facto,
as it was viewed in Greece, by a man of speculative and original
mind, upwards of two thousand three hundred years ago, may be
considered as a matter of curiosity. ;


XXIL


Court not a tyrant’s favour, nor combine 821-2
To further his iniquitous desigh; *


’


448°C _ THEOGNIS. -


If covenants have pass’d between, you both,
Never assassinate him! keep your oath!
But should he still misuse his lawless power,
To trample on the-people, and devour,
Depose or overturn him; any how !

Your oath permits it, and the gods allow.


Bat, if your faith is pledg’d, though late and loth,
1181-4


The two following fragments are also found separate ; but though
relating to the same subject of a royal funeral, and appearing to be
extracts from the same poem, they have not the same mark of
continuity as the two preceding, and are therefore put separately.


XXIV.


I shall not join the funeral train, to go 1208-6
+ An idle follower-in the pomp of woe:

For why-—nq duty binds me; nor would he,,

Their arbitrary chief, have mourn’d for me.


XXV.


I envy not.these sumptuous. obsequies, 1191-4
The stately.car, the purple canopies ; ;
Much better pleas’d am I, remaining here,

‘With cheaper equipage and better cheer.

A couch of thorns, or an embrojder’d bed,

Are matters of indifference tp the dead. '


Two fragments are found (singularly enough) in immediate
juxta-position with each other, and with one of the preceding.
The first of the two appears to be descriptive of the character of
Hipparchus; and the second to have been suggested by the sudden
catastrophe which befell him. ,


XXVI.
Easy discourse with steady sense combin’d, 1185-6
Are rare endowments in a single mind.

XXVILI.
No costly sacrifice nor offerings given 1187-90


Can change the purpose of the powers of heaven ;
Whatever fate ordains, danger or hurt,
Or death predestin’d, nothing can avert,


THEOGNIS, 449


In the following fragment, the phrase 4 édg is evidently used in
the same sense as its corresponding term, “ The single person,”
which -was so frequently employed in England during the ten years
from 1650 to 1660 to signify an individual exercising the functions
of royalty. G4, ffs :


XXVIII.


The sovereign single person—what cares he 689-40
- For'love or hate, for-friend or enemy ? ‘
—His single purpose is utility.


The exact order of time and events in the short and confused
period between the commencement of the changes which took place
at Megara and the emigration or escape of Theognis and his
friend, cannot be satisfactorily deduced from the fragments which
exist. [t appears, however, that Theognis was at a very early period
deprived of the greater part of his property ; since two events are
mentioned subsequent to his ruin and anterior to his flight from
Megara. The first is the arrival of his friend Clearistus, and of his
old friend and instructor Simonides ; moreover, two seasons of the
year are mentioned,—ploughing and harvest, That the loss of his
property was in some way or other the work of the soe fac-

tion is clear, from the circumstance of his looking to the triumph
of his own friends as the means of recovering it, and avengin
himself upon those who had despoiled him of it, as he says, “ wit!
violence and outrage ;” but by what process, or under what pretence,
this spoliation was effected, it is by no means easy to conjecture.

Kurnus in ‘the mean time had held the first authority in the
‘state; for his deposition from the highest office will be found dis-
tinctly alluded to in the verses occasioned by the visit of Simoni-
des above mentioned. The same verses show that the state of
things had become, in consequence, more desperate; and it ap-
ee from another passage that, under these circumstances,

heognis himself had become the advocate of bold and violent

measures, which, up to that time, he had deprecated.
_ Finally, the flight of the two friends from Megara was deter-
mnined by the approach of an‘auxiliary force, despatched (probably
from Corinth) as a reinforcement to their opponents. These events
must have succeeded to each other within a short period of time;
pe shes the Athenians invaded Euboea, Theognis was already an
exile. ‘ ee

Having now brought bs ag the few fragments which illustrate
the political condition of the community to which he belonged,

‘ and the situation and sentiments of the poet himself, during the
Period anterior to the commencement of civil commotion,—it may
26


s


450 THEOGNIS.:

be convenient to place under a single point of view other passages
referrible to the same time, and illustrative of the character of the
friend to whom these and other poems were addressed; and to
whose person and fortunes (in spite of some occasional intervals
of aversion and offence) he appears to have been most sincerely
_ attached.


XXIX.


If popular distrust and hate prevail, 219-20
If saucy mutineers insult and rail,

Fret not your eager spirit,—take a line

Jtst, sober, and discreet, the same as mine. ‘


‘


The natural and spdegnised arrogance of Kurnus is noted in the
plowing Hae, in which the sense of the original has been adhered


to, though the expression has been unavoidably amplified.
. XXX. .
My friend, the feeling you can not correct 1079-82


Will work at last a ruinous effect,

To disappoint your, hopes. You cannot learn
To bear unpleasant things with unconcern ;
Nor work without repugnance or disgust

In tasks that ought to be perform’d, and must.


In the choice of his associates and adherents, the conduct of
Kurnus seems to have been in contradiction with the advice of his
friend. We have seen in fragm. XII. that he warns him against
placing any reliance on a particular, class of persons, whom he
there describes. Admonitions to the same effect are repeated in
other instances.

The kind of qualities which Theognis required in a friend may
serve to give a notion of the violent character of the times, and of
the critical condition of the party to which be belonged.


XXXII.


I care not for a friend that at my board 973-6
Talks pleasantly ; thé friend that will afford

Faithful assistance with his purse and sword

In need or danger; let that friend be mine!

Fit for a bold and resolute design,

Not for a conversation over wine.


THEOGNIS. : 451 .


*


The, two following fragments are nearly to the same effect
XXXII.


Let no persuasive art tempt you to place 100-12
. Your confidence in crafty minds and base ;—
How can it answer? Will their help avail
When danger. presses, and your foes assail ?
The blessing which the gods in bounty send, = — +
Will they consent to share it with a friend? .
No!—To bestrew the waves with scatter’d grain,
To cultivate the surface of the main, ,
Is not a task more absolutely vain
Than cultivating such allies as these,—
Fickle and unproductive as the seas.
Such are all baser minds, never at rest,
With new demands importunately press’d,
A. new pretension or a new request ;
Till, foil’d with a refusal of the last,
They disavow their obligations past.
But brave and gallant hearts are cheaply gain’d,
Faithful adherents, easily retain’d ;
Men that will never disavow the debt
Of gratitude, or cancel or forget.


.


XXXII.
The civil person (he that, to your face 93-100
Professing friendship, in another place :
Talks in an alter’d tone) is not the man
For a determin’d hearty partisan.
Give me the comrade eager to defend,
‘And, in his absence, vindicate a friends
Whose strong attachment will abide the brunt
Of bitter altercation, and confront
Calumnious outrage with a fieree reproof:
Like brethren bred beneath a father’s roof,
Friends such as these may serve for your behoof
—None others—Mark my words! and let them be
Fix’d as a token in your memory,
For ee to make you think of me,

2 «2 ,


‘452 " ‘THEOGNIS.


That nothing may be omitted,a fourth fragment on the same
subject is subjoined. :


XXXIV.


Never engage with a poltroon or craven, ‘ 118-28
Avoid him, Kurnus, as a treacherous haven.
Those friends and hearty comrades, as you think,
(Ready to join you when you feast and: drink,)
Those easy friends, from difficulty shrink.
For a shrewd intellect, the best employ
Is to detect a soul of base alloy ;
No task is harder, nor imports so much:
Silver or gold, you prove it by the touch ;
You separate the pure, discard the dross,
And disregard the labour and the loss ;
But a friend’s heart,—base. and adulterate,
A friendly surface with a core of hate,—
Of ali the frauds with which the Fates have curst
‘ Our simple easy nature, is the worst:
Beyond the rest, ruinous in effect,—
And of all others hardest to detect.
For men’s and women’s hearts you cannot tr
Beforehand, like the cattle that you buy. :
Nor human wit nor reason, when you Seat)
For such a purchase, can escape deceit ;
Fancy betrays us, and assists the cheat. )


If these fragments were considered separately, we might imagine
that Theognis was exciting his friend to some violent measure:
this was not the case; he is only warning him (as we have already
seen in the last lines of fragm. XII.) against placing a false confi-
dence in inefficient associates, and encumbering himself with the
. sort of burdensome and unprofitable dependency described in fragm.

XXXII. The Athenian Alcibiades had been considered the hope

and future support ofthe nobility to which he naturally belonged ;

till an impatience of the superiority of older men, whose talents
and services had placed them at the heed of that party, led him to

_ connect himself with the popular faction —Kurnus, either not
meeting with the same obstacles to ascendency in his own party,
or from whatever other reason, seems to have adhered to the cause
of the aristocracy of Megara with perfect tenacity; upholding,
and partaking in, their worst abuses ;—as may be inferred from the
remonstrances of his friend. _


4


THROGNIS. 458
KERV,
Waste not your efforts, struggle not, my friend, 461-2(?)
Idle and old abuses to defend ;


Take heed! the very measures that you press
May bring repentance with their own success.


_ We have seen in fragm. XIII. that iniquitous and partial de-
cisions formed one of the main grievances which endangered the
ublic tranquillity; and the following fragment expresses, though
less ‘distinctly than in the original, that Kurnus himself was a
principal in iniquities of this kind. ; :
Kurnus, proceed like me! Walk not awry! * 831-2
Nor trample on the bounds of property !


gods,) probably poate in the nature of sacrilege or perjury, is
obscurely, as if unwillingly, intimated, and attributed to the bad
associates with whom he was engaged.


XXXVIL.


“Bad company breeds mischief ;” Kurnus, you 1171-2
Can prove that ancient proverb to be true

In your own instance: you yourself‘were driven,

To an unrighteous act; offending Heaven |


The commission of some other offence, on offence against the


Of the prudential and practical defects in Kurnus’s character
we have seen an instance in fragm. XXX.; the following is pro-
bably of a much earlier date; it seems to be the sort of advice
suited to a young man just cre. ie world, but marks a degree
of rashness and irritability in the character to which such admont- *
tions were addressed. : _

XXXVIIL


At entertainments show yourself discreet : 309-12
Remember, that amongst the guests you meet .
The absent have their friends; and may be told
Of rash or-idle language which you hold.
Learn to endure a jest—you may display.
Your courage elsewhere, in a better way. —


' 454 |, THEOGNIS.


The last line of the original is left untranslated ; it has no con-
nexion With the preceding, and seems to mark another chasm,
which it would not be easy to supply. The above have the ap-
pearance of being part of a series of maxims; but a propensity to
anger and intemperate language seems to be indicated in another
fragment, apparently of later date that the former, though they
are both-probably earlier than any of the admonitory ones.


; XXXIX.
Rash angry words, and spoken out of season, 1221-2
When passion has usurp’d the throne of reason,
. Have ruin’d many.—Passion is unjust,
And, for an idle transitory gust
Of gratified revenge, dooms'us to pay
With long repentance at a later day.


A sort of Coriolanus-like insolence and contempt of the com-
monalty is marked in the following.


The gods send Insolence to lead astray © 151-58
The man whom Fortune and the Fates betray ;
Predestin’d to precipitate decay:
Wealth nurses Insolence, and wealth, we find,
When coupled with a poor and paltry mind,
Is evermore with insolence combin’d.

Never in anger with the meaner sort
Be mov’d to'a contemptuous harsh retort,
Deriding their distresses ; nor despise
In hasty speech their wants and miseries.

Jove holds the balance, and the gods dispense
For all mankind riches and indigence.


Among the defects of Kurnus’s character, one, not'‘uncommonly
incident to men of genius, but peculiarly unfortunate in a public
man, seems to havé been a morbid fastidiousness, producing a
sort of premature misanthropy ; such, at least, is the inference de- .
ducible from the following lines, Observe, too, that the last lines
of fragm. X. refer to Kurnus’s contemptuous estimate of his con-


temporaries. :
, XLI. :


Learn, Kurnus, learn to bear an easy mind;) = 893-8
Accommodate your humour to mankind ~ bck
And human nature ;--take it as you find!


waecents, 8 + 45S


A mixture of ingredients, good or bad,
Such are we all, the best that can be had:
The best are found defective; and the rest,
For common use, are equal to the best.
Suppose it had been otherwise decreed—
How could the business of the world proceed ?
Fairly examin’d, truly understood, ’
No man is wholly bad nor wholly good,
Nor uniformly wise. In every case,
Habit and accident, and time and place, } |”
Affect us. ’Tis the nature of the race.


Theognis’s admonitions and suggestions, in counteraction of this .
defect, are not very magnanimous ; they resemble the concluding
lines of fragm. XII.

XLIz.
Join with the world; adopt with every man - 218-18
His party views, his temper, and his plan ; .
Strive to avoid offence, study to please,
Like the sagacious inmate of the seas;
That an accommodating colour brings, -
Conforming to the rock to which he clings ;
With every change of place changing his hue;
The model for a statesman such as you.


. The quarrels between Kurnus and his friend must be necessarily

classed together ; though probably they range from the time of their
first entrance into the world to the date of their expatriation. That
these quarrels took place in more instances than one seems evident
from the different position in which Theognis is placed. In one
he intimates that he has been deceived, and his confidence abused ;
in another he deprecates unrelenting resentment for a slight
offence; in another he speaks as a person unjustly calumniated ;
another I should be inclined to assign to the time when Kurnus
was at the head of affairs, and when Theognis’s fortunes were
ruined ; the others were probably anterior.


XLITL


Let not a base calumnious pretence, 323-8
Exaggerating a minute offence, ' ‘ Pred
Move.you to wrong a friend; if, every time,

Faults in a friend -were treated as a crime,


456 , THEOGNIS.


Here upon earth no friendship could have plac
But we, the creatures of a faulty race .
Amongst ourselves, offend and are forgiven:
Vengeance is the prerogative of Heaven.


The following must have arisen out of some other ground of


difference; though indirectly expressed, it is evidently intended to
bear a personal application. .


XLIV. °

A rival or antagonist is hard * 1219-20
To be deceiv’d; they stand upon their guard:

But an old friend, Kurnus, is unprepar’d.


“In the following, a feeling of eoldness and distrust is marked on


’ the part of the poet; he is rejecting some proposal made to him by


.


his friend, as tending to engage and compromise him.


. XLV.
That smith, dear Kurnys, shows but little wit, 539-40
Who forges fetters his own feet to fit:
Excuse me, Kurnus! I can not comply
Thus to be yok’d in harness—never try
To bind me strictly, with too close a tie.


With respect to the next fragment there can be no doubt; it is


sufficiently decided, and angry enough. ;


: XLVI.

No more with empty phrase and speeches fine 87-92
Seek to delude me, let your heart be mine: —
Your friendship or your enmity declare

In a decided form, open and fair:

An enemy disguis’d, a friend in show,

—I like him better, Kurnus, as a foe.


The next expresses a consciousness of innocence, and a defi-


ance of unjust calumny. It is observable, that we find here the
same singular association of ideas (water and gold) as in the first
lines of Pindar. :


XLVII.


Yes! Drench me with invective! not a stain 446-52:
From all that angry deluge will remain !


\


THEOGNIS. 457


Fair harmless water, dripping from my skin,
Will mark no foulness or defect within.

As the pure standard gold of ruddy hue,
Prov’d by the touchstone, unalloy’d and irue ;
Unstain’d by rust, untarnish’d to the sight ;
Such will you find me ;+-solid, pure, and bright.


. This image of the trial of gold seems from some reason or other
to have been peculiarly familiar to the poet’s mind. It oecurs in
fragm, VI. and XXXIV., and will be found again in verses com-
posed duting his exile, fragm. LX XVIII. See the extraordinary
work of Mr. Whiter on the association of ideas, considered as an”
instrument of criticism, and his application of it to’ the peculiar
turns of transition observable in Shakspeare. :

. The two next relate apparently to minor differences; in the first,
the poet is out of humour at being in his turn advised and ad-
monished. . . ;


XLVIII.


Change for the worse is sooner understood, 577-8
And sooner practis’d, than from bad to good.
Do not advise and school me! good, my friend!

_ I’m past the time to learn—I cannot mend.


The next treats ef that useless and interminable question,
* Whose fault it was?” ,


a XIX.
You blame me for an error not my own, 407-8
Dear friend! the. fault was yours, and yours alone.


The two following look more like a decided rupture than any
of the foregoing; they seem both to belong to the same time, and
the tone is similar. poe?

L \


My mind is in a strange distracted state ; 1087-98 ©
Love you I cannot !—arid I cannot hate! ,
*Tis hard to change habitual goodwill, .

Hard to renounce our better theughts for ill, »

To love without return is harder still,

But mark my resolution and protest !

Those services, for which you once profess’d


458 : , THEOGNIS,


A sense of obligation due to me,

On my part were gratuitous and free;

No task had I, no duty to fulfil;

No motive, but a kind and friendly will.—
Now, like a liberated bird, I fly,

That, having snapt the noose, ranges on high, .

Proud of his fight, and viewing in disdain —

The broken fetter and the baffled swain,

And his old haunt, the lowly marshy plain !
For you! the secret interested end

Of him, your new pretended party friend,

Whose instigation mov’d you to forego

Your friendship, time will shortly show ;

Time will unravel all the close design,

And mark his merits, as compar’d with mine.


The second of these fragments has been injudiciously subdivided
by Mr, Brunck; but, whether perfect or not, it is evidently one
-and indivisible, the argument throughout being continuous.

The argument of the second fragment, if coarsely stated, would
stand thus, “{ have conferred upon you a celebrity similar to that
which would have resulted to you fom a victory at the Olympic.
Games. Moreover, the celebrity which I have thus gratuitously
conferred upon you, is much more lasting, more brilliant, and more
extensive; but instead of any suitable return for such a service,
you are so destitute of those first blessings, common sense and
common justice, that you treat me with neglect ; and when, like
' everybody else, I have an object which I am anxious to obtain,
you disregard my application to you. I am like one of those horses
at the Olympic Games, which has acquired a celebrity for his
master ;' but, being ill treated, longs to escape.”


LI.


‘Y6u soar aloft, and over land and wave 234-54
Are borne triumphant on the wings I gave

(The. swift and mighty wings, Music and Verse).

Your name in easy numbers smooth and terse

Is wafted o’er the world; and heard among

The banquetings and feasts, chaunted and sung,

Heard and admir’d: the modulated air

Of flutes and voices of the young and fair

‘Recite it, and to future times shall tell; |

When, clos’d within the dark sepulchral cell, °


THEOGNIS. 459


Your form shall moulder, and your empty ghost
Wander along the dreary Stygian coast.
’ Yet shall your memory flourish fresh and young,

Recorded and reviv’d on every tongue,
In continents and islands, every place
That owns the language of the Grecian race.

No purchas’d prowess of a racing steed,
But the triumphant muse, with airy speed,
Shall bear it wide and far, o’er land and main,
A glorious and unperishable strain ; ,
A mighty prize, gratuitously won,

. Fix’d as the earth, immortal as the sun.

But for all this no kindness in return !
No token of attention or concern ! 7
Baffled and scorn’d, you treat me like a child,
From day to day, with empty words beguil’d.
Remember ! common justice, common sense, _ 255-8
Are the best blessings which the gods dispense:
And each man has his object; all aspire.
To something which they covet and desire.
. Like a fair courser, conqueror in the race, 257-60
Bound to a charioteer sordid and base,
I feel it with disdain ; and many a day
Have long’d to break the curb and burst away.


We now come to the period of the poet’s misfortunes, which may
have been connected with a sea-voyage; but which, we are told by
him, were to be ascribed to the mali¢e of his enemies, exerted per-
haps, as the following fragments may imply, by undue partiality
in the law courts, and the crying grievance of judicial iniquity.

If from any other source we could obtain a knowledge of Théog--
nis’s life and history, we might be able to account for some singu-
larities: one of which (his familiarity with the language of the
Assay Office) has been already pointed out, in the note to frag-
ment XLVII.; but there is another, not a little remarkable, namely,
his strong objections and remonstrance against the rule of Provi-
dence, by which the sins of the father were visited upon his de-
scendants !——Can we suppose that he is remonstrating with respect
to his own case? that, as we have seen in fragm, XII, that judicial
iniquity was the most crying grievance of the state, so (as was the
case in Rome, after the death of Sylla) it might have been among
the first: remedied, and in a similar manner, namely, by transfer-
Ting the judicature to another order of citizens: a measure which


x


460 : THEOGNHIS.


might give rise to a course of a partiality in an opposite direc-
tion. - Such.a supposition would afford the best explanation of the
state of alarm and confusion, short of actual violence, which filled
the period antecedent to the poet’s emigration. Can we suppose,
that while things were in this state, an old family Jaw-suit (arising
out of commercial matters, and unjustly decided in favour of his
father or ancestor) had been revived under this new tribunal; and
that the sentence so ruinous to his fortune was at the same time so


arbitrary and excessive, as to excite the resentment and eagerness


for revenge, which he expresses elsewhere ?

The following. lines (fragment LII.) might seem to relate to
some confidential deposit; which perhaps, in expectation of an un-_,
favourable judicial decision, he would have set apart as a. contin-
gent resource ; but which was either treacherously detained or sur-
rendered to his adversary. .

Since writing the above, the following lines, which had not been
noticed before, have appeared to bear a meaning referrible to the
suppositions above stated.


Where on the father’s and the mother’s side 181-2
Justice is found, no treasure you can hide,
Is a resource more certain to abide.


They certainly have the appearance of a gree maxim, assumed
for the sake of a particular application, and are such as might well
have been written by a person who conceived himself suffering
under a retribution for the injustice of his predecessors ; and whose
mind was occupied at the same time with the notion of providing
some concealed resource, as a security against misfortune. The


- association of ideas isso singular, that some such supposition seems


necessary to account for it.
The result of his precaution appears as follows.


LIZ. |


Bad faith hath ruin’d me; distrust alone * 829-34
Has sav’d a remnant; all the rest is gone

To ruin and the dogs !—The powers divine,

I murmur not against them, nor repine :

—Mere human violence, rapine, and stealth, ©

Have brought me down to poverty, from wealth.


The following is a soliloquy, in which he is endeayouring to
bring his mind into a more composed state. |
. 6


THEOGNIS. 461


‘LIM. 1023-30
Learn patience, O my-soul! though rack’d and torn
With deep distress—bear it !—it must be borne ! /
Your unavailing hopes and vain regret,
Forget them, or endeavour to forget:
Those womanish repinings, unrepress’d,
(Which gratify your foes,) serve to molest
Your sympathizing friends—learn to endure !
And bear calamities you cannot cure!
Nor hope. to change the laws of destiny ;


By mortal efforts !—Vainly would you fly
‘Lo the remotest margin of the sky,

‘Where ocean meets the firmament ; in vain
Would you descend beneath, and dive amain
Down to the dreary subterraneous reign.


The following lines, in a more composed and manly strain, seem


to belong to the same period.


LIV.


Entire and perfect happiness is never 1157-64
Vouchsaf’d to man; but nobler minds endeavour
To keep their inward sorrows unreveal’d.

With meaner-spirits nothing is conceal’d :

Weak, and unable to conform to fortune,

With rude rejoicing or complaint importune,

. They vent their exultation or distress.

Whate’er betides us, grief or happiness,

The brave and wise will bear with steady mind,
Th’ allotment unforeseen and uhdefin’d

Of good or evil, which the gods bestow,
Promiscuously dealt to man below.


What has been said a little while ago, of Theognis’s remon-
strances against the rules of Providence, requires to be illustrated ; ,
and the illustration may not improperly be placed here, as it is by
no means improbable that the verses might. have been composed
about this time. es


LV. ’
O mighty Jove! I wish the powers of heaven | 729-50 .
Would change their method ! thas a rule were given .


462 THEOGNIS.


Henceforward, for the wicked and profane,
To check their high presuniption, and restrain
Their insolences and their cruelties ;

Who mock your ordinances, and despise
Justice and right :—henceforth should every man,
In his own instance, justify the plan

Of Providence ; and suffer for his crime
During his life; or at the very time,
With punishment inflicted on the spot:
For now, so long retarded or forgot,

The retribution ultimately falls

Wide of the mark—the vilest criminals
Escape uninjur’d; and the sad decree
Affects their innocent posterity,

(As oftentimes it happens,) worthy men
Blameless and inoffensive—here again
The case is hard ! where a good citizen,
A person of an honourable mind,
Religiously devout, faithful and kind,

Is doom’d to pay the lamentable score

Of guilt accumulated long before—

Some wicked ancestor’s unholy deed.

—I wish that it were otherwise decreed !
For now we witness wealth and power enjoy’d
By wicked doers; and the good destroy’d
Quite undeservedly ; doom’d to atone,

In other times, for actions not their own.


The same notion of a posthumous hereditary retribution .over-
taking the descendants of wicked men, appears in another frag-
ment, but without that tone of querulous expostulation whic
marks the preceding and other fragments.

‘LVE.
Lawful and honest'gain, the gift of Heaven, 197-208
Is lasting ; and abides where it is given. |
But where a man, by perjury or by wrong,
-Rises in riches ; though secure and strong
In common estimation, (though he deem 1
Himself a happy man, and so may seem,)
Yet the just sentence on his. wicked gains
Already stands recorded, and remains


THEOGNIS. 463


For execution.— Hence we judge amiss ;

And the trie cause of our mistake is this :
The punishment ordain’d by Heaven’s decree

Attaches to the sin, but (as we see |

In many cases) leaves the sinner free.—

—Death follows, and is faster in his rate,

While vengeance travels slowly ; speedy fate

Arrests the offender at. a shorter date.


The same tone of querulousness which was before noticed, and
the same singular style of respectful but confident and familiar
expostulation with the Deity, which the readerwill have observed
in a preceding fragment, is marked in another, which is placed
here; though, in the order of time, it should seem to be contempo-
rary with fragm. UX XVIII. and LXXIX. '


LVI. .' ;
‘Blessed, almighty Jove! with deep amaze, . 373-98
I view the world ;—and marvel at thy ways !.
All our devices, every subtle plan, -
Each secret act, and all the thoughts of man,
_ Your boundless intellect can comprehend !
—On your award our destinies depend.
How can you reconcile it to your sense
Of right and wrong, thus loosely to dispense
Your bounties on the wicked and the good ?
How can your laws be known or understood ?
When we behold a man faithful and just,
Humbly devout, true to his word and trust, ;
Dejectéd and oppress’d ;—whilst the profane,
And wicked, and unjust, in glory reign; __
Proudly triumphant, flush’d with power and gain ;
What inference can human reason draw ?
How can we guess the secret of thy law, .
Or choose the path approv’d by power divine? ‘"
~——We take, alas, perforce, the crooked line,
And act unwillingly the baser part, . ,
Though loving truth and justice at our heart;
For very need, reluctantly compell’d
To falsify the principles we held ;
With party factions basely to comply ;
To flatter, and dissemble, and to lie,!


t


464 THEOGNIB,


Yet he—the truly bravé—tried by the test
Of sharp misfortune, is approv’d the best:
While the soul-searching power of indigence
Confounds the weak, and banishes pretence.

Fixt in an honourable purpose still,
The brave preserve the same unconquer’d will,
Indifferent to fortune, good or ill.


LVIII.

. Kurnus, believe it! fortune good or ill ) 133-42
No mortal effort, intellect, or skill % :
Determine it, bit Heaven’s superior will: iy :
We struggle onward, ignorant and blind,

For a result unknown and undesign’d,
Avoiding seeming ills, misunderstood,
Embracing evil as a seeming good ;

In our own plans, unable to detect

Their final unavoidable effect.

Tormented with unsatisfied desire,

The fortunate to further aims aspire,

Beyond the bounds of mortal happiness ;
Restless and wretched in their own success !
We strive like children, and th’ almighty plan
Controls the froward, weak’ children of man !


We may now return from his metaphysical and moral specula-
tions, to a view of the poet’s personal situation; described in a few
lines of welcome to a friend, connected with him by those relations
of hospitality, which were most carefully maintained by the first
families of Greece, as a resource against utter destitution in reverses
of fortune.—Clearistus, being ruined or distressed at home, comes
by sea to Megara; probably on a trading voyage; but reckoning
at the same time on the hospitality of the poet as his hereditary
ally:

LIX.


In a frail bark across the seas you come, 511-22
Poor Clearistus, to my poorer home ! :
Yet shall your needy vessel be supplied -

With what the gods in clemency provide :

And if a friend be with you, bring him here,

With a fair welcome to my simple cheer.


, THEOGNIS, 465
I am not yet a niggard, nor by stealth
Dissemble the poor remnant of my wealth:

- Still shall you find a hospitable board, .
And share in common what my means afford.
Then, should inquirers ask my present state,
You may reply,—my ruin has been great: .
Yet, with my means reduc’d, a ruin’d man,

’ I live contented on an humbler plan ;

Unable now to welcome every guest; )
But greeting gladly and freely, though distress’d,


Hereditary friends, of all the best. -
-, A natural incident brings back to his mind the recollection of
his misfortunes; this fragment concludes with the obscure
before-mentioned, relative to a sea-voyage.


“LX.


‘ The yearly summons of the creaking crane, 1197-1202
That warns the ploughman to his task again, ws
Strikes to my heart.a melancholy strain. ;

When all is lost, and my paternal lands

Are till’d for other lords, with other hands:
Since that disastrous wretched voyage brought
Riches end lands and everything to nought.


The following is an incident relative to another season of the: .
ear. Theognis’s passion for singing to the music of the pipe has-
teen already noticed (on. II.); the scene of this fragment is in
the market-place of Megara, and the lines represent the poet’s
sudden exclamation, at a sight which puts an end to the amuse-
ment in which he was indulging. e text is apparently muti,
lated, and (to the translator ati least) hardly intelligible; he has
endeavoured, however, to restore the original picture from the traces
which are still distinguishable.. hoy
: LXI. -
How could I bearit ? In the public place 823-8
To chaunt and revel! when before my face,
Seen in the distance, I discern the train
Of harvest-triumph ;. and the loaded wain
And happy labourers with garlands crown’d,
. Returning from the hereditary ground,
2a


4


466 i ' THEOGNIS.


No more my own! My faithful Scythian slave !
Break off this strain of idle mirth ; and shave
Your flowing locks ; and breathe another tone
Of sorrow for my fair possessions gone !


Independent of the unbecoming contrast between the levity of
his amusements and the ‘serious nature of his misfortunes, the re-
flection covild not but occur to the mind of the poet, that he was
now arrived at a time of life when.the privileges and pretensions
of early youth could no longer be pleaded in justification of similar
frolics.
sad : L&I.

Elate with wine, my losses I despise, 1125-8
And rude attacks of railing enemies. f
But youth departing, and remember’d years
“Of early mirth and joy, move me to tears; “
While, in the dreary future, I behold
The dark approach of age, cheerless and cold.


These lines may be reckoned as among the very last which were
written at Megara, before his expatriation. His feelings upon
Simonides’ arrival might be supposed to have been aggravated by
the coniparative change which had taken place in their circum-—
stances; for at that time, to which we are now arrived, Theognis

_ was ruined, and Simonides (whose attachment to the n@ain chance
was proverbial) was probably by this time'a rich man; for he ap-,
‘pears td be giving an entertainment to which Theognis wa’ invited.

It is not unlikely that this visit of Simonides (to Athens pro-
bably in the first place, but, as in former instances, extended to
Megara) may be the same which is mentioned as having left a
singular mark ef meanness upon his character, when, revisiting
Athens, after the expulsion of Hippias, he engaged to compose a

sais Ata poem in honour of the assassins of his old friend and
‘benefactor Hipparchus. Arriving at Megara, the same man would.
undoubtedly pay his court to the faction then in power in that
city; but he could not omit sending an invitation to Theognis.
And what sort of invitation would such a man, under such circum-
stances, have contrived to send? something, it may be supposed, to .
this effect—“ The company and conversation to be wholly literary,”
&c. &e., persons of distinguished talents, all anxious for an oppor-
tunity,” §e. &e., “a person sv eminent for his genius and acquire-
ments.” Now the lines of Theognis aré (as we shall see) an
answer, distinctly replymg to.and declining an invitation of this
description. “The sense of his own misfortunes and. the dis-


*


THEOGNIS. . 467


tracted state of public affairs had rendered him unfit for company,
and incapable of joining in any literary conversation.”

P tied answer to Simonides’ “very obliging invitation” is as
‘ollows. : 4


LXIIL


. Simonides ! If with my Jearning’s store 667-82 -
I still retain’d my riches as before,
I should not shrink from joining as a guest
In converse with the wisest and the best.
But now, with idle shame opprest and weak,
I sit dejected, and forbear to speak :
Feeble, forgetful, melancholy, slow,
My former pride of learning I forego,
My former knowledge I no longer know.
Such is our state! in a tempestuous sea,
With all the crew raging in mutiny !
No duty follow’d, none to reef a sail,
To work the vessel, or to pump or bale;
All is abandon’d, and without a check
The mighty sea comes sweeping o’er the deck.
Our steersman, hitherto so bold and steady,
. Active and able, is deposed already.
No discipline, no sense of order felt ;
The daily messes are unduly dealt.
The goods are plunder’d, those that ought to keep
Strict watch are idly skulking or asleep ;
All that is left of order or command,
Committed wholly to the basest hand.
In such-a case, my friend! I needs must think,
It were no marvel though the vessel sink.
- This riddle to my worthy friends I tell,
But a shrewd knave will understand it well. -


This long simile of a ship is not original in Theognis; it was to
be found in an ode of Alceus, an older poet, from whom Horace
has copied it.

The last fragment has already anticipated the greater part of
what can be learned from the few remaining fragments relative to
the revolution ;—the deposition of Kurnus ;—the low character of his
successor ;—and the general confusion and disorder of the com-
munity. er

8


. N


468 THEOGNIS.


. No lines can be found of which it can be decidedly said, that
they relate to Kurnus’s appointment to the highest authority of
the state. The following may have related to some earlier and
inferior object of ambition. : :

LXIVv.
Schemes unadvisable and out of reason 401-6
Are best adjourn’d—wait for a proper season ! ,
Time and a fair conjuncture govern all.
Hasty ambition hurries to a fall;
A. fall predestin’d and ordain’d by heaven:
‘By a judicial blindness madly driven,
Mistaking and confounding good and evil,
Men lose their senses, as they leave their level.


If the conjecture was right, which assigned the two fragments
L. and LI, to the period of Kurnus’s elevation, they would account
sutficiently for the non-appearance of any admonitory or political
lines directly referring to it. If again, (as is probable,) a recon-
ciliation took place after his deposition, the next lines may have
been intended to obviate the influence.of rash or treacherous ad-
visers upon a proud spirit recently mortified by the loss of power.


; LXV.


Stir not a step! risk nothing! but believe. 283-92
That vows and oaths are snares, meant to deceive!
Jove is no warrant for a promise given,
Not Jove himself, nor all the gods in heaven.
Nothing is safe; no character secure,
No conduct, the most innocent and pure:
All are corrupt, the commons and the great,

’ Alike incapable to save the state.
The ruin of the noblest and the best _ :
Serves for an idle ballad or a jest.
Shame is abolish’d, and, in high command,

* Rage, Impudence, and Rapine rule the land.


’


It should seem that Kurnus was now disposed to follow the
advice which his friend had before given him, respecting the
choice of followers and adherents ; see fragm. XX XII., XXXIIL.,
XXXIV. Theognis thinks such a party could not be formed of
assured fidelity, and in sufficient force for the purposes which were
in contemplation. ee z


THEOGNIS. , . 469
; LXVI.
A trusty partisan, faithful and bold, - 77-86


Is worth his weight in silver or in gold,

For times of trouble.—But ‘the race is rare ;,
Steady determin’d men, ready to share

Good or ill fortune !—Such, if such there are,
Could you survey the world, and search it round,
‘And bring together all that could be found; '
The largest company you could enroll,

A single vessel could embark the whole!

—Spo few there are! the noble manly minds
Faithful and firm, the men that honour binds;
Impregnable to danger and to pain

And low seduction in the shape of gain.


* The next fragment serves to mark more distinetly that Kurnus
was no longer in office; it is an ironical exhortation to. his successor,
the chief of the opposite party; who, it shld seem, was ruling
away with a vengeance!


LXVIL


Lash your obedient rabble! lash and load. 845-48
The burden on their backs! Spurn them and goad!
They'll bear it all; by patience and by birth,

The most submissive, humble slaves on earth! '


Another fragment seems to have been addressed to some person
possessed at one time of influence, which he had misemployed ; and
whom the Progress of the revolution had reduced to insignificance.


‘LXV.


Friend ! if your sense and judgment had been wholly 453-6
Of nearly equal to your pride and folly, -
You might have seen yourself approv’d and priz‘d,

. As much precisely as you’re now despis’d.


But the time was come when it was no longer safe to speak so

openly, y—-the time, probably, of the visit of Simonides, See the con-

: iid note subjoined to the verses addressed to him, fragm.
IL. ’ :


»


470 THEOGNIS.


\ LXIX.


Scarce can I venture plainly to declare 013-18
Our present state, or what the dangers are.—-

—Let the worst happen! I shall bear, I trust,

Whatever fate determines—bear we must!

Inextricable difficulties rise,

And death and danger are before our eyes.


We now find Theognis no longer averse to the desperate mea-
sures suited to a desperate situation—but still, as before, distrustful.
of the firmness and fidelity of the majority of the persons upon
whom his friend relied.

: , LXX.


From many a friend you must withhold your plans, 73-6
No man is safe with many partisans,

No secret !— With a party, sure but small,

Of bold adherents, trusty men withal,

You may succeed: else ruin must ensue,

Inevitable, for your friends and you.


'


This advice seems to have been followed: for we now come to a
passage of singular interest—-the speech of Theognis at a secret
meeting of Kurnus’s party friends. The exordium and the con-
clusion of this speech are found in- separate fragments; but
the character of each is clearly marked. The exordium addresses
Kurnus in the presence of his assembled partisans, on the necessity
of efficacious remedies for the maladies of ‘the state. It is evi-
dently the prelude to a speech addressed to a council of con-
spirators ; and the conclusion is marked by a conspirator's oath, (a
very curious and remarkable one,) by which he binds himself to
the assistance of his comrades, and to the execution of utter
vengeance upon his enemies. Some-other fragments which are
found separate, and which are not likely to have been composed
at any ofhier time by a man who had hitherto been averse to all

‘violent and hazardous measures, are arranged in the only order
which can be assigned to them.


LXXI.
Kurnus! since here we meet friends and allies, 1129-80
We must consult in common to devise


A speedy remedy with brief debate,
To meet the new disorders of the state.


THEOGNIS. , _ 473


More practice is requir’d, and deeper skill,
To cure a patient than to make him ill,


The wise, in easy times, will gladly rest; -
When things are at the worst, a change is best. ;

_ * * * * * *
Kurnus! in power and honour, ‘heretofore, . + 855-8


Your former fortunes you discreetly bore. ©
Fortune has alter’d! bear it calmly still!
Endeavouring, with a firm and steady will,
With other changes, our affairs to mend,
With a bold effort, and with heaven to friend. :
* * * .*: * * 7

- If Kurnus (our support) has been displac’d, - 282-6
Our main defence dismantled and defac’d ; ,
Must we, like cowards, of all hope forsaken,

Lament and howl as if the town were taken? :

' Though now reduc’d, no more a numerous host, 635-40
Courage and sense and honour are our boast. '
Danger and hope are over-ruling powers
Of equal influence; and both are ours.

Where counsel and deliberation fail,
Action and strenuous effort may prevail.

/ * * * % ” *
My spirit they shall never bend nor check, 1017-20
Though mountain-heaps were loaded on my neck :
Let feeble, coward souls crouch with atfright,
The brave are ever firm; firm and upright.

* * ~ * | * % *

_ Then let the brazen fiery vault of heaven ‘867-70
Crush me with instant ruin, rent and riven,

(The fear and horror of a former age, )
If from the friends and comrades that erigage ,

In common enterprise I shrink, or spare

Myself or any soul! If I forbear

Full vengeance and requital on my foes!

All our. antagonists! all that oppose!


Whether this conspiracy sueceeded to the extent of obtaining a
temporary superiority within the town, or whether it was baffled
by their opponents, or abandoned in. despair by the party who
projected it, we have no means of forming any conjecture: in any


472 . THEOGNIS.


one of these cases, the incident which appears next in order might
” equally have taken place. :
The march of an armed force from some neighbouring state
(ee politics were opposed to those of the party of Kurnus and
heognis) is indicated by a fire signal, and determines them to
‘abandon their country and escape without delay. '


LXXII.


A speechless messenger, the beacon’s light, 549-56
_ Announcesdanger from the mountain’s height!

Bridle your horses, and prepare to fly ;

The final érisis of our fate is nigh. .

A momentary pause, a narrow space,

Detains them; but the foes approach apace !

—We must abide what fortune has decreed,

And hope that heaven will help us at our need.

Make your resolve! at home your means are great ; 557-60

Abroad you will retain a poor estate.

Unostentatious, indigent, and scant,

Yet live secure, at least from utter want.


4


_ Whoever examines the political character ‘of Corinth at this
time, and remarks the evident bias of that government in favour
of the democratic party at Athens, will feel no hesitation in con-
cluding that they must have been equally disposed to protect a
party of similar principles in their own immediate neighbourhood ;
and that the armed: force above mentioned must have been de-

, spatched from Corinth. This conclusion will be confirmed by the
next fragment. Of the other two powerful neighbouring states,
Thebes was of opposite politics, hostile in the extreme to the —
Athenian revolution, and (as we shall see afterwards) became a
place of refuge for the Megarian exiles: Athens, an Ionian state,
would not at that period have presumed to interpose in the inter-
nal disputes of a Doric city; and least of all at that particular
crisis, when, with the whole weight of the. Doric confederacy op-
posed to her, under the aseendency of Sparta, and directed by the
ability and inveteracy of Cleomenes, she was reduced to the then
unheard-of expedient of soliciting assistance from the king of
Persia. Placed in such 4 precarious situation, it would have been
an act of madness on the part of the Athenians to have risked an
offensive pecseding which could have added nothing to their
military security ; which would have disgusted Corinth ;'and which
at any rate would have prevented the success of those intrigues, by
which the Corinthians (themselves nominally and formally members


ae


THEOGNIS. -- 478


of the confederacy) succeeded in disbanding the combined. army,
at a time when it was already advanced into the plain of Eleusis,
and on the eve ofa battle, likely to have been the most bloodily
decided of any that ever occurred in the internal wars of Greece.
»Availing themselves of the dissolution of the main army, the
Athenians lost no time in advancing against the Thebans and
Chalcidians, who, in the meanwhile, had been making inroads
upon the points bordering upon ‘their own territory ; encountering
them severally, in rapid succession, they overthrew the Thebans,
and immediately (the historian says on the same day) passing
over into Euboea, attacked and defeated the Chalcidians, seizing
upon the territory and expelling the proprietors.
It should seem that Theognis, in escaping from Megara, had
taken up his residence in Eubtea, where the politics of the leading
arty were congenial to his own. Upon this occasion, then, he was
a witness of the calamity. which overwhelmed his friends and hos-
pitable partisans.-The following lines are descriptive of what
occurred. 3


LXXIII.


Alas, for our disgrace! Cerinthus' lost ! 887-90
The fair Lelantian plain! a plundering host

Invade it—all the brave banish’d or fled! |

Within the town, lewd ruffians in their stead

Rule it at random.—Such is our disgrace !
‘May Jove confound the Cypselizing race !


The term of the “Cypselizing-race” could not possibly apply to
any other people than the Corinthians; but it may be a question,
upon what grounds, and with what particular intention, the term
is applied to them in this instance? Cypselus was entirely out of
date; and his son ‘Periander, who succeeded him as tyrant of

. Corinth, had died after a dong reign, in the last year of, the 48th
Olympiad (see Fasti Hellenici). But Cypselus was the first un-
derminer and destroyer of the Dorian aristocracy; ‘having su;
planted the oligarchy of the Bacchiade, he had continued banish-
jng and destroying without intermission during the whole of his
life; and his son (after the usual interval of milder government in
@ new reign) had resumed his father’s policy, and pushed it to a
more severe extreme. . ; : ee

Cypselus was a tyrant and a usurper, but the system of which.

_ he was the personifiegtion was persevered in after his death. The
principle upon which his usurpation had been founded (a hatred
of the hereditary oligarchies) still continued to influence the policy

_ of Corinth, and manifested itself in their support of the democratic
revolution of Athens and Megara. This was the point which


474 THEOGNIS. un
Theognis (doubly a sufferer from the effects of this policy) meant
‘to mark ; ‘and if this view of the subject is admissible, his intention
in characterizing the Corinthians as a Cypselizing race may be
capable of explanation, ; 7
xpelled from Euboea, Theognis seems to have retired to Thebes,
a state whose politics were congenial to his own;' fellow-sufferers
also, like his friends in Eubcea, from the unexpected vigour of the
‘Athenians, who up to-that time, when they became animated (as
Herodotus observes) by the new excitement of liberty, had never
been, accounted very formidable antagonists ;* while the Thebans,
considering themselves, as they were, a superior race of men, dis-
tinguished by a peculiar system of tactics and singular personal ”
prowess in the field, upon which the success of their tactical sys-
tem depended, were wholly unable to digest the disgrace of a de-
feat. it shonld seem, both from local situation and the temper
and spirit of the people, that Thebes must have been the scene of
those projects and hopes which Theognis and his friends at one
time entertained, of recovering possession of their native city, either
by ‘foree or stratagem, and executing-a severe vengeance upon
their opponents. . co, .

It so happened, that in the house of a Theban nobleman a fa-
vourite facetious female slave, Argyris by name, was admitted to
enliven the party. The music of the pipes was introduced after
dinner; this was a temptation which ‘Fheognis could not resist,
and which overset all the cenvorng (grave good breeding) befitting
his condition as an exiled noble. Te offered to accompany the
music, and performed so well as to excite general admiration and
applause; and probably, at the same time, to lower himself to a
certain degree in the estimation of the company; which Argyris
perceiving joined in the general expression of admiration,—* It was
very extraordinary—very extraordinary indeed—the gentleman
must have had a great deal of practice—he must have practised
very young—perhaps his mother might have been a fiute-player,”
to which we may suppose the poet to have answered, “ No! that
his acquirements were not so limited; that, like all other persons
of tolerable education in Megara, he had also learned to accom-

any himself upon the lyre ;” thereupon, the lyre being handed to

im, he sung to it some extempore verses ; acknowledging that
passion for accompanying the music of the pipe, which had sub-
jected him to so severe an insinuation; replying to it at the same
time by an assertion of the nobility of his birth, and a severe re-
taliation upon the condition and origin of the person who had of-
fended him. These lines, originally produced extempore, formed
a short poem, of which the lines already given in illustration of his
early pursuits (and which are here repeated, in what appears to be
their proper place) would have. been the conclusion, at least as far _
as regarded the affront received, and the person who had offered it.


THEOGNIS.. oh ae 475


LXXIV. 2. 8
My heart exults, the lively call obeying, = _ 531-4
When the shrill merry pipes are sweetly playing ;
With these to chaunt aloud or to recite, © —
To carol and carouse, is my delight:
Or in a stedfast tone, bolder and higher,
To temper with a touch the manly lyre.

* * * * +"
The slavish visage never is erect; ; 535-8
But looks oblique and language indirect
Betray their origin—no lovely rose,
Or hyacinth, from the rude bramble grows ;
Nor from a slavish and degraded breed a
Can gentle words or courteous acts proceed.

* * * * *

From noble Aithon my descent I trace, 1209-16
Thebes grants me refuge and a-resting-place ;
Forbear then, Argyris, with empty mirth,  ~
Yourself a slave, to’scandalize my birth:
Woman ! I tell thee, wandering and forlorn,
Tn exile and distress, much have I borne;
Sorrows and wrongs and evils manifold ;

But to be purchas’d as a-slave and sold
Has never been my fate, and never will:
And I retain a town and country still,
Along the banks of the Lethzan river,
In a fair land, where I shall live for ever.
For a firm friend, a steady partisan,

A faithful and an honourable man,
Disdaining every sordid act, and mean,
No slave am I, nor slavish have I been.


At no great distance from two of the preceding, a fragment is
found, separated into two in Brunck’s edition; but which, though
two or more intermediate lines may possibly be wanting, appear
connected by the particle 38 and by the infinitive form of the verb,
which runs through both. These lines belong clearly to the same
poied as the preceaing, when he was hospitably entertained at

hebes, and while he still cherished hopes of a triumphant return
to Megara. Now, if we figure to ourselves the preceding scene,
and do not suppose Theognis to be uttesly destitute of civility and


476 THEOGNIS. :
,common sense, we may fairly take it for granted that the extem-
pore effusion, in which he retaljated the offence given by the slave,
would not have terminated without some marked expression of
- respect and deference to the master of the house; who was wholly
uiltless of the offence which had been given him, In the trans-
fation which follows, the fragment last mentioned is understood
and interpreted in this sense.


' LXXV. ;


To seize my lost possessions and bestow _ 661-6
‘Among my friends the spoils of many a foe, .
Such is my trust and hope; meanwhile I rest :
Content and cheerful an admitted guest,
_ Conversing with a wise and worthy mind,
Profound in learning, and in taste refin’d.
Watching his words and thoughts to bear away
Improvement and instruction, day by day.


The hopes and projects of an exile, briefly alluded to in the bhi
ceding fragment, are more distinctly marked in a passage alluding
to the story of Ulysses; he anticipates like him a safe return from
hell (in his own case, the hell of banishment) and a similar tri-
umphant reéstablishment in his native country; with an equally
full revenge upon his antagonists, and a joyful meeting with his
Penelope and_ his Felemachus, his wife and son; whom it should
seem that he had left behind. The same allusion to his state of
banishment as a kind of hell will be found in another passage,
(composed long after, under the influence of very different views
and expectations,) where the example which he takes as a parallel
to his own is that of Sisyphus. :


 LXXVL
Talk not of evils past! Ulysses bore "4119-24


Severer hardships than my own, and more;

_Doom’d to descend,to Pluto’s dreary reign,—

Yet he return’d, and view’d his home again,

And wreak’d his vengeance on the plundering crew,
The factious haughty suitors, whom he slew:
Whilst all the while, with steady faith unfeign’d, -
The prudent, chaste Penelope remain’d,

With her fair son; waiting a future hour,

For his arrival and return te power.


°


. THEOGNIS. 477


The above allusion to the good conduct of his wife is confirmed
by lines addressed‘ to. Kurnus; who, it should seem, was equally
fortunate. -° :

. LXXVIL. > es
Kurnus, of all good things in human life, . 1223-24
Nothing can equal goodness in a wife. ‘

In our own case we prove the proverb true ;

You vouch for me, my friend, and I for you.


A mixture of hope and despondency accompanied bya vehement
passion for revenge are marked in the following lines. It must be
observed, however, that in the concluding lines a proverb con-
tracted from a simile is expanded into the simile fro which it '
originated, no equivalent proverb being found in the English lan-


age.
othe word yapédpa in the original may perhaps have been in-
tended to convey a local meaning: it signified a gully, the bed of a
wintry torrent—a ravine of this tind called the Charadra was one
of the boundaries of the Megarian territory. ‘Theognis, therefore,
aay neve meant to allude to the direction in which he had passed
the frontier.


LXXVIII.


May Jove assist me to discharge the debt _ 837-50
Of kindness to my friends, and grant me yet
A further boon—revenge upon my foes!
With these accomplish’d, I could gladly close
My term of life—a fair requital made ;
My friends rewarded, and my wrongs repaid, —
Gratitude and revenge, before I die,
Might make me deem’d almost a deity !

Yet hear, O mighty Jove, and gtant.my prayer,
Relieve me from affliction and despair !
O take my life, or grant me some redress,
Some foretaste of returning happiness! . ,
Such is my state—I cannot yet desery ; ‘.


A chance of vengeance on mine enemy,

The rude despoilers of my property.

Whilst I, like to a scar’d and hunted hound,
‘That scarce escaping, trembling and half drown’d,
Crosses a gully swell’d with wintry rain,

Have crept ashore, in feebleness and pain.


478 THEOGHIS. |


Yet my full wish—to drink their very blood—
Some power divine, that watches for my good,
May yet accomplish.—Soon may he fulfil
My righteous hope, my just and hearty will..


The pleasures of hope (the proverbial consolation of a banished
man) are the subject of the next fragment.


LXXIX. a
For human nature Hope remains alone 1131-46
Of all the deities—the 'rest are flown. :
Faith is departed ;. Truth and Honour dead ;
And all the Graces too, my friend, are fled.
The scanty specimens of living worth,
Dwindled to nothing, and extinct on earth.
Yet, whilst I live and view the light of heaven, m
(Since Hope remains, and never has been driven
. From the distracted world, ) the single scope
‘Of my devotion is to worship Hope:
When hecatombs are slain, and altars burn,
With all the deities ador’d in turn,
Let Hope be present; and with Hope, my friend,
‘Let every sacrifice commence and end.
_ Yes! insolence, injustice, every crime,
Rapine and wrong, may prosper for a time ;
Yet shall they travel on to swift decay _ -
That tread the crooked path and hollow way.


’


The fourth line is characteristic ; the victim of a popular revolu-.
tion lamenting that ele Ramin destroyed the Graces ; like the
Commandenr in that admirable Proverbe of Monsr. Le Clercq’s—
Les Soupers. : :

It should seem that the hopes entertained by the poet and the
emigrant party to which he belonged, were never realized; and
that, (as was naturally to be expected) a spirit of impatience and
discontent must have begun to be prevalent amongst them. The
following lines seem to belong to this period, and to be descriptive
of the altered'temper of his associates in misfortune.


“LXXX.
I search among my friends—none can I find, 415-18
No sterling, unadulterated mind ; :


. 2% THEOGNIS. 479
None that ‘abides the crucible like mine 3°
Rising above the standard—superfine!


In these lines the sense which-is assigned to the word imsprepin,
“above the standard,” is assumed from the context: the lexicons do
not give it, nor is it to be expected that lexicographers should find
in ancient authors the technical terms of the assay office; but we
ae seen already that it was an object. familiar to the mind of
‘the poet. ; !

Theognis, it should seem, must have been among the poorest of
the party,—having escaped from Megara qdvr’ dosucdpevoc,
“stript of everything,” a circumstance necessarily omitted in the
translation of fragm. LX XVIIL., as it would have appeared some-
what absurd if combined with the simile of the dog. The follow-
ing lines seem to have been occasioned by the illiberality of some
of ‘his companions who were less destitute than himself.


LXXXI. <


An exile has no friends! no partisan 209-10
Ts firm or faithful to the banish’d man; :

A disappointment and a punishment,

Harder to bear, and worse than banishment !


The reader is here requested to turn back to the fragment
marked LVIL., beginning “ Blessed Almighty Jove ;” (which from
the singularity of its tone had been placed in juxtaposition with
others of a like character ;) he will probably be of opinion that in
chronological order it ought to stand here, as it marks a time
when the notion of abandoning his party, and endeavouring to con-
ciliate the victorious faction,(though not admitted or approved,) has
distinctly presented itself to his mind. ‘

The next fragment marks his resolution upon this subject as al-,
ready taken. In raha? Vaasa of the neglect of his associates, he
declares his intention of negotiating for himself, and endeavouring
to conciliate the faction by which he had been expelled.


LXXXIL


The last and worst of ills, save death alone ! “809-12
The worst of human miseries is my own! ov
—Those friends of mine have cast me off, and I )

Must seek perforce a last resource, to try
- To treat and tamper with the enemy. j


.


480 ; THEOGNIS. -
The English reader is desired to interpret the words “ cast me
- off” as an expression, indirectly implying a refusal of pecuniary
* assistance; the word in the original (zpovdexay) is used in this
sense-in another passage of the poet, (not here translated,) in which.

a poor courtesan is describing her own condition, ver. 859.

The same tone of complete despondency, the same complaint of
abandonment on the part of his friends, and the consequent neces-
sity of endeavouring to concifiate his enemies, are apparent in the
following fragment. ° .


LXXXUL


Happy the man, with worldly wealth and ease, 1007-10
Who, dying in good time, departs in peace.

Nor yet reduc’d to wander as a stranger,

In exile and distress and daily danger ;

To fawn upon his foes, to risk the trial

Of a friend’s faith, and suffer a denial! — +


4


A short fragment is to be found, of little merit in itself; but
which (as it evidently marks a particular turn in the views and
feline of the poet) cannof, according to the strict rules of criti-
cism, be overlooked, in any praca ear ascertain and arrange the
incidents of his life. The original of this singular and perplexing

assage, if expanded into the dimension whieh is necessary to ren-
ver its intention and meaning discernible to an English-reader,
might stand thus :


LXXXIV.


No mean or coward heart will I commend 1077-78
In an old comrade or a party friend: —

Nor with ungenerous, hasty zeal deery

A noble-minded gallant enemy.


The original couplet (for it is a couplet in the original) appears,
like others of the detached couplets, which are found in our pre-
sent copies, to have been the exordium of a separate poem ; a.poem
of which, as of many others, only the initial lines have been pre-
served. In this poem (as is apparent from the. supposed intro-
ductory lines) the poet’s intention must have been to pass in re-
view the characters of his own partisans, and also those of his
adversaries, with professed impartiality, but with a candid bias in
favour of his opponents. -

It was clearly not written before his banishment from Megara,
nor when; many years after, he had gained permission to return


. ’


* THEOGNIS. ; _ 481
thither; but it appears te be the preface to an oration made by our
poet to the dominant party at Megara.

It is clear from fragms. LX XXII. and LXXXIV. that Theog-
nis must have been in negotiation, or at least attempting to-nego-
tiate, with the party in possession of the city,—the pale by whom,
he had been expelled. With a view, then, to conciliate his adver-
saties, and to prepare the way for his own recall, what method
would be most likely to be employed by a man who was in the.
habit of employing poetry upon all occasions ; who replies in verse
to the impertinence of a female slave; and whom we have seen

’ composing in metre the speech which he delivered at a party meet-
ing, assembled at a critical time, and ag is upon the adop-’
tion of the most dangerous measures? There should seem to
little difficulty in supposing that the habitual and natural language
of the poet must have been employed upon this occasion; that ,
verse would have been the vehicle of his first overtures; and that’
a poem of affected candour, in which, as he says himself, his
friends (the bad ones at least) were not to be praised, and his .
enemies (the good ones at least) were not to be blamed, must have
been the first overture to the treaty which he was endeavouring to
open with the victorious party. ;

The failure of this’ negotiation will in the mean while serve to
account for the tone of utter dejection and despondency which is

' marked in the next fragment.’ ° ; :


LXXXV._


Not to be born—never to see the sun——- 425-28
‘No worldly blessing is a greater one!

And the next best is speedily to die, ° Oe
And lapt beneath a load of.earth to lie ! ' ane


We are now approaching to a very different period of the poet’s
existence—his long residence in Sicily. That island and the coun-
try of Magna Greccia, as'it was called, (the maritime portion of the
continental territory of Naples,) stood at that time in the same re- -

“ Jation to the older states of Greece as the coasts of Asia Minor
had done at an early period: nearly the same as that of the States
. of America with respect to the present European world. The
westérn colonies of the little world of Greece were the common re-
fuge of unemployed talent. Abounding in wealth to.a degree that .
was become proverbial, and profuse in their encouragement of all
the arts by which their customary forms of life could be polished .
or adorned, they afforded an asylum and the means of employ-
. ment and maintenance to talents and ingenuity of every kind.
Among the many persons who sought refuge in this new world,’
there could have been hardly bie had who was determined to such
4 : I


482 : THEOGNIS.


2&@ measure, circumstances of more complete destitution than
those'in which Theognis must have found himself. - This resolu-
tion is: announced in the following lines; the last, as it should
seem, in which the name of Kurnus occurs. In the original, there

: is a point of character and feeling, which is imperfectly represented
in the translation.—In taking leave of his friend, he repeats his
name several times, ;

LXXXVI.


For noble minds, the worst of miseries, ‘178-82
. Worse than old age or wearisome disease, .
Is poverty--from:poverty to flee,
From some tall precipice prone to the sea
It were a fair escape to leap below! F
In poverty, dear Rorita! we forego
Freedom in-word arid deed—body and mind,
Action and thought, are fetter’d and confin’d.
Let me then fly, dear Kurnus, once ggain !
* Wide as the limits of the land and main,
From these entanglements ; with these in view,
Death is the lighter evil of the two.


We now come to the period of his long residence in Sicily,
where the following lines were composed under the pressure of dis-
tress and difficulty; probably soon after his arrival, and while the
impressions of a sea-voyage were uppermost in his mind,


; LXXXVII.
” Wearied and sick at heart, in seas of trouble, 619-20

I work against the wind, and strive to double

The dark disastrous cape of poverty,

The following lines seem to have been composed about the same
time and under the same circumstances; it is curiots that the
habit of generalization should follow. him, even when reflecting
‘upon his own situation; his mind expands itself naturally intoa
comprehensive observation.

. ' | LXXXVOr

-All kinds of shabby shifts are understood, 623-24

All kinds of arts are practis’d, bad and good ; ;

All kinds' of ways to gain a livelihood.


THEOGNIS. - 483


His personal talents and acquirements.seem at this time to have
been his sole resource; amongst them, the nisssagoat which he
ey attained to as a vocal, performer, accompanying the music of
the pipe. : fae

in this character we find him assisting at a musical festival, and :
apologizing for his voice, which is likely, he says, to be affected by

* “having accompanied a party of revellers and serenaders the night
before; moreover the other performer, who ought to have borne a
part with him, has failed in his engagement. But he has no ob-
jection to the piper whom they have provided, and will proceed
with his engagement.” a


r


LXXXxIX.


I cannot warble like a nightingale ;
This voice of mine, I fear, is like to fail,
With rambling on a revel late at night.

I shall not make a poor excuse, to slight
Your piper’s art and practice; but the friend’
That ought to bear his part here, and attend,
In fact is absent. I must do my best; °
And put my talent fairly to the test.

So, praying to the-gods for help and grace,
- Close to the piper’s side I take my place. — im


933-8


In the original there is an ambiguity which could not be repre-
sented in-English ; (defdc) in one sense implies his skill as a mu-
sician; in the other it describes his position at the side of the

iper.
x xhibitions such as this must have been felt as mortifying by a
man of birth, and one who had been originally a person of rank and ~
consequence in his native city; accordingly, we find feelings such
as might be expected from him expressed in the following frag-
‘ment, written probably about the same time. .
; XC,

O poverty! how sorely do you press, 649-52

Debasing soul and body with distress :

To such degrading offices you bind » oo :

A manly form, an elevated mind,

Once elegantly fashion’d and refin’d.


It is but too natural to suppose, that the attempts of a poor gen-
tleman to obtain a living by the exercise of talents, of ad


484 |. THEOSNIS.

formerly served for his amusement, would be exposed to the cen-
sure of professional performers; one of them, it should seem, (Aca-
demus by name,) had spoken of him ag not being a thorough-bred
musician, but a kind of mule between an artist and amateur. ‘.To
this taunt he replies in the first of the two following fragments: .
the second, though pepe in the present text, seems to pelong
to it, as an easy conciliatory conclusion to the previous repriman


a. © 0} Fy j
I wish that a fair trial were prepat’d, j 987-90
Friend Academus ! with the prize declar’d, .
‘A comely slave, the conqueror’s reward ;
For a full proof, betwixt myself and you,
Which is the better minstrel of the two.
7 Then would I show you that a mule surpasses - -
In his performance all the breed of asses.
* * *, * _* *
Enough of such discourse ; now let us try
To join our best endeavours, you and I,
With voice and music; since the Muse has bless’d
. Us both with her endowments; and possess’d
With the fair science of harmonious sound
‘The neighbouring people, and the cities round.


‘


1051-4


‘The last lines mark his position as a foreign artist; he is com-
plimenting the natives. ; :
‘We now: find that he was Lepowey to get together a little
money; and the next fragment will show that he was become
very careful of it. . ;

in aes XCIL. ,

_ You boast of wealth, and scornfully deplore -)' 1111-12
My poverty—something I have in store ;
Aid with God’s blessing I shall make it more.


Being now under the necessity of vindicating himself from a
charge of meanness and parsimony, his defence is made in the
same spirit of generalization which has been already noticed as a

" peculiar feature of his mind. : :
e. XCIIL.
Though gifted with a shrewd and subtle ken, 1055-8
“Timagoras ! the secret hearts of men - ;


. THEOGNIS,. ’ 485


(You'll find it) are a point hard to be guess’d;
‘For poor and shabby souls in riches dress’d,
Make a fair show; while indigence and care
Give to the noble mind a meaner air. = -


Theognis might have been enabled, to. maintain himself at first,
and possibly to make a little money, in the way above described ; .
and perhaps by teaching music and poetry ; but his most import-
ant occupation, (like that of his instructor Simonides,) and that
from. which the chief source of his gains would have arisen, was
the direction of: the choral entertainments, which were exhibited
in competition by the different tribes, at the expense of the wealth-.
est citizens of each, who were called choregi. Theognis on one
occasion seems to havé met with one of these who was insensible
to the advantages of some Lae oe improvement; and he is led
to the conclusion expressed in the following verses—that the rarity
of the union of wealth and good taste in the same individual is ©
highly unfavourable to the progress of the fine arts!


XCIV.


Dunces are often rich, while indigence sus 683-6.
Thwarts the designs of elegance and sense.
Nor wealth alone,’nor judgment can avail ;

‘In either case art and improvement fail.


’ Finding himself become an active person, the reflection seems

to have occurred to him that he had formerly been equally active

_ in pursuits of a very different kind. This reflection, according to
his usual.habit, is generalized in the following lines.


XCV.


The passions and the wants of nature breed 1227-8.
Winged desires, that with an airy speed ao
Hurry abroad, for pleasure or for need ;

On various errands, various as their hue, ~

A fluttering, eager, ever busy crew.


As his circumstances improved his spirits seem to have risen,
and he rejoices in the success of his exertions, though conscious of
their derogatory character.

XCVI~ ,


Plutus! of all the gods the first and best,  —«:1118-14
My wrongs with your assistance are redrest ;


. 486 ‘ - THEOGNIS.
Now, reinstated in respectability,
In spite of all my baseness and humility.


- Though now relieved from Bove ; he was unable, or did not
deem it advisable, to indul:; is ‘wishes and fancies, as he had
“been in the habit of doing feueny. This change seemed to re-
quire an apology, which he addressed to them, as follows.


XCVII.


My old companions, Fancy and Desire! 695-6

To treat you both, as each of you require,

My means are insufficient—never mind!

Ours is the common case of human-kind. ,

At length he finds himself in a situation in which he is led to
consider the question of greater indulgence and a larger expendi-
ture. This question, ‘after viewing it on both sides, he seems dis-
posed to determine in favour of continued economy.

‘The perplexity of which Theognis complains is one which in
our times would be easily solved by sinking a ade of capital or
, the whole of it in a life-annuity: but he was fearful of infringing

upon his capital, apprehending that he might live more than Jong

enough to consume the wliole.


XCVEOL


Current expenditure—to bring it all ? 899-926
. Within the compass of our capital, ¢ +!
Is-a wise plan, but difficult withal. f
Could we beforehand ascertain the date
Of our existence, we might fix a rate
* For our expense, and make it more or less ;
But as it is, we must proceed by guess.
The road divides ! which path am I to choose?’
Perplex’d with opposite diverging views.
Say, shall I struggle on, to save and spare,
Or lead an easy life and-banish care ?
Some have I seen, with competence of wealth,
Indifferent to friendship, pleasure, health,
Struggling and saving ; till the final call, ©
‘Death sends his summons, and confiscates all !
Allotting to the thankless, heedless heir
The produce of his economic care !


THEOGNIS. 487


Yet others have I seen reckless of pelf;
“T take my pastime, and I please myself,”
Such was the jolly phrase; the same gallant
' Have I beheld an utter mendicant ;
In sad dependence, at his latter end,
Watching and importuning every friend.
Our wiser course then, Damocles, I deem,
Is that which steers: aloof from each extreme: °
Not to consume my life with care and pain,
Economizing for another’s gain ;
And, least ‘ofall, to risk the future fears
Of indigence in my declining years. F
With this reflection, therefore, I incline 927-8
To lean a little to the saving line: .
For something should be left when life is fled
To purchase decent duty to the dead ;
Those easy tears, the customary debt
Of kindly recollection and regret. .
* Besides, the saving of superfluous cost
Is a sure profit, never wholly lost ;
Not altogether lost, though left behind,
Bequeath’d-in kindness to a friendly mind...
And for the present, can a lot be found 929-32
Fairer and happier than a name renown’d,
And easy competence, with honour crown’d;
The just approval of the good and wise,
Public applauses, friendly courtesies ;
Where all combine a single name to grace
With honour and preéeminence of place,
Coévals, elders, and the rising race ! }


This last passage is separated from the preceding in Brunck’s
edition. It is possible that some intermediate lines may have been
lost, but the train of thought seems to be continuous: he feels
that the estimation which he has acquired in society is such as to *
supersede any temptation to increase it,'by living at an increased
expense. . :

.‘ It is difficult to assign a place to the following fragment; that
it was written in exile ts evident, ‘

It is placed here rather for the sake of marking the time of the
battle of Elorus, than in any confidence that it actually related to
it.—The tone of carelessness and indifference in which he speaks


488° THEOGNIS.:
of going to batile, as upon’a mere point of honour, forbids us to
assign this fragment to the time of the action- between the Chal-
cidians and Athenians,-in which he must have felt a strong in-
terest,
tae XCIrx. ;

Peace is my wish, may peace and plenty crown 881-6.

This happy land, the people and the town !.

’ May peace remain ! and may we never miss
Good cheer and merry meetings such as this !
Whether at home or here, all wars I hate,

All battle I detest and execrate. . ;

Then never hurry forward ! for we fight

Not for ourselves nor for our country’s. right.
But with the bawling herald, loud and clear,.

Shouting a noisy summons in my ear,

And with my own good horse, for very shame,

We must engage and join the bloody game.


The battle of Elorus, in which the Syracusans were totally de-
feated, was followed by the siege of Syracuse ; which appears to
have been ong. protracted, since. it afforded time for a singular
combination—that of the Corinthians and Corcyreans, habitually
enemies, but each of them interested in behalf of the Syraeusans
as 4 kindred race. The joint assistance and interposition of these
two states effected the Tslavarance of the Syracusans, under a com-

omise, by which they surrendered to Gelo the sovereignty of

amarina. Suidas says that during the siege Theognis wrote a
m. to “those who had escaped,” meaning, probably, those who,
aving escaped from the battle, were afterwards the defenders of
the besieged town. ,
es ’ «.


The gods have granted mighty stores of pelf 863-6
To many a sluggard, useless to himself

And his own partisans: but high renown

Awaits the warrior who defends the town.


The events above-mentioned -seem to have led to Theognis’ re-
turn from his long exile. The state of Corinth was democratic.
The Corinthians had promoted the revolution at Megara and fa-
voured that of Athens; they were “the Cypselizing race” whom
Theognis had execrated as the authors of his misfortunes and dis-
appointments., The Corinthian deputies and commanders, how-


: . THEOGNIS. 489


ever, on their arrival at Syracuse, must have found their old aristo-
cratic victim transformed by cireumstances into a very passable
democrat, engaged inthe defence of the city against a besieging-
force, commanded by the patron of the exiled aristocracy. Theog-
nis having no doubt introduced himself to the acquaintance of the
Corinthian commander, (an influential person in a state which
possessed a great ascendency.over Megara,) conscious moreover of
a literary reputation which would do Toncet to his. country, and
sufficiently provided with certificates of civism, seems to have
thought that nothing more was wanting to procure his erasure _
from the “List of Emigrants:” his Corinthian friend, however,
whose: political sagacity seems to have suggested the story of
Sisyphus and Proserpine, was unable to extricate him from the
“Hell of Banishment” upon the simple consideration of his late
litical conduct. Drachmas, it should seem, he had aeeumu-
- lated, and a certain sacrifice of drachmas was necessary to the suc-
- cess of the negotiation. | Under these circumstances the following
characteristic lines were produced. 7
The story of Sisyphus and Proserpine appears, at first sight, not
only foreign to the main ‘subject and purpose, (an expression of
devout gratitude-to the god of wealth,) but is moreover unaccount-
ably tedious; this very tediousness, however, is an ‘artifice of the
poet, by ‘which he directs the attention of the reader to a meatiing
which he could not venture more distinctly to express.
~ CY.
O Plutus! justly to your gifts and you _ 523-6
Mankind attribute praise and honour due. ‘
With your assistance we securely face A
Defeat and disappointment and disgrace.
Thus to reward-the virtuous, and to slight .
Wicked and dirty knaves, is surely right! :
For with- the world at large no merit tells, ' 697-718
But Plutus and his bounty,—nothing else! :
’ Nof not the sense of Rhadamanthus old, °
Nor all the shrewd devices manifold,
Which Sisyphus, the keen Corinthian, knew ;
That wily chief, that, if old tales are true,
Made a most strange escape; so poets tell,
By dint of rhetoric, he return’d from hell!
For she, (that kind oblivion can dispense,
But takes away the judgment and the sense,)
The goddess Proserpine, by strong persuasion,
. Consented to connive at his evasion:


490 ; THEOGNIS..


A thing unheard of and unknown before ;
That, having pass’d the dark infernal door, |
And visited those dreary realms below,
From that. disastrous prison-house of woé,

A man by policy should work his way,
Emerging into light and upper day! :
Sisyphus gain’d & point which none beside

Of all that ever liv’d or ever died)

‘ould have’ achiev’d—yet Sisyphus would fail,
Nor would Ulysses with his arts prevail,
Nor aged Nestor with his eloguence—
No merit would avail you—no pretence;
Though you possess’d the vigour and the speed
Of the swift Harpies, or the winged breed ;
OF Boreas, in the proud Olympic. game

_ Acconqueror; your native place and name }

Recorded and announe’d with loud acclaim ;
Still would you find the common saying hold,
“Fame is a jest ;. favour is bought and sold;
No power on earth is like the power of gold.”


Whether the preceding lines were composed at Syracuse, or
afterwards in Greece, (Liacedemon,) ‘where, it should seem, he
waited the result of his negotiation, cannot be determined.—They
are placed here as forming a natural sequel to ‘the fragments re-
ferrible to Syracuse, and as an introduction to those which from
their internal. marks must be assigned to Lacedemon. The first

‘ of these bear a strong indication of having been composed at the
‘time when the poet had passed the meridian of life. The “black
fear of death which saddens all” is strongly marked in the first


; /  . OF
Enjoy your time, my soul! another race 1067-8
Will shorily fill the world, and take your place;
With their own hopes and fears, sorrow and mirth:
I shall be. dust the while, and crumbled earth. . .
But think not of it! Drink the racy wine ' 875-80
Of rich Taygetus, press’d from the vine _
Which Theotimus, in the sunny glen,
(Old Theotimus, lov’d by gods and men,) :
Planted, and water’d from a plenteous source,
Teaching the wayward stream a better course:


THEOGNIS. - - ; 491
_Drink it, and cheer your heart, dnd banish care;
A load of wine will lighten our déspair.. " *


‘I should be inclined to think that Theognis must have been
connected by the ties of ‘hospitality with some Spartan or Laco-
nian families; that of Theotimus, for instance, here mentioned, or
that Clearistus (before mentioned as so connected with him) ‘may
have been a Laconjan. . :

The following lines ‘appear also to have been written in Laceda-
mon, and evidently relate to some matter of important trust—pro-
bably to the friendly and confidential agency through which he

_ Was enabled to purchase a remission of his exile.
: » CI

Ye twins of Jove! an undivided twain, 1083-6

‘That on. Eurotas’ shore and happy plain

In endless harmony preside and reign !

Punish our guilt! If ever by design

I wrong my friend, let all the loss be mine;

But if the fault is his, double the fine! ~


. The next lines, though referrible to Lacedemon, may have been
composed there at an earlier period of the poet’s life. “Though in
both instances the conclusion points to hard drinking, they seem
much too juvenile for the author of fragm. CII. The four con-
cluding verses have been subjoined as a natural sequel. In the


original they are separated, and stand as a distinct fragment in -


Brunck’s edition.
CIV.


Now that in mid-career, checking his course, 991-6"


The bright sun pauses in his pride and force,
Let us prepare to dine, and eat and drink
The best of everything that heart can think ;
And let the shapely Spartan damsel fair
- Bring, with a rounded arm and graceful air, >, - es
Water to wash, and garlands for our hair.


In spite of all the systems and the rules - 1035-6


Invented and observ’d by sickly fools— :
Let us be brave, and resolutely drink,
Not minding if the dog-star rise or sink.


, The twH first lines of the original are hardly intelligible. It ,
seems probable that two lines may have been lost between the


first and the second.


‘


492 THEOGNIS.


The next fragments bring us back to Megara, and represent
‘Theognis as a returned emigrant, studiously and anxiously. patri-
otie and popular, giving an indirect pease in the first fragment,
and a more decided one in the second; of his resolution to abstain
from party politics, and to confine himself to the cultivation of
poetry and of the sister arts with which it was immediately con-
nected—music and the management of the chorus.

The last lines of the first fragment serve to confirm Mr. Clinton’s
suggestion, that he was born in the 59th Olympiad ; in which, ac-
cording to some accounts, he is said to have flourished ;—but, as he
justly observes, these computations would suppose Theognis to have

een near eighty in 490—the time of the battle of Marathon. The
concluding lines certainly give a decided negative to such a suppo-
sition. The character of mature age (as has been already ob-
served) is marked in a: preceding fragment (the last but two). The
same association of ideas is also observable in this, which must
have been written a very short time after: in both of them the
pleasures of convividlity are connected with the fear of death (the
evil with its remedy); bat in extreme age such remedies are not
etislage to; moreover,,old age itself. is here spoken of as a distant
evil. w 8
, ; CY,. :

May Jove, the almighty, with his.own right hand 755-66

Guard and uphold this happy town and land, vos

With all the glorious blessed gods above!"

And may the bright Apello guide and move

My voice and fancy, cunningly to carp.

In songs accordant to the pipe and harp!

When, after solemn rites of sacrifice, '

At feasts and banquets, freely we devise

Of mirth and pastime; banishing afar “
_All fears of Persia and her threaten’d war ;

. With joyous airy songs of merry verse,

Quaffing and chaunting, “ May we ne’er be worse,”

But better; if a better thing can be, :

Than thus to live at ease, cheerful and free;
+ While far remote, no fears our thoughts engage,

Of death approaching, or disastrous age. =~


The next fragment is of the same time, as appears not only from
thé tone and character, but from the same mention of an appre-
hended invasion from Persia.—It.may be considered # a kind.of
sequel to the preceding; the invocation to the inferior protecting
deity of the town naturally following the preceding address to the


THEOGNIS. 393


supreme roler of the world. This’fragment is of considerable im-
portance, as Mr. Brunck, by comparing the lines in which Alca-
thous is mentioned with an inscription discovered at Megara, has
shown that Theognis must have been a native of Megara in Greece,
and not, as Plato (undoubtedly from a mere supercilious affectation
of ignorance) has asserted, a Sicilian. Moreover, it appears that
Sicily is mentioned as one of the foreign countries visited by him
during his long absence from his native land. 2


CVI.


You, great Apollo, with its walls and towers 771-86
Fenc’d and adorn’d of old this town of ours!
Such favour in thy sight Alcathous won, ~
Of Pelops old the fair and manly son.

- Now, therefore, in thy clemency divine, -
Protect these very walls, our own and thine!
Guide and assist us, turn aside-the boast ~
Of the destroying haughty Persian host!

So shall thy people each returning spring
Slay fatted hecatombs, and gladly bring

Fair gifts, with chaunted hymns and lively song,
Dances and feasts, and happy shouts among :
Before thy altar, glorifying thee, .

In peace and health and' wealth, cheerful and free.

Yet much I fear. the faction and the strife,
Throughout our Grecian cities, raging rife;
And their wild councils. But do thou defend ee
This town of ours, our founder and our friend!

Wide have J wander’d, far beyond the sea,

Even to the distant shores of Sicily,

To broad Eubcea’s plentiful domain,

With the rich vineyards in its planted plain ;
And to the sunty wave and winding edge
-Of fair Eurotas, with its reedy sedge ;
Where Sparta stands in simple majesty,
Among her manly rulers, there was I!
Greeted and welcom’d (there and everywhere)
With courteous entertainment, kind and fair ;
Yet still my weary spirit would repine,
Longing again to view this land of mine. ;

Henceforward no design nor interest 787-90
Shall ever move me, but the first and best, :


494 ; : THEOGNIS, :
- With learning’s happy gift to celebrate,
“To adorn and dignify my native state.
The song, the dance, music and verse agreeing,
Will occupy my life, and fill my being :-
Pursuits of elegance and learned skill 791-4
(With good repute and kindness and good will,
. Among the wiser sort) will pass my time
- Without an enemy, without a crime;
Harmless and just with every rank of’ men,
Both the free native and the denizen.


. ‘The following lines show that his return was embittered by the
undutiful behaviour of his family, who had grown up in his absence.


; -CVII.

The gods in just allotment-have assign’d - 271-8
Youth and old age, the portion of mankind,

Alike for all; impartially we share yy
. Youth’s early pleasures ; equally we bear

The latter ills of life, sickness and care.

One single evil; more severe and rude

Than age or sickness or decrepitude,

Is dealt unequally, for him that rears .

A thankless offspring ; in his latter years,

Ungratefully requited for his pains, —

A arsimoniias life and thrifty gains,
With toil and care acquir’d for their behoof ;
And no return ! but insolent reproof;

Such as might scare a beggar from the gate,
A wretch unknown, poor and importunate!
—To be revil’d, avoided, hated, curst ;
This is the last of evils, and the worst!


Theognis had left his wife, and at least one son, behind him,
when he quitted Megara ; some verses written in the early part of
his banishment, serve to show that she was behaving well in his

. absence. There are no further notices to be found respecting her
- —but a family of children, growing up under the tuition and pro-
tection of the ruling party, would probably become connected with
them, and would be liable to be extremely disgusted and annoyed
at the return of so near a connexion, who, abjuring rank and pre-
tensions of every kind, had subsisted for many years as a mere


| | | 495"
‘ artist,and who now reippeared with a fixed determination to cone
fine himself scrupulously to those pursuits by which he had before’
obtained a livelihood ; all the money which he had made in Sicily


THEOGNIS.


would not compensate for such a mortification.

_ The following lines would be wholly out of place in.the earlier
years of his exile, (at Thebes or Eubcea,) or in the tumultuous
‘times which immediately preceded; and’ if we go back to a still
earlier period, we fitid that the system of secrecy and reserve which
he then practised (see fragm. IX.) is that which (in allusion perhaps
to his former habit) he now condemns.


' CVIiI..
The servant of the Muse, gifted and grac’d ‘767-70.
With high preéminence of art and taste, ie 13
‘Has an allotted duty to fulfil ;
Bound to dispense the treasure of his skill, -
Without a selfish or invidious view ;.
Bound to recite and to compose anew. ae
Not to reserve his talent for himself as
In secret, like a miser with his pelf.


t


Fl -
,


4


4


00063432


sie elaataeeer ai Sie cinema tamara eee


f


a
OHN CHILDS ann SON, BUNGAY.


Digitized with financial assistance from


An Initiative by


FOUNDATION WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGH


on 28 December, 2018


Sao Oa! one RE ra


, ‘ af
