ea
si wf
1%


Oy Um) | oka
ae aS Za a ae


UIE tenn
Ae Ay a EE 1 tars dl te,
. hs
Whur


NE ee eee ich


ea
wy '
’ Set» | p
r Sim Y
‘ 1
16%
a? % 1
i FI
; ' 4 ‘


t ' hE ’
‘ e , |
‘a , .
' i a4 ‘
‘ ' J "
i ‘ / 1s
, t
TAT ' ye Jl
es, >


hii
"eye
its


ae
eh, |


ss


(32,)


-HE LOEB hes LIBRARY
j EDITED BY
rT. BE. PAGE, Litt.D., anp W. H. D. ROUSE, Lirt.D.


HESIOD
CHE HOMERIC HYMNS AND HOMERICA


} Kt
} i
i { i 4
r j 7 f
of pa
\ Nan }
v
\ ii


*
i
i 4 i
“4
j ; 1 Sate
{ je f
: \ ¢ i
f i
pr alh Migr
=i u
! i id i
i 4
j
i x
XX i \ ~
\ . Gif’
it f
Hl
| ih da
+ % il y i! ;
Ne
f
; Ay
vie r
if By)
* > i * i
t I id {]
: H
Shi
Ql #
ins
i l *
' 1 i
ai * y
\ | ey
{ \ I
86 Y ai
mI i
; } i
y ;
i ;
; f
i : é
‘ j : tea
5 ' j \
4
1 4 ‘ bie \ i 4
") it . 1 r _ Le
i H "| i
a y 1 D
ee (iy ai ‘ re
é ¢ i
y t L773
‘ i ,
r day}
y hh r
ti ny ple


DIONYSUS CROSSING {Hees
FROM GERHARD AUSERLESENE VASENBILDER.


W E g I 0 dD


: ot HOMERIC HYMNS AND
HOMERICA


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
HUGH G. EVELYN-WHITE, M.A.


SOMETIME SCHOLAR OF WADHAM COLLEGE, OXFORD


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN


| NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN CO.
| MOMXIV


atm,


RECEP ST


bs


Sap ysee.


FAA RE


St eer


RR heey


a


Pay


—e


SSeS Te Dee


2a TE


RE RI


i


SOS Ios hae eae


AR SN CRIT ORE REN eee


PAT ara Te At Sern aie en gain bene TORE TE Pane An aot


a 4


SAISH MALLS
AJJUIMOAM 2B


-

ot

a
4


PREFACE


Tuts volume contains practically all that remains of
_ the post-Homeric and pre-academic epic poetry.

I have for the most part formed my own text. In
the case of Hesiod I have been able to use indepen-
dent collations of several MSS. by Dr. W. H. D.
Rouse ; otherwise I have depended on the apparatus
criticus of the several editions, especially that of
Rzach (1902). The arrangement adopted in this
edition, by which the complete and fragmentary
‘poems are restored to the order in which they would
probably have appeared had the Hesiodic corpus
survived intact, is unusual, but should not need
apology; the true place for the Catalogues (for
example), fragmentary as they are, is certainly after
the Theogony.

In preparing the text of the Homeric Hymns my
chief debt—and it is a heavy one—is to the edition
of Allen and Sikes (1904) and to the series of articles
in the Journal of Hellenic Studies (vols. xv. sqq.) by
T. W. Allen. To the same scholar and to the


V


PREFACE


Ass of the Clarendon Press I am greatly |
indebted for permission to use the restorations of |
the Hymn:to Demeter, lines 387-401 and 462-470, |
printed in the Oxford Text of 1912. |

Of the fragments of the Epic Cycle I have given
only such as seemed to possess distinct importance or |
interest, and in doing so have relied mostly upon —
Kinkel’s collection and on the fifth volume of the
Oxford Homer (1912). |

The texts of the Batrachomyomachia and of the |
Contest of Homer and Hesiod are those of Baumeister |
and Flach respectively: where I have diverged from —
these, the fact has been noted. |

Owing to the circumstances of the present time |
I have been prevented from giving to the Introduction —
that full revision which I should have desired.


RAMPTON, NR. CAMBRIDGE.
Sept. 9th, 1914


vl


PRE FACH Tg re eS A ieee a i i a So | ® 6 e ° °


INTRODUCTION


CONTENTS


MEIOG@RAPHY ..... . .%..


OE eS REE TR We eal a a


Works ae Pete Ste |


The Divination Ly Birds


_ The Astronomy .


The Precepts of Chiron.
The Great Works .
The Idaean Dactyls .


. The Theogony


THE


The Catalogues of Women and the Boise BARE


The Shield of Heracles a.

The Marriage of Ceyx . . .

The Great EKoiae Pee | feted his
eeeteiempodia.:- 6 ok
The Aegimius . ae
Fragments of Unknown Position.
Doubtful Fragments. ... .


HOMERIC HYMNS .....


oe oO mnysue. 2.
t1.—To Demeter
111.—To Apollo .
tv.—To Hermes
v.—To Aphrodite
v1.—To Aphrodite
vi.—To Dionysus .. .
Witehe—- TO Ares. f-5....
1x.—To Artemis
x.—To Aphrodite
x1.—To Athena .
fa Po Hera: . *.
x1u1.—To Demeter ..
x1tv.—To the Mother of the Gods
xv.—To Heracles the Lion-hearted


i


Ree ee fel. Or Pee RY, Wad ee ote, Fee oe


"985-463


286
288
324
362
406
426
428
432
434
434.
436
436
436
438
438


vil


CONTENTS


THE HOMERIC HYMNS (contenued)—


xvi.—To Asclepius:.. .....)
xvil.—To the-Dioseum (fF 2" eee
xvyuli.—To Hermes ~. ... =) py eee
x1x.—To Pan ee
xx.—To Hephaestus.” i)! Rae
¥xI.—To Apollo... i533 eee:
xx11.—To Poseidon.” 07>) ae
xx111.——To the Son of Cronus, Most Le ke Re
xxiv._-To Hestia . 9... 0) Uae
xxv.—To the Muses and ices aa? th
xxvi.—To Dionysus... . iE Reade a tetae


xxvit.—To Artemis . .) 3 OY a eg eel
xxvi1.—To Athena . oe Pe ee «naa
xx1x.—To Hestia . . 2] ae sat ee Ok
xxx.—To Earth the Mother of Adloszees pete &
xxxE-—To, Helos: 29.05 35


xxx11.—To Selene tis RMcnyOw
xxx1,.— To:-the Dioseuri)...433 4


THE EPIGRAMS, OF HOMER... «:) 92) )> 3°72) See


THE EPIC CYCLE: . 2. 4. = 2
The War of the Titans .. .) { (2
Lhe Story of Oedipus (0c. \). 97
The Thebais. . .  o,..543.44) apd eee
The Epigont 2.0202. Fr
The Cypria ce na
heActhiopis’ 24308 Re 3 Se
The-Little Mad. co (34. . . BEER eee
The Sack of lium... . ©. /7e Ree
The Returns ... . .) wo . 2
The, Telegony ssa neee 22! Ae Ee ;


HOMERICA—
The Expedition of Amphiaratis . ... i. i. 4).
The Taking of Oechalia . . . .° eee Gilat
The Phocais' . - ) 50...) .
The Margites. . 2.) . Se ire ae
The Cercopes. . ....\. . . . «Rn
The Battle of the Frogs and Mice . (...ae.cenalG wee

THE CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD. ......

TMDEX: ok a ee ee


Vill


INTRODUCTION


General


Tue early Greek epic—that is, epic poetry as a
natural and popular, and not (as it became later) an
artificial and academic literary form—passed through
the usual three phases, of development, of maturity,
and of decline.

No fragments which can be identified as belonging
to the first period survive to give us even a
general idea of the history of the earliest epic,
and we are therefore thrown back upon the evidence
of analogy from other forms of literature and of
inference from the two great epics which have come
down to us. So reconstructed, the earliest period
appears to us as a time of slow development in which
the characteristic epic metre, diction, and structure
grew up slowly from crude elements and were
improved until the verge of maturity was reached.

The second period, which produced the /kad and
the Odyssey, needs no description here: but it is very
_important to observe the effect of these poems on
the course of post-Homeric epic. As the supreme
perfection and universality of the Jihad and the
Odyssey cast into oblivion whatever pre-Homeric poets
had essayed, so these same qualities exercised a
paralysing influence over the successors of Homer.
If they continued to sing like their great predecessor
of romantic themes, they were drawn as by a kind of


1X


INTRODUCTION


magnetic attraction into the Homeric style and |
manner of treatment, and became mere echoes of the
Homeric voice : in a word, Homer had so completely |
exhausted the epic genre, that after him further |
efforts were doomed to be merely conventional.
Only the rare and exceptional genius of Vergil and
Milton could use the Homeric medium without loss
of individuality: and this quality none of the later
epic poets seem to have possessed. Freedom from
the domination of the great tradition could only be ©
found by seeking new subjects, and such freedom i
was really only illusionary, since romantic subjects |
alone are suitable for epic treatment.

In its third period, therefore, epic poetry shows
two divergent tendencies. In Ionia and the islands
the epic poets followed the Homeric tradition, ©
singing of romantic subjects in the now stereotyped
heroic style, and showing originality only in their
choice of legends hitherto neglected or summarily
and imperfectly treated. In continental Greece,}
on the other hand, but especially in Boeotia, a new
form of epic sprang up, which for the romance and
mafos of the Ionian School substituted the practical
and matter-of-fact. It dealt in moral and practical
maxims, in information on technical subjects which
are of service in daily life—agriculture, astronomy,
augury, and the calendar—in matters of religion
and in tracing the genealogies of men. Its attitude
is summed up in the words of the Muses to the
writer of the Theogony: “We can tell many a feigned
tale to look like truth, but we can, when we will,
utter the truth” (Theog. 26-27). Such a poetry


* sc. in Boeotia, Locris and Thessaly : elsewhere the moye-
ment was forced and unfruitful,


Xx


INTRODUCTION


could not be permanently successful, because the


subjects of which it treats—if susceptible of poetic


treatment at all—were certainly not suited for epic


treatment, where unity of action which will sustain


interest, and to which each part should contribute,
is absolutely necessary. While, therefore, an epic
like the Odyssey is an organism and dramatic in
structure, a work such as the Theogony is a merely
artificial collocation of facts, and, at best, a pageant.
It is not surprising, therefore, to find that from the
first the Boeotian school is forced to season its matter
with romantic episodes, and that later it tends more
and more to revert (as in the Shield of Heracles) to
the Homeric tradition.


The Boeotsan School


How did the continental school of epic poetry
arise? ‘There is little definite material for an answer


_to this question, but the probability is that there were


at least three contributory causes. First, it is likely
that before the rise of the Ionian epos there existed
in Boeotia a purely popular and indigenous poetry
of a crude form: it comprised, we may suppose,
versified proverbs and precepts relating to life in
general, agricultural maxims, weather-lore, and the
like. In this sense the Boeotian poetry may be
taken to have its germ in maxims similar to our


English


“Till May be out, ne’er cast a clout,”
or


“A rainbow in the morning


Is the Shepherd’s warning.”


Xl


INTRODUCTION


Secondly and thirdly we may ascribe the rise of the
new epic to the nature of the Boeotian people and, as
already remarked, to a spirit of revolt against the
old epic. The Boeotians, people of the class of which
Hesiod represents himself to be the type, were
essentially unromantic ; their daily needs marked the
general limit of pene ideals, and, as a class, they
cared little for works of fancy, for “pathos, or for fine
thought as such. To a people of this nature the
Homeric epos would be inacceptable, and the post-
Homeric epic, with its conventional atmosphere, its |
trite and hackneyed diction, and its insincere |
sentiment, would be anathema. We can imagine,
therefore, that among such folk a settler, of Aeolic
origin like Hesiod, who clearly was well acquainted
with the Ionian epos, would naturally see that the
only outlet for his gifts lay in applying epic poetry
to-new themes acceptable to his hearers.

Though the poems of the Boeotian school! were
unanimously assigned to Hesiod down to the age of
Alexandrian criticism, they were clearly neither the
work of one man nor even of one period: some,
doubtless, were fraudulently fathered on him in
order to gain currency; but it is probable that most
came to be regarded as his partly because of their
general character, and partly because the names of
their real authors were lost. One fact in this
attribution is remarkable—the veneration paid to
Hesiod.


1 The extant collection of hires poems, Works and Days,
Theogony, and Shield of Heracles, which alone have come
down to us complete, dates at least from the 4th century
AD.: the title of the Paris Papyrus (Bibl. Nat. Suppl.
Gr. 1099) names only these three works.


X1l


Se
>


INTRODUCTION


Life of Hesiod.—Our information respecting Hesiod


is derived in the main from notices and allusions in


the works attributed to him, and to these must


- be added certain traditions concerning his death and


burial gathered from later writers.

Hesiod’s father (whose name, by a perversion of
Works and Days, 299 UWépon Stov yevos to HWépon, Aiov
yévos, was thought to have been Dius) was a native of
Cyme in Aecolis, where he was a seafaring trader and,
perhaps, also a farmer. He was forced by poverty to
leave his native place, and returned to continental
Greece, where he settled at Ascra near Thespiae in
Boeotia (Works and Days, 636 ff.). Either in Cyme
or Ascra, two sons, Hesiod and Perses, were born to
the settler, and these, after his death, divided the
farm between them. Perses, however, who is re- —
presented as an idler and spendthrift, obtained and
kept the larger share by bribing the corrupt “lords”’
who ruled from Thespiae (Works and Days, 37-39).
While his brother wasted his patrimony and _ ulti-


mately came to want (Works and Days, 34 ff.), Hesiod


lived a farmer’s life until, according to the very early |
tradition preserved by the author of the 7 heogony
(22-23), the Muses met him as he was tending
sheep on Mt. Helicon and “taught him a glorious
song’’—doubtless the Works and Days. The only
other personal reference is to his victory in a poetical
contest at the funeral games of Amphidamas at
Chalcis in Euboea, where he won the prize, a tripod,
which he dedicated to the Muses of Helicon (Works
and Days, 651-9).

Before we go on to the story of Hesiod’s death, it
will: be well to inquire how far the “ autobio-
graphical ” notices can be treated as_ historical,


Xili-


INTRODUCTION


especially as many critics treat some, or all of them,
as spurious. In the first place attempts have been
made to show that “Hesiod” is a significant name
and therefore fictitious: it is only necessary to
mention Goettling’s derivation from ‘mus and 6dds
(which would make “ Hesiod” mean the “ guide”
in virtues and technical arts), and to refer to the
pitiful attempts in the Etymologicum Magnum (s.v.
‘Hoiodos), to show how prejudiced and lacking even
in plausibility such efforts are. It seems certain
that “ Hesiod” stands as a proper name in the fullest
sense. Secondly, Hesiod claims that his father—if not
he himself—came from Aeolis and settled in Boeotia.
There is fairly definite evidence to warrant our
acceptance of this: the dialect of the Works and
Days is shown by Rzach! to contain distinct
Aeolisms apart from those which formed part of the
general stock of epic poetry. And that this Aeolic
speaking poet was a Boeotian of Ascra seems even
more certain, since the tradition is never once
disputed, insignificant though the place was, even
before its destruction by the Thespians. |

Again, Hesiod’s story of his relations with his
brother Perses have been treated with scepticism
(see Murray, Anc. Gk. Literature, pp. 53-54): Perses,
it is urged, is clearly a mere dummy, set up to be the
target for the poet’s exhortations. On such a matter
precise evidence is naturally not forthcoming ; but
all probability is against the sceptical view. For (1)
if cb uarrel between the brothers were a fiction,
we should expect it to be detailed at length and not
noticed allusively and | rather ahecunt ead

ee eee woh ae


1 Der Dialekt des Hesiodos, p. 464: examples are atvnut
(W. and D. 683) and d&pomevat (tb. 22).


X1V


INTRODUCTION


_ it; (2) as MM. Croiset remark, if the poet needed_
a lay-figure the ordinary practice was to introduce

“some mythological person—as, in fact, is done in

_ thé Precepts-of-Ghiron. In a word, there is no more ~

_ solid ground for treating Perses and his quarrel with
Hesiod as fictitious than there would be for treating _
Cyrnus, the friend of Theognis, as mythical.

Thirdly, there is the passage in the Theogony
relating to Hesiod and the Muses. It is surely an
error to suppose that lines 22-35 all refer to Hesiod:

_ rather, the author of the Theogony tells the story of
his own inspiration by the same Muses who once
taught Hesiod glorious song. The lines 22-3 are
therefore a very early piece of tradition about
Hesiod, and though the appearance of Muses must
be treated as a graceful fiction, we find that a writer,
later than the Works and Days by perhaps no more
than three-quarters of a century, believed in the
actuality of Hesiod and in his life as a farmer or
shepherd. |

Lastly, there is the famous story of the contest in
song at Chalcis. In later times the modest version
in the Works and Days was elaborated, first by making
Homer the opponent whom Hesiod conquered, while
a later period exercised its ingenuity in working up
the story of the contest into the elaborate form in
which it still survives. Finally the contest, in which
the two poets contended with hymns to Apollo,!
was transferred to Delos. These developments cer-
tainly need no consideration ; are we to say the same


' T. W. Allen suggests that the conjoined Delian and
Pythian hymns to Apollo (Homeric Hymns III) may have
suggested this version of the story, the Pythian hymn
showing strong continental influence. ,


XV


INTRODUCTION


of the passage in the Works and Days? Critics from
Plutarch downwards have almost unanimously re-
jected the lines 654-662, on the ground that Hesiod’s
Amphidamas is the hero of the Lelantine war
between Chalcis and Eretria, whose death may be
placed circa 705 B.c.—a date which is obviously too
low for the genuine Hesiod. Nevertheless, there is
much to be said in defence of the passage. Hesiod’s
claim in the Works and Days is modest, since he
neither pretends to have met Homer, nor to have sung
in any but an impromptu, local festival, so that the
supposed interpolation lacks a sufficient motive. And
there is nothing in the context to show that Hesiod’s
Amphidamas is to be identified with that Amphi-
damas whom Plutarch alone connects with the
Lelantine War: the name may have been borne by
an earlier Chalcidian, an ancestor, perhaps, of the
person to whom Plutarch refers.

The story of the end of Hesiod may be told
in outline. After the contest at Chalcis, Hesiod
went to Delphi and there was warned that the “issue
of death should overtake him in the fair grove of
Nemean Zeus.”’ Avoiding therefore Nemea on the
Isthmus of Corinth, to which he supposed the oracle
to refer, Hesiod retired to Oenoé in Locris where he
was entertained by Amphiphanes and Ganyctor, sons
of a certain Phegeus. This place, however, was also’
sacred to Nemean Zeus, and the poet, suspected by
his hosts of having seduced their sister,! was mur-
dered there. His body, cast into the sea, was
brought to shore by dolphins and buried at Oenoé
(or, according to Plutarch, at Ascra) : at a later time
his bones were removed to Orchomenus. The whole


1 She is said to have given birth to the lyrist Stesichorus, ~
XVi


a ae


INTRODUCTION


story is full of miraculous elements, and the various
_ authorities disagree on numerous points of detail.
The tradition seems, however, to be constant in
declaring that Hesiod was murdered and buried at


Oenoé, and in this respect it is at least as old as the
time of Thucydides. - In conclusion it may be worth


| while to add the graceful epigram of Alcaeus of


Messene (Palatine Anthology, vii 55).


oe A (4

Aoxpidos év vemel oKxiepo véxvy Horddoto

Nvpdoar kpnviddwv otoav aro cdherépwv,

N 4 ¢ , / X / 9 A
Kal Tamov wWwcavto: yaXaKTe dé Toipeves aiyov
' €ppavav, €avOa pigamevor peActe-
Toinv yop Kal ynpvv amerveev évven Movoav

e , “ he ,

6 mpeaPevs Kaapov yevodpmevos ALLadwv.


“ When in the shady Locrian grove Hesiod
lay dead, the Nymphs washed his body with
water from their own springs, and heaped high
his grave ; and thereon the goat-herds sprinkled
offerings of milk mingled with yellow-honey :
such was the utterance of the nine Muses that
he breathed forth, that old man who had tasted

_of their pure springs.’


The Hesiodic Poems.—The Hesiodic poems fall into |
two groups according as they are didactic (technical


-or gnomic) or genealogical: the first group centres


round the Works and Days, the second round the
Theogony.

I. The Works and Days.—The poem consists of
four main sections (a) After the prelude, which
Pausanias failed to find in the ancient copy engraved
on lead seen by him on Mt. Helicon, comes a


general exhortation to industry. It begins with the


Xvi


INTRODUCTION


allegory of the two Strifes, who stand for wholesome >
Emulation and Quarrelsomeness respectively. Then
by means of the Myth of Pandora the poet shows 9
how evil and the need for work first arose, and goes —
on to describe the Five Ages of the World, tracing the
gradual increase of evil, and emphasizing the present
miserable condition of the world, a condition in which >
struggle is inevitable. Next, after the Fable of the.
Hawk and Nightingale, which serves as a condem-_
nation of violence and injustice, the poet passes on to—
contrast the blessings which Righteousness brings to —
a nation, and the punishment which Heaven sends |
down upon the violent, and the section concludes with ©
a series of precepts on industry and prudent conduct |
generally. (6) The second section shows how a man
may escape want and misery by industry and care both |
in agriculture and in trading by sea. Neither subject, |
it should be carefully noted, is treated in any way com-_
prehensively. (c) The third part is occupied with mis-—
cellaneous precepts relating mostly to actions of |
domestic and everyday life and conduct which have >
little or no connection with one another. (d) -The
final section is taken up with a series of notices on —
the days of the month which are favourable or
unfavourable for agricultural and other operations.
It is from the second and fourth sections that the ©
poem takes its name. At first sight such a work —
seems to be a misce any ol ipths stechuieal 2cvice: |
moral precepts, and folklore maxims without any
unifying — principle ; and critics have readily taken _
the view that the whole is a cento of fragments or —
short poems worked up by a redactor. Very
probably Hesiod used much material of a far older —
date, just as Shakespeare used the Gesta Roman- —


XVIil


PST. et eae


INTRODUCTION


_orum, old chronicles, and old plays; but close


inspection will show that the Works and Days has a-


real unity and that the picturesque title is somewhat


_ misleading. The poem —has properly no technical


object at all, but is moral :_its real-aim—is—to_show __
men how best to live in a difficult world. So viewed


the four seemingly gly independent sections will be


found to be linked together in a real bond of unity.
Such a connection between the first and second


_ sections is easily seen, but the links between these


and the third and fourth are no less real: to make ~
life go tolerably smoothly it is-most important to be


_ just and to know how to win a livelihood; but


happiness also largely depends on prudence and care


_ both in social and home life as well, and not least on
avoidance of actions which offend supernatural


powers and bring ill-luck. And _ finally, if your


industry is to be fruitful, you must know what days


are suitable for various kinds of work. This moral
aim—as opposed to the currently accepted technical
aim of the poem—explains the otherwise puzzling
incompleteness of the instructions on farming and
seafaring.

Of the Hesiodic poems similar in character to the
Works and Days, only the scantiest fragments survive.


- One at least of these, the Divination by Birds, was, as


we know from Proclus, attached to the end of the
Works until it was rejected by Apollonius Rhodius :
doubtless it continued the same theme of how to live,
showing how man can avoid disasters by attending
to the omens to be drawn from birds. It is possible
that the Astronomy or Astrology (as Plutarch calls {t)
was in turn appended to the Divination. It certainly


_ gave some account of the principal constellations, their


XIX
b..2


INTRODUCTION


dates of rising and setting, and the legends connected
with them, and probably showed how these influenced
human affairs or might be used as guides. The
Precepts of Chiron was a didactic poem made up of
moral and practical precepts, resembling the gnomic
sections of the Works and Days, addressed by the
Centaur Chiron to his pupil Achilles. Even less is)
known of the poem called the Great Works: the title
implies that it was similar in subject to the second ff
section of the Works and Days, but longer. Possible’
references in Roman writers! indicate that among
the subjects dealt with were the cultivation of the
vine and olive and various herbs. The inclusion of
the judgment of Rhadamanthys Cra age tar man
sow evil, he shall reap evil,” indicates a gnomic
element, ‘and the note by Proclus? on Works dnd Days
126 makes it likely that metals also were dealt with. |
It is therefore possible that another lost poem, the
Idaean Dactyls, which dealt with the discovery of.
metals and their working, was appended to, or even
was a part of the Great Works, jast as the
Divination by Birds was appended to the Works and
Days. |
II. The Genealogical Poems.—The only complete
poem of the genealogical group is the Theogony,
which traces from the beginning of things the descent —
and vicissitudes of the families of the gods. Like
the Works and Days this poem has no dramatic plot ;
but its unifying principle is clear and simple. The
gods are classified chronologically : as soon as one
generation is catalogued, the poet goes on to detail —


1 See Kinkel Hpic. Graec. Frag. i. 158 ff.
2 See Great Works, frag. 2


XX


INTRODUCTION


ene


} the offspring of each member of that generation. Ex-
| ceptions are only made in special cases, as the Sons —
‘of lIapetus (ll. 507-616) whose place is accounted for
_by their treatment by Zeus. The chief landmarks in
I the poem are as follows : after the first 103 lines, which
/ contain at least three distinct preludes, three pri-
| meval beings are introduced, Chaos, Earth and Eros
| —here an indefinite reproductive influence. Of these
| three, Earth produces Heaven to whom she bears the
_ Titans, the Cyclopes and the hundred-handed giants.
Se EThe Titans, oppressed by their father, revolt at the
instigation of Farth, under the leadership of Cronos,
and as a result Heaven and Earth are separated,} and
Cronos reigns over the universe. Cronos knowing
that he is destined to be overcome by one of his
children, swallows each one of them as they are
_ born, until Zeus, saved by Rhea, grows up and over-
comes Cronos in some struggle which is not described.
Cronos is forced to vomit up the children he had
swallowed, and these with Zeus divide the universe
between them, like a human estate. Two events
mark the early reign of Zeus, the war with the
_ Titans and the overthrow of Typhoeus, and as Zeus is
still reigning the poet can only go on to give a list
of gods born to Zeus by various goddesses. After
this he formally bids farewell to the cosmic and
_ Olympian deities and enumerates the sons born of
goddess to mortals. The poem closes with an
invocation of the Muses: to sing of the “ tribe of
women.’
This conclusion served to link the. Ti heogony to
what must have been a distinct poem, the Catalogues
of Women. This work was divided into four (Suidas


. 1 See note on p. 93.


‘\~ IF 2 is ¢ Se Se


XXl1


INTRODUCTION ~—


says five) books, the last one (or two) of which was —
known as the Eozae and may have been again a distinct |
poem: the curious title will be explained presently. ©
The Catalogues proper were a series of genealogies |)
which traced the Hellenic race (or its more important |
peoples and families) from a common ancestor. The |
reason why women are so prominent is obvious : since —
most families and tribes claimed to be descended |
from a god, the only safe clue to their origin was
through the mortal’ woman beloved by that god ; and —
it has also been pointed out that mutterrecht-still left —
its traces in northern Greece in historical times. 4

The following analysis (after Marckscheffel +) will
show the principle of its composition. From Prome- —
theus and Pronoia sprang Deucalion and Pyrrha,
the only survivors of the deluge, who had a son
Hellen (frag. 1), the reputed ancestor of the whole
Hellenic race. From the daughters of Deucalion
sprang Magnes and Macedon, ancestors of the
Magnesians and Macedonians, who are thus re-
presented as cousins to the true Hellenic stock.
Hellen had three sons, Dorus, Xuthus and Aeolus,
parents of the Dorian, Ionic and Aeolian races, and
the offspring of these was then detailed. In one
instance a considerable and characteristic section can
be traced from extant fragments and notices: Sal-
moneus, son of Aeolus, had a daughter Tyro who
bore to Poseidon two sons, Pelias and Neleus; the
latter of these, king of Pylos, refused Heracles
purification for the murder of Iphitus, whereupon
Heracles attacked and sacked Pylos, killing amongst
the other sons of Neleus Periclymenus, who had the
power of changing himself into all manner of shapes.


1 Hesiodi Fragmenta, pp. 119 f. ”


XXll


INTRODUCTION


_ From this slaughter Neleus alone escaped (frags. 13,
-and 10-12). This summary shows the general
| principle of arrangement of the Catalogues: each
| line seems to have been dealt with in turn, and the
monotony was relieved as far as possible by a brief
relation of famous adventures connected with any
of the personages—as in the case of Atalanta and
Hippomenes (frag. 14). Similarly the story of the
Argonauts appears from the fragments (37-42) to
have been told in some detail.

This tendency to introduce romantic epiebes led
to an important development. Several poems are
ascribed to Hesiod, such as the Epithalamium of Peleus
and Thetis, the Descent of Theseus into Hades, or the
Circuit of the Earth (which must have been connected
with the story of Phineus and the Harpies, and so
with the Argonaut-legend), which yet seem to have
belonged to the Catalogues. It is highly probable
that these poems were interpolations into the Cata-
logues expanded by later poets from more summary
notices in the genuine Hesiodic work and _ sub-
sequently detached from their contexts and treated as
independent. This is definitely known to be true of
the Shield of Heracles, the first 53 lines of which
belong to the fourth book of the Catalogues, and
almost certainly applies to other episodes, such as
the Suitors of Helen; the Daughters of Leucippus, and
the Marriage of Ceyx, which last Plutarch mentions
as “interpolated in the works of Hesiod.”

To the Catalogues, as we have said, was appended
another work, the EKozae. The title seems to have


* Possibly the division of this poem into two books (see
p- 199) is a division belonging solely to this ‘‘ developed
poem,’ which may have included in its second part a
eae ee of the Tale of Troy.


Xxili


INTRODUCTION


arisen in the following way !: the Catalogues probably
ended (cp. Theogony 563 Hf. ) ‘with some such passage
as this: “ But now, ye Muses, sing of the tribes of
women with whom ‘the Sons of Heaven were joined *
in love, women pre-eminent above their fellows in
beauty, such (oi7) as was Niobe(?).”’ Each succeeding
heroine was then introduced by the formula % oty “ Or
such as was...” (cp. frags. 88, 92, ete.). A large
fragment of the Kozae is extant at the beginning of
the Shield of Heracles, which may be mentioned
here. The “supplement ”’ (ll. 57-480) is nominally
devoted to a description of the combat between
Heracles and Cycnus, but the greater part is taken
up with an inferior description of the shield of
Heracles, in imitation of the Homeric shield of
Achilles (Jad xviii. 478 ff.). Nothing shows more
clearly the collapse of the principles of the Hesiodic
school than this ultimate servile dependence upon
Homeric models.

At the close of the Shield Heracles goes on to
Trachis to the house of Ceyx, and this warning |
suggests that the Marriage of Ceyx may have come
immediately after the 7 oi of Alemena in the Fozae :
possibly Halcyone, the wife of Ceyx, was one of
the heroines sung in the poem, and the original
section was ‘‘ developed’ into the Marriage, although
what form the poem took is unknown.

Next to the Eozae and the poems which seemed to
have been developed from it, it is natural to place
the Great Eowe. This, again, as we know from
fragments, was a list of heroines who bare children to
the gods: from the title we must suppose it to have
been much longer than the simple Lozae, but its


1 Goettling’s explanation.


XXIV


INTRODUCTION


_ extent is unknown. Lehmann, remarking that the
_ heroines are all Boeotian and Thessalian (while the
_ heroines of the Catalogues belong to all parts of the
- Greek world), believes the author to have been either
_ a Boeotian or Thessalian.


Two other poems are ascribed to Hesiod. Of


‘ these-the Aegimius (also ascribed by Athenaeus to
_ Cercops of Miletus), is thought by Valckenaer to
_ deal with the war of Aegimius against the Lapithae


_ and the aid furnished to him by Heracles, and with


Ope CEN SPECI WORE Tet


_ the history of Aegimius and his sons. Otto Miiller

suggests that the introduction of Thetis and of
 Phrixus (frags. 1-2) is to be connected with notices of
_ the allies of the Lapithae from Phthiotis and Iolchus,
_ and thatthe story of Io was incidental to a narrative of


Heracles’ expedition against Kuboea.. The remaining


_ poem, the Melampodia, was a work in three books,
_ whose plan it is impossible to recover. Its subject,


however, seems to have been the histories of famous
seers like Mopsus, Calchas, and Teiresias, and it


probably took its name from Melampus, the most


famous of them all.


Date of the Hestodic Poems.—There is no doubt


that the Works and Days is the oldest, as it is the


most original, of the Hesiodic poems. It seems to
be distinctly earlier than the T'heogony, which refers
to it, apparently, as a poem already renowned.
Two considerations help us to fix a relative date for
the Works. (1) In diction, dialect and style it is
obviously dependent upon Homer, and is therefore
considerably later than the Ihad and Odyssey:
moreover, as we have seen, it is in revolt against the
romantic school, already grown decadent, and while


XXV


INTRODUCTION


the digamma is still living, it is obviously growing
weak, and is by no means uniformly effective.

(2) On the other hand while tradition steadily
puts the Cyclic poets at various dates from 776 B.c.
downwards, it is equally consistent in regarding
Homer and Hesiod as “prehistoric.” Herodotus
indeed puts both poets 400 years before his’ own
time ; that is, at about 830-820 B.c., and the evidence
stated above points to the middle of the ninth
century as the probable date for the Works and
Days. The Theogony might be tentatively placed
a century later; and the Catalogues and Hotae are
again later, but not greatly later, than the Theo-
gony: the Shield of Heracles may be ascribed to
the later half of the seventh century, but there is
not evidence enough to show whether the other
“ developed’”’ poems are to be regarded as of a date
so low as this.


Literary Value of Hestod.—Quintilian’s+ judgment
on Hesiod that “he rarely rises to great heights .. .
and to him is given the palm in the middle-class of
speech” is just, but is liable to give a wrong
impression. Hesiod has nothing that remotely
approaches such scenes as that between Priam and
Achilles, or the pathos of Andromache’s preparations
for Hector’s return, even as he was falling before
the walls of Troy; but in matters that come within
the range of ordinary experience, he rarely fails to rise
to the appropriate level. Take, for instance, the
description of the Iron Age (Works and Days, 182 ff.)
with its catalogue of wrongdoing and violence ever
increasing until Aidés and Nemesis are forced ‘to


ex LS ee!


XXVvil


INTRODUCTION


leave mankind who thenceforward shall have “no
remedy against evil.” Such occasions, however,
rarely occur and are perhaps not characteristic of
Hesiod’s genius: if we would see Hesiod at his best,
in his most natural vein, we must turn to such a
passage as that which he himself—according to the
compiler of the Contest of Hesiod and Homer—
selected as best in ail his work, “ When the Pleiades,
Atlas’ daughters, begin to rise...”’ (Works and Days,
383 ff.). The value of such a passage cannot be
analysed: it can only be said that given such a
subject, this alone is the right method of treatment.

Hesiod’s diction is in the main Homeric, but one
of his charms is the use of quaint allusive phrases
derived, perhaps, from a pre-Hesiodic peasant poetry :
thus the season when Boreas blows is the time when
“the Boneless One gnaws his foot by his fireless
hearth in his cheerless house’; to eut one’s nails is
“to sever the withered from the quick upon that
which has five branches”; similarly the burglar
is the “day-sleeper,’ and the serpent is the “ hairless
one. Very similar is his reference to seasons
through what happens or is done in that season:
“when the House-carrier, fleeing the Pleiades, climbs
up the plants from the earth,” is the season for
_ harvesting ; or “ when the artichoke flowers and the
clicking grass-hopper, seated in a tree, pours down
his shrill song,’ is the time for rest.

Hesiod’s charm lies in his child-like and sincere
naiveté, in his unaffected interest in and picturesque
view of nature and all that happens in nature.
These qualities, it is true, are those pre-eminently of
the Works and Days: the literary virtues of the
Theogony are of a more technical character, skill in


XXVii


INTRODUCTION


ordering and disposing long lists of names, sure
judgment in seasoning a monotonous subject with
marvellous incidents or episodes, and no mean
imagination in depicting the awful, as is shown in
the description of Tartarus (lL 736-745). Yet it
remains true that Hesiod’s distinctive title to a high
place in Greek literature lies in the very fact of his
freedom from classic form, and his grave, and yet
child-like, outlook upon his world. |


The lonic School


The fonic School of Epic poetry was, as we have
seen, dominated by the Homeric tradition, and while
the style and method of treatment are Homeric, it is
natural that the Lonic poets refrained from cultivating
the ground tilled by Homer, and chose for treatment
legends which lay beyond the range of the /iad and
Odyssey. Equally natural it is that they should
have particularly selected various phases of the tale —
of Troy which preceded or followed the action of
the Lad and Odyssey. In this way, without any pre-
conceived intention, a body of epic poetry was built
up by various writers which covered the whole
Trojan story. But the entire range of heroic legend
was open to these poets, and other clusters of epics
grew up dealing particularly with the famous story of
Thebes, while others dealt with the beginnings of -
the world and the wars of heaven. In the end there
existed a kind of epic history of the world, as known
to the Greeks, down to the death of Odysseus, when
the heroic age ended. In the Alexandrian Age
these poems were arranged in chronological order,


apparently by Zenodotus of Ephesus, at the beginning


XXVill


INTRODUCTION


of the 3rd century B.c. At a later time the term


= Cycle, “round” or “course” was given to this


collection.

Of all this mass of epic poetry only the scantiest
fragments survive ; but happily Photius has preserved
to us an abridgment of the synopsis made of each
poem of the “Trojan Cycle” by Proclus, z.e. Kutychius
Proclus of Sicea.

The pre-Trojan poems of the Cycle may be noticed
first. The T%tanomachy, ascribed both to Kumelus of
Corinth and to Arctinus of Miletus, began with a kind
of Theogony which told of the union of Heaven and
Earth and of their offspring the Cyclopes and the
Hundred-handed Giants. How the poem proceeded
we have no means of knowing, but we may suppose
that in character it was not unlike the short account
of the Titan War found in the Hesiodic Theogony
(617 ff).

What links bound the Titanomachy to the Theban
Cycle is not clear. This latter group was formed of
three poems, the Story of Oedipus, the Thebais, and
the Epigont. Of the Oedipodea practically nothing
is known, though on the assurance of Athenaeus
(vii. 277 £) that Sophocles followed the Epic Cycle
closely in the plots of his plays, we may suppose that
in outline the story corresponded closely to the
history of Oedipus as it is found in the Oedipus
Tyrannus. The Thebais seems to have begun with
the origin of the fatal quarrel between Eteocles and
Polyneices in the curse called down upon them by
their father in his misery. The story was thence
carried down to the end of the expedition under
Polyneices, Adrastus and Amphiaraus against Thebes.
The Ejugont (ascribed to Antimachus of Teos) re-


XX1X


INTRODUCTION


counted the expedition of the “ After-Born ” against
Thebes, and the sack of the city. |

The Trojan Cycle.—Six epics with the Ihad and
the Odyssey made up the Trojan Cycle—The Cyprian
Lays, the Ihad, the Aethops, the Lattle Ihad, the
Sack of Troy, the Returns, the Odyssey, and the
Telegony.

It has been assumed in the foregoing pages that
the poems of the Trojan Cycle are later than the
Homeric poems; but, as the opposite view has been
held, the reason for this assumption must now be given.
(1) Tradition puts Homer and the Homeric poems
proper back in the ages before chronological history
began, and at the same time assigns the purely
Cyclic poems to definite authors who are dated from |
the first Olympiad (776 3.c.) downwards. This
tradition cannot be purely arbitrary. (2) The Cyclic
poets (as we can see from the abstracts of Proclus)
were careful not to trespass upon ground already
occupied by Homer. Thus, when we find that in the
Returns all the prominent Greek heroes except
Odysseus are accounted for, we are forced to believe
that the author of this poem knew the Odyssey and
judged it unnecessary to deal in full with that hero's
adventures. In a word, the Cyclic poems are
“ written round”’ the Jad and the Odyssey. (3) The
general structure of these epics is clearly imitative. As
MM. Croiset remark, the abusive Thersites in the A ethz-
opts is clearly copied from the Thersites of the Jad: |
in the same poem Antilochus, slain by Memnon and
avenged by Achilles, is obviously modelled on Patro-
clus. (4) The geographical knowledge of a poem like


1 Odysseus appears to have been mentioned once only—and
that casually—in the Returns.


XXX


INTRODUCTION


the Returns is far wider and more precise than that of
the Odyssey. (5) Moreover, in the Cyclic poems epic:is
clearly degenerating morally—if the expression may
be used. The chief greatness of the Jad is in the
character of the heroes Achilles and Hector rather
than in the actual events which take place: in the
Cyclic writers facts rather than character are the
objects of interest, and events are so packed together
as to leave no space for any exhibition of the play of
moral forees. All these reasons justify the view that
the poems with which we now have to deal were
later than the Jad and Odyssey, and if we must
recognize the possibility of some conventionality in
the received dating, we may feel confident that it
is at least approximately just.

The earliest of the post-Homeric epics of Troy are
apparently the Aethopis and the Sack of Ilium, both
ascribed to Arctinus of Miletus who is said to have
flourished in the first Olympiad (776 B.c.). He set
himself to finish the tale of Troy, which, so far as
events were concerned, had been left half-told by
Homer, by tracing the course of events after the
close of the Iliad. The Aethiopis thus included the
coming of the Amazon Penthesilea to help the
Trojans after the fall of Hector and her death, the
similar arrival and fall of the Aethiopian Memnon,
the death of Achilles under the arrow of Paris, and
the dispute between Odysseus and Aias for the arms
of Achilles. The Sack of Ilum1 as analysed by


Proclus was very similar to Vergil’s version in


1 MM. Croiset note that the Aethiopis and the Sack were
originally merely parts of one work containing lays (the
Amazoneia, Aethiopis, Persis, etc.), just as the IJlad
contained various lays such as the Diomedeia.


XXxl1


INTRODUCTION


Aeneid ii, comprising the episodes of the wooden
horse, of Laocoon, of Sinon, the return of ‘the
Achaeans from Tenedos, the actual Sack of Troy, the
division of spoils and the burning of the city.

Lesches or Lescheos (as Pausanias calls him) of
Pyrrha or Mitylene is dated at about 660 B.c.
In his Lettle Ihkad he undertook to elaborate the
Sack as related by Arctinus. His work included the
adjudgment of the arms of Achilles to Odysseus,
the madness of Aias, the bringing of Philoctetes
from Lemnos and his cure, the coming to the war of
Neoptolemus who slays Eurypylus, son of Telephus,
the making of the wooden horse, the spying of
Odysseus and his theft, along with Diomedes, of the
Palladium : the analysis concludes with the admission
of the wooden horse into Troy by the Trojans. It is
known, however (Aristotle, Poetics, xxiii; Pausanias,
x, 25-27), that the Little Ihad also contained a
description of the Sack of Troy. It is probable that
this and other superfluous incidents disappeared after
the Alexandrian arrangement of the poems in the
Cycle, either as the result of some later recension,
or merely through disuse. Or Proclus may have
thought it unnecessary to give the accounts by
Lesches and Arctinus of the same incident.

The Cyprian Lays, ascribed to Stasinus of Cyprus!
(but also to Hegesinus of Salamis) was designed to do
for the events preceding the action of the iad what
Arctinus had done for the later phases of the Trojan
War. The Cypria begins with the first causes of the
war, the purpose of Zeus to relieve the overburdened
earth, the apple of discord, the rape of Helen. Then


1 No date is assigned to him, but it seems likely that he
was either contemporary or slightly earlier than Lesches,


XXXIl1


INTRODUCTION


_ follow the incidents connected with the gathering of
' the Achaeans and their ultimate landing in Troy;
- and the story of the war is detailed up to the quarrel
_ between Achilles and eigamemnon with which the
Iliad begins.
_ These four poems rounded off the story of the
_ Iliad, and it only remained to connect this enlarged
_ version with the Odyssey. This was done by means of
_ the Returns, a poem in five books ascribed to Agias
_ or Hegias of Troezen, which begins where the Sack
_of Troy ends. It told of the dispute between
Agamemnon and Menelaus, the departure from Troy
_ of Menelaus, the fortunes of the lesser heroes, the
_ return and tragic death of Agamemnon, and the
_ vengeance of Orestes on Aegisthus. The story ends
_ with the return home of Menelaus, which brings the
general narrative up to the beginning of the

Odyssey.
_ But the Odyssey itself left much untold: what,
_ for example, happened in Ithaca after the slaying of
the suitors, and what was the ultimate fate of
_ Odysseus? The answer to these questions was
supplied by the Zelegony, a poem in two books by
Kugammon of Cyrene (fl. 568 B.c.). It told of
_ the adventures of Odysseus in Thesprotis after the
killing of the Suitors, of his return to Ithaca, and his
death at the hands of Telegonus, his son by
Circe. The epic ended by disposing of the
surviving personages in a double marriage, Telema-
chus wedding Circe, and Telegonus Penelope.

The end of the Cycle marks also the end of the
Heroic Age.


XKXIil


INTRODUCTION


The Homeric Hymns.


The collection of thirty-three Hymns,ascribed to —
Homer, is the last considerable work of the ©
Epic School, and seems, on the whole, to be later —
than the Cyclic poems. It cannot be definitely
assigned either to the Ionian or Continental schools, ©
for while the romantic element is very strong,
there is a distinct genealogical interest; and in —
matters of diction and style the influences of both
Hesiod and Homer are well-marked. The date —
of the formation of the collection as suchis unknown. |
Diodorus Siculus (temp. Augustus) is the first to —
mention such a body of poetry, and it is likely enough —
that this is, at least substantially, the one which has —
come down tq us. Thucydides quotes the Delian
Hymn to Apollo, and it is possible that the Homeric
corpus of his day also contained other of the more
important hymns. Conceivably the collection was
arranged in the Alexandrine period.

Thucydides, in quoting the Hymn to Apollo, waltld
it mpootyiov, which ordinarily means a “prelude ”
chanted by a rhapsode before recitation of a lay from
Homer, and such hymns as Nos. vi, x, Xxxi, xxxil,
are clearly preludes in the strict sense; in No. xxxi,
for example, after celebrating Helios, the poet
declares he will next sing of the “race of mortal
men, the demi-gods.”’ But it may fairly be doubted
whether such Hymns as those to Demeter (ii), Apollo
(iii), Hermes (iv), Aphrodite (v), can have been real
preludes, in spite of the closing formula “ and now I
will pass on to another hymn.” ‘The view taken by
Allen and Sikes, amongst other scholars, is doubtless
right, that these longer hymns are only technically


XXKX1V


INTRODUCTION


_preludes and show to what disproportionate lengths
'a simple literary form can be developed. The
_ Hymns to Pan (xix), to Dionysus (xxvi), to Hestza and
_ Hermes (xxix), seem to have been designed for use
_ at definite religious festivals, apart from recitations.
_ With the exception perhaps of the Hymn to Ares
_ (viii), no item in the collection can be regarded as
_ either devotional or liturgical.

_ The Hymn is doubtless a very ancient form; but
if no examples of extreme antiquity survive this
_ must be put down to the fact that until the age of
literary consciousness, such things are not preserved.

First, apparently, in the collection stood the Hymn
to Dionysus, of which only two fragments now survive.
While it appears to have been a hymn of the longer
_ type,' we have no evidence to show gither its scope
or date.

The Hymn to Demeter, extant only in the MS.
discovered by Matthiae at Moscow, describes the
seizure of Persephone by Hades, the grief of
Demeter, her stay at Eleusis, and her vengeance on
gods and men by causing famine. In the end Zeus
is forced to bring Persephone back from the lower
world ; but the goddess, by the contriving of Hades,
still remains partly a deity of the lower world. In
memory of her sorrows Demeter establishes the
Eleusinian mysteries (which, however, were purely
agrarian in origin).

This hymn, as a literary work, is one of the finest

1 Cp. Allen and Sikes, Homeric Hymns p. xv. In the
text I have followed the arrangement of these scholars,
numbering the Hymns to Dionysus and to Demeter, I and Ul
respectively : to place Demeter after Hermes, and the Hymn
to Dionysus at the end of the collection seems to be merely
perverse.

XXXV
G2


INTRODUCTION


in the collection. It is surely Attic or Eleusinian in ©
origin. Can we in any way fix its date? Firstly, it ©
is certainly not later than the beginning of the sixth |
century, for it makes no mention of Iacchus, and the —
Dionysiac element was introduced at Eleusis at about —
that period. Further, the insignificance of Triptolemus |
and Eumolpus point to considerable antiquity, and |
the digammna is still active. All these considerations —
point to the seventh century as the probable date |
of the hymn. |

The Hymn to Apollo consists of two parts, which —
beyond any doubt were originally distinct, a Delian —
hymn and a Pythian hymn.* The Delian hymn ~
describes how Leto, in travail with Apollo, sought ~
out a piace i in which to bear her son, and how Apollo,
born in Delos, at once claimed for himself the lyre,
the bow, and prophecy. This part of the existing
hymn ends with an encomium of the Delian festival
of Apollo and of the Delian choirs. The second part
celebrates the founding of Pytho (Delphi) as the
oracular seat of Apollo. After various wanderings
the god comes to Telphusa, near Haliartus, but is
dissuaded by the nymph of the place from settling
there and urged to go on to Pytho where, after slaying
the she-dragon who nursed Typhaon, he builds his
temple. After the punishment of Telphusa for her
deceit in giving him no warning of the dragoness at
Pytho, Apollo, in the form of a dolphin, brings
certain Cretan shipmen. to Delphi to be his priests ;
and the hymn ends with a charge to these men to
behave orderly and righteously.

The Delian part is exclusively Ionian and insular
both in style and sympathy ; Delos and no other is
Apollo’s chosen seat : Bue, the second part is as


XXXVI


INTRODUCTION


: definitely continental; Delos is ignored and Delphi
_alone is the important centre of Apollo’s worship.
' From this it is clear that the two parts need not be
' of one date—The first, indeed, is ascribed (Scholiast
_ on Pindar Nem. ii, 2) to Cynaethus of Chios (fl. 504
 B.c.), a date which is obviously far too low; general
_ considerations point rather to the eighth century.


The second part is not later: than 600 z.c.; for (1) the
chariot-races at Pytho, which commenced in 586 B.c.,
are unknown to the writer of the hymn, (2) the temple


built by Trophonius and Agamedes for Apollo (IL.


294-299) seems to have been still standing when the
hymn was written, and this temple was “burned in


_ 548. We may at least be sure that the first part is


_ a Chian work, and that the second was composed by a
_ continental poet familiar with Delphi.


The Hymn to Hermes differs from Gfiiere” in its


burlesque, quasi-comic character, and it is also the


_ best-known of the Hymns to English readers in


consequence of Shelley’s translation.

After a brief narrative of the birth of Hermes,
the author goes on to show how he won a place
among the gods. First the new-born child found a


_ tortoise and from its shell contrived the lyre; next,
_ with much cunning circumstance, he stole Apollo's


cattle and, when charged with the theft by Apollo,


_ forced that god to appear in undignified guise before
_ thetribunal of Zeus. Zeus seeks to reconcile the pair,


and Hermes by the gift of the lyre wins Apollo's
friendship and purchases various prerogatives, a share
in divination, the lordship of herds and animals,
and the office of messenger from the gods to Hades.

The hymn is hard to date. Hermes’ lyre has
seven strings and the invention of the seven-stringed


XXXVI


INTRODUCTION


lyre is ascribed to Terpander (flor. 676 B.c.). The ©
hymn must therefore be later than that date, though
Terpander, according to Weir Smyth,' may have only
modified the scale of the lyre; yet while the burlesque
character precludes an early date, this feature is far
removed, as Allen and Sikes remark, from the silliness
of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, so that a date in
the earlier part of the sixth century is most probable.

The Hymn to Aphrodite is not the least remarkable,
from a literary point of view, of the whole collection, —
exhibiting as it does in a masterly manner a divine _
being as the unwilling victim of an irresistible force. |
It tells how all creatures, and even the gods them- —
selves, are subject to the will of Aphrodite, saving only ~
Artemis, Athena, and Hestia; how Zeus to humble her
pride of power caused her to love a mortal, Anchises ;
and how the goddess visited the hero upon Mt. Ida.
A comparison of this work with the Lay of Demodocus |
(Odyssey viii, 266 ff.), which is superficially similar, will _
show how far superior is the former in which the ©
goddess is but a victim to forces stronger than herself.
The lines (247-255) in which Aphrodite tells of her
humiliation and grief are specially noteworthy.

There are only general indications of date. The
influence of Hesiod is clear, and the hymn has almost
certainly been used by the author of the Hymn to
Demeter, so that the date must lie between these two
periods, and the seventh century seems to be the
latest date possible.

The Hymn to Dionysus relates how the god was
seized by pirates and how with many manifestations
of power he avenged himself on them by turning them
into dolphins. The date is widely disputed, for while


1 Greek Melic Poets, p. 165.
XXXVIli


INTRODUCTION


_ lLudwich believes it to be a work of the fourth or
_ third century, Allen and Sikes consider a sixth or
| seventh century date to be possible. The story is
- figured in a different form on the reliefs from the
choragic monument of Lysicrates, now in the British
Museum.

Very different in character is the Hymn to Ares,
which is Orphic in character. The writer, after
lauding the god by detailing his attributes, prays to
be delivered from feebleness and weakness of soul,
as also from impulses to wanton and brutal violence.

The only other considerable hymn is that to Pan,
which describes how he roams hunting among the
mountains and thickets and streams, how he makes
music at dusk while returning from the chase, and
how he joins in dancing with the nymphs who sing
the story of his birth. This, beyond most works of
Greek literature, is remarkable for its fresh and
spontaneous love of wild natural scenes.

The remaining hymns are mostly of the briefest
compass, merely hailing the god to be celebrated and
mentioning his chief attributes. The Hymns to
Hermes (xvii) to the Dioscurt (xvii) and to Demeter
(xiii) are mere abstracts of the longer hymns iv,
XXxiii, and ii.


The Epigrams of Homer


The Epigrams of Homer are derived from the
pseudo-Herodotean Life of Homer, but many of them
occur in other documents such as the Contest of
Homer and Hesiod, or are quoted by various ancient
authors. These poetic fragments clearly antedate
the “ Life” itself, which seems to have been so written


XXX1X


INTRODUCTION


round them as to supply appropriate occasions for
their composition. Epigram ili. on Midas of Larissa
was otherwise attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus, one
of the Seven Sages; the address to Glaucus (xi) is
purely Hesiodic ; xiii, according to MM. Croiset, is a
fragment from a gnomic poem. Epigram xiv is a
curious poem attributed on no very obvious grounds
to Hesiod by Julius Pollux. In it the poet invokes
Athena to protect certain potters and their craft, if
they will, according to promise, give him a reward for
his song; if they prove false, malignant gnomes are
invoked to wreck the kiln and hurt the potters.


The Burlesque Poems


To Homer were popularly ascribed certain bur-
lesque poems in which Aristotle (Poetics iv) saw
the germ of comedy. Most interesting of these,
were it extant, would be the Margites. The hero of
the epic is at once sciolist and simpleton, “knowing
many things, but knowing them all badly.” It is
unfortunately impossible to trace the’ plan of the
poem, which presumably detailed the adventures of
this unheroic character: the metre used was a
curious mixture of hexametric and iambic lines.
The date of such a work cannot be high: Croiset
thinks it may belong to the period of Archilochus
(c. 650 B.c.), but it may well’be somewhat later.

Another poem, of which we know even less, is the
Cercopes. These Cercopes (“ Monkey-Men”’) were a
pair of malignant dwarfs who went about the world
mischief-making. Their punishment by Heracles
is represented on one of the earlier metopes from
Selinus. It would be idle to speculate as to the date
of this work.


xl


INTRODUCTION


Finally there is the Battle of the Frogs and Mice.
Here is told the story of the quarrel which arose


_ between the two tribes, and how they fought, until


ag


Zeus sent crabs to break up the battle. It is a
parody of the warlike epic, but has little in it that is
really comic or of literary merit, except perhaps the
list of quaint arms assumed by the warriors. The
text of the poem is in a chaotic condition, and there
are many interpolations, some of Byzantine date.
Though popularly ascribed to Homer, its real
author is said by Suidas to have been Pigres, a
Carian, brother of Artemisia, “wife of Mausolus,”’
who distinguished herself at the battle of Salamis.
Suidas is confusing the two Artemisias, but he may
be right in attributing the poem to about 480 z.c.


The Contest’ of Homer and Hesiod


This curious work dates in its present form from
the lifetime or shortly after the death of Hadrian,
but seems to be based in part on an earlier version
by the sophist Alcidamas (c. 400 B.c.). Plutarch
(Conviv. Sept. Sap., 40) uses an earlier (or at least a
shorter) version than that which we possess.! The
extant Contest, however, has clearly combined with
the original document much other ill-digested matter
on the life and descent of Homer, probably drawing
on the same general sources as does the Herodotean
Life of Homer. Its scope is as follows : (1) the descent
(as variously reported) and relative dates of Homer


1 Cp. Marckscheffel, Hesiod: fragmenta, p. 35. The papyrus
fragment recovered by Petrie (Petrie Papyri, ed. Mahaffy,
p- 70, No. xxv.) agrees essentially with the extant document,
but differs in numerous minor textual points.


xli


INTRODUCTION


and Hesiod ; (2) their poetical contest at Chalcis ;
(3) the death of Hesiod; (4) the wanderings and
fortunes of Homer, with brief notices of the circum-
stances under which his reputed works were com-
posed, down to the time of his death.

The whole tract is, of course, mere romance ; its
only values are (1) the insight it gives into ancient
speculations about Homer; (2) a certain amount of
definite information about the Cyclic poems; and
(3) the epic fragments included in the stichomythia
of the Contest proper, many of which—did we possess —
the clue—would have to be referred to poems of the ©
Kpic Cycle. |


xlii


, Mx
ee
3
as
9
a
3
;
;
;
:
‘


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Hesiop.—The classification and numeration of MSS. here
followed is that of Rzach (1908). It is only necessary to add
that on the whole the recovery of Hesiodic papyri goes to
confirm the authority of the mediaeval MSS. At the same
time these fragments have produced much that is interesting
and valuable, such as the new lines, Works and Days
169 a-d, and the improved readings ib. 278, Theogony
91, 93. Our chiei gains from the papyri are the numerous
and excellent fragments of the Catalogues which have been
recovered.


Works and Days :—


Vienna, Rainer Papyri L.P. 21—9 (4th cent.).
Geneva, Naville Papyri Pap. 94 (6th cent.).
Oxyrhynchus Papyri 1090.!
Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2771 (11th cent.).
Florence, Laur. xxxi 39 (12th cent.).
Messina, Univ. Lib. Preexistens 11 (12th-—13th cent.).
Rome, Vatican 38 (14th cent. ).
Venice, Marc. ix 6 (14th cent.).
Florence, Laur. xxxi 37 (14th cent.).
3, >»  XxXxil 16 (13th cent.).
re », xxx 2 (14th cent.).
Milan, Ambros. G 32 sup. (14th cent.).
Florence, Bibl. Riccardiana 71 (15th cent.).
Milan, Ambros. J 15 sup. (15th cent.).
Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2773 (14th cent.).
2 ee Trinity College (Gale MS.), O. 9. 27 (13th-14th
cent. ).
Rome, Vatican 1332 (14th cent.).


These MSS. are divided by Rzach into the following
families, issuing from a common original :—
Ra = C Ya =D ba = E
Qb=FGH wb =IKLM $b = NOPQ


HOSEN RHO OQ wb


&


1 Not included in Rzach’s list.
xlii


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Theogony :—


Paris, Bibl. Nat. Suppl. Graec. (papyrus) 1099 (4th-
5th cent. ). |
London, British Museum clix (4th cent. ).
Vienna, Rainer Papyri L. P. 21-9 (4th cent.).
Paris, Bibl. Nat. Suppl. Graec. 663 (12th cent. ).
Florence, Laur. xxxii 16 (13th cent.).
, Cony. suppr. 158 (14th cent.).
Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2883 (15th cent.).
Rome, Vatican 915 (14th cent. ).
Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2772 (14th cent. ).
Florence, Laur. xxxi 32 (15th cent. ).
Venice, Mare. ix 6 (15th cent.).
Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2708 (15th cent.).
These MSS. are divided into two families :
oa = CD v= KL
Qb = EF
ne = GHI


Shield of Heracles :—


Oxyrhynchus Papyri 689 (2nd cent.).
Vienna, Rainer Papyri L.P. 21-29 (4th cent.).
Berlin Papyri, 9774 (1st cent.).
Paris, Bibl. Nat., Suppl. Graec. 663 (12th cent. ).

29 29 29 99 29 oe) (12th cent. ).
Milan, Ambros. C 222 (13th cent.).
Florence, Laur. xxxii 16 (13th cent.),
Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2773 (14th cent.).

. », 2772 (14th cent.).

Florence, Laur. xxxi 32 (15th cent.).
London, British Museum Harleianus (14th cent.),
Rome, Bibl Casanat. 356 (14th cent.).
Florence, Laur. Conv. suppr. 158 (14th cent. ).
Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2833 (15th cent. ). ,


These MSS belong to two families :
Qa = BCDF Ya = E
Ob = GHI vb = KLM
To these must be added two MSS. of mixed family :
N_ Venice, Mare. ix 6 (14th cent. ).
O Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2708 (15th cent. ).
xliv


HR Or EDO pb


ZORA Post seonweyt


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Editions of Hesiod :—


. ‘Demetrius Chalcondyles, Milan (?) 1493 (?) (editio princeps,


containing, however, only the Works and Days).

Aldus Manutius (Aldine edition), Venice, 1495 (complete
works).

_ Juntine Kditions, 1515 and 1540.

_ Trincavelli, Venice, 1537 (with scholia).


Of modern editions the following may be noticed :—


Gaisford, Oxford, 1814-1820; Leipzig, 1823 (with scholia :
in Poett. Graec. Minn II).

Goettling, Gotha, 1831 (3rd edition, Leipzig 1878).

Didot Edition, Paris, 1840.

Schémann, 1869.

Koechly and Kinkel, Leipzig, 1879.

Flach, Leipzig, 1874-8.

Rzach, Leipzig, 1902 (larger edition), 1908 (smaller edition).


On the Hesiodic poems generally the ordinary Histories of
Greek Literature may be consulted, but especially the His¢.
de la littérature Grecque I pp. 459 ff. of MM. Croiset. The
summary account in Prof. Murray’s Anc. Gk. Lit. is written
with a strong sceptical bias. Very valuable is the appendix
to Mair’s translation (Oxford, 1908) on The Farmer’s Year in
Hesiod. Recent work on the Hesiodic poems is reviewed in
full by Rzach in Bursian’s Jahresberichte vols. 100 (1899) and
152 (1911).

For the fragments of Hesiodic poems the work of
Markscheffel, Hesiodi Fragmenta (Leipzig, 1840), is most
valuable : important also is Kinkel’s HLpicorum Graecorum
Pragmenta 1 (Leipzig, 1877) and the editions of Rzach
noticed above. For recently discovered papyrus fragments
see Wilamowitz, Neue Bruchstticke d. Hesiod Katalog
(Sitzungsb. der k. preuss. Akad. fiir Wissenschaft, 1900, pp.
839-851.) A list of the papyri belonging to lost Hesiodic
works may here be added : all are from the Catalogues.


(1) Berlin Papyri 7497! (2nd cent.) \irra v7.
*(2) Oxyrhynchus Papyri 421 (2nd © ois i; B°


1 See Schubart, Berl. Klassikertexte v. 1. 22 ff.; the other


papyri may be found in the publications whose name they
bear,


xlv


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Petrie Papyri iii 3. \ Frag.
Papiri greci e latine. No. 130 (2nd to 3rd cent.) f 14.
Strassburg Papyri, 55 (2nd cent.) Frag. 58. )
Berlin Papyri 9739! (2nd cent.) \ 4

Fe Te taBn0 3 tard ea | Prag. 58.

a » 9777} (4th cent.) Frag. 98.
) Papiri greci e latene, No. 131 (2nd-8rd deeiees Frag. 99.


The Homeric Hymns :—The text of the Homeric hymns is
distinctly bad in condition, a fact which may be attributed
to the general neglect under which they seem to have
laboured at all periods previously to the Revival of Learning.
Very many defects have been corrected by the various
editions of the Hymns, but a considerable number still defy
all efforts ; and especially an abnormal number of undoubted
lacunae disfigure the text. | Unfortunately no papyrus frag-
ment of the Hymns has yet emerged, though one such frag-
ment (Berl. Klassikertexte v. 1. pp. 7 ff.) contains a paraphrase
of a poem very closely parallel to the Hymn to Demeter.

The mediaeval MSS.? are thus enumerated by Dr. T. W.
Allen :—


A Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2763.
At Athos, Vatopedi 587.


Net ee ee


B Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2765.

C Paris, Bibl. Nat. 2833.

r Brussels, Bibl. Royale 11377-11380 (16th cent. ).
D Milan, Ambros. B 98 sup.

E Modena, Estense ii EK 11.

G Rome, Vatican, Regina 91 (16th cent.).
H. London, British Mus. Harley 1752.

J Modena, Estense, ii B 14.

K.. Florence, Laur. 31, 32.

L a 5, 32, 45.

L, 29 9 70, 30

L, 32, 4.

M


Leyden (the “Moscow MS. ) 833 H (14th cent. ).
Mon. Munich, Royal Lib. 333 c.

N_ Leyden, 74 ¢.

O Milan, Ambros. C 10 inf.


1 See note on page xlv.
2 Unless otherwise noted, all these MSS. are of the 15th
century.


xlvi


BIBLIOGRAPHY


b P Rome, Vatican Pal. graec. 179.


M1! Paris, Bibl. Nat. Suppl. graec. 1095.
Q Milan, Ambros. 8 31 sup.


f s Florence, Bibl. Riccard. 53 K ii 13.


v4 52 K ii 14.
Ss” Rome, Vatican, Vaticani graec. 1880.
T Madrid, Public Library 24.
V Venice, Mare. 456.

The same scholar has traced all the MSS. back to a
common parent from which three main families are derived
(M had a separate descent and is not included in any
family) :—

=F.

x? = Lil (and more remotely) AtDSHJK.
y = ELNT (marginal readings).
p = ABCTGL*-LANOPQR,R.V Mon.


Hditions of the Homeric Hymns, &e.


Demetrius Chalcondyles, Florence, 1488 (with the Epigrams
and the battle of the Frogs and Mice in the ed. pr. of
Homer).

Aldine Edition, Venice, 1504.

Juntine Edition, 1537.

Stephanus, Paris, 1566 and 1588.

More modern editions or critical works of value are :—

Martin (Variarum Lectionum libb. iv), Paris, 1605.

Barnes, Cambridge, 1711.

Ruhnken, Leyden, 1782 (Epist. Crit. and Hymn to Demeter).

Ilgen, Halle, 1796 (with Epigrams and the Battle of Frogs
and Mice).

Matthiae, Leipzig, 1806 (with the Battle of Frogs and Mice).

Hermann, Berlin, 1806 (with Epigrams).

Franke, Leipzig, 1828 (with Epigrams and the Battle of the
Frogs and Mice).

Dindorff (Didot edition), Paris, 1837.

Baumeister (Battle of the Frogs and Mice), Gottingen, 1852.

(Hymns), Leipzig, 1860.

Gemoll, Leipzig, 1886.

Goodwin, Oxford, 1893.

Ludwich (Battle of the Frogs and Mice), 1896.

Allen and Sikes, London, 1904.

Allen (Homeri Opera v), Oxford$ 1912.


xlvii


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Of these éditions that of Messrs Allen and Sikes is by far
the best: not only is the text purged of the load of con-
jectures for which the frequent obscurities of the Hymns
offer a special opening, but the Introduction and the Notes
throughout are of the highest value. For a full discussion of
the MSS. and textual problems, reference must be made to
this edition, as also to Dr. T. W. Allen’s series of articles
in. the Journal of Hellenic Studies vols. xv ff. Among
translations those of J. Edgar (Hdinburgh, 1891) and of
Andrew Lang (London, 1899) may be mentioned.


The Epic Cycle. The fragments of the Epic Cycle being
drawn from a variety of authors, no list of MSS. can be
given. The following collections and editions may be
mentioned :—


Muller, Leipzig, 1829.

Dindorff (Didot edition of Homer), Paris, 1837-56.
Kinkel (Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta i, Leipzig, 1877.
Allen (Homeri Opera v), Oxford, 1912.


The fullest discussion of the problems and fragments of
the epic cycle is F. G. Welcker’s der epische Cyclus (Bonn,
vol. i, 1835: vol. ii, 1849: vol i, 2nd edition, 1865). . The
Appendix to Monro’s Homer’s Odyssey xii~xxiv (pp. 340 ff.)
deals with the Cylic poets in relation to Homer, and a clear
and reasonable discussion of the subject is to be found in
Croiset’s Hist. de la Littérature Grecque vol. i.


xlvili


as) :
BAB Sak ong


HSIOAOY EPPA KAI HMEPAI


Modoas Ieepinbev aovdjow Kretovaat
dedte, A’ évvérrete, ohétepov TaTép vpvetovoar
bvTe Sta Bpotol avdpes ows apatot Te haTot Te,
pyntot T appntot te Aros peyddoto Exnte.
¢ / \ \ if CF Oe 4 / |
péa pev yap Spider, péa dé Bpirdovta yaderres, 5
din) > Pee ) / ig \ CP a, Be
peta & apitnrov muvvdes Kal adnrov aé€er,
CoA ee + 3 va \ \ ] J /
pela O€ T (Ovver oKONLOV Kal aynvopa Kaper
Levs wriBpeuéerns, 05 UTéptata S@paTta vaies.
los 3 \ >A. / 9, sp, / :
KADOL tO@v aiwy Te, dikn O iOuve Oéusatas :
4 b] \ J / 3 ig / ej
‘ |
Turn: éy@ Oé Ke, Ilépon, érntupa pvOnocaipny. 10)


OvK apa podvov énv “Epid@y yévos, adr’ éri
yatav
IN PY, \ / b) i /
clot SVM THY MeV KEV eTTALVeToELE VONTAS,
a © 3 / LY » tae
1 O émipopntyn dia & avdrya Ovpov Eyovaw.
i) bev yap TONEMOV TE KaKOV Kal OnpLY OPeAXet,
axeTAin? ovTIs THY ye Pirel BpoTos, aAN vr
aVvayKnNs 15
aOavatov BovrAnow “Kpw timace Bapetav.
Thv © eTépnv mpotéony pev éyeivato Nvé&
épeBevyn, :
One S€ pv Kpovidns trifuyos, aibéps vaiwv,
yains év pi€nat, Kat avdpdor ToAAOV apelva*
TE KAL ATAAAMOV TEP OMMs emt Epryov eryepev. 20


2


Perey
sae Bi


HESIOD’S WORKS AND DAYS


Muses of Pieria who give glory through song,
come hither, tell of Zeus your father and chant his
praise. Through him mortal men are famed or un-
famed, sung or unsung alike, as great Zeus wills. |
For easily he makes strong, and easily he brings
the strong man low; easily he humbles the proud
and raises the obscure, and easily he straightens the
crooked and blasts the proud, — Zeus who thunders
aloft and has his dwelling most high. Attend thou


_ with eye and ear, and make judgements straight


_ with righteousness. And I, Perses, would tell of


true things.

So, after all, there was not one kind of Strife
alone, but all over the earth there are two. As for
the one, a man would praise her when he came to
understand her; but the other is blameworthy : and
they are wholly different in nature. For one fosters
evil war and battle, being cruel: her no man loves ;


_ but perforce, through the will of the deathless gods,


men pay harsh Strife her honour due. But the other
is the elder daughter of dark Night, and the son of
Cronos who sits above and dwells in the aether, set
her in the roots of the earth: and she is far kinder to


men. She stirs up even the shiftless to toil; for «


aaah 3
B 2


HESIOD


ELS ere pov yep Tis TE iOwv Epyoro varices !
TOVTLOV, OS oIrEevoee Mev cipoprevaue NOE purevely
oixov T ev OécOau: Enrol O€é TE yelTOVva yettov
els adevos oamevdovt: ayaby 8 “Epis Hoe
Sporotow.
Kab KEPApevs Kepael KOTEEL Kal TEKTOVL TEKTOD,
Kal  TT@XOS TTOXD pOovéer KaL aOLoos aoLo@.
5) Ilépon, OU be TadTa Te@ évixaTOeo Oud,
pndé ao "Hpis Kaxoxaptos amr épyou Oupov € épvKot
velnce OmeTrevovT’ ayopiis eTAKOUOD € cova.
apn yap T Ody TéXETAL VEUKE@Y a ayopewy TE,
@TUWE [LH Bios évoov é emneTavos KaTaKelT at
apaios, TOV yata pépet, Anpirepos aT HD.
TOU KE Koper a dusvos VELKEa Kat Sijpuv ¢ obérXoes
KTHWAG é€% GAANOTploLs' aot O ovKEeTL SeUTEPOY
ECTAL
@S Epdeww: ArAN avs dtaxpwwopeba veiKos
iOeinar Sixns, ait éx Atds elowy Aprorat.
On pev yap deh fjpov édacoducl’, ANNA TA” TONG
aprratov epopers péeya Kvdaivov Baciijas
Swpopayous, ov THVOE dixnv €OéXovet diKacoas.
VNT LOL, ove i icacw bdo@ ™EOV TLLOV TAVTOS
ovd dcop éy parany Te Kal aopoveho pey overap.
“Kpuparrepyap Exovet Beot Biov avOpeToirw"
pydtas yap Kev Kal eT HuaTte épydacato,
@OTE TE KELS evIQUTOV Exel Kal depryov éovTa:
ainpd KE m™Oadtov pev UTrep KaTvov ckaTtaleto,
géoya Booy & amoXolTO Kal HLOV@Y TANAEPYoV.
anda Leds Expuire YoNwaapmevos ppeotv NOL,
OTTe poy eCararnoe Hpopnbeds QYKVNOMLH TNS"
Tobvex ap avOpe@Troiow éunoato Kndea NUYpa.


1 CF: xarl(wy, other MSS. 2 Guyet: &\Aa te, MSS.


WORKS AND DAYS


_ “man grows eager to work when he considers his }_
_. neighbour, a rich man who hastens to plough and ;
; plant and put his house in good order fand neighbour, ak
«~ vies with his neighbour as he hurries after wealth. ,
his Strife is wholesome for men.) And potter is an gryl
/ with potter, and craftsman with craftsman, and beggar * \
_ { is jealous of beggar, and minstrel of minstrel. _
Perses, lay up these things in your heart, and do
not let that Strife who delights i in mischief hold your
heart back from work, while you peep and peer and
listen to the wrangles of the court-house. Little con-
cern has he with quarrels and courts who has not a
year's victuals laid up betimes, even that which the
earth bears, Demeter’s grain. When you have got
plenty of that, you can raise disputes and strive to
get another’s goods. But you shall have no second
chance to deal so again: nay, let us settle our dis-

- pute here with true judgement which is of Zeus and
is perfect. For we had already divided our inherit-
ance, but you seized the greater share and carried
it off, greatly swelling the glory of our bribe-swallow-
ing lords who love to judge such a. cause as this.
Fools! They know not how much more the half is
than the whole, nor what great advantage there is
2 mallow and asphodel. i

For the gods keep hidden from men the means of _
> ost wonts easily do work enough in aday to”

y you for a full year even without working ; soon
veal you put away your rudder over the smoke,
and the fields worked by ox and sturdy mule would
run to waste. But Zeus in the anger of his heart
hid it, because Prometheus the crafty deceived him ;
therefore he planned sorrow and mischief against


1 That is, the poor man’s fare, like ‘‘ bread and cheese.”


HESIOD


/ \ n \ \ OF > \ fp rts Pru res
Kptrwe 6€ wip: TO pwev avTLs évs Tats LatreToto 5h
éxrew”’ avOpedrrotat Aros Tdpa ponTloevTos Ot
év Kothk@ vapenkt Aadov Aia TEPTLKE PAVLOV.

Tov 6€ Xodwa dpevos mpooepn vehednyepeta Levs:

‘Lasretvovion, TAY TOY Tre pt pended El0as, |
Kabpers TUP Kheyas Kal epas ppévas NT EPOTEVT AS, 55h
colT avT@ weve Thyme Kal avdpdou ea copEevola wy.
toils 6 éy@ avtl mupos d@o@ KaKOV, @ KEV

ATAVTES
TEPTOVTAL Kare Oupoyv éov KaKkov app ayaTrovrTes.

‘Os épat é« 8 éyéXacce Tratip avopov TE

Oeay Te. |
“Hoatotov & éxéXevoe meptkduTov OTTL TaXLTTA 60
yaiav Boer dupe, év 0 avOp@mov Oéwev avonv |
kal cbévos, aBavatns bé Oehs eis Ora eioKew
mapOeviens KaXov eidos érnpatov: avTtap AOnynv
epya Ot OarKhoat, TOAVOaLOaNOV loTOv vpaivew"
Kal ape appuxent Keparyn Xpusenv ‘Ad@pooditny 65.
Kal TOCov apyaneov Kal ¥ YULoxepous percdwvas* |
ép o€ Dé pwev KUVEOY TE VOOV Kal éTriKXOTOV 7005
‘Eppeinv voye, Ssadxtopov ‘Apyeidhovryp.

A! Ds pal! o 2 éidovto Aul Kpovieove QVAKTL.
abtixa © éK yains TAAGTOEY KAVTOS “Appuyyrjers 70.
Taplév@ aidoun ¢ ixerov Kpovidewm dia Bovras:
Gace Oé Kal Koofinoe Dea yravKomis AOnvy:
appl d€ Ob Xapures te Deal Kal TOTVLA Ted
Oppous xpucetous Eecav ypoi* appl d€ THY ye

*Opat KaXMKO {LOL ore pov avleow elapwoiow" 75
[wavra Sé of xpot Kdopov édippoce Taddas
AO jun. ]
év 0 apa ot oTnlerat Oude Topos “Apycipovrns
wevdea 0 aipurtous Te Adyous Kal émixroTrov HO0S
6


WORKS AND DAYS


men. He hid fire; but that the noble son of
Iapetus stole again for men from Zeus the counsellor
in a hollow fennel-stalk, so that Zeus who delights
in thunder did not see it. But afterwards Zeus who
gathers the clouds said to him in anger :

‘‘Son of Iapetus, surpassing all in cunning, you
are glad that you have outwitted me and stolen fire
—a great plague to you yourself and to men that
shall be. But I will give men as the price for fire
an evil thing in which they may all be glad of heart
while they embrace their own destruction.”

So said the father of men and gods, and laughed
aloud. And he bade famous Hephaestus make haste
and mix earth with water and to put in it the voice
and strength of human kind, and fashion a sweet,
lovely maiden-shape, like to the immortal goddesses
in face; and Athene to teach her needlework and
the weaving of the varied web; and golden Aphro-
dite to shed grace upon her head and cruel longing
and cares that weary_the limbs. And he charged
Hermes the guide, the Slayer of Argus, to put in
her a shameless mind and a deceitful nature.

So he ordered. And they obeyed the lord Zeus
the son of Cronos. Forthwith the famous Lame God
moulded clay in the likeness of a modest maid, as the
son oi Cronos purposed. And the goddess bright-
eyed Athene girded and clothed her, and the divine
Graces and queenly Persuasion put necklaces of gold
upon her, and the rich-haired Hours crowned her
head with spring flowers. And Pallas Athene
bedecked her form with all manner of finery. Also
the Guide, the Slayer of Argus, contrived within her
lies and crafty words and a deceitful nature at the


7


HESIOD


[revEe Ads BovrAjos PBapuxtitov: évd apa
daovny | |
Onxe Oeav Knpv€, ovopinve d€ THVOE yuvaira 8¢
Tlavow@pny, ott TAVTES ‘Odvprria S@par exovTes
S@ pov cdwpnoay, TH avopaow andnorhnow.
Avtap érret Oodov atTuv aun XAVOV eeTédecoen,
ELS "Erin Pea TET mar hp KAUTOV ‘A pyeipovrny
da@pov ayovta, JOedy Tayvy ayyedov: ovd *Em-
pndevs 85
éeppacal’, as Ol éeLTre TpopnOevs Ha) TOTE 6a pov |
déEac0at Tap Znvos ‘Oduperrion, arn arom Emme
éforricw, wn Tov TL KaKxov Ovntotct yéevnTaL.
auTap 0 deEdpevos, OTe 67) KaKoV ely’, évdncer. :
II piv peev yap Fw@er ov emi yGovi hun’ avOporrav 90
vor py aTep TE KAKOV Kal aTEp yaNETrOLO TOVOLO |
VOUT @V f apyareor, ait avdpact Kijpas EOWKAD.
Laivva yap €V KAKOTHTL Sporot KaTarynpac Kove. |
GNA yun Xelperor midou peya TOL aerova a =
éoxedac avOpwnotot o €paj Taro KHnOEa NUYPAa. 95
povvn © avTot EAmis év dppnxtotar Soporow
évoov éustuve TiOov vTO YetreoL, OVE Ovpate
Ige/ / \ 3) f dep AN ,
eEéerrtn mpocbev yap émeddaBe* Tawa TiOoLO
[airyvoyou Bovrjor Auos vedehnyepeTao. ] |
adnra oe pupia huypa KAT avOpwrous ahardnrat 100
Tein pev yap yata KAKOV, Tein O¢ Oddaoca: |
votaoot © avOparoow ed hépn, at O emt vuxTti
avToMaToL hotTact KaKa OvnTotor Pépovoas
auyn, émel hwvny éEeineTo pytieta Levs.
oUTws ovTL Ty Eats Atos voov é€areacBat. 105


1 CHK and Plutarch: émwédAaBe, DFIL: eéréuBare,
EHNOPQ.


8


WORKS AND DAYS


will of loud thundering Zeus, and the Herald of the
gods put speech in her. (And_he called this woman | /
“<Pandora.! because all they “who dwelt_on—Olympus #*" |
- gave each a gift, a plague to men who eat_ bread. |
“Bat when he-had—fintsied ‘the sheer, snnee
snare, the Father sent elorious Argus-Slayer, the
_ swift messenger of the gods, to take it to Epimetheus
as a gift. And Epimetheus did not think on what
Prometheus had said to him, bidding him never take
a gift of Olympian Zeus, but to send it back for
fear it might prove to be something harmful to men.
But he took the gift, and afterwards, when the evil
thing was already his, he understood. |
For ere this the tribes of men lived on earth ]
remote and free from ills and hard toil and heavy |
sicknesses which bring the Fates upon men; for in ;
misery men grow old quickly. But the woman took |
off the great lid of the jar? with her hands and
scattered all these and her thought caused sorrow |
and mischief to men. Only Hope remained there
in an unbreakable home within under the rim of the
great jar, and did not fly out at the door; for ere
that, the lid of the jar stopped her, by the will of
Aegis-holding Zeus who gathers the clouds. But
the other countless plagues wander amongst men;
for earth is full of evils and the sea is full. Of
themselves diseases come upon men continually by
day and by night, bringing mischief to mortals
silently ; for wise Zeus took away speech from them.
So is there no way to escape the will of Zeus.


1 The All-endowed.
* The jar or casket contained the gifts of the gods men-
tioned in 1, 82,


9


2¥ sh Be


HESIOD


Ei & é0éneus, Erepov Tot éym NOyov éxxopudoco
ev Kal eTLoTaLEevas aU O evi Ppetl BadXEO oHaLv. |
@s omoJev yeydact Ceot Ovntoi tT avOpwrrot.

Xpvceov ev TpwTvcTa yévos pepoT@v avOpa-

TOV :
ab avator Toingay ‘Odvprroa omar EVOVTES. 1H}
ot poev €7rl Kpovov » AoaV, OT ovpav® éuBacirevev*
OOTE Deol & éCwov aKnoéa. Oupov é exovTes
voopuy arep Te TOvov Kal oubvos* ovde TL OeLNOV
yhpas émhy, alel dé Todas Kal Yetpas opmoto
TépTOVT ev Darina KAKOV extoobey & am ayTov’ 11}
OvncKkov & oof brve dedunpuévot: éoOXa 6€ TavTa —
Totaly Env KapTrov © édepe Cetdwpos apoupa
avTouaTn TONNOY TE Kal abOovov: ot & eGednjol
Houxoe epy eve Lov TO ou éo holo TONEET OLD.
averot prot, piror paKxapecat Geoiow. 12

Avtap é émrel On TovTO yévos KATA yal “ex aduwe,—

TOL ev Sai moves ayvot emux Goveor KanéovTa |
écOrXol, areEixaxol,” puraces unr av av pawn,
[ot pa purdocouciv Te ObKaS Kal TX ETAL epya

NEPA ETTAMEVOL mavTn pour eves er aiay, | 12)
TovToooTaL Kat TOUTO yepas Bactdqjvov € ec yov—, |
devTepov avre yévos TON YELpOTEpoV perorabev
a.pyvpeov Toinoay ‘Ohdpmea O@par’ éxovres,
Xpurew ouTe puny evant ALyKLov ove vOnpa.

GNX’ EXATOV [EV Tals ETED Tapa pNTepe KeOvH —_ 136
étpépeT aTaAXOD, péeya VT LOS, @ evt olkw.

ar 67 dp hBioat te Kal HEns wéTpov tKowTo,


1 ayvol, xaréovrat, Plato (Cratylus), Aristeides, Olympio-
dorus, Theodoret. émx@dv101 Plato (Repub.), Olymp., Theod.:
the MSS. read eior Ards weyaAou 51a Bovads.

2 Plato, Aristeides, Themistius and others: émix@dvi01, MSS,


Io


WORKS AND DAYS
Or if you wil I will sum you up another tale.
well and skilfully—and do you lay it up in your
_ heart,—how the gods and mortal men sprang from
one source.


First of all the deathless gods who dwell on ed


Olympus made a sa race of mortal men who
' lived in the time of Cronos when he was reigning in
heaven. And they lived like gods without sorrow
of heart, remote and free from toil and _ grief:
_ miserable age rested not on them ; but with legs and
arms never failing they made merry with feasting
beyond the reach of all evils. When they died, it was
as though they were overcome with sleep, and they
had all good things; for”the fruitful earth unforced
bare them fruit abundantly and without stint. They
dwelt in ease and peace upon their lands with
many good things, rich in flocks and loved by the
blessed gods.

But after the earth had covered this generation—
they are called pure spirits dwelling on the earth, and
are kindly, delivering from harm, ~ and suardians of
mortal men; for they 1 roam everywhere over the earth,
clothed in mist and keep ‘watch 0 on judgements and
eruel deeds, givers of wealth; for this royal right
also they received ;—then they who dwell on
Olympus made a second generation which was
of silver and less noble by far. It was like the
_ golden race neither in bedy nor in spirit. A child was
brought up at his good mother’s side an hundred
years, an utter simpleton, playing childishly in his
own home. But when they were full grown and
were come to the full measure of their prime, they


Il


HESIOD °


, , Lae / # > » :
TAvpLOLoV S@eo Kon gmt Ypovov, aye EXoVTES
3 if e/ > rk b DSA
adpasins: UBpi yap atacOanov ovK édvvavTo
b) / b) / +g) 9 / VA
adAnrA@V aTréyev, OVd ANavaTtous YepaTrevery 1
4 +Q) »¥ / e an Sa aN A
nOedov ovS Epdery pakapwv Lepots emt Bwpots,
¢ Ss \
i) Oéus avOpotros Kata Oca. Tovs pev eTrELTA
“
ZLevs Kpovidns expuvre yoNovpevos, ovvena TLLaS
9 BY ih a AY M4
ouUK €dLoov paKdpeoor Oeots, ot "OXvptrov Exovow.
Avtap émet kal tovTo yévos KaTa yal éxa-
Aue, — 3 lé
\ \ e / , an / ’
Tot ev UTroVOoviot paKapes PvnTots KAXEOVTAL,
SEVTEPOL, GAN ETTNS TLun KAL TOLCW OTNndEL—,
| 4 U .
Zevs 6€ TatTnp TpiTov aAXo yévos pepoTraV avOpw-
TOV
i 4 b>) b) 9 4 INN e a
YVAXKELOV TOLNG , OVK apyUpew@ OvdEV OMOLoY,
’ A l Chay e ” |
éx pedav, detvov Te Kal GBptmov: olaw Apnos 14
/ eg / Sie hey, 3Q/ A
goy ewerev oTovoevTa kai UBpies: ovdE TL TiTOV
of 5) 3. Ns BY4 / /
noOvov, arr’ adauavTos Eyov Kpatepodpova Ovpor,
” / \ , ‘ \ a 7
admragtot peydrn oé Bin Kal yeipes datTot
3 y b J Ju iN a }
€E€ apwv eTéepuKov ET oTLPApOloL MédET OLD.
Tav © nv yadKea pev TEVYEA, YAAKEOL GE TE OLKOL 15)
A 3
Yark@ © eipyalovro: pédas 8 ovK Exxe alOnpos.
: |
Kat Tol pev yelpecow Uo odetépnat SapevTes
a / a /
Bioay €s edpwevta dojmov Kpvepov ‘Atdao
veovupvor Odvatos Sé Kal éxTayNous Tep éovTas
/ \ > » Wines! ae > / ia
ciXe wéXas, AapTrpov O EALTTOV aos HEALOLO. 15!
Av’tap érel kal TovTO yévos KATA yat éxdduWer,
avtis ét aXXo TéTAPTOV él YOovt movAUBoTELpN
/
Zevs Kpovidns toince, Suxarotepov Kal dpevor,


WORKS AND DAYS


| | lived only a little time and that in sorrow because of __
| their foolishness, for they ‘could not keep from
| sinning and from wronging one another, nor would
| they serve the immortals, nor sacrifice on the holy
} altars of the blessed ones as it is right for men to do
| wherever they dwell. Then Zeus the son of Cronos
| was angry and put them away, because they would
} not give honour to the blessed gods who live on
} Olympus.

But when earth had covered this generation also
—they are called blessed spirits of the underworld
| by men, and, though they are of second order, yet
} honour attends them also—Zeus the Father made a
| third generation of mortal men, a brazen race, sprung
from ash-trees !: ; and it was in no way equal to the
| silver age, but was terrible and strong. They loved


} the lamentable works of Ares and deeds of violence ;


| they ate no bread, but were hard of heart like
| adamant, fearful men. Great was their strength
| andy unconquerable the arms which grew from their
| shoulders on their strong limbs. Their armour was
| of bronze, and their houses of bronze, and of bronze
| were their implements: there was no black iron.
| These were destroyed by their own hands and passed


| to the dank house of chill Hades, and left no name :


terrible though they were, black Death seized them,
| and they left the bright light of the sun.

But when earth had covered this generation also,
Zeus the son of Cronos made yet another, the fourth,
upon the fruitful earth, which was nobler and more

1 Kustathius refers to Hesiod as stating that men sprung
‘*from oaks and stones and ashtrees.” Proclus believed that
the Nymphs called Meliae (Theogony, 187) are intended.


Goettling would render: ‘‘ A race terrible because of their
(ashen) spears.”


‘3


HESIOD


avopav npwwv Oeiov yévos, of KaNEOVTAL |
7b €oL, mporépn ryeven KAT ameipova. yatav. 16)
wal TOUS pev TONE LOS TE KAKOS Kal muAOTS ain, :
TOUS pev UP eT TATUNG OnBy, Kadumio. yain,
Odece papvapevous papvov ever’ Oideroda0,
Tous O€ Kal év vnecow Umép pméeya Raita Oa-
Adoons |
és Tpotny aryaryov “Erévns vex HuKopoco. 16)
évO Hrot TOUS pev OavaTov TENS dupendduyre, —
Tois O€ OLY’ a0 paTrav Biotov Kal Ge om aa cas
Levs Kpovtdns KaTévaooe TaTnp és meipata
yains. a
Kai Tot pev vatovaly annoea Oupov éxovtes 17
év pak apo vi}TOLoe map ‘OKeavov Babuoivny,
drBtoL HPWES, TOLTLW perdandea Kapmov
Tpis €reos Oadrovta héper feidwpos o apoupa. | 17a
TnAOD at alavatwv: Totaw Kpovos éuBaci-
| ever! 169)
Tov yap Oec poly éXvce TalTHp avdpav Te Bewy Te. 169")
Total © opas vleatots Tin [Kal KDdOS OTNdel. 169"
[léumrrov & attis ér a&|AXo yévos OjK [edptoTra |}
Zeus 169°)
avopov, ot | yeyaaow ert [xGovt sTovAuBoretpn. ] 1699
MyKér érert’ apehrov éy@ TEMTT OLS b peTelvar 174)
avdpaow, arr  mpocbe Oavety H Emetta ‘ye-
véo Oat. 175)
yov yap 61 yévos éatl oLOnpeov OvdE TOT Huap
TavovTaL” Kam“aTou Kal oLfvos, OVSE TL VUKT@P
1 Preserved only by Proclus, from whom some inferior
MSS. have copied the verse. The four following lines occur
only in Geneva Papyri No. 94. For the restoration of


ll. 169 b-c see Class. Quart. vil. ee
2B: matvoovta, MSS.


14


WORKS AND DAYS


| righteous, a god-like race of hero-men who are called |
i demi-gods, the race before our own, throughout the |
| boundless earth. Grim war and dread battle des-
| troyed a part of them, some in the land of Cadmus
| at seven-gated Thebe when they fought for the
| flocks of Oedipus, and some, when it had brought
| them in ships over the great sea gulf to Troy for
| rich-haired Helen’s sake: there death’s end en-
| shrouded a part of them. But to the others father Zeus
} the son of Cronos gave a living and an abode apart
| from men, and made them dwell at the ends ot
} earth. And they live untouched by sorrow in the
} islands of the blessed along the shore of deep swirl-
_ ing Ocean, happy heroes for whom the grain-giving
| earth bears honey-sweet fruit flourishing thrice a
| year, far from the deathless gods, and Cronos rules
" over them ; for the father of men and gods released
| him from his bonds. And these last equally have
| honour and glory.
And again far-seeing Zeus made yet another gene-
| ration, the fifth, of men who are upon the bounteous
earth. |

Thereafter, would that I were not among the men
of the fifth generation, but either had died before or
been born afterwards. For now truly is a race of iron,
and men never rest from labour and sorrow by day,


and from perishing by night ; and the gods shall lay


15


HESIOD


/ \ \ eek: ec ice 6s PEN
bberpopevor. YareTras O€ Geo dwoover pepipmvas:
3 > + \ va) / ? 5 a
ANN’ éumrns Kal Tolor pmeueiEetat éoOXa KaKOloL.

\ EEE, \ a / s' b) U
Zevs & od€cet Kal TovTo yévos pepoTrav avOpo-
TOV, 3 | 18¢
RP > X / / / |
E0T Av yEeLtvomevol TrOALOKpOTadaL TENCOWOLD.
ovdé TAaTIP TaibecaLV Opoitos OVE TL TALES,
ovde Eetvos EevvoddKxm Kal éTatpos éTaipa,
0vbé KaciyynTos pidos EcoEeTAal, WS TO TAPOS TeEp.
ainwva O€ ynpdoKovTas ATLLATOVOL TOKHAS: 185
VA S bY \ a / BY fh
péuapovtat 6 apa Tovs KadeTrois Balovtes érecoe —
i Oe @ al of oO / x OE v4
oVETALOL OVdE Dewy OLY ELdOTES* OVOE KEV OF YE
ynpavTecat ToKedalv amo OperTypa Soiev

, cf ate ing Ty ) Y

yerpodixas Etepos 6 ETépov Tod é€araTaéet.
“OW Ae 7 / y > Ve ! |
ovbé TEs EVOPKOU Yapls EaoeTat OUTE StKALOU 190
yu ee Lie an a \ a bs a NY eek
oT aya0od, wadXov O€ KaK@Y pexTHpAa Kal UBpw
> 4 ’ / a OL PS 3 4 x } \
avépes alvnoovat dixn & év xepot, Kal aides
> 7 / des \ N b) Ys a
ovK éotat: Brae 0 0 KakOS TOV apeiova PATA
puvOorowv oKorLois évéTTwv, ert & OpKov ometTat.
a > WME) ee ? an vA 1
Cnros 6 avOp@roicty ovlupotow atact 195}
f € |
dug KEAACOS KAKOY APTOS OMAPTHOEL, TTUYEPOTNS.
eae \ y) ae \ >
Kat ToTe 6n pos "OdvmTrov aro y~Ooves evpuvo-
deins
NevKolow hdpecat KaduWapéeva Kpoa KaNov
7 / \ a / t aS B.%
aGavat@v peta vAov itov mpodurovt avOpw-
TOUS
Aiéas cat Néwects: ta dé Neietas dAyea AVypa 200
Ovntots avOp@moct: Kaxov © ovK EcoEeTal AXKN. |


1 Tr. : dvépa tiyunoovot, MSS. ~.%
16


WORKS AND DAYS


sore trouble upon them. But, notwithstanding, even
these shall have some good mingled with their evils.
And Zeus will destroy this race of mortal men also
when they come to have grey hair on the temples at
their birth.1 The father will not agree with his child-
ren, nor the children with their father, nor guest
with his host, nor comrade with comrade; nor will
brother be dear to brother as aforetime. Men will
dishonour their parents as they grow quickly old, and
will carp at them, chiding them with bitter words,
hard-hearted they, not knowing the fear of the gods.
They will not repay their aged parents the cost of
their nurture, for might shall be their right: and
one man will sack another's city. There will be no
favour for the man who keeps his oath or for the
just or for the good ; but rather men will praise the
evil-doer and his violent dealing. Strength will be
right and reverence will cease to be; and the
wicked will hurt the worthy man, speaking false
words against him, and will swear an oath upon
them. Envy, foul-mouthed, delighting in evil, with
scowling face, will go along with wretched men one
and all. And then Aidés and Nemesis,? with their
sweet forms wrapped in white robes, will go from
the wide-pathed earth and forsake mankind to join
the company of the deathless gods: and bitter
sorrows will be left for mortal men, and there will
be no help against evil.


t7.e. the race will so degenerate that at the last even
a new-born child will show the marks of old age.

2 Aidos, as a quality, is that feeling of reverence or shame
which restrains men from wrong: Nemesis is the feeling of
righteous indignation aroused especially by the sight of the
wicked in undeserved prosperity (cf. Psalms, lxxii. 1-19).


17


©


oef.?


HESIOD


A 5 a / /
Nov © aivoy Baciredaw épéw Ppovéovat Kat
aUTOLS*
«© » Id b) f f
@O ipnE TpocéerTev andova TroLKtdodeLpov
Ue pan’ ev vehéecor hépwv ovvyerot pepwapTos:
e a b 3 7;
i) & €deov, yvaymtoios wemappevn app ovv-
VETOL, | |
/ \ GT Sait if ‘ an +
pupeTo: THY OY émiKpaTéws Tpos pUOOY EELTrEV’
if / if \
Aatpovin, ti NEANKAaS; Exel VV GE ToAXAOD
J, 6
apeLwv*
a > ieee) « > NX > , / Ng X eae)
Th © €is, 7 0 av éyw TED ayw Kal aoLdoy éovcar’
NUA ? 3/ > If/ / aN us
deitrvoy 6, ai x €BéXw, Toinoopar Hé peOnoo.
bY edi Gg IAS \ / > ,
addpov 6, 6s « eOéX\n Mpos Kpetacovas avTiept-
Ceuv* | 2109
, Ys / >] By, 7 f
viKnsS TE TTEPETAL POS T alayeoW adNyea TATYEL.
e /
‘Os Efar’ axumétns ipnE, TavvaitTepos Gpvis.


205 8


°Q, Ilépon, ov 8 adxove dixns, pnd vBpw
opedre :
UBpis yap Te Kak SetX@ Bpot@: ovde pev écOr0s
¢ yf id Sh = “1g 66 Ot > - a ‘
pyro0tws hepeuev OvvaTat, BapvOer d€ O vm avThs 215)
éyxupaas atyaww: odos 0 étépnde mapedOetv |
TF 2 Ni ANY / 9 Ae y

KpeLaowy es Ta Otxata: Aixn & vmép” T Bptos ioyvet
és TéXOS EFEADODTA: Trab@DV Sé TE VHTLOS eyVM.
avTixa yap tpéyer” OpKos dua oxorsnae dixnow.

an \ J Cs e VA Wy 2) Oy ” |
THs O€ Atxns poGos EXKOMEVNS, 1) K avopes aywor 220
dwpopayot, cxoduns O€ dixns Kpivmat DéwoTas.
& > ae I / ASF la
i) © évetat KAXalovca TOA Kal HOea Ka@D,
“népa écoauevn, Kaxov avOpa@rotoe pépovea,}
ol Te pv €EeAAowoL Kal ovK LOciay everpar.

O? dé dtxas Ecivoucs kal évdnuoror S1d0deWW 925 |
Wetas Kai or} Te TapexRaivovat StKaiov, |

ta) VA / \ ye n b] > cas 7
Toltat TEOnAE TrOALS, Aaol 6 avOedaw év avTH:


18


WORKS AND DAYS


And now I will teli a fable for princes who,
themselves understand. Thus said the hawk to the
nightingale with speckled neck, while he carried her
high uy up among the clouds, gripped fast in his talons,
and she, pierced by his crooked talons, cried pitifully.
To her he spoke disdainfully : “ Miserable thing, why
do youcry out? One far stronger than you now
holds you fast, and you must go wherever I take ~
you, songstress as you are. And if I please I will
make my meal of you, or let you go. He is a fool who
tries to withstand the stronger, for he does not get
the mastery and suffers pain besides his shame.” So
said the swiftly lying hawk, the long-winged bird.


But you, Perses, Heton to right and do not foster
violence ; for violence is bad for a poor man. Even
the prosperous cannot easily bear its burden, but, is


weighed down under it when he has fallen HtO |


delusion. The better path is to go by on the other
side towards justice ; for Justice beats Outrage when
she comes at length to the end of the race. But only
when he has suffered does the fool learn this. For
Oath keeps pace with wrong judgements. There is
a noise when Justice is being dragged in the way
where those who devour bribes and give sentence
with crooked judgements, take her. And _ she,
wrapped in t, follows to the city and haunts of
the people, cae and bringing mischief to men, ©
even to such as have driven her forth in that they
did not deal straightly with her.

But they who give straight judgements to strangers
and to the men of the land, and go not aside from
what is just, their city flourishes, and the people

ne
e 2


HESIOD


a / o 3 A lal / 0 ? a : A
elpnvn 0 ava yhv Kovpotpodos, ovdé ToT avTots :
3 / / / aor Y | |
dpryaAcov TONE LOD Texpaiperat ebpvoTa Levs :
ovdé ToT LOvdiknas weT avdpadat Amos Onde 230

>> »¥ / \ / ’/ ie
0v0 aT, Paring dé mEeUNAOTA Epya vEMoVTAL. :

x y \ an \ , oo” oe 5 a
Totat Peper pméev yala troAvy BLov, ovpect Oe OpUS |

> l lA / , \ , :
axpn mwév Te Hepes Baddvous, meron O€ periccas:

b) / 7 9/ fa /
elpoToKoL © les padrdols KaTaBeBpibacuy:

pom: Otes padhois KaTaBesp ;
TIKTOUGLY O€ YUVALKES EOLKOTA TEKVA YoVEvoLVY? 235

, Sai n VA bh a: Nah 2 Jame a
Gaddrovow & ayabotor dvapmepés: ovd emt vnoY

, \ I L
viocovrat, KapTrov dé héper Ceidwmpos apoupa.

® \ VA

Ois oO bBpis Te weuNnre KaKH Kal oYETMLA Epya,

an lf
Tos dé dtxnv Kpovidns texpaipetar evpvotra Levs.

; (4 an \
ToAAaKs Kat Evptaca mods KAaKOD aVopos ~
aT nupa, . 2408
py / 1 NE ce 6 ,
Os Kev ANtTpaivn! Kal aTadoGara pyYavaarTa.

a Kata. an ,
Totcw © ouvpavobev méy’ éerryyaye Hua Kpovioy
: 2 € a le

ALLOY OMOD Kat NoLmoV: aTrobOwvOover SE Nal.
ovoé yuvatKes TiKTOVGLY, wLVvOOUGL O€ OiKOL s

\ 3
Lnvos ppadpoovyynow 'OdvpTtou: adNdoTE O avTE 245
i) TOV YE OTPATOV EvpLV ATWAETEV 7 O YE TELYOS
3 ji Ud A
i) veas ev TovTm Kpovidns amoaivutat avTov. 5


°"O, Bactrijs, tyets 6€ KkatadpdberOe Kat avtol
/
THVdE OLKHY* eyyds yap év avOpwTrOLOL EoVTES |
b / , ef a) / : pe
abavatoe ppavlovtar, Gao. oxodthot SiKNoLV 250
) / l A 2k eee
adrAnXovs TpLBovot Oewv OTL OVK aANEYOVTES.
\ N M4 /
Tpls yap pupLot elow él yOovi TovrAuPorTELpy
b) / GZ \ ih la > /
aGavatot LZyvos dvrXakes Ovyntav avOpeTarv
Y f
ot pa duAdocovoly Te dtkas Kal OXETALA Epya
/ lal i) . ~
népa EToaMEVvolL, TAVTH POLT@VTES ET Ala. 255


1 Aeschines : és Tis dAttpatver, MSS.
20


WORKS AND DAYS


prosper in it: Peace, the nurse of children, is abroad
in their land, and all-seeing Zeus never decrees
cruel war against them. Neither famine nor disaster
ever haunt men who do true justice; but light-
heartedly they tend the fields which are all their
care. The earth bears them victual in plenty, and
on the mountains the oak bears acorns upon the
top and bees in the midst. Their woolly sheep
are laden with fleeces; their women bear children
like their parents. They flourish continually with
good things, and do not travel on ships, for the
grain-giving earth bears them fruit.

But for those who practise violence and cruel
deeds far-seeing Zeus, the son of Cronos, ordains
a punishment. Often even a whole city suffers
for a bad man who sins and devises presumptuous
deeds, and the son of Cronos lays great trouble upon
the people, famine and plague together, so that
the men perish away, and their women do not bear
children, and their houses become few, through the
contriving of Olympian Zeus. And again, at another
time, the son of Cronos either destroys their wide
army, or their walls, or else makes an end of their
ships on the sea.


You princes, mark well this. punishment you also;
for the deathless gods are near among men and


mark all those who oppress their fellows with crooked ~~.


judgements, and reck not the anger of the gods.
For upon the bounteous earth Zeus has thrice ten
thousand spirits, watchers of mortal men, and these
keep watch on judgements and deeds of wrong as
they roam, clothed in mist, all over the earth. And


21


/
es


HESIOD


e b€ / 3 N / S 3 A
n O€ TE mapOévos éotl Aven, Atos exyeyauia,
Kyspn e aidoin Te Geav;' of "OXvprTrov é eXouct.
Kat p omoT av Tis py Cénie TKON@S OVOTACMY,
avr ika, Tap Aut tatpt abelouern Kpoviav |
ynpueT’ avO pom wy GOLKOV VOOD, ode amotion 260|)
On j.0s ataclanrias Bacthéwr, of Auypa VOEUVTES |
adnry TApKMYODL OLKAS TKOALOS EVETTOVTES.
TavtTa dvraccopuevot, BacirgHs, iOuvere +oiKas *
dSwpopdyot, oKkorewy dé dixéwv? él mayyu
Nabec be.
Ot “ avT@® Kaka TevyeL avnp GAAMW KaKa |
TEVNOD, 2658
n 0€ KaKn BovrAN TO Rovredoavre KaKiorn.
dvra iSev Ards odOarpos Kal wadvTa vonoas
J 7&9 M0195 Sy: >) 3 J a Qifv€ /
Kai VU TAO, aK eOEXNO’, értdépKET aL, OVOE € ANOEL,
oS \ \ / if / b \ EBA
oinyv dn Kab THYdE StKNY TOALS EVTOS EEpYel. |
a Ne EN pity rea ee) SR , ,
vov oi éy@ pnt autos év avOp@troict OtKaLOS 270
einy LAT €[u0s ViOs* €Tréel KAKOV avopa SiKaLov |
CHEV aL, el peilen 7e diKNY OLR OT EPOS efeu:
ANNA TAY OV To éoX7ra TENELy Ata panrioevTa.
"0 Ilépon, cu oé€ tatta peta ppect Baddeo
oHCL, |
Kat VU Oixns € CT AKOUVE, Bins & émridnOeo mapa. 2754
Tovde yap avOp@rroiae vopov SréeTake Kpoviwy —
ityOvat ev Kat Onpal Kal ot@vots TeTENnVvots
5) J 44 b) / b) \ ’ if > AF a ? 5
éoOéuev** adXAHXOUS, Eel OU OLKN EOTL [MET
auTots*
1 Ox. Pap. 1090: @eots, MSS.
2 CHD etc. (Ox. Pap. BaaiAjjs) : other MSS. read pvéous.
3 Ox Pap. : &i«év MSS.
4 Clement of Alexandria, Rzach: éo6ew, MSS. |
5 A, Plutarch, Aelian: per avtav, Clement, Porphyry:
per av..., Ox. Pap.: év avtois, MSS.


22


WORKS AND DAYS


there is virgin Justice, the daughter of Zeus, who is
honoured and reverenced among the gods who


dwell on Olympus, and whenever anyone hurts her ae


with lying slander, she sits beside her father, Zeus
the son of Cronos, and tells him of men’s wicked
heart, until the people pay for the mad folly of
their princes who, evilly minded, pervert judgement
and give sentence crookedly. Keep watch against
this, you princes, and make straight your judge-~
ments, you who devour bribes; put crooked judge-
ments altogether from your thoughts.

He does mischief to himself who does mischief to
another, and evil planned harms the plotter most.

The eye of Zeus, seeing all and understanding all,
beholds these things too, if so he will, and fails not
to mark what sort of justice is this that the city
keeps within it. Now, therefore, may neither I
myself be righteous among men, nor my son—for
then it is a bad thing to be righteous—if indeed the
unrighteous shall have the greater right. But I think
that all-wise Zeus will not yet bring that to pass.

But you, Perses, lay up these things within your
heart and listen now to right, ceasing altogether to
think of violence. For the son of Cronos has or-
dained this law for men, that fishes and beasts and
winged fowls should devour one another, for right is
not in them; but to mankind he gave right which


23


HESIOD


avOpaTroure oF edwxe StKny, 1) TONNOV aplorn
yiryverau: eb yap Tis K eOérn TA Sinan | aryopetdo a 280 :
YuyvacKer, TO pev T 6 Bov du608 evpvora, Zevs’
Os O€ KE paptupinat EKOV em LopKov omocaas -
Ypevoeras, ev O€ OLKnY Prarvas vnkec Tov aacon,
TOU 6€ T G:avportepn yeven jerome Neder TAL”
avodpos & evopKou reve) petomuabev a apetvor. 285

Sol & éym écOXad voéwmv epéw, pmeya vyntie

Ilépon.
THV LEV TOL KAKOTHTA Kal thadov éoTtiv EX€aOat
pnLoiws: ein pwev 000s, wdra © eyybOe vater
Ths © apeTyns topwota Ocot mpomapotGey EOnKay
abavatot: paxpos 6€ Kal GpOcos oipos és adTHY 290
Kab TPNXVS TO ™p@rov" émny © els ax pov iKNTQL, |
pneoin 61 é emelTa TmENEL, Karem ep éovaa.

Odtos peév TAVapLTTOS, OS avTos TAaVT a, vonon

Ppacc apevos, Ta K émerTa Kal és TéXOS How
aetva” | |

eo 0X05 6 a, KaKetvos, OS ev el TovTe miOnra 295 |
Os 6€ KE LNT AUTOS voen pT ddov aKovoV |
év upe Parryras, & 00 QUT axpnvos avnp.
GNAA TU yY HueTépns Ee“YNLEVOS alev ederpii
épyatev, Ilépon, Otov yévos, oppa oe Atpos :
ex Oaipn, prey bé a évatépavos Anuntnp ~~ 3007
aidotn, Buorov oe TEND TLUTEAHO b Kaden’
AupLos yap TOL TapTray aEpy@ atpupopos avopt.
T® 0€ Geol veweca@or Kal avépes, ¢ és Kev aepyos
ton, KnpyvEer ct cob ovpors elKENOS opyny,
ol TE peMooawy Kdparov Tpvxovow aepryot
éoSovres col 8 epya hin EoTw METPLA KOO MELD,
@S KE TOL Wpaiov BioTov TANOwWaL KaNLAL.
é& Epywv 0 avdpes TodAvmNArOL T Adpverot TE


24


.


305


WORKS AND DAYS


| proves far the best. For whoever knows the right_


ii) and is ready to speak it, far-seeing Zeus gives him


| prosperity ; but whoever deliberately lies in his wit-
| ness and forswears himself, and so hurts Justice and
sins beyond repair, that man’s generation is left
| obscure thereafter. But the generation of the man
who swears truly is better thenceforward.

To you, foolish Perses, I will speak good sense.
Badness can be got easily and in.shoals: the road to
her is smooth, and she lives very near us.. But be-


| tween us and Goodness the gods have placed the
| . sweat of our brows: long and steep is the path that


leads to her, and it is rough at the first; but when a
man has reached the top, then indeed. she is fee
though otherwise hard to reach.

That man is altogether best who eee. all
things himself and marks what will be better after-
wards and at the end; and he, again, is good who
listens to a good adviser ; but whoever neither thinks
for himself nor keeps in mind what another tells him,
he is an unprofitable man. But do you at any rate,
always remembering my charge, work, high-born
Perses, that Hunger may “hate you, oad venerable
Demeter richly crowned may love you and fill your
barn with food; for Hunger is altogether a meet
comrade for the sluggard. Both gods and men are
angry with a man who lives idle, for in nature he is
like the stingless drones who waste the labour of the
bees, eating without working; but let it be your care
to order your work properly, that in the right season
your barns may be full of victual. Through work men
grow rich in flocks and substance, and working they


25


HESIOD


Kal épyalopuevot modu dirtepor? abavatoiow. é
épyov & ovdev dvetdos, aepyin dé T dveLdos. all
et O€ Ke épyatn, Taxa ce Eni@oet aepyos i
TRouTedvTa: TovT@ O aperi) Kab Kidos omnoet._
Satpovs & otos énoOa, TO epyaver lan a GLELVor,
et Key aT aT Piov KTEAVOV deotppova Oupov 5)
els Epryov Tpepas [ENETAaS Biov, OS OE KEXEUO.
aides & ovK ayaby KeXPNLEVOV avdpa copier,
aides, 47 dvOpas pear civetat 70 ovina.
alows ToL pos avonNPin, Oapaos 6é pos GAGo,
Xpyyata 6 ovy apraxta, Geoodota wodXov |
apeiva. 30
él age TUS. Kab XEpat Bin peyav 6X Rov Ednra, BS
69 ato yrocons Ania eT a, old Te TOAAA
at eUT av 61 KEPOOS voov é€arratyon
avOpaTrov, aida O€ T avaloeiy KaTtoT atin’
pela bé pw pavpodor Jeot, puvoovar d€ OiKOV By |
avépt TO, Tavpov 6é T emt Ypovov GAXBos omNdEr.
icov © 6s & ixérny 6s Te Eeivovy Kaxov EpEn,
6s TE Kao WryvyTOLO é00 ava Oéuvia Baivy
KpUTTAaoins EVVT;S GdOX Ov, Tapakaipa peton,
bs Té TEV ag padins aduraiverat oppava TéKVa,  —-333
6S TE yovha yépovTa KAaK@ ert yHpaos OVO@ |
verkein YareTroiot KaOamTomevos eTeEaoLV
7@ 7 TOL ZLevs avros aryabeT al, és 6€ TeAEUTHY
epyov avr aOLe@v Xarerny em eOnncev aporBny.
aia ov TOV wey TauTav eepy aeoippova
Ovjov. \ 33.
Kad Svivapwv © épdey (ép aBavatoior Geoiow


1 CFH: Epryaomevos . : . platepos, other MSS. Line 310,
éxoeat de Bpotors’ udAa Lai oTuyéoval &epyovs, is omitted by
ACD and Stobaeus.


26


SAE eae


WORKS AND DAYS


FT are much better loved by the immortals.!. Work is_
| no disgrace: it is idleness which is a disgrace. But
| if you work, the idle will soon envy you as you grow
| rich, for fame and renown attend on wealth. And
} whatever be your lot, work is best for you, if you
i) turn your misguided mind away from other men’s
| property to your work-and attend to your livelihood
as I bid you. An evil shame is the needy man’s
companion, shame which both greatly harms and
prospers men: shame is with poverty, but confidence
with wealth. ee.

Wealth should not be seized: god-given wealth
is much better; for if a man take great wealth
violently and perforce, or if he steal it through his
| tongue, as often happens when gain deceives men’s
| sense and dishonour tramples down honour, the
| gods soon blot him out and make that man’s
house low, and wealth attends him only for a little
time. Alike with him who does wrong to a sup-
pliant or a guest, or who goes up to his brother's bed
and commits unnatural sin in lying with his wife, or
who infatuately offends against fatherless children,
or who abuses his old father at the cheerless thres-
hold of old age and attacks him with harsh words,
truly Zeus himself is angry, and at the last lays on
him a heavy requittal for his evil doing. But do you
turn your foolish heart altogether away from these
things, and, as far as you are able, sacrifice to the death-


The alternative version is: ‘‘and, working, you will be


much better loved both by gods and men ; for they greatly
dislike the idle.”


27


HESIOD


€ la \ A Suis 2.3 \ / Sf
ayvas Kal Ka0apars, eri 6 ayaa pnpia Kate:
YA \ aA / , e /
adroTE O€ cTrovdnat Overt Te iiacKec Oat,
3 \ ae? 9 b) / Neh ON / e \ BY,
mpev OT euvaty Kal oT av paos (epov EXOn, zea
@S KE TOL ihaov  kpadinu Kaul Oupov ExXworr, 3
6bp adroV OVA KX pOV, jon TOV TEOV aNXos. 1:
Tov d@iréovt’ ért daita carey, Tov 8 é&yOpov
éacat'
TOV Oe pddora Kanelv, as Tus o€Oev eyo paieu*
eb yap TOL Kal XpAye eyX@pvov ado YEVYTAL,
yetToves alwaros & EKLOD, [oo avo dé ™0b. 34
Tho KaKOS yelTon, bocov T arya os péey Overap. —
EHpope TOL TLMNS, és T Eupope yetTovos éoO nod.
ovd av Bots atroXOLT, Et 1) YELT@V KAKOS EN.
5 A uation) RN
ev ev peTpetaOar Tapa yElTOVOS, Ev 6 ATrOOODVaL, —
AUT@ TO METPW, KAL A@LOV, al KE OUYNAL, 85
@s av xpniser Kal €$ UaTepov apKLoV ebpys.

My KAKA KEPOALVvELy: wana KEepoea i ia’ aatnoww.
TOV dudéovta pirety, «al TP T POT Lovre T poo evar.
Kat Sopen, 6 Os Kev O@, KAaL pI) Soper, 6 6s Kev pn OO.
Sdtn pév Tis Boxer, dddTy & obtis Baxev. 351
PS \ b) @ 4 ef be / @ / } /

ws ayadn, aprraé O€ Kaxn, Gavatoto OoTeLpa.
A \ / STK, 20g 4 29 Pri ls § /
OS MeV yap Kev avnp ECENOD, O YE, KEL” MEYA COLN,
Yaipe. TO OM@pw Kal TépTreTas OV KATA OvpOV
OS. b¢ KEV avros EMT aL avad<einge muOnoas,
Ka TE o [LbK pov éov, 70 y em axvod ev hiXov TOP. 36(
Os 6 én cove Peper, O 6 aneberar aiOorra ALpov: 368
él yap Kev Kal C [LL POV emt TuLKp@ KaTaleto — 361
A . / \ \
kat awa tTovT Epdows, Taya Kev péeya Kal TO
yévotTo.® 362


! joa &rnot, ACDH, etc.
2 Schoemann, Paley : rad, A and all MSS.
3 Line 363 seems to be misplaced i in the MSS.


28


WORKS AND DAYS


| less gods purely and cleanly, and burn rich meats also,
} and at other times propitiate them with libations and


| incense, both when you go to bed and when the holy


| light has come back, that they may be gracious to
you in heart and spirit, and so you may buy another's
| holding and not another yours.
| Call your friend to a feast; but leave your enemy
| alone ; and especially call iin who lives near you:
| for if any mischief happen in the place, neighbours
|) come ungirt, but kinsmen stay to gird themselves.!
| A bad neighbour is as great a plague as a good one
| isa great blessing ; he who enjoys a good neighbour,
} enjoys honour. Not even an ox would die but: for
| a bad neighbour. Take fair measure from your
neighbour and pay him back fairly with the same
measure, or better, if you can; so that if you are in
need afterwards, you may find him sure.

Do not get base gain: base gain is as bad as
ruin. Be friends with the friendly, and visit him
who visits you. Give to one who gives, but do not
give to one who does not give. A man gives
to the free-handed, but no one gives to the close-
fisted. Give is a good girl, but Take is bad and she
brings death. For the man who gives willingly,
even though he gives a great thing, rejoices in his .
gift and is glad in heart; but whoever gives way to
shamelessness and takes something himself, even
though it be a small thing, it freezes his heart. He
who adds to what he has, will keep off bright-eyed
hunger ; for if you add only a little to a little and do
this often, soon that little will become great. What


‘4.€ neighbours come at once and without making
preparations, but kinsmen by marriage (who live at a
distance) have to prepare, and so are long in coming.


29


HESIOD


ovdé TO’ eV OlK@ KATAKELMEVOY avEpa KHOEL. |
olxot BéXTEpov eivat, érret BYaBepov To Ovpyduy. 31
> \ \ f Cats a \ n
éaOXov HEV TApEOVTOS éréo bat, hypo. 6€ Jue
xpnisew ATEOVTOS, & oe ppafecbar a aveya.
apxopevou dé TiPov Kat AHyoVTOS Kopécaa ban,
perooOe peider Par: beth & évl mud weve pedo. |

Miados o avdpl pio elpnjLévos dpKlos EoTM. 3
Kast Te Kao uyVyTe yerdoas ert peapTupa Deo ban. |
miatels yap) Tor opas Kal amloTiat MEcay av-

_ Opas.

My dé yur oe vOoV TUyOrTONOS efamatara
ai ira kaTiddovoa, TenV Oupaoa Karu. |
os Oe yuvaict met ove, TéToLl 6 ye PyANT HOW. 37

Movvoyerns b¢ Tas ein TAT POLOV oiK ov |
pepReper- > yap TODTOS aeEerat év peydporow.
YNPaLos d€ Oavots € eTEpOV Tato éycatahemov.
peta O€ Kev TEOVET OL TOpoL Leds domeTOV GABov. ff

/ \ / J } a /
TAELWY [LEV TAEOVOV pEeAETH, melCov © emrLOnKy. 38(
\ 3 3 / \ a7 > \ e

Sol & ef wrovTou Oupos eéAderar ev dpeciv How,

@O épdew, Kal épryov én épy@ épydbeo Cat.


Tniddov “Atrayevéwv ériteAopevaav
dpyer® aunrov, apototo bé ducopevdwv. _
ai 69 TOL VUKTaS TE KaL HuaTa TEeToapaKovTAa 385
KEKpUPaTal, aUTLS O€ TEPLTTAOMEVOU EVLAUTOD |
paivovta: Ta TPATA Yapaccopévoto TLOHpov.
oUTOS TOL TEedtwy TéAETAL VOmOS, Of TE Dadadaens
eyyver vareT dove, ot T ayKea Bnoonevra,
TOVTOU KUPALVOVTOS arom poo, mova VG) POV 390
vatovoty’ yupvov om eipely, yupvov 6é Bowrtetv,
yupvov & aude, el x’ @pia wavt éOéXno0a

' Bentley : & &pa, G.


WORKS AND DAYS


| a man has by him at home does not trouble him: it_
W is better to have your stuff at home, for whatever is —
| abroad may mean loss. Itis a good thing to draw
} on what you have ; but it grieves your heart to need
| something and not to have it, and I bid you mark
| this. Take your fill when the cask is first opened ae
J _ when it is nearly s spent, but midways be sparing:

| _is poor saving when you come to the lees.

bi Let the wage promised toa friend be Boe even


| fond mistrust, alike ruin men.

| Do not let a flaunting woman coax and cozen and
} deceive you: she is after your barn. The man who
i) trusts womankind trusts deceivers.

There should be an only son, to feed his father’s
| house, for so wealth-will increase in the home ; but
| if you leave a second son you should die old. Yet
Zeus can easily give great wealth to a _ greater
number. More hands mean more work and more
increase.


ee VER NE Se
. < 7


things and work math. work ‘upen pony 4 he Bar


Rage


ee.
Bnd ye "


When the Pleiades, ene of Atlas, are rising,!
begin your harvest, and your ploughing when they are
going to'set.7 Forty nights and days they are hidden
| and appear again as the year moves round, when first
- you sharpen your sickle. This is the law of the plains,
and of those who live near the sea, and who inhabit
rich country, the glens and dingles far from the
tossing sea,—strip to sow and strip to plough and
strip to reap, if you wish to get in all Demeter’s
fruits in due season, and that each kind may grow in


1 Karly in May. 2 In November.
31


If your heart within you desires wealth, do these Meee


HESIOD


épya xouivecOar Anprtepos: ws TOL Exacta
@pe aéénrar, wy Tes Ta peTale! yarTiCov i)
TT@TONS ANAOTPLoVS oiKOUS Kal pwNdeY aVUCTHS. 3h"
@S Kal VOV em éu AAOEs" eyo d€ ToL OvK eTrLdbacw |
ovo eT LMeT NTO épyalev, vine Llépon,
epya, TA ty avOpa@Trotae Peoi OLveTEKUNPAVTO,
fh TOTE OU Taider or yuvarct Té Ou pov axevav |
onTevys Biorov KaT a yeirovas, of 8 AMEN LY. ee |i
dls pev yap Kal tpls Taya tevEeau Hv O ett
NUTS,
an \ b) / \ b i> J id / Pam
XPHwa prev ov mpnees, gU O éTwOLA TONN ayo-
pevoess®
axpetos 8 éotat éTméwy vOpLos. ara o dveya
ppafeo bar xpEvey Te NUCL Aspoo T ddewpyy.
Oixov pev mpwticta yuvaixd te Body T apo- —
TPA, 3 40h
RTNT HY, ov Yaper HD, res Kal Bovolyv érotto, |
xpnwara oy év olk@ maT dpweva. Tromoac ban,

Li) ov MeV ALTHS Bowe 00 apvhrar, ov dé TTA,
nO apn rrapapelBnrat, pav0On O€ TO epyov. |
und avaBanrnreo bar € és T av prov és Te evn buy 41(]
OU yap ETWOLOEPYOS AaVIP mim roe Kaduny |
oud avaBaXX6mevos perern dé TO epyov opénnet*
aiel O ap. Bodepryos avnp aTyol Tanai.

“Hyos 67 Aaryer wévos O&€0S nedtovo

Kavpatos LOanimou, HeTOT@ Lvov omBprijcavtos 415}

Znvos épua Devéos, pera O€ TpeTeT al Bporeos XPOS

TONNOV ehaporepos: 51) yap TOTEe Yeipros aoTHp

Bawoy UTEP Kepanijs KN pLT pepewy avOpomav

EpXeT at )MATLOS, TAELOV O€ TE VUKTOS ETrAUpEL™ |

THOS AONKTOTATH TéAETAL TUNGEiTA CLONP® 420)
1 Herodian: petatd, MSS.


32


WORKS AND DAYS


its season. Else, afterwards, you may chance to be_
} in want, and go begging to other men’s houses, but
| without avail; as you have already come to me.
| But I will give you no more nor give you further
measure. Foolish Perses! Work the work which
the gods ordained for men, lest in bitter anguish of
| spirit you with your wife and children seek your
livelihood amongst your neighbours, and they do not
heed you. I'wo or three times, may be, you will
succeed, but if you trouble them further, it will not
avail you, and all your talk will be in vain, and your
word-play unprofitable. Nay, I bid you find a way to
pay your debts and avoid hunger.

First of all, get a house, and a woman and an ox
for the plough—a slave woman and not a wife, to
follow the oxen as well—and make everything ready
at home, so that you may not have to ask of another,
and he refuse you, and so, because you are in lack,
the season pass by and your work come to nothing.


| Do not put your work off till to-morrow and the day


after ; for a sluggish worker does not fill his barn,
nor one who puts off his work : industry makes work
go well, but a man who puts off work is always at
hand-grips with ruin.

When the piercing power and sultry heat of the sun
abate, and almighty Zeus sends the autumn rains,’
and men’s flesh comes to feel far easier,—for then
the star Sirius passes over the heads of men, who
are born to misery, only a little while by day and
takes greater share of night—, then, when it
showers its leaves to the ground and stops sprouting,


1 In October.
33


HESIOD


vn, porra & épale yéee, mropl ove TE Rayer
TH[LOS ap VOTO [LELY pEpvn pevos @ pla epya.
OA[LOV MEV TPLTFOOHY TAapveELD, Diep ‘Se TpLT NX UY,
adfova © émtamoonv: para yap vu ToL apwevov —

oUT@: |
’ / wo N \ Ale ,
el O€ Kev OKTATIOONY, ATO Kal TmhUpay KE TapoLo. 42

/ >» / , Sap a
tTptoTriOapov 0 arp Tapvew Sexadwp@ aden.
TOAN €mikapTUAa Kada* dépeww O€ yUny, OT av
4

EUPNS;
> 5 Do ysh , A 3: 5 4SP. 4
és oixov, Kat dpos OvCnpevos ) KAT Apovpar,
Tpivivov: os yap Bovaoly apobv oyvpwTatos éoTu,
eut av’ AOnvains dudos év éXvpati wnEas == 4B
youdotow Terdoas mpocapnpeTat toToBone.
dota o€ OécOar dpoTpa, TovnTadmEvOS KATA OiKOV,

b) / \ / b) \ \ J ec

AUTOYVOY KAL THKTOV, ETEL TONV AWLOV OVTO:


/
el x’ Erepov akass, érepov x emi Bovol Barowo. |
Sdduns © 7) wTEAENS aKL@TAaTOL LaTOBONES, 437
5 No! Dh / / bes 5 ’ / ma
puos édXupLa, yuns Tmplvou: Boe 0 evvaeTnpw
n n \ ,
apoeve KexTHoOat, TOV yap cOévos OVK AadaTradvo?,
¢e/ , 4 \ ») / 3 /
HENS weTpov EyovTe’ Tw epyalea Oar apioTo.
3 i

OUK av TO Y EploaVvTE EV AUAAKL KAP LEY APOTPOV


/ \\ \ , 9 —e / ‘i

a&erav, TO Oe Epyov ér@atov avOi Aitrotev. 440}
nan X\ \ }

Tols © dua TecoapaxovtaeTns aiCnos &rovto™ :


A J th 3 /
dptov derTyncas TeTpaTpUpoV, OKTABAWLOY,
a 4 a Pd) as >) By > Oe | a:
OS Epyou pereTOv LOctav K avrNaKk édavvoL,
id if b jemi s / 3 > » pee
PnKEeTL TaTTALWoV weO OunrALKAS, AAN eT Epyo


34


WORKS AND DAYS


the wood you cut with your axe is least liable to
| worm. ‘Then remember to hew your timber: it is
_ the season for that work. Cut a mortar! three feet
| wide and a pestle three cubits long, and an axle of
| seven feet, for it will do very well so; but if you
make it eight feet long, you can cut a beetle? from
| it as well. Cut a felloe three spans across for a
| ’waggon of ten palms’ width. Hew also many bent
| timbers, and bring home a plough-tree when you have
| found it, and look out on the mountain or in the
| field for one of holm-oak; for this is the strongest
for oxen to plough with when one of Athena’s hand-
men has fixed in the share-beam and fastened it to
the pole with dowels. Get two ploughs ready and
work on them at home, one all of a piece, and the
other jointed. It is far better to do this, for if you
shouid break one of them, you can put the oxen to
the other. Poles of laurel or elm are most free from
worms, and a share-beam of oak and a plough-tree of
holm-cak. Get two oxen, bulls of nine years; for
their strength is unspent and they are in the prime
of their age: they are best for work. They will not
fight in the furrow and break the plough and then
| leave the work undone. Let a brisk fellow of forty
years follow them, with a loaf of four quarters? and
eight slices* for his dinner, one who will attend to his
work and drive a straight furrow and is past the age
for gaping after his fellows, but will keep his mind


1 For pounding corn,
2 A mallet for breaking clods after ploughing.
* The loaf is a flattish cake with two intersecting lines
scored on its upper surface which divide it into four equal parts.
* The meaning is obscure. A scholiast renders ‘‘ giving
eight mouthfuls” ; but the elder Philostratus uses the word
in contrast to ‘‘ leavened.”


35
p 2


HESIOD


Oupov € Eyouv: TOU 6 oOUTL vEwTEpOs Dros delve 44, |

om eppara dacoacbat Kal emuamopiny anréacbar.

KOUpOTEpOS yap avnp wel OuNALKAS ETTOLNTAL.
Ppafecbas &, edt av yepadvov haviv émaxovaens

¢e / bd VA > i“ / '

vYyobev x vehéwv éviavata KEeKANYviNs:


NT ApOTOLO Te OHA héper KAL Yel MaTos WpHy 45(
Secxviel ouSpnpov: Kpadiny SS dak’ avdpos


Pd] 7
aBovTew:
\ , / c/ lf x af
67 TOTe YopTabew EXtKas Boas évdov éovTas:
€ “4 X 7 3 la I \ i
pntolov yap é7ros eitretv: Boe dos Kal apakav:
€ f- rrera>) / , By f it
pynidtov 6 atravivaclas mapa épya Boecou.
dynot & avnp dpévas apveros wHEacOat duakav, 4558
/ bp) \ \ Bao e \ VA y 21S /
VHTLOS, OVdE TO O10" ExaToV O€ Te SovpaT aude,
Tov moocGev peréTyny exéuev o1xnia OécOat.
Kir’ dv 6€ mpetict apotos Ovntotat havein,
67 TOT e€hopunOjvas owas Suawés TE Kal AUTOS
y \ \ wee ne > of
avnv Kal dLtepny apowy apoToto Ka? wpny, — 460)
\ iy / if YA ‘
Tpol pdr.a orevdwr, iva Tot TAHOwOW apoupat.
Hpt tone: Oépeos S€ vewpéevyn ov o aTraTHCEL.
velov 6€ oTreipey ete Koudifovaay apoupav: —
; \ b) / , b) ,
vetos adeEiapn Talowy evenANnTELpa. |
EbyeoOau dé Act y@ovie Anunrept 0 ayvn, 465 |
EKTENEA Bpidew Anpujrepos epov aKTqD, |
dipXopievos Ta Tm por dporov, OT av dx pov éyérans
Yetpt NaBov GpTynKa Bowv emt vaTov iknas
> e / / c \ \ v
évSpvoy EXKovT@v peadBav. o d€ TUTOOs dmiabe
du@os Exov waKxédAyv Tovoy opvidecat TiO Ein — 470
oTéppa KaTaxpuTTa@V: evOnwoovvn yap aptoTn.


36 /


\


WORKS AND DAYS


7 on his work. No younger man wili be better than
| he at scattering the seed and avoiding double-sow-


ing ; for a man less staid gets disturbed, hankering


! 3 after his fellows.


Mark, when you hear the voice of the crane! who
eries year by year from the clouds above, for she
gives the signal for ploughing and shows the season


| of rainy winter; but she vexes the heart of the
} man who has no oxen. Then is the time to feed up


your horned oxen in the byre ; for it is easy to say:
“Give me a yoke of oxen and a waggon,’ and it is
easy to refuse: “I have work for my oxen.” The
man who is rich in fancy thinks his waggon as good as
built already—the fool! he does not know that there
are a hundred timbers to a waggon. ‘Take care to
lay these up beforehand at home.

_ So soon as the time for ploughing is proclaimed to
men, then make haste, you and your slaves alike, in
wet and in dry, to plough in the season for plough-
ing, and bestir yourself early in the morning so that


your fields may be full. Plough in the spring; but


fallow broken up in the summer will not belie
your hopes. Sow failow land when the soil is still


| getting light: fallow land \is a defender from harm


and a soother of children.

Pray to Zeus of the Earth and to pure Demeter to
make Demeter’s holy grain sound and heavy, when
first you begin: ploughing, when you hold in your
hand the end of the plough-tail and bring down your
stick on the backs of the oxen as they draw on the ©
pole-bar by the yoke-straps. Let a.slave follow(a


- little’ behind with a mattock and make trouble for


the birds by hiding the seed; for good management
1 About the middle of November.


HESIOD


Ovntois avOp@rrois, KaKoOnpoovvn Sé KaKLoTN.
@Oé Kev adpootyn TTAaXVES VEevoLev Epate,
ef TéXOS avTOS dTiabev ‘OdvpTrLOs eo OAOV OT ACo1,

5) iis Is 2 Spo / NM
éx 0 ayyéov éddoelas apayvia: Kai ce GoATTAa’ = AF.
ynOnoew Buotouv aipevpevov évoov édvTos. |
evoyOéwy & (Feat Todwov Eap, ode POS AAAOUS
avydoeat céo 6 ANAOS aVNP KEYpNMEeVvOS EoTAL.

Ei 6é Kev jertoto TpoTrHs apows KOova Stay, |
HMEVOS AUNnTELS OAUYOV TrEpl yELPOS E€pyOV, 48(
‘avTia der pevov KEKOVLLEVOS, OV WANA Yalpov, 4
oicets © ev hope: mrabpor 6€ ce Onjoovrar.
adroTe © adrXolos Zyves voos airyoXoLo,
apyanéos 8 dvdpecat katabvntoter vonoar.

b) / AG TS. Dee / V4 if by
el O€ KEV ovr apoons, TOOE KEV TOL Pappwakov ein’ 485
7LOS KOKKVE KOKKUGEL Opuds év TETANOLOL
TO Tp@Tov, TéepTres de BpoTous eT aTELpoVAa yaiaV,
THwos Levs vor TpiT@ Huate pnd amodHnyot,
pnt ap wmrepBarr@v Boos oTAnVY LAT aToNeiTTOV:

e/ ie 2 f f af > / |
ovTwW K orapoTns TPwNpOTH * LaopaptCoL. 490}
5) a b) a / / VA /
év Oupo & ed ravta huracceo: pnoe ce AHOOL
[LnT éap yeryvopuevov ToALov nO” @ptos buPpos.

Ilap & io Xtc evov O@rov Kal era ea x
Opn Xetwepin, omore Kpvos avépa epyov
lox aver, év0a kK aoKVOS aynp meyer oikov opéAXot, 495


Ha oe KaKOD VY ELILOVOS apnxavin kaTapapyry

UV Tevinn, New TH d€ TAX DY 700 xeupl Tmuetys.

TOMAG © depos avnp, Keveny él €XTLOA MifLVOD,
vpnifwv Bvdtoo, Kaka mpocedcEaTo Ouuo.


|


4


1 Kirchoff : xponpétn, CD: rpwrnpdtn, GIKL. }
38


WORKS AND DAYS


| _ is the best for mortal men as bad management is the


| worst. In this way your corn-ears wall bow to the
| ground with fullness if the Olympian himself gives a


| good result at the last, and you will sweep the


cobwebs from your bins and you will be glad, I ween,
as you take of your garnered substance. And so you
will have plenty till you come to grey! springtime,


| and will not look wistful ly to others, but another


shall be in need of your help.

But if you plough the good ground at the solstice,?
you will reap sitting, grasping a thin crop in your
hand, binding the sheaves awry, dust-covered, not
glad at all; so you will bring all home in a basket
and not many will admire you. Yet the will of Zeus
who holds the aegis is different at different times ;
and it is hard for mortal men to tell it; for if you
should plough late, you may find this remedy—when
the cuckoo first calls? in the leaves of the oak and
makes men glad all over the boundless earth, if Zeus
should send rain on the third day and not cease until
‘it rises neither above an ox’s hoof nor falls short of it,
then the late-plougher will vie with the early. Keep
all this well in mind, and fail not to mark grey spring
as it comes and the season of rain.

Pass by the smithy and its crowded lounge in winter
time when the cold keeps men from field work,—for
then an industrious man can greatly prosper his
house—lest bitter winter catch you helpless and poor
and you chafe a swollen foot with a shrunk hand.
The idle man who waits on empty hope, lacking a
livelihood, poaps a full harvest of trouble in his heart ;


* Spring is so described because the buds have not ae cast
their iron-grey husks. -
2 In December. a Marehi eae


HESIOD


edmris & ovK ayals eX pH MEVOY avdpa Koper, 50)
Tpevov év Nox, TO 17) Btos a dpktos ein. ~ |
Acixvve dé Sudeoou Oépevs ete péroov éov Tos:
ovK atel Oépos eooetitat, TovetaVe KaNLas.


Miva 6€ Anvatdva, Kak nuata, Bovdopa
TaVvTa,
TovToV adrevacOal, Kal Thnydbas, aiT emt yaiav 508R
mvevaavtTos Bopéao duanreyées TeAeOovaW,
date Ova Opnkns immotpopov evpét TOVvT@ |
euTvevaas opwe: pemuKe dé yaia Kal DAN. ~
TOhhas bé dpvs inruxopous €haTas TE Taxelas |
oupeos ev Bnoons TiAva x Govt TmovhuBoretpn 510
éuTitTov, Kal Taca Bod TOTE ynpLTos Dyn.
Ofjpes O€ ppiccova’, ovpas & Umm0 pete eVevTo,
TOV Kal NaXYn Séppwa KaTacKLOV' ANAG VU Kal
TOV
uxpos é@v dvanat Sacvarépyer TEP eovTav.
Kal Te Ole fp pevov Boos ¢ EpXeTat, ovoée Page boxe 515.
Kal Te du aiva ano TAVUT PLX a.” TEA O ov Th,
obven’ ETNETAVAL TPLYES AUTAD, ov danaou
is avéjwov Bopéov: Tpoxahov dé Yépovta TtOnow.
Kat dia TrapOeviKs dm aXox poos ov Svanow, |
re Comer evtoabe didn Tapa: parepe piver = 20
ov To éprya tovia TOU X PUTOU ‘Ad poditns:
EU TE Nocroapern Tépeva Ypca Kat Aim éaiw
 XpLoapevn puxin KATAREECTAL évd00t olxou
nuate xetuepi@, OT avéaTeos Ov Toda TEVdEL
ey T aTup@ oikw Kal nOeot Nevyaneotow. 525
OE of 1 HéALOS Cet ov oppnOnvac:

ovoé ot | nédLos SeiKVY voLoY OpunOh i“


1 Hermann ; od ydp oi, MSS.
40


WORKS AND DAYS


i) it is not an wholesome hope that accompanies a
t- needy man who lolls at ease while he has no sure
| livelihood.

| While it is yet midsummer command your slaves:
“It will not always be summer, build barns.”


| Avoid the month Lenacon,! wretched days, all of
| them fit to skin an ox, and the frosts which are cruel
when Boreas blows over the earth. He blows across
horse-breeding Thrace upon the wide sea and stirs it
up, while earth and the forest howl. On many a
high-leafed oak and thick pine he falls and brings
them to the bounteous earth in mountain glens:
then all the immense wood roars and the _ beasts
shudder and put their tails between their legs, even
those whose hide is covered with fur; for with his
bitter blast he blows even through them although
they are shaggy-breasted. He goes even through
an oxs hide; it does not stop him. Also he blows
through the goat’s fine hair. But through the
fleeces of sheep, because their wool is abundant, the
keen wind Boreas pierces not at all ; but it makes the
old man curved as a wheel. And it does not blow
through the tender maiden who stays indoors with her
dear mother, unlearned as. yet in the works of golden
Aphrodite, and who washes her soft body and anoints
herself with oil and lies down in an inner room
within the house, on a winter’s day when the Boneless
One? gnaws his foot in his fireless house and wretched
home ; for the sun shows him no pastures to make


1 The latter part of January and earlier part of February.
2 7,e, the octopus or cuttle.


Al


HESIOD


ANN’ ert Kvavéwor avdpav Ohmov TE TOALY TE
otpwpatat, Bpacov dé Llaverdrjvecor hacives.
Kab TOTE 01) KEPAOL KAL VHKEPOL UANKOLTAL
AUYpov puALO@YTES ava Spia BnoonevTa 53C
dhevyovow Kai Tacw évi Ppect TOUTO pEunrer, |
OS TKETA WALomEvoL TUKLVOVS KEevVOMaVAS Exot *
Kal yNadbu mwetphev: tote 6 Tpitrods BpoT@ icot,
ov T émi vaTa gaye, KapN O Eis OVOAaS OpaTaL,
T@ ixehor hoirdow, adevopevor vipa deveny. 535
Kal rote éocacdas é epuma Xp00s, @S TE KEAEVM, |
xraivay TE Hanraxny Kab TepjUoeyTa XiT@va:
oT LOVE & év TAUpo TONY KpoKa pnpvoacbas:
THY meprecoacbar, iva TOL TpPLXEs GT PEMEWS L, i)
pnd op0at dpiccwouy aetpopevar KaTa cHua. 5404
ce dé Togal wédtena Boos ids KTamevoto
apweva Ovoacbat, widows evtocbe TWUKaCCAaS.
Tporoyovev 5 épidbwv, omoT av Kpvos Petey
ErNOn,
Oeppara. Tuppanrew vevpw Boos, opp’ él vOTM |
VETOU appisary anenye Keparnoe & dmeplev 545
TtXov exer doKnTov, iy ovata pnp Karacevy® |
puxpn yap. T HOS TENETOL Bopéao TET OVTOS"
ne@Los 6 émt yaiap aT ovpavov do TEPOEVTOS |
ap Tupopopos TETATAL paKapov én epyous"
OoTE apuoaapevos TOTA POV ATO alevaovTar, 550
inpov umep yains apbels avéwoto Gvédry
Grote pev O ver Toth Ectrepov, AAAOT Anat
TuKva Opnixtov Bopéov védea kNovEovTos.
TOV POdpevos Epyov TEedéoas oiKovde véer Cat, |


1 Peppmuller ; ot... Zxovor, MSS.
A2


WORKS AND DAYS


for, but goes to and fro over the land and city of


| dusky men,! and shines more sluggishly upon the


whole race of the Hellenes. Then the horned and
unhorned denizens of the wood, with teeth chattering
pitifully, flee through the copses and glades, and all,
as they seek shelter, have this one care, to gain
thick coverts or some hollow rock.. Then, like the
Three-legged One? whose back is broken and whose
head looks down upon the ground, like him, I say,
they wander to escape the white snow.

Then put on, as [ bid you, a soft coat and a tunic
to the feet to shield your body,—and you should
weave thick woof on thin warp. In this clothe your-
self so that your hair may keep still and not bristle
and stand upon end all over your body. Lace on your
feet close-fitting boots of the hide of a slaughtered
ox, thickly lined with felt inside. And when the
season of frost comes on, stitch together skins of
firstling kids with ox-sinew, to put over your back
and to keep off the rain. On your head above wear
a shaped cap of felt to keep your ears from getting
wet, for the dawn is chill when Boreas has once made
his onslaught, and at dawn a fruitful mist is spread
over the earth from starry heaven upon the fields of
blessed men: it is drawn from the ever flowing
rivers and is raised high above the earth by wind-
storm, and sometimes it turns to rain towards
evening, and sometimes to wind when Thracian
Boreas huddles the thick clouds. Finish your work
and return home ahead of him, and do not let the


1 7.e. the dark-skinned people of Africa, the Egyptians or


Aethiopians.
2 7.e. an old man walking with a staff (the ‘“ third leg ”’—
as in the riddle of the Sphinx). 2


43


HESIOD


pn TroTé o ovpavobev o KOT OEY vepos appikarurn, Bae
Xpara dé pvdaréov Onn Kara 0 elwara, devoy.
GNX: drarevac0au pels yap XareroraTos OUTOS,
YeElmeplos, KareTos TpoBaTos, yaXeTros 0 avOpo-
TOUS.

TH [105 TWPLLTV Bovour, ém avépt de WEY ei |
appahehs: paxpal yap eippobor edppdvas eloiy. 560!
TAUTA puhac a opevos TETENET [LEVOV els eVLAUTOV
icoda bat VUKTAS Te Kal nwara, elo OKEV adres

YI) TAVTOV LNTHP KAPTOV TUMMLKTOV EVELKN.


ZZ
|) |
|


Rot’ ay 6 eEnKovTa pera TpoTas HEALOLO |
KeLpepe éxtenean Zeus pata, 67) pa TOT aoTnp 5659)
‘A pxTovpos T pOodeT wy ‘epov poov ‘Oxeavoto |
7 PWT OV Tappai vor em bTEANET GL aKpoKvEedasos.
Tov O€ héT OpOoyon Tavdzovis eo Opto Keoav
és paos avOpamous, € EapPOS veov Lo TAPEVOLO. |
Thy pOapevos olvas TeplTapyeper” Gs yap dewvor. 570 |}

"AN odor’ av hepéorxos azro eae on puta

Baivn |
[nudSas pevyor, TOTE 67 oKapos OUKETEL obvéwy”
aX apiras TE Kapaccepevar Kal Omaas € éryetpeuv-
pevryew dé oKtepous Ja@xous Kal em noa | KotTov
@pn év aunTtou, OTE T edtos Vpoa Kappet. ~* STag
TNMLOVTOS oTEvoELy Kal OLKAOE Ka,p TOV aryvetv
épOpov aviactapuevos, tva Tot Bios apxktos ein.

HOS yap Epyolo TpiTnV aTropelpeTat aicar,

OS TOL T poPepEl {Lev OOOD, ™ popepet dé Kat Bs,
N@S, NTE havetoa TONEAS em éRnoe KeNEvO ov

avo p@trous ToAXotct T etl Guya Bovol ec


; 1 Gerhard; 76, MSS.
44


i
} ph
—_


§ forthisis the hardest month, wintry, hard for sheep and


WORKS AND DAYS


dark cloud from heaven wrap round you and make
your body clammy and soak your clothes. Avoid it ;


hard for men. In this season let your oxen have half
their usual food, but let your man have more; for the
helpful nights‘are long. Observe all this until the
year is ended and you have nights and days of equal
length, and Earth, the mother of all, bears again her
various fruit.


When Zeus has finished sixty wintry days after
the solstice, then the star Arcturus! leaves the holy
stream of Ocean and first rises brilliant at dusk.
After him the shrilly wailing daughter of Pandion,
the swallow, appears to men when spring is just |
beginning. Before she comes, prune the vines, for
it is best so.

But when the House-carrier ? climbs up the plants


from the earth to escape the Pleiades, then it


is no longer the season for digging vineyards, but
to whet your sickles and rouse up your slaves.
Avoid shady seats and sleeping until dawn in the
harvest season, when the sun scorches the body.
Then be busy, and bringhome your fruits, getting up
early to make your livelihood sure. For dawn takes
away a third part of your work, dawn advances a man
on his journey and advances him in his work,—dawn
which appears and sets many men on their road, and
puts yokes on many oxen.


1 February to March.
2 7.e. the snail. The season is the middle of May.


45


HESIOD


"Hos. d€¢ oxodupos tT avdel Kat XeT a TéTTLE
Sevope@ epeloptevos eyupny KaTaXeveT aovony
TUKVOV UTO TTEPUYOV, Oépeos Kaparooceos & opn,
THOS TLOTATAL T aires Kal oivos AptaTOS,
payrotatar oé HES adhavpotatot o€ TOL

avo pes
elo lv, érret Keparny Kal youvara Selpuos ater,
avanéos b¢ TE XPos mo KAUMATOS: adda TOT HON
ein meT pain TE KU Kat BiPrtvos oivos, |
paca T aporrya.in yara T aiyay o Bevvupevaor, 590
Kab Boos voparyouo Kpéas BN TW TETOKVINS |
TPwOToyovav T épidov: émt © aidoma mivépev
oivon,
év Kup eCopevor, KeKopn Levon ATOP {wdis,
ay TLoV GK PUES Lepipov TpepavTa T POT WTA,
Kpyyns T alevaou Kal aT oppuTou, qT alorwros, 595
Tpls VdaTos MpoxKéelv, TO O€ TETPATOV LémEV OlVOv.


Apwot & érrotpivey Anuntepos tepov axtnv
Ouvepen, evr ay TpOra gary abevos ‘Oapiovos,
XOPY éy eval Kal eUTPOX aN év arof.

HET PO O ev Kopioacbas € €V ayyert" vTap erp 67) 600

TavrTa Biov KataOnat érdppevov évdo0t otKou,

OnTa T GoLKOV soe Ot Kal aTeKVOU éptOov

dina bar KéAXopat’ Karey UmoTopTLs epuos:

Kal KUVa KapxapocovTa Kope, ba petdeo oiTOU,

fH TwoTé o HuEepoKoLTOs avnp amo xXonual —
EANTAL. 605

XopTov & Eo Kopic at Kal cupderov, oppa Tou ein

Bovoi Kat HpLovorg w émneTavov. avrap eTELTA

duaas avadéat pira yotvata cai Boe N0CAaL.


46


WORKS AND DAYS


But when the artichoke flowers,! and the:chirping


}} grass-hopper sits in a tree and pours down his shrill
| song continually from under his wings in the season


of wearisome heat, then goats are plumpest and wine
sweetest ; women are most wanton, but men are
feeblest, because Sirius parches head and knees and
the skin is dry through heat. But at that time let °
me have a shady rock and wine of Biblis, a clot of
curds and milk of drained goats with the flesh of an
heifer fed in the woods, that has never calved, and
of firstling kids; then also let me drink bright wine,
sitting in the shade, when my heart is satisfied with
food, and so, turning my head to face the fresh
Zephyr, from the everflowing spring which pours
down unfouled thrice pour an offering of water, but
make a fourth libation of wine.


Set your slaves to winnow Demeter’s holy grain,


‘when strong Orion? first appears, on a smooth


threshing-floor in an airy place. Then measure it
and store it in jars. And so soon as you have safely
stored all your stuff indoors, I bid you put your
bondman out of doors and look out a servant-girl
with no children ;—for a servant with a child to
nurse is troublesome. And look after the dog with
jagged teeth; do not grudge him his food, or some
time the Day-sleeper* may take your stuff. Bring
in fodder and litter so as to have enough for your
oxen and mules. After that, let your men rest their
poor knees and unyoke your pair of oxen.


1 In June. 2 July. 3 4.e. a robber.
a


47


HESIOD.


Kor’ av Oo Naplov x Kal Yeiptos és wéaov ENOn
oupavon, “Ape todpov § éct8n poSoddxturos Hos, 6)
& Ilépon, tote mdvtas amodpémev olkade Botpus:
detEar & Heriw déxa T Huata Kal déxa vUKTAS,
TévTe 6€ avoKLacal, ExT@ © eis ayye apvaocal
d@pa Atwvic ov moruyndéos. avr ap émny O17 |
. dneddes a ‘Tades TE TO TE oa Oévos ‘Qaptovos 61)
ouvocw, TOT EMELT GPOTOU HEpV7 WEVOS elvan |
@paiou: Ae 5€ Kata yOovos Appevos cio.


Hi O€ ce vavtirins dvatrepérov ipepos atpet,
9 5) / 5. Mg
evT av Uidniades a Gévos 6B ptpov ‘Qapiwvos
/ , |
hevyovoar TiTTWaLY és HepoeLdéa TOVTOV, — 626
/ Mf n |
6) TOTE TaVTOLMY avéuwv Oviovew! anrat:
/ ! a ,
KAL TOTE LNKETL VHAS EXELV EVI OlVOTL TOVTO,
yhv épyalecOar pepvynpevos, @S TE KENEVO.
n / /
vna & én nrretpou épvcat wuKacat Te NOLL
f Cay Wee > ot / € ee 2 ~ eo
Tavtober, dbp iaxwao aveé“w@V “EeVOS UypoV GéVT@Y, 625)
, ’ / oA \ , Not) ||
yeipapov e€epvoas, wa pn 7vUO0n Aros d6uBpos.
OmAa © érdppeva rdvTa TEe@ éyKaTOeo oik@
4 it rf
EVKOT UWS TTOALTAS VHOS TTEPA TOVYTOTTOPOLO:
mnodr.ov © éevepyes UTTép KATVOU Kpe“acac Oat.
> aaa ts EG la) / / 25. Uk: of
avtos 6 @patov pipvely TrOOV, ELaoKEV EXON —- 630}
are Ay Be ee x ¢ , ’ 2 ,
Kal ToTe Vina Ooiv drad édnépuev, év O€ TE HopTov
>) f
dip peVvoV evrbvac bat, iy olxade Képoos apna,
WS Tp 4408 TE TATHP Kal OOS, peya vymve Ilépon,
mroiber ke ev ynuat, Piou KEX PNMEVOS éaO nod:
6s mote KaL THO HAGE, TONDY 61a TovToV pS S AS, 635
Kupau Aionrtiéa T POT OV, év vn peraivy®
ovK adhevos hevywv ovdé TAOUTOV TE Kal SA Aov,


1 Rzach: @vovoi.w, MSS.
48 ;


WORKS AND DAYS


. But when Orion and Sirius are come into mid-
ij heaven, and rosy-fingered Dawn sees Arcturus,! then

cut. off all, the grape-clusters, Perses, and bring them
home. Show them to the sun ten days and ten
nights : then cover them over for five, and on the
sixth day draw off into vessels the gifts of joyful
Dionysus. But when the Pleiades and Hyades and
strong Orion begin to set,? then reece to plough
in season: and so the completed year ? will fitly pass
beneath the earth.


But if desire for uncomfortable sea-faring seize
you; when the Pieiades plunge into the misty sea 4
to escape Orion’s rude strength, then truly gales of
all kinds rage. Then keep ships no longer on the
sparkling sea, but bethink you to till the land as I
bid you. Haul up your ship upon the land and pack
it closely with stones all round to keep off the
power oi the winds which blow damply, and draw
out the bilge-plug so that the rain of heaven may
not rot it. Put away all the tackle and fittings in
your house, and stow the wings of the sea-going
ship neatly, and hang up the well-shaped rudder
over the smoke. You yourself wait until the season
for sailing is come, and then haul your swift ship
down to the sea and stow a convenient cargo in it,
so that you may bring home profit, even as your
father and mine, foolish Perses, used to sail on ship-
board because he lacked sufficient livelihood. And
one day he came to this very place crossing over a
great stretch of sea; he left Aeolian Cyme and fled,
not from riches and substance, but from wretched

1 September. 2 The end of October.


3 That is, the succession of stars which make up the full year.
* The end of October or beginning of November.


49


HESIOD +


ada KAKND meviny, tiv Levs dvdperot didaow:
pacaato © aX, “EAtK@vOS oubuph € évl KOLN,
"Ackpyn, yeiua xaxh, Oéper apyarén, ovdé ToT
éo Onn. 64)
Tovn 6’, @ Ilépon, ¢ Epyov ue LV] [LEVOS eivau |
apat@r TAVTOV, Tept vauTidins dé padiora..
vy onyY atively, meyarn © €vt Poptia OécOar.
pet Sov pev Popros, pcifov oe emt KeEpoei KEpOOS
eooeTat, el avepot ye KAKAS aTEX OO W antas. 64!
Kor’ ay én éurropiny tpéwras acoidpova Cvpov
BovrAnae Ypéa Te Tpophuyety Kal NLmoV aTEpTéa, =>
deiEw Oy TOL wEeTPA TrOAVHADLG Bolo Garacens,
OUTE TL VAUTLALNS TETOPLTLEVOS OUTE TL VNOV. :
ov yep T@ TOTE UNL Yy eTéeTAOY evpéa TovTov, 65C
eb pn és HvBovay é& AvAL0S, 7 7] TOT. /Axacot : :
pelvavres Xerpava TONUD ou aov dryetpay =
EXdd60s ef Lepis Tpoinv és KANMYUVALKA. >
évda 5 éyou eT  aeOnra dai povos “A ppiodmavtos
Xarxida T eis érépnoa: ta dé Tpoteppadpeva
TOANA 6559
acOn’ EOcoav maides peyarntopos: vla we dys :
UUV@ ViKnoaVTA Pepe TpLTod WTWEVTA.
TOV [ev eyo Movons ‘EXixoviddeca avéOyxa,
evda, pe TO T pPOTOV deryuphs érréSnoav Gowns.
TOGoOV TOL vn@v rye Terr elpn uae TOAVYOMPOV’ 660
GNX Kal Gs épew ZNvos voov airyeox oto:
Modoar ydp pw edidagav abécpatov t Devov aeLoelv.
"Hyata tevT7KovTa LeTa TPOTAS jedtowo,
és TENOS érPovros Oépeos KAPLAT@OEOS OPN,
@pPatos méAeTat Oyntots TAOS OVTE KE vHa 665
Kkavakais ovT avdpas atropbetcere Oddacoa, |


50


WORKS AND DAYS


| poverty which Zeus lays upon men, and he settled_


# near Helicon in a miserable hamlet, Ascra, which is


| bad in winter, sultry in summer, and good at no
im time.
But you, Perses, remember all works in their season


| _ but sailing especially. Admire a small ship, but put


your freight in a large one; for the greater the
lading, the greater will be your piled gain, if only
the winds will keep back their harmful gales.

If ever you turn your misguided heart to trading
and wish to escape from debt and joyless hunger, I
will show you the measures of the loud-roaring sea,
though I have no skill in sea-faring nor in ships; for
never yet have I sailed by ship over the wide sea,
but only to Kuboea from Aulis where the Achaeans
once stayed through much storm when they had
gathered a great host from divine Hellas for Troy,
the land of fair women. Then I crossed over to
| Chaleis, to the games of wise Amphidamas where
| the sons of the great-hearted hero proclaimed and
| appointed prizes. And there I boast that I gained
the victory with a song and carried off an handled
tripod which I dedicated to the Muses of Helicon, in
the place where they first set me in the way of clear
song. Such is all my experience of many-pegged
ships; nevertheless I will tell you the will of Zeus
who holds the aegis; for the Muses have taught me
to sing in marvellous song.

Fifty days after the solstice,| when the season of
wearisome heat is come to an end, is the right time
for men to go sailing. Then you will not wreck your
ship, nor will the sea destroy the sailors, unless


1 July-August.


51
E 2


HESIOD | a


el 61) 7) Toodpov ye Llocerddov évoatix Pov
y Zevs ablavarov Bactrevs eOérynow ohécoat:
éy TOUS yap TEXOS cot OMOS dryasBov TE KAKOY TE.
Thos O evKpuvees T avpat Kal TOVTOS aTHwwV 67M
evKNAOS TOTE pita. Doip a avepwowcr mono as |
Edxéuev €5 TovTOY hopTov T és TdavTa TiHecOat,
omevoew 0 STTt TAYLTTA TAAL olKOVOE vécrOaL’
[Node MEVELV OLVOY TE VéoV Kal OTwpLVOY BuSpoV
Kal yetwov emtovtTa NotoLo Te dewas anras, 67:
bor wpwe Odraccav opapthnaas Atos 6uBp@ |
TOAAM OTTMpPLVO, Yaderov Oé Te wovToVv COnKkev.
"AdXos 6 eiapivos TédeTAL TAOOS aVOpwTOLC LY:
7uos 02) TO TPWTOV, Goov T émLBaca KoparVNn ‘
‘yvos érroinoeyv, Toccov TéTAX avopl haven 686
éy Kpaon akpoTaTn, TOTE O auBaTos éott Cddacca:
elapwvos 6 ovTOS TENETAL THOOS. ov py Eeyore
aivnp ov yap éu@ Oud KeXapLa LEVos éoTiv’
dpmaKTos: NareTas Ke pryols KAKOV? GANG VU
Kal Ta
avo pwrot péCovow ardpeinat vooto: 685)
Xpnwata yao puyn medeTas detdotor Bpototow. — |


evvov © éati Oaveiv peta KYA. GANAO avwya
dpaleo bar tdde Tavta peta dpeciv, @S AyopEevo.
pnd év ynvay imavra Biov Koihyot TiGec Oat: |
aNNA TE hetrrewy, Ta, dé Metova. popriver bar. 690)
Secvov Yep. TOvTOU peTa KU pact TH LAaTL KUpoal.
dewvov 0, el Kk eT’ dpatay Um épBLov ax Gos aeLpas
aova era Kab poptia. pavp@ etn.
pétpa hvrdocecOar Katpos & éml mao aptoTos.


‘Opaios O€ yuvatica TEOV ToTL OLKOV dryer Oat, 695)
LATE TPLNKOVT@V eTEWY LANA TOAN ATONE TOV


52


WORKS AND DAYS


Poseidon the Earth-Shaker be set upon it, or Zeus,


| | the king of the deathless gods, wish to slay them ;


‘}. for the issues of good and evil alike are with them.


1 At that time the winds are steady, and the sea is


{ harmless. Then trust in the winds without care,


} and haul your swift ship down to the sea and put


all the freight on board; but make all haste you
ean to return home again and do not wait till the
time of the new wine and autumn rain and oncoming
storms with the fierce gales of Notus who accom-
panies the heavy autumn rain of Zeus and stirs up
the sea and makes the deep dangerous.

Another time for men to go sailing is in spring


| _ when a man first sees leaves on the topmost shoot of


a fig-tree as large as the foot-print that a crow makes ;
then the sea is passable, and this is the spring sailing


| time. For my part I do not praise it, for my heart


does not like it. Such a sailing is snatched, and you
will hardly avoid mischief. Yet in their ignorance
men do even this, for wealth means life to poor mor-
tals ; but it is fearful to die among the waves. But
I bid you consider all these things in your heart as I
say. Do not put all your goods in hollow ships ;
leave the greater part behind, and put the lesser
part on board; for it is a bad business to meet with
disaster among the waves of the sea, as it is bad if
you put too great a load on your waggon and break
the axle, and your goods are spoiled. Observe due
measure : and proportion is best in all things.


_ Bring home a wife to your house when you are of
the right age, while you are not far short of thirty


53


HESIOD


pnt émrideis dda ToAAd yamos SE TOL WpLos
ovUTOS'

" O€ YUV) TETOP nBaot, TEMTET d€ yamoiro.

ma pOevexny € yapetv, os K nOea Kedva oudains. |
THD dé pariara yapeety, i} TUS oéOev eyyvOr yaict, 70
mavra pan appusov,” pay yelToo Xappwara YHLNS.
ov pev yap TL yuvarcos avnp Anger aiewvov

THs ayadis, THs SO avTe KaKHS Ov pirytov aAXo,
Seumvoroxns’ WT avo0pa Kat IpOtpov TEep €OVTA |
ever ATep Oadolo Kal @U@ ynpai daxev.” 70:


Eo 6 dmv alavaTov paKkapwv mrepubarypevos
eival.

poe KAT LYVIT® io-ov Tmoveia Oa eTaipov’
el O€ KE TOLNTNS, fun fLLV ™ pOTEPOS KQKOV epéns.
pnoe apevoes Par yA@oons Kap el 0€ TE YY APKN
7) Th ETT 0S ELT @V aTroOUpLoy He Kal EpEaS, 71¢
ols TOT Tivuabat wenyvnuéevos’ ef O€ GE Y ADTIS |
HnyAT és didoTyTA, OLeny O eye mapacxeiy,
beEac0an- Oehos TOU aviyp pirov ddrOTE GAXOV
TOLELTAL, TE O€ fb) TL VOOV KaTEMYXETO ei6os. |

Myée ToAvEEwWov pond a&ewvov KanréeaOar, 715}
pnoe KaKa@v Erapov und écOXOv vetKeoTHpa.

Mn6é wor’ otAopévny Trevinv OupopOopov avdpi
TéeTAAO overdiCery, paKapav OOCLV .ALEV eovT@D.
yA@OCaNS TOL Onoaupos é ev avOpwroraw 6 dpua ros
pesoorijs, TreLoTH dé Hepes KATO MET pov tovons. 720
el 6€ KAKOV elToLs, bb oe K autos pelCov axov-

Tals.

1 Heyne: duds idév, MSS.

2 Another recension has daAod kal év aud ynpat OjKey: So
AENOPQ, Plutarch, Stobaeus.


54


WORKS AND DAYS


| years nor much above; this is the right age for
| marriage. Let your wife. have been grown up four
| years, and marry her in the fifth. Marry a maiden,


so that you can teach her careful ways, and especially


marry one who lives near you, but look well about
you and see that your marriage will not be a joke to
your neighbours. For a man wins nothing better
than a good wife, and, again, nothing worse than a
bad one, a greedy soul who roasts her man without
fire, strong though he may be, and brings him to a
raw + old age.


Be careful to avoid the anger of the deathless
gods. Do not make a friend equal toa brother ; but
if you do, do not wrong him first, and do not lie to
please the tongue. But if he wrong you first, offend-
ing either in word or in deed, remember to repay
him double; but if he ask you to be his friend
again and be ready to give you satisfaction, welcome
him. He is a worthless man who makes now one
and now another his friend; but as for you, do not
let your face put your heart to shame.’

Do not get a name either as lavish or as churlish ;
as a friend of rogues or as a slanderer of good men.

Never dare to taunt a man with deadly poverty
which eats out the heart ; it is sent by the deathless
gods. The best treasure a man can have is a sparing
tongue, and the greatest pleasure, one that moves
orderly ; for if you speak evil, you yourself will soon
be worse spoken of.


17.e. untimely, premature. Juvenal similarly speaks of
‘‘cruda senectus” (caused by gluttony).

* The thought is parallel to that of “O, what a goodly
outside falsehood hath.”


BE


HESIOD


; ,
Mnoeé roavéeivouv Sartos buaTémpenos etvat
éx KOLWOU: TrELaTNH O€ YapLS, CaTraVH T OALYLOTN.
Myéé trot’ é& nods Avi Net BEwev aiPorra oivov
NE age ox 0 s
YEepolw aviTTOLoW No ArXoLsS AVavaToLtow
b) \ / 7 b) 4 / 2 Dra /
ov yap Tol ye KAVOVGL, aTroTTUOVGL O€ T apas.
J, a
Myo’ avr’ nediov TeTpappevos opOds opmryety:
bY \ b) / } Vd / 4 : ee / ¥
avTap émrel KE OUN, ME“VHMEVOS, ES T GVLOVTA
ess O0 Am” Circe oO 18 Dir ON,
LNT ev 0O@ HT EXTOS 0OOD TrpOBadnY ovpHaNS
if
und amoyupvobeiss wakapov Tor vuKTes éacty
Cul & v4 @ a b / ‘ VA Oo ,
éCouevos © 6 ye Oetos avnp, TeTVYUMEVa ELOW>S,
Noe \ A f b) / b) n
HO YE TPOS TOLYOV TENATAS EVEPKEOS AVANS.
Myo’ atéota youn meTaXaypevos &vdo0t oixou
|
istin éumedacov Tapadawéwev, ANN anréacbar.
Coan) IN / / > .
pnd amo Ovadypoto Tadhou atovocTnoavTa
7 / b) > ae ff 5 AN /
OTEpmaivery yevenv, AN aPavadtov ato datos.
/ la}
Mn6€ trot’ alevawy ToTaL“aY KaAXippoov Vdwp
\ nn / ? bs OG b) Xa 4 Q
Toool TEpayv, Mply y EVEN LOwV es Kaa peEOpa,
(a) 4 id e/. A
velpas vipdpevos TokuNnpaT@ VOaTl NEVKO.
@ aA he a f
Os ToTapov S1iaBH KaKOTHT Loe YElpas aVLTTTOS,
A x N a he 2 fa) b) ,
T@ O€ Jeol veweoaot Kal adXyea OHKaY OTLTCM.
Myo amo wevtolo.o Gedy ev darth Oareln
5 BT Bead n / 7A ae /
avov avd YA@poD Tauvew aldwve cLdNpo.
A > >) / A a e/
My6é mor oivoyonv TiWéuev KpnTHpos UmepHe
/ ? \ \ ? nA an ae
TLVOVT@V’ OAON YAP ET AVT@ wolpa TETUKTAL.


56


WORKS AND DAYS


Do not be boorish at a common feast where there


| are many guests; the pleasure is greatest and the


expense is least.!

Never pour a libation of sparkling wine to Zeus
after dawn with unwashen hands, nor to others of the
deathless gods ; else they do not hear your prayers
but spit them back.

Do not stand upright facing the sun when you
make water, but remember to de this when he has
set and towards.his rising. And do not make water |
as you go, whether on the road or off the road, and
do not uncover yourself: the nights belong to the
blessed gods. A scrupulous man who has a wise heart
sits down or goes to the wall of an enclosed court.

Do not expose yourself befouled by the fireside in
_ your house, but avoid this. Do not beget children
when you are come back from ill-omened burial, but
after a festival of the gods.

Never cross the sweet-flowing water of ever-rolling
rivers afoot until you have prayed, gazing into the
soft flood, and washed your hands in the clear, lovely
water. Whoever crosses a river with hands unwashed
of wickedness, the gods are angry with him and
bring trouble upon him afterwards.

At a cheerful festival of the gods do not cut the
withered from the quick upon that which has five
branches? with bright steel.

Never put the ladle upon the mixing-bow] at a wine
party, for malignant ill-luck is attached to that.


* The ‘‘common feast” is one to which all present sub-
scribe. Theognis (line 495) says that one of the chief pleasures
of a banquet is the general conversation. Hence the present
passage means that such a feast naturally costs little, while
the many present will make pleasurable conversation,

* z.e, “do not cut your finger-nails.”


57


HESIOD


Mnée S0MOV TOLOV aver iEea Tov KaTareimel,
[bh TOL epelopevn Kpaty NaKeputa, Kopovn.
nO aro XUT pom odey QVET LppERTOV avenovTa
éa Oe unde hoea au émrel Kal TOI évt Trouvn. |
Mno én’ aKwwyiToLae Kabrleuer, ov yap apewor, 780
matsa Suwdexataiov, 6 oT avép’ ainvopa TOLel,
pnde SuM@denadunvov' icov Kal TOUTO TETUKTAL.
pnde yUvaLKel@ AovTpO xpoa pasdpuver bar
dvépa. hevyaen yap em Xpovoy é got ert Kat TP


t


TOL). fend ltepotow ém aiBopevorar KUpH Tas 755
poopevery aionra Beds vv Te Kal Ta vEewer od. |
pnoé TOT év T™ pox.ons TOT A LOD adnade TPopeovT ov
uno ert KpnVvawy oupeiy, edna O efaréac Oar:
pnd? évaTrowuye: TO yap ov ToL N@LOV éoTLY. |
OB: epdew" Oewny dé Bporav umaneveo  PNuny. 760°
pnpen yap, TE KAK TEAETAL, KOUPN [LEV aeipar |
peta jan’, dpyanrén dé dépev, yarern © aro-
éa Bau.
hyun © otis TaTAaV ATOANUTAL, HV TWA TOAAOL
aol dynuiEwor eos vd Tis éaoTe KAL AUTH.


“Hyara S é« Arvddev medvraypévos ed Kata
potpav \ 765

me pace jen Opoerot: T pine doa pnvos apiornv
Epya T émomT evel no appariny dareac Gar.

Aide yap nuépat etot Aros mapa pntioevtos, 769
evUT av arnbeiny Aaol KpivovTes dyoow. 768 |

_lTpetov ¢ évn TETPas TE Kal EBdoun 6 (€ POV Tyan" 119
TH yap ‘ATroAN@va Vpuc aopa yelvaro Ante
éySodTn S évatn Te, SUM ye Mev HMATA MNVOS


58


CUAD a


a
A AP tt, 5


WORKS AND DAYS


When you are building a house,do not leave it rough-
hewn, or a cawing crow may settle on it and croak.

Take nothing to eat or to wash with from
uncharmed pots, for in them there is mischief.

Do not let a boy of twelve years sit on things
which may not be moved,! for that is bad, and makes :
a man unmanly; nor yet a child of twelve months, for
that has the same effect. A man should not clean
his body with water in which a woman has washed,
for there is bitter mischief in that also for a time.
When you come upon a burning sacrifice, do not
make a mock of. mysteries, for Heaven is angry at
this also. Never make water in the mouths of rivers
which flow to the sea, nor yet in springs; but be
careful to avoid this. And do not ease yourself in
them : it is not well to do this.

So do: and avoid the talk of men. For Talk is
mischievous, light, and easily raised, but hard to
bear and difficult to be rid of. Talk never wholly
dies away when many people voice her: even Talk
is in some ways divine.


Mark the days which come from Zeus, duly
telling your slaves of them, and that the thirtieth
day of the month is best for one to look over the
work and to deal out supplies.

For these are days which come from Zeus the all-
wise, when men discern aright.

To begin with, the first, the fourth, and és
seventh—on which Leto bare Apollo with the ~
blade of gold—each is a holy day. The eighth and


1 7,é, things which it would be sacrilege to disturb, such as
tombs.


59


HESIOD


éEox acEopévoto Bpornava ¢ épya méver Oa
Send Oe dSumdekatn T, dupa Ye poev ec Xai,
n jeeV OLS TreLKELY 70 evdpova KapT ov cpio Oar 715
7 O€ du@dexarn Tis evOeKaTNS pey apeivov: |
TH yap ToL vn var’ depouTOrnTos apaxvns
MATOS eK TAé€tou, OTE iS pes o@pov aparau

Th © ioTov oTHaatTo yuv1 mpoBaXolTo TE épyov.

Myvos © toTapévou T plo KaLOEKATHY aréacbat 780
TE PLATOS ap~ac0a' gduta 8 &vOpévracbat

apiorn.

"Extn 6 1 “econ “an ao bpcpopos € éoTe putoiow,
avd poryovos a aryady: Kovpy om ov avpdopds éotwy,
oUTE yevér Pa ™ par ovT ap yeejoy avTiBornaas.
ovee ev 1) T POTN Extn KoUpN YE " yever Oar 785
aPHEVOS, aAXr’ épidous Taye Kal T OED paprov |
onkov T auduBanrety TOULY LOD ym Lov apap
éo0A1 6 avdpoyoves: didéot & 6 ye? KéepTopa

Bate
wevoea 8 aipvriovs Te Royovs Kpudiovs 7
OapLa Lous. }

Mnvos & 6yd0atn KaTpov Kat Bovv épimuxov 790 |
Tapvewev, oUPHas Sé dUWSEKATH TAaNaEPYoUs.

Kicads & év weydAn, TAE@ Hyatt, taTopa PwaTAa
yeivacOar' para yap Te voov emuKagpévos

éotiv.
écOr7 © avdpoyovos Sexatn, Kovpyn S€ TE TETPAS
péoon TH O€ Te UAAG Kal eiAlmrobas EdtKas Bovs 795
Kal Kiva KapKXapddovTa Kal ovphas TaXaEpyous
mpnivew émt yetpa Ticis. mepvrako dé Oup@


1 Rzach : covpy re, AFGH etc.: kovpyor te, KL: koupyat, C,
2 A: gidéor or pidéer 5é xe, MSS.


60


aad ee


WORKS AND DAYS


the ninth, two days at least of the waxing month,!


are meisdll good for the works of man. Also the


eleventh and twelfth are both excellent, alike for
shearing sheep and for reaping the kindly ‘fruits; but


| the twelfth is much better than the eleventh, for on


it the airy-swinging spider spins its web in full day,
and then the Wise One,? gathers her pile. On that
day a woman should set up, her loom and get forward
with her work.

Avoid the thirteenth of the waxing month for
beginning to sow: yet it is the best day for setting
plants.

The sixth of the mid-month is very unfavourable ~
for plants, but is good for the birth of males, though
unfavourable for a girl either to be born at all or to
be married. Nor is the first sixth a fit day for a girl
to be born, but a kindly for gelding kids and sheep


_ and for fencing in a sheep-cote. It is favourable for


the birth of a boy, but such will be fond of sharp
speech, lies, and cunning words, and _ stealthy
converse.

On the eighth of the month geld the boar and
loud-bellowing bull, but hard-werking mules on the
twelfth.

On the great twentieth, in full day, a wise man


should be born. Such an one is very sound-witted.


The tenth is favourable for a male to be born; but,
for a girl, the fourth day of the mid-month. On that
day tame sheep and shambling, horned oxen, and


-the sharp-fanged dog and hardy mules to the touch


of the hand. But take care to avoid troubles which


1 The month is divided into three periods, the waxing, the
mid-month, and the waning, which answer to.the phases of
the moon. 2 2.e. the ant.


61


HESIOD


Tetpdd arevacIar P0ivortos 0 ictapévov TE
anyea GupoBopy' wara yap” TeTekeopevov Huap.
inf) Oe ih \ of Q 3 a ”?
iy O€ Teradptyn wnvos ayeacOas® oixov aKorTiy 80
> \ / ND) 9) oe / of
otevovs Kpivas, oF em’ epypare ToUT@ dploTot.
>) 3 Pp] iN , \
Iléumtas 6° éEaréacOat, émet yadeTrai Te Kal
aivat: |
ed UA / 3 , b) J
év méuTTn yap pacw Kpuvvas auditrodeveu
7 )/ n
"“Opxov yevvopevov, Tov Epis Téxe Thy éridpKots.
Mécon & EBdSopndatn Anuntepos tepov axTny —805
ev war’ oTriTrevovTa evTPOYaX@ ev ALOT |
VA e J A (3 Qian
Barr€uev, VNoTOMOY TE Tapety Dadhapnta Sovpa
Dstt / / oO b] 7 , \
vynia te §EvrA\a TWOAAA, Ta T AppmEeva VHVGt
TENOVTAL. :
10 S / @ an A @ >) /
TeTpaot 0 apyecOar vnas mHyvuc0at apasas. |
\ , 5
Kivas 0 7 péoon ert deteXa A@LOY Huap, 810
, 3
TpwtiaTyn © Eelvas TavaTnpmoYy avOpw@TroloL:
és Orn pev yap O 4 ye * hutevepev Hoe yevérOar
avépe T NOE yUVaLKL’ Kal OUTOTE TaYKAaKOV 7pmap.
A >}
Iladpot 8 atte toact Tpicewvdda pnvos apiotnvy
dpEac0ai te TiPov Kal éml Cuyov avyeéve Oeitvat 815
/ ' |
Bovol Kal nutovotos Kal itmols @KUTOOETCL,
n / \ 3 3/ / :
pha TokvKANLOa Oony es olvoTra TOVTOV
3 1d A J bea / /
eipUpevas Tavpor O€ T adnOéa KiKAHTKOVOLW.
\ 9
Terpade 0 oiye wiPov: Trept TavT@V Lepov Huap
A i \ A
pécon Tavpo. oO avdte mer etxdda uNvos apioTnv 820
an Z , :
HOS ‘ytyvomevns: émrl Oeieda O e€oTl KEpeiwv.


1 Guyet: OvpoBopety, MSS. 2 A: tot, MSS.
3 Sittl : ayeo@ eis, MSS. 4 AM: de, most MSS.


62


WORKS AND DAYS


eat out the heart on the fourth of the beginning and
| ending of the month; it is a day very fraught with fate.

) On the fourth of the month bring home your
bride, but choose the omens which are best for this
business. .

Avoid fifth days: they are unkindly and terrible.
On a fifth, they say, the Erinyes assisted at the birth
of Horcus (Oath) whom Eris ae! bare to trouble
the forsworn.

Look about you very carefully and throw out
Demeter’s holy grain upon the well-rolled | threshing
floor on the seventh of the mid-month. Let the
woodman cut beams for house building and plenty of
ships’ timbers, such as are suitable for ships. On the
fourth day begin to build narrow ships.

The ninth of the mid-month improves towards
evening ; but the first ninth of all is quite harmless
formen. It is a good day on which to beget or to
be born both for a male and a female : it is never an
. wholly evil day.

Again, few know that the twenty-seventh of the
month is best for opening a wine-jar, and putting
yokes on the necks of oxen and mules and swift-
footed horses, and for hauling a swift ship of many
thwarts down to the sparkling sea; few call it by its
right name.

On the fourth day open a jar. ‘The fourth of the
mid-month is a day holy above all. And again, few
men know that the fourth day after the twentieth
is best while it is morning: towards evening it is
less good.

1 Such seems to be the meaning here, though the epithet
is otherwise rendered “well-rounded.” Corn was threshed


by means of a sleigh with two runners having three or four
rollers between them, like the modern Egyptian nurag.


63


HESIOD


ef \ e V4 J ok ? / pe Bas
Aide pev juépar eioiy émryOoviors péy Cverap,

€ epee 4 / > / 7 f
at 6 ddAat peTaoovirol, AKHpLol, OV TL Hépovaai.
arXros 8 adroinv aivel, Tadpot Sé ioacw.

\ v / / ;

ANNOTE LNT PULH TEAEL HMEPN, ANAOTE MYTHP.

VU 3 / NC ph rat if 4
TAWV EVSALMOV TE Kal OABLOS, OS TA0E TaYTA

>] \ 3 , 3 fe J /
eldws épyatntas avaitios adavatoow,
y , NORE / b) Mf
épvilas Kpivav Kat UTEepBactas adecivov.


OPNI®OMANTEIA


Proclus on Works and Days, 828. Tovrets 8é
emayouot tives THY ‘OpviOopaytetav ativa Armrod-
ANwvLos 0 Pddsos Beret.


64


WORKS AND DAYS


I These days are a great blessing to men on earth ;
| but the rest are changeable, luckless, and bring
nothing. Everyone praises a different day but few


| know their nature. Sometimes a day is a_step-


mother, sometimes a mother. That man is happy
} and lucky in them who knows all these things and
} does his work without offending the deathless gods,
| who discerns the omens of birds and _ avoids
transgression.


THE DIVINATION BY BIRDS


Some make the Duwnation by Birds, which
Apollonius of Rhodes rejects as spurious, follow
this verse (Works and Days, 828).


65


HESIOD


AXTPONOMIA


Athenaeus xi. p. 491d. kal 6 tiv eis “Holodov


\ 5) J / b) / > \ a
67) avapepomev ny TOLNTAS AoTpovoptav QveL


Tlenerddas avtas éyeu:
Tas 6€ Bpotot caréovoart IleNecadas..
aL TAAL’
verméepcat Svvovot Ilederddes.
Kal TANW* |
A b) / > /
Thos atoxpumTovae Lererddes ... .


Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. ii. 16. TUneraddas....


@V Ol AT TEpES OUTOL
j oe J Cele ) , \ 3 / nA
Tnvyétn T époecoa cat Hréxtpn xvavotis
b) / Ae J / \
AnXKv6vn Te Kal Aorepomn diy Te Ker.auvo
Maia te cal Meporn, tas yeivato datéipos


"Atias.

% ak 3 * *
Kurdgjuns ev Odpecot Gedy Knp’KAa TEX

“Epp.


2;


Scholiast on Aratus 254. Zevs 6é dorépas
auras (tas “Tavtos adeddas) memoinxke, Tas


66


j


THE ASTRONOMY


THE ASTRONOMY


I


/ Awnp the author of the Astronomy, which is attri-
buted forsooth to Hesiod, always calls them (the
| Pleiades) Peleiades: “but mortals call them
i Peleiades”; and again, “the stormy Peleiades go
| down”; and again, “then the Peleiades hide
lm away... ..”


|
i


The Pleiades . . . whose stars are these :—“ Lovely
Teygeta, and dark-faced Electra, and Alcyone, and
_ bright Asterope,and Celaeno, and Maia, and Meroye,

_ whom glorious Atlas begot . . . . In the mountains
| of Cyllene she (Maia) bare Hermes, the herald of
} the gods,”


I
i


2.


as But Zeus made them (the sisters of Hyas)
| into the stars which are called Hyades. Hesiod
F 2


HESIOD


Karoupevas “Tddas. @v Ta ovopata “Hoiodos
év Th AoTptKyn avTov BiBr@ diddoKet Néyou:
Nvpdat Xapitecow omotae,"
DarovrAn NOE Kopevis evo répavos te Kréeva
Davo 0 imepoer oa io” ‘Evdwpy TAVUTETTOS,
as “Tadas xaréovow eri xOovt bin avOpo-


TOV.


3.


Pseudo- Hratosthenes Catast. frag. 1.2 ~Apetos 1)
peyann | TAUTYV ‘Hotodos dyno. Auedovos Ouya-
Tépa év ‘A pKacig oixely, ehéo Pau yan pera
“AprEepoos THY TWEpl TAS Onpas ayoy ny év TOUS
GpEeat mrovela Oat plapeioav dé vo Auos émpetvae
NavOavoue av Tay Ocov: popalvar dé toTeEpov
émiToKov 707 ovo av opbeioay Um avThHs ovo-
pevnu: éhb' @ opyia Beloay THY deov arroOnpidcar
QUTHV? Kal OUTWS TeKely dipk'Tov yevopevny TOV
Kwhnbevta “A pxaoa. ovo av ° év TO Opet Onpev-
Ofvar t VIO aiTOAWY TIV@Y Kal Trapadod jae pera
Tov Bpéhovs TO Aukdove: pera vpovov O€ TLVa
bdfar ceived Oeiv Els TO TOU Atos aBarov [‘epor]
ayvonocacay TOV vO_OV. umo o€ Tob idtov viod
Svaxopmevny Kat TOV “Apeabov, Kat avaipetobat
Héhdoveay 61a TOV elpmpeévov VOMOV, O Zevs Ova
Thy cuyyévecay avtny é&eiNeTO Kal ev Tois
datpows avtiy €Onxev. “Apxtov O€ avTny @vo-
pace Ova TO cUUBEBNKOS AUTH CUETTMpLA.

Comm. Supplem. on Aratus, p. 547 M. 8. rept
Tov Bowtov Tov Kai ApxtodvAaKos. Tepl TOVTOV


1 This half verse is added by the Scholiast on Aratus, 172.
2 The Catasterismi (‘‘ Placings among the Stars”) is a col-
lection of legends relating to the various constellations.


68


THE ASTRONOMY


| in his Book about Stars tells us their names as
| follows: “Nymphs like the Graces, Phaesyle and
- Coronis and rich-crowned Cleeia and lovely Phaeo
and long-robed Eudora, whom the tribes of men
upon the earth call Hyades.”


Qo.

The Great Bear.|—Hesiod says she (Callisto) was
the daughter of Lycaon and lived in Arcadia. She
chose to occupy herself with wild-beasts in the
mountains together with Artemis, and, when she
was seduced by Zeus, continued some time un-
detected by the goddess, but afterwards, when she
was already with child, was seen by her bathing
and so discovered. Upon this, the goddess was
enraged and changed her into a beast. ‘Thus she
became a bear and gave birth to a son called Arcas.
- But while she was in the mountain, she was hunted
by some goat-herds and given up with her babe to
Lycaon. Some while after, she thought fit to go
into the forbidden precinct of Zeus, not knowing
the law, and being pursued by her own son and
the Arcadians, was about to be killed because of the
said law; but Zeus delivered her because of her
connection with him and put her among the stars,
giving her the name Bear because of the misfortune
which had befallen her.


Of Bodtes, also called the Bear-warden. The
story goes that he is Arcas the son of Callisto and


69


HESIOD


eyeTat, Ort "A pkas ear c KadXuotods cat Ards
yeyoves: pKnoe dé Tept TO AvKavov. Peipavros
avtTnv Axos, ov T POT TOUNT AMEVOS 0 Aukaoy, TOV
Aia efevitev, OS pneu ‘Hatodos, Kal TO Bpépos
caTtaxoWas twapeOnKey ert THY TpaTrEeCay.


4.


Pseudo-Hratosthenes, Catast. fr. xxxii. ~Opiov]|
Ttoutov Hotodds dnaw Kdpuddns ths Mivwos
kat Ilocedavos civat, SoOHvar 5€ av’T@ Swpeav
MOTE ETL TOV KUMATOV mopever Bau Kadamep em
Ths yns. é€AOcevta Sé avTov eis Xiov Mepomny
THY Oivorrimvos Brava ba oivabevta, yvovta
d6€ tov Oivorriwva Kal Karen Os eveyKovTa. THY
Bp EKTUPABDT UL av TOV Kal ék THS X@pas
exBaretv- énOovta oe Ets ASjpvov aNNTEVvOVTA
‘Hdaioto cupptéac: os avtov édXenoas didwaow
avto Kndartova tov avtod | oixetov| otKéTny, OT aS
oonyn ov AaBov ért TOY Bpwv Ehepe onmaivovTa
Tas odovs. éAO@v & eri Tas avatonras Kal “Hriw
cuppitas SoKet vytacOnva, Kal ovT@s éml Tov
Oworiova enbeiy TAAL TLOoplay avr e770 n-
gov. oO O€ UTO TOV TONT OV ume yAv eKEKPUTTTO.
aT eENTLCAS oe THY exetvou inrnow annrOev els
Kpnrny Kal Trept Tas Onpas Ouirye KULYET OY
Ths >Apréusoos Tapovens kat THs Antovs, Kal
Soxel atrethyjoacbat ws mav Onpiov averely THY
éml THS YHS YLvopevov. Oupwbetoa dé avr Vy
avinKe oKOpT Lov evmeyedn, ep ov TO KévTPO
TIVES aTONETO. o0ev 61a THY avTov avdpiav
éy Tois adotpows avTov eOnxev 0 Leds vo Aprté-


7°


THE ASTRONOMY


| y Zeus, and he lived in the country about Lycaeum.
j After Zeus had seduced Callisto, Lycaon, pretend-


ing not to know of the matter, entertained Zeus, as
Hesiod says, and set before him on the table fe
babe which he had cut up.


A.


Orion. |—Hesiod says that he was the son of
Euryale, the daughter of Minos, and of Poseidon,
and that there was given him as a gift the power
of walking upon the waves as though upon land.
When he was come to Chios, he outraged Merope,
the daughter of Oenopion, being drunken; but
; Oenopion when he learned of it was greatly vexed
at the outrage and blinded him and cast him out of
the country. Then he came to Lemnos as a beggar
and there met Hephaestus who took pity on him
and gave him Cedalion his own servant to guide
him. So Orion took Cedalion upon his shoulders
and used to carry him about while he pointed out the
roads. Then he came to the east and appears to have
met Helius (the Sun) and to have been healed, and
so returned back again to Oenopion to punish him ;
_but Oenopion was hidden away by his people under-
ground. Being disappointed, then, in his search for
the king, Orion went away to Crete and spent his
time hunting in company with Artemis and Leto.
It seems that he threatened to kill every beast there
was on earth; whereupon, in her anger, Karth sent
up against him a scorpion of very great size by which
he was stung and so perished. After this Zeus, at
the prayer of Artemis and Leto, put him among the


ve


HESIOD


\ la) bf / ¢ / 3 \ /
pordos Kat Antovs aktmbeis, omoiws Kat to Onpiov
Tov elvat uVnMoaVVOY Kal THS mpdkews.


D.


Diodorus iv. 85. évtot Oe Neyouer o ELT MOV
peyadov ‘yevopevev dvapparyhvae TOV avyéva TIS
HIretpov Kab yever Oat Tov a opO mov, Overpyovons
THS Jaracons THY pr eupov amo TAS vo Ov.
“Hotodos 6€ 0 TOUTS pyc ToUvaYTLOV, ava-
TET TAPEVOV TOU meh aryous ‘Opiova Tpooxoo au
TO Kara THV Hedwpida KELEVOV aK p@TnpLOV Kal
To Téwevos TOV Ilocetd@vos KaATATKEVATAL, TLLO-
pevoy UTO TOV eyXoptov SrabepovTas: ‘Tadra dé
dvaT pat dpevov Els hvBovay peTavaaTho at KaKel
KATOUK HO ae" dia 6€ THY OoEay ev TOls KAT ovpavor
doTpos KaTapOunbéevta TUX EbD wavarov pyiuns.


XEIPONO® THOOHKAT


1)
Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. vi. 19.
Ev viv pot Ta &xacta pera ppect TEvKai pina t


ppaver bas 7 pOTOV bev, OT av Sopov ELT ahiKNAL,
époéuev iepa Kara Oeols aieuyevétynow.


Di.
Plutarch Mor. 1034 5.


pnoe Oteny duxaons, Tplv av appotv povOov
aKkovons.


12


|)


aN | a
rey a a
a ol) Te


THE PRECEPTS OF CHIRON


| stars, because of his manliness, and the scorpion alse


‘as a memorial of him and of what had occurred.


5.


Some say that great earthquakes occurred, which
broke through the neck of land and formed the
straits,! the sea parting the mainland from the island.
But Hesiod, the poet, says just the opposite: that
the sea was open, but Orion piled up the promontory
by Peloris, and founded the close of Poseidon which
is especially esteemed by the people thereabouts.
When he had finished this, he went away to Euboea


| and settled there, and because of his renown was


taken into the number of the stars in heaven, and
won undying remembrance.


THE PRECEPTS OF CHIRON
1.


_ “© AND now, pray, mark all these things well in
a wise heart. First, whenever you come to your
house, offer good sacrifices to the eternal gods.”


2.


“ Decide no suit until you have heard both sides
speak.”
1 The Straits of Messina.


73


HESIOD


5!
Plutarch de Orac. defectu i. 415 c.
b ul / \ / J
évvea Tot Gwe yeveds Naképula Kopwvy
avopav ynpavrev: éxados O€é Te TETPAKOPaVOS:
nN : €
tpeis & éXadhous o KOpak ynpacKeTar avTap oO
potme
> / \ / / / / e A
évvéa bev KOpakas, Séxa oivekas € TOL HpeEts
Nvpodac evrroKxapos, Kovpat Atos atytoxovo.
Ay
Quintilian, i. 1. 15. Quidam litteris instituendos, |
qui minores septem annis essent, non putaverunt ©
. in qua sententia Hesiodum esse plurimi tradunt,
qui ante Grammaticum Aristophanem fuerunt, nam
is primus “Tzro@HKxas, in quo libro scriptum hoc
invenitur, negavit esse huius poetae. |


METAAA EPDA


be
Comm. on Aristotle, Nicomachean FHthics. v. 8.
\ if Bg N a ¢ , b) \ 3
TO pevtot eros (TO Tov “PadamavOvos) éott map
€ 0 b) A / / e/ /
Hovod@ ev Tots MeyaXous” Kpyous ov Twas Eyvov:
EL KAKA TLS TTELPAL, KAKA KEPOEA K AMnoELEV
/ / f / n /
el xe waOor Ta T epeke, Oixn K tela yevorTo.
2


Proclus on Hesiod, Works and Days, 126. To
dé apytpeov Emote TH yH aKovovaL EyoYTES OTL
év tots Meyardos “Epyous TO apyupiov tas yhs
yevearoyel. |


74


~ THE GREAT WORKS


3.


} #£«‘*“A chattering crow lives out nine generations of
} aged men, but a stag’s life is four times a crow’s,
| and a raven’s life makes three stags old, while-the
= phoenix outlives nine ravens, but we, the rich-haired
| Nymphs, daughters of Zeus the aegis-holder, outlive
_ ten phoenixes.”’
as ma 4
1 Some consider that children under the age of
_ seven should not receive a literary education . .
|} That Hesiod was of this opinion very many writers
affirm who were earlier than the critic Aristophanes ;
| for he was the first to reject the Precepts, in which
| book this maxim occurs, as a work of that poet.


THE GREAT WORKS


i.

| Tue verse, however (the saying of Rhadamanthys),
| is in Hesiod in the Great Works and is as follows:
| “If a man sow evil, he shall reap evil increase; if
men do to him as he has done, it will be true
fe justice.” |


2.

Some believe that the Silver Race (is to be attri-
buted to) the earth, declaring that in the Great
Works Hesiod makes silver to be of the family of
Earth.


15


HESIOD


IAAIOL AAKTTAOI


Pliny, Natural History vii. 56, 197. .... Ferrum |
conflare et temperare Hesiodus in Creta eos (mon-.
strasse) qui vocati sunt Dactyli Idaei.


Clement, Stromateis i. 16. 75. KédApus te ad —

\ 4 e a ’ / if
kat Aapvapeveds, ot tov “Idaiwy AaktirXov
Tp@ToL, aLonpov evpov év Kuapo, AéXas bé adXos
‘Idaios etpe yarkod Kpacw, ws 6é “Haiodos, ©
LxvOns, |


76


THE IDAEAN DACTYLS


THE IDAEAN DACTYLS


| Hestop says that those who are called the Idaean
|} Dactyls taught the smelting and tempering of iron in
Crete.

Celmis, again, and Damnameneus, the first of the
} Idaean Dactyls, discovered iron in Cyprus; but
| bronze-smelting was discovered by Delas, another
Idaean, though Hesiod calls him Scythes.!


1 Or perhaps ‘‘ a Scythian.”


| Bt . a
: | rg


HSIOAOY SEOLONIA


Movodov. ‘Educoviddoy apxopel QELOELY,
‘ aie “Educdvos @ Exovaow 6 pos pear Te CaOecov Te
Kat TE TEDL Kpnuny ioeLdéa TOG aATTaNOLoLW
opxyedvTat Kal Bwov épia Deveos Kpoviwvos.
Kat TE oer od pevar Tépeva Kpoa Tleppnocoto
y) “Inrov Kpnyns i ‘On perod Cabéovo
aK porate Enix Xopovs EVETTOLNT AVTO
KANOUS, ipepoevTas” eTEPPOTAYTO o€ Too lv.
évOeyv aTropviwevat, KEKANULMEVAL HEL TOA,
eDVUX LAL oreiXov mepiKahea dooay \eloau,
Upvedoa Aia a airytoxov kal jwotviav “ Hpny
“Apyeinn, Xpucéoroe Tedirous éuBeBaviar,
Koupyy T airyLoxovo Ads yavedT AO nyny
Doi Bov 7 ‘ATodova Kat "Aprepey 6 Loxéatpav
noe Ilocesddwva yenoxor, evvootyatoy,
Kal Oéurv aidotnv eMKoBré apov T ‘Agpodtrny
“HBnv TE xpvooa repavor Kadnv te Avovny
Anrea T ‘lawertov TE dé K povov aryKuhopnTny
"HOT A éXLOV TE peyay hap pay TE Ledajuny
LDatav t Oxeavoy te péyav cal Noeta péraivav
ad\rXov T AOavdtov lepov yévos alev €ovTav.
ai vd wo? “Hotodov carn édidakav aoidny,


48


THE THEOGONY OF HESIOD


From the Heliconian Muses let us begin to sing,
who hold the great and holy mount of Helicon, and
dance on soft feet about the deep-blue spring and
the altar of the almighty son of Cronos, and, when
they have washed their tender bodies in Permessus
or in the Horse's Spring or Olmeius, make their fair,


}) lovely dances upon highest Helicon and move with


vigorous feet. Thence they arise and go abroad by
night, veiled in thick mist, and utter their song with


lovely voice, praising Zeus the aegis-holder and


queenly Hera of Argos who walks on golden sandals
and the daughter of Zeus the aegis-holder bright-


eyed Athene, and Phoebus Apollo, and Artemis who


delights in arrows, and Poseidon the earth-holder who
shakes the earth, and reverend Themis and quick-
glancing! Aphrodite, and Hebe with the crown of gold,
and fair Dione, Leto, Iapetus, and Cronos the crafty
counsellor, Kos and great Helius and bright Selene,
Karth too, and great Oceanus, and dark Night, and
the holy race of all the other deathless ones that are
for ever. And one day they taught Hesiod glorious
song while he was shepherding his lambs under holy


1 The epithet probably indicates coquettishness.
79


HESIOD


/ y> ¢ a
dpvas totpmaivov? ‘EXukwvos bio Cad éouo.
Tovee O€ pe TPwWTLaTA Deal pos pmvOOV EeLTroD,


Modcar ’Ordvptriades, Kodpat Atos airyoyoto" Pe |


Tlospéves &ypavrot, Kak edéeyyea, yaoTepes olor,
ldpwev wev0ea TOAAG Aéyelv ETUMOLTLY Opmota,
tdpuev 0, edt eOéXwpev, adnbéa ynpvcacbat.

A / n fy \ b] }

Os epacayv kovpat peyarou Atos aptemresat:


Kal ot oKHTTpov edov dadvns épulnréos OCov 30


} / Q / 6 ed 2 bé 3 o?
-opewacai, Onntov: everrvevcay O€ Lol AVONV
, / if b] J / >} ,
Géori, va Kdeloims TA T ETTOMEVA TPO T EOVTA.
, > Le / 27 '€ wn 4 J \ x7
Kal ph €KéXoVE UuvEelv waKdpw@v YévoOs AleVv EoVTO?,
an b) 5) \ an / \ d\ /
apas 6 avtas TpwTOV TE Kal VaTAaTOV aiéy aEtoev.


ada TL wor TAVTA TrEpL Spbv 7} TEpl TET ENV; 35.


Tuvn, Movodwr apywpeda, tai Art rartpt
Uuvedoal TéepTrovar péyav voov évTos ‘OvmTrou,
Eipevoal TA T CoVTA TAT eooopEeva TPO T éovTa,
Pov" opnpedoar TOV S akKamaTos péet AVON


b) / e an a / , \ 1

€K TTOMATMV HoELa yera O€ Te O@MATA TaTpos 40
\ a

Znvos éprydsovtroto Peay om NEtpioéooy |


, a a / / ’ /
oKtovapevn nyet dé Kapn vidoevtos ‘OdXUpTrou
Sopata T abavatov. al & &uBpotov dcoav ietaat
Gedy yévos aidoiov Tp@Tov KhEelovaolV aoLon


é& apyins, ods Vata cal Otvpavos evpds éttxtev, 45


Cherie ss e3) A Ss He / a Sv.

ol T €x TMV EyevovToO Deol, SwTHpEs Eawv.

} UA 9 Tn Q al or eee Oe \. Ae fa
evTepov avte Liiva, Peay TaTép nde Kal avdpor,
) / a ey na Ny uid / Li gayds

apxXoueval O vuvevat Kal EXANYOVTAL”~ aAOLONS,


1 Ludwich: 6a) Afvyouoal 7’, MSS.
80 |


THEOGONY


| Helicon, and this word first the goddesses said to_
{| me—the Muses of Olympus, daughters of Zeus who


| holds the aegis :


“Shepherds of the wilderness, wretched things of
shame, mere bellies, we know how to speak many
false things as though they were true; but we know,
when we will, to utter true things.” |

So said the ready-voiced daughters of great Zeus, —
and they plucked and gave me a rod, a shoot of
sturdy olive, a marvellous thing, and breathed into
me a divine voice to celebrate things that shall be and
things that were aforetime; and they bade me sing
of the race of the blessed gods that are eternally,
but ever to sing of themselves both first and last. But
why all this about oak or stone ? 1


Come thou, let us begin with the Muses who gladden
the great spirit of their father Zeus in Olympus with.
their songs, telling of things that are and that shall
be and that were aforetime with consenting voice.
Unwearying flows the sweet sound from their lips,
and the house of their father Zeus the loud-thunderer
is glad at the lily-like voice of the goddesses as it
spreads abroad, and the peaks of snowy Olympus
resound, and the homes of the immortals. And they
uttering their immortal voice, celebrate in song first
of all the reverend race of the gods from the
_ beginning, those whom Earth and wide Heaven
begot, and the gods sprung of these, givers of good
things. Then, next, the goddesses sing of Zeus, the
father of gods and men, as they begin and end their
strain, how much he is the most excellent among the

1 A proverbial saying meaning, ‘‘ why enlarge on irrele-
vant topics ?”’ ,


SI


HESIOD


doaov pépTaros éoTt Oedy Kpatel TE peytaTos.
adr is oe avOpamav Te yévos KpaTepav te Luyavtov 5
Upvetroar Téptrovat Atos voov évtos "Odvptrov
Motvoat ‘Odvptriddes, Kodpar Aros atrysoxoo.

Tas év Usepin Kpovidn téxe matpi pyetoa
Mynuocvvn, youvoiow ’KXevOnpos pedéovaa, |
ANT MOTUVHVY TE KAKOV AuTravpa Te wEepuNnpdwv. Bil
evvea yap OL VUKTOS EuioyeTo pntieta Levs |
voo pu at’ alavarov Lepov EXoS eccavaBaivor:
GX OTE ON p p EveauTos env, Tept O éTpam ov apa
peqvev pOwvovtov, mepl d uaTa TOAN éTehécOn, |

nO érex’ évvéa Kovpas opodpovas, yaw aolon 6C
Aue ti éy oTHVecou, axnodéa Ovuov eyovoals,
TuTOov am akpotaTyns Kopudys vidoevtos O)vp-

TOU.
évba apy AuTrapot Te Xopot Kal dopata aad
Tap & avT HS Xaperes TE Ka’ "Tpepos otKe eXovow a
év Oantns: eparny de O1a oTOMa dooav Leto aL 65]
[LENTOVTAL TAVYT@V TE VOMLOUS Kal HOGA KEdVa :
adavatov KrEiovasy, érnpatov boca iEeioat.
at ToT icav mpos"Ohupr ov ayarhopevat Om Kah,
apBpooty podmiy: Tept oO laye yata pédawva |
bpvevoass, EPaTos. b€ mooey i bT0 SovTOS Op@peEt 70)
YLoTOMEVvov Tatép els Ov" 00 ovpave eu Bacthever,
AUTOS eyo Bpovrny no aiGadoevra KEpauvor,
KapTEL VLKNTAS TOT EPA Kpovov- ed 06 € éxaora
aSavarous bséTa&ev ouas Kal éréhpace Tipmdas.

Tair dpa Modoar aedov, Odtvpria douaT

Eyvouc a, 75 |
évvéa Ovyatépes peryanou Atos éxyeyaviar, :
Krew 7 Kttéprn te Oarerad re Medrropevy te
Tepirryopyn 7 Epateé re Worvpmd + Ovpavin te
82


THEOGONY


gods and supreme in power. And again, they chant.


) the race of men and strong giants, and gladden the


} heart of Zeus within Olympus,—the Olympian
| Muses, daughters of Zeus the aegis-holder.
| Them in Pieria did Mnemosyne (Memory), who
reigns over the hills of Eleuther, bear of union with
the father, the son of Cronos, a forgetting of ills and
arest from sorrow. For nine nights did wise Zeus lie
with her, entering her holy bed remote from the im-
mortals. And when a year was passed and the
seasons came round as the months waned, and many
days were accomplished, she bare nine daughters,
all of one mind, whose hearts are set upon song and
their spirit free from care, a little way from the top-
most peak of snowy Olympus. There are their bright
dancing-places and beautiful homes, and beside them
the Graces and Himerus (Desire) live in delight.
) And they, uttering through their lips a lovely voice,
sing the laws of all and the goodly ways of the
immortals, uttering their lovely voice. Then went
they to Olympus, delighting in their sweet voice,-
with heavenly song, and the dark earth resounded
about them as they chanted, and a lovely sound rose.
up beneath their feet as they went to their father.
And he was reigning in heaven, himself holding the
lightning and glowing thunderbolt, when he had
overcome by might his father Cronos ; and he distri-
buted fairly to the immortals their portions and
declared their privileges.

These things, then, the Muses sang who dwell
on Olympus, nine daughters begotten by great
Zeus, Cleio and Euterpe, Thaleia, Melpomene and
Terpsichore, and Erato and Polyhymnia and Urania

83
G 2


HESIOD


Kadhduo7n 8 %) b€ mpodepectaty éotly aTracéov.
\ \ fa) J a
) yap Kai Bacitredow ap atdotocow omnoei. cre |
év Twa Tiunowot Atos KOUpal mEeyadoLo
/ / 16 1 } / Mi
yeLvomevov TE LOwal + CLoTpEepewV BadLAHOD,
T@ pev ETL YAWoON YAUKEPHVY YEeLovaw eépaony,
TOU O éme EK TTOMATOS pet pethuxya: ol bE TE NADL
TavTes és avtov opwat Staxpivovta Oéwiotas 85
> / / a edi tJ f p) / |
iOcinar dixnow: 0 5 acdaréws ayopevov
aia Ke” Kal péya vetKos émtoTapevw@s KaTté-
WAVED
sf \ a Sb, 4 la)
ToUVEKa yap Baotrtes éxeppoves, obveca davis
PraTrropévois ayopnde peTarpoTra, epya TEACUCE
pnotos, paraxoter TApAarpapevor émréeoo WwW. 90
épyowevoy & av aryava * Geov a as (Ado KovTas
aidot pethexty, fh eT, S€ TpETEL GYPOMEVOLO LD’
TON é sy sly hak vepy) doats avO porovoww.
éx yap tor Movaéwy cai ExnBorov ‘Atrodd@VOS
BA 3 No b) \ If N / |
avdpes aoLool éacw emt yOova Kat KiGapioTai, 95
éx d€ Atos Bacidthes: 0 6 6XBLOs, Ov Twa Movoat
Pir@vTat’ yAvKEpy) Ol ATO TTOMATOS Peel AVON.
el yap TLs Kab mevoos exon veoKnoee dune
agnrat Kpadiny AKAXNMLEVOS, avTap dowdos |
Movodov Geparrav Kréea > TpoTEepov avOporov 100
Upvyion pakapas Te Peods, ob OXvprrov éxovow,
lox b] v4 / 3 / 3 id
airy 6 ye dvodpocvvémy émidHPeTar ovdé Tt
KNOEWV
A / oc / } a @ /
peuvntas Tayéews O€ TapéetTpaTe OWpa Deaav.


Xatpere, Téxva Acos, dote & ipepoecoav aovdyv.


1 Themistius, Stobaeus: 7° éofSwor or étldwor, MSS.
2 A: te, MSS. > A and Scholiasts: ava &etv, MSS.
4 A: oid te, MSS. 5 Nauck : raAeia, MSS.


34


THEOGONY


and Calliope,! who is the chiefest of them all, for
she attends on worshipful princes: whomsoever
| of heaven-nourished princes the daughters of great

Zeus honour, and behold him at his birth, they
pour sweet dew upon his tongue, and from his lips
flow gracious words. All the people look towards
him while he settles causes with true judgements:
and he, speaking surely, would soon make wise end
even of a great quarrel ; for therefore are there princes
wise in heart, because when the people are being
misguided in their assembly, they set right the matter
again with ease, persuading them with gentle words.
And when he passes through a gathering, they greet
him as a god with gentle reverence, and he is con-
spicuous amongst the assembled: such is the holy
gift of the Muses to men. For it is through the
Muses and far-shooting Apollo that there are singers
and harpers upon the earth; but princes are of
Zeus, and happy is he whom the Muses love: sweet
flows speech from his mouth. For though a man
have sorrow and grief in his newly-troubled soul and
live in dread because his heart is distressed, yet,
when a singer, the servant of the Muses, chants the
glorious deeds of men of old and the blessed gods
who inhabit Olympus, at once he forgets his heavi-
ness and remembers not his sorrows at all; but the
gifts of the goddesses soon turn him away from these.


Hail, children of Zeus! Grant lovely song and


1 «*She of the noble voice”: Calliope is queen of Kpic
poetry.


85


.


HESIOD a |


KreLeTE 0 AOavatwy Lepov yévos alév éovTwr, 105/)
of Ds 7 éEeyévovto Kat Ovpavod doTepoevTos,
Nu«ros TE ovopephs, ous & a.m pos eTpepe Ilévros.
elm are }, os Ta mpara Geot Kal yata yévovTo
Kal TOTAMLOL KAL TOVTOS derelpiros, oldpare Oviwv,)
dorpa TE hapmeTowvTa Kab OUPAVOS evpus bm epOev 110)
[ot r é« TaV éyévovTo Geol, Swipes édav *|.
OS T a evos Sdooavro Kal ws TLMAS OtéAovTO
noe Kab OS TA TpOTAa ToAUTTUXOY EayoV
“OnXuptrov. '
TavTa or éomete Modoat, ‘Odvpmia SopaT |
eNovoar |
é& a a pXAS: Kaul eimal, 6 TL 7 p@TOv ever’ autre. 115
"HL rou pe TPOTLT TO Xdos yéver’, avrap emelTa
Tat’ eupvaTEpVos, TavT@V 00S aapanes atel
a aVaTOV, ot éexouae Kapn vipoevtos ‘OXvmtTrov,* |
Taptapa 7 HepoevTa. px xGoves evpvodeins, |
n0 Epos, 0 OS Kahuo ros év aPavarove Jeota, 120.
AvolpwEedtys, TavTey Se Oe@v TavT@Y T avOpaT@V
Sdpvatat ev oTH Pecos voov Kal eTibpova BouvrAnp.
éx Xdeos 0 EpeBos Te pehawa TE NvE éyévovto:
Nu«ros 8 avr ALOnp Te Kal H mEpn efeyevovro, |
ods TEéKE KUTAMEDVN "EpéBev prrornte puyeloa. 125
Data 6€ Tot Tp@Tov pev éryetvarto ig ov EaUTH * - _
Ovpavov actepocv0’, iva pw mwepl wavTa Kadv-
TOL;


1 Rzach (cf. 1. 131): @dwv, MSS.
2 Omitted by A, Theophilus, Hippolytus.
3 Theophilus, Hippolytus, and all MSS. Plato, Aristotle _


and others do not know the line, which is clearly spurious.
4 MBS. : €wurq, A, Theophilus.


86


Fs one


Oa
-


as


THEOGONY


celebrate the holy race ef the deathless gods who
are for ever, those that were born of Earth ae starry
Heaven and gloomy Night and them that briny Sea
did rear. Tell how at the first gods and earth came
ty pe and rivers, and the boundless sea with its
ra.,mg swell, and the gleaming stars, and the wide
heaven above, and the gods who were born of them,
givers of good things, “and how they divided their
wealth, and how they shared their honours amongst
them, and also how at the first they took many-
folded Olympus. These things declare to me from
the beginning, ye Muses who dweil in the house of
Olympus, and teil me pen of them first came to
OE

Verily at the first Eiiog came to be, but next
wide-bosomed Earth, the ever-sure foundation of all}
the deathless ‘ones who hold the peaks of snowy
Olympus, and dim Tartarus in the depth of the wide-
_pathed Earth, and Eros (Love), fairest among. the
deathless gods, who unnerves the limbs and over-
comes the mind and wise counsels of all gods and all
men within them. From Chaos came forth Erebus
and black Night; but of Night were born Aether ?
and Day, whom she conceived and bare from union
in love with Erebus. And Eartb-first bare starry
Heaven, equal to herself, to cover her on every


1 Karth, in the cosmology of Hesiod, is a disk surrounded
‘by the river Oceanus and floating upon a waste of waters. Itis
called the foundation of all (the qualification ‘‘ the deathless
ones ...” etc. is an interpolation), because not only trees,
men, and animals, but even the hills and seas (ll. 129, 131)
are supported by it.

2 Aether is the bright, untainted upper atmosphere, as
distinguished from Aér, the lower atmosphere of the earth.


Cy


HESIOD


oop ein paKaperar Jeois &05 aapanes ate.
yelwaro 6 Ovpea pakpa, Oedy KaplevTas évavdous, |
Nupdéwr, at vatovow av’ oupea Bnoonevta. 13¢H
i) O€ Kal aTpUyeToV TédXayos TéKEV, OlOmaTL OvtoV,' —
Bubs aTEp pidoTHT0s ep pépou" avr da.p ETELT ID,
Ovpare evvnbeioa, TéEK ‘Oxeavov Badvoiwny, Re
Kotov te Kpiov o “Trreptova T "lametov Te |
@ciav te “Petav Te Oémiv Te Mon poo buny TE 135)
PoiBnv TE xpucoatebavoy TObv T cparesvyy.
TOUS b€ él” omArotatos yéveto Kpovos ayxudo-
LTS,
SewvoTatos Taidwv: Oanrepov S nXOnpe TOKHG.
Deivaro S atv’ Kierwras wtrépBiov HT OP
EvovTas,
Boovrny te Yrepownv te kat “Apynv oBpimo- —
Gumov, 140.
of Znvi Bpovrny Te Socay TevEav TE KEpaUVOV.
of dn ToL Ta ev GrAXa Oeois évadiyKtolr Hoav,”
povvos 8 obOadmos mécow evéxerTo MeTOTO.
Ktkror7es & dvom’ hoav ére@vupov, otvex’ dpa
ohéwv |
KUKNOTEPNS opGarpos EELS EVEKELTO HETOT(0" OO) 4a
icxvs 0 Hoe Bin Kat pnxavas Hoav ew Epyous.
"AdNXoL 0 av Dains TE Ka Ovpavod eeyevovTo
T pets TALOES EeyaNot TE KAL | Spt j.06, 0 OUK ovopLac Tol,
Korros Te Bpsdpews TE Dons 0, vTrep hava TEKDO.,
TOV EKATOV peev xetpes ar @ [LOV dlocovTo\ ae LD
amhaor ot, ceparal O€ € EKATTO TEVTHKOVTA /
é& Mur eméepvKov ert ori Bapotat pédeoow"
1 A: @vov, MSS.
2 In place of this line Crates read—
of & ef abavarwy Ovnrol rpddev avdhertes.


838


'THEOGONY


=


| side, and to be an ever-sure abiding-place for the
| blessed gods. And she brought forth long Hills,
|. graceful haunts of the goddess-Nymphs who dwell
amongst the glens of the hills. She bare also the
fruitless deep with his raging swell, Pontus, without
sweet union of love. But afterwards she she la ay with


Heaven and bare deep-swirling Oceanus, Ce Coeus_and
Grius and Hyperion and Tapetus, Theia and Rhea,


| Themis and Mnemosyne and_gold-crowned Phoebe
| and lovely Tethys. After them was born Cronos
_ the wily, youngest and most terrible of her children,
and he hated his lusty sire.

And again, she bare the Cyclopes, overbearing in
spirit, Brontes, and Steropes and stubborn-hearted
Arges,’ who gave Zeus the thunder and made the
thunderbolt: in all else they were like the gods,
but one eye only was set in the midst of their fore-
heads. And they were surnamed Cyclopes (Orb-eyed)


because one orbed eye was set in their foreheads.


Strength and might and craft were in their works.
And again, three other sons were born of Earth
and Heaven, great and doughty beyond telling,
Cottus_and Briareos and Gyes, presumptuous
children. From their shoulders sprang an hundred
arms, not to be approached, and each had fifty heads
upon his shoulders on their strong limbs, and


* Brontes is the Thunderer ; Steropes, the Lightener ; and
Arges, the Vivid One.


39


HESIOD


loxus & drAnTOos Kparepn were ey
dacoe yap Vains te eat Ovpavod efeyevovto,
SELvOTATOL Traideor, operépp & xXGovro TOKIL | |


e& axis: Kat TOV eV dmes TUS mpara es: He
TAVTAS SEPT | Kab €s pdos OUK avt


Tains év Kev pov, KaK@ 0 €meTépTEeTo Epy@

Ovpavos. i) 0 évTds crovayitero Tata redopn
aorewwopévn coriny 6€ Kaxhy +t ébpaccaTo ~
TEYUNY. 160)
—ainba, aq O€ TOUT AG O. YELOS 7 TONLOU addpavTos |
TebEe peya Spémavov Kal em ep pace ' Taal pirovorw:
elme O€ Japruvovea, piNov TETIN{LEVT) nTOp* |
Ilaides uot kat watpos atac@anrov, ai K
~“ebEXNTE— |
meiBecbar, TATPOS Ke auseny Tuga peBa | any 165)
bpeTepou" T pOTEpos yap deueka unoaro & Epya. |
mes pato: ros 8 dpa mdvtas exer Séos, obSé


TLS AVTOV
pOeyEaro. Japancas 5€ péyas Kpovos ayxvno-
paprns ee)


aw avtis podovor m™poonvoa, pnrépa Kedvny-
Mijtep, eyo Kev TovTO y omen are Tehe- |
TOL pt afl yhunrt 170.
epyov; émrel TAT POS rye ¢ Sucovtpou ovK dineyito
7m MET Epo" TpoTEpos yap deLKed pnoato épya.
“Os hato: ynOncer, dé péya pect aia mehepn.
: clare 8é piv kptrpaca NbN" ‘eveOnge Serxep atv |
WapTrny Kapxapooovra: OoAov o REN ots & ‘TavtTa. 175 |
"HNGe bé vier érdywv pwéyas Ovpavos, api dé
Tain
imeipwv dirOTHTOS éméoxeTo Kal p eTavvaOn
Dita ae, OP \ 6


; . .
: ~*~, —_ AS
oO ; é - ~ 7 2 Fie | { vos ve,
} ~ , ‘ pat i }
y : : : wt -

hi ‘ . t a 7 ™


R
ti
4
a


THEOGONY


- irresistible was the stubborn strength that was in


| - their great forms. For of all the children that were


i born of Earth and Heaven, these were the most
| terrible, and they were hated by their own father


| from the first. And he used to hide them all away
| in a secret place of Earth so soon as each was
born, and would not suffer them to come up into the
light : and Heaven rejoiced in his evil doing. But
4 vast Earth groaned within, being straitened, and she
a ‘thought a crafty and an evil wile. Forthwith she
| made the element of grey flint and shaped a great
sickle, and told her plan to her dear sons. And she
spoke, cheering them, while she was vexed in her


| dear heart:


“My hildren. otten of a sinful father, if you will


obey me, we should punish the vile outrage of your
father; for he first thought of doing shameful things.”

So she said; but fear seized them all, and none
of them uttered a word. But great Cronos the wily
took courage and answered his dear mother :

“Mother, I will undertake to do this deed, for I
reverence not our father of evil name, for he first
thought of doing shameful things.”’

So he said: and vast Earth rejoiced greatly in
spirit, and set and hid him in an ambush, and put in
his hands a jagged sickle, and revealed to him the
whole plot.

And Heaven came, bringing on night and longing
for love, and he lay about Earth spreading himself full


QI


(
; rf


r eooup VOWS ihunoe, radu o eppupe incba:


: “ea BBan am nT el poLo TONUKAUG p evi TOVTO,


HESIOD ; | ‘| |
maven 06 é« NoYEoLO Tats aphire mst » sipcel |
‘oxath, SeEvteph Oe Tw prov éhra Bev iprny At
pany cae gmpORGET sy pinay O amo pjoea Ta-

(ALT, OS ( 18¢fj


eCoriaw: Ta peusov TL ETWOLA EKPUYE Xeupos™
boca yap pabdjuryysstdmécouOev aijiat oer oat,
jeden deEaro Tata: TE PLT ANOLEVOY 0 éviavTav
yetvat “Kpwds Te (o pi Mlb Te Tiryav- |
, TAS; 5 185)
TEVYETL NapTropéevous, Sanindy eyxeu xepoww ExOv-
TAS, yaw. ay ey 5 |
Nipodas 0 as Medtas Kahéovo ew ’ daretpova yatav.
penoea O as TO T pOrTov aTOT LN AR adapayTt


Os hépeT ap TENAYOS Touhuy y povor, eel
evKos os f} 190
adpos aw aBavarov xpoos Bpvuros QS Loopy A
eOpehOn: Tp@Tov 6é Kd jpovow amg foie @
eTANT évOev erreita arepip pvtov | teeTg Ov.. |
éx O eBy-aidoin Ka «Obs, appl S8on ot, Sa” |
TOoColWVTO padivoiaw déEero: THY 0A aie 195)
[adpoyevéa te Deady Kai euarépavey” Kvdé €laV *]
KUM TROUT Oeot Te Kal avepes, oben. 4 adpe
OpébOn: aTap Kuteperawl? OTL Mise ‘Ko-


ee


Onpous:
Kumrpoyevéa 6, ore yévTO oe évt Kimpo
noe Si Haine tere OTL UNdéwV éfepadvOn. e% 200


. 1 -


1 The line possibly belongs to another recension: it was
rejected by Heyne as interrupting the sense.


Q2


THEOGONY


} upon exe Then the son from his ambush stretched
| forth his left hand and in his right took the great


| long sickle with jagged teeth, and swiftly lopped off
his own father’s members and cast them away to fall
behind him. And not vainly did they fall from his
hand ; forall the bloody drops that gushed forth
Earth récéived, and as the seasons moved round she
bare the strong Erinyes and the great Giants with
gleaming armour, holding long spears in their hands,
and the Nymphs whom they call Meliae? all over the
boundless earth. And so soon as he had cut off
the members with flint and cast them from the land
into the surging sea, they were swept away over the
main a long time: and a white foam spread around
them from the immortal flesh, and in it there grew
amaiden. First she drew near holy Cythera, and
from there, afterwards, she came to sea-girt Cyprus,
and came forth an awful and lovely goddess, and grass
grew up about her beneath her shapely feet. Her
gods and men call Aphrodite, and the foam-born
goddess and rich-crowned Cytherea, because she
grew amid the foam, and Cytherea because she
reached Cythera, and Cyprogenes because she was
born in billowy Cyprus, and Philommedes? because

* The myth accounts for the separation of Heaven and
Karth. In Egyptian cosmology Nut (the Sky) is thrust and
held apart from her brother Geb (the Earth) by their father
Shu, who corresponds to the Greek Atlas.

2 Nymphs of the ash-trees (uéAva:), as Dryads are nymphs
of the oak-trees. Cp. note on Works and Days, |. 145.


3 “* Member-loving”’: the title is perhaps only a perversion
of the regular piAouerd7s (laughter-loving).


ea)


YW


\
:


‘


t vs an an ae Sy pn Qn ,
“yewopern Ta Tpata Oedv Tes POV lovon*s


HESIOD


Ye Z

e_* RRR
~ yn ty
% — ‘~~’


YS # ais 7
oe. e ‘che OMAPTHTE KAL "Twepas


(V4 ) >
EOWETO KAXNOS
fn.


7 S Wee b) an \ BA ION A
TavTny 0 €& apyis Tyuny ever NOE NENOYYE
fotpay év avOR@TEOUT L Kat adavatoict Oeoict, |
Tapbevious T oapous wedSimata T éamdras PV |
pOeviovs. 7 odpous pierdy}p méras 76 200i


oy


If : ue &.
téprip Te yAuKepny pidOTHTA TE pmeLALYinv Te. -
yTous.6é matnp Tithvas érixhnow Kahéeoxe
Tatcas velkelwv jueyas Ovpares, ods TEKEV AUTOS"

/ we “pay GA UN Ge 6 fis Rigg cy “D's }
PacKE 0€ TITALVOVTAS ATAgVahin Meya peear” |
epyov, toto 8 ére:ta Ticw peTomabev EceoOat. 210)


Nvé & érexey otuyepov te Mopov nat Kijpa


péeNatvav :
Kal @dvatov, téxe O “Trvov, étixte d€ PvXOv
‘Oveipov: |
devTepov av Ma@por cal ‘Orldv adywoeocav 2149
ov Tie KotunOetoa Oca Téxe NUE épeBevvn,? — 2139


‘Eorrepioas 6’, 957 uhra Tépnv KAUTOD O.xeavoio 215)
VOUTEA KANA médovot hépovTa Te SevdpEea KAPTTOV.
kat Moipas cat Kijpas éyetvato vyAeotoivous, -
Kr\ofe te Adyeciv te eal Atpotror, aite Bporotat
ryetvopevotoe OLoovaw Eye ayalov TE KAKO TE, |
air avdpav te Oey Te TapatBactas édétrova.v: 220
ovoé Tote Ajyouat Deal Sewvoto YoXroto, |
Tp Y a0 TO OOwWoL KAaKHY OTLEY, OS TLS ALaPTN.
tieTe 06 Kal Néucow, wha Ovntotat Bportotcr,
Nv& codon peta tv & “Amarny téxe kal
DiroTynTA |
[‘jpds 7 oddopevov, kat ”Kipw téxe KaptepoOupor. 225


1 Schoemann’s order.
2 Rzach: ais, MSS.


94


THEOGONY


she sprang from the members. And with her went


| Eros, and comely Desire followed her at her birth at


the first and as she went into the assembly of the gods.
This honour she has from the beginning, and this is
the portion allotted to her amongst men and undying
gods,—the whisperings of maidens and smiles and
deceits with sweet delight and love and graciousness.
. But these sons whom he begot himself great
Neavemr need to call Titans (Strainers) in reproach,
for he said that they strained and did presumptuously


a fearful deed, and that vengeance for it would come
afterwards.


And Night bare hateful Doom and black Fate and
Death, and she bare Sleep and the tribe of Dreams.
And again the goddess murky Night, though she
lay with none, bare Blame and painful Woe, and the
Hesperides who guard the rich, golden apples and
the trees bearing fruit beyond glorious Ocean.
Also she bare the Destinies and ruthless avenging
Fates, Clotho and Lachesis and Atropos,! who give
men at their birth both evil and good to have, and
they pursue the transgressions of men and of gods:
and these goddesses never cease from their dread
anger until they punish the sinner with a sore’
penalty. . Also deadly Night bare Nemesis (Indig-
nation) to afflict mortal men, and after her, Deceit
and Friendship and hateful Age and hard-hearted
Strife.

1 Clotho (the Spinner) is she who spins the thread of
man’s life ; Lachesis (the Disposer of Lots) assigns to each


man his destiny ; Atropos (She who cannot be turned) is the
‘Fury with the abhorréd shears.”


G5


HESIOD


Av’tap "Epis otuyep) téxe wey ovov adyivo-
evTa
AxjOny te Atwov te Kal” AdXyea Saxpvoerta
‘Topivas te Mayas te Povovs 7 ’Avdpoxtacias
TE
Neixed Te Yrevoeas te Aoyous “Appirroyias TE
Avovopiny tT “Arny te, cvvnbeas adrAndyow,
"Opxov &, Os 6) wretoTov émuyOovious avOpa-
TOUS
THwaiver, OTE KEV TLS EKOY émriopKov omoron.
Napéa & avveviéa cat anna yelvaro Tlovtos,
mpeo BUTaTov TaLowy" autap Kanéougt yepovTa,
ovveKa VNLEPTIS Te Kal TLS, ovoé OemsoTé@y
AnGerar, ana diKaLa kal HT Onvea oidev’
avtis 6 av Oavyuavta péyav Kal aynvopa Dopxuy
Tain wsoyopevos Kat Knt@ Kcadrdurapyov
EvpuBinv + UDA HAYTOS evi  ppeat Ovpov éyoud av.
Nnpijos 6) éyévovTo peynpara, TEKVA Oedwv
TOVTD € év atpuyéto Kat Awptoos T]UKO 1010,
KOUPNS ‘Oxeavoio, TENNEVTOS TOTAHOL0,
TlAwre) 7 Evepavtn te Law 7 ‘A pperpiry TE
Hvdwpyn te O€tis TE eae te ['‘NavKn TE
Kupo6on Liev te Gon e ‘Adin T épdecoa
ILacien Th ‘Epato TE Kal Kovixy podomnxys
kat Merirn Kapleroa kal Ed\pévyn kal “Ayavy
AwT@ Te Ipare TE Pepoved Te Avvapévn TE
Nyoain te cal Axtatn cat Upwropédera
Aapts cal Tavorea? cal everdns Vararera
‘ImaoOon 7 époecca kal ‘Immovon podomnxus


1 Rzach : Tpwrd, MSS.
2 Hermann: Mavdéan, MSS.


96


THEOGONY
But aed. Strife bare painful Toil and-


| Forgetfulness and Famine and tearful Sorrows,
| Fightings also, Battles, Murders, Manslaughters,


Quarrels, Lying Words, Disputes, Lawlessness and
Ruin, all of one nature, and Oath who most troubles


men upon earth when anyone wilfully swears a false
oath.

And Sea begat Nereus, the eldest of his children,
who is true and lies not: and men call him the Old
Man because he is trusty and gentle and does not
forget the laws of righteousness, but thinks just and
kindly thoughts. And yet again he got great Thaumas
and proud Phorcys, being mated with Earth, and
fair-cheeked Ceto and Eurybia who has a heart of
flint within her.

And of Nereus and rich-haired Doris, daughter
of Ocean the perfect river, were born children,!
passing lovely amongst goddesses, Ploto, EKucrante,
Sao, and Amphitrite, and Eudora, and Thetis, Galene
and Glauce, Cymothoé, Speo, Thoé and lovely Halie, |
and Pasithea, and Erato, and rosy-armed Eunice, and
gracious Melite, and Eulimene, and Agaue, Doto,
Proto, Pherusa, and Dynamene, and Nisaea, and
Actaea, and Protomedea, Doris, Panopea, and comely
Galatea, and lovely Hippothoé, and rosy-armed


1 Many of the names which follow express various qualities
or aspects of the sea: thus Galene is ‘‘ Calm,’’ Cymothoé is
the ‘‘ Wave-swift,” Pherusa and Dynamene are ‘‘She who
speeds (ships) ”’ and ‘‘She who has power.”


97


HESIOD


Kupodonn 0°, 4) KonaT éy NEpoELoes TOVT@ |
TVOLAS TE Caco * aVE wOoV ovuv Kuparornyn |
peta mpnuver Kat evo pup “Aperpiry, |
Kupo 7 ’Heovn te évo rébavos O° Adupnon 28
[XavKovopun Te pirouperdys kal Ilovtomopera
Anaryopn TE Kab Evayopn Kab Aaopedeva
IlovAvvon? te Kal Avtovon cat Avotdvacca
Evdpyn Te hun if épaty Kal €idos Le [LOS i
Kab Vapadn Napier oa déuas din te Mera 26)
Nyco 7 Edrropry TE Oemora te IIpovon Te |
Nypeptys 0,4) TAT OS éyer voov aBavaroto.
QUTAL WeV Napijos Gp. {LOVOS ef eyevovTo
KoUpaL TEVTNKOVTO, apvpova Epya touiat. |
Oavpas 6 ‘O.xeavoio Babuppeitao Guyatpa 26)
nyaryeT ‘Hy exr pny: no KELLY TEKEV ‘Ipw |
UKOMLOUS 0 “Apruias ‘AEhAW T ‘O«vrerny TE,
at p avépov Trvolnol Kal Olw@vots Gp ETrovTaL
OKELNS TTEpUyET oe’ peTaX poviat yap tannov.
Popxvi So av Kyte T'paias téxe KANT APHOVS 27
eK YEVETHS TONGS, TAS on Tpatas Kad€ovo ly |
abavatot Te Jeol yapal épxouevot tT avOpwrrot,
Tlewdpnd@ 7 évremAov “Evu@ Te kpoxotem Aor,
Topyovs @, at vaiovot tépny KrXVTOV OKeavoio
éoyatin mpos Nuxtés, & Komepises Nuytdwvor, 27.
YGevve tT Evpudrn te Médoved te Avypa Tra-
dovoa,
i 7) meév equ Ovntn, at & a@avatot Kat aye,
at Ovo: TH O€ [Lh TapEnefaro Kvavoxairns
ey Haran Netwove. Kal avOeow eLaptvotow.
Ths & OTe On Llepoeds Kehadny amrederpoTopynaer, 28


1 Bergk : (adéwy, MSS.
2 Peppmiiller : MovAvydun, MSS.


98


THEOGONY


Hipponoé, and Cymodoce who with Cymatolege! and


1. Amphitrite easily calms the waves upon the misty
| sea and the blasts of raging winds, and Cymo, and


Eione, and rich-crowned Alimede, and Glauconome,


| fond of laughter, and Pontoporea, Leagore, Euagore,


| and Laomedea, and Polynoé, and Autonoé, and
| Lysianassa, and Euarne, lovely of shape and without
blemish of form, and Psamathe of charming figure
and divine Menippe, Neso, Eupompe, Themisto,
Pronoé, and Nemertes? who has the nature of her
deathless father. These fifty daughters sprang from


} . blameless Nereus, skilled in excellent crafts.


And Thaumas wedded Electra the daughter of
deep-flowing Ocean, and she bare him swift Iris and
the long-haired Harpies, Aéllo (Storm-swift) and
Ocypetes (Swift-flier) who on their swift wings keep
pace with the blasts of the winds and the birds; for
quick as time they dart along.

_ And again, Ceto bare to Phorcys the eae cheeked
Graiae, sisters grey from their birth: and both
deathless gods and men who walk on earth call
them Graiae, Pemphredo well-clad, and saffron-robed
Enyo, and the Gorgons who dwell beyond glorious
Ocean in the frontier land towards Night where are
the clear-voiced Hesperides, Sthenno, and Euryale,
and Medusa who suffered a woeful fate: she was
mortal, but the two were undying and grew not old.
With her lay the Dark-haired One? in a soft meadow
amid spring flowers. And when Perseus cut off her
1 The ‘‘ Wave-receiver” and the ‘‘ Wave-stiller.”’
he Unermneg ” or ‘* Truthful’; ep. 1. 235.

~ 8 4.e, Poseidon.

9
H 2


HESIOD


exOope Xpvoaep TE peyas Kal IIjyacos ¢ (M08.
TO pev eT @VUMOV HEV, OT Oeavod Tept myas
ev’ u 5° aop xpucesov eyvov pera XEpat pirnow.
VO pev aTOTTAMEVOS TpodktTT@V Oova,. pwnTépa
HOY, |
ixeT €> ABavarous: Znvos 6 év d@pact vaier 28
Bpovrny TE oTEpoTrHy TE Pépov Auli pyntioev te. |
Xpuodwp o érexev T pixepanov Dnpvovia
px els Kadhipon Koupn KNUTOD Oxeavoto.
TOV [eV ap. éEevaprée Bin “Hpaxdyety |
Bovot TO, Ei hLTTOOET OL TE pLppuT@ elv “KipuOein 29
HUATL TOD O76 Ep Bods iacev eVPULET@TTOUS |
Tipuvé’ ets Lepny dvaPas TOpov ‘OKneavoio
"OpGov te KTeLvas Kal (BoveonXov Kvputiava
oTab ud év nepoevTe TEpnY KXUVTOD OKEavoro.

“Ho érex’ aXXo Téh@pov ALN AVOV, OVOEV EOLKOS 294
Ounrots avOpwotrots 006 abavatoict Geoiow,
ome Eve raup@ Jeiny xpatepodpov ”Ey.dvayr,
ijpeov ev voppny EXLK@TLOA Kader apyon,
Hutov © avtTe TEXWPOY Ohiv SELVOV TE LeyaV TE |
atoNov OUNeTHY cabens vmo Kevdect yains. B06
év0a Oé ol oméos €oTl KATH KOiAN VITO TETPY
THAOD ant aavatov te Oeav Ounrav T avOporrav:

ev dpa ot Sdocayto Geot KUTA Oo para vate.

iO EpuT ety Apipoow t VIO xGovr huypn’ ‘Eydva,
abeuntos voppn Kal arynpaos npara TwavTa. 30:

TH dé Tuddova pace purynprevaue éV prrornre
Sevvov 0 iBpiotny tT dvopov O édix@LoL Kobpn

7 oO DroKVGapevy TEKETO Kparepoppova TEKVG.
"Opbov fev TPOTOV KUVA yelvaTo Pnpvovije: |
OevTEpov avrLs eT LET ED AUNXAVOY OU TL parevov 31(
KépBepov aunoripy, Aisew xiva yarxedpovor, |


ax


TOO


J


THEOGONY


head, there sprang forth great Chrysaor and the horse ~


Pegasus who is so called because he was born near


| the springs (pegae) of Ocean ; and that other, because
| he held a golden blade (aor) in his hands. Now


Pegasus flew away and left the earth, the mother of


i} flocks, and came to the deathless gods: and he


dwells in the house of Zeus and brings to wise Zeus
the thunder and lightning. . But Chrysaor was joined
in love to Callirrhoé, the daughter of glorious Ocean,
and begot three-headed Geryones. Him mighty
Heracles slew in sea-girt Erythea by his shambling
oxen on that day when he drove the wide-browed
oxen to holy Tiryns, and had crossed. the ford of
Ocean and killed Orthus and Eurytion the herdsman
in the dim stead out beyond glorious Ocean.

And in a hollow cave she bare another monster,
irresistible, in no wise like either to mortal men or
to the undying gods, even the goddess fierce Echidna
who is half a nymph with glancing eyes and fair
cheeks, and half again a huge snake, great and
awful, with speckled skin, eating raw flesh beneath
the secret parts of the holy earth. And there she has
a cave deep down under a hollow rock far from the


} deathless gods and mortal men. There, then, did the


gods appoint her a glorious house to dwell in : and she
keeps guard in Arima beneath the earth, grim Echid-
na, a nymph who dies not nor grows old all her days.

Mer say that Typhaon the terrible, outrageous and
lawless, was joined in love to her, the maid with
glancing eyes. So she conceived and brought forth


fierce offspring ; first she bare Orthus the hound of


Geryones, and then again she bare a second, a
monster not to be overcome and that may not be
described, Cerberus who eats raw flesh, the brazen-


Iot


HESIOD


TEVTNKOVTAKEPAAOY, AVALOEA TE KPATEPOV TE
TO T ploy , Topny avTLS éyewvaro Auypa ioviav
Aepvainy, nv Opéerve dea Nevew@r€evos °Hpy |
dim nt ov Kotéoura Bin ‘Hpaxdnetn. | B |
Kal THY pev Avos vids evnpaTo vNret YANK@ mr |
Apditpveoviddys oUV apnupih "ToAdw
‘Hpaxrens Boukjow "AOnvains ivyeheins.

i) 6€ Xipacpav ¢ ETLKTE TVEOUTAY AMLALMaKETOV TUP,
Seba Te meyadny Te TOOWKEA Te KPATEPHVY Te 32
Ths © hv Tpeis Keharat' pia pev. Xaporroio

NEOV TOS,
i) O€ xtpaipns, 1) 0 Odhtos, KpaTEpoio SpakovTos,
[mpoobe Néwv, Omiley Sé Spdkov, peoon é
Xtparpa,
devon a aTroTTVELovaa TUpos [LEVOS aiPopevoro.*|
THv pwev LInyacos cide Kat €oPX0s BedrepodorTns. 32!
9 © dpa Pix’ orXonv tTéxe Kadpetorow OXeOpov
"Op Oe vrobpunbeioa Nepevatov Te eovTa,

Tov p “Hon Opepaca Awos «udp TApaKouTes
youvoiaw KATEVATTE Nepeins, 7H le avO pwrrots.
ev? ap O OLKEL@Y ehepaipero Pon avOporor,

KOLpaveoD Tpyrtoto Nepeins nO Amécavtos’
ANNG €-1S eddpuacce Bins ‘Hpakhneins.

3 Kyte om omhoTaTov Popeve piroTnTe puyeioa
yelvato Oewvov Oty, Os epemnis Kev0ect yains
melpacw év [LeryanXous mayXpvoea pnra puraoce. 33!
TovTo pev é« Kytovs kat Popevvos yévos éoTiv.

THdds & ’Oxeavd Uotapovs téxe duvnevtas,
Netdov 7 ’AXddevov Te Kal “Hprdavov Babudivnv
XTpupova Maiavdpov te cat” lotpov caddtpéeO pov


(


1 Rejected by Wolf as superfluous here and borrowed from
Homer, Iliad vi. 181-2.


I02


THEOGONY


voiced hound of Hades, fifty-headed, relentless and
strong. And again she bore a third, the evil-minded
Hydra of Lerna, whom the goddess, white-armed


| Hera nourished, being angry beyond measure with


the mighty Heracles. And her Heracles, the son of
Zeus, of the house of Amphitryon, together with
warlike Iolaus, destroyed with the unpitying sword
through the plans of Athene the spoil-driver. She
was the mother of Chimaera who breathed raging
fire, a creature fearful, great, swift-footed and strong,
who had three heads, one of a grim-eyed lion, an-
other of a goat, and another of a snake, a fierce
dragon; in her forepart she was a lion; in her
hinderpart, a dragon; and in her middle, a goat,
breathing forth a fearful blast of blazing fire. Her
did Pegasus and noble Bellerophon slay ; but Echid-
na was subject in love to Orthus and brought forth
the deadly Sphinx which destroyed the Cadmeans,
and the Nemean lion, which Hera, the good wife of
Zeus, brought up and made to haunt the hills of
-Nemea, a plague to men. There he preyed upon
the tribes of her own people and had power over
Tretus of Nemea and Apesas: yet the strength of
stout Heracles overcame him.

And Ceto was joined in love to Phorcys and bare
_ her youngest, the awful snake who guards the apples
all of gold in the secret places of the dark earth at
its great bounds. This is the offspring of Ceto and
Phorcys.

And Tethys bare to Ocean eddying rivers, Nilus,
and Alpheus, and deep-swirling Eridanus, Strymon,
-and Meander, and the fair stream of Ister, and


103


HESIOD


Dactv Te ‘Pijoov T ‘Axeh@rov rT apryupodivay 349
Néooov te “Podiov & “AdXtdxpova & “Emramopov |
TE
Dpnvexov TE Kal Aionmov Oetov Te LLpmovvtTa
Invecév te cal “Eppov éuppeitnv te Katxov
Laryryd prov TE meyav Addwva te Wapbéviov te |
Kinvov te Kat "A pono Kov Oeiov TE 2 xdpavdpov. 345
Tixte 6é OuyaTtépov t vepov ryévos, at KATA yalav
dvdpas Koupifovat avy AmoAN@VE avaKTL
cat llorapots, tavrnv dé Atos mapa potpav —
éyovol, |
Teo 7’ "Adunrn te “lav0n 7 Hdéxt py Te |
Awpis TE Tpuprve Te Kat Ovpavin Oeoerdns 350)
‘In7@ Te Kvvpevn te ‘Poderd Te Kadaspon TE
ZLevéw te KXutin te “[dvid Te Iacvon TE
TTAnEavpn TE Tarafavpn T épatn Te Avwvn
MnvroBocis Te Gon TE kat everdons LorAvdepy |
Kepxnis Te puny earn IIXouvt@ te Booms eee |
Ilepanis ce ‘Tdveupa Tt “AkaoTn Te Eiav@n re |
Terpain T épocaca | MevecOo 7 Evporn TE
Maris 7 Evpuvoun TE Tere TE KPOKOTTETTNOS
Xpuonis T ’Acin Te Kat ipepoer oa Kaduypo |
Evdwpn te Tox Te Kal Apdip@ ‘Ocvpon TE 360 |
Kab 2TvE, ip 6n odewmv mpodhepectatn éotivy —
ten
avtat & “Oxeavod cat TyOvos éEeyévovto
mpecBvTatat Kovpat’ TwodAal ye meV elot Kal
anda.
Tpis yap Kidwat etoe Tavbe pu por ‘Oxeavivat, |
at pa woAvotrepées yatav Kal BévOca Aipvns 365 |


104


THEOGONY


Phasis, and Rhesus, and the silver eddies of
Achelous, Nessus, and Rhodius, Haliacmon, and
Heptaporus, Granicus, and Aesepus, and holy Simois,
and Peneiis, and Hermus, and Caicus’ fair stream,
and great Sangarius, Ladon, Parthenius, Euenus,
Ardescus, and divine Scamander.

Also she brought forth a holy company of
daughters! who with the lord Apollo and the
Rivers have youths in their keeping—to this charge
Zeus appointed them—Peitho, and Admete, and
Ianthe, and Electra, and Doris, and Prymno, and
Urania divine in form, Hippo, Clymene, Rhodea,
and Callirrhoé, Zeuxo and Clytie, and Idyia, and
Pasithoé, Plexaura, and Galaxaura, and lovely Dione,
Melobosis and Thoé and handsome Polydora, Cerceis
lovely of form, and soft eyed Pluto, Perseis, Ianeira,
Acaste, Xanthe, Petraea the fair, Menestho, and
Europa, Metis, and EKurynome, and Telesto saffron-
clad, Chryseis and Asia and charming Calypso,
Kudora, and Tyche, Amphirho, and Ocyrrhoé, and
Styx who is the chiefest of them all. These are the
eldest daughters that sprang from Ocean and Tethys ;
but there are many besides. For there are three
thousand neat-ankled daughters of Ocean who are
dispersed far and wide, and in every place alike
serve the earth and the deep waters, children who

1 Goettling notes that some of these nymphs derive their
names from lands over which they preside, as Kuropa, Asia,
Doris, Ianeira (‘‘ Lady of the Ionians”), but that most are
called after some quality which their streams possessed : thus
Xanthe is the ‘‘ Brown” or ‘‘Turbid,” Amphirho is the °


“Surrounding” river, Ianthe is ‘“ She who pe ” and
Ocyrrhoé is the ‘‘ Swift-flowing.”


TO5


HESIOD


/ € A b) Ng 4 bJ \ /
TAVTN OMS Ehérroval, Oeawy ayaa TEKVA.
Toacot © avd’ Erepot TOTApmol KavayNnoa péovTeEs,
viées Oxeavod, tovs yelvato twotvia TyOvs:
A b aA
TOV Ovo apyaNéov TavTwY BpoTov avep éevic Trey,
t O€ ExacToL iocacw, ois Av TEplVaLeTawouv. 370
Ocia © "Hérrov Te péyav Aaptrpav te VeAHvyv
b) A bea , 3 / /
Ha 0, i) mavrecow émtyOoviotcr haciver
aavators Te Oeotcr, Tol ovpavoy evpuv exovat,
, 2 eae ei Wace 8 if, b] /
yetval vrrobunbeta Trreptovos év pidornte. |
Kpio 0 EvpuBin téxev év hirornte piyetoa = - 375
3 a} nA :
Aoctpatov te péeyav UadXavta te dia Oedwv |
Iléponv 0, 0s Kal maou meTémperrev LOpmoovvyc.
ay / S "HI \ LAMA UA A) ,
oTPAlw @S aveéwous TéKE KaPTEPOOU[OUS,
b) 3
apyéotny Lédhupov Bopénv 7 ainrnpoxérevOov |
kat Notov, év durotnte Sed Oed evvnbeiaa. 380
\ \ Ais 2) VA / e / b) /
Tous O€ MET aoTépa TikTev Ewodopov Hpryévera
doTpa Te NawTETOWVTA, Ta T OUpavos éaTeda-
VOTAL.
SrvE & érex’? "Oxeavod Ovyatnp TddXavte
poyeloa
Lijhov kat Nienv Kadi pupov ev peyapovoty" |
Kal Kparos noe Binv apieixera yelvaTo Téxva, 385
TOV OUK eat aTravev0e Atos Somos, ovOE TLS EOpPN,
ovo 000s, ommn pny Keivots Beds Hyemovevn,
ann aiel 701 Znvi Bapucrore eOplo@vrat.
as yap éBovdevoev LTve apOitos ‘Oxcavivy
Hpate To, OTe TavtTas Odvprios actepoTyntTys 390
b) / Pi B76 \ b ee 4
aYavatovs éxadreooe Oeous és waxpov "OXvpTor,
cime 0, Os av peTa eto Dewy Tithor paxotto,


106


THEOGONY


are glorious among goddesses. And as many other
rivers are there, babbling as they flow, sons of Ocean,
whom queenly Tethys bare, but their names it is hard
for a mortal man to tell, but people know those by
which they severally dwell.

And Theia was subject in love to Hyperion and
bare great Helius (Sun) and clear Selene (Moon) and
Eos (Dawn) who shines upon all that are on earth
and upon the deathless Geds who live in the wide
heaven.

And Eurybia, bright goddess, was ae: in love to
Crius and bare great Astraeus, and Pallas, and
Perses who oP was eminent among all men in
wisdom. .—_~

And Eos bare to Astraeus the strong-hearted
winds, brightening Zephyrus, and Boreas, ‘headlong
in his course, and Notus,—a goddess mating in love
with a god. And after these Erigeneia ! bare the star
Kosphorus (Dawn-bringer), and the gleaming stars
with which heaven is crowned. _—

And Styx the daughter of Ocean was joined to
Pallas and bare Zelus (Emulation) and trim-ankled ©
Nike (Victory) in the house. Also she brought
forth Cratos (Strength) and Bia (Force), wonderful
children. These have no house apart from Zeus,
nor any dwelling nor path except that wherein God
- leads them, but they dwell always with Zeus the
loud-thunderer. For so did Styx the deathless
daughter of Ocean plan on that day when the


Olympian Lightener called all the deathless gods to


great Olympus, and said that whosoever of the gods
would fight with him against the Titans, he would


1 7.e. Eos, the ‘* Karly-born.”


107


HESIOD


oi TW amoppaigew yepawr, tippy 8¢ Eeactov
ESE UeD, NV TO ma pos xé [LET Bavarore Geotou.
tov © éhal’, doTis atupos bd Kpovou no aye
pee TOs : 395
TLS Kal yepa@v eri Bnoéuev,  Oéus eoTiv.
mrOe & dpa TPOTN rve apOrtos Oddvprvde
op opotouw matoerot pirov Sia pendea TATpOs.
HV 6€ Levs TIMNOE, TEpira a 6€ oa pa dédwxer. |
AUTHV jev yep eOnnce Oedy peyav cpprevaal OpKov, 400
maidas 5 Tpara TaVTAa €OU peTavareTas eivau.
as 0 attws mdvtecot Svaptrepés, WS TEP UTFETTH,
éfeTéheca* avTos de peya Kparet noe avao cet.
Poi By 6 an Kotov ToT par ov AGev € és evyny:
KUT AMEN) On € eTrevTa bea Oeov év prrornte | 405
Ant® kvavorTeTXov éyeivato, MetALYOV aiét,
7 LOV avOporrott Ka aavarouee Geoiow,
peu ov ef APXNS: dyavoratov eVTOS | ‘OnXvpTrov.
yeivaro o ‘Aortepiny é ev@OVvULOD, HY ToTE Ilépons
nyayer ES peya Odpa pidny Kexrijo Oar o Gc OUT iY. 410
nO UmoKvaapern ‘Exarny TEKE, TH meph TAVT OV
Zeds Kpovidns Th € Tropev dé ci ayraa Sapa,
polpay exer yains TE kal aT purer ovo Qardoons.
7) 6€ Kal GOTEPOEVTOS ATT ovpavod Ep pope TLULAS
aJavaros te Oeotat TeTLM“évn éoTl wadtoTa. (415
Kal yap viv, OTe Tov Tis ety Poviay avOperrav
Epd@v lepa KANA KATA VOpoY LAdoKNTAL,
KUKNIO KEL ‘Exarny. TONAH TE Ol EOTETO Toma
peta. pan, @ T™ poppav ye Oea bmodeterar euxds,
Kab Té OL “dn Bov omaver, éret SUvapis ye Tap-
EO TLV. 420
doco yap Cains te cai Ovpavod éEeyévovto


108


THEOGONY


not cast him out from his rights, but each should


A have the office which he had before amongst the


deathless gods. And he declared that he who was
without office or right under Cronos, should be raised
to both office and rights as is just. So deathless
Styx came first to Olympus with her children through
the wit of her dear father. And Zeus honoured her,
and gave her very great gifts, for her he appointed
to be the great oath of the gods, and her children to
live with him always. And as he promised, so he
performed fully unto them all.

Again, Phoebe came to the desired embrace of
Coeus. Then the goddess through the love of the
god conceived and brought forth dark-gowned Leto,
always mild, kind to men and to the deathless gods,
mild from the beginning, gentlest in all Olympus.
_ Also she bare Asteria of happy name, whom Perses
once led to his great house to be called his dear wife.
And she conceived and bare Hecate whom Zeus the
son of Cronos honoured above all. He gave her
splendid gifts, to have a share of the earth and the un-
fruitful sea. She received honour also in starry heaven,
and is honoured exceedingly by the deathless gods.
For to this day, whenever any one of men on earth
offers rich sacrifices and prays for favour according to
eustom, he calls upon Hecate. Great honour comes
full easily to him whose prayers the goddess receives
favourably, and she bestows wealth upon him; for
the power surely is with her. For she has authority
over all those who were born of Earth and Ocean


109


HESIOD


Kal Tiny EXaXOV, TOVTOV EXEL AloaY ATAVTOD.
IQ/ 14 : / b) / +Q/ Sb /

ovde Ti poy Kpovidns éBujoato ove T aTnupa,

boo edayev Dero pera TpoTepotat Geotow,

GXnN exe, @S TO TpwTOV aT apyhs EmXeETO


ac 0s, 425 |
Kal yépas €v yain Te Kal ovpav@® Hoe Oardacy:+ 427 |
ovo, OTL wovvoyerns, Haaov Hea Eupope TLLAS, 426 |
GX étt Kal wodv padrov, érel Zevs tietar |

QUTHD. 428 |
© & eOérer, weyarws TaparyiryvEeTat nO aviyna iy” ;
ev Te oiKN Baorrebor Tap aidoiouge Kabiter,” 434)
éy T ayoph Naotos petampéret, bv K eOéXnow: 430.


nO OTOT €s TrOAELOV HOELanvopa OapnocwrvTaL

AVEPES, év0a bea TaparyiyveTat, ots « eOédAnot

viLenv T poppovEeas om do at Kal xddos opéeeat. 433

écOXn & av& oot  avdpes aeOrevoow ayoui,® 435

ev0a Jea Kal Tois TaparyiryveTar HO oviynoL*

viKnTAS dé Bin Kal KadpTei KaXOv deOXov

peta pepe. Xatpov TE, TOKEDCL dé Kd605 omdet.

eo OM) 6 immnieroe Tapectaper, ois K eOéXyowW.

Kal TOUS, OF yhavenv Svar éueh ov éprydbovrau, 440

eUXOVTAL 6 “Exarn cal €pURTUTT@ ‘Evvocuyaiy,

pyLdiws aypny xvdpn Oeos dace TOAAHD,

peta Oo apeihero parvowerny, éPéXovad ye Ouue.

éoOnrn © év arab poto UV Epuh Aid? aéEew

Boveonias O ayéXas Te Kal aimo\a mrAATE
alyov 445

Toimvas T eipoTroKwr diwv, Oupd y éPéXovea,

é& odtyov Bpiaes Kal éx TorAX@V pelova OAKer.

OUT TOL Kal soUVOYEVNS EK UNTPOS EovTAa

1 Goettling’s order. 2 Schoemann’s order.
3 Koechly : ayavi de0Acdwow, DGHI: d0acdwow, other MSS.


I1O


THEOGONY


and received an office. ‘The son of Cronos did her |
no wrong nor took anything away of all that was her
portion among the former Titan gods : but she holds,
as the division was at the first from the beginning,
privilege both in earth, and in heaven, and in sea.
Also, because she is an only child, the goddess
receives not less honour; but much more still, for
Zeus honours her. Whom she will she greatly aids
and advances: she sits by worshipful kings in judge-
ment, and in the assembly whom she will is distin-
guished among the people. And when men arm
themselves for the battle that destroys men, then
the goddess is at hand to give victory and grant
glory readily to whom she will. Good is she also
when men contend at the games, for there too the
goddess is with them and profits them: and he who
by might and strength gets the victory wins the rich
prize easily with joy, and brings glory to his parents.
And she is good to stand by horsemen, whom she
will: and to those whose business is in the grey
discomfortable sea, and who pray to Hecate and the
loud-crashing Earth-Shaker, easily the glorious god-
dess gives great catch, and easily she takes it away
as soon as seen, if so she will. She is good in the
byre with Hermes to increase the stock. The droves
of kine and wide herds of goats and flocks of fleecy
sheep, if she will, she increases from a few, or
makes many to be less. So, then, albeit her mother’s
only child,' she is honoured amongst all the deathless


* Van Lennep explains that Hecate, having no brothers to
support her claim, might have been slighted.


IIT


- ria


HESIOD


pe


Taal eT Aavatoiot TETiLLNTAL yepderow. |
One é pv Kpovidys KoupoT pod ov, ov per éxeiynv 450)
opGarpotouw LOovTO paos TohvoEpKeos ‘Hods. |!
ouTws && apys KovpoTpodos, al dé Te TLmal.


“Pein dé Sunbeioa Kpove TéKe Haldia TEKVA,
‘lorinv Anjpntpa Kal “Honv xpucomediiov |
ipO ror T ‘ALony, 0 OS vmro  xGovi Samara VaLeL 455°
VNAEES 1)TOP Exon, Kal épixtuTrov Evvoctyasoy Fi
Lia Té PNT LoerTa., Jeav TATép noe Kab avopov,
Tov Kal uo BpovThs Twereuilerar evpeta YOwv.
Kal Tovs pev Katémiwe peyas Kpovos, ws Tis

EKO TOS |
v7 ovos ef Lepys pNT pos 7 pos youval i iKOUTO, 460.
TA ppovear, t (Va [Ly TLS ayavev Ovpaviaver
adNos év aavaroow ¢ éxou Bacrhniva TUMNY.
mevdeTo yap Cains TE Kab Ovpavod a AOTEPOEVTOS,
OUVEKG Ol TETPWTO EW VITO TALOL OamHVaL |
Kal Kpatep@ mep éovtt, Avos' weyddou dua Bovdds: 465
T 6 Yy ap ovVK arads oKOTLNY EXEV, GAG |


SOKEV@V
Tatoas €éovs Katee “Pénv © exe mévOos
ahacrov. )


AXN’ OTE O1) Av epedre Oeay Tatép noe Kal avopav
TétecOal, TOT émetta hirous ALTaVEVE TOKHAS

tovs avtns, Latav te cat Ovpavov aotepoevta, 470
PLT UV oupppdccacbar, OT 0s Nedaouro TeKovaa
jTatoa pidop, TL aLTO 8 epuvis TATPOS €oLo

Taidov 0, ods xatémwe péyas Kpdvos ayxu-


NOMHTNS.


@


a


1 K (later hand) GHI and a Scholiast read rarpés.


THEOGONY


it gods. And the son of Cronos made her a nurse of


| | the young who after her saw with their eyes the


: light of all-seeing Dawn. So from the beginning
j/ she is a nurse of the young, and these are her
} honours.


| But Rhea was subject in love to Cronos and bare
|} splendid children, Hestia,! Demeter, and gold-shod

| Hera and strong Hades, pitiless in heart, who dwells
under the earth, and the loud-crashing Earth-Shaker,


| and wise Zeus, father of gods and men, by whose


thunder the wide earth is shaken. These great Cronos
swallowed as each came forth from the womb to his
| mother’s knees with this intent, that no other of the
| proud sons of Heaven should hold the kingly office
amongst the deathless gods. For he learned from
Earth and starry Heaven that he was destined to
be overcome by his own son, strong though he was,
through the contriving of great Zeus.? Therefore
he kept no blind outlook, but watched and swallowed
down his children: and unceasing grief seized Rhea.
But when she was about to bear Zeus, the father of
gods and men, then she besought her own dear
parents, Earth and starry Heaven, to devise some plan
with her that the birth of her dear child might be
concealed, and that retribution might overtake great,
crafty Cronos for his own father and also for the


1 The goddess of the hearth (the Roman Vesta), and so of
the house. Cp. Homeric Hymns v. 22 ff. ; xxix. 1 ff.

2 The variant reading ‘‘of his father” (sc. Heaven) rests
on inferior MS. authority and is probably an alteration due
to the difficulty stated by a Scholiast: ‘‘How could Zeus,
| being not yet begotten, plot against his father?” The
| phrase is, however, part of the prophecy. The whole line
_ may well be spurious, and is rejected by Heyne, Wolf,
Gaisford and Guyet.


Lig


HESIOD


of dé Ovyatpl hirn para pev KrAVov HO émiBovTo,
Kat ob TeppaceTny, boa Tep TeTpwTO yeverOar 47h
b) \ ’ an \ Cz / |
aude Kpove BactdHe kat vier KapTepodvpo.

f bray , / b) ry’ an
méurav © és AvKrov, Kpyrns és miova djpmor,
OT TOT ap omoTarov TaLo@y TéeEeoOat euenne,
Lnva peyav: TOV [EV Ob edéEaTo Tata mehopn
Kpytp é EV cbpetn Tpahée ev aTuradhepeval TE. 48(
évda uv into hépovaa Oony ova viKTa pédawvay |

/ b] / A PERS \ na
mpatny és AvKtov Kpv\yev O€ € yepot KaBovca
avTpw év nALBAaT@, Fabéns Uo Kevdecr yains,
Atiyai@ év dpet TeTUKaT EVO UANEVTL. |

n \ / A if > /

T@ 0€ oTTapyavicaca péyav NiDov éyyuddiEevy 485
Ovpavidn ey avakre, Ded mpotépm Bac.
TOV TOO éEXwV Xetperow env éoxdTOero ynovv
TXETALOS" ovo evonoe pera ppeoty, OS Ob OTLTTw
avr MOov € E0S vios GAViKNTOS Kal aeons
NeimreO’, 6 piv TAY Ewedre Bin Kat Kepot wea
oas 4
Tuns eEeXdew, 0 6 év aBavatorot avakeww.

Kaptanripos 0 dp émeita pévos Kal datouua

yula

of a SYA 3 f » a Sion a
nvéeTto ToLo avaxtos’ émumop“evay & éviavT@v
Dains é evveringt Toruppacecr a dorwels
OV yOVOV diy avenKke peyas Kpovos ayKUAOUHTHS 495
[vexnbeis Téxvnar Bindi Te watdos €éoto.*| {
TpwTov O e&éuecev ALOov, Ov TUMAaTOV KATETTLVEV *
Tov pev Levs otnpree Kata YOovos evpvodetns
Ilu@ot év nyabén yuaros bro Wapynooto :
on éuev eEomricw, Oadua Ovntotcr Bpotoicow. 500


1 Rejected by Heyne as interrupting and disagreeing with
the context.


2 Peppmiiller: é&funoe (or é&fmece) AlOov, wiuaroy Kata-
alvwv, MSS.


114


THEOGONY


children whom he had swallowed down. And they
readily heard and obeyed their dear daughter, and told
| her all that was destined to happen touching Cronos
| the king and his stout-hearted son. So they sent her
to Lyctus, to the rich land of Crete, when she was
ready to bear great Zeus, the youngest of her children.
_ Him did vast Earth receive from Rhea in wide Crete
| tonourishandtobringup. Thither came Earth carry-
| ing him swiftly through the black night to Lyctus first,
and took him in her arms and hid him in a remote
cave beneath the secret places of the holy earth on
thick-wooded Mount Aegeum; but to the mightily
ruling son of Heaven, the earlier king of the gods,
she gave a great stone wrapped in swaddling clothes.
Then he took it in his hands and thrust it down into
his belly: wretch! he knew not in his heart that in
place of the stone his son was left behind, un-
conquered and untroubled, and that he was soon to
overcome him by force and might and drive him
from his honours, himself to reign over the deathless ~
gods. |

After that, the strength and glorious limbs of the


| prince Rieredsed quickly, And as the years rolled on,


great Cronos the wily ‘was beguiled by the deep
suggestions of Earth, and brought up again his
offspring, vanquished by the arts and might of his
own son, and he vomited up first the stone which he
had swallowed last. And Zeus set it fast in the
wide-pathed earth at goodly Pytho under the glens
of Parnassus, to be a sign thenceforth and a marvel
to mortal men.!_ And he set free from their deadly


1 Pausanias (x. 24. 6) saw near the tomb of Neoptolemus
- “a stone of no great size,” which the Delphians anointed
every day with oil, and which he says was supposed to be
the stone given to Cronos.


I15
Om ia


HESIOD


Noe SE TATPOKATLYVHTOUS OO@V UITO bec MOV
Ovpavidas, ovs Ona marnp decuppoowya tw:
of OL aTreu“YnaaVTo Xcpw évepyecidw,

odxav dé Bpovrny 70 aidadoevta Kepavvov |
Kab oTEpOT HY" TO Tp b€ Ter@pn Lata Kecevber 50!
Tols micuvos Oyntotct Kal AOavaToLol avacoel.


Kovpny & ‘lameros Kaddopupov "Onccavivny
nyayeto KAvpévny cat OMOV EVOS eicaveBarver.
» 6€ of "ATNavTA Kparepod pova: yetvaTto Traioa: |
alas 6 UTEepKvoavTa Mevotrvov n0€ TpounPéa 510
ToLKthov alohounrw, ajaprivoov Tt ’Encpnbéa,
ds Kaxov €& apyns yéveT avdpaow adrpynorhow:
mpatos yap pa Atos rAacTHY Um exo yuvatka
mapOévov. vB pio rny dé Mevoitiov evpvorra Levs
els "EpeBos KaTétrepape Barov YroXoev Te KEpavv@ 515
elven aracbanins Té Kal VOpENS Umepohou.
“ATAas S ovpavov eupov exet kparepijs UT avayKNS
Telpac év yains, T poTap ‘Horepiowy Myudeaver,
Eo TNOS Kepanh Te kal axapaTnat XEperauy™
TAaUTHVY yap ol poipay é6docaTo uyTieta Levs. 5204
jae O aruKromeonot IIpopnféa TrouKtNoBovhov
dec pois apyaneoure peéoov bua Kilov’ éNaooas:
Kat ol ém aleTov @poe TaviTrTepovy' avTap 6
Tap
noOvev abdvatov, TO 8 aéEeTo ico arravTy
VUKTOS, bcov mpoTav Huap dob TavucitTepos |
Opves. : 525)
TOV jLeV ap ANKENUNS Karhhiapvpov GAKU{LOS vioS
‘Hpaknréns é EKTELVE, KaKNY & amo vodoov adadkev
‘lamersovion Kal é\UaaToO Suc fpocurdey
ovx aéxnts Lynvos Odvprriov twupédovtos,


116


}


THEOGONY


bonds the brothers of his father, sons of Heaven


t- whom his father in his foolishness had bound. And


|| they remembered to be grateful to him for his kind-

| ness, and gave him thunder and the glowing thunder-
bolt and lightning: for before that, huge Earth had
| hidden these. In them he trusts and rules over
| mortals and immortals.


Now lapetus took to wife the neat-ankled maid
Clymene, daughter of Ocean, and went up with her
into one bed. And she bare him a stout-hearted
son, Atlas: also she bare very glorious Menoetius
and clever Prometheus, full of various wiles, and
scatter-brained Epimetheus who from the first was a
mischief to men who eat bread; for it was he who
first took of Zeus the woman, the maiden whom he
had formed. But Menoetius was outrageous, and far-
seeing Zeus struck him with a lurid thunderbolt
and sent him down to Erebus, because of his mad
presumption and exceeding pride. And Atlas through
hard constraint upholds the wide heaven with un-
wearying head and arms, standing at the borders of
the earth before the clear-voiced Hesperides ; for
this lot wise Zeus assigned tohim. And ready-witted
Prometheus he bound with inextricable bonds, cruel
chains, and drove a shaft through his middle, and
set on him a long-winged eagle, which used to eat


_. his immortal liver; but by night the liver grew as


much again everyway as the long-winged bird de-
voured in the whole day. That bird Heracles, the
valiant son of shapely-ankled Alemene, slew; and
delivered the son of Iapetus from the cruel plague,
and released him from his affliction—not without
the will of Olympian Zeus who reigns on high, that


117


HESIOD


opp’ “Hpaxdijos OnBaryevéos Kéos ely 530
mAelov er 1) TO Wapoilev emt YOova TovAv-
Boreipav.
TaoT dpa abopevos Tha d.pidétKeTov viov*
Kat TEP X.oomeEVOS m™avOn Xorou, Ov mp EYED KED,
oven _epiveto Bouras t UTEP MEVEL Kpoviene, |
Kab yap OT expivovTo Fear Ovyrot T avO po mo 535
Mykovn, TOT érevta peyav Body mpoppove Ouu@
Sacadpevos TpoéOnKe, Atos voov éEatradicxav.
Tots pev yap capKas Te Kal eyKara Tiova Onu@
év pire kart éOnke carorpas yaorpl Boein, |
T® © avtT oatéa NevKA Boos body € éml TEXVN 540
eiderioas Kar eOnne karvyas apyéeTe Onue. |
67) TOTE ply TpocéelTre TATHP avopav TE GJe@y Te”
“Tarersovion, TAVTOV GpLoelKeT aVaKTOV,
@ TETOV, @S eTepoln ws dLedacaao poipas. |
“Os pato KEPTOMEOY Levs apbura pndea ciO@s. 545
TOV & avTe mpocéertre TIpounGevs dry LUNOMNTNS
HK eITLLELONTAS, Oohins 6 ov AOero TeEXxYNS” |
Lev KUOLoTE peyote Jeav aevyeveraor, |
Tov © éde, ommoTepny aoe evi dpect Oupos avwryer.
PH pa dorodpovéwrv: Zevs & adpOita pnoea
clO@s | 55
yuo p ovd nyvoinoe OoAov" Kaka © daceTo Oud
Ovntots avOporrouct, TA Kal TeNCETOaL EMENAED.
XEpot S 6 vy aphotépnow aveireTo DevKov
arechap.
XOTaTo | d€ ppevas appi, Xoros bé py ixero Oumov,
Os (OEV OO TEA NEVKA Boos doin ert TEXDY. 555
eK Tob o aDavarovrww € emt xOovi Pon av0 peTrov
Katou’ ooTea NevKa Ounevtov € eT Bopov.
Tov 0€ péey oVOncas Teocépyn vehednyepéeta Levs:
118


y
|


THEOGONY


the glory of Heracles the Theban-born might be yet
greater than it was before over the plenteous earth.
This, then, he regarded, and honoured his famous
son; though he was angry, he ceased from the wrath
which he had before because Prometheus matched
himself in wit with the almighty son of Cronos.
Fer when the gods and mortal men were divided at
Mecone, even then Prometheus was forward to cut
up a great ox and set portions before them, trying
to befool the mind of Zeus. Before the rest he set
flesh and inner parts thick with fat upon the hide,
covering them with an ox paunch; but for: Zeus he
put the white bones dressed up with cunning art and
covered with shining fat. Then the father of men
and of gods said to him:

“Son of Iapetus, most glorious of all lords, good
sir, how unfairly you have divided the portions!”’

So said Zeus whose wisdom is everlasting, rebuking
him. But wily Prometheus answered him, smiling
_ softly and not forgetting his cunning trick :

“ Zeus, most glorious and greatest of the eternal |
gods, take which ever of these portions your heart
within you bids.” So he said, thinking trickery.
But Zeus, whose wisdom is everlasting, saw and
failed not to perceive the trick, and in his heart he
thought mischief against mortal men which also was
to be fulfilled. With both hands he took up the
white fat and was angry at heart, and wrath came to
his spirit when he saw the white ox-bones craftily
tricked out: and because of this the tribes of men

upon earth burn white bones to the deathless gods
upon fragrant altars. But Zeus who drives the clouds
was greatly vexed and said to him:


II9


HESIOD


"Tlametiovion, TavT@Y TEpl NOEA ELO@S,
@ TETTOV, OVK dpa. Tow Oorjins emiAnGeo TEXVNS.

“Os bato X.WOfLEv05 Levs apbira punjoea, eds"
ex TovTou 6 émerTa dodou He pv LeVvos aie
ov édidov Merino! mupos pévos akapatoto
Ovnrots avO p@rrots, ov él xGovt VALETAOUG LV.
aNXa poy efarratncen € éus mats latetoto
creas AKALATOLO TUPOS TACT KOTOV avynv
év Koih@ vapOnee: daKev O€ € vEeLtoOL Oupov,
Li’ txruBpeperny, eXoh@ae 6€ pu dirov 7 TOP,
@s ie év avOpon oat Tupos TIAET KOTOV auyny.
avtixa © avtt Tupos Tevéev Kaxov avOpwTroow:
yains yap clpmAacce TepixrAUTOS Apdiyunets
mapléve aidoin ixerov Kpovidew d1a Bovdds.
Cae 6€ Kal KOTpNTE Gea YAAUKOITLS AOHun
apryupen eo Ore Kata KpnOev O€ KadvTTTpHV
daroanenv Xelperou Kateaxele, badpa ier Oau
[appt 6¢ Ol aTEepavous, veoOnr€os avOea Troins,
LEpTOUS mepiOnne Kapyare Tladras ’AOnvn.?|
appt b¢ ot orepavny xpuceny Keparhow éOnxKe,
THY avros Toinoe TEPLKAUTOS “A ppuyuners
aoKknoas Tahapynet, xaprbouevos Au Tarpl.
Th © evi daidara ToAda TeETEVyaTO, Oadua

ier Bau,
KVaOaN , font Ayreupos Tord Tpépee 70€ Jdracoa,
TOV O ye TOAN EVEOnKE,—yYapis 6 aTENapTeETO
TOA, —

Oavpac.a, Sdorcw éotKoTa hovieccw.


1 Bergk (after scholiast): pedrimor, DEGHI: pealow,
FKL.
* ll. 576-7 appear to belong to a different recension.


I20


THEOGONY


«Son of Iapetus, clever above all! So, sir, you
have not yet forgotten your cunning arts!”’

So spake Zeus in anger, whose wisdom is ever-
lasting; and from that time he was always mindful
of the trick, and would not give the power of
unweatying fire to the Melian! race of mortal men
who live on the earth. But the noble son of
Iapetus outwitted him and stole the far-seen gleam
of unwearying fire in a hollow fennel stalk. And
- Zeus who thunders on high was stung in spirit, and
his dear heart was angered when he saw amongst
men the far-seen ray of fire. Forthwith he made
an evil thing for men as the price of fire; for the
very famous Limping God formed of earth the
likeness of a shy maiden as the son of Cronos
willed. And the goddess bright-eyed Athene girded
and clothed her with silvery raiment, and down
from her head she spread with her hands a broidered
veil, a wonder to see; and she, Pallas Athene, put
about her head lovely garlands, flowers of new-grown
herbs. Also she put upon her head a crown of gold
which the very famous Limping God made himself
and worked with his own hands as a favour to Zeus
his father. On it was much curious work, wonderful
to see; for of the many creatures which the land
and sea rear up, he put most upon it, wonderful
things, like living beings with voices: and great
beauty shone out from it.

1 A Scholiast explains: ‘‘ Hither because they (men) sprang
from the Melian nymphs (cp. 1. 187); or because, when they
were born (?), they cast themselves under the ash-trees
(méAraz), that is, the trees.””’ The reference may be to the


origin of men from ash-trees: cp, Works and Days, 145 and
note. .


121


HESIOD


Avrtap éret 6% ted&e kadov Kaxov avt ayaboio, 585
les > + M7 MY , oo »¥
efayary , eva mep Got eoay Geot no avO pom or,

KOT LO ayarRopwerny YNAUK@TLOOS oBptworrarpns.
Oatpa 8 éy’ abavdtous te Oeovs Ovyntovs 7

av porous,
@s eioov SoAOv altro, aunyavov avOpwrmotow. :

"EK THs yap yevos éorl yuvacKe ay OnruTepawy,! 590 —
[Tis yap ONOLOY éoTL yevos Kal Pora yuvarkay, | 4
Thue per’ ar Ovntoian per avepact vaveTaovaw
ovhomevns mrevins ov ovppopolr, ara KOpoLo.

@s © omoT év ounveror Katnpepeer ot MELT AL
enpivas Bockoat, KAK OV Evynjovas epyov— 595
al pev Te TpoTray Huap és HEALOV KkaTaouyra
HuadTlaL oTEvdovaL TLEtot TE KNPLA NEUKA,

do évtoobe mévovtes emnpedéas Kata ciuBXdous
pO hae KAMLATOV OPETEDHY 5 YATTEP ALO@VTAL—

¢ 0 avtws dvdpecot KaKOV Ovnrotor yuvatkas 600

Zeds vyiBpeweTns OnKev, Evyjovas ¢ epyov
apyanreov Erepov dé Topev KAKOV QVT arya oto-
os Ke apov pevryov Kab pLeppepa. epya YUVALK@V
a) ynuae e0ENN, oAOOV & éi yhpas tKorTo
xnrei ynpoKomolo: 6 Ov Brorou eTLOEVIS 605
Gwe, amopOupevou dé Ova KTHOW SaTéov Tae
XNpocrat oOo avre yapou pera, potpa yévytas,
Kedvny o eo xev AKOLTLD apnpviav Tpam ert,
To dé 7 am aLVOS KOKOV éesOX@ avrupepifer
€ [eves Os O€ Ke TETLN aTapTnpoto yevéOras, 610
Swe évi order aw EXOY ahac Tov avinv |
upp Kal Kpacin, Kal dviKec Tov KAKOV €OTLD.

“Os od« éote Atos Krérpan voov ode TapenOeiv.
ovoe yap lametiovions axaxnta Upounevs

1 ll, 590-1 belong to different recensions..
122


 THEOGONY


But when he had made the beautiful evil tobe the ~~


price for the blessing, he brought her out, delighting
in the finery which the bright-eyed daughter of a
mighty father had given her, to the place where the
other gods and men were. And wonder took hold of
the deathless gods and mortal men when they saw that
which was sheer guile, not to be withstood by men.

For from her is the race of women and female
kind: of her is the deadly race and tribe of women
who live amongst mortal men to their great trouble,
no helpmeets in hateful poverty, but only in wealth.
And as in thatched hives bees feed the drones whose
nature is to do mischief—by day and throughout
the day until the sun goes down the bees are busy
and lay the white combs, while the drones stay at
home in the covered skeps and reap the toil of others
into their own bellies—even so Zeus who thunders
on high made women to be an evil to mortal men, with _
a nature to do evil. And he gave them a second evil
\to be the price for the good they had: whoever avoids
marriage and the sorrows that women cause, and will
not wed, reaches deadly old age without anyone to
tend his years, and though he at least has no lack of
livelihood while he lives, yet, when he is dead, his
_ kinsfolk divide his possessions amongst them. And
as for the man who chooses the lot of marriage and
takes a good wife suited to his mind, evil continually
contends with good ; for whoever happens to have
mischievous children, lives always with unceasing
grief in his spirit and heart within him; and this
evil cannot be healed.

So it is not possible to deceive or go beyond the
will of Zeus ; for not even the son of Iapetus, kindly


123


HESIOD


Tolo y vmeenrvEE Bapvy YOXOV, AAN UT’ avayKys 615
Kal TOAVLOPLY EOVTA MéeyaS KATA SETMOs EPUKEL.


5) / © nian ¢ La) \ > / fa

OBptdpew & as Tp@Ta TaTHp wdvacaTo OuUUL@
Ko 3 Se U / On i DEN } n

oTTo T HOE Tn, SHoev KpaTep@ evi Secp@
NVOPENV UTEPOTAOV AY@MEVOS NOE Kal ELO0S

Naa , tis he \ ’ /
Kal peyeOos: Katévacce 5 vmod YOovos evpvodeins. 620
ev?’ of y’ adye ExovTes Uo YOovl vareTdovTes
elat em éoyVaTin, meyarys €v Treipact yatns,
dnOa pan ayvbmevol, Kpadin méya TEVOOS EXOVTES.
arrnd odeas Kpovidns te cat dbdvatot Oeol adXo1,
ods Téxev HUKOMOS Pein Kpovou év didroTntt, 625
Tains dpadpoovvrnow avyyayov és ddos avtts:
avTn yap obi atavTa dunveréws KaTENEEE
OV Kelvols ViKNY TE Kal ayAaOV evyos apéa Pat.
dnpov yap papvavto movov Ovparye exovTes
Ternvés te Oeot cat 6coe Kpovou é&eyévovto, 630
b) J b) / \ \ e€ /
GVTLOV GXANNOLGL OLA KPATEPas vopivas,
ol pev ad’ wpnrAs "OGpvos Titiives dryavot,

20 ap am Ovnrvprroto Ecoi, dwThpes édov,

/ +7 ¢€ U4 if 3 a

ods Téxev NUKOmOS Pein Kpov@ evvnbetaa.
of pa TOT AAAHAOLGL YOXOV Oupadye EXOVTES 635
TUVEXEDS éudyovto déxa TAElous éviavTous:
oveé Tis Hv epLoos XareT HS AUaLS OVE TENEUTN
ovderépors, & icov d€ TENOS TETATO TTOAE}LOLO.
aXe OTE / KELVOLCL mapeaxelen 6 dppeva TATA,
VEKTAP T "au Bpootny Te, Ta Tep Oeol avrol édovat, 640
TavTO@V ev arnPerow aeFeTo Oupos @ ay ivep.
OS VEKTAp T emda avTo Kat apBpooiny é EPATELVHY,
61) TOTE TOLS peTéELTE TATHP aVOpa@V TE OEe@v TE


124


THEOGONY


Prometheus, escaped his heavy anger, but of neces-_
sity strong bands confined him, although he knew
many a wile. |


But when first their father was vexed in his heart ~


with Obriareus and Cottus and Gyes, he bound
them in cruel bonds, because he was jealous of their
exceeding manhood and comeliness and great size:
and he made them live beneath the wide-pathed
earth, where they were afflicted, being set to dwell
under the ground, at the end of the earth, at its
great borders, in bitter anguish for a long time and
with great grief at heart. But the son of Cronos
and the other deathless gods whom rich-haired Rhea
bare from union with Cronos, brought them up again
to the light at Earth’s advising. For she herself
recounted all things to the gods fully, how that with
these they would gain victory and a glorious cause
to vaunt themselves. For the Titan gods and as
many as sprang from Cronos had long been fighting
together in stubborn war with heart-grieving toil,
the lordly ‘Titans from high Othrys, but the gods,
givers of good, whom rich-haired Rhea bare in union
with Cronos, from Olympus. So they, with bitter
wrath, were fighting continually with one another at
that time for ten full years, and the hard strife had
no close or end for either side, and the issue of the
war hung evenly balanced. But when he had pro-
vided those three with all things fitting, nectar and
ambrosia which the gods themselves eat, and when
their proud spirit revived within them all after they
had fed on nectar and delicious ambrosia, then it
was that the father of men and gods spoke amongst
them :


T25


HESIOD


Kéxruté pev, Tains te cat Ovpavod ayraa
TEKVA,
odp’ clo, Tu [Me Oupuos evl orn0eror KENEVEL. 645
700 yap para Onpov é €vaVTLOL addi ovou
ViKNS Kal KPaTEOS ™épt papya wel Wuata wavTa
Turfves te Oeol Kal door Kpovov exyevopuer Oa.
Dpels dé “eyadny TE Binv Kaul ‘xelpas aaT TOUS
paivere Ternvecow € évavTtor év bat AUYPH 650
pune dpevor purornTos évnéos, boo mabovres
és daos avr adixecbe ducnreyéos ve Sec pod
¢e J S NN € N / ’ /
HmMETEPAS OLA Bovras vuTo Sopou T)EPOEVTOS.
"Os Paro: Tov © ceca apetBetoa Kotrtos
poor"
Aaipove, ovk adanta TipavoKkear’ adda Kal
aUvTOL 2 O08
y / N \ INS \ edieg x ,
iOmev, 6 TOL Tepl eV TPATrLOES, TrEpL O ETL VONLA,
aXKkTHp 0 alavatotoly aphs yéveo Kpvepoto.
ono. © éemiudpoctvynaw vio Copou nepoevTos
BY 4 J&9 5) A 3 u (d \ an
avoppov Ot éEadris awetdixtov Uo Sea pmov
nrvdouev, Kpdvou vie dvaké, avdedrra trabovtes. 660
T@ Kal VOV aTevEel TE VOW Kal éeTrippovs BovAn
puaopela Kpatos vmov év aivn dniorhnre
papvauevor TiTnow ava Kpatepas vopivas.
a @) Uf a D) id be @ Us PS an Do: ot
¢s hat éryvecoay 6é Boi, dwrHpes Edwr,
poOov axovoartes Trodéuov 6 éAtNaieTo Ovjos 665
farXov éT 7) TO Tadpole paynv 0 apéeyapTor
ErVELDAV
Uf VA lA NEED: 4 /
TavTes, Onrevat TE Kal Apaeves, HuUaTL KElVO,
Tornvés te Ocot cat dao. Kpovou éEeyévovto,
ous Te Levs ’"EpéBevaodw 1 taro yOovos Ke howade
detvoi Te KpaTepot Te, Binv UTrépoTAOV EyovTes. 670
1 DEFKLR: ’EpeSeogu, GHI.
126


THEOGONY


“ Hear me, bright children of Earth and Heaven,
that I may say what my heart within me bids. A
long while now have we, who are sprung from
Cronos and the Titan gods, fought with each other
every day to get victory and to prevail. But do you
show your great might and unconquerable strength,
and face the Titans in bitter strife ; for remember
our friendly kindness, and from what sufferings you
are come back to the light from your cruel bondage
under misty gloom through our counsels.”’

So he said. And blameless Cottus answered him
again: “ Divine one, you speak that which we know
well: nay, even of ourselves we know that your
wisdom and understanding is exceeding, and that
you became a defender of the deathless ones from
chill doom. And through your devising we are
come back again from the murky gloom and from
our merciless bonds, enjoying what we looked not
for, O lord, son of Cronos. And so now with fixed
purpose and deliberate counsel we will aid your
power in dreadful strife and will fight against the
Titans in hard battle.”

So he said: and the gods, givers of good things,
applauded when they heard his word, and their spirit
longed for war even more than before, and they all,
both male and female, stirred up hated battle that
day, the Titan gods, and all that were born of
Cronos together with those dread, mighty ones of
overwhelming strength whom Zeus brought up to
the light from Erebus beneath the earth. An


127


HESIOD


TOV EKATOV peev xetpes an OMov dioaovTo
Tao opds, Kepanrat | 6é ExdoTo@ TEVTNKOVTA
éF @uwv éméhuxov érl ort Bapotct pérecou.
ob Tote TiTyverot kaTeoTavey év dat  huypi
TéTpas HNALBaTOVS oTtBapis ev xEpotly éyovTes. 675
Terfves & erepaben € ex AapTUVAVTO parayyas
Tpod povews, VELO@V TE Bins o dpa epyov epawov
apporepor Sewvov be mepraxe TOVTOS atreipov,
yn oé bey éopapdynoev, éméateve 6 ovpavos
2

EUPUS
ceLropevos, tedobev S€ TuvdaooeTo paKkpos "OdAvp- :

TOS | 680
pith im abavatwy, évoois & ikave Bapeta
Tdprapov nepoevTa, Toy T alTeta ton
aomérou f Lax oto Boraav TE KpaTepaoy:
OS ap’ er’ adda hoes tecav Berea TOVOET A.
pwvn 0 apdotépan i (KET OUpavov ao TEpoEVTA 685
KeKOMEVOD' ot O€ Evvicay peyare drargr.

Ovs ap € ert ZLevs taxev €ov pEvOS, GX vu TOD YE
clap mev peveos TAHVTO hpeves, ex O€ TE TATAV
daive Binv: duvdus & ap am ovpavod 7d

‘Ohvperou
aoTpanT@y ETTELYVE cuvaxadov’ oi O€ Kepavvol 690 |
ikTap apa BpovrTn Te Kal aorepoTh TOTEOVTO
KELpos aro oriBapys, | Lepny proya ethud OwVTES
Tappees® appl dé yaia pepéa Bios eo wapayite
Katopevn, AdKE O appl mupt peyan aomweros UAN.


éCee dé XOov Tao, Kal ‘Oxeavoto péeO pa 695
TOovTOS T aTtpvyeTos: Tovs 6 audemre Oepmos
QUT MN)


Titjvas yOovious, POE & alPépa' dtav txavev
1 Naber: j#épa, MSS.
128


THEOGONY


| hundred arms sprang from the shoulders of all alike,
_ and each had fifty heads growing upon his shoulders
| upon stout limbs. These, then, stood against the
Titans in grim strife, holding huge rocks in their
strong hands. And on the other part the Titans
eagerly strengthened their ranks, and both sides at
one time showed the work. of their hands and their
might. The boundless sea rang terribly around, and
the earth crashed loudly: wide Heaven was shaken
and groaned, and high Olympus reeled from its
foundation under the charge of the undying gods,
and a heavy quaking reached dim Tartarus and the
deep sound of their feet in the fearful onset and of
their hard missiles. So, then, they launched their
grievous shafts upon one another, and the cry of
both armies as they shouted reached to starry heaven ;
and they met together with a great battle-cry.

Then Zeus no longer held back his might; but
straight his heart was filled with fury and he showed
forth all his strength. From Heaven and from
Olympus he came forthwith, hurling his lightning:
the bolts flew thick and fast from his strong hand
together with thunder and lightning, whirling an
awesome flame. The life-giving earth crashed around
in burning, and the vast wood crackled loud with fire
all about. All the land seethed, and Ocean’s streams
and the unfruitful sea. The hot vapour lapped round
_ the earthborn Titans: flame unspeakable rose to the


129


HESIOD


do TéT0s, doce S dpepoe kat idOipov Tp éovT@v
avyn pappwatpovoa Kepauvoo TE TTEPOT HS Te.
Kaba dé Oeoméctov Kxateyev Xados: elaato 5
avTa 70C
opbarpoiow idely 70 OVAGL dooay aKodoar |
AUTWS, WS Eb Data Kat Ovpavos eUpus UmepOe
TiAVATO™ TOLOS yap Ke peyas UIO OOUTrOS O opa@pel
TAS pev eperoperns, Tov 0 wWobev éfepurrovos” |
TOT 0S Sobrros é eryevTO Oeay peo Evviovtav. 705
auv 0 dvemoe evooty TE xoviny T éopapar tov
Bpovtnv Te oTEpom ny TE Kab ai@adoevra KEPAUYOV,
Kira Auos peyarovo, Pépov S bayny T evo nD TE
és pécov appoTtépwv: oT0Bos S° drhnTos opwpel
owepoanrens Eptoos, KAPTOS é avepatvero é Epyov. 710}
exdivOn dé paxn’ mplv 8 aX NOUS em EX OVTES
eM pevEewns epaXOVTO Ota KpaTepas vopivas.

O? & ap’ évi tpw@roes paxnv Opipetan & eyerpav
Korros TE Bpidpews te Tins 7 a aa os TONE [OLO, |
ot pa TpinKooias TET PAs o7tBapav a amo XEpov 7154
ELT OV emacauTépas; Kara, & écxtacav Berécoor
Terfvas, KaL TOUS Mev UTFO xPoves eupuodelns
mépapay Kaul Oe molaly €v apyanéouo w édnoav
XEpolv VLKNTAVTES UrrepOvpous TEP covTas,
TOOGOV even UTO YRS, Ocov ovpavos éoT aro

yains” 720)
TOTOOV yap bie amo YAS és Taprapov NepoevTa. :
évvéa yap VUKTAS TE Kal jpara XadKEOS CK LOV
ovpavober KAT LOD dexaTy Ke és yaiav txouTo"
evvea & av vUKTAS Te Kal yar Xah«eos CK [LeOV |
ex yains KaTL@V dexaTy K és Tdaprapov it iKOL. 725
TOV TépL XOrKceo & EKOS eApraras’ appl b¢ poy vvE
TplaToUVEl KEXUTAL TrEpl SeLtpynv: aUTap UTrEpOer


130


THEOGONY


bright upper air: the flashing glare of the thunder
stone and lightning blinded their eyes for all that
they were strong. Astounding heat seized Chaos:
and to see with eyes and to hear the sound with ears
it seemed even as if Earth and wide Heaven above
- eame together ; for such a mighty crash would have
arisen if Earth were being hurled to ruin, and
Heaven from on high were hurling her down; so
great a crash was there while the gods were meeting
together in strife. Also the winds brought rumbling
earthquake and duststorm, thunder and lightning
and the lurid thunderbolt, which are the shafts of
great Zeus, and carried the clangour and the warcry
into the midst of the two hosts. An horrible uproar
of terrible strife arose: mighty deeds were shown
and the battle inclined. But until then, they kept
at one another and fought continually in cruel war.
And amongst the foremost Cottus and Briareos and
Gyes insatiate for war raised fierce fighting: three
hundred rocks, one upon another, they launched
from their strong hands and overshadowed the Titans
with their missiles, and hurled them beneath the
wide-pathed earth, and bound them in bitter chains
when they had conquered them by their strength for
all their great spirit, as far beneath the earth
as heaven is above earth; for so far is it from earth
to Tartarus. Fora brazen anvil falling down from
heaven nine nights and days would reach the earth
upon the tenth: and again, a brazen anvil falling
from earth nine nights and days would reach
Tartarus upon the tenth. Round it runs a fence of
bronze, and night spreads in triple line all about it
ee
K 2


HESIOD


yns pila tedvact Kal atpvyétoto Oadacons.

év0a Ocot Titrhves b7r0 Sod nepoevte

Kkexpupatat Bovrnar Atos vepernyepeTao 730

YOM €v EVPWEVTL, TEANMPNS ETKATA yalns.

Tots ovK é&ttov éott. Ovpas 6 éméOnKe Llocedéwy

YanKelas, TeLyos Oe TepolxeTau appotéepwler.

ev0a, Tuns Korros te Kab ‘OBprapews poeyadupos

vatouow, pvraxes muaTtou Aos airyLoxoto. ‘735
"Ev0a be yns ovobepiis Kat Taprapov HepoevTos

TOvTOU T ct puyerouo Kab oupavod dar Epoevtos

eEeins TaVTOV mya Kal Tmeipar éacw

apyanré evpwevta, TA TE TTUYEOVaL Deni TeEp,

ydopa pey, ovdé Ke TavTa TEAETPOpOV eis

évLauTov 3 -740 |

ovdas tKOLT , Eb TPWTA TUAEWY évTOTOE YyEvOLTO, |

annrd Kev évOa Kal EvOa hépor Tpo Overra OvédAry |

apyanrén: Sewov O€ Kal aBavatoict Oeoiat .

TODTO tépas. Nuxtos 6 epeBevv ts oixia deuva

Earn Kev ved ens Kexahuppeva, Kvavenow. ‘745/ |

TOV mpood ‘Lazretoto Tas eyes oupavov eupvy |

ETTNOS Kepani TE KAL aKapnarya XEperow

AoTELpEDS, 601 NvE re Kat Hyépy & aaoov lovaaL

ANAHNAS TPogeeLTov, ape Bopevat peyav ovoOoV

XadKeov" ) ev éow kataBnoeTat, i 7 6é Oupate 750)

EpXETaL, ovoe TOT auporépas Somos € évTos €épryet, |

GAN atel eTEpN ye Some éxtoo ev € cog a

yatay emia Tpeperat, nO av Sopiov € eV TOS éovaoa

pelpuver THV AUTHS Opnv 0600, éoT av tena,

H) pev érruyPoviorcs paos trodvdepKes Exovoa, ~— 755


|
|
|
}


132


THEOGONY


like a neck-circlet, while above grow the roots—of
the earth and unfruitful sea. There by the counsel
of Zeus who drives the clouds the Titan gods are
hidden under misty gloom, in a dank place where
are the ends of the huge earth. And they may not
go out; for Poseidon fixed gates of bronze upon it,
and a wall runs all round it on every side. There
Gyes and Cottus and great-souled Obriareus live,
trusty warders of Zeus who holds the aegis.

And there, all in their order, are the sources and
ends of gloomy earth and misty Tartarus and the un-
fruitful sea and starry heaven, loathsome and dank,
which even the gods abhor. It is a great gulf, and
if once a man were within the gates, be would not
reach the floor until a whole year had reached its
end, but cruel blast upon blast would carry him this
way and that. And this marvel is awful even to
the deathless gods.

There stands the awful home of murky Night
wrapped in dark clouds. _ In front of it the son of
Iapetus! stands immovably upholding the wide
heaven upon his head and unwearying hands, where
Night and Day draw near and greet one another as
they pass the great threshold of bronze: and while
the one is*about to go down into the house, the
other comes out at the door. \ And the house never
holds them both within; but always one is without
the house passing over the earth, while the other stays
at home and waits until the time for her journeying
come ; and the one holds all-seeing light for them on
earth, but the other holds in her arms Sleep the


1 sc. Atlas, the Shu of Egyptian mythology : cp. note on
line 177.


433


HESIOD


» & “Tarvov pera, VEC, Kao tyyntov @Pavatoo,
N vE odon, vepeMy KEKARU[L [LEV nepoetoet.

"Ev0a dé Nux«ros mraives épeuvys okt exouow,
Trvos Kai MOdvartos, detvot Oeot- OUOE TOT aUTovS
"Héduos haddav émidépxetar axtivecow 760

oUpavov els avi@v ovd otpavobev KaTaPaivon.

TOV S ETEPOS yaiav TE Kab ev pea, vata Jardoons

Ho uxos avarpeperat Kab puetexos vO pwroven,

‘rob d€ aLdnpen pev Kpacin, XadKeov d€ oF WTOP |
ynnrees ev oTHOecow: exe oS Ov TpaTAa rAdByow 765
avOparav: évOpos 5€ Kal abavarotct Beotow.

"Ev0a Geod xPoviov m™ poo dev Sopot 7 NX HEVTES

iPOiwou T  Aldew Kat ET ALVIS Ilepoepovetins

EO TAC LY, dewvos dé KUOY  mporrapoube puraccer
vHrELHS, TeEXY NY dé eaueny exer és ev lovtas 770
TALVEL OMS ouph TE Kat ovaoLv apporéporow,
efehGeiv & ove avtis ea mddwv, adra doxevev
éabiet, ov Ke AaByot mun ov éxtooOev tovTa.
[ibOiwou 7 Aidew Kal em aus Tlepoegpoveins.*] |

"EvOa 6€ vasretdet oTUyepn Geos alavatoici, 775 | |
deuvn YTVE, Guyarnp dalroppoou "Oxeavoto |
mpeo Rutan: voodw oé Dewy KUTA do@pata vatet

pak phew TET PTL Karnpepe : appl O¢ TAaVTY

KLOo LW apyupeoiat POS OUPAVOV EOTHPLRTAL.

mabpa dé Oavpavtos Ouyatnp Todas @Kéa pis 780
dryryedinu TahetTat er evpéa VOTA Jaracons.

om mor: Epes Kat veikos év aPavatototy ¢ opnrar

Kai p otis Wevdntar Orvpria depat’ éyovTor,
ZLevs dé te low emepraye Seay péyav OpKov evetkar
THnArODEV ev YpUTEeN TPOYOW TrohV@VUpLOV VOwWpP —_—'785
oe line (a repetition of 768) is not found in —. better


134


THEOGONY


brother of Death, even evil Night, wrapped in-a
vaporous cloud.

And there the children of dark Night have their
dwellings, Sleep and Death, awful gods. The
glowing Sun never looks upon them with his beams,
neither as he goes up into heaven, nor as he comes
down from heaven. And the former of them roams
peacefully over the earth and the sea’s broad back
and is kindly to men; but the other has a heart of
iron, and his spirit within him is pitiless as bronze :
whomsoever of men he has once seized he holds
fast: and he is hateful even to the deathless gods.

There, in front, stand the echoing halls of the god
of the lower-world, strong Hades, and of awful
Persephone. A fearful hound guards the house in
front, pitiless, and he has a cruel trick. On those
who go in he fawns with his tail and both his ears,
but suffers them not to go out back again, but keeps
watch and devours whomsoever he catches going out
of the gates of strong Hades and awful Persephone.

And there dwells the goddess loathed by the
deathless gods, terrible Styx, eldest daughter of back-
flowing! Ocean. She lives apart from the gods in
her glorious house vaulted over with great rocks and
propped up to heaven all round with silver pillars.
Rarely does the daughter of Thaumas, swift-footed
Iris, come to her with a message over the sea’s wide
back. But when strife and quarrel arise among the
deathless gods, and when any one of them who live
in the house of Olympus lies, then Zeus sends Iris
to bring in a golden jug the great oath of the gods


1 Oceauus is here regarded as a continuous stream enclosing
the earth and the seas, and so as flowing back upon himself.


135


HESIOD


f denne We / , b] tA
ux pov, OT ex TETPNS KaATAAELBETAaL HALBATOLO
na Nibieg \ /
UwnrHs: ToANOV Sé LTO KOovds Evpuvodeins
“a lanl \ J
é& iepov ToTapoto péet Sua vUKTA pmeNaLVAY
"—0 a , ‘ 5 / o 5 INT Pe ae 5é65 ; P
Keavoto Képas’ dexaTn 6 él polpa dédacTat
b / \ \ a \ SRI, lal ,
EVVER [LEV TEDL YHV TE KAL Evpea VATA Daraoons 790
/ ! ] / |
OLYNS ApPYUpEeNS ELALYWEVOS Els ANA TITTEL,
A \ /> f VA an a
i) O€ wl’ €x TréTpNS Tpopeer méeya Hwa Ocotow.
e/ Q eae 4 b] / ? if
OS KEV THY ETLOPKOV aTrohAELWas ETOMOTGH
My f A A J >] ,
alavarwv, ot Eyovot Kapn vipoevtos OdvpTou,
a /
KELTAL VHUTMOS TETENET MEVOV ELS EVLAUTOV? 795
b) a
ovdé ToT auBpocins Kal véxTapos EpxXeTaL Aocov
A ae
Bpeaatos, AANd TE KEiTAL aVaTrVEVETOS Kal AvauvoosS
aA / nan Wi
OTPWTOLS EV NEYEETOL, KAKOV O€ E KOUA KANUVTTEL.
\ A ’ U
AVTAP EEL VOUTOY TEAETN MEYADV Els EVLAUTOD,
Y
adnros y €&€ adrov SéyeTas YaXeT@TEpOS aEOAOS. 800
b) v4 \ A lA d\ ,
etvaeTes O€ Oe@y aTrapeipeTas alev éovTar,
OE eMar) \ 3) , 1o. bt Sa } a
ovoé ToT €s BouAnY érripiaoyEeTas OVO eETrt OatTas
J 3 Ud. 9
evvea TavTa éTEea OEKATO@ O ETrLploryEeTaL AUTLS
/ 3 b) U4 aA) 4 , “py
eipas és abavatayv, of Odvptria S@pat exovow,. |
n / E.
Totov ap OpKoy €Oevto Oeot XTuyos ADOiTov Vdwp 805 —
b) / NC IOQU } N ,
@yuyltov, TOO inot KatacTUpéXou O14 Yopouv.
Y \ n aA /
"Eva 6€é ys Svodephs cat Taptdpov nepoevtos
/ 3 ¥ an /
TOVTOV T ATPUYETOLO KAL OVPAVOD ATTEPOEVTOS
e , /
efeins TavT@V THYyal Kal TelpaT EacLW
b) /3
apyané evpwevTa, TaTe oTUYyéovat Heol Trep. 810
BY 4 a oe / , / x / 500
EVOA OE MAPMAPEAL TE TTUAAL KAL KANKEOS OVOOS
b) / / / f
aoTeupys, piEnaor Sunveréecotv apnpas,


136


THEOGONY


from far away, the famous cold water which trickles
down from a high and beetling rock. Far under the
wide-pathed earth a branch of Oceanus flows through
the dark night out of the holy stream, and a tenth
part of his water is allotted to her. With nine silver-
swirling streams he winds about the earth and the
sea’s wide back, and then falls into the main!; but
the tenth flows out from a rock, a sore trouble to the
gods. For whoever of the deathless gods that hold
the peaks of snowy Olympus pours a libation of her
water and is forsworn, lies breathless until a full year
is completed, and. never comes near to taste ambrosia
and nectar, but lies spiritless and voiceless on a
strewn bed: and a heavy trance overshadows him.
But when he has spent a long year in his sickness,
another penance and an harder follows after the
first. For nine years he is cut off from the eternal
gods and never joins their councils or their feasts,
nine full years. But in the tenth year he comes again
to join the assemblies of the deathless gods who live
in the house of-Olympus. Such an oath, then, did
the gods appoint the eternal and primaeval water of
Styx to be: and it spouts through a rugged_-place.
And there, all in their order, are the sources and
ends of the dark earth and misty Tartarus and the
unfruitful sea and starry heaven, loathsome and
dank, which even the gods abhor. And there are
shining gates and an immoveable threshold of bronze
having unending roots and it is grown of itself.?, And


1 The conception of Oceanus is here different: he has nine
streams which encircle the earth and the flow out into the
‘‘main ” which appears to be the waste of waters on which,
according to early Greek and Hebrew cosmology, the disk-
like earth floated.

2 2.€. the threshold is of ‘‘native” metal, and not artificial.


137


HESIOD


avtoduys: mpoabev Sé Oedv Extrooberv amrdvTwv
Torives vaiovor, Tépnv Xdeos Copepoio.

avTap épiawapayoLo Avos KAELTOL ETTLKOUPOL 815
SOMATA VALETAOUG LY ér “Oxeavoto JepeO dots,
Kértos 7 oe Pons: Bosd peor ye mev Huv éovTa
yapPpov éov Toince Bapv«rumos ‘Evvoatyavos,

dae 6€ Kupomrodeay orrview, Ouyatépa Hv.


an


fe Avtap émet Tithvas at’ ovpavod &€&éXNacev
| p Yetta Vii 820
brrorarop TEKE raise Tupwéa Dalawerkopn |
Taptdpov ev prdornee Sta Xpuaenv ‘Adpodirny:
ov xetpes peev gaow er t loxut, epywar éxovoat,
Kal robes axa WaT Ol KpaTtepod, Oeov* éx O€ of @pLov
HV EKATOV Kepanal. Odtos, Setvoto OpaKovTos, K S29
yAOoonolW dvogepnoy Nedixpores, ex 86 of Moqaay ot
Oeonecins KEpannow Di Spar TUp apdpog wey a
Taceov & é Kepanreov mbp-Kaieto Sepxopévoto? ~"~ of
poval oe ev Tbona wD ETO. Sew Gs, K Ke Moe
TavToiny Om: teioay aéoparov; ‘GNX TE Mev yap 830
POeyyou? OTE Device OUVLE MEY» ODN OTE o gure. 47>
Tavpov epi Bpixew, LEVOS AT KETOVs. dooay ae AD is,
arroTe © avre NOV TOS SENS dud oy éyovTos,
dddoTE Sab oxvrdcecow éovkora, Oavpar
aKovaat, ed? ons DOK wy
arrore Sav poitery’, , UO é varecb PpEe | ath 835
_ KAU VU. Kev €mAeTo épyov apy avov Hare Keiven,
: wal Kel Kev ¢ 0 Ye Gpytoics Kat aBavaroow dvakev,
eb yn dip a4. VOTE Sa ap ayer Te am
€ yeia,


as
840


G4
+=
cep)
xe)
ey,
R
ot
“On
'
~
as
S.
=
QS
> 3%,
oc
ME
ae
R*
7
~
—
2
a
w
Se
YA
oy
3
.~)
ee
4
Ge
+
PY
o>
mS


TOVTOS r ’Oxeavod Te dees Kat b téprapa yains.
| 138


THEOGONY


beyond, away from all the gods, live the Titans,
beyond gloomy Chaos. But the glorious allies of
loud-crashing Zeus have their dwelling upon Ocean's
foundations, even Cottus and Gyes; but Briareos,
being goodly, the deep-roaring EKarth-Shaker made
his son-in-law, giving him proper? his daughter
to wed.


But when Zeus had driven the Titans from heaven,
huge Earth bare her youngest child Typhoeus of
the love of Tartarus, by the aid of golden Aphrodite.
Strength was with his hands in all that he did and
the feet of the strong god were untiring. From his |
shoulders grew an hundred heads of a snake, a
fearful dragon, with dark, flickering tongues, and
from under the brows of his eyes in his marvellous
heads flashed fire, and fire burned from his heads as
he glared. And tliére were voices in all his dreadful
heads which uttered every kind of sound unspeak-
able ; for at one time they made sounds such that the
gods understood, but at another, the noise of a bull
bellowing aloud in proud ungovernable fury ; and at
another, the sound of a lion, relentless of heart; and
at another, sounds like whelps, wonderful to hear ;
and again, at another, he would hiss, so that the
high mountains re-echoed. And truly a thing past
help would have happened Serthat day, and he
would have come to reign over mortals and immortals,
had not the father of men and gods been quick to
perceive it. But he thundered hard and mightily :
and the earth around resounded terribly and the
wide heaven above, and the sea and Ocean’s streams
and the nether parts of the earth. Great Olympus


1 he)


eta


HESIOD f., .
Poet Te reek Ve Age
aca ee Aiea peyas ee atte ”Orup-
Sih 70S ok
? _bpryperoro dvaxros’ éreorevdxute 88 fe
Kade S ur aupotepav KATEXED l aibte Giro»
povtis Te aTEpoTTAs TE, Tupos 7 amo Toto :
TEN@POU, bXPvFnn.2, 8459
e TPNGT POV AVE LOY TE eepauvod TE e dreyeBovros.>
—étee “Oe YOU mace Kal ovpaves 0€ Odrdacca:
~Gutet 3 ap’ auch AkTAs Rae | T aut TE aH
ee oERA NginB availa dos
pina vn Bavaro, ¢ évoots se" 2 eee Spesper:
et “npeetd ‘Along, € evepowat KaTapOrmevorrty d avagawv, 850
Tithves 0 UMOTAPT APLOL, Kpovov apis éovTes, 2»
ag Béorou KeddSovo Kal avs SyvorHtos.: POO,
~ Leds 5 émel Ovv idee éov pévos, etAeTo 7
OTAG, |. ay!
Boooray TE oTEpoTt ay TE Kal aiGadoevTa KEpavvon,
THEE a am OvnrvpTroL0 émrdd pevos appt 6€ maaas 855
\s “\empece Jeanecias Keparas deryoto TEA@pOU. é
Labrey p D eTrEL ¢ 67) MLV, oapacey mie How ipaooa as;
HplTe yulwets, orevaxote 66. aan ENR: |
prog dé Kepavvadeva S imécovTo: “oto LOI
“oUpeos év Bao ona, audvns 3 “Traitra o€aons, ty BO
“a dnyevTos.. TON?) 6é TEMOpN KaLETO ata, BI ve
aT uh Deomectn Kal ETHKETO KagalrEpos Z eae 4,
TEXYN UT ako €V eUTPNTOLS ee ed Ot oe
Oarpoets, ne olonpos, 6 Tep kparep@raros é EoTLY,
oUpeEos eV Pageye dapalomevos mupl Knew 865


OR Ley > Z e J nee
‘ p wt
1K: dve, MSS. Wve
2 Schol.: tpéoce, MSS.
3 MSS. and schol.: “A:tyns, Tzetzes.


age


140


ad ie eee 5 i
<r oa eget


THEOGONY


reeled beneath the divine feet of the king as he arose
and earth groaned thereat. And through the two
of them heat took hold on the dark-blue sea, through
the thunder and lightning, and through the fire from
the monster, and the scorching winds and blazing
thunderbolt. Ihe whole earth seethed, and sky
and sea: and~the long waves raged along the
beaches round and Shou. at the rush of the death-


less gods: and there arose an endless shaking.


Hades trembled where he rules over the dead
below, and the Titans under Tartarus who live
with Cronos, because of the unending clamour and
the fearful strife. So when Zeus had raised up his
might and seized his arms, thunder and lightning
and lurid thunderbolt, he leaped from Olympus
and struck him, and burned all the marvellous heads
of the monster about him. But when Zeus had con-
quered him and lashed him with strokes, Typhoeus was
hurled down, a maimed wreck, so that the huge earth
groaned. And flame shot forth from the thunder-
stricken lord in the dim rugged glens of the mount,!
when he was smitten. A great part of huge earth was
scorched by the terrible vapour and melted as tin
melts when heated by men’s art in channelled?
crucibles; or as iron, which is hardest of all things,
is sottened by glowing fire in mountain glens and

1 According to Homer Typhoeus was overwhelmed by Zeus
amongst the Arimi in Cilicia. Pindar represents him as
buried under Aetna, and Tzetzes read Aetna in this passage.


2 The epithet (which means literally well-bored) seems to
refer to the spout of the crucible.


I4I


HESIOD ae
: ’ vORy ey oer: , ? lyf a x
ThKeTaL ev YOovi Oty mea Hang ray mancune H


¢ ra LAK D LOM ~~ 9, we, ;
Os Apa THKETO yala TEAAL TUPOS aib ojuevoro. nS


Cn id AM 349 LT ECR VE So’ / a ‘3 Lane AA?
pire O€ uly Oupa@caKxayor €$ Taprapov evpuv. |


"Ex__dé —Lupeéos €or aveuwov [evos. bry pov


Mee wre QEVT OD, e ae a ge |
“| voodu Notov.Bopéw te kal apyértew GB 870
-ol.ye pev éx Oeddivyeven, Ovn tots ey Overap< >) 4
ot 6 dAdo pawadpas érruTvetovet Oddacoav’
at 8 To wimtovoas és Hepoerdéa OVTOV, » ) ¥
“aha péya Ovytotc., Kaxh Ovlovow addrry
ddroTte © dANaL derot SlaTKLOVaCL TE VHAS 875.
vautTas Te dOclpovat’ KaKov © ov yiryveTat GXK1) |
avopacty, ob KelvNoL TVVEVTWOVTAL KATA TOV TOP; * > aa
ab & ad Kal Kata yatav amelptTov, av0epoer cay |
Coy épard pbeipovar Kawauvyeveoy avOpearav, 5
TLUwTAELTAL KOVLOS. TE KAL apyanéov KONOTUPTOV. 880
Autap émei pa Trovov waxapes Deol é&erérXcooay,
Tetnverce O€. tidy xpivavro, Bind irs Sere
On pa TOT wTpUvoOY Bacirevéuev nde dagger i
Tains dpadpuootvvncww’ Ordprvov eppvora Tay
Wavatwv: 5 &é tolow éas SvedSaccaTo Tips. 885 |


Levs d€ Gedy Bacireds mpetTnv aroxov OéTo
Mate

TrEelo Ta Oewy eidutay toe Ovntav avOpaTav.
GNN Ore OH dp’ Euerre Oeav yAaveo@Tiv AOnvny

/ [Mie 4 ii / > f
TéEec0ar, TOT Evetta SoAw hpevas eEaTTaTHOAaS

¢ Yes t e\ » / \
aAipmvrLoLol NOYoLaLY Env éoKaTOETO VNHOUY 890
Dains dpadmootyyat kal Ovpavod agtepoertos.


1 Fick : 54 fa, DGHI; 54 6’, EF: 3f 6’ #ueddre, KL.
142


THEOGONY


melts in the divine earth through the strength of
Hephaestus.! Even so, then, the earth melted in
the glow of the blazing fire. And in the bitterness
of his anger Zeus cast him into wide Tartarus.

And. Typhoeus come boisterous winds which
blow amply, except Notus and Boreas and clear
Zephyr. These are a god-sent kind, and a great
blessing to men; + but the others blow fitfully upon the
sea. Some rush upon the misty sea and work great
havoc among men with their evil, raging blasts; for
varying with the season they blow, scattering ships
and destroying sailors. And men who meet these
upon the sea have no help against the mischief.
_ Oth again over the boundless, flowering earth
“spoil the fair fields of men who dwell below, filling
them with dust and cruel uproar.

But when the blessed gods had finished their toil,

nd settted by force their struggle for honours with
the Titans, they pressed far-seeing Olympian Zeus
to reign and to rule over them, by Earth’s prompting.
So he divided their dignities amongst them.


Now Zeus, king of the gods, made; Metis his wife
first, and she was wisest among gods and mortal men.
But when she was about to bring forth the goddess
bright-eyed Athene; Zeus craftily deceived her with
cunning words and put her in his own belly, as Earth
and starry Heaven advised. For they advised him

1 The fire god. There is no reference to volcanic action:


iron was smelted on Mount Ida; cp. Hpigrams of Homer,
ix. 2-4.


143


HESIOD


TOS yap OL dpacdryp, | iva pa) Bacidyiba TLL
GrXOS EXOl Atos avtTt Oedv averyeveT aon.

EK yap THS etpua,pro Tepippova Téxva yevedOat:
TpoOTHy peep KovpnV “yravewm oa T ptroyéverav 895 |
ig ov  €XouTay marpl Lévos Kal émippova Bourdny.
avr ap émevT apa Tratoa Peay Baowdhja Kab avopav
Tjpehev TéEcaOar, UTEpBvov 7 nTOp eX OvT a: |
aN’ dpa. peo Levs mpooben € énv éoxat Gero YNOUD,


@s 67 of dpdaoaito Ged ayabov Te KaKov Te. 900 |
Aevtepov nydayeto Autrapny Oépw, %) Téxev


“Opas,
Ktvouinv te Aixny te kal Kipnynv teOarviar,
at épy @pevovct KaTaOvnTotat Bpototat,
Moipas 0’, 95 wAeta THY Toa Tope pntiera Zevs,
Kro)e te Aayeciv te cat “Atpotov, aite o.-
dovat 905
Ovntots avOpamoray ¢ ex ely ayabov te KAKOV TE.
Tpets S€ of Etpuvoun Xapitas téKe Kaddo-
TApHOUs,
‘OKeavod Koupn, TONUNPATOV eidos € éxovea, |
“AyAainy TE Kal Evgpoovyny Oarinv 7 épatewny
TOV KAL ATO Prepapor ¢ Epos eiBero SepKomevdmy 910
Avorpens” Kanrov 0€ 0 vm oppvor SepKlo@vrTat.
Avrap o O Anpntpos TorupopBns € és Neos NAOev,
y TEKE Iepoepovny NevK@AEVOY, nv “Avdevers
HpTace 1s mapa Unt pos* edwne dé pntieta Leds.
Monpoovrns Oo efavres € épdooaTo KANALKO{LOLO, 915
cE is ot Motdcat XpvodparvKes éfeyevovTo
évvéa, THOW adov Cariar Kal Téprus aowdijs.
Ante, S ‘AmOA@va Kal "Aptepey & Lox éarpar,
ipepoevTa ‘yovov imepl TavToV Ovpaviover,
yelvat ap airyedxovo Avos hiroTnTe puyetoa. 920


144


THEOGONY


so, to the end that no other should hold royal sway
over the eternal gods in place of Zeus ; for very wise
children were destined to be born of her, first the
maiden bright-eyed Tritogeneia, equal to her father
in strength and in wise understanding; but after-
wards she was to bear a son of overbearing spirit,
king of gods and men./ But Zeus put her into his
own belly first, that the goddess might devise for
him both good and evil. | 3 |

Next he married bright Themis who bare the
Horae (Hours), and Eunomia (Order), Diké (Justice),
and blooming Eirene (Peace), who mind the works
of mortal men, and the Moerae (Fates) to whom wise
Zeus gave the greatest honour, Clotho, and Lachesis,
and Atropos who give mortal men evil and good to
have. j

And Eurynome, the daughter of Ocean, beautiful
in form, bare him three fair-cheeked Charites
(Graces), Aglaea, and Euphrosyne, and _ lovely
_ Thaleia, from whose eyes as they glanced flowed love
that unnerves the limbs: and beautiful-is their glance
beneath their brows. |

Also he came to the bed of all-nourishing
Demeter, and she bare white-armed Persephone
whom Aidoneus carried off from her mother; but
wise Zeus gave her to him. |

And again, he loved Mnemosyne with the
beautiful hair: and of her the nine gold-crowned
Muses were born who delight in feasts and the
pleasures of song. :

And Leto was joined in love with Zeus who
holds the aegis, and bare Apollo and Artemis
delighting in arrows, children lovely above all the
sons of Heaven.


145


HESIOD


Aocbotrarny & “Hpny Oarepny momaat aKot-
TW:
n O° HBny xat”Apna cai EideiOuay étixte
puxOecta’ év dirornte Deady BacirH Kai avdpov.
Avtos & éx ceharss yAavcwmda Tprtoyévecav
Sewny eypex vooupLov ayéoTparov aT pUT@OUAY 925
vinta 7 KENAOOL TE AOOV TOE jt TE payor Té,
4 Hn 6 "Hparorov KhuTov ov prrorne puryetoa
yetvaro, Kal apmevnoe Kal pea e @ Tapaxotrn,
éx TavTov TEXVIOL KeKao MEVOY Odpavidven.
= <"Hp dé Capevnoe Kal PLT ¢ o TMapaKoirn.” 929°
éx TauTns © Eptdos 7 i) pep TEKE patidipov VLOV |
‘ H¢asorov, prroTnTos aTep” Avos airyvoxoro,
ek TAVT OY TaAhapwnot KEKAT WEVOY Ovpaviover
auTap by (Oxteavod cat TnOvos nuxopoto
xoupn vord “Hpns trapedéEato card Trapne,

x ” * x
eCamapov Me Kaimep Tohvonve éovoay.
cumpdpypas 0 6 ye XEpoy énv éyxat Gero yndvy
deioas, pea TéEN KPATEP@TEPOV aXXo KEpavVon.
ToUvEKd po Kpovidns bypicuyos aldépe vaiwy
Ka T LEV eEanivns: i Oo auriKa Tlavrad’ >A@nvnv
KUTaTO™ THY [eV ETLETE TaTip avdpav te Oeay Te
Tap Kopupny Tpitavos € eT * OXOnow TOTA|LOLO.
Mijris S avre Znvos t v0 om dry XvOUS Aerabvia
Hato, AOnvains eATNp, TEKTALVA Statov
TrEloTa Gedy Te Lovia coral T avOpor ov,
évOa Oecd trapédexto G0ev ? Taddmats TEepl TaVYT@DV


1 Restored by Peppmiiller. The nineteen following lines
from another recension of lines 889-900, 924-9 are quoted
by, Chrysippus (in Galen).

2. Rzach : TEXYNOW tvev, MSS.
3 Hermann : mapéAexro O¢uis, MSS.


146


THEOGONY


Lastly, he made Hera his blooming wife: and she
was joined in love with the king of gods and men,
and brought forth Hebe and Ares and Hileithyia.

But Zeus himself gave birth from his own head to
bright-eyed Tritogeneia,! the awful, the strife-stirring,
the host-leader, the unwearying, the queen, who
delights in tumults and wars and battles. But Hera
without union with Zeus—for she was very angry and
quarrelled with her mate—bare famous Hephaestus,
who is skilled in crafts more than all the sons of
Heaven.

But Hera was very angry and quarrelled with her
mate. And because of this strife she bare without
union with Zeus who holds the aegis a glorious son,
Hephaestus, who excelled all the sons of Heaven
in crafts. But Zeus lay with the fair-cheeked
daughter of Ocean and Tethys apart from Hera...
deceiving Metis (Thought) although she was full wise.
But he seized her with his hands and put her in his
belly, for fear that she might bring forth something
stronger than his thunderbolt: therefore did Zeus,
who sits on high and dwells in the aether, swallow
her down suddenly. But she straightway conceived
Pallas Athene: and the father of men and gods gave
her birth by way of his head on the banks of the
river Trito. And she remained hidden beneath the
inward parts of Zeus, even Metis, Athena’s mother,
worker of righteousness, who was wiser than gods and
mortal men. There the goddess (Athena) received
that whereby she excelled in strength all the death-

1 7.e. Athena, who was born ‘‘on the banks of the river
Trito” (cp. 1. 9291),

2 sc. the aegis. Line 9298 is probably spurious, since it
pas ag with 9294 and contains a suspicious reference to

ens.


147
pe 2


- HESIOD


€ > +
aBavatorv éxéxac? of ‘Odvprea dopaT Exovow,
2) LiF / / + 3 / :
[aiyida Tromoaca hoBéotpatov evtos “AOnvns:|

\ una e / / BLE BS Clsy ont ©
OUV TH EVYELVATO [LLY TIOKEMNLA TEVXE EYOVTAV.> 929°)


"Ex © ’Audutpityns Kal épixtimov ’Kvvocuyaiou 930)
Tpitav evpuBins yévero péyas, bate Paracans |
TuOmev Evo Tapa unTpl dirty Kal TaTpl avaxte
vaierypvoca 60, dSeuvos Beds. avTap” Apne
pwotopo Kvépeva PoBov cat Aectwov étixTe
dewvovs, ott avdopav | TrUKIVES Koveoua t pba-

Aayyas 935
éy TONE MLO KpuoevTt ovv "Apne mronimsp Oe, \
‘Appovinv 0’, nv Kdéduos tirépOupos Oér’ axovtw.

Znvi & ap’ “Athavris Main réxe xvdtpmov

“Epphp,

KYHPUK aavarov, t iepov NEVOS eloavaBaoa, e

Kaduein o apa ot Sewérn Téxe haldiuov viov 940
px eto’ év dirornte, Avovucov trodvynGéa, 9
abavatov Ovnty vuv 0 audhortepot Oeoi cow.

“AAA oO dip’ érixte Binv Hpaxhyetny
py Oeto’ ev prrornte Atos VEPEN'YEPET AO. | |

“Aghatny S* “Hgaioros, aryAKNUTOS duuyrrfers, 945 |
oTAOTaTHVY Napitov Jarepny TOLNTAT AKOLTLY. |

Xpvaokopuns 6¢ Avovuacos EavOnv ’Apiadvyp,
_Kovpnv Mivwos, Carepnv moujoat aKovTw.

TH O€ ot ABavaTov Kal aynpw OnKe Kpovien.

“HAny S "ArKkunvns Kxardodvpov adKLos

vios; 950
is “Hpaxdhos, Tehéoas otTovoevtas aéOXovs,
matoa Aros peydroro Kal” Hpns xpucomedinou,
atootnv Oér’ axoutiy év OvAVUT}O VidddErTL,


148


THEOGONY


less ones who dwell in Olympus, she who made the
host-scaring weapon of Athena. And with it (Zeus)
gave her birth, arrayed in arms of war.


‘And of Amphitrite and the loud-roaring Earth-
Shaker was born great, wide-ruling Triton, and he
owns the depths of the sea, living with his dear
mother and the lord his father in their golden house,
an awful god.

Also Cytherea bare to Ares the shield-piercer
Panic and Fear, terrible gods who drive in disorder
the close ranks of men in numbing war, with the
help of Ares, sacker of towns; and Harmonia whom
high-spirited Cadmus made his wife.

And Maia, the daughter of Atlas, bare to Zeus
glorious Hermes, the herald of the deathless gods,
for she went up into his holy bed.

And Semele, daughter of Cadmus was joined with
him in love and bare him a splendid son, joyous
_ Dionysus,—a mortal woman an immortal son. And
now they both are gods.

And Alemena was joined in love with Zeus who
drives the clouds and bare mighty Heracles.

And Hephaestus, the famous Lame One, made
Aglaea, youngest of the Graces, his buxom wife.

And golden-haired Dionysus made brown-haired °
Ariadne, the daughter of Minos, his buxom wife:
and the son of Cronos made her deathless and
unageing for him. |

And mighty Heracles, the alien? son of neat-
ankled Alemena, when he had finished his grievous
toils, made Hebe the child of great Zeus and gold-
shod Hera his shy wife in snowy Olympus. Happy
he! For he has finished his great work and lives


149


HESIOD


OrBt0s, Os péeya épyor év ABavaTroow aviccas
VALEL ATH WAVTOS Kai AYHPAOS HuaTa TaYTa. 955)
"Hertw & axdpavte téxev kdvTOS ‘Oncavivn
Ileponis Kipxny te cat Atnrny Bacidja.
Ainrns 8 vios paeciuBportou ’Herioro
Koupny ‘OKeavoto TENHEVTOS ToTapoto
vie Geav BovrAnow ‘Idviav Kadhemapnov. 7 960°
4 6€ ot Mydecav evadupov év prrornte :
era vToéunbetaoa Sua ypucenv PRAETT '
;


vot T HTELpOL TE Kal ene évooO. movTos.
vov O€ Jedwy hidrov aeioare, HOvEeTELAL 965
Mota "Oduprriades, Kobpaw Atos airytoxoto,
doaat On Ounroice Tap avdpaow evvnetaar
abdavatat ‘yelvavTo Geots emeiena TEKVA.
Anyunrnp joey T1dobrov é éyeivaro, dita Oedwr,
‘Tactov’ Hpoe puryeto” eparh prdornte 970
vEer@ eve TpLTON, Kpyrns é év move Onue, -|
écOnrov, ds ela’ emt yhv Te Kal evpea vaTAa Daracons
TavTn T@ O€ TUYOVTL Kal OU K és YeElpas ixnTat,
Tov © advevoy €Onke, ToNvY 6€ of W@Tacev OAPoP.
Kddum S “Appovin, Ouvyarnp xpuaéns “Adpo-
iTS, 975
"lye Kat Lemedqu Kat “Ayauny Kadhem dpyov
Avrovony 0’, iv yihpev “Aptotaios Babuxairns,
yelvato Kat Ton vSopov évatepave evt OnBy.
Kovpy & ’“Oxeavov, Xpvodope KaptepoO ve
pry eta” év prdornre TOY pUTOU ‘Ag podirns, 980
Karacpon TEKE Tatoa Spore KapTic Tov aTaYTOY,
Pnpvovéa, Tov KTelve Bin ‘Hpaxrnein
Body ever’ eihirrodwv appippvT@ eiv “Epudetn.
150


THEOGONY


amongst the undying gods, untroubled and unageing
all his days. yy

And Perseis, the daughter of Ocean, bare to
unwearying Helios Circe and Aeétes the king. And
Aeétes, the son of Helios who shows light to men,
took to wife fair-cheeked Idyia, daughter of Ocean
the perfect stream, by the will of the gods: and she
was subject to him in love through golden Aphrodite
and bare him neat-ankled Medea.


And now farewell, you dwellers on Olympus and
you islands and continents and thou briny sea within.
Now sing the company of goddesses, sweet-voiced
Muses of Olympus, daughter of Zeus who holds the
aegis,—even those deathless ones who lay with mortal
men and bare children like unto gods.

Demeter, bright goddess, was joined in sweet
love with the hero Iasion in a thrice-ploughed fallow
in the rich land of Crete, and bare Plutus, a kindly
god who goes everywhere over land and the sea’s
wide back, and him who finds him and into whose
hands he comes he makes rich, bestowing great
wealth upon him.

And Harmonia, the daughter of golden Aphrodite,
bare to Cadmus Ino and Semele and fair-cheeked
Agave and Autonoé whom long haired Aristaeus
wedded, and Polydorus also in rich-crowned Thebe.

And the daughter of Ocean, Callirrhoé was joined
in the love of rich Aphrodite with stout hearted
Chrysaor and bare a son who was the strongest of all
men, Geryones, whom mighty Heracles killed in sea-
girt Erythea for the sake of his shambling oxen:


151


HESIOD


Ti0ave & "Has réxe Méwvova yadKoxopvaTnp,
Ai@toray Bacirja, cal Hyabiwva advakta. 985
avtap Ural Kedar dhiticato haidipov vio,
iPOtuov PaéPovta, Oeois émrveixeXov avdpa.

Tov pa véov Tépev avOos exovT éptxudéos HANS

Tats’ aTara ppovéovra pirouperoys Appooity

Opt avapepapévn, rai usv Caéors evi vyots 990
pnoTroXov vUyLov ToLnTaTo, Saipova Otov.

Kovpnv & Aintao dvotpedéos Bactdjos
Aicovidns Bovrjot Oe@v ateuyeveTawy
Aye map Aintew, Teréoas aTovdevtas aéeOXous,
TOUS TWoAXOUS é7réTEAAE péyas BaciArevs vUTEp-

VP, 995

vBpiatns TleAins Kal aracbanos, oBptwoepyos.
TOUS TENETAS Tawh«ov AdtKETO, TOAAA poynaas,
@Kelns er v0S ayov EUKOTLOA Koupny
Aigovidns, Kab pL Oarepny TOLNTAT GcOUT LY.
Kat p ye Ounbeto’ vm ‘Ingou, Tolpevs NAW, 1000
Mydeov tTéxe maida, TOV oupeow étpede Xeipav
Porupions: peyarou dé Acos voos efeTenelTo.

Av’tap Nypios Kovpat, dAL0v0 rYyépov'Tos,
7) TOL pev Daxov Vapady TeKE dia Oedwv
Ataxkov év dinornte OLa xpuceny ‘Ad podirny, 1005
TInree dé dunbeica Oca O€tis dpyupotrefa
yelvaT AXA a pnéjvopa Oupohéovra.

Aivetay & ap ETL TED evo TEPavos Ku6épeva
“Ayxion ft Hp@t peryeto eparh prroTnte

"ldns év Kopupyar TONUTTUXOV vAnéEcans. 1010

Ke pen 0’, “Hedtov Ouyarnp ‘Trreptovioao,

yetvar’ Wevcenes Tahacippovos év didoTnte
"Aypiov ndoé Aativov apvpova Te KpaTEpov Te
152


THEOGONY


_ And Eos bare to Tithonus brazen-crested Memnon,


| _ king of the Ethiopians, and the Lord Emathion.


And to Cephalus she bare a splendid son, strong
Phaéthon, a man like the gods, whom, when he was
a young boy in the tender flower of glorious youth
with childish thoughts, laughter-loving Aphrodite
seized. and caught up and made a keeper of her
shrine by night, a divine spirit.

And the son of Aeson by-the will of the gods led
away from Aeétes the daughter of Aeétes the
heaven-nurtured king, when he had finished the
many grievous labours which the great king, over-
bearing Pelias, that outrageous and presumptuous doer
of violence, put upon him. But when the son of
Aeson had finished them, he came to Jolecus after
long toil bringing the coy-eyed girl with him on his
swift ship, and made her his buxom wife. And she
was subject to lason, shepherd of the people, and
bare a son Medeus whom Cheiron the son of Philyra
brought up in the mountains. And the will of great
Zeus was fulfilled.

But of the daughters of Nereus, the Old man of the
Sea/ Psamathe the fair goddess, was loved by Aeacus
through golden Aphrodite and bare Phocus./, And
the silver-shod goddess Thetis was subject to Peleus
and brought forth lion-hearted Achilles, the destroyer
of men.

And Cytherea with the beautiful crown was
joined in sweet love with the hero Anchises and bare
Aeneas on the peaks of Ida with its many wooded
glens.

And Circe the daughter of Helius, Hyperion’s son,
loved steadfast Odysseus and bare Agrius and Latinus
who was faultless and strong: also she brought forth


; 153


HESIOD


[Tnr€yovoy & dp étixte b1a ypvocénv “Adposi-
Thy.)
of 6) Tot pada THE MUXO VHTOV lepawv 1015
Tacw Tuponvotow ayakrelTotow dvacoov.
Navaidoov 8 “Odvajt Kartuwo dia Oedov
ryelvaTo Navoivoov TE puaryetor épaThn piXOTHTL.
Avra pey Ovntotat Tap avopaow evvnO eta at
abdvatas yeivavto Oeois émicixeda TEKVA. 1020 9


Nov 6€ yvvatkav pidov Qeloare, noverrerae
Movcas ‘Odupridoes, xovpat Avos airyLoxoco.


* * * *


KATAAOTOI [TTNAIKON. HOTAI


le


Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius Arg. ii. 1086.
OTL Tpounlecs Kab TI povoins” vios Acuxaniov
‘Haiodos év TPOT@ Katahoy pnot, Kai ote Aev-
Kartovos cat Tvppas “EXXgv.


yh


Toannes Lydus,? de Mens. i. 13. Aartivovs peév

\ b) / \ \ \ ¢ /
TOUS emiyvwplacovTas, I‘patxous dé TOUS ehAnve-
Covras éxaouv amo Aativov ... Kal T'paixov TOV
adeAdhav, os dnow Hatodos év Katandoyors:

1 Omitted by D, Eustathius, and Laurentian Scholiast on


Apollonius Rhodius iii. 200. 2 Sittl: Mavdépas, scholiast.
3 An antiquarian writer of Byzantium, c. 490-570 A.D.


154


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


Telegonus by the will of golden Aphrodite. And


they ruled over the famous Tyrsenians, very far off
in a recess of the holy islands.

And the bright goddess Calypso was joined to
Odysseus in sweet love, and bare him Nausithoiis and
Nausinoiis.

These are the immortal goddesses who lay with .
mortal men and bare them children like unte gods.


But now, sweet-voiced Muses of Olympus, daughters
of Zeus who holds the aegis, sing of the company of
women.


THE CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND
KOIAE !


b:


That Deucalion was the son of Prometheus and
Pronoea, Hesiod states in the first Catalogue, as also
that Hellen was the son of Deucalion and Pyrrha.


2.


They came to call those who followed local
manners Latins, but those who followed Hellenic
customs Greeks, after the brothers Latinus and
Graecus ; as Hesiod says:


1 A catalogue of heroines each of whom was introduced
with the words 4% of%y, ‘*‘ Or like her.”


455


HESIOD


Kkovupn ©. év peyapous wv ayavov Aevaariovos
Tavowpn Au Tat pl, Gedy ONMaVTOPL TaVT Ov,
py Peta’ év duroTnTe TEKEV Vette) vaemeerien


2.
Constantinus Porphyrogenitus, * de Them. 2 p. 48 B.
Makedovia 7 Xopa (avopacOn) a0 Maxedovos
TOU Atos Kat Ovias ths Aeveariwvos, ws dnow


“Hoiodos-
i & wmoxvoapevn Avi yetvato TEPTILKEPAUY@


vie ove Maryvntra Maxnoova 0 immLoxXapeny,
ot wept Uvepiny cat "Odvprov dopat évacov.


” x + x
Madyvns 8 atv Aixtuv te cat avtiOeov IWorv-
SexTEA.
4,


Plutarch, Mor. p. 747; Schol. on Pindar Pyth.
iv. 263.

“EKXAAnvos 0 éyévovTto pidomTor pou Baowdijos

A@pos Te 0000s tg Kat AlonXos immoydpuns.

Aionrioat 6 -éyévorto Oemearomorou Bacudhes

Kpndevs 78 “APapas cat Licvdos aiodountis

Yarpovevs T adikos Kat VTépOvmos Lepunpns.


5.


Scholiast on Apollonius fihodwus, Arg. iv. 266. ot
a7 0 Aeveadiovos TO ‘yéVvOsS EXOVTES éBacidevov
Mecoadias, ws pnow ‘Exatatios Kat ‘Hotodos.


6.
Idem, i. 482. "AXewiddas .. . . Hatodos 66’ AXo-
‘éos Kal “Idtpedeias Kat’ érixrnow, Tats dé ady-
156


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOJAE


*< And in the palace Pandora the daughter of noble
Deucalion was joined in love with father Zeus, leader
of all the gods, and bare Graecus, staunch in battle.”


3.

The district Macedonia took its name_ from
Macedon the son of Zeus and Thyia, Deucalion s
daughter, as Hesiod says :

«¢ And she conceived and bare to Zeus who delights
in the thunderbolt two sons, Magnes and Macedon,
rejoicing in horses, who dwell round about Pieria
and Olympus. ... And Magnes again (begot) Dictys
and godlike Polydectes.


4,


“ And from Hellen the war-loving king sprang
Dorus and Xuthus and Aeolus delighting in horses.
And the sons of Aeolus, kings dealing justice, were
Cretheus, and Athamas, and clever Sisyphus, and
wicked Salmoneus and overbold Perieres.”


D.


Those who were descended from Deucalion used
to rule over Thessaly as Hecataeus and Hesiod say.


6.


Aloiadae. Hesiod said they were sons of Aloéus,
—called so after him,—and of Iphimedea, but in


1 Constantine VII. ‘‘ Born in the Porphyry Chamber,”’
905-959 a.p.


T57


HESIOD


Oetats Hlocevda@vos Kat “Idipedeias bn, cal “AXov
Todw AitwXLas UO TOU TaTpos avToY éxTiaOaL.


"
Berlin Papyri 7497 and Oxyrhynchus Papyri, 421.1
[Evpuvopn Nicou Ouyatnp Iav]|6rovidao,
[tv Tacav TEXYNY 616 |afaro Tarras “AOnvn,
[ ujdea iSpoobyny T emt: 08 Je” yap ica Oeotct. 5
[Oectrecin & oom Tapa et|uatos apyupeoio
[dpvuto KUVULeUNS” Brrhapor| 0 amo el00S ANTO.
[tTHs O ap IXadvd«os ‘AOnvat Ins TELpHTATO Bovvais,
Bods éracals- GXXr od tt Atos voor airyLoxoto
éyveo: o pl ev Sopors Sl |nwevos mrOe yuvaira 10
BovrAn AOlnvains: o 8 dva€k] vepernyeperar Zev[s
adavatov [avéveve k|apynate untoT omat|pous
ésoec0ar Tl aidas ...|yTov Ytovdidao.
» 6€ Iloce| woawvos a ayKoWNnoL piyetoa
Pravcou év* [otk érextev| auvpova Berr| epodor-
THY 15
eEoxov avOl porta . Jerne ear am etpova m|ovrov.
TO 0€ Kal H[AdoKoVTL Ta|tHnp Tope IIHyaco| py, os
én
@KUTATOV [wrepuyerou pepo x€] pv érrre|T ATELENS
mavTn avl a XGove . . . mel HUT a|nrat iar[re
vv TO TU| p TVELoVTAY EX@V Karémepve Xipecpay, 20
yhe 88 maida hirnv peyarnropos loBdtao
aidotov Baal ujos
Koipavos a...
Tél KE .
1 Berlin Papyri, 7497 (left-hand fragment) and Oxzy-


rhynchus Papyri, 421 (right-hand fragment). For the
restoration see Class. Quart. wilt 207- 8.
2 oidje : Jre, Ox. Pap. 3 draltpous, drag|om, Ox. Pap.
* TAavew ev (not er), Berl. Pap.


158


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


reality, sons of Poseidon and Iphimedea, and that
Alus a city of Aetolia was founded by their father.


ie

«_.. Eurynome the daughter of Nisus, Pandion’s
son, to whom Pallas Athena taught all her art, both
wit and wisdom too; for she was as wise as the
gods. A marvellous scent rose from her silvern
raiment as she moved, and beauty was wafted from
her eyes. Her, then, Glaucus sought to win by
Athena’s advising, and he drove oxen! for her. But
he knew not at all the intent of Zeus who holds the
aegis. So Glaucus came seeking her to wife with
gifts; but cloud-driving Zeus, king of the deathless
gods, bent his head in oath that the .. . son of Sisy-
phus should never have children born of one father.?
So she lay in the arms of Poseidon and bare in the
house of Glaucus blameless Bellerophon, surpassing
all men in... over the boundless sea. And when
he began to roam, his father gave him Pegasus who
would bear him most swiftly on his wings, and flew
unwearying everywhere over the earth, for like the
gales he would course along. With him Bellerophon
caught and slew the fire-breathing Chimera. And
he wedded the dear child of the great-hearted
Iobates, the worshipful king ... lord (of) ... and
she Dare *:’.


1 As the price to be given to her father for her: so in
Iivadsxviii. 593 maidens are called ‘‘ earners of oxen.” Possibly
Glaucus, like Aias (fr. 68, ll. 55 ff.), raided (Bots éadoas) the
cattle of others.

2 4.e. Glaucus should father the children of others. The
curse of Aphrodite on the daughters of Tyndareus (fr. 67)
may be compared.


rao


HESIOD


8.


Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius Arg. iv. 57. ‘Tov
dé “Evdupiwva “Hoiodos pév “AeOdtov tod Atos
cat Karvens, mapa Aros eikndhota To S@pov


€ 3 n , / /
iy 0 avt@ Gavatou Tapins OTE perros OdEo Oat.


: iS
Scholiast Ven. on Homer, Il. xi. 750. “Axtoptave
Mondiove. ... Hatodos "Axtopos Kat érikdnow


cat Morgxdévns abtovs yeyeveadoynkev, youm dé
Ilocesd@vos. :
Porphyrwus, Quaest. Hom. ad Tied. pert., 265.
‘Apiorapyos dé dedupous aKover op datth? olou 70 av
Kal ot Atocxopot, GNA TOUS dives, Ov@ € exovras
c@pata, “Howodm pdptupe xXp@pevos, Kal Tovds
TULTEDPVKOTAS GNANNOLS. :


10.


Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodiws, Arg. i. 156.
‘Hoiosos 6é peta BAnGevra els TWA TOV ouv70 wy
Lopp ov émixaler Ohya TO omparg Tob fuyovd Tav
“Hpaknreous ¢ intov, Rovrspuevov ets paxny Kara
oTHVAL TO per, Tov 6€“Hpakdéa Kxaiptws avTov


Katatokeboat THs A@nvas trobeEdons. dnat dé


oUTMS*

TlepexXvpevov T wyepwXov
odBtov, @ TOpeE o@pa lloceddwy évootx Pav
TAYTOL “ddAoTE pev yap év opvidecot pdverkev
aieTOS, AAANOTE O AUTE TENS GIERTs Gada (0é-

cba,
poppuné, adore & avte peioaboy ayhaa pura,
adroTe & aivos ddus Kal apeiduyos. eye O€ dOpa


160


—————— s-


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE
8.


Hesiod says that Endymion was the son of
Aethlius the son of Zeus and Calyce, and received
the gift from Zeus: “(To be) keeper of death for his
own self when he was ready to die.”


o:


The two sons of Actor and Molione. ... Hesiod
has given their descent by calling them after Actor
and Molione; but their father was Poseidon.

But Aristarchus is informed that they were twins,
not... such as were the Dioscuri, but, on Hesiod’s
testimony, double in form and with two bodies and
joined to one another.


10,


But Hesiod says that he changed himself in one
of his wonted shapes and perched on the yoke-boss
of Heracles’ horses, meaning to fight with the hero ;
but that Heracles, secretly instructed by Athena,
wounded him mortally with an arrow. And he says
as follows :


«, . . and lordly Periclymenus. Happy he! For
earth-shaking Poseidon gave him all manner of
gifts. At one time he would appear among birds,
an eagle; and again at another he would be an ant,
a marvel to see; and again at another time a dread
relentless snake. And he possessed all manner of


161
M


“HESIOD


TAVTOL , OUK OVOMAGTTA, TA MLV KAL ETrELTA OOAWOE
Bovrn ’A@nvains.
it,
Stephanus of Byzantium, s.v. Tepnvia.
xtetve 6€ NyAhos TaXacidpovos viéas écOdovs
évdexa, dwbéxaTos O€ Tepnvios immota Néotwp
Ecivos éwy érvynoe Tap’ immoddmovot Vepnvois.
x x x ”
Néorap otos ddvéev év avOenoevts Vepnve.
12:
Lustathius, Hom. VEOG.30:
T NAELAX § ap eT UKTED évfwvos Iloxvedorn,
Néoropos OTANOTATNH KOUPY NyAnuddao,
Ilepoétrokw puyOeica dia ypvoénv “Adpoditny.


13.


Scholiast on Homer, Od. xii. 69. Tup® 1) Lanr-
Havens éexouoa Ovo poe éK TLocesdévos, Nnréa
TE Kal Ilediav, Eryn we Kpnéa, Kat loxer Tatoas
é& avtoo Tpets, Aicova Kat Pepyra Kab ‘ApvOdova.
Aicovos 6€ cal Tlonupndns ca® “Hotodov yivetat
ldo.

Aicov, os téxeO’ vidv “Incova, Troiméva Naar,

dv Xipwv Oper évi Unriw ornHevTe.

14,

Petrie Papyri (ed. Mahaffy), Pl. ITI. 3.
ayaknXe |tToto avaKTos
|rodoxns ot “Atraddvrn

Syouwhjos Ouyarnp, | Xapitav a apapyy war éyouca,

@pain wep éovda am |avaiveto podov 0“wotov

avdpav Bovromevn hevye luv yapov akdnotaor.
162


ES OO Gree ee ee


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


gifts which cannot be told, and these then ensnared
him through the devising of Athene.”’ . ;


Tt.

(Heracles) slew the noble sons of steadfast Neleus,
eleven of them; but the twelfth, the horseman
Gerenian Nestor chanced to be staying with the
horse-taming Gerenians. .. Nestor alone escaped in
flowery Gerenon.”

12.

“So well-girded Polycaste, the youngest daughter
of Nestor, Neleus’ son, was joined in love with
Telemachus through golden Aphrodite and _ bare
Persepolis.”


13.


Tyro the daughter of Salmoneus, having two sons
by Poseidon, Neleus and Pelias, married Cretheus,
and had by him three sons, Aeson, Pheres and |.


Amythaon. And of Aeson and Polymede, according


to Hesiod, Iason was born.


«“ Aeson, who begot a son Iason, shepherd of the
people, whom Chiron brought up in woody Pelion.”


14,


See or tne elorious lord . . . fair: Atalanta,
swift of foot, the daughter of Schoeneus, who had
the beaming eyes of the Graces, though she was
ripe for wedlock rejected the company of her equals
and sought to avoid marriage with men who eat
bread.”

163
M 2


HESIOD


Scholiast on Homer, Ltiad xxl, 683. VE@TEPOS
otv ‘Hoiodos yupvov eicdywv ‘Immopévn aywveto-
pevov “AtaXavtTn.

Papirit grect e latin, ii. No. 130 (2nd—3rd
century).

To 8 ap ém avTiK éTrELTa tlavicdup[os] @pPVUTO

Koupy *
éEoyov eidos éyova la: Todds 6 appiarad Oputhos
SeLVvOV Oepropevy’ O|auBos 0 exe TAVTAS Op@VTas.
THS pev KLVUMEVNS Tv loin Cepvporo XeTava
ouryaoevT éheMige mTel|pt otnOeoo amanoiat. ; 5 [10]
anf oe ave “Inropevns: TOX [NOS o emeryelpero ads.
ToL On aKny Hoa 2x louvers dé yéyave Bonoas:

Kéxruté ev twavtes nulév vi éloe noe yépovtes,
dbp elma Ta pe Ovpos| evi ornBecor KEedeveL.
‘Lrropevns pvnatever | éuny Edixn@mioa Kovpyv. 10[15|
pvbos & 600 wyins vdv] ot eipnwévos gota:
ov pv aéOrov atep KexT|noeTAaL. Ef O€ KEV OUTOS
pienoas Oavatov Te poyy Kal| Kdd0¢5 apec Bau
‘ aOdvatot ddar ot ‘Onvp | ra S@OLAT eXovow, 15 [20]
7) TOL VOT THCOVTL pipryy é és matploa yatav
Tatoa hirny Oooo, étt 8 wxu|todwv cbévos imran,
TOUS pa Somovd a&et ele ie Kai vv Ke Ovp@
TeppOeiy pev Exwv, atel| © avinpov aeOXov
pepvewmT evppoctvyot. matnp| & avodpav Te

Geapv TE 20 [25 |

1 Slight remains of five lines precede line 1 in the original :
after line 20 an unknown number of lines have been lost,
and traces of a verse preceding line 21 are here omitted.
Between lines 29 and 30 are fragments of six verses which


do not suggest any definite restoration. The numbering of
the original publication is given in brackets.


164


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


Hesiod is therefore later in date than Homer since ——~


he represents Hippomenes as stripped when con-
tending with Atalanta.


«Then straightway there rose up against him the
trim-ankled maiden (Atalanta), peerless in beauty :
a great throng stood round about her as she gazed
fiercely, and wonder held all men as they looked
upon her. As she moved, the breath of the west
wind stirred the shining garment about her tender
bosom ; but Hippomenes stood where he was: and
much people was gathered together. All these kept
silence ; but Schoeneus cried and said:

“‘¢ Hear me all, both young and old, while I speak
as my spirit within my breast bids me. Hippomenes
seeks my coy-eyed daughter to wife; but let him
now hear my wholesome speech. He shall not win
her without contest; yet, if he be victorious and
escape death, and if the deathless gods who dwell
on Olympus grant him to win renown, verily he shall
return to his dear native land, and I will give him
my dear child and strong, swift-footed horses besides
which he shall lead home to be cherished possessions ;
and may he rejoice in heart possessing these, and
ever remember with gladness the painful contest.
May the father of men and of gods (grant that
splendid children may be born to him?)’

* ok * *

1 In the earliest times a loin-cloth was worn by athletes,

but was discarded after the 14th Olympiad.


2 The end of Schoeneus’ speech, the preparations and the
beginning of the race are lost.


165


HESIOD
OcELTEpN at ee


Kat jouv emaioo wy err
ny UToXwpNTaAs [em | dpleTeei [rots op dyeeAlbeprroy
aOhov Exel’ 4 wév pa 7 oo@«ns d¢ “AtaXavTn
(eT avarvopern oapa [xpucéns ‘Ad podirys, 25 [31]
T@ O€ Trepl puxiis ‘TéNE| TO Spomos, 1 i) Popov evpet
Ale duyelv' TO Kal pa dor| oppovewy mpoceeme:

°O, Ody yatep Zyouwijos, apletrrxov 7 TOP éxouca,
d|é£0 Tad’ dyNaa Sapa Oe as, xpvoens PN PPP ITT

* %
avTap 6 [piuda oldeccr i la alae KE TO
TPOTOV, 30 [42]
1 O at ac? “Aprruca petlactpepbetoa TO prov
Empapyy AUTAP 0 YELP TO SevTEpov 7| Ke Nauace.
Kab 67 € EXED | OvO ira TodwKnS OL ‘At[aXavrn,
eyyvs Sw téreos- 5 88 TO T piTov KE [xapace,
avy TH & é&édhuyev Odvatov Kal Kl fpa pédatvay 35 [47]
éoTn 0 auTrveiwy Kal.
15.
Strabo, 1. p. 42.
Kal Koupny “ApaBouo, TOD “Eppedov aKannta
yelvato Kat Opovin, covpyn. Bndovo avaxTos.


16.
Kustathius, Hom. 461. 2.
"Apyos avudpov éov Aavaos woinoey évudpov.


17.

Hecataeus' in Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes, 872.
i¢ Ss Sy] 2oaaN \ >] 5 b) 4
0 6€ Aiyumtos autos pev ovx AOev eis “Apyos,

n \ > / e \ id / bd /
qatoas oé [améotevrer |, ws pev ‘Hoiodos érotnee,

/

TEVTHKOVTA.


1 Of Miletus, flourished about 520 B.c. His work, a mix-
ture of history and geography, was used by Herodotus.


166


K
|
.
4


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


emuetee ent . . . and “he, rushing upon her, .... -
drawing back slightly towards the left. And on —
them was laid an unenviable struggle: for she, even
fair, swift-footed Atalanta, ran scorning the gifts of
golden Aphrodite; but with him the race was for
his life, either to find his doom, or to escape it.
Therefore with thoughts of guile he said to her:

“QO daughter of Schoeneus, pitiless in heart, re-
ceive these glorious gifts of the goddess, golden
Aphrodite .. . ?

* ok

« But he, following lightly on his feet, cast the first
apple!: and, swiftly as a Harpy, she turned back and
snatched it. Then he cast the second to the ground
with his hand. And now fair, swift-footed Atalanta
had two apples and was near the goal; but Hippo-
menes cast the third apple to the ground, and
therewith escaped death and black fate. And he
stood panting and...”


15.

“And the daughter of Arabus, whom worthy
Hermaon begat with Thronia, daughter of the lord
Belus.”’

16.

“ Argos which was waterless Danaus made well-

watered.”
we


Aegyptus himself did not go to Argos, but sent
his sons, fifty in number, as Hesiod represented.


1. Of the three which Aphrodite gave him to enable him to
overcome Atalanta. :


167


HESIOD


18.


Strabo,} viii. p. 370. Ka “AmroAdO6w pos ... onotv

Belo Sep peVTOL Kal ‘A pxiAoxov 70 efdévat

kat “EXAnvas Aeyopevous TOUS TULTAYTAS Kab

Ilavédrnvas, .. . wept Tov Ipostid@y NéyovTa ws
Tlavérrnves euvjorevoy avTas.


Apollodorus, ii. 2: 1.4. “Axpiovos pev “Apyous
Bactrever, I potros dé Tipuvbos. Kal yivetat
"Axpioio pev é& ‘Hupudi«ns THs AMaxkedaipovos
Aavan, IIpoite 6é é« SOeveBoias


Avoinnn [te] cal “Idiwvon cat Idsavacca


«© N
auras Onhd it eudynoay, Os poev Hatodds pow,
ott Tas Atovicov TErETAS OV KATEOEXOVTO.


Probus? on Vergil, Eclogue vi. 48. Has, quod
Tunonis contempserant numen, insania exterritas,
quae crederent se boves factas, patriam Argos
reliquisse, postea a Melampode Amythaonis filio
sanatas.


Suidas s.v. paxroovyn.
elvexa paxroovyvns aTtuyephs Tépev @AEcav
av0os.


Lustathius, Hom. 1746. 7.
Kat yap opuy Kepahyat KATA KVUOS aivov dyever"
adpos yap Xpoa tavTa Katéoxebev, éx O€ vU
VALTAL
Eppeov eK Keparéwy, YidovTO Oe KANA KapHva.


1 The geographer ; fl. c. 24 B.o.
2 Fl. 56-88 a.p.: he is best known for his work on Vergil,


168


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE
18.1


And Apollodorus says that Hesiod already knew


that the whole people were called both Hellenes and
Panhellenes, as when he says of the daughters of
Proetus that the Panhellenes sought them in


marriage.


_ Acrisius was king of Argos and Proetus of Tiryns.
And Acrisius had by Eurydice the daughter of |
Lacedemon, Danae ; and Proetus by Stheneboea
« Lysippe and Iphinoé and Iphianassa.’’ And these
fell mad, as Hesiod states, because they would not
receive the rites of Dionysus.


These (the daughters of Proetus), because they
had scorned the divinity of Juno, were overcome
with madness, such that they believed they had been
turned into cows, and left Argos their own country.
Afterwards they were cured by Melampus, the son
e. een.


“Because of their hideous wantonness they lost
their tender beauty ... For he shed upon their
heads a fearful itch: and leprosy covered all their
flesh, and their hair dropped from their heads, and
their fair scalps were made bare.”’


1 The Hesiodic story of the daughters of Proetus can be
reconstructed from these notices. They were sought in
marriage by all the Greeks (Panhellenes), but having offended
Dionysus (or, according to Servius, Juno), were afflicted with
a disease which destroyed their beauty (or were turned into
cows). They were finally healed by Melampus.


169


HESIOD


Hin


Scholiast on Homer, Il. xii. 292. Evp@manv thv
Woivixos Zevs dead pevos év TLL Aewwave beTa
VULPOV avOn dvareyouray npacln Kal KatehOov
AAAEED € EQUTOV els Tadpov Kal a0 TOD oTOMATOS
KpOKOV é€mvEl’ OUT@S TE THV Evpomny am aTng as
éBdoTtace Kat dvaTropO wevoas eis Kpyrny euiyn
avTn 60 ovTwS TUV@KLT EV avr Hy ‘AoTepiovt TO
Kpntov Baownret: ryevouevn dé éyKuOS éxeivn) TPEls
Tatoas eyevenge, Mivoa, Laprndova kal “Pada-
pavOvr. 4 totopia tap “Hovod@ cat Baxyvrséon.


20.


Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 178. ws
6é¢ “Hoiodos dnow, (Pwevs) Boivixos tov “Aynvo-
pos Kal Kacouerretas.


21.

Apollodorus,’ iii. 14. 4. 1. “Hotodos 62 avdtov
(CAdwrv) Potvixos cal AdXdeotBotas réyer.

pies

Porphyrius,? Quaest. Hom. ad Iliad. pert. p. 189.
os map Hordd@ év Tvvarcov Kataroy@ émi tis
"Aynvopos matdos Anpodonns

[Anpodoxy]| tay wrelaTos éTrixPoviov avOpaTav

LVNTTEVOY Kal TOAAG Kal ayaa OMp ovouNnvaY

ibOtwor BactrAHes, amretpécvov KaTa €1O0s.


1 Apollodorus of Athens (fl. 144 B.c.) was a pupil of Aris-
tarchus. He wrote a Handbook of Mythology, from which
the extant work bearing his name is derived.

2 Porphyry, scholar, mathematician, philosopher and _ his-
torian, lived 233- 305 (2) A.D. He was a pupil of the neo-
Platonist Plotinus.


170


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


19. ie

Zeus saw Kuropa the daughter of Phoenix gather-
ing flowers in a meadow with some nymphs and fell
in love with her. So he came down and changed
himself into a bull and breathed from his mouth
a crocus.! In this way he deceived Europa, carried
her off and crossed the sea to Crete where he had
intercourse with her. Then in this condition he
made her live with Asterion the king of the Cretans.
There she conceived and bore three sons, Minos,
Sarpedon and Rhadamanthys. The tale is in Hesiod


and Bacchylides.
20.


But according to Hesiod (Phineus) was the son of
Phoenix, Agenor’s son and Cassiopea.


PA.
But Hesiod says that he (Adonis) was the son of
Phoenix and Alphesiboea.


22.
As it is said in Hesiod in the Catalogue of Women
concerning Demodoce the daughter of Agenor :


“ Demodoce whom very many of men on earth,
mighty princes, wooed, promising splendid gifts,
because of her exceeding beauty.”


* The crocus was to attract Huropa, as in the very similar
story of Persephone: cp. Homeric Hymus ii. lines 8 ff.


CAL


HESIOD


23.

Apollodorus, iii. 5. 6. 2. “Hotodos dé déka pev
vious, déxa 6é Ouyatepas (Apdiovos cat Niofqs).

Aelian," Var. Hist. xii. 36. ‘Hotodos oe _ (Aevyer) F
EDVEA (appevas)) Kal b€Ka (Kopas), eb pa dpa OUK
éotly Hotodov Ta emn, GX WS TOANG Kal a\Aa
KATEEVTTAL AUTOV.

24,

Scholiast on Homer, Jl. xxiii. 679. Kat “Hotodos
dé dynaw év OnBats adtod (Oidimodos) amroPavor-
tos, “Apyetav tiv “Adpaatov avy adda €AOety
éml Thy Knoeiav TOD Oidtiodos.


25.

Herodian” in Etymologicum Magnum, p. 60, 40.
Einapidnv Tervdr.

26.

Argument: Pindar, Ol. xiv. Kndicos 6¢ TOT AILOS
eV Opxoper®, Oa. Kal ab Xaputes TLpovTar:
TAUTALS “EréoKX0s 0 0 Kydicov TOU TOTAaLOU TpPO-
tos €Oucev, Os dnow Hotoédos.


Schol. on Homer, Il. 11. 522.
date AtdainOerv mpoies KaXdrippoov Vdwp.


Strabo, Ix. 424,
bore Tape Ilavorja dra Drnyova T epupyny
Kat Te Ot “Epyopevov eiduypévos eioe SpaKav ws.


mal
Sohnbians on Homer, Il. vii. 9. 0 yap Tov Meve-
aOiov TaTnp ‘A pniOoos Bowwros my KQTOLK GD
"Apynv: éote 6€ attn Botwrtias, as Kat “Hotodds
pyoww:
172


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


Tee
Hesiod says that (the children of Amphion and
Niobe) were ten sons and ten daughters.


But Hesiod says they were nine boys and ten
girls ;—unless after all the verses are not Hesiod’s
but are falsely ascribed to him as are many others.


24.

And Hesiod says that when Oedipus had died at
Thebes, Argea the daughter of Adrastus came with
others to the funeral of Oedipus.

: 25.

Tityos the son of Elara.

26.


Cephisus is a river in Orchomenus where also the
Graces are worshipped. Eteoclus the son of the


river Cephisus first sacrificed to them, as Hesiod


says: “which from Lilaea spouts forth its sweet-
flowing water . . . And which flows on by Panopeus
and through Peed Glechon and through Orcho-
menus, winding like a snake.”’


27.


For the father of Menesthius, Areithoiis was a
Boeotian living at Arnae; and this is in Boeotia, as
also Hesiod says.


1 Priest at Praeneste. He lived c. 170-230 a.p.
2 Son of Apollonius Dyscolus, lived in Rome under Marcus
Aurelius. His chief work was on accentuation.


173


HESIOD


| 28.
Stephanus of Byzantium. ‘Oxxne ros: aNaos"
. KetTas O€ ev TH Adaptiov NOPa, iSpud ev dé
vo ‘Oyynotod tov BowwTov, as Pnow Hoiobos.
29.
Stephanus of Byzantium. Aiyd... éott Kal
Aiyaiov mediov ovvarrov Th Kippa, ws “Hoiodos.
30. i
Apollodorus, ii. 1. 1. 5. “Hotodos 6é€ tov Tle-
Nacyov avToyOova hyowy eivat. |
bee i
Strabo, v. p. 221. T® © 'Edop@ tov é& ‘A pkactas
elvat TO pirov TOUTO (rovs eNacyovs) mpéev
‘Hoiodos: dyat yap: |


1


ULeES éfeyévovTo Avedovos avtBéoLo
év Tote TikTe IleXacyos.
32.


Stephanus of Byzantium. Iadndavreov: TOMS
“Apkadias, amo Ila\Xavtos, évos tov AvKdovos


Tais@v, as Hoatobos.
Bee


-@MédXov évinperinv téxeto krectTH Meri Bora.


34,
Herodian, On Peculiar Diction, p. 18. map
“Howdd@ év Sdevtépw (Karadoyo)
of mpoale havnv évtoaev Exevdovr.


1 Author of a geographical lexicon, produced after
400 A.D., and abridged under Justinian.


174


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


28.
Onchestus: a grove.! It is situate in the country
of Haliartus and was founded by Onchestus the
Boeotian, as Hesiod says.


i *


29.
There is also a plain of Aega bordering on Cirrha,
according to Hesiod. |
30.
But Hesiod says that Pelasgus was autochthonous.


31.

That this tribe (the Pelasgi) were from Arcadia,
Ephorus states on the authority of Hesiod; for he
says >

«Sons were born to god-like Lycaon whom
Pelasgus once begot.”’

Pallantium. <A city of Arcadia, so named after
Pallas, one of Lycaon’s sons, according to Hesiod.


| 33. :
“Famous Meliboea bare Phellus the good spear-


93


man.
34.
In Hesiod in the second Catalogue :
“ Whe once hid the torch ? within.”


* Sacred to Poseidon. For the custom observed there, ep.
Homeric Hymns iii. 231 ff. 2 The allusion is obscure.


175


HESIOD


35.
Herodian, On Peculiar Diction, p. 42. “Hoiodos
év tpito (Kataroyo) |
vov0os O€ TroO@Y VTOdoUTTOS Gpawpet.


36. ;


Apollonius Dyscolus,| On the Pronoun, p. 125.
aplv & avtots méya ha.


37.


Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 45. ovre
“Opunpos ote “Hoiodos .. . Néyouot tov “Idixrov
cuv Tois ‘Apyovavrais. |

38.

“ Hratosthenes,”” Catast. xix. p. 124. Kpuos] otros
0 PpiEov dvaxopicas Kat “EXXny adpOetos dé
av €d00n avTois vmO Needns THS pNT pos” ceive
dé yxpvany dopadv, as “Haiodos cal PDepexvdys
ElpnKaoLD.

aoe


Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. 1 ia BL
memnpacbas dé Pied onow “Halobos € €v peydhaes
"Hotas, 67s DpiEw TID odov é evucen, év 6€ TO
Kararoyy, émreL0n TOV f@AKPOV XpoVvOY TIS Brews
T POEK PLVEV.

Ib. maisas dé es avT@ yevéoOar “Haiodos
v0, Ovvdv cat Mapravdvvor.

1 Apollonius ‘‘ the Crabbed ” was a grammarian of Alex-


andria under Hadrian. He wrote largely on Grammar and
Syntax.


176


id a eel


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


35.
Hesiod in the third Catalogue writes :


« And a resounding thud of feet rose up.”


36.


« And a great trouble to themselves.”


37.
Neither Homer nor Hesiod speak of Iphiclus as
amongst the Argonauts.


38.

The Ram. This it was that transported Phrixus
and Helle. It was immortal and was given them by
their mother Nephele, and had a golden fleece, as
Hesiod and Pherecydes say.


ae. j?
_ Hesiod in the Great Koiae says that Phineus was
blinded because he revealed to Phrixus the road ; but
in the third Catalogue, because he preferred long
life to sight. |
Hesiod says he had two sons, Thynus and
Mariandynus.


2 275-195 (?) B.c., mathematician, astronomer, scholar, and
head of the Library at Alexandria.


Idd


HESIOD


Ephorus' in Strabo, vii. 302. ‘Hotodov & év rH
KaNoupérn yas Tepiod@ Tov Dwéa vd Top
‘Aprrusav ayer Oar— |

yAaxtopayar és yaiav amnvas oki éyovTav.

: 40,
Strabo, vii. p. 300.
Aidtomds te Abyus te i8& SKdOas iamnporyors.


41.


Apollodorus, i. 9. 216: SLerKop.evov oe TOV “Ap-
TUL@V y pev Kara Tedomdrvnoov els TOV Téypnv
TOTA[LOV cumimret, os vov aw exewvns “Aptrus Ka-
NelTaL: TavTyY 6é ot jrev NuxoOony, ot dé “AeAdO-
Touv KaXovalw. 1 O€ éTépa Kadovpevyn Oxvtrétn,
ws be éviot (Anv0dn (Hoiodos dé reyes avTny
3 f ef \ \ / vA
OxvTodnv), attn cata tiv IIpomrovtida hevyovca
péexpe Kyivddav rA0e vncwv, al vov am’ éxeivns

Tpopaces KANOVYTAL.

42.

Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. il, Zot, 200,
OTL O€ nd€avro ot wept Antnv to Avi otpadéevtes
Aéyes Kal “Hoiodos:

&vO’ ot y evyécOny Aivnio tipéedorTe.
"AmroAA@vios pev ovv THY aTooTpeyacay TovsS
\ / 5 / ¢ / \c¢ an
mepi Lytnv Ipwv réyer, “Haotodos dé Epunv.

ot 6€ Ytpopadas haclv avtas KexrAHno Oat, Kao
3 / > / 7s n \ n
émrua Tpaevtes autos nuEavTo T@ Aut kataraPetv

1 Of Cyme. He wrote a universal history covering the
period between the Dorian Migration and 340 B.c.


178


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


Hesiod, in the so-called Journey round the Earth,
says that Phineus was brought by the Harpies “ to
the land of milk-feeders!' who have waggons for
houses.”’


40.


“ The Aethiopians and Ligurians and mare-milk-
ing Scythians.” |
41.


As they were being pursued, one of the Harpies
fell into the river Tigres, in Peloponnesus which is
now called Harpys after her. Some call this one
Nicothoé, and others Aéllopus. The other who was
called Ocypete, or as some say Ocythoé (though
Hesiod calls her Ocypus), fled down the Propontis
and reached as far as to the Echinades islands which
are now called because of her, Strophades (Turning
Islands).
| 42.

Hesiod also says that those with Zetes* turned
and prayed to Zeus:

“There they prayed to the lord of Aenos who
reigns on high.”’

Apollonius indeed says it was Iris who made Zetes
and his following turn away, but Hesiod says Hermes.


Others say (the islands) were called Strophades,
because they turned there and prayed Zeus to seize


* 7.e. the nomad Scythians, who are described by Herodo-
tus as feeding on mares’ milk and living in caravans.

2 Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas, who were amongst the
Argonauts, delivered Phineus from the Harpies. The Stro-
phades (‘‘ Islands of Turning”) are here supposed to have
been so called because the sons of Boreas were there turned
back by Iris from pursuing the Harpies.


179


HESIOD


,
Tas “Aptutas. xata 6¢ “Hoiodov ... ov xrei-
VOVTAL.


43, |
Philodemus,! On Piety, 10. ovd’ “Hordd@ py Tes
éyyerd, 0s ... 7 Kal TOV Katovoaior Kal TOV
Ilvypatwv uvnwovever.
44,


Strabo,i. p.43. “Hatddou 0 ov« dy Tis aitiacaLto
dyvotay “Hyixvvas dNéyovtos cal Maxpoxepadovs
Kat ILuypaious.

45, ‘

Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 284.
‘Haiodos 5é€ da Padordos attovs. (trovs >Apyo-
VAUTAS) ELOTETTAEUKEVAL NEEL.

Id. iv. 259. “Hoiodos 6é... dta Tod Oxneavod
... €Neivy avtovs eis AtBinv cal Bactacaytes
Thv Apy@ eis TO nuéTEpoV TéAAYOS yevérOaL.

46.

Id. iii, 311. hyot dé "AmroAX@r0s Hordd@
émomevos émt Tov appatos tod HdXiov eis tiv
kata Tuppnviav Kepévny vicov thv Kipenv
érOeiv: “Korepiav Sé aviv eimev, émet mpos
Ova mas KelTaL.

47.

Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 892.
nKorovOnoe Hordd@ ov Tws dvoualovTs THY VCO
TOV Yeipyvav—

vncov és AvOeuceaaay, wa adict dake Kpoviwr.
ovopata 6é avTav, Oeré.orn ) Beréivon, Morr7,
"AyAaddhavos.

1 An Epicurean philosopher, fl. 50 B.c,
130


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


the Harpies. But according to Hesiod ... they


were not killed.
43.
Nor let anyone mock at Hesiod who mentions
.. or even the Troglodytes and the Pygmies.


44, |
No one would accuse Hesiod of ignorance though
he speaks of the Half-dog people and the Great-
Headed people and the Pygmies.


45, :


But Hesiod says they (the Argonauts) had sailed
in through the Phasis.


But Hesiod (says) . .. they came through the
Ocean to Libya, and so, carrying the Argo, reached
our sea.

46.

Apollonius, following Hesiod, says that Circe came
to the island over against Tyrrhenia on the chariot
of the Sun. And he called it Hesperian, because
it lies towards the west.


47.

He (Apollonius) followed Hesiod who thus names
the island of the Sirens:

“To the island Anthemoessa (Flowery) which the
son of Cronos gave them.”

And their names are Thelxiope or Thelxinoe,
Molpe and Aglaophonus.! |

* “Charming-with-her-voice ” (or ‘‘ Charming-the-mind ”),
** Song,” and ‘‘ Lovely-sounding.”’


I8t


HESIOD


Scholiast on Homer, Od. xii. 168. évtred0ev “Hoio-

dos Kat Tovs avéwous Oéryewv avTas &by.
48,

Scholiast on Homer, Od.i. 85. thy mev yap OQryv-
ylav évTos etvas pos éotrépav, THY 66 ‘OryurALav
kata Kpnrnv ‘Haoiodds byat xetoOau:

[arov|trov & “Oryvrsov 78 “Oryurinv.... . vAcov.

49,

Td. Od. vii. 54. “Hotodos 6€ aderdhav *“AXKtvoov
Thy Apytny vréxaBev.
| 50.

Schol. on Pindar, Ol. x. 46.

THY oO ‘Apapuynetons Inrmoorpatos, oF0s” ‘Apnos,
Du«téos ayAaos vids, “Emewv dpyapmos av-


Spov...
D1.


Apollodorus i. 8.4.1. ’AXOatas 6é amo0avovens
éynuev Oivevs IlepiSorav thv ‘Immovoov. tavTyv
O61 85. “Hoiodos 2» €& “OXEvov THs “AXaias,

épOapueony § v6 ‘Inmoctparou Tob ‘A papuyKéws,
“Iamovovy tov matépa meunrat ™ pos Oivéa Toppa
Ths EAAdos évta évTeEtAdpEevoy aTroKTEtVaL.

exec & "Orevinv wétpynv Totapoto Tarp dxOas

evpnos Iletpovo.


52.
Diodorus+ v. 81. Ae 5S’ 6 Maxapeds vidos peév
¢ /
Kpwarov TOD Atos, os gnaw Hatodos tee


Kkatoukov © év Onrévw THs TtoTe wev “Iddos, vov
d 'Axaias kadoupévns.


1 Diodorus Siculus, fl. 8 B.c., author of an universal history
ending with Caesar’s Gallic Wars,


182


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


Hence Hesiod said that they charmed even the —_~


winds.
48,

Hesiod says that Ogygia is within towards the
west, but Ogylia lies over against Crete: “... the
Ogylian sea and . . . the island Ogylia.”’

49.


Hesiod regarded Arete as the sister of Alcinous.


50.


Her Hippostratus (did wed), a scion of Ares, the
splendid son of Phyctes, of the line of Amarynces,
leader of the Epeians.


51.


When Althea was dead, Oeneus married Periboea,
the daughter of Hipponoiis. Hesiod says that she
was seduced by Hippostratus the son of Amarynces
and that her father Hipponotis sent her from Olenus
in Achaea to Oeneus because he was far away from


Hellas, bidding him kill her.


‘She used to dwell on the cliff of Olenus by the
banks of wide Peirus.”’


sh
Macareus was a son of Crinacus the son of Zeus as
Hesiod says... and dwelt in Olenus in the country


then called Ionian, but now Achaean.


HESIOD


D3.
Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. iii. 21. epi tov
Muppdovev “Haiodos pev o0Tw hyotv:
i) 0 UToKxvcapévyn Téxev Alaxov iT@moy app.
avTap émet p H2ns moNunpatou ixeTo péTpOV,
poovos €@v iayadre: Tatnp 8 avopov Te Oeov
TE,
doco. éoav pvpunKes eTNpatou évdobL vycou,
Tous advopas Totnoe Badulavous Te yuvatkas.
ot 61 Tot Tp@tot CevEav véas audiediooas,
TpaTto. © lati eOev vHoS TTEPA TOVTOTFOpPOLO,
D4, |
Polybius v. 2.
"Ataxtoas Trorkéum Keyxapnoras nvTE Salt,
D5,


Porphyrius, Quaest. Hom. ad Iliad. pertin. p. 93,
cuvTopws O€ TA aiaxypa dedyrwKe pyhvat ovK
eGehovon, GAN’ ovy womep ‘Hatades Ta meph Tov
IInréws nal ths “Axdatou yuvatKos Ova HAaKPOV
eme eNO wn. .

56.

Schol. on Pindar, Nem. iv. 95.
noe O€ ot Kata Oupov apiatn hatveto Bovavn,
avtov pev oyérOar, epvras 8 dddnnta bayvatpav
Kady, Hv ot Erev&e TEpikduTos "A wduyurers,

OS THY MactevwY olos KaTa I1ydLov almd
ainy uo Kevravporow dpecx@otor Sapetn.


57.


Voll. Herculan. (Papyri from Herculaneum), 2nd
Collection, viii. 105. 6 6€7a& Kvmpua tromoas”Hpa
184 |


Cr


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


D3.


Concerning the Myrmidons Hesiod speaks thus:
“ And she conceived and bare Aeacus, delighting in
horses. Now when he came to the full measure of
desired youth, he chafed at being alone. And the
father of men and gods made all the ants that were
in the lovely isle into men and wide-girdled women.
These were the first who fitted with thwarts ships
with curved sides, and the first who used sails, the
wings of a sea-going ship.”


o4,


“The sons of Aeacus who rejoiced in battle as
though a feast.”’
55,


He has indicated the shameful deed briefly by the
phrase “to lie with her against her will,’ and not
like Hesiod who recounts at length the story of
Peleus and the wife of Acastus.


56.


«“ And this seemed to him (Acastus) in his mind
the best plan ; to keep back himself, but to hide be-
yond guessing the beautiful knife which the very
famous Lame One had made for him, that in seeking
it alone over steep Pelion, he (Peleus) might be slain


‘forthwith by the mountain-bred Centaurs.


57:
The author of the Cypria says that Thetis avoided


1 The first epic in the ‘‘ Trojan Cycle”: like all ancient
epics it was ascribed to Homer, but also, with more pro-
bability, to Stasinus of Cyprus. .


185


HESIOD


yvaptCopevny (Métw) dhevyerv avtod (Ards) Tov

/ / \ b] / / / A
yayuov' Aia b€ opocas yodkwbévta dwote OvnT@
ouvotkioe. Kai Tap “Hovdd@ Oé Ketras TO Tapa-
TAHTLOV. |

58.
Strassburg Greek Papyri 55 (2nd cent. A.D.).
Doinv éEtxeto, untépa wnrw7,

\ / cers) 4 b) b) / b) an
Toa K| THAT aywv €E evpvxopov LlawXdKod
[Inrevs] Ataxidns, ditos aBavato.ot Oeotouw,
Aaotaw| dé iSodow ayateto Ousos amracw,
ef / b) 2 3/ 4 ote EE! /
as Te TO|ALY aAXaTAEEY EVKTLTOV OS T ETEMET TEV
iwepoevTa ya|uov' Kal TOUT émos eimav aravTes:

Tpis uaxap Alaxidn cal retpakis, OXBre Inred,
© a Needy us 3 Vi 3 VA \
@ T adoxov TrOAV|Ompov ‘OdvpTLos evpvotra Levs
anwacev nde yauov p|axapes Geol éEeTéeXNeooar,

Os Toto év peydpols Ltepov AEKXOS eicavafatvers 1

Nypeidsos: para 64 ce taltnp troince Kpoviov

ov Pd inate, / > + ’ /

eEovov npewv Tept| T ad\AwV atdynoTawy

TunevT avdpav, YOove|s 6[aaoe Kap |rov édovaw.
po.

Origen, Against Celsus, iv. 79.

\ \ ELS: a oY 4 \ \ f

Evvai yap Tote Oattes éoav, Evvol dé PowKor

aBavatovct Oeotot katabvntois T avOpwrrois.
60.

Scholiast on Homer Il. xvi. 175... . Hosodou nat
tov adrrov LloAvdepny adrynv (thy Ovyatépa Tov
IInXéws) carovvTwv.

61.
Eustathius,? Hom. 112. 44 sq. totéov dé OTe Tov


1 Tzetzes: eicavaBalywyv, Strassburg papyrus.
2 Archbishop of Thessalonica 1175-1192 (?) A.p., author of
commentaries on Pindar and on the Jlzad and Odyssey.


186


10


sre


eT ars


-CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


wedlock with Zeus to please Hera; but that Zeus _


was angry and swore that she should mate with a
mortal. Hesiod also has the like account.


58.


« Peleus the son of Aeacus, dear to the deathless
gods, came to Phthia the mother of flocks, bringing
great possessions from spacious Iolcus. And all the
people envied him in their hearts seeing how he had
sacked the well-built city, and accomplished his
joyous marriage; and they all spake this word:
‘Thrice, yea, four times blessed son of Aeacus, happy
Peleus! For far-seeing Olympian Zeus has given
you a wife with many gifts and the blessed gods
have brought your marriage fully to pass, and in
these halls you go up to the holy bed of a daughter
of Nereus. ‘Truly the father, the son of Cronos,
made you very pre-eminent among heroes and
honoured above other men who eat bread and con-


2 2


- sume the fruit of the ground.’”’ .


ee


“For in common then were the banquets, and
in common the seats of deathless gods and mortal
29


men.


60.


... whereas Hesiod and the rest call her (Peleus’
daughter) Polydora.


61.
It should be observed that the ancient narrative


1 This fragment is placed by Spohn after Works and Days
120, 2


187


HESIOD


Tar poxhov ) TANALA ioropta Kat ouyyevy TO
‘AX UAAE! Tapacidoct Néyouca, ore ‘Hotodos pyr
Mevoiruov, TOV Ilatpoxrov marepa, IInréws eivar
abEeXp ov, @s civat avTaVEpious OUTMS apoTEpouS
GNAHAOLS.
62.

Scholiast on Pindar, Ol. x. 83.  Tuves ypadovat

>Hpos AAP petioy ov pwéeuvntat Haotodos—


7) TOLO bev SHpov Kal “Ard kvyov, viéas éoOXovs.


iy dé 0 Xijpos Tob ‘AXppoOiov Tod Iepunpous Kat
"AXkvorns.
/') GBs

Pausanias' ii. 26.7. ottos 0 xpnopos Snot
partota ove dvta AckAnmiov ‘Apowons, ara
“Hctosdov, 4} TOV Tiva éutreTroLnKoToD ets Ta Hoto-
dov, Ta ern ovvOévra eis THY Meconviwy yapw.

Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iti, 14. ol pev
"Apowons, ot bé Kopevédos pacly avTOV Eval.
‘AoKkhymedons dé pyc TY ‘Apowony Aevkimov
civat Tod Mepinpous, hs cat AmodX@vos “Aokdn-
mos Kat Ouyatnp ’Epiames:

& érex év peydpors “Ackdnriov, opxaov
avopav,

Doi Bo vrrodunbeica, evrrroKamov T “Kpi@ev.
kal tT Apowvons omoias.

"Apowvon oé puyetoa Avds cal Antoos vid

Tixt AoKANTLOV VidV auvmOVa TE KPATEPOY Te.

1 A Greek of Asia Minor, author of the Description of
Greece (on which he was still engaged in 173 A.D.).


2 Wilamowitz thinks one or other of these citations belongs
to the Catalogue,


188


2


2


ae we


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


hands down the account that Patroclus was even a ~


kinsman of Achilles ; for Hesiod says that Menoetius
the father of Patroclus, was a brother of Peleus, so
that in that case they were first cousins.


62.

Some write “Serus the son of Halirrhothius,”’
whom Hesiod mentions: “He (begot) Serus and
Alazygus, goodly sons.” And Serus was the son
of Halirrhothius Perieres’ son, and of Alcyone.


63.


This oracle most clearly proves that Asclepius was
not the son of Arsinoé, but that Hesiod or one of
Hesiod’s interpolators composed the verses to please
the Messenians.

Some say (Asclepius) was the son of Arsinoé,
others of Coronis. But Asclepiades says that
Arsinoé was the daughter of Leucippus, Perieres’
son, and that to her and Apollo Asclepius and a
daughter, Eriopis, were born : :


“ And she bare in the palace Asclepius, leader of
men, and Eriopis with the lovely hair, being subject
in love to Phoebus ”’


And of Arsinoé likewise :


“And Arsinoé was joined with the son of Zeus
and Leto and bare a son Asclepius, blameless and
strong.”


189


HESIOD :


64.

Scholiast on Hesiod, Theogony, 142. mas yap
Tovs autovs (Kvx«rwrras) Geois évaduyxtous Neyer
kal év to tov AevKermidav Kataroy@ vo
"AmoAX@vos avnphalar Trovet;


65.
Scholiast on Pindar, Ol. xi. 79.
Tipavdpnv "Exyewos Oarepiy tromoat aKovTw.
66.
Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. x. 150. o péev Haiodos
apupotépous (Kdotopa kai Ucrvdevnn) Aros eivar
yeveanroyel.
Ib. 0 evrot ‘Hotodos OUTE Anoas OUTE
Nepecews didaae THY ‘Enevny, GNAa OuyaTtpos
"Oxeavod Kat Atos.


67.


Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes 249. XTyoixyopos
dynow, ws Ovwv toils Oeots Tuvdapews ‘Ad poditns
émehadero, dvd opyvo Oeioay THv Oeov Ouyapous TE
Kau Tpuydmous Kab dev avdpous avtov Tas Ouya-
Tépas Tovjoat... Kat Hoiodos oé-
Thow oe rrouperdis ‘Ag podirn
nyao On mpoobodoa, Kah 6é oh éuBare pbnun.
Teudvopn pev erect "Eyemov 7 éBe-
Byxet,

iKeTO & és Durja, hirov paKapEer at Ocotow:

as d€ KAutarpvjotpyn tporitrova’ ‘Ayapépuvova
Otov : 5

AivicO@ TapérexTo Kal etheTo yYelpoy aKOLTHV"

¢ 6 ‘EAévn noxuve NEKOS Labo Meveddouv.


190


V5 RY CE Sa OT


eae ae, ae
‘


oy


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


64.

For how does he say that the same persons (the
Cyclopes) were like the gods, and yet represent them
as being destroyed by Apollo in the Catalogue of
the Daughters of Leucippus ?


65.


“ KRehemus made Timandra his buxom wife.”’


66.
Hesiod in giving their descent makes them (Castor
and Polydeuces) both sons of Zeus.


Hesiod, however, makes Helen the child neither
of Leda nor Nemesis, but of a daughter of Ocean
and Zeus.

67.

Stesichorus says that while sacrificing to the gods
Tyndareus forgot Aphrodite and that the goddess
was angry and made his daughters twice and thrice
wed and deserters of their husbands. ... . And
Hesiod also says:

« And laughter-loving Aphrodite felt jealous when
she looked on them and cast them into evil report.
Then Timandra deserted Echemus and went and
came to Phyleus, dear to the deathless gods; and
even so Clytaemnestra deserted god-like Agamemnon
and lay with Aegisthus and chose a worse mate;
and even so Helen dishonoured the couch of golden-
haired Meneiaus.”’


1Q1


HESIOD


68.
Mvaro Didowry |rys ayos avdpov [aixu|ntawy
lns, wavtev apedel[ixet los avdpov
rokdteoBau Exlas Te Kab éyyei o&| voe lye.
BH & és Tuvdapélov Avrraphy wort v €livexa Kovpns |
"Apryeins i) ef]oos Eyer ypucéns ’Ad| podi|rns 5
Thv oO... €Texely Xapitov apyap|vypular’ éyovcay |
Znvos év ayxoivys cai] Tuvdapem BaclirH]|os
py Octo’ év Naprr|potae Somots [Kovpyn| KvavaTis |
‘Oxeavod Ovyatnp| méy’ él[ajpatov eidos Eyouca


FA A i i ac AE SSC i Bie


! 10
‘k a x x |
TocaavTas O€ yuvatKkas autvpova épya tovlas
Tacas Ypuceias hidras ev Yepoly éyovoas.
cal vb xe 8) Kdotwp te kab 0 Kpatepos Iondv-
SevKNS F |
yapSpov moujcavto Kata Kpatos: GAN Ayayé-
Lvov :
yapBpos éwv éuvato cacryynto Meverdg. 15
Tio & ’Apdiapdov 'Orxreidao dvaktos
-€&|"Ap[yleos éuvdyvto pal éy|yv0ev: adrAN dpa
Kal TOUS
Brave Oedv [aidws paxdpwv véluecis 7 alv-
Opera
Py a x * ”
aXN ovK Hv atratys épyov rapa Tuvdapionow. 20


1Q2


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


68.1
« ... Philoctetes sought her, a leader of spear-
men, ... , most famous of all men at shooting


from afar and with the sharp spear. And he came
to Tyndareus’ bright city for the sake of the Argive
maid who had the beauty of golden Aphrodite, and
the sparkling eyes of the Graces; and the dark-
faced daughter of Ocean, very lovely of form, bare
her when she had shared the embraces of Zeus and
the king Tyndareus in the bright palace ......

(And... . sought her to wife offering as gifts)

ahd as many woman skilled in blameless arts,
each holding a golden bowl in her hands. And
truly Castor and strong Polydeuces would have made
him ? their brother perforce, but Agamemnon, being
son-in-law to Tyndareus, wooed her for his brother
Menelaus.

And the two sons of Amphiaraus the lord, Oecleus’
son, sought her to wife from Argos very near at hand ;


yet ... fear of the blessed gods and the indig-
nation of men caused them also to fail.
*K *k “ x


but there was no deceitful dealing in the sons of


Tyndareus.


+ Lines 1-51 are from Berlin Papyri, 9739; lines 52-106
with B. 1-50 (and following fragments) are from Berlin Papyri
10560. A reference by Pausanias (ili. 24. 10) to Il. 100 ff.
proves that the two fragments together come from the
Catalogue of Women. The second book (the beginning of’
which is indicated after 1. 106) can hardly be the second
book of the Catalogue proper : possibly it should be assigned
to the ‘Hoto:, which were sometimes treated as part of the
Catalogue, and sometimes separated from it.

The remains of the thirty-seven lines following B. 50 in
the Papyrus are too slight to admit of restoration.
2 sc. the Suitor whose name is lost.


LOS


HESIOD


"Ex 0 'lOaxns éuvato ‘Odvacjos tepn is,
VLOS Aaéptao TOUKPOTA pended elds. 7
dpa pev ov TOT eT EMT Tavuapupou elveKa KOUpNS*
70ee yap Kara Oupov 6 67 EavOos Mevédaos
viknoer KTHVvEL yap Ayatov héptatos ev:
ayyerinv & atel Naxedatmovade Tmpoiadre
Kaol[tlop[. 0 ctlarodduw cat aeOdopop@ Worv-
EUKEL. |
prato Of eS ee ee a
pele 62" Vue (awe a. a e \|
SF ase uiah side Tatcee ater, emma Polelpages 30 |
x ” of 2
Kao rope Oo im mood we kat aeOr0pdpo ee Aoe
ipetpov ‘EiXévns moots Eupevat HUKO{LOLO 2
El00S OVTL LOWY, ANN addov pv ov dodo.
‘Ee Purdkns 8 éeuvavto du, avépes ad |
aplo-rol,
vids ‘A ‘Iptxdovo Tloddpens PurXaxioao, 35 7]
NUS T " Axroptdns t VITEpHVOp IIporecinaos: :
apdw o ayyerinv Aaxedatpovdde 1 potadXov
Tuvdapéov mort lt da datdpovos OiBaridao
ToANa © éedvia diOov], wéya yap KAéos [éoxe yu]-
VALKOS,
YANK | 40
Xpule |


NO
Or


* x * *
“Apyetns “Enevns TOT US ep peval NUKO[LOLO.
"Ex & ap AOnvéwv pvad’ vidos Ulete@o Meve-
abevs,
Toda © éedva Sidou: Ketunrtta yap wada OANA


194


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


And from Ithaca the sacred might of Odysseus,
Laértes’ son, who knew many-fashioned wiles, sought
her to wife. He never sent gifts for the sake of the
neat-ankled maid, for he knew in his heart that
golden-haired Menelaus would win, since he was
greatest of the Achaeans in possessions and was ever
sending messages! to horse-taming Castor and prize-
winning Polydeuces.


And ...on’s son sought her to wife (and
brought) . . . bridal-gifts ... . cauldrons .


to horse-taming Castor and prize-winning Polydeuces,
desiring to be the husband of rich-haired Heten,
though he had never seen her beauty, but because he
heard the report of others.

And from Phylace two men of exceeding worth
sought her to wife, Podarces son of Iphiclus, Phylacus’
son, and Actor's noble son, overbearing Protesilaus.
Both of them kept sending messages to Lacedaemon,
to the house of wise Tyndareus, Oebalus’ son, and —
they offered many bridal-gifts, for great was the girl’s
renown, brazen... golden... |

| ** of eee of
(desiring) to be the husband of rich-haired Helen.

From Athens the son of Petedus, Menestheus,
sought her to wife, and offered many bridal-gifts ;
for he possessed very many stored treasures, gold and

1 Wooing was by proxy; so Agamemnon wooed Helen for
his brother Menelaus (ll. 14-15), and Idomeneus, who came
in person and sent no deputy, is specially mentioned as an


exception, and the reason for this—if the restoration printed
in the text be right—is stated (ll. 69 ff.).


195
o 2


HESIOD


v / J f /
éxTNTO, Kpvaov Te NEBNTaS Tle TpiTrOOAas TE, 45
/ / SINS 4 an / n 4
Kana, Ta p evdobe KevOe Somos |IleTeW@o AvaxTos
ois pulv Oupos avyKev éedvaclacbat aKoTev
an / 9 b) \ A > If /
WreloTa TopovT* eet o|v| Tw éédXmre| TO hEepTEpov
clvat
/ € f / / /
TavTw|VY HpoOwy KTHVETC! TE Ow|TiVaLS TE.
"Ixeto 6° Ot8a]rArddo! douovs xpatepos | Av«Ko-


HONS 50
vnuvoty é€x Kpnrys “Enévn|s ever’ nul xopoco.
x * ” *
x # * x


pvato: retoTta é d@pa peta EavOov MevérXaov
pvnetnpwy édtoov: wdra & AOede Ov Kata Ovo
"A pryeins EXévns moots Eppevats NuKopoLo.
Aias & é« Lanapivos apwopmntos TodepLeTns 55
pvaro Sidou & dp éedva [ou |xora, Javpara Epya’
ov Yap eXoV Tporgnva Kat dryxiahov ‘Emridaupov
vijo ov T, Aiywav Maonra TE Kovpol Axasdy
Kat Méyapa OKLOEVTA Kal oppuoerta KopwGop P|
‘Eppcovny "A civny TE mapee ANA VALETAWCAS, 60 |
TOV epar ethimroods Te Boas Kal idea pnra |
TUvEAdoas Ow@oely, € EKEKATTO yap eyxel Makp@.
Avrap am’ EvBoins ’EXedjveap, ¢ OpxXapos avopov,
Xah«wdovridons, peyaltpav ap|yos ARavtwv
[Lvato* Thetora dé da@pa didov: wdra Oo [7Oere
dupe 65
"A pryetys “Brevns TOOLS eupevale 9 MUKO}OLO.
"Ex Kpyrns & éuvato péya c0évols 1 |dopu| evfos,
Aevearions Mivwos ayaxnettoto y[ev |é[Orn,
ovoeé Twa bynor ipa peeTaryyeXov aXX| ov emreurpev,
GAN AUTOS TOV VHL TOAVKANLOL pedatvy 70
1 |veidao, Berlin Papyrus.
196


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


~~ eauldrons and tripods, fine things which lay hid in --———


the house of the lord Petedus, and with them his
heart urged him to win his bride by giving more
gifts than any other; for he thought that no one
of all the heroes would surpass him in possessions and
gifts.

There came also by ship from Crete tothe house of
the son of Oebalus strong Lycomedes for rich-haired
Helen’s sake. ok ** **

o* + ok of
' sought her to wife. And after golden-haired Menelaus
he offered the greatest gifts of all the suitors, and
very much he desired in his heart to be the husband
of Argive Helen with the rich hair.

And from Salamis Aias, blameless warrior, sought
her to wife, and offered fitting gifts, even wonderful
deeds; for he said that he would drive together and
give the shambling oxen and strong sheep of all
those who lived in Troezen and Epidaurus near the
sea, and in the island of Aegina and in Mases, sons of
the Achaeans, and shadowy Megara and frowning
Corinthus, and Hermione and Asine which lie along
the sea: for he was famous with the long spear.

But from Euboea Elephenor, leader of men, the
son of Chalcodon, prince of the bold Abantes, sought
her to wife. And he offered very many gifts, and
greatly he desired in his heart to be the husband of
rich-haired Helen.

And from Crete the mighty Idomeveus sought her
to wife, Deucalion’s son, ofispring of renowned Minos.
He sent no one to woo her in his place, but came
himself in his black ship of many thwarts over the


LO


HESIOD ATA |


BA vTép Oryvdrtov tovtTovu bia Koda KedXat| VO
Tuvoapéou TOTL O@ La Said poves, oppa [doer
A |p| yetnv] ‘EXévyy, Be addog * ot Kat al youro
Koupny; py K|Aéa Tacav émi , xPova dtav tkavev. |
“Igeto & évyjecin Znvos pwéya [pndopévoro v6) |
(Thirteen lines lost.) |


Tuvddpeos 6€ ava€, drrocot| x[ tov] efvexa Kkovpys,

y 9 9 / e \ ed gf) ¢/ an ¢c A
ovT amréTrepurpev Ex@v| out [at0’]| ere [Sapo |v éExa-

[oTov: 90

ff \ a b) / 4 \
mavtTas oé pynoTHpas amynteev OpK[ta TitTAa
P) VA 4 2) apt S, \ b iA > A
opyopeval T éxehevoe Kab [axpn|re@ alpadjacGar
oTOvOH, py Ti eT adXAov avev EOev Adra T| ever Oar
aud yao xovpns ev[w|rlévou: 6|s dé Kev avdpav

b) NY v4 / VA / Je aie | na \ INA
avTos Edo.To Bin pewerty T aToVetTo Kat alow, = 95
TOV pera TavTas divaryev aodreas opunOjva
; TOLD TL O[LEVOUS. Tol & aM TEPEDS émiPovrto
ENT OfLEVOL TeNéeLy TravTes yapov' AA al wa TavTas
“Atpetons [vixnoe |p apnipiros Mevédaos f |
TAELTTA Top@y: Xetpwv 6 évi Inri@ brAnevte —«2100_
Tn ActOny exopete TO0aS Taxuv e€€oVvov avdpav, 1
maid € T €ovT* Ov yap Kev apniptros Mevédaos
VURNo oie TUS ANOS emx Goviov av0 porov |
pvnG TEVOY Enevny, eb py Kixe mrapGévov ove av if
oiKkace vooTnaas é IIndtou @KUS AXUAAEUS. 105
GAN apa thy Tpiv y érxev apnidtros Mevénaos.


B
H. réxev “Eppcovny cardia pupov éy pmeyapotowy
eNTTOV. TAVTES O€ Jeot bina Ovmov eevro
é& Epudos: O17 yap ToTe wHdeTO OéoKena epya


f


1 adAos oiov ax. .... Papyrus.


198


‘CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


Ogylian sea across the dark wave to the home of .—


wise Tyndareus, to see Argive Helen and that no
one else should bring back for him the girl wnose
renown spread all over the holy earth.

And at the prompting of Zeus the all-wise came.

# * * **

But of all who came for the maid’s sake, the lord
Tyndareus sent none away, nor yet received the gift
of any, but asked of all the suitors sure oaths, and bade
them swear and vow with unmixed libations that no
~ one else henceforth should do aught apart from him as
touching the marriage of the maid with shapely arms ;
butif any man should cast off fear and reverence and
take her by force, he bade all the others together
follow after and make him pay the penalty. And
they, each of them hoping to accomplish his marriage,
obeyed him without wavering. But warlike Mene-
laus, the son of Atreus, prevailed against them all
together, because he gave the greatest gifts.

But Chiron was tending the son of Peleus, swift-
footed Achilles, pre-eminent among men, on woody
Pelion ; for he was still a boy. For neither warlike
Menelaus nor any other of men on earth would have
prevailed in suit tor Helen, if fleet Achilles had
found her unwed. But, as it was, warlike Menelaus


won her before.
)


If.


And she (Helen) bare neat-ankled Hermione in
the palace, a child unlooked for.

Now all the gods were divided through strife; for

1 The Papyrus here marks the beginning of a second book,


possibly of the Hoiae. The passage (ll. 2-50) probably led
up to an account of the Trojan (and Theban ?) war, in which,


Sr ie


HESIOD


Levs vYyiBpenerns, peta Kar’ aTreipova yatav

TupBactas, On 6€ yévos pepom cov avO pore

TOANOY ALTTHCAL omedoe, Tpopacw pev ONeoo aL

ruxas nptléel| v iva pea devr lotoe Bporoicw

TEKVA Gedy peel yen, pLopov of |Oarpoiorw o opavTa,

ANN’ ob pmev paKapes [Kal és VoTEpo|v ws TO Tapos
ep

yopls am avOpwrear [Biotov Kall 70€ éxwou.

tots S€] par [a0alvat[wv te Kai éx| Ovnrav


avO pwTrav
f >) / 4 \ / 3 +
[yeevapevors erréOnKe Trovov Te K |al Adyos ET AXEL
Levis chaos din dine ont loose ee eae aie


(Two lines missing.)


EAI I ES AEE AS ee ae a

HRS OPER AAS ae pines pedawvaav Trl Bain

- 1 + we epoiv te Blinds te héptatos eivas

RD er eee al verte Karabynt av abpeomov

doca T env 60a T élaoTtl Kal omwmoca pédreEL
éceaOat

Tact Oepua trevor jpey la pnder at Ads yEpatpes

Bovras TAaTpos €oto |, Avos vepermyepeTao:

ov yap TLs oaha noe | OTTL ppdccacbar éweArA€EV

ovTe 0 leap paxapov ouTE Oontov avO pwr ov

Tap |oAras Alby KEPaas aro VAAK®@ barre

avopav 7 poor évt OnLoTATe TEC OVTOD.

AND ovmrm TOTE TAT POs émna Ob dveTo  pevos opund,

ola TE Kap aNEELVOVTES operépowo TEKETOL

TépTovT avOpwTot mpatriowy [0] éreTépTreT Epw7

Tatpos éptabevéos peyan avopact wnooévoro.

TloArxa 8 a6 BroOpav Sé&rdpav apvovTa

yapwace


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


at that very time Zeus who thunders on high was .— —


meditating marvellous deeds, even to mingle storm
and tempest over the boundless earth, and already
he was hastening to make an utter end of the
race of mortal men, declaring that he would
destroy the lives of the demi-gods, that the children
of the gods should not mate with wretched mortals,
seeing their fate with their own eyes; but that the
blessed gods henceforth even as aforetime should have
their living and their habitations apart from men.
But on those who were born of immortals and of man-
kind verily Zeus laid toil and sorrow upon sorrow.


Be NP * of 2K
nor any one of men... should go upon black
ships... to be strongest in the might of his
hands . .. of mortal men declaring to. all those


things that were, and those that are, and those that
shall be, he brings to pass and glorifies the counsels
of his father Zeus who drives the clouds. For no
one, either of the blessed gods or of mortal men,
knew surely that he would contrive through the
sword to send to Hades full many a one of heroes
fallen in strife. But at that time he knew not as
yet the intent of his father’s mind, and how men
delight in protecting their children from doom. And
he delighted in the desire of his mighty father’s heart
who rules powerfully over men.

From stately trees the fair leaves fell in abun-
according to Works and Days 161-166, the Race of Heroes
perished. The opening of the Cypria is somewhat similar.
Somewhere in the fragmentary lines 13-19 a son of Zeus—
almost certainly Apollo—was introduced, though for what
purpose is not clear. With 1. 31 the destruction of man (cp.
ll. 4-5) by storms which spoil his crops begins: the remain-


ing verses are parenthetical, describing the snake ‘‘ which
bears its young in the spring season.”


201


HESIOD


XEvEeTO KANG TETHNAQ, peeoke dé Ka pT Os épate
avetovtos Bopéao mepilapeves Atos alton
éCecKev O€ Jadacca, TpOpeer ke 6€ TaVT aro ToI0,
T puter Kev d€ [evos B oTeoD, puvvdecke dé KapTros 35
Opy év elapivi, OTE T aT pUXos ovpert TLE TEL
yains év KevO wave TpiT@ érel T pla TEKVA.
éapo|s . pev KaT 6pos Kal ava Spupa TuKVa Kal
UNV

vood.ly adtuckdlov Kat atrexOaipov matov avopav
dyKkea Kal KYnmovs KaTalvaieras UANéVTAS? 40
XELLOvOS & eTLOVTOS vo [yOovt tuKv@ év avTpp
KELTAL TOAN EM LETT A [MEVOS el prOnhéa. (2) purra,
SELVOS OPiS KATA VATA dal pouvos oT iy ao Ly atvots.
anna puv UBpioTHv TE Kal [aypLov, ov TL haTetor,
Ka Atos Cape: D7;| sree Se 45°
yux x1) TOD Y oin KaTaNeiTe| TAL ev eae 2.

7 Oo aud’ avToxuTov arapl nv TpiCovea ToTaTal
jyBavy ért 0 ipa Kata YO[ovos evpvodetns
ciow aduavpwletca Tob] !
KelTaL O€ 50

(Traces of 37 following lines.) |


69.


Tzetzes,| Exeg. Iliad. 68. 19H. o Ayapéuvor,
opolers dé Kal Mevedaos Kal’ “Hoiodov Kai “Ac
oyvAov [rcto Pévous viod Atpéws matdes Yop
Sovrae .. = KaTa Oe NoLpooavam ‘Ar péos KaL
“Aepomns TDrevo Pevngs. TiXeia beauties dé Kal Kreon-
Nas THs Atavtos *Ayapuéuvwv, Mevéraos kat
"Avaki Bia.


1 ¢. 1110-1180 a.p. His chief work was a poem, Chiliades,
in accentual verse of nearly 13,000 lines,


202 .


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


dance fluttering down to the ground, and the fruit-.—


fell to the ground because Boreas blew very fiercely
at the behest of Zeus; the deep seethed and all
things trembled at his blast: the strength of
mankind consumed away and the fruit failed in
the season of spring, at that time when the Hairless
One! in a secret place in the mountains gets three
young every three years. In spring he dwells upon
the mountain among tangled thickets and brushwood,
keeping afar from and hating the path of men, in
the glens and wooded glades. But when. winter
comes on, he lies in a close cave beneath the earth
and covers himself with piles of luxuriant leaves,
a dread serpent whose back is speckled with awful
spots. .

But when he becomes violent and _ fierce
unspeakably, the arrows of Zeus lay him low. . . .
Only his soul is left on the holy earth, and that
flits gibbering about a small unformed den. And
it comes enfeebled to sacrifices beneath the broad-
Pavmecrearth \ 0. and it lies)... 10"


69.

Agamemnon and Menelaus likewise according to
Hesiod. and Aeschylus are regarded as the sons of
Pleisthenes, Atreus’ son. And according to Hesiod,
Pleisthenes was a son of Atreus and Aérope, and
Agamemnon, Menelaus and Anaxibia were the
children of Pleisthenes and Cleolla the daughter of
Dias.


17.e. the snake; asin Works and Days 524, the ‘‘ Boneless
One” is the cuttle-fish,


203


HESIOD


70.
Laurentian Scholiast on Sophocles’ Electra 539.
» Téxe? “Eppsovny dovpixret® Meverda:
omTAoTaTov 6 érexev Nixdatpatov Cav “Apyos.
71.


e ° 5 ¢ ‘4
Pausanias, i. 43.1. oida 6€ “Hoiodov moimoavra
/ la) / lal
ev Katanroye yuvaixav Idiyéverav ovK atro0aveip,
yvopn 5€ Aptéuoos “Exdrnp eivas.


(lore


Hustathius, Hom, 13. 4%) sq; mY dé, dact, Bovtys
DLOS Tse Sion. as “Hoiodos év Kataddyo.


TD.

Pausanias, ii. 6.5. . . . Hotodos ... émotnoenv
as Epexdéws ein Yexvev.
74,


Plato, Minos, p. 320. dD.


0s BacirevTaTos éoKxe KaTAOYHToV Baciinov
/ /
Kal TAELoTOV HvagcE TEPLKTLCLOV avOpaTraY
A an \ i /
Znvos EXOV TKHTTpPOV: TO Kat TOAEWY Bacinrevev.


75.

Hesychius," er Evpuyuy ayov. Mernoayopas
TOV “Avdporyeor Edpuyuny eiphobat dnote Tov
Mivwos, ep @ TOV ayava Ti06q bau emeTapLov
"AOnvnow év TO Kepapecx@. kat Hotodos:


Etpuyins & éte Kodpos AOnvawy tepaar.


1 Of Alexandria. He lived in the 5th century, and com-
piled a Greek Lexicon.


204


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOTAE
+0.


«“ And she (Helen) bare to Menelaus, famous with
the spear, Hermione and her youngest-born, Nico-
stratus, a scion of Ares.”

71. | |

I know that Hesiod in the Catalogue of Women
represented that Iphigeneia was not killed but, by
the will of Artemis, became Hecate.!


72.


Butes, it is said, was a son ot Poseidon: so Hesiod
in the Catalogue. |
Ve.

Hesiod represented Sicyon as the son of Erech-
theus.


74,


(Minos) who was most kingly of mortal kings
and reigned over very many people dwelling round
about, holding the sceptre of Zeus wherewith he ruled
many.”

75.

The athletic contest in memory of Eurygyes.
Melesagoras says that Androgeos the son of Minos
was called Kurygyes, and that a contest in his honour
is held near his tomb at Athens in the Ceramicus.
And Hesiod writes:


“And Eurygyes,* while yet a lad in holy
AES...


1 According to this account Iphigeneia was carried by
Artemis to the Tauric Chersonnese (the Crimea). The Tauri
(Herodotus iv. 103) identified their maiden-goddess with
Iphigeneia; but Euripides (Iph. in Tauris) makes her
merely priestess of the goddess.

2 For his murder Minos exacted a yearly tribute of boys and
girls, to be devoured by the Minotaur, from the Athenians.


205


HESIOD


76.
Plutarch, Theseus 20.  odXdol 6& Oyo...
mept TAS ‘A peddvns .. . atrorerbOjvat de Tov


dEeLvos yap py eTetpev €pos Ilavornisos fee
TOUTO yap TO érros éx Tov Hovddov Metctatpatov
éFeretvy dyno ‘Hpéas 0 Meyapets.
Athenaeus,’ xiii. 557 a. ‘Hotodos é dyow Kab
"Torrnyv cat AiyAny (Tov Oncéa vopipos yqpat).


Ve

Strabo, ix. p. 393. Kuxpetdns odus' Ov now
‘Hoiodos tpadévta vo Kuypéws éFenaPjvar vo
"EKupvroyou Avpatvopevoy THY ViCOV, UTObEEAT Bat
d€ avtov thy Anuntpa eis EXevotva cal yevéo Gar
TAUTNS ApwpiTrorov.

78.

Argument I. to the Shield of Heracles. ‘Atod-
Aw@voos Sé 0 ‘Pddsos... dynaly avTod (Harodov)
eivas &Kx TE TOD XapaKrijpos Kal eK TOD maw TOV
Toraov év té Katadoyo evpicxeuv nuLoxoovTa
“Hpaknet.

79)
Schol. on Soph. Trach. 266.

7 Oo bmoxucapevn KardiCa@vos LrparoviKnn

AB tht ov 8 ey pmeyapotow éyeivato pidratov viov"

Tov O viels éyévovto Atoatwy te KXutios Te

Tofevs T avTiOeos te’ Igeros, 6f0s’ ‘Apnos” |

Tous 6€ we om hor aTny téxeto EavOnv lonevav

"Avtiomn Kpetovoa tadatod NavBonrioao.

1 Of Naucratis. His Dezpnosophistae (‘‘ Dons at Dinner”)


is an encyclopedia of miscellaneous topics in the form of a


dialogue. His date is c. 230 A.D.
206


5


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE
76.


There are many tales... about Ariadne ..., how
that she was deserted by Theseus for love of another
woman : |

“For strong love for Aegle the daughter of
Panopeus overpowered him.”’

For Hereas of Megara says that Peisistratus re-
moved this verse from the works of Hesiod.


But Hesiod says that Theseus Relaed both Hippe
_ and Aegle aaah


77.

The snake of Cychreus: Hesiod says that it was
brought up by Cychreus, and was driven out by
Kurylochus as defiling the island, but that Demeter
received it into Hleusis, and that it became her
attendant.

78.

But Apollonius of Rhodes says that it (the Shield
of Heracles) is Hesiod’s both from the general
character of the work and from the fact that in the
Catalogue we again find Iolaus as charioteer of
Heracles.

79:

“ And fair-girdled Stratonica conceived and bare
in the palace Eurytus her well-loved son. Of him
sprang sons, Didaeon and Clytius and god-like
Toxeus and Iphitus, a scion of Ares. And after
these Antiope the queen, daughter of the aged
son of Naubolus, bare her youngest child, golden-
haired lolea.”’


207


HESIOD


80.
Herodvan.
r 9 / ! / \
» Téxevy AutodXvKeov te PiNapmova Te KAVTOY AVOHY


Etymologicum Magnum. 7
c/ \ / uh , /
éTTL Ke YEepol AdBeckev, aeloeXa TavTa TiDEcKeD.


81.
Apollonius, Hom. Lexicon.
Aimvutos at téxeto TAnonvopa IepiOoor re.


82.
Strabo vii. p. 322.

7 tor yap Aoxpos AeXéyor nynoato Nawr,
TOUS pa tote Kpovidns Zeds abOuta pijdea eidws
NEKTOUS ex yains Adas! Tope Aeveariov.
éx 5€ UOwy éyévovto BpoTtot Naol dé KaNEdVTO.

83.
Tzetzes, Schol. in Hueg. Iliad. 126.
‘Trea, TOV p epthyce aag Atos vios “ATo\Nor"
Kal ot TOUT OVvO-NVY ovope c/puevat, ovvEeKa vupny
ev popevos ihewy pixOn € épaTn prrornte

NATL TO Ore TELYOS evdpurjroLo 7 OANOS

ibnrov totnoe Loceddwv cat Aro ov.


84,

Scholiast on Homer, Od. xi. 326. Krupern Muvvov
tov Loceda@vos Kat ‘Eupvavacons THs ‘Trrép-.
pavros yaunleica PuraK@ TO Aniovos ’ ‘Agixrdov
TIKTEL TOOWKN TALOA. TOUTOV Aéyerae 61a THY TOV


1 Heyne: aaéas, Villebrun: adAéovs, Strabo. Line 4
(quoted by Scholiast on Pindar, Ol. ix. 68) was added by
Bergk to Strabo’s citation.


208


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE
80.
“Who bare Autolycus and Philammon, famous in


speech... All things that he (Autolycus) took
in his hands, he made to disappear.”


81.
« Aepytus again, begot Tlesenor and Peirithéus.”’


82.

“For Locrus truly was leader of the Lelegian
people, whom Zeus the Son of Cronos, whose wis-
dom is unfailing, gave to Deucalion, stones gathered
out of the earth. So out of stones mortal men
were made, and they were called people.” !


83.

« ... Ileus whom the lord Apollo, son of
Zeus, loved. And he named him by this name,
because he found a nymph complaisant? and was.
joined with her in sweet love, on that day when
Poseidon and Apollo raised high the wall of the
well-built city.”

84, .

Clymene the daughter of Minyas the son of
Poseidon and of Kuryanassa, Hyperphas’ daughter,
was wedded to Phylacus the son of Deion, and bare
Iphiclus, a boy fleet of foot. It is said of him that

1 There is a fancied connection between Adas (stone) and
Aads (people). The reference is to the stones which Deucalion
and Pyrrha transformed into men and women after the Flood.

2 Eustathius identifies Ileus with Oileus, father of Aias.


Here again there is fanciful etymology, ’IAevs being similar
to fAews (complaisant, gracious).


209


HESIOD


TOOOV a cpeT HY cuvapirrao bat Tots ave "ous, eri Te
Tov actaxver SuépyerOat .. . 7 O€ iaTopia Tap
‘Hooda
= ba / ws 4 >Q\ /
dxpov ér avOepixwy Kaptov Oéev ovdé KaTEKXA,
GX érl Tupapiverv Abépwv SpomdacKe TOdETo!
Kal ov CLVéTKETO KAPTOV.
85. Hs
Choeroboscus,' i. 123, 22 H.
X\ \ / / l4
7 0€ Ooav Téxev viov.
86. :
Eustathius, Hom. 1623. 44. tov dé Mdpwva...
& \ / 3 / ¢ ie bY / f
ov tov tatépa “Kvav@nv “Hoiodos Otvorriwves,
dacw, taTtopet viov Avovicov.
87.
Athenaeus x. 428 B, ©.
ola, Avavucos OOK avopact Nappa Kab ax fos.
bates aonv min, oivos dé ot EmXeETO papyos,
auv o€ mooas yetpas Te S€et ~raooay T€ VOOV TE
dea pols adpdatooe direl 6€ € wanrOakos Uarvos.


88.


Strabo ix. p. 442
“Hon Aidvpous LEPOUS vatovea KON@VOUS
Awtio év Tedio ToAU BOT pos avr ‘A ptpovo
vikharo BoBiddos Myvns 1é8a mapOévos ads.
89.
Schol. on Pindar, Pyth. ui. 48.


T@ pev ap ayyeros Oe Kopag t vepijs ao dasTos
Hv0e és nyabénv, ppaccev & apa épy atdnra


1 ¢. 600 A.D., a lecturer and grammarian of Constantinople.


210 . .


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


through his power of running he could race the


winds and could move along upon the ears of
corn! . . . The tale is in Hesiod :

“ He would run over the fruit of the asphodel and
not break it; nay, he would run with his feet upon
wheaten ears and not hurt the fruit.”

85.
«¢ And she bare a son Thoas.”
86.

Maro,” whose father, it is said, Hesiod relates to
have been Euanthes the son of Oenopion, the son of
Dionysus.

Se.

“Such gifts as Dionysus gave to men, a joy and a
sorrow both. Who ever drinks to fullness, in him
wine becomes violent and binds together his hands
and feet, his tongue also and his wits with fetters
unspeakable: and soft sleep embraces him.”


ORR g
“ Or like her (Coronis) who lived by the holy Twin
Hills in the plain of Dotium over against Amyrus
rich in grapes, and washed her feet in the Boebian
lake, a maid unwed.”
So.

“To him, then, there came a messenger from the
sacred feast to goodly Pytho, a crow,? and he told
1 Imitated by Vergil, Aen. vii. 808, describing Camilla.

2 Priest of Apollo, and, according to Homer, discoverer of
wine. Maronea in Thrace is said to have been called after him.


* The crow was originally white, but was turned black by
Apollo in his anger at the news brought by the bird.


211
pP.2


HESIOD


PoiBo axepooxopun ott loyus éynwe Kopovw
Kinratidns, Dreyvao Sioyvnrovo OvyaTpa.
90.

Athenagoras,' Petition for the Christians, 29.
wept 6¢ Ackryiod Hatodos pwév—

TaTHp © avopav te Dewy Te
yooat, aw Ovdrvprov o€ Bartov Wordevte
KEPavv@

éctave Antoidny, DoiS@ cov Ovpov opivov. —

sale

Philodemus, On Piety, 34. “Hatodos 6é (Aéryeu Tov
"Amo\A@va) . . . pédrewy prev eis TOV Taptapov
wTo Tov Aros éuBrAnOHvaL, THS Antovs 8 ixetev-
caons, avdpt Ontevoat.

v2.

Schol. on Pindar, Pyth. ix. 6.

“H oin DOin Xapitwy aro Kdddos éxovea
IInvecod map’ bdwp Kary vatecxe Kupnvn.
“93.

Servius on Vergil, Georg. 1. 14. Aristaeum in-
vocat, id est, Apollinis et Cyrenes filium, quem
Hesiodus dicit Apollinem pastoralem.

G4,
Scholiast on Vergil, Georg. iv. 361.
at illum
Curvata in montis faciem circumstetit unda.
Hunc versum ex Hesiodi Gynaecon transtulit.


1 A philosopher of Athens under Hadrian and Antoninus.
He became a Christian and wrote a defence of the Christians
addressed to Antoninus Pius.


212


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


unshorn Phoebus of secret deeds, that Ischys son of —~-——


Elatus had wedded Coronis the daughter of Phlegyas
of birth divine.
90.

Concerning Agclepius Hesiod says: “And the
father of men and gods was wrath, and from Olympus
he smote the son of Leto with a lurid thunder-
bolt and killed him, arousing the anger of Phoebus.”’


ol.


But Hesiod (says that Apollo) would have been
cast by Zeus into Tartarus!; but Leto interceded for
him, and he became endian to a mortal.


a4

“ Or like her, beautiful Cyrene, who dwelt in Phthia
by the water of Peneus and had the beauty of the
Graces.”’

93.

He invokes Aristaeus, that is, the son of Apollo
and Cyrene, whom Hesiod calls “the shepherd
Apollo.” 2

94,

‘“But the water stood all round him, bowed into
the semblance of a mountain.”’

This verse he has taken over from Hesiod’s
Catalogue of Women.


1 Zeus slew Asclepius. (fr. 90) because of his success as a
healer, and Apollo in revenge killed the Cyclopes (fr. 64).
In punishment Apollo was forced to serve Admetus as herds-
man. (Cp. Euripides, Alcestis, 1-8.)

2 For Cyrene and Aristaeus, cp. Vergil, Georgics, iv. 315 Ff.


213


HESIOD


oo

Schol. on Homer, Iliad ii. 469.

“H otny ‘Tpin Bowwtin étpede xovpnv.
Sin:

Palaephatus,’ e. 42, mepl Fow Kal ‘Apdiovos:
ia Topobow aNNOL TE Kat “Hatodos, dru KiGapa To
Teryos TOV OnPav éTEeiyicay.

ore
Schol. on Soph. Trach. 1167.

"Eote tes EXXomin ToAvAnLOS HO évAEi MOD,

APVELN UNNOLOL Kat eiALTrOOET aL BoETowW:

év O avdpes vatovor ToNUppHvES TOAVBOUTAL |

TOOL QTTELPET LOL, pora Ounrav avOp@rav: 5

evda dé Awdavy TLS ém eax aH TET ONO TAL”

THD dé Zeus ae Kal OV ypnoTHpLov eivas

Titov avOp@Trots .

. vatov 8 ev mud weve pnyou:

évOev érrexyPoviot pavtTnia TavTAa pépovTat, a

Os 67) KetOs porwv Ocov duBportov éEepecivy 10 |

da@pa dhépwv T EXOnat avy otwvols ayalotow. |

98.
Berlin Papyri, No. 9777.

bopir[n . Ovnt ov d€ ye Tis Kev AVETAN

eyxel pépvacdal. Kab évavTiov oppnOfvar,

mip y Hpaxnijlos HeyaAdHTOPOS "AXKaLOL0;

avteotat + apnid| thos kpatepos Medéaypos

EavOoxopns [Ouvjos t& “ANOains dirXos vids" 5

Tov Kal at? obO[adpov am ehaumeTo Jeomidaes TOP

yopyav: unr @ O€ mot év Kadvdav ddpacce


* A writer on mythology of uncertain date.
2 The fragment is part of a leaf from a ah book of
the 4th century A.D.


214


3
x


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE
95.


“Or like her (Antiope) whom Boeotian Hyria


nurtured as a maid.”
96.


Of Zethus and Amphion. Hesiod and some
others relate that they built the walls of Thebes by
playing on the lyre.

97.

“ There is a land Ellopia with much glebe and rich
meadows, and ‘rich in flocks and shambling kine.
There dwell men who have many sheep and many
oxen, and they are in number past telling, tribes of
mortal men. And there upon its border is built a city,
Dodona!; and Zeus loved it and (appointed) it to be
his oracle, reverenced. by men... And they (the
doves) lived in the hollow of an oak. From them
men of earth carry away all kinds of prophecy,—
whosoever fares to that spot and questions the
deathless god, and comes bringing gifts with ies
omens.’


98.


«... strife... Of mortals who would have dared
to fight him with the spear and charge against him,
save only Heracles, the great-hearted offspring of
Alcaeus? Such an one was (?) strong Meleager
loved of Ares, the golden-haired, dear son of
Oeneus and Althaea. From his fierce eyes there
shone forth portentous fire: and once in high Caly-
don he slew the destroying beast, the fierce wild

1 In Epirus. The oracle was first consulted by Deucalion
and Pyrrha after the Flood. Later writers say that the


god responded in the rustling of leaves in the oaks for which
the place was famous.


215


HESIOD


Op o[roov YrovvyY obY aypLoV apyLooovTa.

ode Tus é€v trode [OUT aivyn OntoTHTL

Err és dvta is[a@v oxedov éXOéuev ovde paxerVar 10
dvdSpav hpowy, oor [év mpopaxoict havein

GAN br’ AmdrAXovos xeplolv Béreoiv T eapacly
wapvapevos Kov[pnow tmép Kaduddvos epavvis.
rovs & ddnrous 'OuwvAle téxev, MopPdovos vid,

Dnpéa  immodaplov ’Ayéraov 7’ €Eoxov adhAwv 15
Toféa te KAvper[ov te cal avtiOeov Ilepipavta
[épynv 7 jvcopov [kat érippova Anraverpay,

i) Téy” UTrOSuNOel_ oa Bin “Hpaxdnein

“TM rov kal VrAAvov cal [Krjoimmov cat ‘Odirny:


Tovs TéKe, Kal Sel ov év aidpetnau Epese 20
OMTOTE PAPMAIO] EV. \., wnlial ada
NOm[os] KAlpa peNauvay Eyov . . « s

OAs


Schol. on Homer, Iliad. xxiii. 679. kal “Haiodos
dé dno év OnBats adtod atroPavortos, Apyetav
tyv Adpaotou avy ddrdos édOety emt THY KNdEeLav
tov Oidumdéos.

po.

Papyri greci ¢ latine, No. 131 (2nd—3rd century).?

To © tex év peyapows| “AAKpdova tloipélva
ral ov.

Tov p umép Apryetilous Kadunises Edxecizre| mXo1,

1 Most of the smaller restorations appear in the original


publication, but the larger are new: these last are highly
conjectural, there being no definite clue to the general sense.


216


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


boar with gleaming tusks. In war and in dread ~~


strife no man of the heroes dared to face him and to
approach and fight with him when he appeared in
the forefront. But he was slain by the hands and
arrows of Apollo,! while he was fighting with the
Curetes for pleasant Calydon. And these others
'(Althaea) bare to Oeneus, Porthaon’s son; horse-
taming Pheres, and Agelaus surpassing all others,
Toxeus and Clymenus and godlike Periphas, and rich-
haired Gorga and wise Deianeira, who was subject
in love to mighty Heracles and bare him Hyllus and
Glenus and Ctesippus and Odites. These she bare
and in ignorance she did a fearful thing: when
(she had received) « . the poisoned robe that held
black doom , .
90m

And yet Hesiod says that after he had died in
Thebes, Argeia the daughter of Adrastus together
with others (cp. frag. 99) came to the lamentation
over Oedipus.
oo."

And (Eriphyle) bare in the palace Alcmaon,?
shepherd of the people, to Amphiaraus. Him (Am-

1 According to Homer and later writers Meleager wasted
away when his mother Althea burned the brand on which
his life depended, because he had slain her brothers in the
dispute for the hide of the Calydonian boar. (Cp. Bacchylides,
Ode v. 136 ff.)

2 The fragment probably belongs to the Catalogues proper
rather than to the Hoiae ; but, as its position is uncertain,
it may conveniently be associated with Frags. 994 and the
Shield of Heracles.

3 Alemaon (who took part in the second of the two heroic
Theban expeditions) is perhaps mentioned only incidentally
as the son of Amphiaraus, who seems to be clearly indicated
in ll. 7-8, and whose story occupies Il. 5-10. At |. 11 the


subject changes and Hlectryon is introduced as father of
_Alemena.


217


HESIOD


OupaTta T evmeye|Oés Te déuas eloavTa LOov| cat,
appétrovta| Tapas ToAvKNdEéos ’OrdeTro[ dao,


Javpacay wv. pe. evoux .rwouro |. .vipereni® 5


T@ O€ TOT Els @ABals Aavaol Jepamovtes "A pn[os
€otrov? ws ke ...| [lodvvetxei £0095 1 [dpowTo.


ev 6€ Kal eidoTa Shy Znvos twapa 0échara | ravtTa
cal lal 4 As an >] > le | an /
yaia Yavodod ¢ THAOV | at Adgecod Babvéi|vew


Katie cvv O ima jour Kab dppace KoAANT| oto. 10°}


Dijpev & “Hrextpvov] TléXo7ros mepicadréa

[<oupyy:
yeivaTo © év peydpovow | o O/LOV AEXOS cicavaBlatvav —
Iepoetons| 7 Hpoa Kab aly wn T RD TEP [eovra
bie : PvrAovopov Te Kedawéa T ‘Ap |pipuayov TE

. | re xal EvpvBrov KNeLTOV TE [ . 15

TOUS 3 wévras| Taco VAUGLKAUTOL Ps gt hg
Bovou én’ eid |robecow, érety al . |val .

. vinecow é em eUpea VOTA dalAdoons
"Adepofom & dpa | poovvn [ etm Jero Renee yo| vevow


oes Sesto a ees (EP 2 2
x ”
Tey’ smodpnbetoa| eienaiigenle Kpolviove
” " xk x
100.


Argument to the Shield of Heracles, i. THS ‘Aomidos
) apXn €v TO TETAPTO Kero pépeTar meéexpl
oTLX@Vv Vv Kal >’.
* grapoly (? ); original publication.
2 For scansion cf. Shield, ll. 16, 82.


218


,


CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE


phiaraus) did the Cadmean (Theban) women with


trailing robes admire when they saw face to face his
eyes and well-grown frame, as he was busied about
the burying of Oedipus, the man of many woes.
Once the Danai, servants of Ares, followed
tiga to Thebes, to win renown . . . for Polynices.
But, though well he knew from Heit all -things
ordained, the earth yawned and swallowed him up
with his horses and jointed chariot, far from deep-
eddying Alpheus.
But Electryon married the all-beauteous daughter
of Pelops and, going up into one bed with her, the


son of Perses begat... and Phylonomus and
Celaeneus and Amphimachus and... and Kurybius
and famous... All these the Taphians, famous


shipmen, slew in fight for oxen with shambling hoofs,

. in ships across the sea’s wide back. So Alemena
alone was left to delight her parents... and
the daughter of Electryon ... who was subject
in love to the dark-clouded son of Cronos and bare
(famous Heracles).


' 100.


The beginning of the Shield as far as the 56th”
verse is current in the fourth Catalogue.


219


HESIOD


HSIOAOT ASTIIZ


abe oin mpoTovaa Sopous Kat marpioa yatay

prvoev € és OnBas jet apntov ‘Apditptova
a Wale Juyatnp haoaaoov "Hex pvwvos

h pa yuvatk@v hirov éxaivuto Ondutepdov
eldel Te pueyéVer Te’ vOoV ye perv ov Tis Eptte fee
Taov, as Ovntat Ovntois Téxov evvnbetoat.
TAS KaL ao Kepner Bredapov T dTo KvavEedwy
Toloy an? oiov Te ToAUX PUT OV ‘Appooitns.
) € Kal OS Kara Ouwov édov TiecKEeY aKOLTHY,
@S OU TH TLS ETLTE yUVaLK@Y OnrAUTEpawV: 10
7 ev ot Tatép écOXov arréxtave ids dapacoas,
yvoodmevos tTept Bovoi AiT@V O 6 ye TaTploa

yatav

és OnBas ixétevoe hepeccakéas Kadpetous.
év0’ 6 ye Sw@paTt evate avy aidoin TapaKoiTte
voo uy arep PLAOTHTOS épipepou, ovde OF HEV 15
7 ply hexew@y emeBiva evo pupov "Hrextpuarns,
™ piv Ye hovoy TigatTo KacLYyVHTOV peyad bpov
AS GrOXOV, panrep@ O€ KatagbrcEat Tupl KOpas
mie! mpoov Tadiov idé T'nreBoawr,
TO * yap ot SueKeLTo, Deot o emt peaprupoe Hoav: 20
TOV O is omitero phe, ereityeTo & 6TTe TaXLoTE
exTeheoat peya Epyov, 6 of AcoOev Oémts Hev.
TO O dpa téuevor TONE MOLO TE pudorioos TE
Bovwtot TAnELT TOL, v UTEP CAKEWV TVELOVTES,
Aoxpot 7 ay XEMaXoL Kal Daxijes bey av por 25
EoTovT* npye Oe Toto w és mais “AXKatovo
KUOLOWV NaotaL. TaTHP O avopav Te Vewv TE


1 A: &s, MSS,


220


SHIELD OF HERACLES


HESIOD’S SHIELD OF HERACLES


Or like her who left home and country and came
to Thebes, following warlike Amphitryon,—even
Alemena, the daughter of Electryon, gatherer of the
people. She surpassed the tribe of womankind in
beauty and in height; and in wisdom none vied with
her of those whom mortal women bare of union with
mortal men. Her face and her dark eyes wafted
such charm as comes from golden Aphrodite. And
she so honoured her husband in her heart as none of
womankind did before her. Verily he had slain her
noble father violently when he was angry about
oxen; so he left his own country and came _ to
Thebes and was suppliant to the shield-carrying men
of Cadmus. There he dwelt with his modest wife
without the joys of love, nor might he go in unto
the neat-ankled daughter of Electryon until he had
avenged the death of his wife’s great-hearted
brothers and utterly burned with blazing fire the
villages of the heroes, the Taphians and Teleboans ;
for this thing was laid upon him, and the gods were
witnesses to it. And he feared their anger, and
hastened to perform the great task to which Zeus had
bound him. With him went the _horse-driving
Boeotians, breathing above their shields, and the
Locrians who fight hand to hand, and the gallant
Phocians eager for war and battle. And the noble
son of Alcaeus led them, rejoicing in his host.

But the father of men and gods was forming


221


HESIOD


aNANY pur Upavve pera ppeaty, as pa Oeotow
avSpact T adpnaria wv apns adKTH pA puTevoae.


Opto 8 ar ‘OvdvpeTrOLO doAov dpect Bvacodopevon, 30


(mel pov prrornTos éuC@voio yuvaucos,

evVUX LOS" TAX &’ i€e Tupaovior: Tobev AUTLS

Pixvov dK poTaTov mpoceBicato pentiera Zevs.

evda rabeCopuevos ppect pudero OéoKena Eprya*

avy pev yap vuKTL Tavuapupou “Hy exrpudrys

evvy Kal dirornTe piryn, TéeXecev O Ap’ eédXOwP:

avthn © “Apditpvav Naoaa dos, ayaos pws,

exTeheoas peya Epryov dinero bbe Sopovee.

ov6 6 ny érrl Ouaas Kab TOLpLevas a dypow@ras

Opt Leva, mptv y 1S ddoxXov em Breve EUvHS*

Totos yap Kpadiny mo8os ALVUTO Toupeva, adv.

Os o 6r avn ao maa TOV Text popuyy KAKOTH TO

vouoou vm apyanens Kab Kpatepod vmo deo mod,

as pa ToT “Apditptwv yarerov Tovey éKTo-
huTevaas

dora bos Te pitas Te €OV Oop cioaixaver.

TAVVUX LOS & dp éXexTo ov aidoiy TApaKoire

TEPT O[EVOS S@poLat Tokuy pvaov "Agpodirns.

1 66 Ged ounleioa Kal avepe TONOV aptoT@

Onn ev ETTAT UND dL0UULGaove yelvaro Taide,

ov Kad oma povéovte: KAT UYYHTO ee: pev HOoTHV

TOV mev YELpoTEpov, TOV O av méey apeivova PATA,

devov TE KpaTepov TE, Binu “Hpakdneiny:

TOV. pev vob pnbeion Kehaipedpet Kpovion,

Tov © dpa ‘Tpucdija, Sopuccog * ‘Apudotpvant,

KeKplpevny yevenv: Tov ev BpoT@® avopt puyetoa,

tov d¢ Aut Kpoviwm, Oeiy onwavtope TavT@v.


1 rAaocodm, KLM.


222


40


45


SHIELD OF HERACLES


another scheme in his heart, to beget one to defend =|


against destruction gods and men who eat bread. So
he arose from Olympus by night pondering guile in
the deep of his heart, and yearned for the love of the
well-girded woman. Quickly he came to Typhao-
nium, and from there again wise Zeus went on and
trod the highest peak of Phicium!: there he sat and
planned marvellous things in his heart. So in one
night Zeus shared the bed and love of the neat-ankled
daughter of Electryon and fulfilled his desire;
and in the same night Amphitryon, gatherer of the
' people, the glorious hero, came to his house when he
had ended his great task. He hastened not to go
to his bondmen and shepherds afield, but first went
in unto his wife: such desire took hold on the
shepherd of the people. And as a man who has
escaped joyfully from misery, whether of sore disease
or cruel bondage, so then did Amphitryon, when he
had wound up all his heavy task, come glad and wel-
come to his home. And all night long he lay with
his modest wife, delighting in the gifts of golden
Aphrodite. And she, being subject in love to a god
and to a man exceeding goodly, brought forth twin
sons in seven-gated Thebe. Though they were
brothers, these were not of one spirit; for one was
weaker but the other a far better man, one terrible
and strong, the mighty Heracles. Him she bare
through the embrace of the son of Cronos lord of dark
clouds and the other, Iphicles, of Amphitryon the
spear-wielder—offspring distinct, this one of union
with a mortal man, but that other of union with
Zeus, leader of all the gods.


1 A mountain peak near Thebes which took its name from
the Sphinx (called in Theog. 326 #7é).


223


HESIOD


Os Kal Kv«vov Emedvev, ‘A pnteaony peydOvupov.
evpe Yap | éV TE [LEVEL éxatnBodov "A 7rdAN@VOS
avTov Kab TaTepa OV “Apny, darov TONE [1010,
TEUX ETL Lapmropevous oéXas as TUpOsS aibopevoro, 69
eoTaoT év didpa: xGova & éxtumov wKées trot
vUTTOVTES YNAHTL, KOVUS O€ ob ap Oednet
KOMTOMEDN TEKTOLTLY up dpwact kab tooly trey.
appara oe evTroinTa Kat apruyes aupapa Br Cov
(Tr wy Lewevor” KeXapnto dé Kuv«vos ALVLOY, 65
éXropevos Atos yiov apntov nybox ov TE
XOAKD onvooey Kal ATO KNUTA TevXe Sve ELV.
anna ol ebyoheav ovn éxAve DolBos “AmwoAXNov:
QUTOS yap Ot eTOpPTE Biny “Hpaxdgeiny.
wav © adoos Kal Bw.os "ATOMAVOS ILayacatou 70
Aaprrey vo detvoto Oeov TEUXEDD TE Kal auto
Dp Oo as op Oar pav AT ENA LT ETO. Tis KEV éxelvouU
eThn Ounros € EV KaTevavtiov opymO hvac
Thay y “Hpaxrijos Kal xvdani wou ‘ToAdou;
Keiveov yap peyany Te Bin Kat xetpes AAT TOL 75
€& « @ Lov emepuKov él oTLPapotoe pehec ory.
os. pa TOO _nvLoxov T pooehn kpaTepov ‘Today:
"“Hpws ® ‘loXae, Bpotayv todd diATaTe TaVTOD,
Hy Te péey alavatovs pdKcapas, tol “Odvptrov
eXoualy,
WNLTEV ‘Apdetpvov, ¢ OT evo repavov moti OnBnv 80
7rO¢ NuTr@V TipuvOa,' EVKTLEVOY mTonLeO pov,
Kreivas ‘HAextpvova Bowy ¢ even eUPUPLET@TEOY™
ixeTo d és Kpetovra Kab “Hyvoxny TAVOTETAOY
ot pad pu noma Sovro Kal appeva TAVTA TAPELYOD,
i) dixn oP ixétnot, Tiov b€é €? KNnpoOL MAXXOD. 85
1M: ripuvd’, GHI: Tlovydorv, most MSS. : rhprvdov, B.
2 Ranke: 3¢ ye, GHI: & &pa, other MSS.


224


SHIELD OF HERACLES


And he slew Cyenus, the gallant son of Ares. —~


For he found him in the close of far-shooting Apollo,
him and his father Ares, never sated with war.
Their armour shone like a flame of blazing fire as
they two stood in their car: their swift horses struck
the earth and pawed it with their hoofs, and the
dust rose like smoke about them, pounded by the
chariot wheels and the horses’ hoofs, while the
well-made chariot and its rails rattled around them
as. the horses plunged. And blameless Cycnus was
glad, for he looked to slay the warlike son of Zeus
and his charioteer with the sword, and to strip off
their splendid armour. But Phoebus Apollo would
not listen to his vaunts, for he himself had stirred
up mighty Heracles against him. And all the grove
and altar of Pagasaean Apollo flamed because of the
dread god and because of his arms; for his eyes
flashed as with fire. What mortal man would have
dared to meet him face to face save Heracles and
glorious Iolaus? For great was their strength and
unconquerable were the arms which grew from their
shoulders on their strong limbs. Then Heracles
spake to his charioteer strong Iolaus :

“QO hero Iolaus, best beloved of all men, truly
Amphitryon sinned deeply against the blessed gods
who dwell on Olympus when he came to sweet-
crowned Thebe and left Tiryns, the well-built citadel,
because he slew Electryon for the sake of his wide:
browed oxen. Then he came to Creon and long-
robed Eniocha, who received him kindly and gave
him all fitting things, as is due to suppliants, and
honoured him in their hearts even more. And he


225


HESIOD


Cae S aryaRhopmevos ouY eva pupy "Hex tpuovn,


1) aNOX Taxa & apes émeTrhopevav EVIAUTOV
ryetvo wel? ouTe pury evaniyKLot ore vonpea,
oOS TE T2717) Kal eyo" Tov pev dpévas é€&éXeTO
Levs, |
Os mpodsT@v odérepov Te So“ov aoeTépous Te
TOKHAS 90
@XETO, TLLNT OY ANTI EVOD Kupuao Offa,
TXET\LOS: 7) TOU Toh peter tevaxiveT OTL TW
ty arny oxe@"! 7» © ov Tadwvay/peTos €oTUD.
avTap épol Sai pov Nahetrous emeT ener aéOrous.
*O, diros, adrra ov Oaocov éxy nvia porvixoerta 95
arm oy @KUT OOD" peya oe ppect Odpaos aeEov
tOvds Exetv Ooov a appa. Kab @KkuToooyv alévos imma,
pndev UTrOObELT AS KTOTOV "A peos cwSpopovoro,
OS DOV KEKANYOS TEepLMalvEeTat LEpOV AAGOS -
DoiSov “AmoAA@VOS, ExaTNBEXeTAO AVAKTOS: 100
7) ny Kal KpaTEpOS TEP EMV AATAL TOKEMOLO. |
Tov & atte wpocéatrev auopntos lodaos: if
nOct, 7) pdra On TL TATHP avdpayv TE Oewy TE |
TUG onv Keharnv Kal TAUPEOS ‘Evvoctyacos,
Os @OnBrs KpnoEMvon & Exel pverat TE moka.” 105
olov On Kab Tove Bporov KpaTepov TE peyav TE
oas és xsipas ayouow, ta KNEOS eo Oror ¢ dpnat.
aX’ aye OvaEO TEVYE apnea, dpa TAXLOTE
dipous épT edo aves "Apnos. & per epov Te |
papvopecd , émrel OV TOL ar apBntov Avos ViOV 110
ov “Idixretonv derdiEeTat, aAAG py olw ;
pevgea bar dvo maidas dV {LOVOS "Arxeldao,
ov dn ode oxe0ov eto, Achavopevor TONE {LOLO
purdoT Loa CTHOAL, TA opi TON piTepa Poivns.


1 BCDF: axéor, other MSS,


|


226


SHIELD OF HERACLES


lived joyfully with his wife the neat-ankled daughter--—-~


of Electryon : and presently, while the years rolled
on, we were born, unlike in body as in mind, even
your father and I. From him Zeus took away sense,
so that he left his home and his parents and went to
do honour to the wicked Eurystheus—unhappy man!
Deeply indeed did he grieve afterwards in bearing
the burden of his own mad folly ; but that cannot be ©
taken back. But on me fate laid heavy tasks.

“Yet, come, friend, quickly take the red-dyed
reins of the swift horses and raise high courage in
your heart and guide the swift chariot and strong
fleet-footed horses straight on. Have no secret fear
at the noise of man-slaying Ares who now rages
shouting about the holy grove of Phoebus Apollo,
the lord who shoots from afar. Surely, strong
though he be, he shall have enough of war.”

And blameless Iolaus answered him again : “‘ Good
friend, truly the father of men and gods greatly
honours your head and the bull-like Earth-Shaker
also, who keeps Thebe’s veil of walls and guards
the city,—so great and strong is this fellow they
bring into your hands that you may win great
glory. But come, put on your arms of war that
with all speed we may bring the car of Ares and our
own together and fight; for he shall not frighten
the dauntless son of Zeus, nor yet the son of
Iphiclus: rather I think he will flee before the two
sons of blameless Alcides who are near him and eager
to raise the war cry for battle; for this they love
better than a feast.”’


227


HESIOD .


“Os dato: peldnoev dé Bin “Hpakrneln 115
duped ynOicas' wadra yap vv o: dpmeva eimev
Kal pv apetBomevos Errea TTEpoevTA TpOTHnVOa*

“Hpws @ lorae, dtotpedés, ovKéTe THAOD
vopivn Tenyeta: aod 8 ws wapos Haba Saidpov, |
a> Kal voY wéyav immov Aplova KvavoyaiTny 120
TAVTN aVaTTPAPAY Kal apnyéemev, WS KE SvVNAL.

“Os etrr@v Kvnutdas operyaddKoto haewwov,
‘Hdaiotouv krvTa dopa, mepi Kynunow €Onkerv
devTEepov av OwpynKa Tepl oTHVecow eduveE |
KANOV YPUVTELOV TrOVdALOaAAOD, OV OL EOWKE 125
Iladras “AOnvain, covpn Atos, ommoT éwerre
TO Tp@TOV GTOVvoeVTas ehopunaeaOat aéOXovs.
Onkaro 5 ap Cove wy apis aNKTH PA a iOnpov
SeLvos aunp” KoiAny O€ Tept aTnGecat papeTpnv
KaBBarer éEomiGev: toddol & évtocbev otaToi 130
piynnrot, Gavaroto AaehCoryyov0 doriipes.
™poa ev poev Odvatov T etx ov Kal daKpuot peupor,
jer oor € feo T0l, TE PLULIKEES, avuTap Ora Ge
Loppvoto preyvao KahuTTopevou TTEPUYET TW.
e(deto 6! GSpimov eyyos, akaypéevov aidore

ANKO, 135.4
kpatt © ém tb0ipo Kuveny €UTUKTOV eOnne,
daidareny GOA HAVTOS, € emt Kporapous apaputar,
nT ElpvTo apn “Hpaxrijos Jeiovo.

Xepov We pnv cdKos etXe TavatoXov, ovOE TIS

avTO
out éppnée Barav ovt eOrace, Padua idécBat. 140
TAY MeV YAP KUKN@ TLTAV@ NEVK@ T EAEHaYTL
nréxTp@ O wrrodaptrés Env Kpvoe@® Te Pace
1 Hermann: joav: 38, MSS.
228


SHIELD OF HERACLES


So he said. And mighty Heracles was glad in


heart and smiled, for the other’s words pleased him
well, and he answered him with winged words:

“ O hero Iolaus, heaven-sprung, now is rough battle
hard at hand. But, as you have shown your skill at
other times, so now also wheel the great black-maned
horse Arion about every way, and help me as you
may be able.”

So he said, and put upon his legs greaves of
shining bronze, the splendid gift of Hephaestus.
- Next he fastened about his breast a fine golden
breast-plate, curiously wrought, which Pallas Athene
the daughter of Zeus had given him when first he
was about to set out upon his grievous labours. Over
his shoulders the fierce warrior put the steel that
saves men from doom, and across his breast he slung
behind him a hollow quiver. Within it were many
chilling arrows, dealers of death which makes speech
forgotten: in front they had death, and trickled
with tears ; their shafts were smooth and very long ;
and their butts were covered with feathers of a
brown eagle. And he took his strong spear, pointed
with shining bronze, and on his valiant head set a
well-made helm of adamant, cunningly wrought,
which fitted closely on the temples ; and that guarded
the head of god-like Heracles.

In his hands he took his shield, all glittering: no
one ever broke it with a blow or crushed it. And
a wonder it was to see; for its whole orb was
a-shimmer with enamel and white ivory and electrum,
and it glowed with shining gold; and there were


229


HESIOD


r \ M4 ye
AAWTOMEVOV, KUdVOV O€ OLA TTVKXES NANAAVTO.
/ , ,
év peoow © adapavtos! ény PoBos ov Te hatesos,


5) /

éuTranwy Oacolaly Tupi AawTromEevotal SedopKa@s: 145
A NORD NY \ a / \ I

TOU Kal OOOVTMY Mev TANTO oTOMA NEeVKA JeovTMY,


lal 5 , >) \ A n tA F
SELVOV ATANT@V, ETL. O€ BAOTUPOLO ETwTTOU
dew Epis wemotnto Kopvacovca KNOvoY avop@v, —_
/ By ht 32 Je elas \ 9 S t/- An |
TYXETALYN, 1) PA VOOY TE KAL EK Ppevas etNETO PWTWV,
alteves avTeBinv TmorEwov Aros vit déporev. 150 |
TOV Kat uyai wey yOova dvpevat”Atoos elow
KAKKLOV,” OoTéa O€ ode TEPL pLvOto GaTELONS
Vs b] ie 4 Vi sf
LYeipiov alaréoo wedaivyn wvOeras ain.
"Kv d€ [Ipoiw&is re Tladiwkis te tétuxTo,
f t
év 0 °Opasos te BoBos 7 Avdpoxtacin te dednet, 155
év 8 "Epus, év 6€ Kudotpos eOvveov, év & or0r Knp
ay) % Se iy / > ”
ahNov Cwov evyouca VEoUTATOV, ANNOY AOUTOD,
arrov teOvnaTa Kata woOcy EXKeE TrodolL. im |
a SES Y Meee, WEY > » \ e/ A i
eipea © Ex app WLoLct Sa gpoveov ALLATL PWTOYV,
dewov epKkomevn Kavaynot Te BeBpuyuia. 160
Ev & odiwv xeharal dewav écay, ov Tt hatean,
doHdexa, Tal PoPéecKov eri yOovi POX avOperoar,
t/ ’ 4 If \ Ua /
ot TLVves avTLBinv TroNenov Axos vit hEpotev*
TOV KAL OOOVT@Y [EY KAVA) TENEV, EVTE U“YOLTO
/
"Auditpumviadons, Ta 0 edateTo Oavpata Epya. 165
if IA 3 / 3 nn rn /
atiypata & ws émépavto ideiy detvoics SpaKovatv’
KUGVEOL KATA VOTA, weraVOncay Oé yévela.
1 Schol. : 5¢ Spdxovros, MSS.
2 (=xaréxiov: cp. l. 254), Tr.: ad’rav, MSS.
230 :


;
:
.


“- i


SHIELD OF HERACLES


zones of cyanus! drawn upon it. In the centre was


Fear worked in adamant, unspeakable, staring — iG


backwards with eyes that glowed with fire. His
mouth was full of teeth in a white row, fearful and
daunting, and upon his grim brow hovered frightful
Strife who arrays the throng of men: pitiless ‘she,
for she took away the mind and senses of poor
wretches who made war against the son of Zeus.
Their souls passed beneath the earth and went down
into the house of Hades; but their bones, when the
skin is rotted about them, crumble away on the dark
earth under parching Sirius.

Upon the shield Pursuit and Flight were wrought,
and Tumult, and Panic, and Slaughter. Strife
also, and Uproar were hurrying about, and deadly
Fate was there holding one man newly wounded,
and another unwounded; and one, who was dead,
she was dragging by the feet through the tumult.
She had on her shoulders a garment red with the
blood of men, and terribly she glared and gnashed
her teeth.

And there were heads of snakes unspeakably
frightful, twelve of them ; and they used to frighten
the tribes of men on earth whosoever made war
against the son of Zeus; for they would clash their
teeth when Amphitryon’s son was fighting: and
brightly shone these wonderful works. Andeit was
as though there were spots upon the frightful
snakes: and their backs were dark blue and their
jaws were black.


1 Cyanus was a glass-paste of deep blue colour: the ‘‘zones”’
were concentric bands in which were the scenes described by
the poet. The figure of Fear (1.44) occupied the centre of
the shield, and Oceanus (1. 314) enclosed the whole.


231


HESIOD


"Ev 0€ cvav ayédat YNOVVOY Ecav NOE NEOVT@V

és ahéas Sepkopévav, koTeovT@v O° Leevoy TE.
a) ALE N / of 3 p /
TOV Kab OptANOOY aTLYES Hidav: OVE VUT@ YE  _——170
OvOETEPOL THEETHVY: Hpiacor ye ev aVKEVAS appa.
bY4 i 4 / a > \ \ /
non yap opty exerTo péyas Als, aul O€ KaTpoL
dolol, aTroupapevor Wuyxds, Kata O€ opt KENALVOV
CN pe de BSS ) 7 + + > \ ’ 3 / P] /

aip amenetBet épal: of & avyéevas eEeputrovtes

/ la) e \ an WA
Kelato TeOvnw@TeEs UTO BAOcUpOtat NEovVO LW. 175
Tol O éTt MaAXOY éyerpecOnv KoTéovTE paxerOat,
awporepor, KNODVAL TE TVES YApoTrOL TE EOVTES.

3 2 6) (e / 4 3 VA

Ev & hv vopivn AariOdeov arypntdwv
Kawéa 7 audi dvaxta Aptavta te WespiOoov te
‘Omnréa 7 7EEdéiov te PadAnpov re Uporoyov te 180
Moov 7 “Apruxcidny, Trrapnotov, éCov” Apnos,
@ncéa t Atyeldnv, émie(keXov abavatoiow:
apyUpEol, YpvoEla TrEepl Ypol TEVYE ENOVTES.
Kévtavupot & étépmbev évavtios nryepéovto
apodt péyav Iletpaiov ié “AcBoXov ot@victHy —185
"Apetov tT Odvperov te perayyaiTny Te Mipavta
Kat OVO Tleveidas, Tepruded TE Aptarov TE,
apy vpeot, Xpuceas eNaTas éy Xepaty EVOVTES.
Kal Te cuvairyony & ws eb Swob Trep covres
eyyerry NO, EAATHS AVTOTVEOOV WPLYVOVTO. 190

“Ey oO "A peos Broo vpoio TOO@KEES ETAGAD imTTToL
XpUeEol, év be Kab avTos evapo popos ovALos "A pns
arypuny év Xetperow EXO, TPUNEETOL KENEVOY,
abate POlwwiKoels, WS et fwous evapiCov
Oi pou éeTenBeBaws: Tapa dé Actos te PoBos Te 195
ETTATAY LEMEVOL TOAEMOV KATAOUPMLEVAL avo pav.

"Ep 6€ Atos Ouyarnp ayere’n Tpetoyévera,


A238


SHIELD OF HERACLES


Also there were upon the shield droves of boars


and lions who glared at each other, being furious


and eager: the rows of them moved on together,
and neither side trembled but both bristled up their
manes. For already a great lion lay between them
and two boars, one on either side, bereft of life, and
their dark blood was dripping down upon the ground ;
they lay dead with necks outstretched beneath the
grim lions. And both sides were roused still more
to fight because they were angry, the fierce boars
and the bright-eyed lions.

And there was the strife of the Lapith spearmen
gathered round the prince Caeneus and Dryas and
Peirith6us, with Hopleus, Exadius, Phalereus, and
Prolochus, Mopsus the son of Ampyce of Titaresia, a
scion of Ares, and Theseus, the son of Aegeus, like
unto the deathless gods. These were of silver, and
had armour of gold upon their bodies. And the Cen-
taurs were gathered against them on the other side
with Petraeus and Asbolus the diviner, Arctus, and
Ureus, and black-haired Mimas, and the two sons of
Peuceus, Perimedes and Dryalus: these were of
silver, and they had pinetrees of gold in their hands.
and they were rushing together as though they were
alive and striking at one another hand to hand with
spears and with pines.

And on the shield stood the fleet-footed noes
of grim Ares made of gold, and deadly Ares the spoil-
winner himself. He held a spear in his hands and
was urging on the footmen: he was red with blood
as if he were slaying living men, and he stood in his
chariot. Beside him stood Fear and Flight, eager to
plunge amidst the fighting men.

There, too, was the daughter of Zeus, Tritogeneia


293


HESIOD


TH ined OS et Te pceyny eJéhovea Kopvooew,
ey KOS éxoue év Xepow toe Xpuoenv Tpupareay
aiyisa T aud @pows: él Oo OXETO puroTev aivny. 200
"Ky e Hv adavatwy tepos xopos’ év 0 apa
pec o@
imepoev Oapite Avos Kai Anrods: ulos
xPeoeD Poppy [Ocav & Edos aryvos ‘OAvprros:
aryopn, mept & OABos atreipitos eo tepayvwrTo |
Tippee: év ayove+)] Peat & eEHpxov aLouons 205
Movoat Teepises, deyu jeeNTromenys ELKULAL.
"Ev 6é Aepny EVOPHLOS AMLALLAKETOLO Jaracons
KUKNOTEPNS éréTUKTO TravepOou KaCTUTEPOLO
KAU ECOMEV® | ixehos” [wroArol ye Mev Ae pwecov avTOD
dedpives Th Kal TH eOvveor ixOuvaovres 210
YNXOMEvOUS ixedou 7] dow O atv panera wings |
apy bpeot deh ives Cowart * ENOTES é XObs.
TOV O bro Xarnevor Tpéov ix Obes aUTAp em aKTALS
HOTO AVN GNLEUS dedoxnuevos” eiye O€ Xepotv
ixOvow duh (Bo T pov am opptovrs ECOLKaS. 215
"Ev 0 Hv jUKO_OU Aavans TEKOS, immrora Ilepcevs,
ovT ap em npavev TAKES moo ovd exes aUTOoD,
Jadpa peya ppdccacl, érrel ovoapy é OTN PLKTO.
TOS yap pv TANG [als TevEev KNUTOS "Auuyunecs
x puceor" aut dé jTocaw évev TTEPOEVT OL TEdLAa. 220
@ {LOU WY bé up app pehdvoerov a dop EXELTO
yanKéou €k TENAU@VOS' OO WS TE VONM ETOTATO


1}. 208-5 are clearly intrusive and are rejected by
Baumeister.

2 ll. 209-11 are not found in Q, and are rejected by Pepp-
miiller. They appear to be an alternative version of Il. 211—
212.


3 Ranke: épolveoy, Q: épuiBov, F: épolrwyv, other MSS.
234


SHIELD OF HERACLES


who drives the spoilt She was like as if she would —_-


array a battle, with a spear in her hand, and a
golden helmet, and the aegis about her shoulders.
And she was going towards the awful strife. .

And there was the holy company of the deathless
gods: and in the midst the son of Zeus and Leto
played sweetly on a golden lyre. There also was
the abode of the gods, pure Olympus, and their
assembly, and infinite riches were spread around in
the gathering of the deathless gods. Also the
goddesses, the Muses of Pieria,were beginning a song
like clear-voiced singers.

And on the shield was a harbour with a safe
haven from the irresistible sea, made of refined tin
wrought in a circle, and it seemed to heave with
waves. In the middle of it were many dolphins
rushing this way and that, fishing : and they seemed
to be swimming. Two dolphins of silver were
spouting and devouring the mute fishes. And
beneath them fishes of bronze were trembling. And
on the shore sat a fisherman watching: in his hands
he held a casting net for fish, and seemed as if about
to cast it forth.

There, too, was the son of rich-haired Danaé, the
_ horseman Perseus: his feet did not touch the shield
and yet were not far from it—very marvellous to
remark, since he was not supported anywhere ; for
so did the famous Lame One fashion him of gold
with his hands. On his feet he had winged sandals,
and his black-sheathed sword was slung across his
shoulders by a cross-belt of bronze. He was flying


1 «She who drives herds,” 7.¢. ‘‘The Victorious,” since
herds were the chief spoil gained by the victor in ancient
warfare. |


235


HESIOD


A \ / 5 / na ,
wav € weradpevov ceive Kapn Sewolo TEeNwWpoU,
Topyods: apdl dé pv KiBrows Oée, Padpa tdéc0an,
5) Z / \ La) \
apyupen: Ovcavos 6é KATYWPEVVTO PAELVOL 225
Ypvaevor detvn O€ TEpl KPOTAaPoLoLY AVAKTOS
n> f \ / 9. ial aoe
Kett “ALoos KUvEeN VUKTOS Copov aivov EXovoa.
avTos 6€ omevdorTe Kal eppiryovre EOL WS
Ilepceds Aavaidns étitaivero. Tal Oé per avTOV
Topyéves dwAntot Te Kal ov hatal éppwovto 230
(éwevar marreéey. ml 0€ YANM@POD AbapaVTOS
Bawoveeor laXeoKe TAKOS MEYAAW OpuLAyoW
oféa Kat Nuryéos: émrt Oé Cougar OpaxovTe
50L@ amrnopedvT EMLKUPT@OVTE Kapnva.
Mixpatov 0 apa TO ye peeves © éxapacaov odovTas
dypia SepKomevo. emt b€ Sesvoict Kapyvous 236
Topryetors éSovetto péyas PoBos. of S virép avtéwv
3

dvopes éuapvacOnv Toreuinia Tevye eXovTEs,
Tol wep UTrép odETepNs TOALOS TPETEPMY TE TOKHOV
Novyov GmUVOVTES, TOL O€ TpPAaCEELY WELADTES. 240

\ \ f / 5 ben) A 7
TOANOL pev KEATO, THEOVES O ETL ONPLY EYOVTES
papvavO at oe yuvaires EVOMNTOV ert mUpYyov
Karnueov o&v Bowy, KATA © edpUTTovTo TAPELas,
Cano w ixehat, Eorya. KrUTOD ‘H Taio roto.
dvd pes 6’, ob mpea BHes € EC AV ynpas TE pé“apTren, 245
a0 poor éxtoo Oey TUNEOY era, av 6€ Oeoion
yetpas evov paxdper ot, Tepl opereporoe TEKETOU
SeLouores" ToL O avuTe paxynv éyov. ab dé meT

avTOUS

Kpes xudveat, NevKovs apaBedoat odovtas,

\ / 2 eis , “s
deworal Prooupat Te Sapouvat T amhytat Te — 250
Op é eX ov mepl TUT TOVT OY Tacat Oo ap’ LEV TO
aipa méedav TléeLy' Ov O€ TPWTOV MEWATFOLED.


236.


SHIELD OF HERACLES


swift as thought. The head of a dreadful monster, © ~


the Gorgon, covered the broad of his back, and a
bag of silver—a marvel to see—contained it: and
from the bag bright tassels of gold hung down.
Upon the head of the hero lay the dread cap! of
Hades which had the awful gloom of night. Perseus
himself, the son of Danaé, was at full stretch, like
one who hurries and shudders with horror. And
after him rushed the Gorgons, unapproachable and
unspeakable, longing to seize him: as they trod
upon the pale adamant, the shield rang sharp and
clear with a loud clanging. Two serpents hung
down at their girdles with heads curved forward :
their tongues were flickering, and their teeth
gnashing with fury, and their eyes glaring fiercely.
And upon the awful heads of the Gorgons great
Fear was quaking.

287 And beyond these there were men fighting in
warlike harness, some defending their own town and
parents from destruction, and others eager to sack
it; many lay dead, but the greater number still
strove and fought. The women on well-built towers
of bronze were crying shrilly and tearing their
cheeks like living beings—the work of famous
Hephaestus. And the men who were elders and on
whom age had laid hold were all together outside
the gates, and were holding up their hands to the
blessed gods, fearing for their own sons. But these
again were engaged in battle: and behind them the
dusky Fates, gnashing their white fangs, lowering,
grim, bloody, and unapproachable, struggled for
those who were falling, for they all were longing to
drink dark blood. So soon as they caught a man


1 The cap of darkness which made its wearer invisible.


237


HESIOD


KelEVOY 1) ThITOVTA VEeovTATOY, audl Mev AVT@

Barn dvuxas peyddous, Wwuxn & "Ardoabe KaTHhev

Taptapov és xpvoev’. at d€ dpévas ett apécavTo 255

aimaros avopopéov, TOV Mev plITTagKOV OTLAC®,

avy & éuadov rai parov eObveov adtis tovoas.

Kiabo nal Adyeois odw ébéotacav: 1) mev
upyoomy

“Atporros OU TL TENNEY [EVAN debs, aXn’ apa h ye

TOV YE LEV AAXawY Tpohepys T HV TpEecBuTAaTH TE. |

Tacat © apd evi hott paxny Spimetay COevTo. 261 ||

dewa 6 és addy has Spakov ¢ Oppuact Oupnvacas, |

ey oe ovuxas xEtpas Té Opaceias t io@oarro.

Tap © ‘Aydus ELT TIKEL EMlLamuyEepn TE Kal oe

VA 1) avaTanen Aepo@ KaTATEN THVELL, 265

YOUVOTTAXNHS, HAKpPOL O OVUNES YElpeaow vITHoAav.

THS éx péev pivov wvEat péov, éx O€ TapEL@V

aip amereBet Epal” 7) 0 admAnTOV cecapvia

ELOTHKEL, TOAAN O€ KOVES KaTEVHVOOEY @LOUS,

daxpvot pudarhen, Tapa & evmUpyos TONS
avopav : 270

Xpuoeras O€ pup elyov vmepOuptous apapviae

ETTA TURAL" Tol oe avdpes € év aydains TE xopois TE

Tépyuy éyov' Tol pev yap evo T@TPOU eq’ anrnuns

HYyOVT avopt yuvatKka, TOAUS 0 UpEvatos opwpet:

THA O am’ alOopévwy Oaidwy aédas eihvhae 275

XEpotv eve Op@ev: Tal © aryhain TeGarviae

mpooe exLov" THOW O€ Xopol maifovtes & ET OVTO.

Tol MeV UT O eyupov cuplyyov leo av avony

ef amrarov TT OMETOV, rept dé opiow dyyvuTo WYO.

at © v7 Poppiyyov avayov Yopov pe poevTa. 280

évOev © av’ éEvrépwOe véor Kbpalov vm avr, —


238


SHIELD OF HERACLES


overthrown or falling newly wounded, one of them —— —


would clasp her great claws about him, and his soul
would go down to Hades to chilly Tartarus. And when
they had satisfied their souls with human blocd, they
would cast that one behind them, and rush back
again into the tumult and the fray. Clotho and
Lachesis were over them and Atropos less tall than
they, a goddess of no great frame, yet superior to
the others and the eldest of them. And they all
made a fierce fight over one poor wretch, glaring
- evilly at one another with furious eyes and fighting
equally with claws and hands. By them stood Dark-
ness of Death, mournful and fearful, pale, shrivelled,
shrunk with hunger, swollen-kneed. Long nails
tipped her hands, and she dribbled at the nose, and
from her cheeks blood dripped down to the ground.
She stood leering hideously, and much dust sodden
with tears lay upon her shoulders.

- 27 Next, there was a city of men with goodly
towers ; and seven gates of gold, fitted to the lintels,
guarded it. The men were making merry with festivi-
ties and dances; some were bringing home a bride to
her husband on a well-wheeled car, while the bridal- —
song swelled high, and the glow of blazing torches
held by handmaidens rolled in waves afar. And
these maidens went before, delighting in the festival;
and after them came frolicsome choirs, the youths
singing soft-mouthed to the sound of shrill pipes,
while the echo was shivered around them, and the
girls leading on the lovely dance to the sound of
lyres. Then again on the other side was a rout of
young men revelling, with flutes playing; some


257


HESIOD


TOL ye pev aw matCovres t vm opxne ue Kat aoLon
Tol ye meV av yedowvres UT AUANTHpPL ExaTTOS
mpoae éxtov" macay dé Tod Paria Te xopot TE


dyatar T elyov. Tol O av mporrapote TONNOS 285 |


var” inmoy émiBavres éOuveov. ot & apoThpes
7peLicov x Gove Slay, ema TONGONY dé XeTavas
éoTahat . avTap env Babv Aajvov" ol Ye fev HOV
ax ws o€einot KOp@vLowvra meTH AA, P|
BpiOopeva, TTAYKVOV, WS Eb Anpajrepos ae T HY" 290 |
or 0 dp é év eAedavotar déov Kal eet voy aroy,' |
ot O° eTpuryeov olvas Opemavas € év _Xepotv EXOUTES,

of 0 auT és Tadapous epopevy vTO TPUYNTHPOY
NEVKOUS Kab pehavas Botpvas peyadov ATO Opyan,
SprBopeveor PUAOLOL Kab apyupens éMixerow. 295
ov Oo avr és Taddpous édopevy. mapa 6€ ofiow


Opxos
Xpuaeos HV, KAUTA epya mrepid povos ‘Hdatorouo, 297
-GELOMEVOS PUANOLTL KAL AaPyupence Kawase, 299


SprGopevos TTApuAHoe pehavOna ay ye pev aioe. 300 |
Ob ye ev éTpameon, Tob o npvov’ ol O eHaXOVTO
TUE TE Kab éhenoov TOL O w@KUTOOaS NayOS Tpevy
dvdpes Onpevrat, Kat KapXapooovTe KUVE TPO, .
Lewevol aTreew, ot é tepevor UTanrvEar

Tap 8 avtots UT THES eX Ov OVO), appt & aéOrw
Onpw é Eyov Kal pox Gor. eum exeov & éml didpav 306
nyLoxor BeBadres epier ay OKEAS immous
puTa YaXaivortes, TA O émLKpoTéovTAa TETOVTO


1 GH have the alternative reading mimAov.


298 rol ye mev ad walCoyres bm’ avANTHpt ExacTos -
This line, which is perhaps an alternative for Il. 282-3
and may have once stood at the foot of a MS. page, is
omitted by many MSS!


240


SHIELD OF HERACLES


_ frolicking with dance and song, and others laughing


all in time with the flute player as they went along.
And the whole town was filled with mirth and
dance and festivity.

285 Others again were mounted on horseback and
galloping before the town. And there were plough-
men breaking up the good soil, clothed in tunics girt
up. Also there was a wide cornland and some men
were reaping with sharp hooks the stalks which
bended with the weight of the ears—as if they were
reaping Demeter’s grain: others were binding the
sheaves with bands and were spreading the threshing
floor. And some held reaping hooks and were gather-
ing the vintage, while others were taking from the
reapers into baskets white and black clusters from
the long rows of vines which were heavy with leaves
and tendrils of silver. Others again were gathering
them into baskets. Beside them was a row of vines
in gold, the splendid work of cunning Hephaestus:
it had shivering leaves and stakes of silver and was
laden with grapes which turned black.! And there
were men treading out the grapes and_ others
drawing off the liquor. Also there were men boxing
and wrestling, and huntsmen chasing swift hares
with a leash of sharp-toothed dogs before them, they
eager to catch the hares, and the hares eager to
escape.

Next to them were horsemen hard set, and they
contended and laboured for a prize. The charioteers
standing on their well-woven cars, urged on their
swift horses with loose rein ; the jointed cars flew


1 The existing text of the vineyard scene is a compound of
two different versions, clumsily adapted, and eked out with
some makeshift additions.


241


HESIOD


appara Korrnevt’, emt Oe TAHUVal wey avTEUY.
of ev ap aidLoy etxov Tovov ovoé TrOTE OU 310°
vikn ennvucOn, adr aKpitov eiyov adeOXov.
TOLOLY O€ TPOEKELTO LEAS TPLTTOS EVTOS AY@VOS,
VPUTELOS, KNUTA epya Tepippovos ‘Hoaiorouo.
“Apgi O truv peev ‘Oxeavos mAnOovTt é EOLKOS,
T av 6€ _TuVErXe gakoS TOAVoaloanor, of O€ KAT
avTov 315 | :
KUKVOL GEPTLTOTAL LEYAN HITVOV, Ot Pa TE TONDOL |
viyXOV ém7 akpov vowp? tapa & btxOves éxroO- |
VEOVTO.
Oadua idety cai Znvi BapuetiT@, ob Sia
Bovras
“Hoatotos TOLNTE TAKOS peya TE oTtBapov TE,
apo dpLEvos TANG HNC t. TO pev Aus GNKLLOS ViOS 320
WaNNEV eTLKPATews® emt oe immetou Gope didpou,
ELKENOS aT TEpOT TAT POs Atos airyvoxouo,
Kooga BiBas: TOO NVLOXOS KPATEpOS ‘LoAaos
dip pov érepBeBaws tOvvero Kap vXOV appa.
aryXiwoov dé oh HAGE Gea yave@res "AOnyn, 325
Kab opens Japcvvovea é emea TTEPOEVTA TPOTNVOA'
_Xaipere, Auyknos ryeven TNEKNELTOLO®
yov 67 Zevs KpaTos Dyes 61608 pandper ow aVaTOWV
Koxvov 7 efevapely Kat a7 0 KUTA TevYEa SUCAL.
ado 6€ Tol TL Emros épéw, meya. peprare Aaov 330
evr dy on Kuvxvov yucepiis aldvos APEPONS,
TOV pev €qrett avTou ALréew Kal TeEvXEa ToOLO,
autos 6€ BpotoXoyov "Apny ériovta dSoKevoas,
évOa Ke yupvobévta oaKeus UTro Sbatdoaréoo
See tons, vO? our dev o&eu KAKO 335
é  dvaxdcoacat: émrel ov VU TOL aio (Mov Eo TLD
ote im7rous éX€ety OUTE KAVTA TEVYEA TOLO.


242


SHIELD OF HERACLES


along clattering and the naves of the wheels shrieked —


loudly. So they were engaged in an unending toil,
and the end with victory came never to them, and
the contest was ever unwon. And there was set out
for them within the course a great tripod of gold,
the splendid work of cunning Hephaestus.

And round the rim Ocean was flowing, with a full
stream as it seemed, and enclosed all the cunning
work of the shield. Over it swans were soaring and
calling loudly, and many others were swimming
upon the surface of the water; and near them were
- shoals of fish.

A wonderful thing the great strong shield was to
see—even for Zeus the Joud-thunderer, by whose will
_ Hephaestus made it and fitted it with his hands.

This shield the valiant son of Zeus wielded masterly,
and leaped upon his horse-chariot like the lightning
of his father Zeus who holds the aegis, moving
lithely. And his charioteer, strong lolaus, standing
upon the car, guided the curved chariot.

Then the goddess grey-eyed Athene came near
them and spoke winged words, encouraging them:
“ Hail, offspring of far-famed Lynceus! Even now
Zeus who reigns over the blessed gods gives you
power to slay Cycnus and to strip off his splendid
armour. Yet I will tell you something besides,
mightiest of the people. When you have robbed
Cycnus of sweet life, then leave him there and his
armour also, and you yourself watch man-slaying
Ares narrowly as he attacks, and wherever you shall
see him uncovered below his cunningly-wrought
shield, there wound him with your sharp spear.
Then draw back ; for it is not ordained that you
should take his horses or his splendid armour.”


243


HESIOD |


“Os eitroda’ és digpov éBno aro ota Jeawv,
vixny abavarys Xepo ty Kal KDOOS € éxouoa, |
écovpévas. ToTEe 07 p pa Ovoyvntos ‘ToAaos 340
opepdaneov v bam ovo Ly eKEKNETO® Tol O Um OmoKANS
ping’ Ede pov Door é dip joa. KOVLOVTES TrEdLOLO.
év yap ou pevOS ne Oca yavewres “AGH
airyio dvacoeicaca TEpla TOVAXNTE 6€ yaca.

Tol O avels TpoyevovT bicehou mupt ne Ovehhy, 345
Kv«vos on im 06a,[105 Kal “Apns aKOopnTos GUTS.
TOV im ou poev eres?” vTrevavTiot aXdaprowowy
ogela Xpemeoar, mepl 6é opiow AYVUTO NYO.
TOV TpOTEpos Tpoa éermre Bin “Hpaxhyetn:
Kuxve TwéTov, TL VU vaOLW é€miaxXeTOVY MKEaS
immous 350
avopaow, ot Te Tovou Kab otCvos ISprés ELMLED;
adda, mapee € exe dippov evEoov Hoe KehevO ov
eiKe mapeé t évas. Tpnxiva d€ ToL Tapedavvo
és Kynuxa dvaxta: 6 yap duvapt te Kal aidot
Tpnxtvos mpoBéBnxe, ct & ed para oicba Kal
' AUTOS" 355
TOU yap oTuLElS Talla OeutocTovony Kvava@T Lv.
@ TéTov, ov pwev yap Tor Apns Oavdtoto TeXevTHV
apkécet, et 61) vat cvVOLTOmEeOa TWTOAEMiCELD.
non pev Té & o t Kal adore mTetpnOnvat
On pév ré & nye pnd |
eyXeos TPETEPOD, 60° umep IlvAou 7} wa oevros 360
ayTios orn epelo, MaNNS oT Ov peveaivov.
Tpls pev EO UTO coupt TuTrels npeloaro yan
oUTapevov GAKEOS, TO O€ TET PAaToV praca pen pov
mavTl pevel omevow?, dua O€ peya capKos apag a
TpPNVNS 0) év Kovinot Xa pal Téoev eyXeos Oppn. 365
évOa Ke 61) NeoBnros € év aPavarougty ervxOn
vepoly Up nuetépnot AtTr@v évapa BporoerTa.


244


SHIELD OF HERACLES


So said the bright-eyed goddess and swiftly got up ———


into the car with victory and renown in her hands.
Then heaven-nurtured lIolaus called terribly to the
horses, and at his cry they swiftly whirled the fleet
chariot along, raising dust from the plain; for the
goddess bright-eyed Athene put mettle into them
by shaking her aegis. And the earth groaned all
round them. And they, horse-taming Cycnus and
Ares, insatiable in war, came on together like fire
or whirlwind. Then their horses neighed shrilly,
face to face; and the echo was shivered all round
them. And mighty Heracles spoke first and said to
that other :

“ Cyenus, good sir! Why, pray, do you set your
swift horses at us, men who are tried in labour and
pain? Nay, guide your fleet car aside and yield and
go out of the path. It is to Trachis I am driving on,
to Ceyx the king, who is the first in Trachis for
power and for honour, and that you yourself know
well, for you. have his daughter dark-eyed Themisti-
noé to wife. Fool! For Ares shall not deliver
you from the end of death, if we two meet together
in battle. Another time ere this I declare he has
made trial of my spear, when he defended sandy
Pylos and stood against me, fiercely longing for
fight. Thrice was he stricken by my spear and
dashed to earth, and his shield was pierced; but
the fourth time I struck his thigh, laying on with ali
my strength, and tare deep into his flesh. And he
fell headlong in the dust upon the ground through
the force of my spear-thrust; then truly he would
have been disgraced among the deathless. gods,
if by my hands he had left behind his bloody
spoils.”’


245


4


HESIOD


“Os épat’: ovS dpa Kuixvos évpperins éuevoiva
T@ etriTrerOopevos evéwev Epvtadpyatas imous.
5) ToT am evmrexéov Sidpwv Oopov aiW’ én

yatav | 370

mats te Atos weydXov Kat Kvvadio.o avaktos.
Hvioyot © éuTAnV EXacaV KaNALTPLYAS LIToOUS:
Tov 8 Uo cEevopévay Kavayile TOT evpeia YOov.
as 6 6T ad’ unAHs Kopudhs dpeos pmeyaXouo
TéTpat aToOp@aKwoLy, ér ANANANS OE TETwWOL, 375
TOANGL O€ OPUS dnp ecopor, TOANGL O€ TE TEVKAL
airyetpot Te TavUppLoe PHYyVUYTAL UT AvTEwY
pimpa KUMDOOMEDOY, eles medtovd abixovrar,
@s ob ém aANNNOLOL TéTOV peya KEKAYOVTES.
TAaca be Muppsdover TE TONS KdeTn T ‘Tawdxos 380
"Apvn T 70 ‘EXixn “AvOerd Te TOUNET oa.
povny UT " apporepov poeyan laxov: ov & aNAANTO
JeaTreaip cuvioay péya 8 éxtutre pnriera Zevs.
KauO 0 ap aT " obpavoley Widoas Bdrev-aipatoécoas,


oHpa TWels TONE LOLO &@ peyabapoes TALOL. 385


Glos 6’ év Bnoons dpeos Yaderos mpoider bar
KAT POS KAVALOOMY ppoveet Gup@ paxerac bat
avopact Onpevtijs, Onyer dé Te NEVKOV odovTa
doxuoders, ad pos ¢ mept TTOUA HATTLXOWDTL
Aci Bera, ¢ dace O€ Ob mupl LapreTowVre € €veTOV, — 390
op0as & év NodiH dpioces tpixas audi Te Serpyy
T@ ixeXos Atos vids ad’ imaetou Pope didpou.
HpLos O€ KAOEPP KUAVOTTEPOS NNETA TETTLE
ob epelopevos Oépos avpomorow aetOew
apXeTat, 4 @ TE TOTES Kab Bpacts Ofprus éépon, 395
Kab TE Tay {LE pLos TE Kal HOLOS eer avon
ides €v alvotate@, te Te ypoa LYeipros aber,


246


<a ae ee. ee se


SHIELD OF HERACLES


So said he. But Cycnus the stout spearman cared —--——


not to obey him and to pull up the horses that drew
his chariot. Then it was that from their well-woven
cars they both leaped straight to the ground, the son
of Zeus and the son of the Lord of War. The
charioteers drove near by their horses with beauti-
ful manes, and the wide earth rang with the beat of
their hoofs as they rushed Aes As when -rocks
leap forth from the high peak oc a great mountain,
and fall on one another, and many towering oaks


and pines and long-rooted poplars are broken by


them as they whirl swiftly. down until they reach the
plain ; so did they fall on one another with a great
shout: and all the town of the Myrmidons, and
famous Iolcus, and Arne, and Helice, and grassy
Anthea echoed loudly at the voice of the two. With
an awtul cry they closed: and wise Zeus thundered
loudly and rained down drops of blood, giving the
signal for battle to his dauntless son.

As a tusked boar, that is fearful for a man to see
before him in the glens of a mountain, resolves to
fight with the huntsmen and whets his white tusks,
turning sideways, while foam flows all round his
mouth as he gnashes, and his eyes are like glowing
fire, and he bristles the hair on his mane and around
his neck—, like him the son of Zeus leaped from his
horse-chariot. And when the dark-winged whirring
grasshopper, perched on a green shoot, begins to
sing of summer to men—his food and drink is the
dainty dew—and all day long from dawn pours forth
his voice in the deadliest heat, when Sirius scorches
the flesh (then the beard grows upon the millet


247


HESIOD


Thos bn KeyYpoLat TEpL YAWYES TENEOOVGL
tous Te Oépet arreipovoty, OT GupaKes aloddrovTat,
@ , iors ee) / / A te
oia Aiwvucos bax avdpacr xappa Kat ayGos' —400
THY OpNY wapvavTo, Tors 8 opuparydos opwpeL.
ws Oé NéovTe SVM Audi KTapMEevNs ENAHoLO
b) / , SFG N / € /
AAANAOLS KOTEOVTES ETL TPEAS OPLHTWOL,
dev?) 6€ of iayn dpaBos O dpa yiryver odovTav:
of © ws T alyuTriol yapapwvuyxes, ayKUAOYELAAL, 405
méeTpn eh UWA peyara KNaCoVTE waKXOVTAL
aiyos 6pecatvomov } aypoTtépyns éhadoto
, 4 SING, \ Ges es
Tiovos, hv T éodpacoe Barov atfnros avnp
In 9 \ a GLEN > 3 f 7
(@ amo vevpns, autos 6 aTadHnoeTat AAY
te / 27 A Q 9 f end
%@povu GLOpLs EWU" OL O OTPANEWS EVONCAD, 410
3 / / as) \ / aA byA
écaoupevas O€ of audi wayny Spimetav EOevTo:
a ‘ / a eae / ae.
MS Ol KEKAHNYOVTES ET ANANAOLTL OpovaaV.
y ar / Ny Me / \ eX
Ev 7 tot Koxvos peéev vareppeveos Atos viov
KTELVEMEVAL MEHAWS TAKEL EWBAE YAAKEOV eyyos,
ovd éppynéev yarKov: Eputo Sé dpa Oeoto. 415
‘“Apditpvariddns 5é, Bin “Hpaxkdnein,
pecaonyus Kopulos Te Kal aoTrLOOS eyyYel WaKP@
avyéva yupvobévta Bods UrévepVe yevetou
HAAG eTLKPAaTEWS’ ATO O Auhw Kéepoe TEVOVTE
b) 6 / if Fi , Ni Gé yg /
avopopovos pein’ peya yap oGevos eumrece HwTos. 420
npuTre O, WS OTE TLS OPUS HorTEev H OTE TEVKY
nriBaTtos, TAnyetoa Atos WroroevTL KEPAVYO’
Qs epi: api o€é of Bpaxe TevKea ToLKira KAKO.
Tov pev érert’ elace Atos TaXakapo.os vios,
b) \ N \ 4 / x
autos 6€ Bpotorotyov” Apnv mpootovta SoKevaas, 425
€ a 5) / ©
SELVOV Op@V bacoLGL, AEWV HS C@maTL KUpEas,


248


SHIELD OF HERACLES


which men sow in summer), when the crude grapes ~—


which Dionysus gave to men—a joy and a sorrow
both—begin to colour, in that season they fought
and loud rose the clamour.

As two lions! on either side of a slain deer spring
at one another in fury, and there is a fearful snarling
and a clashing also of teeth—, like vultures with
crooked talons and hooked beak that fight and
scream aloud on a high rock over a mountain goat or
fat wild-deer which some active man has shot with
an arrow from the string, and himself has wandered
away elsewhere, not knowing the place; but they
quickly mark it and vehemently do keen battle
about it—, like these they two rushed upon one
another with a shout.

Then Cyenus, eager to kill the son of almighty
Zeus, struck upon his shield with a brazen spear, but
did not break the bronze; and the gift of the
god saved his foe. But the son of Amphitryon,
mighty Heracles, with his long spear struck Cycnus
violently in the neck beneath the chin, where it was
unguarded between helm and shield. And _ the
deadly spear cut through the two sinews; for the
hero’s full strength lighted on his foe. And Cycnus
fell as an oak falls or a lofty pine that is stricken by
the lurid thunderbolt of Zeus; even so he fell,
and his armour adorned with bronze clashed about
him.

Then the stout hearted son of Zeus let him be,
and himself watched for the onset of manslaying Ares:
fiercely he stared, like a lion who has come upon a


1 The conception is similar to that of the sculptured group
at Athens of Two Lions devouring a Bull We ak Cat. of
the Acropolis Musewm, No. 3).


249


HESIOD


bs TE MAN evdOUKEwWS PLVOV KpaTEpOtsS OVUYETOL
oxiccas OTTL TaxLoTa pedippova Ovpov amnupa*
éw peveos! & apa Tod ye KeNaLWOV TiTAaTaL TOP’
yAavxtowy © daocots Setvov TAEUPAaS TE KAL WmovsS 430
OUP) MacTLOWY Trogaly yAAdEL, OVSE TLS GUTOV
éTAn €s avTa Loav axedov éXNOEeuev? Ode paxerBat:
totos dp Apditpv@ddns, dKopyntos auTHs,
avtios éotn “Apnos, évi dpect Oapaos acEwv,
ésoupevas: 0 Od of axedov HAVOEY AXVUpEVOS KHpP*
appotepos O taxovTes em AAAHAOLTLWW OpovaaV. 436
os © OT a0 weydXou TéTEN TPNAVOS Opovan,
paKpa 5 émibpeaKovea KuhivoeTat, 66 TE NYT
EpxeTau empenavia, TayOs dé ob avreBoknoev
bypndos: TO on ouvEevEelKEeTal, EVOA LLY boxe” 440
TOooN O pev Laxn Spc apparos ovduos ’ ‘Apns
KEKANYS eTrOpoVva EV’ 0 8 eu paTrews UTECEKTO.
Avrap “AOnvain, Kovpn Atos airytoxoto,
avtin HAOev "A pnos é epemyny aiyio /eXovea:
denva O vTroopa idotoa € ETED TT EPOEVTa ™poonvoa: 445
“Apes, emTlLaXE pevOS KpaTEpoV’ KaL YELpAS
adm Tous”
ov yap ToL Deus € éoTly ATO KAUTA TEVYED ovoat
“Hpaxhea KTELVAVTA, Avos OpacuKapovov ion"
ann’ aye Tae pax, pnd avtios taTag’ ecto.
“Os épat: arr ov Tei? "Apeos weyadnTopa
Ovpo, 450
aNXa peryar baXov proyt eixena T eyed TaANwvy
KapTaNi pos érropouce Bin Hpaxrnety x
KaKTdpevar peuaws: Kai p éuBare yddKeov evox
1 Dindorf, Meyer: éuuevéws, MSS,
2 A: éadeiv, MSS.
250


SHIELD OF HERACLES


body and full eagerly rips the hide with his strong ———


claws and takes away the sweet life with all speed :
his dark heart is filled with rage and his eyes glare
fiercely, while he tears up the earth with his paws
and lashes his flanks and shoulders with his tail so
that no one dares to face him and go near to give
battle. Even so, the son of Amphitryon, unsated
of battle, stood eagerly face to face with Ares,
nursing courage in his heart. And Ares drew near
him with grief in his heart; and they both sprang
at one another with a cry. As-it is when a rock
shoots out from a great cliff and whirls down with
long bounds, careering eagerly with a roar, and a
high crag clashes with it and keeps it there where .
they strike together; with no less clamour did
deadly Ares, the chariot-borne, rush shouting at
Heracles. And he quickly received the attack.

But Athene the daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus
came to meet Ares, wearing the dark aegis, and she
looked at him with an angry frown and spoke
winged words to him. “ Ares, check your fierce anger
and matchless hands; for it is not ordained that you
should kill Heracles, the bold-hearted son of Zeus,
and strip off his rich armour. Come, then, cease
fighting and do not withstand me.”’

- So.said she, but did not move the courageous spirit
of Ares. But he uttered a great shout and waving
his spears like fire, he rushed headlong at strong
Heracles, longing to kill him, and hurled a brazen
spear upon the great shield, for he was furiously


251


HESIOD


oO TEPXVOV TALoos € E00 KOTE@D TépL TEOVNOTOS,
év oaKel peyaro. amo € YavKeores "AOnyn 455
ey XEOS oppayy eTpaTt * opeEapevn amo Sippov. :
Opomy é “A pny aX05 ete: epurodevos Oe dop 0&0
éoauTt ed ‘Hpaxr€a KpaTepoppova: Tov © émLovTa
‘Auderpuoveddens, Oeuvijs GKOPNTOS GUTH,
pNpov yupvodévra TAKEUS Umo datdanéovo " . 460
ovTaa é em iKpaTe@s: Oud dé wéya TapKos apagte
Sovpate VOLNTAS, émt o€ xP ov KaBBare pecan.
T@ O€ DoPos Kall Acipos EUTPOX OV dpa Kab tarmous
iphagay airy’ éyyus, Kal amo YOovos evpuodeins
és didpov OhKav Tohvoatdanov" ainpa 6 émerta 465
(IrTOUS PaoTLeTny: ixovTo dé pax pov "Ohuperror.
Tios & “AAKkpnvns Kat kudartpos ‘loXaos
| Kv«vov oKuevo aves am @ Leov TEVYEA Kana
vio oovT ‘ aiva & emeuTa TOLD Tpnxivos & LKOVTO
UT ITOLS WKUTOOET CLD. aT ap yavedres AON 470
éEixeT OtrXuprrov Te péeyay Kal OopaTa TATPOS.
Kv«vov 0 av Kijvé Odrtev kat Naos atreipwr,
of p éyyvs vaiov moALas KNELTOD Bacurijos
"AvOnv Muppudover Te TON KAELT HY tT ’lawdKov
"A pyny T no ‘EXtKny: TONNOS S HyelpeTo Aas, 475
TynwovTes Kynuea, ditov waxapeoot Oeotow.
Tov O€ Tadoy Kal of dLdés Troinoev "AvaupOS
6uBpw Yetmeplm TANOwV: Tas yap pov “ATOAN@V
Antoidns Hvwk® ote pa KrevTas ExaTopBas
batts ayot LvOo0tde Bin cUXAacKe SoKevwV. * 480


SHIELD OF HERACLES


angry because of his dead son; but bright-eyed


Athene reached out from the car and turned aside
the force of the spear. ‘Then bitter grief seized Ares
and he drew his keen sword and leaped upon bold-
hearted Heracles. But as he came on, the son of
Amphitryon, unsated of fierce battle, shrewdly
wounded his thigh where it was exposed under his
richly-wrought shield, and tare deep into his flesh
with the spear-thrust and cast him flat upon the
ground. And Panic and Dread quickly drove his
smooth-wheeled chariot and horses near him and
lifted him from the wide-pathed earth into his richly-
’ wrought car, and then straight lashed the horses and
came to high Olympus.

But the son of Alemena and glorious Iolaus
stripped the fine armour off Cycnus’ shoulders and
went, and their swift horses carried them straight to
the city of Trachis. And bright-eyed Athene went
thence to great Olympus and her father’s house.

As for Cycnus, Ceyx buried him and the countless
people who lived near the city of the glorious king,
in Anthe and the city of the Myrmidons, and famous
Ioleus, and Arne, and Helice: and much people were
gathered doing honour to Ceyx, the friend of the
blessed gods. But Anaurus, swelled by a rain-storm,
blotted out the grave and memorial of Cycnus; for
so Apollo, Leto’s son, commanded him, because he
used to watch for and violently despoil the rich
hecatombs that any might bring to Pytho.


253


HESIOD


KHTKO> PTAMO®


ll,

Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. 1. 1289.
‘Haiodos év TO KyjvKos yaw exBavTa pnow avr ov
ep vdaTos Sirnow THS Mayvyoias méept TAS aTO
Ths abécews avtod Adetas KaXoupévas atrodet-
hO Hvar.

2.

Zenobins,! ii. 19. ovtws ‘Hoiodos EXPT ATO TH
TApouuid, WS ‘Hpaxhéous EM UPOLTITAVTOS én THY
oixiav Kyuxos tov Tpaxwiov Kat obras ElTOVTOS*

avtopatot ©. ayabol ayabav émi daitas tevTat.


Oe
Schol. on Homer, Il. xiv. 119.
toov © immnrata Kivé.
4,

A thenaeus, ii.p.49b. “Hotiodes év Kyuxos yapo—
Kav yap YPappaT cK ov TaioEs aTrokevadt TOU
TOUNTOU TA ETN TabTa, ann éwot doxet apyaia
civat—tpitooas Tas TpaTélas pyot.


D.
Gregory of Corinth, On Forms of Speech (Rhett.
Gr, vii. 776).
avrap emrel SarTos pev eons && Epov EVTO,
[61 To? ot é& dds TH | EnTEpa MNT POS ayovTO
avanény Te Kal OTTANENV OETEpoLoL TEKETOL
TeOVAapeEval.


1 A Greek sophist who taught rhetoric at Rome in the
time of Hadrian. He is the author of a collection of proverbs
in three books.


254


ad


THE MARRIAGE OF CEYX


THE MARRIAGE OF CEYX


E


Hestop in the Marriage of Ceyx says that he
(Heracles) landed (from the Argo) to look for water
and was left behind in Magnesia near the place
called Aphetae because of his desertion there.


2,


Hesiod used the proverb in the following way:
Heracles is represented as having constantly visited
the house of Ceyx of Trachis and spoken thus:

“Of their own selves the good make for the
feasts of the good.”


3.
« And horse-driving Ceyx beholding ... .”


4.


Hesiod in the Marriage of Ceyx—for though
grammar-school boys alienate it from the poet, yet
I consider the poem ancient—calls the tables
tripods.

5.


“But when they had done with desire for the
equal-shared feast, even then they brought from the
forest the mother of a mother (sc. wood), dry and
parched, to be.slain by her own children ’”’ (sc. to be
burnt in the flames).


239


HESIOD


METAAAI HOIAI


iL
Pausanias, ii. 26. 3. “Ezidavpos 6€ ad ov TO
/ n (glee SN as ; \, Nyt / /
dvopa TH yh éTéOn . . . Kata 6€ “Apyeiwov do&av


kal ta én tas Meyadras “Hotas fy “Emidavpo
marTnp "Apyos o Atos.


2.


Anonymous Comment. on Aristotle, Nacomachean
this, ithe l.. KGL OTL, pact, TO Tovnpos éml Tov
€TLTOVOU TATTETAL KAL dvaTuxods, L (KaVOS ‘Haio-
605 TAPAT THO AL ev TaUs Meyanaus “Hotias tv
"AXKLHVNY TOLOY TPOS TOV “Hparhéa Néyoucav


@ TEKOS, 7) Lada On TE TOVNPOTATOV Kal ApLaTOV
Levs TéeKVMOE TATNP.


\
KQL TAN


€ A , f Ny SSP
at Motpat ce wovnpotatov Kal aptoTov.


3.


Scholiast on Pindar, Isthm. v. 53. etkntTat de
b) n J b) n e q / ’ a \
ex TOV Meyd\ov Howwv n totopia: éxet yap
eb plo KeTau em tEevoupmevos 0 ‘Hpaxdijs TO Terapave
Kav éuPaivor TH Sopa. Kab EDX OHEVOS Kab oUTws
0 OLoTomtros aleTos, ah ov THY Tpoow@vupmiay
éxaBev Alas.


256


THE GREAT EOIAE


THE GREAT EOIAE


ie


Epripaurus. According to the opinion of the
Argives and the epic poem, the Great Eowae, Argos
the son of Zeus was father of Epidaurus.


2.


And, they say, Hesiod is sufficient to prove that
the word ponéros (bad) has the same sense as
“laborious”’ or “ ill-fated’’; for in the Great Eotae
he represents Alemene as saying to Heracles:


“My son, truly Zeus your father begot you to


be the most toilful as the most excellent...” ;


and again : |
“The Fates (made) you the most toilful and the
most excellent...”


J.


The story has been taken from the Great Eouae ;
for there we find Heracles entertained by Telamon,
standing dressed in his lion-skin and praying, and
there also we find the eagle sent by Zeus, from which
Aias took his name. !


* When Heracles prayed that a son might be born to
Telamon and Hriboea, Zeus sent forth an eagle in token that
the prayer would be granted. Heracles then bade the age
call their son Aias after the eagle (avetos).


257


HESIOD


4,
Pausanias, iv.2.1. ... adrxa“TrXov pev Tod


“Hpakreous Cedar Kvaixpn CVVOLK TO QL Ilonv-
Kaova viov Bovtou Xeyovoas Tas MeydXas oida


’Hotas.


D.
Pausanias, ix. 40. 6.
@vras 8 w@ruley KoUpHV KrELTOV “loXdov
Aeutredirny, } eidos "OXvpTiddecow opoin,
‘Inmordony Té of viov évl peyapovow ETLKTE
Onpe 7 everdéa, LEAD paceror TEeAHVNS.
Onpe & ’AroAXwvos ev ayKolvyet Tecouca
yelvato Xaipwvos Kpatepov mévos tmmooapov0.
6.
Schol. on Pindar, Pyth. iv. 35.
“A oin ‘Tpin TUKLVOPPOV Myxcovixn,
i) TéKEV Edd npov yarnox@ ‘Evvocuyaip
py ei’ év diroTnte TOAVXpvGOU A dpodirns.
iG
Pausanias, ix. 36. 7.
“Tnrros be Moaoupov ‘Apia Bayros pirov ULOV
eTeivas év peyapous evs évex, 1S addOX 010
oiKov arom pohuTr ov peby "A pyeos immoBorouo,
iEev & ‘Opxopevor Muvunvov: Kal pay 6 y Hypes
déEaTo Kal KTEdV@Y pMolpaV TOpPEV, WS ETTLELKES.
8.
Pausanias, ii. 2. 3. memoinrar dé ev “Hotais
Meryarass Or Barov Ouyatépa eivas Uespyynp.
9;
Pausanias, ii. 16. 4. TAUTNY (Mvenvny) elvau
Ouyarépa "Tecra, yuvaixa Oe ‘Apsomepes Ta émn


258


THE GREAT EOIAE


4,


But I know that the so-called Great Howe say
that Polycaon the son of Butes married Kuaechme,
daughter of Hyllus, Heracles’ son.


5. |
“ And Phylas wedded Leipephile the daughter of


famous lolaus: and she was like the Olympians in
beauty. She bare him a son Hippotades in the
palace, and comely Thero who was like the beams of
- the moon. And Thero lay in the embrace of Apollo
and bare horse-taming Chaeron of hardy strength.”


6.


« Or like her in Hyria, careful-minded Mecionice,
who was joined in the love of golden Aphrodite
with the Earth-holder and Earth-Shaker, and bare
Kuphemus. ”’


te


“And Hyettus killed Molurus the dear son of
Aristas in his house because he lay with his wife.
Then he left his home and fled from horse-rearing
Argos and came to Minyan Orchomenus. And the
hero received him and gave him a portion of his
goods, as was fitting.”’


8.


But in the Great Eoiae Peirene is represented to


be the daughter of Oebalus.


He


The epic poem, which the Greek call the Great
Eotae, says that she (Mycene) was the daughter of


259
s2


HESIOD


héyet A 61) “ENAnves Kadovow *Hoias Meyandas:
amo TavTHS obVv ryEeyovévat Kal TO 6vOMa TH TONEL
paciv.

10;

Pausanias, vi. 21.10sq. améOavov dé vio Tov
Oivopdov kata ta émn tas Meydras ‘Hoias
"ArKabous 0 lop@dovos, devTepos ovTos emt TO
Mappaxe, pera dé Adxabovuyv Evpvaros cai Kipv-
peaxos TE Kab Kporanos. FN TOV 6é amolavorvta
em avrois ‘Axpiay TEK MAlpoLTo adv TIs Nanedat-
peoviov Te eival Kal obKLa THY “AKpLay. él O€ TO
“Axpia Karerov pac vmod TOD Owvopaov povev-
Onvat Kat Av«odpyov Adovov Te Kab Xarx@oovta
kat Tptxohwvoy ee Tpecodwvov dé boTepov
éméhaBev ev TO Spo pes TO \YpEeov “Apia ropax ov
Te xa [piavra, ére 6€ eddyovta cai Aiodtov
Te Kab Kpomov.


ie
Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 57. év
dé Tals Meyadaus "Hotaus AéyeT at TOV "Evdupiova
dvevexOhvar t vmo Tov Atos éis ovpavov: epacbevra
6é° Hpas etder@ Trapanroyes var vedédns Kal éx-
Brnbevta xateOeiy eis “Ardov.


12.
Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 118.
dé Tais Meydrdars Hotas Aéyetat ws dpa Medrap-
TOUS pihtaros av 7 AmoAXouu arroénuncas Katé-
UGE Tapa [odkupavry. Boos b¢ avT@ TeOupevov
SpadKovTos avepTvcavTos Tapa TO Oia diapGeipar


260


~ a = aaa I
A a Ca RR ATE OE Nn EET AN Rictas :


- Ete


THE GREAT EOIAE


Inachus and wife of Arestor: from her, then, it is  _
said, the city received its name. |


10.


According to the poem the Great Lotae, these
were killed by Oenomaus!: Alcathous the son of
Porthaon next after Marmax, and after Alcathous,
Euryalus, Eurymachus and Crotalus. The man
killed next after them, Acrias, we should judge to
have been a Lacedemonian and founder of Acria.


_ And after Acrias, they say, Capetus was done to death


by Oenomiius, and Lycurgus, Lasius, Chaleodon and
Tricolonus. . . . And after Tricolonus fate overtook
Aristomachus and Prias on the course, as also Pelagon
and Aeolius and Cronius.


LT.
In the Great Eoiae it is said that Endymion was


transported by Zeus into heaven, but when he fell in


love with Hera, was befooled with a shape of cloud,
and was cast out and went down into Hades.


2,

In the Great Koiae it is related that Melampus,
who was very dear to Apollo, went abroad and
stayed with Polyphantes. But when the king had
sacrificed an ox, a serpent crept up to the sacrifice and


1 Oenomaus, king of Pisa in Elis, warned by an oracle that
he should be killed by his son-in-law, offered his daughter
Hippodamia to the man who could defeat him in a chariot
race, on condition that the defeated suitors should be slain
by him.. Ultimately Pelops, through the treachery of the


_ charioteer of Oenomius, became victorious.


261


HESIOD


auTov Ttovs GepaTovtas tov. Bacidéws. Tov de
Bacthews Kader ivavTos [Kat amoKrewavros |,
TOV Meddurroda Na Beiv Kal Darras. Ta. bé TOUTOV
eyyova TpapevTa, vmo TOUTOU eiyev Ta OTA Kal
epmvedaat AUTO THV MavTiKnD. ouoTrEp KNEMTOVTA
abtov tas Boas Tod "I dicrov els Aiyovay THY
TONAL mepirnpbevra, SeOfvar Kat TOD olKoU mér-
NOVTOS Tecely ev © HV O "Ipurdos, TH SiaKovey
Tm peo BuTLOr pnvoca. tov ‘IdikXouv Kat Tovtov
vapw apeOnvar.
Fo.

Scholiast on Apolloniws Rhodius, Arg. iv. “28.
€v be Tais Meyarats Hotats déaRapros kat Exa-—
TNS 7 SKUANA.

14.

Scholiast on Apollonus Rhodiwus, Arg. u. 181.
TeTnpaclar 6 Pivéa dnoiv Hatodos év Meyarars
"Hotats, 671 DpiEw@ tHv o80v éwnvucev.


15.


Si choliast on Apollonius Rhodvus, Arg. u. 1122.
"Apyos| eis tov PptEov traidwy ottos. TovTous Oe
‘Haioéos év tais Meydraus "Hotaus paciy e&
‘lopaaons THS Aigjrov. Kal ovTos pev hyo
avTOUS técoapas, "Apyov Ppovti MédXava Kv-
Tio Wpov.


16.

Antoninus Liberalis, xxiii. Battos: totopet.. .
“Hotodos év Meyanaus "Hoiaas. ei

"Apyou tov Ppitou Kal Tepemndys THS Abun-

tou Ouyatpos éyévero Mayvns. ovtos wxnoev


262


THE GREAT EOIAE


destroyed his servants. At this the king was angry
and killed the serpent, but Melampus took and
buried it. And its offspring, brought up by him,
used to lick his ears and inspire him with prophecy.
And so, when he was caught while trying to steal
the cows of Iphiclus and taken bound to the city of
Aegina, and when the house, in which Iphiclus was,
was about to fall, he told an old woman, one of the
servants of Iphiclus, and in return was released.


13.
In the Great Eoiae Scylla is the daughter of
Phoebus and Hecate.
14.
Hesiod in the Great Eowae says that Phineus was
blinded because he told Phrixus the way.


15.
Argus. This is one of the children of Phrixus.
These . . . Hesiod in the Great Eoiae says were


born of Iophossa the daughter of Aeétes. And he
says there were four of them, Argus, Phrontis,
Melas, and Cytisorus.


16.

Battus. Hesiod tells the story in the Great
Eowae. . . . Magnes was the son of Argus, the son
of Phrixus and Perimele, Admetus’ daughter, and

1 sc. to Scythia,
263


HESIOD


éyyus Ococarias Kat THY yhv Tav’THnY am avToD
Mayvynctay mpoonyopevoay ot avOpwrot. éyévero
5 avtTd tais wepiBrertos Thy ovr “Tpévaros.
b] -\ Nae / +O / y Bs la)

évrel 6€ A7roAAwva toovta épws éXhaBe TOU Tat-
60s Kal ovK é&eXipTrave Ta OiKia TOU Mayvytos,
‘Epps émiBovrevet TH ayéry Tov Bow@y Tov Arro)-
Nwvos. al € évéuovTo, iva TEp Haav at Aduntou
Boes.’ Kal moo@ta pev éuBarrAE Talis Kvotv, al
éhvrXattov avtdas, AnPapyov Kal KUVayXNV" at oe
eed dbovro Tov Bowv Kal THY UNAKNDY am@hec ay’
eiTa © amrehavvel TopTLas dodexa Kal EKQTOV
Bods afuvyas Kat Tavpov, OS Tails Bovoly éré-
Bawev. é&nmate 5é éx THs ovpds mpos ExaaTov
DrAnv, os av ta ixyn Tov Boov adhavion.
Kal Aye avTtas éXNatbvev Oud te IleXacyav Kat
Ov “Axaias THs DOLoTL605 Kal dua Nox ptoos Kab
Bovwtias kat Meyaptoos Kat evretlev ELS Teo-
TOvYNa OV bua Kopiv@ou | Kal Aapioons ax pt
Teyéas. Kal evred0 ev mapa TO Av«atov ¢ 6pos é€70-
peveTo Kal Tapa TO Mawadnduiov Kai Tas Aeyouevas
Bdtrov cKxomids. @xer 6€ 0 Battos ottos ém
AKP@ TO CKOTEN® Kal ETrel THS POVIAS HKOUVTE TApeE-
NaVVOLMEVOV TOV pooxKaV, TpoehO@v Ex TOV OLKi-
ov éyV@ Tmept TOV Boo ore KNOTLUALAS anyeu
Kal psa Oov 7 NTNTEV, tVa ™ pos pnoeva ppaon TEpt
aura. Eppas € O@oew € emt TOUTOLS UMETXETO,
Kal o Barros @pore Tépl TaV Bowv pos pndeva
KaTepelD. émel € avTas Eppijs expurpev év TO
Tpn@ve mapa TO Kopupdovov els TO omndaLov
ELoeANAo AS aVTLKPUS *ITraAvtas Kat DiKeMias, avbus
agpixeto pos tov Batrov adddéas éavTov Kal
TELPWOMEVOS, EL AVT@ Tuppéverv emt Tols opKLoLs
264


THE GREAT EOIAE


_lived in the region of Thessaly, in the land which


men called after him Magnesia. He had a son“ ok.


remarkable beauty, Hymenaeus. And when Apollo
saw the boy, he was seized with love for him, and
would not leave the house of Magnes. Then
Hermes made designs on Apollo’s herd of eattle
which were grazing in the same place as the cattle of
Admetus. First he cast upon the dogs which were
guarding them a stupor and strangles, so that the
dogs forgot the cows and lost the power of barking.
_ Then he drove away twelve heifers and a hundred
cows never yoked, and the bull who mounted the
cows, fastening to the tail of each one brushwood
to wipe out the footmarks of the cows. He drove
them through the country of the Pelasgi, and
Achaea in the land of Phthia, and through Locris,
and Boeotia and Megaris, and thence into Pelo-
ponnesus by way of Corinth and Larissa, until he
brought them to Tegea. From there he went on
by the Lycaean mountains, and past Maenalus and
what are called the watch-posts of Battus. Now
this Battus used to live on the top of the rock and
when he heard the voice of the heifers as they
were being driven past, he came out from his own
place, and knew that the cattle were stolen. So he
asked for a reward to tell no one about them.
- Hermes promised to give it him on these terms,
and Battus swore to say nothing to anyone about the
cattle. But when Hermes had hidden them in the
cliff by Coryphasium, and had driven them into a
cave facing towards Italy and Sicily, he changed him-
self and came again to Battus and tried whether he
would be true to him as he had vowed. So, offering


265


HESIOD


eO eeu. 6ud0vs dé poo Bov KAabvay éruv0aveto Tap
auTod, el pn KAOTLMALAS Bows eryv@ maperabet-
cas. 0 6€ Battos éha Be THY Xrapioa Kal ELNVUTE |
mept TOV Body. ‘BR ipuis dé Xarerryvas, é OTe Ouxopu-
Jos 7 mY; éppamucev avTov TH papow Kal peréBadev
els TETPOV. Kal AVTOV OvK ExXELTTEL KPUOS OEE
KAULA.


MEAAMITOAEIA


i


Strabo, xiv. p. 642. NeyeTaL dé 0 Karyas o O peav-
Tis pet Apdheroxou Tod ‘Apdrapaou KATA THD EK
Tpotas émavooop melon depo apixéa Oar, TEPLTU-
Xov 6 éavtov kpelr rove pavrer Kata THY KXadpov
Move t@® Mavtovs tijs Teepeotou Ouyatpos, dua
Avany amobaveiv. ‘Hatodos fev OVV OUTW TS
dtackevater Tov mvOov: MpoTetvar yap TL TOLOUTO
T® Mowe tov Kaddyavta:


Oaiua p eyes Kata Ari €piveds Oaaor
ou ov
oUTOS exer pLKpos TEP éwv: elTrots av apLtOmov;


Tov O€ aTrokpivacbau


Mvpvoi etow api mo, a aTap per pov ye : pedivos-
eis O€ TEplgcEvel, Tov émrevO Ewer ov Ke Svvano.
‘Os pato kai obw apltOmos érHytupos eldeTo
MET pov"
Kal Tote 6 Kadyavta téXos Oavdrowo Kaduwer.


266


THE MELAMPODIA


him a robe as a reward, he asked of him whether he


had noticed stolen cattle being driven past. And ~~


Battus took the robe and told him about the cattle.
But Hermes: was angry because he was double-
tongued, and struck him with his staff and changed
him into a rock. And either frost or heat never
leaves him.! .


THE MELAMPODIA


1.


Ir is said that Calchas the seer returned from Troy
with Amphilochus the son of Amphiaraus and came
on foot to this place. But happening to find near
Clarus a seer greater than himself, Mopsus, the son
of Manto, Teiresias’ daughter, he died of vexation,
Hesiod, indeed, works up the story in some such form
as this: Calchas set Mopsus the following problem :

“TI am filled with wonder at the quantity of figs
this wild fig-tree bears though it is so small. Can
you tell their number ?”

And Mopsus answered: “ Ten thousand is their
number, and their measure is a bushel: one fig is
left over, which you would not be male to put into
the measure.’

So said he; and they found the ee of the
measure true. Then did the end of death shroud .
- Calchas.

1 In the Homeric Hymn to Hermes Battus almost dis-
appears from the story, and a somewhat different account of
the stealing of the cattle is given.

2 sc. Colophon. Proclus in his abstract of the Returns (sc.
of the heroes from Troy) says Calchas and his party were


present at the death of Teiresias at Colophon, perhaps
indicating another version of this story.


267


HESIOD


2.

Tzetzes on Lycophron, 682. . . . vov dé Tov Tec-
peatay Aeyet, ere) paow auTov eT TO ryeveds
Choa adXoL O€ évvéa* amo yap Kadpou HV Kab
KAaT@TEPO "EreoxXéous Kal [LoAvveixous, Os ono
Kat 0 THS Mehaprrodias TOLNTHS' TAapEeLaaye yap
TOV Tecpeotav NéyorTa:

Zev watep, ee joe hoooy exew atava Btiovo

apedres Sodvat Kal toa | peat | penoea id pev

Ovntois avO paTro.s: vov o oveé pe TUTOop éTLOas,

bs ve pe peak pov eOnnas € exe atava Biovo

emtTd T emt Cwew yeveas wepoTov wuld if


3.


Scholiast on Homer, Odyssey, x. 494. pac OS
OpaxovTas dvo éy K Baupén HuyVUMEVOUS iO@v
(Tepectas) avetdhe THV Onrevav Kab oUT aS pera Be-
BrAnTaL els. yuvaixa, Kal Taw Tov dppeva Ka
ar éhae THD idiay pvow. TOUTOV Levs Kab “Hoa
KUT Hy ethovTo, Tis paddov HOETAL TH TuVvOVaIG,
TO anper i To OFXrU: oO O€ EiTrED’

olny ev MoLtpay OéKa poLpewY TEpTrETaL aVNp,

Tas 6éKa © ejurrcan hipart yuvn Tepe von joa.
OLoTep | 7 bev "Hpa opytoVetaa émnpwoerv, 0 Sé
Levs tiv pavreiayv Owpetrar.


4,
5) /

nov [wey | €ot év Oalti Kal etAaTrivyn TEOAAVin

/ 4 , ai
tépTrecOat wvOo.ow, érnv SatTos KOopécwvTat,
e \ \ \ \ / e a 4
nov O€ Kal TO TUOETAaL, boa OvnTolow everpmav

va) A a

abdvatot, Sedov TE Kal écOXOV TéEXMap evapyés.


268


THE MELAMPODIA


2.


But now he is speaking of Teiresias, since it is said


that he lived seven generations—though others say
nine. He lived from the times of Cadmus down to
those of Eteocles and Polyneices, as the author
of Melampodia also says: for he introduces Teiresias
speaking thus:

“Father Zeus, would that you had given me a
shorter span of life to be mine and wisdom of heart
like that of mortal men! But now you have
honoured me not even a little, though you ordained
me to have a long span of life, and to live through
seven generations of mortal kind.”


3.

They say that Teiresias saw two snakes mating
on Cithaeron and that, when he killed the female,
he was changed into a woman, and again, when he
killed the male, took again his own nature. This
same Teiresias was chosen by Zeus and Hera to de-
cide the question whether the male or the female
has most pleasure in intercourse. And he said :

“Of ten parts a man enjoys one only; but a
woman's sense enjoys all ten in full.” :

For this Hera was angry and blinded him, but Zeus
gave him the seer’s power.

4.1
_ For pleasant it is at a feast and rich banquet to
tell delightful tales, when men have had enough of
feasting; and pleasant also it is to know a clear
token of ill or good amid all the signs that the
deathless ones have given to mortal men.”

1 }], 1-2 are quoted by Athenaeus ii. p. 40; 11. 3-4 by


Clement of Alexandria, Stromateis vi. 2. 26. Buttmann saw
that the two fragments should be joined.


269


HESIOD


Do.
Athenaeus, xi. 498. A.
2. TO 06 Mapns Ooos dryryedos AOE dv olKou
Trncas & dpydpeov oxvrdov dépe, Saxe & dvaxrt.


6.


10. i 4 N \ \ By Pr
kat ToTe Mavrns pev deapov Boos aivuTo xepoir,
"Tdixros & ert vat’ érreuateTo. T@ O ém OTriaOev
oxuTpoy éxwv eTépn, ETEpN O€ TKNTTPOV aEipas
éoteryey PvAaKos Kal evi Sumecow evtrev.

7 .
Athenaeus, Xiil. P. 609 e. ‘Hatodos & év TplT@
MeAaprodias Tv év EvBoia Xadkida kadXru-
yuvacka eiTrev. ¢
8.
Strabo, xiv. p. 676. ‘Hoatodos & év Soros bro
‘AmoAXwvos avatpeOnvas Tov ’Audiroxov dyouv.
9. | |

Clement of Alexandria, Stromateis, v. p. 259.
pavtis & ovodeis éotw émruyOoviov avOpaTav
dats av eden Znvos voov aiytoyoto.


AITIMIOS


i

Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iii. 587. 0
dé Tov Aéyipsov mounaoas Sua [To] d€pas avTov
avdarpéros pnot m™poade Onvat. Aeyet dé Ste
peta THY Ovoiay uyvicas TO dépas ovTwS

Kaas éyov éoteryev és Aintao wéraOpa.}
1 Restored by Schenkl.

270


AEGIMIUS |


=


ov.


“And Mares, swift messenger, came to him


through the house and brought a silver goblet which
he had filled, and gave it to ‘the lord.”


6.

“And then Mantes took in his hands the ox’s
halter and Iphiclus lashed him upon the back. And
behind him, with a cup in one hand and a raised
sceptre in the other, walked Phylacus and spake
amongst the bondmen.”


Hesiod in the third book of the Melampodia
ealled Chalecis in Euboea “the land of fair women.”


8. |
But Hesiod says that Amphilochus was killed by
Apollo at Soli.
; om.
“And now there is no seer among mortal men
such as would know the mind of Zeus who holds the
aegis.”


AEGIMIUS


r.

But the author of the Aegimius says that he
(Phrixus) was received without intermediary because
of the fleece.1 He says that after the sacrifice he
purified the fleece and so

“Holding the fleece he walked into the halls of
Aeétes.”’

1 sc. the golden fleece of the ram which carried Phrixus


and Helle away from Athamas and Ino. When he reached
Colchis Phrixus sacrificed the ram to Zeus.


271


HESIOD


2.

Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 816. o
TOV Airyipvoy momaas év devtép@ now OTe 7)
Pértus els NEByTa vdaTtos EBadNnev Tos eK IInrews
yevverp.evous, yvovat Bovroméevn et Ovnrot elouv
es « ALL. OD) TOMNGY SuapOapevtav ayavanrija as
TOV IInA€a Kat Kwrdoa, tov “Ayirréa éuBr-
Ojnvas eis NEBNTA.

3.

Apollodorus, ii. 1.3.1. ‘Hatodos 6¢ cat “Axovoi-
aos IlecpHvos avTny C1o) dace eivar. tavTnv
lepwovuny THis "Hpas ¢ éxoug av Leds epOespe. po-
pabeis oé Up “Hpas Tis pev Kopns aapamevos eis
Bobv peTe“ophwce AEUKHY, aT o1LoTaTo be TOUT
jin uve Geir, 610 pno. “Ha iodos OUK é7L-
oma bar THD ato TOV Deady OpynVv TOUS yLVOMEVOUS
dpxous vmrép Epotos. 7

éx TOU O Opxov eOnnev a aroivipov avOpaTrotct

poo dioiwv épywv mépe Kurpeoos.


4,
Herodian in Stephanus of Byzantium.
"f b / Ot
vnow év APavTios din,
\ \ 3 6 / @ x >\ 2/7
THv Tp APayrTida KikXnoKov Geol arev €ovTes,
of \ \ { dee Saale / 3 / 4
KvBotav 6é Boos ToT ém@vupoy @vopacev Levs.
D.
Schol. on Huripides Phoen. 1116.
9 / J
Kat ot émioKotroyv Apryov tes KPaTEpOV TE LEyaV TE,
Tétpacw ob0arpolcw op@pevov évOa Kat évOa:
l
died par ov O¢ ol @poe Dea pév0s, Ovoe ol virvos
mim rev éml Breddpots, aor & éxyev si
atel.


272


AEGIMIUS


2: oes
The author of the Aegimius says in the second
book that Thetis used to throw the children she had
by Peleus into a cauldron of water, because she
wished to learn whether they were mortal. ... And
that after many had perished Peleus was annoyed,
and prevented her from throwing Achilles into the
cauldron.
ae


Hesiod and Acusilaus say that she (Io) was the
daughter of Peiren. While she was holding the office
of priestess of Hera, Zeus seduced her, and being
discovered by Hera, touched the girl and changed
her into a white cow, while he swore that he had no
intercourse with her. And so Hesiod says that oaths
touching the matter of love do not draw down anger
from the gods.

« And thereafter he ordained that an oath con-
cerning the secret deeds of the Cyprian should be
without penalty for men.”


4,

“(Zeus changed Io) in the fair island Abantis,
which the gods, who are eternally, used to call
Abantis aforetime, but Zeus then called it Euboea
after the cow.” !


-


5.

“And (Hera) set a watcher upon her (Io), great
and strong Argus, who with four eyes looks every
way. And the goddess stirred in him unwearying
strength: sleep never fell upon his eyes; but he kept
sure watch always.”


‘ Huboea properly means the ‘‘ Island of fine Cattle (or
Cows).”


273


HESIOD


6. |
Scholiast on Homer, Il. xxiv. 24. ’Apyerhovrnv
... Kata tovs “Horodov pvdovs tov Boveodov
lods épovevoev (Epps).
5k


Athenaeus, xi. p. 503 d. xat o Tov Airyipstov
moinaas, el8 “Hatodds éotiv ) Képxwws 0 Midn-
oLOS,

év0a tot gatas émov WuKTHpLov, 6pyape Nav.

8


Etym. Gen. “Hatodos b€é da TO TpLyh avTOvS ©


olKHaAL, |
f x / J
TAVTES O€ TPLYALKES KANEOVTAL,
TPLOGHVY OvVEKA Yalay Exas TATPNS EOacaVTO.
Tpia yap Enrrnvixa evn ths Kpnrns émoicjoa,
Ilexaoryovs, “Ayatovs, Awpietis. ots tpixaixas
KEKANKACL. | ;


INCERTAE SEDIS FRAGMENTA
iP


Diogenes Laertvus, vill. 1. 25.
Ovpavin & dp’ értxte Atvov modunpatoy vior,
Ov 67, Goot BpoToi etal aoLool Kal KWapioTai,
mavtes pev Opnvedow év citaTrivals TE Xopots TE,
apxopevos 6¢ Aivov Kal AnyovTes KaXéovaLV

Clement of Alexandria, Strom. i. p. 121.
TavToins coins SedankoTa.

2.

Schol. on Homer, Odyssey, iv. 232.
et ) AmroAXNwV DoiBos vréex Oavatoio cawoat
i avtos Llatnwy, ds arrdvtav dappaka oidev.

274


FRAGMENTS OF UNKNOWN POSITION


é | G. ce
«Slayer of Argus.” According to Hesiod’s tale
he (Hermes) slew (Argus) the herdsman of Io.


(s


And the author of the Aegimius, whether he is


| - Hesiod or Cercops of Miletus (says)


“There, some day, shall be my place of refresh-
ment, O leader of the people.”


8.

Hesiod (says they were so called) because they
settled in three groups: ‘ And they all were called
the Three-fold people, because they divided in three
the land far from their country.” For (he says) that
three Hellenic tribes settled in Crete, the Pelasgi,
_Achaeans and Dorians. And these have been called


Three-fold People.


FRAGMENTS OF UNKNOWN POSITION
7 "


‘So Urania bare Linus, a very lovely son: and him
all men who are singers and harpers do bewail at
feasts and dances, and as they begin and as they end
they call on Linus *« * « who was skilled in all
manner of wisdom.”


2.


“Unless Phoebus Apollo should save him from
death, or Paean himself who knows the remedies for
all things.”


275
fe


HESIOD


J. :
Clement of Alexandria, Protrept, c. vii. p. 21.
avTos yap wavT@y Bacirevs Kal Koipavos éaTL
adavatwv Té ot ov TLS EpnptaTal KPaTOS ANAOS.
4,
Anecd. Oxon (Cramer), i. p. 148.
dadpa Pedy waxdpov rrje bike se
D.
Clement of Alexandria, Strom. i. p. 123,
Move aap, ait avdpa mrorvdpadéovta Teetoe
Oéatriov avdnevra.
6.
Strabo, x. P. 471.
[Tar 5'| ovpecas Nvupdar Dear eeyevovto
Kal yéVvOS OUTLOAVOY LaTvpov Kal apunxavospyav
Koupnrés te Oeot duNorratypoves opynoTnpes.
te


Schol. on Apoll. Rhod. Arg. i. 824.
Jeaodpevos yeveny Kreodaiov cudariporo.
8.
Surdas, 8.0. ANKN.
aha pev yap ébmKev ‘Onda wos. Alaxidyor,
voov © ’ApuvOaovidats, wovTOV 6 érop’ "Atpeldnow.
Oe
Schol. on Homer, Iliad, xiii. 155.
THhoe yap aEvAin KaTeTTVOETO Ki)EA VNODY.
10;
Etymologicum Magnum.
ovKérte 61) Batvovaor Napots Toatv.
1d.
Schol. on Homer, Iliad, xxiv. 624.
OTTHTAV “Ev TPA@TA, Tepippadéws 5 EpvaoayTo.
276


FRAGMENTS OF UNKNOWN POSITION
: 3.


“For he alone is king and lord of all the undying Se


gods, and no other vies with him in power.”


4,
be (To cause ?) the gifts of the blessed gods to come
near to earth.”


rd,
“Of the Muses who make a man very wise,
marvellous in utterance.’ | ‘
6.


“But of them (sc. the daughters of Hecaterus)
were born the divine mountain Nymphs and the
tribe of worthless, helpless Satyrs, and the divine
Curetes, sportive dancers.” ?


i


“ Beseeching the offspring of glorious Cleodaeus.”


oe
“For the Olympian gave might to the sons of
Aeacus, and wisdom to the sons of Amythaon, and
wealth to the sons of Atreus.”’


hod 9: |
“ For through this lack of wood the timber of the


ships rotted.”
10.


“No longer do they walk with delicate feet.”


ine
“First of all they roasted (pieces of meat), and
drew them carefully off the spits.”
| 277


HESIOD


12:
Chrysippus, Fragg. ii. 254. 11.
Tov yap aéEeto Oupos evi otnecor pirorow.


13.
55 1d:
—olov évi oti Perot KoAov Ovparyé Exovaa.
14.


Strabo, vii. p. 327. |
Awsarvny dyyov te, Tetacyav Edpavov, jev.
2 15. )
Anecd. Oxon (Cramer), iii. p. 318. not.
mTisaons Te Ovodephs Kal KéOpov VNAEL KATY.
! 16.
Schol. on Apoll. Rhod. Arg. i. 757.
autos © év mAnopunot SuTetéos ToTapoio.
bes
Stephanus of Byzantium, IapOénos.
@> adkada Tpopéwv ws aBpn TapOévos Eiow.
18.
Schol. on Theocritus, xi. 75.
VNTLOS, OT TLS ETOLLA ALTOV GVETOLMLA OLOKEL.


19,
Harpocration.
épya véwy, Bovral 5é wécwr, evyal dé yepovTav.
20.


Porphyr, On Abstinence, ii. 18. p. 134.
@>S KE TOMS péCnat, vouos 8 apyatos apioTos.
21.
Schol. on Nicander,'Theriaca, 452.
Vpn O€ o¢ TaTplL... KTiNOV empevat.
278


FRAGMENTS OF UNKNOWN POSITION


12
“For his spirit increased in his dear breast.”’


: 13.
“With such heart-grieving anger in her breast.”


. 14,
“He went to Dodona and the oak-grove, the
dwelling place of the Pelasgi.”’


15.
“© With the pitiless smoke of black pitch and of
cedar.”


16.
“ But he himself i in the swelling tide of the rain-
swollen river.’


17.
(The river) Parthenius
«“ Flowing as softly as a dainty maiden goes.”
18.
“Foolish the man who leaves what he has, and
follows after what he has not.”


TD.
“The deeds of the young, the counsels of the
middle-aged, and the prayers of the aged.”’


20.
“ Howsoever the city does sacrifice, the ancient


custom is best.”’
2D.


“ But you should be gentle towards your father.”
| 2719


HESIOD ‘


22.
Plato, Epist. xi. 358.
O €LTrOVTOS pev ejLEto
hatnrov Kev d0keev Euev, YaXeTrov O€ vonaar.
23.

Bacchylides, v. 191-3.  Botwtos avnp Tade
pov| noev yruvKetav | |‘ Hoiodos mporroxos | Movoar,
ov <av> aOdvato TLw@ct, TovT@ | Kat BpoTav
dnpav él ecOar.


FRAGMENTA DUBIA


bh.
Galen, de plac. Hipp. et Plat. i. 266. 7.
Kat TOTE 69 oTNOéwv "APdua dpévas e&éXeTO Zevs.
2.
Schol. on Homer, Od. vii. 104.
ANETPEVOVGL [LUANS ETL MNAOTA KAPTTOV.
3.
Schol. on Pindar, Nem. i. 1.

év AnX@ TOTe TpwToV éyw Kal” Opnpos aordol

peéNTropev, Ev veapots Uuvots padrvavTes aoLony,

Pot Bov “Amrod\N@va ypvadopor, ov Téxe Anta,

4.
Julian, Misopogon, p. 369 B.

YaNeTros 0° emt Spaywats Atmos.

5.

Servius on Vergil, Aen. iv. 484. Hesiodus has
Hesperidas .. . Noctis filias ultra Oceanum mala
aurea habuisse dicit. |

Aiyrn 7 40° "Epv0ea cal “KomepéOovea Boots.

1 Cf, Scholion on Clement, Protrept. i. p. 302.
280


DOUBTFUL FRAGMENTS


29.


“ And if I said this, it would seem a poor thing


and hard to understand.”’
25.
Thus spake the Boeotian, even Hesiod,! servant
of the sweet Muses: “whomsoever the immortals


honour, the good report of mortals also followeth
him,”


DOUBTFUL FRAGMENTS
]


“* Anp then it was Zeus took away sense from the
heart of Athamas.”
2.
“ They grind the yellow grain at the mill.”


3.

“Then first in Delos did I and Homer, singers
both, raise our strain—stitching song in new hymns—
Phoebus Apollo with the golden sword, whom Leto
bare.”’

4.
“ But starvation on a handful is a cruel thing.”


5.
Hesiod says that these Hesperides . . . , daughters
of Night, guarded the golden apples beyond Ocean.
** Aegle and Erythea and ox-eyed Hesperethusa.”’


1 cp. Hes. Theog. 81 ff. But Theognis 169, ‘“‘ Whomso
the gods honour, even a man inclined to blame praiseth him,”
is much nearer.


281


HESIOD


6.
Plato, Republic, iii. 390 #.
Sapa Oeovs TreiPer, dHp aidoious BactrAHas.
te
Clement of Alexandria, Strom. v. p. 256.
éEBSopatyn & adtis Naumpov pdaos nertLovo.
ot
Apollonius, Lex. Hom. Pot Bos.
hotBov bdwp éraywv Képad ‘OKeavoio poner.
s),
Stephanus of Byzantium.
"AotAndav Krtpevos te cat Apdidoxos Oeoedns.


10.
Schol. on Pindar, Nem. ii. 64.
Terapov akopntos avtis
NMETEPOLS ETAPOLOL hows TPwTLATOS EONKE
KTeivas avoporeTetpayv auountov Medavirrrnp,
avTOKacLyYnTHY Kpvool@Vvolo avacons.


1 This line may once have been read in the text of Works
and Days after |. 771.


282


DOUBTFUL FRAGMENTS


6.
“Gifts move the gods, gifts move worshipful
princes.”


&


“On the seventh day again the bright light of the
SU...


8.
“He brought pure water and mixed it with


- QOcean’s streams.”


9.


“ Aspledon and Clymenus and god-like Amphi-
docus”’ (sons of Orchomenus).


10.

“Telamon never sated with battle-first brought
light to our comrades by slaying blameless Melanippe,
destroyer of men, own sister of the golden-girdled
queen.


283


re


odd to Sduil iden ody aidia:


fit iw ; in a fysy vin :


a


Dits YS fae


awe


ia aittgel aa
ddd, 1 a2 REO)


HOMERIC HYMNS


4
MA :
a
|
b r
12 eee LF 2"
‘ t
wate th ’ :
, a3 pa - ——
fat Ta RNAS
2
-
:
j
¥ 5.35
:


? -— 2 »
: ipae =~
- ad > ~
© Dat -
j ~ a4 x ” »
~~ a 4 *
an - ae
~ =


y


I
EIS. AIONTSON!


x ‘m * *
\ \ \ 4 3 e\ > 3 / > A
ot ev yap Apaxdy@ a’, ot 0 “Ikapw nvemoeoon
/ 9 A 1: JE J an / 3 an ¥
dao’, o O év Na&q, diov yévos, etpagiora,
ol 66a er “ArXhe@ ToTau@ BabvounjevTe
/ } / ve
Kucapéevnv Yewérnv Texéerv Aci TepTrikepavve’
| , ‘
anrxrot 6° év OnBnaow, dvak, ce NEyovor yeverOar, 5
Wevddpevor: o6 © étixTEe TaTHp avopav TE Dewy TE
\ 3 ? 3 / Tig ,
jmo\\ov amr av0Opwrav, KpvTT@v evkw@dEVOV
7
“Hpnp.
id
éote O€ tts Nuon, Urratov dpos, avOéov bry,
n 4 N > , e /
Tnrov Dowvikns, oxedov AiyuTToLo podwp,
* x x x
if CS if ) / V4 2 een an
Kal Ol AVAGTHOOVGLY ayadpaTa TOAN Evivnols. 10
/
&s O€ Ta wey TpLa, Gol TaYTwS TpLETHPLOLY atel
BY ef / e /
avOpwro péEovat TeAnéEToas ExaTopBas.
> \ / Bi ID f a f.
H nai xkvavéenow ém7 odpvor vedoe Kpoviwr:
/ a
auBpootar oO dpa YaiTas éreppw@oavTo avaKTOS
J \
xkpatos amt adavdtoo: péeyav & édedEev "OXvp-
TOV. . 15


1 ]1, 1-9 are preserved by Diodorus Siculus iii. 66. 3;
ll. 10-21 are extant only in M.


286


I
TO DIONYSUS


* * * e


For some say, at Dracanum ; and some, on windy
' Tearus; and some, in Naxos, O Heaven-born,
Insewn!; and others by the deep-eddying river
Alpheus that pregnant Semele bare you to Zeus the
thunder-lover. And others yet, lord, say you were
born in Thebes; but all these lie. The Father of
men and gods gave you birth remote from men and
secretly from white-armed Hera. There is a certain
Nysa, a mountain most high and richly grown with
woods, far off in Phoenice, near the streams of


Aegyptus
%


% % *


“and men will lay up for her? many offerings in her
shrines. And as these things are three,’ so shall
mortals ever sacrifice perfect hecatombs to you at
your feasts each three years.”

The Son of Cronos spoke and nodded with his
dark brows. And the divine locks of the king flowed
forward from his immortal head, and he made great


1 Dionysus, after his untimely birth from Semele, was
sewn into the thigh of Zeus.

2 sc. Semele. Zeus is here speaking.

* The reference is apparently to something in the body of
the hymn, now lost.


287


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


> eltm@v érévevoe Kapynate pyntieta Levs.

"In, eipadidta, yuvatpavés ot S€ & aoLdot
GOomeV ApYomevor ANYOVTES T* OVOE TH ETTL

asd 3» J is an A > A
oet ereAnO omer : Lepijs pepvijo Cas aoudiis.
Kal ov pev ovTw Yaipe, Alwyva eipadiora, 20
avy mntpl Leuern, Hv TEep Kadéovat Ovavyp.


II
EIy AHMHTPAN


Anuntp’ NUKOMLOV, TELVNV Oeov, a adpxowe deloety,
avTny noe OvyaTpa tavba pupor, iy "Ardwveds
iprager, O@Kev O€ BapvcruTos evpvorra ZLevs,
yoo pu Anuntpos xpueacpou, ayNaokapTrov,
matfovcay Koupyot ouv ‘Oceavod BabuKonmous 5
dvlea T atvupevnv, poda Kai KpoKoy HO ia KANG
Netwav’ dip pahaKov Kal ayadrloas HO vaxw Gov
yapKeoo ov 0’, bv hice SorXov KaduK@TLOL KOPN
Tata Atos Bounijoe xapebomenn Tlodudéera,
Gavpactov yavowvTa: oéBas TO ye TAacW ioéaOat 10
alavarors Te Oeots 06 Ovntots av porots’

TOU Kal aro pilns éxaTov Kapa eferrepuner’

Kot” HOOT oom,” Tas T ovpaves evpus UmepOev

yatéd te mao éyékacce Kal adpupov oldoua
Gahacons.

i 0 a apa dapPSnoac @peEaTo xepo ly di dpupeo 15
ame abupywa NaBeiv: Yadve dé yOwv evpyayuta

1 Allen: émaAadduevor, M. 2 Tyrrell: «@dis 7° 6847, M.

288


Il.—TO DEMETER, 1-16


Olympus reel. So spake wise Zeus and ordained it
with a nod.

Be favourable, O Insewn, Inspirer of frenzied
women ! we singers sing of you as we begin and as
we end a strain, and none forgetting you may call
holy song to mind. And so, farewell, Dionysus,
Insewn, with your other Soncle com men call


Thyone.


I]
: TO DEMETER


I Bein to sing of rich-haired Demeter, awful god-
dess—of her and her trim-ankled daughter whom
Aidoneus rapt away, given to him by all-seeing Zeus
the loud-thunderer.

Apart from Demeter, lady of the golden sword
and glorious fruits, she was playing with the deep-
bosomed daughters of Oceanus and gathering flowers
over a soft meadow, roses and crocuses and beautiful
violets, irises also and hyacinths and the narcissus,
which Earth made to grow at the will of Zeus and to
please the Host of Many, to be a snare for the bioom-
like girl—a marvellous, radiant flower. It was a
thing of awe whether for deathless gods or mortal
men to see: from its root grew a hundred blooms
and it smelled most sweetly, so that all wide heaven
above and the whole earth and the sea’s salt swell
laughed for joy. Andthe girl was amazed and
reached out with both hands to take the lovely toy ;
but the wide-pathed earth yawned there in the plain


289


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Nivctov dp trediov, TH dpovoev avaké loAvdéypov
i b) / / , es
immo aVavatotor, Kpovou trodkv@vupos vios.
‘Aprraéas & déxovcay émi ypvoéotow oxXotow
Ay oropupopéevny: taynoe 0 ap dplta povy, 20 I
Nps 14 , |
KexAopern tratépa Kpovidny tratov Kal aptoTov.
b) / b] / 3 Ny la b) ,
ovodé Tis ABavatarv ovde OvnTtav avOpaTav
HKOVoEV Hovis, ovd ayNaoKkapTror éhalatt
b) \ / / b) 2) /
et un Ilepoatov Ouvyatnp atara dpovéovea |
duev €& dvTpov, Exatn ATapoKpNHoEpvos, 25
"Héru0s Te dvak&, ‘Tarepiovos ayXaos vios, :
Koupns KexNopevns matépa Kpovidny: 0 6é€ vooduy
e A ? / / a aaN fal
hoto Oewy amravevOe ToAVAALTTH Evi VN,
déypevos tepa KaNa Tapa OvnTtav avOparav. |
\ P iemme J o) \ b) ,
Thy © aexalopevny rryev Atos évvecinat 30.
Tatpokactyvntos, Lloxvonuavtwp Morudéeypor,
C/ 3 ifs he , ees
immows alavatotct, Kpovov modkv@vupos vLOs.
"Odpa pev obv yalav Te Kal ovpavoy daTepoevTa
n / -
Nedooe Dea Kal ToVvTOV ayappoov tyOvoevTa
3 eh 2 apant 7: Ny Reel. f \
avyas T Hertov, ETL O HATETO MNTEPA KEOVNV 35 ff
dwec Oar kal ddra Oewy aieryevetawy, |
/ Cue \ By4 A / 3 z
Toppa ol €ATTIs EOeMye eyav Voov ayvupmevys Trep:
** * x *
nynoav & opéwy xopudal cat BévOea movtou
ne bee) / n pS, / /
dovn vr alavaty tis & éxdve TOTVLA HTN.
"Of S€ pv Kpadinv adxos édraBev, apd dé
VAtTaLs 40 |
auBpociais Kpndeuva daifeto yepat pirnor,


290


l.—TO DEMETER, 17-41


of Nysa, and the lord, Host of Many, with his'im- ~~


mortal horses sprang out upon her—the Son of
Cronos, He who has many names.!

He caught her up reluctant on his golden car and
bare her away lamenting. Then she cried out shrilly
with her voice, calling upon her father, the Son of
Cronos, who is most high and excellent. But no one,
either of the deathless gods or of mortal men, heard
her voice, nor yet the olive-trees bearing rich fruit:
only tender-hearted Hecate, bright-coitfed, the
daughter of Persaeus, heard the girl from her cave,
_and the lord Helios, Hyperion’s bright son, as she
cried to her father, the Son of Cronos. But he was
sitting aloof, apart from the gods, in his temple
where many pray, and receiving sweet offerings from
mortal men. So he, that Son of Cronos, of many
names, who is Ruler of Many and Host of Many,
was ‘bearing her away by leave of Zeus on his
immortal chariot—his own brother's child and all
unwilling.

And so long as she, the goddess, yet beheld earth
and starry heaven and the strong-flowing sea where
fishes shoal, and the rays of the sun, and still hoped
to see her dear mother and the tribes of the eternal
gods, so long hope calmed her great heart for all her
trouble. .. . and the heights of the mountains and
the depths of the sea rang with her immortal voice :
and her queenly mother heard her.

Bitter pain seized her heart, and she rent the
covering upon her divine hair with her dear hands:


1 The Greeks feared to name Pluto directly and mentioned
him by one of many descriptive titles, such as ‘‘ Host of
Many”: compare the Christian use of 6 dié8oA0s or our
‘* Evil One.”


201


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Kuaveov dé Kahu Kar apporépav Barer’ Onan,

cevato Oo OOT olwvos, éml Tpapepny TE Kai LYPHV

paropevyn’ THO ovTIs éTHTVPA puOncacbaL

nOerev ovTE Oewv ovte OvnTtav avOpeTar,

OUT olw@VaYV TLS TH ETHTULOS Ayyeros HAGEv.

évv wap pev eTelTa KATA XG ova. ToT YLA Anew

oTpapar aidomevas daidas META VEpoly EYouca,

ovoe TOT apuBpooins Kab VEKTAPOS OUTFOTOLO

Tao oar KNX EMEVN, ove ypoa BddXeTo AouTpois.

Gd O76 on O€KATN OL em rude pawonris NOS;

TVTETO ot ‘Exarn, cehas év Xelpecow éexouoa

Kab pa ol ayyenéouca éTros Pato povng ey Te"
Tlorvia Anunrnp, pn hope, aryN.aodwpe,

Tos Jeav ovpavier ne unr av avbparov

HPTATE Mepoepovny Kat cov pidov neaye Ovpov;

povis yap NKOUC » , aTap OvK Loop oplarpoiow,
OoTLS env: cold @Ka AEyo vnMEpTed TAaVvTa.
"Qs ap p ebn ‘Exatn: thy & ov nuetBeto wv0@

‘Petns 7 cee OuyatTnp, GAN @Ka ov AUTH

mE atOopévas daidas peta Yepalv Exovaa.

“‘He)voy o ixovto, Oeav o KOT OV 706 Kal avopor,

otav 0 immov mpom apowb Ka epee: dia Cedwv:

"Hehe ; aidercat [Le Oeav ov TEP»! él ToTe 67 GEV

nH é erred i) Epy” Kpaoinyv Kab Gupor i inva:

Koupny THY eTEKOD, yuKepov Odnos, eldei evopiy,

THs adi OT dKxovea Ou ai épos aT pUYyeTOLO

wate Bualopévyns, aTap ovK loov obbarpotow.

add, oD yap On Tacav éml yOdva Kal KaTAa TOD-

TOV
aibépos € éx Oins KATAOEPKEAL d axTived at,
vnmepTéws por eviaTe hirov TéKOS, el TOU OT wTAs,
Ludwich: @éas trep, M.
292


50°


55


65


70 |


l.—TO DEMETER, 42-71


her dark cloak she cast down from both her shoulders
and sped, like a wild-bird, over the firm land and
yielding sea, seeking her child. But no one would
tell her the truth, neither god nor mortal man; and
of the birds of omen none came with true news for
her. Then for nine days queenly Deo wandered over
the earth with flaming torches in her hands, so grieved
that she never tasted ambrosia and the sweet
draught of nectar, nor sprinkled her body with
water. But when the tenth enlightening dawn had
come, Hecate, with a torch in her hands, met her,
and spoke to her and told her news:

“Queenly Demeter, bringer of seasons and giver
of good gifts, what god of heaven or what mortal
man has rapt away Persephone and pierced with
sorrow your dear heart? For I heard her voice, yet
saw not with my eyes who it was. But I tell you
truly and shortly all I know.”

So, then, said Hecate. And the daughter of rich-
haired Rhea answered her not, but sped swiftly with
her, hoiding flaming torches in her hands. So they
came to Helios, who is watchman of both gods and
men, and stood in front of his horses : and the bright
goddess enquired of him: “ Helios, do you at least
regard me, goddess as I am, if ever by word or deed of
mine I have cheered your heart and spirit. Through
the fruitless air I heard the thrilling cry of my
daughter whom I bare, sweet scion of my body and
lovely in form, as of one seized violently ; though
with my eyes I saw nothing. But you—for with
your beams you look down from the bright upper air
over all the earth and sea—tell me truly of my dear


ie,


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


ef / ae) a \ LF b) /
OoTLs Voodly EpmEeto NAB@V aéKoVoaY avayKy
olyetar née Oedy H Kai Ovntav avOparav.
“Os dato: thy & “Trrepsovidyns nuetBeTto wv0@:
oP , b] Id Q ‘é A J BA 15
eins nuxopov Ovyatep, Anuntep avacaa,
> , \ \ J x of xQd 9 /
elonaers’ On yap méeya o aCopmat nO édeatpw
bd) J \ \ / 3 VA A
AXVUMEVNY TEPt TALOL TaVUahUP®: OUVOE TLS AAXOS
ay > / d \ / /
aittos abavatay, e¢ un vehernyepeta Zeus,
bs pv GOK 'Atdn Carepny KexrAHoOar aKorTLW
b) i A Dae \ 4 3 /
avtoKaciyynto: 68 vo Codov nepoevta 80
aptaéas irmo.ow ayev peyara tdyoucav. | i
5) / / / / / aS fsa et \ oe
aNNA, Jed, KaTATraVE meyaV Yyoov" OVE TL TE YPH
\ >” > ov os e ise \
pay aAVTwWS ATANHTOV EXELY YONOV: OV TOL AELKNS
\ 5) b) / 4 9 Z.
—yauBpos év aBavatows Wodvonuayvtap ‘Atdaveds,
avTOKATLYYNTOS Kat omoomopos: audi be Tewny 83
ehhayev @S Ta bie ovat pixa Sac wos er vxOn,
TOUS peTavaveT dewy,! TOV eARaXe Kobpavos Elva.
“Os etrr@v tmroiow éxéxXeTo: Tol & UT GmoKANS
Cf Ul N ef / ef 3 3 /
piuda dhépov Ooov dpya TavUTTEpoL MOT OL@vVOi.
Thy & ayxos atvotepoy Kai KbvTepoy ixeTo Ovprov: 90
/ Or 4 J, UM
vooauevy on eTErTAa KedXaLvedet Kpoviwvt
A ae oY 3 \ \ A by
voodiaGetaa Oew@y ayopny Kat waxpov "OXvpTrov
@yeT et avOpoTav Todas Kal Tlova Epya
Sd. > BA \ / Qs b) fal
El00S AUANOVVOVGA TOAVY KPoVOY" OVOE TLS aVOPOV
etc opowy ylyvwoKxe Babvlovev Te yuvarkor, 95
if 2 ich \ n 4a e/ n
mptv y OTe 617) Kereoio daidpovos txeTo d@pa,
ra bbe oede i a J / 5
ds TOT EnXevotvos Ouvoécans Koipavos ev.
c/ SS \ ig a VA J 5
éeto O éyyvs odoto hidrov TeTLnMEVY HTOP,
IlapGeviw ppéate, 60ev UdpevovTo ToXiTat,


1 Puntoni: werd vaterar, M.


294


Il.—TO DEMETER, 72-99


child, if you have seen her anywhere, what god or
mortal man has violently seized her against her will
and mine, and so made off.”’

So said she. And the Son of Hyperion answered
her: “Queen Demeter, daughter of rich-haired Rhea,
I will tell you the truth; for I greatly reverence and
pity you in your grief for your trim-ankled daughter.
None other of the deathless gods is to blame, but
only cloud-gathering Zeus who gave her to Hades,
her father’s brother, to be called his buxom wife.
And Hades seized her and took her loudly crying in
his chariot down to his realm of mist and gloom.
Yet, goddess, cease your loud lament and keep not
vain anger unrelentingly: Aidoneus, the Ruler of
Many, is no unfitting husband among the deathless
gods for your child, being your own brother and born
of the same stock : also, for honour, he has that third
share which he received when division was made at
the first, and is appointed lord of those among whom
he dwells.”’

So he spake, and called to his horses: and at his
chiding they quickly whirled the swift chariot along,
like long-winged birds.

But grief yet more terrible and savage came into
the heart of Demeter, and thereafter she was so an-
gered with the dark-clouded Son of Cronos that she
avoided the gathering of the gods and high Olympus,
and went to the towns and rich fields of men, dis-
figuring her form a jong while. And no one of men
or deep-bosomed women knew her when they saw
her, until she came to the house of wise Celeus who
then was lord of fragrant Eleusis. Vexed in her dear
heart, she sat near the wayside by the Maiden Well,
from which the women of the place were used to


295


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


év KU, avuTap Smrepbe mepbnel Oapvos éeains, 100
vpn Tararyevés evariyKlos, }TE TOKOLO

elprynTae da@pav Te prroorepavou ‘Ag podirns,

oial TE Tpopot ELOL OepeoroTroh@y Bacidnav

Taidov Kal Taplar KaTa SOMATA HYHEVTA.

THY oe iSov Keneoio ‘Endevowidao Ouyarpes 105 |

EpNopevae pe? Vdwp eUNPUTOD, oppa pépovev :

KaNTUot Karneinou pira ™pos oopara TATPOS,

Téa oapes, ore eat, KoupnLov avOos € exoveat,

Karnr1dixy Kat Krevordixn Ano T _epoeaaa |

Kad\Oon ie ) TOV TpoyeverTaTn Hey aTac@v: 110

ov0 eyvov"t Xanrerrot dé eot Ounrotaty opacbat.

ayxod O loTapevaus eTrea TTEPOEVTA T poonvuowy:

Tis modev é erat, YpHUs TONAL EV EDL avO poTrov;
TIMTE O€ VOTE TONNOS am ETTLXES, ovoe Sopoue
Tidvacar; ev0a YUVALKES ava peyapa TKLOEVTA 115
TIM Ka, OS TU TEP ade Kal om)orTepat ryeyaacur,
at Ké oe pikavrar npev eres NOE KAL epye.

"Qs epav y & éméerow apet Ber o ToTva Oedwv:
TeKVO Pir’, ai TLVES EOTE YUVALKOV Onhutepawy,
Kaiper eyo & vptiy pvOncopar: ov Tot aekeés  —:120
Dev eipopenno vy ann bea pvdnoac ba.

Awcw? éuot y dvow éoti: To yap 0éTo ToTMA

ENT ND.
VUV AUTE Kpnrnéev € eT evpea vara Jaracons
HAVO OV OvK eehouca, Bin & déxovoay QVaYKN
dvopes AqLaThpes amryyayov. ol pmev errerTa 7) 125
vat Gon Oopucovoe kateaxebov, evda yuvaixes
NTELPOU em éBno av GOANEES He Kab avrot,
OelTrvOVv T em NPTUVOVTO mapa MpUmYr oa vnos”
adn éuol ov dSdprroto perippovos Hpato Ovpos*

1 Cobet: éyvwv, M. 2 Passow.: Ads, M.


296


Ii.—TO DEMETER, too-129


draw water, in a shady place over which grew an


olive shrub. And she was like an ancient woman


who is cut off from childbearing and the gifts of
-garland-loving Aphrodite, like the nurses of king’s
children who deal justice, or like the house-keepers
in their echoing halls. There the daughters of
Celeus, son of Eleusis, saw her, as they were coming
for easy-drawn water, to carry it in pitchers of bronze
to their dear father’s house: four were they and like
goddesses in the flower of their girlhood, Callidice
and Cleisidice and lovely Demo and Callithoé who
was the eldest of them all. They knew her not,
_—for the gods are not easily discerned by mortals—,
but standing near by her spoke winged words :

“ Old mother, whence and who are you of folk
born long ago? Why are you gone away from the
city and do not draw near the houses? For there
in the shady halls are women of just such age as
you, and others younger ; and they would welcome
_ you both by word and by deed.”

Thus they said. And she, that queen among
goddesses answered them saying: “ Hail, dear chil-
dren, whosoever you are of woman-kind. I will tell
you my story ; for it is not unseemly that I should
tell you truly what you ask. Doso is my name, for
my stately mother gave it me. And now I am come
from Crete over thé sea’s wide back,—not willingly ;
but pirates brought me thence by force of strength
against my liking. Afterwards they put in with
their swift craft to Thoricus, and there the women
landed on the shore in full throng and the men
likewise, and they began to make ready a meal
by the stern-cables of the ship. But my heart
craved not pleasant food, and I fled secretly across


297


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


AdOpn O oppnbeioa bu 1) Tel pov peNatvns 130
pedyov UTEpPLahous onpayropas, oppa KE LM pe
com puaTmy Tepac avres emis ATOVALATO TLLHS.
oT @ devdp. v0 pV ddan MEVN, ovee TL oida,
y TLS on yet eoTL Kab ob TLVES eyyeyaacw.
GXN’ Upiv wey TaVTES ‘Onwprria Somat eéxovtes 135
OoleVv Kouptdious avopas, Kat Texva Texea Oat,
ws €0éXovct Toes: ewe 8 avT oiKTElpaTe, KOUpAL.
[ rodTO O€ jor capews vToOnnare, oppa Tvdowat, eba374
Tpoppovews, dita Téxva, Téwov mpos Sonat —
CKO Lae |
aVEPOS NOE YUVvarKos, iva a optow epyalopau
Tpodpwv, ota YUVaLKOS APHALKOS € épya TeTUKTaL’ 140
Kal Kev TALOa vEeoyvov ey ayKow now éyouca
Kana TeOnvotwny Kal O@MaTa TNH QL fut
Kab Ke A€EKOS TTOPET ALL pux@ Oarapov EUTIKTOV
Beaouven calle’ Epya OLOATKHTALLL YUVALKaS.
© fa Ded thv 8 avtix apetBeto Twapbévos
AOmNs, 145
Karnridicn, Keheoio Ouyatpav eLO0s apiorn:

Maia, Jeav pwev 6@pa kal axvopevol TEP avayey
TéeTa MeV avOpamoe 67 yap Todw PEpTEpot LOL.
TavTa O€ ToL aapews DrroOyaopau nO ovo paver
avépas ola emeoT péya Kpatos évOdbe TyuAsS —«150
67 mou TE mpovxova ty ide€ Kpndepwa TONNOS
eipvarar Bovrjat kal Weinat diknow:
uev ToumrTorguov truxtprdeos 75¢ Avdkdov
0€ ITorvgetvou | Kab GLU MLOVOS Edporzrovo
Kab Aodixou Kat TATPOS BY NVOPOS MET EpoLo, 155
TOV TaVvTOV GOK Ot Kara Samara mopratvoua
TUWY OUK AV TIS TE KATA TPOTLOTOV OT@T HD

i Allen.
298


Il.—TO DEMETER, 130-157


the dark country and escaped my masters, that
they should not take me unpurchased across the
sea, there to win a price for me. And soI wandered
and am come here: and | know not at all what land
this is or what people are in it. But may ail those
who dwell on Olympus give you husbands and_ birth
of children as parents desire, so you take pity on me,
maidens, and show me this clearly that I may learn,
- dear children, to the house of what man and woman
I may go, to work for them cheerfully at such tasks
- as belong to a woman of my age. Well could I nurse
a new born child, holding him in my arms, or keep
house, or spread my masters’ bed in a recess of
the well-built chamber, or teach the women their
work.” |

So said the goddess. And straightway the unwed
maiden Callidice, goodliest in form of the daughters
of Celeus, answered her and said :

“ Mother, what the gods send us, we mortals bear
perforce, although we suffer; for they are much
stronger than we. But now I will teach you
clearly, telling you the names of men who have
great power and honour here and are chief among
the people, guarding our city’s coif of towers by
their wisdom and true judgements: there is wise
Triptolemus and Dioclus and Polyxeinus and blame-
less EKumolpus and Dolichus and our own brave
father. Ail these have wives who manage in
the house, and no‘ one of them, so soon as she


299


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Eld0s aTLLNOATa OOMoV arrovor pian even,
aNAd OE defovTau 67 yap Ococixedos € EooL.
et O eOeneus, emipewon, (Va Tpos dopara Tatpos 160
EN w Lev Kal pnt pl Babvlave Meraveipn |
eT @ [Lev Ta0E TAaVTa Svapmepés, al Keo avoyn
TMETEPOVO. ceva pene ad dov Sopar épevvar.
TNAUVYETOS d€ of vLos évi peyape EUT RTD |

owpiryovos TpepeTas, TONUEVETOS dom ao vos TE. 165
él TOV re ex 0 pevra.to Kal HES MeTpov LKOLTO, |
pela Ke Tis ce idodca YUvarKeay OnXuTEpadav |
poo ai TOTa Kev TOU aro Operrnpia doin.

“Os éfal” 1) oO érévevoe kapnate tal dé daewa ii
TANT AMLEVAL casi pépov ayyea xvdedovaat. 170. \\)
piuda € matpos txovtTo péyayv Sopov, @xa 6é

\

MNT pl
ee / e SQ/ ‘Na bd A \ eh aR a
EVVETTOV, WS ELOOV TE KAL EKAVOV. 1% be "Lar OKA
b) / NEY A a p Jie lh Le A
eMGovoas. exeheve Ka dew em amelpovt peo.

ai © OoT n éhadot 7 TOpT Les elapos Opn

Edrovt? av Nermava KOpEero duevae ppéva eas 175
Os at eTLaX OMeEvat EAVOV TTUKAS (Me poevT@V
negav KolAnY KaT apakéiTov’ appl d€ YalTaL
@ Lous dig covTo Kpoknio avOer opotar.
TET MOV o eyyus 0600 kvopny Oeov, &vOa _Tapos ep
KaNNLTOV’ avTap éTerta dirov! mpos dopara

TAT pos 180

> / f 9
Hryedve no ap OmtoOe pirov TeTINMEVN WTOP

oTeiye KaTa Kpnlev Kexadtuppéevn apdi oé

TéT NOS

/ ¢€ a a b) la /
xkuaveos padwotot Geas édedtGeTo Toco.
tA 2G n

Aira 6€ dopa’ ixovto diotpepéos Kedeoio,

\ \ rabalie) / ” , / /

Bav &€é ds atCovons, ev0a chicas TOTVLA wHTHP 185
1 Matthiae; gira, M,
300


Il.—TO DEMETER, 158-185


had seen you, would dishonour you and turn you


from the house; but they will welcome you; for


indeed you are godlike. But if you will, stay here;
’ and we will go to our father’s house and tell Metan-
eira, our deep-bosomed mother, all this matter fully,
that she may bid you rather come to our home than
search after the houses of others. She has an only
son, late-born, who is being nursed in our well-built
house, a child of many prayers and welcome: if you
could bring him up until he reached the full measure
of youth, any one of womankind who should see you
would straightway envy you, such gifts would our
mother give for his upbringing.”
_ So she spake: and the goddess bowed her head in
assent. And they filled their shining vessels with
water and carried them off rejoicing. Quickly they
came to their father’s great house and straightway
told their mother according as they had heard and
seen. Then she bade them go with all speed and
invite the stranger to come for a measureless hire.
As hinds or heifers in spring time, when sated with
pasture, bound about a meadow, so they, holding up
the folds of their lovely garments, darted down the
hollow path, and their hair like a crocus flower
streamed about their shoulders. And they found
the good goddess near the wayside where they had
left her before, and led her to the house of their
dear father. And she walked behind, distressed in
her dear heart, with her head veiled and wearing a
dark cloak which waved about the slender feet of the
goddess. |

Soon they came to the house of heaven-nurtured
Celeus and went through the portico to where their


301


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Aoto Tapa oTaO mov TéyEeos TUKA TrOLNTOLO
mais’ vmod KoAT@ éyovca, véov Oddos' al dé Tap
auTny
gSpamov: 1) © dp’ ém ovoov én mool Kat pa
Heh al pov
Kdpe Kapn, wrHoev Sé Odpas cédaos Oetovo.
THV Oo aides Te aéBas TE toe Xo pov dé05 eiAev: 190
ei&e O€ of KALTpOLO Kal édptdacBat avayeV.
arn’ ov Anuntnp cpnpopos, ayaddwpos,
nOerev edprdacbas éri KALO polo paeLvod,
ANN’ akéovT ve pL jive KaT Oupata kara Panrovoa,
7 pt mi bre On ot GOnKev "TéuBn Keoy eloula 195
KT OV édos, cadumeple S ér dpytdeov Bare
KAS.
évba KabeComéevn TPOKATET ETO XEpot Kahomr pny’
Onpov & apboyyos TETLN [EVN HOT emt dip pou,
ovoé TLY OUT emret \TpooTTVGCETO OUTE TL epye,
aN ayéXacTtos, aTacTos éOnTVOs HOe TOTHTOS 200
HjoT0 Tobe pwvdovea Babvlwvovo Juyatpos,
Tp v8 OTE 67 Xevns pee TauBy Keoy eloula
TONNA TapacKon Tove éTpeyaro TOTVLAV ayyny,
peLona at yerdoar TE Kal tNaOV aye Oupov
i) On Ol Kal &TrELTa pel vo TEpov eVAOED O opryais. 205
ae dé demas Meraverpa 6tdou Hedundé€os oivov
TAHTAG i) O aveéveva’> ov yap Oepurov Ol epace
TiVElv OLVOV epuOpov: dveorye o ap ane Kat Vdwp
dobvar piEacav TLE eV yryxove Tepetivn.
ty d€ KuKew TevEaca Hed Tropevr, ws exENEVE" 210
Seen © oains évexev TorvTrotvia Anew
* XK x *


302


Il.—TO DEMETER, 186-211


queenly mother sat by a pillar of the close-fitted
roof, holding her son, a tender scion, in her bosom.
And the girls ran to her. But the goddess walked
to the threshold: and her head reached the roof and
she filled the doorway with a heavenly radiance.
Then awe and reverence and pale fear took hold of
Metaneira, and she rose up from her couch before
Demeter, and bade her. be seated. But Demeter,
bringer of seasons and giver of perfect gifts,
would not sit upon the bright couch, but stayed
silent with lovely eyes cast down until careful lambe
- placed a jointed seat for her and threw over it a
silvery fleece. Then she sat down and held her veil in
her hands before her face. A long time she sat
upon the stool! without speaking because of her
sorrow, and greeted no one by word or by sign, but
rested, never smiling, and tasting neither food nor
drink, because she pined with longing for her deep-
bosomed daughter, until careful lambe—who pleased
her moods in aftertime also— moved the holy lady
with many a quip and jest to smile and laugh and
cheer her heart. Then Metaneira filled a cup with
sweet wine and offered it to her; but she refused it,
for she said it was not lawful for her to drink red
wine, but bade them mix meal and water with soft
mint and give her to drink. And Metaneira mixed
the draught and gave it to the goddess as she bade.
So the great queen Deo received it to observe the
sacrament ? * * x **

* Demeter chooses the lowlier seat, supposedly as being
more suitable to her assumed condition, but really because
‘in her sorrow she refuses all comforts.

2 An act of communion—the drinking of the potion («cuxedv)
here described—was one of the most important pieces of


ritual in the Eleusinian mysteries, as commemorating the
sorrows of the goddess.
393


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


THOL Oe pv 7; mpXEv evC@vos Meraverpa |
Xaipe, yvvat, éret ov ce Kkax@v amr éodTa
TOKNWV
eupeval, AXX ayabev: emi Tor mpérer Ompacw
aides |
Kal xapes, Os el 7ép TE Oepratomor@y Bacidnov. 215
arra Gedy pev dopa Ka axvipevol TEP avayKn |
TéeTA GHEY avO parroe: emt yap Cuyos avxeve KelTat.
vov ©, émel txeo Sevpo, TapécoeTal boca T émoi


Ep.
A / / / \ 3 / *.
Tatoa O€ pot Tpéhe TOVdE, TOY Oiryovov Kal
,
ae TOV
/ £
oTacay adavatot, TodvapyTos O€ Lol éoTLV. 220


ei Tov ye Opéwvato Kal HAns pwétpov ixotTo,
peta KE Tis aE LOovTa yuVatKav OndUTEpawV
tnrooat Toca Kev ToL ATO OpertnHpia Soin.
Pay Of are TPOoeelTeD evo répavos Anpnrnp:
Kal Gv, yuvat, pana Xaipe, Oeot d€ tor ecb
Topovev™ 225
Tatba o€ TOU T poppov UTodéEomal, WS mE KENEVELS,
0 peyro KOU [ULV, EOATTA, Kaxop pacing TO nuns
OUT ap’ emnuoin OnMoeTat otf UToTdupov
oioa yap av TiTomov peya PéepTepov irordporo,
ola O emmduains ToAUTHMOVOS EGO XOV EpvT pov. 230
Os dpa dovincaca Ovwdei déEaro Koh
Xetpero abavatynot yeynOer dé ppeva PaTnp.
@s 7) pev Keneoito dai povos ayNaov viov
Anpopowvl’, ov eTLKTED evCwvos Merdvetpa, 7
eg pepev € év _peyapots: 00 aé£ero Saimovt icos, 235
OUT oy otrov EOMV, OV Onodpevos [yara pntpos *
npatin wev yap KadroTédhavos ?| Anunrnp 236"


1 Hermann’s restoration. 2 Voss’ restoration.


304


Il—TO DEMETER, 212-236*


And of them all, well-girded Metaneira first ~~


began to speak: “ Hail, lady! For I think you are
not meanly but nobly born; truly dignity and grace
are conspicuous upon your eyes as in the eyes of
kings that deal justice. Yet we mortals bear per-
force what the gods send us, though we be grieved ;
for a yoke is set upon our necks. But now, since
you are come here, you shall have what I can be-
stow: and nurse me this child whom the gods gave
me in my old age and beyond my hope, a son much
“prayed for. If you should bring him up until he
reach the full measure of youth, any one of woman-
kind that sees you will straightway envy you, so
great reward would I give for his upbringing.”

Then rich-haired Demeter answered her: “ And
to you, also, lady, all hail, and may the gods give you
good! Gladly will I take the boy to my breast, as
you bid me, and will nurse him. Never, I ween,
through any heedlessness of his nurse shall witchcraft
hurt him nor yet the Undercutter:! for I know a
charm far stronger than the Woodcutter, and I know
an excellent safeguard against woeful witchcraft.”

When she had so spoken, she took the child in
her fragrant bosom with her divine hands: and _ his
mother was glad’in her heart. So the goddess
nursed in the palace Demophoon, wise Celeus’
_ goodly son whom well-girded Metaneira bare. And
the child grew like some immortal being, not fed
with food nor nourished at the breast: for by day
rich-crowned Demeter would anoint him with

1 Undercutter and Woodcutter are probably popular names


(after the style of Hesiod’s ‘‘ Boneless One’’) for the worm
thought to be the cause of teething and toothache.


395


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


/ “99 / ¢ \ aA 9 A
vpieck apBpooin wael Jeod exyeyanTa
4
Ov KaTaTVElovoa Kal év KOATOLOLY ExOUTA:
VA X vA A \
vuxtas O€ KPUTTETKE TUPOS evel NUTE SANOV


AdOpa hirwv yovéwv: Tois Se péya Oadp


ETETUKTO,
os mpo0arns TeMeecKe: Oeoios yap dvTa ede.
Kal KEV Lv TrolnoeVv aynpov T aPdvaTov Te,
b) \ 7 9 9 (Sy 4 blush -
El un ap adpadinow évGwvos Metdverpa
vuKT émiTHnpnoaca Ova@ceos éx Oardpmoto
VA / \ Neon / \
oKéwWwato: KoKvoey O€ Kai dudw TAHEATO UHPw
is A \iever \ N Nice ae f PE
detcac @ Tept TaLol Kal aacOn péeya Oup@
Lowe die Bone) fr: SY / 4
Kai p oAodupopmevn Errea TTEPOEVTA TPOTHVOA*
Téxvov Anpopoor, feivn ae Tupl évt TOAA® 1
KPUTTEL, EwoL O€ YOoV Kal Knoea uypa he ane
“Os bar oSupo penn’ Ths © due Ota Sedov.
Th O€ YoNWoapévn KaANMCTEhavos Anuntnp
A / A Gee > \ , oy
jatoa pidov, TOY AEATTOV Evi pEeyapolaty ETLKTE,
yi b) 10 / UN £0 « 2 LS }
velpeca alavarnow amo ev Ke mWédovee,
éEavehovoa Tupos, Ouu@ KoTécaca pan aivas,
Kal p auvodis mpooéecrrev evS@vov Meravepay:
Las Hi. \ 9 / Se A
Niides avOpwrrot Kai appadpoves oT ayaloto
aicav _emepxopevov Tporyvapeval OUTE KaKoLO"
Kal ov yap adpacinat Tens vyKeotov aacOys.
ict@ yap Jew ¢ 6pkos, dete TOV Lruyos voap,
abdvarov Kev TOL Kal ayn} paov Tpara TwavTa
Tatoa pidov ToinT a Kal apOctov amaca TLULNV’
yov o ovK oO Os Kev Odvarov Kal Knpas anvéat:
Tin © apOitos atev érréaoeTat, ovvEKAa youvaV


oe Tupi én woah, Berlin Papyrus 44.
2 Cobet: €o Ofjxe, M.


306


240
O45 |


250 |


255


260.


Il.—TO DEMETER, 237-263


ambrosia as if he were the offspring of a god and


breathe sweetly upon him as she held him in her
bosom. But at night she would hide him like a
brand in the heart of the fire, unknown to his dear
parents. And it wrought great wonder in these that
he grew beyond his age ; for he was like the gods face
to face. And she would have made him deathless
and unageing, had not well-girded Metaneira in her
heedlessness kept watch by night from her sweet-
smelling chamber and spied. But she wailed
tnd smote her two hips, because she feared for her
son and was greatly distraught in her heart; so she
lamented and uttered winged words :

“ Demophoon, my son, the strange woman buries
you deep in fire and works grief and bitter sorrow
for me”’

Thus she spoke, mourning. And the_ bright
goddess, lovely-crowned Demeter, heard her, and
was wroth with her. So with her divine hands she
snatched from the fire the dear son whom Metaneira
had born unhoped-for in the palace, and cast him |
from her to the ground; for she was terribly angry
in her heart. Forthwith she said to well-girded
Metaneira : :

““Witless are you mortals and dull to foresee your
lot, whether of good or evil, that comes upon you.
For now in your heedlessness you have wrought
folly past healing; for—be witness the oath of
the gods, the relentless water of Styx—I would
have made your dear son deathless and unageing
all his days and would have bestowed on him ever-
lasting honour, but now he can in no way escape
death and the fates. Yet shall unfailing honour


3°7
x 2


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


e / >) / Mi ee > “ x
nmEeTEpwv eTEBN Kal ev ayKoLWnoW taveer.
= Ld a ‘DL ee ;
apnow 6 apa TO ye TEpLTAOMEV@V EVLAUTOV 265
a 3 14 \
Tmatoes EXevotvimv modepnov Kal dvAOTTLY aivny
d\ 3 b) if / esd f
avev EV ANANAOLCLY GUVAaEOVT HUATA TAVTA.
\ /
eipt Oe Anuntnp TLudoxyos, TE méeyto TOV
alavatots Ovyntois 7 dveap Kal Yapma TETUKTAL.
aX’ aye wot Vnoy Te weyav Kal Bwwov UT avTa@ 270
Se wie Nes re ? ties
ta) a e \ oF
TEVKOVTOV TAS SHwos VITal TOAW a’TU TE TELYOS
Kaddyopou KadvrepOev eri mpovxyovTl KONO. ,
5 \ 3
épyta & avTn éyor UTOOncomal, ws av érretTta
evayems EpdovTes éwov voov itdoKot be.
ray an >
Os ettrovaa Bea péyeQos Kal eidos apere 275
a if it, f }
ynpas atrwcapmévn wept T audi Te KaNAOS ANTO*
3 \ > ¢€ f , b) \ VA
ooun © tueodeaoa OunévT@V ato TETAOV
/ an \ J b) \ \ 5 /
oKidvato, THrE O€ héyyos amo ypo0s aBavaToto
ri / @ a @ \ de / / Q@ bd
aptre Oeas, EavOai O€ Kopat KaTevnvolev @pmous, |
3 an Pus) J XN / : 3 n v4
avyns Oo étAnoOn TuKLWOS O6mos GaTEpoTTAS WS 280 F
a Q\ \ f n es
BH oé duex peyapov: THs 8 adtixa youvat édvrTo,
\ > of / A 3 / \
dSnpov 0 adOoyyos yéveTo Ypovov, OVE TL TALOOS
/ J b) \ 7. b) /
pVHTATO THAVYETOLO ATO CaTrédoU avEenéo Oat.
nA Oy , Nae 5) f
Tov O€ Kaciyynta, do@VnV EcadKovaay édeLVHD,
\ Pm) Anite Dilan hfe b) J Z / A \
Kao 0 ap am evaoTp@TaV NEeXéwv Oopov. i) mev fF
ETTELTA : 285 fi
DSS DON \ ¢€ la) ean 3 if é
TAO ava YEepolw EXOVTA E@ EyKATOETO KONTO:
A painwe) f n b] V4 3 A Pe if f dare lal
i © apa Tip avéxar: 1) © EcovTo TOG aTraNOloL
pntép avactycovaa Ov@deos éx Oaddpoco.
,
aypomevar O€ piv apdls €XovVEoY GoTraipoVTa | |
: n | / =
aupayataloucvar: Tov O ov perAtiaoeTo Oupos: 290 If
VELpoTEpar yap on ply Exov Tpopol Hoe TLOHVAL. |
308


Ii.—TO DEMETER, 264-291


always rest upon him, because he lay upon my knees


and slept in my arms. But, as the yearsmove round ——~


and when he is in his prime, the sons of the Eleusi-
nians shall ever wage war and dread strife with one
another continually. Lo! Iam that Demeter who
has share of honour and is the greatest help and
cause of joy to the undying gods and mortal men.
But now, let all the people build me a great temple
and an altar below it and beneath the city and its
sheer wall upon a rising hillock above Callichorus.
And I myself will teach my rites, that hereafter you
may reverently perform them and so win the favour
of my heart.”’

When she had so said, the goddess changed her
stature and her looks, thrusting old age away from
her: beauty spread round about her and a lovely
fragrance was waited from her sweet-smelling robes,
and from the divine body of the goddess a light
shone afar, while golden tresses spread down over her
shoulders, so that the strong house was filled with
brightness as with lightning. And so she went out
from the palace.

And straightway Metaneira’s knees were loosed
and she remained speechless for a long while and
did not remember to take up her late-born son from
the ground. But his sisters heard his pitiful wailing
and sprang down from their well-spread beds: one of
them took up the child in her arms and laid him in
her bosom, while another revived the fire, and a third
rushed with soft feet to bring their mother from her
fragrant chamber. And they gathered about the
struggling child and washed him, embracing him lov-
ingly ; but he was not comforted, because nurses and
handmaids much less skilful were holding him now.


gD


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


A’ pev TraAVvEX Let Kuo pry Oeov thaaKovto
SelwaTe TANAOMEVAL, apa &° not parvopenpu
evpuBin Kered vnweptéa pvOnoarto, |
OS emrevehne ded, KahMoarepavos Anuarnp. 295
avr ap 6 vy eis ayopny Kaheoas TonvTre/pova Naov
HvOy nvKop Anpayrept Tiova vHOoVv
Tolnoar Kal Baov émt mpovyovTs KOAwVO.
of dé par airy ériPovto Kal éxdvov abdnoavTo
€ MAN a 7) S;
Tevyov 0, os €TETEAN. O00 aeEero Satpove iaas.! 300
Avrap émel Tédeoay Kal eponoav KQLaTOLO,
Bav p imev oixad Exactos: atap EavOn Anunrnp
ev0a KabeCouevyn pakdpwv amo voodw amdvTav
pipe T00w@ puvvdovea Babufevor0 Ovyatpos.
a.ivoTaTtov S eveavTov em yOova mouduBorerpay 305
moine avb parrots Kal KUYTATOV" ovoé TL yaia
omepy avtet, KpuTrTED Yap eva répavos Anuntnp®
Toa: b€ KaLTUN apotpa patnv Boes eiAKov
apovpass’
TOANAOY O€ KPL AEVKOV ETMOLOV EuTrETE Yyain’
Kai vu Ke TayTray Odeo oe yEevOS wEepoTTaY aVOpa@Ta?Y 310
ALUOD UT Aapyarens, yepawyv T épliKvdeAa TLUHV
kal Ovotav jnwepoev OrdtpTia d@paT éxovTas,
et pon Levs évonoev €@ T ebpdacato Ovuo.
‘Tow dé 7 p@vTOv VpPVTOTTEPOV Mpae Kahéooat
Anuntp TOKO MOV, TOUT PATOV elas é éxoucar. B15
as bal’: y be Znvt Kedauvepet K povievt
Te\eTo Kal TO meoNYU OvédpapmeV MOKA TOdETOLD.
ixeTo 6€ mToALEOpov EXevaivos Ovoéaons,
etpev © év vn® Anuntepa cvavorreTov
Kab piv hovnoac érea TTEpOEVTA TpOanvOA’ 320
1 Tr. (cp. 235): Saluovos aton, MSS.
310


I1.—TO DEMETER, 292-320


All night long they sought to appease the glorious


goddess, quaking with fear. But, as soon as dawn —


began to show, they told powerful Celeus all things
without fail, as the lovely-crowned goddess Demeter
charged them. So Celeus called the countless
people to an assembly and bade them make a gocdly
temple for rich-haired Demeter and an altar upon
the rising hillock. And they obeyed him right
speedily and harkened to his voice, doing as he
commanded. As for the child, he grew like an
immortal being.
Now when they had finished building and had
drawn back from their toil, they went every man to
his house. But golden-haired Demeter sat there
apart from all the blessed gods and stayed, wasting
with yearning for her deep-bosomed daughter.
Then she caused a most dreadful and cruel year for
mankind over the all-nourishing earth: the ground
would not make the seed sprout, for rich-crowned
Demeter kept it hid. In the fields the oxen drew
many a curved plough in vain, and much white barley
was cast upon the land without avail. So she
would have destroyed the whole race of man with
cruel famine and have robbed them who dwell on
Olympus of their glorious right of gifts and sacrifices,
had not Zeus perceived and marked this in his
heart. First he sent golden-winged Iris to call rich-
haired Demeter, lovely in form. So he commanded.
And she obeyed the dark-clouded Son of Cronos,
and sped with swift feet across the space between.
She came to the stronghold of fragrant Eleusis, and
there finding dark-cloaked Demeter in her temple,
spake to her and uttered winged words :


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Anunrep, Karéer oe Tatnp Levs adOita eidas
3 / \ A nA b} iff
EXMEwevar pera hdAA Pedy alevyeveTawv.
aXNX Os, und atérXecTov éwov ros é« Avos éoTo.
“Os dato Mocopévyn TH O ovK érreTrE’OeTO Ovjos.
avTis ETerta TraTHp pwdadKapas Yeovs aiév éovtas 325
if > of. b) \ \ U
TavTas émiTpoiadrev? aporPnols € KLOVTES
_RucANO KOD Kal TOoNAa OLOoV Tepieadhea dpa
Tyudas 0, tas « eOéXotTOT pet aADavaroiow éeréadan.
GAN ovTIS Telcal OUVATO pevas ovde vOnua
Oued yoopuévns: atepeds & nvaiveto pvOous. 330
b) \ / 397 , 2 /
ov pev yap ToT édacke Ovw@deos OvrAvpTOLO
Tpiv y émiByoecbal, ov mply yns KapTOV avnowyr,
\ s/f 3 aA aN » PUR 2 a
Tp tooe opParjaioey Env EVMTELOA Kovpny.
Avtap émel TO y axovce BapvKtuTros iti
Levs,
eis "KpeBos mréurbe ypvocoppariv ApyeupovTnv, 335
oy of ye) A A / 3 /
opp Atdnyv waraxolor Taparbapevos éméeaoow
e \ J e \ if 3 /
ayvny Llepcedhoverav vo Cohou nepoevTos
3 Da >) / \ / / e J
és daos eEayayor peta datpovas, Oppa € “HTH
opVarpotaw toovca petarnEere YOXOLO.
‘Epps 6 ov amtOnoev, dbap © ve KevOea yains 340
ésovpéevas KaTOpovae NiTr@v &dos OvAVpTOLO.
TeTME O€ TOV ye AvakTa Sopav évToTOepr éovTa,
HpEevov ev Neyeeool oVY alooin TapaKotTt,
TOAN aexalomevn pntpos TOO@: % O amoTHnAoD*
Eoryous Oeayv paxdpwv [dewny| wnticeto BovAnv.? 345
ayxod © iatduevos tpocéhyn Kpatvs A pyerbovtns:
1 Tlgen: é° aTAhrov, M. 2 Voss: BovaAg, M.
312


Il.—TO DEMETER, 321-346


“ Demeter, father Zeus, whose wisdom is everlast-
ing, calls you to come join the tribes of the eternal
gods: come therefore, and let not the message I
bring from Zeus pass unobeyed.”’

Thus said [ris imploring her. But Demeter’s
heart was not moved. Then again the father sent
forth all the blessed and eternal gods besides: and
they came, one after the other, and kept calling her
and offering many very beautiful gifts and whatever
rights she might be pleased to choose among the
deathless gods. Yet no one was able to persuade
her mind and will, so wrath was she in her heart;
but she stubbornly rejected all their words : for she
vowed that she would never set foot on fragrant
Olympus nor let fruit spring out of the ground,
until she beheld with her eyes her own fair-faced
daughter.

Now when all-seeing Zeus the loud-thunderer
heard this, he sent the Slayer of Argus whose wand
is of gold to Erebus, so that having won over
Hades with soft words, he might lead forth chaste
Persephone to the light from the misty gloom to
join the gods, and that her mother might see her
with her eyes and cease from her anger. And
Hermes obeyed, and leaving the house of Olympus,
straightway sprang down with speed to the hidden
places of the earth. And he found the lord Hades
in his house seated upon a couch, and his shy mate
with him, much reluctant, because she yearned for
her mother. But she was afar off, brooding on her
fell design because of the deeds of the blessed
gods. And the strong Slayer of Argus drew near
and said ;


348


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


"Aton Kvavoxaira, KaTapOipevorow a avacowr,
Levs pe marnp WVa@yev ayauny Tlepoepovevay
éEayaryelv “EpéBeva de pera opéeas, oppa é NTH
odOarpotow idovoa XOroU KAL [LHVLOS aiviys 350
abavarots Aaj Eevev" érrel peya pnderar é epryov,
plioas Por apevnua VAMALYEVEMY avO par ov,
onépp vuTO yHs KpUTTOVCA, KaTapOwvOovca be

TLULAS bj
abavatwv: 1) © aivov éxet YoXov, ove Oeotar ie
poryeTat, ar’ am dvevde Ou@deos évdob ynovu 355 |)
Hora "EXevoivos Kpavaov mTonteO pov € éxoved. LY

“Os hato: petdnoev Oe dvak é évépwy “Avdwmvers
oppvawy, ovo aniOnoe Atos Bacidjos epet was :
ésaupévas © éxéXevoe daippov' Ilepoepovein

"Epxeo, Iepoepoun, Tapa pnTepa KvavorreT Nov 360
NTLOV EV oTHOETOL [u€V0S Kat Oupov é exouca,
pode TL Ova Oipawe inv TEPLOTLOY addav"
ov Tot év aBavatoow aevKns € éroow aKotTns,
avToxactyyntos tatpos Atos: éva 6 éovoa
deoTrdcces TaVYTwV oTTOGa Cwe. Te Kal EpTret, 365
Timas O€ aynoncla peT AOavdtotor peyioTas.
TOV O AOLKNTAVT@Y Tials ETTETAL HuATA TaVTa,
ot Kev put) Outings TEOV MEVOS LNATKWVTAL
evaryeos EpoovTes, évatolpa odpa TENOUYTES.

“Os paro: ynd nev ¢ Tepid pov Tlepoepovera, 370
KapTadiwas S avopove’ vo Yappatos’ auTap oO

Y autos
pouns KOKKOV eomKe paryety pereno€ea apn,
api € VOUNT AS, (Va [Ln [EVOL PATA TAaVvTa
avd Tap aiooin Anpunrepe KvavoTreT he.
imrT ous dé mpomdpolev UT X pve éovo w oxen du 375
évtuev adavatous LoAvonpavt@p Ardaveds.


314


Il.—TO DEMETER, 347-376


“‘ Dark-haired Hades, ruler over the departed,


father Zeus bids me bring noble Persephone forth ————


from Erebus unto the gods, that her mother may
see her with her eyes and cease from her dread
anger with the immortals; for now she plans an
awful deed, to destroy the weakly tribes of earth-
born men by keeping seed hidden beneath the earth,
and so she makes an end of the honours of the
undying gods. Forshe keeps fearful anger and does
not consort with the gods, but sits aloof in her
fragrant temple, dwelling in the rocky hold of
Kleusis.”’

So he said. And Aidoneus, ruler over the dead,
smiled grimly and obeyed the behest of Zeus the kings
For he straightway urged wise Persephone, saying :

“Go now, Persephone, to your dark-robed

mother, go, and feel kindly in your heart towards
me: be not so exceedingly cast down; for I shall
be no unfitting husband for you among the deathless
gods, that am own brother to father Zeus. And
while you are here, you shall rule all that lives
and moves and shall have the greatest rights among
the deathless gods: those who defraud you and
do not appease your power with offerings, reverently
performing rites and paying fit gifts, shall be punished
for evermore.”’

When he said this, wise Persephone was filled
with joy and hastily sprang up for gladness. But he
on his part. secretly gave her sweet pomegranate
seed to eat, taking care for himself that she might
not remain continually with grave, dark-robed
Demeter. Then Aidoneus the Ruler of Many
openly got ready his deathless horses beneath the
golden chariot. And she mounted on the chariot,


315


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


iS dxéwv é7éBn, Tapa 6é Kpatds “ApyerhovTns
CaF; \ , \ \ \ /
nvia Kal pdotiya NaBov pera Yepot dirnot
ceve OLeK peyadpav’ T@ O oOvK aéxovTE TETETOND.
Car be \ } @ } / IO\ / a |
piuga 0€ wakpa Kédevla oinvuc ay: ovoé Oddagoa 380 ©
ov? Vdwp ToTAMaY OUT dyKEea TOLnEVTA
immov alavatwv ovT axples ExxeDov oppny,
b) aoe \ b) / \ ahd J. Tee
GX’ vIrép auTawy Baby népa Tépvov LovTes.
aThae 0 aya, 604 pipvev evatéhavos Anunrnp,
ynoto tpotapot0e Ovadeos: 1) dé tOovca 385
mE, nUTE walvas pos KaTAa SacKLoV UND.
Ilepoepovn & étép[ wOev érret idev Gupata Kara 1]
entpos ens Kat [ap hy Gyea Tpodsrrovca Kal
im rovs |

arto Oéeuly, Oetph 6€ ob eumeTe aupixubeica |
TH Oe [hirnv ete Tratda ens peta xEpoly éxovon| 390
alinra SéXov Oupds tev’ dicato, Tpeaoe & ap gies)
mavop| evn plrorntos, adap © EpeetveTo pve: |
TEKVOV, [41 PA TL [LoL olv Yé mda oa0 vepbev éodca]
Bpopns; (eave, ply Ked0, iva elO omer aupe |
QS bev Yap Kev covoa Tapa. otuyepov Aidao|] 395
kal Tap éuol Kal tatpl Kerl awvedéi Kpoviove|
vateTaos mdavrecar Tetipl| evn aBavartor low.

b) odaegte. f / Cy DANS aunt \ Ue A Ves tA
el 0 émdow, Tad avTis tova’ vmlo KevOEor yains |
olKNoELS M@PEwY TpiTaTOV pép| os Els EvLAaUTOY, |
Tas 6€ 60m Tap éuot Te Kal [aAXots ABava |Totow. 400
ommoTe © av0ert yal evodcel civ] etapwol tar]

la] / 4m? e& \ / b] /

TavrooaTols Parry, TOO’ vireo Cohou HepoevTos
avtis dver péya Cada Oeots Ovntois T avOpwTrots.
[ S oe aA oy mee c \ / > / 9 a
eime O€ TAS O HpTrakev vTrO Fohov nepoevTa”| 403

\ / 2 3 7 / \ /
Kal Tivta ekaTraTynoe OoAw KpaTepos Llodudéypor;

1 The restorations of this and the following lines are those
printed in the Oxford (1911) text. 2 Allen.


316


a Oe eg .


pene Ae


IL—-TO DEMETER, 377-404


and the strong Slayer of Argus took reins and wap


in his dear hands and drove forth from the hall, the
horses speeding readily. Swiftly they traversed their
long course, and neither the sea nor river-waters nor
grassy glens nor mountain-peaks checked the career
of the immortal horses, but they clave the deep air
above them as they went. And Hermes brought
them to the place where rich-crowned Demeter was
staying and checked them before her fragrant temple.

And when Demeter saw them, she rushed forth
as does a Maenad down some thick-wooded mountain,
while Persephone on the other side, when she saw her
mother’s sweet eyes, left the chariot and horses, and
leaped down to run to her, and falling upon her
neck, embraced her. But while Demeter was still
holding her dear child in her arms, her heart
suddenly misgave her for some snare, so that she
feared greatly and ceased fondling her daughter
and asked of her at once: “ My child, tell me, surely
you have not tasted any food while you were below?
Speak out and hide nothing, but let us both know.
For if you have not, you shall come back from
loathly Hades and live with me and your father, the
dark-clouded Son of Cronos and be honoured by
all the deathless gods ; but if you have tasted food,
you must go back again beneath the secret places of
the earth, there to dwell a third part of the seasons
every year: yet for the two parts you shall be with
me and the other deathless gods. But when the earth
shall bloom with the fragrant flowers of spring in
every kind, then from the realm of darkness and
gloom thou shalt come up once more to be a wonder
for gods and mortal men. And now tell me how he
rapt you away to the realm of darkness and gloom,
and by what trick did the strong Host of Many
beguile you?”


317


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Tv 8 ad Uepoepovn tepuxaddys avtiov nvda* 405
TOUVAP EY@ TOL, MHTEP, EpeW VNWEPTEA TaVTA:
evTé wot KXpuhs HAO’ éprovvios aryyeXos @KUS
Tap Twatépos Kpovidao cai dhkrov Ovpan@ver,
érOeciv €& "KpéBeus, iva pw opParpoicw ioovca |
AnEats ABavaToos YoXroU Kal UHVvLOS aivhs, 410
avuTix’ éyov avopove’ vuTd yappwaTos’ avTap oO

Nab pn
ep Bane [Ol poLns KOKKOY, pedi doe edmnouw,
dkovoay Oé Bin we TpocnvayKacoe Tacadbat.
ws 66 w avaptaEas Kpovidew muKivny Ova pat
@XETO TATpOS éwoto, hépwv Uo KevOea yains, 415
éEepéw, Kai TavTa ouEopat, @s épecivers. |
Nels MEV UaAA TAAL ay’ imEpTOV Aetpova,
Aevainan Dawe te cat “Hr€éxtpn cal “lavOn
kat Menrity ‘lay TE Poderd te Kanddtpon Te
Mn 0oBoots te Toyn Te Kal ‘Oxvpon KaXVK@TLs 420
Xpvonis T ‘lavetpa 7 ‘Andorn is "Aduntn Te
Kal ‘Poddrn Inout te kat imepoer oa Kadupo
Kab YTVE Ovpavin TE Daragavpy T eparervi)
Ilanrds + T) eypEmaxn Kab "Apremes Lox earpa,
Tatlopev no avOca Oper opev yelpera époevTa, 425
piyoa KpoKoy T ayavoy Kal ayahAloas 70° vaKwOov
Kat podéas Kaunas Kab Aci pua, Gadpa idéaOae,
vapKiao ov 0°, ov épua’ as Ep K pOKOV evpeia yO av.
avT ap eyo Spemduny mepl Xa pware: yata © évepbe

X@pnoev’ TH o exOop’ dvag KPaTEpos TlovAvdéypav 430
BA dé dépwv U0 yatav év dppact YpuaEloLol
TONN deka Somevny™ éBonca 0 ap op0va pov.
TAVTA TOL aXVUmEeVN TEP ANNOEA TaVT ayopEvo.


318


1.—TO DEMETER, 405-433


Then beautiful Persephone answered her thus:
“ Mother, I will tell you all without error. When
luck-bringing Hermes came, swift messenger from
my father the Son of Cronos and the other Sons of
Heaven, bidding me come back from Erebus that
you might see me with your eyes and so cease from
your anger and fearful wrath against the gods, I
sprang up at once for joy; but he secretly put in my
mouth sweet food, a pomegranate seed, and forced
me to taste against my will. Also I will tell how he
rapt me away by the deep plan of my father the
Son of Cronos and carried me off beneath the depths
of the earth, and will relate the whole matter as
you ask. All we were playing in a lovely meadow,
Leucippe! and Phaeno and Electra and Ianthe,
Melita also and Iache with Rhodea and Callirhoé
and Melobosis and Tyche and Ocyrhoé, fair as a
flower, Chryseis, Ianeira, Acaste and Admete and
Rhodope and Pluto and charming Calypso; Styx
too was there and Urania and lovely Galaxaura with
Pallas who rouses battles and Artemis delighting in
arrows: we were playing and gathering sweet flowers
in our hands, soft crocuses mingled with irises and
hyacinths, and rose-blooms and lilies, marvellous to
see, and the narcissus which the wide earth caused
to grow yellow as a crocus. That I plucked in my
joy; but the earth parted beneath, and there the
strong lord, the Host of Many, sprang forth and in
his golden chariot he bore me away, all unwilling,
beneath the earth: then I cried with a shrill cry.
All this is true, sore though it grieves me to tell
the tale.”

1 The list of names is taken—with five additions—from


Hesiod, T'heogony 349 ff. : for their general significance see
note on that passage.


a°9


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Qs toTEe péev TpoTTay Huap. owodpova Ovpov
BA
éyouo aL
TOAAG MAN GAAHAOY Kpadinv Kal Ovuov tawwov 435
aupayaralomevar: axyéwv © amretraveto Oupos.
ynGocvvas 6 édéyovTo Tap aAANA@Y ELOY TE.
Thaw Oo eyyvbev m0 ‘Exary AuTrapoKpnoepvos®
TONNG o dip  aphayannce Kopny Anpnrepos ayn:
€x TOU OL 7 POTOAOS Kab OT a@v Gr NET dvacca. 4405)
Tats dé pér adyyerov xe BapvKetuTos evptvoTa |
Levs
‘Peinv nuxopov, Anuntepa xkvavotrem Xov
a&éwevar peta hvAA Dewy, UTedEKTO Oé TLMAS
woémev, as Kev Ehotto pet AOavato.or Beotar
vedoe O€ OL KOVPNV ETEOS TEPLTENAOMEVOLO 4.45
THV TPLTATHY pev potpav UT Cohov HepoevTa,
Tas 6€ 60M Tapa pynTpl Kab ddXros ABavaTovow.
as é ar ove aniOnae Odea Aros anyryeaov.
eT TUMEVOS & mee Kat OvrvpTrOLO KApIvaY,
és oO apa ‘Papvov ige, pepeo Brov ov0ap a apovpns 450
TO T piv, aTap tote y ovTe dhepécBiov, adra
éxn Nov :
EC THKEL Tmavapurov' éxev0e 0 apa Kt. Aevicoy
pndec Anyntpos Kahhodupou: aT dip émeta,
peddev adap Tavaotdl KOM TE do TaXVveroy
7ipos deF OMeVvOL0, Tew 6 apa. LOVES Ory {LOL 455
Spucépev daTax von, Ta O° év eAdedavoiae dedéaOa.
evo emeBn T P@TLOT OV an aidépos a aT pUYETOLO®
acm actos om idov ahnras, KeyapnvtTo oe Oupe.
THY © WOE T poo eevmre ‘Pén hum apox pryjdemvos:
Acdpo téxos, carhées ce BapuxtuTos evpvoTra
Levs 460
énDéwevar peta hora Oewv, vTrédexto J€ Tyas


320


Il.—TO DEMETER, 434-461


So did they then, with hearts at one, greatly cheer
each the others soul and spirit with many an
embrace: their hearts had relief from their griefs
while each took and gave back joyousness.

Then bright-coiffed Hecate came near to them,
and often did she embrace. the daughter of holy
Demeter: and from that time the lady Hecate was
minister and companion to Persephone.

And all-seeing Zeus sent a messenger to them,
rich-haired- Rhea, to bring dark-cloaked Demeter to
join the families of the gods: and he promised to
give her what rights she should choose among the
deathless gods and agreed that her daughter should
go down for the third part of the circling year to
darkness and gloom, but for the two parts should
live with her mother and the other deathless gods.
Thus he commanded. And the goddess did not dis-
obey the message of Zeus; swiftly she rushed down
from the peaks of Olympus and came to the plain of
Rharus, rich, fertile corn-land once, but then in
nowise fruitful, for it lay idle and utterly leafless,
because the white grain was hidden by design of
trim-ankled Demeter. But afterwards, as spring-
time waxed, it was soon to be waving with long ears
of corn, and its rich furrows to be loaded with grain
upon the ground, while others would already be
bound in sheaves. There first she landed from the
fruitless upper air: and glad were the goddesses to
see each other and cheered in heart. Tier bright-
coiffed Rhea said to Demeter :

“Come, my daughter; for far-seeing Zeus the java!
thunderer calls you to join the families of the gods,
and has promised to give you what rights you please


321


Y


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


dwae eV, as Ke eOenr acOa\| uet AGavartotct Geoicr.:
pe yoda] |


| vedoe 5€ coe KoUpyy ETEOS 1 |epuTehopevovo

[tay TpeTaTnv pev potpav vo Codov 1» \epoevta,

[Tas oe SUM Tapa col TE kal | dd.Xous] aBavarourw. 465,
[as ap’ édy TENE |e Oa E@ 5 érévevoe KapnTe.

[arr 10, tTéxvov] éuwov, cal metOeo, unde Te Ainy

al Snxes pev leawe Kedarved et Kpovionw.

alinra dé Ka |prrov aeEe hepéaBiov avOpwrrotow.

“O[s épar’. ovo amiOnoev eva Tepavos Anpntnp: 70 |
ainfa d€ KapT ov GV AKEV apoupawv éptBarwv |
jaca O¢ pvrrovoty Te kal avOeow evpeta YOov is |
EBpia’: 1) O€ Kiovoa Oeutotomoros Bactrevor
detEev Tpitrtoreu@ te Atoxrel Te TWAnELT TT |
Evpormovu te Bin Kered 0 nyntope Xa@v 475 ff
Spnapoovvnv 0 iepav Kal émédpacev bpyra Tact, |
Terror Te Llodugeive, él Tots O¢ Avoxnet
cena, 7a T OUTS eoTL Tapesipev OvTE mvdéoOau
ovT ayéenv? peya yap te Ge@v céBas toydver

avery. |
ddBt0s, 0 OS TAO Omrwmev emexPovieav av0 poTrov 480
Os oe aTenys Lep@v Os T dip pwopos, ovo opolwv
aicav exer POtpevos TEP uTo Cob@ HEpoevTe.

AvTap errevoy) wavd breOnKato Oia Jeawn,

Bav p ipev OdrAvptrovde Ocov pel opnyvpw
adov.


évba b¢ VaLeTaOUL Tapa Au TEPTLKEPAVVD 485 |


ceva T aidoiai Te péy OAPLOS, bv TY exetvat
7 poppovews pitovrat eux Povieoy avo por ov:
aiwra é ob TéLTTOUC LY epéatiov és pwéya Oma
IThotrov, ds avOpa@trots Adevos Ovntoicr didmaw.


1 The restorations of this and the following lines are those
printed in the Oxford (1911) text.


322


I1—TO DEMETER, 462-489


among the deathless gods, and has agreed that for a


| . third part of the circling year your daughter shall go


down to darkness and gioom, but for the two parts
shall be with you and the other deathless gods: so
has he declared it shall be and has bowed his head
in token. But come, my child, obey, and be not too
angry unrelentingly with the dark-clouded Son of
Cronos; but rather increase forthwith for men the
fruit that gives them life.”’

So spake Rhea. And rich-crowned Demeter did
not refuse but straightway made fruit to spring up
from the rich lands, so that the whole wide earth
was laden with leaves and flowers. Then she went,
and to the kings who deal justice, Triptolemus and
Diocles, the horse-driver, and to doughty Eumolpus
and Celeus, leader of the people, she showed the con-
duct of her rites and taught them all her mysteries, to
Triptelemus and Polyxeinus and Diocles also,—awful
mysteries which no one may in any way transgress or
pry into or utter, for deep awe of the gods checks


Fr _ the voice. Happy is he among men upon earth who


has seen these mysteries; but he who is uninitiate
and who has no part in them, never has lot of like
good things once he is dead, down in the darkness
and gloom.

But when the bright goddess had taught them all,
they went to Olympus to the gathering of the other
gods. And there they dwell beside Zeus who
delights in thunder, awful and reverend goddesses.
Right blessed is he among men on earth whom they
freely love: soon they do send Plutus as guest to
his great house, Plutus who gives wealth to mortal
men.


525


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


ANN a iy |} “EXevotvos Ovoéaons Of jo éyouoa
Kal Fiiéoisv, appipuTny “AvTpovd TE TET PHEVTA,
TOTVLA, ayAaodwp’, wpndope, Anot avacca,
avTn Kal Kovpn Tepixarrns Llepoepovera:
mpoppoves avt @dns Biorov Oupnpe dmate.
avTap éy@ Kal celo Kal AAANS pvnTop aoLons.


aa
EIS ATIOAAQNA [AHAION]-


Movjoopat 0066 XaOwpat AmodAX@VOS ExaTOLO,
ove Oeot Kara OOLa Avs Tpopeovoly lovra.
Kat pat avaic covet emt oxed0n € EpXomevoro
TAVTES a edpdwv, 6 OTE paidiua TOEa TUT ALVEL.
Anto@ & otn pipve tapat Aci teprixepavve,
ae ¢ I 2 Nee) , Ne / : f
H pa Boov T éxadacce Kal exhyioce hapéeTpny,
Kab Ol amr ip Oipoov @ Mov Xelperow edovoa
TOEa KATEKPEMATE Tpos xlova, TAT POS €0L0
Tacodnou éx ypucéov: tov 6 és Opovoy eiaev

aryove a.
TO & apa veKTap edwxKe Tarp démrai Xpvaei@ |
Seuxvipevos pinov vio: evrelTa be Saipwoves GAOL
evda Kadivovat: Xaiper € Te moTVLa AnrTo,
OUVEKA Togo opov Kab KapTEpov VLOV ETLKTE.
xaipe, peaKatp @ Antot, érret TéKES ayaa Téxva,
‘Amor ova T dvaKTa Ka “Aprepw lox éarpar,
THY pen ev ‘Opruyin, TOV dé Kpavah évi Ajo,
KeKNLMEVN 7 POs pak pov 0pos cal Kuv@cov by Oor,
ayyotatw hoivixos, ér “lvwioto peéOpors.
1 Ruhnken: &AA& OeAevoivos, M.


324


490


499 |


> te


10 9


7 ee eee a a
- = eee = —-+ = = SS -
> Cada set ee tf

.
e its : ="


Sn en ne


ede: ae


5 2) RNR)


a oa ee Le


7 ,
as ida


Iil.—TO DELIAN APOLLO, 1-18


And now, queen of the land of sweet Eleusis and
sea-girt Paros and rocky Antron, lady, giver of good
gifts, bringer of seasons, queen Deo, be gracions, you
and your daughter all beauteous Persephone, and
for my song grant me heart-cheering substance.
And now I will remember you and another song
also,


HI
TO DELIAN APOLLO


I wit remember and not be unmindful of Apollo
who shoots afar. As he goes through the house of
Zeus, the gods tremble before him and all spring up
from their seats when he draws near, as he bends his
bright bow. But Leto alone stays by the side of Zeus
who delights in thunder; and then she unstrings his
bow, and closes his quiver, and takes his archery from
his strong shoulders in her hands and hangs them on
a golden peg against a pillar of his father’s house.
Then she leads him to a seat and makes him sit: and
the Father gives him nectar in a golden cup wel-
coming his dear son, while the other gods make
him sit down there, and queenly Leto rejoices
because she bare a mighty son and an archer.
Rejoice, blessed Leto, for you bare glorious chil-
dren, the lord Apollo and Artemis who delights
in arrows; her in Ortygia, and him in rocky
Delos, as you rested against the great mass of the
Cynthian hill hard by a palm-tree by the streams
of Inopus.


$25


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Ilas 7 dp o buvjow TavTws evupmVoY éovTaA;
TavtTn yap Tot, PoiBe, vouwotr BeBAHaT aotbois,
NMEV AV HITELPOV TOPTLTPOPoy nO GVA VHTOUS*
Taca. O€ TKOTLAL TOL GOOY Kal TPWOVES AKPOL
inynro@v opéwy moTamot 0 ddade TpopeovTes
aKTaL T eis GNA KEKALWEVaL ALpEeves TE DaXadoons.
i Os ce TpwTov AnT@ TéKe, yapua BpoToiat,
KrLWOeica mpos KuvOov épos Kpavan evi vice,
Andro év audipvtn; éExatepOe dé Kdpa KEeXaLVOY
éEnes yépaovde AuyUTTVOLOLS AaVEWOLoLD,
évOev ATrOPVUHLEVOS Tact Ounroiow aVaGo ELS.
docous Kpyrn T €VvTOS EXEL Kal djpuos  AOnvav
Vo OS tT Aiyivn VaIG LR NETH Tt KvBoa, —
Aiyat, Tleupectan * TE wal ayxeany IlemapnOos
Opyixios t “Adows Kal TI Atov apa. Kapnva
Opycxin Te Lapos’ ‘Tons T dpEea TKLOEVTA,
LKdpos Ka Poxara Kal Avtoxavns ¢ 6pos alu,

"TuBpos i eveTimevn Kal Anuvos apixParoeca a
Aeéa Bos T anyaden, Maxapos os Atodsevos,
Kat Xios, } vycwv NuTrapoTaty ELV ant Kel at,
TmaLTradoeus te Mipas cal Kepvnou a aKkpa Kapnva
Kat KXdpos atyAjecoa Kal Atoarens ¢ dpos alt
Kal La 105 von Muxarys T avTreva Kapnva
Mianros TE Koos Te, TOMS Meporrwy av pworror,
Kab Kvidos aimewn Kat Kaprados » Tvemocroa
Na€os - noe IIdpos “Pivaca TE TET PNET TA,
Toccov ér @divovoa ExnGorov ixero Anto,
el TLS ob yatéwy viel Oéror olxia Oéecbat.
al d€ wan éTpomeov Kal édetdicav, OVE TEs ETAH
PoiBov deEacQat, Kal miotépn Tep eovca’

1 Ruhnken ; 7° Eipeo/a, MSS,
326


IiIl.—TO DELIAN APOLLO, 19-48


iz How, then, shall I sing of you who in all ways are :
|} aworthy theme of song? Foreverywhere,O Phoebus,


the whole range of song is fallen to you, both over
the mainland that rears heifers and over the isles.
All mountain-peaks and high headlands of lofty hills
and rivers flowing out to the deep and _ beaches
sloping seawards and havens of the sea are your
delight. Shall I sing how at the first Leto bare you
to be the joy of men, as she rested against Mount
Cynthus in that rocky isle, in sea-girt Delos—while


‘on either hand a dark wave rolled on landwards


driven by shrill winds—whence arising you rule over
all mortal men?

Among those who are in Crete, and in the township
of Athens, and in the isle of Aegina and Euboea,
famous for ships, in Aegae and Hiresiae and Pepare-
thus near the sea, in Thracian Athos and Pelion’s
towering heights and Thracian Samos and the shady
hills of Ida, in Seyros and Phocaea and the high hill
of Autocane and fair-lying Imbros and smouldering
Lemnos and rich Lesbos, home of Macar, the son of
Aeolus, and Chios, brightest of all the isles that lie
in the sea, and craggy Mimas and the heights of
Coryeus and gleaming Claros and the sheer hill of
Aesagea and watered Samos and the steep heights of
Myecale, in Miletus and Cos, the city of Meropian
men, and steep Cnidos and windy Carpathos, in Naxos
and Paros and rocky Rhenaea—so far roamed Leto
in travail with the god who shoots afar, to see if any
land would be willing to make a dwelling for her
son. But they greatly trembled and feared, and
none, not even the richest of them, dared receive


Sa |


ee eat


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


mov y OTe On p émt Andou éBncato TmoTMLa
AntT@

Kab [LY AaVELPOMevY ETEa TTEPCEVTA TpPOTHVOA: 50 |

Ann’, & yap K é0érots Edos Eupevas vios Ewoto,
Poi Bou ‘ATrOMAVOS, GécOar T vt TLOva yNOv»—

arXos 6 ovTis aio Tol aaberau, ovde ce ANoEL
ove etBov aé of ever Oar 6 ovomar OUT evpmror, |
ove€ Tpoyny olaeLs OUT dip puta pupa. duces. 55) i
él 06 K “Amro ovos EKaEpTYOU vnov E exnoOa, |
av pam ot Tou T AVTES arywigoue éxaTouBas
évOad ayerpomevot, KViaaN O€ TOL do Ter os avel
Onpod avaiter Boo na ess O° ot KE o EX@oU |
KELpos ant ado pins, émet ov TOL map Um ovdas. 60°
as pato: yaipe dé Afjros, apmerBouevn S€ mpac-
nvoa*

Anrot, KvoLaTN Ovyatep peeyahov Kovoo,
acTacty Kev eyo Ye youny EKATOLO QVAKTOS
deEaiuny: aivas yap éTnTUpOY ELL OVONYIS
avopdow: ade O€ KEV TEPLTLELNETTA yEevolmnv. 65
GANG TObE TPopmew, AnNTO?, ETrOs, OVOE TE KEVTM"
inv yap Twa pac ataa Garov "AToAXN@va
eooer Gas, peya oe TPUTAVEUTE MEV aBavarorce
Kal Oynroicr Bpototat é emt CetSwpov 6 dpoupav.
7@ p. avers deidouKa KATO ppeva Kal Kata Ovpov, 70
HN, oTroT av TO ™p@Tov lon aos jediowo,
vAjo Ov aTLUNT AS, €Tr el » kpavaijrredos ett,
mTooal KaTactpeyras Won G05 ev TENAVETTW,
ev” éwe ev wéeya KDA KATA KpaTOS Adis aiel
KrNoTEL’ OO AAV yalav adi—eTar, } KEV AON Ol, 75
Tevéac Gas vnov Te Kal dAoea OevopHevTa:
TovAvTrooes © ev éoi Oadadpas POKal Te méedaLVAL
OLKLA TrOLHTOVTAL AKNOEA, VHTEL NaWD.


328


IlIl.—TO DELIAN APOLLO, 49-78


Phoebus, until queenly Leto set foot on Delos-and


uttered winged words and asked her :

“ Delos, if you would be willing to be the abode
of my son Phoebus Apollo and make him a rich
temple—; for no other will touch you, as you will
find: and I think you will never be rich in oxen and
sheep, nor bear vintage nor yet produce plants
abundantly. But if you have the temple of far-
shooting Apollo, all men will bring you hecatombs
and gather here, and incessant savour of rich sacrifice
- will always arise, and you will feed those who dwell
in you from the hand of strangers; for truly your
own soil is not rich.”’

So spake Leto. And Delos rejoiced and answered
and said: “ Leto, most glorious daughter of great
Coeus, joyfully would I receive your child the far-
shooting lord ; for it is all too true that I am ill-
spoken of among men, whereas thus I should become
very greatly honoured. But this saying I fear, and
I will not hide it from you, Leto. They say that
Apollo will be one that is very haughty and will
greatly lord it among gods and men all over the
fruitful earth. Therefore, I greatly fear in heart
and spirit that as soon as he sees the light of the
sun, he will scorn this island— for truly I have but a
hard, rocky soil—and overturn me and thrust me
down with his feet in the depths of the sea; then
will the great ocean wash deep above my head for
ever, and he will go to another land such as will
please him, there to make his temple and wooded
groves. So, many-footed creatures of the sea will
make their lairs in me and black seals their dwel-
lings undisturbed, because I lack people. Yet if


$29


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


GNX’ et ot Thains ye, Oed, méeyav 6pKov omoraas,
evO d6e poy TP@Tov Tevteuv TmepiKadhea vnov 80
ELbjLEvaL avO porrov XenernpLoy, avTap érevta
[TevEacOas vynovs Te Kal ddroea Sevdpyévta4| _—— 81"
TavTas eT avOpamous, éqrel 7 TONUOVULOS éoT aL.
SOs ap’ épn. Anta b€ Jeav peyav Spkov 6podae:
loTw voy rade Vata cat Ovpavos evpus bmepOev
Kat TO KaTELBOMEvor Lruyos bbwp, 6 GaoTE péeytoTos 85
bpkos SetvoTaTos Te TéNet pwakdpecat Oeoiow
7 pry DoiBov tHde Ov@dns EcoeTar atel
Bwmos Kat TEMEVOS, TITEL dé céy efoxa TAVTOV.
Avrap evel p Omwooév TE TEAEUTHTEV TE TOV
OpKov,
Anros peer peda, Vatpe youn ® exdToLo QVAKTOS" 90
Ant@ & évyhwap Te Kab evved VUKTAS GéATTOLS
@oiverot TéTrapto. Oeald écav &voo%r racat,
ocoal apiara éact, Avorn TE Pein TE
‘Txvain Te Qéuts Kat ayadorovos ‘Auerpirn
anal T abavarat voo pip NevKwAEVOU © Hpys: 95
HoTO yap ev peryapowre A.ds vedeAnyepeT ao
povvn ° ovK ET ETUCTO joryoo'TOKOS EinctO via:
| HoT0 yap axpo Orj0vpT® UT Xpuaéorae vepecoun,
“Hons $padpootyns heuKwéevou, i} pw epuKe
Cnocuvn, OT ap viov apdpova TE KpaTepov te 100
Anre rékeo Oat KadeThoKa LOS TOT EMENAED.

At 6 *Ipw T povmeunpay EVE TUES amr ynoov,
‘buen HKireiOucar, UTOTXomevat peyay Spor,
Kpuoetovor Aivorowy é ce puuevov, evved XUV"
voodi & Hvwyov Kanéewy Nevx@revou” Hpns, 105
pon ov Evert érréecow aTooTpe ete tovaar.
avTap rel TO y akouvceE TrOOHVEWoS M@KEa I pits,

1 Allen, 2 Franke : yéve, MSS,


339


IIl.—TO DELIAN APOLLO, 79-107


you will but dare to sware a great oath, goddess, that


here first he will build a glorious temple to be an
oracle for men, then let him afterwards make tem-
ples and wooded groves amongst all men ; for surely
he will be greatly renowned.

So said Delos. And Leto sware the great oath of
the gods:: “ Now hear this, Karth and wide Heaven
above, and dropping water of Styx (this is the
strongest and most awful oath for the blessed gods),
surely Phoebus shall have here his fragrant altar
- and precinct, and you he shall honour above all.”

Now when Leto had sworn and ended her oath,
Delos was very glad at the birth of the far-shooting
lord. But Leto was racked nine days and nine
nights with pangs beyond wont. And there were
with her ali the chiefest of the goddesses, Dione
and Rhea and Ichnaea and Themis and loud-moaning
Amphitrite and the other deathless goddesses save
white-armed Hera, who sat in the halls of cloud-
gathering Zeus. Only Eilithyia, goddess of sore
travail; had not heard of Leto’s trouble, for she sat
on the top of Olympus beneath golden clouds by
white-armed Hera’s contriving, who kept her close
through envy, because Leto with the lovely tresses
was soon to bear a son faultless and strong.

But the goddesses sent out Iris from the well-set
isle to bring Hilithyia, promising her a great neck-
lace strung with golden threads, nine cubits long.
And they bade Iris call her aside from white-armed
Hera, lest she might afterwards turn her from coming
with her words. When swift Iris, fleet of foot as
the wind, had heard all this, she set to run; and


334


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


n ¢ / / \ / a \ /
BH pa Oéew, TaxXews O€ Sinvuce TAY TO Meanyv.
Sis ON 5) He NE Walle 2 rn 4 as Rae, ;
auTap émei p ixave Dewy &dos, aimivv”OXvpTrov,
avtix ap KinetOuray amex pweyadpoto Ovpate 110
EXT POKANETTAPEVN ETEA TTEPOEVTA TPOTNUOA,
TavTa pan, ws éétedov Odvpria dopat
éyouca. : |
TH O apa Ovpov érreOev Evt oTHPecar dirouct:
\ \ \ th if, / Se a
Bay 6€ Toot Tpnpwat Trereraow tOual opoiat.
5 /
evT émt Anrou éBaive poyootoKos KireiOua, 115
67 TOTE THY TOKOS ElAE, MEevolvnaev Oe TexEaOaL.
apt dé hoivixs. Bare HYEE, youva 6 Epeice
NELUOVL LANAK@* pelLonoe OE yae varévepbev:
Har madang peldyoe O€ yai pGe
3 + / @
éx © éBope po howade: Geal 6 oAcCAVEAaY aTracat.
"Ev6a oé, Hre Doi Be, eal Noov vdate KAN@ 120
n ~~ >) oe Rr
ayvas kat KaOapas, oTdapEav 6 év hapet NEvKA,
NETTO, VNYATEW: TrEpl S€ YpVaEOYV aTPOpoOY HKav.
Ove ap ’Amo\XKva Ypvcdopa OjncaTo wHTNp,
b) x J lA M8 / 3 \
arrAad Méwis vextap Te Ka’ auPpooinv Epare.vny
b) / ‘ b) / a) \ /
awavatyow NEP ETN PEATO" NaALpE dé Anta, 125
obvera tok opopov KQL KAPTEPOV ViOV ETLKTED.
avrap emel On, PoiPe, KaTeBpos au Bporov eidap,
ov oé xy? émert loyov ypvoeos otTpopor aoTai-
povTa,
9Q> » / ee bg ts \ / /
ovo éTe O0éo maT EpvKe, NVOVTO O€ TeLpaTa TaVTA.
avtixa © aBavatnat petnvéda PotBos “AmroAX@v: 130
Ein pot KiBapis te hiAn Kat KauTvra TOEa,
/ ke , \ / /
XPNT@ 6 av pom our Avos UIpEpTea Bounrnp.
“Os ev OY eBiBacker é emi xGovos evpuodeins
Doi Bos aKepoexouns, exatnBoros al 0 apa
TAC A


332


Ii1—TO DELIAN APOLLO, 108-134


quickly finishing all the distance she came to-the —— ~


home of the gods, sheer Olympus, and forthwith
called Eilithyia out from the hall to the door and
spoke winged words to her, telling her all as the
goddesses who dwell on Olympus had bidden her.
So she moved the heart of EHilithyia in her dear
breast ; and they went their way, like shy wild-doves
in their going.

And as soon as Faltihyia the goddess of sore
travail set foot on Delos, the pains of birth seized
Leto, and she longed to bring forth; so she cast
- her arms about a palm tree and kneeled on the soft
meadow while the earth laughed for joy beneath.
Then the child leaped forth to the light, and all the
goddesses raised a cry. Straightway, great Phoebus,
the goddesses washed you purely and cleanly with
sweet water, and swathed you in a white garment of
fine texture, new-woven, and fastened a golden band
about you.

Now Leto did not give Apollo, bearer of the
golden blade, her breast; but Themis duly poured
nectar and ambrosia with her divine hands: and
Leto was glad because she had borne a strong son
and an archer. But as soon as you had tasted that
divine heavenly food, O Phoebus, you could no
longer then be held by golden cords nor confined
with bands, but all their ends were undone. Forth-
with Phoebus Apollo spoke out among the deathless
goddesses :

“The lyre and the curved bow shall ever be dear
to me, and | will declare to men the unfailing will
of Zeus.”’

So said Phoebus, the long-haired god who shoots
afar and began to walk upon the wide-pathed earth ;


333


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


GapBeov adavatar: ypvo® © dpa Anos ataca 135
| e ;
[BeBpide, caQopaaa Aros Anrovs Te yeveO rnp,
7 ef \ C/- 3417. /
ynboovvn, Tt pv Oeds etreTO olxia Béo Oar
VHTwV HTELpov Te, HiAnTE O€ KHOU wardov 1.|
BA ? e 4 e/ ” A e/
WwOno, ws OTE TE ploy ovpEeos avOeoww VANS.
Avtos 6 ,apyupoto€e, avak éExatnBor ”AtroXXor, 140
arnroTte wév T ert KbvOou éBnoao rartanoevtos,
yA wast VA Ae) / ) Wf
aNroTe 6 av vioous TE Kal aveépas HraoKALES.
} / \P EDF /
TONNOL TOL VNOL TE KAL ANoEA CEvOpHEeVvTA:
A \ if if \ s BA
Tacat d€ cxoTLal TE Pidat Kal TPWOVES AKPOL
UWnrOY opéwy ToTapot 0 adhade TpopéovTes: 145
adra ov Ando, PoiBe, wadvat émtTéprreat HTOp,
évoa Tor edxexiToves laoves nyepeGovtas
avrois oUV TALOET ot KO atooins aGroXoLew.
ot 6é oe UY LAXID Te Kal opxnOue Kal avon
png apevor TEPTFOVTW, or ay OTHTOVTAL ayava. 150
hain « adavdtous Kal aynpws Eupevar atet,
A ‘fm? e f >) (24 Sie Weer J / bf A Sy
os TOO vTavtidcer, 6T doves al pooe eter:
TavTov yap Kev idotto yapiv, Téprratto bé Ovpov
dvdpas T elaopowy KaXALC@VOUS TE yuVAalKAaS
ALP 3459 VA x99 b) a / ff :
yyas T wKelas 7/0 QUTOV KTHMATE TONG, 155
T pos dé TOE wéya Data, Gov KES OVTOT odetT au,
Kotpas Andudoes, exaty BereT ao Geparrvat:
at T émret ap TT P@TOV pev “ATroAN@V LpVHTOTW,
avtis 6 av Ant te Kal” Aptepmer t ioxéaspar,
png apevat avopav Te TAadaALoY 70€ YUVALK@V 160
ipvov aeloovow, Oédyovar b€ bvr’ aveporav.


Fee NE eee RNR Hr a


‘1 ll. 186-8 are intrusive, being alternative for 1. 139.
They are found in Mand the edition of Stephanus (in text),
and in the margin of ETL (with the note ‘‘in another copy
these verses also are extant”). In D they are added by a
second hand.


334


IiIl.—TO DELIAN APOLLO, 135-161


and all the goddesses were amazed at him. Then ——


with gold all Delos | was laden, beholding the child
of Zeus and Leto, for joy because the god chose her
above the islands and shore to make his dwelling in
her: and she loved him yet more in her heart. |
blossomed as does a mountain-top with woodland
flowers. : “
And you, O lord Apollo, god of the silver bow,
shooting afar, now walked on craggy Cynthus, and
now kept wandering about the islands and the
-peoplein them. Many are your temples and wooded
groves, and all peaks and towering bluffs of lofty
mountains and rivers flowing to the sea are dear to
you, Phoebus, yet in Delos do you most delight your
heart; for there the long robed Ionians gather in
your honour with their children and shy wives:
mindful, they delight you with boxing and dancing
and song, so often as they hold their gathering. A
man would say that they were deathless and un-
ageing if he should then come upon the Ionians so
met together. For he would see the graces of them
all, and would be pleased in heart gazing at the men
and well-girded women with their swift ships and
great wealth. And there is this great. wonder
besides—and_ its renown shall never perish—, the
girls of Delos, hand-maidens of the Far-shooter ; for
when they have praised Apollo first, and also Leto
and Artemis who delights in arrows, they sing a
strain telling of men and women of past days, and
charm the tribes of men. Also they can imitate the


335°


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


, 9 ay / x \
TavTov 0 avéparav davas cat BawPadtactovv |


tas) > is Q/7 b) ~ /
pyucia? icacw: hain oé Kev avTos ExacTos
Ma f
pbeyyeo@ ovtw cdi Kadi cvvapnpev aoLdn.
>] b)
AX’ aye? iAnKoe pev AmroAN@v Aprémde
Evp, ok 165
/ SS is al aA 3 a) Oe \ x @
yvaipete O° vets TacaL éweto O€ Kal meToTrLa0ev
Pd] € / "4 ,
prenoace, OMTTOTE KEV TLS emt Jovi avO p@Trav
evd ad avelpnr as Eelvos TahametpLos éNov-
@ KoUpat, Tis O Vupev avHp HOLteToS GoLd@v
2 / A Nee A / ;
ev0dde TwAEiTAL, Kal Tew TépTrecDe padLoTA; 170 —
A 3 i A y
vets O ev pdra Tacat UTOKpivacbat adnums:
\ b] if b>] a \ / SYA ,
Tupros avyp, otKet dé Xiw evi TarTandoecoy
n na / /
TOU Tacat pmeTOTIaOEV ApLaTEVTOUGLY GoOLOal.
€ ta b) / A >
nets © vpeTepov KAEOS Oloomev, BoaoV eT alav
’ , / / a /
avOpwrwv otpedopecba modes ev vateTawaas: 175
e\ \ lh, /
ot 0° émrt 6 TeLoOVTaL, ETEL KAL ETHTULOV EaTLV.
3 \ 3 \ 3 4 £ / b>] /
avuTap éy@v ov AnEw exnPorov AtroAXN@va
€ yd / ¢ / / I
VUVEewY apyupoTokov, Ov HUKOmos TEexe ANTM.


[EIS ATIOAAONA IIT@ION]


°Q, dva, Kat Aveiny Kab Myoviny eparerviyy
Kat Mirnrtov ¢ EXELS, EVANOV TONLY imepoecoar, 180
autos © av An oto TepikdvaTns péey avaooels.

Kict 6é doppifov Anrovs épeKud€os UVLOS
Poppuyys yaguph apos IIv0e TET PET TAY,
dpPpora eluar EX OV TeOve@peva’ Toto Oe popmoye

ua €oU vm TAHKT POV Kava nv ever t (pepoecoay. 185
évOev de ™ 0s "OdvpTov aro xGoves, MOTE YONA,
elot Atos mpos b@ma Gedy pel opnyupw addrov.


1 ETL: xpeuBadrsacriv, other MSS. The former word is
connected with BayBatvey = to chatter with the teeth, and is |
usually taken to mean ‘‘ castanet-playing” ; but since imita-


336


lil.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 162-187


tongues of all men and their clattering speech:
each would say that he himself were singing, so
close to truth is their sweet song.

And now may Apollo be favourable and Artemis ;
and farewell all you maidens. Remember me in after
time whenever any one of men on earth, a stranger
who has seen and suffered much, comes here and asks
of you: “ Whom think ye, girls, is the sweetest singer
that comes here, and in whom do you most delight ?”’
Then answer, each and all, with one voice: “ He is
a blind man, and dwells in rocky Chios: his lays are
evermore supreme.” As for me, I will carry your
renown as far as | roam over the earth to the well-
placed cities of man, and they will believe also; for
indeed this thing is true. And I will never cease to
praise far-shooting Apollo, god of the silver bow,
whom rich-haired Leto bare.


TO PYTHIAN APOLLO


O torp, Lycia is yours and lovely Maeonia and
Miletus, charming city by the sea, but over Delos
you greatly reign your own self.

Leto’s all-glorious son goes to rocky Pytho, playing
upon his hollow lyre, clad in divine, perfumed
garments; and at the touch of the golden key his
lyre sings sweet. Thence, swift as thought, he
speeds from earth to Olympus, to the house of Zeus, to
join the gathering of the other gods: then straightway
tion of castanet playing would hardly be worthy of mention


as a feat of skill, it seems more likely that the stammering or
harsh dental pronunciation of foreigners is to be understood.


CK


Z


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


avtixa © adavartotos pérer KiBapis Kal aoLon:
Mobcas pev O° dpa wacat aperBopevat orl Kar}
vpvedotv pa Jedy bap’ duBpora nO avOp@rev
TANMOTUVAS, eo EXOVTES tim adavdroict Oeotat
Cwova abpacées Kal aunyavol, ovde SvvavTat
evpéuevat Oavatolo T aKOS Kab yHpaos aNKap:
avTap euTOKAaLOL Xaputes Kab evppoves “Opat a |
“Appovin GHB te Avos Ouyarnp T “A ppodirn 195
opxeovT’ GND NOV emt KapT@ Ketpas exoue au: } :
THO’ pep ovT aioxpn peTapehmeTar ovr’ ehaxera, af
ANNA peda, peyann Te LOELY Kal E005 aYyNTH,
"Aptems toxéatpa onotpodos “AmoANwM. |
év © av thow Apns kat évoxotros “Apyespovtns 200
mailova avtap 0 PoiBos ’AmoAX@v éyaBapiter |
KANG Kal ine Bias: airyhn 6€ poly aphipaciver
pappapuryat TE TOOOY Kal EVENT TOLO VLTOVOS.
ot © émitéptrovtat Oupov meyav elo Opo@VTES |
Anre TE XpucomAoKajLos Kal untiera Levs 205 ff
via pidov mailovra pet abavaroct Geoton.

Tas ia ap a bpviee TAVTOS eVUpLvor éovTa;
ne a évi ee mca 1 deido Kat Pehornte,
OTT OS pv@opevos * EKLES ‘Abavrioa Kouvpny ¥
"lox ap avTOéw, Enarsovion Evie ; 210 9
y dua DopBavte Tpoméw ® Yyev0s, 7) au “Kpevbel; :

7H apa AMevelrme@ cat Aevximoo Saadited

‘ 2k xx

melos, 0 © immotow’ ov piv Tpiomos y évédectrev.
i) @S TO TPAToV YpnoTHpLov avOpwTroLaL |
Entevwv Kata yatay éBns, éxatnBor “AmodXov; 215]


1 Martin : pYNoT How, MSS.

2 Martin: émmdtay iguevos, M: the other MSS. are still
more corrupt.

3 Allen-Sikes : tpidrw, tpior@ and tpiordw, MSS.


338


fad
co
S&S,


pace en IISA DS:


a


~


SRD
» “Oe Ue


ee ee ial


Iii.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 188-215


the undying gods think onty of the lyre and song, aie


and all the Muses together, voice sweetiy answering
voice, hymn the unending gifts the gods enjoy and
the sufferings of men, all that they endure at the
hands of the deathless gods, and how they live
witless and helpless and cannot find healing for
death or defence against old age. Meanwhile the
rich-tressed Graces and cheerful Seasons dance with
Harmonia and Hebe and Aphrodite, daughter of


_ Zeus, holding each other by the wrist. And among


them sings one, not mean nor puny, but tall to
look upon and enviable in mien, Artemis who
delights in arrows, sister of Apollo. Among them
sport Ares and the keen-eyed Slayer of Argus, while
Apollo plays his lyre stepping high and featly and a
radiance shines around him, the gleaming of his
feet and close-woven vest. And they, even gold-
tressed Leto and wise Zeus, rejoice in their great
hearts as they watch their dear son playing among
the undying gods.

How then shall I sing of you—though in all ways
you are a worthy theme for song? Shall I sing of
you as wooer and in the fields of love, how you went
wooing the daughter of Azan along with god-like
Ischys the son of well-horsed Elatius, or with
Phorbas sprung from Triops, or with Ereutheus, or
with Leucippus and the wife of Leucippus .. .
you on foot, he with his chariot, yet he fell not
short of Triops. Or shall I sing how at the first
you went about the earth seeking a place of
oracle for men, O far-shooting Apollo? To Pieria


339
yey


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Tleepinv pev TO@TOV aT Ovnvprrov0 Kath es
Néxtov 7 ypuaboévra Taper Texes 70 ‘Evefvas

Kab OL IleppaxBous- Taxa 0 ets ‘lawXxKov ixaves,
Kyvatou tT éwéByns vavaoixrerths EvBoins.

otis 8 émrt Andtdvt@ Tedim: TO ToL ovy ade Oup@ 220
TevEacIat vnov Te Kal dNoeEa SevOpyevTa.

evOev O Edpurov draPas, éxatn Bor “AtroAXov, |
Bis ¢ av &pos cabeor, xapov" Taxa © ies am avTov 2 |
és Muxadnooop iav Kar T eupmaoov AeXeT olny. E
OnBys S cicadixaves bos KaTacypévov UAy* 225 | ! |
ov yap TH TLS évate Bpotav teph evi OB,

ove dpa, wo TOTE hoay aT apmerot ove€e KédevOor
@n8ns dp Tredtov mupnpopor, ann exev UA.

"Evdev dé T™ POTEep@ EKLES, éxaTn Bor “AtroAXor,
‘Oyxna tov & i&es, [Loo udxtov ayXaov adaos: 230
| 6 Sa VEOOHNS T@NOS avaTrVeEl ax Gopevos Ep
EXNKOV AppaTa Kana’ Kapoat o ehaTnp ayalos ep
éx dippoto Gopwv o6ov € epyera: ov 6€ Téws meV
Kel oKea KpoTéouce a dvaxTopiny aplevTes.
et O€ KEV AppaTt ayhow év adoei SevdpnevTi, 235
immous peey KOPEOUCL, Ta 6é KhivavTes edo ey"
as yap Ta mp@TicO ocin yeved of O€ avaKTL
evyovTaL, Oippov Ge Jeo Tore joipa gudaccer,

"KvOev Oé 7 poTepo CKLES, ExaTN BON "A qrorAXov'
Kyduocov Sap em eLT A KU TLO KadALpeeOpov, 240
os te Atrai Dev T POX EEL Ka ppoov Doep.

TOV ova Bas, Eedepye, Kab ‘Oxarenv ToUTUpyov
évGev dp eis “AXtaptov adixeo moinjevta.

Bys & évi Terdhovons: T08t Tot ade Y@pos amHuwv |
Tevéac0ar vnov Te Kal ddoea SevdpnevTa: 245 |
ais O€ war ayy avTis Kal pv mpos woOov Eevtres: |

' Matthiae: ‘Ayvinvas, M.


340


ae
ey


secrete et seu


Iil.—_TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 216-246


first you went down from Olympus and passed_by


sandy Lectus and Enienae and through the land
of the Perrhaebi. Soon you came to [olcus and set
foot on Cenaeum in Euboea, famed for ships: you
stood in the Lelantine plain, but it pleased not your
heart to make a temple there and wooded groves.
From there you crossed the KEuripus, far-shooting
Apollo, and went up the green, holy hills, going on
to Mycalessus and grassy-bedded Teumessus, and
so came to the wood-clad abode of Thebe; for as
yet no man lived in holy Thebe, nor were there


tracks or ways about Thebe’s wheat-bearing plain


as yet.

And further still you went, O far-shooting Apollo,
and came to Onchestus, Poseidon’s bright grove:
there the new-broken colt distressed with drawing
the trim chariot gets spirit again, and the skilled
driver springs from his car and goes on his. way.
Then the horses for a while rattle the empty car,
being rid of guidance ; and if they break the chariot
in the woody grove, men look after the horses, but
tilt the chariot and leave it there ; for this was the
rite from the very first. And the drivers pray to the
lord of the shrine; but the chariot falls to the lot
of the god.

Further yet you went, O far-shooting Apollo, and
reached next Cephissus’ sweet stream which pours
forth its sweet-flowing water from Lilaea, and
crossing over it, O worker from afar, you passed many-
towered Ocalea and reached grassy Haliartus.

Then you went towards Telphusa: and there the
pleasant place seemed fit. for making a temple and
wooded grove. You came very near and spoke to


341


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Terpodc’ , evade O7 ppovew TepiKarhea yyov
avOperav Tev&at ypnaTHpLov, ote wot atel
evO a0” aywnoovet TEANET OAS éxaToupas,

7Tpev Gaol Tehorovyna op mevpay eXovow 250
no boo Kupomny Te Kal appiporas Kara VNTOUS,
X PNT ojEvol Toltaw o€ « eyo vn pEpTea. Bovrnv
Tat Deprarevorue Kpé@y Evi TLOVE vn@.

1 Os el OV d1€OnKe Oewerdua PotBos "ATroAXN@Y
EUPEA Kal Lara waKxpa OLnveKes: H O€ LOovTA 255
Terpodca Kpactny eXoh@oaro clmré TE pd ov

PoiBe avag € ex depye, émos Tl ToL ev ppect Onow.
evOao émrel hpovéers TebEaL TepiKarhea vnov
éwmevat avOp@rrots XPnaTHpLOV, olTe ToL atel
év0ao ayanoover TeAHET TAS éxaTouBas’ 260
ANN’ Ex Tor épéw, av 6 evi dpeai BarXreo onot,
mnuavee. o alel KTUTOS (TTWOY WKELAMV
apdopevol T ovphes éu@v lepOv aro THYEOV"
évoa Tis avOporayv Bovrnceras etcopaadbat
dppatd Tt evTointa Kal @KUTOO@Y KTUTOV tTmT@V 265
H) VNOV TE LEYAV Kal KTHWATA TOA €VEOVTA.

GNX et On Tt TLOOLO, av dé Kpelaowy Kal apetov
evo, avag, ewelev, aed 6é abévos é éoTl méylaTov,
év Kpion moino al UTO TTUYL Tapyncoto.
vl’ ov appara, Kara SOVHTETAL ouTe To. immov 270
@KUTOO@V KTUTOS eoTat evo unTov jept Bwamor,
GANG TOL WS mpoo aryovev ‘Inmavjove da@pa
avOparcv KduTa pdra ov be fpévas apouye-—
ynbas
déFav tepa KANGA TEPLKTLOVOV avOporav.
Os etrrove Eedrov meme ppevas, oppa Ol AUTH 275
Terdovon KNEOS ei emt Govt, und “Exarovo.
"Ev@ev 6é ™ poTepe éxues, ExatyBor “AmoAXor


342


IIL—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 247-277


her: “Telphusa, here I am minded to make a
glorious temple, an oracle for men, and hither they
will always bring perfect hecatombs, both those
who live in rich Peloponnesus and those of Europe
and all the wave-washed isles, coming to seek
oracles. And I will deliver to them all counsel
that cannot fail, giving answer in my rich temple.”’

So said Phoebus Apollo, and laid out all the
foundations throughout, wide and very long. But
when Telphusa saw this, she was angry in heart and
spoke, saying: “ Lord Phoebus, worker from afar, I
_ will speak a word of counsel to your heart, since you
are minded to make here a glorious temple to be an
oracle for men who will always bring hither perfect
heeatombs for you; yet I will speak out, and do you
lay up my words in your heart. The trampling of
swift horses and the sound of mules watering at my
sacred springs will always irk you, and men will like
better to gaze at the well-made chariots and stamp-
ing, swift-footed horses than at your great temple
and the many treasures that are within. But if you
will be moved by me—for you, lord, are stronger and
mightier than I, and your strength is very great—
build at Crisa below the glades of Parnassus: there
no bright chariot will clash, and there will be no
noise of swift-footed horses near your well-built
altar. But so the glorious tribes of men will bring
gifts to you as lepaeon (‘ Hail-Healer’), and you
will receive with delight rich sacrifices from the
people dwelling round about.” So said Telphusa,
that she alone, and not the Far-Shooter, should
have renown there; and she persuaded the Far-
Shooter.

Further yet you went, far-shooting Apollo, until


343


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


ies & és Dreyvav dvdpav ror UBpictawr,
of Aros ov adéyovTes él yOou vateTadacKov
év Karyn Bnaon Knydsaioos éyyvOe Nipvns. 280
évOev kaptanriwas mpocéBns mpos derpdda Ovav |
ixeo © és Kpionv vio Uapynoov vioevta,

Kynwov pos Lépupov TeTpapupevov, avTap Umeplev
TETPN ETLKPEMATAL, KOLAN O VIrodédpope BHaooa, |
tTpnxet* év0a dvak texunpato PotBos “AmodrA@v 285 —
ynov troinaac0ar érnpatov eimé Te puOov:

’EvOdade 59 hpovéw TedEar Teprxadrea vyov
Ep pevae avOp@Trots KpnoTHpLov, olTEe pot atel
ev0ad aylwnoovct TEANET OAS exaTouBas,

7 MEV 6g 0b NG eee Cl Tierpay exovow, 290
nO boot Rdpomny Te Kal apdiporas Kara VRTOUS,
XPNTojLevor: Tolow ap’ eyo Un pepT ea BovAnv —
Tact Oemrarevoupe Vpéwy évt Tove VA®.

“Os eitr@y dvéOnxe Oepweiiia DoiBos “AmoAX@v
evpéa Kal dra paxpa Sunvenés’ avTap em aUTOIS 295
Adwvov ovddv EOnKe Tpodw@vios nd ‘Ayapnons,
viées “Epyivov, dirou adavatotor Oeotow:
appt de vnov évaccav abéohata dvr avOpeTav
cer Toiow Adeow, aot dupov EUpevar ace.

Ayo d€ KpnVN Karhippoos, év0a OpaKkaway 300
xteivev avak, Ads vios, amo Kpatepoto Brot,
Catpedéa, meyarnpy, Tépas dry ptov, i) Kaka TONG
avO porous EpoeaKev emi xIovt, Tone pev avuTous,
TOAAG O€ pHAa TavavTrod, émwel TéXe THA

Sadowvov. |
Kab TOTE deEauevn xpuaobpovou eTpepen * ‘Hpys 305
Oewvov T apyanéov te Tuddova, Thea. Bporotow*


b taht Tdi, 22


ov mot ap “Hpn étexte yoAwoapevrn Aci marpi,
344


II.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 278-307


you came to the town of the presumptuous Phlegyae
who dwell on this earth in a lovely glade near
the Cephisian lake, caring not for Zeus. And
thence you went speeding swiftly to the mountain
ridge, and came to Crisa beneath snowy Parnassus,
a foothill turned towards the west. a cliff hangs
over it from above, and a hollow, rugged glade
runs under. There the lord. Phoebus Apollo
resolved to make his lovely temple, and thus he
said : :
“In this place I am minded to build a glorious
‘temple to be an oracle for men, and here they will
always bring perfect hecatombs, both they who
dwell in rich Peloponnesus and the men of Europe
and from all the wave-washed isles, coming to
question me. And I will deliver to them all
counsel that cannot fail, answering them in my rich
temple.”

When he had said this, Phoebus Apollo laid out
all the foundations throughout, wide and very long ;
and upon these the sons of Erginus, Trophonius and
Agamedes, dear to the deathless gods, laid a footing
of stone. And the countless tribes of men built
the whole temple of wrought stones, to be sung of
for ever.

But near by was a sweet flowing spring, and there
with his strong bow the lord, the son of Zeus, killed
the bloated, great she-dragon, a fierce monster wont
to do great mischief to men upon earth, to men them-
selves and to their thin-shanked sheep; for she was
a very bloody plague. She it was who once received
from gold-throned Hera and brought up fell, cruel
Typhaon to be a plague to men. Once on a time
Hera bare him because she was angry with father


345


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Hvix apa} Kpoviéns épicvoea yelvar’ AOijyny
év Kopuph 4) ) 0 ainva Kohk@aar O TOT VLA “Hen
nOe Kab diypouévoret per aBavarourw & ECUTrE’ 310
Kedure [Lev, TAVTES te Jeot maaat te Géawat,
@S ew aTimagery ¢ apxee vepehnyepera Levs
TOT Os, éqrel fb Goxov TOLGaToO KEOV eLOviaV:
Ka voy yoo pu éweto TEKE yravedrw "AOnvny,
i) Taow paKkdperos peTatperes ADavaToow’ 315
avTap 6 y Hmredavos yéyovev peTa Tact Deotor
mais éuos “Hdatotos, puxvos medas, Ov TéKoV AUTH:
[aicxyos é€uol Kal dverdos év ovpav@ ovtTe Kat
auTy ai 317°
pyr ave Yepoly ENoVTA Kal EwBarov eupel TOVTO"
GNAG E Napijos. Duyarnp Betis apyuporeta
defaTo Kab WeTa ob KATLYVHTHTL KOjUT TED. 320
ds dden’ AAR Ocotor yapitecOa paxdpecot.
TYETALE, TOLKLAOMHTA, TL VOV pNnTioEas AO;
Tos eTANS clos TeKéeww yAaveariv AOnvnv;
ovK - ey@ TEKOMNV; Kab on Kexhnpevn eumns
ha p ® ép aBavarouaw, ob _ovpavov evpuv eX oure. 325
ppateo vov pn Tot TL KQKOV pnticopw o ori oo. 325°
KL VOV [EVTOL EY@ TEXVNTOMAL, WS KE YEVNTAL
mais €[108, bs Ke Geotar peTamperrol aavarorowy,
OvTE TOV aioxwvar iepov NEXOS ovT mov aQUuThs.
OvoE TOL els EVN TOT OMAL, GX” amo oElo
THO eovoa, - Geoicn peTeTTopmat aBavarourty. 330
°Os erTro0o ato voodt Jed Kile Yoowéevn KHp.
arin CTT ELT. npato Bows TOTVLA “Hom,
Yelpt KaTampnvel 0 éEXace yYOova kai hato mvOov:
1 Allen-Sikes: jvex’ &pa, M.
* Suggested by Allen-Sikes to fill up the lacuna,
3 Matthiae: 4 6, MSS.
4 Hermann: t7Ad@ev otoa, MSS.
346


III.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 308--333


Zeus, when the Son of Cronos bare ail-glorious
Athena in his head. Thereupon queenly Hera was
angry and spoke thus among the assembled gods :

“« Hear from me, all gods and goddesses, how cloud-
gathering Zeus begins to dishonour me wantonly,
when he has made me his true-hearted wife. See
now, apart from me he has given birth to bright-eyed
Athena who is foremost among all the blessed gods.
But my son Hephaestus whom I bare was weakly
_ among all the blessed gods and shrivelled of foot, a
shame and a disgrace to me in heaven, whom I my-
self took in my hands and cast out so that he fell in
the great sea. But silver-shod Thetis the daughter
of Nereus took and cared for him with her sisters:
would that she had done other service to the blessed
gods! O wicked one and crafty! What else will
you now devise? How dared you by yourself give
birth to bright-eyed Athena? Would not I have
borne you a child—I, who was at least called your
wife among the undying gods who hold wide heaven.
Beware now lest I devise some evil thing for you
hereafter: yes, now I will contrive that a son be
born me to be foremost among the undying gods—
and that without casting shame on the holy bond of
wedlock between you and me. And I will not come
to your bed, but will consort with the blessed gods
far off from you.’

When she had so spoken, she went apart from the
gods, being very angry. Then straightway large-
eyed queenly Hera prayed, striking the ground
flatwise with her hand, and speaking thus:


347


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Kéxrute viv pev, Vaia kat Ovpavos evpus
Umeplev

Tirnvés te Oeoi, Tou UTrO xGovi VOLETAOVTES 335
Taptapov appt peyay, TOV é& avopes te Oeoi Te
avrol vov ev TaYTES AKOVTATE Kal dore Tatsa
voodt Aros, wndév te Biny éridevéa Ketvou:
> Diy eh / SA 1 cs Nd > if 4 f
arr’ 6 ye héptepos éExtw,' 6cov Kpovov evpvora Zevs.


Hs dpa dwvncac twace yOova yetpl TaxXein: 340 |


/ an / ¢ A
Kwyndn é apa Tata pepec Bros: i) 0€ toovca
TEpTeTo Ov Kara Ouuov: oteto yap. TEReo Oa,
ex TOUTOU on € emelra Tener Opov els éviavTov
ouTe TOT els evyny Atos HrvOe HN TLOEVTOS,
ovTe ToT &€> CaHKov TorvdaidaXoV, WS TO TapOS
TEP | 345
avT@® ehelouevn mruxivas dpalecketo Bovdas:
5 > JS a VA yA
arr ny €&V VHOtoL TOAVANLCTOLOL MEVOVTA
& A A VY,
TépTreTo ols Lepotat Bowmts Totyia ‘Hpn.
> ba A \ hs Ne / b] la)
GX OTE OH pHVvEeS TE KAL Huepar EETENEDYTO
J Sy Nie. / Le
TeptTEAAOpEVOU ETEOS Kab eTHAVOOY pat, 350
\ we > yA a ? / + a
9 & étex ovte Oeols evariyKtov ote BpoTotact,
/ n an
devvov T apyanréov te Tuddova, mhua Bpototcu.
: la) la / 7
avtixa Tovde NaBotaa Bodmis woTvia © Hpy
A a / A /
ddkev rerta dépovea KAK@ KaKov’ 7 O vITédexKTO.
OS KAKA TOAN EpdecKev ayakdruTa PUA avOpo-
Toy" 399
a A oD 3) / J / $Y 9
OS THY avriacele, HEpecKe MW aiotwov Huap,
A VA CLeaN >) A BA e /, 3 f
Mp ye ol Lov epyKxe avake exaepyos AtroNN@V
a , / a
Kaptepov: 4 6 odvynow épeyOopnevn YareTrAaL
n 3 y a \ (a
KetTo per acOuatvovoa KuALVOOMEVN KATA Y@pov.
Vi re >
Oeatrecin 8 évorr7 yévert dometos: 7) be Kal
UAV 360
1 Allen-Sikes: éorw, M.


348


ries a Se ee


II—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 334-360


“ Hear now, I pray, Earth and wide Heaven above, —
and you Titan gods who dwell beneath the earth
about great Tartarus, and from whom are sprung both
gods and men! Harken you now to me, one and
all, and grant that I may bear a child apart from
Zeus, no wit lesser than him in strength—nay, let
him be as much stronger than Zeus as all-seeing Zeus
than Cronos.’ Thus she cried and lashed the earth
with her strong hand. Then the life-giving earth,
‘was moved: and when Hera saw it she was glad in
heart, for she thought her prayer would be fulfilled.
And thereafter she never came to the bed of wise
Zeus for a full year, nor to sit in her carved chair as
aforetime to plan wise counsel for him, but stayed in
her temples where many pray, and delighted in her
offerings, large-eyed queenly Hera. But when the
months and days were fulfilled and the seasons duly
came on as the earth moved round, she bare one
neither like the gods nor mortal men, fell, cruel
Typhaon, to be a plague to men. Straightway large-
eyed queenly Hera took him and bringing one evil
thing to another such, gave him to the dragoness ;
and she received him. And this Typhaon used to
work great mischief among the famous tribes of
men. Whosoever met the dragoness, the day of
doom would sweep him away, until the lord Apollo,
who deals death from afar, shot a strong arrow at
her. Then she, rent with bitter pangs, lay drawing
great gasps for breath and rolling about that place.
An awful noise swelled up unspeakable as she writhed


349


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


muxva par e&0a cat évOa éXooeTo, Aeltre Oe
Ovpeov
powvov amomvelova’* 0 & emnveato Doi Bos AroAXrwv: |
‘Evravd ot vov mudev é emt x Govt Bwrtiaveipn: |
oude ov ve Coovoa KAKOV OnANLA Bporoiow
éoaeat, ob yains Toru popBou KApPTrOV ESOVTES 365 ,
evo ao ayujgoucr TEeANETOAaS éxaTouBas |
ovoé Ti ToL Odvarov ye dvanreyé ovTE Tudwevs
apKecet ovtTe Xiparpa dvao@vupos, GANA GE
AUTOU |
mvce Vata perauva Kau WAEKT OP "Lrrepicon.
"Os par émevyomevos: THY O€ OKOTOS Gace
caruwe. 370 |
THY o avTov KaTémua tepov HEVOS “‘Henriouo, a
€& ov viv Wlu@e KicrAyjoKetas of 60€ dvaxTa
Tv@cov aryKxadéovaw 1 eT @VULOV, ovvexa Kel@u
aUTOU TUGE Tehwop HEVOS of€os ‘Heniovo.
Kai tot ap éyva now évi dpect PoiBos |
"ATOAAw?, 375 |
ovverd pw Kpnyn KANALPPOOS eCarragnae :
BH & én ‘Tedgpovon KEXONDMEVOS, ainpa oe ieave®
TH O€ [ean ayy, auras Kab py T pos poOov éeutre:
Teddodo’ , OUK ap euednes éuov voov éEavrapodca
V0) pov exoug € éparov ™ popeely KaNNLPpooVv ddep. 380
év ade by Kal éuov KXE0S EGoETAL, OVOE GOV ONS.
“H Kai eri plov OE dvag éxdepyos AmoXNo@v
TeTpains TPOXUTHOLw, dreKpuypev dé péeO pa
Kal Bopov TOUjTaT év adoei devdpryevre,
ary Xe jada, KPHVNS Kar ppoo év0ae QVaKTe  —- 385
TAVTES émikrnoww T ‘edhovoig EVYETOMVTAL,
ovveca Texhovans tephs faoxyuve péeOpa.


1 Hermann : [Mv@toy kadéovoiww, MSS. ‘


ee ne


39°


Hi PO PYTHIAN ‘APOLEO; 361-337


continually this way and that amid the wood: and
so she left her life, breathing it forth in blood. Then
Phoebus Apollo boasted over her :

“Now rot here upon the soil that feeds man!
You at least shail live no more to be a fell bane to
men who eat the fruit of the all-nourishing earth,
and who wili bring hither perfect hecatombs.
Against cruel death neither Typhoeus shall avail
you nor ill-famed Chimera, but here shall the Rarth,
_and shining Hyperion make you rot.”

Thus said Phoebus, exulting over her: and dark-
ness covered her eyes. And the holy strength of
Helios made her rot away there; wherefore the
place is now called Pytho, and men cali the lord
Apollo by another name, Pythian; because on that
spot the power of piercing Helios made the monster
rot away.

Then Phoebus Apollo saw that the sweet-flowing
spring had beguiled him, and he started out in anger
against Telphusa ; and soon coming to her, he stood
close by and spoke to her:

“ Telphusa, you were not, after all, to keep to
yourself this lovely place by deceiving my mind, and
_ pour forth your clear flowing water: here my renown
shall also be and not yours alone ?”’

Thus spoke the lord, far-working Apollo, and
pushed over upon her a crag with a shower of rocks,
hiding her streams: and he made himself an altar
‘in a wooded grove very near the clear-flowing stream.
In that place all men pray to the great one by the
name Telphusian, because he humbled the stream of


holy Telphusa.


a5?


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Kal rote 67 kata Oupov éeppagero DoiBos
AmroAX@v, |
ovaoTivas avOpwTroUS Opystovas eigayayoLTo,

a , a4 ie
OL Jepatrevo ovTat Iludot éve TETPHEC ON: 390
TavT dpa oppaivev évona émi olvoTe TovT@

n / b) bli / / So8 /
yHa Foxy: ev d avopes écav TONEES Te Kal éaO nol,
Kpijres Qo Kvocod Muvwiov, of pa dvaxtt
lepa TE peSovar Kal aryyéhovet Oemuoras
Doi Bou "AmroAA wos Xpusaopou, OTTL KEV ElTN 395
Kpetov éx Oadvns qarov U7r0 Lapyne oto.
ob poev eri THEW Kal Xpneara yyt pedaivn
és [lvAov npabocyra [Tudouyevéas on avOparrous
émNeov: avTap 0 Toia. cuvnvTeTo PotBos “Amor:
b) J xi 9 J / na ) \
éy TovT@m © émopovce Séuas SeADive EOLKOS 400
vnt Gon cal xetto TéAwWP péya Te OELVvOV TE?

an S ” \ nN 3 rgb Q ef in 1
TOV O OVTLS KaTAa OupoVv eT Eppaca. MOTE VONTAL
[exBardew o é0ehov dehpiv™ 0 0€ via péracvav *| 402°
TavTOT wacacioacKe, tivacae 6€ vita Sovpa.

‘ot 8 axéwv évi vynt Kabnato SetmaivovTes’

ov0 of y OmN édXvOV «othny ava vija. péraivav, 405
ovo éXvov alihos YNOS KVAVOTP@POLO,

GND @S TA TPOTLaTa KATETTITAVTO Boetow,

@> ém)eov’ KPALTVOS b6¢ Notos catoricbev érretye
via Oonv: mpatov oé  TrapnpetBovTo Madnear,

Tap O€ Aaxwvida yatav ada epavoy mr orteO pov 410
i€ov Kal Yapov TepYruBporov "Herzsoro,

Taivapov, év0a TE pia Babvtpiya Boonerar aiel
‘Hedtovo ¢ AVAKTOS, ever oO eTLTEPTEED, x @pov.

ot ev ap ev’ GerXov via cyelyv 7d atroBavTes


¢


1 Tr.: éredpdcaro vojca, M. For the absolute use of
éemppaicw cp. Herodotus iv. 200 &d¢ émippacbels. adore vojoa
expresses the natural result of reflection.

2 Allen-Sikes’s supplement.


352 :


Ill.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 388-414


Then Phoebus Apollo pondered in his heart what ~
men he should bring in to be his ministers in
sacrifice and to serve him in rocky Pytho. And
while he considered this, he became aware of a
swift ship upon the wine-like sea in which were
many men and goodly, Cretans from Cnossos,! the
city of Minos, they who do sacrifice to the prince
and announce his decrees, whatsoever Phoebus
Apollo, bearer of the golden blade, speaks in
answer from his laurel tree below the dells of Par-,
nassus. These men were sailing in their black
ship for traffic and for profit to sandy Pylos and to
the men of Pylos. But Phoebus Apollo met them: in
the open sea he sprang upon their swift ship, like a
dolphin in shape, and lay there, a great and awesome
monster, and none of them gave heed so as to
understand ?; but they sought to cast the dolphin
overboard. But he kept shaking the black ship
every way and making the timbers quiver. So they
sat silent in their craft for fear, and did not loose
the sheets throughout the black, hollow ship, nor
lowered the sail of their dark-prowed vessel, but as
they had set it first of all with oxhide ropes, so they
kept sailing on ; for a rushing south wind hurried on
the swift ship from behind. First they passed by
Malea, and then along the Laconian coast they éame to
Taenarum, sea-garlanded town and country of Helios
who gladdens men, where the thick-fleeced sheep of
the lord Helios feed continually and occupy a glad-
some country. There they wished to put their ship


1 Inscriptions show that.there was a temple of Apollo
Delphinius (cp. ll. 495-6) at Cnossus and a Cretan month
bearing the same name.

3 sc. that the dolphin was really Apollo.


gig


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


paccacbau péya Oadma Kat opOarpoiau idéoOar, 415 f
et peveet vnos yhadupis damedoie méhwpov |
H €ls olde aNLov movi 0 voy avres opovoet.
GNX’ ov moadiog ty émrei\Oeto wns evepyys,
aNNG Taper TleAomrovyne ov meipav éxyouca
HL OOOV" TVOUH dé dvag é éxdepyos ‘Amro\Nov 420 |
prdios iOuv’ 4 ¢ mpynooovea xédevO ov |
Apnyny t LKAVE KML ‘A pyupenv eparewny
Katt Opvor, ’"Ardetoto mopov, Kal eVKTLT OV Aiaru
Kal Ildnov npaloevra TluAovyeveas T * avO pwrous.
BH && mapa Kpovvovs cal Xadxida Kai mapa
Avyny 425
noe Tap “H16a dtav, 601 KpaTéovow “Exrevol. |
evTe Pepas émé Barner, dyardopevn Atos oupe,
Kab opi t vmeK vedewy ‘10axns T Opos aim wépavTo
Aovatyiov Te Daun TE Kat uer oa ZaxvvOos. |
GNX OTE én Tledorrovyno ov TapeviT ATO macay 430
Kal én émrt Kpions KaTepaiveTo KOMTOS aTrelpov,
GoTe Olek [leh orrovyn cov Tielpav e€pryet
7D’ AVE LOS ZLedupos péyas, alOptos, é ex Atos aions,
AaBpos emauyilov é& aiBépos, ogpa TAaXLOTO. |
ynus aviaee Oéovca Jaracans ap pov vowp. 485 |
dxfoppoe On € eM ELTO 7 pos HOT mehvov TE |
émr eov" myepoveve S avag Atos vids “AmroAXNor’
tEov 5 és Kpiony evdeteXov, amenoecoar,
és Aupév'* 1) 8 apdOoow éypiprpato tovToTropos
vnvs.

“Ev” éx VNOS opovoe avag € exdepyos ‘ArrodNov, 440
do Tépt ELOOMevos peo Hypa: TOD oe aro TONAL
omuvdapioes TWTO@VTO, TérAaS O ES ovpavov ixev
és 0 aouTov KATEOUGE OLA TPLTOOD € eplTi pov.
él’ wp’ 6 ye hrAoya Sate mipavaKdpevos TA A KAA"


354


JIl.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 415-444


to shore, and land and comprehend the great marvel


and see with their eyes whether the monster would
remain upon the deck of the hollow ship, or spring
back into the briny deep where fishes shoal. But
the well-built ship would not obey the helm, but
went on its way all along,Peloponnesus : and the lord,
far-working Apollo, guided it easily with the breath of
the breeze. Sothe ship ran on its course and came to
Arena and lovely Argyphea and Thryon, the ford of
Alpheus, and well-placed Aepyand sandy Pylos andthe
men of Pylos; past Cruni it went and Chalcis and past
_ Dyme and fair Elis, where the Epei rule. And atthe
time when she was making for Pherae, exulting in the
breeze from Zeus, there appeared to them below the
clouds the steep mountain of Ithaca, and Dulichium
and Same and wooded Zacynthus. But when they
were passed by all the coast of Peloponnesus, then,
towards Crisa, that vast guif began to heave in sight
which through all its length cuts off the rich isle
of Pelops. There came on them a strong, clear west-
wind by ordinance of Zeus and blew from heaven
vehemently, that with all speed the ship might finish
coursing over the briny water of the sea. So they
began again to voyage back towards the dawn and
the sun: and the lord Apollo, son of Zeus, led them
on until they reached far-seen Crisa, land of vines,
and into haven : there the sea-coursing ship grounded
on the sands.

Then, like a star at noonday, the lord, far-working
Apollo, leaped from the ship: flashes of fire flew
from him thick and their brightness reached to
heaven. He entered into his shrine between price-
less tripods, and there made a flame to flare up
bright, showing forth the splendour of his shafts, so


350


AA 2


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Tacav dé Kpionv catexev céXas: al 0 oNOAVEaY 445
F Sf A - rf , .
Kpicaiwv aNoyoe KardiCovot te Ovyarpes
/ ¢ e A / / ov cs meh w Cx cd
PoiBov bro purrjs: péya yap déos EuBan éExdoTo.
54 b Qe Dine AON a / 2 a We y f
évOev & avt’ emi via vonuw os adto TéTtecOat,
avépt eldopevos atfn@® Te KpaTEp® TE, |
/ s 3 / Sy 50m 7 . .
TpwOn8n, YatTnS EtAvLévos Evpeas wmous* 450
J
Kat sheas howvincas mea TTEPOEVTA TpPOTHVOA
°O. Eeivor, tives ore; TOOEV TELE’ Hypa KérevOa;
NTL KaTa TpHew h parrioiws adarnobe
4 aA e x of , > 3 Ul
oid Te ANLOTHpPES UTTELP GAA, TOL T AaOwVTAt
N aA
wuxas TapOéuevor, KaKOV GXXOSaTIOLTL HépovTEs; 455
I d WA ® / 3:09) 2s an
TihbO ov TwS HaVov TETINOTES, OVO ETL yalaVv
a tA
ex BHT’, ovd€ KAO’ btrAA peXaivns vnos eOecGe;
ef / 4 VA b) A d /
avTn mév ye OtKn TédEL AVOPaY aXdnoTaer,
ee \
omTTOT av €k TOVTOLO TOTL YOOVL HL wEeXaivn
. Li ,
EMwow Kauat@ adnKoTes, avTixa 0€ oheas 460
4 a A
ciTOLO yAUKEPOLO TrEpL Ppévas twepos aipel.
“Os dato cai cdi Odpoos évi otnOeoow eOnke.
\ Yd , n ] A , #
Tov Kal apecBopuevos Kpnta@v ayos avtiov nvda:
Eectv’, érret ov pev yap Te KaTAaOvNTOLCL EoLKas,
> ta)
ov déuas ovde h_nv, aAN aOavato.ct Oeoiow, 465
OUNE TE KAaL peya Yatpe, Jeol dé Tor OABia Soiev.
A f 3 a
Kab LOL TOUT aryopevooy éTHTUpLOY, OPp Ev ELO)’
tis Ojpmos; Tis yata; tives BpoTtot éyyeyaacw;
/ \ A b / / a
ahryn yap ppoveovtes ETETNEOMEV peya NALT MA
/ / >’
és Ivnov é« Kpnrns, évdev yévos evyomwe? eivar: 470
a >, @ \ \ v4 ” e ea
vov © woe Evy vynt KaTHNOopev Ov TL ExOVTES,
VOOTOV Lé“EVvoL, AXANV OOOV, AANA KEéXEVOA’
anna Tis dOavatwr Sedp’ Hyayev ov‘ €OédovTas.


350


IIl.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 445-473


that their radiance filled all Crisa, and the wives and
well-girded daughters of the Crisaeans raised a cry at
that outburst of Phoebus; for he cast great fear
upon them all. From his shrine he sprang forth
again, swift as a thought, to speed again to the ship,
bearing the form of a man, brisk and sturdy, in the
prime of his youth, while ine broad shoulders were
covered with his hair: and he spoke to the Cretans,
uttering winged words:

“Strangers, who are you? Whence come you
sailing along the paths of the sea? ‘Are you for
traffic, or do you wander at random over the sea as
pirates do who put their own lives to hazard and
bring mischief to men of foreign parts as they
roam? Why rest you so and are afraid and do not
go ashore nor stow the gear of your black ship?
For that is the custom of men who live by bread,
whenever they come to land in their dark ships
from the main, spent with toil: at once desire for
sweet food catches them about the heart.”’

So speaking, he put courage in their hearts, and
the master of the Cretans Hhewered him and said:
« Stranger—though you are nothing like mortal men
in shape or stature, but are as the deathless gods—
hail and all happiness to you, and may the gods give
you good. Now tell me truly that I may surely know
it: what country is this, and what land, and what
men live herein? As for us, with thoughts set other-
wards, we were sailing over the great sea to Pylos
from Crete (for from there we declare that we are
sprung), but now are come on shipboard to this
place by no means willingly—another way and other
paths—and gladly would we return. But one of the
deathless gods brought us here against our will.”


357


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Tovs. 8 amraperBopevos Tpoctegpn - hia
"ATroAN@V
Felvot, Tol Kywoov monvdévépeov dippevépeoBe ATS
TO Tpiv, aTap viv ovK EO vOTpOTTOL adTLS Ecedbe
BY / b) \ \ , ; Ae,
és Te TOALY EpaTnY Kal dMmaTA KAaNa ExATTOS -
5) x
és Te hidas GNOxous: adr’ évOdde Tiova vnov
e¢ >, 9 \ an J >) ,
é&er Euwov TrodNOLoL TeTLWEVOY aVOPa@TOLCELD.
/
eit © éya@ Atos vios, AmroAN@v & evyopmas eivat: 480
Crys Di boy 9 fS9: FE SIU NS f a f
vpéas © Hyayov évOdd vUmép méeya Naitwa Oaracons,
yw \ , 3 3.3 y , ine Be
ov TL KAKA hpovéwy, GAN évOdbe Tiova vnoV
é&eT €ov TATLY UaXQ TLLLOV vO porrova,
Bovdas T adavatov elOno ere, TOV borne
atet tiunoedde Ovapmepes 7 MATA TATA. 485
GD dyed’, OS dv éy@ eitrw, Teieabe TAXLO TA"
iotia peev TT P@TOV xaderov AVoayTe Boeias,
yna & érevta Oonv pev em Hrretpov épvoacbe, —
9 \ J Dd) thy No \ 37
éx dé etTHUAl ErXeoOe Kal EvTea Vnos eins |
\ \ f  DLEAE a 4 1 |
Kat Bomov Tomcat emt pnypive Oaracons: 490
Tip o em LK QLOVTES emt T adduta AevKa Ovovtes
edxer Fat bn € emeLT a TApLaT awevor mepl Bopov.
@S Mev ey@ TO TPWTOV ev nepoeroet TOVT@
eld opevos derive Pons emt v90S Opovea,
Os epol edxeoOar Achguvig: avTap ) Boos 495
AUTOS Achpinos kal ETrOYLOS € eooerar ael.
erTVHoat T ap eT eLTOL Gon mapa vnt pedaivy
Kal ometoat pakapecot Oeots, of “Odvprov
EYoua LW.
Fe N Se\ / f b) 4 Ka
avTap émnv citoto pedtppovos €& Epov nabe,
v , MRC.) Aigee> Suita: \ Nie / ge Tie!
EpyecOat 0 aw Ewol Kal intathov’ aeioety, 500
ets 6 KE K@pov ixnaOor, iv’ &EeTe miova vor.


358


Ill.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 474-501


_ Then far-working Apollo answered them and said :
« Strangers who once dwelt about wooded Cnossos
but now shall return no more each to his loved city
and fair house and dear wife; here shall you keep
my rich temple that is honoured by many men.
I am the son of Zeus; Apollo is my name: but
you I brought here over the wide gulf of the sea,
-meaning you no hurt; nay, here you shall keep my
rich temple that is greatly honoured among men,
and you shall know the plans of the deathless gods,
and by their will you shall be honoured continually
for all time. And now come, make haste and do
as I say. First loose the sheets and lower the sail,
and then draw the swift ship up upon the land.
Take out your goods and the gear of the straight
ship, and make an altar upon the beach of the sea:
light fire upon it and make an offering of white meal.
Next, stand side by side around the altar and pray:
and in as much as at the first on the hazy sea I
sprang upon the swift ship in the form of a dolphin,
pray to me as Apollo Delphinius; also the altar
itself shall be called Delphinius and overlooking!
for ever. Afterwards, sup beside your dark ship
and pour an offering to the blessed gods who dwell
on Olympus. But when you have put away craving
for sweet food, come with me singing the hymn
Ie Paean (Hail, Healer!), until you come to the
place where you shall keep my rich temple.”


1 The epithets are transferred from the god to his altar.
‘“‘Overlooking” is especially an epithet of Zeus, as in
Apollonius Rhodius ii. 1124.


359


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


t t aA . ’
‘Os pal’ ot & dpa Tod para pev KAVOV 76
é7OovTo.
e , \ va A a \ /
toTla ev TP@TOV KaOecay, AVoaV de Poetas,
€ \ x, ¢ / UA / ¢ /
iotov © toTodeKn TéXATAY TPOTOVOLaLW UdEvTeEs:
éx b€ Kal avtot Baivoy émi pnyyive Oaracons. 505
D) 2 256 \ 4 Ul \ b) \ Ad 3 cf
éx & aXos Hmerpovee Oonv ava vi EpvaavtTo
€ ~ 3 \ , CINE NDR \ /
von éri Wrapwabous, v0 6 EpuaTa pakpa Tavvoocay:
Kal Bapov Toinocay étt pnypive Oaddoons:
a hue) / Wis 7 \ VA
Top © émiKatovTes emt T ANhiTAa AevKA OvOVTES
A b] e b] 4 Z / \ f
evyovl’, as éxéheve, TaptoTdpevot Trept B@pov. 510
, 4 ’ O/- a x \ ff.
doptrov émetO eidovto Gon mapa vni medaivy
Kal ametcav pakdpeoot Oeots, of “OdvsTov
éxovow. ,
ea b) \ if Nie) / 3 ey c/
avrap émret TOTLOS Ka ed) TV0S é& epov Evo,
Bay p men” noxe © apa odiv avaké Atos vids
‘ATOAN@D,
popueyy. ev Xelper ow EXOD, épartou napifor, d15
KANG Kab bye BuBas: ot de f pyocovtes éTOVTO
Kpijres mpos Ilvém Kat inmatnov dEeLoov,
tot te Kpnta@v mraijoves, olai te Motvoa
év aoTnOecow €OnKe Ged perirynpuv aoonv.
aKENTOL O€ AOdov TrpocEeBav TOaiv, aifva 0 ixovTO 520
apvnoov Kat X@pov émnpatov, VO ap emweddov
olKHoELY TONAOLOL TEeTLMEeVOL! AaVOP@TrOLCL:
detée O° ayo adutov Ca@ecov Kal Tlova vyov.
Tov o @plVveTo Oumos évt ornderar gpirowce:
TOV Kal GVELpOpEVOS Kpnrav aryos avTiov n06a- 525
°O, dva, et 6? THrE hirov Kal TaTpioos ains
nyayes’ oUT@ Tov TO O@ hidov ETAETO Dupe:
1 Pierson: guedArAev . . . TeTimevor, MSS.
2 Hermann: @ & éreidn, MSS.
360


Ill.—TO PYTHIAN APOLLO, 502-527


So said Apollo. And they readily harkened to
him and obeyed him. First they unfastened the-
sheets and let down the sail and lowered the mast
by the forestays upon the mast-rest. Then, landing
upon the beach of the sea, they hauled up the ship


| from the water to dry land and fixed long stays


under it. Also they made an altar upon the beach
of the sea, and when they had lit a fire, made an
offering of white meal, and prayed standing around |
the altar as Apollo had bidden them. Then they
took their meal by the swift, black ship, and poured
an offering to the blessed gods who dwell on
Olympus. And when they had put away craving ~
for drink and food, they started out with the lord
Apollo, the son of Zeus, to lead them, holding a
lyre in his hands, and playing sweetly as he stepped
high and featly. So the Cretans followed him to
Pytho, marching in time as they chanted the Ie
Paean after the manner of the Cretan paean-singers
and of those in whose hearts the heavenly Muse has
put sweet-voiced song. With tireless feet they
approached the ridge and straightway came _ to
Parnassus and the lovely place where they were
to dwell honoured by many men. There Apollo
brought them and showed them his most holy
sanctuary and rich temple.

But their spirit was stirred in their dear breasts,
and the master of the Cretans asked him, saying:

““ Lord, since you have brought us here far from
our dear ones and our fatherland,—for so it seemed


3261


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


a \ ra , hoe / ”
TOS Kal vov BLowerOa; TO oe hpdlecOar avwypev.
‘ouTE TpUyNnhopos Hoe y EmHpaTos OUT EevAECLMOY,
oor ato T ev Cocv Kal du avOpe@rotow
3 VA
omaceL. 530
Tovs & émripednoas mpooepn Atos vies “Amro ov
Nyrtoe avOpwrrot, SueTANMOVES, OF peEOMVvAS
a 9/ 3 4 , N ba la
Bovrec? apyadéous Te Tovous Kat atelvea Ovo:
Creay, BY BA Ts aus NPS 2 \ J
pyiovov eros Bu epéw Kat emt ppect Ono,
dcEtTEph par’ ExaoTOS EYOV EV xerpt payatpayv, 535 |
opatew atel pia Ta © addova tavtTa Tapea Tatts
SccaT éuoi K aydywot TEeptkduTa PUN avOp@Trav:
pnov o€ Tpopvhrax oe, debe Je dé Pon av pore
evo ad ayetpomevav Kat Epa (Ovv Te wadLo Tas
[Setxvucbe Ovntotar ov O€ pect SéEo Dewiota. 539°
et O€ TLS Abpacins ov TreigEeTAat, AANX aroyHnoet'| 539°
né TL THUGLOY eros ETOETAL HE TL Epyov 540
e/ 3 A 1A b \ An 5 ,
UBpis 0, ) Oéuts oti KaTabyynTov avOpwrrar,
arrose eres? Upuiy anudvtopes avopes Ecovtat,
TOV UT avayKain OedpuncerO Hhuata TaVTa.
ov lA 4 \ \ ‘s a 7 ;
elpnTat ToL TWavTa: av oé dpeci anot PuvAaEaL.
Kai ov pév ott yatpe, Ards Kat Antovds vie» 545
avTap éy@ Kal ceto Kal AAANS pvHTOM aoLoNs.


IV
EIy EPMHN


‘Epunv tuvet, Movoa, Acos cat Masadoos vior,
KvaraAnvns pedéovta kal “Apxadins todupnrou,
dyyerov alavatav éprovviov, ov téxe Maia,

1 Allen suggests these two lines to fill the lacuna.


362


IV._TO HERMES, 1-3


good to your heart,—tell us now how we shall live.
That we would know of you. This land is not to be
desired either for vineyards or for pastures so that
we can live well thereon and also minister to
men.”

Then Apollo, the son of Zeus, smiled upon them
and said: “Foolish mortals and poor drudges are
you, that you seek cares and hard toils and straits!
Kasily will I tell you a word and set it in your
hearts. Though each one of you with knife in>
hand should slaughter sheep continually, yet would
you always have abundant store, even all that the
glorious tribes of men bring here for me. But
guard you my temple and receive the tribes of
men that gather to this place, and especially show
mortal men my will, and do you keep righteousness
in your heart. But if any shall be disobedient and
pay no heed to my warning, or if there shall be
any idle word or deed and outrage as is common
among mortal men, then other men shall be your
masters and with a strong hand shall make you
subject for ever. All has been told you: do you
keep it in your heart.”

And so, farewell, son of Zeus and Leto; but I will
remember you and another hymn also.


IV
TO HERMES
_ Muss, sing of Hermes, the son of Zeus and Maia,
lord of Cyllene and Arcadia rich in flocks, the luck-


bringing messenger of the immortals whom Maia
bare, the rich-tressed nymph, when she was joined in


363


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


voppn euT OKA, Mos, Atos év pinornre pyeioa,

aidoin: paKapav dé Oeay nrevae’ Operon,
av pov éow vaiovca TANT KLOD, evda Kpoviey
vumpn eum oka pLoryéo KETO VUKTOS apony@,
oppa KaTa yAuKVS UIrvos Exot NEvK@NEVOY " ‘Hpnyp,
AjGov aBavarovs te Geovs Ounrous T avOpeTous.
GX OTe O17 peydhovo Avos voos eSereneiTo,
TH Oe 709 O€KaTOS pects ovpave ET TIPLE TO,
cis TE pows ryaryev aplonud Te Epya TETUKTO®
Kal TOT éyeivaro Tatoa TOUT poToy, alpuhowntny,
ANLaTiip eAaTHpa Boor, HYNTOP: ovetpon,
VUKTOS orannr ipa, TUANOOKOY, O OS TAX’ EwedAeV
apdhavéew KrUTA Epya pet ADavaTtotot Ocotow.
GOS yeyovas wéow Huate eye apiten,
_ €o-Trépos Bods Kewpev ExnBorou ‘ArOX@VOS
TeTpaor TH mpotépn, TH pv TEKE TOTVLA Mata.
Os Kal, érresd1) pntpos am’ abavarav Pope yulov,
ovxéTt Onpov ExeltTo pévav Lep@ evi Nikva,
aXN 0 avaitas fyre. Boas “Amro vos
ovoov brrepBatvov trynpedéos avT poo.
eva Xéduv evpov EKTOATO peuptov dd Bor:
‘Epens Tot mpeticta Yéduy TERTHVAT GOLOOV
H pa ot avteBornoev érr’ avrgcinot Ovpyat
BooKxopuevn tpoTapotbe Sopav éptOndéa troiny,
cavra woalv Batvovaa: Aros 6 éptovvios vies
abpnoas éyéXacce Kal avtixa wovOov EevTre

2p Borov 709 [Lob peer ovo Lov" OvUK over ago.

Xaipe, puny é époecoa, XopoituTe, datos € eraipn,
aonacin Tpopavetca: modev 700€ Kadov aOupma
aloo bor paKov ésaoo | YéXdus Opert (oovca;
GND’ olow a és bapa. NaBov: Opedos TL Ol éoon,
ovd aTroTiLnow ov O€ “Ee TPWTLTTOV OVHATELS


1 Tyrrell: éoot, MSS.
364


10


15


20


a he ee


25°


30


30


IV.—TO HERMES, 4-35


love with Zeus,—a shy goddess, for she avoided = _


the company of the blessed gods, and lived within a
deep, shady cave. There the son of Cronos used to
lie with the rich-tressed nymph, unseen by deathless
gods and mortal men, at dead of night that sweet
sleep might hold white-armed Hera fast. And when
the purpose of great Zeus was fulfilled, and the
tenth moon with her was fixed in heaven, she was
delivered and a notable thing was come to pass.
For then she bare a son, of many shifts, blandly cun-
ning, a robber, a cattle driver, a bringer of dreams, |
-a watcher by night, a thief at the gates, one who
was soon to show forth wonderful deeds among the
deathless gods. Born with the dawning, at mid-day
he played on the lyre, and in the evening he stole
the cattle of far-shooting Apollo on the fourth day
of the month ; for on that day queenly Maia bare him.
So soon as he had leaped from his mother’s heavenly
womb, he lay not long waiting in his holy cradle, but
he sprang up and sought the oxen of Apollo. But as
he stepped over the threshold of the high-roofed
eave, he found a tortoise there and gained endless
delight. For it was Hermes who first made the
tortoise a singer. The creature fell in his way at
the courtyard gate, where it was feeding on the rich
grass before the dwelling, waddling along. When
he saw it, the luck-bringing son of Zeus laughed
and said :

“An omen of great luck for me so soon! I do
not slight it. Hail, comrade of the feast, lovely
in shape, sounding at the dance! With joy I meet
you! Where got you that rich gaud for covering, that
spangled shell—a tortoise living in the mountains?
But I will take and carry you within: you shall
help me and I will do you no disgrace, though first


365


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


oiKou Bérepov ElVaL, eT el BraBepov TO Obpnpiy
7 yap emnruoins TOAUTEMOVOS & EO EAL expa
Caova * ny dé Odvys, TOTE Kev pda KaNOV aetbors.

"Os a ap ep: Kab Nepaty ape apporepya wy aelpas
any elow KLE Sopa pepav épatesvov aOuppua. 40
évd avaTnpacas 1 yAuddve ToALolto otOnpov
aioy’ eSeropnoey oper K@oto XENOVIS.
as o Om-OT” @KU VOnUa Sud oTéEpPVOLO TEPHoN
avépos, dv Te Oaperal éTisTpapaot pmepLuvas, |
7 OTe OwwnO@ow am ob0arpav auapvyat, 45 |
Os aw em 0s Te Kat Epyov €p1}deTo KUVOLLOS Epps.
THEE 6 ap év HET poLar TQPLOV dovakas KANAMOLO
Tmevpnvas bua vara dtd p pivovo NerAovns.
appl be dépua tavucce Boos Tpamiderow € ENT L
Ka TIX ELS évéO nk , emt dé Curyov papev audoiv, 50
éemra be Onrurépov” o oLaov eravvaoaro yvopods.
avrap éqret 61) Tebge Aupyy,® € éparervov aduppa,
TAK PD émeupntice KATA pepo: y & wo XELpos
o epoanreov KovaSnae Beds O° U0 KaXov dedev _
é& avrooxedins TELPOLEVOS, NUTE Kovpor 55 |
nBnTat Garinat Tapar3ora KEPTOMEOUGLY,
appt Ata Kpovidny Kal Mauda KadAtTrédtXor,
as m-d.pos apiverkoy € éTatpein PiroTHTE,
hv T avToU ryeveny ovowaKAUTOV eFovoudtov"
dppuTohous TE yépatpe Kal ayaa Sapara viudns 60
Kab Tpimrobas Kata, oiKov é eT NETAVOUS TE A€BnTas. |

Kat Ta peD ovv HEeLde, TA Oe ppeov ada pevoiva.
Kat THY perv KaTEOnKE hépwy LEep@ Evi NiKva,


1 Tr.: avarnanoas, MSS.
2 Antigonus Carystius : Tumpayvors, MSS.
3 Guttmann: dépwr,


— 366


yatr Beeps mt


IV.—TO HERMES, 36-63


of all you must profit me. It is better to be at home:
harm may come out of doors. Living, you shall be a
spell against mischievous witchcraft !; but if you die,
then you shall make sweetest song.”

Thus speaking, he took up the tortoise in both
hands and went back into the house carrying his
charming toy. Then he cut off its limbs and scooped
out the marrow of the mountain-tortoise with a scoop
of grey iron. As a swift thought darts through the
heart of a man when thronging cares haunt him, or
as bright glances flash from the eye, so glorious’


' Hermes planned both thought and deed at once.


He cut stalks of reed to measure and fixed them,
fastening their ends across the back and through the
shell of the tortoise, and then stretched ox hide
all over it by his skill. Also he put in the horns
and fitted a cross-piece upon the two of them, and
stretched seven strings of sheep-gut. And when
he had finished the lyre, a lovely play-thing, he
took it and proved each string in turn with the
key. At the touch of his hand it sounded marvel-
lously; and, as he tried it, the god sang sweet
random snatches, even as youths bandy taunts at
festivals. He sang of Zeus the son of Cronos and
neat-shod Maia, the converse which they had before
in the -comradeship of love, telling all the glorious
tale of his own begetting. He celebrated, too, the
handmaids of the nymph, and her bright home, and
the tripods all about the house, and the abundant
cauldrons.

But while he was singing of all these, his heart
was bent on other matters. And he took the hollow

1 Pliny notices the efficacy of the flesh of a tortoise against


witchcraft. In Geoponica i. 14. 8 the living tortoise is
prescribed as a charm to preserve vineyards from hail.


367


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


/ / a aay, fa) b) /
popmryya yAapupynv: 0 8 dpa cpevdv éparivov —
ANTO KATA TKOTINY EVMdEOS x pLEyaPOLO 65
€ / / b \ > \ , «/ A
oppatvwy Sorov aimvy évi dpeciv, ota TE POTES
dyrnTat Ssémrovat pedaivns vuKTos ev wpn.

‘9
Héduos ev &duve kata yOoves ‘Oneavovde

3 ea a) 44, Xe > N bY gee: LAS A
avtotoiv @ tmmoiot Kai Gppacw: avrap ap HKpyns
IIvepins adixave Oéwv Gpea oxtoevta, 70
By 4 n / / 4 rie 7
evla Oeay paxadpwv Boes awBpotot avy eyecKov
BooKkomevat Netw@vas Aknpactous, éparetvovs.

a / / e?7 +7 P] ’

Ttav ToTe Mauddos vios, €evaKxomos ApyerpovTns,
TEVTHKOVT WYEANS aTreTaLVETO BoOvS épLpvKous. om
TravodLas 6 HArAavVE S14 Yrauabadea yapov 75
iyve amoatpéwas: dodins & ov ANGeTO TEXVNS
avTia Toimoas oTAds, TAS TpdaOev ric Bev,

\ > + f \ o » oN
tas © émiev mpoobev’ Kata 6 éumadiv avTos

éRauve.
cavoara © avtixa piiv' émi wapabots adinow,
adpact nd davonta oiétrexe, Oavpata épya, 80 J
TULployoVv pwupikas Kal wupotwoedéas dCous.

A f 4 VA bY ef
T@Y TOTE TUVOHaAaS VEeoONAEOS AyKaXOV VANS
aBraBéws Uro Toaoly édncato cdvoada Kovda

n / nina id
avTotolw TeTaXoLoL TA KVOLMOS ApyespovTNs
4 , e , bd ys 9 )~
éotrace Iliepinfev odortopinv adeyvvev,” 85

A > 9 / \ eas > ,
old T érreryopmevos SodLYnV OOOV, AVTOTPOTHGAS.+

\ \ , Sah VA b) fas b \

Tov dé yépwv évonce Séuwv avOovoav adrwnpy
e/ / 9 9 \ ,

Léwevov tredtovee du ‘Oyynatov NEKXETTOLNV:
1 Postgate: eprver, MSS.
2 Windisch : adrcelvwy, MSS.
368


IV.—TO HERMES, 64-88


lyre and laid it in his sacred cradle, and sprang from ———~


the sweet-smelling hall to a watch-place, pondering
sheer trickery in his heart—deeds such as knavish
folk pursue in the dark night-time ; for he longed to
taste flesh.

The Sun was going down beneath the earth towards
Ocean with his horses and chariot when Hermes
came hurrying to the shadowy mountains of Pieria,
where the divine cattle of the blessed gods had their
steads and grazed the pleasant, unmown meadows. -
Of these the Son of Maia, the sharp-eyed slayer of
- Argus then cut off from the herd fifty loud-lowing
kine, and drove them straggling-wise across a sandy
place, turning their hoof-prints aside. Also, he
bethought him of a crafty ruse and reversed the
marks of their hoofs, making the front behind and
the hind before, while he himself walked the other
way.! Then he wove sandals with wicker-work by
the sand of the sea, wonderful things, unthought
of, unimagined; for he mixed together tamarisk
and myrtle-twigs, fastening together an armful of
their fresh, young wood, and tied them, leaves and
all securely under his feet as light sandals... That
brushwood the glorious Slayer of Argus plucked in
Pieria as he was preparing for his journey, making
shift ? as one making haste for a long journey.

But an old man tilling his flowering vineyard saw
him as he was hurrying down the plain through


1 Hermes makes the cattle walk backwards way, so that
they seem to be going towards the meadow instead of leaving
it (cp. 1. 345); he himself walks in the normal manner,
relying on his sandals as a disguise.

2 Such seems to be the meaning indicated by the context,
though the verb is taken by Allen and Sikes to mean, ‘‘to
be like oneself,” and so ‘‘ to be original.”


369


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


TOV T™pOTEpOS mpoaédn Mains epucvd€os vios*
ad) Yyépov, Oo TE pura CKATTELS EITLKAMTUAOS
@[L0US, 790
7) Tohvowvycets, evT adv Tae Tavra dépyor,
[et xe TLOn, para TEP He pn pEVOS év ppect ono. +} 9i*
Kal TE iSav by idov eivar Kat Koos axovcas,
Kal ovyay bTe pH TL KATABAaTTN TO TOV AUTO.
Toaoov pas TUvEreve * Booy idOcpa Kapnva.
Toa S don oxldevta Kal avA@VaS KEeNAdELVOUS 95
Kal weot av Oemoevra Sinhace KVELLOS “Eppa.
oppvain oe emLKOUpOS em aveTo Satpovin vue,
y TELOY, TAXA 5 dpOpos éyiyveto Snptoepyos:
) 6€ Véov CKOTLNV mpoceBraaro dia Lekyvn,
IIladvXravtos Ovyarno Meyapunseioao avaxTos. 100
Thwos em’ "AXderov trotrapwov Atos aXKLpLOS VLOS
DoiBov “AwodAAwvos Bods HrAagTEV elpupET@TOVS.
ax piyres 0 ixavov ém avALov bypipehad pov
Kall Anvovs _mpoTapoley a dpuTr peTréOs Netpavos.
eve emrel ev Botavns érrepopBet Bods é epywuKous 105
Kab Tas jpoev cwehaccey € éS avhov ab poas oveas,
Awrov EPETET O[Levas nO eponevta, KUTrELpOV"
cw 6 | epoper EvUha ToAXNd, wupos 6 émewaieTo


TEU.
Sadvns aryaov dfov EX@v is aLonpe@
” *


cp pevov év mahapy” dmvUTO 82 Deppos avTun 110

“Eppas TOL TPOTLTTA Tmupyia TUp T avedaxe.

TONNG O€ KaYKaVa KaNa KaTovoai@ € évt Bob pw

ovAa AaBov éréOnKev ernetavd: Aadpteto de
Grok


TNNOGE divcay ieloa TUPOS peya davopévolo.
1 Translator. 2 Demetrius: dacly éoeve, MSS.


379


IV.—TO HERMES, 80-114


grassy Onchestus. So the Son of Maia began and


said to him :

«“ Old man, digging about your vines with bowed
shoulders, surely you shall have much wine when
all these bear fruit, if you obey me and strictly
remember not to have seen what you have seen,
and not to have heard what you have heard, and
to keep silent when nothing of your own is harmed.’

When he had said this much, he hurried the strong
cattle on together : through many shadowy mountains
and echoing gorges and flowery plains glorious
Hermes drove them. And now the divine night,
his dark ally, was mostly passed, and dawn that
sets folk to work was quickly coming on, while
bright Selene, daughter of the lord Pallas, Megamedes’
son, had just climbed her watch-post, when the
strong Son of Zeus drove the wide-browed cattle of
Phoebus Apollo to the river Alpheus. And they
came unwearied to the high-roofed byres and the
drinking-troughs that were before the noble meadow.
Then, after he had well-fed the loud-bellowing cattle
with fodder and driven them into the byre, close-
packed and chewing lotus and dewy galingal, he
gathered a pile of wood and began to seek the art
of fire. He chose a stout laurel branch and trimmed
it with the knife . . .1 held firmly in his hand: and
the hot smoke rose up. For it was Hermes who
first invented fire-sticks and fire. Next he took
many dried sticks and piled them thick and plenty
in asunken trench: and flame began to glow,
spreading afar the blast of fierce-burning fire.

1 Kuhn points out that there is a lacuna here. In 1. 109
the borer is described, but the friction of this upon the fire-


block (to which the phrase ‘“‘held firmly” clearly belongs) ©
must also have been mentioned.


371


B B


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


"Op pa dé Tip avéxare Bin KAVTOD ‘H¢aterovo, 115
Toppa 8 bmoBpvxous ENLKAS Bods etNKe Oupate
d0Las dyxe TU pos" Stvapus b€ ot éaomeETo TON.
apport épas & é€ml vata xapal Bare puovomcas:
dykdiver ' O éxvAuvoe Ot atavas TETOPNT AS.
eoyo Oo epyov éTrale TAMwV Kpea Tiova Onu@’ 120
OnTA 8 cpu oBeoion TeTrAp Leva Souparéouae |
capkas omod Kat VOTA yEepdo jwa Kal péhav aipa
epypwevov év yoNdbecot' Ta © avTod xeit él

Xepns:
pevovs oy eferavucce KaTATTUpEND evi meT py),
@s éTt viv Ta MeTacoa TohvXpoveoe mepvace, 125
On pov 67) pera TAUTA Kal dicpeTov" avTap emrerTa
Epps Xappoppov Eipvcaro miova épya
Net@ él TAT LOVE Kab éoxioe dadexa potpas
KAnporranels' Tércov 8é yépas mpocéOnxev
exdorn.
ev? ootns Kpedov jipaaoato KVOLLOS Epps: 130
06 pn yap pee éTELpe Kal al dvatov TEP eovTa
moet GN’ 006 @S ol émretOeTo Gupos a arynvep,
KaL TE pan (petpovTe, mephvy t lephs KaTa OeLpnys.
GNNG TA Hev kareOncev és av voy dypipérapor,
On Lov Kal Kpea TONG, HETHOpa o ainy ayaetpe, 135
onua véns pops: éml 6é Evha KayKav ayelpas *
oUNOTFOO , OVAOKAPHVA TUPOS KATEOAMVAT AUTUMN.


1 Gemoll: éyxatvwy, MSS. 2 Tlgen: delpas, MSS,


1 The cows being on their sides on the ground, Hermes
bends their heads back towards their flanks and so can reach
their backbones.

2 O. Miiller thinks the ‘‘ hides” were a stalactite forma-
tion in the ‘‘ Cave of Nestor” near Messenian Pylos,—though
the cave of Hermes is near the Alpheus (1. 139). Others


372


IV.—TO HERMES, 115-137


And while the strength of glorious Hephaestus ~~


was beginning to kindle the fire, he dragged out two
lowing, horned cows close to the fire ; ; for great
strength was with him. He threw them both
panting upon their backs on the ground, and rolled
them on their sides, bending their necks over,! and
pierced their vital chord. Then he went on from
task to task: first he cut up the rich, fatted meat,
and pierced it with wooden spits, and roasted flesh
and the honourable chine and the paunch full of
dark blood all together. He laid them there upon
the ground, and spread out the hides on a rugged
rock: and so they are still there many ages after-
wards, a long, long time after all this, and are
continually. Next glad-hearted Hermes dragged
the rich meats he had prepared and put them on
a smooth, flat stone, and divided them into twelve
portions distributed by lot, making each portion
wholly honourable. Then glorious Hermes longed
for the sacrificial meat, for the sweet savour wearied
him, god though he was; nevertheless his proud
heart was not prevailed upon to devour the flesh,
although he greatly desired. But he put away
the fat and all the flesh in the high-roofed_ byre,
placing them high up to be a token of his youthful
theft. And after that he gathered dry sticks and
utterly destroyed with fire all the hoofs and all the
heads.


suggest that actual skins were shown as relics before some
cave near Triphylian Pylos.

> Gemoll explains that Hermes, having offered all the
meat as sacrifice to the Twelve Gods, remembers that he
himself as one of them must be content with the savour
instead of the substance of the sacrifice. Can it be that by
eating he would have forfeited the position he claimed as
one of the Twelve Gods?


373


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Avtap émet Tor TdvTa KaTa xpéos HvuceE
Salwov,
cavoana pmev mpoenkev és “AXdevov Badvdiwny:
avOpakiny & éudpave, Koviy 6 audOvuve péerawvav 140
Tavvuxtos’ KaNov b€ hows KaTéAapTre LEeAHvNS.
KvaraAnvns 8 aivy adtis apixeto Ota Kapnva
6pOptos, OVSE TL OF CoALYAS OOD avTEBOANGEV
ovte Oeov paxapaov ovte Ovntav avOpoToar,
ovde KUvES AeAdKOVTO: ALos & éprovvios Epuns 145
doxpadets peyapovo da hay. O pov éduvev ‘
aupy omopwy EVANLYKLOS, HUT opixny.
tOvoas 6 _avTpov eEixero mova ynov
Ka Toot TpoPiBav: ov yap KTUTEV, woTrED eT
ovoet.
ET TUMEVOS oe apa MKvOV eT NETO KUOLUOS ‘Eppas 150
oTapyavov app’ @ [LOLS eLhUpLEVOs, NUTE TEKVOV
VINT LOV, év Tmahapnot TED iryviot Aalpos ad bpov
KetTo, Xeduy eparany én apioTEpa XeLpos éépyov.
untépa S ovK dp édnOe Oeav Peds eizré Te po0ov-
Timre aU, TOLKLAOUNTA, TOKEV TOOE VUKTOS eV
apn ~ 155
EPXM» avaideiny € ETT LEL EVE; vou € [Lan ole
TAN apnxava Oerua Tepb TEupHow eXovT a,
ape yet vmTO YEepaot SveK mpobupoto Tepe ew
oe pepovTa petagv KAT dyKea Py rnTevoety.
ies TAN? wEeyadnv Fé TATNp épuTevae pépipvav 160
Ovytots wo perotce kat adavatotot Oeoior.
Thy & ‘Eppijs pvOouow apet Beto KEPOANEOLG U
prep eH» Ti [LE TAUTA dediaKedu,' NUTE TEKVOV
VHT LOV, OS PAAA TAdpa META Ppecly aicuAa ot0E,


1 Pierson : tirvoxea, MSS.


374


IV.—TO HERMES, 133-164


And when the god had duly finished all, he ae


threw his sandals into deep-eddying Alpheus, and
quenched the embers, covering the black ashes with
sand, and so spent the night while Selene’s soft
light shone down. Then the god went straight
back again at dawn to the bright crests of Cyllene,
and no one met him on the long journey either of
the blessed gods or mortal men, nor did any dog
bark. And luck-bringing Hermes, the son of Zeus,


_ passed edgeways through the key-hole of the hall like


the autumn breeze, even as mist: straight through
the cave he went and came to the rich inner
chamber, walking softly, and making no noise as one
might upon the floor. Then glorious Hermes went
hurriedly to his cradle, wrapping his swaddling
clothes about his shoulders as though he were a
feeble babe, and lay playing with the covering
about his knees; but at his left hand he kept close
his sweet lyre.

But the god did not pass unseen by the goddess
his mother; but she said to him: “ How now, you
rogue! Whence come you back so at night-time,
you that wear shamelessness as a garment? And
now I surely believe the son of Leto will soon have
you forth out of doors with unbreakable cords
about your ribs, or you will live a rogue’s life in
the glens robbing by whiles. Go to, then; your
father got you to be a great worry to mortal
men and deathless gods.”’

Then Hermes answered her with crafty words:
“Mother, why do you seek to frighten me like a
feeble child whose heart knows few words of blame,


375


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


TrapBaréov, Kal pntpos vmadelootKev evuTras; 165
avTap eyo Téxuns émeBHoopat, h TLS apioTn,
f Jr ato \ \ } f ; Oe @ A.
Bovkorewv EME Kal oe OvawmepEes* ovde Deolor
VOL per aOavatotow ad@pynror Kal AaNtoToL
avTov THE pevovTes aveFopel’, as od KedEvELS.
BérTepov Huata wavTa pet ABavdtors oapitev, 170
/ 3 f / A \ QA
TAOVGLOV, ADVELOV, TOAVANLOV, 7) KATA COOMA
dvtpw év nepoevtt Oaaccéwev? apt de TUUHS,
> \ A i (d 3 lp e b] f
KaY® THS oains eTLBNoomat, nS TEP ATrOAXNOV.
et O€ KE (1) OMNOL TATHP EL0S, H TOL eywryeE
/ f J yA 3
Teipnaw, Sivapat, PnANTEwWY Gpyamos cival. 175
ei O€ we épevvnoes Antovs Epixud€éos vios,
BY A € \ A ahs 3 4
GAXO Ti Ol KAL petCov oLomat avTLBorAHo Ev.
ely yap és IvOava péyay Sopuov avtitopncwr:
évOev ares Tpitrodas TEpLKANAEAS noe NEBNTAS
mopOjow Kat \KpucoD, didas T aidava otdnpov 180
Kal TmohNay eo Ora: ovo oped, ai Kk ’ edyaOa.
“Os ot ot pev p émréeoot T pos aNAHAOUS aryopevor,
vos T airytorxovo Atos Kat Twotvia Maia. —
‘Has o npuyevera hows Ovynroict pepovoa
@pvuT at “OKeavoto Babuppoov- avTap AmroANwv
‘Oyxnorovs abixave KLOV, TOAUI/paTOV aro 0s (186
aryvov epiapapayou Daunoxov: év0a yepovTa
Kvedahov EVE ve“ovTa Tap é&o0ov Epkeos args."
TOV TPOTEpos mpoaéhyn Antovs épuxvdeos vLOs’

a Yépov, ‘Oyxne Toi Barodpoe TOLNEVTOS, 190
Bois aTr0 Teepins Subj pevos éevOad ixdva, .
Tacas Onreias, Tacas Kepdeoow EXLKTGS,

5] 5) lA ce \ n b) f : aA > p We) 7
é& ayédys: 0 6€ Tavpos éBdoKeTO povvos am aAK@V
! Ludwich : BovAevwv, MSS. ae
2 Tr.: mape& 6500 €pxos dAwns, MSS.


376


IV.—_TO HERMES, 165-193


a fearful babe that fears its mother’s scolding?
Nay, but I will try whatever plan is best, and so
feed myself and you continually. We will not
be content to remain here, as you bid, alone of all
the gods unfee'd with offerings and prayers. Better
to live in fellowship with the deathless gods con-
tinually, rich, wealthy, and enjoying stores of grain,
than to sit always in a gloomy cave : and, as regards
honour, I too will enter upon the rite that Apollo has.
If my father will not give it me, I will seek—and I
am able—to be a prince of robbers. And if Leto’s
most glorious son shall seek me out, I think another
and a greater loss will befall him. For I will go to
Pytho to break into his great house, and will plunder
therefrom splendid tripods, and cauldrons, and gold,
and plenty of bright iron, and much apparel; and
you shall see it if you will.”

With such words they spoke together, the son of
Zeus who holds the aegis, and the lady Maia. Now
Eros the early born was rising from deep-flowing

cean, bringing light to men, when Apollo, as he
went, came to Onchestus, the lovely grove and
sacred place of the loud-roaring Holder of the
Earth. There he found an old man grazing his
beast along the pathway from his court-yard fence,
and the all-glorious Son of Leto began and said to
him.

“Old man, weeder! of grassy Onchestus, I am
come here from Pieria seeking cattle, cows all of
them, all with curving horns, from my herd. The
black bull was grazing alone away from the rest,


1 Int. ‘ thorn-plucker.”
377


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Kuaveos’ Yapotrol O€ KUVES KaTOTLA OEY ErrovTO
TEcoapeEs, HUTE HATES, OMOPpoves: of wev EXerhOey, 195
ot Te KUVES 6 TE TADPOS: 6 OH Trepl Oabwa TéTUKTAL
Tal 0 éBav nerLoLo véovy KaTASVOMEVOLO |
EK HANAKOD AELL@VOS ATO YAUKEPOLO VOMOLO.
TAUTA [OL ELTE, YEPALE TAAALYEVES, EL TOU OTWTAS
avépa tatoo émt Bova divatpnacovta KéAEvOov. 200
Tov & 0 yépav pvOorow apwetBopevos mpocéertrev™
® hiros, apyaréov wév, Bo OfOarpotcw tdotTOo,
mavtTa Aéyewv* ToAXOL yap obo TPHTTOVGLY OdiTAL,
TOV Ob MEV KAKA TONAA pEeUaoTes, OF SE Mar eaOra
poraow: Karerov | dé Sarpmevat éotw Exactov: 205
avTap éy@ mpomay 7pap és nédov KaTAOLYTA
ECKATTOV TeEpt ryouvoy aXwns olvoTrédoto:
Taide. O° eOoka, Peptore, capes ° OUK 0lda, von at,
os TLS O Tats, dua Bovaly évxpatpnow omnoes
VITLOS, eiye Oe papdov- emia Tpopadny o éBaduler. 210
eLomicw o aveEepy€, apn 5 éyev avtiov auTe.

7) po yépwv: 6 dé Odoaov odov Kie wor

aKkoucas’

olw@vov © évoet TavvaiTTEpon, auTika O éyvo
pmrntay yeyawrta Atos watda Kpovievos.
eT oUMEVMS & niEev ava& Avos vios “AmoAA@vV 215
és TIvXov nyabenv 6167 wEVvos eihirobas Bods,
moppupen vepeny KEKANUULMEVOS evpéas @{LOUS"
ixved T elo evonrev “ExnGoros et7ré te vor:

*Q T OTOL, 7 peya wits TOO opOarpotory

opdpmar-

ixpea bev TAOE 1 éoTh Body opboxpatpawy, 220
aNNa Tad TETPATTAL és aapodeov Aewpava:
Bypata & ob7’ avdpos TadE yiryveTas oUTE YUVAaLKOS


378


IV.—_TO HERMES, 194-222


but fierce-eyed hounds followed the cows, four of
them, all of one mind, like men. These were left
behind, the dogs and the bull—which is a great
marvel; but the cows strayed out of the soft
meadow, away from the pasture when the sun was
just going down. Now tell me this, old man born
long ago: have you seen. one passing along behind
those cows ?”’

Then the old man answered him and said: “ My
son, it is hard to tell all that one’s eyes see; for
many wayfarers pass to and fro this way, some bent
on much evil, and some on good: it is difficult to know
each one. However, I was digging about my plot
of vineyard all day long until the sun went down,
and I thought, good sir, but I do not know for
certain, that I marked a child, whoever the child
was, that followed long-horned cattle—an infant
who had a staff and kept walking from side to side:
he was driving them backwards way, with their
‘heads towards him.”

So said the eld man. And when Apollo heard
this report, he went yet more quickly on his way,
and presently, seeing a long-winged bird, he knew
at once by that omen that the thief was the child of
Zeus the son of Cronos. So the lord Apollo, son of
Zeus, hurried on to goodly Pylos seeking his
shambling oxen, and he had his broad shoulders
covered with a dark cloud. But when the Far-
Shooter perceived the tracks, he cried: ©

“Qh, oh! Truly this is a great marvel that my eyes
behold! These are indeed the tracks of straight-
horned oxen, but they are turned backwards towards
the flowery meadow. But these others are not the
footprints of man or woman or grey wolves or bears


379


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


OUTE AVKOV TTOALMY OUT APKT@Y OUTE NEOVTOV:
ouTE TL Kevtavpov Aacravbxevos ENO [aL eivat,
os mus Tota TENwWPAa Supe Toot KAPTANL MOLE LY" 225
aiva pev evdev éSoi0, Ta & aivorep évOev odoio.
“Os etreav iEev dvak Atos vids *ATrodX@V: ©

Kuaagjuns & adixavev dpos KaTacimevov bry,
TETPNS €S Kevd parva, Babvcxiov, ev0a Te vipdy
apBpoain ehoxeuoe Avos maida Kpoviwvos. 230]
66un 0 imepoecoa dz’ ovpeos nyabéoto |
KLOVATO, TOAAG O€ HAA TavavTroda BoaKeTo Tony. |}
eva TOTE oMEvOwY KaTeBnaato Aauwov ovoov :
SPOR és mje poev exatnBonros avTos “ArroA@D, |

Tov & as oy évonae Atos kat Maddos vids _—.235)
YwOouevov Tept Bovolv éExnBorov A7mroAA@Va,
ondpyay éow Katéduve Ounevt > nvTE TOAAHY
Tpéemverv avOpaxinyv UAns aT0d0s auchena dur ret,
Os ‘Eppas ‘Exdepyov ideo aveevnen * éaUTOV.
év © oniry@ ovvéhacce Kapn vetpas TE mooas Te, 240)
a pa VEONNOVTOS, T poKAahevpLEvos pOvpov v Umvov,
eypiao wv éTeov ye Kehuy 6 UTrO pacXany ele.
yo S| ove nyvoinae Atos Kal Anrovs viOS
voppny T oupeiny TEpLKAAAEA Kal pirov ULOV,
TAL oNuyov, dodins cihupevov € evTpoTingt. 245
TAN THVAS 5 ava TAVTa peux ov peyarovo dopoto
Tpets GOUTOUS a ave@ye NaBov Krqioa pacuyny
VEKT AOS eum hetous nO apBpoacins € eparewhs:
TONNOS O€ Xpua os TE Kab apyupos évoov & EKELTO,
TONG dé powiKoerTa Kal apyupa, eiuara VULNS, 2508
oia Geav MaKadpov Lepol Sopor € évTOS exouow:
évO’ érret é&epéetve pwuyovs peyadoto Sopovo
Anroidns, utv0ocot mpoonvda Kvdisov Eppnv:

1 Lohsee: adréewvey, MSS. | |


‘


380


IV.—_TO HERMES, 223-253


or lions, nor do I think they are the tracks of a
rough-maned Centaur—whoever it be that with
swift feet makes such monstrous footprints; won-
derful are the tracks on this side of the way, but
yet more wonderful are those on that.”

When he had so said, the lord Apollo, the Son of
Zeus hastened on and came to the forest-clad
mountain of Cyllene and the deep-shadowed cave in
the rock where the divine nymph brought forth the
child of Zeus who is the son of Cronos. A sweet
odour spread over the lovely hill, and many thin-
shanked sheep were grazing on the grass. Then
far-shooting Apollo himself stepped down in haste
over the stone threshold into the dusky cave.

Now when the Son of Zeus and Maia saw Apollo
in a rage about his cattle, he snuggled down in his
fragrant swaddling-clothes ; and as wood-ash covers
over the deep embers of tree-stumps, so Hermes
cuddled himself up when he saw the Far-Shooter.
He squeezed head and hands and feet together in a
small space, like a new born child seeking sweet
sleep, though in truth he was wide awake, and he
kept his lyre under his armpit. But the Son of
Leto was aware and failed not to perceive the
beautiful mountain-nymph and her dear son, albeit
a little child and swathed so craftily. He peered
in every corner of the great dwelling and, taking
a bright key, he opened three closets full of nectar
and lovely ambrosia. And much gold and silver was
stored in them, and many garments of the nymph,
some purple and some silvery white, such as are kept
in the sacred houses of the blessed gods. ‘Then,
after the Son of Leto had searched out the recesses
of the great house, he spake to glorious Hermes :


381


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


*Q mai, bs év Nixv@ KaTdaKeal, pave poe Bobs
Oaooov érel raya vat Stora opel’ ov KATA Koo pov. 255)
pirpo yap oe AaB é € Taprapov » nepoevTa,
és Copoy aivomopov Kat aunyavov: ovdé ce unTHpP
5) / 2O\ \ 5) / 5) es MY 4
és hdos ovdé TATHP avadvceTAal, GAN VITO yain
éppnoes ONjtiyoLoe peT avopdaty Hyepovevav.
Tov & “Epyjs wt0orow apeiBero xepdaréotor 260
Antoidsn, tiva Todtov atnvéa po0ov eetras; |
\ A 3 s- V4 b) AN es ,
Kal Bods aypavrous dtfnwevos éevOad txavers;

> 3 3 if 3 BA lal a
OvK ioov, ov TUdOUNY, OVK AANOU pUOOY aKovCA'
ovuK av pnvicalm, OVK av unVUTpOV apoimuny
ovdé Bow éXaTHpl, KpaTald Poti, éorKa. 265

3 sf NX BY a VA A blA VA |
OUK €“ov Epyov TOUTO, Tapos SE wot AANA peunreEV*
darvos émot ye péunre Kal nuetépns yada untpos
omdpyava T aud wporow xe Kal Oeppa NoeT pa.
pay TLS TOUTO mvdorro, moOev TOOE VELKOS ere On:

Kab Kev on peya Gatvpa pet abavatoor yevouro, 270
Taioa veov yeyaara OLexK 7 poO porto mepijoat

Bovotv é em * aypavhotee’ TO 0 ampeTréws dryopevers.
Os yevouny, amanol 6€ modes, tTenxela S tro


Ov.
es 6 €0édets, maTpos Kepadnv peéyav OpKov
opodpat:


pa) pev eyo HT avros UTLoVoOMat ai cos eiva, 275 |
pyre TW adv Om wT a _Boay Kom ov UpeTepawy,
at Teves ai Boes eto TO be Khéos olov aKovw.

\ 7 >

Os ap ébn xat tmuxvov amd Bredhapav apa-

"ae ets

9 nm ¢€ / e€ , 54 NV PoP
oppus perTaveakey opmpevos évOa Kal évOa,


1 Schneidewin: yer’, MSS.
382


IV.—TO HERMES, 254-279


“Child, lying in the cradle, make haste and tell
me of my cattle, or we two will soon fall out angrily.
For [ will take and cast you into dusky Tartarus and
awful hopeless darkness, and neither your mother
nor your father shall free you or bring you up again
to the light, but you will wander under the earth
and be the leader amongst little folk.” }

Then Hermes answered him with crafty words:
“ Son of Leto, what harsh words are these you have
spoken? And is it cattle of the field you are come
here to seek? I have not seen them: I have not
heard of them: no one has told me of them. I
cannot give news of them, nor win the reward for
news. Am [ like a cattle-lifter, a stalwart person?
This is no task for me: rather I care for other things :
I care for sleep, and milk of my mother’s breast, and
wrappings round my shouiders, and warm baths. Let
no one hear the cause of this dispute ; for this would
be a great marvel indeed among the deathless gods,
that a child newly born should pass in through the
forepart of the house with cattle of the field : herein
you speak extravagantly. I was born yesterday, and
my feet are soft and the ground beneath is rough ;
nevertheless, if you will have it so, I will swear a great
oath by my father’s head and vow that neither am I
guilty myself, neither have I seen any other who
stole your cows—whatever cows may be; for I know
them only by hearsay.’’.

So, then, said Hermes, shooting quick glances from
his eyes: and he kept raising his brows and looking

.1 Hermes is ambitious (1. 175), but if he is cast into Hades
he will have to be content with the leadership of mere
babies like himself, since those in Hades retain the state of


growth—whether childhood or manhood—in which they are
at the moment of leaving the upper world.


383


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


pap aroaupibov, adtov Tov wvO0ov axov@v. —-.280
Tov & amadov yerddoas mpocédyn éxdepyos
’AtroANwv:
@ WETOV, NITEPOTEVTA, OONOPPACES, 7) TE MAN olw
TONAGKLS AVTLTOPODYTA OOmoUS Ev VaLETAOVTAS
eyyuxov ovxy &va podvov én’ ovdei OTA Kabiccar,
axevalovta KaT oixov atep Wodou, of aryopevers: 285
TONANOVS © aypavAOUS aKkaYynoels UNNOPoTHpas
ovpeos év Bioons, oToT av Kperov éepatifov
avTas Bovkortouct Kal eipoTroKots der owy. |
GNX’ aye, hI) TWHaTOV Te Kal Va TaToOV UTvov iavans,
éx NiKvou KaTdBawve, wedaivns vUKTOS éTAatpe. 290
TOUTO yap ovv Kal émerta pet alavdatots yépas
é&ers.
apxKos Pyrnrewy KeKhno eat NuaTa TAVTQ. ;
“Os ap’ én kal taida AaBav dépe PoiBos
“Arie.
au 0 apa ppaccdpwevos tote 67 Kpatvs Apyei-
povrns
OLWVOV ™poenKev GELPOMEVOS peTa xepat, 295
Thypwova yao pos eptBov, at do Ganov ayyeorny.
ETTUMEVOS dé poe” avTov emem Tape toto © ’AmréANwY
ExAveEV, EK YELP@V O€ Kapa Bare KUOL MOV ‘Epunv.
éCero de 7 poTrapotbe Kal eo a UpLevos Ep odoto
‘Kppeqv Keptopéwy Kat pv 7 pos pdbov € EEL TE 300
Odpcer, oTapyaviora, Aus Kat Mazddos VLE
evpno@ Kai mrerTa Bow iPOipa Kapnva
TOUTOLS ot@voioe ov S abl OOOV nHryEmovevoets.
“Os 48° 6 & adt’ dvopovoe Powis KurdHvW05
‘Eppis, |


384


IV.—TO HERMES, 280-304


this way and that, whistling long and listening to ae


Apolle’s story as to an idle tale.

But far-working Apollo laughed softly and said ‘to

him: “O rogue, deceiver, crafty in heart, you talk
so innocently that I most surely believe that you
have broken into many a well-built house and stripped
more than one poor wretch bare this night,! gathering
his goods together all over the house without noise.
You will plague many a lonely herdsman in mountain
_glades, when you come on herds and thick-fleeced
sheep, and have a hankering after flesh. But come
now, if you would not sleep your last and latest
sleep, get out of your cradle, you comrade of dark
night. Surely hereafter this shall be your title
amongst the deathless gods, to be called the prince
of robbers continually.”
_ So said Phoebus Apollo, and took the child and
began to carry him. But at that moment the strong
Slayer of Argus had his plan, and, while Apollo held
him in his hands, sent forth an omen, a hard-worked
belly-serf, a rude messenger, and sneezed directly
after. And when Apollo heard it, he dropped
glorious Hermes out of his hands on the ground: then
sitting down before him, though he was eager to
go on his way, he spoke mockingly to Hermes :

“Fear not, little swaddling baby, son of Zeus and
Maia. I shall find the strong cattle presently by
these omens, and you shall ee the way.’

When Apollo had so said, Cyllenian Eis


1 Literally, ‘‘you have made him sit on the floor,” i.e.
-** you have stolen everything down to his last chair.”


385


&.¢€


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


omoven iov dudw 6& tap ovata Yepolv ewber 305
TT Ap YAvoy app’ Golo éeApevos, elre O€ pidov:

TI) pe pépers, ‘Exdepye, Oey CapeveaTare TAVTOV;
a] je Boop & evex woe Koovpevos Opa oronevers ;

@ TOTO; el’ amodorto Bowv yevos: ov yap eyo ye
UpeTepas éxrea Boas ovo aNov oTwTa, Yt. 310
aitives at Boes tot TO Oe KNEOS OlOV AKOVO.

60s b€ Otenv Kat d€€o Tapa Znvi Kpoviwv.

Avrap émel TA exaora Svappnony EplOarvov
Eppijs T oloToXos Kat Anrods ay haos VLOS, |
apis Ovpov éyortes. 0 ev vnwepTéa Pwviyy 315 §

x x x gk
ovK adixkws emt Bovaly érabuto xvd.pov Kpuny,
avTap 0 Téyvnoty Te Kal aipvAoloe oyouoty
njPedev efarraray Kuddjvios “Apyuporogor.
avTap ene TONUPNTES E@V TOMULNYAVOV EUPED,
Eo TUMEVOS On ¢ émetta bua apa ovo Bac.fe - 320
mpoabev, atap Katomta0e Avos cal Antods vids.
ainvva dé tépO pov ixovto Ov@deos OvAUpTFOLO
és tatépa Kpoviwva Atos mepixadr€a Téxva*
KetOe Nigi apdhotépotat iKns KaTéKEeLTO TdNAYTA.
oupurin? & ey’ “Odvperov aryavyipov, abdvator dé 325
apGrror iryepeO ovo peta xpvc ol povoy "Ho.?

"Eotncay © Epps. Te Kal apyuporotos ‘ATOd@D |

mpoa Oe Autos youvay’ 0 0 0° aveipeTo Paidipmov Vidor |
Levs vyriBpeuéerns Kati pov mpos wo0or éevrre:

PoiBe, qoGev TAVTOV pevoerKea Anio? éXNavvets, 330
Tmatoa véov yeyaara, puny KNPUKOS éxovTa;
amovdatov Tode XpHpua Oedy weO” opnyupiv HrOe.


1 Allen’s (Oxf. Text) suggestion : eduidln, M: randy:
other MSS.


2 EK and L (in margin): mor) rrdxas OdAdmaroo, other MSS.


286


sprang up quickly, starting in haste. With both


hands he pushed up to his ears the covering that he
had wrapped about his shoulders, and said :

« Where are you carrying me, Far-Worker, hastiest
of all the gods? Is it because of your cattle that
you are so angry and harass me’ O dear, would
that all the sort of oxen might perish ; for it is not
I who stole your cows, nor did I see another steal
them—whatever cows may be, and of that | have
only heard report. Nay, give right and take it
_ before Zeus, the Son of Cronos.”

So Hermes the shepherd and Leto’s glorious son
kept stubbornly disputing each article of their quarrel ;
Apollo, speaking truly
not unfairly sought to seize glorious Hern mes because
of the cows; but he, the Cyllenian, tried to deceive
the God of the Silver Bow with tricks and cunning
words. But when, though he had many wiles, he
found the other had as many shifts, he began to
walk across the sand, himself in front, while the
Son of Zeus and Leto came behind. Soon they
came, these lovely children of Zeus, to the top of
fragrant Olympus, to their father, the Son of
Cronos ; for there were the scales of judgement set
for them both. There was an assembly on snowy
Olympus, and the immortals who perish not were
gathering after the hour of gold-throned Dawn.

Then Hermes and Apollo of the Silver Bow stood
at the knees of Zeus: and Zeus who thunders on
high spoke to his glorious son and asked him :

“ Phoebus, whence come you driving this great
spoil, a child new born that has the look of a herald?
This is a weighty matter that is come before the
council of the gods.”


337
¢¢2


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Tov & adte T poo éerev dvat ex depyos "ATOANOY"
@ marep, 7 Taxa poeov AKOUOEAL OVK charradven,
KEPTOMEDY Qs olos éya pidoAHLOS Eb pe. 335
Taiod Tw evpov Tovde StaTTpvaLoV KEepaiaTiD
Kvarrjvns év 6pecot, Todvdy b1a YMpov avvcoas,
KépTOMoV, OLov eyo ye Oewv ovK addov OTWTA
ove dvOpav, 0 OTOGOL yj aipBporot 6lo emt yain.
xhewpas 0 O ék AeLpavos éuas Bods wyer éXNavvav 340
éoméplos Tapa Jiva mou rota foro Paraoons,
evdv Trove’ éXdov: 7 Oa p ixvea dota méhopa,
ota T ayaooac bat, Kab pie daipovos épya.
Tow ev yap Bovolv és ao podedov Aewpaova
avria Bnwar’ éxouoa wouss avepawve pérava B45
avTos O exTOS 0600, TLS! apnXavos, our apa TOooW
ovUT apa xEpoty éBatve Oud Wwapualodea X@pov- |
GNN Day TWA pir éXov d1éTpuBe KérXevOa
Tota TEMP @s el TLs aparnat Spvat Baivot. |
dppa pev ovv édi@xe dia papalosea X@pon, et 3508
peta jean ixped TATA Ovem perrev € éy Kovinaw*
avTap eT el yrapalovo péeyav oti Bov éLenépnaen,
appactos yeéveT ana Boay aTtiBos noe Kat avTov
X@pov a ava KpaTepov" Tov O eppdcaro Spores a avi) p
8, ITbAov evdus eNovra Bowy yevos eUpUMET@T OY, 355
avTap érel 617 Tas ev ev HovyXin KaTéepEe
Kal SvarrupTrarapnoev 60d TO pwev évOa, TO d évOa,
ev MKve KATEKELTO pedaivy VUKTL €OLK@S,
avr pe év jepoevTe Kata Copov' ovoé Kev avrov |
aieros OED Kawy eoxéato: Todda O€ Yepolw —- 3860
avryas apopyate Sorogppoovvny dNeyvov.
avTos } avTixa po00ov amnreyéws ayopever*

1 Translator : otros 88 éxrés, MSS.


338


IV.—TO HERMES, 333-362


Then the lord, far-working Apollo, answered


him: “O my father, you shall soon hear no trifling
tale though you reproach me that I alone am
fond of spoil. Here is a child, a burgling robber,
whom I found after a long journey in the hills of
Cyllene: for my part I have never seen one so
pert either among the gods or all men that catch
folk unawares throughout the world. He stole away
my cows from their meadow and drove them off in
_ the evening along the shore of the loud-roaring sea,
making straight for Pylos. There were double
tracks, and wonderful they were, such as one might
marvel at, the doing of a clever sprite; for as for
the cows, the dark dust kept and: showed their foot-
prints leading towards the flowery meadow ; but he
himself—bewildering creature—crossed the sandy
ground outside the path, not on his feet nor yet on
his hands; but, furnished with some other means
he trudged his way—wonder of wonders !—as though
one walked on slender oak-trees. Now while he
followed the cattle across sandy ground, all the ~
tracks showed quite clearly in the dust; but when —
he had finished the long way across the sand,
presently the cows’ track and his own could not
be traced over the hard ground. But a mortal
man noticed him as he drove the wide-browed
kine straight towards Pylos. And as soon as he
had shut them up quietly, and had gone home by
erafty turns and twists, he lay down in his cradle in
the gloom of a dim cave, as still as dark night, so
that not even an eagle keenly gazing would have
spied him. Much he rubbed his eyes with his hands
as he prepared falsehood, and himself straightway
said roundly: ‘I have not seen them: I have not


389


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


ovK LOoV, OU mrudouny, ovK ddAou podov dxovea
OUOE KE pve arp : ove av penvuT pov Gpotunv.
"H Toe dp @s eit@v Kat ap e€eto DoiBos
"ATroAN wv’ 365
‘Epujs 6 ane ere pobep aperBopevos ¢ ET 0S nb6a,'
detEato 6 és K poviova,. Peay on MavT ope TaVToOV
Lev TATED, 7 TOU eyo cou arnOeiny KatarhéEa:
UN LEPTNS TE yap elput Kat oUK o10a Wevder Oat.
mroev € és TET Epov Oubipevos etdiTrodas Bots 370
OH MLEPOV neALOLO véov eTUTENOMEVOLO™
ovde Oeav paxdpov aye eaptupas ovde KATOTTTAS,
penvobery oe éxéhevev avayKains vTro TONS,
TONG 6€ pe nmreihna € Banreiv és Taprapov evpur,
obvex O pev TEpEV avOos & EVEL PrroKnvo€os nBns, 375
avTap ery@ xOCos yevounv, Ta 06 T otde eat avTOS,
ovTe Bowv eharipr, KpaTare pori, cous.
met eo: Kal Yap é {Leto TATNP piros eUxXeaL eival,
@S ovK oiKad éXacoa Boas, Os OrBtos einy,
ovd vmép ovoov EBnv: TO 6é bi aTPEKEDS ayopeva. 380
‘HeAwov dé par aidseomar Kal dalpwovas ad)ous,
Kab ge Pro Kal TOUTOV oTrtCopat: ota 0a Kal AUTOS,
as ovK GUTLOS €but peyav 6 émid@copat? dpKov'
ov pa rae aavatov evKoopynta mpoOvpata.
Kal Tou * eyo TOUT TiC® Tore vnrea popyrs 385
Kat Kpatep® TEp éovTe’ oD O OMAOTEPOLO LY apnye.
1 Os par emirdivov Kunagjveos “A pyethovrns”
Kal TO oTrapyavoy elyev er WAEVN OVS améBanXe.
Zevs dé wey’ e&eyéXaccev tOw@y Kakomndéa Traioa


1 Most MSS.: &AAov pdOov ev abavaroiow eerrev (‘told
another story among the immortals”), KE and L (in margin).

2 Barnes : emidevouar, M: éaidaloua:, other MSS.

3 Hermann : zor’, MSS.


Joe


IV.—TO HERMES, 363-389


heard of them: no man has told me of them. I


could not tell you of them, nor win the reward of
telling.’ ”

When he had so spoken, Phoebus Apollo sat down.
But Hermes on his part answered and said, point-
ing at the Son of Cronos, the lord of all the
gods:

“Zeus, my father, indeed I will speak truth to
you; for I am truthful and I cannot tell a lie. He
_eame to our house to-day looking for his shambling
cows, as the sun was newly rising. He brought no
witnesses with him nor any of the blessed gods who
had seen the theft, but with great violence ordered
me to confess, threatening much to throw me into
wide Tartarus. For he has the rich bloom of glorious
youth, while I was born but yesterday——as he too
knows —, nor am [I like a cattle-lifter, a sturdy fellow.
Believe my tale (for you claim to be my own father),
that I did not drive his cows to my house—so may I
prosper —nor crossed the threshold: this I say truly.
I reverence Helios greatly and the other gods, and
you I love and him I dread. You yourself know
that [ am not guilty: and I will swear a great oath
upon it :—No! by these rich-decked porticoes of the
gods. And some day I will punish him, strong as he
is, for this pitiless inquisition ; but now do you help
the younger.

So spake the Cyllenian, the Slayer of Argus, while
he kept shooting sidelong glances and kept his
swaddling-clothes upon his arm, and did not cast
them away. But Zeus laughed out loud to see his


391


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


ED Kal ETLOTAMEVOS d.pvevpLevov api Boeoow. 390
dppoT epous & éxéXNevoev omog pova: Oupov é EYOVTAS
enrevery, Eppiy | de Oude Topov mye HovEevELy

wal detFat TOV Xopov ér aBdaBinor V00L0,

onmn 61) AUT amexpue Boor ipOrwa Kapnva.
vevoev O€ Kpovidys, emreTretOeTo 6 arYA0S -Eppijs: 395
pois 1p émrese Atos voos aiysoyoto.

To & audo omrevoovTe Autos 7 EpiKanhea TEKVA
és ITbdov jpaboevra € em "AXdetov mopov tov:
dypous S eEtKovTo Ka audLov byrcpehab pon, |

x00 1 On Ta XPnpear aTANNETO VUKTOS év apy. 400
end ‘Kpens ev erecta Ki@v mapa NaLVOV AVTpoV
és das éEjrauve Bowv ibOipua Kapnva’
Anrotdns & amateplev Lov evonge Boetas
TéETPN ET NALBATO, TAXA O El peTO Kvotmov Kpunv:

Ilas éduva, Sodopiira, vw Boe OelpoTounaat, 405
MOE VEOYVOS €@V Kal VHTLOS 5 AUTOS eyo Ye
Oavpaiva Katoricbe TO cov KpaToOs: OVOE TL OE XP1)
[Lak pov acEerbau, Kuragjnre, Matdéos vié.

“Os ap’ edn kal xyepat Tepioa Tpepe Kaptepa deo pa
[evdjoae PEMAS ‘Eppa Kpatepatat Avyoure.” 409"
Tov © ove ioyave Seopa, AVyo. 8 amo THAOCCE

TtrTov °| 7 409)
dryvou: Tal 6 UT0 Todal KaTa XOovos aia pvovTo
avroben, eu Bohadyy co TPaLpLeval GXANANCL, 41]
peta Te Kal_Tdonow eT aypavrouet Boecow,

‘EK ppéw Bovrjar Kewpippovos: avTap "ATroAA@Y

Javpacev dO pinaas. Tore 61) KpaTus ‘Apyeupovtns

Yapov UTOBAHSnY éoKéaTo, TIP awapvcdwV, 415
x * x* *


1 Fick : 7x’ od and 4x ob, MSS: éxov, M.
2 Allen. %’ Hymn to Dionysus, 13,


394


IV.—TO HERMES, 390-415


evil-plotting child well and cunningly denying guilt
about the cattle. And he bade them both to be
of one mind and search for the cattle, and guiding
Hermes to lead the way and, without mischievous-
ness of heart, to show the place where now he had
hidden the strong cattle. Then the Son of Cronos
bowed his head: and goodly Hermes obeyed him;
for the will of Zeus who holds the aegis easily
prevailed with him.

Then the two all-glorious children of Zeus
hastened both to sandy Pylos, and reached the ford of
Alpheus, and came to the fields and the high-roofed
byre where the beasts were cherished at night-time.
Now while Hermes went to the cave in the rock and
began to drive out the strong cattle, the son of Leto, .
looking aside, saw the cowhides on the sheer rock.
And he asked glorious Hermes at once:

“How were you able, you crafty rogue, to flay
two cows, new-born and babyish as you are? For
my part, I dread the strength that will be yours:
there is no need you should keep growing long,
Cyllenian, son of Maia!”

So saying, Apollo twisted strong withes with his
hands meaning to bind Hermes with firm bands ;
but the bands would not hold him, and the withes
of osier fell far from him and began to grow at once
from the ground beneath their feet in that very place.
And intertwining with one another, they quickly
grew and covered all the wild-roving cattle by the
will of thievish Hermes, so that Apollo was astonished
as he gazed.

Then the strong slayer of Argus looked furtively
upon the ground with eyes flashing fire .. .
desiring to hide . .. Very easily he softened the


393


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


eryepuyra re pucicos: Anrtovs 6 épixvo0€eos viov

peta par é mr pnuvEY éxnBonror, QS eOeh avTos,

Kab Kparepov mTep éovta’ NaBov & ér pe is

VELPOS

TANKT PD émrerpntice KaTa mépos* 1) O VITO xELpos

o wepoa €or covaBnoe yéhacae se Poi Bos *Amro\Xov

ynOnoas, € €pary | dé O1a ppévas rue’ LON: 421

Jeotrecins évoTris Kai mw prunes | iwEpos HpeL

Ouu® axovalovta: Aven & éparov KiOapiFov

aTh p & ye Oaponoas én’ aptatepa Masados vidos

PoiBov "AmroAAwvos: Taxa dé Auyéws KBapivov 425

ynpuer apuBoradnv—épatn bé ol EoTETO povn—

Kpaivev aBavarous TE Geos Kal yatav epemvnpy,

@S TA mpara yevovTo Kal WS axe pootpav ExaoTos.

Mynpoovyny jev mpara Jeadv éryépatpev aouoh, 3

pnTepa Movoawv: yap Aaxe Maudoos vioy" 430

Tous 0€ KaTa mpeo Bu TE KAL @S yeydaow EKATTOS

alavarous € eyepaupe Jeous Awos dryhaos UVLOS,

TaVT eveTov KaTa Koo HOV, eT @NEVLOV KiOapivov.

TOV 0 Epos év aTnJecow a aunxavos alvuto Oupopr,

Kab pv povicas ¢ eT ed TTEPOEVTOL Tpoonvea: 435
Bougove, LNXAVLATA, TOvEvpEveE, Saitos éraipe,

TEVTHKOVTA Boov avTaéla TAVTA MéuNraQS.

novyltws Kab ererta Siaxpwéer bas iw"

vov © aye pot TOE et7ré, TOAVTPOTE Matdédos viE,

Hh ool y éx yeveTis Ta Gy EotreTo Oavpata épya 440

née TLS ADavaTav He OvynTav avOpaTreVv

d@pov aryavov édwKe Kal eppace Jeon aoudyv ;

Javpaciny yap THVOE VENPATOV dooay aKove,

Ny ov To TOTE Pypse Sanpevat ovTe TL avd pov

ovte TY ABavaTor, ot ‘OAbperrva S@LaT éxouct, 445

voope c€Oev, PnrAnTAa, Atos Kal Maddog vié.


394


2


IV.—TO HERMES, 416—446


son of all-glorious Leto as he would, stern though
the Far-shooter was. He took the lyre upon his
left arm and tried each string in turn with the key,
so that it sounded awesomely at his touch. And
Phoebus Apollo laughed for joy; for the sweet throb
of the marvellous music went to his heart, and a soft
longing took hold on his soul as he listened. Then
the son of Maia, harping sweetly upon his lyre, took
courage and stood at the left hand of Phoebus
Apollo; and soon, while he played shrilly on his
_lyre, he lifted up his voice and sang, and lovely was
the sound of his voice that followed. He sang the
story of the deathless gods and of the dark earth,
how at the first they came to be, and how each one
received his portion. First among the gods he
honoured Mnemosyne, mother of the Muses, in his
song; for the son of Maia was of her following. And
next the goodly son of Zeus hymned the rest of the
immortals according to their order in age, and told
how each was born, mentioning all in order as he
struck the lyre upon his arm. But Apollo was seized
with a longing not to be allayed, and he opened his
mouth and spoke winged words to Hermes:

“Slayer of oxen, trickster, busy one, comrade of
the feast, this song of yours is worth fifty cows, and
I believe that presently we shall settle our quarrel
peacefully. But come now, tell me this, resourceful
son of Maia: has this marvellous thing been with
you from your birth, or did some god or mortal man
give it you—a noble gift—and teach you heavenly
song? For wonderful is this new-uttered sound I
hear, the like of which I vow that no man nor god
dwelling on Olympus ever yet has known but you, O
thievish son of Maia. What skill is this? What


395


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


TUS TeXvn, Tis povoa apnxaveay pededwver,

Tis TptBos; aTpeKéws yap ama Tpla TavTa Tap-—
eoTL,

evppoovyny Kal Epwra } Kal HSupov brvov éréoCar.

Kal yap eyo Movonow ‘Ohupmiddecow omnes, 450

THOU Xopot Te “eNOVGL Kal dyhaos oios! doLons

Kal pods) TteOarvia Kab imepoets Bpopos avA@D’

GAN’ ov Tw Ti LOL WOE bEeTA Hpeciv AXXO pEedyCEY,

ola véewv Oarins évdéEva Epya TéXovTat,


Oavpato, Atos vié, TAS’, ws épatov KiOapiCers. 455 |W


vov © érrel odV OALYOS TeEp é@Y KAUTA LNdEa OidaS,
ite, méTrov, Kat pvOov" émraiver mpec BuTEpotce:
vov yap Tot KXéo0s Eotat ev ADavaTtotot Peotot
Goi T AUT® Kat pnTpl TOO aTpEKéws ayopEevow:
Val [ha TOOE KPQVELVOY GKOVTLOV, 7H LEV eyo TE 460
KUOPOV ev a@avato.ct Kal OABvov mYE HOV’ claw ®
doco T ayaa dpa Kal &> TEXOS OVK ATATHOW.

Tov & Epuas pvOorov apet Berto Kepdaheoro w"
etpwTas pe ; ‘Exdepye, Tepup paces: avr ap ey@ COL .
TeEXYNS NMETEPNS eri Snpwevar ov “ai peyaipo. 465
OH [LEPOV eld ets" ce» O€ TOL im Los elvaw
BovrAy Kai pvOoror. ov 6€ hpeci TavT ev oidas’
T POT OS yap, Atos VLE, ET aavarorat Oaaccens,
nus TE KPATEpos Te piret 6€ oe payriera Zevs
EK Taons o ooins, Emropev O€ TOL ayaa Sapa. 470
Kal Tinds oé yé dace Saypevas ex Aros oudas
pavtetas 0 “Exaepye, Avos mapa, Oéohata Tavta:
TOV VUV AUTOS éy@® oe par avetov* dedanKkar —
gol © AUTaYypETOV EoTL SANWEVaL, OTTL MEVOLVAS.

' Most MSS: tuvos, M with E and L (margin).


2 Rubnken: @updy, M. 3 Tyrrell : jyenovedow, MSS.
* Translator: éywye raid’ apveidv, MSS,


396


IV.—_TO HERMES, 447-474


- song for desperate cares? What way of song ? eo


verily here are three things to hand all at once from
which to choose,—mirth, and love, and sweet sleep. |
And though I am a follower of the Olympian Muses
who love dances and the bright path of song—the
full-toned chant and ravishing thrill of flutes—yet I
never cared for any of those feats of skill at young
men’s revels, as I do now for this: I am filled with
wonder, O son of Zeus, at your sweet playing. But
_ now, since you, though little, have such glorious skill,
sit down, dear boy, and respect the words of your
elders. For now you shall have renown among the
deathless gods, you and your mother also. This I
will declare to you exactly: by this shaft of cornel
wood I will surely make you a leader renowned
among the deathless gods, and fortunate, and will
give you glorious gifts and will not deceive you from
first to last.”’

Then Hermes answered him with artful words:
“You question me carefully, O Far-worker; yet I
am not jealous that you should enter upon my art :
. this day you shall know it. For I seek to be friendly
with you both in thought and word. Now you well
know all things in your heart, since you sit foremost
among the deathless gods, O son of Zeus, and are
goodly and strong. And wise Zeus loves you as all
right is, and has given you splendid gifts. And they
say that from the utterance of Zeus you have learned
both the honours due to the gods, O Far-worker,
and oracles from Zeus, even all his ordinances. Of
all these I myself have already learned that you have
great wealth. Now, you are free to learn whatever


397


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


ann érret ovv tor Oupos émiOver KiOapiCerv, an 475
pédtreo Kat KiOapite Kat ayralas anhéyuve
déypevos €& EuéOev? od O€ pot, dire, KVOOS OTTACE.
eVpoNTrel peTa YEepoly Ex@V ALyUpwvory ETaLpNy,
Kaa Kal ev KATA KOGmoY eTLaTamEVvoS ayopeveELV.
EVKNAOS jeV ETrELTA Hépeuv és Satta Odrevav 480
Kal Yopov ipwepdevta Kal és didokvdéa K@MLov
evppoovvyny vuKTOS TE Kal HuaTOS. OS TLS AV aUTHV
Téyun Kat copin dedanpévos é&epecivy,
pbeyyouevn ravTota vow yaplevta SidoKel
peta cuvynbetnow aOvpopévn parakhour, 485
épyaciny devyouca Sunmabov: os 6€ Kev avuTHY
VHS €wv TO Tpa@ToOV emilameras Epecivy,
Han avT@s KEV emreuTa METHOPA TE (Opurrifor.
col o avTdyperov eoTe Carpevat, ¢ OTTL pevouvgs.
Kal TOL eyo doce TAUTNY, Avos ayNaeé Kovpe’ 490
nuets © avr’ Gpeos TE Kal immoBorou TeOLoLo
Boval vo"ous, ‘Exdepye, VOMEVT OfLEV aypavrowe tv.
évOev tidus TéeEOVTL Boes TavpoLoe puryeioras
piryonv Onr«ELas Té Kal apoevas: ovdé TL aE Xp?)
Kepoancov Hei éovTa ie Kexondo ar. 495
“Os elrr@v wpee’: o' edefaro Poi Bos Amro,
‘Epyun © EAUaNIBED & Exov! wdotiya haewny,
Bovtonrias T éréteAdNev: edexTto 5é Mardoos vids
ynOncas: Kiapw 5é NaBav em apiotepa YeLpos
Antovs ayhaos ulos, dvak& éxdepyos AmoAX@y, 500
TAHKT PO emeupaT ibe KaTa HEpos- i) & umevepOe
o epOareon * Kovapnae Oeos o UmO KaNOY deLoeD.
"Evéa Boas pev €TELTA TOTL Cadeov NeLpavea
ET PATETNV’ avtot dé, Avos TEepiKaNAEA TEKVQ,
1 Martin: éxywv, MSS. 2M: iuepdev, other MSS.


398


IV.—TO HERMES, 475-504


you please; but since, as it seems, your heart is so


strongly set on playing the lyre, chant, and _ play
upon it, and give yourself to merriment, taking
this as a gift from me, and do you, my friend,
bestow glory on me. Sing well with this clear-
voiced companion in your hands ; for you are skilled
-in good, well-ordered utterance. From now on bring
it confidently to the rich feast and lovely dance and
glorious revel, a joy by night and. by day. Whoso
with wit and wisdom enquires of it cunningly, him
it teaches through its sound all manner of things
that delight the mind, being easily played with
gentle familiarities, for it abhors toilsome drudgery ;
but whoso in ignorance enquires of it violently, to
him it chatters mere vanity and foolishness. But
you are able to learn whatever you please. So then,
I will give you this lyre, glorious son of Zeus, while
1 for my part will graze down with wild-roving
cattle the pastures on hill and horse-feeding plain :
so shall the cows covered by the bulls calve abun-
dantly both males and females. And now there is
no need for you, bargainer though you are, to be
furiously angry.”

When Hermes had said this, he held out the lyre:
and Phoebus Apollo took it, and readily put his
shining whip in Hermes’ hand, and ordained him
keeper of herds. The son of Maia received. it
joyfully, while the glorious son of Leto, the lord
far-working Apollo, took the lyre upon his left
arm and tried each string with the key. Awe-
somely it sounded at. the touch of the god, while
he sang sweetly to its note.

Afterwards they two, the all-glorious sons of Zeus
turned the cows back towards the sacred meadow,


399


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


dxpoppot 7pos "OdXvptrov ayavyipoyv éppwoavto 505
TepTopevote poplyye’ vapn & apa pytiétra ZLevs,

M7 29 , / \ at Bre rn
audw & és diroTnTa suvynyaye: Kal Ta pev Epps
Antoidny épirnoe Svamtrepes ws ETL Kal VO,

onpat éret KiPapiv péev “ExnBorw éyyuaréev
iwepTnv, dedaws, 0 O émrwréviov KiOdp.fev 510
avtos © av& éréons coding éxpdaoato Téxvyv
cuplyyov évoTrny ToLjaato THNOO axovaTHD.

Kai tore Antoidns “Epuhy mpos wo0oy éeutre:
delora, Matddos vié, dud Tope, ToLKLAOMATA, t
Ta jeoe dpa chews KiBapw Kal KapT ida Toka* 515
Tiny yap wap Lnvos é exers érrapmot Bra & epya ]
Onoew av pemoior KATO xGova mouduBorerpav. |
aX el Loe Thains ves Peay péyav GpKov omoooat,

1) Kepanri vevoas H eT Lruyos oBpipov vdwp,
TavT av éu@ Ovu@ KexXaplopeva Kal dira Epdots. 520

Kai TOTE Mauaéos vios broaxXopevos KATEVEUCE,
bn TOT amok rewpely, ba” ‘ExnPorog ¢ EXTEATLO TAL,
unoé oT éumeddocay tuxwe@ Sd0u@* avTap

"AT ON@V .
Antoiéns xatévevoev er apOue@ cal dudrornte, :
HI) TLVa pidrep ov ANXOV ev adavarotow éoecOat, 525
pnte Oeov pnt  dvOpa Atos yovov" éx dé TéXEv ov
[ aterov Ke TATHP' OO em @Looey” ”) oe wan otov" | 526°
otpBorov aBavatav Toimoounar Hd dua TwayTor,
mucTov éu@ Ovp®@ Kal Tipwov: av’Tap émerta
dXBou Kal TNOUTOV OCW mepucad)ea papoor, |
Xpuceiny, Tpumérn ron, aieqpLop i) og purager 530 |
TAVTAS émeKpaivovo’ aOrous” éréwy te Kal Epyor |
Tov ayabav, doa dynpi danpuevat éx Aros oudas.

1 Allen’s supplement. 2 Sikes : deods, MSS.
400


“
2}
my
i
a
.
3


IV.—TO HERMES, 505-532


but themselves hastened back to snowy Olek
delighting in the lyre. Then wise Zeus was glad and
made them both friends. And Hermes loved the
son of Leto continually, even as he does now, when
he had given the lyre as token to the Far-shooter,
who played it skilfully, holding it upon his arm. But
for himself Hermes found out another cunning art
and made himself the pipes whose sound is heard
afar.

Then the son of Leto said to Hermes: “ Son of


_ Maia, guide and cunning one, I fear you may steal


from me the lyre and my curved bow together ; for
you have an office from Zeus, to establish deeds of
barter amongst men throughout the fruitful earth.
Now if you would only swear me the great oath of
the gods, either by nodding your head, or by the


potent water of Styx, you would do all that can


please and ease my heart.”

Then Maia’s son nodded his head and promised
that he would never steal anything of all the Far-
shooter possessed, and would never go near his
strong house; but Apollo, son of Leto, swore to
be fellow and friend to Hermes, vowing that he
would love no other among the immortals, neither
god nor man sprung from Zeus, better than Hermes :
and the Father sent forth an eagle in confirmation.
And Apollo sware also: “Verily I will make you
only to be an omen for the immortals and all alike,
trusted and honoured by my heart. Moreover, I
will give you a splendid staff of riches and wealth:
it is of gold, with three branches, and will keep you
scatheless, accomplishing every task, whether of
words or deeds that are good, which I claim to
know through the utterance of Zeus. But as for


AOI


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


/ VA / f A 5) /
pavreiny Oé, héptate, SLoTpEpes, iy épecivels,
oF
ouTe a¢ Oéohatov éots Oanpevat oUTE TLY GOV
A / \ x io \ lp neees\ gee =
abavatwy: TO yap olde Atos voos: avTap éy@ ye 535
‘ |
TicT@lels KATEVEVTA Kal BMoTa KApPTEPOV OpKoP,
pon Tia voodu éucto Pedy ateryeveTawv
» 3 \ lA J
anrrov y eicer Oat Lnvos TuKsvoppovea Bounrny.
Kal ov, KaciyynTe Xpvooppamt, ey 6 KENEUE
Oéodhata midavaoxKe, Goa wndeTat evpvoTa Teds. 540 |
avOporav & addXov SnAnTOMAaAL, ANOV OVHTH,

\ / 5) / Ay: SDs is aoe ;
TONKA TEED PON CO Vie Hm enae e pet avOporray. |
KaL ev Epis opis aTovnceTat, 05 Tus av EMOn
povi Kab mrEpvyer oe TEAMEVTOV olwver:

OUTOS e€uhs Oudhs atrovnceTat, 0Vd aTTAaTHGO. 545
A t / n |
Os O€ KE pairOyoLot TLOHTAS OLwVvOtCL
Rh
pavteiny €Oéryou apex voov éEepecivery
, v4 an / : /
NMETEPHV, Voeelv OF Oewy TEOV aieVv eOVTOD,
AD e / 00 iy b] \ IY OG yé
py, adinv oddv eiaw. eyo O€ Ke SOpa SexXoipny.
! / / ‘
"AAAo 6€é Tot épéw, Mains épixvdéos vie 550
\ \ 3 4 A J n
kat Aros aiyloyoto, Oey éptovvie Satipov*
7 j :
ceuval yap TLVES ELal, KATLYVHTAL yeyavias,
I 4
TapUévol, wKEinoW ayadrAOMEeVvar TTEPVYEToL,
a \ / /
Tpels’ KaTa O€ KpaTOS TeTahaypéevar adgiTa
Neva,
end / ey gi’ rs a |
OlKLa VaLeTaoVoLW vie TTVXL Llapyyooto, 555 Wh

/ i) / / A S)EN wee

pavTeins amravevle SiddoKaXol, Hv émt Boval

a SO SS ON lA \ Oe IN > > ,
Tats ET €@V MEAETHCA’ TATHP O Emos OUK adEeyLeer,
) n ne / M7 4
évTevOev bx Errerta ToT@mevat ANAOTE AAAH

/ i / 1¢
Knpla BooKkovrat Kai Te Kpatvovowy Exacta.


402


IV.—TO HERMES, 533-559


sooth-saying, noble, heaven-born child, of which
you ask, it is not lawful for you to learn it, nor
for any other of the deathless gods: only the mind
of Zeus knows that. I am pledged and have vowed
and sworn a strong oath that no other of the eternal
gods save I should know the wise-hearted counsel of
Zeus. And do not you, my brother, bearer of the
golden wand, bid me tell those decrees which all-
seeing Zeus intends. As for men, I will harm one
and profit another, sorely perplexing the tribes of
‘unenviable men. Whosoever shall come guided by
the call and flight of birds of sure omen, that man
shall have advantage through my voice, and I will
not deceive him. But whoso shall trust to idly-
chattering birds and shall seek to invoke my
prophetic art contrary to my will, and to under-
stand more than the eternal gods, I declare that
he shall come on an idle journey; yet his gifts I
would take.

But I will tell you another thing, Son of all-
glorious Maia and Zeus who holds the aegis, luck-
bringing genius of the gods. ‘There are certain holy
ones, sisters born—three virgins! gifted with wings :
their heads are besprinkled with white meal, and
they dwell under a ridge of Parnassus. These are
teachers of divination apart from me, the art which
I practised while yet a boy following herds, though
my father paid no heed to it. From their home
they fly now here, now there, feeding on honey-comb


1 The Thriae, who practised divination by means of
pebbles (also called @piai). In this hymn they are repre-
sented as aged maidens (ll. 553-4), but are closely associated
with bees (ll. 559-563) and possibly are here conceived as
having human heads and breasts with the bodies and wings
of bees. See the edition of Allen and Sikes, Appendix III.


403
DD. 2


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


ai o 6te pev Ovimow ednbviar pérs Y@pOr, 560
J If, 7 5) , 3 / Z|
mpoppovéws EOéKovaew arnOeinv ayopevety’
iv & atrovoodicOGat Oey nociay édwdny,
revdoovras dn ererta Ol adNjAOY Sovéovaat.
Tas TOL ETELTA Oda pte" avd drpexéws épeetva@v
ay avtod ppeva téprre, wal ef Bpotov avopa
daeins, 565
3 na 3 A y w,
TOANAKL OHS OTS crake a 2
TAT EXE: Maddog vié, Kai aypavrous Edixas Bods
mous T apdirddeve Kal npLovous Tahaepyous.
[os épar’: ovpavolev dé marie Leds avtos erect 568" |
Ojxe Téhos' Tac © dp Oy otwvotct KédNevaer | 568? | |
Kal YapoTroiat N€ovat Kal apytodoval avecoL |
\ \ \ Ue a / 9 a f
Kal kvol Kal pyroLow, boa TpEepet EevpEeia YOwY, 570
Tao. © étl mpoBatoov avacce Kvouuov Kpuny,
5 3 3 3 of. , Bd S
oiov © ets Aidnv teTeXeomévoy ayyeXov eivat,
e/ > +S U SiN lA if 3 if
ds T AdoTOS TEP EMV OWcEL Yepas OVK EAAYLOTOP.
Otitw Mardoos viov dvaé ébirnoev “AmoAXwv |
mavtoin puroTnte yapiw 0 éwéOnKe Kpoviwy. 575
mact © 6 ye Ovntoiot Kal dDavdtoiowy Optnrel. |
la) i) 3
Tavpa pev OvV Ovivnal, TO SO AKPLTOV HTEpOTrEvEL
if Pa / A la) 9 i
vuxta ov opdvainv dora Ovntav av patron.
Kai od peév ot tw xaipe, Avos cai Marddos vié i
isan oN \ A Weer) 4 Vd ae a
avTap éyo Kal oeto Kat GAANS pYHTOM aoLdns. 580


1


1 Hand L: weipdvrou 5} &rerra wapee 58dv yemovevew (Then
they try to lead men aside out of the way ”), other MSS.
2 Allen’s supplement.


404


IV.—_TO HERMES, 560-580


and bringing all things to pass. And when they eer


are inspired through eating yellow honey, they are
willing to speak truth; but if they be deprived of
the gods’ sweet food, then they speak falsely, as
they swarm in and out together. These, then, I
give you ; enquire of them strictly and delight your
heart: and if you should teach any mortal so to do,
often will he hear your response—if he have good
fortune. Take these, Son of Maia, and tend the
wild roving, horned oxen and horses and _ patient
_ mules.”

So he spake. And from heaven father Zeus
himself gave confirmation to his words, and com-
manded that glorious Hermes should be lord over
all birds of omen and grim-eyed lions, and boars
with gleaming tusks, and over dogs and all flocks
that the wide earth nourishes,-and over all sheep ;
also that he only should be the appointed messenger
to Hades, who, though he takes no gift, shall give
him no mean prize. |

Thus the lord Apollo showed his kindness for the
Son of Maia by all manner of friendship: and the
Son of Cronos gave him grace besides. He consorts
with all mortals and immortals: a little he profits,
but continually throughout the dark night he cozens
the tribes of mortal men.

And so, farewell, Son of Zeus and Maia; but I
will remember you and another song also.


405


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


#
EIS) A®POAITHN


Motcad poe evyeTre cpa. Todwypvcou A edie,
Kumpidos, § Hre Ocoiow émt yAuKov twEepov @poeE
Kab T° eaparcaro Piha karabynt oy avo pwTrov:
oLwvous Te OLeTreTéas Kat Onpia Tavr a,

Nev OO HTELPOS TOAAG TpEher NO Goa TOVTOS*
aA 3. 92 Uh b) / /

Taow © é py pepnrev évao tehavov Kvbeperns.
Tpisoas - &§ ob Sivatat memibeiv ppévas ce

amar ho au

Koupny oo aLiryL0 KOLO Atos, yAavearw “AOnvyp: -

ov yap ot evader é epya TromuxXpdoov ‘Agpoditns,

aX dpa ob moe 104 TE AOOV Kab Epyov. "Apnos

dopivat TE MAK AL TE Kal ayaa Epy’ adeyuvel.

TpaTH TEKTOVAS aVdpas éTrLyOovious edidake

TOTAL CATWAS TE Kal APMATA TOLKiNA YANK.

i O€ Te TapJeviKas aTTAaNOXpoas év pweyapoLoL

3 \ »+ » IQ/D SEN \ a € /

ayaa epy edioakev éri hpect Ocioa éxaorn.

b) ; 243 / 4 \
ovoé mot ‘Aptéuoa ypuvonNdKaTov, KeNadelvny
Sdpvatat év hedoTynTe hrropperdyns Adpootry.
Kal yap TH ade TOEA Kal ovpect Onpas evaipe,
hopyuyyes Te Yopot TE ScamrpVvatot T OAOAVYAL
dnoed Te TKLOEVTA OLKALWY TE TTONS aVOpOD.

IQ\ \ bd 7 VA e/ 4 ary /
ovdé pev aldoin Kovpy ade épy ‘Adpoditys,
‘lotin, hv mpwrnv téxeto Kpovos ayxuXounrys,

i) ae / aA \ ’ f
avtis O omdoTaTny, BovrAy Atos airytoxoto,


406


V.—TO APHRODITEH, 1-23


y
TO APHRODITE


Muss, tell me the deeds of golden Aphrodite the
Cyprian, who stirs up sweet passion in the gods and
_ subdues the tribes of mortal men and birds that fly in
air and all the many creatures that the dry land rears,
and all that the sea: all these love the deeds of rich-
crowned Cytherea.

Yet there are three hearts that she cannot bend
nor yet ensnare. First is the daughter of Zeus
who holds the aegis, bright-eyed Athene; for she
has no pleasure in the deeds of golden Aphrodite,
but delights in wars and in the work of Ares,
in strifes and battles and in preparing famous
crafts. She first taught earthly craftsmen to
make chariots of war and cars variously wrought -
with bronze, and she, too, teaches tender maidens
in the house and. puts knowledge of goodly arts in
each one’s mind. Nor does laughter-loving Aphrodite
ever tame in love Artemis, the huntress with shafts
of gold; for she loves archery and the slaying of wild
beasts in the mountains, the lyre also and dancing
and thrilling cries and shady woods and the cities of
upright men. Nor yet does the pure maiden Hestia
love Aphrodite’s works. She was the first-born child
of wily Cronos and youngest too,! by will of Zeus who
holds the aegis,—a queenly maid whom _ both

! Cronos swallowed each of his children the moment that
they were born, but ultimately was forced to disgorge them.
Hestia, being the first to be swallowed, was the last to be


disgorged, and so was at once the first and latest born of the
children of Cronos. Cp. Hesiod Theogony, ll. 495-7.


407


THE HOMERIC HYMNS =.


ToTuLav, Hv éuvevtTo Ilocedawv Kai “AmovAAov:
1) 6€ war’ ovK COerXev, GAAA oTEPEds am éerTreV: 25%
@pmoce be Léeyav BpKov, 6 6) TeTENETMEVOS EOTID,
e U4 A \ x b] U
avapevn Keparys Tratpos Atos avytoxoto,
Tapevos EcoecOar TavT pata, dia Oedwv.
A \ \ 1 a \ f b) ‘\ f
Th 6€ TaTnp Levs d@Ke KaXOV yépas avTL yamoLo
/ f ” > 9 9 & na fied shies ;
Kal TE LET@ OlKM KAT ap EéleTO Tiap EAOvVOa. ~ 30
Tacw © év vnotat Deady TLmaoxos eoTL
Kat Tapa Tact Bpotoicr Oewv mpéoBetpa TETUKTAL.
Tawv ov dvvatat we eiv hpévas ovo atratiaat:
TOV & adNAwv ov Trép TL TEhUYpEvov ot “Adpodityv
ote Oewy pakdpwv ovte Ovntav avOporar. 35
Kai te Tapex Znvos voov Hyaye TepriKepavvov,
OOTE peryLa Tos T éoTi peytarns T EUmope TLLAS.
Kat TE TOD, EvT EOEdoL, TUKWWAS Ppévas eEaTTapodca
pndsi@s cuvveps&e KaTaduntior yuvarkiv,
“Hons €xreX.abovoa, Kkacovyyyntns adoyxou Te, 40
i) méya eidos apiorn év abavatynar Oejar.
KvdlaTny 0 dpa puv téxeto Kpovos ayxudopnrns
pntnp te Pein: Zeds S &pOita wydea eidas
atooinv ahoxov TOUT ATO xédv’ eldviav.
TH Se cat adit Zevs yAuKdv ipepov éuBare Ovp@
b) \ an / / U4
avdpi KaTabunte@ psxO nueva, dppa TayvoTa ~ 46
pnd avtn Bpoténs ebvns atroepypévn ein,
Kat ToT émevEapuevn elirn peta Tact Ocoiow
nov yerornoaca, Prropperons Adpodirn,
eP fc \ pe A /
as pa Oeous cvvéemEe xatabvntnot yuvarki, —S=——_50
Kal Te KaTAOVNTOUS Viels TEKOV ADavaToLoLD,
ws Te Deas avéwiEe KaTaOvytots avO ports.


408


V.—TO APHRODITE, 24-52


Poseidon and Apollo sought to wed. But she was a


wholly unwilling, nay, stubbornly refused; and
touching the head of father Zeus who holds the
aegis, she, that fair goddess, sware a great oath
which has in truth been fulfilled, that she would
be a maiden all her days. So Zeus the Father
gave her an high honour instead of marriage, and
she has her place in the midst of the house and
has the richest portion. In all the temples of the
gods she has a share of honour, and among all
. mortal men she is chief of the goddesses.

Of these three Aphrodite cannot bend or ensnare
the hearts. But of all others there is nothing
among the blessed gods or among mortal men that
has escaped Aphrodite. Even the heart of Zeus,
who delights in thunder, is led astray by her;
though he is greatest of all and has the lot of
highest majesty, she beguiles even his wise heart
whensoever she pleases, and mates him with morta!
women, unknown to Hera, his sister and his wife,
the grandest far in beauty among the deathless
goddesses—-most glorious is she whom wily Cronos
with her mother Rhea did beget: and Zeus, whose
wisdom is everlasting, made her his chaste and
careful wife. —

But upon Aphrodite herself Zeus cast sweet —
desire to be joined in love with a mortal man, to
the end that, very soon, not even she should be
innocent of a mortal’s love; lest laughter-loving
Aphrodite should one day softly smile and say
mockingly among all the gods that she had joined
the gods in love with mortal women who bare
sons of death to the deathless gods, and had mated
the goddesses with mortal men.


409


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


"Ayxicew © dpa ot yAuKUY imepov EwBare Ovupe,
Os TOT év AKpoTroXaLs Bpecwy ToAUTTLOaGKOU "1dns
Bovtoréecxev Bods déuas aOavatoiow éoiKas. 55
TOV 01) emerraL Loovaa Prropperdys ‘Ad pootrn
npacar , ExTrayros O€ KaTa Ppévas | imepos. etNev.
és Kumpov & éXOodca Ov@dea vynov Edvvev,
és Ilagov: évOa &é oi Téwevos Bapos Te Ov@dns. Hi
ev? hy eiceModoa OCuvpas em eOnuce pacivas* 60 |
év0a O€ pv Xapures NovcaV Kal xpi av éLato
apBpotw, ota Peovs emev nyo ev altev eovTas,
apBpocig édav@,! TO pa ol TePvapevor 7 NEV.
ero apevn & ed mavta qept Xpot eluara, KANG
YpvT@ Koopndeioa prropperds ‘Ad podtrn > 65
gevat é€ éml Tpoins TpoMTr ove evodcea Kvtrpor,
inves peta véherw piuda monacovoa KédevOor.

"Tdnv & tkavev TohuTiOaka, pnrépa Onpav,

AA & iOvs arab woto dz’ ovpeos’ ob O€ per’ avTHY
oaivovres Tool TE AVKOL KAPOTTOL Te éovTes, 70
GPKT Ob T apoanes TE Foat TPoKao@V a aKOPNTOL
oay: y) S opooca peta, ppect TEPTrETO Gupov


KaL TOLS EV ornlerau Ban iMepov" O LO aya, TUVTES
TUVOUO KOLLNTAVYTO KATA TKLOEVTAS Latha
en Wl we ne Va ’ / ire, 7
Aurn 6 és KALoLas evTroLnTous adiKave’ 75 |


Tov © eupe TAO MOLGL AEAELLMLEVOY OLOV AT ANNOY
"Ayxtionv jpwa, Geav amo KadXOS EXOVTA.
of & dua Bovoly érovro vowous KATA ToLnEevTAS
f A \ a / 5 b) EY ¢
mavtTes’ 0 6€ cTAOMOLaL AEAELLMEVOS OOS aT AANOV
an 9 NU oe J /
TWNELT ev0a Kat évea ovat po Lov Kcapivon. 80
ath © avTov m porrapoule Aws Ouyarnp "A hpoditn
Trapléva aduntn méyeOos Kal eidos opmoin,
1 Clarke : éavg, MSS.


410


V._TO APHRODITE, 53-82


And so he put in her heart sweet desire for


Anchises who was tending cattle at that time among
the steep hills of many-fountained Ida, and in shape
was like the immortal gods. Therefore, when
laughter-loving Aphrodite saw him, she loved him,
and terribly- desire seized her in her heart. She
went to Cyprus, to Paphos, where her precinct
is and fragrant altar, and passed into her sweet-
smelling temple. There she went in and put to the
glittering doors, and there the Graces bathed her
with heavenly oil such as blooms upon the bodies
of the eternal gods—oil divinely sweet, which she


had by her, filled with fragrance. And laughter-


loving Aphrodite put on all her rich clothes,
and when she had decked herself with gold,
she left sweet-smelling Cyprus and went in haste
towards Troy, swiftly travelling high up among
the clouds. So she came to many-fountained
Ida, the mother of wild creatures and went
straight to the homestead across the mountains.
After her came grey wolves, fawning on her, and
grim-eyed lions, and bears, and fleet leopards,
ravenous for deer: and she was glad in heart to see
them, and put desire in their breasts, so that they all
mated, two together, about the shadowy coombes.
But she herself came to the neat-built shelters,


and him she found left quite alone in the home-


stead—the hero Anchises who was comely as the
gods. All the others were following the herds over
the grassy pastures, and he, left quite alone in the
homestead, was roaming hither and thither and
playing thrillingly upon the lyre. And Aphrodite,
the daughter of Zeus stood before him, being like a
pure maiden in height and mien, that he should not


4It


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


pn py TapByoecev ev obParpoict vonoas.
"Ayytons & opowv édbpagero Oavpatev Te


SQ/r / f \ ~ /

elO0s Te peryeOOs Te Kal eluaTa ciyadoerTa. 85
x an

TET AOV Ev yap EeaTO PaEwoTEpoy TuposS avyNs,

KANO, YPVTELOV, TAMTOLKLAOV? WS O€ TEANVY 89


aTyOeoww apd atandotow éhautreto, Oadtua idéo0at 90
3 oaths \ e/ 4 / Sf
elye O emiyvammrTas EdtKas KaNUKAS TE haEWds’ 87
Oppot © aud amary Serph TeptkarrA€es Hoav. 88
’ 4 >” e of / eee yy
Ayxionv & épos etrev, érros O€ pu avtiov nvda: 91
Yaipe, dvaca’, } Tus wakdpwv Tade COA ixavets,
Vv \ \ 2 We Jim 3 f
Aptepus 4 Antr@ ne xpucén AdpodiTn
BD f 9 \ +X a b ye
7 OEepts nuyevns né yraveatis AOnvn,
4 , , Lele Mice) é Cf a ~
Tov Tus Napitwv dedp HrAvOes, aite Peoior 95
Taow éTatpifovat Kal AOdvaTot Kad€OVTAL, |
os / fuer k wold \ 4
n tts Nupdhawy, ait adoea Kara vep“ovTat
XN A \ N BA / -
7) Nupdov, at Karov pos TOE vateTdovat
KAL THYAS TOTALOV KAL TIOEA TOLNEVTA.
\ S58 NE LS a / Se ,
cot © éye@ év TKOTTLH, TEPLPalvoMEV@ EVL K@P@, 100
Bopov TOUT O, pefo dé Tou Lepa Kaa
@pnaLw TATOL. au & evdpova Oupor ¢ éyouoa
bos pe eta Tpwecow apuT pee & cM HEvaLL avopa.,
ToleL O eforiow Oarepov yovon, avr ap éw avrov
dnpov év Cweuv Kal opav paos nerLovo, 105
OAP.ov év Naois, Kal ynpaos ovoov txéa Oar.
Tov 6 jet Ber ETELTA Avos Ouyatnp ’Adpoditn:
“Ayxion, KUOLOTE Kaparyeveov av0 para,
ov Tis Tot Deos ep Ti ye aHavarnow € elo KeLs;
aXXa Katabynrn TE, yun b€ [Ee yetvato paTnp. 110
"Orpeds & éoti tratHp ovopaKAvTOS, eb TOV aKoOveLs,
1 Wakefield, «adroit etc., MSS:


AI2


V.—TO APHRODITE, 83-111


be frightened when he took heed of her With his’ ~


eyes. Now when Anchises saw her, he marked
her well and wondered at her mien and _ height
and shining garments. For she was clad in a robe
out-shining the brightness of fire, a splendid robe of
gold, enriched with all manner of needlework, which
shimmered like the moon over her tender breasts, a
marvel to see. Also she wore twisted brooches and
shining earrings in the form of flowers; and round
her soft throat were lovely necklaces.

And Anchises was seized with love, and said to
her: “ Hail, lady, whoever of the blessed ones you
are that are come to this house, whether Artemis,
or Leto, or golden Aphrodite, or high-born Themis,
or bright-eyed Athene. Or, maybe, you are one of
the Graces come hither, who bear the gods company
and are called immortal, or else one of the Nymphs
who haunt the pleasant woods, or of those who
inhabit this lovely mountain and the springs of
rivers and grassy meads. I will make you an altar
upon a high peak in a far seen place, and will sacri-
fice rich offerings to you at all seasons. And do you
feel kindly towards me and grant that I may become
a man very eminent among the Trojans, and give
me strong offspring for the time to come. As for
my own self, let me live long and happily, seeing
the light of the sun, and come to the threshold
of old age, a man prosperous among the people.”

Thereupon Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus
answered him: “ Anchises, most glorious of all men
born on earth, know that I am no goddess: why do
_you liken me to the deathless ones? Nay, I am but
a mortal, and a woman was the mother that bare me.
Otreus of famous name is my father, if so be you


413


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


ds maons Dpvyins evTeryntore avaccel.
yA@ocav & vpeTépny Te Kal 7peTépyy cada oda. —
Tpwas yap peydpw pe tpodos tpépev: 4) b€ dtampo
Tmixpyy mad atitarrA*e, Pirkyns Tapa pnTpos
éMova a. 115

ws On TOU yAOooaY YE Kat DeTEpnv ev 010d.
vov O€ pe  aunpT ace Kpue oppamres "A pyechovtns
eK Xopov Apréptoos Xpvonhaxaron, Keradewis.
TOANAL O€ voppas Kal mapOevoe arpect Borat
maiouen, appr © Gprdos ATELPLTOS éeaTepavoro. 120
évO ev He ipmage Xpve opparres “A pryeupovTns” ‘i
TONGA © er Hryaryev epya KATO vyTov avi pwr av,
TOMMY O &KANPOY TE Kal AKTETOV, HV ba OHpes
@popayot PorTaGL KATA aKLOEYTAS EVAUAOUS*
ovo€e Tool yravoew édoxouv puoroov ains* 125
"Ayyioem € pe paoKe mapa Nexeow Kanréeobar
Koupuoiny addon, gol o ayhad TeKVaL rexeto Bau.

avTap émel O71 bel fe Kal eppacer, 1 7) TOU 6 avTis
aBavatov pera Por aTéBn KpaTus A pyespovrns:
avTap eyo co ikounv, Kpatepn O€ poe emeT

aAVvaYKY. 130

aXNa ae tpos Zyvos youvdlopar noe TOKN@V
écOr@v: ov pev yap Ke KaKOL TOLOVOE TEKOLED:
AOMHATHV pf ayayoOv Kal Aatre_pHTnV PtAOTHTOS
Tatpt Te o@ OelEov Kal pyntépe Kédy etdvin
Gols TE KaTLYVHTOLS, Of TOL OmoOEY yeyaacL. 135
ov adi aeKerin vuds Exoopat, ANN etxvia.*
Téurmpat & adyyedov Oka peta Ppvyas atohoT@Xovs
elTrely TAaTpLT Eu@ Kal mnTépt KNdomevy TEP"

1 MELNT give the alternative verse : 7

ef Tot detkeAtn yuvh ooomar HE Kal ovrt.

(‘to see whether I shall be an ill-liking wife for you or no,”’)


414


V.—TO APHRODITE, 112-138


have heard of him, and he reigns over all Phrygia — sh


rich in fortresses. But I know your speech well
beside my own, for a Trojan nurse brought me up at
home: she took me from my dear mother and
reared me thenceforth when I was a little child. So
comes it, then, that I well know your tongue also.
‘And now the Slayer of: Argus with the golden wand
has caught me up from the dance of huntress
Artemis, her with the golden arrows. For there
were many of us, nymphs and marriageable!
maidens, playing together; and an innumerable
company encircled us: from these the Slayer of
Argus with the golden wand rapt me away. He
carried me over many fields of mortal men and
over much land untilled and unpossessed, where
savage wild-beasts roam through shady coombes,
until I thought never again to touch the life-
giving earth with my feet. And he said that I
should be called the wedded wife of Anchises, and
should bear you goodly children. But when he
had told and advised me, he, the strong Slayer of
Argos, went back to the families of the deathless
gods, while I am now come to you: for unbending
necessity is upon me. But I beseech you by Zeus
and by your noble parents—for no base follx could
get such a son as you—-take me now, stainless and
unproved in love, and show me to your father and
careful mother and to your brothers sprung from
the same stock. I shall be no ill-liking daughter
for them, but a likely. Moreover, send a messenger
quickly to the swift-horsed Phrygians, to tell my
father and my sorrowing mother; and they will send


1 “*Cattle-earning,” because an accepted suitor paid for
his bride in cattle.


415


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


of 6é Ké TOL Xpucov Te dts eo Bird 0 vpavrny.

Te UNrOva WW ov d€ moka Kal ayaa béyOar aTrowwa.
TAUTO de TOLNTAS Saivu yd Lov iepoevTa, 141
Titov avOperrotor Kal aBavatotor Ocoicw.

“Os cimovoa Jed YAvKOD ipepov éuBane dupe.
“Ayxiony &° Epos elAey eTOS T épaT ex T ovopater:

Ei ev Ounrn nm éoot, urn 6€ oe yelvato HATNP, 145
"Ortpevs & earl TATHP GVOMAKAUTOS, os ayopevets,
abavarou € é éxnre SuaxTopou evO do Leavers
Eppeo, € éun Oo dNoXOs KEKAHTEAL MMUATA TAVTA*

Ov TLS éTELTA easy ove Ovntav av pam av

evade pe TXNT El, mpl on prrornte puyhvar 150
AUTLKa yop: ovo et KEV én dNos avros "ATroANwY
Tofou at apyupéou 7 poin Berea oTOVOEVTA.
Bovrotunv Kev TreLTa, yUvat éuxvia Gefjor,

ons evvins érruBas ddvat dopxov” Atdos ei.

“Os etrrov AABe yeipa: Prrdomperds 5’ ’Adpoditn
epmre peraatpepleioa KaT Ompara Kara Barovca 156
é5 hexos eVOTPWTOP, 604 mep 7 apos eo Kev avakTt
Xraivnow paraxhs ESTPWLLEVOV’ AUTAP DmepOev
apKT OV Oéppat EKELTO Bapupboyyov Te NEOVTOD,
TOUS avros karérepver € éV oupecty vynrotow. 160

ov © émeb ovv AexXewv eUT OL TOV ereRnaay,
eberpay [eV Ob 7 POTOV aTO Xpoos Eire paewvor,
TOpTras Te yvauTrtas @ édtKas KaduKdS TE Kal

OPfLOUS.
Adae O€ o Covnv ioe ciuata ovyaroevTa,
Exdve Kal KateOnxen € em Opovou dpyuponou 165
"Ayyions: 6 6° érevta Oewv t LoTnTe Kal aion
adavarn TAPENEKTO bea Bporos, od cada eidds.
"Hyos & ay cis addy atroKAlvover vophes
Bods Te cat idia pra voporv é& avOeuoévtav:


416


V.—_TO APHRODITE, 139-169


you gold in plenty and woven stuffs, many splendid — aS


gifts ; take these as. bride-piece. So do, and then
prepare the sweet marriage that is honourable in the
eyes of men and deathless gods.”

When she had so spoken, the goddess put sweet
desire in his heart. And Anchises was seized with
love, so that he opened his mouth and said :

“Tf you are a mortal and a woman was the mother
who bare you, and Otreus of famous name is your
father as you say, and if you are come here by the
will of Hermes the immortal Guide, and are to be
called my wife always, then neither god nor mortal
man shall here restrain me till I have lain with you
in love right now ; no, not even if far-shooting Apollo
himself should launch grievous shafts from his silver
bow. Willingly would I go down into the house of
Hades, O lady, beautiful as the goddesses, once I
had gone up to your bed.”

So speaking, he caught her by the hand. And
laughter-loving Aphrodite, with face turned away and
lovely eyes downcast, crept to the well-spread couch
which was already laid with soft coverings for the
hero; and upon it lay skins of bears and deep-
roaring lions which he himself had slain in the
high mountains. And when they had gone up upon
the well-fitted bed, first Anchises took off her bright
jewelry of pins and twisted brooches and earrings and
necklaces, and loosed her girdle and stripped off her
bright garments and laid them down upon a silver-
studded seat. Then by the will of the gods and
destiny he lay with her, a mortal man with an
immortal goddess, not clearly knowing what he did.

But at the time when the herdsmen drive their
oxen and hardy sheep back to the fold from the


47


THE HOMERIC HYMNS.


Thos ap ’Avyion pev emt yAuKdy Urvov Exeve 170


/ b) \ x \ C7 /
VHOULOV, AUTH O€ Ypol EvvUTO elwaTa Kad.
écoapevn O ev Tavra TEpi Ypot Ota Deawy
M4 \ 1 / b) / 9 iO
éoTn Tap! KALoLn, KEVTTOLNTOLO” pEedAaO pov

a if leo N Ip: EJ /

Kvpe KapN' KaAXOS O€ TAPELdwWY aTréhApTrEV


auBpotov, olov tT éotiv évatepavov KuOepeins, 175 |


b) c Dy D vaieh By 35, > of Sr Bape ;
é& Umvou T avéyerpev Eros T EPAaT EX T OVOMACEY

“O 6 , / ¢/ P) “

paoeo, Aapdavidn: Ti vu viypeTov UTvoV iavets ;

\ , By € Vy 3 N 3 VA 53 q
Kal dpacat, eb Tot omoln éyor itvoadAXopas eivat,
wf 2 \ a P) > a f
olny On we TO TPATov ev ObOarpotos voynaas ;

e\ SQ? A pa) c Pee ee yd € 4

Os bad: 0 0 €E Urrvoto par Eupmatéws UTAKOUCED.
as € idev deupyy Te Kal Oupata Kan Adpodirys, 181
TapBnoev TE Kab Ooce TAPAKNLOOY er pamrev any’
anf 8 avtis xraivy TE KadUWato KANG Tpocwnra

f

eat py hoc opevos ETEA TTEPOEVTA TPOTNVOA®

AvTiKa @ @$ TA TpOTA, Ged, ioov oplarwotarn, 185
EYVOV WS Feos 7a0a: ov © ov Vn LEPTES EeiTEs.
arn or 7 pos Znvos youvalouat alryLoxoro,
Hay jue COVT’ Gpevqvov ev ave pon oro € édons
vate, ann éNéatp* émet ov BroGadpuos avnp


ryiryVETAL, 6S TE Jeals evvaceTat abavatyor. 190 §f


Tov 8 huelBer’ érevta Ards Ouydrnp "Adpoditn:
"Ayxyion, KvdLoTE xarabunt ay avd pomoy,
Gapoet, poe TL ONL feTa ppeal detu8t inv’
ou yap Tol TL déos mal éewy KQKOV ef ewedev Ye,
ovo ddrAN@V paxdpov: érel h diros éool Oeoiat, 195
\ 9} of / es a b) / > /
aol 6 éotat didos vids, ds év Towecow avaket
Kal Tatoes Tadeo OLamTrEpEs exyeyaovTes”®
T@ 0€ Kal Atvetas dvou EaceTat, ovVEKa fh aivov
1 Stephanus: apa, MSS. 2 Sikes.
3 Baumeister: eyyeyaovrat, MSS.
418


+a UE rie naib ate ne We asa Pa lg


V.—TO APHRODITE, 170-198


sleep upon Anchises, but herself put on her rich
raiment. And when the bright goddess had fully
clothed herself, she stood by the couch, and her
head reached to the well-hewn roof-tree ; from her
cheeks shone unearthly beauty such as belongs to
rich-crowned Cytherea... Then she aroused him from
sleep and opened her mouth and said:

“Up, son of Dardanus!—why sleep you _ so
heavily p—and consider whether 1 look as I did

_ when first you saw me with your eyes.”

So she spake. And he awoke in a moment and
obeyed her. But when he saw the neck and lovely
eyes of Aphrodite, he was afraid and turned his
eyes aside another way, hiding his comely face with

his cloak. Then he uttered winged words and

F entreated her:

« So soon as ever I saw you with my eyes, goddess,

_ I knew that you were divine; but you did not tell

me truly. Yet by Zeus who holds the aegis I
beseech you, leave me not to lead a palsied life
among men, but have pity on me; for he who

- lies with a deathless goddess is no hale man
afterwards.”

Then Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus answered
him: “ Anchises, most glorious of mortal men, take
courage and be not too fearful in your heart. You
need fear no harm from me nor from the other
blessed ones, for you are dear to the gods: and you
shall have a dear son who shall reign among the
Trojans, and children’s children after him, springing
up continually. His name shall be Aeneas,! because

' The name Aeneas is here connected with the epithet


amos (awiul): similarly the name Odysseus is derived
(in Od. i. 62) from 65vccoua (I grieve).


419
EE 2


flowery pastures, even then Aphrodite poured soft eae


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


/ ov v4 CW Ne Pee 7? BY 4 > A
goyev ayYos, Evexa BpoTov avépos éumecov evv7y:
ayxiGeou 66 wddtota KaTAaOvyToY avOpeTroVv 200
altel ab’ vueTepns yevens eLOds Te PuHY TE.
5 \
"H toe wev EavOov Vavupndea pytiéta Leds
ef A \ / CARO ics / /
HpTace Ov Ota KadXOS, Wy aOavdtotae peTeln
cat te Atos Kata O@pma Oeois értowvoyoevot,
Oatpa idetv, wavTecct TeTLéevos aDavaTotct, 205
aA ,
Vpuaéou Ex KPNTHpos abvaocay véextap épvOpov.
Tpaa dé mévlos adaotov eve hpévas, OvdE TL HOEL,
A Ld if eX b) / J O) Ae
Om ot pirov viov avyiprTrace Oéomis aedda-
Tov On éTELTAa yoarKe SiauTrEpEs Hata TaVTA
Kat pv Levs édénoe, didov 0é of vios arowva, 210
immous apotmobas, Tot tT aBavatous hopéovet.
TOUS ob S@pov GOwxev Exe eitrev 5é ExaoTA
i
Znvos épypwoovyyat OedxTopos ’Apyehovrns,
ws €or a0dvatos Kal aynpws ica Oeotawv.
avtap émerd1) Znvos 6 y Exdvev ayyediaor, 215
Te ae a aL / i ‘ 4 /
ouxéT érretta yoacke, yeynOer o€ dpévas evoor,
if emis A b) / ? a
ynOoouvos 8 tmmovow aeddoTObET OW OYELTO.
€ iy f
‘Os & ad Teaver ypuccdpovos ipracev “Has,
UpETEpNS yevens, emetKeNov aSavarotor.
an F F
BH 8 ipev aitncovoa Kerawedéa Kpoviwva, 290
/ 5 '
aGavatov T éivat Kal Cov Huata TavTa:
a N \ b) / Ne / Suh
TH O€ Zevs émevevoe Kal Expynvev €€O@p.
, SUNS spas \ \ le > \
yntin, ovo évonoe peta dpeot ToTVia Has
¢e ILA an / wi SP. an ’ hg
HEnV artnoar EVoal T ATO yHpas ONOLOV.
\ ba) ed \ BY / v4
TOV O 1 TOL ELWS MEV EXEV TONUIPATOS HB, 225
>) la f i b] (4
Hot teprropevos ypucoGpove, npiyevetn


420


V.—TO APHRODITE, 199-226


I felt awful grief in that I laid me in the bed of a —


mortal man: yet are those of your race always the
most like to gods of all mortal men in beauty and
in stature.!

Verily wise Zeus carried off golden-haired Gany-
medes because of his beauty, to be amongst the
Deathless Ones and pour drink for the gods in the
house of Zeus—a wonder to see—, honoured by all
the immortals as he draws the red nectar from the
golden bowl. But grief that could not be soothed
filled the heart of Tros; for he knew not whither
the heaven-sent whirlwind had caught up his dear
son, so that he mourned him always, unceasingly,
until Zeus pitied him and gave him high-stepping
horses such as carry the immortals as recompense for
his son! These he gave him asa gift. And at the
command of Zeus, the Guide, the slayer of Argus,
told him all, and how his son would be deathless
and unageing, even as the gods. So when Tros
heard these tidings from Zeus, he no longer kept
mourning but rejoiced in his heart and rode joyfully
with his storm-footed horses.

So also golden-throned Eos rapt away Tithonus
who was of your race and like the deathless gods.
And she went to ask the dark-clouded Son of Cronos
that he should be deathless and live eternally; and
Zeus bowed his head to her prayer and fulfilled her
desire. Too simple was queenly Eos: she thought
not in her heart to ask youth for him and to strip
him of the slough of deadly age. So while he enjoyed
the sweet flower of life he lived rapturously with
golden-throned Eos, the early-born, by the streams

1 Aphrodite extenuates her disgrace by claiming that the


race of Anchises is almost divine, as is shown in the persons
of Ganymedes and Tithonus.


A421


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


vate Tap Oxeavoio pons ert meipact yains:

avTap érel TPOTAL TONAL KATEXUYTO EGetpat

KaMHS x Kepanhs eumyeveos Té yevetou,

TOU é 7) TOb evr is peev am elXETo moTvLa "Has, 230
avr ov o avT aTitadrev vl peyapovow éyouca,

aitw T auBpocin Te Kal elwata Kara dLdodca.

GAN’ OTE OF) TAaULTAY OTUYEPOV KATA YHpas EmreLyev,
ovdé TL KLWHTAL MEAEwY SUVAT OVO avaEtpal,

Oe O€ ob KaTa Ovyov apiatn haiveto Boudry: 235
év Oardpo xatéOnke, Gupas 0 éréOnne hacivas.

Tov S 4 Toe hwvy péet! domeTos, OVSE TL KLKUS

Eo’, on mapos éoxev evi yvauTrToict medeoow.

Ovx av éyo ye oe Tolov év aBavatotow éEXoimnv
alavatoy T evar Kal Coe Huata TavTa. 240
GX’ ei ev TOLODTOS é@Y eiOds TE Oéuas TE !
CMOLS NMETEPOS TE TOGLS KEKANMEVOS ELNS,
ovx av éreita pe axos TuKWwas dogvas apdiKa-

AUTTOL.
vov 06 GE pep TAXA yhpas Omoiloy audicaruyrer
VIAELES, TOT E€NTELTA TapiaTaraL av pwr ota, DAS
ovhopevon, KAPMATI POY, OTe oTUyeoUTt Gecot wep.

Avtap é enol yey” OVELOOS eV aavarotae Ocotouw
eo oETAL TPAT a. TAVTO Sapmrepes eivera ceio,
ot mpl é“ous odpous Kal UnTLAS, ais TOTE TAVTAS
alavatous cuvemea Kat abynr hat yuvargi, 250
TapBecKxov: mdvras yap éuov SduvacKe vonma.
vov O€ 67 ovKETL ot OTOMA YeloeTat* éEOVOUHVAL
TovTO pet AOavato.ow, émel wadda TOAAOV aadcOnD,
oXETALOV, OUK GVOTACTOP,® aTeTAAYXONY 5é vOOLO,
traioa 0 wd Savy éBéunv Bpote evvnetoa. O55

1 Wolf: pez, MSS. 2 Martin: orovaxnjoerat, MSS.
3 Clarke : évotarov, MSS.
422


V.—TO APHRODITE, 227-255


of Ocean, at the ends of the earth; but when the __


first grey hairs began to ripple from his comely head
and noble chin, queenly Kos kept away from his bed,
though she cherished him in her house and nourished
him with food and ambrosia and gave him rich
clothing. But when loathsome old age pressed full
upon him, and he could not move nor lift his limbs,
this seemed to her in her heart the best counsel:
she laid him in a room and put to the shining
doors. There he babbles endlessly, and no more
bas strength at all, such as once he had in his
supple limbs.

I would not have you be deathless among the
deathless gods and live continually after such sort.
Yet if you could live on such as now you are in look
and in form, and be called my husband, sorrow
would not then enfold my careful heart. But, as
it is, harsh} old age will soon enshroud you —ruth-
less age which stands someday at the side of every
man, deadly, wearying, dreaded even by the gods.

And now because of you I shall have great shame
among the deathless gods henceforth, continually.
For until now they feared my jibes and the wiles by
which, or soon or late, I mated all the immortals with
mortal women, making them all subject to my will.
But now my mouth shall no more have this power
among the gods; for very great has been my madness,
my miserable and dreadful madness, and I went
astray out of my mind who have gotten a child
beneath my girdle, mating with a mortal man.


1 So Christ connecting the word with wuds. L. and S.
give = duotos, ‘‘ common to all.”


423


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


\ f Se rN \ Aye > , b) /
TOV pév, enV On T™ p@TOV ion pdos HENLOLO,
Nvpdae po Opeyrovow o opecn@or BabvxorTot,
at T00€ VALET GOVE LW Spos poeya TE Ca eov Te
at p ore Ovntois our’ adavatotow érovTat.
Onpov peev Sa@over Kat apBporov eLdap édovar 260
Kab TE LET aBavarouce Kaov Xo pov éppacavro.
Thee O€ Leihvot KQL €UTKOTOS “A pyetpov7ns
piayovT ev PtAOTHTL MUXO oTreL@v époévTwv.
Tho. & dw 7) éXatas He Spves wrprxdpnvot
, 4 SN Sean
yelvopevnow epvoav emt vGovi Pwriavetpn, 265
/ V4 > by ig La)
Kadai, THAEOaovVa aL, ev OUpEeaiv UYYNAOLOW.
e a ee A / Sn se ,
ETTAG HALBATOL, TEMEVH O€ E KLKAHTKOVOW
b) / \ ’ LA \ 4 ws
aBavatwv: tas 6 ov TL BpoTot Keipovat aLdnpo:
GAN OTE KEV 67 wotpa TapecTHKY JavaToto,
b) i \ an SN \ / 7
afdvetar wey TP@Tov emt KOovt dEevdpea Kara, 270
Prowos & apoherreprpO wud es, mittovot © am oCol,
TOV o€ o opod bux AeiTrer paos nErLOLO.
at pev éov Opevpovar Tapa opiow viov éyoud at.
TOV fev émnyv On Tp@ToV EAN TOAVHPATOS HAN,


aougiv TOL devpo0 Cea SeiEouad TE Tata. 275
gol O éyo, dppa Ke Tav’Ta peta hpeci TaytTa
Seo,


és TEMTTOV ETOS avTus Nene viov ayouca.

TOV [Lev émqy én 7 POT OV ions Oaros opbarpoice,

ynOnoets o opowy: para yap Oeoeirenos é gota:

agers 0 avtixa vin qott lAsov NVELLOET OAD. 280

Ny dé TUS elpnTat o¢ Katadyn av avOpamon,

H TU gol hirov viov v0 Coun Gero LYTNPs

T@ 06 ov puOcicOat memvn_évos, ws oe KEANE’

pdcbas! toe Nuudns KadruKewm.oos Exyovov eivat,

al TOOE VaLEeTaOVOLY Opos KaTaELméevov UAH. 285
1 Matthiae: acl, MSS.


424


V.—TO APHRODITE, 256-285


As for the child, as soon as he sees the light Ate ok


sun, the deep-breasted mountain Nymphs who inhabit
this great and holy mountain shall bring him up.
They rank neither with mortals nor with immortals :
long indeed do they live, eating heavenly food and
treading the lovely dance among the immortals, and
with them the Sileni and the sharp-eyed Slayer of
Argus mate in the depths of pleasant caves ; but at
their birth pines or high-topped oaks spring up with
. them upon the fruitful earth, beautiful, flourishing
trees, towering high upon the lofty mountains (and
men call them holy places of the immortals, and never
mortal lops them with the axe); but when the fate
of death is near at hand, first those lovely trees
wither where they stand, and the bark shrivels away
about them, and the twigs fall down, and at last the
life of the Nymph and of the tree leave the light ot
the sun together. These Nymphs shall keep my son
with them and rear him, and as soon as he is come
to lovely boyhood, the goddesses will bring him here
to you and show you your child. But, that I may
tell you all that I have in mind, I will come here
again towards the fifth year and bring you my son.
So soon as ever you have seen him—a scion to
delight the eyes—., you will rejoice in beholding
him; for he shall be most godlike: then bring him
at once to windy Ilion. And if any mortal man ask
you who got your dear son beneath her girdle,
remember to tell him as I bid you: say he is
the offspring of one of the flower-like Nymphs
who inhabit this forest-clad hill. But if you


425


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


el O€ KEV efelrns Kat emeveeat adpove Oup@

év prdornre purynvar evo Tepave Kudepein,

Zevs oe Xohwaduevos Bahreer oroevre KEPAavv@.

elpnTtat To. TWavTa* ov Oé hpeci chat vonoas,

icyveo “nd ovopatve, Oedv 0 émomiveo uhvev. 290
“Os etrroto’ Ee mpos opavov HvEem“oEvTa.
Xatpe, Ged, Kvtrpoto évetipevyns pedéovea:

aev 6 éyo apEdwevos peTaBnoopat addov és

ULVOP.


cept alll Nell haat Apap Ee Bectigic' rer :


VI


El> A®POATTHN


Aloinu, Kpucoar rePavor, KaNNV ‘Ad pooiray
doopat, i) waons Kumpov Kpnoeyva Nedoyxev
elvanins, 601 ew Leptvpov pLevos vypov aevTos
NVELKEY KATA KOLA morudoia Boto Jaracons
Cope EVL UAAAK@* 17 THY O€ YPUTAPTTUKES ‘Opa 5

oeEavT: doTATtos, Tept O a8 pora eiwata Eaoar:
Kpari & én aGavare orepavny eVTUKTOV EOnKaY
KANHY, xpuceiny év O€ TpnToioe AoBotouv
avoew operyahkov Xpucoto TE TLULNEVTOS:
Seuph S ap’ amanh Kal o7Oeow apyupéotowv —-:10
Cppovae Npuecotaty exOo LEO, oiak TEp aural

Opae Koo peta ny NPVTaMTUKES, OT TOT lovey
és Xopov (MEpoEVTa beady wall oopara TAT POS.
avuTap eTELOn TaVTA TEPL KpOl KOT MoV EOnKa?,
Fyov és adavatous: of 6 naomafovto LoovTes 15
xepot T edeELowvro Kab PNT Avro EKATTOS
etvat KOUpLOinV AO OV Kal oixad adyecOa,
cei0os Oavualortes toatedavov Kvdepeins.


426


VI.—TO APHRODITE, 1-18


tell all and foolishly boast that you lay with a ene


crowned Aphrodite, Zeus will smite you in his anger
with a smoking thunderbolt. Now I have told you
all. Take heed: refrain and name me not, but have
regard to the anger of the gods.”

When the goddess had so spoken, she soared up to
windy heaven.

Hail, goddess, queen of well-builded Cyprus !
with you have I begun; now I will turn me to
another hymn.


Vi
TO APHRODITE


I witt sing of stately Aphrodite, gold-crowned and
beautiful, whose dominion is the walled cities of all
sea-set Cyprus. There the moist breath of the
western wind wafted her over the waves of the loud-
moaning sea in soft foam, and there the gold-
filleted Hours welcomed her joyously. They
clothed her with heavenly garments: on her head
they put a fine, well-wrought crown of gold, and in
her pierced ears they hung ornaments of orichale
and precious gold, and adorned her with golden
necklaces over her soft neck and snow-white breasts,
jewels which the gold-filleted Hours wear themselves
whenever they go to their father’s house to join the
lovely dances of the gods. And when they had
fully decked her, they brought her to the gods, who
welcomed her when they saw her, giving her their
hands. Each one of them prayed that he might
lead her home to be his wedded wife, so greatly
were they amazed at the beauty of violet-crowned


Cytherea.
427


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Xaip éruxoBrtEhape, yAvevpetduye Sos O° ep
lege |
ayave
vikny TOdE hépecOar, éunv O évTvvov aoLony. 20
avTap éy@ Kal ceio Kal AXANs pvnTop aoLons.


VII
EIX AIONTZON


"Apdi Arovucov, Yewéerns éptxvdéos vidr,
pvngoual, as epavn Tapa Civ’ ados aTpuyeToLO
aKTH emt TpoBAHTL venvin avopt éorxas,
TpwOnSn Karat O€ TeptocetovTo EOetpat,
Kuadveat, Papos bé wept atuBapots Exev wots a
Toppupeov’ taxa © avopes EvegEAMOV ATO VHOS
AniaTal mpoyevovTo Gows él olvoTta ToVTOL,
Tuponvot: Tous 6 Aye KaKkos wopos: of bé iOdvTES
vedoav €s addHXOUS, Taxa O ExBopov. aia O

ENOVTES 7

claav éml opeTépns vnos KEXapNevolr HTOP. 10
vioy yap puv epavto dtotpepéwv Bacirnov
civar Kal deapois EOcdov Sev apyanéotar.
tov © ovx toxave Oecud, AUyo. 6 amO THAODGE


TLTTOV
lal 3 \ A A \ v4 b] /
VEeLp@Vv HOE TOOMY: 0 S€ pEeldsda@Vv EXAaONTO
Oupac. kvavéotce’ KuUBEepvnTyns Sé vonaas 15


p dameay A @ e / b) Ne / /
avtixa ols étdporow exéKAETO Havyncev TE-
, \ / la
Aatmoviot, tiva Tovde Oeov decpeve? EdXovTes,
KapTEepov; ovdé dépewy SvUvaTAaL pv VNDS EVEPYNS.
* \ \ cf », 3 \ eae. / > Fé
}) yap Levs bbe vy éotlv 7 apyupoto&os “AmoAX@v
d\ / > \ b] a An
né Ilocerddwy: érret ov Ovntotor Bpototow 20


428


VII.—TO DIONYSUS, 1-20


Hail, sweetly-winning, coy-eyed goddess! Grant
that I may gain the victory in this contest, and order
you my song. And now I will remember you and
another song also.


Vil
TO DIONYSUS


I witt tell of Dionysus, the son of glorious Semele,
~ how he appeared on a jutting headland by the shore
of the fruitless sea, seeming like a stripling in the
first flush of manhood: his rich, dark hair was waving
about him, and on his strong shoulders he wore a
purple robe. Presently there came swiftly over the
sparkling sea Tyrsenian! pirates on a well-decked
ship—a miserable doom led them on. When they
saw him they made signs to one another and sprang
out quickly, and seizing him straightway, put him on
board their ship exultingly; for they thought him
the son of heaven-nurtured kings. They sought to
bind him with rude bonds, but the bonds would not
hold him, and the withes fell far away from his hands
and feet: and he sat with a smile in his dark eyes.
Then the helmsman understood all and cried out at
once to his fellows and said:

“Madmen ! what god is this whom you have taken
and bind, strong that he is? Not even the well-
built ship can carry him. Surely this is either
Zeus or Apollo who has the silver bow, or Poseidon,
for he looks not like mortal men but like the gods

1 Probably not Etruscans, but the non-Hellenic peoples of


Thrace and (according to Thucydides) of Lemnos and Athens.
Cp. Herodotus i. 57; Thucydides iv. 109.


429


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


eiKenos, arha Gcols, ov ‘On parva Sopat éxouoly.

GN ayer , avr op ad dpev én vy mei Povo peNaivns

avriKa pao emt Xetpas iadrere, py TL KONWOELS

open qr  apyanhéous T ave [OUS Kab hatdama TONAHDV.
“Os Paro: TOV O d.pxos oTuyEp@ jvimame p00 25

datpovt’, ovpov Gpa, dua & taotiov EXKEO vNOS

cuptave éria rAaBov: Gde 6 avdT avdpecot

Herre.

ENT Opell, n Aiyunrov apigerar I) 6 YE Kvmpov

i) és ‘TrrepBopeous 7; i EKaTT EPO" és O€ TENEUTID 7

ex TOT épet avTou Te pidous Kal KTHpATA TdVTa 30

OUS TE KAT UYVITOUS, éqrel ply. eBane Satpov.

“Os eitr@v lorov TE Kat ioTtov ENKETO NOS.
éumvevoev © avewos pécov tatiov: audl 0 ap OTAa
KaTTavucay’ Taxa O€ odiv épaiveto Oavpata Epya.
oivos wev Tp@TLaTA Oony ava VHA méeNaLvaV 35
nOUTrOTOS KEeAdpUS EVMdS, WpVUTO O OOpy
auBpecin vavTtas 6€ Tados NdBe TavTas LOovTas.
avtixa © axpoTatoy Tapa iatiov é&eTavucOn
dpmeros évOa kat &vOa, katexpnuvavto O€ TOKE
Botpves: apd torov 6€ peas cio cero KLeo OS, 40
avleos TnrACOdw?, Kapiers d° éqb Kapmos op@per’
TaVTES dé oKarpot aTepavous ¢ exon" of dé LoovTes,
va} On + ror’ emTerTa kuBepynrny ex €Nevov
27) Tehday nol apa ope Aéwy yeveT ev6o0 v0s
SeLvos one axpotatys, peya & éBpayev, év 0 apa

peoon 45
dipKT Ov éqroina ev Lacvavxeva, TNMATA paver
dv © éoTn pepavia: heov & emt oéXmatos aKpou
dewvov uTodpa Lowy: of & és mpvpuny éboByOer,


1 Hermann: uh & #57, M (other MSS. are further
corrupted).


430


VII.—TO DIONYSUS, 21-48


who dwell on Glympus. Come, then, let us set him


free upon the dark shore at once: do not lay hands
on him, lest he grow angry and stir up dangerous
winds and heavy squalls.”

So said he: but the master chid him with taunting
words: “ Madman, mark the wind and heip hoist sail
on the ship: catch all the sheets. As for this fellow
we men will see to him: I reckon he is bound for
Egypt or for Cyprus or to the Hyperboreans or

‘further still. But in the end he will speak out and
tell us his friends and all his wealth and his brothers,
now that providence has thrown him in our way.”
When he had said this, he had mast and sail
hoisted on the ship, and the wind filled the sail and
_ the crew hauled taut the sheets on either side. But
soon strange things were seen among them. First
of all sweet, fragrant wine ran streaming throughout
all the black ship and a heavenly smell arose, so that
all the seamen were seized with amazement when
they saw it. And all at once a vine spread out both
ways along the top of the sail with many clusters
hanging down from it, and a dark ivy-plant twined
about the mast, blossoming with flowers, and with
rich berries growing on it; and all the thole-pins were
covered with garlands. When ihe pirates saw all
this, then at last they bade the helmsman to put the
ship to land. But the god changed into a dreadful -
lion there on the ship, in the bows, and roared
loudly: amidships also he showed his wonders and
created a shaggy bear which stood up ravening,
while on the forepeak was the lion glaring fiercely
with scowling brows. And so the sailors fled into the


431


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


aud cuBepyntny 5é caodpova Oupov éxovTa
/ eH Neue: WS) Us ON Des M4 b i
értay dp éxmdnyévtes: 0 0 é€Eamivns émopovcas 50
) Ge ee / \ / ? / |
apyxov &€d’, ot dé Ovpale Kaxov popoyv éEadvovtes
TAVTES OMOS THONGAD, éTrel LOoV, eis Aa Oiav,
derives 0 éyévovto: KkuBepyntny 0 édenoas
by , BY4 if > tf n
éoyele kat pty EOnKke TavorPtov eiTré Te “UOOV"
Odpoer, tite KaTopt, TO éu@ Kexaptopeve Ovpr@: 55
SNe Ne / LP rN f /
ell O éy@ Arovucos épiBpopos, dv TéKe HTHP
Kadpnis eeu Aros év @iroTnte peyetoa.
Xaipe, TéKos LewéANHS EVOTLOOS’ OVOE TH Eo TL
aelo ye AnOomevoy yAUKEPIVY KOTUHTAL AoLOnY.


Vaid
EIS APEA


aionApes UTeppevera, Bpiodppate, Xpuccon ANE,
oBprpobupe, pépacme, TONLT COE, NarKoxopuaTa,
KapTEpoXetp, aporynTe, Sopiabeves, € EpKos ‘OrdvpTov,
Nixns ev TONE /LOLO TATE, cuvaporye Oéputotos,
avreBiove TUpavye, OuKaLoTaT@D a aye porter,
jvopens TKNTTOVXE, mupavyed KUKNOV EXLT TOV
atBépos ETTATOPOUS € evl Telpeoty, evda g¢ T @AOL
— Cadderyées TpLTarns UTép AVTUYOS atev exover’
cr001, Bporar é emixoupe, doTnp evap eos * Bn,
mpnv KaTactihBev cehas voter € és Biotnta 10
NMETEPHV KAL KAPTOS APHLOV, WS KE OUVALWHD
cevac0at KaKOTHTA TLKpHY aT éwolo KapHVvon,
Kal uxns amatndov vToyvauvat dpec opuny,
1M: ed0adréos ‘ flourishing,” ET.


1


432


VIIL.—TO ARES, 1-13


stern and crowded bemused about the right- minded


helmsman, until suddenly the lion sprang upon the
master and seized him ; and when the sailors saw it
they leapt out overboard one and all into the bright
sea, escaping from a miserable fate, and were
changed into dolphins. But on the helmsman
Dionysus had mercy and held him back and made
him altogether happy, saying to him:

“Take courage, good . . .; you have found favour
with my heart. I am loud-crying Dionysus whom
Cadmus’ daughter Semele bare of union with Zeus.”
Hail, child of fair-faced Semele! He who forgets


you can in no wise order sweet song.


VIll
TO ARES


_ Args, exceeding in strength, chariot-rider, golden-
helmed, doughty in heart, shield-bearer, Saviour of
cities, harnessed in bronze, strong of arm, un-
wearying, mighty with the spear, O defence of
Olympus, father of warlike Victory, ally of Themis,
stern governor of the rebellious, leader of righteous
men, sceptred King of manliness, who whirl your
fiery sphere among the planets in their sevenfold
courses through the aether wherein your blazing
steeds ever bear you above the third firmament of
heaven ; hear me, helper of men, giver of dauntless
youth! Shed down a kindly ray from above upon
my life, and strength of war, that I may be able to
drive away bitter cowardice from my head and crush
down the deceitful impulses of my soul. Restrain


433


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Ouuod T av Hevos 0&0 KAT LOX EME, os BV epeOnoe
puromoos KpvEpiys émBawweper” AXA ov Odpaoos 15
60s, MaKap, ELpHvNs Te wéverv év ATHmoaL Oecpois
ducpevéwy mpoduyovta o0ov Kijpds te Biaiovs.


TX
EIS) APTEMIN


“Aprepw Dyvel, Movdca, KacryynT yD ‘Exaroto,
mapOevon 4 loxéeaupan, opotpodoy “AmoAXvoS,
nO tmmrous apraca Babvaxotvoro MérnTOos
piupa dua 2 mupyns TaryX pvc eov Gp pa OLMKEL
és KXdpov aumehocooar, 00° dpyuporofos "ATrOAXN@Y
HoTaL popvatov éxatnBorov & lox éarpay. 6 i
Kat ov PED OvUT@ xaipe beat & apa TAG Oot doin
avTap eyo ge TpaTa Kal éx céOev a apxop deibew,
gev 0 éym apEdpevos peTaBnoopuar adXov és ; Dpvov.


xX


©


EI> A®POAITHN


Kumpoyev Kuéperav deloopal, NTE Bpotoice
petdexa d@pa didwow, ep pEepT@ dé TpocaTe
aiel perdsaes Kab eb ipepT ov Oéet av0os.

Xaipe, bea, Zadapivos * eVKTLMEDNS pedéove'a
eivanins TE Kumpov bos S (pepoecoay colony. 5
avTap eyo Kal oeio Kal AXANS pYnTOM aoLo}s.


1 All MSS. save M which has xatpe ménapa, Kvdqpns,
‘hail, blessed one, (queen of) Cythera.”


434


X.—TO APHRODITE


also the keen fury of my heart which provokes m eget


to tread the ways of blood-curdling strife. Rather,
O blessed one, give you me boldness to abide within
the harmless laws of peace, avoiding strife and
hatred and the violent fiends of death.


IX
TO ARTEMIS


Muss, sing of Artemis, sister of the Far-shooter,
the virgin who delights in arrows, who was fostered
with Apollo. She waters her horses from Meles
deep in reeds, and swiftly drives her all-golden
chariot through Smyrna to vine-clad Claros where
Apollo, god of the silver bow, sits waiting for the
far-shooting goddess who delights in arrows.

And so hail to you, Artemis, in my song and to all
goddesses as well. Of you first I sing and: with you
I begin ; now that I have begun with you; I will turn
to another song.


Xx
TO APHRODITE
~ Or Cytherea, born in Cyprus, I will sing. She


gives kindly gifts to men: smiles are ever on her
lovely face, and lovely is the brightness that plays
over it.

Hail, goddess, queen of well-built Salamis and sea-
girt Cyprus; grant mea cheerful song. And now
I will remember you and another song also.


435


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


XI
EI> AOHNAN


Tlanrdd’ “A@nvainu épucitrory apyom daetoey,
devnv, 7 ovv” Apne mérEr TrOAEHLA Eprya
TepOGopueval Te TOANES GUTH TE TTONELOL TE,

Kat T épptoato Naov lovTa Te Vico OpmevoY TE.


Xaipe, bed, dds 8 dupe téynv ebdarmovinv te. 5 |
XII
EIS HPAN


Hpnv aetdw ypucoOpovor, iv téxe Pein,
aBavatov 1 Bacireav, Umelpox ov eloos Eyoucay,
Znvos épuySovTrovo Kao UYyYHTHY ddoxov Té,

KvOpny, 4 iv. TAVTES pana pes KATA pax pov "OdvpTrov
atomevot Tiovow owas Art TepTreKEepavva. 5


|


XIII
Ely AHMHTPAN


Anuntnp UKOMOV, emp Oeay, dpxop aeloely,
avTiy Kal KOUpN), “mepiKarnea Tlepepovecav.
Xaipe, Jed, cal tHvde cdov mort apxe &
aoons.
1 Matthiae: &@avartyiv, MSS.


436


» geod se


oe


XII.—TO DEMETER


XI
TO ATHENA


Or Pallas Athene, guardian of the city, I begin
to sing. Dread is she, and with Ares she loves deeds
of war, the sack of cities and the shouting and the
battle. Itis she who saves the people as they go out
to war and come back.

Hail, goddess, and give us good fortune with
happiness !


XII
TO HERA


I sine of golden-throned Hera whom Rhea bare.
Queen of the immortals is she, surpassing all in
beauty: she is the sister and the wife of loud-
thundering. Zeus,—the glorious one whom all the
blessed throughout high Olympus reverence and
honour even as Zeus who delights in thunder.


XIII
TO DEMETER
I Begin to sing of rich-haired Demeter, awful
goddess, of her and of her daughter lovely
Persephone.


Hail, goddess! Keep this city safe,'and govern
my song.


437


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


XIV
EIS MHTEPA @®EQN


A /
Mytépa po. tavtwv te Oeoy TavT@y T av0poTav
aA if
vpvet, Movaoa riryera, Atos Ovyatnp peyadoto,
eC / a
7 KpoTdX@v TUTaVeY T ayn cvV TE BpOoMos AVABY
By IQ\ / \ a f
evadey nO AVKOV KAAYYH YapoTOv TE NeovTo@Vv |
Pat 2) cetd sree Nie \GY yf , al
OUPEA T NYXNEVTA KAL UANEVTES EVAVAOL. | 5
K \ \ N e/ ; a @ if Qe’ UA aA > OF
al TV MEV OVUTM Yalpe Ceat GC Apa TAGAL AOLON.


XV
EI> HPAKAEA AEONTOOTMON


¢€ / SN ey, 9507 A fy £9.> 37
Hpaknréa, Aros viov, aetcopuat, Ov mey aptoTtov
i a: 99 , / BY if

yetvat émtxPoviav OnBys eve KaXKOpoLo Lv

Ade puqvn puxeioa Kehawepel K poviwve:

OS Trply pev KATA yatav abo parov 708 oo


TrAACmEvOsS TopTHaw Ur KvpucOhos dvaxtos! 5
TOAAG pev autos épeEey atdoanra, ToAAAG O
aveTrn*?


pov © dn KaTa Kadov &o5 vidoevTos 'Onprov
vaier TepTropevos Kal Eyes KaAALTdUpOV “Hyp.
Xaitpe, dvak, Aros vie didov & apernv te Kal
ONPov.
1 Most MSS. : anuatver’ aeOrAcvav <de> xparads, M.
2 Most MSS. : etoxa egpya, M.
438


XV._TO HERACLES THE LION-HEARTED


XIV
TO THE MOTHER OF THE GODS


I priTHEs, clear-voiced Muse, daughter of mighty
Zeus, sing of the mother of all gods and men. She
is well-pleased with the sound of rattles and of
timbrels, with the voice of flutes. and the outcry
of wolves and bright-eyed lions, with echoing hills


~ and wooded coombes.


And so hail to you in my song and to all goddesses
as well! |


XV
TO HERACLES THE LION-HEARTED


I wit sing of Heracles, the son of Zeus and much
the mightiest of men on earth. Alemena bare him
in Thebes, the city of lovely dances, when the dark-
clouded Son cf Cronos had lain with her. Once he
used to wander over unmeasured tracts of land and
sea at the bidding of King Eurystheus, and himself
did many deeds of violence and endured many ;
but now he lives happily in the glorious home of
snowy Olympus, and has neat-ankled Hebe for his
wife.

Hail, lord, son of Zeus! Give me success and
prosperity. |


439


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


XVI
EIS ASKAHIIION


b] an / 3 \ YA F039 a)
Intnpa voowy AckXnTrLov apxYom aloe,
CN ’ / S b) / fa \
viov "AmoAAwvoS, TOV éyeivato Ota Kopmvis
Awtiaw év tredio, xovpn Preyvov Bactr4Hos,
n n >)
Yappa péy avOpworoor, KaKoV OedXKTHp dduvdawv.
n ) J >]
al ov pev ovTw Yyalpe, dvak Aitopar dé o :


XVII
EIS AIOSKOTPOTS


Kadotopa cai Worvdevne’ aetoeo, Movaa Xiyera,
Tuvdapioas, ot Znvos ‘Odvprriov éEeyévovto-
Tovs ume Tnurvérou xopudas téxe woTVLa Anon
AAO pn Urobunbeioa xerawedés Kpoviove.

Xatpete, Tuvdapioas, Tayéwv émiBytopes trmov. 5


XVIII
EIS EPMHN


€ aA , /

Eppnv aeiow KvrAAjviov, ‘A pyerbovryp,
Kvrarnvns medéovta cal “Apxadins twodupnrou,
f / d a
ayyerov alavdatwy éptovviov, ov téxe Maia,

/ a
"Atravtos Ouydtnp, Aros év diroTrnte puyeloa,
b / / \ fal > / /
atooin? paKxdpwy O€ Oed@y adéetvev Omron, 5
avTP@ vareTdovoa TradLoKi@: év0a Kpoviwv
/ \ a
VULhN EVTAOKALM LLOYETKETO VUKTOS ALONYO,


440


eee ETO) HERMES, 1-7


XVI
TO ASCLEPIUS


I secin to sing of Asclepius, son of Apollo and
healer of sicknesses. In the Dotian plain fair
Coronis, daughter of King Phlegyas, bare him, a great
joy to men, a soother of cruel pangs.

And so hail to you, lord: in my song I make my

prayer to thee! ;


XVII
TO THE DIOSCURI


Sine, clear-voiced Muse, of Castor and Polydeuces,
the Tyndaridae, who sprang from Olympian Zeus.
Beneath the heights of Taygetus stately Leda bare
_ them, when the dark-clouded Son of Cronos had

privily bent her to his will.

Hail, children of Tyndareus, riders upon swift
horses !


XVIII
TO HERMES


I sine of Cyllenian Hermes, the Slayer of Argus,
lord of Cyllene and Arcadia rich in flocks, luck-
bringing messenger of the deathless gods. He was
born of Maia, the daughter of Atlas, when she had
mated with Zeus,—a shy goddess she. Ever she
avoided the throng of the blessed gods and lived
in a shadowy cave, and there the Son of Cronos
used to lie with the rich-tressed nymph at dead


441


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


-


EVTE KATA YAUKUS UTrvos Exot Aevx@AEvoy “Hyp:
NavOave o aBavarous Te Oeovs Ovnrous T av0 porous.
Kai ov pev ovTw yatpe, Aros kat Matdéoos vié- 10
oev o éyo apEduevos peTaBynoopat adrXov és
Upvov.


[yvatp’, “Epuh yaprdera, dudxtope, d@Top édov.'|


XIX
KIS IANA


"Amdt pot ‘Eppeiao pidov yovov were, Movca,
aiytToony, OiKepwmTa, dudOKpoTOV, GoT ava TiCH
SevopyevT dpvous porta xopoynbea vimpars,
al Te KAT aiyiAT os TET PNS otTeiBovor Kapnva
Tlav’ AVAKEKNO MEDAL, YOpLLOv Jeov, aryhaeberpov, 5
auxpunev?’, Os: TAT Aopov vopoevTa NéAOYVE
Kal Kopupas opeov Kab TET PHEVTA Kapnva.
pourg ro evoa Kat vba OLa pomnua TUKVG,

ANNOTE [Lev petOporow ep Eh K6LEV05 parakotow,
adNdOTE Sav TET PNW év nrmaBarouoe Ovorxvel, 10
Gk pot ar ay Kopupny [nO KOTOV eicavaBaivenr.
TOAAGKL O apyLvoevTa dséOpapev oped paxpa,
TOANGKL © €V KVNfLOLTL Ouphace Ofpas € evaipar,

o&€a Sepkopevos* ToTe & Eomepos exaryev olov

aypns efaviov, Covaxav U vTO “wovaay abopov 15
YROUMOV* OUVK AV TOV YE Tapadpdpor é év peNeoolv
OpVLSs, Nr EAPOS ni pnwiaw Aeon, év TETANOLOL

Opivov enim poxeoug AK EEL” Ein PU covey.
auv 6€ cdi ToTe Nvpdat opertiddes AeyvporTroe

' This line appears to be an alternative to I, 10-11.

2 Ilgen: émimpoxéovca XéEl, MSS.


442


XIX.—TO PAN, 1-19


of night, while white-armed Hera -lay + esi e aoe


sweet sleep: and neither deathless god nor mortal
man knew it. |
And so hail to you, Son of Zeus and Maia; with
you I have begun: now I will turn to another song !
Hail, Hermes, giver of grace, guide, and giver of
. good things !


XIX
TO PAN


Muss, tell me about Pan, the dear son of Hermes,
with his goat’s feet and two horns—a lover of merry
noise. Through wooded glades he wanders with
dancing nymphs who foot it on some sheer cliff’s
edge, calling upon Pan, the shepherd-god, long-
haired, unkempt. He has every snowy crest and the
mountain peaks and rocky crests for his domain ;
hither and thither he goes through the close thickets,
now lured by soft streams, and now he presses on
amongst towering crags ‘and climbs up to the
highest peak that overlooks the flocks. Often he
courses through the glistening high mountains, and
often on the shouldered hills he speeds along laying
wild beasts, this keen-eyed god. Only at evening
as he returns from the chase, he sounds his roe
playing sweet and low on his pipes of reed : not even
she could excel him in melody—that bird who in
flower-laden spring pouring forth her lament utters
honey-voiced song amid the leaves. At that hour
the clear-voiced nymphs are with him and move


443


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


a / \ > \ ¥, (A
horT@oa TUKA TrocOlY emt KPHVN MeXNAVVOP@ 20
is \ \ , BA ’ /
péeATrovTaL Kopudyy Sé TeptaTéver ovpeos Hyo:
daiwv 0 év0a Kal &v0a yxopav, Tote O és pécov
EpT av,
TUKVa Tool SLémeEl, Naihos O émi vaTAa Sadowvov
AuYyKOS Eye, AuyUpHoLY ayadAopevos Ppeva poNTraés
b) an al / J FSP) C7
€V MAAAK® NELwove, TOOL KPOKOS HO VaKLWOOS 25
ev@dns darOov KATAPLT YET aL dx puta motn.
“Tyvedow dé Geovs paxapas Kab pak pov "Oduprrov:
oiov & ‘Eppeiny € éprowviov &Eoxov adv
évveTov, @S 6 y tract Jeois Ooos adyyenros éoTt,
, (] ee 9 b) P) if We f
kat p 6 x és “Apxadinv todumidaxa, pntépa
LNAOD, 30
eFixer’, év0a Té ob TéepEvos Kvarrnviov éotiv.

ev? 6 6 ye Kal Oeos @v Yapaporpixa pA EVO pevEV
avbp. Tapa OvnT@: Odre yap TwOOos vypos erred Oav

if b) he / J an
vuppn evTroKap@ Apvotros diXoTHTL puynvac:

b) b) Hull Ls if / 2 aren

éx © éTéXeace yduov Oarepov. Téxe O ev pe-
ydadpotow 35

‘Eppetn pirov viov, dbap tepatwrov idécOar,

b) / UA / e 4

aiyiTroony, dixépwta, dedoKpoTov, novyéA@TA*
an > /. / 95,190 a A

dhedye 0 avaitaca, XNiTev © dpa Taida TLOnVN:

detoe yap, ws idev dr apmeiduxXov, HuUyévetov.

\ b) a 79 ¢ / 5) / b) / a ee
Tov 0 airy’ ‘Eppetas éprovutos eis yépa Onne 40
deEdmevos, Xaipev O€ vom TEpL@ata Saipov.
piugpa o és adavatwv &pas xie maida KartWas
déppacw év TruKivotow GpecK@OLO NAYwWODdD:

Tap € ZLnvi cdOile Kal adXols aGavatotot, |
detEe dé Kovpov éov: Tavtes 8 apa Oupov érephOev 45


444


XIX.—TO PAN, 20-45


with nimble feet, singing by some spring of dark


water, while Echo wails about the mountain-top,
and the god on this side or on that of the choirs,
or at times sidling into the midst, plies it nimbly
with his feet. On his back he wears a spotted
lynx-pelt, and he delights in high-pitched songs
in a soft meadow where crocuses and sweet-smelling
hyacinths bloom at random in the grass.

They sing of the blessed gods and high Olympus
_and choose to tell of such an one as luck-bringing
Hermes above the rest, how he is the swift messenger
of all the gods, and how he came to Arcadia, the land
of many springs and mother of flocks, there where his
sacred place is as god of Cyllene. For there, though
a god, he used to tend curly-fleeced sheep in the
service of a mortal man, because there fell on him
and waxed strong melting desire to wed the rich-
tressed daughter of Dryops, and there he brought
about the merry marriage. And in the house she
bare Hermes a dear son who from his birth was
marvellous to look upon, with goat's feet and two
horns—a noisy, merry-laughing child. But when
the nurse saw his uncouth face and full beard, she
was afraid and sprang up and fled and left the
child. Then luck-bringing Hermes received him
and took him in his arms: very glad in his heart
was the god. And he went quickly to the abodes
of the deathless gods, carrying his son wrapped in
warm skins of mountain hares, and set him down
beside Zeus and showed him to the rest of the
gods. Then all the immortals were glad in heart


445


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


addvatot, mepladrra, So Baxxevos Avovucos:
Ilava 6é pe KareerKon, OTL ppeva Taow éTeprwe.
Kali od pev ottw yaipe, avat, tdapar 6€ a |
GoLon: a
avTap éy@ Kalb oeio Kal aXANS prHoop aoLONs.


XX
ELS H®BAISTON


Hdasotov KUTOMNTLY aeiLceo, Motca iryeva,
Os eT “AOnvains ‘YAavewn L008 ayhad epya
av pw@mous édtdakev émt xGovos, ob TO TapOS TEP
ayT pows vateTadaoKov év ouperw, nore Onpes.
vov O€ Oe “Hdatotov crutotéxvny epya Saévtes 5
pyroios ai@va Tehea Popov eis EVLAUTOV
eVKNAOL Oudyoucw € évl opeTépotoe Somo.ow.
"ARN thd’, “Hgatote didou & dpetav te Kal
vey oii


XXI
EIS ATIOAAQONA


A M4
DoiBe, o€ wey Kal KUKVOS UTO TTEPUYoV Nir
aeioet,
A 2) M4 \ / /
bxOn em poo Kev ToTaLOY mapa SuwijevTa,
IInveov: oé 8 G0w00s EX OV poppwyya Niryevav
NOUETNS ™pOT Ov Te Kal VoTatov alev aEeLoet.
Kal od pév ott yatpe, dvat, thapar Oé o
aoLon. 5


446


XXI.—TO APOLLO


and Bacchie Dionysus in especial; and they called
the boy Pan? because he delighted all their hearts.

And so hail to you, lord! I seek your favour with
a song. And now | will remember you and another
song also.


XX
TO HEPHAESTUS


Sing, clear-voiced Muse, of Hephaestus famed for
inventions. With bright-eyed Athene he taught men
glorious crafts throughout the world,—men who
before used to dwell in caves in the mountains like
wild beasts. But now that they have learned craits
through Hephaestus the famed worker, easily they
live a peaceful life in their own houses the whole
year round.’

Be gracious, Hephaestus, and grant me success


i and prosperity !


XXI
TO APOLLO


Pyorsus, of you even the swan sings with clear
voice to the beating of his wings, as he alights upon
the bank by the eddying river Peneus; and of you
the sweet-tongued minstrel, holding his high-pitched
lyre, always sings both first and last.

And so hail to you, lord ! I seek your favour with
my song.

1 The name Pan is here derived from waves ‘‘all.” Cp.


_ Hesiod, Works and Days 80-82, Hymn to Aphrodite (v) 198,
for the significance of personal names.


447


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


XXII
EIS TOSEIAONA


"Awol Tlocerddwva, péyav Oeov, dpyop aetdery,
yains Kuvnthpa Kat aT puyéroto Jaracons,
Tovttov, 600 “EXika@va Kal evpetas éyer Aids.
Ou Oa TOL, ‘Evvoo iyate, Geot TUPNY éddoaro,
imt@ov Te OuNTHP Ewevae oorhpa TE VINOD.

Xaipe, Tocetdaoy yaunoxe, KuavoxaiTa,

Kal, wadKap, evpeves Hrop Exo TAWOVOW apnye.


XXIIT
EIS TIIATON KPONIAHN


Liva Jeav TOV &ploTov deioopat noe péyeaTo,
eupvoTra, KpelovTa, Teheo Popo, ¢ bate Oémote
ery LOOV eomevy TUKLVOVS OAPOUS oapiter.

"TAn®’, evpvorra Kpovidn, cvdsate pméyloTe.


XXIV
KIS EXTIAN


‘Eorin, NTE GVAKTOS "AmroAXN@vos ExdTOLO
Iudoi é év jyaben i Lepov Oopov appemronevers,
atel TOW TOKE LOV amonetBerat t brypov éNavov’
Epxeo TOVO ava oikov, éy’ Epxeo" Oupov & éyovoa
avy Aut pyntioevte yap O aw draccov aon.


1 Tucker : érépxeo,


448


cr


XXIV.—TO HESTIA
XXII
TO POSEIDON


I BEGIN to sing about Poseidon, the great god,
mover of the earth and fruitless sea, god of the deep
_ who is also lord of Helicon and wide Aegae. A two-
fold office the gods allotted you, O Shaker of the
Earth, to be a tamer of horses and a saviour of ships !

Hail, Poseidon, Holder of the Earth, dark-haired
_ lord! O blessed one, be kindly in heart and help
those who voyage in ships!


XXITI
TO THE SON OF CRONOS, MOST HIGH


I witt sing of Zeus, chiefest among the gods and
greatest, all-seeing, the lord of all, the fulfiller who
whispers words of wisdom to Themis as she sits lean-
ing towards him.

Be gracious, all-seeing Son of Cronos, most
excellent and great !


XXIV
TO HESTIA


Hestia, you who tend the holy house of the lord
Apollo, the Far-shooter at goodly Pytho, with soft oil
dripping ever from your locks, come now into this
house, come, having one mind with Zeus the all-wise
—draw near, and withal bestow grace upon my
song.


449


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


XX V
EIS MOTSAS KAI ATIOAAQNA


Movodov dip Xoo past "AméAX@vOs Te Atos Te’
éx yap Move dor Kal ex Borou ‘ArrOAA@VOS
dvdpes aoLool €acw em x Gori Kab Kilapiorat,
ex de Atos Baoindies: 00 OrBt0s; ¢ OV Twa Movaar |
pideovrar yAuKEpn Ol ATO OTOMATOS peer avon. 5 of
Xaipere, TEKVOL Avos, wal env TUN AT G@OLony: |
avuTap éyav UucwVv TE KAL AAANS pYnTOM aOLONs.


XXVI
EIS) AIONTSON


Kiocoxopny A.ovuc ov éptBpopor o apxom aeELoeLy,
Znvos Kab Dewehns epuxvo0€os dryhaov vion,
Ov Tpépov nUKomoL NUudat Tapa TaTpos avaKTOS
dcEdmevat KoNTrOLTL Kal evduKEewS ATITAAXOV
Nvons ev yudnous: 0 6 aé&eTo TaTpos ExNTE os
av p@ éy ev@det Her api Los adavatoicww.
avTap éreton) TOVOE Deal TONUU[LYOV eOpewran,
On TOTE portivere Kal’ UNHEVTAS evavous,
KLoo@ Kal Saddvyn meTUKAGMévos* at é ape ETrovTo
Neppau, 0 6 é&nyetto: Bpouos 6 éxev aomeTov
Oy. 10
Kai ov pev ottw xaipe, tordvotddury @
Atovuce: |
dos 5 muds Yaipovtas és @pas adtis ixéaOat,
éx 8 av’ w@pdwy cis TOvS TOAXOUS évLaUTOUS.


450


XXVI—TO DIONYSUS


XXV
TO THE MUSES AND APOLLO


I witx begin with the Muses and Apollo and Zeus.
For it is through the Muses and Apollo that there
are singers upon the earth and players upon the
lyre; but kings are from Zeus. Happy is he whom
the Muses love : sweet flows speech from his lips.

Hail, children of Zeus! Give honour to my song!
And now I will remember you and another song
also.


XXVI
TO DIONYSUS


I BEGIN to sing of ivy-crowned Dionysus, the loud-
crying god, splendid son of Zeus and _ glorious
Semele. The rich-haired Nymphs received him in |
their bosoms from the lord his father and fostered
and nurtured him carefully in the dells of Nysa,
where by the will of his father he grew up in a sweet-
smelling cave, being reckoned among the immortals.
But when the goddesses had brought him up, a god
oft hymned, then began he to wander continually
through the woody coombes, thickly wreathed with
ivy and laurel. And the Nymphs followed in his
train with him for their leader; and the boundless
forest was filled with their outcry.

And so hail to you, Dionysus, god of abundant
clusters! Grant that we may come again rejoicing
to this season, and from that season onwards for
many a year.

451
GG 2


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


XXVII
EI> APTEMIN


Aptemuy detow XpvondaKkaTov, Kedacewyy,
ma.p0 évov aidoiny, ehadnBonror, Loxeaupar,
avToKacuyyyrny \V pUcaOpPoVU ‘ATrOA@VOS,

i) KaT Opn KLOET Kal  aKpLas jvEpoeroas
aypn TepTrowéevy TaryXpuoed TOs, TuTaiver
méeuTrovea TTOvOEVTA Bena: Tpopéer O€ KaPHVA
typn Ov opewn, taxes O és OdoKtos UAH
dewor t mo KrNayyis Onpav, pplocer 6é Te yata
TOVTOS T ixOvoers: nO aL ov nT Op exouca
mav7n ema Tpeper as Onpayv or€xovca yeveOrnv.
avTap émny Teppon OnpockoTos é loxearpa,
evppnvn oe voov, vahdoao eva pm ed, TOEa
EDYETAL ES peya daa Kao LYyVHTOLO pirouo,
@oiBov ‘AmOA@vOS, Acrpar é és mova Onwov,
Movoar Kai Xapirov KANOV Yopov apTuveouaa.
év0a KaTaKpEenacacd may Tova, Toga Kab tous
nryetTat XaplevTa mept xpot KO MOV exouoa,
_ €Eapxyouca Xopous: ar o apBpociny ¢ Om letoat
vpvedow AnT@ Kardio pupor, @S TEKE Taidas
abavatwv Bourg Te Kab epypacw éfox apictous.
Xaipere, TeKva Atos Kal Antovs TUCO [MOLO"
avTap éyov Uméwy Te Kal ANAS pYHTOM aoLoNs.


XX WV ITT


EIS; AOHNAN


TWarrad’ ‘AOnvainy, Kvdpay dear, ¢ &pxop’ he
YAQUVKMTLV, TOAVMYTLVY, ApEeLANLYoV HTOp ExoVGar,


452


XXVIII.—TO ATHENA


XXVII
TO ARTEMIS


I sinc of Artemis, whose shafts are of gold, who
cheers on the hounds, the pure maiden, shooter of
stags, who delights in archery, own sister te Apollo
with the golden sword. Over the shadowy hills and
windy peaks she draws her golden bow, rejoicing in
the chase, and sends out grievous shafts. The tops
of the high mountains tremble and the tangled wood
~ echoes awesomely with the outcry of beasts: earth
quakes and the sea also where fishes shoal. But the
goddess with a bold heart turns every way destroying
the race of wild beasts : and when she is satisfied and
has cheered her heart, this huntress who delights in
arrows slackens her supple bow and goes to the
great house of her dear brother Phoebus Apollo, to
the rich land of Delphi, there to order the lovely
dance of the Muses and Graces. There she hangs
up her curved bow and her arrows, and heads and
leads the dances, gracefully arrayed, while all they
utter their heavenly voice, singing how neat-ankled
Leto bare children supreme among the immortals
both in thought and in deed.

Hail to you, children of Zeus and _ rich-haired
Leto! And now I will remember you and another
song also.


XXVIII
TO ATHENA


I secin to sing of Pallas Athene, the glorious
goddess, bright-eyed, inventive, unbending of heart,


453


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


TapOévov aidoinv, épvaimToALy, ANKnET aay,
Tperoyevt, THY AUTOS evyeivaTo pnriera Zevs
TEL TS eK Keparhs, TONEMNLA TEVYE éxovoay,
Xpvcea, Taupavowvta: céBas 0 eve TavTas
opavTas

abavatous: 4) 6€ m™ poo ev Atos airywoxoto
eooupevars @povcer aT aavarovo Kapyvov,
ocicae o€by a dKkovta: péyas © éderiver’ "Ordvupsros
Selvov UT Bptpyns YAAUK@TLOOS* appl 6€ yaia
TMEpoaréon & Layne’ exevn On & dpa TOVTOS,
KOpact Toppupeoiae KUK@[LEVOS" ExXVTO i é ann
eLamivns: oThoev © “Trreptovos dryads vios
immous. OKUTOOAS On pov Xpovov, ELOOTE Koupn
etAeT at A0avaT@OY WLoV Oeoeixeda TEvXN
TandXas AOnvainy: yndnoe dé pntiera Zevs.

Kat ov fev ovT@ Xatpe, Axos TEKOS aLiryLOxOLO"
avTap éy@ Kat celo Kal AAANS pYHTOM aOLONS.


XXITX
EI ESTIAN


‘Kotin, ) wavrov év dopacw Undotot
abavatrov Te Oeav Yamal épyowévov T avO potrav
eopny aiOtov chaxes, mpeo Bnioa TOMY,

KANOV exovoa yépas Kal TLLOV" ov yap atTep cov
etharrivat Ountoiow, b iy’ ov Tpw@TN TUMATY TE
‘Eorin dPX.0{LEVOS OT EVOEL pehundéa oivov"

Kal ov jot, ‘Apyevpovra, Avos Kal Maud6os ue,
cytyene TOV paKapor, Xpusoppare, S@Top éawy,
(Aaos @y émapnye TLV aidoin Te Pir TE.


1 Baumeister: goyveto, MSS.
454


XXIX.—TO HESTIA —


From his awful head wise Zeus himself bare her
arrayed in warlike arms of flashing gold, and awe
seized all the gods as they gazed. But Athena
sprang quickly from the immortal head and stood
before Zeus who holds the aegis, shaking a sharp
spear: great Olympus began to reel horribly at the
might of the bright-eyed goddess, and earth round
about cried fearfully, and the sea was moved and
tossed with dark waves, while foam burst forth
suddenly: the bright Son of Hyperion stopped his
swift-footed horses a long while, until the maiden
Pallas Athene had stripped the heavenly armour
from her immortal shoulders.. And wise Zeus was
glad. 7

And so hail to you, daughter of Zeus who holds
the aegis! Now I will remember you and another
song as well.


XXIX
TO HESTIA


Hestia, in the high dwellings of all, both deathless
gods and men who walk on earth, you have gained an
everlasting abode and highest honour : glorious is your
portion and your right. For without you mortals
hold no banquet,—where one does not duly pour
sweet wine in offering to Hestia both first and
last.

And you, Slayer of Argus, Son of Zeus and Maia,
messenger of the blessed gods, bearer of the golden
rod, giver of good, be favourable and help us, you
and Hestia, the worshipful and dear. Come and


455


pure virgin, saviour of cities, courageous, Tritogeneia.


THE HOMERIC HYMNS |


VALETE Sopara KANG, pira ppeoiy Joie aq 9

edoTes? aphorepor yap eux Govioy avO pom av 11

ELOOTES epyHara Kana vow O éomea Je Kab By.
Xaipe, Kpovov Ovryarep, ov Te Kal YpUooppaTrits


b) ‘Epps: A
aUTAp Ey@V UuewV TE KaL AAANS “YNTOM AoLoNs.


XXX
EIS THN MHTEPA TANTON


Tatay TOP LNT ELpaV aeloopar, 7v0 EweO ov,
mperBiorny, F y) pépBer € em yOovi mavO OTe eo Ti,
npev boa xO ova dtav é emepXeTat 70° 60a TOVTOV —
no boa TWTOVTAL, TAHOE pépBeras € éx aéOev OAPouv.
éx cé0 © evtraLdés Te Kal evKaptrot TENCO OVAL, 5
mToTvLa, sev © exeTat Sovvat Biov nO aderéoOar
Ovntots av@pamoaw: O & orBi0s, ov Ke ov dupe
mpoppov TUT NS” TT a Cova TAVTA Tapert.
Spider pev od d:poupa, pepe Bros nO€ KAT aypovs
KTNVETW evOnvel, otKos © eumimaras ec OXov: 10
avTot & evvouinot TOALY KATA KaANyVaALKa
Kotpaveéova , OAs 6€ TOADS Kal TAOUTOS OTF NOEL"
matoes 0 evppoovy veoOnr€t KUOLOMGL
map evixat TE xopots Tohvav0eo ty ceUppove Ovu
mailove at TKALPOUTL Kar av0ea wadkOaKka roins, 15
oUS KE OU TLUNT NS, TeV Gea, abOove Oaipov.

Xaipe, Cea PATNPs arox Otvpavod aotepdevtos,
mpoppov & avr pons Biorov Cupnpe orate:
avTap éym Kal oelo Kal aAANS LvHTOM aoLONS.


1 Translator : ‘Eor(n, MSS.
A50


XXX.—TO EARTH THE MOTHER OF ALL


dwell in this glorious house in friendship together ;
for you two, well knowing the noble actions of
men, aid on their wisdom and their strength.

Hail, Daughter of Cronos, and you also, Hermes,
bearer of the golden rod! Now I will remember you
and another song also.


XXX
TO EARTH THE MOTHER OF ALL


I wit sing of well-founded Earth, mother of all,
eldest of all beings. She feeds all creatures that are
in the world, all that go upon the goodly land, and
all that are in the paths of the seas, and all that fly :
all these are fed of her store. Through you, O
queen, men are blessed in their children and blessed
in their harvests, and to you it belongs to give means
of life to mortal men and to take it away, Happy is
the man whom you delight to honour! He has all
things abundantly: his fruitful land is laden with
corn, his pastures are covered with cattle, and his
house is filled with good things. Such men rule
orderly in their cities of fair women: great riches
and wealth follow them: their sons exult with ever-
fresh delight, and their daughters in flower-laden
bands play and skip merrily over the soft flowers of
the field. Thus is it with those whom you honour
O holy goddess, bountiful spirit.

Hail, Mother of the gods, wife of starry Heaven ;
freely bestow upon me for this my song substance
that cheers the heart! And now I will remember
you and another song also.


457


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


XXXI
EIS HAION


"HXwov vuvety avte Aus TEKOS apxeo Movaoa,
Kadduorn, pacdovta, TOV Evpuddecoa Boamus
ryetvao Trains madi Kai Ovpavod aorepoevTos”
ype yap Huipupdercav arya eerny ‘Trrepion,
AUTOKATLYYNTHY, 1) OL TEKE KONO TEKVA, 5
"HO Te podomnyuy évTAdKapov TE YeAnvnv
Héduoy T AKGULQVT , emLelk NOV alavarotow,

Os dhaiver Ovntotar Kab aavarotar Jeoiouw

im mous euBeBaws: apepovoyv 0 6 Ye dépKeras ¢ dacors
Xpurens éx KOpvOos* Naper pat 5 axTives. am avTov 10
airy NHev oTiXBovat Tapa KpoTapov 667 eGerpar *
Aaprpat aro KPATOs Xapiev KaTéexouar T POO WTrOV
THAaUYES' KANOV Oe meph xpat Naprrerat éa0os

Lem ToupyEs, vou ave meoy" UTro dpoeves (aro.
&vO dp’ 6 ve oT HOAs xpua obuyon a appa Kal imrous, 15 |
Ladrobe TaveTat GK pou em ovpavod, elo OKEV AUTLS | 15%
Oeaoméotos méumnaoe Ov ovpavod "Oxeavovee. |

Xaipe, avaé, 7 poppov dé Biov Oupnpe orate.
éx o60 0 apEapevos KANT® MEepoTr@V yeVvos avdpav
nuléwv, av epya Ocal Ovntotow éderEav.


XXXII
KI> SEAHNHN


Myvny aeidery tavucittepov éotrete, Movoa,
e a a / / Oe IQA
noverrets Koupat Kpovidew Aros, ta topes @oqs*


1 Matthiae : te mapeial, MSS.
458


XXXIIL—TO SELENE


Bo. 0.4!
TO HELIOS |


Anp now, O Muse Calliope, daughter of Zeus,
begin to sing of glowing Helios whom mild-éyed
Euryphaéssa, the far-shining one, bare to the Son of
Earth and starry Heaven. For Hyperion wedded
glorious Euryphaéssa, his own sister, who bare him
lovely children, rosy-armed Eos and _ rich-tressed
Selene and tireless Helios who is like the deathless
gods. As he rides in his chariot, he shines upon men
and deathless gods, and piercingly he gazes with his
_ eyes from his golden helmet. Bright rays beam
dazzlingly from him, and his bright locks streaming
from the temples of his head gracefully enclose. his
far-seen face: a rich, fine-spun garment glows upon
his body and flutters in the wind: and stallions carry
him. Then, when he has stayed his golden-yoked
chariot and horses, he rests there upon the highest
point of heaven, until he marvellously drives them
down again through heaven to Ocean.

Hail to you, lord! Freely bestow on me substance
that cheers the heart. And now that I have begun
with you, I will celebrate the race of mortal men
half-divine whose deeds the Muses have showed to
mankind.


XXXII
TO SELENE
AND next, sweet voiced Muses, daughters of Zeus,
well-skilled in song, tell of the long-winged! Moon.


1 The epithet is a usual one for birds, cp. Hesiod, Works
and Days, 210: as applied to Selene it may merely indicate
her passage, like a*bird, through the air, or mean “ far-flying.”


459


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


AS dro airy yatav éAtooeTaL ovpavoderkTos
KPaT os am &Oavaro.o, ods 8 bro KOO 40S Cpmpev
airyhns Aaprovans: orth Bev 6é 7 aNaptreTos anp 5
Xpucéou amo atebavov, actives & evoudovTat, |
evT a ay an ‘Oxceavoto oer oapern xpoa KaAOD,
elwarta er oapevn TyAaUYER ota Lehqyn,
CevEamevn TONOUS epavxevas, airyAHEVTAS, |
ET TUMEVOS TPOTEPOT éXaon KaNTPLX AS irmrous, 10 |)
éomepin, Suxopmvos” 0 de? TrfOer peyas OryjLos
hapmporarat T avyal TOT aeFomevns TeNeovawy
ovpavobev’ Téxpwp 5é Bpotois Kal ohwa TETUKTAL.
TH pa tote Kpovidns éuiyn didrornre cal evvn:
4 &. Uroxvaoapévn Lavdeiny yetvato Kkovpyy, 15
exmrpemes eldos €youcav év afavartoict Oeoict.
Xaipe, dvacaa, Oed NevK@XEVE, Ota Lernvn,
Tpoppov, é€umAcKam“os: céo © apyYomevos KE
PaTOV
aoouar nutléwv, wv KrELOUT epypar’ Good,
Move dov Oepdmovtes, a amo TTOMATODV €p0évTwv. 20


XXXII
KIX AIOZKOTPOTS


"Audi Acds Kovpous, EXtK@mTLdes EoTreETE Modoa,
Tuvdapisas, Anédns Karhzo pvpov ayaa TéKVa,
Kaoropa 0 immodapov Kat pc unTOV [lokatecce:
TOUS UTO Tavyerou Kopudy ¢ Gpeos [ery aXoLo
purxOeio” év diroTnts Kerdawedés Kpoviove 5
TOTHpAS TEKE maidas enix Govicov avd poTrov
OKUT Opa@Vv TE VEMV, OTE TE oTrépyoot AEAANAL

1 Baumeister: 8 te, MSS,


460


XXXIIIL—TO THE DIOSCURI


From her immortal head a radiance is shown from
heaven and embraces earth; and great is the beauty
that ariseth from her shining light. The air, unlit
before, glows with the light of her golden crown,
and her rays beam clear, whensoever bright Selene
having bathed her lovely body in the waters of
Ocean, and donned her far-gleaming raiment, and
yoked her strong-necked, shining team, drives on
her long-maned horses at full speed, at eventime
in the mid-month: then her great orbit is full and
then her beams shine brightest as she increases.
So she is a sure token and a sign to mortal men.

Once the Son of Cronos was joined with her in
love; and she conceived and bare a daughter Pandia,
exceeding lovely amongst the deathless gods.

Hail, white-armed goddess, bright Selene, mild,
bright-tressed queen ! And now I will leave you and
sing the glories of men half-divine, whose deeds
minstrels, the servants of the Muses, celebrate with
lovely lips.


XXXIII
TO THE DIOSCURI


Bricut-evep Muses, tell of the Tyndaridae, the
Sons of Zeus, glorious children of neat-ankled Leda,
Castor the tamer of horses, and blameless Polydeuces.
When Leda had lain with the dark-clouded Son of
Cronos, she bare them beneath the peak of the
great hill Taygetus,—children who are deliverers of
men on earth and of swift-going ships when stormy
gales rage over the ruthless sea. Then the shipmen


461


THE HOMERIC HYMNS


Kelme plat KATA TOVTOV apeidux ov" of & aro vnay
6UX0/LEV01 KaN€ovaL Atos Kovpous peryadoto |
dpvecow Nevcoiow, em aKpaTnpLa Bavres 10
TpveVHS THY O VE MOS TE peyas Kat kDa OaXaoons
OnKav vToBpu’ yinv: ot & éEarivns éepavncav
ovhar mMTEpvyer or ou aibepos atEavres,
avtixka 6 apyaréwv dvéuwov KaTéTavaoay aédXas,
KUpLaTA © €oTOpEecay AEUKHS GOS év TEAaYETOL, 15
THUATA KANG, TOVOY aTroVvocdLow:! of dé LooVTES
ynOnoav, TavoavTo & ouSupoto TOvoLo.

Xaipere, Tuvdapioas, TAX EOY éemeByropes v tm1@y*
avTap éyov Uuéwrv Te Kal AAANS pYHTOM aoLdTs.


1 Bury: vavtas ohuata xara, wévov opiow, MSS.


462


XXXIII.—TO THE DIOSCURI


call upon the sons of great Zeus with vows of white ——


lambs, going to the forepart of the prow; but the
strong wind and the waves of the sea lay the ship
under water, until suddenly these two are seen darting
through the air on tawny wings. Forthwith they allay
‘ the blasts of the cruel winds and still the waves upon
the surface of the white sea: fair signs are they and
deliverance from toil. And when the shipmen see
them they are glad and have rest from their pain and
Jabour.

Hail, Tyndaridae, riders upon swift horses! Now
I will remember you and another song also.


403


bag


BF ip


rina


ne i saris


ba)


:
&
fale =
« ‘ eal 26
= = -.
He , ‘
. 3 _ ” .
q
r “ 3
- “4
2
* —_ ~ - * .
: a ~ fF 7 ;
f > * od
: :
r
; = ial eal i ela : tea vee
ae ae Ree — = a ance =


OMHPOY EIIITPAMMATA


I


Aibetabe Eevioy KEXP] MEVvOV NOE Sopoto,
ot TOMY aimewnv, Kupny eprom a Koupnys
VAaLeTe, Laponuns TO0oa velaTov iypuxopoto,
apBpoctov tivovtes Udwp Ociov ToTapoto,

74 } , a 10 lA VA UA
Epuov duvyjevtos, dv abavatos téxeto Levs.


II


Aifa mooes pe pépovev és aidovwy Toy avopov-
TOV yap Kal Ovpos Tpodpav Kal wHTLS apiorn.


Til
/ b]
Xarkén trapbévos eipi, Midew & émi onparte
KELMAL'
éoT av Vowp Te van Kat Sévdpea paxpa TEOHAN,
> / edeeuee) \ if A f
NENLOS T AVLOV NaLTTH NaLTTPA TE TEAHVN,
\ / Cs 3 / be @ i
Kal ToTapol ye péwow avakduln 5é Oaracoa,
a a , /
avToU THE “eVOVTAa TOAVKAAUTOV ETL TUMBOU
an “A /
ayyeréwo traptovat, Midns ote THde TEOaTrTAaL.


IV
Oin p’ aion odKe TaTHp Levs KUpya yevéo Oat,


vapTrLoy aidoins ¢ él youvace pT pos aTddhov.
hw wot étupywaay Bourn Aros aiyroyovo


1 Plato, Diogenes, Contest of Homer: pén, pseudo-
Herodotus.


466


HOMER’S EPIGRAMS!?.


I


Have reverence for him who needs a home and
stranger's dole, all ye who dwell in the high city
of Cyme, the lovely maiden, hard by the foothills
of lofty Sardene, ye who drink the heavenly water
of the divine stream, eddying Hermus, whom death-
less Zeus begot.

II


SPEEDILY may my feet bear me to some town of
righteous men; for their hearts are generous and
their wit is best.


III


I am a maiden of bronze and am set upon the
tomb of Midas. While the waters flow and tall trees
flourish, and the sun rises and shines and the bright
moon also; while rivers run and the sea breaks on
the shore, ever remaining on this mournful tomb, I
tell the passer-by that Midas here lies buried.


IV


To what a fate did Zeus the Father give me a prey
even while he made me to grow, a babe at my
mother’s knees! By the will of Zeus who holds the

1 The Epigrams are preserved in the pseudo-Herodotean
Infe of Homer. Nos. III, XIII, and XVII are also found in


the Contest of Homer and Hesiod, and No. I is also extant at
the end of some MSS. of the Homeric Hymns.


467
H H 2


HOMER’S EPIGRAMS


Aaol Dpixwvos, papyev émuBntopes iwrwv,
OmNOTEPOL adEpoto Trupos KpivovTes "Apna, — 5
Alorida Xpvpvnv adiyetTova, TovTOTiVaKTo),

Awe Ov ayAaov eiow dap iepoto MédnTos"

évOev atropvvpevar Kovpat Atos, ayAaa Téxva,
nOererny KAnoaL Stav XOova kal Todw avdpov.

of © atavynvacOny tepnv dra, dhyw aordys, 10
adpacin: tav pév Te TAD @Y TIS PpdoceTat avTLS,

ds ohty dvetdecow Tov éwov OLvenoaTo TOTMOD.

Kipa © éya, THv wot Oeds @rrace yetvopev@ rep,
Tajo opa.t axpdavTa pépov TeThmore Pup: |

oveé TL po ira yea, pévely Lepais év ayurais 15
Kins oppaivoue t, peyas 6€ we Oupos é emrebyet
Ojmov és AANOSaTaYV Lévat, OALyoV Tep éovTa.


=
Occropioyn, Ovntotow avwictev Toréwv Tep,
IQA b) , f id > Vd
ovdév appactotepov TédeTat voov avOpwTracwy.


VI


Krd&, Uocetéaov, peyaroobevés, évvociryare,

> VA 66 re @ an ‘EB an
evpvyopouv wedéwv noe EavOov ‘ENtKovos,
60s 0 ovpov Kadov Kal amnuova vooTov idéc bat
vavTats, ob vnos TrouTrol HO apyol gact — |]
50s & és Ummpetny tWrixpyuvoto Mipaytos 5 ff
aidotwy mw’ éOovta Bpotav ociwy Te Kuphaat,
PaTA TE TLOaipnNY, OS Eudv VOoY NIrEepoTEvaas
3 id an / , if
wdvcato Liva Eénov Eevinv te tpametav.


468


f


EPIGRAMS IV—VI


aegis the people of Phricon, riders on wanton horses,
more active than raging fire in the test of war, once
built the towers of Aeolian Smyrna, wave-shaken
neighbour to the sea, through which glides the
pleasant stream of sacred Meles; thence! arose the
daughters of Zeus, glorious children, and would fain
have made famous that fair country and the city of
its people. But in their folly those men scorned the

ivine voice and renown of song, and in trouble
shall one of them remember this hereafter—he who
with scornful words to them? contrived my fate. Yet
I will endure the lot which heaven gave me even at
my birth, bearing my disappointment with a patient
heart. My dear limbs yearn not to stay in the
sacred streets of Cyme, but rather my great heart
urges me to go unto another country, small though


I am.
V


Tuestoripves, full many things there are that
mortals cannot sound; but there is nothing more
unfathomable than the heart of man.


VI


Hear me, Poseidon, strong shaker of the earth,
ruler of wide-spread, tawny Helicon! Give a fair
wind and sight of safe return to the shipmen who
speed and govern this ship. And grant that when I
come to the nether slopes of towering Mimas I may
find honourable, god-fearing men. Also may I avenge
me on the wretch who deceived me and grieved
Zeus the lord of guests and his own guest-table.

1 sc. from Smyrna, Homer’s reputed birth-place.

2 The councillors of Oyme who refused to support Homer
at the public expense.


469


»


HOMER’S EPIGRAMS


VI


Ilorma CH, mavOwpe, dotepa peridpovos dABov,
WS "dpa, 67) Tots per porav evox Pos éruxOns,
Total € duaB@Xos Kal TPNYEl, ots EYOA@O Ns.


VII


a 7 A 9» if v
Navrat trovtotropo., oTUyEph EvVaALYKLOL ATH
/ bd) / , ie yo
mToKacw ailvinat, Biov dvafnrov exovTes,
’ a J N / € VA
atdetabe Eevioro Atos céBas typupédovTos:
\ N PPBSE WEST) / , i 2. 35 7
dew yap met Oris Eeviov Atos, 6s K aNiTHTAL.


ik


¢€ A 5s a f if

Tpéas, w Eetvor, dvewos AdBev aytios éMav:
5) IESE EN A / WEBS / BA Culcn
GX épe viv déEacbe, Kal 0 TAOOS EToETAL UpiV.


xX


“ANG TIS O€V TEVKY apetvova, KapTrov inow
"ldns év Kopuphar TOUT TUX OV NVEMOET ONS,
eva atdnpos ‘Apnos emtxGoviowws Bporotow
éooeTal, evT av pv KeSpnvior avopes €ywor.


XI


Oe , 4 / > as
ETLOTTA, ETOS TL TOL EV HpEct


TAavcec, Botav
Onow:
TPGTOV pev Kvol Seirrvov é em abheinat Odpyar
Oovvat: TOS yap apelvov: 0 1p Kab T @TOV QKOVEL
avépos émepyomevou Kai és Epxea Onpos tovTos.
1 Restored to metrical form by Barnes.
2 Kuester : mémov, Bporayv, MSS.


470


EPIGRAMS VII—xI


VII
QueEN Earth, all bounteous giver of honey-hearted
wealth, how kindly, it seems, you are to some, and
how intractable and rough for those with whom you
are angry. |
VIII
Saitors, who rove the seas and whom a hateful
fate has made as the shy sea-fowl, living an unenviable
_ life, observe the reverence due to Zeus who rules on
high, the god of strangers; for terrible is the ven-
geance of this god afterwards for whosoever has
sinned.


IX
STRANGERS, a contrary wind has caught you: but
even now take me aboard and you shall. make your
voyage.
X


ANOTHER sort of pine shall bear a better fruit! than
you upon the heights of furrowed, windy Ida. For
there shall mortal men get the iron that Ares loves,
so soon as the Cebrenians shall hold the land.


XI


G.iaucus, watchman of flocks, a word will I put in
your heart. First give the dogs their dinner at the
courtyard gate, for this is well. The dog first hears
a man approaching and the wild-beast coming to
the fence.


1 The ‘‘ better fruit” is apparently the iron smelted out in
fires of pine-wood,


47%


HOMER’S EPIGRAMS


XII


KA 06: joev EUXOMEVOU, Kouporpode, Sos € yuvaina
TVOE véwv pev avaiverOat prdoryTa. Kal evvHY:
i) S emitepréabo TONMOKPOT AOL L yépovaln,
av apn wev aTHUBAVYTAL, Duos Oé pwevouwa.


XIII


"Avopos pev aT epavos maides, mUpyot 88 médn0s,
imrot & av mediou KOT 1108, viajes CY: Jaracons,
Xpnpara & av&er oiKov, aTap yepapol Baoinies
MILEVOL ELV AYOPH KOT MOS Aaoiow * opac bau:
aiBopevov dé TUpOS Yepaporepos oikos twoécOat 5
MATL YEermepi@, oTTOT av vidyot Kpoviav.


XIV :


Ee pey. OMOETE poop a aeiow, @ KEepaunes.
debp ary’, ‘AOnvain Kab vmrepaxele xelpa KApiVOV.
ev O€ mepavOeien * KOTUNOL Kab T AV OL KAVATT Pa
ppuxOfvat TE KaNOS Kab TULAS @VOV aper bau,
TONAG [Lev ELV aryopn TONEVHEVA, TONNG ayuiais, 5
TON € KEponvar, nuiv € On, WS obi aEtoas.
ny O en avasdeiny T ped Oevres wevde adponobe,
TUYKANEW on é ETELTA KALLVOV On ANT hpas,
aay o“as Yudpayov te Kat “AaBetov 7Hdé

LaBdurnvy

"‘Omosapov 7’, Os THdE TEX KAKO moat tropitou 10
mép0e rupaiboucay Kal Oomara, ouv O€ KA LLVOS
Taca KuKyOEin KEepapéov méeya K@KUVCAaYTOD.
ws yvabos imtein BpvKes, Bpveor dé Kdpuvos,


' Ruhnken: 7’ &ddAoowv, Sources : The Contest of Homer adds
the verse:


Aads 8 eiv ayopjot Kadnuevos eivopaagbat,
7 Pollux: pwedavOorev, peravdciev, Life of Homer.


472


EPIGRAMS XII—XIV


XII


Goppess-Nurse of the young,! give ear to my
prayer, and grant that this woman may reject the
love-embrace of youth and dote on grey-haired old
men whose powers are dulled, but whose hearts still
desire.


XIII


CHILDREN are a man’s crown, towers of a city;
horses are the glory of a plain, and so are ships of
the sea; wealth will make a house great, and
reverend princes seated in assembly are a goodly
sight for the folk to see. But a blazing fire makes a
house look more comely upon a winter's day, when
the Son of Cronos sends down snow.


XIV


Potters, if you will give me a reward, I will sing
for you. Come, then, Athena, with hand upraised ?
over the kiln. Let the pots and all the dishes turn
out well and be well fired: let them fetch good prices
and be sold in plenty in the market, and plenty in
the streets. Grant that the potters may get great -
gain and grant me so to sing to them. But if
you turn shameless and make false promises, then I
call together the destroyers of kilns, Shatter and
Smash and Charr and Crash and Crudebake who can
work this craft much mischief. Come all of you and
sack the kiln-yard and the buildings: let the whole
kiln be shaken up to the potter's loud lament.
As a horse’s jaw grinds, so let the kiln grind to


1 Hecate: cp. Hesiod, T’heogony, 450,
2 7,e, in protection,


473


HOMER’S EPIGRAMS


/ > ’ XA J \ a
TavtT évtoo? avTns Kepaynia AeTTAa TOLOVGA. |
Sedpo Kal “Heriov Otyatep, twodkuddppake Kipxn, 15°
4 f f / a ae / ey |
aypia dappaka Bddre, Kdkov © avTovs TE Kal Epya.
} a oe > x / b) , / K 4,

evpo o€ Kal Xeipwv ayét@ Trodeas Kevtavpous,

sp? ¢ a a / / 9i 3 ,
ot? “Hpakrhos yvetpas duyov ott atroXovTo,
TUTTOLEV TAOE Epya KAKWS, TiTTOL SE KA{LVOS

og Nu? 121d, ey cn, My ys |
avTol & olu“@lCovTEs Op@aTo Epa TroVnpda. 20 fi
ynOnow © opdav aitav Kaxodaipova TEXVNV’ |

a /
Os 6€ yx” UrrepKi yn, TUpL TOUTOU TaV TO TPOTwTFOV
/
prexGein, os TavTes éTrigT@OVT aiotwa péCeLv.


XV
A@pua mpoceTpaTroperO avdpos pméya Suvvapévoto,
A / x ov VA be UL case 2 aa
Os péeya peyv Ovvatat, péya Oé Tpérret } GXPBx0¢ aiet.
avtat dvaxriverbe Ovpat’ UnodTo0s yap éoeot
moAAos, adv IINovT@ 6é Kat Kigpoctvn teAarvia
Kipyvn + aya0n doa 0 adyyea, weoTa pev ebn, 5
VA 3 aN \ If vA n
KupBain & atel Kata KapOorrov éprot pata.
pov pev KpiOainv, ev@miba, cnoapoecoav
x x x x


Tod masdos dé yur Kata Sippada Bnoetar Duper’
e Uy : > + , bY / n
nptovoe © a&ovat KpaTatmoces és TOOE OMA"
avTy & iorov tdaivos én’ nréxTp@ BeBavia. 10 9
Netpat Tot, vedwar éviavovos, WoTE KEALO@V
éotnk év mpodvpos Widn Todas: GANA hép aivva
/ a? / /
tirépoat TO AmroAXN@VOS yuraTLdos.+


1 Tlgen: Bpewer, MSS.
474


A


Ek ee er ee ee
Ny SSE TOPE 2 CEI, Olay ara
> y


EPIGRAMS XIV—XV


powder all the pots inside. And you, too, daughter
of the Sun, Circe the witch, come and cast cruel
spells; hurt both these men and their handiwork.
Let Chiron also come and bring many Centaurs—all
that escaped the hands of Heracles and all that were
destroyed: let them make sad havoc of the pots and
overthrow the kiln, and let the potters see the
mischief and be grieved; but I will gloat as I behold
their luckless craft. And if anyone of them stoops
to peer in, let all his face be burned up, that all men


~ may learn to deal honestly.


XV!


Let us betake us to the house of some man of great
power,—one who bears great power and is greatly
prosperous always. Open of yourselves, you doors, for
mighty Wealth will enter in, and with Wealth comes
jolly Mirth and gentle Peace. May all the corn-bins
be full and the mass of dough always overflow the
kneading-trough. Now (set before us) cheerful
barley- -pottage, full of sesame . .

Your son’s wife, driving to this house with strong-
hoofed mules, dhiall dismount from her carriage to
greet you ; may she be shod with golden shoes as she
stands weaving at the loom.

I come, and I come yearly, like the swallow that
perches light-footed in the fore-part of your house.
But quickly bring .

1 This song is called aS pseudo-Herodotus Eipyoidyn.
The word properly indicates a garland wound with wool
which was worn at harvest-festivals, but came to be applied


first to the harvest song and then to any begging song. The
present is akin to the Swallow-Song (XeAdévioua), sung at


_ the beginning of spring, and answering to the still surviving


English May-Day songs. Cp. Athenaeus, viii. 360 B.
475


’


HOMER’S EPIGRAMS


XVI
Ki pév te S@oeus: et O€ pH, OVX éEoTHEOper:
ov yap cuvotxnoortes év0ad AAOopeEv.


XVII
OMHPOS
"Avédpes aypns adins! Onpytopes, 7 p’ EXOMED TH;


AAIEIS
“Ooo édopev, AuTrOperO boa 8 ovKX Edoper,
pepopmer Oa.
OMHPOS


Totov yap tatépwv €& aiuatos éxyeyaacbe,
b) 9 A
ovte BabvKAnpwv oVT ATTETA MAA VEMOVTOD.


1 Koechly: daa ’Apxadins, MSS.


476


EPIGRAMS XVI—XVII


| , XVI
Ir you will give us anything (well). But if not, we
will not wait, for we are not come here to dwell
with you.
XVII


HOMER
Hunters of deep sea prey, have we caught
anything ?
FISHERMEN
All that we caught we left behind, and all that we
did not catch we carry home.!


HOMER
_ Ay, for of such fathers you are sprung as neither
hold rich lands nor tend countless sheep.
1 The lice which they caught in their clothes they left


behind, but carried home in their clothes those which they
could not catch.


ATT


FRAGMENTS OF _
THE EPIC CYCLE


ETIKOY KYKAOY AEIVANA


TITANOMAXIA


i
Photius, Epitome of the Chrestomathy of Proclus.
vApxerat peev (0 émikds KUKXNOS) eK THS Ovpavod
Kal Ths prdoroyouperns pEews, ef 5 avT@® Kal
Tpets Tatoas EkaTOVTaYXELpas Kal TPpEts ce age
KvcrorTras.
2.
Anecdota Oxon. (Cramer) i. 75. Aiépos &’ vies
Odpavos, as 0 THY Titavopaytay ypdaras.


Ds
Schol. on Ap. Rhod. i. 1165. Eitjpnros.... Tov
Atyatova js cai Uovtov dyot maida, Kartor-
Koovta O€ év TH Pardooyn Tots Titdot cuppayeiv.


A,
Athenaeus, vii. 277 D. oO THY Teravopaxtay
Toimoas elt Ktunros éotw o KopivOcos 77


) a > n °
STS .. €v TO SevTép@ OUTS ElpNnKeED: |


ev S auth ee Xpus@moes tyOves EXdOL
VAX OVTES matfovat ou VdaTos auPBpoctoto.


5.
Athenaeus, i. 22 c. Etyunros ... tov Ala
OpYovpmEevov Trov Traparyer AEyov"
peocotow & opxelto TaTip avopav Te Bewy Te.
480


Prreokh PIC CYCLE


THE WAR OF THE TITANS
Earner
Tue Epic Cycle begins with the fabled union of
Heaven and Earth, by which they make three


hundred-handed sons and three Cyclopes to be born
to him.


2.


According to the writer of the War of the Titans
Heaven was the son of Aether.


3.


Eumelus says that Aegaeon was the son of Earth
and Sea and, having his dwelling in the sea, was an
ally of the Titans.

4.


The poet of the War of the Titans, whether
Eumelus of Corinth or Arctinus, writes thus in his
second book: “Upon the shield were dumb fish
afloat, with golden faces, swimming and sporting
through the heavenly water.”


5.


Kumelus somewhere introduces Zeus dancing: he
_says— In the midst of them danced the Father of
‘men and gods.”’


= 481


THE EPIC CYCLE


| 6.

Schol. on Ap. Rhod. i. 554. o Oé€ THY Tiyarto-
poaxiay Tonoas prow OTL Kpovos perapoppobeis
els immov Emiryn Prvpg Th ‘Oxeavod, dtomep Kal
immoxévtaupos éyevvnbn o Xetpwv: tovtov dé yuv7
Xapexro.

7.

Athenaeus, xi. 470 B. @eoruTos .. . el NEBNTOs .
dynow avrov SiatrAEDaaL, TOUTO TPWTOV ElTOVTOS
Tov THY TiTavopaxiay ToLnoarTos.


8. |
Philodemus, On Piety. o d€ thv Titavopayiayr,
TA pev pHra huraTTEW ...


‘OIATIIOAEIA
E,
CL.G. Ital. e¢ Sic. 1292.31.11. ... tHv Oidsz0-
detav THY UTO KwaiPwvos Tov... ém@v ovaaY cy.
| 2.


Paus. ix. 5. 10. Traldas dé é& aurhs ( loxdorns)
ov O0K@ OL yevécOaL poaprupe ‘Opijpe* Xpepevos

ee Evpuyavecas bé THS ‘Trréppavtos éryeyove-
cav: dnrol bé Kal o Ta én troinoas & OidiTrodia
ovowalovot.


3 3.
Schol. on Eur. Phoen. 1750. ot tyv Oidstrodiay —
‘ypacpovres . + « Wepl THY >puyyos


GN’ &tt KaAXNLGTOV TE Kat ipepoeotarov aNN@v
Taioa pirov Kpetovtos auvmovos Aipmova dior .


1 Odyssey, xii. 271-4.
482


4 B a Pe Fe 2 el ee
ESR WRISTS es EN OE


THE STORY OF OEDIPUS


6.


The author of the War of the Giants says that
Cronos took the shape of a horse and lay with
Philyra, the daughter Ocean. Through this cause


Cheiron was born a centaur: his wife was Chariclo.


is


Theolytus says that he (Heracles) sailed across the
sea in a cauldron!; but the first to give this ee is
the author of the War of the Titans.


8.


The author of the War of the Titans ee that the
apples (of the Hesperides) were guarded .


THE STORY OF OEDIPUS


1.


. the Story of Oedipus by Cinaethon in six
thousand six hundred verses.


)


Judging by Homer I do not believe that Oedipus
had children by Iocasta: his sons were born of
Euryganeia as the writer of the Epic called the Story
of Oedipus clearly shows.

3.

The authors of the Story of Oedipus (say) of the
Sphinx: “ But furthermore (she killed) noble Haemon,
the dear son of blameless. Creon, the comeliest and
loveliest of boys.”


1 See the cylix reproduced by Gerhard, Abhandlungen,
taf. 5,4. Cp. Stesichorus, Frag. 3 (Smyth).
3 433

1 Meee


THE EPIC CYCLE


@HBAIS


i
Contest of Homer and Hesiod. o O€ “Opmpos ae
TE PLEPX.O[LEVOS enreye TO TOL MAT a, TPQ@TOV [eV
tiv OnBatda, ern f, Is ) apxXn
"Apryos detde Jed Trodvoiyriov evOev avaktes.


e yas
Athenaeus, xi, 465 E.


avr ap 0 Ovoryevs HPS EavOos [loXvvetxns

T para pev Otdirrodn Karn mapeOnce Tpamelav

apyupenv Kadpoto Jeod povos: avTap émelTa

Xpuceov eum joey KaNOV demas NO€OS oivou.

avr dip by os dpacdn TapaKelpeva TAT pos €oto

TLLNEVTA Epa, peya ob KAKOV cu ETE Guu.

ainpa 6€ Tratoly éoloe peT apcporé pore Ww emrapas

dapyahéas n)paTo- Geav & ov NavOdy épivobv.

@S ov Ot TAT pol év nOein perornte

Sdccawr’, auddotepotot & del médepot Te paxat
WE ae


as fe
Schol. Laur. on Soph. O0.C. 1375.
iaxtov @S EVONTE Napa Bdre eiré Te wv0ov-


@LOL ey@, Trades eV OVELOELOVTES ETELALAY
* * * %


evkTo Aul Baocidht Kal adrots aBavatoiot
yYepol vm adAnKov KkaTaBnuevar” Aidos eicw.
4,
Paus. viii. 25.8. “Adpactos épeuvyev ex OnBav
/ \ / Ave / /
eluata AUYpa hepwv cvv Apelove KvavoyaiTy.


434


THE THEBAID


THE THEBAID
1.


Homer travelled about reciting his epics, first the
Thebaid, in seven thousand verses, which begins:
«< Sing, goddess, of parched Argos, whence lords.. ”


2.

“Then the heaven-born hero, golden-haired Poly-
neices, first set beside Oedipus a rich table of silver
which once belonged to Cadmus the divinely wise:
next he filled a fine golden cup with sweet wine.
But when Oedipus perceived these treasures of his
father, great misery fell on his heart, and he straight-
way called down bitter curses there in the presence
of both his sons. And the avenging Fury of the
gods failed not to hear him as he prayed that they
might never divide their father’s goods in loving
brotherhood, but that war and fighting might be ever
the portion of them both.”


« And when Oedipus noticed the haunch! he threw
it on the ground and said: ‘Oh! Oh! my sons have
sent this mocking me...’ So he prayed to Zeus
the king and the other deathless gods that each might
fall by his brother’s hand and go down into the house
of Hades.”

4.

Adrastus fled from Thebes “wearing miserable
garments, and took black-maned Areion? with him.”’

! The haunch was regarded as a dishonourable portion.

2 The horse of Adrastus, offspring of Poseidon and


Demeter, who had changed herself into a mare to escape
Poseidon,


485


THE EPIC CYCLE


51

émta © émetta TedeoOévTwv vexvov évt OnBn,

ol wo Eev Taraiovtdns per éeumreé Te pd0ov:

@ [LOL eyo Trodéw yap éL00 oTparoo dupa daetvor,
appotepov pave 7 ayabov Kat doupt paxecOa.


6.

Apollodorus, i. 74. éynpev Otvevs TepiBorav
Tv ‘Immovoov. tavrTny oé o pev ypdrbas TIV
@nBaida troreunbeions ‘Odévou RAéyet RAaPetv
Oivéa yépas.


fe


Pausanias, ixy 18, 6. Tpos O€ TH mya Taos
éotly Ao godixou' Kal 0 ‘Aa podscos OUTOS QTEK TEL-
vev ey TH Maxn TH mpos “Apyetous LlapGevorraiov
Tov TaXaov Kaba 06 OnBator éyouow, érel TA Ye
éy OnBaics én ta és tHV LapOevotraiov TeNevTHV
TlepexAvpevov tov averovTa dyoty eivas.


EIITONO!I


1.
‘Contest of Homer and Hesiod. etta ‘Euryovous,
emn cus 7 apxn
vov av0 omroTépwv avdpav apxopela Modoar.
2.
Photius, Lexicon. Tevynota: wept ths Tevynotas
GNOTrEKOS Of TA OnBaixa yeypadyKotes ixavas


1 Restored from Pindar Ol. vi. 15 who, according to
Asclepiades, derives the passage from the 7'hebais,


486


THE EPIGONI


D.


“ But when the seven dead had received their last
rites in Thebes, the Son of Talaus lamented and
spoke thus among them: ‘ Woe is me, for I miss the
bright eye of my host, a good seer and a stout
spearman alike.’ ”’


6.


Oeneus married Periboea the daughter of
Hipponoiis. The author of the Thebais says that
when Olenus had been stormed, Oeneus received her
as a prize.

7.


Near the spring is the tomb of Asphodicus. This
Asphodicus killed Parthenopaeus the son of Talaus
in the battle against the Argives, as the Thebans say ;
though that part of the Thebats which tells of the
death of Parthenopaeus says that it was Periclymenus
who killed him.


THE EPIGONI
ie


Next (Homer composed) the Epigont in seven
thousand verses, beginning, “ And now, Muses, let us
begin to sing of younger men.”


2.
Teumesia. Those who have written on Theban
affairs have given a full account of the Teumesian fox.!


1 So called from Teumessus, a hill in Boeotia. For the
derivation of Teumessus cp. Antimachus Thebais fr. 3
(Kinkel).


487


THE EPIC CYCLE)


ioTopynKacl... émiTewhOhvar pev yap vo Oeay
TO Onplov TovTo Tots Kadpetous: 610 THS Bacwdelas
é&é€xNELOV TOUS amr 0 Kaopov yeyovoras. Kedarov
O€ pact TOV Aniovos “A@nvaiov bvta Kal Kova
KEKTN JLEVOV Ov ovoev Suepevyev TOV Onpiov, @S
am éx TELVEV aKca@v THD éavtod yuvatka I1poxpuv,
KabnpavTov avr ov TOV Kadépetov, diumnewy THY
ahomenka pera TOD KUVOS: KaTradaBopwevous dé mepl
tov Tevynaocov diPouvs yevécPas Tov Te KYVa Kal
THV adoTreKa, elAnphact O ovTOL TOY mUOOV ex TOU
€TLKOU KUKAOD.
3. |

Schol. on Ap. Rhod. i. 308. ol O€ THD OnBaida
yeypaores hac Ott bro Tav “Eniyovev ak po-
Oiviov avetéOy Marto y Teupectov Guyatnp Eis

Aerovs treupOeioa, kal Kata XpNg Lov "Amoa-
Awvos efepxouern TEPLETL ETE Panic TO AeBntos
Vi@ Mvenvaig TO YévOS. Kal ynuameVvyn avTo—
TOUTO Yap TEpletye TO Noyiov, yapeioOar @ ay
oVvaVTnTn— [xai] éA@ovaa eis Kohopava Kab
éexet OvoOupnoaca eddKpvce La THY THS TATPLOOS
TopOnow.


KTIIPIA


1:


Proclus, Chrestomathy, i. “EmiuBaddes tovtois Ta
Neyoueva Kumpira ev BiBrto1s dhepopeva evoexa.
1... TH O€ TEPLEXOVTA €oTL TAUTA.

Zevs Bovneverar [eT a. THS O€ju60s mepl TOD
Tpwixod Trohepwou" maparyevouevn 6é° ‘Epis ev@xov-
péevov tov Oewv ev tots IInXéws yapors, vetKos


488


THE CYPRIA


They relate that the creature was sent by the gods
to punish the descendants of Cadmus, and that the
Thebans therefore excluded those of the house of
Cadmus from the kingship. But (they say) a certain
Cephalus, the son of Deion, an Athenian, who owned
a hound which no beast ever escaped, had accidentally
killed his wife Procris, and being purified of the homi-
cide by the Cadmeans, hunted the fox with his hound,
and when they had overtaken it both hound and fox
were turned into stones near Teumessus. These
writers have taken the story from the Epic Cycle.


3.


The authors of the Thebais say that Manto the
daughter of Teiresias was sent to Delphi by the
Epigoni as a first fruit of their spoil, and that in
accordance with an oracle of Apollo she went out and
met Rhacius, the son of Lebes, a Mycenaean by race.
This man she married—for the oracle also contained
the command that she should marry whomsoever she
might meet—and coming to Colophon, was there
much cast down and wept over the destruction of her
country.


THE CYPRIA
iL;


Tuts! is continued by the epic called Cypria which
is current in eleven books. Its contents are as
follows.

Zeus plans with Themis to bring about the Trojan
war. Strife arrives while the gods are feasting at
the marriage of Peleus and starts a dispute between


1 The preceding part of the Epic Cycle (?).
489


THE EPIC CYCLE


mepl Kddrous evio THO W ‘AOnva,” Ape Kal Ag po-
OiTyN, at _T POS. ‘AreFavdpov ev "Sn Kara Auos
TpoaTayny og “Eppod T pos THV Kplow dyouTa
Kab T POK piveL THY "Adpoditny émaplets Tots
“Erevs yapous "AreEavdpos.

“Erevra 6, "Agpodirns. uToOepevns, vauTrnyet-
TAL, Kab "Enevos TeEpb TOV HedOvT ov avT@ 7 po-
Jeomiter. al “Ad poditn Aivetay oupmdeiD aAvT@
KerNevEL. Kal Kaocavopa TEepl TOV weNdovrov
™poonrot. emiBas dé TH Naxedarpovig ‘AAEEavd pos
Eevilerar Tapa TOUS. Tuvdapidaus, Kal [ETO AUTO
€v TH mapry Tapa Mevehag: kat Enévn rapa
THD evaxiav dtowat Sapa o O "AnéEavSpos.

Kai pera Tavuta I Mevenaos els Kpyrny EKTT NEL,
Kenevoas THY “Enevny Tois Eévous Ta emit nOeLaL
mapexer és dy am arhayaow. éy tovuT@ Ooé
“A gdpodirn cuvayel THY ‘EXévnv TO *AneEdv Spo.
Kal peTa THY prov TH TACLTTA KTH MLOT O. év0e-
[EVOL, VUKTOS atoTéovet. xeruava oe avrois
epiornaty "Hoa. Ka mpocevex Gels YLo@vt oO
‘AX€Eavdpos aipet THY TOMY. KAL aTrOTTAEVTAS
ets “T\cov yapous Ths “Enrévns em eTENETED.

Ev TOUT dé Kadotwp pera TlorvdevKovs Tas
"Téa kat Avyxéas Bois Uparpovpevot epopdbncay,
Kal Kdorwp peev vIr0 TOU Ida  avatpetrar,
Avyxevs 6é€ kat "Idas tro TlodudevKous: Kal
ZLevs avrois ET EPI MEPOV veel THY aavactap.

Kai pera TAUTA *Tpus avaryyenet TO Meveraw
TO yeyovora Kara TOV OlKOV. 0 O€ Ta paryevopevos
mepl THS ew “Dusov oTpareias Bovreverat (Mera
TOU Bap pe: kat mpos Néotopa mdparyiverar


490


THE CYPRIA


Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite as to which of them is
fairest. The three are led by Hermes at the command
of Zeus to Alexandrus ! on Mount Ida for his decision,
and Alexandrus, lured by his promised marriage with
Helen, decides in favour of Aphrodite. _

Then Alexandrus builds his ships at Aphrodite's
suggestion, and Helenus foretells the future to him,
and Aphrodite orders Aeneas to sail with him, while
Cassandra prophesies as to what will happen after-
wards. Alexandrus next lands in Lacedaemon and is
entertained by the sons of Tyndareus, and afterwards
by Menelaus in Sparta, where in the course of a feast
he gives gifts to Helen.

After this, Menelaus sets sail for Crete, ordering
Helen to furnish the guests with all they require
until they depart. Meanwhile, Aphrodite brings
Helen and Alexandrus together, and they, after their
union, put very great treasures on board and sail
away by night. Hera stirs up a storm against them
and they are carried to Sidon, where Alexandrus
takes the city. From there he sailed to Troy and
celebrated his marriage with Helen.

In the meantime Castor and Polydeuces, while
stealing the cattle of Idas and Lynceus, were caught
in the act, and Castor was killed by Idas, and Lyn-
ceus and Idas by Polydeuces. Zeus gave them im-
mortality every other day.

Iris next informs Menelaus of what has happened
at his home. Menelaus returns and plans an exped-
ition against Ilium with his brother, and then goes on

/ 1 sc. Paris.


« ; 491


THE EPIC CYCLE


Mevéraos. Néotwp dé év trapexBacet dunyetrar
b) la) e 9 \ , \ , /
avT@ ws ‘Exrwmevs bbeipas tnv AvKov Ovyatépa
3 / \ x \ IQ/ rn u
éEerrop0n0n, Kat ta Tept Otvdimovy Kat THY
¢ VA / \ \ \ f \
Hpakvdéous paviav Kat ta rept Onoéa kai

b] / 4 \ £. / b) /
Apidéyvnv. erecta tovs nyenovas aPpotfovar
émeNOovtes THv “EXAdSa. Kal paiverBar tpoc-

HA \ 2 J 54. DR an \ UA
Tomoduevov Tov Odvaocéa eri TO pon Oédew

, b / 7% ig

avoTtpatevecOas ébwpacayv, Iarapndous vro-
Oeuévou tov viov Tnréuayov éml Kodacw é&apta-
CaVTEs.

Kal pera tabta, cuvenb ores els AvAiOa
Ovovet Kat Ta, Tepl TOV Spaxovra Kab TOUS
at povbovs YEVOMEVA OLKVUTAL, Kal Kadyas mept
TOV aTroBnoouevav TpOrEYEL AUTOLS. emrelTa. ava-
yOévtes Tevdpavia T porta xXouct Kal TAUTHVY OS
"TXtov em opOovr. THrepos dé exBonOnoas
Bcpoavdpor te tov IloAvvelxous KTeiver Kal
avTos UO “AXUNAES TIT p@o KET AL. aTOTAEOVTE
dé avtots éx ths Muctas yemov ériminres Kal
vacKedayvevrat. "Ayerrevs 6€ LKUp@ TpoTacyVov
yapet THY Aveopnoous Ouyartépa Anidapeay.
emreLTa Trepov KATO pavrelay T aparyevowevov
Els "Apyos. Lara "AYlAXNEUS OS AYE MOVva, ryevna 0-
jvevov TOU ém “IXtov trod.

Kal ro devTEpoV HO pote wevou TOU oTONOU év
Avnrioz, Ayapéuvov éml Onpas Barev Eragon,
vmepBadnew epnoe Kal THY "A prepey. pavicaca
Oe ue Oeos éréayey avtovs Tov TOD Xermavas
emUT EMT OUTA. Kadyavrtos 6€ elovTOS TIP TIS
Oeov pnviv Kat ‘Tpuyevevar KeheUTAVTOS Ovew TH
"Apréutds, @s él ydwov avtny “Axidnret peta-


492.


‘THE CYPRIA


to Nestor. Nestor in a digression tells him how
-Epopeus was utterly destroyed after seducing the
daughter of Lycus, and the story of Oedipus, the
madness of Heracles, and the story of Theseus and
Ariadne. Then they travel over Hellas and gather
the leaders, detecting Odysseus when he pretends to
be mad, not wishing to join the expedition, by seiz-
ing his son Telemachus for punishment at the
suggestion of Palamedes.

All the leaders then meet together at Aulis and
sacrifice. ‘The incident of the serpent and the spar-
rows ! takes place before them, and Calchas foretells
what is going to befall. After this, they put out to
sea, and reach Teuthrania and sack it, taking it for
Ilium. Telephus comes out to the rescue and kills
Thersander the son of Polyneices, and is himself
wounded by Achilles. As they put out from Mysia
a storm comes on them and scatters them, and
Achilles first puts in at Scyros and marries. Deida-
-meia, the daughter of Lycomedes, and then heals
Telephus, who had been led by an oracle to go
to Argos, so that he might be their guide on the
voyage to Ilium.

When the expedition had mustered a second time
at Aulis, Agamemnon, while at the chase, shot a stag
and boasted that he surpassed even Artemis. At
this the goddess was so angry that she sent stormy
winds and prevented them from sailing. Calchas
then told them of the anger of the goddess and bade
them sacrifice Iphigeneia to Artemis. This they
attempt to do, sending to fetch Iphigeneia as though

1 While the Greeks were sacrificing at Aulis, a serpent
appeared and devoured eight young birds from their nest
and lastly the mother of the brood. This was interpreted


by Calchas to mean that the war would swallow up nine full
years. Cp. Iliad ii, 299 ff.


4°03


THE EPIC CYCLE


Ter apevol, Oveuv emexerpodow. “Aprepus be
avTny éfapmacaca, Els Tadpous peraxopiter Kab
aSdvatov mou: éxadov bé avTi THs KOopNS
TaploTnal TO Bop.

"Evrevta Katamdéovew eis Tévedov. Kai
evayouuevoay avtav Piroxtytyns vd wdpov
TANYELS dua TY dvooopiay év Anu KaTEncipOn,
Kab “AXuAREvs DoTEpov KrAnOets, Suapéperar ™ pos
Ayapepvova. EM ELTE amoBatvovtas AUTOUS €ts
"TAcov elpyovow OL Tipaes, kab OvnoKer Ipa-
Tea thaos Up i Extopos. emelTa, "A yiddeds avTous
TpeTeT aL dvehoy Kux«vov tov Uoceddvos. al
TOUS vexpous avapoovTar, Kal Ova peo Bevovt au
T™ pos tovs Tpaas, THY “‘Enevny Kal Ta XpnwaTa
atattouvTes. @s oe ovx, vmKOUT AY exetVvol,
évtav0a on TELXOMAX OTOL. eTELT A: THD Xo pay
éme£ehOovres mopOovar Kal TAS TEpLolKous TONELS.
Kab pera TAvTA “AXirdevs “Enevny émiOuped
Jedoacbat, Kal ov nyayov avTous els TO AUTO
“Ag poditn Kat @Oé€tis. etta amovoa Tet @ppn-
pevous TOUS “AyaLovs “Ayedrevs KaTEX EL. KAT ELTA.
QTENAUVEL TAS Aivetou Poas, KOb _Avpyngop Kab
Ijdacov mopet Kal ovxvas TOY TEpLorKiO@y
Todewv, Kab Tpwidov povever. Avxdova Te
Taz poxnos Els Ajuvov arya @v ATEMTONG, aut
éx TOV hapvpwv “Ayxtdhdevs fev Boonida yepas
AauBaver, Xpvonioa dé Ayapéuvov. émerta éote
Iarapynéous Javaros, kat Atos Bounds omas
éemtxoupion TOUS Tpaas ‘AXINA_A THS Tuppaxias
TIS “HAANVLK|S aT OaTHT AS, Kal KaTadoyos TOV
tots Tpwot cvppaynoavTwy.


494


THE CYPRIA


for marriage with Achilles. Artemis, however,
snatched her away and transported her to the Tauri,
making her immortal, and putting a stag in place of
the girl upon the altar.

Next they sail as far as Tenedos : and while they are
feasting, Philoctetes is bitten by a snake and is left
behind in Lemnos because of the stench of his sore.
Here, too, Achilles quarrels with Agamemnon because
he is invited late. Then the Greeks tried to land at
Ilium, but the Trojans prevent them, and Protesilaus
is killed by Hector. Achilles then kills Cycnus, the
son of Poseidon, and drives the Trojans back. The
Greeks take up their dead and send envoys to the
Trojans demanding the surrender of Helen and the
treasure with her. The Trojans refusing, they first
assault the city, and then go out and lay waste the
country and cities round about. After this, Achilles
desires to see Helen, and Aphrodite and Thetis
contrive a meeting between them. The Achaeans
next desire to return home, but are restrained by
Achilles, who afterwards drives off the cattle of:
Aeneas, and sacks Lyrnessus and Pedasus and many
of the neighbouring cities, and kills Troilus. Patro-
clus carries away Lycaon to Lemnos and sells him
as a slave, and out of the spoils Achilles receives
Briseis as a prize, and Agamemnon Chryseis. Then
follows the death of Palamedes, the plan of Zeus
to relieve the Trojans by detaching Achilles from
the Hellenic confederacy, and a catalogue of the
Trojan allies.


495


THE EPIC CYCLE


| De
Tzetzes, Chil. xiii. 638.


LTacivos o 0 Ta Kumpea ouyy paLwara ToLujoas
cimrep Ol TAELOUS Néyouer. ‘Opnpov TEPUKEVAL
és mpotka b¢ adv Ypnuace SoOHvat TO Yracivo.


3.
Schol. on Homer, Il. i. 5.

Hv OTe pupia hodrAa Kata YOova TrAACOMEvwV TEP
[avOparrav éBapuve] Badvorepvov TNATOS ains,
Levs O€ iOav érénoe cal év TuKwais mpamiverc
cuvOero Koupioat avOpomov TapBoropa yatav,
putiooas TohEmov peyarny ep ‘TMvaxoto
ob pa KEVOOELEY davatou Bapos: ot & évi Tpoin

npwes KTetvovto: Atos & éteXeieto Bourn.


4,

Volumina Herculan. 11. viii. 108. o 0€ Ta Kurpia
Tooas “Hpa Xapecomernv hevyey avTov Tov
yapov, Alia S& oudocat yorw0évta S1dTe OvnTe
TVVOLKLCEL.

D.

Schol. on Il. xvii, 140. KaTa yap TOV IIr€ws
KaL Bersdos yapov ot Oeot cuvaxOévtes eis TO
Ij Avov er eva 16 pu Cov TI nXe7t capa, Xelpeov
o€ pedav evdanh TEU@V els OOPU mapea Kev. pact
pev “AOnvay Eéo au avTo, ‘ Haro rov dé KaTa-
oKevdoat ...  toTopia Tapa T@® Ta Kurpia
TOLNCAVTL.

6.

Athenaeus, xv. 682 D, F. avOav b6€ ctepavwTiKav

péuvntar o pwev Ta Kimpia wetoinxcas ‘Hynotas 1)


496


THE CYPRIA
2.


Stasinus composed the Cypria which the more
part say was Homer's work and by him given to
Stasinus as a dowry with money besides.


J.


«There was a time when the countless tribes of
men, though wide-dispersed, oppressed the surface
of the deep-bosomed earth, and Zeus saw it and had
pity and in his wise heart resolved to relieve the all-
nurturing earth of men by causing the great
struggle of the [lian war, that the load of death
might empty the world. And so the heroes were
slain in Troy, and the plan of Zeus came to pass.”


4,


The author of the Cypria says that Thetis, to
please Hera, avoided union with Zeus, at which he
was enraged and swore that she should be the wife
of a mortal.


D.


For at the marriage of Peleus and Thetis, the
gods gathered together on Pelion to feast and
brought Peleus gifts. Cheiron gave him a stout
ashen shaft which he had cut for a spear, and
Athena, it is said, polished it, and Hephaestus fitted
it with a head. The story is given by the author of
the Cypria.

6.


The author of the Cypria, whether Hegesias or .
Stasinus, mentions flowers used for garlands. The


497
K K


THE EPIC CYCLE


A / b) oO v4 b) \ c /
2 Tacivos Me - Never 6 OUV OOTLS EOTLY O TOLHOAS
AvUTa ev TO a’ OUT@CL*


eluara pev Xpot EoTO Ta Ob Xdperés 1 Te Kal “Opat

Toinoav Kal éBawav év avOcow etapwvotat,
@ ; n +3@ / / / pees /
ota hopova ‘Opat, év Te KpoKm ev O vakivlw
M4 BY ld Cay, 2 SIGN SF es n
év Te t@ Oarefovre podou T evi avOet KaX@
NOEL VEKT Ape ev T apBpootats Karixerce a
dvOecu vapKiao ov Kal Aetpiou: tot | “Adpooditn
@pals TaVvTolats TebvMpéva elwaTa EoTO.
x x *

fh 0€ cup appiTororat prropperdns "Agpodirn
TreEdpevae atTehavous evodeas, dvOea yains,
av eparaiow EOevTo Geai Ara poKpndemvor 103)
Noppat Kat Xaperes, 6 apa dé Ypuch "Ag podirn,
KaNOV aeLoovaas KAT Gpos TONUTLOaKOU *ldns.


i
Clement ie Alexandria, Protrept ii. 30. 5.
Kdortwp pev Ovntos, Pavatou O€ ol aica TéTpwTaL
avtap 6 y abdavatos LloAvdevnns, abe, ‘A pnos


8.
Athenaeus, vill. 334 B.


Tous 6€ meta TpitaTrny EnXévny réxe, Oadpa
Bpototct,
THY ToTEe KaAALKomOS Néweots PiroTHTL piyetoa
Znvi Jedy Baownhi Téxe KpaTtephs um avaryens”
pedye yap, ovd eCehev px On pevaas € év pirornre
maT pl Au Kpovion éreipero yap ppEevas aidot
Kal vewéoes’ KaTa yhy 5é Kal aTpUyeTov meray
vowp


1 Meineke: xaAArppdov 8 of’, MS.
498


THE CYPRIA


poet, whoever he was, writes as follows in his first ~~~


book : “She clothed herself with garments which
the Graces and Hours had made for her and dyed in
flowers of spring—such flowers as the Seasons wear
—in crocus and hyacinth and flourishing violet and
the rose’s lovely bloom, so sweet and delicious, and
heavenly buds, the flowers of the narcissus and lily.
In such perfumed garments is Aphrodite clothed at all
seasons. *« * * Then laughter-loving Aphrodite
and her handmaidens wove sweet-smelling crowns
of flowers of the earth and put them upon their
heads—the bright-coiffed goddesses, the Nymphs
and Graces, and golden Aphrodite too, while they
sang sweetly on the mount of many-fountained


Ida.”’
t


“Castor was mortal, and the fate of death was
destined for him; but Polydeuces, scion of Ares,
was immortal.”


8.


« And after them she bare a third child, Helen, a
marvel to men. Rich-tressed Nemesis once gave
her birth when she had been joined in love with Zeus
the king of the gods by harsh violence. For Nemesis
tried to escape him and liked not to lie in love with
her father Zeus the Son of Cronos; for shame and
indignation vexed her heart: therefore she fled
him over the land and fruitless dark water. But


499
Kk 2


THE EPIC CYCLE


pebye, Zevs d edtoe: NaBetv & étratero Oupa:

aNNOTE pev. KATA KDA Tohupnrois Soto daracons,
GNNOT ay’ ‘Oxccavod TOT APOV kal tmeipata L'ains,
ixO uve eLdop.evn TOVTOV TONUY eEopobuven,

aNNOT ay NIrELPOV Tou BohaKa’ yiryvero & atel

Onpt ba Hrretpos aiva Tpédet, Ohpa pvyot viv.


9,
Schol. on Hur. Andr. 898. 06 dé tas Kumpianas
e "a / / id a ae >
tatoptas auvtTatas Undecobevnv dyot, we? ov ets
Kimpov adiyOat, cai tov é& adthis texOévta
"AnreEdvopw “Ayavoyr.
0:
Herodotus, ii. 117. év ev yap toto. Kumpioroe
by C an b) / >) / > ?
clpntat ws TpLTatos é« Yrdaptns ‘AréEavdpos ati-
xeTo &> TO Idtov dyov Enévny, evaés Te TVEvLATL
Vpnoapevos Kai Padrdoon dein.


| 11.
Schol. on Il. iii, 242. érresdy mpotépms vio
Oncews yoTacOn . . 1a yap THY TOTE ryevomerny


aprayny “A diova rN "ATTLUKHS mopOetrat, Kal
TITP@OKETAL Kdorap t vO A pidvov Tov ToTe Ba-
TLNEWS Kara TO deEtoy punpov. ot Oe Avocxoupor
Oncews Ty TUXOVTES had upaywyovor Tas AOnvas.
» toTOpla Tapa... TOlS KUKALKOLS. . .


Plutarch, Thes. 32. “Hpéas & uTO Onoéws avTov
NY 2d / 5) n \ J € /
wept Adidvas atrofaveiv tov “AXuKov taTopnKe,
KaL MAPTUPLA TAUTA TA ETN bidet i! nit
TOV év evpuxope TOT’ Agiovy
papvawevov Onoevs ‘Edévns Ever’ HuKopoto
KTELVEV.”


1 Cp. Allen CLA. xxvii. 190.
500


THE CYPRIA


Zeus ever pursued and. longed in his heart to catch
her. Now she took the form of a fish and sped over
the waves of the loud-roaring sea, and now over
Ocean’s stream and the furthest bounds of Earth, and
now she sped over the furrowed land, always turning
into such dread creatures as the dry land nurtures,
that she might escape him.”


2.


The writer! of the Cyprian histories says that
_(Helen’s third child was) Pleisthenes and that she
took him with her to Cyprus, and that the child she
bore Alexandrus was Aganus.


10.


For it is said in the Cypra that Alexandrus came
with Helen to Ilium from Sparta in three days,
enjoying a favourable wind and calm sea.


dol.


For Helen had been previously carried off by
Theseus, and it was in consequence of this earlier
rape that Aphidna, a town in Attica, was sacked and
Castor was wounded in the right thigh by Aphidnus
who was king at that time. Then the Dioscuri,
failing to find Theseus, sacked Athens. The story
is in the Cyclic writers.


Hereas relates that Alycus was killed by Theseus
himself near Aphidna, and quotes the tolerate
verses in evidence :

“In spacious Aphidna Theseus slew him in hattle
long ago for rich-haired Helen’s sake.”’


1 4.e. Stasinus (or Hegesias : cp. fr. 6) : the phrase ‘‘ Cyprian
histories ” is equivalent to ‘‘ The Cypria.”


501


THE EPIC CYCLE


12.
Schol. on Pindar, Nem. x. 114.
ainva dé AuyKevs
Taiiyerov mpocéBawve tooly Tayéeoor TreTrOLO as.
axpotatov & avaBas duedépxeto vioov aTracav
Tavtaridov TléXorros, raya © etowde KvdLMOS Hpws
dewvois opOarpoicw Ecw Spvos audw KotrANs 5
Kdotopa @ immodapov cat deOrodopov Ilonv-
devKea.
Philodemus, On Piety. Kdotopa 6é tro “Ida
tov Addpewm Kkatnkovtiabar yéypal de . .
13.
Athenaeus, 35 a.
oivov tot, Mevédae, Oeol Trotnoay apiaTov
Ovntots avOp@roiow arocKEddoal MEACOOVAS.


14. |
Laurentian Scholiast on Sophocles, Elect. 157.
7) Opnp@ akorovbet eipnkote Tas Tpets Ovyartépas
tov Ayapéuvovos, 7 os 0 Ta Kimpia, 0 dyoty,
Idiyéverav xai Idtdvacoar.
15.3
Contest of Homer and Hesiod.
> of ev SatvuVTO TraVHWEpoL OUdEY EXOVTES
olxoev, adAa Trapetyev Avak avdpav Ayaméuvav.
16.
Louvre Papyrus.
ov« ehaunv Axirji Kodw@oémev ANKILOV HTOP
MOE Man EKTAYAWS, ETEL 7) WANA pot HiXrOS Her.


1 These two lines possibly belong to the account of the
feast given by Agamemnon at Lemnos.


502


THE CYPRIA


2.

« Straightway Lynceus, trusting in his swift feet,
made for Taygetus. He climbed its highest peak
and looked throughout the whole isle of Pelops, son
of Tantalus;-and soon the glorious hero with his
dread eyes saw horse-taming Castor and athlete
Polydeuces both hidden within a hollow oak.”


(Stasinus?) writes that Castor was killed with a
. spear shot by Idas the son of Aphareus.


13.
“Menelaus, know that the gods made wine the
best thing for mortal man to scatter cares.”’


14.


Hither he follows Homer who spoke of the three
daughters of Agamemnon, or—like the writer of
the Cypria—he makes them four, (distinguishing)
Iphigeneia and Iphianassa.


15.


“So they feasted all day long, taking nothing
from their own houses; for Agamemnon, king of
men, provided for them.”


16.


“T never thought to enrage so terribly the stout
heart of Achilles, for very well I loved him.”


533


THE EPIC CYCLE
17.


Pausanias, iv. 2.7. 0 d€ Ta &rn Toinoas Ta
Kvmpia Upwrteciidov dnotv, 0s 6te Kata THY
Tppasa eoxov “EXdqves amoRiva T POTOS €TOA-
ENCE, IIpwrecthdov Tovtov tHv yuvaixa IloAv-
oapay pev TO dvoua, Ouyatépa O€ Meredypou
dynotv eivat Tod Owéas.


18.


Eustathius, 119. 4. ioTopotat 5é tives OTL €x TOV
rt aacer OnBov 7) Xpvonis EANPON, ovTE
Katapuyovea excel, ovT émt Ovoiav ‘ApTEepoos
éXMovaa, was o Ta Kurrpia ypdas fn, adra
TonuTis ... Avdpopmayns ovaa.


19;


Pausanias, x. 31. 2. Tlarapnédny 6é ATOTVIYHVAL
7 poeovra emt ixObov Onpav, Avoundnv dé Tov
amroKTetvavTa elvat Kal "Odvocéa emrireEapevos ev
émreatv 00a tols Kumpiois.


20.
Plato, ee dia 12 A.


Liva dé TOV T " epgavra Kal Os TA0E TAVT epuTevoen
ovK eOérels etmrety: iva yap déos év0a Kai aides.


ot.
Herodian, On Peculiar Diction.


TO 8 VroKxvaapery TEKE Dopyovas aiva TEN pa,
ai Lapmndova vatov ér “Oneavd Babvdivy,
ane TET pNHEToAaV.


~


504


THE CYPRIA


17.


The poet of the Cypria says that the wife of
Protesilaus—who, when the Hellenes reached the
Trojan shore, first dared to land—was called Poly-
dora, and was the daughter of Meleager, the son of
Oeneus.

18.

Some relate that Chryseis was taken from Hypo-
placian! Thebes, and that she had not taken refuge
there nor gone there to sacrifice to Artemis, as the
author of the Cypria states, but was simply a fellow
townswoman of Andromache.


19.

I know, because I have read it in the epic Cypria,
that Palamedes was drowned when he had gone out
fishing, and that it was Diomedes and Odysseus who
caused his death.

20.

“ That it is Zeus who has done this, and brought
all these things 1o pass, you do not like to say;
for where fear is, there too is shame.”’


21.

“By him she conceived and bare the Gorgons,
fearful monsters who lived in Sarpedon, a rocky
island in deep-eddying Oceanus.”

1 s¢, the Asiatic Thebes at the foot of Mt, Placius.


595


THE EPIC CYCLE


22.


Clement of Alexandria, Reoniaten vii. 2.19. maruv
STacivov etovTos


vimLos OS TaTépa KTElVaS Taloas KATAaNELTEL.


AIOIONIS


1.


Proclus, Chrestomathia, ii. “EreBadree Oe Tots
T poet pn uevots (se. Kumptoes) ev TH 7 po TAUTNS
BiBro ‘Duds ‘Opsjpou, pel Hv cory "AtOcormdos
BuBria ‘Apetivov Maarnoiov TEpLexovTa TA0E.
“Apa Sov Tevdectheva Tapayivetat Tpwat oUMEa-
XygovTa, "A pews pev Ouyarnp, Opdcca dé TO
yevos- Kal KTELVEL avray apraTevoucay ‘Ayednrevs,
ot O€ Tp@es aura Oamrovat. Kal "AX AAEUS
Ocpoitnv avanpet ovdopnbels Tpos auTov Kal
overorabels TOV emt TH TlevGeovAcig eyopievov
epora. Kat €k TOUTOV OTAOLS yiverau TOUS “Axatois
mepl Too Gepaitov povov. pera O€ TAUTA “AXA
evs Els Meo Bov Tre, Kat Ovoas “ATroAX@VL Kal
“A preptoe kat Antot xaOatpetas Tov dhovov vm’
‘Odvacéws.

Menor dé 0 ‘Hobs VLOS eX cov npareToreveTov
TavoT May TaparyiveTat TOUS Tpwat BonOyncov:
Kal Bétus To Tall Ta Kara TOV Mépvova. 7 po-
dere. Kab _oupBoris ryevomevns ‘AYTLAOXOS UT
Mépvovos avatpetTat, emerta ‘Ayidrevs Mépvova
KTELVEL. Kal TovT@ pev “Hos mapa Atos aitnoa-
evn aavactav Sidwor T pe apievos oe “Ayedreds
tovs Topas kal eis THY TOMY GUVELaTET@Y UTO


506


THE AETHIOPIS


22.
Again, Stasinus says :
“ He is a simple man who kills the father and lets
the children live.”


THE AETHIOPIS


5 1.

_ Tue Cypria, described in the preceding book, has
its sequel in the Jiad of Homer, which is followed in
turn by the five books of the Aethiopis, the work of ,
Arctinus of Miletus. Their contents are as follows.
The Amazon Penthesileia, the daughter of Ares and
of Thracian race, comes to aid the Trojans, and after
showing great prowess, is killed by Achilles and
buried by the Trojans. Achilles then slays Ther-
sites for abusing and reviling him for his supposed
love for Penthesileia. As a result a dispute arises
amongst the Achaeans over the killing of Thersites,
and Achilles sails to Lesbos and after sacrificing to
Apollo, Artemis, and Leto, is purified by Odysseus
from bloodshed.

Then Memnon, the son of Eos, wearing armour
made by Hephaestus, comes to help the Trojans, and
Thetis tells her son about Memnon. A battle takes
place in which Antilochus is slain by Memnon and
Memnon by Achilles. Eos then obtains of Zeus and
bestows upon her son immortality; but Achilles
routs the Trojans, and, rushing into the city with


507


THE EPIC CYCLE


Tdpidos AVaLPEtT aL Kal ‘ATrod@vos* Kal Tept
TOU TT O MATOS YevOpEDTS ia xupas paxns "Avas
avEhOpEVOS éml TAS vas Koper, "Odvacéws
ATO MAYO LEVOV TOUS: Two. emeLTa "AVTLAOX OV
TE Oamrovat Kab TOV Vek pov TOU “ANU Ews 7 po-
TiOevtar Kal Oé€tus ap LK 0 MeV ouv Moveais Kab
Tals aedpais Opnvet TOV matoa Kab Heras Tatra
ex Ths Tupas n O€res avapTacaca TOV Tatoa els
TH Aevany Nijoov OraKopitet. ot Oe “Axatol TOV
Tapov XocavTes aryova Teac w, Kal mTepl TOV
‘AXLAREWS Omrov “Odvecet Kat Alavts otdous
€WTLTTEL.


2. |

Schol. on Il. xxiv. 804. tuvés ypadovar :
@s ol ’ dupierov Tapov’ ‘Extopos. 7AGe & “Apatin |
"Apnos Ouyatnp peyadHntopos avdpodovoto.


: 3.
Schol. on Pindar, Isth. iii. 53. 0 yap tHv ’AtOt0-
Tica ypaddov tept tov dpOpov dyot tov Aiavta
EQUTOV AVENEL.


TAIAS MIKPA


be


‘EKERs & éotlv “IWtddos px pas BiBrLa Téa cepa
Aeaxew Mirvdnvaiov TEpLexovTa TQOE. % TOV
OTAwV Kplois yiveTat Kal ‘Odvacevs Kara Bov-
Ano "AOnvas Aap Raver. Aias & éupavnys ryevo-
pevos THY Te Aelav TOV “AXaLdy Aupatverar Kal
éavTov avaipel. peta tavta Odvaceds oxHoas


508


THE LITTLE ILIAD


} them, is killed by Paris and Apollo. A great struggle
| for the body then follows, Aias taking up the body


}_ and carrying it to the ships, while Odysseus drives off


} the Trojans behind. The Achaeans then bury
| Antilochus and lay out the body of Achilles, while
| Thetis, arriving with the Muses and her sisters,
} bewails her son, whom she, afterwards catches away
from the pyre and transports to the White Island.
After this, the Achaeans pile him a cairn and hold
games in his honour. Lastly a dispute arises
between Odysseus and Aias over the arms of
Achilles.
2.

Some read: “Thus they performed the burial of
Hector. Then came the Amazon, the daughter of
great-souled Ares the slayer of men.”


3.


The author of the Aethiopis says that Aias killed
himself about dawn.


THE LITTLE ILIAD


ie


Next comes the Little Iliad in four books by
Lesches of Mitylene: its contents are as follows.
The adjudging of the arms of Achilles takes place,
and Odysseus, by the contriving of Athena, gains
them. Aias then becomes mad and destroys the
herd of the Achaeans and kills himself. Next
Odysseus lies in wait and catches Helenus, who


599


THE EPIC CYCLE


'EnXevoy Xap Bave, cal yphoavtTos Tept THs ado-
cews tovtov, Aropnoyns é« Anuvov Piroxtytny
avayel. sabeis dé ovTOS vmo Maydovos Kal
povoyaynoas ‘AreEavep@ Ktetvet’ Kai TOV VEK pov
UT Meveddov Kataucia evra, avEhomevo Oan-
TOVOLW Ot Tpdes. peta o€ tavta AnidoBos
Edévgy yapet, Ka Neorrohepov ‘Odvacers
ex ZKUpov anyaryov Ta OTAa OlOwoL TA TOD TAT POS"
Kab “AXsAAEUS aUuT@ pavraveras.

‘EupuTrunos 6€ 0 Trédou émiKOUpoS TOLS Toot
TapayiveTat, Kal apiaTevovTa, AUTOV ATOKTELVEL
NeomtoAepuos, Kat ot Tp@es modsopxovytat. Kal
"Eretos xat “AOnvas mpoaipecww tov Sovpetov
immov KatacKevater, Oduacets te aixtodpevos
€auTov KaTacKoTros ets *IX\Lov Tapary/ivEeTat, Kab
avayve pia Bets ud’ “Enévns mepl TNS aha@cews THS
TONEOS cuyTibetat, KTELVAS TE Tuas TOV Tpowv
émi Tas vavs adixvettat. Kal peta TAaVTa ovY
Avopnder TO Tahhaovov exxopiter cK THs ‘Thiov.
émetta els TOV dovpevov immrov TOUS aplaTous
eu BiBacavtes TUS TE cKNVaS KaTabhetavres, ol
oTrol THV ‘EAAqvev eis Tévedov avayovtat: ot
O€ Tpaes Tov KaK OY vrodaPovtes anrnrr.ax Oat,
TOV TE Sovpevov t (mov els THY TON elo OEXOVT AL,
OveAOvTES pEpos Tl TOU TELYOUS, KAL EVMYOUYTAL WS
VEVLKNKOTES TOUS "EAAqvas.


2.


Herodotus, Life of Homer.
"Troy aetow cai Aapdavinv evrrwXov
As wépt ToOANa TAOov Aavaol Oepdarrovtes “Apnos.


510


THE LITTLE ILIAD


prophesies as to the taking of Troy, and Diomede
_accordingly brings Philoctetes from Lemnos. Philoc-
tetes is healed by Machaon, fights in single combat
with Alexandrus and kills him: the dead body is
outraged by Menelaus, but the Trojans recover and
bury it. After this Deiphobus marries Helen, Odys-
seus brings Neoptolemus from Scyros and gives him
his father’s arms, and the ghost of Achilles appears
to him.

EKurypylus the son of Telephus arrives to aid the
Trojans, shows his prowess and is killed by Neo-
ptolemus. The Trojans are now closely beseiged, and
EKpeius, by Athena's instruction, builds the wooden
horse. Odysseus disfigures himself and goes in to
_ Ilium as aspy, and there being recognized by Helen,
plots with her for the taking of the city; after
killing certain of the Trojans, he returns to the ships.
Next he carries the Palladium out of Troy with the
help of Diomedes. Then after putting their best
men in the wooden horse and burning their huts, the
main body of the Hellenes sail to Tenedos. The
Trojans, supposing their troubles over, destroy a part
of their city wall and take the wooden horse into
their city and feast as though they had conquered
the Hellenes.


2.
“J sing of Ilium and Dardania, the land of fine


horses, wherein the Danai, followers of Ares, suffered
many things.”


511


THE EPIC CYCLE


| a. |

Schol. on Aristoph. Krights 1056 and Aristo- - &
phanes ib. 9 toropta TOUTOV TOV TpoTrov EVEL.
Ore de Epov To mepl TOV apiorebov 6 te Aias
Kab Oo ‘Odvacets, as dnow o Thy puxpav “Ididda
TETOLNKWS. TOV Néoropa dé oupBovredo as Tots
if EXAnor mera Tuvas é& avTav bro Ta TetXN
Tov Tpowv @TAKOVT THT OVTAS mepl Ths avdpetas
TOV _ Tpoetpnpevov NPWWV. TOUS Oe mem bevras
acodoat mapOeveov Siapepopeven m™ pos ddMNAS,
OV THY bev A€éyerv @S 0 Alas OND KpetTTOV éaTh
tov Odvocéws, duepyoméevnv ovTas:

Alas péev yap depe Kal Exhepe OntoTHTos

now UInnretdnv ov0’ n0eXe Stos ‘Oducceds.
THhv © étépay avrertrety “AOnvas mpovota:

TOS ETEPOVNTW; THS OV KATA KOTMOV EELTrES

Wpedoos;

Kab KE yun hépou aos eet Kev avnp avabetn,

GAN ovK av payécatTo: KETELTO yap EL HAaXéTaLTO.


Hustathius, 285. 34. 0 THY wLKpaV ‘Tudoa ypa-
bas ta Topet nde KavOijvae our das TOV Aiavra,
TeOHvat O€ ovTw@S ev cope OLA TV Opyiy TOU
Bacirews.

D,

Eustathius on Homer, Il. 326. o 6& THhv pLxpay
Trrdda ypdwas avafevyvivta avtov ato Tndedhou
mpocopplaOnvar exel.

[Tndetdny o "AXA pepe LKbpovde Qverra,

évOa vy és apyanéov ALmEeV’ txeTO VUKTOS EéxEiVNS.


512


THE LITTLE ILIAD


3,


The story runs as follows: Aias and Odysseus
were quarrelling as to their achievements, says the
poet of the Litile Ihad, and Nestor advised the
Hellenes to send some of their number to go to the
foot of the walls and overhear what was said about
the valour of the heroes named above. The eaves-
droppers heard certain girls disputing, one of them
‘saying that Aias was by far a better man than
Odysseus and continuing as follows :

“For Aias took up and carried out of the strife the
hero, Peleus’..son: this great Odysseus cared not to do.”

To.this another replied by Athena’s contrivance :

“Why, what is this you say? A thing against
reason and untrue!.... Kven a woman could carry
a load once a man had put it on her shoulder; but
she could not fight. For she would fail with fear if
_ she should fight.” :


4.
The writer of the Little had says that Aias was


not buried in the usual way,! but was simply buried
in a coffin, because of the king’s anger.


D.


The author of the Little Ihad says that Achilles
after putting out to sea from the country of Telephus
came to land there.

“The storm carried Achilles the son of Peleus to
Seyros, and he came into an uneasy harbour there in
that same night.”

1 sc. after cremation.


513


THE EPIC CYCLE


6.
Schol. on Pindar, Nem. vi. 85.
appt be mopKyS
Ypvaeos aoTpaTTEL Kal er aAUT@ dtKpoos aiy nn.


ie
Schol. on Kur. Troades, 822.
BA (v4 / 3 « : x A
dumerov Hv Kpovidns émopev ob tados atrowa
vpuaelois PUVAAOLTW + ayavoiow + KopowMaav
Botpuat 0 ods “Hdarotos éracknoas Au tratpi
day’, 0 dé Aaopédovte topev Vavupndeos avi.


8.


Pausanias, iii. 26.9. Maydova de vmo Evpu-
TUdOU Tou Ty dépou TereuTHCaL pynolv Oo Ta eTH
ToLnaas THY piKpav ‘Ihtdea.


2.
Homer, Odyssey iv. 247 ana Schol.
bY b] b] \ \ VA A
adr.@ 8 avtov dott KkaTaKpUTTTOV HioKE
5éxTH, Os ovdev ToOlos Env él vnvowW Axatav.


ce


O KUKALKOS TO O€KTY OVOMAT LAS aKovel, Tap ov
dnow Tov ‘Oduccéa Ta paxn daBovra pernuded-
Aa, 0s ovK Hv ev Talis VHVaL ToLOVTOS otos "Odvc-
GEUS aYpElos.

7 EO,

Plutarch, Moralia, p. 153 F. Kal mpovBanr
“Opnpos, os dnor Aéoxns:
Motoa por évver’ éxetva Ta HT éyévovTo Tapoler,
pyar éorat petoria Ger.


514


THE LITTLE ILIAD


6.


« About the spear-shaft was a hoop of flashing
gold, and a point was fitted to it at either end.”


a |
« |... The vine which the son of Cronos gave him
as a recompense for his son. It bloomed richly with
soft leaves of gold and grape clusters ; Hephaestus
wrought it and gave it to his father Zeus: and he
bestowed it on Laomedon asa price for Ganymedes. ”’


8.


The writer of the epic Little Ilad says that
Machaon was killed by Burypy'us; the son of
Telephus.

Q;

“He disguised himself, and made himself like

another person, a beggar, the like of whom was not
by the ships of the Achaeans.”’
_ The Cyelic poet uses “beggar” as a substantive,
and so means to say that when Odysseus had changed
his clothes and put on rags, there was no one so
good for nothing at the ships as Odysseus.


162


And Homer put forward the following verses as
Lesches gives them :

“Muse, tell me of those things which neither
happened before nor shall be hereafter.”’
1 This fragment comes from a version of the Contest of
Homer and Hesiod widely different from that now extant.
The words ‘‘as Lesches gives them (says) ” seem to indicate
that the verse and a half assigned to Homer came from the
Inittle Inad. It is possible they may have introduced some
unusually striking incident, such as the actual Fall of Troy.


8


a


THE EPIC CYCLE


gue noes 6¢ ‘Hatoédos:


GN é6Tav appl Atos TUUBQO Kavaxnmoses t UT OL
ae cvVTPIwo ETrELYyOMEVOL TEDL ViKNS.
Kal OLa TOUTO A€éyeTaL paddtaTa Bavpacbeis Tov

TplTooos TUXELD.
pe
Schol. Lycophr. 344. 0 Ytvov ws Hv avT@ ovv-
TeBerpevov, PpuKTov vmodetEas tots “EAAnow ws
O Aeoxns paeY HVLKA


voE& pev Env péoon, Nappy O éméTEArE ate


L2

Pausanias x. 25. 5. TéTpOTaLt d€ TOV Bpaxtova
o Méyns, Kaba 6n Kab Meoxews o Atoxudtvouv
Iuppaios € ev "TAtov Tépovcs € erroinoe” TpwOO Hvar G€
v1r0 THY paxny TOUTOV HV eV TH VUKTL éHaXeravTo
ot Tpaes v7ro “Adpajrov pyct TOU “Auryetov. Ve
ypam Tae 6€ Kal Avicounons ay EX OY Tpadpa én
TO KapTe: Aécyews 8 ovT@ ono QUTOV UT
’Aryiivopos TpwPijvar. (2b. 26. 4) "Aotobvoov 6é, ov
uy) eTrOLnT ATO Kab Aeaxews puny, TENTOKOTA
és yovu o Neomronepos Eiper mater. (4b. 26. 8)
Aéoxews be TET PO {LEVOV TOV Eduxdova ev TH
VUKTOMAXK LG ype pra Ofivat Te vireo "Odveaéws Kal
eEaxPijvac Ctovra é ek THS HAXNS dnotv. (tb. 27. 1)
Kab aur ov AMeaxews ’Hiovéa v6 Neomronéqou, TOV
dé ume Dido THTOV gnow atto@avetv TOV “AS parov
’ . Ipiapov dé ove atroVavety éby Meoxyews € emi
i éoxapg TOU ‘Epxetov, aXXra anoomacbevra a aro
TOU Bopob Tapepyov TO Neorroreue Tpos Tats
Tis olKlas yeverOau Ovpass ... A&€iova be maida
eivat Lpudpov Aéoxews kai arodavety avtov vTo

516


THE LITTLE ILIAD


And Hesiod answered :

«“ But when horses with cart ehinies hoofs wreck
chariots, striving for victory about the tomb of Zeus.”

And it is said that, because this reply was specially
admired, Hesiod won the tripod (at the funeral
games of Amphidamas).


‘iv By


Sinon, as it had been arranged with him, secretly
showed a signal-light to the Hellenes. | Thus Lesches
writes :—


«“ It was midnight, and the clear moon was rising.”


hes


_ Meges is represented ! wounded in the arm just as
Lescheos the son of Aeschylinus of Pyrrha describes in
his Sack of [uum where it is said that he was wounded
in the battle which the Trojans fought in the night
by Admetus, son of Augeias. Lycomedes too is in

the picture with a wound in the wrist, and Lescheos
says he was so wounded by Agenor . . . Lescheos also
mentions Astynoiis, and here he is, fallen on one knee,
while Neoptolemus strikes him with his sword. . .
The same writer says that Helicaon was wounded in
the night-battle, but was recognised by Odysseus and
by him conducted alive out of the fight .. . Of them,’
Lescheos says that Eion was killed by Neoptolemus,
and Admetus by Philoctetes ... He also says that

Priam was not killed at the hearth of Zeus Herceius,
but was dragged away from the altar and destroyed
offhand by Neoptolemus at the doors of the house .
Lescheos says that Axion was the son of Priam and

1 7.e. in the paintings by Polygnotus at DeJphi.
2 4.e. the dead bodies in the picture.


517


THE EPIC CYCLE >


"EupuT vou TOU "Evaiwovos pnor. TOU "Aryvopos
dé Kara Tov avtov Trountny NeomToremos avToyetp
éoTt.
13.
Aristoph. Lysistr. 155 and Schol.

o yav MevéXaos tas Endévas Ta para Ta

Rees ae éFéBar oi TO Ethos.
...7a 8 avta kai Aéoyns o Iluppatos ev TH
puxpa Irtdoe.


Pausamias x. 25. 8. Méoxews dé els THY Aipay
eroinaev nviKa WAtoKeTo "Tov um egeModaav els
TO oTpaToTmedov avTny adixécOar TO “EXAHvoV
Kal UTO TOV TALOMV yopraOhvar TOV Onceas, Kal
as Tap “Aryapéuvovos ALTHOAL Anpopov aura.
0 8 éxeiv@ pev eDéhew xapiver bau, Toure dé ov
7 poTepov “&hn 7 piv ‘Edévny metoae’ amoarethavtt
dé avT@ KnpuKa edwmxev EnXévn tHhv yapwv.


14.
Schol. Lycophr. Alex. 1268.

auTap “AX IAM}OS peyabvpou paidipos UVLOS
‘Exropeny ado ov KaTAYEV KotAas él vnas:
Tatoa 0 éX@v éx KOATTIOV évTTAOKaMOLO TLOHYNS
pire mrodos TETAYOV GTO mbpyou: Tov O€ Teo ovTa.
eANaBe ToppupEos Odvatos Kal potpa Kparain.
éx & &Nev ‘Avdpopayny, noS@vov TAPaKOUTL

“Exropos, Here Ol AUTO apla thes Tavayaudy
ddkav € exewy érinpov per Bopevor yépas avépi,
avToV T Ayxicao KAUTOV Yyovov immoda.o10
‘Awetay € év vnucly éRncato TOVT OT OPOLELY
éx wavtwov Aavawy ayéuev yépas eEoxov adv.


518


THE LITTLE ILIAD


was slain by Eurypylus, the son of Eugemon.
Agenor—according to the same poet—was butchered
by Neoptolemus.


13.


“Menelaus at least, when he caught a glimpse
somehow of the breasts of Helen unclad, cast away
his sword, methinks.” Lesches the Pyrrhaean also
has the same account in his Little Ihad.


Concerning Aethra Lesches relates that when
lium was taken she stole out of the city and came
to the Hellenic camp, where she was recognised by
the sons of Theseus ; and that Demophon asked her
of Agamemnon. Agamemnon wished to grant him
this favour, but he would not do so until Helen
consented. And when he sent a herald, Helen
granted his request.


14,


“ Then the bri ek son of bold Achilles led the wife of
Hector to the hollow ships; but her son he snatched
from the bosom of his rich-haired nurse and seized him
by the foot and cast him from a tower. So when he had
fallen bloody death and hard fate seized on Astyanax.
And Neoptolemus chose out Andromache, Hector’s
well-girded wife, andthe chiefs of all the Achaeans
gave her to him to hold requiting him with a welcome
prize. And he put Aeneas,! the famous son of
horse-taming Anchises, on board his sea- faring ships,
a prize surpassing those of all the Danains.”


1 According to this version Aeneas was taken to Pharsalia.
Better known are the Homeric account (according to which
Aeneas founded a new dynasty at Troy), and the legends
which make him seek a new home in Italy.


219


THE EPIC CYCLE


LAIOY TLEPSIS


1

"Emeras S€ tovtos “Idtov Teépatdos BuBdia B
“Apetivou MuAnotouv, TEPLEXOVTA, TAGE. @s TO
Tept TOV i@mrov ob Tpdes UTOTTWS eXovTes
TepraTavres Bovrevovtat 6 TL xen move Kab
TOUS pev doKel KaTaKpnuvio as avrov, tois &é
KaTapreyely® ol 06 t Lepov avTov epacay Oety Th
"AOnve avareOhvar Kal TENOS VUKE y) TOUTOV
Youn. TpamTrevTEs dé ets ebppootuny evoxodvrae
@S amTnd\Aaypéevoe TOU TONE MOV. év avT@ oe
TOUT dv0 OpaKovtes emripavevTes rov te Aao-
KO@YTA Kal TOV ETEepoyv TOV TaLo@y StadOelpovcw:
éml O€ TO Tépate SvadopyoavTes ot Tepl Tov
Aiveiap umee HO ov eis THY “ldnv: Kal Yivev Tovs
TUpoOUs dvioxet TOUS “AXaois, TpOTEPOV elo edn- |
AvVIws Mpoomoinros. ol O€ Ex Tevédov 7 poamheu-
oayTes Kab ob kK TOU Soupetou t UIT OU emimimToual
TOUS _TroAE LOLS, Kal TONNOUS avENOVTES THY moh
KATA KpaTos hapPdvovar. Kal NeomroXepos pep
ATOKTELVEL IIpiapov € émt TOV TOD Avos TOU Epxetou
Bepov KarapuyovTa. Mevenaos dé avevpov E)é-
pynv éml tas vavs KaTAYEL, AnigoBov povevoas.
Kacoavopay dé Alas o "Théws | rpos Biav a QTrOOT OV
TWVEPENKETAL To THS “A@nvas Eoavov: ed’ @ 70,0-
Evvdévtes ob Edives KaTaredo at Bovredvovrat
tov Atavta, o 6é émt tov THs “AOnvas Bapov
katadbevye. Kat dtacdlerar éx Tod émixerpévov


1 So MSS. This form is confirmed (as against Heyne’s
OiAgws) by Hesiod, Catalogues, frag. 83.


520


em yea ee ak er oD i ae ei Co CRS ESM == 3 3 Se aaa . a . - Sy mite , UF Sate nae sai 3 eee
SEP ES See ey <a ae : : . S25 ati ee Pie. 2 eee ee e Ee ee ee ae fea So Sie Ae a
: = Nice. : (ie. eee Se Sey ae eS ae 2) a a eee


See STS


THE SACK OF ILIUM


THE SACK OF ILIUM


il


_ Next come two books of the Sack of Ilium, by |
Arctinus of Miletus with the following contents. The
Trojans were suspicious of the wooden horse and stand-
ing round it debated what they ought to do. Some
thought they ought to hurl it down from the rocks,
others to burn it up, while others said they ought to
dedicate it to Athena. At last this third opinion
prevailed. Then they turned to mirth and feasting
believing the war was at an end. But at this very
time two serpents appeared and destroyed Laocéon
and one of his two sons, a portent which so alarmed
the followers of Aeneas that they withdrew to Ida.
Sinon then raised the fire-signal to the Achaeans,


having previously got into the city by pretence.
The Greeks then sailed in from 'Tenedos, and those


in the wooden horse came out and fell upon their
enemies, killing many and storming the city.
Neoptolemus kills Priam who had fled to the altar
of Zeus Herceius'; Menelaus finds Helen and
takes her to the ships, after killing Deiphobus ; and
Aias the son of Ileus, while trying to drag Cassandra
away by force, tears away with her the image of
Athena. At this the Greeks are so enraged that
they determine to stone Aias, who only escapes from
the danger threatening him by taking refuge at the

1 Zeus is so called because it was customary for an altar


dedicated to him to be placed in the forecourt (épxos) of a
house. Cp. Homer, Odyssey xxii. 334-5.


521


THE EPIC CYCLE


We 54 3 , \ id
KLVOUVOU. eETrELTa euTTpHoavTes THY TroALW Ilodv-
, ih ede Shas \ n

Eetvnv opayracovow emTl TOV TOU AXIAAEWS
tadov. Kat ‘Odvacéws ‘Acrudvakra QVENOVTOS
Neorr0A€j10s ‘Avdpopayny yépas NapBaver. Kal
Ta NOTA Addupa OravepwovT ae: Anpopoy dé Kal
“Axdpas AiO pay evpovTes adryovot pel? EGUTOV.
emesta amomheovow ot m Eddqves kat b0opav
avtois 7 AOnva cata TO TéNAYOS pNYaVvaTaL.


oe
Dionysius Halicarn. Rom. Antig. i. 68. “Apktivos


Sé dnow id Ards S00hvar Aapddvm tadrddiov


év Kal eivat TovTo év ‘Thi Téws 7) TWOALS NALTKETO
KEK PUL LEVOV év aBaTo, eixova o éxelvou KaTE-
oKEvaT LeVnD OS umSev THS apxeToTrou dtad épewv
ATAaTNS TOV emuBovrevovTa@v éveka €v pavep@
TeOjvat Kal avtTnv “Axyasovs émtBovrAevoavTas
La Pew.

oe


Schol. on Eur. Andromache 10. Kal TOV THY
Iépowda TVYTETAXOTA KUKNLKOV TOLNTHY OTL Kal
amo TOV TeiXous pipOein (sc. ‘Aotuavaé).


4.


Schol. on Eur. Troades 31. pndev yap eihndévar
TOUS mepl ‘Andpavra Kal Anpopavra ex TOV Aa-
pupov ANNA LoVnY THV AiOpav, du Hv Kal ahixovto
ets “Tuov, Mevecbéws myoupevou. Avotpaxos dé
tov thy Llépoida tremounKxoTa sien ypadew ovTws*


Oncetdars 5 erropev S@pa Kpetov ’Ayapéuvov
nO€ MevecOhu peyarntope Trowméve Na@r,
522


THE SACK OF ILIUM


| q altar of Athena. The Greeks, after burning the city,


sacrifice Polyxena at the tomb of Achilles: Odysseus
murders Astyanax ; Neoptolemus takes Andromache
as his prize, and the remaining spoils are divided.
Demophon and Acamas find Aethra and take her
with them. Lastly the Greeks sail away and Athena
plans to destroy them on the high seas. |


2.


According to Arctinus, one Palladium was given


| to Dardanus by Zeus, and this was in Ilium until the


city was taken. It was hidden in a secret place, and
a copy was made resembling the original in all points
and set up for all to see, in order to deceive those
who might have designs against it. This copy the
Achaeans took as a result of their plots.


The Cyclic poet who composed the Sack says that
Astyanax was also hurled from the city wall.


4.


For the followers of Acamas and Demophon took
no share—it is said—of the spoils, but only Aethra,
for whose sake, indeed, they came to Ilium with
Menestheus to lead them. Lysimachus, however,
says that the author of the Sack writes as follows:

“The lord Agamemnon gave gifts to the Sons
of Theseus and to bold Menestheus, shepherd of
hosts.”


923


THE EPIC CYCLE x


5. :
Hustathius on I ad xiii. 515. EvL0l 8é pacw Oo
ovoée él Tavras TOUS lat pous 0 emawos oT OS |
EOTL KOwWos, AANA él TOV Maxdova, Ov {LoVoV |
Yetpoupyely Ties Neyouae: TOV yap Iodaretprov
dtattado Oat vooous ... TOUTO éowxe Kal “ApKTivos
év “Triov HopOynces vopifev év ois dyat
aUTOS yap apy édwKe Tarnp KAUTOS "Evvootryatos |
dpporépors, & eTEpov & érépou Kvdtov’ éOnKe: |
TO pev Kouporepas xeipas mopev eK TE Berdepva |
oT apKOS éheiy TuHEaL TE Kal €AKea TavT akéecacbat,
7@ S| ap’ axptBéa mayer a, évi otnOecaw &OnKev
do Kon a TE yvoval kal avadOéa inoac Gas |
os pa Kal Aiavtos TpaTos wale X@OMEVOLO
éupatd T aoTpaTTovTa Bapuvvomevov TE vonpa.


6.
Diomedes in Gramm. Lat. i. 477.
0 “lauBos
é& odiryou duaBas mpopope Tool opp. ol yuta
TELVOMEVA PWOLTO Kal evaEvEs Eidos EXNCL.


NOXTOI


i


Proclus, Chrestomathy. - Svvamtet 6€ Tovtois Ta
tov Nootov BiPria ¢ ‘Ayiou Tporgnviov creps-
/ 4 9 a? , \ i
éxovTa Tade. AOnva Ayapepuvova cat MevédXaov
els ep cabiarnat mepl TOD ExT AOU. Ayapeuver
pee ovv TOV THS AOnvas eEvhac opevos xorov
CTL ILEVEL, Avopnons dé xat Néotap ava Gévtes


524


THE RETURNS


D.


Some say that such praise as this! does not apply
to physicians generally, but only to Machaon: and
some say that he only practised surgery, while
Podaleirius treated sicknesses. Arctinus in the Sack
of hum seems to be of this opinion when he
says :

“ For their father the famous Earth-Shaker gave
both of them gifts, making each more glorious than
the other. To the one he gave hands more light to
draw or cut out missiles from the flesh and to heal
all kinds of wounds; but in the heart of the other
he put full and perfect knowledge to tell hidden
diseases and cure desperate sicknesses. It was he
who first noticed Aias’ flashing eyes and clouded
mind when he was enraged.”’


6.


“Yambus stood a little while astride with foot
advanced, that so his strained limbs might get power
and have a show of ready strength.”


THE RETURNS
R
Arter the Sack of Ilium follow the Returns in five
books by Agias of Troezen. Their contents are as
follows. Athena causes a quarrel between Agamem-
non and Menelaus about the voyage from Troy.


Agamemnon then stays on to appease the anger of
Athena. Diomedes and Nestor put out to sea and


1 sc. knowledge of both surgery and of drugs.
535


THE EPIC CYCLE


eis THY oiKelav Siac@lovTar: pel ods éxmAEvaAaS

o Mevédaos, peta révte vewv eis AiyuTtov mapa-

yiverat, TOV NovTrav draplaperc av ve@v év TO

meharyer. ot 6€ TeEpt Kadxavra kat Aeovtéa Kat

Todvrrotrny meCn mopevdevres els Koropava, Teu-

peciav evravla TENUTHTAVTA Oadmtovat. TtaVv oe

Tept TOV “Ayapenvova AT OT NEOVTOV “AXtAAE@s

elowov em upavev TeLparat SvaK@dvew T poNeryov

Ta cupPBnodpeva. iO o Teph TAS Kagnptoas

TET PAS dnrodTat Kel peov kat 7 Alavtos POopa
TOU Aoxpod. Neorrodepos dé Gér.60s Umoeuerns
welh ToLetTaL THY TOpElay, Kal 7 paryevouevos Els

Opaxny ‘Odvacéa KaTarapPBaver € eV TH Mapoveig,

Kal TO AoLTrOV avuet THS 0608, Kal TENCUT IT AVT OL

Dowixa Carter: avtos é els Mondoaaovs ahixo-

pevos dvayveopiberar IInvet. erecta “Ayapéuvovos

vTO Aiyio@ou Ka Ki\vtaprnotpas avaipeevtos

UT ‘Opéatov cat vAdéou tipwpia, cal Meverdov

eis THY OiKELaAY AVAKOMLON.


2.


Argument to Hur. Medea.
avtixa © Alcova OnKke pinoy Kopov A Soovra
yinpas ato-voaca iovinot tpaTidecct,
pappaka TOAN épova’ ert xpvaeiotot ANEBNOLD.


De


Pausanias, i. 2. “Hpaxréa Oeuioxupay TOXL-
opKobvra THY él Oeppadovts érety un Svvaclat,
Oncéws dé épacGeicav ‘AvTLOTNY—aTpATEdC aL
yap aye, ‘Hpaxaret Kab Onoéa—mapacovvas TO
Yopvov. Ttade wev Hyias memoinxer.


526


THE RETURNS


14 get safely hgme. After them Menelaus sets out
| and reaches Egypt with five ships, the rest having


a been destroyed on the high seas. Those with
7 Calchas, Leontes, and Polypoetes go by land to
_ Colophon and bury Teiresias who died there. When


1 Agamemnon and his followers were sailing away,
eG the ghost of Achilles appeared and tried to prevent
} them by foretelling what should befall them. The


| : storm at the rocks called Capherides is then described,
| with the end of Locrian Aias. Neoptolemus, warned


ie by Thetis, journeys overland and, coming into Thrace,
meets Odysseus at Maronea, and then finishes the


rest of his journey after burying Phoenix who dies
on the way. He himself is recognized by Peleus on
reaching the Molossi. Then comes the murder
of Agamemnon by Aegisthus and Clytaemnestra,
followed by the vengeance of Orestes and Pylades.


| Finally, Menelaus returns home.


2.


“ Forthwith Medea made Aeson a sweet young
boy and stripped his old age from him by her
cunning skill, when she had made a brew of many
herbs in her golden cauldrons.”


3


The story goes that Heracles was _ besieging
Themiscyra on the Thermodon and could not take
it; but Antiope, being in love with Theseus who
was with Heracles on this expedition, betrayed the
place. Hegias gives this account in his poem.


527


THE EPIC CYCLE


4,


Eustathius, 1796.45. 0 6€ rods Noorous moinoas
Korogpaveos Tn rénayov fev once THD Kipeny
Uorepov YH pat, Tyréyovov dé Tov éx Kipxns ayte-
yhwat IInvenorny.


5,
Clement of Alex. Strom. vi. 2. 12. 8.


8G \ b) fa) , an BY 4 Oe \ + Bs |
Opa yap av0pwTrav vovyv nTapEev NOE Kal Epya.


6.


Pausanias, RK QBKT Say b¢ ‘Opnpov Toina ls mat
Kab ob Nécrow— poh ym yap on é&p TavTass Kab
“Atdov Kat Tov éxel detmaTtav éoTiv—ioacw
ovdéeva Kvptvomov Saipmova.


Athenaeus, 281 B. 0 you THY TOV “AT pevo@y
Toujoas dB o8or Aptkomevoy avTOV ReEryet ™ pos
TOUS. Oeovs Kat cuvolaTpiBovra, éEouvcias TUxety
mapa TOD Auos airnoacbas 6 dtov émiOupel. Tov be
Tpos TAS ATONAVTELS ATANTTWS OLAKELLEVOY, UTEP
avUTOV TE TOVTOY pVELaV moujnoaa bar Kal TOU oHy
TOV avrov Tpomrop Tots Geos: ep’ ois aryavaKty-
Tavra, TOV Aia, THY pev evxnY ATOTENET AL OLA THY
TOT XETL, Straws O€ pndoev arohavy TOV Tapa-
KELLEV@V ANG OvaTehfy TAPATTOMEVOS, omep THS
Kepanijs efNpTnaev avT® TéTpov, Su dv ov OUVaTaL
TOV TAPAKELMEV@V TUXELY OVOEVOS.


1 Clement attributes this line to Augias: probably Agias
is intended.


528


|


ach avi ed a


ERE REM


THE RETURNS


4.
The Colophonian author of the Returns says that
Telemachus afterwards married Circe, while Telegonus


the son of Circe correspondingly married Penelope.


5.
“For gifts beguile men’s minds and their deeds as
well.” :
: 6.


The poetry of Homer and the Returns—for here
too there is an account of Hades and the terrors


there—know of no spirit named Eurynomus.


The writer of the Return of the Atreidae} says
that Tantalus came and lived with the gods, and was


permitted to ask for whatever he desired. But the


man was so immoderately given to pleasures that he
asked for these and for a life like the life of the gods.
At this Zeus was annoyed, but fulfilled his prayer
because of his own promise; but to prevent him
from enjoying any of the pleasures provided, and to
keep him continually harassed, he hung a stone
over his head which prevents him from ever —


reaching any of the pleasant things near by.


1 Identical with the Retwrns, in which the Sons of Atreus
occupy the most prominent parts.


529


THE EPIC CYCLE


THAETONIA


1.


Proclus, Chrestomathy. Meta tadra éotw “Oun-
pov Odvoocea éreta Tnreyovias BiBria dvo
Evy dppovos Kupnvaiou, TEpLeXOVTA TAO. of
pvnoTopes UTO TOV T poo nKOVTOY Odmtovtar: Kal
"Odvccedts Ovcas Nvpdais eis "HdXw aromne
émuaKkepowevos Ta Boveoda Kat Eeviterar Tapa
Tlorvéév@m Sapov te AapBaver KpaTHpa, ‘Kat. émi
TovTm Ta Tmept Tpwdavioy cat *Ayapnonv Kai
“Avyéav. éreta eis lOdenv catatrevoas Tas U0
Tespeciouv pnGeicas Teret Ovcias. Kal meta TavTA
ets Meotrpwtovs adixvetrar Kal yauet KadrLdixnv
Bacidioa Tov MecoTtpatTay. emerta TOEMOS TUVi-
aTaTat Tots Oeatrpwrtois mpos Bpvryous, Odvacéws
nryoupevov: évtav0a “Apns Tovs tept Tov Odvaocéa
TpeTETAL, Kal AVT@ ets paynv AOnva cafiotatar.
TOUTOUS [ev ‘AT ON@Y Sade: pera dé THv Kand-
NLOLKNS TENEUT HY, THD pen Bacrretav Ovadéx erat
IloruTotrns ‘Odvaceos vos; avr os o els ‘Odxnv
apicveirar: KaV TOVT@ Tyreyovos € éml ont now Tod
TAT POs TED, amoBas els THD “T0deny TEMVEL THD
voov" exBonOnoas & Odvacevs bd Tod Tatdds
avaupetrar KAT dryvouay. Ta A€yoves S emuyvous
THY dpaptiay TO Te TOU TAaTpOS oa ja Kal TOV
TH remaxov Kal THY I nvedomny pos THV pnTépa
 peBior now: uv) 6€ avTovs aGavatous Tote, Kal
cuvoixel TH pev IInvedomn Tyréyovos, Kiprn dé
Tnr€wayos.


53°


THE TELEGONY


THE TELEGONY


1.


Arter the Returns comes the Odyssey of Homer,
and then the Telegony in two books by Eugammon of »
Cyrene, which contain the following matters. The
suitors of Penelope are buried by their kinsmen, and
Odysseus, after sacrificing to the Nymphs, sails to
Elis to inspect hisherds. He is entertained there by
Polyxenus and receives a mixing bowl as a gift; the
story of Trophonius and Agamedes and Augeas then
follows. He next sails back to Ithaca and performs
the sacrifices ordered by Teiresias, and then goes to
Thesprotis where he marries Callidice, queen of the
_ Thesprotians. A war then breaks out between the
|  Thesprotians, led by Odysseus, andthe Brygi. Ares
routs the army of Odysseus and Athena engages
with Ares, until Apollo separates them. After the
death of Callidice Polypoetes, the son of Odysseus,
succeeds to the kingdom, while Odysseus himself
returns to Ithaca. In the meantime Telegonus,
while travelling in search of his father, lands on
Ithaca and ravages the island: Odysseus comes out
to defend his country, but is killed by his son unwit-
tingly. Telegonus, on learning his mistake, transports
his father’s body with Penelope and Telemachus to
his mother’s island, where Circe makes them im-
mortal, and Telegonus marries Penelope, and
Telemachus Circe.


531
MM 2


THE EPIC CYCLE


2.
Eustathius, 1796. 35. “O 6&&€ tHv Tyreyovetav
ypawas Kupnvaios é« perv Karvurypods Tnréyovov
viov "Odvacet avaypaddea » Tryrédapov, éx dé
IInverorns Tyréuayov cal “Arovaidaov.


AM®IAPAOT EHEAASIS


Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer. katnsevos év
A Me an
T@ CKUTEL@ ... THV TE TOLNTLY AUTOLS eTPECELKYUTO
>) 4 J \ 3 if \ b] / \
Aphtapaov te THy é€ehactay Thy és OnBas Kat
\ yak / A
Tovs Uuvous TOUS és Ceods TreToLnMevoUS AUTO.


OIXAAIAS AAQOSI>


i
Hustathius 330. 41. elpntat d€ Kat trept Kv-
putov éxel KAL THS avTov Juyat pos ‘Todays Ou iy
emopO noe Hpaxnijs THY ‘Orxadav. ELS iy Soxei
ypdrpar Kab "Opnpos @s Onrol 0 lLaTopHaas ore
Kpepuros 0 Xdytos Eevia rote deEduevos TOV
“Opmpov éhaPe _8@pov é€& avtTov THY emiypapny
: TOU TOUN|LATOS 0 KAXOUCLW Oixanrias Adoow .
tives d€ avaTradiy pace Kpewpurov bev ypdrvat,
‘Oppo o€ émiypadjvas to BiBriov dia tHv
Eeviav: O10 Kai KadXdipayos:
TOD Lapiov Movos eipi, Som Tote Oetov"Ounpov &
deEapmevou' KrNetm & Kbputov 600 érrabev
kal EavOnv lorevav, Opunpecov dé caredpar
ypdupa: Kpewdtro, Zed hire, todTo méeya.


532


THE TAKING OF OECHALIA


2.


| The author of the Telegony, a Cyrenaean, relates
| that Odysseus had by Calypso a son Telegonus or
| Teledamus, and by Penelope Telemachus and Acusi-
laus. |


THE EXPEDITION OF AMPHIARAUS!


Sirtine there in the tanner’s yard, Homer recited


|__ his poetry to them, the Expedition of Amphiaraus to


Thebes and the = to the Gods composed by


him.


THE TAKING OF OECHALIA
| gael


AN account has there been given of Kurytus and
his daughter Iole, for whose sake Heracles sacked
Oechalia. Homer also seems to have written on this
subject, as that historian shows who relates that
Creophylus of Samos once had Homer for his guest
and for a reward received the attribution of the
poem which they call the Taking of Oechaha. Some
however, assert the opposite ; that Creophylus wrote
the poem, and that Homer lent his name in return
for his entertainment. And so Callimachus writes :
“IT am the work of that Samian who once received
divine Homer in his house. I sing of Eurytus and
all his woes and of golden-haired Ioleia, and am
reputed one of Homer’s works. Dear Heaven! how


{22


great an honour this for Creophylus !


1 The Hxpedition of Amphiaraus, The Taking of Oechalia
and The Phocais were not included in the Epic Cycle.


533


THE EPIC CYCLE


2.
Cramer, Anec. Oxon. i. 327.
e \ \ + Hialiatee: b] b lal v4
pwyanéa, TA Kal avTOS ev OPOarpolow Opnat.
TovTO O€ Evpynaoper Kal ev TH Oivadlas adocet.


3.


Schol. on Soph. Trach. 266. Sragwveirar 6¢ 0
TOV Evputsoay api8 wos: “Haiodos ev Yap 6
pnow é& Evpvrou kat “Avtsoxns tatoas ovTMS,
Kpewdunros 6é £’. |

4.


Schol. on Bur. Medea, 273. Aidupos dé es
mapatiberat ta Kpewpvrov éxovta ouT@s: THV
yap Myer heyeTau dat pt Bovoay ev Kopiv
TOV dpxovra TOTE THS TOMEWS Kpéovta a amoKreivas
happudKos. deicacav é TOUS pirous Kal TOUS
auyyevets avtod guyeiv eis “AOnvas, tovs 5é
viovs, érel vewTEepot OvTES OVK HOVYAYTO GKONOU-
dein, émt TOV Bopov TAS “Axpaias "“Hpas xabioat
vopicac ay TOV TaTEpa AUT@OV ppovtueiy THs cw-
Tnplas avT@v. Tous 6é Kpéovtos oixeious aTro-
KTelvaVTas avTOUS Stadodvat Aoyov GTt 7 Mndera
ov povov tov Kpéovtra adda Kab TOUS EéauTHS
TALOAS ATEKTELVE. |


®OKAIS


Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer. svatpiBav sé
Tapa TO Oeotopion trove? Iitada THv éXaoow...
Kat THY Kadovpevnv Paxaida, Hv dhacw ot
Pwxateis “Ounpov tap avtotot rovjoat.


534


THE PHOCAIS
2.


i: “Ragged garments, even those which now you
| see.” This verse (Odyssey xiv. 343) we shall also
| find in the Taking of Oechalia.

2.


There is a disagreement as to the number of the


| sons of Eurytus. For Hesiod says Eurytus and
| _ Antioche had as many as four sons; but Creophylus
says two.


4,
Didymus contrasts the following account given by
Creophylus, which is as follows: while Medea was


} living in Corinth, she. poisoned Creon, who was ruler


of the city at that time, and because she feared his


| friends and kinsfolk, fled to Athens. However, since
| her sons were too young to go along with her, she


| _ left them at the altar of Hera Acraea, thinking that
} their father would see to their safety. But the


‘ relatives of Creon killed them and spread the story
pa that Medea had killed her own children as well as
: ; Creon.


-THE PHOCAIS


a While living with Thestorides, Homer composed

| the Lesser Iliad and the Phocais; though the Pho-
caeans say that he composed the latter among

| them.

| 535


THE EPIC CYCLE


MAPITITHS

1) |

Suidas. — Uiypns: Kap amo ‘ANKapvaccod,

adEAPOS “A prepictas THS év ‘Tols TONE LOLS Ova

pavous, Mavo@xXov YUVvaLKos * Sau eypanpe eal

TOV iS “Opnpov avapepopevov Mapyitny Kal —

Batpayopvopayiav. |
a

Atilius Fortunatianus, PB 286, Keil.


MAGE TLS ELS Korogava yepav Kal Oetos aordos, —
Movoawy Jeparrav Kab éxnBorov "ATroAA@vos,
dhirns éxov év yepalv evpOoyyov NUpav.


o.
Plato, Alcib. ii. p. 147 a.
TON HTLoTATO Epya, KAKOS O HrloTAaTO TaVTA.
Aristotle, Nic. Eth. vi. 7, 1141.


TOV 0 OUT ap’ oKATTH pa Jeol Oécay ovUT apotipa |
> »


oUT GANS TL GOhoV: Taans O HuapTave TExXVNS.


4,


Schol. on Aeschines in Ctes. S 160. Mapyirny
pnotv dvO pwrrov yeyoveva Os éTOV TONY
EVO MEVOS ovK 70 6oTLS avTOV eTeKeD, TOTEpOV
0 TATHP 7) ) wHTHP, TH O€ yameTH OvK expHTo-


* This Artemisia, who distinguished herself at the_battle
of Salamis (Herodotus vii. 99) is here confused with the
later Artemisia, the wife of Mausolus, who died 350 B.¢.


536


THE MARGITES


THE MARGITES
It
| Pigres. A Carian of Halicarnassus and brother of
| Artemisia, wife of Mausolus, who distinguished her-


| self in war... He also wrote the Margites attri-
| buted to Homer and the Battle of the Frogs and


Mice.
i = ee


_ © There came to Colophon an old man and divine


| singer, a servant of the Muses and of far-shooting


4 Apollo. In his dear hands he held a sweet-toned


| lyre.”’


J.


“He knew many things but knew all badly
| The gods had taught him neither to dig
| nor to plough, nor any other skill; he failed in
im every craft,”

4.


He refers to Margites, a man who, though well


_ grown up, did not know whether it was _ his


_ father or his mother who gave him birth, and
| would not lie with his wife, saying that he was


SOF


THE EPIC CYCLE 2


Sedvévaus yap éXevye ay SiaBddrou abtov mpds
THY PNTEpa. 4
5 _ §

Zenobius, v. 68. é
TONN Ol0 aA@TNE GAN exivos ev peya.' :


KEPKOIIES


Suidas. Képxwrres: vo aderpot 7 oa emt YNSs i.
Tao av adixiay eT LOELKV U[EVOL, Kab eAéyovTo Kép-
KWTES, EK TAS TOV epyov Oewornros OUTWS éTTO-
vowalopevot. 0 peev yap QUT OV Ildocanos ENEYETO,
0 6€ TAK pov. n O€ penTnp Mepvovis Tatra. opadca
éheye Ty TEpeMTUxELY MevauTroyo’ TOUTEOTH TO
“Hpakaret. ovtot ot Képxwres Qeias Kat ’Oxedvov.
ovs hacw atroNOwOjnvat dia TO eyKetpEely aTraTh- -
cat Tov Ata


wevoTtas, nmrepoTnas, apajxava T epya. SaevTas,:
efaTaTnTihpas’ TOAAHY © eh yatav LovTes
avO p@TOUS ATATATKOV, GNOMEVOL MATA TAVTA.


1 Attributed to Homer by Zenobius, and by Bergk to the
Margites. 2 Lobeck : épy’ avicayres, Suidas,


538


THE CERCOPES


| afraid she might give a bad account of him to her
| mother.


D.


| The fox knows many a wile ; but the hedge-hog’s
one trick! can beat them all.”


} THE CERCOPES


-Cercores. These were two brothers living upon
_ the earth who practised every kind of knavery. They
_were called Cercopes? because of their cunning

doings: one of them was named Passalus and the
_ other Acmon. Their mother, a daughter of Memnon,
| seeing their tricks, told them to keep clear of Black-
| bottom, that is, of Heracles. These Cercopes were
_ sons of Theia and Ocean, and are said to have been
| turned to stone for trying to deceive Zeus.


‘« Liars and cheats, skilled in deeds irremediable, ac-
complished knaves. Far over the world they roamed
deceiving men as they wandered continually.”’


ane ey :


1 7.e. the fox knows many ways to baffle its foes, while
the hedge-hog knows one only which is far more effectual.
2 7.e. ‘*monkey-men.”


539


‘8 Sit -cob ett to Fugees
a ator ok cokb io Fagogs
m es, eek wee
(  ebea
rd
a POD Bye)
ies ie! ii Peers BV Ree 5
eae <Soilgaebeion
ete ey vente
ty ed}
FONG
a 7 4 oe CAULEY ee ees a2
x SETAE SON AD Pe EF


ATTLE OF THE FROGS


BATPAXOMYOMAXIA


“Apyopevos mpwtov Movoay yopov €€ Edtx@vos
éNOety eis éwov Hop érrevyomas elvex aoLons,
nv véov év SéXTOLoW euots él youvact OnKa,
Onpww atrepecinv, Tode“oKAovoy Epryov Apyos,
evYGmevos pepoTrecaow ev ovata Tao BarecOat,
ToS pves ev Batpaxotow aptoTevoavTes EBnoaD,
ynyevéewv avipav pspwovpevor Epya LuyavTov,
ws étros év Ovntoiaw env: Toinv 0 éyev apynv.
Mods mote duparéos, yadéns xivduvov arvéas,
TANnotOY év Niuvyn ATrAaXOY TpOTEONKE yEevELOD,
vdate TEpTOMEvOs peru dee: Tov 6€ KaTetoev
MepvoxXa.pys TOMUHNLOS, & émos & epOeyEato Totov"
Ficive, tis ef; woev 7rOes em nova; Tis 0€ o oO
hvoas;
TavTa © adnGevoov: pu) Wevdopevoyv oe vonow.
el yap ae yvoinv dirov aé.ov, és Sopov aE
oapa dé Tol d@ow Eetvita TOAKA Kat éoOAd.
ebput 0 éya Bacirevs Puciyvaeos, o OS Kara ipvnv
TUG Pat Barpdyov 7 nryoumevos Tara, TAVTa’
Kal [Le TATHp IInAevs avebpearo, ‘Topopedovan
puxdels € ép peroryte Tap dx0as "Hpidavoio. ()
Kal o€ © 0p® KaXov TE Kal aN KL BOV éEoyvov ado, 4
oKNTTOVNOV Baowha Kal év Tohepouoe paxntny
Eupevar’ AAN aye Odoaov Env yevenv ayopeve.


542


ee


THE BATTLE OF THE FROGS
AND MICE


Here I begin: and first I pray the choir of the


_ Muses to come down from Helicon into my heart to


/ aid the lay which I have newly written in tablets


upon my knee. Fain would I sound in all men’s
ears that awful strife, that clamorous deed of war,
and tell how the Mice proved their valour on the


_ Frogs and rivalled the exploits of the Giants, those


earth-born men, as the tale was told among mortals.


| _ Thus did the war begin.


Scenes 5 3


One day a thirsty Mouse who had escaped the
ferret, dangerous foe, set his soft muzzle to the
lake’s brink and revelled in the sweet water. There
a loud-voiced pond-larker spied him: and uttered
such words as these.

“Stranger, who are you? Whence come you to


‘if this shore, and who is he who begot you? Tell


me all this truly and let me not find you lying.
For if I find you worthy to be my friend, I will take
you to my house and give you many noble gifts such
as men give to their guests. I am the king Puff-jaw,
and am honoured in all the pond, being ruler of
the Frogs continually. The father that brought me
up was Mud-man who mated with Waterlady by
the banks of Eridanus. I see, indeed, that you
are well-looking and stouter than the ordinary, a
sceptred king and a warrior in fight; but, come,
make haste and tell me your descent.”


543


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE 7


Tov ° av Vixdprag arapel Beto povnce Te |
TIT TE YyévOS TOUMLOV Cnr ets; Of/Aov & év dtacw 2!
avOpwrots Te Oeots Te Kal oUpaviois TEeTENVOLS. =
Wuyaptrak& pwéev ey@ KURT KO pat eli dé Kodpos 2

Tpwfaprao TAT POS peryadnTopos: n O€ VU UnTNP |
Aewxyomorn, Ouyarnp IItepvotpwxrou PactrHos.
yelvato & év Karusn jee Kal é&eOpévrato Bpwtois, 3
TUKOLS Kab Kapvous Kal edeo pact mavrTooaTroio tw. “3
TOs b¢ ptrov Tolh He, Tov és dvow ovoey 0 opmoton ; “1
Tol jeev yap Bios éotiy év doacw avTap émorye, |
oooa Tap avOparTrois, T poorer é0os: ode pe AnGer —
dpTos SLOKOTAVLCTOS GT EUKUENOU KAVEOLO, 31
ov TAKOELS TavoTreT Nos EX Ov TONV TNT AMOTUPOP,
ov TOMOS eK TTEPVNS, ovX TATA AevKoxiTova,
ov TUPOS VEOTIKTOS Gt aTrO yAuxepoto yaNQKTOS,
ov XpnaTov pediropa, TO Kal paKapes moléovon, |
ovo dca 7 pOos Goivas jepoTr@v Tevyoual payerpor, 4
Koo LOvYTES XUTpas apTopact TavTooaToiaty. 4
[ovderor’ ex TONE [LOLO KaKnD amepevyov aUTHD,
aX’ tOvs peta pe@hov i@v T POMAX LoL euiyOny.
ov bebe av0 pomov KaiT ep péya TOMA popobvra, |
GAN’ érl NEKTpoY i@v KaTAaddKYw SaKTUAOY AKpov, 4
Kal TTEpYNS NaBouny, Kal OV TOVOS aVvOpa iKaveV, —
VHOUVLOS OUK aTréhevyev UTVOS SaKVOVTOS Emeto.
GANG OVW TdVTOY “dra Oeldla TacaY éT aiav,
KipKov Kal yarénv, of jor péeya TéVOOS ayoucL,,

Kal Tayioa oTOVoEcaaY, OTrOU Soroeis TENE TOT LOS"
Tela TOV 67) yanénv mepioeloud, 4 TLS apiorn, 5]
Kal TR@YAOOVOYTA KATA TP@YANV épeciver.']


1 Lines 42-52 are intrusive ; the list of vegetables which ;
the Mouse cannot eat must follow immediately after the
various dishes of which he does eat.


544. %


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 24-52


i Then Crumb-snatcher answered him and said:
|) “Why do you ask my race, which is well-known
| amongst all, both men and gods and the birds of
i heaven? Crumb-snatcher am I called, and Iam the son
| of Bread-nibbler—he was my stout-hearted father—
| and my mother was Quern-licker, the daughter of
| Ham-gnawer the king: she bare me in the mouse-
hole and nourished me with food, figs and nuts and
dainties of all kinds. But how are you to make me
your friend, who am altogether different in nature?

For you get your living in the water, but I am used
| to eat such foods as men have: I never miss the thrice-
_ kneaded loaf in its neat, round basket, or the thin-
_ wrapped cake full of sesame and cheese, or the slice
| of ham, or liver vested in white fat, or cheese just
_ eurdled from sweet milk, or delicious honey-cake
which even the blessed gods long for, or any of all
_ those cates which cooks make for the feasts of
| mortal men, larding their pots and pans with
spices of all kinds. In battle I have never flinched
from the cruel onset, but plunged straight into the
fray and fought among the foremost. I fear not man
though he has a big body, but run along his bed and
| bite the tip of his toe and nibble at his heel; and
the man feels no hurt and his sweet sleep is not
broken by my biting. But there are two things I
fear above all else the whole world over, the hawk
and the ferret—for these bring great grief on me—
| and the piteous trap wherein is treacherous death.
Most of all I fear the ferret of the keener sort which
follows you still even when you dive down your hole.


545


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE


ov Tpwyew padhdvas, ov KpawBas, ov KONOKUVTAaS, —
ov Tpacaots YAwpoOts éTUBdTKOMaAL, OVSE TEALVOLS* —
TadTa yap tpétep eotly édéopaTa TOV KaTa Nipyyp
II pos rade peldidoas Puairyvabos avtiov nvoa: 5
Ecive, Ainv auxeis emt yaar eps: €oTL Kab Wty
TONG war év Nipwn Kal él yOovl Oavpar iséoOan.
appiBvov yap éwxe vounv Batpaxotct Kpoviov, —
[aTowyetols Out TOs peweprcpeva O@paTa vaieLy, |
TKIPTHS ab KATA viv Kat vd’ voact capa Karorpa. a
eb O° eOehers Ka TAUTA Sanueva, euNXepes coTW.
Baive oe €v VOTO, K pare O€ ME, baTOT GAA,
OTT WS yndoavvos TOV €jL0v Sopov cloapinnas. |
“Qs ap’ ébn cat var edidov" o 0 o éBawe TaXLOTA 6 .
Netpas are Tpupepoto Ka avdxevos Ghpare Koupe. a |
KAL TO 7 p@rov Evaipev, OT EBNETE yelTovas Opwous, :
vncer TEPT O[MEvos Duowvyvalou: aXr’ OTe On pa 4
KUMATL Troppupéotaty exruceTo, TONG axpvov
ax pnorov pet dvovay eHeUPeTo, TINE dé xaitas,
Kal TOOAS eo puyyev Kara yaorépa, év O€ OL TOP
TarreT anein, Kab ért x Gove, Bovrcl ixeo au:
Seva & imearovdxite poBou K PUOEVTOS avaryKy.
[ovpny pev mpoTréTAcoeV ep Ddacw, 7 HUTE KMTNV
oUpwD, eUX OMEvOS te Oeots emt yatav Fd Bi
Deace Toppupeoaw exduceTo, TONG O ' €Bacev:
Kal ToLov ato poOop a a0 TT OMATOS T dry opevoer”
Ovx ovTe@ VWTOLT LV éBaorace PopTov € EPWTOS
Tadpos, OT’ Evpeomny Oud KUMATOS ny émt Kpnrny,
@S eu eTLTAOT AS eT LY OT LOD nryev €s otKov
Batpayos ape ac as @X pov déuas date evKd.|
“Tédpos o efaidyns avepaivero, dewov 6 Opapa
TaGW onas opBov & bmép UdaTos eixe TPAXNOV. Ih


546


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 53-83


I gnaw no radishes and cabbages and pumpkins, nor

| feed on green leeks and parsley ; ; for these are food
| for you who live in the lake.”

| Then Puff-jaw answered him with a_ smile:
| “Stranger you boast too much of belly-matters: we
| too have many marvels to be seen both in the lake
| and on the shore. For the Son of Cronos has given
| us Frogs the power to lead a double life, dwelling at
will in two separate elements; and so we both leap
; on land and plunge beneath the water. If you
| would learn of all these things, ‘tis easy Gone: just
mount upon my back and hold me tight lest you be
) lost, and so you shall come rejoicing to my house.”

} So said he, and offered his back. And the Mouse
} mounted at once, putting his paws upon the other’s
| sleek neck and vaulting nimbly. Now at first, while
§ he still saw the land near by, he was pleased, and
| was delighted with Puff-jaw’s swimming; but when
} dark waves began to wash over him, he wept loudly
} and blamed his unlucky change of mind: he tore
} his fur and tucked his paws in against his belly,
} while within him his heart quaked by reason of the
f} strangeness: and he longed to get to land, groaning
} terribly through the stress of chilling fear. He put
§ out his tail upon the water and worked it like a
} steering oar, and prayed to heaven that he might
} get to land. But when the dark waves washed over
him he cried aloud and said: “Not in such wise
# did the bull bear on his back the beloved load,
§ when he brought Europa across the sea to Crete,
# as this Frog carries me over the water to his house,
f| raising his yellow back in the pale water.”

§ Then suddenly a water-snake appeared, a horrid
§ sight for both alike, and held his neck upright above


547


aes


NN Q


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE


nA 0 \ l / M /
TOUTOV Lowy KaTédu Puciryvalos, oVTL vonaaS, |
an / a=
olov ETALPOV EMEANEV ATTONAVMEVOY KATANELTELY. 8
a lA f an |
60 b€ Bdbos rNiuvns Kal adevaTO KHpa pératvay.
va) S ig bd LA / e/ Or 349 wm
KEewos 0 ws apedn, Tecev UTTTLOS EevUUS Eh VOM?,
\ A NM 4d / n
Kal yetpas éoduyye Kal OhNUMEVOS KaTETpLEE. is
TONAGKL ev KaTEOUVEV Uh VOaTL, TOAAAKL O AvTE
/ 3 /
haktiCov avédvve: popov 6 ovK HV UTAahvEAL. ¢


f \ / a / By yee be to
Sevopevat dé TpLYEs TAELTTOV Bapos Hoay eT AUTO:
vatata & oAdXvpEVvos ToLoUs ebOéyEaTO pwvOovs:

Ov Anoes Soriws, Puciyvale, TadTa Toinoas,
vaunyov pias amo THUaATOS, WS ATO TETPNS. |
OvK cD pov KATA yalav dpelvov ho 8a, KaKLOTE, |
TayKxpatio Te Tan Te Kab eis Opopov adda —

Tm avng as
3 BY \ / by)
eis Udwp pw éppivas. exes eds Exdsxov dupa.


7) Touvny Ticeds OU “LU@V oTpar®, ovd vTanrvées. —
‘Os elroy anémvevoev ép bdatTu Tov b€ KaTEldev
Aewyorrivak& dyOnow épelomevos pararhory: 0
detvov & efohoru£e, Opapeov S nyyerre pverow. |
as & enadov THY poipay, édu yodos aivos aT AVTAS.
Kab TOTE KnpuKec ow é0%5 éxéhevoay ut’ dpOpov
Knpvocew ayopnve és d@uaTa Tpwfaprao,
TAT pos duaTHVvOU Vixdprayos, ¢ Os KaTa MevaV 1
bmTL0s ef1 Two ver pov deuas, ove map Ox Gaus |
Vy 0n TAHMOV, peco@ oO | eT EVNXETO TOUT.
as 6 HAGoV omevdovres é ap not, T POTOS avéerTy
Tpwkaprns € emt TaLol  XOAOUMEVOS, eimé TE pbOov-
"QO, hiro, ef Kat podvos éy@ KAKA TOANA
Tem ovO ew W
éx BatpaxXov, 7) TElpa KAKN TAVYTETOL TETUKTAL,


548 a |


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 84-111


| the water. And when he saw it, Puff-jaw dived at
| once, and never thought how helpless a friend he


| would leave perishing; but down to the bottom of
_ the lake he went, and escaped black death. But the
| Mouse, so deserted, at once fell on his back, in the
| water. He wrung his paws and squeaked in agony
| of death: many times he sank beneath the water


and many times he rose up again kicking. But he
| could not escape his doom, for his wet fur weighed
| him down heavily. Then at the last, as he was
| dying, he uttered these words.

| “Ah, Puff-jaw, you shall not go unpunished for
) this treachery! You threw me, a castaway, off your
| body as from a rock. Vile coward! On land you
| would not have been the better man, boxing, or
| wrestling, or running; but now you have tricked me
and cast me in the water. Heaven has an avenging
| eye, and surely the host of Mice will punish you and
| not let you escape.”’

| With these words he breathed out his soul upon
| the water. But Lick-platter as he sat upon the soft
| bank saw him die and, raising a dreadful cry, ran and
} told the Mice. And when they heard of his fate, all
the Mice were seized with fierce anger, and bade


| their heralds summon the people to assemble towards


| dawn at the house of Bread-nibbler, the father of


| hapless Crumb-snatcher who lay outstretched on the


water face up, a lifeless corpse, and no longer near
|_ the bank, poor wretch, but floating in the midst of the
deep. And when the Mice came in haste at dawn,
| Bread-nibbler stood up first, enraged at his son’s
| death, and thus he spoke.

| “Friends, even if I alone had suffered great wrong
| from the Frogs, assuredly this is a first essay at


549


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE


cipl S€ vov éreELvos, érrEt TpEls Traidas OAeooa.
Kab TOV [ev 7 pov Ov ye KaTéxtavey apnataca ;
ex OtaTos yanrén, Tpwyrns éxtoa Bev ehotoa. i
Tov © aAAOV TaALY avopEs aTNvEes és wopov eiAEaY H
KaUWVvOTEpaLs TEXVALS Evhwvov SoNOV eEeupovtes, |
Hv Tayida Kadéovet, LU@V OdETELPAY eovCaD.
O TPLTOS AV, AyaTNTOS Ewol KaL pHTEepL KEOVh,
TovToyv aménvieev Duairyvabos és Budov aEas.
ANN’ aye? ordcoperOa Kai eEéMwpev er’ avtovs 1:
TOMATA KOTUHTAVTES ev EVTETL OALOANEOLOLD.

Tatr cir@v avéretce KaboTrileoOa aravtas.
Kal TOUS pep p é€k copugcev “Apys TONE MOLO pep ros:
cvnpidas pev, 7 P@TOV ednppooay eis Ov0 poipas
pygavres KUA{LOUS XAwpous, Kvynuas 0 éxdduTTor, 1
ovs avTol 61a VUKTOS éTLOTaYTES KATET MEAD.
Oopnras 6° ei yov Karapoarepeay aro Bupoar,
ous yanreny OetpavTes € ETLOTALEVOS emoinaay.
aons & Av AUXvOU TO pec oppanoy: y) dé vu Noy
evpyeers Bedovas, TAYXAENKEOV épryov “Apnos’ 1
” O€ KOpUS TO AeTUpoV emt KpoTapots épeBivOou. |

Otre pev pes Hoav ev OTro1LS" as oe von av
Bar paxot, efavedvoay ad vdatos, €5 6 &va XO pov
én Govtes Bounry Evvaryov TOE MOLO KaKolo,
oKETTOLEVOV O AVTaV, TOHEY 7 OTAaOLS, 7 TiS 0

Oupos, 1

KHpve eyyudev re Pépov paBoov PETA YEpoiv,
TupoyAugou VLOS peyariropos ‘EuBactxytpos,
aryyehov TONEMOLO KaKNY par, elmé TE TOLA*

°Q, Batpayxoz, pes U pepe am ethno ares éreurrav
ETE omhitecbas € érl mT Oe MOV TE Hany TE. 1
cidov yap Kal’ bdwp Vixdprraya, ovrrep émredvev


559


ane s=s 5 — ~~ > —wie. dint si." aad”. oolined


ee


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 112-141


| mischief for you all. And now I am pitiable, for I
have lost three sons. First the abhorred ferret
seized and killed one of them, catching him outside
the hole ; then ruthless men dragged another to his
doom when by unheard-of arts they had contrived a


| _ wooden snare, a destroyer of Mice, which they calla


trap. There was a third whom I and his dear


| mother loved well , and him Puff-jaw has carried out


into the deep and drowned. Come, then, and let us


| arm ourselves and go out against them when we have


arrayed ourselves in rich-wrought arms.”’
With such words he persuaded them all to gird
themselves. And Ares who has charge of war


| equipped them. First they fastened on greaves and


covered their shins with green bean-pods broken into
two parts which they had gnawed out, standing over
them all night. Their breast plates were of skin
stretched on reeds, skilfully made from a ferret they
had flayed. For shields each had the centre-piece of
a lamp, and their spears were long needles all of
bronze, the work of Ares, and the helmets upon their
temples were pea-nut shells.

So the Mice armed themselves. But when the Frogs


| were aware of it, they rose up out of the water and


coming together to one place gathered a council of
grievous war. And while they were asking whence
the quarrel arose, and what the cause of this anger,


} a herald drew near bearing a wand in his paws,


Pot-visitor the son of great-hearted Cheese-carver.
He brought the grim message of war, speaking
thus:

“ Frogs, the Mice have sent me with their threats
against you, and bid you arm yourselves for war and
battle ; for they have seen Crumb-snatcher in the


597


‘BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE


bpuétrepos Bactrevrs Duaciyvabos. adra payecbe, —
oitives €v BaTtpayolow apiaThes yeyaaoee. |

ray > \ b) / / ’ >] 7 Srey 7

Os etrr@v amédnve: Novos O Eis OVAT amupoV

cicehO wv érapake dpévas Batpaxav ayepwxov: 14
pehopévorv & avtav Puaoiyvalos eimev avactas: —

°O, diros, ov« Extewov éym pov, oVOE KATELOOY
b) v4 yA x 9 / / bi A
a ae a TAaVTOS O waae ts TmarCov pase) ALYY,
vagers Tas Patpaxav pupLoupevos: OL O€ KAKLOTOL
vov éme penpovrat TOV GVALTLOV’ GAN aye Bovdrnv 15 |
Cyto open, ¢ omras dohious pvas eFoheowper.
ToLyap ey@v épéw, WS moe OoKEl Eivat AploTa.
TOMATA KoTpHCAVTES ev OTTAOLS OT@pPEV ATAaYTES
aKpols Tap YElNEToW, OTTOU KATAKPHMVOS 0 Y@pos-
nvika © opynOevtes eb’ huéas €FéAO wor, — 15
Spakdpevos Kopv0wv, dats axXedov avtios EXOn,
5) 7 > \ Xe Lae, >A /
és ALuYnVY avTOVvS avV Exeivats evOv Baroper.

ef \ if 3 e/ \ 3 4
oUTM yap TriEavTes ev Vdact TOUS akoAvpMBOUS
oTHToMEV EVOY UWS TO LUOKTOVOY WOE TPOTTALOY.

“Os el Tov AVETTELTE caborrrier Gat amavtas. 160
purdous peev paraxav KVHULAS EAS aupexauyay,
Oopncas S elyov KANOV Xoepav amo TEUTAOD,
purra O€ TOV Kpap Bev ELS aomioas ev HoKnoay,
eyXos, & o€vayvouvos ExdoT@ parpos ap7pet, |
Kal Ta KEpa KO MOD ero exadduTrTe Kapynva. 16M
ppatdpevor 0 éoTnoay et ox Ons by how |
aciovTes NOyKaS, Ovpod & ELT ANVTO EKATTOS.

Zevs 6€ Ocovs Kadéoas ets ovpavov daTEpoEvTa,
Kal TORE LOU Tr Odv detEas Kparepous TE PAaXNTAS, ig
TOXNOUS Kab peyddous 8° byxea pak pa Pépovras, - t
otos Kevtavpwrv otpatos épyetas 4o€ Diydvrov, |


55?


Se ee a ee Fe FE OS


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 142-171


} ‘water whom your king Puff-jaw slew. Fight, then,
| as many of you as are warriors among the Frogs.”


With these words he explained the matter. So
when this blameless speech came to their ears, the
proud Frogs were disturbed in their hearts and
began to blame Puff-jaw. But he rose up and said:

“Friends, I killed no Mouse, nor did I see one
perishing. Surely he was drowned while playing by
the lake and imitating the swimming of the Frogs,
and now these wretches blame me who am guiltless.
Come then; let us take counsel how we may utterly
destroy the wily Mice. Moreover, I will tell you
what I think to be the best. Let us all gird on our
armour and take our stand on the very brink of the
lake, where the ground breaks down sheer: then
when they come out and charge upon us, let each
seize by the crest the Mouse who attacks him, and cast
them with their helmets into the lake; for so we shall
drown these dry-bobs! in the water, and merrily set
up here a trophy of victory over the slaughtered Mice.”

By this speech he persuaded them to arm them-
selves They covered their shins with leaves of
mallows, and had breastplates made of fine green
beet-leaves, and cabbage-leaves, skilfully fashioned,
for shields. Each one was equipped with a long,
pointed rush for a shear, and smooth snail-shells to
cover their heads. Then they stood in close-locked
ranks upon the high bank, waving their spears, and
were filled, each of them, with courage.

Now Zeus called the gods to starry heaven and
showed them the martial throng and the stout
warriors so many and so great, all bearing long
spears ; for they were as the host of the Centaurs


1 [it. “* those unable to swim.’’


399


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE


HOU YEXOV Epéerve: Tives BaTpaxXoLaLW apwyol
» pvoly Aavadtwov; kal A@nvainv mpocéetrev’
Oo Ooyarep, pow Ui pa BonOycovea jmopevon;
Kal yap gov KaTa vnov del OKLPTOCW ATaVvTeEs 17
KVLOON TEPTTOMEVOL Kal eder pace TavTodatotaw.
“Os dp &ébn Kpovidns: tov 6€ rpocéertrev AOnvy:
@ TATEP, OUK av TwTTOT éy@ pual TEeLpomEvOLoL
eh Goiny eTAPWYOS, ETEL KAKA TOAAG pe copyav |
oT EM paTa BrarTovTes Kal AUYVOUS elvEeK EXaiODv. 18¢ |
TavTo O€ pou Ainy édaxeE ppevas, olov épeEav.
T eT NOV jLov KaTeTpwgay, 0 ov eEvhava Kapovoa,
eK poddvns Net TAs Kal oTnMova Netrov evo a,
Kal Tporyras eT éAEToaV” 0 oe ATTN pot eméeoTH
Kal Tpucoel pe TOKOV" 70 b€ p piryvov aGavatoow. 185
Xp apevn yap bpava Kab ouK exo avramodobvat. |
GN’ ove OS Bat paxovow apnryeuey OUK eCedjoo.
cial Yap ovo avrol ppevas epmevo, ANNA LE TP@Nv
ex TONE WOU aviodcay, emel Ainv éxoTrwOny,
Umrvov Sevopevny OUK clacay GopuBobvtes 190)
ovo” oMryov KaTrapdo ar eyo 6 autvos KareKeluny, |
THY Kepariy anyotvaa, ws éBonoev GNEKTOD.
aN’ aye Tavea@perba, Geot, ToVTOLoW apnryely,
pnp we “ay npevov TpoOh Benet oEvoevTs :
elol yap ayXewa ot, Kad ef Beds avtiov érOor: 195)
TavTes O ovpavobev TepTopela Onpw o opaves.
VODs ap eon’ Th O avr emerretovTo Geol anor,
TT AVTES OMLers o ela prOov aonXées eis Eva X@pov.
Kai tote k@vores peyddas oddmuyyas EXOVTES :
OELvOV eoahmuyEav TONE LOU KTUTCOD: oupavoter O€ 200
Zevs Kpovidns Bpovrnce, Tépas TONE LOL KAKOUO.
IIpatos & “TyuBoas Aevynvopa ovtace Soup


554


4


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 172--202


and the Giants. Then he asked with a sly smile;
“ Who of the deathless gods will help the Frogs and
who the Mice?”’ And he said to Athena;

“My daughter, will you go aid the Mice? For
they ; all frolic about your temple continually, delight-
ing in the fat of sacrifice and in all kinds of food.”

So then said the son of Cronos. But Athena
answered him: “I would never go to help the Mice
when they are hard pressed, for they have done me
much mischief, spoiling my garlands and my lamps
too, to get the oil. And this thing that they have
done vexes my heart exceedingly: they have eaten
holes in my sacred robe, which I wove painfully spin-
ning a fine woof on a fine warp, and made it full of holes.
And now the money-lender is at me and charges me
interest which is a bitter thing for immortals. For
I borrowed to do my weaving, and have nothing with
which to repay. Yet even so [ will not help the
Frogs; for they also are not considerate : once, when
_I was returning early from war, I was very tired, and
though I wanted to sleep, they would not let me
even doze a little for their outcry ; and so I lay sleep-
less with a headache until cock-crow. No, gods, let
us refrain from helping these hosts, or one of us may
get wounded with a sharp spear; for they fight hand
to hand, even if a god comes against them. Let
us rather all amuse ourselves watching the fight from
heaven.”

So said Athena. And the other gods agreed with
her, and all went in a body to one place.

Then gnats with great trumpets sounded the fell
note of war, and Zeus the son of Cronos thundered
from heaven, a sign of grievous battle.

First ee croaker wounded Lickman in the belly,


555


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE


ETAOT EV T pomaxous KaTa yaorépa és econ Hyrap"
Kad 0 ETETEY TPNVTS, amTranas Oo ex ovea cep eOeipas. |
[Sovmnoey 6é Tear, apapnae Ge Tevye eT avTo. | 205
Tpwyrodurns de MET AVTOV aicovTiae Tnrelova, |
mHeev & &v oTepv@ o71Bapov Sop: Tov O€ TETOVTA
etre eas Oavaros, aux OT OpLATOS 6 eferrn.
YevTratos 6 ap emreve Barov Keap "Ep Bactyutpor. |
‘Apropayos 6€ Tlorvdavor KaTa yaorépa TUpev 210
7peTre de T™ ENVIS, ux? O€ pereov é&err TN.
Acpvoxapts & ws eidev aTrOXND WEVOV Tlorvpavor,
Tpoydoourny amanoio OL airy évos [tpacev émipbas
TET PO pevroetoei Tov O€ 7KOTOS aoe xahuye YQ
Oxiutony & axos eiAe Kal ip ao-ep o&ét oxXove |
ove efeomacen & eyxXos eva tion" nputre © evOvs: 215
Nery ivep © avTolo TITUGKETO Soupl pacw@
Kal Barev, ovd a dpuapre, Kae im aros: @s & évonce
Kooropayov pevyovra, Babeiaus & eM Treo eV oxOais:
GX ovo BS arene aYNS, AAN HNaTEV avrov"
KaTTETE ©, OVO avevevoev: EBamTETO O AimaTs —
Mwy 220
Topmupew@, avTOs b€ Tap meov eferavue On —
Ho pono MeTraphat TE TELPO[LEVOS Aayoverau.
Tupodayov 8 avtiow én oxEarS eEevaprEev.


x x ”
IIrepvoydvdov 6 émid@v Kuala és hoBov
HAO ev,


HraTo © és dipyny hevyov, THY aomida pivas. 225
Pirz patov S ap » emevev &vLOv ‘EpBacixut pos. |
5 Topoxapes vue T émrepvev IIrepvopayov Baoinija, ]
XEppeaoic TrAnEAS KATA Bpeyparos: eyKepanos dé
éx pivav éotake, mardooeTo 6 aipate yaia.

1 Omitted by Baumeister and by many MSS.


556


2"


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 203-229


right through the midriff. Down fell he on his face
and soiled his soft fur in the dust: he fell with a
thud and his armour clashed about him. Next
Troglodyte shot at the son of Mudman, and drove
the strong spear deep into his breast; so he fell, and
black death seized him and his spirit flitted forth
from his mouth. Then Beety struck Pot-visitor to
the heart and killed him, and Bread-nibbler hit
Loud-crier in the belly, so that he fell on his face
and his spirit flitted forth from his limbs. Now when
Pond-larker saw Loud-crier perishing, he struck in
quickly and wounded Troglodyte in his soft neck
with a rock like a mill-stone, sc that darkness veiled
his eyes. Thereat Ocimides was seized with grief,
and struck out with his sharp reed and did not
draw his spear back to him again, but felled his
enemy there and then. And Lickman shot at him
with a bright spear and hit him unerringly in the
midriff. And as he marked Cabbage-eater running
away, he fell on the steep bank, yet even so did not
cease fighting but smote that other so that he fell
and did not rise again: and the lake was dyed with
red blood as he lay outstretched along the shore,
pierced through the guts and shining flanks. Also
he slew Cheese-eater on the very brink .....
But Reedy took to flight when he saw Ham-nibbler,
and fled, plunging into the lake and throwing away
his shield. Then blameless Pot-visitor killed Brewer
and Water-larker killed the lord Ham-nibbler, striking
him on the head with a pebble, so that his brains
flowed out at his nostrils and the earth was bespattered


557


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE


Aewxomivaka O em even Gud poo BopBopoxoirns, 230
éyyes érrai~as: Tov d€ oKOTOS doce Karurpev. |
IIpaccaios & émid@v todos ethxuce vexpov €ovra,
év Nipwn © amrémveee KpaTnoas XEeLlpt TéevovTa.
Viyapraké & nuvy érdpov tept TeOver@tov |
Kal Bare paccaiov unre yains émiBavra: 235
Timte O€ ol mpocbev, uy d ’Atddade BePijxee. |
KpapPoBarns S cae THAOD Opaka pirpev er
avr on, F
Kal TO “pétorrov EXpLTe Kab eferupnou Tapa PL POV.
apyian o dp éxelvos, éEdwv O€ TE xeupt Taxely 3
Kel pevov éy Tredim ALOov uP plwov, axOos a apoupns, 240
T@ Bare K papSoBdrny UTO youvaTa: Tada |
éxracOn —
KVHILN deEvTepn, TET E oy Um TLos éy Kovina ty.
pavyacions O° TLUVE KAL avdus Baiven ¢ err avron,
TUWe O€ Ly pécony KATA yao Tepe: mas b€0i cio® |
of va xXoLvos EOUVE, Kapa Om EK YUVTO dmavra 245
EY KAT epehxoueve t UT O Sovpare vet pb maxety® |
Tpaydodurns O ws eloev err bx Onouv ToT a1010,
oxatwv é ex TONELOV avexatero, TeLpeTO 6 aivas’
nHrato © €s TAPpOUS, otTws Puyn aim by dreO pov. |
Tpofaprns 0 éBanev Puciyvaboy é€ és Too G dK pov. 250°
géoxyata & éx Aiuvns avedvcato, Teipeto & aivas’ |
” sk x x
[lpaccaios & as eLoev 0 nub vOUD ™ pores ova,
Oe Ova Tpomayov Kal aKOVTLOEY o&ét oxove”
ovo éppnke aaxos, TXETO o avrod Soupos a aceon.
Tov © Bane Tpupanecay a apvpova Kal TET PAYXUTpPOV 255 |
60S ‘Opuyavion, HL LOUpEvOS aur ov "Apna,
[ds povos év Batpdyotow apiotevev Kal’ dptrov: |


558


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 230-257


1 with blood. Faultless Muck-coucher sprang upon
_ Lick-platter and killed him with his spear and


| : brought darkness upon his eyes: and Leeky saw it,
| and dragged Lick-platter by the foot, though he was


| dead, and choked him in the lake. But Crumb-
| snatcher was fighting to avenge his dead comrades,
| and hit Leeky before he reached the land ; and he fell
}| forward at the blow and his soul went down to Hades.
| And seeing this, Cabbage-climber took a clod of mud
| and hurled it at the Mouse, plastering all his forehead
1! : and nearly blinding him. Thereat Crumb-snatcher
| ie was enraged and caught up in his strong hand a huge
|| stone that lay upon the ground, a heavy burden for


| the soil: with that he hit Cabbage-climber below the


| knee and splintered his whole right shin, hurling him
1) on his back in the dust. But Croakerson kept him
i aq off, and rushing at the Mouse in turn, hit him in the
| middle of the belly and drove the whole reed-spear
} into him, and as he drew the spear back to him with
| his strong hand, all his foe’s bowels gushed out upon
}| the ground. And when Troglodyte saw the deed, as
} he was limping away from the fight on the river


bank, he shrank back sorely moved, and leaped into a


| __ trench to escape sheer death. Then Bread-nibbler hit
| Puff-jaw on the toes—he came up at the last from
| the lake and was greatly distressed . .. And when


Ke Leeky saw him fallen forward, but still half alive,


he pressed through. those who fought in front and


| hurled a sharp reed at him; but the point of the


| spear was stayed and did not break his shield. Then
| noble Rueful, like Ares himself, struck his flawless


ie head-piece made of four pots—he only among the
: 559


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE


a@pyunoev 0 ap em avtov: 0 O ws tev, ovy Uré-
peLveV

Hpoa KpaTepoppor’, édu & év B&vOecr Nipvys.

"Hv o€ tis év pvecw Mepiddaptraké, &&oxos

adr, 260)

Kvaicwvos' diros vids awtpovos AptettBovrAov, —
olKa0 LOY TrOAEMOLO ETAT KEW TALO éxéEevGEV
avTos 0 éTTHKEL YAUPOUMEVOS WS KATA Aipynv.
ovTos avapraéat Batpayev yeveny émaretr€L,” |
Kal pneas Kapvou peronv pax eis OVO poipas —- 265
ppayony apubor Epota wy év @ous yvelpas eOnnev:
OL Oe TAXOS Seto avTes eBay TayTEs kara Mya
Kal vu Kev efeTeher cen, € émel peeya ot aOévos jer,
Gi ra ap o&u vonce TAT avo pov Te Gey Te. |
Kab TOT aMONAUMEVOUS Batpaxous @KTELPE Kpoviov:
KIC as dé Kapn Toi epbeyEato PHoOviyy: 271

a) TOTOL, n peya Epryov év opParpolow o Opapuae: :
ov pet pov EKTANTOEL Mepioaprraé, 0 OS KATE dipeny
apTaké év Barpaxourw at Berar anna TAaXLOTOL |
Tladraba TémAl@ bev TONE{LOKOVOY, H Kab "Apna, 2754
ot pu eT TX TOUTE Paxns KpaTepov mep éovTa.

TOS ap éby K povidns: ° ‘Hpn & atrapet Beto uo0ov
OUT ap "AOnvains, Kpovidn, abévos, ove "Apnos
loxvoet Barpaxotow apnyéemev aimov breO pov.

GNX aye mavTes L@ [ev apnyoves” ) TO GOV OTFAOY 2808
cweta Ow peya Teravoxrovov oBptmoepyov,

@ TOTE xal Karravja KATERTAVES 6B ptmov avd pa
KaL peyav ‘Eryxédaoov Kah ayy pea, hora Leydvror,
KivelaOw: oUTW yap AN@CETAL, OGTIS APLOTOS.


1 Kpelwvos, Baumeister.
* This may be a parody of Orion’s threat in Hesiod,
Astronomy, frag. 4


560


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 258-284


| Frogs showed prowess in the throng. But when he
| saw the other rush at him, he did not stay to meet
| the stout-hearted hero but dived down to the depths
| of the lake.

| Now there was one among the Mice, Slice-
| snatcher, who excelled the rest, dear son of Gnawer


| the son of blameless Bread-stealer. He went to his


house and bade his son take part inthe war; but he
himself stood exulting by the lake. This warrior
threatened to destroy the race of Frogs utterly, and
splitting a chestnut-husk into two parts along the
| joint, put the two hollow pieces as armour on his paws :
| then straightway the Frogs were dismayed and all
} rushed down to the lake, and he would have made
| good his boast—for he had great strength—had not
the Son of Cronos, the Father of men and gods, been
quick to mark the thing and pitied the Frogs as
they were perishing. He shook his head, and
uttered this word :

: “ Dear, dear, how fearful a deed do my eyes be-
} hold! Slice-snatcher makes no small panic rushing
| to and fro among the Frogs by the lake. Let us then
} make all haste and send warlike Pallas or even
} Ares, for they will stop his fighting, strong though
me is.

| So said the Son of Cronos; but Hera answered
| him: “Son of Cronos, neither the might of Athena
} nor of Ares can avail to deliver the Frogs from utter
} destruction. Rather, come and let us all go to help
} them, or else let loose your weapon, the great and for-
} midable Titan-killer with which you killed Capaneus,
} that doughty man, and great Enceladus and the wild
} tribes of Giants; ay, let it loose, for so the most
| valiant will be slain.”


561


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE.


OS ip epn’ Kpovidns 8 éBare wWordevta —
KE pauvov. 28 |
™POTa pep éBpovrnce, peyav © éneheEep * ‘Odvprrov, |
avr dap CTELTA KEPAVVOD, Setpadeov Avos om rov,
He em Lola as” 00 ap eT TATO neupos AVAKTOS. :
TAVTAS [EV p epoBnoe Barov € em Tova OE [xepavvdy' )
GNX oS > aTEANYE MUGVY TTpAaTOS, GAN ETL
peaOV es: |
ENTETO TopOno-ew Batpayov yévos aixpntawy, ;
eb pen am OdrAdprov Barpaxous @KTELPE Kpovicr, ‘
bs pa ToT év Batpaxoow a cipeoryous evOus Emreprper.
"HAGov & éEaihuns vataxpoves, ayKuhox frat, |
NofoBdtat, oTpeBAoi, WariodoTopMoLl, OoTpPAKO- —
deppol, oom
oo ropuels, TAT WOTOL; dmoatihBovtes € ev apors, |
Bratcol, NELPOTEVOVTES, amo OTE PVOV ETOPOVTES,
oKTaTOOES, OuKéparot, a areupees, ol oe KaredvTar
KapKLvoL, ot pa pd ovpas oTOMATET OW EXOT TOV
HOE TOOaS Kal YELpas’ avEyVaLTT OYTO de hoyxXau. 3)
TOUS 61 UmedvEeLa ay TAVTES LVES, OVO ET euelvaV, —
és 6€ huyny étpatovto: édvaeto & HALOS HON,
Kal TOAe“OU TEETH OvONpMEpou E&ETENETON.


,


562


BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE, 285-303


So said Hera: and the Son of Cronos cast a lurid


| thunderbolt: first he thundered and made great
| Olympus shake, and then cast the thunderbolt, the
| awful weapon of Zeus, tossing it lightly forth. Thus


he frightened them all, Frogs and Mice alike, hurl-
ing his bolt upon them. Yet even so the army of
the Mice did not relax, but hoped still more to
destroy the brood of warrior Frogs. Only, the Son
of Cronos, on Olympus, pitied the Frogs and then
straightway sent them helpers.

So there came suddenly warriors with mailed
backs and curving claws, crooked beasts that walked


| sideways, nut-cracker-jawed, shell-hided: bony they


were, flat-backed, with glistening shoulders and
bandy legs and stretching arms and eyes that looked
behind them. They had also eight legs and two
feelers—persistent creatures who are called crabs.
These nipped off the tails and paws and feet of the
Mice with their jaws, while spears only beat on
them. Of these the Mice were all afraid and no
longer stood up to them, but turned and _ fled.
Already the sun was set, and so came the end of the
one-day war.


563


0 o 2


| OF THE ORIGIN OF HOMER AND
| HESIOD, AND THEIR CONTEST


ae


a3 *


ITEP] OMHPOY KAI HSIOAOY
KAI TOT TENOTS KAI ATONOS ATTON


“Ounpov kat “Haiodov tovs Gevorarous ToT as
TUAVTES avO parrot TOMTAS idtous edXOVTAL yeve-
oa. GN “Hotodos ev TH totav ovomacas
maT ptoa TavT as THis piroverkias amnrAXaEEV el Tre@Vv
@S 0 TATHP avToD”


eiaato © ay “EXLK@VOS outuph € évl KON
"Ackpn, xetua Kxakh, Oéper apyaden, ovdé ToT
éo OX.


"O b¢ fa) e 3 ca) € / \ f
pnpov OE Tagat ws elTrEely al MTOAELS KAL OL
dmovKou avr av Tap €avTols yeyevijo Caw Neyouvaw.
Kal T pOrTot rye 2pupvaior MénnrTos 6vta Tod Tap
QUTOLS ToTapLod Kab KpnOnidos poppns Keka Oat
pace 7 por epov Mernaovyévn, toTepov pevroe TU-
prwdevra * ‘Opnpov pHeTovopacOijvat Ova THY Tap
avTois él TOV TOLOUT@Y cvvndn ™ poonyopiav.
Xiow dé mWadw TEKENpLa dhépovatv idsov eivar
monirny DeyovTes. Kal mepia tea Gat TLVAS EK TOV
yévous avTov Tap abrois ‘Opnpidas KaNOUMEVOUS.
Koroporor dé Kal TOTOV Setxvuovow, ev @ pacw
avTov Yeap para SiSdoKxovta THs Tosoews dip-
EacOat Kat TOU aL Tm p@rov TOV Mapyirny.

Tlepi dé TOV yovecv avTov TwdaNw TON) dua
dovia Tapa wactv éotiv. “EXdviKos pev yap
1 Goettling’s paging. 2 Works and Days, 639 f.

566


OF THE ORIGIN OF HOMER AND
HESIOD, AND OF THEIR CONTEST


EvERYONE boasts that the most divine of poets,


Te Homer and Hesiod, are said to be his particular
} countrymen. Hesiod, indeed, has put a name to his
|} native place and so prevented any rivalry, for he


said that his father “settled near Helicon in a


fa wretched hamlet, Ascra, which is miserable in winter


sultry in summer, and good at no season.” But, as


1 for Homer, you might almost say that every city
| with itsinhabitants claims him asher son. Foremost
are the men of Smyrna who say that he was the Son


14 of Meles, the river of their town, by a nymph
| Cretheis, and that he was at first called Melesigenes.


| He was named Homer later, when he became blind,
| this being their usual epithet for such people. The
|  Chians, on the other hand, bring forward evidence
| to show that he was their countrymen, saying that


there actually remain some of his descendants among


ie them who are called Homeridae. The Colophonians


| even show the place where they declare that he
| began to compose when a schoolmaster, and say that
| his first work was the Margites.

bey As to his parents also, there is on all hands great
| disagreement, Hellanicus and Cleanthes say his


e 567


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


314 cai KredvOns Maiova Xéyouvow, Evyatwv dé Mé-
Anra, Karrxrns 6é Mvacaryopay, Anpoxputos dé
O Tipoetveos Aanpova é é“TTOpoy, Evtot O€ Oapvpar,'
Aiyonriot dé Mevépwaxov lepoypappuaréa, elo 6é,
ov Tnrépayov TOV ‘Odvacéws: pNTepa dé ob bev
Myriv, ot Oé KpnOnida, ol Oe Oemiorny, ot O€
Evyvndo, éviow oé ‘TOaxnotav TWa UTO Powixov
atreuTroAnOetcay, of d€ Kardornv tnv Modcar,
tives 6€ LoAvKdotrny THY Neoropos.

‘Exaneiro dé Means, wos b€ TLvées dact, Medn-
oLyerns, as 6€ év00t, "AAT. ovopaa Ova o€
ayTov pact TILES "Opnpov 6ua@ TO TOV maT épa
avTod Own pov Sof jvat VITO Kurpiov Tlépoats,
ob O€ OL THY T POT LW TOV OmpaTov: Tapa vyaip
Tols Atonedow oUTwS ol TWnpot KaXOvUYTAL. O7rEp
dé KK OO LEV em TOU Oetoratou avTOKpaTopos
‘Adptavod eipyuévov vio THS IIv@tas mepi “Opn-
pou, exOng opel. Too yap Bactréas TuGopéevou,
Tobep * ‘Ounpos Kat Tivos, atepotBace bv éEapé-
TPOU TOVOE TOV TPOTTOY’


"Ayvoortov bs epee ryevenv Kab mar pioa yaiav
apBpoctov TELphvos; Ed0s S ‘Tanna vos € ECTLY,
Tnréuaxos 6é TATHP cat Neotopén Emixaotn
LATHp, ) pv éTixTe BpoTav ToAV mavaoodpov
avopa.
ois padsota Set mictevel OLa TE TOV TUOOMEVOV
Kal TOV cr ox piv pevov; GXAwWS TE OUT@S TOD


TounTod peyaropuas TOV TpoTaTopa OLa TOV
éema@v dedo0EakoTos.


1 Rzach ; Tautparv, Flach.
568


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


father was Maeon, but Eugaeon says Meles ; Callicles
is for Mnesagoras, Democritus of Troezen for Daémon,
a merchant-trader. Some, again, say he was the son
of Thamyras, but the Egyptians say of Menemachus,
a priest-scribe, and there are even those who father
him on Telemachus, the son of Odysseus. As for
his mother, she is variously called Metis, Cretheis,
Themista, and Eugnetho. Others say she was an
Ithacan woman sold as a slave by the Phoenicians ;
others, Calliope the Muse; others again Polycasta,
the daughter of Nestor.

Homer himself was called Meles or, according to
different accounts, Melesigenes or Altes. Some
authorities say he was called Homer, because his
father was given as a hostage to the Persians by the
men of Cyprus; others, because of his blindness ; for
amongst the Aeolians the blind are so called. We
will set down, however, what we have heard to have
been said by the Pythia concerning Homer in the
time of the most sacred Emperor Hadrian. When
the monarch inquired from what city Homer came,
and whose son he was, the priestess delivered a
response in hexameters after this fashion :

“Do you ask me of.the obscure race and country
of the heavenly siren? Ithaca is his country, Tele-
machus his father, and Epicasta, Nestor’s daughter,
the mother that bare him, a man by far the wisest
of mortal kind.” This we must most implicitly
believe, the inquirer and the answerer being who
they are—especially since the poet has so greatly
glorified his grandfather in his works,


' 569


315


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


”Eyeoe _pev ovv abrov T poryever TEpOV ‘Hovddou
hacly eivas: TUES: dé VETEPOY Kab ouyyert.
yeveadoyovar 6€ ottTas: “AmdAX@VOS pact Kat
AiOovans Ths Ioceidavos yeverOau Aivov, Atvov
be I1tepov, ITcépov O€ Kab VUmpNS: MeGovns Oia-
ypov, Otdypou 6é Kat Kanasomns ‘Ophéa, ‘Opdéws
dé Api, [rod 6€ Evxréa?], Tov dé ‘Taspovidny,
Tov 6€ PirotépTny, Tod 5é Kidnpov, tov de “Emu-
ppadnv, Tov dé Medadvarov, tovtov de Aiov Kai
"Amedrnv, Aiov 6é€ Kai Iluacundns ths “AmodA-
Novos Puvyatpos “Haiodov cai Uépanv: *“AmedXod
5é Matova, Maiovos dé kai Ovyatpos MéAntos
Tov ToTamov © Opnpor.

Teves 6€ cvvaxudcat dacivy avTovs @aTE Kal
ayovicacbas ouore éy XaAKlor THS Evotas.”
TOUT avr yap Tov Mapyitnp ° ‘Ounpov TEPLEPXE-
cOat Kata mony parr@oodvta, EhOovta O€ Kal Els
Acrdous rept THS maT ptoos avTov tuvOdavecOat,
Tis etn, THY O€ I1vOiav etzrety:


éotiw los vnoos LNTpos Tatpts, ) oe Oavovta
dé€eTa? AAG véwy Taidov aiviypa dvrAakat.


TOV 0€ AKOVCAaVTA TrepucTacbae pev THY Els “Tov
aes, dvat piBery dé rept THY Exel Xepav. KATO
dé TOD avTov Ypovov Tavixrop emt ap tov Tob
Tatpos Apdiddpuavtos, Baciiéas EvBotas, em t-
TENOY mavTas TOUS eran Hous dvOpas ov povov
pOun Kal TaXEL, GNAA Kab copia él Tov ayava
peyanrass Sepeats TLUOV TUVEKAGNETEV. Kal OUTOL
ovv €K TUYNS, OS pact, cuuBarovtes aAAHXOLS


1 Goettling’s supplement.
2 Nietzsche: év ’AvA(d: THs Bowwrlas, MSS.


578


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


Now some say that he was earlier than Hesiod
others that he was younger and akin to him. They
give his descent thus: Apollo and Atthusa, daughter
of Poseidon, had a son Linus, to whom was born
Pierus. From Pierus and the nymph Methone sprang
Oeager ; and from Oeager and Calliope Orpheus; from
Orpheus, Dres ; and from him, EKucles. The descent is
continued through Iadmonides, Philoterpes, Euphe-
mus, Epiphrades and Melanopus who had sons Dius
and Apelles. Dius by Pycimede, the daughter of
Apollo had two sons Hesiod and Perses; while


if _Apelles begot Maeon who was the father of Homer


by a daughter of the River Meles.

According to one account they flourished at the
same time and even had a contest of skill at
Chalcis in Euboea. For, they say, after Homer had
composed the Margites, he went about from city to
| city as a minstrel, and coming to Delphi, inquired
} who he was and of what country? The Pythia
| answered :

“The Isle of Ios is your mother’s country and it
shall receive you dead; but beware of the riddle
of the young children.” !

Hearing this, it is said, he hesitated to go to Ios,
and remained in the region where he was. Now
| about the same time Ganyctor was celebrating the
' funeral rites of his father Amphidamas, king of
}  Kuboea, and invited to the gathering not only all
those who were famous for bodily strength and
fleetness of foot, but also those who excelled in
wit, promising them great rewards. And so, as the
story goes, the two went to Chalcis and met by


1 sc. the riddle of the fisher-boys which comes at the end
of this work. \


571


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


ANG ov els THY Xankida. TOD b€ ay@VvOS ANNOL Te
TUDES TOV eT LON LOY XanrK.oéov éxab éCovro KpLTal
Kab per AUT OV Ilavetdns, adedpos @V TOU TETEAEU-
TNKOTOS. apo épov 6¢ TOV TOUNT OY Javpacras
GYOVLT A [LEVOV viKnoat pace TOV ‘Hotosov TOV Tp0-
TOV TOUTOV _TpoehOovra Yap els TO péoov Tuv-
Gavecbar Tov ‘Opnpov Kao’ ev Exacrop, TOV O€
“Opnpov atroxpivac0a. dnatv odv “Haiobdos-


Tie MeédqTos, " ‘Onnpe, Jeav c amo pun Sea elas,
el’ dye por wadumpwra, TL péptatov éatt
Bporotow;


OMHPOS
‘A pxny peep Ta) povau éentxGoviorgw ¢ dpiarov,
dovta © Stas okioTa TUAaAS Atdao Te pije at.


316 “Hoiodos ro PevTRP OY:


Ein’ dye pot Kal TovTo, Oeots émveixen “Ounpe,
Ti Ovyntois KaANLGTOV oieat év dpeol eivas;

0 0é
‘Onror’ av evppocvvn pev éyn Kata Shpov

atTavrTa,

Sart upoves Oo ava Sopar’ axovdtwvras dordod
TPEvor efeins, mapa dé TrANGoOot TpameSau
ciTou Kaul Kpec@D, peu So eK KpnThpos abioowv
otvox 00s popence Kal eyxeln Semadeoow.
TOUTO Ti Ol KANXNLO TOV EvL Ppeoiv EldeTat Eivat.


‘Pndévtwv dé TOUTOV TOV €TOV, OUTW apodpas
pact CavpacOhvas vm0 TOV “EXAHV@V TOUS ori
ous @ore xpuaods avTous TpoaayopevO vat, Kal
ETL Kal vov év Talis Kowwats Ovaotas 70 TOV bet
TVOV Kab GTTOVO@V TpoKaTevKecOaL TaVTAaS. oO Oé


572


pees


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


ehance. The leading Chalcidians were judges: to-


gether with Paneides, the brother of the dead king ;
and it is said that after a wonderful contest between
the two poets, Hesiod won in the following manner :
he came forward into the midst and put Homer one
question after another, which Homer answered.
Hesiod, then, began :


“Homer, son of Meles, inspired with wisdom
from heaven, come, tell me first what is best for
mortal man ?”’

HOMER
“For men on earth ‘tis best never to be born at


_ all; or being born, to pass through the gates of


Hades with all speed.”
Hesiod then asked again :
“Come, tell me now this also, godlike Homer:


what think you in your heart is most delightsome
to men?”


Homer answered :


“When mirth reigns throughout the town, and
feasters about the house, sitting in order, listen to
a minstrel; when the tables beside them are laden
with bread and meat, and a wine-bearer draws sweet
drink from the mixing-bow] and fills the cups: this
I think in my heart to be most delightsome.”

It is said that wken Homer had recited these
verses, they were so admired by the Greeks as to be
called golden by them, and that even now at public
sacrifices all the guests solemnly recite them before
feasts and libations. Hesiod, however, was annoyed


573


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


‘Hoiodos axGeabels € emt TH ‘Opnpou eunwepig em
THY TOV aT ope a@ppnoey errepoTnaw Kat dnor
TOUGOE TOUS oe


Modo" aye! wor Ta T €oVvTA Ta T eooomEeva TPO
T cova,


TOV pev ponoev delde, VO AANNS pean dordis.
6 6€ “Opnpos, Bovropevos axoXovO@s TO dropov
Avoal, eager |
Ovse TOT appt Acos TUB Kavaxnmoves ¢ irmoe
appara cvvtpiovaw épitovtes Tept vixns.


Karas 6€ cal ey TOUTOLS ATAVTHT AVTOS éml TAs
apptBorovs yVOMasS Oppnoev 0 ‘Hatodos, Kat
TreELovas OTivoUs NEYO ngtov Kal’ &va ExaaTov
Tuppeoves arroxpivacbat TOV “Opmpov. eoTLy ouv
O ev TPOTOS ‘How0dov, o 0 dé efis ‘Opnpou, eviore
d€ Kal O1a Ovo oTIX@Y THY ETEPOTNOLY TOLOUMEVOV
tov Hozodov:


HSIOAOS
Acitvov él eidovto Bowy Kpéa, Kavyévas
(TT WV
OMHPOS
"ExAvov lop@ovTas, émet ToAEM“OLO KOpEeaO nv.
H3IOAOZ
317 Kai Ppoyes, ot TavT@y avdpov él vnuoly
AploToL |
OMHPOS
"Avdpdot Anicthpow én’ axths Soptrov édéc Oa.
HSIOAOS
Xepot Paréwov tovs? otrAwv? kata gira
yeyavTov


1 MSS. : & yé wot, Flach. 2 Nietzsche : iotow, MS.
° Rzach : 4\Awy, MS.
574


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


| by Homer’s felicity and hurried on to pose him with


hard questions. He therefore began with the fol-


| lowing lines:


“Come, Muse; sing not to me of things that are,
or that shall be, or that were of old; but think of
another song.”’


Then Homer, wishing to escape from the impasse
_. by an apt answer, replied :—

“ Never shall horses with clattering hoofs break
chariots, striving for victory about the tomb of Zeus.”’
- Here again Homer had fairly met Hesiod, and so
. the latter turned to sentences of doubtful meaning 4
he recited many lines and required Homer to com-
plete the sense of each appropriately. The first of the
following verses is Hesiod’s and the next Homer's:
but sometimes Hesiod puts his question in two lines.


HESIOD
“Then they dined on the flesh of oxen and their
horses’ necks—”
3 HOMER
“They unyoked dripping with sweat, when they
had had enough of war.”
HESIOD
“ And the 28 ama who of all men are handiest
at ships—
HOMER
“To filch their dinner from pirates on the
beach.”
HESIOD
«To shoot forth arrows against the tribes of cursed
giants with his hands—’”’
1 The verses of Hesiod are called doubtful in meaning


because they are, if taken alone, either incomplete or
absurd.


575


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


OMHPOS

‘Hpakréns arérucey ar’ @Omov KapTourNa Toe.
HS1IOAOS 3

Odtos avip avipds 7 aya0od Kat avarKiOos ett

®@

OMHPOS

Myrpos, ézet modepnos yareTos Tana yuvaréiv.
HSIOAOS

Avtap? cot ye waTnp émiyn Kab TOTLLA ponTNpP


OMHPOS ql
LOua TO ye” omretpavtTe Ota Ypuaenv Adpooitny.


HSIOAOS
Av’tap érel dunOn yauo “Aptews tovéatpa


OMHPOS
KadNot® Katérepvev am’ apyupéoto Broto.
H=IOAOS
Os of pev Saivuvto Tavypepot, obdev EXOVTES


OMHPOS :
318 Olxodev: adr Tapetyev dvaé avdpav Ayapée- —
LVOV. |

HSIOAOS


a uA n > /
Acinvoy demvncartes evi o700@ ailadoéaon

/ b J \ N a
ovAXeyov oaotéa AevKa Atos KaTaTeOyvnwTOS


OMHPOS
Ilasdos brepO tov Yapirnoovos avTéoo.
HSIOAOS
“Hyets & Au mredtov S1poév Troy uevot AVTWS |
lowev €k VN@V OOOV aud WMoLTLV EXOVTES
1 Ludwich : ovr’ &p, MS, 2 rére, Flach.
57 | (


- dite.”


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


HOMER
“ Heracles unslung his curved bow from his


- shoulders.”’


HESIOD |
“This man is the son of a brave father and a


a weakling—”’


HOMER
“ Mother; for war is too stern for any woman.”
: HESIOD
“ But for you, your father and lady mother lay in


— love—”


HOMER
“ When mor begot you by the aid of oe Aphro-


HESIOD
“ But when she had been made subject in love,


_ Artemis, who delights in arrows—”


_ HOMER

“ Slew Callisto with a shot of her silver bow.”’
HESIOD

*€ So they feasted all day long, taking nothing—”
HOMER

“From their own houses ; for Agamemnon, king


of men, supplied them.”’


HESIOD


«“ When they had feasted, they gathered among


the aes ashes the bones os the dead Zeus-”’


HOMER

« Born ei, that bold and godlike man.’
HESIOD

“ Now we have lingered thus about the plain of


| Simois, forth from the ships let us go our way, upon
| our shoulders—”


577


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


OMHPOS
Pacyava KwTHevtTa Kal atyavéas Sodkvyavrovs.
H3IOAOS |
Pei 39) A an
An TOT aptoThes KovpoL yeipecot DadXacons
OMHPOS
ays > VA b) / 3 he n
TMEVOL ETTUMLEVWS TE ATELPYTAaY WKVAXOV VadY.
H310A02
Konryid’ érevt’ jryovto Kat ei Bacirfa !
OMHPOX
Devbyov, rel yiyvwoxkov avéatiov nO abeusortor.
| H3I0A0%
Avtap émel onmeiody Te Kat éKTrLOV oldpa
Jaracons
OMHPOS


[lovtovropety HuedAov evocéApov ETL VNODV.
cy H=1OAOS
319 Totow S&S ’Atpeidns peyar’ evyeto tacw
oréabar*


OMHPOS
f on) f \ J yy 7
Mydémor év TovTw, Kal dwvnaas Eros Hoa:
H3IOAOz
"Eo Ger, @ Eeivor, Kat mivere® pndé Tis Upméewy
olkacde voothoee hidAnv és TaTpioa yatav


OMHPOX
TTyflinddets AN adtis amnpmoves oixad tkocbe.


IIpos TavTa dé Tov Opnpov Karas dmavrycavtos
Tadw dyotv o Hatodos:

1 Flach follows Nietzsche in transposing this and the
following verse and in reading é7e.@” {ovro.


2 Goettling’s arrangement: Flach assigns the three fol-
lowing verses also to Hesiod.


578


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


HOMER
¢ Having our hilted swords and long-helved spears. ”’


HESIOD

| Then the young heroes with their hands from the

i) sea—”
{ HOMER


“ Gladly and swiftly hauled out their fleet ship.”


* HESIOD
“Then they came to Colchis and king Aétes—’”’


HOMER,
= They avoided ; for they knew he was iihgapitabte
} and lawless.”

: HESIOD
} _ “Now when they had poured libations and deeply
|} drunk, the surging sea—”

HOMER

“They were minded to traverse on well-built ships.”


3 HESIOD

Bs¢The Son of Atreus prayed greatly for them that

C Sy all might perish—’’
beg HOMER

« At no time in the sea: and he opened his mouth


| and said:”’


HESIOD
_ “Hat, my guests, and drink, and may no one of
|| you return home to his dear country—”


HOMER
| “ Distressed ; but may you all reach home again
| unscathed.”


} When Homer had met him fairly on every point
| Hesiod said :


PP 2


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


Tovto te 6 woe povvoy eetpopev@ KaTAXEEOD,
mooco. au Arpeidnow és "Idtov AAOov Ayatot;


0 O€ Sta AOyLoTLKOD TPCBAHpaTOS aToKpiveTaL
ovUT@S’


Lleytyxovt’ Hoa Tupos eoxapat, év dé € ExdoTn
TEVTHKOVT oBerot, mept dé Kpea TEVTKOVTA"
Tpts O€ TpLnKocLoL Trept ev Kpéas Haav Avyatoil.


Tovro 6é eupionerar mAHOos amrla Tov TOV yap
eo Xapov ovoay TEVTNKOVTA, OPEMoKOL YivoVTAL
TEVTAKOGLOL Kal yirLddes B', Kpe@v Sé Sexadvo
pHupiddes  Besvie

Kata wavta 8) Tod ‘Opnpou UTEPTEPOUVTOS
d0ovayv o “Hatodos apxetat Tad:


320° Te Meanros’ ‘Ounp, eitep tiua@at ce Movoa,
@S oyos; trviototo Avs peryaroto Ouyarpes,
Nefov [€T pov evappHolov, ¢ 6 TL 07 Ovnroicr
KAaNMOTOV TE Kal EYOLa TOV: TOEW yap aKovoaL.


CRS

0 6€ hyct:
€ / ' 2
Hoiod’, éxyove Atov, éxovta pe TAUTA KErEVELS

‘a \ \ f > /
elrely' auTAap éy@ dra ToL TpOppwv ayopEevow.
aA va /

KANO TOV Mev TOV ayaa EoTAaL METPOV Eivat
avToV éavT@ TOV O€ KaKwV EXOLoTOV aTraVvTOV.'
BY \ a v4 n fa / > / Distt
ado O€ TAY, 6 TL O@ Oup@ Hirov eotiv, épwra.


HSIOAO= |
Ilas dv dptor’ oixoivto Tones Kal ev OEct
qWoLols;


1 Flach, following Nietzsche, marks a lacuna after this
line.


530


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


“ Only tell me this thing that I ask: How many
Achaeans went to Ilium with the sons of Atreus?”’


gq Homer answered in a mathematical problem,
thus:


“There were fifty hearths, and at each hearth
were fifty spits, and on each spit were fifty carcases,
and there were thrice three hundred Achaeans to
each joint.”


This is found to be an incredible number; for
as there were fifty hearths, the number of spits is
two thousand five hundred; and of carcasses, one
hundred and twenty thousand .. .

Homer, then, having the advantage on every
point, Hesiod was jealous and began again:


“ Homer, son of Meles, if indeed the Muses,


ifs daughters of great Zeus the most high, honour you


as it is said, tell me a standard that is both best
and worst for mortal-men; for I long to know it.”
Homer replied : “‘ Hesiod, son of Dius, I am willing
to tell you what you command, and very readily will
I answer you. For each man to be a standard to
himself is most excellent for the good, but for the
bad it is the worst of all things. And now ask me
whatever else your heart desires.”


HESIOD


“<< How would men best Brel in cities, and with
what observances ?”


591


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD
OMHPOS
Ki po) Kepdaivery amo Tov aioxpav eOéXotev,
of & ayabol tis@vto, dixkn & adtKotow é7reEin.


H3IOAOS |
KiyeoOas dé Oeoiar ti mavtwv éotiv st ;
OMHPOZ |
Edvouv elvat EAUT@ ael Ypovov és TOV aravTa.
H3I0A03
"Ev O° eNAXLoT apiatov exes 6 TL pueTar
ELTTELV;
OMHPOS
‘Os pev eun yvoun, dpéves éeaOral wrrapanity |
avopov.
H3IOAOZ
‘H 8€ étxatocvvn Te Kal avdpetn SvvaTat TI;
OMHPO=
/ F
Kowas wderias idious woxPotoe rropifeww.
H3IOAO3 3
Tas copins dé Ti Téxpap ém@ avOpwrooe
TEPUKEV;
OMHPOS
Y \ fa as A ie~ ae
321 Duyveo new Ta Tapovt op0as, Kkaip@e 6 ap
émrea Oa.
H=IOAOS
Iliotedoat b€ Bpotots mrotov ypéos aEtov éotwv;
OMHPOS
e \ A
Ois avtos Kivduvos emi mpayOetow ernrtat.
HSIOAOS


‘H 8 evdatpovin ti tot avOpwmoiot KadEtTaAL;
OMHPOS
9 id a an
Avrnbévt’ éhayiota Oavety nob évta Te mrEloTa.
582 |


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


HOMER
« By scorning to get unclean gain and if the good
were honoured, but justice fell upon the unjust.”


HESIOD
ee What is the best thing of all for a man to ask of
the gods in prayer?’
HOMER
“That he may be always at peace with himself
continually.”
HESIOD
‘é Gan you tell me in briefest space what is best of
all?”
HOMER :
“ A sound mind in a manly body, as I believe.”


HESIOD
“Of what effect are righteousness and courage ?”’


HOMER
“To advance the common good by private pains.”


HESIOD
“ What is the mark of wisdom among men?”


HOMER
“To read aright the peer and to march with
the occasion.’
HESIOD
‘In what kind of matter is it right to trust in men?”


HOMER

«‘ Where danger itself follows the action close.”
| HESIOD

“ What do men mean by happiness? ”’
; HOMER


“Death after a life of least pain and greatest
pleasure.”


583


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


e UA
Pnbévtwv dé Kal TOUT@Y, ot pev" EXAmves TAVTES


TOV “Opnpov éx€evOV orepavooy, 0 O€ Bactnevs


o22


Ilaveténs éxehevoey EXACTOV TO cade Tov eK TOV
iSi@y Toimpatev eimeiv. ‘Hotodos ovv ébn tpa-
TOS*


TD Aqiadeov “ATAayeve@y ET LTEANOMEVAOV
dpxerO apnrtou, aporowo TE Ovo oevawr

at On ToL VUKTAS Te Kal HuaTa TETT apaKovTa,
rexpipara, aris O€ TE pLTNOfLevou évLaVTOU
patvovras, Ta T para Xapac copevovo GLO pov.
OUTOS TOL TmeOLoy meer au VOLO; ot Te OaXdoons
eyyu0e vareTdoue OL 7 aynea Bnoonevta
TOVTOU KUMALVOVTOS anompoot, mova @ pov
vatovaw" ‘UmvOV oTet peLy, ‘upper dé Bowreiv
yUuLVoV T apdev, OTAY WPLA TAVTA TEA@VTAL.


Me@ ov” Opnpos:


"Audi & ap Atavtas dovovs tatavto Parayyes
¢ 1 ‘
KapTepat, as ovT av Kev’ Apns dvooalto meTENO@v


BA >) / / € \ sf
ovte K “A@nvain Aaogo00s. ob yap apiaTot
cpwvOevtes Tpaas TE KL “Extopa Otov Eptpvov


ppagavres Sopu Ooupi, aK0s cael pole


aomis ap aaoTid Epede, KOpus KOpuV, avéepa &
avnp,

ratov © immoKopor Kopvles Napmpotat Paro.or

VEVOVT@V® as TUKVOL epeotacay aN RoLo Ww.

ep prev be pax POiaipBporos é eyxeinen

paxpats, as etxyov Taperix poas. doce © apepdev

avyn xanKein KopvO@V ATrO NapTOmEevawV

Ocpnxeov TE YEOo UKTOV cAaKewV TE PAELVOV

épKopevev avers. bara Kev Opacvedpouos el,

Os TOTE ynOnoeLEeY (OMY TOVOY OVO AKAXOLTO.


584


|


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD
After these verses had been spoken, all the


i Hellenes called for Homer to be crowned. But
| King Paneides bade each of them recite the finest
} passage from his own poems. Hesiod, therefore,
| began! as follows :


“When the Pleiads, the shee of Atlas, begin


I) to rise begin the harvest, and begin ploughing ere


bi they set. For forty nights and days they are hidden,


| but appear again as the year wears round, when first


if the sickle is sharpened. This is the law of the


| plains and for those who dwell near the sea or live
} in the rich-soiled valleys, far from the wave-tossed
} deep: strip to sow, and strip to plough, and strip to
} reap when all things are in season.”’


Then Homer ?:
“The ranks stood firm about the two Aiantes,


} such that not even Ares would have scorned them
} had he met them, nor yet Athena who saves armies.
} For there the chosen best awaited the charge of the

} Trojans and noble Hector, making a fence of spears
} and serried shields. Shield closed with shield, and
} helm with helm, and each man with his fellow, and
| the peaks of their head-pieces with crests of horse-


| hair touched as they bent their heads: so close they


| stood together. The murderous battle bristled with


| _ the long, flesh-rending spears they held, and ‘the
| flash of bronze from polished helms and new-


| burnished breast-plates and gleaming shields blinded
| the eyes. Very hard of heart would he have been,
| who could then have seen that strife with joy and
| felt no pang.”


1 Works and Days, 383-392.
2 Iliad xiii. 126-133, 339-344.


585


CONTEST OF HOMER AND ie vik


Oavudcaytes O€ Ka év TOUT® Tov" Opnpov oi
“Edges emjvour, WS Tapa TO Tpoo7nKov yeyove-
TOV TOV eTrOV, Kal €xéNevov OLOOVaL THV vikny. 0
d€ Bactrevs TOV Hotodov eo Tepavacey elT@V oi-
KQLOV ELVaL TOV ent ‘yew pyiav Kab etpnuny T poKaov-
juevov wuxay, ov TOV TOAEHLOUS Kat opayas OteEvovTa..
Ths bev odv vikns oOUT@ dact TUxXelv TOV Hatodov
Kal NaBovtTa Tpitroba YarKovy avabeivat Tais
Movcaus émuypapavta:


“Hotodos Movcaars “EXtxwvice Tovd avéOnnev_
ef of, 3 Ma VA la) vA :
Upvo vienoas év Xadkios Oeiov” Ounpov.


Tod 5é ayavos StadvOévtos diémAevcev 0 “Haio-
dos ets Aerdovs ypnoopevos Kal Ths vikns amap-
yas TO Oc avalicwv. mpocepyopmevou O€ avTod

a A ” Id \ oe er
TO VA evGeov yevouernvy THY mpodyTw dacw
EUTrELV"


"OrBt0s obtos avyp, Os €wov 500 dusperronede
‘Hotodos Moveno« TET ULEVOS alavarynaww
Tod 8 Aros Kos €otat, bcov T émixidvatas 7 HOS
adra Aros teptrAako Nepetou Kaddipov ahoos" |
xetOe S€ Tot Oavdtoto TéXOS TETP@péeVOV éoTiV.


‘O. 6éé ‘Hatodos aKova as ToD Xpnop"ov, Ths
Tedomovvycov pep avEeX @pel vopLo as THY éxel
Nepéav tov Oeov heyew, els dé Olvonv TAS: Aoxpt- ,
dos eMOov KaTadvet Tap ‘A ppupaver Kal Tavo-—
KTOPL; Tots Dy yews TALotD, ayvonaas TO joavretov.
0 yep TOTOS OUTOS amas éxaretto Atos Nepetou

323 iepov. dtatpiBis 5€ avT@® TWAELovos yevopevns ev
tots Otvoetaw, vmovonoavtes ot veaviokor THY
adehony avtav poryevew Tov Hotodov, atroxtet-
586 |


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


Here, again, the Hellenes applauded Homer


i: admiringly, so far did the verses exceed the
| ordinary level; and demanded that he should be


| adjudged the winner. But the king gave the crown |
|| to Hesiod, declaring that it was right that he who
called upon men to follow peace and husbandry
should have the prize rather than one who dwelt on


} war and slaughter. In this way, then, we are told,
} Hesiod gained the victory and received a brazen
|| tripod which he dedicated to the Muses with this


inscription :
““Hesiod dedicated this tripod to the Muses of
Helicon after he had conquered divine Homer at.


: ~ Chalcis in a contest of song.”


After the gathering was dispersed, Hesiod crossed
to the mainland and went to Delphi to consult the


7 oracle and to dedicate the first fruits of his victory to
|} the god. They say that as he was approaching the
| temple, the prophetess became inspired and said: |


“Blessed is this man who serves my house,—
Hesiod, whe is honoured by the deathless Muses :
surely his renown shall be as wide as the light of
dawn is spread. But beware of the pleasant grove


| ' of Nemean Zeus; for there death’s end is destined


to befall you.”’
When Hesiod heard this oracle, he kept away
from the Peloponnesus, supposing that the god


‘| meant the Nemea there; and coming to Oenocé in


Locris, he stayed with Amphiphanes and Ganyctor
the sons of Phegeus, thus unconsciously fulfilling the
oracle; for all that region was called the sacred
place of Nemean Zeus. He continued to stay a
somewhat long time at Oenoé, until the young men,
suspecting Hesiod of seducing their sister, killed


587


vavTtes els TO peTakd THs “Axaias * Kab THS Aoxpt-
bos TEAS: KATETOVTLO GD. TOU O€ VEeKpOv Tpt-
TALOU T POS THY ynv v0 dehpiver mpocevexGevtos,
copra TWWOS émuxopiov Tap avTois ovaNS ‘A pias-
yeas,” mares él Tov _airyLarov édpapov Kal TO
THLa yopioayres, eKELVO MeV mevO na avres é0a-
yay, Tous dé poveis avelirouy. o dé poRnbévres
THY TOV TOMTOV OpynVv KaTaon do avTEs adevTt-
Kov oKapos Ove evo ay els Kpyrny: ovs Kara
peéoov TOV Trovv o Levs Kepavvacas KQTETTOV-
TWCEV, OS PNW “AdKoapas év Movaeia. Epa-
toabevns O€ dynaw év ‘Havo8e ° Kripevor Kal
“Avtipov TOUS Dayunnaag éml TH Tpoerpnyevy
aiTig évanrovras 4 opayracbivas deois Tots Eeviors
oT Edpuxdéous TOU aVvTEas. TI pEVTOU ma pbévov,
THY ade pay TOW T POEL PN MEVOV, pera, THD pOopav
EAUTNV avapThcas hbaphvat Oe vTo TLWOS _gevou
ovvooov TOU ‘Hovodov Anpocous dvopa* Ov Kal
avTov dvarpeOivar % bT0 TOV avr Ov dynow. t Borepov


b€


QUTOV Tap QUTOL earpav Kab em éy panrav emt TO
TAP@


l
2
3
4


Stephanus).
588


“AcKpy fev TATPLS TONUMILOS, ANA Javovtos


Kai wept pev “Horodov tocadta: o 6€° Opnpos


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


‘Opxopertor KATA Xpne pov pereveyKay tes


6aTéa TAHET TOS y7 Mwuas KATEXEL |
‘Hovodov, Tov meta Tov év avOp@Trots KES cory \
avopav suambeeemioes év Bacdve mica d


Westermann: EtdSolas, MS.

So MS.: ‘Plov ayvelas, Flach (after Nietzsche).
Goettling : évnmédw, MS.

Friedel: dveAdvras, MS.; avedOdvras, Flach (after


q Pi
ye
Le

i)

1 ee


afte


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


him and cast his body into the sea which separates
Achaea and Locris. On the third day, however, his
body was brought to land by dolphins while some
local feast of Ariadne was being held. There-


} upon, all the people hurried to the shore, and


recognizing the body, lamented over it and buried
it, and then began to look for the assassins. But
these, fearing the anger of their countrymen,


launched a fishing boat, and put out to sea for Crete:


they had finished half their voyage when Zeus sank
them with a thunderbolt, as Alcidamas states in his
Museum. Eratosthenes, however, says in his Hesiod
that Ctimenus and Antiphus, sons of Ganyctor,


} killed him for the reason already stated, and were
} sacrificed by Eurycles the seer to the gods of
| hospitality. He adds that the girl, sister of the
_ above-named, hanged herself after she had been


seduced, and that she was seduced by some stranger,


| Demodes by name, who was travelling with Hesiod,
| and who was also killed by the brothers. At a


later time the men of Orchomenus removed his body
as they were directed by an oracle, and buried him
in their own country where they placed this in-


| scription on his tomb:


“ Asera with its many cornfields was his native
land; but in death the land of the horse-driving
Minyans holds the bones of Hesiod, whose renown
is greatest among men of all who are judged by the
test of wit.”

So much for Hesiod. But Homer, after losing the


589


324


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


GM OTUX@V TIS viKns TE PLEPX 0 [“EVOS edeye Ta
TOU fata, Tp@OTOV bey TIDY OnBaica, Eon Bae
Hy apy}

"Apyos debe, Oea, ToAvdinviov, évOev avaKTes:
3 2 , by «& € 24 Lb
eta Eriyovous, ern [, ov 1 apxn

vov av?’ omroTépwv avopav apxope0a, Modoar.


act yap Ttwes Kal tavdta ‘Opunpov eivat. axov-

\ aA 5) An € J n VA
cgavTes O€ TOV em Ov ol Miéov tov Bacthéws
Tides, EavOos Kat Dopyos, TapaKxanoda ty auTov
emiypaypa TOUo et éml Tov Tapov TOU TAT POS
auT@Vv, ép ov my Trapbevos Narieh tov Miédou
Gavatoy oixtilopevn. Kal Trotet ovT@S:


Xarkén trapévos cipt, Midew o emi onuaros
eat.
got av bdwp Te van Kal dévdpea pakpa tTeOndAy
\ \ VA , NY /
Kab ToTapol TAROwaL, TEepiKNUCH de Odracca,
sf 2-59 \ / : 14 ,
HENLOS 6 ave@y pawn Aapmpa TE cedvn,
QUTOU THOE pevovoa TOAVENAUT DD eri TURBO
onpavéw maptovat, Midns ort HOE TéOaTrrat.


AaBov bé tap avTav diddy apyupay avati-
Onow ev Aedois TO “ATroA\NOML, ETTLYparbas:


oie avak, dapov ToL “Opnpos Kadov éoM@Ka
onow érippoctvais: ov O€é pou KNéEos aiev omatols.


Mera be TaUTa motel THD ‘Odvcceary, € érn M_’,
TET OLNKOS Hon THV ‘Duda eT OV Meg’. Tapa-
ryeVvOLEVOV be éxetOev eis “AOnvas avrov Eevia Ojvat
pace Tapa Médovte TH Baciret TOV ‘AOnvaiwr.
éy 0€ TO Bovreurnpio wuxous OvTOS Kat TUPOS


590


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD
victory, went from place to place reciting his poems ;
|| and first of all the Thebais in seven thousand verses
| which begins: “Goddess, sing of parched Argos
| whence kings... ,” and then the Epigoni in seven
| thousand verses beginning: “ And now, Muses, let
|| us begin to sing of men of later days” ; for some say
| that these poems also are by Homer. Now Xanthus
| and Gorgus, son of Midas the king, heard his epics
} and invited him to compose a epitaph for the tomb
| ‘of their father on which was a bronze figure of a
} maiden bewailing the death of Midas. He wrote
| the following lines :—

“‘T am a maiden of bronze and sit upon the tomb
| of Midas. While water flows, and tall trees put
| forth leaves, and rivers swell, and the sea breaks on
: the shore; while the sun rises and shines and the
| bright moon also, ever remaining on this mournful
| tomb I tell the passer-by that Midas here lies
| buried.”

} For these verses they gave him a silver bowl
+ which he dedicated to Apollo at Delphi with this
| inscription: “ Lord Phoebus, I, Homer, have given
} you a noble gift for the wisdom I have of you: do
| you ever grant me renown.”

|| . After this he composed the Odyssey in twelve
| thousand verses, having previously written the Iliad
in fifteen thousand five hundred verses.!’ From
} Delphi, as we are told, he went to Athens and was
} entertained by Medon, king of the Athenians. And
| being one day in the council hall when it was cold
1 The accepted text of the Ziad contains 15,693 verses ;
| that of the Odyssey, 12,110.


591


325


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


| / / ret Y \ /
KALOMEVOV TYEOLATAaL NEYETAL TOVTOE TOUS OTI-
Yous"


’Avdpos pev otéhavor maides, mUpryot Oe TOANOS,
lormot © aw mredtou KOa 0S, vHes O€ OaXrdaons,
ads 0 ety ayophar KAOHpEvos cic opdaca.
aiPopevou dé mrupos ‘VEpapwrepos oiKos Léa Oat
Hate Yermepim, omoT av veipnot Kpoviwv.


"Exetbev 5€ mapayevopevos ets Kopw0ov, éppa-
poet TA TOUneara. Tipmbels € peydhas Tapa-
yiverau eis “Apryos Kal Reyer éx THs ‘Idsddos Ta
érn Tae’


O07 & "A pryos: 7 eiXov Tipuv0da te TELXLOEC OY

“Eppeovny Tt ’Acivyv te, Baldy Kata Kodo
éxovoas, |

TpouSny’ "Heovas te Kat cpm eNOEVT elbasipos

vijo ov T Aiywav Maonta te xovpor Axaiwv,

Tov avd’ nYyEHoveve Bony arya. os Atopundns

Tudetons, ov TATPOS EXov pévos Oiveidao,

Kab Leveros, Katravjos aryaKrertoo diros VLOS*

totat © a&w Evptmunros tpitatos Kiev, iad0eos
bas,

Myxictéws vios TaXaiovidac avaktos.

éx mavtwv © Hyetto Bony ayalos Avopnons.

TOIoL S dw oyO@xKovTa perauvar vies ero TO"

ev O avopes TONE LLOLO Oanpoves € ca TeX o@vTo

"A pyétos AvoCw@pnxes, KEVTPA TTOAEMOLO.*


Tov dé ’Apyetwv of mpoertnKotes, vUTepBor7
YapevTes el TO eyxwmplatecOar TO yévos avToV
vio Tov évookoTaToU TY ToOlnT@Y, AUTOV meV


1 This and the preceding line are not found in the received
text.


592


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


| sand a fire was burning there, he threw off the
| following lines :

“ Children are a man’s crown, and towers of a city,
horses are the ornament of a plain, and ships of the
sea ; and good it is to seea people seated in assembly.
But with a blazing fire a house looks worthier upon a
wintry day when the Son of Cronos sends down snow.”

From Athens he went on to Corinth, where he
sang snatches of his poems and was received with
distinction. Next he went to Argos and there
recited these verses from the /iad!:

“The sons of the Achaeans who held Argos and
walled Tiryns, and Hermione and Asine which lie
along a deep bay, and Troezen, and Eiones, and vine-
clad Epidaurus, and the island of Aegina, and Mases,
—these followed strong-voiced Diomedes, son of
Tydeus, who had the spirit of his father the son of
Oeneus, and Sthenelus, dear son of famous Capaneus.
And with these two there went a third leader,


i EKurypylus, a godlike man, son of the lord Mecisteus,


sprung of Talaiis; but strong-voiced Diomedes was
their chief leader. These men had eighty dark ships
wherein were ranged men skilled in war, Argives
with linen jerkins, very goads of war.”
This praise of their race by the most famous of
all poets so exceedingly delighted the leading Ar-
: gives, that they rewarded him with costly gifts and


1 ii, 559-568 (with two additional verses).
593


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


wendieiuess Swpeats ériunoa, EiKOva O€ yanr-
kn dvarTnoavTes eynpicavro Jvatav emureheiv
‘Oujpo Kal! Hpepay Kal KaTa pHva Kat Kar
éviavTov, Kab adAAnv Ovotay mevTaeTnpioa Eis
Xioy amootédnew. émiypdgovor ode él Tis
ELKOVOS AUTOD"


@eios “Opnpos 60 é€oTtiv, os “EXXdda TiHy
peydhavyov
Taoav €xoapnoev KadMeTreL coin,
efoxa 6 ‘Apyelous, ot THY Oeoreuxea Tpoiny
pera, TOWN NUKOMLOV Enevys.
ov yapu eoT No ev Of pos peyadon Toes aUTOV
evo dde Kal Tiats audétrer AOavatov.


“Evovatpinpas 6€ TH TONEL Xpovoy Tove Bodeued=
oev els Aijrov els Thy mavnyuply. Kab aTaleis
éml TOV KepaT Lvov Bopov rAéyer Duvoy eis ’Amod-
Awva, OV 7 apxXy’


Mynocopas o06é AGOwmar AtroANWVOS EXATOLO.


pnOévros dé Tod tuvov ot pev “loves roditny
avTov Kowov érrotnocavto, Andtot O€ ypaWwaytes
Ta émn eis NEVKOpA avéeOnKkav év TO THS Aprté-
pusoos tep@. THS O€ Tavnytpews AvVOEions oO
mountns eis “lov érAevoe mpos Kpewpurov Kaxei
vpovov oLéTpiBe mpecBuTNs wv Hon. éml O€ TIS
Jardoons Kabjpevos traidov twav ad andeias
épyopévav, os hace, TUGOMEVOS |


"Avdpes aypns arins 1 Onpyntropes, 4H p Exomér TL;


1 Koechly : am ’Apradlns, MS. (so Flach).
594


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


| set up a brazen statue to him, decreeing that sacrifice


should be offered to Homer daily, monthly, and
yearly ; and that another sacrifice should be sent to
Chios every five years. This is the inscription they
cut upon his statue :

“This is divine Homer who by his sweet-voiced


| : art honoured all proud Hellas, but especially the


| anything?”


Argives who threw down the god-built walls of :
Troy to avenge rich-haired Helen. For this cause
the people of a great city set his statue here and
serve him with the honours of the deathless gods.”
After he had stayed for some time in Argos, he
crossed over to Delos, to the great assembly, and
there, standing on the altar of horns, he recited the


_ Hymn to Apollo* which begins: “I will remember


and not forget Apollo the far-shooter.” When the
hymn was ended, the Ionians made him a citizen of
each one of their states, and the Delians wrote
the poem on a whitened tablet and dedicated it in


' the temple of Artemis. The poet sailed to Ios,


after the assembly was broken up, to join Creophylus,


_ and stayed there some time, being now an old man.


And, it is said, ashe was sitting by the sea he asked
some boys who were returning from fishing :
«Sirs, hunters of deep-sea prey, have we caught


+ Homeric Hymns, iii. ©


; 595
QQ 2


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


elTrovt@p O€ éxelvav

“Ooo éopev AuTOper?’, doa 8 ovy EXopev

hepopeaba, | ;

ov vonaas TO hexGev, 7 pero autTous 6 TL héyotev. -
ot 6€ dacw ev Ghela ev dypeboas pndév, eb Oer-
picOar O€, Kal TOV Oeupav ovs éXaBov KaTaX-
metv, ods dé ovK éXaRov ev Tols imatiots hépetv.
avauvnobeis O€ TOD mavTelov, 6TL TO TENOS AUTOU
HKOL TOU Riou, motel TO TOD Trapou avuTov éri-
ypapLua. avaxop@y be éxeiev, BVTOS mnnrod,
ono Dov Kab TET@V em THY mAeupay, TpiTaios,
as pact, TehevTG. kat éradn ev “I@. éote be TO
ériypappa Téde


"Ev ade THY tepny Kearny KATA yata Kahvaret,
avepav jpwewrv Koopntopa, Beto" ‘Opnpov.


596


CONTEST OF HOMER AND HESIOD


To this they replied :

“ All that we caught, we left behind, and carry
away all that we did not catch.”

Homer did not understand this reply and asked
|| what they meant. They then explained that they
| had caught nothing in fishing, but had been
| catching their lice, and those of the lice which they
| caught, they left behind; but carried away in their

_ clothes those which they did not catch. Hereupon


| Homer remembered the oracle and, perceiving that


|} the end of his life had come composed his own
| epitaph. And while he was retiring from that place,
| he slipped in a clayey place and fell upon his side,


} q and died, it is said, the third day after. He was
} buried in Ios, and this is his epitaph:


“ Here the earth covers the sacred head of divine
Homer, the glorifier of hero-men.”


597


| <Achaeans, xxxii,


dau., daus.
f. = father.
n. = note.


}  Abantes (people of Euboea), 197

} Abantis, island of —, renamed
se @€©53>©Buboea, 273 :

_ Acamas, s. of Theseus, 523


| Acaste, 105, 319


| Acastus, k. of Tolcus, plots the death
| of Peleus, 185

_ Achaea, 183, 265, 589

0.0.41) MD a S19
197; in Crete, 275, 495, 507, 515,
519, 521, 523, 581, 593.


|| Acheloiis (tiver’in Aetolia), 105


i e 4 Achilles, XX 5


shield of —, xxiv,

_ xxvi, xxx; death of —, xxxi ;
contest for arms of —, XXxi,
xxxli; quarrels with Agamem-
NOG. eee | Seva; 8. OF


Peleus and Thetis, 153, 189; edue
cated by Chiron, 199: wounds
Telephus, marries Deidameia,
heals Telephus, 493; quarrels
with Agamemnon, desires to see
Helen, receives Briseis as a prize,
495 ; enraged with Agamemnon,
503, "507: slain by Paris, arms of
—_ "awarded to Odysseus, 509 ;

ghost of — appears to Neopto-
lemus, 511; reaches Scyros, 513,
519; Polyxena sacrificed to —,
523; ghost of — warns Agamem-
non and the Achaeans, 527


} Acmon (one of the Cercopes), 539
| Acria, 261


Acrias, 261
Acrisius, f. of Danaé, 169


| - Actaea, 97
| Actor, 161; f. of Protesilaiis, 195


HESIOD.


INDEX


= daughter, daughters.
Ss. = son. k.=
W. = wife.


king.


Acusilatis, 273; s. of Odysseus and
Penelope, 533

Admete, 105, 310

Admetus, 213 n., 2638, 265; 8. of
Augeias, 517

Adonis, s. of Phoenix, 171

Adrastus, xxix, 173, 217, 485 and


Foran 153; and the Myrmidons,
185, 187; sons of —, 277

Acétes, s. of Helios, 151; f. of
Medea, 153, 209; 271, 579

Aega, 175

a 327; Poseidon lord of —,

Aegaeon, s. of Earth and Sea, aids
the Titans, 481

Aegeum, Mt., 115

Aegeus, f. of "Theseus, 233

Aegimius, doubtful ‘authorship of
the —, xxv, xxix, 271, 273, 275

Aegina, 197, 263, 397, 593

Aegis, the —, 149, 251

Aegis- wearing, passim

Aegisthus, xxxili, 191;
Agamemnon, 527

Aegle, wedded to Theseus, 207; a
Hesperid, 281

Aegyptus, 167, 287

Aéllo (a Harpy), 99

Aéllopus (a th = foregoing), 179

Aeneas, s. of Anchises and Aphro-
dite, 153; significance of name,
419 and n. ; sails with Paris, 491 ;
cattle of — driven off by Achilles,
495; given as a prizeto N eopto-
lemus, and other accounts of —,


599


murders


INDEX


519 and n.; withdraws from
Troy, 52

aes Zeus lord of, 179

Aeolians, their name for the blind,
569

Aeolian, epithet of Smyrna, 469

Aeolic race, sprung from Aeolus,
xxii

Aeolis, xiii, xiv, 49

Acolisms in Hesiod, xiv

Aeolius, 261

Aeolus, g. of Hellen, xxii, 157

Aepy, 355

Aepytus, 209

Aérope, w. of Atreus, 203

Aesagea, "327

Aeschylinus of Pyrrha, f. of Lesches
the Cyclic poet, 517

Aeschylus, 203

Aesepus, 105

Aeson, son of — (Iason), 153, 163 ;
made young by Medea, 527

Aether, s. of Night, 87; f. of
Heaven, 481

Aethiopians, 43 11., 179

Aethiopis (a Cyclic poem), contents

of —, xxxi; by Arctinus of
Miletus, 507, 509

Aéthlius, 161

Aethra (mother of Theseus), 523

Aethusa, 571

Aetna, 141 n.

Aetolia, 157

Africa, 43 0.

Agamedes, Xxxvii; with Tropho-
nius builds temple of Apollo at
Delphi, 345; story of —, 531

Agamemnon, quarrels with Achilles,
death of —, xxxili, 191; woos
Helen for Menelaiis, 193, 195 n. :
s. of Pleisthenes, 203 ; offends
Artemis, 493; quarrels with
Achilles, 495; receives Chryseis
as a prize, 1b. 5 gives feast at
Lemnos, 502n.; daus. of —, 503,
519, 523 ; quarrels with Mene-
laiis about return from Troy,
525; sails from Troy, murdered
by Aegisthus, 527, 577

Aganus, s. of Paris by Helen, 501

Agave, dau. of Nereus, 97 ; dau. of
Cadmus, 151

Age (personified), 95

Ages, the Five — of the world, xvii

Agelaiis, 217


600


Agenor, f. of Phoenix, 171, 517, 519 »
Agias of Troezen, author of the
He dias xxxilil, 525, (as Hegias)


Aglaea (one of the Graces), 145;
wedded to Hephaestus, 149
Aare (one of the Sirens),


Agrius, s. of Odysseus and Circe, 153

Aiantes (the two), 585

Aias (s. of Telamon), contest with
Odysseus, xxxi; madness of —,
XXxii, 197, named after the eagle
sent by. Zeus, 257 and n.; rescues
the body of Achilies, disputes
with Odysseus for arms of Achilles, |
kills himself, madness and death
of —, 509; dispute with Odys- |
seus, ‘burial of —, 513

Aias (8. of Ojileus), Detl Athena,
521; death of —, 527

Aidone us (Pluto), 145, 289, 295;
gives Persephone pomegranate
seed, 315

Aid6és, xxvi, 17 and n.

Alazygus, 189

Alcaeus of Messene, epigram of —
on Hesiod, xvii

Alecaeus, 215, 221.

Alcathoiis, 261

Alcidamas (the
Museum of —,

Alcides, 227

Alcinoiis, 183

Alcmaon, s. of Amphiaratis, 217

Alemene, xxiv ; mother of Heracles
L17,, 149, 219; follows Amphi-
tryon to’ Thebes, 221, 253, 257,


439
Aa (one of the Pleiades), 67,


“Sophist), xli;
89


Alexandrine, Alexandrian, — critic-
ism and Hesiodic poems, xii; —
age, XXViil ; collection of Homeric
Hymns possibly formed in —
period, xxxiv

Alexandrus (Paris) decides the
contest of beauty between the
goddesses, sails to Sparta, para |
off Helen, 491; son of —
Helen, 501; : “slays Achilles, 509.
killed by Philoctetes, 511

Allen (T. W.) and Sikes, Xxxiv,
XXXV N., XxXvilil, xxxix

Aloéus, 157


i) “Alotadae, 157
| Alpheus, 103,
©6871, 372 n., 375, 3


| _ Altes (Homer), 5

_ Althaea (mother fe Meleager), 183,
|| 215, 217 and n.

_ Alus (in Aetolia), 159

| Alycus, slain by Theseus, 501


| Amazon, 507, 509
} - Amphiaraiis, xxix ; sons of —, 193;
14 story of —, 217 and n., 219, 267 ;
| Expedition of — to Thebes attri-
7 buted to Homer, 533
} Amphidamas, funeral games of —,
i Xili, xvi, 51, 517, 571
| Amphidocus, s Ss. of Orchomenus, 283
| Amphilochus, a. 08 Amphiaraiis,
267 ; slain by Apollo, 271
| Amphimachus, 219
a _Amphion, sons of —, 173; builds
| walls of Thebes, 215
| Amphiphanes, murderer of Hesiod,
Xvi, 587
| Amphirho, 105
| Amphitrite, 97,99; present at birth
of Apollo, 331
4 Amphitryon, 103, 221, 223, 225,
me 231, 249, 251, 253

| Ampyee, 233


=o


ar —


ES


| Amyrus, 211
| Amythaon, 163; f. of Melampus,
+ 169; sons of —, 277


i ‘Anaxibia, sister of Agamemnon,
a

} Anchises, xxxviii ; f. of Aeneas, 153;
} loved by Aphrodite, 411, 413, 415,
} 417,419, 421 n.,

| Androgeos: (Burygyes), s. of Minos,


| Andromache, xxvi, 505; given asa
|. prize to Neoptolemus, 519, 523
Antiochus, slain by Memnon, XKX,
me 507% burial of cae)
Antioche, w. of Eurytus, 535
JAntiope, 207, ale


| Antiphus, 589

q Antimachus, Thebais of —, 487 n.
q Antimachus (of Teos), reputed
a Ate oy the Epigoni, xxix
| Anthe, 2

4 nthea, 247


loves Theseus,


218, 219, 287, 355,


|) : INDEX


Anthemoéssa (island of the Sirens),
181


Antron, 325

Apelles, 571

Aphareus, 503

Aphetae (in Magnesia), 255

Aphidna (in Attica), sacked by the
Dioscuri, 501

Aphidnus, k. of Aphidna, 501

Aphrodite, xxxviii, 7, 41, 79;
derivation of her name, 93, 139,
151; carries off Phaéthon, 153,
155, 163, 167 n.; lays curse on
daus. of Tyndareus, 191,193, 221,
223, 259, 297, 339, 407-427
passim; adorned. by the Hours,
427; queen of Salamis and
Cyprus, 435; rivalry with Hera
and Athena, urges Paris to go
to Sparta, 491, 495, 499, 577, and
passum

Apollo, xv and n., xxxvi; born on
a seventh day, 59, 79; patron of
minstrels, 85 ; protector of youth,
105; s. of Zeus and Leto, 145;
f. of Asclepius, 189; slays the
Cyclopes, 191; as prophet, 201 n.;
builds walls of Troy with Posei-
don, 209, 211 n., 213 and n.; slays
Meleager, 217; ‘called Pagasaean,
Boo. Bats plays the lyre amid.
the gods, 935, 253; f. of Chaeron,
259, 261, 271, 275 : Hymns to,
281, 325, 329; claims the lyre,
the bow, and prophetic arts as
prerogatives, 333, 335, 337, 339,
341, 3438, 345; kills the she-
dragon at Delphi, punishes Tel-
phusa, why called Pythian, 351 ;
guides Cretans to Delphi to be
his ministers, 353, 363, 365, 371 ;
seeks cattle stolen by Hermes,
377, 385; pleads against Hermes
before Zeus, 389-391; tries to
bind Hermes, 398, 395; receives
the lyre from Hermes, 399;
gives staff of riches to Hermes,
401, 405; seeks to wed Hestia,
409, 417, 429, 435, 441; temple
of — at Pytho, 449; patron of
minstrels, 451, 453, 489, 507;
aids Paris in slaying Achilles,
509; separates Athena and Ares,
531, 539, 571; dedication to —
by Homer, 591; Homeric Hymn


601


INDEX


to — recited at Delos, 595, and
passim

Apollodorus, 169

Apollonius (of Rhodes) on the Divi-
nation by Birds, xix, 65, 179, 181 ;


eth the Shield of Heracles, 207,


3

AGpGE. "167

Arcadia, 69; Pelasgians in, 175;
Hermes lord of, 363, 441,-445

Arcas, 8. of Callisto and Zeus, 69

Archilochus, xl

Arctinus (of Miletus), possible
author of the Titanomachy, eh Oe
author of the Aethiopis and Sack
of Ilium, xxxi, xxxii, 481, 507,
521, 513, 525

Arcturus, rising of —, 45, 49

Arctus, 223

Ardescus, 105

Areion, the horse of Heracles,
229; the horse of Adrastus, 485
and. n.

Areithotis, 173

Arena, 355

Ares, 13; s. of Zeus and Hera, 147,
149, 183, 205, 207, 215, 219, 225,
227, 233, 243, 245, 249, "O51:
wounded by Heracles, 253, 339,
407; course of — through the
heavens, 433,471, 499,507; f. of

Penthesileia, 509, 511; routs
the army of Odysseus, repelled
ae Athena, 531, 551, 559, 561,
58

Arestor, 261

Arete, w. of Alcinoiis, 183

Argea, peels dau. of Adrastus,

Arges, one of the Cyclopes, 89

Argive, Argives, 193, 197, 199, 257,
487, 593

Argo, 181, 255

Argonauts, xxiii, 175, 181

Argos, 167, 169, 193: (s. of Zeus),

259 ; (3. of Phrixus), 263,
485, 493, 591 ; visit of Homer to
593: decrees honours to

Homer, 595

Argus, watcher of To: 273%
by Hermes, 275

Argus, Slayer of — (Hermes), 318,
315, 339, 369, 385, 391, 393, 415,
421, 425, 441; associated with
FHestia, 455


slain


602


Argyphaea, 355

Ariadne (dau. of Minos), wedded
by Dionysus, 149; deserted by
hig 207, 493; feast of —,


Ae dwelling-place of Kchidna,


Arimi, the, 141 n

Aristaeus, ‘151;
Cyrene, 203

Aristas, 259

Aristarchus, 161

Aristomachus, 261

Aristophanes (of Byzantium), 75

Aristotle, on the Little Iliad, xxxii ;
a the ‘burlesque Homeric poems,


Arnae, 173
Arne, 247, 253
Arsinoé, 189 |
Artemis, XxXxvili, 69, 71, 79; dau. @
of Zeus and Leto, 145, 205 ; ; com-
panion of Persephone, B19 ys
born in Ortygia, 325; hymned
at Delos, 337, 339; unsubdued
by Aphrodite, 407, 415, 415%
drives to meet Apoilo at ’Claros,
435; as huntress, 453; delays
sailing of Greek host to Troy, |
493; transports Iphigenela to —
the land of the Tauri, 495, 505,
ane 577; temple of — at Delos,
Artemisia, queen of Halicarnassus,
xli, 537. |
Asbolus (a Centaur), 233 |
Asclepiades, 189 |
Asclepius, s. of Apollo and Arsinoé, —
189 ; slain by Zeus, 218 ; “healer
of sickness, 441 a
Ascra (in Boeotia), xiii, xiv ; Hesiod |
buried at —, xvi; Hesiod’s father |
settles at —, 51, 567, 589
Asia (dau. of Tethys), 105
Asine (in Laconia), 197, 593
Aspledon, s. of Orchomenus, 283 5 a
AS dau. of Phoebe and Coeus, —


Asterion, k. of the Cretans, 171
Asterope, 0 one of the Pleiades, 67
Astra s..of Crius and Eurybia, |


s. of Apollo and


Astronomy, the for
contents of —, oO |
Astyanax, 8. of 'iettor. killed by |


Astrology),


Neoptolemus, 519; killed by
|. Odysseus, 523 ; death of —, 523
ae R carnols. 517

_ Atalanta, dau. of Schoeneus, 163 ;

} race of — with Hippomenes,
_ xxiii, 165, 167

_ Athamas, 157, 271 n., 281

| Athena, xxxviii, xl; decks Pan-
= dora, 7, 35, 79, 103 ; decks Pan-
dora, 121; dau. of Metis, 143;

born of Metis through head of
Zeus, 147, 149; instructs Eury-
nome, 159, Gl 26a. 4167, 229,
243, 251, 253; birth of —, 347.
407, 413; ; as ‘war-goddess, "437 +

teaches men handicrafts, 447,
453; birth of —, 455, 473 ; rivalry
with Hera and Aphrodite, 491,
497, 499; aids Odysseus to win
the arms of Achilles, 509, 511,
513, 521; plans to destroy the
Greeks, 523 3 causes quarrel
between Agamemnon and Mene-
latis, 525; fights with Ares, 531,
7) @6©>s-5 55, 585,

a Athenaeus, on authorship of the
| Aegimius, xxv, xxix

| Athens, 195; contest in memory
\ of Eurygyes at —, 205, 327, 429
n.; Medea flees from Corinth to
1 —, 535; sacked by the Dioscuri,
a 501: visited by Homer, 591, 593
i Athos, "327

a0 Atlas, f. of the Pleiades, 67; s. of
| #£Japetus, 115; upholds Heaven,
foe 6s117, 138 n., 149, 441

ie Atreidae, 529

| Atreus, 199; grandfather of Aga-
| =memnon ‘and Menelaiis, 203 ;

We sons of —, 277, 529 n., 579, 581
| Atropos, 95 and n., 145 ; chief of
1] . the Fates, 239

me Attic, xxxvi

‘| Attica, 501

| Augeas, 531

| <Aulis, gathering-place of the
| Achaean host against Troy, 51,
‘} Autocane, 327

} poe , powers of thieving of —,


4 ote giial dau. of Cadmus, 99,
| Axion, 517
yj Azan, dau. of —, 339


INDEX


Bacchic (a title of Dionysus), 447

Bacchylides, 171, 217 n., 281

Badness, the way to —, 25

Battle of the Frogs and Mice
(Batrachomyomachia), author-
ship of the —, xli, 537, 543

Battles, offspring of Strife, 97

Battus, story of —, 263, 265, 267
and n.

Bear-warden, the —


69
Beetle (agricultural implement), 35


Beety (a Frog) 557
Bellerophon, slays Chimaera, 103 ;
s. of Poseidon, slays Chimaera,


159

Belus, f. of Thronia, 167

Bia (Force), child of Styx, 107

Biblis, wine of —, 47

Blackbottom (Heracles), 539

Blame, child of Night, 95

Boebian Lake, the —, 211

Boeotia, Boeotians, new form of
Epic in —, x, xiv, 173, 175, 215,
OS. 265, 981, 487 n.

Boeotian School, origin of —, xi,
xii; poems of —, xii, Xxv

Boneless One, the — (octopus), 41

Bootes, the Bear- warden, sc. Arcas,
s. of Callisto, 69

Boreas, xxvii, 41, 43; s. of Astraeus,
“107, 143; ‘ sons of - —, 179 and n.,


203

Bread-nibbler (a Mouse), 545, 549,
557, 559

Bread-stealer (a Mouse), 561

Brewer (a Frog), 557

Briareos, s. of Heaven, 89 ; (Obria-
meus), 125, Labs weds Cymopolea,

3


Briseis, the prize of Achilles, 495

Brontes, one of the Cyclopes, 89

Bronze, use of — in the Third Age
of the World, 13; invented by
the Idaean Dactyls, T¢

Brygi, war of the — with Thespro-
tians, 531

Butes, 205, 259

Byzantine ‘interpolations, xli


Cabbage-climber (a Frog), 559

Cabbage-eater (a Frog), 557

Cadmeans (Thebans), destroyed by
Sphinx, 103, 219, 489

Cadmus, land of — (Thebes), 15;


603


INDEX


weds Harmonia, 149; daus. of —,
151; men of —, 221, 269, 433,
485; descendants of —, 489

Caeneus, 231

Caicus (river in Mysia), 105

Calais, s. of Boreas, 179 n.

Calchas, death of —, 267 and n.; at
Aulis, 493 and n.; at Colophon,
527

Callichorus, a spring near Eleusis,
309

Callidice, 297; eldest dau. of
Celeus, 299; queen of the Thes-
protians, marries Odysseus, 531

Callimachus, epigram of — on the
Taking of Oechalia, 533 ;

Calliope, chief of the Muses, inspirer
of eloquence, 85, 459, 569, 571

Callirhoé, 101, 055 wedded by
Chrysaor, 151; 319

Callithoé, 297

Callisto, dau. of Lycaon, 69, 71, 577

Calyce, 161

Calydon, boar of —, 215, 217 and n.

Calypso, 105, 153; loves Odysseus,
155, 319; son of — by Odysseus,
533

Camilla, 211 n.

Capaneus, slain by Zeus, 561, 593

Capetus, 261

Capherides Rocks, storm at —, 527

Carpathos, 327 ‘

a aN 491; violated by Alias,

u


Cassiopea, 171

Castor, 191, 193, 195, 441; tamer
of horses, 461; slain by Idas,
491; of mortal nature, 499;
wounded by Aphidnus, 501, 503

Catalogues of Women, appended to
the Theogony, xxi; contents and
nature of —, xxii; interpolated
episodes in —, xxiii; ending of
—, XXiv

Cebrenians, 471

Code guides Orion when blinded

Celaeno (one of the Pleiades), 67

Celaenus, 219

Celeus, lord of Eleusis, 295; s. of
Eleusis, daus. of —, 297, 299, 301,
305; buildsa temple for Demeter,
311; instructed by Demeter in
her mysteries, 323

Celmis (an Idaean Dactyl), 77


604


Cenaeum, 341

Centaur, Centaurs, xx, 185; battle
of — with Lapithae, 233, 381;
slain by Heracles, 553

Cephalus, husband of Eos, 153;
s. of Deion, an Athenian, 489

Cephisus, 173, 341

Cephisian Lake, 345

Ceramicus, the — at Athens, 205

Cerberus, the hound of Hades, 101,
103, 1385

Cerceis, 105

Cercopes, the two —, xl, 539 and n.

Cercops of Miletus, possible author
of the Aegimius, xxv, 275

Ceto, 97, 99, 103 i |

Ceyx, k. of Trachis, xxiv, 245;
buries Cycnus, 253; the Marriage
of —, 255 |

Chae s. of Apollo and Thero, |

ae first of all beings, 87, 131,


Chalcis (in Euboea), xili, xv ; war
between — and Hretria, xvi, 51,
271; (in Peloponnesus), 355;
contest of Homer and Hesiod at
—, 571, 573, 587

Chalcidians, xvi, 573

Chalcodon, 197, 261

Chariclo, w. of Chiron, 483

Charites (Graces), daus. of Zeus,


Chians, xxxvii; claim Homer for
their countryman, 567

Chimaera, slain by Bellerophon,
103, 159, 351

Chios, sacrifice in honour of Homer
sent from Argos to —, 595; the
blind poet of —, 337

Chiron (the Centaur), Precepts of —,
XV, xx, 72; educates Medeus, 153;
educates Iason, 163; educates
Achilles, 199, 475; s. of Cronos
by Philyra, 485; gives Peleus a
spear-shaft, 497

Chryseis, dau. of Ocean and Tethys,
105, 319; the prize of Agamem-
non, 495, 505

Chrysaor (Golden-Sword), 101; f.
of Geryones, 151

Cilicia, 141 n.


a gnome, the plague of ff.


| Contest


INDEX


| a Cinaethon, author of the Story of


Oedipus, 483

Circe, xxxiii; dau. of Helios, Lo,
153, Lok 475 ; marries Telema-
chus, 531

Circuit a the Earth (a Hesiodic
poem), xxiii, 179


ee Cirrha, 175


Claros, Calchas dies at —, 267, 327 ;
the seat of Apollo, 435

Cleisidice, 297

Cléeia (one of the Hyades), 69


| Gleio (one of the Muses), 83


Cleobulus of Lindus, author of the
** Homeric ”’ epigram on Midas,


leads: Bel

Cleanthes, 567

Cleolla, mother of Agamemnon and
Menelaiis, 203

Clotho (one of the Fates), 95 and n.,
145, 239

Clymene, 105; dau. of Ocean,
weds Iapetus, 117; dau. of
Minyas, 209

Clymenus, s. of Oeneus, 217 ;
Orchomenus, 283

Clytaemnestra, false to Agamem-


8. of


non, 191; aids Aegisthus to
murder Agamemnon, 527

Clytie, 105

Clytius, 207

Cnidos, 327


Cnossus (in Crete), 353, 359
_ Coéus, s. of Heaven, 89;
1 Phoebe, 109, 329
j Colchis, 271 n., 579
- Colophon, 267 n.; destruction of —,
fee ; Teiresias buried at —, 527,


weds


| Colophonian, the — author of the
= ales 529; claim to Homer,


Communion by ritual-draught in
Eleusinian mysteries, 303 and n.
of Homer and Hesiod,

composite nature of —, main con-
eae of —, xli, xlii; value of —,
Continental Greece, Epic poetry
in —, x, xiii, xxxiv
Corinthus, Isthmus of — eesti, 197,
265; Medea kills Creon at =,
1 535; visit of Homer to —, 593
1 Coronis (one of the Hyades), 69, 189,


211; dau. of Phlegyas, weds
Ischys, 213; bears Asclepius to
Apollo, 441

Corycus, 327

Coryphasium (Pylos), Hermes hides
Apollo’s cattle at —, 265

Cos, 327

Cottus, 8. of Heaven, 89; bound by
Cronos, released by "Zeus, £25,
127, 131; lives in Tartarus, 133.


139

Cratos (Strength), 107

Crane, the, 37

Creon, k. of Thebes, 225; f. of
Haemon, 483 ; of Corinth,
poisoned by Medea, 535

Creophylus (of Samos), reputed
author of the Taking of Oechalia,
533, 535, 595

Cretans, Xxxvi; ministers of Apollo
at Delphi, 353, 357; paean-
singers, 361

Crete, 71, 77, 115, 151, 171, 197, 275,
297, 337, 357, 491, 547, 589

Cretheis, mother of Homer, 567,
569

Cretheus, s. of Aeolus, 157, 163

Crinacus, s. of Zeus, 183

Crisa, 343, 345, 355, 306

Crisaeans, 357


Crius, of Heaven, 89; weds
‘ae, 107

Croakerson (a Frog), 559

Croiset, MM., xv, xxx, xl

Crow, life of the —, 75

Cronius, 261

Cronos, "story of —, xxi; reigns in


the Golden Age, "V1; : rules. over
the departed heroes, 15, 793 over-
come by Zeus, 83; s. of Earth
and Heaven, 89 ; * plots against
Heaven, 91; mutilates his father,
93, 109 swallows his children,
113; swallows a stone in place
of Zeus, vomits up his children,
1 ate confines Briareus, Cottus,
and. Gyes, 125, 127, 141, 349, 407
and n.; dau. of — (Hestia), 457 ;
£208 Chiron by Philyra, 483

Cronos, son of —, passim

Crotalus, 261

Crumbesnatcher (a Mouse), 454 ff.

Cruni, 355

Crudebake, a gnome harmful to
potters, 473


605


INDEX


Ctesippus, 217

Ctimenus, 589

Cuckoo, the —, 39

Curetes, 277

Cyanus, 231 n.

Cybele, mother of the gods, 439

Cychreus, the snake of —, 207

Cycle, the Epic — | meaning of the
term, Xxix

Cyclic poets, date of the —, xxvi;
erate of, xxxi, 501, 515,

2

Cyclopes, the names of —, 89;
killed by Apollo, 191, 213 n. 4
sons of Karth and Heaven, 481

Cycnus, s. of Ares, killed by Hera-
cles, xxiv, 225-253 passim ; s. of
Poseidon, slain by Achilles, 495

Cyllene (in Arcadia), 67; Hermes
lord of —, 368, 375, 387, 441

‘Cyllenian (Hermes), 385, 387, 391,
3938, 441

Cymatolege, 99

Cyme (in Aeolis) xiii; home of
ade aly father, 49, 467, 469 and


Opn. 99

Cymopolea, dau. of Poseidon, w.
of Briareus, 139

Cymothoé, 97

Cynaethus of Chios, reputed author
of the Delian part of the Hymn
to Apollo, xxxvii

Cynthus, a hill in Delos, 325, 327,
335

Cypria, doubtful authorship of —,
Xxxli; contents of —, xxxii,
Xxxili, 185, 201; first poem in the
Trojan Cycle composed by
Stasinus, 489; given by Homer to
Stasinus as a dowry, Hegesias
possible author of —, 497, 503,
505, 507

Cyprian, the (Aphrodite), 273, 407

Cyprian Histories (the Cypria)

Cyprogenes (Aphrodite, the
** Cyprian-born ”’), 93

Cyprus, 77, 983, 411, 427, 431;
birthplace of Aphrodite, 435 ;
Helen in —, 501, 569

Cyrenaean, 533

Cyrene, xxxiii, 213, 531

fae nie the comrade of Theognis,


Grtibie: 93
606


407, 419, 4
Cytisorus, 3. of Pirixus, 263


Cytherea Cipher 93, 149, 153, —


Dactyls, the Idaean, 77
Daémon, 569
Dammameneus (an Tdastn Dactyl),


Danaé, 169, 235, 237

Danai, 219, 511, 519

Danaiis, 167

Dardania (land of Troy), 511
Dark-haired One (Poseidon), 99
Darkness of Death, 239
Dardanus, s. of —, (Anchises), 419;


Palladium given to — by Zeus, 523
Daughters of Leucippus (a Hesiodic


poem), xxiii, 191
Day, dau. of Night, 87; journey-
ings of —, 133
Day-sleeper, the — (the burglar), 47
Dawn (see also Hos), 49, 113, 387
Death, seizes the Brazen Race, 13,
95; the brother of Sleep, 135
Deceit, 95


Deianeira, and the poisoned robe, —


217

Deidameia, dau. of Lycomedes, 493

Deion, 209; an Athenian, 4389

Deiphobus, marries Helen, 511%
slain by Menelatis, 521

Delas, the inventor of bronze-
smelting, 77

Delians, 595

Delian Hymn to Apollo, festival,
choirs, xxxvi, 335 f.


Delphi, xvi, xxxvi, xxxvii; temple !


of Apollo at —, 453, 489, 517 n.,
571, 587, 591


Delphians, anoint the stone swal- —


lowed by Cronos, 115


she et (title of Apollo), 353 n., |


Delos, Xv, Xxxvi, Xxxvii; contest —


of Homer and Hesiod at —, 281 ;
Apollo born at —, 325, 327, 329,


331, 333; the special delight of |


Apollo, girl-choirs at —, 335, 337 ;
Homer recites the H
Apo on the Altar of Horns at


Demeter, story of — and Perse- |


phone, xxxv, 5, 25, 31, 47, 63;


wedded to Zeus, 145 - wedded to |


ymn to


ae


ee


INDEX


fasion, 151; receives the snake of
Cychreus at Hleusis, 207, 231,
289; seeks Persephone, 293 ;

wroth with Zeus, 295; received
by Metaneira at Hleusis, drinks
the ritual potion, 303; nurses
Demophoon, 305 ; places Demo-
phoodn in the fire, 307 ; resumes
her shape, 309; temple of — at
Eleusis, 311; ‘causes a famine,
Suns refuses to obey the~sum-
mons of Zeus, 313, 315; meets
Persephone, - B17, "391; allows
the fruits of the earth to grow
again, instructs the Hleusinians
in her mysteries, 323; bears the
horse Areion to Poseidon, 485 n.


' Demo, 297

‘Democritus (of Troezen), 569
~Demodes, 589

-Demodoce, 171
- Demodocus, Lay of —, contrasted


with the Hymn to Aphrodite,
XXXVI |


Demophon, s. of Theseus, 519, 523


Demophodn, s. of Celeus, nursed
by Demeter, 305, 307


Deo (Demeter), 293, 303, 325
_ Descent of Theseus into Hades, a


Hesiodic poem, xxiii


_ Desire (Himerus), 83, 93
Destinies, 95
- Deucalion, xxii ;


s. of Prometheus,


155, 157; s. of Minos, 197, 209


i Dias, f. of Cleolla, 203


[3 Dictys, 6.01 Magnes, 157


-Diomedes,


Didaeon, 8. of Eurytus, 207


‘Didymus, 535
_ Dike (Justice), 145
-Diocles, Dioclus, a prince of Hleusis,


bo]


' Diodorus Siculus, mentions a collec-


tion of Hymns, XXxXiv

cae O08: 6 brings
Philoctetes fro Lemnos,’ aids
Odysseus to steal the Palladium,
511; returns home from Troy,
525; followers of —, 593


q Dione, 79; dau. of Tethys, 105 ;
_ -present at birth of Apollo, 331
Dione ian element at Eleusis,
XXXvi


Dionysus, xxxvili, 49; s. of Zeus


and Semele, 149; weds Ariadne,
149; rites Of a! 169, 211; gives


grapes to men, 249; birthplace
of —, 287 and n.; adventure of
— with pirates, 429-433 ;
Bacchic, 447; reared ang accom-
panied by Nymphs,

Dioscuri, 1615; sack Richa! 501

Disputes, offspring of Strife, 97

Divination by Birds, the — , attached
to the Works and Days, rejected
by Apollonius Rhodius, probable
purpose of —, xix, 65

Dius, supposed f. of Hesiod and
Perses, xii, 571, 581

Dodona, ‘oracle at —= 215; the oak-
grove "at —, 279

Dogs, treatment of —, 47; taming
ob Ol, 401

Dolichus, a prince of Eleusis, 299

Doom, s. of Night, 95

Dorian race sprung from Dorus,
xxii

Dorians in Crete, 275


Doris, w. of Nereus, 97; dau. of
Nereus, ab.; dau. ‘of Tethys and
‘Ocean, "105


Dorus, s. of Hellen, xxii, 157
Dotian plain, 441

Dotium, 211

Doto, 97

Doso, assumed name of uel ety
Dread, attendant of Ares, 253
Dreams, offspring of Night, 95
Dres, 571

Dryalus (a Centaur), 233
Dryas (a Lapith), 231

Dryops, 445

Dulichium, 355

Dyme, 355

Dynamene, 97


Earth, xxi, xxix; causes death of
Orion, 71; source of the Race of
Silver, 5, 79, 81, 87; second of
the three primeval beings, 87 and
n.; plots against Heaven, 91;
mates with Sea, 97, 109, 113;
receives Zeus from Rhea, 115;
keeps thunder and lighthing
hidden, 117, 127, 131; gives
birth to Typhoéus, 139 ; prompts
the gods to make Zeus their king,
143, 321, 349, 351; the Mother
of All, who enriches men, 457,


607


INDEX


471; union of — with Heaven,
481, 501
Sa (Poseidon), 79, 259,


Earth-shaker (Poseidon), 53, 79,
111; s. of Rhea and Cronos, 113,
149, 227, 259, 449; gives gitts of
healing to Machaon and Poda-
leirius, 525

Echemus, k. of Arcadia, deserted
by his wife Timandra, 191

Echidna, dwelling of —, mother of
Orthus and Cerberus, 101;
pnCupen of the Lernaean Hydra,


Echinades Islands (off coast of
Acarnania), 179

Echo, 445

HKgypt, 431 ; Menelaiis i iW, O26

Egyptians, 43 n.: mode of thresh-
ing amongst the ‘modern —, 63
a ; cosmology of the ancient. —,

5 R..

Hileithyia, dau. of Zeus and Hera,
147, 331; assists at birth of
Apollo, 333

Kion, 517

Eione, dau. of Nereus, 99

Eiones, 593

Hirene (Peace), 145

Hiresiae, 327

eo mother of Tityos by Zeus,
173

Elatus, one of the Lapithae, f. of
Ischys, 213; s. of — (Ischys), 339

Electra, one of the Pleiades, 67 ;
dau. of Ocean, mother of Tris
and the Harpies by Thaumas,
99; a river-nymph, dau. of
Tethys and Ocean, 105, 319

Electryon, 217 n., 019; dau. of
(Alemena), Bail, 207

Hlephenety of Euboea, woos Helen,
19


Eleusis, xxxv; snake of Cychreus


aes 207; f. of Celeus, 297, 311,

39

Eleusinian, Hleusinians, Xxxv,
XXXVI; War amongst the —, 309 ;


— mysteries, 303 ‘and role 323
Eleuther, hills of —,- the domain of
Mnemosyne, 83
Elis, 261, 355, 531
i gs. of Kos and Tithonus,


608


Emulation, one of the two Strifes,
Xvili

Enceladus, s. of Tartarus and Earth,
overthrown by Zeus, 561 |

Endymion, gs. of Zeus and Calyce, |
161 ; “ ay from Heaven into ©
Hades, 2

Enienae, sa

Ree w. of Creon k. of Thebes,


Envy, the curse of the Iron Age, 17.

Enyo, one of the Graiae, 99 |

EKoiae, the —, part of the Catalogues
of Women, xxii; meaning of the
title, xxiii, xxiv


Kos (Dawn), 79; dau. of Hyperion, — !


107 ; bears Memnon to Tithonus,


Phaéthon to Cephalus, 153, 377; jy


story of — and Tithonus, 421-
423) Cah.
Euryphaéssa, 459; obtains im-
mortality for Memnon, 507

Hee (the Morning Star),
0


ape Epeians, 183; rulers of Elis,
ae, builds the Wooden Horse,
Ephorus on the Pelasgi, 175


Epic, the early Greek —, three fl


periods of —, ix, xi; — Cycle,
the beginning of the, 481, 189 1
Epicasta (otherwise Polycasta),
dans of Nestor, mother of Homer,


569
Epa 197; s. of Argos, 257,
Epigoni (i) a poem of the Epic


Cycle, xxix; attributed to
Homer, 487 ; composition of, 591


(ii) “* The After-born, ” send first-_ |


fruits of the spoils from Thebes —
to Delphi, 489
Epimetheus, receives Pandora from
Zeus, 9; s. of Iapetus and


Clymene, how he did mischief to |


men, 117
Epiphrades, 571


Epithalamium of Peleus and Thetis, Mii


a Hesiodic poem, xxiii
Hngpeur , Story of —, told by Nestor,


Erato, one of the Muses, 83, 97
Eratosthenes, the Hesiod of —, 589
Erebus, s. of Chaos, 87; (as a


of Hyperion and fH!


region) Menoetius cast down to —,

mm (107;-127, 313; 315

ee rechtheus, f. of Sicyon, 205

| Eretria, war between— and Chalcis

14 for the Lelantine plain, xvi

| Hreutheus, rival of Apollo, 339

_ Erginus, sons of — (Trophonius and
Agamedes), 345

| Eriboea, w. of Telamon, 257 n.

, Eridanus, s. of Tethys and Ocean,

e103, 543

| Erigeneia (Hos, the “‘ Karly-born ’’),


07
| 4 rinyes (the Furies), assist at birth
|} of Horcus (Oath), 63; spring
from the blood of Heaven, 93 ;
} Erinys, see Fury
pTiopis, dau. of Mn olis and Arsinoé,
} Eriphyle, w. of Amphiaraiis, 217 n.
| Eris (Strife), mother of Horcus
. (Oath), 6
| Eros (Love), one of the three prime-
| val beings, xxi, 87, 95
| Erythea, one of the Hesperides,
om 101, 151, 281
\ z teocles, 5. of Oedipus, xxix, 269
1 Eteoclus, s. of Cephisus, 173
‘ ‘Ethiopia, 215
| Ethiopians, 153
_Etruscans, 429 n.
| Euaechme, 259
-Euaemon, 519
} Euagore, 99
| Euanthes, 211 *
| Euarne, 99
13 uboea, ill, KXV, 51,°73,197,.271,
ae 273 and n., 327, 341, 571
Eucles, 571
| Eucrante, 97
“Eudora, one of the Hyades, 69;
» dau. of Nereus, 97; . dau. of
Ocean, 105
‘Euenus, 105
Eugaeon, 569
‘Eugammon, of Cyrene, author of
& the Telegony, XXxiili, 531
-Eugnatho, 569
eh Eulimene, 97


reputed


} Eumelus, of Corinth,

| author of the Titanomachy,
xxix, 481

‘| Eumolpus, a prince of Eleusis,


: KX Vw ere
Eunice, 97


HESIOD


INDEX


Kunomia (Order), 145

Euphemus, s. of Apollo and Mecio-
nice, 259, 571

rita ie one of the Graces,

1

Kupompe, 97

Euripides, 205 n., 313 n.

Euripus, 341

Europa, carried off by Zeus, 105,
171, 547


Europe, 343, 345


Buryale, dau. of Minos, mother of
Orion, 71; one of the Gorgons,


EKuryalus, 261

Kuryanassa, 219

Eurybia, dau. of Sea and Earth, 97;
weds Crius, 107

Eurybius, s. of Electryon, slain by
the Taphians, 219

Eurycles the Seer, sacrifices Cti-
menus and Antiphus the mur-
derers of Hesiod, 589


‘Kurydice, dau. of Lacedemon, 169


ayo ape first wife of Oedipus,
eb (Androgeos), 8. of Minos,


Eurylochus and _ the
Cychreus, 207

Hurymachus, 261

Eurynome, 105; mother of the
Graces, 145; dau. of Nisus, 159

Eurynomus, a daemon in Hades, 529

Euryphaéssa, w. of Hyperion, 459

Eurypylus, s. of Telephus, aids the
Trojans, slain by Neoptolemus,
511; slays Machaon, 515, 519;
a leader of the Argives, 593

Hurystheus, 227; imposes labours
on Heracles, 439

Boron herdsman of Geryones,
1

Eurytus, s. of Stratonica, 207, 533;
k. of Oechalia, 535

Evil One, the —, 291 n.

Exadius, ‘one of the Lapithae, 233


snake of


Fable, the — of the Hawk and the
Nightingale, Xviil, 19

Fallow-land, 37

Famine, 97

Far-shooter, the.— (Apollo), 335,
3438, 379, 381, 395, 401, 435, 449


609


INDEX |


HAS OnE the — (Apollo), 387,


9

Fate, child of Night, 95, 231

Fates, 9; names of the — (Desti-
nies), 95 and n., 145, 237; names
of the —, 239, O57

Fear, 149, 231, 2338, 237

Felloe, the making of a —, 35

Fightings, offspring of Strife, 97

Fire, hidden by Zeus, stolen for
men by Prometheus, Peas te
invented by Hermes, 371

Fire-sticks, say SneS by Hermes,


371
Flight, 231, 233
Forgetfulness, child of Strife, 97
Friendship, child of N ight, 95
Frogs, 543-563 passim
Fury (Erinys), hears the curses of
Oedipus on his sons, 485


Galaxaura, dau. of Tethys and
Ocean, 105, 319

Galatea, dau. of Nereus, 97

Galene, "dau. of Nereus, 97

Ganyctor, (i) s. of Amphidamas,
571; (ii) s. of Phegeus, murderer
of Hesiod, Xvi, 587, 589

Ganymedes, carried off to be the
cup-bearer of Zeus, 421, 515

Geb, the Egyptian counterpart of
Earth, 93 n.

Gelding, the right season for —, 61

Gerenon in Messenia, 163

Geryones, s. of Chrysaor, slain by
Heracles, 101, 151

Geoponica, the, 367 n.

Giants, xxi; spring from the blood
of Heaven, 93; War of the —,
483, 543, 55D, 561, 575

Give (personified), 29

Glauce, 97

Glauconome, 99

Glaucus, (i) s. of Sisyphus and f. of
Bellerophon, 159; (ii) the herds-
man, 471

Glechon (in Boeotia), 173

Glenus, s. of Heracles, 217

Gnawer (a Mouse), 561

Goettling, on the significance of the
name ‘‘ Hesiod,” xiv

Goodness, the path to —, 25

Gorga, dau. of Oeneus, 217

Gorgus, s. of Midas, 591


610


-Halicarnassus, 573


i {age


Is


Gorgons, the —, daus. of Phoresll
and Ceto, names of, 99; head of
the Gorgon (Medusa), 937 live
in the isle of Sarpedon, 505

Graces, 75; companions of P|
Muses, 83; daus. of Zeus, 145,
149 ; worshipped by Eteocius a
Orchomenus, 173, 193,213, 339
41; dance of the — at Delphi, |
453; deck Aphrodite, 499 I |

Graecus, s. of Zeus and Pandora,


5


ae daus. of Ceto and Phoreys, |


Granicus, river in Mysia, 105 {
Great Hoiae, the, subject of, xxiv 3
by a Thessalian or Boeotian |
author, xxv, 257-263, passim —
ee Works, nature of the —, er


Greeks, origin of the name, 156,
495, 521, 523, 573

Guide, the — (Hermes), 417,421 §

Gyes, one of the Hundred-handed :
Giants, s. of Heaven, 89; bound
by Cronos, released by Zeus, 125,
131 ; lives in Tartarus, 133, 139%


Hades (Pluto, Aidoneus), seizes
Persephone, xxxv, xxxvii, 13,
103; s. of Rhea and Cronos, 113;
home of —, 135, 141, 201, 231;
cap of —, 237, 239, 261; ; carries q
off Persephone, 295, 313, 315, 317,8
383 n., 417, 485 ; terrors of —, |
529, 559, 573 |

Hadrian, the Emperor, xli; con-
sults the Delphic oracle as tog
Homer’s birthplace and parent-§
age, 569

Haemon, es of Creon, slain by
Sphinx, 4

Hanieg ne the — (the snake), 20

Halcyone, w. of Ceyx, xxiv

Baers river in Macedonia, |


Haliartus, in Boeotia, xxxvi, 175
Halie, dau. of Nereus, 97
Halimede, dau. of Nereus, 99
Halirrhothius, 8. of Perieres, 189
Ham-gnawer (a Mouse), 545
Ham-nibbler (a Mouse), 557
Harpies, the —, xxiii, 99, 167;


INDEX


 Phineus delivered from — by
Zetes and Calais, 179, 181


| Harpys, river in Peloponnesus, 179
i Harmonia, dau. of Ares and w. of


Cadmus, 149, 151, 339

Harvesting, 31, 45, 61

Heaven, xxi, xxix; husband of
_ Earth, 81; ‘offspring and husband
of Earth, 87; imprisons his
children, 91; mutilated by
Cronos, 92; calis his sons Titans,
95,113; sons of —, 117, 127, 129,
131, 143, 145; sons of —, 31 19,
331, 349 ; husband of Barth, 457 ;
union of — with Earth and their

ofispring, 481

i) Heaven, Sons of —, passim

} Hebe, dau. of Zeus and Hera, 79,

if 147 ; w. of Heracles, 149, 339, 439

1 Hecataeus, 157

i| Hecate, dau. of Perses and Asteria,
honoured by Zeus, her preroga-
tives, 109-111, 205 ; mother of
Scylla, 263 ; dau. of Persaeus,
hears cry of Persephone when
carried off by Pluto, 291; gives
Demeter news of Persephone,
293; nurse of the young, 473
and n.

Hecaterus, daus. of —, 275

Hector, XXvi; slays ’ Protesilaus,
485; burial of —, 509, 519, 585

Hegesias of Salamis in Cyprus,
possible author of the Cypria,

iv xxxii, 497

| Hegias (se. Agias), author of the
Returns, XXxili, 527

Helen, rape of —, xxxii; cause of
Trojan war, 15; birth op 191,
195, 197; won by Menelaiis,
bears Hermione, 199, 205 ; carried
off by Paris, 491 ; dau. of
Nemesis and Zeus, "499 ; sur-
render of — demanded by the
Greeks, 501; carried off by
Theseus, 501; married by Dei-
phobus, 511, 519, 521, 595

Helenus, s. of Priam, 491;
tured by Odysseus, 509

| Helice, 247, 253

|  Helicaon, 517

} Helicon, Mt. —, in Boeotia xiii,
xvii, 51; Muses appear to
Hesiod on —, 81; Poseidon lord
of —, 449, 543, 567, 587


cap-


Heliconian Muses, 79

Helios (the Sun), xxxiv; cures
Orion of his blindness, 71, 79 ;
s. of Hyperion, 107; weds:
Perseis, 151; f. of Circe, 153;
hears cry of Persephone carried
off by Hades, 291, 293; tells
Demeter of the rape of Perse-
phone, 295, 351; sheep of —,
353, 391; stays his horses at birth
of Athena, 455; the birth and
course of —, 459

Hellanicus, 567

Hellas, 51, 79, 183, 493, 595

Helle, sister of Phrixus, 177

Hellen, ancestor of the Hellenic
race, xxii; s. of Deucalion, 155;
sons of —, 157

Hellenic, genealogies of the — race,
XXil, 155, 495, 519

Hellenes, 43, 169, 275, 505, 511, 513,


Hephaestus, forms Pandora, 7, 71;
forms Pandora, 121, 141; crafts-
man, s. Of Hera, 147; weds
Aeglaea, 149; greaves of Heracles
made by —, 229, 237, 241, 243;
cast into the sea by Hera, 347,
373; teacher of human crafis,
447, 497

erat ee river — (“ Seven-
fords ’’), 1

Hera, Ee at by the Muses, 97;
sets the Nemean -lion against
Heracles, 103 ; dau. of Rhea and
Cronos, 113; w. of Zeus, quarrels
with Zeus, bears Hephaestus,
147, 149, 187; beloved by
Endymion, 261, 269; sets Argus
to watch Io, 2738, 287; keeps
Hilithyia from aiding Leto, 331;
gives Typhaon to the she-dragon
of Pytho to nurse, 345 ff., 365,
409; sister and wife of Zeus, 437,
443; rivalry of — with Athena
and Aphrodite, stirs up a storm
against Paris, 491, 497; altar of
—Acrea (“‘ Hera of the Heights ’’)
at Corinth, 535, 561, 563

Heracles, xxii, xxiv, XXV, xl; slays
Geryones, 101; ; slays the ‘Lerna-
ean Hydra, 103; slays the eagle
which plagued Prometheus, eZ. 5
the “ Theban-born,”’ 119; s. of
Zeus and Alemena, weds’ Hebe,


O11
RR 2


INDEX |
149; lives in Olympus, ry Sale Contest of — es Homer, 571 ff.;
slays Geryones, 151; kills Peri- warned of his death by the Pythia,
clymenus and the sons of killed at Oenoé, 587; his bodya


Neleus, 161-163, 207, 215; weds
Deianeira, 217; s. of Zeus and
Alemena, 219; born in Thebes,
223 ff. passim; left by the Argo-

nhauts, 225; visits the house of
Ceyx, ib.; entertained by Tela-
mon, 257 ; toils and reward of —,
439; crosses Ocean in the caul-
dron of the Sun, 483; madness
of — related by Nestor, 493 ;
takes Themiscyra, 527; — and
the Cercopes, 539, 577

Hereas of Megara, accuses Peisi-
stratus of tampering with the
Hesiodic poems, 207

Hermaon, f. of Arabus, 167

Hermes, XXXvii, TeiSe of Maia, 67 ;
god of cattle (with Hecate), 179,
265; steals Apollo’s cattle, 265,
267; slays Argus, 275, 317, 319;
s. of Zeus and “Maia, 363-405
passim; makes the lyre, 365—
367 5 steals Apollo’s cattle, 369—
373; the Shepherd, 387; ap-
pointed lord of herds, 399, 417,
aye 443; f. of Pan, 445, 457, 491,

Hermione, (i) in Peloponnesus, 197,
593; (ii) dau. of Menelatis and
Helen, 199, 205

Hermus, the river, 105, 467

Herodotus, on the date of Homer
and Hesiod, xxvi; on the Scy-
thians, 179n.; pseudo —, 475 n.,
585, 587

Heroes, the race of —, 15, 201 n.

Hesiod, poems falsely attributed
to —, xii; Life of —, xiii-xvil ;
supposed significance of the name,
xiv; literary value of —, xxvi-
XXVii; influence of — shown in
Hymn to Aphrodite, xxxviil;
Homeric epigram attributed to
—, xl; Contest with Homer, and
death of —, xlii, 67, 71, 73, 75,
77; taught by the Muses, 79,
155, passim; works of — tam-
pered with by Peisistratus, 207 ;
author of Marriage of Ceyx, 255 ;
quoted by Bacchylides, 281, 517 ;
birthplace of —, 567; ancestry
of —, related to Homer, 571;


612


brought to land by dolphins and |
removed from Oenoé to Orcho- |
menus, 589; his epitaph, 7b.
567-597, passim |
Hesiodic Poems, general character
of —, xvii; date of, xxv-xxvi


Hesperethusa, one of the Hespe- | !


rides, 281

Hesperian, 181

Hesperides, daus. of Night, guard
the golden apples, 95, 99, 117;
names of the —, 281; apples of


the —, 483
Hestia, ¥xxviii ; dau. of Rhea andl
Cronos, 113; unsubdued by @


Aphrodite, 407 and n.; ‘Vows |


virginity, 409 ; tends the temple |


of Apollo at Pytho, 449; hon- |
oured at banquets, associated |
with Hermes, 455
Hills, the offspring of Earth, 89
Himerus (Desire),
Hippe, w. of Theseus, 207
Hippodameia, dau. of Oenomaiis, ©
won by Pelops, 261 n.
Hippomenes, xxlii ; ; race of — with
Atalanta, 165, 167
Hipponoé, ‘dau. of Nereus, 99
Hipponoiis, 183, 487
Hippostratus, 183
Hippotades, s. of Phylas, 259
Hippothoé, ‘dau. of Nereus, 97 |
Homer, exhausted the field of Epic |
Poetry, x; Contest
Hesiod, XV; ; Epwrams of —,
xxxix—xl ;
—, XXxix: ; supposed author of
the Battle of the Frogs and Mice,
xli; . life. and descent, of, —79
xli; date of — relatively to.
Hesiod, xlii; and Introduction
passim, 141 n., 165; 176; 185. neg


contest. with Hesiod at Delos, |


281; birthplace of —, 469 n.5_
author of the Thebuis, 485 5
author of the Epigoni, 487 ;


gives the Cypria to Stasinus as


a dowry, 497, 503, 507, 515 n., ff
529, 581 ; author of the Hapedi- §


tion of Amphiaraiis and the
Hymns to the Gods, 533; author
of the Margites, 537;


of — with @


Herodotean Life of @


disputed | |


INDEX


birthplace of —. called Melesi-
genes, meaning of the name,
author of the M argites, 567;
descent of —, the reply of the
Pythia to Hadrian on the birth-
place of —, 569; pedigree of
Homer and Hesiod, Contest of
— with Hesiod at Chalcis, 571
ff.; composes the Thebais, the
Epigoni, the epitaph on Midas,
and the Odyssey, 591; visits
Athens, Corinth, and. Ar 208,
sacrifices to — at Argos, 593 ; re-
cites the Hymn to Apollo at
Delos, visits Ios, 595; death
of —, 597 and 567-597 passim


|| Homeridae (descendants of Homer)


in Chios, 567


i pope confined in Pandora’s jar,


Hopleus, one of the Lapithae, 233


1 Horae (Hours, Seasons), 145, 339


|} Horcus (Oath), child of Strife, 63


| Horse's Spring, the — (Hippocrene),
| Host of Many (Pluto), 289 ;


carries
off Persephone, 291, 317, 319


1 Hours (see also Horae), 7, 145, 427,


| | House-carrier, the — (the snail), 45


Hundred-handed Giants, the three
—, xxi, xxv; names of— 89; aid
Zeus against the Titans, 125, 127,
129 ff.; offspring’of Earth and
Heaven, 481


| Hunger, the Sluggard’s companion


| Hyades, sisters of Hyas, turned into


stars,


67; names of the —, 69
Hyas,


| Hydra, the —, of Lerna, killed by


‘| * ‘Heracles, 103
‘| Hyettus, slays Molurus, 259


*
pe a


| Hyllus, s. of Heracles, 217, 259


Hymenaeus, s. of Magnes and be-
loved by Apollo, 265

Hymns to the Gods, ascribed to
Homer, 533; Hymn to Apollo,
quoted by Thucydides, SAE 5
two parts of the — contents of
the —, xxxvi ; recited by Homer
at Delos, 595

_ Hymns, the Homeric, lonian and
Continental influences in —, date
of collection unknown, nature of,


xxxiv; to Dionysus, xxxiv: to
Demeter, contents of —, xxxiv ;
date of —, xxxv; to Apollo, two
parts of, contents of —, xxxvi;


date of —, xxxvii; to "Hermes,
character of —, contents of a
Xxxvii; date of — XXxXVii-


XXxvili; to Aphrodite, contents and
date of - —, Xxxviii ; to Dionysus,
uncertain "date of 7 ,) (XXX Vil
xxxix; to Ares, xxxix; to Pan,
love of nature in —, Xxxix

Hyperboreans, the, 431

Hyperphas, f. of Buryanassa, 209

Hyperion, s. of Heaven, 89, 107,
153 291) 2950351 538. of (Helios),
455, 459°

Hypoplacian Thebes, 505 n.

Hyria in Boeotia, 213, 259


Tacchus, xXxXvi

Tache, dau. of Tethys and Ocean,
319

Tadmonides, 571

Iambe, cheers Demeter with her
jests, 303

Iambus, 525

Taneira, dau. of Ocean, 105 and n.
319

Tanthe, 105, 319


Tapetus, s. of Heaven, 89; weds
Clymene, 117; Sons of —, Xxi;
(Atlas), 133: (Prometheus),


steals fire, 7, 79, 117, 119
Tasion, f. of Plutus by Demeter, 151
Iason, labours of —, 153; s. of
Aeson, educated by Chiron, 163
Icarus, an island in the Aegean, 287
Ichnaea, present at the birth of


Apollo, 331

Ida, Mt. —, 143 n.; birthplace of
Aeneas, 153, 3827, 411; iron-
smelting on —, 471 and n.;


contest of beauty between the
Ate ea held on —, 491, 499,
1


Idaean Dactyls, the —, a Hesiodic
poem dealing with the discovery
of metals, xx, 77

Idas, killed by Polydeuces, 491;
kills Castor, 503

Idomeneus, 195 n. ;
197

Idyia, 105; w. of Aeétes,
of Medea, 151


suitor of Helen,


mother


613


INDEX


Te Paean (‘‘ Hail, Healer !), a hymn
to Apollo, 359, 361
Tepaeon (Apollo), 343


Tiiad, effect: of the — on later epic |


poetry, ix; greatness of — in

: characterisation, xxxi; length of
—, 591 and n. 593 ; The Little —,
subject of, XXxxii, 509, 518, 515
and n., 535

lian War, the 497

Tleus (Oileus), beloved by Apollo,

ae and n.; f. of the lesser Aias,

Ilium, Menelaiis plans the expedi-
tion against —, 491, 493, 495, 501,
511; Sack of —, 517, by Arctinus
of Miletus, 521, 523, 525, 581

Imbros, 327

Inachus, f. of Mycene, 259

Ino, dau. of Cadmus, 151, Bian:

Inopus, a stream in Delos, 325

Insewn, a title of Dionysus indi-
cating his birth from the thigh
of Zeus, 287 and n., 289

Io, XXv ; ‘loved by Zeus ang trans-
formed into a cow, 273,

Iobates, 159

togae bas mother and w. of Oedipus,


Tola or Ioleia, 207, 533

Tolaiis, 103 ; charioteer of Heracles,
207, 225-253 passim; ~f. of
Leipephile, 259

Tolcus, xxv, 153, 187, 247, 253, 341

Tonia, Homeric type of epic fol-
lowed in —, X

—— the — race sprung from
- Xuthus, xxii; the — School of
Epic Poetry, x, xxviii ff. ; forms
a corpus of heroic story, xxviii—
XXxiv, 183

Ionians, festival of the — at Delos,
335; — make Homer a citizen of
each of their states, 595

Iophossa, w. of Phrixus, 263

Ios, Isle of —, reputed birthplace of
Homer, 571; Homer sails to —,
595; dies at —, 597

Iphianassa, (i) dau. of Proetus, 169;
(ii) dau. of Agamemnon, 503.


Iphiclus, 177, 195; powers of
running of —, 209, 211; s. of
Amphitryon, 2238, 227; cows
of —, 263, 271


Iphigeneia, becomes Hecate, 205
614


and n.; sacrificed to Artemis,
493; transported to the land
of the Tauri, 495; distinguished
from Tphianassa, 503

Iphimedea, w. of Aloéus, 157, 159

Iphinoé, dau. of Proetus, 169

Iphitus, xxii, 307

Tris, dau. of ‘Thaumas, 99; fetches
the water of Styx, 135, 179; sent
by Zeus to summon Demeter, pil.
313; sent to bring Hilithyia to
aid Leto, 331, 491

Tron, 13; Race Shes, 15f.3 discov.
ered by the Idaean Dactyls, Ties
smmelting of —, 141, 143 n. "i
smelted on Mt. Ida, 471 and n.

Tron Age, the —, xxvl, 15 f. .

Ischys, s. of Elatus, weds Coronis, |


3
Ister, ‘the river, 103
Italy, 265, 519 n.


Jar, the — of Pandora, 9

Julius Pollux, x1

Juno, drives mad the daus. of
Justice (personified), 19; dau. of
Zeus, 23, 25, 145


Lacedaemon, (i) f. of Eurydice, 169 ;
(ii) (= Sparta), 195, 491

Lacedaemonian, 261

Lachesis, one of the Fates, 95 and
n., 145, 239

Laconian, 353

Ladon, the river, 105

Lame "One, the — (Hephaestus),
149, 185, 235-

Laoco6n, xxxii;
serpents, 521

Laomedea, dau. of Nereus, 99

Laomedon, f. of Ganymedes, 515

Lapithae, xxv; battle of — with
Centaurs, 231

ey xl; (in the Peloponnesus),

Lasius, slain by Oenomaiis, 261

Latins, named after Latinus, 155

Latinus, s. of Circe and Odysseus,


destroyed by


Lawlessness, child of Strife, 97
Leagore, 99
Lebes, 489


eyes of the Dios-


| es (a Frog), 559
“Lehmann, xxv


|| Leipepnile, dau. of Iolaiis, w. of


t ee Xxxii, 71, 327, 429 n., 495,
}| Lenaeon, month of, 41 and n.
|} Leontes, 527
q Lerna, the Hydra of, 103
| Lesbos, 327, 507

Lesches of Mitylene, author of the
Tittle Iliad, xxxii, 509, 515 and
SDs, b7, 519

" Lescheos (= Lesches), xxxii, 517
}| Leto, xxxvi; mother of ‘Apollo,
59, 71, 79; dau. of Coeus and
Phoebe, 109 ; wedded to Zeus,
145, 189, 213, 250, 20d; 20.1; 325 5
wanderings of eae 327, 329 ;
swears that Deios shall be
Apollo’s chief abode, 331, 335,
3a/, 009, 303, 3/5, 377, 381, 383,
E 395, 401
1, Leucippe, dau. of Ocean, 319
|| Leucippus, 189; daus. of —, 191°
i lUW. Hees 339
| Libya, 181

_Lickman (a Mouse), 555, 557
_Lickplatter (a Mouse), 549, 559
- Ligurians, 179
Lilaea, 173, 341
atriee God, the — (Hephaestus),


| Lindus (in Rhodes), xl

Linus, invoked by minstrels, 275;
s. of Apollo and Aethusa, 571
- Locrians, aid Amphitryon against
1 the Taphians, 271)

 Locrian, the — Aias, 527; the —
grove, (Oenoé), xvii
|| Locris, x n., xvi, 265, 587, 589
1 Locrus, leader of the JLeleges, 209
| Loud-crier (a Frog), 5

| Loud-croaker (a eat 555
| Love (Eros), 87
} Ludwich on the date of the Hymn
1 to Dionysus, xxxix

| Lycaeum (in Arcadia), 71, 265
Lycaon, (i) k, of Arcadia, 69, 71;


INDEX


sons of —, 175; (ii) the Trojan,
captured by Patroclus, 495

Lycia, 337

Lycomedes, suitor of Helen, 197,
493, 517

Lyctus (in Crete), 1

Lying Words, cing of Strife, 97

Lycurgus, 261

Lycus, dau. of —, 493

Lynceus, offspring of —, 243 ; killed
by Polydeuces, 491, 503

Lyrnessus (in the Troad), 495

Lysianassa, dau. of Nereus, 99

Lysicrates, choragic monument of
—, xxxix

Lysimachus, 523

Lysippe, dau. of Proetus, 169


Macar,:s. of Aeolus, 327

Macareus, 183

Macedon, 8. of Zeus, xxii, 157

Macedonia, Macedonians, xxii, 157

Machaon, ‘heals Philoctetes, 511;
killed by Eurypylus, 515; re-
ceives gift of surgery, "from
Poseidon, 525

Maenad, 317

Maenalus, 265

Maeon, 569, 571

Maeonia, 337

Magnes, s. of oe KXit, 57 5. 6: of
Argos, 263,

Magnesia, ur 255, 265

Maia, one of the Pleiades, 69;
bears Hermes to Zeus, 149, 363-
405 passim, 441, 443; Son ‘of —,


passim

Maiden Well, the — at Eleusis, 295

Malea, 353

Manslaughters, offspring of Strife, 97

Mantes, 271

Manto, dau. of Teiresias, 489

Marckscheffel, xxii, xli n.

Mares, 271

Margites, the —, xl, 537, 567, 571

Mariandynus, s. of Phineus, 177

Marmax, 261

Maro, 211 and n.

Maronea, in Turace, 211 n., 527

Marriage of Ceyx, a Hesiodic poem
Xxiil, xxlv

Mases, 197, 593

Matthiae, ‘discovers the Hymn to
Demeter, XXXV


615


INDEX


Mausolus, prince of Halicarnassus,
xli, 537

May- ‘day cone 475 n.

Meander, 1

Mecionice, 259

Mecisteus, f. of Eurypylus, 593

Mecone, division between gods and
men at —, 119

Medea, dau. of Aeétes, 151, 153;
renews youth of Aeson, 527;
poisons Creon k. of Corinth, 535


Medeus, s. of Iason and Medea, 153


Medon, k. of Athens, 591

Medusa, story of —, 99, 101

Megamedes, f. of Pallas, 371

Megara, 197, 207

Megaris, 265

Melampodia, subject of the —, xxv

Melampus, xxv; cures daus. of
Proteus, 169; dear to Apollo,
261; inspired by serpents, 263

Melanippe, an Amazon, 283

Melanopus, 571

Melas, s. of Phrixus, 263

Meleager, story of —, 215, 217;
dau. of —, 505

Meles, the river of Smyrna, 435,
469 ; sy of Homer, 567, 569, 571,
573, 581

Melesagoras, 205

Melesigenes (Homer), 567, 569

Meliae, nymphs of ash- -trees, 13 n.
93 and Nn.

Melian Race (men sprung from the
Meliae), 121 and n.

Melite, 97, 319

Meliboea, 175

Melobosis, dau. of Ocean, 105, 319

Melpomene, one of the Muses, 83

Memnon, xxx, xxxi; s. of Eos and
Tithonus, 153; aids the Trojans
and slain by Achilles, 507; dau.
of —, 539

Menelaiis, return of —, xxxiii ; de-
serted by Helen, 191; suitor of
Helen, 198, 195; chosen as
husband of Helen, 199; s. of
Pleisthenes, 205; entertains
Paris, plans expedition against
Tlium, 491, 508, 511, 519, 521;
quarrels with Agamemnon, 525 :
reaches Egypt, returns home, 527

Menemachus, 569

Manoehous, suitor of Helen, 195,


616


Menesthius, 173

Menestho, 105

Menippe, ‘99

Mencetius, s. of Iapetus, struck er
the thunderbolt of: Zeus, ab ae
of Patroclus, 189

yer at (i) one of the Pleiades, 67
(ii) dau. of Oenopion, 71

Meropes, inhabitants of Cos, 327

Messene, xvii

Messenians, 189

Messina, Straits of; 71 n. |

Metaneira, w. of Celeus, 3015 re=%
ceives Demeter, 30383 gives De-
mophoon to Demeter to nurse, |
305; spies on Demeter, 307, 309

Methone, a nymph, 571

Metis, 105; w. of Zeus and swal- |
lowed. by him, 143, 147; mother
of Homer, 569

Mice, the —, 543-563 passim

Midas, D4 467 ; epitaph on — by
Homer, 5

Miletus, 321, 507, 521
ilton,

Mimas, (i) a Centaur, 233 7 ‘(li) a
promontory in Ionia, 327, 469
Minos, 71, 149; s. of Zeus and
Europa, 171, 197;

of —, 205 and n. 353

Minyan, title of Orchomenus in
Boeotia, 259

Minyans, 589

Minyas, 209

Mirth, 475

Mitylene, xxxii

Mnemosyne, mother of the Muses,
83; dau. of Heaven, 89; wedded
to Zeus, 145; hymned by
Hermes, 395

Mnesagoras, 569

Moerae (Fates), 145

Molione, 161 4

Molossi, Neoptolemus returns to
the —, 527

Molpe, one of the Sirens, 181

Molurus, slain by Hyettus, 259

Moon, the — (Selene), 459

Mopsus, (i) a Lapith, s. of Ampyce,
233; (ii) the seer, s. of Manto,
XXv, 267

Mortar, dimensions of a —,35 and


Mother of the Gods (Cybele), 439
Mother of All (Harth), 457


wide rule


ie XXXV

y) Muck-coucher (a Frog), 5

|) Mudman (Peleus), a Frog, 53, 557

| Miller, Ctto —, on the ‘Aegimius,

= XXV

|| Murders, offspring of Strife, 97

| eooy: G., Ancient Greek Literature

i ~3= of —,, xiv

| Muse, 363; dau. of Zeus, 439, 443,

i, 44°, 459, 515, 569, 573

|| Muses, KS) Ls and Hesiod, xv,

re xvii, xxi; ; — of Pieria, 3; — of

Helicon, 51, 79; — of Olympus

teach Hesiod, 81; sing in Qlym-

pus, 81; names ‘of the —, 83;

patronesses of minstrels, 85, 87,
151; — of Olympus, 155:

eS oe Pieria, 285,.275, 281, 339,

395; Olympian, 395, 451 ; dance

of the — at D Delphi, 453; cele-

brate the deeds “ot the demigods,

459, 461, 487, 509, 539; — of

Helicon, 543, 581: tripod dedi-

7 ~=—s cated by Hesiod to —, 587, 591

| Museum, the —, of Alcidamas, 589

yj Mycale, 327

| -Mycalessus, 341

i Mycenaean, 489

} Mycene, dau. of Inachus, 259

he -Myrmidons, ants transformed into

}  —, 185; ‘town of the —, 247, 253

Z Mysia, 493

: ie Mysteries, the — of Eleusis, 303

|  andn. ; taught by Demeter to the

princes of Eleusis, 323


| Narcissus, the — created by Earth
} to ensnare Persephone, 289
)/ Naubolus, 207
I ‘Nausinoiis, s. of Odysseus, 155
- Nausithoiis, s. Of Odysseus, 155
_ Naxos, 287, 327
oN eleus, sons of —, killed by
Heracles, Xxii, xxili, 163
| Nemea, xvi ; lion of —, killed by
B Heracles, 103, 587
| Nemean Zeus, grove of —,'xvi, 587
} | Nemertes, dau. of Nereus, 99
| Nemesis, xxvi, 17 and n. , 95 and n.,
tls
| 499
| Neoptolemus, xxxii : 3 tomb of — at
| Delphi, 115 n. brought by


i _ Moscow, Hymn to Demeter found at,


mother of Helen by Zeus,


INDEX


Odysseus from Scyros, slays
Eurypylus, 511, 517; murders
Astyanax, 519; murders Priam,
BAN 528 ¢ meets Odysseus at
Maronea, 527

Nephele, gives the Ram to Phrixus
and Helle, Gs,

Nereus, s. of Sea, called the Old
Man, 97 ; daus. of —, ib., 99, 153,
187, 347

_ Neso, 99

Nessus, the river —, 105

Nestor, s. of Neleus, 163; so-called
Cave of —, 372 n., 493, 513;
returns from Troy, 525, 569

Nicostratus, s. of Menelaiis, 205

* Nicothoé, one of the Harpies, A

Night, mother of Strife, 3, 79,
dau. of Chaos, 87; vended
of —, 95, 99; house and journey-
ings of —, 138, 135; mother of
the Hesperides, 281

Nike (Victory), dau. of Styx, 107

Nilus (the River Nile), 103

Niobe, children of —, 173

Nisaea, dau. of Nereus, 97

Nisus, "159

soe 538; s. of Astraeus, 107,

Nut (the pevpe counterpart of
Heaven), 93 n.

Nymphs, wash the corpse of Hesiod,
Xvii, 13; daus. of Zeus, 75, 89;
— of mountains, 275 5 — of ash-
trees, 93 n., 417 ; tree-nymphs of
Mt. Tda, 425: companions of Pan,
443; companions of Aphrodite,
499, 581

Nysa, in Phoenice, the birthplace
of Dionysus, 287 ; plain of —,
291; Dionysus nurtured in dells


3


Oath ake dogs unjust judge-
ments, 1 irth of —, 63; child
of Strife. 07: — by the water of
Styx described, 135, 137

Obriareus (= Briareus, q.v.), one of
the Hundred-handed Giants,
bound by Cronos and released by
Zeus, 125; lives in Tartarus, 133

Ocalea, 341

Ocean, the river, 15, 45, 79, 89, 95,
97, 99, 101; £. of rivers; 103;


617


INDEX


daus. of —, 105, 109, 115, 129,
135; streams of, 137, 1389, 145,
147, 151, 181, 191, 193, 231, 243,
281, 283; daus. of —, 289, 319,
369, See "423, 459, 461, 483, 501,
505, 539

Ocimedes (a Frog), 557

Ocypete (or Ocythoé), one of the
Harpies, 99, 179

Ocypus, one of the Harpies, 179

Ocyrrhoé, dau. of Ocean, 105, 319

Ocythoé, see Ocypete

Odites, s. of Heracles, 217

Odysseus, xxviii ; omission of — in
the Returns, xxx and n.; rivalry
with Aias, xxxi; wins arms of
Achilles, xxxii; fortunes of —
after return to Ithaca, xxxiii;
sons of — by Circe, 1533; sons
of — by Calypso, 155; suitor of
Helen, 193, 419 n.; feigns mad-
ness, 493, 505; aids in the rescue
of body of Achilles, 509; wins
the arms of Achilles, captures
Helenus, 509; brings Neoptole-
mus from Scyros, spies in Troy,
511; rivalry with Aias, 513;
disguised, 51S. oly * murders
Astyanax, 523 ; at Maronea, 527;
story of — after close of Odyssey,
531, 569

Odyssey, the, effect of the Iliad and
— on post- Homeric epic, ix;
structure of —, xi, 531; com-
position and length of the —,
591 and n.

Oeager, f. of Orpheus, 571

Oebalus, 195, 197

Oechalia, the "Taking of —, by Creo-
phylus of Samos or by Homer,
5338, 535

Oedipodea, the —, xxix

Oedipus, war for the flocks of —,
ars funeral of —, 1738, 217, 219:
Story of — (Oedipodea), 483 ;
sons of —, ib.; curses his sons,
485; story of — related by
Nestor, 493

Oeneus, 183; f. of Meleager, 215,
ahs marries Periboea, 487, 505,


Oenoé in Locris, Hesiod murdered
and buried at —, xvi, xvii, 587
gnomes, persons "slain by —, 261

and n


”


618


Oenopion, blinds Orion, 71; 8. of
Dionysus, 211

Ogygia, the island of Calypso, 183

Ogylia, an island off Crete, 183

Ogylian Sea, the —, 183, 199

me the — of the Sea (Nereus),

Olenus (in Achaea), 183, 487

Olmeius, 79

Olympiads, XXX

Olympians, xxi, 259

Olympian, the — (Zeus), 277;
Muses, 395, 441

Olympus, Muses of —, 79; birth-


pe of the Muses, 83; occupied \q


e gods, 87, 107, 109; strong-


hold of the Sons of Cronos in the |)!


war with the Titans, 125, 129, ©
139, 141, 149, 157, 213, 223, 235, |
253, 289, 295, 299, 313, 321, 323.
331. 300; 337, 341, 359, 361, 337,
395, 401, 431° 433, 437, 439, 445,
455, 563, and passim

Onchestus, 175; grove of Poseidon
ec and custom there, 341, ofl,

Orchomenus, Hesiod’s bones re-
moved to —, xvi, 173; Minyan,
259; sons a 983 ; men of —,
remove the body of Hesiod from
Oenoé,

Order (Eunomia), dau. of Zeus and
Themis, 145

Orestes, Xxxiii ; avenges his father,
Agamemnon, 527

Orion, rising of —, 47, 49: ; story of


Orpheus: 571 :

Orphic, ‘the —~ character of the
Hymn to Ares, XXxix

Orthus, the hound of Geryones,
born of Echidna and Typhaon,
slain by Heracles, 101; f. of
Sphinx, 103

Othrys, Mt. —, the stronghold of
the Titans, 125

Otreus, k. of Phrygia, Fe 417

Outrage (personified), 1

Overlooking, a title of the altar of
Apollo, 530 ; a title of Zeus, ib. n.


Paean (the Healer), 275
Paean-singers, Cretan —
Pagasaean, a ‘title of aeolian "995


}) Palamedes, 493, 495; drowned by

}_ Odysseus and Diomedes, 505

‘}) Palladium, xxxii; stolen from Troy

| I by Diomedes and Odysseus, 511,

} Pallantium (in Arcadia), 175
Pallas, (i) =Athena (@.v.), 7, 121,

. 147, 159, 229, 319, 437, 453, 561 ;

(ii) s. of Lycaon, ‘175; : (iii) 3. of


| Selene, 371

imran, s. of Hermes, haunts ee,
} plays on pipes at eventide, 443 ;
} | birth of —, 445; why so named
by the gods, 447 and n.
om dau. of Zeus and Selene,


; andion, the dau. pis —, 45, 159.

au) andora, Gi) myth —, Xviili;
| ~—s creation of —, 7; eee of the
name, 9 n.; lets loose the
ji ~=6 plagues, 9; creation of —, 121,
_ 123; (ii) dau. of Deucalion, 157


| of Chaleis, 573, 585

} Panhellenes, 43, 169

} Panic, 149, 231;

}_ Ares, 253

| Panopea, 97

} Panopeus, 173, 207

|. Paphos, 411

} Paris (Alexandrus, 4q.v.)
| _ Achilles, xxxi, 509

| Parnassus, 115, 343, 345, 353, 361,


403

| Paros, 325, 327

: Parthenius, the river —, 105, 279

| Parthenopaeus, s. of Talaiis, 487
Patroclus, xxx, 189; captures
}]  Lycaon, 495

| Pasithea, dau. of Nereus, 97

} Pasithoé, dau. of Ocean, 105.

} Passalus, one of the Cercopes, 539
} Pausanias, xxxii; on the stone
| swallowed by Cronos, 115n.,198n.
1) eee nurse of children, 21, 145,


} Pedasus, a town n the Troad, 495
}- Pegasus, born from the blood of
| Medusa brings thunder to Zeus,
101, 103; the horse of Bellero-
Yo phon, 159
Peiren, f. of Io, 273
Peirene, dau. of Oebalus, 259
| Peirithotis, s. of Aepytus, 209;


attendant on


slays


Crius and Burybia, BOW 3), fof


INDEX


fights with the Lapithae against
Centaurs, 233

Peirus, the river —, 183

Peisistratus, tampers with the text
of Hesiod, 207

Peitho, dau. of Ocean, 105

Pelagon, 261

Pelasgi, 175, 265; in Crete, 275; at
Dodona, 279

Pelasgus, 175

Peleiades (= Pleiades), 67

Peleus, f. of Achilles, 153; adven-
ture of — with Acastus, 185;
epithalamium of, 187, 189, 199,
273; dispute of gods at the
marriage of —, 489; marriage
of —, 497, 5133; recognises
Neoptolemus, 527

Pelias, s. of Poseidon, xxii, 163

Pelion, Mt. —, 163, 185, 199, BY a
marriage of Peleus on — , 497

Peloponnesus, 179, 265, 343, 345,
353, 587

Pelops, dau. of —, 219; wins
Hippodameia from Oenomaiis,
261; isle of —, 355, 503

Peloris, 73

Pemphredo, one of the Graiae, 99

Penelope, xxxiii; burial of suitors
of —, 531; marries Telegonus,
Bohs sons of — by Odysseus,


Peneus, the river —, 105, 213, 447

Penthesileia, xxxi; killed by
Achilles, 507, 509

Peparethus, 327

Periboea, w. of Oeneus, 183

Periclymenus, s. of Neleus killed
by Heracles, xxii, 161, 487

Perieres, s. of Aeolus, 157, 189

Perimedes, a Centaur, 233

Perimele, 263

Periphas, s. of Oeneus, 217

Deen "79

Perrhaebi, the —, 341

Persaeus, f. of Hecate, 291

Persephone, carried off by Hades,
XXxv; w. of Hades, 135; dau.
of Zeus and Demeter carried off
by Aidoneus, 145, 171 n., 289 ff.,
313; eats pomegranate seed in
Hades, 315; returns to De-
meter, 317; tells the story of
her seizure, 319, 325, 437

Persepolis, 163


619


INDEX |


Perseis, 105; w. of Helios and
mother of Circe and Aeétes, 151

Perses, (i) s. of Crius and Eurybia,
107 ; weds Asteria, 109; s. of —,
219; (ii) Hesiod’s brother, xiii,
xiv, xv; his quarrel with Hesiod,
Bis exhorted to deal justly, 19,
25;025,0/00, 402 O71

Perseus, s. of Danaé, slays Medusa,
99, 235, 237

Persians, 569

Persuasion (Peitho), 7

Pestle, 35

Peteotis, 8. of, 195, 197

Petraea, dau. of Ocean, 105

Petraeus, a Centaur, 233

Petrie, recovers papyrus fragments
of the Contest of Homer and
Hesiod, xli n.

Peuceus, sons of —, 233

Phaeo, one of the Hyades, 69

Phaeno, dau. of Ocean, 319

Phaesyle, one of the Hyades, 69

Phaethon, s. of Eos, carried off by
Aphrodite, 153

Phalereus, one of the Lapithae, 233

Pharsalia, 519 n.

Phasis, the river —, 105, 181

Phegeus, Xvi, 587

Phellus, 1

Pherae, 300

Pheres, 163; s. of Oeneus, 217

Pherusa, dau. of Nereus, 97

Phicium, 223

Philammon, 209

Philoctetes, xxxii; suitor of Helen,
193; deserted in Lemnos, 495;
Bea to Troy and healed, 511,

1

Philommedes (Aphrodite), 93 and n.

Philoterpes, 571

Philyra, s. of — (Chiron), 153;
mother of Chiron by Cronos,

Phineus, xxiii; s. of Phoenix, 171;
blinded, 177, 179, 263

Phlegyae, the —, 345

Phlegyas, 213, 441

Phocaea, 327; Phocaeans, 535

Phocais, a poem ascribed to Homer,
533 n., 5

Phocians, 221

Phocus, s. of Aeacus, 153

Phoebe, dau. of Heaven, 89; wedded
to Coeus, 109


620


Bee ch apices 79, 189, 213, 225, @
227 2680275 % hymns to —. 281, j
327. 329, 381; 333, 335, 343, 345,
351, 353, 357, 371, 385, 387, 391,
395, 399 ; sung of by minstrels, i
447. 453, 591

Phoenice, 287

Phoenician, 569

Phoenix, (i) the life of a —, 75;
(ii) f. of Huropa, Phineus, and


Adonis, 171; (iii) dies on return | | d


from Troy, 527
Phorbas, rival of Apollo, 339


:
perpse s. of Sea and Earth, 97;


f. of the Graiae, 99, 103 a
Photius, compiler of an abstract of )}i
the Trojan Cycle, xxix Pe
Phricon, the people of —, 469 |
Phrixus, xxv; the Ram of —, 177,

263, 271 and n. |
Phrontis, child of Phrixus and
Tophossa, 263


Phrygians, 415, 575

Phthia, 187, 213, 265

Phthiotis, XXV

Phyctes, k. of the Epeians, 183

Phylace, 195

Phylacus, s. of —, (Iphiclus), 195;
f. of Iphiclus, 209, 271

Phylas, f. of Hippotades, 259

Phyleus, 191

Phylonomus, s. of Electryon, 219

Pieria, 3; the birthplace of the


Muses, 83, 157, 235, 330, 369, 377 fF


Pierus, an ancestor of Homer, 571 |

Pigres, the Carian, brother of Arte-
misia, author of the Margites and
of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, —
mi 537

Pindar, 141 n.

Pisa, 261

Placius, Mt., 505 n. |

Planting, the proper day for —, 61 |

Pleiades, xxvii; daus. of Atlas,
mark seasons for harvesting and §

ploughing, 31, 45, 49, 67, 585

Pleisthenes, (i) f. ‘of Agamemnon and —

Menelaiis, 203; (ii) s. of Helen,
0

Plexaura, dau. of Ocean, 105

Pliny, 367 n.

Ploto, dau. of Nereus, 97

Plough, directions for making —,
and parts of —, 35, 37


39; ox for —, 33, 35
; Plutarch, discredits the notice of
Hesiod’s victory at  Chalcis,
authority for Hesiod’s burial at
ASCIA, MVE" XIX; GXKML:. uses
shorter version of tne Contest of
Homer and Hesiod, xli
- Pluto, (i) dau. of Ocean, 105, 319;
20k (Hades) indirectly named,


| | i ‘Ploughing, the season for —, 31, 37,


1


god of wealth, 151, 323

j Podaleirius, reccives the gift of
medicine from Poseidon, 525

_ Podarces, suitor of Helen, 195

- Polycaon, 259


| reputed mother of Homer, 569
}| Polydectes, s. of Magnes, 157
i Polydeuces, 189, 193, 195, 441, 461;
i slays Lynceus and Tdas, A491 ;
| — enjoys immortality, 499, 503
| Polydora, dau. of Ocean, 105 ; dau.
ae. of Peleus, 187; w. of Protesilaiis
| — (according to the Cypria), 505
| Polydorus, s. of Cadmus, 151
| Polygnotus, 517 n.
1 Polyhymnia, one of the Muses, 83
| Polymede, w. of Aeson, 163
7 Polyneices, Xxix, 219,. 369 ; ; cursed
! by Oedipus, 485
Polyphantes, 261
Polypoetes, 5273 8. Of Odysseus and
| Callidice, 531
}| Polynoé, dau. of Nereus, 99
} Polyxeinus, prince of Eleusis, 299 ;
i instructed in the mysteries by
a 606. Demeter, 323
¥ Polyxena, oe at the tomb of
Achilles, 5
i Polyxenus, ort
1 Pondlarker (a Frog), 557
| Pontomedea, dau. of N ereus, 97
Pontoporea, "dau. of N ereus, 99
_ Pontus, s. of Earth, 89
Porthaon, I. Of Oeneus, 217, 261
Poseidon (see also Earth-shaker,
Earth-holder), xxii, 53; sanctu-
ary of — at Peloris, 1a5. 09%
and Medusa, 99, 133, 157, ooo,
161; weds Tyro, 163; grove of
—at Onchestus, 175 n. , 205, 341 ;
woos Hestia, 409, 429 ; tamer of
horses and saviour of ships, 449 ;


INDEX


f .
lord of Helicon, 469; f. of the
horse Areion, 485, 495, 569

Pot-visitor (a Mouse), 551, 557

Precepts of Chiron, Xv, Xx, 75

Priam, xxvi; murdered by Neo-
ptolemus, 517, 521

Proclus, xix, xx ; makes synopsis of
the Trojan Cycle, XXIX, XXX, XXXi,
SKM 13) ne, nh.

Procris, w. of Cephalus the Athe-
nian, 489

are k. of Tiryns, daus. of —,
1

Prolochus, one of the Lapithae, 233

Prometheus, xxii; deceives Zeus,
5; steals fire for men, 7; pun-
ished by Zeus, 117; befools
Zeus, 119; steals fire, 121, 125;
f. of Deucalion, 155

Pronoé, dau. of Nereus, 99

Pronoea, w. of Prometheus, xxii,
155

Propontis, the —, 179

Protesilaiis, suitor of Helen, 195;
killed by Hector, 495; first of
the Hellenes to land at Troy, 505

Proto, dau. of Nereus, 97

Prymno, dau. of Ocean, 105, 153°

Psamathe, dau. of Nereus, 99

Puff-jaw, k. of the Frogs, 543 ff.

Pursuit (personified), 231

Pycimede, mother of Hesiod and
Perses, 571

Pygmies, the —, 181

Pylades aids Orestes to avenge
Agamemnon, 527

Pylos, xxii; Heracles wounds Ares
at —, 245, 353, 355, 357 5; Messe-
nian —, 372, n. : Triphylian —,
373 N., 379, 389, 393

Pyrrha, (i) in ’Mitylene, xxxii, 517;
(ii) w. of Deucalion, xxii, 155

Pyrrhaean, 519

Pythia (the Delphic priestess), 569,


Pythian, the — Hymn to Apollo,
Xxxvi; a title of Apollo, 351
Pytho (Delphi), XXXvi:  chariot-
races at —, Xxxvil; Zeussets up
the stone swallowed, by Cronos
at —, 115, 211; Cycnus robs pil-
grims to —, 253, 337; Apollo
slays the dragoness at —, deriv-
ation of the name, 351, 353, 361,
377; temple of Apollo at —, 449


621


INDEX,


Quarrels, offspring of Strife, 97

Quarrelsomeness, Xvii

Quern-licker (a Mouse), 545

Quintilian on Hesiod’ s literary
value, xxvi


Race, the — of Gold, 11; of Silver,
11, 18, 75; of Bronze, 13; of
Heroes or demi-gods, 18, 15; of
Iron, 15, 17

Ram, the — of Phrixus, 177

Raven, the life of a — yu 5

Reedy ‘(a Frog), 557

Returns, the —, its relation to the
Odyssey, XK geographical
knowledge of —, xxxi; contents
and authorship of —, xxxiii ; also
called the Return of ‘the ‘Atreidae,
by Agias of Troezen, 525, 527,
529 and n., 531

’ Rhacius, a Mycenaean, 489

Rhadamanthys, x3 saying of —,
753; s. of Zeus and HKuropa, 171

Rharus, plain of —, 321

Rhea, xxi; dau. of Heaven, 89;

- children of —, 113, 125; mother
of Demeter by Zeus, 321, 323;
pseu at the birth of Apollo,


Rhenaea, 327

Rhesus, the river —, 105

Rhodea, dau. of Ocean, 105, 319

Rhodius, the river —, 105

Rhodope, dau. of Ocean, 319

Rivers, sons of Ocean, ‘protectors
of youths, 105

Rueful (a Frog), 559

ore of Many (Pluto, Hades), 291,


Ruin, child of Strife, 97
Rzach on Aeolisms in Hesiod, xiv
and n.


Sack of Ilium, xxxi and n., xxxiii,
B17. 521. 523, 525

Salamis, (i) the Isle of —, xli; the
nee ‘ot Aias, 197 ; (ii) in Cyprus,

a

Re oe s. of Aeolus, xxii, 157,
163

Same, 355

Samos, 327


622


x
_ Semele, dau: of Cadmus, mother of


Peses


Sage!


aN


Sangarius, the river, 105
Sao, dau. of Nereus, 97
Sardene, Mt., 467 |
Sarpedon, (i) 8. of Zeus and Europa,
171, B77; (ii) the island of the
Gorgons, 505 |
Satyrs, the 277
Scamander, the river —, 105
Schoeneus, tf. of Atalanta, 163, 165)
Scorpion, created by Earth to
destroy Orion, placed by Zeus
in the sky, 73°
Scylla, 263
Scyros, the Isle of —, 3827, 493, 511; ca
‘Achilles at —, 51 3
Scythes, 77
Scythia, 263 n.
Scythians, 77 n.;
the —, 179 and n.
Sea, 87, 97
Seasons (Horae), 339, 499
Sea-faring, 49 ff., 63, 143
Selene (the Moon), 79; dau. off}
Hyperion, 107; dau. "of Pallas, §
371, 875; dau. of Hyperion and
Euryphaéssa, 459; a token to
men, 461
Selinus, metope from — represent-
ing punishment of the Cercopes, |)


Herodotus on


Dionysus, 149, 151, 287, |
429, 483 -

Serus, 189

es use of old material)
y —, Xvi

es a gnome hurtful to potters,


Sheep-cotes, 61
Sheep-shearing, 61
Shelley, translation of Hymn to


Hermes by —, XXXvVii
Shield of Heracles, the —, xi, xxiii, a
xxiv; genuineness of’ —, 207;


beginning of the — part of the i
ee book of the Catalogues, §


Sha tthe Egyptian counterpart of
Atlas), 93 n., 183 n. j

Sicily, 265 |

Sicycon, s. of Erectheus, 205 |

ape , taken by Alexandrus Pai

Sileni, 425

Simois, the river —, 105, 577


i
1
io
he
fe
oP
1
‘a
y


INDEX


- Sinon, xxxii; shows signal light to
the Greeks, 517, 521

Sirens, names of the — AS4

_ Sirius (the Dog-star), 33, 47, 49,
231, 247

Sisyphus, s. of Aeolus, 157, 159


; Slaughter, 231


Sleep, 95 ; brother of Death, 133, 135

Slice-snatcher (a Mouse), 561

Smash, a malignant kiln- og 473

Smyrna, 435; building of —, 469 ;
birthplace ‘of Homer, 567.

Smyth, Weir —, on Terpander’s im-
provement of the lyre, xxxviii

Soli, 271

Sophocles, use of the Epic Cycle
by —, xxix

Sorrows, offspring of Strife, 97

suai Paris at —, 491, 501

Speo, dau. of Nereus, 97

Sphinx, 43 Nn.; offspring of Orthus
and Echidna, 103; slays Hae-
mon, 483

Staff of Riches,
Hermes, 401°

Stag, the life of a —, 75

Stasinus of Cyprus, ‘author of the
Cypria, xxxii, 185 n.; author or
recipient of the Cypria, 497, 507


given by Apollo to


a Steropes, one of the Cyclopes, 89


and n.


|| Stesichorus, reputed s. of Hesiod,


Xvi n., 191, 483 n.
Stheneboea, w. of Proetus, 169


t Sthenelus, s. of Capaneus, 593


Sthenno, one of the Graiae, 99
Stratonica, 207


| Strife, dau. of Night, 3, 95, 97, 231,
489


Strophades Islands, 179
Strifes, the two —, xviil, 3, 5
Strymon, the river —, 103:


| Styx, chief of the daus. of Ocean


and Tethys, 105; wedded to
Pallas, 107 ; home and water
of —, 135, "137 ; water of —,


307, 319, 331; oath by the water
of —, 401
Suidas, xxi, xli


| - Suitors of Helen, the —, a Hesiodic


poem, xxiii and n.

Sun, the — (see also Helios), 135;
chariot of —, 181, 369; f. of
Circe, 475


| Swallow-Song, 475 n.


Taenarum, the town of Helios, 353

Take (personified), 29

Talatis, son of —, 487, 593

Talk (personified), 59

Taming, the right day for — ani-
mals, 61

ae 503; punishment of —,


Taphians, the — slay the sons of
Electryon, VA aA

Tartarus, description of —, xxviii ;
one of the three primeval
beings, 87, 129; depth of —
below the earth, 131; f. of
Typhoéus, 139, 141; Typhoéus
cast into —, 143, 213, 239, 349,
383, 391

Tauri, the —, 205 n.

Tauric Chersonnese, Iphigeneia at
—, 205 n.

Taygetus, Mt. —, the birthplace of
the Dioscuri, 441, 461, 503

Tegea, 265

Teiresias, death of —, 267 n.; age
and change of sex of —, 269; the
dau. of —, ektaeais 489; dies
at Colophon, 527, 531

Telamon, f. of Aias, 257 and n.
slays Melanippe the Amazon, 383

Teleboans, 221

Teledamus (or Telegonus), s. of
i Maackc and Calypso (se. Circe),


Telegonus, xxxiii; s. of Odysseus
and Circe, 155; marries Penelope
529; kills Odysseus, marries
Penelope, 531; s. of Odysseus by
Calypso (sic), 533

Telegony, the —, by Engammon of
Cyrene, Xxxiii, 531, 533

Telephus,_ k. of My sia, XXxii;
wounded by iMihdalowe 493, 511,
513, 515

Telemachus, XID KK Pe wyeds
Polycaste, 163, 493; marries
Circe, 529, 531, 5383; reputed f.
of Homer, 569

Telesto, dau. of Ocean, 105

Telphusa, xxxvi, 341; dissuades
Apollo from building a temple,
343, punished by Apollo, 351

Telphusian, a title of Apollo, 351

Tenedos, xxxii, 495; Greeks sail
from Troy to —, 511, 521

Teos, xxix


+


023


INDEX,


Terpander, reputed inventor of the
seven-stringed lyre, xxxvili

Terpsichore, one of the Muses, 83

Tethys, dau. of Heaven, 89;
eid of the Rivers, 103, 105,

Teygeta, one of the Pleiades, 67

Teumesian Fox, the —, 487, 489

Teumessus, 341, 487 n., 489

Teuthrania, sacked by ‘the Greeks
in mistake for Troy, 493

Thaleia, one of the Graces, 83, ate

Thamyras, 569

Thaumas, 97, 99, 185

Thebais, the —, xxix, 485, 487, 489;
composition af , 91

Thebe (se. Thebes), wars of the
heroes at —, 15, 151, 223, 225,
227, 341

Thebes, the story of —, treated by
the Gyclic poets, XXviil ; Oedipus
dies at —, 173; walls of — built
by Zethus and Amphion, 215,
Bi 57200, M22; 2B Ais Heracles
born. at —, 4389, 485, 487, 533 ;
Hypoplacian —, 505 and n.

Theban, poems af they Cycle,
xxix ; — born (Heracles), 119;
— wars, 199 n., 217 n.3 —
women, 219, 487, 489

Theia, dau. of Heaven, 89; w. of
Hyperion, 107; mother of the
Cercopes, 539

Thelxinoé (or Thelxiope), one of the
Sirens, 181

Themis, 79; dau. of Heaven, 89;
w. of Zeus, 145; present at
birth of Apollo, 331; feeds
Apollo with nectar and ambrosia,
333, 413; aided by Ares, 433,
449, 489

Themiscyra, betrayed to Heracles
and Theseus by Antiope, 527

ee reputed mother of Homer,


Themisto, dau. of Nereus, 99

Themistonoé, dau. of Ceyx and w.
of Cycnus, 245

Theogony, the —, x; structure of
—, xl; analysis of —, xx, xxi

Theognis, xv, 57 n., 281 n.

Theolytus, 483

Thermodon, the river —, 527

Thero, dau. of Phylas, wedded to
Apollo, 259


624


Thersander, 8. of Polyneices, 493


Thersites, in the Aethiopis and the


Iliad, xxx; slain by Achilles, 507
Theseus, deserts Ariadne for Aegle,


207; fights with the Lapithae |


against the Centaurs, 233; story
of —, related by Nestor, 493 ;
sons of —, 519 ; carries off ‘Helen,
5OL; loved by Antiope, 527
Thespiae, in Boeotia, xiii
Thespians,
the —, xiv
Thesprotis, adventures of Odysseus |
in —, xxxiii, 531
Thessaly ruled by the descendants
of Deucalion, 157 |
Thessalian te Ese tk of the Great
Hoiae, X | |
Thestorides, - 469, 535 | |
Thetis, xxv, 97; w. of Peleus. and
mother of Achilles, 158 ;
wedlock with Zeus, 185; throws.
her children into a cauldron, 273 ;
tends Hephaestus when cast out
of Heaven by Hera, 347, 495, §
497 ; carries off Achilles to the ff,
White Island, 509, 527 |
Thoas, 211 | ss
Thoé, @, dau. of Nereus, 97; (ii)
dau. of Ocean, 105 | |
Thoricus, 297
Thrace, 41, 211 n., 429 n., 529
Thracian, 43, 327, 507 in
Threefold People, thes; (Treas
chaikes), of Crete, 275 | @
Three- legged One, the —, (an old §
man), 4 ia
Threshing, as and n.
Thriae, the —, 403 and n.
Thronia, w. of Arabus, 167
Thryon, “ford of the Alpheus, 353


Thucydides, authority for the tradi- |p


tion of Hesiod’s murder at Oenoé,


big ;, quotes the Hymn to Apollo : |


** prelude,” xxxiv
Thyia, dau. of Deucalion, 154
Thynus, s. of Phineus, 177
Thyone (Semele), 289
Tigres, the river, in Peloponnesus,


Tiryns, 101, 169, 225, 593
Timandra, deserts Echemus, 191
Tin, smelting of —, 141 ia
Titan-killer, the Bai (the thunder- jf.
bolt), 561 |


Ascra destroyed by u


rejects. §


i} Tithonus, f.


INDEX


Titanomachy, first poem in the
Epic Cycle, disputed authorship
of —, xxix

Titans, xxi; names of —, 89; de-
rivation of the name, 95; ; war
of — with Zeus, 107, 111; war
of — with Olympians, 125 it.,
aot. vio los; imprisoned in
Tartarus, nies: 137, 139, 141, 148,
349 ; The War of the —, 481, 483


| Titaresia, 233
of Memnon, 153;
| story of — and Eos, 421, 423
Tityos, 173
Tlesenor, ¢. of Aepytus, 209


| Toil, child ‘of Strife, 97


| Toxeus, (i) s. of Eurytus, 207; (ii)
i s. of ’Oeneus, 28 wa

Trading by sea, 51
| Trachis, xxiv, 245, 253, O55


Tricolonus, 261


| Tretus, 103
Triptolemus, prince of Hleusis,
in: xxv: instructed by Demeter in
i the Mysteries, 299, 323
Trito, the river —, 147
Tritogeneia (Athena), 145, 233, 455
Triton, s. of Poseidon and Amphi-
trite, 149
if Troezen, xxxili, 197, 525, 569, 593
| Troglodyte (a Mouse), 557, 559
| Troglodytes, 181
| Troilus, slain by Achilles, 495
Trojan, relative date of poems of
{3 ee — Cycle to Homer, xxx, 185
; — War, 199 n., 413, 415, "419,
493 ; - allies, a20., "507, 509, 511,
| Re ae 521, 585
jj Trophonius, Xxxvii; builds temple
| of Apollo, 345; story of —, 531
Tros, f. of Ganymedes, 421
| Troy, xxviii, xxxii; expedition of
y . the heroes’ to —, 15, 51, 267, 411,
| 491; heroes slain at —, 497;
taking of — foretold by Helenus,
cL S dynasty of Aeneas at —,
| 519 n. ; return of heroes from —,
SO ii. Doe
| Tumult (personified), 231
| Tyche, dau. of Ocean, 105, 319
| Tydeus, f. of Diomedes, 593
| Tyndareus, incurs the anger of
| Aphrodite, 191, 193; imposes an
oath on the suitors of Helen, 199,
441; sons of —, 491


HESIOD


Tyndaridae, 441; birth of —,
saviours of ships, 461, 463
Typhaon, xXxxvi; wedded to
Echidna, 101; story of —, 345
fis born of Hera, 349
Typhaonium, 223
s. of Earth and


Typhoeus, xxi;
Tartarus, 139; destroyed by
cae 141; f. of the winds, 148,
1
Tyro, dau. of Salmoneus, xxii, 163
Tyrrhenia (Etruria), 181
Tyrsenians, 429 n.
Twelve Gods, the —, 373
Twin Hills, the —, 211


Undercutter, 305 and n.

Uproar (personified), 231

Urania, (i) one of the Muses, 83 3.
mother of Linus, 275, 319; (ii)

dau. of Tethys and Ocean, 105

Ureus, a Centaur, 233


Valckenaer, on the subject-matter
of the Aegumius, XXv

Vergil, x; his account of the sack
of Troy, Xxxi, 211 n., 213 n.

Vesta, 113 n.

Victory, dau. of Ares, 433

Vine-pruning, 45

Vineyards, 45 7

Vintage, the season of —, 49


Waterlady (a Frog), 543.

Waterlarker (a Frog), 557

Wealth (see also Plutus), 475

Weaving, the right day for —, 61

White Island, Achilles transported
by Thetis to the —, 509

Winnowing, 47

Wise One, the —, (the Ant), 61

Woe, child of Night, 95

Women, 31, 33, 58, 55; originate
from Pandora, evils caused to
men by —, 123

Woodcutter, the —, 305 and n.

Woodcutting, 33, 35

Works and Days, ancient leaden
copy of the — seen by Pausanias,
xvii; analysis of —, xviii; its
aim, ‘moral and hot technical, xix


Xanthe, dau. of Ocean, 105


Xanthus, s. of Midas, 591
Xuthus, 8. of Hellen, xxii, 157


625


INDEX


Zacynthus, 355

Zelus (Emulation), s. of Styx, 107

Zenodotus of Ephesus, probable
editor or redactor of the Cyclic
Poems, xxviii

Zephyr, 47 ; s. of Astraeus, 107, 143

Zetes,s. of Boreas, delivers Phineus
from the Harpies, 179 and n.

Z ier builds the walls of Thebes,


Zeus (the Son of Cronos, the Father
of Men and Gods), Nemean, XVi}
punishes the sons Of lapetus, xxi?


overcomes Cronos, xxi; causes.
the Trojan War, xxxli, xxxv,
XXXvii, xxxvili, xli; f. of the


Muses, 3; hides the means of
life from men, 5; hides fire, 7;
makes the plagues speechless, 9;
ends the Silver Age, 13; makes
the Bronze Age, 7b.; places the
heroes in the Isles of the Blessed,
15; makes the-Race of Iron, 15;

will destroy the Race of Iron, Nhe

punishes injustice, 21; his
guardian spirits among men, 7A
the eye of —, 23; blesses the
righteous, 25 ; *his anger against
sinners, 27 : giver of wealth, 31;

sends the autumn rains, 33, 53,
57; days appointed for special
work by —, 59 ; turns the Hyades
into stars, 67; f. of Arcas by
Callisto, 69; entertained by
Lycaon, / A places Orion
amongst the stars, 71; hymned
by the Muses, 79, 81; weds
Mnemosyne, 83; patron of
princes, 85, 105; accompanied
by Cratos and Bia, 107; honours
Styx, 109; honours Hecate, 109,
111 ;. s. of Rhea and Cronos, 113 ;

birth of —, 115; sets up the "stone
swallowed by Cronos at Pytho,
115; punishes Menoetius and
Prometheus, appoints Atlas to
uphold Heaven, 117; befooled
by Prometheus at Mecone, 119;
hides fire from men, orders
‘creation of Pandora, 121, 123;
fights with the Titans, 129;

weapons of —, 131; imprisons the
Titans in Tartarus, 133; sends
Iris to fetch the water of Styx,
135 ; «destroys Typhoeus, 139 ff.;


626


- plans to destroy the race of


’ dite, 409, 411, 419;


assigns to the gods their portions,


143; weds Metis, ib.; swallows |


her, ib., 145; weds Themis,
Eurynome, Demeter, Mnemo-
syne, Leto, ab.; gives Persephone
to Aidoneus, ib. ; swallows Metis,
147; gives birth to Athena, 149 ;

f. of Hermes by Maia, of Dionysus
by Semele, of Heracles by Alc-
mena, °149,° 153, -155;". £. . of


Graecus by Pandora, of Macedon —
curse of — on |
carries off


by Thyia, 157;
Glaucus, 159, 161 ¢
Europa, 171; lord of Aenos, 179,
183 ; rejected by Thetis, "187 :
f. of the Dioscuri, 191, 193, 199 ;


mortals, 201, 203; sceptre of —,
205 ; creates men out of stones
for Deucalion, 209 ;
pius, ZI" founds an oracle at
Dodona, 215, ARSE
mena, 219, 221 begets Heracles,
Zee, 395, 227, 229, 233, 200, 243,
247, 249 - f. of Argos, "O57 :
transports Endymion to Heaven,
261, 269, 271; seduces Io, 271 ;


\ changes the name of Abantis to |
Euboea, 273; gifts of — to sons 9


of Aeacus and Atreus, 277, 281 5
f. of Dionysus, 287, 289 ;


291; sends Iris to Demeter, 311 ;


sends Hermes to bring Perse- | |


phone back from Hades, 313, 315,
317, 319; sends Rhea to De-
meter, 321, olan


gives birth to Athena, 347, 349,
855; S50, BOLYooa gens of Hermes,
365, 367, 377, 379 ; judges be-
tween Apollo and Hermes, 387-
390, 0005
phecy to "Apollo, 397, 401, 403;
confirms the prerogatives of
Hermes, 405;
casts love for Anchises on Aphro-
carries off
Ganymedes, 421;
immortality for Tithonus, 421,


427, 429, 433; husband of Hera,


4377, 439 ; +a. ‘of the Dioscuri, f.


of Hermes, 441, 443, 445; con- @
fers with Themis, 449; the @
support of kings, f. "of Dionysus, | |


slays Ascle- |


weds Alc-. |


suffers
Pluto to carry off Persephone, ,


|


welcomes
© Apollo, 325, "335, 337, 339, 3455 ff
giver of gift of pro- | |
honours Hestia, §


promises Eos |


INDEX


451; bears Athena, 455; f. of
Calliope, 459; f. of Pandia by
- Selene, 461; f. of the Tyndaridae,
461, 463 ; f. of the river Hermus,
467; the god of guests, 469,
471; sender of snow, 473;
dances, 481 ; invoked by Oedipus
to destroy his sons, 485; plans
the Trojan War, 489; gives the
‘Dioscuri partial immortality,
491; plans to relieve the Trojans,
495; plans to relieve the over-
burdened earth, swears Thetis


shall wed a mortal, 497; f. of
Helen by Nemesis, 499, 501, 505,
507 ; recompenses Laomedon for
Ganymedes, 515; tomb of —,
517 ; Herceius, ib., 521; gives the
Palladium to Dardanus, 523:
punishes Tantalus, 529, 539,
547, 553, 555, 561: sends Crabs
to aid the Frogs against the Mice,
563 ; tomb of —, 573, 577, 581;
destroys Hesiod’s murderers, 589
and passim.


627


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
RICHARD CLAY AND Sons, LIMITED
BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STREET, S.E., —
AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.


LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY
VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED*
-APOLLONIUS RHODIUS, translated by R. C. Seaton, of


Jesus College, Cambridge. volume. |


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS, translated by ie
Lake, of the University of Leyden. 2 volunies.


APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY, translated by Horace
White, of New York. . 4 volunies,

APULEUIS, THE GOLDEN ASS (METAMOR-
PHOSES), translated by W, Adlington. Revised by S,.

_ Gaslee of Magdalen College, Cambridge. 1 volume.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE, translated
by W. Watts (1631). 2 volumes.

THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS,

; BION, MOSCHUS) translated by J. M. Edmonds, of


' Jesus College, Cambridge. 1 volume.


CATULULUS, translated by F. W. Cornish, Vice-Provost of
Eton College ; TIBULLUS, tramslated by J. P. Posigate,
of Liverpool University ; PERVIGILIUM VENERIS,
translated by J. W. Mackail, formerly Professor of
Poetry in the University of Oxford. 1 volume, : :

“CAESAR, CIVIL WARS, translated by A. G. Peskett, of


Magdalen College, Cambridge. 1 volume,


CICERO, LETTERS TO ATTICUS, translated by E. O.
Winstedt, of Magdalen College, Oxford. 3 volumes.
Volumes I and II,


CICERO, DE OFFICIIS, translated by Walter Miller.


I 2 eS


CICERO, DE FINIBUS, translated by H. Rackham of


Christ's College, Cambridge. I volume,


DIO CASSIUS, ROMAN HISTORY, trauslated by E,
Cary, of Princetown University. 8 volumes, Volumes
Tif and Til: 3


EURIPIDES, translated by A. S. Way, of the Univer sity oe
London. 4 volumes, Vera


HESIOD AND THE HOMERIC HYMNS, Weiisiaied
by H. G. Evelyn-White, of Jesus College. 1 volume.
HORACE, ODES AND EPODES, translated by C. E,

Bennett, of Cornell University. 1 volume.


JULIAN, translated by Wilmer Cave Wright, of Bee Mawr
College. 3 volumes. Volumes I and II,


* All volumes can be supplied separately.


LUCIAN, jranslated by A. M. Harmon, of Princetown
University, 8 volumes, Volumes 1 and II,


OVID, METAMORPHOSES, translated by F. J. Miller,
of the University of Chicago. 2 volumes


PETRONIUS, translated by M. Heseltine, of New College,
Oxford ; SENECA, APOCOLOCYNTOSIS, trans-
lated by W. HH. D, Rouse. 1 volume,


PHILOSTRATUS, THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS
OF TYANA, franslated by F. CO. Conybeare, of
University College, Oxford. 2 volumes,


PINDAR, translated by Sir J. E, Sandys, of S. John’s
College Cambridge. 1 voluie.


PLATO, EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO,
PHAEDO, PHAEDRUS, translated by A. 'N. Fowler.


I volume,


PLINY, LETTERS, Melmoth’s translation revised by W.
M. L. Hutchison, of Newnham College, Cambridge. 2
VOluLiNes.


PLUTARCH, THE PARALLEL LIVES, translated by
B. Perrin, of Yale University. 10 volumes. Volumes
Land II,


PROCOPIUS, translated by H. B. Dewing, Volume I.


PROPERTIUS, translated by H. E. Butler, of the Univer-
sity of London. 1 volume,


QUINTUS SMYRNAEUS, translated by A. S, Way, of
the University of London. I volume.


SOPHOCLES, translated by F, Storr, of Trinity College,
Cambridge. 2 volunies.


ST. JOHN DAMASCENE, translated by Harold Mattingly
~ and the Rev. G. R. Woodward. I volume.


_ SUETONIUS, translated by J. C. Rolfe. 2 volume.
- TACITUS, DIALOGUS, translated by Wm. Peterson;
AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA, translated by


Maurice Hutton, I volume.


TERENCE, translated by John Sargeaunt, of Westminster
School, 2 volumes.


XENOPHON CYROPAEDIA, translated by Waller
Miller. 2 volumes,


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET
NEW YORK THE MACMILLAN CO., 64 FIFTH AVENUE


Serr ce


eee etree
tp ning = et Pe


=


me PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR StIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


PA Hesiodus
4009 Hesiod
A2

1914a


32


¥ ft F ee Aa YA RDS
+9. Filey © be ai et 45) A ES Bee

N Pie) Pinih bee at ae
, Lue £ of net


vt ee
oe
bl
ok
=)
ere
:
-~
-
“
a
bot


.


ig - Yt )
) eae is ci


RAY pate LaP iohee ‘ $55 (bro et obs Pi
ae iy hy cin a NAD Et
cite nee ae 70 rae RAAT

} bu gt
" 4 uy
or te
Saad
+4
cL


aha %
ye ee


Wu eek) mee
AON he t? F
Fe aie


a
os
“
_
te
he

a.
=
Be
co
ae


\
ei y! 8 toe bs '? Wat je tek {
te tom t tater 1 tt ot 4
PS ARR 2% ' :
a 1 tel. ‘a! ; ere 2 ERK MAR ft, ‘ ont *
diag te Dt aa
: eH CAAA ES mig yt
AGE A Vibe a4 8 Et} a ; fi,
ans FS a9 1 Leth Pty o Pai hh
i seh Ars os tes
boty ane #
ai AND AAR
ae Ee ‘4
Wid rs oh of
ee ne ae ae |


, 9) ae iy .
. ; ay Fi “4% iy ; 4 , 5 13
re yy me p se s a nf art io | H ny - Lp ie} nf i.
GU ale elln Cec mtn hl praitte cd th
tot) Meter ere ert 8 or MELE
Pei A We cia te ky! ‘ ae PS FA ed: eg: Ps
“'¢ we a he 4 Lethe A. s a? ah 4 ft ei ¢ } q
ce ate See Cape Gud ne $34 . da Py *; ‘ te 4
oH eee as Me tee 4 i shes AAS Sivek abe
is % ; A f 4 “ x : ¢ : ; eat urd if Pat
. een Ani yf pint stale? ALS AAP aan an eee
Rt] Si c sey i s ‘¢ as a Oe Mea aT ae ot pie a?
Bera: Ah hs NaH APES RAE SOM OG Rt a ah 5 Oa
set yah Mis y aaet ete its Pet RAS ARE eat SaPy atby's. an east
’ es ey : si ? arent sf fet ‘ c% “ <— ‘ ae
et ce “ . aad Ai ARTSY OOPS 2 er Re REE
Bie NEA! ris Ray aiyit tie Pe IS Ses
ri ie Pk I. ee si oe MAG ash 4 t. 5 Aid
‘ Mati at fhe ah Ltt alas ate ‘ a a a. Ate | | ie Ab ad Py vebente
AT eat ia Denne penny geet | Ah Neh cat Se] att)
Dea: - A eer bY i Aye AAG pany * » aA ha vin spree.
AROS nian Vain tas tT EM Uh fa CAC AIMEE Tap oe tine
HASERICGITR SOR Run ORE Ly Mee NRE a a Se
A Areas RL RAG Maa hy AOA ales yin (oct Sah
: ie Ta My DRA ted CREO Ne te a Als pice tebe}
ALORS NREL Rah Oe
SEER IDET DIDO Pa hia ity Cit gold Fy Afi Mt i ee
She Oy bt ea be S hia eee on mats aif
: hwy ii $35 Re ae OHA hy ee rhe oe aval st ek
be AA el ule CLARA Ty ibe UT a
toys pe Geo PRM hte Cade Aa atk Gb We ae we
a ee ee Php ee de eA Tide Het tae APG : Pas Aad? peers
hog Re UN oe Ns) Os ee he Aare ate eee y } .
é ee fy - th { y" i Say ghey pep vt a) 4" bof 's ) be bore
Pee ‘Y ne he tits
es


Y
=a — . - »
et te, Be mel


ss


ot eh e sath . ) ; ie:
Se TO el ors reed 7 ae ta. i :
ah) AIARSES MOO RE SDA aaa te |
. Hee he Mes We is Fly Hie ee { “« ? “nD :
F ey Bish F rad; at i be apt : Fae ie teat “0,
